m 


THE 


BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOK: 


ANECDOTES,   SIMILES,  EMBLEMS,  ILLUSTEATIONS,  EXPOSITOEY, 

SCIENTIFIC,  GEOGKAPHICAL,  HISTOEICAL,  AND   HOMILETIC, 

GATHERED    FEOM    A    WIDE    EANGE    OF    HOME    AND 

FOEEIGN   LITEEATURE,   ON   THE   VEESES 

OF   THE  BIBLE. 


/ 

BY  / 

EEY.   JOSEPH   S.   EXELL,   M.A,.,.--.^ 

I.  CORINTHIANS. 

VOL.  11. 


»<^ 


NEW  YORK 
ANSON    D.  F.  RANDOLPH   &   COMPANY 

91    AND   93   FIFTH   AVENUE 


THE    BIBLICAL    ILLUSTEATOR. 

I.  CORINTHIANS. 

CHAPTEB  X. 

Vers.  1-13.  Moreover  ...  all  our  fathers  were  under  the  cloud,  and  all  passed 
through  the  sea. — The  castaicaijs  and  Ihe  victors  .-—-The  analo^^'y  between  this 
passage  and  the  preceding  is  strikiusj.  Tliis  nation  that  bad  come  out  of  Egypt  to 
get  to  Canaan  corresponds  to  the  runner  who,  after  starting  in  the  race,  misses  the 
prize  for  want  of  perseverance  in  self-sacriiice.  The  one  runnt^r  whom  the  judge 
of  the  contest  crowns  is  the  counterpart  of  the  two  faithful  Israelites,  to  whom  it 
was  given  to  enter  the  Promised  Land.  {Prof.  Godet.)  The  privUcriea  and  the 
doom  of  Israel : — I.  Their  exalted  privileges.  1.  The  i^illar  of  cloud  and  of  tire. 
This  remarkable  body — opaque  by  day,  to  screen  them  from  the  sun,  and  luminous 
by  night,  was  at  once  their  guide,  glory,  and  defence.  And  what  are  the  ordinances 
of  religion  but  a  directory  and  means  of  refreshment  and  defence  ?  2.  The  passage 
opening  for  them  through  the  Ri^d  Sea  (Exod.  xiv.).  Surely  it  can  never  be  that  any 
among  this  favoured  people  should  ever  prove  forgetful  of  their  Deliverer !  Yet, 
so  it  was.  And  happy  had  it  been  for  the  Church  of  God  if  deliverances  exceeding 
it  in  wonder  had  never  been  treated  with  equal  forgetfulness  !  3.  The  miraculous 
supply  of  food.  "They  did  all  eat  the  same  spiritual  meat."  "He  sent  them 
bread  from  heaven."  And  what  did  they  send  in  return  ?  Murmurs,  rebellion, 
and  blasphemies.  Then  learn — 1.  That  miracles  can  neither  convince  nor  convert, 
except  as  they  are  attended  with  the  influences  of  the  Spirit.  2.  That  benefits  may 
be  heaped  upon  man,  &c.  Yet  he  may  rebel  against  the  bountiful  Donor.  What 
are  the  verities  of  the  gospel  but  spiritual  bread?  Y'^et  in  how  many  instances 
are  such  truths  rejected  ;  yea,  even  made  an  occasion  of  sin !  3.  The  refreshing 
stream  issuing  from  the  smitten  rock.  The  water  is  called  spiritual  drink,  and  the 
bread  spiritual  meat,  yet  without  spiritual  discernment ;  while  the  body  was 
nourished  the  soul  perished.  II.  Their  awful  doom.  1.  They  incurred  the 
Divine  displeasure.  "  With  many  of  them  God  was  not  well  pleased."  2.  They 
perished  under  the  Divine  wrath  :  "  they  were  overthrown  in  the  wilderness."  [T. 
Mortimer,  B.A.)  Israel  in  tlie  unlderness  : — The  Israelites  are  her^  introduced  as 
exemplifying  a  common  experience.  They  accepted  the  position  of  God's  people, 
but  failed  in  its  duties.  I.  They  had  their  sacr^jients.  1.  They  were  all  baptized 
unto  Moses.  By  passing  throuf;h  the  Eed  Sea  at  his  command  they  definitely 
renounced  Pharaoh  and  as  definitely  committed  themselves  to  Moses,  and  were  as 
certainly  sworn  t )  obey  him  as  ever  was  Riman  soldier  who  took  the  onth  to  serve 
his  emperor.  When,  at  Brederode's  invitation,  the  patriots  of  Holland  put  on  the 
beggar's  wallet  and  tasted  wine  from  tlie  beggar's  bowl,  they  were  baptized  unto 
William  of  Orarige  nnd  their  country's  cause.  W^hen  the  sailors  on  board  the  Swan 
weighed  anc!ioi'  and  beat  out  of  Plymouth,  they  were  baptized  unto  Drake  and 
pledged  to  follow  him  and  fight  for  him  to  the  death.  Christian  baptism,  then,  if  it 
means  anytliing,  means  a  line  drawn  across  the  life,  and  proclaims  that  to  whomsoever 
we  have  been  bound,  we  now  are  pledged  to  this  new  Lor.1,  and  are  to  live  in  His 
service.  2.  Israel  had  also  a  spiritual  food  and  drink  analogous  to  tlie  Communion. 
They  were  not  led  into  the  desert,  and  left  to  do  the  best  they  could  on  their  own 
resources.  He  who  had  encouraged  them  to  enter  on  this  new  life  was  prepared  to 
VOL.    II.  1 


2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

carry  them  through.     Their  food  and  drink  were  "spiritual,"  or  sacramental,  f.e., 
their  sustenance  continually  spoke  to  them  of  God's  nearness  and  reminded  them 
that  they  were  His  people.     And  as  Christ  said  of  the  bread  at  the  Last  Supper, 
"This  is  My  body,"  so  does  Paul  say,  "  That  Eock  was  Christ."     II.  The  manna. 
AND  THE  WATER  WERE  TYPES  OF  Christ,  Serving  for  Israel  the  purpose  v/hich  Christ 
serves  for  us,  enabling  them  to  believe  iu  a  Heavenly  Father  who  cared  for  them,  and 
accomplishing  the  same  spiritual  union  with  the  unseen  God  which  Christ  accom- 
plishes for  us.     It  was  in  this  sense  that  Paul  could  say  that  the  Eock  was  Christ. 
1.  Israel  did  not  know  that,  nor  as  they  drank  of  the  water  did  they  think   of  One 
who  was  to  come  and  satisfy  the  whole  thirst  of  men.    The  types  simply  worked  by 
exciting  there  and  then  the  same  faith  in  God  which  Christ  excites  in  our  mind. 
It  was  not  knowledge  that  saved  the  Jew,  but  faith,  attachment  to  the  living  God  as 
his  Eedeemer  there  and  then.     So  every  sacrifice  was  a  type  of  Christ ;  not  because 
it  revealed  Christ,  but  because  for  the  time  being  it  served  the  same  purpose  as 
Christ  now  serves,  enabling  men  to  believe  in  the  forgiveness  of  sins.    2.  But  while 
in  the  mind  of  the  Israelite  there  was  no  connection  of  the  type  with  Christ,  there 
was  in  reality  a  connection  between  them.     The  redemption  of  men  is  one  whether 
accomplished  in  the  diiys  of  the  Exodus  or  in  our  own.    The  idea  of  salvation  is  one, 
resting  always  on  the  same  reasons  and  principles.     The  Lamb  was  slain  "  from 
the  foundation  of    the  world,"   and  the   virtue  of    the  sacrifice  of    Calvary  was 
efficacious  for  those  who  lived  before  as  well  as  for  those  who  lived  after  it.     III. 
These  outward  blessings,  intended  to  be  the  channels  of  grace  to  most  or  the 
Israelites,  remained  mere  manna  and  water.     1.  Instead  of  learnuig  the  sufficiency 
of  Jehovah  they  began  to  murmur  and  lust  after  evil  things,  and  shrank  from  the 
hardships  and  hazards  of  the  way.   2.  And  so,  says  Paul,  it  may  be  with  you.    You 
may  have  been   baptized,  and  may  have   professedly  committed  yourself  to  the 
Christian  career ;  you  may  have  partaken  of  that  bread  and  wine  which  convey 
undying  life  and  energy  to  believing  recipients,  and  may  yet  have  failed  to  use 
these  as  spiritual  food,  enabling  you  to  fulfir  all  the  duties  of  the  life  you  are 
pledged  to.     Had  it  been  enough  merely  to  show  a  readiness  to  enter  on  the  more 
arduous  life,  then  all  Israel  would  have  been  saved,  for  "  all "  passed  through  the 
Eed  Sea.   Had  it  been  enough  outwardly  to  i^articipate  in  that  which  actnully  links 
men  to  God,  then  all  Israel  would  have  been  inspired  by  God's  Spirit  and  strength, 
for  "all  "  partook  of  the  spiritual  food  and  drink.     But  the  disastrous  result  was 
that  the  great  mass  of  the  people  were  overthrown  in  the  wilderness.     And  men 
have  not  yet  outlived  this  same  danger  of  committing  themselves  to  a  life  tliey  find 
too  hard  and  full  of  risk.     Conclusion :  The  practical  outcome  of  all  Paul  utters 
in  the  haunting  words,  "  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall." 
If  determined  wickedness  has  slain  its  thousands,  heedlessness  has  slain  its  tens  of 
thousands.     Through  lack  of  watchfulness  men  fall  into  sin  which  entangles  them 
for  life  and  thwarts  their  best  purposes.     Every  man  is  apt  to  lay  too  much  stress 
on  the  circumstance  that  he  has  joined  himself  to  the  number  of  those  who  own 
the  leadership  of  Christ.     The  question  remains.  How  far  has  he  gone  with  his 
Leader  ?     Wlioever  takes  it  for  granted  that  things  are  well  with  him,  whoever 
"  thinketh  he  standeth  " — he  is  the  man  who  has  especial  and  urgent  need  to  "take 
heed  lest  he  fall."     {M.  Dods,  D.D.)         Presuming  on  freedom: — This  chapter  is 
closely  connected  with  the  eighth.    The  principle  there  laid  down  is  "  act  from  love, 
and  not  mere  knowledge."    The  great  danger  was  that  of  presuming  on  the  freedom 
enjoyed  under  the  gospel.     To  meet  this,  Paul  says,  "  Beware  lest  you  carry  this 
principle  too  far.     God  once  had  a  people  privileged  as  no  other  people  were.     But 
notwithstanding  this  they  were  overthrown.     And  you  Corinthians,  as  surely  as 
you  allow  your  liberty  to  degenerate  into  licence,  will  be  destroyed  even  as  the 
Israelites  were."     Consider — I.  That  God  rules  by  unalterable  laws.     As  under 
Moses,  so  under  Christ.     Then  people  sinned,  and  punishment  followed ;  and  so  as 
surely  as  we  sin  will  judgment  overtake  us.     II.  That  spiritual  privileges  are  no 
guarantee  of  security.     The  Israelites  were  privileged — where  are  they?     The 
Corinthians  were  privileged — but  where  are  the  Corinthians  now?     England  is  a 
great  nation;  but  as  surely  as  her  laws  vary  from  the  Divine  code  will  her  glory 
wane.   A  Church  may  have  great  activity,  a  fine  ritual,  and  a  popular  ministry,  but 
as  certainly  as  that  Church  forgets  God,  "  Ichabod  "  maybe  written  upon  her  walls. 
The  individual  Christian  may  have  conquered  sin  in  various  forms,  bat  as  soon  as 
he  begins  to  say,  "  I  can  do  it,"  in  that  moment  he  shows  his  weakness  and  his  fall 
has  begun.     III.  That  Satan  is  not  omnipotent  (ver.  13).     He  may  try  his  worst, 
but  there  will  come  a  time  when  God  wiU  say,  "Thus  far,  but  no  farther."     IV. 


CHAP.  X.]  I.   CORINTHIANS. 


That  no  man  can  serve  two  mastees.  God  and  idols  can  never  agree.  Some  of  the 
Corinthians  partook  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  then  joined  idolaters  in  their 
unhallowed  feasts.  1.  They  did  this  probably — (1)  Because  they  thought  as  an  idol 
was  nothing,  there  could  be  no  harm  in  the  act.  (2)  Or  from  some  lingering  feeling 
of  superstition  connected  with  the  old  forms  of  worship.  (3)  Or  because  they 
wished  to  avoid  the  jeers,  and,  peihaps,  persecution  of  their  old  companions.  2.  But 
the  Christians  who  attended  those  sacrifices  would  be  supposed  to  engage  in  the  same 
worship  (ver.  21).  And  just  so  now  ;  in  order  to  receive  the  Divine  benediction 
men  must  be  straightforward  and  true.  "  Ye  cannot  serve  God  and  mammon."  V. 
A  manifestation  of  true  greatness  (ver.  24).  Some  men  think  it  a  sign  of  great- 
ness when  they  carry  tbeir  point  in  opposition  to  every  one  else.  The  apostle  says 
true  greatness  is  seen  when  self  is  light  as  a  feather  comf)ared  with  the  interests  of 
the  other.  The  concluding  verses  illustrate  his  meaning.  Here,  then,  is  a  principle 
for  the  guidance  of  life.  The  true  Christian  may  go  anywhere,  and  do  anything 
that  his  own  conscience  does  not  condemn  ;  but  the  moment  he  is  in  danger  by  his 
liberty  of  leading  others  astray,  abstain  from  the  act,  even  if  you  deny  yourself.  VI. 
Do  not  make  religion  obtrusive,  but  always  act  religiously  (vers.  27,  28).  VII. 
"Whatsoever  ye  do,  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God."  This  is  the  supreme  end  of 
life,  and  the  only  right  motive  of  action  ;  indeed,  this  principle  includes  all  others 
{A.  F.  Barfield.)  The  old  a  type  of  the  new  : — All  history  is  prophecy.  Knowing 
what  has  been,  we  are  far  on  the  way  to  know  what  sliall  be.  Tliis  is  specially  true 
in  religious  matters.  The  substance  of  all  dispensations  is  the  same,  and  even  the 
forms  for  one  occasion  answer  also  to  the  forms  in  other  occasions.  The  New 
Testament  began  in  the  Old,  and  the  Old  Testament  is  consummated  in  the  New. 
This  is  clearly  implied  in  the  text,  in  which  we  note — I.  A  sacred  baptism. 
"Baptized  unto  Mnses."  1.  It  was  not  an  immersion.  The  Egyptians  were 
immersed  and  perished;  Israel  "  walked  upon  dry  land  in  the  midst  of  the  sea," 
and  did  not  so  much  as  wet  their  feet.  2.  It  was  a  baptism  of  infants  as  well  as 
adults.  Paul  says  "  all"  were  baptized.  "About  six  hundred  thou-and  on  foot, 
beside  children,"  made  th^t  passage.  3.  It  was  a  baptism  of  deliverance  from 
their  opiDressors.  It  put  the  sea  between  Israel  and  Egypt,  and  drowned  their 
pursuers.  Evei-y  oppressor  is  gone  from  him  who  enters  fully  into  what  his  baptism 
signifies  and  pledges  (1  Pet.  iii.  21).  4.  It  was  a  baptism  into  a  transcendent 
change.  It  transferred  Israel  from  the  land  of  Ham  and  blackness  to  shores 
bordering  on  the  primitive  homes — from  cruel  slavery  to  blessed  liberty — from 
nothingness  to  an  independent  nation.  Their  baptism  was  to  them  a  new  birth, 
the  beginning  of  a  new  style  of  existence.  In  all  the  poetry  of  this  people  we  find 
a  glad  recurrence  to  these  waters  as  the  scene  of  their  bringing  forth  into  the  new 
life  unto  God.  II.  Heavenly  bread.  "Did  all  eat  the  same  spiritual  meat?" 
The  manna — 1.  Was  a  direct  product  of  God.  It  came  down  from  heaven.  Christ 
(John  vi.)  appropriates  it  as  the  type  of  Himself,  sent  of  the  Father,  to  give  His 
flesh  and  life  for  tlie  life  of  the  world.  2.  Was  a  new  and  miraculous  sort  of  food, 
distantly  resembling  something  in  nature,  but  far  above  nature — "bread  from 
heaven,"  "  angels'  food"  ;  existing  prior  to  this  appearance,  and  now  a  marvellous 
type  of  our  Saviour.  3.  Was  the  sustenance  of  I-^rael  for  all  their  pilgrimage. 
Christ  is  the  sustenance  of  all  spiritual  life.  4.  Had  to  be  gathered  ami  appropria- 
ted in  its  season — each  day  for  its  needs,  a  double  portion  before  the  sabbath  ;  but 
people  had  to  go,  collect,  appropriate,  and  use  it,  or  perish.  Spiritual  life  requires 
constant  renewal  in  our  going  to  Christ  and  our  appropriation  of  Him.  III.  Spiritual 
drink.  1.  It  was  from  a  rock — a  literal  rock  at  Eephidim  and  in  Hebron,  yielding 
plentiful  waters.  "  That  Eock  was  Christ."  Eock  connects  with  unchangeable 
Deity.  "  Who  is  a  rock  save  our  God  ?  "  And  when  Paul  connects  that  rock  with 
Christ,  he  connects  Christ  with  eternal  Godhead,  as  well  as  makes  Him  the  only 
source,  medium,  and  outlet  of  the  s-aving  waters  of  life  for  thirsting  and  perishing 
men.  2.  It  came  through  the  smiting  of  that  rock.  3.  It  attended  them  con- 
tinually. Wherever  they  were  ihey  could  find  these  waters.  The  Eock  is  ever  near ; 
and  in  all  the  wilderness  of  this  life,  wherever  a  soul  thirsts  for  Him,  there  the 
Fountain  flows.  4.  It  was  free  to  all  Israel.  Salvation  is  for  every  one  who  will 
take  it.  Conclusion  :  It  thus  appears  why  the  apostle  did  not  wish  the  Corinthians 
to  be  ignorant  concerning  the  fathers.  1.  The  most  vital  things  of  saving  religion 
were  involved  in  those  things.  To  fail  in  understanding  these  things  was  to  fail  in 
understanding  the  way  of  life.  2.  Not  to  give  due  heed  to  our  Christian  privihges 
is  to  involve  ourselves  in  hopeless  condemnation.  (•/.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.)  Sacra- 
mental symbols  : — The  mystic  and  formalist  say  these  signs,  and  these  only,  convey 


4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

grace ;  sacraments  are  miraculous.  But  St.  Paul  says  to  the  Corinthians,  the 
Jews  had  symbols  as  living  as  yours.  Bread,  wine,  water,  cloud ;  it  mntters  nought 
what  the  material  is.  God's  presence  is  everything  ;  God's  power,  God's  life — wher- 
ever these  exist  tJiere  there  is  a  sacrament.  What  is  the  lesson,  then,  which  we  learn  ? 
Is  it  that  God's  life,  and  love,  and  grace,  are  limited  to  certain  materials,  such  as 
the  rock,  the  bread,  or  the  wine?  or  is  it  not  much  rather  that  every  meal,  every 
gushing  stieam,  and  drifting  cloud  is  the  symbol  of  God,  and  a  sacrament  to  every 
open  heart  ?  And  the  power  of  recognising  and  feeling  this  makes  all  the  difference 
between  the  religious  and  the  irreligious  spirit.  There  were  those,  doubtless,  in  the 
wilderness,  who  saw  nothing  wonderful  in  tlie  flowing  water.  They  rationalised  upon 
its  origin :  it  quenched  their  thirst,  and  that  was  all  it  meant  to  them.  But  there 
were  others  to  whom  it  was  the  very  love  and  power  of  God.  (F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.) 
And  did  all  eat  the  same  spiritual  meat. — The  Jeicish  gacraments  a  type  of  Christ : — 

I.  The  respects  in  which  the  food  on  which  Israel  lived  typified  our  Saviour. 
The  manna  to  which  the  apostle  refers — 1.  Was  supernatural.  And  did  not  this 
represent  that  the  food  of  the  soul  must  descend  from  heaven  ? — that  the  person  of 
Clirist  should  not  be  produced  in  the  ordinary  courf^e  of  nature  ?  2.  Sufficed  for 
the  whole  multitude.  So  Christ  gave  Himself  for  the  world,  and  there  is  not  an 
individual  in  the  wide  family  of  man  for  whom  provision  has  not  been  made  in  the 
gospel.  3.  H  d  any  disdained  it  because  it  was  common  to  all,  he  must  have 
perished  in  his  pride ;  had  any  loathed  it  because  it  was  the  same  every  day, 
hunger  must  have  been  unappeased.  So  there  is  but  one  mode  of  salvation  for 
the  king  and  the  b-ggar;  and  as  Christ  died  equally  for  the  mightiest  and  the 
meanest,  every  man,  whatever  his  station,  may  eat  the  bread  of  life,  but  none  that 
refuse  it  can  hope  to  escape  eternal  death.  4.  Was  ground  in  a  mill,  or  broken  in 
a  mortar  ;  so  ere  Christ  could  become  the  food  of  the  world.  He  became  a  curse,  and 
was  pressed  down  by  the  weight  of  God's  wrath  against  sin.  5.  Was  not  to  be  kept. 
In  this  God  taught  that  day  by  day  Israel  were  to  look  to  Him  for  a  supply  of  their 
wants.  So  iu  spiritual  things.  We  have  no  stock  iu  lund  ;  but  when  the  necessity 
arises  we  must  apply  afresh  to  the  Saviour.  "  As  thy  day  so  shall  thy  strength  be." 
6.  It  fell  only  when  Israel  were  in  the  wilderness,  ceasing  as  soon  as  they  reached 
the  promised  land.  So  here  in  the  wilderness,  knowing  but  in  part,  and  seeing 
only  through  a  gl  iss  darkly,  there  are  intermediate  channels  through  which  we 
must  derive  every  spiritual  blessing  ;  but  when  we  shall  have  entered  the  heavenly 
Canaan,  then  we  shall  eat  of  the  corn  of  the  land,  and  need  not  sacramental 
assistance.  We  shall  still  feed  on  Christ,  but  not  through  outward  ordinances. 
The  veil  will  have  departed,  and  what  need  shall  we  have  of  instituted  symbols? 

II.  How  Christ  was  typified  by  the  rock  which  accompanied  the  people 
through  their  wanderings.  1.  There  is  a  peculiar  fitness  in  the  metaphor, 
which  is  frequently  employed  in  Scripture.  Christ  is  the  foundation  on  which  the 
Church  is  built,  "  a  tried  stone,  a  precious  corner-stone,  a  sure  foundation."  As 
Mediator,  Christ  sustains  such  a  relation  to  ourselves  that  upon  Him  must  rest  our 
every  hope,  whilst  He  has  so  discharged  that  office,  that  no  hoj)e  thus  based  can 
ever  be  disappointed.  2.  But  it  is  not  Christ's  resemblance  to  a  rock  in  general 
that  we  are  required  to  trace,  but  to  a  particular  rock.  As  this  rock  yielded  no 
water  till  it  was  struck  by  Moses,  so  Christ  must  be  smitten  ere  forgiveness  could 
issue  forth  to  a  iDerishing  world.  It  was  by  the  rod  of  the  lawgiver  that  the  rock 
was  smitten,  and  by  what  but  by  the  curse  of  the  law  was  Christ  buried  ?  And  then 
gushed  from  His  body  a  river  which  ever  since  has  been  rolling  along  the  desert  of 
creation,  and  it  is  so  abundant  that  the  invitation  is,  "  Whosoever  will  let  him 
come,  and  take  of  the  waters  of  life  freely."  (H.  MeJvill,  B.D.)  And  did  all 
drink  ...  of  that  rock  which  followed  them;  and  that  rock  was  Christ. — Tliat 
rock  was  Christ  : — There  is  resemblance — I.  In  the  apparent  unlikelihood  of 
the  source.  The  very  name  of  Horeb  was  "  hill  of  dried-up  ground."  No 
wonler  there  was  the  incredulous  cry,  "must  we  fetch  water  out  of  the  rock?" 
To  the  untaught  eye  it  is  thus  with  regard  to  Christ.  A  babe  in  a  manger ;  a 
carpenter's  son;  a  wearied  traveller  ;  a  broken-hearted  suiiferer  ;  a  dying  malefactor. 
Truly  He  may  be  called  "a  root  out  of  a  dry  ground."  II.  In  the  means  by  which 
BLESSINGS  WERE  PROCURED.  The  rock  was  smitten.  It  is  iu  the  working  of  the 
same  law  by  which  the  bark  must  be  brui-ed  if  you  would  have  the  healing  balsam, 
the  grape  pressed  if  you  would  have  the  invigorating  wine.  Christ  smitten  is  the 
rock  whence  flowed  of  old,  and  flows  to-day,  all  that  consoles,  inspires,  reconciles, 
saves  human  life.  As  Lea  'er,  Model,  Teacher,  Friend,  Saviour,  our  Lord  was 
"  made  perfect  through  suffering."    III.  In  the  value  of  the  blessings  conferred. 


CHAP,  x.]  I.   CORINTHIANS. 


In  the  river  that  broke  forth  from  Horeb  for  the  Jews,  and  in  the  influences  that 
proceed  from  Christ  for  hmiianity,  there  is  aUke — 1.  Exact  adaptation  to  conscious 
need.  Thirst  cried  for  water,  sin  cries  for  Christ.  Nothing  but  "  the  truth  as  it  is 
in  Jesus  "  can  meet  the  inquiries,  tlie  lieart-ache,  the  despair  of  men.  2.  An  all- 
eufficieut  supply.     (17.  iJ.  Thoiiimf.)         Tlie  rock  was  Christ: — A  type — I.  Of  His 

ETERNAL    AND    UNCHANGEABLE    NATDRE.        II.    Of    HiS    PAINFUL    SUFFEKIXG.        The    rOck 

was  smitten.  III.  Of  the  communication  of  His  Spirit.  IV.  Of  its  continuous 
AND  ABUNDANT  SUPPLY.  The  Stream  followed  them,  (J.  Lyt.h,D.D.)  The  rock — 
Christ: — In  what  respects  did  the  rock  at  Horeb  represent  Christ?  I.  It  found 
THE  people  perishing  WITH  THIRST.  This  is  just  our  condition  by  nature.  We 
are  destitute  of  all  that  can  refresh  or  satisfy  the  soul.  II.  It  was  a  most  im- 
probable MEANS  op  relief.  In  countries  like  our  own  tlie  springs  of  water 
generally  take  their  course  along  a  rocky  bed  below  the  surface.  But  in  those  sandy 
deserts  the  case  is  far  otherwise.  Horeb,  a  vast  mass  of  stone,  only  increased  the 
desolation  of  the  prospect.  And  such  were  the  gloomy  anticipations  of  many  to 
whom  Jesus  offered  Himself  as  their  Eedeemer.  Scribes  and  Pharisees  were 
offended  at  His  personal  meanness — the  son  of  a  carpenter!  no  worldly  show! 
His  own  disciples  were  continually  stumbled,  and  "  all  forsook  Him  and  fled." 
Learned  Gentiles  heard  with  scorn  that  one  executed  as  a  malefactor  was  to  be 
received  as  king  of  the  world.  Nay,  even  to  this  day  men  will  hope  nothing,  and 
therefore  seek  nothing  from  Christ  till  they  are  compelled.  III.  It  required  to  be 
smitten  ere  it  gave  a  supply.  And  how  exactly  did  this  action  typify  the  suffer- 
ing Redeemer!  It  was  not  by  His  miracles  nor  by  His  instructions  that  Jesus 
provided  salvation  for  us,  but  by  His  death.  Eead  Isaiah  liii.  and  Zech.  xiii.  7. 
Not  only  Christ  was  smitten  ;  but  He  was  to  be  smitten.  "  Ought  not  Christ  to 
have  suffered  the^e  things ?"  Ac.  Here  then  let  us  fix  our  attention.  "Behold 
the  wounded  Lamb  of  God,"  ci-c,  and  say,  "  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory,"  &c. 
IV.  It  yielded  an  abundant  supply.  For  such  a  host  no  ordinary  stream  of  water 
would  suffice  ;  but  here  was  enough  and  to  spare.  And  such  is  the  supply  of 
spiritual  blessings  which  is  treasured  up  in  Christ  Jesus  (Col.  i.  19).  V.  It  saved 
the  lives  of  rebels  if  they  would  but  drink.  (J.  Jowett,  M.A.)  The  rock 
of  ages  : — 1.  St.  Paul  is  warning  the  Corinthians.  He  says,  "You  may  come  to 
the  Communion  and  use  tlie  means  of  grace,  and  yet  become  castaways.  I  keep 
under  my  body  lest  I  should  be  one.  Look  at  the  old  Jews  in  the  wilderness. 
They  all  i^artook  of  God's  grace;  but  they  were  not  all  saved.  Spiritual  meat  and 
spiritual  drink  could  not  keep  them  alive,  if  they  sinned,  and  deserved  death. 
And  nothing  will  save  you  if  you  sin,"  2.  The  spiritual  rock  which  followed  the 
Jews  was  Christ.  It  was  to  Him  they  owed  their  deliverance  from  Egypt,  their 
knowledge  of  God,  and  His  law,  and  whatever  reason,  righteousness,  and  good 
government  there  was  among  them.  And  to  Christ  we  owe  the  same.  The  rock 
was  a  type  of  Him  from  whom  flows  living  water.  "  Whosoever  drinketh  of  the 
water  which  I  shall  give,"  &c.  3.  Herein  is  a  great  mystery.  Something  of  what 
it  means,  however,  we  may  learn  from  Philo.  The  soul,  he  says,  fa'ls  in  with  a 
scorpion  in  the  wilderness ;  and  then  thirst,  which  is  the  thirst  of  the  passions, 
seizes  on  it,  till  God  sends  forth  on  it  the  stream  of  His  own  perfect  wisdom,  and 
causes  the  changed  soul  to  drink  of  unchangeable  health.  For  the  steep  rock  is  the 
wisdom  of  God  (by  whom  he  means  the  Word  of  God,  whom  Philo  knew  not  in 
the  flesh,  but  whom  we  know  as  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ),  which,  being  both  sublime 
and  the  first  of  all  things.  He  quarried  out  of  His  own  powers  ;  and  of  it  He  gives 
drink  to  the  souls  which  love  God  ;  and  they,  when  they  have  drunk,  are  filled  with 
the  most  universal  manna.  4.  Christ  is  rightly  called  the  Eock,  the  Rock  of  Ages, 
the  Eternal  Eock,  because  on  Him  all  things  rest,  and  have  rested  since  the 
foundation  of  the  world.  He  is  rightly  called  the  Rock  of  living  waters ;  for  in 
Him  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge,  and  from  Him  they  flow 
forth  freely  to  all  who  cry  to  Him  in  their  thirst  after  truth  and  holiness.  To  be 
parted  from  Christ  is  death.  To  be  joined  to  Christ  and  the  body  of  Christ  is  life — 
the  life  of  thfi  soul.  Holiness,  righteousness,  froodness.  And  why?  Because  it  is 
the  life  of  Christ.  For  who  is  Christ  but  the  likeness  and  the  glory  of  God  ?  And 
what  is  that  but  goodness  ?  From  Christ,  and  not  from  any  created  being,  comes 
all  goodness  in  man  or  angel.  5.  Let  the  good  which  a  man  does  be  mu'li  or  be  it 
little,  he  must  say,  "  The  good  which  I  do,  I  do  not,  but  Christ  who  dwellelh  in  me." 
It  is  Christ  in  the  child  which  makes  it  speak  the  truth,  and  shrink  from  whatever 
it  has  been  told  is  wrong  ;  in  the  young  man,  which  fills  him  with  hopes  of  putting 
forth  all  his  powers  in  the  service  of  Christ ;  in  the  middle-aged  man,  which  m?^■■  < 


6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

him  strong  in  good  works  ;  so  that  having  drunk  of  the  living  waters  himself,  they 
may  flow  out  of  him  again  to  others  in  good  deeds  ;  in  the  old  man,  which  makes 
him  look  on  with  calm  content  while  his  own  body  and  mind  decay,  knowing  that 
the  kingdom  of  God  cannot  decay.  Yes,  such  a  man  knows  whom  he  has  believed. 
He  knows  that  the  spiritual  Kock  has  been  following  him  through  all  his  wander- 
ings in  this  weary  world,  and  that  that  rock  is  Christ.  He  can  recollect  how,  again 
and  again,  at  his  Sabbath  haltings  in  his  life's  journey,  it  was  to  him  in  the  Holy 
Communion  as  to  the  Israelites  of  old  in  their  haltings  in  the  wilderness,  when  the 
priests  of  Jehovah  cried  to  the  mystic  rock,  "Flow  forth,  0  fountain,"  and  the 
waters  flowed.  6.  But  if  these  things  are  so,  will  they  not  teach  us  much  about 
Holy  Communion,  how  we  may  receive  it  worthily,  and  how  unworthily  ?  If  what 
we  receive  in  the  Communion  be  the  good  Christ  who  is  to  make  us  good,  then  how 
can  we  receive  it  worthily,  if  we  do  not  hunger  and  thirst  after  goodness  ?  If  we  do 
not,  we  are  like  those  Corinthians  who  came  to  the  Lord's  supper  to  exalt  their  own 
spiritual  self-conceit ;  and  so  only  ate  and  drank  their  own  damnation,  not  dis- 
cerning the  Lord's  body — a  body  of  righteousness  and  goodness.  We  need  not  stay 
away  because  we  feel  ourselves  burdened  with  many  sins ;  that  will  be  our  very 
reason  for  coming,  that  we  may  be  cleansed  from  our  sins.  (C  Kingslry,  31. A.) 
Tlie  rock  in  the  det^ert : — I.  The  desert.  1.  Our  sinful  parentage  is  our  Egypt, 
and  death  our  Jordan.  What  lies  between  is  the  desert  of  our  wanderings.  2. 
Consider  what  it  is  that  renders  a  desert  formidable.  To  the  dromedary  it  is  what 
the  sea  is  to  a  ship ;  almost  what  the  air  is  to  a  winged  bird.  But  not  so  with  man. 
His  nature  is  not  so  well  suited  to  those  trackless  wastes.  So  we  were  not  made  to 
feel  at  home  here.  Many  tokens  are  there  that  we  are  only  strangers  and  pilgrims. 
(1)  Now  it  is  a  loss  of  property,  now  a  loss  of  health,  now  a  loss  of  friends.  (2)  But, 
to  say  nothing  of  what  is  lost,  who  needs  be  reminded  of  the  countless  prizes  which 
we  may  sigh  for,  but  have  never  gained  ?  To  no  man  is  life  a  holiday.  To  most  is 
it  a  scene  rather  of  feverish  and  but  poorly  requited  toil.  The  one  secret  of  all  this 
suffering  is  to  be  sought  in  the  contradiction  which  is  found  to  exist  between  our 
circumstances  and  our  endowments.  We  are  all  of  us  like  kings  in  exile.  We  have 
lost  our  thrones,  and  are  jDawjung  our  jewels  for  our  daily  bread.  (3)  But  the 
great  burden  and  the  saddest  bliglit  of  all  is  our  sense  of  sin.  Years  ago  and 
yesterday  we  sinned  ;  and  all  the  period  between  is  dark  with  remorseful  memories. 
The  soul  has  no  perfect  rest.  And  so  the  world  becomes  a  desert  to  us.  3.  But 
courage,  brother.  Even  this  blank  desert  is  better  than  it  seems.  Though  it  has 
no  waving  wheat-fields,  it  has  manna  for  its  morning  dew.  Though  its  sands  be 
trackless,  there  move  on  always  before  us  the  pillar  of  cloud  and  fire.  But  in 
addition  to,  and  above  all,  thout-'h  there  be  no  running  streams,  there  is  the  rock 
smittf-n  to  assua<,'e  our  thirst.  II.  And  that  rock  is  Christ.  1.  What  men  call 
pleasure  only  palls  upon  our  jaded  senses.  Chesterfield,  in  his  old  age,  said  of  the 
world  :  "  I  have  enjoyed  all  its  pleasures,  and  consequently  know  their  futility,  and 
do  not  regret  their  loss."  As  for  gold,  no  wealth  ever  yet  purchased  a  night's  rest. 
As  for  power,  the  Alexanders  and  Napoleons  have  all  shed  bitter  tears  of  disappoint- 
ment, either  conquering  or  conquered.  As  for  wisdom,  from  Solomon  to  Burke,  the 
wisest  have  been  also  the  saddest  of  men.  As  for  friendship  and  affection,  even 
their  idols  are  shivered  one  by  one.  "  Vanity  of  vanities,  all  is  vanity."  All 
around  us  sweeps  the  glimmering  desert,  with  no  refreshment  for  us  but  what  is 
furnished  by  the  gushing  rock.  And  that  rock  is  Christ.  2.  But  who  and  what  is 
the  Christ  we  speak  of?  I  challenge  man's  own  aching  heart  for  an  answer.  What 
is  the  Christ  thou  cravest  ?  Is  it  only  a  human  brother  ?  Is  it  only  an  awful  God? 
Or  is  it  the  tw^o  united  in  a  sweet  but  stupendous  miracle  of  love  ?  The  answer 
cannot  be  doubtful.  Annihilate  my  faith  in  the  God-man,  and  what  then  is  life  ? 
But  give  me  now  the  God-man,  and  this  dreary  desert  of  my  sorrow-stricken,  sinful 
life  receives  at  once  its  gushing  rock.  Let  redeeming  love  shoot  its  beams  into  the 
darkness,  let  the  radiant  form  of  the  Son  of  God  be  seen  walking  up  and  down  the 
furnace  of  our  earthly  afflictions,  and  straightway  the  torturing  problem  is  solved. 
We  take  up  the  line  of  our  march  through  the  desert  without  murmuring,  when  we 
behold  the  smitten  rock  moving  on  before  us  over  the  sterile  sand.  To  us  now  this 
world  is  brighter  than  it  would  have  been  without  the  heavy  shadows  of  sin  upon 
it;  for  in  its  skv  has  been  set  the  Star  of  Bethlehem.  Our  own  nature  has  been 
dignified,  as  it  would  not  have  been  but  for  our  fall ;  for  now  God's  own  Son  is  our 
brother.  Even  our  life  of  sorrow  is  glorified  since  those  shining  feet  have  traversed 
it  so  meekly  from  the  manger  to  the  tomb.  With  this  rock  in  our  desert,  the  desert 
shouts  and  sings.     3.  But  of  what  avail  to  us  is  this  smitten  rock,  unless  we  stoop 


CHAP.  X.]  I.  CORINTHIANS. 


to  drink?  Of  what  avail  to  us  tlae  presence  of  this  Divine  humanity,  unless  we  are 
consciously  related  to  it  by  a  living  faith  ?  To  each  heart  there  speaks  the  voice  of 
mercy.  And  each  heart  must  answer  for  himself.  What  shall  our  response  be? 
Christ's  great  central  work  is  not  teaching,  which  rivals  the  lessons  of  sages  ;  not 
example,  which  rivals  the  exploits  of  heroes,  but  atonement,  which  scatters  the 
clouds  of  Divine  wrath,  and  takes  away  our  sin.  4.  That  spiritual  rock,  we  are 
told,  followed  the  Hebrews.  So,  too,  shall  our  Eock  follow  us.  In  health  and 
peace  and  prosperity  it  shall  pour  its  libations  upoir  our  gladness.  In  sickness, 
war,  and  want  it  shall  cool  our  fevered  veins.  In  death  it  shall  moisten  our  parched 
lips.  (jR.  D.  Hitchcock,  D.D.)  lite  rock  : — Is  it  not  perfectly  simple  to  explain 
this  figure  by  the  numerous  passages  in  which  the  Lord  is  called  the  Rock  of 
Israel  (Deut.  xxxii.  4,  15,  18  ;  Isa.  xvii.  10,  xxvi.  4)  ?  Only  the  title  of  Eock  of 
Israel  is  given  by  Paul  not  to  Jehovah,  but  to  Christ.  The  passage  forms  one 
analogy  to  the  words  (John  xii.  41),  where  the  apostle  applies  to  Jesus  the  vision  of 
Isaiah  (chap.  vi.).  Christ  is  represented  in  these  passages  by  Paul  and  John  as 
pre-existeut  and  presiding  over  the  theocratic  history.  In  chap.  vjii.  6  Paul  had 
designated  Christ  as  the  Being  by  whom  God  created  all  things.  Here  he  represents 
Him  as  the  Divine  Being  who  accompanied  God's  people  in  the  cloud  through  the 
wilderness,  and  who  gave  them  the  deliverances  which  they  needed.  We  have  the 
same  view  here  as  appears  in  "  the  angel  of  the  Lord,"  so  often  identified  in  Genesis 
with  the  Lord  Himself,  and  yet  distinct  from  Him,  in  the  Being  who  is  called  in 
Isaiah  (Ixiii.  9)  "the  angel  of  His  presence,"  and  in  Malachi  (iii.  1)  "  the  angel  of 
the  covenant,  Adonai,"  the  mediator  between  God  and  the  world,  especially  with  a 
view  to  the  work  of  salvation.  It  is  easy  to  understand  the  relation  there  is  between 
the  mention  of  this  great  theocratic  fact  and  the  idea  Avhich  the  apostle  wishes  to 
express  in  our  passage.  The  spiritual  homogeneity  of  the  two  covenants,  and  of 
the  gifts  accompanying  them,  rests  on  this  identity  of  the  Divine  Head  of  both. 
The  practical  consequence  is  obvious  at  a  glance  :  Christ  lived  in  the  midst  of  the 
ancient  people,  and  the  people  perished.  How  can  yon  Christians  think  yourselves 
secure  from  the  same  lot?  {Frof.  Godet.)  But  with  many  of  them  God  was 
not  well  pleased. —  God's  displeasure : — I.  May  be  incurred  by  His  own  people, 
because  of — 1.  Unbelief.  2.  Rebellion.  3.  Sin.  II.  May  be  followed  with  the 
MOST  disastrous  RESULTS.  1.  The  withdrawal  of  His  presence  and  favour.  2. 
Final  destruction.     {J.  Lijth,  D.D.) 

Vers.  6-13.  Now  these  things  were  our  examples. — Israel  a  type  : — "  Examples  " 
here  mean  "  types."  A  type  is  an  impression  ;  anything  produced  by  blows  ;  then 
an  impression  which  has  a  resemblance  to  something  else  ;  then  a  model  to  which 
some  other  person  or  thing  should  be,  or  in  point  of  fact  would  be  conformed. 
The  Israelites  and  the  facts  of  their  history  were  our  types,  because  we  shall  be 
conformed  to  them  if  we  do  not  exercise  caution.  Our  doom  will  correspond  to 
theirs.  They  therefore  stand  as  warnings  to  us.  (C.  Hod  fie,  D.D.)  Wilderness 
learnings  : — Human  nature  is  the  same  in  every  age.  The  old  Israelites  differed  froin 
us  in  ail  those  things  which  we  class  under  the  term  "  civilisation  "  ;  but  as  moral 
beings  they  were  precisely  the  same.  Like  them  we  are  in  danger  of — I.  Lusting 
AFTER  EVIL  THINGS.  Tliose  Israelites  should  have  been  contented  with  what  God 
provided  for  them  ;  instead,  they  let  appetite  master  them,  and  set  them  thinking 
of  the  self-indulgencies  of  Egypt ;  thinking  begat  longing,  and  longing  lusting,  and 
lusting  repining,  which  destroyed  trust  in  God.  So  they  had  to  be  severely 
punished.  Is  not  hankering  alter  something  other  than  God  provides  one  of  the 
great  sins  of  our  times  ?  We  want  pleasures  which  we  see  worldly  people  have  ; 
and  we  lust  after  them.  But  remember  what  the  wilderness  life  of  God's  ancient 
people  teaches.  We  go  wrong  if  we  refuse  to  keep  our  wishes  narrowly  within  the 
limits  of  God's  will.  II.  Idolatry.  At  first  it  might  seem  as  if  this  were  no 
modern  peril.  But  the  essential  idea  of  idolatry  is  putting  somebody,  or  some- 
thing else,  into  the  place  which  belongs,  of  right,  to  God  alone.  We  can  do  this 
without  acknowledging  any  Jupiter  or  Vishnu.  Perhaps  we  are  making  pleasure 
our  idol ;  many  make  science  their  idol ;  it  is  quite  possible  to  have  a  family  idol. 
Whatever  form  it  takes  it  becomes  a  serious  Christian  peril.  III.  Sensuality. 
The  apostle  had  in  mind  the  act  of  Balaam,  who  advised  Balak  to  entice  the  people 
by  allowing  free  intercourse  with  the  Moabitish  women.  And  sensuality  was  one 
of  the  chief  sins  of  Corinth.  But  who  can  read  the  revelations  of  our  law  courts, 
and  of  society  life,  without  feeling  the  need  of  this  warning.  IV.  Presumption. 
It  must  always  be  wrong  to  put  God  to  the  test,  as  if  we  doubted  Him.     We  should 


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  x, 

never  risk  a  doubtful  or  wrong  thing  in  the  hope  that  it  ■will  pass.     A  man  may 
take  advantage  of  God ;  presume  upon  what  is  His  will,  without  asking  Him. 
"Thou  shalt  not  tempt  ttie  Lord  thy  God."     Then  we  should  ever  pray,  "Keep 
back  Thy  servant  from   presumptuous   sins."      V.  McRiiuEiNOS.      Troubles   and 
disappointments  and  failures  are  Divine  testings  of  our  professed  trust ;  and  for  us 
to  complain  and  fret  and  murmur  is  plainly  to  show  lost  submission  and  lost  trust. 
Happy  indeed  are  they  who  can  trust  when  they  cannot  trace.     Conclusion:  1. 
"  Abstain  from  fleshly  lusts,  which  war  against  the  soul."     2.  "  Watch  and  pray, 
thut  ye  cuter  not  into  temptation."     {Weekly  Pulpit.)        We  should  not  lust  after 
evil  things  as  they  also  lusted. — Lust  after  evil  things : — I.  The  sin.     1.  Incident 
to  humanity.     2.  May  possibly  be  excited  in  God's  people.     H.  The  caution — lest, 
&c. — there  is  need  of — 1.  Self  distrust.     2.  Watchfulness.     3.  Prayer.     IH.  The 
WAKXiNG.      Israel — 1.  Lusted.      2.  Sinned.      3.  Was  punished.      {J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
Sill : — I.  Its  progeessive  nature.     First  lust,  then  apostasy  and  sensuality,  lastly 
obstinate  unbelief  and  murmuring.     II.  A  caution  against  it — by  the  example  of 
Israel ;  admonition  ;  warning.     {Ibid.)         Temptation.: — I.  What  are  its  ordinary 
FORMS  ?     Lust  after  evil  things  (vers.  6-10).     II.  Who  are  liable  to  it  ?     1.  AIL 
2.  Especially  the  self-contident.     III.  How  is  it  to  be  overcome?     1.  By  vigilance, 
because  ii;  is  common  to  man.     2.  By  trust  in  God's  faithfulness.     3.  By  depend- 
ence on  His  help.     4.  By  faithful  endurance.    {Ibid.)        Neither  be  ye  idolaters. — 
Idolatry  : — I.  The  common  disposition   in  man  to  put  the  natural,  the   visible, 
the  material,  in  the  place  of  God.     II.  The  insidious   nature  of  the  refined 
FORMS  of  idolatry — as — 1.   Covetousness.     2.  Worldliness.     3.  Excessive  earthly 
attachment.     III.  The  serious  evils  arising  out  of  this  idolatrous  spirit.     1. 
Apostasy  from   God.     2.  Licentiousness.     IV.    The   awful    warning    against   it 
furnished  by  the  example  of  Israel.     {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)         Neither  let  us  tempt 
Christ   as   some   of    them   also   tempted.  —  tempting   Christ : — Observe — I.  The 
tempting  of  God  by  the  Israelites.     1.  The   apostle   refers  to  that   portion   of 
their  history  where  "  the   Lord  sent  fiery  serpents  among  the  iseojde."     This  was 
in  consequence  of  tlieir  discontent.     And  this  discontent  was  produced  by  several 
causes.     "  The  people  were  much  discouraged  because  of  the  way."     Apparently, 
too,  the  miraculous  sujiiply  of  water  was  suspended  ;  and,  besides,  the  manna  had 
grown  distasteful.     2.  How   could   God  be  tempted  by  the  murinurers?     "God 
cannot  be  tempted  wiih  evil,"  but  discontent  with  what  the  Almighty  allots  a  man 
to  do  or  to  bear  is  provoking  God  to  change  His  i^urposes  ;  aud  what  is  this  if  it 
be  not  "tempting"  Him?     And  again,  when  a  man  questions  whether  God  loves 
him,  he  tempts  the  Lord,  seeing  that  he  challenges  Him  to  fresh  demonstrations  of 
what  He  has  already  abundantly  displayed.     3.  It  was  thus  that  the  Israelites 
"  tempted  "  God.     Wliat  can  be  said  of  their  perpetual  disposition  to  murmur  and 
distrust,  if  not  that  it  virtually  accused  God  of  unfaithfulness,  and  challenged  Him 
to  do  yet  greater  things,  if  He  would  have  His  people  confide  in  His  protection  ? 
We  are,  perhaps,  not  accustomed  to  think  of  unbelief  or  murmuring  as  a  tempting 
of  the  Lord,  and  therefore  we  fail  to  attach  to  it  a  just  degree  of  heinousness. 
Let  us  be  warned  by  the  fate  of  the  Israelites,  to  struggle  against  this,  and  amid 
all  difficulties  hold  fast  the  truth,  that  God  is  faithful  to  His  word,  and  does  all 
things   for   the    best.     II.  How  in  tempting   God   they  could  be  said  to  tempt 
Christ.     The  ajDostle  is  speaking  of  events  which  occurred  long  before  the  Incarna- 
tion ;  and  unless  you  admit  Christ's  pre-existence  as  a  Person  of  the  Godhead,  it 
will  be  impossible  to  offer  any  satisfactory  account  of  His  having  been  tempted 
centuries  before  He  appeared  upon  earth.    A  parallel  passage  (Heb.  xi.  26)  will  help 
us  here.     We  know  that  since  the  Fall  there  has  been  going  forward  upon  this 
earth  a  mighty  contest  between  evil  and  good.     And  we  cannot  well  question  that, 
informed  as  Satan  was,  immediately  after  his  success  over  our  first  parents,  that  a 
Man  should  arise  to  repair  the  breach  in  creation,  all  his  after  plans  would  have 
reference  to  this  promised  Deliverer.     He  had  so  far  prevailed  as  to  have  effected 
the  ruin  of  this  creation,  and  all  that  now  remained  was  to  prevent  its  restoration. 
Hence  when  he  beheld  the  selection  of  a  family,  and  perceived  the  travelling  down 
of  the  promise  from  Abi-aham  to  his  children,  he  migbt  have  learned,  that  if  he 
would  defeat  the  promised  Deliverer,  he  must  overthrow  the  chosen  Israelites. 
Henceforward,  therefore,  he  fought  against  Christ,  by  fighting  against  them.     And 
if  this  be  correct,  then  we  must  conclude  that  Christ  was  persecuted  in  the  persecu- 
tion of  Moses,  and  tempted  through  the  murmuring  of  the  Israelites.     He  was 
opposed  through  Moses  His  type,  both  as  a  prophet  and  a  leader.     Aud  in  like 
manner  there  might  be  (as  there  was)  great  murmuring  against  Moses ;  but  this 


CHAP.  X.]  I.   CORINTHIANS. 


murmuring,  so  far  as  it  was  caused  by  the  machinations  of  Satan  for  the  injury  of 
the  Israelites,  was  nothing  less  than  a  murmuring  against  Christ.     III.  How  we 

MAY   IMITATE    THE    SIN    OF    THE    ISRAELITES,    AND    WHAT    DOOM    WE    MUST    EXPECT    IF    WE 

DO.  1.  The  Israelites  virtually  said  that  God  had  not  done  enough  for  them — that 
He  must  do  greater  things  still,  ere  they  would  give  Him  their  confidence,  their 
love  ;  and  is  not  this  precisely  what  you  also  say  to  Christ,  when  you  are  not  to  be 
moved  by  all  the  mysteries  of  His  mercy,  to  the  giving  heed  to  the  gospel  and 
closing  with  its  protfers?  How  little  had  been  done  for  the  Israelites  by  God,  in 
comparison  with  what  has  been  done  by  Jesus  for  us  !  "  How,"  then,  "  shall  we 
escape,  if  we  neglect  so  great  salvation  ?  "  2.  Fiery  serpents  swarmed  amongst  the 
murmurers — a  very  significant  punishment.  The  serpent  had  been  the  first 
tempter,  and  ever  after  might  be  regarded  as  the  emblem  of  Satan.  What,  then, 
was  taught,  if  not  that  to  distrust  God  is  to  give  one's  self  up  to  the  power  of  the  evil 
one  ?  What,  moreover,  was  taught  if  the  occurrence  were  typical,  but  that  there  is 
no  alternative  to  our  rejecting  the  Saviour  but  our  being  a  prey  to  tbe  devil?  {H. 
Melvill,  B.B.)  Neither  murmur  ye. — Murmuring  : — The  history  of  Israel  in  the 
wilderness  is  a  history  of  human  ingratitude  and  rebellion  ;  and  a  history  of  Divine 
retribution,  graciously  tempered  by  Divine  forbearance  and  mercy.  The  apostle 
takes  occasion  to  warn  Christians  against  falling  into  a  snare  which  proved  so  fatal 
to  multitudes  of  the  chosen  nation.  I.  Life  abounhs  in  tejiptations  to  mur- 
MUEiNG.  1.  Some  such  are  common  to  the  human  lot:  e.g.,  infirmity  of  body, 
brevity  of  life,  limitation  of  mental  powers,  imperfections  of  human  society.  2. 
There  are  others  more  peculiar  and  special,  e.g. ,  personal  sufferings  and  privations, 
bereavements,  severe  toil,  uncongenial  occujjations,  calamities,  disappointments, 
trials  and  persecutions  for  Christ's  sake.  II.  The  murmuking  here  censured 
consists  in  rebellious  dissatisfaction  and  complaints.  1.  The  reference  is  not  to 
a  just  disapproval  of  sinful  conduct  in  men.  We  are  not  required  to  acquiesce 
contentedly  in  a  fatalistic  view  of  human  affairs.  2.  But  we  are  forbidden  to 
murmur  against  God,  His  ways  and  His  will.  And  not  only  is  discontented 
language  to  be  repressed  ;  the  habit  of  feeling  which  thus  finds  vent  is  to  be  checked. 
Who  is  there  whose  conscience  does  not  reproach  him  for  having  sinned  in  this 
respect  ?  III.  There  are  considerations  which  should  act  as  dissuasives  and 
CORRECTIVES  TO  MURMURING.  1.  The  injurious  moral  effect  which  a  murmuring 
habit  has  upon  the  character  of  those  who  give  way  to  its  encroachment.  2.  The 
unhappy  effect  produced  upon  society  by  tbe  prevalence  of  this  habit.  3.  The 
dishonour  done  to  God's  righteous  and  beneficent  Providence.  4.  The  example  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  should  have  great  weight  with  His  disciples  ;  He  neither  com- 
plained of  His  lot  of  suffering,  nor  reviled  those  who  wronged  Him.  5.  The  prospect 
of  a  speedy  and  happy  issue  out  of  His  afflictions  should  lead  the  Christian  to  bear 
with  patience  the  appointed  burden  without  murmuring  or  complaint.  {Family 
Churchman. )  Murmuring : — How  many  of  us  turn  from  the  Canaan  and  gaze  rebel- 
lious on  the  desert  behind,  and  the  very  conduct  which  shocks  us  in  the  Jews  of  old 
ourselves  pursue.  We  too  murmur  as  they  did.  In  every  rank,  in  every  age,  are 
these  complainers  heard.  The  poor  man  meditates  in  moody  silence  on  the  unequal 
distribution  of  this  world's  goods.  The  rich  man  may  be  seen  joyless  in  all  his 
plenty.  The  young  complain  of  needless  restraints  imposed  upon  them ;  the  old, 
of  the  weakness  and  infirmity  attendant  on  declining  years.  Painful,  says  the 
student,  is  the  search,  and  difficult  the  perception  of  truth.  Yes,  and  even  the 
faithful  may  often  feel  despondent,  and  express  in  bitter  regret  their  little  progress 
in  the  good  they  seek  for.  Suppose,  then,  being  faint-hearted,  we  come  to  hesitate, 
to  rebel,  to  return.  The  murmurers  of  old  were  destroyed  of  the  destroyer.  Our 
ruin  likewise  may  be  slow,  but  if  we  continue  in  their  sin,  it  must  be  sure.  In 
your  patience  possess  ye  your  souls,  endeavouring  so  to  walk,  as  He  also  walked. 
The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  a  richer  treasure  than  the  grapes  of  Eschol.  (F. 
Jackson.)  Unreasonable   miirvinrlng  : — Seneca  bath  his  similitude  to   set   out 

the  great  evil  of  murmuring  under  small  afflictions.  Suppose,  saith  he,  a  man 
to  have  a  very  fair  house  to  dwell  in,  with  very  fair  orchards  and  gardens  set 
about  with  brave  tall  trees  for  ornament :  what  a  most  unreasonable  thing  were  it 
in  this  man  to  murmur  because  the  wind  blows  a  few  leaves  off  the  trees,  though 
they  hang  full  of  fruit!  If  God' takes  a  little,  and  gives  us  much,  sball  we  be 
discontent? — if  He  takes  our  son,  and  gives  us  His  own;  if  He  cause  the  trees 
to  bring  forth  the  fruit,  shall  we  be  angry  if  the  wind  blow  away  the  lenves  ?  {U. 
Venning.)  Uselessncss   of  murmuring  : — As  the    fluttering   of   the    snared   bird 

holdeth  her  faster  than  before,  so  our  struggling  and  murmuring  against  God  in 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

our  afflictions  availeth  us  nothing.  Chronic  discontent : — Some  people  are  never 
content  with  their  lot,  let  wbat  will  happen.  Clouds  and  darkness  are  over  their 
heads,  alike  whether  it  rain  or  shine.  To  them  every  incident  is  an  accident,  and 
every  accident  a  calamity.  Even  when  they  have  their  own  way,  tliey  like  it  no 
better  than  yonr  way,  and,  indeed,  consider  their  most  voluntary  acts  as  matters  of 
compulsion.  We  shw  a  striking  illustration  the  other  day  of  the  infirmity  we 
speak  of  in  the  conduct  of  a  child,  about  three  years  old.  He  was  crying  btcause 
his  mother  bad  fhut  the  parlour  door.  "  Poor  tiling,"  said  a  neighbour,  compas- 
sionatply,  "you  have  shut  the  child  out."  "It's  all  the  same  to  him,"  said  the 
mother  ;  "  he  would  cry  if  I  called  him  in  and  then  shut  the  door.  It  is  a  pecu- 
liarity of  that  boy,  that  if  he  is  left  rather  suddenly  on  either  side  of  a  door,  he 
considers  himself  shut  out,  and  rebels  accordingly."  There  are  older  children  who 
take  the  same  view  of  things.  {C.  H.  Sjjurrieon.)  Now  all  these  things  happened 
unto  them  for  ensamples  ;  and  they  are  written  for  our  admonition,  upon  whom 
the  ends  of  the  world  are  come. — Tlie  ar/es  : — I.  The  moral  relationship  of  the 
AGES.  "  The^<e  things,"  in  -Jewish  history,  "  happened  unto  them  for  ensamples," 
or  type«.  The  v/ords  suggest — 1.  That  the  Jewish  history  in  the  wilderness  is  a 
mirrur  of  Christian  life.  (1)  In  the  blessings  it  records.  The  Jews  in  the  wilder- 
ness— (a)  Had  special  guidance  (chap.  v.  1).  The  cloud  means  the  shechinah,  the 
symbol  of  the  Divine  presence.  So  long  as  they  followed  this,  they  were  safe. 
This  cloud  is  an  "  ensample "  of  the  Bible,  (b)  Were  specially  initiated.  By 
passing  through  the  sea  the  Jews  were  initiated  in  an  especial  sense  to  the  guidance 
of  God.  There  was  no  going  back  to  Egypt  after  this.  This  is  an  "  ensample  "  of 
the  consecration  of  Christians,  (c)  Had  special  supjilies  (vers.  3.  4).  The  manna 
and  water  are  "  ensamples  "  of  the  blessings  which  Christians  derive  from  Christ. 
(2)  In  the  impeife-tious  it  records.  These  Jews,  favoured  with  so  many  blessings, 
were  lustful,  idolatrous,  frivolous,  discontentei).  These  imperfections,  alas  !  are 
too  often  seen  in  the  Christian  Church.  (3)  In  the  perils  whicli  it  records  (vers. 
8-10).  Christians  are  exposed  to  the  same  peril — in  danger  of  offending  God. 
2.  That  Jewish  history  in  the  wilderness  is  a  monitor  of  Christian  life.  "They 
were  written  for  our  admonition."  The  principles,  therefore,  embodied  in  that 
history  are  of  universal  application.  They  are — (1)  The  special  care  which  God 
exercises  over  those  who  commit  themselves  to  Him.  (2)  The  tendency  o£  the 
depraved  heart  to  go  wrong.  (3)  The  indissoluble  connection  between  sin  and 
suffering.  These  prim-iples  should  be  studied.  You  may  find  them  in  every 
chapter  of  Providence.  II.  The  Divixe  supekixtekdence  of  the  ages.  The 
words  suggest — 1.  That  Gud  is  in  the  history  of  all  ages.  Human  history  contains 
no  chapter  of  accidents.  God  is  in  all.  He  originates  the  good,  permits  and 
controls  the  evil,  2.  That  God  employs  one  age  to  benefit  another.  Whatsoever 
God  does.  He  does  for  ever.  The  events  that  transpired  in  Arabia,  during  forty 
short  years,  some  thousands  of  years  ago,  were  to  tell  on  the  boundless  future. 
We  are  very  incompetent  to  judge  of  His  plan.  We  can  neither  see  the  beginning 
nor  the  end.  This  thought  should — (1)  Restrain  us  from  hasty  judgments  on 
Providence.  The  very  things  which  we  consider  evils  may  in  the  long  run  prove 
the  greatest  blessings.  When  the  whole  history  of  our  race  is  complete,  it  may 
appear  that  all  the  evils  of  our  world,  as  compared  with  the  good,  are  but  as  one 
jarring  note  in  an  endless  anthem  of  joy,  one  cloudy  hour  in  the  sunshine  of  ages. 
(2)  Impress  us  with  the  seriousness  of  life.  All  things  are  full  of  God.  Christ 
taught  that  all  the  events  of  His  providence  are  His  advents.  "  Be  ye  therefore 
ready,"  &c.  III.  The  growing  responsibility  of  the  ages.  "Upon  whom  the 
ends,"  &c.  "Ends  of  the  world  "  means  the  gospel  dispensation,  the  last  under 
which  men  will  live  on  the  earth.  In  this  age  we  have  the  advantages  of  the 
experiences  and  discoveries  of  past  ages.  (1)  Through  literature.  History  gives 
us  all  the  intellectual  wealth  of  the  ancient  heathen,  the  chosen  people,  of  the 
apostles  of  moilern  Europe.  The  intellectual  wealth  and  experience  of  all  past 
ages  meet  in  this.  Consequently  our  responsibility  is  great.  If  it  shall  be  "  more 
tolerable  for  Sodom  than  for  Chorazin,"  it  will  be  more  tolerable  for  Chorazin  than 
for  modern  Europe.  (2)  Through  influence.  The  mental  influence  streaming 
down  regularly  from  sire  to  son.  Gmclusion:  The  subject  reminds  us— 1.  Of  the 
special  goodness  of  God  to  this  age.  "  Tiie  lines  are  fallen  to  us  in  pleasant 
places,"  etc.  The  pious  Jews  once  desired  to  see  what  we  see  ;  but  they  did  not. 
The  Jews  lived  under  moonlight,  cold,  &c.  The  first  Christians,  under  the  clear 
dawn  of  morning  ;  but  it  is  high  noon  with  us.  2.  The  necessity  for  a  superior 
type  of  excellence.     Do  you  admire  the  greatest  early  saints  ?     You  ought  to  be 


CHAP.  X.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  11 

higher,  for  your  advantages  are  greater.  But  alas  I  fear  the  ages  which  have 
raised  us  in  the  arts  and  sciences  have  not  brought  us  corresponding  spiritual  good. 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver.  12.  Let  Mm  that  thinketh  lie  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall. — Falling 
jrom  grace  : — I.  A  fall  is  possible.  Consider — 1.  Human  weakness.  2.  The 
force  and  variety  of  temptation.  3.  The  many  admonitory  examples.  II.  The 
MOST  SECURE  IS  IN  THE  GREATEST  DANGER.     1.   Thi'ough  pride.     2.    Carelsssness. 

3.  Unwatchfulness.  III.  Caution  is  the  only  way  of  safety.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
Falling  from  grace  : — It  is  possible  to  begin  in  the  Spirit,  and  to  end  in  the  flesh  ; 
it  is  possible  to  be  seriously  hindered  ;  it  is  possible  to  come  short  of  the  promise 
of  the  grace  of  God.  Clouds  sometimes  obscure  the  brightest  evening  and  the 
sunniest  morning.  A  slight  atmospheric  change  may  transform  an  Alpine  ascent 
from  a  safe  excitement  into  an  imminent  jjeril.  It  is  thus  in  the  natural  world ; 
and  so  is  it  in  the  realm  of  grace.  There  are  numberless  causes,  arising  from  the 
circumstances  of  external  things,  or  from  the  inbred  and  unsubdued  corruption  of 
our  own  traitorous  hearts,  which  may  endanger  the  constancy  of  the  Christian,  and 
cause  his  goodness  to  be  even  as  the  morning  cloud  and  as  the  early  dew,  goodly 
and  sparkling  in  promise,  but,  by  the  fierce  heat  of  the  sun,  very  speedily  exhaled. 
{W.  31.  Punshon.)  The  possibility  of  a  moral  fall : — I.  Man  is  ever  in  danger 
OF  A  MORAL  "  FALL."  Whatever  else  the  record  of  "  the  Fall  "  may  teach  us,  it  is 
certainly  an  instructive  warning  that  no  state  on  earth  places  us  above  the  reach  of 
temptation  and  the  possibility  of  fall.  The  Jews  spelt  that  awful  word  in  the 
desert ;  Adam  and  Eve  spelt  it  in  Paradise.  To  all  it  meant  the  same.  1.  A 
departure  from  the  morally  erect  attitude  of  heart  that  God  designed  for  man. 
2.  A  prostration  of  the  manhood  that  was  meant  to  be  upright,  vigorous  in  good- 
ness. There  is  no  garden  here,  be  it  church,  college,  or  even  home,  that  has  not 
a  serpent  in  it.  II.  There  are  men  who  consider  themselves  above  the  possi- 
bility OF  such  a  moral  "  FALL."  They  consider  themselves  as  safe  whoever  is  in 
jDeril  ;  as  "  standing,"  whoever  is  falling.  This  misconception  arises — 1.  From  a 
faulty  moral  standard.  If  that  is  flexible  he  cannot  tell  whether  or  no  he  is  standing 
or  falling.  A  ship  at  sea  does  not  measure  her  course  by  another  ship  in  motion, 
or  still  less  by  ever  restless  waves,  but  by  star,  or  headland,  or  lighthouse.  So  we 
must  measure  our  moral  distances  by  the  inflexible  and  inviolable.  2.  From 
inattention  to  the  true  standard,  even  though  it  be  recognised.  3.  From  self- 
delusion  as  to  one's  own  condition.  There  are  moral  intoxicants,  and  under  their 
influence  many  a  backslider  is  unconscious  of  his  egregious  lapses  from  right,  and 
so  considers  himself  in  no  danger,  though  at  the  very  moment  he  is  falling. 
III.  Such  men  are  in  the  greatest  danger  of  a  moral  fall.  All  are,  even  those 
who  really  are  standing,  but  especially  those  who  "  think  "  they  are  standing.  It  is 
the  self -consciousness  that  this  "  thinking  "  involves,  the  self-satisfaction  it  implies, 
the  self-gratulation  it  engenders  that  is  the  source  of  peril.  No  traveller  is  so 
likely  to  stumble  as  the  Pharisee.  His  whole  attitude  and  temper  conspire  to 
imperil  his  spiritual  safety.  "  Pride  goeth  before  destruction,  and  a  haughty  spirit 
before  a  fall."  (U.  R.  Thomas.)  The  red  light : — I.  The  matter  of  circumspection. 
Ee  careful — 1.  Over  your  secular  vocation.  2.  Over  your  own  heart.  3.  Because 
of  your  enemies.  II.  Its  necessity.  Be  circumspect  especially  in  times  of — 
1.  Temporal  prosperity.  2.  Spiritual  triumph.  3.  Public  usefulness.  III.  Motives 
TO  IT.     1.   Oar  heavenly  vocation.     2.  Our  circumstances.     3.    Our  dispositions. 

4.  Our  character  and  reputation,  do  not  exempt  us — beware  of  little  and  secret  sins. 
(Biblical  Museum.)  Forewarned,  forearmed  : — 1.  Paul  has  been  reminding  the 
Corinthians  that  Israel  bad  religious  privileges  which  might  have  been  blessings  if 
they  had  used  them  rightly,  but  which,  being  abused,  did  them  more  harm  than 
good.  So  with  them.  Hence  the  conclusion  of  the  text.  2.  The  men  whose  fall 
the  Bible  has  recorded  for  our  warning,  fell  just  when  they  seemed  most  strong. 
Moses  was  the  meekest  of  men,  and  yet  he  sinned  unadvisedly  with  his  lips.  Peter 
■was  brave,  and  yet  for  want  of  moral  courage  he  denied  his  Lord.  John  was  the 
apostle  of  love,  but  he  desired  to  call  down  fire  from  heaven  against  his  enemies. 
Elijah  was  not  afraid  to  rebuke  a  king  to  his  face,  but  he  fell  into  such  a  fit  of 
cowardly  despondency  that  he  asked  God  to  take  away  his  life.  When  a  man 
commits  some  great  sin,  his  friends  often  say,  "  Well,  I  never  would  have  thought 
of  him  doing  that.  He  is  the  last  man  in  the  world  to  have  done  it."  And  that 
is  just  why  he  did  it,  because  he  thought  that  he  was  quite  safe,  and  as  a  consequence 
he  took  no  precaution  against  falling.     3.  Our  subject,  then,  is  the  danger  the  best 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  x. 

of  us  are  in  of  falling  into  sin  if  we  are  not  forearmed  by  being  forewarned,  and 
how  macli  further  a  sin  yielded  to  will  carry  us  in  the  ways  of  wickedness  than  we 
thought  at  first  that  it  would.  In  both  these  respects  "  let  him  that  thinketh  he 
standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall."  A  man  was  being  served  with  a  writ  for  debt. 
Knowing  that  if  he  got  beyond  tlie  boundary  of  his  county  he  could  not  be  obliged 
to  take  it,  he  ran  from  the  bailiff,  and  escaped.  On  coming  up  to  him  the  bailiff 
said,  "  You  have  given  me  a  good  run,  and  no  mistake,  but  don't  let  us  part  enemies, 
let  us  shake  hands."  The  man  did  so,  and  the  bailiff  pulled  him  over  the  fence 
and  then  arrested  him.  That  is  what  sin  does  for  us  if  we  are  not  on  our  guard 
against  it.  4.  Consider  the  character  of  the  first  and  last  in  a  series  of  tenipta- 
tious.  The  first  time  the  temptation  occurs,  there  is  a  shudder  and  a  feeling  of 
impossibility.  "  I  cannot  do  it,"  we  say.  The  next  time  it  is  treated  with  greater 
civility.  We  begin  now  to  reason  with  it,  and  ask,  is  it  really  so  bad  after  all  ?  At 
last  the  evil  thought  passes  into  the  evil  act,  and  the  second  transgression  becomes 
easier  by  recollecting  the  pleasantness  of  the  first.  We  now  plunge  daily  down  the 
precipice  on  the  brink  of  which  we  once  trembled.  The  power  of  habit  "  first 
draws,  then  drags,  then  hauls."  That  temptation  which  in  the  beginning  was  no 
stronger  than  a  cobweb,  was  so  strengthened  by  indulgence  that  it  became  a  cable, 
and  we  were  forced  to  "  draw  iniquity  with  cords  of  vanity,  and  sin  as  it  were  with 
a  cart  rope."  This  is  every  day  illustrated  by  the  liar  and  the  drunkard.  But, 
indeed,  all  sin  approaches  in  the  same  gradual  way.  George  Eliot  gives  in 
"Eomola"  the  picture  of  a  man,  good,  generous,  handsome,  with  all  the  appli- 
ances and  means  of  doing  good,  who,  "  because  he  tried  to  slip  away  from  every- 
thing that  was  unpleasant,  and  cared  for  nothing  so  much  as  his  own  safety,  came 
at  last  to  commit  some  of  the  basest  deeds  such  as  make  men  infamous."  5.  The 
holy  man  who  exclaimed,  as  he  saw  a  criminal  led  to  execution,  "There  goes  me 
but  for  the  grace  of  God,"  was  not  exaggerating,  but  only  speaking  from  observation 
and  experience.  All  men  who  know  themselves  are  conscious  that  a  bias  towards 
evil  exists  within  them.  When  we  see  a  man  fall  from  the  top  of  a  five-storey  house, 
we  say  the  man  is  lost.  We  say  that  before  he  has  fallen  a  foot ;  for  the  same 
principle  that  made  him  fall  one  foot  will  undoubtedly  make  him  complete  the 
descent  by  falling  other  eighty  or  ninety  feet.  The  gravitation  of  sin  in  a  human 
soul  acts  precisely  in  the  same  way.  6.  In  the  Zulu  and  Afghanistan  wars  some  of 
our  forces  suffered  disaster,  not  because  they  were  weak  or  cowardly,  but  because 
they  felt  so  strong  and  brave  that  they  thought  they  might  be  careless.  [E.  J. 
Hardi/,  M.A.)  A  caution  to  the  •presiimphious  : — The  vices  are  the  counterfeits 
of  virtues.  Whenever  God  sends  from  the  mint  of  heaven  a  precious  coin  of 
genuine  metal,  Satan  will  imitate  the  imi^ress,  and  utter  a  vile  production  of  no 
value.  God  gives  love.  Satan  also  fashioneth  lust.  God  bestows  courage. 
Satan  inspires  foolhardiness.  The  saving  grace  of  faith  ripens  into  confidence. 
Satan  palms  upon  us  the  vice  of  presumption.  Let  us — I.  Find  out  the  character 
OF  the  man  who  thinks  he  stands.  I  could  find  men  in  business  who,  because 
they  have  in  one  speculation  been  successful,  will  risk  their  all — and  lose  it  too.  I 
might  mention  others  who,  presuming  upon  their  health,  are  spending  their  years 
in  sin  because  they  think  "  all  men  mortal  but  themselves."  I  might  speak  of  men 
who  will  venture  into  the  midst  of  temptation,  confident  in  their  boasted  power. 
But  my  business  now  is  to  uncover  the  causes  of  presumption  in  a  Christian. 
1.  Worldly  prosperity.  Give  a  man  wealth,  or,  if  not  wealth,  continued  health, 
and  the  consequence,  let  him  be  the  best  Christian  who  ever  breathed,  will  be  pre- 
sumption ;  and  he  will  say,  "  I  stand."  "  In  my  prosperity,"  says  David,  "  I  said, 
I  shall  never  be  moved."  And  we  are  not  much  better  than  David,  nor  half  as 
good.  Bless  God,  then,  for  our  afflictions  ;  but  for  them  we  might  become  too 
secure.  2.  Light  thoughts  of  sin.  When  we  are  first  converted,  our  conscience  is 
so  very  tender,  that  we  are  afraid  of  the  slightest  sin.  But  alas !  very  soon  the 
sensitive  plant  of  young  piety  turns  into  a  pliant  willows  It  is  sadly  true  that 
even  a  Christian  will  grovv  by  degrees  so  callous,  that  the  sin  which  once  startled 
him  does  not  alarm  him  in  the  least.  By  degrees  we  get  familiar  with  sin.  The 
men  who  work  in  those  huge  vessels,  the  h;immering  of  which  causes  immense 
noise,  cannot  at  first  sleep  for  the  continual  din;  but  by  and  by  they  think 
nothing  of  it.  3.  Low  thoughts  of  the  value  of  reli^;ion.  We  none  of  us  value 
religion  enough.  We  have  nought  with  which  to  compare  the  soul ;  therefore  we 
cannot  tell  its  value.  It  is  because  we  do  not  l<now  this  that  we  presume.  Doth 
the  miser  scatter  his  gold  on  the  floor  that  his  servant  may  steal  it?  Doth  the 
mother  trust  her  babe  by  the  river-side  ?     Oh!  no  ;  what  we  esteem  most  precious, 


CHAP.  X.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  13 

we  guard  with  the  most  anxious  care.  So,  if  Christians  estimated  religion  at  its 
proper  rate,  they  never  would  presume.  4.  Ignorance  of  what  we  are,  and  where 
we  stand.  We  say,  "I  have  a  good  dispositiou,  and  none  of  those  passions  that 
some  have ;  I  can  stand  secure."  Take  heed.  Christian,  thou  hast  a  heart  of 
unbelief;  therefore  watch  thou  both  night  and  day.  5.  Pnde — (1)  Of  talent. 
How  many  that  flamed  like  comets  in  the  sky  of  the  religious  world  have  been 
quenched  in  darkness !  (2)  Of  grace.  A  man  says,  "  I  have  great  faith,  I  shall 
not  fall."  "  I  have  fervent  love,"  says  another,  "  there  is  no  danger  of  my  going 
astray."  He  who  boasts  of  grace,  has  little  grace  to  boast  of.  But  there  are  some 
who  think  their  graces  can  keep  them,  knowing  not  that  the  stream  must  flow 
constantly  from  the  fountain  head,  else  the  bed  of  the  brook  shall  soon  be  dry,  and 
ye  shall  see  the  pebbles  at  the  bottom.  (3)  Privileges.  "  I  take  the  sacrament,  I 
have  been  baptized ;  I  attend  such  and  such  a  ministry."  Take  heed,  pride  cometh 
before  a  fall.  II.  Show  the  dangkr.  He  who  thinks  he  stands  is  in  danger  of  a 
fall.  Because  such  a  man — 1.  In  the  midst  of  temptation  will  be  sure  to  be  more 
or  less  careless.  He  is  off  his  guard ;  he  is  not  ready  to  parry  the  stroke  of  the  evil 
one.  2.  Will  not  be  careful  to  keep  out  of  the  way  of  temptation,  but  rather  will 
run  into  it.  Presumptuous  men  will  say  they  can  go  into  sin,  they  are  so  full  of 
moral  strength.  3.  Will  not  use  the  means  of  grace.  I  know  some  professedly 
religious  people  who  stop  away  from  the  house  of  God  because  they  conceive  they 
are  so  advanced  that  they  do  not  want  it.  They  fancy  that  means  are  intended  for 
weaker  Christians ;  and  leaving  those  means,  they  fall.  4.  Quenches  the  Spirit 
who  delights  to  dwell  in  the  low  places.  He  leaves  every  heart  where  pride 
dwelleth  ;  that  evil  spirit  of  Lucifer  he  abhors.  III.  Give  the  counsel.  "  Take 
heed,"  because — 1.  So  many  have  fallen.  Could  I  take  you  into  the  wards  of  that 
hospital  where  lie  sick  and  wounded  Christians,  I  could  make  you  tremble.  2.  A 
fall  will  so  much  damage  the  cause  of  Christ.  Nothing  has  hurt  religion  one 
thousandth  part  so  much  as  the  fall  of  God's  people.  (C.II.  Spurrieo)}.)  False 
confidence : — One  of  the  saddest  incidents  connected  with  the  disastrous  fire  at 
Chicago  is  that  so  many  trusted  not  only  their  goods  but  their  lives  to  buildings 
that  were  regarded  as  fireproof,  and  that  they  perished  together.  Dr.  Goodall 
records  similar  incidents  connected  with  the  great  fire  at  Constantinoj)le  in  1831, 
and  makes  a  suggestive  reflection,  "  We,  like  many  others,  fared  the  worse  for 
living  ill  houses  which  were  considered  fire-proof.  In  the  great  burning  day  may 
no  such  false  confidence  prove  our  ruin."  {Christian  A<ie.)  A  caveat  for 
Christians  : — 1.  This  is  a  godly  fear,  and  ' '  blessed  is  he  "  which  "  standeth  in  fear," 
not  of  God's  mercy,  but  of  his  own  frailty  (Prov.  xxviii.  14),  as  Job  did  (chap.  ix. 
28).  We  must  have  confidence  towards  God,  but  diffidence  towards  ourselves  ;'  for 
God  will  be  true  to  us  if  we  be  true  to  Him.  This  fear  is  not  contrary  to  faith, 
but  cannot  stand  without  it.  2.  The  apostle  warneth  us  that  we  are  all  in  a  house 
ready  to  fall,  all  in  a  ship  ready  to  sink,  and  all  in  a  body  ready  to  sin.  Who  can 
say  what  he  will  do  when  he  is  tried  ?  "  Take  heed  "  is  a  good  staff  to  stay  upon, 
and  so  often  a  man  sins  as  he  casts  it  from  him  ;  all  go  astray.  3.  Who  would  have 
said  that  the  chosen  people  should  become  the  cursedest  upon  the  earth  ?  Who 
would  have  thought  that  Noah,  when  he  builded  the  ark,  because  he  believed  in 
God,  would  have  given  the  first  example  of  sins  to  his  own  sons?  Who  would 
have  thought  that  David,  when  he  was  j)ersecuted  for  his  godliness  in  the  desert, 
would  have  murdered  Uriah,  when  the  blessings  of  God  did  call  him  to  thankful- 
ness ?  Who  would  have  thought  that  Solomon,  the  wisest  man,  would  have  taken 
more  conculiines  unto  him  than  any  heathen  in  the  world  ?  "  How  are  the  mighty 
overthrown  !  "  Like  Peter,  which  said  he  would  never  forsake  Christ,  and  forsook 
Him  first.  These  strong  oaks  lie  in  the  dust,  that  they  which  think  they  stand 
may  take  heed  lest  they  fall.  Can  I  look  upon  these  ruins  without  compassion,  or 
remember  them  without  fear  ?  Who  am  I  that  I  should  stand  like  a  shrub,  when 
these  cedars  are  blown  down  to  the  ground?  They  which  are  charged  like  Hazael 
(2  Kings  viii.  13)  blush  to  hear  thus  of  themselves,  and  would  have  scorned  some- 
time at  him  whiih  should  once  have  said,  when  they  were  zealous  and 
studious  preachers,  that  the  time  would  come  when  they  should  be  time-servers, 
lovers  of  the  world,  and  persecutors.  What  shall  we  do  then  when  we  hear  of 
other  men's  thoughts?  Not  talk  as  we  do,  but  beware  by  them,  and  think.  Am  I 
better  than  he?  am  I  stronger  than  Samson?  wi^er  than  Solomon?  firmer  than 
Peter,  if  God  should  leave  me  to  myself?  There  is  no  salt  but  may  lose  his 
saltness,  no  wine  but  may  lose  his  strength,  no  flower  but  may  lose  his  scent,  no 
light  but  may  be  eclipsed,  no   beauty  but  may  be  stained,  no  fruit  but  may   be 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

blasted,  nor  soul  but  may  be  corrupted.  4.  So  earnestly  must  we  call  upon  our 
souls,  that  we  be  not  weary  of  well-doing ;  for  happier  are  the  children  that  never 
began,  than  Judas,  whose  end  was  worse  than  his  beginning.  {H.  Smith.) 
Christian  circumspcctinn: — -It  is  a  very  affecting  truth,  that  of  all  the  thousands 
who  left  Egypt,  there  were  none,  only  Joshua  and  Caleb,  entered  the  promised 
land.  And  there  is  something  peculiarly  solemn  in  the  thought  that  the  apostle 
has  brought  them  forward  as  a  warning  to  the  Church.  Note — 1.  Those  falls  to 
WHICH  A  CHILD  OF  GoD  IS  EXPOSED.  A  child  of  God  may  fall— 1.  In  doctrine. 
2.  In  his  own  personal  religion.  He  may  get  into  a  cold  and  heartless  state.  3.  In 
the  outward  conduct.     Low  i^rinciples  lead  to  low  practice.     II.  That  there  may 

BE    THE    STATE   OF   MIND  IN    WHICH   A  MAN  MAY   THINK   THAT   HE  STANDS,  I.e. ,    that  he   is 

secure.  He  sees  others  fall,  and  he  reasons,  "I  am  not  exposed  to  the  same  falls 
as  tliey  were."  What  does  it  arise  from  ?  An  overweening  confidence  in  his  own 
strength,  wisdom,  experience.  And  how  does  self-confidence  evince  itself  ?  In  the 
Church  of  old  it  showed  itself  by  a  state  of  sleep  ;  in  boasting  expressions,  in  the 
case  of  Peter.  Distinguish,  however,  betvireen  self-confidence  and  confidence  in 
Christ.  Paul  was  very  confident  in  the  latter  sense  (2  Cor.  v.  6 ;  Phil.  iii.  3  ; 
1  Cor.  i.  13,  31).  III.  The  need  foe  caution  is  given  us  in  the  text.  1.  There 
is  in  you  a  perpetual  proneness  to  fall.  It  is  well  for  a  man,  when  he  rises  in  the 
morning,  to  have  this  in  his  soul  as  a  certain  principle,  "  I  have  in  me  the  seed  of 
all  evil,  and  my  prayer  through  this  day  must  be,  '  Hold  Thou  me  up  and  I  shall 
be  safe.'"  2.  Any  of  our  outward  circumstances,  even  the  most  prosperous,  may 
prove  occasions  for  falling  (cf.  Hezekiah).  So  with  adversity  (Psa.  Ixxiii.).  3.  Our 
very  lawful  occupations — things  that  are  positively  commanded  by  God — yea,  our 
very  spiritual  exercises,  may  have  something  in  them  which  takes  our  heart  from 
God.  IV.  How  TO  BE  peeseeved  fkom  falling.  1.  Keep  ever  in  mind  your  per- 
petual tendency  to  depart  from  the  living  God.  2.  Watch  over  the  first  declen- 
sions. 3.  When  the  Holy  GLost  unfolds  to  your  souls  where,  in  what,  and  from 
wbat  you  have  fallen,  take  it  to  Jesus — to  tbe  fountain  opened  for  sin  and 
uncleanness.      {J.    H,    Evans,   31. A.)  Caution   necessary    in    the   best    saints 

against  the  tvorst  of  sins  : — I.  What  it  is  this  heed  eefees  to,  or  what  is 
THE  natuee  of  THE  DUTY  TO  WHICH  MY  TEXT  DIRECTS.  It  denotes  that  hecdful- 
iiess  and  circumspection  a  person  would  show  who  apprehended  anger  to  be 
near.  More  particularly  this  circumspection  relates — 1.  To  a  man's  outward 
circumstances  and  calling  in  life.  Choose  rather  to  be  called  unneighbourly, 
stiff,  precise,  and  what  not,  than  to  sacrifice  religion  and  conscience  for  a  little 
worldly  pelf,  or  a  mere  empty  compliment.  2.  This  circumspection  and  care 
relates  to  a  mnn's  heart.  God  complains  of  Israel,  that  His  heart  was  divided 
(Hosea  x.  2).  The  true  fear  of  God  has  always  its  seat  in  the  heart  (Jer.  xxxi. 
33).  Hypocrisy  seeks  a  cover,  but  truth  and  sincerity  begin  here ;  if  this  be 
rotten,  all  your  faith  is  vain,  your  hope  is  vain,  ye  are  yet  in  your  sins.  It  is  an 
awful  word  in  Hosea  vii.  16,  and  yet  it  is  a  true  representation  of  every  man's 
heart :  "  They  return,  but  not  to  the  Most  High  ;  they  are  like  a  deceitful  bow." 
Alas  !  how  ofien  do  our  hearts  fail  us  when  we  have  thought  we  took  them  with 
us  at  the  beginning  of  a  duty  ?  Take  heed  to  your  hearts,  if  you  would  stand 
your  ground  against  the  evil  one.  3.  This  circumspection  and  care  relates  to  the 
way  in  which  our  enemies  are  opposed  and  resisted  by  us.  Take  heed  how  you 
walk,  if  you  would  stand  your  ground  ;  how  you  fight,  if  you  would  keep  the  field. 
You  have  the  great  law  of  arms  set  down  (Eph.  vi.  10).  4.  This  circumspection 
and  care  relates  to  a  believer's  life  and  conversation  after  such  a  conquest  ;  take 
heed  to  your  walk  after  any  advantages  you  have  gained  against  your  enemy.  It 
is  Peter's  advice,  and  his  experience  cost  him  dear  (1  Pet.  v.  8).  Pride  and  self- 
applause  are  apt  to  shove  themselves  in,  though  our  own  arm  hath  not  gotten  us 
the  victory.  Paul's  thom  in  the  flesh  was  given  to  keep  him  humble.  Take  heed 
of  a  vain,  wandering,  loose  conversation  after  sweet  communion  ;  pray  that  you 
may  not  ffiU  from  your  steadfastness.  II.  Who  are  the  peesons  the  duty  is  directed 
TO?  In  general,  it  is  to  them  that  think  they  stand,  them  whose  fall  is  least 
expected.  Paul  gives  this  special  direction  to  Timothy  (1  Tim.  iv.  16).  Ministers 
may  soon  pull  down  in  their  life  and  conversation  what  they  are  building  up  in 
their  doctrine.  Some  that  have  stood  it  out  manfully  against  the  storms  of 
persecution,  have  been  easily  drawn  aside  from  their  steadfastness  in  a  calm  of 
liberty.  III.  Why  such  as  think  tiiejiselves  most  safe  as  to  theie  state 
sifooLD  TAKE  HEED  LEST  THEY  FALL  ;  or  what  are  tliosc  motives  and  arguments 
contained  in  the  term  "  wherefore."     1.  Because  many  have  so  fallen  (see  ver  5). 


CHAP.  X.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  15 

Where  there  are  many  cautions  and  memorandums  there  must  be  great  danger  ; 
here  a  post  and  there  a  pillar  to  give  warning  ;  sure  there  must  be  some  pits  in  the 
way  which  we  are  not  well  aware  of.  It  is  reported  ol  a  Grecian  commander  that 
wherever  he  went,  though  he  was  alone,  he  was  still  considering  all  the  places  he 
passeil  by,  how  an  enemy  might  possess  them,  and  lay  ambushes  in  them  to  his 
disadvantage,  should  he  command  an  army  there.  Oh  !  that  Christians  were  half 
so  cautious!  "A  prudent  man  seeth  the  evil,  and  hideth  himself."  2.  Because 
there  is  nothing  in  your  circumstances,  gifts,  station  of  life,  experience,  or  attain- 
ments, that  will  of  itself  keep  you  from  falling.  Corrupt  nature  is  corrupt  nature  in 
one  as  well  as  another.  Temptation  meeting  with  approbation  and  acceptance  in 
the  heart,  like  a  violent  land-flood  rushing  down  a  steep  place,  cariies  all  before  it. 
When  sin  is  committed  a  man  wonders  he  should  be  so  overtaken,  so  sadly  soiled ; 
he  can  scarcely  believe  that  it  is  he  that  has  sinned.  3.  Sin,  when  it  is  committed, 
hardens,  whoever  be  the  person  sinning  (Heb.  iii.  1.3).  4.  Should  you  be  restored 
after  your  falls  the  fruit  of  sin  will  be  exceeding  bitter.  Inferences :  1.  If  tbe 
heedful  are  in  so  much  danger,  what  must  become  of  poor  heedless  souls  !  2.  Is 
he  that  thinketh  he  standeth  in  danger  lest  he  fall?  How  humble  should  this 
make  us  in  our  own  eyes!  how  pitiful  and  tender  towards  them  that  are  fallen? 
3.  What  a  blessing  is  the  care  and  watch  of  a  gospel-church,  when  so  many  are 
our  temptations,  so  great  our  dangers.  (J.  Hill.)  Take  hi-ed  : — The  dangers  to 
■which  religion  and  viitue  are  exposed  during  the  whole  of  our  Chiistian  course  are 
enough  to  excite  the  care  and  to  exercise  the  prudence  and  fortitude  of  a  Christian. 
The  passions  and  appetites  implanted  in  our  nature,  if  not  strictly  restrained,  will 
rise  into  irregularity  and  lead  us  into  criminal  excess.  The  pernicious  examples 
with  which  the  world  abounds,  unless  they  be  carefully  guarded  against,  will  easily 
corrupt  the  heart,  and  seduce  us  into  sinful  practices.  No  inconsiderable  degree  of 
danger  arises  from  tbat  cheerfulness  of  heart  and  gaiety  of  temper  which,  though 
innocent  and  agreeable  in  themselves,  may  lead  us  inadvertently  beyond  the  bounds 
of  innocence.  The  desire  of  riches  and  wealth,  that  love  of  money  which  is  the  root 
of  all  evil,  has  carried  away  numbers  of  mankind,  and  landed  them  in  destiuction. 
1.  The  first  and  most  essential  preservative  of  virtue  is  to  maintain  a  lively  faith  in 
the  principles  of  religion.  By  frequently  recollecting  the  evidences  of  the  gospel, 
which  are  the  proper  grounds  of  faith,  revive  that  essential  principle,  and  by 
reflecting  on  the  consequences  of  religion  keep  alive  a  deep  sense  of  its  impor- 
tance. Often  call  to  mind  the  goodness  of  God,  especially  as  displayed  through 
Jesus  Christ;  exercise  your  faith  in  those  great  and  precious  promises  which  are 
made  to  good  men  in  the  gospel,  and  never  lose  sight  of  those  awful  threatenings 
which  are  denounced  against  impenitent  sinners.  2.  As  another  excellent  mean 
of  safety,  which  should  be  employed  in  the  preservation  of  innocence,  cultivate  a 
lively  sense  of  virtue  and  vice,  by  attending  to  the  dictates  of  conscience.  Never 
stifle  the  admonitions  of  your  own  minds ;  regarding  them  as  so  many  warnings 
from  heaven,  attend  to  their  voice  and  follow  their  directions.  Allow  conscience 
to  strip  vice  of  those  artificial  disguises  which  it  assumes  in  the  world,  and  which 
lessen  the  sense  of  its  guilt  and  danger.  Always  regard  sin,  even  under  its  most 
flattering  appearance,  as  the  reproach  of  human  nature,  as  subversive  of  society, 
as  peculiarly  offensive  to  God.  Nor  let  your  abhorrence  of  evil  be  confined  to 
those  flagrant  vices  wbich  expose  men  to  shame,  which  lay  waste  the  conscience, 
and  are  an  outrage  on  religion.  Look  even  upon  less  instances  of  vice  as  propor- 
tionably  guilty  in  the  sight  of  God  and  dangerous  to  your  own  souls.  3.  It  will 
greatly  conduce  to  our  spiritual  safety  to  maintnin  a  sense  of  the  weakness  of 
human  nature,  and  of  an  absolute  dependence  upon  God.  Eemember  the 
imperfection  of  the  understanding,  the  power  of  prejudice,  the  perverseness  of  the 
will,  and  the  deceitfulness  of  the  heart.  4.  As  a  natural  consequence  of  human 
weakness,  and  another  excellent  preservative  of  virtue,  carefully  avoid  the  occasion 
of  sin.  Allow  not  yourselves  to  proceed  to  the  utmost  bounds  even  in  things 
lawful.  From  the  utmost  boundary  of  virtue  there  is  but  one  step  into  the  legions 
of  vice  ;  and  he  who  continues  to  take  this  dangeious  liberty  will  sometimes  make 
the  fatal  transition.  Make  yourselves  well  aci|uainted  with  your  own  abilities, 
dispositions,  and  inclinations  ;  that  you  may  encounter  no  temptation  which  you 
are  unable  to  resist,  that  you  may  undertake  nothing  to  which  you  are  unequal. 
But  do  not  think  it  enough  merely  to  avoid  the  occasions  of  sin.  If  you  would 
effectually  secure  your  integrity,  you  must  make  diligent  use  of  the  means  of 
virtue.  Attend  with  seriousness  and  regularity  the  public  institutions  of  religion. 
Be  as  regular  in   your  private   as  in  your  public   devotions.      There   call   your 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

past  ways  to  remembrance,  deliberate  concerning  your  future  conduct,  and  ask 
assistance  and  direction  from  the  eternal  fountain  of  wisdom  and  goodness. 
(A.    Donnan.)  Presumptuous    confidence: — Dr.    Talmage   tells    a   story   of   an 

experience-meeting  held  in  Louisville,  Kentucky,  that  is  not  without  its  lessons. 
It  seems  to  have  been  a  meeting  where  what  our  Transatlantic  friends  call 
"  high  falutin'  talk  "  was  in  the  ascendant.  A  man  rose  up  and  said,  "  I'm  a 
ship  steaming  right  ahead  for  glory.  I  can  tell  ye  I'm  going  along  at  a  spanking 
pace,  and  soon  expect  to  enter  the  blessed  haven  of  eternal  felicity."  Another  man, 
whose  jealousy  seems  to  have  been  excited  by  this  very  high-sounding  profession, 
immediately  rose  and  said,  "  Yes,  friends,  like  our  brother  who  has  just  sat  down, 
I  also  am  a  ship  in  full  sail,  steaming  straight  and  fast  for  the  heavenly  shore.  I'm 
going  along  at  the  rate  of  forty  knots  an  hour,  and  soon  shall  hail  the  mountain- 
tops  of  Immanuel's  land.  Glory  !  glory  !  "  An  aged  sister  who  was  j^resent,  and 
whose  experience  of  Christian  life  extended  over  many  years,  rose  and  said,  "Well, 
you  are  all  gettin'  'long  mighty  fast.  I  have  been  a-goin'  to  heaven  for  seventy 
years,  and  I've  had  to  walk  all  the  way,  and  have  often  stumbled  and  fallen,  but 
have  got  up  again,  and  if  I  ever  get  there  at  all  I  expect  I'll  have  jest  to  walk  the 
rest  of  the  way.  As  to  you  men  who  are  going  so  fast,  all  I've  got  to  say  is,  that 
if  you  get  to  goin'  much  faster  you'll  bust  your  bilers  and  never  git  there  at  all." 
Dr.  Talmage  naively  adds,  "  There  are  a  good  many  folk  whose  bilers  have  busted, 
all  about."  Fatal  self-confidence  : — A  wild  beast  tamer  boasted  that  he  was  the 
entire  master  of  the  animals  committed  to  his  charge.  They  were  completely  his 
slaves.  On  entesiug  the  cage  in  which  they  were  confined,  he  was  immediately  set 
upon,  and  but  for  timely  assistance  would  undoubtedly  have  perished.  So  men 
often  boast  themselves  masters  over  evil  habits.  They  can  drink  without  becoming 
slaves  to  it.  Beware,  lest  in  an  unguarded  moment  the  so-called  slave  becomes  the 
master.     {Ellen  K.  Tripper.) 

Ver.  13.  There  hatli  no  temptation  taken  you  but  sucli  as  is  common  to  man. — 

The  limits  of  human  experience  : — I.  A  great  biany  believe  that  there  never  were 
SUCH  people  as  themselves.  1.  Nobody  ever  did  what  they  have  done,  or  came 
through  what  they  have  come  through.  There  never  were  such  children  as  theirs; 
nor  such  toils,  nor  even  such  headaches  and  worries  as  theirs.  All  this  comes  of  a 
morbid  self-conceit.  2.  But  there  is  a  particular  manifestation  of  this  tendency 
which  deserves  our  heartiest  sympathy.  There  are  those  who  fancy  there  never 
were  such  sinners  as  they  are :  that  you  may  just  leave  them  alone,  as  past  all 
redemption ;  and  there  are  others  who  have  found  some  little  measure  of  hope  and 
peace  in  Christ,  but  who  seem  likely  to  be  desponding  pilgrims  to  the  end.  They 
will  have  it  that  there  never  were  believers  so  weak  as  they  are,  and  never  such 
temptations  and  perils  as  those  which  they  must  pass  through.  It  was  to  such  as 
these  that  St.  Paul  wrote.  II.  We  may  understand  the  text  as  reaching  to  all 
that  makes  the  common  lot  of  human-kind.  We  fancy,  when  painful  trials  come, 
that  things  so  painful  were  never  felt  before.  But  our  text  reminds  us  that  there 
is  a  limit,  within  which  all  human  experience  lies.  Human  ability  and  human 
endurance  have  their  tether,  and  cannot  range  very  far.  Here  is  a  lesson  of 
humility  for  the  self-conceited;  let  them  remember  that  thousands  more  have  been 
at  least  as  good.  Here  is  comfort  for  those  bowed  down  under  the  sense  of  sinful- 
ness ;  thousands  are  now  in  heaven  who  have  sinned  as  deeply  as  they.  Here  is 
encouragement  for  the  tempted  :  thousands  have  by  God's  grace  been  led  safely 
through.  So  you  see  that  the  text  may  be  useful  as  a  medicine  for  two  opposite 
spiritual  diseases,  presumption  and  despair.  But  it  is  to  the  comforting  view  of 
the  text  that  I  would  direct  your  thoughts.  It  speaks— 1.  To  those  under  deep 
conviction  of  sin.  If  you  wish  to  persuade  a  sick  man  to  send  for  the  physician, 
the  first  thing  you  must  do  is  to  convince  him  that  he  is  sick.  So  the  Holy  Spirit 
begins  His  saving  work  by  showing  the  careless  soul  how  sick  it  is.  Now  there  is 
something  very  startling  in  this.  It  is  something  quite  strange.  For  the  natural 
thing  is,  to  think  that  we  are  not  very  great  sinners.  Then  the  soul  is  sometimes 
ready  to  run  from  presumption  to  the  other  extreme  of  despair.  In  that  sad 
time,  what  unspeakable  comfort  to  know  that  other  men  have  felt  the  like  !  2.  To 
those  under  the  pressure  of  temptation.  Now  there  is  comfort  under  any  trouble 
in  the  bare  thought  that  others  have  known  the  like;  but  the  special  comfort  of 
the  text  is,  that  if  no  temptation  is  likely  to  assail  us,  except  that  through  which 
souls  as  weak  as  we  have  by  God's  grace  passed  safely  into  glory — then  that  we  too 
may  hope,  by  tbe  same  blessed  aid,  to  fight  our  way  through.     That  which  man 


CHAP.  X.J  I.  CORINTHIANS.  17 

has  done,  man  may  do.  The  great  adversary,  and  the  ensnaring  world,  fairly 
vanquished  in  a  hundred  battles,  may  well  be  vanquished  again.  But  ii;  you  are 
an  insincere  and  half-hearted  Christian,  seeking  to  just  reacii  heaven  at  last  after 
having  held  by  the  world  here,  you  need  never  think  to  cloak  your  own  proneness 
to  go  astray  under  the  pretext  that  temptation  overpowered  you.  Never  think,  as 
some  hy]5ocritically  do,  to  cast  wholly  upon  Satan  the  sin  into  which  they  went 
quite  readily  themselves.  3.  Those  under  great  sorrow  and  bereavement.  The 
mother  who  has  lost  her  child  is  consoled  when  another,  who  has  passed  through 
the  like  trial,  does  but  come  and  sit  by  her,  and  say  no  word  but  that  she  has  felt 
the  same.  Surelj-  there  is  something  consoling  amid  our  earthly  sorrows,  in  the 
bare  remembrance  that  our  Saviour  understands  them,  because  He  has  felt  them 
all !  But  the  texi  suggests  comfort  more  substantial  than  this,  viz.,  that  others 
who  have  known  such  sorrow  as  we  feel,  have  been  enabled  by  God's  grace  to  bear 
it,  and  profit  by  it ;  and  surely  there  is  something  in  that  thoujzht  which  should 
enable  us  to  bow  the  more  submissively  to  our  Heavenly  Father's  will.  It  is  not 
alone  that  the  mourner  travels  throut;h  this  vale  of  tears ;  apostles  and  prophets 
are  of  the  company  ;  saints  and  martyrs  go  with  him  ;  and  the  sorrowful  face  of 
the  Great  Kedeemer,  though  sorrowful  now  no  more,  remains  for  ever  with  the  old 
look  of  brotherly  sympathy  to  His  servants'  eyes  and  hearts.  Nothing  hath  come 
to  us,  nothing  will  come  to  us,  but  has  been  shared  by  better  men.  {A.  K.  H. 
Boyd,  D.D.)  Very  peculiar  circ2imstances  : — "  Ah,"  said  one  to  me,  "  you  do  not 
know  the  peculiar  circumstances  in  which  I  am  placd."  "  I  ask  your  paidon,"  I 
replied,  "  I  thought  I  had  spoken  of  peculiar  circ^mstiirces."  "  Yes,  but  mine  are 
very  peculiar  circumstances."  "But  is  Christ  not  a  mighty  Saviour?"  "Yes, 
but  mine  are  very,  very  peculiar  circumstances."  "  Will  you  look  away  from  me 
now,  and  speak  to  God  in  heaven  thus :  '  God,  I  thank  Thee  for  Jesus  Christ.  I 
thank  Thee  Thou  hast  looked  down  on  my  lost,  hell -deserving  state,  and  that  He 
died  to  save  me.  I  want  to  live  a  holy  life  to  Thy  glory.  But  my  circumstances 
are  so  very,  very  peculiar  that  I  cannot  think  Jesus  Christ  is  quite  able  to  keep  me 
in  them.  I  am  very  sorry  for  Jesus  Christ,  and  I  wish  He  were  a  little  stronger  ?  ' " 
"But,"  she  exclain^ed,  "  would  not  that  be  blasphemv  ?  "  "  Not  more  than  your 
saying  that  in  your  very,  very  peculiar  circumstauces  He  cannot  keep  you.  Let  us 
try  another  way.  Address  yourself  to  God  thus :  '  I  go  out  to  my  very,  very  peculiar 
circumstances,  believing  that  there  is  for  me  a  very,  very  i^eculiar  Saviour,  able  to 
keep  me  every  day  in  my  very,  veiy  peculiar  trial.  I  go  believing  He  will  help  me 
if  I  trust  Him,  and  go  trusting  Him.'  "  "  Is  thai  all  I  have  to  do  ?  "  "  Yes,  that 
is  all.  Go  on  trusting,  moment  by  moment,  and  He  will  keep  you,  however  peculiar 
the  circumstances,  moment  by  moment,  to  the  end."  {H.  W.  Wehh-Peploe,  M.A.) 
T evi plat  ion  : — I.  None  of  omi  tejiptations  exceed  ouk  powers  op  endup..\nce. 
1.  We  sliall  never  be  placed  where  to  sin  will  be  inevitable.  God  will  so  adjust 
our  surroundings  that  we  sliall  always  be  able  to  do  what  is  right.  Even  when 
our  difliculties  arise  from  what  we  unexpectedly  find  in  the  Church,  we  shall 
not  find  them  invincibly  obstructive.  2.  Tiiere  is  great  ground  of  encouragement 
in  this.  We  are  apt  to  suppose  that  our  difficulties  are  unique,  and  some  have 
sought  to  improve  their  position  by  entering  on  some  more  favourable  line  of  life. 
But  the  apostle  says,  "Let  every  man  abide  in  the  same  calling  wherein  he  was 
called."  And  this  is  the  highest  and  most  practical  wisdom.  For  every  sphere  of 
life  has  its  peculiar  temptations,  and  while  we  know  sometliing  of  those  that  meet 
us  where  we  are,  we  know  nothing  of  those  that  may  meet  us  elsewhere,  and  they 
might  be  more  perilous  to  us.  But  to  one  trying  manfully  to  make  the  most  of  his 
lot  my  text  comes  with  very  potent  help.  All  things  seem  to  be  against  you.  It 
was  quite  otlierwise  when  you  never  tried  to  serve  God.  Still  there  is  nothing  in 
what  you  have  to  bear  which  may  not  be  manfully  borne.  Christ  has  not  come  to 
save  us  by  taking  us  out  of  the  world,  but  to  save  us  by  a  grace  that  brings  sal- 
vation. Wherever  you  are,  therefore,  from  that  very  point  you  may  advance  to 
sure,  complete,  and  tinal  conquest.  Look  at  your  sources  of  encouragement  as  well 
as  your  trials.  And  be  sure  if  any  man  can  be  a  Christian  you  are  that  man.  There 
hath  no  temptation  taken  you  but  such  as  man  can  bear.  II.  Wiih  every  temp- 
tation God  will  also  maivE  a  way  of  escape  that  we  may  be  able  to  bear  it.  1. 
This  is  but  an  application  of  the  general  law  that  Christ's  grace  is  sufficient  for  us. 
God  is  here  said  to  make  the  temptation  as  well  as  the  way  of  escape.  He  knows 
precisely  the  strength  we  need,  because  He  has  prepared  the  occasion  on  which  we 
shall  be  called  to  use  it.  He  never  breaks  the  bruised  reed,  nor  quench^s  the 
smoking  flax.  2.  But  how  is  it  He  makes  a  way  of  escajie?  He  does  not  withdiaw 
VOL.   II.  2 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

the  temptation  any  more  than  He  took  away  Paul's  thorn.  This  would  be  to  defeat 
the  very  purpose  for  which  He  has  sent  it,  viz.,  to  develop  by  exercise  the  strength 
we  possess,  and  train  it  into  greater  maturity.  If  the  temptation  were  removed  we 
should  only  be  confirmed  in  our  feebleness.  We  escape  it  by  not  only  avoiding  the 
sin  to  which  it  leads,  but  by  using  it  as  a  stepping-stone  to  farther  attainment.  3. 
This  way  of  escape  must  be  sought  for,  or  it  may  not  be  found.  It  reveals  itself  to 
the  eye  that  waits  only  upon  God.  In  our  very  praying  we  shall  enter  into  it,  and 
by  our  very  prayer  we  shall  pass  through  it  into  larger  liberty  and  strength.  III. 
God  is  faithful.  Therefore  He  not  only  controls  the  strength  of  temptation,  but 
Vv'ill  also  enable  us  to  sustain  it.  Should  you  be  disposed  to  doubt  this,  remember 
His  faithfulness.  He  cannot  be  true  to  His  purpose  of  grace,  and  yet  allow  us  to 
be  overcome  by  the  sheer  weight  and  pressure  of  evil.  This  would  also  place  Him 
in  contradiction  to  Himself,  which  cannot  be.  His  actions  are  never  at  variance 
with  His  nature,  though  sometimes  they  may  seem  to  us  to  be  so.  He  has  pledged 
Himself  by  the  gift  of  His  Son  to  leave  nothing  undone  to  give  it  the  victory.  Let 
us,  therefore,  be  of  good  courage.  His  presence  is  the  guarantee  of  victory.  (C. 
Moinet.)  Temptation  : — Many  think  that  their  temptations  are — I.  Singular. 

But  they  are  common.  II.  Intoleeable.  Butthey  are  proportioned.  III.  Invincible. 
But  there  is  a  way  of  escape,  God  the  hdper  of  the  tempted : — A  sentinel  posted 
on  the  walls,  when  he  discerns  a  hostile  party  advancing,  does  not  attempt  to 
make  head  against  them  himself,  but  informs  his  commanding  officer  of  the  enemy's 
approach,  and  leaves  him  to  take  the  proper  measures  against  the  foe.  So  the 
Christian  does  not  attempt  to  fight  temptation  in  his  own  strength:  his  watchful- 
ness lies  in  observing  its  approach,  and  in  telling  God  of  it  by  prayer.  (IF.  Mason.) 
Able  to  hear  the  pressure  of  temptation  : — Professor  Wyville  Thomson  remarks  that 
the  fact  that  a  shark  "  can  bear  without  inconvenience  the  pressui'e  of  half  a  ton 
on  the  square  inch  is  a  sufficient  proof  that  the  pressure  is  applied  under  circum- 
stances which  prevent  its  affecting  it  to  its  prejudice ;  and  there  seems  to  be  no 
reason  why  it  should  not  tolerate  equally  well  a  pressure  of  one  or  two  tons.  At  all 
events,  it  is  a  fact  that  the  animals  of  all  the  invertebrate  classes  which  abound  at 
a  depth  of  2,000  fathoms  do  bear  that  extreme  pressure,  and  that  they  do  not  seem 
to  be  affected  by  it  in  any  way."  We  turn  from  the  kingdom  of  nature  to  the  king- 
dom of  grace,  and  we  say  to  every  child  of  God  in  the  depths  of  doubts  a.nd  dis- 
tresses, "  God  is  faithful,  who  will  not  suffer  you  to  be  tempted  above  that  ye  are 
able."  On  temj^tation  : — I.  What  is  temptation?  Generally  an  incentive,  entice- 
ment, or  provocation  to  sin.  Buf  there  are  other  things  called  temptations  which 
are  not  so  in  their  own  nature,  but  only  as  they  become,  through  the  corruption 
of  our  hearts,  the  occasions  of  sin,  viz.,  afflictions,  and  the  self-denying  duties  of 
the  Christian  life.  God  tempted  Abraham,  to  try  him  whether  he  would  be  obedient 
or  not.  Afflictions  are  called  temptations  because  they  stir  up  impatience  and 
provoke  unbelief  and  apostasy.  "Let  no  man  say,  when  he  is  tempted,  I  am 
tempted  of  God."  Strictly  speaking  He  can  tem^Dt  no  man.  He  never  provokes 
us  to  sin.  But  He  does  try  and  prove  us,  whether  we  will  keep  His  command- 
ments or  not.  II.  Whence  come  temptations  ?  From  what  has  been  said  it  is 
evident  that  they  come — 1.  Permissively,  from  God.  But  permission  does  not  imply 
approval.  God  looks  on,  and  suffers  creatures  to  work  out  their  own  purposes  :  that 
is  all,  2.  Externally  and  instrumeutally,  from  Satan,  the  world,  or  providential 
circumstances.  3.  Internally,  and  by  way  of  assistance  they  derive  their  force  from 
our  own  corruptions,  and  liability  to  be  overcome.  Our  natures  are  like  dry  fuel, 
ready  to  kindle  at  the  least  spark.  It  is  a  happy  thing  that,  while  God  permits 
temptation.  He  also  governs  and  controls  it,  holding  Satan  himself  in  check.  III. 
Why  does  God  pebmit  temptation  ?  1.  To  prove  and  develop  character.  2.  To 
show  His  own  power  and  wisdom  in  bringing  good  out  of  evil.  3.  To  strengthen 
the  graces  of  sanctification  in  His  people.  (1)  By  giving  scope  and  exercise  to  those 
graces.  What  would  become  of  them  if  they  were  not  called  out  into  action  ?  (2) 
By  necessitating  nearness  to  God  and  perpetual  dependence  upon  Christ.  IV.  How 
DOES  God  limit  temptation?  1.  By  controlling  the  power  and  malice  of  the 
tempter.  2.  By  adopting,  moderating,  alleviating  providential  circumstances,  so 
as  to  suit  the  measure  of  our  strength.  3.  By  raising  our  own  strength  in  propor- 
tion to  the  temptation.      "  As  thy  day  is,  so  shall  thy  strength  be."     V.  What 

BECUKITY  HAVE  WE  THAT  GoD  WILL  SO  LIMIT  TEMPTATION  ?        Tllis  :    "  God   is  faithful." 

1.  Therefore  He  will  not  break  His  word.  This  is  the  subject  of  express  promise  ; 
and  God  is  not  a  man  that  He  should  lie.  2.  Therefore  He  will  not  falsify  the 
assurances  which  He  has  giren  of  His  tender  regard  for  the  weakest  of  His  people. 


CHAP.  X.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  19 


They  are  His  jewels.  Will  He  suffer  tliem  to  be  trampled  under  foot?  They 
are  the  sheep  of  His  pasture.  Will  He,  the  Great  Shepherd,  permit  the  ravager 
to  make  havoc  in  the  fold?  They  are  His  children.  Will  He  abandon  them 
to  the  rage  of  an  implacable  foe?  VI.  What  are  oue  duties  in  reference 
TO  TEMPTATION  ?  1.  Beware  of  rushing  headlong  into  danger.  The  Word  of  God 
gives  no  sanction  to  foolhardiness.  Why  should  Peter,  in  the  plenitude  of  his  vain- 
glorious zeal,  thrust  himself  into  the  high  priest's  palace,  and  dare  the  jealous 
scrutiny  of  a  thousand  eyes,  as  though  it  were  impossible  for  him  to  faint  in  the 
hour  of  trial  ?  2.  Be  armed  against  timidity  and  discouragement.  If  God  allows 
you  to  fall  into  circumstances  of  temptation,  be  not  dismayed.  What  servant  of 
Christ  was  ever  conducted  to  heaven  without  being  often  confronted  by  the  enemy  ? 
3.  Resist  to  the  uttermost.  (D.  Katterns.)  On  temptation  : — I.  There  hath  no 
TEMPTATION  TAKEN  YOU  BUT  SUCH  AS  IS  COMMON  TO  MAN.  Our  translators  were  not 
satisfied  with  this  rendering,  so  they  gave  "moderate"  in  the  margin,  which  is 
further  still  from  the  meaning  of  the  original,  which  signifies  "  such  as  is  suited  to 
man's  nature  and  circumstances,  and  what  every  man  may  reasonably  expect." 
Consider — 1.  Your  body.  How  many  are  the  evils  to  which  it  is  liable  !  Now 
considering  that  all  pain  implies  temptation,  how  numberless  must  the  temptations 
be  which  beset  every  man  while  he  dwells  in  the  body !  2.  The  present  state  of  the 
soul.  How  weak  is  the  understanding!  How  liable  are  the  wisest  to  foruQ  false 
judgments  !  3.  The  situation  of  even  those  who  fear  God.  They  dwell  amidst  the 
ruius  of  a  disordered  world,  among  men  that  know  not  God,  with  sin  remaining  if 
not  reigning,  and  exposed  to  the  assaults  of  evil  spirits.  "  The  servant  is  not  above 
his  Master";  and  if  Christ  was  tempted  can  we  expect  exemption?     II.  God  is 

FAITHFUL,  WHO  WILL    NOT    SUFFER  US  TO  BE  TEMPTED  ABOVE  THAT  WE    ARE    ABLE.       "  He 

knoweth  whereof  we  are  made ;  He  remembereth  that  we  are  but  dust,"  and  His 
justice  could  not  jDunish  us  for  not  resisting  a  temptation  disproportionate  to  our 
strength.  Not  only  His  mercy  but  His  faithfulness  is  pledged,  for  the  whole  tenor 
of  His  promises  is  "As  thy  days,  so  shall  thy  strength  be."  Our  great  Physician 
observes  every  symptom  of  our  distress  that  it  may  not  rise  above  our  strength. 

III.    He  WILL  WITH  THE    TEMPTATION    MAKE    A   WAY  TO  ESCAPE,  i.e.,  a  Way  OUt.       1.    By 

removing  the  occasion  of  it.  "  I  was  walking,"  says  one,  "over  Dover  cliffs  with 
the  lady  I  was  to  marry  in  a  few  davs,  when  her  foot  slipped,  and  I  saw  ber  dashed 
in  pieces  on  the  beach.  I  cried,  '  This  evil  admits  of  no  remedy.  I  must  now  go 
mourning  all  my  days.  It  is  impossible  I  should  ever  find  another  so  fitted  for  me 
in  every  way.'  I  added  in  an  agony, '  This  is  just  such  an  affliction  as  God  Himself 
cannot  redress  ! '  And  just  as  I  uttered  these  words  I  awoke :  for  it  was  a  dream  !  " 
Just  so  can  God  remove  any  temptation  ;  making  it  like  a  dream  when  one  waketh. 

2.  By  delivering  in  the  temptation — suffering  the  occasion  to  remain,  but  removing 
its  bitterness  so  that  it  sliall  not  be  a  temptation  at  all,  but  a  ground  of  thanks- 
giving. Thus  the  Marquis  de  Eenty,  when  asked  while  suffering  from  a  violent 
attack  of  rheumatism,  "  Sir,  are  you  in  much  pain?  "  answered,  "  My  pains  are 
extreme :  but  through  the  mercy  of  God  I  give  myself  up,  not  to  them,  but  to 
Him."  (J.  Wesley,  31. A.)  Temptations  not  irresistible: — Among  the  various 
extenuations  of  sin,  none  is  more  common  than  that,  considering  the  weakness  of 
human  nature  and  the  strength  of  some  temptations,  it  is  not  to  be  expected  that  we 
should  get  the  better  of  them.  But  how  groundless  this  is  the  text  may  inform  us. 
Let  me — I.  Explain  and  state  this  truth.  Observe — 1.  That  the  ajjostle  is  not  speak- 
ing of  the  powers  of  mere  human  nature,  but  of  human  nature  Divinelj'  assisted.  2. 
That  he  does  not  alfirm  that  the  measure  of  Divine  grace  shall  be  such  as  to  enable 
us  so  to  baffle  all  temptations,  as  to  live  perfectly  sinless,  but  only  that  we  shall 
be  preserved  from  falling  into  sach  sins  as  to  throw  us  out  of  the  favour  of  God. 

3.  That  the  supernatural  assistance  which  enables  us  to  resist  temptations,  supposes 
our  use  of  means  and  our  concurrence  with  it  to  the  best  of  our  power.  II.  Con- 
firm THIS  BY  various  WAYS  OF  PROOF.  1.  By  experience.  There  is  no  temptation 
but  what  hath  been  actually  withstood  by  holy  men  and  women,  and  what  hath 
been  already  done  may  be  repeated.  2.  By  reason.  They  who  say  any  temptation 
is  not  to  be  conquered  speak  absurdly  and  inconsistently.  For — (1)  A  temptation 
is  an  expet-iment,  a  trial,  whether  we  will  do  or  forbear  such  a  thing;  and  therefore 
it  suppo-es  it  to  be  in  our  power  to  do  or  forbear,  else  it  were  no  trial.  (2)  What 
is  grace  but  an  extraordinary  supply  of  strength  to  resist  tempfations?  And  there- 
fore, if  it  be  not  now  eijual  to  every  tt'inptation,  the  grace  of  God  has  been  given 
us  in  vain.  (3)  Is  not  man  by  nature  a  free  agent  ?  But  if  there  be  any  such 
things  as  inducements  to  sin  that  are  altogether  insuperable,  there  is  an  eod  of  his 


20  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  s. 

boasted  freedom.  The  great  end  of  man  is  to  glorify  God  by  livinpr  according  to 
the  perfect  rule  of  rip;ht  reason  ami  virtue  ;  and  yet  impossible  it  is  that  he  should 
ever  attain  this  end  while  he  converses  with  temptations  which  he  cannot  surmount. 
Now  all  other  beings  have  powers  that  enable  them  to  fulfil  tlie  design  of  their 
creation.  Is  man  alone  utterly  destitute  of  these  powers?  (4)  Consider  the  nature 
and  perfections  of  God.  (a)  How  can  He  be  holy,  who  is  the  author  of  sin  ?  And 
how  can  He  but  be  the  author  of  sin  who  hath  so  adapted  us  that  it  is  impossible 
for  us  to  withstand  the  force  of  them?  (h)  How  can  He  be  said  to  be  just  who 
places  us  under  irresistible  temptations;  and  yet,  as  He  Himself  assures  us,  ■will 
punish  us  for  not  resisting  them  ?  (c)  Again,  how  can  He  be  true  ?  His  promises 
are  most  express  and  lull  (2  Cor.  xii.  9;  Rom.  viii.  37;  Numb,  xxiii.  19; 
Bom.  iii.  4).  III.  Application.  1.  There  is  matter  of  encouragement  arising 
from  hence  to  the  good  (Psa.  cxii.  7,  8).  Is  not  He  that  is  with  you  stronger  than 
he  that  is  against  you?  And  hath  He  not  promised  that  His  strength  shall 
support  your  weakness  ?  2.  Here  is  ample  matter  of  reproof  to  the  hj'pocrite  and 
the  profane  person.  Let  them  not  indulge  the  hope  that  in  this  thing  the  Lord 
will  pardon  His  servant  (2  Kings  v.  IS),  and  that  one  small  fault  will  be  overlooked 
amonK  a  crowd  of  other  good  qualities.  3.  Wherefore,  laying  aside  shifts  and 
excuses,  let  us  set  ourselves  in  good  earnest  to  resist  all  temptations  ;  let  us 
put  out  all  the  strength  which  we  naturally  have  to  this  pur2:)ose,  and  beg  of 
God  supernaturally  to  supply  us  with  what  we  have  not.  (Bp.  Atterburij.) 
Temptation  and  siifferinrj  li»uted  and  made  iisefid  : — The  word  "temptation  "  in  the 
first  passage  is  the  same  as  "  trial  "  in  the  second  ;  and  this  difference  only  repro- 
duces the  different  use  of  the  original  word  by  Paul  and  Peter  respectively.  The 
testing  to  which  Paul  refers  arises  from  solicitation  to  wrong-doing ;  while  Peter 
speaks  of  a  testing  that  takes  tlie  form  of  persecution.  Our  discipline  arises  first 
from  the  sin  that  is  in  us,  and,  secondly,  froni  the  sin  that  is  without  us.  The  first 
constitutes  our  temptation  ;  the  second  our  trial.  The  first  has  to  do  with  our 
salvation;  the  second  with  our  equipment  for  Christian  service.     I.  It  is  A  universal 

LAW  THAT  A  MAN's  EEAL  LIFE  ONLY  BEGINS  WHEN  HE  HAS  FOUGHT  AND  WON  HIS  FIEST 
GREAT  BATTLE  WITH  SIN,  OR  WHEN  HE  HAS  MET  AND  ENDURED  HIS  FIRST  GREAT  CRUSHING 

TRIAL.  And  yet,  it  is  hardly  less  universally  true  that  every  man,  when  the  hour 
of  his  temptation  or  his  trial  dawns,  imagines  tlmt  both  are  peculiar.  As  long  as 
the  thunder-cloud  does  not  gather  above  their  heads  and  burst  ujpon  them,  they  see 
nothing  strange  in  the  ways  of  God  with  men ;  but,  when  the  storm  breaks  upon 
them,  it  is  "  something  very  strange,  very  peculiar,"  they  say.  Now  the  great 
temptations  in  this  century  were  never  better  summarised  than  they  were  in  the 
Ten  Commandments.  The  same  is  true  of  trials.  They  have  their  sources  in  the 
poverty,  sickness,  and  bereavements  which  are  common  to  man.  You  cannot 
mention  a  temptation  or  a  trial  of  which  you  will  not  be  able  to  find  illustrations 
in  your  own  community,  to  say  nothing  of  past  generations ;  so  it  will  be  to  the 
end  of  time.     II.  Now,  this  fact  of  the  universality  of  temptation  and  of  trial 

SUGGESTS  THAT  THERE  MUST  BE  SOME    PROFOUND   NECESSITY    FOR    ITS    EXISTENCE.       And 

this  necessity  is  partly — 1.  Because  we  are  hunjan — creatures  of  limited  capacities. 
How  many  things  we  pant  to  do  !  How  many  things  we  want  to  know  !  And  yet 
every  advance  only  renders  us  more  conscious  of  our  constitutional  limitations. 
Now,  it  is  a  severe  trial  to  a  man  who  is  wide  awake  for  him  not  to  know  what  he 
wants  to  know,  and  to  do  what  he  wants  to  do.  It  is  just  here  that  we  discover 
how  it  was  possible  for  man,  without  any  tendencies  to  sin,  to  fall  from  his  first 
estate.  The  temptation  was  to  resent  the  liniitations  that  were  imposed,  to  seek 
after  a  freedom  that  should  be  like  the  freedom  of  God.  There  will  be  always 
many  more  things  iu  heaven  and  in  earth  than  our  loftiest  jDhilosophies  drenm  of ; 
problems  in  the  moral  government  of  God  that  stagger  us,  and  where  faith  in  His 
goodness  and  righteousness  is  our  only  refuge.  2.  Because  we  are  sinners,  and 
because  a  heroic  treatment  is  iieeded  if  we  are  to  secure  salvation  from  sin.  We  are  full 
of  pride  and  obstinacy,  and  that  covetousness  which  is  idolatry,  and  self-righteous- 
ness. And  so  comes  in  the  serious  discipline  of  life,  to  te>ich  us  our  weakness  and 
show  us  the  weakness  of  our  supports,  that  we  may  hasten  to  find  refuge  in  His  grace. 

III.    So  UNIVERSAL  AND  NECESSARY  A  DISCIPLINE  AS  THIS  MUST    BE  PERFECTLY  ADJUSTED 

TO  OUR  CAPACITIES  AND  NECESSITIES.  God  docs  iiot  deal  with  men  in  the  mass.  He 
deals  with  each  soul  singly.  In  all  wise  i)arental  govetnment  there  is  the  most 
careful  study  of  each  child's  peculiarities.  One  needs  to  be  pushed ;  another 
needs  the  check.  As  a  father  pitieth  his  child,  so  the  Lord  pitieth  them  that  fear 
Him.     1.  No  man  is  subject  to  any  temptation  for  which  there  is  not  provided  a 


CHAP,  X.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  21 

way  of  escape ;  and  there  is  no  burden  that  needs  to  inyolve  necessarily  any  serious 
injury.     We  liear  a  great  deal  about  irresistible  temptations,  but  tbere  is  no  such 
thing.     Sin  always  begins  in  an  evil  heart,  and  f^^r  the  possession  of  that  evil 
heart  the  sinner  alone  is  responsible — not  his  circumstances  cor  the  government  of 
God.     It  is  the  plea  of  the  devil  when  men  say,  "The  temptation  was  so  strong 
that  I  could  not  resist  it."     God  bars  no  man's  way  up  so  that  it  becomes  necessary 
for  him  to  fall  into  captivity  and  to  abide  there.     2.  And,  as  there  are  no  irresistible 
temptations,  so  are  there  no  trials  so  crushing  that  a  man  needs  to  be  buried  under 
them.     God  is  too  kind  ever  to  impose  any  burdens  that  are  heavier  than  our 
shoulders  can  bear.     3-  And  this  brings  me  to  the  promised  and  assured  deliverance. 
The  fight  may  be  long  and  hard,  but  it  need  not  be  of  uncertain  issue.     The  trial 
may  be  very  severe,  bat  God's  pruning-kuife  never  goes  further  than  the  require- 
ments of  the  case.     Every  death-pang  in  your  experience  may  be,  by  the  grace  of 
God,  a  birth-cry.     The  grave  where  your  dearest  hopes  are  buried  may  be  the 
garden  where  the   fairest  flowers  are  blooming,  filling   your   life  with  the   very 
fragrance   of   heaven.     4.    Perbaps   some  of  you   are   tempted  to  say  that  your 
experience  is  like  that  of  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  who  had  his  thorn  in  the 
flesh.     Well,  that  drove  him  to  his  knees  when  he  found  God's  grace  sufficient, 
and  after  thirty  years  of  service  for  Christ,  he  learned  to  rejoice  in  tribulation  and 
to  glory  in  infirmities,  because  in  his  own  weakness  the  strength  of  Christ  was 
magnified.     5.  But  deliverance  is  not  the  sweetest  nor  last  word  in  the  gospel  of 
consolation.     The  discipline  is  intended  to  leave  us  richer  than  we  could  have  been 
without  its  endurance.     Temptation  and  trial  are  God's  drill  and  dynamite  to  blow 
up  the  obstructions  that  choke  the  channels  of  our  affections  and  energies  until  the 
whole  broad  stream  of  God's  life  shall  course  through  our  own  and  have  its  own 
sweet  will.     There  are  three  forms  of  gladness — the  gladness  that  wells  up  from 
the  comparatively  innocent  heart  of  the  child,  and  which  is  only  more  intense  in 
the  youth  ;  the  joy  which  takes  to  itself  the  form  of  quiet  contentment  in  the 
maturer  years  of  manhood  ;  and  the  blessedness  of  a  ripe  old  age  that  has  learned 
to  submit  its  own  will  to  the  will  of  God.     (A.  J.  F.  Behrends,  D.D.)         Our  safety 
in  temptation : — It  is  said  of  a  good  portrait  that  the  eyes  of  it  seem  always  turned 
to  the  observer.      So  it  is  with  Scripture.      To  the  loving  it  rays  forth  love  ;  to  the 
trembling,  comfort ;  to  the  presumptuous,  admonition  ;    to  the   desponding,   en- 
couragement.    Mark  this  in  the  passage  of  our  text.     For  the  careless  it  lias  a  look 
of  warning  :  "  Let  him  who  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall."     But  to 
the  anxious  it  turns  a  look  of  encouragement.     Kouse  up  a  child  to  its  peril  in 
playing  on  the  brink  of  a  precipice  :  for  the  moment  this  peril  is  increased ;  it  may 
be  scared  into  falling  over.     The  hand  of  help,  therefore,  must  second  the  voice  of 
admonition.     Hence  the  sudden  turn  in  St.   Paul's  words,  "  But."     Your  safety 
lies  : — I.  Not  in  what  you  are  to  youkselves.     Those  Corinthians  "  thought  they 
stood."     But  we  may  not  tiust — 1.  Our  wisdom.     Paul  had  complimented  the 
Corinthians  on  their  wisdom  (chap.  i.  5).     He  makes  appeal  to  them  as  wise  (chap. 
X.  15).      They  could  talk  contemptuously  of  the  emptiness  of  idolati\y  (chap.  viii. 
1-7).     Yet  they  ran  into  the  peril  of  the  idolatrous  banquets.     2.  Our  wakefulness. 
This  indeed  is  an  important  means  of  safety.     St.  Paul  had  warned  the  Corinthians, 
"  Take  heed  lest  ye  fall "  (ver.  12).     Forewarned  is  forearmed.     But  this  is  not 
enough.     The  disciples  were  forewarned  (Matt.  xxvi.  31).     Yet  they  all  "forsook 
Jesus  and  fled"  (Matt.   xxvi.  56).     Therefore  Jesus  did  not  say  merely,  "Keep 
awake,"  but  "  Keep  awake  and  pray  "  (Matt.  xxvi.  41).     3.  Our  will.     The  resolute 
man  fancies  he  has  built  up  a  breakwater  against  sin.     But  who  knows  the  height 
to  which  the  tide  may  rise  ?     "  Let  not  a  man,"  says  Bacon,  "  trust  his  victory  over 
nature  too  far ;  for  nature  will  be  buried  a  great  time,  and  yet  revive  on  the  occasions 
of  temptation.     Like  as  it  was  with  ^sop's  damsel,  turned  from  a  cat  to  a  woman, 
who  sat  very  demurely  at  the  board's  end,  till  a  mouse  ran  before  her."     II.  But 
IN  WHAT  God  is  to  you.     "  God  is  faithful."     1.  To  His  love  for  us.     Mark  the 
implied    contrast  in  the  word.      You,    alas !     are   becoming  unfaithful  to    your 
relation  to  God  (vers.  1-9).     2.  To  His  care  over  us.     "  God  will  not  suffer  you  to 
be  tempted  above  that  ye  are  able."     One  seems  to  see  a  careful  father  fitting 
gymnastic  exercises  to  his  son's  age  and  skill  and   strength.     The  youth  must 
indeed  be  exercised ;  trial  is  the  very  condition  of  growth  ;  the  fresh  breeze  is 
indispensable  to  the  opening  leaf ;  in  the  furnace  we  must  be  hardened  into  vessels 
unto  honour,  meet  for  the  Master's  use  ;  but  see  the  care  with  which  the  Father 
proportions  these  exercises,  laying  on  such  burdens  only  as  the  son's  weak  shoulders 
can  bear  ;  changing  them  according  to  his  proficiency,  fitting  his  discipline  to  his 


22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 


powers,  and  his  powers  to  bis  discipline,  so  that  while  he  becomes  well  breathed  he 
may  not  be  bieathless;  while  stimulated,  not  broken  down.  3.  To  His  designs  for 
us.  "  God  will  make  a  way  to  escape."  He  has  ulterior  views  in  everything.  He 
makes  all  things  work  in  concert  lor  oi;r  ultimate  good.  And  He  will  help  us  to 
bear  up  under  every  intermediate  evil,  till  the  way  of  escape,  the  passage  out  of  it, 
is  found.  Imagine  a  forlorn  hope,  sent  forward  with  promise  of  "supports"  to 
follow  (as  in  the  storming  of  the  Hedan)  :  the  enemy  may  be  mighty;  he  may  now 
urge  by  promises,  now  scare  by  threats,  into  surrender  ;  the  spirits  may  faint  ;  a 
treacherous  whisjper  may  arise,  "It  is  no  use  to  struggle  any  loDger."  But  the 
"  supports  "  are  coming  !  Bear  up  therefore  ;  hold  on.  Each  particular  tempta- 
tion has  its  outlet ;  Jesus  found  it  so  with  Satan's  reiterated  attacks.  "  Consider," 
then,  those  who  have  fought  before  you :  observe  "  the  end  of  their  struggle"  ;  the 
"way  of  escape  out  of  it"  (the  same  word  in  Heb.  xiii.  7,  as  in  our  text).  (T. 
Griffith,  BI.A.)  How  God  delivers  from  iemptatiov: — 1.  Of  all  the  evils  incident 
to  man,  there  is  none  from  which  an  escape  is  so  difficult  and  desirable  as  from 
temptations.  All  escape  imports  some  precedent  danger — the  difficulty  of  getting 
through  it,  and  a  final  deliverance  from  it :  so  in  this  business  of  temptation,  the 
danger  threatening  is  damnation  ;  the  difficulty  of  escaping  it  is  due  partly  to  the 
importunity  of  the  evil  one,  and  partly  to  an  inbred  inclination  to  sin  heightened 
by  custom,  and  inflamed  by  circumstances.  2.  Therefore  nothing  less  than  a 
Being  infinitely  wise  can  sound  all  the  depths,  and  outreach  all  the  intrigues  of  this 
tem^Dting  spirit ;  and  nothing  but  a  Being  of  infinite  power  can  support  the  weak- 
nesses and  supply  the  defects  of  a  poor  mortal  engaged  against  him.  Now  how 
God  does  this  we  shall  now  inquire.  I.  If  the  force  of  the  temptation  be  chiefly 
from  the  importunities  of  the  evil  spirit,  God  often  puts  an  issue  to  the  temptation, 

BY  EEBOKING    AND    COMMANDING    DOWN   THE    TEMPTER   HIMSELF.       For  although  lie  actS 

the  part  of  an  enemy,  yet  he  does  the  work  of  a  servant.  He  is  in  a  chaiu  and  that 
chain  is  in  God's  hand.  Certain  it  is  that  God  has  put  it  into  the  power  of  no 
created  bting  to  make  a  man  do  an  ill  thing  against  his  will ;  yet  thuugh  Satan 
cannot  compel  to  sin,  yet  he  can  follow  a  man  with  vehement  aud  continual  solicita- 
tions to  it.  Though  none  of  his  fiery  darts  should  kill,  yet  it  is  next  to  death  to  be 
always  warding  off  deadly  blows.  And  being  brought  thereby  to  the  very  brink  of 
destruction,  God  is  tben  pleased  to  step  in  and  command  the  tempter  to  hold  his 
peace,  or  his  hand,  and  so  takes  him  off  before  he  is  able  to  fasten.  II.  If  the 
force  of  a  temptation  be  from  the  weakness  of  a  man's  mind,  God  oftentimes, 
delivers  by  mighty  inwaed  supplies  of  strength.  The  former  way  God  delivers  a 
man  by  removing  his  enemy,  but  this  latter  by  giving  him  wherewithal  to  conquer 
him.  It  is  with  the  soul  and  temptation  as  with  weak  sight  and  the  sunbeams  :  if 
you  divert  the  beam  you  relieve  the  man,  but  if  you  give  him  an  eagle's  eye  he 
will  look  the  sun  in  the  face,  and  so  if  God  gives  an  assistance  greater  than  the 
opposition,  the  man  is  deliveted  by  a  method  as  much  more  noble  as  the  trophies 
of  a  conqueror  surpass  the  inglorious  safeties  of  an  escape.  Thus  it  was  with  St. 
Paul  (2  Cor.  xii.  7-9).  God  Himself  fought  his  battles,  and  that  brought  him  off, 
jiot  only  safe,  but  triumphant.  But  this  kind  of  deliverance  was  never  so  signal . 
and  illustrious  r.s  in  the  noble  army  of  martyrs.  As  God  brings  His  servants  into 
different  conditions,  He  fails  not  to  measure  out  to  them  a  spirit  proportioned  to 
tbe  exigences  of  ea'^h  condition.  And,  therefore,  let  us  so  prepare  for  the  day  of 
trial  before  it  comes,  as  not  to  despond  under  it  when  it  comes.  III.  If  the  force 
of  a  temptation  springs  chiefly  from  those  circumstances  which  expose  a  man  to 
tempting  objects,  God  frequently  delivers  by  a  providential  change  of  the  whole 
course  of  his  life,  aud  the  circumstances  of  his  condition.  And  this  He  may  do 
either  by  a  general  public  change  which  always  carries  with  it  the  rise  and  fall  of  a 
vast  number  of  particular  interests,  or  by  a  personal  change,  affecting  a  man  only. 
Accordingly,  if  God  shall  transplant  a  voluptuous  person  from  a  delicate  way  of 
living  into  a  life  of  hardship,  those  temptations  which  drew  their  main  force  from 
his  opulence  will  attack  him  but  very  faintly  under  penury.  There  is,  how- 
ever, such  an  impregnable  strength  in  some  natures  as  to  baffle  all  providential 
methods,  and  evt-n  when  occasions  of  sin  are  wanting,  to  supply  the  want  by 
concupiscence  from  within.  So  that  a  man  can  be  proud  though  in  rags,  and  an 
epicure  with  the  bread  and  water  of  affliction.  In  a  word,  a  man  can  be  his  own 
tempter,  and  so  is  always  sure  of  a  temi^tation.  Nevertheless,  the  way  God  took 
with  His  own  people  was  to  plague  them  in  their  bodies  and  estates  for  the  salva- 
tion of  their  souls.  And  so  now  if  riches  debauch  a  man,  poverty  shall  reform  him. 
If  high  places  turn  his  head,  a  lower  condition  shall  settle  it.     If  his  table  becomes 


CHAP.  X.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  23 


his  snare,  God  will  diet  him  into  a  more  temperate  course  of  living.  IV.  If  the 
force  of  a  temptation  be  chiefly  from  the  solicitation  of  some  unruly  affection,  God 
delivers  from  it  by  the  overpowering  influence  of  His  Holt  Spirit  gradually 
■weakening,  and  at  length  totally  subduing  it.  The  tempter  for  the  most  part 
prevails  not  so  much  by  what  he  suggests  to  a  man  as  by  what  he  finds  in  him. 
Archimedes  said  that  he  would  turn  the  whole  earth  if  he  could  but  have  some 
place  beside  the  earth  to  fix  his  feet  upon.  So,  skilful  an  engineer  as  the  devil  is, 
he  will  never  be  able  to  play  his  engines  to  any  purpose  unless  he  finds  something 
to  fasten  them  to.  If  he  finds  a  man  naturally  passionate  he  has  numberless  ways 
and  arts  to  transport  him  into  a  rage.  It  being  with  the  soul  as  with  some  impreg- 
nable fort,  nothing  but  treachery  witbin  itself  can  deliver  it  up  to  the  enemy.  "  I 
withheld  thee  from  sinning  against  Me,"  says  God  to  Abimeleeh  (Gen.  xx.  6) ;  and 
no  doubt  God  has  innumerable  ways  by  which  He  does  this.  God  may  withhold  a 
man  from  sin  by  plucking  away  the  baneful  object,  by  diverting  his  thoughts  and 
desires,  by  putting  impediments  in  his  way,  and  by  various  methods  of  restraint. 
But  when,  over  and  above  all  this,  God,  by  the  powerful  impressions  of  His  almighty 
Spirit,  shall  subdue  and  mortify  the  sinful  appetite  and  inclination  itself,  and  plant 
a  mighty  contrary  bias  in  the  room  of  it,  this  is  a  greater,  a  nobler,  and  a  surer 
deliverance  out  of  temptation  than  even  the  prevention  of  the  sinful  act  itself. 
{M.  South,  D.D.)  God's  promise  of  assistance  under  trials  : — The  design  of  the 
apostle  seems  to  be  the  establishment  of  two  things — 1.  That  it  is  not  man  himself, 
but  God,  who  delivers  out  of  temptation;  and — 2.  That  the  ways  by  which  God  does 
this  are  above  man's  power,  and  for  the  most  part  beyond  his  knowledge.  Now 
these  considerations  are  great  in  themselves,  but  greater  in  their  practical  conse- 
quences. These  are  : — I.  That  the  only  true  estul^te  of  an  escape  from  tejiptation 
IS  to  be  taken  from  the  final  result  of  it.  From  whence  these  two  things  follow. 
First,  that  an  escape  fj-om  a  temptation  may  consist  with  a  long  continuance  under 
it ;  indeed  so  long,  that  God  may  put  an  end  to  its  life  altogether.  Secondly,  that 
a  final  escape  may  well  consist  with  several  foils  under  a  temptation.  For  a  foil 
given  or  received  is  not  a  conquest.  The  tempter  may  be  worsted  in  many  a  con- 
flict, and  yet  come  off  victorious  at  last.  True,  "  if  we  resist  the  tempter  he  will  fiy 
from  us,"  but  he  may  return  and  carry  all  before  him.  It  is  not  every  skirmish 
which  determines  the  victory.  Let  no  man  then  flatter  himself,  yet  let  him  not 
despond  ;  for  God  may  deliver  him  for  all  this  ;  only  let  him  continue  the  combat 
still.  Nothing  should' make  us  give  up  our  hope  till  it  forces  us  to  give  up  the 
ghost  too.  But  God  will  have  us  wait  His  leisure.  There  is  a  ripeness  for  mercy 
as  well  as  for  judgment,  and  consequently  there  is  a  fulness  of  time  for  both.     II. 

No  WAY  OUT  OF  any  CALAMITY  IF  BROUGHT  ABOUT  BY  SIN  OUGHT  TO  BE  ACCOUNTED  A  W'AY 

MADE  OR  ALLOWED  BY  GoD.  On  the  Contrary,  it  is  a  seeking  to  cure  the  burnings  of 
a  fever  by  the  infections  of  a  plague  ;  a  flying  from  the  devil  as  a  tempter,  and 
running  into  his  hands  as  a  destroyer.  The  temptations  which  men  generally 
attempt  thus  to  rid  themselves  of  are  either  from  suffering,  or  from  the  pretence  of 
compassing  some  great  good  by  an  action  in  itself  indeed  evil,  but  vastly  exceeded  by 
the  good  brought  to  pass  thereby.  But  this  is  a  wretched  fallacy.  The  procurement 
of  the  greatest  good  cannot  warrant  the  least  evil,  nor  the  safety  of  a  kingdom  com- 
mute for  the  loss  of  personal  innocence.  AVhile  men  fly  from  sufi'ering,  they  are  so 
fatally  apt  to  take  sanctuary  in  sin  :  which  is  to  go  to  the  devil  to  deliver  them  out 
of  temptation.  For  so  men  certainly  do  where  suffering  is  the  temptation,  and 
sin  must  be  the  deliverance.     III.  To  choose  or  submit  to  the  commission  op  a 

LESSER  sin  to  AVOID  THE  COMMISSION  OF  A  GREATER  OUGHT  NOT  TO  BE  RECKONED 
AMONGST  THOSE  WAYS  WHEREBY  GoD  DELIVERS  MEN  FROM   TEBIPTATION.        I    have    heard 

it  reported  of  a  certain  monk,  who  for  a  long  time  was  worried  with  three  tempta- 
tions, ?iz-,  to  commit  murder,  or  incest,  or  to  be  drunk  ;  till  at  length,  quite  wearied 
out,  he  pitches  upon  the  sin  of  drunkenness,  as  the  least,  to  avoid  his  solicitation  to 
the  other  two.  But  the  tempter  was  the  better  artist.  For  having  prevailed  upon 
him  to  be  drunk,  he  quickly  brou<:ht  him  in  the  strength  thereof  to  commit  both 
the  other  sins  too.  Such  are  we  when  God  abandons  us  to  our  own  deluded  and 
deluding  judgment.     IV.  If  it  be  the  prerogative  of  God  to  deliver  men  out  of 

TEMPTATION,  LET  NO  MAN,  WHEN  THE  TEMPTATION  IS  FOUNDED  IN  SUFFERING.  BE  SO  SOLI- 
CITOUS HOW  TO  GET  OUT  OF  IT,  AS  HOW  TO  BEHAVE  HIMSELF  UNDER  IT.      Nothing  SO  mUch 

entitles  a  tempted  person  to  relief  from  above  as  an  unwearied  looking  up  for  it. 
In  every  arduous  enterprise,  action  must  begin  the  work,  and  courage  car)y  it  on ; 
but  it  is  perseverance  only  which  gives  the  finishing  stroke.     V.  There  can  ee  no 

SUFFERING   BUT    MAY   BE    ENDURED    WITHOUT    SIN  ;    AND    IF    SO,    MAY   BE    LIKEWISE    MADE 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

A  MEANS  WHEEEBY  GoD  BEINGS  A  MAN  OUT  OF  TEMPTATION.  The  Christian  martyi'S 
were  a  glorious  and  irrefragable  i^roof  of  this.  No  evil,  how  afHictive  soever,  ought 
to  be  accounted  intolerable,  which  may  be  made  a  direct  means  to  escape  one 
intolerably  greater.  And  death  itself,  which  nature  fears  and  flies  from  as  its 
greate-t  enemy,  is  yet  the  grand  instrument  in  the  hand  of  mercy  to  put  a  final 
period  to  all  temptations.  [Ibid.)  God  in  relation  to  the  trials  of  the  good  : — 
The  verb  to  t-nipt  meant  originally  to  try,  to  test,  or  to  prove.  This  is  its  meaning 
in  John  vi.  G ;  Acts  xxvi.  7  ;  2  Cor.  xiii.  5  ;  Eev.  ii.  2,  &c.  This  is  its  meaning  in 
the  Lord's  Prayer,  which  means  "  Lead  us  not  into  trial."  The  text  suggests  that 
— I.  God  permits  them.  "  God  will  not  suffer  you,"  &c.  It  has  been  asked,  Is 
not  a  being  responsible  for  an  evil  which  he  can  prevent?  Answer.  1.  If  the 
prevention  would  outrage  the  constitutional  liberty  of  the  moral  creature,  it  would 
be  wrong.  2.  If  the  permitter  of  this  evil  had  determined  to  subordinate  it  to  the 
highest  bene6cence,  its  permission  involves  no  wrong.  If  I  had  the  power  of 
preventing  a  terrible  tiial  befalling  an  ungodly  man,  which  I  knew  would  turn  him 
to  God,  should  I  be  justified  in  preventing  it  ?  II.  He  adapts  them.  "  Above  that 
ye  are  able."  He  adapts  them^l.  To  the  character.  The  trial  that  would  touch 
one  man's  leading  central  imperfection  would  not  affect  another.  Some  men 
require  a  blow  that  shall  wound  their  sensuality,  others  their  greed,  others  their 
ambition,  others  their  love.  The  trial  that  is  needed  He  will  "  suffer  "  to  come.  2. 
To  the  capacity.  He  will  not  allow  any  trial  to  happen  which  the  sufferer  is 
incapable  of  bearin?.  "  As  thy  day  so  thy  strength  shall  be."  III.  He  sub- 
OKDiNATES  THEM.  "  Will  with  the  temptation  also  make  a  way  to  escape."  Or, 
"  make  the  issue  that  ye  may  be  able  to  bear  it."  Whether  the  trial  is  a  temptation 
to  your  patience,  honesty,  resignation,  confidence  in  God,  &o.,  He  will  cause  this 
issue  to  be  good.  And  this  virtually  will  be  for  you  a  deliverance.  All  the  good 
in  heaven  have  come  out  of  "great  tribulations."  (Z).  Thomas,  D.D.)  IVhat 
keeps  the  Christian  (text  and  2  Cor.  xii.  9) : — There  is  nothing  more  wonderful 
than  a  man  whose  nature  is  essentially  evil,  whose  path  is  thronged  with  spiritual 
enemies,  should  be  brought  off  "more  than  a  conqueror."  The  only  explanation 
is  to  be  found  in  our  texts.  I.  This  is  matter  op  distinct,  positive,  repeated 
PROMISE.  God  has  bound  Himself,  even  by  covenant,  to  stand  by  His  child  and 
never  to  suffer  the  enemy  to  prevail  over  him.  He  never  goes  back  on  His  word.  II. 
These  promises  are  biatter  of  experience.  They  have  been  put  to  the  test  in  every 
age,  land,  and  occasion,  and  such  a  thing  as  a  failure  was  never  known.  III.  These 
promises  are  world-wide  in  tjieir  application.  They  cover  every  moment  of  life — 
extend  to  every  need  and  duty — are  equal  to  any  emergency  or  strait.  IV.  The  signi- 
ficance, THE  FULNESS,  ANIJ  THE  ALL-SUFFICING  OF  THE  PLEDGES  OF  God's  FAITHFULNESS 
CAN    BE  KNOWN  ONLY  WHEN  WE  HAVE  PUT  THEM    TO    THE    PROOF  !      (HomUelic  Monthly.) 

A  fair  chance  for  salvation  : — Let  us  consider  the  matter  by  way  of  objections.  It 
is  objected — I.  That  men  are  depraved  citizens  of  a  fallen  world.  The  answer 
is  that  the  world  is  redeemed.  II.  That  there  is  an  unusual,  startling,  com- 
pelling element  in  thf.ir  temptations.  The  answer  is,  that  even  temptation  is 
tethered  by  law,  and  the  special  severity  of  it  is  a  mjth.  III.  That  the  total 
moral  and  social  environment  must  conspire  with  the  inner  depravity  to  make 
sin  victor.  The  answer  is  that,  jDractically,  there  is  much  in  these  relations  of 
ours  to  sin,  on  the  one  hand,  and  righteousness  on  the  other,  to  break  the  force  of 
temptation.  1.  There  is  the  danger  wliich  attends  sinning.  This  is  one  of  God's 
ways  for  our  escajoe.  2.  Our  memory  reproduces  the  pain  and  sorrow  which  jjast 
sins  caused  us.  This  is  another  of  God's  ways.  3.  We  know  that  sinning  is 
wrong,  and  conscience,  more  or  less  alei  t  in  all  souls,  makes  another  of  God's  fire- 
escapes.  4.  Every  sinner  is,  to  some  extent,  conscious  of  coming  retribution,  and 
that  mingles  with  his  motives  and  makes  a  way  of  escape.  5.  Nor  is  it  a  small 
thing  that  every  grace  and  nobleness  are  honoured  in  the  consciousness  of  sinning 
men.  Is  it  no  way  of  escape  that  right-doing  wears  the  purple  of  royalty?  IV. 
That,  though  these  things  may  be  true,  yet  common  experience  proves  that  men 
are  in  a  hard  case  as  related  to  rigecteousness.  Admitted.  Because  it  is  hard 
infinite  love  stoops  to  help  us.  A  hard  case,  therefore,  is  not  a  hopeless  case. 
Eedemption  has  made  obedience  possible.  Suppose  you  were  as  anxious  to  win 
righteousness  as  to  win  your  way  in  the  world?  V.  That  "  anyhow  some  men  have 
NOT  A  FAIR  CHANCE,"  fi.r/.,  the  heathen  in  the  slums  of  our  cities  and  the  heathen 
abroad.  But  what  does  this  objection  mean?  "  The  race  is  not  fair,  and  ttiough 
I  might  win,  I'll  not  run  where  my  fellows  must  fail."  Beautiful  self-abnegation  ! 
But  will  this  objector  apply  the  principle  ?    These  same  people  have  not  his  chance 


CHAP,  s.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  25 

to  be  rich — will  he  surrender  his  chance  on  that  account  ?  What  good  of  Providence 
does  he  refuse  because  street  Arabs  have  it  not  ?  And  how  can  any  of  us  know  that 
others  have  not  a  fair  chance  for  salvation  ?  VI.  That  general  expeiuence  con- 
rip.Ms  THE  VIEW  THAT  THE  CHANCE  IS  NOT  FAIR.  And  HOW  we  studv  arithmetic  and 
the  saints  are  few  while  the  sinners  are  countless  legions.  But  is  there  one  saint  ? 
Has  one  climbed  the  hill  of  virtue  ?  Then  you  also  may  climb.  That  men 
choose  to  be  morally  lazy,  rather  than  agonise  for  righteousness,  maybe  true.  But 
the  men  who  escape  prove  to  us  that  there  is  a  way  of  escape.  VIl.  That  the  law 
IS  RIGOROUS  AND  jiisN  VERY  WEAK.  Here  the  sinner  stands  by  the  sea  and  tells  us 
it  is  wide,  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain  and  declares  that  it  is  high.  All  this  is  pretty 
enough.  The  rigour  of  the  law  and  the  far-offness  of  perfect  character  may  be 
admitted.  But  that  is  not  our  practical  question.  When  men  began  to  sail  the 
seas  they  did  not  hesitate  to  creep  along  the  coasts,  because  the  ocean  was  wide ; 
knowing  the  Alps  to  be  high,  early  men  struggled  up  tliem  and  through  them.  The 
practical  man  has  never  hesitated  to  do  what  he  could  because  there  seemed  to  be 
no  end  to  his  possible  labour.  The  practical  question  is  not  whether  you  can  do 
all,  but  have  you  a  margin  ?  Are  you  conscious  of  no  power  to  do  anything  that 
the  law  of  right  asks  of  you  in  betterment  of  your  life  ?  This  which  you  can  do 
is  your  fair  chance  for  salvation.  (D.H.Wheeler,  D.D.)  The  wcnj  of  escape  : — 
1.  St.  Paul  was  writing  from  Asia  to  Europe.  Many  things  divide  us  :  time  and 
place,  rank  and  worth,  age  and  country,  and  yet,  in  Clirist,  all  may  be  one  ;  and 
St.  Paul  can  write,  under  the  shadow  of  Diana,  to  dwellers  in  another  idolatrous 
city,  and  touch  a  chord  to  which  their  hearts  vibrate  as  one,  because  Christ  is  the 
theme,  and  the  Spirit  of  Christ  the  inspiration.  And  that  theme  and  that  inspira- 
tion enables  us  to  read,  as  if  written  to  us,  this  ancient  Greek  epistle,  though 
Ephesus  and  Corinth  have  passed  away.  2.  And  there  is  yet  another  thought  in 
this  obliteration  in  Christ  of  all  natural  distances  and  differences.  Mark  how 
St.  Paul  freshens  into  new  life  the  old  histories  of  the  Bible — makes  these 
Corinthians  see  in  Israelite  wanderings  the  type  of  all  human  wanderings  and  in 
Israelite  judgments  the  history  of  the  dangers  and  catastrophes  of  their  own.  Such 
is  the  setting  of  my  text.  3.  Temptation  is  another  word  for  trial.  It  is  explora- 
tion. It  is  the  probing  or  the  sifting  which  shows  what  is  in  us,  how  much  and 
■what  kind  of  natural  or  acquired  evil — how  much,  if  any,  of  the  grace  of  God's 
Holy  Spirit,  sought  and  cherished  by  prayer.  4.  Though  St.  Paul  would  have  us 
be  serious,  he  would  not  have  us  to  be  desjjondent,  and  therefore  he  adds  three 
words  of  encouragement   about  this  life  of  trial.     I.  Do   not   imagine   that  you 

ARE     ALONE     IN     THIS     EXPERIENCE.       YoUR     TEMPTATION     IS     QUITE     COMMON.        E\ery 

physician  of  the  soul  knows  it  perfectly  well.  1.  There  is  consolation  even  in  the 
sympathy  of  faith.  It  is  no  selfishness,  it  is  nature  as  God  made  it,  to  find 
comfort  in  the  fellowship  of  suffering.  On  this  principle,  in  part,  the  Cross  was 
uplifted.  "In  all  their  affliction  He  was  afflicted,  and  the  angel  of  His  presence 
saved  them."  If  you  could  place  yourself  in  imagination  among  the  first  readers 
of  this  letter,  you  might  have  said  to  yourself,  "  I  live  here  in  a  city  wholly  given  to 
idolatry.  My  own  house — wife  or  husband,  sister  or  mother — scoff's  at  my  faith  in 
Jesus,  and  threatens  me  with  excommunication  if  I  confess  it.  How  can  St.  Paul 
tell  me  that  I  am  under  no  temptation  but  the  commonest  of  all  ?  "  But  when  we 
turn  to  our  own  life,  with  Christians  all  around,  ought  we  not  to  say,  "  I,  at  all 
events,  cannot  call  myself  exceptionally  tempted."  2.  Yet  there  is  not  one  who 
has  not  some  imaginations  of  a  peculiarity  in  his  own  temptation.  One  snys,  "  If 
my  disposition  were  but  passionate  instead  of  being  sullen !  "  Or,  "  If  my  snare 
were  only  temper  instead  of  being  the  flesh  !  "  Or,  "  If  I  had  but  a  parent  who 
could  feel  with  me,  or  a  husband  who  was  helpful,  it  would  be  so  much  easier  to  be 
a  Christian  !  But  as  things  are  with  me,  there  is  a  force  in  my  temptation  which 
is  not  common  at  all."  3.  Now  let  this  message  straight  from  God  weigh  with  you 
in  this  matter.  "  Depend  upon  it,"  St.  Paul  says,  "  there  is  more  of  e(iualit  than 
you  reckon  in  the  spiritual  circumstances  of  God's  creatures.  Temptatiim  is  not 
so  dis2:)roportioned  as  you,  in  your  own  little  instance,  may  imauine,  and  if  you 
knew  all  you  would  admit  it."  II.  St.  Paul  affirms  that,  if  it  were  not  so, 
THERE  would  BE  A  BREACH  OF  ENGAGEMENT,  where  we  are  quite  certain  there  cannot 
be,  IN  God  Himself.  1.  If  God  did  suffer  this,  He  would  not  be  faithful.  It  is 
like  St.  John  saying,  "  God  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  our  sins."  There  is 
nothing  in  the  religion  of  nature  which  binds  God  to  forgive  sin,  or  to  so  temper 
temptation  as  to  make  Him  unjust  if  He  did  not  do  so.  But  the  gospel,  which  is 
God's  covenant  in  Christ,  has  introduced  new  equities ;  God  has  promised  salva- 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

tion ;  therefore  all  things  that  accompany  it,  strength  as  the  day,  and  a  Fatherly 
hand  so  guiding  that  all  shall  work  together  for  good.  It  cannot  work  for  good 
that  a  man  should  be  overpowered  with  evil;  therefore  tbe  promise  that  the  tempta- 
tion shall  be  coerced  into  an  exact  adaptation  to  the  strength  given,  i.e.,  grace,  is 
involved  in  tbe  promise  that  faith  shall  save.  2.  What  a  serious  hue  does  this 
give  to  being  tempted !  With  many  of  us  it  is  a  light  thing.  It  is  but  to  sin  and 
be  sorry,  and  all  will  be  well  again.  St.  Paul  assumes  the  terribleuess  of  sin,  and 
says  that  God  Himself  would  be  unfaithful  if  He  left  you  to  it.  III.  The  tempta- 
tion COMES,  BUT  WITH  A  WAT  TO  ESCAPE.  "  The  exit  " — "  the  way  out."  1.  It  may 
have  happened  to  one  of  you,  on  some  dull  November  evening,  to  find  yourself 
surprised  by  a  sudden  transition  from  twilight  to  darkness.  You  have  been,  perhaps, 
in  a  meadow,  surrounded  by  woods.  There  was  one  little  wicket  gate  somewhere, 
but  you  could  not  find  it.  You  went  round  and  round  ihe  enclosure,  but  the  light 
was  gone,  and  you  might  remain  there  till  morning.  Accident  or  Providence  at  last 
guided  you  to  it;  and  then  you  could  understand  what  St.  Paul  means — the  one 
way  oui  which  makes  all  the  difference  between  a  hopeless  entanglement  and  a 
remediable  perplexity.  2.  There  is  a  moment  in  every  temptation  when  God  makes 
the  exit.  There  is  a  pause  between  the  suggestion  and  the  execution  of  every  wrong 
thing,  which  leaves  room  for  escape.  An  angry  retort  is  upon  your  tongue  :  it  need 
not  beconje  articulate.  A  passionate  impulse  is  upon  you  :  you  need  not  strike.  A 
sinful  desire  is  in  your  heart :  you  need  not  take  that  turn  which  will  lead  you  by 
the  house  of  danger.  When  lust  conceives  it  bringeth  forth  sin  ;  but  it  takes  time. 
Conclusion  :  1.  If  no  temptation  is  above  the  common,  away  with  our  excuses  for 
being  what  we  are.  2.  If  God  adapts  the  temptation  to  the  strength,  you  must  pray. 
It  is  not  the  strength  of  nature,  but  the  strength  of  grace.  3.  When  temptation  is 
upon  you,  look  out  for  the  way  of  escape.  It  is  there  :  take  heed  that  you  miss  it 
not.  God  makes  it :  it  is  yours  to  watch  for  it,  and  not  to  lose  it.  {Dean  Vaiighan.) 
The  limitatiuit)!  of  the  laic  of  antagonism  : — We  are  all  familiar  with  the  severity  of 
life  ;  we  often  feel,  and  feel  bitterly,  the  extreme  tension  and  painfulness  of  our 
present  situation.  It  may  be  quite  true  that  the  fiery  law  is  on  the  whole  benign, 
that  the  battle  of  life  ends  with  a  victory  for  the  better,  ere  it  begins  again  a  battle 
for  the  be;^t ;  b;it  so  far  as  we  are  concerned  individually,  it  is  very  ditticult  to  bear 
the  pressure  and  pain.  Very  delightful,  tlien,  is  our  text,  showing  how  tbe  Divine 
love   tempers   life's  fierce   tyranny.      I.  Whilst  discipline  is  essential  to  the 

PERFECTING  OF  OUR  NATURE,  THE  STRUGGLE  OF  LIFE  MIGHT  BE  EXCESSIVE  AND  DESTRUC- 
TIVE. "Tritd  above  that  ye  are  able."  How  easy  this  might  be!  We  see  in 
nature  that  the  law  of  antagonism  may  become  so  severe  and  unremitting  that  it 
makes  impossible  those  things  of  beauty  and  joy  which  prevail  under  normal  con- 
ditions. In  Arctic  regions  plants,  which  under  more  genial  conditions  would 
unfold  thfinselves  in  a  delightful  perfection,  remain  stunted  and  mean,  exhausting 
their  vitality  in  withstanding  the  severities  of  the  climase.  The  same  is  true  of 
animal  life.  The  Newfoundland  dogs  of  Kane  in  the  Polar  seas  become  mad 
through  the  excruciating  severity  of  the  cold.  The  birds  come  to  a  certain 
strength  and  glory  through  the  necessity  of  awareness,  but  there  is  often  such  a 
fearful  bloodtnnstiness  in  the  tropical  forest,  such  a  profusion  of  cruel  hawks, 
owls,  serpents,  and  beasts  of  prey,  that  a  bird's  life  is  one  long  terror,  and  it 
forgets  its  music.  And  this  applies  equally  to  man.  He  is  all  the  better  for 
a  regulated  conflict  with  his  environment,  but  all  the  worse  if  the  conflict  attain 
undue  severity.  Sometimes  a  houseful  people  have  collapsed  because  they  have 
been  compelled  to  struggle  at  once  against  human  oppression,  and  the  destructive 
forces  of  inorganic  nature ;  with  both  combined  against  him,  man  sooner  or  later 
succumbs,  and  the  fields  he  has  won  from  the  primieval  wood  relapse  once  more  into 
wild  forestry,  or  into  barren  wildernesses.  And  all  this  is  just  as  true  of  our  moral 
as  it  is  of  our  jihysical  and  intellectual  nature.  A  fair  share  of  hardship  develops 
heroic  qualities,  but  when  existence  becomes  too  hard  it  breaks  the  spirit ;  the 
child  cruelly  treated  becomes  cowed ;  men  and  women  bred  in  misfortune's  school 
hecomes  timid,  nervous,  cowardly.  So,  if  Heaven  did  not  temper  life,  the  finer 
qualities  could  never  be  developed  in  us.  Overborne  by  unmitigated  pressure,  we 
should  lose  all  faith,  courage,  lioi^e  ;  nothing  would  be  left  to  us  but  atheism, 
cynicism,  despair.  "  God  is  faithful,  who  will  not  suffer  you  to  be  tempted  above 
that  ye  are  able."  Amid  all  the  confusion,  waste,  ruin,  sweat,  tears,  and  blood  of 
the  groaning  creation,  God  stands  with  the  measuring-line,  dealing  to  every  man 
trial,  as  He  assigns  to  every  man  duty,  according  to  his  several  ability.  "  For  He 
knoweth  our  frame  ;  He  remembereth  that  we  are  dust."    II.  Some  of  the  limita- 


CHAP.  X.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  27 

TiONS  WHICH  God  has  imposed  on  the  severity  of  life.  "But  will  with  the  trial 
also  make  a  way  of  escape."  1.  There  are  doois  of  escape  in  the  direction  of 
nature  and  intellect.  It  is  not  all  conflict  with  nature.  Summer  hangs  out  a  gay 
flag  of  truce.  Men  shout  in  the  gladness  of  the  vintage ;  the  sky  rings  with  the 
joy  of  harvest.  We  have  all  gracious  hours  in  which  the  discords  of  life  are 
drowned  in  the  music  of  the  world.  There  are  doors  of  escape  also  into  the 
intellectual  world.  The  door  opening  into  the  library,  the  picture-gallery,  the 
observatory,  the  museum — all  are  doors  of  hope  and  salvation.  In  literature,  art, 
and  science  increasing  multitudes  are  finding  bright  intervals  which  make  life 
endurable,  and  something  more  than  endurable.  2.  The  Divine  government 
softens  the  severity  of  life  by  the  disposition  and  alternation  of  the  trials  by  which 
we  are  exercised.  A  door  of  escape  from  one  trial  is  sometimes  found  in  the  door 
which  opens  upon  another,  aud  one,  perhaps,  not  at  all  less  severe.  Now,  this 
variation  of  trial  must  be  regarded  as  a  mitigation  of  trial.  Peter  speaks  of  "  being 
in  heaviness  through  manifold  temptations  "  ;  but  that  heaviness  might  have  been 
utterly  crushing  had  those  temptations  been  less  diversified.  We  liitle  know  how 
much  we  owe  to  the  vast  variety  and  unceasing  change  which  obtain  in  the 
discipline  of  human  life.  Change  and  novelty  play  their  benign  part  in  trial  as  in 
pleasure.  Manifold  temptations  are  counter-irritants  ;  they  relieve  one  another ; 
together  they  work  to  a  complex  strength  and  perfection.  3.  The  severity  of  life 
is  broken  by  that  law  of  reaction  which  God  has  established  within  our  nature. 
Trials  without  discover  forces  within.  Mighty  forces  often  lie  latent  in  nature 
until  peculiar  conditions  elicit  them.  The  trembling  dewdrop  is  an  electric 
accumulator,  and  within  its  silvery  cells  is  stored  a  vast  energy;  the  raiirdrop  and 
the  snowflake  are  the  sport  of  the  wind,  but,  converted  into  steam,  we  are  aston- 
ished at  their  potentiality;  the  tiny  seed  seems  weakness  itself,  yet,  beginning  to 
germinate,  it  rends  the  rock  like  a  thunderbolt.  Thus  is  it,  only  in  a  far  more 
eminent  degree,  with  human  nature  strengthened  by  the  indwelling  Spirit  of  God. 
Says  Victor  Hugo,  "  There  are  instincts  for  all  the  crises  of  life."  A  deep  per- 
plexity awakens  a  flash  of  insight ;  a  bitter  opposition  sets  the  soul  on  fire  ;  a  grave 
peril  opens  our  eyes  to  horses  and  chariots  of  fire ;  a  severe  catastrophe  evokes  a 
heroism  of  which  the  sufferer  had  not  thought  himself  capable.  The  mere  meta- 
physician perceives  the  extraordinary  virtue  of  this  mystic  interior  power :  "  In 
extreme  cases  the  inner-deriving  activity  will  conquer.  Martyrs  may  find  the 
flames  at  the  stake  as  pleasant  as  rose-leaf  couches."  God  dwelling  in  us,  working 
in  us,  speaking  in  us — ^liere  is  the  limitation  of  the  otherwise  overwhelming  burden 
of  life.  As  we  pass  through  scorching  flame  and  sweeping  flood.  He  giveth  us 
the  victory  through  the  Spirit  which  worketh  in  us  mij^htily.  4.  The  rigour  of 
life  is  abated  by  the  social  law.  If,  says  the  modern  evolutionist,  stern  competition 
is  the  fundamental  law  of  nature,  coalition  is  the  fundamental  law  of  civilisation. 
The  social  law  is  the  principle  of  civilisation,  and  the  process  of  civilisation  is 
nothing  else  than  the  giving  to  the  principle  of  reciprocity  ever  more  coojplete 
ascendancy.  5.  Finally,  life  is  blessedly  tempered  by  the  religious  hope.  "  Behold, 
a  door  was  opened  in  heaven."  What  a  hiding-place  is  the  Church  of  God  from 
the  storm  and  stress  of  life  1  Strengtliened  by  its  sacraments,  uplifted  by  its  songs, 
ennobled  by  its  solemnities,  the  penitent  believing  soul  forgets  its  griefs  and  cares, 
tasting  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come.  No  language  can  express  the  infinite 
preciousness  of  the  grace  flowing  to  us  through  the  ministers  and  institutions  of 
the  Church  of  Christ.  A  lady  receirtly  related  in  one  of  the  journals  how  she  went 
through  a  veritable  bhzzard  to  see  a  flower-show.  With  one  step  she  passed  out 
of  the  wild  night,  the  deep  snow,  the  bitter  wind,  into  a  brilliant  hall  filled  with 
hyacinths,  tulips,  jonquils,  cyclamens,  azaleas,  roses,  and  orchids.  It  is  the 
privilege  of  godly  men,  at  any  time,  to  pass  at  a  step  from  the  savage  conflicts  of 
life  right  into  the  sweet  fellowship  of  God,  finding  grace  to  help  in  the  time  of 
need.  It  is  the  knowledge  of  God,  the  light  of  His  truth,  the  power  of  His  Spirit, 
the  hope  of  His  glory,  which  makes  us  more  than  conquerors  in  the  times  when 
men's  hearts  fail  them  for  fear.  "For  which  cause  we  faint  not."  No  men 
knew  more  of  the  travail  of  existence  than  did  the  apostles,  but  by  laying  hold  of  the 
Eternal  they  smiled  at  life  in  its  darkened  aspects,  at  death  in  its  cruellest  form=:.  ( W. 
L.  Watkinson.)  Escape  from  temptatinn  : — "  Chronicles  of  Froissart  "  relate  the 
issue  of  a  siege,  which  took  place  in  the  days  of  chivalry,  and  somewhere,  I  think,  in 
France.  Though  gallantly  defended,  the  outworks  of  the  citadel  had  been  carried. 
The  breach  was  practicable  :  to-morrow  was  fixed  for  the  assault.  That  none, 
alarmed  at  the  desperate  state  of  their  fortunes,  might  escape  under  the  cloud  of 


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

night,  the  besiegers  guarded  every  sally-port,  and,  indeed,  the  whole  sweep  of  wall. 
They  had  the  garrison  in  a  net,  and  only  waited  for  the  morrow  to  secure  or  to 
slaughter  them.  The  night  wore  heavily  on :  no  sortie  was  attempted ;  no 
.sound  came  from  the  beleaguered  citadel ;  its  brave  but  ill-starred  defenders  seemed 
to  wait  their  doom  in  silence.  The  morning  came :  with  its  dawn,  the  stormers 
rushed  at  the  breach  ;  sword  in  hand,  they  poured  in  to  find  the  nest  empty,  cold. 
The  bird  had  flown,  the  prey  escaped.  But  how  ?  That  was  a  mystery  :  it  seemed 
a  miracle,  till  an  opening  was  discovered  that  led  by  a  flight  of  steps  down  into  the 
bowels  of  the  rock.  They  descended,  and  explored  their  way  with  cautious  steps 
and  lighted  torches?,  until  this  subterranean  passage  led  them  out  a  long  way  off 
from  the  citadel,  among  quiet  green  fields  and  the  light  of  day.  It  was  plain  that, 
by  this  passage,  the  doors  of  which  stood  open,  their  prey  had  escaped  under  cover 
of  night.  A  clever  device,  a  wise  precaution.  It  was  a  refuge  of  the  besieged,  pro- 
vided against  such  a  crisis.  And  when  affairs  seem  desperate,  and  the  worst  has 
come  to  the  worst,  how  should  it  encourage  God's  people  to  remember  that  He  has 
promised  them  as  safe  a  retreat !     (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.) 

Vers.  14,  15.  Wherefore,  my  dearly  beloved,  flee  from  idolatry. — Idolatry  : — I. 
What  is  idolatry  ?  The  worshipping  of  anything  besides  God.  1.  Outwardly. 
2.  Inwardly.  II.  What  idols  must  we  not  wokship  ?  1.  Heathenish  (Rom.  i.  23). 
2.  Jewish  (1  Kings  xii.  28).  3.  Papistical.  (1)  The  Cross  (Isa.  xliv.  19).  (2)  The 
host.  (3)  Images  (Exod.  xx.  4).  (a)  Of  Christ,  (b)  Of  saints,  (c)  Of  God  (Exod. 
xxxii.  4,  5  ;  Deut.  iv.  12-16).  III.  What  outward  worship  must  we  not  give  to 
THEM?  1.  Praying  (Isa.  xliv.  17).  2.  Thanksgiving  (Judg.  xvi.  23,  24 ;  Dan.  v. 
4).  3.  Sacrifices  (2  Kings  xvii.  35).  4.  Incense  (Jer.  xviii.  15,  xliv.  17).  5. 
Temples  or  altars  (Hos.  viii.  14,  xii.  11).  6.  Asking  counsel  (Hos.  iv.  12).  7. 
Bowing  down  to  tbem,  and  so  adoring  of  them  (Actsx.  25,  26  ;  Rev.  xxii.  8,  9).  (Bj). 
Bevrridge.)  Idolatry  : — I.  Inward  idolatry  (Ezek.  xiv.  7)  is — 1.  Covetousnesg 
(Col.  iii.  5;  Eph.  v.  5).  A  covetous  man — (1)  Minds  his  riches  more  than  God. 
(2)  Takes  more  pains  for  them  (Matt.  vi.  24).  (3)  Loves  them  better  (1  Tim.  vi. 
10).  (4)  Fears  to  lose  them  (Acts  xix.  25).  (5)  Puts  his  trust  in  them  (Luke  xii. 
18,  19 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  17).  (6)  Makes  them  his  chiefest  good  (Luke  xviii.  19).  (7) 
Sacrifices  both  body  and  soul  for  them  (Matt.  xvi.  26).  2.  Carnal  pleasures 
<Phil.  iii.  19).  A  voluptuous  man — (1)  Loves  pleasure  more  than  God  (2  Tim.  iii. 
4).  (2)  Takes  more  delight  in  them  (Rom.  viii.  5,  6).  (3)  Takes  more  pains  for 
them  (Rom.  xvi.  18).  3.  Popular  applause  (John  xii.  43).  The  ambitious  man — 
(1)  Desires  his  own  honour  more  than  God's.  (2)  Prizes  it  more  (Dan.  iv.  30).  (3) 
Is  more  troubled  at  the  loss  of  it  than  of  God's  favour  (2  Sam.  xvii.  23).  4.  Sin, 
especially  beloved  sin,  which — (1)  You  prefer  before  God.  (2)  Will  not  part  with 
for  His  sake.  (3)  Venture  more  for  than  for  God.  5.  Satan.  (1)  You  prefer  him 
to  God  (John  viii.  44).  (2)  Are  more  pleased  with  his  works  than  God's.  If. 
Whence  proceeds  this  inward  idolatry  ?  From — 1.  Ignorance  in  the  mind.  2. 
Perverseness  in  the  will.  3.  Disorder  in  the  affections.  III.  How  does  it  appear 
THAT  this  is  PLAIN  IDOLATRY?  1.  Others  Worship  idols  with  their  bodies,  we  with 
our  souls.  2.  These  give  the  principal  part  of  Pivine  worship  to  these  things.  3. 
These  things  alienate  our  minds  from  God  (Eph.  ii.  12).  (Ibid.)  Flee  from 
■idolatry  : — The  "wherefore  "  can-ies  us  back  to  the  previous  verse,  and  reveals  the 
apostle's  train  of  thought.  He  had  been  warning  these  Corinthians  in  chap.  viii. 
against  partaking  of  meat  that  had  been  offered  to  idols,  not  because  it  was  wrong 
in  itself,  for  an  "  idol  is  nothing  in  the  world,"  but  because  of  "  weaker  brethren," 
who  believed  in  the  reality  of  heathen  divinities.  This  leads  him,  in  chap,  ix.,  to 
refer  to  his  own  example  of  self-denial,  and  he  then  passes  on,  in  chap,  x.,  to  justify 
his  warnings  by  quoting  the  melancholy  example  of  Israel,  who  were  placed  in  cir- 
cumstances in  many  respects  similar  to  those  of  the  Church  at  Corinth,  and  in  their 
temptations  and  sins  the  latter  might  see  the  danger  that  threatened  themselves. 
Still,  the  temptation  was  not  irresistible  (ver.  13).  "  Wherefore,"  St.  Paul  adds, 
*'  flee  from  idolatry  "  :  that  is,  do  not  see  how  near  to  it  you  may  approach  without 
being  entangled,  but  avoid  it  altogether.  I.  It  might  seem  that  such  a  precept 
WAS  UTTERLY  NEEDLESS  IN  THE  PRESENT  DAY.  For  we  have  reached  an  intellectual 
I)Osition  exactly  the  opposite  to  that  oecnpied  by  the  ancient  world.  They  believed 
in  "  gods  many,  and  lords  many  "  ;  we  find  it  difficult  to  believe  in  any  God  at  all. 
They  saw  divinitii-s  everywhere  ;  we  see  God  nowhere.  Their  sin  was  believing  in 
gods  who  had  no  existence;  our  sin  is  disbelieving  in  One  who  alone  exists.  II. 
But  if  idolatry  be  the  enthroning  of  anything  in  the  place  of  God,  this  is 


CHAP.  X.]  I.  COBINTHIANS.  29 

A  sijj  TO  WHICH  WE  AKE  JUST  AS  PEOXE.  1.  The  RomaQ,  e.g.,  is  an  idolatrous 
church.  And  this  not  because  it  formally  worships  the  Pope— although  the  ex- 
travagant homage  of  those  who  call  him  "  our  Lord  God  the  Pope  "  comes  perilously 
near  to  rendering  him  Divine  homage — but  because  it  has  dogmatically  declared 
that  the  voice  of  a  fallible  man  has  the  authority  of  the  Word  and  Spirit  of  God 
over  the  intellect  and  conscience  of  man.  2.  But  Protestants,  who  reject  this  with 
indignation,  may  themselves  be  in  danger  of  a  similar  sin.  Roman  Catholics  com- 
plain that  we  have  substituted  an  infallible  Book  for  an  infallible  Pope.  And  it 
must  be  confessed  that  when  human  interpretations  of  the  Bible  have  been  placed 
on  a  level  with  its  Divine  verities,  when  theories  of  the  Atonement  have  been  con- 
founded with  the  great  fact,  when  a  human  creed  has  practically  been  asserted  to 
be  an  infallible  exposition  of  Divine  truth,  or  when  the  authority  of  the  Bible  has 
been  used  in  support,  not  of  religious  truth,  but  of  historical  and  political  and 
scientific  theories,  all  of  which  have  turned  out  to  be  false,  and  when  men  have 
been  branded  as  misbelievers  because  they  have  refused  to  submit  to  the  claim  thus 
made  upon  them,  then  we  have  been  guilty  of  a  sort  of  idolatry.  3.  Just  in  tlie 
same  way  scientific  men  and  philosophers  are  in  danger  of  idolising  the  intellect. 
To  claim  for  the  logical  understanding  sole  authority  in  the  discovery  or  the  verifying 
of  truth,  to  deny  that  we  can  go  beyond  all  phenomena  and  hold  converse  with  the 
Author  of  them  all,  to  refuse  to  allow  the  supreme  facts  of  the  spiritual  nature  of 
man  any  place  in  the  facts  of  human  consciousness,  is  an  idolatry  offensive  to  God 
and  perilous  to  man.  4.  Perhaps  the  most  dangerous  is  practical  idolatry.  Money 
is  man's  chiefest  idol,  and  it  is,  unhappily,  only  too  possible  to  retain  it  in  the 
heart,  even  after  we  have  professed  to  be  servants  of  Christ.  But  "  no  covetous 
man  who  is  an  idolater  hath  any  inheritance  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ  and  of  God." 
To  us  all,  in  one  forin  or  other,  the  warning  belongs — "Flee  from  idolatry."  (R. 
W.  Dale,  LL.D.)  I  spaak  as  to  wise  men  :  judge  ye  what  I  say. — An  appeal  to 
men  of  icisdom  and  candour  : — I.  The  gospel  appkoves  itself  to  all  wuo  are 
TRULY  WISE — 1.  As  a  revclation.  2.  As  a  remedy.  II.  It  is  the  duty  of  every 
MAN  TO  EXERCISE  HIS  JUDGMENT  IN  RELAUuN  TO  IT.  With — 1.  Care.  2.  Caudour. 
3.  Prayer.  (./.  Lytli,  D.D.)  Man's  refiponsihilitij  in  relation  to  God's  truth  : — 
Let  us  look  upon  the  text — I.  As  presuming  a  capacity  in  man  for  the  exercise 

OF   JUDGMENT    IN    MATTERS    CONCERNING     HIS     MORAL    AND     SPIRITUAL     INTEREST.         The 

text  presumes — 1.  A  natural  capacity  for  judgtuent  (Rom.  ii.  14,  &c.).  2.  A  culti- 
vated capacity  ;  a  mind  that  has  passed  under  the  hands  of  the  cultivators  of  mental 
soil.  A  cultivated  mind  sees  God  in  a  thousand  things  which  the  less-informed 
cannot  compiehend.  Its  charms  are  thrown  into  the  writings  of  Paul.  3.  A  spiritual 
capacity  (chap.  i.  2  ;  Rom.  viii.  5).  II.  As  suggesting  the  subjects  on  which  to 
EXERCISE  this  judgment.  "  Judge  yc  what  I  say."  1.  The  Jews  in  their  rebellions 
and  judgments  are  ensamples  to  us  (ver.  11).  2.  We  must  guard  against  light 
thoughts  of  sin,  and  presumptuous  confidence  in  God's  grace  (ver.  12).  3.  Divine 
support  in  temptation  (ver.  13).  4.  That  we  merge  all  minor  ditficulties  that  stand 
in  the  way  cf  Christian  usefulness  or  communion  (vers.  27-33).     III.  As  urging 

INVESTIGATION    AS    A   MATTER    OP    IMMEDIATE    IMPORTANCE.       "  I  Speak   aS  tO  wisC   men, 

judge  ye  what  I  say."  And  this  in  order— -1.  To  the  jDurity  of  tlie  Church.  2.  Its 
prosperity.     3.  Its  unity.     (IF.  ilurris.) 

Vers.  16,  17.  Tlie  cup  of  blessing  whicli  we  bless,  is  it  not  tlie  communion  of  tlie 

blood  of  Christ  ?  —  The  Holy  Eucharist : — I.  The  cup  of  blessing  which  we  bless, 
i.e.,  over  which  we  apostles  or  ministers  speak  the  word /'or  good.  When  we  mortals 
say  may  it  he  good,  we  pray  that  it  may  be  good  :  when  God  s.ys,  Be  it  good,  the  good 
becomes,  it  takes  effect.  Man  blesses  God  in  words,  God  blesses  man  in  deeds  ;  for 
He  speaks  and  it  is  done,  His  benedictions  are  benefactions.  In  the  Holy  Supper 
of  bread  and  wine  what  is  offered  by  us  to  God  of  His  own  earthly  gifts,  with  the 
IDrayer  that  He  bless  the  offering  into  a  heavenly  good,  that  is  given  back  to  us  by 
God  in  the  new  form  and  substance  of  the  supernatural  good  itself.  But  the  citp  of 
blessing,  i.e,  th-  cup  of  the  benediction — of  the  benediction  whith  tlie  Lord  Himself 
pronounc  d  iaHis  own  institution  of  the  sacrament — this  cup — is  it  not — communion? 
the  means  of  communion,  asks  the  apostle — in  the  blood — here  St.  Paul  pauses  a 
moment  and  then  dictates  to  his  amanuensis — of  the  Christ  ?  This  word  communion 
denotes  the  fellowship  of  persons  xvith  persons  in  one  and  the  same  object  common 
to  all  and  sum  times  whole  to  each.  By  way  of  illustration  :  when  the  sun  shines 
upon  a  band  of  haymakers  in  a  field,  these  do  not,  properly  speaking,  partake  of 
the  sun  ;  there  is  no  true  participation ;  we  cannot  say  that  a  portion  of  ten  beams 


30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  s^ 

is  assigned  to  A,  of  twelve  to  B,  of  twenty  to  C,  rather  the  undivided  sun  is 
common  to  all  the  labourers  and  whole  to  each  of  them  ;  they  all  have  fellowship 
or  a  common  interest  in  one  and  the  same  sun.  Even  so  within  the  hallowed 
sphere  of  the  sacramental  communion  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness  shines  upon  His 
own,  equal  to  all  and  total  to  each.  Communion  is  not  the  same  thing  with  union, 
but  raiher  proceeds  from  it,  growing  out  of  our  mystical  union  with  Christ's 
humanity ;  by  this  mystical  union  we  were  made  members  of  His  body,  bred  of 
His  flesh  and  of  His  bones.  This  mystical  union  is  founded  in  baptism  and  is 
fctrengthened  and  consolidated  in  the  Eucharist  by  means  of  mystical  communion. 
And  as  the  union  itself  is  twofold,  for  thereby  we  are  "  members  of  Christ,"  and 
"members  one  of  another,"  so  is  the  communion  twofold,  for  thereby  we  have 
fellowship  with  the  Incarnate  Son  and  fellowship  with  one  another.  The  cup  of 
the  Lord's  blessing  and  the  chalice  of  His  benediction  is  it  not  in  the  consecrated 
wine  thereof — the  medium  of  fellowship,  fellowship  of  the  members  both  with  the 
Head  and  with  each  other — fellowship  in  what  ?  In  a  ?(a<i<?'e  common  to  all.  Of 
this  fellowship  the  blood  is  the  medium.  Of  this  inward  communion  with  Christ 
and  with  all  who  have  been  baptized  into  His  Divine  human  nature,  the  Divine 
human  blood  is  the  life-giving  medium.  For  in  baptism  we  put  on  Christ — just  as 
a  graft  by  insertion  ^J^'^s  07i  a  tree,  and  as  a  graft  after  insertion  drinks  the  sap  of 
the  tree  ("has  in  common  with  the  root  the  fatness  of  the  good  olive,")  so  in  the 
Eucharist  we  drinli  the  blood  of  Christ  more  truly  than  the  graft  drinks  the  sap  of 
the  tree  in  which  it  has  been  inserted.  II.  The  bread  which  we  bbeak  after 
consecration  or  benediction,  is  it  not  the  medium  of  our  communion  with  Christ 
and  with  one  another  in  the  body  of  Clirif:t?  As  the  material  bread,  God's  earth- 
born  gift,  we  all  do  eat  together  with  the  outward  man,  so  "  the  spiritual  food  of 
Christ's  most  precious  body,"  we  receive  togt^tber  and  manducate  with  the  inward 
man  ;  for  the  natural  bread  after  consecration  is  not  only  the  symbol  but  also  the 
vehicle  (in  effect)  of  Christ's  body  (in  essence).  How  often  in  Scripture  is  the 
natural  consecrated  to  be  the  medium  of  the  supernatural !  And  there  is  always 
a  congruity  and  meetness  of  correspondence  between  the  outward  sign  and  the 
inner  thing  signified.  The  matei  ial  rock  gushing  with  streams  in  the  desert  was  a 
vehicle  of  a  spiritual  rock,  even  Christ  in  effect.  The  sacred  animal  breath  which 
our  blessed  Lord  before  His  ascension  breathed  on  His  disciples  was  not  only  the 
meet  emblem  but  tiue  vehicle  also  of  Holy  Spirit ;  for  He  hlcnv  on  tliem,  He 
breathed  strong  and  steadfast  upon  them  and  said  Take  Holy  Sjnrit,  and  they,  the 
disciples,  received  their  Master's  sensible  breath,  and  with  it  an  insta  ment  of  His 
own  God-man's  Spirit.  III.  For  me  being  many  are  one  bread  ani>  one  body. 
A  better  rendering  and  one  that  connects  the  argument  is  because  there  is  one  bread, 
one  body  are  ire  the  assembled  many.  The  sense  is:  Becftuse  the  bread  of  many 
parts,  into  which  it  is  broken,  is  yet  one  bread,  one  body  are  the  many  we.  Many 
fractions,  one  bread;  many  members,  one  Dody.  The  bread  which  we  break,  is  it 
not  communion  with  Christ  and  with  one  another  in  n^lation  to  the  bodi/ — of 
Christ  ?  We  the  many  are  one  body — Body  and  bod;/  ?  The  body  jiroiier  of  Christ 
— and  the  many  we  one  body  corpoiate  ?  Clearly  St.  Paul  here  mak-  s  an  easy 
transition  from  the  body  proper  of  Christ  to  the  body  corporate,  His  Churcb. 
This  is  most  remarkable  as  tending  to  show  that  he  identifier  the  two  bodus  in 
essence  or  substance.  In  accord  with  this  inteipretation,  no  wonder  many  ancient 
fathers  held  that  while  in  baptism  we  obtain  incorporation  into  Christ,  in  the 
Eucharist  we  obtain  concorporeity  if  not  consanguinity  with  Him.  But  this 
concorporeity  we  receive  by  degrees  and  rudimentally.  The  consubstanuation  is 
now  laid  in  its  fonndations,  to  be  consummated  at  the  I'arousia.  The  Church, 
says  Chrysostom,  is  one  body,  not  only  generally  and  mystically,  but  properly  and 
corporeally,  because  all  members  are  really,  i.e.,  substantiiilly,  united  to  Christ. 
Every  one  of  us  mortals  is  a  twofold  man;  one  called  by  St.  Paul  outward,  the 
other  inward.  Every  one  of  us  is  double  by  double  creation,  constituted  in  the 
first  Adam  we  are  reconstituted  in  the  second,  the  outward  or  material  man  asKs  for 
earthborn  food,  bread  and  wine,  lest  physicnl  death  supervene;  the  inwatd  or 
spiritual  man  asks  fur  heavenly  food,  the  Divine  bod^  and  blood,  lest  the  hgher 
life  of  the  new  creation  should  pine  and  fade  and  dwindle  and  peash  in  the  silting 
brightness  of  the  advancing  Paruusia.  (Caiion  Evans.)  The  nature  oi  the  Lord^s 
Supper: — Christ,  though  not  corpoialh ,  is  really  and  spiritually  present  in  the 
sacrament  of  the  Supper,  and  those  happy  aids  and  influences  which  that  I  oly 
presence  imparts  are  the  benefits  and  the  comforts  with  which  true  Christians 
are    then  favoured.      And  it  is  by  these  aids    and    these  influences  which  the 


CHAP.  X.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  31 

Saviour's  presence  conveys,  that  the  Divine  life  in  the  soul  is  cherished  and  main- 
tained. As  vegetables  and  animals  can  live  only  by  their  connection  with  the 
earth  or  material  system  from  which  they  spring,  so  a  sense  of  piety  and  religion 
in  the  mind  can  be  preserved  and  strengthened  only  by  the  support  and  agency  of 
that  Divine  Being  who  gave  it  birth.  (D.  Savile,  M.A.)  Gommuniomvith  Christ : 
^But  here  the  question  rises  :  What  is  this  principle  of  communion  ?  The  com- 
munion is  commonly  spoken  of  as  sometliing  upon  a  table  consisting  in  certain 
elements  distributed  to  persons  met  under  special  conditions  to  receive  them.  All 
these  are  evidently,  however,  not  the  communion,  but  only  the  form  of  the  com- 
munion. The  communion  is  not  a  material  but  an  invisible  thing  of  the  soul. 
Valuable  emblems  surely.  If  tokens  and  signals  are  valuable  anywhere  or  for  any- 
thing; if  we  will  not  strip  life  of  all  its  beautiful  symbols  and  affectionate 
associations,  then  these  tokens,  chief  and  head  of  all  in  the  dignity  and  pathos  and 
promise  they  intend,  deserve  our  respect  and  solemn  celebration.  But  still  comes 
back  the  question,  What  do  they  intend  ?  For  when  Christians  are  so  absorbed  in 
the  external  signs  as  to  forget  the  thing  signified,  and  look  on  the  visible  ordinance 
as  the  source  of  benefit,  instead  of  its  indication,  then  come  in  superstition  and 
idolatry,  exaggerated  and  foolish  reverence  for  the  mere  shape  and  ritual  of 
worship.  What,  then,  is  the  intrinsic  communion  itself  ?  It  is  being  brought  out 
of  our  individual  interests  and  separations,  and  bound  together  by  the  holy  and 
loving  power  we  all  acknowledge.  Communion,  so  understood,  is  indeed  the 
essence  of  Christianity ;  not  a  theory,  but  a  life.  This  communion  is  the  fulfil- 
ment of  the  Saviour's  prayer  for  His  disciples,  that  they  all  might  be  one  in  Him 
and  His  Father.  It  is  the  consciousness  that  we,  who  live  and  breathe  in  these 
several  frames,  are  not  mutually  exclusive  beings,  but  with  a  common  care  for  the 
welfare  of  each  other,  and  of  our  neighbour  and  of  our  fellow-man.  This  reality  of 
communion  we  refer  to  Christ,  because  He  first  bronght  it  in  its  fine  and  perfect 
pattern  as  an  historic  verity  upon  earth.  He  established  it  among  men  and  made 
His  Church  by  it.  So,  after  Him,  the  Christian  is  a  communicant.  He  does  not 
shut  up  anything  good  in  his  own  hand  or  his  own  bosom,  but  extends  and 
diffuses  it  for  a  general  blessing.  Whatever  he  has  he  shares.  The  more  precious 
it  is,  the  more  free  and  anxious  he  is  to  share  it.  Thus,  too,  it  is  very  easy,  by 
the  same  rule,  to  say  who  is  not  a  Christian.  He  is  one  that  does  not  communi- 
cate, who  takes  not  communion,  but  competition  for  his  spirit  and  law.  He  seeks 
his  own,  not  another's.  But  this  communion  does  not  break  down  the  sacred 
distinctions  of  men.  To  commune  is  not  to  be  confounded  together.  We  are 
individuals,  each  with  a  distinct  nature,  and  free,  accountable  will.  But  the 
peculiarity  is  that  in  Christ  we  are  individuals  pledged  to  each  other  and  to  the 
race  we  are  part  of,  and  have  a  common  nature  with  being  "  members  one  of 
another."  This  is  the  communion.  A  majestic  principle,  indeed,  then  is  the 
communion.  There  is  some  grandeur  in  any  way  of  living  for  others  and  con- 
secration to  common  ends.  The  very  meanest  type  of  such  an  existence  is  nobler 
than  the  highest  and  most  ostentatious  one  of  self-seeking.  The  old  Eoman,  when 
he  felt  he  was  part  of  Rome,  freely  to  fight  and  bleed  for  her,  as  if  his  arms  and 
veins  were  her  own  ;  the  wild  Northman  jealous  for  his  clan  has  a  touch  of  subli- 
mity about  him  absolutely  glorious  in  comparison  with  tlie  close  temper  of  a  man, 
in  our  modern  Christendom,  all  taken  up  with  hugging  his  gains  or  nursing  his 
reputation  heedless  of  others'  success  and  forgetful  of  the  common  weal ;  while  all 
the  time  Christianity  tliunders  in  his  ears  her  meaning  that  we  are  not  onr  own 
but  public  property,  belonging  to  others  in  public  spirit  and  love.  In  such  com- 
munion there  is  power  be>ond  the  desultory  efforts  of  individual  men.  As  electric 
jars,  touched  one  after  another,  yield  each  but  a  faint  flash,  but  combined,  pour 
out  a  sparkling  stream  before  which  flint  melts  and  flows,  so  the  exertions  which, 
disunited  and  scattered,  made  but  a  feeble  display  of  little  execution  when  blended 
in  the  loving  Church  of  Christ,  reduce  what  is  most  refractory  in  the  world.  More- 
over, in  such  communion  alone  is  there  any  beauty.  When  we  look  out  upon  the 
bright  evening  sk.v,  it  is  not  some  strange  shooting  star,  appearing  madly  to  leave 
its  sphei'e  and  traverse  the  firmnment  on  its  own  account,  that  attracts  our  admira- 
tion ;  but  it  is  the  moving  harmony  of  the  mutually  related  orbs  of  heaven.  How 
affecting  the  permanency  and  inexhaustible  supply  of  Christ's  redeeming  power! 
Nothing  so  spreads,  nothing  so  lasts  as  the  religious  feeling,  He  above  all  others 
especially  awakens.  But  the  question  we  started  with  now  opens  into  a  further 
interrogation.  Who  and  what  is  Christ,  the  object  or  medium  of  this  communion? 
The  same  principle  or  essence  of  the  gospel  rises  and  meets  us  for  an  answer. 


32  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

Christ  Wcas  and  is  a  beinp;  in  communion  with  God,  communion  perfect  and  entire, 
receiving  the  Spirit  without  measure.  Eut,  then.  He  is  a  being  in  communion 
with  man  too,  and  is  the  Son  of  man  wearing  a  human  nature  mixed  with  the 
Divine.  He  alone  possesses  the  wonderful  i^roperty  to  fill  up  the  whole  space 
between  God  and  man.  His  communion  has  two  wings :  one  touching  the 
heavenly  throne,  the  other  mortal  abodes.  On  this  principle  of  communion  as  the 
true  expression  of  our  religion,  the  pattern  of  supreme  excellence  set  in  God  and 
Christ  for  man  to  copy,  is  not  a  correct  outward  morality,  though  that  is  indispen- 
sable, and  will  be  a  certain  result.  We  do  not  feel  tbat  we  adequately  describe 
Christ  in  speaking  of  Him  merely  as  of  one  that  tells  the  truth  and  never  violates 
His  veracity.  We  are  thus  far  only  on  the  outside  and  at  the  fingers'  ends  of  His 
excellence.  We  reach  the  heart  of  it  only  when  through  all  true  words  and 
righteous  deeds  we  penetrate  to  the  warm,  immense  love  of  His  communion  with 
God  and  man.  This  communion  it  is,  reverently  be  it  said  that  makes  Christ. 
This  communion,  too,  alone  can  make  the  Christian  Christ's  follower.  How 
wondrously  too  this  idea  transforms  the  outward  figure  and  being  of  Jesus  Him- 
self !  He  is  no  longer  simply  an  historic  character  of  whom  we  read.  Through 
this  all-conquering,  everywhere  travelling  power  of  love,  He  draws  near.  To  our 
gaze  He  seems  not,  as  to  those  men  of  Galilee,  rising  up  to  vanish  in  abysses  of 
air,  but  rather  approaching.  He  leaves  His  seat  of  glory  on  high,  and  descends 
upon  us.  Busily  He  works  within,  writing  His  own  life  on  the  fleshly  tables,  and 
forming  Himself  in  us  the  hope  of  glory.  This  communion  is  no  abstract  and 
fruitless  thing.  If  genuine,  it  will  issue  from  us  in  every  mode  of  gracious  action. 
As  Christ's  nature  was  to  impart,  and  virtue  went  out  of  Him  from  His  tongue  and 
hand  and  garment's  hem  ;  so,  in  His  communion,  virtue  will  go  out  of  us.  Our 
light  and  kuowiedge,  our  genius  and  joower,  or  our  worldly  oi:)portunities  and 
means  will  be  sacrifice.  This  Christian  communion,  in  fine,  makes  us  responsible, 
not  only  for  ourselves  but  for  all  within  the  circle  of  our  life.  As  some  plants 
make  the  air  wholesome,  and  others  turn  it  to  a  deadly  poison,  so  is  it  with  our 
own  atmosphere.  Christ  came  and  left  in  charge  to  His  followers  to  sweeten  the 
air  of  existence.  Therefore,  descended  He  from  heaven ;  therefore  His  followers 
live  on  earth.  (C.  A.  Bartol.)  The  sacramental  symbols  : — I.  The  cup.  It  may 
have  been  of  gold,  or  silver,  or  brass,  or  wood  ;  it  matters  not.  1.  Its  name. 
"  The  cup  of  blessing  which  we  bless."  All  blessing  is  in  Scripture  connected  with 
Messiah,  His  person,  and  His  work.  Hence  that  vessel  which  so  specially  points 
to  Him  receives  this  name.  It  contains  the  blessing,  the  long-promised,  long- 
looked-for  blessing.  The  wine  in  that  cup  is  impregnated  with  blessing.  2.  Its 
meaning.  "  Is  it  not  the  communion  of  the  blood  of  Christ  ?  "  or,  "  is  it  not  com- 
munion with  the  blood  of  Christ  ?  "  That  wine  is  then  the  symbol  of  the  blood ; 
the  blood  of  the  new  covenant,  the  everlasting  covenant.  That  blood  is 
the  life ;  and  that  life  is  the  payment  of  the  sinner's  penalty.  In  that 
cup  there  is  both  the  death  of  the  Surety  and  the  life  flowing  out  of  that  death  ; 
our  death  flowiieg  into  Him  so  that  He  dies  ;  His  life  flowing  into  us,  so  that  we 
live.  Thus  the  cup  is  the  cup  of  blessing  for  the  sinner,  because  it  contains  both 
the  death  and  the  life.  The  word  "  comnrunion  "  is  properly  "  partnership  " — 
"  partnership  in  the  blood  of  Christ";  all  that  the  blood  contains  for  the  soul 
becoming  ours.  All  its  blessings — the  paid  ransom,  the  cancelled  penalty,  the 
forgiveness,  the  life,  the  joy — all  becoming  ours.  He,  then,  tbat  takes  the  cup  is 
committed  to  all  that  it  symbolises,  he  is  counted  as  one  with  it,  the  possessor  of 
its  contents,  the  partaker  of  its  fulness.  II.  The  bread.  The  word  more  properly 
signifies  "  the  loaf  "  or  "  cake,"  intimating  its  original  oneness  or  completeness. 
It  is  necessary  to  keep  this  in  mind,  as  the  point  of  the  apostle's  argument  turns 
on  this.  Let  us  consider — 1.  What  the  bread  signifies.  It  is  bread — the  common 
passover  loaf,  unleavened  bread — made  of  the  corn  of  earth,  grown  in  our  fields, 
cut  down,  gathered  in,  winnowed,  ground,  and  formed  into  a  loaf  for  the  passover 
table.  Such  was  Christ's  body,  our  very  flesh ;  born,  growing  up,  ripening,  cut 
down,  prepared  for  our  food.  2.  What  the  breaking  of  the  bread  signifies.  It  points 
us  to  the  Cross,  it  speaks  of  a  crucified  Christ.  His  body  unbroken  is  no  food  for 
us.  It  is  no  nourishment  for  the  soul  of  the  sinner.  It  would  not  satisfy  our 
appetite  nor  prove  wholesome  food.  Incarnation  without  crucilixion  does  not  satisfy 
the  soul.  Bethlehem  without  Golgotha  would  be  mockery.  3.  What  our  partak- 
ing of  it  signifies.  This  act  of  eating,  then,  has  a  twofold  signification  or  reference. 
(1)  A  reference  to  Christ.  It  is  "  communion  with  the  body  of  Christ,"  partnership 
with  that  body ;  so  that  aU  that  is  in  it  of  virtue,  health,  strength,  or  excellence 


CHAP.  X.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  33 

becomes  ours.  We  reckon  ourselves  one  with  it,  and  God  reckons  us  one  with  it. 
As  he  who  eats  of  the  idols'  breail  in  a  lieatheu  temple  is  responsible  for  the  whole 
idolatry  of  the  place,  and  is  so  dealt  with  by  God,  so  he  who  eats  this  broken  bread 
in  faith  is  identilied  with  a  crucified  Christ  and  all  His  fulness.  Partner^hip  with 
the  body  of  Christ,  how  much  that  implies  !  (2)  A  reference  to  ourselves.  It 
realises  to  us  the  perfect  oneness  between  the  members. of  Christ's  body.  As  the 
loaf  is  made  up  of  many  parts  or  crumbs,  and  yet  is  but  one  loaf — nay,  gets  its 
true  oneness  from  the  union  of  these  many  parts — so  is  it  with  the  members  of  the 
body  of  Christ.  All  that  He  has  is  ours — His  life,  our  life  ;  His  light,  our  light ; 
His  fulnes=,  our  fulness ;  His  strength,  our  strength ;  His  righteousness,  our 
righteousness ;  His  inheritance,  our  inheritance  ;  for  we  are  heirs  of  God,  and 
joint-heirs  with  Jesus  Christ.  If  these  things  be  so — («)  What  a  blessed  place 
should  the  communion  table  be  to  us  !  A  Peniel  where  we  prevail  with  God  and 
receive  the  blessing  in  full,  (b)  What  manner  of  persons  ought  we  to  be.  Nothing 
is  Jackiug  to  those  who  have  this  heavenly  communion,  this  Divine  partnership. 
((')  What  love  and  unity  should  prevail  against  us.  (d)  What  longing  for  the 
time  when   we  shall   see  Him    face  to    face.      (H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  The  Lord's 

Supper : — I.  This  o}iDTNANCE  is  a  profession  of  faith.  1.  It  was  an  acknowledg- 
ment of  sin.  Wherefore  did  Christ  die.  That  He  might  save  sinners.  2.  It  has 
an  expression  of  faith  in  the  good  news  of  mercy.  3.  It  is  also  on  expression  of 
attachment  to  the  Saviour.  It  is  an  open  and  bold  declaration  of  that  attachment. 
4.  It  is  an  expression  of  earnest  desire  that  others  may  sliare  with  us  the  purchase, 
of  His  death.  II.  This  ordinance  is  a  solemn  covenant.  We  renew  this  cove- 
nant with  each  other  "  as  often  as  we  do  it."  1.  We  renew  our  covenant  to  accept 
Christ  as  our  common  Lord.  2.  It  is  a  covenant  to  fulfil  the  duties  of  di-cipleship. 
3.  It  is  a  covenant  of  self-denial  for  the  sake  of  others.  III.  This  ordinance  is 
AN  act  of  spirituai,  COMMUNION  WITH  Christ.  Here,  if  possible,  more  truly  than 
anywliere,  we  feel  that  "  we  have  fellowship  with  the  Father,  and  with  His  Son 
Jesus  Christ."  1.  We  have  fellowp.hip  with  His  sufferings  ;  being  reminded  of  His 
pains  on  the  Cross.  2.  We  have  fellowship  with  His  love  ;  entering  into  somewhat 
of  the  spirit  that  led  Him  to  lay  down  His  life  a  ransom  for  sinners.  3.  We  have 
fellowship  with  His  joys  ;  rejoicing  with  Him  in  the  progress  of  His  kingdom  and 
the  prosperity  of  His  cause.  4.  By  anticipation  we  have  fellowship  with  His  glory 
since  they  who  suffer  with  Him  shall  also  be  glorified  in  His  presence.  (/''. 
Wagstoff.)  The    communion   of  the   Hood  of    Clirist  : — By  the  term  KonnDvia, 

does  the  apostle  mean  to  designate  a  material  participation  in  the  blood  of 
Christ,  or  a  moral  participation  in  its  salutary  etlicacy  for  the  expiation  of  sins? 
In  the  former  case  we  must  hold  tliat,  as  the  instantaneous  effect  of  the  conse- 
cration, a  physical  act  is  wrought,  either  in  the  form  of  a  transubstantiation,  wljich 
makes  wine  the  very  blood  of  Christ,  or  in  tliat  of  the  conjunctiou  of  the  bl(;od 
with  the  wine.  But  if  the  real  blood  of  Christ  was  in  one  of  these  two  forms 
offered  to  the  communicant,  this  so  essential  element  of  the  rite  would  certainly  be 
wanting  at  its  institution ;  for  Christ's  blood,  not  yet  shed,  could  not  be  com- 
municated to  the  apostles.  The  reference,  therefore,  could  only  be  to  the  blood  of 
His  glorified  body.  But  Paul  expressly  teaches  that  blood,  as  a  corrujjtible  prin- 
ciple, does  not  enter  as  an  element  into  the  glorified  body  (chap.  xv.  50).  The  two 
theories.  Catholic  and  Lutheran,  seem  to  be  overturned  by  this  simple  observa- 
tion. On  the  other  hand,  the  apostle's  words  cannot  merely  denote  the  profession 
of  faith  made  by  the  communicant  in  the  expiatory  virtue  of  Christ's  blood,  and 
the  tlianksgiving  with  which  he  accompanies  this  profession.  What  does  Paul 
wish  to  prove  by  appealing  here  to  the  analogy  of  the  Holy  Supper  ?  He  wishes  to 
demonstrate,  by  tlie  salutary  infiuence  which  the  communion  exercises  over  the 
believer's  heart,  th-it  demons  exercise  a  pernicious  one  over  him  who  takes  part  in 
the  sacrificial  heathen  feas:s.  The  Holy  Snipper  is  not,  therefore,  a  simple  act  of 
profession  and  tlianksgiving  on  the  believer's  part.  It  is  at  the  same  time  a  real  par- 
taking of  the  grace  purchased  by  Christ,  and  which  He  communicates  to  the  devout 
recipient.  [Prof.  Godet.)  The  communion  of  saints  : — I.  The  subjects  of  this  com- 
munion. 1.  The  designation  "  saints  "  is  often  applied,  in  modern  usage,  as  a  term 
of  reproach.  2.  The  term  applies  to  sincere  believers  only — those  who,  whatever  may 
have  been  their  former  characters,  are  washed  and  sanc:ifiecl.  They  are  partakers  of 
a  "holy  faith,"  they  are  called  with  a  "  holy  calling,"  and  thi-y  are  distinguished 
by  a  "  holy  conversation  "  :  in  a  word,  they  are  wholly  set  apart  for  God.  3.  These, 
and  these  only,  are  the  capable  subjects  of  this  sacred  communion.  A.11 
communion  springs  out  of  union.  It  arises  out  of  certain  sympathies  which  we 
VOL.    II.  b 


34  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

have  in  common  one  with  another.  You  cannot  have  communion  with  plants, 
with  minerals,  <fcc.,  etc.  Hence  there  can  be  no  communion  without  spiritual 
affinity.  "What  fellowship  hath  light  with  darkness?"  &c.  There  must,  in 
order  to  this  fellowship,  be  a  Christian  state  of  mind,  in  order  that  we  may  hold 
converse  with  Christians  as  such.  As  none  but  these  are  capable  subjects  of  this 
fellowship,  so  all  these  have  a  right  to  participate  in  this  communion,  in  despite 
of  minor  differences  and  distinctions.  II.  Its  nature.  It  embraces  within  its 
sphei'e — 1.  All  the  holy  and  happy  intelligences  in  the  heavenly  world.  (1)  The 
Father,  in  the  purposes  of  His  grace,  the  provisions  of  His  mercy,  the  com- 
munications of  His  love  ;  the  Son,  in  the  nature  He  assumed,  the  obedience  He 
rendered,  the  sufferings  He  endured,  the  blessings  He  procured ;  the  Holy  Ghost, 
in  His  light,  purity,  and  consolations.  (2)  Unfallen  angels.  We  come,  in  the 
exercises  of  this  communion,  to  the  "  innumerable  company  of  angels."  (3)  The 
disembodied  spirits  of  "tlie  just  made  perfect."  2.  All  the  disciples,  followers, 
and  friends  of  Christ,  who  are  now  living  in  the  present  world.  They  have 
communion  with  each  other — (1)  In  the  belief  of  the  same  truth  (2  John).  (2)  In  the 
participation  of  the  same  spiritual  privileges  :  justification,  adoption,  regeneration, 
hope,  consolation,  joy.  (3)  In  the  pursuit  of  the  same  objects:  the  glory  of  God, 
the  advancement  of  Christ's  kingdom,  and  the  happiness  of  the  whole  human 
family.  (4)  In  the  celebration  of  the  same  ordinances  :  reading,  singing,  praying, 
preaching,  and  sacramental  commemoration.  This  ordinance  of  the  Supper, 
referred  to  in  the  text,  is  at  once  the  badge,  1he  seal,  and  expression  of  this 
fellowship.  III.  The  value  and  blessedness  of  this  communion.  Consider — 1. 
How  it  has  been  purchased.  It  became  necessary  to  this  end,  that  "  one  man 
should  die  for  the  people;  "  that  He  might  "  gather  together  in  one  the  children 
of  God" — "  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will  draw  all  men  unto  Me."  2. 
How  it  is  produced.  The  Holy  Spirit  visits  the  heart  to  purify  it,  and  thereby 
lay  a  foundation  for  the  existence  and  interchange  of  this  charitable  fellowship. 
3.  How  malignantly  it  is  grudged  and  envied  by  apostate  spirits.  The  g'-eat 
design  of  Satanic  policy  is  to  divide  the  people  of  God,  and  to  interrupt  their 
communion.  4.  How  inexpressibly  sweet  and  refreshing  it  is,  and  how  helpful 
and  strengthening.  5.  What  it  foreshows  and  prognosticates.  Conclusion  :  1. 
Let  us  be  thankful  if  we  know  anything  of  tliis  subject.  2.  You  who  are 
strangers  to  this  bliss,  come  and  enjoy  it.  (G.  Clayton,  M.A.)  The  Lord's 
Siq)per  is  : — I.  A  thanksgiving  for  our  Lord's  death,  more  than  a  grateful 
remembrance  of  it.  1.  "  The  cup  of  blessing  which  we  bless."  Paul  does  not 
mean  a  cup  full  of  blessings  ;  but  alludes  to  a  custom  at  the  passover.  The 
master  of  the  house  took  a  passover  cake,  and  blessed  God  for  it ;  and,  breaking  it, 
distributed  it  among  the  persons  present.  The  feast  then  went  on.  At  the 
conclusion  of  it,  he  took  a  cup  of  wine  and  did  likewise.  Our  Lord  did  this  when 
He  kept  His  last  passover.  And  hence  this  ordinance  is  called  "  the  eucharist," 
or  the  giving  of  thanks.  2.  See,  then,  in  what  frame  of  mind  we  ought  to  attend 
this  ordinance;  most  humbly  and  sorrowfully  doubtless,  for  it  was  our  siu  that 
brought  on  Christ  all  the  sufferings  we  are  commemorating.  But  we  must  not 
so  mourn  over  the  evil  as  to  forget  the  glorious  deliverance.  A  broken  heart  is  a 
good  thing  at  the  Lord's  table,  but  a  thankful  and  rejoicing  heart  becomes  us  as 
well  there.  II.  A  symbol  op  our  spiritual  reception  of  Christ.  The  ordinance 
which  shadows  forth  to  us  Christ's  death,  He  takes  care  shall  shadow  forth  also 
our  need  of  a  personal  interest  in  it.  He  commands  us,  therefore,  not  to  stand 
gazing  on  the  bread  and  wine,  but  to  eat  and  drink  them.  Thus  this  ordinance 
is  "  the  communion  of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ,"  i.e.,  a  taking  together.  And 
faith  does  partake  of  Christ  here;  of  His  blood  to  cleanse  us.  His  righteousness  to 
cover  us.  His  Spirit  to  purify  us.  His  wisdom  to  guide  us.  His  power  to  keep  us. 
His  love  to  solace  us,  His  peace  to  quiet  us,  His  joy  to  elevate  and  delight  us.  HI. 
An  open  avow.vl  by  us  of  our  being  the  disciples  op  the  Lord.  1.  After 
offering  sacrifices  to  their  deities,  the  Corinthians  used  to  make  a  feast  of  those 
sacrifices,  and  these  feasts  were  generally  scenes  of  riot  and  excess.  And  so  much 
under  the  influence  of  early  habits  were  some  Christians  that  they  continued  to 
frequent  these  unhallowed  feasts.  St.  Paul  reproves  them  for  this  by  a  reference 
to  the  Lord's  feast,  which  involves  a  profession  of  faith  in  Him.  "  How  then  can 
you  partake  of  that  sacrament,  and  then  go  to  the  feasts  of  your  old  heathen 
deities  ?  It  is  idolatiy  ;  and  being  such,  it  is  a  turning  of  your  back  on  Christ.  The 
two  things  are  altogether  opposed,  and  you  must  give  up  one  of  them."  2.  And 
this  reasoning  fully  bears  out  the  view  of  attendance  on  the  Lord's  Supper  as  a 


CHAP.  X.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  35 

profession  of  faith  in  Christ  and  allegiance  to  Him.  It  is  more  so  than  baptism. 
That  is  done  once  and  over,  but  this  is  continually  recurring.  This  sacrament 
must  have  been,  in  the  early  Church,  a  trial  of  the  Christian's  faith.  "  There," 
says  Christ,  "I  leave  you  a  memorial,  not  of  My  power  and  greatness,  but  of  My 
humiliation,  My  Cross.  Now  can  you  own  Me  in  My  shame  ?  "  And  hence  it  was 
that  this  ordinance  soon  began  to  be  designated  by  the  word  "sacrament" — the 
oath  which  the  Roman  soldiers  took  to  be  faithful  to  their  general.  It  represents 
us  at  the  table  of  the  Lord,  as  so  many  soldiers  of  Christ,  binding  ourselves  in 
the  most  solemn  manner  to  be  faithful  to  Him  even  unto  death.  IV.  An  emblem 
OF  OUR  UNION  ONE  WITH  ANOTHER  IN  CiiRisT.  Men  who  voluntarily  feast  together 
may  be  supposed  to  be  men  of  one  mind.  If  they  are  heathens  and  feast  together 
in  honour  of  any  idol,  they  may  be  regarded  as  united  to  one  another  by  their 
common  attachment  to  him.  The  apostle  takes  up  this  idea  (ver.  17).  And  this 
seems  to  have  been  much  in  our  Lord's  mind  when  He  instituted  His  Supper 
(John  xiv.-xvii. ).     (C.  Bradley,  M.A.)         The  LoriVs  Sitppcr  : — I.  This  ordinance 

PERTAINS    peculiarly    TO    BELIEVERS    IN    ChRIST    IN    EVERY    AGE.       1.     The     doCtrlnC    of 

the  Scriptures  is  that  it  pertains  to  believers  only.  The  instructions  here  given 
as  to  the  state  of  mind  in  which  communicants  should  partake,  show  that  this 
ordinance  is  intended  exclusively  for  them  (chap.  v.  7,  8,  xi.  27-30).  Few  but 
the  self-righteous  and  pharisaical  appear  to  be  in  eiTor  here  :  for  wicked  persons 
confess  frankly  that  none  but  the  godly  are  qualified  to  partake  of  it.  2.  The 
observance  is  enjoined  by  Christ  on  all  His  disciples  (Luke  xxii.  19 ;  JIatt.  xxvi.  27). 
There  are  two  classes  of  persons  to  whom  these  i-emarks  are  more  particularly 
applicable  :  young  disciples  of  Christ ;  and  those  whose  faith  is  but  weak  and 
wavering.  In  religion  assistance  comes  not  in  the  way  of  abstaining  from,  but  of 
compliaoce  with,  the  will  of  your  Lord.  Wait  on  the  Lord,  then,  and  He  will 
renew  your  strength.  II.  Its  chief  object.  To  bring  the  souls  of  the 
communicants  into  fellowshij)  with  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ.  1.  For  this 
object  the  ordinance  is  commemorative  of  Christ.  The  broken  bread  which  we  here 
eat  brings  to  our  wandering  and  forgetful  minds  the  remembrance  of  that  precious 
body.  The  wine  poured  out  brings  to  our  remembrance  that  piecious  blood  which 
was  shed  on  the  Cross.  In  this  ordinance  the  Saviour  has  thus  recorded  His 
name  for  ever,  and  this  is  His  memorial  throughout  all  generations.  2.  It  is  an 
ordinance  in  which  we  are  warranted  to  expect  the  special  presence  of  Christ. 
Wherever  but  two  or  three  are  met  in  His  name,  at  His  ordinance,  and  in 
dependence  on  the  fulfilment  of  His  promise,  there  is  He  in  the  midst  of  them. 
III.  The  STATE  OF  irixD  im  which  believers  should  join  im  it.  This  as  taught 
in  the  text  is  a  spirit  of  thankfulness.  "  The  cup  of  blessing  which  we  bless." 
1.  You  should  here  bless  God  for  the  gift  of  His  Son  to  be  our  Saviour.  2.  You 
should  here  bless  Christ  for  giving  Himself.  3.  Y'ou  should  here  bless  the 
Holy  Spirit  for  applying  the  merits  of  Christ  to  your  souls.  (C  Lee.) 
For  we  toeing  many  are  one  toread  and  one  toody. — Real  oneness  avddst  circum- 
stantial dirersitij  : — I.  The  visible  diversities  among  true  believers.  1.  The 
differences  observable  in  God's  people  according  to  the  dispensation  under  which 
they  live.  As  in  the  natural  world,  both  the  opening  dawn  and  the  bri^'ht  meridian 
acknowledge  the  same  source  of  light,  so  in  the  spiritual  world  it  is  the  same  "Sun 
of  Eighteousness,"  whether  it  is  fiiufiing  its  dim  rays  over  the  dawn  of  patriarchal 
promise  or  lighting  up  the  f-'o^iiel  times  with  gbay.  Hence  we  are  to  conclude 
that  the  apparent  diversity  bet^^een  Jewish  and  Christian  forms  of  worsh'p  or 
religious  experience  is  merely  a  difference  arising  from  the  progressive  character  of 
the  Divine  disclosures  and  the  advancing  capacities  of  the  human  mind.  2.  The 
inequalities  of  our  several  stations  in  life.  God  "would  have  all  men  to  be  saved." 
Hence  rich  and  poor,  young  and  old,  may  be  "all  partakers  of  that  one  bread," 
and  yet  all  vary  in  their  manifestations  of  religious  character.  This  should 
enhance  to  us  the  law  of  Christian  charity,  which  reminds  us  that  mi^n  who  seem 
"  not  to  follow  with  us,"  may  yet  in  spirit  be  truly  of  us  and  with  us.  3.  The 
diversities  among  good  men  which  arise  out  of  education,  temperament,  and 
intellectual  endowments.  Christianity  has  no  war  with  the  refinements  of  life  ; 
but  it  would  be  folly  to  assert  that  it  may  not  exist  without  them.  There  are  many 
rugged  tempers  which  in  the  main  are  rif^ht  towards  God  ;  and  many  gentle  j-pirits 
who  please  everybody  while  they  are  displeasing  God.  The  retaining  ot  original 
characteristics  may  consist  with  a  converted  state.  Where  could  we  find  two 
more  opposite  characlers  than  Peter  and  John?  And  yet  both  had  drunk  into  the 
same  spirit;  both  had  been  "partakers  of  the  one  bread."     4.  The  diversities 


36  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

occasioned  by  the  progressive  character  of  religion  itself.  The  "  babe  in  Christ," 
from  the  moment  he  is  made  "partaker  of  the  Divine  nature,"  is  as  much  a 
Christian  as  if  lie  had  arrived  at  "  the  measure  of  the  stature  of  the  fuhiess  of 
Christ."  In  all  its  elementary  properties  the  spark  is  the  same  as  the  flame ;  the 
green  blade  as  the  full-grown  ear.  II.  Wherein  they  ought  and  are  seen  to 
AGREE.  "  For  we,  being  many,  are "  still  "  one  bread  and  one  body."  The 
diversities  of  Christian  character  lie  upon  the  surface ;  the  uniformities  are 
internal,  and  often  discoverable  only  by  the  eye  of  God.  And  this  was  what  was 
to  be  expected.  The  empire  of  Christ  has  more  especial  reference  to  the  affections. 
There  with  unseen  food  He  supports  our  fainting  life,  and  makes  us  partaker  of 
that  "  meat  which  the  world  knows  not  of."  But  since  this  meat  is  the  same  to 
all,  aud  since  we  "  all  drink  of  the  same  spiritual  drink,"  there  must  be  some 
corresponding  uniformity  in  the  manifestations  of  spiritual  life.  We  note  in  all 
good  men — 1.  A  deep  abasement,  forced  upon  them  by  a  consciousness  of  their 
own  vileness  and  of  their  Maker's  holiness.  Difference  of  dispensation  makes  no 
difference  in  this  respect.  2.  The  joys  and  hopes  of  Christian  life.  Their  personal 
ex[)erience  of  these  feelings  may  be  little  or  mucb ;  but  in  their  nature  and  tendency 
they  must  be  the  same.  3.  An  endeavour  after  increased  sanctification ;  a  desire 
to  be  mure  assimilated  to  the  likeness  of  God.  Conclusion  :  1.  Learn  that  however 
much  the  trees  of  the  Lord's  vineyard  may  differ  in  size,  strength,  age,  and  natural 
form,  yet  that  every  tree  of  the  Lord's  planting  bears  the  same  kind  of  fruit. 
2.  Wherefore,  "if  these  things  be  in  you  and  abound,"  happy  are  ye.  (£>. 
Moore,  M.A.)  On  Church  communion: — I.  The  nature  of  the  communion  of 

SAINTS  AS  ONE  BODY.  1.  Who  are  the  members  of  this  communion  ?  (1)  Some  in 
show  only.  The  openly  wicked  of  course  are  excluded  (Gal.  v.  19-21).  But 
hypocrites  are  seeming  "visible  members  of  it  (Gal.  ii.  4 ;  1  John  ii.  19).  (2)  There 
are  three  sorts  of  real  members,  (a)  Real  members  in  God's  design,  but  not  yet 
formed,  (h)  Real  members  alrendv  perfected — the  saints  triumphant  (Heb.  xii. 
22,  23).  (c)  Real  members  formed,  but  not  perfected  yet — all  saints  on  earth,  what- 
ever visible  Church  they  belong  to  (chap.  xii.  12).  These  are  they  whom  our  text 
speaks  of.  II.  Wherein  this  communion  consists,  or  how  they  are  one  body. 
1.  They  have  all  one  Head  (Kph.  i.  22,  23  ;  Col.  ii.  19).  2.  They  are  all  animated 
by  one  Spirit  (Rom.  viii.  9  ;  1  Cor.  xii.  13).  3.  One  grace  of  faith  wrought  by  the 
self-same  Spirit  in  them  all  (Col.  ii.  12)  terminates  in  and  knits  them  to  one  head, 
the  Lord  Jesus  (Eph.  iii.  17).  4.  They  have  all  one  heart  and  one  mind  in  respect 
of  fundamentals  (Eph.  iv.  5).  5.  They  are  united  to  one  another  in  love  (Col. 
iii.  14  ;  EjDh.  iv.  IG).  6.  Tliey  have  a  communion  in  one  another's  gifts  and 
graces,  as  the  case  stands  in  the  natural  body  (Eph.  iv.  16).  III.  The  properties 
OF  this  communion.  1.  It  is  a  most  honourable  communion,  for  it  is  a  com- 
munion with  the  Holy  Trinity  (1  John  i.  3).  (1)  The  Father  is  the  Head  and 
Father  of  the  commuuion  (Eph.  iv.  0;  1  Cor.  xi.  3).  (2)  The  centre  of  this  com- 
munion is  the  Son,  the  blessed  Mediator.  In  Him  all  meet  (chap.  xi.  3).  (3)  The 
Holy  Spirit  is  the  internal  original  bond  knitting  all  the  members  to  Christ  and 
among  themselves  (Eph.  iv.  4).  2.  It  is  a  most  rich  communion.  There  are 
companies  joining  stocks  together  to  advance  worldly  wealth ;  but  the  richest  of 
them  have  nothing  but  trifles  in  comparison  with  the  company  of  saints.  (1)  They 
have  communion  with  Christ,  a  common  interest  with  Hitn  who  is  Heir  of  all 
things.  (2)  They  have  communion  with  God  (Psa.  cxliv.  1.5),  and  with  Him  all 
things,  since  all  is  His,  aud  He  is  theirs  (cha]?.  iii.  21-23).  3.  It  is  a  most 
extensive  communion.  It  extends — (1)  Over  the  earth;  and  so  is  called  the 
Catholic  Church  (chap.  i.  2).  (2)  To  the  heavens  (Heb.  xii.  22,  23).  4.  It  is  a 
holy  communion.  It  is  a  fellowship  of  saints  (Eph.  ii.  19).  Conclusion  :  One's 
partaking  of  the  sacrament  is  a  declaring  himself  to  be  of  that  communion.  1.  It 
is  a  sign  and  badae  of  the  communion  of  saints.  "We  are  one  bread" — the  one 
bread  signifying  that  we  are  one  body.  2.  It  is  a  seal  of  the  communion  of  saints, 
and  seals  it  effectually  to  all  tho-e  that  do  sincerely  take  hold  of  the  covenant 
(Rom.  iv.  11 ;  1  Cor.  xii.  13).  3.  It  is  an  engagement  to  the  duties  of  this  com- 
muuion of  saints  (Eph.  iv.  1-5).  (T.  Boston,  D.I).)  Holy  communion  (John 
xiv.  15  ;  Matt.  xxvi.  26,  27  :  and  t^■xt) : — I.  Consider  the  three  texts  in  order.  1. 
From  the  first  we  learn  that  the  test  of  love  to  tlie  Saviour  is  obedience  to  His  will 
and  keep  ng  of  His  commandments.  Now  when  Christ  says,  "Keep  My  com- 
mandments," does  He  mean  that  we  are  to  choose  amongst  them?  Certainly  not. 
He  means,  of  course,  keeja  all  My  commandments.  2.  The  second  belongs  to  a 
very  solemn  occasion,  and  has  the  power  of  a  dying  request.     It  was  the  very  last 


CHAP.  X.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  37 

that  the  disciples  were  likely  to  neglect.  3.  In  the  third,  as  well  as  in  all  other  records 
of  the  history  of  the  early  Church,  we  find  that  the  wbole  body  of  believers  were  com- 
municants, and  that  it  was  a  strange,  indeed  almost  an  unheard-of  thing  for  any 
adult  to  be  an  habitual  absentee  from  the  table  of  the  Lord.  What,  then,  is  to  be 
thought  of  a  man's  pretension  to  love  the  Saviour  when  he  lives  in  wilful  and 
systematic  violation  of  one  of  the  Saviour's  most  important  commandments  ?  II. 
Theke  are  two  mistakes  often  made  about  the  holy  communion.  1.  That  of 
scrupulosity.  The  majority  of  those  who  absent  themselves  from  the  Lord's 
table  do  so  from  the  secret  conviction  that  they  have  not  given  their  hearts  to 
Christ.  To  come  to  church  they  think  commits  them  to  nothing.  But  attendance 
at  the  communion  does  commit  them,  and  they  dare  not,  whilst  they  feel  that 
they  are  living  for  the  world  and  not  for  Christ,  they  dare  not  approach  the  Lord's 
table.  No  one,  of  course,  can  blame  them.  Tlie  only  wonder  is  that,  knowing 
they  are  in  a  wrong  state,  they  can  be  contented  to  remain  in  it.  Look  at  the 
excuses  that  are  made.  (1)  Some  say,  "  Many  frequent  the  Lord's  table  regularly, 
who  are  yet  not  a  bit  better  than  others.  AVlint  is  the  good  of  communicating, 
then  ?  I  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  it  whilst  these  people  go  there."  Now, 
what  sort  of  reasoning  is  this?  When  Peter  asked  Christ  a  merely  inquisitive 
question,  the  Lord  said,  "  What  is  that  to  thee  ?  Follow  thou  Me."  May  not  the 
same  be  said  to  these  singular  reasoners?  The  question  is  about  my  duty,  not 
about  the  manner  in  which  another  man  fulfils,  or  fails  to  fulfil,  his.  (2)  Others 
say,  "  Oh,  a  man  sets  himself  up  to  be  so  much  better  than  others  if  he  becomes 
a  communicant."  Now  that  is  precisely  what  the  man  does  not  do.  In  fact,  his 
coming  forward  to  the  holy  table  is  a  virtual  confession  of  his  unworthiness  and 
weakness.  (3)  Another  says,  "  It  is  such  an  awful  thing  to  fall  into  sin  after 
receiving  the  holy  communion.''  Now  that  means  really,  "  I  am  bound  to  lead  a 
strictly  Christian  life  if  I  attend  the  communion  ;  but  I  am  not  so  bound  if  I 
continue  to  absent  myself  from  it."  Is  not  this  a  fallacy,  and  a  very  ruinous  one? 
Those  of  you  who  are  non-communicants  are  as  much  bound  to  live  a  holy  life 
as  the  communicants  are.  The  difference  between  you  and  them  is  that  they  are 
taking  the  right  means  to  do  it  and  you  are  not.  (4)  Another  says,  "But  if  I 
come  to  the  holy  communion,  people  will  set  up  a  higher  standard  for  me,  and 
watch  my  conduct;  and  should  I  fall  into  any  inconsistency  they  will  speak 
reproachfully  of  me."  Well,  what  else  does  the  New  Testament  lead  you  to 
expect,  if  you  would  be  a  follower  of  Christ,  but  that  you  will  become  a  marked 
man?  The  city  set  on  a  hill  cannot  be  hid.  And  Christ  warns  His  followers  that 
they  are  to  expect  the  world  to  even  "hate"  them.  What  right,  then,  have  we 
to  claim  exemption  from  the  usual  consequences  of  Christian  discipleship?  (5) 
Others  say  they  are  "not  good  enough  to  be  communicants."  But  we  do  not 
come  because  we  are  good,  but  because  we  want  to  be  made  better.  The  question, 
then,  is  not.  Are  we  holy?  but.  Have  we  given  our  hearts  to  Christ?  2.  That  of 
superstition  :  and  this  is  more  fatal  than  the  other.  It  is  taught  that  in  the  act 
of  consecration  some  mysterious  change  passes  over  the  elements  ;  so  that  a  man 
receiving  the  bread  and  wine  receives  something — it  is  difticult  to  say  what — quite 
irrespective  of  his  state  of  mind  and  of  his  relation  to  Jesus  Christ.  Now  this  is 
simply  untrue.  Life  is  necessary  for  the  reception  and  assimilation  of  food.  So, 
spiritual  life — that  being,  of  course,  inseparably  associated  with  true  faith — is 
essential  to  the  right  use  and  enjoyment  of  the  privilege  of  holy  communion.  And 
whenever  you  give  the  bread  and  wine  to  a  man  who  is  destitute  of  a  true  and 
living  faith  in  the  Saviour,  you  are  simply  putting  food  into  the  mouth  of  a  corpse ! 
Whilst  keeping  j-ourselves  from  that  miserable  fetichism  which  attributes  to  the 
sacrament  a  magical  efficacy,  regard  the  holy  communion  as  the  chiefest  of  the 
means  of  grace  which  God  has  appointed  for  your  edification  and  comfort,  and  for 
your  growth  in  the  Divine  life.     (G.  Calthroi),  M.A.) 

Vers.  18-22.  Are  not  they  which  eat  of  the  sacrifices  partakers  of  the  altar  ? — 

Altar  communion  : — In  the  Levitical  sacrifices  there  was  communion  between 
Jehovah  on  the  one  hand  and  the  priests  and  worshippers  on  the  other.  The  com- 
munion was  effected  by  means  of  the  slain  bullock,  e.rj.,  in  the  peace-offering. 
This  bullock  in  the  burning  of  the  fat  furnished — 1.  Food  of  firing  for  Jehovah, 
who  by  fire  consumed  His  portion  of  the  sacrifice.  2.  Food  of  flesh  hallowed  by 
the  altar  to  the  priests  and  worshippers,  who  in  this  feast  common  to  all  were 
fellow  guests  with  one  another  and  with  God.  This  common  feast  was  a  sacri- 
ficial meal  after  the   sacrificial   offering.      In   like   manner   the    blood,  after  its 


38  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOB.  [chap.  x. 

^/fusion  from  the  body  of  the  bullock  in  the  slangbtericg  (cf.  Luke  xxii.  20),  was 
q/'fused  or  poured  against  the  altar  (1)  for  atonement,  and,  (2)  hallowed  by  the 
altar,  was  given  back  in  the  form  of  sprinkling  upon  the  people  for  cleansing. 
Thus  the  same  animal  was  from  the  altar  given  back  both  in  its  blood  and  its 
flesh  to  the  priest  and  the  people.  The  blood  was  regarded  as  one  blood  although 
it  was  set  in  bowls  by  the  priest  in  two  halves — one  half  for  affusion  to  bring  God 
nigh  His  people,  the  other  half  for  aspersion  to  make  the  people  meet  for  drawing 
nigh  to  God.  Thus  the  altar,  on  which  the  victim  was  given  to  Jehovah  and  from 
■which  it  was  given  back  to  the  offerers,  was  a  meeting-pldce  of  communion  between 
them.  Now,  Hccording  to  St.  Paul,  the  Eucharistic  feast  is  an  antitype  of  the 
sacrificial  meal  of  the  peace-offering  here,  as  it  is  of  the  passover  in  chap.  v.  And 
from  the  significant  word  "  altar  of  sacrifice  "  it  seems  as  if  the  apostle's  thought 
was  that  the  flesh  of  Christ,  as  given  back  from  the  altar  of  the  Cross,  is  the 
medium  of  communion  in  the  eating  thereof,  and  the  real  and  therefore  spiritual 
food  of  His  body,  by  feasting  on  which  we  have  fellowship  with  Himself  and  with 
one  another,  and  through  Himself  with  God.  His  human  nature,  then,  of  flesh 
and  blood  is  the  "  thing  signified,"  and  the  "  remission  of  sins  and  all  other 
benefits  of  His  passion  "  is  that  which  is  given  us  through  the  "  thing."  This 
being  the  cast-,  the  Lord's  Supper  is  not  a  sacrifice,  save  in  the  offering  of  self- 
dedication  and  of  God's  creatures  of  bread  and  wine,  but  a  sacramental  feast  upon 
the  great  sacrifice  which  was  once  for  all  offered  to  God  on  the  altar  of  the  Cross. 
{Canon  J:vans.)  Ye  cannot  drink  the  cup  of  the  Lord  and  the  cup  of  devils, 
— Tlie  tiDO  cups  of  life;  ur,  moiul  i)icom2)atibiUties : — I.  The  mokal  incompaxi- 
Bii.iTiES  IN  LIFE.  Every  man's  life  has  the  two  cups.  Oat  of  one  of  these  every 
man  drinks,  and  by  it  he  lives  such  a  life  as  he  has.  What  are  these  cups  ?  1. 
The  devil's  cup  is  full  to  the  brim  of  selfish  gratification.  They  who  drink  of  it 
are  absorbed  with  their  own  personal  interests  and  pleasures.  Christ's  cup  is  that 
of  self-denial.  "  He  that  taketh  not  his  cross,"  &c.  2.  The  devil's  cup  is  full  of 
fictions,  phantasies,  and  vanities.  False  theories  of  religion,  happiness,  greatness, 
life.  Hence  the  millions  who  drink  of  it  "  walk  in  a  vain  show."  Christ's  cup  is 
full  of  realities.  "I  am  come  to  bear  witness  of  the  truth."  Those  who  drink 
of  this  cup  are  real  men,  real  in  thought,  conviction,  puriDOse,  and  life.  They 
"  quit  themselves  like  men."  3.  In  the  cup  of  the  devil  everything  is  material — ■ 
material  pleasures,  pursuits,  dignities.  The  men  who  drink  of  it  live  after  and  for 
the  flesh.  Their  grand  question  is,  "  What  shall  we  eat,  what  shall  we  drink  ?  " 
In  Christ's  cup  there  is  spirituality,  and  the  men  who  drink  of  it  feel  that  the  spirit 
is  everything,  they  are  "  born  of  the  spirit,  are  spirit,"  and  live  spiritually.  4.  In 
the  cup  of  the  devil  there  is  no  God,  nothing  but  nature.  The  men  who  drink  of 
it  are  without  God  in  the  world.  God  is  not  in  all  their  thoughts.  In  Christ's 
cup  God  is  the  essence  and  si^irit  of  its  contents.  They  who  drink  of  this  cup 
come  under  the  consciousness  of  the  fact  that  God  is  everything  ;  hence,  like  Enoch, 
they  "walk  with  God."  II.  The  strongest  temptation  in  life — to  participate 
of  both  cups.  1.  All  men  begin  and  most  cc>»itinue  with  the  devil's  cup.  We 
"  were  by  nature  the  chibiren  of  wrath  even  as  o'hers."  The  cup  is  put  into  the' 
hand  of  the  child  at  the  very  dawn  of  moral  agency,  he  takes  a  liking  to  it  until 
it  gets  the  mastery  over  him.  2.  Some — and  their  number  is  ever  increasing — 
renounce  the  devi!'s  cup  and  adopt  the  cup  of  Christ.  The  apostle  is  referring  to 
these  when  he  says,  "  Such  were  some  of  you  :  but  ye  are  washed,"  &c.  3.  In  both 
classes  there  is  a  desu'e  to  participate  of  both  cups  at  the  same  time.  Those  who 
drink  of  the  devil's  cup  are  not  morally  satisfied,  and  hence  they  often  desire  if 
possible  to  participate  of  the  other.  On  the  other  hand,  many  of  those  who 
drink  of  Christ's  cup  have  frequently  a  strong  desire  to  participate  of  the  devil's 
cup.  Hence  the  desire  for  self-indulgence,  worldly  pleasures  and  pursuits,  &c. 
Like  the  Jews  in  the  wilderness,  they  have  a  hankering  after  the  fleshpots  of 
Egypt ;  like  Lot's  wife,  they  cast  a  lingering  look  upon  the  old  scenes  of  Sodom, 
III.  The  attempted  impossibility  in  life.  "  Ye  cannot,"  &c.  "  No  man  can 
serve  two  masters,"  &c.  Ye  cannot  be  selfish  and  benevolent,  materialistic  and 
spiritual,  false  and  true,  atheistic  and  godly,  good  and  bad  at  the  same  time. 
Every  man  must  be  one  or  the  other.  Conclusion  :  1.  My  unregenerate  brother, 
drink  no  more  of  the  devil's  cup.  It  may  be  pleasant,  but  it  is  sapping  your 
spiritual  constitution,  and  stealing  away  your  health.  It  may  be  delicious,  but  it 
will  and  must  turn  to  poison.  Thrust  it  from  you.  Thousands  have  done  so  : 
not  one  who  has  done  it  has  ever  regretted  the  sacrifice.  2.  To  you,  my  Christly 
friends,  I  say,  cherish  no  lingerings  after  the  old  cup  ;  crush  every  rising  desire 


CHAP.  X.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  39 

for  another  sip  of  it.  The  cup  you  have  in  your  hand  has  all  and  more  than  you 
want  to  satisfy  your  conscience,  to  strengthen  your  faculties,  to  ennoble  your 
existence,  and  beautify  your  being.     (D.   Thomas,  D.D.)  The  cup  of  demons  is 

an  expression  easily  understood  when  we  remember  that  in  the  solemn  feasts  of  the 
ancients  the  consecration  of  the  banquet  took  place  with  that  of  the  cup,  accom- 
panied by   the   libation  in   honour   of   the   gods.     The  first  cup  was  offered   to 
Jupiter ;  the  second  to  Jupiter  and  the  nymphs  ;  the  third  to  Jupiter  Soter.     To 
participate  in  these  three  cups  which  circulated  among  the  guests,  was  net  this  to 
do  an  act  of  idolatry,  and  to  put  oneself  under  the  power  of  the  spirit  of  evil,  as 
really  as  the  Jew  by  sacrificing  put  himself  under  the  induence  of  Jehovah,  and 
the  Christian  by  communicating  under  that  of  Christ  ?     Materially,  no  doubt,  it 
was   possible   to   act   thus,   but   not  without  criminal   inconsistency.     And  what 
proves  that  this  is  the  meaning  of  "  Ye  cannot "  is  the  fact  that  in  the  sequel 
Paul  exjDressly  states  that  the  Corinthians   already  venture  to  act   thus,  for  he 
declares  the  fate  which  awaits  them  if  they  persist.     {Prof.  Godet.)         The  sacra- 
ment of  the  Lord's  Supper : — Consider — I.  Wh.^t  this  saceament  is.    "  The  cup  of  the 
Lord  "^"  the  table  of  the  Lord."     1.  We  have  many  observances  which,  however 
profitable,  are  of  man's  appointment  only.     But  this  owes  its  origin  to  our  Divine 
Lord.     And  this  circumstance  ought  to  make  us  view  it  with  the  greatest  revereuce. 
Christ  spreads  this  table  and  presides  at  it.     2.   The  Lord  who  instituted  it  com- 
manded it  as  a  memorial  of  Himself.     And  the  fact  in  our  Lord's  history  of  which 
we  are  to  be  put  peculiarly  in  mind  is  His  love  for  lost  sinneis  as  displayed  iu  His 
sufferings  and  death  upon  the  Cross  (chap.  xi.  26).     Apart  from  Him  this  sacra- 
ment has   no   meaning   whatsoever.     IL    The   spieitual  privileges  enjoyed  by 
THOSE  WHO  PROPERLY  RECEIVE  THIS  SACRAMENT.     It   is   Dot   bread  aud  wine   alone 
which  true  communicants  receive,  but  that  which  is  signified  by  the  bread  and 
wine— even  the  benefits  of  Christ's  body  crucified,  the  merits  of  His  dying  blood 
(ver.    16).     III.    What   is   it   which    will   hinder    a   man   from   enjoying    such 
PRIVILEGES  ?     1.  Paul  is  evidently  referring  to  festivals  in  honour  of  heathen  gods 
(Dan.  V.  4).     The  Christians,  it  appears,  were  often  asked  to  join  these;  and, 
believing  that   an   idol   was   nothing  in   the  world,  they  drew  from   thence   the 
inference  that  such  a  course  was  harmless.      Now  St.  Paul  reminds  them  that 
though  in  truth  "  an  idol  was  nothing  in  the  world,"  yet  what  the  heathens  offered 
to  their  idols  they  offered  in  fact  to  evil  spirits  (ver.  20).     "  And  I  would  not,"  says 
he,  "  that  ye  should  have  fellowship  with  devils."     Then,  by  way  of  giving  them 
a  weighty  reason  against  continuing  to  attend  those  ungodly  celebrations,  he  tells 
them  how  impossible  it  was  that  they  could  get  any  benefit  from  the  Lord's  Suj)per 
whilst  they  did  so.     2.  Satan  has  a  wide  temple,  has  spread  a  large  table  and  has 
provided  deep  cups  overflowing  with  deadly  wine.     At  this  table  every  man  sits  who 
lives  in  the  practice  of  sin.     The  brutish  drunkard — is  it  not  the  devil's  cup  which 
bereaves  him  of  his  reason  and  fills  his  mouth  with  riot  and  with  blasphemy? 
The  gluttonous  man — is  it  not  at  tlie  devil's  table  that  he  sits  when  he  makes  such 
a  besotted  use  of  the  bounties  of  Clod's  providence  ?     The  covetous  man  that  is 
making  gain  his  god,  the  lover  of  worldly  j^lea^ure  and  praise,  the  selfish,  the 
proud,  the  passionate,  the  liar,  the  hypocrite — all  are  Satan's  guests.     Now,  can 
such  drink  the  Lord's  cup,  eat  the  Lord's  bread,  i.e.,  receive  the  spiritual  blessings 
of  this  sacrament  ?     IV.  How  are  we  to  come  to  this  sacrament  so  as  to  enjoy 
its  privileges  ?     If  we  cannot  drink  the  Lord's  cup  or  jpartake  of  the  Lord's  table 
whilst  we  partake  of  Satan's,  then  the  right  way  of  coming  to  this  ordinance  is  by 
dashing  Satan's  cup  away  from  us — by  rising  from  his  table  with  an  intention, 
under  grace,  of  sitting  down  to  it  no  more.     {A.  Boherfs.  31. A.)         Ye  cannot  be 
partakers  of  the  Lord's  table  and  of  the  table  of  devils. — Tlie   Lord's   table  :— 
The  Lord's  Supper  got  the  name  cf  "  table"  because  the  early  Christians  celebrated 
it  in  connection  with  the  family  meal  (cf.  Acts  ii.  46  and  Pliny's  letter).  Heathenism 
turned  religious  rites  into  convivial  feats,  and  Christianity  made  a  household  meal 
a  sacrament.     But  the  apostle  here  borrows  the  name  from  Malachi,  who  designates 
the  altar  of  burnt-offering  "  the  table  of  the  Lord,"  meaning  that  God's  altar  is 
God's  table,  i.e.,  that  God  partakes  of  the  sacrifice  in   common  with  the  wor- 
sLipper.     Similarly,  says  the  apostle,  the  supper  instituted   by  Christ  was  tben 
aud  now  a  table  at  which  the  believer  is  brought  into  real  communion  with  Christ. 
But  tbe  table  is  an  altar,  inasmuch  as  the  communion  rests  on  Christ's  atoning 
sacrifice  (cf.  Heb.  xiii.  10).     {PrmcijMl  Edicards.)         Decision  of  character  in  reli- 
gion:— I.  The  decision  which  is  essential  to  the  maintaining  of  the  Christian 
CHARACTER.     "Ye   caiiHot   be  partakers,"  &c.    Paul   does  not   mince  the  matter. 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

but  holds  forth  the  solemn  fact  that  idolatrous  worship  is  the  worship  of  devils. 

I.  Mark  what  real  Christianity  is.  It  is  a  Divine  participation,  not  merely  a 
participation  of  bread  and  wine;  that  were  to  be  partaker  of  man's  table,  because 
man  provides  them.  To  constitute  it  the  Lord's  table,  the  Lord  must  be  present, 
and  I  must  by  faith  partake  of  the  Lord,  as  my  lips  partake  of  the  bread  and  the 
wine.  2.  Mark  how  this  excludes  all  Satan's  baits.  (1)  By  "  the  table  of  devils  " 
I  understand  carnal  objects  engaging  the  affections,  vain  amusements,  &c. 
A  real  Christian  is  not  careful  to  contrive  how  near  he  may  go  to  hell  and  yet  not 
perish  ;  but  he  is  anxious  to  try  how  near  be  can  live  to  God  and  Christ.  (2)  But 
morp  is  intended.  The  apostle  is  speaking  throughout  of  idolatry.  3.  "  Ye  can- 
not be  partakers  "  of  both.  "No  man  can  serve  two  masters."  It  is  this  which 
condemns  the  spirit  of  compromise.  It  cannot  he  expected  that,  if  you  have  been 
meeting  with  His  enemies  at  their  table,  Christ  will  meet  you  at  His  as  a  friend. 

II.  The  obligation  which  makes  it  impekative.  1.  Have  you  ever  attempted  to 
calculate  what  you  are  indebted  to  grace  for?  Have  the  infinite  obligations  under 
which  you  are  laid  by  tlie  acts  of  grace  had  their  due  influence  upon  heart  and 
life?  Were  an  earthly  monarch  or  an  earthly  friend  to  do  for  you  or  for  me  a 
thousandth  part  of  what  Jesus  has  done,  all  his  injunctions  and  wishes  would  be 
sacred  with  u«.  And  how  is  it  that  Christ  should  have  given  Himself  for  us,  and 
yet  we  should  fe^l  such  a  wretched  coldness  and  indifference  to  the  interests  of 
His  kingdom  upon  earth  and  His  throne  in  our  own  hearts  ?  Think  of  the  mighty 
debt  we  owe,  and  then  ask  whether  we  can  "  be  partakers  of  the  table  of  the  Lord 
and  the  table  of  devils."  2.  The  obligation  rises  still  higher  if  we  bear  in  mind 
the  dignity  of  the  character  to  which  we  are  exalted.  Eemember  you  are  not 
merely  pardoned,  but  adopted ;  made  kings  and  priests  to  God,  and  destined  to 
live  and  reign  with  Him.  And  shall  such  dignity  of  character  be  debased  by  our 
"partaking  of  the  table  of  devils"?  3.  What  is  your  expectation?  To  be  like 
Christ  and  to  see  Him  as  He  is,  to  be  entirely  and  eternally  rid  of  sin,  and  be  a 
partaker  of  g'ory.  And  shall  I  forget  it  all  and  be  "  a  partaker  of  the  table  of 
devils"?  God  forbid!  {J.  Irons.)  Do  we  provoke  the  Lord  to  jealousy? — 
ProvGking  tlte  jealous  God : — I  know  of  but  one  provocation  that  is  commendable 
— the  "provoking  one  another  unto  love  and  to  good  works."  All  others  are  to 
be  shunned ;  and  n>ost  of  all  that  which  provokes  God.  My  text  is  in  perfect 
accordance  with  that  expression,  "  Grieve  not  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God."  We 
"provoke  the  Lord  to  jealousy" — I.  By  a  worldly  spirit.  All  through  the  Bible 
separation  from  the  world  is  enjoined.  God's  Church  is  a  peculiar  people.  But 
alas !  it  has  become  almost  the  common  practice  to  aim  to  get  rid  of  all  that 
could  be  considered  j)eculiar.  II.  When  the  opposition  to  sin  and  heresy  ceases 
TO  BE  maintained.  "  Curse  ye  Meroz."  Why?  Not  because  they  had  done  any 
mischief,  but  because  they  were  neutrals.  Our  Lord  has  said,  "He  that  is  not 
with  Me  is  against  Me."  Oh  !  provoke  Him  not  to  jealousy.  III.  By  unbelief. 
There  are  mmy  of  you  that  have  had  evidences  which  you  could  not  controvert 
that  you  belong  to  God  ;  but  yet  you  have  never  owned  it — nay,  refuse  to  admit 
the  fact,  fear  it  is  not  for  you.  You  reject  the  comforts :  and  this  is  "  provoking 
God  to  jealousy."  IV.  By  laxity  in  prayer.  His  kind  invitation  runs,  "  Draw 
nigh  to  Me,  and  I  will  draw  nigh  to  you";  "Pray  without  ceasing."  And  what 
say  our  closets  ?  V.  By  declension  from  His  truth.  This  will  follow  laxity  in 
prayer.  Where  the  truth  of  God  is  undervalued,  where  the  doctrines  of  God's 
grace  are  considered  of  comparatively  little  importance,  we  "provoke  the  Lord  to 
jealousy."  Nothing  is  more  offensive  in  His  sight  than  when  "  truth  is  fallen  in 
the  streets"  and  "cannot  enter."  (Ibid.)  Frovoking  the  jealous  God: — 
Consider — I.  How  thoughtlessly  men  provoke  God.  1.  By  sin.  2.  By  impeni- 
tence and  unbelief.  3.  By  distrust  and  murmuring.  4.  By  giving  His  glory  to 
another.  II.  How  dreadful  it  is  to  provoke  God.  1.  He  is  very  jealous.  2. 
His  anger  is  fierce.  3.  He  will  not  acquit  the  guilty.  III.  How  foolish.  1.  He 
is  stronger  than  we.     2.    We  cannot  escape.     (J.  Lytli,  D.D.) 

Vers.  23-33.  All  things  are  lawful  for  me,  but  all  things  are  not  expedient. — 

Lmvfulness  mtd  expediency  : — People  born  and  eilueated  in  a  Christian  country, 
and  surrounded  with  the  public  opinion  and  social  habits  attendant  upon  Christian 
civilisation,  can  have  no  idea  of  the  dilKcnlties  of  a  converted  heathen.  Cases  of 
conscience  would  perplex  such  a  man  which  to  us  would  seem  childish.  In  the 
present  and  preceding  chapters  the  apostle  is  dealing  with  such  cases,  and  sums  up 
the  whole  matter  in  the  text.     The  question,  in  things  indifferent,  was  not  merely 


CHAP.  X.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  41 

Are  they  lawful  ?  but  Are  they  expedient  ?  They  may  be  lawful  in  the  abstract,  but 
this  lawfulness  must  always  be  used,  subject  to  the  consideration  that  advance  in 
righteousness  must  not  be  hindered  whether  in  ourselves  or  others.  "  All  things  " 
of  course  must  be  limited  to  the  special  cases  I'eferred  to.  The  apostle  gives  here 
no  countenance  to  Antinomianism.     Only  indifferent  things  are  intended.     Note — • 

1.  That  what  is  lawful  for  a  Christian  mat  not  always  be  expedient.  Con- 
sider what  a  Christian  man  is,  and  how  holy  a  trust  he  has  committed  to  him.  He 
is  a  child  of  God  and  has  to  walk  worthy  of  his  vocation.  Such  a  position  brings 
with  it  not  merely  an  obligation  to  do  what  is  right,  but  to  do  what  is  becoming. 
E.g.,  to  a  Christian  prince  and  a  Christian  peasant  there  are  the  same  motives  of 
action  and  the  same  rule  of  character  ;  yet  what  would  be  becoming  for  the  one, 
would  be  unbecoming  for  the  other.  This  jDrinciple  obtains  in  social  life.  The 
world  holds  truly  that  there  are  many  things  which  are  not  unseemly  in  an  ordinary 
man  which  are  unseemly  in  a  magistrate  or  in  a  minister.  And  it  is  just  this 
distinction  which  a  child  of  God  is  to  regard.  Now  to  what  a  variety  of  things 
may  this  principle  be  applied !  To  dress,  style  of  social  life,  recreations,  conver- 
sation, &c.  Does  this  conduct  ecn.iist  with  charity  ?  Does  it  throw  a  hindrance  in 
the  way  of  a  weak  brother  ?  The  expenditure  I  make  is  lawful.  Granted  ;  but  is  it 
expedient?  Might  not  my  time  and  money  be  better  employed  ?  Am  I  seeking  in 
selfishness  my  own  needless  indulgence  in  preference  to  the  important  good  of  my 
neighbours  ?  II.  That  to  a  Che:stian,  whatever  is  apparently  expedient,  must 
at  the  same  time  be  clearly  lawful.  In  the  world  the  right  is  too  often 
sacrificed  to  the  expedient.  E.g.,  "  My  business  would  be  gone,"  says  the  worldly- 
wise  trader,  "  if  I  acted  upon  those  rigid  rules  of  right  which  you  put  up."  "  These 
commercial  frauds,"  says  the  man  on  'Change,  "  are  general  customs,  they  are 
understood  things,  and  I  only  practise  upon  others  according  to  my  experience 
from  others."  But  to  do  evil  that  good  may  come  is  to  do  Satan's  work.  Eemember, 
our  standard  of  conscience  and  conduct  is  not  that  of  the  world — it  is  that  of  Christ. 
"He  that  abideth  in  Him  must  walk  even  as  He  walked."  Now  I  know  of  no  other 
method  of  safety  but  that  which  lies  in  the  command,  "Watch  and  pray,  lest  ye 
enter  into  temptation."  [C.  J.  P.  Eyre,  M.A.)  Gospel  casui.itry  : — I.  A  good 
»ian  may  have  a  right  to  do  th.\t  which  may  not  always  be  expedient  for 
OTHERS  (ver.  22).  1.  A  good  man  has  a  right  to  go  wherever,  to  eat  whatever,  and 
to  dress  as  he  pleases,  for  he  will  be  actuated  evermore  from  a  good  motive.  2. 
But  for  him  to  use  his  full  right  would  be  often  inexpedient  and  even  pernicious  to 
others.  "Things  lawful"  for  him  would  not  always  "edify,"  build  up  souls  in 
reverent  faith  and  true  worship.  Therefore  do  not  stand  upon  your  rights,  but 
yield  for  the  sake  of  others.  II.  Small  scruples  on  minor  biatters  should  not 
BE  ENCOURAGED.  I.  If  you  are  over-scrupulous  about  what  you  eat,  it  will  pre- 
vent your  participation  in  what  nature  has  provided  for  you  (ver.  25).  If  it 
is  good   meat   it   is  not   the   worse  for  human   food  because   used   in   sacrifice. 

2.  If  you  are  over-scrupulous  about  the  beliefs  of  men,  you  will  be  deprived 
of  social  enjoyments  (ver.  27).  Free,  genial,  social  intercourse  is  one  of  the 
greatest  blessings.  Our  Saviour  came  "  eating  and  drinking,"  but  by  scrupu- 
losity you  saciifice  all  this  and  injure  your  nature.  The  world  was  given 
for  your  enjoyment.  "All  things  are  yours."  III.  A  deference  to  the  con- 
sciences OF  OTHERS  SHOULD  NEVER  BE  NEGLECTED.  When  at  the  table  with  meats 
which  have  been  sacrificed  to  idols,  from  which  a  fellow-guest  conscientiously 
abstains  and  reminds  you  of  the  fact,  then  out  of  deference  to  his  weak  conscience 
do  not  touch  it — however  delicious  it  may  appear,  and  however  hungry  you  may 
be.  The  most  sacred  thing  is  conscience,  and  the  weakest  should  be  respected. 
What  are  meats  and  drinks  in  comparison ?  IV.  Supreme  regard  for  the  gi.ory 
OF  God  should  rule  us  all  (ver.  31).  These  words  embrace  all  life.  The  definite 
acts  of  eating  and  drinking  are  mentioned  because  under  consideration.  They  are, 
however,  to  be  regulated  by  the  same  principle  which  guides  all  true  life.  The 
modern  distinction  between  religious  and  secular  is  nowhere  recognised  by  St. 
Paul.  The  commonest  thing  may  be  done  in  a  high  Christian  spirit ;  the  gr^^atest 
deed  may  spring  from  a  low  and  selfish  motive.  A  religious  act  done  in  a  secular 
spirit  is  secular.     A  secular  thing  done  in  a  religious  spirit  is  religious.     V.  The 

GOOD    OF    others,    AND    NOT     THE     GRATIFICATION     OF     SELF,    SHOULD    BE    OUR    CONSTANT 

AIM  (vers.  24,  32,  33).     {D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Let  no  man  seek  Ms  own,  but  every 

man  another's  wealth. — Om-  duty  to  others  : — I.  The  sense  of  the  several  expres- 
sions IN  the  text.  1.  Wealth  here  does  not  mean  riches,  but  men's  spiritual 
good.     The  word  signifies  prosperity  in  general,  as  is  still  seen  in  the  use  of  the 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 


word  commonwealth  or  pviblic  good.  2.  The  apostle  directs  us  not  to  seek  our 
own,  but  every  man  another's  weahh ;  ourpelves  are  not  excluded,  but  others  are 
included  in  tbe  rule.  It  is  a  Jewish  form  of  speaking,  very  common  in  the  Old  and 
New  Testaments  (Mark  ix.  '61).  II.  What  pahticular  instances  this  rule  ought 
TO  BE  APPLIED  TO.  We  are  bound  by  this  rule.  —  1.  Not  to  do  that  action  which 
we  know  to  be  lawful  when  there  is  danger  of  its  misleading  and  weakenmg  the 
faith  of  another  Christian  who  thinks  it  unlawful.  2.  To  endeavour  to  promote 
the  practice  of  pi^^ty  and  virtue.  3.  To  promote  the  knowledge  of  religion  in  our 
fellow-cieatures,  the  want  of  which  we  find  by  experience  to  produce  very  fatal 
effects;  for  when  young  persons  set  out  in  such  a  world  as  this  is,  unacquainted 
with  the  grounds  of  their  religion,  not  knowing  the  reason  and  foundation  of  the 
hope  that  is  in  them,  how  easily  do  they  become  a  prey  to  the  libertine  or  super- 
stiuous  perveiter.      {Z.  Pearce,  D.D.)  Public-spiritidness  recomvieiuled  : — The 

main  cause  of  men's  prejudices  against  the  gospel  was  that  it  not  only  pretended 
to  mysteries  far  above  human  understanding,  but  enjoined  such  things  as  were 
intolerable  to  human  sense.  And  seeing  that  this  phrase  is  so  hard  to  be  under- 
stood, and  so  much  harder  to  be  practised,  I  shall  endeavour — I.  To  explain  the 
SENSE  OF  IT.  "Let  no  man  seek  his  own,"  i.e. — 1.  Be  selfish  in  his  designs,  be  of 
a  narrow  private  spirit ;  but  let  him  have  an  open  heart  and  a  public  mind.  2.  So 
as  to  nijure  or  neglect  others ;  but  let  him  also  seek  another's  wealth,  and  not  only 
his  wtaltt),  but  his  safety,  peace,  content,  honour,  eveidasting  good.  Let  no 
man  lay  it  as  the  first  principle  of  his  thoughts,  words,  and  actions,  How  shall 
I  improve  my  own  affairs  ?  But,  How  shall  I  make  other  people  happy  ?  II.  To 
SHOW  THE  reasonableness  OF  IT — the  goodness,  the  agreeableness  of  it  to  our 
interest.  Consider — 1.  That  no  good  man  is  a  sepaiate  and  entire  being  of 
himself ;  he  is  but  a  part  of  a  whole,  or  a  member  of  a  borly.  That  which  gives 
life  and  heat  to  any  member  is  the  circulation  of  spirits  that  is  in  common  to 
the  whole  body.  Therefore  when  ye  are  bid  not  to  seek  your  own,  ye  are  bid  to 
live  and  be  happy  in  the  common  benefits  of  mankind;  to  have  an  interest  in  that 
which  others  have.  It  is  for  your  own  preservation  and  happiness  that  ye  are  bid 
not  to  seek  your  own.  2.  That  we  ourselves  are  not  our  own  ;  we  have  a  projjrietor 
which  is  God.  We  neither  made  ourselves,  nor  are  we  anything  but  what  He  pleases 
to  make  us;  and  theiefore  it  is  very  improper  to  call  ourselves,  or  anything  we  have, 
our  own,  and  to  seek  anythiug  as  our  own  is  to  withdraw  ourselves  from  Him  in 
whom  we  live  and  move  and  have  our  being ;  but  not  to  seek  our  own — that  is,  not 
to  place  our  hopes  and  desires  on  anything  but  God — is  to  entitle  ourselves  to  His 
care  and  protection.  3.  That  upon  the  text  we  may  build  safely  and  iunocently 
the  greatest  self-interest.  For  if  we  dedicate  all  our  desires  and  acquisitions  to  God, 
then,  and  not  till  then,  everything  we  j)ossess  is  properly  our  own;  everything  we 
enjoy  is  the  free  gift  and  blessing  of  God.  III.  To  diuei't  to  the  practice  of  it.  1. 
Our  Lord  "  came  unto  His  own,  and  His  own  received  Him  not,"  &c.  His  own  were 
those  whose  benefit  He  designed.  So,  following  His  examjile,  we  may  make  many 
things  our  own  which  otherwise  we  siiould  have  no  relation  to.  We  may  "  make  to 
ourselves  friends,  e.g.,oi  the  mammon  of  unrighteousness"  The  mammon  itself  will 
fail  them  that  seek  it,  but  the  friends  we  make  with  it  will  never  fail  us.  The  j^oor 
we  have  always  with  us,  and  we  may  make  them  our  own,  our  relations  and 
dependents  here;  and  they,  under  Christ,  will  be  our  advocates  hereafter.  If  we 
seek  out  a  distressed  family  to  relieve  it,  that  will  be  our  own  family,  it  will  always 
own  us  before  God,  and  we  ourselves  shall  enjoy,  as  it  were,  the  affluence,  the 
refreshments,  the  joys  of  that  family.  2.  But  that  reward  must  not  be  the  only 
motive.  That  will  be  seeking  our  own,  if  what  we  do  for  others  be  only  upon  the 
hopes  that  God  will  pay  it  back  to  us  ;  and  much  less  may  we  propose  to  ourselves 
any  temporal  advantage  from  the  benefits  we  'confer  upon  our  brethren.  We  muct 
not  do  good  to  our  tenants  or  servants  because  they  may  be  the  better  able  to  pay 
us  or  serve  us,  but  because  they  have  a  dependence  upon  us.  So  likewise  in  duties 
to  ourselves  we  must  not  seek  our  own  upon  selfish  motives;  we  must  not  be 
temperate  for  the  sake  only  of  health,  but  in  obedience  to  God  and  for  a  good 
example  to  others.  We  must  not  be  sober  and  discreet  only  because  we  are  in 
such  a  place  or  office,  but  because  we  possess  the  gospel  of  Christ  and  are  called  by 
His  name.  We  must  not  be  industrious  and  frugal  that  we  may  fill  our  bags, 
but  because  we  have  a  family  to  provide  for,  or  some  great  acts  of  charity  to 
perform.  We  must  not  do  great  and  glorious  actions  for  the  reputation  that  we 
may  gain,  but  for  the  glory  of  God  and  the  honour  of  our  country.  All  our  designs 
must  be  of  a  large  and  regular  circumference,  our  hopes  and  desires  must  be  elevated 


CHAP.  X.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  43 

above  ourselves.  3.  But  every  one  must  consider  himself  as  no  more  than  one 
among  the  rest  of  mankind — a  servant  of  Christ's  and  a  member  of  His  body ;  and 
therefore  he  must  seek  that  only  as  is  most  pleasing  to  His  Lord  and  most  bene- 
ficial to  the  advantage  of  the  whole.  As  a  tree  that  brings  not  forth  for  itself,  but 
for  others.  He  must  look  upon  bimself  as  poor  and  miserable,  when  he  has  not 
an  opportunity  of  feeding  the  hungiy  and  clothing  the  naked,  &c.  He  must  seek 
opportunities  of  doing  all  this  and  much  more  ;  and  he  must  rejoice  when  he  hath 
found  out  a  way  of  making  others  happy.  For  as  the  enemy  of  God  and  man 
"goes  about  seeking  whom  he  may  devour,"  so  he  who  will  be  a  friend  to  God 
and  man  must  go  about  seeking  whom  he  may  support.  (S.  Pratt,  D.D.)  A 
henerolent  attention  to  the  interest  of  others  recommended  : — The  apostle  cannot 
be  supposed,  in  the  text,  to  prohibit  or  discourage  all  regard  to  our  own  interests. 
Self-love  is  the  most  active  principle  in  the  human  mind ;  and  to  seek  our  own 
happiness  is  to  obey  the  first  law  of  our  nature.  It  is  then  only  that  our  attention 
to  our  own  concerns  becomes  culpable,  when  they  so  entirely  employ  our  thoughts, 
and  engross  our  aliections,  as  to  leave  us  neither  leisure  nor  inclination  to  pay  a 
due  regard  to  the  interests  of  others.  And  at  tbe  same  time  that  the  apostle 
dissuades  us  from  indulging  a  selfish  temper,  he  exhorts  us  to  cultivate  the  contrary 
spirit,  and  to  exercise  a  generous  concern  for  the  welfare  of  our  brethren.  Behold 
the  prosperity  of  such  as  are  happy;  and  let  tbe  sight  of  their  felicity  increase 
your  own.  Take  notice  of  the  calamities  of  the  unfortunate,  and  let  their  afdic- 
tions  penetrate  your  hearts.     I.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  perfectly  agreeable  to 

OUR   NATURE,  AS   MEN",  THAT   WE    SHOULD   BE    ATTENTIVE    TO    THE    INTERESTS  OF  OTHERS, 

AS  WEIL  AS  TO  OUR  OWN.  Examine  the  constitution  of  the  human  mind,  and  you 
will  see  that  it  is  endued  by  its  Maker,  with  priueij)les  and  aifections  of  a  social  as 
well  as  of  a  private  and  personal  kind  ;  and  that  we  are  as  really,  though  perhaps 
less  strongly,  impelled  by  the  former  to  interest  ourselves  in  the  welfare  of  our 
fellow-creatures,  as  by  the  latter  to  provide  for  our  own  hapi^iness.  A  farther 
obligation  to  this  duty  arises  from  the  state  of  mutual  dependence  in  which  man- 
kiiid  are  placed.  All  the  employments  and  occujjations  of  society  are  reciprocal 
offices  of  kindness,  which  mankind  are  perpetually  performing  towards  each  other, 
for  their  mutual  support  and  happiness.  Another  argument,  to  enforce  the  exhor- 
tation of  the  text,  may  be  taken  from  the  pleasures  of  benevolence.  How  noble, 
how  satisfying,  how  far  superior  to  all  other  delights,  these  pleasures  are,  tbe  good 
man  who  has  experienced  them  alone  can  tell.  There  is  nothing  from  which  the 
superior  excellence  of  the  pleasures  of  benevolence  more  plainly  appears  than  from 
this  circumstance;  that  they  may  be  enjoyed  through  all  the  vicissitudes  of  human 
life,  and  will  continue  when  other  pleasures  shall  forsake  us  for  ever.  Under  the 
greatest  reverse  of  fortune,  and  the  heaviest  pressure  of  affliction,  the  good  man 
may  have  the  satisfaction  of  performing  some  offices  of  kindness  to  others  :  or  at 
least  may  extend  his  benevolent  wishes  to  all  mankind,  and  offer  up  his  fervent 
prayers  to  heaven  on  their  beh.alf.  The  reinembrance  of  his  good  deeds  will 
minister  consolation  to  his  soul  in  that  hour  when  consolation  is  most  of  all 
needed.  Having  said  thus  much  concerning  the  internal  pleasures  of  benevolence, 
it  may  perhaps  seem  of  little  consequence  to  add,  that  an  attention  to  the  interests 
of  others  will  secure  us  the  esteem  and  love  of  mankind.  But,  though  the  appro- 
bation of  our  own  hearts  is  above  all  things  else  to  be  desired,  yet  the  good  opinion 
of  the  world  is  certainly  not  beneath  the  notice  of  a  wise  man.  II.  That  by  com- 
plying WITH  the  exhortation  OF  THE  APOSTLE  IN  THE  TEXT,  WE  SHALL  ACQUIRE 
A   RESEMBLANCE    TO    THE    JEOST    AMIABLE    AND    PERFECT    OF    ALL   BeINGS.       The    Eternal 

Deity,  whose  being  and  happiness  are  independent  and  immutable,  liveth  not  unto 
Himself.  He  continually  exerts  His  almighty  power,  and  employs  His  jperfect 
wisdom  to  preserve  and  bless  tbe  numberless  orders  of  beings  which  He  hath 
created.  Consider,  farther,  that  to  be  attentive  to  the  interests  and  seek  the 
happiness  of  our  brethren,  is  to  act  agreeably  to  our  Christian  profession  and 
character.  If  we  form  our  ideas  of  the  Christian  character,  either  from  the  dispo- 
sitions and  conduct  of  Christ,  from  the  laws  w^hich  He  hath  given  us  for  the 
regulation  of  our  actions,  or  from  His  own  express  language,  we  shall  see  that  it 
consists  in  a  benevolent  heart  and  a  good  life.  "  By  this,"  saith  He,  "  shall  all 
men  know  that  ye  are  My  disciples,  if  ye  have  love  one  towards  another."  III. 
Finally,  it    is   only   by  obeying   the    precept    of   the    text   that   we   can   be 

PREPARED    FOR    THE    ENJOY JIENT    OF    THE    HAPPINESS    PROMISED    TO    SINCERE  CHRISTIANS 

IN  THE  LIFE  TO  COME.  {W.  Enfield.)  The  duty  of  usefulness  : — The  precepts  of 
the  gospel  sometimes  fall  in  with,  and  sometimes  oppose,  the  natural  feelings  of 


44'  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

the  heart.  One  of  the  strongest  natural  feelings  is  self-love.  This  principle  in  man 
is  rebuked  or  countenanced  by  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  according  to  the  manner  in 
which  it  is  modified  by  other  principles.  If  it  be  single,  the  only  motive  which 
governs  the  character,  it  is  then  a  thorough  selfishness  which  leads  to  all  sin,  and 
is  peremptorily  denounced.  But  when  it  is  kept  under  sober  control,  regulated  by 
reason,  limited  by  regard  to  the  rights  and  happiness  of  others,  and  to  the  laws  of 
equity,  kindness,  and  truth,  then  it  is  allowed  and  advocated  by  Christianity.  Our 
Lord  would  blot  out  and  destroy  none  of  the  native  characteristics  of  man ;  He 
seeks  but  to  correct,  renew,  and  exalt  them.  It  is  the  purpose  of  the  gospel  to 
bring  the  benevolent  principle  to  an  equality,  as  far  as  possible,  with  the  selfish. 
It  would  adjust  the  one  by  the  other,  gi-aduate  them  side  by  side,  and  make  them 
equal,  active,  and  successful  partners  in  the  promotion  of  human  happiness.  I. 
That  thehe  is  an  obligation    on    men   to  lead  useful  lives  ;   and  that  every 

MAN    IS    bound    to    MAKE    USEFULNESS    HIS    RULE    IN    HIS    PLANS   AND     PURSUITS.       1.    He 

may  have  a  legal  right  to  go  on  and  advance  his  own  interest,  however  it  may  be  to 
the  detriment  of  another.  He  may  trample  on  the  poor  man  his  neighbour,  and 
avail  himself  of  the  defencelessness  of  the  widow,  and  take  advantage  of  the 
unskilful  in  trade,  and  obstruct  the  inexperience  of  youth.  But  all  this,  which  the 
policy  of  the  world  may  allow,  the  kind  spirit  of  the  gospel,  yes,  the  eternal  rule  of 
equity  condemns.  So  also  of  the  character  of  his  pursuits.  He  may  have  a  legal 
right  to  enter  upon  any  occupation  which  shall  grant  a  livelihood,  or  make  him 
rich,  without  regard  to  its  injurious  operation  on  others.  But  he  has  no  moral 
right,  no  Christian  right,  to  do  it.  It  was  not  for  this  that  was  sent  into  the 
world.  Both  natural  morality  and  Christian  precept  cry  out  against  this  prostitu- 
tion of  his  power,  and  lay  upon  him  their  imperative  injunction  to  pursue  an 
occupation  innocent  at  least,  if  he  cannot  make  it  absolutely  beneficial.  2.  We  are 
not,  however,  to  interpret  this  obligation  of  usefulness  so  straitly  as  to  infer  that 
no  pursuit  is  allowable  but  such  as  promotes  directly  the  welfare  of  other  men  or 
of  society.  It  must  be  accounted  sufficient  that  a  man's  calling  be  not  injurious, 
or  that  it  be  indirectly  useful  to  the  whole  by  its  benefit  to  those  whom  Scripture 
calls  his  own.  3.  It  is  to  be  observed  further,  that  in  a  civilised  state  of  society 
there  are  many  callings  essential  to  the  general  comfort  and  refinement  which 
cannot  be,  and  ought  not  to  be,  dispensed  with,  which  can  yet  in  only  a  very 
secondary  sense  be  denominated  useful.  Yet  they  are  so  indispensable  to  the 
highest  advancement  of  human  society  that  they  are  not  to  be  proscribed  by 
religion.  All  cannot  be  teachers,  all  cannot  be  magistrates,  all  cannot  be  philan- 
thropists. "If  the  whole  body  were  the  head,  where  were  the  body."  But  they 
have  their  place,  and  in  that  place  their  office  is  serviceable.  And,  be  it  remem- 
bered, that  the  conscientious  man  may  always  make  his  occupation  directly 
useful  by  devoting  a  portion  of  its  gains  to  useful  ends,  and  of  its  leisure  to  works 
of  kindness  and  social  good.  Thus  much  concerning  the  general  obligation  of  use- 
fulness.     II.   Let    ME    NOW   state    some     of     the    reasons    on    which   it    RESTS.      1. 

God  has  plainly  intimated  His  will  by  the  UHture  which  He  has  given  us.  Our 
earliest  feelings,  it  is  true,  are  absorbed  in  ourselves.  But  we  no  sooner  enter  on 
the  experience  of  society,  and  become  capable  of  understanding  the  situation  of 
others,  than  our  hearts  are  drawn  out  toward  them,  and  we  instinctively  desire 
that  they  also  should  enjoy.  2.  God  has  further  testified  to  us  His  will  by  the 
situation  to  which  He  has  appointed  us.  It  is  a  state  of  mutual  and  reciprocal 
depeudance.  3.  He  has  further  enforced  this  obligation  by  His  own  example. 
What  has  He  made,  what  has  He  done,  except  for  some  useful  end  ?  In  all  the 
expenditures  of  His  universe,  what  has  beeu  expended  except  to  do  good?  4.  The 
obligation  is  also  laid  upon  us  by  the  example  of  Jesus  Christ.  His  life  was  devoted, 
consecrated,  to  useful  labours.  No  matter  for  Himself;  no  matter  for  His  own 
convenience,  comfort  or  rest.     (H.  Ware.) 

Vers.  27-30.  If  any  of  them  that  believe  not  bid  you  to  a  feast. — Social  inter- 
course hetu-een  believers  attd  unhelu'vers : — I.  Christianity  does  not  forbid  it — 
does  not  forbid  the  acceptance  of  the  invitation.  To  forbid  such  intercourse — 
1.  Would  involve  a  command  with  which  it  would  be  impossible  to  comply,  and 
which  would  be  inconsistent  with  the  position  of  the  Christian  as  a  citizen  of  this 
world.  The  distinction  between  believers  and  unbelievers  is  doubtless  the  most 
important  which  it  is  possible  to  make,  but  is  not  the  classification  made  by 
men  generally.  It  is  not  r*  cognised  by  trade.  Hence  to  forbid  intercourse  would 
be  to  prescribe  au  impossible  rule.    Christians  are  to  be  "  diligent  in  business,"  &c. 


CHAP.  X.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  45 

Moreover,  how  many  families  are  there,  some  of  the  members  of  which  believe,  and 
others  believe  not !  2.  Would  necessitate  our  making  distinctions  wliich  it  is 
impossible  for  us  to  make.  Which  of  us  could  draw  the  line  between  those  that 
believe  and  those  that  believe  not  ?  3.  Would  encourage  in  those  who  believe  the 
most  un-Christlike  feelings?.  How  would  it  encourage  the  spirit  of  Pharisaism  ! 
"  Lord,  I  thank  thee  that  I  am  not  as  other  men  are."  "  Give  place,  for  I  am 
holier  than  thou."  Further,  all  those  who  believe  were  once  amongst  those  who 
believe  not ;  and  how  has  this  transition  been  made  ?  "  By  grace."  And  this 
being  the  case,  how  unbecoming  abstinence  from  all  social  intercourse  with  those 
who  believe  not.  4.  Would  be  to  take  away  the  best  means  for  the  cultivation  of 
personal  piety.  The  piety  of  the  Bible  is  not  the  piety  of  the  cloister,  but  one  which 
is  consummated  in  love.  And  wl^ere  do  we  find  the  best  school  for  this  ?  A  manly 
piety  is  best  cultivated  in  the  midst  of  the  busy  hum  of  the  market  and  the  shop. 
It  is  in  the  world  that  we  meet  with  that  discipline  which  is  necessary  for  tlie 
strengthening  of  our  faith,  patience,  and  meekness.  5.  Would  interpose  a  barrier 
to  the  spread  of  Christian  truth.  The  influence  of  example  is  one  of  the  most 
valaaWe  means  of  spreading  the  gospel  (chaps,  vii.  viii.)  G.  Would  be  inconsis- 
tent with  the  example  of  Christ.  He  was  "invited  to  a  feast,"  on  more  occasions 
than  one  by  those  who  believed  not,  and  went.  "  This  man  receivelh  sinners  and 
eateth  with  them."  Such  reasons  show  the  propriety  of  the  truth  involved  in  our 
text.  With  many,  however,  the  great  danger  is  of  erring  on  the  other  side.  No 
surer  proof  is  there  that  our  heart  is  not  right  with  God  than  when  we  choose  for 
our  intimate  companions  those  who  are  utter  strangers  to  the  power  of  godliness. 
II.  Christians  should  be  careful,  in  such  intekcoukse,  not  to  be  the  means  op 
CAUSING  thkik  Chkistianity  to  be  evil  spoken  of.  The  j)articular  way  in  which 
this  might  be  done  is  specified  by  the  apostle.  Occasions,  in  such  intercourse, 
there  are  sure  to  be,  when  the  temptation  to  belie  our  faith  in  Christ  will  be  strong. 
An  unguarded  word  or  look  may  be  the  means  of  causing  some  of  "  the  enemies  of 
the  Lord  to  blaspheme."  Moreover,  we  may  advert  to  the  care  we  should  take  to 
turn  such  social  intercourse  to  good  account.  To  what  an  eminent  degree  did 
Christ  do  so  ;  and  well  would  it  be  if  Christians  embraced  opportunities  of  saying 
"  a  word  in  season  "  in  that  easy,  natural  way  in  which  Christ  did  it.  We  must 
cultivate  our  own  personal  godliness — live  more  ourselves  in  the  Spirit — and  then 
we  shall  make  t'(at  use  of  social  intercourse  which  we  ought.  (Caleb  Scott,  LL.B.) 
Conscience,  I  say,  not  thine  own,  but  of  the  other. — The  social  conscience: — 
Strictly  the  form  of  the  expression  would  be,  "  Consciiiuce,  not  only  thine  own,  but 
of  the  other  as  well."  The  moral  siguificauce  of  life  is  nowhere  more  vitally  mani- 
fest than  in  what  we  do  or  fail  to  do  for  the  characters  of  our  neighbours.  And  it 
is  easy  enough  to  agree  that  we  ought  not  to  damage  other  men's  consciences  ;  but 
to  give  up  the  pleasant  and  otherwise  harmless  habit  which  will  damage  them,  is  not 
always  easy.  Besides,  there  are  some  questions  of  right,  how  far  this  ought  or  is 
demanded  to  be  done.  Now  note — I.  That  every  man  should  make  his  relations 
TO  other  men's  characters,  and  the  effects  of  his  actions  on  OTHtR  men's  actions, 
A  direct  part  of  his  regular  religious  CULTURE.  1.  On  the  ground  of  the  nature 
of  the  case  this  can  be  denied  only  by  the  monk  on  the  ground  that  in  solitude,  as  a 
higher  state  of  man,  the  relations  do  not  exist ;  by  the  indiffereniist  on  the  ground 
that  the  result  of  things  is  beyond  the  influence  of  ethical  distinctions  ;  or  by  the 
believer  in  the  legitimacy  of  sheer  impulse.  2.  Quite  as  clear  is  the  word  of  the 
gospel.  The  Christian  f  ith  is  eminently  a  social  principle.  The  forms  it  takes  on 
are  domestic  and  associative.  It  founds  a  church.  It  advocates  the  common  weal. 
Amongst  its  commandments  are,  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself,"  and 
"Bear  ye  one  another's  burdens."  The  lives  of  the  apostles  were  consecrated 
labours  for  the  souls  of  their  fellow-men.      II.  Now,  the  helps  men  render  to 

ONE    another's   virtue   ARE,    FOR    THE    BIOST    PART,   RENDERED    WITHOUT    ANJ    EXPRESS 

attempt  AT  WHAT  IS  CALLED  "  SETTING  AN  EXAMPLE."  Excellcnce  is  more 
impressive  when  it  is  seen  living  and  acting  by  a  certain  independent  force 
from  within  itself,  than  when  it  is  pat  on  exhibition  for  a  pattern.  la  agriculture 
and  mechanics  producers  do  sometimes  raise  stock,  or  finish  fabrics,  merely  for 
a  show  ;  but  goodness  is  a  more  delicate  thing.  If  we  undertake  to  manufacture  it 
for  a  pattern,  we  shall  spoil  it  in  the  making.  It  will  not  be  genuine,  but  Pharisaic. 
IIL  But  this  does  not  at  all  deny  our  obligation  to  do  or  not  to  do  some 
THINGS,  OUT  OF  A  SIMPLE  REGARD  TO  THEIR  SOCIAL  EFFECTS.  Christian  modesty  may 
shrink  from  the  thought  of  being  exemplary ;  but  Christian  principle  will  eagerly 
renounce  what  is  hurtful.     Is  it  not  likely  that  we  are  set  into  society  for  this  very 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

end,  that  by  sacrifices  for  others  we  may  be  disciplined  into  a  more  Christlike  dis- 
interestedness"? The  complicated  case,  undoubtedly,  is  where  some  habit  is  felt  to 
be  perfectly  safe  to  yourself,  but  would  probably  be  unsafe  to  others  who  are  the 
more  likely  to  go  astray  for  your  j^ractice.  1.  The  defence  set  up  is  :  "Eules  of 
meat  and  drink,  amnseraent  and  display,  are  not  definite  nor  absolute.  Each 
must  adjust  his  habit  to  his  constitution  and  circumstances,  and  stop  there. 
Everything  is  likely  to  be  abused.  I  am  to  strike  out  a  way  of  hving  that  seems 
lawful  enough  for  myself,  and  expect  everybody  else  to  do  the  same."  Now^l) 
This  language  has  a  sound  of  hardness  and  selfishness,  and  the  moral  judgment 
pronounces  that  it  is  not  the  final  nor  the  highest  view  of  duty.  It  is  not  the  sort 
of  response  we  expect  from  the  nobler  order  of  men,  who  live  for  the  good  of  their 
race,  and  not  for  themselves.  (2)  This  defence  is  not  very  likely  to  be  urged 
where  the  party  endangered  by  our  gratification  should  be  a  child  or  a  brother. 
But  Christianity  recognises  no  such  limitation  of  responsibility — it  declares  all 
mankind  one  family  ;  and  that,  for  the  purposes  of  doing  God's  will,  every  human 
being  is  a  mother  or  a  brother  or  a  sister.  (3)  And  when  it  is  said  that  all  things 
must  be  abused,  remember  that  this  tendency  by  no  means  excuses  him  who  so 
uses,  beyond  the  line  of  nei'essity  or  duty,  that  the  abuse  comes  in.  If  "  offences 
must,  needs  come,"  none  the  less  "  woe  to  him  by  whom  the  offence  cometh." 
(4)  If  you  further  say  that,  so  long  as  your  act  is  not  in  itself  wrong,  Providence 
must  see  that  no  harm  comes  of  it,  the  reply  is  that  Providence  is  quite  as  likely  to 
see  that  no  harm  comes  to  you  whpn  you  deny  yourself.  Besides,  when  we  speak 
of  an  act  as  "right  in  itself,"  consider  what  is  included  in  "itself."  For  no  act 
can  be  i-aid  to  be  right  in  itself  which  is  so  done  that  the  spirit  of  the  doer  or  the 
situation  of  its  occurrence  binds  it  up  inseparably  with  wrong.  (5)  And  if  you 
still  urge  that  nothing  ought  to  be  given  up  which  makes  for  the  happy  processes 
of  social  life,  then  let  it  be  fully  established  that  the  practice  does  belong  to  the 
best  ordt'r  of  life,  and  is  essential  to  it,  and  that  its  advantages  are  not  outweighed 
by  the  evils  that  spring  directly  out  of  it.  Above  all,  let  it  be  clear  whether  the 
thing  is  really  done  from  a  conscientious  regard  to  the  public  good,  or  whether  that 
is  only  a  sophistication  to  palliate  what  is  actually  done  only  because  it  is  agree- 
able. 2.  Set  over  against  the  defence  the  following  words  of  Paul,  and  say  which 
seems  to  ring  clearest  from  the  heights  of  Christian  clearsightedness  and  truth, 
"  None  of  us  liveth  to  himself,  and  no  man  dieth  to  himself.  Let  no  man  put  a 
stumbling-block  in  his  brother's  way.  Destroy  not  him  with  thy  meat,  for  whom 
Christ  died.  If  ineat  make  my  brother  to  offend,  I  will  eat  no  fiesh  while  the  world 
standeth.     For  the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  meat  and  drink,"  A-c.     IV.  The  more 

FREQUENT  OBSTACLE  TO  THIS  THOUGHTFUL  AND  GENEROUS  BEHAVIOUR,  IS  THE  ABSENCE 
OF  ANY  GLARING  EVIDENCE  THAT    OUR  LUXURIES    DO    TEMPT    OUR    NEIGHBOURS.       What  is 

the  delight  of  a  palate,  or  of  an  amusement,  that  any  of  us  would  not  hurl  from 
him  if  he  saw  one  fellow-creature  plunged  into  all  ijrofligacy  by  it  ?  But  surely, 
in  such  a  matter,  a  doubt  is  grave  enough  to  dictate  a  Christian's  conduct.  A  very 
earnest  moial  nature  will  not  be  willing  to  imperil  a  fellow-creature's  purity  on  the 
slender  difference  between  a  conjecture  and  a  certainty.  And  little  as  tney  may 
suspect  it,  who  eat,  drink,  and  are  merry,  without  a  religious  scruple  on  their 
pleasures,  all  the  while,  in  many  a  building  not  far  away,  the  beginnings  of  vice 
are  taking  a  terrible  warrant  and  license  from  their  freedom.  Conclusion: 
1.  There  is  no  self-denial  deseiving  the  name  that  is  not  willing  to  give  up  any 
privilege  rather  than  endanger  the  least  or  lowest  of  God's  children.  In  the 
estimates  of  God  and  eternity,  the  generosity  that  shields  a  human  heart  from 
shame  will  stand  above  a  genial  st\  le  of  hospitality.  Not  till  comfort  shall  bf'come 
the  creed  of  Christendom,  can  fiee  living  be  the  testimony  of  faith.  2.  After  all, 
we  must  raise  our  minds  before  a  higher  judgment  than  our  own.  Again  the  voice 
of  the  Lord  God  will  be  beard  at  the  end  of  the  day,  asking  of  you  and  me,  "Where 
is  thy  brother?  "  How  little  will  it  avail  us  then  to  stammer  with  the  impotent 
iHOckery  of  self-defence,  "  Am  1  my  brother's  keeper  ?  "     [Bishop  Huntington.) 

Ver.  31.  Whether  therefore  ye  eat  ...  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God. — Of  the  (jlnry 
of  Gild. — I.  The  true  meaning  of  the  phkase.  1.  The  glory  of  God  is — (1)  The 
essence,  person,  or  majesty  of  God  ;  i.e.,  God  Himself,  who  is  th^^  fountain  of 
glory  (2  Pet.  i.  17).  (2)  The  manifesta'ion  of  God's  perfections  (Isa.  xliii.  7  ;  1  Cor. 
xi.  7).  And  because  in  every  o  e  of  the  Divine  perfections  there  is  something 
distinctly  worthy  of  p'aise,  it  is  not  unirequent  to  call  any  one  of  those  perfections 
the  glory  of  God.     (a)  The  Divine  power  (Psa.  xix.  1 ;  John  xi.  4,  4U).     {b)  The 


CHAP.  X.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  47 

Divine  mercy  and  goodness  as  the  attributes  wherein  God  chiefly  delights  (James 
ii.  13,    "  Mercy   glorieth   over  judgment  "  ;    see  also  Eom.  is.  23  ;  Eph.  iii.  16). 
These  are  also  called  the  glory  of  Christ  (John  i.  14).     And  even  the  glory  of  a 
man  (Prov.  xis.  11 ;  see  also  Eph.  i.  14  ;  Eom.  xi.  32).     2.  The  glorifying  God  is — - 
(1)  The  acknowledgment  which  creatures  make  again  to  God — (a)  In  worshipping 
(Psa.  xxix.  1 ;  Rev.  iv.  11,  xix.  7) ;  and  because  the  heathen  gave  this  to  others 
instead   of   the   true  God   St.    Paul   charges   them    (Eom.    i.    21)   with    knowing 
God  but  glorifying  Him  not  as  God.  (!>)  By  thanks  particularly  returned  for  special 
benefits  received  (Luke  xvii.  18).    (c)  By  acknowledgment  of  His  government  and 
supreme  dominion  in  the  world  (Phil.  ii.  11;  Eev.  xi.  13).  Belshazzar,  for  neglecting 
this,  was  reproved  by  Daniel  (Dan.  v.  22).  And  Herod,  in  Acts  xii.  23.    (2)  Confession 
of  past  sins  with  true   humiliation  (.Josh.  vii.  19).      (3)  Actual  repentance,  and 
forsaking  of  sin,  by  real  amendment  (Eev.  xvi.  9).      (4)    Habitual  holiness  (chap. 
vi.  20  ;  Phil.  i.  11).     In  a  word  :  whatever  tends  to  the  true  honour  of  religion,  to 
its  promotion  among  men,  are  the  things  which  promote  the  glory  of  God.     Hence 
the  apostles,  in  their  exhortations  to  the  practice  of  any  virtue,  urge  this  argument — 
that  it  will  be  to  the  glory  of  God  (Eom.  xv.  5;  and  text;  see  also  Col.  iii.  17  ;  1  Pet. 
iv.  11 ;  Titus  ii.  10).    II.  What  it  is  that  is  eequieed  of  men  in  peactice  in  okdee 
TO  theie  satisfying  the  peecept.     He  who  will  in  all  things  promote  the  glory  of 
God,  must — 1.  Show  forth  the  sense  he  has  of  God  upon  his  mind,  by  acts  directly 
religious  (Heb.  x.  24 ;  Psa.  cvii.  31 ;  Eev.  v.  13).     2.  Eesolve  against  being  at  any 
time  guilty  of  any  action  which  is  sinful  (Eom.  ii.  23  ;  Numb.  xv.  30 ;   Isa.  v.  24 ; 
1  Cor.  X.  22).     3.  In  all  actions  of  moment,  although  not  directly  relisious,  expressly 
intend  the  glory  of  God  as  the  m.iin  end.     4.  The  same  in  the  smallest  and  most 
inconsiderable  actions  of  life.     The  Scripture  represents  all,  even  irrational  and 
the  very  inanimate  creatures  (Psa.  cxlviii.  2,  &c.)  as  glorifying  God,  because  they 
act  regularly,  according  to  the  nature  He  has  given  them,  and  by  His  command. 
Much  more,  then,  may  even  the  most  common  actions  of  men  be  justly  said  to  be 
done  to  the  glory  of  God,  when  they  are  done,  as  becomes  men  and  Christians. 
Conclusion  :  (1)  The  text  rebukes  those  who,  far  from  doing  all  things  to  the  glory 
of  God,  do,  on  the  contrary,  dishonour  Him  by  open  sin.     (2)  Those  who,  though 
they  do  not  dishonour  God  by  acts  directly  irreligious,  yet  are  careless  and  negli- 
gent in  matters  of  religion.     (3)  Such  as  have  indeed  a  zeal  for  religion,  but  not 
according  to  knowledge,  placing  the  main  stress  on  ceremonies  unworthy  of  God  ; 
or  in  opinions  and  notions,  which  through  their  obscurity  or  their  disagreeableness 
to  the  everlasting   gospel,  hinder,  instead  of  promoting,  the  glory  of  God.     (4) 
Even  the  best  of  men  have  need  to  be  admonished,  to  be  more  and  more  diligent  in 
ail  their  actions,  to  do  everything  to  the  glory  of  God :  not  with  a  superstitious 
anxiety  or  burdensome  preciseness,  but  with  a  cheerful  application  of  everything  that 
occurs  in  life,  to  the  promoting  of  truth  and  virtue  amont?  men.     (S.  Clarke,  D.D.) 
To  the  glory  of  God  : — 1.  To  do  everything  for  God's  glory  is  the  great  law  of  the 
universe.     For  this  the  flower  blooms,  the  bird  warbles,  the  rivers  murmur,  &c., 
and  from  the  standpoint  of  celestial  science  all  seemingly  anomalous  facts  and 
antagonistic  forces  yield  to  the  same  law.     2.  This  is  also  the  law  of  God's  moral 
universe ;  all  actions  of  all  spiritual  creatures  work  out  the  same  Divine  purpose. 
Even  sin  is  working  out  God's  declarative  glories — like  the  thick  cloud,  a  back- 
ground for  His  rainbows  ;  like  the  black  night,  revealing  His  stars.     The  moving 
invitations  of  the  gospel  are  not  urged  lest  God  should  come  short  of  His  ultimate 
glory.     Note: — I.  The  constancy  op  this  eeligious  peinciple.     1.  Oar  religious 
life  is  no  more  to  be  confinpd  to  Sabbaths  and  sanctuaries  than  is  our  eating  and 
drinking.     Holiness  to  the  Lord  ought  to  be  inscribed  as  well  on  the  bells  of  our 
horses  as  on  the  bells  of  our  sanctuaries.     And  all  the  sounds  of  busy  civilisation — ■ 
the  axe,  the  chisel,  the  saw,  the  wheels,  yea,  the  joyous  laugh,  should  blend  with 
the  new  song  of  the  redeemed  in  heaven  unto  the  glory  of  God.     2.  That  it  is  not 
so,  practically,  we  all  know.     To  profess  religion  has  come  to  mean  little  more  than 
to  go  to  church  and  partake  of  the  sacrament.     There  may  be  during  the  entire  six 
days  an  arrest  of  all  thought  of  God.     But  now  comes  the  Sabiiath,  and,  lo  !  a 
sudden  resurrection  of  buried  Christianity.     Practical  Christianitj*  is  no  sanctuary 
sensation  ;  it  is  the  conscientious  (Uscharge  of  all  duty  with  a  desire  therein  to 
honour  Jehovah.     It  makes  the  whole  world  a  temple,  and  the  whole  life  a  priest- 
hood.    II.  Its  univeesality.     The  apostle  speaks  of  actions  seemingly  trivial  to 
be  done  religiously.     The  taste  of  our  times  is  for  great  things  in  religion.     As 
the  summer  tourist  hurries  carelessly  by  all  the  tamer  beauties  of  the  landscape,  and 
can  experience  no  rapture  save  on  the  height  of  some  mountain,  or  in  the  spray  of 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

7 

some  waterfall,  so  nothing  less  than  a  powerful  revival  seems  to  many  a  season  or 
sphere  wherein  God  can  be  honoured.  Now,  against  this  disposition  our  text  is 
launched.  Its  practical  wisdom  will  appear  if  we  consider — 1.  That  life  is  made 
up  of  little  things  and  trivial  occurrences.  As  in  nature  there  is  but  one  Mount 
Blanc,  and  one  Niagara,  so  in  grace  there  occur  but  few  great  crises.  In  the  mass 
and  in  the  main,  if  we  do  anything  for  Go<i,  it  must  be  in  the  ever-recurring  things 
of  our  daily  life,  2.  That  though  one  might  occasionally  do  some  great  thing  for 
God,  yet  this  neglect  to  honour  Him  in  these  small  things  would  destroy  all  the 
good  influence  of  the  grander  achievements.  Let  a  man  be  as  ardent  as  Peter,  as 
eloquent  as  Paul,  as  loving  as  John,  if  in  his  common  life  be  is  vain,  or  proud, 
or  s^-lfish,  then  it  will  be  as  the  dead  liy  of  Solomon — the  savour  of  his  godliness  is 
an  offence.  3.  That  the  absence  of  small  graces  destroys  the  very  essence  of  the 
greater.  So  dependent  are  all  Christ iau  principles  one  upon  another,  that  they 
cannot  even  exist  separately.  Let  a  man  be  all  patience  without  courage,  and  he 
becomes  more  a  sheep  than  a  saint ;  let  him  be  all  courage  without  gentleness,  and 
he  is  simply  a  tiger.  Zeal  without  knowledge  is  a  devouring  fire  in  a  harvest-field; 
and  even  love  without  labour  is  a  scorching  s'rocco,  withering  the  strength  of  the 
becalmed  mariner.  4.  That  even  in  regard  of  His  own  actions  God  is  more  sensibly 
glorified  in  small  things  than  in  great.  Strictly  speaking,  God's  great  things  are 
only  an  aggregate  of  little  things.  Mount  Blanc  is  but  a  masonry  of  sand-grains  ; 
Niagara  only  a  multiplication  of  raiu-diops.  And  to  a  simply  philosoijhic  mind 
God  is  more  wondeiful  when  feathering  the  insect's  wing  than  when  upholding  the 
great  orbs  of  astronomy.  5.  How  often  false  are  our  reckonings  of  what  is  great 
and  small.  Great  actions  are  such  only  as  produce  great  results :  and  so  short- 
sighted are  we  in  respect  to  life's  issues,  that  we  can  never  know  when  we  are  doing 
great  things  or  small.  6.  How  it  requires  and  manifests  a  higher  style  of  piety  to 
do  well  the  small  thing  than  the  great.  Naanian  found  it  easier  to  conquer  mighty 
cities  than  to  go  down  in  cbiLllike  obedience  to  the  Jordan.  Martyrdom  itself, 
under  the  influence  of  a  grand  heroism,  is  among  the  easiest  of  all  things.  It 
requires  less  piety  to  do  this  splendid  thing  for  God  than  to  subdue  every  selfish 
and  carnal  thought,  to  love  an  insolent  and  provoking  enemy.  Paul  found  it  easier 
to  combat  Ephesian  beasts  than  to  bear  his  thorn  in  the  flesh  ;  and  Peter,  who 
could  plunge  into  the  sea,  and  flash  his  sword  for  Christ,  could  neither  keep  his 
temper  nor  govern  his  tongue.  7.  The  importance  of  these  smaller  things  in 
religion,  inasmuch  as  they  abound  in  the  spheres  of  our  pleasures.  If  we  may  eat 
and  drink  to  God's  glory,  then  as  certainly  we  may  gather  bright  flowers  and  listen 
to  singing  birds.  We  may  gratify  all  taste  of  art,  literature,  and  science.  God 
wants  His  children,  even  on  earth,  to  be  happy.  Conclusion  :  What  a  blessed 
world  this  would  become  under  the  full  play  of  so  heavenly  a  principle  !  W'hat  a 
prodigious  i^ower  it  would  give  to  the  gospel  in  the  eyes  of  gainsaying  men  if, 
instead  of  this  mere  Pharisaism  of  sanctuaries  and  sacraments,  ii  was  seen  to 
inspire  its  disciiDles  with  all  the  practical  graces  of  truth,  honour,  public  spirit, 
brotherly  kindness,  and  charity.  (C.  Wadsworth,  D.D.)  Living  for  God's  glory  ; 
—This  injunction  is  abused  by  those  who  pay  no  attention  to  it  at  all,  and  by  those 
who,  by  giving  it  the  most  literal  and  matter-of-fact  interpretation,  worry  them- 
selves over  every  little  detail  of  conduct.  I.  What  is  meant  by,  and  when  is  a 
THING  DONE  FOR,  THE  GLOKY  OF  GoD  ?  1.  No  decds  of  ours  add  to  or  detract  from 
God's  glory.  He  is  Himself  the  source  of  His  own  glory.  When  we  do  anything 
for  the  glory  of  God,  it  is  to  bring  His  glory  out.  A  man  who  acts  worthily,  as 
God  enjoins,  causes  men  to  acknowledge  the  source  and  origin  of  his  worthiness. 
Thus  the  mother  is  honoured  when  her  son  is  honoured ;  so,  too,  her  virtue  shines 
again  in  the  virtue  of  her  daughter.  2.  This  definition  does  away  with  that 
objective  obedience  to  our  text  upon  which  so  many  insist,  and  substitutes  a  sub- 
jective form  of  obedience.  Take  a  business  man,  as  he  sits  in  his  office,  or  pushes 
past  you  on  the  streets.  Of  what  is  he  thinking  ?  Is  it  of  wife  and  children  ?  Not 
at  all.  In  thought  he  is  making  a  bargain.  Yet  he  is  a  father  and  a  husband  as 
truly  as  if  he  had  his  boy  on  his  knee,  and  his  wife  by  his  side.  A  carriage-maker 
does  not  make  a  wheel  all  at  once,  but  spoke  by  spoke ;  and,  when  he  is  shaping  a 
spoke  or  a  felly,  he  is  thinking  about  that,  and  not  of  the  entire  wheel.  The 
highest  motive  is  not  always  necessary  or  proper.  A  butcher  is  doing  his  duty; 
but  it  would  be  nonsense  to  ask  him  if  he  used  his  knife  for  the  glory  of  God.  A 
Christian  has  no  right  to  vulgarise  his  religion  by  such  forced  interpretations.  3. 
The  passage,  then,  is  to  be  taken  in  its  large,  general  sense.  It  has  no  applicatioa 
to  pudding  and  pies,  inlaying  chess,  &c.     It  is  intended  to  cover  the  main  tendency 


cnAP.  X.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  49 

of  a  life,  and  not  particular  acts  and  transient  states  of  feeling.  It  is  globular,  and 
not  atomic.  It  is  vast  as  the  earth,  and  not  minute  and  special  as  a  gi-ain  of  sand. 
II.  The  application.  It  is  an  exhortation  to  all  men,  and  especially  to  all  Chris- 
tians— 1.  To  give  in  all  their  doings  a  due  recognition  of  God.  By  nature  man  i3 
his  own  god.  Self-love  rules.  But  Christians  are  people  whose  nature  has  been 
renewed.  Still,  we  are  not  immaculate.  We  are  pushed  against  and  soiled.  Even 
the  best  forces  of  our  nature  lead  us  astray.  Economy,  unless  watched,  becomes 
sordidness ;  ambition,  unscrupulousness  ;  pride,  arrogance  ;  self-esteem,  vanity. 
The  goal  is  lost  sight  of  in  the  dust  of  the  course,  and,  owing  to  the  multitude  and 
)ush  of  the  runners,  we  Ret  excited,  lose  control,  and,  like  a  vicious  or  frenzied 
horse,  when  in  the  very  home-stretch — bolt.  This  text,  therefore,  exhorts  us  to 
recognise  God  in  all  our  plans  and  purposes — His  authority  over  us,  His  ownership 
in  us.  His  gracious  love  for  us.  Put  this  recognition  of  God  as  a  pilot  at  the  helm 
of  your  life,  and  your  soul  will  come  to  the  conclusion  of  its  voyage  as  a  rich- 
freighted  sliip.  Even  trouble  will  be  to  you,  in  your  relation  to  God,  what  night  is 
to  the  sky  above  your  head.  Its  sliadows  are,  indeed,  sombre  and  oppressive;  but 
without  its  darkness  you  would  never  have  known  the  stars.  2.  To  a  wise  gravity. 
I  fear  that  half  the  lives  lived  are  frivolous  lives.  Not  a  few  are  living  without  an 
object.  How  dare  you  live  in  idleness  (you  call  it  leisure)  when  the  best  voices  of 
the  world  are  calling  for  help  ?  How  dare  you  fritter  away  your  time  in  self- 
amusement?  Help  some  one;  lift  some  one.  Conclusion:  1.  The  first  thing  for 
one  to  do  who  would  live  for  the  glory  of  God  is  to  live  without  sin.  He  who  sins 
cannot  glorify  God.  It  is  in  virtue  and  personal  holiness  that  man  most  glorifies 
his  Maker.  2.  If  he  vrould  glorify  God,  the  average  state  of  a  Christian's  soul 
shouLl  be  a  happy  one.  Christians  should  sing  while  they  work,  as  birds  while 
building  their  nests  and  gathering  food  for  their  young.  {W.  H.  H.  Murray.) 
On  doiiifj  all  to  tlw  glortj  of  God  : — I.  The  vap.ious  use  of  this  phkase  in  Scriptdp.e. 
We  are  said  in  Scripture  to  glorify — i.e.,  honour — God — 1.  By  a  solemn  acknow- 
ledgment of  Him  and  His  perfections  in  worship  (Psa.  Ixxxvi.  9)  ;  but  especially  in 
praise  and  thanksgiving  (Psa.  Ixxxvi.  12;  Matt.  v.  16;  Luke  v.  25,  xvii.  18).  2. 
By  the  acknowledgment  of  sin  and  repentance  for  it  (Josh.  vii.  19 ;  Jer.  xiii.  16  ; 
r.ev.  xvi.  9) ;  because  in  so  doing  we  acknowledge  God's  authority  and  the  righteous- 
ness of  those  laws  which  we  have  broken.  3.  By  our  holiness  and  obedience  (chap, 
vi.  20).  Thus  our  Saviour  glorified  God  (John  xvii.  4),  and  bids  us  do  so  (John  xv. 
8).  So  likewise  St.  Paul  prays  for  the  Philippians  (Phil.  i.  11).  4.  By  our  suffer- 
ings for  His  cause  and  truth  (John  xxi.  19).  5.  When  the  honour  and  advantage 
of  religion  is  consulted — (I)  By  faithful  ministers  (1  Pet.  iv.  11).  (2)  By  maintain- 
ins  the  peace  and  unity  of  the  Church  (llom.  xv.  5,  6).  (3)  By  abstaining  from 
things    likely  to  cause  scandal,  as  in  the  argument  concluded  by  the  text.     II. 

ThKEE    things   must    concur     that     ode     actions    may    be    done    "  TO    THE    GLORY    OP 

Gou."  1.  They  must  be  materially  good  ;  we  must  do  what  God  commands,  and 
avoid  what  He  forbids.  2.  They  must  be  done  with  regard  to  God,  and  out  of  con- 
science to  our  duty  to  Him,  and  not  for  any  mean  or  temporal  end.  If  we  serve 
God  to  please  men,  if  we  profess  godliness  for  gain,  though  the  actions  be  never  so 
good,  yet  all  their  virtue  is  lost.  3.  Tliey  must  not  be  spoiled  by  any  bad  circum- 
stance; for  circumstances  may  render  that  which  is  lawful  in  itself  unlawful.     III. 

How  far    we    are    bound     actually    TO    INTEND    AND    DESIGN    THE    GLORY    OF    GoD   IN 

EVERY  PARTICULAR  ACTION  OF  OUR  LIVES.  1.  Tliis  is  morally  impossible,  and  there- 
fore cannot  be  obligatory.  2.  It  is  not  necessary,  any  more  than  it  is  for  a  man 
who  takes  a  journey  every  step  of  his  way  actually  to  think  of  his  journey's  end. 
3.  A  habitual  intention  to  glorify  God  in  the  course  of  our  lives  is  sufficient ; 
because  this  will  serve  all  good  purposes,  as  well  as  an  actual  intention  upon  every 
particular  occasion.  IV.  Is  a  man  bound  to  prefer  the  glory  of  God  before 
his  own  eternal  happiness,  as  Moses  and  St.  Paul  seem  to  have  done?  1.  If 
we  C'^uld  admit  the  supposition  that  the  two  mi-ht  come  in  competition,  there 
could  be  no  obligation  to  choose  eternal  misery,  for  that  would  be  to  choose  sin,  the 
cause  of  it.  And  sin  is  not  to  be  chosen  in  any  case  ;  no,  not  for  the  glory  of  God 
(Rom.  iii.  7,  8).  As  to  the  instance  of  Moses,  the  phrase  of  "  blotting  out  of  the 
book  of  life  "  probably  signifies  no  more  than  death.  St.  Pnul's  was  a  vehement 
and  hyperbolical  expressi^m  of  his  mighty  affection  to  his  brethren  according  to  the 
flesh.  2.  The  supposition  is  senseless.  By  seeking  the  glory  of  God  we  directly 
promote  our  own  happiness ;  the  two  are  inseparably  linked  together.  V.  Infer- 
ences. 1.  See  here  the  goodness  of  God,  who  is  pleased  to  esteem  whatever 
is  for  the  good  of  men  to  be  for  His  glory.  2.  Here  is  a  great  argument  to 
VOL.   II.  4 


50  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

us  to  be  very  careful  of  our  duty,  and  to  abound  in  the  fruits  of  holiness, 
because  hereby  we  glorify  God.  3.  We  should  in  all  our  actions  have  regard 
to  the  honour  and  advantage  of  religion,  the  edification,  peace,  and  unity  of 
the  Church ;  because  in  these  things  we  do  in  a  peculiar  manner  glorify  God. 
{Ahjy.    TiUotson.)  A  new   activity  in   life  : — This   is   one   of   those   brief   and 

wonderful  sentences  whose  simplicity  is  the  mark  of  their  Divine  original.  In 
these  few  words  there  is  that  truth  after  which  the  best  earthly  philosophy 
was  always  reaching  forth  in  vain.  This  great  principle — I.  Involves  the  solu- 
tion    OF    THE    DABK     MYSTEEY    OF    LIFE    AND     OF    OUKSELVES.       1.    When    men     of     old 

looked  forth  into  the  world  around  them,  they  saw  everything  in  broken  lights 
and  endless  contradictions  :  good  and  evil,  pain  and  pleasure,  so  mingled  that  the 
whole  constitution  of  things  was  hopelessly  entangled.  Tiaey  knew  not  how  a  good 
God  could  permit  such  misery,  nor  how  an  evil  God  should  mingle  so  much 
blessing  with  His  curses.  And  if  they  turned  their  thoughts  inward,  they  found 
the  darkness  tuicken  over  tht-m.  There  was  such  a  mixture  of  great  and  small,  of 
good  and  bad.  They  could  not  settle  wherein  their  chief  good  lay,  or  whitljer  time 
was  bearing  theiu.  The  voice  of  God  within  haunted  and  distracted  them :  that 
unwritten  living  law,  which  they  continually  transgressed,  tormented  and  embar- 
rassed them.  2.  Now,  on  all  this  confusion  rose  the  gospel  of  Christ,  as  a  har- 
monising light.  (1)  In  the  world  around  might  now  be  seen  the  work  of  a  good 
and  holy  God,  marred  by  the  sin  and  wilfulness  of  His  creatures.  There  was  this 
elite  to  the  continued  entanglement,  that  He  was  even  now  working  to  bring  good 
out  of  evil.  (2)  Now  man  saw  why  he  was  so  full  of  greatness  and  littleness.  He 
saw  that  the  sin  which  had  tormented  him  was  irot  himself,  but  his  enemy,  which, 
by  breaking  his  relation  to  God,  had  taken  from  him  all  the  true  end  of  his  being — 
the  service  of  a  holy  God ;  yea,  had  brought  the  stiife  which  had  consumed  him 
within  his  own  heart.  But  he  now  leanred  also  that  his  Lord  had  taken  his  very 
nature,  that  He  might  constitute  Himself  the  i^erfect  and  righteous  Head  of  tbe 
fallen  race,  and  so  present  him  again  as  holy  and  acceptalile  before  God.  Here, 
then,  the  mystery  was  solved.  Now,  when  he  met  with,  sin  cr  misery,  it  was  not 
as  a  mystery,  but  as  a  detected  enemy.  He  knew  his  place  in  Gad's  world,  and  he 
knew  the  secret  of  its  apparent  contradictions  ;  he  could  take  tnat  place,  and  walk 
amongst  those  contradictions,  and  hear,  with  a  living  meaning  flowing  forth  from 
them,  the  words,  "Whatsoever  ye  do,  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God."  II.  Is  the 
rRACTicAL  SPEING  OF  A  NEW  ACTIVITY  OF  LIFE.  Evciy  man  who  has  not  learned  to 
look  upon  himself,  and  all  around  him,  in  this  light,  must  be  infected  more  or  less 
with  the  benumbing  spirit  of  the  Manichaan  philo^ophy,  which  leads  him  to  make 
his  religion  principally  a  speculation — to  satisfy  himself  with  better  feelings,  though 
his  works  are  evil,  and  which  must  diminish  the  hearty,  straightforward  service  of 
God.  III.  Hestoees  his  beoken  relations  to  his  fellow-men,  amongst  whom, 
and  for  whom,  he  is  to  work.  Believing,  as  he  does,  that  Christ  has  redeemed  the 
whole  race,  every  man  has,  through  Christ,  become  again  his  brother.  IV.  Gives 
HIM  a  happy  liberty  IN  HIS  woEK.  He  is  working  for  God,  and  with  God's  provi- 
dence ;  he  need  not  perplex  himself  about  results  :  these  are  God's,  not  his.  It  is 
from  this  that  great  deeds  spring ;  it  is  in  this  spirit  that  a  man  can  be  contented 
to  labour  in  the  Church  for  some  good  end,  which  may  not  be  accomplished  for 
ages  to  come.  And  this  spirit  of  liberty  will  animate  and  ennoble  all  that  he  does. 
In  his  labours  it  will  take  away  tl:ose  low  present  ends  which  ever  haunt  and 
enfeeble  self-servers  and  self-worshippers.  In  his  intercourse  with  others  it  will 
deliver  him  from  the  need  of  those  petty  distinctions  by  which  men  who  live  on 
lower  rules  seek  to  mark  out  for  themselves  a  separate  path  of  holiness.  In  a  high 
and  noble  sense,  "  all  things  are  lawful  to  him."  The  arts  and  knowledge  of  this 
world,  all  its  triumphs  and  its  stores,  he  dares  to  take  and  to  use  freely  as  gifts  of 
his  God,  as  knowing  that  all  things  are  sanctified  to  him.  And  this  gives  a  glory 
to  all  his  occupations,  whilst  it  keeps  him  from  sinful  exultation  in  any.  There 
can  neither  be  great  nor  small  in  services  done  to  God ;  His  greatness  makes  all 
equal.  Whether  he  be  ruling  an  empire  or  ministering  to  a  beggar,  what  matters 
it  if  he  is  ministering  as  God's  freedman  ?  And  this  will  reach  down  to  the  meanest 
things — to  the  service  even  of  his  body,  as  well  as  of  his  spirit ;  and  will  do  its 
work  upon  those  secret  springs  of  the  will  by  which  the  man  is  moved  and  governed. 
Conclusion :  1.  Many  allow,  within  their  hearts,  low  aims  and  barren  earthly 
motives,  on  the  plea  that  "to  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God"  is  an  overstrained 
attempt,  except  for  some  few  saints  of  a  higher  level,  or  that  it  is  a  species  of 
service  which  th^y  can  hardly  render,  who,  with  full  hands  and  busy  heads,  are 


CHAP.  X.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  51 

just  entering  upon  the  throng  and  bustle  of  life.  Let  us  look  into  this.  Life  here, 
as  faith  reveals  it,  is  the  opportunity  of  performing  certain  outward  actions  from 
ceitain  inward  motives,  on  the  necessary  condition  that  every  action  will  strengthen 
the  motive  from  wbich  it  springs,  and  make  it  tend  towards  growth  into  a  habit; 
this  tendency,  moreover,  being  accelerated,  if  its  direction  be  evil,  by  the  corruption 
of  our  nature — if  good,  by  the  gracious  influences  of  the  blessed  Spirit  of  God. 
Thus,  then,  the  opportunities  of  outward  action  offered  to  each  one  of  us  are 
the  seeds  of  our  future  character  for  good  or  for  evil,  in  time  and  in  eternity. 
Thus,  then,  this  busy  opportunity  of  working,  which  is  made  the  excuse  for  not 
doing  all  to  God's  glory,  is,  in  fact,  our  special  call  to  do  all  from  this  verj^  motive: 
for  he  who  enters  on  every  day's  actions  in  this  spirit,  strengthens  the  upgrowth  of 
this  spirit  within  himself :  he  who  performs  them  from  a  worldly  spirit,  makes 
himself  worldly.  It  is  this  wbich  will,  and  must,  colour  bis  whole  being.  2.  If, 
then,  we  have  such  need  of  this  earnest  exhortation,  let  us  inquire  how  we  may 
nourish  within  ourselves  this  only  worthy  habit  of  doing  "  all  to  the  glory  of 
God."  (1)  Strive  to  possess  your  souls  with  a  higher  estimation  of  the  will  of 
God.  As  self -worship  is  your  danger,  bring  yourself  into  tlie  presence  of  Jehovah, 
iand  the  idol  of  man's  majesty  must  fall  before  Him.  (2)  To  this  reverence  for 
God's  will  add  this  :  that  you  strive  to  realise  your  true  position  in  this  world,  as 
one  whom  Christ  hath  redeemed.  Without  this,  God's  majesty  and  njight  must  be 
to  us  a  continual  terror.  His  will  cannot  be  the  will  of  a  Father,  unless  we  so  look 
unto  Him.  (3)  As  springing  out  of  this,  strive  to  sanctify  every  act  and  under- 
taking by  a  special  reference  to  your  heavenly  Father.  (Bj).  S.  Wilberforce.) 
Doing  all  to  the  glory  of  God : — I.  "rHE  Scriptuees  and  common  sense  teach  that 

THE    GLOET   OF    GoD    IS    THE    ONLY    PROPER    END    AND    RULE    OF   ALL    THINGS.       For    tllis 

they  were  created.     By  the   glory  of   God  is  meant  His  Divine  ijerfection,  His 
essential  and  infinite  excellence,  which  renders  Him  tbe  object  of  admiration  and 
adoration.     To  act  for  the  glory  of  God  is  to  act  so  that  His  glory  is  manifested, 
acknowledged,  and  admired.     The  text  is  therefore  an  exhortation — 1.  To  make 
that  end  the  highest  commanding  end  of  our  actions.     (1)  Some  make  their  end — 
(a)  Their  own  happiness,      {h)  Their  country,      (c)  Their  kind,     (d)  All  beings. 
(2)  These  are  false  ends.     Their  selection  vitiates  religion  because  it  makes  some- 
thing besides  God  the  motive  and  the  end  of  action — i.e.,  it  substitutes  for  religion 
something  that  is  not  religion.     2.  To  make  that  the  rule  of  our  actions.     When 
anything  is  to  be  done  or  left  undone — (1)  The  rule  is  not — (a)  Whether  it  will  be 
agreeable  or  disagreeable  to  ourselves,  or  to  others,  i.e.,  popular,     {b)  Nor  whether 
it  will  be  expedient  or  inexj^edient.     (2)  But  whether  it  will  tend  to  make  men 
admire  and  worship  God  or  not.     II.  Tins  is  a  edle  which  applies  to  every- 
thing, GREAT  and  small.     1.  To  the  choice  of  a  profession.     2.  In  determining 
where  we  are  to  labour.     3.  In  deciding  on  the  distribution  and  occupation  of  our 
time.     4.  In  determining  our  outward  conduct  towards  others,  our  conformity  to 
the  world.     5.  In  deciding  on  the  thoughts,  feelings,  and  purposes  which  we  shall 
cherish.     6.  In  the  way  we  bear  reproach,  neglect,  sickness,  &g.     In  short,  it  is  a 
simple  comprehensive  universal  rule.      III.  The  reasons  why  we  should  adopt 
IT.     1.  God's  glory  is  the  highest  end.     2.  God  Himself  has  made  it  the  end  of 
creation,  providence,  and  redemption.     3.  Christ  made  it  His  end.     4.  All  saints 
and  angels  do  the  same.     5.  It  is  essential  to  the  order  and  happiness  of  the 
universe.     What  would  result  if,  instead  of  making  the  son  the  centre  of  our 
system,  some   little   satellite   should   set   up,    or   be   set   up,   as   such  ?      6.  The 
making   of   any  other  end  our  object  is  the  sum   and    essence   of   idolatry.      7. 
It    brings    the    whole    life    into   perfect    harmony,    inward    and    outward.       It 
j)romotes    holiness,    happiness,    and    usefulness.      8.    It    is   the   end    which   we 
must  promote,  either  by  our  salvation  or  perdition.      {C.  Hodge,  D.D.)        Doing 
all  to  the  glory  of  God  : — I.  The  glory  of  God  is  the  honour  which  redounds 
TO   His   Name    from    the    exhibitions    of    His    power,    wisdom,    and   goodness 
IN   the    natural  and  in  the  moral  world.      1.    The   heavens  declare  the  glory 
of    God,  and  the  firmament  showeth  His  handiwork.       Heaven    and    earth    are 
full  of  His  glory.     But  to  believe,  to  admire,  and  to  adore,  is  all  the  part  which 
we  can  take  in  this  province  of  His  glory.     We  cannot  in  any  way  contribute  to 
it.     2.  The  natural  world,  however,  is  not  the  only  or  the  most  exalted  domain  of 
God's   glory.     In   the   kingdom  of  mind  the   majesty  of  God  is  more  especially 
enthroned.    The  aiifections,  the  moral  sentiments,  the  intellectual  faculties  proceed 
most   from   Him,   they  are  nearest  to   Him,  they  are  most  like  Him.      In   this 
province  we  are  not  only  allowed  but  expected   to  act.     Our  Maker  has   so  en- 


52  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

dowed  us  that  in  the  hall  of  His  presence  and  on  the  steps  of  His  throne  we  may 
assume  the  station  of  our  birthright,  and  work  with  Him  and  for  Him.  He  has 
given  us  faculties  to  be  improved,  and  affections  to  exercise,  and  reason  that  we 
might  regulate  all ;  and  we  consult  His  glory  by  answering  these  designs.  He 
bids  us  help  forward  the  cause  of  holiness  and  study  the  happiness  of  our  fellow- 
creatnres ;  and  so  far  as  we  obey  these  commands,  we  increase  the  sum  and  the 
splendour  of  His  glory  in  the  world  ;  for  what  is  His  glory,  but  the  triumph  of 
rehgion  and  benevolence?  II.  But  we  aee  told  to  do  all  to  His  glory.  How 
IS  THIS  ALL-iNCLurixG  REQUISITION  TO  BE  FULFILLED  ?  We  canuot  always  have 
the  Deity  in  our  thoughts,  nor  consider  whether  every  occupation  will  conduce  to 
His  glory.  Neither  can  we  be  always  engaged  in  the  high  concerns  of  worship  and 
piety.  How  then  is  the  precept  to  be  obeyed  ?  1.  Take  an  instance  from 
domestic  life.  When  we  say  of  an  exemplary  son  that  he  conducts  himself  in 
all  things  to  the  honour  of  his  father,  we  do  not  mean  that  in  every  ti'ansaetion 
he  had  his  father's  image  and  approbation  in  view,  but  that  he  was  determined 
never  to  bring  disgrace  upon  his  father's  name,  that  he  was  ever  watchful  of  his 
father's  interests,  and  that  he  so  carried  the  paternal  injunctions  in  his  heart  that 
he  referred  to  them  unconsciously,  and  was  preserved  by  a  habit  of  obedience  to 
them  from  being  guilty  of  practices  which  they  would  condemn.  2.  Just  in  this 
manner  may  we,  the  children  of  God,  do  all  to  His  glory.  When  we  read  a  book 
we  do  not  slowly  spell  every  word  ;  it  would  certainly  be  no  proof  of  our  scholar- 
ship if  we  did.  The  accomphshed  arithmetician  calculates  his  sums  without 
turning  over  at  every  process  to  the  simple  tables.  Eeligious  principle,  well 
instilled  and  thoroughly  received,  is  present  and  operative,  though  unobtrusively 
and  unostentatiously  so,  through  every  chapter,  page,  and  paragraph  of  life. 
{F.  W.  P.  Grcenirood,  D.D.)  God's  glory  to  he  soupJit  in  all  tldnps  :—l.  The 
universe  may  be  likened  to  a  great  machine,  the  prime  motive  power  of  which  is 
God ;  and  man  the  one  who  is  set  to  tend  upon  it.  So  long  as  he  keeps  liis 
place,  all  is  well ;  but  when,  instead  of  regulating  his  own  acts  and  motions  by 
the  movements  of  the  machinery,  he  throws  himself  recklessly  into  the  midst  of 
its  wheels  and  levers,  he  is  crushed.  2.  The  doctrine  of  the  text  is  that  true 
religion  belongs  to  all  the  interests  of  life,  or,  rather,  they  all  belong  to  it.  False 
religions  are  confined  to  time,  place,  circumstance  ;  and  are  satisfied  with  man's 
homage  in  part.  They  may  be  compared  to  chemical  attraction,  where  one 
paiticular  body  has  an  affinity  for  another  particular  body  and  only  for  that ; 
whilst  true  religion  is  like  the  attraction  of  gravitation,  which  draws  all  bodies  to 
its  centre.  The  whole  man  is  God's  creature,  the  object  of  God's  care,  the 
purchase  of  the  blood  of  Christ  :  should  less  than  the  whole  man  then  be 
sanctified?  God's  glory  should  be  consulted— I.  In  eating  and  drinking.  The 
apostle  would  have  us  recognise  God  as  the  bountiful  Benefactor  who  openeth  His 
hand  and  filleth  all  things  living  with  pleuteousness.  He  would  not  have  man 
eat  as  the  dumb  beast  eats.  He  would  not  have  the  Christian  eat  as  even  many 
men'eat.  What  a  beautiful  1-sson  our  Lord  hath  left  us  on  this  subject !  About 
to  feed  the  people  miraculously.  He  called  the  people  to  thanksgiving,  and  in  it 
led  the  way.  How  mconsistent  excess  in  eating  and  drinking,  and  a  form  of 
thanksgiving  at  meat !  It  looks  as  though  we  would  make  God  the  "  minister  of 
sin."  How  degrading  thus  to  live  to  eat,  and  not  rather  simply  eat  to  live  to  God's 
glory !  The  taking  of  food,  if  sanctified  by  religion,  is  eucharistic,  involves 
devotion  in  act  and  habit  in  one  of  its  highest  forms.  II.  In  the  use  of  speech. 
In  order  for  speech  to  glorify  God  it  must  be — 1.  Truthful.  God  is  a  God  of 
truth,  and  He  requires  truth.  2.  Pure.  Impurity  of  thought  is  wicked  ;  impurity 
of  speech  is  worse.  3.  Habitually  temperate  ^nd  sedate.  We  need  run  into  no 
cynical  or  ascetic  extremes,  but  sitill  it  should  be  remembered  that  the  spirit  of 
Christianity  is  not  a  spirit  of  frivolity.  4.  P.everent.  5.  Benevolent.  6.  Devout. 
III.  In  the  use  of  time.  Time  has  but  two  proper  uses,  and  all  others  are 
insignificant  in  comparison.  The  first  is,  to  be  spiritually  wise  in,  to  make  our 
peace  with  God  in ;  and  then,  having  obtained  reconciliation  with  God  through 
the  blood  of  His  Son,  to  serve  Him  in  it,  by  the  aid  of  His  Spirit,  to  our  lives' 
end.  (IF.  Sparrow,  D.D.]  The  qlory  of  God  the  chief  end  of  man  .-—I.  What 
IS  it  to  glorify  God  ?  We  glorify  God — 1.  By  seeking  to  know  Him,  because 
thus  we  arrive  at  a  better  comprehension  of  His  excellence.  2.  By  constantly 
acknowledging  Him,  because  we  thus  declare  in  the  strongest  terms  how  worthy 
He  is  of  our  admiration  and  regard.  3.  By  loving  Him,  because  we  thus 
acknowledge    His    supsrio'ity   to    every   earthly   object.      4.    By    serving    Him, 


CHAP.  X.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  53 


because  we  thus  testify  that  His  service  is  perfect  freedom,  5.  By  de- 
lighting in  Him,  because  we  thus  show  that  He  is  greater,  and  better, 
and  more  desirable  than  all  things.  H.  Thus  to  glorify  God  is  the 
CHIEF  END  OF  MAN,  This  I  proceed  to  prove.  The  design  of  the  Creator 
in  making  all  things  was  to  exhibit  to  intelligent  beings  His  own  glory.  It  is 
absurd  to  suppose  that  any  created  thing  could  have  been  made  for  itself  alone. 
We  know  not  at  what  period  creation  commenced  ;  but  before  that  took  place  God 
was  as  happy  as  when  creation  appeared.  And  how  ? — in  the  contemplation  of 
His  own  excellences.  But  then  these  excellences  could  not  have  been  seen  if 
intelligent  creatures  had  not  been  made.  Such  a  manifestation  of  His  glory  was 
the  end  for  which  we  were  formed.  Man  therefore  is  bound  by  the  originnl  law 
of  his  creation,  in  whatsoever  he  does,  to  "  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God."  When 
God  first  created  man,  this  was  his  high  office,  to  be  a  high-priest,  to  offer  up 
sacrifices  of  praise  to  God  continually.  When  man  sinned,  he  lost  sight  of  this  great 
object ;  he  no  longer  sought  the  Divine  glory,  but  began  to  live  to  himself.  HI. 
From  this  general  statement  we  may  derive  some  reflections.  1.  Doctrinal. 
We  are  taught  by  this  subject — (1)  To  take  a  most  affecting  view  of  the  nature  of 
sin.  Sin  is  nothmg  less  than  robbing  God  of  His  glory.  (2)  The  only  principle 
laid  down  in  Scripture  as  constituting  evangelical  virtue.  "  Whatsoever  ye  do, 
do  all  to  the  glory  of  God"  :this  is  the  only  motive  which  the  gospel  recognises 
and  of  which  God  will  approve.  2.  Practical,  Kegard  this  as  a  motive  to  vigi- 
lance and  industry ;  for  this  demands  the  exertion  of  your  whole  powers  of  soul 
and  body.  Mark  how  this  rule  applies  alike  to  all  your  employments,  and  to  all 
your  relaxations — will  they  glorify  God?  If  not,  they  ought  not  to  be  engaged 
in.     (./.  F.  Denliam,  A.M.)  Of  mail's  cliief  end  (text;  Psa.  Ixxiii.  25,  26): — 

I.  The  glorifying  of  God.  1.  Its  nature.  To  glorify  is  either  to  make  glorious 
or  to  declare  to  be  glorious.  God  glorifies,  i.e.,  makes  angels  or  men  glorious  ; 
but  man  cannot  make  God  glorious,  for  He  is  not  capable  of  any  additional  glory 
(Job  XXXV.  7).  God  is  glorified,  then,  only  declaratively  (Psa.  xix.  1).  Man 
declares  His  glory — (1)  By  his  heart.  Honouring  God  with  the  lips  only  is  but  a 
very  lame  and  unacceptable  performance.  He  ought  to  be  glorified — (a)  By  our 
understanding,  thinking  highly  of  Him,  and  esteeming  Him  above  all  others,  (b) 
By  our  wills,  choosing  Him  as  our  portion  and  chief  good,  (c)  By  our  affections, 
loving  Him,  and  rejoicing  and  delighting  in  Him  above  every  other.  (2)  By  his 
lips  (Psa.  1.  23).  Therefore  man's  tongue  is  called  his  glory  (Psa.  xvi.  9),  not  only 
because  it  serves  him  for  speech,  which  exalts  him  above  the  brutes,  but  because 
it  is  given  him  as  a  proper  instrument  for  speaking  forth  the  glory  of  God.  (3) 
By  his  life  (Matt.  v.  16).  2.  In  what  respects  is  God's  glory  man's  chief  end  ? 
(1)  It  is  man's  end — (a)  It  is  the  end  which  God  aimed  at  when  He  made  man 
(Prov,  xvi.  4  ;  Eom.  xi.  36).  (h)  It  is  the  end  of  man  as  God's  work.  Man  was 
made  fit  for  it  (Eccles.  vii.  29).  The  very  fabric  of  a  man's  body,  whereby  he 
looks  upward,  while  the  beasts  look  down,  is  a  palpable  evidence  of  this,  (c)  It  is 
the  mark  to  which  man  should  direct  all  he  does  (text ;  Psa.  xvi.  8).  (2)  It  is 
man's  chief  end,  that  which  God  chiefl}'  aimed  at,  and  that  which  man  should 
chiefly  aim  at,  God  made  man  for  other  ends,  as  to  govern,  use,  and  dispose  of 
other  creatures  (Gen.  i.  26) ;  but  still  these  are  subordinate.  There  are  some  ends 
which  men  propose  to  themselves,  which  are  simply  unlawful,  and  which  are  not 
capable  of  subordination  to  the  glory  of  God,  who  hates  rolibery  for  burnt-offering. 
But  there  are  other  ends,  in  themselves  lawful,  but  sinful,  if  they  be  not  subordinate 
to  the  glory  of  God.  Now,  God's  glory  is  made  our  chief  end — {a)  When  what- 
ever end  we  have  in  our  actions,  the  glory  of  God  is  still  one  of  our  ends.  We 
may  eat  and  drink  for  the  nourishment  of  our  bodies  ;  but  this  must  not  jostle 
out  our  respect  to  the  glory  of  God.  (h)  When  it  is  that  which  we  chiefly  design. 
All  other  sheaves  must  bow  to  that  sheaf  :  as  a  diligent  servant  designs  to  please 
both  the  master  and  his  steward,  but  chiefly  the  master,  (c)  Wh^n  it  is  the 
perfection  of  what  we  design,  beyond  which  we  have  no  more  view.  Thus  we 
should  eat  that  our  bodies  may  be  refreshed,  so  that  we  may  be  the  more  capable 
to  glorify  God.  Thus  we  are  to  seek  salvation,  that  God  may  be  gloiified.  3.  The 
extent  of  this  duty.  This  must  be  the  end — (1)  Of  our  natural  actions  (text).  (2) 
Of  our  civil  actions,  working  our  work,  buying  and  selling,  &c.  (Eph.  vi.  7 ;  Prov. 
xxi.  4),  (3)  Of  our  moral  and  religious  actions  (Zech.  vii.  5).  We  must  pray, 
hear,  &e.,  for  God's  glory.  4.  The  reason  of  the  point  is,  because  God  is  the  first 
principle,  therefore  He  must  be  the  last  end.  He  is  the  first  and  the  last,  the 
Alpha,  and  therefore  the  Omega,    God  is  the  fountain  of  our  being ;  and  there- 


54  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

fore  seeing  we  are  of  Him,  we  should  be  to  Him  (Rom.  xi.).  II.  The  enjoyment 
OF  God  for  ever.  1.  The  nature  of  this  enjoyment.  (1)  There  is  an  imperfect 
enjoyment  of  God  in  this  hfe  ;  which  consists — (a)  In  union  with  Him,  or  a 
saving  interest  in  Him,  whereby  God  is  our  God  by  covenant.  By  this  union 
Christ  and  believers  are  so  joined  that  they  are  one  spirit,  one  mystical  body. 
(b)  In  communion  with  God,  which  is  a  participation  of  the  benefits  of  that 
saving  relation,  whereof  the  soul  makes  returns  to  the  Lord  in  the  exercise  of  ita 
graces,  particularly  of  faith  and  love.  (2)  There  is  a  perfect  enjoyment  of  God  iu 
heaven.  This  consists  in — (a)  An  intimate  presence  with  Him  in  glory  (Psa.  xvi. 
11).  (h)  Seeing  Him  as  He  is  (1  John  iii.  2).  (c)  A  perfect  union  with  Him  (Rev. 
xxi.  3).  ((7)  An  immediate,  full,  free,  and  comfortable  communion  with  Him, 
infinitely  superior  to  all  the  communion  they  ever  had  with  Him  in  this  world, 
and  which  no  mortal  can  suitably  describe,  (c)  Full  joy  and  satisfaction  i-esulting 
from  these  things  for  ever  (Matt.  xxv.  21).  2.  The  order  of  this  enjoyment.  (1) 
It  is  a  part  of  man's  chief  end,  and,  in  conjunction  with  glorifying  of  God,  makes 
it  up.  (2)  Glorifying  of  God  is  put  before  the  enjoying  of  Him,  because  the 
way  of  duty  is  the  way  to  the  enjoyment  of  God  (Heb.  xii.  14).  The  pure  in  heart, 
and  they  who  glorify  God  now,  shall  alone  see  God,  to  their  infinite  joy  in  heaven. 
3.  The  enjoyment  of  God  is  man's  chief  end  in  point  of  happiness,  the  thing  that 
he  should  chiefly  seek.  For  this  end,  consider — (1)  What  man  is.  (a)  He  is  a 
creature  that  desires  happiness,  and  cannot  but  desire  it.  {b)  He  is  not  self- 
sufficient;  and  therefore  he  is  ever  seeking  something  without  himself  in  order  to 
be  happy,  (c)  Nothing  but  an  infinite  good  can  fully  satisfy  the  desires  of  an 
immortal  soul.  (2)  What  God  is.  (a)  God  is  the  chief  good,  for  He  is  the 
fountain  good,  and  the  water  that  is  good  is  always  best  in  the  fountain.  {!>)  God 
is  all  good.  There  is  nothing  in  Him  but  what  is  good.  All  that  is  good  is  in 
Him  ;  so  that  the  soul,  finding  Him  commensurate  to  its  desires,  needs  nothing 
besides  Him.      (T.  Boston,  D.D.)  True  temperance  promotive  of  the  fjlorif  of 

God  : — I.  All  things  tend  to  promote  the  glory  op  God.  1.  In  nature  (Psa. 
xix.  1  ;  cxxxix.  4).  2.  In  Providence.  3.  In  grace.  (1)  The  incarnation.  (2) 
The  resurrection.  (3)  The  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God.  The  full  development, 
however,  of  the  works  and  purposes  of  grace  will  be  in  heaven.  II.  Sin  tends 
TO  HINDER  the  piio:motion  OF  THE  GLORY  OF  GoD  witli  regard  to— 1.  Nature.  It 
closes  the  eyes,  so  that  it  is  not  seen  as  showing  forth  the  wisdom  and  power  of 
God.  It  stops  the  ears,  so  that  its  voice,  proclaiming  the  goodness  and  greatness 
of  its  Almighty  Creator,  is  not  heard.  It  darkens  the  understanding  (Rom.  i. 
18-22).  2.  Providence.  By  this  our  country  is  distinguished  above  all  other 
countries  ;  but  how  is  this  mighty  intiuence  and  vast  wealth  employed?  Has  not 
sin  perverted  our  maritime  power,  so  that  the  visits  of  our  sailors  to  heathen 
countries  have  proved  serious  hindrances  to  the  spread  of  the  gospel  ?  Are  not 
commercial  prosperity  and  national  property  sadly  abused  and  obviously  misem- 
ployed ?  Not  to  mention  the  thousands  spent  by  the  lovers  of  pleasure  at  places 
of  vanity  and  dissipation,  I  would  call  your  att^ntion  to  what  is  expended  on 
intoxicating  liquors.  III.  In  what  way  the  gloky  of  God  may  be  promoted  in 
ACCORDANCE  WITH  THE  TEXT.  1.  As  to  eating  and  drinking.  The  glory  of  God  is 
promoted  when  these  exercises  fit  us  for  the  service  of  God.  If,  on  the  contrary, 
we  eat  or  drink  that  which  disables  us  from  serving  God,  then  they  can  in  no  way 
promote  the  glory  of  God.  2.  As  to  abstinence.  Total  abstinence  from  intoxi- 
cating drinks  may  be  promotive  of  the  glory  of  God — (1)  When  the  money  usually 
spent  on  such  liquors  is  better  emijloyed.  (2)  When  done  with  a  viev?  to  the 
benefit  of  our  fellow-creatures.  (3)  When  done  with  a  desire  to  remove 
hindrances  to  the  spread  of  truth  and  godliness.  Conclusion  :  1.  What- 
ever others  may  think  of  these  things,  and  however  they  may  be  deter- 
mined to  act,  let  us  have  no  part  at  all  in  the  drunkard's  ruin.  2.  Be 
sure  you  bear  in  mind  that  temperance  is  not  regeneration.  (J.  F.  Witty.) 
Motives  of  action  : — A  kmg  is  made  glorious  by  the  obedience  of  his  subjects.  The 
parent  is  honoured  by  the  child.  Not  by  his  running  around  the  neighbourhood 
and  saying,  "  Oh,  what  a  great  man  my  father  is  !  "  or,  "  What  a  beautiful  woman 
my  mother  is  !  "  but  by  studiously  fulfilling  their  wishes.  The  teacher  is  honoured, 
not  by  what  the  pupil  says,  but  by  what  he  does.  And  we  honour,  or  glorify,  God 
by  fulfilling  His  commands.  The  command  of  the  Bible  is,  Amid  all  the  thousand 
questions  of  life,  ask  yourself,  What  is  the  will  of  God  ?  Ascertain  what  this  is, 
and  then  settle  your  casuistry  by  aiming  to  fulfil  it.  I.  This  leads  to  the  supremk 
QUESTION  OF  MOTIVES.     Ordinarily  a  motive  is  supposed  to  be  that  which  draws  out 


CHAP.  X.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  55 

of  a  man  a  line  of  conduct.  But  this  is  wrong.  E.g.,  we  say  that  gold  is  the 
motive  which  impels  the  miser.  No  ;  gold  wakes  up  his  avarice,  but  his  will  is 
working  in  him  the  desire  of  acquisition  ;  and  the  motive  power  is  the  faculty,  and 
not  the  thing  which  sets  the  faculty  in  motion.  We  say  that  a  man  works  because 
he  wants  food ;  the  truth  is,  that  hunger  is  the  thing  which  moves  him  towards  the 
food.  The  question,  therefore,  becomes  not,  What  end  induces  such  a  course  of 
action  ?  but.  What  faculties  worked  in  such  a  course  of  action  ?  and  then  you  can 
ask.  What  was  it  that  started  those  faculties  ?  Let  us  look  cluser  at  this.  1.  Eight 
and  wrong  consist  not  in  action  but  in  the  end  or  purpose.  I  take  from  a  store  an 
object  of  great  value  and  carry  it  home.  Another  man  takes  it  and  carries  it  home. 
In  both  cases  the  action  is  precisely  the  same  ;  but  there  is  a  special  reason  why 
that  man  is  a  thief  and  I  am  not.  God  has  never  put  a  faculty  into  the  mind  of  a 
man  which  is  not,  in  its  own  sphere  and  degree,  right.  If  it  be  wrong,  it  is  because 
it  is  acting  out  of  the  proper  degree  and  out  of  its  own  sphere.  2.  Many  faculties 
act,  in  regard  to  the  other  faculties,  with  co-operation,  or  with  a  normal  alternation. 
Many  men  say,  "What  was  the  motive  by  which  I  was  guided?  "  And  when  they 
look  into  their  minds  there  is  a  perfect  jumble  of  motives,  as  they  interpret  them. 
A  man  says,  "  I  am  afraid  I  was  not  actuated  by  right  motives  ;  for  I  can  discern 
the  traces  of  other  motives."  The  normal  activity  of  the  mind,  in  every  case,  is 
the  result,  not  of  a  single  faculty,  but  of  all  the  faculties.  The  revolution  of  forces 
which  go  to  make  up  the  process  of  your  thought  in  a  single  hour  is  a  more 
stupendous  work  than  any  that  was  ever  performed  in  a  laboratory.  If  it  were 
possible  for  a  man  to  put  sensitised  paper  in  his  hat  and  have  everything  that  lie 
thought  or  felt  stamp  itself  thereon  the  journal  of  an  hour  thus  recorded  would 
take  him  two  days  to  read.  And  yet  men  are  troubled  because  there  is  not  a  single- 
ness of  motive  which  inspires  their  action  !  3.  The  power  of  any  action  in  men 
depends,  not  on  the  singleness,  but  on  a  combination  of  faculties.  Instead  of  other 
faculties  invalidating  any  course  of  conduct,  or  making  it  inferior,  its  value 
depends  upon  the  other  faculties  which  are  concentrated  in  the  production  of  it. 
The  highest  condition  of  the  mind  is  that  in  which  all  the  pipes  in  the  multiform 
organ  are  uttering  their  appropriate  sounds  in  the  proper  way.  4.  Moral  char.icter 
is  to  be  determined  or  primary  and  regnant  motives  and  not  simply  by  auxiUary 
ones.  Thus  a  man  says,  "  I  have  made  up  my  mind  to  join  the  Church  ;  but  I  do 
not  know  that  I  am  sincere  in  wishing  to  do  it."  What  is  the  matter?  "  Well, 
nothing  would  please  my  wife  and  my  mother  so  much ;  and  I  have  thouf;;ht  per- 
haps it  was  to  please  them  that  I  was  going  to  join  it."  Well,  it  is  right  that  you 
should  inquire  whether  these  are  the  prime  feelings;  but,  if  you  say,  "I  see  that 
the  time  is  going  fast  with  me,  and  that  if  ever  I  am  to  change  and  get  a  hold  on 
heaven  I  must  do  it  soon,  and  now  I  am  determined  to  obey  my  Master  according 
to  the  best  of  my  ability,"  there  is  a  motive  that  should  be  sovereign ;  and  if  then, 
when  that  is  settled,  you  think  that  everybody  who  loves  you  will  be  happy,  this 
collateral  motive  will  be  a  help  to  the  other.  Again,  thoughts  of  personal  interest 
are  not  wrong  under  such  circumstances.  Godliness  is  profitable  for  this  world  and 
for  that  which  is  to  come  ;  only  see  that  your  chief  motive  is  to  glorify  God.  II. 
The  stjBJECT  throws  light  upon  questions  which  have  aeisen  in  the  winds  of 

MANY  who  have  NOT  TAKEN  THE  COMFOIIT  IN  THEIR  RELIGIOUS  LIFE  WHICH  THEY  JIIGHT 
IF  THEY  HAD  BEEN  BETTER  INFORMED  AS    TO    THEIR   DUTY.       1.    Oil    the    One    side    is    the 

danger  of  indifference  to  all  motives.  Men  ouaht  to  want  to  do  the  best  things  from 
the  best  motives,  i.e.,  with  their  noblest  faculties;  but  it  is  better  to  do  a  right 
thing  from  the  poorest  motive  than  not.  at  all.  If  you  make  the  condition  of  right 
living  onerous  the  great  mass  will  be  discouraged.  If  you  say  to  a  man,  "  You  have 
before  you  an  ideal  of  Christian  duty,  and  you  must  live  up  to  that,  you  must  act 
from  the  highest  motives — for  if  those  motives  are  adulterated  by  lower  ones,  they 
go  for  nothing  " ;  you  screw  the  man  up  till  he  is  like  a  violin-string  that  goes 
squealing  higher  and  higher  until  by  and  by  it  snaps  and  no  longer  has  any  power. 
Tliere  are  thousands  who  begun  hone-tly  to  live  a  Christian  life,  but  on  whom  were 
put  tests,  until  they  were  screwed  so  high  that  the  feeling  in  them  snapped  ;  and 
now  they  are  in  despair,  and  say,  "There  is  no  use  of  my  trying  any  longer."  2. 
There  is  great  feebleness,  and  a  great  want  of  generous  momentum  in  the  Christian 
life,  which  comes  from  the  consciousness  of  one's  self.  Any  couri^e  of  self-exami- 
nation is  mischievous  that  puts  a  man  all  the  time  upon  thinking  of  himself ;  under 
which  a  man  is  continually  asking  himself,  "  Am  I  going  right  now  ?  " — saying, 
e.g.,  at  ten  o'clock,  "  Well,  I  have  gone  right  all  day  so  far"  ;  but  at  twelve  says, 
"  Have  I  had  the  glory  of  God  before  me  up  to  this  time  ?  "     You  are  not  to  sit 


56  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOE.  [chap.  x. 

and  brood  over  your  possible  conduct.  You  are  to  take  your  direction  and  be 
sure  it  is  right,  and  then  make  a  fire,  and  i)ut  on  steam,  and  go  ahead,  and  trust 
yourself  on  the  way.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  iiraisinfj  life  : — 1.  Tiie  praises  of 
God  should  not  be  kept  only  for  Sunday.  A  Christian's  whole  life  should  be  a  life 
of  praise.  Every  day  sees  all  nature  singing  its  Te  Deum,  and  shall  we  alone  keep 
silence  ?  2.  All  our  lives  are  woven  of  a  different  pattern,  but  in  all  we  can  trace 
the  gciklen  thread  of  God's  mercy,  of  Christ's  redeeming  love.  When  we  remember 
how  little  we  have  deserved  God's  goodness,  how  little  we  have  done  for  Him  who 
doeth  all  for  us,  surely  our  lips  must  break  forth  into  praise.  We  owe  Him  "  our 
creation,  preservation,  and  all  the  blessings  of  this  life,"  &c.  3.  Bat  we  must  praise 
God  not  only  with  our  lips  but  in  our  lives,  making  our  life  one  long  hymn  of  praise. 
To  do  this  you  must  make  it — I.  A  contented  life.  Murmuring  lips  can  shape 
no  praises.  There  is  the  legend,  that  one  day  Elijah  appeared  suddenly  in  the 
crowded  market-place  of  a  great  city.  The  prophet,  on  being  asked  who  among  that 
crowd  would  be  saved,  pointed  to  two  mechanics  talking  and  laughing  merrily 
together.  These  men  had  done  no  great  thing,  but  they  were  contented  with  such 
things  as  they  had,  they  worked  honestly  and  cheerfully  at  their  trade,  they  thanked 
God  for  His  mercies,  and  never  spoke  evil  of  their  neighbours.  So  the  man  or 
woman  who  takes  what  God  sends,  be  it  sunshine  or  shower,  and  can  look  up  and 
say  truly,  "  Thank  God,"  who  works  cheerily  without  grumbling,  "  as  unto  the 
Lord,  and  not  unto  men,"  such  an  one  praises  God.  If  men  would  understand  this, 
they  would  not  look  on  their  work  as  a  curse,  but  a  blessing.  The  reason  why  it  is 
so  hard  to  get  working-men  to  church  is  because  they  have  never  learned  to  praise 
God  in  their  work,  and  so  they  do  not  care  to  praise  Him  in  His  holy  temple.  11. 
By  helping  to  make  others  happy,  and  by  leading  them  to  Jesus.  I  believe  that 
the  sight  of  a  mother  teaching  her  little  one  to  pray,  or  that  of  a  gentle  friend 
soothing  the  sorrows  of  an  invalid,  or  leading  a  wrong-doer  to  a  better  mind,  are 
precious  in  God's  eyes  above  all  the  great  works  of  the  greatest  men  of  all  time. 
These  things,  like  Jlary's  ointment,  are  remembered  for  ever.  The  sacrifice  of  love 
is  the  best  praise  offered  to  the  all-giviug  God.  It  was  said  by  one  of  old  that  life 
consisted  of  two  heaps ;  a  large  one  of  sorrow,  a  small  one  of  happiness.  And 
whoever  carried  a  little  atom  from  one  to  the  other  did  God  service.  To  make 
others  hapj)y,  especially  to  make  them  good,  is  an  offering  of  a  sweet-sm' lling 
savour  to  the  Lord.  They  tell  us  that  they  can  trace  in  the  sandstone  the  marks  of 
a  raindrop  that  fell  a  million  years  ago.  So  the  smallest  act  of  love  done  for  God 
shall  leave  its  mark,  if  not  seen  here  in  time,  it  will  be  visible  in  eternity.  {H.  J. 
W.  Buxton,  M.A.)  Eclicjioii  in  common  life: — Li  all  ages   there  has  been   a 

tendency  to  stt  apart  ceitain  days,  places,  and  occasions  for  worship;  and  these 
have  their  importance.  A  man  cannot  be  so  much  of  a  Christian  on  Sunday  that 
he  can  afford  to  be  a  worldling  all  the  rest  of  the  week.  If  a  steamer  put  out  for 
Southampton,  and  go  one  day  in  that  direction  and  the  other  six  days  go  in  other 
directions,  how  long  will  it  take  the  steamer  to  get  to  Southampton  ?  And  though 
a  man  may  seem  to  be  voyaging  heavenward  on  the  Sabbath,  if,  during  the  follow- 
ing six  days  he  is  going  towards  the  world,  the  flesh,  &c.,  he  will  never  ride  up  into 
the  harbour  of  heaven.  We  want  to  bring  the  religion  of  Christ  into — I.  Our 
eveey-day  conversation.  When  a  dam  breaks,  and  two  or  three  villages  are  over- 
whelmed, or  an  earthquake  swallows  a  city,  then  people  begin  to  talk  about  the 
uncertainty  of  life,  and  imagine  that  they  are  engaged  in  religious  conversation. 
No.  You  may  talk  about  these  things  and  have  no  grace  in  your  heart.  If  there 
is  anything  glad,  beautiful,  important  about  religion  we  ought  to  be  continuously 
speaking  about  it.  And  yet  how  few  circles  there  are  where  it  is  welcome  I  As  on 
a  summer  day,  when  the  forests  are  full  of  life  and  carol,  if  a  hawk  appear  in  the 
sky  the  forests  are  still ;  just  so  I  have  seen  a  lively  religious  circle  silenced  on  the 
appearance  of  anything  like  religious  conversation.  But  then  we  must  live  religion 
or  we  cannot  talk  it.  If  a  man  is  cross,  uncongenial,  and  hard,  and  then  begins  to 
talk  about  Christ  and  heaven,  everybody  is  repelled  by  it.  II.  Our  every-day 
EMPLOYMENTS.  "  Oh,"  you  Say,  "  that  is  very  well  if  a  man  handle  large  sums  of 
money,  or  if  he  has  an  extensive  traffic  ;  but  my  sphere  is  too  humble  for  the  action 
of  such  grand  principles."  Who  told  you  so?  God  watches  the  faded  leaf  as 
certainly  as  He  does  the  path  of  the  sun.  And  the  moss  makes  as  much  impres- 
sion upon  God's  mind  as  the  cedar.  When  you  have  anything  to  do  in  life,  however 
humble  it  may  seem  to  be,  God  is  always  there  to  help  you  to  do  it.  A  religion  that 
is  not  good  in  one  place  is  not  worth  anything  in  another  place.  The  man  who  has 
only  a  day's  wages  in  his  pocket  as  certainly  needs  the  guidance  of  religion  as  he 


CHAP.  X.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  57 

who  rattles  the  keys  of  a  bank.  Plato  once  said  that  spirits  of  the  other  world  came 
back  to  this  to  find  a  body  and  a  sphere  of  work.  One  came  and  took  the  body  of 
a  king  and  did  his  work.  Another  took  the  body  of  a  poet  and  did  his  work.  After 
a  while  Ulysses  came,  and  he  said,  "  Why,  all  the  fine  bodies  and  all  the  grand 
work  are  taken.  There  is  nothing  left  for  me."  And  some  one  replied,  "  Ah  !  the 
best  one  has  been  left  for  you — the  lody  of  a  common  man,  doing  a  common  work, 
and  for  a  common  reward."  A  good  fable  for  the  world,  and  just  as  good  a  fable 
for  the  Church.  "Whether  ye  eat  or  drink,"  &c.  III.  Our  every-day  trials. 
For  severe  losses,  for  trouble  that  shocks  like  an  earthquake,  we  prescribe  religious 
consolation  ;  but  for  the  small  annoyances  of  last  week,  how  much  of  the  grace 
of  God  did  you  apply  ?  "  Oh  !  "  you  say,  "  these  trials  are  too  small  for  such  appli- 
cation."  My  brother,  they  are  shaping  your  character,  souring  your  temper,  wear- 
ing out  your  patience,  and  making  you  less  and  less  of  a  man.  A  large  fortune 
may  be  spent  in  small  change,  and  a  vast  amount  of  moral  character  may  go  away 
in  small  depletion.  A  swarm  of  locusts  will  kill  a  grain-field  sooner  than  the 
incursions  of  three  or  four  cattle.  Eats  may  sink  a  ship.  One  lucifer  match  may 
send  destruction  through  a  block  of  storehouses.  Catherine  de  Medici  got  her  death 
from  smelling  a  poisonous  rose.  Columbus,  by  stopping  and  asking  for  a  piece 
of  bread  and  a  drink  of  water  at  a  Franciscan  convent,  was  led  to  the  discovery  of 
a  new  world.  There  is  an  intimate  connection  between  trifles  and  immensities, 
between  nothings  and  everythings.  Now,  be  careful  to  let  none  of  those  annoy- 
ances go  through  your  soul  unarraigned.  Compel  them  to  administer  to  your 
spiritual  wealth.  Our  Government  does  not  think  it  belittling  to  put  a  tax  on  trifles. 
The  individual  taxes  do  not  amount  to  much,  but  in  the  aggregate  to  millions  of 
dollars.  And  I  would  have  you  put  a  high  tariff  on  every  annoyance  that  comes 
through  your  soul.  This  might  not  amount  to  much  in  single  cases,  but  in  the 
aggregate  it  would  be  a  great  revenue  of  spiritual  strength  and  satisfaction.  A  bee 
can  suck  honey  even  out  of  a  nettle,  and  if  you  have  the  grace  of  God  in  your 
heart  you  can  get  sweetness  out  of  that  which  would  otherwise  annoy.  IV.  Our 
EVERY-DAT  BLESSINGS.  When  the  harvests  are  in  we  assemble  in  churches  and  are 
very  thankful.  But  every  day  ought  to  be  a  thanksgiving  day.  We  have  to  see  a 
blind  man  led  by  his  dog  before  we  begin  to  bethink  ourselves  of  what  a  grand 
thing  it  is  to  have  eyesight.  We  have  to  see  some  wounded  man  hobbling  on  his 
crutch,  or  with  his  empty  coat  sleeve  pinned  up,  before  we  learn  to  think  what  a 
grand  thing  God  did  for  us  when  He  gave  us  healthy  use  of  our  limbs.  We  are  so 
stupid  thiit  nothing  but  the  misfortunes  of  others  can  rouse  us  up  to  our  blessings. 
The  cow  that  stands  under  the  willow  chewing  its  cud  looks  very  thankful ;  and 
who  can  tell  how  much  a  bird  means  by  its  song?  The  aroma  of  the  flowers 
smells  like  incense,  and  mist  arising  from  the  river  looks  like  the  smoke  of  a  morn- 
ing sacrifice.  Oh,  that  we  were  as  responsive  !  Yet,  who  thanks  God  for  the  water 
that  gushes  up  the  well  and  that  foams  in  the  cascade,  and  that  laughs  ovei'  the 
rocks,  and  that  patters  in  the  shower,  and  that  claps  its  hands  in  the  sea?  Who 
thanks  God  for  the  air,  the  fountain  of  life,  the  bridge  of  sunbeams,  the  path  of 
sound,  the  great  fan  on  a  hot  summer's  day?  Who  thanks  God  for  this  wonderful 
physical  organism  ?  We  take  all  theee  things  as  a  matter  of  course.  But  suppose 
God  should  withdraw  these  common  blessings?  (T.  I)e  Wilt  Tahmuje,  1>.D.) 
Religion  in  daily  life  .-—Man  must  not  separate  his  life  from  God.  By  so 
doing  he  ruins  his  own  soul.  Can  the  stream  continue  to  flow  when  discon- 
nected from  the  fountain  ?  Can  the  tree  blossom  and  fruit  w  hen  uprooted 
from  the  earth  ?  Can  a  boy  say,  "  Father  I  can  do  without  you  "  ?  Let  everything 
you  do,  then,  have  reference  to  God.  Do  all  things  to  His  glory.  I.  How?  1.  Let 
everything  we  do  show  the  intention  of  God  in  our  existence.  The  flowing  of  the 
river,  the  fruit  and  fulness  of  the  tree,  the  shining  of  the  sun,  &c.,  are  exhibitions 
of  God's  purposes  in  those  objects.  Does  your  life  tell  what-God's  intention  is  with 
it  ?  If  so,  you  glorify  God.  2.  Let  everything  be  done  in  obedience  to  God.  We 
live  in  the  midst  of  a  complicated  system  of  laws— physical,  mental,  moral. 
Obedience  to  these  is  glory  to  God.  3.  Let  all  things  be  so  done  that  when  they 
are  completed  they  shall  be  to  the  praise  of  God's  wisdom,  power,  and  love. 
The  artist  is  moved  by  his  genius  and  paints  a  picture.  When  exhibited  the 
genius  of  the  artist  is  praised.  Every  good  man  has  in  his  heart  the  inspiration  of 
God.  Let  him,  then,  so  act  that  when  his  works  are  completed  they  shall  be  to 
the  glory  of  God.  II.  In  what  ?  1.  In  business.  (1)  Here  religion  is  an  absolute 
necessity.  Business  requires — (a)  Integrity,  and  rtligion  makes  a  man  just,  truth- 
ful, cfec.     {h)  Strength  and  health  in  business.     Let  men  do  the  business  of  life  in 


58  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

the  spirit  of  religion,  and  a  voice  shall  break  over  them  saying,  "  The  everlasting 
arms  are  underneath  thee  ;  thou  shalt  not  bear  thy  burden  alone.  Cast  thy  burden 
on  the  Lord."  (2)  Keligion  connects  the  business  of  this  life  with  the  affairs  of 
another.  Business  is  a  dull  leaden  cloud  in  itself :  let  in  the  light  of  eternity  upon 
it  and  it  becomes  glorious.  2.  In  government.  (1)  Thegovernmeut  of  a  family  is 
nev(  r  done  well  without  religion.  The  development  of  your  boys  and  girls  will 
never  be  beautiful  if  you  rule  the  home  without  God.  (2)  The  government  of 
society  cannot  be  well  done  without  religion.  A  great  city  is  likely  to  become  a 
mass  of  sin  and  miseiy  without  it.  (3)  No  nation  was  ever  yet  governed  well  without 
some  kind  of  religion.  Eome  began  to  decline  when  the  priests  began  to  laugh  at 
each  other,  and  the  thinkers  to  ask,  "  What  is  truth  ?  "  France  tried  to  govern 
without  God,  and  the  wicked  attempt  ended  in  the  Reign  of  Terror.  3.  In  litera- 
ture. This  to  work  for  goi^d  must  be  permeated  with  the  principles  of  religion.  (1) 
Truth.  (2)  Purity.  (3)  Kindness.  The  truth  of  criticism  should  be  baptized  with 
love.  4.  In  science.  Men  of  science  need  the  light  of  religion  for  the  sake  of  their 
own  science.  If  you  were  to  read  a  book  that  you  could  not  understand,  would  it 
not  be  of  immense  advantage  to  have  the  Huthor  present  to  explain  it?  The 
material  world  is  God's  book,  End  if  you  would  understand  its  higher  hieroglyphics 
you  must  pray.  5.  In  philosophy,  which  is  the  noble  attempt  of  the  greatest  minds 
to  answer  three  great  questions.  Kow  there  are  no  answers  so  wise  and  deej)  as 
the  old  ones.  Whence?  From  God.  How?  Nobody  knows.  Why?  That  the 
universe  might  be  filled  with  blessedness  to  the  glory  of  God.  {T.  Jones,  D.D.) 
Glorify  God : — I.  Contrast  this  principle  with  what  naturally  inhabits  our  own 
BOSOMS,  and  we  shall  then  be  fully  convinced  that  this  text  must  have  God  for  its 
Author.  Believe  me  when  I  tell  you  that  we  are  all,  in  every  thought,  and  word, 
and  action,  engaged  in  undeifying  God  and  deifying  ourselves.  I  do  not  mean  to 
say  that  there  are  not  many  amiabilities  in  members  of  civil  society  which  ought 
to  endear  them  to  us  ;  but,  mark  me  !  you  will  find  the  loveliest  of  these  amiabilities 
in  the  brute  creation.  I  refer  you  to  the  ingenuity  and  love  with  which  the  parent 
brute  defends  its  young.  It  does  everything  it  could  possibly  do,  even  if  possessed 
of  the  reasoning  jjowers  of  man.  We  hear  a  great  deal  of  human  friendship  :  human 
friendship,  without  the  grace  of  God,  I  boldly  assert,  is  inferior  to  the  friendship  of 
a  dog.  There  is  a  something  awfully  defective  in  the  best  works  of  man — in  all 
his  loveliest  emotions.  "  God  is  not  in  all  his  thoughts,"  he  is  a  withered  branch 
separated  from  the  parent  tree.  II.  I  would  assign  the  most  satisfactory  reasons 
WHY  God  should  be  oroiiiriED  in  all  our  thoughts,  words,  and  actions.  1.  God 
glorifies  Himself  in  calling  all  things  into  existence.  Saints  and  angels  are 
triumphing  in  this  truth  in  heaven,  and  ever  will  triumph  in  it.  2.  For  the  same 
reason  He  preserves  everything  in  existence,  namely,  to  glorify  Himself.  3.  It  is 
for  His  own  glory  that  He  governs  all  things ;  and  we  should  bear  this  in  mind 
while  courting  at  His  hands  the  sublimest  principles  of  action.  4.  God  glorifies 
Himself  in  His  mercy  infinitely  mote  than  in  anything  else.  5.  He  glorifies  Him- 
self in  His  vengeance.  6.  The  obedience  of  all  innocent  beings  is  fully  influenced 
by  this  principle,  or  rather  they  have  this  end  fully  in  view,  the  glory  of  God  in  all 
thin;.s.  III.  How  God  TEACHES  MAN  this  subliimest  principle  of  action?  1.  By 
convincing  him  of  sin  in  its  evil  and  desert — in  its  evil,  as  being  committed  against 
God — in  its  desert,  as  meriting  nothing  less  than  His  eternal  wrath  and  condemna- 
tion. 2.  By  revealing  His  Son  in  the  heart  of  man.  3.  By  conferring  a  new  dis- 
position upon  man — a  disposition  that  involves  the  glory  of  God  in  all  His  beauty 
and  i3erfections.     (IF.  Hoicels.)         Subserviency  to  the  Divine  glory  : — I.  By  the 

TERM    "  GLORY,"   WHEN    REFERRING    TO    GoD,    WE    ARE    TO    UNDERSTAND   HiS   ESSENTIAL 

attributes  and  CHARACTER,  especially  as  displayed  in  the  works  of  creation,  provi- 
dence, and  grace.  It  may  serve  to  illustrate  this  definition,  to  consider  that  the 
glory  of  any  human  behigs  consists  in  the  display  of  those  parts  of  their  conduct 
which  are  deemed  worthy  of  admiration.  Thus  the  false  glory  of  warriors  and  con- 
querors has  ever  been  sought  to  be  promoted  by  the  declaration  and  celebration  of 
their  deeds  of  valour  ;  the  glory  of  the  beneficent,  by  the  record  of  their  acts  of 
charity ;  and  the  glory  of  men  of  science  by  the  name  they  acquire  for  the  dis- 
coveries which  they  make.  Those  who  desire  to  extend  the  glory  of  such  persons 
efjfect  their  object  by  extending  the  knowledge  of  what  has  been  accomplished  by 
the  subjects  of  their  admiration  ;  and  in  proportion  to  the  degree  of  manifestation, 
is  the  amount  of  glory  attained.  So  with  respect  to  the  Divine  character,  the  glory 
in  itself  is  infinite,  because  it  consists  in  the  uncreated  excellency  of  infinite  per- 
fection ;  but  the  manifestation  of  the  glory  is  increased  or  diminished  according  to 


CHAP.  X.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  59 

our  knowledge  or  ignorance  of  the  attributes  and  acts  and  chanicter  of  the  most 
high  God.  II.  Consider  this  glory  as  the  end  of  God  r;;  creation,  providence, 
AND  GRACE,  and  how  the  creatures  are  made  subservient  thereto.  It  is  quite  con- 
ceivable that  Jehovah  might  have  continued  to  delight  Himself  alone,  Tvithout 
putting  forth  any  act  of  creative  power  ;  but  it  became  His  infinite  goodness  to  com- 
municate and  reveal  itself  by  giving  being  to  various  ranks  of  intelligent  creatures. 
After  He  had  created  the  angels,  He  might  have  paused  for  ages  longer  before  He 
condescended  to  form  the  material  world,  or  to  people  it  with  inferior  beings.  But 
it  was  His  blessed  will  to  increase  the  happiness  of  the  angels,  l)y  increasing  their 
knowledge  of  Himself ;  and  therefore  the  command  went  forth,  the  earth  arose  out 
of  chaos,  and  the  morning  stars  sang  together,  and  the  sons  of  God  shouted  for  joy, 
at  the  new  manifestation  of  the  Divine  glory.  Wisdom  and  love  and  power  were 
magnified  by  their  being  put  forth  into  exercise.  The  glory  of  the  Divine  attributes 
doth  shine  brighter  and  brighter  until  the  peifect  day,  and  a  fuller  and  fuller  dis- 
closure of  them  may  be  looked  forward  to,  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  They  dwell,  as 
in  a  fountain,  in  Jehovah  ;  they  streamed  forth  as  a  wide  and  rapidly  increasing 
river  in  the  works  of  creation  and  preserving  Providence ;  but  they  spread  into  a 
searchless  and  unbounded,  ocean  in  the  displays  of  redeeming  grace.     III.  Notice 

SOME  OF  THE  PRACTICAL  DIRECTIONS  ARISING  OUT  OF  THE  SUBJECT  THUS  UNDERSTOOD.    1. 

If  our  only  true  enjoyment  is  to  be  found  in  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God,  this 
fact  affords  a  new  argument  for  highly  estimating  that  whereby  this  glory  is  revealed. 
2.  In  order  to  carry  out  into  our  habitual  conduct  the  precept  of  the  inspired  apostle, 
it  is  necessary  that  we  cordially  acquiesce  in  the  design  of  God.  As  long  as  we 
adopt  any  other  end,  we  are  jjursuing  vanity  and  lies.  3.  Diligently  cultivate  the 
use  of  those  means  which  are  fitted  to  increase  our  knowledge  of  God.  4.  Belore 
engaging  in  any  pursuit,  consider  how  it  bears  upon  the  great  ultimate  end  of  all 
things.  God  hath  given  you  mental  faculties,  and  you  ought  to  employ  them  ;  but 
see  that  they  are  employed  about  those  objects  which  tend  to  promote  His  glory. 
God  hath  given  you  affections,  and  these  aff'ectiuns  are  not  to  lie  dormant ;  but  see 
that  they  are  awake  to  objects  becoming  a  jdlgrim  and  a  stranger  upon  eaith.  He 
permits  you  to  enj-iy  intercourse  with  your  fellow-men  ;  but  see  that  your  speech  be 
always  with  grace,  seasoned  with  salt.  It  is  in  the  way  of  self-denial,  of  lowliness, 
of  dependence,  that  fresh  revelations  of  Divine  beauty  meet  the  traveller  in  his 
journey  heavenward.  5.  Consider  the  variety  of  ways  in  which  we  may  advance 
the  Divine  glory.  {II.  Craik.)  The  duty  of  (jlorifyinq  God  : — One  great  object  of 
religion  is  to  bring  men  to  a  sense  of  the  duty  which  they  owe  to  God.  I.  To  under- 
stand THE  NATURE  OF  THE  PRINCIPLE  whicli  St.  Paul  here  inculcates  we  should 
observe  the  cases  before  him,  in  the  context  from  which  he  takes  occasion  to  pre- 
scribe this  general  rule.  This  chapter  contains  advice  upon  three  particular  cases 
of  conscience.  The  first  respects  the  lawfulness  of  assisting  at  idolatrous  feasts, 
such  as  were  held  in  pagan  temples,  and  in  honour  of  the  pagan  worship.  Of  these 
entertainments  some  Christians,  it  appears,  who  were  less  careful  to  please  God 
than  to  gratify  their  worldly  connections,  condescended  to  paitake.  The  second  case 
was  that  of  buying  such  flesh  in  the  market ;  for  whatever  part  of  the  animal  was 
not  consumed  on  the  altar,  or  distributed  for  presents  and  entertainments,  was 
exposed  publicly  to  sale.  And  to  this  the  apostle  gives  his  decided  sanction. 
"  Whiitsoever  is  sold  in  the  shambles,  that  eat,  asking  no  questions  for  conscience 
sake."  The  third  case  respected  the  propriety  of  eatmg  these  same  meats  at  the 
table  of  a  heathen  acquaintance,  and  this  is  resolved  like  the  last.  Being  invited 
as  to  a  common  meal,  you  are  in  general  to  partake  of  it  as  such,  without  either 
uneasiness  or  remark.  "  Whatsoever  is  set  before  you,  eat,  asking  no  question  for 
conscience  sake."  This  leads  to  the  general  conclusion — not  only  in  these  cases 
but  in  all  others — "  Whether  ye  eat  or  drink,"  or  abstain  from  eiiher  ;  in  a  word, 
"  whatever  ye  do,  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God."  "We  see,  then,  that  the  principle  here 
inculcated  is  of  the  soundest,  most  enlightened,  and  vigilant  kind :  ^ound,  as  for- 
bidding strictly  whatever  is  really  an  offence  :  enlightened,  as  it  discriminates  what 
is  sinful  from  what  only  seems  so  to  be  :  and  watchful,  in  attending  not  merely  to 
an  action  as  it  stands  alone,  but  even  to  those  possible  effects  of  it  which  might 
bring  dishonour  to  God.  The  great  rule  of  our  life  must  be  regard  to  God's  honour, 
and  this  rule  must  be  applied  on  occasions  when  we  perhaps  tbink  little  of  resjionsi- 
bility.     II.  Having  thus  examined  the  nature  of  the  principle,  let  us  proceed  to 

snow  ITS  OPERATION  IN  SANCTIFYING  THE  COMMON  ACTIONS  OF  LIFE.    It  is  llOt  oftCU  that 

the  best  of  men  have  a  due  sense  of  the  value  of  Christian  principle  in  this  j^oint  of 
view.     And  as  to  the  world  at  large  they  can  scarcely  understand  the  application  of 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

it.     With  them  religion  is  confined  to  acts  of  worship,  morality  is  the  principle  of 
our  duty  to  man  ;  and  interest,  inclination,  custom,  convenience  are  to  direct  the 
vast  variety  of  human  actions  which  are  less  perfectly  of  the  moral  kind.  Thus,  in 
all  the  ordinary  conduct  of  their  lives,  in  their  business  and  their  amusements,  in 
the  connections  they  form,  and  the  society  they  frequent ;  in  the  use  of  their  time, 
their  influence,  their  fortune,  or  their  talents  ;  in  the  management  of  their  famihes ; 
in  their  habits  of  personal  indulgence  ;  in  their  common  discourse  ;  in  their  general 
bearing  and  behaviour  they  live  altogether  without  regard  to  God.     But  let  us  take 
a  particular  instance  or  two.     Take  first  the  duties  of  any  humble  and  laborious 
calling — of  a  husbandman,  of  a  mechanic,  of  a  servant,  of  one  who  must  labour  for 
a  subsistence,  and  whose  whole  time  is  occupied  in  the  work  of  his  vocation.     If  a 
man  submits  to  this  lot  as  a  mere  act  of  necessity,  if  he  goes  through  his  toil  with 
cheerfulness,  because  he  thus  supplies  his  wants,  or  procures  his  humble  comforts, 
or  hopes  one  day  to  improve  his  condition  ;  though  he  may  be  acting  well  and 
wisely  in  some  points  of  view  he  does  nothiug  to  the  glory  of  God.     But  suppose 
that  he  thus  reflects  on  his  condition,  and  says,  "  I  will  therefore  go  to  my  labour 
cheerfully :  I  will  pursue  it  diligently,  as  God's  appointment :  I  will  consider  this  as 
my  place  in  the  great  family  of  His  creatures,  and  endeavour  to  serve  Him  in  it." 
Such  views  would  consecrate  the  labours  of  the  day.     Thus  would  a  man  be  glori- 
fying God.     But  there  may  be  a  question  of  some  importance  here.     Are  these 
reflections  to  be  continually  passing  in  the  mind  ?    Or,  is  nothing  done  to  the  glory 
of  God,  when  we  do  not  place  it  thus  distinctly  before  us,  as  our  express  and  par- 
ticular object?     I  answer,  when  the  principle  exists  and  thrives,  such  reflections 
will  of  course  be  frequently  occurring.     But  when  it  is  well-formed  and  established 
we  shall  act  by  it  on  all  common  occasions,  not  so  much  from  reflection  as  from 
habit ;  and  be  led  into  the  feelings  and  duties  which  our  object  demands  without 
recalling  it  expressly  to  our  thoughts.     A  parent  who  lives  for  the  welfare  of  her 
child  has  no  need  to  reason  with  herself  upon  the  matter  ;  nor,  in  every  single  act 
which  promotes  her  object,  to  have  it  strongly  or  expressly  in  her  eye.     She  feels 
rather  than  reasons,  she  acts  rather  from  habit  than  deliberation.  2.  Let  me  biiefly 
show  the  operation  of  this  same  principle  in  another  instance.     There  are  various 
peculiar  duties  attached  to  every  rank  and  relation  in  life.   To  parents  and  children 
for  example,  to  husband  and  wife,  to  master  and  servants.     The  duties  of  these 
relations  may  be  performed,  and  decently  performed,  without  any  regard  to  God. 
A  heathen  parent  may  have  a  tenderness  of  affection  for  his  children  which  all 
mankind  must  admire.     In  such  cases  natural  affections  or  ordinary  motives  do 
that,  in  part,  which  the  aid  and  control  of  a  higher  principle  would  enable  them  to 
do  much  better — and  God  is  only  so  far  glorified  as  the  general  order  and  harmony 
of  His  creatures  demonstrates  the  perfection  of  the  Creator.     But  where  the  heart 
is  renewed,  and  a  regard  to  God  implanted,  the  influence  of  this  principle  will 
extend  to  the  various  relations  of  life,  and  all  their  duties  be  placed  on  a  new  foot- 
ing.    Thus  our  very  amusements  and  relaxations  should  be  enjoyed  upon  principle. 
As  far  as  they  are  subservient  to  right  ends  they  may  be  indulged  with  a  good  con- 
science.     Thus,  too,  the  food  and  rest  which  we  require  should  be  taken  upon 
Christian  principles.  Such  then  are  the  objects  we  shall  keep  in  view,  and  such  the 
motives  from  which  we  shall  act  in  proportion  as  we  feel  the  power  and  possess 
the  true  spirit  of  the  gospel.     And  now  let  us  turn  to  our  own  consciences  and 
hearts.     What  is  our  prevailing  jirinciple?     Is  it  the  fear  and  love  of  God  ?     Oris 
it  our  own  gratification  or  temporal  advantage  alone  ?  I  say  alone,  because  we  may 
conscientiously  seek  our  own  advantage  when  it  is  in  subserviency  to  the  will  of 
God.     That  will  and  our  own  interest  point  frequently  to  the  same  line  of  conduct. 
Again,  let  this   subject  convince  us  of  the  error  of  those  who  confine  religion  to 
devotional  duties.    Lastly,  would  we  possess  this  principle  of  doing  all  things  to  the 
glory  of  God,  let  us  first  seek  to  have  the  love  of  God  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts. 
The  effect  is  a  great  one,  the  motive  which  produces  it  must  therefore  be  powerful. 
Let  us  love  God,  and  we  shall  serve  Him  faithfully  and  universally.  {J.  Tenn,  il.A.) 
Doinp  glory  to  God  in  jyuymits  of  the  world  : — When  persons  are  convinced  that  life 
is  short,  when  they  feel  that  the  next  life  is  all  in  all,  then  they  are  apt  to  under- 
value this  life  altogether,  and  to  forget  its  real  importance.     This  state  of  mind  is 
chided  m  figure  in  the  words  of  the  holy  angels  to  the  apostles,  when  they  say,  "Ye 
men  of  Galilee,  why  stand  ye  gazing  up  into  heaven?"     In  various  ways  does  the 
thought  of  the  next  world  lead  men  to  neglect  their  duty  in  this;  and  whenever  it 
does  so  we  may  be  sure  that  there  is  something  wrong  and  unchristian.     Now  I  am 
far  from  denying  that  a  man's  worldly  occupation  may  be  his  cross.     Again,  I  am 


CHAP.  X.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  61 

far  from  denj'ing  that  under  circumstances  it  may  be  right  even  to  retire  from  the 
world.  But  I  am  speaking  of  cases  when  it  is  a  person's  duty  to  remain  in  his 
worldly  calling,  and  when  he  does  remain  in  it,  but  when  he  cherishes  dissatisfac- 
tion with  it :  whereas  what  he  ought  to  feel  is'this — that  while  in  it  he  is  to  glorify 
God,  not  out  of  it,  but  in  it,  and  by  means  of  it,  according  to  the  apostle's  direction, 
"  not  slothful  in  business,  fervent  in  spirit,  serving  the  Lord."  Now  what  leads 
such  a  person  into  this  mistake  is  that  he  sees  that  most  men  who  engage  cheerfully 
and  diligently  in  worldly  business,  do  so  from  a  worldly  spirit,  from  a  low  carnal 
love  of  the  world ;  and  so  he  thinks  it  is  his  duty,  on  the  contrarj',  not  to  take  a 
cheerful  part  in  the  world's  business  at  all.  But  surely  it  is  possible  to  "  serve  the 
Lord,"  yet  not  to  be  "  slothful  in  business  "  ;  not  over  devoted  to  it,  but  not  to  retire 
from  it.  1.  "  Do  all  to  the  glory  of  God,"  says  St.  Paul,  in  the  text ;  nay,  "  whether 
we  eat  or  drink  " ;  so  that  nothing  is  too  slight  or  trivial  to  glorify  Him  in.  We 
will  suppose  a  man  who  has  lately  had  more  serious  thoughts  than  he  had  before, 
and  determines  to  live  more  religiously.  In  ci^nsequence  of  the  turn  his  mind  has 
taken  he  feels  a  distaste  for  his  worldly  occupation.  The  ill-instructed  man  will  at 
once  get  impatient  and  quit  it ;  or  if  he  does  not  quit  it,  at  least  he  will  be  negligent 
and  indolent  in  it.  But  the  true  penitent  will  say  to  himself,  "  No  ;  if  it  be  an  irk- 
some employment,  so  much  the  more  does  it  suit  me.  I  deserve  no  better.  I  am 
bound  to  afflict  my  soul  for  my  past  sins.  Far  from  repining,  I  will,  through  God's 
grace,  go  cheerfully  about  what  I  do  not  like.  I  will  deny  myself.  I  know  that 
with  His  help  what  is  in  itself  painful  will  thus  be  pleasant  as  done  towards  Him. 
But  leave  it  without  a  call  from  God,  I  certainly  must  not.  On  the  contrary,  I 
will  work  in  it  the  more  diligently,  as  far  as  hiuher  duties  allow  me."  2.  A  second 
reason  which  will  animate  the  Christian  will  be  a  desire  of  letting  his  lipht 
shine  before  men.  3.  Thankfulness  to  Almichty  God,  nay,  and  the  inward  life 
of  the  Spirit  itself,  will  be  additional  principles  causing  the  Christian  to  labour 
diligently  in  his  calling.  He  will  see  God  in  all  things.  He  will  recollect 
our  Saviour's  life.  Christ  was  brought  up  to  a  humble  trade.  Thus  he  will 
take  his  worldly  business  as  a  gift  from  Him,  and  will  love  it  as  such.  4.  True 
humility  is  another  principle  which  will  lead  us  to  desire  to  glorify  God  in  our 
worldly  employments  if  possible,  instead  of  resigning  them.  Christ  evidently  puts 
His  greater  blessings  on  those  whom  the  world  despises.  He  has  bid  His  followers 
take  the  lowest  seat.  5.  Still  further,  he  will  use  his  worldly  business  as  a  means 
of  keei)ing  him  from  vain  and  unprofitable  tlioughts.  One  cause  of  the  heart's 
devising  evil  is,  that  time  is  given  it  to  do  so.  The  m^m  who  has  his  daily  duties, 
who  lays  out  his  tune  for  them  hour  by  hour,  is  saved  a  multitude  of  sins  which 
have  not  time  to  get  hold  upon  him.  6.  Lastly,  we  see  what  judgment  to  give  in  a 
question  sometimes  agitated,  whether  one  should  retire  from  our  worldly  business 
at  the  close  of  life,  to  give  our  thoughts  more  entirely  to  God.  On  the  whole,  then 
what  I  have  said  comes  to  this,  that  whereas  Adam  was  sentenced  to  labour  as  a 
punishment,  Christ  has  by  His  coming  sanctified  it  as  a  means  of  grace  and  a  sacri- 
fice of  thanksgiving,  a  sacrifice  cheerfully  to  be  offered  up  to  the  Father  in  His 
name.  It  is  very  easy  to  speak  and  teach  this,  difficult  to  do  it ;  very  difficult  to 
steer  between  the  two  evils — to  use  this  world  as  not  abusing  it,  to  be  active  and 
diligent  in  this  world's  affairs,  yet  not  for  the  world's  sake,  but  for  God's  sake. 
{Plain  Sermons  hi/  Contributors  to  "  The  Tracts  for  the  Times.^')  The  cirief  end  of 
ma)i : — 1.  That  God's  glory  is  the  end  of  our  being.  2.  That  God's  glory  should  be 
tlie  end  of  our  doing.  3.  The  ground  of  both  these,  because  both  being  and  doing 
are  from  Him,  therefore  they  ought  to  be  both  for  Him.  God  is  independent  alto- 
gether and  self-sufficient.  This  is  His  royal  prerogative,  Avherein  He  infinitely 
transcends  all  created  perfection.  He  is  of  Himself,  and  for  Himself,  from  no 
other,  and  for  no  other,  but  of  Him,  and  for  Him  are  all  things.  But  the  creature, 
even  the  most  perfect  work,  besides  God,  it  hath  tbese  two  ingredients  of  limitation 
and  imperfection  in  its  bo'^om.  It  is  from  anotber  and  for  another.  It  hath  its 
rise  out  of  the  fountain  of  God's  immense  power  and  goodness,  and  it  must  run 
towards  that  again,  till  it  empty  all  its  faculties  and  excellencies  into  that  same  sea 
of  goodness.  Dependence  is  the  pr  'per  notion  of  a  created  being,  dependence  upon 
that  infinite  independent  being,  as  the  first  immediate  cause  and  the  last  immediate 
end.  You  see  then  that  this  piir.-^iple  is  engraven  in  the  very  nature  of  man.  It 
is  as  certain  and  eviibnt  that  man  is  made  for  God's  gloiy,  and  for  no  other  end, 
as  that  he  is  from  God's  power,  and  from  no  other  cause.  And  there  JS  the  more 
reason  of  it  that  His  Majesty's  seeking  of  His  own  glory  is  not  preju'Slfiial  to  the 
creature's  good,  but  the  very  communication  of  His  fulness  goes  along  with  it ;  so 


I 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

that  in  plorifying  Himself  He  is  mnst  beneficial  to  His  own  creatures.  "  All  things 
are  of  Him  and  for  Him,"  but  man  in  a  peculiar  and  proper  way.  As  God  in 
making  of  man,  He  was  pleased  of  His  goodness,  to  stamp  him  with  a  character  of 
His  own  imaj-'e,  and  in  this  He  puts  a  difference  between  man  and  other  creatures  ; 
th».t  he  should  have  more  plain  and  distinct  engravings  of  Divine  majesty  uj^on  him, 
which  might  show  the  glory  of  the  workman.  So  it  appears  that  he  is  in  a  singular 
way  made  for  G-od  as  his  last  end.  As  he  is  set  nearer  God,  as  the  beginning  and 
cause  than  other  creatures,  so  he  is  placed  nearer  God  as  the  end.  But  you  may 
ask,  wliat  is  it  to  glorify  Gcd  ?  Doth  our  goodness  extend  to  Him  ?  Or  is  it  an 
advantage  to  the  Ahnighty  that  we  are  rigliteous?  Ko  indeed.  And  hf-rein  is  the 
vast  difference  between  God's  glorifying  of  us  and  sanctifying  of  us,  and  our  glorify- 
ing and  sanctifying  of  Him  ;  God  calls  things  that  are  not  and  makes  thtm  to  be  ; 
but  we  can  do  no  more,  but  call  things  that  are,  and  that  far  below  what  they  are, 
God's  glorifying  is  creative,  ours  only  declarative.  He  makes  us  such,  we  do  no 
more  bat  declare  Him  to  be  such.  This  then  is  the  proper  work  that  man  is 
created  for,  to  be  a  witness  of  God's  glory,  and  to  give  testimony  to  tlje  appearances 
and  out-breakings  of  ir,  in  the  ways  of  power,  and  justice,  and  mercy,  and  truth. 
Other  creatures  are  called  to  glorify  God,  but  it  is  rather  a  proclamation  to  dull  and 
senseless  men,  and  a  provocation  of  them  to  their  duty.  The  creatures  are  the 
books  wherein  the  lines  of  the  song  of  God's  praises  are  written,  and  man  is  made 
a  creature  capable  to  read  them,  and  to  tune  that  song.  They  are  appointed  to 
bring  in  bricks  to  our  hand,  and  God  has  fashioned  us  for  this  employment,  to  make 
such  a  buiMing  of  it.  We  are  the  mouth  of  the  creation,  God  will  open  the  mouths 
of  asses,  of  babes  and  sucklings,  and  in  them  perfect  praises  (Psa.  viii.  1,  2). 
Epictetus  said  well, "  If  I  were  a  lark  I  would  sing  as  a  lark,  but  seeing  I  am  a  man 
what  should  I  do  but  praise  God  without  ceasing?  "  It  is  as  proper  to  us  to  praise 
God  as  for  a  bird  to  chant.  All  beasts  have  their  own  sounds  and  voices  peculiar 
to  their  own  nature,  this  is  the  natural  sound  of  a  man.  Now  as  you  would  think  it 
monstrous  to  hear  a  melodious  bird  croaking  as  a  raven,  so  it  is  no  less  monstrous 
and  degenerate  to  hear  the  most  pai  t  of  the  discourses  of  men  savouring  nothing  of 
God.  If  we  had  known  that  innocent  estate  of  man,  ob,  how  would  we  think  he 
had  fallen  from  heaven  !  This,  then,  is  what  we  are  bound  unto  by  the  bond  of 
our  creation ;  this  is  our  proper  ofSce  and  station  God  once  set  us  into  when  He 
assigned  every  creature  its  own  use  and  exercise.  This  was  our  portion  (and  oh, 
the  noblest  of  all,  because  nearest  the  King's  own  person)  to  acknowledge  in  our 
hearts  inwardly,  and  to  express  in  our  words  and  actions  outwardly,  what  an  one  He 
is,  according  as  He  hath  revealed  Himself  in  His  Word  and  works.  Well,  tfien, 
without  more  discourse  upon  it,  without  multiplying  of  it  into  particular  branches, 
to  glorify  God  is  in  our  souls  to  conceive  of  Him,  and  meditate  on  His  name,  till 
they  receive  the  impression  and  stamp  of  all  the  letters  of  His  glorious  name,  and 
then  to  exjiress  this  in  our  words  and  actions,  in  commending  of  Him,  and  obeying 
of  Him.  Our  soul  should  be  as  wax  to  express  the  seal  of  His  glurious  attributes 
of  justice,  power,  goodness,  holiness,  and  mercy.  And  as  the  water  that  receives 
the  beams  of  the  sun  reflects  them  back  again,  so  should  our  spirits  receive  the 
sweet  warming  beams  of  His  love  and  glorious  excellency,  and  then  reflect  them 
towards  His  Majesty  with  the  desires  and  affections  of  our  souls.  All  our  thoughts 
of  Him,  all  our  affections  towards  Him,  should  have  the  stamp  of  singulaiity  such 
as  may  declare  there  is  none  like  Him,  none  besides  Him  ;  our  love,  our  meditation, 
our  acknowlciigment  should  have  this  chara'-ter  on  their  front,  there  is  none 
besides  Thee.  Thou  art,  and  none  else.  And  then  a  soul  should  by  the  cords  of 
affection  to  Him,  and  admiration  of  Him,  be  bound  to  serve  Him.  Then  a  soul  will 
glorify  God,  when  love  so  unites  it  to  God,  and  makes  it  one  spirit  with  Him.  that 
His  glory  becomes  its  honour  and  becomes  the  principle  of  all  our  inward  affections 
and  outward  actions.  Now,  when  we  are  speaking  of  the  great  end  and  jaurpose  of 
our  creation  we  call  to  mind  our  lamentable  and  tragical  fall  from  that  blessed 
station  we  were  constitute  into.  "  All  men  have  sinned  and  come  short  of  the 
glory  of  God  "  (Rom.  iii.  2.3).  His  being  in  the  world  was  for  that  glory,  and  he  is 
come  short  of  that  glory.  0  strange  shortcoming  !  Short  of  all  that  he  was  ordained 
for!  What  is  he  now  meet  for?  For  what  purpo-e  is  that  chief  of  the  works  of 
God  now?  But  behold!  the  goodness  of  the  Lord  and  His  kindne-s  and  love  hath 
appeared  towards  nan,  "  not  by  works  of  righteousness  which  we  have  done,  but 
according  to  His  mercy.  He  saved  us  tin  ough  Jesus  Christ "  (Titus  iii.  4,  5).  Our  Lord 
Jesus,  by  Whom  all  things  were  created,  and  fur  whom  He  would  not  let  this  excellent 
workmauship  perish  so,  therefore  He  goes  about  the  work  of  redemption..    A  second 


CHAP.  X.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  63 

creation  more  laborious  and  also  more  glorious  than  the  first,  that  so  He  might 
glorify  His  Father,  and  our  Father.  This  is  the  end  of  His  second  creation  as  it 
was  of  the  first ;  "  We  are  His  workmanship  created  to  good  works  in  Christ  Jesus 
(Eph.  ii.  10).  We  once  came  short  of  our  end.  God's  glory  and  our  happiness  ; 
but  know  that  it  is  attainable  again.  We  lost  both,  but  both  are  found  in  Christ. 
Awake  then  and  stir  up  your  spirits  else  it  shall  be  double  condemnation,  when  we 
have  the  offer  of  being  restored  to  our  former  blessed  condition,  to  love  our  present 
misery  better.  You  are  sent  into  the  world  only  for  this  business,  to  serve  the  Lord. 
Now  what  will  many  of  you  answer  ?  If  you  speak  the  truth  you  must  say,  "Lord, 
I  spent  my  time  in  serving  my  own  lusts,  I  was  taken  up  with  other  businesses  and 
had  no  leisure,  I  was  occupied  in  my  calling,"  &c.  Even  as  if  an  ambassador  of  a 
king  should  return  him  this  account  of  his  negotiation,!  was  busy  at  cards  and  dice, 
I  spent  my  money,  and  did  wear  ray  clothes.  Though  you  think  your  ploughing, 
and  borrowing,  and  trafficing,  and  reaping  very  necessary,  yet  certainly  these  are 
but  as  trifles  and  toys  to  the  main  business.  Oh,  what  a  dreadful  account  will  souls 
make !  Know,  my  iDeloved,  that  you  were  not  made  for  that  purpose,  nor  yet  re- 
deemed either  to  serve  yourselves  or  other  creatures,  but  that  other  creatures  might 
serve  you,  and  ye  serve  God  (Luke  i.  74,  75).  And  this  is  really  the  best  way  to 
serve  ourselves,  and  to  save  ourselves,  to  serve  God.  Self-seeking  is  self-destroying ; 
self-denying  is  self-saving,  soul-saving.  Here  is  a  compendious  wny  to  glorify  God. 
Eeceive  salvation  of  Him  freely,  righteousness  and  eternal  life,  and  this  sets  a  seal 
to  God's  truth,  and  grace,  and  mercy :  and  whoso  counts  the  Son  worthy  to  be  a 
Saviour  to  them,  and  sets  to  their  seal  of  approbation  to  Him  whom  God  the  Father 
hath  sent  and  sealed,  he  also  honours  the  Father,  and  then  he  that  honoureth  the 
Father  hath  it  not  for  nothing,  "  for  them  that  honour  Me,  I  will  honour  "  (1  Sam. 
ii.  30),  says  the  Lord  ;  and  "  he  that  serves  Me  him  will  My  Father  honour  " 
(John  xii.  26).  {Hugh  Binning.)  The  great  aim  of  life  : — It  is  difficult  for  us, 
accustomed  to  the  use  of  the  phrase,  "  the  glory  of  God,"  to  imagine  the  fresh 
interest  and  the  new  dignity  with  which  this  clear  ringing  sentence  of  the  apostle 
must  have  invested  even  the  humblest  lives  of  those  who  first  listened  to  it.  To 
some,  no  doubt,  such  as  the  proselyte  Titus  Justus,  or  Crispus,  the  ruler  of  the 
synagogue,  who  had  found  in  the  Church  the  true  Israel  of  God,  the  real  goal  of 
Judaism,  the  idea  of  the  Divine  glory  being  the  end  of  life  was  not  strange.  But  to 
the  Greek  converts  the  contrast  between  their  present  life  and  a  past,  from  which 
an  interval  of  at  most  three  years  separated  them,  must  have  come  home  with  an 
almost  overpowering  force.  Now  they  were  instinct,  unless  indeed  they  were  losing 
it  by  self-will,  with  the  power  of  a  new  life,  for  "  they  were  washed,  they  were  sancti- 
fied, they  were  justified  m  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  in  the  Spirit  of  their 
God."  Now  they  were  the  glad  possessors  of  a  revelation  from  on  high,  such  as 
gave  them  the  key  to  understanding  the  world's  history  and  their  own.  A  little 
before,  the  skill  and  power  and  beauty  of  life,  regarded  as  merely  human,  had 
thrilled  them,  but  it  was  satisfaction  on  the  surface  with  the  present  world  which 
had  been  complete.  1.  It  is,  I  think,  worth  while,  by  strong  and  true  efforts  of 
the  imagination  to  rescue  the  apostle's  magnificent  axiom  from  the  insincere  con- 
ventionality with  which  we  too  often  drape  it,  as  we  strive  to  realise  the  power 
which  must  have  marked  the  moment  of  its  earliest  enunciation.  Are  some  of  the 
younger  among  us  perplexed,  are  some  of  the  older  tempted  almost  to  despair,  at 
the  fact  of  our  age  being  distinguished  by  efforts,  not  seldom  both  earnest  and 
honest,  to  reconstruct  morality,  whose  basis  we  had  rightly  believed  to  be  Divine, 
on  foundations  purely  of  man's  making?  The  explanation  is  not  far  to  seek. 
History  will  tell  you  that  when  (as  in  the  thirteenth  century,  or  the  sixteenth,  or 
the  eighteenth)  tliere  is  a  decay  of  personal  religion  in  men's  relationship  to  God, 
to  self,  to  the  world,  a  desire  to  have  morality  as  our  very  own,  apart  from  God,  is 
sure  to  appear.  We  know  what  the  Church  of  Corinth  had  become.  And  yet,  in  a 
centre  of  luxury  and  license,  face  to  face  with  a  Church  which  would  have  been 
pronounced  by  modern  objectors  to  missions  as  "a  total  failure,"  or  else  as  an 
imposture,  the  apostle  loses  neither  nerve  nor  heart.  Impurity,  conceited  folly, 
untempered  feeling,  unhallowed  rivalry,  spiritual  decay,  these  shall  all  be  things 
of  the  past ;  each  pulsation  of  the  pure  moral  enthusiasm  of  the  regenerated  life 
will  throw  the  whole  being  of  those  Corinthians  upon  revealed  truth  ;  each  new 
perception  of  revealed  truth  will  increase  the  volume  of  the  moral  force  of  their 
entire  being;  and,  therefore,  "whether  they  eat  or  drink,  or  whatsoever  they  do, 
they  will  do  all  for  the  glory  of  God."  2.  The  principle  then  was  set  before  men 
whom,  despite  whatsoever  imperfections,  St.  Paul  could  discern  an  inextinguishable 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

power,  such  as  would  enable  them  to  make  it  the  chief  among  the  final  aims  of  their 
lives.  The  power  which  we  have  striven  to  realise  must  not  be  foi'gotteu,  if  we 
would  understand  the  maxim.  Apart  from  the  power  of  which  tlie  apostle  and  the 
Corinthian  converts  alike  were  conceivers,  the  maxim  miglit  indeed  have  been  im- 
pressive, but  it  would  have  awakened  no  response.  Instead  of  being,  as  it  has 
become,  the  possession  of  multitudes,  it  would,  like  the  wonderful  saying  of  Epic- 
tetus,  or  Seneca,  or  M.  Aurelius,  have  been  nothing  more  than  the  word  of  a  solitary 
thinker.  But  the  Corinthians  felt  tliat  it  was  not  a  mere  sentiment.  3.  And, 
certainly,  the  principle  has  been  tested  long  enough  to  make  us  contideut  in  adopt- 
ing it  as  the  end  which  shall  determine  conduct,  especially  as  no  other  end  has  yet 
been  found  to  be  adequate,  or  other  sanctions  to  be  really  influential.  (1)  To  St. 
Paul,  as  to  his  Jewish  converts,  the  principle,  although  now  instinct  with  a  vivi- 
fying spirit  unknown  in  their  earlier  days,  was  not  strange.  The  main  instrument 
in  St.  Paul's  mental  education,  even  while  he  sat  at  the  feet  of  the  renowned  teacher 
whom  his  contemporaries  fondly  named  "  The  Beauty  of  the  Law,"  had  undoubtedly 
been  the  creed  of  Judaism,  the  fulness  of  which  in  its  developed  form  became  known 
to  him  when  an  apostle  as  it  had  never  been  known  before.  "  The  Lord  our  God 
is  one  Lord."  You  may  have  sometimes  wondered  how  it  was  that  a  nation  which, 
except  at  rare  intervals,  must  have  seemed  to  the  empires  around  so  p  iltiy  and  so 
down-trodden  as  tiie  Jewish  nation,  did  nevertheless  most  clearly  contain  within 
itself  a  recuperative  force.  Where,  you  may  have  asked,  can  we  find  the  secret  of 
its  vitality?  You  may  find  it,  if  you  will,  at  every  stage  of  its  progress.  It  is 
revealed  in  the  Divine  charge  to  Abraham  :  "  I  am  the  Almighty  God  ;  walk  before 
Me,  and  be  thou  perfect."  It  prompts  the  large-hearted  prayer  of  the  great  Law- 
giver :  "Show  me,  I  pray  Thee,  Thy  glory."  It  is  the  explanation  of  Elijah's 
steadfast  will;  he  lives  in  the  consciousness  of  a  Presence  hijjher  than  any  Avhich 
eye  can  see:  "As  the  Lord,  the  God  of  Israel,  liveth,  before  whom  I  stand." 
Isaiah  finds  in  it,  as  he  faces  Eastern  speculations,  the  true  interin-etation  of  creation. 
The  Divine  voice,  which  "  awakened  morning  by  morning  "  his  listening  ear,  speaks 
to  him  of  "  every  one  that  is  called  by  My  name,  and  whom  I  have  created  for  My 
glory."  In  the  manifestation  of  the  God-hke  character  Jeremiah  traces  a  grandeur 
which  no  philosophy,  no  military  splendour,  no  commercial  enterprise  can  supply  ; 
"  Let  him,"  so  ran  the  Divine  message,  "  that  gloritieth  God,  glory  in  this,  that  he 
understandeth  and  knoweth  Me,  that  I  am  the  Lord,  which  exercise  lovingkindness, 
judgment,  and  righteousness  in  the  earth ;  for  in  these  things  I  delight,  saith 
the  Lord."  (2)  If  you  would  begin,  still  better  if  you  are  continuing  to  live 
a  "  godly,  righteous,  and  sober  life,  to  the  glory  of  God's  holy  name,"  put  honestly 
and  humbly,  not  shirking  some  inevitable  shame,  the  life  of  the  Son  of  God  made 
Man  side  by  side  with  your  own.  It  is  the  fault  of  this  restless,  often  superficial, 
age  to  be  always  adopting  new  plans,  which  too  often  end  in  a  humiliating  collapse. 
Let  us  be  content  for  once  with  an  old  plan,  which  no  one  is  yet  known  to  have 
honestly  tried  and  to  have  found  a  failure.  (3)  He  has  now,  in  His  manhood,  thus 
triumphed  through  sacrifice,  been  the  one  final  end  which  His  Body,  the  Church, 
representing  her  unseen  Head  amid  the  things  of  time  and  sense,  has  in  her  truest 
moods  set  before  herself.  (4)  The  experience  of  St.  Stephen  has  been  the  experience 
of  the  Church  just  in  proportion  as  her  members  "  have  been  filled  with  laith  and 
the  Holy  Ghost."  If  the  glory  of  God  has  really  been  the  one  aim  to  which  every 
other  consideration,  whether  of  ease,  or  of  work,  or  of  policy,  or  of  success,  has 
been  honestly  and  consciously  subordinated,  then  the  Church  has  gained  that  vivid 
sense  of  the  splendour  and  energy  of  the  unseen  and  eternul,  that  profound  convic- 
tion of  the  present  fellowship  of  the  interceding  Lord,  who  in  His  majesty  loves 
each  one  still,  which  is  the  secret  of  strength  alike  to  the  society  and  the  individual. 
No  one  felt  it  more  than  St.  Paul.  "  Why,"  he  thinks,  "  were  we  received  into  the 
Church  at  all?"  There  is  but  one  explanation  of  mercy  so  undeserved;  not  to 
promote  our  private  happiness,  but  "  Christ  received  us  to  the  glory  of  God." 
"  Unto  Him  be  the  glory  in  the  Church  and  in  Christ  Jesus  unto  all  generations  for 
ever  and  ever."  What  is  the  aim  of  the  final  consumm»tion  ?  "  The  Lord  "  will 
come  "  to  be  glorified  in  His  saints."  Nothing  lower  than  the  image  of  Christ  in 
His  glory  imprinted  on  the  hearts,  not  only  of  bishops  and  confessors,  "  whose 
praise  is  in  all  the  churches,"  but  of  lowly  and  untutored  multitudes  of  slaves,  of 
little  children,  can  possibly  account  either  for  the  Church's  growth  or  for  those 
first  triumphs  of  the  Cross.  4.  Certainly,  this  principle  so  tested,  these  powers  so 
clearly  recognised,  cannot  be  explained  on  the  supposition  of  having  sprung  from 
what  is  with  some  boldness  described  as  "  the  sacred  soil  of  the  human  heart."  The 


CHAP.  X.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  65 

dominant  influence  ami  aim  were  high  indeed  in  Rome.  Reverence  for  law  and  the 
paramount  claims  of  the  public  interest  are  alike  noble,  but  they  are  not  conscious 
of  relationship  with  God  nor  the  sovereignty  of  His  will.  The  Plellenic  mind,  at  its 
best,  delighted  in  beauty  and  in  truth,  but  if  these  were  occasionally  identified  in 
poetic  imagery  with  the  supreme  good,  it  knew  nothing  of  the  will  and  love  of  an 
unseen  Person.  In  the  philosophy,  if  not  in  the  practice  of  those  vast  Buddhist 
systems,  which  still  number  among  their  adherents  perhaps  four  hundred  and 
seventy  millions  of  mankind,  there  is  no  doubt  an  energetic  sympathj'  with  many 
forms  of  goodness,  but  the  end  of  human  life,  in  which,  indeeil,  there  is  held  to  be 
no  abiding  principle,  has  ever  been  the  purely  individual  object  of  perfection  of  self. 
No,  the  spring  of  this  "  rushing  river  of  consciousness  of  God,"  with  all  the  quicken- 
ing power  enabling  those  who  drink  of  it  to  glorify  Him  more,  is  not  found  in  the 
human  heart.  It  flows  from  beneath  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb,  but  it 
meets  as  nothing  else  can  do  the  cravings  of  our  being.  5.  Each  heart  here, 
and  perhaps,  the  hearts  of  those  who  are  the  youngest  and  appear  the  lightest, 
most  of  all  knows  as  none  other  can  describe  its  own  want,  but  it  asks  still  to  be 
assured  of  the  blessedness  of  making  the  Divine  glory  its  final  aim.  "  The  prin- 
cijjle,"  it  says,  "is  no  doubt  practical;  it  has  well  stood  the  test  of  time;  it  is 
unquestionably  unique ;  but,  will  it  give  me  what  I  feel  to  be  so  sore  a  need,  will  it 
give  me  honestly  and  truly  the  peflce  which  passeth  all  understanding  ?  "  Note  the 
jaath  by  which  St.  Augustine,  baffled,  tempted,  driven  by  overwhelming  passion 
almost  into  entire  wreck,  returned  to  God.  See  how  his  thirst  for  truth,  as  keen 
as  that  of  the  most  ardent  student  in  this  University,  was  satisfied  by  the  gift  of  the 
Divine  revelation.  See  how  the  undiscii^lined  will,  which  craved  in  all  its  licentious- 
ness for  salvation,  became  the  possessor  of  true  freedom  by  the  action  of  the  Divine 
Redeemer.  In  mental  and  moral  helplessness,  it  was  not  merely  or  chiefly  an 
example,  however  beautiful,  for  which  Augustine  craved.  He  needed  a  Saviour 
"  full  of  grace  and  truth,"  who  would  enable  him  to  attain  the  true  end  of  his 
creation.  (2)  And  yet,  with  all  the  experience  of  history,  with  all  the  lives  of  the 
saints,  with  the  calm  beauty  and  majestic  order  of  the  natural  world,  with  the 
"  gospel  of  the  kingdom  and  all  its  marvellous  power  of  appropriating  and  assimi- 
lating everything  that  is  noble  and  salutary  around  it,"  it  is  as  sad  as  it  is  strange 
to  note  how  largely  this  which  is  pre-eminently  the  end  of  life  is  set  aside  and 
practically  forgotten.  Even,  as  we  learn  from  his  biography,  it  was  in  earlier  life 
almost  like  a  new  revelation  to  one  so  pure  and  so  true  as  the  late  Lord  Chancellor 
Hatherley,  who  in  after  years  could  say,  "  Enough  for  me  if  I  may  sit  in  loving 
adoration  of  Him  in  the  extremest  confines  of  His  courts,"  to  learn  that  the  "  glory 
of  God's  holy  name  "  is,  after  all,  the  object  which  must  determine  and  sanction 
the  life  of  devotion,  of  righteousness,  and  of  self-discipline.  6.  Is  it  not  then 
the  case  that  a  conscious  sense  of  promoting  the  Divine  glory  is  just  what  is  needed 
to  reanimate  and  to  control  the  energies  of  public  worship?  And  we  feel  with 
David,  that  "  the  palace  is  not  for  man,  but  for  the  Lord  God  "  ;  we  begin  to  dis- 
cern that  public  worship  is  not  a  matter  of  sentiment  or  taste,  but  of  duty.  7. 
And  if  from  chiklhood  we  had  only  been  taught  that  there  is  an  object  in  praver 
far  higher  than  the  supply  of  our  daily  needs,  there  would  never  have  been  that 
stagnation  in  private  devotion  which,  too  often,  explains  a  creeping  paralysis  of 
moral  effort.  8.  And  many  a  home  clouded  with  disappointment,  embittered  by 
ill-concealed  jealousies,  because  there  is  no  one  common  aim,  disunited  because,  in 
forgetting  the  Divine  will,  its  orgHnising  principle  is  gone,  earthbound  by  thoughts 
only  of  what  is  material,  and  therefore  temporary,  would  at  once  be  lit  up  with 
new  hope,  if  it  were  felt  that  the  family  too  were  not  for  man  only,  but  for  the  Lord 
God.  9.  Work,  now  and  then,  could  not  be  unaffected.  These  riches  of  the 
Eternal  Wisdom  committed  to  our  stewardship  are,  as  Richard  Hooker  felt,  for  Him 
"  to  show  beneficence  and  grace  in  them."  "  All  things  have  been  created  through 
the  Son  of  His  love,  and  unto  Him ;  and  He  is  before  all  things,  and  in  Him  all 
things  consist."  How  splendid  a  motive,  to  throw  by  grace  every  energy  of  will, 
and  heart,  and  mind  into  our  appointed  task.  Such  is  the  final  end  of  life — an  end 
which,  if  desired  in  early  manhood,  wili  at  once  consecrate  and  harmonise  the 
discipline  of  self  and  the  service  of  men.  Already  we  are  the  sons  of  God,  and  a  son 
must  surely  reflect  in  himself  and  on  his  brethren  his  Father's  character.  (Preh. 
Wuvllcdqe,  M.A.)  Relif/ion  in  daily  life  : — Do  you  want  to  have  religion  in  daily 
life  ?  See  to  it  that  it  exists  in  your  heart,  that  you  love  God  with  your  whole  soul, 
and  you  will  not  fail  to  render  daily  sacrifice  acceptable  to  your  Maker.  There  is  a 
reason  why  religion  is  possible  in  daily  life.  It  is  that  daily  work  brings  out  the 
VOL.    II.  5 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

Christian  temper,  shows  the  Christian  character  and  develops  it.  Christianity  is 
like  a  beautiful  tree,  with  the  branches  of  sturdy  virtue  growing  on  it,  and  healing 
leaves  quiver  on  those  branches,  and  occasionally  it  is  covered  with  the  blossoms 
of  kindness  and  gentleness  ;  and  in  the  snmmer-tinie  of  the  soul  it  is  laden  with  the 
fruits  of  generosity  and  self-sacrifice.  Where  shall  we  plant  that  tree  ?  To  put  it 
in  some  close  courtyard,  where  neither  scorching  sun  nor  biting  wind  can  reach  it, 
would  be  to  make  it  languish  and  die.  No  !  out  in  the  open,  among  other  plants 
and  trees,  where  broad  sunshine  is  felt  and  winds  are  blowing — there  it  must  be 
reared  if  it  is  to  be  healthy.  There  are  things  to  be  resisted  in  daily  life  which 
show  how  necessary  every-day  religion  is.  Every  man  takes  a  lower  self  with  him 
which  stands  like  a  demon  at  his  elbow.  You  hear  its  cynical  laugh  and  its  his- 
sing whisper,  "  Take  care  of  number  one."  That  lower  self  has  to  be  resisted  by 
young  people  at  home,  by  older  people  in  shopping,  by  business  men  in  dealing  with 
other  business  men.  There  is  injustice  standing  with  a  stiletto  before  us  with 
threatening  mien  ;  a  coward  at  heart  but  a  bully  in  manners.  Resist  him.  There 
i^  impurity  sliding  stealthily  along  the  pavement.  Eesist  him.  Intemperance 
destroys  with  its  poison  tens  of  thousands.  Oh  !  in  the  name  of  all  that  is  noble 
and  powerful  in  God's  truth,  resist  him.  It  is  said  that  we  do  not  lay  enough  stress 
on  the  doctrines  of  Christianity  in  thus  teaching,  as  we  so  often  do,  the  necessity  of 
a  practical  religion.  But  I  think  we  shall  see  that  the  two  cannot  be  divorced  from 
one  another.  You  cannot  have  religion  in  daily  life  unless  you  have  Christ  in  daily 
life.  To  have  Him  is  to  have  His  teaching,  and  the  truths  which  explain  His 
mission  and  character.  Take  some  of  the  principal  ones,  and  we  shall  see  how 
they  illustrate  and  enforce  our  subject.  1.  The  incarnation.  This  teaches  us  that 
God  was  in  the  flesh,  that  the  very  God  came  to  our  common  duties.  What  could 
be  more  inspiring  than  the  knowledge  of  this  fact  ?  Why,  it  at  once  brmgs  God 
down  to  be  our  Guide  and  Helper.  Our  common  life  is  no  longer  common  when  we 
find  ourselves  side  by  side  with  the  very  God  who  undertakes  our  work  for  us  and 
with  us.  2.  The  Atonement  is  a  cardinal  doctrine.  How  can  we  understaml  and 
apply  it  ?  Apply  it  to  daily  sins,  to  common  guilt ;  to  the  transgressions  which  we 
ourselves  have  committed.  It  is  an  awful  struggle,  this  fight  against  sin.  It  was 
said  that  Constautine  saw  a  flaming  cross  in  the  sky  on  the  night  before  his  battle 
with  Maxcntius,  and  that  thenceforth  he  gave  his  soldiers  the  sign  of  the  cross  on 
their  shields.  This  is  a  parable  of  what  we  must  do.  By  the  blood  of  Chi-ist  we 
conquer.  In  the  power  of  the  Cross  we  can  go  forward.  3.  There  is  the  doctrine 
of  inspiration.  We  see  a  book  before  us  which  professes  to  tell  us  how  to  live,  how 
to  work,  how  to  believe,  how  to  die,  how  to  enter  eternal  felicity.  We  might  dis- 
cuss that  statement  and  define  it,  and  refine  upon  it  for  years,  nnd  get  no  nearer 
any  valuable  truth.  But  if  once  we  turn  to  the  Book,  and  seek  to  guide  daily  life 
by  its  precepts,  all  becomes  clear.  We  get  inspiration  in  actual  experience,  and  our 
souls  are  lifted  near  to  God.  .  4.  Nay,  the  very  Godhead  is  best  understood  in  the 
light  of  every-day  life.  How  can  we  ever  penetrate  the  great  mystery  of  the  Trinity  ? 
Y'^es,  it  is  there  that  we  understand  who  God  is  and  what  He  may  be  to  us.  Every 
breath  tells  of  His  power,  every  blessing  witnesses  of  His  kindness,  every  incident 
points  to  His  Providence,  and  death  itself  is  the  door  that  admits  to  His  presence 
chamber.  Oh!  how  glad  and  solemn,  liow  beautiful  and  responsible  your  life  may 
be;  redeemed  from  triviality  and  sin,  you  are  now  a  child  of  God  by  faith  in  His 
Son,  an  heir  of  immortality  and  marching  forward  to  glory  !  Eemember,  then, 
whose  you  are,  and  whom  you  serve.  (S.  Pearson,  31. A.)  Heaven  on  earth: — 
1.  Worth  considering,  indeed,  is  this  command;  for  though  it  has  been  in 
the  Bible  for  eighteen  hundred  years,  it  is  seldom  read,  seldomer  understood, 
and  still  more  seldom  put  into  practice.  This  is  the  especial  curse  of  our  day, 
that  religion  does  not  mean,  as  it  used,  the  being  like  God  and  showing  forth 
God's  glory  ;  but  the  art  of  saving  our  own  miserable  souls  from  hell,  and  getting 
God's  wages  without  doing  God's  work,  as  if  that  was  anything  but  selfishness.  And 
therefore  it  is  that  i^eople  have  forgotten  what  God's  glory  is.  2.  It  is  a  wonder, 
indeed,  that  we  are  saved  from  hell,  much  more  raised  to  heaven  ;  and  yet  the  more 
we  think  of  it  the  less  wonder  we  shall  find  it.  God  has  done  for  sinful  men 
only  just  what  was  to  be  expected  from  such  unutterable  generosity  as  His  is. 
And  recollecting  this,  we  shall  begin  to  forget  self  and  look  at  God ;  and  in  thinking 
of  Him  we  shall  get  to  worshipping  Him.  3.  This  is  what  we  must  try  at — to  find 
out  what  God  is  :  and  has  He  not  shown  us  what  He  is?  He  who  knows  Christ 
knows  God ;  and  that  knowledge  will  help  us  to  show  forth  God's  glory.  He  is  His 
own  glory.     As  you  say  of  any  very  excellent  man,  you  have  but  to  know  him  to 


CHAP,  s.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  67 

honour  him  ;  or  of  any  very  beautiful  woman,  you  have  but  to  see  her  to  love  her ; 
80  men  have  but  to  see  and  know  God  to  love  and  honour  Him.  4.  When  we 
delight  to  honour  our  Father  we  shall  try  to  make  every  one  honour  Him.  Now 
nothing  is  so  infectious  as  examjile.  If  you  wish  your  neighbours  to  see  what  Jesus 
Christ  is  like,  let  them  see  what  He  can  make  you  like.  One  man  who  does  not  put 
his  religion  on  with  his  Sunday  coat,  but  wears  it  for  his  working  dress,  and  lets  the 
thought  of  God  grow  into  and  through  him  till  everything  he  says  and  does  becomes 
religious,  that  man  is  worth  a  thousand  sermons — he  is  a  living  gospel,  he  is  the 
image  of  God.  5.  Would  not  sueh  a  life  be  a  heavenly  life  ?  We  should  then  be 
sitting  in  heavenly  places  with  Jesus  Christ,  and  having  our  conversation  in  heaven. 
We  are  in  heaven  now — if  we  had  but  faith  to  see  it.  Get  rid  of  tbose  carnal, 
heathen  notions  about  heaven,  which  tempt  men  to  fancy  that  after  having  misused 
this  place  for  a  whole  life,  they  are  to  lly  away  when  they  die,  like  swallows  in 
autumn,  to  some  place  where  they  are  to  be  very  happy.  JHeaven  is  not  a  mere 
place.  All  places  are  heaven  if  you  will  be  heavenly  in  them.  Heaven  is  where 
God  is  and  Christ  is ;  and  hell  is  where  God  is  not  and  Christ  is  not.  (C  Klugsley, 
M.A.)  Of  recreation  : — 1.  St.  John,  as  Cassian  relates,  amusing  himself  one  day 
with  a  tame  partridge,  was  asked  by  a  huntsman,  how  such  a  man  as  he  could 
spend  his  time  in  so  unprofitable  a  manner.  To  whom  St.  John  replied,  "  Why 
dost  thou  not  carry  thy  bow  always  bent?  "  "Because,"  answered  the  huntsman, 
"if  it  were  always  bent  I  fear  it  would  lose  its  spring  and  become  useless."  "Be 
not  surprised  then,"  replied  the  apostle,  "  that  I  should  sometimes  remit  a  little 
of  my  close  attention  of  spirit  to  enjoy  a  little  recreation,  that  I  may  after- 
wards employ  myself  more  fervently  in  Divine  contemplation."  In  the  broad 
sense  of  the  term,  recreation  must  form  an  integral  part  of  human  life,  which 
is  made  up  of  graver  and  lighter  passages.  Man's  mind  is  so  constituted 
that  it  cannot  be  always  on  the  strain ;  so  it  seeks  and  finds  a  safety-valve 
in  the  lighter  passages  of  life,  through  which  its  natural  elasticity  vents  itself. 
Thei'efore  if  recreation  is  a  constituent  part  of  life,  recreation  must  be  capable  of 
being  sanctified.  2.  Eecreation  is  for  the  mind  what  sleep  is  for  the  body.  No 
man's  body  could  long  endure  the  stress  and  burden  of  daily  life  without  sleep. 
And  no  man's  mind  could  long  endure  any  mental  pressure  without  recreation.  It 
is  wonderful  what  the  body  gains  in  sleep,  and  it  is  no  less  wonderful  how  much  the 
mind  may  gain  in  recreation.  That  recreation  is  abused  is  no  avgutnent  whatever 
against  its  possible  utility.  Sleep  itself  is  not  beneficial  but  mischievous  if  it  be 
not  well  regulated.  Consider — I.  The  principle  by  which  alone  any  recreation 
CAN  BE  SANCTIFIED.  Like  woi'k,  it  must  be  engaged  in  with  a  view  to  Gods  glory. 
Eating  and  drinking,  the  taking  of  nourishment,  is  a  species  of  recreation.  To 
take  nourishment  is  to  refresh  the  body,  even  as  to  take  recreation  is  to  ref  i  esh  the 
mind.  If  then  the  taking  of  nourishment  may  be  made  conducive  to  God's  slory, 
and  brought  within  tlie  scope  of  His  service,  so  also,  without  doubt,  may  the  taking 
of  recreation.  II.  As  to  the  different  forms  of  recreation,  the  following  sugges- 
tions may  be  offered.  1.  Care  must  be  taken  that  there  may  be  nothing  in  them 
contrary  to  the  will  and  Word  of  God.  2.  It  does  not  follow  that  because  it  is 
abstractedly  innocent,  it  is  therefore  allowable.  There  are  many  amusements  which 
to  the  pure  are  pure,  but  which  with  persons  whose  imasinations  have  been  fouled 
by  evil,  throw  serious  temptations  in  their  way.  Let  no  mau  or  woman  for  the  sake 
of  a  paltry  amusement  venture  within  arm's  length  of  a  temptation.  To  do  so  were 
to  turn  into  a  mockery  the  petition — "  Lead  us  not  into  temptation."  If  the  circum- 
stantials of  any  amusement  are  such  as  effectually  to  preclude  secret  prayer,  the 
realisation  of  God's  presence,  &c.,  to  us  such  amusement  is  forbidden,  though 
Scripture  may  be  silent  upon  it.  Yet  it  is  quite  possible  that  our  neighbour,  whose 
mind  is  possessed  of  more  recollectedness  and  self-control  than  ours,  may  partake 
of  it  innocently.  3.  Tlie  more  amu-^ing  amusements  are  the  better,  busy  lives 
have  not  time  for  many  ;  let  such  as  are  taken,  then,  be  thoroughly  refreshing.  Yet 
what  a  perfect  burden  are  many  forms  of  so-called  amusement !  The  ordinary 
recreation  of  ordinary  persons  very  much  resolves  itself  into  conversation  with 
friends  or  casual  acquaintance.  Yet  how  miserably  stale,  flat,  and  unprofitable 
much  of  it  is  !  How  often  is  foreign  travel,  one  of  the  best  and  most  intelligent 
forms  of  recreation,  turned  from  a  pleasure  into  a  burden  by  the  i-illy,  scrambling 
way  in  which  it  is  embarked  up jn  !  4.  Although  anything  like  severe  aiiplication 
would  interfere  with  the  end  of  recreation,  it  is  very  much  to  be  wished  that  a 
good  education  embraced  so  ne  knowledye  of  those  lighter  subjects  of  study,  which, 
as  they  turn  upon  Nature,  can  be  taken  up  and  pursued  wherever  Nature  is  found. 


68i  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  x; 

Nature  is  God's  pure  work,  unsullied  by  sin ;  and  therefore  the  study  of  it  is  a  pure 
delight  to  those  who  love  Him.  5.  All  excess  in  recreations  must  be  avoided.  They 
are  not,  and  must  not  be,  regarded  as  the  earnest  business  of  life.  6.  Our  longer 
periods  of  leisure  should  always  be  made  to  pay  to  God  the  tax  of  additional  devo- 
tion. (Bean  Goidhurn.)  Lirivg  to  the  glory  of  God  : — I  was  talking  the  other 
day  to  a  friend  of  mine  whom  I  had  known  some  years  before  as  an  easy-going 
youth,  just  drifting  with  the  hour,  a  present  pleasure  shaping  his  life.  I  found  him 
an  earnest  and  devoted  Christian,  a  leader  in  the  work  of  God's  word.  I  was 
anxious  to  know  what  had  led  to  the  change,  and  soon  I  had  the  chance  of  a  quiet 
talk  with  him.  "How  did  this  all  come  about?"  I  asked.  He  told  me  that 
one  week-day  afternoon  he  was  passing  some  place  of  worship,  and  seeing  the 
people  going  in  he  strolled  in  with  the  rest.  He  sat  and  listened  to  an  earnest 
appeal  from  the  speaker,  and  began  to  think  more  seriously  than  he  ever  had  done 
about  his  life  and  what  he  should  do  with  it.  "  Here  am  I  just  beginning  life," 
he  said  to  himself,  "  what  is  really  the  best  thing  I  can  do  with  it  ?  I  can  go  in  for 
money,  and  perhaps  make  it ;  but  I  shall  have  to  leave  it  behind,  and  I  must  die  a 
pauper  however  much  I  make.  I  can  go  in  for  pleasure  and  get  it  for  awhile 
perhaps,  but  that  can't  last  for  ever  ;  or  I  might  give  myself  right  up  to  God,  and 
live  with  all  my  heart  to  serve  and  please  Him.  That  will  last  longest  and  be  best 
for  now  and  ever."  So  he  started  then  and  there  ;  and  since  that  day  he  had  tried 
to  make  that  the  purpose  of  his  life.     (ill.  Guy  Fearse.) 

Vers.  32,  33,    Give   none  offence  .  .  .  Jews  .  .  .  Gentiles  ...  the   Churcli  of 

Ood. — Gratuitous  offences  of  the  vriuistry  : — I.  The  essential  offence  of  the 
Cross  mcist  not  be  evaded.  The  doctrine  of  a  crucified  Christ  with  its  correspond- 
ing duty  of  crucified  affections  will  ever  provoke  the  hostility  of  "  the  carnal  mind." 
Offence  is  inevitable  where  disaffection  rules.  "  Love  or  hatred "  is  the  sole 
alternative.  Our  mission  is,  "  Christ  and  Him  crucified  " — not  Christ  and  Him 
Judaised,  or  philosophised,  or  adumbrated  in  a  mytli,  or  held  in  reserve,  or  the 
Shibboleth  of  a  faction.  Far  from  St.  Paul  was  the  least  suppression  of  the  faith 
in  deference  to  the  fashion  of  the  world  or  the  fury  of  his  adversaries.  If  "  to  the 
Jew  he  became  as  a  Jew,  it  was  to  gain  the  Jew,"  &c.  His  evangelical  theology 
coupled  with  his  chivalrous  life  of  toil  present  the  safest  comment  upon  the 
mingled  courtesy,  charity,  and  policy  of  his  injunction — "  Give  none  offence, 
neither  to  the  Jews,"  &c.  II.  What  are  the  circumstantial  affronts  that 
MUST  BE  AVOIDED?  The  Jcw,  the  Gentile,  and  the  Church  present  the  three  types 
of  those  several  relations  of  the  world  to  religion,  and  whose  spiritual  interests  may 
be  gratuitously  obstructed  by  ministrational  ofl'ensiveness.  1.  Ritualism.  (1)  This 
was  "  the  rock  of  offence  on  which  Zion  stumbled  "  and  lost  her  standing,  (a)  The 
Jew  gloried  in  his  descent  from  Abraham ;  but  St.  Paul  did  not  ridicule  the  pre- 
tension, but,  pointing  it  in  its  right  direction  to  the  faith  of  Christ,  courteously 
conceded  "then  are  ye  Abraham's  seed,"  &c.  (!>)  The  Jew  rested  in  the  law. 
Paul  "  bare  them  record,  they  had  a  zeal  for  God,"  &c.,  because  "the  law  was  their 
schoolmaster  to  bring  them  to  Christ."  {c)  The  Jew  stood  upon  his  circumcision. 
Was  it  asked,  "  What  profit  was  there  of  circumcision  ?  "  The  reply  was,  "  Much 
every  way,"  except  indeed  in  th'-ir  own  way,  but  in  such  a  way  as  they  would  be 
more  disposed  to  listen  to  as  "  the  more  excellent  way."  (2)  Apply  this  apostolic 
gauge  to  our  own  modes  of  dealing  with  modern  Jews,  (a)  Take  the  English  Jew  ; 
his  national  and  hererlitary  dishke  of  Christianity  is  not  likely  to  be  propitiated  by 
our  too  general  indifference  to  the  means  of  his  conversion,  which  strikes  hira  as 
irresistibly  at  variance  with  our  evangelical  premises,  (b)  Take  the  spirit  of 
ritualism  as  embodied  in  Romanism.  To  unchurch  Rome — the  communion  of  a 
Borromeo,  Fenelon.  and  Pascal — is  not  the  spirit  which  acknowledged  their  proto- 
types, "who  are  Israehtes."  The  civil  concession  of  her  antiquity  pleads  the 
conciliatory  parallel,  "  whose  are  the  Fathers."  The  graceful  recognition  of  her 
early  evangelising  labours  finds  a  gentler  precedent  in  the  ailmission,  "  of  whom, 
as  concerning  the  flesh,  Chiist  came,"  than  in  the  loose  ignoring  of  all  old  better 
times.  Neither  is  it  an  obstacle,  but  rather  ancillary  to  our  argument  to  let  her 
share  the  honour  of  having  had  "  committed  unto  her  the  oracles  of  God."  Rome 
must  be  vanquished  by  her  own  instruments.  The  Christianity  in  her  Vulgate  will 
yet  displace  the  Popery  in  her  cieeds.  2.  Rationalism.  (1)  There  can  be  no 
antagonism  between  reason  and  fnith.  Christianity  and  science  are  both  from  the 
same  Author,  and  it  robs  Him  of  part  of  His  glory  to  take  either  away.  Deal  with 
such  particles  of  truth  as  exist  in  rationalistic  or  socialistic  writings,  as  Paul  did 


CHAP,  X.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  69 

with  the  inscription  on  the  Athenian  altar,  or  the  maxims  of  a  Menander  or 
Aratus.     He  "  disputed  daily  in  the  school  of  one  Tyrannus,"  but  "  gave  no  offence 
to  the  Gentiles."     (2)  But  the  text  includes  the  unconverted,  and  there  is  a  risk  of 
gratuitously  offending  the  mere  worldling  by  the  style,  as  well  as  matter  of  preach- 
ing.    Do  not  blacken  poor  human  nature  darker  than   she   is.     Look  upon  the 
young  keeper  of  the  commandments  as  Jesiis  "  looked  and  loved  him."     (3)  The 
Church  of  God.     The  really  enlightened  children  of  God  are  susceptible  of  offence 
from  an  incautious  ministry.     There  is  such  a  contingency  as  "  making  my  weak 
brother  to  offend  "  in  various  shapes.     We  may  scandalise,  damage,  or  discournge 
a  fellow-Christian   by  the  class  of  amusements  in  which   ourselves   or  families 
fraternise  with  the  world,  or  by  the  inconsiderate  denouncement  of  all  recreation  ; 
by  showing  respect  of  persons  in  the  way  of  sparing  the  follies  of  the  rich,  and 
bearing  hard  upon  the  vices  of  the  poor,  or  contrasting  the  assiduity  of  pastoral 
attention  to  the  former,  with  a  comparative  neglect  of  the  latter ;   by  careless, 
partial,  imperfect  or  indistinct  statements  of  truth  ;  by  an  obvious  disparity  between 
our  public  preaching  and  personal  conversation  ;  by  any  inattention  to  the  commoner 
charities,  morals,  and  civilities  of  life,  as  if  Christianity  contained  no  such  precepts 
as  "  use  hospitality,"  "  be  courteous,"  "  render  unto  all  their  dues."     {J.  B.  Oiven, 
M.A.)         An  incentive  to  Christian  liberality  : — I.  The  gkeat  object  at  which  the 
APOSTLE  AIMED — the  profit,  the  salvation,  of  many.    The  term  "  profit  "  may  apply,  in 
general,  to  anything  which  improves  either  the  man  or  his  condition.   So  "  wisdom 
is  profitable,"  &c.  (Eccles.  x.  10) ;  and  Paul  profited  in  Jewish  learning,  &c.  (Gal. 
i.  14).     Bat  as  happiness  is  man's  summmn  honum,  his  highest  good,  whatever 
promotes  this  evidently  deserves  to  be  so  characterised.      In  this  view  salvation 
appears  to  be  eminently  profitable.     1.  Deliverance  from  the  shackles  of  supersti- 
tion— of  a  superstition  erroneous  in  sentiment — extravagant  in  its  hopes,  tears, 
&c. — painful  in  its  services.     2.   Deliverance  from  the  guilt  of  sin,  and  from  that 
danger  which  always,  and  from  those  fearful  anticipations  which  frequently,  attend 
it.     3,  Deliverance  from  the  slavery  of  sin  (Eom.  vi.  12-14).     4.  It  is  an  abiding 
profit.     II.  The  means  by  which  the  apostle  endeavoup>ed  to  attain  his  object. 
1.  Observe  his  disinterestedness.     "  Not  seeking  mine  own  profit."     How  different 
from  the  man  who,  when  any  subject  is  proposed  to  him,  immediately  inquires, 
"  What  shall  I  gain  by  it  ?  "     2.  Mark  the  apostle's  benevolence.     Aiming  at  "  the 
profit  of    many."      3.  Consider   the  apostle's  labours.      "  Seeking  the  profit  of 
many  "  ;  in  devising  plans  to  promote  their  prosperity  (2  Cor.  xi.  28).    4.  Consider 
also  the  sacrifices  he  made.     (Sketches  of  Sermons.)         The  duty  of  an  inoffensive 
conchtct : — I.  The  nature  of  the  duty  heee  becommended.     1.  What  are  we  to 
understand  by  the  word  "offence."     This  word  is  taken  in  two  senses.     In  the 
sacred  writings  it  generally  signifies  a  stumbling-block,  or  whatever  is  the  occasion 
of  another's  fall.  But  the  word  "  offence,"  in  the  common  acceptation  of  it,  is  taken 
to  signify  an  occasion  of  anger,  grief,  or  resentment.  Wlioever  finds  these  passions 
stirring  in  his  mind,  is  said  to  be  offended  ;  and  whatever  be  the  incentive  or  cause 
of  them,  is  called  the  offence.     In  this  latter  sense  we  sometimes  find  the  word 
used  in  Scriptui'e,  as  well  as  in  the  former  (Psa.  cxix.  165  ;  Matt.  xvii.  27).     It  is 
this  latter  sense  in  which  I  intend  to  improve  the  words  of  the  text,  and  consider 
them  as  a  precept,  to  follow  after  things  that  make  for  peace,  and  to  keep  our 
conscience  void  of  offence  towards  all  men.     2.  With  what  restrictions  this  precept 
must  reasonably  be  taken.     (1)  When  peace  with  men  stands  in  competition  with 
our  duty  to  God,  we  should  not  be  afraid  of  giving  them  offence.     (2)  Not  only 
the  honour  of  God,  but  the  rights  of  conscience  must  be  maintained  as  sacred  in 
opposition  to  all  that  would  invade  them,  however  that  opposition  may  offend  them. 
(3)  Nor  are  the  perverse  and  unreasonable  humours  of  men  to  be  always  submitted 
to  for  fear  of  giving  offence.     The  truth  ought  to  be  sometimes  boldly  asserted, 
strongly  proved,  and  closely  urged  ;  and  the  vanity  and  ignorance  of  the  conceited 
humorist  mortified  and  exposed.     (4)  It  is  lawful  sometimes  to  give  offence  to 
others  for  the  sake  of  their  good.     That  is,  when  that  good  we  are  able  to  do  them 
cannot  be  done  without  it.     This  especially  takes  place  in  case  of  reproof.     (5)  Nor 
should  we  be  afraid  of  giving  a  private  offence  when  it  is  necessary  to  the  public 
good.     Otherwise  magistrates  would  not  be  faithful  to  their  trust,  nor  could  penal 
laws  be  executed.     (6)  We  should  not  be  too  scrupulous  of  giving  offence  in  justi- 
fying an  injured  character,  or  in  vindicating  the  honour  and  reputation  of  an  absent 
person,  when  aspersed  by  the  petulance  of   an  unbridled  or  malicious  tongue. 
(7)  When  the  honour,  interest,  and  credit  of  religion  are  manifestly  concerned, 
they  ought  not  to  be  meanly  prostituted  for  the  sake  of  peace.     3.  The  proper 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

latitude  and  extent  of  it  in  a  few  particulars  wherein  men  are  most  apt  to  forget 
it.  (1)  We  bhould  take  care  we  do  not  gis^e  a  needless  offence  to  others  in  matter 
of  opinion.  (2)  In  like  manner  we  should  take  care  how  we  give  just  offence  to 
weak  Christians  in  matters  of  practice.  (3)  We  should  take  care  not  to  give 
offence  in  our  discourse  or  conversation  with  others.  (4)  We  should  take  care  to 
give  no  just  offence  in  our  way  of  commerce  or  dealings  with  men.  Either  by 
exaction  and  oppression,  or  by  rigorous  and  exorbitant  claims,  beyond  the  rules  of 
equity  and  mercy,  where  there  is  but  small  ability  to  answer  them.  (-5)  We  should 
take  care  not  to  give  offence  to  others  by  our  tempers.  In  some  tempers  there  are 
many  things  very  offensne,  which  tend  veiy  much  to  disturb  the  peace  of  society 
and  dissolve  the  bonds  of  Christian  love  and  friendship,  (a)  A  vain  and  osten- 
tatious temper  —when  a  man  appears  to  centre  all  his  views  in  himself,  and  to  be 
so  full  of  secret  pride  and  self-applause  that  it  is  continually  running  over  his  lips. 
(h)  A  rigid,  censorious,  and  detracting  spirit,  which  often  proceeds  from  the  same 
original  as  the  other,  viz.,  secret  pride  and  excessive  self-love,  (c)  A  passionate 
and  revengeful  temper  is  a  very  offensive  one.  (rf)  An  arbitrary,  over-bearing,  and 
imperious  temper,  which  tyrannises  over  ingenuous  modesty,  and  thinks  to  carry 
all  before  it  by  mere  dint  of  noise  and  confidence,  ie)  A  mercenary  and  selfish 
temper,  which  shows  a  little,  contracted  heart,  wrapped  up  in  itself,  and  shut  fast 
to  all  the  world  beside;  whereas  the  heart  of  a  good  man  is  open  and  generous, 
and  longs  to  diffuse  joy  and  gladness  all  around  it.  (6)  We  should  take  care  to 
give  no  offence  to  others  by  the  abuse  of  those  talents  which  we  enjoy  more  than 
they.  (7)  We  should  take  care  how  we  give  offence  in  any  of  tliose  several 
relations  in  life  wherein  Providence  hath  placed  us.     II.  I  shall  recommend  this 

DUTY    OF    AN    INOFFENSIVE    CONDUCT    FEOII    TWO    CONSIDERATIONS.       1.    The  first   is  fronr 

the  example  of  our  great  Lord  and  Master,  Jesus  Christ.  Which  is  not  only  our 
greatest  motive  to  it,  but  at  the  same  time  will  be  our  best  direction  in  the  practice 
of  it.  He- was  not  ashamed  to  maintain  the  cause  of  God  and  truth  at  the  expense 
of  His  own  peace  and  fame ;  nor  afraid  to  oppose  and  reprove  the  proud  priests 
and  bigoted  Pliarisees,  though  He  knew  He  should  give  them  offence  and  incur  their 
hatred  by  so  doing.  Here  He  showed  the  courage  of  a  lion  ;  in  other  cases  all  the 
meekness  of  a  lamb.  2.  He  who  makes  no  conscience  of  offending  men,  will  make 
no  conscience  of  offending  God.  Nay,  herein  he  actually  does  offend  Him.  A  just 
occasion  of  offence  given  to  them  is  a  real  offence  offered  to  Him,  because  it  is  a  wilful 
violation  of  His  laws,  which  in  tbe  most  express  manner  have  forbidden  it.  (J.  Mason, 
A.M.)  Christian  ivflnence  : — 1.  The  apostle  did  not  shrink  from  giving  offence 
where  the  honour  of  his  Master  or  the  rights  of  His  gospel  were  to  be  maintained, 
where  sin  was  to  be  rebuked,  and  hypocrisy  unmasked.  The  public  opinion  of 
those  times  doubtless  regarded  him  as  an  extreme  man  (chap.  iv.  3,  4).  Wherever 
he  went  he  roused  the  fiercest  passions  of  the  Jews.  It  was  from  no  inability  to 
perceive  the  "  offence  of  the  Cross,"  that  he  made  it  the  theme  of  his  ministry. 
Even  to  the  Church  he  gave  offence  where  duty  required — to  Barnabas,  to  Peter,  to 
the  Jewish  Christians  in  general.  2.  How  singular,  then,  sound  such  words  as 
those  of  the  text.  "  He  give  no  offence !  "  might  be  the  comment  of  some  of  his 
opponents,  "  why,  it  is  not  possible  that  any  man  should  give  more."  These  words, 
however,  prove  tliat  Paul  had  no  love  for  antagonism.  Truth  must  be  served  first, 
but  where  it  did  not  call  he  would  not  grieve  either  Jew  or  Gentile  or  fellow- 
Christian.  He  is  speaking  here  of  things  not  necessary  to  salvation.  I.  God  has 
GIVEN  EVERY  CHRISTIAN  SOME  INFLUENCE  IN  THE  WORLD.  1.  With  many  it  may  be  very 
feeble  and  restricted,  but  to  none  has  it  been  wholly  denied.  To  some  have  been 
given  two,  and  to  a  few  even  five  talents,  but  there  is  not  one  who  can  say  that  he 
has  no  talent  at  all.  One  of  the  mightiest  forces  thus  lies  within  the  reach  of  all. 
An  innocent  babe,  all  insensible  of  the  power  which  it  wields,  will  sometimes 
almost  transform  the  spirit  of  a  father.  2.  Few  things  are  more  marvellous  than 
the  way  in  which  such  influence  propagates  itself.  Take,  e.g.,  the  simple  Christian 
man  whose  sympathy  was  excited  on  behalf  of  the  ignorant  and  godless  children  in 
the  city  of  Gloucester.  He  little  knew  how  his  Christian  thought  would  fructify. 
So  the  Christian  woman  who  invited  her  young  apprentice  to  the  evening  service  in 
the  Tabernacle  was  unconsciously  setting  in  motion  a  train  of  influence,  the  full 
results  of  which  are  not  yet  fully  developed.  That  evening  sermon  was  to  lead 
John  Williams  to  the  foot  of  the  Cross.  3.  Nor  is  it  only  that  a  man  may  exercise 
such  influence,  it  is  certain  that  he  must  do  so.  It  is  not  that  no  man  ought  to 
live  to  himself,  but  that,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  no  man  can  live  to  himself.  Be  not 
deceived,  if  you  are  not  a  blessing  you  will  be  a  curse  to  the  world,     A  purely 


CHAP.  X.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  71 

negative  existence,  even  if  desirable,  is  not  possible  to  any  of  us.  II.  This 
INFLUENCE  IS  A  TALENT  TO  BE  DILIGENTLY  CULTIVATED.  1.  It  may  be  regarded 
under  two  aspects,  the  direct  and  the  indirect  power  which  we  exert.  The 
Christian  must  strive  to  serve  his  Master  in  both.  He  must  not  only  engage  in 
Christian  labours,  but  he  must  breathe  a  Christian  temper.  The  power  of  earnest 
■words  and  generous  deeds  will  be  neutralised  by  the  inconsistency  which  awakens 
doubts  as  to  his  sincerity,  or  the  offensive  bearing  which,  in  exciting  prejudice 
against  himself,  creates  a  new  obstacle  to  the  success  of  the  message  which  he  bears. 
It  is  to  this  that  the  apostle  chiefly  alludes.  The  offence  of  the  Cross  was  not  to  be 
removed  by  silence  as  to  Christ  crucified ;  but  whatever  his  message  might  be,  he 
sought  that  he  himself  should  not  be  a  stumbling-block.  2.  Some  men  make  it 
their  boast  that  they  take  no  heed  to  the  opinions  of  others.  They  have  the 
approval  of  their  own  conscience.  What  can  it  matter  to  them  though  they  are 
condemned  by  the  unanimous  voice  of  their  brethren?  A  doubt  of  their  own 
infallibility  never  appears  to  occur  to  them,  nor  a  desire  to  spare  the  feelings  and 
respect  the  convictions  of  others  to  influence  their  modes  of  speech  or  action.  Of 
course  it  is  better  to  be  unpopular  than  untrue  ;  but  even  if  regard  to  the  highest 
principle  require  a  man  sometimes  to  oppose  himself  to  those  whom  he  most 
respects,  there  is  a  way  of  acting  by  which  he  may  avoid  provoking  that  unpleasant 
irritation  which  is  sure  to  defeat  the  very  purpose  he  seeks  to  achieve.  Keep  back 
nothing  which  fidelity  to  God  requires  you  to  utter  ;  but  let  there  be  the  courtesy 
■which  pays  a  due  respect  to  the  opinions  it  is  compelled  to  oppose,  and  the  readiness 
to  make  everything  subordinate  to  the  one  great  work  of  promoting  the  gospel.  It 
is  pitiable  to  mark  the  way  in  which  some  men,  hj  little  defects  of  character,  mar 
the  effect  of  labours  inspired  by  the  purest  motive  and  apparently  fitted  to  secure  the 
richest  fruit.  They  are  like  a  gardener  who,  having  sown  his  seeds,  no  sooner  sees 
them  breaking  the  ground  than  he  begins  to  trample  them  down.  3.  "  Not  s.  eking 
mine  own  profit,"  &c.  Such,  too,  is  our  principle,  but  may  we  not  learn  something 
even  from  those  who  seek  the  inferior  end  ?  If  men  can  stoop  to  secure  an  earthly 
prize — if  they  deem  no  labour  too  hard,  no  rebuff  too  humiliating,  no  arts  too 
mean  which  are  necessary  to  ensure  success — what  effort  sliould  not  Christians  put 
forth,  and  what  sacrifice  should  they  not  make  in  order  to  win  a  power  which  they 
may  use  for  the  pi'ofit  of  many?  (/.  G.  Ror/ers,  B.A.)  True  xi^isdom  and 
charity: — I.  The  duty.  1.  Give  none  offence.  2.  Please  all  men.  3.  Sacrifice 
self.  II.  The  object — that  they  may  be  saved.  III.  The  incentive — the  example 
of  Christ  and  His  apostles  (chap.  xi.  1).  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Even  as  I  please  all 
men  in  all  things. — Paul  j^leasivg  and  not  -pleasiug  men  : — I.  How  he  pleased  all 
MEN.  Consider — 1.  The  case  of  Timothy  (Acts  xvi.  3).  2.  Paul  at  Athens.  3. 
Paul  at  Corinth.  4.  His  address  to  Agrippa.  .5.  His  words  in  reference  to  meats 
and   drinks.     II.  How  inflexibly   he    refused   to  please  men  when  Chkist  or 

THE     HONOUR     OF    THE    GOSPEL    WAS    CONCERNED    (Gal.    i.    10).       III.    HoW     THESE     TWO 

phases  of  THE  apostle's  SPIRIT  ARE  IN  HARMONY.  Learn — (1)  Christian  truth  and 
principle  must  at  all  rates  be  maintained.  (2)  Christian  moderation  and  suavity 
must  be  exhibited.  [H.  ir.  Beecher.)  The  abuse  and  proper  use  of  tlie  apostolic 
principle : — I.  The  principle  has  often  been  lamentably  perverted.  1.  On 
the  plea  of  becoming  all  things  to  all  men.  Christians  are  tempted  into  sinful  con- 
formity with  the  halaits  and  amusements  of  the  world.  2.  On  the  same  plea  the 
Church  of  Kome  adopted  heathen  rites,  until  the  distinction  between  Paganism 
and  Christianity  was  little  more  than  nominal.  Heathen  temples  were  called 
churches  ;  Pagan  gods  were  baptized  as  saints,  and  honoured  as  before.     II.  The 

APOSTLE     SO    ACTED     AS     TO     PRESERVE     THE     ChURCH     FROM     EVERY    TAINT    OF     EITHER 

Paganism  or  Judaism.  The  rules  which  guided  the  apostles  may  be  easily  deduced 
from  the  conduct  and  epistles  of  Paul.  1.  They  accommodated  themselves  to 
Jewish  or  Gentile  usages  only  in  matters  of  indifference.  2.  They  abstained  from 
all  accommodation  even  in  things  indifferent,  under  circumstances  which  gave  to 
those  things  a  religious  import.  They  allowed  sacrifices  to  be  eaten;  but  eating 
within  a  temple  was  forbidden.  3.  They  conceded  when  the  concession  was  not 
demanded  as  a  matter  of  necessity ;  but  refused  when  it  was  so  regarded.  Paul 
said  circumcision  was  nothing  and  uncircumcision  was  nothing  ;  yet  he  resisted  the 
circumcision  of  Titus  when  it  was  demanded  by  the  Judaisers.  4.  The  object  of 
their  concessions  was  not  to  gain  mere  nominal  converts,  nor  to  do  away  with  the 
offence  of  the  Cross  (Gal.  iv.  11),  but  to  save  men.  No  concession  therefore,  whether 
to  the  manners  of  the  world  or  to  the  prejudices  of  the  ignorant,  can  plead  the 
sanction  of  apostolic  example,  which  has  not  that  object  honestly  in  view.     5.  It  is 


72  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOR.  [chap,  xi, 

included  in  the  above  particulars  that  Paul,  in  becoming  all  things  to  all  men, 
never  compromised  any  truth  or  sanctioned  any  error.     (C.  Hodge,  D.D.) 


CHAPTEE  XI. 

Vers.  1-2.  Be  ye  followers  of  me,  even  as  I  also  am  of  Christ. — Folloiu  Paul  and 
follow  Christ : — I.  Be  ye  followeks  of  Paul.  But  how  can  we  be  like  a  man 
who  has  been  dead  for  centuries,  whose  language  and  occupations  were  wholly 
different  from  ours?  Can  the  nineteenth  century  be  changed  into  the  first?  No. 
There  are  hundreds  of  points  in  which  we  cannot  be  like  him ;  and  yet  Paul  is 
more  capable  of  being  an  example  to  us  than  he  has  been  to  almost  any  previous 
age  of  the  world.  He  is  truly  the  apostle  of  Englishmen,  because — 1.  He  is  the 
apostle  most  congenial  to  our  peculiar  excellences.  There  is  a  real  likeness  between 
the  English  character  and  the  freedom  and  love  of  truth  which  is  the  fibre  and 
tissue  of  the  teaching  of  St.  Paul.  2.  He  is  the  apostle  of  progress.  Are  any  of 
us  inclined  to  think  tliat  Christianity  is  worn  out,  that  it  is  too  contracted  for  these 
broad,  enlightened  times?  Some  forms  of  it  may  have  become  so,  but  not  the 
Christianity  of  St.  Paul.  He  is  the  apostle  of  the  vast  and  unknown  future.  St. 
Paul  is  always  looking,  not  backward,  but  forward.  He  went  beyond  his  own  age, 
beyond  the  ages  that  followed ;  and,  however  far  we  have  advanced  in  enlighten- 
ment and  liberation,  he  has  gone  before  us  still.  3.  The  apostle  of  toleration. 
Have  we  outgrown  the  noble  lessons  of  Eom.  xiv.  ?  Are  we  more  able  to  bear  with 
those  who  differ  from  us,  more  tender  to  the  rights  of  conscience,  than  he  ?  Let 
us  separate  the  essential  from  the  non-essential,  the  temporal  from  the  eternal,  as 
he  did.  II.  Even  as  he  was  of  Christ.  1.  In  many  forms  this  is  the  burden  of 
all  his  Epistles  (Eom.  xiii.  14  ;  Col.  ii.  6 ;  Eom.  viii.  29 ;  Gal.  vi.  14 ;  Gal.  ii.  20). 
He  is  but  a  servant  of  Christ.  To  carry  in  his  own  life  a  copy,  however  imperfect, 
of  what  Christ  had  said  and  done ;  to  be  one  with  Christ  now  and  hereafter  was 
his  highest  ambition  and  hope  of  salvation.  And  to  this  he  calls  us  still.  2. 
True,  we  cannot  imitate  Christ  in  the  letter,  but  we  can  in  the  spirit ;  we  cannot 
"  put  on  "  His  outward  garb  and  actions,  but  we  can  put  on  "  the  mind  which  was 
in  Christ  Jesus."  We  cannot  attain  to  His  perfection  ;  in  great  part  He  is  rather 
the  likeness  of  God  than  the  example  of  man ;  but  we  can  study  in  His  life  and 
character  the  will  of  God  and  the  duty  of  man.  He  should  be  to  us  as  a  second 
conscience,  to  fix  our  wills,  to  calm  our  scruples,  to  guide  our  thoughts,  the  con- 
science of  our  conscience,  the  mind  of  our  mind,  the  heart  of  our  heart.     III. 

How    SHALL    WE    BRING    HOME    THIS    JOINT     EXAMPLE     TO    OURSELVES  ?       HoW     shall    We 

concentrate  on  our  own  lives  the  rays  of  this  double  li|.ht,  tbe  greater  light  for  ever 
going  before,  the  lesser  light  for  ever  moving  behind?  Turn  from  the  text  to  tbe 
context,  and  you  will  find  laid  down  two  fundamental  principles  of  Evangelical 
religion — 1.  For  the  service  of  God  (chap.  x.  xiii.).  Whatsoever  ye  do,  in  com- 
merce and  in  labour,  wheresoever  it  be,  there  is  what  you  have  to  do  to  the  glory  of 
God.  Here,  joining  in  the  prayers  and  hymns,  &c. ,  you  are  preparing  for  the 
service  of  God.  But  there,  in  your  daily  life,  is  the  true  "  Divine  service,"  in 
which  we  must  all  bear  our  parts.  (1)  Paul  was  ever  employed  in  driving  the 
enthusiasm  of  his  followers  into  homely,  useful,  practical  channels.  (2)  What  was 
true  of  Paul  was  still  more  true  of  Christ.  He  did  not  retire  to  the  wilderness. 
He  lived  and  died  in  blessed  compianionship  with  men.  In  labour  and  in  festivity, 
in  moving  multitudes  and  in  crowded  ship,  He  found  alike  His  Father's  work.  2. 
How  are  we  to  follow  Paul  and  Christ  in  the  service  of  man  ?  (chap.  x.  33  ;  ix.  22). 
Not  by  one  uniform  mode,  but  in  ten  thousand  ways,  ever  fresh,  every  varying  with 
the  wants  and  characters  of  each.  (1)  Every  face  that  looks  up  from  this  crowd  is 
different  from  every  other ;  it  expresses  a  history,  a  character,  a  weakness,  a  strength 
of  its  own.  To  every  one  tbe  apostle  would  have  been,  as  it  were,  a  different  man ; 
he  would  have  transformed  himself  into  the  thoughts  and  would  have  borne  with 
the  infirmities  of  each.  No  outward  difference  would  have  prevented  him  from 
seeing  the  good  which  lay  beneath.  He  would  have  made  straight  for  that  and 
built  it  up,  and  so  would  have  saved  the  soul  in  the  midst  of  which  he  had  dis- 
covered it.  (2)  And  this  example  is  not  only  for  teachers  or  special  times  and 
places.     It  is  for  all  times,  places,  and  persons ;  for  it  is  the  example,  not  only  of 


CHAP.  XI.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  73 

Paul,  but  of  Christ  Himself.  He,  too,  "became  all  things  to  all  men,  if  by  any 
means  He  might  save  some."  He  came  with  a  gracious  word  and  touch  for  each. 
A.nd  as  Christ  and  Paul  have  done  to  us,  so  ought  we  in  our  humble  measure  to  do 
to  our  brethren;  so  ought  we  humbly  to  hope  that  they  each  in  their  turn  will  do  to 
us,  if  by  any  means  some  of  us  may  be  saved.  [Dean  Stanley.)  Following  Cliris- 
tians  and  follow  in  rj  Christ : — I.  We  ought  to  follow  the  exajiple  of  formek  saints, 
so  FAR  AS  they  WALK  IN  THE  LAWS  OF  GoD.  1.  Though  by  nature  all  be  sinners,  yet 
by  grace  many  in  all  ages  have  been  saints.  2.  The  lives  of  many  saints  are  recorded 
for  our  imitation  (James  v.  10,  11,  17 ;  Phil.  iii.  17,  iv.  9).  3.  But  everything  re- 
corded of  them  is  not  to  be  followed.  (1)  Not  such  actions  as  are  condemned.  (2) 
Nor  all  such  which  are  not  condemned  (Gen.  xix.  8,  xxvii.  25-27,  xlii.  15-16).  (b) 
Nor  all  such  as  are  approved.  For — (a)  Some  things  are  only  in  part  approved 
(Luke  xvi.  8;  Exod.  i.  19-20).  (h)  Some  things  were  done  by  the  extraordinary 
call  and  instinct  of  God  (Numb.  xxv.  7-8;  2  Kings  i.  10;  Luke  ix.  54,  55).  So 
Abraham  otl'ering  Isaac.  4.  In  our  imitation  of  the  saints  we  must  observe — (1) 
Whether  wliat  they  do  be  according  to  the  law  of  God.  (2)  The  circumstances  of 
their  actions  (Amos  vi.  5).  Bead,  then,  the  lives  of  former  saints,  and  follow  their 
examples,  especially  the  particular  graces  wherein  they  were  eminent  (Numb.  xii.  3 ; 
1  Sam.  iii.  18 ;  Job.  i.  21 ;  Acts  v.  41).  II.  Christ  is  the  grand  example  which  we 
OUGHT  to  imitate.  1.  What  is  it  to  imitate  Christ  ?  (1)  As  He  did  it.  («)  Under- 
standingly  (John  iv.  22).  (b)  Obediently  (Luke  ii.  49;  1  Sam.  xv.  22).  (c)  Sincerely 
(John  iv.  24  ;  2  Cor.  i.  12).  {d)  Wholly  (Matt.  iii.  15;  John  xvii.  4).  {e)  Believ- 
ingly  (John  xi.  41,  42).  (f)  Cheerfully  (Isa.  liii.  7;  Heb.  x.  34;  Kom.  xii.  8).  {cj) 
Humbly  (Matt.  xi.  29).  (/()  To  the  glory  of  God  (chap.  x.  31).  2.  What  are  those 
works  whicli  we  are  co  imitate  Christ  in?  Christ  was  truly  God  from  eternity 
(John  i.  1 ;  viii.  58).  He  became  truly  man  in  time  (John  i.  14 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  5),  and 
He  was  and  is  truly  both  God  and  man  in  one  person  (Acts  xx.  28).  Whatsoever 
He  did  in  the  flesh  He  did  under  one  of  these  three  notions.  (1)  We  are  not  to 
follow  Christ  in  what  He  did  as  God ;  such  are  His  acts — (a)  Of  omnipotence. 
Healing  the  sick,  casting  out  devils,  raising  the  dead,  etc.  (b)  Of  omniscience 
(Lukexi.  17;  xiii.  32).  (c)  Of  sovereignty  (Matt.  xvi.  2,  7).  (2)  Nor  in  what  He 
did  as  God-man,  in  the  acts — (a)  Of  His  proplietical  office  (Dent,  xviii.  15 ;  John 
XV.  15  ;  Acts  iii.  22).  (b)  His  priestly  office.  Satisfying  for  our  sins  (1  John  ii.  2), 
and  interceding  for  our  souls  (Heb.  vii.  25).  (c)  His  kingly  office  (Isa.  ix.  7). 
(3)  But  we  are  to  follow  Him  in  what  He  did  as  mere  man.  (a)  He  was  subject  to 
His  parents  (Luke  ii.  51).  This  subjection  consisteth  in  reverencing  them  (Lev. 
xix.  3) ;  in  obeying  them,  by  hearkening  to  their  instructions  (Prov.  xiii.  1  ;  xxiii. 
22)  and  i^erforming  their  lawful  commands  (Col.  iii.  20  ;  Eph.  vi.  1) ;  in  thankful- 
ness, by  acknowledging  their  care  and  providing  for  their  necessities  (1  Tim.  v.  4  ; 
Gen.  xlvii.  12;  John  xix.  26,  27).  Consider — This  is  pleasing  to  God  (Eph.  vi.  1), 
and  hath  a  promised  blessing  (Eph.  vi.  2,  3;  Exod.  xx.  12).  (/))  He  committed  no  sin 
(1  Pet.  ii.  22 ;  Isa.  liii.  9 ;  1  John  iii.  5).  How  are  we  not  to  siu  ?  We  are  not  to  love 
it  (Psa.  cxix.).  We  must  imitate  Christ  in — (c)  Love,  (d)  Submission,  (f)  Meekness 
and  holiness.  (  f )  Hearing,  (r/)  Finishing  His  work.  (/;)  Taking  all  opportunities 
of  doing  good.  3.  Means.  (1)  Watch  always  over  thy  heart  (1  Pet.  v.  8;  Prov. 
iv.  23).  (2)  Live  as  under  the  eye  of  God.  (3)  Consider  thou  art  a  Christian. 
(Bp.  Beveridfjc.)  A  follou'er  of  Christ: — It  needs  no  argument  to  prove  that  all 
men  do  not  follow  Christ.  Many  profess  to  follow  Him,  and  many  boast  that  they 
do  follow  Him,  but,  oh,  how  few  faithfully  follow  Christ !  Indeed,  the  grand  mis- 
take of  the  world  lies  in  this — that  following  Christ  consists  in  mere  attendance  to 
a  few  forms  and  professions  of  religion,  whereas  it  is  wholly  a  spiritual  service,  and 
can  never  be  taken  up  by  any  but  spiritual  men.  Therefore  the  Scriptures  assure 
us  that  a  follower  of  Christ  is — I.  One  who  has  been  quickened  by  Christ.  A  dead 
man  cannot  follow  another.  A  man  dead  m  trespasses  and  sins  must  be  quickened 
by  the  Son  of  God  before  he  will  take  one  step  in  the  way  to  heaven.  II.  One  who 
heartily  LOVES  Christ.  "We  love  Him,  because  He  first  loved  us."  "The  love 
of  God  constraineth  us."  All  Christ  asks  in  return  for  His  love  is  "Follow  Me," 
and  the  grateful  and  redeemed  spirit  says,  "  Lord,  I  will  follow  Thee  whithersoever 
Thou  goest."  III.  One  who  embraces  the  doctrine  of  Christ.  When  quickening 
takes  place,  the  soul  receives  the  kingdom  of  heaven  as  a  little  child.  "  Teach  me,' 
Bays  such  a  spirit,  "  Thy  way,  0  Lord  ;  I  will  walk  in  Thy  truth  ;  unite  my  heart 
to  fear  Thy  name."  It  does  not  take  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel  and  throw  away 
the  precepts  ;  it  does  not  reserve  the  precepts  and  cast  away  the  doctrines,  but  it 
takes  it  as  a  whole,  as  the  word  of  Christ,  and  the  directory  in  the  way  to  heavt'n. 


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xi 

IV.  One  who  cheerfully  walks  in  the  ways  of  Christ.  Keligious  labour  is  no 
drudgery  to  him.  Never  has  a  Cliristian  any  melancholy  as  long  as  he  walks  in 
Christ's  paths ;  it  is  when  he  turns  out  of  them  that  occasions  him  sadness  and 
pain.  V.  One  who  copies  the  example  or  Christ.  A  follower  of  Christ  is  not  one 
whose  head  is  filled  with  well-digested  schemes  of  theology.  Christ  hath  left  us  an 
example  that  we  should  follow  His  steps.  Following  Christ  is  walking  behind  Him, 
putting  our  feet  into  the  print  of  His  footsteps,  and  so  going  on  in  the  way  to 
heaven.  He  has  left  His  footprints — 1.  In  His  meek  and  amiable  spirit.  2.  In 
heavenly  behaviour  and  conversation.  3.  In  prayer.  4.  In  His  abounding  liber- 
ality. 5.  In  His  diligent  labours.  6.  In  His  spirit  of  love.  VI.  One  who  perse- 
VERiNGLY  continues  WITH  Cheist.  Some  follow  Christ  from  gain,  some  partially, 
as  long  as  the  truth  does  not  touch  their  consciences ;  some  in  poverty  and  afHie- 
tion ;  but  when  the  sun  of  prosperity  has  arisen,  when  persecution  or  affliction 
Cometh  on  account  of  the  truth,  then  they  desert  Christ.  "  But  he  that  endureth 
to  the  end  shall  be  saved."  (J.  Sherman.)  True  following  : — Some  men  are 
destined  to  lead  either  in  evil  or  in  good.  St.  Paul,  who  had  been  a  leader  in 
persecution,  was  made  "  a  leader  and  commander  of  Christ's  people,"  and  he 
removes  every  trace  of  human  assumption  when  he  qualifies  the  exhortation  with 
"even  as  I  am  also  of  Christ."  I.  To  follow  Christ  is  the  source  of  Christian 
influence.  It  is  one  thing  to  look  at  the  life  of  Jesus  with  interest  and  admira- 
tion ;  it  is  another  thing  to  regard  it  as  our  pattern  and  inspiration.  To  gain  the 
higher  influence  of  the  Saviour's  life  we  must  follow  Him — 1.  Wholly.  The 
would-be  followers  of  His  day  made  loud  professions  of  following  Him,  but  when 
He  said,  "If  any  man  w-ill  come  after  Me,  let  him  take  up  his  cross,"  &c. ,  the 
crowd  dispersed,  and  only  the  twelve  remained.  2.  Constantly.  When  you  sit  for 
your  likeness  the  photographer  measures  the  time  in  which  to  take  a  deep  and 
shari3  impression.  Half  the  time  would  only  give  half  the  result.  If  you  only  look 
at  Jesus  once  in  awhde.  and  if  serious  thought  only  possess  you  at  times,  the  flood 
of  worldly  influence  will  sweep  awaj'  the  gi'od  impressions  as  the  tide  demolishes 
footsteps  in  the  sand.  3.  Openly.  Conversion  becomes  more  real,  love  to  Christ 
more  intense,  and  hatred  of  sin  more  forci'de  by  the  exhibition  of  the  virtues  of 
Him  who  has  called  us  out  of  darkness  into  light.  The  light  we  shed  on  others  is 
again  reflected  on  ourselves.  The  voice  of  the  echo  is  sweeter  than  your  own  ;  so 
is  piety  wh'  n  it  returns  to  us  from  its  mission  of  mercy.  II.  To  exhibit  Christ  is 
the  ■mission  of  the  Christian  life.  1.  The  power  of  example  is  great.  The 
ancient  Eornans  us"d  to  place  the  statues  of  distinguished  men  in  their  halls. 
When  they  left  in  the  morning  they  were  inspired  by  the  remembrance  of  their 
noble  deeds,  and  when  they  returned  in  the  evening  they  were  ennobled  by  the 
thought  of  the  associations  they  enjoyed.  2.  The  power  of  Christian  example  is 
the  greatest.  Both  in  moulding  and  reforming  characters  it  has  not  a  rival.  Its 
force  is  that  of  Divine  love  working  through  human  actions.  God  in  Christ  Jesus 
made  His  life  the  noblest  of  all  lives,  because  it  has  produced  the  greatest  reforms 
in  the  race.  The  life  of  Jesus  in  His  Church  is  its  perpetuation.  {Weekly  Pulpit.) 
ChrisVs  example : — 1.  Once  in  the  course  of  the  world's  history  there  has  been 
seen  on  earth  a  perfect  life.  It  was  a  life  not  merely  to  admire,  but  to  follow.  It 
has  been  ever  since  the  acknowledged  human  standard.  2.  And  we  have  not  only 
the  i^erfect  example,  but  we  have  it  declared  why  and  how  it  is  perfect.  Lessons, 
teaching  and  enforcing,  accompany  each  incident  of  our  Lord's  ministi'y ;  they  are 
drawn  together  into  a  solemn  summary  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  Here  we 
have  the  highest  moral  guidance  for  the  world.  3.  That  example  and  law  of  life 
were  nothing  less  than  universal.  They  were  meant  for  all  men.  Differing  so 
widely  as  m..!n  do,  Christ  calls  them  all  alike  to  follow  Him.  4.  Christianity  makes 
itself  universal  by  making  its  moral  standard,  not  verbal  rules  or  laws,  but  a 
character.  That  character  is  one  who  is  called  in  Scripture  the  Image  of  God. 
All  that  Christ  did  and  said  were  the  various  expressions  of  the  perfect  goodness  of 
the  Father.  And  that  is  the  Christian  law.  And  this  is  what  fits  the  Christian 
standard  to  be  a  universal  one.  For  a  character,  if  it  is  great  enough,  carries  its 
force  far  beyond  the  conditions  under  which  it  may  have  been  first  disclosed.  If 
shown  under  one  set  of  circumstances  its  lesson  can  be  extended  to  another, 
peifectly  different.  It  adapts  itself  with  the  freedom  and  elasticity  of  life. 
We  can  follow  it  on,  from  the  known,  to  what  it  would  be,  in  the  new  and 
strange.  "Jesus  Christ  is  the  same  yesterday  and  to-day  and  for  ever" — the 
same  in  glory  as  in  the  form  of  a  servant.  Under  conditions  utterly  changed.  His 
goodness  is  that  same  very  goodness  which  we  saw.     And  so  we  can  derive  from 


CHAP.  XI.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  75 

that  Character  lessons  for  our  state,  which  is  so  different  from  His.  And  not  only 
so,  but  we  can  derive  lessons  from  it  for  conditions  of  human  life  very  far  removed 
from  those  conditions  under  which  His  goodness  was  manifested  to  us  here. 
Literal  imitation  may  be  impossible,  but  it  is  not  impossible  to  catch  its  spirit  and 
apply  its  lessons  to  altered  circumstances.  In  that  character,  though  shown  to  us 
in  the  form  of  servant,  we  know  that  everything  is  gathered  wbich  could  make 
human  nature  what  it  ought  to  be.  Consider  Christ  as  a  pattern  for — I.  The 
LIFE  OF  FAITH.  1.  All  the  wliilc  that  He  was  on  earth  He  was  in  heart  and  soul 
undivided  for  a  moment  from  heaven.  He  does  what  is  most  human  ;  but  He  lives 
absolutely  in  the  Divine.  However,  we  see  Him:  tempted,  teaching,  healing,  &e., 
in  the  wilderness,  in  the  temple,  on  the  Cross — He  is  yet  nil  the  while  "even  the 
Son  of  Man  which  is  in  heaven."  2.  Men  have  compared  the  active  and  the  con-< 
tem^^lative  life,  and  the  life  of  practical  beneficence  with  the  life  of  devotion.  We 
see  great  things  done  without  the  sense  of  religion,  and  we  see  the  religious  spirit 
failing  to  command  the  respect  of  those  who  have  other  ways  of  ministering  to 
men's  wants.  But  in  Christ  we  have  both  lives  combined.  In  Him  we  see  man 
serving  to  the  utmost  his  brethren  ;  but  we  also  see  man  one  with  the  thought  and 
will  of  God.  3.  Here  we  see  how  character  in  itself,  irrespective  of  circumstance, 
is  adapted  to  be  a  guide ;  here  is  an  example,  shown  under  the  most  exceptional 
conditions,  yet  fit  to  be  universal.  But  on  what  outward  circumstances  does  such 
a  life  depend?  Why  is  not  equa^y  to  be  realised  in  the  calling  of  the  ruler,  the 
rich  man,  the  student?  How  need  their  outward  conditions  affect  their  relation- 
ship to  God?  2.  The  life  of  truth.  (1)  To  all,  quite  apart  from  the  acci- 
dental conditions  of  their  state,  Christ's  life  shows  what  alone  is  real  and  great  in 
life ;  and  surely  there  are  ends  and  purposes  in  the  life  of  each  of  us  which  are 
literally  as  real  as  the  ends  of  His  life.  One  is  high  and  another  low  ;  one  Ijas 
much  and  another  little,  but  to  every  one  who  beheves  in  God  and  providence,  the 
work  of  each  is  equally  real :  a  call,  a  stewardship  from  God.  (2)  What  we  see  in 
Christ's  life  is  not  only  a  purpose  and  work  passing  man's  understanding,  but  that 
purpose  followed,  and  that  work  done,  in  a  way  which  man  can  understand.  It  is 
a  life  governed  by  its  end  and  purpose,  in  which  shows  or  illusions  have  no  place  ; 
and  further,  a  life  in  which  its  purpose  is  followed  with  absolute  indifference  to 
whatever  sacrifice  it  may  cost.  He  has  put  all  this  into  words  which  mark  for 
ever  the  change  He  made  in  our  views  of  life — "  My  meat  is  to  do  the  will  of  Him 
that  sent  Me,  and  to  finish  His  work  "  ;  "I  must  work  the  works  of  Him  that 
sent  Me  while  it  is  day  "  ;  and  when  all  was  over,  "  I  have  finished  the  work  that 
Thou  gavest  Me  to  do."  3.  The  life  of  love.  It  is  the  new  commandment,  new 
to  the  world,  but  as  old  as  the  eternal  Word  who  brought  it,  which  turns  the 
Sermon  on  the  Mount  from  a  code  of  precepts  into  the  expressions  and  instances 
of  a  charactei".  Its  words  have  their  interpretation  and  their  reason  in  that  Divine 
temper  which  had  come  with  Christ  to  restore  the  world.  The  purity,  the  humi- 
lity, the  forgiving  mind,  the  unflagging  goodness  they  speak  of,  were  but  some 
among  the  infinitely  varied  ways  of  acting  out  the  meaning  of  His  last  charge, 
"  That  ye  love  one  another  as  I  have  loved  you  "  ;  and  of  His  last  prayer,  "  That 
the  love  wherewith  Thou  hast  loved  Me,  may  be  in  them,  and  I  in  them."  A  great 
deal  may  be  said  of  love  without  ever  really  touching  what  is  its  vital  essence. 
But  here  our  sympathies  are  appealed  to.  We  see  how  Jesus  Christ  showed  what 
it  is  to  lead  a  life  of  love.  Conclusion  :  1.  The  mutable  shapes  of  society,  un- 
folded by  God's  providence,  fix  almost  without  our  will  our  outward  circumstances. 
But  for  the  soul,  wherever  it  is,  Christ  our  Lord  has  one  unchanging  call,  "Be 
perfect";  and  He  has  one  unchanging  rule  for  its  fulfilment,  "Be  what  I  am,  feel 
what  I  felt,  do  as  I  should  do."  How  shall  we  ?  How  but  by  looking  steadfastly 
at  Him  and  trying  to  see  and  know  Him  ?  In  the  same  Living  Person  each  age 
has  seen  its  best  idea  embodied  ;  but  its  idea  was  not  adequate  to  the  truth — there 
was  something  still  beyond,  (1)  An  age  of  intellectual  confusion  saw  in  His 
portraiture  in  the  Gospels  the  ideal  of  the  great  Teacher,  the  healer  of  human  error. 
It  judged  rightly ;  but  that  was  only  part.  (2)  The  monastic  spirit  saw  in  it  the 
warrant  and  suggestion  of  a  life  of  self-devoted  poverty  as  the  condition  of  perfec- 
tion :  who  can  doubt  that  there  was  much  to  justify  it:  who  can  doubt  that  the 
reality  was  something  far  wider  than  the  purest  type  of  monastic  life?  (3)  The 
Reformation  saw  in  Him  the  great  improver,  the  quickener  of  the  dead  letter,  the 
stern  rebuker  of  a  rehgion  which  had  forgotten  its  spirit ;  and  doubtless  He  was  all 
this,  only  He  was  infinitely  more.  (4)  And  now  in  modern  times  there  is  the 
disposition  to  dwell  on  Him  as  the  ideal  exemplar  of  perfect  manhood.     He  is  all 


76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

this,  and  this  is  infinitely  precious.  We  may  "  glorify  Him  for  it  and  exalt  Him  as 
much  as  we  can,  but  even  yet  will  He  far  exceed."  And  as  generations  go  on  they 
will  still  find  that  Character  answering  to  their  best  thoughts  and  hopes.  2.  What 
is  the  lesson  ?  Surely  this  :  to  remember  when  we  talk  of  the  example  of  Christ, 
that  the  interpretations  and  readings  of  it  are  all  short  of  the  thing  itself ;  and 
that  we  possess,  to  see  and  to  learn  from,  the  thing  itself.  {Dean  Church.) 
Christ,  our  example  : — The  apostle — I.  Directs  our  attention  to  Christ  as  the 
GREAT  MODEL  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN.  It  is  a  marked  characteristic  of  Christianity  that 
all  the  truths  are  presented  in  no  vague,  intangible  form,  but  as  embodied  in  one 
living  model.  Note — 1.  The  fitness  of  Christ  to  be  our  model  pattern.  We 
needed  one  Divine  and  yet  human.  One  all  Divine  would  have  been  inimitable  : 
,one  all  human  must  have  fallen  below  the  necessities  of  the  case.  So  Christ 
came,  "God  manifest  in  the  flesh."  His  divinity  fitted  Him  to  reveal  God's  will, 
and  uniting  His  Deity  with  humanity.  He  lived,  laboured,  suffered,  and  died  as  a 
Man,  to  present  a  visible  picture  which  shall  be  the  model  of  study  and  imitation 
for  all  time.  2.  The  perfection  of  this  model.  Perfect  God  and  perfect  man. 
He  forms  a  perfect  study  for  the  believer.  His  love  to  God  was  supreme ;  the 
exercise  of  His  will  was  ever  in  perfect  harmony  with  the  Divine  will.  In  the  hour 
of  His  temptation.  He  emerges  from  the  furnace  unscathed ;  and  in  the  pro- 
foundest  depth  of  agony  there  is  the  deepest  submission  to  God.  3.  Its  surpassing 
loveliness.  Look  at  His  unearthly  life — living  in  the  world,  and  yet  above  the 
world.  Look  at  His  humility — the  incarnate  God  though  He  was,  yet  stooping  to 
wash  His  disciples'  feet.  Look  at  Him  as  a  Man  of  prayer — walking  in  the  closest 
communion  with  His  Father.  II.  Delineates  the  character  op  a  true  believer 
.\s  MOULDED  UPON  THAT  OF  Jesus.  A  followcr  of  Christ.  '  1.  Is  a  partaker  of  its 
spiritual  nature.  An  unsanctitied  heart,  an  unrei:ewed  soul,  cannot  be  said  to  be 
cast  into  this  mould.  It  becomes,  then,  a  question  of  the  deepest  moment,  "  Am 
I  born  again  of  the  Spirit  ?  "  2.  Has  his  hope  of  acceptance,  as  a  lost  sinner, 
entirely  in  Christ.  He  has  renounced  his  own  righteousness,  and  has  received  as 
his  only  justification  "  the  righteousness  of  God  which  is  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus." 
3.  Sits  as  a  humble  learner  at  the  feet  of  Christ.  4.  Follows  Christ  only.  We 
may  follow  ministers  and  not  Christ,  Churches,  and  not  the  Head  of  the  Church. 
5.  Is  crucified  with  Christ :  "  If  any  man  will  come  after  Me,  let  him  deny  himself 
and  take  up  his  cross  and  follow  Me."  (0.  IVinslow,  D.D.)  Imitation  of  Christ : — 
1.  We  find  in  the  Word  of  God  that  the  imitation  of  Christ  is  frequently  laid  down 
as  the  leading  principle  of  the  gospel  (Matt.  xvi.  24;  John  xii.  26;  xiii.  13; 
1  Pet.  ii.  21;  Eph.  v.  i.  ;  1  Thess.  i.  16).  In  these  passages  we  are  taught  the 
importance  of  the  principle  of  example.  The  Word  of  God  has  many  ways  of 
teaching.  But  especially  it  teaches  by  example.  Example  embodies  precept, 
places  it  before  us  in  pictorial  form,  which  we  can  easily  see  and  understand.  And 
not  only  so,  but  example  recommends  precept ;  because  where  it  is  a  good  example, 
it  evidently  carries  with  it  the  proof  of  sincerity  on  the  part  of  the  person  who 
sets  it.  2.  But  it  may  be  asked  why,  if  Christ  is  the  real  standard  and  example, 
does  St.  Paul  set  himself  before  us  ?  I  think  the  reason  is  simply  this,  that  M'hile 
Christ  is  undoubtedly  the  example,  St.  Paul  regarded  himself  as  an  illustration  of 
that  example.  Note  some  of  the  leading  features  of  our  Lord's  character  in 
which  this  principle  of  imitation  is  to  be  carried  out.  I.  In  His  spirit  of  self- 
EENUNCiATiON  (Phil.  ii.  6;  cf.  5.)  How  closely  St.  Paul  copied  our  Lord  in  this! 
He  "counted  all  things  but  loss  that  he  might  win  Christ,"  and  glorify  Him.  And 
that  same  sjjirit  lies  at  the  foundation  of  all  true  religion.  "  If  any  man  will  be 
My  disciple,  let  him  deny  himself."  II.  His  spirit  of  obedience.  "  My  meat  is 
to  do  the  will  of  Him  that  sent  Me,  and  to  finish  His  work."  It  was — 1.  A  willing 
obedience;  one  in  which  He  delighted.  2.  A  constant,  ceaseless  obedience.  3.  An 
obedience  victorious,  because  it  was  through  and  after  conflict.  And  so  with  St. 
Paul.  "  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  seems  to  have  been  the  question 
which  pervaded  his  whole  career.  Now,  we  love  and  value  the  privileges  of  the 
gospel;  but  do  not  let  us  lose  sight  of  its  responsibilities.  III.  His  spirit  of  zeal 
(John  ii.).  St.  Paul  followed  Him  in  this.  Men  in  the  present  day  seem  afraid  of 
zeal.  But  it  is  good  to  be  zealous  in  a  good  cause.  Lukewarmness  in  religion  is 
especially  hateful  in  the  sight  of  God.  IV.  His  spirit  of  meekness  and  gentle- 
ness— "I  beseech  you,"  says  St.  Paul,  "by  tlie  meekness  and  gentleness  of 
Christ."  He  never  quenched  the  smoking  flax.  And  so  St.  Paul,  with  all  his  fire 
and  energy,  observed  the  evident  spirit  of  tenderness  and  sympathy  with  which  he 
watched  over  the  iufant  Church.     There  are  rough  and  rugged  characters  which 


CHAP.  XI.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  77 

are  full  of  energy  in  Christ's  cause,  but  which  need  to  look  at  His  example  in  this 
respect.  V.  His  spieit  of  love  as  showu  in  giving  Himself  for  us  ;  as  shown 
towards  the  impenitent,  and  to  the  multitude  scuttered  as  sheep  having  no 
shepherd.  All  this  was  imitated  by  St.  Paul.  VI.  The  spirit  of  blesseb 
ANTICIPATION  AS  EEGARDS  THE  FUTURE  (Heb.  xii.  3).  In  the  Same  way  St.  Paul 
tells  us  that  his  one  desire  was  to  finish  his  course  with  joy.  We  should  endea- 
vour in  our  seasons  of  trial  to  remember  that  the  time  is  short,  and  that  if  we  be 
faithful  there  is  laid  up  for  us  "an  exceeding  weight  of  glory,  a  crown  of  right- 
eousness." Conclusion:  The  subject  maybe  used — 1.  By  way  of  self-examination. 
It  is  exceedingly  difficult  to  bring  home  to  the  sinner's  conscience,  by  the  mere 
statement  of  truth,  the  guilt  which  attaches  to  him.  But  let  the  sinner  place  his 
own  life  by  the  side  of  Christ's  life.  2.  As  a  principle  of  guidance.  There  are 
perplexing  questions  which  continually  arise  in  the  Christian  life.  Whenever  you 
can  find  Christ's  example  as  a  guide  to  you  in  your  conduct,  you  may  be  perfectly 
certain  that  you  are  safe  in  the  course  you  adopt.  3.  As  an  encouragement  for 
Christians.  It  is  according  to  the  will  of  God  that  we  should  be  conformed  to  the 
image  of  His  Son.  In  attempting,  therefore,  to  reach  this  conformity,  you  are 
attempting  that  which  is  the  revealed  will  of  God  concerning  you,  and,  therefore, 
which  you  may  reasonably  expect.  He  will  give  you  grace,  at  least  in  some 
measure,  to  attain.  In  the  future  we  shall  be  like  Him,  for  "  we  shall  see  Him  as 
He  is."  And  the  more  we  see  Him  now,  the  more  we  live  with  Him  now,  the  more 
like  Him  we  shall  become.  {E.  Bayleij,  D.D.)  Imitation  and  commendation  : — 
In  these  words  we  have — I.  The  peinciple  on  which  the  characters  of  most  men 
ARE  FORMED.  Men  are  imitative  beings,  and  from  a  law  of  their  nature  those 
whom  they  most  admire,  and  with  whom  they  most  associate,  they  become  like  in 
spirit  and  in  character.  The  request  of  Paul  at  first  si^dit  seems  somewhat 
arrogant,  "  Be  ye  followers  of  me."  No  man  has  a  right  to  make  such  an  un- 
qualified claim.  Hence  Paul  puts  the  limitation,  "  Even  as  I  also  am  of  Christ." 
The  apostle  undoubtedly  refers  to  the  preceding  verses,  in  which  he  speaks  of 
himself  as  not  seeking  his  own  pleasure  or  profit,  but  that  of  others.  This  Christ 
did.  He  "  pleased  not  Himself."  He  means  to  say.  Be  like  me  as  I  in  this  respect 
resemble  Christ.  Here  is  the  principle  that  should  regulate  our  imitation  of  men  ; 
imitate  tljetu  just  so  far  as  they  resemble  Christ.  Children  should  not  imitate 
their  jiarents,  pupils  their  teachers,  congtegations  their  ministers,  save  so  far  as 
they  resemble  Christ.  II.  A  commendation  of  merit  which  many  are  reluctant 
TO  bender  (ver.  2).  In  some  things,  then,  some  of  the  Corinthians  pleased  Paul. 
There  was  much  in  them  at  which  he  found  fault,  but  so  far  as  they  did  the  proper 
thing  he  praises  them.  To  render  generously  credit  where  credit  is  due,  is  the 
characteristic  of  a  great  soul,  but  oue  which  most  men  are  reluctant  to  perform. 
A  wife  will  go  on  lovingly  attending  to  the  wants  and  wishes  of  her  husband,  and 
perhaps  not  from  one  year  to  another  does  she  receive  from  him  one  word  of 
hearty  commendation.  So  with  servants  and  masters,  and  ministers  and  their 
congregations.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  A  momentous  example: — In  one  of  our 
western  cities,  high  up  on  a  very  tall  building,  is  a  large  clock.  It  registers  what 
is  called  "  electric  time,"  and  is  known  to  be  very  accurate  because  it  is  regulated  by 
the  calculations  of  scientific  instruments.  On  a  large  sign  is  painted,  "  Correct 
city  time,"  and  when  one  has  any  doubts  about  having  the  exact  time,  he  sets  his 
watch  by  this  clock.  Great  mills,  railroads,  manufactories,  run  by  its  time. 
Should  it  lose  or  gain  an  hour  the  whole  city  would  be  thrown  into  confusion. 
Let  us  remember,  one  watch  set  right  will  do  to  set  many  by ;  while,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  watch  that  goes  wrong  may  be  the  means  of  iiiisleading  a  whole  multi- 
tude of  others.  So  it  is  with  life.  A  wholly  consecrated  person  may  become  the 
example  for  many,  and  a  wicked  life  of  sin  may,  too,  be  tlje  means  of  entangling  a 
whole  community  of  associates.  "Examine  yourselves."  [Sharpened  Arroivs.) 
Imitation  of  the  good  : — It  is  characteristic  of  St.  Paul  that  in  his  Epistles,  as  in 
his  ministry,  he  uses  his  own  life,  his  own  personality,  almost  as  if  they  were  not 
his  own  ;  they  are  as  much  at  the  service  of  his  argument  as  of  his  work.  Such 
was  the  nature  of  his  self-surrender  to  Christ.  There  is  much  in  the  faculty  of 
imitation,  and  in  the  facts  connected  with  it,  that  is  mysterious,  much  beyond  our 
ken.  Man  is  presented  to  us  in  Holy  Scriptuie  on  the  one  hand  in  his  first  state 
before  the  fall,  as  a  creature  of  imitation,  made  after  the  likeness  of  God.  On  the 
other  hand,  in  his  fallen  state  we  find  him  wearying  himself  with  all  kinds  of 
yearnings  after  the  likeness  of  God  manifested  in  every  kind  of  idolatry.  In  the 
fulness  of  time  Christ  came  on  earth,  in  His  human  nature,  both  restoring  the 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

Divine  image  and  making  it  possible  for  man  to  realise  the  long  lost  ideal.  What 
wonder,  then,  that  St,  Paul,  realising  and  profoundly  impressed  with  this  great 
feature  of  the  Incarnation,  should  emphasise  imitation  of  himself  as  leading  to 
Christ,  imitation  of  Christ,  and  imitation  of  God  in  Christ?  What  wonder  if  of 
all  books  (next  to  the  Bible  itself)  the  most  dear  to  devout  souls  and  spirits  striving 
upwards  after  heavenly  things  should  be  the  "  Imitatio  Christi  "  of  Thomas  a 
Kempis?  But  befoi'e  we  go  on  to  consider  how  this  can  become  potent  in  our  life 
and  practice,  we  ought  not  to  fail  to  observe  one  aspect  of  imitation  which  is  of 
infinite  importance  to  us  in  its  effects  for  good  or  for  ill.  Imitation  is  not  only  a 
conscious  activity,  by  which  we  can  strive  to  follow  and  adapt  ourselves  to  any 
example  which  we  may  select  for  ourselves.  It  is  a  part  of  ntiture  ;  not  only  of 
human  nature.  It  hiis  its  unconscious  as  well  as  its  conscious  side.  It  pervades 
animal  life  to  an  extent  which  we  are  apt  to  ignore  or  forget.  It  is  the  first  didactic 
force.  It  is  concerned  with  the  simplest  and  most  necessary  problems  of  life.  By 
it  the  young  of  many  animals  are  first  taught  to  take  their  food.  For  instance,  in 
the  case  of  chickens  hatched  by  an  incubator,  if  they  are  to  be  artificially  reared, 
it  is  necessary  tliat  the  example  of  picking  up  their  food  should  be  set  them  in 
some  way.  By  imitation  they  learn  to  live.  Imitation,  as  Darwin  has  pointed 
out,  is  one  of  the  chief  factors  in  the  advancement  and  modification  of  such 
intellectual  powers  as  animals  possess.  There  are,  indeed,  subtle  indications  of 
its  force  in  lower  animal  life,  but  it  is  most  manifest  in  birds  and  in  the  apes, 
whose  very  name  furnishes  a  verb  of  kindred  meaning.  And  again,  as  we  rise  in 
the  scale  of  animal  life,  it  is  very  noticeable  as  a  characteristic  of  savage  races  of 
men  ;  of  man,  indeed,  in  what  some  are  wont  to  call  his  primitive  state.  We  need 
hardly  dwell  upon  its  development  in  civilised  man.  It  is  dominant  in  those  arts 
which  claim  so  large  a  portion  in  his  education,  his  enjoyment  of  life,  his  material 
well-being.  Again,  as  part  of  human  nature,  imitation  has  two  functions,  which 
it  is  important  that  we  should  observe,  explanatory  as  they  are  in  a  measure  of 
that  which  we  have  noticed  in  the  history  of  man  in  relation  to  God.  On  the 
one  hand  he  received  the  likeness,  on  the  other  hand  he  sought  it  outside  himself. 
Even  so,  just  as  in  the  nervous  and  muscular  system  of  the  body  we  have  the 
division  into  involuntary  and  voluntary,  so  the  imitative  faculty  in  man  is  uncon- 
scious and  conscious,  is  passive  as  well  as  active.  Much  more  of  it  perhaps  is 
unconscious  than  conscious,  and  the  mystery  of  its  essential  being  and  origin  is 
more  inexplicable  in  the  former  than  in  the  latter.  Why  is  it  that  such  physical 
defects  as  squinting  and  tricks  of  movement  are  said  to  be  infectious,  capable  of 
being  communicated  at  sight  to  very  young  children  ?  Why  is  it  that,  as  so  often 
happens,  a  boy's  handwriting  becomes  like  his  tutor's  ?  All  these  instances  poiut 
to  unconscious,  involuntary  imitation.  The  surroundings  of  a  child,  of  a  boy,  of 
a  young  man,  have  more  effect  upon  him  than  he  himself  can  discern,  or  any  one 
else  can  determine,  and  that  because  of  this  faculty  of  imitation,  which  is  part 
and  parcel  of  his  nature.  He  assimilates  them  as  he  does  his  food,  they  become 
portions  of  his  being,  and  affect  his  growth,  his  development,  his  ultimate  destiny. 
Nay  more,  it  seem-;  as  if  these  influences  became  hereditary  in  their  effects.  We 
cannot  limit  tbese  eff-^cts  to  merely  physical  characteristics  or  physical  results.  If 
our  intellectual  and  spiritual  being  is  tlius  subject  to  the  supreme  influence  of 
assimilation  and  unconscious  imitation,  can  we  doubt  its  power  in  the  sphere  of 
morality  ?  "  Tell  me  who  he  lives  with,  and  I  will  tell  you  who  he  is,"  is  an  old 
proverb.  "  With  the  holy  thou  shalt  be  holy,  and  with  the  perfect  man  thou  shalt 
he  perfect.  With  the  clean  thou  shalt  be  clean,  and  with  the  froward  thou  shalt 
learn  frowardness."  Youth  is  plastic.  And  without  doubt  the  first  and  most  important 
counsel  is  :  "  Be  not  over  hasty  in  making  friends  "  ;  take  heed  as  to  the  associates 
W'iom  you  choose  to  live  with.  Remember  you  will  probably  become  like  them.  All 
unconsciously  your  moral  being  will  receive  the  impression  of  their  moral  being,  their 
conversation,  their  tone,  their  virtu  s,  or  their  vices.  Unless  the  soul  p'oposes  to 
itself  the  imitation  of  good,  it  will  prove  unconsciously  to  be  assimilating  and 
imitating  evil.  The  Apostle  Paul  had  so  devoted  himself  to  the  imitation  of 
Christ,  that  as  we  have  seen  he  regarded  himself  as  living  in  Christ,  and  Christ 
living  in  him.  This  imitation  cannot  be  without  effort,  and  if,  as  in  the  mixed 
community  of  Corinth  with  all  its  blemishes,  and  weaknesses,  and  grievous  sins,  it 
was  not  easy  to  rise  to  the  iiieal  of  the  unseen,  yet  still  the  nearer  ideal  of  the 
good  man  is  better  than  none,  and  the  apostle  did  not  hesitate  to  set  his  own 
example  before  them.  There  must  be  few  of  us  who  cannot  find  some  such  good 
example,  some  good  and  holy,  some  pure  and  honourable,  some  generous  and 


CHAP.  XI.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  79 

manly  life,  to  -which  we  may  look  with  satisfaction  and  hopefulness,  and  a  desire 
so  to  follow  it  as  to  rise  "  upon  the  stepping  stones  of  our  dead  selves  to  higher 
things."  But  even  so  the  imitation  must  ultimately  be  not  even  of  good  and  holy 
men,  but  of  Christ  in  them.  "  Be  ye  followers  of  me  even  as  I  also  am  of  Christ." 
The  work  of  the  lacarnation  was  not  only  to  restore  to  humanity  the  image  of  the 
perfect  man  in  Christ  but  also  the  power,  to  them  that  believe  in  Christ,  of 
reflecting  that  image,  and  by  conscious  and  unconscious  imitation  of  becoming 
more  and  more  like  Him.  I  know  not  at  what  time  of  life  this  work  of  the  imita- 
tion of  Christ  can  be  entered  upon  more  freely,  more  reasonably,  more  joyfully, 
than  that  in  which,  when  childish  things  are  being  put  away,  the  youug  man 
reaching  toward  the  maturity  of  his  physical  and  mental  powers,  is  still  occupied 
with  his  own  education  and  improvement,  and  is  not  yet  immerged  in  the  world- 
life  with  all  its  engrossing  toil  of  business  and  jileasure,  its  triumphs,  its  dis- 
appointments, its  sorrows,  and  soul-enthralling  anxieties.  {E.  JJ'arre,  D.D.) 
Now  I  praise  you,  brethren,  that  ye  remember  me  in  all  things,  and  keep  the 
1)rdinances  as  I  delivered  them  to  you. — Apostolic  commendation  : — I.  Its  grounds. 

1.  Personal,  "that  ye  remember  me."  (1)  We  all  like  to  be  remembered,  especially 
by  those  who  owe  us  much,  or  between  us  and  whom  there  exist  the  tenderest 
relationships.  These  Corinthians  owed  all  their  spiritual  life  and  blessings  to  the 
apostle,  and  it  comforted  him  amidst  the  toils  and  perils  of  his  Ephesian  ministry 
to  know  that  he  was  not  forgotten.  Nothing  would  more  sadden  a  father  than  to 
be  forgotten  by  his  children,  a  wife  by  her  husband,  a  pastor  by  his  church.  (2) 
We  like  to  be  remembered  "  in  all  things."  They  remembered  Paul's  pieaching, 
his  labours  at  his  handicraft,  his  sympathy  and  helplessness.  And  when  we  come 
across  an  acquaintance  that  we  have  not  seen  for  years,  how  pleasant  it  is  to  be 
remembered  by  one's  features:  tone,  gait,  or  some  other  characteiistic,  and  to 
gather  in  conversation  that  this  and  that  incident  or  word  has  been  treasured  up. 

2.  Moral.  The  Corinthiaus  not  only  remembered  Paul  and  what  he  said  ;  they 
remembered  to  do  what  he  told  them.  Not  tlie  most  tender  personal  recollections 
would  have  compensated  for  the  absence  of  this.  Paul's  wish  was  nut  to  be 
popular,  but  to  be  permanently  useful.  This  is  what  Christ  wants:  "If 
ye  love  Me,  keep  My  commandments."  This  is  what  we  all  want :  parents, 
teachers,  ministers,  etc.,  and  exact  obedience  is  what  is  required — "  as  I  delivered 
thera,"  adding  nothing  to  them,  taking  nothing  from  them,  but  keeping  them  both 
in  the  spirit  and  in  the  letter.  II.  Its  expression.  This  was — 1.  Frank  and  open. 
Encouraging  sentiment  is  sometimes  entertained  where  it  is  not  expressed.  This 
does  no  good.  If  you  feel  that  a  man  deserves  your  praise,  why  not  tell  him  so  ? 
2.  Large-hearted  and  generous.  There  were  a  good  many  things  which  the 
apostle  could  not  praise,  but  was  forced  to  blame  the  Corinthians ;  but  where 
he  felt  he  could  praise  conscientiously  he  did  so  unstintedly.  3.  Fraternal, 
"Brethren."  He  did  not  indulge  them  as  children  simply  to  spur  them  on,  nor 
flatter  them  as  superiors  to  secure  their  patronage.  He  treated  them  as  eq.ially 
next  himself  concerned  about  the  prosperity  of  the  Church,  and  in  their  efforts  to 
promote  that  prosperity  he  felt  them  worthy  of  a  brother's  praise.     (-/.  W.  Burn). 

Vers.  3-16.  But  I  would  have  you  know  that  the  head  of  every  man  is  Christ ; 
and  the  head  of  every  woman  is  the  man ;  and  the  head  of  Christ  is  God. — Christ 
our  Head  : — This  important  statement  is  the  starting-point  for  a  deliverance  on  the 
subject  of  the  conduct  of  women  in  the  Church.  The  apostle  often,  in  dealing  with 
matters  of  trifling  importance  or  limited  interest,  rises  to  the  enunciation  of  the 
grand  principle  on  which  it  rests.  Here  he  gives  the  principle  first.  Let  us  look 
at  our  relationship  with  Christ— I.  Thkodgh  its  earthly  shadow.  1.  In  building 
the  house  of  the  human  family  God  made  the  man  the  head  of  the  woman,  the 
husband  or  bond  of  the  house.  This  headship  carries  with  it  responsibility  ;  for  if 
wives  are  to  obey  their  husbands,  husbands  are  to  love  their  wives  as  Christ  loved 
the  Church,  and  so  make  the  wifely  duty  a  joy.  2.  In  this  sense,  only  with 
deepened  meaning,  Christ  is  the  head  of  every  man,  ?.^.,  of  the  race.  And  just  as 
the  wife  attains  the  end  of  her  being  on  the  earthly  side  in  her  husband ;  as  she 
finds  the  sum  of  her  womanly  ambitions  and  duties  in  promoting  his  welfare;  as 
she  is  entitled  to  look  to  him  for  protection,  counsel,  tenderness,  and  example  ;  as 
she  is  to  seek  in  him  the  rounding  of  her  present  life  and  the  fulness  of  her  earthly 
joy ;  so  the  members  of  the  human  family  are  to  look  up  to  Christ  as  their  Head. 
None  of  us  is  complete  without  Him.  And  just  as  tru^t  and  obedience  unite  a 
woman  to  her  husband  and  enable  him  to  fulfil  his  obligations  to  her,  so  it  is  by 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

faith  and  submission  that  Jesus  is  able  to  accomplish  His  saving,  life-giving  work. 
There  is  thei'efore  dee])  truth  in  the  representation  of  the  exaltation  of  tlae  Church 
to  glory  as  a  marriage  supper.  II.  In  its  heavenly  aechetypes — God's  headship 
over  Christ.  1.  In  His  Divine,  eternal  essence  Christ  is  "the  brightness  of  His 
Father's  glory,"  Ac,  God's  realised  ideal,  a  vessel  into  which  God  lias  poured  all 
the  fulness  of  the  Divine  nature,  a  vessel  of  Godhead  eternally  equal  to  that  which 
it  contains  and  perfectly  full.  2.  In  the  light  of  this  look  once  more  at  your 
relationship  to  Christ.  "  As  the  Father  hath  loved  Me  "  (John  xv.  9,  10).  We  are 
to  reflect  Christ  just  as  He  reflects  God,  and  appears,  therefore,  full  of  grace  and 
truth.  Conclusion  :  "  The  head  of  every  man  is  Christ."  1.  Then  Christ  is  just 
yourself,  idealised  and  perfected — the  prophecy  of  what  you  are  to  become.  He  is 
not  a  gloritied  man  merely,  but  glorified  humanity.  2.  This  great  fact  throws  light 
on  the  doctrine  of  substitution.  Christ  became  man,  not  a.  man.  Just  as  we  were 
all  in  Adam,  and  are  so  many  multiplied  copies  of  him,  so  Christ  became  the  second 
Adam,  and  God  looks  at  us  in  Him.  Since,  then.  He  was  a  representative  man, 
all  He  did  and  suffered  on  earth  had  a  representative  character.  [E.  W.  Shalders, 
B.A.)  Human  and  Divine  relations  : — There  exist  three  relations  which  together 
form  a  sort  of  hierarchy  :  lowest  in  the  scale,  the  purely  human  relation  between 
man  and  woman ;  higher,  the  Divine-human  relation  between  Christ  and  man ; 
highest,  the  purely  Divine  relation  between  God  and  Christ.  The  common  term 
whereby  Paul  characterises  these  relations  is  "  head,"  or  chief.  This  figurative 
term  includes  two  ideas — commucity  of  life,  and  inequality  within  this  community. 
So  between  the  man  and  the  woman,  by  the  bond  of  marriage  there  is  formed 
between  them  the  bond  of  a  common  life,  but  in  such  a  way  that  the  one  is  the 
strong  and  directing  element,  the  other  the  receptive  and  dependent  element.  The 
same  is  the  case  in  the  relation  between  Christ  and  the  man.  Formed  by  the  bond 
of  faith,  it  also  establishes  a  community  of  life,  in  which  there  are  distinguished  an 
active  and  directing  principle  and  a  receptive  and  directed  factor.  An  analogous 
relation  aj^pears  higher  still  in  the  mystery  of  the  Divine  essence.  By  the  bond  of 
filiation  there  is  between  Christ  and  God  communion  of  Divine  life,  but  such  that 
impulse  proceeds  from  the  Father,  and  that  "  the  Son  doeth  nothing  but  what  He 
seeth  the  Father  do."  The  relation  between  Christ  and  the  man  is  put  first.  It  is, 
so  to  speak,  the  link  of  union  between  the  other  two,  reflecting  the  sublimity  of  the 
one  and  marking  the  other  with  a  sacred  character,  which  should  secure  it  from  the 
violence  with  which  it  is  threatened.  (Prof.  Godet.)  The  conduct  and  deport- 
ment of  Christian  women  : — A  broad  principle  laid  down  by  Christianity  was  human 
equality:  "there  is  neither  uiale  nor  female,  but  ye  are  all  one  in  Christ  Jesus." 
We  all  know  how  fruitful  a  cause  of  popular  commotion  the  teaching  of  equality 
has  been  in  every  age,  and  at  Corinth  this  doctrine  threatened  to  lead  to  much  social 
confusion.  A  claim  was  made  for  a  right  in  woman  to  do  all  that  men  should  do^ 
to  preach  and  pray,  e.g.,  in  public,  and  therefore  to  appear  as  men,  unveiled  in 
public.  This  latter  the  apostle  here  prohibits — I.  On  the  ground  that  it  was  a 
EASH  DEFIANCE  OF  ESTABLISHED  RULES  OF  DECORUM.  The  Veiled  head  is  a  symbol 
of — 1.  Modesty ;  for  to  jjray  unveiled  was  to  insult  all  the  conventional  feelings  of 
Jew  and  Gentile.  The  Holy  Ghost,  however,  has  not  imposed  on  the  Church  this 
particular  fashion,  but  the  principle  contained  in  it  is  eternal ;  and  it  is  impossible 
to  decide  how  much  of  our  ijublic  morality  and  private  purity  is  owing  to  the  spirit 
which  refuses  to  overstep  the  smallest  bound  of  ordinary  decorum.  2.  Dependence. 
St.  Paul  perceived  that  the  law  of  Christian  equality  was  quite  consistent  with  the 
vast  system  of  subordination  running  through  the  universe  (vers.  3,  11,  12).  He 
distinguishes  between  inferiority  and  subordination ;  each  sex  exists  in  a  certain 
order,  not  one  as  greater  than  the  other,  but  both  great  and  right  in  being  what  God 
intended  tliem  to  be.  II.  By  an  appeal  to  natural  instincts  and  propriety  (vers. 
14,  15).  Fanaticism  defies  nature.  Christianity  refines  it  and  respects  it.  It 
develops  each  nation,  sex,  and  individual,  according  to  their  own  nature — making 
man  more  manly  and  woman  more  womanly.  But  let  us  not  forget  that  here,  too, 
there  are  exceptions.  Beware  of  a  dead,  hard  rule.  There  have  been  many 
instances  in  which  one  man  standing  against  the  world  has  been  right,  and  the 
world  wrong,  as  Elijah,  Athanasius,  Luther,  and  others.  But  in  questions  of 
morality,  propriety,  decency,  when  we  find  our  own  private  judgment  contradicted 
by  the  general  experience,  habit,  and  belief  of  all  the  best  around  us,  then  the 
doctrine  of  this  chupter  commands  us  to  believe  that  the  many  are  right  and  that  we 
are  wrong.  {F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.)  The  veil: — St.  Paul  is  now  compelled  to 
qualify  tlae  general  commendation  of  ver.  2.     He  heard  with  surprise  and  vexation 


CHAP,  xi.l  I.  CORINTHIANS.  81 

that  women  presumed  to  address  the  assembled  Christians  unveiled,  to  the  scandal 
of  all  sober-minded  Orientals  and  Greeks.  It  is  a  singular  s^jecimen  of  the 
stran|,'e  matters  that  came  before  Paul  for  decision  when  the  care  of  all  the 
Churches  lay  upon  him.  I.  What  was  the  intention  op  Chkistian  women  in 
MAKING  A  demonstration  SO  tJNFEMiNiNE  ?  1.  TLrougliout  this  letter  Paul  is 
correcting  the  hasty  impressions  which  the  new  believeis  were  receiving  regarding 
their  position  as  Christians.  A  flood  of  new  ideas  was  suddenly  poured  in  upon 
their  minds,  one  of  which  was  the  equality  of  all  before  God  aid  of  a  Saviour  for 
all  alike.  There  was  neither  Jew  nor  Greek,  male  nor  female,  tfec,  now.  And  it 
dawned  on  the  woman  that  she  was  neither  man's  toy  nor  slave,  but  that  she  had  a 
life  to  frame  for  herself.  She  was  not  dependent  on  men  for  her  Christian  privi- 
leges ;  ought  sbe  not  to  show  this  by  laying  aside  the  veil,  which  was  the  acknow- 
ledged badge  of  dependence?  2.  Among  the  Greeks  it  was  the  uuiver.-al  custom 
for  the  women  to  appear  in  public  with  the  head  covered,  commonly  with  the 
corner  of  their  shawl  drawn  over  their  head  like  a  hood.  It  was  the  one  significant 
rite  in  marriage  that  she  assumed  the  veil  in  token  that  now  her  husband  was  her 
head.  This  covering  could  be  dispensed  with  only  in  jDlnces  where  they  were 
secluded  from  public  view.  It  was  therefore  the  badf^e  which  proclaimed  that  she 
who  wore  it  was  a  private,  not  a  public,  person,  finding  her  duties  at  home,  not 
abroad.  It  was  the  man's  place  to  serve  the  State  or  the  public,  the  woman's  place 
to  serve  the  man.     II.  This  movement  op  the  CoiiiNTuiAN  women  Paul  meets  by 

EEMINmNG    them    THAT    PERSONAL    EQUALITY    IS    PERFECTLY    CONSISTENT    WITH    SOCIAL 

subordination.  The  woman  must  not  argue  that  because  she  is  independent  of  her 
husband  in  the  greater  sphere  she  must  also  be  independent  of  him  in  the  less 
(ver.  3).  This  principle  is  of  incalculable  imijorfance  and  very  wide  and  constant 
application.  1.  Whatever  is  meant  by  the  natural  equality  of  men,  it  cannot  mean 
that  none  are  to  have  authority  over  others.  In  order  to  the  harmony  of  society 
there  is  a  gradation  of  ranks  ;  and  social  grievances  result,  not  from  the  existeuce 
of  social  distinctions,  but  from  their  abuse.  This  gradation,  then,  involves  Paul's 
inference  (vers.  4,  5).  The  veil  being  the  recognised  badge  of  subordination,  when 
a  man  appears  veiled  he  would  seem  to  acknowledge  S(^me  one  present  and  visible 
as  bis  head,  and  would  thus  dishonour  Christ,  his  true  Head.  A  woman,  on  the 
other  hand,  appearing  unveiled  would  seem  to  say  that  she  acknowledges  no  visible 
human  head,  and  thereby  dishonours  her  head — i.e.,  her  husband — and  so  doing, 
dishonours  herself.  She  puts  herself  on  the  level  of  the  woman  with  a  shaven  head, 
which  both  among  Jews  and  Greeks  was  a  brand  of  disgrace.  2.  This  subordination 
has  its  roots  in  nature  (vers.  7,  8).  (1)  Man  is  the  glory  of  God  because  he  is  His 
image  and  is  fitted  to  exhibit  in  actual  life  the  excellences  which  make  God  worthy 
of  our  love  and  worship.  But  while  man  directly,  woman  indirectly,  fulfils  this 
purpose  of  God.  She  is  God's  glory  by  being  man's  glory.  She  exhibits  God's 
excellences  by  creating  and  cherishing  excellence  in  man  (vers.  8,  9).  The  position 
assigned  to  woman  as  the  glory  of  man  is  therefore  far  removed  from  the  view 
which  cynically  proclaims  her  man's  mere  convenience.  (2)  That  this  is  woman's 
normal  sphere  is  indicated  even  by  her  unalterable  physical  characteristics.  By 
nature  woman  is  endowed  with  a  symbol  of  modesty  and  retirement.  The  veil  is 
merely  the  artificial  continuation  of  her  natural  gift  of  hair.  The  long  hair  of  the 
Greek  fop  or  of  the  English  cavalier  was  accepted  by  the  people  as  an  indication  of 
effeminate  and  luxurious  living.  And  nature,  speaking  through  this  visible  sign  of 
the  woman's  hair,  tells  her  that  her  place  is  in  the  home,  not  in  the  city  or  the 
camp  ;  in  the  attitude  of  free  and  loving  subordination,  not  in  the  seat  of  authority 
and  rule.  In  other  respects  also  the  physical  constitution  of  woman  points  to  a 
similar  conclusion — e.g.,  her  shorter  stature  and  slighter  frame, her  higher  pitch  ot 
voice,  her  more  graceful  form  and  movement.  And  similar  indications  are  found 
in  her  mental  peculiarities.  She  has  the  gifts  which  tit  her  for  influencing  indi- 
viduals ;  man  has  those  qualities  which  enable  him  to  deal  with  persons  in  the 
mass.  Not  all  women,  of  course,  are  of  the  distinctively  womanly  type.  A  Brito- 
marte  may  arm  herself  and  overthrow  the  strongest  knights.  A  Joan  of  Arc  may 
infuse  into  a  nation  her  own  warlike  and  patriotic  ardour.  In  art,  in  literature,  in 
science,  feminine  names  may  occupy  some  of  the  highest  places.  In  our  own  day 
many  careers  have  been  opened  to  women  from  which  they  had  hitherto  been 
debarred.  Conclusion  :  A  woman  is  a  woman  still  though  she  become  a  Christian ; 
a  subject  must  honour  his  king  although  by  becoming  a  Christian  he  is  himself  in 
one  aspect  above  all  authority ;  a  servant  will  show  his  Christianity,  not  by 
assuming  an  insolent  familiarity  with  his  Christian  master,  but  by  treating  him 
VOL.    II.  6 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xr. 

•with  respectful  fidelity.  It  forms  a  great  part  of  our  duty  to  accept  our  own 
place  without  envying  others,  and  to  do  honour  to  those  to  whom  honour  is  due. 
{M.Dods,D.D.) 

Vers.  4-7.  Every  man  praying  or  prophesying'  with  Ms  head  covered  dis- 
honoureth  his  head. — Decorum  in  the  lioufe  of  God  : — 1.  It  is  possible  to  dishonour 
Christ  in  our  holiest  services.  2.  It  is  not  enougli  to  pray  and  preach  in  the  spirit 
- — some  regard  is  due  to  propriety  of  manner  and  demeanour.  3.  This  is  especially 
necessary  in  public  worship,  lest  we  dishonour  Christ  whom  we  represent  before 
others.  4.  Every  true  and  enlightened  Christian  will  tlierefore  study  what  is 
decorous,  as  well  as  what  is  religious.  {J.  Lijth,  D.D.)  The  j}roprieties  of  jncblic 
ivorsJtijy : — I.  Explain  the  improprieties  referred  to  in  the  text.  These  were 
determined  by  natural  and  siiiritual  relations.  Required  apostolic  prescription, 
whifh  was  fixed  in  harmony  with  prevailing  custom  and  opinion.  II.  Apply. 
1.  Tlie  proprieties  of  public  worship  must  to  some  extent  be  governed  by  the 
customs  of  the  times.  2.  Because  Christianity  inculcates  whatsoever  is  of  good 
report.  3.  Yet  the  outward  form  must  be  iiervaded  witli  spiritual  life.  (Ibid.) 
For  a  man  ...  is  the  image  and  glory  ot  God. — Man  is — I.  The  image  of  God. 
Iiiiaijo  if  an  abbreviation  of  i)iiitago,  soaietliing  more  than  imitatio — not  as  one  orange 
is  the  likeness  of  anotner ;  it  means  the  copy  of  an  archetype,  as,  e.g.,  the  sovereign's 
head  on  a  coin  (Matt.  xx.  20),  or  the  sun's  reflection  in  water.  A  catliedral  in 
photograph  is  a  copy  of  a  copy ;  for  it  is  an  image  of  a  catliedral  in  stone,  and  this 
again  is  the  image  of  the  oiiginal  pre-existino;  in  the  mind  of  the  architect.  God  is 
both  the  architect  and,  within  due  limits,  the  archetype  of  man.  But  tlie  relation 
between  the  two  consists  in  something  more  than  similitude,  even  in  affinity  of 
essence.  For  man  is  the  image  of  God  by  virtue  of  his  spiritual  nature,  which, 
because  of  the  primal  inbreathing  (Gen.  ii.  7),  is  akin  to  the  Divine.  II.  He  is  the 
GLORY  OF  God.  The  Divine  glory  itself  is  the  eternal  self -manifestation  to  the 
Triune  God  of  His  own  holy  nature.  In  the  Divine  counsel  of  creation  this  inner 
self-manifestation  was  to  become  an  outer  manifestation  filling  all  creation.  But 
it  was  through  man,  the  created  lord  of  the  cosmos,  the  representative  of  God  in 
the  universe,  the  connecting  link  between  heaven  and  earth,  that  the  glory  of  God 
was  to  be  commnnicated  to  the  cosmos.  As  this  derived  glory  was  to  be  the 
effluence  of  the  self-manifested  Divine  gloiy,  which  is  itself  the  eternal  effluence  of 
Deity;  so  man  in  his  higher  nature  of  spirit,  inbreathed  into  him  from  Spirit, 
was  created  actually  the  image  of  God,  but  in  his  lower  nature  of  body,  moulded 
from  earth,  was  created  potentially  the  glory  of  God,  i.e.,  constituted  with  a  possi- 
bility, contingent  on  obedience,  of  a  glorified  body  and  soul  and  spirit.  Tlie  design 
was  baffled  by  Satan  for  a  season.  Meanwhile  humiliated  in  body,  yet  now  trans- 
formed in  spirit,  fallen  man  awaits  in  faith  and  hope  the  unveiling  of  the  "new 
creation  "  in  Christ  and  his  own  bodily  assimilation  to  the  body  of  His  glory. 
(Canon  Evans.) 

Ver.  10.  For  this  cause  ought  the  woman  to  have  power  on  her  head  because 

of  the  angels. — Power  on  the  icoman's  head  hecauac  of  tlie  angels  : — 1.  Hardly  any- 
thing is  more  notable  in  St.  Paul  than  his  impatience  of  mere  maxims  and  rules  of 
conduct.  He  can  never  rest  till  he  has  based  them  on  large  general  principles 
which  may  be  applied  under  all  changes  of  condition.  So  here  with  regard  to 
woman's  dress.  2.  Paul  had  taught  both  the  spiritual  equality  of  woman  with,  and 
her  subordination  to,  man.  But  these  eager  converts  had  not  minds  large  enough 
to  hold  and  reconcile  both  these  great  principles  :  they  seized  impetuously  on  that 
which  fell  in  with  their  wishes,  and  let  the  other  go.  True,  in  a  subordinate 
position  they  may  show  an  equal,  even  a  superior,  ability  ;  just  as  a  designer  in  a 
factory,  or  a  governess  in  a  family,  or  a  manager  in  a  bank,  may  display  higher 
gifts  than  their  social  or  official  superiors.  But  how  do  they  prove  their  superiority? 
Not  by  rebelling  against  their  position,  but  by  excelling  in  it.  So  with  woniRU. 
She  proves  her  equality  with  man,  not  by  rebelling  against  her  subordinate  social 
position,  but  by  discharging  its  duties  with  an  ability  equal  or  superior  to  that 
shown  by  her  husband  in  his  different  sphere.  Some  of  the  Corinthian  women  did 
not  see  that.  They  thought  to  assert  the  equality  of  the  sexes  by  praying  and 
prophesying  in  church  instead  of  ruling  their  households.  As  a  sign  of  their 
enfranchisement  they  appeared  in  public  unveiled,  and  so  became  bad  as  women 
that  they  might  prove  themselves  as  good  as  men.  And  had  the  Christian  women 
gone  unveiled,  when  the  absence  of  the  veil  was  the  open  stamp  of  harlotry,  we  can 


.CHAP.  XI.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  83 

easily  conceive  what  a  fatal  obstacle  would  have  been  thrown  in  the  path  of  the 
infant  Church.  3.  It  was  no  mere  question  of  maxims  and  rules,  therefore,  with 
which  St.  Paul  had  to  deal ;  it  was  a  question  of  principles  vital  and  profound. 
And  hence  he  appeals — I.  To  Nature  (vers.  13-15).  1.  Man  is  by  nature  unveiled, 
has  short  hair  ;  woman  is  veiled  with  her  long  hair.  The  Divine  intention  is  thus 
revealed.  In  handling  and  attiring  the  body  we  are  to  take  the  suggestions  of 
nature  as  ordinances  of  God.  Man  is  to  go  unveiled,  woman  is  to  use,  or  to 
imitate,  the  natural  veil  which  God  has  given  her.  The  Greeks  and  Bomans  did 
thus  interpret  and  obey  the  voice  of  Nature.  While  their  noblest  men  cut  their 
hair  close  and  short,  they  held  long  flowing  tresses  as  among  the  most  i)otent 
charms  of  women — as  a  real  "power "on  their  heads.  2.  St.  Paul  appeals  to 
Nature  ;  from  how  many  evils  would  the  Church  have  been  saved  had  his  example 
been  followed  ?  Had  we  listened  to  her,  had  we  asked  with  St.  Paul,  "  What  does 
Nature  itself  teach  ?  "  we  should  have  had  more  of  his  free,  generous,  catholic 
spirit.  II.  To  the  Scriptures  (vers.  7-9  ;  cf.  Gen.  i.  26,  ii.  18,  21).  1.  Man,  said 
Moses,  was  made  "in  the  image  of  God";  therefore,  adds  St.  Paul,  man  is  a 
"  glory  "  of  God.  Hence  he  ought  not  to  veil  the  head  which  bears  an  impress  and 
reflects  a  glory  so  Divine.  But  "  the  woman  is  the  glory  of  man  "  ;  she  was  taken 
not  from  rude  clay,  and  not  from  any  remote  or  uncomely  member  of  man's 
body,  but  from  his  very  heart.  Therefore  she  is  his  "glory  "  ;  she  represents  what 
is  tinest  in  him.  Nevertheless,  the  apostle  insists  (vers.  8,  9),  although  she  is  his 
glory,  because  she  is  his  glory,  she  is  to  defer  and  minister  to  hun  from  whom  she 
.sprang,  just  as  the  highest  spirits  are  those  who  serve  most  and  best.  2.  "And 
therefore  ought  the  woman  to  have  power  on  her  head."  Now  one  of  Paul's  great 
fixed  thoughts  is,  that  we  rule  by  serving;  that  to  become  great  we  must  make 
ourselves  of  the  least.  He  has  been  describing  the  subordinate  position  of  woman. 
But  if  she  is  to  serve,  she  must  be  strong.  To  the  Hebjews  unshorn  hair,  like  that 
•of  Samson,  was  the  sign  of  strength.  And  the  unshorn  hair  of  the  woman  is  "  the 
power,"  or  the  symbol  of  the  power,  which  her  service  requires.  And  does  not 
Nature  confirm  his  thought  ?  How  often  has  a  thread  of  golden  hair  drawn  strong 
men  across  the  world  1  How  often  have  soft  locks  proved  stronger  bonds  than 
bars  of  steel !  Who  does  not  remember  the  little  packet,  all  blotted  with  tears, 
which  they  found  in  a  corner  of  poor  Swift's  desk,  with  these  words  on  it,  "  Only  a 
woman's  hair  "  ?  3.  But  what  are  we  to  make  of  "  the  angels,"  for  whose  sake 
woman  is  not  to  put  off  this  power  ?  Now  closely  following  the  passage  in  Genesis 
to  which  Paul  refers,  there  is  the  story  of  the  first  infraction  of  the  true  relation  of 
the  sexes  (Gen.  vi.  1-4),  which  the  rabbis  read  thus : — The  daughters  of  men, 
departing  from  their  primitive  simplicity  and  decorum,  laid  aside  their  veils,  and 
tricked  out  their  hair  and  faces  with  ornaments.  The  angels  saw  them,  and  grew 
•  enamoured  of  their  beauty,  and  fell  from  their  blessedness.  Possibly  St.  Paul 
alludes  to  this  here.  If  only  "  because  of  the  angels"  therefore,  the  Corinthian 
■women  should  carry  this  veil  on  their  heads.  The  rabbis  were  so  possessed  by 
this  legend  that  they  were  constantly  making  proverbs  about  it.  Thus,  Piabbi 
Simeon  used  to  say,  "  If  a  woman's  head  be  uncovered,  evil  angels  come  and  sit 
upon  it."  The  "fathers"  of  the  Church  believed  it.  The  Arabs  and  Turks 
believe  it  to  this  day.  They  tell  us  that  "  Khadijah  said  to  Mahommed  after  his 
first  vision,  'If  the  angel  appear  again,  let  me  know.'  Gabriel  appeared  to  bim 
again.  He  said  to  her, '  I  see  him.'  His  wife  placed  his  head  first  on  her  left,  then 
on  her  right  shoulder,  and  asked,  '  Seest  thou  him  still?'  He  answered  '  Yea.' 
Then  she  said,  '  Turn,  and  lie  on  my  bosom  ' ;  which,  when  he  had  done,  she  asked 
again,  '  Seest  thou  him? '  He  answered,  '  Yea.'  Then  she  took  her  veil  from  her 
head,  and  asked,  '  Seest  thou  him  still  ? '  And  this  time  he  answered, '  Nay.'  Then 
she  said,  'By  heaven,  it  is  true,  it  is  true  !  It  was  an  angel,  and  not  a  devil ! '  " 
Having  told  this  story,  the  Arabian  historian  remarks  and  explains,  "  Khadijah 
knew  that  a  good  angel  must  fly  before  the  face  of  an  unveiled  woman,  whilst  a 
•devil  would  bear  the  sight  very  well."  III.  To  Christian  doctrine  (ver.  3). 
1.  But  is  not  Christ  just  as  truly  the  head  of  the  woman  as  of  the  man  ?  Yes, 
viewed  simply  as  human  beings,  the  relation  of  women  to  Christ  is  as  direct  and 
vital  as  that  of  men.  But  look  at  them  as  forming  a  distinct  sex,  as  members  of 
the  social  order.  In  that  order  there  must  be  grades.  In  an  empire  there  must  be 
a  ruling  class,  or  person  ;  and  in  a  household  there  must  be  a  ruling  sex.  When  we 
-ask.  Which  ?  the  Bible  replies,  "  Man  is  first  in  creation,  first  in  dignity.  W^oman 
"was  made  for  him,  not  he  for  her."  And  with  this  natural  order  and  subordination, 
ithe  equal  spiritual  relation  to  Christ  is  not  to  interfere.     Christ  did  not  come  tc 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

thwart  or  to  reverse,  but  to  perfect,  human  nature  and  human  society.     2.  What 
grade  we  hold  in  this  social  order,  and  what  part  we  play,  is  not  by  any  means  the 
main  question  ;  but  how  we  till  it,  how  we  play  it.     The  woman,  e.g.,  though  equal 
in  nature,  holds  the  subordinate  social  grade ;  but  if  she  play  her  part  well,  she 
becomes  perfect  as  a  woman.    But  suppose  a  wife  to  rebel,  what  happens?    Either, 
casting  off  all  restraint,  she  divorces  herself  from  him  rather  than  obey  him  ;  or 
she  openly  rules  where  she  ought  to  obey,  and  is  condemned  by  her  own  instincts 
and  her  own  sex  even  more  severely  than  by  men.     3.  But  before  we  can  fully 
reach  Paul's  seuse  of  the  sacredness  of  "  the  head,"  we  must  remember  that  the 
pious  Hebrew  not  only  retained  hat  or  turban  when  he  entered  the  sanctuary,  but 
also  drew  over  it  the  tallith,  a  sacred  veil,  kept  exclusively  for  public  worship.     By 
this  he  meant  to  express   reverence  for  the   Divine  Presence — that  he  was   not 
worthy  to  stand  in  it,  that  he  could  not  look  on  God  and  live.     But  in  Paul's 
scheme  of  thought  Christ  was  the  head  of  the  man.     For  a  man  to  cover  his  head 
in  worship  was  therefore  to  veil  Christ;  it  was  to  imply  that  He  needed  to  veil  His 
face  before  God.     Man  must  not  thus  dishonour  Christ,  Ins  head.     But  the  very 
reason  which  made  it  right  for  man,  made  it  wrong  for  woman,  to  worship  unveiled, 
for  her  head  was  tbe  man.     And  to  uncover  her  head  iu  worship  was  to  imply  that 
man  needed  no  veil  when  he  came  before  God.     Let  her  worship,  therefore,  with 
head  veiled,  and  thus  bear  witness  to  the  fact  that  sinful  man  was  unworthy  so 
much  as  to  lift  up  his  eyes  unto  heaven.     Conclusion  :  Let  us  learn  from  St.  Paul 
to  apply  the  larg^st  and  deepest  principles  to  the  smallest  details  of  conduct  and 
duty  ;  but  let  us  also  learn  to  apply  them  with  his  freedom.     Are  we  invariably  to 
adopt  and  enforce  these  rules  ?     Is  a  woman  never  to  speak  in  public,  and  always 
to  wear  a  veil?     Is  it  wrong  for  a  man  in  India,  or  at  an  outdoor  service,  to  worship 
with   covered  head  ?      To   make  St.  Paul's   rule  inflexible   and   universal  would 
be  to  sin  against  his  spirit.     On  Greeks  and  Homaus  he  enforces  attention  to  the 
decorums  of  their  race  and  time,  and  gives  them  perfectly  good  reasons  for  adhering 
to  them.     Principles  abide,  but  customs  change.     And  we  then  act  most  in  the 
spirit  of  Paul  wben  we  freely  apply  his  principles  to  our  changed  customs.     (.S\ 
Cox,  D.D.)         Power  on  icoincm^s  head  : — It  is  argued  that  exousia  might  have  been 
used  for  "  veil  "  or  "  covering,"  as  a  local  and  Tarsian  expression.     But  this  is  not 
very  probable.     Many  comnii-ntators,  there  ore,  prefer  to  regard  the  word  as  one 
which,  though  originally  metaphorical,  would  have  been  widely  understood  to  mean 
"  a  veil,"  just  as  luipcrhnn  is  used  for  a  female  ornament,  regnum  for  an  imperial 
crown,  and  trireijno  for  the  triple  tiai  a  of  the  popes.     Thus  Diodorus  Siculus  uses 
the  Greek  word  ha.sileia,  "kingdom,"  to  mean  the  crown,  or  token  of  a  kingdom, 
describing  the  statue  of  a  queen  as  "  having  three  liinrjdo)iis  upon  its  head."     It  is 
a  curious  fact  that  in  Hebrew  the  word  radUl,  which  sometimes  means  "  a  veil,"  is 
derived  from  a  verb  of  which  one  of  the  meanings  is  "he  f^ubdued  " ;  and  it  is  not 
impossible  that  the  knowledge  of  this  may  have  smoothed  the  way  for  the  apostle's 
unusual  phrase.     One  more  explanation  is,  that  exoudan,  etvmologically,  may  also 
mean  "  existence,"  and  tbat  St.  Paul  selected  it  because  it  might  serve  to  indicate 
that  woman's  dignity  consists  in  her  being  created  from  or  out  of  the  man  {uvna  iK 
avSpu^).    But  modern  criticism  seems  to  be  settling  down  into  the  simple  familiar 
meaning  of  the  word  "power,"  in  the  obvious  sense  of  "a  sign  of  power."     But 
the  question  then  naturally  arises,  "  A  sign  of  whose  power?  "     I.  Some  say,  "  Her 
OWN  POWER,"  and  refer  this  not  to  the  veil  which  the  woman  is  directed  to  wear 
upon  her  head,  but  to  the  glory  of  her  natural  covering,  her  own  long  hair.     They 
argue  that  this  is  one  of  the  chief  elements  of  female  beauty — "Love  in  her  rosy 
cheeks  did  basking  lie,  love  walked  in  the  sunny  masses  of  her  hair."     They  quote 
such  instances  as  that  of  Swift,  in  whose  desk  was  found  a  folded  paper  containing 
one  faded  tress,  and  on  it  written,  "  Only  a  woman's  hair."     II.  The  context,  how- 
ever, does  not  at  all  favour  this  view  ;  and  we  see  from  chap.  xii.  22,  23,  that  St. 
Paul  considered  a  covering  as  a  proof  of  inferiority  in  honour.     Our  translators 
seem  to  have  hit  on  the  only  true  meaning  of  the  expression,  in  the  margin  of  our 
Bibles,  "A  covering,  in  sign  that  she  is  under  the  poweb  of  her  hdsband."     Any 
api^arent   harshness   in  this  meaning  is  at   once  dispelled — 1.  By  the  analogies 
("  hiiperiuin,"  triregiw,  etc.),  which  we  have  already  adduced.     These  show  how 
easily  the  word  "power"  could  come  to  be  "a  sign  of  power  "by  tbe  common 
figure  of  speech  whii-li  is  called  "  metonymy  " ;  and  if  so,  it  is  much  more  likely  to 
mean  a  sign  of  her  husband's  power  over  her  than  a  sign  of  her  own  power,  because 
the  whole  context  is  eufircJng  the  superiority  of  the  man,  and  bears  on  the  "He 
shall  rule  over  thee  "  of  Gen.  iii.  16.     2.  Because  to  this  day  the  veil  is  regarded  in 


CHAP.  XI.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  85 

the  unchanging  East  as  a  sign  of  subordination,  and  the  traveller  Chardin  says  that 
in  Persia  "  only  married  women  wear  it,  and  it  is  the  mark  by  which  it  is  known 
that  they  are  under  subjection."  And  in  the  Koman  customs  the  putting  on  of  a 
veil  in  marriage  was  a  sign  that  a  woman  lost  all  independent  rights  of  citizenship. 
3.  Because  there  is  a  close  analogy  between  this  passage  and  Genesis  xx.  16,  where 
"covering  of  the  eyes  "  is  generally  understood  to  mean  "  a  veil,"  and  is  by  the 
IjXX.  rendered  n/o';,  which  properly  means  "  honour."  Lastly,  it  is  to  me  no  small 
confirmation  of  this  plain  and  simple  sense  that  we  find  it  in  the  noble  verse  of 
Milton,  who  seems  to  combine  the  notions  of  a  woman's  hair  being  at  once  a 
covering  and  a  glory  to  herself,  and  a  sign  of  subjection  to  her  husband ; — 

"  His  fair  large  front  and  eye  sublime  declared 
Absolute  rule,  and  hyacinthine  locks 
Bound  from  his  parted  forelock  manly  hung 
Clustering,  but  not  beneath  his  shoulder  broad  : 
She,  as  a  veil,  down  to  the  slender  waist 
Her  unadorned  golden  tresses  wore 
Dishevelled,  but  in  wanton  ringlets  waved 
As  the  vine  waves  her  tendrils  ;  which  implied 
Subjection,  but  required  with  gentle  sway, 
And  by  her  yielded,  by  him  best  received." 

— (Archdeacon  Farrar.) 

Because  of  the  angeh  : — The  absence  of  "  and  "  suggests  that  it  is  a  motive,  not 
additional  to,  but  confirmatory  of,  that  given  in  ver.  9.  Already  (iv.  9)  we  have 
seen  tl  e  angels  contemplating  the  apostles'  hardships.  They  attend  upon  men 
(Heb.  i.  14),  are  placed  side  by  side  of  the  Church  militant  (xii.  22),  and  desire  to 
look  into  the  teaching  of  the  prophets  (1  Pet.  i.  12).  Now,  if  tbey  take  interest  in 
men,  they  must  take  special  interest  in  those  assemblies  in  which  men  unitedly 
draw  near  to  God,  and  which  have  so  great  influence  upon  the  spiritual  life  of  men. 
We  must  therefore  conceive  them  present  at  the  public  worship  of  the  church. 
Now  the  presence  of  persons  better  than  ourselves  always  strengthens  our  in- 
stinctive perception  of  right  and  wrong,  and  deters  us  from  improper  action.  And 
the  moral  impression  thus  produced  is  almost  always  correct.  To  this  instinctive 
perception  Paul  appealed  by  the  word  "  shame  "  in  ver.  6  ;  and  has  revealed  its 
source  in  the  purpose  of  woman's  creation.  He  now  strengthens  his  appeal  by 
reminding  us  ^that  we  worship  in  the  presence  of  the  inhabitants  of  heaven.  For 
every  right  instinct  in  us  is  strengthened  by  the  presence  of  those  better  than  our- 
selves. Surely  a  remembrance  of  these  celestial  fellow-worshippers  will  deter  us 
from  all  that  is  unseemly.  {Prof.  Beet.)  Because  of  the  angels  : — I.  Some 
suppose  that  the  words  refer  to  eeal  angels.  1.  The  holy  angels.  It  appears  to 
have  been  the  opinion  of  the  Jews  that  the  holy  angels  were  present  at  their 
religious  assemblies  (Psa.  cxxviii.  1 ;  Eccles.  v.  6).  Bengel  supposes  that  the 
reason  why  the  apostle  names  the  angels  is,  because  as  the  angels  are  represented 
.as  veiling  their  faces  before  God,  so  women  ought  also  to  veil  their  faces  when  they 
worship.  Erasmus  remarks,  "  If  a  woman  has  arrived  at  that  pitch  of  shameless- 
uess  that  she  does  not  fear  the  eyes  of  men,  let  her  at  least  cover  her  head  on 
account  of  the  angels  who  are  present  at  your  assemblies."  But  such  an  explana- 
tion appears  to  be  far-fetched.  St.  Paul  does  not  lay  much  stress  elsewhere  on  the 
sentiments  of  the  angels  ;  he  employs  reasons  far  stronger  and  more  telling.  And 
certainly  the  above  reason  is  not  one  which  would  suggest  itself  as  a  corrective  to 
■disorders  in  public  worship.  2.  Evil  angels.  It  is  supposed  that  the  apostle  here 
accommodates  himself  to  this  extravagant  notion,  which  arose  from  a  gross  mis- 
conception of  the  words  "  the  sons  "  (or  angels)  "  of  God  saw  the  daughters  of  men 
that  they  were  fair  ;  and  they  took  them  wives  of  all  which  tbey  chose."  Women 
should  veil  themselves,  because  they  might  tempt  or  be  templed  by  evil  angels. 
Dr.  McKnight  supposes  that  the  reference  is  to  the  seduction  of  tbe  woman  by  the 
artifices  of  the  serpent ;  and  that  the  wearing  of  the  veil  was  to  be  the  perpetual 
memorial  of  her  fall  and  of  her  subjection  to  man  in  consequence.  We  cannot 
imagine  that  Paul  adopted  the  rabbinical  notion,  nor  can  we  see  the  force  of  that 
notion  as  an  argument  for  women  veiling  their  faces.  Nor  does  the  view  that  the 
reference  is  to  the  seduction  of  Eve  recommend  itself ;  for  this  seduction  was  not 
effected  by  evil  spirits  in  general,  but  by  one  pre-eminentl;-,  namely,  the  devil. 
And  in  general,  if  evil  angels  were  meant,  we  would  expect  some  statement  to  that 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xi^ 

effect  by  the  apostle,  as  "  the  angels  that  sinned,"  "  the  angels  that  kept  not  their 
first  estate."  II.  Others  suppose  that  the  word  refers  to  the  ministers,  who  were 
specially  set  apart  to  conduct  the  worship  of  the  congregation.  The  name  angel,  it 
is  said,  is  conferred  on  ministers,  both  in  the  Old  Testament  and  in  the  New  (Mai. 
ii.  7 ;  Eev.  ii.  3).  Such  a  name  is  also  sufficiently  appropriate,  as  ministers  are- 
ihe  messengers  of  God.  The  reason,  then,  here  assigned  is,  that  women  should 
veil  their  faces  lest  they  should  draw  away  the  affections  or  distract  the  attention 
of  the  ministers  or  presidents  of  the  assemblies.  But  the  term  dyyeXoi  is  never 
applied  to  mini>;ters  by  Paul.  Nor  is  it  certain  that  by  the  angels  of  the  aiDocalyptic 
Churches  the  ministers  are  meant.  TIL  Others  suppose  that  the  reference  is  to 
HEATHEN  MESSENGEES  OR  SPIES.  In  the  New  Testament  the  word  frequently  occurs 
in  the  sense  of  messenger  (Matt.  xi.  10;  Luke  vii.  24,  ix.  52).  But  the  most 
remarkable  passage,  and  the  one  which  bears  most  closely  upon  our  subject,  is- 
James  ii.  25,  where  this  very  word  is  applied  to  the  spies  whom  Joshua  sent  to  spy 
out  Jericho.  Now  it  is  argued  that  this  is  the  meaning  of  the  term  here  ;  women, 
in  their  assemblies  for  worship,  ought  to  veil  their  faces  because  of  the  heathen 
spies.  Tertullian  informs  us  that  the  heathen  were  in  the  habit  of  sending  spies 
to  observe  what  was  said  or  done  in  their  Christian  assemblies.  According  to  this^ 
view,  the  apostle  exhorts  the  Corinthians  to  see  to  it  that  their  assemblies  be  con- 
ducted witli  proper  order — that  all  violations  of  what  was  counted  decorum  be 
absent ;  that  thev  are  to  remember  that  the  eyes  of  the  heathen  are  upon  them. 
{P.  J.  Gloag,  D.D.) 

Yers.  11-16.  Nevertheless,  neither  is  the  man  without  the  wcman. — Sanct{fied 
marriage  implies — I.  Equal  privilege  in  Christ.  1.  Alike  redeemed.  2.  In  Him 
there  is  neither  male  nor  female.  II.  Equal  subjection  to  Christ — here  the 
husband  has  no  superiority.  III.  Equal  dependence  upon  Christ — for  grace  to 
discliHTge  their  reciprocal  duties.  IV.  Indissoluble  union  in  Christ — whose  Spirit 
makes  both  one  in  Him.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D. )  For  as  the  woman  is  of  the  man,  even, 
so  is  the  man  also  by  the  woman. — 21ie  vivtiial  dependence  of  man  and  woman: — 

1.  A  NATURAL  LAW.    1.  Woman  was  created  out  of  man,  and  is  therefore  subordinate. 

2.  Man  is  born  of  woman,  therefore  dependent.  II.  A  Divine  appointment.  III. 
A  GRACIOUS  PURPOSE.  That  each  might  love,  succour,  and  comfort  the  other  in  the 
faithful  discharge  of  their  relations.  (Ibid.)  Is  it  comely  that  a  woman  pray 
unto  God  uncovered? — A  Christian  must  observe  ichat  is  comely: — I.  Illustrate 
THIS  BY  the  EXAMPLE  ADDUCED.  1.  The  USB  of  a  Veil  in  Christian  worship  is  in  itself 
indifferent.  Only  the  condition  of  the  heart  is  of  importance  in  the  sight  of  God. 
2.  But  in  the  times  of  the  apostle  it  was  not  indifferent  because  it  was  required  by 
established  custom.  Its  disuse  caused  offence  and  contention,  and  might  easily  be 
interpreted  as  a  sign  of  superstition  or  immorality.  3.  Eespect  must  therefore  be 
paid  to  the  alteration  in  public  opinion  and  the  circumstances  of  the  times.  IL 
Enforce  by  arguments.  1.  Of  Christian  prudence.  Attention  to  externals — (1) 
Is  often  of  great  importance.  (2)  Cannot  be  ignored  without  disadvantage.  2.  Of 
Christian  faith.  Neglect  of  externals  may  create  offence,  this  love  will  avoid. 
(Ibid.)  Propriety  and  religion: — The  teachings  of  religion — 1.  Harmonise  in 
matters  of  j^ropriety  with  those  of  reason  and  nature.  2.  Condemn  what  is  un- 
comely in  woman  and  what  is  effeminate  in  man.  3.  Require  us  in  indifferent 
matters  to  avoid  contention  by  complying  with  established  custom.  (Ihid.)  But 
if  any  man  seem  to  be  contentious,  we  have  no  such  custom,  neither  the  Churches 
of  God  — Peaceful  compliance  with  the  establislied  usage  of  the  Cliurch  is  a  Cliristian 
duty — Because — 1.  In  this  case  usage  becomes  law.  2.  A  wilful  violation  of  it 
breeds  contention.  3.  Contention  is  utterly  at  variance  with  a  Christian  spirit.  (Ibid.) 
Contentions  in  the  Church : — First,  it  should  seem  there  were  contentions  in  the 
apostle's  times.  Contentions  about  what  ?  About  matter  of  circumstance.  So 
was  this  here.  Whether  men  were  to  pray  uncovered,  and  women  veiled  or  no? 
Not  to  pass  them  in  silenL-e,  and  say  nothing  to  them.  But  this  to  Fay,  We  have 
no  such  custom,  nor  the  churches  of  God.  And  so  oppose  the  Church's  custom 
to  contention.  In  which  saying  there  are  these  heads — First,  that  the  Church 
hath  her  customs.  As  she  hath  them,  so  she  may  and  doth  allege  them.  This  I 
note  first,  that  we  may  not  think  it  strange  if  there  be  contentions  in  our  times. 
As  true  it  is  of  the  last  as  of  the  first  Church.  There  were  contentions  then. 
About  what  ?  For  though  peace  be  precious,  yet  of  such  moment  may  the  matters 
be  as  they  are  to  be  contended  for.  For  what  then  were  these  ?  For  nothing  but 
a  matter  of  rite.    Men  praying  whether  they  should  be  uncovered ;  women,  whether 


CHAP.  XI.]  I,  CORINTHIANS.  87 

veiled  or  no.  For  a  hat  and  a  veil  was  all  this  ado.  It  was  not  about  any  of  the 
high  mysteries,  any  of  the  vital  parts  of  religion.  And  to  pick  a  quarrel  with  a 
ceremony  is  easy.  A  plausible  theme  not  to  burden  the  Church  with  ceremonies — 
the  Church  to  be  free — which  hath  ahnost  freed  the  Church  of  all  decency.  About 
such  points  as  these  were  there  that  did  not  only  contend  but  that  giew  contentious. 
Why  should  any  love  to  be  contentious?  Why,  it  is  the  way  to  be  somebody. 
Well,  if  any  such  should  happen  to  be,  what  is  to  be  done  in  such  a  case  ?  What 
saith  the  apostle?  Saith  he  thus?  Seeing  it  is  no  greater  matter,  it  skills  not 
greatly  whether  they  do  it  or  no — sets  it  light,  and  lets  it  go.  No,  but  calls  them 
back  to  the  custom  of  the  Church.  Why  doth  he  so  ?  For  two  reasons.  1.  First, 
he  likes  not  contention  at  all.  Why?  If  it  be  not  talien  at  first,  within  a  while 
ye  shall  hear  of  a  schism  (ver.  18).  And  within  a  little  after  that  (ver.  19)  ye 
shall  have  a  flat  heresy  of  it.  The  one  draws  on  the  other.  2.  Nor  he  likes  not 
the  matter,  wherefore  though  it  seems  but  small.  St.  Paul  knew  Satan's  method 
well — he  asks  but  some  small  trifle.  Give  him  but  that,  he  will  be  ready  for 
greater  points.  If  he  win  ground  in  the  ceremonies,  then  have  at  the  sacrament. 
For  when  they  had  sit  covered  at  prayer  awhile,  they  grew  even  as  unreverent,  as 
homely  with  the  sacrament.  Opposing  then  to  these,  what  course  takes  be  ? 
Where  it  is  plain  the  apostle  is  for  the  Church  customs.  And  first,  that  she 
hath  them.  Every  society,  beside  their  laws  in  books,  have  their  customs  also  in 
practice  ;  and  those  not  to  be  taken  up,  or  laid  down,  at  every  man's  pleasure. 
The  civil  law  saith  this  of  custom.  A  custom  is  suscejjtible  of  more  and  less — 
the  further  it  goeth,  the  longer  it  runneth,  the  more  strength  it  gathered ;  the  more 
gray  hairs  it  getteth,  the  more  venerable  it  is — for,  indeed,  tlie  more  a  custom  it 
is.  Now,  then,  as  the  Church  hath  them,  so  she  stands  upon  them — fears  not  to 
allege  them.  And  say  not  the  prophets  the  same  ?  "  Stand  upon  the  ways  "  [it  is 
Jeremiah],  "  and  there  look  for  the  good  old  way ;  and  that  way  take,  it  is  the  only 
way  to  find  rest  for  your  s mis."  If  it  be  but  of  some  one  Church,  but  at  Corinth 
alone  it  is  too  narrow — not  large,  not  general  enough.  If  it  be  but  taken  up  l>y 
some  of  our  masters  of  late,  it  is  too  fresh — it  is  not  ancient  enough.  But  by 
these  two  we  know  our  right  custom.  As  neither  is  any  particular  Church  bound 
to  the  private  custom  of  anotlier  like  particular  as  itself  is.  But  if  the  other 
Church's  custom  have  also  been  the  general  custom  of  the  Church,  then  it  binds, 
and  may  not  be  set  light.  But,  if  to  this  we  add,  or  rather  if  before  this  we  set, 
this  the  apostles  had  it  too,  that  it  is  apostolic,  we  have  then  said  as  mucli  as  in 
this  point  cm  be  said,  as  much  as  may  content  any  that  is  not  contentious. 
(Bj).  Andreices.) 

Vers.  17-22.  Nq-w  .  .  .  I  praise  you  not,  that  ye  come  together  not  for  the  better, 
but  for  the  worse. —  Vnpmjitahle  public  ironflilj} : — I.  When  do  we  cojie  together, 
NOT  for  the  better,  BUT  FOR  THE  WORSE  ?  This  may  be  known — 1.  By  the  principles 
which  influence  our  attendance.  (1)  Do  we  come  to  receive  instruction,  to  get  good 
that  we  may  grow  in  conformity  to  God,  or  do  we  come  only  to  gratify  curiosity, 
to  subserve  our  worldly  interest,  Ac.  ?  (2)  Do  we  come  without  any  preparation  of 
heart  ?  Are  we  soon  weary  of  the  service  (Ezek.  xiv.  3)  ?  2.  From  the  manner  of 
our  attendance.  If  we  are  either  captious,  careless,  or  sleepy ;  if  we  suffer  the 
fowls  to  come  down  and  devour  the  sacrifice,  and  the  buyers  and  sellers  to  occupy 
the  inward  sanctuary ;  if  we  have  no  love  for  the  work  in  which  we  are  engaged, 
but  can  indulge  in  a  trifling  or  stupid  frame  of  mind,  assuredly  we  come  together,  not 
for  the  better,  but  for  the  worse.  3.  By  the  effects  of  our  attendance.  Some,  like 
Festus,  treat  the  Word  with  derision.  Some,  like  Agtippa,  are  half  convinced,  but 
they  stifle  their  convictions.  Others,  again,  hear  and  approve,  but  never  practise. 
In  the  jiarable  of  the  sower  we  hear  of  four  sorts  of  ground,  and  only  one  of  them 
good.  II.  The  evil  of  sucti  conduct.  If  we  do  not  come  together  for  the  better, 
it  will  be  for  the  worse.  Where  the  Word  does  not  soften  it  generally  hardens  ;  and 
where  it  does  not  make  the  heart  c  int'ite  it  often  makes  it  desperate  (chap.  ii. 
IG).  More  particularly — 1.  It  is  highly  displeasing  to  God.  2.  It  is  a  great  grief 
to  godly  ministers  ;  and  what  can  be  more  unreascnable  than  to  afflict  those  who 
labour  for  our  ^'ood,  and  are  seeking  our  everlasting  salvation  (Jer.  xiii.  17  ;  Phil, 
iii.  18).  3.  In  the  end  it  will  be  a  source  of  sorrow  to  themselves,  and  will  issue 
in  their  ruin  (Prov.  v.  11-14;  1  Cor.  xi.  30).  {B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  PiCliyiovs  insti- 
tutions— their   abuse: — Observe  —  I.    That   attendance    on    the    institutions    of 

EELIGION  MAT  PROVE  PERNICIOUS  RATHER  THAN    BENEFICIAL  (ver.  17).       Men    cannot   be 

made  religious ;  an  irresistible  moral  force  is  a  contradiction  in  terms,  an  impossi- 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

bility  in  fact.  Hence  the  hij^hest  reilemptive  forces  on  man  often  conduce  to  his 
ruin.  The  gospel  is  either  the  "  savour  of  life  unto  life,  or  of  death  unto  death." 
Pharaoh's  heart  was  hardened  under  the  ministry  of  Moses,  and  the  hearts  of  the 
men  of  Chorazin,  Ac,   were  hardened  under  the  ministry  of  Christ.     II.  That 

ASSEMRLINO  TOGETHER  FOR  RELIGIOUS  PURPOSES  DOES  NOT  NECESSARILY  IMPLY  UNITY  OP 

SOUL  (vers.  18,  19).  It  does  not  follow  that  because  peoi:)le  are  brought  together  in 
the  same  church  that  they  fire  united  together  in  spirit.  Two  people  may  sit  in  the 
same  pew,  hear  the  same  discourse,  &c.,  and  yet  in  soul  be  as  remote  from  one 
another  as  the  poles.  No  real  spiritual  unity  can  exist  where  there  is  not  a  supreme 
affection  for  Christ,  who  is  the  only  uniting  place  of  souls.     III.  That  the  very 

BEST  INSTITUTIONS  ON  EARTH  ARE  OFTEN  SADLY  PERVERTED  BY  MEN.     FoT  many  reasOUS 

the  Lord's  Supper  may  be  regarded  as  one  of  the  best  ordinances.  But  it  was  now 
perverted  into  a  means  of  gluttony  and  drunkenness  (vers.  20,  21).  Are  not  men 
constantly  perverting  Divine  institutions.  Churches,  Bibles,  the  Christian  Ministry, 
&c.  ?  (D.  Thomas,  D.I).)  The  abuse  of  the  means  of  grace  is — I.  Very  common. 
Through — 1.  Carelessness.  2.  The  indulgence  of  an  improper  spirit,  as  enmity, 
pride,  unbelief,  &c.  II.  Highly  criminal — because  a  direct  offence  against  the 
purity,  majesty,  mercy  of  God.  III.  Exceedingly  dangerous.  It  makes  a  man 
worse  by  increasing  his  sin,  hardening  his  heart,  augmenting  his  guilt  and  punish- 
ment. {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Abuse  of  the  Lord's  Supper: — In  this  paragraph  (vers. 
17-34)  Paul  speaks  of  an  abuse  which  can  scarcely  be  credited  in  our  times.  A 
respectable  citizen  would  hardly  have  permitted  at  his  own  table  the  licence  visible 
at  the  table  of  the  Lord.  I.  How  did  such  disorders  arise  ?  1.  It  was  com- 
mon in  Greece  for  clubs  to  meet  periodically  and  to  share  a  common  meal.  This 
custom,  not  unknown  in  Palestine,  had  been  adopted  by  the  primitive  Church  of 
Jerusalem.  The  Christians  then  felt  themselves  to  be  more  closely  related  than 
the  members  of  any  trade  guild  or  political  club.  Sjieedily  love  feasts  (agapm) 
became  prevalent  institutions.  On  a  fixed  day,  generally  the  first  day  of  the  v/eek, 
the  Christians  assembled,  each  bringing  what  he  could  as  a  contribution  to  the 
feast.  In  some  places  the  proceedings  began  by  partaking  of  the  consecrated  bread 
and  wine ;  but  in  other  places  physical  appetite  was  first  appeased.  2.  This  mode 
of  celebrating  the  Lord's  Supper  was  recommended  by  its  close  resemblance  to  its 
original  celebration.  It  was  at  the  close  of  the  paschal  supper  that  our  Lord  took 
bread  and  brake  it.  But  when  the  first  solemnity  passed  away  the  love-feast  was 
liable  to  many  corruptions.  Those  who  had  no  need  to  use  the  common  stock,  but 
had  houses  of  their  own  to  eat  and  to  drink  in,  yet,  for  the  sake  of  appearances, 
brought  their  contribution  to  the  meal,  but  consumed  it  themselves.  The  conse- 
quence was  that  from  being  truly  love-feasts,  these  meetings  became  scenes  of 
greedy  selfishness,  and  profane  conduct,  and  besotted  excess.  II.  To  the  reform 
OF  this  abuse  Paul  now  addresses  himself.  1.  Negatively.  (1)  He  does  not  pro- 
pose to  disjoin  absolutely  the  religious  rite  from  the  ordinary  meal.  In  the  case  of 
the  richer  members  of  the  Church  this  disjunction  is  enjoined  (ver.  22).  But  with 
those  who  had  no  well-iirovided  homes  another  rule  must  be  adopted.  It  would 
shame  the  Christian  community,  and  undo  its  reputation  for  brotherly  love  were  its 
members  observed  bef:jging  their  bread  on  the  streets.  (2)  Although  the  wine  of  the 
holy  communion  had  been  so  sadly  abused,  Paul  does  not  prohibit  its  use.  On  infi- 
nitely less  occasion  alterations  have  been  introduced  with  a  view  to  preventing  its 
abuse  by  reclaimed  druukards,  and  on  still  slighter  pretext  in  the  Church  of  Piome  the 
lay  communicant  is  only  allowed  to  partake  of  the  bread.  Mohler  says  that  this  arose 
from  a  nice  sense  of  delicacy,  a  pious  dread  of  desecrating,  by  spilling  and  the  like, 
even  in  the  most  conscientious  ministration.  In  contrast  to  all  such  contrivances 
we  recognise  the  sagacity  which  directed  that  the  ordinance  should  not  be  tanij)ered 
with  to  suit  the  avoidable  weaknesses  of  men,  but  that  men  should  learn  to  live  up 
to  the  requirements  of  the  ordinance.  (3)  Paul  does  not  insist  that  because  frequent 
communion  had  been  abused,  this  must  give  j)lace  to  monthly  or  yearly  communion. 
For  some  centuries  it  was  expected  that  all  members  of  the  Church  should  partake 
weekly.  That  familiarity  breeds  contempt,  or  heedlessness,  is  a  rule  that  ordinarily 
holds  good.  And  by  the  same  law  it  is  feared,  and  not  without  reason,  that  if  we 
observed  frequent  communion  we  should  cease  to  feel  the  sacredness  of  the  ordinance. 
But  our  method  of  procedure  is  first  to  find  out  what  it  is  right  to  do,  and  then, 
though  it  cost  us  an  effort,  to  do  it.  If  our  reverence  for  the  ordinance  in  question 
depends  on  its  rare  celebration,  may  it  not  be  a  merely  superstitious  or  sentimental 
reverence?  Paul  seeks  to  restore  reverence  in  the  Corinthians,  not  by  prohibiting 
frequent  communion,  but  by  setting  more  clearly  before  them  the  solemn  facts 


CHAP.  XI.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  89 

which  underlie  the  rite.  But  dops  not  our  shrinking  from  communion  often  mean 
that  we  shrink  from  being  more  distinctly  confronted  with  the  love  and  holiness  of 
Christ  and  with  His  purpose  in  dying  tor  us — that  we  are  not  quite  reconciled  to  be 
always  living  as  the  children  of  God,  whose  citizenship  is  in  heaven  ?  2.  The 
positive  counsel  Paul  gives  regarding  suitable  preparation  for  participation  in  this 
sacrament  is  very  simple.  He  otters  no  elaborate  scheme  of  self-examination 
which  might  fill  the  mind  with  scruples  and  induce  introspective  habits  and 
spiritual  hypochondria.  (1)  He  would  have  every  man  answer  the  plain  question, 
Do  you  discern  the  Lord's  body  in  the  sacrament  ?  The  Corinthians  were  chastened 
by  sickness,  and  apparently  by  death  that  they  might  see  and  repent  of  the  enormity 
of  using  these  symbols  as  common  food ;  and  in  order  that  they  might  escape  this 
cbastening,  they  had  but  to  recall  the  institution  of  the  sacrament  by  our  Lord 
Himself.  (2)  The  brief  narrative  gives  prominence  to  the  truth  that  the  sacra- 
ment was  intended  primarily  as  a  memorial  or  remembrance  of  the  Saviour.  As 
the  dying  gift  of  a  friend  becomes  sacred  to  us  as  his  own  person,  and  we  cannot 
bear  to  see  it  handed  about  by  unsympathetic  hands,  and  as  when  we  gaze  at  his 
portrait,  or  use  the  pencil  worn  smooth  by  his  fingers,  we  recall  the  many  hnppy 
times  we  spent  together,  so  does  this  sacrament  seem  sacred  to  us  as  Christ's  own 
person,  and  by  means  of  it  grateful  memories  of  all  He  was  and  did  throng  into  the 
mind.  (3)  The  form  of  this  memorial  is  fitted  to  recall  the  actual  life  and  death  of 
the  Lord.  By  the  symbols  we  are  brought  into  the  presence  of  an  actual  living 
Person.  Our  religion  is  not  a  theory  ;  we  are  saved  by  being  brought  into  right 
personal  relations  by  remembering  Christ  and  by  assimilating  the  spirit  of  His  life 
and  death.  (4)  But  especially  by  giving  His  flesh  and  blood  He  means  that  He 
gives  us  His  all,  Himself  wholly ;  and  by  inviting  us  to  partake  of  His  flesh  and 
blood  He  means  that  we  must  receive  Him  iuto  the  most  real  connection  possible, 
must  admit  His  self-sacrificing  love  into  our  heart  as  our  most  cherished  possession. 
{M.  Dods,  D.D.)  When  ye  come  together  in  the  Church,  I  hear  there  be  divisions 
among  you. — Divisions  in  the  Church — I.  Are  a  seiuous  evil.  1.  They  hinder 
prosperity.  2.  Demoralise  many.  3.  Occasion  reproach.  4.  Dishonour  Clirist. 
n.  Ought  not  to  excite  sueprise.  Because  offences  must  come — 1.  Through  the 
imperfections  of  humanity.  2.  The  instigation  of  Satan.  IIL  Are  overruled  by 
God,  as  a  test  of  the  faith,  i^urity,  steadfastness  of  those  who  are  approved  before 
God.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  A  siiirit  of  disunion  in  the  Church — 1.  Destroys  edifica- 
tion. 2.  Occasions  divisions.  3.  Profanes  what  is  most  holy.  4.  Usually  springs 
from  selfishness  and  pride.  5.  Is  deserving  of  the  strongest  condemnation.  (Ibid.) 
And  I  partly  believe  it. — Charitalle  judgments  : — I.  Some  of  you  ake  guilty  of  this 
FAULT,  THOUGH  OTHERS  BE  INNOCENT.  General  ccnsures,  condemnmg  whole 
churches,  are  altogether  uncharitable.  Angle  out  the  offenders,  but  take  heed  of 
killing  all  with  a  drag-net :  and  grant  many,  yea,  most  to  be  faulty,  yet  some  may  be 
guiltless.  Wickedness  was  not  so  general  in  Sodom,  but  that  righteous  Lot  was  an 
exception.  Obadiah  Wiis  steward  of  Ahab's  wicked  household.  Yea,  seeing  impiety 
intrudes  itself  amongst  the  thickest  of  God's  saints,  just  it  is  that  God  should  have 
some  names  even  where  the  throne  of  Satan  is  erected  (Rev.  lii.  4).  Let  us  therefore 
follow  the  wary  proceedings  of  Jehu  (2  Kings  x.  23).  When  we  are  about  with 
censuring  to  murder  the  credits  of  many  together,  let  us  take  heed  that  there  be  not 
some  orthodox  amongst  those  whom  we  condemn  to  be  all  heretics  ;  scunetliat  desire 
to  be  peaceful  in  our  Israel,  amongst  those  whom  we  condemn  for  all  factious 
schismatics.  II.  I  believe  these  accusations  only  in  part,  and  hope  they  are  noc  so 
bad  as  they  are  reported.  When  fames  are  brought  unto  us  from  good  hands,  let 
us  not  be  so  incredulous  as  to  believe  no  part  of  them  ;  nor  so  uncharitable  as  to 
believe  all;  but  with  St.  Paul  "  partly  believe  it."  1.  Because  fame  often  creates 
something  of  nothing,  always  makes  a  great  deal  of  a  little.  It  is  true  of  fume 
what  is  said  of  the  devil  ;  it  has  been  "a  liar  from  the  beginning";  yea,  and 
sometimes  a  murderer.  Absalom  slew  one  of  David's  sons,  and  fame  killed  all  the 
rest  (2  Sam.  xiii.  30).  2.  Because  men  in  rep  >rting  things  often  mingle  their  own 
interests  and  engagements  with  their  relations,  makinj,'  them  better  or  worse,  as 
they  themselves  stand  affected.  Water  resembleth  both  the  taste  and  colour  of  that 
earth  through  which  it  runneth  ;  so  reports  relish  of  their  relators,  and  have  a 
smack  of  their  pirtial  disp'>sitions;  and  therefore  such  relations  are  not  to  be 
believed  in  their  full  extent.  Conclusion  :  1.  This  confutes — (1)  Those  that  will 
believe  nothing  of  what  they  hear  reported,  though  warranted  by  never  so  good 
witnesses.  I  bear  them  witness,  these  men  have  charity,  but  nit  according  to 
knowledge.     (2)  But  where  too  much  charity  hath  slain  her  thtu  sands,  too  little 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xi.. 

hath  slain  her  ten  thousands.  2.  Let  not  our  beliefs  be  altogether  of  clay  to  receive 
any  impression  ;  nor  altogether  of  iron  to  receive  none  at  all.  But  as  the  toes  in 
the  image  of  Nebuchadnezzar's  dream  were  partly  iron  and  partly  clay,  so  let  our 
beliefs  be  composed  of  charity,  mixed  with  our  credulity;  that,  when  a  crime 
is  reported,  we  may  with  St.  Paul  "partly  believe  it."  (T.  Fuller,  D.D.) 
For  there  must  toe  also  heresies  among  you.— Heresies  .-—Consider— I.  What 
HEEESY  IS.  There  are  two  opinions  upon  this  subject.  One  is,  that  it  is  a  schism. 
But  the  apostle  in  the  text  and  in  ver.  18  makes  a  distinction  between  the  two. 
By  heresies,  all  denominations  mean  false  doctrines,  contrary  to,  and  subversive 
of,  the  gospel  (Titus  iii.  10-11  ;  Gal.  i.  6-9).  Every  error  is  not  a  heresy,  yet 
every  error  which  subverts  the  gospel  is.  II.  That  heresies  have  been  in  the 
Chukch  rnoM  the  beginning.  Immediately  after  the  gospel  was  preached  by 
Philip,  Simon  professed  to  believe  it;  but  he  soon  propagated  the  grossest  heresies. 
Paul  intimates  that  there  were  heretics  in  the  Church  of  Eome  (Rom.  xvi.  17-18). 
Our  test  assures  us  that  there  were  heresies  in  the  Church  of  Corinth.  And  John 
mentions  various  dangerous  heresies  in  the  seven  Churches  of  Asia.  If  we  consult 
ecclesiastical  history,  we  shall  find  that  the  Church  has  never  been  free  from  them.. 
Christ  predicted  that  there  would  always  be  tares  among  the  wheat  to  the  end  of 
the  world.  III.  In  what  sense  it  is  necessaby  that  heeesies  should  be  in  the. 
Church.  There  never  can  be  any  natural  necessity.  Those  who  enjoy  the  gospel 
may  always  know  the  truth.  Heresy  is  always  the  fruit  of  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief. 
There  is,  tberefore,  only  a  moral  necessity  arising  from  the  corruption  of  the  heart. 
As  long  as  this  is  the  case,  some  will  love  error  better  than  truth.  IV.  Why  God- 
CHOOSES  that  heresies  SHOULD  EXIST.  1.  To  distinguish  truth  from  error.  Dark- 
ness renders  light  more  visible,  and  ligbt  renders  darkness  more  visible.  The- 
errors  in  the  heathen  would  illustrate  the  truths  believed  in  the  Christian  world. 
The  errors  in  the  Romish  illustrate  the  truths  professed  in  the  Protestant  Church. 
2.  That  true  believers  may  be  distinguished  from  fal-e  professors.  Paul  gives  this 
reason  in  the  text.  The  heterodox  everywhere  are  a  foil  to  the  orthodox,  and 
exhibit  their  characters  in  a  beautiful  light.  3.  That  mankind  may  have  a  fair 
opportunity  of  choosing  the  way  to  life  or  the  way  to  death.  Accordingly,  it  has 
always  been  God's  method  to  exhibit  both  truth  and  error  before  their  minds,  and 
give  them  opportunity  of  choosing  the  one  or  the  other,  that  they  may  be  saved  or 
that  they  may  be  damned.  V.  Improvement.  1.  If  heresies  are  opposite  to,  and 
subversive  of,  the  gospel,  then  we  have  reason  to  think  that  they  have  had  a  long 
and  extensive  spread  in  the  world.  2.  It  appears,  from  the  nature  and  tendency 
of  heresy,  that  the  Church  ought  to  censure  and  reject  any  of  its  members  who 
embrace  it.  3.  If  it  be  one  design  of  God  in  continuing  heresies  to  distinguish 
real  Christians  from  false  and  erruneons  professors,  then  there  is  a  p>ilpable  impro- 
priety and  absurdity  in  attempting  to  unite  tbose  together  in  Christian  communion 
who  differ  essentially  in  their  leligious  sentiments.  4.  When  fatal  heresies  greatly 
prevail,  then  is  a  time  when  God  is  about  to  purify  the  Chuich,  and  malce  manifest 
those  who  are  approved  among  the  professors  of  religion.  5.  Learn  the  importance 
of  ministers'  preaching  the  gospel  fully  and  plainly.  If  the  gospel  had  always 
been  preached  fnlly  and  plainly,  it  is  hard  to  conceive  how  heresies  should  have 
abounded.  6.  From  the  nature  and  tendency  of  heresy,  we  conclude  that  sinners 
are  in  the  most  dangerous  situation,  for  they  are  surrounded  by  heretics  on  every 
side.     (iV.  Emmons,  D.D.)  Heresy  : — Heresies  sin  against  faith  and  schism, 

against  charity  ;  and,  as  children  say  they  love  father  and  mother  both  best,  so  let 
us  hate  heresies  and  schisms  both  worst.  I.  What  is  a  heresy?  An  error  in  the 
fundamentals  of  religion,  maintrined  with  obstinacy.  1.  Note  those  qualities  which 
dispose  a  man  to  be  the  founder  of  a  heresy.  (1)  Pride.  When  one  is  elated  with 
conceited  sanctity  above  others,  he  will  quarrel  with  tbose  who  are  before  him  in 
place,  which  are  behind  him  in  piety.  (2)  Discontent  that  his  preferments  bear 
not  proportion  to  his  supposed  deseits.  Thus  Arius  would  be  an  Arian,  because 
he  conld  not  be  a  bishop.  (3)  Learning  void  of  humility  ;  or  good  natural  parts, 
especially  memory  and  a  fluent  expression.  But  if  both  be  wanting,  yet  boldness 
and  brazen-faced  impudence  will  supply  the  place,  especially  if  he  trades  with  the 
vulgar.  (4)  To  varnish  all  these,  thtre  must  be  pretended  piety  and  austerity  of 
life.  Put  all  these  together,  and  they  spell  together  luercsiarcham.  To  prevent 
these  mischiefs,  let  such  men  pray  to  God  for  humility.  Let  them  beware  of  dis- 
contentment, which  is  a  direct  quarrelling  with  God,  who  is  the  Fountain  of  all 
preferment.  Grant  preferment  is  denied  thee  ;  be  not  so  childish  to  cast  away  a 
crown,  because  thou  canst  not  get  a  counter.    Lastly,  if  God  hath  bestowed  good 


CHAP.  XI.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  91 

parts  upon  thee,  pray  to  Him  to  sanctify  them  ;  otherwise  the  greatest  memory 
may  soon  forget  itself,  and  a  fluent  tongue  may  cut  his  throat  that  hath  it.  2.  A 
plain  follower  of  a  heresy  may  be  tlius  described.  He  must  be — (1)  Ignorant ;  for 
he  that  knows  nothing  will  believe  anything  (2  Tim.  iii.  6).  (2)  Desirous  of 
novelty.  It  is  an  old  humour  for  men  to  love  new  things.  (3)  As  a  result  of  these 
two,  he  must  have  the  persons  of  men  in  much  admiration,  and  entertaining  any- 
thing that  is  said  because  they  say  it.  To  prevent  these  mischiefs,  let  the  meanest 
labour  to  attain  to  some  measure  of  knowledge  in  matters  of  salvation,  that 
so  he  may  not  trust  every  spirit,  but  be  able  to  try  whether  he  be  of  God  or  no. 
Secondly,  kill  the  itch  of  novelty  in  thy  soul,  practising  the  prophet's  precept  (Jer. 
vi.  16).  Lastly,  love  and  admire  no  man's  doctrine  for  his  person,  but  rather  love 
his  person  for  his  doctrine.  II.  There  must  be  heresies.  A  condilionate  neces- 
sity is  this  :  for  upon  the  pre-supposition  of  these  two  things,  which  cannot  be 
denied — that  the  devil  goeth  about  like  a  roaring  lion,  &c. ,  and  that  the  flesh 
lusteth  against  the  spirit,  making  men  prone  to  all  wickedness  ;  hence  it  followeth 
there  must  be  heresies.  Thus  he  that  beholdeth  a  family,  and  findeth  the  mnster 
to  be  careless,  the  mistress  negligent,  the  sons  riotous,  the  servants  unfaithful,  he 
may  safely  conclude  that  family  cannot  be  safe,  but  must  be  ruined  (Luke  xvii.  1). 
(T.  Fuller,  D.D.)  Heresies  in  the  Church:—!.  The  assertion — "there  must 

be  heresies  " — is  made  in  the  same  sense  as  "  It  must  needs  be  that  offences  come" 
(Matt,  xviii.  7).  Not  that  he  is  excusable  who  introduces  heresies,  or  occasions 
offences  ;  for  "  woe  unto  him  by  whom  they  come."  But  in  the  natural  course  of 
things,  such  evils  will  happen.  1.  Could  no  external  cause  be  assigned,  our 
common  frailties  and  corruptions  may  prepare  us  to  expect  them  in  a  society  com- 
posed of  men.  Of  all  pnrts  of  our  knowledge,  we  are  inclined  to  be  fondest  of 
those  in  which  we  differ  from  other  men.  It  appears  dull  and  undi^tinguishing  to 
tread  on  in  the  common  road,  and  think  and  believe  as  other  men  do.  And  if  we 
observe  how  deeply  this  is  rooted  in  our  nature,  and  how  diflicult  it  is  even  for 
good  men  to  restrain  it  within  due  bounds  ;  and  if  we  take  farther  into  our  reflec- 
tion that  envy,  resentment,  and  almost  every  other  passion  may  accidentally  concur 
in  producing  heresies,  we  must  confess  that  these  evils  are,  humanly  speaking, 
unavoidable.  And  accordingly  the  Scriptures  jDrepare  us  for  them,  as  natural 
effects  of  the  corrupt  passions  of  mankind  (Acts  xx.30;  2  Tim.  iii.  2-4;  2  Pet. 
ii.  1).  2.  From  false  teachers  and  seducers,  then,  the  Church  must  never  hope  to 
be  perfectly  free  in  this  world.  Nor  shall  we  be  surprised  at  their  success  if  we 
reflect  that  there  will  be  hearers — light  and  unstable  men  with  itching  ears^ 
strongly  inclined  to  hearken  after  new  discoveries.  II.  The  providential  exi> 
assigned  for  God's  permission  of  these  evils — the  trial  and  manifestation  of 
those  who  are  approved  (see  Deut.  xiii.  1 ;  Luke  xxi.  13).  This  manifesta- 
tion may  be  understood — 1.  With  respect  to  ourselves.  It  is  a  comfort  un- 
speakable to  a  good  man  to  find  his  graces  of  strength  to  endure  this  trial. 
Unless  our  constancy  has  been  tried,  we  know  not  how  far  an  esteem  for 
the  virtues  and  abilities  of  any  man  may  prevail  on  us  to  desert  the  faith. 
If  upon  experiment  we  find  ourselves  equal  to  the  trinl,  we  may  then  hope  well 
o£  oiu-  integrity,  and  that  we  shall  "hold  the  beginning  of  our  confidence  stead- 
fast unto  the  end."  2.  With  respect  to  the  Church.  Known  unto  God  only  are 
they  who  are  His,  by  an  internal  inspection  into  their  hearts.  To  the  Church, 
however,  this  character  can  only  appear  by  outward  evidences  ;  and,  therefore, 
professions  of  faith  have  been  always  required,  as  terms  of  admission  into  its 
society.  But  these  cautions  are  not  always  sufficient  to  reach  the  heart 
and  discover  the  sincerity  of  the  man.  But  he  who  has  stood  firm  in  the 
day  of  temptation  has  given  an  evidence  of  his  integrity  which  cannot  be  sus- 
pected; and  if  to  his  faith  he  has  added  knowledge,  and  is  able  to  convince  gain- 
sayers  and  defeat  the  craft  of  those  \vho  lie  in  wait  to  deceive,  we  must  distinguish 
him  in  our  esteem,  not  only  as  a  sincere  member,  but  as  a  light  and  ornament  of 
the  Church.  III.  The  advantages  derived  to  the  Church  from  these  manifes- 
tations. 1.  It  is  hereby  enabled  better  to  exercise  its  disfii^line,  to  separate  the 
sound  from  the  corrupted  members  of  the  body.  2.  Hereby  its  enemies  are  dis- 
covered in  their  proper  character.  3.  Hereby  Church  governors  are  enabled  to 
choose  fit  persons  to  serve  in  the  sacred  office.  4.  By  occasions  of  inquiry  into 
heresy,  the  doctrines  of  the  Church  become  more  attentively  considered  and  more 
firmly  established.  To  the  early  heresies  we  owe  many  of  the  writings  of  the 
primitive  fathers,  and  several  parts  of  the  Scriptures  themselves.  5.  By  the 
appearance  of  these  dangers,  pastors  are  quickened  to  a  more  diligent  attendance 


92  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

on  the  duties  of  thfir  station,  and  at  the  same  time  carefully  to  examine  their  own 
lives,  and,  by  an  unblamable  conduct,  to  keep  up  the  dignity  and  influence  of  their 
ministry,  that  the  enemy  may  have  no  occasion  to  blaspheme.  Conclusion  :  1.  It 
may  hence  appear  with  how  little  reasoii  Eome  reproaches  us  with  those  schisms 
and  heresies  which  God  has  permitted  to  vex  our  CLurch,  and  to  use  them  as  an 
argument  of  our  rejection  by  Clirist.  It  may  as  reasonably  be  objected  that  it  is 
composed  of  men,  and  has  enemies.  And  least  of  all  can  this  objection  become 
those  who  are  well  known  to  have  been  the  authors  of  these  evils  to  us.  2.  If,  as 
the  apostle  affirms,  the  providential  end  of  these  heresies  is  that  they  who  are 
approved  by  God  may  be  made  manifest,  then  it  follows — (1)  That  they  who  under 
these  trials  persist  in  the  faith  and  communion  of  the  Church  are  thereby  mani- 
fested to  be  approved  by  God.  (21  That  they  who  introduce  heresies  into  the 
Church,  or  follow  those  who  introduce  them,  are  thereby  manifested  to  be  dis- 
approved by  God  ;  and  thprefore  that  the  Church  may,  and  ought,  to  treat  them  in 
its  discipline  as  sufficiently  discovered  under  that  character.  {J.  Rogers,  D.D.) 
That  they  which  are  approved  may  be  made  manifest  among  you. — Heresy 
manifesting  trutli  : — Oftentimes  goldsmiths,  though  they  themselves  be  sufficiently 
satisfied  of  the  goodness  of  the  gold,  yet  "put  it  to  the  touch,"  to  content  the 
beholders.  Never  had  Athanasius  so  answered  his  name,  and  been  so  truly 
*' immortal"  in  his  memory,  but  for  oj^posing  of  the  Arians.  Never  had  St. 
Augustine  been  so  famous,  but  for  quelling  of  Maniclieans,  Pelagians,  Donatists, 
tfec.  Many  parts  of  true  doctrine  have  been  but  slenderly  guarded,  till  once  they 
were  assaulted  by  heretics ;  and  many  good  authors  in  those  points  which  were 
never  opposed  have  written  but  loosely,  and  suffered  unwary  passages  to  fall  from 
their  posting  pens.  But  when  thieves  are  about  the  country,  every  one  will  ride 
with  his  sword  and  stand  on  his  guard  :  when  heretics  are  abroad  in  the  world, 
writers  weigh  each  word,  ponder  each  phrase,  that  they  may  give  the  enemies  no 
advantage.  Again,  the  hardened  will  be  made  unexcusable,  who  obstinately 
persist  in  their  errors.  They  cannot  plead  they  lost  their  way  for  want 
of    guides,    but   for  mere   wilfulness.       (T.    Fuller,   D.D.)  When    ye    come 

together  therefore  into  one  place,  this  is  not  to  eat  the  Lord's  supper. — 
The  lore-feast  and  the  Lord's  Supper : — The  Church  of  Corinth  introduced  what 
was  called  a  love-feast  previous  to  the  reception  of  the  Lord's  Supj^er — rich 
and  poor  bringing  their  own  provisions.  This  idea  seemed  in  strict  accordance 
with  the  original  institution  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  for  that  was  preceded  by  a  com- 
mon meal.  There  was  a  great  beauty  in  this  arrangement,  because  it  showed  the 
conviction  of  the  Church  of  Coiinth  that  differences  of  birth  and  rank  are  but 
temporary,  and  are  intended  to  join  by  reciprocal  bonds  the  different  classes 
together.  Still,  beautiful  as  the  idea  was,  it  was  liable  to  great  abuse.  Thus  there 
arises  a  perpetual  lesson  for  the  Church  of  Christ :  it  is  never  good  to  mix  things 
religious  with  things  worldly.  In  the  highest  conceivable  form  of  the  Church  of 
Christ,  the  two  will  be  identified,  for  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  are  to  become  the 
kingdoms  of  God  and  of  His  Christ.  In  order  to  make  these  two  one,  the  Christian 
plan  has  been  to  set  apart  certain  days  as  holy,  that  through  these  all  other  days 
may  be  sanctified  :  to  set  apart  a  certain  class  of  men,  through  them  to  sanctify ^all 
other  men  :  to  set  apart  one  j^articular  meal,  that  all  meals  through  that  one  may 
be  dedicated  to  God.  The  world's  way  is  rather  this :  to  identify  things  religious 
and  worldly  by  throwing  the  spirit  of  the  week-day  into  the  Sabbath  ;  to  make 
Christian  ministers  like  other  men,  by  infusing  into  them  its  own  secular  spirit; 
and  to  eat  and  drink  of  the  Lord's  Supper  in  tbe  spirit  of  a  common  meal.  {F.  W. 
Rohert>'on,j\I.A .)  The  henvenh/  banquet : — Let  me  notice  here  the  many  words  which 
are  connected  with  "  tbe  Lord  "  by  the  apostle  :  the  Lord's  body  (ver.  29),  the  Lord's 
blood  (ver.  27),  the  Lord's  bread  (ver.  27),  the  Lord's  cup  (ver.  27),  tbe  Lord's  death 
(ver.  26),  the  Lord's  Supjaer  (ver.  20).  For  in  this  ordinance  Christ  is  all  and  in 
all  ;  He  is  the  Alpba  and  Omega,  the  beginning  and  the  end,  the  first  and  the  last. 
Why  does  the  apostle  call  it  the  Lord's  Supper  ?  I.  The  Lord  appointed  it.  It 
is  not  man's  feast,  or  the  Church's  feast,  it  is  the  feast  of  the  Lord.  II.  He 
PROVIDES.  The  feast  of  fat  things  is  of  His  providing,  so  is  the  table,  so  is  the 
banqueting  house,  so  is  the  raiment.  All  the  viands  are  of  His  selection.  His 
purchase.  His  setting  out.  He  is  both  appoiuter  and  provider.  The  provisions 
must  be  rare  and  suitable  and  nouris^hing  in  such  a  case.  His  wisdom  knows 
what  we  need,  and  His  love  prejDares  it  all.  III.  He  invites.  Come,  is  His 
message  to  us  !  IV.  He  is  Himsflf  the  feast.  He  is  the  Paschal  Lamb.  He 
is  the  bread  and  wine.     Yes  ;  C.  ri^t  is  Himself  the  provision,  as  well  as  the  Pro- 


CHAP.  XI.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  93 

vider.     V.  He  pabtakes  with  us.     He  sits  at  the  table  Himself,  and  forms  one  of 
our  number.     Here  we  have  fellowship  with  Him,  and  He  with  us.     Seated  at  this 
table,  and  partaking  of  this  Supper — 1.  We  look  backward.     And  as  we  look  back 
we  see  the  passover,  we  see  the  shewbread,  we  see  the  Cross.     2.  We  look  forward. 
For  we  show  His  death  till  He  come.    We  fix  our  eye  on  the  coming  glory.    3.  We 
look  inward.     In  doing  so,  we  ask,  Is  my  soul  prospering?     4.  We  look  around. 
Brethren  iu  the  Lord  are  on  each  side — our  fellow-believers,  our  fellow-pilgrims. 
Love  circulates  around,  as  well  as  joy  and  peace.     5.  We  look  outward.     We  can- 
not, at  a  feast  like  this,  forget  a  world  which  is  famishing ;  shutting  itself  out  from 
this  heavenly  feast,  and  revelling  in  its  lusts  and  vanities.     We  pity,  we  pray  for 
you,  we  plead  with  you  to  come.     For  here  at  this  table  we  find  all  we  need — the 
fulness  of  Christ.     Here  we  taste — (1)  His  love.     (2)  His  peace  and  joy.     (3)  His 
conpolations.     (4)  His  glory.     For  that  glory  is  our  hope,  specially  at  the  table. 
Here  we  get  the  foretaste  of  it.     (H.  Bonar,  D.D.)         Eatinrj  the  LonVs  Supper  : — 
Those  who  do,  and  those  who  do  not,  sit  at  this  board,  may  alike  wish  to  under- 
stand what  it  is  to  eat  the  Lord's   Supper.     1.  First,  it  is  not  to  eat  the  Lord's 
Supper  to  make  it  a  feast  for  the  satisfaction  of  outward  appetite.     Into  so  low  an 
estate,  as  we  learn  from  Paul's  rebuke,  had  it  degenerated  among  the  Corinthians. 
They  may,  indeed,  have  but  imitated  an  earlier  example,  set  in  the  depravity  of 
human  nature.     It  was  a  custom  at  Athens,  in  the  age  of  Socrates,  for  edch  person 
coming  to  a  feast  to  bring  his  own  provision ;  not  that,  as  in  some  later  social 
festivals,  he  might  add  it  to  the  common  stock,  but  to  feed  on  it  by  himself  alone. 
No  wonder  the  apostle  said  this  wa^  not  to  eat  the  Lord's  Supper.     It  is  upon 
something  far  different,  even  upon  making  a  sensual  feast  of  the  Lord's  Supper, 
that  Paul  lays  his  ban.      They  fancied,  forsooth,  they  were   eating  the  Lord's 
Supper  because  they  came  together  in  one  place.     Without  hesitation  he  explodes 
the  superstition,  which,  alas  !  has  reached  our  own  day,  that  any  local  sacreduess 
of  temple  or  altar  made  an  act  holy.     The  Lord's  Sapper  was  a  showing  forth  of 
the  Lord's  death.     The  apostle's  admonition  is  still  instructive.    Some,  iu  our  own 
age,  have  complained  of  the  grave  and  serious  manner  of  observing  the  Lord's 
Supper.     They  would  have  it  more  of  a  social  and  friendly  feast.     Surely,  there 
should  be  no  coldness  round  the  Lord's  table.     Yet  this  table  cannot  furnish  what 
is  like  any  other  feast,  the  dinner  given  to  a  hero,  or  even  the  family  thanksgiving 
of   kindred  and  friends,  eating  and  drinking,  in  gay,  though  innocent,  hilarity 
together.      In  the  Lord's  Supper  is  the  presence  of   a  spirit  peculiar,  awful  in 
purity,  as  it  is  tender  in  love.     2.  But  the  apostle's  description  shows  again,  that 
it  is  not  eating  the  Lord's  Supper  to  make  it  a  mere  form.     Externally,  no  doubt, 
it  is  a  form.     But  there  are  two  kinds  of  forms,  the  dead  and  the  living.     The 
dead  are  those  that  have  lost,  or  never  had,  life.     The  true  form  is  the  tree,  that 
buds  and  blooms,  to  show  in  flower  and  fruit  the  hidden  meaning  which  God  set  in 
its  seed.     3.  Once  more,  the  meaning  of  our  text  shows  that  eating  the  Lord's 
Slipper  is  not  to  make  a  profession  of  holiness.     This  is  a  very  common  mistake. 
Many  are  prevented  from  coming  to  the  table  by  their  reluctance  to  make  such  a 
profession.     Yet,  so  far  from  being  a  profession  of  holiness,  it  is,  in  truth,  the 
very  opposite.     It  is  a  declaration  of  our  not  having  attained  what  we  desire, 
because  so  anxiously  we  use  this  means  of  attaining  it.     4.  Still,  again,  eating 
the  Lord's  Supper,  as  Paul  describes  it,  is  not  to  increase  our  moral  obligations. 
Infinittly  bound  are  we  beforehand  to  love  and  serve  God.     Eating  the  Lord's 
Supper  reminds  us  of  our  oblg  tioiis,  and  may  assist  us  to  fulfil  them,  but  does 
not  originally  impose  them,  or  add  to  their  essential  weight  or  number.     5.  In 
fine,  according  to  the  mind  of  the  apostle,  eating  the  Lord's  Supper  is  not  swearing 
an  oath.    The  Romish  dogma,  that  the  communicant  eats  the  real  flesh  and  drinks 
the  real  blood  of  Christ,  and  thus  assumes  a  vow  and  j^jerforms  a  sacrament,  such 
as  men  have  sealed  with  awful  ceremonies  and  signed  in  their  heart's  gore,  is  a 
fancy  no  less  unscrii^tural  than  irrational,  and  contrary  especially  to  the  discourse 
of  Christ.     "  The  words  that  I  speak  unto  you  are  spirit,  and  they  are  life."     As 
much  as  to  say,  "  It  is  no  physical  or  literal  meaning  I  intend  by  them,  but  a  sense 
of  spiritual,  coidial  communion  with  my  own  feeling  and  mind."     So  he  stops 
their  murmur  at  what  they  were  at  flrst  inclined  to  think  a  hard  saying.     Let  us 
now  consider,  more  positively,  what  to  eat  the  Lord's  Supper  is.     (1)  First,  as  a 
showing  forth  of  His  death,  it  is  the  highest  manifestation  of  the  Divine  love.     So, 
in  the  Scriptures,  the  death  of  Christ,  the  sinless  Son  of  God,  is  described.     Tliis 
meaning  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  as  the  supreme  sign  of  Divine  love,  let  us  now 
observe,  falls  in  with  all  that  is  best  in  human  thought  and  knowled  e.     It  is  a 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ch.u-.  xi. 

fact  of  singular  and  transcendent  beauty,  that  all  discovery,  through  all  history, 
in  all  the  world,  has  been  but  the  gradual  and  ever  cumulative  discovery  of  tha 
goodness  of  God.  Now,  all  this  scientific  discovery  of  God's  goodness  is  but  a 
ladder  to  the  highest  point  of  that  goodness  revealed  in  the  gospel,  whose  crown  is 
in  the  death  of  Christ,  and  whose  celebration  is  in  the  Lord's  Supper.  The  Lord's 
Supper,  as  the  great  peculiar  symbol  of  the  spiritual  fact,  especially  tells  us  that 
our  Father  is  pure,  essential  love,  in  long-sulfering  and  willingness  to  forgive. 
Nothing  can  refute  its  witness,  that,  when  He  chastens,  it  is  still  love,  not  hatred, 
that  wields  the  scourge  ;  and  that  His  wrath  to  the  wicked  is  but  His  kindness  for 
their  case.  (2)  But,  as  eating  the  Lord's  Supper  is  a  recognition  of  this  Divine 
love,  it  is,  too,  a  corresponding  expression  of  our  own  love.  It  should  be  regarded 
and  observed  in  all  the  largeness  and  liberality  of  this  idea.  It  was  not  meant  by 
Christ,  as  it  has  been  often  made  by  man,  to  be  a  subtle,  tormenting  test,  on  minor 
points,  of  formal  custom  or  intellectual  opinion.  But  all  the  troublesome  theories, 
arising  or  imposed,  are,  in  the  light  of  the  new  covenant  itself,  brought  down  to 
one  which  may  indeed  be  sharper  and  stricter  than  any,  or  all  beside,  and  to  which 
those  otherwise  most  rigid  may  give  place.  Do  we  love  Jesus  Christ?  (3)  Further- 
more, to  eat  the  Lord's  Supper,  according  to  the  universal  law  of  exercise,  is  to 
increase  the  love  it  expresses.  This  law  holds  peculiarly  of  all  true  affections  and 
right  exertions.  The  waxing  love  for  Christ  is  its  highest  illustration.  It  especially 
is  a  magnet  whose  use  enhances  its  power.  It  is  true  our  love  for  Christ  is  a 
spiritual  love  for  a  now  spiritual  being,  whom  our  fleshly  eye  never  saw,  or  mortal 
ear  heard.  So  the  love  of  the  Master  and  the  follower  is  no  antiquarian  tradition. 
Truly,  of  what  worth  is  love,  if  not  i^ersonal?  This  Christian  love  passes  and 
repasses,  with  God's  own  spirit,  the  great  conveyancer  of  all  good  things,  like  a 
dove  through  the  air,  and  knits  tiiose  who  share  it  together.  The  feeling  below 
tends  to  rise  to  the  level  of  that  from  which  it  runs,  on  high.  (4)  Eating  the 
Lord's  Supper,  thus  expressing  and  increasing  our  love,  furthermore  supplies  the 
loftiest  and  most  efficient  motive  to  all  duty.  All  our  life,  all  earnest  labour,  flows 
out  of  our  heart.  We  give  all,  by  natural  and  inevitable  consequence,  to  Him  to 
v/hom  we  have  first  given  our  heart.  Eating  the  Lord's  Supper,  therefore,  while  it 
may  seem  merely  formal,  is  of  all  things  most  practical.  It  does  not  end  as  an 
exhibition  or  ceremony.  It  nerves  to  toil,  endurance,  and  sacrifice,  for  the  sake  of 
God  and  humanity.  (5)  In  fine,  the  Lord's  Supper,  while  thus  empowering  for 
earthly  duty,  prepares  us  for  scenes  beyond  this  passing  world.  Its  shadow  falls 
two  ways,  back  into  time,  and  forth  into  eternity.  It  wings  the  soul  to  fly  in 
another  atmosphere,  beyond  this  grosser  air.  It  is  preparation  for  the  world  to 
come.  It  is  making  ready  for  the  second  coming  of  Christ.  Shall  we  extend  this 
principle  of  preparation  in  all  that  is  palpably  useful,  no  further,  but  let  it  stop 
with  the  brink  of  the  grave  ?  Taking  but  a  step  in  our  little  footing  in  this  world, 
shall  we  not  receive  that  staff  of  the  bread  of  Lfe  which  helps  us  to  take  the  next, 
the  second  step,  beyond  the  grave  ?  Ah  !  in  its  true  sense  and  meaning,  both  for 
present  support  and  coming  exigencies,  we  need  the  Lord's  Supper.  All  the 
ministrations  of  this  world  cannot  satisfy  our  appetite,  that  immortal  hunger  and 
thiist  with  which  God  has  made  our  souls  to  be  hungry  and  thirsty.  {C.  A. 
Bariol.)  What  .  .  .  despise  ye  the  Church  of  God? — Despising  the  Church: 
— Take  the  term  in  the  sense  of : — I.  The  house  of  God.  Do  you  undervalue 
the  place  set  apart  for  God's  service,  to  convert  it  into  an  ordinary  banqueting- 
honse  ?  1.  Duties  public  and  not  j^ious  more  befit  a  guild-hall  or  town-house  ; 
duties  pious  and  not  public  more  become  a  closet  (Psa.  iv.  4)  ;  whilst  duties  public 
and  pious  beseem  a  church,  as  proper  thereto.  2.  The  use  is  to  blame  those  that 
turn  the  church  into  a  counting-house,  tliere  to  rate  their  neighbours— both  to 
value  their  estates,  and  too  often  to  revile  their  persons.  Others  make  it  a  market- 
place, there  to  bargain  in  ;  yea,  some  turn  it  into  a  kennel  for  their  dogs,  and  a 
mew  for  their  hawks,  which  they  bring  with  them.  Surely  if  Christ  drove  out 
thence  sheep  and  doves,  the  emblems  of  innocency,  He  would  not  have  suffered 
these  to  have  abode  in  His  temple.  II.  The  spiritual  Church.  The  rich 
Corinthians,  in  not  inviting  the  poor,  made  chaff  of  good  corn  ;  yea,  refuse  of  God's 
elect.  1.  Objection.  But  not  inviting  the  poor,  was  not  despising  them.  A  free- 
will offering  is  no  debt.  2.  Au'^wer.  This  is  true  of  civil  and  ordinary  entertain- 
ments:  but  these  being  entitled  "  love-feasts,"  and  charity  pretended  the  main 
motive  of  them,  poor  people  were  the  most  proper  guests.  Besides,  if  not  Christi- 
anity, yet  good  nature  might  have  moved  them,  whilst  they  gorged  themselves,  to 
have  given  something  to  the  poor  which  stood  by.     To  let  them  look  on  hungry 


■CHAP,  xr.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  95 

was  to  wrong  their  peers  in  grace  here,  and  glory  hereafter.  3.  Doctrine.  He 
that  despiseth  the  poor,  despiseth  the  Church  of  God.  Whereof  they  are  a  member 
inferior  to  none  in  piety  (Jas.  ii.  5);  superior  to  all  in  number.  Now  he  that 
pincheth  the  little  toe  paineth  the  whole  body  ;  the  disgracing  any  member  is  the 
despising  the  whole  church.  Let  us  beware  of  affronting  those  in  want.  "  He 
that  seeth  his  brother  in  need  .  .  .  how  dwelleth  the  love  of  God  in  him."  {T. 
Fuller,  D.D.)  Ecgard  for  the  Church : — I.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  the 
■Chdrch  of  Gon.  Nor  need  we  travel  far  to  find  it.  Wherever  there  is  a  con- 
gregation of  believers  among  whom  the  gospel  is  preached  and  the  ordinance;^ 
observed,  tliere  is  the  Cliurch  of  God.  Sucli  a  church  existed  at  Coiinth.  It  was 
the  assembly  of  them  who  were  "called  to  be  saints,"  and  had  responded  to  that 
call  in  the  confession  of  faith  in  Christ  and  in  the  observance  of  His  commands. 
II.  Theue  be  some  who  despise  this  Chdrch  of  God.  1.  The  particular  offence 
of  the  Corinthians  was,  that  they  misapprehended  the  character  and  spirituality  of 
the  holy  Supper,  and  thought  to  celebrate  it  after  the  manner  of  a  worldly  festival. 
This  ihe  apostle  sets  down  as  equivalent  to  contempt  of  the  whole  institution  of 
wliich  they  were  members.  2.  On  the  same  principle  there  are  many  ways  of 
despising  the  Church  of  God.  (1)  By  contemning  the  Church's  faith.  (2)  By 
despising  its  ministry.  (3)  By  neglecting  its  services.  (4)  By  ignoring  Church 
fellowship  and  relations.  III.  There  is  much  in  and  about  the  Church  to 
TEMPT  MEN  TO  DESPISE  IT;  much  witli  which  the  carnal  reason  and  taste  of  man 
is  naturally  offended,  and  which  he  is  therefore  predisposed  to  dislike  and  dis- 

■esteem.  1.  Take  the  faith  of  the  Church,  the  Trinity,  the  Incarnation,  &e.,  &c. 
2.  Its  ordinances.  3.  Its  unimportance  in  the  world  in  comparison  with  pomf)ous 
organisations  of  man's  devising  !  4.  Its  members.  How  destitute  of  that  style 
which  is  claimed  amongst  the  worldly  great  and  noble !  5.  Its  hypocritical 
adherents.  Nevertheless^IV.  There  is  reason  why  the  Church  should  not  be 
DESPISED.     There  is  but  one  consideration  to  this  effect  named  in  the  text ;  but 

■■that  reason  is  ample.     The  Church  is  not  of  man,  it  is  Divine.     It  is  not  a  Masonic 

-fraternity — a  man-made  institution. — 1.  God  made  the  first  Churches,  and  out  of 

.and  through  them  He  has  made  all  Churches.  2.  The  faith  of  the  Church  is  from 
Divine  revelation.  3.  Its  sacraments  are  Divine  ordinances.  4.  The  making  of 
true  members  of  the  Church  is  by  a  new  creation  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  5.  And 
everything  entering  into  the  constitution  of  the  Church  is  the  work  or  gift  of  God. 
(J,  A.  Seiss,  D.D.)  The  Church.-  its  note  of  universality  : — 1.  It  is  important  to 
put  the  local  church  in  its  right  Christian  setting.  The  single  congregation  is  a 
unit  in  the  great  multiple  of  communions  which  constitute  the  Church  of  God.  2. 
It  is  necessary  that  the  kingdom  of  God  should  be  localised  in  separate  churches. 
The  strong  emotions  gather  around  definite  objects.  Men  in  battle  look  to  their 
regimental  colours  for  their  rallying-point ;  yet  those  colours  would  be  nothing  of 
themselves,  did  they  not  belong  to  and  represent  the  country.  To  follow  the 
colours  of  a  particular  church  for  its  own  sake  miglit  prove  to  be  treason  to  the 

■Church  of  God.  I.  The  Church  of  God  is  a  universal  institution  for  man. 
1.  If  we  listen  to  the  gospel  which  Jesus  preached  we  cannot  fail  to  hear  ringing  in 
it  this  clear  note  of  universality.  It  was  not  a  gospel  of  individual  election,  nor  of 
personal  salvation  simply,  but  the  gospel  of  the  Kingdom  of  a  redeemed  society 
organised  in  righteousness,  and  vital  witli  the  spirit  of  love.  2.  His  daily  life  was 
marked  by  the  sign  of  universality.  And  so  it  was  a  constant  surprise  to  His 
disciples.     It  was  a  larger  liumanity  than  Jerusalem  could  understand.     Kecall, 

■  e.g.,  that  scene  at  which  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  were  shocked,  when  Jesus  sat  at 
meat  with  publicans  and  sinners  ;  and  that  scene  at  Jacob's  well  at  which  even  the 
good  disciples  were  surprised.  He  healed  the  impotent  man,  and  restored  the 
sight  of  the  blind  on  the  Sabbath  day,  and  proclaimed  that  even  an  institution  so 
sacred  to  God  from  the  completion  of  the  creation  was  made  for  man.  3.  This 
note  pervades  also  and  harmonises  all  His  doctrines.  No  teacher  had  ever  used 
the  universal  adjectives  in  speaking  to  men.  We  cannot  take  "all,"  "any," 
"  whosoever,"  &c.  out  of  the  speech  of  Jesus  without  taking  all  the  music  from  it. 
4.  The  Person  also  of  Jesus  is  distinguished  from  all  others  by  this.  He  has 
named  Himself  in  His  human  place  in  history,  "  the  Son  of  Man."     When  the 

■disciples  began  to  realise  who  and  what  manner  of  man  the  Son  of  man  was,  the 
other  confession  followed  of  itself,  "  Thou  art  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living 
God."  And  upon  the  man  who  confessed  that  whole  truth  Christ  said  the  Church 
should  be  built.      5.  The  Church,  therefore,  whose  promise  was  given   in  that 

rmoment  should  be  characterised  by  the  same  note  of  universality.    It  is  not  to  be 


96  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

a  chosen  school  of  disciples  around  their  Teacher ;  it  is  not  to  be  a  national  church 
— another  temple  in  Jerusalem.  II.  Thkee  days  of  the  Son  of  man,  at  least, 
IN  Christian  histoky  have  pkeceded  odr  day.  1.  The  apostolic  age,  that  day  of 
glorious  beginnings  of  Christianity.  It  was  nece.-sarily,  however,  an  era  of  but 
partial  applications  of  Christ's  words  to  the  life  of  the  people.  The  apostles  were 
called  to  liberate  and  set  in  motion  the  Christian  ideas,  but  not  to  apply  them 
universally  to  tbeir  world  and  its  customs.  2.  The  age  of  the  power  of  external 
law,  and  the  era  of  the  outward  unity  of  the  Cliurch.  The  Eoman  age  witnessed 
an  external  universality  of  the  Church ;  but  its  method  was  the  way  of  Ciissar  rather 
than  the  way  of  the  Son  of  man.  3.  A  return  from  Eoman  Catholic  supremacy  to 
the  authority  of  the  Son  of  man  followed  next,  in  the  Divine  order  of  history, 
through  the  lleformation.  III.  And  now  what  is  the  next  step  foewaed  ?  1. 
"What  are  the  chief  questions  of  life  now  the  woild  over?  How  not  only  in  this 
city,  or  this  country,  but  how  in  the  whole  world  shall  men  live  together?  All 
labour  troubks,  or  wasteful  competitions,  or  hurtful  combinations,  are  symptoms 
and  siuns  of  this  vital  problem  of  society.  No  nation  can  live  for  itself  alone. 
The  fates  of  the  modern  nations  are  bound  together.  There  is  nothing  so  foreign 
that  it  may  not  become  domestic  to  any  country.  The  destiny  of  this  world,  it  is 
increasingly  evident,  is  to  be  one  destiny.  2.  To  the  Church  of  God  providence  is 
bringing  home  this  one  soc'al  question.  How  then  are  the  churches  to  answer  it  ? 
(1)  Not  in  the  way  of  Rome.  The  Son  of  man  will  not  be  enthroned  as  CiEsar. 
There  is  no  way  of  legislation  to  the  millennium.  (2)  Neither  shall  the  old  man  of 
Protestantism,  shrunken  in  muscle,  its  separate  members  scarce  hanging  together, 
and  living  on  the  income  of  its  capital  laid  up  in  other  days,  be  the  new  man  of  the 
coming  day.  (3)  Verily,  the  days  are  coming — are  they  not  now  at  Land? — when 
the  Son  of  man  will  open  His  mouth,  and  bless  the  multitudes  in  our  churches, 
and  in  the  power  of  His  Spirit  our  Christianity  shall  become  as  never  before  the 
Church  of  God  for  the  world.  The  churches  are  becoming  more  deejjly  conscious 
that  they  exist  not  for  themselves  ;  but  for  some  Divine  blessing  for  all  men.  The 
Church  belongs  to  you,  whether  you  will  belong  to  it  or  not.  The  Church  is  for  the 
world,  whether  the  world  now  be  for  or  against  it.  IV.  Two  consequences  of 
great  moment  follow.  1.  Tliat  we  who  belong  to  particular  communions  should 
be  careful  in  our  administration  of  them  not  to  interfere  with  the  Divine  rights  of 
any  man  in  the  Church  of  God.  AVe  must  look  carefully  to  it  lest  we  exclude  some 
souls  from  our  churchly  participation  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  All  disciples  have 
Divine  rights  to  any  table  of  communion  which  is  spread  in  the  name  of  Christ.  The 
Divine  rights  of  the  world  to  the  Church,  and  in  the  Church,  impose  upon  us  the  pre- 
sent and  urgent  missionary  obligation.  2.  That  men  who  are  already  in  the  Church 
have  right  to  stay  there,  and  to  work  out  honestly  and  patiently  within  the  Church 
any  questions  which  may  trouble  them.  The  disciples  of  old  were  constantly  going 
back  to  the  Son  of  man  with  some  new  question,  or  from  some  fresh  perplexity. 
Still,  the  Son  of  man  dwells  among  the  questionings  of  men.  And  there  is  no 
better  place  than  within  the  communion  of  the  Church  fur  you  to  meet  the  questions 
of  your  lives.  Thomas  of  old  kept  in  the  Church,  although  he  doubted.  And  so 
Thomas,  the  honest  sceptic,  became  an  honest  apostle.  Conclusion :  It  follows 
from  this  truth  that  every  man  to  whom  the  Clmrch  is  presented  has  some  corre- 
sponding obligation  towards  it.  The  world  is  redeemed  in  Christ,  and  it  is  a  sin 
and  a  shame  to  live  in  it  as  though  it  were  not  redeemed.  There  is  a  Church  of 
God  forming,  growing,  having  a  glorious  world-task  committed  to  it ;  and  it  is 
ignoble  not  to  have  part  in  it  and  its  work.  (N.  Smyth,  D.D.)  Shall  I  praise 
you  in  this?  I  praise  you  not. — Ministerial  blame  and  commendation: — I. 
Pastoes  may  and  must  phaise  their  people  wherein  the?  do  well.  1.  Reasons. 
(1)  Hereby  they  shall  peaceably  possess  themselves  of  the  good- wills  of  their 
people,  which  may  advance  the  efficacy  of  their  preaching.  (2)  Men  will  more 
willingly  digest  a  reproof  for  their  faults,  if  praised  when  they  do  well.  (3)  Virtue 
being  commended  doth  increase  and  multiply ;  creepers  in  goodness  will  go,  goers 
run,  runners  fly.  2.  Use.  Those  ministers  are  to  be  blamed  which  are  ever 
blaming,  God  "doth  not  always  chide"  (Psa.  ciii.  9).  These  preachers  use  their 
reproofs  so  commonly,  till  their  physic  turns  natural,  and  will  not  work  with  their 
people.  Do  any  desire  to  hear  what  Themistocles  counted  the  best  music — namely, 
themselves  commended?  On  these  conditions,  we  ministf-rs  will  indent  with 
them  :  Let  them  find  matter,  we  will  find  words ;  let  them  do  what  is  commend- 
able, and  blame  us  if  we  commend  not  what  they  do.  Such  work  would  be  a 
pleasure.     To  reprove  is  pressed  from  us,  as  wine  from  grapes  ;  but  praises  would 


CHAP.  XI.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  97 

flow  from  our  lips,  as  water  from  a  fountain.  But,  alas  !  how  can  we  build,  when 
they  afford  us  neither  brick  nor  straw  ?  If  with  Abab  they  will  do  what  is  evil, 
then  with  Mieaiah  we  must  always  prophesy  evil  unto  them.  II.  Ministeks  must 
NOT  coMJiExn  THEiii  PEOPLE  WHEN  THEY  DO  ir.L.  1.  Eeasous.  (1)  Dlshonourable 
to  God.  (2)  Dangerous  to  the  ministers.  That  ambassador  who,  being  sent  to 
proclaim  war,  pronounceth  peace  to  rebels  (Isa.  Ivii.  21),  deserves  at  his  return  to 
lie  preferred  to  the  gallows.  (3)  Dangerous  to  the  people  who  arc  soothed  in  their 
i~ins.  Honey-dews,  though  they  be  sweet  in  taste,  do  black  and  blast  the  corn  :  so 
those  wlio  praise  their  people  without  cause,  are  cruelly  kind  unto  them  :  it  is 
pleasmt  to  tlie  palate  of  llesh,  but  destroyeth  and  damneth  the  soul.  2.  Use.  It 
were  to  be  wished,  that  as  those  that  live  under  the  equmoctial  at  noonday  have 
no  shadows  at  all ;  so  great  men  should  have  no  shadows,  no  parasites,  no  flatterers 
to  commend  them  when  they  least  deserve  it.  3.  Objection.  But  wliy  doth 
St.  Paul  deal  so  mildly  with  the  Corinthians,  "I  praise  you  not"?  Methinks  he 
should  have  made  his  little  finger  as  heavy  as  his  loins.  (1)  Theophylact  answers 
that  St.  Paul  reproves  the  rich  men  the  more  mildly,  lest  otherwise  they  should  be 
implacably  incensed  against  the  poor  as  the  causers  of  the  apostle's  anger.  (2)  It 
was  the  first  time  he  told  the  Corinthians  of  their  fault,  and  therefore  used  them 
the  more  gently,  on  hope  of  their  amendment.  This  corrupt  humour  in  the 
Corinthians  was  not  as  yet  clodded  in  them  by  custom,  and  therefore  the  easier 
purged  and  removed.  So  ministers  must  use  mildness,  especially  at  their  first 
reproving  of  a  sin.  Yea,  God  so  blessed  the  mild  severity  of  St.  Paul,  that  the 
Corinthians  reformed  their  errors.     (T.  Fuller,  D.D.) 

Vers.  23-26.  For  I  have  received  of  the  Lord  Jesus  that  -which  also  I  delivered 
unto  you. — Giving  as  ice  receive  : — At  a  sailors'  meeting  a  seaman  prayed,  "  Lord, 
make  us  ships  with  two  hatchways  ;  one  to  take  in  cargo,  and  the  other  to  give  it 
out."  A  good  prayer  ;  Paul  knew  its  answer,  "  I  have  received  of  the  Lord  that 
which  also  I  delivered  unto  you"  (chap.  xi.  23).  We  are  not  storehouses  ;  we  are 
ships,  intended  to  trade  with  the  heavenly  country  and  bring  suijplies  for  a  needy 
world.  Always  loading  ends  in  overloading;  if  we  unload,  we  shall  soon  be 
reloaded.  He  who  keeps  his  talent  in  a  napkin,  will  lose  both  napkin  and  talent ; 
one  will  rot,  and  the  other  rust.  Tlie.  Lord's  Supper ; — Four  things  strike  us  with 
amazement : — I.  That  any  should  doubt  the  genuineness  op  CnrasTiANiTY. 
Here  is  an  institution  that  was  started  the  night  previous  to  our  Saviour's  cruci- 
fixion, and  which  from  that  to  this  hour,  through  eighteen  long  centuries,  has  been 
attended  to  by  all  the  brandies  of  the  true  Church.  Since  its  origin  thousands  of 
generations  have  passed  away,  many  systems  have  risen  and  disappeared,  nations 
have  been  organised,  flourished,  and  broken  up,  but  this  ordinance  continues.  And 
what  for  ?  To  commemorate  the  great  central  fact  of  the  gospel,  viz. ,  that  Christ 
died.  Is  there  any  other  fact  in  history  sustained  by  evidence  half  so  powerful  as 
this?  II.  That  any  should  misinterpret  this  ordinance.  It  is  to  "  show  forth 
the  Lord's  death."  There  are  three  abuses  of  ttiis  institution  which  imply  the 
gi'ossest  misinterpretation.  1.  The  gustatory.  The  Corinthians  thus  abused  it. 
Hence,  in  the  preceding  verses  he  says,  "  When  ye  come  together,  therefore,  into 
one  place,  this  is  not  to  eat  the  Lord's  supper,"  &c.  They  had  been  accustomed, 
in  their  heathen  festivals,  to  give  way  to  gluttony  and  intemperance.  ]\Iany  of 
them,  from  the  force  of  old  habits,  were  tempted  to  use  the  Lord's  Supper  in  this 
way,  hence  they  were  guilty  of  profaning  tlie  institution.  Thus,  tliey  ate  and 
drank  "  unworthily,"  and  by  so  doing  ate  and  drank  condemnation  to  themselves. 
2.  The  superstitious.  There  are  some  who  believe  tliat  after  the  words  of  conse- 
cration pronounced  by  the  priest  over  these  elements,  the  elements  become  carnally 
the  "  body  and  blood  of  the  Lord."  This  is  transubstantiation.  3.  The  formalistic. 
There  are  those  who  partake  of  the  bread  and  wine  merely  as  a  matter  of  ceremony. 
It  is  regarded  as  the  proper  thing  to  be  done,  and  is  done  mechanically.  We  evan- 
gelical Christians  are  not  guilty  of  the  first  nor  the  second,  but  we  may  be  of  the 
third.     Let  us  "examine  ourselves";  so  let  us  eat,  &c.     III.  That  any  should 

SAY    the    institution    IS    NOT    PER5IANENT    IN    ITS    OBLIGATION.        Tlie    apostlc    tells    US 

distinctly  that  it  was  to  show  forth  the  Lord's  death  till  He  come.  On  to  that 
distant  p-dnt  tlie  obligation  is  binding.  There  are  some  professing  Christians  who 
think  themtelves  too  sjiiritual  to  observe  such  an  ordinance.  These  very  spiritual 
ones,  to  be  consistent,  should  avoid  all  scientific  studies,  for  science  has  to  do  with 
material  forms.  They  should  also  avoid  all  Biblical  studies,  for  Biblical  truths  are, 
for  the  most  part,  embodied  in  material  facts.  Christ  Himself  was  flesh  and  blood.' 
VOL.    II.  7 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOR.  [chap.  si. 

IV.  That  ant  acquainted  with  the  biogeapbt  op  Christ  should  neglect  it 
Consider — 1.  That  it  is  to  comnieinorate  the  world's  greatest  Benefactor  that  has 
served  the  world — (1)  In  the  highest  way,  effected  its  deliverance  from  sin  and  hell. 
(2)  By  the  most  unparalleled  sacrifice.  (3)  With  the  most  disinterested  love.  2. 
It  is  enjoined  by  the  world's  greatest  Benefactor,  under  the  most  touching  circum- 
stances. How  amazing  it  is  that  men  should  neglect  it!  Conclusion:  The 
excuses  that  men  make  for  neglecting  this  are  singalarly  absurd.  1.  A  man  will 
sometimes  say,  "  I  can  be  saved  without  it."  We  ask,  who  told  you  so?  What  is 
damnation  ?  What  but  disobedience  to  Christ  ?  And  he  who  neglects  this  insti- 
tution disobeys  Him.  2.  Another  man  will  say,  "  I  am  unfit  for  it."  We  say,  if 
you  are  unfit  for  this  you  are  unfit  for  any  oihor  religions  observance  ;  unfit  to  read 
the  Bible,  sing,  or  pray,  nor  can  you  ever  become  fit  by  neglecting  your  duty.  (D. 
I'lionias,  D.D.)         The  sacrament  of  the  LonVs   Siip^yer  of  Divine   institution  : — 

I.  What  is  a  sacra-^ient  ?  In  general,  the  visible  sign  ol  an  invisible  grace.  1. 
As  God  hath  used  covenants,  so  also  sacraments  always.  2.  They  are  part,  not  of 
His  natural,  but  instituted  worship.  3.  They  are  all  pledges  of  the  covenant  of 
grace.  4.  They  all  represent  Ciirist  the  Mediator — (1)  To  suffei*?  (2)  Or  having 
suffered.  5.  In  all  saciaments  there  are  two  parts.  (1)  The  thing  signified.  II. 
What  is  the  Lokd's  Supper  ?  A  sacrament,  wherein  tlie  outward  sit^ns  are  bread 
and  wine.  III.  What  are  we  to  understand  by  Divine  institution  ?  That  it 
was  instituted  of  God,  as  the  others  were  not,  which  the  Church  of  Rome  maintains 
to  be  sacraments,  viz.,  confirraation,  orders,  penance,  matrimony,  and  extreme 
unction.  IV.  How  does  it  appear  to  be  op  Divink  institution  (Luke  sxii.  19, 
20).  V.  Wherefore  was  it  instituted  by  God?  1.  When  God  had  made  man. 
He  entered  into  a  covenant  of  works  with  him  (Lev.  xviii.  5).  2.  This  covenant 
man  broke,  and  so  became  miserable.  3.  Hence  God,  of  His  mercy,  enters  into  a 
covenant  of  grace  (Jer.  xxxi.  33).  4.  This  covenant  of  grace  was  established  in 
Christ  (Heb.  xii.  21;  2  Cor.  i.  20).  5.  This  covenant  man  is  also  apt  to  miscarry 
in ;  so  as — (1)  To  be  forgetful  of  it.  (2)  Not  to  believe  in  it.  (3)  To  receive  no 
benefit  from  it.  6.  Hence  God  instituted  this  saeiament.  (1)  To  make  us  mindful 
of  this  covenant  and  Christ  (Luke  xxii.  19).  (2)  To  confirm  and  seal  it  to  us 
(Rom.  iv.  11).  (3)  To  convey  the  benefits  of  it  to  us.  Conclusion:  1.  Be  thankful 
for  this  sacrament.  2.  Do  not  neglect  the  use  of  it.  3.  Prepare  yourselves  for  it. 
(1)  Acquaint  yourselves  with  tlie  nature  of  it.  (2)  llepent.  (3)  Act  faith  in  Christ. 
(Bp.  Beveridfje.)  The  doctrine  of  the  Holy  Communion  : — I.  It  is  A  memorial  of 
THE  SACRIFICE  OF  THE  DEATH  OF  Chf.ist.  1.  See  how  closcly  it  is  connected  with 
that  death.  Consider — (1)  The  time;  Christ  and  His  apostles  had  met  for  the  last 
time  before  He  died.  (2)  The  action  ;  the  breaking  being  a  sign  of  the  dissolution 
of  the  body,  the  separation  of  body  and  soul  in  death,  and  also  that  His  death  was 
an  act  of  free-will.  He  had  power  over  His  life  to  take  it  up  and  lay  it  down,  just 
as  of  His  own  accord  He  took  up  from  the  table  the  bread,  and  brake  it,  and  gave 
it  to  the  disciples  to  eat.  2.  To  this  picture  the  three  Evangelists  and  St.  Paul  all 
describe  the  Lord  as  ■'  blessing,"  or  "  giving  thanks,"  as  He  brake  the  bread.  And 
so  this  also  afterwards  passed  as  a  synonym  for  the  sacrament.  St.  Paul  calls  it 
"  the  cup  of  blessing,"  and  among  us  it  has  the  name  of  "Eucharist."  3.  Since 
the  sacrifice  of  the  death  of  Christ  is  the  cause  of  our  justification,  our  chief  con- 
cern must  be  to  make  sure  of  our  partaking  of  it.  It  is  one  thing  to  say  "  Christ 
died  for  all";  another,  "Christ  died  for  me."  Therefore  every  man  for  himself 
must  stretch  forth  this  hand  of  faith  and  take  to  himself,  appropriate,  his  part  in 
the  atoning  sacrifice.     The  sacrament  is  an  instrument  for  such  an  appropriation. 

II.  A  MEANS  OF  present  COMMUNION  WITH  Christ.  As  it  was  the  work  of  Christ 
of  His  own  free-will  and  grace  to  offer  His  body  upon  the  Cross,  so  now  every  fruit 
of  that  sacrifice  which  we  gather  in  His  Church  comes  fresh  from  His  living  hand, 
and  His  work,  and  is  nothing  less.  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  always,"  is  the  secret  of  our 
life  in  tlie  Church ;  and  nowhere  more  effectually  than  in  the  holy  sacrament  is 
His  presence  made  real  and  true  to  the  eye  of  faith.  The  maiiner  of  our  Lord's 
presence  cannot  be  explained,  but  His  presence  in  some  supernatural  form  is  there, 
or  the  text  has  no  proper  sense.  III.  The  highest  act  of  worship  in  the 
Church.  1.  The  faithful  Christian,  in  preparation  for  this  holy  act,  examines 
himself,  and  confesses  his  unworthiness.  2.  Then  we  make  an  offering  of  our 
stores,  which,  though  small,  is  at  least  a  symbol  of  homage.  3.  Then  the  oblation 
of  bread  and  wine  is  blessed  and  taken  into  His  service — an  offering  of  the  first- 
fruits,  in  acknowledgment  that  hfe's  bounties  are  His  gift.  4.  Then  comes  an 
oblation  of  greater  significance.    The  worshipper  offers  himself  with  a  free  heart 


CDAP.  xr.]  L  CORINTHIANS.  99 

to  receive  Christ,  and  in  return  gives  himself  to  God.  5.  Above  all,  we  come 
nearest  to  the  work  of  heaven  itself,  where  the  Church  worships  God  in  the 
presence  of  the  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain.  So  in  the  Church  below  our  highest  act 
of  worship  is  celebrated  in  that  place,  where  the  Lamb  of  God  and  His  sacrifice  is 
brought  most  near  to  us.  (C.  IV.  Fiirse,  31. A.)  "This  do  in  remcvihrance  of 
M-e"  : — If  Christ  had  said,  "Build  Me  some  fine  cathedral  that  shall  stand  as 
memorial  to  Me,"  how  we  would  have  poured  out  our  contributions  that  somewhere 
in  tliis  world  there  might  stand  some  central  temple,  over  which  the  cross  on  whichl 
He  hung  should  tower  throughout  the  ages  !  But  the  cathednd  would  have  passedi 
into  hands  of  men  corrupted  by  ambition.  He  made  His  monument  of  loving 
hearts.  Only  this  do  :  Sometimes  sit  down  together  ;  sometimes  remember  that 
last  occasion  when  I  grasped  the  hands  of  those  I  loved,  looked  into  their  faces, 
and  heard  their  voices.  He  longs  to  be  remembered  as  love  always  longs  to  be 
remembered.  He  wanted  not  His  name  to  be  blotted  out  of  human  memory,  nor 
His  personality  to  be  forgotten  from  throbbing  hearts.  He  comnnrnds  and  guides 
you  in  many  things.  He  gives  you  opportunity  to  serve  His  children.  His  poor,  in 
many  ways  ;  but  there  is  only  one  personal  request  He  makes  of  you,  that  now  and 
again,  at  some  supper  table,  with  simply  bread  and  wine,  you  shall,  as  they  that 
love  Him  have  throughout  all  ages,  peipetuate  His  memory  and  show  your  love  for 
Him.  {Lyman  Abbott.)  'The  remembrance  of  Christ : — I  saw  behind  an  hotel  in 
Switzerland  a  fine  garden,  and  I  unexpectedly  found  there  American  flowers,  and 
being  far  away  from  home,  and  half  homesick,  they  afforded  me  great  pleasure. 
Every  one  of  them  seemed  like  a  message  to  me  full  of  ati'ection  by  association. 
So  the  remembrance  of  Christ  in  the  Lord's  Supper  rekindles  our  love  to  Him. 
(II.  ]V.  Beechi'r.)  Expressive  symbols  : — I  cannot  bring  back  my  little  child,  but 
I  can  take  a  locket  and  look  at  his  face,  and  he  springs  to  life  in  my  inward  tliought. 
There  are  scenes  in  my  childhood  that  I  cannot  tread  again,  but  a  very  simple 
memorial,  a  little  dried  flower,  or  some  little  yellow  faded  note  brings  back  again 
the  sweet  sense  of  an  early  experience.  And  so,  by  some  such  very  simple  symbol, 
we  can  bring  again  before  us  the  Saviour  broken  for  us.  His  blood  shed  for  us.  His 
love  so  great,  dying  to  give  us  life.  (Ibid.)  The pitrpose  ofthf  Lord's  Supper  : — 
We  soon  forget  objects  wliich  are  removed  from  our  sight ;  and  our  Lord,  who 
knows  and  pities  tliis  weakness  of  our  nature,  has  given  us  an  abiding  memorial  of 
Himself.  He  has  appointed  an  ordinance  for  this  very  purpose,  to  remind  us  of 
His  love.  "  All  our  fresh  springs  "  are  in  our  crucified  Ijord,  and  therefore  He 
brings  Himself  frequently  before  us  as  our  crucified  Lord  that  we  may  go  to  Him 
as  the  great  source  of  our  mercies,  and  take  of  His  blessings.  (Dean  Bradley.) 
The  Lord's  Siqyper,  a  simjjle  vumorial : — We  need  not  look  for  great  things  in  order 
to  discover  great  truths.  To  those  who  reach  after  God,  He  will  reveal  His  deepest 
secrets  through  things  insignificant  in  themselves,  within  the  routine  of  common 
lives.  No  event  occurs  more  regularly  than  the  daily  meal,  none,  perhaps,  gathers 
around  it  so  many  jileasant  associations.  Its  simplest  form,  in  Christ's  time, 
consisted  in  eating  bread  and  drinking  a  cup  of  wine.  Into  this  act,  one  evening, 
He  gathered  all  the  meaning  of  the  ancient  sacrifices,  all  sacred  and  tender  relation 
between  Himself  and  His  followers,  and  all  tbe  prophecies  of  His  perfected 
kingdom.  That  the  Lord  Jesus  the  same  night  in  which  He  was  hetrayed  took 
bread. —  Christ  takhiy  bread,  and  our  taking  it  from  Him  :—l.  He  took  bkead.  1. 
Why  did  Christ  choose  so  cheap  and  common  a  thing  to  exhibit  His  body  in  ?  (1) 
Herein  He  graciously  provided  for  the  poor.  Had  He  appointed  some  costly 
recipe,  the  poor  could  not  procure  it  for  themselves,  and  the  charity  of  the  rich 
would  not  purchase  it  for  others.  (2)  Had  He  instituted  it  in  some  precious 
element,  people  might  have  imputed  tlie  efficacy  thereof  to  its  natural  worth  and 
working,  not  to  Christ's  institution.  Christ  therefore  chooseth  a  thing  so  mean  in 
itself,  that  it  cannot  eclipse  God  of  His  glory  ;  none  can  be  so  mad  as  to  attribute 
to  plain  bread  itself  such  spiritual  operation.  Let  us  take  heed  how  we  despise  the 
simplicity  of  God's  ordinance.  Say  not  with  Naaman,  "Are  not  Abana  and 
Pharpar,"  &c.  Is  not  the  bread  at  the  baker's,  and  the  wine  at  the  vintner's,  as 
good  as  that  in  the  sacrament  ?  And  far  be  it  from  us  to  seek  with  our  own  inven- 
tions to  beguard  that  which  God  will  have  plain.  Bather  let  us  pray,  that  onr 
eyes  may  be  anointed  with  that  eye-salve,  to  see  majesty  in  the  meanness,  ami  the 
state  in  the  simplicity,  of  the  sacraments.  2.  But  amongst  such  variety  of  cheap 
elements,  why  was  bread  preferred  ?  To  show  our  bodies  can  as  well  subsist  with- 
out bread,  as  our  souls  without  a  Saviour.  It  is  called  "  the  staff  of  bread  "  ;  other 
meats  are  but  as  pretty  wands  to  whisk  in  our  hands.     Without  bread  no  feast ; 


/ 


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xi, 

■with  bread  no  famine.  II.  He  said  unto  them,  Take,  i.e.,  in  their  hands,  and 
put  it  to  their  mouth  ;  not  as  the  custom  lately  introduced  in  the  Komish  Church, 
for  the  priest  to  put  it  in  the  mouth  of  every  communicant.  But  it  is  pleaded, 
that  it  is  unmannerly  for  laymen  to  hanille  Christ's  body  ;  and  therefore  it  is  most 
reverence  to  talve  it  with  their  mouths.  1.  There  is  no  such  clown  in  Christianity 
as  he  who  will  be  more  mannerly  than  God  will  have  him.  It  is  moat  reverence 
for  us  to  do  as  God  commands  us.  Ahaz  tempted  God  in  saying,  he  "  would  not 
tempt  Hira  "  (Lsa.  vii.  12).  Those  do  little  better  who,  more  nice  than  wise,  strain 
courtesy  not  to  take  Christ's  body  in  their  hands,  when  He  reaches  it.  2.  Take  it 
strictly,  and  our  mouths  are  as  unworthy  as  our  hands  to  receive  Christ's  body. 
But,  seeing  it  is  Christ's  pleasure  to  come  under  the  roof  of  our  mouth,  let  Him 
also  pass  through  the  porch  of  our  hands.  The  rather  because  it  seemeth  that  we 
entertain  Christ's  body  in  more  state,  and  with  more  observance  towards  it,  when 
the  more  servants  attend  it,  the  more  members  of  our  body  using  their  service  in 
receiving  it.  3.  The  Romish  custom  loseth  the  significancy  of  the  hand  of  faith. 
The  taking  Christ's  body  in  onr  hands  mindeth  us  spiritually  by  faith  to  apprehend 
and  lay  hold  on  His  mercies  and  merits.     {T.  Fuller,  D.D.) 

Ver.  24.  And  when  He  had  given  thanlfs,  He  torake  it,  and  said,  Take,  eat. — The 

Lord's  Supper : — 1.  It  is  lemaikable  that  we  are  indebted  to  Paul  for  the  most  par- 
ticular account  of  this  service,  because  he  was  not  one  of  those  who  were  present 
on  the  night  of  its  institution.  Nor  did  he  derive  his  knowledge  from  those  who 
were  present  (Gal.  i.  11,  12).  The  striking  agreement  between  this  report 
and  that  of  those  who  were  pi-esent  is  one  of  the  evidences  of  the  truth  of 
Scripture.  2.  Thoughtful  men  know  the  value  of  particular  customs,  medals 
and  inscriptions,  to  certify  any  historical  event.  Now,  the  observance  of  the  Lord's 
Supper  is  a  standing  historical  evidence  of  the  truth  of  the  Christian  religion.  It 
is  to  be  traced  backwards  for  hundreds  of  years  to  the  niglit  in  which  Christ  was 
betrayed  ;  but  no  farther.  There  we  lose  the  clue,  because  the  institution  then  had 
its  origin.  I.  The  naturr  of  the  ordinance.  It  is  commemorative.  1.  Who  is 
it  that  is  to  be  particularly  remembered  ?  Chiist  claims  our  grateful  recollection 
on  the  giound  of — (1)  His  dignity.  Bank  and  power  impress  all  beings  :  but  there 
never  was  such  rank  on  eaith  as  that  which  attached  to  the  person  of  Christ.  He 
was  in  possession  of  the  attributes  of  Godhead.  (2)  His  condescension.  He  passed 
by  the  nature  of  angels,  and  was  "found  in  fashion  as  a  man."  (3)  His  love.  A 
love  that  "  passeth  knowledge."  Christ's  love  has  been  compared  with  the  love  of 
Jonathan  to  David.  But  that  was  love  for  a  friend :  this  is  love  for  enemies.  That 
■was  love  for  love  :  this  is  love  for  hatred.  2.  What  is  it  that  is  commemorated? 
(1)  The  death  of  Christ — a  death  entitled  to  this  distinction.  Many  men  are 
remembered  who  are  not  entitled  to  that  honour  ;  many  have  had  monuments 
raised  to  them,  whose  name  ought  to  have  been  blotted  out.  I  find  the  death  of 
Christ  observed  by  God  the  Father.  "  My  Father  loveth  Me  because  I  lay  down 
My  life."  And  we  are  told  that  in  heaven  the  great  event  which  is  celebrated  is 
the  death  upon  Calvary.  "  Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain."  W^e  may  well, 
therefore,  celebrate  that  death.  (2)  The  second  coming  of  Christ.  Just  as  Israel 
had  manna  so  long  as  they  were  in  the  wilderness,  but  when  once  they  came  into 
Canaan,  the  manna  ceased  ;  so  when  Christ  comes  we  shall  not  want  anything  to 
remind  us  of  Him.  II.  The  tejiper  in  which  this  service  should  be  observed  by 
us.  1.  We  are  called  to  remember  the  person  of  Christ,  and  the  great  events 
connected  with  His  person,  in  a  manner  corresponding  with  the  dignity  of  His  per- 
son ;  and  the  vastness  of  the  benefits  flowing  from  His  sacrifice,  as  expected  by  us 
at  His  second  coming.  2.  We  are  to  draw  near  with  fervour  and  lively  gratitude. 
The  ordinance  itself  is  a  eucharistical  one.  Hence  we  find  our  Saviour  Himself, 
when  He  had  instituted  the  supper,  sung  a  hymn.  (./.  Beaumont,  M.D.)  The 
Lord's  Supper:  its  end  and  our  duty  :—I.  The  Author  of  the  institution.  In 
every  action  it  is  good  to  know  bj'  what  authority  we  do  it.  For  what  can  reason 
see  in  bread  and  wine  to  quicken  or  raise  a  soul  ?  (chap.  viii.  8).  The  outward 
elements  are  indiiferent  in  themselves,  but  authority  giveth  them  efficacy.  He  that 
put  virtue  into  the  clay  and  spittle  to  cure  a  bodily  eye,  may  do  the  same  to  bread 
and  wine  to  heal  our  spiritual  blindness.  The  outward  elements  of  themselves  have 
no  more  power  than  the  water  of  Jordan  had  to  cure  a  leper  ;  their  virtue  is  from 
above.  II.  The  duty  enjoined.  To  take  bread,  and  to  give  thanks,  and  eat  it ; 
and  so  of  the  cup.  And  if  this  be  done  with  a  lively  faith  in  Christ,  this  is  all. 
*'  To  do  this  "  is  not  barely  to  take  the  bread  and  eat  it :  this  Judas  himself  might 


CHAP,  sr.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  101 

do ;  this  he  cloeth  that  doeth  it  to  his  own  damnation.  And  that  we  may  do  it, 
besides  the  authority  and  love  of  the  Author,  we  have  all  those  motives  which  use 
to  incite  us  unto  action.  1.  Its  titness  to  our  present  condition.  As  God  sent 
Adam  "  a  help  meet  for  him,"  so  He  affordeth  us  helps  attempered  to  our  infirmity. 
As  Laban  said  to  Jacob,  when  they  made  a  covenant,  "  This  stone  shall  be  witness 
between  us,"  so  God  doth  say  to  thy  soul  by  these  outward  elements,  "  This 
covenant  have  I  made  with  thee,  and  this  that  thou  seest  shall  witness  between 
thee  and  Me."  2.  Its  profitableness — a  will  extended,  a  love  exalted,  hope  increased, 
faith  quickened,  more  earnest  looking  on  God,  more  compassion  on  our  brethren, 
more  light  in  our  understanding,  more  heat  in  our  affections,  more  constancy  in 
our  patience  ;  every  vicious  inclination  weakened,  every  virtue  established.  What 
is  but  brass  it  refineth  into  gold  ;  raiseth  the  earthy  man  to  the  participation  of  a 
Divine  nature.  3.  Its  delightfulness.  In  the  action  of  worthy  receiving  is  the  joy 
of  a  conqueror;  for  here  we  vanquish  our  enemy:  the  joy  of  a  prisoner  set  at 
liberty  ;  for  this  is  our  jubilee.  Here  is  Christ,  here  is  heaven  itself.  4.  Its  neces- 
sity. For  if  this  sacrament  could  have  been  spared,  our  Lord,  who  came  to  beat 
down  the  ceremonies  of  the  law,  would  not  have  raised  up  this.  He  calleth  and 
commandeth  us  to  His  table,  to  feed  on  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  and  in  the 
strength  thereof  to  "  walk  before  Him  and  be  perfect."  III.  When  are  we  to  do 
IT  ?  "  As  oft  as  ye  do  it  "  implies  that  you  do  it  often.  It  is  not  necessary  to  say 
how  often.  Every  man's  want  in  this  should  be  a  law  unto  him.  If  we  come  like 
unmannerly  guests,  once  is  too  often ;  but  if  we  come  prepared  we  cannot  come  too 
often.  The  truth  is,  the  sacrament  is  fit  for  every  day,  but  we  are  not  every  day 
fit  for  it.  A  great  shame  it  is  that  any  man  should  be  dragged  to  a  feast.  And  if 
we  loved  "  the  cup  of  blessing,"  we  should  not  fear  how  oft  it  came  into  our  hands. 
IV.  Its  END.  "In  remenjbrance  of  Me."  We  must  open  the  register  of  our  soul, 
and  enrol  Christ  there  in  deep  and  living  characters.  For  the  memory  is  a  preserver 
of  that  which  she  receiveth.  But  we  must  inquire  whether  we  remember  Christ  as 
we  should  :  whether  Christ  be  hung  up  in  this  gallery  of  our  soul  only  as  a  picture,  or 
■whether  He  be  a  living  Chiist,  and  dwelleth  in  us  of  a  trath.  For  can  he  remember 
a  meek  Christ,  who  will  be  angry  without  a  cause  ?  Can  he  remember  a  poor  Christ 
that  maketh  mammon  his  God  ?  Can  he  remember  Christ,  who  is  as  ready  to 
betray  Him  as  Judas,  and  nail  Him  to  the  cross  as  Pilate  ?  Better  never  to 
have  known  Him,  than  to  know  and  put  Him  to  shame!  (A.  Farindon,  B.T>.) 
Sacramental  grace  : — The  outward  part  of  the  sacrament  is  not  only  a  sign  of  the 
inward  part  or  thing  signified,  but  a  sign  that  the  inward  grace  is  given  to  us,  the 
means  whereby  it  is  given,  and  the  pledge  or  seal  to  assure  us  of  its  being  given. 
The  elements  are  not  the  sign  of  a  hostelry,  like  a  painted  board  that  reminds  the 
weary  pilgrim  of  the  comforts  he  may  enjoy  within,  if  he  can  obtain  them ;  but 
they  are  the  signed  and  stamped  conveyance  of  that  which  makes  him  rich  and 
purchases  repose,  the  note  of  one  who  will  never  fail,  in  receiving  which  we  receive 
that  which  it  is  appointed  to  represent  by  him  who  offers  it.  In  taking  a  note  of 
the  bank,  he  who  receives  it  is  assured  that  he  receives  the  value  it  represents  ;  and 
that  bit  of  paper,  worthless  in  itself,  may  be  worth  to  him  a  large  estate.  ( G.  D.  Hill.) 
The  Lord's  Siqypcr,  a  symbol : — "  Do  you  then,"  men  ask,  "  reduce  this  sacrament  to 
make  it  only  a  symbol  ?  "  I  confess  my  inability  to  appreciate  the  force  of  the 
depreciatory  innuendo.  Does  not  a  symbol  mean  all  that  it  symbolises  ?  Has  it 
not  the  same  honour  and  sanctity  attaching  to  it  as  that  which  it  represents  ?  Are 
not  symbols  the  most  sacred  things  on  earth  ?  Why  is  it  that  men  will  talte  a 
tattered  piece  of  silk  and  nail  it  to  the  mast,  and  blow  themselves  and  the  ship  to 
atoms  rather  than  any  enemy's  hand  should  touch  that  flag  ?  It  is  only  a  symbol. 
Why  is  it  that  in  one  corner  of  the  battle-field  "  the  swords'  flash  is  brightest,  and 
the  pistols'  ring  is  loudest "  round  a  blood-stained  banner  ?  It  is  only  a  symbol — ■ 
but  a  s\  mbol  of  England,  and  of  all  the  freedom,  the  honour,  the  truth,  the  heroism, 
that  that  word  "  England  "  means  !  Thus,  for  the  eye  of  faith  and  the  heart  of 
love  these  symbols  mean  all  that  they  recall  and  represent.  We  are  to  eat  that 
bread  and  drink  that  wine  in  remembrance  that  His  body  was  given,  and  that  His 
blood  was  shed  for  us.  (T.  T.  Shore,  M.A.)  The  Lord's  Supper  the  sample  of  the 
Christian  life  (Text,  and  Col.  iii.  17)  : — One  of  the  saddest  things  about  the  Chris 
tian  life  is  that  it  seems  to  be  split  into  two  parts.  Is  the  distinction  between 
sacred  and  secular  a  valid  one?  is  there  any  reason  why  a  mnn's  prayers  th  )uld  be 
more  devout  than  his  business?  Look  at  these  two  passages.  The  s;ime  conse- 
cration is  claimed  for  the  most  trivial  acts  of  daily  life,  as  is  claimed  for  the  sacred 
communion.     I.  All  the  objects  around  us  are  to  be  regarded  as  syjibols  and 


102  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

MEMORIALS  OF  OUR  LoED.  Bread  and  wine  are  common  things :  the  act  of  eating 
and  drinking  is  not  an  elevated  one  ;  a  snpper-table  is  not  a  very  holy  place.  And 
when  Christ  selected  them  He  showed  us  that  all  material  things  were  fitted  and 
intended  to  impart  the  same  teaching.  The  unity  of  the  Maker,  the  all-pervading 
influen«e  of  one  Divine  Spirit,  make  everything  sacred,  and  put  every  object  to  wit- 
ness to  some  Divine  truth.  Every  day  we  walk  amidst  the  "  outward  and  visible 
signs  of  an  inwanl  and  spiritual  grace,"  and  this  wonderful  world  is  one  great 
sacrament.  1.  All  the  elements  stand  as  tvpes  of  spiritual  things — the  sunshine  of 
the  "  light  of  tlie  world,"  the  wind  of  the  Spirit,  the  water  of  the  stream  of  life  and 
drink  for  thirsty  souls,  and  the  fire  of  His  purity  and  of  His  wrath.  2.  All  objects 
are  consecrated  to  Him.  The  trees  of  the  field  speak  of  the  "  root  of  David,"  and 
the  vine  of  which  we  are  all  branches.  The  everlasting  mountains  are  His  "  right- 
eousness," the  mighty  deep  His  "  judgments."  3.  All  the  processes  of  nature  have 
been  laid  hold  of  by  Him.  The  gentle  dew  falls  a  promise,  and  the  lashing  rain 
forebodes  a  storm,  when  many  a  sand-built  house  shall  be  swept  away.  Every 
spring  is  a  propliecy  of  the  resurrection,  every  harvest  a  promise  of  the  coming  of 
His  kingdom.  4.  All  living  things  testify  of  Him.  He  is  Lord  over  the  fish,  the 
fowls,  the  beasts.  5.  All  occupations  of  men  are  consecrated  to  reveal  Him.  He 
laid  His  hand  upon  the  sower,  the  vine-dresser,  the  shepherd,  &c.,  as  being  emblems 
of  Himself.  6.  All  relations  between  men  testify  of  Him — father,  mother,  brother, 
friend,  &g.  In  a  word,  every  act  of  our  life  sets  forth  some  aspect  of  our  Lord  and 
of  oar  relation  to  Him,  from  the  moment  when  we  open  our  eyes  in  the  morning, 
up  to  the  hour  when  night  fails,  and  sleep,  the  image  of  death,  speaks  to  us  of  the 
last  solemn  moment,  when  we  shall  close  the  eyes  of  our  body  on  earth,  to  open 
those  of  our  soul  on  the  realities  of  eternity.  If  you  would  know  the  meaning  of  ' 
the  world,  read  Christ  in  it.  II.  Every  a^t  of  our  life  is  to  be  done  from  the 
SAME  MOTIVE  AS  THAT  HOLY  COMMUNION.  "  This  do  in  remembrance  of  Me  .  .  .  dis- 
cerning the  Lord's  body."  "  Whatsoever  ye  do,  in  word  or  dee^l,  do  all  in  the  name 
of  the  Lord  Jesus,"  i.e.,  for  the  sake  of  the  cliar:icter,  as  revealed  to  vou,  of  Him 
■whom  you  love.  1.  Is  tbat  sacred  motive  one  which  we  keep  for  select  occasions 
and  special  acts  of  worship  ?  I  am  afraid  that  the  most  do  with  tliat  Divine  reason, 
"  the  love  of  Christ  constraineth  me,"  as  the  old  Franks  with  their  long-haired 
kings — they  keep  tliem  in  the  joalace  at  all  ordinary  times,  only  now  and  then  bring 
tliem  out  to  graee  a  procession.  There  is  no  action  of  life  which  is  too  great  tO' 
bow  to  the  influence  of  "  This  do  in  remembrance  of  Me  "  ;  and  the^'e  is  no  action 
of  life  which  is  too  small  to  be  turned  into  a  solemn  sacrament  by  the  operation  of 
the  same  motive.  Do  you  and  I  keep  our  religion  as  princes  do  their  crown  jewels — 
only  wearing  them  on  festive  occasions,  and  have  we  another  dress  for  working  days  ?■ 
2.  Is  it  not  something  to  have  a  principle  which  prevents  anything  from  degene- 
rating into  triviality,  or  from  pressing  u^jon  us  with  an  overwhelming  weight  ? 
Would  it  not  be  grand  if  we  could  so  go  through  life,  as  that  all  should  be  not  one 
dead  level,  but  one  high  plateau,  because  all  rested  upon  "  Whatsoever  ye  do,  in 
word  or  deed,  do  it  all  in  the  name  of  tlie  Lord  -Jesus  "?  Ah  !  it  is  possible — not  to 
our  weak  faith,  pprhaps  ;  but  the  weakness  of  the  faith  is  not  inevitable.  It  i& . 
possible,  and  tberefore  it  is  duty  ;  and  therefore  the  opposite  is  sin.  To  have  my 
life  with  one  high,  diffusive  influence  tlirough  it  all.  is  like  one  of  those  applications 
of  power  where  a  huge  hammer  is  lifted  up,  and  comes  down  with  a  crash  that 
breaks  the  granite  in  pieces,  or  may  be  allowed  to  fall  so  gently  and  so  true  that  it 
touches  without  cracking  a  tiny  nut  beneath  it ;  or  it  is  like  that  mighty  power  that 
holds  a  planet  in  its  orbit,  and  yet  binds  down  the  san<1-grain  and  dust-mote  to  its 
place.  III.  All  life,  like  the  communion  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  may  re,  and  ought 
TO  BE,  A  showinct-forth  OF  Christ's  DEATH.  The  death  of  Christ,  which  is  shown 
forth  in  the  holy  communion,  as  a  death  for  us,  and  the  ground  of  our  hope,  is  tO' 
be  shown  forth  ni  our  daily  walk,  as  a  death  working  in  us,  and  the  ground  of  our 
condsct  ('2  Cor.  iv.  10,  11).  There  is  not  only  the  atoning  aspect  in  Christ's  death, 
but  the  example  of  the  way  by  which  we  ave  to  "  mortify  our  members  which  are 
upon  earth,"  because  "  we  are  dead  with  Him,  and  our  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in 
God."  No  man  manifests  the  death  of  Christ  by  any  outward  act  of  worship,  who 
is  not  feeUng  it  daily  in  his  own  soul.  It  is  in  vain  for  us  to  say  that  we  are  rely- 
ing on  Christ,  unless  Christ  be  in  us,  slaying  the  old  man  and  quickening  the  new. 
You  do  "show  forth  the  Lord's  death  till  He  come  "  when  you  "  crucify  the  old 
man  with  his  affections  and  lusts,"  and  "  rise  again  into  newness  of  life."  The 
fact  is  better  than  the  symbol — the  inward  communion  more  true  than  the  outward 
participation.     IV.  This  communion  is  in  itself  one  of  the  mightiest  means  fob 


CHAP.  51.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  103 

MAKING  THE  WHOLE  OF  LIFE  LIKE  ITSELF.  In  this  Ordinance,  as  it  were,  is  the  reser- 
voir :  out  of  it  there  come  the  streams  that  freshen  and  gladden  the  piety  of  daily 
life.  Only  remember,  not  the  outward  act,  but  the  emotions  which  it  kindles, 
are  the  reservoir.  Not  the  taking  that  cup  in  your  hand,  but  the  deeper 
glow  of  feeling  which  is  legitinjately  kindled  then,  and  the  intenser  faith 
which  springs  therefrom;  these  are  the  fountains  which  will  nourish  verdure  and 
life  through  our  dusty  days.  And  so,  if  you  want  to  live  in  this  world,  doing  the 
duty  of  life,  knowing  the  blessings  of  it,  doing  your  work  heartily,  and  yet  not 
absorbed  by  it ;  remember  that  the  one  power  whereby  you  can  so  act  is,  that  all 
shall  be  consecrated  to  Christ,  and  done  for  His  sake  !  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Take, 
eat: — I.  Take — 1.  Knowingly  (ver.  29).  (1)  What  it  is  in  itself:  bread  (chap.  x. 
16).  (2)  What  it  represents  unto  us  :  the  body  of  Christ.  2.  Humbly.  Consider- 
ing— (1)  God's  greatness  that  gives.     (2)  Our  vileness  that  do  receive  (Isa.  vi.  5). 

3.  Believingly.  (1)  That  Christ  is  really  present  with  us  (Matt,  xviii.  20.  (2) 
Doth  really  offer  His  body  to  us.  (3)  That  if  we  worthily  receive,  we  are  really 
partakers  of  all  the  merits  of  His  death  and  passion  (chap.  x.  16).  So  that— (a) 
Our  sins  shall  be  pardoned  (Matt.  xxvi.  28).     (h)  Our  natures  cleansed  (Acts  iii.  26). 

4.  Thankfully.  (1)  That  He  was  pleased  to  offer  Himself  for  us.  (2)  That  He  is 
now  pleased  to  offer  Himself  to  us.  II.  Eat,  not  take  and  lay  up  ;  not  take 
and  carry  about  ;  not  take  and  worship  ;  but  take  and  eat.  Take  and  eat 
bread,  but  yet  My  body — 1.  With  repentance  (Exod.  xii.  8).  2.  Faith.  3.  Thanks- 
giving (1  Tim.  iv.  4,  6).  III.  Uses.  1.  Prepare  yourselves  for  this  spiritual 
banquet.  2.  Receive  it  with  faith.  3.  Feed  with  thankfulness.  4.  Endeavour  to 
get  that  nourishment  from  it,  as  to  serve  God  better  hereafter.  {Bp.  Bereridge.) 
This  is  My  body. — 21ie  body  of  CJtrist  in  the  sacrament:  —  What  are  we  to 
anderstaud  by  this  ?  I.  Negatively.  Not  that  it  is  trans-ubstantiated.  This 
error  was  broached  by  Damascene  and  Amalarius  ;  opposed  by  a  synod  at 
Constantinople  of  338  bishops,  in  the  East;  Paschasius  Eadi'ertiis,  Bertiamnus, 
Johannes  Scotus  Erig'iia,  and  Berengarius,  in  the  West.  The  word  transub- 
stantiation  was  coined  in  the  Lateran  Council.  This — 1.  Is  not  grounded  on 
Scripture.  (1)  Not  on  John  vi.  55.  For  this — (a)  Was  said  be'ore  the  sacra- 
ment was  instituted  (ver.  4).  {b)  Dues  not  prove  bread  to  be  turned  into  Christ's 
body,  but  Christ's  body  into  flesh,  (c)  Is  to  be  understood  spiritually  (vers.  50,  51, 
56).  (2)  Not  on  the  text  (see  Gen.  xli.  26;  Ban.  ii.  38;  1  Cor.  x.  4).  2.  Is 
contrary  to  the  Scriptures.  When  Christ  said  this  there  could  be  nothing  but 
bread  ;  for  His  body  was  not  yet  offered  (see  chap.  x.  16,  xi.  25  ;  Matt.  xxvi.  20). 
3.  It  taljes  away  the  nature  of  the  sacramsait,  there  being  no  sign.  II.  Posiiively. 
1.  "  This  is  My  body  " ;  that  is,  the  sign  and  sacrament  of  My  body  (see  Gen.  xvii. 
10,  11;  Exod.  xii.  11).  2.  "  Which  was  broken  for  j'ou."  (1)  How  broken? 
Bruised,  pierced  (John  xix.  33,  34).  He  sulTercd  torment.  (2)  For  what? 
(a)  God  our  Governor  has  given  us  laws  to  observe  (Gen.  xxvi.  5),  and  annexed 
promises  and  threatenings  (Lev.  xviii.  5;  Gal.  iii.  10-12).  (/;)  Man  has  broken 
these  laws  (Psa.  xiv.  1-3),  and  so  is  obliged  to  the  punishments,  (c)  These  punish- 
ments he  cannot  bear,  without  being  enlirelv  miserable  (Matt.  xxv.  46).  Hence 
Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  undertakes  to  bear  them  for  him  (Isa.  liii.  4,  6).  This  He 
could  not  do,  unless  He  became  man.  Neither  must  He  be  man  only,  but  He 
must  suffer  (Heb.  ix.  22).  These  His  sufferings  are  the  things  represented  by  the 
bread  and  wine.  (3)  For  wiiom?  Believers  (John  iii.  16).  (4)  What  benefits 
have  we  by  these  sufferings?  It  is  only  by  them — (u)  Our  sins  can  be  pardoned  ( 
(Matt.  xxvi.  28).  (b)  God  reconciled  (Piom.  v.  ]).  Our  natures  renewed  (Acts  iii. 
26).  Our  souls  saved  (Heb.  ii.  10;  v.  9).  Conclusion:  1.  Admire  the  love  of 
Christ  in  dying  for  us.  2.  Be  always  mindful  of  it.  3.  Frequent  the  sacraments, 
especially  appointed  to  put  us  in  mind  of  it,  but  come  preparedly.  (1)  Penitently. 
(2)  Believingly.  (3)  Charitably.  [Bp.  Beceridije.)  Which  is  broken  for  you. — 
The  broken  Christ: — I.  A  bunifestation  of  the  power  op  six.  When  once 
threatened  with  being  broken  by  tlie  stones  that  malice  would  have  hurled  at  Him, 
He  asks,  "  For  which  of  these  good  works  do  ye  stone  Me?"  It  was  because  of 
His  good  works  that  an  evil  world  hated  Him,  and  hates  Him  still.  There  is  an 
innate  antagonism  between  seltislmess  and  love.  Moses  in  hot  anger  bi'oke  the 
two  tables  of  stone  on  which  the  law  of  God  had  just  been  insfribed  ;  but  the  Jews, 
with  fixed  and  relentless  j)urpose,  broke  Him  who  was  the  living  embodiment  of 
the  law.  And  that  achievement  reveals  how  sin  stands  at  nothing,  though  it  is 
most  Divine.  Our  conflict  with  sin  is  conflict  with  the  powers  by  which  Christ  was 
broken.     II.  A  model  fob  our  self-s-vceifice.     He  was  broken  thus,  not  in  pur- 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xi, 

suit  of  any  dream  of  ambition,  or  struggle  for  any  personal  satisfaction.  It  was 
in  the  one  peerless  woik  of  redeeming  the  world.  1.  Selfishness  is  ever  seeking 
to  keep  what  it  has  whole.  Health  must  never  be  broken  for  neighbourliness, 
patriotism,  or  religion.  Home  must  never  be  broken  by  giving  up  of  sons  or 
daughters  to  missions.  Proxjerty  must  on  no  account  be  broken  for  distribution  in 
charity  or  maintenance  of  worship.  The  Church  must  not  be  broken  to  help  to 
form  ttie  nucleus  of  some  other  church  much  needed.  2.  And  yet  what  is  broken 
is  often  the  most  beautiful.  When  is  light  more  rich  and  varied  than  when  it  is 
broken  in  the  prism  ?  And  is  the  ocean  more  beaiatiful  when  it  ripples  tamely  upon 
the  sandy  shore,  or  when  the  crested  billows  break  in  wild  majesty  upon  some  rock- 
bound  coast  ?  So  with  the  self-denials  that  mean  brokenness — brokenness  of 
tastes,  desires,  comforts,  possessions,  and  even  affections.  3.  What  is  broken  is 
often  the  most  useful.  When  the  bark  is  bruised  the  balm  is  poured  forth  for 
healing ;  when  the  wheat  is  ground  it  becomes  an  element  of  nourishment ;  when 
the  spices  are  pounded  their  odours  fill  the  air.  So  self-deninl  has  given  to  science, 
patriotism,  and  religion  their  apostles  and  martyrs.  4.  For  beauty  and  usefulness 
in  man's  individual  character,  there  must  be  brokenness.  What  is  there  for 
imperious  temper,  hard  indifference,  stubborn  resistance  to  God's  will,  but  broken- 
ness? HI.  An  emblem  of  the  universality  of  His  mission.  1.  He  was  broken 
that  He  might  be  distributed,  that  His  teachings,  influence,  grace,  might  eventually 
pervade  the  whole  human  race.  By  giving  broken  bread,  as  an  emblem  of  His 
broken  Self,  to  all  His  disciples.  He  taught  them  that  His  love,  life,  grace,  are 
designed  for  the  nourishment  of  all.  2.  And  in  our  dealings  with  Him  and  Hia 
system,  we  must  ever  remember  this.  The  true  Church  can  never  be  a  mere 
treasure-house  for  hoarding  up  privileges  and  graces.  Like  its  Lord  and  Master, 
it  must  suffer  much  brokenness.  IV.  The  highest  expression  op  the  love  op 
God.  Our  language  has  no  words  to  describe  Giver  or  Gift.  But  its  influence 
testifies  to  the  worth  of  the  Gift.  The  woman  who  broke  the  alabaster  box  on  her 
Lord  gave  unreservedly  the  best  she  had,  and  the  whole  house  was  filled  with 
fragrance.  So,  when  God's  gift  was  broken.  His  influence,  like  the  odours  of 
a  very  i^recious  ointment,  began  to  fill  the  whole  world.  (U.  R.  Thomas.)  This 
do  in  remembrance  of  Me. — In  remembrance : — I.  Other  memories  will  come, 
BUT  must  not  crowd  OUT  THE  ONE  MEMORY.  The  foUowing  remembranc<='S  may 
be  natural,  and  profitable,  but  they  must  be  kept  in  a  secondary  place : — 
1.  Of  ourselves  when  we  were  strangers  and  foreigners.  2.  Of  our  former 
onlooking  and  wishing  to  be  at  the  table.  3.  Of  our  first  time  of  Icoming, 
and  the  grace  received  smce  then.  4.  Of  the  dear  departed  ymo  »nce  were 
with  us  at  the  table.  5.  Of  beloved  ones  who  cannot  be  with  UEjJiit  this  time 
because  they  are  kept  at  home  by  sickness.  6.  Of  many  present  witlffis,  and  what 
grace  has  done  in  their  cases.  We  may  think  of  their  needs  and  of  their  holy  lives, 
d'c.  7.  Of  the  apostates  who  have  proved  their  falsf^ness,  lil<e  Judas.  However 
these  memories  may  pre:-s  upon  us,  we  must  mainly  remember  Him  for  whose 
honour  the  feast  is  ordained.  II.  The  ordinance  is  helpful  to  that  one  sacred 
MEJioRY.  1.  Set  forth,  the  signs  dii^play  the  person  of  our  Lord  as  really  man, 
substantial  flesh  and  blood.  2.  Placed  on  the  table,  their  presence  betokens  our 
Lord's  dear  familiarity  with  us,  and  our  nearness  to  Him.  3.  Broken  and  poured 
forth,  they  show  His  sufferings.  4.  Separated,  bread  apart  from  wine,  the  flesh 
divided  from  the  blood,  they  declare  His  death  for  us.  5.  Eating,  we  symbolise 
the  life-sustaining  power  of  Jesus  and  our  reception  of  Him  into  our  innermost 
selves.  6.  Remaining  when  the  Supper  is  ended,  the  fragments  suggest  that  there 
is  yet  more  bread  and  wine  for  other  feasts ;  and,  even  so,  our  Lord  is  all-sufficient 
for  all  time.  Every  particle  of  the  ordinance  points  at  Jesus,  and  we  must  therein 
behold  the  Lamb  of  God.  III.  That  sacred  memory  is  in  itself  most  needful 
roR  us.  It  is — 1.  The  continual  sustenance  of  faith.  2.  The  stimulus  of  love. 
8.  Tlie  fountain  of  hope.  4.  A  recall,  from  the  world,  from  self,  from  controversy, 
from  labour,  from  our  fellows — to  our  Lord.  5.  The  reveille,  the  up-and-away. 
It  is  the  prelude  of  the  marriage  supper,  and  makes  us  long  for  "the  bridal  feast 
above."  Above  all  things,  it  bthoves  us  to  keep  the  name  of  our  Lord  engraven  on 
our  hearts.  IV.  This  symbolic  festival  is  highly  beneficial  in  refreshing  our 
MEMORIES,  and  IN  OTHER  WAYS.  1.  We  are  yet  in  ths  body,  and  materialism  is  a 
most  real  and  potent  force ;  we  need  that  there  be  a  set  sign  and  form  to  incarnate 
the  spiritual  and  make  it  vivid  to  the  mind.  Moreover,  as  the  Lord  actually  took 
upon  Him  our  flesh  and  blood,  and  as  He  means  to  save  even  the  material  part  of 
us.  He  gives  us  this  link  with  materialism,  lest  we  spirit  things  away  as  well  as 


CHAP.  XI.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  105 

spiritualise  them.  2.  Jesus,  who  knew  our  forgetfulness,  appointed  this  festival  of 
love  ;  and  we  may  be  sure  He  will  bless  it  to  the  end  designed.  3.  Experience  has 
ofttimes  proved  its  eminent  value.  4.  While  reviving  the  memories  of  the  saints, 
it  has  also  been  sealed  by  the  Holy  Spirit ;  for  He  has  very  frequently  used  it  to  arouse 
and  convince  the  spectators  of  our  solemn  feast.  Conclusion:  1.  To  observe  the  Supper 
is  binding  on  all  believers,  to  the  extent  of  "  oft.''  2.  Only  as  it  assists  remembrance 
can  it  be  useful.  Seek  grace  lovingly  to  remember  yonr  Lord.  (C  H.  Spuiv/eun.) 
The  nature  and  importance  of  the  Lord's  Supper: — I.  The  different  names 
DESCRIPTIVE  OF  THIS  ORDINANCE.  1.  "Breaking  of  bread."  Bread  is  considered 
the  chief  support  of  life,  and,  among  the  Jews,  breaking  of  bread  was  a  sign  of 
mutual  friendship.  Thus  Clirist's  body  was  broken  for  the  sins  of  men.  2. 
"  Communion  " — which  may  signify  either  a  participation  or  communion  between 
the  receivers  themselves,  or  between  the  receivers  and  the  thing  received.  In  both 
senses  it  is  applicable  to  the  Lord's  Supper  (chap.  x.  IG).  3.  "Eucharist" — which 
signifies  thankfulness  or  thanksgiving,  and  frequently  occurs  in  the  New  Testament 
as  a  general  expression  of  fuatitude.  Taking  this  view  of  the  ordinance,  how 
should  our  hearts  overflow  with  adoring  gratitude,  love,  and  praise,  whenever  we 
approach  the  Lord's  Table  !  4.  "  Sacrament  " — which  originally  signified  a 
religious  oath  which  the  Koman  soldiers  took  to  their  commanders.  So  does  every 
Christian  solemnly  engage  to  maintain  irreconcilable  warfare  against  the  world, 
the  flesh,  and  tbe  devil.  5.  Tliere  are  two  other  terms  often  applied  to  this 
ordinance,  both  of  Levitical  origin.  They  are  "oblation"  and  "sacrilice. "  II. 
In  celebrating  the  Lord's  Supper,  according  to  His  last  solemn  command,  "  This 
do  in  remembrance  of  Me,"  we  view  Christ  as  the  great  atonejient,  and  the 
ONL1  sacrifice  FOR  SIN.  In  this  sacred  ordinance  the  Church  invites  the  attention 
of  men  "to  behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  who  taketh  away  the  sins  of  tbe  world." 
III.  Our  obligation,  duty,  and  interest  all  combine  to  enforce  obedience  to 
THIS  last,  solemn,  AND  DYING  COMMAND  OF  Christ.  {N.  Mecres,  B.D.)  The 
Supper  of  the  Lord  : — I.  It  affords  a  visible  and  permanent  testimony  to  the 

TRUTH  of  the  GOSPEL.  II.  It  CALLS  IN  THE  SENSES  TO  THE  AID  OF  OTHER  POWERS  AND 
FACULTIES  FOR  THE  PROMOTION  OF  PIETY.  HI.  It  PROVIDES  A  PUBLIC  TEST  OF  OUR 
RELIGIOUS  SINCERITY.  IV.  It  TENDS  TO  INCREASE  OUR  LOVE  OF  THAT  SavIOUR  TO  WHOSE 
MEMORY  IT  IS  ESPECIALLY  DEDICATED.  V.  HoW  WELL  CALCULATED  IS  IT  TO  HUMBLE 
THE  IMPENITENT  SINNER  !       VI.  It  CHEERS  THE  HEART  OF  THE  TRUE  BELIEVER.       (J.  W. 

CunnhuiJiam,  31.  A.)  In  remembrance  of  Me  : — 1.  Were  a  stranger,  who  had  never 
heard  of  Christ,  to  come  into  church  while  we  are  seated  at/the  Lord's  table,  he 
would  naturally  ask,  "What  does  this  observance  mean?"  And  the  answer,  no 
doubt,  would  rise  to  the  lips  readily  enouj^h,  "  We  commemorate  the  dying  of  Him 
whom  we  call  Lord  and  Saviour."  And  yet,  would  not  much  remain  still  un- 
explained? AVould  it  not  still  seem  strange  thit  our  highest  act  of  worship  should 
centre  in  a  memory  of  one  whose  death  was  a  dishonoured  death?  Tliere  is  no 
other  religion  whose  believers  can  look  back  to  a  founder  who  was  content  to  say, 
"  Be  true  to  My  memory.  That  is  all  I  command.  Let  your  most  solemn  worship 
embody  the  expression  of  this  remembrance."  2.  You  may  have  heard  of  the 
power  of  a  pure  and  noble  memory  of,  e.ij.,  a  well-loved  Lome,  to  keep  back  the 
foot  from  falling  and  the  soul  from  death  ;  or  of  a  generous  and  trustful  love  which 
has  been  a  breastplate  to  the  heart  tempted  to  unwoi  thy  ways.  But  in  that  remem- 
brance of  Christ  of  which  the  sacrament  is  the  visible  expression,  there  is  some-,  ^ 
thing  more  than  we  find  in  the  best  human  memory.  I.  Let  us  see  what  Chuist's'''^ 
MEBioRY  IS,  what  is  implied  in  remembrance  of  Him.  The  sacrament  is  a  memorial' 
of — 1.  One  who  lived  a  human  life,  and  yet  a  life  such  as  none  else  has  ever  lived. 
2.  Who,  at  a  time  when  the  world  was  full  of  darkness  and  unrest,  came  into  it 
with  a  message  from  God  for  all  whose  hearts  were  weary,  whose  minds  were  dark. 
His  life  was  one  that  gladdened  other  lives,  and  bore  about  with  it  one  living 
message  of  peace  and  goodwill.  And  is  it  not  well,  amid  all  the  worldliness,  and 
selfishness,  and  untruth  of  man's  society,  to  be  ahle  to  look  back  to  a  life  in  whiidi 
these  evil  principles  had  no  place,  in  which  all  was  tru  h,  honesty,  earnestness  and 
love?  3.  Who  revealed  God  the  Father.  Think  nf  what  the  world  would  be  to  us 
without  this  truth,  and  of  what  it  will  be  to  us,  when  we  come  to  lie  at  "  the  last 
low  verge  of  life  '' ;  and  as  you  think  of  this,  and  remember  that  all  our  knowlelsje 
of  this  blessed  trutb  comes  from  Christ,  do  you  not  feel  that  there  is  an  unequalled 
urgency  and  solemnity  in  that  last  charge  to  us,  "  This  do  in  remdmbran^e  of  Me  "  ? 
4.  One  who  closed  His  perfect  life  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself.  ^  It  is  indeed  this, 
more  than  aught  else,  that  the  saciamental  symbols  bring  home  to  us.     Think, 


106  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xi, 

then,  how  but  for  that  we  had  been  without  hope  and  without  God  in  the  worlds 
II.  If  such  tuen  be  His  memokt,  SHALii  we  not  kemember  Him  as  He  has  given 
us  commandment?  But  is  that  commandment  altogether  fulfilled  when  we  have 
eaten  the  bread  and  drunk  the  wine?  1.  If  we  would  be  really  true  to  the  memory 
of  the  Master,  it  must  be  by  showing  forth,  in  our  whole  life,  the  power  of  His- 
Divine  example.  There  are  stately  tombs,  on  which  in  the  lapse  of  ages  the  graven 
record  of  love  and  sorrow  has  waxed  dim,  and  the  very  name  recorded  has  been 
lost,  and  the  tomb  stands  there  a  dumb  witness  to  an  unknown  memory ;  and  just 
such,  no  better,  would  be  our  remembrance  of  our  Lord,  if  it  were  professed  only 
while  we  celebrate  the  sacrament  of  His  body  and  blood.  But  if  it  expresses  a  real 
union  with  our  Lord,  a  real  devotion  to  Him,  a  real  sharing  of  His  spirit,  then  in 
this  sacrament  we  indeed  eat  of  the  Bread  of  Heaven  and  drink  of  the  Water  of 
Life.  2.  Now  suppose  the  stranger  mentioned  at  the  beginning  had  got  his 
answer,  and  gone  away,  and  were  to  return  after  a  lime  and  see  us  going  about  our 
daily  works,  might  he  not  be  inclined  to  say  to  us,  "  What  has  become  of  that 
sacred  memory  of  which  you  spoke  to  me  ?  I  see  no  trace  of  it  among  you.  L 
understood  He  was  one  who  was  pure  and  true  and  unselfish ;  and  I  see  you 
serving  your  own  ends.  You  told  me  that  He  died  for  you;  and  I  look  about  for 
the  memoiials  of  such  a  love  as  that,  and  cannot  find  it."  Let  us  be  careful  not  to- 
bring  reproach  upon  our  Master's  name.  3.  If  there  be  one  here  who  is  burdened 
with  the  consciousness  of  sin,  who  hears  the  voice  which  is  saying  to  us  now, 
"  This  do  in  remembrance  of  Me,"  speaking  to  him  in  sorrow  because  of  his  faith- 
lessness, let  him  be  warned  and  recalled  to  a  better  spirit,  and  truer  life;  and  he 
will  find  that  that  voice  will  change  its  tone  of  sorrow  and  reproach  for  one  of 
encourag'^ment  and  consolation,  that  will  say,  "  Abide  in  Me,  and  I  in  you  ;  let  not 
your  heart  be  troubled,  neither  let  it  be  afraid."  (R.  H.  Story,  D.D.)  In  re- 
membrance of  Me  ;— 1.  This  Epistle  is  prior  in  date  to  any  of  the  Gospels,  conse- 
quently we  have  the  earliest  account  of  the  institution  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  More 
than  that,  the  account  is  entirely  independent  of  any  oral  tradition,  for  the  apostle 
distinctly  affirms  that  he  received  this  narrative  from  none  of  the  guests  in  that 
upper  chamber,  but  from  the  Host  Himself.  We  can  theiefore  trace  the  celebra- 
tion to  a  period  very  near  to  the  death  of  Christ,  and  thus  we  have  a  strong 
presumption  of  the  "historical  accuracy  of  the  story,  and  a  view  of  the  aspect 
in  which  it  was  regarded  by  the  primitive  belief  of  Chiistendom.  2.  The 
occasion  for  the  utterance  is  characteristic  of  Taul,  and  instructive  to  us.  Had 
it  not  been  for  some  abuses  in  Cotiuth  we  should  never  have  had  one  word 
about  this  ordinance  ;  and  in  that  event  there  would  have  been  scarcely  any 
reference   to   it    outside   the    Gospels.      Let  us   regard   the   Lord's   Supper   as— 

I.  A  MEMOiUAL.  1.  The  words  are  used  in  the  institution  of  that  Passover 
which  our  Lord,  with  sovereign  authority,  brushed  aside  in  order  to  make  room> 
for  His  own  rite.  "  This  day  shall  be  unto  you  for  a  memorial."  The  text  there- 
fore has  reference  to  the  Exodus,  and  is  meant  to  substitute  for  the  mi^mories  so 
stirring  to  Jewish  national  pride  and  devout  feeling  the  remembrance  of  Christ  as. 
the  one  thing  needful.  2.  This  is  Chvi-t's  distiuct  statement  of  the  purpose  of 
the  Lord's  Supper,  and  you  will  find  nothing  additional  to  it  in  the  New 
Testament.  3.  Notice  of  what  the  Lord's  Supper  is  a  mfinorial — "  of  Me." 
"You  have  remembered  Mos^s  and  his  deliverance;  forget  him!  The  shadow 
passes,  and  here  I  stand,  the  substance!  Do  this  ;  nevermind  about  your  old  Passover 
— that  is  done  with.  Do  this  in  remembrance— no  lonper  of  dead  Pharaohs  and 
exhausted  deliverances,  but  of  an  everloving  friend  and  helper;  and  of  a  redemp- 
tion that  shall  never  pass  away."  (1)  What  a  marvellous,  majestic  prevision  that 
was,  that  looked  all  diywn  the  ages  and  expected  that  to  the  end  of  tii"e  men  would 
turn  to  Him  with  passionate  thankfulness!  And  more  wonderful  still,  the  forecast 
has  been  true.  (2)  And  as  majestic  as  is  the  authoiity,  so  tender  and  gracious  is 
the  condescension.  He  does  not  rely  upon  His  mighty  love  and  sacrifice  for  the 
remembrance,  but  He  consents  to  trust  some  portion  of  our  remembrance  of  Him 
to  mere  outward  things.  Surely  we  need  all  the  help  we  can  got  to  keep  His 
memory  vivid  and  fresh  in  si)ite  of   the  pressure  of    the  visible  and  temporaL 

II.  As  A  MEANS  OF  GRACE.  1.  I  kuow  oulv  oue  Way  by  which  grace  can  get  into 
men's  souls,  and  that  is  through  the  occupation  of  a  man's  understanding,  heart, 
and  will,  with  Christ  and  the  gospel  that  tells  of  Him.  And  the  good  that  any 
outward  thing  does  us  is  that  it  brings  before  us  the  truth  on  which  our  hopes 
depend,  and  knits  to  our  heart  the  Christ  and  His  love.  2.  This  Comnrunion  is 
obedience  to  a  definite  command,  and  so  has  the  blessing  which  always  follows 


CHAP.  XI.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  107 

upon  obedience.  And  this  blessing,  and  the  one  that  comes  from  having  our 
thoughts  turned  to  Him,  and  faith  and  hope  kindled  towards  Him,  exhaust  the 
■whole  of  the  good  that  the  service  does  to  any  man.  3.  All  that  is  confirmed  by 
the  remarks  in  the  context  about  the  mischief  that  it  sometimes  does  to  people. 
We  read  about  an  unworthy  partaking,  which  is  defined:  "Whoso  eateth  and 
drinketh  (not  "  unworthily,"  for  that  is  an  unauthorised  supplement),  "  eateth  and 
drinketh  judgment  to  himself,  not  discerning  the  Lord's  body,"  i.e.,  unworthy 
participation  is  one  which  does  not  use  the  external  symbols  as  a  means  of  turning 
thought  and  feeling  to  Christ  and  His  death  ;  and  unworthy  participation  does  a 
man  harm,  as  unworthy  handling  of  any  outward  rite  does.  I  try  with  words  to 
lead  men  to  look  to  Christ.  If  my  words  come  between  you  and  Him  rather  as  an 
obscuring  medium,  then  my  sermon  does  you  harm.  You  read  a  hymn.  The 
hymn  is  meant  to  lead  you  up  to  Christ ;  if  it  does  not  do  tliat,  then  it  does  you 
harm.  If  through  the  outward  ritual  we  see  Christ,  we  get  all  the  good  that  the 
outward  ritual  can  do  us.  If  through  the  outward  rite  we  do  not  see  Him,  if  the 
coloured  glass  stay  the  eye  instead  of  leading  it  on,  then  the  rite  does  us  harm. 
III.  A  WITNESS  FOR  CHRISTIAN  TRUTH.  1.  Christ  Himsclf  has  appointed  this 
institution  and  selected  for  us  the  part  of  His  mission  which  He  considers  the  vital 
and  all-important  centre — "  This  is  My  body,  broken  for  you.  This  is  the  new 
covenant  in  My  blood,  shed  for  the  remission  of  sins."  Not  His  words,  not  His 
loving  deeds,  not  His  tendeiness,  does  He  point  us  to  ;  but  to  His  violent  death,  as 
if  He  said,  "  There  is  the  thing  that  is  to  touch  hearts  and  change  lives,  and  bind 
men  to  Me."  2.  Forms  of  Christianity  which  have  let  go  the  Incarnation  and  the 
Atonfment  do  not  know  what  to  make  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  They  who  do  not 
feel  that  Christ's  death  is  their  peace,  do  not  feel  that  this  rite  is  the  centre  of 
Christian  worship.  I  may  be  speaking  to  some  who  regard  it  as  unnecessary.  ]\Iy 
brother,  Christ  knew  wliat  He  meant  by  His  work  quite  as  well  as  you  do,  and  He 
thouL'ht  that  the  part  of  it  which  most  concerns  us  to  remember  was  this  :  "that 
He  died  for  our  sins,  accoiding  to  the  Scriptures."  3.  And  as  plain  as  the  teach- 
ing is  of  this  ordinance  in  reference  to  what  is  the  living  heart  of  Christ's 
■work  for  us,  so  plain  is  it  in  reference  to  what  is  our  wny  of  making  that  work 
ours.  We  eat  that  we  may  live.  We  take  Christ,  the  fact  of  His  death,  love, 
personal  life  for  us  to-day,  and  by  faith  we  partake  of  Him,  and  the  body  is 
assimilated  to  the  food,  and  so  in  that  higher  region  we  live.  (A.  IMaclaren,  B.I).) 
The  rememhrance  of  Christ : — 1.  Christians  may  forget  Christ.  It  seems  at  first 
sight  too  gross  a  crime  to  lay  at  the  door  of  converted  men  ;  but  if  startling  to  the 
ear,  it  is,  alas!  too  apparent  to  the  eye.  Forget  Him  wlio  never  forgot  us !  Wtio 
loved  us  even  to  the  death!  The  incessant  round  of  world,  world,  world;  the 
constant  din  of  earth,  earth,  eaith,  takes  away  the  soul  from  Christ.  While 
memory  will  preserve  a  poisoned  weed,  it  suffereth  the  Eose  of  Sharon  to  wither. 
2.  The  cause  is  apparent.  We  for.cet  Christ,  because  regenerate  as  -we  are,  still 
corruption  remains.     Consider — I.   Tue  glokious  and  precious  obji-ct  op  memory. 

1.  Christians  have  many  treasures  to  lock  up  in  the  cabinet  of  memory.  They 
ought  to  remember  their  election,  their  extraction,  their  effectual  ciilling,  ttieir 
special  deliverances.  But  there  is  one  whom  they  shoul  1  embalm  in  their  souls 
with  the  most  costly  spices.     One  I  said,  for  I  mean  not  an  act,  but  a  Person. 

2.  But  how  can  we  remember  Christ's  person,  when  we  never  saw  it?  Well,  it  is 
true  we  cannot  remember  the  visible  appearance,  but  even  the  apostle  said,  though 
he  had  known  Christ  after  the  flesh,  yet,  thenceforth  after  the  flesh  he  would  know 
Christ  no  more.  You  may  know  Hiin  after  the  spirit ;  in  this  manner  you  can 
remember  .Jesus  as  much  now  as  any  of  those  favoured  ones  who  once  walked  side 
by  side  with  Him.  3.  Let  us  remember  Him  in  His  baptism,  in  the  wilderness,  in 
all  His  daily  temptations  and  hourly  trials,  in  Gethsemane,  in  Pilate's  hall,  at 
Calvary.  You  can  very  well  carry  all  this  away,  because  you  have  read  it  often  ; 
but  you  cannot  spiritually  rememl  ev  anything  about  Christ,  if  you  never  had  Him 
manifested  to  you.     What  we  ha\e  never  known,  we  cannot  rememtofer.     II.  The 

BENEFITS  TO  BE    DERIVED  FROM  A  LOVING    RF-MEMBRAXCB    OF    ChpIST.    ^t    -wiU    tend    tO 

give  you — 1.  Hope  when  you  are  under  the  burden  of  your  sins.  2.  Patience 
under  persecution.  Sc  Strength  in  temptation.  4.  Victory  in  death.  III.  A 
SWEET  AID  TO  MEMORY./'  Behold  the  whole  mystery  of  the  sacred  Eucharist.  1.  The 
power  to  excite  remembrance  consists  in  the  appeal  made  to  the  senses.  Here  the 
eye,  the  hand,  the  mouth,  find  joyful  work,  and  thus  the  senses,  which  are  usually 
clogs  to  the  soul,  become  wings  to  lift  the  mind  in  contemplation.  2.  Much  of  the 
influence  in  this  ordinance  is  found  m  its  simplicity.     Here  is  nothing  to  burden 


108  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xi, 

the  memory.  He  must  have  no  memory  at  all  who  cannot  remember  that  he  has 
eaten  bread,  and  that  he  has  been  drinking  wine.  3.  Note — The  mighty  pregnancy 
of  these  signs.  Bread  broken — so  was  your  Saviour  broken.  Bread  to  be  eaten — so 
His  flesh  is  meat  indeed.  Wine  poured  out,  the  pressed  juice  of  the  grape — so  was 
your  Saviour  crushed.  Wine  to  cheer  your  heart — so  does  the  blood  of  Christ. 
Wine  to  strengthen  and  invigorate  you — so  does  the  blood  of  the  mighty  sacrifice. 
4.  But  before  you  can  remember  Christ,  you  must  ask  the  assistance  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  There  ought  to  be  a  preparation  before  the  Lord's  Supper.  Take  heed  to 
yourselves  (ver.  27)  ;  mind  what  you  are  doing !  Do  not  do  it  carelessly ;  for  of 
all  the  sacred  things  on  earth,  it  is  the  most  solemn.  IV.  A  sweet  command.  It 
is  important  to  answer  this  question — "This  do  ye."  Who  are  intended?  Ye 
who  put  your  trust  in  Me.  "  This  do  ye  in  remembrance  of  Me."  Christ  watches 
you  at  the  door.  Some  of  you  go  home,  and  Christ  says,  "  I  thought  I  said, 
'  This  do  ye  in  remembrance  of  Me.'  "  Some  of  you  keep  your  seats  as  spectators. 
Christ  sits  with  you,  and  He  says,  "I  thought  I  said,  '  This  do  ye  in  remembrance 
of  Me.'  "  (C.  H.  Sjnirfieon.)  The  coinvie)iiora(ion  of  Christ's  death  : — We  are  to 
remember — I.  What  He  was  from  eternity:  God  (JRom.  ix.  5).  II.  What  He 
BECAME  :  Man  (John  i.  4).  III.  What  He  did,  and  how  He  lived.  1.  Humbly 
(Matt.    xi.    29).     2.  Charitably.      3.  Bighteously  (1  Peter  ii.  22  ;  Matt.    iii.    15). 

4.  Inoffensively  (Matt.  xvii.  27).  5.  Obediently.  IV.  What  He  suffered. 
1.  Contempt  (Isa.  liii.  3).  2.  Pain  in  His  body  (Isa.  liii.  3).  3.  Grief  of  heart 
(Matt.  xxvi.  37  ;  Luke  xxii.  44),  4.  Death.  (1)  A  shameful,  (2)  A  painful,  (3)  A 
cursed,  death  (Gal.  iii.  13).     V.  Whom  He  suffered  so  much  for  :  for  us  (Isa.  liii. 

5,  6).  VI.  What  benefit  we  have  by  it.  1.  Pardon  (Rom.  v.  1).  2.  Eeconcilia- 
tion  to  God  (2  Cor.  v.  11).     3.  Mortification  of  sin  (Eom.  viii.  1,  2  ;  Matt.  i.  21). 

4.  Grace  here.  5.  Glory  hereafter  (John  iii.  16).  VII.  What  He  did  after  His 
death.  1.  He  rose  again  (Rom.  iv.  25).  2.  Ascended  (Acts  i.  11).  3.  Sits  at  the 
right  hand  of  God  (Rom.  viii.  34).     4.  Maketh  intercession  for  us  (1  John  ii.  1,  2). 

5.  Will,  ere  long,  cume  and  judge  us  (2  Cor.  v.  10).    Conclusion:  For  preparation — 

1.  Review  your  lives.  2.  Examine  your  hearts  (1  Cor.  xi.  28).  (1)  The  strength  of 
your  sins.  (2)  The  growth  of  your  graces.  3.  Pray  God  for  His  assistance.  (Bp. 
Bevericlge.)  Chrht  remeinhered  at  His  table  : — Remember — 1.  Your  guilt  and 
wretchedness,  which  rendered  His  interference  for  your  deliverance  so  absolutely 
necessary.  2.  The  amazing  magnitude  of  that  love  and  compassion  which  induced 
Him  to  undertake  our  cause.  3.  The  holiness  of  the  doctrines  which  He  taught, 
and  the  purifying  tendency  of  the  precepts  which  He  inculcated.  4.  The  sufferings 
He  underwent,  and  the  death  He  endured  for  you.  5.  The  position  which  He  now 
occupies,  and  the  glorious  rewards  which  He  has  provided  for  all  His  faithful 
followers.  (R.  Cameron.)  The  sacrament  a  feast  of  aZZ/oHce  .-—This  idea  must 
be — I.  Explained.  This  feast  is  one  of — 1.  Reconciliation.  2.  Friendship. 
3.  Union.  II.  Limited.  It  is  a  feast,  but  a  solemn  feast.  III.  Justified.  It  is 
a  feast  of  sacrifice.     IV.  Improved  :  1  Come  with  a  contrite  heart  to  this  feast, 

2.  Let  it  be  a  source  of  consolation  to  you.     (I.  S.  Spencer,  D.D.) 

Vers.  26,  27.  And  after  the  same  manner  also  He  took  the  cup. — The  sacramental 
ciq) : — He  doubleth  the  elements,  to  show  that  in  Christ  is  not  only  necessary  and 
sufficient,  but  also  plentiful  and  abundant,  with  assured  redemption.  To  blame, 
then,  is  the  Church  of  Rome,  which  is  guilty  of  that  fault  whereof  Benjamin  was 
taxed  ;  they  have  "  stolen  away  the  cup."  If  "  to  steal  the  chalice  "  be  the  phrase 
whereby  men  express  the  highest  sin,  what  sacrilege  is  it  to  steal  the  wine  of 
the  chalice,  from  whom  it  belongeth  ?  But  let  us  hear  what  these  Romanists 
plead  for  themselves.  I.  Flesh  and  blood  go  always  together.  It  is  sujDer- 
fluous,  therefore,  to  give  the  laity  the  blood  the  second  time,  who  by  concomitancy 
had  received  it  before.  Answer — What  God  hath  put  asunder,  to  be  taken  severally 
and  distinctly,  let  no  man  join  together.  II.  There  be  many  inconveniences,  yea, 
mischiefs,  attend  the  laity's  receiving  of  the  wine  ;  as,  its  sticking  in  their 
beards,  spilling  of  it,  <tc.  Answer — God,  in  the  omnisciency  of  His  wisdom, 
surveyed  the  latitude  of  all  occurrences,  yet,  beholding  all  future  inconveniences 
present.  He  appointed  the  laity  to  drink  of  the  cup.  AVine  was  then  as  subject  to 
spilling  ;  it  hath  not  since  gotten  a  more  liquid  or  diffusive  quality.  III.  In 
several  places  no  mention  is  made  of  wine,  but  of  bread  only  (Acts  ii.  42,  46,  xx.  7). 
Answer — Either  "  bread,"  by  a  synecdoche,  is  here  put  for  bread  and  wine  ;  or  else 
that  phrase  importeth  their  ordinary  meetings  and  civil  feasts.  But  a  cart-load  of 
these  exceptions  are  "weighed  in  the  balance  and  found  too  light"  to  outpoise 


CHAP.  XI.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  109 

Christ's  institution.  Let  us  not  be  so  foolish  as  to  depart  from  God's  written  Word 
in  the  sacranaent,  concerning  giving  the  laity  the  cup,  for  the  company  of  human 
arguments  on  our  side;  but  let  us  slick  to  our  commission.  [T.  Fuller,  D.D.) 
The  sacramental  cup  : — Remembrance — I.  Begets  humiliation.  II.  Quickens  hope. 
III.  Inspires  new  activity  through  gratitude.  IV.  Lifts  our  longings  heavenward. 
(T.  A.  Nelson.)  Price  of  the  sacrament : — Cleopatra  put  a  jewel  in  a  cup,  which 
contained  the  price  of  a  kingdom  :  this  sacred  cup  we  are  to  drink  of,  enriched 
with  the   blood  of  God,   is    above   the    price  of   a    kingdom.  For    as  oft  as 

ye  eat  this  bread  and  drink  this  cup,  ye  do  show  the  Lord's  death  till  He 
come. — Vrctpieat  cominunion  : — In  the  primitive  Church  the  Lord's  Supper  was 
celebrated  every  day  :  and  fit  it  was,  needing  as  they  did  constant  cordials 
in  the  time  of  persecution.  This  frequency  soon  abated,  and  St.  Ambrose  reproves 
the  negligence  of  the  Eastern  Churches,  who  received  it  but  once  a  year.  The 
Church  of  England  requires  her  children  to  receive  at  the  least  thrice  a  year. 
But  hear  those  who  say  that  it  is  to  be  but  seldom  received.  I.  The  Passover  was 
celebrated  but  once  a  year  ;  in  whose  i)lace  the  Lord's  Supper  succeeds.  Answer — 
The  Passover  was  so  restricted  by  God ;  in  the  Lord's  Supper  we  are  left  to  our 
own  liberty.  Finding,  therefore,  our  continual  sinning,  and  therefore  need  thereof 
to  strengthen  us  in  oar  grace,  we  may,  yea,  must  oftener  use  it,  especially  seeing  all 
services  of  God  under  the  gospel  ought  to  be  more  plentiful  tiian  under  the  law. 
II.  Things  done  often  are  seldom  done  solemnly.  Manna,  if  rained  every  day, 
is  not  dainty.  The  frequent  doing  of  it  will  make  men  perfunctory  and  negligent 
therein.  Answer — Then  sermons  should  be  as  seldom  as  Apollo's  smiles,  and 
prayers  should  not  be  presented  to  God  every  day,  lest  the  commonness  of  the  duty 
should  bring  it  into  contempt.  Rather  ministers  are  to  instruct  their  people  to 
come  with  reverence,  notwithstanding  their  frequent  repairing  thereunto.  III.  But 
long  preparation  is  requisite  to  this  action  ;  and  therefore  this  sacrament  cannot 
often  be  received.  Answer — After  the  first  grand  preparation,  where,  by  faith  and 
rejientance,  we  are  first  estated  in  Gud's  favour,  other  j)reparations  are  not  so 
ditiicult  in  doing,  or  tedious  in  time,  as  being  but  the  reiterating  of  the  same  again. 
The  good  housewife  tliat  scoureth  her  plate  once  a  week  hath  less  work  than  she 
that  doth  it  but  once  in  a  twelvemontli.  Often  preparing  makes  the  work  easy,  and 
fits  men  the  sooner  for  the  sacrament.  (T.  Fuller,  D.D.)  The  Lord's  Supper  : — I.  A 
commemorative  okdinance.  I.  The  sacrament  was  instituted  at  the  time  of  the 
feast  of  the  Passover,  and  this  was  the  memory  uppermost  in  the  minds  of  the 
discij)li^s.  Afterwards  they  saw  as  we  see  in  the  light  of  the  perfected  revelation, 
how  fitly  on  that  ni^^ht  was  instituted  the  memorial  of  deliverance  from  a  bondage 
greater  than  Egyptian,  and  from  the  deadlier  peril  of  a  death  that  never  dies. 
2.  But  what  were  the  thoughts  of  the  Redeemer?  There  stretched  out  the  whole 
course  of  suffering  which  He  had  set  Himself  resolutely  to  travel.  It  was  "the 
same  night  on  which  He  was  betrayed."  It  was  the  last  supper  table.  Very 
deeply  under  such  circumstances  as  those  would  the  words  sink  into  the  hearts 
of  the  disciples.  We,  too,  must  enter  into  the  Saviour's  sorrows.  For  us,  if  we 
believe  in  Him,  He  breaks  the  bread  and  pours  the  wine,  and  when  we  eat  and 
drink  we  do  "  show  forth  His  death  till  He  come."  3.  And  this  is  what  we  com- 
memorate. FEis  death — (1)  Not  His  life,  though  that  was  lustrous  with  a  holiness 
that  knew  not  the  shadow  of  a  stain.  (2)  Not  His  teaching,  though  that  embodied 
the  fulness  of  a  wisdom  and  truth  that  was  Divine.  (3)  Not  His  miracles, 
although  His  course  was  a  march  of  mercy.  (4)  His  death — His  body,  not  glorious, 
but  broken  :  His  blood,  not  coursing  through  the  veins  of  a  conqueror,  but  shed 
for  man.  You  are  to  see  your  sins  laid  upon  Him  ;  your  souls  washed  by  Him  ; 
your  doom  reversed  by  Him ;  your  life  secured  by  Him  ;  and  thus  "show  forth 
Flis  death — till  He  come."  II.  A  confirmatory  ordinance.  1.  Its  perpetuity 
seems  to  stamp  it  as  an  ordinance,  confirming,  on  the  one  hand,  man's  faith 
in  God,  and  on  the  other  God's  fidelity  to  man.  The  disciples  had  followed 
Christ's  fortunes  through  evil  and  good  report ;  but  they  were  more  faithful 
witnesses  after  this  night  than  they  had  ever  been  befoi  e.  And  when  in  obedience 
to  His  command  they  jiartook  of  the  ordinance  which  He  had  bequeathed  to  them, 
it  is  no  wonder  that  they  should  come  away  from  each  successive  celebration  of  the 
communion  of  His  body  and  blood  with  braver  purpose.  And  it  is  so  with  God's 
people  still.  By  thus  "  waiting  upon  the  Lord  "  in  His  own  enduring  ordinance 
"  they  renew  their  strength,"  &c.  2.  The  sacrament  confirms  the  two  things 
which  it  exhibits — the  death  and  the  second  advent  of  the  Lord.  It  seems  to  link 
the  humiliation  and  the  royalty,  the  accomplished  passed  and  the  assured  future 


no  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

together.  It  is  the  wedlock  of  the  believer's  memory  and  the  believer's  hope  ;  the 
memory  which  yet  lingers  round  the  Cross  ;  the  hope  which  already  revels  in  the 
Rlory  of  the  throne.  3.  For  the  confirmation  of  your  faith  and  of  your  devotedness 
God  has  i-et  up  this  sacramental  sign.  It  is  to  confirm  your  faith — (1)  In  His 
death.  It  is  to  confirm  your  faith — (a)  In  its  reality — that  it  was  not  a  prolonged 
swoon,  (/;)  In  its  vicitridusness,  to  show  you  that  His  life  was  offered — "  tlie  just 
for  the  unjust,  that  He  might  bring  us  to  God."  (c)  In  its  efficacy  as  an  accepted 
atonement.  (2)  In  His  coming — [n]  In  its  certainly  that  the  Church  is  not  for  ever 
orpbaned  of  His  presence.  (/;)  In  the  recompense  that  awaits  you  ;  for  the  day  is 
coming  wlien  all  wrongs  shall  ba  redressed,  sin  eradicated,  Satan  trampled  under 
fiiot,  the  glad  welcome,  the  abundant  entrance,  the  triumphal  and  eternal  song. 
4.  Kow  you  are  called  to  meet  the  S>t.viour  in  His  containing  and  witne^sing 
ordinance.  If  thou  seekest  Jesus  surely  He  will  not  send  thee  emi^ty  from  His 
own  table  away.  But  for  you  who  do  not  love  the  Saviour,  tbere  is  no  grai^e  in  the 
sacrament  for  you,  Like  the  sun  and  rain,  they  will  shine  and  fall  upon  the  stone, 
and  the  stone  will  remain  insensible,  because  it  has  no  hidden  principle  of  life  ; 
but  if  tbey  fall  upon  the  flower  they  will  foster  the  growth,  and  develop  the  beauty, 
find  bring  out  the  fragrance,  because  the  principle  of  life  is  there.  III.  K 
COVENANTING  OKDiNANCE,  and  this  follows  ui^ou  the  two  preceding.  1.  It  is  not 
only  a  sign  but  a  seal :  a  solemn  federal  act  which  involves  mutual  pledges — 
pledges  of  fidelity  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  blessing  on  the  other.  Says  the 
Psalmist :  "  I  will  take  the  cup  of  salvation,  and  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord." 
And  in  the  next  verse  is  the  translation  of  the  symbol :  "  I  will  pay  my  vows  unto 
the  Lord,  now  in  the  presence  of  all  His  people."  And  your  participation  in  the 
Holy  Communion  is  to  be  thus  regarded  as  the  fresh  act  of  your  espousals.  If  you 
eat  and  drink  witliout  discerning  this  great  purpose,  you  eat  and  drink  unworthily. 
2.  But  I  am  speaking  to  those  who  love  the  Saviour.  There  is  a  mortal  distrust 
of  .yourselves  which  causes  you  to  hesitate.  Well,  that  you  may  t-ike  this  Holy 
Sacrament  for  your  comfort,  remember  that  tbere  are  two  parties  to  the  covenant, 
and  that  the  sacrament  is  the  Divinely  instituted  seal  of  the  fidelity  of  God's 
promise  to  you.  The  Lord  speaks  to  the  father  of  the  new  world,  from  which  tbe 
waters  have  been  but  recently  assuaged.  "  I  do  set  My  bow  in  the  cloud,  and  it  shall 
be  a  token  of  the  covenant  between  Me  and  the  earth."  Here  in  the  sacrament 
is  the  rainbow  of  the  new  and  the  better  covenant.  Behold  the  renewed  pledge  of 
salvation  purchased,  and  blessing  conferred  upon  you  all  who  believe.  Oh  !  the  sim- 
plicity of  the  condition— upon  him  that  belie\  eth  in  Jesus.  ( W.  M.  Pnnshon,  LL.  D.) 
The  Lord's  Siq^ier  : — This  passage  is  instructive  when  regarded  in  its  beaiingupon 
great  and  ever-recurring  controversies.  Around  the  oJaservance  of  the  Lord's 
Supper  a  multitude  of  irregularities  had  arisen.  Here,  then,  if  anywhere,  was  the 
opportunity  for  the  apostle  to  glorify  the  sacrament,  and  to  surround  it  with  all 
those  symbolic  rites  which  would  make  its  desecration  impossible  in  the  future. 
But  we  hear  nothing  of  priest,  altar,  lights,  incense,  and  genuflexions ;  but  simply 
of  a  sti>te  of  heart  of  those  who  unite  in  the  act.  I.  The  true  significance  of  the 
Lokd's  Supper.  It  is  a  "  proclaiming  "  (E.V.)  tbe  death  of  Christ  until  He  come. 
1.  The  Lord's  Supper  is  a  memoriid  of  the  one  fact  in  the  Master's  story  which 
every  natural  feeling  would  have  led  His  followers  to  conceal,  and  there  was  not 
a  feeling  of  horror  at  the  thought  of  the  Cross  which  they  had  not  experienced. 
The  thought  so  familiar  to  us,  but  which  the  world  has  learned  from  Calvary  only, 
of  victory  through  suffering  and  the  crown  won  by  the  Cross,  was  unknown  to  them. 
The  Cross  was  a  sign  of  defeat  and  disaster.  No  wonder  that  Peter  should  cry : 
"  That  be  far  from  Thee,  0  Lord."  The  humiliation  and  despair  of  the  day  after  the 
crucifixion  baflle  description.  More  pathetic  utterance  could  hardly  b>  spoken  than 
"  We  trusted  that  it  hnd  been  He  who  should  have  redeemed  Israel."  2.  There  are 
few  facts  more  remarkable  than  the  revolution  of  feeling  which  is  shown  in  the 
ai-tion  of  these  men  in  regard  to  the  Lord's  Supper.  In  the  hour  of  their  reviving 
faith,  it  was  the  Cross  to  which  they  gave  prominence,  and  the  one  cnaracteristic  of 
early  Church  life  was  the  keeping  of  the  feast  by  which  they  proclaimed  "  the  Lord's 
death  till  He  come."  A  festival  of  the  Incarnation,  or  of  the  Transfiguration,  or  of 
the  Besurrection,  would  have  been  intelligible.  But  this  is  the  memorial  of  His 
death.  3.  And  could  anything  have  set  it  forth  with  more  iiupressiveness  as  the 
distinctive  truth  of  Christianity?  Other  systems  nave  had  teachers,  leaders  of 
genius  and  power,  and  lawgivers.  But  where  else  do  we  find  a  Saviour  who  nas 
died  for  the  sins  of  men  ?  Christ's  claim  rests  not  on  the  profundity  of  His  wisdom, 
but  on  the  infinitude  of  His  love.     So  there  is  a  fitness  in  the  Supper  as  tne  pro- 


•CHAP.  XI.]  I.  COBINTHIANS.  Ill 

clamation  of  the  gospel.  The  guests  are  not  the  wise  or  the  holy,  but  sinners  who 
have  learned  to  put  their  trust  in  Clirist.  They  eat  the  bread  and  drink  the  wine 
as  a  confession  that  in  His  death  alone  is  their  hope  of  eternal  life.     II.  The 

INFLUENCE    WHICH    THIS    VIEW    OF    THE    LoKU's    SuPPER    SHOULD     EXERT    ON    US.         The 

apostle  points  out  distinctly  when  he  says  :  "  Let  a  man  prove  himself,  and  so  let 
him  eat  of  that  bread,  and  drink  of  that  cap."  1.  What  miserable  trifling  are  all 
the  questions  which  men  distjuss  with  so  much  heat  as  compared  with  this  !  Forms 
•of  observance — what  are  they  all  when  weighed  in  the  balances  with  the  spirit  of 
the  observance  ?  Surely  the  first  and  chief  question  must  be  as  to  our  riglit  to  a 
place  at  the  table,  and  as  to  our  preparation  for  tilling  that  place  with  consistency. 
Here  is  a  meeting-place  between  God  and  the  soul.  This  is  a  renewed  act  of  faith 
and  most  solemn  confession,  and  this  is  the  point  in  which  all  proving  of  ourselves 
converges  ;  and  it  is  one  evil  result  of  certain  theories  that  their  tendency  is  to  keep 
this  out  of  view.  The  attention  is  fixed  on  the  priest  and  the  altar  rather  than  on 
the  relations  between  Christ  and  the  soul  of  the  individual  worshipper.  The  whole 
reminds  us  of  Micah  when,  having  detained  the  wandering  Levile,  he  exclaimed, 
"  Now  know  I  that  the  Lord  will  do  me  good,  seeing  I  have  a  Levite  to  my  priest." 
He  who  comes  filled  with  the  solemn  awe  of  the  altar  and  the  priest,  and  allows 
these  to  interrupt  his  communion  with  Christ,  "  feedeth  on  ashes  :  a  deceived  heart 
hath  turned  him  aside."  2.  Here,  then,  is  tbe  one  question  for  each  communicant. 
What  is  the  death  to  me  ?  It  is  not  enough  that  I  hold  as  an  article  of  my  creed  that 
Christ  died  for  sinners.  This  act  of  communion  is  a  profession  of  my  personal 
trust  in  that  death  to  deliver  me  from  my  sins.  It  is  in  the  light  of  the  Cross  that 
we  begin  to  understand  something  of  the  infinite  tenderness  of  the  Divine  heart, 
and  so  to  learn  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin.  3.  What  may  be  the  special  benefits 
to  the  soul  which  comes  in  humble  faith  to  this  banquet  of  love,  it  would  be  pre- 
sumption in  any  man  to  decide.  Wbo  would  undertake  to  determine  the  possibilities 
of  spiritual  growth  which  may  be  the  result  ?  Here,  as  everywhere,  to  faith  all 
things  are  possible.  (J.  Guinness  Rogers,  B.A.)  The  objects  of  the  believer's 
contemplation  in  the  Lord's  Supper  : — I.  In  this  ordinance  the  believer  con- 
templates     THE     FULL     ACCOJIPLISHMENT     OF     THE     INFINITELY     IMPORTANT    OBJECTS 

WHICH  THAT  DEATH  WAS  DESIGNED  TO  ATTAIN.  1.  In  the  Sufferings  and  death  of 
our  Eedeemer  exhibited  in  the  Lord's  Supper  faith  discerns  the  character  of 
the  true  God  unfolded,  and  His  transcendent  glory  dispLayed,  with  far  more  bright- 
ness than  by  all  the  works  of  creation.  2.  In  the  death  of  Christ,  as  represented 
in  the  Lord's  Supper,  the  believer  by  faith  di-cerns  the  price  of  his  own  salvation 
and  the  only  foundation  of  his  hope  before  God.  3.  The  believer  contemplates  in 
the  death  of  Christ,  as  represented  in  the  Lord's  Supper,  the  source  of  all  his 
spiritual  blessings  and  a  never-failing  spring  of  strong  consolation  in  his  afflictions. 
4,  The  believer,  in  the  ordinance  of  the  Supper,  views  by  faith  our  glorious  Mes- 
siah's death  as  accomplishing  a  happy  reconciliation  between  men  and  angels,  and 
as  opening  to  both  new  discoveries  and  new  employments.     II.  In  this  ordinance 

THE  BELIEVING  CHRISTIAN  PERCEIVES  A  LIVELY  AND  AFFECTING  REPRESENTATION  OP  ALIi 
THE  CIRCUMSTANCES  CONNECTED  WITH  THE  DEATH  OF  ChRIST  AND  THE    BLESSINGS    TO   BE 

THEREBY  CONVEYED  TO  His  PEOPLE.  1.  All  who  sit  at  the  sacrcd  table  partake  of 
these  elements  and  affectionately  distribute  them  from  one  to  annther ;  thus  we 
are  reminded  that  there  is  a  sufficiency  in  Christ  to  supply  the  wants  of  all  His 
people,  and  that  they  are  all  children  of  the  same  family,  eating  at  the  same  table, 
drinking  of  the  same  cup,  and  bound  by  every  endearing  tie  to  love  one  another 
and  to  live  as  brethren.  2.  After  partaking  of  the  sacred  symbols  they  retire  from 
the  communion  table,  from  the  delightful  service  of  the  sanctuary,  to  mingle  in 
the  duties  and  toils  and  trials  of  life.  For  it  is  only  in  the  temple  not  made  with 
hands  that  their  fellowship  shall  be  uninterrupted  and  their  joy  be  full.  3.  At  the 
first  celebration  of  the  sacrament  the  condescending  Saviour  Himself  was  present 
with  His  disciples  and  gave  them  the  cup  and  spake  words  of  consolation  to  their 
fainting  minds.  Thus  it  still, is  as  to  His  spiritual  presence  ;  He  is  in  the  midst  of 
them  to  do  them  good ;  the  cup  of  blessing  which  in  His  name  we  bless  is  the 
communion  of  the  blood  of  Christ.     III.  The  believing  Christian  contemplates 

THE  sacrament  OF  THE  SuPPER  AS  A  SACRED  MEMORIAL  OF  HIS  INESTIMABLE  FrIEND, 
THE  BEST  BELOVED  OF  HIS  SOUL  ;  AND  AS  A  FEAST  OP  COMMEMORATION,  DESIGNED  TO  KEEP 
UP    THE    BELIEVING    AND    SANCTIFYING    REMEMBRANCE    OF    WH.\T     ScRIPTURE    TESTIFIES 

CONCERNING  HiM.  1.  Ye  show  forth  the  Lord's  death  ;  the  Lord  of  angels  and  men  ; 
the  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth  ;  the  Lord  of  providence  and  grace.  It  wonderfully 
enlarges  and  elevates  the  mind  of  devout  communicants  when  they  can  enter  into 


112  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xr. 

the  contemplation  of  their  Eedeenier's  personal  greatness ;  as  the  brightness  of  the 
Father's  glory ;  as  upholding  all  things  by  tlie  word  of  His  power  ;  as  King  of  kings 
and  Lord  of  lords;  and  as  tire  same  to-day,  yesterday,  and  for  ever.  2.  Again,  when, 
showing  fortli  the  Lord's  death,  "  do  it  in  remembrance  "  that  He  is  tlie  Mediator 
of  the  New  Testament,  or  better  covenant.  When  you  are  engaged  in  this  ordi- 
nance you  ought  to  rest  on  the  sure  promises  of  that  covenant  v/hich  was  sealed 
with  the  blood  of  the  Testator;  be  persuaded  of  their  truth,  embrace  them,  and 
plead  their  fulfilment.  3.  Once  more,  when  showing  forth  the  Lord's  death,  not 
only  remember  that  He  died  in  the  character  of  Mediator  between  an  offended  God 
and  offending  creatures,  bat  survey  the  gradual  progress  of  His  work  from  its 
commenceuieut  before  the  worlds  were  framed  to  its  consummation  in  the  glorify- 
ing of  all  the  elect.  IV.  We  ake  to  view  this  ordinance  as  a  solemn  gospel  feast, 
A  sacred  Christian  festival.  1.  In  the  everlasting  gospel  jjro vision  is  made  for 
the  most  indigent  of  mankind  ;  and  in  this  sacred  ordinance  the  poor  and  needy  feed 
with  satisfaction  on  the  rich  blessings  of  the  great  salvation.  2.  Provision  is  not 
the  only  idea  which  enters  into  our  mind  under  the  general  term  of  a  feast  or 
supper  ;  nourishment  also  is  included,  and  when  applied  to  this  sacred  ordinance 
it  suggests  this  reviving  sentiment,  that  by  the  right  participation  of  the  Lord's 
Supper  humble  believers  are  strengthened  with  the  inestimable  blessings  of  that 
well-ordered  covenant  which  the  great  Master  of  the  feast  makes  with  all  who  give 
themselves  to  Him.  3.  Besides  nourishment  and  provision  the  comparison  of  the 
sacred  ordinance  before  us  to  a  feast  or  supper  conveys  to  the  mind  all  the  anima- 
ting ideas  of  fellowship  and  intercourse  with  the  whole  Church  of  Christ.     V.  This 

ORDINANCE  IS  REPRESENTED,  IN    THE  WORDS    OF    THE    INSTITUTION,  AS    A    DISTINGUISHING 

BADGE  OF  Christianity  and  a  mark  of  separation  between  the  friends  of  Christ 
AND  the  children  OF  THE  WORLD.  1.  Tljose  who  liave  a  right  to  participate  of  this 
holy  ordinance  are  in  Christ,  and  are  new  creatures.  2.  Tliey  lay  aside  the  sins 
which  beset  them,  and  separate  themselves  from  whatever  is  displeasing  to  their 
heavenly  Father.  They  are  awake  to  the  infinite  evil  of  sin,  and  are  brought 
through  Divine  grace  to  hate  it  perfectly,  as  displeasing  to  God  by  whom  tht^y  live, 
and  on  whom  they  rely.  3.  Those  who  are  prepared  to  sliow  forth  the  death  of  Christ, 
love  Him  above  all  that  this  poor  world  can  give  or  promise.     VI.  We  now  direct 

YOUR  meditations  TO  THE  CONNECTION  BETWEEN  THE  DEATH  OF  ChRIST  AND  HiS  SECOND 

COMING  AS  THE  SOVEREIGN  JuDGE  OF  QUICK  AND  DEAD.  His  death  prepared  the  way 
for  all  the  triumphs  of  the  general  resurrection,  and  the  sacred  ordinance  of  the 
Supper  is  a  standing  pledge,  that  He  who  was  once  offered  up  to  bear  the  sins  of 
many  will  come  the  second  time  wiihout  a  sin-offering  for  the  complete  salvation  of 
His  people.  (A.  Bonar.)  Of  the  end  of  the  LonVs  Supper: — The  Corinthians 
were  a  Church  planted  by  Paul,  watered  by  a  long  preaching  among  them.  But 
notwithstanding  all  his  pains  he  receives  news  of  some  corruptions  crejpt  in  and 
oversjjreading  that  Church.  1.  Concerning  the  carriage  of  men  and  women  in  the 
Church.  2.  The  celebration  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  3.  The  use  and  exercise  of 
spiritual  gifts  (chap.  xii.  17).  The  apostle  makes  a  transition  from  the  first  to  the 
second,  and  taxeth  them  with  their  divisions.  Observe,  divisions  in  a  Church  are 
usually  attended  with  sad  consequences.  They  despoil  the  Church  of  its  beauty  and 
ornaments  ;  they  here  hindered  a  communion  with  one  another.  All  communion 
is  founded  upon  union  ;  divisions  shook  that  and  brought  in  gross  miscarriiiges 
about  the  Lord's  Supper.  For  the  reformation  of  those  abuses  the  apostle  i-educeth 
them  to  the  consideration  of  the  first  institution.  Observe,  in  all  reformations  we 
are  not  so  much  to  mind  what  this  or  that  custom  of  the  Church  is  when  there  is  a 
clear  word  to  walk  by.  Christ  overthrows  polygamy  by  reducing  the  number  of 
persons  married  to  the  first  institution  (Matt.  xix.  4,  9).  1.  How  soon  will  corrup- 
tions creep  into  the  best  Church  !  The  devil  will  sow  his  tares  where  God  sows  His 
■wheat.  2.  Human  ceremonies  are  not  to  be  urged,  especially  when  they  by  abuse 
degenerate  into  superstition,  carnality,  and  profaneuess.  Divine  institutions, 
because  of  God's  sanction,  are  not  to  be  laid  aside  though  abuses  creep  in.  What  is 
man's  must  be  discarded,  what  is  God's  must  be  preserved.  For  the  first  doctrine.  The 
Lord's  Supper  is  chiefly  instituted  for  the  remembering  and  showii  !g  forth  the  death  of 
Christ.    It  is  not  a  bare  historical  remembrance  of  the  deatk  of  Christ.    For  then — 

1.  Every  profane  man  who  assents  to  the  history  of  Christ's  death,  and  believes  the 
acting  of  this  tragedy  on  the  Cross,  and  hath  a  notional  belief  of  the  ends  of  it, 
might  be  partaker  of  this  ordinance.     But  the  apostle  puts  a  bar  to  that  (ver.  28). 

2.  A  man  could  not  then  receive  more  unworthily,  or  incur  a  greater  damnation  in 
this  than  in  other  acts.    But  here  the  apostle  fixeth  a  particular  guilt  of  the  body 


CHAP.  XI.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  113 

and  blood  of  Christ  when  received  unworthily  (vers.  27-29).  As  Christ's  death  was 
not  a  bare  dying,  but  a  death  with  high  and  glorious  ends,  so  our  remembrance  of 
it  is  not  to  be  a  bare  historical  but  a  practical  remembrance  and  declaration.  As 
Christ's  remenibrauce  of  the  promises  of  His  Father  was  not  only  an  assent  to  the 
truth  of  tliem,  but  a  recumbency  on  Him  for  the  perforniance,  so  our  remembrance 
of  the  death  of  Christ  ought  to  be.  It  is  not  a  speculative  remembrance  only,  as 
when  a  man  sees  a  picture  of  a  prince,  but  such  a  remembrance  as  a  man  hath 
when  he  sees  the  picture  of  a  dear  friend  absent  from  him  at  that  time;  he 
remembers  not  only  his  person,  but  the  mutual  love  between  them,  the  actions  his 
friend  hath  done  for  him,  which  stirs  up  a  sense  of  gratitude  at  that  time.  I  shall 
show — 1.  This  is  the  end  of  the  institution.  2.  What  it  is  in  the  death  of  Christ 
that  is  here  remenibeted  and  shown  forth.  3.  How  we  should  show  forth  this 
death.  (1)  The  remenibrauce  and  declaration  of  the  death  of  Christ  is  chiefly 
intendeil  hereby.  For  the  explication  consider — 1.  God  was  always  careful  of 
appointing  and  preserving  memorials  of  His  favour.  The  pot  of  manna  and 
Aaron's  budding  rod  were  to  be  preserved  in  the  ark  as  standing  monuments  of 
God's  kindness.  Stones  were  appointed  to  be  set  up  for  a  memorial  of  the  division 
of  the  waters  of  Jordan  to  give  the  Israelites  passage  to  the  conquest  of  Canaan 
(Josh.  iv.  5).  Tbe  passover  was  instituted  as  a  memorial  of  the  Israelites'  alHic- 
tion.  And  is  there  not  much  more  reason  for  a  standing  memoriHl  of  that  mercy  of 
which  all  those  were  but  the  types?  It  hath  been  the  custom  of  all  nations  to  have 
an  anniversary  commemoration  of  those  heroes  who  have  been  the  instruments  of 
some  public  hajipiness  to  them,  and  of  all  societies  to  commemorate  their  bene- 
factors. And  is  there  any  reason  to  deny  that  to  the  great  Benefactor  of  mankind, 
the  Eedeemer  of  the  world  ?  2.  These  memorials  are  necessary — (1)  Because  of 
the  nature  of  our  affections,  which  rather  follow  the  orders  of  our  sense  than  the 
commands  of  our  souls,  and  are  more  excited  by  sensible  than  invisible  objects. 
Most  things  we  cannot  understand  but  under  sensible  representations  ;  we  understand 
not  God's  power,  goodness,  justice,  but  by  the  objects  we  see  those  attributes  conver- 
sant about.  Hence  are  those  frequent  metaphorical  i-esemblances  of  spiritual  things 
in  the  Scripture,  and  our  Saviour  sets  Himself  forth  to  us  under  the  notions  of  bread, 
wine.  Bridegroom.  (2)  In  regard  of  the  inconstancy  of  our  affections.  What  our 
affections  rouse  themselves  up  to  receive  at  the  first  approach,  they  afterwards  begin 
to  flag  like  the  strings  of  an  instrument  that  sound  well  at  the  first  tuning,  but 
quickly  slack  and  need  a  watchful  ear  and  careful  hand  to  wind  them  up.  We  want, 
therefore,  thnsc  memorials  to  keep  up  our  hearts  in  a  warm  and  glowing  temper. 
(3)  In  regard  of  the  natural  ingratitude  and  enmity  we  have  to  a  crucified  Christ, 
and  the  weakness  of  faith.  What  the  world  did,  that  doth  every  man's  heart 
naturally,  account  the  Cross  foolishness.  How  is  our  faith  weak  when  Christ  is 
absent  from  us  !  He  hath  therefore  instituted  a  symbol  of  His  spiritual  presence, 
whereby  our  minds  miglit  exercise  themselves  as  well  as  the  eyes  of  men  did 
behold  His  body.  3.  What  it  is  in  the  death  of  Christ  that  is  here  set  forth. 
(1)  The  painfuluess  of  His  death.  It  is  the  picture  of  Him  as  He  hung  upon  the 
Cross,  (a)  This  was  the  intent  of  the  ancient  jiassover.  The  lamb  was  to  be 
killed,  the  flesh  roasted  with  fire  (Exod.  xii.  G-8).  (b)  Of  the  elements  in  this  sacra- 
ment. Bread  signifies  as  passing  through  various  kinds  of  sufferings  to  be  made 
fit  for  food,  reaped  when  ripe,  thrashed  when  housed,  ground  to  powder  and  baked 
to  be  made  fit  for  bread.  The  actions  testify  the  painfulness.  (2)  The  intention  of 
this  death  for  us.  It  is  in  this  ordinance  represented  as  a  sacrifice-death.  He  is  our 
Pa-^sover  sacrificed  for  us  (chap.  v.  7,  8).  In  His  institution  it  was,  My  body 
broken  for  you.  My  blood  shed  for  you,  as  an  expiatory  sacrifice.  (3)  The  sufli- 
ciency  of  this  death  for  us.  It  would  never  else  be  remembered.  We  remember 
no  more  than  what  was  done  ;  we  remember  a  whole  Christ  broken.  God  by  cove- 
nant with  Christ  could  challenge  no  more,  and  justice  after  the  striking  of  that  match 
could  demand  no  more.  Whence  ariseth  a  redundancy  of  merit,  an  overflowing 
merit  for  ten  thousand  woi'kls,  were  they  in  being  and  in  a  sinful  stiite.  (4)  The 
acceptablei'.ess  of  this  death  to  God.  All  that  Christ  did  He  did  by  order  as  His 
Father  commanded  Him.  Had  not  His  death  been  acceptable  to  His  Father  He 
would  not  have  ordered  us  to  remember  it.  (5)  The  present  efficacy  of  this  death. 
It  is  now  of  efficacy,  and  will  be  to  the  second  coming  of  Christ.  Why  else  should 
it  be  remembered  ?  To  what  purpose  should  we  commemorate  it  if  it  did  not 
retain  an  everlasting  efficacy?  (6)  How  we  should  show  forth  and  remember  this 
death.  1.  Reverentially.  (1)  With  a  reverence  of  the  holiness  of  God.  (2)  With 
a  reverence  of  the  justice  of  God.  2.  Holily.  We  must  undertake  such  religious 
VOL.    II.  8 


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

services  with  suitable  dispositions  of  heart.  (1)  With  mourning  hearts  for  sin.  A 
broken  Christ  must  not  be  remembered  without  a  broken  heart.  (2)  With  deep 
considerations  of  tlie  cursed  nature  and  demerit  of  sin.  It  must  needs  be  bitter, 
kilUnp;,  condemning,  cursed  sin  which  brought  Christ  to  such  a  bitter  death. 
(3)  With  strong  lesohitions  against  sin.  It  is  a  sad  thing  to  be  Christians  at  a 
supper,  heathens  in  onr  shops,  and  devils  in  our  closets.  3.  Believiugly.  (1)  We 
should  profess  our  adherence  to  Him.  The  showing  forth  His  death  is  solemnly  to 
cleave  to  Him  alone  for  the  pardon  of  our  sins,  the  justification  of  our  persons, 
and  the  sanctification  of  our  natures.  (2)  Look  up  to  Christ  in  His  death  as  a 
Conqueror.  It  is  the  Lord's  death  ;  He  was  a  Lord  in  His  death  ;  He  was  a  King 
upon  the  Cross  as  well  as  a  Priest,  as  He  is  a  Priest  in  heaven  as  well  as  a  King. 
His  death  was  His  victory.  His  ascension  His  triumph.  Piegard  it,  show  it  forth, 
not  simply  as  a  death,  but  a  conquering  death.  (3)  Plead  this  death  with  God.  (4) 
Plead  this  death  agiinstsin  and  Satan.  Show  it  again^^t  every  charge.  Can  the  sins 
of  men  be  stronger  to  condemn  than  the  blood  of  God  is  to  save  ?  4.  Humbly. 
(1)  Consirler  in  this  representation  what  we  should  have  suffered.  (2)  Consider  the 
deplorable  misery  wherein  we  were.  How  deeply  were  we  sunk  into  the  mire  that 
nothing  could  pluck  us  out  but  the  Son  of  God  !  5.  Thankfully.  Such  mercies  as 
the  death  of  Christ  require  high  and  raised  thanksgivings.  (1)  Blessing  God  for 
His  love  in  offering  up  His  Sou  to  death.  (2)  Blessing  Christ  for  His  love  in  dying. 
(3)  The  costliness  of  this  redemption  by  the  death  of  Christ  should  excite  us  to 
show  it  forth  with  thankfulness.  (4)  The  gain  we  have  by  it  should  excite  us  to  it. 
Death  was  bitter  to  Him,  but  comfortable  to  us.  By  His  blood  are  the  promises 
sealed;  by  His  blood  all  the  treasures  of  grace,  mercy,  peace,  happiness,  riches  of 
glory,  are  gathered  together  for  us.  Use :  1.  If  the  Supper  be  a  showing  the 
death  of  Christ,  it  is  then  no  sacrifice,  but  the  commemoration  of  a  sacrifice. 
Sacrifices  im^jly  some  kind  of  expiation  and  atonement ;  this  is  a  natural  notion. 
But  the  Sujiper  is  not  intended  as  an  expiation  of  sin  or  a  satisfaction  to  God.  In 
a  sacrifice  something  is  offered  to  God,  in  a  sacrament  something  is  exhibited  to 
us.  2.  How  should  the  death  of  Christ  run  much  in  our  thoughts  and  our  affec- 
tions be  raised  !  The  Lord's  Supper  is  to  be  frequently  celebrated  and  participated 
of.  "As  often,"  implying,  it  ought  often  to  be  done.  For  explication.  1.  How  often 
is  not  determined.  2.  Nor  can  there  be  a  constant  time  fixed  for  every  particular 
person.  Because  there  are  varieties  in  the  cases  of  good  men,  who  may  by  some 
emergency  find  themselves  hindered  one  time  and  not  another.  3.  It  was 
anciently  often  participated  of.  Some  think  every  day  from  that  of  Acts  ii.  46. 
4.  Yet  to  be  frequent  in  it  is  agreeable  to  the  nature  of  the  ordinance  and  neces- 
sary for  the  wants  of  a  Christian.  The  too  much  deferring  doth  more  hurt  than 
the  frequent  communicating.  The  oftener  we  carefully  and  believingly  communi- 
cate the  more  disposed  we  shall  be  for  it.  It  ought  not  to  be  neglected  upon  these 
reasons.  1.  Because  of  the  Author.  It  is  a  feast  of  God's  providing.  The  great 
God  appointed  not  any  trifling  ordinance ;  His  wisdom  appoints  none  but  what  His 
power  can  make  worthy  instruments  ;  His  goodness  will  appoint  none  but  what  His 
love  will  make  highly  beneficial ;  the  contempt  of  it  is  a  slighting  both  of  His- 
wisdom  and  grace.  If  Jordan  be  appointed  for  the  healing  Naaman's  leprosy 
(2  Kings  v.  10),  the  waters  of  Abana  and  Pharj^ar,  rivers  of  Damascus,  shall  never 
be  medicinal.  When  God  appointed  lamps  for  the  defeat  of  the  Midianites  (Judg. 
vii.  20),  had  Gideon  slighted  them  as  too  weak,  and  assaulted  them  with  his 
numerous  host,  he  had  received  a  rout  instead  of  a  victory.  2.  The  time  when 
Christ  instituted  it  shows  it  is  not  worthy  of  our  neglect.  It  was  a  little  before  His 
death  (chap.  xi.  23).  3.  The  ends  of  it  declare  the  unworthiness  of  neglecting  it. 
(1)  The  remembrance  of  Chwst.  How  can  we  say  we  love  Him  if  we  do  not  mind 
Him  ?  What  value  have  we  for  Him  if  He  be  not  in  our  thoughts  ?  Well,  but  we 
may  remember  Christ  otherwise  without  this  ceremony.  We  may,  but  do  we?  (2) 
It  is  a  seal  of  the  covenant.  This  is  the  common  nature  of  a  sacrament  to  be  a 
seal  of  the  righteousness  or  justification  with  God  by  faith  in  Christ  (Eom.  iv.  11). 
It  is  not  only  a  sign  which  represents,  but  a  seal  which  confirms  the  benefit.  (3) 
It  is  a  renewing  our  covenant  with  Him.  (4)  It  is  a  communion  with  God.  4. 
The  benefits  of  this  ordinance  require  frequency.  These  benefits  are  many.  (1) 
Weakening  of  sin.  Not  iihysically,  but  morally.  The  lively  representation  and 
consideration  of  the  death  of  Christ  with  all  its  circumstances  is  a  strong  incen- 
tive and  assistant  to  the  mortifying  sin  in  us.  (2)  Nourishment  of  the  soul.  (3) 
Increase  and  exercise  of  grace.  Christ  is  the  storehouse  and  fountain  of  all  the 
treasure    of  life  and  peace,  but  His  ordinances  are  the  channel.     (4)  Sense  and 


CHAP.  XI.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  113 

assurance  of  love  often  comes  in  by  it.     (5)  Union  with  Christ  is  promoted.     Use  : 

1.  How  much  is  tire  neglect,  if  not  contempt,  of  tliis  institution  to  be  bewailed  ! 
■(1)  It  concerns  such  to  inquire  whether  the  reasons  of  their  neglect  be  valid  against 
a  positive  command.  (2)  Was  it  api^ointed  to  be  neglfcted  ?  Did  Christ  take  such 
care  to  institute  it  and  we  take  care  to  avoid  it  ?  (3)  How  can  such  free  themselves 
from  unworthy  reflections  upon  Christ?  It  is  either  an  act  of  wisdom  or  folly  in 
Him.  If  of  wisdom,  why  are  we  so  foolish  as  not  to  observe  it  ?  If  of  folly,  why 
do  we  at  all  believe  in  Him  whom  we  count  a  foolish  Saviour  ?  (4)  Is  it  neglected 
^because  the  elements  are  so  mean  and  the  thing  so  easy  in  itself?  Had  any 
Israelite  neglected  to  turn  his  eye  upon  the  brazen  serpent  the  poison  in  his  blood 
had  digged  his  grave.  (5)  Or  do  we  think  Christ  is  come  again  that  we  neglect  it  ? 
(6)  Why  doth  any  one  neglecter  of  it  who  hath  faith  observe  any  other  commander 
institution  ?  (7)  Or  is  it  unfitness  that  is  the  cause  of  the  neglect?  Hath  any  man 
heard  of  repentance  and  faith  and  holiness,  and  yet  hath  nothing  of  them  ?  What 
a  miserable  case  is  this!     (8)  Consider  what  you  lose  and  what  danger  you  incur. 

2.  Use  :  Is  of  exhortation  to  observe  it  and  that  frequenily.  Thou;(h  a  dyiug  Saviour 
is  remembered,  yet  a  living  Saviour  is  sought  for  in  it ;  and  shall  not  we  be  as  ready 
to  seek  a  living  Christ  in  the  saciament  as  the  women  were  to  seek  a  dead  Christ 
in  the  sepulchre?  (Matt,  xxviii.  1).  Let  us  consider  some  questions.  (1)  Will  any 
believer  be  guilty  of  disobedience  to  the  Author  of  his  faith  ?  (2)  Is  Christ  so 
mean  a  Friend  as  not  to  be  remembered  ?  The  memory  of  a  good  friend  should  be 
very  precious.  (3)  Why  should  we  not  often  be  in  those  ways  where  we  may  meet 
with  our  best  Friend  ?  (4)  Have  you  no  graces  that  need  strengthening  ?  (.5)  Why  will 
any  true  believer  gratify  Satan  ?  The  motions  to  hinder  those  that  are  gracious  must 
either  be  from  God  or  Satan.  From  God  they  cannot  be,  who  is  no  enemy  to  the 
ordinance  He  hath  appointed  for  them.  (6)  Why  should  any  believer  deny  to  pay 
Christ  the  debt  of  thankfulness  for  His  great  love  in  that  way  which  He  hath 
appointed  ?  It  is  a  thanksgiving,  a  thankful  remembrance,  therefore  anciently 
called  the  Eucharist.  We  have  handled  two  doctrines  from  the  words.  There  is  one 
more  yet  behind  concerning  the  duration  of  this  ordinnnce.  You  show  the  Lord's 
death  till  He  come.  There  is  especially  a  twofold  coming  of  Christ  mentioned  in 
Scripture.  1.  His  coming  in  the  flesh.  2.  His  coming  to  judgment.  The  doctrine 
then  is — the  Lord's  Supper  is  a  lasting  and  continuing  institution,  not  to  be  put 
down  at  the  pleasure  of  any  man.  It  will  not  be  repealed  till  Christ  come.  Another 
.gospel  is  not  to  be  expected  (Gal.  i.  6,  7,  ttc),  and  therefore  while  the  gospel 
endures  the  appendixes,  the  institutions  annexed  to  it  will  endure.  The  ordinances 
of  Christ  are  like  the  pillar  of  fire  and  the  cloud  which  guided  the  Israelites  in 
their  journey  through  the  wilderness,  and  did  not  withdraw  from  them  till  they 
entered  into  Canaan.  1.  All  the  ordinances  of  Christ  are  to  continue  in  His 
Church,  then  certainly  this.  2.  Sacraments  were  thought  by  God  needful  for  men 
in  all  their  several  states  in  the  world.  Sacraments  were  judged  necessary  by  God 
in  innocent  nature.  The  Tree  of  Life  had  a  sacramental  signification  of  life  upon 
Adam's  obedience.  Much  more  in  lapsed  nature  have  we  need  of  those  sensible 
things  for  the  support  of  our  faith  in  the  promises  of  God.  After  the  Fall  there 
were  various  institutions  brought  in  by  degrees.  Adam  and  Abel  and  Noah  had 
their  sacrifices  as  significant  of  the  Messiah  promised  to  them  and  expected  by 
them.  Abraham  had  an  addition  of  circumcision.  The  Paspover  and  other  rites 
were  added  under  Moses.  And  God  always  had  some  conduit-pipes  through  which 
to  pour  out  the  blessings  of  His  grace  upon  the  souls  of  His  creatures.  3.  All  laws 
once  settled  are  of  force  till  they  be  repealed  by  that  authority  which  did  enact 
them.  4.  The  covenant  is  perpetual,  and  therefore  the  seals  are  perpetual.  5. 
The  state  wherein  we  are  requires  the  continuance  of  it  and  of  other  ordinances. 
.(1)  In  regard  of  our  constant  decays.  Our  bodies  would  moulder  to  dust  were  they 
not  daily  nourished  ;  and  is  there  not  as  much  need  of  nourishment  for  our  souls  ? 
i(2)  In  respect  of  our  weakness.  Some  intercourse  there  must  be  between  God  and 
U8  if  we  be  happy.  Use  :  1.  Christ  will  always  have  a  Church  in  the  world.  A 
Church  is  the  seat  of  ordinances.  2.  It  is  in  no  man's  power  to  add  to  or  detract 
from  Christ's  institutions.  Not  a  pin  in  the  temple  He  will  have  altered  till  He 
gives  order.  God  is  a  jealous  God,  and  careful  of  His  sovereignty.  3.  See  Christ's 
love  and  bounty.  Christ  would  not  leave  His  people  without  a  durable  legacy.  4. 
This  ordinance  must  not  be  contemned.  The  passover  was  to  be  observed,  much 
■more  the  Supper  settled  by  Christ.  (Bp.Hacket.)  The  Lord's  Slipper  a  showing 
forth  of  ClirisL's  death  : — I.  The  manner  of  His  death,  its  violence  and  painfulness. 
The  first  promise  spoke  of  a  bruised  Saviour.     The  patriarchal  and  Levitical  sacri- 


116  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 


fices  represented  Him  as  a  slain  victim ;  and  the  prophets  described  Him  in  a 
similar  way.    And  if  we  look  into  heaven,  it  is  the  same.    He  is  adored  there  as  one 
who  has  been  slain.  So  we  rightly  regard  this  ordinance  as  setting  forth,  not  Christ's 
death  only,  but  His  violent  death  on  the  Cross.     II.  Its  efficacy.     The  institution 
of  this  ordinance  by  Christ  is  a  declaration  by  Christ  that  He  has  removed  the 
Divine  displeasure  from  His  people,  and  brought  them  within  tbe  full  sunshine  of 
the  Divine  favour.     He  would  not  call  on  us  to  celebrate  continually  a  work  which 
is  not  accomplished,  or  only  hulf  accomplished.     This  would  be  like  a  vauntiog 
general  ordermg  a  column  to  be  raised  for  a  victory  that  was  never  won.     It  is  like 
a  continual  echo  of  His  own  dying  cry,  "  li  is  finished. "     And  our  celebrating  this 
sacrament  becomes  in  consequence  a  repetition  on  our  part  of  this  cry,  a  declaration 
that  we  believe  in  the  full  sufficiency  of  His  atonement.     III.  The  necessity  of  its 
PARTicut  AR  APPLICATION  TO  ouKSELVES.     "We  do  uot  merely  look  at  the  sacred  ele- 
ments of  the  Lord's  Supper,  we  eat  and  drink  tliem.     Without  eating  and  drinking 
we   might  show  the  manner  and  efficacy  of  Christ's  death ;  but  this  partaking 
becomes  an  emblem  of  that  faith  which  applies  the  sacrifice  of  Cirrist  to  the  i-oul. 
In  His  own  strong  language,  it  "  eats  the  tiesh  of  the  Son  of  Man  and  it  drinks  His 
blood."     Conclusion  :  Learn — 1.  That  a  knowledge  of  the  gospel  itself  is  needful  for 
a  right  understanding  of  this  sacrament.   It  is  a  picture  of  the  gospel :  an  embody- 
ing of  its  great  truths  in  visible  things.     If  we  understand  the  gospel,  we  find  no 
difficulty  in  understanding  this  sacrament.     And  then  in  its  turn  it  illustrates  the 
gospel,  enabling  us  to  understand  it  better.     But  unless  we  understand  the  gospel, 
we  shall  be  in  thi=^  same  situation  with  many  of  the  ignorant  Jews  under  the  law. 
The  shadows  of  "  good  things  "  will  take  the  place  of  those  "  good  things  "  them- 
selves, "carnal  ordinances"  will  be  confounded  with  spiritual  blessings,  and  the 
emblems  of  a  dying  Saviour  will  be  more  to  us  than  that  dying  Saviour  Himself. 
Go  through  Koman   Catholic  countiies — theie  is  the  crucifix,  the  elevated  host, 
adored  ;  the  great  Saviour  Himself  piactically  desjused,  and  His  gospel  scarcely 
heard  of  or  known.     2.  That  Christ's  gospel  must  be  highly  valued  and  loved  by  us 
before  we  can  rightly  altend  to  His  holy  Supper.    3.  Thut  the  Lord's  Supper  should 
be  celebrated  by  us  frequently.     Is  it  a  showing  of  His  death  ?     Then  the  more 
frequently  His  death  is  shown  forth  in  this  world  of  sinners  the  better.     4.  That 
this  sacrament  is  to  be  celebrated  perp. dually.     It  is  to  be  a  standing  ordinance  in 
the   Church,  unlike  circumcision  or  the  Jewish  sacrifices  and  feasts  which  have 
passed  away.    It  is  to  be  celebrated  till  the  heavens  aie  opened  and  the  Sou  of  Man 
is  revealed.     Then  the  sacrament  will  have  done  its  woik.     We  see  now  a  picture 
only  ;  but  when  Christ  comes,   we  shall  see  the  original.      (C   Bradley,  M.A.) 
The  LorcVs  d  ath : — 1.  These  words  seem  contradictory.     If  He  was  Lord,  hosv 
could  He  die  ?     If  He  died,  how  could  He  be  Lord '?     Why  show  forth  the  memory 
of  the  Lord's  death  ?     Why  not  say  as  little  about  it  as  possible  ?     Is  it  not  keeping 
up  the  memory  of  His  shame  ?     Why  not  show  forth  His  birth  ?     He  never  said  a 
word  about  that.     He  founded  no  birthday  festival.     Why  not  forget  His  death  in 
His  resurrection  ?     2.  Note  that  for  historical  purposes  tbe  event  is  always  called 
His  crucifixion,  but  for  religious  puiposes  His  death.     W^e  do  not  say  about  a  man 
who  is  hanged  that  he  died,  but  that  he  was  killed.     And  so  on  the  Lord's  side  it 
is  always  said  that  Christ  died,  on  man's  side  that  He  was  slain.     I.  The  Loed 
Himself  always  magnified  the  event.     He  never  treated  it  as  part  of  the  common 
lot,  or  availed  Himself  of  the  consolation  of  despair,  saying,  it  can  come  but  once — 
the  sooner  come,  the  sooner  done.     His  martyrs  often  said  that.     Christ  made  it 
the  supreme  fact  in  His  history.     It  is  easy  for  you  who  are  getting  on  towards 
seventy  to  talk  about  your  death.     What  is  it  to  die  at  thirty,  when  you  are  quite 
strong — perfectly  well?     What  is  it  at  thirty — to  make  death  the  supreme  thought 
of  the  mind — the  meridian  of  your  calculations?     You  cannot  enter  into  it.     But 
this   is   what   Christ    did.      II.   The  Lord  never  spoke  of  His  death  as  a  fact 
COMPLETE  IN  ITSELF.     Now  wc  do :  we  Say  the  end  cannot  be  far  off.     But  Jesus 
never  referred   to  His  death  as  a  full  stop.     He  always  connected  it  with  His 
resurrection.      He   was   always   talking   about   coniing   back  again.      His  life   is 
a  beautiful  whole — not  to   be   brolcen  into  parts,  or  studied   in   fragments,   else 
the  results  of  His  ministry  would  be  humiliation,  victory  of  the  enemy.     What 
am  I  to   make   of  this  April  day?     At   six  it  was  so   mild   and   beautiful;    and 
at   nine   it  was   drizzling.      And    then,    after   ten,   it   was   so   bright;    and   just 
now  it  was  so  dark  I  could  see  nothing  but  for  the  gas,  and  presently  it  will  be 
teeming  with  rain.     Do  not  break  the  day  off  at  any  of  these  points,  and  say,  What 
do  you  think  of  that?     God  says,  Let  it  alone  ;  take  the  whole  year,  and  see  what 


CHAP.  SI.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  IV, 

I  make  of  it.  And  so  Christ  says,  "  Say  nothing  of  this  till  the  Sod  of  Man  be  risen 
from  the  dead."     The  last  fact  explains  the  preceding  facts.     III.  The  Lobd  made 

THE    CELEBRATION    OF    HiS    DEATH    THE    ONE    FESTIVAL   IN    THE    ClIDKCH.       There    have 

been  some  poor  black  days  in  your  life — you  say  let  them  be  forgotten.  Christ 
does  not  say  so — nay,  in  view  of  this  black  day  in  His  life,  He  boldly  said  that 
except  men  did  eat  His  flesh  and  drink  His  blood,  they  had  no  life  in  them.  He 
never  spoke  of  His  death  as  a  disaster.  He  came  upon  it  as  from  eternity,  travel- 
ling in  the  greatness  of  His  strength.  Other  men  celebrate  their  triumphs — this 
Man  His  Cross ;  other  conquerors  tell  of  the  banners  they  have  wrested  from  the 
hand  of  the  enemy — this  Man  celebrates  His  overthrow.     IV.  The  Lord  never 

ASKED    His    TORMENTORS    TO    BE    PITIFUL,    OR   IN    ANT    WAT   TO    MITIGATE    THE    AGONT  OF 

His  CRUCIFIXION.  And  this  would  be  the  less  remarkable  but  for  tlie  fact  that  He 
did  ask  His  Father  if  it  were  possible  to  let  the  cup  pass  from  Him.  So  He  was 
not  insensible  to  pain.  But  when  He  comes  to  men.  He  asks  no  favour.  Nay, 
when  people  lament  His  fate.  He  says,  "  Weep  not  for  Me."  And  it  is  the  more 
remarkable,  because  Pilate  set  tbe  door  oj^en,  and  said  in  effect.  Here  is  a  way  of 
escape  ;  art  Thou  the  King  of  the  Jews  ?  He  put  his  question  in  a  tone  that  offered 
deliverance.  And  yet  this  very  self-same  man,  whom  we  have  seen  in  this  agony 
of  blood,  avails  not  Himself  of  the  door  so  open*  d.  Truly  such  a  death  had  a 
meaning  in  it.  Conclusion;  Now  in  view  of  these  facts,  it  becomes  a  serious  ques- 
tion whether  the  reason  given  for  this  commemoration  is  equal  to  the  necessities  of 
the  case.  Why  do  you  celebrate  His  death  instead  of  His  birth — His  resurrection 
— the  triumphal  parts  of  His  history?  I  answer — He  was  delivered  for  our 
offences.  Why  keep  up  the  memory  of  His  death  ?  I  answer.  He  was  bruised  for 
our  iniquities.  Why  keep  up  the  memory  of  His  Cross?  I  answer,  while  we  were 
yet  sinners.  He  died  for  us.  Will  you,  after  hearing  these  answers,  tell  ns,  on  the 
other  hand,  why  we  should  leave  such  a  death  nncelebi-ated  ?  {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Practical  influence  of  the  death  of  Chrint : — To  "show  forth  "  here  means  to  pro- 
claim. In  communicating  we  set  forward  the  death  of  Jesus,  according  to  the  views 
we  may  entertain  of  it.  The  most  important  views  will  be  brought  before  us  if  we 
consider  it  as  it  is  described  in  Scripture — I.  As  the  foundation  of  all  our  hopes 
OF  God's  favour  and  of  eternal  life.  In  it  we  see  One  wlio  was  God's  equal 
suffering  in  His  human  nature  as  the  only  means  by  which  sin  could  be  expiated 
and  sinners  saved.  We  cannot  doubt  that  this  atonement  is  sufficient,  and  see, 
therefore,  in  the  death  of  Christ  the  complete  removal  of  all  bairiers  to  our  salvation, 
and  a  way  thrown  open  for  our  restoration  to  blesseilness.    II.  As  the  source  of  the 

MOTIVES    BT   which    OUR    CON'DUCT    OUGHT  TO   BE  REGULATED.       1.  What  COuld  be  morS 

fitted  to  make  us  feel  deeply  and  realise  strongly  our  obligation  to  devote  ourselves 
to  God's  service  than  this  gift  of  God's  love  ?  2.  Is  there  any  sin  which  the  con- 
templation of  Christ's  de^ith  should  not  prompt  and  enable  us  to  subdue — any  grace 
which  it  is  not  fitted  to  implant  and  to  cherish  ?  Are  any  of  you  disposed  to  be 
proud  ?— then  think  of  Him  who  humbled  Himself.  Are  any  of  you  disposed  to  be 
selfish? — then  tliink  of  Him  who  submitted  to  a  cruel  and  shameful  death  for  the 
good  of  those  who  had  no  claim  upon  His  regard.  Would  any  one  see  an  example 
of  compassion  and  fortitude — of  love  to  God  and  love  to  man,  in  circumstances  well 
fitted  to  touch  his  heart  and  to  produce  decided  imitation  ? — let  him  look  to  the 
death  of  Christ.  HI.  As  the  great  ground  of  our  consolation  amid  trials  and 
AFFLICTIONS.  1.  That  the  Captain  of  our  salvation  was  made  perfect  through 
suffering  reminds  us  of  the  important  and  salutary  place  which  suffering  holds  in 
the  moral  government  of  Goil,  and  cordially  reconciles  us  to  the  great  principle  tliat 
it  is  by  much  tribulation  that  we  must  enter  the  kingdom.  2.  Christ,  having 
endured  the  Cross,  being  now  set  down  at  tbe  right  hand  of  God,  is  an  encourage- 
ment to  His  people  to  bear  their  trials  with  resignation,  and  to  press  on  with 
diligence — Christ's  success  having  ensured  theirs,  and  the  result  in  His  case 
being  substantially  a  pattern  of  what  is  to  be  the  result  in  ours.  3.  The  death  of 
Christ  is  peculiarly  fitted  to  afford  believers  encouragement  and  consolation  in 
looking  forward  to  their  own  encounter  with  the  last  enemy.  The  King  of  terrors 
is  indeed  a  formidable  foe,  but  Christ,  by  dying,  has  deprived  him  of  all  power  to 
Imrt ;  and  when  we  know  this  we  shall  no  longer  be  subject  to  bondage  through  the 
fear  of  death,  but  shall  be  enabled  to  say,  "0  Death,  where  is  thys-ting?"  &c. 
Conclusion  :  These  are  some  plain  views  of  the  death  of  Christ  as  set  before  us  iu 
the  Scriptures.  As  often  as  ye  eat  that  bread,  and  drink  that  cup,  you  show  them, 
and  thereby  pledge  yourselves  to  hold  them  forth  more  fully  in  the  whole  tenor  of 
your   conversation.     (]V.    Cunningham,   D.D.)         Tlie   ordinance   of  the  interval 


118  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

between  Christ's  going  and  Christ's  coming : — Christians — 1.  Bepresent  Christ. 
They  defend  and  declare  His  truth  ;  upliold  and  make  known  His  honour  ;  illustrate 
and  maintain  His  laws.  2.  Copy  Christ.  All  He  is,  they  desire  to  be.  All  He 
has,  they  expect  to  share.  All  He  require^,  they  are  glad  to  do.  3.  Commemorate 
Christ.  He  is  the  tie  which  binds  them  all  together;  the  light  which  gives  to  each 
his  colour  ;  the  circle  which  prescribes  to  each  his  course.  Before  He  left  them  He 
said,  "  Do  this  in  remembrance  of  Me."  And  till  He  returns  He  continues  to  say, 
"Ye  do  show  the  Lord's,"  &c.  I.  Of  what  does  this  okdinaxce  consist?  1.. 
What  is  it  that  is  fed  ?  (1)  Not  the  body  only.  "  If  any  man  hunger,  let  him  eat 
at  home  "  (chap.  xi.  34).  (2)  But — (a)  The  memory,  because  it  goes  back  to  the  Cross. 
(h)  The  faith,  because  it  goes  up  for  the  grace,  (c)  The  heart,  for  it  goes  forward  to 
the  glory.  2.  What  is  it  on  which  the  faithful  feed  ?  Not  on  the  material  Christ. 
"  The  natural  body  and  blood  of  our  Saviour  Christ  are  in  heaven,  and  not  here." 
The  food  is  not  on  an  altar  to  satisfy  the  claims  of  God,  but  on  a  table  to  satisfy 
the  soul  of  man.  To  man  physical,  the  things  taken  are  bread  and  wine.  To  man 
spiritual,  the  things  appropriated  are  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ.  II.  To  what 
DOES  THE  OBDiNANCE  KEFEE  ?  1.  It  is  a  doctriuc  soHdificd  into  an  act.  It  is  a  pro- 
fession published  by  a  feast.  It  is  a  sign  as  to  the  past,  and  is  a  seal  as  to  the 
future.  Like  a  mile-stone  by  life's  wayside,  it  has  two  faces  :  one  tells  whence- 
we  come  ;  the  other,  whither  we  are  going.  It  is  the  old  oath  in  which  the  great 
army  of  the  Cross  have  sworn  fealty  to  their  Lord.  It  is  the  old  well,  at  which  all 
the  pilgrims  have  rested  and  been  refreshed  on  their  way  to  Zion.  It  is  the  old  cry, 
by  which,  in  gloom  or  joy,  the  saints  encourage  one  another  to  go  on.  It  is  the 
old  challenge,  by  which  the  true  men  distinguish  friends  from  foe.  2.  It  repre- 
sents His  death  ;  for  the  broken  bread  and  the  poured-out  wine  find  their  parallel 
only  at  the  Cross.  3.  It  implies  life  ;  for  only  living  souls  can  feed  together  on  that 
bread  from  heaven.  4.  It  promises  immortality;  for  they  who  really  feed  upon 
the  living  Christ,  in  their  living  spirits,  by  a  living  faith,  have  this  prospect  given  : 
"  If  any  man  eat  of  this  bread,  he  shall  live  for  ever  "  (John  vi.  51).  III.  To  what 
DOES  THE  ORDINANCE  POINT  ?  "  Till  He  come."  1.  To  the  g":ory  of  Jesus.  Intelligent 
love  delights  in  the  Master's  honour,  His  glorified  body.  His  grand  espousals,  His^ 
many  crowns.  2.  To  the  gathering  of  the  redeemed  in  the  heavenly  banqueting 
house.  (1)  For  the  perfect  communion.  (2)  In  the  presence  of  the  ever-loving 
Lord.  3.  But  if  at  the  table  we  show  the  Lord's  death,  what  do  we  show  in  the 
world?  (1)  Servants  of  the  Crucified,  are  we  dead  with  Him?  (2)  Saved  by  His 
dying  love,  are  we  severe  to  living  men  ?  (3)  Talking  of  the  dawn,  are  we  walking 
in  the  dark  ?  (4)  Pointing  to  heaven,  are  we  cleaving  to  earth  ?  (J.  Richardson, 
3I.A.)  The  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper  a  standing  ordinance  : — God  often  ap- 
pointed standing  memorials  to  perpetuate  great  and  extraordinary  events.  Aaron's 
rod  and  the  pot  of  manna  ;  the  stones  taken  from  Jordan  ;  the  Passover,  &c.  And 
the  apostle  tells  that  the  Lord's  Supper  was  appointed  to  commemorate  not  Christ's 
birth,  temptation,  &c.,  but  His  death.  I.  Why  the  sacrament  was  designed  to 
COMMEMORATE  Chkist's  DEATH  IN  PARTICULAR.  Bccause — 1.  It  was  the  most  striking 
scene  that  ever  took  place  with  respect  to  Him  or  any  other  being.  It  was  rendered  so 
by  many  singular  circumstances.  2.  It  was  the  strongest  expression  of  His  marvellous 
love  to  this  sinful  and  perishing  world.  "  Greater  love  hath  no  man  than  this,"&c. 
But  Christ  suffered  death  for  sinners,  and  that  in  a  most  painful  and  humiliating 
way.  3.  It  alone  made  atonement  for  the  sins  of  the  world,  and  laid  a  foundation 
fnr  the  pardon  and  salvation  of  all  penitent,  believing  sinners.  All  Christ  did  before 
His  death,  and  all  He  has  done  since,  and  all  He  ever  will  do  hereafter,  dejiends 
upon  His  death,  and  without  it  v.'ould  be  of  no  avail.  II.  Keflections.  1.  This 
exhibition  of  a  crucified  Saviour  is  a  solemn  address  to  our  understandings,  and 
calls  for  our  most  serious  and  fixed  contemplation  upon  the  most  ghirious  truths 
which  can  employ  the  minds  of  heavenly  intelligences.  2.  This  significant  ordinance 
addresses  your  hearts,  as  well  as  your  understandings,  and  calls  for  the  most  grateful 
ai3fections  to  the  Father  and  Son.  3.  As  the  ordinance  reminds  you  of  Christ  giving 
Himself  for  you,  so  it  equally  reminds  you  of  your  obligations  of  renewedly  giving 
yourselves  to  Him.  III.  Improvement.  Since  the  sacrament  was  appointed  to  be 
a  memorial  of  Christ's  death,  then — 1.  Christians  with  good  reason  experience 
much  comfort  and  derive  much  benefit  from  it.  2.  Those  who  never  find  any 
satisfaction  in  it  have  reason  to  fear  that  they  are  enemies  to  the  Cross  of  Christ. 
3.  None  are  duly  prepared  to  observe  it  who  do  not  cordially  approve  of  the  vindic- 
tive justice  of  God.  It  was  this  which  rendered  the  death  of  Christ  necessary,  and 
which  it  was  the  design  of  His  death  to  display.     4.  It  is  of  great  importance  to 


CHAP.  XI.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  119 

maintain  this  sacred  ordinance.  The  continuance  of  the  Christian  rehgion  in  the 
world  greatly  depends  upon  the  continuance  of  the  memorial  of  Christ's  death. 
5.  If  the  sacrament  be  a  standing  memorial  of  Christ's  death,  then  we  may  see  how 
little  the  gospel  is  prized  by  the  great  body  of  the  Christian  world.  (.V.  Euunoiis,  D.D.) 
A  persuasive  to  frequent  communion  : — I.  For  the  pekpetuity  of  this  institution, 
implied  in  those  words,  "  For  as  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread,  and  drink  this  cup,  ye 
do  show  forth  the  Lord's  death  till  He  come  "  :  or  the  words  may  be  read  inipeia- 
tively  and  by  way  of  precept,  show  ye  forth  the  Lord's  death  till  He  come.  So  that 
it  is  a  vain  conceit  of  the  enthusiasts  concerning  the  dispensation  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
when,  as  they  suppose,  all  human  teaching  shall  cease,  and  all  external  ordinances 
and  institutions  in  religion  shall  vanish,  and  there  shall  be  no  farther  use  of  them. 
Whereas  it  is  very  i^lain  from  the  New  Testament,  that  prayer,  and  outward  teach- 
ing, and  the  use  of  the  two  sacraments,  were  intended  to  continue  among  Christians 
of  all  ages.  And  if  this  be  the  end  and  use  of  this  sacrament,  to  be  a  solid  remem- 
brance of  the  death  and  sufferings  of  our  Lord  during  His  absence  from  us,  that  is, 
till  His  coming  to  judgment,  then  this  sacrament  will  never  be  out  of  date  till  the 
second  coming  of  our  Lord.  The  consideration  whereof  should  mightily  strengthen 
and  encourage  our  faith  in  the  hope  of  eternal  life  so  often  as  we  partake  of  this 
sacrament.  II.  The  obligation  that  lies  upon  all  Christians  to  the  frequent 
OBSERVANCE  AND  PRACTICE  OF  THIS  INSTITUTION.  I  shall  biietly  mention  a  threefold 
obligation  lying  upon  all  Christians  to  frequent  communion  in  this  holy  sacrament. 

1.  We  are  obliged  in  point  of  indispensable  duty,  and  in  obedience  to  a  plain  pre- 
cept and  most  solemn  institution  of  our  blessed  Saviour,  that  great   Lawjiiver. 

2.  We  are  likewise  obliged  hereunto  in  point  of  interest.  The  benefits  which  we 
expect  to  be  derived  and  assured  to  us  by  this  sacrament  are  all  the  blessings  of  the 
new  covenant.  3.  We  are  likewise  particularly  obliged  in  point  of  gratitude  to  the 
careful  observance  of  this  institution.  Can  we  without  the  most  horrible  ingrati- 
tude neglect  this  dying  charge  of  our  Sovereign  and  Savioiu',  the  great  Friend  and 
Lover  of  sonls  ?  A  command  so  reasonable,  so  easy,  so  full  of  blessings  and  benefits 
to  the  faithful  observers  of  it.     HI.  Third  particular  I  proposed,  which  was  to 

ENDEAVOUR  TO  SATISFY  THE  OBJECTIONS  AND  SCRUPLES  WHICH  HAVK  BEEN  RAISED  IN  THE 
MINDS  OF  MEN,  AND  PARTICULARLY  OF  MANY  DEVOUT  AND  SINCERE  CHRISTIANS.       1.    That 

the  danger  of  unworthy  receiving  being  so  very  great,  it  seems  the  safest  way  wholly 
to  refrain  from  this  sacrament,  and  not  to  receive  it  at  all.  But  this  objection  is 
evidently  of  no  force  if  there  be  as  great  or  greater  danger  on  the  other  hand,  viz., 
in  the  neglect  of  this  duty.  Nay,  of  the  two  it  is  the  greater  sign  of  contempt  wholly 
to  neglect  the  sacrament,  than  to  partake  of  it  without  some  due  qualification.  And 
indeed  scarce  any  man  can  think  of  coming  to  the  sacrament  but  he  will  by  this 
consideration  be  excited  to  some  good  purposes,  and  put  upon  some  sort  of  endea- 
vour to  amend  and  reform  his  life.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  as  to  those  who 
neglect  this  sacrament,  there  is  hardly  anything  left  to  restrain  them  from  the 
greatest  enormities  of  life,  and  to  give  a  check  to  them  in  their  evil  course  :  nothing 
but  the  penalty  of  human  laws,  which  men  may  avoid  and  yet  be  wicked  enough. 
For  if  this  be  a  good  reason  to  abstain  from  the  sacrament  for  fear  of  performing  so 
sacred  an  action  in  an  uudue  manner,  it  were  best  for  a  bad  man  to  lay  aside  all 
religion,  and  to  give  over  the  exercise  of  all  the  duties  of  piety,  of  prayer,  of  reading 
and  hearing  the  Word  of  God,  becaupe  there  is  a  proportionable  danger  in  the 
unworthy  and  unprofitable  use  of  any  of  these.  I  cannot  more  fitly  illustrate  this 
matter  than  by  this  plain  similitude :  he  that  eats  and  drinks  intemperately 
endangers  his  health  and  his  life,  but  he  that  to  avoid  this  danger  will  not  eat  at 
all,  I  need  not  tell  you  what  will  cert  i inly  become  of  him  in  a  very  short  space. 
There  are  some  conscientious  persons  who  abstain  from  the  sacrament  upon  an 
apprehension  that  the  sins  which  tliey  shall  commit  afterwards  are  unpardonable. 
But  this  is  a  great  mistake.  To  draw  to  a  conclusion  of  this  matter:  such  ground- 
less fears  and  jealousies  as  these  may  be  a  sign  of  a  good  meaning,  but  they  are 
certainly  a  sign  of  an  injudicious  mind.  For  if  we  stand  upon  these  scruples,  no 
man  perhaps  was  ever  so  worthily  prepared  to  draw  near  to  God  in  any  duty  of 
religion  but  there  was  still  some  defect  or  other  in  the  disposition  of  his  mind,  and 
the  degree  of  his  p)repnration.  But  if  we  prepare  ourselves  as  well  as  we  can,  this 
is  all  God  expects.  We  cannot  surely  entertnin  so  unworthy  a  tliought  of  God  and 
our  blessed  Saviour  as  to  imagine  that  He  did  institute  the  sacrament  not  for  the 
furtherance  of  our  salvation,  but  as  a  snare,  and  an  occasion  of  our  ruin  and 
damnation.  2.  Second  objection,  which  was  this.  That  so  much  i3reparation  and 
■worthiness  being  required  to  our  worthy  receiving,  the  more   timorous   sort   of 


120  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

Christians  can  never  think  themselves  duly  enough  qualified  for  so  sacred  an  action. 
1.  That  every  degree  of  imperfection  in  our  preparation  for  this  sacrament  is  not  a 
sufficient  reason  for  men  to  abstain  from  it.  For  then  no  man  should  ever  receive 
it.  For  who  is  every  way  worthy  ?  The  graces  of  the  best  men  are  imperfect.  And 
if  we  will  neglect  the  use  of  these  mean;-,  it  is  to  no  put  pose  for  us  to  pray  to  God 
for  His  grace  and  assistance.  2.  The  total  want  of  a  due  preparation,  not  only  in 
the  degree  but  in  the  main  and  substance  of  it,  though  it  render  us  unfit  at  present 
to  receive  this  sacrament,  yet  does  it  by  no  means  excuse  our  neglect  of  it.  One 
fault  may  draw  on  another,  but  can  never  excuse  it.  We  will  not  do  our  duty  in 
other  things,  and  then  plead  that  we  are  unfit  and  unworthy  to  do  it  in  this 
particular  of  the  sacrament.  3.  The  proper  inference  and  conclusion  from  a  total 
want  of  due  preparation  for  the  sscrament  is  not  to  cast  off  all  thoughts  of  receiv- 
ing it,  but  immediately  to  set  about  the  work  of  preparation,  that  so  we  may  be  fit 
to  receive  it.  IV.  Fourth  and  last  thing  I  proposed,  viz.,  what  preparation  of  our- 
selves IS  NECESSARY  IN  ORDER  TO  THE  WORTHY  RECEIVING  OF  THIS  SACRAMENT.      Which 

I  told  you  would  give  me  occasion  to  explain  the  apostle's  meaning  in  the  last  part 
of  the  text,  "  But  let  a  man  examine  himself,  and  so  let  him  eat  of  that  bread  and 
drink  of  that  cup."  I  think  it  very  clear  from  the  occasion  and  circumstances  of 
the  apostle's  discourse  concerning  the  sacrament  that  he  does  not  intend  the  exami- 
nation of  our  state,  whether  we  be  Christians  or  not,  and  sincerely  resolve  to  con- 
tinue so  ;  and  consequently  that  he  does  not  here  speak  of  our  habitual  preparation 
by  the  resolution  of  a  good  life.  This  he  takes  for  granted,  that  they  were  Chris- 
tians and  resolved  to  continue  and  persevere  in  their  Christian  profession.  But  he 
speaks  of  their  actual  fitness  and  worthiness  at  that  time  when  they  came  to 
receive  the  Lord's  Supper.  But  let  a  man  examine  himself,  that  is,  consider  well 
with  himself  what  a  sacred  action  he  is  going  about,  and  what  behaviour  becomes 
him  when  he  is  celebrating  this  sacrament  instituted  by  our  Lord  in  memorial  of 
His  body  and  blood,  that  is,  of  His  death  and  passion.  But  some  will  say.  Is  this 
all  the  i^reparation  that  is  required  to  our  worthy  receiving  of  the  sacrament,  that 
we  take  care  not  to  come  drunk  to  it,  nor  to  be  guilty  of  any  irreverence  and  dis- 
order in  the  celebration  of  it  ?  I  answer  in  short,  this  was  the  particular  uuworthi- 
ness  with  which  the  apostle  taxeth  the  Corinthians,  and  which  he  warns  them  to 
amend.  It  is  of  great  use  for  Christians  by  way  of  preparation  for  the  sacrament 
to  examine  themselves  in  a  larger  sense  than  in  all  probability  the  apostle  here 
intended.  And  because  this  work  of  examining  ourselves  concerning  our  state,  and 
of  exercifing  repentance  towards  God  and  charity  towards  men  is  incumbent  upon 
us  as  we  are  Christians,  and  can  never  be  put  in  practice  more  seasonably  and  with 
greater  advantage  than  when  we  are  meditating  of  this  sacrament,  therefore  besides 
our  habitual  i^reparation  by  repentance  and  the  constant  endeavours  of  a  holy  life, 
it  is  a  very  commendable  custom  in  Christians  before  their  coming  to  the  sacrament 
to  set  apart  some  particular  time  for  this  work  of  examination.  The  best  prepara- 
tion for  the  sacrament  is  the  general  care  and  endeavour  of  a  good  life.  And  he 
that  is  thus  prepared  may  receive  at  any  time  when  opportunity  is  offered,  though 
he  had  no  particular  foresight  of  that  opportunity.     (J.  TilloUon,  D.D.) 

Vers.  27-32.  Whosoever  shall  eat  .  .  .  and  drinR  .  .  .  unworthily  shall  be 
guilty  of  the  body  and  blood  of  the  Lord. — Eating  and  diinldnrj  iinirorthibj : — 
I.  The  sin  consists  in  doing  it — 1.  Ignorantly.  2.  Irreverently.  3.  Uncharitably. 
4.  Sensually.  II.  Its  guilt  includes — 1.  A  contempt  of  Christ's  sacrifice.  2.  A 
denial  of  its  efficacy  ;  and  by  implication.  3.  A  rej^etition  of  His  sufferings.  III. 
Its  PUNISHMENT.  1.  Condemnation.  2.  Temporal  chastisement  (ver.  30)  corrective 
in  its  design  (ver.  32).  IV.  Its  prevention  is  secured.  1.  Not  by  neglect  or 
abstinence.  2.  But — (1)  By  self-examination.  (2)  Faithful  and  conscientious 
self-discipline  (ver.  31).  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  WoitJnj  or  umcorthy  : — 1.  Ver.  27 
has  023erated  as  a  hindrance  to  the  approach  of  many  of  our  best  to  the  Lord's 
table;  but  it  is  not  so  appalling  as  it  looks.  "  Unworthily  "  must  be  understood 
relatively  to  human  ignorance  and  imperfection  ;  otherwise  it  would  act  as  a  bar  to 
the  approach  of  any.  Were  the  right  based  upon  righteousness  there  would  be 
none  but  the  Great  Host  at  the  table.  The  unworthy  are  they  whose  habitual 
temper  is  uuchristUke,  who,  being  unworthy,  are  content  with  their  unworthiness. 
The  qualified  are  those  who  wrestle  with  their  bad  spirit  and  tendencies,  and  who 
pant  to  be  worthier  men  and  the  true  children  of  God.  2.  A  sacrament  is  an 
outward  sign  of  an  inward  experience.  And  this  is  the  profanation — when  he  who 
gives  the  sign  does  not  yearn  for  the  thing  signified.     3,  The  scruples  that  hold 


CHAP.  XI.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  121 

some  back  from  the  Lord's  table  are — 1.  As  to  the  age  at  which  a  peuson  should 
MAKE  PUBLIC  DECLABATioN  OF  HIS  DisciPLESHip.  Now,  the  couditioii  of  time  does 
not  enter  into  the  question  at  all.  The  spirit  of  life  in  man  does  not  regulate  its 
arrival  by  the  chronometer.  When  the  hour  of  conscious  life  in  God  and  conscious 
fellowship  with  Him  comes,  then  also  comes  the  hour  when  you  may  give  the 
sacred  symbolic  signs,  and  take  your  seat  at  the  guest  table  of  the  Lord,  no  matter 
how  young  in  years  you  may  be.  And,  indeed,  till  the  hour  does  come  when  you 
freely  place  yourself  at  the  disposal  of  Christ's  iutiuence,  you  have  no  right  to  claim 
a  place  at  that  board,  no  matter  how  many  your  years.  II.  That  theib  minds  are 
UNSETTLED  BY  DOUBT.  Well !  the  doubtiiig  temper  is  not  the  most  blessed  ;  but  at 
the  same  time  all  doubts  are  not  sins.  It  is  not  seldom  by  doubt  that  God  leads  us 
to  faith.  And  as  long  as  doubt  does  not  spring  from  worldliness  or  levity;  as  long 
as  it  does  not  shake  our  faith  in  God,  in  Christ,  and  in  conscience ;  as  long  as  it 
drives  us  to  the  feet  of  God  in  prayer,  and  not  away  from  them  in  pride  ;  as  long  as 
•we  wiish  to  believe  the  things  we  find  it  hard  to  believe,  so  long  may  doubt  be  a 
schoolmaster  to  bring  us  home  to  Christ.  Doubt  of  dogma  is  no  sin  ;  indifference 
to  Christ's  claims  is  ;  and  the  Lord  has  spread  this  table  for  the  loving  and  the 
docile,  not  for  the  clear-headed  system-maker  and  the  scientific  expert.  The 
doubter  who  sits  in  the  scorner's  chair,  deriding,  jeering,  sneering,  let  him  alone 
stay  away  !  and  let  the  reverent  and  lowly  listening  doubter  come,  and  Christ,  the 
Host,  will  not  withhold  His  hand.  III.  The  consciousness  of  peksonal  unvvorthi- 
NESS  of  nature.  But,  if  that  table  were  only  for  the  worthy,  it  were  arrogance  in 
any  mortal  man  to  appear.  Christ  invites  not  the  righteous  but  the  sinful  to  come. 
Indeed,  it  is  in  the  feeling  that  we  are  unwoithy  that  our  only  qualification  lies. 
It  is  not  that  we  be  holy,  but  that  we  aspire  to  be  holy ;  and  in  whomsoever  there 
is  this  desire,  no  matter  how  poor  and  impeifect  his  actual  attainments  are  in  such, 
and  not  in  the  self-satisfied  Tharisee,  you  find  the  true  disciple  who  may  take  his 
place  at  the  guest  table  of  the  Lord.  (J.  Forfar.)  Worthy  and  univorthy  com- 
mimicatiiu) : — I.  The  sin,  unworthy  eating  and  drinking  of  the  Facrament.  1. 
One  may  do  an  action  worthily  in  a  threefold  respect.  (1)  As  "  the  labourer  is 
worthy  of  his  hire  "  (Luke  x.  7).  This  exact  worthiness  may  claim  a  reward  due 
unto  it,  and  the  denier  doth  tliis  worthy  party  wrong.  Now  no  snint  can  receive 
•with  this  worthiness,  as  appears  by  the  humble  confessions  of  Jacob  (Gen.  xxxii.  10), 
John  Baptist  (Matt.  iii.  11).  So  communicants  say,  "  We  be  not  worthy  i-o  much 
as  to  gather  up  the  crumbs  under  Thy  table."  2.  Though  not  in  a  perfect  and 
exact  proportion,  yet  in  some  fitness  unto  that  which  is  required  (Matt.  iii.  8  ;  Col. 
i.  10;  Eph.  iv.  1;  Phil.  i.  27) — i.e.,  let  not  your  life  shame  your  belief;  let  not 
your  practice  be  inconsistent  with  your  profession.  And  we  must  know  that  sins 
of  infirmity,  through  God's  mercy,  may  subsist  with  this  worthiness.  In  tliis 
acception  to  "eat  worthily"  is  tu  eat  so  fitted  and  prepared  as  may  bear  some 
resemblance  and  agreement  to  the  solemnity  of  the  work  we  go  about.  (3)  The 
worthiness  of  acceptance,  when  God  for  Christ's  sake  is  pleased  to  take  our  actions 
in  good  worth.  That  is  well  spoken  which  is  well  taken  ;  and  that  nmn  is  worthy 
who  by  God  is  accepted  so  to  be  (Rev.  iii.  4).  2.  Two  sorts  of  f)e(>ple,  then,  do  eat 
and  drink  unworthily.  (l)_The  unregenerate  who  (Heb.  vi.  1)  have  not  as  yet 
"laid  the  foundation  of  repentance  from  dead  works  and  faith."  Without  this 
foundation,  the  fair  side-walls  of  a  good  nature,  and  the  proud  roof  of  all  moral 
performances,  will  both  totter  and  tumble  to  the  ground.  (2)  The  regenerate,  but 
guilty  of  some  sins  unrepented  of,  who  eat  unworthily  till  they  have  sued  out  a 
special  pardon  out  of  the  court  of  heaven.  II.  The  sinfulness  ok  the  sin. 
"  Shall  be  guilty  of  the  body  and  blood  of  the  Lord."  As  those  that  deface  the 
stamp  or  abuse  the  seal  of  a  king  are  traitois,  so  the  unworth.v  receivers  of  the^-e 
elements,  which  personate  and  represent  Christ's  body,  sin  against  the  body  of 
Christ  itself.  Christ's  person  is  out  of  the  reach  of  your  cruelty ;  as  for  His 
picture,  it  is  with  us  in  the  sacraments ;  and  unworthy  receivers  show  to  the 
shadow  what  they  would  do  to  the  substance  if  it  were  in  their  power.  Conclusion  : 
Men  generally  hate  Pilate  and  Judas,  being  more  angry  with  them  than  David  with 
the  rich  man  that  took  away  the  poor  man's  ewe  lamb;  whereas  in  some  sense  it 
may  be  said  of  many  of  us,  "Thou  art  the  man."  Yet,  as  for  those  which 
hitherto  have  not  taken  notice  of  the  heinousness  of  this  sin,  let  me  say  to  ti  em 
what  St.  Peter  doth  (Acts  iii.  17).  And  let  us  all  pray  with  David  (Psa.  li.  14). 
{T.  Fuller,  D.D.)  Worthy  and  unworthy  comnrnnicating  : — Perhaps  no  words  in 
all  the  Bible  have  given  so  much  distress  as  the-e,  ^et  they  need  not  have  t;iven 
any  distress  at  all.     The  sufferers  have  created  clouds  in  their  own  sky.     I  want  to 


122  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 


lift  the  cloud  and  to — I.  Eecall  the  circumstances  to  which  Paul  addeessed 
HIMSELF.  1.  In  connection  with  other  abuses  there  arose  a  peculiar  method  of 
celebrating  the  Lord's  Supper.  As  it  was  orighially  instituted  after  a  common  meal 
with  Christ  and  His  disciples,  people  at  Corinth  said,  "  We  must  have  a  meal  first." 
In  conducting  that  the  rich  brought  their  viands  and  their  rich  wines,  the  poor 
what  they  could  ;  and  this  love  feast  became  a  revel.  The  rich  man  held  up  his 
viands  and  mocked  the  poor  man,  and  the  poor  looked  with  hungry  eyes  upon  the 
rich  man's  banquet;  and  after  they  had  been  thus  infuriated  alike  by  passion  and 
by  drink,  they  jDroceeded  to  add  to  their  intoxication  by  the  very  wine  that  was 
meant  to  symliolise  the  sacrificial  blood.  Now  you  see  the  exact  purport  of  the 
apostle's  words.  He  says,  "  Have  ye  not  houses  to  eat  and  drink  in  ?  "  &c.  Take 
care,  this  is  not  for  gluttons  and  drunkards.  You  do  not  come  to  it  in  a  right 
spirit,  you  misconceive  its  meaning,  and  if  you  do  not  take  it  worthily  you  eat  and 
diink  damnation  to  your  soul."  2.  Now  there  is  no  church  in  England  in  which 
this  practice  is  indulged.  Your  mistake  has  been  in  applying  the  word  "  worthily" 
to  yourself  instead  of  to  the  Supper.  You  must  take  it  in  a  manner  worthy  of  it, 
quietly,  reverently,  self-distrustmgly,  casting  yourself  with  your  sin  upon  the  heart 
of  the  Saviour.  That  is  to  take  the  Lord's  Supper  worthily.  How  can  I  speak  in 
terms  strong  enough  against  the  rubbish  about  people  making  themselves  fit  to 
come  to  the  Lord's  Supper?  Shame  on  the  Pharisaism  that  gets  itself  ready  to 
come,  and  blessings  on  the  penitence  that  comes  all  tears  and  jearnings  and  self- 
distress,  and  says,  "  Other  refuge  have  I  none,  hangs  my  helpless  soul  on  Thee." 
Unfitness  may  arise  from  two  opposite  points  :  the  m^n  who  thrusts  forth  a  drunken 
hand  to  take  this  cup,  and  the  man  who  takes  it  with  a  hand  soaped  and  dried  in 
the  tub  of  his  own  morality.  Tiiese  two  hands  thrust  a  sharp  cold  arrow  into  the 
Lord's  heart.  I  will  presently  sit  there  and  say,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me,  a  sinner." 
II.  What  is  the  true  and  peoper  idea,  then,  of  the  Lord's  Supper  ?  1.  It  is 
a  memorial.  (1)  Christ  did  not  say,  "  This  do  because  ye  are  angels  amongst 
men,"  but  "This  do  in  remembrance  of  Me."  Is  He  worth  remembering?  He 
took  just  what  was  going  on,  and  made  it  sacred  by  His  touch  and  blessing.  He 
did  not  go  to  far  countries  and  bring  rich  luxuries  which  only  wealth  could  supply. 
He  never  said  anything  about  morally  trimming  ourselves  up  for  the  purpose  of 
being  fit  for  it.  All  the  fitness  He  requires  is  to  feel  our  need  of  Him.  (2)  Now, 
why  should  any  of  us  go  away  from  this  sacred  opportunity?  Take  the  children 
away?  Take  the  poor,  broken-henrted  sinner  away?  Take  away  the  poor  soul 
that  loves  Christ,  but  knows  nothing  about  theological  metaphysics  ?  God  forbid. 
Take  away  the  man  who  thinks  he  is  tit  to  sit  here,  the  man  who  thinks  he  is  con- 
ferring patronage  upon  the  table.  (3)  Then  is  this  feast  to  be  taken  without  any 
self-examination?  I  think  not.  There  must  be  self-examination,  but  beware,  if 
you  please,  of  vivisection.  A  man  may  lacerate  himself,  and  he  will  find  no  worthi- 
ness in  his  own  nature.  I  examine  myself  to  find  whether  I  am  really  penitent. 
2.  Being  an  act  of  memorial  it  is  an  act  of  love.  Make  a  ceremony  of  it,  and  all  the 
pathos  is  gone,  all  the  deep,  holy  significance  evaporates.  3.  It  is  also  an  act  of 
happy  prospects.  It  goes  back  to  the  past,  and  it  sets  forth  the  Lord's  death  till 
He  come.  III.  Many  endeavour  to  persuade  us  that  the  word  "  damnation  "^ 
ought  to  be  softened  into  condemnation.  Let  the  word  stand ;  only  apply  it 
proi^eiiy.  If  we  had  been  spending  the  last  hour  in  eating  and  drinkmg,  in 
gluttony  and  wine-bibbing,  the  word  "damnation"  would  itself  be  too  gentle  a 
word  to  apply  to  our  case.  (J.  Parher,  D.D.)  Desecration  of  the  LonVs  Supper  : 
— The  man  who  tramples  on  the  flag  of  his  country,  insults  his  country  ;  and  he 
who  treats  with  indignity  the  representative  of  a  sovereign,  thereby  offends  the 
sovereign  himself.  In  like  manner,  he  who  treats  the  symbols  of  Christ's  body 
and  blood  irreverently  is  guilty  of  irreverence  towards  Christ.  (C.  Hodge,  D.D.) 
Hie  innvortJnj  receiving  of  the  Lord's  Supper  : — I.  What  unworthy  receiving  is.  1. 
Something  negatively.  (1)  Unworthy  receiving  is  not  proper  only  to  a  man  in  a 
natural  state.  The  apo'-tle  chargeth  here  unworthy  receiving,  not  only  upon  the 
professing,  but  the  regenerate  Corinthians.  (2)  Unworthy  receiving  is  not  to  be 
measured  by  our  sensible  joy  or  comfort  after  receiving.  Two  men  that  have  perfect 
health,  have  not  equal  stomachs,  nor  equal  appetites,  and  consequently  not  the 
same  joy  in  their  meals,  yet  both  in  health.  We  should  more  consider  how  graces 
are  acted,  than  how  comforts  are  dispensed.  God's  dispensations  are  not  equal  to 
all ;  some  have  no  tastes,  others  full  draughts ;  so  we  may  have  more  joy  than 
strength,  others  more  strength  than  joy.  But — 2.  Positively  that  is  an  unworthy 
receiving.     (1)  When  evil  dispositions  and  beloved  sins  are  not  laid  aside  and  for- 


CHAP.  XI.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  123 

saken.  (2)  When,  though  beloved  sins  are  discarded,  yet  there  is  not  a  due  pre- 
paration suitable  to  the  quality  of  the  institution.  (3)  It  is  an  unworthy  receiving 
•when  we  rest  only  in  the  ordinance,  expecting  froxn  the  work  done  what  we  should 
expect  only  from  Christ  in  it.  When  we  content  ourselves  with  Elijah's  mantle, 
•without  asking  for  the  God  of  Elijah.  (4)  When  thi^re  is  a  garishuess  and  loose- 
ness of  spirit  in  the  time  of  our  attendance.  Not  discerning  the  Lord's  body,  say 
some,  not  minding  the  Lord's  b"dy,  but  letting  the  thoughts  run  at  rovers,  which 
should  be  fixed  upon  Christ's  dying.  IL  The  sinfolness  of  this.  It  is  a  con- 
tracting the  guilt  of  the  body  and  blood  of  the  Lord.  He  that  doth  despite  to  the 
image  or  arms, of  a  prince,  would  do  the  same  to  his  person  were  it  as  much  in  his 
poMer.  1.  It  is  an  implicit  approbation  of  the  Jews' act  in  crucifying  Christ.  If 
■we  are  not  affected  with  that  state  of  Christ,  we  consent  to,  and  approve  of  that  act 
of  His  crueifiers  ;  not  positively,  but  privatively ;  not  having  that  temi:)er  and  affec- 
tion of  spirit  which  such  an  action  duth  call  for  from  us.  They  were  the  authors 
of  the  first  crime,  and  an  unworthy  receiver  the  abettor.  2.  It  exceeds  the  sin  of 
•the  Jews  in  some  circumstances,  as  well  as  that  exceeded  this  in  others.  That  was 
against  His  person,  this  against  His  propitiation.  3.  In  regard  of  the  relation  the 
ordinance  hath  to  Christ.  There  is  an  analogy  between  the  bread  and  the  wine, 
and  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ.  The  nearer  relation  anything  hath  to  God,  the 
more  heinous  is  the  offence.  It  disparageth  the  whole  covenant  of  grace.  How 
base  a  disposition  is  it  to  sit  down  at  the  table  of  a  man  with  an  hostile  mind 
agHinst  him,  to  stab  the  master  of  the  feast  at  his  own  table  while  he  is  treating 
and  entertaining  us  with  dainties  !  4.  It  is  a  great  sin,  as  it  is  against  the  greatest 
testimony  of  His  love.  III.  The  danger  of  this  sin  :  he  eats  and  drinks  damnation 
to  himself.  That  which  is  not  melted  by  the  sun  grows  into  a  greater  hardness. 
Christ,  as  a  sacrifice  on  the  Cross,  was  pleasing  to  God ;  as  the  murdered  Innocent 
a  burden  of  guilt  on  the  Jews :  so  as  He  is  grateful  food  in  the  sacrament  to  a 
worthy  receiver.  He  is  the  bane  of  an  unworthy  communicant,  by  reason  of  his 
unholiness.  IV.  The  use.  1.  The  manner  of  duties  must  be  regar<led  as  well  as 
the  matter.  The  matter  of  this  ordinance  is  participated  by  both  the  worthy  and 
the  unworthy  receiver:  the  manner  makes  the  difference.  2.  The  holiness  of 
an  ordina:ice  will  not  excuse  a  miscarriage  in  it.  Some  are  nouiisiied  by  this 
ordinance,  others  jiollute  themselves.  The  fruit  is  not  according  to  the  holiness  of 
the  ordinance,  but  the  disposition  of  the  receiver.  3.  The  sins  of  those  that  draw 
nearest  to  God  are  the  blackest.  4.  The  ground  of  our  mischief  is  always  in  our- 
selves. It  is  not  from  the  emptiness  of  the  ordiniince,  that  is  a  full  cistern;  nor 
from  the  shortness  of  God's  grace.  He  is  an  overflowing  fou!itain  ;  but  from  want 
of  those  graces,  or  of  exercising  those  Kvaces  which  are  the  bucket  to  draw,  and 
the  mouth  to  drink.  5.  We  see  here  the  base  nature  of  sin.  It  changeth  the 
brightest  ordinances,  makes  the  waters  of  the  sanctuary  bitter,  turns  food  into 
poison,  and  a  cup  of  salvation  into  one  of  damnation.  6.  If  an  unworthy  receiver 
be  guilt,y  of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  a  worthy  receiver  hath  a  sjiecial  interest 
in  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ.  He  hath  as  much  advantage  thereby  as  the 
other  hath  guilt.  7.  Should  not  all  of  us,  that  have  at  any  time  of  our  lives  been 
partakers  of  this  ordinance,  reflect  upon  ourselves,  yea  the  best  of  us?  8.  How 
then  should  we  take  heed,  whenever  we  approach  to  the  Lord's  table,  of  any 
unworthy  demeanour  towards  Him,  whereby  to  contract  such  guilt,  and  incur  such 
displeasure?     [Bp.  Ilaclict.) 

Ver.  28.  But  let  a  man  examine  himself — Self-examination  : — I.  Its  necessity. 
1.  At  all  times.  2.  Especially  when  we  draw  near  unto  God.  3.  Most  of  all 
before  communion.  II.  Its  exercise.  Should  be — 1.  Particular,  including  a 
review  of  our  state,  need,  sins,  temptations,  &e.  2.  Faithful,  according  to  the 
Word  of  God  and  the  light  of  His  Spirit.  3.  Frequent.  4.  Earnest,  with  a 
sincere  desire  and  purpose  of  amendment.  III.  Its  advantages.  1.  Security 
from  sin.  2.  Confidence  before  God.  3.  Freedom  from  condemnation.  (J.  Lyth, 
D.D.)  Sdf-e.vaiiiination  : — The  Lord's  Supper  a  sacrament.     Eoman  oath  of 

soldier.  At  communion  soldiers  are  at  headquarters  to  report,  be  inspected,  and 
receive  fresh  orders.  Each  should  ask — I.  Have  I  a  bight  to  be  here  ?  Am  I 
enlisted?  II.  Have  I  the  qualiiies  of  a  soldier?  1.  Am  I  obedient?  2.  Is 
my  oiiedience — (1)  Unselfish?  (2)  Unciuestioning  ?  (3)  Prompt?  (4)  Entire? 
(5)  Cheerful?  3.  Am  I  reliable?  Wesley  said  that  with  three  hundred  reliable 
christians  he  could  shake  the  gates  of  hell  and  set  God  up  in  the  woild.  Have- 
lock's  "  saints "  ■n'ere  known  to  be  always  ready.  4.  Am  I  watchful  ?  Our 
enemy  is  able,  crafty,  without  honour.     5.  Have  I  proper  discipline  ?     6.  Am  I 


124  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xr. 

diligent  in  knowing  and  doing  my  duty?  III.  As  a  soldier,  what  have  I  done? 
1.  Have  I  conquered  myself?  2.  Do  I  show  signs  of  conflict  and  victory — the 
fruits  of  the  Spirit?  3.  Have  I  any  captives  for  my  Captain ?  IV.  What  do  I 
WANT  AT  the  TABLE  ?  1.  To  eat  and  drink  simply  to  get  spiritually  fat  ? 
Soldiers  need  sinew  and  muscle,  not  adipose  tissue.  2.  To  appear  well  before 
men?  They  judge  our  lives,  not  our  professions.  3.  To  get  inspiration  for 
better  service  ?  4.  To  get  strength,  so  as  to  continue  faithful  to  the  end  ?  V. 
We  must  be  our  own  examiners.  1.  The  world  or  our  brethren  cannot  see  our 
hearts.  2.  God  does  not  judge  us  here.  He  gives  means  and  tests.  3.  God 
will  not  even  examine  us  at  last.  Our  own  open  hearts  will  be  our  judges. 
{Homiletic  Montlilij.)  Self-examination  ; — This  advice  is  not  peculiar  to  Cliristi- 
anity.  It  is  an  axiom  which  forms  the  groundwork  of  all  social  well-being. 
The  words  "  Know  thyself  "  were  sculptured  on  all  the  noblest  public  buildings  of 
Greece.  Self-knowledge  lies  at  the  root  of  all  true  wisdom,  and  is  the  ground- 
work of  religion.  Until  we  know  our  sin,  we  shall  not  seek  for  forgiveness  ; 
until  we  know  our  weakness,  we  shall  not  crave  for  strength.  A  mau's  worldly 
affairs  would  soon  plunge  him  in  ruin  if  he  did  not  exercise  needful  supervision, 
and  our  spiritual  affairs  will  bring  us  far  worse  ruin  if  we  do  not  give  them 
requisite  attention.  Consider — I.  The  duty  enjoined.  1.  To  examine  does  not 
mean  a  mere  parsing  glance,  but  a  thorough  searching.  2.  Let  a  man  examine 
himself.  There  is  a  universal  spirit  of  curiosity,  and,  generally  speaking,  it  is  an 
agreeable  business  to  enter  into  the  concerns  of  others!.  But  when  it  comes  to 
self,  it  is  irksome,  for  it  is  very  painful  to  a  man's  vanity.  He  would  like  to  feel 
rather  better  than  other  men.  But  if  he  dives  down  into  his  own  inner  nature, 
the  result  is  a  most  humiliating  disappointment.  And  so  we  would,  lilvc  the 
ostriches  who  hide  their  heads  in  the  sand,  and  thereby  think  that  they  are 
screening  their  whole  bodies,  rather  not  know  the  truth,  because  we  justly 
surmise  that  that  truth  is  unpalatable.  II.  The  subjects  of  inquiry.  1.  Our 
position  as  regards  God — whether  we  are  pardoned  and  reconciled.  Our  own 
hearts  will  give  us  the  answer  in  a  moment  if  once  we  ask  the  question.  2.  The 
course  of  our  daily  conduct.  Do  we  carry  out  into  practice  the  faith  we  profess, 
and  the  love  which  ought  to  be  our  ruling  principle?  III.  The  method  op 
CARRYING  OUT  THE  ACTION.  There  must  be — 1.  Frequency  and  regularity.  The 
act  must  not  be  an  isolated  one,  performed  occasionally,  once  a  year  or  once  a 
■week — it  must  be  the  constant  effort  of  our  souls.  2.  Prayerfulness.  Of  our  own 
selves,  we  can  never  hope  to  be  impartial,  or  persevering,  or  true.  And  we  shall 
find  out  more  and  more  every  day  how  much  depends  upon  Divine  grace.  (JV.  H. 
Davison.)  Self-e.xamination  : — These  words  show  how  we  should  be  prepared 

for  a  worthy  receiving  the  blessed  sacrament.  Wherefore  examine — I.  Youk 
KNOWLEDGE  (vcT.  29).  We  are  to  know — 1.  The  Author :  Christ,  who  was  Author 
(ver.  23) — (1)  Not  as  God;  (2)  Nor  as  man;  (3)  But  as  God-man,  and  Hend  of 
the  Church.  2.  The  institution  (vers.  23-25).  Where  observe— (1)  What  Christ 
did.  (2)  What  He  said.  3.  The  nature.  (1)  It  is  a  sacrament,  (2)  Wherein, 
under  the  outward  signs  of  bread  and  wine,  (3)  Christ  is  signified  to  us  (ver.  30). 
4.  The  end.  (1)  To  remember  Christ's  death  (vers.  24-26).  (2)  To  represent  it. 
"  This  is  My  body."  (3)  To  offer  it  (Matt.  xi.  28  ;  Isa.  Iv.  1).  (4)  To  convey  it, 
(5)  To  seal  it  (Rom.  iv.  11).  5.  The  uses.  (1)  Examine  whether  ye  know  these 
things.  (2)  Endeavour  to  know  them  more  and  more  (2  Pet.  iii.  18).  (3) 
Improve  your  knowledge  to  practice.  II.  Your  repentance.  1.  Wlierein  doth 
repentance  consist  ?  (1)  In  conviction  of  our  sins  (John  xvi.  8,  9).  {a)  Of  original 
sin  (Psa.  li.  5).  [b)  Actual  (Psa.  li.  3,  4).  (c)  Habitual  (Eom.  vii.  24).  (2)  Con- 
trition for  them,  (a)  Because  they  transgress  so  righteous  a  law  (1  John  iii.  4), 
(h)  Displease  so  gracious  a  Father  (Isa.  vi.  5).  (c)  Defile  so  precious  a  soul  (Titus 
L  15;  Isa.  i.  G).  {d)  Deprive  us  of  so  great  happiness  and  blessing  (Isa.  lix.  2). 
(e)  As  makes  us  obnoxious  to  eternal  miseries  (2  Thess.  i.  8,  9).  (3)  Conversion 
from  them  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  11).  [a]  Sincere  (Joel  ii.  13).  (&)  Universal  (Ezek. 
xviii.  31).  (c)  Constant.  2.  What  nece-sity  of  repentance  in  the  receiving  of  the 
■sacrament?  (1)  No  repentance,  no  faith  (Mark  i.  15).  (2)  Clirist  is  there  offered 
only  to  the  penitent  (Matt.  xi.  28).  (3)  By  repentance  our  hearts  are  piepared  to 
receive  Him  there  offered.  3.  Uses.  (1)  Examine  whether  you  have  repented. 
{a)  Are  you  sorry  for  your  sins?  (Psa.  xxxviii.  18).  {b)  Are  you  out  of  love  with 
them?  (c)  Are  you  resolved  to  forsake  them?  (Psa.  xvii.  3;  xxxix.  1).  (2) 
Repent.  Without  repentance— (a)  No  pardon  (Ezek.  xviii.  21,  22).  (b)  No  peace 
(Isa.  xlviii.  22).     (c)  No  duty  accepted  (Prov.  xv.  8).     {d)  You  must  perish  (Luke 


CHAP.  XI.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  125 

xiii.  3).  III.  Your  faith.  1.  By  the  grounds  of  it :  the  testimouy  of  God.  2. 
By  the  effects  of  it,  as— (1)  Love  to  God.  (2)  Ihankfnloess  for  Christ.  (3) 
Humility  in  ourselves.  (4)  Conipsission  for  the  poor.  (6)  Charity  to  all.  3. 
Reasons.  Without  faith  we  cannot — (1)  Discern  the  Lord's  body  (ver,  29). 
(2)  Eeceive  anything.  (3)  Improve  what  we  receive.  (Bji.  BevrriiUje.)  Self- 
examination  is — I.  A  DUTY  FOR  ALL  TIMES.  1.  Examination  is  a  duty  of  no  quick 
dispatch  ;  for  it  is  to  take  a  strict  survey  of  all  the  passages  of  our  life  ;  to  follow 
our  thoughts,  which  have  wings,  and  fly  in  and  fly  out ;  to  number  our  actions, 
and  weigh  them  all  in  the  balance  of  the  sanctuary ;  to  anatomise  our  hearts, 
which  are  "deceitful  above  all  things"  (Jer.  xvii.  9);  to  follow  sin  in  all  i.s 
labyrinths,  to  drive  it  out  of  the  thicket  of  excuses,  and  by  the  light  of  Scripture 
to  take  a  full  view  of  ourselves.  2.  The  right  performance  of  this  duty  requires 
great  care  and  diligence,  because  we  are  our  own  greatest  enemies,  our  own 
deceivers,  parasites,  and  murderers.  3.  Examination  must  not  end  in  itself ;  but 
we  must  propo>e  the  true  end,  and  draw  all  up  to  it ;  which  is,  to  purge  the 
conscience,  to  supply  what  is  defective,  to  repair  what  is  defaced,  to  beautify  Avhat 
is  slurred,  to  complete  what  is  imperfect ;  which  is,  to  n^new  ourselves  in  the 
inward  man.  Therefore  what  is  here  to  "  examine,"  is  in  ver.  31  to  "judge,"  our- 
selves. Eor  what  a  vain  work  were  it  to  examine  a  thief,  if  we  do  not  judge 
him !  We  must  try  and  examine  our  actions  as  the  Levites  did  their  sacrifices, 
and  not  offer  them  up  if  there  be  any  blemish  on  them  ;  that  so  we  may  "  prove 
to  ourselves  what  is  that  good,  and  acceptable,  and  perfect  will  of  God"  (Eom. 
xii.  2).  Examination  is  but  lost  labour  without  amendment.  A  survey  is  the 
extremity  of  folly,  if  I  see  the  faults  in  my  spiritual  building,  and  then  let  it  fall 
to  the  ground.  II.  A  udty  especially  when  we  approach  the  Lord's  table. 
Here  thou  dost  as  it  were  renew  thy  covenant,  and  here  thou  must  renew  thy 
examination.  1.  Examine  your  repentancp,  therefore,  whether  it  be  true  and 
unfeigned,  whether  it  be  moved  and  earned  on  by  a  true  spring — hatred  of  sin  and 
love  of  Christ :  whether  it  be  constant  and  universal.  2.  "  Examine  yourselves 
whether  you  be  in  the  faith  "  or  no  ;  "  prove  yourselves,  whether  Christ  be  in 
you"  (2  Cor.  xiii.  5).  Faith  is  the  salt  which  seasoneth  all  our  actions:  nor 
will  Christ  admit  us  to  His  table  without  it,  nor  give  Himself  to  those  who  do 
not  believe  in  Him.  Faith  is  the  mouth  of  the  soul,  and  with  it  we  receive 
Christ.  The  faith,  too,  must  be  one  which  worketh  by  love,  and  that  both 
towards  God  and  towards  our  brethren.  For  these  two  are  inseparable,  and 
bear  witness  one  to  the  other :  my  faith  begetteth  my  charity,  and  my  charity 
publisheth  and  declareth  my  faith.  Let  them  therefore  both  meet  and  be 
united  in  our  trial  and  preparation  to  this  sacrament,  which  is  a  sacrament  of 
union,  not  only  of  the  Head  with  the  members,  but  of  the  members  one  with 
another  under  one  Head.  3.  Let  us  "  examine  "  ourselves,  and  "  consider  "  Him 
that  inviteth  us  (Heb.  iii.  1).  "  Consider  "  Him — (1)  As  our  High  Priest.  (2) 
As  our  Teacher.  (3)  As  our  King  and  Lord.  Who  hath  most  command  over 
thee,   the  prince  of   this  world,   or  this   King  ?      {A.  Farindon,   B.D.)  Self- 

examination  : — Some  make  this  to  be  a  bare  permission,  that  if  they  will  they  may 
do  it ;  others,  a  counst!^  that  they  should  do  it  ;  others,  a  command  that  we 
must  do  it,  which  is  the  truest.  I.  The  necessity  of  self-examination.  The 
reasons  are  taken — 1.  From  the  majesty  of  Him  whose  presence  we  approach. 
What  prodigious  state  did  Ahasuerus,  an  earthly  prince,  stand  upon  !  (Esther 
ii.  12).  "Behold,  a  greater  than"  Ahasuerus  "is  here."  2.  From  the  great 
profit  which  we  receive  thereby,  if  we  come  prepared.  3.  From  the  grievousuess 
of  the  ijunishments,  if  we  are  unworthy  receivers.  The  sacrament  is  not  like  to 
those  receipts  which,  if  they  do  no  good,  do  no  harm.  If  it  brings  not  profit 
and  spiritual  grace,  it  draws  great  punishments  on  us.  II.  Its  natdre.  1.  A 
Christian's  eyes  ought  to  be  turned  inward,  chiefly  on  himself :  yet  how  many 
are  there  wtiose  home  is  to  be  always  abroad!  They  say  not  with  the  soldiers, 
"What  shall  we  do?"  (Luke  iii.  14);  but  with  Peter,  "What  shall  this  man 
do  ? "  (John  xxi.  21).  Yet  a  man's  examining  of  himself  excludes  not  his 
examination  of  those  who  are  committed  to  his  care,  as  pastors  their  flock  and 
fathers  their  children.  2.  In  examining  of  the  word,  learned  men  run  in  three 
several  streams.  Some  prosecute  the  metaphor  of  a  goldsmith,  searching  the 
purity  of  his  gold  (1  Pet.  i.  7).  Others,  because  bread  and  wine  to  be  taken  in 
the  sacrament  are  both  food  and  physic,  insist  on  the  similitude  of  a  physician, 
giving  preparatives  to  his  patient  before  he  receives  the  physic.  A  third  sort 
make  "  examine  "  here  to  be  as  magistrates  question  offenders.     We  will  follow 


126  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

the  latter.  1.  A  man,  in  examining  himself,  must  personate  three,  and  act  three 
several  parts — the  part  of  tlje  ol'feuder,  of  the  accuser,  of  the  judge.  The  part  of 
the  accuser  may  be  well  performed  by  "  conscience  "  ;  for,  besides  her  oflfice  to  be 
the  register  and  recorder  of  the  soul,  it  is  also  the  attorney-general  of  the  King 
of  heaven  in  our  hearts,  to  press  the  evidence  against  us  after  the  indictment. 
As  for  our  reason  and  judgment,  that  must  supply  the  office  of  a  judge,  acquit  or 
condemn  us.  2.  But  here,  it  is  to  be  feared,  men  will  be  partial  to  themselves 
in  two  respects.  (1)  In  nut  giving  their  conscience  fair  play  ;  what  in  whole  they 
cannot  silence  they  will  in  part  iuteirupt.  (2)  It  is  to  be  feared  our  judgment 
will  not  be  upright,  but  partial  and  favourable  to  us.  Wherefore  this  is  a  sound 
and  safe  rule  :  let  us  account  ourselves  to  be  worse  than  upon  examination  we 
find  ourselves  to  be  (chap.  iv.  4).  3.  Seeing,  then,  that  a  man  is  to  act  thiee 
parts,  we  may  observe  that  a  Christian,  though  alone,  may  niHke  conifiany  for 
himself  (Psa.  iv.  4  ;  xliii.  5).  Had  men  tlie  art  <if  these  self-exaudnations  and 
soliloquies,  they  need  not,  to  put  awMy  melanc'noly  and  to  avoid  solitariness, 
repair  to  the  schools  of  drunkenness,  there  to  seek  for  bad  comiDany,  tiiat  there 
they  may  drive  awny  the  time.  III.  The  interrogatories,  wherei'pon  every 
MAN  IS  to  be  examined,  are  these.  1.  Whether  thou  dost  repair  to  receive  the 
sacrament  with  a  competent  measure  of  knowledge?  2.  Whethf-r  dost  thou  come 
with  unfeigned  repentance  for  thy  sins  past '?  3.  Whether  dost  thou  come  with  a 
lively  faith,  relying  upon  God  in  Christ  for  the  pardon  of  thy  sins  ?  4.  Whether 
dost  thou  come  with  love  undissembled,  freely  from  thy  heart  to  forgive  all 
injuries  committed  against  thee  ?  5.  Whether  dost  thou  come  with  an  earnest 
desire  and  longing  to  be  made  partaker  of  these  heavenly  mysteries  ?  6.  Whether 
dost  thou  come  with  thankfulness  to  the  God  of  heaveu  for  this  His  great 
blessing  ?      {T.    Fuller,    D.D.)  Questions    for    self-examination  : — The   three 

questions  which  the  Rev.  Philip  Henry  advised  pf-ople  to  put  to  themselves  in 
self-examination  before  the  sacrameut  were — "What  am  I?"  "  Wliat  have  I 
done?"  and  "What  do  I  want?"  SeJf-erandnation,  constant: — One   of   the 

holiest  of  the  Church's  saints,  St.  Bernard,  was  in  the  habit  of  constantly 
warning  himself  by  the  so]einn  query,  " Bernard'',  ad  quid  veniste?^' — "Bernard, 
for  what  purpose  art  thou  here  ?  "  Self-examination  could  assume  no  more 
searching  form.  (Archdeacon  h'arrar.)  The  duty  of  self-examination  : — I.  In 
GENERAL.  1.  It  is  mucli  neglected.  2.  Exceedingly  necessary.  3.  Highly  bene- 
ficial. II.  In  PARTICULAR.  Before  the  Lord's  Supper  it  is  requisite — 1.  To  keep 
us  from  sin.  2.  To  secure  it  unspeakabe  benefits.  III.  Piespf.cts  especially — 1. 
Our  view  of  the  ordinance.  2.  The  staie  of  our  souls.  3.  The  immtdiate  frame 
and   disposition  of    our   minds.       {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Examination   before   com- 

munion:— 1.  The  Lord's  Supper  is  not  for  all  men,  but  only  for  those  who  are  able 
spiritually  to  discern  the  Lord's  body.  2.  It  is  not  meant  for  the  conversion  of 
sinners,  but  for  the  edification  of  dis^-iples.  3.  Hence  the  need  of  examination, 
lest  we  intrude  ourselves  where  we  have  no  right  to  be.  I.  The  objicct  of  the 
EXAMINATION.  1.  That  the  communicant  may  eat  and  drink.  "  So  let  him  eat." 
He  is  not  to  examine  in  order  to  justify  his  btoppng  away.  2.  That  he  may  know 
that  the  responsibility  rests  with  himsi  If.  The  examination  is  not  by  priest  or 
minister  :  he  examines  himself.  3.  That  he  may  communicate  solemn'y,  and  not 
as  a  matter  of  course.  He  is  to  make  heart-searching  inquiry,  and  so  afiproach 
the  table  with  snlf-humiliation.  4.  That  hn  may  come  to  the  taiile  intelligently, 
knowing  to  what  he  comes,  and  why,  and  wherefore.  5.  That  he  may  do  so  with 
confidence  and  joy.  After  examination  he  will  know  his  right  to  come,  and  feel 
at  ease.  Many  good  results  would  follow  if  this  examination  were  universally 
practised.  The  examination  should  be  as  frequent  as  the  eating  of  the  bread. 
No  mnn  has  reached  a  point  at  which  he  is  beycmd  the  n^^ed  of  further  self- 
searching.  II.  The  matter  op  the  examination.  Points  of  examination  may  be 
sufjgested  by  the  following  thoughts  :  1.  It  is  a  feast.  (1)  Have  I  life?  The  dead 
sit  not  at  bau'iuets.  (2)  Have  I  appetiie?  Else  ho iV  can  I  eat  ?  (3)  Have  I  a 
friendship  toward  the  Lord  who  is  the  Host?  (4)  Have  I  put  on  th  ■  wedding 
garment?  2.  Jesns  bids  us  sh^w  forth  His  death.  (1)  Have  I  faith  in  His  death? 
(2)  Do  I  live  by  His  death?  3.  Jesus  bids  us  do  this  by  eating  bread.  (1)  Is 
this  eating  a  symbol  of  a  fact,  or  is  it  a  meie  in.)ckery?  (2)  Is  Jesus  really  and 
truly  the  food  of  my  soul?  4.  Jesus  bids  each  believer  do  this  in  union  with 
oth  rs.  (1)  Am  I  truly  one  of  His  people,  and  one  "ith  them?  (2)  Am  I 
dwelling  in  love  with  them  all?  5.  I  his  cup  is  the  New  Covenant  in  Christ's 
blood.      (1)  Am  I  in  covenant  with  God  in  Christ  Jesus?      (2)  Do  I  rest  in  that 


CHAP.  XI.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  127 

covenant  for  all  my  hopes  ?  6.  Jesus  calls  His  people  to  remember  Him  in  this 
Supper.  (1)  Can  1  remember  Christ  ?  Or  am  I  attempting  a  vain  thing  ?  (2) 
Do  I  know  Him  ?  How  else  can  I  remember  Him  ?  (3)  Are  my  past  dealings 
with  Him  such  as  I  wish  to  remember  ?  (4)  Is  He  so  loved  by  me  that  I  wish  to 
bear  Him  in  my  memory?  Our  profession,  experience,  conduct,  hopes,  and 
designs  should  all  pass  the  test  of  this  self-examination.  IH.  Tue  duty  after 
EXAMINATION.  1.  To  eat  of  the  bread.  Not  to  neglect  communion,  or  postpone 
it,  or  to  go  away  trembling  from  the  table  ;  but  to  partake  reverently.  2.  To  drink 
of  the  cup.  This  is  specially  commanded.  3.  To  eat  and  drink  so  as  to  discern  the 
Lord's  body.  Having  the  mind  awake  to  see  Jesus  symbolised  in  this  ordinance. 
4.  To  give  thanks  uuto  the  Lord  for  so  great  a  privilege.  Twice  did  our  Lord  give 
thanks  during  the  Supper,  and  at  the  close  He  sang.  It  is  not  a  funeral,  but  a  festival. 
Conckision  :  1.  Ye  who  have  come  to  this  table  heedlessly,  repent  of  your  wicked 
intrusion,  and  keep  away  till  ye  can  come  aright.  2.  Ye  who  have  never  come  at 
all,  remember,  if  you  are  not  fit  for  the  communion  below,  you  are  not  fit  for 
heaven  above.  3.  All  of  you,  bethink  yourselves  of  Jesus,  and  having  examined 
yourselves  to  your  humbling,  behold  Him  to  your  consolation.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Self-examination  in  reyard  to  the  holy  communion : — I.  What  notions  do  I  form 

OF   THE    holt   communion  ?      II.    In    WHAT    VIEWS    DO    I     INTEND     TO     CELEBRATE    THIS 

SOLEMN  ACT  ?  Are  these  views  adecjuate  to  the  nature  of  the  subject  and  its  design  ? 
Are  they  worthy  of  a  rational  worshipper  of  God,  of  a  well-taught  and  reflecting 
Christian  ?  What  is  it  properly  that  I  seek  in  the  observance  of  this  religious  rite 
and  exj^ect  from  it?  III.  Am  I  now  in  that  frame  op  mind  that  is  suited  to 
THE  celebration  OF  THIS  SOLEMN  ACT  ?  Am  I  really  actuated  by  Christian  senti- 
ments ?  Do  I  perceive,  do  I  feel  the  high  value  of  the  objects  the  memorial  whereof 
I  am  going  to  celebrate  ?  Are  they  often  present  to  my  mind  and  always  interesting 
to  my  heart?  (G.J.  Zollikofer.)  The  advantages  of  self-examination  : — Self- 
examination  is  advantageous,  as  it — I.  Gives  us  a  true  sense  of  our  condition. 
II.  Inclines  us  to  be  favourable  and  tender  in  our  censure  of  others.  III. 
Renders  us  cautious  lest  we  continue  to  offend.  No  man  would  make  him- 
self his  own  enemy  by  wilfully  committing  sin,  were  he  fully  aware,  at  the  time,  of 
the  sentence  of  condemnation  which  he  must  afterwards  p^iss  on  himself.  IV. 
Prevents  us  from  entertaining  vain  confidence  and  presumption.  (J.  Willinm- 
son.)  The  qualifications  required  in  communicants  : — 1.  Among  these  may  be 
reckoned  faith.  Faith  presupposes  knowledge.  "For  how  shall  men  believe  in 
Him  of  whom  they  have  not  heard  ?  "  It  also  implies  such  a  firm  persuasion  of 
religious  and  moral  obligation  as  produces  obedience  in  its  various  branches.  2. 
But  to  faith  communicants  must  add  humility.  3.  Reverence  is  another  requisite 
in  those  who  api^roach  the  holy  table.  The  want  of  a  serious  frame  of  mind  on 
such  an  occasion  would  belray  an  abandoned  character  and  a  corrupt  heart.  4. 
Farther,  repentance  is  required  in  all  who  show  forth  Christ's  death  in  the  sacra- 
ment of  His  Supper.  "  What,"  said  one  of  the  most  enlightened  philosophers  of 
antiquity,  "  what  must  the  gods  think  of  the  gifts  of  the  profane,  when  a  virtuous 
man  would  blush  to  receive  presents  from  a  villain?"  5.  Farther  still,  grateful 
affection  to  God  and  our  Redeemer  is  another  qualification  expected  in  every 
communicant.  6.  Finally,  it  is  required  of  them  who  would  partake  worthily 
of  the  Lord's  Supper,  that  they  examine  themselves  respecting  their  love  to 
mankind.  If  you  have  any  animosities,  now  dismiss  them  ;  exercise  mutual 
forgiveness,  and  let  former  quarrels  for  ever  cease.  (T.  Laurie,  D.D.) 
Examination  required  in  every  communicant : — First,  by  the  grievousness  of  the 
sin ;  such  a  person  makes  himself  guilty  of  the  body  and  blood  of  the  Lord,  as  we 
see  in  ver.  27.  Secondly,  by  the  doleful  consequence  that  follows  upon  it :  "  He 
eats  and  drinks  damnation  to  himself,"  as  we  see  in  ver.  29.  We  must  not  rush 
upon  the  sacrament.  There  must  somewhat  be  done  before  we  can  receive  it. 
"  Let  a  man  examine  himself,  and  so  let  him  eat  of  that  bread,  and  drink  of  that 
cup."  The  rcMSOus  of  this  are — First,  because  naturally  we  are  not  invited  guests, 
we  are  not  such  as  are  invited  to  the  Lord's  Supper;  we  are  children  of  wrath,  and 
as  long  as  we  are  in  such  an  estate,  we  cannot  come  aright  to  the  communion. 
First  we  must  prove  ourselves  invited  guests.  A  second  reason  is,  though  thou  be 
invited,  it  may  be  thou  art  not  disposed.  Thirdly,  suppose  we  were  both  invited 
and  disposed,  yet  this  is  not  enough  ;  this  is  a  solemn  ordinance  of  God,  and  an 
ordinary  disposition  will  not  serve  the  turn.  First,  the  matter  of  the  duty  com- 
manded; that  is  to  eat  of  that  bread,  and  drink  of  that  cup.  Secondly,  the 
manner  of  doing  the  duty;  not  only  to  eat  of  that  bread,  but  so  to  eat;  and  not 


128  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 


only  to  drink  of  that  cup,  but  so  to  drink.  Thirdly,  the  rule  of  direction  how  to 
come  in  a  right  manner  to  partake  of  it,  that  is,  by  examining  of  ourselves,  "  Let 
a  man  examine  himself,  and  so  let  him  eat  of  that  bread,  and  drink  of  that  cup." 
Fourthly  and  lastly,  the  benefit  following  that  direction.  Now  the  reasons  of  this 
are — First,  because  the  same  Lord  that  commands  the  matter,  commands  the 
manner  too.  The  Lord  will  have  His  service  well  done,  as  well  as  done.  Secondly, 
another  reason  is,  because  circumstance  overthrow  actions,  if  they  be  not  rightly 
and  duly  observed.  A  garment,  though  it  be  never  so  good,  if  the  tailor  handle  it 
not  well  it  is  marred  in  the  making,  if  he  bring  it  not  to  a  right  form,  and  make 
it  in  a  right  manner,  the  man  that  is  to  have  the  garment  is  disappointed.  So 
timber,  though  it  be  never  so  excellent,  thougli  it  be  all  oak,  or  elm,  or  whatsoever 
tree,  though  it  be  never  so  fit  for  building,  if  the  artificer  deal  not  well  in  handling 
it,  the  inhabitant  that  comes  there  may  curse  the  day  that  ever  he  came  there. 
So  it  is  in  all  the  ordinances  of  God  and  the  matters  of  religion,  we  must  not 
only  do  them  for  matter,  but  for  manner  too ;  for  that  either  makes  or  mars 
them.  Tl)irdly,  another  reason  is,  because  only  the  right  manner  of  doing  duties 
gets  the  blessing.  Why  do  we  do  the  duties  if  we  do  not  do  them  so  as  we  may 
get  the  blessing?  Now  except  we  observe  the  right  manner  of  doing  them,  all  is 
to  no  purpose.  Fourthly,  another  reason  is,  the  example  of  Jesus  Christ :  Christ 
hath  given  us  an  exnmple  that  we  should  do  as  He  did.  Now  He  did  not  only  do 
that  which  His  Father  bid  Him  do,  for  matter  but  for  manner,  both  in  all  the 
words  He  spake,  and  in  all  the  deeds  that  He  performed.  Fifthly  and  lastly, 
except  we  do  it  in  a  right  manner,  except  as  we  come  to  the  duty,  so  we  come  to 
the  right  manner,  we  can  never  glorify  God.  The  glory  of  God  lies  in  the  manner  of 
doing  of  things.  "  So  let  your  light  shine  before  men,  that  they  may  see  your  good 
works,  and  glorify  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven  "  (Matt.  v.  16).  Another  use  shall 
be,  what  may  be  the  reasons  why  people  are  so  willing  generally  to  do  duties  for  the 
matter,  and  care  not  to  do  them  in  a  right  manner.  It  shall  not  be  amiss  a  little  to 
show  the  mystery  of  this  thing.  The  first  is  this,  because  the  matter  of  the  duty 
is  easy,  but  tlie  manner  is  difficult.  Secondly,  another  reason  is  this,  because  the 
matter  of  duties  may  be  done  with  a  proud  heart ;  there  is  no  duty  but  a  man  may 
do  it  with  a  proud  heart,  and  never  be  humble.  Thirdly,  another  reason  is,  because 
the  matter  may  stand  with  an  unholy  life.  A  man  may  do  a  duty  for  the  matter 
of  it,  and  yet  be  unholy.  This  is  plain  ;  how  many  thousands  are  there  that  praj', 
and  yet  are  vain,  and  covetous,  and  carnal  !  The  last  reason  is,  because  the 
matter  of  duties  brings  not  the  cross  upon  a  man.  Thirdly,  if  we  ought  to  be 
careful  to  perform  duties  in  a  right  manner,  let  us  be  exhorted  in  the  fear  of  God 
to  go  and  quicken  all  our  duties,  to  bring  a  soul  into  so  many  bodies ;  we  have 
bodies  of  i^raying,  and  bodies  of  hearing,  and  bodies  of  receiving  the  sacrament, 
and  of  good  duties ;  let  us  get  a  soul  into  them,  labour  to  do  them  in  a  right 
manner.  The  bare  duty  is  like  a  carcass.  Let  us  consider,  first,  we  do  not  partake 
of  any  ordinance  at  all,  except  we  do  it  in  a  right  manner.  I  remember  a  fit  place 
for  this  in  Numb.  xi.  14.  It  is  said  there,  "  The  stranger  shall  eat  the  passover,  and 
partake  of  it  according  to  the  ordinance,  and  the  manner  of  it."  Where  the  text 
puts  in  the  ordinance  of  the  passover,  and  the  manner  of  it.  For  it  is  all  one. 
Secondly,  consider,  it  is  nothing  but  hypocrisy,  when  a  man  prays  and  doth  not 
pray  in  a  right  manner.  Thirdly,  consider,  it  makes  the  ordinance  of  God  of  no 
effect.  "Thus  they  make  the  commandments  of  God  of  none  effect  "  (Matt.  xv.  6). 
Lastly,  it  cannot  please  God,  it  is  only  the  right  manner  of  doing  duties  that  pleased 
God,  as  in  1  Thess.  iv.  1.  The  third  thing  is  the  rule  of  direction,  how  we  may 
come  to  the  right  manner  of  receiving  the  sacrament,  that  is,  by  preparing  of  a 
man's  self ;  and  the  preparation  is  here  set  down  by  the  specification  of  it,  namely, 
in  examining  himself,  "Let  a  man  examine  himself,  and  so  let  him  eat  of  that 
bread,  and  drink  of  that  cup."  The  general  scope  of  the  words,  and  the  apostle's 
meaning  in  them,  is  this,  that  "  Every  man  must  prepare  himself  before  he  come 
to  the  Lord's  table."  The  reasons  of  this  are — First,  because  the  sacrament  is  an 
ordinance  of  God.  Now  all  the  ordinances  of  God  require  preparation.  Nov/  man 
is  naturally  unprepared  for  it.  First,  a  man  must  fell  his  wood,  and  then  cut  it, 
and  hew  it  even,  and  carve  it,  and  plane  it  fit,  and  prepare  it,  before  he  build.  So  a 
man  must  hew  down  his  own  heart,  he  must  humble  his  own  soul,  and  qualify  all 
within  bim,  and  so  be  sanctified,  before  he  be  fit.  Secondly,  another  reason  is, 
because  the  Lord  Christ  hath  made  great  preparations  to  provide  the  Lord's 
Supper ;  therefore  we  must  be  prepared  to  eat  it.  You  know  what  a  great  deal 
ado  there  was  before  the  Supper  was  made.     Christ  must  be  incarnate,  and  fulfil 


CHAP,  xr.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  129 

all  righteousness.  Thirdly,  another  reason  is,  because  the  Lord  Christ,  when  He 
administers  Himself  in  this  heavenly  mystery,  He  offers  to  come  into  the  soul,  and 
He  looks  for  good  entertainment ;  and  therefore  of  necessity  there  must  be  prepara- 
tion for  it.  You  see  wlien  a  mortal  man,  an  earthly  prince,  or  a  nobleman  comes 
1o  another  man's  house,  what  a  deal  of  preparation  there  is  to  jjiovide  for  him  ! 
Lastly,  because  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper  is  a  pirt  of  Christ's  last  will 
and  teslament.  {IF.  Fenncr.)  Self-examination: — I.  Fur  the  i>uxy,  to  examine 
ourselves  ;  everything  is  valued  to  be  of  more  or  less  wortli,  8,ccording  to  the 
usefulness  and  litness  it  has  to  its  end,  peculiar  to  it,  as  it  is  such  or  such  a  thing. 
The  gf'oduess  of  a  house  does  not  consist  in  this,  that  it  has  a  beautiful  outside,  or 
splendid  ricli  furniture  within  ;  but  that  it  affurds  convenience  for  habitation,  to 
keej)  out  the  injuries  of  weather,  and  to  be  fitted  for  the  use  and  comforts  of 
life:  for  this  is  that  which  answers  the  true  proper  end  of  a  house.  That  is  a 
good  sliip,  that  is  a  good  sailer,  and  so  built  as  to  endure  storms,  and  live  in  a 
rough  sea,  and  perform  a  voyage  well ;  and  if  it  be  not  so,  though  it  should  have 
all  its  cordage  and  shrouds  of  silk,  and  be  all  iulaid  and  gilt,  that  would  not  be 
enough  to  make  it  deserve  that  name.  So  not  only  in  artiticial  things,  we  ourselves 
have  devised,  but  in  things  natural  too,  when  we  apply  them  to  our  use  we  judge 
of  their  worth  by  their  usefulness.  A  horse,  let  him  be  of  never  so  fine  a  shape, 
and  have  never  so  gaudy  trappings  on,  we  do  not  value  him  for  that ;  we  may  say 
he  is  a  fine  horse  indeed;  but  if  he  be  broken-winded,  if  he  be  also  a  heavy  goer, 
he  is  no  good  horse  for  all  his  finery,  as  beiug  unsuitable  to  that  use  we  design  a 
horse  for.  And  thus  is  it  to  be  in  our  making  an  estimate,  and  passing  a  judgment 
upon  ourselves.  He  alone  is  a  good  man  who  answers  that  end  for  which  man  was 
created.  And  what  is  tliat  ?  To  act,  and  think,  and  discourse,  and  behave  himself 
all  over  like  a  man,  according  to  tlie  rules  of  right  reason.  If  a  poor  heathen 
philosopher  were  alive  now  to  take  the  poll  of  men,  and  try  them  accorcUng  to  the 
bare  standard  of  natural  reason,  how  many  hundreds  of  men  would  he  tlirow  aside 
as  nulls  and  cyphers,  things  utterly  insigniOcant  to  those  names  they  are  called  by, 
for  one  that  might  pass  for  current  coin  ?  For  when  all  covetous,  ambitious, 
voluptuous,  vicious,  debauched  persons  are  cast  on  one  side,  and  all  idle,  formal, 
empiy,  slight,  ignorant,  pretending  people  put  on  the  otlier  side,  there  would  be 
very  few  left  in  the  middle  road  of  virtue,  very  few  tliat  might  fairly  challenge  the 
name  of  men.  But  then  we  have  a  further  pitch  to  fly  still,  a  more  severe  teht  to 
bring  ourselves  to  our  examination,  as  being  by  God's  special  favour  designed  for 
a  higher  end — to  have  communion  and  fellowship  with  Himself.  It  is  not  enough 
for  us  to  be  good  men,  but  we  must  be  good  Christians  too.  And  if  good  men  are 
so  scarce,  that  the  cynic  lighted  a  candle  at  noon,  and  carried  his  lantborn  about  to 
find  out  an  honest  man,  how  scarce  must  good  Christians  needs  be !  Come,  then, 
let  us  inquire  iuto  ourselves,  and  take  the  candle  of  the  Lord,  which  He  hath  set 
up  in  each  of  our  souls,  our  own  conscience  along  with  us,  to  help  us  to  discover 
ourselves  to  ourselves  ;  and  if  we  do  not  tind  ourselves  to  liie  such  as  God  requires 
and  expects  we  should  be,  let  us  beg  of  Him  earncbtly,  in  the  sense  of  our  own 
wants,  that  He  would  make  us  such  as  He  would  have  us  to  be.  II.  Examiniirg  is 
every  one's  duty,  and  the  subject  is  himself.  People  are  generally  too  forward 
in  examining  others,  and  are  so  taken  up  with  impertinence  and  things  that  do  not 
concern  thenr,  that  they  have  no  time  to  be  acquainted  with  themselves ;  like  idle 
travellei  s,  that  can  tell  you  a  world  of  stories  concerning  foreign  countries,  and  are 
very  strangers  at  home.  Study  of  ourselves  is  the  most  useful  knowledge,  as  that 
without  which  we  can  know  neither  God  nor  anything  else  aright,  as  we  should 
know  them.  And  it  highly  concerns  us  to  know  ourselves  well  ;  nor  will  our 
ignorance  be  pardonable,  but  prove  an  everlasting  reproach ;  when  poor  ruined 
self  shall  curse  negligent  sinful  self  to  all  ages,  and  with  direful  imiDrecations  ujion 
that  day  and  hour  that  first  joined  them  together.  Again,  God  has  given  man  that 
advantage  above  all  other  creatures,  that  he  can  with  reflex  acts  look  back  and 
pass  judgment  upon  himself.  Come,  then,  let  us  step  aside  awhile  into  our.-elves, 
and  taking  every  one  his  conscience  along  with  him,  examine  and  try  what  we  can 
find  there,  and  that  according  to  this  apostle's  division  of  man  (1  Thess.  v.  23), 
into  three  parts,  the  spirit,  soul,  and  body,  which  he  makes  to  be  the  entire  and 
complete  man.  1.  First,  then,  for  thy  spirit.  Dost  thou  find  a  principle  of  life  and 
liglrt  in  it?  dost  thou  feel  the  influences  of  God's  Spirit  upon  it,  illuniinating  thy 
understanding,  and  in  bright  characters  imprinting  on  thy  mind  the  resemblances 
of  Divine  nature,  and  writing  His  lav\r  in  thy  heart,  and  convincing  thy  reason  of 
supernatural  truths,  and  by  this  means  fastening  thee  close  to  Himself,  and  making 
VOL.    II.  9 


130  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ch.w.  xi. 

thee  one  with  God?  Or  is  thy  intellectual  faculty  still  daikened  and  estranged 
from  God  ?  2.  In  the  next  place,  examine  the  inclinations  of  thy  soul.  Dost  thou 
find  thy  will  readily  to  give  her  assent  to  the  convictions  of  thy  understanding,  and 
kindly  to  embrace  that  light  which  is  conveyed  into  thee  by  the  Sph-it  ?  How 
makes  she  her  elections  and  choices,  according  to  the  dictates  of  the  Spirit,  or 
according  to  carnal  suggestions?  3.  In  the  last  place,  take  thy  body,  thy  flesh, 
into  examination.  Are  thy  carnal  affections  raised  heavenward,  and  possessed 
with  things  above?  Dost  thou  hate  sin  for  sin's  sake?  and  art  thou  heartily 
displeased  with  thyself  after  the  commission  of  any  sin,  under  the  sole  apprehen- 
sion of  God's  displeasure?  Dost  thou  tiud  at  thy  devotions  and  meditations  that 
thy  heart  burns  within  thee,  being  set  on  fire  with  celestial  flames  of  zeal  ?  On 
the  contrary  to  all  this,  do  thy  desires  stream  forth  in  a  full  current  to  other 
objects,  the  profits  and  pleasures  and  preferments  tif  this  world,  and  take  up  with 
things  here  below  ?  and  art  thou  not  led  along  With  worldly  vanities,  the  examples 
of  the  multitude,  and  the  enticements  of  the  flesh  ?  In  a  word,  has  thy  spirit  been 
guided  by  the  direction  of  God's  Spirit,  thy  will  inclined  to  a  full  conjpliance  with 
His  holy  will,  !ind  thy  outward  man  made  conformable  to  thy  inward  man,  being 
renewed  with  the  renewing  of  the  mind  Kccording  to  rigliteousness?  If  this  great 
work  be  completed  in  thee,  0  happy  thee !  that  hast  got  thy  head  above  the  clouds, 
and  like  Enoch,  walkest  with  God,  and  hast  thy  conversation  in  heaven,  filled  with 
blessed  assurances  and  foretastes  of  ensuing  joys  and  glories,  being  steadfast  in 
faith,  joyful  through  hope,  and  rooted  in  charity .  But  if  this  spiritual  life  be  but 
imperfectly  begun  in  thee  yet,  and  thou  findest  the  willingness  of  thy  spirit  is 
clogged  and  retarded  by  the  weakness  of  thy  flesh,  be  of  good  courage,  however, 
and  apply  that  answer  which  was  given  to  St.  Paul  to  thyself,  that  God's  grace  is 
all-suthcient  for  thee ;  and  make  thy  humble  and  constant  addresses  to  God  for  the 
continual  supplies  thereof,  which  may  assist  thee  to  get  the  perfect  victory  over  all  thy 
coiruptions.  Thou  hast  been  negligent  and  remiss  in  the  duties  of  thy  life,  and  hast 
n'd  endeavoured  to  acc^uaint  thyself  with  God,  or  with  thyself  in  private.  (A .  Littleton, 
D.D.)  E.caiitinatiun  before  couimitidou  : — The  duty  required  for  preventing  the  sin 
and  danger  of  unworthy  communicating  is  si  If-examiuation.  It  is  a  metaphor  taken 
from  gold.-miths,  who  try  the  truth  of  their  gold  by  the  touchstone,  the  purity  of 
their  gold  by  the  fire,  and  the  weight  of  it  by  the  scale.  We  have  here — I.  The 
PERSON  examining:  "Let  a  man  examine."  II.  The  person  examined:  it  is 
"himself";  he  is  to  call  himself  to  the  bar  of  conscience,  and  to  put  questions 
to  himself.  Concerning — 1.  His  state,  whether  he  has  a  right  to  come  or  not. 
2.  His  sins  and  sliortcomings.  3.  His  wants  and  necessities.  4.  His  ends  and 
designs  ;  whether  it  be  to  obey  the  charge  of  his  dying  Saviour,  to  show  forth  His 
death,  renew  and  seal  his  covenant  with  God,  get  nearness  and  communion  with 
Him,  nourishmeut  to  his  soul,  and  supply  to  his  wants.  5.  His  graces  and 
qualifications,  particularly  as  to  knowledge,  faiih,  repentance,  fear,  love,  thankful- 
ness, holy  de>ires,  and  new  obedience.  (./.  Willisoit.)  Qualifications  for  com- 
mimion — suggested  by  its  nature  : — It  is — I.  A  sign  :  qualification,  knowledge.  A 
knowledge  not  of  any  branches  of  learning,  nor  of  theology  in  all  its  varied 
departments,  but  of  the  si>;nificance  of  the  ordinance,  "  discerning  the  Lord's 
body."  The  Corinthians  erred  here.  II.  A  seal  :  qualification,  faith.  It 
not  only  represents  gospel  blessings  as  a  picture,  but,  rightly  received,  secures 
them  as  a  seal.  Its  blessings  depend — 1.  Not  on  the  administrator.  He 
has  no  power  to  confer  nor  to  intercept  the  blessing.  2.  Not  on  other 
communicants.  They  can  neither  direct  nor  divert  the  blessings.  3.  But 
simply  on  the  faith  of  the  communicant  himself.  Faith  is  the  hand  that 
takes  the  proffered  gifts  of  grace.  Without  faith  it  is  no  sacrament.  With 
faith  it  becomes  a  sacramental  seal.  Worthiness  is  therefore  not  sinlessness, 
but  the  sinner's  humble  trust.  III.  A  feast  :  qualification,  hunger.  "  Let  us 
keep  the  feast."  The  Corinthians  sinned  in  regarding  it  a  carnal  feast.  This 
feast  is  prepared  by  God's  gracious  bounty.  He  welcomes  to  it  all  who  hunger  for 
His  blessings.  "Blessed  are  they  that  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness,  for 
they  shall  be  filled."  IV.  A  memorial.  :  qualification,  love.  Memorials  are 
heart-offerings.  Enemies  never  erect  memorials.  Christ  desires  to  be  remem- 
bered. He  has  chosen  His  own  memorial.  Who  shall  build  it  ?  The  heart  that 
loves.  A  sacrilege  for  any  other  to  approach.  Worthiness  is  love.  If  the  con- 
dition of  approach  is  love,  shall  any  one  be  content  to  stay  away  ?  {Hmnileict 
Monthly.)  HungeriiKj  after  Christ  a  qualification  for  communion: — When  the 

Lord  spreads  His  table  to  feast  His  friends.  He  calleth  not  them  who  have  no 


♦HAP.  XI.]  I.   CORIXTIITANS.  131 


iippetite ;  and  tliPiefore  thon  must  examine  thyf elf  whether  thou  hast  a  hungering 
after  Clitist.  If  a  man  have  his  victuals  taken  from  him,  he  grows  hungry  and  is 
discontented.  How  then  cometh  it  to  pass  that  our  bodily  hunger  is  so  sensible, 
when  yet  our  soul's  hunger  is  not  fi  It  oi  us?  He  that  is  in  this  estate,  a-starving, 
and  fetls  it,  is  not  that  man  ready  to  die?  Before  we  come  therefore  to  the 
Lord's  table,  let  us  labour  to  fjet  an  appetite,  for,  I  say,  God  thinketh  such 
precious  meat  a<  this  ill  best  iwed  upon  them  that  h)ive  no  appetite  unto  it.  But 
it  is  not  sufficient  for  a  mim  to  hunger,  and  never  go  about  the  work  ;  but  as  a 
hungry  man  is  eager  to  feed,  nothing  should  keep  him  from  it.  A  man  that  is 
ready  to  die  for  hunger  will  give  all  that  In-  hatli  rather  than  he  will  go  without 
meat.  Even  so  the  soul,  when  it  is  once  pinched  and  hunger-bit,  and  seeth  bread 
in  heaven,  it  presenteth  itself  before  God,  beggeth  as  for  life  that  God  would 
bestow  J-iis  Son  for  cure.  So  that  I  may  truly  say,  "The  kingdom  of  heaven 
sulTers  violence"  (Matt.  xi.  12),  and  i  ot  ling  shall  withhold  the  violent  from 
taking  it,  when  they  come  into  the  presence  of  God.     {U.  Sibbcs,  D.D.) 

Ver.  29.  For  he  that  eateth  and  drinketh  unworthily,  eateth  and  drinketh  dam- 
nation to  himself. — Eathuj  and  drinkiiig  unworthily  .- — I.  Explication.  1.  What 
is  meant  by  eating  and  drinking?  Not  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  but  sacra- 
mental bread  and  wine.  2.  \Yhat  by  unworthily?  Not  according  to  Chiist's 
institution.  3.  What  by  damnation  ?  Jiid;^ment.  He  sins,  and  so  must  expjct 
punishment.  II.  Doctkine.  It  behoves  every  one  to  have  a  great  care  he  cloth 
net  receive  unworthily.  Who  are  unworthy  receivers?  1.  The  ignorant  receivers. 
(1)  Such  as  know  not  the  fundamentMls  of  religion,  that  is  (Matt,  xxviii.  19) — (a) 
God  the  Father  (.John  xvii.  3).  {h)  God  the  Son.  Who  He  was  ;  \vhnt  He  became ; 
what  He  suffered  ;  what  He  did ;  what  He  is  ;  for  whom  He  undertook  these 
things;  what  benefit  we  receive  from  them,  (c)  The  Holy  Ghost.  (2)  Such  as 
know  not  the  state  of  their  own  souls.  (3)  That  know  not  the  nature  of 
the  sacrament,  e\en  that  it  is  an  ordinance  instituted  by  God,  wherein, 
under  the  outward  signs  of  bread  and  wine,  Christ,  with  all  the  ben-fits  of 
His  death  and  passion,  is  represented,  sealed,  and  conveyed  to  the  worthy 
receiver.  (4)  Examine — («)  How  may  we  know  whether  we  know  God  ?  By 
our  love  to  Him,  trust  on  Him  (Psa.  ix.  10),  desire  for  Him,  joy  in  Him,  fear 
of  Him.  {}))  Ourselves.  By  our  thoughts  of  ourselves,  and  our  constant  endeavour 
to  get  ourselves  bettere  1.  (c)  The  sacrament.  By  our  desire  of  it,  and  preparation 
f jr  it.  2.  The  impenitent  (Acts  ii.  33).  (1)  What  is  repentance?  (<i)  To  sorrow 
for  the  sins  we  have  committed,  (i.)  Heartily  (Joel  ii.  13).  (ii.)  Sincerely,  (iii.) 
Universally,  (iv.)  Constantly,  (h)  To  turn  from  the  sins  for  which  we  sorrowed 
• — (i.)  With  full  purpose  of  heart,  (ii.)  In  obedience  to  God.  (iii.)  From  all  sin. 
(iv.)  To  a  right  end.  (2)  How  appears  it  that  the  impenitent  is  unworthy  ?  [a) 
They  cannot  discern  the  Lord's  body,  (h)  They  mock  the  ordinance  by  actinur  and 
living  contrary  to  it,  and  provoke  God.  3.  Examine — (1)  Your  heart,  thoughts, 
affections.  (2)  Your  life,  words,  actions  (Jer.  ix.  17,  IS).  {Bp.  Bercridge.) 
Eatiiip  and  drinking  iniwurthihj  : — I.  The  sin.  Thoughtless,  impenitent,  irreverent 
participation  of  the  holy  communion.  II.  The  cause.  1.  Not  discerning  the 
Lord's  body.  2.  Through  ignorance  and  unbelief.  HI.  The  consequences.  Not 
necessarily  eternal  damnation,  but  condemnation,  entailing,  it  may  be,  temporal 
chastisement  (ver.  30),  yet  with  a  merciful  design.  (J.  LytJi,  D.D.)  Hie  dinger 
of  unworthy  cominnnicating  : — I.  The  necessity  of  communicating  suitably,  and  in 
A  kictHT  manner.  1.  God  commands  it  (ver.  28).  The  matter  and  manner  of  all 
duties  are  linked  together  in  the  command  of  God.  What  God  hath  joined,  let  no 
man  put  asun-.er.  2.  No  duty  is  pleasing  to  God,  unless  it  be  done  in  a  right 
manner.  3.  Nothing  is  a  work  theologically  good,  but  what  is  done  in  a  right 
manner  (Heb.  xi.  6).  There  was  a  vast  difference  betwixt  Cain  and  Abel's  offering 
(Gen.  iv.  4,  5;  cf.  Heb.  xi.  4).  Cloth  may  be  good,  and  yet  the  coat  base,  if  it  be 
niMrred  in  the  making.  4.  Though  the  work  l^e  in  itself  good,  yet  if  it  be  d  ne  not 
in  a  right  manner,  it  provokes  Uod  to  inflict  heavy  strokes  on  the  doer  (ver.  31). 
5.  Only  the  duty  done  in  a  right  manner  prospers  and  gets  the  blessing.  Our  meat 
can  do  us  no  good,  and  our  cloth  s  cannot  warm  us,  if  we  do  not  use  them  in  the 
right  manner.  6.  If  we  communicate  not  in  a  right  manner,  we  do  no  more  than 
hypo^'ites  actually  do,  and  pn^ans  may  do.  7.  God  gets  no  glory  otherwise  from 
US  II.  our  <luty  (Matt.  v.  16).     II.  Why  it  is,  that  though  the  eight  manner  of 

CO-VL-\IUNICAIING  BE  THE  MAIN  THING,  YET  MANY  CONTENT  THEMSELVES  WITH  TiiE  BARE 
DOING    OF    IT,  NEGLECTING    THE    DOING    OF    IT    SUITABLY,    AND    IN   A    RIGHT  MANNER.       1. 


132  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap  xi. 

Because  to  communicate  is  easy,  but  to  communicate  in  a  right  manner  is  very 
difficnlt.     2.   Because  they  obtain  their  end  by  the  bare  performance  of  the  duty. 
As — (1)  Peace  of  mind.     Many  consciences  are  not  so  far  awakened  as  to  give  men 
no  rest  without  doing  duty  in  a  right  manner,  jet  tliey  will  not  hold  their  peace 
should  a  man  neglect  duties  altogether.     (2)  Credit  in  the  world.     It  is  no  small 
matter  to  have  a  name,  and  to  seem  good.     3.  Men  may  get  duties  done,  and  their 
lust  kept  too  ;  they  may  go  to  a  communion  table,  and  to  the  table  of  devils  too  ; 
but  to  do  duties  in  the  right  manner  is  inconsistent  with  peace  with  our  lusts  (Psa. 
Ixvi.  18).     4.  Because  men  mostly  have  low  and  mean  thoughts  of  God  and  His 
service  (Mai.  i.  6-8  ;  cf.  Heb.  xii.  28,  29).     5.  Because  men  mostly  are  acquainted 
with  fellowship  with  God  to  be  had  in  duties  ;  they  know  not  the  necessity  of  it, 
nor  the  excellency  of  it.     Hence  they  are  not  at  pains  about  it.     (T.  Boston,  D.D.) 
Of  till-  subjects  of  the  LorcVs  Sujjper : — 1.  A  trial  of  grace,  whether  it  be  inherent  or 
no.    It  is  a  showing  the  death  of  Christ :  there  must  be  therefore  a  search,  whether 
those  graces  which  salt  the  death  of  Christ,  and  answer  to  the  ends  of  it,  be  in  the 
subject.     2.  A  tri:il  of  the  state  wherein  those  gvaci^s  are.     Since  the  Sapper  is  not 
■worthily  received  but  by  an  exercise  ui  repentance,  failh,  and  love,  it  is  necessary 
to  inquire  into  the  state  of  those  graces  and  their  vigor  or  languor  in  the  soul.     By 
this    are  excluded  from  this  ordinance — (1)  All  persons  incapable  of  performing 
this  antecedent  duty.     Either  in  regard  of  natural  inability,  as  children,  infants. 
And  in  regard  of  a  negligent  inaljility,  as  ignorant  persons,  who  neglect  the  means 
of  knowledge,  or  improve  them  not.     (2)  All  persons  who  cannot  find  upon  exami- 
nation anything  of  a  Divine  stamp  upon  them  in  the  lowest  degree.    This  command 
of  self-examination  evidencethto  us  —  («)  Tiiat  a  Christian  may  come  to  the  know- 
ledge of  his  state  in  grace ;    otherwise  it  would  be  wholly  fruitless  to   examine 
ourselves,     {h)  No  necessity  of  auricular  confession  :  to  tell  all  the  secrets  of  the 
lite  to  a  priest.     So  let  a  man  eat  of  this  bread  and  drink  of  this  cup.     So,  not 
otherwise,  it  is  a  hedge  planted  against  every  intiusion,  so  not  without  examination, 
and  a  fitiiess  upon  it.     For  the  first.     All  men  outwardly  professing  Christianity 
are  not  in  a  capacity  to  come  to  the  great  ordinance  of  tLie  Supper.     If  all  men 
were  capable,  pre-examination  were  not  then  necessary.     In  prosecution  of  this 
doctrine  we  shall  ky  down  some  propositions.     1.  Only  regenerate  men  are  fit  to 
come  to  the  Lord's  Supper.     No  man  in  a  natural  state  but  must  needs  eat  and 
drink  unwortldly,  for  he  retains  his  eiuiiity  against  God  and  Christ.     Sanctitied 
persons  only  are  the  proper  guests.     An  unregenerate  man  cannot  perform  the 
duties  necessary.     It  is  bread  belonging  to  cliildren  ;  unrenewed  men  are  not  yet 
in  a  state  of  sonship.     (1)  Faith  is  a  necessary  qualification,  but  unrenewed  men 
have  not  faith.     An  unbeliever  ret'eives  the  elements,  not  the  life  and  spirit  of  a 
sacrament.     (2)  An  unrenewed  man  is  not  in  covenant,  and  therefore  no  capable 
subject.     (3)  This  sacrament   is   a  sacrament  of   nourishment ;    unrenewed  men 
therefore  are  not  fit  for  it.     They  are  dead  (Eph.  ii.  1),  and  what  hath  a  dead  man 
to  do  with  a  feast  ?     Men  must  be  alive  before  they  be  nourished.     Dead  branches 
receive  no  saja  from  the  vine.     (4)  This  sacranieut  is  an  ordinance  of  inward  com- 
munion with  Christ.     But  unrenewed  men  can  have  no  inward  communion  with 
Him.     They  cannot  have  that  joy  whi -h  ought  to  be  in  a  converse  vvith  Christ. 
Bosom  communion  belongs  only  to  bosom  frieniis:  others  are  but  intruders,  and 
will  receive  no  countenance  from  Christ.     (5)  Tliis  ordinance  is  to  be  received  by 
true  Christians  only.     But  renewed  men  only  are  such.     Christianity  is  an  inward 
powerful  work,  not  a  paint,  an  image.     The  form  of  godliness  doth  not  constitute 
a  man  a  Christian,  but  the  power  of  it  (2  Tim.  iii.  5).     Freemen  only  have  a  right 
to  the  privilfges  of  the  city,  and  true  Christians  to  the  privileges  of  the  Church. 
2.  Men  guilty  of  a  course  of  sin,  though  secret  Mud  unknown  to  others,  are  unfit  for 
this  ordinance.     What  sins  debar  a  man  from  this  ordinance?     (1)  Not  such  which 
are  infirmities  incident  to  human  nature.    Every  sin  doth  not  impede  the  operation 
of  faith  about  the  proper  object.     (2)  But  a  course  in  wilful  and  frequent  breaches 
of  a  known  command  debars  a  man.     (3)  Such  cannot  in  that  state  i^erform  the 
duties  requisite  in  this  ordinance.     Faith  is  a  necessary  qualification  ;  but  a  denial 
of  sulijection   to   Christ  is  an  evidence  of  a  gross  infidelity.     Practices   are  the 
clearest  indexes  of  faitli  or  unbelief,  evil  works  deny  God  in  His  promises  and 
precepts.     (4)  Such  contemptuously  undervalue  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  therefore 
are  unfit  for  this  heavenly  ordmance.     It  is  no  better  tlian  a  mocking  of  God  to 
come  to  His  table  with  a  professed  enmity  in  the  heart  against  Him.  (5)  Such  cannot 
receive  any  good  from  this  ordinance.     He  can  design  no  good  to  himself  with  a 
resolution  to  continue  in  his  sin.    Doctrine  second  :  It  is  every  man's  duty  solemnly 


CHAP.  XI.]  I.   CORINTHIANsS.  133 

and  seriously  to  examine  himself  about  his  interest  in  Christ,  his  habitual  grace, 
his  actual  right  and  fitness  for  the  Lord's  Supper  before  his  apprnach  to  it.  Every 
ordinance  hath  a  preparative  :  meditation  is  to  usher  in  prayer,  prayer  is  to  sanctify 
the  Word,  the  Word  and  prayer  to  sanctify  other  ordinances.  This  institution  bath 
examination  for  its  harbinger  to  prepare  the  way  of  its  access  to  us,  and  our  access 
to  it.  1.  Tliis  self-examination  or  preparation  is  necessary.  God  required  it  in  all 
duties.  Purification  went  before  sacrificing.  The  preparation  and  examination  of 
themselves  as  to  ceremonial  uncleanness  was  strict  before  the  passover,  which  was 
inferior  to  this  ordinance,  as  the  legal  state  was  to  the  evangeli('al.  The  mercy  to 
be  now  remembered  is  greater,  the  duties  of  preparation  and  devotion  ought  not  to 
be  le-^s.  Sanctify  yourselves,  and  come  with  me  to  the  sacrifice,  and  eat  of  the  part 
appointed  for  the  feast  (1  Sam.  xvi.  5).  (1)  It  is  necessary  to  clear  up  a  rij^ht. 
There  is  an  outward  acceptation  of  Christ  and  His  laws  without  a  true  and  inward 
change  of  heart.  (2)  It  is  necessary  for  the  exciting  of  grace.  That  the  soul  may 
be  excited  before  ;  that  there  may  not  be  an  ebb  in  our  affections,  when  there  is  a 
flood  of  our  Saviour's  blood  ;  that  we  may  not  have  little  thoughts  in  the  presence 
of  great  and  adorable  objects.  (3)  It  is  necessary  to  prevent  sin.  The  apostle's 
direction  to  thera  to  examine  themselves  imjolies  the  want  of  it  to  be  the  cause  of 
those  miscarriages  among  them,  which  he  taxeth  in  the  preceding  verses.  2.  As 
it  is  necessary,  so  it  is  universal.  Let  a  man  examine  himself.  Not  some  men,  but 
every  man  ;  the  most  substantial  Christian,  as  well  as  the  weakest.  I  shall  only 
mention  two  things.  (1)  Let  a  man  examine  himself  as  to  his  sentiments  concern- 
ing the  nature  of  the  institution.  (2)  Let  a  man  examine  himself  what  soil  he 
hath  contracted  since  the  last  time  he  was  with  God,  whether  the  interest  of  God 
hath  prevailed  in  our  hearts  above  the  interest  of  the  fie^h.  Do  we  invite  Christ 
into  our  souls,  and  shall  we  not  examine  every  corner  and  search  out  the  dirt  and 
cobwebs  which  maj'  be  offensive  to  Him  ?  The  Spirit  of  Christ  is  a  dove,  and  doves 
love  clean  places.  But — 3.  We  should  inquire  whether  we  have  habitual  grace  or 
no  ;  whether  there  be  those  uniting,  gluing  graces — faith  and  love.  The  second 
grace  to  examine  ourselves  about  and  to  exercise  at  this  ordinance  is  sorrow  for 
sin.  This  is  necessary  to  the  Supj)er.  The  way  to  an  heavenly  repast,  as  well  as 
the  way  to  heavenly  mansions,  is  through  the  valley  of  Baca.  Since  repentance  is 
necessai'y,  let  us  examine  ourselves  wliat  of  this  grace  there  is  in  us.  (1)  What  is 
the  spring  of  our  sorrow  ?  (2)  What  is  the  subject  of  the  sorrow  ?  Is  it  the  sin  of 
nature?  do  we  judge  that  the  greatest  sin,  and  not  regard  it,  as  the  common  people 
do  the  stars,  imagining  them  no  bigger  than  a  candle,  when  they  are  of  a  vast 
bigness?  (3)  What  are  the  adjuncts  of  the  grief  ?  Is  it  in  some  measure  propor- 
tionable to  our  sin,  proportionable  not  to  the  law,  but  to  the  gospel?  The  first 
cannot  be  attained  by  us,  because  tlie  injury  done  to  God  is  infinite.  Is  the  league 
between  sin  and  the  soul  broken  ?  4.  Love  to  God  is  another  grace  we  are  to 
examine  ourselves  about.  (1)  Spiritual  affections  to  God  are  required  in  all  duties, 
much  more  in  this.  The  highest  representation  of  a  loving  Saviour  suffering, 
ought  to  have  a  suitable  return  of  affection.  Now  for  the  tiial  of  this  love,  (a)  Let 
us  not  judge  ourselves  by  a  general  love,  (b)  Nor  let  us  judge  ourselves  to  be  lovers 
of  God  because  of  our  education,  (c)  Nor  let  us  judge  ourselves  by  any  passionate 
fits  of  love  which  may  sometimes  stir  in  our  souls.  But  let  us  examine — (1)  The 
motives  and  object  of  our  affection.  (2)  What  is  the  nature  of  our  love  ?  (a)  In 
regard  to  the  prevalency  of  it.  Do  we  love  Chvist  solely  ?  (h)  In  regard  to  the 
restlessness  of  it.  Can  nothing  but  Christ  and  the  enjoyment  of  Him  content  us? 
(c)  What  are  the  effects  and  concomitants  of  our  love  ?  Are  we  careful  to 
please  Him,  though  with  our  own  shame?  5.  Another  grace  to  be  examined  is 
love  of  God's  people.  This  is  the  badge  of  a  disciple  (John  xiLi.  34,  35).  (1) 
This  is  necess^ary  in  all  duties.  Would  we  pray,  our  hcinds  must  be  lifted  up 
without  wrath  and  doubting  (1  Tmi.  ii.  8).  (2)  But  nmre  necessary  in  this 
ordinance.  («)  It  represents  the  union  of  behevers  together.  The  bread  being 
made  up  of  several  grains  compacted  together  (1  Cor.  x.  IC)).  For  we  being  many 
are  one  bread  and  one  body.  This  ordinance  was  instituted  to  solder  believers 
together.  They  have  the  same  nourishment,  and  therefore  should  have  the  same 
affection,  (b)  No  benefit  of  the  ordinance  without  this  grace.  Let  us  examine 
ourselves  as  to  this  grace.  And  that  we  may  not  mistake,  every  difference  in 
judgment  is  not  a  sign  of  the  want  of  this  grace.  But  this  love  is  true — (1) 
When  it  is  founded  upon  the  grace  of  a  person.  (2)  It  must  be  a  fervent  love. 
With  a  pure  heart  fervently  (1  Pet.  i.  22),  not  in  appearance  and  faintly.  (3)  A 
love  manifested  most  in  their  persecutions.     To  be  abhamed  of  believers  in  their 


134  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

sufferings  is,  in  Clirist's  interpretation,  to  be  ashamed  of  Christ  Himself.  6. 
Another  grace  to  be  examined  and  acted  is  desire,  a  holy  appetite.  (1)  This  is 
necessary  in  all  duties.  In  heaii'i^  the  Word  the  desire  must  be  as  insatiable  as 
the  infant's  cry  for  milk  (1  Pet.  ii.  2j.  (2)  But  in  this  ordinary  more  necessary,  (a)  It 
is  a  feast,  and  appntite  is  proper  to  tliat.  (b)  The  greater  the  longings,  the  greater  the 
satisfaction,  (c)  This  is  the  noblest  affection  we  can  bestow  upon  God.  (jBjj.  Hacket.) 
3Iysiical  bread  and  wine  : — Like  as  if  a  rebellious  subject  should  no  more  regard  his 
king's  seal  than  other  common  wax,  it  might  rightly  be  said  that  he  doth  no  more 
esteem  him  than  other  men  ;  so  when  we  come  to  the  Lord's  table,  if  we  take 
irreverently  the  mystical  bread  and  wine  as  common  food,  we  make  the  Lord's  body 
and  life  to  be  like  the  common  body  and  life  of  humanity.  {Caiudray.)  Unworthy 
communicatinrj  : — It  was  a  smart  and  piercing  speech  of  St.  Ambrose  to  Theodosius, 
offering  himself  to  the  table  of  the  Lord,  Wliat,  wilt  thou  reach  forth  those  hands 
of  thine,  yet  dropping  with  the  blood  of  innocents,  slaughtered  at  Thessaloniea,  and 
with  them  lay  hold  upon  the  most  holy  body  of  the  Lord  ?  Or  wilt  thou  offer  to  put 
that  precious  blood  in  thy  mouth  ?  &c.  The  like  may  be  said  to  many  coming  to  the 
sacrament,  that  instead  of  washing  their  hands  in  iunocency,  they  rinse  them  in 
the  blood  of  innocents.  What !  will  they  reach  forth  those  hands  of  theirs,  defiled 
with  blood,  with  the  blood  of  oj)pression,  those  fingers  of  theirs  defiled  with  iniquity 
and  with  those  hands  and  fingers  touch  those  holy  mysteries  ?  with  those  lips  of 
theirs,  tliat  have  drivelled  out  such  a  deal  of  filthy  communication,  with  those 
mouths  which  have  drunk  of  the  cup  of  devils ;  with  those  mouths  and  lips,  will 
they  offer  to  drink  the  precious  blood  of  Christ  ?  is  it  not  sin  enough  that  with 
their  sins  they  have  already  defiled  their  hands,  fingers,  lips,  moutbs,  but  that  now 
also  they  will  needs  come  and  defile  the  Lord's  table  ?  and  impudently  crowd  into 
the  sacrament,  when  they  come  piping  hot  out  of  their  sins  and  ijrovocations  ?  (R. 
Skinner.)  Worthy  receiving  : — A  man  is  not  said  to  be  worthy  in  regard  of  any 
•worthiness  in  himself,  bat  in  resjDect  of  his  affection  and  preparation,  and  in  regard 
of  his  fit  and  seemly  receiving.  As  we  used  to  say  the  king  received  worthy  enter- 
tainment in  such  a  gentleman's  house,  not  for  that  he  was  worthy  to  receive  him, 
but  because  he  omitted  no  compliments  and  service  in  his  power  fit  to  entertain 
him ;  even  so  I  say,  we  are  not  worthy  of  Christ,  that  He  sliould  enter  into  our 
houses,  that  He  should  come  under  our  roof.  But,  notwithstanding,  we  are  said  to 
be  worthy  when  we  do  all  things  which  are  in  our  power  fit  for  the  entertainment 
of  Him.  If  we  come  not  in  pride  and  in  our  rags,  but  with  repentance,  joy,  com- 
fort, and  humility,  then  are  we  worthy.  {R.  Sibbes,  D.D.)  The  worthij  receiving 
of  the  Lords  Supper  : — Consider — I.  What  woethixess  to  partake  is.  1.  What  is 
meant  by  worthmess  to  partake.  (1)  Not  a  legal  worthiness,  as  if  we  could  deserve 
it  at  the  hands  of  God  (Luke  xvii.  10).  Those  who  are  that  way  worthy  in  their 
own  eyes,  are  altogether  unworthy.  ("2)  But  it  is  a  gospel-meetness  and  fitness 
(Matt.  iii.  8).  And  much  of  that  lies  in  coming  with  a  deep  sense  of  our  vileness 
and  emptiness  (Isa.  iv.  1).  2.  Wherein  does  this  worthiness  to  partake  consist? 
(1)  In  haidtual  meetness  for  it,  in  respect  of  a  gracious  state.  A  dead  man  is  not 
fit  for  a  feast  nor  a  dead  soul  for  the  Lord's  table.  (2)  In  actual  meetness,  in  • 
respect  of  a  gracious  frame.  Not  only  life,  but  liveliness  is  requisite  (Psa.  Ixxx.  18). 
A  sleeping  man  is  not  fit  for  a  feast ;  and  therefore  even  a  true  believer  may  com- 
municate unworthily,  as  some  in  Corinth  did  (vers.  30,  32).     II.  The  duty  of  self- 

EXAMIXATIOX  NECESSAKT  FOR  WORTHY  RECEIVING   OF    THE   LoRD'S  SuPPER.       1.    The  rulo 

or  touchstone  by  which  we  must  examine.  (1)  Beware  of  false  ones,  (a)  The 
common  guise  ot  the  world.  It  is  not  enough  that  ye  are  like,  aye,  and  better  than 
many  (Luke  xviii.  11).  (b)  One's  being  better  than  sometime  before  (2  Cor.  x.  12). 
(c)  The  letter  of  the  law.  The  Pharisee  (Luke  xviii.  11)  ;  and  Paul  before  his  con- 
version (liom.  vii.  9).  {d)  The  seen  practice  of  the  godly,  which  is  an  unsafe  rule, 
because  you  cannot  see  the  principle,  motives,  and  ends  of  their  actions.  (2)  The 
only  true  rule  or  touchstone  in  this  case  is  the  Word  of  God  (Isa.  viii.  20).  God 
hath  given  us  marks  in  the  Word,  by  which  one  may  know  whether  he  be  in  Christ 
or  not  (2  Cor.  v.  17) ;  whether  born  of  God  or  not  (1  John  iii.  9),  and  the  like.  2. 
The  matter  about  which  we  are  to  examine  ourselves — the  state  of  our  souls  before 
the  Lord.  (1)  The  reason  is,  this  sacrament  is  not  a  converting,  but  a  confirming 
ordinance.  It  is  a  seal  of  the  covenant,  and  so  supposes  the  covenant  entered  into 
before  by  the  party.  It  is  appointed  for  nourishment,  which  presupposes  life.  And 
if  it  were  not  so,  what  need  of  self-examination?  (2)  But  more  particularly, 
because  there  are  some  graces,  namely,  knowledge,  faith,  repentance,  love,  and  new 
obedience,  which  in  a  particular  manner  are  sacramental  graces — these  are  to  be 


CHAP,  xr.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  135 

examined.  III.  The  necessity  of  self-examination.  1.  To  prevent  the  sin  of 
coming  unworthily  to  the  Lord's  table.  If  we  rush  on  this  ordinance  without  previous 
examining  ourselves,  how  can  we  miss  of  commuuicating  unworthily  ?  2.  To  prevent 
the  danger  of  coming  so,  which  is  eating  and  drinking  damnation  to  one's  self.  The 
danger  is  great— (1)  To  the  soul  (ver.  29).  (2)  To  the  body  (ver.  30).  (2'.  Boston,  D.D.) 
Not  discerning  the  Lord's  body. — Discernment  of  the  Lord's  body :— The  Saviour 
is  here  making  a  spiritual  feast  for  His  people,  presenting  Himself  to  them  under 
the  form  of  bread  and  wine ;  you  are,  therefore,  not  to  look  on  these  as  mere  dumb 
signs,  but  as  objects  which  speak  most  distinctly  to  your  spiritual  ear.  It  behoves 
every  Church,  that  is,  every  company  of  believers — I.  To  realise  the  presence 
OF  THE  Lord  among  them  as  His  guests  and  friends.  At  His  table  you  are  to 
meditate  of  His  love — to  sit  down  and  commemorate  His  sufferings  on  your 
behalf;  His  object  is  to  make  you  happy;  He  commands  you  to  take  this  as  a 
pledge  of  His  friendship  ;  you  must  not  stojD  short  at  the  mere  symbol ;  this  is,  in 
effect.  His  body  that  was  broken  for  you,  and  this  is  His  blood  which  was  poured 
out  for  you  on  the  accursed  tree.  His  hands.  His  feet  were  pierced  for  you — His 
side,  too,  was  pierced,  after  He  had  given  up  the  ghost :  His  sufferings  were  such 
as  no  tongue  can  tell,  and  such  as  cannot  be  known  to  mortal  man.  His  affection 
for  you  was  written  in  blood,  and  that  blood  was  His  own  !  That  bread  and  tiiat 
wine  tell  you  that  He  died  for  you ;  and  that  in  so  doing  He  made  "  an  end  of  sin, 
and  brought  in  an  everlasting  righteousness."  "  He  is  now  able  to  save  unto  the 
uttermost  all  that  come  uuto  God  by  Him."  "  Eat,  then,  oh  !  friends,  and  drink, 
oh  !  beloved,"  is  His  language.  As  He  died  for  you,  so  He  now  lives  for  you  :  and 
at  the  close  He  will  come  ;'gain,  and  take  you  unto  Himself,  that  you  may  be  for 
ever  with  the  Lord.  II.  To  reciprocate  the  feelings  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  The 
soul  must  and  will  speak  to  the  praise  of  sovereign  mercy.  That  we  may  properly 
discern  the  Lord's  body,  we  must — 1.  D.sceru  the  evil  of  sin.  Where  is  sin 
painted  in  colours  so  dreadful  as  here?  2.  Discern  the  relation  of  man.  What  is 
the  depraved  creature  man  worth  to  his  Maker  ?  He  is  lost  for  all  the  ends  which 
he  ought  to  answer.  Divine  mercy  could  not  reach  him,  apart  fiom  a  proper 
Mediator  and  an  atonement  for  sin.  After  this  redemption  he  needed  the 
exercise  of  Divine  power  to  create  him  anew.  The  Cross,  clearly  seen,  is  death  to 
human  glorying.  There  is  no  room  for  it  there  !  Go  then.  Christian,  to  His 
table,  and  take  a  fresh  lesson  from  j'our  Lord,  who,  with  all  His  perfections,  was 
made  lowly  in  heart,  since  the  more  you  share  of  this,  the  more  abundantly  will 
you  possess  rest  to  your  own  soul.  3.  Discern  the  beauty  of  holiness  and  the 
necessity  of  cultivating  it.  Can  you  have  a  more  impressive  lesson  on  the  evil  of 
sin  than  the  table  of  the  Lord  affords  you?  Will  you  prepare  a  second  Cross  for 
Christ,  and  with  your  own  hands  nail  Him  to  it?  Is  there  anything  in  the 
universe  so  full  of  beauty  as  holiness?  Is  it  not  the  interest  of  every  creature  to 
press  after  a  close  resemblance  to  our  Judge  and  our  Creator?  4.  Discern  His 
sovereign  and  unutterable  love.  "Were  we  not  all  enemies,  full  of  selfishness,  a 
god  to  ourselves,  and  a  rule  to  ourselves,  living  without  God,  and  having  no  hope 
in  the  world?  Yet  He  came  to  die  for  these  very  enemies.  (TJic  Cliristluii 
Wit7icss.) 

Vers.  30-32.  For  this  cause  many  are  weak  and  siclrly  among  you,  and  many 
sleep. — The  piinislnnent  for  unuorthij  partal^huj : — I.  Tiii>:  punishment.  Here  are 
three  steps  to  the  grave  :  weakness,  sickness,  temporal  death.  1.  Learn  that 
God  intiietetli  not  the  same  punishment  for  all,  but  hatli  variety  of  correction. 
And  the  reason  is,  because  there  are  divers  degrees  of  men's  sins.  God  therefore 
doth  not,  like  the  unskilful  empirics,  prescribe  the  same  for  all,  but  wisely  varieth 
His  physic.  2.  Let  us,  then,  endeavour  to  amend,  when  God  layeth  His  least 
judgment  upon  us.  Let  us  humble  ourselves  under  His  hand  when  He  la.yeth  but 
His  "  little  finger  "  upon  us;  for  light  punishments,  neglected,  will  dr^w  heavier 
upon  us.  3.  Let  magistrates  and  men  m  authority  miti^'ale  or  increase  the  punisli- 
meut,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  offence.  For  probable  it  is  that  those  who 
were  least  offenders  here  were  punished  with  weakness;  the  greater,  with  sickness; 
the  greatest  of  all,  with  death  temporal.  II.  The  cause.  1.  All  sicknesses  of  the 
body  proceed  from  the  sin  of  the  soul.  I  am  not  ignorant  of  second  causes  ;  but 
the  fountain  of  all  these  fountains  is  sin.  And  not  only  the  sins  which  we  have 
lately  committed,  but  those  which  we  have  committed  long  ago  (Job  xiii.  2(5). 
Job  being  grey  wa«  punished  for  Job  being  green ;  Job  in  his  autumn  smarts  for 
what  he  hath  done  in  his  spring.    Do  we,  then,  desire  to  lead  our  old  age  in  health. 


136  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

I  know  of  no  better  preservative  than  in  our  youth  to  keep  our  souls  from  sin. 
2.  But  how  came  St.  Paul  to  know  that  this  sickness  proceeded  from  the  irreverent 
receiving  of  the  sacrament,  especially  since  they  were  guilty  of  four  other  grand 
gins  ?  Since  they  were  guilty  of  factious  affecting  of  their  ministers,  going  to  law 
under  pagan  judges,  suffering  an  incestuous  person  to  live  amongst  them  un- 
punished, denying  of  the  resurrection  of  the  body,  why  might  not  St.  Paul  think 
that  any  one  or  all  of  these  might  be  the  causes  of  this  disease?  (1)  Because  this 
sin  was  the  sin  paramount.  The  others  were  felony,  robbing  God  of  His  glory ; 
this  was  high  treason  against  the  person  of  Christ,  and  so  against  God  Himself. 
Learn  we,  then,  though  God  of  His  goodness  may  be  pleased  graciously  to  j^ardon 
sins  of  an  inferior  nature  and  meaner  alloy,  yet  He  will  not  let  him  escape 
unpunished  who  irreverently  receive  the  body  and  blood  of  His  Son.  (2)  Because 
the  apostle  perceived  some  resemblance  betwixt  the  sin  committed  and  the  punish- 
ment inflicted.  For,  as  a  physician,  when  a  disease  puzzles  all  his  rules  of  art  to 
trace  it  to  some  natural  cause,  will  be  ready  to  put  it  down  to  poison,  so  St.  Paul, 
seeing  the  Corinthians  to  be  punished  with  a  strange  and  unusual  sickness, 
suspected  that  they  had  eaten  some  poisonous  thing,  and  on  inquiry  he  finds  that 
it  was  the  sacrament  irreverently  received :  it  being  just  with  God  to  turn  that 
which  was  appointed  to  be  preservative  for  the  soul,  to  prove  poison  to  the  body, 
being  not  received  with  due  preparation.  (T.  Fuller,  D.D.)  Judged,  not  con- 
demned : — I.  "For  this  cause  many  are  weak  and  sickly  among  you,  and  many  sleep." 
1.  Just  then  there  was  a  more  than  average  prevalence  of  disease  and  mortality, 
and  Paul  had  authority  to  trace  it  to  its  source.  Our  Lord  has  solemnly  warned 
ns  against  drawing  such  inferences  arbitrarily  (Luke  xiii.  1-5).  We  are  prone  to 
this  sort  of  presumption.  But  here  St.  Paul  was  speaking  in  the  Spirit,  and  was 
authorised  to  knit  together  a  particular  sin  and  punishment.  And  I  cannot  read 
in  this  record  the  "  thus  far  and  no  farther."  I  catch  here  the  faint  echo  of  the 
thought  that  God  our  Father  has  us  all  in  His  school,  and  is  carrying  on  our 
education  for  a  life  beyond  death  by  a  direct  providential  dealing  with  us  in  the 
way  of  mental  and  bodily  chastisement.  "  For  this  cause" — because  of  such  and 
such  a  sin,  with  which  the  man  would  not  deal  for  himself — "many  are  weak," 
&c.  2.  To  some  minds  the  idea  of  punishment  may  be  repulsive  and  daunting. 
To  me  it  is  a  thought  of  hope  :  it  speaks  of  a  living  and  personal  God,  not  willing 
that  I  should  perish.  The  chastening  hand,  St.  Paul  tells  us,  stops  not  short 
sometimes  of  taking  the  very  life  itself.  There  are  even  deaths  which  cou'lemn 
not  but  only  chastise  the  sinner.  3.  Bead  it  in  its  simplicity,  and  what  comfort 
is  here  for  some  comfortless  mourners !  Let  the  Christian  mother  hush  her  a^'ony 
over  the  grave  of  some  soldier  or  sailor  son  takpn  away  in  the  very  dawn  of  man- 
hood, with  immature  piety,  and  believe  that  still,  for  all  that,  the  young  life  was 
taken,  not  in  wrath,  but  in  chastisement ;  taken,  perhaps,  that  it  might  expand  iu 
a  purer  and  a  higher  companionship.  II.  Yet  St.  Paul  goes  on  to  teach  us  that 
even  these  judgments  might  be  turned  aside.  "  If  we  would  judge  ourselves, 
WE  should  not  be  judged."  1.  So  unwillingly  does  God  afflict,  that,  if  the  same  end, 
which  is  our  good,  could  be  otherwise  reached,  it  would  be.  It  is  our  refusal  to 
judge  ourselves  which,  as  it  were,  compels  God  to  judge.  Do  it  upon  yourselves, 
and  the  rod  drops  from  His  hand.  2.  St.  Paul  carefully  guards  against  the  idea  of 
any  self-infliction  of  suffering,  by  varying  the  word  when  he  speaks  of  our  judging. 
To  "judge"  becomes  then  not  to  punish,  but  simply  to  discern.  To  "judge" 
ourselves  is  to  look  ourselves  through  and  through,  so  as  to  distinguish 
between  the  precious  and  the  vile.  3.  Do  not  look  upon  this  duty  with 
repugnance.  God  and  you  are  on  one  side  in  the  matter.  He  bids  you  to  do 
what  is  necessary  for  yourself  in  the  way  of  judging,  and  so  to  answer  the 
one  purpose,  which  is  that  of  your  not  being  left  in  self-decnit.  4.  Many 
shrink  from  this  self-intuition  from  the  dread  of  long  and  dilKcult  processes. 
Will  they  just  bethink  themselves  of  that  fountain  opened  for  sin  and  uuclean- 
ness  ?  Iir.  The  final  cause  of  that  judging  which  is  chastening — "Th\t  we 
SHOULD  NOT  be  CONDEMNED  WITH  THE  WORLD."  Weakness  and  sickness — even  the 
last  sleep  itself — all  have  this  merciful  character  within  the  Church  of  Jesus 
Christ.  They  are  to  prevent  the  everlasting  "damnation."  Nothing  short  of 
apostasy,  the  wilful  and  obstinate  "  standing  away  from  the  living  God,"  can  throw 
a  man  back  out  of  the  Church  of  the  Divine  chasti^^ement  into  the  Cosmos  of  the 
Divine  condemnation.  [Dean  Vaurjhan.)  TheimnisJimcnt  of  unworthy  recfivers  : — 
Now,  the  verse  that  I  h  ive  read  to  you  is  a  part  of  that  use  of  terror  which  the  apostle 
makes  against  the  unworthy  receivers  of  the  sacrament ;  and  it  contains  God's  severe 


CHAP.  XI.]  /.  CORINTHIANS.  137 

punishment  against  those  that  come  unworthily :  wherein  note  three  things.  First, 
the  cause  of  their  punishment,  which  is  tlie  unworthy  eating  of  the  communion  :  for 
this  cause  many  are  sick  and  weak  among  you,  and  many  are  fallen  asleep.  Secondly, 
the  punishment  inflicted  for  this  sin — weakness,  sickness,  and  mortality.  Thirdly, 
there  is  the  delinquents,  which  are  you,  Corinthians:  many  are  sick  and  weak 
among  you,  and  in  them  all  others  that  come  unpreparedly  to  the  sacrament. 
Whence  we  may  observe  this  point  of  instruction  :  that  God  doth  most  seveiely 
punish  the  unworthy  receivers  of  the  saci'ament  of  the  Lord's  SupiDer.  He 
punished  the  Corinthians  here  with  sickness,  weakness,  fevers,  ijeslilence,  death 
temporal,  and  God  knows  how  many  with  death  eternal.  Now  the  reason  why 
the  Lord  doth  so  severely  punish  both  with  temporal  judgments  and  with  spiritual 
curses  the  unworthy  receivers  of  the  sacrament,  is,  in  regard  of  the  author  of  the 
sacrament,  who  is  Christ  ;  and  that  not  only  as  He  was  man,  but  Christ  as  He 
was  God  did  institute  the  same.  When  the  Lord  delivered  the  Law  upon  Mount 
Sinai,  He  commanded  the  people  to  sanctify  themselves  ;  yea,  if  a  beast  did  but 
touch  the  mountain,  he  must  die  for  the  same,  even  be  stoned  to  death,  or  thrust 
through  with  a  dart  (Heb.  xii. ).  Much  more,  then,  now,  when  the  Lord  doth 
deliver  the  gospel,  especially  the  groundwork  and  masterpiece  thereof,  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  and  that  in  the  most  blessed  manner  that  ever  God  exhibited  Himself 
unto  man ;  how  much  more  doth  God  require  purity  and  holiness,  that  all  such  as 
come  to  receive  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  the  blessed  sacrament  should  be 
sanctified,  purging  their  hearts,  and  cleansing  their  souls  from  all  their  sin  and 
uncleanness  !  The  second  reason  is  in  regard  of  the  matter  of  the  sacrament, 
■which  is  Christ  al-o;  who,  as  He  was  the  efficient  c:iuse,  so  in  regard  of  sacramental 
relation  He  is  the  matter  of  the  communion  (chap.  x.  16).  Now  the  better 
matter  anything  is  of,  the  more  heinous  is  the  defilement  of  it.  A  master  will  not 
be  so  angry  for  casting  his  earthen  vessels  into  the  mire  as  he  will  be  for  casting 
his  rich  jewels.  A  third  reason  is  in  regard  of  the  form  of  the  sacrament,  which 
is  Christ  too.  If  thou  shouldest  clip  the  king's  coin,  I  will  say  that  thou  art  a 
traitor.  Oh,  what  a  traitor  art  thou,  then,  yea,  accursed  traitor  in  the  account  of 
God  and  Christ,  if  thou  clippest  His  holy  communion,  if  thou  clip  it  of  thy 
examination  and  due  preparation,  and  so  come  hand  over  head,  not  regarding  so 
holy  an  ordinance  :  thou  sinnest  against  the  court  of  heaven.  The  last  reason  is 
in  regard  of  the  end  of  the  sacrament,  which  is  Christ  also.  Is  it  so,  then,  that 
the  Lord  doth  so  severely  punish  the  unworthy  receiver  of  the  sacrament?  Take 
notice,  then,  from  whence  cometh  all  sickness,  weakness,  and  mortality,  and  the 
reason  why  the  Lord  doth  send  so  many  kind  of  sorrows,  crosses,  and  miseries 
upon  men  ;  namely,  because  of  the  unworthy  receiving  of  the  Lord's  Supper. 
And,  beloved,  we  shall  never  see  the  Lord  take  away  His  judgments  here  from  the 
earth  until  we  betake  ourselves  to  a  more  diligent  and  lioly  receiving  of  the 
sacrament.  Many  there  be  that  expound  these  words  in  a  spiritual  sense  ;  many 
are  sick  and  weak,  and  many  are  fallen  asleep,  that  is  to  say,  many  have  their 
consciences  seared,  and  their  hearts  hardened,  &e. ;  and  this  is  true  also,  that 
because  men  come  unpreparedly,  they  have  their  hearts  hardened,  and  tireir 
consciences  seared,  and  their  soul  plagued  with  many  spiritual  plagu<-s.  But  it  is 
as  true  also  in  temporal  judgments.  King  Belshazzar,  that  abused  but  the  holy 
vessels  of  the  temple,  and  the  cups  thereof,  what  a  small  plague  bsfel  him  for  it 
(Dan.  V.  27,  28).  Wherefore  let  us  take  heed  of  unprepared  coming  to  the 
sacrament;  for  God  will  not  hold  such  guiltless.  And  now  to  conclude:  As  the 
Cherubim  stood  before  Paradise  with  a  naked  sword  to  keep  Adam  dut,  that  he 
might  not  enter  and  so  eat  of  the  Tree  of  Life,  so  I  bring  with  me  the  sword  of 
God,  to  run  it  up  to  the  hilt  in  the  heart  of  every  ungodly  man,  every  rebellious 
and  impenitent  sinner  that  d>ires  presume  to  rush  upon  this  holy  ordinance  of 
God  with  a  polluted  heart.  {IV.  Fenner.)  For  if  we  would  judg'e  ourselves,  we 
should  not  be  judged. — Self-judgment : — I.  There  is  in  us  a  capacity  of  juhgixo 
ouESELVEs.  We  can  overlook  our  own  acts  and  feelings  ;  we  can  promaince 
sentence  upon  them.  It  would  be  no  mercy,  but  a  great  degradation,  if  we  were 
excused  from  this  jurisdiction.  II.  The  Lord  will  not  excuse  us  from  it.  He 
takes  the  office  which  we  abdicate.  He  judges  when  we  will  not  judge.  III.  This 
CAPACITY  IS  BLUNTED  BY  CEKSORiousNKS.s.  1.  Thebesetiing  sin  of  the  Corinthians 
was  that  of  judging  others.  They  were  ever  determining  that  this  man  was  not  so 
wise  or  so  spiritual  as  themselves.  And  on  this  very  account  they  could  not  judge 
themselves  ;  the  faculty  lost  its  edge  ;  it  exhausted  itself  in  unprofitable,  unlawful 
efforts.     It  was  ever  busy  looking  outward  for  motes ;  the  consciousness  of  the 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  si. 

beam  within  became  continually  less  alive.  2.  Most  of  us  are  agreed  that  we  live 
in  a  critical  rather  than  in  a  creative  age.  Politicians,  artists,  religious  men,  all 
alike  are  critics  ;  some  censors  of  their  predecessors  as  well  as  of  their  contem- 
poraries. And  just  as  it  was  with  the  Corinthians,  we  have  lost  to  a  veiy  great 
degree  the  power  of  judging  ourselves.  IV.  How  it  may  be  restoeed  (ver.  32). 
1.  Much  is  said  in  pulpits  about  the  blessed  effects  of  God's  discipline  upon  men. 
Some  of  the  very  best  are  constrained  to  say,  "  Suffering  has  brought  forth  an 
amount  of  evil  in  us  which  we  did  not  know  there  was  in  us  before."  And  thanks 
be  to  God  it  did  !  Now  you  know  Him  and  yourselves  a  little  better  than  you  did 
before.  For  it  is  this  revelation  of  what  is  dark  in  us  which  drives  us  to  His  Light. 
God's  judjiuients  are  not  mere  punishments,  but  are  meant  to  awaken  in  us  that 
slumbering  faculty  without  which  we  are  not  truly  men,  because  we  are  not  truly 
showing  forth  the  image  of  God.  He  comes  amongst  us  that  our  ciiticism  may  be 
turned  to  a  more  practical  and  glorious  service,  that  we  may  not  "  be  condemned  with 
the  world."  2.  What  is  the  condemnation  from  which  this  judgment  rescues  us? 
The  world,  considered  as  apart  from  God,  is  condemned  to  a  very  hopeless  kind  of 
darkness.  Its  members  cannot  see  any  light  which  sliould  guide  their  own  footsteps, 
for  they  confess  no  liglit  but  what  proceeds  from  themselves.  All  God's  chastise- 
ments, tlierefore,  are  to  purge  the  Church  of  its  worldly  elements,  not  by  making  it 
censorious  and  exclusive  (for  there  are  essentially  worldly  elements),  but  by  making 
each  man  see  in  himself  all  the  evil  which  he  has  detected  in  his  brother.  (F.  D. 
Maurice,  BLA.)  GocVs  judgoient  and  our  jiidgvient : — I.  The  purpose  of  God's 
JUDGMENTS.  Paul's  words  imply  two  great  propositions.  1.  God's  chastisements 
are  judgments.  A  most  strange  assertion,  on  the  ordinary  acceptati'in  of  judg- 
ments as  special  interferences  of  Providence  to  punish  some  special  evil !  But  if 
the  word  means  to  discern  between  good  and  evil,  then  this  strange  assertion 
becomes  merely  a  statement  of  the  result  which  afflictions  ever  produce  in  the 
heart  and  con^^cience  of  a  Christian  :  they  make  us  discern  the  good  and  the  evil^ 
the  fleshly  and  the  spiritual  in  our  own  selves,  as  we  never  saw  theui  before. 
Many  a  man  in  the  quiet  days  of  sickness  and  pain  has  found  a  light  searching 
him,  and  separating  the  true  from  the  fal-e.  It  is  ever  in  the  whirlwind  and 
darkness  of  adversity  that  we  learn  to  say  with  him  of  old,  "  I  have  hesird  of  Thee 
by  the  hearing  of  the  ear,  but  now  mine  eye  seeth  Thee ;  wherefore  I  abhor  myself 
in  dust  and  allies."  2.  The  design  of  God's  judgment  is  to  save  us  from  con- 
demnation. The  spirit  of  the  world  is  the  choice  of  darkness  rather  than  light, 
therefore  to  be  condemned  with  the'world  is  to  be  left  in  ever-deepening  blindness 
to  all  the  light  and  glory  of  God.  That  doom  of  being  given  up  to  one's  self,  and 
being  ruined  by  the  secret  idolatiies  and  evils  of  self,  is  the  doom  into  which  every 
one  of  us  would  fall  if  God's  chastisements,  \^hich  are  judgments,  did  not  deliver 
us  from  its  peril.  (1)  Sometimes  He  breaks  the  concealed  idol  of  the  heart.  We 
did  not  know  it  was  an  idul  until  it  had  gone.  (2)  Sometimes  He  permits  us  to 
have  our  own  way,  and  allows  us  to  discover  its  vanity.  (3)  Snm"times  He 
l^revents  man's  will  from  ever  being  fulfilled.  This  is  the  meaning  of  the 
chastening  judgments  of  God.  Let  us  accept  it  heartily  and  broadly,  even  when 
we  cannot  trace  it.  Let  us  not  limit  it  to  individuals.  It  is  true  of  nations,  and 
has  been  true  of  this  England  of  ours  again  and  ajiain.  It  is  true  of  Churches ; 
hence  the  meaning  of  chastenings  as  the  response  to  the  most  earnest  prayers : 
it  is  God's  method  of  revealing  the  hindrances  to  their  growth,  of  manifesting  the 
impediments  to  their  spiritual  power.  II.  The  necessity  of  self-judgment.  Two 
questions  meet  us  here — 1.  If  God  be  judgino;  us  why  are  we  bound  to  judge 
ourselves?  Because— (1)  Every  chastening  is  a  voice  of  mercy  calling  us  to 
exercise  the  faculty  of  judgment  which  God  has  given  us.  (2)  Past  sorrow  and 
disappointment  revealed  the  secrecy  of  the  heart's  life,  and  the  necessity  for 
guarding  that  life.  (3)  If  we  let  our  wonderful  inner  life  go  unwatched,  we  shall 
need  continued  and  repeated  chastisements.  2.  How  is  this  work  to  be  accom- 
plished ?  Paul  implies  that  we  have  the  faculty  of  judgment,  but  dare  not  use  it ; 
God  chastens  thus  that  He  may  awaken  it.  In  trust  on  His  education  let  us  judge 
ourselves.  (1)  Let  us  bring  our  spirits  into  His  light  by  prayer — one  flash  of  that 
light  may  reveal  to  us  the  meaning  of  our  lives.  (2)  Guard  the  springs  of  action — 
the  beginnings  of  sin.  Let  a  man  slothfully  allow  him-elf  to  move  in  a  jjath  that 
is  dubious,  and  which  he  fears  to  examine,  and  God  will  hedge  in  his  way  with 
thorns,  and  send  him  deep,  desolate  sorrow,  that  he  may  not  be  "  condemned  with 
the  world."  III.  The  blessings  which  self-judgmi'.nt  would  being.  1.  Confidence. 
But  does  not  self-searching  create  doubt,  and  wither  the  energy  of  action  ?     Not 


CHAP.  XI.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  139 

when  exercised  in  the  trust  that  God  will  reveal  us  to  ourselves.  "  Keep  thy  heart 
with  all  diligence,  for  out  of  it  are  the  issues  of  life."  2.  Insight  into  God's 
truth  and  love  (ver.  28).  (1)  Those  Corinthians  are  asleep  because  they  did  not 
judge  themselves — asleep  to  all  tha  beauty  of  the  Christian  sacrament.  If  we  let 
our  spirits  go  unwatched  the  beauty  and  power  of  sacraments  will  fade.  (2)  Let 
us  believe  that  God  is  testing  us  ;  that  Christ's  light  is  dwelling  in  us  ;  and  in  that 
belief  guide  our  spirits  and  guard  them  ;  then,  all  God's  works  will  become  a 
sacrament  of  love  and  glory  I  {E.  L.  Hull,  B.A.)  Self-scrutimj  : — Let  us 
consider  the  difficulty,  the  advantages,  and  the  means  of  forming  a  correct 
estimate  of  ourselves.  I.  The  difficulty.  The  portions  of  our  character,  which 
it  most  concerns  us  to  understand  aright,  are,  the  extent  uf  our  powers,  and 
the  motives  of  our  conduct.  But  on  these  subjects  everything  conspires  to 
deceive  U'^.  1.  No  man,  in  the  first  place,  can  come  to  the  examination  of 
himself  with  perfect  impartiality.  His  wishes  are  all  necessarily  engaged  on  his 
own  side.  2.  We  can  always  find  excuses  for  ourselves,  which  no  other  person 
can  suspect.  Frivolous  as  the  apology  may  be,  it  appears  satisfactory,  because, 
while  no  one  knows  its  existence,  no  one  can  dispute  its  value.  3.  Few  men 
venture  to  inform  us  of  our  real  character.  We  are  flattered,  even  from  uur 
cradles.  4.  We  fondly  ima^'ine  that  no  one  can  know  us  as  well  as  we  know 
ourselves,  and  that  every  man  is  inteivsted  to  depreciate,  even  when  he  knows, 
the  worth  of  another.  Hence,  whf-n  reproved,  it  is  much  more  easy  to  conclude 
that  we  have  been  misrepresented  by  envy,  or  misunderstood  by  prejudice,  than 
to  believe  in  our  ignorance,  incapacity,  or  guilt.  Nothing,  also,  more  dnectly 
teuds  to  swell  into  extravagance  a  man's  opinion  of  his  moral  or  intellectual  worth, 
than  to  find  that  his  innocence  has,  in  any  instance,  been  falsely  accused,  or  his 
powers  inadequately  estimated.  II.  The  advantages.  1.  An  intimate  knowledge 
of  ourselves  is  absolutely  necesj^ary  to  the  security  and  improvement  of  our  virtue 
ani  holiness.  2.  The  knowledge  of  ourselves  would  jsreserve  us  from  much  of  the 
calumny,  the  censure,  and  the  contempt  of  others.  3.  A  man  who  knows  liimself 
will  know  more  of  others,  than  one  who  boasts  of  studying  mankind  by  mixing 
with  all  their  follies  and  vices.  4.  Self-knowledge  will  preserve  us  from  being 
deceived  by  flatteiy,  or  overborne  by  unmerited  censure.  5.  He  who  examines 
himself  will  learn  to  profit  by  in-truction.  6.  If  we  will  judge  ourselves,  we  shall 
not  he  jnd^^ed,  at  least,  bv  the  Judge  of  heaven  and  earth;  that  is,  we  shall  not 
be  unprepared  for  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ.  III.  The  means  by  which  this 
knowledge  may  be  attained.  1.  Su-pect  yourselves.  Do  not  be  afraid  of  doing 
yourselves  injustice.  When  you  suspect,  watch  your  conduct ;  and  detect,  if  you 
can,  your  predominant  motives.  Depend  upon  it,  you  will  struggle  hard  to  deceive 
yourselves.  Compare  yourselves,  then,  with  the  Word  of  God,  and  with  one 
another.  2.  But,  aliove  all,  look  up  to  the  Father  of  lights,  lay  yourself  open  to 
the  eye  of  almighty  mercy,  and  cry,  "Lord,  who  can  understand  his  errors? 
cleanse  Thou  me  from  secret  faults."  (J.  S.  l>uckiiiin.iter.)  The  judge  witliin  : — 
If  the  quHstion  be  asked.  How  can  a  presumed  criminal  be  his  own  judge?  the 
answer  lies  in  the  constitution  of  the  human  soul.  Every  man  has  within  him  a 
faculty  which  discharges  by  turns  all  the  dfiices  of  a  court  of  justice.  Conscience 
is  the  counsel  for  the  prosecution ;  it  collects  the  evidences  of  guilt,  sets  them 
out,  weiuhs  their  value,  marshals  them  iu  their  separate  and  collective  stiength, 
urges  the  conclusion  to  which  they  point.  But  conscience  is  also  the  counsel  for 
the  defence.  Although  outside  the  court,  it  stands  by  no  means  alone.  It  is 
assisted,  often  to  its  great  embarrassment,  by  three  uninvited  and  very  importunate 
junior  counsel,  who  are  very  nearly  related  to  each  other — self-love,  and  self- 
conceit,  and  self-assertion.  But  yet,  even  on  the  side  of  the  defence,  conscience 
may  sometimes  have  something  honest  and  substantial  to  urge  against  the  prima 
facie  aspect  of  the  case  for  the  prosecution.  And  then,  having  concluded  the  case 
for  the  prosecution  and  the  case  for  the  defendant,  conscience  weighs  out  and 
balances  the  conflicting  statements  by  a  debate  within  itself  after  the  fashion  of  a 
jury,  as  though  it  had  many  voices,  but  a  single  mind.  And,  once  more, 
conscience,  being  thus  warder,  and  counsel  on  both  sides,  and  jury,  clothes  itself 
at  last  in  the  higher  majesty  of  justice,  ascends  the  seat  of  judgment,  and 
pronounces  the  sentence  of  the  Divine  law  ;  and  when  that  sentence  is  a  sentence 
of  condemnation,  and  has  been  clearly  uttered  within  the  soul,  the  soul  knows  no 
peace  until  it  has  sought  and  found  some  certificate  of  pardon  from  the  supreme 
Authority  which  conscience  represents.  Self-judgment  in  the  sense  recommended 
by  the  apostle  is  not  as  easy  a  process  as  might  at  first  appear.     It  has  several 


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

obstacles,  several  enemies  to  encounter  who  have  long  made  themselves  at  home 
in  human  nature,  who  are  certain  to  do  their  best  against  it.  And  of  these  the 
first  is  a  want  of  entire  sincerity,  and  this  involves  a  charge,  the  justice  of  which 
will  be  always  disputed,  but  especially  when  it  is  made  against  the  temper  and 
disposition  of  men  of  our  own  time ;  for,  probably,  there  is  one  thing  on  which  we 
pride  ourselves  as  characterising  us  more  than  the  generations  who  have  preceded 
us — it  is  that  we  are  the  devotees  of  truth.  It  might  seem  that  we  had  taken  as 
our  own  the  old  Homeric  motto,  "Let  us  have  light,  even  if  we  perish  in  it,"  so 
strong  is  this  passion  for  truth,  so  seemingly  noble,  so  far-reaching,  so  actively  at 
work  in  all  directions,  whether  of  public  or  of  private  life,  around  us  !  But  is  our 
passion  for  truth  equally  ardent  in  all  directions  ? — is  there  not  one  quarter  iu 
which  we  shrink  from  indulging  it?  Is  it  not  often  the  case  that  while  we  are 
eager  to  know  everything,  even  the  worst,  about  public  affairs  and  the  affairs  of 
our  neighbours,  about  persons  high  in  state,  and  about  our  humblest  acquaintances, 
there  is  one  state  of  affairs,  and  there  is  one  person  about  which  the  great  majority 
of  us  is  often  content  to  be  very  ignorant  indeed?  A  second  enemy  to  a  true 
self-judgment  is  moral  cowardice.  Observe,  I  say  moral  cowardice— a  very  different 
thing  from  physical.  The  man  who  could  head  a  storming  party  without  a 
minute's  hesitation  is  not  always  willing  to  meet  his  true  self.  If  the  truth  is  to 
be  told,  are  not  a  great  many  of  us  like  those  country  folk  who  are  afraid  of 
crossing  a  churchyard  path  after  nightfall,  lest  they  should  see  a  ghost  behind  a 
tombstone?  Our  consciences  are  but  cemeteries,  in  which  dead  memories  are 
buried  close  to  or  upon  each  other  in  forgotten  confusion.  Some  of  you  may  have 
noticed  an  account  of  tbe  conduct  of  a  distinguished  and  learned  Englishman  who 
nearly  lost  his  life  in  Egypt  a  short  time  ago.  He  was  travelling  in  order 
to  prosecute  his  favourite  studies,  and  was  returning  to  his  boat  on  the  Nile, 
after  examining  some  antiquities  in  the  neighbourhood,  when  he  trod  by 
chance  on  a  cerastes — a  snake  of  the  species  one  of  which,  nineteen  centuries  ago, 
ended  the  life  of  the  fnllen  Cleopatra.  When  he  felt  that  he  had  been  bitten,  and 
a  moment's  glance  had  shown  him  the  deadly  reptile,  he  lost  not  a  moment  in 
making  his  way  to  the  boat,  which  was,  happily,  only  a  few  yards  distant.  He 
called  for  a  hot  iron,  and  then,  with  his  own  hands,  he  applied  it  to  the  wound, 
holding  it  there  until  he  had  burnt  out  the  i^oisoned  flesh  down  to  the  very  bone. 
"  Had  you  acted  with  less  decision,"  so  said  a  distinguished  physician  to  him  on 
his  return  to  Cairo,  "  your  life  must  have  been  forfeited."  With  matters  of 
conscience  we,  it  seems,  are  less  capable  of  heroism,  though  a  great  deal  more  is 
really  at  stake.  A  third  enemy  to  a  true  self -judgment  is  the  lack  of  perseverance. 
As  we  are  constantly  being  tempted,  and  often  yielding  more  or  less  to  temptation, 
we  should  be  constantly  bringing  ourselves  to  the  bar  of  conscience,  which  is  the 
bar  of  God.  Unless  we  take  care,  the  determination  to  persevere,  to  be  true  to 
ourselves,  is  likely  to  become  weaker  and  more  intermittent  as  our  natural  faculties 
decay  with  the  progress  of  time.  Much  will  take  place  within  which  will  never 
have  been  reviewed  on  this  side  the  grave.  There  have  been  sovereigns  of 
earthly  realms — such  as  the  Roman  Emperor  Hadrian,  and  the  Caliph  Harouu 
Alraschid — whose  senses  of  the  responsibility  of  empire  have  been  such  as  to 
compel  them  to  do  more  than  official  duly  would  prescribe,  to  inspect  their 
dominions  and  to  visit  their  subjects  as  far  as  they  could  personally,  perhaps  in 
disguise,  and  so  to  relieve  distress  and  to  encourage  meritorious  efforts,  and  to 
correct  injustice,  and  to  promote  well-being  and  prosperity,  and  tbus  to  strengthen 
the  defences  of  the  Empire,  and  remove  the  motives  to  insurrection  and  disorder. 
And  if  a  man,  as  a  Christian,  should  be  absolute  ruler  within  and  over  his  own 
body,  if  his  conscience  is  true,  he  best  self-governs  as  well  as  reigns  if  it  does  not 
hold  its  office  merely  at  the  good  pleasure  of  a  democracy  of  passions,  each  of 
whiidi  is  playing  for  its  own  hand,  and  which  collectively  may  proclaim  a  republic 
in  the  soul  to-morrow  morning,  and  send  their  present  ruler  about  his  business — 
no  doubt  with  a  pension.  If,  I  say,  a  triumph  of  all  the  forces  of  moral  disorder 
is  not  to  take  place  within  the  human  soul,  its  ruler  must  be  constantly  inspecting 
it,  constantly  judging  it,  that  he  may  finish  his  royal  course  with  joy,  and  arrest 
the  stern  judgment  tiiat  must  else  await  him  by  thus  constantly  anticipating  it. 
The  motive  for  this  self -judgment  follows — "  We  should  not  be  judged  if  we  would 
judge  ourselves."  Does  this  mean  that  a  man  who  deals  truly  and  severely  with 
himself  may  always  expect  to  escape  human  criticism  ?  This  is  only  very  partially 
true.  It  is  true,  no  doubt,  that  so  far  as  we  juilge  ourselves  in  matters  which 
affect  our  intercourse  with  others,  endeavouring  to  bring  that  intercourse  into 


CHAP,  xr.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  141 

strict  accord  with  the  principles  and  the  ternis  of  the  law  of  Christ,  we  shall 
diminish  the  opportunities  for  hostile  criticism  on  this  score.  In  this  sense  self- 
judgment  brings  with  it  in  this  world  its  own  reward.  In  whatever  degree  we 
cultivate  self-discipline — the  sincere,  pure,  humhle,  kindly,  patient  temper  which 
is  prpscribed  by  the  teaching  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ — in  that  degree  we  diminish 
the  friction  with  our  brother  men  in  the  struggle  of  our  own  common  life,  and  so 
we  escape  the  judgments  which  such  friction  provokes.  But  it  does  not  follow 
that  those  who  judge  themselves  severely  are  thereby  always  exce2:)ted  from  the 
unfavourable  judgments  of  other  men,  for  a  very  large  number  of  men  not  only 
pass  judgments  upon  the  words  and  acts  of  others  of  which  they  can  take  some 
sort  of  cognisance,  but  also,  and,  strange  to  say,  with  equal  confidence,  upon  the 
motive  and  secret  characters  of  others,  of  which,  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  they 
can  have  no  real  knowledge  whatever.  Added  to  which  the  great  majority  of  men 
resent,  perhaps  almost  unconsciously,  a  higher  standard  of  life  and  conduct  than 
their  own.  When  one  of  the  greatest  of  tbe  heathen  set  himself  to  consider  what 
would  happen  if  a  really  perfect  man  were  to  appear  upon  the  earth,  his  decision 
was  an  unconscious  prophecy.  "Men,"  he  said,  "would  put  such  a  man  to 
death."  Men  who  are  not  themselves  holy  are  impatient  of  holiness,  and  pass 
hard  judgments,  if  they  can  do  nothing  more,  on  those  who  aim  at  it ;  and  thus  it 
has  happened  that  all  the  great  servants  of  God,  although  judging  themselves 
severely,  have  been  agiin  and  again  judged  by  their  fellow  men  with  mui-h  greater 
severity.  So  it  has  been  with  nearly  all  the  finest  characters  in  the  Church  of 
Christ,  They  have  passed  their  lives  constantly  under  a  storm  of  calumny  and 
insult,  and  only  when  they  have  left  the  world  have  they  been  recognised  as 
having  been  what  they  were.  Nor  is  this  wonderful  iu  the  case  of  those  who  at 
their  very  best  only  approached  perfection,  if  it  was  also  true  in  His  case  who 
alone  was  jjerfect.  A  man,  then,  who  judges  himself  severely  cannot  on  that 
account  expect  to  disarm  human  judgments  ;  but  he  may  do  much  more:  he  may 
anticipate,  and  by  anticipating  he  may  arrest,  the  judgments  of  God,  for  the 
judgments  of  God  light  not  on  all  sinners,  but  only  on  unrepentant  sinners  ;  and 
self -judgment  is  the  effect  and  expression  of  penitence — it  is  the  effort  of  the  soul 
to  be  true  to  the  highest  law  of  its  own  being,  which  is  also  the  law  of  its  Creator. 
Self-judgment  shows  us  what  we  are.  It  does  not  of  itself  enable  us  to  become 
other  than  we  are  ;  it  does  not  of  itself  confer  pardon  for  the  past  or  strength  to 
do  better  in  the  time  to  come.  It  bids  us  look  out  of  and  beyond  ourselves  to  a 
Divine  compassion  which  is  also  a  Divine  justice,  which,  if  we  will,  we  can,  by 
that  complete  and  whole-hearted  adhesion  of  the  soul  to  truth,  which  the  Bible 
calls  faith,  make  in  reality  and  for  ever  our  own.  It  makes  a  man  pray  at  once 
more  intelligently  and  more  earnestly — more  intelligently  because  when  he  has 
had  himself  up  for  a  strict  judicial  investigation  at  the  bar  of  his  conscience  he 
knows  what  he  needs,  not  in  a  vague  way,  but  in  detail,  and  precisely  instead  of 
complaining  to  God  in  general  terms  of  the  corruption  of  his  fallen  nature — a 
complaint  which  makes  him  in  his  own  estimate  not  worse  than  any  of  his 
neighbours — he  lays  his  finger  upon  certain  acts  of  evil  which  he,  and  he  only,  so 
far  as  be  knows,  has  committed.  He  prays  as  for  his  life,  and  when  his  prayer  is 
crowned  with  victory  he  understands  what  he  owes  to  having  judged  himself 
honestly,  and  how,  having  judged  himself,  he  will  not,  through  God's  mercy,  be 
judged  as  an  unrepentant  sinner  at  the  last.     {Canon  Liddon.) 

Vers.  33,  34.  When  ye  come  together  to  eat,  tarry  one  for  another. — "  Tarry  one 
for  another  "  ; — 1.  These  words  glance  at  a  state  of  things  of  which  happily  we 
can  form  little  idea  from  any  existing  analogy.  No  one  thinks  now  of  bringing 
or  sending  food  to  satisfy  his  hunger.  No  one  thinks  of  making  distinctions 
between  rich  and  poor,  nor  of  beginning,  in  violation  of  the  priuciple  of  fellow- 
ship, to  eat  and  drink  before  the  rest.  We  all  tarry  one  for  another.  2.  But  are 
not  these  words  full  of  meaning  and  value  even  to  us?  You  sometimes  picture  to 
yourselves  the  Church  lifted  high  above  the  world,  with  aspects  and  motions  to 
the  world  above.  But  innumerable  ties  bind  her  also  to  the  earth.  She  looks  on 
to  victory  and  rest,  but  also  far  around,  to  see  who  are  coming  to  share  in  it.  She 
makes  no  tarrying,  and  yet  she  tarries  for  all  who  need  her  help.  Tarry — I.  For 
THE  youNG.  You  Cannot  look  for  the  steady  tread  of  those  who  have  long  been 
in  the  way  in  the  case  of  those  who  are  just  coming  into  it.  Joseph  and  Mary 
went  a  day's  journey  homeward  before  they  missed  their  Son.  So  I  seem  to  see 
the  Church  of  manhood  and  womanhood  more  than  a  day's  journey  ahead,  with 


142  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xir. 

no  Teaiuing  desire  after  the  Cliurcb  of  adolescence.  But  -when  they  found  the 
young  Jt-sus  He  was  in  the  temple  about  His  Father's  business.  Eeverence  the 
chihiren — the  Church  of  tbe  future.  It  is  not  given  to  fatheis  and  mothers  to 
divine  all  that  their  children  may  yet  be  and  achieve.  Tarry  tor  them.  HeliJ  the 
stiuggling  thought  ;  throw  gentle  airs  and  warm  sunsb'ne  around  the  budding 
affections.  Say  "  well  done  "  when  it  has  been  well  done.  And  when  ye  come 
up  to  the  chief  festival  of  life,  do  not  S'  em  as  if  you  could  comfortably  come  alone. 
Say  to  them,  "  Couie  with  us,"  until  they  respond,  "We  will  go  with  \ou,  for  we 
perceive  that  God  is  with  you."  II.  For  the  weak.  1.  There  never  was  an  army 
without  the  sick  and  lame.  But  they  are  cared  for  as  true  soldiers.  There  never 
was  a  family  of  many  children  that  had  not  some  weaker  than  the  rest.  Where 
the  law  of  love  prevails,  they  are  car.  d  for  in  proportion  to  their  weakness.  Have 
you  beard  how  in  a  band  of  workmen  there  are  weak  men;  and  when  the  others 
see  their  weakness,  they  will  edge  in  a  little  help  on  each  side,  so  as  to  keep  that 
part  of  the  work  square  with  the  rest,  that  the  weak  may  claim  fu!l  wage  at  the 
week's  end?  2.  "We,  then,  that  are  strong  ought  to  bear  the  infirmities  of  the 
weak."  The  tender  spirit  of  the  New  Testament  in  regard  to  weakness  and  the 
weak  is  everywhere.  It  had  its  scurce  in  the  heart  of  our  blessed  Lord,  who  had 
compassion  on  the  multitudes  when  He  saw  them.  It  filled  the  hearts,  and  it 
pervades  the  writings  of  His  apostles.  It  is  one  of  tbe  notes  of  the  true  Church. 
It  is  her  law  which  I  now  enforce.  Some  are  fainting  ;  but  when  they  have 
rested  awhile  they  will  come.  Some  are  hungry;  when  they  are  fed  tl  ey  will  be 
stronger.  Some  have  been  sick  ;  nothing  can  recruit  them  but  time  and  gracious 
weather  and  kindly  nourishment.  Tarry  one  for  another,  and  the  weak  sliall  be 
as  David,  and  David  as  the  angel  of  the  Lord.  III.  Fi^b  the  doubting.  Not  for 
the  captious  and  tlje  insincere,  but  for  those  who  are  honestly  i^eeking  for  light. 
1.  A  company  of  people,  travelling  thiough  a  for.  st,  come  to  a  place  where  many 
paths  meet.  Most  of  them  are  in  no  doubt  which  j.ath  to  take.  But  seme  are  in 
•doubt.  How,  th<n,  should  they  be  tieated  by  those  from  wLom  they  part?  Are 
•we  to  cry,  "  Farewell ;  we  shall  see  you  no  more.  Go  your  ways  into  famine  and 
death"?  Are  we  not  rather  to  say,  "We  shall  tany  for  von;  not  indeed  by 
staying  our  own  progress,  but  by  calling  to  yon,  by  lighting  our  camp-fires  at  night, 
that  you  may  see  where  we  halt  ?  You  will  not  go  far  without  seeing  that  you  are 
wrong,  and  then  take  the  path  that  lea.ls  right,  into  ours.  We  shall  be  waiting  for 
you."  2.  There  are  many  wanderers  that  are  to  be  waited  for.  There  are  honest 
doubts,  only  to  be  resolved  by  time  and  light.  IV.  For  the  steickkn.  They  are 
perhaps  out  of  sight ;  for  they  are  apt  to  fall  out  of  the  company.  As  the  great 
Sufferer,  now  the  great  Conqueror,  waits  for  us  all,  let  us  wait  for  one  another. 
V.  For  the  whole  world.  Enemies  as  they  are  now,  in  the  future  they  are  to 
be  friends.  Let  none  doubt  how  the  long  conflict  is  to  end.  The  Church  can 
never  sulnnit  herself  to  the  world  ;  but  the  «orl.i  shall  ground  its  weapons,  and  hold 
out  the  hand  of  friendship  to  the  Church,  and  the  conciliation  shall  be  perfect. 
Conclusion  :  But  to  those  of  whom  we  have  been  speaking,  for  whom  we  have 
asked  all  patience  and  consideration,  I  would  say.  Be  sure  that  you  do  not  wait. 
Make  haste;  others  are  tarrying  fo'  you.  {A.  RaleUih,  B.D.)  One  missing  :— 
Sir  Michael  Costa  was  having  a  rehearsal  with  a  great  number  of  singers  and 
musicians.  When  the  mighty  chorus  pealed  foith  with  the  strains  of  the  organ, 
the  beating  of  drums,  and  the  clashing  of  cymbals,  one  man  who  played  the 
piccolo  (a  small  kind  of  flute  with  ver\  high  notes)  thought  he  was  not  needed  and 
ceased  to  play.  The  conductor  suddenly  stopped,  threw  up  his  hands,  and  when 
all  was  quiet,  cried,  "  Where  is  the  pi'  colo  ? "  Tlie  keen  ear  of  the  master  missed 
it,  and  he  felt  that  the  ch  rus  was  im  om|  lete.  How  many  are  mit^sed  by  tbe  great 
Master  of  assemblies,  when  He  gathers  His  friends  into  His  banqueting  house ! 


CHAPTER  Xn. 


Vers.  1-31.  Now  concerning  spiritual  gifts, brethren,  I  would  not  have  you  ignorant. 

Spiritual  pifts:— The  partic  lar  gifts  to  which  St.  Paul  was  referring  were  not 

exactly  a,^  a  whole  like  anything  tha-  is  to  be  witnessed  in  the  Church  now.  They 
produced  effects  whbh  challenged  the  attention  of  the  eye  and  the  ear,  and  were 
calculated  to  fire  the  imagination.      St.  Paul  mentions  nine  of  these  gifts.     Of 


CHAP,  xii.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  143 

these  the  word  of  knowledge,  the  word  of  wisdom  and  prophecy,  were  such  as 
might  be  found   on  no  inconsiderable  scale  at  the  present  day  diffused  in  the 
Church  of  Christ.     The  word  of  wisdom  would  seem  to  be  an  eminent  power  of 
apprehending  revealed  truth  in  its  relations  towards  the  general  field  of  human 
thought  and  human  knowledge — as  we  should  say,  of  apprehending  it  philosophically. 
The  word  of  knowledge  implies  an  insight  into  the  several  departments  of  revealed 
truth,  and  into  their  mutual  relations  towards  each  other ;  while  prophecy  means 
not  simi^ly  prediction  of  the  future,  but  especially  the  power  of  stating  truth  and 
duty  clearly  and  forcibly  to  others.     Aad  the  gift  of  faith  here  mentioned  would 
be  probably  something  distinct  from  the  faith  of  ordinary  believers — an  extraor- 
dinary illumination  of  the  believing  soul,  making  God  and  the  world  unseen  so 
vividly  present   to  it  that  all  obstacles  to  duty  seem  for  the   time  straightway 
to  vanish.     This,  too,  is  to  be  found  in  some  gifted  Christians  in  all  ages  of  the 
Church.     The  five  other  gifts  are  at  least  less  ordinary.     There  were  Christians 
at  Corinth  who  had  the  gift  of  healings,  and  others  a  more  extended  gift  of  working 
miracles ;  cases,  these,  i^lainly,  in  which  the  fire  of   the  Holy  Ghost,  possessing, 
■enlightening,  warming  the  believing  soul,  made  itself  felt  through  the  soul  and 
body  of  the  believer  upon  surroundim;  nature,  and  produced  effects  for  which  no 
natural  causes  that  were  known  would  account.     Others,  again,  had  the  gift  of 
discerning   spirits — something  deeper,  that  is,   than   any  insight   into   character, 
.although  analogous  to  this  great  and  uncommon  gift.     A  power  they  had  of  seeing 
in  other  souls  the  exact  endowment  with  which  the  Holy  Ghost  had  furnished 
them — what  in  them  was   really  the  work  of  grace — what  only  the  counterfeit 
of  nature.      Others,  again,  spoke  with   tongues — probably,   as   at   Pentecost,   in 
foreign  languages,  sometimes  with  a  view  to  missionary  work  among  the  strangers 
who  were  to  be  found  about  the  port  and  in  the  streets  of  Corinth  ;  probably  also, 
a,nd  more  frequently  still,  in  a  m>stic  language  to  which  no  known  human  tongue 
corresponded,  yet  in  which  an  entranced  and  illuminated  soul  might  at  times  alone 
be  able  to  express  itself.     Others,  again,  had  tire  gift  of  interpreting  tongues — 
probably  the  mystic  language  of  devotion,  which,  but  for  the  gifted  interpreter, 
would  have  died  away  upon  the  ear  of  the  audience  without  leaving  even  an  idea 
behind.     It  was  natural  that  the  exercise  of  such  endowments  as  these  should 
have  led  to  a  great  deal  of  discussion  at  Corinth,  where  the  subject  was  continually 
and  practically  brought  before  the  eyes  and  ears  of  Christians.     Questions  were 
eagerly  asked  ;  they  were  often  hastily  and  erroneously  answered.     They  were  at 
last  referred  to  the  apostle.     St.  Paul  answers  these  questions,  and  in  doing  so  he 
lays  down  principles  of  permanent  and  vital  importance.     First,  every  single  gift,  -^ 
he  says,  even  the  very  least,  is  important,  because  all  come  from  a  single  source — 
the  Divine  and  eternal  Spirit  living  and  working  in  the  Church  of  Christ.    Secondly,  -^ 
he  rules  that  the  gifts  do  differ  in  importance,  and  that  their  importance  is  to  be 
measured  by  their  practical  value  to  the  soul  and  to  the  Church  of  Christ.     On  this 
account  he   decides  that  the  gift   of   tongues  which  excited   such  extraordinary 
■enthusiasm  at  Corinth  is  really  a  less  important  gift  than  the  relatively  quiet  and 
tame  gift  of  teaching  or  prophecy,  simply  because  the  latter  is  of  grt'ater  service  to 
.others — of  greater  service  to  the  Church.     Thirdly,  he  will  not  allow  that  the  -' 
possession  of  any  gift  whatever  ought  to  make  the  possessor  an  object  of  jealousy. 
Being  a  gift  it  implies  no  sort  of  merit  in  the  possessor  at  all,  but  only  in  the  giver. 
It  is  given,  too,  not  for  the  advantage,  not  for  the  credit  of  the  possessor  of  it,  but 
simply  for  the  good  of  the  Church  at  large.    No  gift,  accordingly,  could  be  possessed 
;by  the  heat  lien  outside  the  Church  who  cursed  the  blessed  name  of  Jesus  ;  and  no 
gift  rendered  its  possessor  independent  of  others  in  the  holy  body,  or  could  be 
wholly  monopolised  for  the  advantage  of  the  possessor.   The  eye  could  not  possibly 
say  to  the  foot,  "  I  have  no  need  of  tliee."     And,  lastly,  all  these  gifts  were  inferior  - 
to  those  which  were  shared  by  all  Christians,  even  the  very  humblest  in  a  state  of 
grace — love,  joy,  peace,  longsuffering,  gentleness,  goodness,  faith,  meekness,  tem- 
perance, especially  the  graces  of  faith,  of  hope,  of  charity.     Especially  were  they 
inferior  to  the  last  and  greatest  of  these,  the  grace  of  chai'ity — the  love  of  God  for 
His  own  ble-;sed  sake  because  He  is  what  He  is  ;  the  love  of  man  in  and  for  God. 
The  importance  of  this  knowledge  to  us  at  the  present  day  appears  to  me  to  be 
lundeniable,  for  we  live  at  a  time  when  men  are  disposed  to  ignore  the  very  existence 
of  the  spiritual  world — the  presence  and  action  of  the  Holy  Comforter  upon  the 
souls  of  men.     This  is,  perhaps,  partly  a  reaction  from  some  fanatical  ideas  about 
His  work  which  were  to  be  found  here  and  there  in  a  past  generation  ;  but  it  is 
much  more  largely  due,  I  apprehend,  to  the  immense  place  -which  the  material 


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xii. 

universe  holds  in  the  thoughts  and  especially  in  the  imaginations  of  the  present 
generation.  We  have  explored  the  realm  of  matter;  we  have  subjugated  it;  we 
have  made  it  at  once  our  friend  and  our  slave  in  ways  undreamt  of  by  our  fore- 
fathers. Beneath  all  material  splendour,  even  the  greatest,  there  is  at  bottom  an 
aching  void,  because  man  was  made  for  something  higher  and  nobler  tljan  matter 
—because  he  cannot  find  his  real  satisfaction  in  matter.  He  was  made  for  God, 
and  all  that  reminds  man  of  his  real  destiny — yes,  I  will  say  it,  of  his  true  nobility 
— has  a  claim  upon  his  ear  and  upon  his  heart  that  cannot  be  25ermauently 
ignored.  And  when  the  apostle  cries,  "  Concerning  spiritual  gifts,  brethrea,  I 
would  not  have  you  ignorant,"  he  touches  a  chord  to  which  man  sooner  or  later 
responds,  because  in  his  deepest  self  man  is,  and  knows  himself  to  be,  a  spirit. 
His  real  self  is  a  deeper  and  more  central  thing  than  can  be  touched  by  these 
merely  outward  surroundings ;  and  therefore  man  cannot  permanently,  even  in 
this  very  metropolis  of  the  world's  material  civilisation,  forget  that  higher  gifts 
than  any  which  matter  can  furnish  him  are  really  within  his  reach,  and  that  he 
does  not  well  to  be  ignorant  of  tbem.  But  then  some  who  know  that  something 
higher  than  matter  is  their  true  aim  and  portion  do  not  always  fix  their  eye  upon 
the  really  spiritual.  They  mistake  intellect  for  spirit.  But  man's  reason  and 
thought  is  but  an  instrument  of  his  deepest  self — of  his  indestructible  personal 
being.  Spiritual  gifts  are  higher,  far,  than  merely  intellectual  gifts.  The  latter 
imply  nothing  as  to  the  moral  excellence  of  the  inmost  being  itself.  Voltaire's 
brilliancy  was  undeniable,  but  who  would  exchange  solid  peace  of  soul  for  a  power 
of  making  the  epigrams  which  delighted  Paris,  but  which  could  not  bring  one  hour 
of  true  rest  or  happiness  to  their  gifted  author  ?  Do  I  say  that  material  or  intel- 
lectual gifts  are  worthless  ?  God  forbid  !  Thfy  have,  too,  come  from  Him.  His 
gifts  to  the  old  heathen  world,  its  astonishing  cultivation  of  reason,  of  fancy,  of 
language,  its  vast  and  varied  efforts  in  the  way  of  constructive  enterprise,  its 
burning  passion,  its  abundant  genius  for  art,  its  vigorous  talent  for  administration 
and  for  government,  were  and  are  still  worthy  as  coming  from  Him.  Even  although 
these  gilts  were  frequently,  or,  rather,  almost  as  a  matter  of  course,  misused, 
debased,  by  the  pervading  presence  of  sin,  they  were  in  themselves  admirable,  and 
we  do  well  to  h(mour  and  admire  them  if  only  because  of  their  Author.  And  all 
that  He  has  given  in  addition  to  tiie  modern  world,  outside  the  kingdom  of  His 
Son,  and  independently  of  it — our  material  and  intellectual  progress  in  all  its 
dei:)artments — is  matter  not  for  depreciation,  still  less  for  secret  fear,  but  for 
thankful  and  generous  acknowledgment,  if  only  we  remember  that  there  are  higher 
gifts  beyond  ;  that,  when  our  architects,  our  merchants,  our  engineers,  our  his- 
torians, our  poets,  our  metaphysicians,  have  done  their  best,  there  still  remains 
a  sublimer  sphere  from  which  an  apostle  whispers,  "  Concerning  spiritual  gifts, 
brethren,  I  would  not  have  you  ignorant."  Doubtless  we  here  touch,  as  so  often 
in  the  kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ,  ujDon  mystery — that  is  to  say,  upon  a  truth  of  the 
reality  of  which  we  are  convinced,  but  the  full  account  and  reason  of  which  is,  in 
our  present  state  of  being  and  knowledge,  beyond  us.  Who  shall  attempt  to  picture, 
much  less  to  describe,  the  process  whereby  He,  the  Eternal,  the  Uncreated,  over- 
shadows, enwraps,  penetrates,  moulds,  changes,  burns,  our  finite  and  created 
spirits,  bathing  them,  if  we  will,  through  and  through  with  His  light  and  with 
His  warmth,  endowing  them  with  powers  which,  according  to  the  original  terms 
of  their  natural  structure,  are  altogether  strange  to  them,  fitting  them  by  anticipa- 
tion here,  amid  the  scenes  of  sense  and  time,  for  a  higher  and  a  better  world  ? 
Who  indeed  shall  say,  since  who  knows  enough  of  the  nature  and  intrinsic  capacities 
of  spirit  to  attempt  the  description?  From  age  to  age  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit  may 
vary  in  their  form  ;  substantially  they  are  the  same  to  the  very  end  of  time  ;  and, 
next  to  the  atoning  death  of  Jesus  Christ  and  the  power  of  His  blood  to  cleanse 
our  sins,  there  is  no  fact  of  equal  practical  importance  to  human  beings  who  are 
living  and  must  die.  In  conclusion,  one  or  two  practical  considerations.  Now 
these  words  furnish  us  with  a  guide  to  the  true  idea  of  education,  with  a  test  and 
criterion  of  some  current  educational  theories.  When  I  hear  of  schemes  of  educa- 
tion which  are  only  schemes  for  packing  the  mind  full  of  facts,  and  which  include 
among  those  facts  almost  everything  except  what  beais  upon  that  one  subject  which 
it  is  of  most  importance  for  a  human  being  to  know,  a  voice  from  above  sounds  in 
my  ears,  "  Concerning  spiritual  gifts,  brethren  of  this  generation,  I  would  not  have 
you  ignorant."  What  will  it  profit  to  have  measured  and  weighed  out  the  whole 
realm  of  matter — to  have  explored  and  studied  all  the  achievements  of  human 
thought  ;  if,  af;er  all,  God's  gifts  to  the  soul— His  gifts  of  a  new  birth,  of  a  real 


CHAP.  XII.  J  I.  CORINTHIANS.  145 

redemption,  of  a  new  insight  into  truth,  of  a  robe  wherein  one  clay  the  soul  may 
appear  even  before  Him  in  His  sanctity  and  in  His  justice  witliout  trembling  and 
wiiliDut  c'onfusinn — if  tliese  are  altogether  ignored?  So,  too,  in  the  sentence  of  the 
apubtle  I  see  a  rule  for  forming  friendship.  Perhaps  before  the  idea  of  a  universal 
iurotbt-rliood  in  Clirist  had  dawned  upon  the  conscience  of  the  world,  a  single  sincere 
attaihment  between  two  human  beings  had  a  significance  which  we  to-day  can  with 
diJiiciilty  appreciate.  But,  at  any  rate,  the  ancients  were  right,  in  estimating  very 
highly  the  moral  importance  of  friendship;  for  a  friend — ;iud  there  is  scaicely  a 
truth  which  a  young  man  ought  more  carefully  to  lay  to  heart — a  friend  at  once 
reflects  and  moulds  character.  His  influence  penetrates  in  a  thousand  ways  into 
the  recest-s  of  ttiought  and  of  feeling.  He  leaves  his  mark  there,  most  assuredly. 
He  is  a  help  or  a  hindrance ;  he  is  a  blessing  or  a  curse,  as  the  case  may  be.  What 
is  his  real  character?  What  are  the  qualities  of  his  heart?  What,  properly 
speaking,  are  his  spiritual  endowments?  What  is  his  amount  of  faith  in  the 
unseen — of  hope  in  an  eternal  future — of  love  of  God  and  of  man?  And,  lastly, 
here  is  a  rule  for  all  steady  and  systematic  efforts  at  self-improvement.  Let  us 
make  the  most  of  the  means  of  grace,  as  they  are  termed,  while  we  may.  Of  the 
ceitificated  channels  through  which  these  gifts  must  reach  us — of  prayer,  first  of 
all,  of  the  Divine  Scriptures,  of  the  holy  sacraments — life  is  too  short,  my  brethren, 
to  allow  any  man  to  know  or  to  do  everything.  There  is  much  of  which  we  may 
safely,  and  even  profitably,  be  ignorant ;  but  as  immortal  beings  we  dare  not  ignore, 
we  dare  not  negiect,  tlie  gifts  which  the  eternal  Spirit  bestows  upon  us  here  that 
hereafter  they  may  robe  us  in  a  happy  immortality.  (C'lvon  Liddon.)  Con- 
ceruhiri  spiriiual  yifts : — 1.  This  Epistle  is  well  fitted  to  disabuse  our  minds  of^ 
the  idea  that  the  primitive  Church  was  in  all  respects  superior  to  the  Church 
of  our  own  day.  We  turn  page  after  page  and  find  little  but  contention, 
errors,  immorality,  &c.  2.  At  this  point,  however,  the  primitive  Church  is 
differentiated  from  our  own,  and  it  would  have  been  surprising  had  the  revolution 
which  Christianity  introduced  not  been  accompanied  by  abnormal  manifestation. 
The  new  Divine  life,  suddenly  poured  into  human  nature,  sfirred  it  to  unusual 
power.  People  who  yesterday  could  only  condole  with  their  sick  friends,  found  to- 
day that  they  coubl  impart  to  them  vital  energy.  Men  brought  up  in  idolatry  and 
ignorance  suddenly  found  their  minds  filled  with  new  and  stimulating  ideas  which 
they  felt  impelled  to  impart.  3.  The  Spirit  of  Christ  does  not  produce  these  mani- 
festations now  because — (1)  They  are  no  longer  required.  When  you  sow  a  plot 
you  stick  twigs  round  it  that  the  unseen  plant  may  not  be  trodden  down,  but  when 
the  plants  have  become  as  tall  as  the  twigs,  then  these  are  useless.  So  mirafdes 
helped  the  young  Church's  growth  ;  but  she  has  now  become  sufficiently  visible 
and  understood  to  need  them  no  more.  (2)  The  disturbances  produced  by  the  first 
impact  of  these  new  Christian  forces  could  not  be  expected  to  continue.  New 
political  or  social  ideas  suddenly  possessing  a  people,  as  at  the  French  Revolution,, 
mspire  with  an  eneryy  which  cannot  be  normal.  4.  Nothing  could  be  more  natural 
than  that  these  gifts  should  be  overrated.  They  came  to  be  prized  for  their  own 
sake,  and,  as  usual,  what  was  useful  could  not  compete  with  what  was  surprising. 
5.  Paul  now  explains  the  object  of  these  gifts  and  the  principle  of  their  distribu- 
tion. (1)  He  reminds  them  that  their  previous  history  sufficiently  explained  their 
need  of  instruction  (vers.  1,  2).  The  first  thing  needed  to  guide  them,  therefore, 
was  a  criterion  by  which  they  could  judge  whether  so-called  manifestations  of  the 
Spirit  are  genuine  or  spurious  (ver.  3).  Very  early  men  were  found  in  the  Church 
who  could  not  reconcile  themselves  to  the  accursed  death  of  Christ.  They  believed 
in  His  gospel,  miracles,  kingdom,  but  the  Crucifixion  was  a  stumbling-block.  And  so 
they  lield  that  the  Divine  L/ogos  descended  upon  Jesus  at  His  baptism,  but  aban- 
doned Him  before  the  Crucifixion.  Tliis  degradation  of  Jesus  was  not  to  be 
tolerated,  and  to  own  His  kjrdship  was  the  test  of  a  man's  Christianity.  And  this 
is  the  only  sure  test  to-day.  No  wonderful  works  he  may  accomplish  prove  his 
possession  of  Christ's  Spirit  (Malt.  vii.  22,  23).  (2)  And  as  to  the  gifts  tliemselves, 
they  should  be  no  cause  of  discord,  for  they  have  everything  in  common:  they 
have  their  source  in  God;  they  are  for  Christ's  service;  they  are  forms  of  the  same 
Spirit  (vers.  4-G).  (3)  The  new  life  a^surHed  various  form's  and  sufficed  for  all 
man's  need-.;.  As  the  sun  in  spring  develops  e^'ch  seed  according  to  its  own  special 
character,  so  with  this  n^w  spiritual  force.  Christian  influence  does  not  clip  all 
men  after  one  pattern  like  trees  in  an  avenue,  but  causes  each  to  grow  according 
to  his  own  individuality,  one  with  the  ruL'ged  irregularity  of  the  oak,  another  witii 
the  orderly  richness  of  the  plane.  6.  That  society  is  an  organism  similar  to  thr 
VOL.  II.  10 


145  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xii. 

human  body,  is  not  an  exclusively  Christian  idea.  It  was  a  common  Stoic  doctrine, 
and  in  tlie  earlirst  days  of  Kome  Menenius  Agrippa  uttered  his  fable  which  Shake- 
speare has  helpsd  to  make  famous.  But  although  this  comparison  is  not  new,  it  is 
now  being  more  seriously  and  scientifically  examined  and  pushed  to  its  legitimate 
conclusion.  Paul  suggests — I.  That  the  unity  of  CiiitisTiANS  is  a  vital  unity  (ver.  13). 
This  unity  is  not  a  mechanical  unity,  as  of  shot  in  a  bag;  nor  a  forced  unity,  as  of 
wild  beasts  in  a  menageiie;  nor  a  unity  of  mere  accidental  juxtaposition,  as  of 
passengers  in  a  train.  But  as  the  life  of  the  liuinan  body  maintains  all  the  vari-ous 
members  and  nourishes  them  to  a  well-proi^ortioned  and  harmonious  growth,  so  is 
it  in  the  body  of  Christ.  II.  That  the  efficiency  of  the  body  depends  upon  the 
multiplicity  and  vaeiety  of  its  members  (vers.  17,  19).  The  lowest  forms  of  life 
have  either  no  distinct  organs  or  very  few ;  but  the  h'gher  we  ascend  the  more 
numerous  and  distinctly  dilfeieutiated  are  the  organs.  The  same  law  holds  good 
of  society.  Among  uncivilised  tribes  each  man  is  his  own  farmer  or  huntsman, 
and  his  own  priest,  butcher,  cook,  and  clothier.  But  as  mfn  become  civilised  the 
various  wants  of  society  are  supplied  by  different  individuals,  and  every  function  is 
specialised.  The  same  law  necessarily  holds  true  of  the  boly  of  Clirist.  In  a 
society  in  which  Christianity  is  just  beginning  to  take  root,  it  may  fall  to  one  man 
to  do  the  work  of  the  whole  Christian  body,  &c.  But  as  it  advances  towards  a  perfect 
condition  its  functions  and  organs  become  as  multifarious  and  distinct  as  the 
organs  of  the  human  body.  Every  memljer  therefore  has  something  to  coiitril^ute 
to  its  good  and  to  the  work  it  does.  And  it  is  tor  him  to  discover  what  his  Chiistian 
instincts  lead  him  to.  The  eye  does  not  need  to  be  told  it  is  for  seeing,  or  the  hand 
that  it  is  for  grasping.  And  where  there  is  true  Christian  life,  it  matters  not  what 
the  member  of  Christ's  body  be,  it  will  fuul  its  function,  even  though  that  function 
is  new  in  the  Church's  experience.  HI.  That  as  there  is  to  be  no  slothful 
self-disparagement  in  the  body  of  Christ,  so  must  there  be  no  dkpreciahon  of 
other  people  (ver.  21).  When  zealous  people  discover  new  methods,  they  forthwith 
despise  the  normal  ecclesiastical  system  that  has  stooil  the  test  and  is  stnmjicd  with 
the  approval  of  centuries.  One  method  cannot  regenerate  and  Christianise  tlie 
world  any  more  than  one  mem^'cr  can  do  tlie  whole  work  of  the  bod^'.  Paul  goes 
even  further,  and  reminds  us  that  the  "feeble"  parts  of  the  body  are  "the  more 
necessary";  the  heart,  the  brain,  the  lunys,  &c.,  are  more  necessary  than  the 
hand  or  the  foot,  the  loss  of  which  no  doubt  ciipples,  but  does  not  kill.  So  in  the 
Church  it  is  the  hidden  souls  who,  by  their  prayers  and  domestic  godliness,  maintain 
the  v.-hole  body  in  health  and  enable  more  conspicuously  gifted  members  to  do 
their  part.  Contempt  for  any  member  of  the  body  of  Christ  is  most  unseemly 
and  sinful.  IV.  That  "  the  5l\nifestation  of  the  Spii.tt  is  given  to  every  man  to 
PROFIT  withal,"  and  not  for  the  glorific;)tion  of  the  individual.  However  beautiful 
any  feature  of  a  face  may  be,  it  is  hideous  apart  from  its  position  ;  so  is  the  Chris- 
tian who  attracts  attention  to  hini'-elf  and  does  not  subordinate  his  gift  to  the 
advantage  of  the  whole  body  of  Christ.  If  in  the  human  body  any  member  is  not 
subservient  to  the  one  cential  will,  that  is  recognised  as  disease  :  St.  Vitus'  dance. 
If  any  member  ceases  to  obey  the  ceutral  will,  paralysis  is  indicated.  And  equally 
so  is  disease  indicated  wherever  a  Christian  seeks  his  own  ends  or  his  own  glorifica- 
tion, and  not  the  advantage  of  the  whole  body.  (M.  Dods,  D.D.)  Of  a2)irituiil 
(lifts  : — 1.  The  ancient  prophets  had  clearly  predicted  that  the  Messianic  period 
should  be  attended  l^y  a  remarkable  effusion  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Our  Lord,  before 
His  crucifixion,  promised  to  send  the  Holy  Ghost  (.John  xiv.,  &c.),  and  after  His 
resurrection  lie  said,  "These  signs  shall  follow  them  that  believe,"  etc.  (Mark  xvi. 
17,  18 ;  cf.  Acts  i.  5).  On  the  day  of  Pentecost  these  promises  and  proi)hecies  were 
literally  tnllilled.  2.  The  peculiarity  of  the  new  dispensation  consisted — (1)  In  the 
general  diffusion  of  these  gifts.  They  were  extended  to  all  classes — (2)  In  their 
■wonderful  diversity.  3.  fnder  circumstances  so  extraordinary  it  was  unavoidable 
tbat  many  disorders  should  arise.  (1)  Some  claimed  to  be  the  organs  of  the  Spirit, 
who  were  deluded  or  impostors.  (2)  Some  were  dissatisfied  with  their  gifts,  and 
envied  those  whom  they  regarded  as  more  highly  favoured.  (3)  Oihers  were 
inflated,  and  made  an  ostentatious  display  of  their  powers.  (4)  Many  persons  were 
desirous  to  exercise  their  gifts  at  the  same  time.  4.  To  the  correction  of  these  evils 
the  apostle  now  devotes  himself.     Note — I.  The  criterion  by  which  they  might 

DECIDE  WHETHER  THOSE  WHO  PRETENDED  TO  BE  THE  ORGANS  OF  THE  SpIRIT  WERE  RE.\LLY 

UNDER  His  INFLUENCE.  Do  they  blaspheme  Christ  or  do  they  worship  Him  ?  If 
they  recognise  Jesus  as  Lord,  then  they  are  under  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
(vers.  1-3).     II.  These  gifts,  whether  viewed  as  graces  of  the  Spirit,  or  as  forms 


CHAP.  XII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  147 

of  ministering  to  Christ,  or  the  eiJects  of  God's  power,  are  but  different  mani- 

FESTATIOXS  OF  THE  HOLY  GhOST,  AND  ARE  ALL  INTENDED  FOR  THE    EDIFICATION    OF    THE 

Ohdrch  (vers.  4-7).  III.  Their  arrangement.  1.  The  word  of  wisdom  and  the 
word  of  knowledge.  2.  Faith,  the  gift  of  healins,  the  power  of  working  mii-acles, 
prophesying,  and  the  discerning  of  spirits.  3.  The  gift  of  tongues  and  tlieir  inter- 
jiretation  (vers.  8-10).  IV.  They  are  not  only  the  fruits  of  ihe  Spirit,  but  are 
distributed  according  to  His  sovereign  will  (ver.  11).  V.  There  is  in  this  matter 
A  striking  analogy  between  the  Church  and  the  human  body.  For — 1.  As  the 
bi)dy  is  one  because  animated  by  one  spirit,  so  the  Church  is  one  because  of 
the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  2.  As  the  unity  of  life  in  ttie  body  is 
manifested  in  a  diversity  of  organs  and  members,  so  is  the  indwelling  of  the 
Spirit  by  a  diversity  of  gifts  and  offices.  3.  As  the  very  idea  of  the  body  as 
an  orcanisation  supposes  this  diversity  in  unity,  the  same  is  true  in  regard  to 
the  Chinch.  4.  As  in  the  body  the  members  are  mutually  dependent,  and  no 
one  exists  for  itself  alone,  so  also  in  the  Church.  5.  As  in  the  body  the  position 
and  function  of  each  member  are  determined  by  God,  so  also  these  gifts  are 
distributtd  according  to  the  good  pleasure  of  tbeir  Author.  6.  In  the  body  the 
least  attractive  parts  are  those  which  are  indispensable  to  its  existence,  and  so  in 
the  Church  it  is  not  the  most  attractive  gifts  which  are  the  most  us^-tul.  VI. 
Inferences  from  this  analogy.  1.  Every  one  should  be  contented  with  the  gift 
which  he  has  received  just  as  the  hand  and  the  foot  are  contented  wiih  their  position 
and  office  in  the  body.  2.  There  should  be  no  exaltation  of  one  member  of  tbe 
•Church  because  of  his  gifts.  3.  There  must  be  mutual  sympathy  between  the 
members  of  the  Church,  as  there  is  between  the  members  of  the  body.  One  cannot 
suffer  without  all  the  others  suffering  with  it.  No  one  lives,  or  acts,  or  feels  for 
itself  alone,  but  each  in  all  the  rest  (vers.  12-27).  Conclusion  :  What  the  apostle  had 
said  with  regard  to  these  spiritual  gifts,  applies  in  all  its  force  to  the  various  offices 
of  the  Church,  whii-h  are  the  organs  through  which  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit  are 
exercised  (vers.  28-31).  {G.  Hodcje,  D.D.)  Sjiiritual  c/ifts  : — I.  Tnic  distribution  /> 
OF  spiritual  gifts.  1.  The  distribution  is  as  varied  as  that  of  bodily  and  eaithly 
gifts.  (1)  One  penetrates  into  the  depths  of  the  wisdom  of  God  in  nature,  history, 
human  life,  and  in  the  plan  of  salvation.  (2)  Another  communicates  the  sum  of 
human  knowledge  in  books  or  by  speech.  (3)  To  another  there  is  given  a  special 
spiritual  power  which  is  able  to  sustain  him  under  the  most  trying  circumstances. 
(4)  Or  there  are  gifts  of  miracles,  prophecy,  discerning  of  spirits,  tongues.  Our  own 
time  is  not  wanting  in  spiritual  gifts.  Think  of  the  spirit  of  investigation,  and  of  tlie 
multitude  of  singers,  preachers,  leaders,  and  praying  men.  No  village  is  too  small 
in  which  may  not  be  found  a  trace  of  spiritual  gifts.  2.  There  are  gifts  enough, 
but  no  one  person  possesses  them  all.  Hence  all  man-worsh^j)  is  entirelv  out  of 
l^lace.  No  self-exaliation  is  permissible.  Every  one  has  his  limitations,  which  he 
cannot  transcend  without  paying  the  penalty.  And  hence  all  discontent  at  our  time 
and  art  is  also  out  of  order.  3.  Every  one  has  some  kind  of  a  gift.  Often  there 
creeps  over  us  a  feeling  of  gloom  in  view  of  more  glorious  gifts  and  greater  suc- 
cesses on  the  part  of  others.  But  in  God's  sight  humility  and  fidelity  are  of  more 
avail  than  glory  and  splendour.  Emjiloy,  then,  thine  own  gifis  without  envy  and 
without  hindrance.  He  that  cannot  construct  a  magnificent  park  can  j.lant  roses 
in  bis  little  family  garden.  II.  The  right  use  of  spiritual  gifts.  1.  "  There  are 
diversities  of  gifts,"  but  what  is  the  Spirit  whence  they  come  and  which  they  serve? 
The  greater  the  gil'ts  the  greater  the  responsibility;  a  Saul  becomes  a  Paul,  but  how 
many  have  reversed  this  course  !  2.  "  There  are  differences  of  administrations." 
3.  There  are  diversities  of  operations.  4.  But  the  manifestation  of  the  Spirit  is 
given  to  every  man  to  profit  withal.      (K.  Gerok,  D.D.)  Spirhual  (lifts  and  >^ 

inspiration: — I.  The  apostle  lays  down  a  broad  general  principle  ri'SPkctivg 
spiritual  inspiration  (ver.  3),  1.  This  made  the  broad  separation  between  the 
Church  and  the  world,  and  is  far  above  all  distinctions  as  to  gifts.  It  is  far  more 
important  to  ascertain  tbat  a  man  is  a  Christian  than  what  sort  of  Christian  he  is 
(vers.  4-6).  In  what  we  differ  from  the  world  and  not  in  what  we  differ  from  oiher 
Christians  consists  our  distinction  in  the  sight  of  God.  Does  bnplism  teach  of  a 
difference  between  Christians  (ver.  13)  ?  There  are  vaiieties,  but  they  are  all  of  ''  the 
selfsame  Spiiit."  2.  Let  us  biing  this  home  person^dly.  What  is  it  that  waked 
up  the  ener^-des  of  these  Coiinthians  most?  Was  it  tbat  which  stimulated  the 
apostle  at  Athens  (Acts  xvii.  IG)  ?  or  was  it  rather  the  dfference  bet\»een  party  ^nd 
jjarty  ?  What  is  it  that  wakes  up  the  polemical  energies  of  this  day?  Is  it  opposition 
to  evil,  or  is  it  opposition  to  some  doctrine  held  by  other  Christians?     Were  half 


143  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xil. 

the  energy  spent  in  trampling  down  sin  which  is  spent  in  religious  controversy,  the 
kingdom  of  God  will  soon  be  established  in  this  world ;  but  "  if  ye  bite  and  devour 
one  another,  take  heed  that  ye  be  not  consumed  one  of  another."   II.  The  place  and 

VALUE  ASSIGNED  BY  St.  PaUL  TO  DIFFEliENCES  (IF  SPIRITUAL  GIFTS.     1.  ThcSe  dili'eienceS 

are  the  very  conditions  of  Christian  unity.  The  distinction  between  a  society  and  an 
association  is  that  artificial  association  binds  man  to  man  on  the  principle  of  simi- 
larity, while  natural  society  binds  men  together  in  diversity.  The  idea  of  the  Church 
presented  in  tlie  Bible  is  that  of  a  family  which  is  not  a  union  of  similarity,  for  the 
father  dilTers  from  tlje  mnther,  &c.,  and  yet  toxether  they  form  a  most  blessed  type 
of  unity.  2.  St.  Paul  carries  on  this  piincijile,  and  draws  out  of  it  special  personal 
duties ;  he  says  that  gifts  are  granted  to  individuals  for  the  sake  of  the  whole 
Church.  After  this  he  applies  the  principle  to — (1)  Those  possessed  of  inferior 
gifts.  These  are — (a)  Not  to  envy.  Observe  here  the  difference  between  the 
Christian  doctrine  of  unity  and  equality,  and  the  world's  doctrine  of  levelling  all  to 
one  standard.  The  intention  of  God  is  not  that  the  rude  hand  s'tiould  have  the 
delicacy  of  the  eye,  or  the  foot  power  of  the  brain,  but  to  pioclaim  the  real  equality 
of  each  in  mutual  sympathy  and  love,  {h)  Not  to  despond.  There  are  few  tempta- 
tions more  common  to  ardent  sp'rits  than  to  repine  at  their  lot,  believing  that  in 
some  other  situation  they  could  serve  God  better.  St.  Paul  says  that  it  is  the  duty  of 
every  tuch  man  to  try  to  be  himself,  to  do  his  own  duty  ;  fur  here  in  this  world  we  are 
nothing  apart  from  its  strange  and  curious  clockwork  ;  and  if  each  man  had  the  spirit 
of  the  Cross  it  would  not  matter  to  him  whether  he  were  doing  the  work  of  the  main- 
spring or  of  one  of  the  inferior  parts.  (2)  Those  gifted  with  higher  powers.  These 
duties  were — («)  Humility.  They  were  not  to  despise  those  who  were  inferior.  As 
with  the  natuial  body  the  rudest  parts  are  the  most  useful,  and  the  delicate  parts 
require  most  care,  so  is  it  with  tlie  body  politic ;  the  meanest  trades  are  those  with 
which  we  can  least  dispense,  (h)  Sympathy  (ver.  2G).  How  little,  during  eighteen 
hundred  years,  have  the  hearts  of  men  been  got  to  beat  tof^ether  !  Nor  can  we  say 
that  this  is  the  fault  of  the  capitalists  and  the  masters  only,  it  is  the  fault  of  the 
servants  and  dependents  also.  [F.  W.  liohcitsoiu  M.A.)  The  ivork  of  the  Spirit 
■in  vtudeni  lij'e  : — "\\  hat  i.he  api  stle  saw  the  Divine  Spirit  doing  on  the  limited 
arei  of  the  early  Cuurch,  we  can  see  Hiin  doing  at  large  in  modern  civilised 
society.  Where. er  the  minds  of  men  are  k'.ndled  into  activity,  redeeming 
them  from  the  thraldom  of  merely  animal  existence,  there  the  inspiration  of  the 
Divine  Spirit  is  at  work.     Of  this  the  grandest  forms  are — I.  The  satisfaction  op 

THE  passionate    DESIKE    FILLING    SO    MANY    IIEAIiTS,  EAGERLY    ASKING,  WhaT    IS    TRUE  ? 

For  that  is  equivalent  to.  What  is  Divine  ?  What  is  it  that  really  represents  to  us 
God's  thought  and  way  of  working?  1.  This  gift  of  the  Spirit  of  truth  is  con- 
demned by  the  worldly-minded,  b--caase  it  leads  men  to  question  what  seems  settled. 
2.  Men  under  the  ius[)iration  of  this  Spirit  are  not  all  impelled  into  the  same 
departments  of  inquiry.  (1)  One  man  goes  oi'i  upon  the  scientific  track  and  wants 
to  know  the  truih  about  the  outward  universe.  (2)  Others  again,  feeling  that 
mountains  and  rivers  and  animals  can  tell  them  little  about  the  most  entrancing 
matter,  turn  to  ask,  What  is  the  nature  of  Gud  and  His  relation  to  man?  That 
which  inspires  this  question  is  the  voice  of  the  great  Fiither  saying  within  us, 
"  Seek  ye  My  face."  II.  The  revelation  of  beauty.  1.  The  faculty  which  per- 
ceives the  beautiful,  wrought  on  by  the  Divine  S()irit,  was  never  so  generaUy  active 
as  at  the  present  day.  (1)  One  of  the  most  lemarkable  developments  of  the  human 
mind  is  its  rerent  awaking  to  the  beauty  and  po.  trv  of  the  external  nature.  The 
elder  poets  and  painters  did  not  go  to  nature  for  the  inspiration  of  their  master- 
pieces, but  to  man  and  to  mythology.  People  travel  in  thousands  over  sens  and  con- 
tinents to  see  a  grand  waterfall,  or  a  sublime  range  of  mountains.  (2)  Musical 
thought  and  feeling  again  has  never  attained  to  sudi  wonderful  expression,  and  in 
the  whole  history  of  the  world  we  have  never  heard  such  bursts  of  glorious  song  as 
we  have  heard  from  Bach,  Handel,  (fee.  2.  I  know  that  neither  poetry,  nor  painting, 
nor  music,  will  of  themselves  renew  a  man's  moral  nature ;  but  if  you  can  inspire 
along  with  the  love  of  truth  and  goodness  a  love  of  the  grand  and  the  beautiful,  you 
have  done  a  great  deal  to  assist  the  more  direct  religious  influences.  3.  The  day 
will  come  when  religion  shall  be  more  closely  associated  with  its  natural  frieods  of 
culture  and  art,  and  in  com  ination  shall  consecrate  the  family  life  and  drive  out  the 
demon  of  intemperance.  III.  The  gift  of  goodness  or  beneficence.  1.  Gifts  of 
healing  were  among  the  sp  ritual  t-'ilts,  and  we  nmst  surely  reckon  them  amongst 
the  most  precious  gifts  vouchsafed  to  modern  da\  s.  Human  life  is  besieged  by  a 
whole  army  of  diseases  and  da'  gers,  both  of  mind  and  body,  so  that  he  who  gives 


CHAP.  XII.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  14S 

his  whole  mind  and  energy  to  prevent,  or  to  heal  them,  is  a  gift  of  God  to  the 
sufferer.  When  every  medical  man  shall  becnme  a  deep  student  of  his  art,  seeking 
for  all  the  new  li^ht  which  God  sends,  untrammelled  by  the  traditions  merely  of  his 
prr^lession,  he  will  become  a  faithful  minister  of  that  Spirit  who  has  called  him  to 
His  Divine  work,  and  an  unspealcable  blessing  to  society.  2.  "  Government "  is 
another  item.  This,  whether  local  or  imperial,  must  be  regarded  as  one  of  the 
greatest  of  modern  boons.  Any  one  who  helps  fo  govern  a  city  well,  to  promote 
the  health  and  security  of  its  inhabitants,  even  though  he  may  get  scant  gratitude 
for  his  services,  is  as  clearly  a  minister  of  God  as  he  who  pi'paclies  the  gospel.  And 
any  man  who  helps  to  govern  a  nation  well,  who  seeks  to  lead  a  people  on  by  just 
laws  and  wise  policy,  stunds  in  the  front  rank  among  God's  eminent  servants.  The 
prosperity  of  a  whole  nation  depends  upon  such  meu  being  at  the  helm  of  the 
nationiil  ship.  3.  Gifts  of  speech  have  become  ours  in  a  far  more  wonderful  way 
than  those  of  the  Apostofic  Church.  The  uuiver.^e  hns  become  vocal,  and  the 
distunt  sun  and  planets  are  full  of  speech,  telling  us  something  of  their  own  tale. 
The  buried  monuments  of  extinct  empires  have  arisen  to  tell  us  the  story  of  their 
history.  Languages  which  were  spoken  in  the  grey  dawn  of  the  world  speak  to  us 
again  through  the  labours  of  scholars  who  have  wrought  at  ill-requited  work. 
Nearly  all  the  speech  and  dialects  now  spoken  in  the  wide  world  have  been 
mastered  and  made  intelligible  to  us.  The  eastern  world  speaks  to  the  western  as 
easily  as  two  persons  conversing  in  the  same  room,  and  the  telegraph  girdles  the 
globe  with  fiery  thought  and  flashing  speech.  And  consider  how  the  channels  of 
communication  from  mind  to  mind  are  multiplied  in  all  civilised  communities. 
There  is  the  greatest  of  all  modern  miracles — the  daily  newspaper,  and  it  would  be 
endless  to  speak  of  the  books  and  periodicals  that  are  printed  in  all  departments  of 
inquiry  or  imagination.  And  then  consider  how  God  has  gifted  some  men  with  the 
powers  of  speech  as  orators.  Think  what  this  modern  English  tongue  becomes  in 
their  use  of  it — flexilile,  rich,  m-ijestic,  for  the  expression  of  every  variety  of  thouglit 
and   feeling.       (C.    Short,    I\1.A.)  The   vniti/    of    the    ChrisHan    Church    is    its 

dii-ersity  : — 1.  There  are  various  believers,  but  one  faith  (vers.  1-3).  2.  There  are 
various  ordinances,  but  one  Ordainer  (vers.  4-(3).  3.  There  are  various  operations, 
but  one  work  (vers.  7-11).  (Pustui-  Pfeiffer.)  The  Christly  assembly: — Every 
member  of  this  community — I.  Has  passed  tpeougii  a  radical  change  (vers. 
1-2).  1.  This  is  a  change  from  the  spirit  of  the  Gentiles  or  the  world  to  the  Spirit 
of  Christ — the  most  radii-al  change  tliat  can  take  place  in  a  man.  2.  This  is 
described — (1)  Negatively.  No  man  who  has  experienced  it  has  anything  irreverent 
or  profane  in  his  spirit  towards  Christ  (ver.  3).  (2)  Positively  (ver.  3).  "  Can  say," 
not  of  course  merely  the  words,  for  all  could  easily  do  that,  but  with  the  heart  and 
life.  3.  This  is  the  production  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  No  man  is  a  member  of  the 
true  Church  who  has  not  come  under  the  control  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  There 
are  such  who  are  found  in  no  Church,  and  there  may  be  Ci.urches  wheie  no  such 
are  found.  All  sucli,  however,  wherever  found,  belong  to  the  Church  of  the  "  first- 
born written  in  heaven."  II.  Has  received  special  endowments  fkoji  God  (vers. 
4-12).  1.  These  may  be  divided  into — (1)  Those  of  intellect.  "  Wisdom,"  "  know- 
ledge," &o.  (2)  Those  of  "  faith,"  operating  faith  in  words,  deeds,  and  "discern- 
ment." (3)  Those  of  language.  "  Tongues,"  speaking  and  interpreting.  2.  Now 
all  responsible  men  have— (1)  Intellect  of  some  kind  and  aniount.  (2)  Faith  of 
some  sort.  Man  has  an  instinctive  tendency  to  believe,  hence  his  credulity  is  pro- 
verbial. And  he  is  necessitated  to  believe  :  he  could  not  carry  on  the  business  of 
life  without  faith.  (3)  A  language  of  some  kind  or  other.  3.  The  man  who  has 
come  into  possession  of  the  Christlv  Spirit  and  purpose,  and  is  thus  a  member  of 
the  genuine  Church,  will  receive — (1)  A  new  force  and  elevation  of  intellect.  (2) 
A  new  object  and  energy  of  faith.  (3)  A  new  style  and  emphasis  of  exiDression,  a 
new  tongue.  4.  This  great  variety  of  endowments  reveals — (1)  The  sovereignty  of 
the  Siiirit.  Why  did  He  bestow  any  at  all?  Still  more,  why  so  different  to  diffeient 
men?  The  only  answer  is  be  ause  it  pleased  Him  so  to  do.  "He  work,  d  all 
things  aftei'  the  counsel  of  His  own  will."  (2)  His  afiluence.  He  is  the  inexhaus- 
tible Fountain,  not  only  of  all  life,  but  of  all  spiritual  endowments.  (3)  His 
benevolei'ce.  All  these  varied  endowments  are  for  "piofit. "  5.  Since  all  our 
endowments  are  the  free  gifts  of  God,  there  is  no  reason  for  those  of  the  humblest 
to  be  dissatisfied,  nor  for  those  who  have  the  most  splendid  to  be  exultant.  III. 
Should  regahd  'ihese  endowments  as  papiTS  of  a  vital  wioie,  i.e.,  of  the  "  body  of 
Christ."  As  the  soul  resides  in,  directs,  and  reveals  itself  in  the  body,  so  Christ  in 
the  true  Church  (ver.  12,  &v.).   Gieat  is  the  variety  in  the  various  faculties,  organs. 


150  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xii. 

and  parts  of  the  human  body.  Some  are  larger  and  more  comely  than  others,  but 
each,  even  the  most  insigniticant  and  uncomely,  are  equally  essential  (ver.  22,  &c. ). 
How  preposterous  would  it  be  for  one  part  of  the  body  to  contend  with  another  for 
importance  and  supremacy  !  Yet  not  more  absurd  than  for  one  member  of  a  Church 
to  contend  with  another.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver.  2.  Ye  know  that  ye  were  Gentiles,  carried  away  unto  these  dumb  idols. — 

The  fireat  change  and  its  obhgntions  : — Observe — I.  Thk  condition  of  the  heathen. 

I.  Worshippers  of  dumb  idols.  2.  Carried  away  by  their  lusts.  3.  Led  by  the 
devil  and  his  agents.  II.  This  condition  was  youes.  1.  Literally  m  past 
times.  2.  Spiritually  in  your  own  former  experience.  III.  The  change  in  you 
has  been  effected  by  God's  grace.  1.  Through  the  gospel.  2.  By  the  agency 
of  othets.  3.  Hence  your  obligation  to  send  it  to  the  world.  Christianity  and 
heathenism: — Two  things  are  here  expressed — I.  The  dead  silence  op  the  state 
OF  HEATHENISM — the  idols  standing  voiceless,  with  neitlier  moutbs  to  speak,  nor 
ears  to  hear — silent  amongst  their  silent  worshippers.  "  The  oracles  are  dumb." 
This  is  contrasted  with  the  music  and  speech  of  Christianity,  "  the  sound  of  a. 
miglity,  rushing  wind,"  "the  voice  of  many  waters,  which  resounded  through  the 
whole  Chuich  in  the  diffusion  of  the  gifts,  especially  of  prophesying  and  tongues. 

II.  The  cnconsciods  ikkational  state  of  heathenish,  in  which  the  worshi2:)pers 
were  blindly  hurried  away  by  some  overruling  power  of  fate,  or  evil  spirit  of  divina- 
tion, or  priestly  caste,  without  any  will  or  reason  of  their  own  to  worship  at  the 
shrine  of  inanimate  idols.  This  is  contrasted  with  the  consciousness  of  an  indwell- 
ing Spirit,  moving  in  harmony  with  their  spirits,  and  controlled  by  a  sense  of  order 
and  wisdom.  Possibly  there  is  the  further  intention  of  impressing  the  superiority 
of  the  conscious  over  tlje  unconscious  gifts  of  the  Spirit.  {Dean  Stanley.)  No 
man  speaking  by  the  Spirit  of  God  calleth  Jesus  accursed :  and  ...  no  man  can 
say  that  Jesus  is  the  Lord  tout  by  the  Holy  Ghost. — Jesus  anathema: — The  first 
thing  needed  by  a  Church  so  inexperienced  was  to  know  what  was  the  true  character 
of  the  Divine  influence.  The  apostle  says  every  utterance,  be  it  prophecy,  tongue, 
or  do  -trine,  which  amounts  to  saying  "  Jesus  is  accursed,"  is  not  Divinely  inspired. 
But  to  whom  can  we  attribute  this  language?  To  the  Jews  or  unbelieving  Gentiles 
who  treated  Jesus  as  an  impostor,  and  saw  in  His  ignominious  and  cruel  death  a 
token  of  the  Divine  curse  (chap.  i.  23)  ?  No;  for  how  could  Ciiristians  be  tempted 
to  esteem  such  as  inspired?  Besides,  we  have  here  to  do  with  discourses  uttered iu 
church  ;  and  how  would  anti-Christians  have  been  allowed  to  speak  there  ?  Does, 
then,  Paul  admit  the  possibility  of  di.-^coursts  from  Christians  to  this  effect? 
Eem^mber  the  powerful  fermentation  of  religions  ideas  then  called  forth  by  the 
gospel.  In  2  Cor.  xi.  3,  4,  the  apostle  speaks  of  teachers  newly  arrived  in  Corinth, 
who  preached  another  Jesus  and  raised  a  different  spirit  to  that  which  the  Church 
had  received.  It  whs  therefore  not  only  another  doctrine,  but  another  breath,  a 
new  principle  of  inspiration,  which  these  people  brought  with  them.  In  chap.  xvi. 
22  he  devotes  to  anathema  certain  persons  who  love  not  Jesus  when  the  Lord  shall 
come,  which  would  be  very  severe  if  it  were  not  a  return  for  the  anathema  whicli 
they  threw  in  His  face.  How  was  this  possible  in  a  Christian  Church  ?  We  must 
observe  the  term  "Jesus,"  denoting  the  historical  and  earthly  person  of  our  Lord, 
and  bear  in  mind  that  from  the  earliest  times  there  were  people  who,  offended  at 
the  idea  of  the  ignominious  punishment  of  the  Cross,  and  the  unheard  abasement 
of  the  Son  of  God,  thought  they  must  set  up  a  distinction  between  the  man  Jesus 
and  the  true  Christ.  The  tiist  had  been,  according  to  them,  a  pious  Jew.  A 
heavenly  Being,  the  true  Christ,  had  chosen  Him  to  serve  as  His  organ  while  He  acted 
below  as  the  Saviour  of  humanity.  But  this  Christ  from  above  had  parted  from 
Jesus  before  the  Passion,  and  left  the  latter  to  suffer  and  die  alone.  It  is  easy  to  see 
how,  from  this  point  of  view,  one  might  curse  the  Crucihed  One  who  appeared  ta 
have  been  cursed  of  God  on  the  Cross,  and  that  without  thinking  he  was  cursing 
the  true  Saviour,  and  while  reniMining  without  scruple  a  member  of  the  Church. 
Cerinthus  taught  tiiis  doctrine,  and  Epiphanius  affirms  thatthisEpistle  was  written 
against  him.  The  Ophites,  or  serpent  worshippers,  too,  who  existed  before  the  end 
of  the  first  century,  asked  those  who  wished  to  enter  thtir  churches  to  curse  Jesus. 
In  stating  this  first  negative  criterion,  the  apostle  therefore  means  :  However  ecstatic 
in  form  or  profound  in  matter  may  be  a  spiritual  mauilestation,  if  it  tends  to 
degriide  Jesus,  to  make  Him  an  impostor  or  a  man  worthy  of  the  Divine  wrath,  if 
it  does  violence  in  any  way  to  His  holiness,  you  maybe  sure  the  inspiring  breath  of 
such  a  discourse  is  not  that  of  God's  Spirit.     Such  is  the  decisive  standard  which 


CHAP.  XII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  151 

the  prophets,  e.g.,  are  summoned  to  use  when  they  sit  in  judgment  on  one  another 
(chap.  xiv.  29).  (Prof.  Godct.)  Tlie  denial  of  Christ: — I.  Its  forms.  1.  Infi- 
delity makes  Him  an  impostor.  2.  Socinianism  robs  Him  of  His  Divinity.  3. 
Impenitence  and  unbeUef  resist  His  claims  and  authority.  4.  All  by  denying  prac- 
tically declare  Him  accursed.  II.  Its  cause.  The  want  of  the  Spirit.  Hence  a 
man  is  governed  in  his  views  and  conduct  either  by  a  depraved  reason  or  corrupt 
natural  sense.  III.  Its  conseqcences.  1.  Delusion.  '2.  Misery.  3.  Euin.  (J. 
Lyth,  D.D.)  The  confession  of  Christ: — I.  What  it  ijiplies.  1.  A  full  convic- 
tion of  His  supreme  authority  as  Lord  and  Christ.  2.  A  believing  trust  in  Him.  3. 
A  willing  submission  to  His  authority.  II.  How  is  it  EriciTED ?  By  the  Holy 
Ghost,  who — 1.  Enlightens.  2.  Convinces.  3.  Assures.  4.  Sanctifies — him  that 
believeth.      (Ibid.)  Tlie  confession  that  Jesus  is  Lord  by  the   Holy  Ghost: — 

Note— I.  The  genebal  impctency  of  man  in  spiritual  duties.  Here  we  see — 1. 
The  universality  of  our  loss  in  Adam.  No  one  hath  any  power  to  do  this.  \Vhich 
notes  their  blaspliemy  that  exempt  any  man  from  the  infection  of  sin.  2.  Where 
this  impotency  lies — in  man.  "  No  man."  Which  notes  their  blasphemy  that  say 
man  may  be  saved  by  his  natural  faculties  as  he  is  man.  3.  By  just  occasion  of 
that  word  "  can,"  is  able,  we  see  also  the  laziness  of  man  who,  though  he  can  do 
nothing  effectually  and  primarily,  yet  does  not  do  so  much  as  he  might  do.  II. 
What  this  spimtual  duty  is  wherein  we  are  all  so  impotent.  1.  An  outward  act, 
a  profession  ;  not  that  the  outward  act  is  enough,  but  that  the  inward  affection 
alone  is  not  enough  neither.  To  tiank  it,  to  believe  it,  is  not  suflicieut ;  we  must 
say  it,  profess  it.  2.  And  what?  (1)  That  Jesnsis  :  not  only  assent  to  the  histoiy, 
and  matter  of  fact  tliat  Jtsus  was,  and  did  all  that  is  recorded  of  Him,  but  that  He 
is  still  that  which  He  pretended  to  be.  Ca;sav  is  not  Caesar  still,  nor  is  Alexander, 
Alexander  ;  but  Jesus  is  Jesus  still,  and  shall  be  for  ever.  (2)  Tint  He  is  the  Lord. 
He  was  not  sent  hither  as  the  greatest  of  the  prophets,  nor  as  the  greatest  of  the 
priests  ;  His  work  consists  not  on'y  in  having  preached  to  us,  nor  in  having  s.icii- 
ficed  Himself,  thereby  to  be  an  example  to  us ;  but  He  is  Lord.  He  purchased  a 
dominion  with  His  blood.  He  is  the  Lord,  not  only  the  Lord  j)aramount,  but  tlie 
only  Lord,  no  other  hath  a  lordship  in  our  souls  and  no  other  any  part  in  saving 
them  but  He.  Ilf.  This  cannot  be  done  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  1.  All  means 
but  one  are  excluded,  and  therefore  that  one  must  necessarily  be  hard  to  be  com- 
passed. The  knowledge  and  discerning  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  a  diUicult  thing.  2. 
As  all  other  meaus  are  excluded,  so  this  one  is  included  as  necessary.  Nothing  can 
effect  it  but  having  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  therefore  the  Holy  Ghost  may  be  had.  (J. 
Donne,  D.D.)  Jesus  the  Lord  : — I.  The  truth  that  Jesus  is  the  Lord.  The  man 
Jesus  for  thirty-three  years  acted  as  a  man  in  connection  with  men,  and  at 
last  died.  This  man  is  the  Lord.  The  word  he  uses  is  almost  invariably  the 
translation  of  Jehovah  in  tl^e  LXX.,  aversion  in  common  use  among  the  apostles. 
Now  if  Paul,  as  a  Jew,  called  Jesus  Jehovah,  he  must  have  demandi  d  for  Him  all 
those  attributes  which  his  nation  was  wont  to  associate  with  that  name  ;  and  that 
he  did  claim  these  attributes  for  Jesus  no  candid  and  qualified  reader  of  h  s  seimons 
and  epistles  can  doubt.  II.  This  tremendous  truth  is  so  transcendent  that  it 
cannot  be  accepted  without  Divine  help.  No  man  of  himself  can  atfinn  it — can 
state  it  as  the  natural  conviction  of  his  judgment.  When  you  tell  me  that  Jesus 
was  born,  lived,  taught,  and  died,  I  under.-tand  you;  for  you  have  narrated  a 
natural  event ;  but  when  you  tell  me  that  Jesus  is  the  great  God,  you  transport  me 
from  the  sphere  of  iutelligible  statement  and  testimony  into  wonderland.  I  do  not 
mean  that  the  Godhead  of  Cljrist  is  naturally  inconceivable,  but  simply  that  the 
doctrine  is  above  me.  I  cannot  say  that  Jesus  is  God  unless  you  add  some  oth  r 
power  ti>  my  mind,  or  stinmlale  to  an  unnatural  intensity  the  powers  I  have.  St. 
Paul  alTirms  that  no  man  cin  :  and  if  St.  Paul  had  not  affirmed  it  we  should  have 
found  it  out.  The  history  of  controversy  has  repeated  it  in  every  age.  Moilern 
philosophers  maintain  this  in  a  spirit  of  boasting,  ill  concealed  beneath  an  tiffi^cta- 
tion  of  scientific  certainty  ;  as  if  it  had  been  left  for  them  to  discover  ;  whereas  Paul 
asserted  it  from  the  first.  And  he  has  described  this  temiier  of  mind  with  as  much 
camlour  and  accuracy  as  if  he  had  been  a  philosopher  himself !  "  The  natural  man 
receiveth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God,"  &c.  ;  neither  can  he  know  them.  The 
natural  men  have  been  unconsciously  repeating  Paul's  words  from  his  clay  to  ours. 
Now  there  is  a  portion  of  this  wonderful  truth  which  is  historic — the  works  and  the 
resurrection  of  Jesus.  These  were  visible  facts,  and  might  be  supposed  to  lie 
within  the  realm  of  observation  and  testimony.  But  see  how  the  natural  men  treat 
them — as  they  dare  not  treat  any  other  history.     They  first  say  that  Jesus  cannot 


152  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xii. 

be  God,  and  then  they  read  the  gospels  to  explain  away  New  Testament  facts.  I 
do  not  blame  these  men  because  they  are  unable  to  say  that  Jesus  is  the  Lord,  any 
more  than  I  would  rate  a  blind  man  for  not  knowing  the  sun  ;  but  I  should  censure 
the  blind  man  if  he  declared  there  was  no  sun  because  he  could  not  see  it.  III.  The 
EVIDENCE  BY  WHICH  THIS  GRAND  TKUTH  CAN  BE  AFFIRMED.  The  internal  persuasioH  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.  This  leads  as  at  once  into  the  region  of  the  supernatural.  Here 
we  pnvt  company  with  the  wise,  and  the  scribe,  and  the  disputer  of  this  world.  Here 
■we  speak  in  parables  to  them  that  are  without.  The  Spirit  is  the  author  of  the 
expression  or  manifestation  of  the  Christian  religion.  The  lips  of  prophets  were 
touched,  and  the  pens  of  scribes  were  moved,  by  Him  ;  the  holy  child  Jesus  was 
conceived  by  Him;  the  dispensing  of  the  glad  tidings,  that  that  child  was  a  light 
to  lighten  the  Gentiles,  was  entrusted  to  Him.  Now,  the  first  step  toward-;  the  con- 
fession of  the  Godhead  of  Christ  is  the  conviction  of  sin  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  The 
misery  following  such  a  conviction  of  sin  will  make  a  man  strive  against  it,  and 
learn  by  bitter  failures  his  helplessness.  When  I  preach  Jesus  to  a  man  in  this 
state,  with  his  self-despair  and  his  enger  cries  for  help,  he  not  only  sees  no  difficulty 
in  accepting  the  Godhead  of  Christ,  but  he  giasps  it  iis  the  only  truth  that  can  give 
him  comfort.  He  wants  a  God-mediator  because  he  has  sinned  against  God.  He 
must  take  his  forgiveness  from  Him  against  whom  he  has  sinned  ;  and,  being  par- 
doned, he  must  render  Him  the  full  and  loyal  service  of  his  heart  and  life.  That 
•which  makes  Jesu3  our  final  resting-place  is  His  Godhead  :  that  which  gives  an 
omnipotent  potency  to  His  blood  is  His  equality  with  the  Father.  How  easy  for 
those  whom  the  Holy  Ghost  has  convinced  of  sin,  and  who  have  imagined  under  the 
tyranny  of  its  power  what  a  connter-power  that  must  be  which  could  redeem  us 
from  it— how  easy  for  such  to  admit  that  Jesus  is  God!  (E.  E.  Jenkins,  D.D.) 
The  impoft.nhilitij  of  truly  believing  and  savingly  confessing  Christ,  hnt  by  the  Holy 
Ghiist : — I.  The  statement  I^^  the  text  nekds  explan.aiton.  It  does  not  mean 
that  a  person  cannot  repeat  the  words,  "Jesus  is  the  Lord,"  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 
What,  then,  is  the  true  meaning  of  the  text?  It  is  that  none  can  without  the  Holy 
Spirit  make  this  confession — 1.  With  a  firm  belii-f  of  its  truth.  2.  With  a  firm 
reliance  on  Him  for  salvation.  In  order  to  our  relying  on  Jesus  Christ  for  salvation 
two  things  are  necessary.  (1)  We  must  feel  our  need  of  such  a  salvation.  (2)  We 
must  believe  that  there  is  such  a  provision  made  for  our  salvation  in  Christ  Jesus, 
neitlier  of  which  we  can  do  without  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  3.  With  a 
full  purpose  of  living  to  His  glory.  II.  We  are  here  instructed — 1.  In  the 
nature  of  true  religion.  Faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  lies  at  the  foundation 
of  all  true  religion.  That  glorious  truth,  "  Jesus  is  the  Lord,"  that  He  who  died 
upon  the  Cross  for  our  sins  is  "  the  Lord,"  this  truth  is  the  great  turning  point 
of  salvation,  and  whoever  truly  believes  it  is  brought  into  a  state  of  salvation.  Ey 
the  belief  of  this  glorious  truth  he  is  also  prepared  for  God's  service,  to  confess 
Him  before  men,  and  to  maintain  a  conduct,  according  to  His  will,  in  the  face 
of  all  difficulties  from  within  and  from  without.  2.  In  the  need  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
We  cnnnot  know  and  believe  that  "  Je<us  is  the  Lord"  so  as  to  have  our  hearts 
savingly  affected  by  it,  so  as  to  depend  on  Jesus  as  our  Saviour,  so  as  to  be  renewed' 
thereby  after  His  iusage  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness.  To  attniu  thi-;  faith 
the  special  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  needful.  3.  The  peculiar  office  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.     How  He  w^rks,  and  by  what  means.      (G.  Maxwell,  B.A.)  The 

icork  of  the  Holy  Ghost  necessary  to  man : — I.  The  need  of  the  Spirit's  work. 
It  is  a  matter  of  needful  preliminary  consideration,  that  we  dwell  upon  the 
guiltiness  of  our  own  nature.  And  no  man  wants  more  evidence  than  that  which 
he  finds  concurrently  upon  the  page  of  the  Bible  and  in  the  volume  of  his  own 
heart ;  he  has  ordy  to  look  into  the  former  to  see  what  is  holy  and  right  and  good ; 
he  has  only  to  look  into  the  latter  in  or^ler  to  see  how  utterly  we  have  dejiarted 
therefrom.  And  this  condition  is  not  to  be  chanu'ed  by  any  power  which  we  can 
set  in  motion.  It  is  not  to  be  cliam^'ed  by  the  force  of  education.  It  is  true  that 
we  may  train  and  discipline  our  children  to  a  certain  outward  course  ;  we  may  bind 
u^ion  tlicm  the  necessity  of  maintaining  a  certnin  line  of  conduct,  but  this  has 
nothing  to  do  with  the  heart.  It  is  not  even  by  the  ordinances  of  God's  appoint- 
ment that  we  can  ensure  the  conversion  of  souls.  II.  The  mode  of  the  Spirit's 
operations.  It  is  a  marvellous  vvork  wdiich  is  wrought  upon  the  soul  of  every  man 
who  passes  from  a  state  of  nature  into  a  state  of  grace.  It  is  a  change  of  desires, 
hopes,  iiurposes,  objects — a  new  birtii.  We  can  trace  it  by  its  results;  we  cannot 
always  trace  it  by  its  accomplishmi-nt.  "  Tlie  wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth,"  &c. 
But  we  are  certain  that  if  the  effect  be  really  and  truly  wrought  upon  any  man  the 


CHAP.  XII.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  153 

results -will  be  manifest.  "  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace,"  d'c.  When 
the  evil  has  been  removed,  when  the  hardness  has  been  subdued,  when  the  door 
of  the  understanding  has  been  opened  to  admit  the  trutli  of  Christianity,  and  when 
the  door  of  the  lieart  has  been  unclosed  to  all  its  blessed  influences,  the  man  comes 
to  pursue  earnestly  and  diligently  those  things  for  which  he  had  once  no  esteem. 
(S,  Eobiiif!.)  Faith  a  gift  of  the  Spirit : — Perhaps  there  is  no  one  habit  which 

Scripture  attributes  more  often,  either  explicitly  or  implicitly,  to  the  agency  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  than  a  sound  and  lively  faith  ;  and  there  is  none,  therefore,  which  the 
soul  will  more  carefully  seek  and  cherish.  Faith,  in  the  sense  in  which  we  are 
here  concerned  with  it,  is  the  belief  of  a  professed  revelatitai  of  God  to  man,  on 
the  authority  of  God  who  made  it,  and  a  lively  faith  is  such  a  conviction  of  its 
truth  as  causes  it  to  operate  as  a  motive  on  our  affections  and  lives.  It  is  itself, 
then,  a  habit  of  the  intellect,  and  appears,  so  far,  to  become  moral  only  at  the 
point  where  it  influences,  rather  than  is  influenced  by,  the  will.  And  in  this  light, 
as  a  moi'al  motive,  coupled  too,  as  it  often  is  in  Si;ripture,  with  those  effects  which 
it  should  produce  on  the  will,  there  seems  no  greater  difficulty  in  viewing  i'aitli  as 
a  work  of  the  Spirit  than  in  so  regaiding  repentance,  love,  or  obedience.  But 
in  the  prior  intellectual  process — the  conviction  of  the  understanding  by  the  force 
of  proof — there  is  a  difficulty  which  has  been  felt  probably  by  most  minds.  There 
appears,  as  far  as  can  be  seen,  no  more  reason  to  seek  or  expect  Divine  interposition 
to  correct  or  prevent  a  logical  error,  than  to  stay  the  effects  of  any  physical  power 
which  we  ourselves  have  set  in  motion.  Either  would  be  a  miracle  wbich  God  via;/ 
work,  but  which  we  have  no  authority  to  suppose  He  will.  We  can  no  more  refuse 
to  believe  what  is  proved,  or  believe  what  is  destitute  of  apparent  proof,  than  the 
eye  can  reject  or  cbange  the  forms  and  colours  thrown  by  external  objects  on  the 
retina.  How  then  can  the  rccef)tion  of  a  doctrine  by  the  reason  be  affected  by  the 
operations  of  Divine  grace  ?  If  it  is  proved,  must  it  not  be  believed  ?  This  difficulty, 
however,  such  as  it  is,  is  not  peculiar  to  Scripture,  or  religious  tr  uth,  or  the  question 
of  the  Holy  Spirit's  influence.  It  belongs  equally  to  the  acknowledged  fact  that, 
on  almost  every  subject,  men,  apparently  of  equivalent  power  of  intellect,  with 
precisely  the  same  evidence  before  them,  arrive  at  wiiiely  different  conclusions. 
Thus  it  is  every  day  in  history,  in  politics,  in  much  tliat  is  called  science,  in  the 
judgment  we  form  of  each  other's  characters  and  conduct,  and  even  in  the  credit 
that  is  given  to  alleged  events  almost  within  the  sphere  of  our  own  observation. 
Whether  it  be  that  a  partial  and  temporal  blindness  of  the  judgment  is  superin- 
duced by  the  force  of  passion  and  I:  e  tension  of  the  will ;  or  whether,  as  seems 
more  probable,  attention,  the  optic  glass,  or  rather  the  eye  of  the  mind,  is  directed 
by  the  prevailing  emotion  excited  by  the  subject  in  question,  with  more  intensity 
on  a  certain  class  of  considerations  bearing  upon  it,  while  others  it  glances  over 
slightly,  or  entirely  disregards — even  as  the  bodily  eye  gazing  fixedly  on  one  object 
is  as  blind  for  the  time  to  all  the  rest  as  if  th^y  were  not — so  that  from  all  the 
topics  which  should  have  been  considered  in  due  weight  and  measure,  it  culls 
those  only  which  lead  to  the  desired  conclusion,  or  gives  them  such  undue 
prominence  in  tlie  field  of  vision  that  the  judgment,  deceived  and  misled,  ariives 
at  a  partial,  tliough  acceptable,  decision — these  are  questions  whicb  may  be  left  to 
the  metaphysician  to  solve.  It  is  enough  for  us  that  the  fact  is  adn.itle.l,  that 
everywhere,  but  in  the  necessary  truths  of  demonstrative  reasoning,  the  conclusions 
of  reason  are  actually  modified  by  the  wishes,  interests,  or  prejudices  of  the 
reasoner ;  so  that  belief  is  not  meiely  the  result  of  intellect,  but  is,  in  perhaps 
a  large  majority  of  cases,  the  mixed  product  of  the  moral  anil  intellectual  facul  ies 
combined.  And  if  this  be  true  where  the  feelings  and  passions  are  only  remotely 
affected,  and  should  not  be  so  at  all,  how  much  more  will  it  huve  place  when  the 
subject-matter  is  religion,  which  must  li.^oh  the  tenderest  part  of  oiu'  moral  nature; 
which  strikes  on  hopes  and  fears  ;  which  bears  directly  on  every  affection,  pnssion, 
motive,  habit,  and  act  ;  which,  if  admitted  to  be  true,  requiies  a  complete  !'■  volu- 
tion in  the  whole  inner  man  and  in  great  j)irt  of  ihe  ontwatd  conduct.  The  choice 
of  arrangement  of  the  materials  with  which  reason  is  to  work  is  much  in  the 
power  of  the  will  ;  and  the  will  is  prejudiced,  and  cannot,  or  wiil  not,  honestly  do 
its  part.  It  is  not,  then,  surprising  that  onr  Lord  should  have  attribiitt  d  unbelief 
always  to  moral,  never  to  puicly  intellectual  causes  (see  John  iii.  18-20  ;  v.  40-44  ; 
vii.  17).  It  will  follow,  too — which  is  the  point  more  immediately  before  us — not 
only  th-)t  in  the  formation  of  a  sound  and  living  faith  ihere  is  room  for  the  agency 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  that  without  His  nid  sucb  faith  cnnnot  exist.  For  if  the 
character  of  our  belief  depends  not  merely  on  the  correctness  of  the  reasoning 


154  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xii. 

process,  but  much  more  on  prior  operations  of  the  will,  by  which  the  antecedents 
and  materials  of  reason  are  selected  and  ai'ranged,  and  if  our  moral  nature  is  iu  our 
unregenerate  state  warped  and  impaired  so  as  to  have  a  disinclination  to  what  is 
good  and  a  bias  to  what  is  evil,  it  is  evident  that  the  gospel,  placed  before  such 
a  tribunal,  must  be  tried  by  a  prejudiced  and  incapable  judge  ;  that,  being  wished 
false,  and  admitting  of  objections  capable  of  being  magnified  and  coloured  into 
refutations,  it  is  certain  to  be  found  false ;  and  that  nothing  can  rectify  the  balance 
of  judgment,  and  place  truth  on  an  equal  footing  with  falsehood,  but  the  same 
external  and  Divine  power  which  chan,t;es  and  renews  the  will  of  man,  and  enables 
it  to  love  right  instead  of  wrong,  and  to  desire  in  all  things  to  know  and  to  do  God's 
will.  Let  us  now,  in  further  illustration  of  what  has  been  said,  endeavour  to  trace 
in  one  or  two  instances  the  process  by  which  moral  causes,  acting  on  the  intellect, 
may  lead  to  avowed  or  practical  belief.  1.  In  a  certain  class  of  minds  infidelity 
and  heresy  alike  seem  to  owe  their  origin  to  intellectual  pride.  To  believe  is  to- 
adopt  the  same  opiniuns  wdiich  have  been  the  creed  of  multitudes  before,  and 
to  be  confounded  in  the  mass  of  unreasoning  minds  which  have  received  implicitly 
the  same  traditionary  tenets.  Objections,  on  the  other  hand,  have  an  air  of  novelty. 
There  is  at  least  the  appearance  of  power  in  striking  out  difficulties.  It  is  an 
intoxicating  pleasure  to  feel  different  from  other  men — that  is,  in  our  own  judg- 
ment, s  iperior  to  them — and  the  brain  often  reels  under  it.  Besides  this,  there 
is  a  prejudice  against  the  gospel  from  the  mere  circumstance  of  its  being  old.  In 
every  science  new  discoveries  are  making  daily.  In  history,  in  politics,  in  science, 
men  have  been  long  mistaken,  why  not  in  religion  also?  With  such  feelings  and 
prei^ossessions  the  mind  catches  np  objections  to  Christianity,  or  to  some  of  its 
doctrines,  as  just  what  it  was  expecting  to  find.  It  dwells  on  tliem;  it  nmgnifies 
them  by  the  exclusion  of  other  presumptions,  till  they  fill  the  field  of  mental  vision 
and  leave  no  room  for  truth.  Humility  and  faith  are  kindred  gifis  of  the  same 
Spirit.  2.  Another  source  of  unbelief  is  even  more  evidently  moral.  It  arises 
when  the  soul  would  hide  from  God  after  displeasing  Him  by  wilful  sin.  Some, 
for  example,  smother  accusing  thoughts  in  worldly  amusements  and  the  dissipation 
of  frivolous  gaiety.  But  many — far  more,  j)robably,  than  can  be  known  till  the 
secrets  of  all  hearts  ate  disclosed — take  refuge  in  a  kind  of  partial  unbelief.  There- 
are  difficulties  in  revelation,  and  in  some  of  its  doctrines  — liglit  as  a  feather,  indeed, 
when  weighed  impartially  in  the  balance  against  the  accumulated  evidences  of 
truth,  but  not  of  course  without  weight  when  paised  and  pondered  over  by 
themselves.  Such  the  writhing  soul  is  glad  to  seize.  Suppose  the  gospel  should 
not  be  true?  his  obligations  are  imaginary,  and  his  guilt  and  ingratitude  are  unreal. 
(Bp.  Jackson.)  The  necesdty  of  Divine  influence  in  the  study  and  use  of  Holy 
Scripture : — I.  WiiAT  pkogeess  may  be  made  in  the  study  and  use  of  Scripture. 

WITHOUT    THE    SPECIAL    INFLUENCE     OF     THE      HoLY    SpIRIT.         1.     It     is     obvloUS    that, 

without  such  special  influence  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  it  is  possible  to  arrive  at 
a  merely  speculative  belief  in  the  truth  of  Scripture.  Men  of  keen  faculties  ia 
other  pursuits  do  not  forfeit  them  on  approaching  the  Word  of  God.  2.  It  is 
possible  for  an  individual,  without  the  special  intluence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  to 
obtain  a  general  acquaintance  with  the  contents  of  the  sacred  volume.  The 
strongest  eye  will  make  the  largest  discoveries.  3.  It  is  possible,  without  the 
special  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  feel  the  highest  admiration  for  parts  of  the 
sacred  volume.  4.  Such  an  individual  may  proceed  clearly  and  strikingly  to 
display  the  contents  of  the  sacred  volume  to  others.  He  may  be  a  man  of  lively 
imagination,  and  conjure  up  the  most  attractive  images  for  the  illustration  of  the 
truth.  He  may  be  a  master  in  composition  and  therefore  able  to  describe  forcibly 
what  he  sees  distinctly.  But,  nevertheless,  all  these  powers  and  faculties  may  be 
called  into  action  without  the  operation  of  any  principle  of  piety,  and  therefore 
without  the  sanctifying  influences  of  the  Holy  Bpiiit  on  the  soul.     II.  What  is 

THAT    KNOWLEDGE    AND     USE     OF     ScRIPTUP.E     OF     WHICH     THE     HOLY     GhOST    MUST    BE 

CONSIDERED  AS  THE  EXCLUSIVE  AuTHOR.  1.  It  is  by  the  Holy  Spirit  we  are  led 
to  make  a  personal  application  of  the  holy  Scripture  to  our  own  case.  2.  It  is  the 
Spirit  of  God  alone  who  endears  the  promises  of  Scripture  to  the  heait.  They 
nominally  called  Christ  "  Lord  "  before,  but  they  now  use  the  expression  in  a  higher 
and  more  appropriate  sense.  They  are  entirely  His.  They  "  yield  their  members  as 
instruments  of  righteousness"  to  Him.  3.  It  is  the  Holy  Spirit  alone  who  brings  the 
Word  of  God  effectually  to  bear  upon  the  temper  and  conuuct.  As  soon  as  this  new 
influence  is  felt  on  the  soul  our  chains  begin  to  drop  from  us.  Conclusions  :  1.  Let 
the  text  teach  us  not  to  confound  the  results  of  our  natural  powers  with  the  fruits 


CHAP,  xn.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  155 

of  the  Spirit.  2.  Let  the  text  teacli  us  the  transcendent  importance  of  seeking 
habitually  and  devoutly  the  presence  and  influence  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  3.  If  He 
does  not  lead  us  to  "  say  that  Jesus  is  the  Lord  " — to  acknowledge  Him,  practically 
and  spiritually,  as  our  Redeemer,  our  Saviour,  our  Teacher,  our  Example — the 
whole  of  Scripture  is  as  to  us  a  dead  letter,  and  we  have  "  received  the  grace 
of  God  in  vain."  (J.  IV.  Cuiuiinfjham.)  The  LorJsldp  of  Jesus  tlie  (jrounil  of  unity  : 
— I.  There  are  reasons  for  believing  that  the  expression,  "  Jesus  is  Loud,"  was  the. 
PBiMiTivK  Foiui  OF  CuKisTiAX  cKEED,  out  of  wliich  all  Other  more  elaborate  forms  have 
grown  (Phil.  ii.  11).  1.  This  simple  formula  contains  in  germ  the  whole  faith,  both 
objrctively  and  subjectively.  We  cannot  heartily  accept  this  without  accepting  with 
it  the  truths  of  His  incarnation,  atonement,  resurrection,  reign.  It  incimles  also  all 
that  we  need  for  our  own  spiritual  welfare.  If  He  is  Lord,  we  are  His,  He  is  ours. 
2.  So  full  and  so  mighty  is  this  confession  of  faith  that  we  cannot  hen  r til y  make  it 
save  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (cf.  St.  Miitt.  xvi.  16,  17).  To  make  it  on  the 
authority  of  others,  or  because  our  reasoning  faculties  have  been  convinced  of  its. 
truth,  is  not  sullJcient.  It  is  real  only  wiien  the  Holy  Spirit  has  convinced  our 
spirit  that  it  is  a  living  truth.     II.  From  the  above  considerations  we  can  gain 

some   GUID.\NCE    IN    THE    SEARCH   AFTER   UNITY   AMONG    CHRISTIANS.         If    the    eSSCniiai 

primitive  creed  that  "Jesus  is  the  Lord  "  be  held  siiiritually — 1.  It  may  be  per- 
mitted us  to  differ  as  to  the  exact  methods  in  which  He  works  upon  our  spiritual 
being.  St.  Paul  allows  that  there  are  diversities  of  gifts,  differences  of  administra- 
tion, differences  of  operation.  2.  We  shall  learn  not  to  contradict  the  spiritual 
experiences  of  others  because  they  have  been  gained  by  methods  diff  rin^  fiora  our 
o'.vn.  Our  cree  I  is  a  creed  of  alhrniati  ais,  nut  of  denials.  The  spiritual  education 
of  St.  Peter  differed  from  that  of  St.  John,  and  both  dilfered  from  that  of  St.  Paul 
or  St.  James,  j'et  they  are  united  in  their  belief  in  the  one  Lord.  {Canon  Vernon 
Hutton.)  The  teacliinii  of  tlie  Spirit  of  God: — I.  The  lesson  we  are  to  learn, 
to  say.  "  Jesus  is  the  Lord."  1.  It  is  but  short,  but  it  is  the  whole  f^ospel.  Here 
is  Jesus,  "  a  Saviour  "  and  "  the  Lord,"  and  as  they  are  joined  tog  ther  in  one 
Christ,  no  man  must  put  them  asunder.  If  we  will  have  Christ  our  Saviour,  we 
must  make  Him  our  Lord :  and  if  we  make  Him  our  Lord,  He  will  then  be  our 
Saviour.  Had  He  not  been  the  Lord,  the  world  had  been  a  chaos,  the  Church  a 
body  without  a  hoad,  a  family  without  a  father,  an  iirniy  without  a  captain,  a  ship 
without  a  pilot,  and  a  kingdom  without  a  king.  2.  What  it  is  to  say  it.  It  is  soon 
f-aid  :  it  is  but  three  words.  The  devils  themselves  did  say  it  (Matt.  viii.  29).  And  if 
the  heretic  will  not  confess  it,  saith  Hilary,  "  what  more  fit  to  convince  him  than  the 
cry  of  tlie  devils  them-'elves  ?  "  The  "  vagabond  Jews  "  thought  to  work  miracles 
with  these  words  (Acts  xix.  13).  To  say  it  taketh  in  the  tongue,  the  heart,  the 
hand,  i.e.,  an  outward  profission,  an  inward  psrsuasion,  a  constant  practice 
answirahle  to  them  both.  (1)  We  are  bound  to  say  it  (Eoni.  x.  9 ;  1  John  iv.  1-5). 
(a)  But  if  to  say  it  were  snflicieut,  there  needed  no  Holy  Ghost  to  teach  it.  We 
might  learn  to  say  it  as  the  parrot  did  to  salute  Ctesar.  And  indeed,  if  we  take 
a  survey  of  the  conversation  of  most  Christians,  we  shall  find  that  our  confession 
is  much  after  the  fashion  of  birds,  (h)  Some  dare  not  but  say  it  for  very  shame, 
lest  tho=e  they  live  with  should  confute  them.  Yet  the  voice  may  be  tor  Jesus, 
and  the  h<-art  for  Mammon.  "  It  is  a  voice,  and  no  more."  Thus  they  may  name 
Him  who  never  name  Him  but  in  their  execrations.  (2)  As  there  is  "a  word 
floating  on  the  toiiRue,"  so  there  is  the  word  of  the  heart,  when  by  due  examination 
we  are  well  persuaded  that  Jesus  is  the  Lord.  We  call  it  "  faith,"  which  as  a  fire 
will  not  be  concealed  (Jcr.  xx.  9  ;  Psa.  xxxix.  3  ;  Psa.  cxvi.  10).  Sometimes  we 
read  of  its  valour  (Heb.  xi.  33);  its  policy  (2  Cor.  ii.  11)  ;  its  strength;  but  that 
faith  should  be  idle,  or  speechle.-s,  or  dead,  is  contrary  to  its  nature.  Now  there 
are  many  who  maintain  the  truth,  but  by  those  ways  which  are  contrary  to  the 
truth  (2  Tim.  iii.  .5)  ;  crying,  "  Ji  sus  is  the  Lord,"  but  scourging  Him  with  their 
blasphi-mies,  and  fighting  against  Him  with  ths  ir  lusts.  Theiefore — (3)  That  we 
may  truly  say  it,  we  must  speak  it  to  God  as  God  speaketh  to  us  ;  who,  if  "  He 
saith  it,  will  inake  it  good"  (Numb,  xxiii.  10).  And  as  He  speaketh  to  us  bv  His 
benefits,  so  must  we  speak  to  Him  by  our  obedience.  For  if  He  be  indeed  our 
Lord,  then  shall  we  be  under  His  command.  II.  The  teacher.  As  the  lessrm  is 
difficult,  we  must  have  a  skilful  master.  1.  Good  reason  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
should  be  our  teacher.  For  as  the  lesion  is,  such  should  the  master  be.  The 
lesson  is  spiritual ;  the  teacher  a  Spirit.  The  lecture  is  a  lecture  of  piety  ;  and  the 
Spirit  is  a  Holy  Spirit.  It  is  not  sharpness  of  wit,  or  quickness  of  apprehension, 
or  force  of  eloquence,  that  can  raise  us  to  this  truth.     2.  "  Christ  dwelleth  in  us 


156  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xii= 

by  His  Spirit  "  (Rom.  viii.  11).  Who  teaches  us— (1)  By  sanctifying  our  knowledge 
of  Christ ;  by  showing  ns  the  riches  of  His  gospel,  and  the  majesty  of  His  kingdom, 
with  that  evidence  that  we  are  forced  to  fall  down  and  worship.  (2)  By  quickening, 
enlivening,  and  even  actuating  our  faith.  For  this  Spirit  "  dwelleth  in  our  hearts 
by  faith,"  maketh  ns  to  he  "  rooted  and  grounded  in  love,"  enableth  us  to  believe 
with  eificacy  (Eph.  iii.  17).  3.  A  teacher  then  He  is.  But  great  care  is  to  be  taken 
that  we  mistake  Him  not,  or  take  some  other  spirit  for  Him.  And  it  doth  not 
follow,  because  sonip  men  mistake  and  abuse  the  Sjiirit,  that  no  man  is  taught  by 
Him.  Because  I  will  not  learn,  doth  not  the  Spirit  therefore  teach?  And  if  some 
men  tsike  dreams  for  revelations,  must  the  Holy  Ghost  needs  lope  His  office? 
4.  But  you  will  say  perhaps  that  "the  Holy  Ghost  was  a  teacher  in  the  apostles' 
times,  but  doth  He  still  keep  open  school?"  Yes,  certainly.  Though  we  be  no 
apostles,  yet  we  are  Christians;  and  the  same  Spirit  teacheth  both.  And  by  His 
light  we  avoid  all  by-paths  of  dangerous  error,  and  discern,  though  not  all  truth, 
yet  all  that  is  necessary.  III.  His  pherogative.  He  is  our  "  sole  instructor." 
1.  "  There  are  diversities  of  gifts,  but  the  same  Spirit."  And  there  are  diversities 
of  teachers,  but  the  same  Spirit.  (1)  The  Church  is  "  the  house  of  learning," 
and  "the  pillar  of  the  truth."  (2)  The  Word  is  a  teacher:  and  Christ  by  open 
proclamation  hath  commanded  us  to  have  recourse  unto  it.  (3)  W^e  are  taught 
also  by  Christ's  discipline.  2.  All  these  are  teachers  ;  but  their  authority  and 
efficacy  is  from  the  Spirit.  The  Church,  if  not  directed  by  the  Spirit,  were  but  a 
rout  or  conventicle  ;  the  Word,  if  not  quickened  by  the  Spirit,  "  a  dead  letter  " ; 
and  His  discipline  a  rod  of  iron,  first  to  harden  us,  and  then  break  us  to  pieces. 
But  the  Spirit  bloweth  upon  His  garden  the  Church,  and  the  spices  thereof  flow 
(Cant.  iv.  16)  ;  He  sitteth  upon  the  seed  of  the  Word,  and  hatcheth  a  new  creature, 
a  subject  to  this  Lord  ;  He  moveth  upon  these  waters  of  bitterness,  and  then  they 
make  us  "  fruitful  to  eveiy  good  work."  Conclusion :  Wilt  thou  know  how  to 
speak  this  language  truly,  that  "Jesus  is  the  Lord,"  and  assure  thyself  that  the 
Spirit  teacheth  thee  so  to  speak?  Mark  well  then  those  symptoms  of  His  presence. 
Remember — 1.  'J'hat  He  is  a  Spirit,  and  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  so  is  contrary  to 
the  flesh,  and  teacheth  nothing  that  may  flatter  or  countenance  it,  or  let  it  loose 
to  insult  over  the  spirit.  2.  That  He  is  "  a  right  Sphit  "  (Psa.  li.  10)  ;  not  now 
glancing  on  heaven,  and  having  an  eye  fixed  and  buried  in  the  earth.  3.  That  He 
is  a  Spirit  of  truth.  And  it  is  the  property  of  truth  to  be  always  like  unto  itself, 
to  change  neither  shape  nor  voice.  (A.  Farindon,  B.D.)  Who  have,  and  who 
have  not,  the  Spirit: — I.  AVho  do  not  speak  by  the  Spieit  of  God,  and  have  not 
His  influences.  "They  that  call  Jesus  accursed"  (Lev.  xxvii.  21,  28).  1.  The 
test  put  on  Christians  by  their  persecutors  was,  that  they  should  revile  and 
blaspheme  Christ.  Pliny,  writing  to  Trajan,  says,  "When  they  "  (the  Christians) 
*'  could  be  induced  to  call  on  the  gods  .  .  .  and,  moreover,  to  revile  Christ,  to  none 
of  which  things  it  is  said  that  those  who  are  in  reality  Christians  can  be  compelled, 
I  thought  they  ought  to  be  released."  And  the  Jews  not  only  uttered  blasphemies 
against  Christ  themselves,  but  extorted  them,  if  possible,  from  those  they  appre- 
hended to  be  His  disciples  (Acts  xxvi.  11).  The  apostle,  therefore,  here  signifies 
that  those  who  reviled  Christ  had  not  the  Spirit.  This  is  applicalde  to  those  who 
in  any  way  detract  from  the  glory  of  Christ,  or  that  do  not  acknowledge  Him  to 
be  Lord.  2.  It  includes — (1)  All  that  blaspheme  Him,  or  account  Him,  an  impostor; 
as  all  infidels,  heathens,  Jews,  Mohammedans,  and  whoever  does  not  acknowh-dge 
Jesus  to  be  the  Messiah  (John  viii.  24 ;  1  John  iv.  3).  (2)  All  that  reject  Him 
(Acts  iv.  11).  {a)  As  a  Teacher,  not  receiving  the  whole  of  His  doctrine  as  infallibly 
true,  (h)  As  a  Mediator,  not  making  His  atonement  or  intercession  the  ground  of 
their  justificntion  (Rom.  ix.  31 ;  x.  3).  (c)  As  a  Saviour  from  sin  and  its  conse- 
quences, {d)  As  a  King,  by  disobeying  His  laws.  For,  as  the  chief  end  for  which 
the  Holy  Spirit  is  given  to  ns  is  to  glorify  Christ,  if  we  neglect,  or  be  indifferent 
about.  Him,  it  is  certain  we  are  not  inspired  by  that  Spirit.  11.  Who  have  the 
Holy  Spirit?  All  that  "say  that  Jesus  is  the  Lord."  1.  What  is  implied  in 
sayii'g  this?  To  say  so  is — (1)  To  believe  and  confess  that,  although  He  was 
despised  and  persecuted,  yet  He  was  the  Lord  Christ  promised  to  the  patriarchs, 
foretold  by  the  prophets  (Mai.  iii.  1  ;  Psa.  ex.  1  ;  1  John  iv.  2  ;  Matt.  xvi.  16) ; 
anointed  and  qualified  to  be  our  Teacher,  our  Redeemer  (Isa.  lix.  20,  21 ; 
Heb.  ii.  14),  our  Saviour,  our  Owner,  our  King  (Phil.  ii.  11),  our  Lord  and  Master 
(Rom.  xiv.  7-9),  our  Judge  (Rom.  xiv.  9-12).  (2)  To  believe  and  confess  Him  to 
be  the  Son  of  God,  in  a  sense  that  no  other  being  is  His  Son  (1  John  iv.  15; 
Matt.  xvi.  16  ;  Heb.  i.  3,  &c.) ;  therefore,  to  be  the  "  heir  "  and  "  lord  of  all  " — to 


CHAP,  xir.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  157 

be  "  Immanuel,  God  with  us"  (Rom.  ix.  5).  It  is  impossible  He  should  sustain 
His  otFices,  or  be  our  Lord,  if  He  be  not  God.  2.  The  iuiportance  of  it.  (1)  It  is 
the  eud  of  His  life,  death,  and  resurrection,  that  He  should  be  acknowledged  such 
(Phil.  ii.  6-11).  (2)  It  is  necessary  to  our  salvation,  and  certaiuly  connected  with 
it  (Rom.  X.  8-10  ;  1  John  iv.  13-15).  (3)  It  tends  to  the  glory  of  God,  and  the 
salvation  of  others.  3.  It  can  only  be  said  "by  the  Holy  Ghost."  It  must  be 
said — (1)  In  the  mind  believingly  and  sincerely;  therefore,  it  must  proceed  from 
knowledge  which  we  cannot  have  but  by  the  Spirit  (Matt.  xi.  27;  1  Cor.  ii.  10, 12; 
John  xvi.  13-15  ;  Eph.  i.  17  ;  2  Cor.  iv.  G).  (2)  In  the  heart,  affectionately 
(Rom.  X.  10 ;  and  1  Cor.  xvi.  22 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  7,  8) ;  but  this  love  we  cannot 
have  but  by  the  Spirit  (Rom.  v.  5).  (3)  With  lips,  openly,  whatever  it  may  cost 
(Rom.  X.  9;  2  Tim.  ii.  8-11;  Matt.  x.  25,  28,  32,33-39),  which  we  cannot  do  of  our- 
selves, or  without  faith  and  a  new  birth  (1  John  v.  4,  5),  aod,  therefore,  without 
the  Spirit.  (4)  By  the  life,  consistently.  (J.  Benson.)  Sptniual  discernment : — ■ 
I.  What  does  this  statement  mean?  The  Holy  Ghost  must — 1.  Convince  us  of 
its  truth.  2.  Reveal  to  us  its  importance.  3.  Inspire  us  tj  trust  in  it.  II.  Upon 
what  is  it  based  ?  It  is — 1.  Necessarily  a  matter  of  revelation.  2.  Contrary  to 
the  carnal  mind.  3.  Superior  to  human  reason.  [W.W.  J'r'i,the.)  Divine  (/ race 
necessary  to  tJie  right  appreciation  of  rerealed  truth: — It  seems  a  very  simple  thing 
to  say  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  and  yet  the  apor,tle  declares  that  no  mau  can  do 
this  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  This  is  cutting  down  human  power  to  a  very  low 
point  indeed ;  and  if  that  be  so,  then  must  the  whole  of  Revelation  be  a  sealed 
book  to  us,  unless  laid  open  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  I.  The  text  does  not  assert 
THE  incompetency  of  the  human  undekstanding  in  matters  of  religion.  Though 
the  understanding  was  greatly  injured  by  the  fall,  nevertheless  in  the  main  it  still 
faithfully  executes  its  part.  But  it  can  only  judge  of  things  according  to  the  repre- 
sentations laid  before  it ;  and  if  those  representations  be  incorrect,  it  may  deliver 
a  wrong  judgment,  and  yet  be  no  ways  in  fault.  li.g.,  we  lay  a  case  before  a  lawyer; 
he  delivers  a  favourable  opinion  ;  nevertheless,  when  we  go  into  court,  the  verdict 
is  against  us.  Now,  it  is  possible  enough  that  the  lawyer  may  have  been  to  blame, 
but  the  case  may  not  have  been  fairly  submitted  to  him  ;  a  colouring  may  have 
been  thrown  over  certain  facts,  which  has  distorted  tliem.  Then  surely  the  lawyer 
is  not  in  fault.  II.  The  understanding  may  be  DEoiavED.  1.  By  the  senses. 
Jjet  us  suppose  a  man  born  with  impaired  senses,  but  with  a  clear  understanding. 
Suppose  that  his  eye  distorts  everything,  or  is  uuable  to  discriminate  colours; 
suppose  his  touch  imperfect,  or  his  ear  faulty.  Now  what  will  the  powers  of  the 
man"s  understanding  avail  him  when  such  senses  make  their  report?  Would  he 
not  himself  lequiro  to  be  made  the  subject  of  a  rectifying  process  ere  he  could 
frame  any  true  and  fitting  conceptions  of  the  world  in  which  he  is  placed  ?  2.  By 
the  affections.  There  are  in  all  of  us  faculties  by  vhi  h  we  love  and  by  which  we 
hate  certain  things  ;  the  former  is  in  right  order  if  it  fix  on  nothing  but  what  is 
worthy  of  our  love,  and  the  latter  if  it  fix  on  nothing  but  what  is  worthy  of  our 
hatred.  But  if,  like  the  diseased  eye  or  ear,  they  misrepresent  objects,  what  will 
the  understanding  be  able  to  do,  seeing  that  the  impression  transmitted  to  it  of 
evil  may  make  it  seem  good,  and  of  good  may  make  it  seem  evil?  And  is  not  man 
in  his  natural  state  a  being  with  depraved  atfections,  though  he  may  not  be  a  being 
with  vitiated  senses?  By  nature  he  regards  as  worthy  of  his  best  love  what  God 
would  have  him  despise,  and  gives  his  aversion  to  that  which  God  would  have  him 
value  ;  he  seeks  happiness  where  God  asserts  that  it  cannot  be  found,  aud  denies 
that  it  exists  where  alone  God  would  place  it.  The  task  demanded  from  the 
understanding  by  religion  is,  that  it  determine  that  in  God  is  man's  chief  good, 
and  that  in  obedience  to  God  is  also  true  happiness.  But  whilst  the  affections  in 
their  natural  state  give  preference  to  some  finite  good  and  shrink  from  God's 
service,  how  can  the  understanding  deliver  the  verdict  required  by  religion  any 
more  than  it  could  form  a  correct  notion  of  a  tree,  if  the  senses  represent  it  as 
lying  on  the  ground  in  place  of  springing  from  it  ?  HI.  The  Holy  Spirit  is 
required  to  work  on  that  by  which  the  undehstanding  is  deceived,  i.e.,  in  the 
heart ;  removing  the  corrupt  bias  from  the  afi'ections,  and  purifymg  them  so  that 
they  shall  find  their  chief  good  in  God,  ere  the  head  can  apprehend  the  great 
truths  of  the  gospel,  confess  their  force,  and  bow  to  their  authority.  Men  often 
profess  to  count  it  very  strange  that  we  should  make  them  out  incapable  of 
understanding  spiritual  things,  when  they  have  confessedly  so  much  power  in 
other  departments  of  knowledge.  The  proper  answer  is,  that  the  affections  ar^  to 
spiritual  things  what  the  senses  are  to  natural  things.     If,  then,  the  affections 


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xii. 

misrepresent  the  objects  of  which  they  have  to  give  impressions  to  the  under- 
standing, the  result  will  be  of  the  same  kind  as  if  the  work  were  done  by  the 
senses.  Tbe  Holy  Ghost  did  not  come  to  give  a  new  understanding,  for  there  was 
strength  enough  in  the  head ;  He  came  to  set  in  order  those  faculties  through 
which  the  understanding  is  necessarily  influenced.  And  it  follows  indubitably, 
from  such  passages  as  onr  text,  that  until  a  man  has  submitted  himself  to  the 
influences  of  the  Spirit,  he  cannot  enter  into  the  meaning  of  the  Bible,  and  yield 
himself  to  the  duties  nf  rel  gion.  [H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Real  submission  to  CItrist 
the  effect  of  Divine  ivfluence : — I.  The  manner  in  which  a  true  Christian  is 
HERE  described.  1.  He  says  "  Jesus  is  the  Lord."  The  term  "  Lord  "  is  here  used 
to  signify  Clirisfs  Messiahship,  including  His  authority  and  dominion.  "He  is 
Lord  of  all."  Christ  has  authoiily — (1)  To  teach,  to  prescribe  the  faith  of  His 
followers,  to  enact  laws  for  His  Church,  to  direct  and  command  in  all  things  per- 
taining to  our  piesent  duty,  and  our  hopes  for  the  future.  (2)  To  rule.  As  Lord 
of  all.  He  is  the  head  of  that  mediatorial  government  which  extends  over  the 
world,  for  the  sake  of  His  Cliurch  which  is  in  the  world.  His  reign  is  a  reign  of 
grace.  His  throne  is  in  the  hearts  of  the  faithful,  who  are  made  willing  in  the  day 
•of  His  j)0wer,  and  find  their  pleasure  in  their  obedience.  (3)  To  pardon  and  save. 
AVh  n  on  earth  He  had  power  to  foigive  sins;  and  He  is  now  "exalted  to  be  a 
Piince  and  a  Saviour,  to  give  remission  of  sins."  We  are  required  to  look  unto 
Him,  that  we  might  be  saved.  (4)  He  will  hereafter  come  in  the  clouds  of  heaven 
with  all  authority  to  judge.  2.  But  wiiat  is  meant  by  saying  that  Jesus  is  the 
Lord  ?  (1)  That  to  say  it  aright  you  must  cordially  receive  Christ,  and  trust  in 
Him  as  your  iiedeemer  and  Saviour  (John  i.  12,  13).  (2)  With  this  is  connected  a 
spirit  (if  submission,  and  a  practical  acknowledgment  of  His  lordship  over  us.  To 
say  He  is  th  ■  Lo'd,  and  yet  to  refuse  to  obey  Him,  is  to  mock  Him  with  vain 
words.  (3)  To  this  must  be  joi'  ed  those  exercises  of  the  mind  which  are  the 
proper  workings  of  faiih,  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  of  grace.  11.  The  w^irk  of  the 
Hoi.Y  Si'iHiT  in  producing  a  cordial  subjection  to  Christ  the  Lord.  1.  The 
human  mind  shows  a  rehictiince  to  th  4  spiritual  reception  of  the  gospel  which  is 
meant  by  saying  that  Je-us  is  the  Lord.  2.  It  is  not  to  be  expected  that  the 
h'  art,  under  this  wrong  bias,  will  cure  itself.  Nor  can  so  desirable  a  ch.-mge  be 
effected.  e\cept  by  our  heavenly  Father's  gracious  assumption  of  this  work  to 
Himself  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  2fi).  The  S'-riptures  connect  the  sanclification  of  the  Spirit 
with  the  belief  of  the  truth.  What  occasions  the  rejection  of  the  authority  of 
Jesus  the  Lord?  Is  it  not  ignorance  and  unbelief?  And  how  shall  these  be 
removed  but  by  instruction  and  evidence  ?  These  are  to  be  obtained  from  the 
Word  of  God,  and  it  is  by  means  of  His  own  truth  as  there  revealed  that  souls 
aie  renewed  and  reconciled.  His  Spirit  helpeth  our  infirmities,  and  "  woiketh  in 
us  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  His  good  pleasure"  (1  Thess.  ii.  13).  Co'  elusion: 
1.  Ijct  us  infer,  for  our  iinprovement,  the  great  importance  of  the  work  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  in  the  concerns  of  our  salvation.  2.  Let  us  all  carefully  use  the  means 
\^hHrfhy  our  souls  may  be  quickened  ta  all  holy  obedience,  {Essex  Congregational 
Remembrancer  ) 

Vers.  4-6.  Now  there  are  diversities  of  gifts,  tout  the  same  Spirit. — Virersities 
of  gifts: — 1.  The  glory  of  the  Apostolic  <  hurdi  w^js  not  merely  in  her  fiiith,  zeal, 
conversions,  or  martyrdoms  ;  but  above  all,  and  as  their  source — in  the  possession 
of  tliM  Holy  S|iiiit.  2.  Her  miraciilo  s  gifts  have  been  long  laid  aside;  but  the 
H  ilv  S25ii'it  is  still  the  glory  of  the  Church,  endowing  her  with  even  nobler  gifts  ; 
and  of  theiu  the  text  is  still  tn.e.  Thete  is  variety  in  unity.  1.  In  spiritual 
endowments.  1.  There  is  the  greatest  diversity — (1)  In  the  natural  order, 
(a)  Take  a  famdy.  One  has  more  ability  than  another,  and  the  abilities  run 
in  sn  h  different  lines  as  make  the  snme  treatment  or  destination  impossible. 
(1))  T.ke  ihe  little  world  of  school.  Each  boy  has  his  own  capacity,  one  seemingly 
promisi'g,  anotiier  the  opposite  accoidiug  to  our  artificial  stmdard — a  standard  to 
be  reversed  in  after  life,  (c)  Take  the  greater  world.  What  diversities  here  — the 
orator,  and  the  man  of  no  utterance,  but  a  man  of  deeds  ;  the  poet  and  the  stern 
man  of  facts,  Ac.  And  all  these  diveisities  are  for  the  well-being  of  man,  and  we 
ae  not  to  despise  any  of  them.  (2)  Now  graiting  that  religion  is  the  work  of  the 
same  God,  should  we  not  anticipate  a  kindred  diversity  in  His  spiritual  gifts?  All 
Christians  have  their  spiritual  ta'ents,  some  five,  some  two,  &c.,  but  every  man 
according  to  several  ability.  All  God's  children — (a)  Are  taught  of  the  Lord  by  a 
Divine  illumination.     But  how  great  the  diversity  between  the  apostle  soaring  in 


CHAP.  XII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  159 

inspired  vision  and  the  unlettered  Christian  who  simply  knows  her  Bible  true — 
her  Saviour  sufficient,  (b)  Are,  in  common,  partakers  of  like  precious  faith  ;  but 
here  there  are  diversities  between  the  faith  that  staggers  not  at  promised  impossi- 
bilities, and  the  faith  that  can  only  say,  "Lord,  I  believe,  help  Thou  mine  unbelief." 
•(c)  Love  Ciirist.  But  what  striking  diversities  between  the  love  that  rejoices  to 
■surrender  all  for  Him,  and  the  love  that  can  but  keep  the  gflrmeuts  unspotted  and 
is  ever  ready  to  wax  cold!  From  this  diversity,  then,  it  follows  that  some  will 
become  more  remarkable  for  faith,  some  for  love.  Some  have  the  grander,  sterner 
qualities  predominating ;  others  have  the  softer,  more  gentle.  2.  Over  all  these 
-divei'sities  there  is  a  pervading  imity  of  the  one  Spirit  that  creates  and  sustains 
them.  As  all  the  diverse  works  of  nature  prove  the  unity  of  the  Creator,  so  all  the 
gifts  of  grace  bear  the  broad  arrow  of  His  hand.  Some  are  like  great  rivers 
diffusing  fertility  through  an  empire,  sustaining  a  mighty  popilation  on  their 
banks,  and  bearing  great  navies  on  their  bosom  ;  others  are  as  little  rills,  whicli 
serve  only  to  gladden  the  eyes  of  a  household  or  two,  and  then  disperse  into  the 
great  waters ;  yet  all  of  them  are  channels,  filled  with  the  same  living  water ;  each 
has  its  own  flow  from  the  one  mountain  range,  each  is  of  the  like  quality,  each 
lias  its  own  separate  beauty.  (1)  The  humblest  gifts  of  grace  have  a  use  and  a 
value,  surpassing  all  gifts  of  genius  and  wealth,  and  are  not  to  be  desi^i.-ed.  True 
■science  finds  its  field  not  merely  in  scanning  the  firmament,  but  in  studying  the 
flowers.  (2)  Nay,  the  more  lowly  and  ob'^cure  these  graces  are,  the  more  thny  are 
like  Hiufl  whose  chief  glory  shines  in  His  condescension.  The  humblest  gifts 
•are  the  Divinest,  for  they  do  not  inflate  the  heart  with  the  sense  of  its  own 
greatness.  And  in  a  higher  world,  may  it  not  be  found  that  these  humble  ones 
were  the  highest  in  God's  esteem,  because  the  least  mixed  up  with  self?  II.  In 
SPIRITUAL  MiNisTEY.  "  Property  has  its  rights,  it  has  also  its  duties  " — so  have 
natural  gifts.  And  the  greater  a  man's  powers,  the  more  sacredly  is  he  bound  to 
minister  to  the  welfare  of  humanity.  And  all  gracious  powers  are  held  by  the 
like  condition.  The  Church  is  like  a  great  palace  where  every  man  has  his  post, 
;and  the  humblest  ministry  is  as  necessary  as  the  most  distinguished.  In  a  great 
steamship,  it  is  not  enough  that  there  be  the  master  to  issue  instructions,  the  pilot 
to  steer,  tlie  engineer  to  control  its  mighty  powers ;  but  there  must  be  those  who 
perform  the  meanest  services,  else  all  the  skill  and  power  of  the  others  will  be 
useless.  So  in  the  Church.  What  lives  of  power  and  productiveness  were  those 
of  Paul,  Luther,  Knox,  &c.  How  insufficient  seem  other  ministries  in  comparison; 
jet  the  faithful  steward  of  a  few  things  is  as  useful  in  his  way  and  as  honourable 
as  the  faithful  occupant  of  the  most  splendid  office.  There  is  a  ministry  of — 
1.  Parental  instruction.  You  cannot  transfer  this  to  another  hand,  even  weie  you 
anxious  to  do  so  to  the  wisest  and  best.  You  alone  can  travel  the  pathway  to  the 
affections  and  confidence  of  the  youthful  heart.  For  your  children's  sake  and  for 
your  own  soul's  sake,  renounce  not  this  ministry.  It  is  your  noblest  blessedness 
and  theirs  to  have  these  children  made  yours  by  the  double  tie  of  nature  and  of 
^race.  2.  Sympathy.  This  brings  us  into  immediate  communion  with  the  Spirit 
■of  Jesus,  who  has  consecrated  all  the  sorrows  of  humanity  by  His  own.  In  the 
Primitive  Church  this  office  was  heralded  by  gifts  of  healing.  These  are  gone, 
but  we  can  sympathise  with  distress,  and  by  that  chord  touch  the  heart,  and  gain 
a  hearing  for  Christ.  "  Mercy  is  twice  bhssed,"  <fee.  3.  Liberality.  What  a 
masnificent  power  of  blessing  to  the  Church  is  a  rich  man  wlm,  with  a  heart 
delivered  from  selfishness,  is  willing  to  use  his  Master's  stores  in  his  Master's 
service!  4.  Prayer.  The  Church  is  mightiest  on  her  knees.  III.  In  spiritual 
OPERATIONS.  Nothing  could  be  more  infinitely  varied  than  the  operations  of  God 
in  nature  and  in  providence.  There  is  the  tempest,  as  well  as  the  soft  west  wind ; 
the  gentle  breath  of  spring,  and  the  summer  heat.  And  there  are  corresponding 
diversities  in  God's  dealings  with  the  sinner.  1.  In  the  act  of  preparation  for,  or 
in  the  want  of  it.  In  the  sunrise  in  our  own  land  the  darkness  of  night  gradually 
passes  into  the  pale  grey  of  dawn,  the  grey  into  the  saffron,  and  the  saff'i'on  into 
the  ruddy  tints  of  morning,  and  how  these  in  their  turn  melt  away  in  the  bright 
light  they  herald.  Whereas,  in  tropical  lands  the  sun  rises  at  once.  And  is  it  not 
the  same  with  the  dawn  of  new  life  on  the  soul  ?  I  have  stood  on  the  sea-shore, 
and  for  a  considerable  time  could  not  tell  whether  the  tide  was  coming  in  or  going 
out.  Again,  I  ha^e  stood  beside  it  when  its  mass  of  waters  was  tossed  by  the 
■fierce  tempest,  and  when  it  swept  all  before  it,  as  it  rolled  its  mighty  waves  to  the 
shore.  And  iu  these  different  aspects  of  the  ocean  we  have  a  picture  of  the  diverse 
"experiences  of  the  soul  in  passing  through  the  great  change.     Take  the  case,  e.g., 


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xii. 

of  Lydia  and  the  gaoler,  John  and  PauL  2.  In  the  after  experience  of  the  Christian 
hfe.  Soma  advance  with  uninterrupted  progress.  There  are  others  whose  course 
is  like  tliat  of  Israel  of  old  in  the  wilderness.  With  some,  the  course  is  all  among 
the  deep  shady  valleys;  others  are  walking  on  the  high  ground,  always  in 
the  sun.  The  one  class  go  on  their  way  with  joy  and  singing,  tlie  other 
advance  with  timid  step,  going,  and  weeping  as  they  go.  But  however  opposite 
the  experiences  of  God's  children,  and  however  diverse  their  paths,  they  are 
all  led  by  the  right  way,  by  the  one  Spirit  to  the  one  home.  (-/.  lluldell.) 
Diversities  of  (jifts  : — God  hath  distributed  variety  of  gifts  and  graces  in  dilTerent 
degrees  amongst  His  people.  Every  man  hath  his  proper  gift  of  God,  and  the  gifts 
and  graces  of  all  are  this  way  made  useful  and  beneficial.  Job  was  exemplary  for 
plainness  and  patience  ;  Moses  for  faithfulness  and  meekness  ;  Josiah  for  tender- 
ness. Atlianasius  was  prudent  and  active  ;  Basil  heavenly  and  of  a  sweet  spirit ; 
Chrysostom  laborious  and  without  affectation  ;  Ambrose  reserved  and  grave.  One 
hath  quickness  of  parts,  but  not  so  solid  a  judgment ;  another  is  solid,  but  not  so 
ready  and  quick.  One  hath  a  good  wit,  another  a  better  memory,  a  third  excels 
theiu  both  in  utterance.  One  is  zealous,  but  ungrounded,  another  well 
principled,  but  timorous.  One  is  wary  and  prudent,  another  open  and  plain- 
hearted.  One  is  trembling,  another  chef-rful.  Now,  the  end  and  use  of  Church- 
fellowship  is  to  make  a  rich  improvement  of  all  bj  a  regular  use  and  exercise  of  the 
gifts  and  graces  found  in  every  one.  One  must  impart  his  light,  and  another  his 
warmth.  Tlie  eye,  viz.,  the  knowing  man,  cannot  say  to  the  hand,  viz.,  the 
active  man,  I  have  no  need  of  thee.  Unspeakable  are  tlae  benefits  resulting  from 
spiritual  and  orderly  communion  ;  but  they  are  all  cut  off  by  dissentions ;  for  as 
faith  is  the  grace  by  which  we  receive  all  from  God,  so  lo\e  is  the  grace  by  which 
we  share  the  comfort  of  all  among  ourselves.  (-/.  Flavel. )  Diversity  of  nutnre : — 
Break  off  an  elm  bough  three  feet  long,  in  fall  leaf,  and  lay  it  on  the  table  before 
you,  and  try  to  draw  it,  leaf  for  leaf.  It  is  ten  to  one  if  in  the  whole  bough  (provided 
you  do  not  twist  it  about  as  you  work)  you  find  one  form  of  a  leaf  exactly  like 
another;  perhaps  you  will  not  even  have  one  complete.  Every  leaf  will  be 
oblique,  or  forohortened,  or  curled,  or  crossed  by  another,  or  shaded  by  another,  or 
have  something  or  other  the  matter  with  it ;  and  thoiigh  the  whole  bough  will  look 
graceful  and  symmetrical,  you  will  scarcely  be  able  to  tell  how  or  why  it  dr.es  so, 
since  there  is  not  one  line  of  it  like  another.      (J.  Buskin.)  Unity  in  diversitii : — 

I.  Intellectual  progkess  consists  in  discovering  the  unity  which  underlies 
ALL  diversity.  In  early  ages  everything  appeared  to  be  totally  different  from 
everything  else.  "  God's  many  and  loids  many  "  found  in  the  material  universe  a 
convenient  playground  for  their  manifold  CHpiices.  The  history  of  science  is  a 
record  of  the  discovery  in  this  primeval  cliaos  of  the  unifyirg  principal  of  law. 
Phenomena  that  seemed  altogether  dissimilar  have  turned  out  to  be  merely  different 
operations  of  the  same  force.  The  apple  which  falls  to  the  ground  once  seemed  to 
have  nothing  in  common  with  the  moon  which  does  not  so  fall ;  but  now  we  know 
that  both  are  equally  under  the  control  of  gravity.  Shooting  stars  may  even  yet 
appear  to  many  to  be  extreme  examples  of  lusiis  naturce ;  but  investigation  has 
proved  that  these  eccentiic  objects  contain  animal  remains  which  shows  that  in 
the  most  distant  parts  of  the  universe  the  same  biological  forces  were  ages  ago  at 
work  which  are  in  operation  here  and  now.  II.  This  unity  in  the  midst  op 
DIVERSITY  IS  TO  BE  FOUND,  ALSO,  IN  THE  SPIRITUAL  SPHERE.  1.  There  are  "  diversities 
of  gifts,  but  the  same  Spirit."  These  gifts  may  be  roughly  divided  into  the  secular 
class,  which  includes  gifts  of  teaching,  healing,  and  government ;  and  the  religious 
class,  which  includes  those  of  prophecy  and  of  tongues.  What  the  gift  of  tongues 
precisely  was  i  do  not  know;  but  the  unholy  emulation  to  possess  it  St.  Paul  shows 
was  foolish  and  wrong.  In  comparison  with  charity  or  enthusiasm  of  man  for 
men  it  was  nothing  worth.  The  crucial  test  by  which  spiritual  gifts  may  be  known, 
and  their  relative  value  determined,  was  "profit."  Even  a  secular  endowment, 
such  as  the  power  of  healing,  becomes  a  gift  of  the  Spirit  to  him  who  uses  it  for  the 
■welfare  of  his  fellow-man.  Such  a  desire  is  an  inspiration  that  can  only  come  from 
above,  and  this  inspiration  transforms  what  would  otherwise  be  a  mere  natural 
endowment  into  a  gift  of  the  Spirit.  The  mistake  of  the  Corinthians  was  similar 
to  one  not  uncommon  in  the  present  day.  It  is  sometimes  imagined  that  a 
clergyman,  as  such,  is  in  a  unique  degree  under  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit.  In 
spiritual  matters  there  is  no  exclusive  prerogative.  I  pity  the  clergyman  who  has 
never  been  niinisttred  unto  when  he  went  to  minister.  Profitableness  is  the  test 
of  spiritual  gifts.     He  is  the  most  highly  gifted  man  who  does  the  most  good.     2. 


CHAP.  XII.]  /.  CORINTHIANS.  IGl 

Not  only  do  different  gifts  proceed  from  the  same  Spirit,  but  there  are  different 
developments  of  the  same  gift.  The  ortice  of  the  Spirit  is  not  to  provide  us  with 
an  infallib'e  set  of  doctrines,  or  with  an  immnculate  set  of  actions  ;  but  to  give  us 
powers,  iiistinc  ts,  emotions,  and  sentiments,  which  will  be  diberently  developed  in 
different  individuals  and  according  to  different  circumstMUces.  "God  fulfils 
Himself  in  in;iny  ways,  lest  one  good  custom  should  corrupt  the  world."  Barren 
uniformity  is  death.  Our  hpiritual  life  consists  in  our  co-ojieration  with  God,  and 
the  co-operation  of  different  individuMls  under  different  circumstances  leads  of 
necessity  to  a  diversity  of  opinions  and  practices.  The  same  desire  to  honour  God 
may  manifest  itself  in  the  most  diverse  ways.  Some  think  it  incumbent  to  go 
through  an  elaborHte  ritual,  while  to  others  a  bold  simplicity  will  seeui  more  in 
haimony  with  worship.  Some  will  feel  that  music  draws  them  heavenwards; 
others  that  it  ties  them  down  to  earth.  Some  will  find  that  they  can  hardly  pray 
without  a  form  of  words;  others  that  they  can  hardly  pray  with  it.  There  are 
diversities  of  wotkinj:,  yet  it  is  the  same  God  who  worketh.  What  we  have  to 
loolc  for  in  the  spiritual  as  in  the  physical  spheres  is  not  uniformity  but  unity — the 
unity  manifested  through  diversity.  3.  This  is  a  lesson  which  many  find  it  very 
hard  to  learn.  Some  time  ago  the  author  of  "Religious  Denominations  "  was  told 
that  in  the  North  of  Scotland  there  was  a  sect  nearly  dying  out,  the  membeis  of 
which  were  peculiarly  sure  that  they  alone  were  in  the  way  of  salvation.  He  went 
to  the  house  of  the  chief  representative  of  this  expiring  sect.  The  man  was  away, 
but  the  wife  admitted  that  they  had  lost  member  after  member  from  unsoundness 
of  views,  until  at  last,  as  she  pathetically  i^ut  it,  "  There  is  only  just  myself  and  my 
husband  left,  and  I  am  not  so  very  sure  of  him."  Now,  we  m;iy  smile  at  this 
foidish  old  woman,  yet  hhe  is  only  an  extreme  specimen  of  many  who  seem  to 
find  supreme  comfort  in  the  assurance  that  God's  Spirit  is  working  only  in  the  very 
select  few  who  agree  in  doctrine  and  practice  with  themselves.  4.  In  heaven, 
if  not  on  earth,  men  will  discover  that  their  differences  were  much  less,  and  their 
agreement;  much  greater  than  at  the  time  appeared.  All  honest  seekers  after  God 
are  in  heart  united,  whether  they  know  it  or  not;  though  distinct  as  the  billows, 
thev  are  one  as  the  sea  ;  though  distinct  as  the  colours  of  the  rainbow,  they  are  as 
the  pure  white  light  which  those  colours  compose.  The  mount  of  truth  has  many 
IDaths  ;  those  who  are  ascending  it  by  different  ways  look  too  often  upon  each  other 
with  suspicion  and  contempt ;  but  they  will  all  be  led  onwards  and  upwards  by  the 
Holy  Ghost,  till  eventually  they  find  themselves  standing  side  by  side  before  the 
throne  of  the  Eternal.  (I'rof.  Momerie.)  Unity  nnth  diversity  : — "Hear,  O 
Israel,  the  Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord,"  but  there  ai'e  distinctions  in  tbe  Divine  nature  : 
in  the  Old  Testament  He  is  called  Elohim,  plural  noun  joined  to  singular  verb  ;  and 
in  the  New  He  is  spoken  of  as  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost.  Again,  the  moral  law 
is  also  one  summed  up,  like  the  Divine  character,  in  love ;  but  it  has  a  diversity  of 
applications.  There  is  unity  with  variety  in — I.  Tbe  wokks  of  God.  1.  In  the 
matter  of  the  universe.  Matter  is  the  same  in  all  time  and  in  all  space.  Chemistry 
and  geology  both  prove  this.  But  in  what  a  diversity  of  modes  does  it  appear  :  in 
earth,  water,  air,  and  fire;  in  the  trunks,  branches,  fruits,  d-c. ,  of  plants;  in 
the  bones,  muscles,  etc.,  of  animals.  2.  In  the  forces  of  the  universe.  The  sum 
of  force  is  always  one  and  the  same.  If  you  consume  it  in  one  form  it  appears  in 
another.  A  large  portion  of  it  coming  from  the  sun  is  taken  up  by  tbe  plant,  which 
is  eaten  by  the  animal,  and  becomes  in  us  the  power  which  we  use  to  serve  our  pur- 
poses. But  in  what  a  diversity  of  modes  does  this  force  appear;  in  matter  attracting 
matter,  and  holding  atoms  and  worlds  together ;  in  elements  combining  according 
to  their  affinities  ;  driving  our  steam  engines,  heating  our  homes,  quivering  in  the 
niHgnetic  needle,  blowing  in  the  breeze,  smiling  in  the  sunshine,  striking  in  the 
liKbtning,  and  living  in  every  organ  of  the  body  ;  ever  changing  and  yet  never 
changing  ;  imparting  uncea^ing  activity,  and  yet  securing  an  undisturbed 
stability.  3.  In  the  orderly  arrangement  of  the  matter  and  forces  of  the  universe. 
He  who  created  the  elements  and  their  properties  has  so  disposed  them  that 
they  fall  in  order  like  the  stones  in  a  laiT'C  building',  or  soldiers  in  companies,  eveiy 
one  with  a  duty  to  discharge.  The  issue  is — (1)  Beneficent  and  highly  complex 
laws,  such  as  the  revolution  of  the  seasons.  What  a  number  of  agencies,  e.y.,  are 
involved  in  the  periodical  return  of  spring.  (2)  The  adaptation  of  law  to  law,  so 
as  to  bring  about  individual  events.  This  is  wliat  constitutes  providence.  This 
providence  is  general,  reaching  over  the  whole,  because  it  is  particular  providing 
for  every  being,  and  for  all  wants.  4.  In  our  mental  talents  and  tastes.  The 
mind  is  suited  to  the  position  in  which  it  is  placed  in  the  world,  and  the  world  is 
VOL.    II.  11 


1G2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 


adapted  to  the  minds  which  are  to  observe  and  use  it.     Man's  intellect,  formed 
after  the  image  of   God,   delights   in    unity   with   variety,    and   nature   presents 
these  everywhere.     II.  In  the  Word  of  God.     This  was  written  at  very  different 
times   by   different    men    in   different    styles    and    about    different    topics;    but 
there  is  unity  fiom  beginning  to  end.     It  is  one  creed  in  regard  to  God,  Christ, 
man,  this  world  and  the  world  to  come.     This  arises — 1.  From  the  ciicumstance 
that  there  is  one  God  inspirkig  the  writers.     As  "  the  Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord," 
so  the  Word  He  has  inspired  is  also  one.     While  "  all  Scripture  is  given  by  the 
inspiration  of  God,"  it  "  is  "  piofitable  "  for  a  variety  of  purposes.     2.  From  the 
whole  being  a  development  of  the  one  plan  of  redemption.     There  is  a  universal 
harmony   in   nature,  but  somehow   a   discordant  element   has   been   introduced. 
Loolving  within,  we  find  conscience  indicating  that  man  is  not  at  peace  with  God 
nor  with  liimself.    Looking  without,  we  st  e  w-irs,  bloodshed,  disease,  disappointment, 
and  death.     AH  these  things  can  be  traced  directly  or  indirectly  to  sin.     Now  the 
Word   of   God   reveals   a   way   by   which   this    discordance   is  removed.      In   its 
evolution   the  plan    assumes   various    forms,    the    patriarchal,    the    Jewish,    the 
Christism.     But  it  is  substantially  the  same  along  the  whole  line.     God  appears 
fverywbere  as   a  holy  God,    saving  sinners  througli  the   suffering   of   His    Son. 
Except    in   the   degree   of   development   there  is   no   difference   between   God  as 
re\ealed  in  Eden,  on  Smai,  and  on  Calvary.     The  first  book  of  Scripture  discloses 
to  us  a  worshijiper  offering  a  lamb  in  sicritice,  and  the  last  shows  a  lamb  as  it  had 
been  sluin  in  the  mid-^t  of  the  Throne.     In  heaven  they  "  sing  the  song  of  Moses 
the  servant  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb."     3.  From  the  unity  with  variety  in  the 
experience  of  believers.     In  essential  points  the  experience  of  all  is  alike,  and  has 
been  so  from  the  beginning ;  but  because  tlie  Spirit  works  in  a  certain  way  in  the 
l-reast  of  one  believer,  this  is  no  reason  why  He  should  work  in  the  same  way  in 
the  heart  of  every  other.     He  suits  His  ma  ifestations  to  the  difference  of  their 
state  and  character.     III.  There  is  an  accordance  between  the  works  ani>  Wohd 
OF  God  and  \v:t  there  is  a  difference.     1.  Both  come  from  God  and  therefore 
reflect  His  character,  but  in  a  Rom<nvhat  diffe'ent  light.     The  works  manifest  His 
power  and  His  wisdom  ;  the  Word  His  holiness  on  the  one  hand  and  His  mercy  on 
the  other.     2.  There  are  times  when  science  and  Scripture  seem  to  contradict  each 
other;  but  only  as  one  branch  of  science  may  s-em  to  be  inconsistent  with  another. 
Geology,  e.g.,  requires  long  ages  to  explain  its  phenomena,  whereas  astronomy  seems 
to  say,  tiiat  so  long  time  has  not  elapsed  since  the  earth  was  farmed  by  the  rotation  of 
nebulous  matter,  every  one  believes  that  sooner  or  later  the  seeming  inconsistencies 
will  be  cleared  up.     Account  for  it  as  we  may,  there  is  a  general  correspondence 
between  Genesis  and  seology.  and  with  such  correspondences  we  may  leave  the 
apparent  irrpcuncilabilities  to  be  explained  by  fnt'ire  investigation.     At  times  it  is 
not   easy   to   reconcile   profane   history   with  Scripture  ;  but  ever  and   anun   the 
monuments  of  Egypt,  Nineveh,  and  Moab,  tell  us  that  the  Old  Testament  gives  us 
a  correct  picture  of  the  state  of  the  nations  in  anci'  nt  times.     3.  I  might  dwell  on 
the  numerous  analogies  between   nature   and   revelation.      Both   give   the   same 
expanded  views  of  tlie   greatness   of  God  ;    the   one   by  showing  His   workman- 
ship,   the   other  by   its  descriptions.     "  The  heavens   declare,"  &c.     Both    show 
that  there  is  only  one  God;  the  works,   which  ai'e  bound  in  one  concatenated 
system,  and  the  Word  when  it  declares  that  "  the  Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord." 
Note — Two  points  brought  into  prominence  by  recent  science.     (1)  The  operation 
of   evolution.     It  is  not  proved,  as  some  would  aver,  that  there  is  nothing  but 
development.     For  there  cannot  be  development  without  S'>me  previous  seed.     We 
see  a  like  operation  in  the  kingdom  of  grace.     The  Jewish  economy  is  developed 
out  of  the  Patriarchal,  the  Christian  out  of  the  Jewish  ;  and  the  seed  planted 
eighteen   hundred   years  ago  has  become  a  wide-spread  tree.      (2)  The  state  of 
things  in  which  we  are  placed.     The  frivolous  may  feel  as  if  the  Scriptures  have 
drawn  too  dark  a  picture  of  our  world  ;  but  all  who  have  had  large  experience  of 
human  life  acknowledge  that  the  account  is  a  correct  one.     How  much  of  history 
is   occupied   with   the   narrative   of  desolating   wars.     We  boast  of  our  splendid 
cities,  but  in  every  one  of  them  you  will  find  crime  and  misery  fermenting.     There 
are   warring  elements   in   every  human    bosom,  and  in  every  society.     Any  one 
seeking  to  remove  the  causes  of  discord  will  be  sure  to  irritate  and  to  meet  with 
determined  opposition.     1  he  greatest  men  h>ive  been  martyrs,  who,  in  order  to 
pull  down  the  evil,  have  had  themselves  to  perish.     And  science  gives  the  saime 
picture.     What  mean  these  discoveries  of    worlds   being  formed   out  of  warring 
elements?     What   means   the    "struggle   for   existence"?      Science,   as   well   as 


CHAP.  XII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  1G3 

Scripture,  i-hows  that  the  whole  creation  groaneth  and  travaileth  in  pain  together 
until  now."  The  two  are  thus  seen  to  be  in  curious  corresjpondence  ;  but  they 
differ  in  this,  that  while  both  speak  of  a  troubled  day,  the  latter  and  more 
comforting  revelation  assures  us  that  "  at  evening  time  there  shall  be  light." 
{J.  McCosli,  D.D.)  Allrgorical  time-keej'ers  : — On  the  face  f'f  a  watch  are  three 
workers,  and  an  ignorant  man  would  conclude  that  the  second  hand  was  the  most 
impoitant.  But  you  might  remove  that,  and  even  the  minute  hand,  and  yet  be 
able  to  tell  the  time  if  the  steady  hour  liand  were  left.  So  there  are  diversides  of 
operations  in  the  Church,  and  we  are  liable  to  form  wrong  conclusions  as  to  their 
relative  value.  We  have  liitle  fussy  men,  who  can  turn  round  sixty  times  before 
a,notlier  man  will  turn  round  once,  but  they  are  not  always  the  mo.^t  reliable  as  to 
spiritual  time,  nor  are  they  the  most  important  workers  in  tlie  Church.  What  we 
want  is  men  and  women  of  steady,  lelinble  character,  on  the  dial  of  whose  conduct 
the  true  time  is  always  r^  gistered.  I  once  went  into  a  clocktnaker's  at  noon, 
and  the  clocks  were  striking  the  hour.  There  wei-e  "  diversities  of  operations," 
but  "  the  same  spirit  "  actuated  them  all,  viz.,  to  tell  everybody  th  it  it  was  twelve 
o'clock.  It  was  amusing  to  hear  little  clocks  tip  off  the  whole  twelve  before  larger 
ones  had  got  more  than  nicely  begun.  But  each  did  its  own  work,  according  to  its 
own  j)romptings,  and  found  no  fault  with  others  because  they  had  different  methods 
of  doing  the  same  thing.  The  effect  of  a  quarrel  would  have  been  loss  of  time  and 
damnge.  I  learn  from  this — 1.  That  all  Cliristians  should  be  busy  at  ih^-ir  great 
life-work.  2.  That  Christian  activity  must  be  prompted  and  controlled  Irom 
within.  3.  That  uniformity  of  method  is  impossible,  and  therefore  that  each 
should  work  in  his  own  way,  and  find  no  fault  with  those  whose  methods  may 
differ.  4.  That  method  is  quite  secondary.  What  is  the  quality  of  the  work 
done  ?  Let  me  describe  the  clocks  I  saw.  I.  The  clock  that  did  not  strike. 
A  fine-looking  clock,  which  only  told  the  time  to  the  eye,  whereas  others  told  it  to 
the  ear  as  well.  Now,  as  a  rule,  all  true  Christians  are  made  to  strike,  but  now 
and  then  you  will  come  across  one  who  appears  to  hick  the  striking  weight  or  the 
bell;  but,  in  many  cases,  if  you  look  on  the  dial  of  their  conduct  you  will  find  it 
unvarving  as  the  sun.  I  have  often  lain  awake  at  night  wondering  what  time  it 
was,  when  suddenly  the  faithful  clock  struck  off  the  answer.  It  is  a  great  blessing 
to  the  world,  in  the  midst  of  its  moral  darkness,  that  there  are  so  many  Chiistians 
who  fearlessly  publish  the  time.  II.  The  clock  that  made  only  a  buzzing 
NOISE.  It  went  through  all  the  motions  of  striking  without  making  one  the  wiser 
as  to  what  it  was  trying  to  tell.  So  some  well-meaning  peojile  go  through  all  the 
motions  of  bearing  witness  for  the  Master,  but  no  one  can  understand  them.  This, 
however,  is  in  very  many  instances  the  result  of  habit  or  inconsistency.  I  knew 
a  most  powerful  political  speaker  who,  in  relating  his  Christian  experience,  seemed 
to  be  afraid  of  everybody  present ;  and  1  know  good  sisters,  whose  voices  can  ring 
all  over  the  place,  who  can  only  mumble  their  Christian  experience.  III.  The 
CLOCK  1HAT  STKUCK  TOO  MUCH.  There  was  a  clock  that  appeared  to  like  to  hear 
itself  strike,  and  was  little  phort  of  a  nuisance :  yet  the  b^^nding  of  a  little  wire, 
about  the  eighth  of  an  inch,  would  have  made  it  as  orderly  as  any  in  the  room. 
So  those  who  prav  and  spenk  too  long  in  our  churches  only  require  a  gentle, 
brotlixirly  suggestion,  and  the  trouble  in  many  cases  would  be  at  an  end,  yet  not  in 
all.  For,  when  very  highly  ti'inpered,  the  wire  sometimes  breaks  in  bending,  and 
then  I  have  known  them  to  sink  themselves  in  ill-natured  silence,  and  scarcely  as 
much  as  tick  in  public  afterwards.  Some  of  these  great  talkers  are  very  poor  time- 
ke' pers.  I  have  heard  them  strike  off  "Twelve  o'clock,  sjjiritual  noonday  here," 
when  the  hands  on  the  dial  of  their  conduct  scarcely  indicated  spiritual  sunrise. 
IV.  The  clock  that  needed  starting.  I  thought  perhaps  it  was  out  of  gear  or 
not  wound  up,  but  the  gentleman  told  me  that  it  was  in  going  order,  but  ihat  he 
had  forgotten  to  statt  it.  So  theie  are  persons  who  just  need  the  gentle  touch  of 
Christian  encouragement  to  start  them  in  the  path  of  righteousness.  And  in  the 
Church  theie  are  many  who  would  pray  in  the  prayer-meeting,  labour  in  the  Sunday- 
schooi,  or  give  liberally  if  they  ouce  got  started.  V.  The  clock  that  was  not 
PLU^m — wliicli  was  just  in  the  act  of  stopping.  There  was  something  under  it. 
How  many  church  members  are  swayed  all  to  one  side  by  ttdngs  that  ate  incon- 
sistent with  the  Christian  character.  While  in  such  an  attitude  you  may  ask,  but 
you  can  receive  no  spiritual  blessings.  YI.  The  one  feature  the  clocks  ail  had 
IN  coMJioN.  I  noticed  amid  all  the  "  diversities "  of  .'-ize,  mechanism,  and 
"  opeiations,"  that  all  these  clocks  had  a  tehdencv  to  run  down.  So  with  all 
Christians.     You  may  be  as  punctual  at  church,  and  as  exemplary  in  your  dei3>  it- 


1C4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xii. 

ment  as  usual,  aud  be  ruuning  down  all  the  time.  The  pendulum  of  profession  may 
continue  to  wag  when  the  mechanism  is  clog-^ed  with  the  dust  of  worldliness  or  for- 
bidden pleasures.  No  Christian  can  run  on  time,  if  left  to  himself,  for  a  single  hour. 
What,  then,  mu^t  be  the  condition  of  those  who  live  loose  from  God  six  days  out  of 
seven.  Some  clocks  are  so  madn  that  they  can  run  for  weeks  and  keep  good  time  ; 
but  I  never  knew  a  Christian  that  could  do  it,  and  I  have  known  many  who  gave  it  a 
fair  trial.  Conclusion  :  1  well  remember  my  tirst  watch.  Sometimes  it  would  rattle 
off  an  hour  in  fifteen  minutes,  while  at  other  tinias  it  could  not  make  an  hour  in 
twenty-four.  I  spent  a  good  deal  of  time  in  finding  out  the  time  and  Riving  it  to 
my  watch,  by  turning  the  iiands  into  proper  position.  My  father  at  length,  to  save 
time  I  presume,  took  it  to  the  watcljmaker,  und  I  thought  my  watch  was  ruined  as 
the  man  took  it  to  pieces,  but  when  thd  job  was  done,  it  could  keep  its  own  hands 
to  tlie  true  time  without  any  help  from  mine.  Many  in  our  churches  act  towards 
themselves  »s  I  did  towards  that  old  watch.  Their  inner  mechanism  is  clogged  and 
deranged  by  the  dust  and  defilement  of  sin.  When  they  perform  any  Christian 
duties  it  is  all  mechanical  and  outside  work  with  them.  You  cannot  keep  time 
from  the  outside.  You  must  come  under  God's  cleansing  and  regulating  hand 
before  you  can  run  the  way  of  His  commandments.  (2\  Kellij.)  Tlie  disj^ensa- 
tioii  of  the  Spirit : — The  ages  of  the  world  are  divisible  into  three  dispensations.  1. 
Of  the  Father  when  God  was  known  as  a  Creator  ;  creation  manifested  His  eternal 
powtr  aud  Godhead.  2.  Of  the  S  m  when  God  manifested  Himself  through  man; 
the  Et  r.ial  Word  spoke  through  the  inspired  and  gifted  of  the  race.  Its  climax  was 
the  advent  of  the  Redeemer.  3.  Of  the  Spiiit  iu  which  God  has  communicated 
Himself  by  the  highest  revelation,  as  a  Spirit  mingling  with  a  spirit.  There  is  a 
twofold  way  in  which  the  operations  of  the  Spirit  may  be  considered.  I.  Spikitual 
GIFTS  CONFERRED  ON  INDIVIDUATES.  In  vcr.  28  tlicsc  are  divided  into  two  classes  ; 
the  first  are  those  capMcities  which  are  originaUv  found  in  human  nature,  elevated 
and  enlarged  by  the  gift  of  the  Spirit ;  the  second  are  those  which  were  called  into 
existence  by  the  sudden  approach  of  the  same  infiuence.  Just  as  if  the  tempera- 
ture of  this  nortljern  hemisphere  were  raised  suddenly,  and  a  mighty  tropical  river 
were  to  pour  its  fertilising  inundation  over  the  country,  the  result  would  be 
impartation  of  a  vigorous  and  gigantic  growth  to  the  vegetation  already  in 
existence,  and  at  the  same  time  the  devebjiment  of  life  in  seeds  and  germs  which 
had  long  hxin  latent  in  the  soil,  incapable  of  vegetation  in  the  unkindly  climate  of 
their  birth.  Consider — (1)  The  natural  gifts,  (a)  Teaching  is  a  gift,  natural  or 
acquired.  To  kuow  is  one  thiny; ;  to  hiiVc;  the  capacity  of  imparting  knowledge  is 
another.  (h)  Healing  is  no  supernatural  m.vstery;  long  and  careful  study  of 
physical  laws  capacitate  the  physician  for  his  task,  (c)  Government,  again,  maybe 
learned,  but  there  are  some  wlio  never  could  so  acquire  it.  Some  men  seem  born  to 
command.  Now  the  doctrine  of  the  apostle  was,  that  all  these  are  transformed  by  the 
Spirit  so  as  to  become  almost  new  powers.  (2)  Supernatural  fiifts.  Of  these  we  find 
two  pre-eminent  gif  IS.  («)  The  gift  of  tongues  was  not  merely  the  imparted  faculty  of 
speaking  foreign  languaj:es  ;  it  would  rather  seem  that  the  Spirit  of  God,  mingling 
with  the  soul  of  man,  so  glorified  its  conceptions,  that  the  ordinary  forms  of  speech, 
were  found  inadequate  for  their  e.cpressjon.  In  a  far  lower  department,  when  a 
mm  becomes  possessed  of  great  ideas,  his  language  becomes  broken.  But  it  often 
happens  that  when  perfect  sympathy  exists,  incoherent  utterances — a  word — a 
svUable — is  quite  as  etticient  as  elaborate  sentences.  On  the  day  of  Pentecost  all 
who  were  in  the  same  state  of  spiiitual  emotion  as  those  who  spoke  understood  the 
speakers;  to  those  who  were  scepiically  watching,  the  effects  appeared  like  those 
of  intoxication.  A  similar  account  is  tjiven  in  chap.  xiv.  (b)  The  gift  of 
prophecy  seems  to  have  been  a  state  of  communion  with  the  mind  of  God, 
mure  u.ider  the  guidance  of  reason  than  the  gift  of  tongues,  2.  Upon  these 
gifts  we  make  two  observations.  (1)  Even  the  highi^st  were  not  accompanied 
with  spiritual  faultlessuess.  Disorder  and  vanity  might  accompany  these  gifts, 
and  the  prophetic  utterance  itself  might  be  degraded  to  mere  brawling,  there- 
fore St.  Paul  declared  the  need  of  subjection  and  rule  over  spiritual  gifts; 
the  siDiiits  of  tlie  prophets  were  to  be  subject  to  the  prophets;  if  those  endowed 
with  tongues  were  unable  to  interpret  what  they  meant,  they  were  to  hold 
their  peace.  There  is  nothing  jDrecisely  identical  in  our  own  day  with  these 
gifts,  but  there  are  those  which  stand  in  a  t-omewhat  analogous  relation.  The 
flights  of  genius  aj)pear  like  maniac  ravings  to  minds  not  elevated  to  the  same 
level,  and  are  perfectly  compatible  with  moral  disorder.  The  most  gifted  of  our 
countrymen  wan  "  tlie  greatest,  wise.-t,  meanest  of  mankind."     The  most  glorious 


CHAP.  XII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  1G5 

gift  of  poetic  insight  is  too  often  associated  with  degraded  life.  (2)  The  gifts, 
■which  were  higher  in  one  sense,  were  lower  in  another;  as  supernatural  gifts  they 
would  rank  thus — tongues — prophecy — teaching  ;  but  as  blessings  to  be  desired, 
this  order  is  reversed.  The  principle  upon  which  that  was  tried  was  tliat  of 
a  utility  whose  measure  whs  love  (chap.  xiv.  19).  Our  estimate  is  almost  the 
reverse  of  this :  we  value  a  gift  in  proportion  to  its  rarity.  One  of  our  countrymen 
has  achieved  for  himself  extraordinary  scientific  renown,  but  the  same  man  applied 
his  rare  intellect  to  the  construction  of  that  simple  lamp  which  had  been  the 
guardian  of  the  miner's  life.  The  most  trifling  act  which  is  useful  .s  nobler  in 
God's  sight  than  the  most  brilliant  accomplishment  of  genius.  II.  The  spiritual 
UNITY  OF  THE  Church — "  the  Same  Spirit."  There  are  two  ideas  of  unity  :  same- 
ness of  form  and  identity  of  spirit.  Some  have  fondly  hoped  to  realise  an  unity 
for  the  Church  of  Christ  which  should  be  manifested  by  uniform  expressinns  in 
everything.  There  are  others  who  have  thrown  aside  entirely  this  idea  as 
chimerical;  and  who,  perceiving  that  the  law  of  the  universal  system  is  manifold- 
ness  in  unity,  have  ceased  to  expect  any  other  oneness  for  the  Church  of  Christ 
than  that  of  a  sameness  of  spirit,  showing  itself  through  diversities  of  gifts. 
Among  these  was  Paul.  1.  All  real  unity  is  manifold.  Peelings  in  themselves 
identical  find  countless  forms  of  expression.  In  the  world  as  God  has  made  it  one 
law  shows  itself  under  diverse,  even  opposite  manifestations.  2.  All  living  unity 
is  spiritual,  not  formal.  You  may  have  a  unity  shown  in  identitj'  of  form  ;  but  it 
is  a  lifeless  unity.  The  illustration  given  by  the  apostle  is  that  of  the  human 
body.  Uniformity  here  would  have  been  irrei^arable  lo^s — the  loss  of  every  part 
that  was  merged  into  one.  The  body's  unity  is  the  unity  of  a  living  consciousness 
which  animates  every  separate  atom  of  the  frame,  and  reduces  each  to  the 
performance  of  a  function  fitted  to  the  welfare  of  the  whole.  3.  None  but  a 
spiritual  unity  can  preseive  the  rights  both  of  the  individual  and  the  Church. 
Some  have  claimed  the  right  of  private  judgment  in  such  a  way  tbat  every 
individual  opinion  becomes  truth,  and  every  utterance  of  private  conscience  right  ; 
thus  the  Church  is  sacrificed  to  the  individual ;  and  the  universal  conscience,  the 
common  faith,  becomes  as  nothing.  Again,  there  are  others  who,  like  the  Church 
of  Eome,  would  surrender  the  conscience  of  each  man  to  the  conscience  of  the 
Church.  Spiritual  unity  saves  the  right  of  both  in  God's  system.  It  respects  the 
sanctity  of — (1)  The  individual  conscifnce.  "Let  every  man  be  fully  persuaded  in 
his  own  mind."  The  belief  of  the  whole  world  cannot  make  that  thing  tiue  to  me 
which  to  me  seems  false.  (2)  The  individual  character.  Out  of  the  millions  of 
the  race,  a  few  features  diversify  themselves  into  so  many  forms  of  countenance, 
that  scarcely  two  could  be  n)istaken  for  each  other.  There  are  no  two  leaves  on 
the  same  tree  alike  ;  nor  two  sides  of  the  same  leaf,  unless  you  cut  and  kill  it. 
Each  man  born  into  this  world  is  a  fresh  new  soul  intended  hy  his  Maker  to 
develop   himself    in  a  new   fresh    way.       (F.    W.    Eobertson,  M.A.)  The    (jifts 

of  Cliristianiti/ : — Christianity  claims  to  be,  and  is,  in  the  behef  of  all  its  truest 
sons,  a  universal  religion.  And  consider  what  that  means.  It  mears  that  it  is 
a  religion  for  all  peoples,  whatever  their  land,  whatever  their  character ;  for 
the  emotional  races  of  the  south  as  well  ae  for  the  sterner  and  harder  dwellers  in 
the  north,  for  the  subtle  and  dreamy  oriental  as  for  the  strong  a^d  practical  in- 
habitant of  the  west.  It  means  that  it  is  a  religion  for  all  ages  ;  that  it  can  adapt 
itself  to  changing  times.  It  means  that  it  is  a  religion  for  all  classes  ;  that  it  can 
appeal  to  the  rich  as  to  the  poor,  to  the  cultivated  intellect  of  i;he  few  as  to  the 
untrained  reason  of  the  many,  to  woman  as  to  man,  to  the  child  as  well  hs  to  the 
old.  It  means  that  it  is  a  religion  for  all  temperaments.  Let  us  see  what  right 
Christianity  has  to  claim  to  be  and  to  do  all  this.  Through  what  agencies  does  it 
work  ?  Are  they  fitted  to  make  it  accomplish  the  end  of  its  being  ?  Let  us  never 
forget,  in  the  fiist  place,  that  the  one  great  agency  to  which  it  must  look,  nay  the 
one  which  is  its  very  life  and  inspiration,  is  the  Holv  Spirit  of  God.  Without  Him 
there  can  be  no  religion,  no  Christianity  ;  without  His  work  and  influence  no  soul 
of  man  can  be  born  again  unto  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  And  if  tliere  is  one 
attribute  of  His  working  which  is  dwelt  upon  more  than  another  in  the  Bible  it  is 
its  diversity.  You  cannot  set  limits  to  it ;  you  cannot  assign  reasims  for  it.  It 
can  seize  bold  of  a  self-seeking  Balaam  or  a  narrow-souled  Saul  and  make  them 
its  mouthpieces  as  easily  as  it  can  rest  upon  an  Elijah,  or  a  John  the  Baptist,  or  a 
St.  Paul.  It  is  on  this  boundless  power,  this  power  to  change  and  to  exalt,  this 
power  to  fire  the  various  capacities  of  men,  to  give  them  new  strnnge  gifts,  that 
the  apostle  dwells  so  eloquently  in  this  passage  in  the  Corinthian  epistle.     And 


1G6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xii. 

then  pas^s  on  to  another  agency,  which  is  in  one  sense  not  another,  but  the  same  ; 
I  mean  the  Book  which  the  Spirit  of  God  has  inspired  and  wliioh  the  Church  of 
Christ  bears  in  her  hand  for  tlie  teaching  of  the  nations.  What  is  the  character 
of  it  ?  Not,  as  might  have  been  expected,  a  short  and  logical  and  exact  book  of 
reference.  The  Biule  is  a  book  of  what  marvellous  variety  !  Truly  a  book  of 
marvellous  diversity  and  yet  of  no  less  marvellous  unity,  for  the  golden  thread  of 
God's  purpose  of  salvation  in  Christ  runs  through  it  and  binds  it  in  one  from  its 
beginning  to  its  end.  There  is  yet  another  agency  which  Christianity  must  use, 
and  tliat  is  the  Church.  St.  Paul,  in  the  passage  on  which  I  am  dwelling,  makes 
it  clear  that  here  too,  in  his  view,  is  to  be  the  same  diversity  in  unity.  The 
Church  is  to  be  one,  to  know  but  the  "  one  Body,  and  one  Spirit,  and  one  Hope  of 
our  calling,  one  Lord,  one  Faith,  one  Baptism,  one  God  and  Father  of  us  all "  : 
and  yet  it  is  to  find  place  and  play  for  all  manner  of  minds  and  characters,  as  the 
body  find^,  work  for  all  its  differing  members.  "God  fulfils  Himself  in  many 
ways  "  ;  there  is  room  in  the  church  for  all  temperaments,  and  characters,  and  minds  ; 
her  true  aim  as  a  Church  is  to  follow  up  the  work  of  the  Spirit,  not  to  attempt  to 
manufacture  Christians  after  a  single  extm|>lar,  but  rather  to  take  what  is  strongest 
and  best  in  the  character  of  each,  and  to  make  it  do  service  to  God  ;  not  to  crush 
the  enthusiasm  out  of  a  St.  Paul,  or  the  independent  thought  out  of  an  Augustine, 
or  the  artistic  power  out  of  a  Fra  Ang^lico,  or  the  poetry  out  of  a  Milton,  or  the 
scientific  spirit  out  of  a  Livingstone,  but  to  tarn  their  special  gifts  to  God's  ends 
and  consecrate  them  to  all  holy  purposes.  There  are  diversities  of  gifts,  but  the 
same  Spirit,  differences  of  ministries,  but  the  same  Lord,  diversities  of  operations, 
but  the  same  God  which  workeih  all  in  all.  And  yet,  in  spite  of  this  universality 
of  which  we  have  been  boasting,  it  is  useless  to  shut  our  eyes  to  the  fact  that 
there  is  much  failure  to  mourn  over,  much  success  that  is  only  partial  at  best,  in 
the  progress  of  Christianity.  Are  there  no  Christians  who  have  faith  without 
charily,  whose  belief  in  Clirist  is  a  belief  of  the  mind,  whose  religion  is  dogma 
without  love,  bigotry  without  humility  ?  We  may  well  ask,  if  Christianity  is  what 
it  claims  to  be,  whence  come  these  failures  ?  And  when  we  set  ourselves  to 
answer  that  question,  the  first  thing  we  find  is  that  one  failure  is  due  to  another. 
If  the  religion  of  Christ  has  failed  in  tliis  or  that  part  of  the  world,  it  is  because  it 
has  not  got  thoroughly  hold  of  the  nation  which  preaches  it.  Yes,  if  we  want  to 
find  the  explanation  of  the  compaiative  failure  of  Christianity  among  the  races  of 
the  world,  or  among  the  labourers  of  our  own  land,  we  must  seek  it  in  this,  that 
we  are  only  one-sided  Christians  ourselves.  But  then  we  carry  our  inquiries  a  step 
further  back.  Why  is  it  that  there  is  so  much  of  this  one-sided  Christianity? 
And  the  answer  to  that  is  that  men  do  not  entirely  realise  the  ideal  which  is  set 
before  them.  For  that  ideal  is  this — that  every  part,  and  power,  and  capacity, 
and  tendency  within  them  must  be  illuminated  and  inspired  by  the  Spirit  of  God, 
given  over  to  His  supremacy  and  to  His  government,  subordinated  and  made 
obedient  to  His  will.  Man  is  a  many-sided  bcng  ;  and  it  is  not  enough,  it  is  not 
the  whole  of  the  religion  of  Christ,  if  the  intellect  is  convinced  but  the  conscience 
silenced,  if  the  emotions  are  kindled  and  the  life  untouched.  The  surrender,  if 
surrender  it  is  to  be  called  where  surrender  means  victory,  must  be  complete  ;  the 
service  of  the  heart  to  God,  if  service  it  be  where  service  is  perfect  freedom,  must 
be  unreserved  and  unqualified.  But  I  shall  be  told  very  likely  that  I  am  contra- 
dicting myself ;  that  a  surrender,  a  service,  a  uniformity,  a  hannony  so  complete 
is  practically  just  that  dead  level,  that  absence  of  diversity,  which  just  now  I 
disclaimed.  But  that  is  not  so.  God  asks  you  for  all  your  powers,  but  He  does 
not  ask  you  to  exert  them  all  in  equal  measure ;  He  does  not  demand  the  same 
interest,  the  same  fruit  from  your  mind  and  hearc  if  one  is  by  nature  greater  than 
the  other.  He  leaves  you  free.  Thus  with  one  man  religioir  is  the  consecration 
of  his  intellect  to  God.  The  truth  of  Christ's  message  and  mission  has  come  upon 
him  like  a  revelation ;  it  fills  his  tlioughts  ;  the  conviction  that  has  seized  him 
bears  him  on  like  a  flood;  it  is  life  to  him  now  to  learn  more  and  more  of  the 
knowleilge  of  God.  Or,  again,  with  another,  religion  is  the  consecration  of  the 
will  and  the  affections ;  the  salt  which  saves  him  from  moral  corruption  and 
decay.  The  strength  of  his  life,  the  flower  of  his  service  to  God,  is  not  intellectual, 
but  moral  and  spiritual.  His  part  in  the  great  warfare  is  less  an  active  one  than 
one  of  stedfastness  and  rest.  In  quietness  is  His  strength.  And  yet  once  more  : 
the  religious  life  may  be  the  consecration  of  the  energies.  We  are  familiar  all  of 
us  with  men  who  have  neither  exceptional  ability  nor  any  singular  power  of  self- 
restraint  ;  but  whatever  they  do  they  do  it  with  their  might,  seeing  but  one  thing 


CHAP.  XII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  167 

In  front  of  them  and  making  for  that  with  every  power  and  capacity  that  tliey 
possess.  Theirs  is  no  ambition  to  be  in  the  vanguard  of  the  marcli,  but  to  save  the 
stragglers  and  strengthen  the  weaiy  and  the  weak  as  tliey  falter  and  fail.  Well 
for  you  if  God's  Spirit  takes  your  intellect  and  makes  it  His  own;  well  for  you  if 
He  uplifts  you  to  a  life  of  holiness  livtd  in  the  very  presence  of  God  ;  but  if  neitber 
of  these  lots  may  be  yours,  then  pray  Him  to  make  you  one  of  His  workers, 
wherever  your  held  may  lie.     (II.  A.  Jame^,  B.D.)  Diversities  of  gifta  in  the 

Church: — The  work  of  God,  the  life  of  His  Cliurch — how  strange,  confused,  and 
mixed,  and  accidental  it  looks,  as  we  pass  our  eyes  over  the  surface!  And  St. 
Paul,  Lere,  in  my  text,  is  looking  on  at  his  Church  at  Corinth  ;  and  he  is  hard 
pressed  by  accidents  of  circumstance,  and  by  local  details.  Disordered  as  it  mny 
all  look  in  its  crude  outward  scene,  to  him,  looking  below,  it  is  all  under  the 
control  of  a  single  principle,  it  is  all  the  evidence  of  a  single  Supreme  Agent. 
There  is  no  accident  and  no  chance,  but  everywhere  one  determining  Force,  and 
that  Force  is  the  Spirit  of  God,  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  it  is  who  is  the  spring  of  all 
these  eddying  motions.  Wherever  men  believe,  it  is  He  who  makes  faiih  possible; 
and  all  varieties  of  human  character,  all  the  distinctions  of  personal  peculiarities, 
do  but  display  His  solitary  activity.  Wherever  and  however,  and  so  far  as,  men, 
through  whatever  means,  loyally  confess  that  the  Man  Jesus  is  the  Christ  of  God, 
there  we  are  to  recognise,  and  to  reverence,  the  prompting  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
The  Spirit  has  no  higher  task  than  that  which  is  set  for  it,  and  circumscribed  for 
it,  by  the  body  of  Christ.  Wherever  it  gpeaks  or  works,  it  will  be  perfectly  certain 
to  make  Jesus,  the  Man,  prominent  and  emphatic.  It  will  testify  to  His 
authority  ;  it  will  make  yet  more  precious  His  bodily  appearance  ;  it  will  ma^mify 
His  historical  position.  Nothing  thut  lowers  the  importance  of  Jesus,  or  diss-jolves 
His  supremacy,  or  makes  light  of  His  unique  value,  can  come  from  the  Spirit. 
"No  man,  speaking  with  the  Spirit  of  God,  calleth  Jesus  accursed."  The  Incar- 
nation, then,  operates  upon  the  world  of  man  with  perfect  regularity  of  law 
through  the  one  Agent.  He  is  the  Worker,  this  Spirit  of  God  ;  what,  then,  is  His 
work  ?  how  does  He  apply  the  Incarnation  of  Jesus  Christ  to  men  ?  He  does  so 
in  two  modes,  that  to  the  outsider  might  seem  contradictory,  but  which  are  but 
the  effects  of  this  one  cause.  First,  the  effect  of  the  Spirit's  stirring  is  seen  in  the 
outburst  of  spiritual  gifts.  Each  soul  is  quickened  by  a  new  impulse  ;  it  thrills 
with  a  sense  of  fresh-born  vitality;  and  new  jDowers  spring  forth,  and  gifts  break 
out  from  it.  St.  Paul  watched  the  Spirit  at  work  in  that  new  church  of  his  ac 
Corinth  ;  and  how  strong  was  that  new  wine,  and  how  tiery  the  flame — how  loud 
and  full  the  prophecy  !  Each  soul,  made  alive  in  Jesus,  is  brimming  with  the 
glory  of  its  new  endowment,  the  stress  and  storm  of  the  Spirit  are  shocking  these 
(^ouls  into  ecstasy.  Here  it  was  intellectual  insight,  there  it  was  proplietic  vision  ; 
here  it  was  spiritual  passion,  there  it  was  administrative  capacity.  That  was  the 
outcome  of  the  Spirit,  the  outbreak  of  individual  freedom  from  experience.  And 
then  St.  Paul  looked,  and  there  was  another  vision  and  another  sight  altogether. 
There  he  saw  arising  a  stately  and  orderly  fabric,  the  Church  of  God,  the  body  of 
Christ.  There  he  watched  it,  laying  limb  to  limb,  until  the  body  came  togetiier, 
by  joints  and  sinews,  compacted  together  and  bonded.  There  was  the  double 
vision:  on  the  one  side,  an  inner  inspiration  of  individual  souls  exalted,  varied, 
and  ecstatic ;  on  the  other  side,  an  outer  assertion  of  visible  order,  administrative, 
complete,  whole,  and  harmonious.  And  yet  here  was  this  point :  contradictory  as 
these  effects  miyht  look,  they  are  the  symptoms,  the  outcome  of  one  and  the  same 
Spirit.  If  the  Sjdrit  that  quickens  the  individual  gifts  be  the  same  that  builds  up 
the  corporate  Church,  then,  on  the  one  hand,  the  inner  and  private  experiences  of 
souls  need  not  view  with  suspicion  and  dislike  the  discij)line  of  ecclesiastical  rule 
or  theological  furmuhe ;  neither,  on  the  other  hand,  ought  the  ecclesiastical 
system  to  condemn  or  distrust  the  freedom  of  individual  spiritual  experiences. 
Let  us  take  the  first  point.  These  individual  spir.tual  experiences,  however 
manifold  and  varied,  in  teing  requited  to  harmonise  themselves  with  the  Church 
order  iiud  with  the  formulated  creed,  are  not  asked  to  yield  to  some  arbitrary 
restraint,  to  submit  their  claims  to  some  general  convenience  not  their  own,  to 
conform  to  a  conventional  expedient,  necessary,  perhaps,  but  still  a  bondnge. 
Every  corporate  rule  springs  cut  of  the  same  source  as  the  individual  experience. 
The  Spirit  that  gives  inner  special  personal  experience  is  the  saide  Spirit  that 
builds  the  Church.  In  asserting  their  own  peculiarities,  no  one  gift  can  attribute 
a  value  to  itself  which  it  must  not  by  the  same  necessity  attribute  to  all  the  rest, 
for  its  one  value  comes  to  it  from  the  Spirit  in  which  they  equally  share,     \yhat- 


168  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xii. 

ever  prerogative  one  gift  jDossesse^,  that  same  advant'ige  must  all  the  other  gifts 
possess.  That  purpose  with  which  He  allots  the  gift  to  this  man  must  be  the 
same  with  which  He  allots  that  other  gift  to  that  other.  He  who  authorises  the 
gift  authoiises  the  end,  and  if  that  ultimate  jnirposa  have  no  valid  right,  neither 
has  the  gift.  And  what  is  that  purpose  ? — pdification — the  building  of  tlie  body  of 
Christ,  the  edification  of  all  separate  individual  capacities  to  the  enrichment  of  the 
corporate  Church.  If  the  Spirit  who  fills  and  frames  the  ecclesiastical  fabric  is 
still  and  always  the  Spirit  tlaat  stirs  into  action  all  the  manifold  variety  of  indi- 
vidual gifts,  then  the  Church,  the  system,  ought  not  to  have  to  condemn  or  dislike 
these  inner  spiritual  experiences.  Yet  there  is  a  very  natural  repugnance  here. 
To  us,  loving  the  sweet  calmness  of  the  Spirit's  orderly  working,  there  cannot 
but  be  a  shock  as  we  face  the  turmoil  and  confusion  which  often  beset  the 
outbursts  of  His  work  in  individual  souls.  Surely  here  is  something  repellent, 
something  out  of  harmony  with  God's  mind,  something  out  of  kinship  with 
Christ's  ancient  heritage!  So  many  instinctively  feel,  and,  wlipn  they  feel,  so 
let  them  remember  that  the  Spirit  always  has  its  double  manifestation,  remember 
that  the  same  Spiiit  which  shapes  the  sweet  fabric  which  tliey  love  so  dearly  is 
the  same  Spirit  who,  as  He  stirs  in  the  individual  soul,  shapes  it  into  those 
passionate  outbursts ;  those  upheavals,  they  are  His  proper  material,  out  of  which 
He  delights  to  build ;  not  another  spirit  enkindles  them,  but  He  Himself.  And, 
as  He  raises  them,  so  He  will  not  confront  them  as  a  foe,  but  will  approach 
them  as  One  who  is  at  home  with  them,  who  is  aware  of  their  inner  signifi- 
cance, who  can  greet  them  as  a  friend.  True,  He  may  have  many  a  great  lesson 
yet  in  store  for  these  experiences.  He  does  not  for  a  moment  desire  that  they 
should  remain  as  they  are  in  their  present  temporary  disorder.  But,  for  all  that, 
He  will  not  come  to  them  as  that  which  is  to  Him  alien,  shocking,  or  distressing. 
He  will  know  the  secret  that  is  alive  in  all  this  stormy  outpouring?  As  it  bends 
down,  then,  in  gracious  seemliness,  it  will  be  in  fullest  syoipathy.  "  Come  to 
Me,"  it  will  be  saying  to  all  souls  made  alive  in  the  Spirit,  "  come  under  My 
discipline,  conform  to  My  rule,  not  because  you  are  bad,  or  dangerous,  or  human, 
or  erring,  not  because  you  need  some  arbitrary  exteimal  repi-ession,  but  come  to 
Me  and  obey  My  gift.  You  are  already  My  own,  of  My  making.  My  inspiiation. 
I  awoke  you  because  I  needed  you;  I  have  a  place  for  you  in  tlie  work  ;  for  Me 
and  by  Me  you  were  made  ;  find,  then,  in  Me  your  peace."  And  for  ourselves  we 
will  remember,  finally,  that  there  is  but  one  rule  laid  down  by  St.  Paul  to  govern 
all  our  treatment  of  gifts  and  spii  itual  experiences,  whether  in  ourselves  or  others — 
the  rule  of  love,  of  edification.  Love,  first  in  relation  to  gifts  not  our  own.  Love 
will  rejoice  to  recognise  by  how  many  paths  men  are  brought  to  Christ,  to  recognise 
how  infinite  are  the  resources  of  the  Spirit.  It  will  be  quick  to  recognise  how 
sacred  are  individual  diversities.  It  will  respect  all  it  can,  find  work  in  all  it  can, 
just  because  it  is  the  very  character  and  note  of  the  one  Spirit  to  exhibit  His 
excellence  in  infinite  diversity  of  operation.  The  first  aim  of  love  is  to  make  its 
gift  intelligible  to  all,  useful  to  all,  a  common  possession,  a  common  good,  and  a 
common   joy.       {Canon    Scott   Holland.)  Tin'    (/ifts  of  the    Spirit : — I.    Their 

NATURE.  They  are — 1.  Ordinary.  These  the  Spirit  conveys  to  us  thmugli  our 
own  endeavours,  as  he  who  both  makes  the  watch  and  winds  up  the  wheels 
of  it  may  be  said  to  be  the  author  of  its  motion.  Amongst  these  w'e  may 
rank  oratory,  philosophy,  &c.  And  God  ordinarily  gives  these  to  none  but  such  as 
labour  hard  for  them.  God  is  ready  to  do  His  part,  but  not  to  do  His  own  and 
ours  too.  2.  Extraordinary.  These  are  entirely  from  God,  as,  e.g.,  the  gifts  of 
miracles,  healing,  etc.,  which  might  indeed  be  the  object  of  men's  admiration  and 
envy,  but  never  the  effect  of  their  endeavours.  Some  will  perhaps  inquire  how  long 
these  extraordinary  gifts  eontinu'='d  in  the  Cliurch.  Just  as  long  as  the  settling  of  a 
new  religion  in  the  world  required.  Wherefore  the  purpose  of  miracles  being  extraor- 
dinary, and  to  serve  only  for  a  time,  they  were  not  by  their  continuance  to  thwart 
their  design,  nor  to  be  made  common  by  their  being  perpetual.  The  exact 
period  of  their  duration  can  hardly  be  assigned;  but  certain  it  is  that  now  these 
are  ceased,  and  that  upon  as  good  reason  as  at  first  they  began.  For  when  the 
spiritual  building  is  completed,  to  what  purpose  should  tbe  scaffolds  any  longer 
stand  ?  II.  Thrir  diversity.  What  is  meant  by  this  diversity  of  gifts. 
Note  here — 1.  Something  by  way  of  afiirmation,  which  is  variety.  This  variety  is 
— (1)  For  use.  In  the  Church  there  are,  and  must  be,  several  members  having  their 
several  uses  and  stat'ons  (ver.  28) ;  tlie  employment  of  so  many  parts  subseiving 
the  joint  interest    and   design   of    the  whole — as   the    motion   of    a    clock  is   a 


CHAP.  XII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  1G9 

iromplicated  motion  of  so  many  wheels  fitly  put  together ;  and  life  itself  but  the 
result  of  several  operations,  all  issuing  from  and  contributing  to  the  support  of  the 
same  body  (vers.  29,  30).  As  in  the  natural  body  the  eyes  do  not  speak,  nor  the 
tongue  see,  so  neither  iu  the  spiritual  is  every  one  who  has  the  gift  of  prophecy 
endued  also  with  the  gift  and  spirit  of  government,  &c.  Now  Uod  has  use  of  all 
the  several  tempers  and  constitutions  of  men,  to  serve  the  Church  by.  E.g. — (a) 
Some  men  are  of  a  sanguine  and  cheerful  disposition.  And  these  are  fitted  for  the 
airy,  joyful  offices  of  devotion.  Again,  there  are  others  of  a  reserved  and  severe 
temper,  and  these  are  the  fittest  to  serve  tbe  Church  in  a  retirement  from  tbe 
world,  and  a  settled  composure  of  their  thoughts  to  meditation,  and  in  dealing  with 
troubled  consciences.  {U)  Some,  again,  are  of  a  fervent  spirit ;  and  God  serves  His 
Church  even  by  these  as  l3einw  particularly  fitted  to  preach  the  rigours  of  the  law  to 
obstinate  sinners.  And  on  the  contrary,  there  are  others  again  of  a  gentler  genius, 
and  these  are  serviceable  to  speak  comfort  and  refreshment  to  the  weary,  &c.  And 
thus  the  gospel  must  have  both  its  Boanerges  and  its  Barnabas ;  the  first,  as  it 
were,  to  cleanse  the  air  and  pui'ge  tbe  sonl,  before  it  can  be  fit  tor  the  smiles  of  a 
Saviour.  (2)  For  ornament — to  dress  and  set  oi?  the  spouse  of  Clrrist.  Where 
would  be  the  beauty  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth  ;  where  would  then  be  the  glory 
and  lustre  of  the  universe,  it  our  senses  were  forced  to  be  alwavs  puring  upon  the 
same  things  without  the  quickening  relish  of  variety  ?  And,  moreover,  does  not 
such  a  liberal  effusion  of  gifts  equally  ai'gue  both  the  power  and  the  bounty  of  the 
giver  ?  2.  As  this  diversity  of  the  Spirit's  gifts  imports  variety,  so  it  excludes 
contrariety  ;  different  they  are,  but  they  are  not  opposite.  There  is  no  jar  or 
contest  between  them,  but  all  are  disposed  of  with  mutual  agreements  and  a  happy 
subordination ;  for  as  variety  adorns,  so  opposition  destroys.  The  spirit  of 
meekness  and  the  spirit  of  zeal,  e.g.,  do  equally  serve  and  carry  on  the  great  end 
and  business  of  religion.  III.  Their  lessons.  1.  If  the  Spirit  works  such 
variety  and  multitude  of  supernatural  gifts,  it  is  but  rational  to  conclude  that  He 
is  a  being  superior  to  nature,  and  so  God.  2.  This  great  diversity  of  the  Spirit's 
gifts  may  read  a  lecture  of  humility  to  some,  and  of  contentment  to  others.  God, 
indeed,  has  drawn  some  capital  letters,  and  given  some  men  gifts,  as  it  were,  witli 
both  hands  ;  hut  for  all  that  none  can  brag  of  a  monopoly  of  them.  He  has  filled 
no  man's  intellectual  so  full,  but  he  has  left  some  vacuities  that  may  sometimes 
send  him  for  supplies  to  lower  minds.  Moses  with  all  his  knowledge  and  ruling 
abilities  required  Aaron's  elocution;  and  he  who  "speaks  with  the  tongue  of 
angels  "  may  yet  be  at  a  loss  when  he  comes  to  matters  of  controversy.  And  this 
should  prevent  the  de?pondencv  of  the  meanest  understandings  (vers.  21,  22).  Let 
not  the  foot  trample  upon  itself  because  it  does  not  rule  the  body,  but  consider  that 
it  has  the  honour  to  support  it.  Nay,  the  greatest  abilities  are  sometimes 
beholding  to  the  very  meanest.  The  two  talents  went  into  heaven  as  easily  as  the 
five.  3.  We  have  here  a  touchstone  for  the  trial  of  spirits  ;  for  such  as  are  the  gifts, 
such  must  be  also  the  Spirit  from  which  they  flow.  4.  This  emanation  of  gifts  from 
the  Spirit  assure  us  that  knowledge  and  learning  are  by  no  means  opposite  to 
grace ;  since  we  see  gifts  as  well  as  graces  conferred  by  the  same  Spirit. 
(R.  South,  D.D.)  The  Truiities  :—I.  Personal.  1.  The  same  Spirit.  2.  The 
same  Lord.  3.  The  same  God.  II.  Eeal.  1.  Gifts.  2.  Administrations  or 
offices.  8.  Operations  or  works.  III.  Actual.  1.  Dividing.  2.  Manifesting.  3. 
Profiting.  The  three  real  are  the  ground  of  all.  The  three  personal  are  from 
whence  those  come.  The  three  actual  are  whether  they  will.  (1)  Divided.  (2) 
So  divided  as  to  make  manifest.  (3)  So  made  manifest  as  not  only— (<()  To  make 
a  show  but  to  some  end.  (b)  That  end  to  be  not  "  th-^  hurt  or  trouble,"  imt  "  the 
good."  (c)  The  good,  not  ptivate,  of  ourselves,  but  common,  of  the  whole  body  of 
the  Church.     (Bp.  Andre  tees.) 

Vers.  5,  6.  There  are  differences  of  administration,  but  the  same  Lord. — The 

agencies  of  the  Church — 1.  Are  widely  divehsified.  1.  Every  branch  has  its  own 
sphere.  2.  Every  member  his  own  olHce.  (1)  Diffeiing  in  character,  importance, 
scope.  (2)  Yet  all  necessary.  II.  Are  under  the  control  of  'jhe  same  Lord — 
Christ,  who — 1.  Appoints  every  man  his  duty.  2.  Supplies  him  with  grace.  3. 
Observes  and  rewards  his  conduct.  III.  Are  directku  to  one  end.  Henc»  the 
meanest  office — 1.  Is  honourable.  2.  Is  useful.  3.  Should  be  faithfully  fulfilled. 
{J.  lyth,  D.D.)  Differences  of  adminhtrations  : — Glycera,  the  flower-girl,  knew 
so  well  how  to  diversify  the  combination  and  arrtingeiuent  of  her  flowers,  as  with 
the  same  flowers  to  make  a  great  variety  of  nosegays.     So  that  when  the  painter 


170  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xii. 

Pausias  tried  to  emulate  her  skill  he  failed,  for  he  could  not  vary  his  painting  so 
many  ways  as  Glycera  did  ber  nosegays.  Thus  the  Holy  Ghost  disposes  and  arranges 
•with  so  much  variety  the  instructinns  of  devotion  which  He  gives  us  by  the  tongues 
and  pens  of  His  servants  that,  although  the  doctrines  are  always  the  same,  the 
treatises  which  are  made  out  of  them  are  very  different,  according  to  the  different 
ways  in  which  they  are  put  together.  {St.  Francis  de  Sales.)  There  are  diversi- 
ties of  operations,  but  it  is  the  same  God. — Tlie  diversity  of  the  Divine  operations : — 
These  words  suggest  practical  reflections  as  to — I.  The  vast  variety  of  classes  for 
WHOM  Christian  work  is  carried  on.  Such  work  is  work — 1.  For  all  varieties  of 
need.  (1)  Bodily.  The  hospital ;  the  sauitary  enterprise  of  any  form  is  included. 
(2)  Meutal.  All  true  educational  work,  not  least  of  all  when  it  aims  at  fixing  a 
ladder  that  shall  rise  from  the  gutter  to  the  university,  is  included.  (3)  Moral. 
Every  crusade  for  temperance  and  chastity  is  included.  (4)  Spiritual.  The  pro- 
clamation, in  its  manifold  fulness,  of  the  gospel  that  converts,  comforts,  and  edifies 
is  included.  (.5)  National.  Right  endeavour  in  the  cause  of  peace,  of  land  reform, 
&c.,  is  included.  2.  For  the  needs  of  people  of  all  ages — the  child,  the  youth,  the 
adult,  the  aged.  3.  For  the  needs  of  people  of  all  places.  The  prediction  as  to  the 
usef uhiess  of  the  men  of  the  early  Chuich  (Acts  i.  8)  seems  to  hint  at  what  we  call — 
(1)  City  missions — "witnesses  for  Me  in  Jerusalem."  (2)  Home  missions — "and 
in  all  Judiea."  (3)  Colonial  missions — "  and  in  Samaria."  (4)  Foreign  missions 
— "  and  unto  the  uttermost  part  of  the  earth."  II.  The  vast  variety  of  means  by 
WHICH  Christian  work  is  carried  on.  There  are  methods  in  which  the  individual 
is  a  potent  force,  and  others  in  which  the  elaborate  machinery  fulfils  a  useful  func- 
tion. There  are  splieres  for  highe-t  culture,  and  others  for  simplest  speech,  domains 
for  the  pen  and  for  the  tongue.  True  Christian  enterprise  is  hydra-handed.  It 
touches  the  unnumbered  strings  on  the  great  harp  of  humanity,  sometimes  gently, 
as  with  the  delicacy  of  woman's  fingers,  and  sometimes  mightily,  as  with  the 
smiting  of  a  seraph's  hand.  III.  The  one  moiive  Spirit  undek  whose  influence 
Christian  work  is  carried  on.  In  all  and  through  all  who  are  true  to  Christ  there 
is  one  impelling  motive,  i.e.,  love  to  Him.  This  is  the  great  unifying  force  at  the 
central  heart  of  all  Christly  men.  (U.  B.  Thomas.)  The  Divine  operations — I. 
Are  richly  exemplified — 1.  In  nature.  2.  In  the  Church.  II.  Are  wonderfully- 
varied.  III.  Are  singularly  harmonious.  IV.  Exhibit  the  glory  of  the  one 
God — His— 1.  Wisdom.  2.  Power.  3.  Love.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  diversity 
of  the  SpiriVs  operations  : — The  witnessing  of  the  Spirit  admits  of  degrees.  Just 
as  a  rich  man's  window  may  be  wider  than  a  poor  man's,  and  so  the  sun  may  make 
his  house  the  more  light,  that  the  things  within  it  may  be  better  discerned,  yet  the 
poor  man  may  really  enjoy  the  beams  of  the  sun,  and  see  what  is  in  his  house  ;  so 
the  poorest,  the  weakest  believer  may  know  the  Spirit  hath  shined  into  his  heart, 
as  well  as  others  that  enjoy  brighter  beams  than  he  hath  been  acquainted  with, 
{T.H.Leary,  D.C.L.) 

Vers.  7-11.  The  manifestation  of  the  Spirit  is  given  to  every  man  to  profit 
withal. — Tlie  manifestation  of  the  Spirit: — As  there  are  diveisities  of  gifts,  so  are- 
there  diversities  of  measures  in  which  these  gifts  are  bestowed.  Three  degiees  of 
the  power  of  the  Spirit  are  mentioned  in  Scripture.  I.  For  some  special  occasion. 
This  is  but  transitory  and  occasional.  It  was  granted  to  men  in  ancient  times,  as 
when  Bain  am  prophesied  and  SHmson  dis))layed  his  strength.  The  phrase  gene- 
rally used  for  this  is,  "  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  him."  The  subject  of 
this  influence  was  not  necessarily  a  man  of  holy  life.  He  was  but  used  as  an 
instrument,  and  for  the  hour  brought  into  acquiescence  with  the  Divine  will.  II. 
For  salvation.  This  is  the  continuous  possession  of  the  Spirit  as  a  new  life.  It  is 
desciibed  in  such  ternis  as  "  led  by  the  Spirit,"  "  walking  after  the  Si^irit,"  "  to  be 
spiritually  minded,"  which  "  is  life."  The  entrance  into  this  state  is  regeneration 
— the  inclination  of  the  will  to  God.  This  is  "eternal  life."  IH.  For  exalted 
SERVICE.  This  is  the  new  life  in  its  fulness,  the  flowering  and  fruiting  of  the  plants 
of  Divine  grace.  It  is  called  being  "  tilled  with  the  Spirit."  It  is  the  development 
of  Christian  life,  at  times  attained  bv  a  sudden  influx  of  the  Divine  power,  and 
termed  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  (J.  Hunt  Cooke.)  Grace  given  to 
individuah  for  the  peneral  good: — By  the  word  "manifestation"  is  intended 
the  same  thing  as  is  set  forth  in  the  phrases,  "gift,"  "administration"  and  in 
this  context,  doubtless,  the  allusion  is  to  miracles.  By  the  phrase,  "  profit 
withal,"  is  to  be  understood,  for  the  advantage  of  others,  i.e.,  as  the  con- 
text proves,  of  the  Church  in  the  first  instance,  and  then,  through  the  Church, 


CHAP.  XII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  171 

of  the  world  at  large.  The  transition  from  the  miraculous  gifts  of  early  times  to 
the  graces  in  which  the  Spirit  is  now  more  commonly  manifested,  is  easy  and 
appropriate  ;  the  manifestation  of  the  Spirit  is  given  to  every  one  of  you  to  profit 
withal.  What,  then,  are  the  manifestations  of  the  Spirit  which  are  pecuhar  to 
no  one  age  of  the  Church  ?  There  is  a  manifestation  of  the  Spirit  in  the  miracle 
of  a  changed  heart,  evidenced  by  a  holy  life,  and  by  this  manifestation  of  the 
Spirit,  God  now  speaks  to  men,  and  calls  upon  those  thus  gifted  to  profit  the 
brethren.  Is  a  man  meek,  gentle,  longsul'fering,  temperate,  and  kind  ?  He  is  so 
to  use  thpse  graces  as  to  profit  others.  Is  a  man  blessed  with  joy  and  peace? 
He  is,  through  the  instrumentality  of  these  gifts,  to  profit  othf'rs.  Has  a  man  a 
strong  faith  ?  He  is  to  exercise  it  to  the  general  benefit.  Has  a  man  clear  and 
vigorous  hope,  well  grounded  on  Christ ;  he  is  to  exercise  himself  to  the  general 
advantage.  Is  one  full  of  charity  ?  Such  a  one  needs  not  to  be  told  he  is  to  be 
solicitous  for  his  fellows.  Let  us  see  in  what  manner  this  may  be  done,  and  let 
us  take  the  several  particulars  in  the  order  just  enumerated.  Is  any  nuek,  gentle, 
longsuffering,  temperate,  and  kind  ?  Let  him  remember  that  his  example  is  much 
needed  in  an  age  of  retaliation,  impatience,  and  extremes!  I  will  pass  on  now  to 
consider  the  case  of  him  who  is  blessed  wilh  joy  and  peace.  And  let  those  who 
thus  are  warranted  in  relying  on  the  favour  of  God,  and  who  derive  an  awful  joy, 
and  not  fear  alone,  from  the  contemplation  of  His  holin-  ss,  let  such  love  to 
recollect  how  they  may  profit  the  Church  by  spe  iking  of  their  own  consolaiion  to 
the  mourning  penitent.  Have  you  the  gift  of  faith?  It  is  t  lat  you  may  profit 
others.  Fiist,  by  its  instrumentality  in  keeping  your  sp.  i  lal  life  vigorous, 
whereby  you  mny  be  an  example  in  all  things.  One  holy  example  is  better  than  a 
thou-and  sermons.  The  former  may  convince,  the  latter  must.  But  there  is 
another  way  in  which  we  are  called  upon  to  exercise  our  faith  to  the  ailvantage 
of  all.  Faith  alone  can  give  our  prayers  audience  in  the  presence  chamber  of 
Divinity.  The  effectual  fervent  prayi-r  of  a  righteous  man  availeth  much  ;  but 
prayer  is  not,  cannot  be  etfectual  unless  it  be  the  prayer  of  faith.  Pray  for  the 
conversion  of  sinners,  and  the  good  estate  of  the  Cuurch  through  the  guidance  of 
her  great  and  glorified  Head,  Christ  Jesus.  So  those  whose  hope  is  strong  will 
do  well  to  let  their  couvictiun  that  they  are  walking  humblv  with  their  God 
incite  them  to  build  others  up  in  the  same  reverent  confidence;  while  those  whose 
love  comes  up  to  the  gospel's  standard  will  be  fain  ti)  benefit  others;  nay,  in 
benefiting  others  it  is  that  tnis  manifestation  of  the  Spirit  is  made.  He  who 
believes,  and  he  who  hopes,  may  forget  that  the  Body  is  not  one  mem'^er,  but 
many ;  and  so  they  may  come  to  forget  that  the  manifestation  of  the  Spirit  is 
given  to  th^-m  to  profit  others  ;  but  he  who  loves  cannot  forget  this  ;  hence  "  love 
is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law."  Hence,  charity  is  the  chiefest  grace,  the  most 
valuable  for  time,  no  less  than  the  only  one  needed  in  eternity  !  He  who  loves  is 
using  the  gift  of  grace  for  the  general  good  ;  he  is  a  living  member  of  the  Body  of 
Christ.     {A.  IVatson,  M.A.)  But  tlie  manifestation  of  the  Spirit  is  given  to  every 

man  to  profit  ivithal . — In  the  first  verse  of  this  chapter  St.  Paul  proi^oseth  to 
himsi-lf  an  argument,  which  he  prosecuteth  the  whole  chapter  through,  and,  after 
a  profitable  digression  into  the  praise  of  charity  in  the  next  chapter,  resumeth 
ag  lin  at  the  fourteenth  chapter,  spending  also  that  whole  chapter  therein  ;  and  it 
is  concerning  spiritual  gifts,  "  Now,  concerning  spiritual  gifts,  brethren,  I  would 
not  have  you  ignorant,"  &c.  These  gracious  gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God, 
bestowed  on  them  for  the  edification  of  the  Church,  the  Corinthians,  by  making 
them  the  fuel  either  of  their  pride  in  despi-ing  those  that  were  inferior  to  them- 
selves, or  of  their  envy  in  maiicing  those  that  excelled  therein,  abased  to  the 
maintenance  of  schism,  aud  faction,  and  emulation  in  the  (-Ihurch.  For  the 
remedying  of  which  evils  the  apostle  entereth  upon  the  argument,  discoursing 
fully  of  the  variety  of  these  spiritual  gifts,  and  who  is  the  author  of  them,  and  for 
what  end  they  were  given,  and  in  what  manner  they  should  be  employed,  omitting 
nothing  that  was  needful  to  be  spoken  anent  this  subject.  In  this  part  of  the 
chapter,  entreating  both  before  and  after  this  vdse  of  the  wonth'ous  great,  yet 
sWeet  and  useful  variety  of  these  spiritual  gifts,  he  showeth  that  howsoever 
manifold  they  are,  either  for  kind  or  degree,  so  as  they  may  difler  in  the  material 
and  formal,  yet  they  do  all  agree  both  in  the  same  etfiicient  and  the  same  final 
cause.  In  the  same  efficient  cau^e,  which  is  God  the  Lord  by  His  Spirit  (ver.  6), 
"  Now  there  are  diversities  of  gifts,  but  the  same  Spirit  ;  and  there  are  differences 
of  administrations,  but  the  same  Lord;  and  there  are  diversities  of  o()erations, 
but  it  is  the  same  God  which  worketh  all  in  all."    And  in  the  same  final  cause. 


172  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xii. 

•which  is  the  advancement  of  God's  glory,  in  the  propagation  of  His  gospel  and 
the  edification  of  His  Church,  in  this  verse,  "  But  the  manifestation  of  the  Sjjirit 
is  given  to  every  man  to  profit  withal."  By  occasion  of  which  words  we  may 
inquire  into  the  nature,  conveyance,  and  use  of  these  gifts.  First,  their  nature  in 
themselves  and  in  tlieir  original;  what  they  are,  and  whence.  They  are  the 
works  of  God's  Spirit  in  us,  "the  manifestation  of  the  Spirit."  Secondly,  their 
conveyance  unto  us — how  we  come  to  have  them,  and  to  have  property  in  them  ; 
it  is  by  gift  :  "  It  is  given  to  every  man."  Thirdly,  their  use  and  end  ;  wby  they 
were  given  us,  and  what  we  are  to  do  with  them.  They  must  be  employed  to  the 
good  of  our  brethren  and  of  the  Church ;  it  is  given  to  every  man  "  to  profit 
withal."  Of  the-e  briefly,  and  in  their  order,  and  with  special  reference  ever  to  us 
tbat  are  of  the  clergy.  By  "  manifestation  of  the  Spirit,"  here  our  apostle  under- 
standeth  none  other  thing  than  he  doth  by  the  adjective  word  Trviv^inriKd  in  the 
first,  and  by  the  substantive  word  ^rtpiVjua™  in  the  last  verse  of  the  chapter. 
Both  which,  put  together,  do  signify  those  spiritual  gifts  and  graces  whereby  God 
enableth  men,  and  especially  Churchmen,  to  the  duties  of  their  particular  callings 
for  the  general  good.  Such  as  are  those  particulars,  which  are  named  in  the 
next  following  verses,  the  word  of  wisdom,  tbe  word  knowledge,  faith,  the  gifts 
of  healing,  working  of  miracles,  prophecy,  discerning  of  spirits,  divers  kinds  of 
tongues,  interpretation  of  tongues.  Allwhieli,  and  all  other  of  like  nature  and  use, 
because  tbey  are  wrought  by  that  one  and  self-ame  Spirit,  which  divideth  to  every 
one  severally  as  He  will,  are  therefore  called  Trrfrwan.w,  "  spiritual  gifts  "  ;  and 
here  favfpwaig  tov  Trvfv^iaroc,  "the  manifestation  of  the  Spirit."  The  word 
"  Spirit,"  though  in  Scripture  it  have  many  other  significations,  yet  in  this  place 
I  conceive  it  to  be  understood  directly  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Third  Person  in  the 
ever-blessed  Trinity.  For  first,  in  ver.  .3,  that  which  is  called  the  Spirit  of  God 
in  the  former  part,  is  in  the  latter  part  called  the  Holy  Ghost.  "  I  give  you  to 
understand  that  no  man,  speaking  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  calleth  Jesus  accursed  ; 
and  that  no  man  can  say  that  Jesus  is  the  Lord,  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  Again 
that  variety  of  gifts,  which  in  ver.  4  is  said  to  proceed  from  the  same  Spirit, 
is  said  likewise  in  ver.  5  to  proceed  from  the  same  Lord,  and  in  ver.  6  to  proceed 
from  the  same  God,  and  therefore  such  a  Spirit  is  meant,  as  is  also  Lord  and  God, 
and  that  is  only  tlie  Holy  Ghost.  And  again,  in  those  words  in  ver.  11:  "All 
these  worketh  that  one  and  the  Felfsame  Spirit,  dividing  to  every  man  severally 
as  He  will."  The  apostle  ascribeth  to  this  Spirit  the  collation  and  distribution 
of  such  gifts  according  to  the  free  power  of  His  own  will  and  pleasure,  which 
free  power  belongeth  to  none  but  God  alone,  "  Wlio  hath  set  the  members  every 
one  in  the  body,  as  it  hath  pleased  Him."  Which  yet  ought  not  to  be  so 
understood  of  the  Person  of  the  Spiiit ;  as  if  the  Father  and  the  Son  had  no  part 
or  fellowship  in  this  business.  For  all  the  actions  and  op-rations  of  the  Divine 
Persons  (those  only  excepted  which  are  of  intrinsical  and  mutual  relation)  are 
the  joint  and  undivided  works  of  the  whole  three  Persons,  according  to  the 
common  known  maxim,  constantly  and  uniformly  received  in  the  Catholic 
Church,  Opera  Trinitatis  ad  extra  sunt  indivisa.  And  as  to  this  particular  con- 
cerning gifts  the  Scriptures  are  clear.  Wherein,  as  they  are  ascribed  to  God  the 
Holy  Ghost  in  this  chapter,  so  they  are  elsewhere  ascribed  unto  God  the  Father, 
"  Every  good  gift  and  every  perfect  giving  is  from  above,  from  the  Father  of 
Lights  "  (James  i.),  and  elsewhere  tu  God  the  Son,  "  Unto  every  one  of  us  is 
given  grace,  according  to  the  measure  of  the  gift  of  Christ"  (Eph.  iv.).  Yea, 
and  it  may  be  that  for  this  very  reason  in  the  three  verses  next  before  my  text, 
these  three  words  are  used  :  "  Spirit  "  in  ver.  4,  "  Lord  "  in  ver.  5,  and  "  God"  in 
ver.  6,  to  give  us  intimation  that  these  spiritual  gifts  proceed  equally  and  un- 
dividedly  from  the  whole  three  Persons:  from  God  the  Father,  and  from  His 
Son  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  and  from  the  eternsil  Spirit  of  them  both,  the  Holy 
Ghost,  as  from  one  entire,  indivisible,  and  co-essential  Agent.  But  for  that  we 
are  gross  of  understanding,  and  unable  to  conceive  the  distinct  Trinity  of  Persons 
in  the  unity  of  the  Godhead,  otherwise  than  by  apprehending  some  distinction  of 
their  operations  and  offices  to  u sward,  it  hath  pleased  the  wisdom  of  God  in  the 
holy  Scriptures,  which  being  written  for  our  sakes  were  to  be  fitted  to  our 
capacities,  so  far  to  condescend  to  our  weakness  and  dulness  as  to  attribute  some 
of  those  gi'eat  and  common  works  to  one  jierson,  and  some  to  another,  after  a 
more  special  manner  than  unto  the  rest ;  although  indeed  and  in  truth  none  of 
the  Three  Peisons  had  more  or  less  to  do  than  other  in  any  of  those  great  and 
common  works.     This  manner  of  speaking  Divines  used  to  call   appropriation. 


CHAP,  xii.l  I.   CORINTHIANS.  173 

By  which  appropriation,  as  power  is  ascribed  to  the  Father,  and  wisdom  to  the 
Son,  so  is  goodness  to  the  Holy  Ghost.  And  tlieiefoie,  as  the  .work  of  creation, 
wherein  is  specially  seen  the  mighty  power  of  God,  is  appropriated  to  tlie  Father ; 
and  the  work  of  redemption,  wherein  is  specially  seen  the  wisdom  of  God,  to  the 
Son ;  and  so  the  works  of  sanctification  and  the  inf  Ui^ion  of  habitual  graces, 
whereby  the  good  things  of  God  are  communicated  unto  us,  is  appropriated  unto 
the  Holy  Ghost.  And  for  this  cause  the  gifts  thus  communicated  unto  us  from 
God  are  ailled  TrrEv/xaTiKa,  "spiritual  gifts,"  and  (pari (jmok^  tov  TTPfv^aroQ,  "the 
manifestation  of  the  Spirit."  We  see  now,  why  Si^irit  ?  but  then,  why  manifesta- 
tion? The  word,  as  most  other  verbals  of  that  form,  may  be  understood  either  in 
the  active  or  pnssive  signification.  And  it  is  not  material,  whether  of  the  two  ways 
we  take  it  in  this  place,  both  being  true,  and  neither  improper.  For  these  spiritual 
gifts  are  the  manifestation  of  tue  Spiiit  actively,  because  by  these  the  Spirit 
manifesteth  the  will  of  God  unto  the  Clmrch,  these  being  the  instruments  nnd 
means  of  conveying  the  knowledge  of  salvation  unto  the  people  of  God.  And  tlipy 
are  the  manifestation  of  the  Spirit  passively  too,  because  where  any  of  these  gifts, 
especially  in  any  eminent  sort,  appeared  in  any  person,  it  was  a  manifest  evidence 
that  tlie  Spirit  of  God  wrought  in  him.  As  we  read  it  (Acts  x.),  that  they  of  the 
circumcision  were  astonish-^d  "  when  they  saw  that  on  the  Gentiles  also  was  poured 
out  the  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  if  it  be  demanded,  But  how  did  that  appear? 
it  folLiweth  in  the  next  verse,  "  For  they  heard  them  speak  with  tongue-^,"  &c. 
The  spiritual  gift,  then,  is  a  manifestation  of  the  Spirit,  as  every  other  sensible 
effect  is  a  manifestation  of  its  proper  cause.  We  are  now  yet  further  to  know 
that  the  gifts  and  graces  wrought  in  us  by  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  are  of 
two  sorts.  The  Scriptures  sometimes  distinguish  them  by  the  different  terms 
of  xapt^  and  x'^ipKjj.ia ;  although  those  words  are  sometimes  again  used  indifferently 
and  promiscuously,  either  for  other.  They  are  commonly  known  in  the  schools 
and  differenced  by  the  names  of  Gratice  gratamfacieiite)!  and  Gruticc  [iratis  datce. 
Which  terms,  though  they  be  not  very  proper  (for  the  one  of  them  may  be 
affirmed  of  the  other,  whereas  the  members  of  every  good  distinction  ought  to 
be  opposite),  yet  because  tliey  have  been  long  received  (and  change  of  terms, 
though  haply  for  the  better,  liath  by  experience  been  found  for  the  most  part 
unhappy  in  the  event,  in  multiplying  unnecessary  book-quarrels)  we  may  retain 
them  profitably,  and  without  prejudice.  Those  former,  which  they  cajl  GrcUum 
facieittL'ii,  are  the  graces  of  sanctification,  whereby  the  person  that  hath  tliem  is 
enabled  to  do  acceptable  service  to  God  in  the  duties  of  His  general  calling ; 
these  latter,  which  they  call  GratiH  datas,  are  the  graces  of  edification,  whereby 
the  person  that  hath  them  is  enabled  to  do  profitable  service  to  the  Church  of 
God  in  the  duties  of  His  particular  calling.  Those  are  given  Nobis,  et  Nobis, 
both  to  us  and  for  us,  that  is  chiefly  for  our  own  good;  these  Nobis,  sed  Nostris, 
to  us  indeed,  but  for  others;  that  is,  chiefly  for  the  good  of  our  brethren. 
Those  are  given  us  ad  salutem,  for  the  saving  of  our  souls ;  these  ad  lucrnm, 
for  the  winning  of  other  men's  souls.  Those  proceed  from  the  special  love  of  God 
to  the  person,  and  may  therefore  be  called  personal,  or  special ;  these  proceed 
from  the  general  love  of  God  to  His  Church,  or  yet  more  general  to  human 
societies,  and  may  therefore  rather  be  called  ecclesiastical  or  general  gifts  or 
graces.  Of  the  first  sort  are  faith,  hope,  charity,  repentance,  patience,  humility, 
and  all  those  other  holy  graces,  "  fruits  of  the  Spirit,"  which  accompany  salvation. 
Wrought  by  the  blessed  and  powerful  operation  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  after  a 
most  effectual  but  unconceivable  manner,  regenerating,  and  renewing,  and  season- 
ing, and  sanctifying  the  hearts  of  His  chosen.  But  yet  these  are  not  the  gifts 
so  much  spoken  of  in  this  chapter ;  and  namely  in  my  text,  every  branch 
whereof  excludt^th  them.  Of  those  graces  of  sanctification,  first,  we  may  have 
indeed  probable  inducements  to  persuade  us  that  they  are,  or  are  not,  in  this  or 
that  man.  But  hypocrisy  may  make  such  a  semblance  that  we  may  think  we  see 
spirit  in  a  man  in  w-hom  yet  there  is  nothmg  but  flesh,  and  infirmities  may  cast 
such  a  fog  that  we  can  discern  nothing  but  flesh  in  a  man  in  whom  yet  there  is 
spirit.  But  the  gifts  here  spoken  of  do  incur  into  the  senses  and  give  us  evident 
and  infallible  assurance  of  the  Spirit  that  wrought  them ;  here  is  (pai'tpioaig,  a 
"  manifestation  of  the  Spirit."  Again,  secondly,  those  graces  of  sanctification 
are  not  communicated  by  distribution — Alius  sic,  alius  vcro  sic.  Faith  to  one, 
charity  to  another,  repentance  to  another;  but  where  they  are  given  they  are 
given  all  at  once  and  together,  as  it  were  strung  upon  one  thread  and  linked  into 
one  chain.     But  the  gifts  here  spoken  of  are  distributed,  as  it  were,  by  dole,  and 


174  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xii. 

divided  severally  as  it  pleased  God,  shared  out  into  several  portions,  and  given  to 
every  man  some,  to  uone  all ;  for  "  to  one  is  given  by  the  Spirit  the  word  of 
wisdom,  to  another  the  word  of  knowledge,"  &c.  Thirdly,  tho^e  graces  of  sanctifi- 
cation,  though  they  may  and  ought  to  be  exercised  to  the  beuetit  of  others,  who 
by  the  "  shining  of  our  light ''  and  the  "  sight  of  our  good  works"  may  be  pro- 
voked to  glorify  God  by  walking  in  the  same  paths  ;  yet  that  is  but  utilitas 
emergens,  a,nd  not  Jim's  jjrojyr his  ;  a  good  use  made  of  them  upon  the  bye,  but  not 
the  main  i^roper  and  direct  end  of  them,  for  which  they  were  chiefly  given.  But 
the  gifts  here  spoken  of  were  given  directly  for  this  end,  and  so  intended  by  the 
giver  to  be  employed  for  the  benefit  of  others  and  for  the  edifying  of  the  Church  ; 
they  were  given  "  to  profit  withal."  It  then  remaineth  to  understand  this  text  and 
chapter  of  that  otlier  and  later  kind  of  spiritual  gifts,  those  graces  of  edification, 
or  pratice  gratis  datce.,  whereby  men  are  enabled  in  iheir  several  callings,  according 
to  the  quahty  and  measure  of  the  gra^'es  they  have  received,  to  be  profitable 
members  of  the  iiublic  body,  either  in  Church  or  Commonwealth.  Under  which 
app^-llation  {■the  very  first  natural  powers  and  faculties  of  the  soul  only  excepted, 
which,  flowing  h  priiicijjiis  speciei,  are  in  all  men  the  same  and  like),  I  comprehend 
all  other  secondary  endowments  and  abilities  whatsoever  of  the  reasonable  soul, 
which  are  capable  of  the  degrees  of  more  and  less,  and  of  better  and  worse ;  together 
with  all  subsidiary  helps  any  way  conducing  to  the  exercise  of  any  of  them. 
Whether  they  be,  first,  supernatural  graces,  given  by  immediate  and  extraordinary 
infusion  from  God  ;  such  as  were  the  gifts  of  tongues  and  of  miracles,  and  of 
healings,  and  of  prophecy  properly  so  called,  and  many  other  like,  which  were 
frequent  in  the  infancy  of  the  Church,  and  when  this  Epistle  was  v\ritten,  accord- 
ing as  the  necessity  of  those  primitive  tinn^s  considered  God  saw  it  expedient  for 
His  Church.  Or  whether  they  be,  secondly,  such  as  jDhilosophers  call  natural 
dispositions,  such  as  are  j)romptness  of  wit,  quickness  of  conceit,  fastness  of 
memory,  clearness  of  understanding,  soundness  of  judgment,  readiness  of  speech, 
and  other  like,  which  flow  immediaiely  a  princijnis  individui,  from  the  individual 
condition,  constitution,  and  temperature  of  particular  persons.  Or  whether  they 
be,  thirdly,  such  as  philosophers  call  intellectual  habits,  which  is,  when  those 
nHtural  dispositions  are  so  improved  and  perfe<ted  by  education,  art,  industry, 
observation,  or  experience,  that  men  become  theieby  skilful  linguists,  subtle 
disputers,  copi  ais  orators,  profound  Divines,  powerful  preachers,  ex]iert  lawyers, 
phy.-icians.  historians,  staiesmen,  commanders,  artisans,  or  excellent  in  any 
science,  piofession,  or  faculty  whatsoever.  To  which  we  may  add,  in  the  fourth 
place,  all  outward  subservient  helps  whatsoever,  which  may  any  way  f luther  or 
facilitate  the  exercise  of  any  of  the  former  graces,  dispositions,  or  habits,  such 
as  are  health,  strength,  beauty,  and  all  those  other  bona  corporis,  as  also  bona 
fortunes,  hoi'our,  wealth,  nobility,  reputation,  and  the  rest.  All  of  these,  even 
the  se  among  them  which  seem  most  of  all  to  have  their  foundation  in  nature,  or 
perfection  from  art,  may  in  some  sort  be  caled  Tri'eir /uan/cd,  "spiritual  gifts"; 
inasmuch  as  the  Spiiit  of  God  is  the  fir-t  and  jirincipal  worker  of  them.  Nature, 
art,  indu  try,  and  all  other  subsidiary  furtherances,  being  but  second  agents  under 
Him,  aid  as  means  ordained.  And  now  we  have  found  out  the  jus-t  latitude  of 
the  spiritual  gifis  spoken  of  in  this  chapter,  and  of  the  manifestation  of  the  Spirit 
in  my  text.  From  whence  not  to  piss  without  some  observable  inferences  for 
our  edification,  we  may  here  first  behold,  and  admire,  and  magnify  the  singular 
love,  and  care,  and  providence  of  God  for  and  over  His  Church.  Those  active 
gifts,  and  graces,  and  abilities  which  are  to  be  found  in  the  memliers  of  the 
mystical  body  of  Christ,  are  a  strong  manifestation  that  there  is  a  powerful 
Spirit  of  God  within,  that  kuitteth  the  whole  body  t<'.gether,  and  worketh  all  in 
all,  and  all  in  every  part  of  the  body.  Secondly,  though  we  have  just  cause  to 
lay  it  to  heart,  wht  n  men  of  eminent  gifts  and  place  in  the  Church  are  taken 
from  us,  yet  we  should  sustain  ourselves  with  this  comfoit,  that  it  is  tlie  same 
God  that  still  hath  care  over  His  Church.  And  therefore  we  mav  not  doubt  hut 
this  Spirit,  as  He  hath  hitherto  done  from  the  beginning,  so  will  still  manifest 
Himself  from  time  to  time,  unto  the  end  of  the  woild  ;  in  raising  ip  itistiuments 
for  the  service  of  His  Cliurch,  and  furnishing  them  with  gifts.  Thirilh,  where 
the  Spirit  of  God  hath  manifested  itself  to  any  man  by  the  distribution  of  gifts, 
it  is  but  reason  that  man  should  manifest  the  Spirit  that  is  in  him,  by  exorcising 
tho  e  wilts  in  some  lawful  calling.     II.  Consiiler  we  next,  and  in  the  second  place, 

TnE    CONVEYANCE     OF     THESE     GIFTS    OVER    UNTO    US  ;     HOW     WE    COME    TO    HAVE    A    PBO- 

PEKTY  IN  THEM,  AND  BY  WHAT  EIGHT  WE  CAN  CALL  THEM   OURS.      The  Conveyance 


CHAP,  xn.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  175 

is  by  deed  of  gifts ;  the  manifestation  of  the  Spirit  "  is  given  to  every  man." 
Understand  it  not  to  be  so  much  intended  here  that  every  particular  man  hath 
the  manifestation  of  the  Spirit,  as  that  every  man  that  hath  the  manifestation 
of  the  Spirit  hath  it  given  him  and  given  him  withal  to  this  end,  that  he  niay 
do  good  with  it.  Tlie  variety  both  of  the  gifts  meet  for  several  ofhces,  and  of 
tlie  ottices  wherein  to  imply  those  gifts,  is  wonderful ;  and  no  less  wonderful 
the  distribution  of  both  gift-s  and  ofhces.  But  all  that  variety  is  derived  from 
one  and  the  same  fountain,  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  ;  all  those  distributions  pass 
unto  us  by  one  and  the  same  way,  of  most  free  and  liberal  do'iation.  Possibly 
thou  wilt  allege  thy  excellent  natui'al  parts — these  were  not  given,  but  thou 
broughtest  them  into  the  world  with  thee;  or  thou  wilt  vouch  what  tliou  hast 
.attained  to  by  art  and  industry — and  these  were  not  given  thee,  but  thou  hast 
won  them,  and  therefore  well  deservest  to  wear  them.  Deceive  not  thyself. 
But  tlie  truth  is,  the  difference  that  is  in  men  in  regard  of  these  gifts  and 
abilities  ariseth  neither  from  the  power  of  nature  nor  from  the  merit  of  labour, 
otherwise  than  as  God  is  pleaded  to  use  these  as  second  causes  under  Him. 
Whatsoever  spiritual  abilities  we  have,  we  have  them  of  gift  and  by  grace. 
The  manifestation  of  the  Spirit  is  given  to  every  man.  A  point  of  very  fruitful 
(Consideration  for  men  of  all  sorts,  whether  they  be  of  greater  or  of  meaner  gifts. 
And  first,  all  of  us  generally  may  hence  take  two  profitable  directions  ;  the  one,  if 
■we  have  any  useful  gifts,  whom  to  thank  for  them ;  the  other,  if  we  want  any 
jieedful  gifts,  where  to  seek  for  them.  I  must  now  turn  more  particularly  to  you 
1o  whom  God  hath  vouchsafed  the  manifestation  of  His  Spirit  in  a  larger  pro- 
portion than  unto  many  of  your  brethren,  giving  unto  you,  as  unto  His  firstborn, 
Si  double  portion  of  His  Spirit,  as  Elisha  had  of  Elijah's,  or  perhaj'S  dealing  with 
you  yet  more  liberally,  as  Joseph  did  with  Benjamin,  whose  mess,  though  he  were 
■the  youngest,  he  appointed  to  be  five  times  as  much  as  any  of  his  brethren.  It  is 
Jieedful  that  yon,  of  all  others,  should  be  put  in  remembrance,  that  those  eminent 
manifestations  of  the  Spirit  you  have,  were  given  you.  First,  it  will  be  a  good 
klielp  to  take  down  that  pride  which  is  so  apt  to  engender  in  the  Sdul  throngh 
.abundance  of  knowle:ige,  and  to  let  out  some  of  the  coiruption.  It  is  a  very  hard 
thing  to  know  much,  and  not  to  know  it  too  much.  Secondly,  every  wise  and 
conscionable  man  should  advisedly  weigh  his  own  gifts,  and  make  them  his  rule 
to  work  by,  not  thinking  he  doth  enough  if  he  do  what  law  compelleth  him  to  do, 
or  if  he  do  as  much  as  other  neighbours  do.  But  thirdly,  though  your  graces 
■must  be  so  to  yourselves,  yet  bewai'e  you  do  not  make  them  rules  to  others.  The 
dnanifestation  of  the  Spirit  is  given  to  every  man  ;  let  no  man  be  so  severe  to  his 
brother  as  to  look  he  should  manifest  more  of  the  Spirit  than  he  hath  received. 
JNow,  as  for  you  to  whom  God  hath  dealt  these  spiritual  gifts  with  a  more  sparing 
hand,  the  freedom  of  God's  distribution  may  be  a  fruitful  meditation  for  you  also. 
Pirst,  thou  hast  no  reason,  whosoever  thou  art,  to  grudge  at  the  scnntness  of  thy 
gifts,  or  to  repine  at  the  Giver.  How  little  soever  God  hath  given  thee,  it  is  more 
-than  He  owed  thee.  He  hath  done  thee  no  wrong,  may  He  not  do  as  He  will  with 
His  own  ?  Secondly,  since  the  manifestation  of  the  Spirit  is  a  matter  of  free  gift, 
thou  hast  no  cause  to  envy  thy  brother  whose  portion  is  greater.  Thirdly,  if  thy 
■gifts  be  mean,  thou  hast  this  comfort  withal,  that  thy  accounts  will  he  so  much 
the  easier.  Merchants  that  have  the  greatest  dealings  are  not  ever  the  safest 
men.  And  how  happ}'  a  thing  had  it  been  for  many  men  in  the  world  if  they  had 
■had  less  of  other  men's  goods  in  their  hands.  The  less  thou  hast  received,  the 
Hess  thou  hast  to  answer  for.  Lastly,  remember  what  the  preacher  saith  in 
Eccles.  X.  10 :  "  If  the  iron  be  blunt,  then  he  must  put  to  the  more  strength." 
Many  men  that  are  well  left  by  their  frie'nds  and  full  of  money,  because  they 
think  they  shall  never  cee  the  bottom  of  it,  take  no  care  by  any  employment  to 
increase  it,  but  spend  without  either  fear  or  wit ;  whereas,  on  the  contrary, 
industrious  men  that  have  but  little  to  begin  withal,  yet  by  their  care  and 
providence,  and  painstaking,  get  up  wondei fully.  It  is  almost  incredible  what 
industry,  and  diligence,  and  exercise,  and  holy  emulation  are  able  to  effect,  for  the 
bettering  and  increasing  of  our  spiritual  gifts  ;  so,  though  thy  beginnings  be  but 
small,  thy  latter  end  shall  wonderfully  increase.  By  this  m^ans  thou  slialt  not 
only  profit  thyself  in  the  increase  of  thy  gifts  unto  thyself,  thou  shalt  also  profit 
others  by  communicating  of  thy  gifts  unto  them.  Which  is  the  proper  end  for 
vvhicli  they  Wf-re  bestowed,  and  of  which  we  are  next  to  speak.  The  manifestation 
of  the  Spirit  is  given  to  every  man  to  profit  withal.  To  profit  wh'm?  it  may 
he  himself.     It  is  true,  "If  thou  art  wise,  thou  shalt  be  wise  for  thyself,"  said 


176  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xft. 

Solomon ;  and  Solomon  knew  what  belorged  to  wisdom  as  well  as  another.  He 
that  is  not  pood  to  himself,  it  is  but  a  chance  that  he  is  good  to  anybody  else. 
He  that  hath  a  gift,  (hen,  he  should  do  well  to  look  to  his  own,  as  \se\\  as  to 
the  profit  of  others,  and  as  unto  doctrine  (1  Tim.  iv.  16),  so  as  well  and  first 
to  twke  heed  unto  himself,  that  so  doing  he  may  save  himself  as  well  as  those 
that  hear  him.  This,  then,  is  to  be  done ;  but  this  is  not  all  that  is  to  be  done. 
In  wisdoiri  we  cannot  do  less ;  but  in  charity  we  are  bound  to  do  more  than  thus 
with  our  gifts.  You  see,  then,  what  a  strong  obligation  lieth  upon  every  man 
that  hath  received  the  Spirit  to  call  his  gifts  into  the  common  treasury  of  the 
Church,  to  employ  his  good  parts  and  spiritual  graces  so  as  they  may  some 
way  or  other  be  profitable  to  his  brethren.  It  was  not  only  for  the  beautifying 
of  liis  Church  tbat  God  gave  some  apostles,  and  some  prophets,  and  some 
evang-lists,  and  some  pastors  and  teachers ;  but  also,  and  especially,  for  more 
necessary  and  profitable  uses  ;  for  the  perfecting  of  the  saints,  for  the  work  of 
the  ministry,  for  the  edifying  of  the  body  of  Christ  (Eph.  iv.  11,  12).  The 
stomach  eateth,  not  to  fill  itself,  but  to  nourish  the  body  ;  the  eye  seeth,  not  to 
please  itself,  but  to  espy  for  the  body  ;  the  foot  moveth,  not  to  exercis^e  itself, 
but  to  cany  the  body;  the  hand  worketh,  not  to  help  itself,  but  to  maintain 
the  body.  Now  this  necessity  of  employing  spiritual  gifts  to  the  good  and 
profit  of  others,  ariseth  first  from  the  will  and  the  intent  of  the  Giver.  My 
text  sliovveth  plainly  what  that  intent  was.  The  manifestation  of  the  Spirit  was 
therefore  given  to  every  man,  that  he  might  profit  withal.  Certainly,  as  nature 
doth  not,  so  much  less  doth  the  God  of  nature  make  anything  to  no  purpose,  or 
barely  for  show,  but  for  use ;  and  the  use,  for  which  all  these  things  were  made 
and  given,  is  edification.  He  that  bath  an  estate  made  over  to  him  in  trust  and 
for  uses,  hath  in  equity  therein  no  estate  at  all,  if  he  turn  the  commodities  of  the 
thing  seme  other  way,  and  not  to  tho^e  special  uses  for  which  he  was  so  estated 
in  it.  It  is  a  just  thing  with  the  Father  of  Lights,  when  He  hath  lighted  any  man 
a  candle  by  bestowing  s-piritual  gifts  u]5on  him,  and  lent  him  a  candlestick,  too, 
whereon  to  set  it,  by  providing  him  a  stay  in  the  Church,  if  tbat  man  shall  then 
hide  his  candle  under  a  bushel  and  envy  the  light  and  comfort  of  it  to  them  that 
are  in  the  house,  either  to  remove  his  candlestick  or  to  put  out  his  candle  in 
obscurity.  As  the  intent  of  the  Giver,  so,  secondly,  the  nature  and  quality  of  the 
gift  calleth  upon  us  for  employment.  It  is  not  with  these  spiritual  gifts,  as  with 
most  other  things,  which,  when  they  are  imparted,  are  impaired,  and  lessened  by 
communicating.  Here  is  no  place  for  that  aile^'ation  of  the  virgins,  "  Lest  there 
be  not  enough  for  you  and  for  us."  These  graces  aie  of  the  number  of  those 
things  that  communicate  themselves  by  multiplication,  as  the  stal  maketli 
impression  in  the  wax,  and  as  fire  conveveih  heat  into  iron,  and  as  one  candle 
tindeth  a  thousand,  all  without  loss  of  figure,  heat,  or  light.  Had  ever  any  man 
less  knowledge,  or  wit,  or  learning,  by  teaching  of  others  ?  Had  he  not  rather 
more  ?  Thirdly,  our  own  insufficiency  to  all  offices,  and  the  need  we  have  of  other 
men's  gifts,  must  enforce  us  to  lend  them  the  help  and  comfort  of  ours.  Surely, 
then,  those  men,  first  of  all,  run  a  course  strangely  exorbitant,  who,  instead  of 
employing  them  to  the  profit,  bend  those  gifts  they  have  received,  whether 
spiritual  or  temporal,  to  the  ruin  and  destruction  of  their  brethren.  Abusing 
their  power  to  oppression,  their  wealth  to  loxury,  their  strength  to  drunkenness, 
their  wit  to  soffing,  atheism,  profaneness,  their  learning  to  the  maintenance  of 
heresy,  idolatry,  schism,  novelty.  Be  persuaded,  in  the  second  place,  all  you 
whom  God  hath  made  stewards  over  His  Imusehold,  and  blessed  your  basket  and 
your  store,  to  "  bring  forth  of  your  treasures  things  both  new  and  old  ;  "  manifest 
the  spirit  God  hath  given  you,  so  as  may  be  most  for  the  profit  of  your  brethren. 
Thirdly,  since  the  end  of  all  gifts  is  to  profit,  aim  most  at  those  gifts  that  will 
profit  most,  and  endeavour  so  to  frame  those  you  have  in  the  exercise  of  them,  as 
they  may  be  likeliest  to  bring  profit  to  those  that  shall  partake  of  them, 
"  Covet  earnestly  the  best  gifts."  You  cannot  do  more  good  unto  the  Church  of 
God,  you  cannot  more  profit  the  people  of  God  by  your  gifts,  than  by  pressing 
effectually  these  two  great  points,  faith,  and  good  works.  These  are  good  and 
profitable  unto  men.  I  might  liere  add  other  inferences  from  this  point,  as 
namely,  since  the  manifestation  of  the  Spirit  is  given  to  every  one  of  us,  chiefly  for 
this  end,  that  we  may  profit  the  people  with  it,  tbat  theief ore,  fourthly,  in  our 
preaching;  we  should  rather  seek  to  profit  our  hearers,  though  perhaps  with  sharp 
and  unwelcome  reproofs,  than  to  please  them  by  flattering  them  in  evil;  and  that, 
fifthly,  we  frhculd  more  desire  to  bring  profit  unto  them  than  to  gain  ajjplause  unto 


cuAP.  XII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  177 

ourselves.      {Bishop  Sanderson.)  The   gifts   of  the  Holy   Spirit: — These   are 

— I.  Profitable.  Some  are  more  showy,  others  are  more  useful.  1.  For  the 
conversion  of  sinners.  2.  For  the  edificatiou  of  saints.  II.  Divebse.  1.  The 
word  of  wisdom.  2.  The  word  of  knowledge.  3.  Faith,  such  as  became  the 
confessors  and  martyrs  (Heb.  xi.).  4.  Gifts  of  healing  (Acts.  iii.  4).  5.  Woik- 
ing  of  miracles.  6.  Prophecy  (1  Cor.  xiv.  24,  25).  7.  Discerning  of  spirits  (Acts 
V.  8,  4,  9).  8.  Divers  kinds  of  tongues  (Acts  ii.  4).  9.  The  interpretation  of  tongues 
(1  Cor.  xiv.  27).  III.  Bestowed  upon  each  and  all  by  the  same  Spirit  (ver.  11). 
Let  there  be  no  rivalry  in  the  Churches.  IV.  Shocld  unify  the  Church  into  one 
body  (vers.  12,  13).  V.  Should  be  coveted  earnestly  (ver.  31).  To  him  that 
hath  shall  be  given,  and  he  shall  have  more  abundantly.  {L.  0.  Thompson.) 
Diversity  of  operations,  bnt  one  Spirit : — Note  the  specific  methods  of  the  Spirit's 
operation — I.  In  the  Church.  1.  As  a  breath,  wind.  See  Ezekiel's  vision  of  the 
valley,  Christ  breathing  on  His  disciples,  and  the  rushing,  mighty  wind  of  Pente- 
cost. Symbol  of  life,  quickening  inspiration.  2.  Refreshment.  Water  tlie  type. 
"If  any  man  thirst,"  "  I  will  pour  water,"  &c.  Fertilising,  cleansing  of  tbe  out- 
waul.  3.  Inward  purifying.  Fire  the  symbol.  "  He  shall  baptize  with  .  .  .fire." 
"I  am  come  to  send  fire  on  earth."  Also  of  vital  warmth,  zeal,  fervour.  4.  Con- 
Becration.  Anointing.  Oil  the  type.  Setting  apart,  enduing  wi^h  power.  II. 
With  the  world.  1.  A  reprover  (John  xvi.  8-11).  2.  Strives  with  men  (Gen.  vi. 
3  ;  Acts  vii.  -51).  3.  Enlightens  by  revealing  Christ.  4.  Piegenerates  by  awakening 
faith  in  Christ.  {Homiletic  Monthly.)  The  distribution  of  yifts  in  tlie  Church  is 
— I.  Liberal.  To  every  man.  II.  Wise.  Designed  for  the  profit  of — 1.  The  indi- 
vidual. 2.  The  whole  Church.  III.  Suitable.  1.  'Wisdoni  and  knowledge 
contribute  to  enlargement  of  view.  2.  Faith  to  edification  and  increase.  3.  Gilts 
of  healing,  etc.,  to  the  ci«nfirmation  of  the  truth.  IV.  Sovereign.  By  the  Spirit — 
as  He  will — hence  all  glory  bekmgs  to  God.     (J.  Lijth,  D.B.) 

Ver.  11.  But  all  these  things  worketh  that  one  and  the  selfsame  Spirit,  dividing' 
to  every  man  severally  as  He  will. — Tlie  icork  of  tlie  Spirit : — I.  Christ  pkomised 
THAT  He  would  be  present  with  His  Church  unto  the  end  of  the  world  (Matt. 
xxviii.  20),  And  this  is  that  which  differenceth  His  Church  from  any  other  society. 
If  Christ  be  not  present  there  is  no  Church.  The  foundation  is  wanting ;  and  where 
there  is  no  foundation,  the  higher  the  building,  or  the  more  glorious  its  appearance, 
the  sooner  it  will  fall.  II.  Christ  is  thus  present  with  His  Church  principally 
AND  FUNDAMENTALLY  BY  His  Spirit  (.Tohn  xiv.-xvi.).  Christ  hath  no  vicar  but  the 
Spirit.  Some  say  that  Christ  is  no  otherwise  present  than  by  outward  ordinances. 
I  grant  that  these  are  pledges  of  His  presence,  and  instruments  wherewith,  by  His 
S(jirit,  He  doth  effectually  work.  But.  make  them  Christ's  whole  presence,  and  we 
have  no  better  Church  state  than  the  Jews.     HI.  This  presence  of  the  Spirit  is 

PROMISED,  AND    GIVEN    UNTO    THE    ChURCH    BY    "  AN    EVERL.ASTING    COVENANT  "  (Isa.  lix. 

21).  IV.  It  is  from  hence  that  the  ministry  of  the  gospel  is  "  the  ministry  op 
THE  Spirit  "  (2  Cor.  iii.  6-8).  1.  There  were  never  but  two  ministrations,  the  one 
the  ministration  "  of  the  letter  and  of  death,"  the  other  "of  the  Spirit  and  of  life  "; 
the  one  of  the  law,  the  other  of  the  gospel.  Any  other  is  antichrist's.  2.  The 
ministration  of  the  Spirit  must  signify — (1)  That  the  Spirit  is  the  efficient  of  the 
ministration,  giving  siairitual  gifts  to  the  ministers  of  the  gospel,  to  enable  them  to 
administer  all  gospel  ordinances  to  the  glory  of  Christ  and  the  edification  of  the 
Church.  (2)  The  communication  of  Him,  and  so  the  effect  of  the  ministration 
(Gal.  iii.  2).  Then  it  follows  that,  so  long  as  there  is  the  preaching  of  the  gospel, 
there  is  ihe  communication  of  the  Spirit.  V.  The  general  end,  why  the  Spirit 
IS  THUS  PROMISED  UNTO  THE  Church.  God  liatli  promised  unto  Christ  a  kingdom 
and  Church  in  the  world  for  ever  (Psa.  Ixxii.  17  ;  Isa.  ix.  7  ;  Ma't.  xvi.  18).  The 
accomplishment  of  this  promise  must  depend  upon  the  Spirit.  If  He  should  cease 
as  to  either  of  His  operations,  eifcber  in  workujg  internal  saving  grace  or  spiritual 
abilities  for  gospel  administrations,  the  Churcb  must  cease.     VI.  The  Holy  Ghost 

THUS  PROMISED  and  GIVEN  FURNISHES    THE    MINISTiaiS  OF    THE    GOSPEL    WITH    SPIRITUAL 

ABILITIES  IN  THE  DISCHARGE  OF  THEIR  WORK  ;  and  without  it  they  are  no  way  fitted 
for  it.  1.  Read  Matt.  xv.  14-30.  Note  in  this  parable — (1)  That  wherever  Christ 
calls  and  Hijpoints  a  minister  in  His  house.  He  gives  him  spiritual  abilities  for 
that  work  by  tbe  Holy  Ghost.  He  set  none  at  work,  but  He  gave  them  talents. 
(2)  For  men  to  take  upon  them  to  serve  Christ  who  have  received  none  of  thess 
spiritual  abilities  is  a  high  presumption,  and  casts  lefiection  on  Christ,  as  if  He 
called  to  work  and  gave  no  strength,  as  though  He  called  to  trade  and  gave  no 
VOL.  II.  12 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha?.  xil. 

stock,  or  required  spiritual  duties  and  gave  no  ppiritual  abilities.  (3)  Those  who 
have  received  talents  or  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost  are  to  trade  with  them.  2.  liead 
Rom.  sii.  4-8.  Note  ijere — (1)  That  this  discourse  concerns  the  ordinary  state  of 
the  Church  in  all  ages.  (2)  That  gifts  are  the  foundation  of  all  Church  worl?.  (3) 
That  not  only  does  work  depend  on  the  administration  of  gifts,  but  the  measure  of 
work  depends  upon  the  measute  of  gifts  (Eph.  iv.  8-13).     VII.  As  spiritual  gifts 

ARE    BESTOWED    UNTO    THIS    END,  SO    THEY   AKE    NECESSARY   FOR   IT.       The    Way  whereby 

the  world  lost  the  spiritual  ministrations  of  the  gospel  was  by  the  neglect  and 
contempt  of  spiritual  gifts,  whereby  alone   they  can  be  performed.     VIII.  That 

THERE  IS  A  C05nrUNICATIO>J  OF  SPIRITUAL  GIFTS  IN  ALL  GOSPEL  ORDINANCES  We  knOW  by 

experience.     I'his  is  deriiJed  by  scoffers,  but  we  plead  the  experience  of  humble 
Christians  who  have  a  spiritual  acquaintance  with  tliese  things.     [J.  Owen,  D.D.) 
The  operations  of  the  S2)irit  are — I.  Rich  i;<  thicir  variety.     Gifts — 1.  Of  power. 
2.  Of  grace.     II.  Free  in  their  dispensation.     III.  Sovereign  in  their  dis  i'RIBU- 
TioN.     IV.  Beneficial  in  their  design.     (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)         Variety  in  unity  : — 
I.  The  Divine  Worker.     1.  "Evei-y  good  and  perfect  gift  is  from  above."   Bezaleel 
and  Aholiab  were  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  God  even  as  Moses  and  Aaron.     The  tact 
of  the  man  of  bu-iness,  the  fancy  of  the  poet,  the  skill  of  the  scientist  are  all  from 
Him.     2.  So  in  the  spiritual  sj^liere.    Spiritual  life  is  His  gift ;  that  life  is  preserved 
by  His  renewing,  and  hU  its  progressive  developments  must  be  referred  to  Him. 
All  aspirations  after  purity,  all  high  piirpns  s  of  consecration  are  from  Him.     In 
wliHtever  way  we  are  jible  to  strengthen  the  Chuich  and  bless  the  world,  the  gift  is 
a  tfilent  entrusted  to  us  by  Him.     3.  There  is  great  comfort  in  this  thought.     ]\Ien 
who  have  done  eminent  service  pass  away,  and  sometimes  the  anxious  inquiry  will 
arise,  Wliere  shall  the  host  of  the  Lord  find  its  leaders  ?    Fear  not !    His  gifts  never 
fail,  and  His  Church  can  never  be  abandoned.     Moses  die  1,  but  Joshua  conducted 
ihe  people  to  the  promised  land.     Stephen  fell  a  martyr,  but  the  gap  in  tbe  ranks 
was  more  than  filled  by  Saul.     Our  Lord  tnld  the  disciples  that  it  was  good  for 
them  that  even  He  should  be  taken  away,  that  the  Comforter  might  come.     II. 
The  characteristic  of  His  works.     Variety  in  unity.     Variety  is  everywhere  a 
condition  of   strengt'i   and   beauty.     1.   "We   should  soon   weary  of    landscapes   in 
which  the   same  features  were  ever   reproluced.      There  would  have  been   little 
beauty  in  the  firmameut  if  star  had  not  differed  from  star  in  glory.     2.  Intellect 
has  been  able  to  render  humanity  real  service  because  it  has  had  "  diversities  of 
gifts."     We  want  men  of  science  and  mrn  of  action  to  reduce  their  thoughts  to 
practice;  some  to  give  strong  and  noble  impulses,  and  others  to  aj)ply  the  check  of 
caution  and  experience;  some  to  bear  us  aloft  to  the  world  of  fancy,  others  to  de- 
tain us  among  the  hard  realiti's  of  life.     3.  So  in  the  highest  region  of  all.     (1) 
Tlie  ages  of   the  Church's  story  have   been   marked  by  different  characteristics. 
There  have  been  missionary  ages,  ages  of  defence,  ages  of  quiet  building  to  which 
we  owe  the  great  works  of  our  theology,  ages  of  pulling  down  so  as  to  reform,  to 
purify,  to  revive,  and  Ages  of  suffering — heroic  times.      Here  is  variety,  and  the 
wise  observer  will  see  the  presence  of  God's  Spirit  in  all,  and  admire  the  wisdom 
that  has  made  all  contribute  to  the  prosperity  of  thf  Chnrch.     ('2)  Si>  is  it  with  the' 
varions  sections  into  which  the  Church  has  b<^en  divided.    Men  formed  with  different 
powers  and    temperaments,   trained  amid  diversified  circumstances,  are    sure    to 
arrive  at  different  conclusions.     As  to  questions  of  (Jhurch  polity,  some  will  be 
sticklers  for  authority,  while  others  will  be  concerned  to  maintain  the  rights  of  the 
individual  Christian.     In  ritual  some  will  attaidi  importance  to  externnl  beauty, 
others  will  refuse  t<>  dejiart  from  primitive  simplicity.     Some  may  be  moved  by  an 
irrepressible  enthu-iasm,  others  will  adhere  to  a  mere  formal  service.     Some  may 
state  truth  in  a  way  which  may  be  offensive  to  men  of  culture,  while  others  may  seek 
to  present  it  philosophically  and  disgust  men  of  earnest  heart.     Yet  everywhere  we 
may  feel  that  the  work  of  tlie  Church  is  more  thoroughly  done  as  the  result  of  the 
diversified  agencies  enlisted  on  its  behalf,     (3)  The  same  manifoldness  is  seen,  too, 
in  individual  character  and  experience.     The  story  of  no  two  sonls  is  exactly  alike, 
(a)  There  are  varieties  of  agency.     Always  the  same  truth  must  be  the  power  of 
God  unto  salvation,  but  there  are  many  avenues  by  which  it  obtains  admission  to 
the  soul,  and  gains  power  and  dominion  there.     In  one  the  conscience  is  awakened 
to  agonising  convictions  of  sins;  otheis  are  led  by  soft  and  gentle  hands  into  tbe 
wa.A  s  of  peace.    Lydia  and  the  jailor  were  converted  in  the  same  city  by  the  agency 
of  the  sa-ne  apostle  ;  but  to  the  one  the  Spirit  came  in  the  "  still  small  voice  "  ;  to 
the  other  He  spoke  in  the  terrors  of  an  earthquake.    Some  are  brought  to  enter  the 
kingdom  through  a  great  "fight  of  atiQictions,"  and  others  are  drawn  as  "  by  the 


OHAP.  xri.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  179 

cords  of  love."  Here  the  work  is  instantaneous,  there  gradual.  One  is  converted 
by  the  apptal  of  the  preacher,  another  by  solitary  meditation  on  the  truth,  another 
by  the  iirtli  ss  words  of  a  little  child,  (b)  There  are  diversities  in  the  result.  In 
all  there  is  faith  in  Jesns,  but  with  innumerable  points  of  difference.  In  some 
there  is  a  burning  enthusiasm,  in  others  holy  quiet.  One  is  all  activity  and  daring ; 
another,  like  Mary,  loves  to  sit  at  the  feet  of  Jesus.  One  is  a  Boanerges,  annther 
a  Barnabas.  These,  then,  are  the  phenomena,  and  they  are  just  such  as  we  might 
have  expected.  "  The  wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth."  Sometimes  its  music  is  soft 
and  sweet,  anon  it  is  clear  and  shrill,  and  again  it  is  deep,  solemn,  and  sad.  Con- 
clusion:  1.  We  have  here  a  rebuke  of  intolerant  exclusiveness.  Tliere  is  a  strong 
tendency  in  most  men  to  expect  that  piety  should  be  cast  in  one  mould,  and 
fashioned  after  one  pattern.  2.  We  have  a  crU  to  earnest  diligence.  The  mani- 
festation of  the  Spirit  is  given  to  every  man  to  profit  witlial.  Whatever  gift  the  Spirit 
bestows  on  any  man — by  whutever  impulse  He  s.tirs  the  soul,  the  design  is  that  the 
talent  should  be  used  for  the  advancement  of  Divine  glory.  (J.  Guinness  J'of/ers,  B.A.) 
Ethnic  and  Christian  views  of  Divine  influence  : — So  much  of  ouf  knowledge  conies 
through  the  senses,  it  is  not  wonderful  that  many  persons  believe  that  all  our  know- 
ledge comes  through  the  senses.  So  large  a  part  of  our  time  is  occupied  with  this 
outward  world  of  sights  and  sounds,  no  wonder  many  think  that  this  is  all  we  have 
to  do  with.  What  is  spirit,  what  is  soul,  but  a  higher  development  of  matter  ? 
What  do  we  know  of  either,  except  what  we  see  through  forms  of  material  organi- 
sation ?  This  is  modern  materialism,  which  does  nut  deny  spirit  but  maintains 
that  all  we  know  of  it  is  what  comes  to  us  from  without,  througli,  forms  of  matter. 
It  is  not  curious  that  multitudes  of  men  should  have  been  materialists  ;  for  matter 
impresses  itself  constantly  and  necessarily  on  all.  But  the  really  curious  fact  is 
that  tlie  great,  majority  of  munkind  should  have  always  been  Spirituiilists  ;  believing 
in  spirit  more  than  in  matter — in  the  infinite  more  than  the  finite  ;  believing  not  in 
evolution,  but  emanation  ;  accepting  as  the  origin  of  the  universe  a  diopping  down- 
ward out  of  the  infinite,  into  the  finite,  or  a  creation  of  the  world  by  the  Gods.  I. 
Chrisiianity  differs  from  all  other  religions,  in  maintaining  the  universality 
OF  THIS  influence.  Other  religions,  so  far  as  I  know,  have  limited  insjoiration., 
either  to  a  few  select  souls,  as  pi'ophets  and  saints ;  or,  secondly,  to  some  select 
class  ;  as  priests  ;  or,  thirdly,  to  those  who  sought  it  by  seclusion,  by  meditation, 
by  solitary  prayer,  by  self-denial,  going  apart  into  caves  and  cells  to  macerate  tlie 
body  bystaivation  and  asceticism.  But  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  in  the  first  words 
which  Peter  said,  he  declared  that  the  prophecy  of  Joel  was  fulfilled — "  It  sliall  come 
to  pass,  in  the  last  days,  saith  the  Lord,  that  I  will  pour  out  My  Spirit  on  all  flesh, 
and  your  sons  and  daughters  shall  prophesy."  Accordi'  gly,  thi'ough  the  Book  of 
Acts,  and  in  all  the  Epistles,  we  find  that  wherever  the  gospel  was  preached,  all 
were  told  that  they  were  to  receive  the  H  dy  Spirit.  All  Christians  weie  inspired  ; 
but  their  inspiration  showed  itself  in  different  ways.  It  inspired  some  of  them  with 
knowledge,  helping  them  to  a  clear  sight  of  truth.  It  inspired  some  of  them  with 
wisdom,  helping  them  to  see  what  was  the  best  thing  to  be  done  in  any  emergency. 
It  inspired  some  of  them  with  faith,  enabling  them  to  feel  the  presence  and  love 
of  God  amid  bereavement,  loneliness,  bitter  disappointment,  and  sharp  trial.  It 
inspired  some  of  them  to  be  good  physicians,  tender  and  careful  nurses  of  the  sick. 
If  they  saw  a  man  or  a  woman  who  had  a  gift  of  healing,  they  said,  "  She  is 
inspired  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  heal  dise-se,  as  the  Apostle  Paul  is  inspired  to 
preach."  Gifts  were  special,  but  the  inspiration  was  univeisal;  one  and  the 
same  for  all,  from  the  lowest  to  the  highest.  God  was  in  every  heart  in  this  h  ippy 
community  of  brothi-rs  and  sisters.  This,  therefore,  is  one  of  the  characters  of  the 
true  Christian  doctrine  of  Divine  influence,  that  God's  influence  comes  to  all  of  us 
whenever  we  wish  for  it.  This  is  what  Jesus  says:  "If  a  hungry  child  asks  his 
father  and  mother  for  bread,  will  they  give  him  a  stone?  No  !  Do  you  think,  then, 
that  if  any  of  you  ask  God  for  pow^r  to  do  light  and  be  right.  He  will  not  (.dve  it 
to  you  ?  So  certain  it  is  that  God  will  give  His  Holy  Spirit  to  them  who  ask  Him." 
II.  According  to  the  New  Testament,  the  Divine  influence  is  not  only  universal,  but 

IT    IS    CONTINUOUS,  CO'  STANT,  A  NEVER-FLOWING   STKEAJr,  DESCENDING  INTO  EVERY  0PE>J 

60UL.  It  is  not  only  for  all  men,  but  it  is  at  all  times.  Undoubtedly  there  are  seasons 
when  the  human  heart  is  more  tender,  more  susceptible,  more  open  to  Divine 
influence,  than  at  other  times.  So  in  this  opening  season  of  the  year,  the  seeds 
and  buds  are  more  susceptible  to  the  influence  of  the  sun.  The  buds  are  swelling 
by  millions  on  the  trees  ;  eveiy  dny  they  become  a  little  larger  ;  jiresently  they  open 
into  delicate,  soft  leaflets  ;  then  they  hang  out  their  pretty  form-s  more  and  more 


180  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  xii. 

uatolded.  Some  immense  force  is  pushing  them  from  within,  and  attracting  them 
from  without.  The  small  plant  in  the  sick  girl's  window  in  some  narrow  city  lane 
feels  the  same  influence  ;  the  weeds  and  grasses  over  ten  thousand  miles  of  latitude 
feel  the  influence.  Every  twenty-four  hours  swells  this  tide  of  vegetable  life  which 
flows  in  upon  us  like  the  ocean.  Thus,  too,  there  are  doubtless  spring  seasons  in 
the  human  soul,  when  we  aie  more  susceptible  to  Divine  influence  than  at  other 
times.  God  is  not  necessarily  nearer  than  at  other  times,  but  our  hearts  are  turned 
more  towards  Him.  III.  A  third  peculiarity  of  the  Christian  view  of  Divine  influence 
is,  that  IX  coNsiDiiRS  inspiration  as  natural,  rational  and  practical.  1.  It  is 
rational.  It  does  not  come  to  confuse  the  mind,  but  to  give  it  more  insight,  deeper 
knowledge.  Part  ut  our  knowledge  comes  to  us  from  the  outward  world  by  obser- 
vation ;  but  anotber  part,  and  often  the  best  part,  comes  to  us  from  within,  by 
intuition.  2.  The  Divine  influence,  according  fo  Ciiriatianity,  is  not  only  rational, 
but  also  practical.  *  We  have  seen  that  one  cjf  the  gilts  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the 
gift  of  "  healing."  We  also  read  of  the  "  ^'ifts  "  of  "helping,"  of  "governing,"  of 
"  discerning  of  spirits."  One  man  wiio  believes  in  inspiraiiwn,  and  looks  up  for  it, 
will  be  filled  wiih  a  Divine  power  of  helping  those  in  dnliculty,  of  showing  them 
what  they  ought  to  do,  of  lending  a  hand  to  a  weak  brother  or  sister.  Another  man 
will,  in  ansv^er  to  his  inward  prayer,  be  gifted  with  executive  ability  to  direct  and 
guide  and  govern.  We  know  how  some  persons  can  govern  without  seeming  to 
{.ovem.  Some  are  born  leaders,  but  some  are  also  iuspired  leaders.  They  are 
enabled  by  a  power  not  their  own  to  guide,  repress,  restrain,  uplift,  and  bring 
together  m  my  hearts,  till  they  beat  as  one.  This  is  also  a  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
And  others  are  made  discerners  of  spirits.  The  eye  is  made  clear  and  penetrating 
to  discern  shams.  The  hypocrite  and  deceiver  is  unmasked  in  their  presence. 
These  various  powers  of  the  soul  are  all  as  much  quickened  and  fed  and  vitalised 
by  the  Holy  Spirit  as  that  of  the  prophet  who  speaks  with  the  tongue  of  men  and 
ang<  Is,  or  the  rapt  devotee  who  wears  the  stones  with  his  knees  in  constant  prayer. 
It  is  one  spirit  by  which  all  Goi's  servants  are  baptised  into  that  one  body,  the 
invisilile  eiiuich  of  good  men  and  women.  3.  Although  this  influence  is  super- 
natural it  is  also  natural.  The  Divine  life,  flowing  down  through  human  souls  into 
the  world,  must  be,  and  is  iu  harmony  with  the  same  Divine  life  flowing  down  into 
the  world  through  external  nature.  Consequently,  wherever  God  sends  a  fuller  tide 
of  religious  inspiration  into  any  period,  it  is  followed  by  a  greater  growth  of  art, 
science,  knowledge  and  civilisation.  What  we  ought  to  believe,  therefore,  is  that 
God  is  always  inwardly  near  to  us,  in  the  depths  of  our  soul,  and  always  ready  to 
strengthen  us,  and  lig  iten  our  darkness,  when  wi--  tuin  inward  to  Him.  But  it  is  a 
mistake  to  speak  of  any  irresistible  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Gud  respects  our 
freedom,  and,  if  we  choose  to  res  st  these  tender  attractions  and  illuminations,  they 
are  never  forced  upon  us.  Let  us  not  harden  ourselves  against  tfie  voice  within, 
whether  it  comes  to  give  us  better  insight  into  truth,  or  to  show  us  how  acceptably 
to  work  :  whether  it  open  our  eyes  to  see,  our  ears  to  hear,  our  hands  to  act,  our 
lips  to  speak,  or  our  hearts  to  love.  (Jus.  Fn email  Clarke.)  One  Spirit,  many 
j/i/ts : — But  now  these  best  gifts  of  God,  as  well  as  all  His  other  gifts,  are  in  danger 
of  being  profaned  by  men.  And  it  seems  that  the  Corinthians  did  profane  them. 
They  employed  the  power  of  speaking  new  lau'juages,  as  well  as  other  spiritual  gifts, 
to  their  own  glory,  and  not  to  God's  glory  alone.  His  mystical  body,  the  Church, 
is  like  His  natural  body,  or  any  of  our  bodies,  in  respect  that  although  it  is 
made  up  of  many  members,  each  having  its  own  office,  yet  it  is  truly,  strictly, 
my-teriously  one.  What  makes  it  one,  and  binds  it  together,  is  the  HcAy  Spirit  of 
God  dwelling  in  each  person  s  soul  and  body,  to  unite  him  truly  to  Jesus  Christ. 
Thus  are  Christians  put  in  mind  of  the  one  Church,  to  which  all  alike  helong  ;  and 
they  are  also  put  in  mind  of  tlie  diversity  of  gifts,  whereby  each  member  is  made 
different  from  another.  First,  to  the  weaker  and  less  honourable  member  be 
say.«.  You  are  not  to  be  ca-t  down  nor  di>contented,  as  if  no  one  cared  for  you, 
because  others  have  higher  places  than  you.  "  Nay,"  it  might  be  said,  "  you  surely 
have  in  you  the  same  life,  the  same  blood,  that  any  other  limbs  of  the  body  have. 
The  pulse  which  beats  in  you  comes  fr.jm  the  h  art,  the  power  and  will  which  guides 
you  from  the  head;  you  are  as  mu'-h  a  member  of  the  Man  as  any  of  the  limbs 
which  are  most  jjrecious.  If  yo  i  hear  instead  of  speaking,  if  you  move  instead  of 
ruling,  if  you  act  instead  of  ordering,  you  are  not  therefore  the  less  parts  of  the 
body."  And  much  more  should  we  quiet  with  the  same  gracious  words  all  discon- 
tented and  envious  thoughts.  Are  you  not  a  member  of  Christ?  and  what  is  it,  in 
comparison  of  so  great  mercies,  if  another  man  is  more  learned,  more  respected, 


CHAP.  XII.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  181 

richer,  or  healthier  than  you  are?  The  weak  then  are  not  to  envy  the  strong,  and 
the  strong  on  the  other  hand  are  not  to  despise  tlie  weak.  "  The  eye  is  not  to  say 
to  the  hand,  I  have  no  need  of  ihee  ;  neither  fgain  the  head  to  the  feet,  I  have  no 
need  of  you."  Those  who  are  above  others,  either  in  learning  or  in  dignity,  are  of 
course  in  some  danger  of  becoming  proud  and  contem))tuons.  Let  this  then  be  the 
lesson  settled  in  our  hearts;  to  believe  that  we  are  Christian  brethren  indeed,  and 
to  cheiish  in  our  hearts  true  brotherly  feeling  one  towards  another.  Now,  then, 
with  this  deep  faitli  in  Christ's  Holy  Spirit,  as  having  really  been  given  to  dwell  in 
our  hearts,  let  us  think  on  any  other  person,  whomsoever  we  will,  as  being  also  par- 
takers of  the  same  Spirit.  Consider ;  if  he  were  partaker  of  the  same  blood  with 
us,  if  it  were  our  brother  or  sister  after  the  flesh,  should  we  not  be  full  of  love  for 
him  ?  Again,  because  this  Spirit  deals  not  with  all  exactly  alike,  but  divides  to  every 
man  severally  as  He  will,  how  should  the  remembrance  of  Him  fail  to  make  us  con- 
tent in  our  places,  orderly  and  diligent  in  our  duties  ?  since  wherever  we  are  in 
God's  work.  He  assigned  us  our  place.  Are  you  then  a  rich  and  prosperous  person  ? 
do  not  trust  in  your  own  riches  :  beware  of  thinking  that  you  can  do  without  the  poor, 
that  you  need  them  not.  Are  you,  on  the  contrary,  a  poor  man  ?  Then  beware 
how  you  allow  yourself  to  think  sadly  on  the  rich,  as  being  better  off  than  you  are. 
Such  thoughts  are  too  likely  to  end  in  repining  and  envy.  Again,  are  you  in  com- 
parison learned?  are  you  able  to  read  the  Scriptures?  yet  do  not  trust  in  your 
reading:  do  not  think  that  you  can  make  out  your  duty,  and  save  yoursi  If  well 
enough  :  you  still  need  the  prayers  of  Christ's  aftlicted  and  poor.  Are  \ou,  on  the 
other  hand,  an  ignorant  person,  and  does  it  mortify  you  to  see  and  feel  that  you 
know  much  less  than  most  others?  care  not  for  it,  but  turn  your  thoughts  to  the 
infinite  and  wonderful  truth,  which,  as  we  all  know,  belongs  to  us  and  to  the  very 
wisest  alike.  Are  you  so  fsr  blameless  as  to  have  kept,  by  God's  mercy,  your  soul 
and  body  from  wilful  doadly  sin?  You  know  it  is  altogether  the  work  of  God's 
Spirit :  believe  and  think  of  this;  it  will  keep  you  from  pride  and  self-righteousness. 
{Plain  Sermons  by  Contributors  to  the  'Tracts  for  the  Times.)- 

Ver.  12.  For  as  the  body  is  cne,  and  hath  many  memhers,  ...  so  also  is 
Christ.  —  Of  the  great  variety  of  men  s  characters  in  the  Cliurcli, : — The  law  of  variety 
in  unity  obtains — I.  In  Nature.  1.  No  two  leaves  of  the  same  tree,  no  two  faces, 
even  of  twins,  entirely  correspond.  Science,  however,  is  continuHlly  bringing  to 
light  an  unity  and  simplicity  of  type  in  things  apparently  different.  What  objects 
can  present  a  greater  superficial  difference  than  quadrupeds  and  fishes,  botli  of 
which,  however,  being  vertebrates,  are  formed  on  the  same  general  plan?  2.  And 
the  resemblance  is  not  only  of  ground-plan,  but  of  agency.  Tlie  same  power  of 
gravitation  which  ties  the  planets  to  the  sun,  nnd  retains  them  in  their  orbits, 
causes  the  leaf  or  the  fruit  to  fall  to  the  ground.  The  same  power  of  electricity 
which  rives  the  oak,  attracts  light  substances  towards  chafed  Sf>aling-wax.  The 
same  refraction  of  the  ravs  of  the  sun  produces  the  rainbow,  and  makes  the  tiny 
dewdrop  to  twinkle  with  tlie  prismatic  colours.  3.  The  various  parts  of  the 
universe  work  together  for  one  end.  Strong  forces  are  at  work  in  and  around  the 
earth,  which,  if  allowed  unlimited  sway,  might  peril  the  planet's  existence  ;  but 
they  play  into  one  another's  hands,  and  hold  one  another  in  equipoise.  II.  In  the 
WoBD  OF  God.  The  Scriptures  are  a  collection  of  books  written  under  various  cir- 
cumstances at  different  times.  We  have  histories,  biographies,  x^oetry,  aphorisms, 
propliecies,  rituals,  letters.  But  however  dissimilar,  they  are  one  organic  whole, 
knit  together  by  a  certain  plan  and  principles.  The  prophc-y  of  the  Seed  of  the 
woman,  which  should  bruise  the  seip«ut's  liead,  is  manifestly  the  nucleus  round 
which  the  whole  Bible  has  formed  itself.  The  entire  Old  Testament  looks  forward 
to  Messiah  historically,  typically,  and  prophetically.  III.  In  the  Church.  Shall  we 
not  expect  to  find  the  same  feature  here,  for  the  Church,  quite  as  much  as  Nature 
and  Scripture  is  God's  workmanship?  1.  The  members  of  the  Apostolic  Church 
had  various  gifts,  the  phenomena  of  which  were  different,  but  all  the  results  of  the 
agency  of  one  Spirit,  and  all  wiTkinu  together  for  the  glory  of  one  Saviour.  These 
supernatural  gifts  b8d  something  in  the  natural  endowments  of  the  possessor's 
mind  corresponding  to  them.  Thus,  e.n.,  corresponding  to  the  gift  of  tongues, 
some  persons  have  now  a  great  facility  of  acquiring  languages  ;  corri-sponding  to 
the  gilt  of  prophecy,  we  find  in  others  a  natural  gift  of  higli  and  fervid  eloquence  ; 
some  persons  even  nowadays  have  such  a  wonderful  ait  of  imp  irting  what  they 
know,  thrt  we  can  hardly  be  said  to  ha\e  lost  the  gift  of  teaching;  others  are 
admirably  adapted  for  government ;  while  even  the  gift  of  miracles  itself  rests  on 


182  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xii. 

the  power  of  mind  over  matter,  of  which  power  we  have  exemplifications  in  a 
natural  way  even  nowadays.  2.  The  character  and  temperament  of  each  indivi- 
dual Christian  is  different  from  that  of  his  neighbour.  Thus  St.  John  represents 
the  contemplative  and  studious  disciple.  St.  Peter  is  the  great  bulwarli  and  rock 
of  the  Church,  breasting  its  perils  and  responsibilities  gallantly,  before  St.  Paul 
app  "ars  ;  Apollos  is  an  eloquent  declaimer,  "mighty  in  the  Sijriptures" ;  Bar- 
nabas has  a  still  small  voice  of  consolation ;  while  Paul,  in  powers  of  physical 
and  mentil  endurance,  in  the  expansiveness  of  his  affections,  is  God's  cliiefest 
instrument  for  the  diffusion  of  the  glad  tidings.  These  are  some  of  the  moulds  in 
■which  Christian  character  was  cast,  and  in  which  we  may  expect  that  it  will 
continue  to  be  cas^t  nowadays.  Conclusion:  1.  Let  us  not  distress  ourselves  that 
we  were  not  brought  to  God  in  the  same  way  as  some  others.  God's  ways  of 
induencing  the  human  mind  for  good  vary,  first,  with  the  original  character  of  the 
mind,  on  which  the  Holy  Ghost  has  to  operate  ;  and,  secomlly,  with  the  acquired 
shape  which  that  mind  has  taljen  from  circumstances  in  which  it  has  been  thrown. 
On  the  same  jjage  of  Scripture  there  is  the  record  of  Lydia,  who  became  a  Chris- 
tian through  the  gentle  opening  of  the  heart,  and  of  the  gaoler  who  was  shaken 
with  strong  alarm,  as  if  over  the  pit  of  hrll ;  nothing  else  would  have  broken 
bonds  so  firmly  riveted.  2.  Our  method  of  serving  God  must  depend  on  our 
capacities,  endowments,  position,  and  opportunities.  It  may  not  be  a  high  or  a 
widely  influential  work  which  we  are  doing  for  God,  bat  then  He  may  not  have 
called  us  to  such  a  work.  "I  would  xmdertake  to  govern  a  hundred  empires," 
said  Dr.  Payson,  "if  God  called  me  to  it,  but  I  would  not  undertake  to  govern  a 
hundred  sheep  unless  He  called  me."  3.  Learn  a  lesson  of  large  charity.  We 
ought,  if  rightly  minded,  to  rejoice  in  the  exuberance  and  variety  of  tlie  spiritual 
gifts  possessed  by  Christians,  just  as  we  deligiit  in  the  rich  variety  of  Nature  or 
ihe  Word  of  God.  God's  purpose  is  that  each  Christian  should  exhibit,  in  the 
peculiarity  of  his  circumstances,  education,  moral  tempeiament,  and  mental 
endowments,  a  new  specimen  of  redeeming  love  and  grace.  By  various  discipline 
here  He  fits  and  polishes  each  living  stone  for  the  place  which  it  is  destined  to 
occupy  in  the  spiritual  temple  ;  and  when  all  the  stones  are  made  ready.  He  will 
build  them  together  each  into  his  plat-e,  and  exhibit  to  men  and  angels  their 
perfect  unity.  {Dean  Goiilbitru.)  Different  work  given  to  diff'^  rent  people : — 
If  we  examine  a  thistle  we  find  that  each  of  the  purple  fringes  of  which  the  head  is 
composed  is  a  distinct  flower,  so  that  the  plume  of  the  thistle  is  not,  in  reality, 
one  tiower,  but  a  collection  of  flowers.  Each  part  has  its  own  work  to  do,  and  is 
changed  in  shape  or  colour,  according  to  its  work.  One  put  produces  honey; 
another  attracts,  by  its  colour,  insects  to  fertilise  the  plant;  another  helps  to 
produce  seed.  Each  part  has  its  own  excellent  quality,  and  the  effect  of  their 
combined  labour  is  to  promote  the  welfare  of  all.  {II.  Maemillan,  LL.D.) 
The  Church:  xinitij  in  dicersity  ;  diversity/  in  unity  : — The  apostle's  discourse  is  of 
spiritual  gifts.  Tliese  were  largely  distributed  among  the  Christians  of  Corinth— too 
largely,  it  would  seem,  for  the  grace  that  went  along  with  them.  The  diversity  in 
unity  here  affirmed  by  the  apostle  of  the  gifts  communicated  to  the  early  Church, 
pertains  to  the  Church  in  its  entire  structure.  It  is,  in  fact,  the  law  of  its  com- 
position—an identity  of  character  and  experience,  combined  with  an  endless 
diversity  in  the  details.  The  most  palpable  exemplification  of  this  law  is_  that 
•wlrich  is  ofi'ered  by  tlie  diverse  outward  forms  in  which  the  Church  exists.  It  is  not 
the  visible  Church  which  the  apostle  affirms  to  be  one;  but  the  true  Church— the 
Church  made  up  of  the  regenerated  and  saved,  who  are  confined  to  no  one  com- 
munion, and  are  known  to  God  alone.  But  it  is  not  without  its  significance  that  He 
has  permitted  the  visible  Church  to  be  cast  in  many  separate  moulds.  He  might 
have  prescribed  a  polity  with  such  distinctness,  and  enjoined  it  in  such  terms  of 
authority,  that  all  churclns  would  have  conformed  to  it.  But  He  saw  fit  so  to 
frame  Hi-  instructions  on  this  subject  as  to  leave  room  for  a  diversity  of  interpre- 
tation. The  fact  is  indisputable,  that  to  one  class  of  minds  this  form  of  worship 
is  the  more  edifying ;  to  another,  that.  In  this  view  we  may  refer  to  the  visible 
Church  as  illustrating  the  principle  of  diversity  in  unity.  The  principle,  however, 
finds  its  legitimate  sphere  within  the  brotherhood  of  real  believers.  This  phrase, 
in  fact,  defines  the  sense  in  which  they  are  affirmed  to  be  one;  they  are  "real 
believers  "  :  this  makes  tliem  one.  So  the  apostle  teaches  in  the  passage  before  us  : 
The  body  of  Christ  (the  Church)  is  one:  "for  (ver.  13)  by  one  Spirit  are  we  all 
baptized'into  one  body,  whether  we  be  Jews  or  Gentiles,  whether  we  be  bond  or 
free."     It  is  through  the  anointing  of  the  Spirit  men  are   born  again,   and  so 


CHAP,  sii.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  183 


engrafted  into  Christ  as  to  become  members  of  His  body.  This  is  the  communi- 
cating of  a  new  nature  which  makes  them  one,  as  real]y  as  the  natural  birth,  the 
possession  of  a  common  liumanity,  makes  them  one.  External  diversities  aie  of  no 
consequence  in  either  case.  The  child  of  the  hovel,  the  wigwam,  the  palace,  it 
matters  not  where  or  when  he  is  born,  he  inherits  the  common  nature  and  belongs 
to  the  race.  So  with  the  new  birth,  it  merges  all  outward  distinctions.  1.  This 
unity  includes  a  common  head.  "  Christ  is  the  Head  of  the  Church."  Union  with 
Christ  is  indispensable.  2.  It  denotes,  further,  a  oneness  of  faith.  Diversities  of 
belief  there  certainly  are  among  real  believers.  All  Christians  concur  in  the 
necessity  of  "  repentance  toward  God  and  faith  in  our  Loid  .Je:;us  Christ."  3. 
They  are  also  of  one  purpose.  The  various  members  of  the  body,  controlled  by 
a  single  will,  work  together  for  the  same  ends.  The  members  of  Christ's  mystical 
body  have  a  common  aim.  4.  They  are  united,  too,  by  the  bonds  of  a  mutual 
sympathy.  In  the  human  body,  if  one  member  suffers,  all  suffer  ;  if  one  rejoices, 
all  rejoice.  But  this  unity  is  not  monotony.  The  Church  is  one.  But  it  is  one  as 
the  body  is  one  ;  as  the  animal  kingdom  is  one  ;  the  vegetable  ;  the  mineral ;  the 
whole  realm  of  nature.  The  formula  of  definition  in  all  these  cases  is.  Unity  in 
diversity,  and  diversity  in  unity.  The  Christian  Church  began  in  this  way,  and 
began  gloriously.  The  Day  of  Pentecost  supplied  the  mould  in  which  it  was  to  be 
cast.  "  Parthians  and  Medes,  and  Elamites,  and  the  dwellers  in  Mesopotamia,  and 
in  Judea,  and  Cappadocia,  in  Pontus,  and  Asia,  Phrygia,  and  Pamph>lia.  in  Egypt, 
and  in  the  parts  of  Libya  about  Cyrene,  and  sti  angers  of  Rome,  Jews  and  proselytes, 
Cretes  and  Arabians."  What  an  assemblage  was  this  !  And  as  it  set  out,  so  it  has 
continued.  Contemning  all  distinctions  of  climate,  tmpire,  language,  and  religion, 
the  Church  has  gone  on,  gathering  into  its  ample  fold  people  of  all  lands  and 
tongues  and  faiths  ;  cementing  them  into  one  harmonious  whole  ;  and  that,  with- 
out disturbing  the  elements  which  mark  their  several  nationalities.  But  we  may 
see  this  diversity  in  unity  without  convening  the  Church  Ecumenical.  It  is  the  law 
of  the  kingdom  everywhei^e.  In  the  apostolic  age,  the  household  of  faith  com- 
prised persons  of  every  rank  and  occupation.  And  this  variety  has  been  perpetuated. 
The  ministry  has  never  been  without  its  Johns  and  Pauls,  its  Thomases  8nd  Peters, 
its  sons  of  thunder  and  its  sons  of  consolation.  Let  me  name  Baxter,  Owen, 
Bunyan,  Jeremy  Taylor,  Bishop  Hall,  the  Wesleys,  the  Erskines,  Eomaine, 
President  Edwards,  Whitefield,  Dwight,  Robert  Hall,  Chalmers,  Davies,  Mason, 
the  Alexanders.  What  a  galaxy  is  this  !  Every  star  is  brilliant ;  but  no  two  shine 
wiih  the  same  lustre.  And  as  with  the  ministry,  so  with  the  people.  To  delineate 
the  variety  which  ijertains  to  the  many  members  of  the  one  spiritual  body  would  be 
to  describe  the  numerous  sorts  of  people  aggri?gated  in  a  community.  For  the 
Church  recruits  itself  indifferently  from  the  vast  outlying  rjasses  of  humanity.  It 
appropriates  to  itself  all  ages,  sexes,  and  conditions.  Of  course  the  training  to 
which  it  subjects  them  demands  the  lopping  off  of  excrescences  and  the  healing  of 
disorders  which,  neglected,  would  consume  the  life.  But  within  the  wise  and  wide 
limitations  prescribed  by  the  Divine  Husbandman,  it  allows  all  the  trees  and  shrubs 
transplanted  into  its  enclosure  to  follow  out  each  the  law  of  its  own  growth.  The 
pine  isnst  expected  to  become  an  oak  ;  nor  the  orange  a  vine  ;  nor  the  violet  a  rose. 
This  rule  is  observed  even  in  respect  to  the  methods  by  which  the  dead  branches  are 
engrafted  into  the  True  Vine  and  made  alive.  It  is  the  prerogative  of  the  one 
Almighty  Sjjirit  to  effect  this  ;  here  is  the  unity.  But  He  does  it  in  a  great  variety 
of  modes ;  here  is  the  diversity.  Nor  in  conversion  only.  He  carries  the  same 
variety  of  modes  and  means  into  the  culture  and  development  of  the  immortal  germ 
deposited  in  regeneration.  The  efficiency  in  all  instances  is  His  own.  And  the  one 
agency  He  has  Himself  prescribed,  in  His  Word.  But  who  can  describe  the  paths 
along  which  He  leads  His  peojile,  and  the  endless  combinations  of  proverbial  and 
gracious  influences  by  which  He  conducts  them  step  by  step  up  the  acclivities  of 
the  higher  life,  and  fashions  tliem  to  the  "likeness  of  the  heavenly  "?  The  fnct  is 
patent  to  everyone.  Let  us  advert  to  a  few  of  the  more  important  aspects  in  which 
it  offers  itself  to  our  contemplation.  It  will  not  be  difiicult  to  show  that  this  Divine 
law  of  diversity  in  unity  is  as  essential  to  the  proper  perfection  of  the  Church  as  it 
is  moially  beautiful.  1.  Let  me  begin  with  this  latter  thought,  the  moral  beauty  of 
this  arrangement.  This  is  not  a  thing  to  be  argued.  Beauty  is  a  matter  not  of 
logic,  but  of  feeling.  Its  appeal  is  to  a  constitutional  susceptibility.  And  it  is  a 
part  of  our  constitution  to  crave  variety.  We  do  not  want  »  paiuting  to  be  all  of 
one  colour,  nor  a  tune  of  one  strain.  The  ocean  would  pall  upon  us  if  it  were 
always  still  or  always  boisterous.   We  grow  weary  of  looking  day  by  day  at  the  same 


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [chap.  xii. 

people  in  the  same  situation,  unless  they  are  our  intimate  fi-iends.  And  as  to  our 
friends,  we  would  not  have  them  all  alike  if  we  could.  It  is  one  of  the  charms  of 
the  domestic  state,  the  variety  there  is  in  families.  He  who  made  man  made  the 
Church  ;  and  of  course  adapted  it  to  this  as  well  as  to  every  other  part  of  his  nature. 
No  one  can  complain  of  the  New  TL-stament  as  a  monotonous  book  ;  nor  feel  that 
when  he  has  seen  one  of  its  personages  he  has  seen  all.  We  love  the  Church  all  the 
more  because  its  unity,  like  that  of  a  garden,  effloresces  in  a  grateful  varii-ty  of  fruits 
and  flowers.  2.  The  principle  of  diversity  in  unity  upon  which  the  Church  is  con- 
structed illustrates  the  power  and  efficacy  of  Divine  grace.  The  palpable  fact  which 
meets  the  eye  is  that  while  grace  is  more  than  a  match  for  depravity  in  its  worst 
foims,  it  renews  and  elevates  all  the  nobler  traits  of  humanity;  and  in  either  case, 
without  disturbing  identity  of  character.  In  man's  hands  these  various  types  of 
character  m'ght  be  bent  or  broken  ;  they  could  never  be  renewed.  Changed  they 
might  be,  but  not  changed  without  sad  contortion  or  mutilation.  Too  often  has  the 
experiment  been  tried.  A  wonderful  achievement  it  is,  as  wonderful  in  power  as  in 
love,  that  of  imbuing  a  whole  community  with  a  new  life,  from  its  very  nature  per- 
vading, elevating,  and  controlling,  and  yet  so  incorporating  it  with  all  the  natural 
faculties  and  functions  as  to  aid  their  proper  working  and  their  true  development. 
We  cite  it  as  one  of  the  fruits  of  that  diversity  in  unity  which  enters  radically  into 
the  constitution  of  the  Church.  3.  It  is  still  more  to  our  purpose  to  refer  to  the 
wisdom,  perhaps  we  may  say  the  necessity,  of  this  principle,  in  view  of  the  mission 
assigned  to  the  Church.  It  is  not  for  man  to  say  that  anything  is  absolutely 
necessary  to  God  in  effecting  His  purposes  which  He  has  not  declared  to  be  so.  But 
we  may  speak  of  the  perfect  adaptation  of  the  principle  we  are  considering,  to  the 
ends  for  which  the  Church  was  established.  Not  to  name  other  topics,  the  Church 
is  ai'pointed  to  be,  under  God,  the  Teacher  and  Guide  of  the  world.  Its  business  is 
to  disciple  all  nations.  It  needs,  therefore,  labourers  of  every  sort  and  every  variety 
of  talent.  With  fewer  gifts  in  kind,  some  portions  of  its  work  would  be  neglected. 
If  it  is  to  carry  Christianity  through  the  globe,  it  mast  have  men  whose  cuustitu- 
tions  and  training  fit  them  for  the  various  climates  of  the  earth.  It  must  have  men 
of  iron  nerve  who  can  face  dangers.  It  must  have  men  of  the  requisite  scholarship 
to  grapple  with  strange  languages  and  preach  to  strauge  peoples.  In  its  home-field 
there  is  room  for  the  exercise  of  every  kind  of  gift.  A  scheme  so  vast  demands  a 
corresponding  variety  and  affluence  of  talents.  And  this  want  is  provided  for  in 
that  diversify  which,  as  we  have  seen,  enters  into  the  constituency  of  the  Church. 
There  are  ministers  of  every  Krade  of  culture  and  with  every  kind  of  gifts.  How, 
otherwise,  could  the  ministry  fulfil  its  design  ?  The  people  vary  ind.  finitely.  And 
who  can  survey  the  broad  acres  which  the  Church  is  cultivating,  without  rejoicing 
in  the  combination  of  gifts  employed  in  carrying  forward  the  work?  A  radical  part 
of  this  agency  lies  in  the  silent  power  of  example  ;  the  simple  routine  of  a  quiet  and 
upright  life.  Some  are  breaking  up  the  fallow  ground.  Some  are  sowing.  Some 
are  nurturing  the  precious  grain.  And  others  reaping  and  gathering  tlie  crop.  But 
all  are  servants  of  the  great  Taskmaster.  The  unfolding  of  such  a  subject  suggests 
the  practical  lessons  which  grow  out  of  it.  1.  One  is  a  lesson  of  instruction  and 
encouragement  in  respect  to  religious  experience.  We  have  seen  that  this  is  of  no 
uniform  type.  Certain  elements  are  essential,  but  beyond  these  it  jjartakes  of  a 
very  great  vnriety.  We  are  not,  th^n,  to  set  up  this  or  that  instance  of  conversion, 
nor  this  or  that  form  of  the  Christian  life,  as  the  standard  by  which  all  others  are 
to  be  tested.  God  has  His  own  methods  for  bringing  men  into  His  kin.i^dom.  The 
only  safe  or  authorised  mode  of  trying  our  state  is  to  come  to  the  law  and  the  testi- 
mony. 2.  As  unity  in  diversity  is  the  law  of  the  Church,  it  is  the  duty  of  all  its 
members  to  cherish  and  promote  the  spirit  of  unity.  The  apostle  points  out  the 
effect  of  a  schism  among  the  members  of  the  bodj',  as  illustrative  of  a  divisive 
spirit  among  the  members  of  the  Church.  The  divi'-ions  among  Christians  have 
always  been  the  o[)probrium  of  religion.  3.  As  diversity  in  unity  is  the  law  of  the 
Church,  let  us  try  to  learn  what  are  our  own  gifts,  and  to  fill  each  his  own  place. 
To  leain  what  this  is,  we  mast  ask  His  teaching  iu  prayer.  We  must  consider 
our  situation  and  ciicumstances.  We  must  endeavour  to  find  out  what  gifts 
we  have,  and  how  they  can  be  used  to  the  best  purpose.  4.  There  is  one  other 
lesson  which  I  would  gladly  enforce  if  the  tinm  would  permit,  viz.,  a  lesson 
of  charity  in  judging  of  the  Christianity  of  others.  {II.  A.  Jloardntan,  D.D.) 
Christ  thf  head,  tlte  Cliurch  His  body  : — The  appellation  "  Christ "  is  here  applied, 
not  to  the  person  of  our  Lord,  but  to  His  Church,  intimating  that  she  is  ideutified 
with  her  Saviour ;  and  being  given  to  the  Church  as  a  body,  indicates  the  harmony 


CHAP.  XII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  185 

and  union  of  all  iLs  parts.  I.  The  union  of  believers  with  Christ.  This  is 
here  represented  as  corresponding  with  that  which  subsists  betwixt  tlie  head  and 
the  members  of  the  body.  (Eph.  iv.  15,16;  Col.  i.  18).  This  remiuds  us  that 
Christ  is — 1.  The  same  nature  with  ourselves,  even  as  the  head  is  of  the  same 
nature  with  the  body  (Heb.  iv.  16,  17).  2.  The  governing  power  in  the  Church,  as 
the  head  is  of  the  body.  In  the  head  the  eyes  are  stationed  lilce  watchful  senti- 
nels;  tlie  ears  receiving  the  information  conveyed  by  sound;  the  organs  of  taste 
and  smell  discerning  things  that  differ,  and  contributing  eminently  both  to  our 
safety  and  to  our  enjoyment  ;  the  tongue,  the  interpreter  of  thought :  there,  in 
short,  is  the  countenance,  the  seat  of  beauty,  giving  to  man  an  impress  of  dignity 
not  found  in  any  of  the  inferior  animnls.  Now  the  superior  endowments  of  this 
capital  of  the  human  frame  afford  a  fit  emblem  of  the  honour  and  supremacy  of 
Him  who  is  constituted  our  spiritual  Head.  3.  The  vital  principle,  the  source  of 
life  and  feeling  to  the  whole  body.  Christ  our  Head,  in  whom  dwell  all  wisdom 
and  all  power,  imparts  and  sustains  the  principles  of  the  spiritual  life.  II.  Their 
KELATioN  TO  ONE  ANOTHER.  1.  The  members  of  the  body  are  many,  and  differ 
exceedii  gly,  and  yet  in  a  machine  so  complex  each  movement  and  circumvolution 
is  exactly  fitted  for  its  specific  end.  Of  the  many  bones,  e.r/.,  of  the  hand  or  foot, 
not  one  could  change  its  place  without  injury  to  the  limb  to  whicli  it  belongs.  In 
like  manner,  every  muscle,  nerve,  and  artery  has  its  own  place  and  office,  which 
no  other  could  supply.  So  in  the  mystical  body  of  Christ  there  are  many  mem- 
bers, with  each  its  own  office.  One  Christian  excels  in  the  intelligence  of  ihe  eye, 
another  in  the  discrimination  of  the  ear:  one  has  the  activity  and  adaptation  of 
the  band,  another  the  firmness  and  perseverance  of  the  foot :  one  has  tlie  enei'gy 
of  the  arm,  another  the  tenderness  of  the  bosom  (vers.  4-11).  2.  This  diversity 
occasions  a  dependence  of  the  several  members  upon  one  another  (vers.  21,  22). 
Let  no  believer,  however  mean,  be  discouraged  ;  let  no  believer,  however  eminent, 
presume  that  he  is  independent.  The  analogy  suggests  the  mutual  symiiathy  that 
should  subsist  among  believers  (ver.  26).  The  tenderness  each  should  clierish  our 
fellow-Christians,  the  zeal  each  should  render.  4.  This  mutual  co-operation  has 
the  happiest  results.  In  the  natural  boiiy,  when  the  eye  is  quick  to  discern,  the 
hand  diJigent  to  execute,  the  foot  steady  to  pursue,  the  ear  open  to  hear, 
and  the  tnngue  ready  to  return  a  right  answer,  the  combined  exertion  of  our 
powers  secures  ends  which  their  separate  and  unconnected  attempts  could  never 
have  attained.  In  like  manner  the  efforts  of  the  several  members  of  the  body  of 
Christ  are  then  successful  when  they  are  honestly  and  affectionately  cimbii  ed. 
{H.  Grey,  D.D.)  The  Church  the  hoihj  of  Christ: — I.  What  this  implies. 
That  its  members,  like  a  living  organism,  are — 1.  Animated  by  one  spirit  (ver.  13). 
2.  Mutually  dependent  (vers.  14-18).  3.  United  for  one  end  (vers.  10,  20).  II. 
What  it  eequikes  in  the  several  members.  1.  Humility  and  contentment  (vers. 
21-24).  2.  Unity  and  sympathy  (vers.  25,  26).  3.  Gratitude  and  lidelity  (vers. 
27-31).    {J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 

Vers.  13-20.  For  by  one  Spirit  we  are  all  baptized  into  one  body.  — 0/  vnioii 
with  Clirist: — Consider — I.  How  Christ's  redemption  is  APrLiEi)  to  a  sinner. 
By  uniting  the  sinner  to  Christ  (chap.  i.  30).  Men  must  not  think  to  stand  afar 
from  Christ,  but  must  unite  with  Christ,  and  so  partake  of  the  redemption  pur- 
chased by  Him,  as  the  poor  widow  drowned  in  debt,  by  marrying  the  rich  man,  is 
interested  in  his  substance.  II.  There  is  a  real  union  betwixt  Christ  and 
believers.  Consider — 1.  The  terms  by  which  this  union  is  expressed.  Christ  is 
said  to  be  in  believers  (Col.  i.  27  ;  Rom.  viii.  10),  and  they  in  Him  (1  Cor.  i.  30). 
He  is  said  to  dwell  in  them,  and  they  in  Him  (Jolm  vi.  54).  Ttiey  are  said  to  abide 
in  one  another  (John  xv.  4).  Believers  have  put  on  Christ  (Gal.  iii.  27).  They 
are  so  joined  as  to  be  one  Spirit  (I  Cor.  vi.  17).  2.  The  several  real  and  proper 
unions  which  it  is  resembled  to.  The  vine  and  the  lirancfes  (.John  xv.  5)  ;  the 
head  and  the  body  (Eph.  i.  22,  23) ;  meat  eaten  and  the  eater  (John  vi.  56) ;  yea, 
to  that  betwixt  Father  and  Christ  (John  xvii.  21).  3.  If  this  union  be  not  a  true 
and  real  one,  the  sacrament  of  the  supper  is  but  a  bare  sign,  and  not  a  seal.  III. 
What  is  that  union.  There  are  three  mysterious  unions  in  our  religion — the 
substantial  union  of  the  three  persons  in  one  Godhead  ;  the  personal  union  of  the 
Divine  and  human  natures  in  Jesus  Clirist ;  the  mystical  union  betwixt  Cluist  and 
believers,  which  is  that  wherein  Chiist  and  believeis  are  so  joined  that  'hey  are 
one  Spirit  and  one  mystical  body  (1  Cor.  vi.  17  and  text).  In  this  union  the  whole 
man  is  united  to   a  whole   Christ.     The  believing  soul  is  united  to  Him    (Eph- 


.186  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xii. 


iii.  17).  His  body  also  is  united  to  Him  (1  Cor.  vi.  19  ;  1  Thess  iv.  14).  They  are 
united  to  Him  in  His  Divine  nature  (Col.  i.  27),  and  in  His  human  nature  (Eph. 
V.  30),  and  so  through  the  Mediator  unto  God  (2  Cor.  vi.  IG).  IV.  Tqe  bonds  of 
THIS  UNION.  All  corporal  union  is  made  by  contact ;  but  Christ  is  in  heaven, 
and  we  on  earth,  and  so  we  can  have  no  such  union  with  Him  ;  and  if  we 
had,  what  would  it  profit?  (John  vi.  63.)  But  this  union  is  spiritual  (1  Cor.. 
vi.  17),  and  so  are  the  bonds  of  it.  And  they  are  two.  1.  The  SjDirit  on 
Christ's  part,  whereby  He  taketh  and  keepeth  hold  of  us  (1  John  iii.  ult. ).  And  the 
distance  betwixt  Christ  and  believers,  as  great  as  is  betwixt  heaven  and  earth, 
cannot  hinder  the  joining  of  our  souls  and  bodies  to  His,  since  the  Spiiit  is  an 
infinite  Spirit,  everywhere  present.  2.  Faith  on  the  believer's  part  (Kph.  iii.  17). 
Thereby  the  believer  apprehends,  takes,  and  keeps  hold  of  Christ.  It  is  by  that  we- 
receive  Christ  (John  i.  12),  come  unto  Him  (John  vi.  35),  and  feed  on  Him  (ver.  56). 
And  its  fitness  for  this.  V.  The  author  and  efficient  cause  op  this  union.  1. 
The  Spirit  of  Christ  comes  in  the  Word,  and  enters  into  the  heart  of  the  elect  sinner 
dead  in  sin  (Gal.  iii.  2).  2.  That  quickening  Spirit  works  faith  (Eph.  ii.  8 ;  Col. 
ii.  12).  Hereby  the  soul  lays  hold  on  Christ,  and  actually  unites  with  Him.  VI.  The. 
PROPER  I  lES  OF  this  UNION.  1.  A  true,  real,  and  proper  union,  not  a  mere  relative  one. 
2.  A  spiritual  union  (1  C  >r.  vi.  17).     3.  A  mysteiious  union  (Eph.  v.  32  ;  Col.  i.  27). 

4.  A  most  close  and  intimate   union   (1  Cor.  v.  17  ;  John  vi.   56  ;  Eph.  v.   30). 

5.  An  indissoluble  union  (John  x.  28,  29).  6.  It  is  the  leading,  comprehensive, 
fundamental  privilege  of  believers  (1  Cor.  iii.  23).  All  their  other  privileges  are 
derived  from  and  grafted  upon  this — their  justification,  adoption,  sanctification,. 
and  glorification.  {T.  Boston,  D.D.)  Unity  in  Clirist  the  secret  of  man's 
life:  "all  one"  by  faith  in  Christ,  the  o)ie  life  of  all: — There  is  a  joy 
familiar  to  you,  from  the  experience  of  daily  life,  which  may  assist  you  iu 
understanding  the  nnture  of  the  blessing  to  be  derived  from  the  Loril's  Supper.. 
All  of  you  have  felt  refreshed  by  meeting  a  friend.  The  very  sight  of  him  may 
have  done  you  good,  like  a  medicine.  If  you  have  ever  tasted  the  blessedness 
of  communion  with  a  Christian  friend,  you  will  understand  still  better  the  nature 
of  this  spiritual  food.  The  Ethiopian  eunuch  tasted  it  when  he  went  on  his  way 
rejoicing,  after  Philip  had  come  up  into  his  chariot,  and  conversed  with  him  abouti 
the  One  of  whom  he  was  reading.  Still  move  did  the  two  disciples  learn  the  lesson 
on  the  way  to  Emmaus,  where  they  met  with  Jesus,  although  in  thejiuise  of  another 
man,  a  fellow-traveller  on  the  road.  They  had  "meat  to  eat"  of  which  others 
knew  nothing,  while  He  was  thus  manifesting  Himself  to  them  in  another  way  than 
He  does  to  the  world.  They  and  He  were  becoming  one  in  spirit.  They  were 
growing  up  into  Him,  drinking  into  His  spirit.  Before  they  parted  they  had  become 
one.  I.  Elsewrere,  as  well  as  at  the  coji.munion  taisle,  communion  with  Christ 
MAKES  Christians  one,  and  so  feeds  their  spirits.  This  oneness  is  food  to  man's 
spirit,  and  is  to  be  found  in  Christ  filone,  so' that  it  is  the  secret  of  true  Christians. 
All  men  in  their  spirits  are  seeking  this  oneness,  more  or  less  conscious  that  it  is 
the  food  of  their  spirits,  the  secret  of  hnppiness  ;  in  fact,  eternal  life.  Without 
faith  in  Christ  this  oneness  is  not  attained  at  h11,  and  therefore  man's  spirit, 
starved,  stinted  of  its  appropriate  nourishment,  remains  nuFatisfied,  and  is  tormented 
with  unquenchable  longings,  aud  disappointment  in  all  the  broken  cisterns  to  which 
he  resoit-i.  Faith  it  is  that  gives  friendship  its  substance,  its  strength,  its  eternal 
life ;  that  alone  keeps  man  from  hungeiing  and  thirsting  after  some  better  nonrish- 
ment  suited  to  his  spirit's  immortal  nature  aud  eternal  longings.  Faith  alone  binds 
the  bond  of  perfectness  between  master  and  servant,  between  buyer  and  seller, 
between  ruler  and  subject,  between  the  citizens  of  one  community  or  the  members 
of  one  Christian  Church.  In  all  tliese,  aud  the  other  channels  of  intercourse  between 
man  and  man,  without  faith  love  is  a\vanting,or  is  impure  and  imperfect.  The  parties, 
therefore,  do  not  become  one.  For  love  is  unity.  Man's  delusion  is  to  expect  unity 
without  love,  and  love  without  faith.  Men  know  that  they  cannot  be  happy  till 
they  become  one;  but  they  believe  that  they  can  become  one  without  drinking  into 
Christ's  one  spirit,  without  being  rooted  and  grounded  in  the  love  of  God,  without 
becoming  one  as  the  Father  and  the  Son  are  one,  through  faith  beholding  in  the 
Son  the  revelation  of  the  Fatln-r,  claiming  sonship  in  Christ,  and,  therefore, 
brotherhood  in  the  Lord,  and  thus  coming  to  renonciliation  in  the  Piedeemer. 
Communion  with  Christ  alone  feeds  man's  spirit ;  and  it  is  food  in  proportion  to 
his  faith,  and  love,  or  charity.  It  is  food  by  bringing  him  in  spirit  and  in  truth 
into  God's  presence,  into  the  secret  of  the  Loid,  into  tbe  revelation  of  God's  grace 
and  glory  in  the  covenant,  and  in  the  kingdom,  into  conscious  fellowship  with  the 


CHAP.  XII.]  J,   CORINTHIANS.  187 


Pather,  and  with  His  Son  Jesus  Christ,  in  all  his  fellowship  with  his  fellow-Chris- 
tians and  fellow-men.     II.  Sacramental  communion  bkinos  "  all  into  one,"  and, 

BO  FAR  AS  it  DOES  SO,  IS  A  COMMUNIOM  FEAST — FAITH  DISCERNINO  THE  LoRD's  BODY  — 
BELIEVERS    THERE    AND     THUS    BECOMING    ONE    IN    SPIRIT.       1.    They  ftast    by  COming, 

through  Christ's  body  and  blood  discerned  by  faith,  all  to  one  Father.  Saw  you 
ever  the  child  that  was  long  away  from  home  in  the  moment  of  his  glad  return^ 
rushing  into  his  mother's  arms,  jjiessed  to  his  father's  bursting  heart,  welcomed 
back  into  the  bosom  of  the  family  that  have  been  counting  the  years  of  his  absenfe, 
and  watching  for  the  blessed  hour  when  they  shall  see  him  again,  one  of  their  circle 
in  everything?  Did  not  the  soldier  thus  returning,  from  this  or  that  batt'e-field 
and  long  campaign,  find  it  food  to  his  drooping  heart  to  feel  himself  one  again,  and 
still  one  as  esn,  or  more  than  ever,  with  those  whom  be  loved  and  left  behind 
sorrowing  ?  Still  more  did  not  the  prodigal,  received  back  to  forgiveness,  live  again, 
breathe  freely,  return  to  life  and  renew  his  strength,  as  he  heard  his  father's  lips 
once  more  pronounce,  *'  My  son,"  and  knew  that  there  was  a  father's  heart  still 
welcoming  him  upon  earth,  however  unworthy  he  had  proved  himself  by  his  mis- 
conduct? So  it  is  to  the  communicant  in  the  bread  and  wine  of  the  couimuuion. 
They  point  to  the  body  broken  for  him,  to  the  blood  of  the  new  covenant  shed  for 
the  remission  of  his  sins,  and  thus  to  the  bond  of  perfectness  between  him  and  the 
living  God  his  Father  in  heaven.  They  bring  him  near  consciously,  and  in  spirit, 
to  that  Father.  2.  They  feast  by  coming,  through  Christ's  body  and  blood 
discerned  by  faith,  to  one  another,  and  nearer  all  to  one  anotber.  It  is  a  family 
feast,  one  Father's  board  spread  for  all  the  members  of  His  one  family,  without 
respect  of  persons.  All  are  brethren,  who  are  to  sit  side  by  side  at  one  table,  eat 
one  common  bread,  and  drink  one  cup  of  communion,  the  cup  of  brotherhood. 
Without  the  spirit  of  brotherhood  we  have  nothing  better  than  the  shadow.  Our 
feast  is  a  counterfeit,  a  work  of  the  Hesh.  Nay,  it  is  worse,  a  substitution  of  the 
lust  of  the  flesh  for  the  love  of  the  Spirit.  "Little  children,  love  one  another." 
This  is  the  feast.  It  is  a  feast  of  love ;  and  those  only  wlio  love  one  another  in  the 
Lord  are  comiuunicants  here  ;  those  only  have  communion  in  the  body  and  blood. 
The  "new  commandment  "  is  the  law  of  the  communion  table,  the  bond  of  perfect- 
ness in  the  new  covenant.  3.  They  feast  by  coming  near,  or  nearer,  through  the 
body  and  blnod  discerned  by  faith,  to  that  kingdom  of  God  in  wliich  all  are  one.  In 
that  body  and  blood  we  are  to  discern  written  the  new  covenant  in  Christ,  the 
kingdom  of  God  and  of  heaven  brought  near,  so  near  that  we  can  claim  the  place 
of  citizens,  and  enter  into  a  blersed  fellowship  with  all,  whether  on  earth  or  in 
heaven,  who  bow  the  knee  to  Jesus,  and  call  Him  Lord,  taking  on  them  His  yoke. 
In  the  name  of  Jesus  we  are  to  receive  and  use  all,  cailin.;  nothing  "  common  or 
unclean,"  which  He  hath  sanctified.  This  is  the  liberty  of  the  chilJren  of  God, 
a  liberty  which  we  are  to  guard  with  the  utmost  jealous.\ ,  but  which  we  are  also  to 
beware  of  abusing.  Our  life  in  this  kingdom  is  to  be  a  life  of  God — heavenly,  holy, 
Christ-like — "not  of  the  world,  as  He  was  not  of  the  world."  {R.  Paisley.)  The 
sameness  of  relic/ion  : — We  often  read  of  water,  of  living  water,  of  drawing  water  out 
of  the  wells  of  salvation,  and  of  thirsting  and  drinking.  By  which  expressions  are 
undoubtedly  meant  the  inward  spirit  and  experience  of  religion,  with  the  many 
comforts  and  blessings  of  it.  Now,  says  the  apostle,  whatever  be  our  character  or 
circumstances  in  other  respects,  yet  having  felt  the  renewing  infiuence  of  the  grace 
of  God,  we  have  been  all  made  to  drink  into  one  spirit.  We  have  all  hungered  and 
thirsted  after  rijjhteousness,  have  all  been  led  to  the  same  fountain-head,  and  have 
all,  in  our  different  proportion,  drank  of  the  same  Divine  blessings  which  freely  and 
largely  flow  thence.  I.  As  to  that  divehsity  of  natural  and  external  circum- 
stances WHICH  .attends  the  PROFESSION  OF  RELIGION,  it  will  be  iiecessary  to  take  a 
general  view  of  it,  m  order  to  set  the  contrast  m  the  stronger  light,  and  especially  as 
the  apostle  himself  directs  us  to  it  in  the  very  text.  1.  It  is  obvious  to  every  one, 
that  there  is  a  wide  difference  among  those  who  fear  Gid,  in  respect  of  their  out- 
tvard  and  worldly  circumstances,  lleligion  is  not  confined  to  any  particular  nation 
or  age  of  the  world,  nor  to  any  particular  rank  or  condition  of  men.  2.  There  is  a 
remarkable  difference  among  good  men  as  to  their  intellectual  capacities  and  their 
natural  teujpers.  These,  be  they  what  they  may,  are  not  the  tests  by  which  the 
charHcters  of  the  di-ciples  of  Jesus  are  to  I'e  decisively  determined.  3.  The  differ- 
ence mny  be  considerable,  in  resfiect  of  the  i^articular  dispensntions,  forms,  and 
means  of  religion  they  may  be  under.  The  same  degree  of  light  hath  not  been 
enjoyed,  nor  hath  the  same  mode  of  worship  obtained  from  the  beginning.  4.  The 
diversity  there  is  of  spiritual  gifts  infers  no  real  diversity  as  to  religion  itself.     5. 


183  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xii. 

There  may  be,  and  often  is,  a  difference  as  to  the  degree  of  religion,  thoup-h  it  still 
retains  the  same  nature.  There  are,  in  the  langunge  of  Scripture,  bubes,  young 
men,  and  fathers  in  Christ;  some  weak,  and  others  strung  in  faith.     II.  Wherein 

CONSISTS  THAT  UNIFOR'MITY  IN  REl.IOION  WHICH  OUR  TEXT  JIENTIDNS  AS  A  PECULIAR  COM- 
MENDATION OF  ITS  REAL  AND  INTRINSIC  EXCRr.LKNCY.  1.  By  tlia  saniencss  of  religion 
is  here  mt^ant,  the  exact  similarity  there  is  in  the  spirit  and  temper  of  all  good  men. 
As  the  several  indixiduals  of  mankind  are  all  made  of  one  blood,  and  a-s  the  same 
faculty  of  reason  in  a  greater  or  less  degree  is  common  to  each  of  the  human 
species,  so  what  the  Scripture  calls  "  a  new  creature  "  is  one  Divine  or  spiritual 
nature  common  to  all  the  people  of  God.  2.  The  main  expressions  of  inward 
religion  may  be  eomiirised  in  this  short  account  of  it.  It  first  I  umbles  the  heart  of 
man — then  inspires  it  with  Divine  hopes  and  joys — by  this  means  refines  and 
sanctifies  it — and  so  makes  it  capable  of  a  pui'e  love  and  exalted  friends *iip.  And 
in  respect  of  each  of  ihese  particiitirs  there  is  an  exact  unifoiraiiy,  at  least  in  a 
degree,  among  all  the  x^eople  of  God.  They  have  all  been  made  to  drink  into  the 
same  spirit.  Ilf.  The  grounds  or  reasons  of  this  uniforjiity.  1.  They  are  all 
of  the  same  natuie.  It  is  acknowledged  indeed  that  there  is  a  strength  of  genius, 
and  a  softness  of  natural  temper  in  some,  which  renders  them  more  amiable  than 
others;  yet  the  principal  outlines  of  human  apostacy  are  much  the  same  in  all. 
This  inference  is  likewise  with  the  f^ame  force  of  reason  to  be  drawn  from  a  con- 
templation— 2.  Of  the  one  grand  source  or  ori,L,'in  whence  religion  is  derived.  It  is 
from  above,  the  offspring  of  God,  and  the  genuine  fiuit  of  the  influence  and  opera- 
tion of  His  Spirit.  Now  as  no  fountain  can  send  forth  at  tlie  same  pla'-e  sweet 
water  and  bitter,  so  we  may  be  very  suie  that  what  is  the  effect  of  a  Divine  influ- 
ence on  the  souls  of  men  must  be  of  thu  same  pure  and  s.nriiu.l  nature  and 
tendency.  And  for  the  like  reason  we  may  safely  conclude  in  the  general,  that 
however  the  circumstances  of  j^artietilar  persons  may  in  some  resp  ds  differ,  yet 
the  manner  of  the  Divine  operation  on  the  hearts  of  men  is  mu"h  tiie  same. 
Beligion  will  begin  then  in  our  humiliation,  and  advance  through  various  di^greps 
of  sanctific;ition,  till  it  rises  to  a  perfection  of  happiness  and  glory  in  the  heavenly 
world.  3.  The  great  and  important  ends  which  religion  pioposes,  ideavly  evince 
the  simplicity  and  uniforniily  of  it.  The  giory  of  God,  our  own  ha]ipiness,  and 
the  welfare  of  society  are  acknowledged  to  be  the  principal  objects  of  this  great 
concern.  [S.  Steniiett,  D.D.)  Cliristicins  infirnfiiiirj  into  Cltrii^t: — I.  What  is 
this  body  of  Chi'vUt,  which  the  Spirit  of  God  d'  th  ingraft  His  people  into? 
First,  it  is  the  Chur  h  of  God  ;  as  the  apostle  saith  (Col.  i.  18),  "  He  is  the  head  of 
the  body,  the  Church."'  So  that  the  Church  is  the  body  of  Christ,  that  same  peculiar 
company  of  men  and  women,  as  St.  Peter  calls  them,  "  You  are  a  chosen  generation, 
a  peculiar  people,  a  royal  priesthood  "  (1  Pet.  ii.  9).  The  author  to  the  Hebrews  calls 
them,  "  the  assembly  of  the  firstborn  "  (Heb.  xii.  23).  Now  I  call  this  invisible,  for 
though  their  pnsons,  and  courses,  and  manner  of  life  be  seen  and  known,  and  they 
may  be  known  who  they  are,  yet  all  of  them  were  never  known,  nor  ever  will  be  (2 
Tim.  ii.  89).  Secondly,  it  is  such  a  company  as  is  gathered  out  of  all  nations  under 
heaven  ;  as  St.  John  speaks  (Piev,  vii.  9).  Thirdly,  this  same  godly  company  are 
a  company  of  predestinated  men  unto  eternal  hfe.  Fourthly,  it  is  such  a  godly 
company  as  is  gathered  by  the  Word  of  God.  The  Word  of  God  gathers  them 
together.  Fifthly,  they  are  such  a  company  as  are  made  one,  knit  and  combined 
together  in  Christ,  though  themselves  are  never  so  many,  and  never  so  remote  and 
distant  from  one  another.  It  is  true,  you  are  diff'erent  among  yourselves  ;  one  is  a 
master,  another  a  servant,  one  is  a  rich  man,  another  a  poor  man — so  there  is  a 
difference ;  but  they  are  all  one  in  Christ  Jesns,  they  have  all  one  and  the  selfsame 
faith,  they  have  all  one  and  the  selfsame  Father,  there  is  but  one  Lord,  and  one 
Spirit  to  quicken  and  unite  thfm  all.  Thus  we  see  what  this  body  of  Christ  is. 
II.  Now  in  the  second  place,  what  is  it  to  be  put  into  this  body  ;  to  be  implanted 
into  it?  I  answer — First,  it  is  a  part  of  a  man's  ingrafting  into  Christ;  for  the 
ingrafting  of  a  man  into  C'urist,  and  into  the  body  of  Christ,  ave  not  two  things,  but 
God  doth  them  by  one  and  the  selfsame  act,  as  you  may  sen  (Rom.  xii.  5).  It  must 
needs  be  the  same  work,  for  the  putting  a  man  into  Christ  in  whom  are  the  other 
members,  that  very  act  makes  a  man  to  have  fellowship  with  Christ,  together  with 
all  the  other  members.  Secondly,  this  likewise  is  done  by  faith.  Then  in  the 
third  place,  it  makes  a  man  have  a  common  life  with  all  the  rest  of  the  members  of 
Jesus  Christ.  As  you  may  see  (Col.  ii.  4),  "  When  Christ  which  is  our  life  shall 
appear,  ye  also  shall  appear  with  Him  in  glory."  Christ  who  is  our  life.  In  the 
fourth  place,  it  makes  a  man  to  be  of  one  consent  with  all  the  j)eople  of  God  every- 


CHAP.  XII.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  189 


where  (Zeph.  iii.  9).  Fifthly,  all  this  is  for  mutual  profit,  and  help,  and  care,  and 
sympathy.  III.  In  the  third  place  we  must  show,  that  the  Spirit  doth  this,  and 
WHY  Hii  DOTH  it.  First,  that  it  is  the  Spirit  that  unites  and  tieth  all  these 
members  together.  This  makes  them  hang  together,  therefore  it  is  called 
the  "unity  of  the  Spirit"  (Eph.  iv.  3).  Now  the  reason  why  the  Spirit 
of  God  doth  do  this,  is  —  first,  because  none  else  besides  the  Spirit  is 
able  to  do  it.  For  by  nature  we  are  woefully  different  from  the  body  of 
Christ,  we  are  of  another  nature,  of  another  kind,  of  another  life ;  nay,  we  are 
contrary  to  it.  Secondly,  there  is  none  so  fit  as  the  Spirit  of  God  to  do  it. 
Thirdly,  how  the  Spirit  of  God  doth  this ;  and  that  is  two  ways,  as  the  Scripture 
reveals  to  us.  The  one  is,  by  being  one  and  the  same  Spirit  in  all  the  members  of 
Christ.  He  comes  into  them,  and  dwells  in  them  as  one  and  the  selfsame  Spirit, 
and  so  makes  up  this  union.  The  same  Spiiit  that  was  in  Paul  «  as  in  Peter ;  and 
so  all  the  rest  of  the  members  of  Christ  one  aud  the  selfsame  Spirit  is  in  them 
(1  Cor.  iii.  IG).  Secondly,  the  Spirit  doth  this  by  uniting  and  tying  a  knot  between 
these  members.  He  doth  unite  them,  and  make  them  hang  together  in  one;  He 
makes  them  to  be  of  one  heart.  IV.  Now  I  come  to  the  uses.  First,  is  it  so  that 
the  Spirit  of  God  doth  unite  all  the  saints  of  God  together  in  one  body  ?  Then 
here  we  may  see  the  reason  of  the  diiference  of  men  in  the  world.  Some  com- 
panies have  a  different  spirit ;  but  all  the  saints  of  God  have  the  Spirit  of  God 
which  makes  them  hang  together.  Secondly,  doth  the  Spirit  of  G^d  join  all  the 
saints  of  God  together  in  one  body  ?  Then  that  which  God  hath  joined  together, 
let  no  man  put  asunder.  Thirdly,  here  we  may  see  how  to  try  our  acquaintance, 
and  whether  the  company  we  join  ourselves  unto  be  good  or  no.  If  our 
company  be  right,  the  Spirit  of  God  tieth  the  knot.  The  last  use  is  this  :  is  it  so 
that  the  Spirit  of  God  joins  all  the  saints  of  God  together  in  one  body?  Then  we 
should  have  a  fellow-leeliug  with  all  the  members  of  Christ.  But  how  shall  we 
have  a  fellow-feeling  with  the  members  of  Chiist?  Firt^t,  we  must  inform  ourselves 
as  much  as  we  can  concerning  one  anolher.  Secondly,  we  should  visit  our  fellow- 
members.  As  it  is  said  of  Moses,  though  he  were  a  great  courtier  in  Pharaoh's 
court,  yet  he  went  out  to  look  upon  his  brethren's  burdens  (Exod.  ii.  11).  Thirdly, 
we  should  lay  to  heait  their  afflictioDS.  ( IF.  Feniter.)  The  true  unity  of  the  Church  : 
— I.  Is  Spiritdal.  1.  In  its  nature.  2.  In  its  origin.  II.  Surmounts  all  earthly 
DISTINCTIONS.  1.  Of  nationality.  2.  Denominationalism.  3.  Of  condition. 
(J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  For  tlie  body  is  not  one  member,  but  many. — Human  con- 
nections:— Bound  about  God  is  a  universe  of  connections.  Nothing  stands  single. 
The  economy  of  universal  administration  is  that  of  borrowing  and  lending.  The 
root  takes  from  the  soil ;  the  soil  from  the  sun.  There  is  no  bulk  of  matter  so 
large  that  it  can  stand  alone  by  itself.  The  gi-eat  worlds  all  lean  on  each  other. 
Systems  depend  on  systems,  as  worlds  on  worlds.  They  are  "  all  parts  of  one 
stupendous  whole."  From  inanimate  nature  turn  to  human  society.  Here  we 
find  the  same  law.  1.  We  can  trace  it  in  all  the  stages  of  man's  development. 
What  is  there  so  dependent  as  a  babe  ?  What  do  we  not  all  owe  to  mother-love 
aud  father-love?  How  many  eyes  saw  for  us,  how  many  feet  ran  for  us,  &«.,  when 
we  were  young.  Furthermore,  when  the  babe  has  become  a  man  he  is  more 
dependent  than  ever.  For  man  is  dependent  to  the  extent  of  his  wants  ;  aud  as  a 
man  grows,  a  great  crop  of  wants  grow  up  with  him.  2.  Indeed,  society  is  only  a 
partneiship,  and  is  more  a  confession  of  weakness  than  a  proof  of  strength. 
Society  is  only  a  pohte  system  of  borrowing  and  lending.  We  talk  of  men  being 
the  architects  of  their  own  fortunes,  of  being  self-made.  But  how?  Because  in 
them  was  the  power  of  absorption.  Their  minds  had  in  them  that  imperial 
quality  which  enabled  them  to  tax  the  sources  of  all  knowledge,  and  compel  the 
universe  of  mat»ter  and  of  thought  to  bring  tribute  to  the  feet  of  their  growth. 
But  plant  any  man  or  woman  rightly,  i.e.,  give  them  favourable  connections,  and 
they  will  grow.  Plant  them  wrongly,  and  their  growth  will  be  checked.  3. 
Consider  the  favourable  connections  in  which  men  to-day,  in  this  country,  stand. 
Formerly,  everything  was  against  the  individual.  Government,  religion,  wealth 
robbed  him.  Indeed,  the  old  civilisations  weie  organised  robbery  of  the  indi- 
vidual. To-day.  government  is  nothing,  religion  is  nothing,  unless  they  assist 
man.  The  world,  in  all  its  combinations  of  law  and  love,  has  become  his  friend. 
If  he  is  ignorant,  it  helps  him  to  knowledge  ;  if  rude,  it  teaches  him  the  lesson  of 
refinement ;  if  poor,  it  pushes  him  up  toward  riches  ;  if  blind,  it  teaches  him  to 
see  with  his  lingers  ;  if  duml),  it  instructs  his  lips  to  talk  without  sound.  The 
whole  drift  of  modern  civilisation  is  to  make  man's  connections  benevolent  and 


190  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xa. 

helpful.  Under  such  conditions  it  is  a  shame  for  one  not  to  succeed.  Knowledge, 
■virtue,  manliness,  and  womanliness,  piety,  to-day  are  possible  to  all.  4.  It  is 
through  the  connections  which  the  civilisation  of  his  age  weaves  around  a  maa 
that  he  ministers  benevolem^e  unto  men,  rather  than  by  any  self-created  channels. 
There  is  a  conscious  benevolence,  but  what  a  man  gives  by  his  hand  is  notliing 
compared  to  what  he  gives  through  his  activities.  It  is  only  as  we  apprehend  how 
closely  we  are  connected  with  people  that  we  become  s,»  mpathetic  with  them. 
Love  demands  contact,  and  is  grown  by  it.  If  you  desire  to  love  men,  go  among 
them.  Why  do  men  call  so  fine  an  instiument  as  human  nature  base,  when  it  is 
only  loosened  in  its  stiiugs  and  weakened  in  its  frame?  Cannot  the  frame  be 
rebraced  and  the  strings  strung  anew  ?  And  when  this  has  been  done,  and  the 
hand  of  the  Maker  sweeps  it  again,  and  the  latent  harmonies  roll  forth,  shall  it  be 
base  then?  And  it  is  only  as  you  live  in  cl  ise  connection  with  men  tnat  you  can 
ever  know  how  splendid  they  are  in  their  possibilities.  Christ  took  human  nature 
in  order  to  know  it.  He  loved  men  because  they  were  brethren.  And  so  to-day 
the  saviours  of  men  are  the  lovers  of  men.  To  help  a  man's  body  out  of  a  slough 
you  must  take  hold  of  it  with  your  hands  and  lift,  and  so  to  help  a  man's  mind 
and  soul  up  your  mind  and  soul  must  take  hold  of  his  and  lift.  5.  Tuere  is  no 
other  way  by  which  society  can  ba  held  together  save  by  the  principle  of  mutual 
benevolence,  miuistering  to  mutual  dependence.  The  strong  must  bear  the  infir- 
mities of  the  weak,  or  the  universal  order  of  creation  would  become  chaotic  and 
dest  uctive.  For  the  universe  is  peopled  with  weakness.  Look  at  the  natural 
kingdom.  How  few  are  the  oaks,  and  how  many  are  the  rushes  !  Yet  there  is  not 
a  spire  of  grass,  a  bird,  nor  a  worm,  so  low  and  weak  as  to  be  beneath  God's  care. 
And  if  tliH  strong  should  ignore  the  principle  of  love,  the  world  would  be  swept 
backward  and  downward  to  the  depth  in  which  it  lay  when  Christianity  was  born. 
Not  only,  however,  do  the  stiong  help  the  weak,  but  the  weak  help  the  strong. 
The  grasses  gi\e  protection  to  the  ro  ts  of  the  oak.  And  so,  through  all  the  orders 
of  life,  from  trees  to  men,  you  will  find  that  the  humble  tilings  are  needed  by  the 
proud  and  tlie  loftv.  The  millionaire  needs  the  tailor  more  than  the  tailor  needs 
the  millionaire.  The  branches  of  the  tree  need  the  soil  more  than  the  soil  needs 
the  branches.  Therefore,  if  any  of  you  who  are  poor,  and  have  few  talents, 
have  been  saying.  We  are  of  no  use;  if  we  only  had  talents,  or  money,  or  know- 
ledge, or  power,  we  might  help  people  ;  say  so  no  more,  for  however  small  and 
weak  and  lacking,  you  are  not  lacking,  you  are  not  useless.  If  you  cannot  be 
great  trees,  be  grasses  only,  and  know  that  grasses  beautify  the  world.  G.  The 
author  of  our  religion,  above  all  other  men,  recognised  the  responsibility  of  His 
human  connections.  He  lived  amid  the  weakness  of  the  world,  and  did  what  He 
could  to  make  it  strength.  The  people  were  not  slow  to  apprehend  His  goodness 
nor  to  love  Him  for  it.  They  followed  Him  in  throngs  ;  and  as  they  followed  He 
continued  to  do  them  good.  All  this  was  done  for  our  example.  {W.  H.  H. 
Murray.) 

Vers.  20-25.  But  now  are  they  many  members,  yet  but  one  body. — The  memhers 
of  the  body  of  Christ: — I.  Thkir  unity.  "One  body."  II.  Their  diversity. 
The  eye,  the  hand,  &c.  III.  Mutual  dependence.  IV.  Adiiikable  cojipexsations. 
V.  Common  interests.  (J.  Lijth,  D.D.)  A  livinrj  unity  requires — 1.  Ihe  com- 
bination of  many  members.  2.  The  harmonious  arrangement  of  pirts,  3.  The 
inspiration  of  one  Spirit.  4.  Co-operation  for  one  common  end.  (Ibid.)  Help- 
ful co-operation: — "I  stood  awhile  ago  and  looked  at  a  drinking-fountain.  A 
marble  an^el,  beautifully  sculptured,  stood  pointing  to  heaven.  Then  came  (lolished 
granite  inscribed  with  gilt  letters,  and  massive  slabs  of  stone.  But  I  notic(  d  that 
the  water  came  through  a  small  brass  pipe,  and  the  people  drank  from  an  iron  cup 
attach'  d  to  an  iron  chain.  And  the  marble  angel  pointing  heavenwards  would  have 
done  nobody  any  good  but  for  the  brass  pipe  and  iron  cup.  Think  if  the  pipe  had 
said,  'If  they  do  not  make  me  of  gold  I  will  not  belong  to  the  thing  '  ;  or  if  the 
cup  had  said,  '  I  must  be  of  silver,  or  I  shall  be  ashamed  to  be  there  at  all.'  No, 
I  thought  I  heard  the  music  of  the  three — common  water,  common  cup,  <'ommon 
pipe — all  co-operating  to  furnish  the  refreshing  draught."  Every  one  should  keep 
to  his  oirn  Ktatio)i : — In  the  ringing  of  bells,  whilst  every  one  keeps  his  due  time  and 
order,  what  a  sweet  and  harmonio  s  sound  they  make  1  All  the  neighbour  villages 
are  cheere  1  with  the  sound  of  them.  But  when  once  they  jar  and  check  each  other, 
either  jangling  toge  her  or  striking  preposterously,  how  harsh  and  unpleasins^;  is 
that  noise!    So  that  as  we  testify  our  public  rejoicing  by  an  orderly  and  well-tuned 


CHAP.  XII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  191 


peal,  so,  when  we  would  signify  the  town  is  on  fire,  we  ring  the  bells  backward  in 
a  confused  manner.  It  is  just  thus  in  Church  and  comojonwealth  :  when  every  one 
knows  bis  station  and  keeps  their  due  ranks,  there  is  a  melodious  concert  of  comfort 
and  contentment ;  but  when  either  states  or  persons  will  be  clashing  with  each 
other,  the  discord  is  grievous  and  extremely  prejudicial.  (-/.  Spencer.)  Mutual 
support : — "  It  was  only  the  other  day,"  s»ys  one,  "  I  noticed  a  lofty  hill,  crowned 
■with  a  sturdy  and  thick  wood.  '  How  often,'  I  reflected,  '  have  the  proud  tops  of 
those  trees  shaken  off  "the  injuring  tempest!"  In  many  a  storm  they  have 
battled  nobly,  and  conquered.  Had  these  trees  been  scattered  over  tlie  surrounding 
hills,  each  separate  and  alone,  these  noble  branches  would  long  ere  this  have  been 
broken  and  peeled  by  the  pelting  of  many  a  storm.  The  rushing  wind  would  have 
long  iigo  twisted  and  split  these  exposed  trunks,  or  would  htive  cariied  them  down 
into  the  valley  beneath.  At  present  they  shelter  and  sustain  each  other,  bidding 
defiance  to  the  tempest.'  I  noted  down  the  thought,  as  illustrative  of  the  benefits 
of  church-fellowship."  And  the  eye  cannot  say  to  the  hand,  I  have  no  need  of 
thee. — The  least  of  service  to  the  greatest : — 1.  It  is  beautiful  to  oijseive  what  close 
links  there  are  between  the  several  classes  in  a  connnunity,  and  how  the  br<  aking 
of  any  one  would  go  far  towards  dislocating  the  whole  social  system.  "  The  king 
himself  is  served  by  the  field" ;  the  throne  is  connected  with  the  soil ;  the  illustrious 
occupant  of  the  one  depends  on  the  tiller  of  the  other.  It  is  literally  from  the 
field  that  all  the  arts  and  comforts  of  civilised  life  spring.  When  you  look  on  a 
community,  with  its  nobles,  merchants,  preachers,  men  of  science,  artificers,  you 
may  perhaps  think  little  of  the  peasantry.  Yet  you  have  only  to  suppose  the 
peasantry  ceasing  from  their  labours,  and  there  would  be  an  almost  iuimediate 
arrest  on  the  businesses  and  enjoyments  of  our  stirring  community.  A  land 
covered  with  palaces,  but  without  cottages  would  be  a  land  of  costly  sepulchres. 
Does  not  this  effectually  expose  the  preposterousness  of  that  piide  which  would 
put  a  slight  on  the  j^oor.  2.  But  let  us  consider  this  great  fact  under  a  somewhat 
more  practical  point  of  view.  Suppose  the  case  of  a  community  from  which  was 
banished  everything  like  want,  so  that,  though  gradations  of  rank  might  still  exist, 
there  should  be  everywhere  sufficiency.  This  is  a  state  of  things  for  which  many 
philanthropists  ardently  long,  as  the  very  perfection  of  the  social  system.  But  we 
know  not  how  to  join  in  this  longing  for  universal  affluence.  The  country  in  which 
it  would  be  hardest  to  make  progress  in  genuine  piety  would  be  that  in  whose 
habitations  none  were  to  be  found  requiring  the  succours  of  Christian  benevolence. 
One  of  the  most  fatal  tendencies  in  our  nature  is  the  tendency  to  selfishness. 
And  who  can  fail  to  see  that  the  having  amongst  us  objects  which  continually 
appeal  to  our  compassions  is  wonderfully  adapted  to  the  counteracting  that 
tendency?  Why,  then,  should  we  hesitate  to  pronounce  the  poor  among  the 
benefactors  of  a  community  ?  We  can  imauine  such  a  revolution  in  the  circum- 
stances of  this  country,  that  many  of  its  public  structures  might  no  longer  be 
required  for  the  purposes  to  which  they  were  originally  devoted.  But  it  would  not 
be  the  downfall  of  our  warehouses,  museums,  or  arsenals  which  could  fill  us  with 
apprehension  for  the  spiritual  well-being  of  our  people.  Whilst  you  swept  away 
buildings  which  belong  to  us  as  a  rich,  intelligent,  and  powerful  people,  we  should 
feel  that  though  there  might  be  much  in  the  removal  that  was  humiliating,  there 
might  be  much  also  that  was  profitable.  But  when  you  come  to  remove  strm-tiires 
reared  for  the  shelter  of  the  miserable,  we  should  feel  the  removal  an  indication 
that  henceforward  there  would  be  little  appeal  to  the  sympathies  of  the  heart,  and 
we  could  therefore  anticipate  the  rapid  growth  of  selfisimess.  It  may  be  perfectly 
true  that  the  indigent  cannot  do  without  the  benevolent,  but  it  is  equally  true  that 
the  benevolent  cannot  do  without  the  indigent.  W^liensoever  you  give  ear  to  a  tale 
of  distress,  and  you  contribute  according  to  your  ability  to  the  relief  of  the  sup- 
pliant, you  receive  as  well  as  confer  benefit.  The  afflicted  one  keeps,  by  his  appeal, 
the  charities  of  your  nature  from  growing  stagnant,  and  thus  may  be  said  to 
requite  the  obligation.  3.  It  were  easy  to  enlarge  ou  the  mter  uselessness  of  orders 
or  individuals  who  may  be  likened  to  the  more  honourable  members  of  the  body, 
were  there  not  other  orders  or  individuals  who  may  with  equal  fitness  he  likened 
to  the  less  honouiable.  Of  what  avail,  for  example,  would  l^e  the  courage  and 
skill  of  a  general  without  troops  to  obey  his  commands  ?  of  what  the  ingenuity  of 
the  engineers,  were  there  no  labourers  to  employ  his  inventions?  of  what  the 
■wisdom  of  the  legislator,  without  functionaries  to  carry  his  rueasures  into  force? 
If  Christian  ministers  be  likened  to  the  eye  or  the  head,  'hey  depend  on  the  very 
lowest  of  the  people  as  they  prosecute  their  honourable  and  difficult  employment. 


192  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xii. 

For  if  the  presence  of  suffering  be  tlie  great  antagonist  to  selfishness,  the  poor  of 
his  flock  must  be  a  clergyman's  best  auxiliaries,  seeing  that  they  help  to  keep  the 
rest  from  that  moral  hardness  which  would  make  them  impervious  to  his  most 
earnest  remonstrance.  {II.  Melvlll,  B.D.)  Mutual  dependence  : — I.  Is  a  general 
LAW.  1.  In  nature.  2.  In  the  world.  3.  In  the  Chuich.  II.  Arises  out  of — 1. 
Individual  imperfection.  2.  Difference  of  position  and  function.  III.  Is  divinely 
ORDAINED.  1.  For  the  common  benefit.  2.  By  promoting  mutual — (1)  Love.  (2) 
Support.      (3)  Unity.     (J.  LyUi,  D.D.)  Working  men,  hear! — So  thoroughly  is 

society  balanced,  that  if  you  harm  one  part  you  harm  all.  The  man  who  lives  in 
a  mansion  and  the  man  who  breaks  cobble-stones  affect  each  other's  misfortune  or 
prosperity.  Dives  cannot  kick  Lazarus  without  hurting  his  own  foot.  They  who 
tlirow  Shadrach  into  the  furuace  get  their  own  faces  scorched.  What  if  the  eye 
should  say,  "  I  am  overseer  of  this  physical  anatomy  ;  I  despise  those  miserable 
fingers  !  "  "What  if  the  hand  should  say,  "  I  am  a  first-class  workman  ;  if  there  is 
anything  I  hate  it  is  the  eye,  which  dues  nothing  but  look  !  "  Oh,  silly  eye. !  how 
sijon  you  would  die  if  you  had  not  the  hand  to  suppoi't  and  defend  you  !  Oh,  silly 
hand,  you  would  be  a  mere  fiimbler  in  the  darkness  if  it  were  not  for  the  eye. 
ilelief  will  come  to  the  working  classes  of  this  country  through — I.  A  better 
UNDERSTANDING  BETWEEN  CAPITAL  AND  LABOUR.  Their  interests  are  identical ;  what 
helps  one  helps  buth ;  what  injures  one  injures  both.  Show  me  any  point  in  the 
world's  history  where  capital  was  prospered  and  labour  oppressed,  or  where  labour 
was  prospered  and  capital  oppressed.  Show  me  any  point  in  the  last  fifty  years 
where  capital  was  getting  large  accumulation,  and  I  will  show  you  the  point  at 
which  labour  was  getting  large  wages.  Show  me  a  time  when  labour  was  getting 
large  wages,  and  I  will  show  you  the  point  where  capital  was  getting  large 
profits.  Every  speech  that  capital  makes  against  labour  or  that  labour  makes 
against  capital  is  an  adjournment  of  our  national  prosperity.  When  capital 
maligns  labour  it  is  the  eve  cursing  the  hand.  Wljen  labour  maligns  capital,  it 
is  the  hand  cursing  the  eye.  The  .distance  between  capital  and  labour  is  only 
a  step,  and  the  labourers  there  will  cross  over  and  become  capitalists,  and  the 
capitalists  will  cross  over  and  become  labom-ers.  W^ould  to  God  they  v>'ould  shake 
hands  while  they  are  crossing.  The  combatants  in  the  great  war  are  chiefly 
men  who  have  never  been  obliged  to  toil,  and  men  who  could  get  labour  but 
will  not  have  it.  I  want  it  understood  that  the  labourers  are  the  hitrhest  style 
of  capitalists.  Their  investment  is  their  muscles,  nerves,  bones,  skill,  health. 
II.  Co-operative  associ.^tion.  That  plan  by  which  labourers  become  their  own 
capitalists.  Thomas  Brassey  declared,  "  Co-operation  is  the  oi  e  and  only 
solution  of  the  labour  question ;  it  is  the  sole  path  by  which  the  labouring 
classes,  as  a  whole,  will  ever  get  their  share  in  the  rewards  and  honours  of  our 
advanced  civilisation."  Thomas  Hughes,  Lord  Derby,  John  Stuart  Mill,  men 
who  gave  half  their  lifetime  to  the  study  of  this  question,  all  favour  co-operntive 
association.  Our  working  people  will  be  wiser  after  a  while,  and  the  money  they 
fling  away  on  hurtful  indulgences  they  will  put  into  co-operative  associations,  and 
they  will  become  capitalists.  HI.  More  providence  and  forecast.  "  Oh,"  you 
say,  "  you  ought  not  to  talk  that  way  in  the  hard  times."  I  tell  you  hard  times 
are  not  always  to  stay.  I  know  woiking  men  who  are  in  a  perfect  fidget  till  they 
have  got  rid  of  their  last  dollar.  A  young  man  worked  hard  to  earn  bis  six  or 
seven  hundred  dollars  yearly.  Marriage  day  came.  The  bride  had  inherited  five 
hundred  dollars,  and  spent  every  dollar  on  the  wedding  dress.  Then  the  young 
man  took  extra  evening  employment,  which  almost  extinguished  his  eyesight ! 
Why?  To  lay  up  something  for  a  rainy  day  ?  No  ;  that  he  might  get  a  hundred 
and  fifty  dollars  to  get  his  wife  a  sealskin  mantle.  A  minister  told  me,  in  Iowa, 
that  his  church  and  the  neighbourhood  had  been  impoverished  by  the  fact  that 
they  put  mortgages  on  their  farms  in  order  to  send  their  families  to  the  Philadelphia 
Centennial.  It  was  not  respectable  not  to  go  to  the  Centennial.  Now,  between 
such  fools  and  pauperism  there  is  a  very  short  step.  Easy  and  hard  times  change. 
In  times  of  peace  prepare  for  war.  I  have  no  sympathy  for  skinflint  saving,  but  I 
plead  for  Christian  providence.  Some  people  think  it  is  mean  to  turn  the  gas  low 
when  they  go  out  of  the  parlour.  Saving  is  mean  or  magnificent  according  as  it 
is    for   your-elf    or   for   others.     IV.    More  thorough  discovery  on  the  part  of 

employers    that     it    is    BEST    FOR    THEM     TO     LET     THEIR    EMPLOYES    KNOW    JUST    HOW 

M.ATTERs  STAND.  I  kncw  a  manufacturer  who  employed  more  than  a  thousand 
hands.  I  said  to  him,  "  Do  you  ever  have  any  trouble  with  your  workmen?  Do 
you  have  any  strikes  ?  "     "  ISIo.     Every  little  while  I  call  my  employes  together, 


CHAP,  xii.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  193 

and  I  say,  '  What  you  turned  out  this  year  isn't  as  much  as  we  got  last  year.  I 
can't  afford  to  pay  you  as  much  as  I  did.  Now,  you  know  I  put  all  my  means 
into  this  business.  What  do  you  think  ought  to  be  my  percentage,  and  what  wages 
ought  I  to  pay  you  ?  Come,  let  us  feettle  this.'  And  we  are  always  unanimous. 
When  we  suffer,  we  all  suffer  together.  When  we  advance,  we  all  advance  together, 
and  my  men  would  die  for  me."  Biit  when  a  man  goes  among  his  employes  with 
a  superciliuus  air,  and  drives  up  to  his  factory  as  though  he  were  the  autocrat  of 
the  universe,  he  will  have  strikes,  and  will  see  at  the  end  that  he  has  made  an 
awful  mistake.  V.  The  religious  rectification  of  the  countby.  Labour  is 
appreciated  and  rewarded  just  in  proportion  as  a  country  is  Chiistianised.  Why 
is  our  smallest  coin  a  penny,  while  in  China  it  takes  six  or  a  dozen  pieces  to  make 
one  penny?  Show  me  a  community  that  is  inhdel,  and  I  will  show  you  a  com- 
munity where  wages  are  small.  Show  me  a  community  that  is  thoroughly  Chris- 
tiauised,  and  I  will  show  you  a  community  where  wages  are  compuratively  large. 
Our  religion  is  a  democratic  religion.  It  makes  the  owner  of  the  mill  understand 
he  is  a  brother  to  all  the  operatives  in  that  mill.  I  do  not  care  how  much 
money  you  have,  you  have  not  enough  money  to  buy  your  way  through  the  gnte  of 
heaven.  I  do  not  care  how  poor  you  are,  if  you  have  the  grace  of  God  in  your 
heart  no  one  can  keep  jou  out.  The  religion  of  Christ  came  to  rectify  all  the 
wrongs  of  the  world,  and  it  will  yet  settle  this  question  between  labour  and  capital. 
The  hard  hand  of  the  wheel  and  the  soft  hand  of  the  counting-room  will  clasp  each 
ether  in  congratulation  yet.  The  hard  hand  will  say,  "  I  ploughed  the  desert  into 
a  garden  ";  the  soft  hand  will  reply,  "  I  furnished  the  seed."  Tlie  one  hand  will 
say,  "  I  thrashed  the  mountains  "  ;  the  other  will  say,  "  I  paid  for  the  flail."  The 
one  hand  will  say,  "  I  hammered  the  spear  into  a  pruning-huok  "  ;  the  other  hand 
will  answer,  "I  signed  the  treaty  of  peace  that  made  that  possible."  Tben  capital 
and  labour  will  lie  down  together,  and  there  will  be  nothing  to  hurt  or  destroy  in 
all  God's  holy  mount,  for  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it!  {T.  I)e  llltt- 
Talmage,  D.D.)  Nay,  mucli  more  are  those  .members  of  the  hody  which  seem 
to  be  more  feeble  necessary. — Foiver  of  the  feeble  : — I.  The  gifts  of  the  first 
RANK.  They  are  of  two  kinds.  1.  Supernatural — such  as,  speaking  in  unknown 
tongues,  curing  diseases,  prophesying.  2.  Natui-al,  relating  to — (1)  The  heart ; 
(2)  The  Intellect.  II.  The  feebler  gifts.  1.  Humility.  2.  Fulelity.  3.  Purity 
of  manners  and  of  thought.  4.  Truth.  5.  Contentment.  6.  Activity  in  God's 
cause.  7.  Charity — that  is,  true  love.  III.  The  fact  that  these  obscure  gifts 
ARE  THE  most  NECESSARY  to — 1.  The  individual  who  possesses  them.  2.  The 
Church.  (A.  Vinet,  D.D.)  The  vses  of  the  feeble: — I.  The  true  Church  has 
MEMBERS  SEEMINGLY  FEEBLE.  1.  There  are  those  who  are  destitute  of  that  to 
which  the  world  attaches  the  idea  of  power.  (1)  Great  wealth  is  power  in  the 
world's  estimation,  and  he  that  is  without  it  is  feeble.  But  the  most  perfect 
excellence  appeared  in  the  form  of  worldly  destitution  ;  hence  Christ  seemed  a  root 
out  of  a  dry  ground,  without  form  or  comeliness.  High  ofhcialism  is  power  in  the 
estimation  of  the  world.  It  sees  power  in  the  general  marshalling  his  armies,  in 
the  statesman  guidmg  the  destinies  of  his  country,  etc.  But  one  long  life  of 
goodness  down  in  tbe  region  of  obscurity,  where  many  Christians  live,  passes 
away  unnoticed,  (2)  Great  mental  endowments  are  power  in  the  est'mation  of  the 
world.  But  the  majority  of  Christians  are  not  often  blessed  with  such  endow- 
ments, and  therefore,  however  good,  they  seem  feeble.  2.  There  are  those  who 
work  out  their  mission  in  a  quiet  and  unostentatious  spirit.  All  who  have  most 
of  the  spirit  of  their  Master  thus  work.  The  most  powerful  things  are  the  most 
silent.  Gravitation  wheels  suns  and  systems  about  immensity  without  noise. 
II.  The  sefmingly  feeble  members  are  vitally  necessary.  It  is  important  to 
have  men  of  great  endowments  in  the  Church.  Such  men  have  often  rendered 
signal  service  in  tlie  cause  of  truth.  But  the  Church  may  get  on  without  great 
endowments,  but  dies  without  piety.  Great  piety  is  more  "  necessary"  than  great 
endowments — 1.  To  the  individual.  The  hitter  not  only  often  exist  apart  from 
the  former,  but  often  militate  against  it  by  fosteiing  pride.  Genius  often  lights  a 
toich  that  leads  the  soul  astray.  2.  To  the  Cl.urch.  It  is  not  the  reasonings  of 
the  phiL  sopher,  the  eloquence  of  the  orator,  that  have  done  most  for  the  Cburch, 
but  tbe  holy  lives,  the  earnest  prayers,  of  humble  saints.  3.  To  the  world. 
What  does  society  require  most  at  the  present  moment?  More  science,  laws, 
inveutions,  openinjzs  for  trade  ?  No;  but  more  embodied  piety.  This  is  the  salt 
which  can  alone  prevent  its  corruption,  the  light  that  can  reveal  to  all  the  path  of 
peace.  Conclusion  :  Our  subject — 1.  Shows  that  the  conditions  of  our  highest 
VOL.    II.  13 


194  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xii. 


interests  are  available  to  all.  If  our  well-being  and  influence  for  good  depended 
upon  great  talents,  the  case  of  the  millions  would  be  hope'ess,  but  consisting  as  it 
does  in  simple  goodness,  all  can  attain  the  happiness  they  seek.  2.  Urges  us  to 
recognise  and  reverence  goodness  wherever  seen.  See  it  in  the  humblest  cottage, 
and  in  a  frame  worn  and  wan  with  poverty  ;  and,  seeing  it,  honour  it  as  a  ray  from 
«'  The  Father  of  Lights."  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  A  -place  for  the  feeblest ;— At  the 
outbreak  of  the  American  Civil  War  there  were  many  sturdy  men  who  were 
thorouglily  heart  and  soul  with  the  movement  for  the  liberation  of  the  slaves. 
Many  of  tiiem  were  small  farmers  wbo  could  hardly  be  spared  from  their  farms  ; 
but  still,  where  there's  a  will  there's  a  way.  One  day  about  this  time  a  gentleman 
was  going  along  the  highway,  and  he  saw  a  small  boy  at  the  plough.  He  asked 
how  it  was  that  he  was  obliged  to  do  work  that  was  not  the  work  of  a  lad  at  all, 
but  of  a  grown  man.  "  Well,  you  see,  sir,"  said  the  lad,  "  father's  fighting,  and 
mother's  praying,  and  I'm  working.  We're  all  doing  what  we  can  !  "  The  feeble 
are  veccssarij : — Feeble  souls  are  like  those  tracks  of  land  which  have  neither  depth 
nor  richness  of  soil,  yet,  however  arid,  produce  something  to  serve  the  world.  The 
sandy  and  stormy  deserts  of  the  Cape  are  covered  with  heath  of  every  line  and 
form,  to  beautify  the  scMie  and  to  charm  the  traveller's  eye.  Even  so  the  feeblest 
soul  can  display  some  phase  of  feeling  and  character  that  shall  add  a  beauty  to  its 
sphere.  The  world  wanrs  the  heath  as  well  as  the  oak,  and  the  genial  heavens 
shine  alike  on  both.     "Even  the  most  feeble  are  necessary."     (D.  Ihonias,  D.D.) 

Vers.  '2-5,  26.  There  should  be  no  schism  in  the  body. — Schism  may  he  destriic- 
tii'e : — A  screw  in  the  crank  of  an  engine  of  an  express  train  at  full  speed  thus 
addressed  itself  to  the  surrounding  machinery:  "  I'm  very  small,  but  exceedingly 
impoitant.  Without  m'^  the  whole  fabric  would  come  to  grief.  Upon  me  depends 
the  successful  working  of  the  whole  engine.  Now  just  >ou  observe  how  important 
I  am  !  "  and  then  without  more  ado  the  screw  leapt  from  its  socket,  involsiiig  the 
whole  train  in  hopeless  wreckage.     (Great  Thoutr  is.)         Seliism  : — I.  Its  nature. 

1.  Its  rise — a  division  of  opinion.  In  this  stage  it  existed  among  the  hearers  of 
the  Saviour  concerning  the  Me-viahship  of  Jesus  ;  arid  Jolin  informs  us  "  so  there 
was  a  division  [schism]  among  the  peojile  because  of  Him."  While  it  proceeds  no 
furtlipr,  it  becomes  the  obvious  duty  of  believers  to  endeavour  by  eai'nest  prayer, 
diligent  investigation  of  the  Scriptures,  and  calm  friendly  conference,  to  come  to 
the  same  mind.  2.  Its  p'ogress — a  breach  of  friendship,  either  by  unkind  words 
or  unkind  trentment,  by  partial  or  obvious  neglect,  from  a  want  of  love  to  the 
brethren  and  cncern  for  tlie'r  interest  and  welfare,  or  from  regarding  any  member 
or  members  of  the  Church  as  inferior,  useless,  or  unnecessary.  3.  Its  results. 
(1)  It  divides  the  interests  of  the  people  of  God.  (2)  It  destroys  the  spirit  of 
prayer.  (3)  It  exposes  reliL'ion  to  contempt.  (4)  It  brings  misery  or  ruin  to  the 
individual  who  excites  or  promotes  it.  II.  The  duty  of  believers  as  respects 
IT.     1.  By  exercising  great  care  in  the  admission  of  persons  into  the  Church. 

2.  By  watchfulness  over  our  own  tempm-s — guarding  against  every  proud,  haughty 
look,  word,  or  action.  We  must  cultivate  mutual  forbearance,  and  impartiality 
in  our  treatment  of,  and  expressions  concerning,  our  fellow-members,  and  the 
ministers  of  the  gosp  1.  We  must  be  very  watchful  over  the  tongue.  Many 
schisms  have  commenced  in  an  unguarded  trifling  word.  We  must  shnn  all  false 
doctrines.  3.  By  submission  to  Chuich  discipline.  4.  By  prayer.  Communion 
with  God  conforms  us  to  His  image,  and  that  image  is  love.  (J.  Hicks.)  Of 
schism : — In  general  there  can  be  no  such  thing  as  schism  but  in  cases  where 
there  is  an  obligation  to  unity  and  communion;  so  that  in  order  to  define  the 
nature  of  it  we  must  find  out  some  centie  of  union  which  is  common  to  all  Chris- 
tians. 1.  As  for  uniformity  of  sentiment  in  matters  of  speculative  belief,  that  can 
never  be  the  common  centre  of  Christian  unity,  because  it  is  in  the  nature  of  things 
impossible.  For  in  order  to  this,  all  mankind  must  have  exactly  the  same  strength 
of  underst'inding,  the  same  advantages,  the  same  manner  of  education,  the  same 
passions,  prejudices,  and  interests.  Besides,  if  all  Christians  must  concur  in  the 
same  way  of  thinking  about  every  controversy  in  religion,  whose  opinion  shall  pre- 
vail, and  be  made  the  public  standard?  Are  the  majority  to  decide  for  us?  How 
shall  we  determine,  without  collecting  the  vote  of  every  individual,  who  are  the 
majority  ?  Are  the  majority  always  in  the  right  ?  Or  must  we,  for  the  sake  of 
uniformity,  profess  (believe  we  cannot)  against  truth  and  reason?  Will  not  this 
make  all  religion  dissimulation  and  hypocrisy  ?  But  if  uniformity  of  opinion  cannot 
be  secured  in  this  way,  shall  we  not  be  governed  by  the  most  learned  and  pious 


<;hap.  XII.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  193 


■Christians,  who  are  neither  influenced  by  irregular  passion,  nor  swayeil  hy  criminal 
prejudice  ?  I  answer,  that  who  are  really  the  most  learned  and  pious  will  be  matter 
of  endless  dispute,  and  can  never  be  certainly  fixed.  They  are  fallible  as  well  as 
others  ;  and  have  frequently  maintained  such  principles  as  derogate  highly  from 
the  honour  of  God,  and  are  of  vast  disservice  to  religion.  It  appears  then  from 
what  has  been  said,  that  to  endeavour  to  bring  all  mankind  to  the  same  sentiments 
in  matters  of  religious  controversy  is  an  absurd,  romantic  scheme,  and  represents 
religion  as  nothing  else  but  outward  formality,  artifice,  and  craft.  Tlje  same  may 
be  said  of  uniformity  in  external  modes  of  worsliip  and  discipline,  viz.,  that  this, 
likewise,  cannot  be  a  necessary  term  of  Christian  communion.  For  it  will  be 
altogether  as  difficnlt  to  determine  who  are  to  settle  externnl  rites  and  ceremonies, 
and  forms  of  Church-government,  as  articles  of  speculative  belief.  Besides,  the 
lawfulness,  expediency,  or  Divine  authority  of  any  particular  form  is  as  mnch  a 
matter  of  i^rivate  opinion  as  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  doctrinal  propositions;  and 
therefore  it  is  as  natural  to  expect  a  variety  of  sentiments  about  it.  Let  me  a^ld 
to  this,  that  a  variety  of  sentiments  in  religion,  while  moderation  and  mutual 
charity  are  maintained,  can  do  no  hurt,  whereas  an  attempt  to  introduce  public 
amiformity  has  been  a  constant  source  of  schisms  in  the  Church,  and  will  infallibly 
keep  alive  a  spirit  of  animosity.  And  finally,  when  there  is  a  difference  of 
'Opinions,  and  a  variety  of  outward  forms,  this  is  just  such  a  state  of  things  as  a 
•wise  man  would  expect,  if  all  were  honest  and  impartial  inquirers ;  whereas  if  one 
set  of  prineiijles  and  the  same  scheme  of  worship  were  universally  to  prevail,  it 
would  not  lode  like  human  nature;  it  would  have  nothing  of  the  appearance  of 
sincerity;  and,  conseqnently,  must  lead  an  indifferent  spectator  to  conclude  that 
religion  was  all  complaisance,  courtliness,  and  carnal  policy,  and  did  not  spring 
from  a  conviction  of  the  understanding,  or  a  free  delibera'e  ch'dce.  2.  I  would 
make  a  few  observations,  relating  to  the  nature  and  guilt  of  schism,  and  so  con- 
clude. (1)  It  appears,  ti-at  let  there  be  ever  so  many  difl'ei'ences  amongst  Chris- 
tians, as  long  as  mutual  charity  is  preserved  there  cannot  be  the  guilt  of  schism. 
A  man  that  holds  the  common  faith  of  the  gospel,  leads  a  holy  life,  behaves  peace- 
ably, and  has  charity  for  all,  notwithstanding  the  little  vaiieties  by  which  they  are 
distinguished  from  each  other,  does  not  differ  from  any  church  so  far  as  it  is  formed 
■on  the  essential  principles  of  Christianity  ;  but  only  takes  that  liberty  of  judging 
for  himself  which  reasmi  allows  and  revelation  confirms  to  him  ;  a  liberty  to  differ 
from  fallible  exjiositions  of  Sctipture,  from  civil  constitutions,  or  ecelesiastii'al 
ordinances  of  rather  less  authority.  (2)  Differences  among  Christians  are  not  only 
innocent  while  unity  of  affection  is  jDreserved,  but  there  are  many  cases  in  which 
a  separation  from  a  particular  church  is  absolutely  necessary.  (3)  None  who  are 
truly  honest,  who  are  not  swayed  by  irregular  passions,  or  vicious  prejudices,  but, 
upon  a  deliberate  impartial  inquiry,  according  to  their  capacity  and  advantages, 
think  themselves  obliged,  in  con-science,  to  dissent  fiom  their  brethren;  no  such 
persons  as  these,  I  say,  can  possildy  incur  the  guilt  of  schism.  For  this  would  be 
to  make  honesty  itself  a  crime  ;  and  at  the  same  time  that  we  suppose  it  a  man's 
'duty  to  act  according  to  the  light  and  directions  of  his  conscience,  to  reproach  and 
condemn  him  for  it.  And  shall  not  we  treat  involuntary  errors  with  candour 
and  humanity?      (James   Foster.)  And  whether   one  member  suffer,   all  the 

members  suffer  with  it. — The  suffenufis  of  all  in  the  sufferinas  of  one:  — 
Look  upon  this — I.  As  a  fact.  1.  The  sufferings  of  the  unfortunate  in  a 
community  affect  each.  The  sufferings  of  the  merchant  whose  business  breaks 
■down,  of  the  agriculturist  whose  crops  fail,  of  the  operatives  who  are  thrown 
out  of  work,  affect  more  or  less  each  individual  in  the  Slate.  2.  The  suffer- 
ings of  the  criminals  in  a  community  affect  each.  There  is  the  swindler 
whose  schemes,  after  enriching  his  own  coffers,  break  down,  spreading  disasters 
far  and  wide.  There  is  the  murderer,  whether  by  assassination  or  by  war,  his 
suiJerings,  for  sutTerings  he  has,  affect  all  in  some  way  or  other.  The  record  of  the 
assassin's  life,  trial,  and  execution,  brings  a  pang  into  many  a  heart.  So  also 
wars  bring  suffering,  in  some  form  or  other,  to  every  individual  in  a  community. 
3.  The  sufleiings  of  the  non-industrious  in  a  community  affect  each.  There  are 
tens  of  thousands  in  every  civilised  community^  who  lounge  tlieir  existence  away  in 
drawing-rooms,  clubs,  and  taverns  :  they  consume  all  and  produce  nothing.  They 
sigh  out  their  miserable  existence  under  the  weight  of  ennut  :  each  one  of  the  C' im- 
munity is  more  or  less  affected.  The  common  stock  of  human  subsistence  depends 
Ti  on  labour,  and  is  limited  :  they  therefore  who  partake  of  that  stock  without 
labour  are  social  thieves.     These  sufferings  may  be  in  body,  through  deprivation  of 


196  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xii. 


some  comfort,  or  necessary,  or  in  mind.  (1)  By  a  painful  sense  of  responsibility. 
(2)  By  a  painful  sense  of  di-gust  for  the  race.  Who  can  see  human  nature 
swindling,  murdering,  idling,  debauching,  without  feeling  ashamed  of  the  race  to 
which  he  belougs.  II.  As  a  duty.  We  are  commanded  to  "  bear  each  other's 
burdens,"  to  "weep  with  those  that  weep,"  <fec.,  in  fact,  to  follow  Christ.  And 
what  was  Christ  ?  The  incarnation  of  a  Divine  philanihropy.  Now,  the  duty  of 
every  man  is,  as  a  member  of  the  race,  to  suli'er  by  practical  philanthropy  with 
and  for  a  suffering  world :  so  suffer  for  it  as  to  pray,  labour  and  die  for  it,  if  need 
be.  Conclusion — 1.  Do  not  be  too  severe  on  criminnls.  The  vilest  criminal  that 
England  ever  produced  has  been  nursed  and  matured  by  the  conjoint  influences  of 
each  man's  life  :  each  tueuiber  of  the  State  has  contributed  a  something  to  produce 
it.  2.  Live  to  purify  the  moral  atmosphere  of  the  world.  One  day  we  believe  the 
atmosphere  of  the  world  wiU  be  so  pure  with  holiness  that  human  snakes  and 
poisonous  reptiles  will  no  longer  live  therein.  Contribute  your  part  to  this  end, 
send  inio  it  the  noblest  thoughts,  to  circuLite  and  breathe  into  it  the  purest 
influences  of  love  and  light.       [B.   Thomaa,  D.D.)  The,  unity  of  the  hodij  in 

suffeviiui : — As  w'hen  by  chance  a  thorn  is  planted  in  the  heel,  all  the  body 
manifests  a  fellow-feeling  ;  back,  hands,  stomach,  and  thighs  are  drawn  together, 
hands  like  attendants  or  esquiies  approach  the  wounded  part  and  proceed  to 
extract  the  i^aiuful  fixture  ;  head  stoops,  eyes  look  sad,  the  brow  is  delved  with 
parallels  of  solicitude.      (Cliri/xostnm.)  The  ■uniti/  of  the  />ody  in  suffering  : — 

When  one's  finger  is  hurt  such  is  the  fellow-feeling  which  spreads  along  the  body 
to  the  soul  until  it  reaches  the  ruling  piinciple,  that,  the  whole  condoling  with  tho 
part  afflicted,  the  man  says  not  "my  finger  is  in  pain,"  but  I  have  a  pain  in  my 
finger.  [Plato.)  Meiiibcrnliij)  of  a  body  : — 1.  Was  there  ever  a  truer  remark 
than  that  of  the  text?  A  panicle  of  dust  in  the  eye,  an  irritable  nerve  in  one 
tooth,  a  sprain  in  the  foot,  and  what  an  instant  cessation  of  the  enjoyment  of  life ! 
What  does  a  day's  pleasure  become  when  an  aching  head  or  an  inflamed  eye  has 
to  be  can  ied  about  through  it?  On  the  otiier  liand,  when  one  member  is  specially 
honoured,  all  the  members  rejoice  with  it.  Imagine  that  a  particle  of  dust  has 
lurked  m  the  eye  for  a  niglit  and  a  day  ;  now  imagine  it  removed,  and  wiiat  a 
positive  sense  of  pleasure  is  diffused  through  the  whole  frame  !  Every  other  part 
is  found  as  it  were  to  congratulate  the  r.  lieved  part.  Such  is  the  truth  from  which 
St.  Paul  here  draws  his  spiritual  lesson.  2.  It  is  not  good  f<n-  man  to  be  alone  ;  in 
one  sense  it  is  not  possible.  A  poor,  stauteJ  character  would  that  be  which  was 
wholly  self-contained.  That  is  what  fallen  human  nature  runs  to  ;  but  it  does  not 
love  it  when  it  sees  it  in  a  living  example.  No  one  thinks  selfish  a  term  of  praise. 
And  God,  well  knowing  thi^  tendency,  has  interposed  at  every  turn  to  save  us  all 
from  it.  I.  He  has  skt  us  in  families,  and  thk  tendency  of  family  life  is  to 
COUNTERACT  SELFISHNESS.  What  do  we  scc  to  be  the  effects  of  the  practical  want  of 
a  home?  But  alas,  we  may  live  in  exemplary.  Christian  homes,  and  not  learn  the 
lesson  of  memb  rship  of  a  body;  not  learn  the  debt  of  gratitude  which  the  eye 
owes  to  the  hand  for  obeying  its  indication,  and  the  head  to  the  foot  for  executing 
its  mandate  ;  not  learn  how  a  son  should  deport  himself  towards  a  mother,  or  a 
brother  deal  with  a  sister.     II.  That  which,  foe  one  paht  of  the  human  family, 

C^N    BE    DONE    only   BY    THE    HOME,    IS    DOSE    FOR    ANOTHER   BY   VARIOUS    SUBSIDIARIES. 

What  e.~pecially  qualifies  a  public  school  to  be  of  use  in  forming  the  character  is 
the  fact  that  it  is  a  body,  an  organised  whole  made  up  of  parts,  each  one  of  which  has 
its  own  definite  work,  which  yet  affects  and  is  affected  by  every  other.  I  know 
nothing  SO  satisfactory,  in  connection  witli  school  gam^-s,  as  their  influence  in 
leading  boys  to  value  skill  or  strength  not  so  much  as  a  means  of  individual 
success  or  re|)utation,  but  as  a  means  of  security  for  the  success  or  reputation  of 
the  school.  It  remains  to  be  seen  whether  the  school  feeling  will  bear  good  fruit 
hereafter.  And  that  it  may  do  so,  let  us  pray  that  school  patriotism  may  be 
carrieii  into  its  le_'itimate  field.  If,  e.g.,  you  see  one  of  your  schoolfellows  sin, 
suffer  with  hiin  ;  give  yourself  no  rest  till  you  have  done  something  to  save  a  soul 
from  death.  II f.  Patriotism  is  one  of  the  ways  in  which  the  feeling  of  collec- 
tive LIFE  OUGHT  TO  BE  SHOWN.  God  has  de-igued  our  country  to  be  the  highest 
object  but  one  of  our  thoughts  and  cares  on  ea'th.  IV.  But  we  are  the  body  of 
Christ,  and  members  in'  particular.  See  that  you  Lve  together  as  those  who  are 
so.  Let  no  act  ever  be  done  inconsistent  with  the  proper  working  of  the  various 
parts  and  members  of  the  whole  Christian  body.  Never  say  to  yourselves,  I  am 
too  insignificant  to  be  of  any  account  amongst  Christ's  members,  nor  to  another, 
we  have  no  need  of  thee.     Chribt's  object  in  having  an  earthly  body  is  that  we  may 


I.   CORINTHIANS.  107 


help  one  another.  Ee  not  selfish  m  your  religion  :  heaven  is  not  so  won.  The 
individual  life  will  be  healthy  and  vigorous  in  pioportion  as  it  expands  and  diffuses 
itself  towards  those  around.  Let  not  Christian  life  be  the  beauty  of  a  few  exotics 
pcenting  a  rooln ;  but  rather  that  of  a  garden  of  the  Lord,  watered,  tended,  and 
bearing  fruit;  in  the  full  light,  in  the  free  air;  having  in  the  midst  of  us  t^at  tree 
of  life,  the  leaves  of  which  are  not  for  the  privilege  of  the  few,  but  for  the  healins 
of  the  nations.       (Dean   Vaurilia}!.)  The  benevolence  of  the   (jospel : — I.    God 

BESTOWS    upon    US    NOTHING    JIERELY    ON    OUR    OWN    ACCOUNT    BUT    FOR    THE     GOOD    CF 

OTHERS.  We  should  all  sympathise  in  the  sorrows,  and  rejoice  in  the  joys,  of  each 
other,  as  if  they  were  our  own.  This  principle  is  not  peculiar  to  the  Church.  It 
enters  into  the  very  idea  of  a  society,  that  we  are  reciprdcally  affected  by  what- 
ever affects  every  member.  1.  Take,  e.f/.,  the  family.  Let  but  the  youngest  and 
the  least  considerable  suffer,  and  what  a  shade  of  sadness  is  spread  over  the  whole 
household!  When  the  family  grows  up  to  matniity,  it  might,  at  first,  seem  as 
though  the  chain  which  once  bound  them  so  closely  together  had  been  severed. 
The  thought  of  each  other  rarely  breaks  in  upon  the  pressing  cares  of  each  one's 
daily  occupation.  But  let  any  of  these  brothers  attain  to  high  distinction,  and 
what  a  lustre  is  at  once  reflected  on  all  who  bears  his  name!  Or  let  a  member 
disgrace  himself  by  criiue,  and  how  mournfully  the  disgrace  settles  down  upon  his 
kindred.  2.  But  we  are  members  of  a  larger  society.  Our  happiness  in  the  com- 
munity is  subject  to  the  same  law.  If  our  fellow-men  around  us  suffer,  we  shall 
suffer  "also,  unless  we  do  all  in  our  power  to  relieve  them.  Let  a  deadly  epidemic 
alight  upon  some  neglected  neighbourhood,  and  it  will  be  wafted  to  the  dwellings  of 
the  opulent,  and  the  pestilence  will  utter  in  solemn  accents  the  words  of  the  text. 
3.  Take  a  more  extensive  field.  How  often  has  the  form  of  social  organisation 
been  constructed  for  the  sole  benefit  of  the  few,  rather  than  the  whole  !  You  will 
see  the  face  of  the  land  here  and  there  beautified  by  the  mansions  of  the  proprietors, 
while  the  million,  the  children  of  ignorance  and  vice,  herd  together  in  cabins  like 
brutes.  All  this  gees  on  quietly,  it  may  be,  for  generations.  At  last,  some  famine 
or  some  giant  act  of  oppression  maddens  the  multitude  to  frenzy,  and  all  at  once 
the  fabric  of  government  which  ages  had  cemented  crumbles  into  dust.  4.  Or  we 
may  observe  the  relations  of  a  single  individual  to  a  whole  nation.  Suppose  that 
a  Government  lays  its  hand  unrighteously  upon  the  smallest  portion  of  the 
property  of  a  citizen.  It  may  be,  for  instnnce,  the  ship-money  of  Hampden,  or  the 
trifling  tax  on  tea  that  inaugurated  the  American  revolution.  At  once  the  shook 
is  felt  by  the  remotest  citizen  of  the  realm.  One  member  has  suffered,  and  all  the 
members  have  suffered  with  it.  By  inflicting  injustice  on  a  single  citizen,  the 
Government  has  outraged  the  moral  sentiment  of  the  nation.  And  it  must  retrace 
its  steps;  or  else,  unless  the  love  of  liberty  be  wholly  extinguished,  a  revolution 
must  ensue.  II.  If  God  has  made  our  hat-piness  to  depend  upon  the  course  of 
LIFE  HERE  INDICATED,  He  HAS  DONE  SO  TO  TEACH  US  His  WILL.  A  moral  necessity  is 
thus  laid  upon  us.  We  cannot  live  to  ourselves  without  doing  violence  to  our 
conscience  and  incurring  the  consequences  of  disobedience  to  God.  But,  in  a 
matter  of  so  much  importance,  we  are  not  left  to  the  unassisted  li^ht  of  natural 
religion.  The  Bible  teaclies  us  this  doctrine  on  every  page.  Our  Father  imposes 
upon  us  no  duty  of  which  He  has  not  set  us  the  example.  W^e  aie  to  imitate  His 
boundless  beneficence,  by  using  the  talents  of  every  kind  which  He  has  committed 
to  us  for  the  good  of  others.  We  are  to  imitate  His  self-sacrificing  love  in  the  plan 
of  redemption,  by  cuTymg  the  pood  news  of  salvation  to  the  lost.  Such  was  the 
Spirit  of  Christ,  and  we  are  told  that  unless  we  have  the  Spirit  of  Christ  we  arc  none 
of  His.  God  is  love,  and  he  thnt  dwelleth  in  love  dwelleth  in  God,  and  God  in  him. 
He  that  loveth  not  knoweth  not  God  ;  for  God  is  love.  Conclusion  :  We  are  spending 
our  probation  under  the  most  solemn  of  all  possible  conditions.  The  choice  between 
two  modes  of  life  is  presented  to  every  one  of  us.  Will  you  hve  unto  yourself,  and 
lose  your  own  soul,  or  will  you  live  unto  God,  and  enter  into  the  rest  that 
remnineth?  Now  is  the  time  for  decision.  (J.  Wayland,  D.D.)  Soaal  respon- 
sibiUt)/  .-—St.  Paul  was  thinking  mainly  of  moral,  not  of  physical,  sufferings.  The 
Church  at  Corinth  had  been  guilty  of  grave  crimes  which  ought,  he  contends,  to  be 
felt  as  a  misfortune  weighing  upon  alh  Does  our  estimate  of  crime  correspond  to 
the  spirit  of  these  "nords?  It  is  notorious  that  our  interest  in  a  great  trial  is  just 
that  we  feel  in  a  novel.  It  is  very  interesting,  very  horrible,  but  we  have  nothing 
to  do  with  it.  W^e  observe  the  criminal  as  if  he  were  a  wild  creature  in  the 
Zoological  Gardens;  and  then  when  he  is  convicted  and  sentenced  we  say,  "  lie  is 
rightly  served ;  let  us  have  no  maudlin  sentimentality ;  society  is  well  rid  of  the 


198  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xii^ 

rascal."  And  so  we  shut  up  our  novel  and  fall  back  on  tamer  subjects — our  every^ 
day  duties — till  some  new  excitement  presents  itself.  Now  is  this  justifiable. 
Christian  or  warranted  by  the  facts  ?  Note — I.  The  principles  which  ought  tO' 
GOVEKN  A  Christian's  thought  in  his  estuiate  of  a  great  criminal  case.  1.  Every 
criminal  is,  to  a  certain  extent,  the  product  of  the  spirit  of  the  society  in  which  he 
has  passed  his  life.  Just  as  certain  marshy  districts  are  favourable  to  the  growth 
of  noxious  insects  or  diseases,  so  particular  moodi:  of  popular  feeling  are  favourable- 
to  the  growth  of  crime.  Of  course  no  criminal  is  altogether  the  helpless  uncon- 
scious victim  of  his  circumstances.  A  man's  free  will  is  never  necessarily  enslaved 
by  anything  external  to  himself.  Yet  most  of  us  are  largely  governed  by  the 
influences  amidst  which  we  pass  our  lives.  For  many  to  breathe  an  atmosphere 
of  moral  corruption  is  to  become  almost  inevitably  criminal.  Now  who  is  respon- 
sible for  ihis  atmosphere  ?  "  Not  I  "  would  be  the  answer  of  most  of  us,  and  no 
doubt  we  have  not  contributed  directly  to  this  or  that  particular  crime ;  but  have 
we  contributed  nothing  to  that  state  of  feeling  which  makes  the  crime  natural  to- 
the  criminal  ?  Nay,  there  is  a  general  stock  of  moral  evil  in  the  world  to  which  we 
all  coutribute  by  the  sin  we  commit  just  as  every  small  house  in  London  does  its 
little  something  to  thicken  the  air.  And  this  touches  us  all  like  the  common 
atmosphere  we  all  breathe.  If  one  suffer,  therefore,  all  of  us  should  suffer  with 
him.  2.  All  guilt  is  relative  to  a  man's  opportunities  in  the  sight  of  God.  Our 
Lord  insists  again  and  again  that  a  man's  responsibility  exactly  corresponds  with 
his  opportunities  of  knowing  what  is  right.  "Woe  unto  thee,  Chorazin,"  &c. 
"  To  whom  much  is  given,"  cfcc.  This  we  practically  ignore.  \\e  think  of  the  poor 
man  who  has  been  denied  our  advantages  as  if  he  had  acted  from  the  same  level 
of  knowle.lge,  &c.,  that  we  occupy.  But  his  grave  crime  may,  in  him,  mean  less 
unfaithfulness  to  light  and  grace  than  what  we  deem  our  little  peccadilloes.  If  we^ 
kept  this  in  mind  when  one  member  suffered  we  should  all  suffer  with  him. 
'6.  There  should  be  a  deep  sincere  conviction  of  our  own  condition  as  sinners 
before  God  ;  we  shall  then  have  no  heart  to  be  hard  on  others.  Oar  own  capacity 
for  evil  is  only  checked  by  the  grace  of  God.  "If  it  were  not  for  the  grace  of 
my  Maker,"  says  St.  Augustine,  "  I  should  have  been  the  worst  of  criminals."' 
II.  What  have  been,  what  ought  to  be  the  effects  of  this  Christian  way  op 
LOOKING  at  crime  ?  1.  The  softening  of  the  penalties  of  criminal  law.  The  con- 
science of  society  stays  its  hand  with  the  whisper,  "Who  art  thou  that  judgest 
another  ?  "  2.  Constant  efforts  to  cut  up  its  roots  by  schools,  reformatories, 
Christian  charity,  &c.  3.  The  resolve  to  live  nearer  to  God  oui  selves.  We  cannot 
influence  legislation,  or  found  institutions  for  the  reformation  of  criminals,  but  we 
can  all  do  something  within  our  own  souls  which  will  help  to  purify  the  corrupt 
moral  atmosidiere.      {Cinion  Liddon.)  Or    one  member  be  honoured  all  the 

members  rejoice  with  it.  The  duty  of  all  to  rejoice  at  the  honour  given  to  tlieir 
brethren  .-—I.  Kejoicing  is  a  Christian  duiy — required — 1.  On  our  own  account. 
2.  On  account  of  others.  Here  an  unselfish  sympathy  with  another's  honour — not 
merely  not  to  envy  it,  but  to  rejoice  in  it.  II.  What  this  rejoicing  at  the 
honour  paid  to  others  may  be  the  means  of.  Of — 1.  Increasing  their  joy.. 
2.  Demonstrating  your  love  and  sympathy.  3.  Engaging  and  confirming  their 
love  to  you.     (T.  Robinson.) 

Ver.  27.  Now  ye  are  the  body  of  Christ,  and  members  in  particular. — Tlie  bodrj 
of  Christ : — I.  True  Christians,  as  the  body  of  Christ,  bianifest  His  pfrsonai^ 
PRESENCE  among  MEN.  lu  Cliiist  incarnate  "  God  was  manifest  in  the  flesh."  Just 
as  really  is  Christ  manifest  in  His  Church.  II.  The  body  of  Christ  reveals  the 
MIND  OF  Christ.  So  closely  do  body  and  mind  correi-pond,  that  the  mind  some- 
times fashions  the  body  to  its  own  character.  Essential  characteristics,  if  not 
every  thought  and  feeling,  are  revealed  iu  gesture,  gait,  and  countenance.  The 
human  body  of  Christ  served  the  same  purpose  in  expressing  His  mind.  Now  He 
has  another  manift station.  He  is  formed  in  us  and  thus  expresses  Himself  as 
truly  as  once  through  fle-h  and  blood.  These  "  living  epistles  are  known  and  read 
of  all  men,"  written  over  with  Christ's  thoughts,  as  those  thoughts  were  once 
written  on  His  own  face.  W'e  are  Christians  only  so  far  as  we  embody  and  reveal 
Christ  to  men.  I  [I.  These  members  of  Christ's  body  are  the  instruments  for 
THE  EXECUTION  OF  His  WILL.  The  body  is  the  servant  of  the  soul.  Such  was 
Christ's  body  on  earth.  It  is  now  laid  aside  for  other  organs,  even  His  Church, 
who  are  "  members  of  His  body,  of  His  flesh  and  His  bones  "  Here  is  the  radical 
idea  of  Christian  service.     We  are  not  independent  to  follow  our  own  purposes^ 


CHAP.  XII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  lOt 

but  the  will  of  Christ.  While  the  hands  and  feet  are  involuntary  instruments 
moved  by  the  soul,  the  organs  of  Christ's  body  act  freely,  although  God  worketh 
in  them  to  will  and  to  do  of  His  good  pleasure.  Thou^^h  not  losing  identity  or 
individuality,  they  are  so  assimilated  to  tach  other  and  to  Christ  that  they  freely 
act  together  with  the  harmony  of  the  most  nicely  adjusted  machine.  Again, 
Christ  now  is  not  limited  to  any  spot  at  once,  but  is  everywhere,  in  every  Christian 
heart.  Were  He  to  get  complete  po^^sPssion  of  all  the  members  of  His  body  and 
of  all  the  agencies  which  they  command,  what  rapid  and  sweeping  successes  would 
He  achieve!  When  the  Church  is  sanctified,  when  no  member  is  paralysed  or 
dormant  or  reluctant,  but  the  whole  are  "clear  as  the  sun,  fair  as  the  moon,  and 
terrible  as  an  army  with  banners,"  how  soon  will  the  world  be  redeemed  !  [H. 
Mead,  D.D.)  The  hudij  of  Clirist: — The  chemist  mixes  his  various  elements 
together  in  the  battery,  and  when  they  are  brought  together,  and  the  conditions 
are  fulfilled,  electricity  is  there.  He  does  not  summon  electricity  from  some  remote 
distance  ;  but  already  dormant  in  these  elements  was  the  electric  power,  and  when 
they  are  combined,  instantly  the  electric  power  springs  into  existence.  So  Christ 
says,  "  In  each  one  of  you  Christians  there  is  a  dormant  power.  I  am  in  you, 
but  there  is  more  of  Me  in  all  of  you  together  than  there  is  in  any  one  of  you 
separate  and  individually  ;  and  when  you  have  combined  around  My  banner  and 
My  name  to  do  My  will,  there  springs  into  existence,  not  merely  the  strength  that 
comes  from  union,  but  the  Diviner  help  that  comes  from  this,  that  I  am  in  the 
midst  of  that  organisation,  the  spirit  that  inspires  the  body."  It  becomes  at  once 
more  than  human — it  becomes  Divine — the  body  of  Christ.  {Lyiitan  Abbott.) 
The  hod]!  of  Chriat : — God  has  chosen  the  most  familiar  objects  to  be  the  emblems 
of  Christ  and  His  Church — tree,  rock,  house,  wheat,  bread,  and  here  the  human 
body.  In  the  "  body."  I.  All,  life  is  in  the  head.  If  you  separate  the  smallest 
particle  of  the  body  from  it,  that  moment  it  dies.  And  so  the  Church  is  in  such 
union  with  Christ  that  if  you  wilfully  break  the  union  by  sin  or  unbelief,  yon  are, 
spiritually,  as  dead  as  an  amputated  hmb !  II.  All  feeling  and  all  springs  of 
POWER  AND  action  LIE  IN  THE  HEAD.  When  any  spot  in  the  body  is  injured,  a 
nerve  communicates  the  fact  to  the  brain,  and  there  is  the  suffering.  And  then, 
from  the  brain,  a  nerve  communicates  back  to  the  injured  place  what  is  to  be  done 
under  the  circumstances.  And  so  whatever  touches  any  living  member  of  the 
Church,  either  for  weal  or  woe,  it  goes  up  at  once  to  Christ;  and  from  Him  again 
there  flows  down  to  you  the  never-failing  cords  of  His  sympathy,  guidance,  and 
power.  III.  The  different  parts  of  our  body  are  all  held  together  by  their 
MEETING  IN  THE  ONE  HEAD.  So  there  is  no  real  unity  of  Cliristians,  except  as  thev 
all  meet  and  unite  in  the  one  Christ.  Christ  is,  and  must  be,  the  centre  piece  of 
the  arch  of  unity.     If  that  centre  piece  is  not  there,  the  arch  will  fall  !     IV.  No 

ONE  PART  OF  THE  BODY  CAN  COSIMDNICATE  WITH  ANOTHER    EXCEPT    THROCGH    THE    HEAD. 

My  right  hand  cannot  touch  my  left  but  through  the  head.  Just  so  it  is  in  the 
Church.  All  true  service  and  charity  must  be  through  Christ.  If  I  have  been 
kind  to  any  one  it  is  the  Head  has  done  it,  from  first  to  last.     V.  Some  members 

ARE    COUNTED    "  MORE    HONOURABLE  "   AND    SOME    LESS,    BUT    ALL    BELONG    TO    THE    SAME 

"head,"  and  so  SHARE  IN  THE  sAJiE  DIGNITY.  So  it  is  witli  the  Churcli.  The 
poorest,  meanest  uian  that  walks  this  earth,  if  he  be  a  "  child  of  God,"  is  in  the 
Head.  You  meet  him  there  ;  he  is  equal  with  you  there.  Conclusion  :  1.  Away 
with  all  selfishness,  pride,  isolation!  We  are  all  one  body.  2.  This  principle 
reaches  beyond  this  world.  In  heaven  itself  there  is  "  the  Body  of  Christ."  And 
there  is  nothing  greater  than  that.  The  saints  in  glory  are  my  fellow-members  in 
it.  (J.  Yanqhan,  M.A.)  Th>'  hodi/ of  Christ  and  its  members  :— I.  The  Church 
IS  THE  BODY  OF  Christ  {cf.  Eph.  1.  22,  23  ;  iv.  12 ;  Col.  i.  24).  1.  Note  the 
resemblances.  (1)  As  the  body  reveals  the  soul,  so  the  Church  reveals  Christ. 
What  we  love  is  in  our  friends,' not  the  body.  That  is  but  the  casket.  But  we 
know  nothing  of  their  souls  except  through  the  body.  1'hey  are  revealed  to  us  by 
the  glance  of  the  eye,  the  tone  of  the  voice,  the  deeds  of  love.  So  Christ  is  never 
seen  directly.  The  salvation  of  men  depends  on  the  Church's  revelation  of  Christ. 
(2)  As  the  soul  acts  by  the  body,  so  Christ  acts  through  the  Church.  The  soul  is 
the  seat  of  the  affections  and  motives,  but  the  body  must  carry  out  its  purposes. 
The  soul  of  the  parent  goes  oat  after  the  children  who  are  scattered  over  the 
world.  The  body  must  write  with  pen  and  ink  the  messages  oE  love.  A  neighbour 
longs  to  help  some  sick  one.  The  body  must  be  robbed  of  sleep  that  the  neighbour 
may  be  helped.  So  Christ,  the  soul  of  the  Church,  loves  and  desires  to  save  all 
men.     But  wherever  men  are  saved,  it  is  usually  by  the  action  of  "His  body,  the 


200  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xii. 

Church."  (3)  As  the  soul  spealis  through  the  bofly,  so  Christ  speaks  by  the 
Church  (1  Cor.  vi.  1-5  ;  Matt,  xviii.  17,  18).  2.  If  all  this  be  true— (1)  How  great 
is  the  honour  which  Christ  has  ynit  upon  us  !  (2)  How  great  is  our  responsibility  ! 
(3)  How  important  that  we  should  s  e  to  it  that  we  do  not  become  a  body  without 
a  soul — a  Church  without  Christ!  II.  Indivihual  Chiustiaxs  are  members  in 
PAETicuLAR,  i.e.,  each  in  his  appointed  place.  The  teaching  of  the  previous  verses 
is — 1.  Tliat  we  are  all  members  or  parts  of  the  body  of  Christ.  We  may  have 
nothing  that  brings  us  into  pvomineuce,  and  yet  we  are  component  parts  of  the 
body.  Without  us  it  would  be  incomplete.  2.  That  we  all  have  a  part  in  the 
work  of  the  body.  No  pirt  of  a  living  body  is  witlioiit  a  function  which  it  alone 
can  perform.  So  in  the  body  of  Christ  our  office  may  be  a  humble  one,  but  it  is 
one  to  which  we  are  Divinely  appointed.  3.  That  the  meanest  offices  are  often 
most  important.  How  the  disor.ler  of  one  small  obscure  part  of  the  body  hinders 
the  whole  ; — pleurisy  or  tic  !  So  in  the  body  of  Christ.  If  the  Church  is  hindered 
we  need  to  make  it  a  personal  matter.  "  Lord,  is  it  I  ?  "  Again,  the  less  promi- 
nent offices  in  the  Church  are  just  now  more  necessary.  We  have  had  much 
preaching;  we  want  reli,<:ion  lived  in  little  things.  (J.  Ogle.)  The  body  of 
Chriat  and  its  meinbera : — There  are  several  analogies  between  our  bo(1ies  and  the 
Church  as  the  body  of  Christ,  viz. — I.  These  are  our  bodies  BECiusE  odr  spirits 
POSSESS   AND   ANIMATE   THEM.     So   Christ's   spirit  vitalises  the  Church.     II.  Odr 

PHYSICAL   AND    PSYCHICAL    NATURES    ARE    SO    CLOSELY    JOINED    THAT    THEY   CONSTITUTE    A 

VIRTUAL  UNITY.  So  Christ  says  of  His  Church,  "  As  Thou,  Father,  art  in  Me,  and 
I  in  Thee,  that  they  also  may  be  one  in  us."  III.  Our  spirits  ae»  in  most 
SENSITIVE  SYMPATHY  WITH  ALL  PAR']'s  OF  OUR  BODIES.  If  any  pavt  is  cut  or  bruised, 
to  th^t  at  once  goes  the  mind  in  painful  consciousness.  So  Christ  bears  all  our 
sorrows,  and  carries  our  grief  in  His   sympatlietic   spirit.     IV.  Odr   spieits   aee 

ALERT    THAT    THEY    MAY    DEFEND    AND    OTHERWISE    HELP    THE    BODILY    MEMBERS.       If    a 

missile  comes  near,  it  is  the  soul  that,  looking  through  the  eyes,  sees  it  and 
warns  the  nerve  to  spring  the  muscle  that  moves  the  proper  part  of  the  body  to 
avoid  it.  Such  is  Christ's  watchfulness  for  His  people.  V.  Our  spirits  fiiequkntly, 
IN  THEIR  dekper  WISDOM,  oRDKR  THE  BODY  TO  EECEivE  PAIN — e.f).,  to  present  a  hand 
to  the  !-urgeon's  knife,  to  endure  fatigue,  &c.  So  Christ  ordains  suffering  for  the 
disripline  of  His  people.  VI.  Odr  spirits  impart  thi'  strength  of  their  courage 
TO  OUR  bodies,  that  THEY  MAY  ENDURE  PAIN  without  flinching,  the  resolute  will 
holding  the  shrinl<iiig  nerve  ;  moral  courage  the  source  of  truest  physical  heroism. 
So  Christ's  grace  is  sufficient  for  us,  VII.  Our  spirits  are  constantly  training 
OUR  BODIES  TO  EASY,  aliiiost  unvolitional  obedience,  e.p.,  we  learn  to  do,  as  if 
instinctively,  many  things  that  at  first  are  performed  only  with  difficulty — to 
strike  the  notes  on  a  jjiano,  to  read  without  definite  thought  of  the  letters,  all  that 
we  mean  by  "  second  nature."  So  Christ  is  training  our  souls  to  obey  His  precepts 
with  liberty,  without  constant  pressure  of  the  sense  of  duty.  Perfect  sainthood 
will  be  as  natural  as  the  processes  of  physical  motion.  VIII.  Our  spirits  are 
CONSTANTLY  MODIFYING  THE  ASPECT  OF  OUR  BODIES,  Stamping  cliaract-r  upon  the 
countenance,  and  expressing  disposition  by  manner  and  mien.  So  Christ,  by 
the  indwelling  of  His  Holy  Spirit,  sanctities  tis.  IX.  Our  spirits  keep  our  bodies 
ALIVE  so  LONG  AS  THEY  ARE  ASSOCIATED.  There  caii  he  no  death  until  the  soul 
is  withdrawn  ;  then  only  does  the  ta'iernacle  of  the  flesh  fall.  So  Christ  is  the  life 
of  all  the  members  of  His  body.  And  as  His  promise  is,  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you 
alway,"  we  can  never  die.  "  Because  I  live  ye  shall  live  also."  (J.  M.  LiuUoio,  D.D.) 
Union  of  Christians  irith  Christ,  and  ivith  each  other: — I.  The  union  of  Christ 
WITH  His  Church.  This  is  sometimes  illustrated  by  images  borrowed  from  the 
relations  of  domestic  life  :  those  of  master  and  servants,  parent  and  children, 
husband  and  wife  ;  sometimes  by  images  derived  from  works  of  art,  or  from 
natural  history  :  Pie  Himself  represents  it  by  tlie  union  of  the  vine  with  its 
branches.  The  Scripture  idea  of  Christ  repiesents  Him  as  identified  wilh  the 
Church,  which  is  called  the  fulness  or  complement  of  Christ :  so  that  Christ  would 
want  something  essential  to  Him,  without  the  Church.  In  the  text  behevcrs  are 
styled  His  body,  which  implies — 1.  The  participation  of  a  common  nature.  In 
the  former  part  of  this  chapter  the  apostle  had  spoken  of  the  union  of  Christians, 
and  those  who  participate  of  one  Spirit.  Christ  makes  them  all  His  own,  by  the 
communication  of  His  own  Spirit ;  just  as  the  natural  members  are  united  with 
the  head.  They  receive,  out  of  His  fulness,  grace  for  grace.  Notwithstanding  the 
difference  of  nature  and  of  office  between  Him  and  them,  yet  the  graces  of 
Christians  are  of  the  same  origin,  and  nature,  with  His.    Every  real  Christian 


HAP.  XII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  201 


is  animated  by  the  same  views,  desires,  tempers,  principles  of  conduct,  with 
his  Divine  Master.  "  If  any  man  have  not  tlie  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of 
His."  The  difference  between  Christians  and  men  of  tlie  world  is  not  a  difference 
in  dei^ree ;  it  is  a  difference  in  nature.  2.  Tlie  direction  which  Christ  has  over 
His  Churoh.  He  is  the  supreme  authority  who  prescribes  all  our  duties.  All 
religion  emanates  from  Him  as  Lord  of  all.  It  is  the  work  of  tiie  Spirit  to  establish 
His  authority  in  the  heart :  a  sceptre  by  which  He  gently,  yet  effectually,  subdues 
His  penple.  3.  The  affectionate  union  which  subsists  between  both.  The  Church 
is  loved  by  Christ  as  His  body,  endeared  to  Him  by  the  most  tender  ties.  In  love 
to  it  He  descended  from  His  throne  to  the  Cross.  Such  love  as  the  Father  has  to 
Him  He  has  to  the  Church.  And,  by  analogy,  we  ought  to  have  *iie  same  love  to 
Him,  manifested  by  walking  in  His  steps,  consecrating  ourselves  to  Him  who  so 
loved  us.  Like  loves  like  ;  and  if  Christ  is  the  pattern  and  friend  of  His  people, 
how  entire,  intense,  and  constant,  ought  to  be  our  devotedness  to  Him  !  II.  The 
UNION  OP  Christi.\ns  WITH  EACH  OTHER.  "  We  are  members  in  particular."  1. 
Every  member  of  the  natural  body,  however  mean,  feeble,  and  obscure,  is  a 
member ;  so  should  no  Christian  be  overlooked,  however  humble,  since  he  stands 
in  a  sacred  relation  to  Jesus  Christ.  To  despise  the  image  of  God  in  the  natural 
man  implies  a  profane  disregard  of  that  God  who  made  man  in  His  own  image ; 
but  to  despise  this  image  in  the  spiritual  man  is  a  higher  species  of  impiety.  2. 
There  exists  an  affection  and  sympathy  betsveen  all  the  members.  In  the  system 
of  animal  life,  which  is  probably  a  modification  of  the  spirit  that  animates  the 
whole,  the  functions  of  all  the  rest  are  affected  by  one.  Thus  Christians  are  to 
feel  for  each  other,  "  bear  one  another's  burdens,  and  so  fnlhl  the  law  of  Christ  "  ; 
they  are  not  to  say,  as  Cain,  "Am  I  ray  brother's  keeper?  "  3.  There  is  no  schism 
in  the  body,  so  long  as  it  is  in  a  natural  and  he  dthful  state  ;  otherwise  it  tends  t'> 
decay.  Thus,  for  one  member  of  Christ  to  envy  others,  is  as  unnatural  and 
destructive  as  a  division  in  the  animal  system.  4.  There  are  different  offices  in 
the  body;  some  parts  are  organic,  as  the  eye,  the  ear;  these  are  instruments  of 
sense,  and  peculiarly  important.  Thus,  in  the  Church,  some  are  apostles,  some 
evangelists  ;  but  all  are  not  such,  yet  each  has  his  own  place  and  use  ;  each  may 
contribute  his  portion  to  the  general  good.  (/?.  Hall,  M.A.)  Members  of  Christ 
a7id  their  service  r^"  A  member  of  Christ."  Now,  what  "member"  will  you  be? 
If  you  are  "  a  member  of  Christ,"  you  must  do  the  member's  part.  If  you  say,  "  I 
will  be  like  the  hand,"  what  will  you  do  ?  You  must  work  usefully  with  your 
hand,  you  must  work  for  God,  you  must  five  to  God.  Or,  with  your  feet,  you 
must  run  witli  messages.  Be  very  useful.  Think,  "  Perhaps  I  shall  be  a 
missionary,  with  my  feet  beautiful  on  the  mountains,  to  the  heathen.  I  will 
do  it  for  Christ's  sake."  Or,  "I  will  always  listen  to  good  things."  Be  the  ear. 
Or,  with  the  eye,  look  at  the  beautiful  things  from  heaven.  Or,  like  the  tongue. 
speak  of  God,  of  goodness,  and  of  happinpss.  Then  you  are  a  useful  "  member  of 
Christ."  Eemember,  if  you  have  got  Christ  in  your  heart,  then  you  are  "  a 
member"  indeed.     {J.  Vaiujhan,  M.A.) 

Vers.  28-31.  And  God  hath  set  some  in  the  Church,  first  apostles. — Help- 
v:ork : — The  words  which  I  have  taken  as  my  text  occupy,  you  will  remember, 
a  somewhat  exceptional  position.  They  occur  in  the  midst  of  what  seems  at  first 
a  systematic  classification  of  gifts  in  the  apostolic  Church  and  the  functions 
resting  on  those  gifts  :  they  come  in  between  "  gifts  of  healing  "  and  "  diversities 
of  tongues."  The  two  terms  do  not  meet  us  elsewhere  in  the  writings  of  the  New 
Testament.  It  is  open  to  us,  under  the  view  of  interpreters,  to  identify  them 
respectively  with  the  offices  of  the  deacons,  and  bishops,  and  elders  of  the  Church; 
but  it  is  also  open  to  us  to  believe  that  the  terms  occur  to  St.  Paul's  mind  as 
covering,  each  of  them,  a  special  das'!  of  supernaturMl  gifts,  or  of  natural  gift-s 
purified  and  illumined  by  the  higher  gifts,  of  the  course  of  which  the  diaconate 
and  presbyterate  were  indeed  the  representative  exponents,  but  which  were  to  be 
found  also  in  those  who  are  not  called  to  either  of  those  special  functions.  Every 
member  of  that  Church  which  the  Eternal  Spirit  governs  and  sanctifies  has  a 
vocation.  The  history  of  the  word  which  we  render  "  helps  "  sufficiently  explains 
its  meaning — to  lay  hold  as  with  a  firm  and  loving  hand  on  one  who  totters  and 
stumbles  and  is  on  the  point  of  fallincr.  That  is  its  sense  as  I  find  it  in  an  old 
lexicon.  In  that  sense  it  meets  us  in  the  words  St.  Paul  addressed  to  the  ministers 
of  Ephesus  when  he  bids  them  so  minister  that  they  may  "  support  the  weak," 
a  sulHcient  proof,  I  take  it,  that  we  may  not  limit  the  word  to  the  function  of 


202  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xii. 


the  diaconate.  As  in  every  grace,  so  in  this  ;  what  from  one  point  of  view  is 
a  special  gift  of  God  is  from  another  the  development  of  a  natural  capacity, 
and  with  the  capacity  there  is  a  natural  delight  in  its  exercise.  The  wild 
flower,  which  on  the  wayside  might  have  been  withered  by  the  parching  winds 
or  degenerated  into  a  weed,  is  transplanted  into  the  paradise  of  the  great 
Gardener,  and  watered  by  the  dew  of  His  blessing  and  fostered  by  the  warmth 
of  the  eternal  sunshine  of  His  love  it  becomes  a  goodly  flower,  bright  in  its 
varied  hues  and  fragrant  as  the  spices  of  Lebanon.  The  observer  of  the  child 
nature  will  tell  you,  from  experience  well  confirmed,  that  there  are  few  children 
in  whom  this  desire  to  help  is  not,  in  a  greater  or  less  measure,  a  motive 
spring  of  action.  They  delight  in  their  little  gifts :  little  ministries  jmd  services 
to  parents,  to  brothers,  sisters,  frimds,  and  teachers.  All  they  seek  is  a  recog- 
nition by  word  or  look,  by  loving  glance  or  smile,  that  their  service  is  appre- 
ciated. Tlieir  labour  of  love,  however  small  it  may  be,  is  its  own  exceeding 
great  reward.  The  next  stage  of  life  to  most  men  is  for  the  most  part  less 
favouralile  to  the  growth  of  the  ministering  spirit.  The  life  of  the  public  school,, 
with  its  struggle  for  existence,  its  inevitable  self-assertion,  its  competitive  exer- 
cise. The  boy  has  to  learn  to  make  a  just  estimate  of  his  powers  of  body  and 
mind,  to  assert  his  own  rights,  sometimes  also  to  uphold  the  rights  of  others  by 
fighting  for  them.  It  is  well  on  the  whole  it  should  be  so.  To  be  weak  is 
miseruhle,  and  strength  of  body,  brain,  and  will,  cannot  be  secured  without 
collision.  When  these  early  years  are  over,  and  the  boy  passes  into  the  man,  it 
is  at  once  right  and  wise  to  form  a  distinct  plan.  To  V/ld  to  the  passing 
impulse  of  the  moment  is  to  drift  he  knows  not  whither.  \Vhat  forms  of  help- 
work,  then,  are  possible  for  those  living,  as  you  live,  in  the  midst  of  tasks  and 
duties?  Of  that  which  has  seemed  to  some  the  chief,  if  not  the  exclusive 
meaning  of  the  helps  St.  Paul  speaks  of,  "  supporting  the  weak,"  in  the  sense  of 
mini.-tering  to  the  s:ok,  I  do  not  suj)pose  you  have  much  experience  or  oppor- 
tunities. That  gift  belongs  more,  on  the  whole,  to  wom  n  than  to  men,  and  your 
etloits  at  direct  nursing  might  perhaps  be  clumsy  and  inelifici^'nt.  For  those  who 
are  without  that  special  call  fur  ministration,  it  may  not  be  a  bad  training  of 
their  capaci'y  for  service  to  visit  sometimes  the  wards  of  the  hospital  to  read  to  the 
patients  there,  or  talk  with  them,  or  better  still,  as  meeting  what  is  often  a  real 
want  with  the  disahh  d  poor,  write  letters  for  them  to  their  friends.  A  more 
familiar  and  easy  form  of  help  given  to  the  weak  is  found,  I  need  hardly  say,  in 
the  work  of  teaching  the  yom  g.  And  then  among  the  functions  of  true  friend- 
ship there  is  that  of  helping  the  we.ik,  not  in  body,  but  in  mind  and  will.  You 
may  know  one  who  has  been  dear  to  you  as  a  brother,  companion  in  sports  or 
studies,  who  is  infirm  of  purpose,  drifting  on  the  impulse  of  sm,  on  the  waves  of 
doubt.  I  know  all  too  well  the  dilliculty  of  that  form  of  helpdng,  the  hindrances 
of  shyness,  ruserve,  self-distrust,  which  check  the  utterance  of  the  faithful  words 
that  may  avert  the  threatened  evil.  You  fear  to  make  matters  worse,  to  los<<  yonr  hold 
on  affections  which  are  as  yet  unstable  only.  Among  the  means  of  work  those  of 
helping  tho.>-e  «hom  we  call  the  poor  hohl,  of  course,  a  permanent  place.  Their 
lot  is  in  the  nature  of  the  case  for  the  most  part  a  hard  c>ne,  even  if  they  have 
fallen  in  the  struggle  for  existence  throut:h  no  fault  of  their  own.  More  often,  it 
may  be,  their  lot  is  all  the  worse  because  it  is  made  harder  by  their  faults.  Help 
in  this  case  calls  for  the  higher  gift  of  government.  Happily,  in  this  instance,  the 
guidance  is  not  far  to  seek.  Work  in  subordination  to  others,  to  the  minister  of  a 
parish  or  to  the  society  which  by  its  very  title  undertakes  to  organise  charity, 
supplies  the  missing  link.  To  love  all  you  can  and  to  help  all  yoit  can  is  the  true 
way  to  the  hif;hest  culture,  and  works  out  a  higher  spiritual  completeness  than  any 
forms  of  a'stheticism,  asceticism,  and  shall  I  say  athleticism,  in  which,  according 
to  mpn's  character  and  temper,  they  too  often  seek  for  that  completeness.  I  have 
dwelt  chiefly  upon  the  manifestation  of  the  gift — the  ai'TiXinJ/eiQ  of  which  I  have 
spoken.  I  must  say  something  as  to  the  source  from  whirh  it  sprinps,  the  source 
which  is  the  secret  of  its  permanence.  One  hears  much  of  the  religion  of  Humanity, 
of  the  altruism  which  they  oppose  alike  to  the  ordinary  self-consciousness  of  man- 
kind and  to  the  loving  charity  of  the  mind  of  Christ.  That  religion,  it  is  said, 
supplies  us  with  a  sufHcient  motive  for  the  love  of  sacrifice,  if  not  what  that  sacri- 
fice implies,  tlie  sacrifice  of  self.  I  believe  no  striving  to  serve  is  without  its  fruit, 
that  in  this  life  or  in  the  life  to  cane  he  who  seeks  shall  find,  that  a  man  may 
learn  frtith  byviitue,  and  that  in  due  time  faith  may  ripen  with  knowledge.  I 
reverence  the  saints,  even  of  Buddhism  or  of  Islam,  and  still  more  those  of  the 


CHAP.  XII.]  I.  COBINTHIANS.  203 

dark  ages  of  Christpndom,  in  whom  I  find  that  likeness  of  the  future  of  Christianity. 
All  the  same,  I  hold  it  to  be  capable  of  proof  that  that  likeness  has  never  been  so 
vivid  and  dislinct  as  when  it  hath  been  a  conscious  reproduction  of  the  Divine 
original,  a  true  Iiiutatio  Cliristi.  {Demi  Fluiuptre,  D.l).)  Helps  : — 1.  It  has 
been  thought  that  these  were  assistant-ministers,  or  asbistant-deacons,  or  dea- 
conesses, or  atte^ndants,  who  took  care  that  strangers  were  accommodated,  and 
managed  various  details.  But  whoever  they  were,  they  were  thought  worthy 
to  be  mentioned  with  apostles,  teachers,  etc.  Probably  they  had  no  official 
standing,  but  were  the  sort  of  brethren  who  can  always  stop  a  gap,  and  who  ai'e 
only  too  glad  to  make  themselves  serviceable  in  any  capacity.  2.  Bunyan  has 
described  that  part  of  tlieir  work,  which  is  most  valuable.  He  desciibes  Help  as 
coming  to  Christian  when  he  was  in  the  Slough  of  Desijond.  Wljen  we  were  going- 
through  a  pass  in  Northern  Italy,  we  saw,  some  three  or  four  miles  from  the  top, 
a  man  with  a  spade,  who  came  down  and  saluted  us.  By  and  by  we  came  to  deep 
snow,  and  the  man  cleared  a  footway,  and  wheir  we  catue  to  a  very  ugly  piece  of 
road,  he  carried  some  of  the  party  on  his  back.  Ere  long  came  one  of  his 
companions  with  refreshments.  These  men  were  "  helps,"  who  spent  their  lives 
where  i\v  ir  services  wnuld  be  requisite.  They  would  have  been  worth  nothirg 
down  in  the  plains.  "  Helys  "  are  of  no  use  to  a  man  when  he  can  help  liiuiself. 
And  just  as  the  Euyal  Humane  Society  keep  their  men  along  the  borders  of  the 
lakes  \n  the  parks  when  the  ice  is  forming,  so  a  little  knot  of  Christian  people 
shou'd  al>ays  be  ready  in  eveiy  church,  to  give  assistance  wheiever  it 
may  be  reijuired.  Let  me — I.  Give  a  few  directions  to  these  "helps."  When 
you  meet  sinners  in  the  Slough  of  Despond — 1.  Get  them  to  state  their 
case.  When  Help  went  to  Ciiristian  he  said  first,  "  What  are  you  doing 
there?  How  did  you  get  there?"  I  have  found  that  the  mere  act  of  siaiing  a 
difliciilty  has  been  the  veiy  means  of  at  once  removing  it.  2.  Enter,  as  much  as 
lieth  in  you,  into  their  case.  Sympathy  is  a  great  power.  3.  Comfort  them  with 
the  promises.  Help  told  Christian  that  there  were  good  steps  all  the  way  through 
the  mire.  Now,  you  can  p)oint  these  poor  sinking  ones  to  the  steps.  4.  Instruct 
them  more  fully  in  the  plan  of  salvation.  5.  Tell  them  your  own  experience. 
Many  have  been  able  to  get  out  of  the  Slough  in  this  way.  We  have  gone  along  the 
same  roa'',  and  it  would  be  very  hard  if  we  could  not  describe  it.  (J.  Pray  with 
them.  Wien  you  cannot  tell  the  sinuer  what  you  want  to  say,  you  can  sometimes 
tell  it  to  God  in  the  sinner's  heariuji;.  As  certa  nly  as  the  electric  fluid  bears  the 
message  fr  m  one  place  to  another,  and  the  laws  of  gravitation  move  the  spheres, 
so  certamly  is  prayer  a  mysterious  but  real  power,  il.  Describe  those  who  can 
HELP.  A  tr..e  "  he!p  "  must  have — 1.  A  tender  heart.  There  are  some  people  who 
seem  to  be  pr  p  ired  by  Divine  grace  on  puiposeto  be  soul-winuers,  just  as  there  are 
some  people  who  seem  t>  be  born  nurses.  2.  A  quick  eye.  There  is  a  way  of 
gt-tting  the  eye  seu^itlveIy  acute  with  regard  to  i-inneis.  3.  Quick  ears.  When 
they  have  these  they  listen,  and  by  and  by  they  hear  a  splash,  and  though  it  may 
be  very  dark  and  misty,  they  go  to  the  rescue.  4.  Eapid  feet.  5.  A  loving  face. 
Cheerfuln  sscomiiien'>sitseJf,  especially  to  a  truubledheart.  6.  Afirmf.iot.  If  I  have 
to  p  li  a  brother  out  of  the  Slough,  I  must  know  how  to  stand  fast  myself,  or  I  may 
fall  in.  Full  assurance  is  not  necessary  to  salvation,  but  it  is  very  necessary  to  your 
success  as  a  helper  of  nthers.  7.  A  strong  hand.  8.  A  bending  buck.  You  cannot  pull 
theiii  out  if  \ou  stand  bolt  upright.  It  is  said  that  the  sermons  of  Augusiine  are  in 
bad  Latin,  not  be<-ause  Augustine  was  not  a  gor  d  scholar,  but  because  the  dog-Latin 
of  the  day  suited  his  turn  best  to  get  hold  of  men.  That  preaching  is  best  which 
fisherwonien  ur  dei^tai  d.  "But  the  dignity  of  the  pulpit  1  "  says  one.  Well,  the 
"  dignity  "  of  a  war-eh  iriot  lies  in  the  captives  dragged  at  its  wheels,  and  the 
"  dignity  of  the  pulpit"  lies  in  the  number  of  souls  converted  to  God.  You  must 
condescend  to  men  of  low  estate.  III.  Incite  "helps"  to  gPvEater  eaunkstness. 
1.  Souls  want  help.  Is  not  that  enough  ?  The  cry  of  mis  ry  is  a  sulHcient  argu- 
ment for  luercy.  2.  Pieuiemi  er  how  you  were  helped  yourselves  when  you  were  in 
a  like  condition.  Eepay  the  obligilion.  3.  Christ  deserves  it.  'I he  lost  lamb  out 
there  is  His  lamb  ;  will  you  not  care  for  it  ?  That  sinner  is  your  Saviour's  blood- 
bought  one  ;  he  is  a  prodigal,  but  he  is  your  Fatlier's  son,  and  consequently  your 
own  brother.  4.  You  would  not  want  any  other  argumeut,  did  you  know  how 
blessed  the  work  is  in  itself.  Would  you  acquire  kuowledge  ?  grow  in  grace  ?  shake 
off  despondency  ?  help  others.  5.  You  are  called  to  this  work.  Your  Master  has 
hired  you  ;  it  is  not  for  you  to  pick  and  choose.  To-nij^ht,  then,  try  to  do  some 
practical  service  for  yoar  Master.     If  you  do  not,  you  will  probably  get  the  rod  for 


204  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  sii. 


correction.  6.  We  are  getting  nearer  heaven,  and  sinners  are  getting  nearer  hell. 
(C.  H.  Spnrgeon. )  Governments  : — The  second  of  the  two  words  which  I  have  taken 
as  inchiding  a  large  portion  of  the  activities  of  human  life  for  the  good  of  others  is 
even  more  directly  figurative  than  the  first.  The  seafaring  life  of  the  Greeks  taught  a 
race  more  gifted  than  most  others  with  the  power  of  interpreting  the  troubles  of  the 
world  around  them,  and  led  them  to  see  in  the  work  of  piloting  the  ship  that  which 
had  its  counterpart  in  the  duties  of  those  who  were  called  to  be  rulers  of  mankind. 
Probably  no  similitude  has  taken  so  vast  a  hold  on  the  minds  of  men  as  that  which 
we  find  in  the  Kepublic  of  Plato,  and  in  which  he  compares  the  democracy  of  his 
own  time  to  an  untrained  crew  in  which  every  one  thought  that  without  any 
previous  discipline  he  was  compptent  to  take  the  helm.  He  pictures  the  confusion 
which  must  ensue  when  men  undertook  that  work  without  any  knowledge  of  seas 
or  sky,  of  stars  or  wind  ;  how  the  man  truly  gifted  with  the  power  of  steering 
would  be  despised  and  rejected  as  the  demos  of  Athens  despised  and  rejected  the 
teachers  of  wisdom  who  gave  them  true  coun'sels  for  their  good.  The  thought  of 
the  word  passed  from  Greece  to  Kome.  The  figurative  meaning  almost  superseded 
the  literal,  and  so  became  the  Gubernator  to  Wtstern  Europe.  I  can  scarcely  doubt 
that  one  with  St.  Paul's  experiences  of  perils  by  water,  thrice  shipwrecked,  able  to 
give  wise  counsel  to  master  and  mariners  out  of  his  own  experience,  would  use  the 
word  with  a  full  sense  of  the  similitude  under  which  it  would  be  i^resent  in  his 
thoughts.  It  was  as  familiar  to  him  as  the  soldier's  armour  or  the  conflict  for  the 
prize  and  the  ti'aining  of  the  athlete.  He  paints  Hymenteus  and  Alexander  as 
having  made  shipwreck  concerning  the  faith.  He  warns  men  not  to  be  carried 
about  by  every  blast  of  false  doctrine.  Some  men  seem  born  with  an  innate 
capacity  for  this  form  of  government  in  its  most  literal  sense.  They  have  the 
watchful  eye,  the  ready  hand,  the  sagacious  forecast,  which,  working  together,  bring 
them  to  the  haven  where  they  would  be.  They  need  only  to  teach  and  to  practise, 
and  they  rapidly  become  proficient.  And  passing  from  the  literal  to  the  figura- 
tive meaning,  he  saw  that  here  also  there  was  a  gift  of  steersmanship,  governments, 
as  well  as  a  governing  power,  which  showed  itself  in  helps.  Discerning  school- 
masters soon  learn  to  see  what  boys  are  likely  to  take  the  lead  among  their  fellows. 
They  recognise  in  him  one  firm  in  purpose,  ready  to  accept  suggestions  when  they 
are  reasonable,  not  shrinking  from  nsing  his  power  when  occasion  calls  for  it.  To 
most  of  you,  of  courpe,  who  are  yet  in  the  probationary  stage  of  manhood,  the 
opportunities  of  governing  are  few  and  far  between.  The  influence  of  the  young 
is  for  the  most  part,  as  I  said,  that  of  ministration.  But  not  seldom,  as  your  own 
experience  or  the  history  of  the  past  may  tell  you,  the  one  gift  grows  out  of  the 
other.  The  good  subject  ripens  into  the  good  ruler.  Help  leads  to  insight  of 
character,  and  rubs  otf  the  angularities  of  tempeiament  and  self-assertion  which 
impair  the  capacity  for  governing.  That  disidi'line  where  the  capacity  for  ruling 
exists  leads  men  on  to  the  likeness  of  the  ideal  king,  who  reigns  not  for  his  own 
good  but  for  that  of  his  people,  while  without  it  the  gift  itself  may  degenerate 
into  the  pattern  of  the  mob-ruling  tyrant.  We  find  this  in  the  limits  and  the 
walks  of  duty  which  lie  within  your  immediate  reach.  The  teacher  in  the  Sunday 
school  develops  into  a  pi'ofessor  of  theology,  or,  as  in  two  familiar  instances,  into 
the  holder  of  one  of  our  highest  offices  of  state.  The  manager  of  the  boys'  guild 
may  become  a  faithful  and  wise  steward  in  some  wider  organisation,  in  wbich  he 
will  give  to  every  mnn  his  portion  of  meat  in  due  season.  You  will  stand  face  to 
face  with  some  at  least  of  the  great  problems  of  our  times,  the  relations  of 
capital  and  labour,  the  question  of  land  tenure  and  the  equitable  division  of  its 
profits,  the  organisation  of  charity  so  that  it  may  tend  to  elevjite  and  not 
degrade,  the  jiroblem  how  best  to  bridge  over  the  chasm  which  yawns  between 
the  classes  and  the  masses ;  these  and  other  kindred  inquiries  can  scarcely  fail 
to  meet  you.  It  is  easy,  fatall.y  easy,  to  ignore  these  j)roblems,  to  follow  the 
impulses  of  pleasure  seeking,  or  of  working  for  your  own  success.  But  England 
expects  better  things  from  you.  You  need  to  learn  how  to  steer,  to  know  the 
forces  which  are  working  around  you,  the  currents  and  the  drifts  of  thought  which 
are  sweeping  over  men's  minds,  the  time  when  to  spread  your  sails  to  the  wind 
of  public  opinion  and  when  to  reef  them,  to  discern  the  signs  of  tbe  times,  to 
free  yourselves  from  the  delusion  of  an  unreal  optimism  or  an  equally  unreal  and 
far  more  perilous  pessimism.  And  in  close  connection  with  these  views  of  the 
gift  of  government  there  is  a  wide  sphere  of  yet  vaster  questionings,  which  make 
the  thinker,  wlio  is  led  to  speculate,  ponder  on  the  course  of  the  world's  history, 
the  mystery  of  man's  life  and  of  God's  covenant,  the  wonders  of  our  being,  the 


CHAP.  XII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  205 

origin  of  the  evil  which  leaves  its  serpent  trail  alike  in  our  individual  lives  and  in 
the  collective  experience  of  mankind,  the  manner  of  the  final  victory  over  that 
evil.  Here,  also,  the  gift  of  steersmanship  is  needed.  It  is  no  voynge  uj^on  the 
summer  sea  on  which  the  frail  barque  of  the  weak  or  untrained  intellect  may 
lightly  launch.  The  thought  comes  to  our  minds  that  it  is  safer  to  stand  on  the 
shore  and  watch  the  surging  waves  from  a  position  of  security.  The  warnings 
may  be  unheeded,  the  impulses  that  sway  the  mind  to  look  before  and  aft  and 
muse  upon  many  things  are  not  easily  repressed.  All  that  we  can  attempt,  with 
any  hope  of  success,  is  to  put  before  the  inquirer  the  conditions  of  safe  sailing 
ill  that  vast  sea  of  thought.  We  may  tell  him  that  there  must  be  the  temper 
of  love  and  pui-ity,  for  now  as  ever  it  is  true  that  "  into  a  malicious  soul  peace 
will  not  enter,  nor  dwell  in  the  body  that  is  subject  unto  sin."  There  must  be  a 
recognition  at  once  of  the  capacity  and  limitaiions  of  man's  knowledge.  The 
questioner  must  restrain  himself  to  keep  within  the  boundaries  of  the  known  or 
knowable.  There  must  be  reverence  for  the  past  in  its  strivings  and  aspirations 
and  successes,  the  recognition  of  the  increasing  purposes  which  works  throughout 
the  ages,  of  the  education  of  mankind  in  many  varied  manners  and  many 
different  measures.  The  system  of  speculative  thought  in  which  the  man  thotigiit 
to  win  his  fellows  to  reach  the  desired  haven  may  prove  iinseaworthy  and  founder 
in  sight  of  shore.  There  may  be  with  them  in  the  ship,  as  in  that  night  in  tlie 
Adria,  one  whose  prayer  is  mi;^hty  to  prevail,  to  whom  God  has  given  the  lives  of 
his  coiupanions.  Here,  too,  the  bighest  form  of  the  gift  of  government  is  that 
wliich  has  been  rightly  disciplined  by  the  exercise  of  the  earlier  gifts  of  helps. 
"  Helps,  governments."  I  return  to  the  two  words  from  which  I  staited  as 
embracing  wide  reasons  of  all  human  activity.  Each  of  you,  as  you  look 
within  the  depths  of  jour  own  personality,  or  in  the  environment  in  which 
you  live,  may  find  in  yourselves  the  germs  of  one  of  those — ui'TiXi'i^eii;, 
KvjSepvi'iaeiQ — pjssibly  not  seldom  of  both  of  these  germs.  It  is  yours  to  quicken 
them  into  life,  to  train  by  exercise  the  talents  which  you  have  to  keep,  as  those 
who  shall  give  an  account  to  the  Master  who  has  bestowed  them  upon  you.  For 
the  faiihfal  exercise  of  those  gifts  there  is  a  sure  reward  of  ever-widening 
opportunities.  With  the  will  to  do  that  which  is  indeed  God's  will,  there  will 
come  a  power  sooner  or  later  in  this  life,  or  behind  tbe  veil,  to  know  the 
doctrine  of  the  Christ,  whether  it  be  of  God.  {Dean  Plumptre,  D.D.)  Covet 
earnestly  tlie  best  gifts  :  and  yet  show  I  unto  you  a  more  excellent  way. — 
Holy  cocetuusness  : — I.  All  God's  blessings  are  valuable.  Amongst  all  His 
gifts  there  is  nothing  worthless.  A  breath  of  air,  a  drop  of  water,  a  beam  of 
light,  a  crust  of  bread  are  incalculably  valuable.  Circumstances  often  occur  in 
men's  history  when  they  feel  their  priceless  worth.  II.  Somr  of  these  blessings  are 
MORE  VALUABLE  THAN  OTHERS.  1.  Intellectual  than  material.  2.  Moral  than  intel- 
lectual.     Paul   says   without   charily — love — we   are   nothing.      III.     The    most 

VALUABLE  OF  THESli  BLESSINGS  SHOULD  BE  EARNESTLY  SOUGHT.       To  COVet    SOme    Of   the 

minor  blessings  is  a  sin.  But  we  are  justified  in  coveting  tbesebest  things,  because — 
1.  There  is  no  monojjoly  of  them.  Material  good  is  limited.  The  more  one  has  of 
it  the  less  remains  for  others.  But  spiritual  gifts  are  as  free  as  air,  as  vast  as 
immensity,  as  infinite  as  God.  2.  Themoie  one  has  of  them  tbe  more  generous  he 
becomes.  When  a  man  gets  into  him  this  love,  it  burns  up  his  seltishness  and 
melts  him  into  sympathy  with  the  universe.  3.  The  more  one  has  of  them  the 
more  useful  to  the  universe  he  becomes.  The  more  he  reflects  God,  tlie  more  light 
and  happiness  he  pours  forth  on  the  creation.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  best  gifts 
to  he  coveted: — Consider — I.  What  some  of  the  best  gifts  are.  1.  Negatively.  (1) 
They  are  not  those  which  are  external  to  the  soul's  nature,  such  as  money,  jpower, 
or  reputation.  A  Christian  man  is  not  foibidden  to  seek  these  in  the  right  way,  and 
when  gained  they  may  be  employed  for  high  ends.  Yet  neither  Paul  nor  liis  Master 
would  nuiuber  them  ainongthe  best  gifts.  (2)  Nor  are  they  all  the  gifts  that  touch  our 
inward  nature.  Intellectual  ability,  taste,  and  culture  are  veiy  precious,  and  Paul 
was  far  from  despising  them,  yet  he  would  be  far  from  describing  them  as  "  the 
best."  2.  Positively.  He  points  us  to  those  gifls  with  vvhich  love  is  connected. 
(1)  In  regard  to  God,  reverence,  humility,  and  trustfiili>ess.  (2)  In  regard  to  man, 
candid  and  gener.ais  judgment,  and  sym^'athy.  (3)  As  regards  ourselves,  patience, 
contentment,  courage,  and  fortitude,  (i)  As  to  things  around,  temperance  of 
chastened  desire.  3.  Tl;at  we  may  be  convinced  of  their  superiority,  let  us  see  how 
these  differ  from  otliers.  They — (1)  Enter  deepest  into  our  nature.  The  outer 
things  of  the  world  can  scarcely  be  said  to  enter  into  our  nature  at  all,  except  whea 


206  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xii 

their  abuse  corrupts  it.  Intellect,  culture,  and  ambition  may  go  deeper,  bnt  can 
they  reach  the  centre  ?  If  the  spiritual  nature  is  left  uncared  for,  the  mind  is  a 
very  cheerless  honre  for  happiness.  The  value  of  the  gifts  of  love  in  the  soul  is 
that  they  reacli  the  centre  where  happiness  lies.  As  they  go  deepest,  they  become 
the  ruling  power,  and  make  all  else  that  a  man  possesses  a  blessing  to  liimself  and 
others.  (2)  Are  the  most  lasting.  We  know  how  very  quickly  outward  possessions 
may  take  iheir  leave.  And  intellectual  gains  are  not  over  secure.  The  stores  of 
knowledjje  are  in  the  keeping  of  a  treMcherous  memory.  More  melanchi'ly  than  the 
loss  of  empire  is  the  saying  of  poor  Swift,  when  reading  one  of  his  own  wo'ks, 
"  What  a  glorious  mind  I  had  when  I  wrote  that !  "  But  let  a  man  liave  ttie  gifts  of 
a  loving,  patient,  self-renouncing  heart,  and  the  rule  is  that  they  grow  richer  and 
mellowei  as  life  advances.  (3)  Are  most  (iol-like.  It  is  in  a  small  degree  that  we 
can  share  Ood's  wisdom;  in  a  still  smaller  degree  His  power.  Hut  "he  that 
■dwelleth  in  love  dwelleth  in  God,  and  God  in  him  !  "  II.  The  frame  of  mind  we 
ARE  TO  CHKEisH  TOWARDS  THESE  GIFTS.  1.  We  are  to  covet  thi  m  earnestly.  The 
Cormthians  were  coveting  each  other's  place,  honour,  and  talent.  "  If,"  snys  Paul, 
*'  you  would  oily  set  your  hearts  on  the  right  things,  you  may  both  de-ire  and 
appropriate  what  belongs  to  your  n'^  ij-'hbour.  Covet  if  you  will,  but  let  it  be  the 
gifts  of  charity  and  self-denial."  Here  thf  wcrd  ceases  to  have  any  sin  in  it.  If 
we  covet  our  neij^hbours'  material  possessions,  we  shall  desire  to  disp  is-ess  him. 
If  we  covet  his  intellectual  gifts,  there  will  be  envy.  But  if  we  co>  et  his  loving 
spirit,  we  are  yielding  to  him  our  deepest  affection  and  reverence.  We  are  not  so 
much  taking  from  as  r»^ndering  to  him,  lighting  our  taper  at  his  fire,  and  adding  it 
to  the  flame.  The  word  of  prohibition  in  the  law  thus  becomes  a  w<>rd  of  command 
in  the  gospel.  2.  We  are  to  covet  these  gifts  ean  estly,  making  growth  in  t  '^m  a 
constant  and  supreme  desire.  (1)  Try  to  discover  what  is  best  in  those  around  you 
and  to  rejoice  in  it.  This  is  one  wa\  of  making  what  is  good  in  them  your  own 
without  taking  anything  from  them.  It  is  a  blessed  work  to  go  through  the  world 
trying  to  put  men  and  things  in  the  best  light.  (2)  You  should  mingle  much  with 
those  wIjo  have  it  in  larje  degree.  It  is  \ery  difficult  to  live  long  among  selfish 
people  without  becoming  like  them.  But  theiC  is  an  unselfish  world  :  live  in  that. 
Conclusion:  Tn  coveting  earnestly  the  best  gifts — 1.  We  can  never  harm  any  one, 
neither  ourselves  nor  otheis.  Is  th  're  augl.t  else  of  which  this  can  be  said  ?  2.  VVe 
are  suie  to  t-'ain  them.  Of  what  else  can  this  be  affirmed  ?  (■/.  Ker,  D.D. )  The 
Christian  estimate  of  pifts  : — I.  In  themselves.  The  gifts  of  the  Church  of  Corinth 
were  bestowed  accoidmg  to  God's  i)leasure :  they  were  "divided  to  eve  y  man 
severally  as  He  willed."  They  w<-re  profitable  to  othfrs.  They  were  not 
the  highest  perfection  of  human  nature,  for  a  man  m'gbt  have  them 
and  yet  perish.  So  it  is  with  ours  Consider  —  1.  What  a  gift  is.  It  is 
that  in  whii-h  our  main  strength  lies.  One  mnn  is  remarkable  for  intel- 
lectual, and  another  for  moral  qualifications.  One  is  highly  sensitive,  and 
another  nnimpie-sionable.  One  has  exquisite  taste,  and  ano  her,  like  the  English, 
persevering  an^l  able  to  improve  inventions.  All  God's  g  fts  are  not  sublime.  You 
would  all  acknowledge  i^rophecy  to  be  a  gift,  but  St.  Paul  says  the  humblest 
faculties  are  also  gifts.  2.  All  th'  se  are  gifts,  sometimes  we  fancy  they  are  not, 
because  sad  moralists  remind  us  that  these  things  are  \ain.  "  Beauty  is  fieeting  ; 
strength  is  soon  but  labour  and  sorrow;  the  path  of  glory  leails  but  to  the  grave." 
True,  all  these  are  transient  ;  and  because  so,  we  are  forbidden  to  set  our  hearts 
upon  them ;  hut  still  men  covet  ttiem,  and  the  ;ipostle  says  it  is  right :  God  gave 
them  :  do  you  honour  Him  by  despising  them  ?  The\-  are  good  so  long  as  they 
are  desired  in  subservience  to  the  ^/i  eater  good,  but  evil  if  they  ae  jjut  in  the  place 
of  this.  3.  They  are  to  be  earnestly  cultivated.  The  workl  makes  very  little  of 
(harity ;  and  religious  men,  perceiving  the  trnnscendent  excellence  of  this  grace, 
m  ke  vr-ry  little  of  talents.  Now,  on  the  contrary,  St.  Paul  pra\s  that  the  wlmle 
soul,  the  natural  msn  as  well  as  the  spirit,  may  "  be  pri  set  ved  IdamcL  ss  till  the 
coming  of  Christ."  4.  He  allows  a  distii  ction — "the  best  gifts."  The  same 
apostle  who  so  earnestly  uryed  contentment  with  the  gifts  we  have,  bids  us  yet  to 
aspire.  And  just  as  St.  Peter  said,  "  Add  to  your  f  ath,  virtue;  and  to  virtue, 
knowledge,"  Ac,  so  Wduld  St.  Paul  have  said,  "Add  to  your  nob  lity  of  r^nk, 
nobleness  of  mind  ;  to  your  strong  cnnstitui  ion,  heaifh  liy  exercise  ;  to  you  memory, 
judgment;  to  your  power  of  imit:>t  nt?,  invention."  II.  In  <  ojipar'Son  with  ciiArES. 
He  who  treads  the  brilliant  road  of  the  hi-h  st  accomjlishinents  i  ,  as  h  man, 
inferior  to  him  who  treads  the  path  of  Love.  For  in  the  S|  iritual  wdrld  a  man  is 
measured  not  by  his  genius,  but  by  his  likeness  to  God.     (F.  W.  Rt>hert!ii)n,  M.A.) 


CHAP.  XII.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  207 

■Com!na"dinj  gifts: — These  which  were  so  highly  valued  by  the  Corinthians  are 
now  no  longer  found  in  the  Church,  but  there  are  other  endowments  to  which  all 
xnay  lawfully  aspire,  so  long  as  tbey  are  not  substituted  for  the  more  excellent  way. 

I.  The  powek  of  populah  addekss  — the  faculty  of  arresting  attention  and  of 
■exciting  at  will  emotions  of  fear,  hope,  trust,  jov,  is  indeed  a  commanding  quality. 

II.  The  liti!r.\ry  gift — the  ability  to  inform  the  understanding,  direct  the  judg- 
ment, by  means  of  the  press.  III.  The  influence  of  a  winsome  manner.  We 
meet  with  some,  chiefly,  though  not  exclusively,  of  the  gentler  sex,  who,  by  the 
■exercise  of  peculiar  tact,  charm,  and  grace,  obtain  access  to  rude  and  rugged  hearts, 
which  refused  to  yield  to  all  ordinary  influences.  C  >nclusion  :  1.  It  may  be  said 
that  these  are  natural  gifts,  and  do  not  depend  on  cultivation.  But  here  the  rule 
holds  good,  "  to  him  that  hath  shall  be  given."  The  man  of  moderate  powers,  by 
diligence  rises  above  the  expectations  of  his  friends,  while  the  man  of  genius  often 
disappoints  them.  2.  The  precept  directs  us  to  form  a  due  estimate  of  the  value 
•of  these  gifts,  and  our  responsibility  for  the  use  of  them,  and  cautions  us  not  to 
■depreciate  or  exaggerate  gifts  of  which  we  have  a  very  limited  portion.  '6.  These 
gifts  are  not  the  essential  characteristics  of  Christ's  kingdom  ;  ho^vever  slender 
may  be  our  pretensions  to  the  possession  of  any  of  them,  we  may  all  pursue  the 
more   excellent  way.      {W.  W<'bster,  M.A.)         The  gifts  of  civilit:(ition  : — I.  Since 

EVERY  GOOD  AND  PKRFECT  GIFT  COMETH  DOWN  FROM  THE  FaTHER  OF  LlGHTS,  &C., 
St.    P.i.UL's    LANGUAGE     MAY     BE     APPLIED     TO     THE     UNIVERSAL     INTERESTS     OF    HUMAN 

SOCIETY.  1.  The  contrast  has  often  struck  observers  between  civilisation  and 
■Christianity.  It  is  true  that  botli  have  worked  together ;  but  in  their  aims  and 
nature  they  are  distinct,  and  may  be  opposed.  And  minds  strongly  under  the 
influence  of  the  one  are  ajDt  to  fear  or  shrink  from  the  other.  But  no  Christian 
■can  feel  ditiiculty  in  believing  that  they  both  come  from  Him  who  has  made  man 
for  this  world,  as  well  as  intended  him  for  another.  2.  The  world  easily  suggests 
very  awful  views  of  its  own  condition  ;  but  it  would  be  far  more  dreadful  if  we 
must  not  see  in  its  civilisation  the  leading  and  guiding  hand  of  God.  Nor  should 
Ave  be  deterred  from  this  bi- cause  of  its  use,  by  luxury  and  pride,  for  impurity  and 
■wrong.  The  gifts  at  Corinth  were  foolishly  and  wrongly  used.  3.  Civilisation  has 
indeed  its  dark  side  ;  there  is  much  that  is  dreiry  and  forbidding  in  the  history  of 
its  growth;  and  who  can  look  without  anxiety  at  the  dangers  of  its  future?  But 
its  irreligious  tendencies  are  not  to  be  combated  Ijy  simply  decrying  them.  Let  us 
look  at  the  world  as  those  who  were  put  here  to  "  refuse  the  evil  and  choose  the 
good."  (1)  Follow  the  history  of  a  great  people,  and  consider  what  it  brings  fortb. 
•Observe  the  progressive  refinement  of  human  nature;  how,  as  time  goes  i>n,  men 
gain  in  power ;  how  great  moral  habits  strike  their  roots  deep  in  a  society — the 
sense  of  justice  as  justii-e,  self-devoting  enterprise,  patriotism  and  public  spirit.  If 
nations  have  characteristic  faults,  there  grow  up  in  them  characteristic  virtues. 
■Civilisation  to  us  means  liberty,  a  peaceful  life,  growing  honour  for  manliness, 
unselfi>hness,  sincerity.  (2)  And  it  has  disclosed  to  us  in  the  course  of  its  develop- 
ment more  and  more  of  what  is  contained  in  human  characters  and  capacities. 
We  are,  in  this  age,  drawing  forth  with  amazement  discoveries  which  seem  to  be 
inexhaustible  from  the  treasure-house  of  material  nature.  Think  of  the  great 
forms  of  historj',  so  diversified,  so  unlike  one  to  another,  so  unexpected  in  their 
traits.  Think  of  what  fiction,  with  all  its  abuses,  has  done  for  us;  multiplying 
and  unfolding  for  the  general  knowledge  types  which  would  otherwise  have  been 
lost  where  they  grew  up  ;  think  of  its  world  of  ideal  histories,  revealing  to  man 
himself.  Think  again  what  has  been  bestowed  on  man  in  the  perfecting  of 
language.  Think  of  the  way  in  which  new  faculties,  as  it  were,  spring  up  in  us  of 
seeing  and  feeling ;  how,  by  art,  by  poetry,  our  eyes  are  more  and  more  opened  to 
discern  in  new  ways  tlie  wonders  of  the  physical  universe  and  their  meaning. 
Count  over  all  our  great  possessions.  Shall  we  venture  to  say  that  all  this  does  not 
■come  fmm  the  Source  of  all  beauty  and  aH  wisdom  and  all  light?  And  what  He 
gives,  it  is  for  us  to  accept  and  improve.  ''  Covet  earnestly  the  greater,  the  better 
gifts."  This  is  indeed  one  side  of  the  matter.  But  there  is  another  and  a  higher. 
II.  Covet  earnestly  what  would  be  to  be  most  desired  and  followed,  even 
IF  man's  part  ended  here,  but  remember  that  there  IS  A  yet  moke  excrllent 
way.  Above  God's  greatest  gifts  is  charity;  for  "  God  is  1  >ve."  1.  It  would  still 
be  true,  even  if  this  world  were  aQ,  that  this  peifecfion  of  character  is  the  highest 
achievement  of  human  nature.  2.  But  this  world,  with  all  its  wonderful  results, 
is  not  all  ;  we  have  a  place  in  something  wider  and  more  lasting.  We  are  sharers 
together  in  a  great  disaster,  and  in  a  great  recovery,  even  now  begun.     "  God  so 


208  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xii. 

loved  the  world,"  &c.  That  by  which  He  makes  us  to  understand  and  draw  near 
to  Him  is  His  love  for  us.  Henceforth  the  world  knows  Him  if  it  knows  Him  at 
all,  in  the  Cross.  The  world  never  can  be  the  same  after  that,  as  it  was  before  it. 
It  has  brought  a  new  spirit  into  the  world,  with  a  Divine  prerogative  of  excellence, 
to  which  all  other  things  excellent  and  admirable  must  yield  the  first  place.  3. 
There  is  something  else  to  be  thought  of  besides  civilisation.  We  are  not  neces- 
sarily growing  better  men,  though  we  may  be  doing  a  great  work  when  we  are 
dispersing  God's  manifold  gifts  of  knowledge  or  ability.  And  what  we  are  here  for 
is,  if  anything,  to  become  good  ;  and  goodness  now  means  that  spirit  of  love  which 
joins  man  to  man  and  lifts  him  to  God.  Side  by  side  with  our  brilliant  successes 
and  hopes  abide  the  conditions  of  our  state — pain,  moral  evil,  death.  When  a 
man  enters  into  his  closet  and  is  still,  and  by  himself  looks  in  the  face  his  awful 
destiny,  he  can  hardly  help  feeling  that  the  gif  is  of  God  for  this  life  are  for  this  life  ; 
they  cannot  reach  beyond ;  they  cannot  touch  that  which  is  to  be.  As  St.  Paul 
argues,  they  are  incomplete,  transitory,  and,  compared  with  what  we  are  to  look  for, 
but  the  playthings  and  exercises  of  children;  they  share  our  doom  of  mortality. 
One  thing  only  "never  faileth."  In  tlie  next  world,  as  in  this,  it  is  by  love  that 
creatures  receive  and  show  forth  the  likeness  of  their  Maker,  Conclusion :  God 
has  placed  us  to  develope  our  full  nature  here  ;  but  He  has  placed  us  here,  we 
believe,  still  more  to  become  like  Himself.  So,  while  learning  to  understand, 
value,  and  use  the  greatest  endowments  which  the  course  of  things  has  unfolded  in 
human  society,  remember  that  there  is  a  way  for  you  to  walk  in  which  cariies  you 
far  beyond  thtm,  and  opens  to  you  even  wider  prospects,  more  awful  thoughts,  a 
deeper  train  of  ideas  and  relations  and  duties  which  touch  us  in  what  is  most 
inward,  to  the  very  quick.  We  are  sinners  who  have  been  saved  by  a  God  who  loved 
us.  (Dean  Church.)  Tlie  hest  (jifts  : — We  begin  in  order  with  the  counselor  exhor- 
tation, "  Covet  earnestly,"  &c.  Wherein  again  we  h^ive  three  particulars  more.  Thus 
I  say  are  all  those  abilities  which  any  in  any  kind  whatsoever,  or  to  any  purpose, 
are  endowed  witljal.  This  it  is  thus  far  useful  to  us,  as  it  serves  to  engender  all 
meekness  and  humility  in  us.  So  likewise  further  it  holds  well  for  the  improve- 
ment and  exercise  of  these  gifts  which  God  hath  given  us,  that  we  be  no  niggards 
or  restraineis  of  them,  but  good  stewards  of  the  manifold  grace  of  God.  "Freelj 
ye  have  received,  freely  give."  The  dignity  and  excellency  of  them  may  be  brieflj 
laid  forth  unto  us  in  three  particulars:  Fiist,  from  their  original  and  conveynnce, 
when  we  shall  consider  how  we  come  by  them,  and  how  they  are  indeed  trans- 
mitted unto  us.  Now  if  there  were  no  more  but  this  in  it,  there  were  very  good 
reason  certainly  why  we  should  a  little  look  jifter  them.  But  secondly,  that's  not 
all,  there's  a  further  ground  for  our  embracing  them  besides,  and  that  is  by  con- 
sidering them  substantially,  what  they  are  in  their  own  nature,  and  that  impres-sion 
which  they  leave  upon  the  subject  in  which  they  are:  these  gifts  if  we  do  but  con- 
sider them  in  themselves,  they  are  very  amiable  and  lovely,  and  so  make  those 
persons  further  to  be  who  are  endowed  with  them.  They  are  special  ornameuts 
and  beautifyings  to  them.  Thirdly,  and  especially  for  their  use  and  improvement 
and  those  gracious  ends  which  they  lead  unto.  So  much  therefore  now  for  that, 
viz.,  the  first  particular  considerable  in  this  first  general,  and  that  is  the  object 
propounded,  "gifts."  The  second  is  the  qualification  of  this  object  by  way  of 
comparison  or  distinction,  and  that  is  the  best  or  better  gifts.  First,  for  that 
which  is  implied,  there  are  some  gifts  which  are  better  than  others.  Consider 
wherein  this  distinction  does  consist,  namely,  in  what  respect  some  gifts  are  said 
to  be  better  than  others.  First,  gifts  sometimes  are  counted  better  as  they  are 
anything  more  rare  and  unusual.  Those  which  can  do  somewhat  which  few  else 
can  do  besides,  they  do  from  hence  for  the  most  part  esteem  themselves.  Thus  it 
is  with  some  scholars,  just  as  it  is  with  some  books  which  have  a  price  set  upon 
them  more  from  their  scarcity  than  from  the  matter  of  them  or  any  intrinsical 
worth  which  is  in  them.  But  this  is  not  such  a  betterness  as  the  apostle  does 
intend  in  this  place.  Secondly,  gifts  are  sometimes  counted  better  as  they  are 
more  glorious  and  conspicuous  in  the  eyes  of  the  world;  thus  there  are  some 
which  are  especially  more  than  others,  which  have  a  greater  lustre  upon  them. 
It  is  neither  those  gifts  always  which  are  most  rare  and  unusual,  nor  yet  which 
are  most  conspicuous  and  plausible,  which  are  truly  the  better  gifts.  Therefore 
thirdly,  to  speak  home  to  the  point,  there  are  two  things  especially  which  the 
apostle  does  here  mention  to  us.  And  gifts  may  be  said  to  be  better  in  a  twofold 
respect  First,  gifts  are  said  to  be  better  intrinsically  and  materially  as  con- 
sidered wi'hin  the:r  own  compass  and  sphere.     But  then  secondly,  gifts  are  said 


CHAP.  XII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  209 

to  be  better  extrinsically,  or  extensively  ia  their  effects,  as  they  do  more  commu- 
nicate and  enlarge  themselves  beyond  the  subject,  in  which  tliey  are  to  the  good 
of  other  men.  Tlius  those  are  the  best  gifts  whicli  do  tend  best  to  edification. 
Tlie  second  is  that  which  is  expressed,  that  if  there  be  any  gifts  which  are  better 
than  others,  those  are  they  which  we  for  our  particulars  of  all  others  are  to  apply 
ourselves  to,  "  Covet  earnestly  the  best  gifts."  Tiiis  the  apostle  here  requires,  and 
he  does  it  but  upon  reasouable  considerations.  First,  that  common  and  general 
inclination  which  is  in  all  men  in  everything  else ;  tliere  is  nothing  else  in  any 
kind  wbatsoever,  which  men  do  at  any  time  desire  or  look  after,  but  they  would 
have  the  best  of  it  as  near  as  tijey  can  ;  even  there  sometimes  where  worse  might 
serve  their  turn,  and  might  be  good  enough  for  them,  their  mouths  water  after 
that.  The  best  garments,  the  best  houses,  the  best  provisions,  the  best  preferments. 
Wouldst  thou  have  that  which  is  good,  and  be  the  w  orst  of  all  thyself  ?  What  an 
incongruous  and  unsuitable  thing  is  this !  Secondly,  the  consideration  of  the 
nature  of  the  soul  itself,  that  calls  for  as  much  from  us.  The  better  the  soul  is 
considered  in  its  own  substance  and  essence,  the  better  would  those  things  be 
which  shiiuld  qualify  it,  and  which  it  would  be  endued  withal.  The  better  gifts 
do  best  become  the  better  part.  Thirdly,  in  reference  also  to  practice  and  execu- 
tion ;  therefore  the  better  gifts,  that  we  may  accomplish  the  better  iserforniances 
and  may  do  the  most  goud.  The  operations  are  answerable  to  the  principles  ; 
those  which  have  but  mean  gifts,  they  can  consequently  do  but  mean  services. 
This  does  therefore  justly  come  home  to  the  consciences  of  many  persons  in  the 
world ;  there  are  some  which  look  after  none  of  these  gifts  at  all ;  like  Gallio 
they  care  for  none  of  these  things.  If  they  may  have  but  so  much  as  to  subsist 
on  and  to  thrive  in  their  temporal  condition,  that  is  all  they  take  care  for  or  trouble 
themselves  withal.  Give  them  but  the  livings,  and  let  others  go  away  with  the 
gifts.  Again,  there  are  others  which  any  gifts  will  very  well  please  them,  and 
serve  their  turn  ;  which  many  times  want  judgment  to  disijern  of  the  better  gifts, 
which  they  should  give  themselves  unto.  That  this  may  be  further  rightly 
unfolded,  we  must  add  these  following  limitations  by  way  of  explication.  First, 
that  these  words  here  of  the  apostle,  they  are  not  to  be  taken  exclusively,  but  only 
emphatically.  Not  as  denying  us  a  liberty  to  look  after  other  gifts,  but  as  carrying  us 
more  e.'^pecially  to  these  which  are  of  higher  consideration.  It  is  lawful  and  also 
commendable  to  covet  meaner  gifts  likewise,  such  as  knowledge  and  learning. 
This  will  be  easily  cleared  unto  us  upon  ths  account.  First,  because  it  is  that 
which  does  bring  us  into  a  nearer  Ukeness  and  similitude  to  God  Himself ;  that  is 
undoubtedly  tlie  most  excellent  way  which  does  make  us  most  conformable  to  Him 
who  is  the  chieft:'st  excellency.  Now  this  we  are  not  so  much  by  our  gifts  and 
parts  as  we  are  liy  the  work  of  grace  in  our  hearts.  Indeed  it  is  true  that  we  are 
made  like  unto  God  in  some  sort,  in  the  natural  faculties  of  our  soul,  our  reason, 
understanding,  &o.  But  this  is  not  all,  nor  the  chiefest ;  no,  bitt  so  far  forth  as 
we  are  new  created  and  made  over  again  by  the  sanctifying  work  of  God's  SiJirit  in 
as.  Secondly,  grace  is  the  more  excellent  way  and  such  as  is  beyond  common 
gifts,  as  the  end  is  better  than  the  means  which  are  ordained  and  appointed  there- 
unto. Thirdly,  it  is  more  excellent  also  in  regard  of  the  effects  and  consequents  of 
it.  For  it  gives  peace  of  conscience  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  We  are  not  saved 
as  we  have  greater  parts  than  others,  more  knowledge  and  enlightening  in  our 
understandings;  but  rather  as  we  have  more  grace  than  others,  and  more  love  and 
flexibilitv  in  our  affections.  The  consideration  of  this  point  may  serve  as  a  good 
rule  unto  us  wherehy  to  estimate  botlr  ourselves  and  other  men ;  and  that  is  not  so 
nmch  by  tue  former  as  rather  by  the  latter.  Let  us  not  think  ourselves  the  better 
men  so  much  by  our  wit  and  learning  as  rather  by  our  piety  and  religious  grace. 
And  so  much  also  for  that  second  point  :  that  grace  and  godliness  is  the  most 
excellent  way.  The  third  is  that  which  follows  from  this  second,  and  that  is  this  : 
that  it  is  a  duty  which  lies  upon  us  to  pursue  the  latter  above  the  former,  to 
cov'  t  the  more  excellent  way,  above  the  better  gifts,  grace  before  other  accomiDlish- 
ment-;.  And  surely  not  without  very  good  cause  and  ground  for  it.  For  first,  we 
shall  otherwise  be  detective  in  the  ino»t  principal  accomplishment  of  all.  There  is 
an  argument  in  the  very  title  which  he  gives  it  when  he  calls  it  "  the  most  excellent 
way."  What  a  folly  is  it  to  mind  things  which  are  inferior!  Secondly,  we  shall 
be  otherwise  able  to  do  less  good  with  such  gifts  as  these  are  ;  where  there  are 
the  better  gifts  without  the  more  excellent  way,  there  will  not  be  tliat  improvement 
of  those  gifts  as  it  is  fitting  there  should  be  to  God's  glory,  and  the  good  of  the 
Church  or  commonwealth  in  which  a  man  is  and  whereunto  he  belongs.  Take  a 
VOL.    II.  14 


210  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xii. 

man  that  has  nothing  but  pirts,  and  has  not  grace  for  the  ordering  of  his  parts, 
and  he  will  do  but  very  little  or  no  good  with  them.  Nay  further,  thiidlv,  such  as 
these  will  oftentimes  do  so  much  the  more  hurt.  St.  Paul  had  very  g'od  reason, 
when  he  had  made  mention  of  the  better  gifts,  to  propound  immediatel.y  up^n  it 
the  more  excellent  waj',  because  those  without  this  are  but  so  much  the  more 
hurtful  and  pernicious.  Iniquity  when  it  is  armed  with  learning  is  so  much  the 
more  dangerous.  What  does  all  this  now  come  to,  but  so  much  the  more 
strongly  to  enforce  this  present  exhortation  of  the  apostle,  which  we  have  here 
now  before  us,  upon  ourselves.  To  couple  these  two  both  together  in  our 
endeavour,  which  he  does  h?re  together  in  his  speech.  And  further,  as  we  are 
to  mind  godliness  and  religion  in  the  chiefest  place,  that  also  which  is  chief 
and  most  principd  in  it;  there  is  the  ex  fell  en  t  way  considerable  in  the  excellent 
way,  in  opposition  to  that  which  is  meaner  and  inferior  in  it.  There  is  the  form 
and  outside  of  reliyion,  and  th^re  is  the  power  and  efficacy  of  it.  We  should 
not  be  only  formal  Christians,  but  real  ;  not  only  remiss  Christians,  but  zealous  ; 
not  only  slight  arid  supevticial  Christians,  but  i-ound  and  solid  and  substantial. 
Again  still  further,  to  explain  this  i  oint  of  the  excellent  way  a  little  moie  unti)  us, 
as  we  are  to  endeavour  after  this  simply  con^idi-ved  in  itself ;  so  hkewise  in  refer- 
ence to  our  several  pe'foimances  for  tlie  pavticuhir  exercise  and  execution.  There 
are  some  kind  of  actions  and  performances  in  religion,  whicli  as  concerning  the 
right  and  better  di=charge  of  them  aie  mixed  of  parts  and  piety  both.  They 
require  the  better  gifts,  and  they  require  the  more  excellent  way  for  the  doing  of 
them.  And  we  should  not  satisfy  ourselves  in  the  one  without  the  other.  Again 
yet  further,  we  s^hould  be  careful  ho  to  order  and  dispose  of  our  gifts  for  the  getting 
and  improving  of  tliem,  as  that  witlial  we  do  not.  ])rejndice  our  graces,  and  hinder 
and  obstruct  them  ;  we  should  take  heed  of  losing  ourselves  in  our  studies,  as  con- 
cerning the  frame  and  temper  of  our  hearts.  Labour  to  advance  in  learning,  but 
still  remember  to  keep  up  in  grMce.  I^astlv,  this  excellent  way,  it  does  not  only 
refer  to  the  getting  of  grace  ourselves,  but  likewise  to  the  promoting  of  it  in  others. 
And  this  was  that  which  the  Apostle  Paul  in  this  place  did  seem  especially  to  aim 
at  in  these  Corint'dnns.  Humility  and  thankfulness  iu  the  enjoyment  of  gifts,  and 
charity  and  faithfu'ness  in  the  im;  rovement  of  gifts,  is  the  most  excellent  way 
in  order  to  the  gifts  themselves.  Tlie  second  is  the  proposition  of  it,  that  we 
have  in  this  word,  "  I  sViow  it  unto  you."  Show  it  ?  How  did  he  show  it  ?  Two 
ways,  as  we  may  conceive  more  especially.  First,  he  showed  it  in  thesi ;  and 
secondly,  he  showed  in  hypothesi.  He  sh'  wed  it  in  the  practice.  He  showed  it 
in  his  doctrine  and  ministry.  First,  he  showed  it  them  in  his  doctrine,  and  by 
way  of  simple  propos-tion  he  published  it  and  declared  it  unto  them,  and  that  at 
large  here  in  this  Episile  in  the  chapter  immediately  following.  The  apostle 
showed  unto  thepe  Corinthians  the  most  excellent  wav  ;  and  he  showed  it  first  of 
all  in  his  doctnne.  Here  are  divers  things  wdiich  from  hen-e  I  mi  ht  very 
pertinently  insist  ujion  ;  as — First,  we  see  heie  tliat  religion  is  capable  of  demon- 
stration. It  is  such  as  may  be  clearly  evidenced  and  demonstrated  and  made 
good  to  those  who  will  not  be  peevish  and  refractory  and  perverse.  Again 
secondly,  in  that  the  apostle  here  speaking  of  his  pleaching  and  wrding  and 
ministerial  dispensation  says,  "  I  show  it  unto  you."  We  see  here  in  v.hat  kind 
of  way  preaching  and  teaching  is  to  be  carried.  In  the  demonstration  of  the 
Spirit  and  jiowcr  (chap.  ii.  4).  It  is  not  enough  for  us  simply  to  propound 
truths,  but  as  near  as  we  can  to  evidence  them  and  demonstrate  them.  'I  here- 
fore  we  are  here  especially  to  take  heed  of  anything  which  may  be  any  hindrance 
or  prejudice  hereunto.  Secondly,  he  showed  it  also  in  his  own  practice  and 
example.  This  we  may  gather  from  the  next  chapter,  "  Though  I  should  speak 
.  .  .  without  charity,"  &c.  "  Though  I  should,"  is  here  as  much  as  "  I  do  not," 
and  this  is  another  kind  of  showing,  which  does  belong  to  all  ministers  else 
whosoever  they  be,  without  which  the  other  showing  will  do  little  or  no  good  at 
all.  The  Apostle  Paul,  as  he  was  a  sound  teacher,  so  he  was  likewise  a  follower 
of  that  vhich  liimself  did  teach.  Ihis  is  requisite  to  be,  thereby  to  make  our 
doctrine  more  effectual  and  full  of  success.  Who  will  believe  our  report  when  we 
do  not  believe  it  ourselves?  (Thomas  Hortoii,  D.D.)  Grace  and  love  beyond  (jifta  : — 
The  Church  of  Corinth  abounded  most  with  spiritual  gifts,  and  so  they  did  most  abuse 
them.  All  had  not  those  sjiiritual  gifts,  some  had  ;  those  that  had  them  despised  those 
that  had  them  not ;  and  those  that  had  them  not  envied  those  that  had  them. 
Paul,  therefore,  that  he  might  heal  this  distemper,  tells  them  that  though  the  way 
of  gifts  be  an  excellent  way,  yet  the  way  of  grace  and  love  is  more  excelleut  and 


CHAP,  xir.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  21J 

most  to  be  desired.  I.  There  is  a  way  of  gifts  distinct  from  the  way  of 
GRACE,  and  vice  i-ersa.  All  the  saints  liave  grace,  but  all  liave  not  ulfts.  Grice  is 
that  excellency  whereby  we  are  made  like  to  God  in  Christ ;  gifts,  that  whereby  we 
are  serviceable  for  God  in  the  Church.  A  mjin  may  have  a  gift  and  yet  no  grace 
in  prayer  or  in  preaching,  ami  may  have  the  gift,  and  yet  not  the  saving  grace  of 
faith.  II.  Bot  what  excellency  is  there  iv  the  way  of  gifts'?  1.  'ihj  are 
useful.  The  sun  is  an  excellent  creature,  because  be  doth  good  to  others.  Taou-'h 
there  be  excellent  commodities  in  other  countries,  yet  if  you  have  no  means  of 
transport,  you  are  no  better  for  them ;  therefore  there  is  a  great  use  of  shii:)ping. 
So  by  these  gifts,  the  grace  that  grows  in  one  man's  heart  is  transported  into 
anotber's  (Eph.  iv.).  If  you  cannot  rench  a  book  yon  take  a  stool,  and  then  you  are 
able  to  take  it  down ;  the  stool  a»e  these  gifts.  2.  They  add  excellency  to  that 
which  is  the  most  excellent.  Ordinirily,  if  a  worse  thing  be  iulded  unto  a  butter, 
the  better  is  defiled,  e.g.,  when  lead  is  added  to  silver.  But  now  gace  is  the 
greatest  excellency  in  the  world,  yet  add  gifts  to  it,  and  gra^e  itself  is  made  the 
more  excellent ;  for  as  the  temple  did  sanctifv  the  gold,  but  the  gild  did  i)eautify 
ihe  temple ;  so  grace  sanctifies  gifts,  and  gifts  beautify  grace.  III.  Wherein  is 
■grace  and  love  most  excellent.  1.  Love — (1)  Is  not  an  empty  thing  fcha)). 
xiii.  1).  (2)  It  never  fails.  (.S)  It  is  not  easily  provoked,  &c.  2.  Gr^ice — (1)  Is 
the  proper  effect  of  the  Spirit;  gifts  aie,  opi/.s  ad  extra.  (2)  Affords  no  hold  for 
sin.  IV.  Application:  1.  To  those  that  have  gifts.  It  calls  upon  you  all  for  to 
hless  the  Lord,  and  to  seek  the  more  excellent  way.  For  gifts  and  grace  differ — (1) 
In  their  nature  ;  the  one  are  a  dead  grace,  the  other  a  living  gii't.  (2)  In  their 
disposition,  for  grace  is  contented  with  the  simplicity  of  the  gospel,  gifts  are  not 
■contented.  'J  he  Corinthians,  who  excelled  in  gifts,  adulterated  the  gospel  with 
their  swelling  words  ;  and  the  Galatians  with  fnlse  doctrine.  A  child  in  a  cornfield 
is  most  taken  with  the  coloured  weeds  and  daisies;  but  the  husbanlman  is  taken 
with  nothing  but  tlie  corn.  So  a  man  that  hath  gifts  only,  when  he  comes  to  a 
sermon,  or  a  prayer,  is  much  taken  witli  the  fine  expressions  ;  but  the  man  that 
hath  grace  looks  at  the  spirituality  and  the  power  of  those  things  that  are  there 
delivered.  (S)  In  their  effects  ;  grace  hath  a  good  hand  at  suffering  as  well  as 
at  doing;  gifts  have  a  very  good  hand  at  doing,  but  an  ill  hand  at  suffering.  (4) 
In  their  abatement  and  quenching  :  if  a  man  have  gra  'e  and  fall  into  sin,  that  sin 
will  hinder  and  quench  the  former  actings  of  his  grace  ;  but  if  a  man  have  gifts 
only,  and  he  fall  into  sin,  that  Sin  hinders  not  his  actings,  he  can  prav  as  he  did, 
&C,.  A  candle  painted  upon  a  board,  if  put  into  water,  is  not  quenched  thereby; 
•because  it  is  a  dead  and  not  a  living  candle.  2.  To  those  who  have  either  no  gifts 
at  all,  or  very  weak  gifis.  It  calls  upon  you  to  be  of  good  comfort.  The  w^y  of 
gifts,  indeed,  is  an  excellent  way ;  yet  if  God  has  led  you  in  a  more  excellent  way, 
have  you  any  cause  to  complain?  Will  you  complain  for  want  of  that,  which  if 
you  had  in  abundance,  you  would  have  less  time  to  tend  your  own  souls?  Or,  will 
you  complain  for  want  of  that,  which  if  you  had  without  grace,  would  be  your 
uniloing?       (W.    Bridfie,    M.A.)  A   comparison    b-tireeii  {lifts   and   graces: — I. 

Graces  are  better  than  gifts.  Gifts  were  necessary  in  the  early  ages  of  the 
■Church;  as  outward  illustra'ions  of  the  new  spiritual  facts,  as  evidences  of  the 
Divine  authority  of  the  pn  achers  of  the  gosnel,  and  as  fitting  them  to  ca'ry  their 
message  to  all  nations.  And  there  are  still  gifts  bestowed  on  the  Church.  We 
speak  of  a  person  having  a  gift  for  preaching  or  teaching,  or  praying  or  giving,  &c. 
The  Redeemer's  king  loin  needs  consecrated  learning,  eloquenct^,  Ac.  But  the 
apostle  sets  graces  above  gifts,  a  thing  surely  very  remarkable  in  his  case.  II. 
Wh\t  graces  and  gifts  hwe  I^f  comjion.  1.  A  Divine  origin.  "  What  hive  we 
that  we  have  not  received?  By  the  grace  of  God  we  are  what  we  are."  2.  A 
purpose  to  effect.  Both  are  for  the'use  of  edifying.  If  we  have  gifts  we  are  to  use 
them  in  kindly  and  wise  actions,  helping  our  brothers  to  carry  their  burdens,  or 
teaching  them  how  best  to  lay  stone  upon  stone.  If  we  have  graces,  then  we  are 
enabled  to  exf-rcise  a  holy  influence,  inspiring  and  inspiriting  souls.  3.  Both  can 
grow  and  suffer  loss.  III.  What  graces  have  that  gifts  h»ve  not.  1.  Graces 
have  the  power  to  come  to  all.  and  enrich  all.  In  any  very  large  sense  gifts  can 
only  be  for  the  few.  2.  Graces  last  for  ever.  The  thinp;s  which  we  have  must  one 
day  drop  out  of  our  hands  ;  thn  dead  hand  hold^  nothinjr.  What  wh  are  in  our- 
selves we  must  be  forever.  3.  Graces  have  the  pnver  of  working  always.  Gifts 
are  depenlent  on  men's  wills,  and  th^ise  wills  are  oft-n  wholly  self-ruled.  We  very 
seld  lui  can  get  the  full  benefit  of  the  gifts  of  the  gified.  But  if  a  man  h'ue  a 
grace,  he  cannot  help  working  for  his  fellow-men  and  for  Christ.     {R.  'fuck,  B.A.] 


212  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xm. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

Yeks.  1-13.  Though  I  speak  with  the  tongues  of  men  and  of  angels,  and  have  not 
charity,  I  am  become  as  soundirg  brass,  or  a  tinkling  cymbal. — Chanty  : — Each 
of  the  apostles  had  a  ijredoininant  leature  of  character.  Paul's  was  faith  ;  John's 
love.  And  yet  it  was  not  to  John  that  the  oihce  was  assigned  of  expounding  his 
own  especial  grace.  The  reason  for  this  is,  if  Paul  had  exalted  faith  only,  and  John 
love  only,  we  might  have  conceived  that  the  ^dgment  of  each  was  guided  by  his 
peculiarities  of  temperament.  But  when  the  gifted  apostle  counts  gifts  as  nothing 
in  comparison  of  lo\  e,  no  doubt  remains.  I.  The  desckiption  of  this  grace  (ver.  4-7). 
1.  This  is  needed,  because  no  single  word  can  express  its  fulness.  Many  of  these 
qualities  are  what  we  should  assign  to  other  graces,  e.p.,  patience,  "  snfferethlong"  ; 
generosity,  "  envieth  not  "  ;  humility,  "vaunteth  not  herself  "  ;  dignified  demeanour, 
"doth  n<.t  behave  itself  unset mly,"  etc.  But  it  is  in  the  coexistence  of  all 
that  the  real  life  of  the  uu'ier-root  of  love  was  shown.  2.  The  apostle  here 
desciibes  a  Christian  gentleman.  The  difference  between  high-breeding  or  courtesy, 
i.e.,  manners  of  the  court,  the  characteristic  of  the  hifjh-born,  and  Christian 
courtesy  is,  that  the  former  gracefully  insists  upon  its  own  rights  ;  the  latter  grace- 
fully remembers  the  rights  of  others.  The  Spirit  of  Christ  does  leally  what  high- 
breeding  only  does  outwardly.  A  high-bred  man  is  urbane  even  to  persons  whom 
he  is  inwardly  cursing  ;  and  1  ence  the  only  true  deep  refinement  comes  from 
Christian  love.  And  hence,  too,  we  understand  what  is  meant  by  elevating  and 
refining  the  jioorer  cl»sses.  Chiistianity  desires  to  make  tlnm  all  gentlemen.  Only 
read  this  desciiption  of  Christ  an  charily,  and  conceive  it  existing  in  a  peasant's 
breast.  Could  he  be  rude,  seltish,  and  incdnsiderate?  "Would  he  not  be  a  gentle- 
man in  heart?  II.  The  eeasons  foe  its  sitpeeioeity  to  gifts.  1.  Its  peimanence 
— "  Charity  never  faileth."  (1)  Prophecy — the  power  of  inteipreting  Scrii^ture,  is 
a  precious  gift,  but  a  time  will  ccme  "  when  ihey  shall  not  teach  every  man  his 
neighbour,  saying,  Know  the  Liad,  but  all  shall  know  Him  from  the  least  to  the 
greatest."  (2)  Tongui  s,  also,  shall  pass  away.  Suppose  a  man  had  known  fifty 
languagi^s  in  the  days  of  St.  Paul,  how  few  would  be  of  use  now  !  (3)  Knowledge 
also  "  shall  vanish  away,"  for  it  is  hut  a  temporary  state  of  the  human  mind,  e.p., 
—  (a)  That  of  the  physician,  vlnch  arises  out  of  the  existence  of  disease:  were 
there  no  disease,  his  knowledge  would  disappear,  {h)  It  is  the  same  with  gifts  of 
healing  :  when  the  time  comes  in  which  "  they  shall  hunger  no  more,  and  thirst 
no  more,"  when  sickness  and  death  shall  cease,  this  power  shall  be  needless,  (n) 
So  also  with  the  knowledge  of  the  lawyer.  Were  there  no  wrongs  done,  the 
necessity  of  legal  knowledge  would  be  at  an  end.  (d)  The  same  with  science, 
which  is  ever  shifting  and  becoiuing  obsolete.  The  science  of  St.  Paul's  day  is 
only  curious  now.  2.  Its  completeness.  Gilts  are  only  means  to  an  end.  Love 
remains,  the  perfection  of  our  huiuan  being,  just  as  stem,  tlower,  bud,  and  leaf  in 
the  tree  are  all  subservient  to  the  fruit.  St.  Paul  uses  two  illustrations  to  make 
this  plain  (ver.  11,  12).  (1)  Just  what  childhood  is  to  manhond,  the  most  advanced- 
manhood  is  to  our  heavenly  being.  There  are  many  things  now  which  subserve 
a  high  purpose,  but  do  not  belong  to  the  highest  state.  Patriot  ism,  ambition, 
exclusive  friendship,  will  then  disappear,  and  be  succeeded  by  higher  impulses.  (2) 
Just  what  the  going  out  of  a  room  lighted  through  horn  windows  into  the  clear 
daylight  would  be  to  us  now,  will  h^  the  entrance  of  the  purified  spirit  into  God's 
realities  out  of  this  world  of  shadows — of  things  half  seen — of  restless  drenms 
(1  John  iii.  2).  {F.  W.  Ixohert.fox,  M.A.)  Ciiurity  : — There  is  no  royal  road  to 
learning,  but  there  is  one  to  heaven — charity.  To  love  is  to  be  in  possession  of 
eternal  blessedness.  I.  All  gifts  aee  of  little  wokth  if  not  diekcted  and 
controlled  by  love  (vers.  1-3)  Paul  takes  the  gifis  upon  which  the  Corinthians 
prided  themselves,  and  affirms  that  all  these  are  usehss  if  love  does  not  regulate 
their  operations.  1.  One  man  noted  for  his  eloquence.  But  suppose  he  uses  his 
gift  for  his  own  advantage,  or  to  stir  up  the  passions  of  his  audience!  2.  Another 
has  vast  knowledge,  but  what  is  the  use  of  it  if  he  has  not  love  to  communicate  it, 
and  that  in  the  best  w -y  ?  It  is  one  of  the  most  dangerous  gifts  a  man  can  possess. 
3.  Faith  is  nothing  without  lo^e.  4.  Lih^rality  is  noti'ing  without  love  (ver.  3). 
You  gave  five  pounds  to  a.  charitable  institution  ;  why  ?  Because  you  wanted  to  get 
rid  of  the  collector,  or  b'^cause  you  thought  it  would  biing  custom  ?  5.  Zeal  with- 
out love  is  nothing.  I'aul  says,  "  I  can  conceive  of  a  man  being  burned  through 
obslinacy  or  a  false  notion  of  heroism,  but  it  will  avail  nothing  if  there  is  no  love 


,a  01  us.     a. 
ling  is  mor^ 
back,"  and^ 


CHAP.  XIII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  213 

in  his  heart."  And  so,  now,  it  is  possible  to  be  zealously  affected  in  a  good  cause 
from  the  worst  of  all  motives,  viz.,  self-exaltation.  II.  A  description  op  love 
(vers.  4-8).  The  man  who  has  real  love  in  his  heart  is — 1.  Long-suffering  and 
generous.  2.  Contented.  "  Charity  envieth  not."  Not  that  we  should  never  strive 
for  anything  higher  and  better  ;  but  we  should  always  be  thankful  for  our  position, 
and  not  constantly  grumbling  because  some  one  else  is  a  little  ahead  of  us.  3. 
Humble.  "  Charity  vaunteth  not  herself,  is  not  puffed  up."  Notii 
offensive  than  that  spirit  of  assumption  whi'-h  "  i^ats  one  on  the 
patronises  as  though  it  were  an  embodiment  of  the  wisdom  of  all  the  ages.  4 
Considerate  of  anotlier's  feelings.  "  Doth  not  behave  itself  unseemly."  5.  Unselfish. 
"  Charity  seeketh  not  her  own."  The  motto  of  most  is,  "  Take  care  of  number 
one."  6.  Calm.  "Is  not  easily  provoked."  Love  has  power  to  command  all  the 
other  faculties,  and  to  make  them  obey.  7.  Unsuspicious.  "  Thinketh  no  evil,"1 
and  with  this  may  be  put  purity.  "  Epjoiceth  not  in  iniquity,  but  lejoiceth  in  the  J 
truth."  The  best  construction  possible  is  put  upon  everything  ;  on  the  other  hand, 
where  sin  is  really  shown,  love  does  not  spare  the  sinner.  8.  Magnanimous. 
"Beareth  all  things,"  or  "  covereth  all  things."  The  tendency  of  love  is  to  hide"L 
rather  than  expose  the  faults  of  others  instead  of  blazoning  them  abroad.  9._J 
Trustful.  "  Believeth  all  things."  Not  that  the  charitable  man  is  credulous,  but 
he  "  thinketh  no  evil,"  i.e.,  when  the  conduct  of  others  is  concerned  he  always 
believes  the  best  report.  10.  Hopes  for  the  best.  "  Hopeth  all  things."  When  an 
investigation  is  going  on  Love  says,  "  I  hope  that  man  will  come  out  clear."  11. 
Endures  all  things.  Does  not  murmur  or  repine  in  times  of  sorrow — will  bear  any- 
thing for  the  welfare  of  another.  Put  all  these  characteristics  together,  and  yoh? 
have  Jesus  Christ,  for  in  Him  only  do  they  all  meet.  Why,  then,  did  Paul  put  sucn 
a  high  ideal  before  us  ?  In  order  that  we  may  try  to  reach  it.  III.  The  gkeatness 
OF  LOVE.  1.  Gifts  are  transient.  Those  special  gifts  of  tongues,  &c.,  have  long 
since  passed  away,  and  others  have  come  in  their  place — eloquence,  knowledge. 
These,  however,  are  fleeting ;  but  when  th^se  shall  fail.  Faith,  Hope,  and  Chai'ity 
■will  remain.  2.  Love — it  includes  all.  3.  Love  is  the  peifection  of  knowledge 
(vers.  9,  10).  This  is  illustrated  by  his  personal  experience  (ver.  11).  (A.  /*'. 
Barjield.)  Charity  : — This   chapter  is   a   noble   hymn  ;    scarce  anywhere  else 

does  Paul  seem  so  wholly  possessed  with  his  subject.  The  very  words  themselves 
have  something  about  them  of  the  grace  which  they  describe.  They  sound  like 
an_gelic  harmonies.  I.  See  how  the  apostle  tears  up  by  the  roots  many  a  sign 
OF  acceptance  on  which  men  are  accustomed  to  rely.  1.  What  a  noble  thing  it 
is  to  have  the  power  of  speech  to  move  men's  souls  !  No  wonder  that  men  put 
such  a  price  upon  eloquence.  However,  so  long  as  it  is  employed  in  mere  worldly 
interests,  whose  soul  is  the  better  for  it?  If  charity  breathe  into  it  and  give  it  life, 
it  is  well.  But  if  you  substitute  fine  talking,  dressed  out  with  the  names  of  God 
and  Christ,  it  is  not  a  blessing  to  you,  but  a  curse.  Learn  to  love,  and  away  with 
the  ready  tongue  and  fluent  profession.  2.  Even  in  worldly  matters,  and,  specially, 
in  God's  works,  knowledge  is  a  great  and  noble  thing,  and  much  more  so  when 
conversant  with  things  Divine.  But  men  are  led  to  fancy  that  this  is  religion  itself. 
But  though  your  minds  were  so  enlarged  that  they  could  contain  all  mysteries  and  all 
knowledge,  yet  if  charity  be  not  there,  not  only  is  all  this  knowledge  cold  and  dead, 
majestic  like  some  great  building,  but  with  no  soul  in  it ;  but  it  profits  nothing,  it 
will  not  bring  you  on  one  step  to  heaven !  3.  But  to  come  to  better  things,  e.g., 
faith.  Great  is  the  might  that  lies  within  it.  Yet  faith  without  love  is  no  better 
than  the  belief  of  the  evil  angels,  though  it  works  miracles.  4.  The  apostle  waxes 
bolder  and  denies  the  seal  of  salvation,  even  to  beneficence,  if  it  could  exist  alone. 
Nay,  to  that  sablimest  effort  of  faith,  by  which  the  martyrs  gave  their  very  bodies 
to  the  flames,  he  refuses  the  assurance  of  God's  love  if  charity  be  absent.  An 
admirable  thing,  if  you  please  ;  so  great  as,  perhaps,  to  be  beyond  the  comprehen- 
sion of  most  men  in  our  age,  when  too  many  Christians  would  not  sacrifice  a  finget 
to  Christ,  much  less  give  the  body  to  be  burned !  yet,  in  the  lack  of  love  as  the 
source  of  it,  it  is  not  capable  of  profiting  any  of  us  at  the  grt- at  day  of  the  Lord  1 
II.  What,  then,  is  this  Divine  virtue  ?  1.  Ascharitv  is  not  the  mere  giving  to  the 
poor,  though  that  is  a  duty,  so  still  less  has  the  thing  which  counts  all  religion  the 
same  anything  to  do  with  this  Divine  grace.  If  the  world's  notLm  of  charity  be 
right,  it  is  the  easiest  thing  that  can  be ;  and  you  have  only  to  be  an  infidel  to  have 
it.  2.  Measure  your  charity,  and  frame  your  standard  of  it,  by  Him  who  is  perfect 
truth  and  peifect  love.  You,  then,  who  profess  yourselves  Christians,  are  you 
impatient  to  affronts  and  injuries,  unable  to  bear  anything  that  opposes  your  own 


214  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 

will  ?  if  so,  ye  have  not  charity  ;  for  charity  "  suffereth  long  and  is  Mnd."  Are  you 
jealous  of  other  men's  praises  and  possessions,  looking  on  them  with  an  evil  eye? 
if  so,  charity  ciwelleth  not  iu  you  ;  for  charity  envieth  not,  &c.  2.  This  charily, 
which  surpasses  all  other  graces,  does  in  deed  and  iu  truth  contain  them  all.  Tl  at 
it  is  no  other  than  the  Christian  life  ;  a  manifestation  in  daily  and  hourly  action  of 
a  Divine  principle  witln'n,  which  testifies  to  its  own  heavenly  origin.  Christ  is  this 
living  charity,  and  hath  left  an  example  that  we  should  follow  His  steps.  Aye,  and 
He  is  still  among  you,  not  only  stining  within  the  soul,  but  speaking  oftentimes, 
and  aciing  in  the  form  of  charity.  Whenever  you  see  a  gentle  and  long-suffering  \ 
spiiit,  there  you  see  Christ !  Whenever  you  see  an  earnest  love  for  men's  souls,  aud__} 
labour  for  them,  there  you  see  Christ.  Christ  is  in  His  disciples,  and  His  disciples 
in  Him  !  Tliey  are  one  with  Him,  and  He  one  with  them,  in  a  Divine  and  unspeak- 
able unity!  (J.  Gaibett,  3LA.)  Chriatian  charity: — I.  Irs  natlee.  Charity 
meiins  love.  As  to  its  properties,  it  coujprises  complacency,  gratitude  and  benevo- 
lence. Its  objects  are — 1.  God.  This  constitutes  the  firbt  great  commandment  of 
the  moral  law  ;  God  is  the  object  of  love,  as  it  comprises  complacency  in  the  con- 
templation of  His  perfections,  and  gratitude  in  the  coutfuiplation  of  His  blessings. 
2.  Man.  This  is  the  second  great  commandme))t — the  love  requiied  not  excluding 
compl'cency  and  gratitude,  but  consisting  principally  in  benevolence.  (1)  To  those 
who  share  the  same  spiritual  privileges  and  are  therefore  in  the  highest  sense 
bre  hien.  2.  To  men  simply  as  men.  It  is  impossible  for  any  one  to  be  a  Christian 
wiihout  b>  ing  a  philanthropist.  II.  Its  maxu'Estations.  1.  Toward  God.  (1) 
Lelief  of  His  taith.  Faith  produces  love,  but  love  in  return  lends  a  higher  and 
more  powerful  energy  to  faith.  (2)  The  study  of  His  character.  We  cannot  con- 
ceive of  love  but  as  meditating  u2)on  its  object.  (3)  Obedience  to  His  command- 
ments. "  If  a  man  love  Me,  he  will  keep  My  words,"  &c.  (4)  Activity  in  His 
cause.  They  who  are  thus  animated  will  desire  that  others  may  love  Him  also.  (5) 
Anticipation  of  Ili.s  kingdom.  Here  it  blends  with  hope.  2.  To  man.  These  mani- 
festations are  presented  in  the  verses  direcily  succeeding  the  text.  Note  the  impor- 
tance of  ihese  manifestations,  iu  relation — (1)  To  the  Church.  All  that  love  can 
think  and  do,  in  forbearance,  forgiveness,  liumility,  sympathy,  and  benevolence,  is 
demanded  on  behalf  of  those  who  are  united  in  the  same  community  with  ourselves ; 
and  not  only  to  these,  but  to  all  who  own  the  Christian  name.  The  whole  Church 
must  cidtiViite  this  towards  the  whole  Chui-ch,  ere  it  can  ever  approximate  to  the 
fulfilii  ent  of  its  responsibility,  both  in  relation  to  the  glory  of  God  and  the  happi- 
ness of  nifin.  (2)  To  tlie  world.  Beyond  the  manifestations  presented  here  there 
is  one  whicli  the  present  state  of  the  unconverted  world  does  most  solemnly  demand, 
viz.,  pity.  Christianity  calls  on  us  to  be  almoners  of  the  Divine  bounty  to  the  souls 
of  men,  and  we  have  to  carry  to  them  the  gospel.  This  will  purify  their  pollution 
and  ri  dress  their  wrongs.  III.  Its  pee-eminexce.  Passing  by  the  superiority  of 
love  to  miraculous  gilts  or  natural  amiable  aispo>itions,  note  two  facts  in  which  its 
pre-eminence  consists.  1.  Love  partakes  of  the  Di\ine  nature.  This  cannot  be 
stated  of  a  laig^i  prcportion  of  the  other  graces,  viz.,  repentance,  faith,  hope,  &c. 
But  "  Go'l  is  love  "  (1  John  iv.  7,  12,  10).  2.  Love  is  perfected  and  perpetuated  iu  . 
the  celestial  state.  Other  graces  prepare  for  heaven,  but  do  not  enter  it,  e.g.,  repen- 
tance, faith,  &c.  But  love  is  there;  and  love  is  all.  (J.  Paiyons.)  lite 
wirealitfi  of  leligion  uithout  love: — Nothing  is  more  dangerous  in  religion  than 
unreality.  It  may  pass  muster,  and  be  undetected,  iu  secular  things,  but  it  is  soon 
discovered  in  people  who  profess  and  call  themselves  Christians.  St.  Paul  had  m 
the  previous  chajiter  rebuked  the  Corinthians  for  their  mistaken  view  of  spiritual 
things.  He  had  done  his  utmost  to  lead  them  up  to  the  realisation  that  they  were 
then  "as  sounding  brass  or  a  tinkling  cymbal" — mere  voice,  and  nothing  more. 
He  had  also  p.  omised  to  show  them  a  more  excellent  way.  It  is  the  way  of  charity, 
or  perfect  love.  I.  A  great  fact.  All  things  are  valueless  without  love.  Bishop 
Wordsworth  describes  this  love  (aya~7j)  as  "  love  to  God  and  to  man  in  God  and 
for  God  "  (chap.  viii.  1).  The  life  and  work  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  show  us  the 
power  of  love  over  human  hearts.  He  used  no  artifice,  no  violence,  no  ostentation. 
The  gieat  secret  of  His  power  was  that  His  was  the  acme  of  love  (John  xv.  13).  II. 
A  GEEAT  motive.  St.  Paul  would  have  us  look  to  our  motives  (1  Sam.  xvi.  7).  That 
Ti^ot  always  charity  wdiich  seems  so,  just  as  "  all  is  not  gold  that  glitters."  The 
great  motive  is  wanting.  Even  martyrdom,  without  love,  is  a  hollow  and  useless 
sham.  It  is  as  worthless  as  a  great  sounding  of  brass  and  a  tinkling  of  cymbals. 
It  is  a  thing  "without  life,  giving  sound"  (chap.  xiv.  7).  III.  A  GEE.vr  character- 
istic.    How  are  we  to  know,  then,  what  is  truly  charity  and  what  is  not  ?     We 


CHAP,  xin.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  215 

must  test  it.  The  genuineness  of  everything  is  discovered  by  tests.  1.  That  which 
looks  like  a  sovereign  is  often  discovered  to  be  of  base  metal  by  its  ring  uijon  the 
counter,  or  by  the  application  of  an  acid.  2.  A  house  sometimes  looks  well  built 
and  habitable,  but  when  the  rain  descends  and  the  flooJs  come,  and  beat  upon  it, 
the  fall  thereof  is  great  (Matt.  vii.  27).  3.  Those  who  seem  to  be  our  best  friends 
are  often  actuated  by  the  most  selfish  motives,  and  would  be  the  last  to  give  us  help 
if  we  needed  it.  In  all  these  cases  the  test  brings  out  the  true  characteristics.  The 
great  characteristic  of  true  charity  is  unselfishness.  Wherever  it  is  found,  that 
quality  will  be  at  the  root  of  all  its  actions.  IV.  A  geeat  consolation.  All  men 
long  for  something  that  will  last.  We  live  in  a  world  of  change.  St.  Paul  answers, 
"  Charity  never  failelh."  In  love  we  have  something  which  will  not  be  old-fashioned 
in  time  or  eternity.  It  will  never  wear  out.  (F.  St.  John  Corhelt.)  Love  is  God- 
like : — It  is  the  aim  of  religion  to  lift  men  out  of  their  natural  unregenerate  selves, 
and,  so  far  as  their  human  nature  is  capable  of  such  exaltation,  to  make  them  more 
like  God :  to  produce  and  increase  in  them  some  fteble  counterpdrt  of  that  moral 
goodness  which  we  worship  in  the  perfection  of  the  Divine  Being.  Now  charity  is 
the  road  which  alone  brings  us  on  this  heavenly  journey,  and  each  one  of  the  several 
exhibitions  of  the  same  blessed  spirit,  which  are  detailed  for  us  by  St.  Paul  in  the 
chapter  now  before  us,  is  one  more  added  to  the  golden  steps  that  carry  the  Chris- 
tian higher  and  higher  towards  the  throne  of  God.  I  said  that  by  the  practice  of 
charity  men  are  made  more  like  God,  for,  if  we  take  those  parts  of  the  description 
of  it  which  are  applicable  to  the  case,  we  shall  find  that  they  are  a  description  not 
only  of  what  man  ought  to  aspire  to  be,  but  of  what  God  Himself  is,  so  far  as  He 
reveals  Himself  in  His  dealings  with  men.  I  do  not  mem  that  the  picture  was  so 
intended,  but  that  so  it  is.  "  Charity  snffereth  long  and  is  kind  " — and  do  not  we 
find  by  daily  experience  that  this  benign  long-suffering  is  one  of  the  attributes  of 
the  Most  High  ?  If  it  were  not  so,  where  should  we  sinners  be  to-day  ?  "  Charity 
envieth  irot."  Of  course  the  Creator  cannot  envy  His  creature,  but  it  is  conceivable 
that  He  might  grudge  him  good :  the  heathen  often  surmise  this  of  their  gods  :  but 
our  God  "  giveth  to  every  man  liberally  and  upbraideth  not."  Charity  "is  not 
easily  provoked."  "  God  is  a  righteous  Judge,"  says  the  Psalmist,  "  strong  and 
patient,  and  God  is  provoked  every  day,"  and  yet,  as  he  implies,  still  withholds  the 
chastisement,  "  if  a  man  will  nut  turn,"  then,  and  then  only,  "  He  will  whet  His 
sword."  Charity  "thinketh,"  or  better,  "  imputeth  not  the  evil":  and  so  our 
Father,  instead  of  saddling  us  with  our  siire~the  instant  we  commit  them,  is  ever 
ready  to  helj)  us  out  of  them,  to  rid  us  of  them  if  only  we  will  be  rid,  not  to  impute 
them  to  us,  but  to  forgive  and  forget  them  for  His  dear  Son's  sake.  Charity  "  never 
faileth."  It  is  the  very  spirit  of  God's  treatment  of  man.  It  is  because  His  love 
fails  not,  and  never  can  fail,  that  we  dare  either  enjoy  the  present  or  look  forward 
to  the  future.  Now  the  more  excellent  a  way  is,  the  harder  it  is  to  reach  it  and 
to  walk  in  it :  and  if  the  ijrinciple  of  charity  be  at  the  rout  of  God's  dealings 
with  us,  it  need  not  surprise  us  that  we  find  much  difficulty  in  producing  any 
genuine  copy  of  the  Divine  pattern  in  our  dealings  with  one  another.  And  \et 
we  must  do  so,  or  fail  altogether  in  godliness.  It  may  therefore  be  of  ser- 
vice to  take  some  three  or  four  of  the  chief  aspects  of  our  many-bided  life 
in  which  the  exercise  of  charity  is  called  for,  and  ask  ourselves  how  far  we 
exhibit  or  fail  to  exhibit  it  in  tliem.  1.  Take  first  our  religion.  If  there 
be  any  subject  in  which  our  charity  should  be  deep-seated  and  unquestionable, 
one  would  think  it  should  be  this.  The  solemn  nature  of  the  matter  tnated 
of,  the  deep  importance  of  the  issues,  the  sense  of  human  feebleness  and  ignorance 
in  face  of  the  infinite  and  the  unseen,  the  consciousness  of  our  own  personal  failures 
and  inconsistencies — thes^e  things,  one  wonld  think,  should  make  us  very  tender, 
both  in  judgment  and  act,  towards  other  "  seekers  after  Gud."  And  yet  nowhere 
is  charity  more  starved  and  stunted  than  it  is  among  the  differing  professors  of  a 
common  faith.  Imagine  a  number  of  travelers  all  bouml  for  the  same  distant  and 
as  yet  uuvisited  country,  each  furnished  with  a  map  of  the  road.  The  mai:)s  agree 
as  to  the  main  dircL'tioi),  and  indeed  have  most  of  their  chief  features  in  common, 
^  but  they  vary  often  in  minor  particulars.  Will  they  all  fall  to  quarrelling  and  hate 
one  another  because  of  these  ditlerences?  What  hard  thoughts,  what  harsh 
unsympathising  judgments,  the  staunch  Churchman  often  forms  of  his  Dissenting 
brother,  and  his  Dissenting  brotlier  forms  of  him!  How  suspicious  and  antago- 
nistic is  the  attitude  of  Protestant  to  Catholic  !  But  it  way  be  urged.  How  can  I 
look  lovingly  on  my  neighbour,  and  tolerate  his  ways  and  his  opinions,  when  I 
believe  them  to  be  thoroughly  mischievous?     Am  I  to  stand  by  and  see  error 


216  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 

triumph  unopposed  ?  Certainly  not ;  it  is  our  duty  to  oppose  it :  but  there  are  two 
ways  of  opposing  it.  The  one  is  dogmatic,  dictatorial,  pugnacious.  It  will  admit 
no  possibility  of  weakness  or  imperfection  in  its  own  position,  no  element  of  good 
in  tbat  of  the  adversary.  It  hates  compromise.  It  struggles  for  tiiumpl),  not  for 
truth.  The  ottier  is  based  on  meefuress  and  moderation.  It  believes  that  it  has 
possession  of  a  truth,  but  it  claims  no  exclusive  patent  for  proclaiming  it.  It  sees, 
and  chef-rfuUy  pays  honour  to,  the  truth  and  go'dness  which  are  mixed  up  with 
the  error  of  an  opposite  party.  It  yearns  not  for  triumph,  but  for  barmony.  Cer- 
tainly, a  man  whose  opposition  is  animated  by  this  spirit  is  a  very  dangerous  and 
effective  combatant.  He  is  not  indifferent  to  truth  :  he  is  its  devotee.  Wiiat  he  is 
indifferent  to  is  the  triumfth  of  a  faction.  The  character  looks  fair  and  noble, 
surely,  when  thus  sketched  in  the  general,  but  whei  we  come  to  try  to  work  some- 
thing of  tbe  pattern  of  it  into  the  texture  of  our  own  daily  lives,  it  will  not  liHrmonise 
with  the  stuff  already  there,  and  the  business  bristles  with  ditticulties.  Pride  has 
to  be  overcome,  dislike  reasonable  or  unreasonalde,  ancient  prejudices,  our  own 
self-esteem.  This  person  or  this  party,  whom  you  or  I  dislike,  does  not  seem  like 
other  persons  or  parties.  2.  We  will  turn  now  to  another  wide  tield  of  action — 
politics.  The  more  deeply  men  feel,  the  more  impatient  of  opposition  are  they  apt 
to  be,  and  tbe  more  angry  at  anything  that  runs  counter  to  their  own  persuasions. 
Next  to  religion  there  is  nothing  of  a  public  kind  about  which  men  feel  more  deeply 
than  politics,  and  hence  the  frequent  need  in  this  sphere  also  of  the  blessed 
influences  of  a  Christian  charity.  Difference  of  opinion  has  too  often  culminated 
in  personal  animosity,  and  it  has  seemed  more  hard  than  ever  for  political 
opponents  to  see  any  good  in  each  other's  views,  or  any  nobleness  in  their  aims.  If 
this  be  so,  it  becomes  the  special  duty  of  tbe  preacher  to  assert  aloud  the  claims  of 
charity  to  be  reverenced  and  practised  in  the  political  arena.  She  would  not  stop 
the  strife,  but  she  would  moderate  it.  It  is  as  unchristian  as  it  is  foolish  to  impute 
bad  or  low  motives  to  an  opponent  where  there  is  any  hope  that  we  may  be  mis- 
taken. 3.  The  next  field  over  which  we  will  cast  a  glance  is  that  of  literature. 
Surely  iu  the  great  republic  of  letters,  if  nowhere  else,  every  citizen  will  be  candid 
and  courteous  towards  his  fellows  !  But  it  is  not  always  so.  Even  great  and  good 
men  have  yielded  to  the  temptation  to  be  uncharitable  here.  It  is  a  noble  saying  of 
Aristotle's,  when  he  is  about  to  canvass  Plato's  Theory  of  Ideas,  that  both  being  dear 
to  him,  it  is  a  sacred  duty  to  prefer  the  truth  to  Plato.  Let  us  have  the  truth,  here 
as  in  all  other  subjects,  before  all  things;  that  of  itself  never  can  hatm  us,  but  let 
us  have  it  spoken  in  love.  Tbe  exclusive  pursuit  of  truth  is  not  inconsistent  with 
the  purest  charity.  The  calm  and  patient  examination  of  another's  arguments,  the 
respectful  consideratinn  of  his  position,  the  readiness  to  be  convinced  of  error  where 
/  it  can  be  shown  to  exist,  the  reluctance  to  impute  ignorance  or  stuijidity,  the  absence 
('  of  all  tinge  of  personality,  the  scorn  of  snatching  a  momentary  victory  at  the  expense 
'"  of  truth,  which  we  mark  in  some  great  controversialist — how  much  more  noble  and 
power  I  ul  they  are  than  whole  reams  of  brilliant  but  insincere  invective.  4.  The 
relations  which  we  have  so  far  looked  at  have  been  all  more  or  Icfs  of  a  public 
character  :  before  concluding  let  us  give  our  thoughts  for  a  while  to  the  demands  of 
charity  in  the  private  region  of  domestic  life.  It  is  an  old  and  a  true  saying  that 
"  Charity  begins  at  home."  Here  if  anywhere  the  Christian  should  exhibit  that 
spirit  of  forbearance,  of  unselfishness,  of  unwearying,  uncalculating  kindness,  of 
optimism  in  judging  of  the  characters,  motives,  actions  of  those  about  him,  which 
are  the  parts  of  charity.  The  occasions  for  its  exercise  are  as  numerous  as  the 
hours  of  the  day.  Happy  tbe  family  where  this  sweetest  and  wholesomest  of 
influences  reigns  supreme,  and  is  shared  in  by  all  its  members.  Such  a  household 
becomes  the  nursery  of  true  ijublic  virtues.  How  unhapijy  are  that  man  and  woman 
who  have  linked  tlieir  lot  for  life  together,  and  yet  have  made  no  preparation  to  carry 
out  the  Divine  behests  of  charity  in  the  insignificant  things  of  daily  life.  They 
may  bear  a  brave  face  to  the  world,  but  what  profit  is  that  to  them,  if  the  simple 
sweetness  of  the  domestic  hearth  be  marred  by  peevishness,  or  hardness,  or  a 
cutting  tongue,  or  wilfulness,  or  mere  want  of  sympathy  ?  We  have  thus 
traversed,  in  however  cursory  a  manner,  some  of  the  great  fields  in  which 
chatity  works.  There  are  other  fields  on  which  we  have  not  entered,  nor  is  there 
much  need  to  do  so,  for  though  "there  be  diversities  of  operations  it  is  the  same 
Spirit  which  worketh  all  in  all."  If  it  be  true  that  he  that  offends  in  one  point  of 
the  law  is  guilty  of  all,  no  less  is  it  true  that  he  that  has  grasped  what  the  genuine 
spirit  of  charity  is  in  any  one  great  relation  of  life  will  be  able  to  understand  it  in 
all.     (E.  H.  Bradby.  MA.)         Christian  charity: — William  Tyndale,  the  trans- 


cuxT.  xiir.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  217 

lator  of  tbe  Scriptures,  had  many  enemie«,  who  persecuted  hhn  with  cruel 
hatred,  but  to  whom  he  bore  the  tenderest  charity.  It  is  recorded  that  to 
some  of  them  he  said  one  day,  "  Take  away  my  goods,  take  away  my  good 
name ! — yet  ?o  long  as  Christ  dwelleth  in  my  heart,  so  long  shall  I  love 
you  not  a  whit  the   less."  Charity  difficult   of  attainment  : — A   Brahman  on 

hearing  this  chapter  read,  exclaimed,  "  Who  can  act  up  to  that?"  (Dr.  Bnff.) 
Eloquence  icitlwut  chariti/  .-—Two  introductory  truths  are  suggested  by  the  context 
— 1.  That  there  is  great  diversity  in  the  talents  with  which  heaven  has  em'owed 
mankind.  Some  men  are  distinguished  by  one  faculty  and  some  by  another.  Some 
by  the  faculty  of  creating,  some  by  the  faculty  of  combining,  some  by  the  faculty 
of  oratoricaliy  presenting,  thought.  Tlrese  faculties  exist  in  various  degrees  of 
strength  ;  in  some  they  are  dwarfish,  in  some  gigantic.  2.  That  without  charity  the 
highest  kind  and  degree  of  talent  is  of  little  worth.     Note— I.  That  it  is  possible 

FOR  ELOQUEXCE  OF  THR  BIGHEST  TYPE  TO  EXIST  WITHOUT  CHARITY.       We  find    it — 1.    In 

party  politics.  Many  party  speeches,  fashioned  after  the  highest  models  and 
delivered  with  all  the  graces  of  the  art,  beat  with  selfish  ambition  and  burn  with 
envious  spleen.  2.  In  p«rty  theology.  Some  of  the  discourses  on  polemic  theology 
are,  in  all  the  attributes  of  true  eloquence,  unexcelled,  but  they  are  all  aglow  with 
acrimonious  zeal  for  certain  dogmas.  3.  In  party  Churchism.  II.  That  eloquence 
OF  the  highest  type  without  charity  is  utterly  worthless — -"brass,"  giving  out 
a  mere  clanking  sound.  It  is  worthless — 1.  In  itself.  Wliat  would  you  give  for 
two  pieces  of  brass  forming  a  cymba  Whatever  their  marketable  value  may  be, 
for  musical  purposes  they  are  not  worth  a  "  penny  whistle."  What  worth  is  there 
in  an  organism  unless  it  has  life?  and  what  worth  is  there  in  sentences,  however 
eloquent,  unless  they  have  charity?  2.  In  its  influence.  The  sounds  you  get  out 
of  the  cymbal  produce  rather  an  irritrtting  than  an  inspiring  or  calming  influence 
upon  the  listener.  What  moral  good  can  speeches  without  charity  accomplish  ? 
Eloquence  without  charity  is  like  the  roar  of  a  winter's  north-easter,  irritating  and 
destructive ;  but  eloquence  with  charity  is  like  the  quiet  south-wester  in  spring, 
■warming  all  things  into  life  and  touching  all  things  into  beauty.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D. ) 
Charity,  emblem  of: — The  Egyptian  hieroglyphic  representing  charity  is  a  naked 
child,  with  a  heart  in  his  hand,  giving  noney  to  a  bee  without  wings.  The  child 
represents  the  humility  of  charity  ;  the  heart  in  its  hand,  the  cheerfulness  of  chanty  ; 
giving  honey  to  the  bee  without  wings,  the  worthiness  and  helplessness  of  the  object 
of   charity.         Tlie  imjwrtance   of  charity  : — Consider — I.  What  is  that  charity 

WHICH    is    the    substance    AND    REALITY    OF   ALL    TRUE    RELIGION.       1.    Negatively.       (1) 

Not  mere  almsgiving.  (2)  Nor  that  kindly  disposition  which  naturally  distinguishes 
some  persons  without  any  religious  principle.  (3)  Nor  any  aiJection  which  by 
human  skill  and  labour  can  be  produced  in  human  nature.  Education  and  example 
do  much  to  restrain  the  outward  expression  of  the  malevolent  passions ;  nay,  it  is 
a  part  of  courtesy  to  hide  them,  but  they  are  still  there.  2.  Positively.  Charity, 
as  described  here,  is  a  grace  only  of  regenerated  human  nature.  It  springs  only 
from  love  to  God.  "  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love."  Here  the  apostle  speaks  of 
this  principle  chiefly,  as  his  subject  required,  in  its  acting  towards  men.     II.  The 

manner  IN  WHICH  THE  APOSTLE  EMFORCES  IT.S  IMPORTANCE    AND   NECESSITY.       He    plaCCS 

it — 1.  Above  all  miraculous  gifts.  He  does  not  depreciate  them,  but  he  exalts 
charity.  2.  Above  the  most  profuse  almsgiving  and  the  loftiest  zeal.  3.  Above 
knowledge.  4.  Above  faith  and  hope.  Conclusion  :  1.  We  see  the  tendency  of 
men  to  mistake  the  external  circumstances  of  religion  for  religion  itself.  2.  Let  us 
elevate  our  views  to  the  true  character  of  the  religion  of  Christ.  Love  is  its 
principle,  its  vital  flame.  3.  Let  us  mark  how  much  of  religion  exists  in  temper, 
4.  Kejoice  in  the  prospect  of  a  future  state,  which  this  chapter  opens.  {R.  Watnoji.) 
Charity,  reyard  for  : — It  is  recorded  of  the  excellentBishop  Ken,  that  when  his  copy 
of  the  Bible  was  examined  after  his  death,  it  opened  spontaneously  at  Paul's  great 
chapter  of  the  Corinthians  on  charity.  (J.  Tho]nsnu.)  Charity,  want  of,  not  confined 
to  the  'logical  circles  : — One  doftor  says  bolus,  and  another  sa^  s  globule.  Globule 
calls  Bolus  a  butcher,  and  Bolus  calls  Globule  a  qnack,  and  the  hydropathist  says, 
"  Beware  of  pick-pockets."  And  Bolus  will  not  speak  to  Globule,  though  Globule 
says,  "  Let  us  make  it  up,  and  begin  again  "  ;  and  Bolus  says,  "  Never  ;  as  long  as 
I  live  I  will  leech  and  blister  and  cup  and  bleed  and  do  things  with  scientific 
vigour."  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Charity,  icortldessi/ea.i  of  yifts  without : — All  gifts,  all 
graces,  all  talents,  natural  or  acquired,  are  ungraceful,  or  wanting  in  that  one  essential, 
which  is  the  complement  or  the  supplea]ent  of  them  all,  without  this  chnrity. 
Take  it  as  of  a  circle,  and  it  is  wanting  in  that  which  makes  it  round.     The  lines 


218  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiir. 

from  its  centre  do  not  go  straight  to  its  circ  imference.  They  are  disproportioned  ;. 
they  are  not  equi-distaut.  Take  it  as  of  a  (•uildiiig,  and  there  is  want  of  symmetry.. 
Tlie  thing  i'^  deformed.  It  may  have  due  length,  but  not  due  breadth.  It  may  have 
breadth  and  lengtli,  hut  no  dei^th.  It  may  have  due  breadth,  but  not  due 
h  ight.  It  may  have  all  these,  but  have  no  foundation.  Such  is  any  or  every  work 
without  charity.     (J.  B.  Wilkinson,  ]\I.A.)         Christian  love  : — I.  Its  essentiality.. 

1.  The  apo.stle  contrasts  it  with  the  highest  and  richest  endowments  possible  to 
man.  (1)  The  mastery  of  all  languages.  (2)  To  voice  forth  God's  purposes.  (3} 
To  interpiet  all  secret  things  and  comprehend  all  truth.  (4)  To  be  inspired  with 
the  highest  supernatural  faith.  (5)  To  be  moved  with  the  noblest  philanthropy  and 
by  the  spirit  of  martyrdom.  2.  Though  possessing  all  these  highest  gifts,  the  apostle 
declares  that  without  lovelo  God  the  Christian  is  nothing.  Nothing — (1)  In  view  of 
God's  purpose  of  grace,  to  make  His  children  to  be  "  conformed  to  the  image  of  His. 
Son."  (2)  la  view  of  the  highest  characteristic  of  the  Divine  nature.  "  For  God  is 
love."  (3)  In  view  of  the  essential  attribute  of  Christian  character — "  He  that  loveth. 
not  knovk-eth  not  God."  "This  is  life  eternal  to  know  Thee,"  &c.  II.  Its  cha- 
EACTEEisTics.  1.  Long-su£fering.  2.  Tender-hearted.  3.  Unenvious.  4.  Meek.  5. 
Modest.  6.  Not  arrogant.  7.  Unselfish.  8.  Unresentful.  9.  Unsuspecting.  10.  Has 
no  sympathy  with  sin.  11.  Loves  the  truth.  12.  Hides  faults.  "T.37 Charitable.  14. 
Sanguine.  15.  Firm  in  trials.  HI.  Its  supekioIu'Iy.  1.  In  permanence — (1)  To 
prophecies.  (2)  To  tongues.  (3)  To  knowledge.  2.  In  nature.  Superior — (1)  To  faith, 
because  faith  expresses  helpless  dependence  on  God,  and  love  expresses  the  exercise  of 
the  most  exalted  attribute  of  God.  (2)  To  hope,  because  hope  expresses  desire  for 
the  good  of  ourselves,  and  love  expresses  desire  for  the  highest  good  of  otheis^ 
Practical  lessons  :  1.  How  opposite  the  Divine  and  human  estimates  of  true  glory. 

2.  How  equal  is  God's  plan  for  human  good.  All  cannot  speak  with  tongues  ;  all 
cannot  master  f^cience  and  knowledge,  but  all  can  love.  3.  Do  we  believe  the  testi- 
mony which  the  Holy  Spirit  bears  in  this  chapter?  (X>.  C.  Hughes,  A.M.)  Chris- 
tian love  : — I.  Gifts  ake  of  less  value  thax  gkaces.  Still  Wn^j  are  of  great  value. 
Do  the  best  with  all  you  have.  Eloquence  is  useful  in  iDroelaiming  truth.  Insight 
is  helpful  to  the  teacher.  Knowledge  is  needful :  we  cannot  love  an  unknown 
person.  Faith  works  wonders  (Heb.  vi.).  Almsgiving  and  faithfulness  unto  death 
are  required.  But  all  th'-se  without  love  are  worthless  in  God's  sight.  Yet,  how 
often  intellect,  genius,  and  learning  win  the  higher  praises !  A  bright  lad  may 
he  a  bad  boy.  Without  love  teachers  may  fail.  II.  Christian  love  is  thts  chief 
GRACE.  It  is  very  dilTerent  fiom  natural  love  to  kindred  and  to  the  world.  It  comes 
from  God  (ilom.  v.  5).  It  is  to  be  shown  to  men.  God  requires  it ;  His  children 
need  it ;  we  are  better,  holier,  happier  for  manifesting  it.  Love  to  men  shows  our 
love  to  God,  as  stars  reHect  the  light  of  the  sun.  Love  is  here  personified,  for  na 
Christian  is  ytt  so  perfect  as  to  sit  for  the  portrait  (ver.  4).  Love  did  not  write  the 
old  proverb,  "  Forbearance  ceases  to  be  a  virtue."  Kindness  makes  real  gentlemen. 
Envy  leads  to  unfairness  and  cruelty.  Jealousy  gives  the  eye  a  wrong  cast.  Love 
hushes  boasting,  reduces  self-disjjlay,  and  takes  the  wind  out  of  pufling  pride.  It 
iuiparts  magnanimity,  meekness,  and  a  true  estimate  of  one's  self  (Rom.xii.  10-18  ; 
ver.  5).  In  the  school  of  love  good  behaviour  and  unselfishness  are  taught.  Her 
pupils  do  not  tsike  mean  advantage  of  each  other,  nor  quick  offence  at  trifles,  nor 
keep  a  note-book  of  evil  things.  They  learn  politeness,  fairness,  self-possession, 
purity,  and  candour  (ver.  6).  Love  gives  joy.  Iniquity  brings  sorrow.  We  must 
hate  sin  (Rom.  xii.  9)  while  loving  the  sinner.  A  loving  heart  is  a  home  for  truth. 
Falsehood  knocks  there  in  vain.  Love  and  truth  are  boon  companions  (ver.  7).  It 
is  hard  to  say,  "  Let  the  righteous  smite  me  "  (Psa.  cxli.  5),  and  to  bear  a  rebuke  ; 
it  is  harder  to  believe  in  the  justice  of  it,  to  hope  well  of  people  who  injure  us,  and 
to  wait  patiently  for  God  to  bring  good  out  of  our  troubles  (Gen.  xlv.  5,  1.  20). 
Love  makes  us  docile,  tolerant,  trustful  and  trustworthy,  hopeful,  jiatient.  It 
beareth — roofs  over — things  which  should  not  be  exposed.  It  is  the  ivy  growing 
over  castles  once  noisy  with  crimes  (1  Pet.  iv.  8).  IH.  Love  is  the  ceaseless 
gkace  (ver.  8).  It  is  "  a  flower  whose  petals  never  fall  off."  In  heaven  we  shall 
not  need  the  special  uses  of  gifts  which  are  now  meant  for  the  Church  on  earth. 
These  uses  shall  cease  (vers.  9,  10).  The  partial  loses  itself  in  the  complete. 
Dawn  passes  into  day.  Steps  to  heaven  will  be  put  away  when  we  get  there,  and 
have  all  things  that  are  promised.  We  are  here  to  grow  in  knowledge  in  childhood 
and  employ  our  gifts  till  we  come  to  the  full  stature  of  Christian  manhood  (ver.  11 ; 
Eph.  iv.  11-13).  Faith  now  helps  us  to  see  images  of  heavenly  things  ;  but  it  will 
end  in  sight.     Still  there  will  always  be  knowledge  and  trust.     Hope  will  result  in 


CHAP.  XIII.]  J.   CORINTHIANS.  219 

possession,  and  still  there  will  be  expectation  (vers.  12,  13).     (IF.  M.  Blacldnmi, 
D.D.)  The  apostoUc  doctrine  of  love: — 1.    This  passage  stands  aLme  in   the 

writings  of  St.  Taul,  both  in  its  subject  and  its  style.  It  is  the  climax  of  tbe 
Epistle.  The  evil  ti^ndencies  of  the  Corinthian  Chuich  met  their  true  correction  in 
this  gift,  without  which  the  Cliristian  society  would  fall  to  pieces — just  as  the  civil 
society  had  appeared  to  philosophers  and  statesmen  to  be  doomed  to  dissolution 
withcut  (pi\ia  or  mutual  harmony.  Unlike  mere  rhetorical  panegyrics  on  particular 
virtues  every  word  tells  with  double  force  because  aimeH  against  a  real  enemy.  It  is 
as  though  wearied  with  discussion  auainst  the  sins  of  this  Church,  Paul  had  at  last 
found  the  spell  by  which  they  could  be  overcome,  and  uttered  sentence  after  sentence 
with  the  triumphant  "Eureka."  2.  But  the  very  style  shows  that  it  rises  above 
any  immediate  or  local  occasion.  On  each  side  of  this  chaj)ter  argument  and 
remonstrance  still  rage ;  but  within  it  all  is  calm  ;  the  sentences  move  in  almost 
rhythmical  melody ;  the  imagery  unfolds  itself  in  almost  dramatic  propriety;  tlie 
language  arranges  itself  with  almost  rhetorical  accuracy.  We  can  imagine  how  the 
apostle's  amanuensis  must  have  paused,  to  look  up  into  his  master's  face  at  the 
sudlen  change  in  his  style,  and  seen  it  as  it  had  been  the  face  of  an  angel,  as  this 
vision  of  Divine  perfection  passed  before  him.  I.  Thk  wokd  'Ayum]  is  peculiar  to 
THE  New  Testament.  The  verb  is  used  in  clasiriical  Greek,  hut  only  in  the  lower 
sense  of  acquiescence,  esteem,  or  caressing.  It  is  in  the  LXX  we  first  find  it  em- 
ployed to  desifinate  what  we  call  "  love  "  ;  and  it  is  there  introduced  (probably  from 
its  likeness  in  sound  to  the  Hebrew  words)  to  represent  aliah  and  agah,  both  expres- 
sive of  passionate  affection,  drawn  from  the  idea  of  panting  after  a  desired  object. 
The  Greek  woild  exhibited  in  a  high  degree  the  virtue  of  personal  friendship,  which 
was  so  highly  esteemed  as  to  give  its  name  {(jyiXia)  to  affection  generally.  l)omestie 
/fend  coujuyal  afl'eclion,  strictly  speaking,  there  was  not.  The  word  which  most 
(nearly  approaches  to  the  modern  notion  of  love  (fVjoc)  expressed  either  a  merely 
\seusual  admiration  of  physical,  or  an  intellectual  admiration  of  ideal  beauty.  The 
Alexandrians  expressed  benevolence  toman  by  the  word  "  pliilanihropy  "  which  was,^ 
however,  an  abstraction  to  be  panegyrised,  not  a  poweiful  motive  to  be  acted  upon. 
In  contradistinction  to  all  these,  and  yet  the  crown  and  completion  of  them  all,  is 
the  "love"  of  the  New  Testament.  It  is  not  religion  evaporated  into  benevolence,  but 
benevolence  taken  un  into  religion — love  of  man  for  the  sake  of  love  to  God  ;  love 
to  God  showing  itself  in  love  to  man.  II.  Its  origin.  It  is  perhaps  not  too  much 
to  say  th.t  it  was  derived  expressly  from  "the  revelations  of  the  Lord."  It  is,  in 
all  probability,  from  tlie  great  example  of  the  self-sacriticing  love  shown  in  the  life 
and  deatli  of  Christ,  that  love  to  man  for  the  sakeof  lovaJLcGod  is  the  one  great 
end  of  existence  (John  xiii.  34,  xv.  13).  Until  Clu-i.-t  had  lived  and  died  this  virtue 
was  almost  imx^ossible.  The  fact  of  its  having  come  into  existence,  the  uigency 
with  wliich  the  apostle  dwells  upon  it,  is  itself  a  proof  that  He  had  lived  and  died 
as  none  otlier  had  lived  and  died.  This  is  confirmed  by  observing  that  the  word 
and  idea  which  thus  first  appear  in  the  writings  of  St.  Paul  receive  their  full  mean- 
ing and  development  in  those  of  St.  John,  wlm,  without  doubt,  received  them  from 
the  example  ai  d  teaching  of  Christ.  III.  Thu  contrast  between  the  apostolical 
VIEW  of  love  and  later  representations.  1.  Usually  it  is  employed  foralmsgiving,^ 
yet  this  is  the  very  sense  with  which  the  apostle  expressly  contrasts  his  own  employ- 
ment (if  the  word  (ver.  3).  2.  Sometimes  it  is  useil  for  "  toleration  "  or  "  forbearance," 
as  when  we  speak  of  a  "  charitable  construction,"  in  "  charity  with  our  neigh- 
bours." But  this  sense,  though  founded  on  "  charity  thinketh  no  evil,"  and  "  is  not 
easily  provoked,"  is  inadequate.  As  there  may  be  almsgiving  without  love,  so  there 
may  be  toleration  without  love.  Here  our  conceptions  of  cliarity  soon  come  to  an 
end,  but  this  new  commanduient  of  Christ  and  His  apostle  is  exceeding  broad. 
(Dc'it  Stanley.)  Love,  clmrm  of: — When  Dr.  Doddridge  asked  his  little  daughter, 
who  died  so  early,  why  everybody  seemed  to  love  her,  she  answered,  "I  cannot  tell, 
unless  if  is  btcause  I  love  everybody."  This  was  not  only  a  striking  but  very 
judicious  reply.  It  accords  with  the  sentiment  of  Seneca,  who  gives  us  a  love- 
charm.  And  what  do  you  suppose  the  secret  is?  "Love,"  says  he,  "  in  order  to 
be  loved."  No  being  ever  yet  drew  another  by  the  use  of  terror  and  authority. 
Aw.  Joy.)  Love,  comprehensireness  of : — Love  is  the  brightest  star  in  the  Chris- 
Ltian  firmament,  and  the  fairest  flower  in  the  garden  of  God.  It  comprehends  all 
virtue,  honour,  goodness,  purity,  sincerity,  magnanimity,  and  whatever  else  can 
adorn  the  human  character.  For  what  is  holiness  but  love  supreme  ?  and  what  is 
heaven  but  love  perfected  ?  and  what  are  all  the  Christian  virtues  and  graces  but  so 
many  modifications  of  the  same  Divine  principle  ?     Mercy  is  love  sparing  the 

^  —      -v. 


220  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 

guilty ;  kindness,  love  blessing  the  needy ;  pitv,  love  sympathising  with  the 
sufferer;  justice,  love  rendering  to  all  their  due;  beneticenre,  love  distributing  its 
bounty;  gratitude,  love  recipro-ating  its  favours;  fortHuds,  love  sustaining  its 
burdens;  penitence,  love  b^wiili'ig  its  sinfulness;  fidelity,  but  love  performing 
its  promises.  And  what  is  faith  but  love  confiding?  zeal,  but  love  contending? 
peace,  but  love  repusing?  joy,  but  love  exulting?  hope,  but  love  expecting? 
patience,  but  love  enduring?  meekness,  but  love  forbearing?  And  worship  is 
love  adoring  the  Divine  Excellence ;  pvayer,  love  supplicating  its  heavenly 
Father;  praise,  love  pourina;  its  gLid  melody  into  the  ear  of  (iod ;  preaciing, 
love  proclaiming  the  riches  of  the  love  thnt  passeth  knowledge;  tie  holy  eucharist, 
love  celebrating  love's  sublimest  mystery  and  transcending  tiiumph;  and  all 
^  Cliristian  work  is  love  bringing  its  best  sacrifice  to  the  altar  of  the  Love  eternal, 
^— and  laying  its  richest  tril)ute  at  the  nail-pierced  feet.  (J.  Crosit,  D.D.)  Lnve,  the 
essence  of  Chrisiinniti/  : — Gnstave  Dore  s;iid  to  the  Eev.  Frederick  Harfoid  one 
day,  "  My  friend,  I  am  a  Roman  Catholic,  a  professed  Eoman  Catholic.  I  was 
baptized  in  that  Church,  and  I  stick  to  it :  but  if  you  wish  to  know  my  real  religion 
I  will  t'll  it  to  vou.  It  is  contained  in  the  thirteenth  chapter  of  St.  Paul's  First 
Epistle  to  the  Corinthians."  Ttien  he  recited  it  through  from  the  beginning  to  the 
end,  without  hesitation  or  missing  one  word.  When  he  had  finished  he  turned  to 
Canon  Harford  and  said,  "  Have  I  made  any  niistalces  ?  and — and,  believing  in  that 
chapter  as  I  do,  might  I  be  considered  a  Christian  ?  "  Canon  Harford's  reply  was, 
"Any  man  living  up  to  that  chapter  might  be  called  not  only  Christian,  but 
Christianissimus."  L(we,  the  essence  of  ri'lir/ion : — Nothing  is  more  common  than 
to  tind  even  those  who  deny  the  authority  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  yet  affirming, 
"  This  is  my  religion."  Nay,  even  a  Jew,  a  Spanish  physician,  then  settled  at 
Savannah,  used  to  say  with  great  earnestness,  "  f  a  d  of  Tarsus  is  one  of  the  finest 
writers  I  have  ever  read.  I  wish  the  thirteenth  chapter  of  his  first  letter  to  the 
Corinthians  were  written  in  letters  of  gold  ;  and  I  wish  every  Jew  were  to  carry  it 
/^  with  him  wherever  he  went."  He  judged  (and  herein  he  certainly  juiiged 
/  right)  that  this  single  chapter  contained  the  whole  of  true  religion.  (John  Wesley.) 
^•-i/Oi'e ;  fron  God  the  source  : — As  the  water  exhaled  from  the  sea  falls  in  refreshing 
rains  and  reviving  dews  upon  field  and  forest,  meadow  and  mountain,  thirsty 
soil  and  withered  herbage,  and  then  by  a  thousand  channels  flows  back  again  to  the 
""  sea;  so  charity,  coming  forth  from  God,  scatters  its  blessings  among  the  children 
of  men,  and  with  its  gathered  revenue  of  love  and  praise  leturns  to  the  bosom  of 
Ood.  God  is  its  Atplia  and  Omega— the  fountain  whence  it  issues,  and  the  ocean 
/^  where  it  empties.  Love  to  God  is  the  tree;  love  to  man  is  the  delicious  fruit  it 
\^  bears.  Love  to  God  is  the  mountain  spring  ;  love  to  man  is  the  fertilising  stream 
it  sends  singing  through  the  landscape.  We  love  God  for  His  own  sake,  man  for 
God's  sake  ;  the  child,  because  we  love  the  Father.  (  (J.  Cross,  D.D.)  Love:  pifts 
comparedwith  : — Gifts — L  Have  no  value  in  thk.m selves  ;  may  occasion  mischief  ; 
love  is  intrinsically  excellent ;  gives  value  to  everything.  II.  Do  not  necessarily 
make  a  man  useful  ;  love  makes  him  active  and  self-sacrificing.  III.  Cannot 
save;  love   is  salvation    already   begun.      [J.  Lyth,   D.D.)  Love:  growtli   and 

power  of: — We  know  that  in  this  world,  love,  like  all  the  other  of  the  higher 
emotions,  is  the  weakest  when  we  are  young,  and  that  it  grows  in  j^ower  witti 
exercise  and  age.  We  have  to  ripen  in  love  as  well  as  in  all  other  things.  A  youth 
does  not  love  as  a  middle-aged  person  can.  Love  is  a  thing  first  ot  leaves,  then 
of  blossoms,  and  at  last  of  fruit.  We  sometimes  connect  together  the  manifesta- 
tions of  it  which  we  see  in  this  life,  to  get  a  large  view  of  what  it  will  be  in  the 
future  life.  In  this  W(n-ldwe  occasionally  see,  in  parents  and  brotljeis  and  sisters, 
or  experience  in  ouiselves,  that  which  gives  us  a  somewhat  accurate  conception  of 
the  Divine  power  of  love  which  we  shall  possess  in  the  world  to  come.  There  is 
nothing  which  love  cannot  do.  It  is  the  only  thing  that  walks  without  touching 
the  ground.  It  never  grows  weary.  Nothing  in  the  soul  is  superior  to  it.  Let 
love  be  an  active  feeling  there,  and  all  the  other  faculties  come  eagerly  before  it, 
and  willingly  lay  down  their  crowns  and  coronets  at  its  feet.  It  governs  without 
command.  All  otlier  feelings  open  to  it  as  Howers  to  the  sun.  'i'here  are  ten 
thousand  things  in  life  from  which  we  gain  some  idea  of  what  this  supernal  nature 
is.  What  if  every  soul  was  affected  by  every  other  soul,  as  some  are  affected  by 
those  who  have  the  mysterious  power  of  sympathy,  so  that  every  chord  in  their 
nature  quivers  at  the  touch,  as  the  chords  of  a  piano  quiver  when  the  keys  are 
touched  ?  What  if  every  soul  were  so  royal  with  this  spirit  that  each  word,  and 
look,  and  posture,  and  gesture,  radiated  joy  and  gladness  upon  every  other  soul? 


CHAP.  XIII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  221 

H  )\v  blessed  will  be  the  time  when  there  is  this  ccmnierce,  this  freedom,  this 
universality  of  this  wonderliil  ht  art-power  !  How  doth  this  Divine  tmoticm  cleanse 
both  those  who  exercise  it  and  those  who  receive  its  benofactions !  By  it  God 
maintains  the  hoiiseliold.  From  its  secret  springs  He  nohiis  les  the  new  genera- 
tions of  men.  Even  afar  off  from  its  source  it  shines  with  power  enough  to  guide 
the  world  and  lead  men  up  the  ways  of  civilisation.  What,  then,  shall  be  its 
redemptive  and  educating  power  in  heaven?  (H.  ]V.  Bceclier.)  Love:  Ihe 
gauge  of  true  manhood  : — I  do  not  distii  guish  men  one  from  another  merely  by  the 
difference  of  their  thought-powfr.  Still  lets  do  I  distinguish  them  by  the  difference 
of  their  executive  power.  There  must  be  a  deeper  gauge  than  these.  Still  less  do 
I  distinguish  them  by  their  external  differences,  as  where  one  is  high  and  another 
is  low  ;  where  one  is  rich  and  another  is  poor  ;  where  one  is  wise  and  another  is 
unwise.  The  point  where  true  manhood  resides  is  in  the  neighboiuhf)od  of  love. 
In  the  copiousness,  the  variety,  the  endlessntss,  the  sweetness,  and  the  purity  of 
the  element  of  love,  you  shall  find  the  measure  that  God  applies  disci'iminatjng 
between  cne  and  another.  (Ibid.)  Lure:  hiiportance  of: — I.  "Without  lovk 
GIFTS  ARE  woKTiiLEss.  1.  They  ai 6  inefficient.  2.  Confer  no  real  honour.  '6. 
Profit  us  nothing  before  God.  11.  Sanctified  by  love  they  are  of  inestimable 
WORTH.  1.  The  tongue  is  touched  uitli  fire.  2.  The  intellect  is  filled  with 
spiritual  light.  3.  Faith  triumphs  over  sin.  4.  G^od  works  are  a  sacrifice  well 
pleasing  to  God.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Love:  tlie  ivipurtance  of : — Love  is  the  first 
outgoing  of  the  renewed  soul  to  God — -"We  love  Him,  because  He  fiist  loved  us." 
It  is  the  sure  evidence  of  a  saving  work  of  grace  in  the  soul — "  The  fruit  of  the 
Spirit  is  love."  It  lies  at  the  very  foundation  of  Ch)istian  character  ;  we  aie 
"rooted  and  grounded  in  love."  It  is  the  path  in  which  all  the  tiue  children  of 
God  are  found;  they  "walk  in  love" — the  bond  of  their  mutual  union;  their 
hearts  are  "  knit  together  in  love  "—their  protection  in  the  spiritual  warfare ;  they 
are  to  put  on  "  the  breastplate  of  love  " — the  fulness  and  completeness  of  their 
Christian  character ;  they  are  "made  perfect  in  love" — the  spirit  through  which 
they  may  fulfil  all  the  Divine  acquirements  ;  for  "love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law  "  ; 
that  by  which  they  may  become  like  ih'ir  Father  in  heaven,  and  fitted  for  His 
presence;  for  "God  is  love,"  and  heaven  is  a  world  of  love.  (Tryo)i  Edwards, 
D.D.)  Love:  iudinpennableness  of : — I.  Though  many  external  virtues  may 
seem  to  exist  without  ir.  There  might  be — 1.  Great  gifts  of  speech,  2.  Great 
grasp  of  understanding.  3.  Great  fulness  of  faith.  4.  Great  ahnsgiving.  5.  Great 
mart.\r  enthusiasm — yet  with  all  this  if  a  man  hns  not  love  he  is  a  spiritual 
"nothing,"  a  moral  "nobody,"  a  nonentity  in  the  great  rcdlm  of  being,  where 
whosoever  dwells  in  love  dwells  in  God  and  God  in  him.  II.  Because  it  inspires, 
ensures,  and  energises  all  such  virtues.  The  virtues  described  are  desirable. 
"Covfetthem."  But  they  are  only  ensured  by  love,  and  are  certain  to  be  found, 
and  to  be  found  in  their  fulness,  where  love  is.  It  is  the  true  inspiration  and 
energiser.  Without  love  such  virtues  are — 1.  Mere  sound.  2.  Mere  appearance 
"  I  am  nothing  " — oi  ly  the  seD)blance  of  moral  manhood.  3.  Mere  abortive  effort, 
"  it  profiteih  me  nothing  "' — it  is  labour  in  vain.  Whereas  not  one  of  these  virtues 
but  will  flourish  where  love  is.  St.  Augustine's  great  savins?,  "  Love,  and  do  what 
thr'u  wilt "  is  warranted  by  "Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law."  (U.  li.  Tltomas.) 
Love:  extent  of: — Clever  men  can  tell  to  a  nicety  the  exact  distance  between  the 
earth  on  which  we  live  and  the  moon  ;  they  can  even  tell  just  how  far  the  sun  is 
from  us.  They  can  even  measure  how  far  it  is  from  one  of  the  twinkling  stars 
that  shine  in  the  sky  at  night  to  another;  they  know  the  size  of  the  sturs,  and 
their  weight.  But  not  even  the  cleverest  of  all  the  clever  men  that  ever  lived  can 
say  how  far  one  single  little  loving  deed  can  go,  or  say  v\'here  its  influence  will  end. 
Love  is  infinite  and  everlasting.  Wlren  the  world  passeth  away,  and  the  lust 
thereof,  he  that  loveth  and  "  doeth  the  will  of  God  abideth  for  ever."  {Baldwin 
Broun,  J i. A.)  I>ove  :  the  life  of  the  soul: — The  soul  may  sooner  leave  off  to 
subsist  than  to  love;  and,  like  the  vine,  it  wiihers  and  dies  if  it  has  nothing  to 
embrace.  {R.  South,  D.D.)  Lore:  no  gift  like  it: — This  is  one  of  the  passages 
of  Scripture  wliich  an  expositor  scruples  to  touch.  The  bloom  and  delicacy  passes 
from  the  fiower  in  handling.  But  although  this  eulogium  is  its  own  best  inter- 
preter, there  are  points  in  it  which  require  explanation  and  enforcement.  Note — 
I.  Thr  supremacy  of  love.  1.  The  extraordinary  gifts  of  which  the  Corinthians 
were  so  proml  may  profit  the  Church,  but  they  are  no  evidence  of  the  ripe  Christian 
manhood  of  their  possessor.  (1)  Suppose  I  speak  all  possible  languages,  and  have 
not  love,  I  am  but  a  mere  instrument  played  upon  by  another — sounding  brass, 


222  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xin. 

<fec.  (2)  Take  the  gifts  of  prophecy,  nih-acles,  &c.  Without  love,  however,  they 
may  profit  others,  tiiey  neither  bring  me  into  closer  connection  with  Christ  nor 
give  assurance  of  iny  sound  spiritual  condition.  (3)  Take  almsgiving.  The  young 
rtiLr  lacked  but  one  thing :  to  sell  his  property  and  give  to  the  poor.  But,  says 
Paul,  "  though  I  bestow  all  my  goods  to  feed  the  poor,"  etc.,  I  may  do  this  from  a 
love  of  display,  or  from  an  uneasy  sense  of  duty.  (4)  But  martyrdom?  Well,  at 
one  period  martyrdom  bfc.ime  fashionable,  just  as  suicide  once  became  fashionaUe. 
2.  Too  often  it  is  a  man's  snare  to  judge  Limself  by  what  he  does  rather  than  by 
what  he  is.  But  no  eye  to  advantage  or  to  public  opinion  can  ennble  a  man  to 
love.  Love  mu-t  be  spontaneous  from  the  soul's  self,  the  unconstaine'l,  natural  \ 
outc  me  of  the  real  man.  Love  cannot  be  got  up.  It  is  the  result  of  God  entering  / 
and  possessing  the  soul.  "  He  that  loveth  is  born  of  God."  And  therefore  it  is 
that  where  love  is  absent  all  is  absent.  And  yet  how  the  mistake  of  the  Corimhians 
is  psrpetuated  from  age  to  age.  The  Church  is  smitten  with  a  genuine  admiration 
of  talent.  Do  parents  sufticieutly  impress  on  Ihrir  children  that  all  succ^'sses  at 
tchool  and  in  early  life  are  as  nothing  comp  'red  to  the  more  obscure  but  much 
more  substantial  acquisition  of  a  thoroughly  unselfish  spirit?  II.  Its  positive 
EXCEi-LENCE  (vers.  4-7).  1.  It  is  possible  that  Paul  may  have  read  the  eulogium 
pronounced  on  love  by  the  greatest  of  Greek  writers  five  hundred  years  before  : 
*'  Love  is  our  lord,  supplying  kindness  and  banishing  unkindness,  giving  friendship 
and  forgiving  enmity,  ttje  joy  of  the  good,  the  wonder  of  tlie  wise,  the  ama/ement 
of  the  g.'ds ;  desired  by  those  who  have  no  part  in  him,  and  precious  to  lhos«  who 
have  the  better  part  in  him;  ]  arent  of  delicacy,  luxury,  desire,  fondues-*,  softness, 
grace  ;  careful  of  the  good,  uncareful  of  the  eil.  In  every  word,  work,  wish,  fear 
— [lilot,  helper,  defender,  saviour  ;  plory  of  gods  and  men,  leader  best  and  bn^zhtest ; 
in  whose  footsteps  let  every  mm  follow,  chantmg  a  hymn  and  joining  in  that  fair 
strain  with  which  love  charms  the  sonls  of  «ods  and  men."  Five  hundred  years 
after  Paul  another  euloKium  was  pronounced  on  love  by  Mohammed  :  "  Every  good 
act  is  ch  irity  ;  your  smiling  in  your  brother's  face  ;  your  putting  a  wand'  rer  in  the 
right  road  ;  your  giving  water  to  the  thirsty,  or  exliortatious  to  others  to  do  right. 
A  man's  true  wealth  hereafter  is  the  good  he  has  d  ine  in  this  world  to  his  fellow- 
man.  When  he  dies,  people  will  ask,  Wiiat  property  has  he  left  behind  him?  but 
the  angels  will  ask  what  good  deeds  he  has  sent  before  him."  Thomas  a  Kempis 
dwells  on  its  varied  capacity.  "Love,"  h^  says,  "feels  no  burden,  regards  not 
labours,  would  willingly  do  more  than  it  is  able,  i)leads  not  imp'>ssit)ilities,  because 
it  feels  sure  that  it  can  and  may  do  a'l  things.  Love  is  swift,  sincere,  pious, 
pleasant,  and  delightful;  strong,  patient,  faithful,  prulent,  longsuffering,  manly, 
and  never  seeking  itself;  it  is  circumsjiect,  humble,  and  upright;  so  er,  chaste, 
steadfast,  quiet,  and  guarded  in  all  its  senses."  2.  Paul's  description  of  the 
behaviour  of  love  is  diawn  as  a  contnst  to  the  unseemly  and  uubrotherlv  c  >nduct 
■of  the  Coriuthi-ins.  III.  Irs  permanence.  1.  As  compared  witli  gifts  of  which 
the  Corinthians  were  so  proud  (ver.  8).  These  gifts  were  for  the  temporary  beneit 
of  the  Church.  They  were  the  scaifolding  wh  ch  no  one  thinks  of  wiien  tne  build- 
ing is  flushed,  the  s  hool-books  which  become  rubbish  when  the  boy  is  educated, 
the  prop  whiidi  the  forester  removes  when  the  s-ipling  has  b.'come  a  tree.  But 
knowledge?  The  knowledge  of  God  an  i  of  Divine  things— is  not  this  permanent? 
No,  says  Paul.  (1)  When  a  boy  be-ins  the  study  of  Euclid,  the  first  proposition  he 
learns  is  absolutely  accurate  and  true;  he  may  add  to  it,  but  he  C'n  never  improve 
up  'U  it.  Hiskiowlcdge  isim|'erfei:t  in  amount,  but  so  far  as  it  g  'cs  it  is  absolutely 
reliable.  But  when  we  are  walking  on  a  misty  morning  and  see  an  object  at  a 
distance,  our  knowledge  is  imperfect  in  the  sense  of  being  dim,  uncertain, 
inaccurate.  We  see  that  there  is  something  before  us,  but  whether  a  man  or  a 
gatepost  we  cannot  say.  A  little  nearer  we  see  it  is  a  man,  but  whether  old  or 
young,  fri'-nd  or  no  friend,  we  cannot  say.  Here  the  growth  of  <uir  knowledge  is 
from  dimness  to  accuracy.  Both  the  (igures  used  by  Paul  imply  that  our  know- 
ledge of  Divine  things  is  of  this  latter  kind.  They  loom,  as  it  were,  through  a 
mist.  We  are  at  present  in  the  state  of  childhood,  wh'ch  cherishes  mmv  noiijns 
destined  to  be  exidoded  by  maturer  knowledge.  (2)  The  other  figure  is  still  more 
precise.  The  word  here  rendered  "  glass  "  was  a  common  figure  amon  '  the  rabbis 
to  idustrate  dimness  of  vision.  If  they  wished  to  denote  dire -t  and  clear  vision, 
they  cpoke  of  seeing  a  thing  face  to  face.  They  had  a  common  saying,  "  All  o  'ler 
proi  hets  saw  as  through  nine  gla-ses,  Moses  as  through  one."  The  rabbi-,  too, 
had  anot  er  saving,  "  Even  as  a  king,  who  with  common  people  talks  thiou-h  a 
veil,  so  that  he  sees  them,  but  they  do  not  see  him,  but  when  his  friend  c  miis  to 


CHAP.  XIII.]  I.  COniXTHIANS.  223 

speak  to  him  he  rpmoves  this  vr  il,  so  that  he  might  see  him  face  to  far^e,  even  so 
■did  God  speak  to  Moses  apparently,  and  cot  darkly."  2.  Paul's  crowning  testimony 
to  the  worth  of  love  is  given  in  ver.  13.  He  does  not  mean  that  love  abi'les  while 
faith  becomes  sight  and  hnpe  fiuition.  Fur  faith  an<l  hope  pass  away  onlv  in  one 
aspect  of  their  exercise.  If  bv  faith  lie  meant  belief  in  things  unseen,  this  passes  away 
when  the  unseen  is  seen.  If  hope  be  taken  as  referring  only  to  the  future  state  in 
general,  then  when  th't  statT  is  reached  hops  j)asses  away.  But  faith  and  hope 
are  really  permanent  elements  of  hmnan  life,  faith  being  the  confidence  we  have  in 
Ood,  and  hope  the  ever-renewed  expectancy  of  future  go"d.  But  while  faith  main- 
tains ua  in  connection  with  Goi',  love  is  the  enjoyment  of  God  and  the  jiartfiking 
of  His  nature;  and  while  hope  renews  our  energy  and  guides  our  aims,  it  c:in  bring 
xis  to  no  better  thing  than  love.  (,!/.  Dods,  D.D.)  I.ove  :  jimccr  and  office  of: — 
Love  confers  on  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit  their  proper  character  and  work.  1.  It 
renders  the  unintelligent  utterance  of  ecs!asy  significant  (ver.  1).  2.  It  raises  the 
gifts  which  are  significant  and  powerful,  such  as  proj^hecies  and  faith  to  the  rank  of 
moral  virtues  (ver.  2).  3.  It  ensures  for  those  gifts  which  are  themselves  moral 
virtue^,  such  as  kindness  to  the  poor  or  the  sacrifice  of  one's  life  for  others,  their 
fitting  reward.  {Pruicipal  Edwards. )  Lnve  :  the  ,<!}iiii  of  all  virtue  : — I.  The  natuiuc 
OF  A  TKULY  CHRISTIAN  I  ovE.  All  true  Christian  love  is  one  and  the  same  in  its 
principle,  v^hatever  the  objects  toward  \\hich  it  may  flow.  1.  It  is  all  from  the 
same  Spirit  influencing  tlie  lieart.  The  Spirit  of  God  is  a  Spirit  of  love,  and 
when  He  enters  the  soul  love  also  enters  (Eom.  xv.  30;  Col.  i.  8;  Phil.  ii.  1; 
Eom,  V,  5 ;  1  Ji  hn  iii.  23,  24.  iv.  12,  13).  2.  It  is  from  the  same  motives.  Both 
are  loved  for  God's  sake.  II.  The  truth  of  the  doctrine  that  all  virtue 
IS  suMjiKD  UP  in  Christian  lovic.  We  may  argne  this — 1.  From  what  reason 
teaches  of  the  nature  of  love.  (1)  Love  will  dispose  to  all  proper  acts  of  respect  to 
both  God  and  man.  (a)  Love  to  God  will  dispose  a  man  to  honour,  worship,  obey, 
put  confidence  in,  submit  to,  and  walk  humbly  with  Him.  (b)  Love  to  man 
disposes  men  to  all  duties  towards  their  neighbours  (Eom.  xiii.  10).  (2)  Whatever 
performances  or  seeming  virtues  there  are  without  love  are  unsound  and  hypo- 
critical. If  there  be  no  love  in  what  men  do,  then  there  is  no  true  respect  to  God 
or  men  in  their  conduct  ;  and  if  so,  then  certainly  there  is  no  sincerity.  2.  From 
what  the  Scriptures  teach  us.  (1)  Of  the  law  and  word  of  God  in  general  (Eom. 
xiii.  8;  1  Tim.  i.  5;  Matt.  xxii.  40).  (2)  Of  each  table  of  the  law  in  particular 
(Matt.  xxii.  38  ;  Eom.  xiii.  9  ;  Gal.  v.  14  ;  Jitmes  ii.  8).  3.  From  what  the  apostle 
teaches  us  viz. ,  that  "  faith  works  by  love  "  (Gnl.  v.  6).  By  this  it  is  evident — (1) 
That  true  love  is  an  ingredient  in  true  and  living  faith,  and  is  what  is  most 
essential  and  distingnisliing  in  it.  A  practical  or  saving  faith  is  light  and  heat 
together,  while  that  which  is  only  a  speculative  faith  is  light  only.  (2)  That  all 
Christian  exercises  of  the  heart  and  works  of  the  life  are  from  love ;  for  we  are 
abundantly  taught  in  the  New  Testament  that  all  Christian  holiness  begins  with 
faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  dmclusion:  We  may  use  this  subject  in  the  wav  of — 1. 
Self-examination.  From  love  to  God  springs  love  to  man  (1  John  v.  1).  Have  we 
this  love  to  the  children  of  God?  This  love  leads  those  who  possess  it  to  desire 
and  endeavour  to  do  good  to  their  fellow-men  (1  John  iii.  16-19).  Is  this  spirit, 
which  dwelt  in  Jesus  Christ,  in  our  hearts  and  lives?  2.  Instruction.  This 
doctrine  shows  us — (1)  What  is  the  rit.'ht  Christian  spirit  (Luke  ix.  55).  This 
may,  by  way  of  eminence,  be  called  the  Christian  spirit ;  for  it  is  much  more 
insisted  on  in  the  New  Testament  than  anything  else.  (2)  What  is  real  Christian 
experience?  Love  is  the  sum  and  substance  of  it.  When  persons  experience  true 
comfort  and  spiritual  joy,  their  joy  is  the  joy  of  faith  and  love.  (3)  The  amiable- 
ness  of  a  Christian  spirit.  (4)  The  pleasantness  of  a  Christian  life  (Prov.  iii. 
13-17).  (5)  The  reason  why  contention  tends  so  much  to  the  ruin  of  religion 
(James  iii.  16).  (6)  What  a  watch  and  guard  should  Christians  keep  against  envy 
and  bitterness  of  spirit !  For  these  things  are  the  very  reverse  of  the  real  essence 
of  Christinnity.  (7)  Hence  it  is  no  wonder  that  Christianity  ?o  strongly  requires 
us  to  love  our  enemies  (Matt.  v.  44).  3.  Exhortation.  To  seek  a  spirit  of  love  ; 
to  grow  in  it  more  and  more;  and  very  much  to  abound  in  the  works  of  love. 
{Joiinthan  Edwards.)  I,ove  :  the  test  of  relipion: — Is  your  religion  the  religion 
of — I.  Of  profession.  II.  Of  intellect.  III.  Op  enthusiasm.  IV.  Of  good 
WORKS,  v.  Of  orthodoxy.  VI.  Or  of  love?  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Far,  but  not 
far  enough  : — Note — 1.  How  far  a  man  may  go  in  religion,  and  yet  be  nothing. 
1.  We  may  speak  well  on  religion,  and  yet  be  nothing.  Beyond  all  doubt  Judas 
had  the  power  of  speaking ;  and  to  all  appearance  there  was  no  difference  between 


224  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 

his  speaking  and  tlie  speaking  of  every  other  of  the  twelve.  2.  We  may  have  know- 
ledge, and  be  nothing.  Had  not  Balaam  great  knowledge  ?  Yet  he  never  had  the 
saving  grace  of  God.  3.  We  may  do  miracles,  and  yet  be  nothing.  Did  not  tlie 
magicians  in  Moses'  time  do  many  wonderful  things  ?  Did  not  our  Lord  tell  us 
that  many  in  the  last  day  shall  say,  "  Lord,  Lord,  have  we  not  in  Thy  name  done 
many  wonderful  works?  And  then  will  I  profess  unto  them  I  never  knew  you"? 
4.  We  may  give  all  our  substance,  and  yet  be  nothing  in  the  sight  of  God.  Many 
in  the  Middle  Ages  did  so ;  many  an  old  cathedral  or  religious  house  shows  still 
what  meu  did  f)om  false  principles  in  the  matter  of  giving  money.  It  is  not  the 
quanti'y  of  our  gifts,  but  the  quality  that  God  regards.  5.  We  may  even  die  for 
our  opinions,  and  yet  be  nothing.  Has  not  many  and  many  an  one  laid  down  his 
life  before  Juggernaut,  and  thus  showed  the  sincerity  of  his  belief  in  his  poor, 
miserable,  false  idol?  There  is  a  zeal  that  is  taught  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  a 
zeal  also  that  is  "  not  according  to  knowledge."  These  are  solemn  things.  Let  us 
not  be  content  with  a  little  religion.  Kemember  Lot's  wife — bow  far  she  went; 
remember  Demas,  Judas  Iscariot,  the  sixth  of  Hebrews.  II.  What  is  this  grace 
OF  CHARITY,  WITHOUT  WHICH  wn  ARE  NOTHING  ?  I  know  DO  more  simple  definition 
of  charity  than  this :  "  the  mind  that  was  in  Christ  Jesus  "  towards  His  fellow-men. 
[Bp.  Ilyle.) 

Ver.  2.  And  though  I  have  the  gift  of  prophecy  .  .  .  and  have  not  charity, 
I  am  nothing. — Strong  love  : — These  are  the  words  of  a  man  of  high  culture,  who 
could  prophesy  and  work  miracles,  and  had  attained  great  faith,  to  the  most  learned 
nation  in  the  world.  See  how  he  loads  the  scales  and  strikes  the  balance  of  head 
and  heart!  All  the  rest  is  as  light  as  a  feather  compared  with  love.  I.  Why 
SHOULD  LOVE  RANK  THUS  HIGH?  1.  "  God  is  lovc."  God  has  knowledge,  and 
wisdom,  and  power  infinite ;  but  He  is  never  said  to  be  knowledge,  &c.  Love  is 
His  essence,  the  rest  are  His  attiibutes:  and  whatever  comes  nearest  to  the  image 
of  God  is  the  finest  condition  of  man.  2.  The  greatest  deed  ever  done  was  the 
result  of  "  love."  3.  The  first-fruit  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  love.  So  we  have  a 
Trinity  of  love.  4.  What  brings  salvation  ?  Say  that  I  believe  every  truth  in  the 
Bible.  That  is  all  nothing.  "The  devils  believe  and  tremble."  But  when  I 
believe  and  feel  it  is  all  for  me,  it  is  mine  immediately  I  love.  I  cannot  help 
loving  when  it  is  so  personal  to  myself,  and  that  iiioment  I  am  saved.  5.  And 
what  moves  to  good  actions  and  makes  th^m  contiguous?  Love.  There  are 
plenty  of  things  which  will  give  impulse  and  start,  but  there  is  only  love  which  will 
give  continuance.  "Love,"  and  only  love,  theretore,  "  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law" 
6.  What  will  be  the  subject  of  the  great  Judgment  Day?  Love.  "Inasmuch  as 
ye  have  done,"  &c.  7.  And  what  will  heaven  be?  Perfect  love.  8.  And  ^^ hat  is 
the  whole  summary  of  the  law  by  which  we  try  ourselves  ?  "  Thuu  shalt  kvj." 
That  is  the  great  subject  of  self-examination  this  Lent.  9.  And  why  are  we  to  be 
sorry  for  our  sins,  and  so  humble  ?  From  sorrow  for  Laving  been  so  very  ungrate- 
ful to  so  good  a  God.  This  is  the  true  spirit  of  all  Lenten  exercises,  without  wliich 
it  would  not  be  acceptable  to  God,  nor  do  us  any  good.  II.  How  is  this  pre- 
requisite  FOR  ALL   that   IS   GOOD   AND   PLEASING   TO   GoD,  AND  ALL   THAT   SHALL  MAKE 

OUR  VERY  BEING  IN  His  SIGHT  TO  BE  OBTAINED?  1.  Take  clearer  and  loving  views 
of  God,  always  waiting  and  yearning  to  receive  back  His  prodigal.  2.  Take  grand 
views  of  the  power  of  the  Cross.  And  as  you  see  it,  feel  "  That  is  all  for  me."  3. 
Cherish  every  good  emotion  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Especially  look  to  Him  as  the 
love-maker,  and  a^k  Him  to  create  love  in  that  heart  of  yours.  4.  And  then,  as 
working  with  Him,  who  is  working  in  you,  do  stronger  battle  with  your  temper,  pride, 
selfishness.  5.  Then  go  and  do  some  acts  of  love.  Acts  make  motives,  as  well  as 
motives  make  acts.  Do  acts  of  love,  that  you  may  get  the  spirit  of  love.  6.  But 
remember  above  all  that  all  life,  which  is  life  indeed,  is  the  result  of  union  with 
Him,  who  is  the  life.  The  life  of  love  depends  upon  that  union  ;  without  it,  love 
will  soon  die.  Having  Christ,  you  will  have  love  ;  but  the  more  you  have  of  Christ, 
the  more  you  will  always  say,  "  I  am  nothing,  because  Christ  is  everything."  {J. 
Vaughan,  M.A.)  Love  superior  to  gifts  : — I.  In  its  nature.     1.  Noble  as  were 

these  gifts,  they  were  simply  intellectual  or  executive,  not  moral.  So  distinct  is 
charity,  the  moral  product  of  the  Spirit's  regenerating  power,  from  these  extra- 
ordinary gifts,  that  Paul  in  this  discourse  could  eliminate  it,  and  represent  the 
highest  endowments  as  existing  without  it.  Look  on  the  prophet  of  Midian.  You 
can  almost  feel  the  thrill  of  his  inspiration.  And  yet  the  name  of  Balaam  is  a 
synonym  of  tue  wickedness  of  all  who  love  the  wages  of  unrighteousness.     Who 


CHAP.  XIII.]  J.  CORINTHIANS.  225 

can  read  the  storv  of  Jonah  without  admiration  of  his  message  and  of  contempt  for 
the  man  ?     Our  Lord  gave  to  His  twelve  disciples  powfr  against  unclean  spirits,  to 
cast  them  out,  and  to  ht^al  all  manner  of  sickness  and  all  manner  of  disease,  and 
Judas  Iscariot  was  amongst  them.     The  aj)ostles  had  power  to  heal  the  sick,  but 
not  grace  enough  to  prevent  thenr  from  striving  which   should  be  the   greatest. 
They  had  faith  to  cust  out  devils,  but  they  all  fursook  Him  and  fled,  and  one  denied 
Him.     In  this  Corinthian  Church,  which  seems  to  have  been  distinguished  above 
all  others  in  miraculous  force,  these  gifts  were  accompanied  with  glaring  incon- 
sistencies.     2.  Charity,  on  the  other  hand,  is  moral.     It  is  the  product  of  the 
Spirit  in  the  moral  nature.     It  is  the  single  element  of  holy  character ;  and  all 
moral  excellf-nce  must  be  traced  back  to  love,  even  as  under  the  seai'ching  analysis 
of  the  spectroscope  it  has  been  suggested  that  all  material  substances  may  be 
traced  to  a  single  element.     (1)  God  is  love;  but  that  love  differs  in  its  forms  of 
expression  with  the  different  relations  of  its  exercise.     In  relation  to  light  and 
wrong,  justice  ;  in  relation  to  need  and  suffering,  mercy  ;  in  relation  to  pardon, 
grace.     (2)  And  so  all  human  goodness  is  resolved  into  love,     (a)  Love,  in  relation 
to  God's  majesty,  is  adoration,  worship  ;  in  relation  to  His  will,  .submission  ;  in 
relation  to  His  command,  obedience  ;  to  His  superiority,  humility  ;  to  His  ^r^ce  in 
Chri-t  and  to  His  declarations,  faith  ;  to  His  bestowals,  gratitude,     (b)  So  love,  in 
relation  to  human  need,  is  beneficence  ;  in  relation  to  injury,  meekness  ;  in  relation 
to  trials,  patience  ;  and  in  relation  to  the  want  aJd  the  woe  of  a  lost  world  for 
which  Clirist  died,  it  is  the  pity  and  the  love  and  the  longing  which  find  expression 
in  intercession  and  in  service.     3.  Thus,  in  its  very  nature,  is  charity  superior  to 
all  gifts.    Gifts  were  a  power  conferred,  charity  is  the  Divine  requirement ;  in  gifts, 
God's   natural   attributes   are   represented ;    in  holy  love,  His   moral   psrfection. 
Miraculous  gifts  are  super-imposed  by  the  Spirit.     In  love  the  Spirit  communicates 
Himself  to  us  in  His  own  true  nature.     Love  unites  the  soul  in  fellowship  and 
sympathy  with  God,  for  love  is  of  God,  and  every  one  that  loveth  is  born  of  God. 
II.  In  the  tact  that  it  was  the  end  for  which  all  sdpehnatural  endowments 
WERE  given.     They  were  the  scaffolding  of  that  temple  whose  shrine  is  love.     And 
so  gifts  of   miraculous   power  would  he  withdrawn,  but  love   would  be  eternal. 
There  is  no  more  need  of  miracles.     But  the  Spirit's  distinctive  work  continues, 
and  we  receive  not  the  power  of  Christ,  but  the  Spirit  of  Christ;  not  the  arm  or 
the  lips  (if  Christ,  but  fellowship  with  the  heart  of  Christ.     No  miracle  so  much 
declares  the  excellence  and  the  might  of  the  Spirit  as  the  conversion  of  such  a  man 
as  Bunyan,  th*^  production  of  such  a  character  as  that  of  John  Howanl,  or  snch 
triumphant  resignation  as  tjiat  of  the  dairyman's  daughter.     Thus  secondary  are 
gii'ts,  and  thus  pre-eminent  is  charity,  intrinsically  good,  god-like,  enduring.     For 
this  let  the  Church  long  rather   than  for  tbe  return  of  miracle,  that  thus,  "  ye 
being  rooted  and  grounded  in  love,"  &c.     Conclusion  :  1.  There  is  entering  into 
the  religious  thinking  and  experience  of  our  time  an  element  which  grently  needs 
the  antidote  of  this  discussion.     Men  are  eagerly  gazing  for  prodigies  of  the  Spirit, 
miracles  of  healing,  &c.     2.  So  also  what  claims  and  aims  to  be  a  superior  type  of 
piety,  places  emphasis  on  what  relates  to  intellect  and  power,  rather  than  on 
character.     Natural  gifts  now,  like  those  that  were  supernatural,  are  dt^sirable. 
Consecrated  in  love,  they  shall  be  sources  of  a  princely  Christian  power  ;  but  gifts 
do  not  indicate  the  genuineness  or  the  degree  of  holy  devotion.     Jesus  has  said 
that  in  the  great  day  "  many  will  say  unto  Me,  Lord,  Lord,  have  we  not  prophesied 
in  Thy  name,"  &c.     (A.H.  Coolidge.)         The  wortlilesanesfi  of  rjifts  witliout  lore  :— 
I.    Propi'Ecy — i.e.,  preaching.      Great  power  of  setting  forth  the  truths  of  the 
gospel  often  co-exists  with  a  bitter,  exclusive,  uncharitable  spiiit.     Has  not  the 
hatred  of  theologians  become  a  byword  ?      Look   at   the  language   of   so-called 
relii^'ioiis  publications,  and  judge  by  it  of  that  which  is  current  where  they  circulate. 
Wh  it  is  our  religious  influence  upon  the  world  wiihout,  with  all  our  preaching, 
religious  meetings,  reports,  pleadings  for  good  and  for  God  ?    Are  not  our  hospitals, 
reformatories,  mis.-ions,  church-buildings,   struggling   or  languishing — striving  to 
exist  l)y  continually  strained  artificial  appeals  from  the  pulpit  aud  from  the  plat- 
form ?     Is  it.  not  true  that,  having  this  gift  of  utterance  in  abundance,  yet  as  to 
any  worthy  effect  on  the  vast  mats  of  wealth  and  talent  about  us  we  are  next  to 
nothing?      And  this  because  of   our  want  of  love.      II.    The  understanding  op 
MYSTERIES  AND  ALL  KvowLEDGE.     1.  What  St.  Paul  intended  we  m»j  gather  from 
his  own  expressions,  viz.,  the  mystery  of  God's  purpose  in  revealing  the  gospel  to 
the  Gentiles;  "  in  Christ  are  hidden  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge." 
He  refers,  therefore,  to  sacred  things,  and  the  knowledge  of  the  truths  of  salvation, 
VOL.    II.  15 


226  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 

2.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  a  very  accurate  and  thorough  knowledge  of  Christian 
doctrine  ;  nay,  more,  a  j)ower  of  reasoning  able  to  enter  thoroughly  into,  and  carry 
further,  speculations  on  the  deep  tbings  of  God;  and  yet  all  this  taken  up  and 
carried  on  in  a  cold  and  selfish  and  unloving  si^irit.  Some  of  the  soundest  theo- 
logians have  been  some  of  the  keenest  hnters.  It  is  perhaps  one  of  the  commonest 
temptations  of  those  who  are  much  versed  in  theology  to  forget  the  necessity  of 
allowing  for  those  who  diljfer  from  them.  And  what  have  been  the  consequences  ? 
(1)  A  cousiderable  portion  of  the  knowledge  of  Divine  things  has  remained  shut  up 
as  the  jiossession  of  one  or  other  of  the  Churches.  (2)  A  proficient  in  doctrinal 
distinctions  has  almost  always  been  a  person  dreaded  and  shunned  as  exclusive  and 
narrow-minded.  III.  Faith  and  powkr  to  work  miracles.  1.  Faith  is  realising 
beHef  in  the  truth  of  God.  The  faithful  man  not  only  yields  assent  to,  but  believes 
and  lives  in,  God"s  levelation  concerning  His  Son.  And  tliat  no  less  than  this  is 
meant  is  evident;  for  Paul's  suppositi'm  is  dealt  with  also  by  our  Lord,  when  He 
says,  "  No  man  that  can  do  a  miracle  in  My  name  can  speak  lightly  of  Me."  2.  I 
su[ipose,  if  we  are  to  translate  what  is  said  into  the  language  of  our  own  day,  we 
have  a  man  working  by  means  if  faith  great  victories  over  himself  and  others, 
mighty  in  word  and  deed;  and  yet  snch  an  one  is  nothing.  Why?  Because  these 
spiritual  endowments  are  held  and  exercised  in  an  unloving  spirit.  Thus  even 
Divine  truth  loses  its  power  for  good  :  with  such  an  one,  even  the  birth  of  the 
Spirit  is  cut  ofi  in  mid-youth,  and  comes  to  an  untimely  end :  beneath  such  an  one, 
even  the  Eock  of  Ages  crum'ules  awny  like  the  shifting  sand.  (1)  We  uphold 
essentials  in  a  wrong  spirit.  Is  our  usual  behaviour  to,  and  method  of  speaking  of, 
the  so-called  Unitarian  such  as  to  induce  him  to  re-exnmine  the  grounds  of  a  faith 
which  can  bring  f(jr I h  such  fruits?  (2)  We  put  that  first  which  should  be  second. 
The  first  and  indispensable  care  for  every  Christian  and  eveiy  Christian  body  is  the 
spirit  of  love.  No  difference  of  belief  can  be  truly  conscientious  unless  it  be 
subordinated  to  the  spirit  of  love.  If  you  are  a  Christmn,  you  must  love  me  before 
you  can  conscientiously  differ  from  me.  {Dean  Alfnrd.)  The  life  of  tlie  cifl'er- 
tions : — 1.  Ours  is  an  age  of  great  intellectual  activity.  In  former  times,  tirst 
physical  strength,  then  birth  or  bereditiry  rank,  then,  and  almost  till  now,  wealth, 
have  successively  been  the  measures  of  greatness.  But  now  the  aristocracy  of  the 
world  is  an  aristocracy  of  intellect.  But  there  is  danger  that,  while  we  rejoice  in 
having  found  something  better  than  men  used  to  seek  and  stiive  for,  we  may  not 
recognise  that  which  alone  is  supremely  good.  Eeligion  is  the  life  of  the  affec- 
tions ;  and  in  the  reverence  now  j)aid  to  intellect  there  is  danger  that  religion  be 
undervalued,  and  that  the  affections,  which  are  its  tlirone,  receive  much  less  than 
their  due  regard  and  cultivation.  2.  By  the  religious  life  I  mean  a  life,  not  of 
mere  i^roprieties,  but  of  love.  It  includes,  first,  the  thankful  recognition  of  a 
present  God,  and  the  exercise  of  the  affections  in  wor.^hip  and  obedience  ;  then  and 
thence,  the  cherishing  of  sincere  brotheily  love  towards  onr  fellow-men.     I.  The 

LIFE    OF    THE     AFFHCTIONS    IS     ESSENTIAL    TO     THE     FULL     DEVELOPMENT    AND    HEALTHY 

WORKING  OP  THE  INTELLECT.  The  affectious  are  our  highest  faculties.  They  have 
the  nearest  view  of  truth,  and  the  strongest  hold  upon  it.  Of  the  men  who  have, 
essentially  connected  their  names  with  the  progress  of  the  race,  there  has  been 
hardly  one  whose  mind  was  not  trained  by  religious  faith.  There  exists  an 
essential  connection  of  cause  and  effect  between  the  life  of  the  heai  t  and  that  of 
the  mind,  and  the  highest  walks  of  intellectual  greatness  cannot  be  reached  without 
the  keenness,  breadth,  and  loftiness  of  vision  which  religion  alone  can  supply. 
There  are  many  men  who  exert  no  intellectual  influence,  simply  because  they  have 
no  moral  power.  They  are  shrewd,  well-informed,  and  of  admirable  executive 
capacity ;  and  yet  you  cannot  renrler  them  confidence,  because  their  views  are  all 
sordid,  narrow,  and  selfish.     II.   Compare  the  life  of  the  affections  and  that 

OF    THE    intellect   AS    TO    THE    PROMISE    OF    SUCCESS   AND   ATTAINJIENT.       In  every  path 

of  intellectual  effort  the  ptizes  are  but  for  few.  But  the  high  places  of  moral 
excellence  are  within  the  reach  of  aU.  How  much  nearer  absolute  perfection  can  we 
approach  in  the  moral  than  in  the  intellectual  life  !  Onr  growth  in  knowledge  is 
growth  in  conscious  ignorance.  But  of  the  life  of  the  affections,  of  that  love  which 
mounts  to  the  throne  of  God,  and  excludes  none  of  His  children  from  its  embrace, 
the  Divine  Teacher  has  said,  "Be  ye  jjerfect,  even  as  your  Father  in  heaven  is 
perfect."  The  wisest  men  have  always  been  outgrown  in  a  few  generations.  We 
look  down  on  all  ancient  wisdom  as  men  used  to  look  up  to  it;  and  future  genera- 
tions will  learn  in  their  infant  schools  truths  that  have  but  just  dawned  upon  the 
greatest  minds  of  the  present  day.     But  a  good  man  the  world  never  outgrows, 


CHAP.  XIII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  227 

never  looks  down  upon.     III.  Compare  the  life  of  mere  intellect  with  that  of 

THE    AFFFCTIONS    AS    TO    THE    POWER    OF    RESISTING    TEMPTATION.       It  JS  a  COllimoU    idea 

that  a  clear  inind  and  an  accurate  perception  of  the  quahties  and  tendencies  of 
actions  are  enough  to  save  one  from  moral  degradation.  Bat  I  have  known  nifn, 
second  to  none  of  our  day  in  mental  power  and  culture,  ensnared  in  paljDable  and 
gross  meanness,  and  many  of  the  highest  mental  endowments  sleep  in  early  graves 
dug  by  their  own  profligncy.  But  the  affections,  fixed  on  a  present  God,  and  filling 
the  life  with  charity,  have  power  over  every  meaner  propensity  of  our  natuie.  The 
soul  that  prays  has  ever  at.  hand  a  name  in  which  it  can  bid  the  tempter  depart. 
IV.  The  LIFE  OF  intellect  has  its  meridian  and  THEN  ITS  DECLINE.  One  must 
expect  to  see  more  recent  wisdom  preferred  to  Ins  own.  And  he  who  is  thus  set 
aside,  if  jjossessed  of  no  moral  resources,  grows  ahnost  unifunnly  imhappy  and 
misanthro|-iic.  But  moral  qualities  fade  not  with  declining  yeats.  The  plants  of 
our  Heavenly  Father's  planting  are  all  evergreens.  Nor  yet  is  the  good  mnn,  in 
his  old  age,  thrust  aside,  or  willingly  spared  from  his  post  of  duty.  Veneration 
and  love  for  him  only  grow  the  more  intense  and  tender  as  his  steps  tremble  on 
the  margin  of  eternity.  V.  It  becomes  every  prddent  man  to  take  some  account 
of  that  only  event,  deatli,  which  is  sure  to  all.  Did  you  know  death  to  be  close  at 
hand,  as  it  may  be,  is  there  anything  in  meie  attainments  which  would  nerve  you 
to  meet  the  last  hour  with  serenity,  confidence,  and  hope?  (A.  Peahodij,  D.D.) 
Man-u-ortli : — The  greatest  thing  in  the  universe  is  minH,  and  the  greatest  tiling  in 
mind  is  love.  This  love,  however — 1.  Is  not  the  gregarious  sentiment  which  links 
us  to,  and  gives  us  an  interest  in,  our  species.  All  sentient  creatures  ha^  e  this. 
It  is  a  blessing,  but  not  a  virtue.  Man  is  no  more  to  be  praised  or  blamed  for  its 
existence  than  he  is  for  the  colour  of  his  skin.  2.  Nor  is  it  theological  love;  that 
affection  which  one  has  for  those  of  his  faith  and  sect,  but  which  will  look  coldly 
upon  all  besides — which  reduces  the  gospel  to  a  dogma,  and  man  to  a  bigot.  3. 
Nor  is  it  sacerdotal  love — that  love  which  speaks  from  ecclesiastical  chairs  about 
the  cure  of  souls  and  Church  extension,  but  whispers  no  accents  of  sympathy  for 
the  woes  of  the  race.  4.  But  it  is  a  generous  moral  s\mpathy  for  the  race  sj>ring- 
ing  from  love  to  the  Creator.  "  If  a  man  love  God,  he  will  love  his  brother  also." 
Je^us  was  the  incarnation  of  this  love,  the  love  which  alone  can  confer  real  worth 
on  humanity.  Man,  without  this  love,  is  nothing — I.  In  relation  to  nature. 
As  nature  would  be  nothing  to  a  man  whose  senses  were  sealed  up,  or  whose 
reflective  faculty  was  paralysed,  so  it  is  nothing  to  a  man  who  has  not  a  loving 
heart.  To  such  a  man  the  world  is  merely  a  larder  to  feed  him,  a  wardrobe  to 
clothe  him,  a  maiket  to  enrich  him,  or,  at  most,  a  riddle  to  amuse  his  intellect. 
Love  entering  the  heart  of  a  selfish  man  touchf-s  all  nature  into  a  new  form.  To 
the  sensual,  nature  is  gtatification ;  to  the  thinker,  it  is  theory  ;  to  the  loving,  it  is 
heaven.  II.  In  relation  to  Pkovidence.  If  I  have  n- it  love.  Providence  mini-^tfis 
no  real  good  to  me.  I  am  amidst  its  influences,  not  likn  the  healthy  msin,  feeling 
the  buoyant  throbbing  of  new  life  flowing  from  salubrious  wind  and  quickening 
scenes,  but  like  oiie  whose  system  is  the  subject  of  a  mortal  disease,  liavintr  no 
power  to  appropriate  the  healthy  elements.  As  the  mortally  diseased  must  i-ay,  I 
am  nothing  to  the  heahh-giving  economy  of  nature,  so  the  uidoving  must  say,  I 
am  nothing  in  relation  to  the  spiritual  blessings  of  Providence.  But  lo^e  in  the 
heart  makes  Providence  a  minister  for  good — Hml  for  yood  only.  Like  the  bee,  it 
transmutes  the  bitterest  fruit  into  honey;  like  the  JHolian  har|),  itturns  the  wildest 
wind  into  music.  "Tribulation  worketh  patience,  .  .  .  because  the  love  of  God 
is  shed  abroad  in  the  heart."  III.  In  relation  to  Christianity.  1.  Chri^tianity 
is  a  revelation  of  love,  and  none  but  the  loving  can  rise  to  its  meaning.  Mind 
destitute  of  this  generous  element,  however  powerful  in  philosophy,  &c.,  will  be  as 
incapable  of  understanding  it  as  the  wayw.ird  boy  the  workings  of  a  mother's 
heait,  or  the  frozen-souled  miser  Howard's  pliilanth  opy.  '2.  Still  more,  that 
which  rende'S  us  incapable  of  entering  into  its  meaning,  unfits  at  the  saTie  time 
from  apphing  its  overtures.  It  is  a  system  of  "great  and  i>r-cious  promises," 
which  oiler  God's  strength  in  weakness.  His  guidance  in  p  rolexity,  &c.  But  is 
there  one  who,  uninspired  with  love,  dares  apply  a  single  promise?  IV. 
In  relation  to  this  community  of  the  good.  Wherever  they  exist  they 
have  the  same  bond  of  union,  the  same  principle  of  mspiiation,  and  the 
same  standard  of  worth.  What  is  that?  Wealth,  learning,  tab  nt,  birth?  Such 
is  the  corrupt  state  of  society  here,  that  if  a  man  have  any  of  these,  e«neida'ly 
the  first,  he  is  recognised  as  a  respect  ble  member,  however  cold  anl  callous  his 
heart.  But  in  the  gre-it  community  of  the  good  love  is  everything.   [D.  Tliomats,  1).D. ) 


228  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

Inicllett  trilhoiit  lore  : — I.  How  iiticn  cax  it  achieve?  1.  It  is  capable  of  inspira- 
tion. 2.  Can  iienetrate  to  mysteries.  3.  Acquire  all  knowledge.  II.  How  little 
IS  IT  woKTH  ?  It  cannot — 1.  Change  its  heart.  2.  Conquer  sin.  3.  Pkase  God. 
4.  Secure  heaven.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Knoicledga  icithout  lox-e  : — There  is  a  well- 
authemicated  tradition  of  a  famous  aigument  between  that  great  scholar  and 
divine  Bishop  Horsley,  and  Dr.  C^ril  Jackson,  dean  of  Christ  Church.  They  sat 
late  into  the  night  debating  the  question  whether  God  could  be  better  reached 
ihrough  the  exercise  of  the  intellect,  or  thiough  the  exercise  of  the  affection. 
Jnv\illingly,  but  sti  p  by  step,  the  bishop,  who  advocated  the  claims  of  intellect, 
retreated  before  the  arguments  of  his  friend,  till  at  length,  in  a  spirit  which  did  no 
less  honour  to  his  huiui  ity  than  to  his  canilour,  he  exclaimed,  "Then  my  whole 
life  has  been  one  great  mistake."  Certainly  that  cnelusion  had  been  already 
■^anticipated  by  St.  Paul;  and  the  extreme  antagonist  theory,  whetlier  put  forward 
by  p  imitive  Gnostics,  or  by  paradoxical  schoolmen,  or  by  the  cold  sceptics  of  the 
last  agi",  has  never  found  an  echo  in  the  great  heart  of  the  human  family.  For 
men  perceive  that  a  pure  intellectualisni  is  ajDt  to  fall  short  even  of  the  lower 
measures  of  duty.  When  it  is  unbalanced  by  a  warm  heart  and  a  vigorous  will, 
the  mere  cultivation  of  mind  makes  a  man  alternately  seltish  and  weak.  Selfish  ; 
if,  for  instance,  to  tiie  prosecution  of  a  private  speculation  or  to  the  assertion  of  a 
private  theory,  the  faith,  the  moral  vigour,  the  broadest  and  highest  interests  of 
others  are  sacrificed  or  postponed.  Weak ;  when  the  entire  man  is  cultivated 
intellect  and  nothing  else,  nt^ither  love  nor  resolution  ;  when  the  clearness  of 
intellectual  perception  contrasts  grimly  with  the  absence  of  any  jDractical  effort; 
when  mental  development,  in>tead  of  being  the  crowning  grace  of  a  noble  character, 
is  but  as  an  unseemly  and  unproductive  fungus,  that  has  drained  out  to  no  purpose 
the  life  and  strength  of  its  parent  soul.  Instead  of  protecting  and  illustrating  that 
Truth  which  really  nerves  th«  will  for  action,  intellect  has  too  often  amused  itself 
with  pulverising  all  tixed  convictions.  It  has  persuaded  itself  that  it  can  dispense 
with  those  high  motives,  without  which  it  is  itself  too  cold  and  incorpore.il  a  thing 
to  be  of  practical  service  in  tiiis  human  world.  It  has  learnt  to  rejoice  in  its  own 
selfish  if  not  aimless  eneigy ;  but  it  reallv  has  abandoned  the  highest  work  of 
which  it  was  capable ;  it  hns  left  to  an  imintellectual  enthusiasm,  to  men  of  much 
love,  if  of  iijfenor  mental  cultivation,  the  task  of  stimulating  and  guiding  the 
true    progress    of    mankind.      (Canon    Liddon.)  Faith   and   love : — 1.    What 

is   charity  ?     St.   Paul   answers   by  giving   a   great   number   of    properties  of  it. 
Which   of   all  these  is  it,  for   if  it   is   all   at   once,  surely  it  is  a  name  for  all 
virtues  ?      And    what   makes    this    conclusion   still   more   plausible  is  that    St. 
Paul    calls   charity  "  the  fultilling  of   the  law  "  :    and   our   Saviour   makes  our 
whole  duty  consist   in   loving   God   aud   our   neighbour.      And   St.  James   calls 
it    "the   royal   law":    and    St.   John    says,    "We   know   that    we    have    passed 
from  death  unto  life,   because  we  love  the   brethren."      2.    It   is  well,  by  way 
of  contrast,  to  consider  the  description  of  faith  in  Heb.  xi.,  which  starts  with  a 
definition  <if  it,  and  is  then  illustrated  in  a  series  of  instances.     How  then  is  it 
that  faith  is  of  so  definite  a  character,  and  love  so  large  and  comprehensive? 
3.  Now  the  reason  is  what  at  first  sight  is  the  difKculty.     The  difficulty  is  whether, 
it  love  be  su>-h  as  here  described,  it  is  not  a  1  virtues  at  once.     In  one  sense  it  is, 
/  and  therefore  St.  Paul  cannot  describe  it  more  definitely.     It  is  the  root  of  all  holy 
/    dispositions,  and  grows  and  blossoms  into  them  :  they  are  its  parts  ;  and  when  it 
\    is  described,  they  of  neces-ity  are  mentioned.     Love  is  the  material  out  of  which 
■  all  graces  are  uiade,  and.  as  being  such,  it  will  last  for  ever.     "  Charity,''  or  love, 
"  never  faileth."     Faith  and  hope  are  graces  of  an  imperfect  state,  and  they  cease 
with  tliat  state;  but  love  is  greater,  because  it  is  perfection.     Faith  will  be  lost  in 
sight,  and  hope  in  enjoyment ;  but  love  will  incrense  more  and  more  to  all  eternity. 
Faith  and  hope  are  means  by  which  we  exj)ress  our  love  :  we  believe  God's  Word, 
because  we  love  it ;  we  hope  after  heaven,  because  we  love  it.     Faith,  then,  and 
/'    hope  are  but  instruments  or  expressions  of  love ;  but  as  to  love  itself,  we  do  not 
(     love  because  we  believe,  for  the  devils  believe,  yet  do  not  love;  nor  do  we  love 
'^  because  we  hope,  for  hypocrites  hope,  who  do  not  love.     Balaam  had  faith  and 
hope,  but  not  love.     "  May  I  die  the  death  of  the  light^ous  " !  is  an  act  of  hope. 
"  Tlie  word  that  the  Lord  putteth  into  my  mouth,  that  will  I  speak,"  is  an  act  of 
faith  ;  but  his  conduct  showed  that  neither  his  faith  nor  his  hope  was  loving. 
The  ser\ant  in  ihe  parable,  who  tell  down  at  his  lord's  feet,  and  begged  to  be 
excused  his  debt,  had  b  ith  faith  and  hope.     He  believed  his  lord  able,  and  he 
hoped  him  willing,  to  forgive  him.     But  he  haa  neither  love  of  God  nor  of  his 


CHAP.  XIII.]  I.   CORIXTIIIANS.  229 


brother.  There  are  then  two  kinds  of  faith  in  Gol,  a  good  and  a  worthless; 
and  two  kinds  of  hope,  good  and  wortliless :  but  theie  are  not  two  knids 
of  love  of  God.  In  the  text  it  is  said,  "  Though  I  had  all  faith,  yet  with- 
out love  I  am  nothing  " :  it  is  nowhere  said,  "  Though  I  Lave  all  love, 
without  faith  I  ain  nothing."  Love,  tlien,  is  the  seed  of  holiness,  and  grows 
into  all  excellences,  not  indeed  destroying  their  peculiarities,  bat  making  them 
what  they  are.  4.  But  here  it  may  be  asked,  whether  Scripture  does  not  make 
faith,  not  love,  the  root,  and  all  giaces  its  fruits.  I  think  not.  In  our  Lord's 
parable  of  the  Sower  we  read  of  persons  who,  "  when  they  hoar,  receive  the  woid 
with  joy,"  yet  having  no  ''  root,"  fall  away.  Now,  receiving  the  word  with  joy, 
surely  implies  faith  ;  faiih,  then,  is  certainly  distinct  from  the  rnot.  However,  it 
is  allowable  to  call  faith  the  root,  because,  in  a  certain  sense  at  least,  works  do 
l^roceed  from  it.  And  hence  Scripture  speaks  of  "  faith  working  by  love."  And 
in  this  chapter  we  read  of  "  faith,  hope,  and  charity,"  which  se^ms  to  imply  that 
faith  precedes  charity  (see  also  1  Tiiri.  i.  5).  In  what  sense,  then,  is  faith  tlje 
beginning  of  love,  and  love  of  faith?  I  observe  faith  is  the  first  element  of  religion, 
and  love,  of  holiness  ;  and  as  holiness  and  religion  ai'e  distinct,  yet  united,  so  are 
love  and  faith.  Faith  is  to  love  as  religion  to  holiness;  for  religion  is  the  Divine 
law  as  coming  to  us  from  without,  as  holiness  is  the  acquiescence  in  the  same  law 
as  written  within.  Love  is  meditative,  tranquil,  gentle,  abounding  in  all  offices  of 
goodness  and  truth  ;  and  faith  is  sti'enuous  and  energetic,  formed  for  this  world, 
combating  it,  training  the  mind  towards  love,  fortifying  it  in  obedience,  and  over- 
coming sense  and  reason  by  representations  more  urgent  than  their  own.  More- 
over, it  is  plain  that,  while  love  is  the  root  out  of  which  faith  grows,  faith  by 
receiving  the  wonderful  tidings  of  the  gospel,  and  presenting  before  the  soul  its 
sacred  objects,  expands  our  love,  and  raises  it  to  a  perfection  which  otherwise  it 
could  never  reach.  And  thus  onr  duty  lies  in  faith  working  by  love  ;  love  is  the 
sacrifice  we  offer  to  God,  and  faith  is  the  saciificer.  Yet  they  are  not  distinct  from 
each  other  except  in  our  way  of  viewing  them.  Priest  and  sacrifice  are  one  ;  the 
loving  faith  and  the  believing  love.  Faith  at  most  only  makes  a  hero,  but  love 
makes  a  saint ;  faith  can  but  put  us  above  the  world,  but  love  brings  us  under 
God's  throne  ;  faith  can  but  make  us  sober,  but  love  makes  us  happy.  {J.  H. 
Neirwan,  D.D.)  Faith  and  charity  : — The  unity  of  the  Bible  is  a  unity  of  spirit 
within  a  changeful  individual  variety.  The  writers  care  little  for  seeming  contra- 
diction. St.  James  and  St.  Paul  would  have  smiled  if  they  heard  their  several 
views  of  faith  pitted  against  one  another.  They  would  have  said,  "  We  are  at 
root  agreed,  but  we  each  follow  a  different  radius  from  the  same  centre."  St. 
Paul  would  have  been  exceedingly  surprised  if  he  had  heard  that  the  text  was 
considered  as  in  the  slightest  degree  lessening  the  full  value  of  Christ's  saying, 
"  If  ye  have  faith  as  a  grain  of  mnstard  seed,"  &c.  In  fact,  St.  Paul  balances 
this  statement  as  Christ  Himpelf  would  have  done,  and  we  shall  follow  him  to-day, 
and  balance  the  glory  of  faith  by  the  glory  of  charity.  The  phrase  is  strange  on 
the  lips  of  the  aj)ostie  who,  more  than  all  the  others,  dwelt  on  faith;  but  for 
that  very  reason  it  has  additional  force.  Note — I.  Thk  need  of  this  balance. 
1.  There  have  been  times  when  faith  has  been  insisted  on,  and  love  put  in  the 
background.  Men  had  faith — they  did  remove  mountains — but  they  grew  to  be 
nothing  because  they  lost  love,  and  the  mountains  were  only  removed  to  be  rebuilt. 
Wherever  we  look  in  the  history  of  religion  we  find  that  faith  without  love  does 
nothing  for  the  progress  of  man.  2.  There  have  been  times  when  love  h-is  been 
so  insisted  on  as  to  pot  the  necessity  for  a  clearly  conceived  statement  of  faith  into 
the  background.  (1)  Such  teaching  made  religions  life  first  too  sentimental,  and 
then  often  hysterical.  The  idea  of  God  lost  tiie  sternness  necessary  to  check  sin, 
and  the  result  was  a  widespread  immorality.  (2)  Another  form  of  the  same  thing 
is  found  in  those  who  maintain  that  love  to  man  is  enough,  without  faith  in  God  ; 
and  the  result  is  that  while  tlie  body  is  helped  and  the  mind  strengthened,  the 
soul,  left  untouched,  grows  hard.  The  history  of  philanthroi)y  without  faith  in 
God  is  written  in  loss  of  the  culture  of  the  highest  feelings,  in  despondency,  and 
often  in  revolutionary  excess.  Mnzzini  saw  that  with  regard  to  the  French  Revolu- 
tion. Faith  in  God,  in  his  view  and  in  that  of  all  great  projihets,  was  necessary 
as  the  balance  of  love  of  man.  II.  Faith  in  God  is  nothixg  without  love  op 
3IAN,  AND  NOTHING  WITHOUT  LOVE  OF  GoD.  1.  It  IS  nothing  without  love  of  man. 
(1)  There  is  a  faith  without  love  which  takes  scorn  for  its  companion.  It  arises 
chiefiy  in  those  who  have  become  one-sided  from  having  been  brought  up  in  a 
closed  circle  of  opinions.     They  despise  then  those  who  contradict  them,  just  as 


230  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xiir. 


the  one-sided  scientist  despises  those  who  deny  theories  which  seem  proved  to  him, 
or  as  the  extremely  cultured  person  has  scorn  of  him  whom  he  calls  a  Philistine. 
The  religious  man  suffers  more  than  the  re-t,  for  the  very  life  of  his  religion  is 
love  to  man,  and  he  ceases,  in  proportion  as  he  loses  love,  to  be  religious  at  all. 
With  scorn,  h  .w  can  you  be>ir  all  things  for  men,  believe  and  hope  all  things  for 
them,  endure  all  things  that  they  may  advance  ?     The  faith  in  God  which  has  in 
it  any  scorn  of  others  is  without  charity,  and  is  nothing,  and  you  who  have,  pr 
seem  to  h-ive  it,  are  also  nothing.     (2)  Another  kind  of  faith  which  has  a  tendency 
to  lose  love — the  impetuous  faith.     It  is  full  of  love  to  man,  of  longings  for  his 
progress.     It  believes  and  hopes  all  things  for  all  men,  and  in  idea  it  does  not  fail 
in  love.     But  in  practical  life  it  sometimes  sins  against  love  for  the  very  sake  of 
love.     Suppose  that  a  man  who  feels  that  faith  in  God,  as  a  Father  of  men,  and 
in  immortality  as  the  destiny  of  man,  are  the  very  pillars  of  the  universe,  meet 
those  who  quietly  deny  these  truths,  he  will  feel  this  denial,  not  as  a  personal 
insult,  as  the  man  who  scorns  others  does,  but  as  an  injury  done  to  the  whole 
human  race  he  loses.     Bat  the  intensity  of  his  feeling  will  lead  hmi  into  violence 
of  his  words  ;  and  forgetting  that  the  question  is  for  God,  the  advocate  of  charity 
forgets  that  charity  doth  not  behave  itself  unseemly,  and  does  not  seek  her  own. 
The  result  is,  his  faith  and  he  are  for  the  time  nothing.     He  has  done  harm  to 
God's  caus",  and  to  his  own  influence.    What  should  be  his  guard  ?    (</)  He  should 
remember  that  the  questions  he  supports  do  not  staud  by  his  support,  but  by  God's. 
He  should  have  truer  faith ;  for  in  losing  love  he  has  also  in  reality  lost  faith.     If 
his  faith  were  firm,  he  would  not  think  that  a  few  doubts  or  many  sceptics  could 
shake  the  pilhirs  of  heaven,     [h)  And  he  should  recall  in  society  the  words,  "  Love 
btareth  all  things."     Mike  love  the  ceaseless  companion  of  faith,  and  then  faith 
will  not  fail.     Make  faith  intense  enougli,  and  then  love  will  not  fail.     2.  There  is 
a  faith  in  God  without  love  of  God,  which  is  also  nothing.     (1)  Faith  in  a  creed 
only,  and  not  in  a  Divine  Spirit  that  dwells  within  us.     Such  a  faith  leaves  you 
a  nothing,  (lud  in  itself  it  is  nothing  also — the  mere  froth  of  the  wave.     But  love 
of  God  in  marriage  with  faith  in  a  creed  about  Him  are  living  powers.     It  is  all 
the  difference  between  saying,  "I  believe  that  the  seamen  of  England  in  some 
small  ships  destroyed  the  great  Armada,  and  it  is  an  interesting  story,"  and  saying, 
"  I  be  ieve  it,  and  I  love  my  nation  for  it ;  I  rejoice  to  belong  to  a  people  capable  of 
such  great  doing,  and  every  drop  of  my  blood  thrills  when  I  hear  the  tale."     That 
is  faith  and  lov.-  together,  and  it  produces  results  in  thought  and  action.     So  mere 
faith  in  God'»  fatherhood  is  only  assent  to  a  statemeut ;  but  when  we  feel  Him  as 
our  Fathn,  our  whole  heart,  brimming  over  with  love,  grows  passionate  with 
desire  to  be  like  Him,  and  do  His  will.     (2)  Faith  in  God  without  love  of  Him  may 
be  faith  in  an  abstract  idea  to  which  we  give  His  name.     We  may  confess  Him  as 
the  Thought  that  makes  the  universe,  or  as  the  Older  that  keeps  it  in  haimony,  or 
as  tlVe  Movement  that  builds  or  unbuilds  it.    And  it  is  wise  and  right  to  so  believe. 
But,  first,  it  is  not  a  belief  which  will  do  for  the  whole  of  life.     It  is  not  human ; 
it  may  do  for  rocks  and  stones  and  trees,  but  not  for  men,  women,  and  children. 
It  may  do  to  explain  the  earthquake  and  the  outburst  of  the  morning,  but  not  the 
shattered  heart  or  the  rapture  of  the  soul.    It  may  satisfy  us  as  we  see  the  building 
of  the  crystal,  but  it  will  not  satisfy  us  as  we  watch  the  building  up  of  our  child's 
character.     Nor  will  it  satisfy  us  as  we  consider  through  ages  past  the  upbuilding 
of  the  human  race,  for  into  that  upbuilding  an  almost  infinite  disorder  seems  to 
enter — sin  and  sorrow,  and  it  would  seem  aimless  sacrifice.     Oh,  then,  in  order 
to  be  at  rest,  to  be  able  to  work  and  worship  with  hope  and  joy,  to  have  the  heart 
to  be  somethinJ^■  and  not  nothing,  we  must  add  love  of  God  to  faith  in  God.     For 
only  when  we  love  Hiin  do  we  understand  and  feel  that  He  loves  us,  and  that  His 
love  will  make  clear  and  right  at  last,  not  only  the  tangle  of  our  child's  character, 
but  the  tangled  web  of  the  whole  world  of  men.     [Stoijford  A.  Brooke,  M.A.) 

Ver.  3.  And  though  I  bestow  all  my  goods  to  feed  the  poor,  and  .  .  .  give 
my  body  to  be  burred. — True  charity  : — I.  "Though  I  bestow  all  my  goods  to 
TEED  THE  POOR."  Literally,  "  bestow  all  my  sulistance  in  food":  turn  it  all  into 
charitable  doles.  Well,  all  this  lavish  benevolence  will  bring  no  profit  if  unaccom- 
panied with  love.  1.  A  man  may  be  liberal  from  the  mere  bent  of  his  natural 
disposition.  (1 )  "  But  is  it  not  a  blessed  thing  to  have  such  a  disposition  ?  "  Yes  ; 
but  the  brightest  lamp  leaves  many  corners  dark  and  cheerless,  while  the  bright 
day  spring  flows  into  every  nook.  So  it  is  with  the  human  character,  according  as 
natural  liberality,  or  Divine  love,  prompts  it  to  action.     Under  the  first,  much  may 


CHAP.  XIII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  231 

be  bright  and  lovely,  but  there  will  ever  be  left  lurking  spots  of  darkness — enmities, 
prejudices,  partialities,  &c. ;  whereas,  if  lighted  up  by  Divine  love,  all  these  will  be 
resisted  and  vanish  by  degrees,  and  the  man  will  become  jubfc  and  large-heaited. 
The  naturally  liberal  may  give  to  satisfy  his  wish  and  ease  his  desire  of  giving  ; 
true  Christian  charity  gives  in  self-denial,  often  withholding  where  nature  prompts 
to  give  ;  often  giving  where  nature  would  fain  withhold.  (2)  Of  those  who  bestow 
largely  without  the  spirit  of  love,  the  indiscriminate  almsgiver  is  one  of  the  chief 
examples.  Kot  one  of  the  characteristics  of  love  here  described  is  in  operation 
upon  him.  The  indolent  giving  way  to  an  amiable  propensity,  the  hypocritical 
getting  rid  of  a  troublesome  duty,  must  not  for  an  instant  be  confounded  with  the 
yearning  and  painstaking  self-denial  of  Christian  L.ve.  2.  A  man  may  bestow  all 
his  goods  to  feed  the  poor,  out  of  motives  of  mere  display.  (1)  "  But  is  it  not  a 
laudable  thhig  to  give  as  befits  a  man's  station  and  income?"  That  depends 
on  the  motive.  One  man  bestows  up  to  the  mark  which  is  required  of  him.  If  he 
goes  further  than  this,  he  expects,  and  gets,  no  small  share  of  credit.  But  in  this 
lean  see  nothing  laudable.  But  another  man  bestows  as  responsible  to  God.  He 
acts  not  up  to,  but  down  upon  his  earthly  position  ;  not  as  sparing  that  which  is 
his  own,  but  administering  that  which  is  not  his  own.  Now,  love  is  set  free,  and 
in  that  alone  is  capable  of  working  great  and  lasting  good.  (2)  But  such  is  the 
infirmity  of  our  nature,  that  the  existence  of  a  motive  is  by  no  means  a  guarantee 
for  its  full  operation.  There  may  be  conscientious  bestowal  in  a  hard,  rigid  spirit 
of  duty,  without  kindliness  of  heart  or  manner,  just  as  the  seed  may  appear  in 
the  ijlant,  but  after  all  be  nipped  by  unkindly  skies  and  winds.  And  of  a  bestowal 
so  dt'fective,  what  our  text  says  is  true.  Note  how  true  it  is  found  to  be  in  our 
public  legal  provision  for  the  poor.  Not  that  we  could  in  our  present  state  of 
society  do  without  such  a  provision.  But  no  one  thanks  us  for  it,  no  one  is  softened 
by  it :  all  look  to  it  as  a  sort  of  right,  and  feel  no  gratitude  to  its  bestowers. 
II.  "  If  I  GIVE  MY  BODY  TO  BE  BURNED,  and  liavc  not  love,  it  profiteth  me  nothing  " 
— i.e.,  all  toil,  all  sacrifice,  &c.  How  different  would  have  been  the  history  of  the 
world  and  the  Church,  if •  this  had  been  borne  in  mind  by  Christians!  1.  How 
many  lamentable  instances  have  we  seen  of  self-denial  on  a  vast  scale,  followed 
by  rule  and  prescription,  where  every  sign  of  the  spirit  of  love  was  wanting  ;  nay, 
where  hatred  and  rancour  not  only  burned  in  men's  breasts,  but  led  on  to  wars  and 
massacres,  nominally  for  the  truth's  sake !  On  what  is  the  greatest  amount 
of  self-denying  labour  spent  among  men  ?  What  answer  could  be  given,  but  that 
it  is  but  after  all  for  ulterior  objects  ?  2.  And  then  rise  to  a  higher  kind  of  sacrifice. 
How  often  do  we  see  men  earnestly  devoting  themselves,  even  without  any  prospect 
beyond,  to  the  interest  or  advancement  of  some  favourite  scheme,  the  mainten:ince 
of  one  side  of  some  debated  question  ?  Sometimes  substance,  and  family,  and 
peace  of  mind,  are  offered  generously  up  ;  many  a  man  is  a  wreck  of  some  hopeless 
voyage,  but  evermore  fitting  himself  out  again  for  undertaking  it  afresh.  Then 
again,  as  in  the  former  case,  but  h'^re  even  more,  there  is  temptation,  from  the 
very  glory  of  self -sacrifice,  to  make  it  unworthily.  Often  have  the  words  of  our 
text  been  literahy  verified.  The  body  has  been  burned,  but  no  flame  of  love  was 
lit  up  in  the  soul :  the  martyr  has  met  death  with  smiles  perhaps  on  his  persecutors, 
but  with  unsubdued  polemical  hatred.  And  many  who  have  not  reached  this  con- 
summation have  stripped  themselves  of  all  they  had,  and  have  gime  forth  into 
deserts,  there  to  become  renowned  in  the  eyes  of  the  Church,  and  thence  to  launch 
their  anathemas  upon  others,  wiser  perhaps  and  better  than  themselves.  Well 
indeed  might  it  be  written,  that  the  heart  is  deceitful  above  all  things,  and 
desperately  wicked.  And  just  in  propurtion  to  this  character  of  our  hearts  is  the 
necessity  of  constant  and  unwearied  watchfulness,  that  in  our  own  case  neither 
our  bestowals  nor  our  self-iienials  may  be  without  love,  bat  indeed  all  prompted 
and  regulated  by  it.  And  how  may  this  be  ?  Now  as  at  the  first,  by  the  Spirit 
of  God.  {Dean  Alford.)  Jewish  chariUj  : — The  Jews,  according  to  Maimonides, 
reckoned  eight  degrees  of  charity  in  almsgiving.  The  first  was,  to  give,  but  with 
reluctance  or  regret.  The  second  was,  to  give  cheerfully,  but  not  in  proportion 
to  the  need  of  the  recipient.  The  third  was,  to  give  proportionately  to  the  need, 
but  not  without  solicitation  and  entreaty  on  the  part  of  the  poor.  The  fourth  was, 
to  give  unsought  and  unsolicited,  but  putting  the  gift  into  the  hand  of  the  receiver, 
and  that  even  in  the  presence  of  others,  exciting  in  him  the  painful  feehng  of 
shame.  The  fifth  was,  to  give  in  such  a  way  that  the  beneficiary  should  know  his 
benefactor  without  being  known  of  him,  as  those  did  who  folded  mou'-y  in  the 
corners  of  their  cloaks  that  the  poor  as  they  passed  might  take  it  unperceived. 


232  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 

The  sixth  was,  to  give  kimwiDg  the  objects  of  the  giver's  bounty,  but  remaining 
unknown  to  them,  afier  the  manner  of  those  wlio  conveyed  their  alms  by  some 
secret  agency  to  the  dwellings  of  the  iniligent,  m^iking  it  impossible  fur  them  to 
ascertain  the  source  of  their  relief.  'J  he  seveuih  Avas,  to  give  both  unknowing  and 
unknown,  like  those  benevolent  persons  >vho  depo-ited  their  gifts  privately  in  a 
place  2:irepared  for  that  purj^ose  in  the  temple  and  in  every  synagoiiue  as  you  are 
supposed  to  do  in  the  alms-boxes  at  the  door,  from  which  the  most  resj)ectable 
poor  families  were  regularly  supplied  wiihout  ostentation  or  observation.  The 
eighth  and  most  meritorious  of  alt  was,  to  anticipate  charity  by  preventin<^  poverty, 
to  help  the  worthy  brother  by  satisfying  the  claims  of  his  creilitors,  assisting  him 
to  redeem  some  forfeited  portion  of  his  inheritance,  furnishing  him  remunerative 
employment,  or  putting  him  in  the  way  of  obtaining  it,  so  th'it  he  should  be  able 
to  secure  an  honest  livelihood  without  the  hard  irecessity  of  holding  out  an  empty 
hand  to  the  rich.  These  were  the  eight  steps  in  their  goLien  stairway  of  charity, 
but  the  highest  of  them  does  not  rise  to  the  It-vel  of  the  Pauline  platform  ;  for 
a  man  might  give  all  his  goods  to  feed  the  poor,  and  yet  have  no  charity;  and 
wanting  this,  his  utmost  alms,  shouered  from  the  top  of  the  ideal  stairs,  shall 
profit  him  nothing.  (J.  Cruss,  D.D.)  The  greatest  perjoniiances  and  sulierinps 
vain  tcitliout  cliarity  : — I.  There  may  be  great  performances  and  sufferings 
WITHOUT  LOVE.  1.  Great  pi-rfoimances  (Phil.  iii.  3;  Luke  xviii.  11,  12).  Many 
have  been  exceeding  magnificent  in  their  gifts  for  pious  and  charitable  uses  from 
fear  of  hell,  hoping  thereby  to  make  atonement  for  their  sins,  others  froin  pride, 
or  from  a  desire  for  reputation.  2.  Gre«t  sufferings.  Many  have  undertaken 
wearisome  pilgrimages,  or  spent  their  lives  in  deserts,  or  sulTered  death,  of  whom 
we  have  no  reason  to  think  they  had  any  sincere  love  in  their  hcaits.  In  the 
Crusades  thousands  went  voluntarily  to  all  the  dangers  of  the  conflict,  in  the  hope 
of  thus  securing  the  pardon  of  their  sins  and  the  rewards  of  glory  hereafter.  And 
history  tells  us  of  some  tliat  have  yielded  themselves  to  voluntary  death,  out  of 
mere  obstinacy  of  spirit.  Manj'  among  the  heathen  have  died  tor  their  country, 
and  many  as  marL\rs  for  a  false  faith.      II.  Whatever  men  may  do  or  suffer, 

THEY     CANNOT    MAKE     UP    FOR    THE    WANT    OF   LOVE.         1.    It    is    UOt    the    WOrk     Or    the 

suffering  that  is,  in  itself,  worth  anything  in  the  sight  of  God.  "  The  Lord 
lookeih  not  on  the  outward  appearance,  but  on  the  heart."  2.  Whatever  is  done 
or  suffered,  yet  if  the  heart  is  withheld  from  God,  there  is  nothing  reaily  given  to 
Him.  3.  Love  is  the  sum  of  all  that  God  requires  of  us.  And  it  is  absurd  to 
suppose  tint  anything  can  m^ke  up  for  the  want  of  that  which  is  the  sum  of  all 
that  God  requires.  As  to  things  without  the  heart,  God  speaks  of  them  as  not 
being  the  thiirgs  that  He  has  required  (Isa.  i.  12),  and  dmiauds  that  the  heart  be 
given  to  Him,  if  we  would  have  the  exiern;il  ottering  accepted.  4.  If  we  make  a 
great  show  of  respect  and  love  to  God,  in  the  outward  actions,  while  there  is  no 
sincerity  in  the  heart,  it  is  but  hypocrisy  and  practical  lying  unto  the  Holy  One 
(Psa.  Ixxviii.  3G).  5.  Whatever  may  be  done  or  suffered,  if  there  be  no  siuceritj' 
in  the  heart,  it  is  all  but  an  offering  to  some  idol.  In  all  such  offerings,  something 
is  virtually  worshipped  ;  and  whatever  it  is,  be  it  self,  or  our  fellow-nun,  or  the 
world,  that  is  allowed  to  usurp  the  place  that  should  be  given  to  God,  and  to  receive 
the  offerings  that  should  be  made  to  Him.  Conclusion  :  It  becomes  us  to  use  the 
subject — 1.  In  the  way  of  s  If-examination.  If  it  be  indeed  so — that  all  we  can 
do  or  suffer  is  in  v«in,  if  we  have  not  sincere  love  to  God  in  the  heart — then  it 
should  put  us  upon  searching  ourselves  whether  or  no  we  have  this  love  in  sincerity 
in  our  hearts.  There  aie  these  things  that,  belong  to  sincerity — (1)  Ti'uth — that 
is,  that  tliere  be  that  truly  in  the  heart  of  which  there  is  the  appearance  and  show 
in  the  outward  action  (Psa.  li.  G;  John  i.  47).  (2)  Freedom.  Chrint  is  chosen 
and  followed  because  He  is  loved.  (3)  Integrity — wholeness.  Where  this  sincerity 
exists,  (iud  is  sought,  and  religion  is  chosen  with  the  whole  heart.  (4)  Purity. 
2.  To  (;onvinco  the  unregenerate  of  their  lost  condition.  If  by  all  you  can  do  or 
suffer,  you  cannot  make  up  for  the  want  of  love,  then  it  will  follow  that  you  are  in 
an  undone  condition  till  you  have  obtained  God's  regenerating  grace  to  renew  a 
right  spirit  within  you.  3.  To  exhort  all  earnestly  to  cherish  sincere  Christian 
love  in  their  hearts.  If  it  be  so,  that  this  is  of  such  great  and  absolute  necessity, 
seek  it  with  dilijjence  and  yrayer.  God  only  can  bt-stow  it.  (Jon.  Edivards.) 
Goodness  without  lore: — I.  lis  common  for."iis.  1.  Benevolence.  2.  Attachment 
to  the  truth.  II.  Its  wokthlessness.  1.  It  cannot  please  God.  2.  It  fails  in 
motive.  3.  It  profits  nothing.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Vaidti/  of  self-imnudation : — 
E.g.,  when  a  Buddhist  ascetic  leaps  upon  the  blazing  pyre,  immolating  his  body 


CHAP,  xiii.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  233 

that  he  may  immortalise  his  spirit,  what  does  it  profit  him?  Nothing ;  the  fanatic 
is  in  love  with  himself,  and  with  no  one  else ;  he  seeks  Lis  own  soul  happiness,  whether 
in  the  shape  of  a  coming  deification  or  a  present  glorification  of  self.  It  is  quite 
possible  that  this  image  of  a  Buddhist  priest  with  his  "  ineffectual  fires"  suggested 
the  thought  of  this  text  to  Paul ;  more  especially  as  this  text  was  written  in  57  a.d.  , 
before  the  outbreak  of  Nero's  fiery  persecution.  The  apostle,  just  before  his  visit  to 
Corinth,  had  been  staying  in  Athens,  where  he  had  ceitainly  seen  an  altar  to  the  "un- 
known God,"  and  had  probably  seen  or  heard  about,  "  the  tomb  of  the  Indian,"  with  its 
epitaph,  "Here  hesZarmanochegas,  who  made  his  own  self  immortal."  [CanonEvans.) 
Self-iiiarti/rdom : — The  cynic  philosopher  Peregrinus,  who  was  for  a  considerable 
time  a  Christian,  burnt  himself  publicly  at  the  Olympic  games,  in  imitation,  as  he 
said,  of  Hercules  ;  ending  a  life  of  extravagance  and  villainy  by  an  act  of  the  wildest 
vainglory  and  ambition.  During  the  dark  ages  it  was  no  uncommon  thing  for 
religious  bigots  to  prove  the  tenets  of  their  faith  by  the  fervency  of  their  zeal,  and 
their  obstinacy  was  often  taken  for  strength  of  argument.  Under  the  pontificate  of 
Alexander  VI.  a  certain  monk  in  Italy  offered  himself  to  be  burnt  in  confirmation  of 
opinions  which  he  professed.  This  was  received  as  an  incontestable  proof  of  their 
truth,  till  another  monk  arose,  as  obstinate  as  the  former,  and  made  the  same  offer  to 
establish  opinions  directly  contrary.  The  history  of  all  ages  and  countries  abounds 
with  examples  of  inflexible  zealots  who  are  ready  to  burn  others,  or  to  be  burnt 
themselves,  for  the  cause  which  they  espouse  ;  fur  zeal  hath  no  necessary  connec- 
tion with  truth,  and  as  little  with  charity.     (A.  McDonald.) 

Vers.  4-8.  Charity  suffereth  long,  and  is  kind. — Christian  love: — I.  Suffers 
LONG.  The  Greek  denotes  having  the  power  "to  hold  the  mind  long,"  i.e.,  it  is 
the  opposite  to  rash  an^er.  There  are  persons  who,  when  they  are  afflicted  by 
Providence,  or  provoked  by  man,  are  unable  to  hold  their  minds.  Like  the  water 
which  has  mastered  the  dam,  so  do  some  men's  unhappy  feehngs  rise  and  over- 
spread tbeir  families  and  neighbourhood.  But  when  one  has  failed  in  his  duty 
towards  the  charitable  man  it  may  grieve  him,  but  he  seeks  for  grace  to  bear  the 
trial.  He  holds  his  mind  long  ;  and  while  not  forgetful  of  the  demands  of  justice, 
is  influenced  by  the  spirit  of  forgiveness.  II.  Is  not  easily  provoked.  If  a  man's 
spirit  be  fully  imbued  with  an  affectionate  complacency  towards  God  and  man,  he 
is  not  thrown  into  bitter  resentments  by  unjust  usage.  He  is  "  slow  to  wrath." 
Provocations  must  and  will  arise.  The  state  of  the  liealth,  mind,  temperature, 
circumstances,  will  make  a  man  more  disposed  to  frelfalness  or  reserve,  one  day 
than  another.  "Behold  how  great  a  matter  a  little  fire  kindleth  !"  A  family 
pique  has  overthrown  an  empire,  and  a  bodily  sen-ation  directed  the  course  and 
given  the  feeling  to  a  man's  life  !  But  the  spirit  of  the  charitalde  man  does  not 
soon  become  acid.  His  injured  feelings  do  not  ferment  into  vinegar.  III.  Beareth 
ALL  THINGS,  or  "  covcreth  all  things."  "  Hatred  stirreth  up  strife,  but  love  covereth 
all  sins."  As  you  would  conceal  a  defect  in  your  person,  or  cover  up  what  was 
offensive  on  your  grounds,  so  does  the  spirit  of  the  gospel  lead  us  to  hide  a  brother's 
infirmities  from  the  animadversion  of  others.  The  spirit  of  envy  and  revenge 
would  lead  you  to  speak  of  the  misconduct  of  others  with  exasperated  feelings. 
But  heie  an  objection  has  arisen.  "  How  unmanly  is  this  charity  which  you 
commend  !  Are  we  then  to  be  trampled  upon?  "  Not  so  :  love  can  feel  injured, 
and  seek  redress,  but  not  recklessly  and  bitterly;  and  when  in  pursuit  of  her 
rights  she  is  all  the  while  calm  and  kind  and  universally  benevolent. 
IV.  Endureth  all  things.  Christian  love  remains  under  its  burdens.  Bad 
usage  from  man  and  affliction  from  God  it  teaches  us  to  sustain.  Let  the  conduct 
of  Christ  illustrate  the  spirit  of  His  own  religion.  He  was  not  impatient  with  the 
ignorant,  or  revengeful  upon  His  persecutors.  (Isaac  Tatjlor.)  Featmcs  of 
lore  : — These  features  are — I.  Manifold.  There  are  some  landscapes  that  are 
almost  tame;  some  faces  not  featureless,  but  not  marked  and  vivid.  Not  so  with 
love.  It  is  the  landscape  of  Devonshire  rather  than  Lincolnshire;  of  Switzerland 
rather  than  Holland.  Bead  this  description — there  is  no  monotony,  eye  bright, 
brow  clear,  lips  strong  and  definite.  II.  Harmonious.  1.  There  is  the  presence 
of  all  that  could  complete  character.  Patience,  kindness,  joy,  fortitude.  "  Strenj^th 
and  beauty  are  in  the  sanctuary";  the  full  diapason  of  the  music  of  morals. 
2.  There  is  the  absence  of  any  element  that  could  be  disfigurement  or  di^cord. 
*'  Envieth  not,  is  not  puffed  up,"  &c.  III.  Beautiful.  There  is  not  one  virtue 
in  this  description  that  is  not  like  a  splendid  Corinthian  column.  Nothing  deforms 
the  landscape,  nothing  disfigures  the  face.    Bather  every  element  heightens  the 


234  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 

loveliness.  There  is  not  only  a  wealth,  but  a  wealth  of  the  beauties  of  love. 
IV.  Pekjianent.  "The  grass  withers,  the  fio^vers  lade  "  ;  even  "  the  human  face 
Divine  "  grows  old,  the  brow  wrinkled,  the  eye  dim,  the  mouth  weak.  The  beauty 
of  love  is  imperishable.  "  Love  never  faileth."  The  word  "faileth  "  pictures  either 
a  flower  whose  petals  never  fall  off,  or  an  actor  "  who  is  never  hissed  off  the  stage, 
has  its  pnrt  to  play  on  the  stage  of    eternity."     (U.  R.  Thonum.)  Christian 

lore: — Why  has  the  Cliurch  assigned  this  chapter  to  Quinquagesima  Sunday, 
the  Sunday  immediately  preceding  the  season  of  Lent?  We  shall  be  able  to 
answer  that  question  if  we  consider  what  the  season  of  Lent  means,  and  why  it 
has  been  set  apart  as  a  season  of  special  humiliation,  self-mortification,  and  prayer. 
Lent  is  the  introduction  to  Good  Friday  and  Easter  Day.  It  is  meant  to  prepare  us 
better  to  realise  and  understand  the  great  mystery  of  godliness,  the  unseat  chable 
riches  of  God's  truth,  so  beautifully  summed  up  in  the  words  of  Jesus  (Luke  xviii. 
31-33).  We  cann(jt  take  one  step  forward  into  the  knowledge  of  God's  truth  with- 
out love.  Love  is  the  very  first  condition  without  which  it  is  impossible  to  see  even 
the  outside  of  the  great  mystery  of  godliness.  Let  a  man  look  at  the  Cross  of  Christ, 
and  without  the  light  of  love  it  will  be  foolishness  to  him.  Or  let  him  look  at  the 
power  of  God  manifested  in  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  and  without  the  light  of  love 
it  will  be  a  riddle  to  him.  Love  is  the  microscope  which  re.yeals  the  hidden  and 
deep  things  which  the  careless  eye  scans  without  any  sense  of  tlieir  inexpressible 
beauty  and  value.  You  have  noticed,  have  you  not,  on  a  calm  and  sunny  day,  how 
softly  and  how  beautifully  the  clear  bright  sky  above  us  is  reflected  in  the  still  sur- 
face of  some  deep  pool  of  water  ?  The  sky,  you  know,  is,  as  it  were,  received  into 
the  bosom  of  tlie  water.  Now,  God's  truth  is  just  like  the  sky  above ;  and  the  heart 
that  is  full  of  love — love  to  God  and  love  to  man — the  heart  that  is  steeped  in  love 
is  just  like  the  still  surface  of  the  deep  and  steady  pool.  It  can  receive  the  truth 
into  itself  and  reflect  it.  If  we  suffer  the  gusts  of  passion,  of  hatreil,  and  envy,  and 
malice,  and  uncharitableness,  and  ill-will  to  sweep  over  our  hearts  and  ruffle  them, 
we  shall  become  quite  incapable  of  receiving  and  discerning  the  truth.  We  shall 
be  no  longer  like  the  steady  lake  which  receives  the  glorious  sky  so  beautifully  into 
its  bosom,  and  mirrors  it  back  so  faithfully.  Surely,  then,  we  have  great  need  to 
pray  for  love ;  we  have  great  need  to  pray  that  God  will  send  His  Holy  Spirit,  and 
pour  into  our  hearts  that  most  excellent  gift  of  charity.  Where  shall  we  find  any- 
thing fairer,  anything  pleasanter  to  behold  or  more  joyful  to  possess  than  charity  ? 
Is  selfishness,  or  ill-will,  or  pride,  or  vanity,  or  any  other  thing  that  is  not  of  God, 
either  more  beautiful  to  look  upon,  or  more  delightful  to  hold,  than  charity?  Oh, 
then,  let  us,  as  the  apostle  bids  in  the  first  words  of  the  next  chapter,  "  follow  after 
charity."  So  doing,  we  shall  be  laying  hold  of  that  which  is  imperishable.  (Canon 
D.  J.  Vanghnn. )  Love  as  a  regulator : — 1.  Every  great  engine  is  brought  to  i^recision 
of  movement,  to  the  quiet  and  steady  exertion  of  power,  by  means  of  a  governor  or 
regulator.  The  world  is  full  of  jarrings  and  disturbairees,  and  man  finds  a  strange 
warfare  going  on  in  his  own  breast.  Such  was  tlie  state  of  things  when  Christ  came. 
He  saw  the  need  of  some  Divine  principle  of  life  to  act  as  a  regulator  both  in  the 
individual  and  in  society.  This  regulator  is  love  :  the  life  of  the  soul ;  the  all-per- 
vasive and  all-controlling  energy  of  our  spiritual  being.  2.  The  apostle,  in  his 
vivid  analysis  of  this  Divine  piinciple,  looks  upon  it  as  embodied  in  character. 
He  tells  how  this  lovely  personage  will  think,  speak,  and  act  in  the  midst  of  uulove- 
liness  and  sin.  He  views  love  as  a  person  in  her  attitude— I.  Towards  self. 
1.  She  is  modest  and  unassuming.  "  She  vaunteth  not  herself."  While  she 
maintains  a  true  self-respect  and  a  wise  estimate  of  her  own  worthiness  she  never 
displays  arrogance  or  self-conceit.  2.  "  She  seeketh  not  her  own."  The  belittling 
limitations  ot  selfishness  are  not  permitted  to  dwarf  the  outgoings  of  her  generous 
heart.  II.  Towards  the  truth.  1.  This  is  one  of  affectionate  desire  and  rejoicing. 
Here  truth  is  also  personified.  Both  experience  profound  satisfaction  in  the 
enlightenment  and  ennobling  of  man.  2.  In  reference  to  truth  and  its  ultimate 
triumph  love  is  also  trustful  and  hopeful.  "  She  believeth  all  things."  This  does 
not  signify  credulity,  for  there  is  nothing  so  wise  and  discerning  as  love. 
Discerning  but  not  doubtful,  she  rejoices  to  accept  every  revelation  or  manifesta- 
tion of  God.  3.  Her  temperament,  or,  better,  her  faith  is  buoyant  and  cheerful. 
"  She  hoiieth  all  things."  Expects  good  instead  of  evil ;  is  not  foreboding  and 
gloomy ;  trusts  a  kind  Providence  ;  believes  in  the  possibilities  of  men.  III.  To- 
WABDS  OTHERS.  1.  "  Love  sufferetli  long."  In  the  face  of  provocation  where 
others  would  be  vehement  with  passion,  she  maintains  her  own  serene  dignity. 
This   is   almost   identical    with    "not    easily   provoked,"    "  beareth   all  things," 


CHAP.  XIII. J  I.   CORINTHIANS.  235 

•'  endureth  all  things."  These  manifold  expressions  reveal  love  as  a  personage  of 
great  moral  strength,  as  well  as  of  unrivalUd  loveliness.  She  maintains  constant 
equipoise  of  spirit.  2.  "  Is  kind."  Her  self-forgetful  love  makes  her  gracious, 
benignant,  generous,  and  forgiving  under  all  circumstances.  3.  "  Envietli  not." 
Competition  is  the  most  conspicuous  trait  of  men  in  their  relations  one  with 
another.  To  live  without  envy  is  a  miracle  of  grace.  4.  "Does  not  behave  itself 
unseemly."  She  Iihs  a  delicate  discernment  of  what  is  appropriate  at  all  times 
and  places;  is  never  indecorous  or  unrefine<l.  5.  "  Thinketh,"  or  "  taketh  not 
account  of  evil."  Not  suspicious  or  self-seeking  by  nature,  she  does  not  impute 
evil  to  others.  6.  "  Eejoices  not  in  utirighteousness."  The  world  seems  to  take 
delight  in  the  downfall  of  others.  Yet  love  grieves  and  blushes  at  another's 
immorality.  (D.  W.  Pratt,  M.A.)  Love  sujf'ereth : — I.  What?  Unkinduess, 
opposition,  injury,  &c.  II.  How?  1.  Long.  2.  Patiently.  3.  Without  resent- 
ment. III.  Why?  1.  For  Christ's  sake.  2.  For  man's  sake.  3.  In  hope.  (J. 
Lyth,  D.D.)  Lore  svffereth  loiui : — I  once  undertook  a  duty  the  like  of  which 

I  would  nevi^r  attempt  again.  A  widow  lady  had  a  son — a  poor  p  'odigal.  He  had 
spent  his  all,  and  was  fast  making  inroads  upon  his  mother's  little  competence. 
Some  friends  had  suggested  that  I  should  call  upon  her,  and  olfer  a  gentle  ex- 
postulation. I  did  so.  I  fancy  that  I  can  see  her  now — her  white  hair  nnd  her 
widow'.s  cap.  Shn  patiently  heard  my  message,  but  she  turned  to  me  in  tears,  Hnd 
said,  "  Yes,  Mr.  Garrett,  you  are  very  kind,  you  mean  well,  and  all  you  say  is  true ; 
but  still,  af  er  all,  he  is  my  son!"  {C.  Garrett.)  The  lonij-siijj'rrlnp  of  charily 
is  not  feebleness,  cowardice,  indifference,  nor  imbecility  ;  but  a  princij^le  perfectly 
consonant  with  the  largtst  mental  endowments,  the  loftiest  aims  and  the  noblest 
endeavours,  with  freedom  of  speech,  firmness  of  purpose,  and  unwearied  peisever- 
ance  in  well-doing;  while  it  is  totally  opposed  to  all  temporising  expedients, 
vacillating  policies,  and  inconstant  endeavours.  Christ  is  our  example  of  long- 
suffering  ciiarity  ;  yet  witness  how  He  clears  His  Father's  temple  of  the  sacrilegious 
throng,  and  rebukes  the  wickedness  of  the  SurU,es  ami  Pharisees.  It  is  the  depth 
of  the  river,  not  its  shallowness,  that  makes  it  so  smooth  and  gentle  in  its  How  ; 
and  the  mountain  stream,  which  in  the  drought  of  summer  went  brawling  from 
rock  to  lock  and  from  pool  to  pool,  with  a  thousand  disturbances  of  its  surface  and 
misdirections  of  its  course,  now,  when  the  autumn  rains  have  fallen,  or  the  winter 
snows  have  melted,  and  tributary  torrents  have  swollen  it  to  full  flood,  glides  with 
an' evenness  and  Ijeauty  between  its  green  banks,  with  a  placidity  of  stn^ngth  and 
a  unity  of  might  which,  while  pleasant  to  behold,  is  terrible  to  withstand.  Even 
so  charity,  subordinating  all  the  feelings  and  faculties  of  the  snul  to  one  Divine 
impulse,  and  consecrating  all  to  one  holy  and  benevolent  purpose,  flows  on  with  a 
mild  and  gentle  majesty,  undisturbed  by  rude  speeches  and  unkind  actions,  and 
never  diverud  from  its  aim  by  the  annoying  accidents  of  society,  straight  forward 
to  the  vast  ocean  of  blessed  being,  its  destined  union  with  God  in  Christ,  and  all 
that  is  great  and  good  and  happy  in  the  univeise.  The  tranquil  meekness  of 
charity,  therefore,  is  perfectly  consistent  with  true  grandeur  of  soul,  and  of  all  true 
grandeur  of  soul  is  itself  an  essential  element ;  even  as  the  most  perfect  harmony 
consists  with  the  mightiest  tones  in  music,  and  the  nicest  cultivation  of  plants 
contributes  to  their  most  stately  forms  and  most  luxuriant  fruitfulness,  and  the 
careful  discipline  of  domestic  animals  results  in  the  development  of  superior 
stature,  with  more  sirengih  of  muscle,  and  greater  fleetness  of  course,  and  what- 
ever else  belongs  to  the  utmost  periection  of  their  nature.  (J.  Cross,  D.D.) 
Charity  dii^poses  ns  meekly  to  hear  injuries : — Meekness  is  a  great  part  of  the 
Christian  spirit  (Matt.  xi).  And  meekness,  as  it  respects  injuries  received  from 
men,  is  called  long-suffering,  the  fruit  of  the  true  Christian  spiiit  (Gal.  v.  22; 
Eph.  iv.  1,  2  ;  Col.  iii.  12).  Note — I.  Some  of  the  kinds  of  injuries  that  we  may 
EECEiVE  FROM  OTHEKS.  Some  injure  others — 1.  In  their  estates  by  unfairness  and 
dishonesty  in  their  dealings.  2.  In  their  good  name,  by  reproaching  or  speaking 
evil  of  them  behind  their  backs.  3.  In  their  thoughts,  bv  unjustly  entertaining 
a  low  esteem  of  them  (Job  v.  21  ;  Psa.  cxl.  3).  4.  In  their  injurious  treatment. 
II.  How  SUCH  iN,TUEiES  OUGHT  MEEKLY  TO  BE  BOENE.  1.  The  nature  of  the  duty 
enjoined.  It  implies  that  injuiies  should  be  borne— (1)  Without  doing  anything 
to  revenge  them.  (2)  With  the  continuance  of  love  in  the  heart,  and  without 
those  passions  that  tend  to  interrupt  and  destroy  it.  (3)  W^ithoiit  our  losing  the 
quietness  and  repose  of  our  own  minds  and  hearts  (Luke  xxi.  19).  (4)  With 
willingness  to  sntfer  much  in  our  interests  and  feelings  for  the  sake  of  peace, 
rather  than  do  what  we  have  opportunity,  and  perhaps  the  right,  to  do  in  defending 


236  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 

ourselves  (1  Cor.  vi.  7).  2.  Why  it  is  called  long-suffering.  (1)  Because  we  ought 
meekly  to  bear  not  only  a  small  injury,  but  also  a  good  deal  of  injurious  treatment 
from  others.  (2)  Because  in  some  cases  we  should  be  willing  to  suffer  a  great 
■while  in  our  interests,  before  we   improve  opportunities  of    righting   ourselves. 

III.    How  THAT  LOVE,  WHICH    IS    THE    SUM  OF    THE    CHRISTIAN    SPIRIT,  WILL   DISPOSE  US 

MEEKLY  TO  BEAR  SUCH  INJURIES.  1.  Lovc  to  God  and  Christ  has  a  tendency  to 
dispose  US  to  this ;  for  it— (1)  Disposes  us  to  imitate  Him,  and  therefore  disposes 
US  to  such  long-suffering  as  He  manifests  (Exod.  xxxiv.  6 ;  Rom.  ii.  4  ;  1  Tim.  i. 
12-16).  (2)  Disposes  us  thus  to  express  our  gratitude  for  His  long-suffering 
exercised  toward  us.  (3)  Tends  to  humility,  which  is  one  main  root  of  a  meek 
and  long-suffering  spirit  (Eph.  iv.  2).  (4)  Disposes  men  to  have  regard  to  the 
hand  of  God  in  the  injuries  they  suffer,  and  not  only  to  the  hand  of  man,  and 
meekly  to  submit  to  His  will  therein  (2  Sam.  xvi.  5,  10).  (5)  Sets  us  very  much 
above  the  injuries  of  men.  (a)  Because  nothing  can  ever  really  hurt  those  that 
are  the  true  friends  of  God  (Rom.  viii.  28 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  13).  (/))  Because  the  more 
we  love  God,  the  more  we  shall  place  all  our  happiness  in  Him.  2.  Love  to  our 
neighbour  will  dispose  us  to  the  same.  Long-suffering  and  forbearance  are  always 
the  fruit  of  love  (Eph.  iv.  1,  2  ;  Prov.  x.  12).  Conclusion  :  The  subject — 1.  Exhorts 
us  all  to  the  duty  of  meekly  bearing  the  injuries  that  may  be  received  from  others. 
Consider — (1)  The  example  that  Christ  has  set  us  (2  Cor.  x.  1).  He  meekly  bore 
innumerable  and  very  great  injuries  from  men.  (2)  If  we  are  not  disposed  meekly 
to  bear  injuries,  we  are  not  fitted  to  live  in  the  world,  for  in  it  we  must  exppct  to  meet 
with  many  injuries  from  men  (Matt.  x.  16).  (3)  In  this  way  we  shall  be  most 
above  injuries.  He  that  has  established  such  a  spirit  that  the  injuries  received 
from  others  do  not  disturb  the  calmness  of  his  mind,  lives,  as  it  were,  out  of  their 
reach.  (4)  The  spirit  of  Chiistian  long-sufferintr,  and  of  meekness  in  bearing  injuries, 
is  a  mark  of  true  greatness  of  soul  (Prov.  xvi.  82,  xiv.  29  ;  James  iii.  13).  (-3)  The 
spirit  of  Christian  long-suffering  and  meekness  is  commended  to  us  by  the  example 
of  the  saints.  (6)  This  is  the  way  to  be  rewarded  with  the  exercise  of  the  Divine 
long-suffering  toward  us  (Psa.  xviii.  25,  26  ;  Matt.  vii.  2,  14,  15).  2.  But  some,  in 
their  hearts,  may  object — (1)  That  the  injuries  they  receive  from  men  are  intoler- 
able, (rt)  Do  you  think  the  injuries  you  have  received  fr;m  your  fellow-man  are 
more  than  you  have  offered  to  God  ?  {b)  Do  you  not  hope  that  as  God  hitherto 
ha",  so  He  will  still  bear  with  you  in  all  this,  and  that  notwithstanding  all.  He  will 
exercise  toward  you  His  infinite  love  and  favour  ?  (c)  When  you  think  of  siich 
long-suft'ering  on  God's  part,  do  you  not  approve  of  it,  and  think  well  of  it,  Rnd 
that  it  is  not  only  worthy  and  excellent,  but  exceeding  glorious?  (d)  If  such  a 
course  be  excellent  and  worthy  to  be  approved  of  in  God,  why  is  it  not  so  in  your- 
self ?  (e)  Would  you  be  willing,  for  all  the  future,  that  God  should  no  longer  bear 
with  the  injuries  you  may  offer  Him,  and  the  offences  you  commit  against  Him? 
{/)  Did  Christ  turn  again  upon  those  who  injured  and  insulted  and  trod  on  Him, 
when  He  was  here  below  ;  and  was  He  not  injured  far  more  grievously  than  ever 
you  have  bi^eu  ?  (2)  That  those  who  have  injured  you,  persist  in  it,  and  do  not  at 
all  repent,  but  go  on  doing  it  still.  But  what  opportunity  could  there  be  for  long- 
suffering,  if  iujury  were  not  persisted  in  long  ?  (3)  That  your  enemies  will  be 
encouraged  to  go  on  with  their  injuries.  But  you  do  not  know  this,  for  you  have 
not  an  insight  into  the  future,  nor  into  the  hearts  of  men.  And,  beside,  God 
will  undertake  for  you  if  you  obey  His  commands  ;  and  He  is  more  able  to 
put  a  stop  to  the  wrath  of  man  than  you  are  (Rom.  xii.  19).  (Jon.  Edwards.) 
The  jjcitience  of  love  .---1.  Its  manifestations.  There  may  be  a  world  where  love  is  not 
strains d  and  taxed  as  it  is  here.  Here  there  is  certainly  scope  for  the  manifestation  of 
jjatience  in — 1.  The  relationsliips  of  life.  2.  The  antagonisms  of  life.  3.  Thephilan- 
thropy  of  life.  And  in  all  these  it  is  claimed  and  will  be  manifested  in — (1)  Gentle- 
ness, (2)  Uiisuspiciousness,  (3)  Tolerance,  (4)  Forgivingness,  (5)  Continuance.  II, 
Its  bhauty.  Love  is — 1.  Sensitive,  yet  patient.  Not  hard  and  servile.  2.  Anxious, 
yet  patient.  Eager,  not  apathetic.  III.  The  explanation.  Because  love  cares  for 
the  beloved  rather  than  for  self.  Self  is  thrown  away  in  the  interests  of  others,  the 
Avelfare  of  others.  This  patience  and  all  the  powers  of  love  a'e  in  its  self-sacrifice. 
{U.  B.  Thomas.)  Tlie  patience  of  ClirisVs  hive: — God  suffereth  Himself  to  be 
conceived  in  the  wnmb  of  a  mother,  and  abideth  the  time :  and  being  born,  waiteth 
to  grow  up  :  and  being  grown  up,  is  not  eager  to  be  acknowledged,  but  putteth  a 
furthc-  slight  upon  Himself,  and  is  baptized  by  His  own  servant,  and  repelleth  the 
attacks  of  the  tempter  by  words  only.  When  from  the  Lord  He  became  tlie  Master, 
teaching  man  to  escape  death,  having  well  learned,  for  salvation's  sake,  the  for- 


CHAP.  XIII.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  237 

giving  spirit  of  offended  patience  :  He  strove  not :  He  cried  not :  the  shattered  reed 
He  did  not  break,  the  smoking  flax  He  did  not  quench — God  did  put  His  own  Spirit 
in  His  Son  with  perfection  of  patience.  None  that  desired  to  cleave  to  Him  did  He 
not  receive  :  no  man's  table  or  house  did  He  despise.  Yea,  Himself  ministered  to 
the  washing  of  His  disciples'  feet  (even  of  him  who  betrnyed  Him).  He  scorned 
not  the  sinners  nor  the  publicans.  He  was  not  angry  with  that  city  which  would 
not  receive  Him.  He  healed  the  unthankful.  He  gave  jjlace  to  those  who  laid 
snares  for  Him.  He,  at  whose  side,  if  He  had  desired  it,  legions  of  angels  fi'om 
heaven  would  at  one  word  have  been  present,  approved  not  ttie  avenging  swoid  of 
even  a  single  disciple.  In  Malchus  the  patience  of  the  Lord  was  wounded.  Where- 
fore also  He  cursed  the  works  of  the  sword  for  ever  after,  and  by  the  restoration  of 
soundness  to  him  whom  He  had  not  Himself  hurt,  He  made  satisfaction  through 
patience,  the  mother  of  mercy  and  charity.  The  Loid  Je^us  is  long-suffering  and 
kind:  is  patient  and  gentle.  I  pass  in  silence  the  Crucifixion,  for  it  wa«  for  that 
that  He  came  in  the  world :  yet,  was  th-re  nt-ed  of  insult,  alas!  that  He  mi^'ht 
undergo  death  ?  But  being  about  to  leave  the  world,  He  desired  to  be  filled  to  the  full 
with  the  pleasure  of  patience.  He  is  spit  upon,  is  beaten,  is  mocked,  is  foully  clothed, 
and  still  more  foully  crowned.  Wondrous  constancy  in  long-suffering  and  patience  I 
{Tertullian.)  Charity  is  considerate : — Louis  XIV.  in  a  gay  party  at  Versailles 
thought  he  perceived  an  opportunity  of  relating  a  facetious  story.  He  commenced 
but  endtd  abruj)tly  and  insijndly.  One  of  the  compjiny  soon  after  leaving  the  room, 
the  king  said,  "  I  am  sure  you  must  all  have  observed  how  uninteresting  my  anec- 
dote was.  I  did  not  recollect  till  I  began  that  tlie  turn  of  the  narrative  reflected, 
very  severely  on  the  immediate  ancestor  of  the  Prince  Armigue,  who  has  just  quitted 
us  ;  and  on  this  as  on  every  occasion,  I  think  it  far  better  to  spoil  a  good  story  than 
to  distress  a  worthy  man.''  (]J'.  Baxendale.)  Love  is  kind: — 1.  In  spirit.  2. 
Inaction.  3.  To  all.  4.  At  all  times.  5.  Without  selfish  ends.  [J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
The  hiiidiiessof  love  : — Like  the  last  word,  this  is  one  in  frequent  use  by  our  apostle. 
He  employs  it — 1.  As  an  avowal  of  his  own  attitude  to  men.  2.  As  an  injunction 
to  others.  8.  As  a  description  of  God.  The  thing  he  here  indicates  is  rather  the 
fragrance  of  the  whole  flower  of  love  than  any  one  of  its  petals,  the  lustre  of  the 
entire  diamond  rather  than  any  one  of  its  facets.  Kindness  is — I.  A  charji  of  the 
Cheistian  life.  The  word  is  a  beautiful  word,  and  is  the  expression  of  a  beautiful 
grace;  sometimes  befng  rendered  gentleness,  goodness — in  the  Eheims'  veisiou — 
benignity.  It  is  not  simply  a  manner,  but  a  moral  loveliness  that  shines  through 
all  manner.  II.  An  obligation  of  the  Cukistian  life.  It  is  not  an  ornament  to 
be  worn  at  option,  but  the  constant  garb  of  our  life,  not  a  work  of  supererogation, 
but  a  necessary,  essential,  and  elementul  duty.  (U.  R.  Thomas.)  The  kindness 
of  Christian  churity  : — It  is  like  the  teeming  cloud,  emptying  its  copious  blessing 
upon  the  thirsty  soil.  It  is  like  the  swelling  stream,  overflowing  its  banks  to  enrich 
the  plantations  of  the  valley.  It  is  like  the  fruitful  field,  pouring  its  golden  harvest 
into  the  exhausted  granary.  It  is  like  the  generous  oak,  shaking  the  genial  dew 
from  its  branches  upon  the  humbler  herbage  at  its  roots.  Nay,  it  is  like  God's 
incarnate  love,  walking  the  sinful  world,  chasing  sorrow  from  the  abodes  of  men, 
shedding  the  light  of  immortalitj'  into  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  and 
amidst  the  dissonances  of  human  selfishness  singing  a  melody  which  charms  the 
angels  down  from  heaven  !  (J .  Cross,  D.D.)  CItarity  henigna\it : — In  things  law- 
ful and  things  indifferent  it  bends  to  the  partialities  and  predilections  of  others, 
studying  to  please  all  for  their  good  to  edification.  It  would  not  needlessly  crush 
the  wing  of  an  insect,  much  less  inflict  upon  a  rational  and  immortal  being  an  evil 
remediless  and  everlasting.  It  is  eminently  pacific  and  conciliatory  ;  as  far  as  f)os- 
sible  without  any  compromise  of  the  Christian  law,  endeavouring  to  live  peaceably 
with  all  men,  and  labouring  in  many  ways  to  promote  the  harmony  of  human 
society.  As  the  sea  is  coruposed  of  drops,  and  the  earth  is  compacted  of  atoms,  and 
the  daylight  is  only  a  profusion  of  inappreciable  rays,  and  forest  and  field  are 
refreshed  and  beautified  by  millions  of  imperceptible  particles  of  dew,  so  it  is  the 
aggregate  of  little  things  that  makes  the  happiness  or  unhappiness  of  domestic  and 
social  life ;  and  charity  is  attentive  to  the  minutest  circumstance  that  can  affect  the 
comfort  and  welfare  of  mankind,  jilaniing  here  a  lily  and  there  a  rose  where  she 
cannot  convert  the  whole  dt^sert  into  a  f)aiadise,  pouring  in  a  thousand  tiny  rivulets 
to  swell  the  yreat  ocean  of  human  blessedness,  and  thus  impressing  the  universal 
conviction  of  her  kmdness.  {J.  Angell  James.)  Lonnsvffering  and  kindness  :  — 
Dr.  M'Ciie,  in  his  life  of  the  late  Sir  Andrew  Agnew,  M.P.,  says  :  "  We  were  speak- 
ing one  day  of  the  difficulty  of  confessing  Christ  before  the  world.     It  was  affecting 


238  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap,  xiir, 

to  hear  Sir  Andrew  acknowledge  this  difficulty,  who  had  borne  Christ's  reproach  so 
niafiiully  in  all  places.  He  told  me,  that  when  he  first  began  to  take  up  the  cause 
of  the  Sul'bath,  there  were  many  worldly  men  who  disliked  him  so  much  that  they 
seemed  anxious  to  stare  him  out  of  their  coiup  my,  and  that  he  had  felt  this  particu- 
larly at  the  Nesv  Club.  One  hounur  'ble  baronet,  not  satisfied  with  this  species  of 
annovance,  when  he  saw  that  Sir  Andrew  had  courage  enough  to  despise  it,  and  to 
fre(|iient  tlie  club  regularly  every  day  notwithstanding,  began  speaking  at  him,  and 
acting  as  rudely  as  he  could  towards  him.  One  morning  Sir  Andrew  was  waiting 
for  his  breakfast  at  the  club,  when  the  baronet  to  whom  I  allude  came  in, 
apparently  in  gr'  at  agitation.  Sir  Andrew,  perceiving  this,  asked  him  if  anything 
waswr^ng;  to  which  he  replied  that  his  lady  had  last  night  had  an  att:ic'<  of 
par:ilysis,  and  that  she  was  dangerously  ill.  Sir  Andrew  said  he  felt  for  him 
sincer  ly,  and  CNpressed  his  sympathy  warmly.  Next  morning  he  met  him  again  with 

his  two  sons,  who  had  come  to  si-e  iheir  mother,  and  he  asked  for  Lady with 

much  interest.  The  nnswer  was  that  he  had  been  sitting  up  with  her  all  night,  and 
that  she  was  no  better.  Ultimately,  however,  she  did  recover  ;  and  on  one  occasion 
afterv  a  ds,  ttie  baronet  referred  to  came  up  to  Sir  Andrew,  and  with  feeling  that 
did  him  grn^.t  honour,  said,  '  Sir  Andrew,  there  are  many  people  who  like  to  laugh 
at  you  and  abuse  yon,  because  of  your  Sabbath  principles,  and  I  confess  that  I  have 
been  among  the  number,  but  I  trust  I  shall  never  so  far  forget  myself  again.'  " 
Gluriiy  disposes  ns  to  do  good: — I.  The  nature  of  the  duty  of  doing  good  to 
oiHBES.  And  here  three  things  are  to  be  cons'dered,  viz. — 1.  The  act.  Persons 
may  do  good — (1)  To  the  souls  of  others,  which  is  the  most  excellent  way  of  doing 
good.  {'2)  lu  outward  things,  and  for  this  world  (Matt.  xxv.  35,  36).  In  three  ways 
Christianity  re(|uires  us  to  do  good  to  others,  [a)  To  give  to  others  (Luke  vi.  38). 
(h)  To  do  for  others  (1  Thess.  li.  9  ;  Heb.  vi.  10).  (r)  To  suffer  for  others  (Gal.  vi. 
2  ;  1  John  iii.  16).  2.  The  objects  of  this  act  are  often  spoken  of  in  the  Scriptures 
by  tiie  expres-ion,  "our  neighb  'ur  "  (Luk«  x.  29,  &c.).  We  are  to  do  good — (1) 
Both  to  the  wood  and  to  the  bad  (Matt.  v.  43).  (2)  To  friends  and  enemies  (Ma',t. 
V.  44).  (3)  To  the  thankful  and  the  unthankful  (Luke  vi.  35).  3.  The  manner  in 
which  we  should  do  good  to  others.  Tnis  is  expressed  in  the  single  word  "  fi'eely." 
This  seems  implied  in  the  words  of  the  text ;  for  to  be  kind  is  to  have  a  disposition 
freely  to  do  good.  And  this  doing  good  frenly  implies — (1)  That  our  doing  good 
be  not  m  a  mercenary  spirit  (Luke  vi.  35;  xiv.  12-14).  (2)  Th<t  we  do  it  cheer- 
fully Of  heartily,  and  with  real  good-will  to  th'^  one  we  would  benefit  (1  Pet.  iv.  9  ; 
2  Cor.  ix.  7 ;  Rom.  xii.  8  ;  Deut.  xv.  10).  (3)  That  we  do  it  liberally  and  bounti- 
fully (2  Cor.  ix.  8,  11 ;  Deut.  xv.  8  ;  Prov.  xi.  25  ;  2  Cor.  ix.  6).  II.  That  a  Chris- 
tian si'iiiiT  WILL  DISPOSE  US  THt's  TO  DO  GOOD  TO  oTHHES.  And  this  apppars  from 
two  considerations.  1.  The  main  thing  in  that  love  which  is  the  sum  of  tlie  Chris- 
tian spi'it  is  benevolence,  or  good-will  to  others  (Luke  ii.  14).  2.  The  most  proper 
and  c«  inclusive  evidencn  that  such  a  principle  is  real  and  sincere  is  its  being  eife^-tual. 
The  proper  and  conclusive  evidence  of  our  wishing  or  willing  to  do  good  to  another 
is  to  <lo  it.  The  Scriptures  therefoie  speak  of  doing  good  as  the  proper  and  full 
evidence  of  love  (1  John  iii.  18,  19  ;  James  ii.  15,  IC).  Conclusion  :  1.  What  a  great 
honour  it  is  to  be  made  an  instrument  of  good  in  the  world  (Gen.  xii.  2).  Eastern 
kings  and  t.'o\ernors  u-<ed  to  assume  to  t'lemselves  the  title  of  benefactors,  that  is, 
"  dot^rs  of  good,"  as  the  niost  honourable  th^y  could  think  of  (Luke  xxii.  25).  2. 
Thus  freel.^  to  do  good  to  others,  is  but  to  do  to  them  as  we  would  have  th'in  do  to 
ns.  3.  How  kind  God  and  Christ  have  been  to  us  (2  Cor.  viii.  9  ;  1  Pet.  i.  4).  4. 
Wliat  great  rewar  Is  ure  promised  to  those  that  freelv  do  good  to  others  (Psa.  xviii. 
25;  Acts  XX.  35  ;  Matt.  xxv.  34-40).  {Jon.  Edwards.)  Charity  envieth  not. — 
Chiriiy  7int  envious: — To  see  that  envy  is  utterly  incompatib  e  with  charity,  we 
need  but  glance  at  some  of  its  characteristic  qualities  and  fruits.     I.  Chakiiy  is 

DI^INTKliJ.S    KD    GOODNESS  ;     ENVY    IS    UNMINGLED    SFLFISHNESS.        It    WOUld    grasp    all 

riches,  ai'sorb  all  enjym  nt,  engross  all  admiration  and  esteem.  Every  superior 
an  I  every  rival  would  it  destroy ,  and  live  alone  in  an  impoverished  or  depo|iulated 
universe.  The  envious  man,  like  G  d  on"s  fieece,  would  absorb  every  particle  of 
moisture  that  falls  from  heaven,  and  leave  all  around  him  dewless  as  the  desert. 
II.  Charity  is  the  biiotheehood  of  the  iihart  ;  envy  is  as  malicious  a-  it  is  sel- 
fish Josep  1  was  hated  liv  his  brethren  because  he  was  beloved  by  his  father,  and 
bec'use  his  dream  made  him  their  snpeiior.  And  Hunan  was  full  of  indignation 
a"aiiist  Morde  ai  becaise  he  held  a  i'igh  place  in  the  favour  of  the  king.  An  )  the 
same  evil  surit  inliamed  the  wrath  of  Saul  against  David.  The  envious  man  resents 
t.ie  good  of  ot  ers,  as  if  it  were  an  injury  to  himself.  Envy  is  like  the  ocean,  wliich 


CHAT.  XIII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  239 

because  it  cannot  shine  as  the  firmament  does,  would  shroud  the  starry  lustre  of 
the  latter  with  its  vapoury  exhalations.  Nay,  in  order  to  enjoy  the  gliuimer  of  its 
own  rushlight,  it  would  extinguish  the  sun  and  leave  the  world  in  darkness.  III. 
Charity  is  a  meek  and  gexti.e  spirit  ;  fnvy  is  as  outrageous  as  it  is  mautcious. 
It  is  "  cruel  as  death  and  insatiable  as  the  grave."  There  is  in  its  hate  an  inhuman 
fierceness,  in  its  action  a  diabolical  fnry,  which  respect  no  dignity,  reveience  no 
sanctity,  pause  abashed  at  ro  splendid  array  of  virtue.  What  slew  Cfesar,  and 
banished  Cicero,  and  put  out  the  eyes  of  Belisarius,  but  a  merit  too  great  for  wealth 
to  reward  or  envy  to  endure  ?  Envy  murdered  Abel  at  his  altar,  and  nailed  the  Son 
of  God  upon  the  Cross.  Envy  first  blighted  the  bloom  of  paradise,  and  ever  since 
it  has  raged  through  the  scene  of  its  ruin,  tilling  the  earth  with  dire  confusion,  and 
every  evil  work  ;  and  well  saith  the  wisest  of  ancient  monarc'is,  "  Wrath  is  cruel, 
.and  anger  is  outrageous,  but  who  can  stand  before  envy  ?  "  IV.  Charity  is  ready 
unto  every  good  work  ;  envy  is  mischievous.  There  is  no  injury  it  would  not 
inflict  upon  its  happier  neighbour.  It  would  poison  your  peace  and  blacken  your 
fame.  Who  shall  set  bounds  to  its  wickedness,  or  limit  its  balt-ful  power?  Has  it 
mot  rifled  the  richest  treasuries,  thwarted  the  shrewdest  policies,  conquered  the 
mightiest  warriors,  and  subverted  the  proudest  thrones  ?  If  there  is  any  exemption 
irom  the  inflictions  of  envy,  it  is  only  in  the  case  of  those  who  have  nothing  for 
•which  they  can  be  envied,  whose  obscurity  is  their  fortress,  whose  poveity  is  their 
panoply.  The  tornado  may  spare  the  willows,  but  woe  to  the  oaks  !  Never  pitying, 
never  relenting,  envy  follows  its  victim  to  the  very  grave,  and  tramples  upon  his 
■ashes,  and  desecrates  his  memory,  and  persecutes  his  posterity.  V.  Charity  is  free 
FROM  deceit  ;  ENVY  IS  HYPOCRITICAL.  Pride,  anger,  gluttony,  drunkeni^ess,  &c.,  are 
ordinarily  frank  and  open.  But  envy,  conscious  that  it  is  an  unnatural  disposition, 
having  more  the  rancour  of  a  tiend  than  the  temper  of  a  man,  and  branded  by  com- 
mon consent  with  a  stigma  deep  nnd  foul,  conceals  its  real  nature.  As  Bishop  Hall 
says,  "  It  is  indeed  a  most  reputable  and  orthodox  vice,  a  regular  church-going  sin, 
•dressing  like  virtue  and  talking  like  piety.  It  has  a  great  zeal  for  religion,  a  keen 
sense  of  public  justice,  and  is  much  shocl<ed  at  the  inconsistencies  of  good  peoi^le. 
It  exults  when  the  h\pocrite  is  unmasked  and  exclaims — 'Ah  !  I  told  you  so  ;  I 
•always  suspected  him.'  It  is  also  most  benevolent ;  and  when  adversity  overtakes 
a  brother,  prays  devoutly  that  it  may  be  the  means  of  promoting  his  humility  and 
■other  Christian  graces."  VI.  Charity  is  fraught  with  Divine  peace  and  content- 
ment; ENVY  is  miserable.  Hating  and  hated,  can  it  know  an>  thing  of  a  good 
■conscience  and  a  cheerful  mind?  Deceitful  and  treacherous,  must  it  not  be  like 
the  troubled  sea  that  cannot  rest  ?  Baffled  and  chagrined,  will  it  not  become 
desperate,  and  turn  its  fangs  upon  itself,  and  devour  its  own  vitals?  Conclusion  : 
■Charity  and  envy  are  as  much  opposed  as  light  and  darkness.  Charity  is  from 
above  ;  envy  is  from  beneath.  Charity  is  the  frnit  of  the  Spirit ;  envy  is  the 
work  of  the  flesh.  Charity  is  the  outgrowth  of  the  new  heart  ;  envy  is  the 
product  of  the  carnal  mind.  Charity  is  as  pure  as  the  mountain  stream  ;  envy 
is  as  foul  as  the  city  sewer.  Charity  is  as  harmless  as  the  gentle  dove ;  envy  is 
as  deadly  as  the  viper's  fang.  Charity  is  as  tranquil  as  the  summer  evening  ; 
•envy  is  as  restless  as  the  troubled  sea.  Charity  is  as  tender  and  pitiful  as  an 
angel  ;  envy  is  as  heartless  atid  ciuel  as  a  demon.  Chatity  is  the  spirit  of 
Christ  and  the  temper  of  heaven  ;  envy  is  the  rankling  selfishness  which  makes 
"the  immitigable  woe  of  the  lost,  the  wormwood  and  gall  transfused  through  all 
the  faculties  and  feelings  of  a  reprobate  immortality.  No  two  principles  could 
he  more  antagonistic  and  irreconcilable.  (J.  Cross,  D.J).)  Charity  inconsistent 
icitli  an  envions  spirit : — I.  The  nature  of  envy.  1.  A  spirit  of  dissatisfaction 
with,  and  opposition  to,  the  prosperity  and  happiness  of  others  as  compared  with 
our  own  (Esther  v.  13;  Numb.  xi.  29;  Gen.  xxxvii.  11).  2.  A  dislike  of  their 
persons  for  it  (Esther  v.  9  ;  Gen.  xxxvii.  4,  5).  II.  W^hekein  a  Christian  spirit 
IS  THE  opposite  OF  SUCH  A  SPIRIT.  A  Christian  spirit — 1.  Disallows  of  the  exercise 
and  expressions  of  such  a  spirit.  2.  Tends  to  mortify  its  principle  and  dispo- 
sition in  the  heart  (Phil.  iv.  11).  3.  Disposes  us  to  rejoice  in  the  prosperity  of 
others  (Rom.  xii.  15).  III.  Why  it  is  that  a  Christian  spirit  is  thus  the  oppo- 
site OF  a  spirit  of  envy.  1.  A  spirit  and  practice  entirely  contrary  to  an  envious 
spirit  is  much  insisted  on  in  the  pivcepts  of  Christ  and  His  apostles  (Eom.  xiii.  13  ; 
1  Cor.  iii.  3  ;  2  Cor.  xii.  20  ;  Gal.  v.  21,  &c.).  2.  The^e  precepts  are  strongly 
■enforced — (1)  By  the  Cliristian  scheme  of  doctrine.  For  there  we  are  told  how 
God  has  not  begrudged  us  His  well-beloved  Son,  nor  the  highest  honour  and  blessed- 
aiess  in  and  through  Him.     How  far  Christ  was  from  begrudging  us  anything  that 


24D  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 

He  could  do  for  or  give  ns  !  (2)  By  its  history.  And  particularly  is  this  true  of 
the  history  of  the  life  of  Christ,  and  the  example  He  has  set  us.  3.  The  true  spirit 
of  Christian  love  will  dispose  us  to  yield  to  the  authority  of  these  precepts,  and  to 
the  iutlnenee  of  the  motives  enforcing  them.  (1)  By  its  own  immediate  tendency; 
for  love  does  not  grudge,  but  rejoices  at  the  good  of  those  who  are  loved.  (2)  By 
inclining  us  to  humility.  It  is  pride  that  is  the  great  root  and  source  of  envy. 
Conclusion:  The  subject  —  1.  Should  lead  us  to  examine  ourselves,  whether 
we  are  in  any  degree  under  the  influence  of  an  envious  spirit.  2.  Exhorts 
us  to  disallow  and  put  away  everything  approaching  to  it.  {J.  Edwards.) 
On  envy  : — Envy  is  a  sensation  of  uneasiness  arising  from  the  advantages  which 
others  are  supposed  to  possess  above  us,  accomjianied  with  malignity  towards  those 
who  possess  tliem.  Tlie  character  of  an  envious  man  is  univeisally  odious.  All 
disclaim  it ;  and  tbej'  who  feel  themselves  under  the  influence  of  this  passion  care- 
fully conceal  it.  But  it  is  proper  to  consider  that  among  all  our  passions,  both  good 
anil  bad,  theie  are  many  different  grndations.  Sometimes  they  swim  on  the  sur- 
face of  the  mind,  without  producing  any  internal  agitation.  They  proceed  no 
farther  than  the  beginnings  of  passion.  Allayed  by  our  constitution,  or  tempered 
by  the  mixture  of  other  dispositions,  they  exert  no  considerable  intlnence  on  the 
temper.  Though  the  character  in  which  envy  forms  the  ruling  passion  be  one  too 
Qilious  to  be  common,  yet  some  tincture  (f  this  evil  disposition  mixes  with  most 
characters  in  the  world.  The  chief  grounds  of  envy  may  be  reduced  to  three.  I. 
Accomplishments,  or  endowments  of  the  mind.  The  chief  endowment  for  which 
man  deserves  to  be  valued  is  virtue.  This  forms  the  most  estimable  distinction 
among  mankind.  Yet  this,  which  may  appear  surprising,  never  forms  any  ground 
of  envy.  No  man  is  envied  for  being  more  just,  more  generous,  more  pa'ient,  or 
forgiving  than  others.  This  may,  in  part,  be  owing  to  virtue  producing  in  every 
oxiH  who  beholds  it  that  high  degree  of  nspect  which  extinguishes  envy.  But  j)ro- 
bably  it  is  more  owing  to  the  good  opinion  which  every  one  entertains  of  his  own 
mural  qualities.  Some  virtues,  or  at  least  the  seeds  of  them,  he  finds  within  his 
bn  ast.  Others  he  vainly  attributes  to  himself.  Those  in  which  he  is  plainly 
deficient  he  undervalues;  on  the  whole  he  is  as  worthy  as  his  neiglibour.  The  case 
is  different  with  regard  to  those  mental  abilities  and  powers  which  are  ascribed  to 
others.  As  long  as  these  are  exerted  in  a  sphere  of  action  remote  from  ours,  and 
not  brought  into  competition  with  talents  of  the  same  kind,  to  which  we  have  pre- 
tensions, they  create  no  jealousy.  They  are  viewed  as  distant  objects,  in  which  we 
have  not  any  concern.  Even  then,  envy  is,  properly  spciiking,  not  grounded  on 
the  talents  of  others.  For  here,  too,  our  self-complacency  brings  us  relief ;  from 
the  persuasion  that,  were  we  thoroughly  known,  and  full  justice  done  to  us,  our 
abilities  would  be  found  not  inferior  to  those  of  our  rivals.  What  properly 
occasions  envy,  is  the  fruit  of  the  accomplishments  of  others  ;  the  pre-eminence 
which  the  opinion  of  the  world  bestows,  or  which  we  dread  it  will  bestow,  on  their 
talents  above  ours.  Mere  rivality,  in-pired  by  emulation,  would  carry  no  reproach; 
were  not  that  rivality  joined  with  obliquity,  and  a  malignant  sj^irit ;  did  it  not  lead 
to  secret  detraction,  and  unfair  methods  of  diminishing  the  reputation  of  others. 
Let  such  as  are  addicted  to  this  infirmity  consider  how  much  they  degrade  them- 
selves. Supeiior  merit  of  any  kind  always  rests  on  itself.  Conscious  of  what  it 
deserves,  it  disdains  low  competitions  and  jealousies.  They  who  are  stung  with 
envy,  especially  when  they  allow  its  malignity  to  appear,  confess  a  sense  of  their 
own  inferiority  ;  and,  in  effect,  pay  homage  to  that  merit  from  which  they  endeavour 
to  detract.  But  in  order  to  eradicate  the  passion,  and  to  cure  the  disquiet  which  it 
creates,  let  such  persons  further  consider  how  inconsiderable  the  advantage  is 
which  their  rivals  have  gained  by  any  superiority  over  them.  They  whom  you  envy 
are  themselves  inferior  to  others  who  follow  the  same  pursuits.  Public  aiiplause  is 
the  most  fluctuating  and  uncertain  of  all  rewards.  Within  what  narrow  bounds  is 
their  fame  confined?  With  what  a  number  of  humiliations  is  it  mixed?  To  how 
many  are  they  absolutely  unknown?  Among  those  who  know  them,  how  many 
censure  and  decry  them  ?  II.  Advantages  of  fortune,  superiority  in  birth,  rank, 
and  riches,  even  qualifications  of  body  and  form,  become  grounds  of  envy.  Among 
external  advantages  those  which  relate  to  the  body  ought  certainly  to  hold  the 
lowest  place,  as  in  the  acquisition  of  them  we  can  claim  no  merit,  but  must  ascribe 
them  entirely  to  the  gift  of  nature.  Yet  envy  has  often  showed  itself  here  in  full 
malignity.  It  would  have  proved  a  blessing  to  multitudes  to  have  wanted  those 
advantages  for  which  they  are  envied.  How  frequently  has  beauty  betrayed  the 
possessors  of  it  iuto  many  a  snare,  and  brought  upon  them  many  a  disaster  ?  Short- 


CHAP.  XIII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  2il 

lived  at  the  best,  and  trifling  at  any  rate,  in  comparison  with  the  higher  and  mora 
lasting  beauties  o£  the  mind.  But  of  all  the  grounds  of  envy  among  men  superi- 
ority in  rank  and  fortune  is  the  most  general.  Hence  ihe  malij^nity  which  the 
poor  coiunio^ily  bear  to  the  rich,  as  ingrossing  to  thi-mselves  all  tiie  comforts  of  life. 
Alas  !  all  this  envious  di  -quietude  which  agitates  the  world,  arises  from  a  deceitful 
figure  which  impos^es  upon  the  pubUc  view.  False  colours  are  hung  out  :  the  real 
state  of  men  is  not  what  it  seems  to  be.  The  order  of  society  requires  a  distinction 
of  ranks  to  take  place ;  but,  in  point  of  happiness,  all  men  come  much  nearer  to 
equality  tliHir  is  commonly  imagined.  The  poor  man  possesses  not,  it  is  true,  some 
of  the  conveniences  and  pleasures  of  the  rich  ;  but,  in  return,  he  is  free  from  many 
embarrassments  to  which  tliey  are  subject.  When  you  think  of  the  enjoyments 
you  want,  think  also  of  the  troubles  from  which  you  are  free.  Often,  did  you  know 
the  whole,  you  would  be  inclined  to  pity  the  state  of  those  whom  you  now  envy. 
III.  Sdperior  success  in  the  course  of  worldly  pursuits  is  a  frequent  ground  of 
envy.  Among  all  ranks  of  men  competitions  arise.  Wlierever  any  favourite  object 
is  pursued  in  common,  jealousies  seldom  fail  to  take  place  among  those  who  are 
equally  desirous  of  attaining  it.  "I  could  easily  bear,"  says  one,  "that  some 
others  should  be  more  famous,  should  be  riclier  than  I.  It  is  but  just  that  this 
man  should  enjoy  the  distinction  to  which  his  splendid  abilities  have  raised  him. 
It  is  natural  for  that  man  to  command  the  respect  to  which  he  is  entitled  by  liis 
birth  or  his  rank.  Eut  when  I  and  another  have  started  in  the  race  of  life,  upon 
equal  terms,  and  in  the  same  rank,  that  he,  witlrout  any  pretension  to  uncommon 
merit,  should  have  suddenly  so  far  outstripped  mc;  should  have  engrossed  all  that 
public  favour  to  which  I  am  no  less  entitled  than  he  ; — this  is  wliat  I  cannot  bear  ; 
my  spirit  swells  with  indignation  at  this  undeserved  treatment  I  have  suffered  from 
the  woild."  Com;)laints  of  this  nature  are  often  made  by  tliem  who  seek  to  justify 
the  envy  wliich  they  bear  to  their  more  prosperous  neighbours.  But  if  such  persons 
wish  not  to  be  thought  unjust,  let  me  desire  them  to  inquire  whether  they  have 
been  altogether  fair  in  the  comparison  they  have  made  of  their  own  merit  with  tliat 
of  their  rivals?  and  wliether  they  Lave  not  themselves  to  blame  more  than  the 
world  for  being  left  behind  in  the  cai'eer  of  fortune?  The  world  is  not  always 
blind  or  unjust  in  conferring  its  favours.  Supposing,  however,  the  world  to  have 
been  unjust  with  legard  to  you,  this  will  not  vindicate  inalignity  and  envy  towards 
a  mure  prospi^rous  competitor.  You  may  accuse  the  world,  but  what  reason  have 
you  to  bear  ill-will  to  him  ?  You,  perhaps,  preferred  the  enjoyment  of  your  ease  to 
the  stirs  of  a  busy  or  to  the  cares  of  a  thoughtful  life.  Ought  you  then  to  com- 
plain if  the  more  laborious  have  acquired  what  you  were  negligent  to  gain  ?  Con- 
sider that  if  you  have  obtained  less  preferment  you  have  possessed  more  indulgence 
and  ea'^e.  The  causes  that  nourish  envy  are  principally  two,  and  two  which,  very 
frequently,  operate  in  conjunction  :  these  are  pride  and  indolence.  The  connectioa 
of  pride  with  envy  is  obvious  and  direct.  The  high  value  which  the  proud  set  on 
their  own  merit,  the  unreasonable  claims  which  they  form  on  the  world  are  per- 
petual sources,  first  of  discontent,  and  next  of  envy.  When  indolence  is  joined  to 
pride  the  disease  of  the  mind  becomes  more  inveterate  and  incurable.  Pride  leads 
men  to  claim  more  than  they  deserve.  Indolence  prevents  them  from  obtaining 
■what  they  might  justly  claim.  Disappointments  follow;  and  spleen,  malignity,  and 
envy  rage  within  them.  As,  therefore,  we  value  our  virtue  or  our  peace,  let  us 
guard  against  these  two  evil  dispositions  of  mind.  Let  us  be  modest  in  our  esteem, 
and  by  diligence  study  to  acquire  the  esteem  of  others.  So  sIimII  we  shut  up  the 
avenues  that  lead  to  many  a  bad  passion,  and  shall  learn,  in  whatsoever  state  we 
are,  therewith  to  be  content.  Finally,  in  order  to  subdue  envy,  let  us  bring  often 
into  view  those  religious  considerations  which  regard  us  particularly  as  Christians. 
Let  us  remember  how  unworthy  we  are  in  the  sight  of  God  ;  and  how  much  the 
blessings  which  each  of  us  enjoy  are  beyond  what  we  deserve.  Let  us  nourish 
reverence  and  submission  to  that  Divine  government  which  has  appointed  to  every 
Ore  such  a  condition  in  the  world  as  is  fittest  for  them  to  possess,  {tl.  Blair,  D.D.) 
Charitij  not  envious  : — Envy  is  one  of  the  most  malignant  and,  if  we  except  vanity 
alone,  the  most  empty  of  aU  human  passions.  Other  affections  have  some  good 
thing  in  view  either  real  or  apprehended ;  but  envy  has  nothing  for  its  object  except 
an  ill-natured  pleasure  m  the  hurt  of  our  neighbour.  Charity  is  quite  inconsistent 
with  envy,  ami,  whenever  it  prevails,  expels  that  malicious  passion  from  the  heart. 
Has  God  bestowed  on  others  larger  measures  of  knowled.i;e  and  understaj:ding,  of 
honour  and  respect,  of  riches,  of  po«er  and  authority,  of  any  blessing,  spiritual  or 
temporal  ?  The  charitable  man,  though  eclipsed  in  these  respects,  does  not  look  up 
VOL.   If.  16 


242  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xiii 

to  those  who  eclipse  him  with  an  envious  eye.  He  takes  not  an  ill-natured  pleasur 
in  the  disappointments  and  misfortunes,  in  the  dec-line  and  fall  of  those  above  him 
He  does  not  attempt,  by  malicious  detraction,  to  depreciate  the  merits  of  those  whi 
excel ;  and,  tbough  unable  to  rise  to  their  standard,  he  does  not  enviously  endeavou 
to  bring  them  down  to  his  own,  and  to  koep  all  mankind  on  a  level  with  himself 
He  considers  worldly  bless- inf^s  as  the  gifts  of  Uod,  who  may  bestow  them  on  wha 
persons  and  in  what  degrees  He  pleases;  aui',  satisfied  wilh  his  own  condition,  hi 
rejoices  to  see  the  glory  of  the  giver  advanced  and  the  ends  of  the  gift  answered,  who 
ever  may  be  chosen  by  Providence  for  the  accomplishment  of  these  ends.  [A .  Lunitan.^ 
Charity  vaunteth  not  itself,  is  not  puffed  up. — Love  vaimtcth  not  itself,  is  no 
priffcd  t'j} : — [.  The    evils    ixdicated.       1.  Assumption.      2.   Vanity.     II.    Theh 
oFFKNsivENESS.     They  imply — 1.  Contempt,  for.     2.  Disregard  of  the  feelings  and 
clrtitus  of  others.      IH.  Their  consequent    inconsistency  with  love.      Love — 1 
Is  humble  in  spirit  and  deportment.     2.  Willingly  otfends  none.     (J.  Lyth.  D.D.\ 
Clnirity  raunteth  not  itxclf : — "It  was  my  custom  in  my  youth,"  says  a  celebiateJ 
Pe'sian  writer,  "  to  rise  from  my  sleep,  to  watch,  pray,  and  read  tbe  Koran.     One 
night  as  I  was  thus  engaged,  my  fatlier,  a  man  of    practistd    virtues,    awoke. 
'  Eeliold !  '    said  I  to  him,   'thy  other  children  are  lost  in  irrelij^ions  .'^lumbers, 
while  I  alone  wake  to  praise  God.'     '  San   of  my  soul,'  said   he,  '  it  is  better  to 
sleep  than  to  wake   to  remark  the   faults   of    tiiy  brethren.'  "       (FamUy   Circle.) 
Vauntinrj  inconsistent  jritlt   love : — ^Ve  think  we  need  not  love  God  less,  nor  ouv 
neighbour  less,  by  a  little  harmless  talking  of  ourselves.     But  we  do.     We  rob  God, 
because  in  vaunting  we  forget  that  it  all  comes  from   Him,  and  we  cannot  possibly 
have  anything  whatever  to  vaunt  or  to  boast  of.     We  rob  our  neighbour  because, 
unconsciously  perhaps,  we  put  him  in  a  lower  position  than  ourselves,  and  look 
down  upon  him,  or  we  may  make  him  envious  of  us.     And  we  r,(b  ourselves, 
because  we  deprive  ourselves  of  the  reward  of  any  good  we  may  have  done.     The 
grace  of  charity  is  deprived  of  its  bloom,  or  imleed  of  its  fruit,  by  vaunting  or  boast- 
ing.    (-7.  B.  Wilkinson,  M.A.)         Diffidence  of  love  : — Of  all  feelings,  there  is  none 
of  which  men  need  be  so  little  ashamed  of  as  tiuf^  love,  and  none  which  so  much 
puts  on  all  the  appearance  of  shame.     For  love  is  born  behind  blushing  defence-^. 
And  after  it  has  won  its  victories  and  subdued  to  itself  the  whole  of  life,  it  then 
more  than  ever  has  in  it  the  iipcessity  of  hiding  it>"elf.     For  love,  like  the  blnod  in 
the  human  body,  though  it  be  the  cau-^e  of  all  tlie  life  that  appears,  is  itself  hidden 
within  the  veins  and  never  seen.     {H.   W.  Beecher.)         Cliariiy  not  'proud  : — To 
vaunt  is  to  boast,  to  make  an  ostentatious  display  of  our  own  qualities  or  achieve- 
ments.    It   is   the  language  of  pride.     I.  The  nature  of  pride.     1.  It  is  not  to 
be  confounded  with  that  courtly  demeanour  which  is  so  natural  to  some  peofde, 
and  so  suitable  to  certain  ranks  in  society.     This  is  the  use  of  our  dignity,  not  the 
abuse  of  it.     2.  It  is  an  over-valuing  of  self.     Was  there  ever  a  time  when   this 
hat'-ful  vice  was  more  prevalent  than  it  is  at  present  ?     Does  not  the  age  vaunt  its 
mlightenment  and  its  progress?  Do  not  persons  of  all  classes  vaunt  thei'-  su}  erior- 
ity  in  one  respect  or  another?     Tiiere  is  a  pride  of  birth,  of  wealth,  of  power,  of 
knowledge,  of  morality,  and  even  of  humility.     II.  The  repugnance  of  such  a  spirit- 
to  charity.     Charity  is  unseltisli  ;  pride  is  one  of  the  many  forms  of  selfishness. 
Charity  yields  to  its  neighbour  due  honour ;  Tuide  claims  all  respeot  andhonour  for  its 
own  dignity.    Charity  accords  to  every  man  his  proper  place  and  merit ;  pride  aims  to 
impress  its  brother  with  a  mortifjnng  sense  of  his  inferiority.     Charity  tenderly  re- 
gards your  sensibilities,  and  carefully  avoids  giving  you  offence ;  pride  trHmples  upon 
all  courtesy,  and  cares  not  whom  nor  how  deeply  it  wounds.     Ciiarit  \  sheds  a  benign 
influence  over  the  heart,  expanding  it  to  all  that  is  noble  and  magnanimous ;  pride 
folds  the  soul  in  upon  itself,  freezing  up  the  genial  springs  of  sympathy  and  affec- 
tion.    Charity  is  the  spirit  of  those  who  veil  their  faces  before  the  throne  of  God, 
and  the  tempi-r  of  Him  who  for  our  sake  humbled  Himself  to  the  denth  of  the 
Cross  ;  pride  is  the  spirit  of  rebellion  which  of  old,  seeking  to  exalt  itself  against 
the  God  of  love,  plunged  headlong  into  hell.     Cliarity  knows  something  of  angelic 
blessedness  ;  pride  shares  the  misery  of  Satan.     (J.  Cross,  D.D.)         The  spirit  of 
cliarity  an  humble  spirit : — As,  on  the  one  hand,  it  prevents  us  from  envying  others 
what  they  possess,  so,  on  the  other,  it  keeps  us  from  glorying  in  wh  it  we  possess 
ourselves.     I.  What  humility  is.     1.  A  sense  of  our  own  ccmipa'ative  meanness. 
(1)  As  regards  God  (Gen.  xviii.  27)).     (2)  As  regards  our  fellow-creatures.     Man  is 
very  mean  as  conipared  with  multitudes  of  a  superior  rank  in  the  universe,  and 
most  men  are  mean  in  comparison  with  many  of  their  fellow  men.     He  that  has  a 
right  sense  and  estim^ite  of  himself  in  comparison  with  God,  will  be  likely  to  have 


CHAP.  XIII.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  243 

his  eyes  open  to  see  himself  aright  in  all  respects.  All  this  would  apply  to  men 
considerKl  as  unfallen  beings.  But  humility  ia  fallen  men  implies  a  sense  of  a 
tenfold  meanness,  (a)  Man's  natural  meanness  consists  in  his  being  infinitely 
below  God  in  natural  perfection,  and  in  Clod's  being  infinitely  above  him  in  great- 
ness, power,  wisdom,  majesty,  &c.  {h)  The  truly  hiunlile  man,  since  the  fall,  is 
also  sensible  of  his  moral  meanness  and  vileness  (Isa.  vi.  5  ;  Job  xlii.  5,  6  ;  Vsa.  li. 
17  ;  Isa.  Ivii.  15  :  Matt.  v.  3).  2.  A  disposition  to  a  corresponding  behaviour  and 
conduct.  Without  this  there  is  no  true  humiUty.  The  devils  and  damned  spirits 
see  much  of  their  comparative  littleness  before  God  in  some  respects.  Note — (1) 
Some  things  in  our  behaviour  towatd  God  to  which  humility  will  dispose  us.  (a) 
To  acknowledge  our  meanness  or  littleness  before  God.  {h)  To  be  distrustful  of 
ourselves  and  to  depend  ouly  on  God.  (c)  To  renounce  all  the  glory  of  the  good 
we  have  or  do,  and  to  give  it  all  to  God  (Psa.  cxv.  1).  (d)  Wholly  to  subject  our- 
selves to  God.  (2)  It  disposes  to  a  behaviour  toward  men  answerable  to  our  comparative 
meanness.  It  tends — (a)  To  prevent  an  aspiring  and  ambitious  behaviour  amongst 
men  (Jer.  xlv.  5  ;  Eora.  xii.  1(5).  (b)  An  ostentatious  behaviour  (Matt,  xxiii.  5). 
(c)  An  arrogant  and  assuming  behaviour  (Phil.  ii.  3;  Eph.  lii.  8).  (d)  A  scornlul 
behaviour  (Kom.  xii.  16).  (e)  A  wilful  and  stubborn  behaviour  (Uoai.  xii.  19; 
1  Cor.  vi.  7  ;  Matt.  v.  40,  41).  (f)  A  levelling  behaviour  (Rom.  xiii.  7  ;  Titus  iii.  1). 
(/;)  A  self -justifying  behaviour  (James  v.  16  ;  Psa.cxli.  5).  II.  The  spikitof  charity 
IS  AN  HUMBLE  SPIRIT.  1.  It  implies  aud  tends  to  humility.  (1)  It  implies  humility. 
And  this  appears  plain  from  two  considerations  :  because  a  snnse  of  the  loveliness 
of  God  is  pncnliarly  that  discovery  of  God  that  works  humility  ;  and  because,  when 
God  is  truly  loved,  He  is  loved  as  an  infinite  superior.  (2)  It  also  tends  to 
humility,  (a)  Love  inclines  the  heart  to  that  spirit  and  behaviour  that  are 
becoming  the  distance  from  the  beloved.  The  devils  know  then-  distance  from 
God,  but  they  are  not  reconciled  to  it.  And  so  love  to  man,  arising  fr. ^m  love  to 
God,  disposes  to  an  humlJe  beh  iviour  toward  tiiem,  inclining  us  to  give  them  all 
the  lionour  and  respect  tliat  are  their  due.  (6)  Love  to  God  tends  to  an  abhonence" 
of  sin  a-.'aiust  God,  and  so  to  our  being  humbled  before  Him  for  it.  2.  It  tend-;  to 
draw  forth  such  exercises  of  love  as  do  especially  imply  and  fend  to  it.  The  gospel 
leads  us — (1)  To  love  God  as  an  infinitely  condescending  God  (2)  To  love  Christ 
as  an  humble  person  (Phil.  ii.  (J-8 ;  Matt.  x.  24,  25,  xx.  25-28  ;  John  xiii.  13-16). 
(3)  To  love  Christ  as  a  crucified  Saviour.  (4)  To  humble  exercises  of  love,  because 
it  leads  us  to  love  Christ  as  one  tbat  was  crucified  for  our  sakes.  Conclusion  :  1. 
Note  the  excellency  of  a  Christian  spirit  (Prov.  xii.  26 ;  1  Peter  iii.  4).  2, 
Examine  yourselvts,  and  see  if  you  are  indeed  of  an  humble  spirit  (Hab.  ii.  4; 
James  iv.  0).  3.  Let  strangers  to  the  grace  of  God  seek  that  grace,  that  t  ey  may 
thus  attain  to  this  spirit  of  humility  (Prov.  xvi.  5,  vi.  16  xxix.  23  ;  2  Sam.  xxii. 
28  ;  Isa.  xxiii.  9).  4.  Let  all  be  exhorted  earnestly  to  seek  much  of  an  humble 
spirit,  and  to  endeavour  to  be  humble  in  all  tlnir  behaviour  towind  God  and  men. 
(Jon.  Edwaida.)  Charity  not  vain  : — Charity  endeavours  to  conceal   its    good 

works  as  the  sea  conceals  its  pearls  and  tire  earth  its  gold.  It  is  not  the  ambitious 
sunflower  that  lifts  its  gaudy  head  on  high,  and  expands  its  inodorous  petals  to 
the  broad  light  of  the  noon;  but  the  unobtrusive  violet  that  hides  its  delicate 
beauty  in  the  bank  of  a  shady  biook,  and  from  its  green  seclusion  pgi fumes  the 
dewy  twilight.  Intent  only  on  doing  good,  it  cares  nothing  for  the  ajtp  ause  of  the 
Avorid,  and  seeks  to  build  no  temple  to  its  own  fame.  Aimii'g  only  at  blessing 
others,  it  is  comparatively  a  small  matter  whether  it  win  another's  blessing  or 
incur  another's  curse.  It  sends  no  herald  to  announce  its  advent,  blows  no  trumpet 
to  proclaim  its  purpose,  unfurls  no  banner  to  catch  the  eye  of  the  worl  I,  saith  to 
no  son  of  Herhab,  "Come  with  me  and  see  my  zeal  for  the  Lord";  hut,  like  its 
Divine  example,  goes  about  doing  good,  without  causing  its  voice  to  be  heard  in  the 
street,  or  letting  the  left  hand  know  what  the  right  hand  doeth  ;  and  like  t'  ose 
holy  and  blessed  creatures  who  minister  to  the  heirs  of  salvation  ami  shed  a 
thousand  blessings  from  wings  unseen,  it  conceals  its  benefic-nt  agency  even  from 
its  benefi'  iaries.  King  Hezekiah  lost  bis  ro^'al  treasures  by  an  ostentatious  display 
of  them  to  the  Assyrian  embassy  ;  and  Clirysostom  tells  us  iliat  virtues,  like 
precious  stones,  must  be  concealed  to  be  k'  pt ;  for  if  we  display  them  publicly,  we 
lose  thun,  and  vain-glory  is  the  one  thief  that  has  robbed  many  of  their  treasure 
laid  up  in  heaven.  But  this  celestial  visitant  in  the  abodes  of  men  carries  her 
jewf-ls  in  a  safe  casket — hides  them  in  her  own  heart,  while  she  herself  lies  hidden 
in  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High,  and  abides  secure  under  the  siadow  of  th 
.  Almighty,     (j.  Cross,  D.D.)         Charity  o^^^^oscd  to  vanity  andpride  :— The  Siamese 


24:t  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOE.  [chap.  xiii. 

Twins  seem  to  have  been  two  perfect  human  beings,  each  possessing  all  the  func- 
tions of  life  coaiplete,  though  so  bound  together  that  the  sundering  of  the  ligament 
would  probably  have  been  futal  to  both.  I.  Thus  pride  axd  vanity  ake  two 
VICES  so  CLOSELY  RELATED  that  tliey  are  seldom  found  apart,  yet  so  distinct  that 
■we  ordinarily  have  no  difMculty  in  their  identification  and  discrimination.  Like 
two  plants  springing  from  the  same  root,  they  are  both  the  products  of  selfishness, 
alike  partaking  of  its  qualities,  but  differing  in  form  and  aspect.  Pride  is  an 
undue  estimate  of  self ;  vanity  is  an  inordinate  desire  of  the  esteem  of  others.  The 
former  makes  a  man  odious ;  the  latter  renders  him  ridiculous.  II.  Charity  is 
EQUALLY  OPPOSED  TO  BOTH.  Humble,  it  is  opposed  to  pri<le  ;  modest,  it  is  opposed 
to  vanity.  Humility  and  modesty,  though  as  intimately  related  to  each  other,  are 
as  perfectly  distinct  as  pride  and  vanity.  Humility  is  opposed  to  pride,  modesty  is 
opposed  to  vanity.  The  former  is  the  inward  feeling  of  lowliness,  the  latter  is  its 
outward  expression.  The  one  makes  a  man  sensible  that  he  merits  but  little,  the 
other  renders  him  moderate  in  his  demands  and  expectations.  Both,  therefore, 
are  essential  attributes  of  charity.  Notwithstanding  their  distinction,  it  is 
difficult  to  separate  them ;  for  they  run  into  each  otner,  like  the  blending 
of    two    shades    in    painting,  or   two    tones    in    music.       (Ibid.)  Chariti/    vot 

boastful : — Charity  docs  not  boast  of  its  connections,  and  talk  of  the  dignity 
of  its  family,  the  lustre  of  its  ancestors,  tLe  fortune  and  rank  of  its  relations,  and 
its  intercourse  witii  the  great ;  as  little  does  it  magnify  itself  on  account  of  its 
external  possessions,  and  set  Jorth  in  lofty  terms  its  own  riches,  its  credit  and 
interest  among  men,  its  power  and  authority  over  others.  Neither  does  it  vaunt  of 
its  personal  accomplishments  and  exalt  itself  above  those  whom  it  seems  to  excel 
in  p  jint  of  learning  and  knowledge,  of  wit  and  courage,  of  dexterity  and  address,  or 
of  bt^auty  and  strength.  It  does  not  even  boast  of  its  own  good  deeds,  and  take 
undue  praise  to  iiself  from  the  things  it  has  done  and  the  actions  it  has  performed. 
In  every  case  charily  forbids  us  to  seek  our  own  giatifi  ation  in  the  diminution  of 
that  of  our  neighbour  whom  v.e  should  love  as  ourselves.  It  modestly  declines  to 
talk  concerning  itself,  and  avoids  every  subject  in  convrsation  which  tends  to 
elevate  its  own  merit,  and  to  place  that  of  another  in  an  inferior  j)oint  of  view.  (A. 
Donniin. )  Doth  not  behave  itself  unseemly. — Lore  doth  not  hchave  itself  unseemhj  : 
— I.  The  CONDUCT  IT  AVOIDS.  1.  ill  mannered.  2.  Ileproachful.  i3.  Unbecoming  age, 
station,  and  place.  II.  The  conduct  it  ouserves.  1.  It  honours  all  men.  2.  Seeks  to 
please  all.  3.  Specially  regarding  the  civilities  of  life :  treating  superiors  with  respect 
and  inferiors  with  consideration.  (J.Lyth,  D.D.)  U)tseetiiliitess  is  acting  contrary 
to  a  scheme  to  form  which  is  becoming,  or  due,  or  right.  It  is,  in  fa>;t,  to  be 
deformed  ;  for  there  is  a  deformity  of  mind  as  well  as  a  deformity  of  body:  and 
just  as  deformity  may  affect  various  members  of  the  body,  so  also  may  it  affect 
various  qualities  of  the  mind  or  soul.  Hence  we  get  an  enormous  range  for 
this  word  unseemliness.  Eeaiity  is  the  very  type  or  attribute  of  God's  creation. 
All  things,  as  they  originally  left  the  Creator's  hand,  were  beautiful,  being 
"very  good."  All  things  were  "seemly"  and  "comely."  Sin  alone  marred 
their  fair  proportion,  and  their  seemliness  and  comeliness.  Sin  alone  introduced 
deformity  and  undue  piopoition.  Man  was  created  "seemly"  in  the  image  of 
God.  The  impress  of  God's  love  was  upon  the  soul  of  mnn.  God  is  love — cbarity. 
So  love  is  not,  and  cannot,  and  doth  not,  behave  itself  "  unseemly,"  unlike  the 
Image  upon  which  it  was  foimed  or  fashioned.  (-/.  B.  11'Uhiiison,  21. A.)  The 
seeiiduiess  of  the  charitij  of  Christ : — What  dit;uity  and  yet  what  condescension  !  what 
perfect  self-possession  and  yet  what  abandonment  of  self  !  what  purity,  what 
modesty,  what  retiredness  !  what  humility  in  the  King  of  heaven,  without  any  loss 
of  dignity,  making  fishermen  His  companions  and  intimate  friends  !  He  eats  with 
the  Pharisee,  and  yet  is  a  guest  of  publicans  and  sinners  !  He  is  left  alone  with 
the  woman  taken  in  adultery  and  pardons  her.  He  welcomes  the  Magdalen  and 
forgives  her.  He  converses  with  the  woman  of  Samaria,  to  the  astonishment  of 
His  disciples.  He  despises  none.  He  hides  not  His  face  from  shame  and  spitting. 
He  gives  His  back  to  the  smiters  in  the  flagellation  or  scourging.  He  dies  the 
shameful  death  of  the  Cross  !  and  in  all  that  unseemliness  Divine  charity  is  most 
seemly,  most  dignifi^cl,  most  attractive,  most  loving,  most  charitable.  Yes,  in  His 
person,  the  person  of  very  charity  hert-elf.  (Ibid.)  Pleasant  behaviour  : — Accurate 
fitting  of  the  parts  of  a  machine  is  not  all  that  is  needed.  Oil  is  required.  Our  life 
functions  bring  us  together.  Something  is  needed  to  make  all  work  smoothly.  Good 
manners,  courtesy,  pleasant  behaviour  is  this  oil  which  is  needed.  Some  say :  What 
have  we  to  do  with  good  manners  between  master  and  workmen?     Every  creaking 


CHAP,  xiii.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  245 

bearing  in  the  social  machine  means  loss  of  power.  All  heating  and  friction  must 
be  avoided.  "  Fair  words  butter  no  parsnips,"  is  an  old  adage.  But  they  do  much 
in  a  shop  where  the  assistants  are  attentive  and  obliging.  Customers  will  be  more 
likely  to  come.  So  in  all  things.  The  faculty  of  mastership  is  largely  behaviour. 
The  man  on  a  committee  who  is  courteous  is  worth  two  who  are  not.  Courteous  man- 
ners and  fair  words,  if  they  do  not  put  money  in  the  pocket,  sweeten  life  and  make 
it  more  endurable.  {Brooke  Herford.)  Charity  not  vncovrteoiis  : — Of  unseemli- 
ness there  are  many  varieties,  alike  the  fruit  of  selfishness,  and  equally  alien  to 
charity,  which  is  the  most  effectual  conservator  of  good  manners.  Tliere  is  — I.  A 
FORWARD  AND  OFFICIOUS  BKHAviouR.  But  charity  is  never  meddlesome.  It  is  pride 
and  vanity  that  makes  men  "  busybodies  in  other  men's  matters."  II.  An  un  ivir, 
AND  DISRESPECTFUL  BEHAVIOUR.  Who  lias  not  met  with  those  who  aflect  what  they 
call  honest  bluntness,  who  feel  above  all  conventional  forms,  and  care  not  how 
many  they  disgust  by  their  brusquery?  Charity,  however,  considers  the  tastes  and 
customs  of  society,  and  restrains  from  all  that  is  offensive  to  the  best  culture? 
/^Christian  love  produces  the  most  genuine  politeness,  and  the  best  Christian  is  the 
X^most  perfect  gentleman  or  lady.  III.  An  invidious  emulation  and  ambition.  But 
charity,  content  with  her  own  position,  caring  little  for  the  honours  of  the  world, 
practically  heeds  the  words  of  her  Divine  Master — "  Whosoever  will  be  great  among 
you,  let  iiim  be  your  minister,"  &c.  IV.  A  noisy  and  blusterino  ostentation. 
Nothing  is  farther  from  charity  than  display.  If  gifted,  she  exhibits  no  anxiety  to 
impress  the  world  with  the  superiority  of  her  endowment.  If  she  achieves  any- 
thing for  the  improvement  of  humanity,  she  is  inHuenced  by  no  desire  to  be 
applauded  of  men.  If  she  has  cast  her  spiritual  sounrling-line  into  the  deep  things 
of  God,  she  still  owns  with  him  who  was  not  a  whit  behind  the  very  chiefest  of  tlie 
apostles,  "  I  am  less  than  the  least  of  all  saints."  V.  An  arrogant  and  supercili- 
ous DEPORTMENT.  But  charity,  minding  not  high  things,  conrlescends  to  men  of  low 
estate.  The  diseii^le  of  the  lowly  Man  of  Nazareth,  without  desiring  to  destroy  the 
just  distinctions  of  social  life,  conceals  his  rank  so  far  as  duty  will  permit,  and 
unites  his  advantages  with  such  affability  and  gentleness  as  shall  render  them 
attractive  to  all.  VI.  An  obstinate  and  imperious  will.  Some  people  are  always 
setting  up  their  own  judgment  as  the  standard,  and  their  own  decision  as  the  law. 
On  the  contrary,  he  who  is  under  the  influence  of  charity  yieMs  gracefully  to  ihe 
opinions  and  preferences  of  his  brethren,  except  where  such  compliance  involves 
some  dereliction  of  truth  and  duty.  VII.  An  unseemly  self-confidence  and  self- 
reliance.  Charity  looks  to  a  higher  wisdom  for  guidance  and  a  higher  power  for 
strength ;  and  feels  itself,  in  the  presence  of  God,  as  less  than  nothit^g  and  vanity. 

VIII.  An  unseemly  haste  and  impetuosity  of  spirit,  which  it  is  the  tendency  of 
charity  to  moderate,  and  one  of  its  chief  offices  to  control.  How  often,  from  this 
very  infirmity,  did  St.  Peter  subject  himself  to  mortifying  rebuke  and  bitter  sorrow ! 

IX.  An  unseemly  inconsistency  and  incongruity  of  deportment,  a  want  of  harmony 
between  the  manners  and  the  profession  of  the  Christian.  Cliaiity  in  the  heart  is 
the  temper  of  Christ.  Charitv  in  the  action  is  the  imitation  of  Christ.  Charity  in 
the  character  is  Christ's  unmistakalde  image.  Now  what  ought  that  man  to  he 
who  professes  to  furnish  to  the  world  a  miniature  likeness  of  the  Incarnate  Perfec- 
tion ?  Verily,  he  should  be  harmless  and  blameless,  holy  in  all  manner  of  conver- 
sation. (J.  Cross,  D.D.)  Charity  doth  not  behave  itself  unsp em iy  : — It  inspires  a  dis- 
position to  please,  and  leads  to  that  propriety  of  conduct  which  is  so  beautiful  in  itself 
and  so  acceptable  to  mankind.  It  is  always  unwilling  to  give  offence,  and  leads  us 
studiously  to  avoid,  both  in  conduct  and  speech,  whatever  may  seem  unbecoming  in 
ourselves  and  offensive  to  others.  It  introduces  civility  into  conversation,  and  guards 
against  that  harshness  and  indelicacy  of  expression  which  are  inconsistent  with  good 
manners,  and  hurt  the  feelings  of  mankind.  It  restrains  a  petulant  disposition  of 
mind,  and  permits  not  men  to  take  freedoms  which  are  imj)ertinent  and  disrespect- 
ful to  those  around  them.  It  checks  that  spirit  of  arrogance  and  ambition  which 
breaks  in  upon  the  peace  of  society  and  the  happiness  of  mankind.  Charity  does 
not  arrogate  to  itself  more  honour  and  respect  than  is  justly  due  to  its  rank,  and 
necessary  to  the  order  of  society.  It  avoids  giving  offence  by  standing  on  little 
points  of  honour,  and  insisting  on  precedency  from  a  conceit  of  superior  station  or 
distinguished  ability,  nor  does  it  thrust  itself  into  offices  above  its  ability  and 
beyond  its  sphere,  to  the  subversion  of  order  and  the  hurt  of  society.  In  every 
situation  and  under  all  circumstances  of  life,  charity  guards  against  improper 
behaviour,  and  allows  not  men  to  act  in  a  manner  unbecoming  the  station 
they  hold,  the   abilities   they  possess,  or  the   period   of   life   they  are   in.      {A. 


246  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xiiu 

Donnan.)  Seeketb   not   her    own. — Loi-e  seek  tli  not   her  own : — I.    Love  is. 

tiNSELFivSH.  1.  Seeketh  not  her  own  honour,  pleasure,  advantage.  2.  Inordi- 
nately, injuriously,  mainly.  II.  Is,  on  the  conteaky,  self-sacrificing.  1.  In 
its  endeavours  to  benefit  others.  2.  Which  is  the  very  essence  of  love,  as  exem- 
plified by  Chiist.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Love  seekfth  not  her  own: — Paul  showeth 
the  temper  of  mind,  on  account  of  which  "  Charity  doth  not  behave  herself 
unseemly."  She  "  seeketh  not  her  own,"  for  the  beloved  she  esteems  to  be  all : 
and  to  benefit  her  beloved  she  doth  not  so  much  as  count  the  thing  unseemliness. 
This  is  friendship,  that  the  lover  and  the  beloved  should  no  longer  be  two  jjersons- 
divided,  but,  in  a  manner,  one  single  person,  a  thiug  wliich  nohow  takes  place 
except  from  love.  Seek  not,  therefore,  thine  own,  that  thou  mayest  find  thine  own: 
for  he  that  seeks  his  own,  finds  not  his  own.  Wherefore  also  the  same  St.  Paul 
says,  "  Let  no  man  seek  his  own,  but  every  man  another's  wealth."  (S.  Chryaostom.) 
Love  seeketh  not  her  own  : — Like  seeks  like.  Charity  seeks  charity,  or  God,  who  is 
Love.  It  cares  little  or  nothing  for  aught  else.  It  knows  that  all  the  rest  will 
come  in  time.  It  remembers  how  it  is  written,  "  Seek  ye  first  the  kingilom  of  God 
and  His  righteousness,  and  all  these  things  shall  be  added  unto  you."  How  deadly 
opposed  tills  tine  charity  is  to  that  cruel,  cold,  wcu'ldly  maxim,  that  "Charity 
begins  at  home."  Ah  !  yes,  it  forgets  that  Charity  was  once  homeless,  and  had  not. 
where  to  lay  His  head,  in  order  to  procure  for  us  an  eternal  home  in  the  heavenly 
Fathers  mansions.  [J.  B.  Wilkinson,  M.A.]  Cluist  sought  not  His  own: — The 
life  of  Divine  charity,  which  is  the  life  of  Jesus  Christ,  was  a  life  summed  up  in 
one  word  as  a  life  of  search,  a  seeking  for  souls.  So  ever  He  sought  them,  by  day 
and  by  night,  in  the  crowded  streets  of  the  city  and  in  the  desert  places,  on  the- 
mouniain-side  and  on  the  sea-shore,  in  the  house  of  the  Phaiisee,  as  equally  as 
in  tliat  of  the  publican ;  amongst  Gentile  kings  as  amongst  Jewish  peasants^ 
amongst  the  rich  as  amongst  the  poor,  amongst  the  learned  doctors  as  amongst 
the  ignorant  common  people,  in  Bethlelieni  as  at  Calvary,  in  the  cradle  as. 
on  the  Cross,  at  the  bejiinning  of  His  earthly  life  as  at  the  end  of  it,  at  the  begin- 
ning of  His  passion  as  at  the  end  of  it,  from  the  nailing  on  the  bitter  tree  to  the 
last  sigh,  or  ihe  loud  crv  of  His  departing  spirit.  He  seeks  not  His  own.  He  sought 
no  relief  for  Himself,  He  prays  for  His  enemies,  He  prays  for  His  mother.  He 
prays  for  the  beloved  disciple,  He  prays  for  the  thief  on  the  cross  ;  for  in  seeking 
them  He,  by  that  very  fact,  interceded  for  them.  And  even  when  He  prays  for 
Himself,  it  is  such  a  prayer  as  can  only  be  understood  by  including  all.  He  is  for- 
saken, derelict,  left,  as  it  were,  the  hull  of  that  which  had  once  been  a  gallant  ship, 
left  at  the  mt-icy  of  the  waves,  and  all  only  that  we  should  not  be  forsaken.  When 
He  thirsts.  He  thirsts  only  to  be  thirsted  for.  In  commending  His  Spirit  to  the 
eternal  tather.  He  cnmmends  our  spirits  and  souls  to  the  keeping  of  that  Father's 
love.  He  descends  to  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth  to  proclaim,  not  His  own  victory^ 
or  He  only  proclaims  it  that  the  good  news  of  the  redemption  should  be  proclaimed 
to  the  spirits  in  prison.  He  rises,  as  a  pledge  of  our  resurrection.  He  ascends,  that 
we  may  now  in  heart  and  mind  ascend,  and  when  the  time  comes,  also  our  body 
ascend  with  Him,  be  glorified  with  Him,  and  with  Him  continually  dwell.  (Ibid.) 
Unsclfisli  i)coiile  : — Who  are  the  best  loved  people  in  the  community  ?  I  answer 
unhesitatingly  ihey  are  the  unselfish.  They  are  those  who  have  drunk  deepest  of 
the  spirit  of  Christ.  They  are  those  who  have  the  most  effectually  cut  that  cursed 
cancer  of  self  out  of  their  hearts,  and  filled  its  place  with  that  love  that  "seeketh 
not  its  own."  This  beautiful  grace  sometimes  blooms  out  in  most  unexpected  places. 
It  was  illustrated  by  the  poor  lad  in  the  coal-mine  when  a  fatal  accident  occurred, 
and  a  man  came  down  to  relieve  the  sufferers,  and  the  brave  boy  said  to  him, 
"  Don't  mind  me  ;  Joe  Brown  is  a  little  lower  down,  and  he's  a'most  gone,  save 
him  first  1  There  are  enough  "  Joe  Browns  "  who  are  lower  down  in  poverty,  and 
ignorance,  in  weakness  and  in  want  than  we  are,  and  Christianity's  first  duty  is  to 
save  them.  It  was  to  save  sinners  that  Jesus  died  on  Calvary.  He  who  stoops  the 
lowest  to  rescue  lost  souls  will  have  the  highest  phice  in  heaven.  Will  it  not  be 
these  unselfish  spirits  who  will  have  John's  place  up  there  on  the  Saviour's  bosom 
and  will  be  "the  disciples  whom  Jesus  loves"?  (2'.  L.  Cinjlcr.)  Disinterestedness: — 
Here  is  a  little  story  which  tells  better  than  a  dictionary  can  the  meaning  of  the 
word  "disinterestedness."  The  late  Archdeacon  Hare  was  once,  when  tutor  of 
Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  giving  a  lectuie,  when  a  cry  of  "fire"  was  raised. 
Awas  rushed  his  pupils,  and  forming  tbemsehes  into  a  line  between  the  building, 
which  was  close  ai  hand,  and  the  river,  passed  buckets  from  one  to  another.  The 
tutor,  quickly  following,  found  them  thus  engaged.     At  the  end  of  the  line  one 


CHAP,  xin.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  247 

youth  was  standing  up  to  his  waist  in  the  river.  He  was  delicti te  and  looked  con- 
sumptive. "  What,"  cried  Mr.  Hare  ;  "you  in  the  water,  Sterling;  you  so  liable 
to  take  cold  !  "  "  Somebody  must  be  in  it,"  the  youth  answered ;  "  why  not  I  as 
well  as  another?"  The  spirit  of  this  answer  is  that  of  all  great  and  generous  doing. 
Cowardice  and  coldness,  too,  say:  "  Oh,  somebody  will  do  it,"  and  the  speaker  sits 
still.  He  is  not  the  one  to  do  what  needs  doing.  But  nobility  of  character,  look- 
ing at  necessary  things,  says  :  "  Somebody  must  do  it ;  why  not  I !  "  And  the  deed 
is  done.  Unselfishness  makes  liappiness  : — James  Freeman  Claike  describes  in 
his  fragment  of  autobiography  a  journey  from  Massachusetts  to  Kentucky  in  the 
days  before  the  railroad.  He  noticed,  he  says,  that  the  tone  of  a  stage  coach  party 
often  depended  upon  the  temper  of  a  single  individual.  A  cross,  ill-uatuved,  com- 
plaining fellow  would  make  all  tbe  other  passengers  cross,  ill-natured,  and  com- 
plaining. "  Once,"  he  says,  "when  going  through  the  Cattaraugus  woods,  where 
the  road  was  mostly  deep  mire  and  there  was  every  temptation  to  be  cross  or 
uncomfortable,  one  man  so  enlivened  and  entertained  our  party,  and  was  so 
accommodating  and  good-natured  that  we  seemed  to  be  having  a  pleasant 
pic-nic,  and  the  other  inmates  of  the  coach  took  the  same  tone.  I,  there- 
fore, found  it  best  for  my  own  sake,  as  soon  as  we  took  our  places  in 
the  coach  for  a  long  journey,  to  manifest  an  interest  in  my  fellow- 
passengers,  and  their  comforts  ;  offering,  for  example,  to  change  places  with 
them  if  they  preferred  my  seat  to  their  own,  and  paying  them  such  little  atten- 
tions as  are  always  agreeable.  It  happened  almost  always  that  the  other  pas- 
sengers would  follow  this  lead,  and  take  pains  to  be  civil  and  accommodating." 
CJtarity  the  opposite  of  a  selfish  spirit : — I.  The  natube  of  that  selfishness  of 
wtiicH  charity  is  the  opposite.  Observe — 1.  That  charity  is  not  contrary  to  all  self- 
love.  If  Christianity  tended  to  destroy  a  man's  love  to  himself  and  his  own 
happiness,  it  would  tend  to  destroy  the  very  spirit  of  humanity.  The  saints  and 
the  angels  love  their  own  happiness ;  otherwise  they  would  not  be  happy  ;  for  what 
one  does  not  love  he  cannot  enjoy.  Nor  is  it  unlawful,  for  God's  law  makes  self- 
love  a  rule  by  which  our  love  to  others  should  be  regulated  (Matt.  xix.  19).  And 
the  same  appears  also  from  the  fact  that  the  Scriptures  are  full  of  motives  which 
work  on  self-love.  2.  That  the  selfishness  which  charity  is  contrary  to,  is  only  an 
inordinate  self-love.  This  consists — (1)  In  its  being  too  great  comijaratively  ; 
either  by  love  to  God  and  to  man  being  too  small,  as  it  is  in  many  Christians,  or 
by  its  being  none  at  all,  as  is  the  case  with  the  unregenerate.  In  some  respect'^, 
of  course,  wicked  men  do  not  love  themselves  enough  ;  for  they  do  not  love  the 
way  of  their  own  happiness;  and  in  this  sense  it  is  said  of  them  that  they  hate 
themselves,  though,  in  another  sense,  they  love  self  too  much.  (2)  In  placing 
that  happiness  in  things  that  are  confined  to  liimself.  And  when  it  is  said  that 
charity  seeketh  not  her  own,  we  are  to  understand  it  of  her  own  private  good — ■ 
good  limited  to  herself  (Phil.  ii.  21 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  2).  II.  How  charity  is  contrary  to 
SUCH  A  spirit.  1.  It  leads  those  who  possess  it  to  seek  not  only  their  own  things, 
but  the  things  of  others.  (1)  It  seeks  to  please  and  glorify  God  (Eph.  vi.  6;  1  Cor. 
X.  31).  (2)  It  seeks  the  good  of  our  fellow-creatures  (Phil.  ii.  4  ;  1  Cor.  x.  24,  33  ; 
Eom.  xiv.  2)  for — (a)  It  is  a  sympathising  and  merciful  spirit  (Col.  iii.  12  ;  James 
iii.  17  ;  Psa.  xxxvii.  26).  It  is— (6)  A  hberal  spirit  (Heb.  xiii.  16  ;  Gal.  vi.  10).  (c) 
It  disposes  a  person  to  be  public-spirited.  A  man  of  a  right  spirit  is  not  a  man  of 
narrow  and  private  views,  but  is  greatly  interested  and  concerned  for  the  good  of 
the  place  in  which  he  resides,  and  the  society  of  which  he  is  a  member  (Jer.  xxix. 
7;  Luke  vii.  5;  Esther  iv,  16;  Rom.  ix.  1-3).  Especially  will  the  spirit  of 
Christian  love  dispose  those  that  stand  in  a  public  capacity,  such  as  that  of 
ministers,  and  magistrates,  and  all  public  officers,  to  seek  the  public  good.  2.  It 
disposes  us,  in  many  cases,  to  forego  and  part  with  our  own  things,  for  the  sake  of 
others  (Acts  xxi.  13 ;  1  John  iii.  16).  III.  Some  of  the  evidence  sustaining  the 
doctrine.  This  appears  from — 1.  The  nature  of  love  in  general.  It  is  of  a  diffusive 
nature,  and  espouses  the  iuterests  of  others.  2.  The  peculiar  nature  of  Christian 
or  Divine  love.  Though  all  real  love  seeks  the  good  of  those  who  are  beloved,  yet 
all  other  love,  excepting  this,  has  its  foundation,  in  one  sense,  in  the  selfish 
principle.  So  it  is  with  the  natural  affection  which  pai-ents  feel  for  their  children, 
and  with  the  love  which  friends  have  one  to  another.  But  as  self-love  is  \,he 
offspring  of  natural  principles,  so  Divine  love  is  the  offspring  of  su]5ernatviral 
principles,  for  it  embraces  enemies  as  well  as  friends.  3.  The  nature  of  this  ova 
to  God  and  to  man  in  particular.  (1)  From  the  nature  of  this  love  to  God.  The 
Scriptures  teach  that  those  who  truly  love  God,  love  Him  so  as  wholly  to  devote 


248  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 

themselves  to  Him  and  His  service  (IWark  yii.  30).  (2)  From  the  nature  of  this 
love  to  man.  (a)  We  are  required  to  love  our  neighbour  as  ourselves  (Lev.  xix. 
18  ;  Matt.  xxii.  39).  (h)  We  are  to  love  others  as  Christ  hath  loved  us  (John  xiii. 
34).  In  John  xv.  12  Christ  calls  it  His  commandment,  (i)  Christ  has  set  His 
love  on  His  enemies  (Kom.  v.  8,  10).  (ii)  Such  was  Christ's  love  to  us,  that  He 
was  pleased,  in  some  respects,  to  look  on  us  as  Himself  (Matt.  xxv.  40).  (iii)  Such 
was  the  love  of  Christ  to  us,  that  He  spent  Himself  for  our  sakes.  (iv)  Christ 
thus  loved  us,  without  any  expectation  of  ever  being  requited  by  us  for  His  love. 
Conclusion :  Let  me  dissuade  all  from  a  selfish  spirit  and  practice,  and  exhort  all 
to  seek  that  which  shall  be  contrary  to  it.  In  addition  to  the  motives  alieady 
presented,  consider — 1.  That  you  are  nnt  your  own  (1  Cor.  vi.  19,  20  ;  1  Pet.  i.  19). 
2.  That  by  your  very  professiou  as  a  Christian,  you  are  united  to  Christ  and  to  your 
fellow-Christians  (Kom.  xii.  5 ;  1  Cor.  xii.  13).  3.  That,  in  seeking  the  glory  of 
God  and  the  good  of  your  fellow-creatures,  you  take  the  surest  way  to  have  God 
seek  your  interests  and  promote  your  welfare.  (Jon.  Kd-.t'ards.)  Christian  self- 
.tacripre  :—l.  Love  seeketh  not  hkr  own.  1.  To  the  injury  of  others.  2.  Regard- 
less of  the  welfare  of  others.  We  are  to  love  our  neighbour  as  ourselves,  even 
blessing  those  who  curse  us.  3.  Self-sacrifice  is  involved.  A  mother  shows  it, 
for  her  c.iildren's  sal^e.  Paul  for  his  kinsmen.  Christ,  for  our  s-ikes,  became 
poor.  4.  In  efforts  for  the  good  of  others.  Love  seekcth  not  her  own,  as  the 
great  end  of  life  and  action.  This  is  not  the  central  manispring — self-worship  or 
the  credit  which  may  be  gained  of  men.  II.  What  does  lovr  seek?  1.  The 
glory  of  God.  This  is  a  privilege,  a  gratification,  and  not  a  dreaded  task.  2.  The 
welf.ne  of  others  Charity  begins,  but  does  not  end,  at  home.  3.  The  welfare  of 
Christ's  cause.  III.  What  does  love  gain?  1.  Her  own  true  honour.  Christ, 
who  "  emptied  Himself,"  receives  now  the  adoration  of  earth  and  heaven.  The 
unselfish  shall  hear  at  last,  "  Come,  ye  blessed."  2.  Her  own  highest  blessedness.  It 
is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  recei'^e.  3.  Her  highest  usefulness.  Unselfish 
love  is  the  mightiest  of  moral  forces.  Example  is  powerful,  but  behind  that  is  the 
subtle  power  of  character.  This  is  the  highest  power  of  the  preacher.  The  same 
mind    which    is    in    Jesus  should  be    in    us.       {W.   IV.   Woodworth.)  Charity 

scelceth  not  her  own  : — Lovh  seeks  the  happiness  of  its  object,  and  not  mere 
self-interest.  I  do  not  say  that  all  religion  is  employed  about  the  interest  of  others. 
Love  for  character  is  a  love  for  that  which  regards  our  own  interest  as  well  as  that 
of  othejs.  Some  of  the  exercises  of  religion  transact  with  God  directly  about  our 
own  interest,  and  contemplate  God  as  standing  related  to  our  own  interest, 
and  consist  in  these  feelings  of  gratitude,  trust,  hope,  and  dependence  which 
have  imme  liate  reference  to  our  own  interest.  I  will  endeavour  to  set  before 
you  some  of  the  leading  attribut'  s  of  tiue  religion.  Its  vital  principle  consists  in 
that  love  which  "  seekeih  not  her  own."  Although  it  has  more  to  do  with  personal 
concerns  than  with  the  concerns  of  any  other  in^lividual,  yet  so  far  as  the  interest 
of  others  comes  into  view,  it  does,  when  perfect,  love  a  neighbour  as  one's  self.  It 
respects  all  beings  that  are  clearly  seen,  according  to  their  moral  excellenc  •._  Of 
course  it  delights  in  the  character  of  God  more  than  in  that  of  all  created  beings, 
and  it  regards  his  happiness  more  tl'an  theirs.  Here,  then,  you  have  the  picture  of 
a  real  Chiistian.  His  care  is  mere  for  the  honour  of  God  and  the  interest  of  His 
kingdom  than  for  his  own  happieess.  He  really  loves  God  better  than  himself. 
What  a  noble  and  lovely  temper  is  this  !  How  vast  the  difference  between  such  a 
man  and  the  sordid  wretch  \vho  cares  not  what  becomes  of  God  or  His  kingdom 
provirled  he  is  safe !  Tiiis  will  let  you  into  a  view  of  the  character  of  God.  Sucli 
love  fills  his  heart.  His  whele  lieart  is  fixed  on  the  puldic  good.  His  own  happi- 
ness consists  in  promoting  that  and  in  enjoying  that.  His  benevolence  therefore 
hates  sin  and  takes  the  form  of  holiness.  It  was  benevolence  which  founded  a 
moral  government,  to  secure  the  holy  order  and  happiness  of  the  creation.  From 
this  view  of  the  character  of  God  we  may  discover  the  different  motives  which 
excite  the  Christian  and  the  hypocrite  to  love  him.  The  Christian  loves  him 
l.'ecause  he  is  love,  and  has  set  his  heart  on  the  haipiness  of  the  universe.  He 
delights  in  God's  wisdom  and  power  because  it  is  their  nature  to  contrive  and  exe- 
cute glorious  purposes  for  the  general  happinei-s.  But  the  selfish  man  loves  God 
only  as  a  personal  friend — becHuse  he  has  done  him  good,  and  as  he  hopes,  intends 
to  save  him.  He  h>ves  to  meditate  on  God's  milder  attributes,  because  he  regards 
them  as  pledges  of  his  salvation.  And  now  he  is  full  of  joy  and  praise  and  love, 
and  is  melted  into  tears  by  a  sense  of  God's  mercies  to  him,  and  is  willing  to  do 
many  things  for  his  heavenly  Friend.     But  his  love  is  worthless  because  it  is  sel- 


CHAP,  xiii.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  219 

fish.  We  may  also  see  from  what  different  motives  the  Christian  and  the  hypocrite 
rejoice  that  God  reigns.  The  Christian  rejoices  that  all  things  are  und^r  the  Divine 
direction,  because  in  this  he  sees  a  security  that  all  things  will  be  conducted  for  the 
glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  His  kingdom.  The  hypocrite  rejoices  that  God  reigns, 
because  if  his  friend  has  the  management  of  affairs,  he  trusts  it  will  fare  well  with 
him.  The  view  we  have  taken  of  the  nature  of  charity  will  help  us  to  discover  the 
excellent  nature  of  the  Divine  law.  Look  again  at  that  amiable  man  who  loves  the 
interest  of  God's  kingdom  belter  than  his  own,  who  pities  and  relieves  the  hungry 
and  the  naked  ;  whose  heart  is  under  ths  dominion  of  justice  and  universal  benevo- 
lence. Well,  this  is  the  model  which  tlie  law  of  God  has  formed.  Were  the  law 
universally  obeyed,  it  would  fill  the  world  with  just  such  characters.  It  enjoins 
nothing  but  love  and  its  fruits.  And  what  does  it  forbid  ?  Here  is  a  selfish  wretch 
who  would  burn  a  house  and  send  a  whole  family  to  perdition  for  the  sake  of  robbing 
it  of  a  few  shillings.  Here  is  another  who  would  demolish  the  throne  of  God  and 
bury  the  universe  under  its  ruins,  for  the  sake  of  being  independent.  What  a 
satanical  temper  is  this  !  Well,  this,  and  nothing  but  such  as  this,  the  Diviue  law 
forbids.  How  clear  it  is  that  this  law  is  the  friend  of  the  universe !  Here  agwin 
the  true  character  of  God  comes  out  to  view.  This  sprit  must  be  in  Him  or  it 
could  not  flow  forth  in  His  law.  We  now  see  how  certain  it  is  that  a  good  man  will 
love  the  Divine  law.  He  has  the  very  temper  of  the  law  in  his  heart,  and  he  sees 
that  the  happiness  of  the  universe  rests  on  the  principles  which  the  law  contains. 
We  may  now  see  from  what  different  motives  the  Christian  and  the  hypocrite 
oppose  sin.  The  good  man  abhors  sin  as  b^ing  a  transgression  of  the  Divine  law, 
an  enemy  of  God  and  His  kingdom  ;  but  the  selfish  man,  having  connected  together 
the  ideas  of  sin  and  misery,  resists  sin  merely  as  an  enemy  to  himself.  We  are 
now  prepared  to  discover  bow  charity  will  regard  the  atonement  and  mediation  of 
Christ.  Had  it  proclaimed  that  the  penalty  should  never  be  ex-cuted,  it  would 
have  ruined  tbe  law,  and  the  Sufferer  might  better  have  remained  in  heaven.  But 
it  pronounced  exactly  the  opposite  truth.  The  obedience  of  Christ  likewise  honoured 
the  law.  Let  us  now  examine  the  general  grounds  on  which  a  benevolent  man  will 
approve  of  this  way  of  salvation.  He  wishes  well  to  the  universe,  and  is  prepared 
to  approve  of  any  measure  which  is  conducive  to  the  public  happiness.  These  are 
some  of  the  ways  in  which  that  charity  \vhich  "  seeketh  not  her  own"  will  act 
towards  God,  His  government.  His  law,  and  towards  sin  and  the  gospel.  I  pray 
you  to  bring  your  religion  to  this  test.  If  it  does  not  agree  with  this,  cast  it  from 
you  as  a  viper  that  will  sting  yon  to  death.  {E.  D.  Gnffiii,  D.D.)  Charity  the 
opposite  of  an  anijry  spirit : — I.  What  is  that  spirit  to  which  Cheistian  love  is 
THE  OPPOSITE  OF  A  WRATHFUL  DISPOSITION  ?  It  is  not  all  anger  that  Christianity  is 
opposite  to  (Eph.  iv.  26).  Anger  may  be  undue  and  unsuitable  in  respect  to — 1. 
Its  nature,  i.e.,  when  it  contains  ill-will,  or  a  desire  of  revenge.  We  are  requite'! 
by  Christ  to  pray  for  the  prosperity  even  of  our  enemies  (Matt.  v.  44;  Eom.  xii. 
14).  And  so  revenge  is  forbidden  (Lev.  xix.  18  ;  Rom.  xii.  19 ;  Eph.  iv.  31 ;  Coh_, 
iii.  8),  2.  Its  occasion,  i.e.,  when  it  is  without  any  just  cause  (Matt.  v.  22).  And 
this  may  be  the  case — (1)  When  there  is  no  fault  in  its  object.  Many  are  of  such 
a  pnud  and  peevish  disposition,  that  they  will  be  angry  at  anything  that  is 
troublesome,  whether  anybody  be  to  blame  for  it  or  not.  And  it  is  a  common  thing 
for  persons  to  be  angry  with  others  for  their  doing  well,  and  that  which  is  only 
their  duty.  (2)  When  i^ersons  are  angry  upon  small  and  trivial  occasions.  Some 
are  of  such  a  fretful  spirit,  that  th(-y  are  put  out  of  humour  by  every  little  thing  in 
the  family,  society,  or  business,  that  are  no  greater  faults  than  they  themselves  are 
guilty  of  every  day.  (3)  When  our  spirits  are  stirred  at  the  faults  of  others  chiefly 
as  they  affect  ourselves,  and  not  as  they  are  against  God.  We  should  never  be 
angi-y  but  at  sin.  3.  Its  end.  When  we  are  angry — (1)  Without  considerately 
proposing  any  end  to  be  gained  by  it.  (2)  For  any  wrong  end.  4.  Its  measure. 
When  it  is  immoderate — (1)  In  degree.  Sometimes  men's  passions  rise  so  high 
that  they  act  as  if  beside  themselves.  (2)  In  its  continuance  (Eccles.  vii.  9 ; 
Eph.  iv.  26).  If  a  person  allows  himself  long  to  hold  anger  towards  another,  he 
will  quickly  come  to  hate  him.  II.  How  charity  is  contrary  to  it.  1.  It  is 
directly,  and  in  itself,  contrary  to  all  undue  anger,  for  its  nature  is  good-will.  2. 
All  its  fruits,  as  mentioned  in  the  context,  are  contrary  to  it.  It  is  contrary  to — (1) 
Pride,  which  is  one  chief  cause  of  undue  anger.  (2)  To  selfishness.  Love,  or 
charity,  is  contrary  to  anger.  It  is  because  men  seek  their  own  that  they  are 
malicious  and  revengeful.  Conclusion :  Consider  how  undue  anger — 1.  Destroys 
the  comfort  of  him  that  indulges  it.     2.  Unfits  persons  for  the  duties  of  religion 


250  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xiii. 

(Matt.  V.  24).  3.  The  angry  men  are  spoken  of  in  the  Bible  as  unfit  for  human 
society  (Prov.  xxii.  24,  25,  xxix.  22).  {Jon.  Edwards.)  Is  not  easily  provoked. — 
Love  is  not  easily  pi-ovoki-d : — I.  The  self-comjiand  of  love.  Under  passion 
it  is — 1.  Cool,  not  passionate.  2.  Calm,  not  stolid.  3.  Patient,  not  peevish.  4. 
Serious,  not  sarcastic.  5.  P'orgiving,  not  resentful.  II.  The  seceet  of  its 
POWER — humility,  enlightenment,  pity  for  the  offender,  steadfast  reliance  on  God. 
(J.  l.yth,  D.D.)  Charity  not  easily  provoked: — After  an  intimate  acquaintance 
with  Archbishop  Leighton  for  many  ye'irs,  and  having  been  witli  him  by  night 
and  by  day,  at  home  and  abroad,  in  public  and  private,  I  must  say  I  never  saw  him 
in  any  temper  in  which  I  myself  would  not  wish  to  be  found  at  death.  {Bp. 
Burnet.)  Charity  not  easily  provoked  : — St.  Kemigius,  Archbishop  of  Rheims,, 
foreseeing  that  a  year  of  famine  was  approaching,  stored  up  a  quantity  of  grain 
for  the  poor  of  his  flock.  Some  drunkards  set  fire  to  his  granaries,  and  the  Saint 
hearing  of  it,  mounted  his  horse  and  rode  to  the  spot  to  save  the  corn.  Finding,, 
however,  that  the  fire  had  gained  too  great  power,  he  quietly  dismounted,  and 
approaching  the  fire,  stretched  out  his  hands  as  if  to  warm  himself,  observing  : 
"  To   an  old  man  a  fireplace  is  always    acceptable."  On   the    gorernment    of 

the  temper : — To  be  "  not  easily  provoked,"  to  be  slow  in  taking  offence,  and 
moderate  in  the  expression  of  resentment — in  one  word,  a  good  temper  seems 
to  be  generally  reckoned  rather  among  the  gifts  of  nature,  the  privileges  of  a 
happy  constitution,  than  among  the  possible  results  of  careful  self-discipline.  We 
speak  of  our  unhappy  temper  as  if  it  were  something  that  entirely  removed  th& 
blame  from  us,  and  threw  it  all  upon  the  peculiar  sensitiveness  of  our  frame.  The 
excuse  is  as  absurd  as  it  is  mischievous.  It  is  to  say,  "  I  have  great  need  of  self- 
control  ;  therefore  I  will  take  no  care  about  controlling  myself ;  I  have  much  to 
acquire  of  a  truly  Christian  spirit;  therefore  I  need  take  no  pains  in  studying  it." 
It  is  granted  that  there  may  be  great  dilferences  of  natural  constitution,  just  as 
there  are  gre^t  differences  of  outward  situation.  A  sickly  frame  may,  in  itself,  be 
more  disposed,  than  one  which  has  always  been  healthy,  to  a  fretful  and  irritable 
temper.  Particular  circumstances,  also,  may  expose  some  to  greater  vexations  than 
others.  But,  after  all  this  is  granted,  the  only  reasonable  conclusion  appears  to  be, 
that  the  attempt  to  govern  the  temper  is  more  difficult  in  some  cases  than  in  others,, 
not  that  it  is,  in  any  case,  impossible.  I  now  proceed  to  lay  down  some  rules  for 
its  government.  The  first  I  derive  not  only  from  the  opinion  that  a  bad  temper  is 
nothing  else  than  the  strength  and  waywardness  of  selfish  feelin<^s  habitually 
indulged,  but  from  the  connection  in  which  I  find  the  apostle's  description  of  that 
good  temper  wbich  is  one  characteristic  of  charity — Charity  "  seeketh  not  her  own." 
Now  it  appears  tome  that  the  reverse  of  this  is  pre-eminently  true  of  a  bad  temper. 
It  is  coutinuciUy  seeking  its  own — its  own  convenience,  ease,  comfort,  pleasure  ; 
and  therefore  it  cannot  bear  that  these  things  should  be  forgotten  or  interrupted. 
1.  The  first  rule,  therefore,  which  I  would  mention  for  the  government  of  the 
temper  is,  guard  against  the  indulgence  of  a  selfish  feeling  even  in  your  best 
purposes  ;  bewai'e,  even  when  you  think  you  are  entirely  occupied  with  the  welfare 
of  otbers,  lest  there  be  some  lurking  self-will  which  is  seeking  to  be  gratified.  2. 
Another  caution  which  will  frequently  be  found  of  use,  and  jDarticularly  in  our 
intercourse  with  those  to  whom  it  is  of  most  consequence  that  our  temper  should 
be  gentle  and  forbearing,  is  this  :  avoid  raising  into  undue  importance  in  your  own 
minds  the  little  failings  which  you  may  perceive  in  others,  or  the  trifling  disap- 
pointments which  they  may  occasion  you.  How  much  uneasiness  and  provocation 
do  we  seek,  both  for  ourselves  and  our  friends,  if  we  fret  ourselves  into  anger  on  an 
occasion  which  requires,  perhaps,  only  a  gentle  word ;  or  if  we  think  it  necessary 
to  wear  a  frown,  wlien  every  purpose  of  correction  might  as  well,  if  not  better,  be 
effected  by  a  good-tempered  smile.  3.  Again,  if  you  wish  to  follow  after  that 
charity  which  "is  not  easily  provoked,"  do  not  forget,  in  the  opposition  or  disap- 
pointment of  which  you  may  feel  inclined  to  complain,  to  make  due  allowance  for 
the  situation,  feelings,  or  judgments  of  others ;  do  not  forget  that  tliese  cannot 
always  be  expected  to  be  in  unison  with  your  own.  4.  Another  rule  for  the  govern- 
ment of  the  temper,  closely  connected  wiih  the  last,  if  indeed  it  can  be  separated 
from  it,  is,  always  put  the  best  construction  on  the  motives  of  others,  when  you  do 
not  understand  their  conduct.  Do  not  let  it  be  your  immediate  conclusion,  that 
they  must  have  intended  to  neglect  or  offend  you,  that  they  cannot  possibly  have  a 
good  reason  for  their  behaviour.  5.  It  will  further  be  a  great  help  to  our  efforts, 
as  well  as  our  desires,  for  the  government  of  the  temper,  if  we  consider  seriously 
the  natural  consequences  of  hasty  resentments,  angry  replies,  rebukes  impatiently 


CHAP.  XIII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  251 

given  or  impatiently  received,  muttered  discontents,  sullen  looks,  and  harsh  words. 
It  may  safely  be  asserted  that  the  consequences  of  these  and  other  varieties  in  which 
ill-temper  can  show  itself,  are  entirely  evil.  Tlie  feelings  which  accompany  tliem 
in  ourselves,  and  those  which  they  excite  in  others,  are  unprofitable  as  well  as 
painful.  They  lessen  our  own  comfort,  and  tend  rather  to  prevent  than  to  promote 
the  improvement  of  others.  After  considering  the  effects  of  a  bad  t^  mper,  even 
when  connected  with  good  intentions,  we  shall  be  the  more  disposed  to  piactise 
another  method  which  may  be  mentioned,  for  correcting  or  guardmg  against  it  in 
ourselves.  I  have  already  advised  a  re-traint  to  be  placed  upon  hasty  feelings  of 
anger  or  dissatisfaction;  but  we  should  check  tbe  e'<pies-ion  of  those  feelings.  If 
our  thoughts  are  not  always  in  our  power,  our  words  and  actions  and  looks  may  be 
brought  under  our  command ;  and,  if  I  mistake  not,  a  command  over  these  will  be 
found  no  mean  help  towards  obtaining  an  increase  of  power  over  our  thoughts  and 
feelings  them^^elves.  There  are  not  wanting  either  reasons  or  rules  for  the  govern- 
ment of  the  temper,  even  when  we  have  serious  cause  for  complaint  or  censure. 
Let  it  be  that  the  langusige  or  conduct  of  another  has  done  us  real  and  great 
injustice.  Is  this  more  than  we  ought  to  expect,  or  to  be  prepared  for  bearing,  in 
a  world  where,  among  otber  purposes,  we  are  placed  to  be  exeicised  by  trials  of 
Christian  palience  ?  A  good  temper  is  the  natural  and  constant  homage  of  a  truly 
religious  man  to  that  God  whom  he  believes  to  be  love,  and  to  dwell  in  those  who 
dwell  in  love.  To  confirm  us  in  the  resolution  of  making  our  religion  elfectual  as 
a  help  and  a  rule  in  tlie  government  of  our  tempers,  we  sliall  do  well  to  consider, 
frequently,  tbe  j)roofs  of  its  efljcacy  for  such  a  purpose  whiih  we  may  find  in  the 
examples  of  those  wbo  have  been  remarkable  for  tlieir  meekness  and  patience. 
These  examples  will  familiarise  us  witb  the  fact,  that  such  things  have  been  borne; 
they  will  accustom  us  to  consiiler  a  patient  endurance  of  them  a  regular  part  of  our 
religious  duties ;  they  will  accustom  us  to  think  it  the  business  of  a  Christian  to 
wat<-h  over  every  weakness  to  which  lie  knows  hiuis-elf  subject.  Cherish  in  your 
minds  a  spirit  of  pra.ver.  The  help  of  religion  is  best  sought  in  connection  with 
supplication  to  Him  who  is  the  source  and  end  of  religion.  Tbe  calmness  and 
seriousness  of  reflection  are  best  secured  by  making  the  pause  allowed  for  com- 
munion with  our  own  wisest  thoughts,  a  pause  also  for  communion  with  Him 
who    is   the   giver  of   wisdom.     {A.  B.  Beard.)  IrritahiUttj  : — 1.   Provocation 

is  but  the  calling  forth  in  us,  and  from  us,  some  emotion,  by  some  external 
circumstmce  which  in  some  way  or  other  affects  us.  It  is  perhaps  the 
evil  from  within  us,  answering  to,  and  going  forth  to  meet  the  evil  from 
without  us.  There  is  probably  some  dangerous,  tender  spot  in  the  cha- 
racter or  temperament  of  every  one  of  us  which  is  peculiarly  susceptible  to 
provocation.  It  may  vary  from  time  to  time.  It  may  ^hift  from  one  point  to. 
another,  just  as  fiain  sometimes  shifts  from  one  luember  to  anoiher.  We  know 
also  that  certain  conditions  of  the  atmosphere,  or  postures  of  the  body,  or  certain 
things  which  affect  our  senses,  affect  each  of  us  according  to  the  sensitivene.--s  of 
any  particular  sense.  So  it  is  with  the  mind.  One  thing  which  one  person  will 
hear  without  the  least  annoyance  will  entirely  disturb  an<'ther;  or  a^ain,  certain 
people  will  have  the  peculiar  gift  of  s-aying,  or  looking,  or  having  a  manner  which 
almost,  in  spite  of  ourselves,  seems  so  easily  to  provoke  us,  and  cause  us  to  be 
wanting  in  kindly  feeling.  There  are  persons  who  somehow  always  contrive  to  say 
the  right  things  at  the  wrong  times,  or  are  out  of  tune  with  us  altogether.  When 
we  are  in  great  trouble,  they  talk  trivially  ;  or  they  console  us  with  just  the  very 
things  that  do  not  afford  us  the  very  least  consolation  ;  or  when  our  minds  are  full 
of  some  important  business,  they  detain  us  with  some  imaginary  trouble  of  their 
own,  or  some  story  about  their  neif^hbour.  Our  charily,  our  courtesy,  is  chafing 
under  it,  and  at  last  we  are  fairly  "  easily  provoked,"  and,  indeed,  if  we  knew 
where  to  draw  the  line — justly.  2.  Much  depends,  however,  by  what  is  meant  by 
the  W'Ord  "  provoked  "  here.  The  word  is  such  an  everyday  word,  that  we  can  be 
at  no  loss  to  attach  a  meaning  to  it  in  its  ordinary  sense.  When  we  hear  such 
expressions  as  "  I  was  provoked  beyond  endurance,"  or  even  of  things  which  tall 
out  in  the  order  of  providence,  that  favourite  expression,  "It  is  so  provoking,'^ 
when  we  come  to  found,  means  really  neither  more  nor  less  than  that  our  mind 
has,  for  the  time  being,  lost  its  equilibrium,  and  therefore  we  are  so  far  forth  out  of 
charity  with  God  and  our  neighbour.  Of  course  the  range  of  such  an  expression  is 
enormous.  It  may  go  from  a  hasty  passing  phrase  to  the  deadly  sin  of  anger, 
malice,  and  all  uncharitableness.  At  any  rate,  it  is  the  bt  ginning  of  sin  ;  and, 
says  the  wise  man,  the   "beginning  of  strife  is  as  when  one  letteth  out  water  "  ; 


252  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 

that  is  to  say,  no  one  knows  when  or  where  it  will  stop.  3.  No  doubt  one  common 
form  that  this  sin  takes  with  us  is  irritability  of  temper.  We  call  it  sometimes 
constitutional  irritability.  We  maj'  excuse  it  in  others,  but  we  must  not  excuse  it  in 
ourselves.  It  can  be  overcome.  It  must  be  overcome,  though  it  cost  us  twenty-two 
years'  work,  as  it  is  said  to  have  cost  a  great  saint.  Charity  is  not  irritable,  nor  easily 
irritated,  we  may  translate  the  text.  4.  To  show  its  great  danger,  and  how  it  may  take 
any  one  of  us  at  unawares,  remember  that  one  hasty  word,  spoken  under  provocation, 
deprived  Moses  of  the  possession  of  the  promised  land.  (J.  B.  Wilkinson,  M.A.) 
Irritable  temper  :  ttnrestrained,  andrest>ained  by  grace  : — A  quick  and  fiery  temper, 
easily  excited  and  irritable  under  small  provocations,  ought  to  be  regai'ded  as  a  mis- 
fortune and  a  disadvantage.  By  such  a  temper,  ungoverned  and  unchecked,  a  man  may 
be  driven  to  acts  of  violence,  and  even  to  deeds  of  blood ;  partially  restrained,  it  will 
hurry  him  into  acts  of  indiscretion,  and  involve  him  in  controversies  and  disputes ; 
but  let  such  a  temper  be  brought  under  the  dominion  of  grace,  and  it  is  precisely 
the  temper  which  creates  zeal,  which  rouses  the  soul  to  the  gracious  self-denyings 
of  noble  doing  for  the  sake  of  God  and  His  truth,  to  a  bold  resistance  of  what  is 
wrons,  and  an  enthusiastic  pursuit  of  what  is  good.  (Dean  Hook.)  TMnketh 
no  evil. — Charity  thinketh  no  evil : — I.  Suspects  no  evil.  II.  Imputes  no  evil. 
III.  Enteetains  no  thought  of  resentment.  IV.  Devises  no  evil.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
Charity  thinketh  no  evil : — As  self-love  makes  us  think  well  of  ourselves,  so  charity 
makes  us  think  well  of  our  brethren.  Judge  unkindly  it  cannot ;  condemn 
officiously  it  never  will.  Upon  everything  said  or  done,  it  puts  the  best  construc- 
tion possible  in  the  case.  No  evil  rep  ut  will  it  believe  witbout  evidence  ;  no  test 
of  character  will  it  accept  but  that  which  God  hath  ordained;  no  follower  of  Christ 
will  it  discard  because  his  views  and  feelings  do  not  quadrate  in  all  respects  with 
its  own.  To  mere  surmise  and  rumour  it  will  not  listen  for  a  moment;  and  from 
the  malicious  whispers  of  the  tale-bearer  it  averts  its  ear  with  a  holy  disgust. 
When  forced  to  believe  evil  of  another,  it  accepts  the  fact  with  manifest  reluctance, 
takes  no  pleasure  in  reporting  it,  finds  many  a  palliation  for  the  olfence,  and 
spreads  its  broad  mantle  over  the  multitude  of  sius.  To  talk  of  the  good  of  its 
neighbours  is  its  special  delight,  to  set  forih  their  virtues  and  commend  their  worthy 
deeds.  In  every  opportunity  of  communicating  pleasure  it  rejoices  witli  unfeigned  joy, 
and  with  instinctive  horror  shinks  from  inflicting  needless  pain.  The  counsels  of 
avarice  and  ambition  it  opposes  with  all  its  might;  and  by  every  mild  and  gracious 
means  at  its  command  counteracts  the  deadly  influence  of  pride,  envy,  anger,  malice, 
and  revenge.  Stemming  the  torrents  of  vice  and  error,  it  seeks  to  rescue  the 
perishing  and  edify  the  faithful — to  make  the  miserable  happy,  and  the  happy 
happier  still.  In  the  closet  it  originates  schemes  for  ble^^sing  humanity,  and  goes 
forth  into  society  for  their  execution.  At  night  it  devises  deeds  of  mercy  upon  its 
bed,  and  in  the  morning  rises  radiant  as  the  dawn  to  perform  the  benevolent 
pnrposes  with  which  it  sank  to  rest.  (J.  A.  James.)  Loi'e  thinketh  no  evil: — 
No  one  is  perhaps  half  as  bad  as  he  is  rejpresented,  and  many  of  the  faults  and 
failings  of  our  neighbours  exist  only  in  our  own  disordered  minds.  If  you  have  a 
flaw  in  your  window  glass,  the  loveliest  view  seen  through  it  will  be  ugly  and 
distortpcl.  So  if  you  have  a  flaw  in  your  mmd,  if  you  look  uncharitably,  unloviugly 
at  others,  you  will  see  nothing  but  evil  in  them.  So  much  depends  upon  our  way 
of  looking  at  things.  I  have  heard  of  a  man  who,  coming  home  late  one  night, 
complained  tbat  he  had  been  followed  by  an  ill-looking  person.  It  turned  out  that 
this  was  his  own  shadow.  [H.  J.  W.  Buxton.)  Thinketh  no  evil : — That  was  a 
well-deserved  rebuke  given  by  a  gentleman,  whose  wife  said  of  a  neighbour,  "  He 
is  very  kind  to  the  poor,  but  it  may  be  more  for  the  sake  of  praise  than  doing 
good."  To  which  the  husband  replied,  "Look  here,  Mary,  when  you  see  the 
hands  of  our  clock  always  right,  you  may  be  sure  that  there  is  not  much  wrong 
with  the  inside  works."  The  tendency  to  sit  in  judgment  upon  each  other's 
motives  is  a  very  common  fault,  especially  among  young  people.  It  crops  up  more 
frequently  n  the  freedom  of  home  intercourse  than  anywhere  else,  consequently 
that  is  just  i  the  place  where  its  first  manifestations  should  be  nipped  in  the  bud. 
The  charity  that  "  thinketh  no  evil  "  is  a  rare  but  most  desirable  possession.  (The 
Brooklet.)  Detraction  : — 1.  Each  man's  thoughts  are  a  world  to  himself.  We 
all  of  us  have  an  interior  world  to  govern,  and  he  is  the  only  king  who  knows  how 
to  rule  his  thoughts.  We  are  very  much  influenced  by  external  things,  but  our 
true  character  is  found  within.  It  is  manufactured  in  the  world  of  our  thoughts, 
and  there  we  must  go  to  influence  it.  He  whose  energy  covers  his  thoughts,  covers 
the  whole  extent  of  self.     2.  In  some  degree  our  thoughts  are  a  more  true  measure 


CHAP.  XIII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  253 

of  ourselves  than  even  our  actions.  Our  thoughts  are  not  under  the  control  of 
human  respect.  No  one  knows  anything  about  them.  There  are  thousands  of 
things  which  we  are  asliamed  to  say,  or  to  do,  which  we  are  not  ashamed  to  think. 
It  is  not  easy  for  our  thoughts  to  be  ashamed  of  themselves.  They  have  no 
witnesses  but  God.  Keligious  moti^'es  can  alone  have  a  jurisdiction  over  them. 
3.  If  a  man  habitually  has  kind  thoughts  of  others,  not  because  he  happens  to  be 
of  an  easy-going  disposition,  but  on  supernatural  motives,  that  is,  as  a  result  of 
grace,  he  is  not  far  from  being  a  saint.  4.  Kind  thoughts  imply  a  great  deal  of 
thinking  about  others.  This,  in  itself,  is  rare.  But  they  imply  also  a  great  deal 
of  thinking  about  others  without  the  thoughts  being  judgments  of  their  conduct,  or 
criticisms.  This  is  rarer  still.  Active-minded  people  are  naturally  the  most  ptone 
to  find  fault,  and  such  mu^t,  therefore,  make  kind  thoughts  a  defence  against  self. 
By  sweetening  the  fountain  of  their  thoughts  tliey  will  destroy  the  bitterness  of 
their  judgments.  But  kind  thoughts  imply  a  great  nearness  to,  ami  a  close  contact 
with,  God.  Kind  thinking  is  an  especial  attribute  of  God,  because  He  is  not  extreme 
to  mark  what  is  done  amiss  :  "  God  was  in  Christ  reconciling  the  woi  Id  unto  Himself, 
not  imputing  their  trespasses."  5.  Nobody  can  judge  men  but  God,  and  we  can 
hardly  obtain  a  higher  or  more  reverent  view  of  God  than  that  which  represents 
Him  to  us,  ns  judging  men  with  boundless  charity.  6.  The  habit  of  judging  others, 
that  is,  of  thinking  evil,  requires  a  long  process  to  eradicate  it.  We  must  con- 
centrate ourselves  upon  it  to  keep  it  in  check,  and  this  check  is  to  be  found  in  kind 
inteipretations  in  suspecting,  not  evil,  but  good  motives.  We  must  come  to  esteem 
very  ligbtly  our  sharp  eye  for  evil  on  which  we  perhaps  prided  ourselves  as  clever- 
ness in  detecting,  or,  as  we  called  it,  unmasking  it.  We  forget  that  all  this  may 
be,  that  there  is  a  terrible  possibility,  or  even  a  probability  of  its  being,  a  huge 
uncharitableness.  No  doubt  knowledge  of  character  may  be  a  talent,  but  it  is  the 
hardest  talent  of  all  to  manage.  We  are  sure  to  continue  to  say  clever  or  sharp 
things  as  long  as  we  are  by  way  of  judging  others.  Sight  is  a  great  blessing,  but 
there  are  times  and  places  in  which  it  is  far  more  blessed  not  to  see.  Of  course  we 
are  not  to  grow  bind  to  evil,  but  we  must  grow  to  something  higher  and  something 
truer  than  a  quickness  in  detecting  or  suspecting  evil,  if  we  would  have  anything  of 
that  blessed  "charity,"  that  love  which  "  thinketh  no  evil."  7.  Have  we  not 
always  found  that,  on  the  whole,  our  kind  interpretations  were  truer  than  our  harsh 
ones?  What  mistakes  have  we  not  made  in  judging  others  ?  But  have  they  not 
almost  always  been  on  the  side  of  harshness?  We  have  roused,  and  perhaps  given 
vent  to  our  righteous  indignation.  All  at  once  the  whole  matter  is  explained  in 
some  most  simjjle  way,  and  we  are  lost  in  astonishment  that  we  should  never  have 
thought  of  it  ourselves.  On  the  other  hand,  how  many  times  in  life  have  we  been 
wrong,  when  we  put  a  kind  construction  on  the  conduct  of  others  ?  8.  The  practice 
of  kind  thoughts  tells  most  decidedly  on  our  spiritual  life.  It  leads  to  great  self- 
denial  about  our  talents  and  influence.  9.  Thinking  no  evil,  that  is,  thinking 
kind  thoughts,  endows  us  with  great  facility  in  spiritual  things.  It  opens  and 
widens  the  paths  of  prayers.  It  enables  us  to  find  God  easily,  because  God  is  Love. 
10.  Above  all,  it  is  one  of  the  main  helps  to  the  complete  government  of  the  tongue. 
(J.  B.  Wilkinson,  M.A.)  Charity  opposed  to  censoriousness : — I.  The  nature  of 
CENSoRiODSNEss.  It  consists  of  a  disposition  to  think  evil  with  re^jject  to — 1.  The 
state  of  others.  It  often  shows  itself  in  a  disposition  to  think  the  wor,-«t  of  those 
about  us,  whether  they  are  worldly  men  or  Christians.  2.  The  qualities  of 
others.  It  appears  in  a  disposition  to  overlook  their  good  qualities,  or  to  make  very 
little  of  them;  or  to  make  more  of  their  ill  qualities  than  is  just;  or  to  charge 
them  with  those  ill  qualities  which  they  have  not.  3.  The  actions  or  speech  of 
others.  This  spiiit  discovers  itself — (1)  In  judging  them  to  be  guilty  of  evil  actions 
without  any  evidence  that  constrains  them  to  such  a  judgment  (1  Tim.  vi.  4; 
Psa.  XV.  1-3  ;  Prov.  xvii.  4).  (2)  In  a  disposition  to  put  the  worst  constructions 
on  their  actions.  But  here  it  may  be  inquired,  "  Wherein  lies  the  evil  of  judging 
ill  of  others,  since  it  is  not  true  tliat  all  judcjing  ill  of  others  is  unlawful? 
And  where  are  the  lin^s  to  be  drawn  ?  "  To  this  I  reply,  that  there  are  persons 
appointed  on  purpose  to  be  judges,  in  civil  societies,  and  in  Churches,  and  that 
particular  persons,  in  their  private  judgments  of  others,  are  not  obliged  to  divest 
themselves  of  reason,  that  they  may  thus  judge  well  of  all.  And  therefore  we 
are  not  forbidde'i  to  judge  all  persons  where  there  is  plain  and  clear  evidence  that 
they  are  justly  chargeable  with  evil.  But  the  evil  of  that  judging  wherein  cen- 
soriousness consists,  lies — (a)  In  judging  evil  of  others  when  evidence  does  not 
oblige  to  it,  or  in  thinking  ill  of  them  when  the  case  very  well  allows  of  thinking 


254  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xin. 

well  of  them  (Prov.  xviii.  13).  [h]  In  a  well-pleasedness  in  judging  ill  of  others. 
II.  How  A  CENSORIOUS  SPIRIT  IS  coNTKARY  TO  CHARITY.  1.  It  is  Contrary  to  love 
to  our  neighbour.  (1)  We  see  that  persons  are  very  backward  to  judge  evil  of 
themselves.  And,  therefore,  if  tliey  loved  their  neighbour  as  themselves,  love 
would  have  the  same  tendency  with  respect  to  him.  (2)  We  see  that  persons  are 
very  backward  to  judge  evil  of  those  they  love.  (3)  We  see,  also,  universally  that 
where  hatied  and  ill-will  towards  others  most  prevail,  there  a  censorious  spirit 
most  prevails.  2.  A  censorious  spirit  manifests  a  proud  spirit.  And  this,  the 
context  declares,  is  contrary  to  the  spirit  of  charity.  Conclusion  :  This  t'ubject 
— 1.  Stf-rnly  reproves  those  who  commonly  take  to  themselves  the  Kberty  of 
spe-riking  evil  of  olhtrs.  How  often  does  the  Scripture  condemn  backbiting  and 
«vil-speaking!  (Psa.  1.  19,  20;  Titus  iii.  1,  2;  1  Pet.  ii.  1;  Psa.  xv.  3).  2. 
Wrns  all  ngainst  censoriousness,  either  by  thinking  or  speaking  evil  of 
othnrs,  as  they  would  be  worthy  of  the  name  of  Christians.  (1)  How  often, 
wlien  the  truth  comes  fully  out,  do  things  appear  far  better  concerning  others 
than  at  first  we  were  ready  to  judge.  (2)  How  little  occasion  is  there  for  us  to 
pass  our  sentence  on  others.  Our  great  concern  is  with  ourselves  (chop.  iv.  5). 
(3)  God  has  threatened,  that  if  we  are  found  censoriously  judging  and  condi  mn- 
ing  others,  we  shall  be  condemned  ourselves  (Rom.  ii.  3).  [Jon.  Edwards.) 
Censoriousness  : — The  character  of  Aunt  Henderson  in  "  Kitty  Trevylyan"  is  a  very 
suggestive  and  instructive  one.  Her  conversation  consisted  chieilyin  compassionate 
animadversions  upon  the  infirmities  of  her  ne  ghbours.  In  this,  of  course,  she  was 
perfectly  conscientious,  thinking  it  a  matter  of  much  importance  that  we  slionld 
obser\e  the  follies  and  errors  of  others,  in  order  to  learn  wisdom  and  prudence  from 
them.  Now  Aunt  Henderson  is  scarcely  an  ima-iuative  personnge.  The  world  is 
full  of  just  sui-h  iieopln,  who  seem  to  regard  the  rest  of  mankind  as  a  set  of  defective 
specimens  expressly  designed  to  teach  them  mornl  jjerfection,  just  as  chiMren  at 
school  have  un^rammatical  sentences  i)laced  before  them  to  teach  them  grammar. 
But  I  cannot  help  thinking,  wiih  Kitty,  that  th"  children  may  learn  more  from  the 
correct  sentences  than  from  the  incorrect,  and  that  it  is  far  more  pleasant  tu  have 
the  beautiful  right  thing  before  one  than  the  failure ;  nor  can  I  believe,  any  more 
than  i-he,  that  others  are  sent  into  the  world  to  be  a  sort  of  example  of  etror  and 
imperfection,  even  to  make  Aunt  Henderson  and  other  conscientious  people  of  the 
same  kind  quite  perfect  by  the  contrast.  Aunt  Henderson  and  her  followers  seem 
to  be  the  very  opposite  of  St.  Paul's  charity  in  this  chajjter;  for  they  enjoy  a  sort 
of  selfish  gratification  in  the  mistakes  and  misdoings  of  their  neighbours,  and  dwell 
upon  them  with  a  ma'icious  self-complacency  of  wtdch  tliey  are  scarcely  conscious; 
while  it  is  »moug  the  most  consp  cuous  qualities  of  chaiity,  and  by  no  means  the 
least  beaulilul  of  the  portraiture,  that  she  "  taketh  not  account  of  evil"  (R.V.). 
{J.  Cross,  D.D.)  Cen.'iOiiotis  jiuhiiiient  ; — Who  is  not  acquainted  wiih  people  who 
aie  expressing  unfavomable  opinions  of  others  and,  without  any  apparent  concern 
about  the  consequences,  look  upon  everybody  with  suspicion?  aiid  a  very  suihII 
circumstance  is  to  them  a  sufficient  indication  of  insincerity  or  wickednes-^.  The 
soundness  of  your  fHith  they  question  because  you  happen  to  differ  with  them 
in  some  unimportant  matter  of  opinion.  Your  worship  may  be  as  heartv  and  as 
spiritual  as  their  own  ;  yet,  because  you  do  not  confoim  perfectly  to  their  ritual, 
you  are  denounced  as  a  PiO nauiser  or  a  schismatic.  They  ju^ge  all  by  their  own 
standard,  measure  hU  by  their  own  iron  bedstead,  and  make  no  account  of  the 
modifying  influences  of  education  and  society.  Even  the  ftttherh  chastisements 
of  Divine  Providence  they  misinterpret;  and,  like  Job's  miserable  comforters, 
ponounce  the  metal  spurious  because  it  has  been  submitted  to  the  furnace.  If  the 
motive  of  an  act  is  not  perfectly  obvi'^us,  they  are  apt  to  give  it  a  bad  construction, 
thongh  a  good  one  w  re  quite  as  easy.  A  {.-eneral  remark  is  made  in  comjiany,  and 
some  one  present  thinks  it  applicable  to  himself,  and  forthwith  angrily  appropriHtes 
it,  though  the  s|ieaker  had  no  more  thought  of  him  than  of  Julius  Cassar. 
Absorbed  in  meditati-  n  or  conversation,  you  unconsciously  pass  an  acquaintance 
in  tlie  street  witliout  speaking  to  him,  and  the  casual  oversight  is  set  down  against 
y^u  fis  an  intentional  incivility.  I  recollect  once  to  have  given  lastit  g  offence  by 
failing  to  recognise  on  tlie  instant  an  old  friend  whom  I  had  not  met  for  many  years, 
thou  h  I  was  never  in  my  life  more  innocent  of  unfriendly  intention.  On  another 
occnsion  I  incurred  the  displeasure  of  a  bdy  by  my  inability  to  identify  her  behind 
a  vei  ,  wh'ch  rendered  her  face  as  invisible  as  the  moon  in  a  to'al  echpse,  and  the 
crimel  hclie\e  was  never  forgiven.  Censoiio  'speople  commonly  see  motesin  others' 
eyes  through  beams  in  their  own,  and  none  are  more  to  be  suspected  than  those 


CHAP.  XIII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  255 

■who  are  always  suspecting  their  neighbours.  Their  knowledge  of  human  nature  is 
obtained  at  home,  and  their  fears  of  you  are  only  the  reHected  images  of  their  own 
evil  hearts.  Tliey  resemble  the  surly  mastiff,  that  sidles  growling  toward  the 
mirror,  mistaking  his  own  likeness  for  a  foe.  Full  of  evil  surmisings,  they  cannot 
afford  to  suspend  their  judgment  and  wait  for  explanation  or  evidence  ;  but,  impelled 
by  the  bad  spirit  within  them,  tliey  rusli  blindly  to  tlie  bench  and  thunder  forth 
their  anathema  against  the  sujiposed  delinquent.  How  eagerly  they  take  up  an 
•evil  report,  and  how  industriously  they  ciiculate  it!  Hearing  a  vague  rumour, 
than  which  nothing  is  more  uncertain  in  such  a  world  as  this,  they  believe  without 
a  particle  of  evidence,  and  never  tiike  the  trouble  to  inquire  into  the  grounds  of  the 
suspicion ;  but  roll  the  delicious  slander  as  a  sweet  morsel  under  their  tongues, 
and  feed  on  the  imaginary  imperfection  of  their  neighbours  with  the  zest  of  a 
vuhure   upon    the    slain.      (Ihich)  Charity   thinketh   no    evil: — This   is   not 

to  sny  that  love  is  blind  to  iniquity  or  slow,  on  occasion,  to  reprove  it.  The 
most  scathing  denunciation  that  ever  was  heard,  "  Woe  unto  you,  scribes 
and  Pharisees,  hypocrites,  how  shall  ye  escape  the  damnation  of  hell ! "  fell 
from  the  lips  of  Incarnate  Love.  But  love  has  nothing  in  common  with  a 
censorious  spirit.  Love  puts  the  best  construction  on  everything  it  sees.  It 
thinketh  no  evil.  Let  us  note  some  of  the  reasons  why  we  should,  as  far 
■as  possible,  speak  well  of  our  fellow-men.  I.  It  is  Chiustlike.  How  sympa- 
thetic Hnd  gracious  and  helpful  He  ever  was!  He  had  a  kind  word  for  the  mag- 
dalen,  a  pitying  glance  for  the  dying  thief.  II.  Consider  our  ignokancic.  Who 
are  we  that  we  should  assume  to  know  what  i^asses  in  a  human  breast  ?  How 
little  we  understand  tlip  conditions,  the  environment,  tlie  sore  temptations,  of  those 
who  fall  int')  sin  !  1.  Of  justice  we  know  little  or  nothing.  Let  us  leave  that  to  an 
■omniscient  God.  Our  function  is  with  mercy.  That  falls  mensuraldy  within  our 
sphere  of  knowledge,  and  we  are  safe  to  administer  it.  III.  We  work  incai.cdlable 
INJURY  BY  OUR  UNCHARITABLE  TREATMENT  OF  OTHERS.  There  are  people  who  would 
not  prick  their  neighbours  with  a  bodkin,  yet  do  not  hesitate,  as  Swift  says,  to — 


*'  Convey  a  libel  with  a  frown, 
And  wink  a  reputation  down." 


They  would  not  steal  a  farthing,  but  rob  their  neighbours  without  scruple  of  that 
which  is  better  than  life.  It  is  related  that  when  the  martyr  Taylor  was  dying  at 
the  stake  one  of  the  bystanders  cast  a  flaming  torch  wbich  struck  his  eyes  and 
blinded  them  "  and  brake  his  face  that  the  blooil  ran  down  his  visage."  This  was 
base,  cowardly,  brutal  beyond  words.  But  it  was  not  more  base,  more  brutal,  or 
more  cowardly  than  to  injure  a  man  in  his  reputation,  to  put  him  to  an  open 
shame  by  blackening  his  lionour.  IV.  We  live  in  gt.aks  houses.  We  are 
none  of  us  any  better  than  the  law  requires,  none  of  us  any  better  than  we  ought  to 
be.  We  have  all  sinned  and  come  short  of  the  Divine  glory  ;  and,  strange  to  tell, 
the  faults  which  we  are  most  prone  to  criticise  in  others  are  those  which  are  most 
■deeply  seated  in  ourselves.  Tell  me  the  general  drift  of  a  man's  aspersions  and  I 
will  show  you  his  dai'ling  sin.  It  would  be  prudent  in  us  all  to  take  advantage  of 
that  provision  which  in  courts  of  justice  excuses  a  witness  from  testifying  against  a 
■culprit  when  to  do  so  would  incriminate  himself.  It  takes  a  rogue  to  catch  a 
rogue.  All  c;iptious  criticism  is  in  the  nature  of  State's  evidence.  V.  We  are  on 
OUR  WAY  TO  JUDGMENT.  And  here  we  are  making  the  rule  which  will  apply  to  our- 
■selves  at  that  gieat  day.  "  Judge  not,"  said  the  Master,  "  that  ye  be  not  judged. 
For  with  what  judgment,"  &c.  The  Moslems  say  that  two  t-pirits  are  set  to  guard 
the  actions  of  every  man.  At  night  they  fly  up  to  heaven  and  repnrt  to  the  record- 
ing angel.  The  one  says,  "  He  liath  wrought  this  good,  0  angel !  Write  it  ten 
times!"  The  other  says,  "He  hath  wrought  tliis  evil;  but  forbear,  0  ^.ngel,  yet 
seven  hours,  in  order  that  he  may  repent !  "  It  is  true  that  God  delighteth  in 
mercy.     But  if  we  want  it  we  must  here  accord  it.     VI.  In  dealing  ungraciously 

WITH    OTHERS   WE    LOSE    THE    BLESSED  OPPORTUNITY  OF    KINDNESS.       There  is  110  telling 

what  good  may  be  done  by  a  word  of  symiDatby  and  helpfulness,  one  of  those 
"  words  in  due  season  "  which  are  like  apples  of  gold  in  pictures  of  silver.  In  the 
prison  at  New  Bedford  there  is  a  man  serving  out  a  life  sentence  who  some  years 
ago  had  a  strange  experience.  He  had  previously  been  regarded  as  one  of  the  most 
■despernte  and  dangerous  inmates.  He  had  planned  outbreaks  and  m'tiuies,  and 
been  repeatedly  punished  in  vain.  His  heart  was  full  of  bitterness.  But  one  day 
■in  June  a  party  of  strangers  came  to  visit  the  institution,  an  old  man  with  several 


256  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 

ladies  and  one  little  girl.  It  happened  that  this  prisoner  had  just  been  assigned 
for  some  misdemeanour  to  the  menial  task  of  scrubbing  the  corridor.  The  warden, 
leading  the  visitors  about,  saw  him,  sulky  and  morose,  at  the  top  of  the  stairway. 
"Jim,"  he  called,  "  come  and  carry  this  little  girl  up."  The  convict  scowled  and 
hesitated.  The  little  girl  at  the  foot  of  the  stairway  held  out  her  arms  and  said, 
"If  you  will,  I'll  kiss  you."  He  looked  at  her  seriously  a  moment,  tln-n  slowly 
came  down,  and  lifting  her  upon  his  shoulders  as  tenderly  as  any  father  could  have 
done,  carried  her  to  the  upper  corridor.  She  raised  her  face.  He  gravely  stooped 
and  kissed  it,  then  returned  to  his  task.  And  they  say  at  the  New  Eeiiford  jail 
that  he  has  never  been  the  same  man  since  that  dtiy.  The  kindness  of  that  child 
in  some  way  transformed  his  life.  {D.J.  Burrell,  D.D.)  On  candour  : — lleligion 
and  government  are  the  two  great  foundations  of  order  and  comfort  among  mankind. 
Government  restrains  the  crimes  which  would  be  subversive  of  society,  secures  the 
property,  and  defends  the  lives  of  its  subjects.  But  the  defect  of  government  is, 
that  human  laws  can  extend  no  farther  than  to  the  actions  of  men.  Eeligion 
supplies  the  insufficiency  of  law  by  striking  at  the  root  of  those  disorders  which 
occasion  so  much  misery  in  the  world.  Its  professed  scope  is  to  regulate,  not 
actions  alone,  but  the  temper  and  inclinations.  Bv  this  means  it  ascends  to  the 
sources  of  conduct.  We  are  led  to  this  reflection  by  the  description  given  in  the 
context  of  charity,  that  grent  principle  in  the  Christian  systf^m.  He  justly  sup- 
poses, that,  if  the  temper  be  ciuly  regulated,  propriety  of  action  will  f  cjHow,  and 
good  order  take  place  in  external  behaviour.  I.  Let  us  consider  what  this 
DESCRIPTION  OF  CHARITY  iMPOKTS.  You  wiU  easily  perceive  that  the  expression  in 
the  text  is  not  to  be  understood  in  a  sense  altogether  unlimited  ;  as  if  there  were 
no  occasion  on  which  we  are  to  think  unfavourably  of  others.  To  view  all  the 
actions  of  men  with  the  same  degree  of  complacency  would  be  contrary  both  to 
common  understanding  and  to  many  express  precepts  of  religion.  Religion  renders 
it  our  duty  to  abhor  that  which  is  evil.  The  virtue  inculcated  is  that  which  is 
known  by  the  name  of  candour.  It  is  necessary  to  observe  that  the  true  candour 
is  altogether  different  from  that  guarded,  inoffensive  language  and  that  studied 
openness  of  behaviour  which  we  so  frequeutly  meet  with  among  men  of  the  world. 
Smiling,  very  often,  is  the  aspect,  and  smooth  are  the  words,  of  those  who  inwardly 
are  the  most  ready  to  think  evil  of  others.  That  candour  which  is  a  Christian 
virtue  consists  not  in  fairness  of  speech,  but  in  fairness  of  heart.  It  may  want 
the  blandishment  of  external  courtesy,  but  supplies  its  place  with  generous 
liberality  of  sentiment.  Its  mRnneis  are  unaffected,  and  its  professions  cordial. 
It  is  perfectly  consistent  with  extensive  knowkilge  of  the  world,  and  with  due 
attention  to  our  own  safety.  In  that  various  intercourse  vshich  we  are  obliged  to 
carry  on  with  persons  of  every  different  character,  suspicion,  to  a  certain  degree,  is 
a  necessary  guard.  It  is  only  when  it  exceeds  the  bounds  of  prudent  caution  that 
it  deirenerates  into  vice.  He  makes  allowance  for  the  mixture  of  evil  with  good, 
which  is  to  be  found  in  every  human  character.  He  expects  none  to  be  faultless ; 
and  he  is  unwilling  to  believe  that  there  is  any  without  some  commendable  quality. 
In  the  midst  of  many  defects  he  can  discover  a  virtue.  Under  the  influence  of 
personal  resentment  he  can  be  just  to  the  merit  of  an  enemy.  He  is  not  hasty  to 
judge,  and  he  requires  full  evidence  before  he  will  condemn.  As  long  as  an  action 
can  be  ascribed  to  different  motives,  he  holds  it  as  no  murk  of  sagacity  to  impute  it 
always  to  the  worst.  Where  there  is  just  ground  for  doubt,  he  keeps  his  judgment 
undecided.  When  he  must  condemn,  he  condemns  with  regret.  He  listens 
calmly  to  the  apology  of  the  offender.  From  one  wrong  opinion  he  does  not  infer 
the  subversion  of  all  sound  principles ;  nor  from  one  bad  action  conclude  that  all 
regard  to  conscience  is  overthrown.  He  commiserates  human  frailty  ;  and  judges 
of  others  according  to  the  principles  by  which  he  would  think  it  reasonable  that 
they  should  judge  of  him.  In  a  word,  he  views  men  and  actions  in  the  clear  sun- 
shine of  charity  and  good-nature,  and  not  in  that  dark  and  sullen  shade  which 
jealousy  and  party-spirit  throw  over  all  characters.     II.   To  recommend,  by  various 

ARGUMENTS,    THIS    IMPORTANT    BRANCH    OF    CHRISTIAN    VIRTUE.       1.    Let    US    begin    wltll 

observing  what  a  necessary  requisite  it  is  to  the  proper  discharge  of  all  the  social 
duties.  Accordingly,  love,  gentleness,  meekness,  and  long-sutfering  are  enumerated 
as  distinguishing  fruits  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  But  it  is  impossible  for  such 
virtues  to  find  place  in  a  breast  where  the  propensity  to  think  evil  of  others  is  pre- 
dominant. Charitable  and  candid  thoughts  of  men  are  the  necessary  introduction 
to  all  good-will  and  kindness.  They  form,  if  we  may  speak  so,  the  only  climate  in 
which  love  can  grow  up  and  flourish.     A  suspicious  temper  checks  in  the  bud  every 


CHAP,  xiii.]  I.  eOEINTHIANS.  257 

kind  affection.     It  hardens  the  heart,  and  estranges  man  from  man.     It  connects 
humanity  with  piety.     For  he  who  is  not  given  to  think  evil  of  his  fellow-creatures, 
will  not  be  ready  to  censure  the  dispensations  of  his  Creator.     Whereas  the  same 
turn  of  mind  which  renders  one  jealous   and  unjust  towards  men,  will  incline 
him  to  be  querulous  and   impious  towards  God.     2.  In  the  second  place,  as  a 
suspicious   uncharitable    spirit  is  inconsistent  with    all   social   virtue   and   hap- 
piness,  so,  in  itself,   it  is  unreasonable   and   unjust.     In  order  to    form  sound 
opinions   concerning  characters  and   actions,  two  things  are  especially  requisite, 
information  and  impartiality.     But  such  as  are  most  forward  to  decide  unfavourably 
are  destitute  of  both.     Instead  of  possessing,  or  even  requirin?,  full  information, 
the  grounds  on  which  they  proceed  are  frequently  the  most  slight  and  frivolous. 
Nothing  can  be  more  contrary  both  to  equity  and  to  sound  reason  than  such  pre- 
cipitate judgments.     The  motives  of  the  actor   may  have  been  entirely  different 
from  those  which  you  ascribe  to  him  ;  and,  where  you  suppose  him  impelled  by 
bad  design,  he  may  have  been  prompted  by  conscience  and  mistaken  principle. 
Admitting  the  action   to  have  been  in  every  view  criminal,  he  may  have  been 
hurried   into   it   through    inadvertency   and    surprise.      He   may  have   sincerely 
repented;  and  the  virtuous  principle  may  have  now  regained  its  full  vigour.     No 
error  is  more  palpable  than  to  look  for  uniformity  from  human  nature,  though  it 
is  commonly  on  the  supposition  of  it  that  our  general  conclusions  concerning 
character  are  formed.     Mankind  are  consistent  neither  in  good  nor  in  evil.     In  the 
present  state  of  frailty  all  is  mixed  and  blended.     The  strongest  contrarieties  of 
piety  and  hypocrisy,  of  generosity  and  avarice,  of  truth  and  duplicity,  often  meet 
in  one  character.     There  are  few  cases  in  which  we  have  ground  to  conclude  that 
all  goodness  is  lost.     Placed,  then,  in  a  situation  of  so  much  uncertainty  and  dark- 
ness, where  our  knowledge  of  the  hearts  and  characters  of  men  is  so  limited,  and 
our  judL'ments  concerning  them  are  so  apt  to  err,  what  a  continual  call  do  we 
receive  for  candour  !     3.  In  the  third  place,  what  the  sources  are  of  those  severe  and 
uncharitable  opinions  which  we  are  so  ready  to  form.     Were  the  mind  altogether 
free  from  prepossession  and  bias,  it  might  avail  itself  to  more  advantage  of  the 
scanty  knowled_e  which  it  possesses.     It  is  one  of  the  misfortunes  of  our  present 
situation  that  some  of  the  good  dispositions  of  human  nature  are  apt  to  betray  us 
into  frailties  and   vices.      Thus   it  often  happens  that  the  laudable  attachment 
which  we  contract  to  the  country  or  the  church  to  which  we  belong,  or  to  some 
political  denomination  under  which  we  class  oursf-lves,  both  confines  our  affections 
within  too  narrow  a  sphere,  and  gives  rise  to  violent  prejudices  against  such  as 
come  under  an  opposite  description.     Not  contented  witb  being  in  the  right  our- 
selves, we   must   find   all   others   in  the   wrong.     They   rashly  extend  to   every 
individual  the  severe  opinion  which  they  have  unwarrantably  conceived  of  a  whole 
body.     Was  there  ever  any  great  community  so  corrupt  as  not  to  include  within  it 
individuals  of  real  worth?     Besides  prepossessions  of  this  nature,  which  some- 
times mislead  the  honest  mind,  there  are  other,  and  much  more  culpable,  causes  of 
un(;haritable  judgment.     Pride  is  hurt  and  wounded  by  every  excellence  in  which 
it  can  claim  no  share  ;  and,  from  eagerness  to  discover  a  blemish,  rests  upon  the 
slightest  appearance  of  one,  as  a  satisfying  proof.     When  rivalry  and  competition 
concur  witb  pride,  our  desire  to  espy  defects  increases,  and,  by  consequence,  the 
grounds  of  censure  multiply.     Where  no  opposition  of  interests  takes  place,  envy 
has  too  much  influence  in  warping  the  judgment  of  many.     A  person  of  low  and 
base  niiud  naturally  imputes  to  others  the  sentiments  which  he  finds  congenial  to 
himself.     4.  In  the  fourth  place,  that  suitable  to  the  sources  whence  a  jealous  and 
suspicious  temper  proceeds,  are  the  effects  which  it  produces  in  the  world,  the 
crimes  and  mischiefs  with  which  it  fills  society.     It  p  >ssesses  this  unhappy  dis- 
tinction beyond  the  other  failings  of  the  human  heart,  that  while  it  impels  men  to 
violent  deeds,  it  justifies  to  their  own  apprehension  the  excesses  wbich  they  commit. 
Amidst  the  uproar  of  other  bad  passions,  conscience  acts  as  a  restraining  power. 
As  soon  as  the  tumult  subsides,  remorse  exerts  its  influence,  and  renders  the  sinner 
sensible  of  the  evil  which  he  has  done.     But  the  uncharitable  man  is  unfortunately 
set  loose  from  any  such  check  or  control.     Through  the  infatuation  of  prejudice, 
his   judgment   is   perverted;   conscience  is   misled.     The   first-fruits   of   an   evil- 
thinking  spirit  aie  calumny  and  detraction,  by  which  society  is  so  often  embroiled, 
and  men  are  set  at  variance  with  one  another.     But,  did  it  proceed  no  farther  than 
ceiisorioi.s  speech,  the  mischief  would  be  less.     Much  greater  and  more  serious 
evils  frequently  ensue.     What  direful  effects,  for  instance,  have  often  flowed  from 
rash   and   ill-founded  jealousy  in  private  life  1     In   public   life,  how  often  have 
VOL.    11.  17 


258  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiir. 


kingdoms  been  shak'^n  with  all  the  violence  of  war  and  rebellion,  from  the  unjust 
suspicions  which  sulijects  had  conceived  of  their  rulers  ;  or  the  rash  jealousy  which 
princes  had  entertained  of  their  people  !  But  it  is  in  reiifjious  dissensions  chiefly 
that  the  mischievous  power  of  nncharitai  le  prejudice  has  displayed  its  full  atrocity. 
Let  us  attend  particuharly  to  one  awful  instance  of  tlie  guilt  which  men  may 
contract,  and  of  the  ruin  wldch  they  may  bring  upon  themselves,  through  the  want 
of  fairness  and  candour.  The  nation  of  the  Jews  were  almost  noted  for  *  narrow 
and  uncharitable  spirit.  V/hen  John  the  Baptist  and  onr  blessed  Lord  appeared 
among  them,  because  the  former  was  austere  in  his  temper,  and  retired  in  his  life, 
they  pronounced  of  him  that  he  had  an  evil  spirit ;  and  because  the  latter  was  open 
and  sociable  in  His  manner;^,  they  held  Him  to  be  destitute  of  that  sanctity  which 
became  a  prophet.  Their  prejudice  again--t  our  Lord  took  its  first  rise  from  a  most 
frivolous  and  contemptible  cause.  "Is. not  this  the  son  of  the  carp'iiter?  Can 
any  good  thiug  come  out  of  Nazareth?  5.  In  the  fifth  place,  as  a  suspicious  spirit 
is  the  si'urce  of  so  many  crimes  and  calamities  in  the  world,  so  it  is  the  spiing  of 
certain  misery  to  the  person  who  indulges  it.  His  friends  will  be  few  ;  and  small 
will  be  his  comfort  in  those  whom  he  possesses.  Believing  others  to  be  his 
enemies,  he  will  of  course  make  them  such.  So  numerous  and  great  are  the  evils 
arising  from  a  S'lspici'jus  disposition,  that  of  the  two  extremes  it  is  more  eligible  to 
exfose  ourselves  to  occasional  disadvantage  from  thinking  too  well  of  others,  than 
to  suffer  continual  misery  by  thinking  always  ill  of  them.  It  is  better  to  be  some- 
tin' es  imposed  upon  than  never  to  tiust.  Sa'ety  is  purchased  at  too  dear  a  rate 
when,  in  order  to  secure  it,  we  are  obliged  to  be  always  clad  iu  armour,  and  to  live 
in  perpetual  hostility  with  our  fellows.  'J'his  is,  for  the  sake  of  living,  to  deprive 
ourselves  of  the  comfort  of  life.  The  man  of  candonr  enjoys  his  situation,  wliat- 
ever  it  is,  with  cheerfulness  and  peace.  G.  In  the  sixth  place,  that  there  is  nothing 
which  exposes  men  in  a  more  marked  and  direi-t  manner  to  the  displeasure  of  the 
Almighty  than  a  malignant  and  censorious  spirit.  I  insist  not  now  on  the  general 
fienunciations  of  Divine  wrath  against  malice  and  hatred.  Let  us  only  consider 
under  what  particular  description  the  Spirit  of  (iod  brings  this  crime  of  un- 
charitable judgment.  It  is  declared  to  be  an  impious  invasion  of  the  prerogative 
of  God,  to  whom  alone  it  belonj,'s  to  search  all  hearts,  and  to  determine  concerning 
all  characters.  On  the  whole,  it  clearly  app  ais  that  no  part  of  the  government  of 
temper  deserves  attention  more  than  to  keep  our  minds  pure  from  uncharitable 
prejudices,  an)  open  to  candour  and  humanity  in  judging  of  others.  The  worst 
consequences,  both  to  ourselves  and  to  society,  f  How  from  the  opposite  sjiirit. 
Let  us  beware  of  encouraging  a  habit  of  suspicions,  by  forming  too  severe  and 
harsh  opinions  concerning  human  nature  m  general.  Darkened  as  the  Divine 
image  now  is  among  m-inkind,  it  is  U't  wholly  effaced.  Much  piety  and  goodness 
may  lie  hidden  in  hearts  that  are  unknown  to  us.  Vice  is  glaring  and  loud.  The 
crimes  of  the  wicked  make  a  noise  in  the  world,  and  alarm  society.  True  wotth  is 
retired  and  mod  st,  and  requires  particular  situations  to  biing  it  forth  to  public 
notice.  The  aged  and  the  unfortunate,  who  have  toiled  through  an  unsuccessful 
life  with  long  experience  of  the  falsehood  and  fraud  of  evil  men,  are  apt  to  l)e  the 
most  severe  in  the  opinions  which  they  entertain  of  oih'^rs.  For  such,  their  cir- 
cumstances may  be  allowed  to  form  some  degree  of  apology.  (//.  Blair,  D.D.) 
Censorious  j ndg nientit — their  evil  effects  : — As  the  magicinns  of  Eg.vpt,  it  is  said,  imi- 
tated Moses  and  Aaron  in  turning  their  rods  into  serpents,  but  were  not  able  to  turn 
the  serpents  at.'ain  into  rods,  so  a  censorious  spirit  can  make  an  evil  thing  out  of  a 
good,  but  cannot  recover  the  good  at'ain  out  of  the  evil.  It  can  make  an  honest 
man  look  like  a  villain,  a  soiier  man  like  a  drunkard,  a  modest  man  like  a  libertine, 
a  devout  mm  like  a  hypocrite;  but  what  power  has  it  to  revive  the  fair  fame  it  has 
blasted,  and  undo  the  terrible  mischief  it  has  done  ?  The  poison  once  poured  upon 
the  mind  can  iiever  be  recalled.  Your  evil  surmise  is  readily  received  by  others  as 
censorious  as  yourself ;  your  whispered  suspicion  is  taken  up  by  a  hundred  willing 
tongues,  and  confirmed  and  magnified  by  a  thousand  more,  till  it  becomes  a  common 
report  which  no  one  dares  to  doubt ;  but  when,  convinced  of  your  error  and  sorry 
for  your  imprudence,  you  wish  to  retract  or  modify  your  statement,  you  speak 
to  averted  ears  and  minds  already  prejudiced.  The  remedy  comes  too  late ;  the 
poison  has  done  its  work.  You  have  made  the  serpent ;  you  cannot  remake  the  rod. 
(Ibid.) 

Ver.  6.  Rejoic3th  not  in  iniquity,  but  rejoiceth  in  the  truth. — Charity  cannot 

rejoice  in  iniquity,  hut  must  rejoice  in  the  truth  : — I.  Iniquity  expresses  unevenness 


CHAP,  xiii.l  I.   CORINTHIANS.  259 

•or  inequality — a  want  of  rectitude  or  moral  principle.  In  its  largest  comprehension, 
.as  here  used  by  St.  Paul,  it  is  the  gieat  falsehood  brought  in  by  the  fatiier  of  lies, 
antagonising  the  goodness  of  the  Creator,  and  working  infinite  evil  to  His  creatures. 
Warring  against  the  love  of  God,  it  tends  to  subvert  His  authority  and  spread 
disorder  and  anarchy  throughout  His  empire.  How,  then,  can  charity  rejoice  in 
iniquity?  Desiring  the  welfare  of  an  intelligent  universe,  how  can  she  rejoice  in 
that  which  must  result  only  in  wretchednuss  and  ruin  ?  II.  The  truth  is  the 
•exact  opposite  of  iniquity,  and  th  refore  the  legitimate  object  of  charity's  rejoicing. 
It  indicates  that  which  is  fixed,  settled,  si>lid,  certain,  constant,  according  to  fact  or 
reality,  to  be  confidently  believed  anil  relied  upon.  The  truth  by  pre-eminence  is 
•God's  gracious  revelation  to  man  contained  in  His  written  Word.  The  truth  in 
human  practice  and  haman  character  is  conformity  of  heart  and  life  to  the  principles 
.and  requirements  of  that  revelation.  {J.  Cross,  D.D.)  The  pnrili/  of  lore  .•— 
I.  It  has  no  pleasure  in  sin.  1.  In  the  commission  of  it.  2.  In  the  contempla- 
•tion  of  it  in  others.  3.  In  the  sufferings  it  occasions.  II.  Irs  joy  is  in  the  tkuth 
(righteousness).  1.  In  the  practice  of  it.  2.  In  the  triumph  of  it.  3.  The  elTects 
of  it.  (J.  Lyth,  D  D.)  Rejiiicing  in  iniquity  : — Some  are  never  conient  till  they 
have  arrested  somebody's  career  of  usefulness  or  honourable  success,  or  cast  a 
blight  over  some  unbleinishe  1  reputation,  or  marred  the  peace  of  some  harmonious 
family,  or  inflicted  a  wound  upon  some  unsuspecting  heart.  For  these  ends  th^y  pry 
into  your  business  matters,  your  social  relations,  your  domestic  concerns,  the  sacred 
privacy  of  your  chambers,  with  a  diligence  worthy  of  the  highest  virtue,  and  an 
impertinence  not  unworthy  of  the  lowest  vice.  They  whisper  a  scandalous  surmise, 
and  enjoin  the  strictest  secrecy,  well  knowing  that  they  are  giving  it  to  every  bird 
of  the  air,  and  sowing  it  broadcast  on  the  winds  of  heaven.  With  a  basen>'ss  of 
which  Satan  himself  might  be  ashamed,  they  write  an  anonymous  letter,  rank  with 
the  poison  of  false  kindness  ;  making  the  postmaster  an  unconscious  partner  in 
their  despicable  enterprise,  and  converting  the  ever-welcome  letter-carrier  at  your 
door  into  a  messenger  of  hell.  In  their  cowardlv  amb  iscade  they  sit  conce;i,led, 
and  by  proxy  play  their  masked  batteiies  upon  their  victim,  who  knows  not  whither 
to  turn,  nor  which  way  to  escape,  nor  whose  the  hand  that  wounds  him.  With 
what  a  fiendish  satisfaction  do  they  enjoy  the  mischief  they  have  done !  with  what 
an  under-chuckle  of  infernal  glee  watch  the  writhings  of  the  anguish  they  have 
caused.  The  ComancliH  is  more  humane  in  his  warfare  ;  the  rattlesnake  is  more 
honourable  in  its  aitack.  Such  a  one  could  laugh  at  chains,  dance  in  dungeons, 
jest  over  guillotines,  amuse  himself  with  inquisitorial  engines,  enjoy  his  orgies  on 
hattle-fields  reeking  with  blood,  and  with  liis  boon  companions — as  my  own  eyes 
Iiave  seen — make  a  ganibling-table  of  his  brothei's  grave!  He  could  t  ifle  at  the 
death-bed  of  a  Paine  or  a  Vnltaire,  frolic  merrily  aro  ind  the  Savi  au's  Cross,  and 
find  his  sweetest  music  in  the  dirge  of  ruined  souls.  (./.  Cross,  D.D.)  Dehfihting 
ill  the  clef  dire: — Erasmus  tells  of  one  who  collected  all  the  lame  and  defective 
verses  in  Homer's  works,  but  jjassed  over  all  that  were  excellent.  So  these,  if  they 
can  spy  anything  defective  and  evil,  they  ob-erve  it,  and  gather  all  they  can 
together,  but  will  take  no  notice  of  that  which  is  yood  and  praiseworthy;  like  the 
kite  who  flies  over  the  fair  mea  lows  and  flowers,  and  ligh  s  only  upon  the  carrion, 
■or  like  flies  that  love  only  to  be  up^n  the  sore,  galled  |ilaces  of  th"  horse  s  back. 
(Jeremiah  Birroiii/hs.)  Uejoicing  with  the  truih  : — The  gospel  is  thet'ulh  "f  God 
beCHUse  it  is  the  absolute  wisdom,  the  Divine  philosopliy,  of  which  all  the  efforts  of 
the  human  intellect,  and  all  the  partial  lights  that  had  broken  from  heaven,  were 
but  the  dawn  (r/.  Gal.  ii.  5  ;  Eph.  i.  13 ;  3  John  3  ;  all  an  echo  of  John  xiv.  6). 
This  revelation  of  God  bursts  upon  man  with  tl'e  fulness  of  joy.  The  Sou  of  Mai 
Himself  has  been  anointed  with  the  oil  of  gladness  ab.)ve  H's  le  lows,  and  He 
appoints  als  >  unto  the  mourner  l>eanty  for  ashes,  the  oil  of  joy  for  mourning,  the 
ga'ment  of  praise  for  the  spirit  of  h  aviness.  Abraham  saw  the  day  of  Christ  and 
was  glad.  The  gladne-s  of  the  ea  ly  C-urch  attracted  the  notice  of  the  h  storian 
•(Acts  ii.  46).  We  may  conjecture  that  it  was  her  joy  that  cr.  ated  song  and  broke 
fonh  even  in  ecst  ttic  utterance.  Who  is  not  struck  with  the  ])rofound  sadness  of 
the  later  paga  ism  of  Greece  and  Rome?  A  Christian  apostle  alone  can  ddress  to 
his  readers  without  irony  the  exho'tation  to  "  rejoice  evermore."  In  this  hymn  to 
love  St.  Paul  personifies  the  gospel,  and  represents  it  as  rejoicing.  The  truth 
rejoices  in  its  power  to  ere  te  love  ;  for  as  Augustine  savs,  "  the  victory  oi  truth  is 
love."  Then  love  creat  d  by  the  truth  rejoices  in  the  loveliness  of  the  truth  and 
Tejoices  with  the  t  ut  •  in  its  love  rreati  'g  energv.  It  is  the  joy  of  the  shepherd 
when  he  has  f.mnd  the  lost  she  p  ;  the  joy  of  the  father  when  the  prodiga.1  has 


2G0  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  xiii. 


returned  ;  of  holy  anf:;el8  and  of  God  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth.  {Principal 
Edwards.)  Rcjoicinci  with  the  mu/i;— Charity  does  not  only  rejoice  in  the 
posi^ession  of  truth,  for  that  would  be  selfishness,  but  rejoices  with  it  whenever 
she  finds  it  in  others.  Possessing  the  whole  truth  lierself,  and  yet  being  too  humble 
and  too  loving  to  be  arrogant  in  the  possession  of  it,  she  rejoices  as  a  part  of  her- 
self, as  it  were  very  grnins  of  truth  in  masses  of  ermr,  by  attracting  them  to 
herself  by  the  truth  which  tliey  hold,  or  seem  to  hold,  or  that  remnant  of  a 
righteousness,  which  is,  or  seems  to  be,  still  left  in  them  :  remnants  of  righteousness 
even  in  the  life  of  the  unrighteous.  Just  as  a  magnet  draws  to  itself  grains  of  true 
metal  out  of  a  mass  of  sand,  so  she  draws  others  to  the  whole  truth.  (J.  B. 
Wilkinson,  B.  A.)  True  grace  in  the  heart  tends  to  holy  i»'actice  in  the  life: — 
Negatively,  the  apoFtle  declares  that  charity  is  opposed  to  all  wickedness,  or  evil 
practice  ;  and,  positively,  that  it  tends  to  all  righteousness,  or  holy  practice.  I. 
Some  arguments  in  support  of  the  doctrine.  1.  Holy  practice  is  the  aim  of  that 
eternal  election  which  is  the  first  ground  of  the  bestowmeiit  of  all  true  grace 
(Eph.  i.  4,  ii.  10  ;  Jolin  xv.  Ifi).  2.  That  redemption,  by  which  grace  is  purchased, 
is  to  the  same  end  (John  xvii.  19;  Col.  i.  21,  22;  Titus  ii.  14).  3.  That  saving 
conversion  in  which  grace  is  commenced  in  the  soul  is  to  the  same  end  (Eph.  ii.  10  ; 
1  The^s.  iv.  7).  4.  That  spiritual  knowledge  and  undt-rstanding,  which  are  the 
inward  attetulauts  of  all  true  grace  in  the  heart,  tend  to  holy  practice.  5.  From  the 
more  immediate  consideration  of  the  principle  of  grace  itself,  from  which  the  same 
will  be  seen.  And  here — (1)  Because  the  faculty  which  is  the  immediate  seat  of  it 
is  the  faculty  of  the  will,  which  is  the  faculty  tirat  commands  all  a  man's  actions 
and  practice.  The  will  is  the  fountain  of  the  practice,  as  truly  as  the  head 
of  a  spring  is  tlie  fountain  of  the  stream  that  flows  from  it.  (2)  It  is  the 
definition  of  grace,  that  it  is  a  principle  of  holy  action.  What  is  grace  but  a 
principle  of  holiness  in  the  heart?  And  if  grace  be  a  principle,  what  is  it  a 
prini-iple  of,  but  of  action?  (3)  The  nature  of  a  principle  of  grace  is  to  be  a 
vital  principle.  (4)  Grace  is  an  exceedingly  powerful  principle  (2  Tim.  iii.  5). 
II.  The  tkuth  of  the  doctkim?  with  REsi-Ecr  to  the  particular  Christian 
GRACES.  This  is  the  cas  • — 1.  With  respect  to  a  true  and  saving  faith  in  the  Lord 
Jesus  Chiist  (1  Gal.  v.  6  ;  James  ii.  18).  (1)  Tiie  conviction  of  the  understanding 
and  judgment,  which  is  implied  in  saving  faitli,  tends  to  holy  practice.  If  men  are 
really  convinced  of  the  truth  of  the  things  they  are  told  iti  the  gospel,  about  salva- 
tion and  an  eternal  world,  it  will  act  in  such  a  manner  as  will  tend  to  their 
obtaining  this  salvation.  (2)  So  does  that  act  of  the  will  which  there  is  in  saving 
faith.  He  that,  by  tlie  act  of  his  will,  does  truly  accept  of  Christ  as  a  Saviour, 
accepts  of  Him  as  a  Saviour  from  i-in,  and  not  merely  from  the  punishment  of  sin. 
(3)  So  does  all  true  trust  in  Go  i.  And  herein  a  true  trust  differs  from  all  false  trust. 
A  trust  in  God  in  the  way  of  negli  ence,  is  what  in  Scripture  is  called  tempting  God ; 
and  a  trust  in  Hiui  in  the  way  of  sin,  is  what  is  called  presumption,  which  is  a  thing 
terribly  threatened  in  His  Word.  But  he  that  truly  and  rightly  trusts  in  God,  trusts 
inHini  in  tire  way  of  dilij^ence  and  holiness.  2.  AH  true  love  to  God.  Love  to  our 
fellow-creatures  alwa  s  influences  us  in  our  actions.  He  that  loves  money  is 
influenced  in  his  prac-tice  by  that  love,  and  kept  by  it  in  the  continual  pursuit  of 
wealth.  And  so  he  that  truly  loves  God  is  also  influenced  by  that  love  in  his 
practice.  3.  All  true  rep.  ntance.  In  the  ori'^;inal,  tlie  word  signifies  a  change  of 
the  mind  ;  and  men  are  said  to  repent  of  sin  when  they  change  their  minds  with 
respect  to  it.  4.  All  true  humility.  He  that  is  sensible  of  his  own  unworthine.ss, 
will  be  disposed,  by  a  sense  of  it,  to  carry  himself  accordingly  both  before  God  and 
man.  5.  All  true  fear  of  God.  which  is  a  holy  solicitude  or  dread  lest  we  should 
■  offend  God  by  sinning  against  Him.  6.  The  spirit  of  thankfulness,  and  praise,  which 
leads  us  to  render  again  according  to  tfie  benefits  received.  7.  Christian  vveanedness 
from  the  world,  and  heavenly-mindedness.  8.  The  spirit  of  Christian  love  to 
men.  If  the  spirit  of  love  to  man  be  sincere,  it  will  tend  to  the  practice  and  deeds 
of  love  (Rom.  xiii.  9,  10).  9.  A  tiue  and  gracious  hope.  A  false  hope  tends  to 
licentiousness — to  encourage  men  in  their  sinful  desires  and  lusts,  and  to  flatter  and 
embolden  them  even  when  they  are  in  the  way  of  evil.  But  a  true  hope  tends  to 
'  stir  men  up  to  holino-s  of  life,  to  awaken  them  to  duty,  and  to  make  them  more 
careful  to  avoid  sin,  and  more  diligent  in  serving  God  (1  John  iii.  3).  Conclusion  : 
1.  We  may  see  one  main  reason  why  Christian  practice  and  good  works  are  so 
abundantly  insisted  on  in  the  Scriptures  as  an  evidence  of  sincerity  in  grace 
(Matt.  vii.  16-20;  John  xiv.  21-24;  Eph.  v.  5,  6).  2.  In  view  of  this  subject,  let 
all  examine  themselves,  whether  their  grace  is  real  and  sincere.     (1)  Has  your 


CHAP,  xiii.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  261 

supposed  grace  such  influence  as  to  render  thc^e  things  in  which  you  have  failed  of 
holy  practice,  loathsome,  grievous  and  humbling  to  you  ?  (2)  Do  you  carry  about 
with  you,  habitually  a  dread  of  sin  (Gen.  xxxix.  9)  ?  (3)  Are  you  sensible  of  the 
beauty  ami  pleasantness  of  the  ways  of  holy  practice  ?  (4)  Do  you  find  that  you  do 
particularly  esteem  and  delight  in  those  practices  that  may,  by  way  of  eminence,  be 
called  Christian  practices,  in  distinction  from  mere  worldly  moralitv?  (5)  Do 
you  hunger  and  thirst  after  a  holy  practice?  (G)  Do  you  make  a  business  of 
endeavouring  to  live  holily,  and  as  God  would  have  you,  in  all  respects  ?  (7)  Do 
you  greatly  desire  that  you  may  know  all  that  is  your  duty?  (Jon.  Edwarih.) 
Charity  rejoicing  with  truth  : — There  is  a  bold  double  personification — Charity  is 
one  person  ;  Truth  is  another.  Truth  is  rejoicing,  and  charity,  or  Christian  love, 
rejoices  with  her.  Truth  is  by  definition  reality,  or  the  thing  that  is ;  and  for  St.  Paul 
the  sum  of  all  reality,  the  embodiment  of  all  that  is,  the  revelation  of  God  in  Christ. 
Moral  truth,  intellectual  truth,  all  meet  and  harmonis^e  in  truth  revealed.  There 
is  nothing  in  nature,  there  is  nothing  in  thought,  there  is  nothing  in  virtue  outside 
and  apart  from  Him  who  calls  Himself  in  so  many  words  "  the  Way,  the  Truth, 
and  the  Life."  "  Charity  rejoiceth  not  at  iniquity,  but  rejoiceth  with  the  truth." 
It  is  not  needful  to  dwell  at  any  length  on  the  negative  statement,  "  Chnrity 
rejoiceth  not  at  iniquity."  It  can  be  no  charity  to  take  plea^iure  in  unrighteous- 
ness. St.  Paul  makes  it  the  very  climax  of  wickedness  to  do  so.  But  there  are,  at 
least,  two  cautions  on  this  subject  which  ought  never  to  be  left  unspoken.  Records  of 
crime  solemnly  judged,  and  terribly  punished,  if  in  any  sense  capable  of  corrupting 
us,  carry  with  them  their  formidahle  lessons  of  consequence  and  of  retribution. 
Even  these,  in  all  journals  fit  for  circulation,  are  records  not  of  offensive  particulars, 
but  of  reserved  and  reticent  generalities.  What  shall  we  say,  then,  of  fictitious 
narratives  of  vice,  vulgar  or  fashionable,  of  tales  of  which  the  very  point  of  interest 
lies  in  their  immorality,  of  novels  presupposing  and  taking  for  granted  a  state  of 
opinion  in  which  profligacy  is  the  rule,  and  virtue  is  the  exception,  in  which 
modesty  is  made  silly  and  ridiculous,  and  vice  interesting,  heroic,  and  charitable  ? 
Can  any  reprobation  be  too  strong  for  the  writers  of  such  fiction,  or  any  prohibition 
be  too  positive  of  its  tolerance  in  Christian  homes  ?  The  second  caution  needs  to 
be  spoken.  Take  heed  how  ye  hear,  and  how  ye  read,  in  what  spirit  you  look 
upon  the  crimes  and  vices  of  the  sinful,  what  mind  and  heart  you  bring  to  the 
contemplation,  whether  it  be  the  "  considering  thyself  lest  thou  also  be  tempted," 
or  the  proud  feeling  which  thanks  God  that  he  (the  beholder)  is  not  as  other  men 
are ;  whether  it  be  the  wicked  sympathy  which  gloats  over  the  sin,  or  the  Christian 
■which  bewails  and  weeps  over  the  sinner.  "  Charity  rejoiceth  not  in  iniquity,  but 
rejoiceth  with  the  truth."  Other  texts  tell,  as  we  have  seen,  of  the  struggles  and 
hardships  here  below,  of  the  truth  which  is  the  gospel.  This  one  passage,  perhaps, 
almost  alone  tells  of  its  joys.  Then  truth  sometimes  rejoices.  It  is  a  delightful 
thought.  Let  us  give  it  room.  Have  we  seen  no  triumphs  of  the  gospel  ?  By  the 
nature  of  the  case  they  will  cotne,  on  different  evidence  than  that  by  which  the 
victories  of  earthly  conquerors  are  decided.  There  will  be  no  assaults,  no  bombard- 
ments, no  smoking  ruins,  and  no  blood-stained  battle-fields  to  show  where  the 
gospel  has  taken  an  onward  step  towards  that  universal  reign  which  is  not  the 
dream  nor  the  vision,  but  the  sure  word  of  prophecy  for  the  Christian.  And  yet 
the  gospel  triumphs  have  not  been  few.  Traceable  directly  to  the  influence,  slow, 
but  sure,  of  Chdstian  principles — of  principles  which  had  no  place  and  no  existence 
until  Christ  died — there  have  been  such  results  as  these :  the  elevation  of  women  ; 
the  emancipation  of  the  slave  ;  the  higher  conception  of  the  sanctity  of  life,  whether 
shown  in  the  diminution  and  greater  mercifulness  of  war,  or  shown  in  the  mitiga- 
tion of  a  Draconic  statute-book ;  the  amelioration  of  the  lot  of  the  pauper,  the 
lunatic,  the  prisoner,  and  the  captive ;  the  institution  of  hospitals  for  every  form 
of  disease,  and  associations  for  every  enterprise  of  benevolence ;  the  advance,  let 
none  gainsay  it,  of  public  opinion  in  its  estimate  of  honour,  humanity,  and  virtue ; 
the  improvement  of  habits,  domestic  and  national ;  and  the  gracious  and  generous 
sacrifices  by  which  education  has  become  the  enthusiasm  of  senate  and  people — its 
promotion  recognised  as  a  primary  duty  ;  its  condition  made  a  very  test  of  a  stand- 
ing or  falling  State.  Surely  all  these  things,  and  a  thousand  others  nnt  included 
in  that  enumeration,  show  that  the  truth  has  rejoiced,  and  charity  has  rejoiced 
with  her.  But  it  is,  no  doubt,  in  her  more  thMrough  and  more  secret  workings  that 
the  words  of  the  text  are  more  strikingly  justified.  It  is  but  a  tentative  and  distHut 
approach  that  we  can  make  to  St.  Paul's  feeling,  while  we  sp  ak  only  of  the 
triumphs  of  the  gospel  in  a  wide  field  and  on  a  large  scale.     It  is  in  the  individual 


262  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xiir, 

life  that  truth  exercises  the  most  salutary  and  saving  of  her. influences.  It  is  there 
that  the  light  is  kindled  that  is  to  shine  before  ruen  to  the  Father's  glory.  Oh!  it 
is  not  by  magnificent  attempts  of  a  feeble  or  shallow  conviction,  aiming  at  great 
things  in  proportion  to  its  neglect  of  the  smaller,  that  the  real  cause  of  the  real 
gospel  is  promoted,  and  made  honourable.     (Dcaii.  Yaughan.) 

Ver.  7.  Beareth  .  .  .  believeth  .  .  .  hopeth  .  .  .  endureth  all  things. — Love'g- 
lahotirs  : — Notice — I.  The  multitude  of  love's  difficulties.  1.  The  difficulties 
of  love  are  many,  for  the  apostle  sets  forth  the  opposing  armies  as  four  times. 
"  all  things."  You  will  have  to  contend  with  "all  things" — (1)  Within  yourself. 
Nothing  in  your  original  nature  will  help  you.  God  has  put  within  you  a  new 
life,  but  the  old  li'e  seeks  to  smother  it.  {'2)  In  tbe  persons  whom  you  are  called 
upon  to  love.  The  best  of  the  saints  will  try  your  patience  ;  and  as  for  th& 
ungodlj',  everything  in  them  will  oppose  the  drawings  of  your  love.  (3)  In  the 
world,  for  the  world  lieth  in  the  wicked  one,  and  all  its  forces  run  against  love. 
(4)  In  hell.  The  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air  leads  the  van,  and  the  host  of 
fallen  spirits  eagerly  follow  him.  Speak  of  crusades  against  the  Paynim,  what  a- 
crusade  is  this  against  hate  and  evil !  Yet  we  shrink  not  from  the  fray.  2. 
Though  love  has  many  difficulties,  it  overcomes  them  all,  and  that  four  times,  (l) 
By  patience,  which  "beareth  all  things."  Let  the  injury  be  inflicted,  we  will 
forgive  it.  (2)  By  faith :  we  trust  in  Christ,  and  look  for  Divine  succour,  and  sa 
we  "  iielieve  all  tilings."  (3)  By  hope  :  we  rest  in  expectation  that  gentleness  will 
win,  and  that  long-sulTering  will  wear  out  malice.  (4)  By  perseverance  :  we  abide- 
faitbful  to  onr  resolve  to  love,  we  will  not  be  irritated  into  unkindne?s.  Baffled 
often,  love  "  e  d  a-eth  all  things."  3.  Love  conquers  on  all  four  sides.  Lov& 
makes  a  hollow  square.  (1)  Does  God  seem  to  smite  love  with  afflictions?  She 
"  beareth  all  things."  (2)  Do  her  fellow  Christians  treat  her  ill?  She  believes 
everv  thing  that  is  good  about  them,  and  nothing  that  is  injurious.  (3)  Do  the 
wicked  rise  against  her?  Sbe  hopes  that  yet  they  may  be  brought  to  a  better 
mind.  (4)  Do  all  her  spiritual  foi-s  attack  her  with  temptations  and  insinuations  ?' 
She  turneth  patience  against  ihem,  and  by  God's  grace  "  endureth  all  things."' 
4.  Love  conquers  in  all  stages  of  her  life.  (1)  She  begins  in  conversion,  and  the 
powers  of  evil  are  at  once  aroused  to  seek  her  destruction.  Then  she  "  beareth  all 
tliii  gs."  (2)  She  gathers  stiength,  and  "  believing  all  things,"  confesses  her 
faith,  and  her  fellow  Christians  are  confirmed.  (3)  Advancing  a  little  farther, 
though  often  dissippointed,  she  "  hopes  all  things."  (4)  And  when  infirmities  and 
old  age  come,  and  she  can  do  little  else  but  sit  still,  she  still  perseveres,  and 
accepts  even  death  without  complaining,  for  love  "  endureth  all  things."  II.  The 
TKiuMPH  OF  love's  LABOUR.  Her  labours  are  fourfold.  1.  In  bearing  all  things. 
"Bear"  might  be  translated  "cover."  The  two  ideas  may  be  blended,  however. 
Love  bears  all  things  in  silence,  concealing  injuries  as  much  as  possible  even  fron:k 
herself.  (1)  Think  of  this  word  "covers."  (a)  In  reference  to  the  brethren.  It 
is  not  honourable  to  men  or  women  to  be  common  informers.  Love  stands  in  the 
presence  of  a  fault,  with  a  finger  on  her  lip.  She  imitates  the  pearl  oyster.  A 
hurtful  particle  intrudes  itself  and,  unable  to  eject  the  evil,  it  covers  it  with  a 
precious  substance  extracted  out  of  its  own  life,  by  which  it  turns  tbe  intruder 
into  a  pearl.  I  would  desire  to  keep  ready  fur  my  fellow  Christians  a  bath  of 
silver,  in  which  I  could  electroplate  all  their  mistakes  into  occasions  for  love.  As 
the  dripping  well  covers  with  its  own  de2)osit  all  that  is  placed  within  its  drip,  so 
would  love  cover  all  within  its  range  with  love,  thus  turning  even  curses  into- 
blessings,  (h)  As  to  "bearing  all,"  apply  the  text  mainly  to  trials  in  dealing  with 
the  unconverted.  Ignore  any  repulsiveness  that  there  may  be  in  them.  Bear  with 
their  ignorance  of  the  gospel,  their  hardness  of  heart,  and  their  jests.  Would  you 
see  the  p>-rfection  of  the  charity  that  beareth  all  things  ?  Behold  your  Divine 
Lord.  Oh,  what  He  has  covered!  2.  In  believing  all  things.  In  reference — (1) 
To  our  fellow  Christians.  True  love  believes  good  of  others  as  long  as  it  can, 
and  when  it  is  forced  to  fear  that  wrong  has  been  done,  gives  the  accused  the 
benefit  of  many  a  doubt.  When  the  thing  is  too  clear,  love  says,  "Y'es,  but  the 
friend  must  have  been  under  very  strong  temptation,"  or  else  that  the  good  man 
must  have  been  mistaken.  Love's  blind  eye  is  to  the  fault,  and  her  bright  is  for 
the  excellence.  It  is  said  that  once,  in  the  streets  of  Jerusalem,  there  lay  a  dead 
dog,  and  every  one  reviled  it.  One  spoke  of  its  currish  breed,  another  of  its  lean 
and  ugly  form,  &c.  ;  but  one  passed  by  who  said,  "What  white  teeth  it  has ! " 
Men  said,  as  He  went  on  His  way,  "  That  is  Jesus  of  Nazareth."     Surely  it  is  ever 


CHAP.  XIII.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  2G3 

our  Lord's  way  to  see  good  points  wherever  He  can.  (2)  To  the  unconverted. 
She  doos  not  beheve  that  they  ate  converted,  but  she  beheves  that  theu-  conversion 
is  possible,  and  expects  that  the  word  she  speaks  will  be  God's  instrument  of 
salvation.  Do  you  want  a  model  of  this?  Look  to  your  Divine  Master  once 
again.  He  had  no  faith  in  man's  goodness,  for  "He  knew  what  was  in  man  ",; 
but  He  had  great  faith  in  what  could  be  done  in  men  and  for  them,  and  for  the 
joy  that  was  set  before  Him  in  this  He  endured  the  Cross,  despising  the  shame. 
3.  In  "  hoping  all  things."  Love  never  de;<pairs.  (1)  Hope  all  things  about  your 
brethren,  and  if  you  should  be  forced  to  see  sad  signs  in  them,  yet,  remember  that 
some  of  the  brightest  believers  have  had  their  faults.  Eemember  yourself,  lest  you 
also  be  tempted.  (2)  As  to  the  unconverted,  you  will  never  do  anything  with  them 
unless  you  hope  great  things  about  them.  When  the  good  Samaritan  found  the 
poor  man  half  dead,  if  he  had  not  lioped  about  him  he  would  never  have  poured 
in  the  oil  and  the  wine,  but  would  have  left  him  there  to  die.  Would  you  see  a 
model  of  this?  Our  blessed  Lord  despaired  of  none,  but  went  after  those  whom 
others  would  have,  given  up.  4.  In  enduring  all  tbings.  This  is  perhaps  the 
hardest  work  of  all,  for  many  people  can  be  affectionate  and  patient  for  a  time,  but 
the  task  is  to  hold  on  year  after  year.  In  reference — (1)  To  our  fellow  Christians, 
love  holds  out  under  all  rebuffs.  If  your  brethren  are  angry  without  a  cause,  be 
sorry  for  them,  but  do  not  let  them  conquer  you  by  driving  you  into  a  bad  temper. 
(2)  To  the  unconverted.  Our  Lord  said,  "I  will  make  you  fishers  of  men."  If 
you  go  out  fishing  for  souls  you  will  have  to  endure  all  things,  for  some  whom 
you  have  been  seeking  for  a  long  time  will  grow  worse  instead  of  better.  III.  The 
soHKCES  OF  love's  ENERGY.  Lovc's  art  is  learned  at  no  other  school  but  at  the  feet 
of  Jesus,  whei-e  the  Spirit  of  love  doth  rest  on  those  who  learn  of  Him.  Lf)ve  wins 
these  victories,  for — 1.  It  is  her  nature.  The  nature  of  love  is  self-sacrifice.  2. 
She  has  four  companions.  Tenderness  that  "  beareth  all  things";  faith  that 
*'  believeth  all  things  "  ;  hope  and  patience  which  "  endureth  all  things."  3.  She 
sncks  her  life  from  Christ.  Love  can  bear,  believe,  hope,  and  endure  because 
Christ  has  borne,  believed,  and  hoped,  and  endured  for  her.  (C.  H.  Sjmrfieoii.) 
The  wide  scope  of  love  : — Grief  is  near-sighted,  and  holds  its  trouble  close  up,  but 
love  is  long-sighted,  and  takes  the  events  of  life,  and  looks  at  tbem  in  all  poinis  of 
view,  and  sees  how  they  look  against  the  east,  and  how  against  the  west,  how 
toward  the  north,  and  how  toward  the  south,  how  above  and  how  below,  how 
against  one  background,  and  how  against  another.  Love  looks  upon  a  thing  all 
around,  in  its  germs  and  in  its  fruits,  in  its  prcr-ence  and  in  its  coming.  It 
sympathises  not  with  the  limitation  of  grief,  but  with  the  largeness  of  that  love  of 
humanity  which  is  in  every  event.  [H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  magnanimity  of 
love  : — I.  BE.iRETH  (covereth)  all  things — with  a  mantle  of  charity — as  far  as 
circumstances  will  admit.  II.  Believeth  all  things.  1.  To  tlie  advantage  of 
its  neighbour.  2.  Until  convinced  by  tbe  clearest  evidence.  III.  Hopeth  all 
things.  1.  Good  of  others.  2.  Or  that  can  possibly  alleviate  the  wroig.  3.  Or 
contribute  to  its  amendment.  IV.  Endub-th  all  things  when  there  is  no 
relief.  1.  Without  a  murmur.  2.  Without  resentment.  3.  Without  repr  ach. 
(J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  ChariUi  beareth  all  thiiuis  : — The  real  meaning  of  the  word  is' 
"  concealeth."  It  does  the  very  thing  which  it  is  always  asking  God  to  do,  hiiles 
its  face  from,  and  shuts  its  eyes  to,  the  sins  of  others.  It  is  charity  which  applies 
to  itself  what  it  asks  of  God  in  the  Miserere,  and  in  the  De  ■proj'uiidis.  It  turns 
away  its  face  from  the  sins  of  others,  and  in  that  deep  of  God's  love  it  buries  and 
conceals  them.  1.  It  is  terrible  to  think  what  a  keen  eye  we  have  for  each  other's 
faults.  It  is  sad  to  think  how  clever  we  are  at  feireting  them  out,  either  for  our 
own  or  for  our  neighbour's  amusement.  Even  the  dead  are  sometimes  not 
suffered  to  rest  unmolested  in  their  graves.  True  it  is  that  they  are  out  of  tbe 
reach  of  the  tongue  of  slander  or  uncbaritableness,  but  the  sin  is  not  the  less  great 
for  all  that.  2.  Now  charity,  so  far  from  injuring  the  reputation  of  any  person  by 
exposing  their  faults,  not  only  conceals  them,  but  protects  these  very  persons,  and 
interposes  a  shield,  as  it  were,  between  them  and  the  attack  of  their  enemies. 
The  very  meaning  of  the  word  protect  is  to  hide  or  conceal,  by  interposing  some 
object  between  one  who  would  seek  to  injure  another.  No  doubt,  from  time  to 
time,  cases  will  arise  where  faults  have  to  be  brought  to  li^ht  nnd  plainly  told. 
But  we  must  make  quite  sure  that  it  is  our  business  to  find  them  out,  and  when 
we  do  speak,  to  be  careful  that  we  are  not  gratifying  any  prejudice  of  our  own.  3. 
But  to  bear  all  things,  in  the  sense  of  concenling  the  faults  of  others,  is  indeed  to 
have  a  Christ-like  spirit.     It  is  to  resemble  Him  very  closely.     It  is  to  walk  very 


264  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xin. 

closely  in  His  loving  footsteps.  When  need  arose  our  gentle  Lord  was  stern  and 
strong  in  His  repi-oofs.  But  how  often  He  passes  over  faults  !  How  ready  He  is 
to  malje  excuses  for  or  to  conceal  or  hide  them  !  Let  two  instances  alone  suffice: 
first,  in  the  case  of  the  woman  taken  in  the  deadliest  of  deadly  sins.  Then, 
again,  on  the  Cross.  (J.  B.  Wilkinson,  M.A.)  Charity  willing  to  undergo  all 
sufl'criiigs  in  the  ivay  of  duty : — I.  Explain  the  doctrine.  It  implies  that  those 
that  have  Chiistian  love — 1.  Are  willing  not  only  to  do,  but  also  to  suffer,  for 
Chiist  (Luke  xiv.  27).  2.  Have  the  spirit  to  undergo  all  the  sufferings  to  which 
their  duty  to  Christ  may  expose  them.  They  are  willing  to  unrlergo  all  sufferings — 
(1)  Of  all  kinds,  (a)  Eeproach  and  contempt  (2  Cor.  xii.  10).  (h)  Hatred  and 
ill-will  (Matt.  X.  22).  (c)  Losses  in  their  outward  possessions  (Phil.  iii.  8) ;  in 
their  ease  and  comfort  (2  Cor.  vi.  4,  5).  (d)  Persecution  (Heb.  xi.  35,  36) :  (e)  Deuth 
itself  (Matt.  x.  39).  (2)  Of  all  degrees,  like  pure  gold,  that  will  bear  the  trial  of 
the  hottest  furnace.  H.  Some  reason  or  proof  of  the  doctrine.  1.  If  we 
have  not  such  a  spirit,  it  is  an  evidence  that  we  have  never  given  ourselves 
unreservedly  to  Christ.  It  is  necessary  to  our  being  Cbiistians  that  we  t^hould 
give  ourselves  to  Him,  whoUy,  only,  and  for  ever.  2.  They  that  are  truly 
Christians,  so  fear  God,  that  His  displeasure  is  far  more  terrible  than  all  eanhly 
afflictions  and  sufferings.  3.  Tliey  that  are  truly  Cliristians,  have  thit  fHith 
whereby  they  see  that  which  is  more  than  sufficient  to  make  up  for  the  greatest 
Bufferings  (2  Cor.  iv.  17;  Heb.  xi.  24-26).  4.  If  we  are  not  willing  to  close  with 
religion,  notwithstanding  all  the  difficulties  attending  it,  we  shall  be  overwhelmed 
with  shame  at  last  (Luke  xiv.  28-33).  5.  Without  this  epiiit  which  the  text 
implies,  we  cannot  be  said  to  forsake  all  for  Christ.  If  there  be  any  one  kind  or 
degree  of  temporal  suffering  that  we  have  not  a  spirit  to  undergo  for  Chris-t,  then 
there  is  something  that  we  do  not  forsake  for  Him  (Luke  xiv.  26,  &e.).  6. 
Without  this  spirit  we  cannot  be  said  to  deny  ourselves  in  the  sense  in  which  the 
Scriptures  require  us  to  do  it  (Matt.  xvi.  24,  25).  7.  It  is  the  character  of  all  the 
true  followers  of  Christ  that  they  follow  Him  in  all  things.  8.  It  is  the  character 
of  true  Christians  that  they  overcome  the  world  (1  John  v.  4).  9.  The  sufferings 
in  the  way  of  duty  are  often,  in  the  Bible,  called  temptations  or  trials,  because 
by  them  God  tries  the  sincerity  of  our  characters  as  Christians  (1  Pet.  i.  6,  7 ; 
iv.  12,  13).  Conf^lusion  :  1.  How  happy  those  persons  are  represented  in  the 
Scriptures  to  be  who  have  a  spirit  to  suffer,  and  do  actually  suffer,  for  Christ 
(Matt.  v.  10-12).  2.  What  glorious  rewards  God  has  promised  hereafter  to  bestow 
on  those  that  do  willin>,'ly  suffer  for  Christ  (Matt.  xix.  29  ;  2  Tim.  ii.  11,  12).  3. 
How  the  Scriptures  abound  with  blessed  examples  of  those  that  have  sulfeied  for 
Christ's  sake  !  (Jon.  Edwards.)  Chari'y  helicveih  all  things  :■ — Go  tell  a  mother 
of  the  faults  of  her  absent  son.  You  must  adduce  the  clearest  evidence  before  she 
will  yield  her  reluctant  credence :  and  even  then  it  is  rot  yielded  without  many 
misgivings  and  conjectural  qualifications  in  favour  of  her  child.  She  demands 
whether  you  yourself  witnessed  the  thinirs  of  which  you  speak,  or  whether  your 
informant  were  a  tru'hful  and  unprejudiced  person,  or  whether  the  rejiort  may 
not  have  originated  in  some  unfriendly  motive,  or  whether  there  he  not.  some 
circumstance  in  connection  with  the  facts  that  would  give  them  a  different  aspect, 
or  whether  after  all  it  were  not  some  other  child  instead  of  her  own.  Bather  thsn 
credit  the  report  of  her  darling's  culpability,  she  would  believe  a  dozen  persons  in 
error,  or  even  guilty  of  mali€iou=i  lalsehoocl.  But,  on  the  other  hand  ttll  her  of 
the  good  and  noble  conduct  of  her  boy ;  unexceptional  deportment,  his  studious 
habits  and  proficiency  in  learning ;  and  instantly  you  see  the  glad  conviction 
beaming  in  her  eye,  and  mantling  all  her  features  with  simny  joy;  and  perhaps 
she  adduces  many  confirmations  of  your  encomium,  and  tells  you  the  finest  things 
concerning  h'^v  son,  and  expatiates  entliusiastically  upon  his  rare  and  noble 
qualities.  What  is  it  but  love  that  renders  her  so  incredulous  to  what  is  said 
against  him,  and  so  ready  to  receive  ■v^iihout  abatemeit  or  qualification  all  that 
is  uttered  in  his  praise?  And  Christian  love,  operating  in  anotl  er  sphere,  differs 
nothing  in  this  respect  from  natural  maternal  affection,  powerfully  inclining  the 
heart  to  faiih  in  the  moral  excellence  of  its  object.  The  apostle  tells  us  that 
"faith  worketh  by  love";  is  it  not  equally  true  that  lov«  worketh  by  faith? 
(J.  Cross,  D.D.)  Charity  hcUeveth  nil  things  : — If  we  really  love  a  person  we 

implicitly  trust  him.  So,  and  in  a  far  higher  degree,  if  we  really  love  God  we 
cannot  but  believe  in  Him.  True  it  is  that  the  actions  of  our  friends  often  j  erplex 
us,  and  even  distress,  but  for  all  that  we  do  not  lose  our  love  for  them,  and  if  our 
love  be  a  rightly  founded  love,  we  do  not  lose  our  confidence  in  them.     So  must  it 


CHAP,  xiii.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  265 

bs  with  God  and  us,  our  love  and  trust  in  Him  must  be  so  implicit  and  so 
unquestioning,  that  we  must  be  ready  with  Job  to  say,  "  Though  He  slay  me,  yet 
will  I  trust  Him."  It  is  just  the  want  of  this  child-like  trustful  faith  which  makes 
us  suspicious  about  our  fellow-men,  and  which,  at  the  same  time,  makes  us  cold 
and  incredulous,  or  unbelieving  in  our  relifiion.  On  the  one  hand  we  are  always 
afraid  of  being  imposed  upon  or  unduly  influenced,  on  the  other  we  are  afraid  of 
believing  too  much,  and  so  we  are  apt  to  be  reserved,  to  hold  back  coldly,  not 
only  from  our  fellow-men,  but  from  God.  Limits,  and  rightly  theie  must  be 
somewhere,  but  to  believe  too  much  is  always  safer  than  to  believe  too  little  : 
and  probably  to  be  imposed  upon  many  times  is  safer  and  more  charitable 
than  to  hold  back  once  when  we  ought  to  go  forward.  (J.  B.  WiUdusou,  31. A.) 
The  faith  of  love: — I.  Operates  in  manifold  dirkctions.  1.  There  is  a  sense  in 
which  it  tinds  exercise  towards  God.  The  heart  that  loves  God  is  not  tormented 
with  the  mysteries  of  His  Providence.  The  lips  of  love  say,  "  Shall  not  the  Judge 
of  all  the  earth  do  right  ?  "  In  tbe  midst  of  iusciutable  events  in  individual  or 
national  life,  the  filial  child  of  God  "believeth  all  things  "  about  His  wisdom  and 
love.  2.  It  finds  frequent  exercise  in  relation  to  the  imperfections  of  friendship. 
Often  in  social  life  there  is  need  for  the  best  construction  to  be  put  upon  some  word 
or  some  action.  Love  so  believes  in  tbe  beloved  that  it  eagerly  puts  that  construc- 
tion. 3.  It  finds  exercise  in  relation  to  mankind  generally.  With  the  true 
"  enthusiasm  of  humanity,"  its  views  of  men,  its  interpretations  of  men  are  inspired 
by  a  faith  it  is  very  unwilling  to  forego.  And  thus,  as  long  and  as  far  as  possible, 
it  "  believeth  all  things."  II.  Is  an  unspbakable  gain  to  men.  For  who  cannot 
see  that  to  have — 1.  Unbroken  repose  in  God's  government.  2.  Ungrudging  trust 
in  friendship,  and — 3.  Unfaltering  belief  in  humanity,  exerts  the  highest  influences 
on— (1)  Piety.     (2)  Philanthropy?     {U.  R.   Tliomas')  All  the  gracrs  of  Ckris- 

tianitij  connected  : — I.  The  manner  in  which  they  are  connected.  1.  They  alwav  s 
go  together.  Where  there  is  one,  there  are  all,  and  where  one  is  wanting,  all  are 
wantmg.  2.  Th^y  depend  upon  one  another.  One  cannot  be  without  the  others. 
To  deny  one  would  in  effect  be  to  deny  another,  and  so  all.  3.  They  are,  in  some 
respects,  implied  one  in  another.  Thus,  e.g.,  humility  is  implied  in  fnith,  &c. 
II.  Some  reasons  of  their  being  thus  connected  and  dependent.  1.  They  are  all 
from  the  same  source  (chap.  xii.  4,  6).  2.  They  are  all  coinmunicated  in  the  same 
work  of  the  Spirit,  namely,  conversion.  There  is  not  one  conversion  of  the  soul  to 
faith,  and  auotlier  conversion  to  love,  &c.  3.  That  they  all  have  the  same  root 
and  foundation,  namely,  the  knowledge  of  God's  excellence  (Psa.  ix.  10 ;  1  John  iii. 
6,  iv.  7).  4.  That  they  all  have  the  same  rule,  namely,  the  law  of  God  (James  ii. 
10,  11).  5.  They  have  the  same  end,  viz.,  God.  6.  They  are  alike  related  to  one 
and  the  same  grace,  namely,  charity,  or  Divine  love,  as  the  sum  of  them  all.  Con- 
clusion :  1.  The  subject  may  aid  us  to  understand  in  what  sense  old  things  are  said 
to  be  done  away,  and  all  things  become  new,  in  conversion  (2  Cor.  v.  17).  A  true 
convert,  the  moment  he  is  converted,  is  possessed  not  of  one  or  two,  but  of  all  holy 
principles,  and  all  gracious  dispositions.  2.  Hence,  als-o,  they  that  hope  they  have 
grace  in  their  hearts  may  try  one  grace  by  another;  for  all  graces  go  together.  If 
persons  think  they  have  faith,  they  should  inquire  whether  their  faith  was  accom- 
panied with  repentance,  &c.  And  so  persons  should  examine  their  love  by  their 
faith.     (Jon.  Edwards.)  Chant])  hopeth  all  things: — I.   The  limitation.     We 

must  tie  our  hope  to  (iod's  promise,  and  limit  one  duty  by  another,  our  hope  by  our 
prayers.  What  God  commands  me  to  i^ray  for,  what  He  hath  promised  to  give, 
may  raise  my  hojse.  Some  things  there  are  which  are  not  to  be  nuraiered 
"  amongst  this  all."  Some  things  are  "  as  good  as  nothing  "  ;  and  my  estate  may  be 
bettered  in  being  witliout  them.  Some  things  are  worse  than  nothing  ;  and  my  estate 
will  be  far  worse  if  I  have  them.  Some  things  are  "  indifferent,"  neither  good  nor 
evil ;  and  a  bare  "  if "  may  make  it  either  good  or  evil  to  hope  for  them.  Some 
things  are  evil  "  in  their  own  nature,"  and  a  great  sin  it  is  to  hoi  e  ^ov  these.  Some 
things  appear  evil  to  us,  viz.,  alHiction,  jDoverty,  dipgrf^ce:  and  these  I  am  so  far 
from  hoping  for,  as  that  I  may  pray  ajiainst  tliem.  II.  The  extension.  1.  All 
good  things.  For,  to  wait  for  the  twili(.ht  with  the  adulterer;  to  CMtch  at  all  oppor- 
tunities which  may  be  as  steps  to  bring  to  the  pinnacle  of  honour;  to  have  "oureyes 
still  watching  upon  the  prey,"  is  not  hope,  but  lust,  or  ambition,  or  covetousness. 
2.  Future,  absent  goods  ;  goods  at  a  distance.  For  when  the  object  is  present,  hope 
is  no  more.  Charity  "  is  patient "  (ver.  4),  draws  in  its  breath,  as  it  were,  and 
stayeth,  and  defers,  and  prolongs  itself  (Eom.  viii.  25).  3.  Matters  of  diifi(  ulty. 
For  hope  loves  to  struggle  with  its  object,  and  sometimes  is  increased  by  opposition, 


266  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 

and  made  bolder  by  being  frighted.  But  if  the  object  be  "  at  hand  and  cheap,"  my 
hopn  is  lazy  and  asleep ;  "hope  above  hope,  hope  against  hope "  (Eom.  iv.  18),  that 
is  hope  indeed.  The  way  of  hope  is  hard  and  rugged.  She  passeth  by  the  pomp  of 
the  world,  and  she  treadeth  dangerous  paths.  If  a  serpent  be  in  the  way,  she 
feareth  nut ;  if  a  flower,  some  pleasing  object,  she  gazeth  not ;  but  presses  on  for- 
ward, over  riches  and  poverty,  over  honour  and  disgrace,  over  all  relations  and 
dependencies,  and  striveth  forward  to  her  object.  4.  Good  things,  though  hard  to- 
obtain,  yet  "possible."  For  charity  is  not  foolish  and  indiscreet  :  it  ploughs  not 
the  air,  nor  sows  upon  the  rocks.  What  is  easy  and  at  hand  cannot  raise  a  hope  ; 
and  what  is  impossible  overwhelms  and  swallows  it.  What  is  ready  to  fall  into  my 
bosom,  I  need  not  hope  for  :  and  what  I  cannot  have  doth  scarce  produce  a  wish,, 
much  less  beget  a  hope.  (A.  Farindon,  D.D.)  Charity  hopeth  all  things  : — 
Suppose  the  matter  is  investigated.  What  will  charity  do  now  ?  She  "hopeth  all 
things."  May  not  some  palliation  be  found  which  will  relieve  the  case  of  its  darker 
features?  First  appearances  are  often  deceptive,  circumstantial  evidence  is  fre- 
quently fallacious,  and  even  direct  testimony  cannot  always  be  relied  upon ;  and 
charity  hopes  that,  though  many  things  now  look  suspicious,  some  future  discoveiy 
or  explanation  will  make  the  innocence  of  the  accused  perfectly  clear  to  all.  People, 
often  form  an  unfavourable  opinion  of  others  from  some  error  of  their  own,  or  from, 
an  ex-i^arte  statement  by  a  third  person  ;  and  charity  hopes  that,  when  the  other 
side  comes  to  be  heard,  the  opposmg  testimony  may  be  sufficient  to  obliterate  the 
false  or  passing  impres.^ion  already  thus  produced.  Some  speakers  are  always 
using  superlatives  ;  and  charity  hopes  that  the  affair,  having  passed  from  tongue  ta 
tongue,  a  little  embellished  or  exaf-'gerated  by  every  repetition,  will  be  found  less 
flagrant  than  at  first  represented.  The  world  is  largely  given  to  lying,  and  defama- 
tion is  one  of  the  most  prevalent  vices  of  society,  and  envious  tongues  can  never 
rest  till  they  have  blasted  some  overshadowing  reputation  or  checked  the  career  of 
some  ambitious  rival ;  and  charity  hopes  that  the  allegation  may  turn  out  in  tha 
end  to  be  altogether  groundless,  the  despicable  work  of  one  of  those  depraved  souls- 
who  are  always  trying  to  put  out  another's  light  that  their  own  may  shine  the 
brighter.  Wrong-doing  sometimes  originates  in  ignorance  or  infirmity,  in  misin- 
formation or  misjudgment,  where  there  is  no  evil  motive,  where  the  intention  is 
even  friendly  and  benevolent ;  and  charity  hopes  that,  while  the  deed  itself  wears  a, 
questionable  aspect,  it  may  yet  be  made  to  appear  that  the  error  was  more  in  the- 
head  tban  in  the  heart,  that  it  was  rather  an  involuntary  mistake  tlian  an  inten- 
tional wrong,  and  that  better  information  in  the  future  will  prevent  its  repetition.. 
The  sinner  is  not  always  incorrigible,  the  worst  offenders  have  occasionally  been 
reformed,  and  no  one  ought  to  be  delivered  over  to  Satan  for  the  first  or  second 
delinquency ;  and  charity  hopes  that,  if  the  accused  is  really  guilty,  and  guilty  to 
the  full  extent  of  the  finding,  he  is  not  yet  quite  past  all  power  of  recovery,  but  may, 
by  proper  means  be  brought  to  repentance  and  plucked  as  a  brand  from  the  burning. 
In  short,  amidst  all  that  is  unfavouralde  and  discouraging,  charity  hopes  on,  hopes, 
ever;  unwilling  to  abandon  her  efforts  in  behalf  of  the  beloved  delinquent,  still 
pursuing  him  with  prayers  and  tears  and  tender  remonstrances.  Who  has  not  seen 
the  Gliristian  mother  patiently  bearing  with  the  irregularities  of  a  wild  and  wayward 
son,  hoping  to  reclaim  him  from  his  wicked  ways,  even  when  all  others  have  given 
him  up  in  despair  ?  Who  has  not  seen  the  meek  and  long-suffering  wife,  after 
years  of  cruel  annoyance  and  guilty  provocation,  planning,  toiling,  watching,  night 
and  day,  in  hope  of  recovering  a  debauched  and  abandoned  husband  out  of  the 
snare  of  evil  habit  and  vicious  companionship,  and  raising  him  up  from  his  moral 
degradation  to  the  dignity  of  a  virtuous  and  sober  life?  {J.  Cross,  D.D.)  Charitij 
hopes  for  others  : — As  we  build  up  ourselves,  so  must  we  edify  others  also,  "  in  our 
most  holy  faith  "  ;  and  as  we  hope  for  all  things  for  ourselves,  so  must  we  reserve 
a  hope  for  those  also  who  are  tied  in  the  same  link  and  bond  of  love.  When  we  see 
a  house  tottering,  we  must  not  make  our  censure  a  wind  to  blow  it  down  ;  but  hope 
that  even  a  broken  beam,  a  loose  rafter,  nay,  the  very  rubbish  itself,  may  in  time 
be  made  a  sound  part  of  the  building.  When  I  see  my  brother  fall,  I  must  lend  him 
my  hand  to  help  him  up.  If  my  hand  will  not  help  him,  I  must  lend  him  my  pity 
and  compassion  and  prayer.  And  when  all  the  rest  fail,  I  must  give  him  my  hope. 
Charity  hath  an  eye  abroad  as  well  as  at  home ;  nor  doth  she  nurse  up  hope  for 
herself  alone,  but  makes  it  as  catholic  as  the  Church,  nay,  as  the  world.  Saith 
Cicero,  "  Hope  lasteth  as  long  as  life  lasteth,  nor  can  it  expire  but  with  the  soul." 
And  how  desperately  soever  we  see  onr  brother  plunged  in  sin,  yet  we  must  hope 
well  that  his  sickness  is  not  unto  death.     And  indeed  why  should  we  not  hope  well 


CHAP,  xiii.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  267. 

of  every  man,  suppose  he  were  a  Judas,  and  by  our  Christian  industry  strive  to 
recover  bis  drooping  soul,  and  to  revive  the  flame  of  charity  in  his  breast,  whii-h 
may  warm  liim  into  a  temperate  hope?  How  know  we  but  that  the  word  of  God 
through  our  ministry  may  of  this  stone  raise  up  a  child  unto  Abraham  ?  Let  our 
weak  brother  be  "lame  hand  and  foot,"  sick  in  head  and  heart ;  yet  as  long  as 
there  is  life  in  him,  our  charity  must  visit  him,  and  our  hope  make  us  active  to  his 
recoveiy;  otherwise,  like  unskilful  physicians,  we  shall  suiter  him  to  die  under  our 
hands,  and  then  pretend  his  disease  was  incurable.  The  priest  and  the  Levite,  who 
saw  the  man  wounded  on  the  way,  and  passed  by  on  the  other  side,  are  not  proposed 
as  patterns  of  our  imitation,  but  the  Samaritan  (Luke  x.  30-35).  How  sinful  soever 
a  man  be,  yet  if  he  come  behind,  and  but  touch  the  kem  of  Christ's  garment,  the 
grace  of  God  may  cure  him.  Nay,  were  he  dead  in  sin,  who  knows  what  God  may 
do  ?  (.4.  Fariiidon,  D.D.)  The  hopefnlness  of  love  : — This  quality  of  love  follows 
as  a  consequence  from  the  last-named  element,  viz.,  "  faitli."  While  this  hopeful- 
fulness  is  again  a  source  of  the  next  qu;ility — endurance.  The  hopefulness  of  love — ■ 
I.  Is  ATTESTED  BY — 1.  Its  nature.  For  love  will  not  let  go  any  ground  for  expecting 
the  best  things  concerning  the  admired,  or  for  anticipating  the  best  things  con- 
cerning even  the  pitied.  Unwilling  to  forebode  ill,  it  is  sanguine  ever  of  good.  2. 
Its  history.  Love  is  always  known  to  be  declining  wheu  it  is  unhopeful.  The 
infinite  love  is  the  God  of  hope.  II.  Gives  life  and  beauty  to  love.  Whilst  love 
is  a  3  'Urce  of  hope,  hope  again  feeds  the  lamp  of  love.  It  suggests  the  better 
explanation  of  what  seems  mysterious  in  human  or  in  Divine  proredure,  and  thus' 
it  endows  love  with  an  eye  that  never  grows  dim.      (U.  R.  Thomas.)  Charitif 

endurcth  all  tltiufi^ : — Like  the  storks  of  Delft  that  wlien  the  city  was  burning, 
having  vainly  tried  to  cany  off  their  callow  young,  resolutely  remained  and  perished 
in  the  effort  to  protect  them,  charity  fi'st  exhausis  all  her  energies  in  the  service 
of  miserable  man,  and  then  sacrifices  herself  for  those  she  could  not  save.  Rather, 
like  the  Koman  soldier  who  kept  liis  place  at  the  Herculaneau  Gate  of  Pompeii  till 
the  fiery  sturm  entombed  him  where  he  stood,  she  maintains  her  position  to  the> 
last,  and  will  be  found  erect  in  full  armour  at  her  post  when  the  world's  cata^^trophe 
shall  fall.  As  J.  A.  Jnmes  says,  "  Her  energies  increase  with  the  difiiculty  that 
requires  them,"  says  the  writer  just  quoted  ;  "  and,  like  a  well-constructed  arch,  she 
becomes  firmer  by  what  she  has  to  sustain."  Charity  is  not  a  spark  falling  into 
the  ocean,  nor  a  snowflake  descending  into  the  volcuno;  but  a  mass  of  gold  cast 
into  the  furnace,  and  surviving  the  flame  by  which  it  is  purilied.  Unchanged  and 
unchangeable  as  her  Lord,  charity  is  superior  to  all  adversity,  to  all  hostility,  to  all 
the  powers  of  earth  and  hell.  Censures,  slanders,  curses,  threatenings,  cannot 
daunt  her  heroic  spirit;  nor  losses,  exiles,  jDrisons,  scourges,  crosses,  wear  out  her 
energies.  She  lies  calm  among  the  lions,  and  walks  unharmed  in  flames.  She 
smiles  at  the  inquisitor's  engine,  and  triumphs  at  the  martyr's  stake.  Wearing  her 
fetters  more  proudly  than  royal  lady  ever  wore  her  jewels,  and  glorying  in  her 
wreath  of  thorns  more  than  oriental  princes  in  their  diadems,  she  lives  on  through 
a  thousand  tribulations,  invincible  to  the  last  hour  of  life,  exulting  in  the  last 
at;ony  of  death,  and  serenely  falling  asleep  on  the  bosom  of  her  Beloved,  to  awake 
satisfied  with  His  likeness  in  the  glory  of  immortality.     {J.  Cross,  D.D.)  The 

endurance  of  love : — Though  not  wholly  dissimilar  from  the  virtue  described  in  the 
word  "beareth,"  which  suggested  to  us  the  tolerance  of  love,  the  characteristic 
here  asserted  is  not  precisely  the  same.  This  indicates  the  force  of  love  to  sustain 
quietly  and  to  survive  all  persecutions  and  distresses  inflicted  by  others.  Indeed, 
our  word  "  endure  "  embodies  the  thought  very  completely.  I.  Love  has  to  endure 
MUCH.  This  is  strange,  but  it  is  true.  Love  is  not  requited  with  love,  but  often  with 
misunderstanding  and  even  witl)  hatred.  Error  hates  truth,  selti.-^hness  hates  love. 
Christ's  biography  supplies  the  climax  of  the  proof  of  this.  But  all  loving  bears 
witness  to  the  same  experience.  Does  not  God  endure  much  ?  II.  Love  is  able 
TO  ENDURE  MUCH.  The  distresses  and  persecutions  that  seem  to  have  force  enough 
in  them  to  blast  and  burn  out  all  they  oppose,  have  been  asain  and  again  as  harm- 
less to  love  as  the  fiery  furnace  to  the  three  Hebrew  youths.  Fierce  fire  cannot 
consume  it;  many  waters  cannot  quench  it.     (U.  R.  Thomas.) 

Vers.  8-10.  Charity  never  faileth  ;  .  .  prophecies  shall  fail ;  .  .  .  tongues  shall 
cease ;  .  .  .  knowledge  shall  vanish  away. — Cliariiy  never  faileth : — I.  As  the 
LIVING  PKiNciPLE  IN  THE  HEART  OF  BELiRVEBS.  In  its  essencc  it  is  the  love  of  God 
within  a  man.  It  may  vary  indeed  in  its  apparent  intensity.  It  may  seem  almost 
extinguished;  but,  like  the  fire  on  the  altar  of  sacrifice,  it  still  exists,  and  is  soon 


268.  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [csAf.  xiii. 

fanned  up  again  into  a  flame  when  Jesus  smiles.  "  Of  itself,"  says  Poole,  "  it  will 
never  desert  a  man  in  this  life,  unless  it  be  first  deserted  by  him  through  deadly 
sin."  II.  As  AN  ACTIVE  GRACE  OF  THE  Cheistian  LIFE  ON  EARTH.  1.  View  it  in  any 
of  its  manifestations.  (1)  Beneficence  and  self-denying  liberality — "  the  poor  ye 
have  always  with  you  "  ;  and  a  claim  ever  arises  from  these.  (2)  Forgiveness  of 
injuries,  while  these  abound— and  so  long  as  human  nature  is  what  it  is  they  will 
abound — every  day  affords  occnsious  in  which  it  is  called  for.  (3)  Kindness  and 
forbearance  to  the  faults  and  failings  of  others  :  in  the  present  imperfect  state  such 
must  ever  be  expected.  2.  Nor  less  than  this  is  it  adapted  to  all  circumstances  and 
situations  of  life  :  to  the  poor  and  the  rich,  &c.  There  is  no  position  in  which  the 
believer  can  possibly  be  found  in  which  charity  will  not  be  an  ornament  and  a 
delight.  It  will  add  glury  to,  and  preserve  the  soul  from,  the  dangers  of  the  day 
of  prosperity  ;  and  it  will  equally  cheer  it  in  the  day  of  adversity.  3.  It  is  adapted 
to  every  period  of  time,  to  the  hour  of  death,  to  the  day  of  judgment,  yea,  to  heaven 
itself.  4.  And  so,  in  a  more  extended  sense,  and  as  regards  the  condition  of  the 
Church,  no  less  than  in  individual  cases.  It  is  adapted  to  times  of  persecution 
and  to  times  of  p^ace  ;  when  the  world  frowns  or  when  the  world  smiles.  Charity 
is  the  best  preservative  against,  as  it  is  the  only  cure  for,  those  petty  jealousies 
which  equally  disgrace  the  Church  and  dishonour  God.  II[.  In  supplying  motives 
TO  EXERTION  IN  THE  Eedeemek's  CAUSE.  In  its  c  anpreliensivencss,  it  takes  in  the 
entire  race,  and  aims  at  no  lower  object  than  to  "make  known  His  ways  upon 
earth  ;  His  saving  health  among  all  nations."  IV.  As  to  the  durability  of  its 
EXISTENCE.  It  will  la«t  for  ever,  and  live  in  heaven,  as  the  life  of  glory  there. 
Death  cannot  annihilate  it.  "  Love  is  heaven,  and  heaven  is  love."  To  have  it, 
therefore,  now  is  to  possess  the  foretaste  of  eternal  joys.  (J.  T.  Smith,  3I.A.) 
Charitii  never  failcth  : — Observe — I.  How  gifts  fail.  1.  Prophecy  must  be  accom- 
plished. 2.  Tongues  superseded.  3.  Knowledge  vanish  before  a  brighter  mani- 
festation. II.  How  LOVE  NEVER  FAILS.  1.  Its  work  is  ncvcr  done.  2.  Its  necessity 
can  never  be  superseded.  5.  Its  expression  may  be  perfected,  but  in  heaven  as  on 
earth  its  nature  is  the  same.  III.  The  inference.  1.  Love  is  better  than  gifts. 
2.  Should  be  more  earnestly  desired.     {J.  Li/tb,  D.D.)         Charity  never  faileth  :  — 

1.  As  a  GIFT.  1.  The  apostle  had  been  speaking  of  temporary  gifts.  Supernatural 
endowments  were  granted  to  the  Church  for  a  season  only.  The  apostle  intimates 
that  there  is  a  gift  of  richer  value,  and  that  the  time  would  come  when  these  would 
be  bestowed  no  longer,  and  when  that  only  would  remain.  2.  What  a  catastrophe 
would  it  be  were  it  to  become  extinct !  But  it  cannot  fail.  So  wide  a  channel  was 
made  for  it  by  the  mission  of  the  Son  of  God,  that  to  stop  its  onward  flow  were  as 
impoi-sible  as  to  prevent  the  rolling  of  the  ocean's  waves.  Love  as  it  dwells  in  the 
believer's  breast  is  only  a  reflection  of  the  love  of  the  Creator.  Hence  it  is  a 
gift  which  never  fails.  3.  The  gift  of  charity  will  never  fail  on  earth,  how  then  is 
it  possible  that  it  shriuld  fail  in  heaven  ?  The  period  will  arrive  when  not  only 
miracles  will  cease,  but  even  the  ordinary  means  for  the  edification  of  the  Church. 
But  love  will  even  then  abide.  Upon  the  blessed  inhabitant  of  the  upper  sanctuary 
it  will  stream  in  richest  plenitude,  direct  from  the  eternal  throne.  II.  An  active 
VIRTUE.  1.  It  is  a  gift,  but  it  is  a  gift  to  be  employed,  and  on  its  exercise  depends 
its  value.  Nor  does  it  ever  fail  in  this  respect.  It  is  ever  seeking  to  do  good,  and 
to  pour  its  gifts  and  blessings  on  the  hapless  sons  of  man.  (1)  Its  pity  never  fails. 
Wherever  it  beholds  an  object  of  distress,  its  efforts  are  put  forth  to  give  relief. 
(2)  Its  liberality  never  fails.  It  is  like  an  angel  of  mercy,  which  is  never  wearied 
with  conferring  favours,  and  never  says  you  ask  too  much.  (3)  Its  ingenuities 
never  fail.  It  is  ever  occupied  in  forming  schemes  to  carry  out  its  generous 
designs.     Spurious  or  defective  charity  may  fail,  but  true  charity  will  never  fail. 

2.  Look  again  into  the  eternal  woild.  How  active  is  the  principle  of  love  among  the 
hosts  of  heaven  !  On  earth,  love  is  more  or  less  mixed  up  with  other  things  ;  in 
heaven  it  will  be  free  from  all  defect.  The  family  will  be  one.  They  will  have  one 
common  inteiest.  Each  will  contribute  to  the  happiness  of  all.  Jealousies  will  not 
be  there.  No  envious  feelings  can  be  there  indulged.  III.  A  source  of  pore  and 
ELEVATED  ENJOYMENT.  What  is  SO  Constant  as  the  joy  that  simngs  from  the 
activities  of  benevolence  ?  Man's  happiness  will  ever  be  increased  in  proportion  to 
the  largeness  of  his  soul.  When  other  springs  of  pleasure  are  dried  up,  this  will 
continue  to  flow  in  copious  and  refreshing  streams.  In  heaven,  our  Father's  house, 
love  will  be  more  pure,  more  elevated,  and  more  fervent ;  and  hence  it  will  be  there, 
as  it  is  on  earth,  but  in  a  far  higher  measure,  the  source  of  never-ending  satisfac- 
tion  and   delight.     {Thornley   Smith.)         Charity  never  faileth : — It   is   a   noble 


CHAP,  xiii.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  ^ 

plant,  full  of  vigorous  life,  that  allows  insects  and  reptiles  to  feed  upon  its  bark  and 
leaves,  but  grows  on  in  silence  and  rears  its  l;ead  in  beauty  and  majesty,  and 
throws  out  its  branches  on  all  sides  to  the  wind  and  the  light,  bright  and  fragrant 
■with  bloom  and  bending  with  abunlant  fruit.     (J.  A.  James.)       Love  never  fails  : — 

1.  As  AN  EVIDENCE  OF  PARDON  (Lukc  vii.  47).  The  woman  who  was  a  sinner  loved 
much  because  she  had  much  forgiven.  To  whom  little  is  forgiven  the  same 
loveth  little.  II.  As  an  element  of  acceptable  obedience  (ver.  S).  The  acts  of 
the  unconverted  are  not  considered  by  God.  There  is  but  meagre  satisfaction  in 
this  passage  for  tbe  moralist.  Without  love  to  Je^us  our  best  deeds  do  not  avail 
before  God  (Matt.  xxv.  40).  Doing  for  the  brethren  is  doing  fur  Jesus.  An  act  of 
kindness  or  deed  of  love  done  for  a  child,  far  away  from  home  and  in  need  of 
sympathy  and  care,  is  regarded  by  the  parent  as  a  favour  done  to  him.  The  mother 
is  better  pleased  than  if  the  deed  of  love  had  been  done  unto  her.  III.  As  an 
element  of  acceptable  service  (Kev.  ii.  4,  5).  The  Church  at  Ephesus  had  left 
her  first  love;  therefore  the  service  she  rendered  was  not  pleasing  to  God.  She 
must  do  her  first  works,  which  were  seasoned  with  love,  and  cease  to  perform 
her  duties  mechanicully  in  order  that  her  efforts  might  be  acceptable  to  God 
(vers.  1,  2).  Love  is  also  the  power-element  of  service.  IV.  As  a  sin- 
RESisTiNO  POWER  (John  xiv.  15).  Love  to  Jesus  produces  righteousness.  It 
enables  us  to  keep  the  commandments,  and  is  therefore  a  sin-resisting  power 
(John  xiv.  21).  V.  As  an  aggkessive  power  (2  Cor.  v.  14).  The  constraining  love 
of  Jesus  made  Paul  the  aggressive  man  he  was.  VI.  As  a  sustaining  power 
(John  xxi.  17).  Peter  repented,  because  he  had  in  him  the  germ  of  true  love  for 
Jesus,  and  was  sustained.  Judas  repented  from  remorse,  and  ultimately  destroyed 
himself.  Love  to  Jesus  sustained  Polycarp,  Steplien,  Latimer,  Kidley,  the  martyrs, 
and  the  persecuted  in  all  ages.  VII.  In  producing  confession  (John  xii.  42,  43). 
When  men  love  positiou  and  power  and  the  praise  of  men  more  than  Christ  they 
will  not  confess  Him.  When  ni'  n  love  Jesus  supremely  thej'  are  swift  to  confess 
Him  as  Lord  and  Saviour  (Rom.  x.  10).  VIII.  As  a  preparation  for  heaven 
(chap.  xvi.  22).  Without  love  to  Christ  no  one  is  meet  for  heaven,  but  is  devoted 
to  destiuction.  The  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him.  (Horn.  Jieview.)  The  immor- 
tality of  love  : — It  will  never  fail  as — I.  An  element  of  moral  power.  It  is  the 
strongest — 1.  Sustaining  power.  2.  Resisting  power.  Love  builds  around  the 
soul  a  rampart,  invulnerable.  3.  Aggressive  power.  We  have  not  only  to  bear  up 
under  trials,  and  to  resist  temptations,  but  we  have  battles  to  fight.  There  is 
nothing  so  aggressive  in  the  moral  woild  as  love.  Man  can  stand  before  anything^ 
sooner  than  love.  II.  A  principle  of  social  unity.  Daep  in  the  heart  of  man  is-' 
the  desire  for  union  with  his  fellow.     Isolation  and  division  are  naturally  repugnant 

to  his  social  nature.  His  ingenuity  has  been  taxed  for  ages  in  the  invention  of 
schemes  for  union.  As  the  result  we  have  confederations  ba«ed  on  political 
sympathy,  material  interests,  theological  dogmas,  mere  carnal  allinities  ;  but  we 
are  only  one  with  those  we  love.  l5ut  we  can  only  love  the  lovable.  III.  A 
SOURCE  of  spiritual  happiness.  Love  is  joy.  1.  It  expels  from  the  mind  all  the'N 
elements  unfavourable  to  happiness.  2.  It  generates  in  the  mind  all  the  elements-^ 
of  spiritual  joy.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Tlie  iiiqicrisliahlenesn  of  love  : — -Either  of 
the  two  explanations  of  this  word  "  faileth,"  viz.,  "  falls  down,"  or  is  "hissed  off 
the  sta'^e,"  conveys  the  same  impression  concerning  love,  namely,  that  it  is 
permanent,  it  will  never  "  fall  down  "  from  inanition,  nor  be  "  hissed  off  "  because 
superseded.  All  the  beauties  of  love,  unlike  those  of  face  or  landscape,  are 
permanent.  The  imperishableness  of  love — I.  Is  indicated  by  its  capacity  of 
mbeting  at.l  demands  made  upon  it.  1.  This  is  the  conclusion  from  the  previous 
assertions  of  this  passage.  2.  This  is  the  result  of  our  observation  of  every-day 
life.  T  ue  love  is  equal  to  any  exigency.  It  survives  all  else.  II.  Is  a  striking 
contrast  TO  almost  ALL  else  IN  HUMAN  EXPERIENCE.  1.  This  is  the  declaration  of 
the  passage  following  our  text.     All  else  "  ceases,"  "vanishes,"  is  "done  away." 

2.  This  is  confirmed  by  human  experience.  Love  is  the  great  protest  of  our 
immortality.  III.  Is  explained  by  its  being  Divink  not  only  in  its  origin  and 
SUSTENANCE,  BUT  IN  ITS  NATURE.  Love  is  of  G  'd,  and  God's  love  never  faileth,  "  His 
mercy  enduietli  I'o  ever.''  Ours  is  not  an  imitation  of  His,  but  an  inspiration  from 
it.  His  love  is  th^  life  of  ours.  Hence  ours  is  deathless.  (U.  B.  Thomas.) 
Charily  unfailnifi  and  everlasting  : — Immortality  is  the  crown  of  virtue.  Riches 
perish,  laurels  wither,  b  auty  fades,  tbe  fires  of  genius  burn  out,  and  the  proudest 
monuments  crumble.  Even  in  Christianity  there  are  many  things  which  are  only 
of  tempjrary  utility.     Already  all  that  splendid  array  of  miraculous  powers  that 


270  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 

_^ a 

distinguished  the  Apostolic  Chnrch  is  numbered  with  the  things  that  were.  For 
these  were  only  the  instruments  and  auxiliaries  of  that  Divine  system  of  which 
charity  is  the  vital  principle.  These  were  only  tbe  temporary  seai^oLis  of  that 
spiritual  temple  of  which  charity  is  the  precious  mnterial.  We  may  change  many 
of  our  opinions  and  practices,  and  yet  be  Christians.  But  this  great  central 
principle  of  our  religion  cannot  be  sacrificed,  without  the  subversion  of  Christ's 
throne  on  earth.  It  was  proverbially  the  spirit  of  the  first  believers,  and  will  be 
equally  the  temper  of  the  last.  {J.  Cross,  D.D.)  Charity  toivards  the  dead: — 
The  Duke  of  Marlborough  and  Lord  Bolingbroke  were  in  opposite  political 
interests,  and  on  most  occasions  ranged  against  each  other.  Some  gentleman, 
after  the  death  of  the  great  commander,  speaking  of  his  character  and  avarice, 
appealed  to  Bolingbroke  for  confirmation.  To  his  honour,  be  replied,  "  The  Duke 
of  Marlborough  was  so  great  a  man  that  I  quite  forget  his  failings."  (JF.  Baxen- 
dale.)         The  Holy  Spirit  for  ever  : — I.  The  Spirit  of  Christ  is  given  to  His 

PEOPLE    everlastingly,  XO   INFLUENCE    AND    DWELL    IN    THEM    (John   xiv.    16,  17).      II. 

There  are  other  fruits  of  tre  Shirit  besidks  that  which  summarily  consists  in 
rovE,  wherein  the  Spirit  of  God  is  communicated  to  His  Church.  1.  Extraordi- 
nary gifts,  miracles,  inspiration,  &c.  2.  Ordinary  gifts.  These,  in  all  ages,  have 
more  or  less  been  bestowed  on  many  unconverted  men,  in  common  convictions  of 
sin,  common  illuminations,  and  religious  affections.  III.  All  these  othicr  fruits 
OP  the  Spirit  abe  but  for  a  season,  and  either  have  already  ceased,  or  at  some 
time  will  cease.  As  to  the  miraculous  gifts,  they  are  but  of  a  temporary  use,  and 
cannot  be  continued  in  heaven.  And  as  to  the  common  fruits  of  the  Sp  rit,  with 
rsi-pect  to  the  persons  that  have  them,  they  will  cease  when  they  come  to  die ;  and 
■with  respect  to  the  Church,  they  will  cease  after  the  day  of  judgnipnt.  IV.  Love 
IS  THAT  GEEAT  FRUIT  OF  THE  SpiRiT  THAT  NEVER  FAILS.  Consider  the  Church 
— 1.  With  respect  to  its  members,  as — (1)  It  never  fails  in  this  world  (Rom.  viii. 
yS,  39).  (2)  And  it  ceases  not  when  the  saints  come  to  die.  When  the 
apostles  went  to  heaven,  they  left  all  their  miraculous  gifts  behin  1.  But 
they  carried  love  with  them  to  heaven,  where  it  was  perfected.  2.  As  a 
body.  Though  other  fruits  of  the  Spirit  fail  in  it,  this  shall  never  fail. 
Of  old,  when  there  were  interruptions  of  the  miraculous  gifts  of  thi^  St'irit 
there  never  was  any  interruption  of  this.  And  at  the  end  of  the  world,  when  the 
Church  shall  be  settled  in  its  eternal  state,  and  all  common  and  miraculous  gifts 
shnll  be  at  an  end,  love  shall  be  bri^ught  to  its  most  glorious  perfection  in  every 
individual  member  of  the  ransomed  Church  above.  V.  The  reason  for  the  truth 
OF  THE  doctrine  WHICH  HAS  THUS  BEEN  PRESENTED,  viz.,  that  love  is  the  great 
end  of  all  the  other  fruits  and  gifts  of  the  Spirit.  It  is  the  end  to  which  all  the 
miraculous  gifts  that  ever  were  in  the  world,  are  but  the  means.  They  were  only 
means  of  grace,  but  love  is  grace  itself ;  and  not  only  so,  but  the  sum  of  all  grace. 
Application  :  1.  There  seems  to  be  no  reason  to  thmk  that  the  extraordinnry  gifts 
of  the  Spirit  are  to  be  restored  to  the  Church  in  the  times  of  her  latter-day  pros- 
peritv  and  blessedness.  Prophecy  and  miracles  Hrgue  the  imperfection  of  the  state 
of  the  Church,  ruther  than  its  perfection.  For  tliey  are  designed  as  a  support,  or 
as  a  leading-string,  to  the  Church  in  its  infancy,  rather  than  as  means  adapted  to 
it  in  its  full  growth.  And  then  again  that  state  will  not  be  more  glorious  tlian  the 
heavenly  slate  ;  and  yet  the  apostle  teaches,  that  in  the  heavenly  state  all  these 
gifts  shall  be  at  an  end,  and  the  influence  of  the  Spirit  in  producing  Divine  love 
onlv  shall  remain.  2.  The  subject  should  make  persons  exceedingly  cautious  how 
they  give  heed  to  anything  that  may  look  like  a  new  revelation,  or  that  may  claim 
to  be  any  extraordinary  gift  of  the  Spirit.  3.  The  subject  teaches  how  greatly 
we  should  value  those  influences  and  fruits  of  the  Spirit  which  are  evidences  of 
true  grace  in  the  soul,  and  which  are  all  summarily  included  in  love.  (Jon.  Edwards.) 
^Heaven,  a  world  of  love  : — I.  The  cause  and  fountain  of  love  in  heaven. — The  God 
of  love  Himself  dwells  there,  and  this  renders  heaven  a  world  of  love  ;  for  God  is 
the  fountain  of  love,  as  the  sun  is  the  fountain  of  liaht.  II.  The  objects  of  love 
THAT  IT  CONTAINS.  1.  There  are  none  but  lovely  objects  in  heaven  (Rev.  xxi.  27). 
AH  the  persons  that  belong  to  the  blessed  soi-iety  of  heaven  are  lovely.  'I'he 
Father  of  the  family  is  lovely,  and  so  are  all  His  children.  There  are  no  false 
professors  or  hypociites  there.  2.  They  shall  be  perfectly  lovely.  There  are  many 
things  in  this  world  that  in  the  general  are  lovely,  but  yet  are  not  peifectly  free 
from  that  which  is  the  contrary.  3.  All  those  objects  that  the  saints  have  loved 
above  all  things  here  while  in  this  worhi  shall  be  in  heaven.  III.  The  subjects  of 
liOVE  IN  HEAVEN.     And  thesc  are  the  hearts  in  which  it  dwells.     In  every  heart  in 


CHAP,  xiii.]  1.  CORINTHIANS.  271 

heaven  love  dwells  and  reigns.  The  heart  of  God  is  the  original  seat  or  subject 
/of  love.  The  love  of  God  the  Father  flows  out  toward  Christ  the  head,  and  t"  all 
yihe  members  through  Him.  And  the  light  of  their  love  is  reflected  iu  the  first 
place,  and  chiefly  back  to  its  great  source.  There  is  no  enemy  of  God  in  heaven  ; 
but  all,  as  His  children,  love  Him  as  their  Father.  IV.  The  principle  op  i.ove  in 
HEAVEN.  1.  As  to  its  nature.  It  is  altogether  holy  and  Divine.  2.  As  to  its 
degi'ee.  It  is  perfect.  The  love  that  dwells  in  the  heart  of  God  is  absolutely 
■perfect.  The  love  of  angels  and  saints  to  God  and  Christ  is  perfect  in  its  kind,  or 
with  such  a  perfection  as  is  proper  to  their  nature.  It  is  i^erfcct  with  a  sinless 
perfection,  and  perfect  in  that  it  is  commensurate  to  the  capacities  of  their 
nature.  V.  The  excellent  circumstances  in  which  love  shall  be  expressed 
AND  ENJOYED  IN  HEAVEN.  1.  It  is  always  mutual.  It  is  always  met  with 
answerable  returns  of  love — with  returns  proportioned  to  its  exercise.  2.  Its 
joy  shall  never  be  interrupted  or  damped  by  jealousy.  3.  There  sball  be 
nothing  within  themselves  to  clog  or  hinder  it  in  the  saints.  In  this  world  they 
find  much  to  hinder  them  in  this  respect.  4.  [t  will  be  expressed  with  perfect 
•decency  and  wisdom.  5.  There  shall  be  nothing  to  keep  us  at  a  distance  from  each 
other,  or  to  hinder  our  most  perfect  enjo.vment  of  eacli  other's  love.  6.  We  shall 
all  be  united  iu  very  near  and  dear  relations.  7.  All  shall  have  property  and  owner- 
ship in  each  other.  Love  seeks  to  have  the  beloved  its  own  ;  and  Divine  love 
rejoices  in  saying,  "  My  beloved  is  mine,  and  I  am  his."  8.  We  shall  enjoy  each 
other's  love  in  perfect  and  uninterrupted  prosperity.  9.  All  things  shall  conspire  to 
promote  our  love,  and  give  advantage  for  mutual  enjoyment.  10.  We  shall  know 
that  we  shall  for  ever  be  continued  in  the  p'^rfect  enjoyment  of  each  othei's  love. 
VI.  The  blessed  effects  and  fruits  of  this  love,  as  exercised  and  enjoyed  in 
THESE  circumstances.  1.  The  most  excellent  and  perfect  behaviour  of  all  the 
inhabitants  of  heaven  toward  God  and  eacJi  other.  2.  Perfect  tranquillity  and  joy. 
Oonclusiou:  1.  If  heaven  be  such  a  world  as  has  been  described,  then  we  may  see 
a  reason  why  contention  and  strife  tend  to  darken  our  evidence  of  fitness  for  its 
possession.  2.  How  happy  those  are  who  are  entitled  to  heaven!  But  here  some 
may  be  ready  to  say,  "  Wii  hout  doulit ;  but  who  are  thesf^  persons  ?  By  what  marks 
may  they  be  distinguished?"  (1)  They  are  those  that  have  had  the  principle  or 
seed  of  the  same  love  that  reigns  in  heaven  implanted  in  their  hearts  in  regenera- 
tion. (2)  They  are  those  who  have  freely  chosen  the  happiness  that  flows  from 
the  exercise  and  enjoyment  of  such  love  as  is  in  heaven,  above  all  other  conceivahle 
happiness.  (2)  They  are  those  who,  from  the  love  that  is  in  them,  are,  in  heart 
and  life,  in  principle  and  practice,  struggling  after  holiness.  3.  What  has  been 
■said  on  this  subject  may  well  awaken  and  alarm  the  impenitent.  (1)  By  putting 
them  in  mind  of  their  misery,  in  that  they  have  no  portion  or  right  in  this  world  of 
love  (Rev.  xxii.  15).  (2)  By  showing  that  they  are  in  danger  of  hell,  which  is  a  world 
■of  hatred.  {J.  Edwards.)  Traiisitiveiiegs  of  gifts  : — All  our  present  knowled^^e  is 
limited  in  its  range,  defective  in  its  evidence,  incomplete  in  its  nomenclature,  and 
inadequate  in  its  current  media  of  communication  ;  and  these  must  be  excliMuged 
ior  clearer  conceptions,  ampler  comprehensions,  fuller  demonstrations,  better  forms 
•of  expression,  and  easier  methods  of  a<'quisition ;  and  that  which  we  value  our- 
selves so  much  for  possessing  will  vanish  away  in  the  superior  revelations  of 
■eternity,  as  vanish  the  stars  in  the  light  of  the  rismg  snn.  The  practical  sciences, 
the  mechanic  and  assthetic  arts,  and  the  teemmg  literature  of  the  world — what  will 
be  their  utility  in  the  glorious  life  to  come  ?  If  they  were  not  necessary  to  man  in 
the  innocence  of  Eden,  how  can  they  be  necessary  to  him  in  his  "paiad.se 
regained  "  ?  What  need  of  your  agricultm-al,  hoiticultural,  and  botanical  systems, 
when  the  earth  is  restored  to  its  original  fertility,  adorned  with  flowers  that  never 
fade,  and  fruits  that  never  fail,  among  which  wander  all  animals  in  the  perfection 
of  their  strength  and  beauty?  What  demand  for  your  theories  of  political 
economy,  and  the  science  of  government,  wh^-n  God  shall  set  His  own  King  upon 
His  holy  hill  of  Zion  ?  What  call  for  aivhitectural  skill,  and  the  arts  ot  the 
•sculptor  and  the  painter — of  the  lapidary,  the  jeweller,  and  the  chemist — amid  the 
perfect  forms  and  faultless  hues  of  the  New  Jeiusalem  ?  How  shall  your  lame  and 
limping  poetry  and  your  feeble  and  faltering  music  presume  to  lift  a  note  or  strike 
^  string  amid  the  joyous  minstrelsy  of  the  redeemed  and  the  unfallen,  rolling  forth 
as  the  sound  of  many  waters  and  mighty  thunderings?  And  what  work  sh.ll  be 
found  for  the  legal  profession  where  all  obey  the  royal  law  of  love  ?  and  what 
service  for  the  medical  faculty  where  "the  inhabitant  shall  not  say,  I  am  sick  "? 
And  what  use  will  there  be  for  their  geographical  and  astronomical  books — your 


272  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 

maps  of  the  earth  ani  charts  of  the  sky — when  men  shall  be  as  angels,  with 
glorious  sph-itual  bodies,  quick  as  the  light  and  discursive  as  thought  ?  And  how 
shall  the  historian  and  the  philologist  employ  their  ample  lore,  when  the  confluent 
streams  of  liistory  are  lost  in  the  ocean  of  eternity,  and  all  the  languages  and 
dialects  of  the  babi'ling  eaith  have  given  place  to  the  one  tongue  of  the  universal 
kingdom?  And  the  author  and  the  orator — what  will  they  do  when  there  is  no 
more  error  to  be  corrected  nor  vice  to  overcome — when  truth  requires  no  further 
apology  and  virtue  no  further  vindication  ?  And  the  statesman  and  the  warrior — 
where  shall  their  vocation  be  when  all  power  Hnd  authority  are  given  to  the  glorified 
Son  of  man — when  nation  shall  never  aj^ain  lilt  up  sword  against  nation,  but  "  the 
work  of  righteousness  shall  be  peace,  and  the  effect  of  righteousness  quietness  and 
assurance  for  ever "  ?  And  the  preacher,  the  theologian,  and  the  critical 
connnentator  — what  shall  become  of  their  functions  when  "  the  tabernacle  of  God 
shall  be  with  men,  and  He  shall  dwell  among  them  " — when  "  the  knowleilge  of 
ihe  Lurd  stiall  lill  the  world  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea  " — when  "  all  shall  know 
Him  Irtmi  the  least  even  unto  the  greatest"?  And  all  your  schools,  colleges, 
universities,  what  place  will  be  found  for  these  in  the  original  fatherland  and  ever- 
lasting dwelling  of  truth  ?  Yea,  and  the  very  Bible  ;  what  is  it  but  a  primer  for 
chil'lren,  an  elementary  treatise  for  those  who  have  just  entered  their  novitiate  and 
begun  their  studies  for  eternity,  to  be  laid  aside  when  we  gi'aJuate  into  the  higher 
spheres  of  intellectual  and  moral  perfection  ?  (-7.  Cross,  D.D.)  Charity  enduring: 
gifts  ivansient  : — O^^serve — I.  Gifts  are  tejiporary.  1.  Imperfect  in  their 
nature.  2.  Adapted  to  an  imperfect  state.  3.  Must  consequently  pass  away.  II. 
Love  is  eternal.  1.  In  its  own  nature.  2.  Is  the  end  of  all  gifts.  3.  Must  endure 
in  a  perfect  stale  of  being.  {J.L;itli,D.D.)  Charity  abiding  :  gifts  tra)isient : — 
When  Eliot  the  missii)nary  to  the  Indians  was  an  old  man,  his  energy  never 
sustained  the  slightest  abatement,  but,  on  the  contrary,  evinced  a  steady  and 
vigorous  increase.  As  his  bodily  strength  decayed,  the  energy  of  his  being  seemed 
to  retreat  into  his  soul,  and  at  length  all  his  faculties  seemed  absorbed  in  holy  love. 
Being  asKed  shortly  before  his  departure  how  he  did,  he  replied,  "I  have  lost 
everyrhing  ;  my  understanding  leaves  me,  my  utterance  fails  me,  my  memory  fails 
me;  but  I  thank  God  my  charity  holds  out  still;  and  I  find  that  it  rather  grows 
than  fails. "  [J.  H.  Hinton.)  Knowledge  vani.iheth  away  : — In  my  time  in  the 
University  of  Edinburgh,  the  greatest  figure  in  the  faculty  was  Sir  James  Simpson, 
the  discoverer  of  chloroform.  The  other  day,  just  before  I  left  Scotland,  his 
successor  and  nephew.  Professor  Simpson,  was  asked  by  the  librarian  of  the 
University  to  go  to  the  library  and  pick  out  the  books  on  his  subject  (midwifery) 
that  were  no  longer  needed.  And  his  reply  to  the  librarian  was  this :  "  Take  evciy 
book  that  is  more  than  ten  years  old  and  put  it  down  in  the  cellar. "  Knowledge 
has  vanished  away.  Sir  James  Simpson  was  a  great  authority  ten  years  ago — 
twelve  years  ago  ;  men  came  from  all  parts  of  the  earth  to  consult  him  ;  and  the 
whole  knowledge  of  that  day,  within  that  short  period,  is  now  consigned  by  the 
science  of  to-day  to  the  cellar.  How  true  are  the  words  of  Paul:  "We  know 
in    part,    and    we    prophesy    in    part  " !       {Prof.    Henry    Druinmond.)  The 

vanishing  gnosis  : — How  can  knowledge  ever  vanish  away  ?  As  long  as  there 
are  sentient  beings  in  the  universe,  so  long  must  there  needs  remain  the  objects  of 
the  emotional  faculty ;  as  long  as  there  are  intelligent  beings,  so  long  must  the 
objects  of  the  intellectual  faculties  survive.  The  imperfect  knowledge  of  yesterday 
may  become  less  imperfect  to-day,  and  may  approximate  to  fulness  of  knowledge 
to-morrow.  Unless  we  can  conceive  of  a  life — the  higher  life — without  conscious- 
ness and  intellifience,  we  cannot  conceive  how  there  should  ever  come  a  time,  or 
ever  exist  conditions,  when  (for  personal  beings  whose  personality  is  not  annihi- 
lated) knowledge  should  ever  vanish  away.  Of  all  men  that  ever  lived  the  apostle 
was  the  last  man  who  would  have  put  forth  so  dreary  a  view  of  the  future  state  as 
his  words  at  first  sight  seeiji  to  indicate.  To  him  the  blessedness  of  the  life 
beyond  the  veil  was  supremely  desirable,  because  in  the  spiritual  world  darkness 
and  error  would  vanish,  not  light  and  knowledge.  Who  is  content  with  the  utmost 
range  of  knowledge  attainable  by  creatures  such  as  we  ?  Who  would  care  for  a  life 
where  the  yearning  to  know  would  find  itself  without  an  object  ?  But  how  if  this 
word  yviomg,  which  our  translators  have  rendered  by  the  word  knowledge,  connote 
an  idea  which  its  English  representative  fails  to  convey  ?  How  if  the  yvaxytg  of  the 
apostle  has  proved  untranslateable  because  we  have  never  seriously  studied  its 
history,  and  so  have  failed  to  grasp  its  meaning  ?  What  then  ?  Then  may  not  a 
■more  careful  scrutiny  get  rid  of  the  difficulty  which  the  passage  as  it  stands  pre- 


CHAP.  XIII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  273 

sent s  ?     Nay  !     May  not  that  passage  contain  the  enunciation  of  a  great  law  which 
the  Church  of  Christ,  by  losing  sight  of,  would  be  sure  to  suffer  serious  damage  ? 
Now  it  would  be  unadvisable  to  attemj^t  anyihing  like  an  exhaustive  examination 
of  tiie  use  of  this  word  by  St.  Paul,  or  of  the  meaning  it  may  be  found  to  bear  in 
the  several  passages  in  which  it  occurs.     This  much,  however,  is  apparent  to  any 
careful  reader  of  the  Epistles,  that  the  word  yvuiaig  was  a  term  which  was  very 
familiar   to   St.   Paul's  readers,  and  that  it  was  an  ambiguous  term   of   whose 
ambiguity  the  apostle  on  occasion  did  not  disdain  to  avail  himself.     He  speaks  of 
a  yiwfTif  which  is  none  other  than  the  beatific  vision  which  the  saints  of  God  have 
dreamt  of,  and  which  is  the  object  of  their  loftiest  hopes.     But  he  speaks  of  a 
yviT'mc,  too,  which  does  not  deserve  to  be  called  such.    He  speaks  of  a  yvioaiQ  which 
will  admit  of  no  addition  and  no  imperfection  in  its  fruition,  and  of  ayj'waig  which 
is  by  no  means  inseparable  from  the  notion  of  childish  dependence,  of  defective 
methods  in  arriving  at  it,  even  of  a  certain  measure  of  empiricism.    Nor  is  this  all ; 
it  bei^omes  evident  on  further  examination  that  this  ambiguous  term  was  used  at 
times  to  connote  not  merely  intellectual  apprehension,  but  a  formulated  summary 
of  conclusions  arrived  at,  the  result  of  speculations  which,  when  thus  foimnlated, 
the  intellectual  faculty  was  required  to  accept  as  an  authoritative  setting  forth  of 
truth.     In  other  words,  this  yvojni^  was  a  summary  of  dogmatic  teaching  which 
might  be  imperfect  in  its  statements  and  yet  serve  a  worthy  purpose,  though 
essentially  limited  in  its  view,  and  intended  only  as  a  step  in  the  right  road  ;  or  it 
might  be  not  only  imperfect  but  dangerous,  delusive  and  mischievous,  because  it 
exjDressed  conclusions  arrived  at  from  assumptions  which  were  mere  dreams,  and 
so  would  necessarily  be  a  yi'wcyig  falsely  so  called.     In  the  one  case  it  might  be  a 
Christian  yvwdttj,  which  was  good  as  far  as  it  went.  In  the  other  case  it  was  a  com- 
petitive yvMait:  which  its  supporters  set  up  as  antagonistic  to  any  expression  of 
Christian  belief,  a  summary  of  theosophic  or  mystical  dogma  with  no  real  basis  of 
truth  on  which  to  stand.     Yet  of  both  one  and  the  other,  the  first  being  partial  and 
so  inadequate,  the  second  being  erroneous  and  so  having  no  real  vitality,  the 
apostle  says — "  As  for  knowledge  it  shall  vanish  away. "  But  is  not  this  the  great  law 
abundantly  obs-ervable  in  the  history  of  all  science  in  its  various  branches  ?     Is  it 
not  the  fact  that  in  the  department  of  pure  mathematics  the  science  of  algebra 
slumbered    for   centuries,   and   when   the   awakened   intellect   of    men    resumed 
inquiries  which  for  ages  had  been  laid  aside,  the  new  discoveries  or  the  new  methods 
compelled  the  new  thinkers  to  use  new  formulae,  such  new  formulfe  being  necessitated 
by  established  facts  on  the  one  hand  and  becoming  the  very  conditions  of  progress  in 
the  Hpprehensiou  of  truth  on  the  other?     The  dogma  of  yesterday  had  served  its 
purpose,  it  expressed  elementary  truths  which  the  childhood  of  the  human  mind 
had  arrived  at,  but  that  which  seemed  final  yesterday  became  antiquated  or  rudi- 
mentary to-day.     When  men  are  brought  face  to  face  with  new  truths,  or  with  new 
aspects  of  truth,  or  compelled  to  investigate  truth  from  a  new  standpoint,  that 
moment  they  are  compelled  to  resort  to  new  expressions,  to  adopt  new  formula, 
that  is,  to  enunciate  new  dogmas,  the  old  knowledge  is  in  process  of  vanishing  away. 
But  truth  is  one  thing,  dogma  is  another.     The  formulas  may  suffer  change,  but 
the  truth  formulated  changes  not.    But  here  it  may  be  suggested  that  a  distinction 
must  be  made  between  such  truths  as  are  formulated  in  theological  dogmas,  and 
those  which  are  arrived  at  by  the  methods  employed  in  the  exact  sciences.     In  fact 
so  loose  is  our  language  and  so  vagne  is  our  vocabulary  when  we  approach  the  dis- 
cussion of  questions  in  which  our  religious  convictions  and  sentiments  are  supposed 
to  be  concerned,  that  nothing  is  more  common  than  the  assumption  exjiressed  or 
implied  that  scientific  truth  and  what  people  call  Divine  truth  are  in  some  mys- 
terious way  moving  as  it  were  in  different  orbits,  in  different  planes,  and  that  what 
holds  good  of  the  one  does  not  at  all  hold  good  of  the  other.     What !  Is  not  all 
truth  Divine — all  or  none  ?     Yes,  and  is  not  all  truth  a  truth  of  science — all  or 
none? — truth,  that  is,  which  is  once  formulated  with  sufficient  precision  for  the 
logical  faculty  to  exercise  itself  upon,  however  much  or  however  little  the  higher 
reason  may  have  helped  us  to  embrace  it  befoi-e  we  had  learnt  to  ext)ress  it  in 
scientific  terms?     It  is  in  vain  to  attempt  to  evade  the  question  which  is  being 
more  and  more  rudely  forced  upon  us.     The  question.  Is  there  such  a  science  as 
theology  ?  science  based  upon  axioms  which  are  indisputable,  requiring  postulates 
whi(!h  are  reasonable,  pursuing  its  inquiries  according  to  strictly  logical  methods, 
engiiged  upon  the  investigation  of  facts  and  their  correlation,  weighing  the  signifi- 
cance of  conflicting  testimony,  and  fearlessly  hailing  the  discovery  of  any  new  law? 
Is  it  a  science  whereby  our  race  may  hope  to  advance  to  the  apprehension  of  some 
VOL.   II.  18 


274  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 

eternal  truths  ?  a  science  not  one  whit  the  less  a  science  because  it  has  a  domain  of 
its  own  ?  If  not,  it  is  hardly  worth  our  while  to  trouble  ourselves  about  it.  Though 
even  tlien  observe,  that  the  facts  of  the  spiritual  life  remain.  On  tlie  other  hand, 
it  it  be  a  science,  no  matter  in  what  stage  it  may  at  any  moment  be  said  to  be,  then 
assuredly  it  is  only  what  we  should  exp'-ct,  that  this  same  story  which  history  has 
to  tell  of  other  sciences  should  be  found  to  be  true  of  this  one  also.  And  that  is 
exactly  what  we  do  find.  Take  whatever  science  you  please,  music,  medicine, 
astronomy,  and  what  is  more  certain  than  that  that  science  has  arrived  at  a  certain 
point  and  then  has  ceased  to  be  studied  by  competent  students,  and  its  further 
advance  been  arrested  for  centuries  ;  the  dogmas  of  such  science,  formulated  a 
thousand  years  ago,  being  accepted  ns  absolutely  true,  and  assumed  to  have  some- 
thing like  tinalitv.  For  ages  astronomers  assumed  that  the  sun  nroved  round  the 
earth — that  was  at  any  rate  a  dogma  about  which  ihere  could  not  conceivably  be 
any  disfiute — a  dogma  above  all  others  which  could  claim  for  itself  catholicity,  and 
stood  alone  as  answering  the  most  rigid  conditions  of  catholicity.  For  ages  the 
formulated  scipuce  of  architecture  helped  men  to  raise  up  to  heaven  those  stupendous 
structures  which  are  likely  to  last  as  the  wonder  and  envy  of  mankind  as  long  as 
the  race  lasts.  And  yet  into  that  formulated  science  the  very  conception  of  the 
properties  of  the  arch  never  entered.  What  appear  to  us  the  elementary  truths  of 
the  science  had  no  place  in  the  early  dogmas  "f  architecture.  In  all  these  instances 
\ve  are  met  by  the  his'oric  fact  that  every  scien-e  which  deserves  to  be  called  such 
has  had,  must  have,  its  periods  of  growth  and  rapid  development,  and  its  peru^ds 
of  torpor  and  repose.  Men  have  grown  weary  ov  despairing  of  solving  c  rtain  great 
problems,  and  have  thrown  them  aside  to  deal  with  others.  Then  the  tide  has 
turned,  and  they  have  gone  back  with  fre--h  enthusiasm  and  reawakened  curiosity 
to  the  old  ditiiculties,  prepared  themselves  to  att  ick  them,  perhaps  from  new  points 
of  view,  perhaps  according  to  new  methods.  And  then  new  discoveries  have  been 
made,  sometimes  the  results  of  patient  years  of  rese;)rch,  sometimes  by  a  Hiish  of 
what  we  call  genius,  and  sometimes  they  had  been  forced  upon  those  who,  by 
earnest  toil  and  seriousness  of  aim  and  greatness  of  purpose,  have  put  themselves 
into  the  attitude  o;  receiving  new  truths  and  qualified  themselves  for  expressing 
those  truths  in  formula  which  were  necessary  expnusions  of  the  development  from 
previous  dogmas.  The  time  had  come  for  the  old  yroJiTig  to  vanish  away !  And 
now  another  (■[uestion  comes  to  us.  Granted  tliat  theology  too  is  a  science.  In 
what  stage  mny  we  venture  to  say  that  we  tind  it  now '?  The  more  we  reflect  upon 
it  the  more  do  we  find  ourselves  compelled  to  acknowledge  that  theology,  as  a 
science,  is,  and  has  been  for  long,  in  a  condition  of  torpor  ;  it  is,  as  it  were,  taking 
its  repose,  it  has  gone  to  sleep.  But  if  theology  as  a  science  may  be  said  to  be 
asleep,  even  though  it  be  exhibiting  no  signs  or  evidence  of  awakening  activity, 
slumber  is  not  death,  it  need  not  even  imply  exhaustion;  it  may  be  only  heathful 
repo-e  before  the  dawning  of  a  new  day.  Even  though  they  would  iJ'-rsuade  you 
that  the  old  theob^gy  has  received  its  quietus  and  the  old  dogmas  are  moribund  or 
dead,  be  not  afra  d.  It  is  the  gre.it  law  that  every  yi'wirit,'  when  it  has  served  its 
pur^jose  must  vanish  away,  but  only  to  be  replaced  by  another  yvCjcnq  which  shall 
be  grander  and  larger  and  more  prof<!und  tlinn  that  which  we  possess.  Be  not 
afraid  to  say  tlie  theology  o'  the  fourth  century  may  not  have  been  the  theology  of 
the  second,  nor  the  theology  of  the  sixteenth  century  the  theologv  of  the  twelfth, 
and  ()eradventure  the  theology  of  the  twentieth  century  may  be  very,  very  different 
in  its  dogmas  and  its  foimulffi>  from  anything  that  we  can  conceive  of  now.  This 
science,  too,  may  find  another  Copernicus  to  whom  God  may  grant  strange  revela- 
tions, revelations,  or  if  you  dislike  the  word,  discoveries,  such  as  come  to  the  holy 
and  humble  men  of  heart,  guileless  and  true,  such  revelations  as  may  perforce 
necessitate  revolutions  in  our  methods  of  investigHtion,  in  the  terminology  we 
employ,  in  the  calculus  which  may  be  placed  at  our  disposal.  At  least  assure  your- 
selves that  imperfect  light  is  better  than  darkness,  and  cloudland  a  better  region  to 
live  in  than  chaos.  {A.  Jessopp,  M.A.)  We  know  in  inirt : — The  illuminated  page 
of  nature,  on  which  God  has  written  so  many  disclosures  of  His  power  and  love — 
how  small  a  portion  of  its  wonders  is  man  yet  able  to  understand  !  Look  at  the 
tree  which  rises  before  your  window,  and  shields  you  from  the  summer  sun.  You 
are  familiar  with  its  form,  its  foliage,  and  its  flowers.  But  can  you  tell  what  is 
going  on  within  it?  Can  you  explain  how  it  is,  that,  when  the  winds  of  autumn 
are  singing  their  vesper  hymn,  the  tree  listens  to  their  warning — how  it  forms  and 
folds  its  leaves  and  blossoms,  to  have  them  ready  for  another  spring  ?  No.  In  the 
history  of  the  simplest  things  in  the  vegetable  and  animal  world  there  is  much 


•CHAP,  siii.]  1.  CORINTHIANS.  275 

that  man  does  not  and  cannot  understand.     Come,  then,  to  our  knowledge  of 
human  nature  itself — bow  imperfect  it  is  !  how  many  new  pages  are  opened  from 
time  to  time  which  fill  us  with  wonder  and  dismay  !     Perhaps  you  are  able  to  tell 
iow  men  will  feel  and  act  under  the  common  circumstances  of  life  ;  but  who  can 
tell  the  measure  of  the  soul,  or  how  deep  and  far  man's  powers  and  passions,  in 
their  wild  energy,  can  go?     We  can  understand  benevolence  in  its  common  mea- 
sure, when  it  gives  what  it  does  not  want  to  others  ;  but  can  we  comprehend  that 
love  which  warms  and  fills  the  mait/r's  heart?     Passing  finally  to  the  knowledge 
of  the  Most  High — are  not  clouds  and  darkness  round   about  Him  as  of  old  ? 
*'  Canst  thou  by  searching  find  out  God  ?  "     Let  those  who  have  tried  it  reply.     A 
short  time  before  his  death,  Newton  said,  "  I  do  not  know  what  I  may  ap[)ear  to 
the  world  ;  but  to  myself  I  seem  to  have  been  only  like  a  boy  playing  on  the  sea- 
shore, and  diverting  myself  in  now  and  then  finding  a  smoother  pebble  or  a  prettier 
shell  than  ordinary,  while  the  great  ocean  of  truth  hiy  all  undiscovered  before  me." 
Here,  then,  we  shall  be  told  to  reflect  on  human  imxierfection  and  be  humble  ;  for 
we  see  how  little  way  the  sight  of  man  extends,  how  little  man  is  able  to  know. 
But  let  us  read  our  own  nature  aright.     That  "  we  know  in  part  "  is  not  humilia- 
ting ;  it  is  the  ground  and  necessary  condition  of  man's  chief  prerogative,  ami  of 
the  only  perfection  of  which  he  is  capable.     Consider  the  difference  between  human 
and  Divine  perfection,  and  this  will  be  plain  to  every  eye.     Divine  perfection  con- 
sists in  attributes,  each  and  all  of  them  unbounded,  except  by  th«  impossibility  of 
being  greater.     Divine  power  extends  to  all  things  that  power  can    do;  Divine 
wisdom  embraces  everything  that  exists,  or  will  exist,  or  ever  has  existed ;  Divine 
holiness  is  holiness  which  cannot  be  enlai'ged  nor  exceeded.  The  perfection  of  these 
attributes  is,  that  they  can  be  no  greater  than  they  are.     To  God  nothing  can  be 
added.     But  human  perfection,  by  which  I  mean  the  greatest  height  to  which 
humanity  can   aspire,  consists  in  continual  progress — in  continually  advancing 
towards  perfection.     It  is  plain,  then,  that  to  "  know  in  part  "  is  not  humiliating ; 
it  is  not  even  an  imperfection  ;  it  is  a  happy  and  honourable  condition  of  our  exis- 
tence, for  which  we  should  be  grateful   to   Him  who  made  us.     Had  we   been 
differently  created,  it  must  have  been  like  the  animals.     What  they  know,  they 
know  in  full ;  to  them  there  is  nothing  "  in  part."     What  they  know,  they  know  as 
well  in  the  first  years  of  their  existence  as  the  last.     And  if  man  bad  not  been 
created  as  he  is,  to  "  know  in  part,"  it  must  have  been  so  with  him  ;  he  must  have 
had  the  instinct  of  an  animal,  the  perfection  of  animals,  for  he  could  not  have  the 
IDcrfection  of  God.     Seeing,  then,  that  improvement  is  the  perfection  to  which 
human  nature  must  aspire,  let  us  next  observe  how  this  limited  knowledge  tends 
to  induce  and  encourage  it  in  every  field  of  thought.     Look  again  at  the  world  of 
nature.     Its  wonders  do  not  manifest  themselves  at  once  ;  if  they  did,  the  mind 
could  not  embrace  them,  or  if  it  could,  a  heavy  satiety,  a  lethartric  self-satisfaction, 
would  take  the  place  of  that  restless  energy  which  makes  man  labour  and  suffer  to 
extend  his  knowledge.     Everything  opens  gradually,  as  the  sun  rises,  not  full-orbed 
and  fiery  red,  but  gently  heralded  by  the  grey  light  and  the  kindling  clouds.    When 
you  first  point  out  to  an  intelligent  child  the  wonders  of  nature,  he  fixes  upon  you 
his  soft,  dark,  earnest  eyes.     The  world  seems  enchanted.     He  asks  where  these 
things  were  hidden,  that  he  never  saw  them  before.     He  enjoys  a  deep  delight,  he 
finds  a  luxury  in  this  gradual  illumination  of  mind,  to  which  he  would  have  been 
a  stranger  had  not  God  created  him  to  know  but  in  part.   And  so  in  maturer  years, 
if  the  mind  is  kept  from  stagnation,  into  which  it  too  readily  subsides.     Let  a  man 
give  his  attention  to  any  department  of  knowledge,  and  he  soon  gives  it  his  heart. 
He  will  leave  all  man  loves  at  home,  and  encounter  all  man  dreads  abroad.     The 
least  new  discovery  fills  him  with  rapturous  joy.     The  glad  energy,  the  intense 
devotion,  with  which  he  engages  in  the  chase  of  knowledge,  gives  an  idea  of  the 
manner  in  which  the  souls  of  the  just  will  study  the  works  and  ways  of  God,  and 
find  everything  radiant  with  happiness  and  eloquent  with  praise.     It  is  the  same 
with  moral  truth  ;  by  which  I  mean  all  truth  which  relates  to  God  and  to  the  nature 
and  destiny  of  men.     Our  knowing  but  in  part  inspires  that  earnest  desire  to  know 
more,  whii;h  is  compared  to  hunger  and  thirst  for  wisdom — a  desire  of  truth  which 
always  burns  in  the  breasts  of  those  who  are  enlightened  by  the  Word  of  God.   With 
respect  to  mankind,  also,  it  is  true  that  partial  knowledge  inspires  a  desire  to  know 
more.     I  mean  a  real  knowledge,  for  I  would  not  give  this  n^me  to  that  meaner 
sagacity  which  teaches  us  to  distrust  mankind.     Who  are  th^y  that  complain  most 
of  men  ?    They  are  those  who  dwell  apart,  who  have  none  but  selfish  interests  and 
•pleasures,  who  never  lift  a  hand  to  do  good  for  others — these  are  they  who  talk  of 


276  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 


the  fraud  and  falsehood  of  their  race,  while  the  lovers  of  mankind  are  those  who  go 
about  doing  good.  The  young  always  have  this  desire  to  know  more  of  others. 
Alas,  that  tljis  generous  affec-tinn  should  be  driven  back  to  their  hearts,  disappointed 
and  dismayed,  by  what  they  see  and  hear!  They  find  their  pareuts  talking  with 
cold  severity  of  others — of  all  ohers — of  uny  otheis — even  their  nearest  friends; 
and  they  listen  with  wonder  and  pain.  Mankind  are  thrown  apart  and  kept  so; 
those  cords  of  humanity,  whiih  united  would  have  been  strong  as  the  sheet- 
anchor's  cable,  become  singly  as  weak  as  the  silk-worm's  thread,  and  the  purpose 
of  Christianity  is  not  answered,  which  is  to  recouL-ile  them  to  each  other  and  make 
the  divi'ied  one.  So  our  knowing  God  but  in  part  inspires  an  earnest  desire  to  know 
more.  It  leads  us  on  in  religious  improvement,  and  it  makes  that  inij^iovement 
a  succession  of  bright  revelations,  in  which  man  is  continually  learning  what  he 
thiisted  to  know.  There  are  many  things  in  the  dispensations  of  Heaven  which 
the  thoughtlul  long  to  know,  as  the  pro] diets  and  kings  of  ages  past  desired  to  look 
into  the  masteries  of  God.  "  What  I  do  thou  knowest  not  now,  but  thou  shalt 
know  hereafter."  This  hope  of  knowing  liereafter  is  an  anclior  to  the  soul ;  it 
saves  it  from  lieing  wrecked  in  its  own  doubts  and  fears  ;  it  keeps  it  true  to  itself 
and  iis  destiny,  tiil  it  reaches  the  world  where  the  wonders  of  Providence  are 
unfolded  to  its  astonished  view,  and  it  can  read  and  understand  them  all.  Above 
all,  I  would  say  that  we  cannot  complain  of  the  limitation  of  our  knowledge  till  we 
make  a  better  improvement  of  what  we  already  know.  Enough  is  already  known 
to  make  us  wise  unto  salvation.  It  remains  that  we  apply  it  to  our  hearts  and 
hves.  ( ir.  B.  0.  Peiihody,  D.D.)  Now  I  know  in  part : — The  Scriptures  abound 
in  rellections  upon  the  weakness  and  short-sightedness  of  the  human  mind.  Now, 
it  is  observable  that  the  atheist  and  sceptic  have  taken  up  the  strain  of  Scripture, 
and  striven  to  turn  its  weapons  against  itself  and  its  friends.  "How  blind  and 
weak,  how  pour  and  miserable,"  they  repeat,  "  the  creature  to  whom  you  yet  assign 
so  splendid  a  destiny  !  "  I  accept,  the  isr,ue  which  atheism  and  intidelity  thus  pre- 
sent. I  'will  reason  for  the  magaificent  yro-pects  of  man  ou  the  very  ground  here 
taken,  of  his  wcalcnesses  and  dise  iS'  s,  hv^  griefs  iind  i'eais.  I  will  show  that  there 
is  no  incongruity  m  Holy  Writ,  when  in  one  breath  it  tells  of  man's  miseiies  and 
vauiti(  s,  Mud  in  the  next  of  his  unending  life  and  glories.  For,  "  I  know  in  part "  : 
what  does  this  mean,  but  that  I  have  an  idea  of  more  knowledge  than  I  actually 
jiossess,  bidieve  myself  capable  of  greater  acquisitions,  and  see  the  domain  of  wisdom 
stretching  out  beyond  my  present  reach,  aad  inviting  my  further  pursuit  ?  Why  be 
straitened  in  my  limits,  but  that  my  true  element  is  the  unbounded  ?  Could  we  glorify 
man's  present  spiritual  advances,  and  celebrate  the  complete  beauty  of  his  intel- 
lectual furniture,  t'  e  argument  for  immortality  would  not  be  so  strong.  We  might 
think  the  mind  had  drunk  its  till  here,  and  accomplished  its  destiny.  The  same 
argument  might  be  pushed  as  to  all  the  linjitatitms,  sadnesses,  and  defects  of  our 
nature.  With  what  a  wreck  of  plans  and  hopes,  enterprises  and  calculations,  is 
the  shore  of  eternity  strewn  !  If  the  soul's  nit^asure  be  in  this  weaver's  shuttle  of 
time,  with  no  threads  woven  to  reach  across  the  span  of  earth,  death  is  untimely 
and  the  tomb  premature.  Look  out  upon  all  nature,  and  see  the  exquisite  perfec- 
tion of  every  object  there.  From  the  blade  of  grass  to  the  everlasting  stars,  there 
is  no  deviation  from  the  law  of  Oider  or  the  line  of  beauty.  Everything  seems  to 
accomplish  its  work,  and  fultil  its  design.  There  is  nothing  more  to  be  wished  or 
exi38cted.  The  astronomer  detects  no  lawless  course,  no  really,  however  for  a  time 
apparentl}',  irregular  or  straying  motion.  So  perfect  is  nature,  from  the  fine  dust 
of  the  balance  to  the  revolutions  of  the  sky.  But  the  human  mind  rises  up  the 
vast,  lonely  exception  to  this  hair-breadth  completene-s  of  the  world.  Recogniser 
of  the  perfection  of  all  things  else,  itself  alone  is  imperfect.  It  conceives  of  a 
knowdedge  transcendent.  It  conceives  of  a  purity  shaming  its  pollution.  It  con- 
ceiv<  s  of  a  blessedness  to  which  earth's  joys  are  but  glimpses  of  light  and  breakings 
in  a  stormy  sky.  Now  God,  the  j)erfect  One,  deals  not  in  fraf;;ments,  like  some 
weak  human  artist  who  may  overlay  the  walls  of  his  chamber  with  attempts  at  an 
entire  beauty.  I5ut  if  this  human  soul,  in  the  very  beginning  of  its  aspirings,  is  to 
cease  at  death,  then  there  is  a  fragment  indeed,  one  colossal  frustration  and 
stupendous  anomaly.  Man,  whom  He  made  the  lord  of  the  universe,  is  the  broken 
column,  while  everythmg  beside  is  whole !  Were  there  any  sign  of  the  soul's 
filling  out  its  defects  and  putting  away  its  limitations,  the  argument  would  be  les3 
strong.  But  its  growth,  marked  at  any  point,  followed  in  any  direction,  requires 
still  a  lengthened  being.  A  late  traveller  observed  in  the  city  of  Jerusalem  the 
fragment  of  an  arch  on  the  wall  of  the  temple ;  and,  tracing  it  according  to  the, 


CHAP,  xiii.]  J.   COJIINTIIIANS.  277 


principles  of  its  construction,  concluclpd  it  must  have  been  designed  to  spring  as  a 
bridge  across  the  adjoining  vallev.  So,  if  this  littlf^  arc  of  the  human  mmd,  which 
we  can  here  trace,  be  constructed  upon  true  principles,  it  must  mount  over  the  dark 
valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  the  stream  of  lime  must  flow  away  beneath  it,  while 
the  course  of  an  immortal  destination  opens  befoie  it.  Else,  denyii'g  this,  we 
charge  the  Supreme  Architect  wiih  fnult.  I  would,  then,  found  an  argument  for 
immortality  on  the  apostle's  declaration,  "  Kow  I  know  in  part."  Even  did  I 
adopt  Hume's  philos"phy  of  universal  scepticism,  I  should  snli  say  the  intellect 
is  made  for  truth,  and  must  have  time  for  its  inquiry  and  doubt  to  end  in  the 
satisfactions  of  knowledge.  I  know  this  is  the  commonly  accepted  mode  of  reason- 
ing. I  know  it  is  usual  to  draw  religious  arguments  from  man's  positive  abilities  ; 
but  I  would  draw  them  from  his  vast  defects.  It  is  usual  to  draw  them  from  his 
great  triumphs  ;  I  would  draw  them  from  his  signal  failures.  The  train  of  reflec- 
tions to  which  our  text  has  led,  accords  wiih  the  old  tenor  of  Scriptuie.  The 
gospel  of  Christ  speaks  no  flattering  words  to  our  vanity;  it  paints  in  no 
high  colours  our  powers  and  acquiremcts.  It  rather  digs  beneath  the  high- 
blown pride,  fond  fancy,  and  blind  self-complacency  of  the  human  soul,  to 
lay  the  foundation  of  that  structure,  which  shall  reach  to  heaven,  in  its  feeling 
of  weakness,  in  its  confession  of  ignorance,  in  its  sense  of  unworthiness,  in 
its   pangs    of    grief,    and   piayers   for   Divine   aid.      (C.    A.    Daitul.)  Life: 

2}artinl  and  perfect  .-—The  Cliristian's  experience  of  Christ  is  in  this  life  only 
partial :  partial  love  is  followed  by  partial  knowledge.  1.  He  knows  something  of 
the  welcome  of  Jesus.  2.  He  knows  something  of  communion  with  .Jesus.  3.  He 
knows,  too,  in  part,  the  spirit  of  service  to  Jesus.  4.  A  Christian  knows  also,  in 
part,  likeness  to  Clnist.  Eut  all  these  brightest  moments,  these  deepest  joys,  these 
noblest  moods,  are  to  be  eclijised,  forgotten,  counted  as  nothing,  "when  that  which 
is  perfect  is  come."  To  the  Christian  this  is  coming.  All  else  is  going.  What, 
then,  can  compare  with  the  claims  and  the  charms  of  the  f^piritual  life?  Suppose 
there  were  on  earth  a  country  where,  in  health,  that  which  is  perfect  had  c  .me  ; 
where,  in  purity  of  character,  that  which  is  perfect  had  come  ;  where,  in  all  the 
tender  relations  of  domestic  life,  that  which  was  i^erfect  had  come  ;  where,  in  society 
and  in  government,  in  cottage  and  in  palace,  that  which  is  perfect  had  come  ; 
where,  in  man,  and  field,  and  air,  and  sky,  that  which  was  perfect  had  come  ; — how 
ships  would  groan  with  human  cargoes  destined  for  its  shores!  In  comparison, 
fields  of  gold  and  seas  of  pearl  would  cease  to  draw.  Yet  the  brightest  conception 
of  such  a  slate  falls  immeasurably  below  what  the  dying  Christian  finds  in  heaven. 
(Benjamin  Waugh.)  The  lindtatv  ns  of  knou-letbje  : — The  fa'iiiliar  context  in 
which  these  words  occur  gives  a  peculiar  colour  to  them.  St.  Paul  in  his  estimate 
of  the  most  conspicuous  endowments  of  a  Chri:-tian,  places  knowledge — the  pro- 
gressive knowledge  of  observation  and  reflection — in  contrast  with  love.  He  sets 
the  intellectual  over  against  the  moral.  He  implies  that  the  knowledge  of  which 
he  sp.  aks  belongs  to  the  present  in  its  essence,  while  love  belongs  to  the  present 
only  in  its  form.  But  in  doing  this  he  doe-i  not  disjiarage  knowledge  ;  on  tlie  con- 
trary he  reveals  it  in  its  true  nobility.  Christ  declared  (John  xvii.  17)  truth  to  be  the 
medium  of  man's  consecration.  Under  the  necessary  conditigns  of  life  knowledge 
is  the  minister  of  love.  I  wish  to  consider  the  limitation  of  knowlerlge  and  not  the 
destination  of  knowleilge.  "  We  know  in  part."  The  fact  itself  is  one  which  we 
shall  do  well  to  realise  more  distinctly  than  by  a  general  acknowledgment.  When 
this  is  done  I  hope  that  we  shall  see  sufficient  r^asons  for  holding  that  this  neces- 
sary incompleteness  of  our  knowledge,  which  is  at  first  sight  disappointiig,  is,  when 
duly  weighed,  fitted  to  bring  stability  to  the  results  of  labour,  that  it  satisfies  the 
conditions  of  progress,  that  it  others  hope  in  the  face  of  tlie  dark  problems  of  the 
present  age.  1.  We  know  in  part.  This  limitation  is  imposed  upon  us  triply.  Of 
all  that  is,  of  all  that  even  we  with  our  prf'sent  faculties  feel  must  be,  we  can  know 
but  a  small  fraction.  Our  knowledge  is  limited  in  range.  And,  again,  our  know- 
ledge of  that  small  fraction  of  being  which  is  in  any  way  accessible  to  us  is  bounded 
and  conditioned  by  our  human  powers.  Our  knowledge  is  limited  in  form.  And, 
yet  once  more,  of  th  .t  which  man  could  know,  being  what  he  is,  if  the  personal 
powers  and  the  personal  experience  of  the  race  were  concentrated  in  a  single  repre- 
sentative, what  an  nifinitely  small  portion  is  embraced  by  one  mind  !  Our  know- 
ledge is  limited  by  the  circumstances  of  life.  So  far  the  fact  itself  that  we  know  in 
part  is  unquestionable  and  unquchtioned.  No  one  who  ever  presumptuously  main- 
tained that  "  man  is  the  measure  of  all  things,"  ventured  al^o  to  assert  that  "  all 
things"  which  he  measures  owe  their  being  to  him.     No  one  who  has  considered 


278  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 

the  slow  development  of  the  powers  which  man  now  enjoys  in  what  appears  to  us 
to  be  his  maturity  would  be  willing  to  admit  that  his  faculties  exhaust  in  kind  or 
in  degree  the  possible  action  of  being.  Our  knowledge,  I  repeat,  is  inevitably 
partial  in  regard  of  the  object,  and  of  the  subject,  and  of  the  conditions  of  its 
acquisition.  In  each  respect  an  infinite  mystery  enwraps  a  little  spot  of  light.  But 
while  upon  reflection  we  admit  that  our  knowledge  is  thus  limited,  we  do  not,  I 
think,  commonly  take  account  of  the  momentous  significance  of  the  fact.  Many 
of  us  who  are  ceaselessly  busy  with  our  daily  occupaiions  do  not  habitually  feel  it. 
Many  who  have  distinctly  realised  it,  deliberately  put  it  out  of  sight.  That  which 
we  cannot  know  in  the  way  of  earthlv  knowledge  is  for  us,  they  say,  as  if  it  were 
not.  St.  Paul  follows  a  better  way.  He  teaches  us  to  see  that  these  mysteries,  and 
the  full  sense  of  limitation  which  they  bring  with  them,  are  an  important  factor  in 
our  lives.  He  rounds  life  off  on  this  side  and  that,  not  with  a  sleep,  but  with  the 
glory  of  the  invisible.  And  is  it  not  true  that  we  are  made  stronger  as  well  as 
humbler  by  lifting  up  our  eyes  to  the  sky  which  opens  with  measurable  depths 
above  the  earth  on  which  we  are  set  to  woik?  2.  We  know  in  part.  Tlje  fullest 
recognition  of  this  fact  is  not  only  helpful  but  essential  for  the  fulfilment  of  our 
several  tasks.  The  practical  or  deliberate  disregard  of  this  relation  of  all  our  know- 
ledge to  the  unknown  brings  with  it  urgent  dangers.  On  the  one  hand  we  are 
tempted  to  make  our  own  knowledge,  our  own  thoughts,  our  own  experience,  an 
absolute  standard.  On  the  other  hand  we  are  tempted  to  apply  a  dominant  method 
to  subjects  which  do  not  admit  it.  There  is  no  one,  I  suppose,  who  has  not  been 
sorely  tried  by  both  temptations.  It  requires  a  serious  effort  to  enter  with  a  living 
sympathy  into  the  character  of  another  man,  or  of  another  class,  or  of  another 
nation,  or  of  auDther  course  of  thought :  to  feel,  not  with  a  sense  of  gracious 
superiority  but  of  devout  thankfulness,  that  here  and  there  that  is  supplied  which 
we  could  not  have  provided :  to  acknowledge  how  peculiar  gifts  or  a  peculiar 
environraeut,  how  long  discipline  or  an  intense  struggle,  have  conferred  upon  others 
the  power  of  seeing  that  which  we  cannot  tee.  But  it  is  to  breadth  of  hope,  to  self- 
denial,  to  patience  that  we  are  called,  as  those  who  believe  and  seek  to  live  as 
believing  tliat  we  know  in  part.  The  immediate  circumstances  in  which  we  are 
placed  need,  as  we  must  feel,  the  exercise  of  such  graces.  There  is  on  all  sides  an 
overpowering  passion  t<x  clearness,  for  decision,  for  results  which  can  be  measured 
on  demand.  Art  and  history  are  trammeled  by  realisim.  A  restless  anxiety  for  ful- 
ness and  supei facial  accuracy  of  detail  diverts  the  forces  which  should  be  given  to 
an  interpretation  of  the  life.  We  begin  to  think  that  when  we  can  picture  to  our- 
selves the  outside  of  things  we  have  mastered  them.  So  it  is  also  in  many  respects 
with  opinion.  We  are  told  that  we  must  make  our  choice  definitely  between  this 
extreme  and  that  ;  that  there  can  be  no  mean  ;  that  a  logical  necessity  demands 
one  precise  conclusion  or  the  other.  In  tbis  way  we  lose  insensibly  the  present 
consciousness  of  the  great  deeps  of  life.  Portraiture  becomes  photography,  and 
faith  is  represented  by  a  phrase.  The  reflections  from  the  mirror,  the  shadows  on. 
the  wall  of  the  cave,  are  taken  for  the  realiti^-s  which  these  fleeting  signs  should 
move  us  to  seek.  There  is  no  outline  in  nature,  however  convenient  or  even  n^ces- 
sary  we  may  find  it  to  draw  one.  A  closer  view  of  this  one-sided  and  dominant 
realism,  whicli  is  characteristic  of  our  generation,  shows  what  is  at  once  its  final 
issue  and  its  remedy.  For  it  is  not  fanciful,  I  think,  to  connect  it  with  the  great 
successes  of  the  method  of  physical  inquiry.  We  try,  perhaps  even  withdut  know- 
ing of  what  spirit  we  are,  to  make  the  same  method  supreme  over  all  knowledge. 
Meanwhile  we  are  ne-jlecting  a  different  lesson  which  physics  have  to  teach  us  and 
which  we  have  not  yet  learnt.  However  paradoxical  the  statement  may  appear, 
physical  study  more  than  any  other  brings  the  invisible  vividly  before  us.  The 
world  of  the  man  of  science  is  not  the  scene  of  conflict  and  disorder  which  we  look 
upon  with  our  untrained  eyes,  but  an  order  of  absolute  law  which  he  finds  by  the 
interpretation  of  a  larger  experience.  He  pierces  beneath  the  seen  to  that  which  it 
indicates.  So  far  he  has  read  the  thought  of  God.  His  partial  knowledge  is  a  sign 
for  the  moralist  and  for  the  theologian.  3.  We  know  in  part.  We  have  seen  that 
acceptance  of  this  fact  enables  us  to  n:\eet  and  to  use  the  dangers  and  the  lessons  of 
limited  views.  The  same  words  describe  the  iDrocess  by  which  our  efforts  are  made 
effective.  We  advance  towards  the  limits  of  our  attainable  knowledge  by  the  help 
of  every  fragmentary  movement.  We  look  upon  the  fullest  vision  of  the  truth  in 
the  combination  of  parts  held  separately.  This  is  the  Divine  law  of  spiritual  pro- 
gress and  of  spiritual  apprehension.  It  is  not  that  any  one  mind  or  any  one  race 
can  evolve  the  last  deductions  from  the  primal  facts.     The  manifold  endowments 


CHAP.  XIII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  279 

of  the  nations  are  made  contributory  in  due  order  to  t1ie  unfolding  of  the  universal 
gospel.  The  history  of  Judaism  and  the  history  of  Christianity  jDrove  the  truth 
beyond  doubt.  Spiritu>il  knowledge  and  with  it  spiritual  life  is  furthered  by  the 
introduction  into  it  of  new  elements  from  without.  The  seed  which  has  the  prin- 
ciple of  life  gathers  from  all  around  that  by  which  the  life  is  manifested  in  the 
fulness  of  its  beauty.  It  has  often  been  pointed  out  how  every  critical  stage  in  the 
progress  of  earlier  revelation  was  marked  by  the  action  of  new  races  upon  the 
people  of  God.  Assyria,  Persia,  Greece,  Rome,  quickened  fresh  thoughts  in  Israel, 
and  brought  to  light  fresh  mysteries  in  the  Law.  The  Son  of  Man  entered  on  the 
patrimony  of  the  race  made  ready  for  His  use.  The  course  of  Christianity  up  to  the 
present  time  exhibits  the  accomplishment  of  the  same  law  on  a  larger  scale  and 
with  a  more  pervading  application.  Judaism  was  limited  and  preparatory.  The 
Divine  Presence  was  symbolised  for  the  fathers  by  a  cloud  or  by  a  glory.  But 
Christianity  is  absolute  and  final.  For  us  the  Divine  Presence  is  "  the  Word  mude 
flesh,"  "  the  man  Christ  Jesus."  It  is  no  longer  any  part  of  man,  or  any  part  of 
mankind  to  which  the  mes-age  of  God  is  addressed  or  entrusted.  The  experience 
of  our  own  lives  offers  an  illustration  of  this  growth  through  assimilation  and  loss. 
The  unfolding  of  our  separate  powers  is  able  to  bring  home  to  us  what  is  fulfilled 
on  a  colossal  scale  in  the  broad  history  of  human  progress.  One  faculty  after 
another  is  called  into  dominant  activity,  and  yields  in  its  turn  to  some  fresh 
claimant.  And  here  comes  the  trial  of  faith.  We  are  tempted,  as  it  may  be,  to  linger 
■with  a  vain  regret  round  that  which  is  ready  to  vanish  away  or  to  hasten  pre- 
maturely the  advent  of  that  which  is  not  yet  mature.  But  the  faith  deals  witn  all 
in  a  process  of  life.  The  conviction  that  every  result,  every  triumph,  every  prize  is 
given  us  to  use  and  not  to  keep,  saves  us  from  the  peril  of  stationariness  and  from 
the  peril  of  innovation.  He  cannot  rest  who  knows  that  the  counsel  of  God  is  not 
yet  accomplished.  4.  And  surely  this  paradox  is  the  very  joy  of  life.  We  know 
all :  and  we  have  still  much  to  learn.  Our  strength  is  to  feel  that  the  end  which 
is  given  to  us  is  not  yet  gained.  As  long  as  there  is  movement  there  is  hope. 
Because  the  central  fact  of  our  faith  reaches  to  the  utmost  bounds  of  our  being  : 
because  to  the  last  our  knowledge  is  limited,  we  bring  together  with  loving  rever- 
ence all  that  has  been  accumulated  in  the  past,  and  we  stand  ready  to  welcome  the 
new  light  which  shall  reveal  the  old  treasures  in  fresh  glory.  It  is  not  strange  then 
that  there  should  at  all  times  be  difficulties.  Difficulties  guide  men  to  new  ref^ions 
of  work  for  Christ's  sake.  We  can  feel,  I  repeat,  in  these  different  directions,  in 
the  spheres  of  personal  life,  of  human  fellowship,  of  cosmical  dependence,  how  our 
partial  knowledge  witnesses  to  the  existence  of  regions  of  vital  energy  not  es.'-entially 
unattainable  but  hitherto  necessarily  unexplored  :  we  can  feel  that  the  darkest 
riddles  of  life  lose  their  final  gloom  when  we  refuse  to  acknowledge  that  their  solu- 
tion must  be  found  in  the  facts  which  we  have  been  so  far  able  to  grasp  :  we  can 
feel  that  the  gospel  of  Christ  incarnate  and  ascended  deals  with  these  latest  question- 
ings not  by  accident  or  by  accomivodation,  but  in  its  inmost  nature :  we  can  feel  as  the 
problems  rise  before  us  that  our  historic  creed  contains  the  answer  to  them,  though 
it  has  not  yet  been  drawn  out,  that  our  needs  have  not  been  left  uncared  for  by 
eternal  love,  that  it  is  through  the  sternest  searchings  of  heurt  that  the  growing 
fulness  of  the  truth  is  realised.  The  sorest  trial  of  very  many  now  is  the  sad 
suspicion  that  Christianity  does  not  cover  all  which  we  know  to  be.  Peihaps  we 
have  given  colour  to  the  fear  by  our  own  narrowness  of  SMnpathy.  But  from  the 
first  it  was  not  so.  And  it  is  true  still,  true  alwavs,  that  our  faith  conquers  not  by 
the  suppression  or  by  the  dissimulation  of  difficulties,  but  by  interpreting  them  or  by 
placing  them  in  their  right  relation  to  what  we  see  of  the  whole  constitution  and 
circumstances  of  the  world.  We  do  not  then  appeal  to  ignorance,  but  to  the  condi- 
tions of  a  partial  knowledge  :  we  do  not  transfer  our  hope  to  an  imaginary  scene, 
but  find  the  pledge  of  its  fulfilment  in  a  completer  revelation  of  this  in  which  we 
toil  and  suffer :  we  do  not  offer  any  intellectual  formulas  as  exhaustive  and  abso- 
lute, but  we  claim  that  now  and  at  all  times  the  faith  should  he  regarded  in  connec- 
tion with  every  human  interest ;  we  do  not  affirm  the  limitation  of  knowledge  as  a 
bar  to  inquiry,  but  as  a  bar  to  finality.  We  know  in  part.  1.  The  wot ds  are  a 
consolation.  No  one  has  ever  set  before  himself  a  high  ideal  of  work  for  the  truth's 
sake  without  sadly  noting  at  the  close  of  his  labour  the  scantiness  of  his  achieve- 
ments. His  difficulties,  perhaps,  have  grown  clearer,  but  they  have  not  grown  less. 
At  last  he  finds  himself  left  face  to  face  with  mysteries,  which  appear  in  the  form  of 
irreconcilable  cipposites.  The  fundamental  mystery  of  his  finite  being  responsible 
to  the  Infinite  repeats  itself  in  many  forms.     'Ihere  is  no  escape  from  conditions  of 


280  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xiii, 

thought  which  he  feels  to  be  inapplicable  to  spiritual  existences.  Happy  is  he  only 
when  he  knows  that  what  he  sees,  what  he  can  see,  is  but  a  fragment  of  that  glory 
which  all  the  powers  of  all  the  ages  will  not  exhaust  in  its  fulness.  We  inherit  and 
we  transmit  our  inheritance  to  others,  with  the  slender  accessions  we  have  made. 
So  it  is  that  we  are  bound  one  to  another,  and  while  we  contend  to  the  uttermost 
for  the  truth  which  is  given  to  us,  we  find  a  place  opened  for  other  labourers.  2. 
They  are  a  promise.  The  knowledge  is  partial,  but  the  object  is  not  illusory.  We 
may  not  be  able  to  see  much,  but  the  appearances  which  we  observe  answer  to 
something  which  is  eternal.  Tliis  convicttion  is  sufficient  to  inspire  us  with  hope. 
We  are  so  constituted  that  we  cannot  but  group  together  the  scattered  facts  which 
come  before  us,  and  interpret  them  in  some  fashion.  Looking  to  them  we  can 
cherish  the  signs  of  a  wider  order  in  the  moral  world  which  has  not  yet  been 
realised.  3.  They  are  a  prophecy.  Now  we  see  in  a  mirror  darkly,  but  then  face 
to  face.  The  mode  of  knowledge  will  be  changed,  but  He  who  is  revealed  in  many 
parts  and  in  many  ways  is  Himself  unchangeable.  Perfect  knowledge  now  would 
be  the  sentence  of  spiritual  death  :  "  the  whole  can  increase  no  more,  is  dwarfed 
and  dies."  But,  let  us  thank  God,  we  know  in  part ;  and  we  know  Him  that  is  true. 
We  do  not  rest  in  what  we  are,  or  in  what  we  can  attain  to,  but  in  what  God  is,  in 
whose  image  we  are  made.  (Bp.  Westcott.)  Knowledge  in  part : — In  guarding 
our  talk  thus,  we  are  helped  by  the  analogies  of  those  who  know  less  than  we  do, 
and  who  cannot  know  as  much  as  we  do.  A  blind  man,  for  instance,  does  not 
know  as  much  about  colour  as  people  who  see.  Nor  does  a  man  who  is  colour- 
blind. They  may  imagine  what  colour  is,  and  they  can  talk  about  their  imagina- 
tions. But  they  must  not  prophesy.  That  is,  they  must  not  proclaim  the  truth 
about  colour.  They  do  not  know  what  the  truth  is,  and  they  do  not  even  know 
the  meaning  of  the  words  they  use.  The  analogy  with  our  ignorance  is  precise. 
For  su£h  people  sometimes  think  they  know.  In  the  same  direction  is  the  advance 
which  mankind  has  made  since  those  prehistoric  days  of  the  cave-dweller.  If  to  the 
poor  savage  of  the  limited  experience  of  that  early  time  I  said,  "  Your  God  can  give 
at  the  same  instant  His  present  command  to  you  who  are  here  and  to  other  men 
on  the  other  side  of  the  world,"  he  would  hardly  understand  my  language ;  and,  so 
far  as  he  did  understand  it,  he  would  tell  me  I  lied.  In  the  first  place,  he  would 
not  know  what  I  meant  by  the  other  side  of  the  world.  In  the  second  place,  he 
would  say  that  one  God  could  not  be  in  two  places.  But,  \\ith  the  steady  progress 
of  the  world,  all  this  changes.  Any  telegraph  boy  sees  one  will  acting  in  a  dozen 
places,  and  his  imagination  and  conception  carry  him  into  a  much  wider  range 
than  that  which  he  sees.  On  a  thousand  lines  the  world  understands  that  it  has 
advanced  from  that  feeble  knowledge  of  that  savage  life.  Just  so  far  as  it  under- 
stands this,  does  the  same  world  make  out  that  it  knows  only  in  part  now,  and 
looks  forward,  with  a  confi  lence  akin  to  certaiuty,  to  a  coming  time  and  a  larger 
life,  in  which  it  shall  know  more.  All  such  instances  from  history  help  us  in  our 
lives  of  to-day,  and  in  looking  forward  for  to-morrow.  History,  indeed,  is  always 
useless,  unless  we  extort  from  it  such  lessons.  If  the  cave-dweller  or  tl'e  Eskimo 
of  to-day  knew  only  in  part  what  s^'ems  wholly  necessary  to  your  life  and  mine,  in 
just  the  same  fashion  is  it  probable — it  is  well-nigh  certain — that  where  I  know 
only  in  part  there  is  more  knowledge  which  my  successors  will  have  — nay,  which 
I  myself  may  have,  in  a  life  not  cumbered  by  this  body.     (E.  E.  Hale,  D.D.) 

Vers.  9,  10.  We  know  in  part,  and  we  prophesy  in  part. — We  kiio2o  in  part : — 
I.  The  imperfection  of  ouk  knowledge.  1.  We  know  but  little.  2.  That  little  is 
mixed  with  much  error.  3.  Includes  much  that  is  useless.  4.  Is  very  imperfectly 
apprehended.  II.  Its  causes.  1.  Intellectual.  2.  Physical.  3.  Moial.  III.  Its 
LESS0N.3.  1.  Humility.  2.  Docility.  3.  Distrust  of  our  own  understanding. 
4.  Hope.  {J.  Lijtli,  D.D.)  We  kitoiv  in  part  .-  —  The  apostle  says  this  not  simply 
of  the  "  wisdom  of  this  worid,"  but  of  Divinely-given  knowledge.  A  reverence 
not  according  to  knowledge  has  led  Christians  to  forget  this,  and  to  argue  as  if 
inspired  writers  gave  us  tinal  and  complete  knowledge  about  the  ways  of  God. 
This  is  not  so,  and  hence  much  that  is  trapmentary  even  in  Scripture,  and  repre- 
sentations which  cannot  be  harni'iiiised  yet.  I.  The  part  we  do  not  know— by 
far  the  greater  part :  and  the  more  we  know,  the  more  we  seem  not  to  know — as 
the  outside  of  a  circle  gets  larger  as  the  inside  is  increised.  Only  bef.'inners  are 
proud  of  their  acquirements  ;  discoverers,  who  stand  upon  the  boundaries  of 
human  knowledge,  gazing  with  earnest  eyes  over  the  boundless  untrodden  region 
beyond,  feel  themselves  unable  to  spell  out  the  very  alphabet  of  the  universe  of 


CHAP,  xiit.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  281 

God.  1.  What  do  we  know  abont  the  material  world?  Men  observe  that  things 
have  certain  appearances,  and  tliat  changes  occur  with  a  certain  regularity  ;  but 
why  they  appear  so,  and  how  the  e  changes  take  place,  which  obviously  are  the 
most  important  points  to  understnnd,  helong  to  the  part  we  do  not  know.  Why  a 
star  moves  or  a  plant  grows,  it  is  useless  to  ask  an  astronomer  or  a  botanist.  2.  So 
in  the  spiritual  world.  Plow  much  fif  goodness  and  how  much  of  trial  make  up 
the  facts  and  events  of  our  lives  !  But  what  can  we  know  al)out  them — how  they 
come,  and  why  ?  What  an  amount  of  ingenuity  we  spend  upon  these  questions, 
and  how  much  are  we  perplexed  !  But  vain  are  our  endeavours  to  get  at  the  mean- 
ing. 3.  It  is  the  same  in  i-egard  to  the  great  facts  of  the  Christian  revelation. 
"  Jesus  Christ  came  into  tlie  world  to  save  sinners."  Why  was  that  necessary  ? 
How  was  it  possible?  That  is  the  part  we  do  not  know;  nnd  we  must  content 
ourselves,  liaving  appropriate  evidence,  with  the  fact  that  it  is  so.  Paul's  eauer 
mind  did  indeed  press  against  the  furthest  boundaries  of  inspiied  knowledge;  but 
he  once  stopped  with,  "  O  the  depth  of  the  riclies,"  &c.,  and  then  turned  to 
practical  matters.  11.  Tiik  part  we  do  know.  It  is  natural  to  us  to  appreciate 
what  we  lack,  and  to  undervalue  what  we  have.  In  this,  as  in  other  respects,  we 
are  but  children  of  a  larger  growth.  As  a  thousand  natural  wonders  and  beaut.es 
lie  at  our  feet  which  we  have  not  eyes  attentive  enough  to  see,  or  minds  awake 
enough  to  study,  or  hearts  big  enough  to  love  :  so  with  the  marvels  of  Christ  and 
Christianity,  of  which  our  tongues  often  speak  parrot-like  in  hymns  and  prayers, 
yet  the  rich  significance  of  which  we  seldom  feel.  Our  prayer  should  be,  "  Lord, 
open  thou  mine  eyes,  that  I  may  behold  wondrous  things  out  of  Thy  law."  (T.  M. 
Herbert,  M.A.)  We  know  in  part : — We  wish  we  knew  more.  To  api^reciate 
the  fact  that  we  know  but  little,  and  to  understand  some  of  the  reasons  why,  will 
help  us  to  be  more  reconciled  to  our  own  ignorance  and  to  that  of  others,  and  will 
contribute  to  remove  some  of  the  obstacles  that  lie  in  the  way  of  a  completer 
knowledge.  I.  We  are  born  with  an  eye  graduated  to  some  particular  tr^tii  ok 
TRUTHS,  and  not  with  a  vision  that  spreads  itself  with  equal  facility  over  all  truths. 
1.  It  is  no  fault  of  ours  that  we  cannot  see  the  Southern  Cross.  That  constellation 
does  not  form  part  of  the  heavens  under  which  God  intended  us  to  live.  If  it  had 
fallen  to  our  lot  to  dwell  in  Patagonia,  then  we  should  have  lived  under  its  blaze, 
and  it  would  then  Lave  been  impossible  for  us  to  make  out  the  Great  Bear.  No 
eye  is  able  to  see  everything,  and  each  eye  has  an  outlook  of  its  own.  2.  Truth  is 
like  a  diamond,  and  you  must  shift  your  position  in  order  to  catch  the  particular 
flash  from  each  individual  facet ;  which  is  what  in  the  matter  of  truth  we  do  not 
and  cannot  do.  We  can  migrate  from  latitude  to  latitude,  and  skip  from  street  to 
street ;  but  as  regards  truth,  we  can  change  neither  our  nationality  nor  our 
address;  truth  is  fixed,  and  we  are  born  fixed  in  our  relation  to  it.  We  are 
individually  created  into  a  specific  angle  with  the  truth.  Truth  individualis  s 
itself  to  each  eye  and  makes  only  minute  donations  to  each.  It  is  with  us  in  this 
respect  much  as  it  is  with  objects  in  their  relation  to  a  sunbeam,  where  one  sort  of 
material  will  pull  the  blue  out  of  it ;  another  the  green  ;  another  the  red,  and  so 
on  through  the  entire  bundle  of  colour  bound  up  in  a  white  ray.  In  the  same  way, 
each  mind  picks  the  particular  truth  that  is  native  to  it.  3.  It  is  the  way  we  are 
made.  It  has  its  advantages  ;  some  one  aspect  of  truth  we  have  power  to  take 
hold  of  and  to  feel  keenly.  It  results  in  each  man  having  his  own  little  patch  of 
truth  to  cultivate,  and  by  that  means  he  doubtless  gets  more  produce  on  to  the 
world's  market  than  he  would  do  if  he  had  a  whole  hundred  acre  lot  to  cultivate 
Bcatteringly.  4.  That  ought  to  keep  us  steadily  at  work  on  constructive  lines,  not 
destructive  ones ;  telling  what  little  we  do  see  and  know,  and  letting  the  rest  go. 
A  star  is  not  brilliant  because  I  happen  to  see  it ;  it  is  brilliant  because — it  is 
brilliant.  Exactly  s-o  it  is  of  a  truth.  If  there  is  some  reaUty  that  your  mind 
looks  right  into,  but  that  your  Christ  an  neighbour  has  no  sense  of  and  no  care 
for,  it  is  not  because  he  is  a  theological  idiot,  but  because  your  little  star  does  not 
happen  to  shine  where  he  stands.  II.  We  allow  the  one  particular  bent  that 
WE  are  born  with  to  assert  a  despotism  over  us.  1.  If,  e.g.,  there  is  somn  par- 
ticular truth  of  God's  Word  that  we  have  a  native  bias  for,  we  shall  be  almost 
certain  to  make  that  determine  for  us  the  portions  of  Scriptuie  that  we  shall  admit 
to  our  thought  and  our  confidence;  much  as  the  one  glowing  constellation  tiiat  is 
in  the  direct  range  of  our  vision  will  be  almost  certain  to  prevent  our  scouring 
around  to  delect  others  imperfectly  disclosed.  2.  The  same  holds  of  other  books 
as  v.ell  as  of  the  Bible.  Look  at  the  library  of  any  Christian  thinker,  and  you 
will  be  able  to  determine  what  his  theological  bent  is.     The  very  particularity  of 


282  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 

his  view  operates  to  keep  it  narrow,  and  his  will  only  be  those  that  he  can  use  as 
whet-stones  upon  which  to  whet  his  particularity  down  to  a  thinner  edge.  3.  Then, 
too,  the  habit  of  thinking  along  some  congenial  line,  not  only  weakens  our  interest 
in  truth  lying  upon  other  lines,  but  sometimes  even  impairs  our  power  of  appreci- 
ating truth  lying  upon  them.  Just  as  a  creature  needs  a  different  bodily  coustruc- 
tion  to  enable  him  to  live  upon  land  from  what  he  does  to  exist  in  water,  so,  to  a. 
certain  degree,  a  different  equipment  is  required  to  live  and  think  in  a  region  of 
spirit  from  what  is  required  to  adapt  one  to  a  world  of  matter ;  and  the  more 
exclusively  we  are  habituated  to  the  former,  the  more  awkward  it  will  make  us 
when  we  undertake  to  make  any  headway  in  the  latter.  Some  of  us  use  our 
scientific  faculties  so  little  that  they  become  aborted  and  we  lose  all  power  to- 
appreciate  scientific  facts.  And  the  converse  of  that  is  equally  true.  4.  So  that 
in  these  days,  when  there  is  being  so  strong  a  pressure  brought  to  bear  in  behalf 
of  those  branches  of  knowledge  that  deal  with  matter  only,  if  you  want  your  boy 
to  be  a  Christian,  see  to  it  that  he  gets  his  mind  trained  in  tho?e  faculties  that  will 
especially  be  called  in  play  in  the  discernment  and  appreciation  of  spiritual  truth. 
III.  By  a  deliberate  act  of  our  own  will  we  veto  the  truth.  1.  Truth  depends 
for  its  power  upon  the  concurrence  of  the  mind  as  much  as  light  depends  for  its 
power  on  the  concurrence  of  the  eye.  A  truth  coming  to  us  always  knocks  at  the 
door  and  then  stands  outside  waiting  till  some  one  comes  and  answers.  No  man 
is  likely  to  be  persuaded  against  his  will.  We  personally  decide  just  how  mucb 
God's  Word  shall  do  for  us  and  how  far  it  shall  go  with  us.  The  preacher  never 
drives  it  in ;  we  let  it  in,  and  just  as  far  as  we  choose.  Good  hearing  is  a  far  more 
difficult  art  than  good  preaching.  2.  Christ  had  perfect  confidence  in  the  truth,, 
and  He  had  just  as  much  confidence  that  when  once  the  heart  had  taken  the  truth 
fairly  in,  something  would  come  of  it;  tbe  parable  of  the  sower  teaches  that.  It 
may  rain  as  bard  as  ever  it  did  in  the  days  of  old  Noah,  but  the  rain  will  start  no- 
grass  so  long  as  the  downpour  falls  on  to  frozen  ground.  IV.  Three  are  certain 
elements  of  Christian  knowledge  that  can  come  only  with  the  years  and  indeed 
WITH  THE  centuries.  1.  Experience  is  tbe  only  perfect  teacher.  We  can  of  course 
crowd  ourselves  with  facts,  but  that  is  not  wisdom.  Wisdom  is  gained  by  the 
process  of  somehow  letting  the  threads  of  truth  weave  tbemselves  into  the  tissue 
of  our  own  life  ;  and  therefore  it  is  not  a  thing  to  be  hurried  any  more  than  yoa. 
can  hurry  the  growing  of  the  corn.  You  will  have  to  visit  the  country  before  ever 
you  will  quite  understand  what  you  have  so  painstakingly  learned.  Experience- 
is  expository ;  the  Bible  illnmiuates  us  but  we  illuminate  the  Bible.  We  make 
the  Bible  ours  by  our  becoming  its.  We  do  not  understand  tbe  publican  until  we 
have  been  on  our  knees  by  bis  side.  We  do  not  fathom  the  story  of  the  prodigal 
until  we  have  returned  from  the  far  country  and  have  known  what  it  is  to  stand  in 
restored  relHtions  with  that  father.  Is  there  any  one  of  us  who  feels  that  he  has. 
more  than  merely  begun  to  understand  this  chapter?  2.  The  simple  change,  too, 
that  comes  with  our  steady  departure  from  childhood  to  manhood  brinfjs  us  on  to- 
a  new  side  of  some  matters.  Perhaps  we  have  found  out  that  life  is  not  what  we 
once  thought  it  was  going  to  be.  Possibly  the  present  is  not  quite  so  real  as  it 
used  to  be,  and  very  likely  the  great  future  is  growing  upon  us.  One  day  I  was 
looking  at  two  large  telescopic  photographs  of  the  moon,  one  taken  when  it  was  at 
its  full,  the  other  a  week  later.  In  the  latter,  some  of  the  mountains  that  showed 
dull  and  lustreless  in  the  earlier  view,  came  out  bright,  as  in  the  meantime  the 
sun  had  passed  along  to  the  point  where  it  could  illumine  the  evening  slopes. 
I  remarked  this  to  the  dealer  whose  hair  had  been  whitened  by  the  years.  "  Yes," 
he  t-aid,  very  quietly,  but  quite  cheerily,  withal,  "  Yes,  tbe  lights  are  very  differently 
arranged  when  you  get  into  tbe  last  quarter."  (C.  H.  Parkhurst,  D.D.) 
Limited  knoirlcdge  : — Knowledge  is  not  always  good.  It  profited  our  first  parents 
little.  God  knew  this  then  and  He  knows  it  now.  Consider — I.  The  assumption 
MADE — "  Now  we  know."  It  is  knowledge  that  makes  man  better  than  the  brute, 
ihat  makes  him  like  God,  that  develops  his  power,  that  is  his  salvation.  We 
know,  indeed,  and  therefore  stand  out  before  the  heathen,  the  Jews,  the  early 
Christians.  We  have  privileges  which  are  peculiarly  our  own,  and  which  none 
have  ever  enjoyed  before.  II.  The  limitation  enforced.  "We  know  in  part." 
Of  all  things  finite,  human  knowledge  is  the  most  limited.  It  is  limited — 1.  In 
its  range.  2.  In  power.  III.  The  significance  implied.  This  stwte  of  limited 
human  knowledge  has  its  purpose.  1.  It  places  us  in  our  own  projjer  position. 
We  are  tempted  to  make  our  own  knowledge  an  absolute  standard.  We  fix  rules 
for   morality,  doctrine ;  we   organise   parties   and  call  them  perfect,  because  we 


CHAP.  XIII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  283 

imagine  our  knowledge  is  perfect ;  but  the  autlioi  s  can  only  see  in  part.  It  requires 
a  serious  effort  to  understand  that,  otiiers  have  the  power  of  seeing  what  we  cannot 
see.     2.    It  alters  the  whole  tone   of    our   spiritual  life   on  earth.     It   should — 

(1)  Remove  fear,  for  what  appears   to  us  to  be   dark  may  in  reality   be   light. 

(2)  Remove  doubt,  for  we  must  trust.  (.3)  Lessen  grief,  for  trials  may  be  blessiugs 
in  dis;iuise.  IV.  The  piuvilege  bestowed.  Our  present  limited  knowledge  is  to- 
some  extent  a  blessing.  1.  It  gives  us  something  to  look  forward  to — "Then we 
shall  know  even  as  we  are  known."  All  mysteri.  s  shall  one  day  be  revealed,  and 
then  all  errors  shall  cease.  2.  It  prevents  much  sorrow.  How  fearful  to  know  all 
that  is  before  us!  3.  It  engages  our  thoughts  on  the  practical  rather  than  the 
theoretical.  Love  is  the  practical  duty  at  present ;  for  we  can  love  even  if  we 
cannot  know.  [J,  J.  S.  Bird,  M.A.)  Partial  knnwledrie  : — There  is  a  partial 
knowledge  tbat  is — I.  A  necessity.  The  knowledge  of  the  highest  creature 
must  by  the  necessity  of  nature  be  partial.  What  he  knows  is  as  nothing 
compared  with  the  knowable,  still  less  with  the  unknowable.  "Who  by 
searching  can  find  out  God?"  II.  A  calamity.  Our  necessary  ignorance  is 
not  a  calamity,  but  a  benediction.  It  acts  as  a  stimulus.  But  ignorance  of 
knowable  things  must  be  ever  a  disadvantage.  Ignorance  of  ethics,  political 
eco  omy,  laws  of  >ienlth,  religion,  entails  incalculable  injuries.  Ignorance 
of  these  tidngs  is  the  night,  the  winter  of  intellect.  III.  Sinful.  A  partial 
knowledge  of  our  moral  condition,  the  claims  of  God,  the  means  of  redemp- 
tion, where  a  fuller  knowledge  is  attainable,  is  a  sin.  Ignorance  of  Christ  in  a 
land  of  churches  and  Bibles  is  a  sin,  and  that  of  no  ordinary  Leinousne-s.  It  is 
a  calamity  to  heathens,  it  is  a  crime  to  us.  IV.  Beneficent.  Our  ignorance  of 
our  future  is  a  blessing.  Were  the  whole  of  our  future  to  he  spread  out  before  us, 
with  all  its  tria  s.  sorrows,  death,  life  would  become  intolerable;  it  is  mercy  ttiat 
has  woven  the  veil  that  hides  the  futnre.  Conclusion  :  Our  partinl  knowledye 
should  make  us  humlde,  studious,  undogmatic,  devout.  {D.  Thoiitun,  D.D.) 
Our  partial  kiioicledge  is  : — I.  A  discipline  to  diligence.  1.  We  require  our 
children  to  know,  and  then  we  give  them,  not  the  knowledge  that  they  seek,  but 
the  key  of  that  knowledge.  Doubtless  the  teacher  imparts  kuowlelge,  but  his 
greater  funcion  is  in  wisely  keeping  it  back  until  it  is  fairly  won.  So  God  teaches 
without  telling;  sets  tilluring  objects  of  knowledse  almost  within  sight  and  reach  ; 
sets  ajar  the  doors  of  science,  and  writes  up,  "  Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive,"  &c.  2, 
And  no  faithful  si  eker  seeks  in  vain.  Perhaps  he  fiu'^s  somewhat  other  than  he 
sought,  as  Saul  sought  the  straying  asses  and  found  a  kingdom.  Men  sought  by 
alchemy  for  the  philosopher's  stone,  the  elixir  of  life,  &c.,  and  found  them  not,, 
but  found  marvellous  things  in  the  quest,  and  by  and  by  found  themselves  at  the 
sp  endid  portals  of  the  great  treasure-house  of  modern  chemistry.  Geography 
exploied  unknown  seas  for  a  new  route  to  Cipango  and  Cathay,  and  lo !  a  new 
continent  was  given  as  her  reward.  Astrology  adventurtd  out  vaguely  among  the 
stars,  sleeking  she  knew  not  what,  and  became  trai.stigured  into  astronomy.  3. 
But  ever  wilh  what  is  given  is  something  yet  reseivtd.  Each  new  discovery 
disci  ses  new  questions  yet  to  be  answered.  And  what  is  true  in  the  study  of 
material  things  is  even  more  impressively  true  in  the  higher  study  of  man,  and 
duty,  and  God.  "  Ye  shall  know,  if  ye  shall  follow  on  to  know  the  Lord.''  II. 
A  discipline  to  humility  and  patience.  And  so  good  a  discipline  is  it  that  they 
who  have  learned  the  most  are  commonly  the  humblest,  for  they  know  how 
inadequate  their  knowledge  is.  For  running  through  the  very  midst  of  human 
life,  in  its  most  intimate  concerns,  is  a  line  of  unanswerable  questions.  Along  the 
seam  between  will  and  motive,  foreknowledge  and  respimsibility,  eternity  and 
time,  spirit  and  matter,  the  absolute  and  the  conditioned,  are  ranged  the  anti- 
nomies over  which  the  only  wisdom  is  to  despair  and  be  patient.  And  that  is  the 
wisdom  which  after  these  six  thousand  years  of  discipline,  theology  and  i^hilo- 
sophy  are  only  now  at  last  beginning  to  learn.  III.  A  Disciia.iNb:  to  charity 
towards  others  whose  knowledge  is  yet  more  nnrrowly  limited  or  is  on  a  different 
side  from  ours.  We  are  vexed  at  their  narrowness,  and  do  not  think  wliat  reason 
we  gice  them  or  others  to  be  vexed  at  ours.  Prob  ibly  none  of  us  are  aware  where 
our  knowledge  is  nearest  akin  to  ignorance  and  error.  Likely  enough  it  is  at  the 
very  point  wlieie  we  are  most  positive.  We  need,  as  a  training  in  charity,  to 
♦'  look  upon  the  things  of  otiiers  "  as  well  as  "  upon  our  own  things."  Vinet  says, 
"  The  men  of  two  hundred  years  hence  will  be  looking  back  with  astonishment  on 
some  monstro'  s  error  that  was  unconsciously  held  by  the  best  Christians  of  the 
nineteenth  century."     This  is  the  constant  story  of  the  past.     And  it  is  right  that 


,284  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

we  should  be  reminded  of  it ;  not  that  we  should  cease  to  hold  the  truth  or  hold 
it  with  timorous  or  hesitating  grasp,  but  that  we  should  learn  to  hold  the  truth  no 
longer  in  unrighteousness  or  in  self-righteousness,  but  in  love.  IV.  A  discipline 
TO  FAITH.  We  speak  of  a  man  of  great  and  settled  faith,  meaning  a  learned, 
confident  theologian,  who  has  surveyed  and  triangulated  the  whole  field  of  sacred 
knowledge.  Eternity,  Trinity,  Atonement,  all  these  are  quite  clear  and  definite 
to  him.  Nay,  rather,  he  is  a  man,  so  far  as  this  goes,  of  no  faith  at  all.  He 
has  not  the  necessary  antecedent  condition  of  faith  that  should  bring  hnn  to  the 
feet  of  the  great  Teacher,  and  to  lay  his  hand  in  tliat  of  the  only  Guide.  And 
you  who,  vexed  by  doubts  and  uncertainties  and  limitations,  have  been  wont  to 
say,  "  But  for  these  I  might  believe,"  learn  now  to  speak  in  a  higher  strain,  and 
say,  "  In  spite  of  these — no  ;  because  of  these  I  must — I  do  believe.  To  whom 
can  I  go  but  to  Him  who  hath  the  words  of  eternal  life  ?  Blessed  be  God,  who 
hath  fenced  up  my  way  of  knowledge  that  so  I  might  learn  to  feel  for  the  leading 
of  His  hand,  and  wallv  by  faith,  not  by  sight."  V.  A  discipline  to  hope.  It  is 
not  for  always,  this  which  is  in  part,  even  though  it  is  expedient  for  us  now.  It  is 
the  dimness  which  turns  our  mind  toward  the  day-star  and  the  coining  dawn. 
This  hunger  and  thirst  unsatisfied  are  a  continual  promise  of  the  coming  time 
when  I  shall  be  filled.  In  this  mood  I  can  well  afford  to  await  that  glorious  time 
for  which  I  am  not  yet  prepared,  but  for  which  God  is  preparing  me,  when  that 
which  is  perfect  shall  have  come  and  these  things  which  are  in  part  sijall  be  done  away 
— when  I  shall  see  face  to  face  and  know  even  as  I  am  known.  (L.  W.  Bacon,  D.D.) 
Present  defect  and  future  perfection: — I.  A  statement  of  present  defect.  1.  The  gifts 
themselves.  (1)  The  knowledge  is  not  ordinary  but  extraordinary,  being  the  effect 
of  supernatural  influence  (chap.  xii.  8).  (2)  The  gift  of  prophecy  comprehended 
much.  Sometimes  it  meant  the  power  of  foretelling  future  events  ;  sometimes 
celebrating  the  praises  of  God  by  a  Divine  afflatus ;  sometimes  the  power  of 
teaching  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel  by  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God. 
So  it  means  here.  (3)  We  may,  however,  apply  the  terms  to  that  more  ordinary 
knowledge  and  teaching  which  is  the  present  qualification  of  all  who  have 
received  the  Spirit  and  have  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  of  God.  This  is  know- 
ledge which  none  can  possibly  surpass,  and  which  very  few  can  equal,  2.  The 
imperfection  ascribed  to  these  gifts.  (1)  The  Spirit  of  God  never  gave  a  full 
development  of  all  His  revelations.  Even  the  apostles  themselves  did  not  know 
all  that  it  was  possible  to  know  respecting  Jesus  Christ.  Paul,  with  all  his  know- 
ledge, says,  "  I  have  suffered  the  loss  of  all  things — that  I  may  know  Him."  And 
as  the  knowledge  was  impeifect,  so  was  the  prophecy.  The  inspired  apostle  found 
himself  on  the  shore  of  a  boundless  ocean,  and  exclaimed,  "  O  the  depth  of  the 
riches  I  "  &c.  (2)  And  so  to  us  the  same  imperfection  attaches  most  strongly. 
The  pride  of  our  nature  maj'  induce  us  to  imagine  otherwise  ;  but  that  i^ride  will 
veiy  soon  be  checked.  The  man  who  has  studied  the  hardest,  who  has  heen  most 
frequently  wrapt  into  visions  of  future  times — even  he  must  still  say,  "I  know  in 
part — I  prophesy  in  part."  And  I  would  ask  a  Ciu-istian  of  the  highest  class,  if 
any  illuminations,  in  which  he  has  been  enabled  hitherto  to  rejoice,  have  permitted 
him  yet  to  say,  "  That  which  is  perfect  is  come  "  ?  Consider  what  you  knovv  of 
God — of  His  government  of  the  universe,  of  the  councils  of  His  will,  and  of  the 
connection  of  these  with  His  actions — and  then  say  how  incomj^lete  is  your  know- 
ledge !  Consider  what  you  know  of  the  mediatorial  influence  of  Christ — of  the 
full  transformation  of  the  soul  into  His  image — of  the  future  state.  You  have,  it 
is  true,  facts  t  >  believe,  but  you  cannot  comprehend  their  fulness  ;  you  study,  you 
meditate,  you  explore — but  .>ou  are  soon  lost;  and  you  come  to  the  conclusion,  "I 
know  in  part. "  (3)  And  then  some  will  say,  "  Where  there  is  so  much  uiyNtery, 
there  should  be  no  faiih."  But  if  you  will  reason  thus  on  religion,  extend  your 
reasoning  to  life,  to  liature,  to  all  aiound  yon.  You  know  that  you  live  ;  you  sit, 
you  think,  you  hear,  you  sj)eak  ;  but  how  soon  will  you  find  your  knowledge,  even 
on  these  subjects,  limiteu  and  nonplussed!  Here  we  must  be  content  to  see 
imperfectly — to  comprehend  as  in  enigma.  We  can  only  stand  as  it  were  on  the 
threshold  of  the  temple  ;  it  is  in  the  future  age  that  the  veil  will  be  rent,  that  the 
inner  sanctuary  will  be  open  to  our  gaze,  and  the  fire  that  burns  on  the  jiolden 
altar  revealed.  3.  The  reasons  on  vhich  this  imperfection  is  founded.  (1)  Man's 
moral  pollution.  The  mcst  sinful  are  always  tht- most  ignorant.  Adam  hy  trans- 
gression lost  much  of  his  knowledge  ;  and  in  pioportion  as  transgression  increased, 
ignorance  abounded.  Sin  has  a  tendency  to  pervert  the  imatination,  and  forms  an 
hindrance  in  the  way  of  attainiiig  the  pure  and  sublime  knowledge  of  religion.     (2) 


CHAP.  XIII.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  285 

Man's  intellectual  weakness.  Tbere  is  much  in  Divine  knowledge  that  we  have 
not  a  capacity  for  knowing.  Engaged  as  we  all  are  on  material  objects,  and  able 
to  see  only  through  the  medium  of  our  senses,  what  wonder  is  it  if  we  be  compelled 
to  confess,  "  We  know  in  part  "  ?  (3)  The  desij<ns  of  God  in  connection  with 
man's  present  and  future  state.  It  is  not  the  design  of  God  that  we  should  know 
all.  The  future  state  is  to  make  up  for  the  defects  of  the  present.  It  is  this 
which  makes  heaven  an  object  of  such  ardent  desire  to  the  Christian.  II.  An 
ANTICIPATION  OF  FUTURE  PEKFECTiox.  1.  In  regard  to  some  future  state  of  the 
Church  upon  earth.  Look  at  the  Church  in  our  own  day  ;  see  how  abundantly  our 
information  has  increased.  Yet  the  Church  is  now  in  a  very  imperfect  state  com- 
pared with  what  it  shall  be  in  the  last  days;  then  "many  shall  run  to  and  fro, 
and  knowledge  shall  be  increased."  None  shall  say  to  his  neighbour  or  his 
brother,  "  Know  the  Lord,"  &c.  2.  In  reference  to  tiie  state  of  the  Church  in 
heaven.  Then  it  will  be  truly  said,  "  Tliat  which  is  perfect  is  come."  (1)  A  per- 
fection of  purity.  (2)  Of  ijower.  (3)  Of  knowledge.  (4)  Of  happiness.  (J. 
Parsons.)  Present   iiiiperffction   and  future  perfection: — Observe  —  I.    The 

IMPERFECTION  OF  OUR  PRESENT  CONDITION.  1.  Gifts  are  but  partially  distributed. 
2.  Are  imperfect.  3.  Are  adapted  to  a  state  of  imperfection.  II.  The  perfection 
OF  HEAVEN.  1.  Certainly  anticipnted.  2.  Implies  tbe  removal  of  all  imperfection 
and  its  causes.  3.  The  consummation  of  our  nature  and  its  consequent  happiness. 
(J.  Lijth,  D.D.) 

Ver.  10.  But  when  that  wliich  is  perfect  is  come,  then  that  which  is  in  part 
shall  be  done  away. — The  perfect  state: — I.  What  hope  have  we  of  it?  1. 
Foun^led  on  human  instinct.  2.  Confirmed  by  revelation.  3.  Secured  by  faith. 
II.  What  relief  will  it  bring  ?  1.  The  removal  of  all  defect.  2.  Consequently 
of  all  sorrow.  III.  What  happiness  does  it  promise  ?  The  perfection  of  our 
condition.  1.  Physical.  2.  Intellef:tual.  3.  Moral.  4.  Social.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
The  Christian  doctrine  of  the  perfectibility  of  man  : — I.  Futurity  is  the  great- 
ness OF  man,  and  hereafter  is  the  grand  scene  for  the  atiainment  of  the 
fulness  of  his  existence.  1.  When  depressed  by  conscious  littleness  of  being, 
yet  feeling  that  he  should  not  be  little,  man  may  look  to  futurity  and  exclaim,  "  I 
shall  be  great  \onder  !  the  immense  futurity  is  mine  !  I  may  be  content  to  be  poor 
awhile  in  the  prospect  of  that !  "  2.  It  is  most  gratifying  to  see  the  Divine  reve- 
lation connecting  the  condition  of  perfectiou,  on  any  terms,  in  any  sense,  at  any 
future  period,  with  human  nature.  Looking  at  man,  we  seem  to  see  a  vast 
collection  of  little  beginnings,  attempts,  failures — ^so  that  the  perfectibility  of  man 
is  ridiculed  as  one  of  the  follies  of  philosophic  romance.  Then  how  delightful  is  it 
to  see  revelation  itself,  pronouncing  it  as  possible  1  3.  This  j^'edictiou  of  some- 
thing "  perfect"  to  come,  relates  to  knowledge.  This  is  somewhat  surprising.  It 
seems  much  more  easy  to  conceive  of  perfection  in  holiness.  But  knowledge  is 
not  a  state  of  the  dispositions,  but  an  intellectual  relation  with  anything  which  can 
come  within  the  sphere  of  its  apprehension.  All  things  in  the  stupendous  totality 
of  existence  are  subjects  for  knowledge.  To  hear,  then,  of  perfection  in  know- 
ledge, in  any,  the  most  limited,  accommodated  sense,  is  very  marvellous.  II.  Let 
us  attempt  to  realise  to  our  imagination  such  a  state.  1.  The  lowest  point 
we  can  take  is  the  exclusion  of  error.  So  that  if  the  manner  of  apprehending  be 
intuition,  the  objects  will  be  made  clearly  self-evident  ;  if  by  reasoning,  the 
evidence  will  be  explicit  and  the  reasoning  process  infallible.  It  could  not  but 
be  in  the  heavenly  state  a  painful  thing  for  the  spirit,  after  exulting  in  the 
reception  of  a  portion  of  knowledge,  to  find  out  that  it  had  been  imposed  on. 
2.  It  will  be  perfectly  adequate  to  the  infallible  direction  of  all  the  activities  of 
the  superior  state.  Those  activities  we  may  well  believe  to  be  of  vast  extent  and 
endless  variety,  and  an  infallible  knowledge — what  to  do,  and  when,  and  by  what 
means — will  be  vouchsafed.  3.  Knowledge  will  doubtless  be  perfect  in  that  we 
shall  possess  as  much  of  it  as  is  indispensable  to  our  happiness,  and  be  sensible 
that  we  do  so.  We  shall  not  be  in  the  condition  of  John,  who  looked  on  the 
sealed  book  and  "  wept  "  because  tliere  was  none  to  open  it.  4.  We  shall 
possess  always  as  much  knowledge  as  for  the  time  our  faculties  are  actually 
capable  of.  Here  theie  are  a  vast  number  of  things  kept  in  the  dark  from  us, 
which  we  could  understand  if  they  were  but  declared;  and  there  is  sometimes 
a  most  restless  wish  to  know  them.  Imagine  then  a  continual  enlai'gement  of 
the  iniellectual  capacity,  and  as  it  enlarges,  a  continual  influx  of  new  knowledge 
to  fill  it.      III.  We   should   take    some   advantage   of  the  apostle's  contrast 


286  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cbap.  xiir. 

BETWEEN    "  THAT    WHICH    IS    IN    PAET,"    AND     THAT     "  PERFECT  "     M'HICH     IS    TO    COME. 

Note — 1.  The  imperfect,  pirtiHl  nature  vi  our  means  of  knowledge.  The  senses, 
the  grand  inlets  of  our  kuowlKlge,  must  and  do  convey  it  in  a  most  imperfect 
manner.  Through  them  the  spirit  can  receive  only  reports  and  images  of  the 
things.  How  it  wishes  to  come  at  the  things  themselves  !  Language,  again,  is 
a,  most  imperfect  medium  for  the  conveyance  of  knowledge,  being  framed  upon 
•our  imperfect  knuwledge  and  partaking  of  all  its  defects.  But  "when  that  which 
is  perfect  is  come,"  the  mode,  the  medium,  the  instruments  of  our  receiving  and 
conveying  knowledge  must  be  som^ thing  immensi-ly  different,  whether  or  not  in 
analogy  wiih  the  present  means.  If  there  are  to  be  senses  and  any  artificial 
instruments  of  knowledge  analogous  to  the  present,  let  them  be  but  as  much 
superior  to  thtse  as  a  "  spiritual  body,"  made  like  the  gloriHed  body  of  Christ, 
will  be  superior  to  this  "  earthy,'"  mortal  one,  and  it  will  suffice.  But  whatever 
shall  be  the  means  and  manner  of  apprehending — the  ai^prehension  must  be 
incomparably  more  intimate  than  in  this  world  to  satis'y  the  exalted  intelligence. 
And  that  it  wiU  be  so,  the  apostle  intimates,  "  I  shall  know  even  as  also  I  am 
known."  2.  How  emphatically  our  pre^ent  knowldlge  is  but  "  in  part  "  as  to  the 
number  and  extent  of  the  tilings  known  I  Just  think  how  many  can  lie  answered 
of  all  the  questions  we  can  ask.  "  When  that  which  is  perfect  is  come,"  it  will 
not  bring  an  answer  to  all  possible  inquiries  ;  but  it  will  be  amazing  and  delightful 
to  see  what  a  multitude  of  things,  of  which  we  had  but  the  faintest  glimpses 
before,  are  brought  into  perfect  manifestation.  What  a  revelation  there  may  be — 
'(-1)  In  the  vast  enlargement  of  the  mind's  own  proper  power  of  knowing,  while  it 
looks  from  a  higher  eminence  over  a  wider  field.  (2)  In  the  direct  disclosures  and 
communieations  which  the  Divine  Being  may  beneficently  make.  3.  Hut  all  these 
anticipations  remind  us  but  the  more  forcibly  how  we  here  "  know  but  in  part." 
^1)  So  "  in  part,"  that  just  the  part  which  we  want  to  attain  is  divided  off  fiom 
our  reach.  It  seems  as  if  a  dissevering  principle  or  a  dark  veil  fell  down  exactly 
at  the  point  where  we  think  we  are  near  upon  ihe  knowledge  we  are  pursuing.  (2) 
So  "  in  part,"  that  we  sometimes  feel  as  if  a  disproportionate  weight  is  thrown 
upon  our  faiih.  In  our  partial  view,  appearances  may  seem  against  what  we  never- 
theless are  required  most  firmly  to  believe.  It  is  difficult  to  maintain  this  faith, 
but  is  ha)>piiy  aided  by  the  Divine  assurance  that  one  day  we  shall  know  "  when 
that  which  is  perfect  is  come."  (3)  So  "  in  part,"  that  in  many  things  we  see  far 
more  of  the  evil  than  of  the  good.  But  we  are  sure  that  there  must  be  a  decided 
predominance  of  good  in  the  empire  of  Him  who  is  infinite  in  wisdom,  power,  and 
goodness.  And  the  anticipation  of  clearly  seeing  it  so  is  a  delightful  radiance 
from  heaven  on  our  present  dark  abode.  (4)  So  "  in  part,"  that  we  cannot 
agree  one  with  another,  Tlie  "  part  "  itself  contains  llmse  shades  and  per- 
plexities among  which  men  must  greatly  differ.  But  when  the  "  perfect  comes," 
the  grand  illumination  of  each  spirit  svill  be  rendered  inconceivably  delightful  by 
coincidence  of  judgment.     (J.  Foster.) 

Ver.  11.  When  I  was  a  child,  I  spake,  .  .  .  understood,.  .  .  thought  as  a  child : 
but  when  I  became  a  man,  I  put  away  childish  things.— Onl  i]iO"d  : — 1.  This  is 
tlie  only  reference  which  the  apostle  makes  to  his  childhood,  and  without  dwelling 
on  the  connection,  the  reference  is  beautiful  and  touching.  He  was  born  at  Tarsus, 
of  respect'ible  parents,  tentmakers  probably.  Whether  he  had  brothers  we  cannot 
tell,  but  he  had  a  sister,  for  "his  sister's  son  "  came  to  him  (Acts  xxiii.)  "  Circum- 
cised on  the  eighth  day,"  his  name  was  then  called  Saul,  probably  after  the  first 
king  of  Israel,  who  was  of  the  same  tribe.  For  the  first  few  years  of  his  life  wa 
may  suppose  him,  like  other  children,  chiefly  given  to  play  ;  while  the  daily 
associations  of  Jewish  life  and  character  would  gradually  mould  his  being.  It 
would  seem  that  he  had  a  pious  ancestry  and  kindred,  for  he  says,  "  I  serve  God 
from  my  forefathers."  Daily  worship,  reading  from  Old  T  stament  Scripture, 
mingled  with  his  earliest  experiences,  and  unconsciously  influenced  his  mind. 
That  home  <f  his  childhood  was  intensely  Jewish.  A"  Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews," 
we  must  suppose  him  to  have  been  educated  with  intense  abhorrence  for  Christians 
and  Christ.  It  is  in  reference  to  such  things  as  these,  he  thought,  when  he  used 
these  significant  words,  2.  Turning  from  the  apostle  to  ourselves,  we  might  pursue 
a  similar  train  of  thought  with  regai'd  to  our  childhood.  (1)  "  When  I  was  a 
child,"  one  would  say,  "I  was  surrounded,  n'>t  like  Saul,  with  religious  influence, 
but  with  everything  that  was  bad."     (2)  "  My  childhood,"  another  would  say, 


CHAP,  xiii.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  287 

*'  was  spent  in  what  ought  to  have  been  a  happy  home,  but  misunderstanding  and 
discord  made  it  anything  but  that,  and  the  effect  is  I  am  a  misanihri>pe."  (3) 
"  Mine,"  a  third  would  say,  "  was  the  childhood  of  frivolity  and  fashion.  In  all 
senses  my  childhood  and  youth  were  '  vanity.'  I  was  trained  a  trifler,  and,  as  the 
result,  I  am  mentally  and  morally  a  dwarf."  (4)  "  When  I  was  a  child,"  another 
would  say,  "  I  was  trained  for  heaven  and  for  Christ,  and  so  long  as  memory  lasts, 
the  recollection  of  tiiy  childhood  will  be  to  me  an  impulse  to  duty  and  a  lustre  to 
life,"  and  so  on.     But  now  let  us  look  at  what  is  common  to  chiMhood  as  such. 

I.    How     BEAUTIFUL     THE      DiVINE     AllllANGEJIENT      ACCORDING     TO     WHICH     CHILDHOOD 

GRADUALLY  UNFOLDS !  He  who  formed  our  first  parents  complete  could  as  easily 
have  done  so  with  us.  But  it  is  best  as  it  is.  1.  God  has  given  us  forms  of  beauty 
everywhere,  but  nowhere  more  strikingly  than  in  the  openings  of  life.  2.  Moie 
than  this,  He  has  thus  multiplied  enjounent.  Each  ag<^,  as  each  season,  has  its 
j)eculiar  joys.  3.  We  see,  too,  an  indication  of  the  way  in  which  the  gi'eat  Worker 
works  always — ever  gradually.  Childhood  gradually  unfolds  into  youth.  We 
foolish  creatures  are  in  haste  for  results  ;  God  teaches  us  alike  in  nature,  providence, 
and  grare  to  wait  and  be  patient.  4.  While  thus  acting;  what  benulic  does  He 
secure?  How  great  the  benefit  to  the  young,  teaching  them  lessons  of  docility, 
patience,  sulimission  ;  and  to  adults  forbearance,  watchfulness,  &o.  Imagine  life 
without  childhood,  home  without  children.  5.  If  there  were  no  hight^r  advantage, 
what  a  benefit  is  the  naturalness  of  the  arrangement !  The  child  speaking, 
thinking,  understanding  "  as  a  child,"  not  trying  to  do  more  ;  so  often  rebuking 
thus  our  unreal  and   artificial  modes  of  adult  life.     II.  How  important  that  we 

SHOULD  RECOGNISE  THIS  DiVINE  ARRANGEMENT,  AND  SEEK  TO  OBEY  IT  !       1.    Recollect  the 

capacity  of  the  chdd  in  your  teaching.  He  speaks  "  as  a  child,"  and  will  only 
understand  you  as  you  do  the  same,  and  then  not  according  to  your  meaning  of  the 
words,  but  his  own,  for  he  thinks  "as  a  child."  2.  Recognise  this,  too,  in  your 
expectations.  You  may  not  expect  too  much.  They  think  and  feel  "  as  children," 
and  not  even  grace  will  destroy  the  force  of  child  nature.     Nor  ought  you  to  wish 

it.       III.    How  OBVIOUS  OUR  DUTY,  SUCH  being  THE  CONDITION  OF  childhood!       1.  You, 

dfar  children,  must  be  willing  to  submit  to  such  training  as  your  condition  i-equires. 
(1)  Obedience  is  the  first  lesson  God  expects  you  to  learn.  Nor  forget  that  dis- 
obedience to  parents,  or  those  who  for  the  tmie  stand  in  th^ir  place,  is  a  great  sin. 
Remember  on  the  one  hand  Hophni  and  Phmehas,  and  Absalom,  and  on  the  other 
Timothy  and  Jesus.  "  Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother,"  which  is  the  first 
commandment  with  promise.  (2)  Seek  the  Saviour.  Of  Josiah  we  read  that  when 
but  eight  years  old  his  heart  was  tender,  and  he  feared  God.  Your  hearts  are 
tender,  nut  yet  "  hardened  by  the  deceilfulness  of  sin"  ;  while  they  are  so,  submit 
io  the  guidance  of  Je-us !  2.  Parents,  teachers,  see  that  your  duty  is  wisely  and 
faithfully  fulfilled.  Strive  to  have  an  intelligent  appreciation  of  what  your  work  is. 
In  each  of  those  minds  and  characters  undei-  your  care  are  latent  powers.  You  are 
to  develop  them.  How?  As  the  sun  does  the  bud  of  the  flower — -by  shining  upon 
them.     Only  thus  will  they  unf  LI  to   you.     IV.  How   much   encouragement  is 

AFFORDED  TO  THOSE  WHO  ARE  THE  GUIDES    AND    INSTRUCTORS    OF    CHILDHOOD.       1.    Were 

the  material  on  which  you  are  cahed  to  act  stereotyped,  your  task  would  be 
hopeless.  It  is  becau-e  it  is  so  plastic  that  you  may  work  with  the  prospect  of 
success.  We  cannot  tell  how  early  the  Spirit  of  God  may  work  upon  the  ope  ang 
mind  of  children.  2.  Remember  what  God  has  said  about  this  seed-time  !  "  Cast 
thy  bread  upon  the  waters,  and  thou  shalt  find  it  after  many  days."  Whence  have 
the  majority  of  Christian  men  and  women  had  their  origin  ?  Has  it  not  been  from 
the  ranks  of  pious  families,  Christian  schools?  {J.  Vinei/.)  Childhh  things: — 
1.  "  There  is  a  time  for  everything,"  and  "  God  hath  made  everything  beautiful  in 
his  time."  We  do  not  love  the  frost  in  spring.  It  is  out  of  its  season,  but  when,  in 
December,  it  gives  its  own  peculiar  beauty  to  the  landscape,  we  welcome  it.  So 
with  the  other  seasons.  2.  The  spring,  surumer,  autumn,  and  winter  of  our  being 
are  beautiful  only  in  their  time.  Precocious  childhood,  prolonged  infancy,  or 
premature  decay  excite  other  feelings  than  those  of  admiration.  Childishness  is 
beauiiful  in  its  time,  but  only  in  its  time.  It  would  be  a  sad  world  if  it  were 
stripped  of  all  the  beauty  and  joy  gi-  en  to  it  by  the  innocence  and  playfulness  of 
children.  He  is  a  hard  man  who  can  frown  on  the  "  childish  things  "  so  unworthy 
the  man,  but  so  natural  in  them.  3.  This  life  of  ours  is  a  parable  introduced  by 
tlie  apostle  to  d  scribe  our  inner  spiritual  life.  There  are  the  "  babes  in  Christ," 
«vho  require  to  be  fed  with  milk  ;  "  little  children,"  in  whom  the  good  seed  is  giving 
the  promise  of  fruit ;  "  young  men,"  deficient  in  the  wisdom  which  long  experience 


288  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiir. 

alone  can  sui'ply,  bnt  full  of  hope  and  zeal;  "  strong  men,"  the  pillars  of  the 
Church,  the  leaders  in  enterprise ;  and  lathers,  who,  a°.  shocks  of  corn,  are 
fully  ripe  and  ready  to  be  gathered  into  the  garner.  This  progressive  im- 
provement we  ought  all  to  manifest.  4.  There  is  something  belonging  to 
our  chiklhood  whiih  we  should  seek  always  to  preserve — its  freshness, 
humility,  and  truthfulness.  Between  childlikeness  and  childishness  there  is 
the  wide-t  difference.  Christ's  life  teaches  us  that  it  is  possible  to  unite 
the  understanding  of  the  man  with  the  heart  of  the  child.  What  are  the 
childish  things  to  be  put  away  with  our  advancing  intelligence  and  experience  ? 
I.  loNoiiAKCE.  1.  The  understanding  of  a  child  is  necessarily  feeble  and  his  views 
crude  ;  but  we  expect,  as  years  p-<ss  on  and  education  does  its  work,  that  the 
various  faculies  shall  begin  to  develop  themselves.  2.  God  dealt  with  the  Jews 
as  with  children.  He  did  not  give  the  substance  of  the  truth,  but  only  types  and 
shadows — a  series  of  pictures.  So,  too,  the  requirements  of  tbe  law  were  designed 
tor  children.  There  was  not  the  simple  exhibition  of  one  great  principle  which 
the  people  weie  themselves  to  apply,  but  a  multitude  of  distinct  enactments.  But 
the  law  has  done  its  work  as  a  schoolmaster,  and  now  we  are  brought  to  Christ  to 
receive  other  teaching,  and  walk  after  another  rule,  even  the  perfect  law  of  liberty 
and  love.  3.  There  are  many,  however,  who  would  always  be  Jews.  They  love 
thfit  which  appeals  to  the  senses,  and  have  little  sympathy  with  the  purely  spiritual 
aspects  of  religion.  They  want  a  system  of  exact  law,  drawing  distinct  lines  of 
sepmation  between  the  right  and  the  wrong,  and  have  no  idea  of  that  mighty,  all- 
pervading  pi  inciple  of  self-consecration  begotten  at  the  Cross.  It  is  needful  that 
we  put  away  these  childish  things,  and  let  men  understand  that  our  religion 
consists  not  in  tbe  submission  to  priestly  authority,  or  the  discharge  of  a  dreary 
routine  of  sacred  duties,  or  even  in  the  cherishing  of  certain  religious  sentiments, 
but  in  the  rule  of  an  enlightened  conscience,  sprinkled  from  dead  works  in  the 
blood  of  Chrift,  and  taught  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God.  We  would  walk  not  as  those 
who  are  without  law,  but  under  the  law  to  Christ.  To  feel  that  religion  must  not 
be  a  mere  piece  of  mechanism,  a  s-keletcn  without  a  soul,  but  a  life  of  godliness — to 
find  in  well-l%ept  Sabbaths  and  sacrtd  ordinances  helps  to  the  attainment  of  this 
end— to  re-t  with  all  a  child's  depei  dei.ce  on  Christ,  and  yet  to  show  a  m.an's 
energy  in  Chrihtian  effort,  these  are  among  the  highest  attainments  of  Christian 
knowledge  and  the  best  evidence  of  spiritual  maturity.  II.  Narrowness.  1.  It  is 
perfectly  natural  for  a  child  to  attach  undue  value  to  his  own  surroundings.  He 
has  never  seen  the  great  city,  and  he  ascribes  to  bis  little  town  an  undue  importance. 
He  has  never  looked  on  the  mountain,  and  the  little  hillock  is  to  him  a  towering 
height.  He  has  never  wandered  on  the  hnnks  of  some  wide-spreading  stream,  and 
therefore  he  counts  the  rivulet  with  which  he  is  familiar  a  river.  How  strong  these 
feelings  are  we  may  perhaps  learn  from  our  own  experience.  Even  after  time, 
travel,  and  reading  have  enlaiged  our  views,  we  are  inclined  to  think  that  the  little 
town  with  which  we  were  lamiiiar  in  early  days  was  superior  to  others  until  a  visit 
serves  to  break  the  spell.  2.  The  same  feature  is  to  be  found  in  men  whose  want 
of  education  leaves  tliem  still  in  a  state  little  better  than  thut  of  children.  There 
are  dwellers  in  a  remote  part  of  our  country  who  astonish  strangers  by  their  simple 
faith  in  the  superiority  of  their  own  district.  3.  How  absurd  this  sounds— yet  is  it 
only  a  type  of  what  we  may  see  continually  in  religious  things.  (1)  There  are 
numbers  who,  in  this  respect,  are  nothing  but  children.  They  have  never  gone 
beyond  the  narrow  confines  of  their  own  little  community.  Their  reading  is 
restricted  to  a  certain  class  of  authors  who  look  at  the  truth  from  their  standpoint. 
The  result  can  only  be  a  cramped  intellect  and  a  narrow  heart.  They  do  not  see 
that  there  are  other  sides  of  truth.  Their  own  poor  sect  is  to  them  the  Church  of 
Christ.  Such  men  are  holding  fast  by  "  childish  things."  Greater  breadth  of  view 
and  truer  charity  of  sentiment  should  characterise  those  who  have  become  men. 
We  cannot  read  the  story  of  the  Church  without  seeing  that  God  has  honoured 
men  of  the  most  opposite  views  and  temperaments.  We  cannot  take  up  our  books 
of  praise  without  having  the  same  truth  impressed  upon  us.  (2)  Here,  however,  as 
almost  everywhere,  there  are  opposite  extremes  against  which  we  have  to  guard. 
The  very  idea  of  breadth  has  been  brought  into  disrepute  by  the  way  in  which  some 
have  employed  it.  The  man  who  holds  fast  by  his  own  deep  and  intelligent 
convictions  of  doctrine  and  duty  is  pronounced  narrow.  On  the  other  hand,  if  a 
man  desires  to  tone  down  the  gospel  to  the  supposed  tastes  of  men  until  it  has 
been  robbed  of  all  that  is  distinctive  and  glorious  in  its  revelations,  he  is  esteemed 
broad.    No  wonder  that  devout  men  should  look  with  some  feeling  of  dread  upon 


CHAP,  xin.]  1.  CORINTHIANS.  289 

these  broad  views  of  Christianity.  Yet  is  it  deeply  to  be  lamented  if  in  their  recoil 
they  are  provoked  to  an  un-Christian  narrowness.  Because  others  indulge  in  a 
latitudinarianism  which  trenches  on  unbelief,  we  are  not  to  yield  ourselves  to  the 
sway  of  a  bigotry  which  can  tolerate  no  difference  nf  opinion.  Liliprty  is  a  precious 
Christian  right,  not  to  be  surrendered  or  compromised,  even  tboutih  unwise  friends 
have  abused  its  privileges.  Charity  is  the  chief  of  the  graces,  and  though  its  sacred 
name  may  often  be  employed  to  cloak  indifference,  or  even  to  excuse  hostility  to 
Divine  truth,  yet  must  we  not  fail  to  cultivate  and  manifest  it  in  all  our  con- 
troversies. He  shows  the  breadth  of  Christian  manhood  who  is  able  to  preserve 
fidelity  without  the  sacrifice  of  charity.  Ill  .Feebleness.  1.  A  child  is  necessarily 
weak,  and  only  by  slow  degrees  gains  that  muscular  strength  necessary  for  the 
discharge  of  the  various  functions  of  his  physical  life.  His  first  efforts  aie  sure  to 
be  failures.  He  lacks  confidence  even  more  than  strength,  for  as  yet  he  knows  not 
his  own  power.  But  when  the  child  becomes  a  man,  we  desire  to  see  robustness 
and  vigour.  2.  So  may  it  be  expected  that  the  first  efforts  of  the  Christian  after 
holiness  will  be  marked  by  weakness  and  attended  witli  frequent  failure.  In  the 
glow  of  his  first  love  the  yciung  disciple  fancies  that  nothing  will  be  too  hard  for 
him  to  achieve.  But  soon  experience  teaches  him— the  evils  of  years  cannot  be 
repaired  in  a  day — habits  cannot  easily  be  abandoned — passions  that  have  been 
masters  are  not  content  to  become  subjects.  But  we  have  a  right  to  expect  that 
advHncing  years  will  bring  with  them  increasing  strength.  What  we  have  most  to 
deplore  is,  that  so  many  fail  to  manifest  this  progress.  They  are  content  to  be  as 
they  have  been  for  years.  They  sin  and  repent,  make  confession  of  their  guilt,  and 
straightway  return  to  sin  again.  Possibly  life  is  not  extinguished,  but  assuredly  it 
is  very  feeble  and  unhealthy.  {J.  G.  Bogers,  B.A.)  The  child  and  the  man: — 
The  contrast  is  very  striking.  "I  spake  as  a  child."  When  the  chiM  begins  to 
speak,  bow  broken  the  utterance  is  !  The  mother's  ear,  sharpened  by  love,  is  able 
to  comprehend  it ;  but  the  stranger  finds  the  task  too  hard  for  him.  "  I  understood 
as  a  child."  How  weak  the  understanding  is — how  uncertain — how  liable  to  err! 
"  I  thought  as  a  child."  But  what  a  poor  illogical  affair  ray  reasoning  was !  What 
a  marvel  it  is,  the  change  of  a  little  child  into  a  man  !  The  infant  boy,  Saul,  in  his 
nursery  at  Tarsus,  and  the  man  making  Felix  tremble,  and  Mars  Hill  ponder.  But 
he  uses  this  change  in  himself  for  the  sake  of  illustration.  Note — I.  The  advance 
FROM  Judaism  to  Christianity.  Jud'iism  was  the  childhood  of  the  Church.  I  do 
not  say  this  to  insmuate  any  doubt  of  its  Divine  origin.  The  child  is  as  much  the 
creature  of  God  as  the  man  :  just  so,  it  is  as  clear  that  He  spake  by  Moses  as  by 
Christ.  But  still  there  is  a  marked  difference  between  the  two  dispensations. 
1.  Judaism  was  adapted  to  those  who,  in  religious  knowledge  and  expcience,  were 
children.  You  teach  the  little  ones  chiefly  through  the  eye  :  give  them  picture 
books,  and  assume  pif^torial  attitudes.  So  the  tabernacle  was  a  picture-gallery, 
teaching  precious  truth — but  to  the  senses  mainly  to  reach  the  mind.  2.  How 
different  are  the  institutions  of  the  gospel !  Here  are  no  altars,  no  priests.  The 
Church  has  got  out  of  the  nursery  into  the  study ;  and  Christians  are  treated  not  a3 
children,  but  as  men.  We  are  taught — esjjecially  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews^ 
that  the  ordinances  of  Judnism  were  merely  figures  for  the  time  till  Christ  should 
come;  but  now  what  need  of  the  type,  when  we  have  the  antitype?  Our 
sacraments  are  just  the  exceptions  that  prove  the  rule.  3.  But  see  the  te-ndency  of 
the  present  day.  It  is  to  crush  the  manhood  of  the  Chuich  of  Christ,  and  bring  us 
back  to  a  religion  of  ceremonies  again.  Ritualism  is  a  second  Judaising  of  the 
Church — a  coming  back  to  the  nursery  and  babyhood  again.  II.  The  advance 
FROM  EARLY  PIETY  TO  MATURE.  1.  Early  piety  is  one  of  the  loveliest  things  I  know 
—like  the  blossoms  of  the  apple-tree  in  spring,  or  the  first  faint  light  on  the 
horizon.  Yet  it  is  a  very  imperfect  thing.  The  blossoms  are  not  the  fruit— the 
dawning  is  not  the  day. .  The  young  Christian  is  only  a  little  child  in  the  family  of 
God.  2.  But  let  him  become  a  man  in  Christ  Jesus — what  an  advance !  The 
blossoms  have  gone — but  here  is  the  tree  filled  with  the  fruits  of  righteousness  ;  the 
dawning  lias  disappeared— but  it  is  only  swallowed  up  in  the  sunrise.  There  was 
a  time  when  Paul  knew  little  more  than  that  he  had  been  a  great  sinner,  and  lay 
wholly  at  the  mercy  of  the  Loid.  But  he  lived  "  to  comprehend  with  all  saints  the 
breadth  and  length,"  etc.  Oh,  to  altain  a  full  manhood  of  Christian  character!  to 
have  the  greatest  peace,  to  do  the  greatest  good,  to  bring  God  tiie  greatest  glory! 
HI.  The  ativance  from  the  earthly  state  to  the  heavknly.  This  was  what  the 
afiostle  had  chiefly  in  his  mind.  1.  He  describes  the  earthly  state  of  Christians  as 
imperfect.  What. a  lesson  of  humility  !  This  great  gifted  man  acknowledges  how 
VOL.     II.  19 


290  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiir. 

much  he  cannot  teach  !  "  We  know  in  part."  And  so  with  the  very  aptest  of 
scholars.  John  Howe  says,  "  Many  of  our  conceits,  which  we  thought  wise,  we 
shall  then  see  cause  to  put  away  as  common  trash  ";  and  Owen,  "  Notwithstanding 
all  our  conBdence  of  our  high  attainments,  all  our  notions  of  God  are  but  cliiklish 
in  respect  of  His  infinite  perfections."  Down,  then,  with  our  foolish  pride,  our 
arrogant  assumption  !  2.  But  what  is  there  awaiting  us?  We  are  looking  through 
a  dim  window  now,  and  things  outsiile  are  a  riddle;  but  then  the  window  will  be 
tiirown  open,  and  we  shall  see  face  to  face  (ver.  12;  IJohniii.  2),  and  the  clear  sight 
of  Jesus  shall  complete  our  transformation.  All  that  was  dim  in  us  shall  become 
luminous,  and  we  shall  perfectly  reflect  the  image  of  our  Lord.  3.  The  cbange 
must  liegin  here.  We  must  be  new-born  babes  on  earth,  if  we  are  ever  to  reach 
maturity  in  heaven.  "  Except  a  man  be  born  again,"  &c.  Then  we  shall  look 
down  on  this  dim  spot,  and  say,  Theie  I  was  a  child,  Imt  now  I  am  a  man.  {F. 
Tucker,   B.A.)  The    child  and  the  man  : — The    feelings    and    thoughts    of    a 

chilli    are   true  and   just,   in   so  far  as  they   are   the   natural  impression   of   tlie 
objects  to  which  they  relate.      They  are  neither  irrational  nor  false,  but  inade- 
quate.      The  impression   whicdi    ihe  sight  of   the  heavens  makes   on   the   mind 
of  the  child,  is  for  the  child  a  ju?t  and  true  impression.     Tlie  conception  which 
it  forms  of  what   it    sees  is  correct  in  one  aspect  of   the   great  object  contem- 
plnted.     Yet  that  impiession  is  very  different  from  that  which  is  made  <m  the  mind 
of  the  astronomer.     In  like   manner   our  views  of   Divine  things  will  hceafier  be 
V.  ry  different  from  those  which  we  now  have.     Dut  it  does  not  thence  follow  that 
our  present  views  are  false.     They  are  just  as  far  as  they  go,    they    are    only 
inadequate.     It   is  no  part   of   the   apostle's   object  to   unsettle    our    contideace 
in  what  God  now  communicates  by   His  Woul   and  Spirit  to  His  children,  but 
simply    to    prevent    our    being  satisfied    with    the    partial     and    imperfect.     (C. 
Hodge,     D.D.)         Childhood      and     mnihnod: — I.    The     saint's     childhood.     1. 
Speech    corresponds  with    tongues    (ver.    S).     2.    Understanding    with    prophecy. 
3.  Thought  with    knowledge.     II.     The    saint's    mamidod.     1.   Perfect   power   of 
expression.     2.  Glorified  intellect.     3.  Full  revelation    of    God.     {J.    Lyth,  D.D.) 
Th'  Christian  a  child  in  time,  a  man  in  eteriiiti/ : — This  is  the  case  iu  relation 
to — I.    Speech.       "  I   spake   as    a   child."      The   Christian's   speech   in   eternity 
will  be  characterised — 1.  By  chfirness.     Onr  speech  here,  like  that  of  children, 
is   often   unintelligible,   meie   jargon.      The   reason    is   our   conceptions   are   ill- 
defined.     Clear  speech  requires  a  clear  head.     In  heaven  thoughts  are  clear,  and 
complete  as  balls  of  radiant  crystal.     2.  By  reality.     Our  speech  here,  like  that  of 
children,  is  frequently  nothing  more  than    the  vehicle  of   menttd  fantasies   and 
conjecture.     But  speech  in  eternity  is  the  organ  of  reality.     Words  there  are  things. 
They    are    truths    made    vocal.     3.    By    comprehensiveness.     How    meagre    the 
vocabulary  of  a  child  !     Our  speech  here,  like  that  of  children,  is  limited  to  a  very 
small  range  of  things.     Not   so  in  heaven.     The  soul  will  range  over  the  whole 
domain   of  facts,    rec-eive   true  impressions   of  all,   and  speak  them  out.     4.  By 
sublimity.     Our  speecti  here,  like  tuat  of  children,  is  not  of  the  most  exalted  and 
soul-inspiring  character.     In  heaven  every  word  will  be  electric,  every   sentence 
radiant,  and  quickening  as  the  sunbeam.     II.   Undukstanding.     "  I  understood  as 
a  child."     The  Christian's  understanding  here  is   like  that  of  a  child  in  several 
respects.     1.  In  feebleness.     The  child's  intellect,  like  his  body,  in  the  first  stages  is 
very  feeble.     It  is  incapable  of  any  great  effort.     It  is  thus  with  the  Christian  here. 
We  say  of  such  a  man — he  has  a  great  intellect.     But  in  reality  what  a  small 
amouut  of  truth  can  the  most  vigorous  hold  within  his  grasp  !     In  heaven  the 
understanding  will  be  strong,  unencumbered  by  matter,  unchecked  by  disease,  un- 
clouded by  siu.     It  will  grow  young  with   age  and  strong  with  exercise.     2.  In 
sensuousness.     A   child's  understanding  is  under  the  control  of   the   senses.     It 
judges  by  appearances.     Is  it  not  so  with  the  Christian?     He  is  prone  to  "  mind 
earthly  things,"  "  to  judge  after  the  flesh."     3.  In  relativeness.     The  child  judges 
of  all  things  by  their  relation  to  hims  If.     His  father  may  be  an  author  or  a  states- 
man, but  the  child  knows  nothing  of  him  in  those  relations.     As  a  father  only  hs 
knows  him.     So  with  the  understanding  of  a  Christian.     His  conceptions  of  God 
are  purely  relative.     Kedeemer,  Father,  Master.     Thus  only  is  He  regarded.     What 
He  is  in  Himself,  what  He  is  in  the  universe,  he  understands  nothing.     In  eternity 
we  shall  "  see  Him  as  He  is."     4.  In  servility.     Thechild  yields  his  under-tanding 
up  to  others.     So  it  is  often  with  Christians  here.     Not  so  iu  heaven.     Eah  with 
a  full  consciousness  of  his  individuality  will  be  independent  in   his  investigations 
and  conclusions.     III.  Keasoning.     "I  thought  as  a  child."    How  does  the  child 


•CHAP.  XIII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  291 

reason  ?  From  an  insufficiency  of  data.  Having  neither  the  power  nor  the  oppor- 
tunity of  making  an  adequate  ohservation  and  comp:irison,  he  draws  his  conclusions 
from  passing  impressions  and  unfounded  conjectures.  Thus  it  is  often  with  the 
Christian  here.  His  knowledge  of  the  facts  of  God  and  the  universe  on  which  he 
reasons  is  so  limited,  that  his  conclusions  are  often  inconclusive  and  puerile.  2. 
Prum  the  impulse  of  desire.  In  all  cases  his  wish  is  the  father  to  the  tliought.  It 
is  too  often  so  with  the  Christian  here.  Their  likings  control  their  logic.  Not  so 
in  heaven.  Conclusion  :  'I  his  subject  teaches — 1.  The  educational  character  of  this 
life.  The  true  view  of  this  life  is  that  it  is  a  school  for  eternity.  Be  reconciled  to 
this  state.  Struggle  on  till  you  "  put  away  chil.lish  things."  We  shall  leave  this 
school  soon  for  the  family  mansion  and  the  grand  inheritnnce.  2.  The  organic 
unity  of  man  through  nil  the  scenes  and  stages  of  his  being.  Though  the 
man  here  tilks  and  judges  and  reasons  very  differently  to  what  he  did  when 
a  child,  »he  is  nevertheless  the  same  being.  Man  in  heaven  is  but  the  child 
matured.  We  shall  never  be  greater  than  men.  3.  The  necepsity  of  modesty 
in   the   maintenance   of   our   theological  views.       (D.   Tliomnn,   D.D.)  True 

vianliness  : — True  manliness  means  the  putting  away  childish  thii  gs — rising 
■out  of  the  weakness  and  frivolity  of  childhood  to  the  stature  of  a  rijie  Cluistian. 
Consider  what  are  the  chii-f  characteristics  of  childhood.  We  see  much  tli^it  is 
pleasant  and  winning  in  them — openness,  simplicity,  a  compaiative  innocence, 
and  an  absolute  ignorance  of  many  evil  things.  But  we  see,  also,  much  that  is  not 
pleasant  to  see.  Now  we  are  not  to  put  away  the  better  things  of  childhood;  but 
retaining  these  we  are  to  put  awaj' — I.  Sii-liness.  Tiere  are  many  things  that  we 
pardon  in  a  child  because  it  is  a  child.  If  a  child  makes  a  foolish  remark,  or  does 
a  foolish  act,  we  say,  in  excuse,  "  He  is  but  a  child — he  will  be  wiser  by  and  by." 
But  if,  when  the  child  grows  up,  and  is  still  not  wiser,  we  say,  by  way  of  reproach, 
that  he  is  childish  and  ought,  at  his  age,  to  know  better.  II.  Selfishnkss.  All 
young  children  show  this  more  or  less.  Hence  the  greediness  in  chi'dten  and 
their  egotism,  the  frequent  use  in  their  mouth  of  ttje  words  "  I  "  and  "  me."  And 
this  is  a  fault  which  all  parents  should  try  to  correct.  But  a  selfish  child  has  the 
■excuse  of  ignorance;  but  a  selfish  young  man  or  woman  has  not  this  excuse. 
They  do  know  better.  While  this  fault  remains  uncoriected  in  us  we  have  not 
made,  and  we  cannot  make,  any  jjrogress  in  true  religion.  Learn  from  your  Lord 
and  Example  to  think  of,  to  care  for,  to  give  to  others.  It  is  more  blessed  to  give 
tban  to  receive!  HI.  Want  of  self  control.  They  only  are  to  be  accounted 
manly  who  are  masters  of  tliemse.ves,  who  act  from  reason  not  from  passion. 
Bemember  what  St.  Paul  says,  ' '  Every  one  that  striveth  for  the  mastei'v  is  temperate 
in  all  things  " — in  meat,  drink,  speech,  pleasure,  pursuit  of  earthly  pains.  'J  he  way 
to  self-mastery  is  to  be  on  the  watch  against  all  excess,  aU  inordinate  aif >  ction  ;  to 
bring  your  bodies  into  subjection  to  the  law  of  your  mind;  to  look  in  all  you  do, 
not  at  what  is  most  pleasant ;  but  at  what  reason  and  conscience  enjoin.  {R.  D. 
B.  Rinciisley,  M.A.)  Avtildfij/  hetween  our  present  state  and  <i  state  of  cliihUiood  : — I 
might  observe  that  our  pursuits,  our  cares,  onr  sorrows,  and  our  joys  are  too  often 
like  those  of  children,  low,  trifling,  and  frivolous.  Were  we  properly  affected  and  in- 
formed, we  should  pursue  nothing  eagerly  but  virtue.  But  how  far  is  this  from  being 
the  general  temper  of  mankind  !  Wl.ere  can  we  find  true  manliness  and  integrity — a 
steadiness  not  to  be  shaken  by  low  passions — a  love  (f  truth  not  to  be  warped  by 
rsilly  prejudices,  and  an  elevation  of  mind  not  to  be  depressed  by  the  temptations 
and  trials  of  this  world  ?  Children  are  apt  to  be  wayward,  and  fickle,  ai  dc;  pricious 
- — one  moment  displeased  with  what  the  moment  before  they  admired — uelighted 
with  toys,  and  grieving  when  a  foolish  fancy  cannot  be  gratified.  Such  is  also  tlie 
■  case  with  men  ;  nor  can  I  view  a  courtier,  who  sets  his  heart  upon  a  ribbon,  in  any 
hi^iher  light  than  I  do  a  child  who  cries  for  a  trinket,  or  is  proud  of  his  fiiie  clothes. 
Our  levities  and  inconstancies,  our  variable  and  peevish  humours,  our  groundless 
attachments,  our  unreasonable  prejudices  and  gross  mistakes,  all  show  our  weak- 
ness, atjd  prove  us  to  be  in  the  infancy  of  our  existence.  But  it  will  be  proper  to 
ex^jlain  this  subject  more  distinctly,  and  to  cany  our  ideas  a  little  hig  er.  1.  Let 
us,  therefore,  consider  that  our  present  existence,  ci  mpared  with  our  future,  is  a 
childhood  in  respect  of  its  duration.  We  are  to  exist  f  r  ever.  What,  then,  is  th^s 
life?  How  justly  may  it  be  called  our  childhood?  The  strict  tiuth  is,  th-it  it  is 
no  more  than  our  entrance  into  being — our  birth  into  the  va-t  creation — Ihe  first 
glimmering  of  light  at  the  dawn  of  day.  2.  Again,  this  life  is  our  cl  ildhood  in  rcsp  ct 
-of  iuiprovement.  At  our  best  sti'te  in  this  world  we  uTy  sa\  of  ourseh  es,  wi  h  the 
utmost  propriety,  that  we  know  nothing,  and  are  nothing.     We  now  mistake  pre- 


292  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xin. 

sumption  for  knowledge,  a  strange  imagination  for  a  sound  understanding,  and  the 
delusions  of  passion  for  the  perct  pti..ns  of  truth.     Hereafter  our  intellectual  powers 
will  acquire  vigour.     We  shall  see  intuitively  those  truths  which  we  now  are  obliged 
to  make  out  by  long  and  intricate  deductions.     3.  I  might  go  on  to  observe  to  you 
that  we  are  now  children  in  respect  of  power  and  dignity,     fluctuating  at  best  and 
very  feeble  is  our  present  condition.   Hereafter  our  condition  will  be  more  fixed  and 
stable.     Our  powers  will  be  enlarged,  and  we  shall  rise  to  a  dignity  and  weight  in 
the  universe  of  which  we  can  now  form  no  conception.    4.  But  it  is  necessary  that  I 
should  endeavour  to  give  you  a  yet  more  accurate  view  of  this  subject  by  observing 
to  you  that  this  life  answers  to  the  idea  of  a  childhood,  as  it  is  an  introduction  to, 
and  a  state  of  education  for,  another  and  a  higher  state.     Infancy  prepares  for 
childhood,  and  chiMhood  for  manhood.     As  we  pass  through  these  several  stages, 
we  are  continually  becoming  more  and  more  famihaiised  to  the  scene  in  which  we 
are  placed.     And  it  is  easy  to  perceive  that  were  we  to  be  brought  into  life  full 
grown,  or  to  be  made  men  without  passing  through  inf;incy  and  childhood,  we 
should  be  totally  incapable  of  relishinc;  life,  and  as  unfit  for  it  as  we  should  be  for 
conversation,  had  we  never  been  taught  language  ;  or  forenjoynit^nt  and  happiness, 
were  we  destitute  of  senses.     Thus  is  the  beginning  of  our  existence  here  a  natural 
and  neces=sary  pieparation  for  mature  life;  and  in  like  manner  the  whole  of  our 
mature  life  itself  is  a  necessary  prepnrati'n  for  that  future  life  on  which  we  are  to 
enter  at  death.     Should  you  ask  me  here  in  what  manner,  and  by  what  means,  this 
life  is  thus  an  education  for  am'ther,  I  would  answer,  that  it  is  so  particularly  by 
the  instruction  and  the  habits  which  are  the  necessary  consequence  to  all  of  passing 
through  this  life  ;  but  that  it  is  so  principally  by  that  instruction  in  righteousness, 
and  those  habits  of  self-government  and  virtue  which  we  are  put  upon  acquiring  in 
this  life.     Virtue,  you  must  always  remember,  is  the  grand  cotidition  of  happiness 
under  the  Divine  government.     Without  this  we  cannot  be  qualified  for  permanent 
existence,    or  any  honourable   situaiion  in  the  univeise.      It    is    this,  therefore, 
that  we  must  chiefly  be  placed  here  to  learn.     It  is  proper  to  add,  that  as  the 
Author  of  nature  has  so  ordered  oi  r  cirfu  in  stances  in  this  world  as  to  make  early 
life  tit  to  be  au  education  for  nuture  lif*^,  so  like^\ise   das  He  so  ordered  our  cir- 
cumstances in  mature  li'e  as  to  adapt  it  to  the  purpose  of  an  education  in  virtue. 
We  cannot  proceed  a  step  in  life  without  finding  opportunities  for  practising  some 
virtue,  witiiout  being  required  to  resist  some  temp  ation,  to  check  some  wrong 
tendency,  to  discharge  some  duty,  to  govern  some  passion,  to  cherish  some  grace, 
or  to  stand  some  trial.     Another  sense  in  which  our  education  in  this  world  for 
another  corresponds  with  our  t-ducation  in  early  or  mature  life,  is  the  necessity  we 
are  under  in  both  capacities  of  submitting  to  stii't  and,  sometimes,  painful  disci- 
pline, the  reason  and  uses  of  which  we  may  not  be  able  to  understand.     Children 
are  trained  up  by  restraint  and  correction,  the  tendency  of  which  they  do  not  see, 
and  which,  theiefote,  they  are  apt  to  think  hard  and  severe.     So  it  is  with  us,  as 
probationers  and  candidates  for  eternity.     It  is  obvious  that  our  happiness  when 
men  depends  in  a  great  degree  on  our  conduct  when  yiuing  ;  and  that  the  turn  we 
take,  the  habits  we  contract,  and  the  bent  th«t  is  given  us  as  we  grow  up  from 
infancy  to  maturity,  determine  the  colour  and  fate  of  all  our  subsequent  days. 
Idleness  and  laziness  in  youth  form  a  manhood  void  of  worth  and  dignity ;  and  a 
worthless    and    vicious    manhood   forms   a  wretched   old  age.      On  the  contrary, 
virtuous,  faitliful,  modest,  sober,  and  well-educated  youths  always  come  out  with 
advantage  into  the  world.     Such  is  the  dependence  ot  our  happiness  in  the  succes- 
sive stages  of  the  present  life  on  our  conduct  in  those  which  have  preceded  them  ; 
and  such,  likewise,  is  the  dependence  of  our  happiness  in  our  future  stages  of  exis- 
tence on  our  conduct  in  our  present  existence.   Every  particular  of  what  I  have  just 
observed  of  the  latter,  holds  with  respect  to  the  former,  and  our  seeing  this  to  be 
the  order  of  the  Divine  government  in  the  one  case,  should  silence  all  objections  to 
the  credibility  of  it  in  the  other.   Our  education  in  youth  for  manhood  (we  all  know) 
may  miscarry,  and  through  negligence  and  vice  leave  us  deficient,  ignorant,  worth- 
less, and  unhappy  ;  or,  on  the  contrary,  it  may  attain  its  end,  1  ly  the  foundation  of 
subsequent  honour,  and  make  us  wise,  and  worthy,  and  respectable.     The  s mie  is 
true  of  our  whole  education  here  for  eternity.    This  also  may  miscarry ;  and  instead 
of  qualifying  us  for  the  habitations  of  the  just,  and  a  place  among  superior  beings, 
it  may  leave  us  fit  associates  only  for  evil  beings,  or  issue  m  our  ruin  ;  and  one  of 
the  most  terrifyinu;  of  all  reflections  is,  that  in  both  cases  these  miscarriages  are 
common.     I  shall  conclude  with  desiring  your  attention  to  the  following  reflections. 
1.  It  leads  us  to  reflect  on  the  wisdom  of  God  in  ordering  the  scenes  of  our  exis- 


CHAP.  XIII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  293 

tence.  He  causes  us  to  rise  gradually,  and  to  qualify  ourselves  for  happiness,  as  a 
necessai-y  condition  of  obtaining  it.  2.  The  subject  on  which  I  have  been  dis- 
coursing should  teach  us  patience  under  the  trials  of  life,  and  reconcile  us  to  all 
present  ditiiculties.  3.  Tlie  observations  I  have  made  should  render  us  earnest  in 
our  endeavours  to  make  this  life  what  it  is  designed — a  preparation  for  a  better  life 
— an  introduction  to  glory — an  education  for  the  joys  of  angels.  {R.  Price,  D.D.) 
The  diversity  of  character  belonfihui  to  different  periods  of  life  : — I.  The  apostle,  by 
placing  the  characteristic  of  childhood  in  the  speech,  may  possibly  be  understood 
to  intimate  that  a  child  speaks  before  he  thinks.  Whether  this  be  here  particu- 
larly intended  or  not,  it  is  certainly  a  fault  very  observable  in  such  children  as  are 
not  restrained,  but  very  unbecoming  and  inconvenient  in  men.  We  readily  and 
fully  excuse  a  child  who  speaks  without  care  or  thought.  Gaiety  and  inattention 
are  natural  to  his  age,  and  neither  the  subject  nor  the  matter  of  his  prate  can  be 
important.  He  talks  of  trifles  only,  and  as  they  appear  to  his  puerile  conception. 
But  when  the  mind  is  employed  upon  many  suljjects,  the  speech  will  of  course  be 
deliberate  ;  some  degree  of  slowness  and  gravity  will  still  prevail  in  it,  and  a  greater 
degree  when  the  points  under  consideration  are  more  difficult  or  more  interesting. 
A  mature  understanding  has  constant,  gentle  exercise  in  the  government  of  the 
tongue ;  and  either  remissness  on  the  one  hand,  or  eagerness  on  the  other,  will  cer- 
tainly betray  itself  in  the  discourse.  Faults  of  these  opposite  kinds  are  to  be  found  in 
young  men  of  different  dispositions  ;  but  both  are  to  be  referred  to  the  samechildish 
ifoUy  of  speaking  before  they  think.  And  thus  a  young  man,  by  declaring  opinions 
before  he  has  well  considered  them,  becomes  afterwards  unable  ever  to  consider 
them  without  prejudice,  and  his  thoughts,  which  should  have  governed  his  speech, 
are  enslaved  by  it.  Another  part  of  the  character  of  a  child  is,  that  he  speaks  all 
he  thinks.  Intending  no  ill,  and  suspecting  none,  he  communicates  all  his  senti- 
ments and  designs  without  reserve  or  caution.  But  the  same  unhmited  openness 
is  not  suitable  to  the  transactions  among  men.  He  cannot  expect  any  success,  nor 
indeed  any  reputation  among  them,  who  has  not  some  degree  of  discretion  and 
reserve  and  habitual  secrecy.  Nor  is  it  only  in  the  conduct  of  business,  and  to 
guard  his  own  interests,  that  a  prudent  man  will  be  often  silent.  He  will  not  too 
freely  discuss  the  characters  of  other  men,  nor  speak  too  much  of  himself,  lest  he 
incur  the  reproach,  in  one  case,  of  envy  or  ill-nature ;  in  the  other,  of  self-conceit 
or  arrogance.  II.  The  next  note,  by  which  the  apostle  distinguishes  the  characters 
of  a  man  and  a  child,  is  taken  from  the  difference  of  their  inclinations.  Those  of 
a  child  are  always  governed  by  trifles.  The  things  which  strike  his  fancy,  which 
offer  him  immediate  pleasui-e,  how  minute,  how  momentary  soever,  are  the  objects 
of  his  pursuit.  But  manly  prudence  includes  in  it  attention  to  different  kinds  of 
good;  the  power  of  comparing  them  with  regard  both  to  their  iiitenseness  and 
duration;  and  the  habit  of  resisting  the  allurements  of  triHing,  short-lived 
pleasures,  and  of  being  directed  by  views  of  greater  and  more  lasting  happiness. 
He  who  suffers  his  mind  to  be  continually  engaged  by  mere  amusements,  and 
drawn  away  by  them  from  every  serious  employment  worthy  of  a  rational  being, 
whether  of  furnishing  himself  with  useful  knowledge  and  virtuous  habits  at  one 
period  of  life,  or  at  another  of  providing  for  the  interests  of  a  family,  a  neigh- 
bourhood, or  the  public ;  though  his  years  may  not  be  few,  nor  his  amusements  the 
same  as  in  his  childhood,  is  yet  in  the  eye  of  reason  still  a  child :  not  indeed  in 
innocence,  for  a  constant  attachment  to  things  of  little  value  is  not  a  little  criminal ; 
but  in  folly  and  perverseness.  III.  In  the  judgment  consists  the  third  great 
distinction  jjetween  the  characters  of  a  man  and  child.  With  little  experience,  and 
less  exercise  of  his  rational  faculties,  a  child  cannot  have  formed  for  himself  any 
principles  on  which  he  may  build  real  knowledge.  He  must  of  necessity  learn  many 
truths  without  the  proper  evidence  of  them,  which  yet  he  may  afterwards  by  slow 
degrees  discover.  Nor  are  they  the  principles  of  knowledge  only  which  he  receives 
implicitly.  Eules  of  conduct  also  he  gathers  from  examples  before  he  is  able  to 
understand  their  foundations.  But  it  becomes  a  man  to  judge  and  act  for  himself  : 
to  examine  as  a  critic,  not  receive  as  a  disciple,  all  the  reasoning  proposed  to  him, 
and  to  direct  his  conduct  by  his  own  judgment,  not  by  a  blind  submission  to 
examples.  He  who  takes  his  opinions  without  inquiry,  though  from  the  most 
accurate  philosopher,  has  no  mme  real  knowledge  than  the  child  who  takes  them 
from  his  nurse.  For  in  science  that  only  is  our  own  which  we  have  earned  by  our 
attention  and  labour.  What  is  cast  upon  us  from  the  stores  of  others,  without  our 
claim  or  merit,  loses  its  value  in  passing,  and  cannot  enrich  us.  And  he  who  in 
the  regulation  of  his  life  is  influenced  by  foolish  fashions  of  which  he  has  formed 


294  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 


DO  judgment,  or  can  give  no  approbation,  may  be  justly  charged  with  the  negli- 
gence or  the  weakness  of  a  child.  (IF.  S.  Powell,  D.D.)  Childish  and  manly 
love  .-—Let  us  examine  this  love  as  it  manifests  itself  in  the  child,  and  afterward 
in  the  man.  Love  in  childhood  is  but  love  "  in  part."  It  is  lovely  and  lovable, 
but  it  is  not  i)erfect ;  it  is  not  the  truest  love.  The  love  of  manhood  takes  up  the 
germ  of  love  in  the  child,  like  as  the  tiee  absorbs  and  develop^  the  germ  in  the  seed. 
The  child's  love  is  love,  but  it  is  founded  in  ignorance,  and  is  the  creature  of 
inrpulse.  I.  That  the  atiainment  to  manhood  in  love  cos  is  an  effort.  You 
are  not  only  to  develop  out  of  the  child's  love,  but  you  are  to  "put  away  childish 
things."  II.  Manhood  in  love  puts  away  only  childishness,  not  childlikeness. 
All  that  is  good  is  to  be  kept  by  the  growing  man.  The  child's  love  is  gentle,, 
sincere,  confiding,  honest,  simple;  retain  all  this,  and  add  to  it,  by  putting  away 
the  "  childish  ''  peevishness,  and  ignorance,  and  vacillations.  1.  One  of  the  weak- 
nesses of  a  child  is  his  longing  to  outgrow  childhood.  The  apple-tree  in  blossom  is 
beautiful.  So  is  the  perfect  tree.  A  child  wlien  a  child,  a  man  when  a  man,  are 
alike  beautiful.  2.  One  of  the  greatest  magnets  on  earth  is  a  little  child.  A  child 
is  a  purifier  of  our  evil  thoughts  and  passions.  All  that  is  thus  excellent  in  the  child 
retain,  cultivate,  put  not  away.  III.  The  cultivation  of  a  manly  love,  feee  from 
CHiLDisriNESS,  is  WORTHY  OP  MANHOOD.  1.  "When  the  powers  of  manly  love  are- 
enlaiged,  it  is  easy  to  rid  ourselves  of  childishness.  2.  Manly  love  is  quite  likely 
to  assert  itself  as  we  approach  manliood.  3.  Manly  love  is  of  the  highest  worth — 
"  Greatest  of  these  "  is  love.  4.  Manly  love  moves  the  hand  as  well  as  the  heart. 
It  is  self-sacrilicing  and  yielding.  5.  It  is  invincible.  Becomes  strong  by  "  long- 
suffering."  It  "  endures  all  things."  In  conclusion — 1.  How  can  we  be  content 
with  the  unripe  and  the  imperfect  ?  We  should  become  men ;  not  be  fickle,  impul- 
sive, i<?uoiant  in  our  love.  2.  Paul's  love  enabled  him  to  endure  as  a  good  soldier. 
His  life  was  not  child's  play.  Be  strong,  be  manly  ;  "  put  away  childish  things  "  in 
manly  love.  {Thomas  Annitage,  D.D.)  On  the  duties  belonging  to  vuddlc  age  : — As. 
there  are  duties  whiiih  belong  to  particular  situations  of  fortune,  so  there  are  duties- 
also  which  result  from  particular  periods  of  human  life.  I.  1  begin  with  observing 
that  the  first  duty  of  those  who  are  become  men  is,  as  the  text  expresses  it,  to  put- 
away  childish  things.  The  season  of  youthful  levities,  follies,  and  passions  is- 
now  over.  Some  things  may  even  be  graceful  in  youth,  which,  if  not  criminal,  are 
at  least  ridiculi)us,  in  persons  of  maturer  years.  It  is  a  great  trial  of  wisdom  to 
make  our  relreat  from  youth  with  propriety.  It  becomes  us  neither  to  overleap- 
those  boundaries  by  a  transition  too  hasty  and  violent ;  nor  to  hover  too  long  on 
one  side  of  the  limit  when  nature  calls  us  to  pass  over  to  the  other.  There  are- 
particularly  two  things  in  which  middle  age  should  preserve  its  distinction  and 
separation  from  youth  ;  these  are  levities  of  behaviour,  and  intemperate  indulgence 
of  pleasure.  Higher  occupations,  more  serious  cares,  await  you.  Turn  your  mind 
to  the  steady  and  vigorous  discharge  of  the  part  you  are  called  to  act.  This  leads 
me — II.  To  POINT  out  the  particular  duties  which  open  to  those  who  are 
in  the  middle  period  of  life.  The  time  of  youth  was  the  preparation  for 
future  action.  In  old  age  our  active  part  is  suj)posed  to  be  finished,  and  rest  is. 
permitted.  Middle  age  is  the  season  when  wo  are  expected  to  display  the  fruits 
which  education  had  prepared  and  ripened.  In  this  world  all  of  us  were  formed 
to  be  assistants  to  one  anothei.  The  wants  of  society  call  for  every  man's  labour, 
and  require  vnrious  dt-partments  to  be  filled  up.  No  one  is  permitted  to  be  a  mere 
blank  in  the  world.  This  is  the  precept  of  God.  This  is  the  voice  of  nature.  This 
is  the  just  demand  of  the  human  race  upon  one  another.  One  of  the  first  ques- 
tions, therefore,  which  every  man  who  is  in  the  vfgour  of  his  age  should  put  to 
himself  is,  "  What  am  I  didng  in  this  world?  What  hH,ve  I  yet  done,  whereby  I 
may  glorify  God,  and  be  us.-ful  to  my  fellows?  Do  I  properly  fill  up  the  place 
which  belongs  to  my  rank  and  station?"  In  fine,  industry,  in  all  its  virtuous 
forms,  ought  to  inspirit  and  invigorate  manhood.  This  will  add  to  it  both  satisfac- 
tion and  dignit}';  will  make  the  current  of  our  years,  as  they  roll,  flow  along  in  a 
clear  and  equable  stream,  w^ithout  the  putrid  stagnation  of  sloth  and  idleness. 
Idlt-ness  is  the  great  corrupter  of  youth,  and  the  bane  and  dishonour  of  middle  age. 
III.  To  guard  with  vigilance  against  the  peculiar  dangers  which  attend  the 
period  of  middle  life.  It  is  much  to  be  legretted  that  in  the  present  state  of 
things  there  is  no  period  of  man's  age  in  which  his  virtue  is  not  exposed  to  perils. 
Pleasuie  lays  its  snares  for  youth  ;  and,  after  the  season  of  youthful  follies  is  past, 
other  temptations,  no  less  formidable  to  virtue,  presently  arise.  The  love  of  plea- 
sure is  succeeded  by  the  passion  for  interest.   In  this  passion  the  whole  mind  is  too 


CHAP.  XIII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  295 

often  absorbed;  and  the  change  thereby  induced  on  the  character  is  of  no  amiable 
kind.  It  deadens  the  feeling  of  everything  that  is  sublime  or  refined.  It  contracts 
the  affections  within  a  narrow  circle,  and  extinguishes  all  those  sparks  of  generosity 
and  tenderness  which  once  glowed  in  the  breast.  In  proportion  as  worldly  pursuits 
multiply,  and  competitions  rise,  ambition,  jealousy,  and  envy  combine  with 
interest  to  excite  bad  passions,  and  to  increase  the  corruption  of  the  heart.  To 
these,  and  many  more  dangers  of  the  same  kind,  is  tbe  man  exposed  who  is  deeply 
engaged  in  active  life.  No  small  degree  of  firmness  in  religious  principle,  and  of 
constancy  in  virtue,  is  requisite,  in  order  to  prevent  his  being  assimilated  to  the 
spirit  of  the  world,  and  carried  away  by  the  multitude  of  evildoers.  Let  him  there- 
fore call  to  mind  those  principles  which  ought  to  fortify  him  against  such  tempta- 
tions to  vice.  Let  not  the  affairs  of  the  world  entirely  engross  his  time  and 
thoughts.  From  that  contagious  air  which  be  breathes  in  the  midst  of  it,  let  him 
sometmies  retreat  into  the  salutary  shade  consecrated  to  devotion  and  to  wisdom. 
In  order  to  render  this  medicine  of  the  mind  more  effectual,  it  will  be  highly 
proper^IV.  That,  as  we  advance  in  the  course  of  teaks,  we  often  attend  to 

THE    LAPSE    OF    TIME    AND    LIFE,    AND    TO     THE     REVOLUTIONS    WHICH     THESE   ARE     EVER 

EFFECTING.  In  thls  meditation,  one  of  the  first  reflections  which  should  occur  is, 
how  much  we  owe  to  that  God  who  hath  hitherto  helped  us ;  who  hath  guided 
us  throuj^h  the  slippery  paths  of  youth,  and  now  enables  us  to  flourish  in  the 
strength  of  manhood.  Eiing  to  mind  the  various  revolutions  which  jou  have 
beheld  in  human  affairs,  since  you  became  actors  on  this  busy  theatre.  To  the 
future,  we  are  often  casting  an  eager  eye,  and  fondly  stoiing  it,  in  our  imagination, 
with  many  a  pleasing  scene.  But  if  we  would  look  to  it,  like  wise  men,  let  it  be 
under  the  persuasion  that  it  is  nearly  to  resemble  the  past  in  bringing  forward  a 
jnixture  of  alternate  hopes  and  fears,  of  griefs  and  joys.  While  we  thus  study  to 
correct  the  errors,  and  to  provide  against  the  dangers  which  are  peculiar  to  this 
stage  of  life,  let  us  also — V.  Lay  foundation  for  comfort  in  old  age.  That  is  a 
period  which  all  expect  and  hope  to  see  ;  and  to  which,  amidst  the  toils  of  the 
world,  men  sometimes  look  forward,  not  without  satisfaction,  as  to  the  period  of 
retreat  and  rest.  But  let  them  not  deceive  themselves.  A  joyless  and  dreary 
season  it  will  prove  if  they  arrive  at  it  with  an  unimproved  or  corrupted  mind. 
First,  he  who  wishes  to  render  his  old  age  comfortable,  should  study  betimes  to 
enlarge  and  improve  his  mind  ;  and  by  thought  and  inquiry,  by  reading  and  reflect- 
ing, to  acquire  a  taste  for  useful  knowledge.  This  will  provide  for  him  a  great  and 
noble  entertainment  when  other  entertainments  leave  him.  Among  the  measures 
thus  taken  for  the  latter  scenes  of  life,  let  me  admonish  every  one  not  to  forget  to 
put  his  worldly  affairs  in  order  in  due  time.  {H.  Blair,  D.I).)  Expansion  of  mind  : — 
The  narrow  dopma  makes  no  allowance  for  the  expansion  of  men's  hearts  and  brains, 
and  therefore  becomes  obsolete.  The  society  which  is  bashed  on  rigid  bigoted  small 
rules  and  pedantic  formulas  breaks  up,  because  no  arrangements  have  been  made  for 
the  inevitable  expansion  of  the  hopes  and  opinions  of  its  members.  There  must  be 
room  for  expansion.  This  is  perfectly  well  understood  in  the  arts,  and  practical  men 
make  proper  arrangements  in  obedience  to  this  law.  The  bars  of  furnaces  nmst  not  be 
fitted  tightly  at  their  extremities,  but  at  least  must  be  free  at  one  end,  otherwise  in 
expanding  they  would  split  the  masonry.  In  making  railways  a  small  space  is  left 
between  the  successive  rails,  for  if  they  touched,  the  force  of  expansion  would  cause 
them  to  curve  or  would  break  the  chairs.  Water  pipes  are  fitted  to  one  another  by 
means  of  telescopic  joints,  which  allow  room  for  expansion.  In  every  department 
there  must  be  provision  made  for  expansion.  (Scientific Illuslratiom.)  Freimra- 
tory  processes  : — It  frequently  happens  that  the  very  insects  which  we  most  admire, 
■which  are  decorated  with  the  most  brilliant  colours,  and  which  soar  on  the  most 
ethereal  wings,  have  passed  the  greater  portions  of  their  lives  as  burrowers 
beneath  the  surface  of  the  earth.  The  well-known  Mayfly  or  ephemera,  so  delicate 
in  its  gauzy  wings,  so  marvellous  in  its  muscular  power,  which  enables  the  new- 
born being  to  disport  itself  in  the  air  for  a  period  which,  in  comparison  with  our 
own  lives,  is  equal  to  at  least  forty  years,  and  passing  the  greater  portion  of  its 
terrestrial  existence  as  an  inhabitant  of  the  air — has  spent  a  life  of  some  three 
years  or  more  hidden  from  human  gaze.  Let  this  fact  remind  young  people  who 
are  impatiently  anxious  to  soar  high  in  the  world's  notice,  that  there  are  prei^ara- 
tory  processes  necessary  for  aerial  spirits.  The  orator  susta'^is  the  flight  of  his 
eloquence  all  the  better,  and  the  flgures  of  his  rhetoric  are  all  tne  brighter,  because 
he  spends  the  first  portion  of  his  life  burrowing  in  the  usf-ful  obscurity  of  a  libraiy. 
Away  from  all  distractions,  in  the  seclusion  of  reading  and  meditation,  he  acquires 


296  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xin. 

the  intellectnal  powers  which  enable  liim  to  rise  to  his  proper  sphere.     (Ibid.) 
Human    develoixuent : — I.    Man  in   the    infancy    of   his    being.      1.    His  speech 
imperfect,  childish.     2.  His  understanding  weak,  hmited,  easily  deceived.     3.  His 
thought  and    reasoning,  trifling,    foolish,  erring.      II.    Man   in    the    course    of 
DEVELOPirENT.     1.  Under  instruction  and  discipline.     2.  Accumulating  experience. 
3.  Looking  forward  in  hope.     III.  Man  in  his  maturity.     1.  Fully  developed  in 
heaven.     2.  Bids  farewell  to  the  toys  of  earth.     3.  Has  clearer  perceptions,  grander 
views,  nobler  ohjects.     (J.  Lijth,  D.D.)         The  j^resent  life  the  infant  state  of  man  : 
— Note  the  truth  of  this.     I.  In  regard  to  mankind  in  general.     Man  is  a  more 
noble  being  than  he  appears,  and  was  desit-'ned  for  nobler  ends  than  he  attains.     1. 
If  God  expended  so  much  labour  in  creating  men  and  the  world  they  live  in,  that 
they  might  be  happy  and  illustrate  His  glory,  their  present  existence,  unconnected 
with  a  future  st^te,  shows  neither  His  wisdom,  goodness,  nor  justice,  but  casts 
obscurity  over  them  all.     Men  do  not  here  receive  the  punishment  due  to  tbeir  sins 
nor  arrive  at.  the  perfection  either  of  their  powers  or  happiness.     2.  The  Author  of 
our  being,  who  designed  us  for  immortality,  placed  us  in  this  infant  state  to  ripen 
p,s  for  a  glorious  and  eternal  manhood.     Our  greatest  growth  here,  compared  with 
our  futuie  dimensions,  does  not  transcend  the  size  of  children.     This  world  is  only 
the  nursery,  or  the  cradle  in  which  souls  yet  in  swaddling  bands  are  rocked  for 
jmniortality.     3.  How  miserably  do  they  overlook  the  dignity  of  man  who  contem- 
plate him  only  in  the  present  life.     What  wretched  miscalculation  to  consume  all 
their  cares  in  making  provisions  for  this  infant  state,  and  neglect  to  pi'ovide  for 
the  happiness  of  a  vigorous  and   eternal   manbood.     II.  In  regard  to  worldly 
iT^v.     Tlieir  views,  tastes,  knowledge,  pleasures,  &c.,  all  bespeak  them  children. 
Oorrpared  with  the  high  and  noble  end  for  which  they  were  made,  what  trifles  they 
are  pleased  with  and  ihev  pursue  !     Compared  with  the  dimensions  and  dignity  of 
a  glorified  saint,  the  wealth  of  Croesus  and  the  honours  of  Caesar  are  mere  play- 
things.     Are  they  not  children  ?      Mark  how  they  pursue  their  little  jjleasures 
without  any  dignified  and  manly  aim — what  want  of  foresight  for  their  future  well- 
bei'^.g.     Subject  to  disappointments  and  sorrows,  the  children  often  fret  and  cry. 
They  speak  as  a  child,  understand  as  a  child,  etc.     Ah  1  when  will  they  become 
Kjen  and  put  away  childish  things  ?     Cast  aside  your  toys  and  raise  your  thougbts 
to  objects  wortby  of  men — to  the  kingdom  and  glory  of  God — to  infinite  interests 
and  immortal  concerns.     Many  deem  it  manly  to  neglect  religion,  and  account  it 
childish  to  yield  to  piety.     But  they  ajspear  to  angels  as  one  would  appear  to  us 
who  at  the  age  of  tiftv  should  busy  himself  in  making  houses  in  the  sand.     And  it 
would  have  been  better  for  them  always  to  have  remained  children.     A  child  is 
satisfied  with  his  baul>les  :  but  they,  possessed  of  capacities  which  nothing  but  God 
can  fill,  remain  restless  and  uneasy  with  all  their  toys  about  them.     III.  In  regard 
TO  Christians  themselves.     1.    They  speak   of  Divine  things  as  a  child,  using 
expressions  which  no  more  reach  the  extent  of  the  subject  than  the  prattling  of 
children  about  the  moon  conveys  a  full  idea  of  that  luminary.     They  had  no  other 
language  for  these  subjects  than  that  of  Scripture,  which,  being  adapted  to  the 
weakness  of  our  apprehensions,  is  little  more  than    an   association    of    images 
borrowed  from  sensible  objects.     But  when  they  arrive  at  manhood  they  will  use  a 
language  expressive  of  things  as  they  are — a  language  no  longer  darkened  with  the 
shadow  of  figures,  but  taken  from  the  very  light  of  the  subjects  themselves,  and  as 
luminous  as  truth.     2.  Here  their  conceptions  of  heavenly  things  are  extremely 
crude.     All  are  largely  mingled  with  ideas  borrowed  from  sensible  objects.     But 
when  they  arrive  at  manhood  their  conceptions  will  be  correct.     3.  In  this  life 
their  under.standings  are  feeble  and  contracted,  are  darkened  by  ignorance,  are  per- 
verted by  prejudice,  are  liable  to  errors  and  misconstructions  of  the  Word  of  God. 
But  in  heaven  they  will  all  see  eye  to  eye,  and  be  united  in  the  most  sublime  and 
delightful  views  of  Divine  truth.     Here  they  are  limited  to  a  very  imperfect  know- 
ledge of  God's  will,  and  are  often  pi'essed  with  doubts  respecting  their  duty ;  but 
there  all  duty  will  be  made  plain.     Here  their  views  are  confined  to  a  small  circle; 
there  they  will  take  in  the  universe.     Here,  with  all  the  helps  they  enjoy,  they 
know  but  little  of  God  ;  there  they  will  see  as  they  are  seen  and  know  as  they  are 
known.     No  longer  limited  to  the  hopes  and  anticipations  of  childhood,  they  will 
have  arrived  at  the  full  attainment  of  their  sui^reme  good.     No  longer  confined  to 
the  company  of  children,  they  will  enjoy  the  society  of  the  glorious  army  of  patri- 
archs, prophets,  apostles,  &c.     No  longer  limited  to  the  low  pursuits  of  this  infant 
state,  all  their  faculties  will  be  employed  in  the  most  noble  parts  of  the  Divine 
service.      How  vastly  their  powers  will  be  enlarged  cannot  now  be  told.      Was 


CHAP.  XIII.]  2.  CORINTHIANS.  297 

Newton  a  child  ?    Was  Solomon  a  child  ?     What  then  is  a  man  ?     {E,  D.  Griffin, 
D.D.) 

Ver.  12.  For  now  we  see  through  a  g-lass  darkly. — Seeing  darldy ; — I.  We  see 
THBODOH  A  GLASS  DARKLY.  1.  There  is  a  literal  significance  in  these  words.  With 
our  physical  ogans  of  vision  we  do  not  see  essential  realities.  This  is  an 
elementary  law  of  optics ;  our  sensuous  vision  is  only  a  mirror  upon  which  realities 
cast  shadows.  2.  We  see  our  fellow-men  with  double  veils  between  ourselves  and 
them — they  hidden  from  us  in  a  drapery  of  flesh,  and  we  looking  through  the 
glazed  windows  of  our  own  organism.  How  much  do  we  really  know  of  them  ? 
The  lesson  here  is  that  we  should  think  more  charitably  of  our  fellow-men.  Under 
the  hardest  concealment  there  is  some  goodness  that  shrinks  from  exposing  itself, 
and  the  most  careless  and  frivolous  have  their  moments  of  thought  and  devotion. 
If  ever  one  man  is  truly  revealed  to  anotlier,  it  is  only  by  the  agency  of  love  and 
sympathy.  The  lightnings  of  the  satirist  do  not  rend  open  the  door  of  the  deepest 
heart.  6.  So  it  is  with  the  forms  and  objects  of  the  actual  world,  the  chemist,  the 
botanist,  the  physiologist,  after  all  how  much  below  the  rind  have  they  pierced  ? 
How  soon  they  are  balked  ?  The  moment  they  get  below  forms  and  positions,  and 
certam  relations  of  things,  everything  becomes  as  impalpable  as  the  shapes  that 
pass  over  the  surface  of  the  mirror.  Science,  with  all  it  has  achieved,  is  merely  a 
catalogue  of  appearances ;  its  terminology  is  merely  a  set  of  equivalents,  words 
masking  the  deep  facts  which  we  do  not  know.  The  chemist  boasts  that  he  can 
almost  reconstruct  the  original  tissues  of  the  human  frame.  But  what  then  ?  He 
cannot  ^live  life  ;  nay,  he  cannot  even  tell  what  it  is.  4.  Astronomy  is  the 
oldest  and  most  complete  of  all  the  sciences.  Yet  the  questions  in  Job  are  just  as 
applicable  to  our  day  as  to  his.  It  is  a  singular  fact  that  objects  which  are  the 
most  remote  from  us  fall  within  the  arrangements  of  this  most  complete  science. 
The  nearer  we  get  to  our  personality,  the  more  deep  the  problems  become. 
Astronomy  is  ?o  satisfactory  only  because  we  are  not  near  enough  tn  it  to  touch  the 
real  problems  which  it  presents.  The  most  familiar  objects — how  the  grass  grows, 
how  the  finders  move — become  to  us  unexplainable.  And  if,  then,  it  is  thus  with 
the  more  familiar  objects,  how  is  it  with  unknown  realities  or  those  which  are 
known  only  by  intermediate  i-evelations  ?  5.  Now  if  the  creations  of  God  which 
are  most  intimate  are  confessedly  but  as  shadows  of  shapes  upon  a  mirror,  how 
must  it  be  with  the  infinite  God  Himself?  We  behold  Him  only  thmugh  His 
works,  and  there  as  in  a  glass  darkly.  And  so  in  regard  to  His  providential  dealings 
with  us.  We  cannot  take  in  the  vastness  of  God's  plan,  surely,  if  we  cannot  take 
in  the  essence  of  His  works  !  We  behold  only  processes,  parts  of  thintrs.  As  the 
child  that  might  come  into  the  laboratory  of  his  father,  the  chemist,  could  not 
begin  to  comprehend  from  the  transaction  in  which  the  father  was  engaged  the 
great  work  at  which  he  aimed,  so  we,  children  all  of  us,  in  a  thousand  years  see 
but  one  of  God's  processes,  and  yet  we  talk  and  act  as  though  we  saw  the  whole, 
and  challenge  the  Almighty  because  everyihing  is  not  made  clearly  cousisteut  with 
our  idea  of  His  goodness.  God's  most  beneficent  agencies  appear  to  us  only  in 
shadow  at  the  best.  And  thus  it  is  that  even  the  most  beneficent  providences  of 
God  sometimes  appear  like  the  ministers  of  wrath.  We  see  but  the  transient 
aspects  of  death ;  it  is  but  a  shadow  on  the  miiTor,  and  this  is  a  lesson  for  our 
faith  in  all  the  workings  of  God.  II.  Although  we  see  darkly,  we  do  see 
SOMETHING.  1.  It  IS  not  a  mere  reflection,  it  is  a  reality  behind  the  reflection. 
There  are  shadows,  but  there  never  is  a  shadow  without  something  to  cast  a 
shadow.  And  remember  also  it  is  we  who  see  darkly,  not  thnt  the  things  them- 
selves are  dark.  Faith,  therefore,  is  the  only  legitimate  conclusion  from  the  (•ap4city 
of  seeing  at  all.  (1)  What  do  you  make  of  these  instincts  of  something  higher  and 
something  better  that  have  prevailed  in  all  ages  of  the  world  and  in  all  souls? 
are  all  these  the  images  of  nothingness?  How  can  we  have  the  shadows  without 
the  substance,  or  have  the  forms  of  things  mirrored  before  us  that  do  not  exist  in 
reality  ?  (2)  And  then  the  affections,  tlie  great  working  of  man's  love,  there  is  the 
thing  that  Paul  fell  back  upon  in  this  chapter.  Man's  love  assure'^  us  that  in  this 
depth  of  nature  in  which  God  has  planted  within  us  there  must  be  something 
higher  and  better.  2.  There  is  great  grandeur  in  the  fact  that  Christianity  has 
not  made  a  full  revelation  of  the  things  to  come.  Tuere  is  a  reason  for  that  in  the 
discipline  we  ne^d.  Gradual  yrowih  must  develop  us  and  make  us  all  that  we 
should  be  ;  Christianity  should  not  reveal  everything  to  us.  But  at  the  same  timp, 
as  a  religion  of  benevolence,  Christianity  would  have  informed  us  if  these  great 


298  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiil. 

primary  instincts  played  us  false.  Jesus  Christ  would  have  told  us  if  these  affec- 
tions of  our  nature  prophesied  untruly.  Yes,  we  see  darlily,  but  we  do  see.  And 
in  that  fact  there  is  proof  that  we  shall  see  belter  face  to  face.  3.  Even  with  this 
dim,  imperfect  mirror  there  are  degrees  of  seeing.  We  all  see  darkly  enough — the 
clearest-sighted  of  us — but  sometimes  there  is  a  him  upon  the  eye  of  the  observer 
as  well  as  upon  the  mirror.  (1)  Sometimes  men  have  their  eyes  darkened  all  over 
with  the  scales  of  appetite,  so  that  all  that  they  see  is  distorted,  is  made  abomin- 
able. (2)  And  sometimes  men  see  nothing  on  the  mirror  of  this  life  but  a  gigantic 
image  of  self.  Like  the  giant  of  the  Hartz  Mountains,  they  see  projected  upon 
life  merely  an  enlarged  idea  of  their  own  wants  and  of  their  own  greatnes^s.  (;',) 
But  there  are  men  who  apprehend  the  reality  of  things  which  come  darkly,  and 
feel  that  there  is  a  substance  back  of  those  shadows.  4.  It  is  a  momentous  period 
in  our  being  when  a  man  awakes  to  a  sense  of  realities.  That  is  conversion  to 
come  to  a  sense  that  there  are  spiritual  realities  beyond  our  present  vision,  to  come 
to  a  sense  that  our  souls,  God,  Christ,  eternity  are  real.  {E.  H.  Chapin,  D.D.) 
The  body,  the  dark  medium  of  spiritual  vision : — It  needs  no  illustration  to  show- 
that  our  vision  of  spiritual  things  is  very  dim.  The  cause  of  this  is  our  subject : 
the  medium  is  dark,  that  medium  is  the  body.  Through  the  five  senses  we  gather 
all  the  ligjits  that  flash  on  our  consciousness  and  form  within  us  ideas.  But  why 
is  it  dark?  The  body  tends — I.  To  materialise  the  conceptions  of  the  mind. 
We  ''judge  after  the  flesh."  II.  To  sway  the  decisions  of  the  mind.  "The 
desires  of  the  flesh  "  often  move  and  master  the  soul.  III.  To  clog  the  opera- 
tions of  the  mind.  Business,  sleep,  refreshment,  exercise,  disease,  all  these  inter- 
rupt the  soul.  Our  visions  of  spiritual  things  being  so  dim.  Conclusion:  1.  None 
should  pride  themselves  in  their  knowledge.  2.  None  should  arrogate  infallibility 
of  judgment.  3.  We  should  anticipate  biighter  and  fuller  visions,  when  the 
medium  is  removed,  and  we  "  see  face  to  face."  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  enigma 
of  life : — The  idea  seems  to  be  that  just  as  when  a  man  looks  into  a  metal  mirror, 
such  as  the  ancients  used,  sees  only  a  dim  and  ghost-lilce  reflection  of  himself; 
so  we,  gazing  ever  upon  the  world  of  the  known,  see  at  best  but  a  shadow  of  the 
truth.  And  just  as  a  man  puzzling  over  a  riddle  which  is  insoluble,  sees  a  half,  or 
some  less  or  greater  portion,  of  the  meaning  wrapped  up  in  it,  so  it  is  with  refer- 
ence to  all  our  knowledge.  It  does  but  amount  to  a  guess  more  or  less  near  or 
wide  of  the  truth.  Truth  is  wrapped  in  a  riddle,  life  is  a  great  and  unexplained 
parable,  but  what  urges  us  on  is  the  feeling  that  by  and  by  we  shall  stand  face  to 
face  with  the  reality,  and  shall  no  more  have  to  content  ourselves  with  its  mere 
representation.  I.  The  enigma  of  life.  An  enigma  is  a  form  of  thought  and 
speech  which  half  reveals  and  half  conceals  the  soul  of  truth.  If  you  take  any  of 
those  proverbs  which  form  the  current  thought-coin  of  the  world,  you  will  find  it 
to  be  only  a  hint  of  the  truth  to  which  it  points.  Hence  almost  every  such  saying 
may  be  capped  by  others  which  express  the  exact  opposite.  There  are  proverbs 
which  tell  us  that  to  live  for  the  day  is  the  best  wisdom,  others  which  tell  us  to 
"  consider  the  end  ;  "  some  which  emphasise  the  value  of  money,  others  which  warn 
that  loss  is  more  profitable  than  gain.  For  we  are  many-sided  creatures,  and  truth, 
to  seem  like  truth  at  all,  must  be  chameleon-like  in  its  aspect.  Our  Saviour 
deliberately  taught  the  multitude  in  riddles,  which  are  but  transcripts  of  that 
immense  parable  of  nature  and  human  life  on  which  we  are  ever  gazing.  1. 
Nature  is  full  of  oracles  which  never  say  quite  clearly  what  is  meant.  God 
addresses  us  in  an  oblique,  not  in  a  direct  manner.  There  are  times  of  anxiety 
when  we  wish  it  would  please  God  to  speak  to  us  no  more  in  these  riddles.  But  if 
the  wish  were  granted  it  would  be  unbearable,  and  your  prayer  would  soon  be  thafi 
this  excess  of  knowledge  might  be  again  hidden  from  your  soul.  2.  What  an 
enigma  is  human  nature  !  Few  of  us  kn%w  anything  but  the  surface.  The  great 
masters  in  poetry  go  a  little  below,  but  not  far.  What  is  human  nature  ?  Good  or 
evil  ?  Or,  neither  good  nor  evil,  but  a  mixture  or  conflict,  a  result  determined  by 
education  and  circumstance?  None  but  the  ignorant  will  undertake  to  answer 
such  questions  otJ-hand.  You  or  I  know  as  much  about  it  as  Calvin  or  as  Shake- 
speare, which  is  not  much.  The  soul  is  the  enigma  of  enigmas.  It  is  the  meeting- 
point  of  heaven  and  hell.  It  is  the  scene  of  contention  of  good  and  evil  spirits. 
The  angel  and  the  demon,  the  saint  and  the  sinner,  are  in  each  heart.  We  look 
from  day  to  day  into  the  mirror  of  conscience,  and  see  an  image  fainter  or  clearer 
of  self.  We  note  changes  in  that  self,  yet  fiud  that  self  the  same.  Sometimes  that 
image  frightens  us,  and  again,  under  the  spell  of  music  or  of  prayer,  a  celestial 
glory  falls  upon  that  image.     II.  What  is  the  temper  of  mind  that  befits  us 


CHAP.  XIII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  290 


IN  PRESENCE  OF  THIS  ENIGMA  ?  1.  Evidently  a  lowly  habit,  the  very  opposite  of  all 
conceit  and  dogmatism  about  the  great  problems  of  existence.  Things  mean  much 
more  than  they  seem  to  any  one  of  us.  Humility,  the  sense  that  our  opinions  are 
very  partial,  begets  slowly  a  truer  judgment  of  tlie  relative  value  of  things.  We 
learn  to  appraise  the  contents  of  the  world,  and  giadually  to  give  them  their  right 
place  in  the  scale  of  spiiitual  value.  And  we  may  learn,  above  all,  better  to  know 
our  own  place  and  value,  somewhere  between  the  highest  and  the  lowest  point.  2. 
And  thus,  through  lowliness,  we  may  reach  patience  and  leisure  of  mind;  for  we 
must  not  be  hasty  or  impatient  if  we  would  live  with  God.  Our  easjerness  to  come 
to  conclusions  and  to  set  the  world  to  rights  may  imply  a  foryetfulness  that  the 
world  is  in  God's  charge,  not  ours.  Our  anxiety  to  get  to  a  terminus  seems  to 
ignore  that  we  have  all  eternity  before  us.  Every  great  subject  requires  to  be  re- 
examined, every  great  book  to  be  re-studied  and  revised.  The  forms  of  our  religion 
must  iindert/o  incessant  change  ;  its  essence  abides,  for  the  spirit  of  Jesus  is  the 
essence  of  Christianity.  This  is  rooted  not  in  any  jDarticular  sort  of  intellectual 
acquirement,  but  simply  in  love.  Love  alone  abideth.  III.  Love  is  the  last 
SOLUTION  of  the  ENIGMA  OF  LIFE.  As  a  principle  in  our  own  minds,  love,  says  St. 
Paul,  is  greater  than  either  faith  or  hope.  The  moment  the  spring  of  iove  dri'  s  in 
the  heart,  that  moment  we  cease  to  believe  and  to  hope.  If  we  are  true  to  love  in 
the  little  world  we  govern,  it  cannot  well  be  doubtful  that  He  is  true  to  love  in  the 
vast  woild  He  governs.  The  cause  of  any  serious  infidelity  that  exists  lies  here; 
men  doubt  whether  God  is  as  loving  as  themselves.  But  whence  came  your  own 
love  ?  You  did  not  create  it,  and  will  you  deny  the  Giver  in  the  very  strength  of 
His  gift?  We  cannot  explain  thn  problem  of  existence,  but  we  can  feel  that  that 
is  already  expl&ined  in  the  mind  of  God.  In  proportion  as  we  live  ni  God's  love, 
shall  we  find  the  faith,  and  the  hope,  and  the  courage  to  face  the  facts 
of  life,  so  long  as  those  qualities  are  n.  edul.  (Prof.  E.  tlohimon.)  Cini'ntlan 
iiiijstcric.<  .-—Why  God  has  mingled  with  the  revelation  of  His  will  to  man  so 
much  that  is  confessedly  obscure.  Note — I.  That  the  obscdkity  is  nothing 
MORE  than  is  to  ee  EXPECTED  FROM  ANALOGY.  It  is  remarkable  that  mysteries 
sensibly  multiply  as  knowledge  increases.  In  every  direction  we  soon  reach 
the  limits  of  human  knowledge.  How  little  does  the  educated  man  know  of 
the  mysteries  connected  with  our  bodily  frame  ;  but  let  the  physiologist  speak,  and 
he  will  tell  you  that  every  separate  member  and  vessel  and  nerve  of  the  human 
frame  is  iull  of  mystery.  The  peasant  that  turns  up  the  ground,  and  casts  in  the 
seed,,  perceives  no  mystery  in  its  growth  ;  bnt  the  philosopher,  who  understands  the 
wondeiful  process  of  vegetitiou,  is  conscious  of  ditlicult  es  which  he  cannot  solve 
in  its  several  stages  towards  maturity.  Since,  then,  there  is  so  much  that  is 
mysterious  in  the  natural  world,  revelation  is  the  production  of  the  sumt^  Being, 
and  bears  the  same  characteristic  feature  of  its  great  Original.    II.   Ihe  mystehioi  s 

PART  OF  CnuSTIANITY  ARISES  FROM  THE  VERY  NATURE    OF    THE    CHRISTIAN    REVELATION. 

The  truths  which  it  announces  transcend  the  comprehension  of  the  human  mind. 
"  Who  can  by  searching  find  out  God,  who  can  find  out  the  Almighty  to  perfec- 
tion ?  "  1.  The  doctrine  of  three  persons  in  one  God  is  an  instance  of  this.  The 
mystery  does  not  consist  in  any  ambiguity  of  language,  but  in  the  nature  of  the 
subject  ;  not  in  the  teacher,  but  in  the  small  ability  of  the  scholar.  2.  The  facts 
of  revelation  are  accompanied  with  a  similar  difficulty.  They  do  not  come  under 
human  observation.  Redemption  thiough  Chiist  is  a  series  of  operations  which 
stands  alone,  belongs  to  a  class  of  its  own,  and  is  not  to  be  judgci  of  by  the 
measuring  line  of  human  policy.  As  well  might  a  man,  ignorant  of  the  rules  of 
art,  pass  his  judgment  on  its  most  finished  production.  As  well  might  the  babe  of 
yesterday  exercise  his  faculties  on  the  higher  problems  of  nature,  as  men  attempt 
to  estimate  the  wisdom,  love,  and  mercy  that  shine  in  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ. 
"  His  ways  are  not  as  our  ways,  nor  His  thoughts  as  our  thoughts,"  &c.  3.  The 
regeneration  of  the  soul  transcends  ihe  common  observation.  It  is  a  fact  taught 
us  by  revelation,  and  experienced  by  the  subject  of  it ;  but  is  only  to  be  studied  and 
known  by  others  through  the  medium  of  its  results.  4.  The  resurrection  from  the 
dead  is  not  in  accordance  witli  our  experience.  We  have  no  means  of  ascertaining 
the  account  of  thist  ruth.  There  is  clearly  no  impossibility  in  it.  The  same  power 
that  formed  our  bodies  may  obviously  reconstruct  them.  It  is  a  field  of  Divine 
operation  into  which  we  cannot  enter,  and  the  mode  in  which  the  work  will  be 
accoinpli-hed  is  among  the  secrets  of  the  Deity.   III.  The  mystery  that  accompanies 

REVELATION  TENDS  TO  INCREASE  THE  EFFICACY  OF  THE  GOSPEL.     1.  It  tciids  tohumblc  US 

before  God,  which  is  the  great  end  of  the  gospel.     God  is  worthy  of  universal  adora- 


aOO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ciup.  xin. 

tion,  and  the  elements  of  this  exercise  of  the  mind  are  awe  and  reverential  feelins- 
But  this  state  of  mind  can  never  be  produced  by  anything  that  we  fully  understand. 
Familiarity  breeds  contempt.  The  more  distinctly  vi^e  realise  the  limits  of  our  know- 
ledpe  the  deeper  will  be  our  impression  of  the  grandeur  of  the  Divine  mind.  The 
■wisdom  of  God,  in  His  restorative  system  of  mercy,  abases  man  in  the  very  faculty 
which  caused  our  fall.  He  humbles  us  at  the  very  root  of  the  tree  of  knowledge, 
teaching  us  to  submit  our  understandings  to  the  guidance  of  His  Word.  2.  It  tends 
to  excite  our  diligence  in  examining  Divine  truth.  The  obscurity  that  conceals  it 
is  a  reason  for  continuing  our  researches.  God  has  made  His  revelation  of  a  kind 
to  try  our  best  faculties.  Were  all  that  is  to  be  known  easy  of  ai^prehensiou  it 
would  be  a  departure  from  the  usual  mode  of  Divine  procedure.  In  nature  the 
most  valuable  is  not  found  upon  the  surface.  Gold  is  dug  from  the  bowels  of  the 
earth,  and  pearls  are  gathered  from  the  depths  of  the  ocean.  3.  It  is  necessary  to 
make  us  more  desirous  of  heaven,  where  we  shall  enjoy  perfect  knowledge.  The 
attainment  of  the  loftiest  intellect  on  earth  is  but  the  alphabet  of  knowledge,  compared 
with  what  we  shall  know  hereafter.  4.  It  lies  at  the  foundation  of  the  Christian's 
hope.  It  must  be  mysterious  that  God  should  so  love  a  mined  world.  (S.  Sununers.) 
Now  and  then: — Paul  had  just  been  speaking  of  the  "  child  "  and  the  "  man,"  and 
no  doubt  that  but  dimly  represents  the  dilference  between  the  "  Now  "  in  this  world 
and  the  "  Then"  in  the  woild  to  come.  I.  Now.  1.  Oar  present  organs  of  vision 
implied  in  "  we  see."  These  are  our  mental  and  sjiiritual  powers  of  apprehension 
and  knowledge.  Through  these  we  learn  all  we  know  of  God.  But  these  organs 
are  weak  and  defective  by  reason — (1)  Of  sin.  (2)  Want  of  pi'oper  activity  and 
culture.  2.  Oar  present  medium  of  seeing — "  through  a  glass  darkly."  Spiritual 
and  Divine  things  are  seen  only  by  reflection,  and  that  which  reflects  is  incapable  of 
giving  a  full  representation,  because  of — (1)  Its  own  defectiveness.  (2)  Our  defective 
vision.  (3)  The  magnitude  of  that  which  is  to  be  revealed.  The  "  glass  "  through 
■which  we  see  consists  of  three  things — («)  Nature,  (h)  Revelation,  (c)  Providence. 
These  three  represent  God  in  His  woi'ks,  His  words,  and  His  ways.  But  that  there 
is  mystery  and  darkness  about  them  who  is  vain  enough  to  deny?  That  God  is  seen 
in  these  we  all  admit ;  but  when,  with  our  weak  vision,  we  peer  into  these  reflec- 
tors, what  more  can  we  say  than  that  "  we  see  through  a  glass  darkly."  II.  Then. 
1.  Our  future  organs  of  vision  will  be  very  much  the  same  as  "now";  but  how 
greatly  developed  and  improved  no  mortal  may  know.  The  comprehensive  know- 
ledge, the  strength  and  sweep  of  vision  enjoyed  by  the  redeemed  may  defy  the 
powers  of  the  most  daring  imagination  to  conceive.  2.  Our  futia-e  medium  of 
seeing—"  face  to  face."  No  glass  any  more,  but  blessed  contact — actual  presence. 
{1)  The  enormity  of  sin.  (2)  The  love  of  God  in  the  gift  of  His  Sod.  (:s)  The 
righteousness  of  God's  moral  government.  (2'.  Kelly.)  Now  and  tlfn  .-—There 
is  all  the  difference  between  viewing  an  object  through  an  obscure  medium  and 
clof^ely  inspecting  it  with  the  naked  eye.  "  Now  we  see  through  a  glass  darkly  "  in 
a  riddle  !  So  weak  are  our  perceptions  that  plain  truths  often  puzzle  us.  It  is  a 
matter  of  congratulation  that  we  do  see,  though  we  have  much  cause  for  diftidence, 
because  we  do  but  "see  through  a  glass  darkly."  Thank  God  we  do  know;  but 
let  it  check  our  conceit,  we  know  only  in  part.     Note — I.  Some  things  that  we  do 

SEE  now,  which  we  AEE  TO  SEE  MORE  FULLY  AND  DISTINCTLY  HEREAFTER.     1.  OurSclveS. 

To  see  ourselves  is  one  of  the  first  steps  in  true  I'eligion.  The  mass  of  men  have 
never  seen  themselves.  They  have  only  seen  the  flattering  image  of  themselves. 
(1)  We  have  been  taught  to  see  our  ruin  in  the  fall  and  our  actual  sinfulness.  But 
in  heaven  we  shall  see,  as  we  have  not  yet  seen,  how  desperate  a  mischief  was  the 
fall,  and  the  blackness  of  sin  as  we  have  never  seen  it  here.  (2)  We  know  to-day 
that  we  are  saved ;  but  that  robe  of  righteousness  which  covers  us  now,  as  it  shall 
cover  us  then,  will  be  better  seen  by  us.  (3)  Here  we  know  that  we  are  adopted ; 
but  there  we  shall  kuow  better  what  it  is  to  be  the  sons  of  God,  for  here  it  doth  not 
yet  appear  what  we  sball  be,  there  shall  we  not  only  see  the  estates  that  belong  to 
us,  but  actually  enjoy  tiiem.  2.  The  Church.  (1)  We  know  tliere  is  a  Church  of 
God,  but  there  we  shall  know  something  more  of  the  numbeis  of  the  chosen  than 
we  do  now,  it  may  be  to  our  intense  surprise.  There  we  shall  find  some  amongst 
the  company  of  God's  elect  whom  we  in  our  bittei'ness  of  spirit  had  condemned, 
and  there  we  shall  miss  some  who,  in  our  charity,  we  have  conceived  to  be  perfectly 
secure.  (2)  We  shull  understand  then  what  the  history  of  the  Church  has  been  in 
all  the  past,  and  why  it  has  been  so  strange  a  history  of  conflict  and  conquest.  3. 
The  providence  of  God.  (1)  We  believe  all  things  work  together  for  good  to  tbera 
that  love  God ;  but  still  it  is  rather  a  matter  of  faith  than  a  matter  of  sight  with 


CHAP,  xiii,]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  301 

us.  Then  some  of  us  will  say,  "  I  have  fretted  and  troubled  myself  over  what  was, 
after  all,  the  richest  mercy  the  Lord  ever  sent."  (2)  We  snail  there,  perhaps, 
discover  that  wars,  pestilences,  and  earthijuakes  are,  after  all,  nece-sary  cogs  in  the 
great  wheel  of  the  Divine  machinery ;  and  He  who  sits  upon  the  throne  at  tliis 
moment  will  then  make  it  manifest  to  us  that  His  government  was  right.  4.  The 
doctrines  of  the  gospel  and  the  mysteries  of  the  faiih.  How  much  more  of  authentic 
truth  shall  we  discern  when  the  mists  and  siiadows  have  dissolved;  and  how  much 
more  shall  we  understand  when  raised  to  that  higher  sphere  and  endowed  with 
brighter  faculties  none  of  us  can  tell.  5.  Jesus.  We  have  seen  enough  of  Him  to 
know  that  "He  is  altogether  lovely  "  ;  we  can  say  of  Him,  He  "  is  all  my  salvation. 
and  all  my  desire."  Yet  when  we  once  get  to  the  court  of  the  Great  King  we 
shall  declare  that  the  half  has  not  been  told  us.  The  streets  of  gold  will  have 
small  attraction  to  us,  and  the  harps  of  angels  will  but  slightly  enchant  us, 
compared  with  the  King  in  the  midst  of  tije  throne.  We  shall  see  Jesus. 
6.  The  pure  in  heart  shall  see  God.  God  is  seen  now  in  His  works  and  in 
His  Word.  Little  indeed  could  these  eyes  bear  of  tlie  beatific  vision,  yet  we  Ijave 
reason  to  expect  that,  as  far  as  creatures  can  bear  the  sight  of  the  infinite  Creator, 
we  shall  be  permitted  to  see  God.  II.  How  this  veky  ke.makkable  change  shall  be 
EFFECTED.  1.  No  doubt  many  of  these  things  will  be  more  clearly  reveale;!.  Here 
we  are  in  the  dim  twilight  ;  there  we  shall  be  in  the  blaze  of  noon.  God  Las 
declared  something  of  Himself  by  His  prophets  and  apostles.  He  ha*,  through 
His  Son,  spoken  more  plainly.  These  are  the  first  steps  to  knowledge.  Uut  there 
the  only-wise  God  shall  unveil  to  us  tlie  mysteries,  and  exhiidt  to  us  the  glories  of 
His  everlasting  kingdom.  The  revelation  we  now  have  suits  us  as  men  clad  in  our 
poor  mortal  bodies ;  the  revelation  then  will  suit  us  as  immortal  spirits.  2.  Here 
we  are  at  a  distance  from  many  of  the  things  we  long  to  know  something  of,  but 
there  we  shall  be  nearer  to  them.  3.  We  sh>ill  be  belter  qualified  to  see  them  than 
we  are  now.  It  would  be  an  inconvenience  for  us  to  know  here  as  much  as  we  shall 
know  in  heaven.  But  up  th^re  we  shall  have  our  minds  and  our  systems 
strengthened  to  receive  more,  without  the  damage  that  would  come  to  us  here  from 
overleaping  the  boundaries  of  order,  Divinely  apijointed.  4.  Besides,  the  atmosphere 
of  heaven  is  so  much  clearer  than  this.  Here  there  is  the  smoke  of  daily  care,  the 
constant  dust  of  toil,  the  mist  of  trouble  perpetually  rising.  III.  The  practical 
LESSONS.  1.  Gratitude.  Let  us  be  very  thankful  for  all  we  do  see.  Those  who 
do  not  see  now  even  "  through  a  glass  darkly,"  shall  never  see  face  to  face.  2. 
Hopefulness.  You  shall  see  better  by  and  by.  3.  Forbearance.  Our  disputes  are 
otten  childish.  Two  persons  in  the  dark  have  differed  about  a  colour.  If  we 
brought  candles  in  they  would  not  show  wiiat  it  was  ;  but  if  we  look  at  it  to-morrow 
morning  we  shall  be  able  to  tell.  How  many  difficulties  in  tiie  Word  of  God  are 
like  this  !  Not  yet  can  they  be  justly  discriminated  ;  till  the  day  davvn  the  apocalyp- 
tic symbols  will  not  be  all  transparent  to  our  own  understanding.  Besides,  we  have 
no  time  to  waste  while  there  is  so  much  work  to  do.  4.  Aspiration.  It  is  natural 
for  us  to  want  to  know,  but  we  shall  not  know  as  we  are  known  till  we  are  present 
with  the  Lord.  We  are  at  school  now  ;  we  shall  go  soon  to  the  great  university  of 
heaven,  and  take  our  degree  there.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)        Now  unci  tlien: — I.  Now 

WE  SEE  ALL  THINGS  IN  THE  "  MIF>ROK  "  OF  OUR  OWN    EXPERIENCE.       It    is  impossible    for 

either  child  or  man  to  travel  beyond  the  stage  of  knowledge,  or  experience,  to  which 
he  has  reached  in  his  ideas  and  judgment  of  things.  The  uncivilised  barbarian  of 
the  wilds  cannot  be  made  to  realise,  by  description,  the  wonders  of  a  great  modern 
city.  Thus  through  an  imperfect  mirror  of  knowledge  and  feeling  we  now  see — 1. 
God.  2.  The  Saviour.  8.  Heaven.  II.  Then  we  see  all  things  by  actdaii 
^  presence  and  contact.  "Face  to  face."  1.  The  glory  of  Gol.  2.  The  love  of  the 
Saviour.  3.  The  wonders  of  heaven.  So  shall  "  we  know  even  as  we  are  known." 
The  child  becomes  a  man.  Imperfection  of  knowledge  and  experience  give  way  to 
the  perfection  of  both.  Then,  like  the  queen  of  Sheba,  we  shall  find  that  "  not  the 
half   has  been  told   us."      (Cltrical   World.)  'The  nmv  and  then  of  life: — The 

pre^■ent  life,  in  and  by  itself,  is  imperfect.  Its  completeness  consists  alone  in 
viewing  it  as  a  part  of  a  more  complete  whole.  The  present  life  is  but  a  side, 
neeessitatini,',  to  its  completeness,  another  side.  Viewed  as  a  part  of  an  entire 
whole,  its  discrepancies  are  corrected,  its  mysteries  partially  solved,  and  its  signifi- 
cance and  importance  inimeasuraidy  enhanced.  Note — I.  The  extremes  of  life,  as 
VIEWED  RELATIVE  TO  TIME — ' '  uow  "  and  "then."  These  extremes  are  parts  of  the  same 
piece,  only  different  in  place,  and  perhaps  also  in  circumstances  and  relations.  The 
"now  "and  "  then"  of  life — 1.  Are  dependent  upon  each  other.  The  "  then  "  of  life  is 


302  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  sen. 


dependent  upon  the  "  now  "  of  it  as  to  its  fact  and  character.  There  must  be  some 
antecedent  "  now  "  before  there  can  be  an  anticipative  "  then."  The  "  now  "  would 
be  worth  but  little  without  tue  "  then,"  any  more  than  to-day  could  be  higlily  prized 
without  a  hop-^  of  to-morrow.  Tire  "  then  "  inspires  us  in  our  present  discourage- 
ments, or  depresses  us  in  its  anticipation.  The  "  then  "  of  life  influences  our  minds 
as  we  view  it  app  icaide  to  our  state  and  character.  The  guilty  receives  it  with  fear, 
the  innocent  with  joy.  2.  Are  extremes  only  possible  in  conscious  reality  to  superior 
beings.  "  Now  "  belongs  to  all  existences  aliice  ;  but  only  a  rational  being  can  con- 
ceive in  thought  of  the  future,  and  he,  as  a  moral  being,  can  anticipate  it  tlirongh 

1  his  hope  or  fenr.  3.  Have  in  them  all  provided  and  possible  for  us.  All  the  past 
crowds  the  present,  and  will  follow  us,  in  some  form  or  other,  to  the  future.    All  that 

I  is  needed  to  fill  the  present  hour  and  fit  us  for  the  future  is  given  us  in  the  "  now," 
and  all  the  blessings  and  privileges  of  the  heaven  of  the  future  will  be  included  in 
the  "  then."  Whatever  you  need  is  within  the  compass  of  the  "  now  "  :  what^^  ver  you 
hoi^e  aud  wish  is  coujprehended  in  the  "  then."  4.  Present  themselves  very  differently 
to  our  conviction  and  faith.  The  present  is  a  matter  of  direct  consciousness,  the 
future  is  a  matter  of  inference.  Our  experience  is  all  in  the  "  now."  We  look  at 
the  "  then  "  through  promises  and  hope.  The  religion  of  the  present  would  not  only 
be  absurd  without  the  future,  but  groundless  and  impossilde.  5.  Are  compre- 
hensive only  of  one  order.  The  moral  order  of  truth  and  rectitude  which  obtains 
"  now  "  will  be  the  same  "  then."  The  authority  which  demands  certain  things 
"  now  "  will  be  in  force  and  unchanged  "  then  "  ;  nor  will  the  essential  powers  of 
man  be  different  "  then  "  to  what  they  are  "  now,"  6.  May  be  extremi-ly  different, 
and  in  no  case  will  they  be  identical.  "  Now  "  we  may  be  hapi^y  and  successful,  bat 
there  may  a  "  then  "  when  these  will  not  be  our  isortion  any  more.  Let  the  "  now  "  be 
true  and  ri^ht,  and  the  "then"  will  have  its  hope  and  brightness.  II.  The  superiority 
OF  THE  "then"  over  THE  "NOW."  As  regards — 1.  The  mode  of  perception.  In 
this  statH  we  behold  spiritual  objects  through  a  glass.  All  the  means  and  things 
in  our  earthly  state  are  but  glasses  to  show  something  unseen  and  spiritual  above 
sense  and  our  present  imperfect  perceptions.  What  is  the  universe  but  one  glorious 
glass  to  show  us  the  more  gloiious  Maker  ?  And  what  is  the  Bible  but  a  glass  of 
the  Divine  and  spiritual  in  man  and  the  universe  ?  Christianity,  in  all  its  means 
and  ordinances,  is  a  glass  to  us  of  the  real  and  spiritual  above  and  beyond  them- 
selves. But  with  all  the  assistance  of  our  glass  media  our  perception  is  feeble  of 
things  invisible  and  eternal.  And  why  ?  Is  it  in  our  glasses  or  our  way  of  using 
them,  or  in  a  deficiency  in  our  spiritual  peicepticn?  Partly  in  all  these.  But  in 
our  future  state  it  will  be  face  to  face.  There  will  be  no  veil  over  the  face  of  things, 
and  many  things  we  use  are  things  for  rude  childish  condition ;  the  condition  of 
manhood  will  dispense  with  them  as  unfit  and  u^ele^s.  In  the  "then  "  condition  of 
our  being,  the  distance  will  be  reduced  into  nearness,  the  attitude  will  be  ad  vantagt-ous, 
the  expression  will  be  clear  and  in  si^^ht,  and  the  powers  of  the  soul  will  be 
strengthened  and  matuied.  2.  Clearness.  In  thi-!  state  of  things  we  see  nothing 
perfectly  clear.  But  in  our  future  state  not  only  will  our  perceptions  be  more  acute 
and  perfect,  we  shall  not  be  subject  to  delusions  and  illusions,  which  so  much  con- 
fuse and  mar  our  p-^rceptions  in  this  world.  3.  The  degree  of  knowledge.  We  in 
part  know  something  about  most  things,  but  in  the  light  of  another  day  we  shall 
probably  learn  that  our  profoundest  knowledge  is  but  a  small  part.  The  present  con- 
dition of  things  <loes  not  allow  us  to  know  except  in  part.  The  imperfections  of  our 
senses,  the  weakness  and  afflictions  of  our  minds  and  bodies,  the  caies  anil  anxieties 
of  life,  the  want  of  means,  the  shoitness  of  lift',  and  other  obstructions,  aie  things 
which  prevent  our  knowledge  being  anything  hut  very  partinl.  But  such  imperfec- 
tion is  not  to  be  always  our  lot.  "  Then  we  shall  know  as  now  we  are  known."  We 
shall  know  holy  intelligences  as  they  shall  know  us.  As  they  and  we  are  but  part 
of  the  same  family,  and  they  the  most  perfect,  their  knowledge  of  us  appears  to  be 
a  natural  conclusion.     As  they  know  us  in  our  lower  home,  so  shall  we  know  them 

lin  iheir  liigher  one.     As  they  know  us  in  our  trials,  so  shall  we  know  them  in  their 

'joys.  Though  our  knowledge  of  God  will  be  infinitely  less  perfect  of  Him  ihan  His 
is  of  us,  \et  He  will  be  known  to  us  as  real,  as  a  fact,  as  we  are  to  Him.     III.  The 

ADVANCEMENT  OF  LIFE  AS  VIEWED  BETWEEN  THE  PRESENT  AND  THE  FUTURE.  Advance- 
ment, in  some  form  or  other,  is  seen  eveiywhere.  Life  is  a  school  lor  it,  and  every- 
where there  are  suitable  means  ami  agents.  'J  his  law  runs  throngh  C  iristian  life, 
flnd  never  is  suspended,  either  in  time  or  eternity.  1.  It  is  a  personal  advanci  m'  nt. 
The  few  cannot  procure  u  for  the  nany,  or  the  many  for  the  few.  2.  It  is  the 
advancement  of  the  good  and  tiue  in  life — from  the  childhood  of  weakness  to  the 


CHAP.  XIII,]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  303 

manhood  of  strength.  3.  It  is  a  thing  of  consciousness  to  its  subjects.  The 
advancement  which  is  outside  our  conscious  Icnowledge  must  be  outside  our  will, 
faith,  and  activity,  for  the  thing  tbat  is  written  therd  we  have  in  common  with 
them.  Such  an  aivanct-mt^nt  is  the  one  of  a  plant  or  a  brute,  and  not  of  a 
rational  man.  4.  It  is  an  advancement  which  is  comprehensive  of  all  requisite 
life.  It  is  complete  both  in  quality  and  degree.  5.  It  is  an  advancement 
above  the  power  of  common  and  natural  means  to  produce.  ('1\  HiKjUes.) 
Pre.tent  knowL  df/e  and  future  : — I.  The  iMPEiirECxioN  of  our  present  knowledge 
or  Divine  things.  It  is  said  to  be  twofold,  an  imperfection  of  kind  and  an  imper- 
fection of  degree.  1.  The  first  is  illustrated  by  two  compiirisons.  (1)  We  see  by 
means  of  a  minor;  that  is  to  say,  it  is  a  reflection  of  truth  we  have  at  present,  not 
the  very  truth  itself.  The  copy  is  both  defective  and  misleading.  How  often  is 
the  face  of  the  mirror  occupied  with  other  images  !  How  often  is  the  vision  dis- 
torted by  passion  or  guilty  remembrance  !  (2)  We  see  darkly,  in  a  riddle,  enigma, 
or  dark  saying.  Our  knowledge  comes  to  us  through  words,  the  source  of  so  much 
misunderstanding  and  confui-ion.  We  apply  a  human  langunge  to  measure  Divine 
things.  What  is  infinity,  eternity?  Each  a  riddle.  2.  But  our  present  knowledge 
is  also  imperfect  in  degree.  "  I  know  in  part."  Our  great  ditficnlty  in  religion  is 
to  know  how  to  combine.  We  have  several  portions  of  Divine  truth  communicated 
to  us,  but  in  many  cases  without  the  connecting  link — God's  justice  and  mercj': 
His  hatred  of  sin,  aud  permission  of  the  existence  of  evil,;  man's  free  will  and 
God's  free  grace.  But  we  know  that  God  sees  them  in  one.  And  "what  I  do 
thou  knowest  not  now,  but  thou  shalt  know  hereafter."  II.  The  future  perfec- 
tion OF  our  knowledge.  1.  "But  then  face  to  face."  Our  knowledge  of  truth  will 
bediiect;  not  by  reflection,  but  by  intuition.  And  it  will  be  personal.  Face  to 
face  implies  a  person  :  ''  The  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ."  2.  "  Even 
as  I  was  known."  Therefore  our  knowledge  will  be  thorough  ;  through  and 
through.  God  is  a  heart-searching  God.  And  it  will  be  comprehensive.  God's 
insifiht  is  larjie  as  well  as  minute.  Notwithstanding  a  fault,  He  sees  a  servant; 
notwithstanding  a  good  quality,  He  sees  an  enemy.  Seeing  minutest  qualities. 
He  judges  of  the  charactt-r  as  a  whole.  We  also  shall  see  God's  truth  in  its 
reconciling  harmony  and  perfect  unity.  The  imperfection  of  our  present  knowledge 
of  Divine  things  must  make  no  one  idle  in  the  pursuit  of  it.  In  this  also,  "  Who- 
soever hath,  to  him  shall  be  given."  Finally,  though  many  of  onr  theologies  may 
be  contradicted,  nothing  that  we  have  known  of  the  living  Saviour  Himself  will  be 
contradicted,  nothing  that  we  have  learned  of  Him  by  experience,  or  seen  of  Him 
in  prayer.  [Dean  Vamihan.)  The  knowledge  of  God: — What  Paul  prophesies 
ior  uian,  Christ  already  possesses.  Paul  says,  "  Some  day  I  shall  know  God  as 
God  knows  me."  Jesus  says,  "  As  God  knows  me,  even  so  I  do  now  know  God." 
This  is  man's  highest  hope.  It  has  been  realised  already  in  the  man  Christ  Jesus. 
Thus  we  know  tliat  our  hope  is  not  a  vain  hope.  1.  "  God  knows  me,"  says  St. 
Paul.  That  was  his  fumiamental  conviction.  But  that  conviction  involved  another. 
If  the  Father  knew  the  child,  it  must  be  in  the  child's  power  to  know  the  Father. 
Paul  was  no  agnostic.  Known  perfectly,  he  knew  but  in  part ;  but  the  time  would 
•come  when  he  should  know  as  he  was  known.  And  this  certainty  of  a  future 
Jvuowledge  was  itself  a  present  knowledge.  2.  This  future  knowledge  means 
perfect  obedience  in  the  future  ;  perfect  harmony  between  tlie  child's  action  and 
the  Father's  will.  When  Jesus  said,  "  The  Father  knoweth  Me,"  He  meant, 
■"  God  has  a  will  for  every  act  of  Mine."  And  when  He  said,  "  I  know  the  Father," 
He  meant,  "In  every  act  of  Mine  I  do  the  Father's  will."  So  with  us.  With 
jierfect  freedom  answering  to  every  will  of  God.  There  alone  is  peace  and  power. 
{Bp.  Phillips  Brooks.)  Imperfect  knowh'dge  : — Perhaps  \ou  are  inclined  to  ask, 
why  are  there  mysteries  at  all  in  the  revelations  vouchsafed  by  God  to  man? 
Why  should  not  the  truths  which  it  is  of  importame  for  us  to  know,  be  declared  in 
language  level  to  our  cajiacities,  and  involving  in  them  nothing  to  stagger  our 
'belief,  or  perplex  our  reason?  I  would  meet  this  question  with  another,  Why  are 
there  in\  steries  in  the  works  of  God  ?  Why  is  this  material  universe  filled  with 
wonders  which  we  cannot  explain  ?  and  why  are  the  design  and  objects  for  which 
an  immeasurable  portion  of  it  was  creat'd,  altogether  concealed  from  us?  There 
are  prfrsons  of  such  sluggish  and  unthinking  habits  that  th  y  live  constantly  in  the 
midst  of  marvels  without  ever  bestowing  a  thought  upon  thi  m  ;  and  yet  these  very 
men  who  take  all  for  granted,  and  never  even  appear  to  be  aware  of  these  every- 
day miracles,  are  apt,  ail  at  once,  to  grow  scrupulous  and  over-cautious,  and  to 
demand  proofs  such  as  cannot  be  su])plied,  when  they  are  called  to  give  their 


304  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 

assent  to  the  mysteries  of  inspiration.     Others  there  are  who  make  the  human 
mind  their  study  ;  and  surely  there  cannot  be  a  subject  more  open  to  coustant 
observation  and  intimate  search  than  this.     And  yet,  to  teach  us,  as  it  would 
almost  seun,  how  very  limited  our  knowledge  is,  and  how  much  there  is  to  be 
believed  which  cannot  be  uudersiood,  these  very  inquiries  into  our  own  mental 
actions  and  endowments,  appear  to  be,  of  all  others,  the  least  attended  with  any 
conclusive  or  satisfactory  results.     Others,  again,  there  are  who,  building  upon  the 
unchangeable  foundation  of   abstract   truths,  have  investigated  the   laws   which 
govern  the  heavenly  bodies,  and  traced  the  handiwork  of  God  in  the  glories  of  the 
firmament.      But   this    very   pursuit,    which   of    all   others  most    magnifies   the 
capacities  of  the  human  mind,  and  seems  to  elevate  our  race  to  rank  but  a  little 
lower  than  the  angels,  what  does  it  open  to  us  but  Jresh  mysteries,  and  fresh 
demands  upon  our  faith  and  humility?     That  there  are  mysteries  both  in  nature 
and  revelation,  affords  therefore  some  presumption  that,  since  in  this  lespect  at 
least  the  systems  are  not  ojiposed  to  each  other,  both  may  have  the  same  author. 
But   this  presumption  is  strengtbened  when  we  trace  the  analogy  lur  her,  and 
consider  tbe  rules  wliieh  seem  to  hold  alike  in  the  mysteries  of  nature  and  in  those 
of  revelation.     In  the  first  place,  they  are  matters  which  we  are  not  qualified  to 
understand  ;  and  in  the  second,  they  would  not  profit  us  at  all,  in  our  present 
state  of  existence,  even  if  we  could  understand  them.     The  mode  of  our  present 
existence  and  tbe  arrangeinents  needful  for  its  support,  are  familiar,  and  to  a 
certain  extent  intelligible  to  us ;  but  what  conception  could  by  any  means  be  con- 
veyed to  us  of  existences  and  qualities  unlike  our  own  ?     The  utmost  stretch  of 
human  language  could  only  express  to  us  wliat  they  were  not ;  and  so  far  therefore 
from  having  any  information  communicated  to  us,  we  certainly  might  be  more 
perplexed,  but  not  wiser,  than  we  were  before.      If  this  be  true  respecting  the 
inhabitant  of  some  other  planet,  must  it  not  be  equally  true  respecting  the  nature 
of  the  unseen  world  of  spirits,  and  of  tbe  supreme  and  eternal  God  who  reigns 
thnre?     And,  again,  if  we  could  umlerstHiid  them,  what  advantage  would  it  be  to 
us?     Should  we  be  better  able  to  control   our  passions,  by  being  informed  about 
those  who  had  no  such  passions  to  control?     Should  we  be  directed  to  a  better  use 
of  our  own  faculties,  by  hearing  of  a  race  who  had  no  pursuits  or  qualities  in 
common  with  ourselves?     God  permits,  and  science  enables  us  to  learn,  just  so 
much  with  regard  to  the  heavenly  bodies,  their  orbits,  and  variations,  as  ujay  in 
any  way  conduce  to  the  enlargement  of  our  understanding,  or  our  general  well- 
being.     To  allow  more  than  this,  to  pamper  an  unseemly  and  useless  curiosity, 
would  not   be   in  agreement  with  the   unfathomnble  wisdom  of  Him  who  does 
nothing  in  vain.     The  application  of  the  same  limit  to  the  revelations  contained 
in  His  Word  is  sufficiently  obvious.     But  tliere  is  a  still  further  analogy  in  the 
practical  results  which  follow  from  the  existi-nce  of  these  mvsteries,  and  which 
they  were  doubtless  intended  to  effect.     What  can  so  forcibly  inculcate  humility 
as  the  experimental  proof  of  our  own  ignorance  and  infirmity?     And  if  such  be 
the  salutary  lesson  which  nature's  mysteries  imi^ress  upon  a  thinking  and  a  well- 
ordered   mind,  do   not  the   mysteries   of   revelation  enforce   the  same  upon  the 
student  of  God's  will  and  Word  ?     But  further  than  this,  they  also  indirectly  serve 
to  promote  the  acquirement  of  most  important  truths.     The  philosopher,  in  his 
attempts  to  investigate  that  which  is  inexplicable    by  human   powers,  has  often 
been  led  incidentally  to  the  discovery  of   much  real  knowledge;    and  he,  whose 
curiosity  may  have  led  him  to  open  the  Bible  with   the  view  of    displaying  his 
own  sagacity  in  unravelling  its  marvels,  may,  in  the  end,  have  not  only  had  his 
vanity   chastened   and   corrected,  but   his    soul   enriched   with   some  treasure  of 
Divine  wisdom,  revealing   juster  views  of  himself,  and  better  hopes  and  desires 
than  he  had  entertained  before.     Surely,  then,  the  analogy  between  the  mysteries 
of  the  material  universe  and  the  revealed  Word  of  God  ;  the  rules  which  appear 
to  hold  respecting  both  ;    and  the  practical  results  to  which  both  are  calculated 
to  lead,  would  teach  us  to  ascribe  them   to   one  gracious  and  incomprehensible 
Author,  and  to  acquiesce  in  them,  without  one  shadow  of  misgiving  or  inquisitive 
discontent.     But  besides  tliis,  there  is  another  reason  why  mysteries  must  form 
a  necessaiy  part  of  a  revelation  proceeding  from  heaven,  and  another  practical 
consequence  of  their  existence  to  be  deduced  from  the  text.     If  the  Word  of  God 
contained  only  just  what  we   could   understand,  might  we   not  with  son)e  sbow 
of  reason  doubt  whether  it  could  be  God's  Word  at  all?     Might  we  not  say,  "  The 
Supreme  Being  would  surely  nev^r  have  interfered  to  instruct  His  people,  where 
their  own  nataial  powers  might  have  proved  a   sufficient   guide.     That  which 


CHAP,  xiii.]  J.  CORINTHIANS.  305 

man  can  understand  so  clearly  in  all  its  bearings,  it  is  hardly  too  much  to  say 
that  man  might  have  discovered ;  and  the  absence  of  everything  which  calls  for 
submissive  faith  is  no  weak  argument  against  its  Divine  original  "  ?  Mysteries 
then  may,  in  some  sort,  be  called  the  very  credentials  of  a  revelation.  But  again  ; 
I  said  that  there  is  a  practical  consequence  of  the  existence  of  mysteries  in  the 
gospel  of  our  salvation,  to  be  deduced  from  the  expressions  of  St.  Paul  in  the  text. 
We  are  anxious  to  understand  all  mysteries  and  all  knowledge.  He  tells  us  where 
this  yearning  shall  be  satisfied  to  the  uttermost.  It  shall  be  in  that  kingdom  of 
glory  where  we  shall  no  longer  see  through  a  glass  darkly,  but  face  to  face ;  where 
we  shall  not  know  in  part,  but  know  even  as  we  are  known.  He  that  would  rea^h 
to  such  intellectual  sublimities  mast  have  had  his  soul  purified  to  a  meetness  for 
the  society  of  angels,  and  for  approaching  the  more  immediate  presence  of  the 
Eternal.  And  further  yet,  the  illustration  taken  by  the  apostle  may  aptly  represent 
the  posture  of  mind  which  befits  the  aspirant  after  heavenly  wisdom.  "When  I 
was  a  child,  I  spake  as  a  child,  I  understood  as  a  child,  I  thought  as  a  child." 
What  are  the  characteiistics  of  a  good  and  intelligent  child  ?  His  cnriosity  ;  his 
simplicity  ;  his  ready  acquiescence  in  such  explanations  as  he  may  receive  upon 
the  subjects  of  his  inquiries :  his  cheerful  confidence  in  his  instructors,  and  his 
willing   obedience  to   their  injunctions.     {T.  Ainger,  M.A.)  The  imperfection 

of  our  present  knmulecige : — I.  The  peopeexies  op  our  present  knowledge 
WHICH  THE  APOSTi.E  HERE  MENTIONS.  1.  Thls  may  refer  to  the  extent  or 
objects  of  our  knowledge.  (1)  It  is  partial.  Compare  the  views  of  a  worm  or  any 
minuter  insect  with  those  of  a  man  who  h-is  the  largest  and  most  comprehensive 
sight  of  the  works  of  nature,  and  you  have  a  faint  image  of  the  unknown  difference 
there  is  between  our  present  and  future  sphere  of  knowledge.  (2)  We  know  but  in 
part  even  those  few  things  that  do  fall  within  the  compass  of  our  present  know- 
ledge. There  is  not  the  least  particle  of  matter  we  see,  or  the  hast  dust  of  earth 
we  tread  on,  but  what  puzzles  the  most  penetrating  and  philosophic  minds.  We 
see  only  the  outside  of  things,  their  external  properties,  their  dimensions,  form, 
figure,  and  colour ;  but  as  to  their  essence  or  internal  sub.-tance,  the  cohesion  of 
their  cnnstituent  parts,  and  the  laws  of  that  cohesion,  we  can  give  no  account  at 
all  of  them.  And  if  we  know  so  little  of  material,  how  much  less  do  we  know  of 
spiritual  substances,  which  we  have  much  fewer  helps  and  opportunities  of  being 
acquainted  with  !  And  if  we  examine  our  knowledge  of  abstracted  truths,  or  points 
I  of  speculation  and  reason,  how  very  defective  does  it  appear  !  2.  Our  knowledge  is 
\not  only  partial,  but  very  indistinct.  We  see  through  a  glass.  This  glass  is  two- 
fold— reason  and  faith  ;  by  which  we  realise  and  represent  to  the  mind  future, 
distant,  and  invisible  things.  And  happy  is  it  for  us  that  we  have  these  excellent 
glasses  to  assist  the  eye  of  the  mind,  whose  sight  without  the  h-^lp  of  both  would 
be  very  short  and  very  defective.  But  the  uuhappiness  of  it  is  that  these  glasses, 
though  very  excellent  in  themselves,  are  often  obscured  and  spoiled  by  the  mists  of 
errors,  passions,  and  jjrejudices  whi(di  hang  upon  them,  and  make  them  unable  to 
penetrate  through  the  darkness  which  lies  between  them  and  the  distant  objects 
they  are  intended  to  descry,  which  render  our  sight  of  those  objects  very  obscure 
and  indistinct.  Not  to  say  that  imagination,  as  a  false  medium,  often  comes 
between,  which  enormously  magnifies  some  objects  and  diminishes  others  as  much. 
3.  Our  present  knowledge  is  not  only  very  confined  and  indistinct,  but  very  un- 
certain also.  Our  best  knowledge  is  often  but  mere  conjecture,  and  that  conjecture 
may  depend  only  on  mere  fancy,  arising  from  a  j)articular  state  or  moiion  of  the 
animal  spirits,  and  resting  more  on  mechanical  than  rational  supports.  For  we 
not  only  see  through  a  glass,, but  darkly.  Future  things  are  as  yet  concealed  from 
us,  wiapped  up  in  allegory,  riddle,  or  dark  enigma,  which  gives  us  only  a  few 
indirect  hints  or  a  mystical  representation  of  the  thing  intended,  by  which  we  are 
left  to  guess  it  out.  And  hence  it  is  that  multitudes  form  no  notion  at  all  concern- 
ing the  objects  of  abstract  science,  whilst  some  are  very  dubious  in  the  riglit,  and 
others  very  confident  in  the  wrong.  And  not  only  matters  of  abstruse  speculation, 
but  the  plainest  things  in  religion  are  by  many  but  uncertainly  understood.  Not 
that  the  things  themselves  are  uncertain,  but  it  is  unceitain  whether  the  persons 
that  boast  the  greater  knowledge  of  them  do  form  a  cone  ption  of  them  that  is 
certainly  right,  especially  considering  the  medium  they  look  through — that  is,  the 
lusts,  passions,  and  prejudices  with  which  they  are  beset.  4.  The  last  view  which 
the  apostle  gives  us  of  the  deficiency  of  human  knowledge  in  the  present  state  is 
by  comparing  it  with  that  of  children  or  infants.  We  are  as  yet  in  our  non-age, 
and  but  children  in  understanding.  Chi'dren,  you  know,  through  the  immaturity 
VOL    II.  20 


306  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 

of  their  faculties,  the  livehness  of  their  fancy,  the  strength  of  their  passions,  and 
inexperience  of  their  age,  are  very  hable  to  be  mistaken  ;  to  take  up  with  tlie  first 
notions  tliat  are  instilled  without  examination,  to  retain  the  iirst  impressions  that 
are  made,  whether  right  or  wrong,  to  be  fond  of  the  little  knowledge  they  have,  to 
be  confident  in  it,  and  to  despise  others  for  the  want  of  it;  whilst  per-ons  of  greater 
sense,  experience,  and  understanding,  see  that  all  their  confidence  is  owing  to  their 
ignorance,  and  look  upon  them  with  pity.  Bnt  not  with  half  so  much  pity  as  we 
shall  look  upon  ourselves  hereafter  when,  emerged  out  of  this  obscurity  in  which 
we  dwell,  we  look  back  from  that  region  of  ligut  upon  this  land  of  darkness,  and 
consider  all  our  former  ignorance,  errors,  false  judgment,  confidence,  and  preju- 
dices, when  we  were  but  children  in  knowledge ;  when  we  saw  through  a  glass 
darklv»  and  knew  but  in  part,  and  spake  and  reasoned  and  thought  as  mere 
infants  in  understanding.  II.  What  kind  of  knowledge  the  apostle  is  here 
SPEAKING  OF.  1.  How  partial,  indistinct,  uncertain,  and  low  is  our  knowledge  of 
the  ever-blessed  God  !  We  dimini-h  His  Divine  dignities  in  all  our  thou^'hts  ; 
we  depreciate  His  excellencies  in  our  most  elevated  conceptions  :  wlipn  we  put  our 
mind  to  the  utmost  stretch  to  form  the  sublimest  ideas  Of  His  eternal  g'ories,  how 
soon  do  we  find  it  overwhelmed  with  the  we  ght  of  so  astonishing  a  sobjei-t !  For 
ah  !  how  can  immensity  be  confined  in  a  hand's  breadth  ?  Here  all  finite  faculties 
are  entirely  swallowed  up,  hke  a  drop  in  the  ocean,  and  we  are  lost  in  astonishment 
at  the  poverty  of  our  poweis.  2.  It  is  but  very  little  we  know  of  ourselves.  We 
know  not  the  wonders  either  of  our  external  or  internal  frame  ;  the  faculties  of  our 
nature  ;  our  capacities  tor  service  and  happiness  ;  the  motives  and  sjDrings  of  our 
conduct ;  the  passions  that  govern  us  ;  the  conduct  and  improvement  of  our 
snperior  powers  ;  the  influences  to  wh'ch  they  Mre  liable;  the  purpises  to  which 
they  are  to  be  directed,  and  the  manner  in  which  they  are  to  be  employed  in  order 
to  our  happiness  and  usefulness,  for  which  «-nds  we  received  them.  And  \>  hich  is 
worse,  we  do  not  so  much  as  know  either  our  ignorance  or  knowledge;  we  shut 
our  eyes  upon  the  former  and  wnndeifuUy  admi-e  the  latter,  though  it  be,  perhnps, 
but  little  better.  3.  Our  knowledge  of  lUvine  and  religious  things  in  general  is 
exceedingly  defective.  It  is  sad  to  see  what  amazing  ignorance  there  is  amongst  a 
multitude  even  of  Christians  about  the  great  things  of  religion;  and  that  not  only 
in  the  deep  and  disputable  mysteries  of  it,  but  in  some  of  its  most  plain  and 
important  principles;  nay,  about  the  essential  nature  and  most  substantial  truths 
of  it,  and  even  the  plainest  parts  of  practical  religion;  and  this  not  only  amongst 
the  lowest  order  of  men  who  have  had  no  advantages  of  education,  but  among 
persons  of  a  more  elevated  rank,  who  have  had  sufficient  opportunities  of  being 
better  instructed  ;  but  having  no  heart  to  improve  the  prize  put  into  their  hands, 
are  apt  to  despise  it  as  a  very  unnecessary  part  of  learning,  and  neither  value  others 
the  more  for  having  it,  nor  themselves  the  less  for  wanting  it.  4.  How  inscrutable 
are  the  ways  of  Providence !  If  we  turn  but  our  eyes  to  the  government  of  this 
lower  world,  we  are  soon  lost  in  the  mazes  of  infinite  wisdom,  and  can  never  in 
the  least  conceive  how  good  can  arise  from  so  mucli  visible  evil,  order  out  of  so 
much  confusion,  and  beauty  out  of  so  much  deformity.  And  yet  that  hU  things 
under  the  government  of  God  are  well  nnd  wisely  managed  we  cannot  doubt.  But 
if  we  turn  our  thouglits  to  other  worlds  and  other  species  of  created  beings  (of 
which,  without  dnubt,  there  are  innumerable),  all  uud<  r  the  wise  care  and  govern- 
ment of  the  same  Almighty  and  Universal  Monarch  who  is  the  daily  object  of  our 
adoration,  how  do  we  blush  and  mourn  under  our  present  ignorance,  and  look  upon 
ourselves  Hud  all  our  knowledge  comparatively  as  notliing,  and  less  than  nothing, 
and  vanity  !  III.  Whence  it  is  that  all  our  best  attainjients  in  knowledge 
ARE  at  present  SO  VERY  POOR  AND  DEFECTIVE.  1.  Our  mental  povi-ers  themselves 
are  at  present  b  it  very  feeble  and  defective.  2.  The  powers  of  the  human  mind  at 
present  are  not  only  weak,  but  miserably  confined  and  cramped  in  their  operations 
by  the  union  of  the  soul  with  a  crazy  and  corruptible  body.  3.  Our  sphere  of 
knowledge  is  here  very  much  contracted.  Alas  !  what  knowledge  of  the  world  or 
men  can  be  expected  from  one  who  hath  lived  all  his  life  in  a  dungeon  ?  4.  Under 
all  these  disadvantages,  the  time  that  is  here  allowed  us  for  attaining  knowledge  is 
very  short.  5.  How  often  are  we  diverted  from  this  pursuit !  How  many  avoca- 
tions do  we  meet  with  from  the  world  and  the  affairs  of  it,  which  necessarily  claim 
a  good  part  of  our  attention  and  care,  and  rob  us  of  that  time  which  might  have 
been  more  usefully  employed  in  augmenting  the  furniture  of  the  mind  !  6.  How 
often  are  we  perplexed,  entangled,  and  bewildered  by  our  own  prejudices  and  those 
of  others,  whereby  we  are  often  turned  aside  from  the  right  path  of  wisdom,  and 


CHAP.  XIII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  307 

put  upon  a  wrong  scent.  So  that  instead  of  making  a  progress  in  the  right  way  of 
knowledge,  we  have  enough  to  do  to  recover  our  wanderings  from  it.  And  it  is 
sometimes  the  main  business  of  the  latter  part  of  life  to  retract  the  ermrs  of  the 
former.  "  To  what  end,  now,"  perhaps  you  will  be  apt  to  say,  "  have  yon  given 
us  this  very  diminutive  view  of  human  knowledge  ?  "  I  answer — 1.  To  excite  our 
most  ardent  desires  after  that  world  of  light  and  liberty  where,  disencumbered  from 
our  present  embarrassments,  we  shall  enjoy  the  I'leasures  of  pure  and  perfect 
science.  2.  To  show  how  very  little  reason  the  most  understanding  man  on  earth 
has  to  be  vain  of  his  knowledge.  3.  That  holy,  Immble,  upright  souls,  who  have 
had  but  few  means  and  opportunities  of  attaining  knowledge,  may  not  be  too 
much  discouraged  under  a  consciousness  of  their  present  ignorance.  (J.  Mason,  A.M.) 
The  j)erfection  of  mir  future  knmcledfie  : — I.  The  phopehtii'^s  of  our  fotuke  know- 
ledge. 1.  It  will  be  distinct  and  clf^ar  ;  no  longer  confused  and  obscure  as  it  now 
is  whde  we  look  through  a  glass.  2.  It  will  be  certain  and  satisfying;  no  longer 
conjectural  and  enigmatical  as  it  now  is  while  we  look  through  a  glass  darkly.  3. 
It  will  be  perfect  and  complete  in  its  kind ;  and  no  longer  defective  as  it  now  is 
whilst  we  know  but  in  part,  for  we  shall  then  know  even  as  we  are  known.  II. 
Some  of  the  VAraous  objects  of  it.  1.  The  most  glorious  and  felicitating  object 
of  our  thus  improved  and  enlightened  understanding  will  be  the  ever-blessed  God 
Himself.  It  is  true  the  great  and  blessed  God,  as  a  pure  and  perfect  Spirit,  can 
never  be  seen  with  bodily  eyes.  But  we  must  not  think  that  the  soul  is  capable  of 
no  distinct  and  clear  perceptions  l>ut  what  it  receives  by  means  of  bo  lily  oi'gans. 
It  has  even  now  a  power  of  realising  and  ascertaining,  of  contemplating  and 
enjoying  things  that  are  not  seen.  And  when  our  mental  powers  shall  be  uncon- 
fiued,  enlarged,  and  improved,  as  we  are  sure  they  will  be  in  heaven  (and  we  know 
not  but  there  may  be  new  faculties  superadded,  suitable  to  the  new  objects  of 
contemplation),  we  shall  then  as  distinctly  and  clearly  discern  and  contemplate 
spiritual  and  in\isible  objects,  as  we  now  do  material  ones  by  an  eye  of  sense.  2. 
Then  shall  we  begin  to  know  ourselves.  For  whatever  it  may  be  thought,  man  is 
as  yet  one  of  the  greatest  mysteries  to  himself;  that  is  a  subject  aliout  which  he 
knows  as  little  as  almost  anything  which  falls  within  the  compass  of  his  under- 
stHuding.  Then  he  will  bfgin  to  think  as  an  immortal  creature  ought  to  do, 
which  he  very  rarely  does  now,  whilst  his  mind  is  sensualised,  his  undei  standing 
cramped,  his  sentiments  debased,  and  his  heart  captivated  by  low  and  ^a^thly 
things.  Then  will  he  look  up  to  his  original  with  perpetual  adoration  and  joy,  and 
live  up  to  the  dignity  of  an  intellgent  and  immortal  being,  made  for  the  honour 
of  his  great  Creator,  in  whose  praise  and  service  all  his  powers  will  be  for  ever 
delightfully  employed.  3.  Our  sense  of  religious  and  Divine  things  will  then  be 
stro  g,  comprehensive,  and  clear.  Then  only  shall  we  begin  to  be  infallible,  and 
pi  rhaps  be  ashamed  of  our  former  ignorance  when  we  thought  ourselves  most  so. 
Then  shall  we  discern  the  wrong  paths  in  which  we  trod,  as  plainly  as  a  benighted 
travellfT  at  the  rising  of  the  morning  sun,  and  be  able,  it  may  be,  to  trace  our 
errors  up  to  their  original,  the  first  wrong  impression  we  received  which  insensibly 
turned  us  aside  from  the  path  of  truth,  which  we  were  never  able  afterwards  to 
recover,  whilst  at  the  same  time  we  shall  adcpre  the  guard  and  guidance  of  Divine 
grace  which  preserved  our  feeble  and  tickle  minds  from  imbibing  errors  of  a  more 
dangerous  and  pernicious  tendency.  4.  Glorious  and  surprising  tlien  will  be  the 
new  discoveiies  we  shall  make  in  the  works  of  God.  The  hidden  mysteries  of 
nature  which  now  lie  too  deep  for  our  ken,  and  baffle  all  our  most  exquisite  and 
laborious  re>earih,  will  then  lie  open  to  our  view,  and  we  shall  have  an  intuitive 
knowledge  of  what  it  now  costs  ns  the  study  of  an  age  to  attain  an  imperfect 
notice  of.  5.  What  a  swet't  and  sublime  entertainment  will  the  enlarged  mind 
enjoy  in  contempla'ing  the  wise  and  wondrous  ways  of  Providence!     III.  What 

just    ANn    SOLID    KEASONS    WE    HAVE     TO     BELIRVE     THAT     OUR     KNOWLEDGE    HKREAFTER 

WILL  BE  SO  cojiPLETK  AND  SATISFYING.  1.  Because  wc  are  sure  that  in  heaven 
there  will  be  nothing  wanting  to  perfect  the  happiness  of  a  glorified  spirit.  2.  Its 
powers,  capai-ities,  and  desires  will  be  then  inconceivably  enlarged  and  opened, 
and  consequently  tl  e  objet^ts  and  extent  of  its  knowledge  must  be  proporiionably 
increased.  Conclusion  :  1.  Let  us  remember  that  all  the  naturfil  powers  and 
faculties  of  the  mnd  will  then  be  in  th' ir  full  streigth  and  maturitv.  2.  Our 
sphrre  of  knovvleilge  will  tiien  be  vastly  enlarged.  3.  The  enlarged  powers  of  our 
mind  will  then  he  free  from  hU  their  present  encumbrances.  4.  We  shall  have  no 
wn.ng  prejudi  es  and  prepossessi(  ns  to  overcome  or  guard  against,  by  which  our 
free  progress  in  true  knowledge  is  now  so  much  obstructed.     5.  We  shall  then 


308  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xnu 

meet  with  no  more  avocations  to  divert  us  from  the  pursuit  of  knowledge.  6.  This 
speedy  progress  in  knowledge  we  shall  make,  not  only  a  few  yeais,  but  to  all 
eternity.  (J.  Masnn,  M.A.)  The  joy  of  revelation: — Now  we  see  in  a  mirror 
darkly,  but  then  face  to  face.  Now  I  know  iu  part,  but  then  shall  I  know  fullVj 
even  as  also  I  am  known  fully.  What  joy,  what  exultation,  what  ardour,  wbat 
longing  there  is  in  these  words !  They  carry  us  far  on  and  far  away — far  on 
beyond  this  present  time  of  this  passing  world,  far  away  from  the  scenes  of  tbis 
present  life.  "Then" — when  time  and  change  and  varying  seasons  are  past — 
then,  when  the  alternations  of  cloud  and  sunshine  are  over — when  doubt,  and 
diliiculty,  and  perplexity  have  been  left  behind — then  I  shall  know  fully.  Then, 
in  a  sense  more  complete  than  the  words  have  ever  yet  borne,  I  shall  be  able  to 
say,  "The  darkness  is  past,  and  the  true  light  now  shineth."  His  vision  has 
reached  the  innermost  shrine.  Like  another  St.  John,  a  "door  has  been  opened 
to  him  in  heaven."  A  voice  has  said  to  him,  "  Come  up  hither  and  I  will  show 
thee  things  which  must  be  hereafter."  But  for  what  was  the  apostle's  heart 
yearning  ?  He  was  yearning  for  the  full  knowledge  of  God  ('fniyvSj-jiQ).  Yes,  but 
what  made  him  yearn  for  that  knosvledge?  Because  he  had  known  the  joy  of 
knowledge.  "  Now  I  know  in  part,  but  thfn  shall  I  know  fully."  But  is,  then, 
knowledge  a  joy?  All  things  r.^und  us  witness  to  the  fact  that  knowledge  is 
believed  to  be  a  source  of  happiness.  And  does  not  every  advance  in  knowledge 
make  us  eager  for  a  further  advance  still,  as  mountain  climbers  find  fre^h  peaks 
still  luring  them  on  to  the  delight  of  further  efforts  ?  Are  we  not  ready  to  cry  out 
t. gain  and  again  with  the  apostle,  "  We  know  only  in  part"?  And  if  this  be  so 
with  all  forms  of  mere  earthly  knowledge,  must  it  not  be  far  more  so  with  heavenly 
knowledge  ?  These  strange  powers  which  we  possess  of  thought,  of  reflection,  of 
consideration,  of  meditation,  of  insight,  of  memory,  of  intuition,  of  investigation, 
were  not  given  us  tliat  they  mijiht  be  spent  only  on  what  one  of  our  poets  calls  so 
well  "these  earth-born  idols  of  this  lower  air."  Man  was  not  made  only  that  he 
might  know  the  records  of  history,  the  niceties  of  language,  the  wonders  of  j^hysical 
science,  the  conclusions  of  mathematics.  We  were  created  with  all  our  powers  of 
mind  that  we  might  know  God.  Not  in  vain  has  theology  been  called  "  Scien- 
tiarum  Scientia."  The  science  of  all  sciences  is  the  knowledge  of  God.  Aye,  and 
it  was  the  joy  of  this  knowledge  which  was  filli'  g  the  apostle's  heart  when  he 
wrote  these  words,  "  Then  shall  I  know  fully,  even  as  also  I  am  known  fully." 
Already  he  knows  God  in  the  tenderness  of  His  fatherhood,  in  the  fulness  of  His 
pardoning  love,  in  the  atonement  wrought  out  by  the  Son  of  God,  in  the  might  of 
the  indwelling  Spirit,  in  the  richness  of  the  gifts  poured  out  on,  poured  into  the 
Church.  That  knowledge  has  ^rown  upon  him  more  and  more  since  the  day  when 
the  pleading  voice  of  his  Lord  broke  in  upon  him  with  the  question,  "  Saul,  Saul, 
why  persecutest  thou  Me?  ''  Every  past  revelation  hns  brought  to  him  an  increase 
of  faith,  of  hope,  of  love,  of  p?ace,  of  happint-ss,  and  ]oy,  and  has  taught  him  to 
realise  more  fully  what  will  be  the  exceeding  bliss  of  the  complete  revelation  of 
God  to  those  who  are  brought  to  see  Him  face  to  face.  So  rejoicing,  so  hoj)ing, 
so  expecting,  so  yearning,  Ije  cries  out,  "  Then  shall  I  kno^v  fully,  even  as  also  I 
am  fully  known."  All  bars  all  hindrances,  all  veils  will  be  withdrawn.  And  now 
let  us  see  how  the  joy  of  this  knowledge  c  ^me  so  to  grow  iu  tlie  mind  of  St.  Paul. 
First,  cleaily,  because  he  set  himself  with  intense  earnestness  to  receive  in  all  its 
vividness  and  distinctness  the  revelation  that  came  from  God.  He  felt  deeply  the 
tenderness  of  God  in  making  known  the  tr^ith.  He  felt  asstrongly  the  responsibility 
of  man  for  receiving  into  his  mind  the  fulness  of  truth  in  all  its  purity,  in  preserv- 
ing it  from  all  error  that  might  dim  or  disturb  it.  No  doubt  ever  crossed  his  mind 
that  God  could  be  known.  Still  less  did  he  question  the  power  of  God  to  reveal 
Himself.  How  should  not  the  best  of  all  Fathers  teach  His  children  ?  Then  quick 
upon  the  thought  of  this  love  of  God  came  the  feeling  that  if  God  is  so  loving  as  to 
tell  to  His  children  the  secrets  of  their  own  nature — their  sin,  their  fall,  the  way  of 
their  recovery,  and  of  their  union  with  Himself,  nay,  if  God  goes  further  still  and 
tells  them  even  the  secrets  of  the  mystery  of  His  own  being,  then  the  children  in 
very  gratitude  must  be  ready  to  learn  in  its  fulness  the  lessons  that  the  Heavenly 
Father  has  given  them.  So  see  how  jealously  St.  Paul  ever  guards  the  truth.  Not 
an  angel  from  heaven  is  to  persuade  us  to  receive  any  other  gospel  than  that  which 
we  have  received.  Yes,  indeed,  the  knowledge  of  God  grew  upon  his  soul  because 
he  set  himself  to  use  in  their  fulness  and  exactness  all  the  Divine  utterances  of 
truth.  He  was  the  unswerving  disciple  of  a  Master  that  spoke  with  authority,  and 
he  taught  men  to  ob~  rve  all  things  which  that  Master  had  commanded.     Is  not 


CHAP,  xiir.)  L   COniNTHlANS.  309 


this  the  gecret  of  the  growth  of  knowle'lge  of  God— the  getting  clearly  before  the 
soul  the  things  that  He  has  taught?  To  us,  as  to  him,  it  will  bring  a  higher  joy 
than  any  other  kind  of  knowledge  can  biing.  In  us,  as  in  him,  it  will  waken  up  a 
thirst  for  a  fuller,  a  more  complete  knowledge.  To  us,  as  to  him,  the  knowledge 
which  we  have  already  as  a  gift  from  God,  will  be  a  pledge  that  it  is  the  will  of  God 
to  carry  to  their  highest  perfection  the  revelations  which  even  here  Lave  been  so 
full  of  joy.  "  Now  I  know  in  part,  but  then  shall  I  know  fully,  even  as  also  I  am 
fully  known."  "  Even  as  also  I  am  fully  known."  As  we  hear  these  words  a  new 
thought  comes  breathing  out  through  them.  It  was  not  only  because  he  had  been 
so  careful  to  receive  the  revelation  that  comes  from  God  that  the  knowledge  of 
God  had  grown  in  the  soul  of  the  apostle.  No,  he  had  known  God  personally, 
something  as  one  friend  knows  another  ;  nay,  in  a  manner  more  intimate.  There 
had  been  between  him  and  God  the  close  communion  of  the  creature  with  the 
Creator,  of  the  redeemed  with  the  Eedeemer,  of  the  spirit  of  man  with  the  in- 
dwelling and  sanctifying  Spirit.  There  is  no  knowledge  which  so  grows,  \yhich  so 
blesses,  as  the  knowledge  which  the  soul  gains  by  living  in  close  communion  with 
God.  Oh !  live,  move,  act,  speak,  think  as  in  His  sacred,  loving,  penetrating 
presence.  "  Sanctify  the  Lord  God  in  your  hearts."  Live  with  souls  kept 
consciously  ever  open  to  His  iniluences.  In  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  press 
into  an  ever  closer  union  with  the  living  Chiist  till  He  lives  more  wholly  in  you 
and  you  more  wholly  in  Him.  Then,  then  indeed,  the  joy  of  knowing  God  will 
grow  more  and  more  upon  you.  The  sa<^red  doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  the  name  of 
the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost  will  be  no  mere  abstract  truth 
to  you.  It  will  be  a  revelation  of  a  love  personal  to  yourself  in  tbe  light  of  which 
you  will  live.  (R.  W.  Randall,  M. A.)  The  future  state  a  self -conscious  stati;  :— 
A  moment's  reflection  will  convince  any  one  that  the  article  and  fact  of  death  must 
of  itself  make  a  vast  accession  to  the  amount  of  a  man's  knowledge,  because  death 
introduces  him  into  a:i  entirely  new  state  of  existence.  Foreit-m  travel  adds  much 
to  our  stock  of  ideas,  because  we  go  into  regions  of  the  earth  of  wliich  we  had 
known  only  by  the  hearing  of  the  ear.  But  the  great  and  last  journey  that  man 
takes  carries  him  over  into  a  province  of  which  no  hook,  not  even  the  Bible  itself, 
gives  him  any  distinct  cognition,  as  to  the  style  of  its  scenery  or  the  texture  of  its 
objects.  But  death  carries  man  over  into  the  new  and  entirely  different  mode  of 
existence,  so  that  he  knows  by  direct  observation  and  immediate  mtuition.  A 
Hood  of  new  information  pours  in  upon  the  disembodied  spirit,  such  as  he  cannot 
by  any  possibility  acquire  upon  earth,  and  yet  such  as  he  cannot  by  any  possibility 
escape  from  in  his  new  residence.  But  not  only  does  the  exchange  of  worlds  make 
a  vast  addition  to  our  stores  of  information  respecting  the  nature  of  the  invisible 
realm,  and  the  mode  of  existence  there,  it  also  mnkes  a  vast  addition  to  the  kind 
and  degree  of  our  knowledge  respectiog  ourselves,  and  onr  personal  relationships 
to  God.  This  is  by  far  the  most  important  part  of  the  new  acquisition  which  we 
gain  by  the  passage  from  time  to  eternity,  and  it  is  to  this  that  the  apostle  directs 
attention  in  the  text.  The  latter  clause  of  the  text  specifies  the  general  cha- 
racteristic of  existence  in  the  future  world.  It  is  a  mode  of  existence  in  which  the 
rational  mind  "knows  even  as  it  is  known."  It  is  a  world  of  knowledge — of 
conscious  knowledge.  In  thus  unequivocally  asserting  that  our  existence  beyond 
the  tomb  is  one  of  distinct  consciousness,  revelation  has  taught  us  what  we  most 
desire  and  need  to  know.  The  future,  then,  is  a  mode  of  existence  in  which  the 
soul  "  knows  even  as  it  is  known."  But  this  involves  a  perception  in  which  there 
is  no  error,  and  no  intermission.  For  the  human  spirit  in  eternity  "  is  known  " 
by  the  omniscient  God.  If,  then,  it  knows  in  the  style  and  manner  that  God 
knows,  there  can  be  no  misconception  or  cessation  in  its  cognition.  ^  Here,  then, 
\ve  have  a  glimpse  into  the  nature  of  our  eternal  existence.  It  is  a  state  of 
distinct  and  unceasing  knowledge  of  moral  truth  and  moral  objects.  The  cognition 
is  a  fixed  quantity.  Given  the  soul,  and  the  knowledge  is  given.  If  it  be  holy, 
it  is  always  conscious  of  the  fact.  If  it  be  sinful,  it  cannot  for  an  instant  lose 
the  distressing  consciousness  of  sin.  In  neither  instance  will  it  be  necessary,  as 
it  generally  is  in  this  life,  to  make  a  special  effort  and  a  particular  examination,  in 
•  order  to  know  the  personal  character.  Knowledge  of  God  and  His  law,  in  t  he 
I  future  life,  is  spontaneous  and  inevitable  ;  no  creature  can  escape  it.  If  the  most 
thoughtless  person  that  now  walks  the  globe  could  only  have  a  clear  perception  of 
that  kind  of  knowledge  which  is  awaiting  him  upon  the  otht-r  side  of  the  tomb,  he 

1  ■would  become  the  most  thoughtful  and  the  most  anxious  of  men.     It  would  sober 
tim  like  death  itself.      It  is  only  because  a  man  is  unthinking,  or  because  he 


310  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  xiir. 

imagines  that  the  future  world  will  be  like  the  j)resent  one,  only  longer  in  duration, 
that  he  is  so  indifferent  regar.iing  it.  ('1\  W.  Sliedd,  D.b.)  Of  a  future  state: — 
Was  such  an  obscure  and  impertVct  discovery  of  another  life  worthy  to  proceed 
from  God  ?  Dues  it  not  afford  some  ground,  either  to  tax  His  goodness  or  to 
suspect  the  evidence  of  its  coming  from  Him  ?  It  plainly  appears  to  be  the  plaa 
of  the  Deity,  in  all  His  dispensations,  to  mix  light  with  darkness,  evidence  with 
uncertainty.  Whatever  the  reasons  of  this  piocedure  be,  the  fact  is  undeniable. 
If,  then,  the  future  state  of  man  be  not  placed  in  so  full  and  clear  a  light  as  we 
desire,  this  is  no  more  than  what  the  analogy  of  all  religion,  both  natural  and 
revealed,  gave  us  reason  to  expect.  But  such  a  solution  of  the  difficulty  will  be 
thought  imperfect.  It  may,  perhaps,  not  give  much  satisfaction  to  show  that  all 
religion  abounds  with  difficulties  of  a  like  nature.  Let  us  call  upon  the  sceptic, 
and  desire  liim  to  say  what  measure  of  information  would  afford  him  entire  satis- 
faction. 'Ihis,  he  will  tell  us,  requires  not  any  long  or  deep  deliberation.  He 
desires  only  to  have  his  view  enlarged  beyond  the  limits  of  this  corporeal  state. 
Instead  of  resting  upon  evidence  which  requires  discussion,  he  demands  the  ever- 
lasting mansions  to  be  so  displayed,  if  in  truth  such  maiiisions  there  be,  as  to  place 
faith  on  a  level  with  the  evidence  of  sense.  What  noble  and  happy  effects,  he 
exclaims,  would  instantly  follow,  if  man  thus  beheld  his  present  and  his  future 
existence  at  once  before  him  !  But  let  us  pause  and  suspend  our  admiration,  till 
we  coolly  examine  the  consequences  tliat  would  follow  from  this  supposed  reforma- 
tion of  the  universe.  Consider  the  nature  and  circumstances  of  man.  Introduced 
into  the  world  in  an  indigent  condition,  he  is  supported  at  first  by  the  care  of 
others  :  and,  as  soon  as  he  begins  to  act  for  himself,  finds  labour  and  industry  to 
be  necessary  for  sustaining  his  life  and  supplying  his  wants.  Mutual  defence  and 
interest  give  rise  to  society ;  and  society,  when  formed,  requires  distinctions  of 
property,  diversity  of  conditions,  subordinations  of  ranks,  and  a  multiplicity  of 
occuj'ations,  in  order  to  advance  the  general  good.  In  a  word,  by  the  destina- 
tion of  his  Creator  and  the  necessities  of  his  nature,  man  coirimences  at  once  an 
active,  not  merely  a  contemplative  being.  Eeligion  assumes  him  as  such. 
Suppose,  now,  that  veil  to  be  withdrawn  which  conceals  another  world  from  our 
view.  Let  all  obscurity  vanish  ;  let  us  no  longer  "  see  daikly,  as  through  a  glass  "  ; 
but  let  every  man  enjoy  that  intuitive  perception  of  Divine  and  eternal  objects 
which  the  sceptic  was  supposed  to  desire.  The  immediate  effect  of  such  a  dis- 
covery wiiuld  be  to  annihilate  in  our  eye  all  human  objects,  and  to  produce  a 
total  stagnation  in  the  affairs  of  the  world.  All  the  studies  and  pursuits,  the 
arts  and  labours,  which  now  employ  the  activity  of  man,  which  support  the 
order,  or  promote  the  happiness  of  society,  would  lie  neglected  and  abandoned. 
Those  desires  and  fears,  those  hopes  and  interests,  by  which  we  are  at  present 
stimulated,  would  cease  to  operate.  Human  life  would  present  no  objects 
sufficient  to  rouse  the  mind,  to  kindle  the  spirit  of  enterprise,  or  to  urge  the 
hand  of  industry.  Whatever  is  now  attractive  in  society  would  appear  insipid. 
In  a  word,  he  would  be  no  longer  a  fit  inhabitant  of  this  world,  nor  be  qualified 
for  those  exeitions  which  are  allotted  to  bim  in  his  present  sphere  ot  being.. 
But  all  his  faculties  being  sublimated  above  the  measure  of  humanity,  he  would  be 
in  the  condition  of  a  being  of  su^jerior  order,  who,  obliged  to  leside  among  men, 
would  regard  their  pursuits  with  scorn,  as  dreams,  trifles,  and  puerile  amusements 
of  a  day.  But  to  this  reasoning  it  may  perhaps  be  replied,  that  such  conse- 
quences as  I  have  now  stated,  supposing  them  to  follow,  deserve  not  much 
regard.  Would  not  such  a  change  prove  the  highest  blessing  to  man?  Is  not  his 
attachment  to  worldly  objects  the  great  source  both  of  his  misery  and  his  guilt? 
How  far  the  change  would  contribute  to  his  welfare  comes  to  be  considered. 
If  there  be  any  principle  fully  ascert  lined  by  religion,  it  is  that  this  life  was 
intended  for  a  state  of  trial  and  impiovement  to  man.  His  preparation  for  a 
better  world  required  a  gradual  purification  carried  on  by  steps  of  progressive 
discipline.  The  situation,  therefore,  here  assigned  him  was  such  as  to  answer 
this  design  by  calling  forth  all  his  active  powers,  by  giving  full  scope  to  his  moral 
dispositions,  and  bringing  to  light  his  whole  character.  Hence  it  became  proper 
that  difficulty  and  temptation  should  arise  in  the  course  of  his  duty.  Such  is  the 
plan  of  Divine  wisdom  for  man's  improvement.  But  put  the  case  that  the  plans 
devised  by  human  wisdom  were  to  take  place,  and  that  the  rewards  of  the  just 
were  to  be  more  fully  displayed  to  view,  the  exercise  of  all  those  graces  which  I 
have  mentioned  would  be  entirely  superseded.  Their  very  names  would  be 
unknown.     The  obscurity  which  at  present  hangs  over  eternal  objects  preserves 


CHAP.  XIII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  311 

the  competition.  Remove  that  obscurity,  and  you  remove  human  virtue  from  ita 
place.  You  overthrow  that  whole  system  of  discipline  by  which  imperfect  creatures 
are,  in  this  life,  gradually  trained  up  for  a  more  perfect  state.  From  what  has 
been  said,  it  now  appears  that  no  reasonable  objection  to  the  belief  of  a  future 
state  arises  from  the  imperfect  discoveries  of  it  which  we  enjoy  ;  from  the  diffi- 
culties that  are  mingled  witii  its  evidence ;  from  our  seeing  as  through  a  glass, 
darkly;  and  being  left  to  walk  by  faith,  and  not  by  sight.  It  cannot  be  otherwise, 
it  ought  not  to  be  otherwise  in  our  present  state.  The  evidence  which  is  afforded 
is  sutlicient  for  the  conviction  of  a  candid  mind,  though  not  so  striking  as  to 
withdraw  our  attention  from  the  present  world,  or  altogether  to  overcome  the 
impression  of  sensible  objects.  In  such  evidence  it  becomes  us  to  acquiesce, 
without  indulging  either  doubts  or  complaints.  For,  upon  the  supposition  of 
immortality,  this  life  is  no  other  than  the  childhood  of  existence ;  and  the 
measures  of  our  knowledge  must  be  proportioned  to  such  a  state.  Iq  a  word,  the 
whole  course  of  things  is  so  ordered  that  we  neither,  by  an  irregular  and  precipitate 
education,  become  men  too  soon,  nor,  by  a  fond  and  trifling  indulgence,  be  suffered 
to  continue  children  for  ever.  Let  these  reflections  not  only  remove  the  doubts 
which  may  arise  from  our  obscure  knowledge  of  immortality,  but  likewise  produce 
the  highest  admiration  of  the  wisdom  of  our  Creator.  The  structure  of  the  natural 
world  affords  innumerable  instances  of  profound  design,  which  no  attentive 
spectator  can  survey  without  wonder.  In  the  moral  world,  where  the  workmanship 
is  of  much  finer  and  more  delicate  contexture,  subjects  of  still  greater  admiration 
open  to  view.  We  have  now  seen  that  the  darkness  of  man's  condition  is  no  less 
essential  to  his  well-being  than  the  light  which  he  enjoys.  His  internal  powers 
and  his  external  situation  appear  to  be  exactly  fitted  to  each  other.  In  order  to 
do  justice  to  the  subject,  I  must  observe  that  the  same  reasoning  which  hns  been 
now  employed  with  respect  to  our  knowledge  of  immortality  is  equally  applicable 
to  many  other  branches  of  intellectual  knowledge.  Thus,  why  we  are  permitted  to 
know  so  little  of  the  nature  of  that  Eternal  Being  who  rales  the  universe ;  why  the 
manner  in  which  He  operates  on  the  natural  and  moral  world  is  wholly  concealed. 
To  all  these,  and  several  other  inquiries  of  the  same  kind  which  often  employ  the 
solicitous  researches  of  speculative  men,  the  answer  is  the  degree  of  knowledge 
desired  would  prove  incompatible  with  the  design  and  with  the  proper  business  of 
this  life.  It  is  therefore  reserved  for  a  more  advanced  period  of  our  nature.  One 
instance,  in  particular,  of  Divine  wisdom  is  so  illustrious,  and  corresponds  so 
remarkably  with  our  present  subject,  tbat  I  cannot  pass  it  over  without  notice ; 
that  is  the  concealment  under  which  Providence  has  placed  the  future  events  of  our 
life  on  earth.  "  How  cruel  is  Providence  !  "  we  are  apt  to  exclaim,  "  in  denying  to 
man  the  power  of  foresight,  and  in  limiting  him  to  the  knowledge  of  the  present 
moment !  "  But  while  fancy  indulges  such  vain  desires  and  criminal  complaints, 
this  coveted  foreknowledge  must  clearly  appear  to  the  eye  of  I'eason  to  be  the  most 
fatal  gift  wbich  the  Almighty  could  bestow.  If,  in  this  present  mixed  state,  all  the 
successive  scenes  of  distress  through  which  we  are  to  pass,  were  laid  before  us  in 
one  view,  perpetual  sadness  would  overcast  our  life.  Hardly  would  any  transient 
gleams  of  intervening  joy  be  able  to  force  their  way  through  the  cloud.  Precisely 
in  the  same  manner,  as  by  the  mixture  of  evidence  and  obscurity  which  remains 
on  the  prospect  of  a  future  state,  a  proper  balance  is  preserved  betwixt  our  love  of 
this  life  and  our  desire  of  a  better.  The  longer  that  our  thoughts  dwell  on  this 
subject  the  more  we  must  be  convinced  that  in  nothing  the  Divine  wisdom  is  more 
admirable  than  in  proportioning  knowledge  to  the  necessities  of  man.  Instead  of 
lamenting  our  condition,  that  we  are  permitted  only  to  see  as  through  a  glass, 
darkly,  we  have  reason  to  bless  our  Creator,  no  less  for  what  He  hath  concealed 
than  for  what  He  hath  allowed  us  to  know.  From  the  whole  view  which  we  have 
taken  of  the  subject,  this  important  instruction  arises,  that  the  great  design  of  all 
the  knowledge,  and  in  particular  of  the  religious  knowledge  which  God  hath 
afforded  us,  is  to  fit  us  for  discharging  the  duties  of  life.  No  useless  discoveries 
ai'e  made  to  us  in  religion.  Let  us,  then,  second  the  kind  intentions  of  Providence, 
and  act  upon  the  plan  which  it  haih  pointed  out.  Checking  our  inquisitive 
solicitude  about  what  the  Almighty  hath  concealed,  let  us  diligently  improve  what 
He  hath  made  known.  Before  I  conclude,  it  maybe  prober  to  observe  tbat  the 
reasonings  in  this  discourse  give  no  ground  to  apprehend  any  danger  of  our  being 
too  much  influenced  by  the  belief  of  a  future  state.  The  bias  of  our  nature  leans 
so  much  towards  sense  that  from  this  side  the  peril  is  to  be  dreaded,  and  on 
this  side  the  defence  is  to  be  provided.     Let  us,  then,  walk  by  faith.     Let  us 


312  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xiii 


strengthen  this  principle  of  action  to  the  utmost  of  our  power.  (H.  Blair,  D.D.) 
Present  knoicled(je  imperfect  hut  sufficient  : — I.  We  see  dakkly — very  darkly. 
•  1.  We  are  in  a  world  full  of  mystery.  Every  step  we  take,  the  great,  deep 
problems  strike  us  which  we  are  unable  to  solve.  (1)  Day  fades  away  into 
night,  the  night  blossoms  out  into  day;  the  stars  walk  up  and  down  the  vault 
of  night.  We  cannot  but  wonder  why.  Say  that  it  is  because  the  earth  revolves 
on  its  axis,  and  moves  round  in  its  orbit,  but  where  is  the  force  that  drives  it 
along  its  pa'h?  Astronomy  only  magnifies  tlie  mystery.  I  see  otber  worlds 
flying  in  every  conceivable  direction  and  at  all  possible  velocities  ;  and  yet  the 
power,  the  tiring  I  want,  does  not  come  out  to  me.  I  push  the  mystery  perhaps 
one  step,  and  taking  that  step,  I  plunge  again  into  the  darkness,  to  ride  on  as 
my  fathers  have  been  riding  through  all  the  past,  unsoothed  by  definitions, 
and  formulas.  (2)  But  somebody  says,  "  Why,  ic  is  gravity  that  holds  the 
world  in  its  path."  And  so  I  dig  down  to  the  earth  tor  this  giant  whose  arms 
are  so  long  and  whose  grip  is  so  almighty,  but  I  do  not  find  him ;  and  after 
my  weary  search  I  sit  back  in  despair,  muttering  "Gravity!"  and  I  know 
no  more  than  I  did  before.  Nature,  like  the  man  who  gave  the  empty  casket 
to  the  highwayman  and  kept  the  jewels,  has  given  us  names  and  kept  the 
secret — the  power.  (3)  Oh !  but  you  say,  chemistry  settles  that.  She  has  gone 
into  the  world  and  parcelled  it  out,  saying,  "  This  is  oxygen,  that  is  nitrogen, 
and  that  is  carbon,"  &c.  So  I  walk  along  quietly  after  her,  and  say, 
What  is  oxygen,  what  is  carbon  ?  I'll  call  this  carbon  every  time  I  see  it  in 
the  future.  I  used  to  call  it  coal :  and  yet  my  soul  is  fed  no  more  by  carbon 
than  it  was  by  coal.  The  term  does  not  change  the  fact.  My  poor  heart 
cries  out  for  the  power  behind  this.  Where  did  it  come  from?  Who  stored 
the  fires  in  its  dark  bosom?  Who  gathered  the  sunbeams  of  so  many  centuiies 
and  stored  them  into  coal?  That  is  the  power  1  want,  and  not  the  name. 
(4)  But  chemistry  has  taken  up  the  microscope,  and  says,  "  Now  we  have  it ; 
we  have  got  things  in  the  very  act  of  beginning  to  be  ;  we  have  seen  them 
actually  w-riggling  up  into  life."  Yes,  wriggle  before  they  existed.  I  am  sure 
I  see  very  darkly  here.  (5)  Suppose  we  go  into  the  domain  of  my  thoughts. 
This  is  something  that  you  may  chII  psychology — what  can  that  do  after  all? 
Why,  it  takes  up  what  I  call  my  thought — gives  its  outer  history,  tells  somewhat 
of  its  worth  ;  but  that  is  all  it  does.  There  is  something  behind  the  thought ; 
here  is  the  mystery  it  cannot  touch  at  all.  2.  Now,  we  are  in  this  one  universe, 
and  should  it  be  strange  if,  when  we  come  to  the  things  concerning  eternal 
verities,  there  should  be  some  darkness;  if  nature  has  cast  a  shadow  over  all 
things  here,  need  we  stumble,  or  be  alarmed,  if  concerning  spiritual  and  eternal 
things  we  see  through  a  glass  darkly?  What  if  I  cannot  understand  the  mysteries 
of  the  incarnation,  the  Trinity,  regeneration  and  resurrection — what  of  all  that? 
Is  it  not  rather  the  demonstration  that  we  are  under  the  administration  of  one  God. 
May  I  not  bring  as  many  difficulties  and  arguments  against  the  facts  of  your 
personal  experience  in  every-day  life  as  you  can  bring  against  the  experience 
and  facts  of  this  spiritual  and  eternal  life?  II.  But  we  do  see  something. 
Though  we  cannot  define  it.  Look  at  two  or  three  mountain-peaks  that  indicate 
to  us  the  inner  line  that  possibly  we  cannot  pass,  and  even  surveying  may 
not  definitely  define.  1.  One  mountain-peak  is  the  fact  of  revelntion  itself. 
I  do  not  mean  the  arguments  by  which  we  sustain  that  this  book  is  from  God, 
but  rather  the  fact  of  the  communication  of  God  to  us.  There  it  stands.  Here  we 
are  in  the  universe ;  somebody  brought  us  here ;  we  did  not  make  ourselves ;  we 
cannot  trace  our  pedigree  back  through  the  ages.  Yet  we  are  here,  and  so 
circumstanced  that  we  must  do  somebody's  will  in  order  to  have  peace ;  and  to  do 
it,  we  must  know  it.  We  cannot  reach  it  with  our  reason.  We  have  not  instinct. 
The  animals  monopolise  that.  Will  He  not  come  out  to  me  ?  Will  he  take  such 
wonderful  care  of  His  meanest  creatures,  and  leave  His  best  to  die  in  the  darkness? 
I  do  not  see  very  clearly,  but  I  see  sumething.  2.  Here  is  another  peak — the  Book 
itself,  said  to  be  from  God.  A  wonderful  document ! — too  much  in  it  for  us  to 
comprehend ;  full  of  mysteries,  yet  so  simple  and  plain  in  most  of  its  parts, 
that  it  has  been  the  food  of  the  common  people  for  all  the  centuries.  It  is  so 
compact  and  self-sustaining,  that  it  has  defied  the  sharpest  criticism  of  eighteen 
centuries.  There  it  is  ;  fifteen  hundred  years  in  the  simp  being  made,  written  by 
forty  different  men,  separated,  as  far  as  possible,  both  in  station  and  in  culture. 
Yet  somehow  these  forty  men  tell  one  story,  and  so  telling  it,  that  as  we  read  it  we 
feel  that  it  is  true,  because  they  got  one  inspiration.     They  tell  the  history  of  the 


CHAP.  XIII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  313 

race  into  sin,  and  throngh  sin  up  into  redemption  ;  and  where  one  lets  go,  another 
takes  hold,  so  that  it  is  one  story.  I  do  not  linow  how  it  was  inspired  ;  but  ttiere 
is  the  fact.  It  may  be  dark  about  the  dejoths  of  tlie  book,  but  it  is  infinitely  darker 
outside  of  it.  Outside  we  have  nothing ;  here  we  do  have  something.  I  do  see 
One  said  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  the  Lamb  of  God  who  tuketh  awfiy  the  sin  of  the 
world,  giving  to  me  the  fact  of  peace.  I  cannot  fathom  it.  ludeed,  I  do  not  know 
why  I  am  cold  or  why  I  am  warm;  but  I  know  when  I  am  cold  and  when  I  am 
warm.  I  am  not  able  to  understand  exactly  how  it  is  that  this  that  I  see  lifted  on 
Calvary  lifts  me  up  in(o  a  better  life,  but  it  does.  3.  Here  is  the  Church  opposed 
by  every  possible  power,  with  no  human  instrumentality  to  commend  it,  and  yet  here 
it  is.  Yesterday  it  was  a  weakling,  with  only  a  dozen  followers  ;  to-day  it  masters 
all  the  peoples  of  the  earth  and  brings  them  toward  itself.  {Bp.  Foivler.) 
Partial  knowle<Jtje. — I.  A  calamity,  when  it  is  traceable  to — 1.  Early  truiuing  in 
prejudice.    2.  False  teaching.    3.  Inability  to  learn.    II.  A  ceuie,  when  owing  to — 

1.  Prayerlessness.  2.  Wilfulness.  3.  Lethargy.  4.  Inattention.  5.  Fur[.'etfulness. 
III.  A  BLESSING,  when  it  causes — 1.  Faith  to  be  exercised.  2.  Inquiry  to  be 
evoked.      3.   Filial  fear  to  be   displayed.     IV.   An  argument   for — 1.   Humility. 

2.  Praise.  3.  Hope.  4.  Alarm.  (Stems  and  Twujs.)  Prei^ent  hnoiPledije partial 
hut  sufficient  .-^In  this  imperfect  and  preparatory  stage  of  our  existence  we  have 
just  light  sufficient  to  command  our  belief  in  matters  essential  to  our  salvation,  to 
direct  us  in  the  di>^charge  of  our  duties  to  God  and  to  one  another,  and  conduct 
us  to  a  home  where  we  shall  see  clearly  and  know  perfectly  the  sublime  truths 
which  have  so  often  bafHed  and  peiplexed  our  reason.  This  is  all  we  need, 
and  all  that  God  hath  given.  He  would  have  us  walk  by  faith,  which  is  opposed 
alike  to  open  vision  and  to  perfect  knowledge.  The  Bible  stands  like  a 
waymark,  pointing  the  pilgrim  to  the  celt^stial  city,  but  furnishing  him  no  needless 
information  concerning  either  the  country  of  his  sojourn  or  the  sceneiy  of  his 
destination.  Tne  full  disclosure  of  that  which  is  unseen  and  eternal,  at  present, 
we  could  bear  no  better  than  tbe  infant  of  an  hour  could  bear  the  unsoftened 
splendours  of  the  noontide  sun;  nor  could  we  possibly  grasp  the  ample  sphere  of 
truth  any  more  than  the  aims  of  a  child  coulii  embrace  the  moon  it  so  much 
admires,  or  than  the  ken  of  a  cricket  could  sweep  the  solar  system  and  comprehend 
the  stellar  universe.  Truth  is  infinite,  and  its  study  is  to  occupy  the  redeemed 
intellect  for  ever,  and  its  discovery  or  development  is  to  constitute  one  of  the  cliief 
elements  of  our  endless  felicity;  but  what  must  be  the  vastness  and  variety  of 
that  knowledge  which  is  constantly  to  afford  fiesh  interest  to  the  employments 
of  eternity !  and  how  can  we  hope  to  attain  unto  it  in  this  brief  infancy  of  our 
being?     [J.  Cross,  D.D.)        Heaven  a  state  o_t  perfection  in  knowledge  : — I.  There 

AEE    MANY   CONSIDERATIONS   WHICH    SHOW    HOW   VAST    WILL    BE    THE  ATTAINMENTS  OE  THE 

GLORIFIED  SPIRIT.  1.  All  causes  of  ignorance  and  eiror  will  then  be  entirely 
removed.  Here  below,  not  only  the  body  of  flesh,  but  still  more  the  body  of  sin, 
darkens  our  understandings.  But  in  heaven,  sin  will  no  longer  becloud  our 
minds;  prejudices  will  be  eradicated,  the  passions,  refined,  purified,  and  directed 
to  their  proper  object,  will  only  aid  us  in  the  pursuit  of  truth  ;  and  the  cares  and 
pleasures  of  the  world  can  no  longer  affect  us.  2.  Our  intellectual  faculties  will  be 
greatly  strengthened.  Our  fact  Ities  shall  ever  be  in  vigorous  exercise,  never 
requiring  to  be  relaxed,  always  penetrating  and  active ;  our  imaginations  ever 
unclouded ;  our  memories  never  losing  the  knowledge  we  have  acquired. 
8.  Much  of  our  improvement  depends  upon  the  society  with  which  we  associate. 
"He  that  walketh  with  wise  men  shall  be  wise."  We  shall  be  companions 
of  the  redeemed  in  the  world  of  felicity.  4.  There  the  redeemed  shall  be 
instructed  by  the  all-wise  God  (Rev.  xxi.  22 1.  5.  The  knowledge  of  the 
saved  will  be  increasing  throughout  eternity.  II.  What  shall  be  the  objects 
OF  OUR  KNOWLEDGE?  The  glorified  saints  shall  know  God — 1.  In  His  nature. 
2.  His  attributes.  3.  His  works  of  creation.  4.  His  works  of  Providence.  5. 
Eedemption  through  the  blood  of  Jesus.  6.  The  Word  of  God.  III.  What 
WILL  BE  ITS  CHIEF  PROPERTIES.  Our  knowledge  shall  be — 1.  Immediate  and 
intuitive.  Instead  of  the  labour,  cares,  processes  of  reasoning,  that  are  h^re 
necessary,  we  shall  have  only  to  open  our  souls  for  the  reception  of  that  celestial 
light  which  will  flow  into  them  from  God,  the  source  of  light.  2.  Full  and 
adequate,  both  in  variety  and  degree,  and  certain  and  infallible.  3.  Transfoiming. 
4.  Beatifying.  5.  Unfading  and  eternal.  Conclusion :  This  subject — 1.  Is 
calculated  to  animate  Christians  and  comfort  them.  You  now  lamenr.  that  you 
know  so  little  of  God  and  the  Redeemer  ;  wait  till  the  light  of  eternity  shall  burst 


314  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chai.  xiii; 


upon  your  view,  and  then  you  "  shall  know  even  as  you  are  known."  2.  Leads  us 
to  lament  the  doom  of  men  of  unsanctified  genius  and  learning.  3.  Should  give 
.us  consolation  on  the  death  of  pious  friends.  You  may  again  meet  them,  advanced 
in  knowledi^e  and  perfect  in  bliss.     (H.  Kollock,  D.D.)         Recognition  in  heaven  : — 

I.  There  is  something  very  solemn  in  this  anticipation  of  my  future  being; 
"  Tlien  shall  I  know  even  as  also  I  am  known  "  ;  that  there  will  be  a  clearness 
and  certainty  around  me,  no  prejudice,  no  distorting  medium,  no  unsettling 
estimate,  no  tremulous  light;  and  that  this  same  clearness  and  certainty  will 
not  only  shine  around,  but  through  me,  so  that  as  little  possible  as  it  is  for  me 
to  mistake  anything  will  it  be  for  others  to  mistake  me  ;  I  can  no  longer  wear 
a  mask ;  I  can  no  longer  practise  an  imposition ;  I  intuitively  know,  and  as 
intuitively  am  known.  2.  It  is  a  relief,  in  considering  that  universal  perception 
which  we  shall  take  of  others,  and  others  shall  take  of  us,  to  institute  the  inquiry. 
Will  Christian  friends  then  meet — will  they  recognise  each  other?  We  cannot 
withstand  a  thought  of  the  past.  Our  fathers  worshipped  in  this  mountain. 
In  casting  my  eye  over  the  present  assembly,  I  am  only  struck  with  bereavement 
and  loss  ;  I  know  not  whither  to  turn  to  find  some  friend  of  my  youth.  But 
is  there  an  absolute  privation  ?  We  must  think  of  heaven  as  an  existing  reality. 
We  speak  of  it  as  if  forgetting  that  it  is  only  future  to  us.  But  our  brethren, 
sainted  and  glorified  in  heaven,  have  their  present  beatitudes,  splendours,  and  songs. 
Let  us  think  of  them,  therefore,  as  only  sej)arated  from  us  by  a  veil,  which  will 
soon  be  torn  aside.  Will  there  be  those  who  shall  be  ready  to  welcome  us  ? 
Shall  there  be  those  whom  we  ourselves  remember?  This  is  not  a  barren 
speculation  ;  it  is  that  which  surely  has  engaged  every  thinking  mind  and  every 
susoeptible  heart.  "  Oh,  reuowned  day,"  exclaimed  the  Koman  orator,  "  when 
I  shall  have  reai-hed  the  Divine  assemblage  of  those  minds  with  which  I  have 
congenial  predilections,  and  shall  escape  this  untoward  and  uncongenial  throng !  " 
"  We  but  depart,"  said  the  lyrist  of  the  same  nation,  "  to  meet  our  ^Eneas,  and  our 
Tully,  and  our  Ancus."     I.  The  contrary  conclusion  iiiPLtEs  a  destruction  which 

IS  QUITE  opposite  TO  THE  DEALINGS  OF  GoD  WITH  OUR  NATURE.       If    I    do    not    knOW  in 

heaven  those  whom  I  have  known  here,  there  must  have  taken  jjlace  an 
imperfection  in  my  mind.  We  must  suppose  that  God  blots  out  some  of  the 
exercises  of  the  recollection.  But  this  seems  quite  opposite  to  His  ordinary  dealings 
with  us ;  and  therefore,  unless  there  was  the  strongest  proof  that  we  should  not 
know  each  other,  we  should  argue  that  it  was  contrary  to  all  that  we  might  inter. 
Now,  heaven  is  the  consummation  of  our  present  happiness.  And  what  makes  us 
happier  upon  earth  than  mutual  acquaintance?  "  I  have  no  greater  joy,"  said  the 
beloved  disciple,  "  than  to  hear  that  my  children  walk  in  truth  "  :  and  was  that  joy 
entirely  torn  from  his  spirit  when  he  passed  from  this  world  of  distraction  and 
discord  to  that  region  where  all  was  love  ?  Besides,  it  is  impossible  to  think  tbat 
all  will  be  without  a  history  and  without  a  name ;  some,  we  know,  will  be  pre- 
eminent ;  we  shall  sit  down  with  Abraham,  and  with  Isaac,  and  with  Jacob,  in  the 
kingdom  of  G"d.     And  will  all  other  spirits  tlit  before  us  unstoried  and  nameless? 

II.  BfT  LET  Scripture  decide.  1.  When  David  thought  of  his  dying  child,  he 
agonised  in  fasting  and  in  prayer;  when  that  child  was  taken  away  he  found 
encouragement.  "I  shall  go  to  him,  but  he  shall  not  return  to  me."  That  his 
head  should  recline  on  the  same  clod  ?  Nay ;  here  is  an  intimation  of  immortality 
and  of  the  communings  of  two  spirits  in  that  immoitality.  And  the  same 
remark  may  be  made  when  the  pious  are  said  to  be  "  buried  with  their  fathers." 
It  is  cliilling  and  repulsive  to  think  that  the  cemetery  only  is  referred  to,  and  that 
there  is  no  mingling  of  the  departed  except  in  the  dust  of  the  sepulchre.  2.  There 
are  other  phrases  in  the  latter  portion  of  the  Christian  Scriptures  which  we  think 
are  absolutely  decisive.  "Knowing,"  says  the  apostle,  "that  He  who  raised 
up  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  shall  also  raise  up  us  also  by  Jesus,  and  shall  present 
us  with  you."  And  again,  he  adjures  those  to  whom  he  writes,  '*  by  our  gathering 
together  unto  Jesus  Christ."  Now  there  seems  to  be  a  banishment  of  all  point  and 
of  all  spirit,  unless  you  suppose  tliat  tliey  will  know  each  other.  To  prove  how 
disinterested  was  the  spirit  and  jiurpose  of  the  first  Christian  teachers,  they 
alwavs  rested  their  labours  upon  a  reward,  which  consisted  in  the  glory  of  those 
spirits  whom  they  had  saved.  "For  what  is  our  hope,  or  joy,  or  crown  of 
rejoicing  ?  Are  not  even  ye  in  the  presence  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  at  His 
coming?  For  ye  are  our  glory  and  our  joy."  "That  I  may  rejoice  in  the 
day  of  the  Lord  that  I  have  not  run  in  vain,  neither  laboured  in  vain."  "Look  to 
yourselves,  that  ye  receive  a  full  reward."     "  That  we  may  present  every  maa 


CHAP.  XIII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  315 

perfect  in  Christ  Jesus."  Now  this  cannot,  for  a  moment,  be  separated  from 
the  recognition  of  those  who  were  the  fruits  of  their  ministry  (see  particulaily 
1  Thess.  iv.  13-17).  3.  When  standing  near  the  grave  of  Bethany,  our  Lord 
says,  "  Thy  brother  shall  rise  again  "  ;  was  it  that  that  brother  was  to  be  absorbed 
and  lost  in  the  myriads  of  spirits;  so  that  the  sisters  who  had  lately  laid  him  in 
the  grave  should  see  him  and  know  him  no  more?  4.  The  process  of  judgment 
seems  to  include  this  recognition  of  each  other.  A  cup  of  cold  water  piven  to 
a  disciple  in  the  name  of  Jesus  shall  not  be  without  its  reward.  The  Saviour, 
specifying  those  who  are  before  Him,  shall  say,  "  I  was  an  hungered,  and  ye  gave  Me 
meat,"  &c.  Now,  this  is  reflected  in  the  persons  of  those  who  are  in  the  crowd : 
"  Inasmuch  as  ye  have  done  it  unto  one  of  the  least  of  these  My  brethren,  ye  have 
done  it  unto  Me."  5.  Then,  when  we  go  further,  and  consider  the  Christian 
doctrine  upon  the  destruction  and  overthrow  of  death.  "  0  grave,  where  is  thy 
victory?  "  Now,  this  implies  that  all  that  death  has  done  of  evil  and  of  pain  shall 
be  compensated.  But  what  has  been  a  more  bitter  consequence  of  death  than 
bereavement?  How,  if  that  is  never  repaired,  can  it  be  said  that  death  has  no 
sting,  that  the  grave  has  no  victory  ?  6.  But  think  of  the  happiness  of  the 
heavenly  world.  Will  all  remembratice  of  that  world  which  we  have  left  be 
suspended  ?  Shall  we  not  think  of  the  means  of  our  conversion — what  we  have 
done  for  others— what  others  have  done  for  us  ?  Hear  the  new  language  :  "  Thou 
hast  redeemed  us  to  God  by  Thy  blood,  out  of  every  kindred,  and  tongue,  and 
peoplf ,  and  nation."  Is  not  this  a  rush  of  the  past  upon  the  soul  ?  Is  not  this^ 
like  living  again?  Conclusion:  We  are  not  at  all,  however,  unconscious  that 
objections  may  be  raised  against  this  doctrine.  If  we  recognise  our  beloved 
friends,  must  we  not  deplore  the  absence  of  those  who,  whatever  was  their  guilt„ 
were  dear  to  our  bosoms,  and  were  twined  around  our  hearts  ?  But  remember  that 
you  are  perfect  in  heaven.  You  cannot  conceive  of  that  which  is  perfect  in 
heaven  without  the  most  entire  acquiescence,  in  wluit  God  has  arranged,  or  what 
God  has  satt'ered.  {R.  W.  Hamilton,  D.D.)  Individual  recognition  in  eternity  :  — 
I.  Subordinate  arguments.  Testimony  in  its  favour  might  be  drawn — 1.  I'rom 
the  constitutional  sociality  of  our  nature,  that  renders  such  an  expectation  as  our 
mutual  recognition  hereafter  conducive  to  onr  happiness,  heaven  being  the  scene- 
where  all  the  innocent  sources  that  contribute  to  felicity  would  be  probably 
accumulated.  2.  From  our  enlarged  capacities  of  knowledge  and  enjoyment  in  a 
future  state.  3.  From  the  common  assent  of  mankind  in  all  ages.  4.  From  the 
incidental  inference  drawn  from  the  like  general  belief  of  mankind  in  the  appear- 
ances of  the  dead,  and  their  being  recognised  by  the  parties  to  whom  they  appeared,, 
as  was  undoubtedly  the  case  in  the  instances  of  Moses  and  Elias  on  the  Mount  of 
Transfiguration,  and  of  "the  bodies  of  the  saints"  ttiat  arose  after  our  Lord's 
resurrection.  5.  From  the  ansilojry  of  sleep,  the  Scriptural  type  of  death,  the 
persons  of  individuals,  both  dead  and  living,  being  clearly  identified  in  the  dreams 
of  the  night,  and  therefore  leading  to  the  inference  that  such  persons  would  be 
equally  identified  after  they  and  we  shall  have  "  fallen  asleep  in  Jesus."  II.  The 
ScBiPTUBAL  ARGUMENT.  1.  Old  Testament  (1.  Sam.  xxviii.  11,  <fcc.).  If  a  parted 
spirit  and  a  living  man  could  be  mutually  recognised,  then  it  is  even  more 
probable  if  both  individuals  had  departed  they  could  equally  recognise  each 
other.  David,  indeed,  proposes  an  express  comfort  to  himself  from  such  an 
expectation,  when  bereaved  of  his  child  (2  Sam.  xii.  29,  &c.).  Where  would 
be  tlie  special  consolation  in  the  fatlier's  being  lost  to  the  child,  as  the  child 
had  been  lost  to  the  father,  if  death  were  the  final  extinction  of  the  power 
of  recognition  and  recovery  each  of  the  other?  2.  New  Testament.  In  the  parable 
of  Dives  and  Lazarus  not  only  does  the  rich  man  recognise  Lazarus,  but  converses 
■with  him,  and  Lazarus  is  represented  "  in  Abraham's  bosmn,"  i.e.,  in  terms  of 
close  intimacy  with  Abraham,  The  reply  of  our  Lord  to  the  Sadducees,  in  Matt, 
xxii.,  implies  that  if  men  in  the  resurrection  are  to  resemble  the  angels,  men  will 
enjoy  the  like  privilege  of  "knowing  ench  other,  eveu  as  they  are  known."  This 
view  may  be  further  confirmed  from  1  Cor.  xv.  54.  The  angels  sing  this:  the 
angels,  then,  must  recognise  in  the  redeemed  spirits  who  had  died,  or  how  could 
they  triumph  over  their  escape  from  and  defeat  of  death  ?  But  not  only  angels 
triumph  in  the  victory  of  their  brethren  from  the  flesh;  St.  Joiin  (Eev.  vii.  13) 
tells  us  of  "one  of  the  elders,"  ?.e.,  an  Old  Testament  saint,  who  was  perfectly 
acquainted  with  the  persons  and  the  antecedent  trials  of  some  triumphant  souls. 
Moreover,  death  was  the  effect  and  penalty  of  sin.  If  man  had  not  sinned, the 
union  of   earthly   attachments   and  relationships,  for   aught   we   now,  had   been 


Si6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 

immortal.  If  in  Christ  all  the  effects  of  sin  shall  be  abolished,  man  will  be 
reinstated,  though  with  much  superadded  glory,  in  all  the  privileges  which  he 
originally  enjoyed,  and  therefore  with  a  capacity  of  renewing  and  perpetuating 
his  communion  with  them,  over  whom  "death  shall  have  no  more  dominion." 
Again,  in  Luke  xiii.  28,  it  is  stated  as  one  of  the  peculiar  aggravations  of 
the  auguish  of  lost  souls  that  they  should  recognise  in  the  realms  of  glory 
those  who  had  not  been  so  highly  favoured  as  themselves.  3.  Again,  there  is 
a  moral  necessity  for  individual  remembrance  at  least  in  the  scene  of  judgment. 
"We  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ,  to  give  an  account 
of  the  deeds  done  in  the  body  "  (Matt.  xxv.  34,  &c. ;  1  Thess.  ii.  19 ;  Heb.  xiii. 
17).  Thus  the  penitent  thief  makes  the  fact  of  his  recognition  the  burthen 
of  his  dying  prnyer,  "  Lord,  remember  me  when  Thou  comest  into  Thy 
kingdom!"  and  had  there  been  any  error  or  mere  fanaticism  in  the  hope, 
Jesus  would  have  corrected  it ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  He  sanctioned  and 
established  it  in  the  tender  answer — "  To-day  thou  shalt  be  with  Me  in  paradise." 
"The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  His"  here;  "His  name  shall  be  in  their 
foreheads  "  there  ;  and  thus  each  shall  recognise  another,  and  all  their  common 
Lord.  Conclusion  :  But  if  we  shall  rejoice  to  recognise  our  friends  in  heaven, 
must  we  not  be  grieved  at  the  absence  of  others,  in  hell?  The  consequence  is 
not  necessary.  The  Lord  may  give  His  risen  people  large  capacities  for  joy 
without  a  single  capacity  for  sorrow.  Angels  are  said  to  "joy  over  the  penitent 
sinner,"  but  they  are  never  said  to  be  grieved  for  tiie  reprobate  sinner.  May  not 
the  enlarged  views  of  Divine  perfections  into  which  the  glorified  saints  will  be 
admitted  serve  to  swallow  up  every  inferior  imptession  ?  "  Even  so.  Father,  for  so 
it  seemed  good  in  Thy  sight!  "  (J.  B.  Owen,  M.A.)  Recognition  of  friends  in 
lieaven : — Luther,  the  night  before  he  died,  was  reasonably  well,  and  sat  with  his 
friends  at  table.  The  matter  of  their  discourse  was  whether  we  shall  know  one 
another  in  heaven  or  not.  Luther  held  it  affirmatively,  and  this  was  one  reason 
he  gave  :  Adam,  as  soon  as  he  saw  Eve,  knew  what  she  was,  not  by  discourse, 
but  by  Divine  revelation  ;  so  shall  we  in  the  life  to  come.     (J.  Trapp.) 

Ver.  13.  And  now  abideth  faith,  hope,  charity. — Faith,  Jiope,  and  charity  : — I. 
Faith,  the  fundamental  principle  of  Chiistianitv.  It  is  not  mere  belief,  but 
trust.  It  is  faitb  that  gives  to  Christianity  its  whole  name,  character,  and  nature. 
And  faith  gives  a  man  a  new  relationship  to  God.  It  makes  him  son  of  God  and 
joint-heir  with  Christ.  Therefore,  the  man  who  has  faith  in  Christ  will  be  a  good 
living  man,  showing  his  faith  by  his  works.  II.  Hope,  the  consequence  of  faith. 
If  a  man  believes  in  the  Son  of  God,  he  shall  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting 
life.  If  we  firmly  believe  this  promise  it  will  give  ua  hope  of  its  fulfilment.  Hope 
is  the  anchor  that  sustains  the  Christian  in  all  the  storms  of  time,  the  chain  that 
connects  him  with  the  future  amid  all  its  difficulties.  What  would  life  be  without 
it,  even  in  a  worldly  sense  ?  The  anticipation  of  something  better  bears  us  up 
amid  many  of  the  world's  trials.  But  even  the  best  of  our  worldly  hopes  is  of  a 
transitory  and  uncertain  character,  but  the  heavenly  hope  is  sure  and  steadfast.  . 
Hope  is  not  only  a  privilege  and  a  blessing  ;  it  is  part  of  a  Christian's  duty.  A  man 
who  sits  down  and  des^ponds  lofes  the  very  anchor  of  his  ship.  III.  Ch*rity. 
First,  faith  the  root  and  trunk,  then  hope  the  branches,  then  charity  the  fruit,  the 
highest  development  of  the  Christian  character,  the  i^ractical  part  of  Christianity. 
Faith  is  the  inward  union  of  the  soul  with  Christ;  hope  is  the  support  which 
gives  us  strength  to  battle  with  the  present ;  charity  the  outward  manifestation 
of  what  we  feel  within.  Only  realise  that  the  gospel  is  love,  and  then  you  realise 
its  beauty  and  realise  its  glory.  (J.  J.  S.  Bird,  B.A.)  Faith,  hope,  and 
charity  : — I.  The  nature  of  each  or  these  graces.  1.  Faith.  Now  faith  means 
belief  ;  and  evangelical  and  saving  faith  is  believing  the  gospel.  The  gospel 
contains  an  account  of  man's  ruin  by  sin,  and  of  his  redemption  by  Christ, 
and  these  things,  when  believed,  produce  an  important  effect  upon  our  state  and 
character.  2.  Hop-t  is  the  desiie,  combined  with  the  expectation,  of  some 
future  good ;  and  Christian  hope  is  the  desire  and  the  expectation  of  all 
the  good  which  is  premised  to  believers  in  the  Word  of  God.  (1)  Its  objects 
include  all  the  blessings  belonging  to  the  kingdom  of  grace  and  of  glory. 
As  Christians  we  have  much  in  possession,  but  more  in  prospect.  (2)  Its 
foundation  is  the  got-pel  of  Christ.  The  reason  which  we  have  for  the  hope  that  is 
in  us  is  derived  from  the  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises  which  God  has  given 
to  us  in  His  Word,  thi'  fulfilment  of  which  is  secured  to  us  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  by 


CHAP,  xiii.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  317 

the  oath  of  God,  and  by  the  faithfulness  of  the  Divine  character.     We  hope  there- 
fore because  we  believe.     (3)  Its  influence.    ItencouraRes  our  prayers  ;  for  the  hope 
of  receiving  inspires  confidence  in  asking.  It  promotes  our  holiness ;  "  for  every  man 
that  hath  this  hope  in  Him,  puritieth  himself,  even  as  He  is  pure."     And  it  is  a 
source  of  peace  and  consolation  and  joy.     3.  Charity  or  love.     (1)  Love  to  God 
includes  in  it  gratitude  to  Him  for  His  goodness  ;  approbation  of  His  character  ; 
cheerful  obedience  to  His  commands;  desire  for  the  enjqyment  of  His  favour,  and 
for  increasing  conformity   to   His   image.     (2)  Love   to   our   fellow-creatures    iu 
general  is  "  goodwill   to  men."      (3)  Love   to  the    brethren   is   love  to  Christians 
as  such.     It   includes   approbation   of   their    characters  as   well   as   benevolence 
to   their  persons.     11.  Tue  union  which  subsists  among  the  thuee.     They  are 
united.     1.  In  their  source.     Diversified  as  they  are  iu  their  nature  and  operations, 
they  have   each  their  source   in    God.     The  heart    of    man,   which  is  nat  i rally 
"deceitful    above    all    thin^^s,"    &o.,    cannot    be    the    fountain    of    sireams,    so 
pure    and    hallowed    as    these    three.     Faith,    we    are    toll,    is    "the    fruit    of 
the    Spirit"   and  "the    gift   of  God."     Hope   has    the   same   Divine   origin,   for 
it  is  "  the  God  of  hope,  who  fiils  yon  witii  all  joy  and  peace  in  behoving,  that 
ye  may  abound   in  hope,  through  the  power   of  the  Holy  Ghost."     An.l  love  is 
equally  of  God,  for  "  God  is  love,"  and  it  is  His  love  which  is  shed  abroad  in  our 
hearts.     And  as  "  these  three"  are  thus  united  in  God,  their  sonrce  and  giver, 
it  is  from  God  alone  that  you  are  to   seek  them,  by  earnest  and  by  persevering 
prayer.    2.  In  their  residence — the  heart.  The  b«dy,  the  soul,  and  the  spirit  are  not 
more  necessary  to  compose  a  living  and  a  perfect  man  than  are  faith  and  hope  and 
love  to  constitute  a  living   and  a  perfect   Christian  ;  for  were  any  one  "f  these 
three  wanting,  tliere  wo'ild   be  a  fatal   deficiency  in  the  character.     He  therefore, 
by  whom  that  character  is  formed,  begins  it  by  the  gift  of  faith,  but  completes  and 
perfects   it  by   the   addition   of  hope   and  love.     There  is  not  one  of  them  with 
which  a  Christian  can  part.     You  cannot,  e.p.,  part  with  faith  ;  for  we  are  saved  by 
faith,  and  without  faith  it  would  be  itn  possible  to  please  God.     You  cannot  part 
with  hope;  for  without  hope  we  should   be  of  all  men  the  most   mi>^erable.     And 
you  cannot  part  with  love  ;  for  that  would  be  to  lose  the  very  image  of  God  ;  for 
"  he  that  loveth  not  knoweth  not  God."     As  therefore  in  an  arch  you  cannot  part 
either  with  the  found  ition-stones  or  with  the  key-stons  in  the  centre,  without  ruin 
to    the   whole  fabric,    so    you  cannot  part   with  any  one    of    these  three  graces 
without   becoming   absolutely  "nothing."     3.  In  their  influence.     (1)  To  purify 
the   heart,   for    o'lr    hearts   are    "  puriiied    by   faith";    "every   man   that    hath 
this   hope   in   Him,  purifieth   hims  If,  even    as  He  is  pure";    no  man  can  love 
God    without   becoming    "a  partaker    of    His  holiness."     (2)  In   pro-perity,   in 
supplying    the    Christian    with     sweeter    pleasures    than     earthly    things     can 
yield,    and   in   keeping   him   unspotted   from   the   world.     His  faith   beholds   an 
inlieritance,   "  incorruptible,   undefiled,  and  that   fadeth   not   away  " ;    his    hope 
seeks  fruition  in  "  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory  "  ;  and  his  love  leads  him  to 
choose  Goi  as  his  invaluable  poition,  and  to  declare,  "whom  have  I  in  heaven 
but  Thee  ? "  itc.     (3)  In   adversity,  in    bringing    strength    and   consolation  to  the 
soul.     III.  The  SUPERIORITY  OF  charity  TO  both  faith  and  hope.     "The  greatest 
of    these    is   charity."     The    epithet  of  "great"   belongs   to  each,  and    they  are 
far  superior   to  natural  talents  and   even  to  miraculous  endowments.     Love  is 
the  greatest  of  the   three,  because — 1.  It   is   the  only   grace    which  is  exercised 
by    God    Himself.     2.  It   is   the   grace   for  the  sake   of   which   faith   and   hope 
are  produced  and  exercised.     Love  is  the   sacred  temple  which  faith   and  hope 
are    employed     in    building,    and    needful    as   their    presence    and    exertions    are 
now,    wliil-^t   the  temple  is  rising,    yet    when  the  topstone  is  brought  forth,  and 
when  the  cloud  of  glory  has  filled  tire  IvAj  place,  their  assi-<tance  will  no  longer 
be  required,  and  they  may  rest  from  their  labours.     3.  It  is  capable  of  putting 
forth     greater    en<-rgies,    and     of    perlorming    greater    achievements.       4.  It    is 
eminently   and   almost   entirely  a   socal  grace.     Faith  and   hope  are    in  a  great 
measure  personal  graces.     5.  It   a'one   is  eternal  in  its  duration.     Faith,  like  the 
venerable   lawgiver,  ascends   Mount    Pisgah,    views   the   promised    land,  and  dies. 
Hope,  brii,ht  and  cheering  as  ihe  morning  star,  grows  dim,  and  fades,  amidst  the 
splendours    of    the    rising    and  ,  meridian    sun.     But    Charity,    immortal   in   her 
existence  as  the  soul  she  inspires,  and  as  the  God  from  whom  she  came,  ascends, 
like  Elijah,  iu  a  chariot  of  tire,  and  is  translated  to  the  realms  of  life  and  joy. 
(r.  Alexander.)         taitli,  hope,  and  churiti/  : — Let  us  theu  inquire — 1.  What  faith, 
HOPE,  and  charity  are.     1.  Faith  has  respect  to  things  either  unseen  or  future. 


318  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 

2.  Hope  is  desire  and  expectation  of  good.  3.  Charity  is  love  to  God  and  love 
to  man.  There  may  be  in  our  text  a  special  reference  to  love  to  man,  including 
the  love  of  complacency  towards  the  gooi,  and  a  love  of  compassion  towards  even 
the  vilest  of  the  vile.  II.  The  excellence  of  faith  and  hope.  1.  Faith  is 
excellent  contemplated — (1)  Intelleotually.  The  power  of  realising  existing  objects 
and  past  and  future  events  is  a  power  of  incalculable  value,  without  which  man 
would  not  be  man.  Most  of  our  knowledge  is  obtained  through  the  medium  of 
books  and  oral  instruction,  which  we  have  read  and  heard  and  have  believed. 
Even  common  conversation  owes  much  of  its  interest  to  the  faith  which  we  have 
in  one  another.  In  commerce  the  importance  of  a  promise  to  pay  and  of 
believing  that  promise  is  most  apparent.  Trial  by  jury,  on  which  the  question  of 
life  or  death  often  depends,  would  be  useless  were  faith  in  civil  society  impo  sible. 
(2)  Morally,  (a)  A  man  "  whose  word  is  as  good  as  his  bond"  is  universally  and 
deservedly  esteemed.  He  is  a  man  who  can  be  believed,  (h)  But  the  moral  excellence 
of  faith  is  most  of  all  a^jparent  in  its  reference  to  God.  Faithfulness  as  clearly  be- 
longs to  God  as  either  justice  or  mercy  ;  and  when  we  trust  in  Him  without  fear,  we 
"  give  to  Hm  the  glory  due  to  His  name."  (c)  Faith  exerts  a  beneficial  interest  on 
the  entire  character  of  man  as  exposed  to  temptation.  For  his  conflict  the  moral 
soldier  is  furnished  with  "  the  shield  of  faith."  "  This  is  the  victory  that  over- 
cometh  the  world,"  &c.  (d)  It  is  essential  to  our  salvation.  It  is  to  a  Christian 
what  grasping  the  hand  of  a  friend  would  be  to  a  drowning  man.  2.  Hope  is 
excellent,  because — (1)  It  is  the  next  best  thing  to  actual  possession  ( Rom.  viii.  24). 
It  is  the  earnest  of  heaven.  (2)  It  neutralises  if  not  annihilates  the  misery  which 
great  affliction  miglit  otherwise  create  ;  "  these  light  afflictions,  which  are  but  for  a 
moment,"  &c.  III.  The  sukpassing  excellence  of  charity.  1.  It  is  more 
disinterested  than  either  faith  or  hope.  2.  It  is  the  perfection  of  man.  3.  It  is 
eternal.  4.  Although  charity  is  before  faith  and  hope  in  point  of  excellence,  faith 
is  first  in  order  of  time.  (J.  Burder,  M.A.).  Faith,  hopp,  charitij  : — 1.  It  is  a 
proof  of  the  importance  of  this  Divine  trio  that  they  are  universally  necessary. 
Excellent  and  wonderful  are  the  gifts  of  healing,  &c.  ;  precious  and  in  dispensable 
are  those  more  ordinary  gifts  through  which  the  edification  of  Christ's  body  is 
provided  for;  but  they  are  not  gifts  of  wliich  it  can  be  said  that  a  man  must  possess 
them  in  order  to  be  saved.  2.  The  practical  value  of  these  three  gifts  is  enhanced 
by  the  fact  that  they  are  univei'sally  attainable.  Miraculous  gifts  might,  even  in 
the  age  of  miracles,  be  sought  without  success;  and  they  were  withdrawn  long  ago. 
But  of  the  gifts  of  faith,  hope,  and  love,  we  can  say  that  "every  one  that  seeketh 
findeth,"  and  it  is  a  man's  own  fault  if  he  has  them  not.  3.  There  is  a  remarkable 
pairing  and  grouping  of  these  graces  in  the  Scripture  (1  Tim.  i.  14;  Eph.  vi.  2.^  ; 
Gal.  v.  6).  Observe  also  the  coupling  of  faith  and  hope  (1  Pet.  i.  21 ;  Col.  i.  23).  We 
also  find  them  grouped  all  together  (Col.  i.  3-5;  1.  Ihess.  i.  3).  4.  The  admirable 
nature  of  these  graces  is  proclaimed  by  the  functions  assigned  to  them  as  part  of 
the  Christinn's  heavenly  armour  (Eph.  vi.  16).  Consider  them — I.  In  a  general 
WAT.  1.  Love  has  the  first  place  in  point  of  time.  Tliere  was  a  time  when  there 
was,  and  could  be,  no  faith  and  no  hope  ;  but  the  gospel  tells  us  of  an  everlasting 
love.  What  is  declared  of  the  Word  is  true  of  love  (John  i.  1).  2.  While  love 
can,  and  does,  dwell  wherever  faith  and  hope  find  a  home,  it  makes  its  chief  abode 
in  a  quarter  to  which  they  have  no  access.  But  love  takes  a  higher  fli-ht.  God 
neither  believes  nor  hopes  ;  but  God  loves.  3.  All  three  are  springs  of  hum.an 
action.  But  love  is  more  ;  it  is  a  spring  of  action  on  the  part  of  Gud.  Faith  and 
hope  beget  great  deeds ;  but  they  are  only  the  deeds  of  men  after  all.  Love 
awakens  to  action  the  powers  of  omnipotence,  and  God  arises  at  its  summons. 

II.    As    graces    which   are    found    in    every    REAL    CHRISTIAN'S     HEART.       When    tllUS 

considered,  love  is  the  greatest  of  them  all.  1.  It  excels  in  resp<  ct  of  its  su>cess  and 
range.  The  Christian's  love  is  the  companion  of  his  faith  and  hope  in  all 
their  exercises,  and  goes  forth  upon  the  object  on  which  they  1  y  liold;  but 
it  is  also  the  conjpanion  and  follower  of  God's  love,  and  makes  for  the  objects 
of  Divine  regard.  2.  It  carries  off  the  palm  among  the  graces,  because  it 
imparts  a  likeness  to  God.  God  is  love.  "  In  this  the  children  of  God  are 
manifest,  and  the  children  of  the  devil."  3.  The  disinterestedness  of  love 
gives  it  pre-eminence.  Love's  office  is  to  give.  Faith  and  hope  are  exercised 
in  the  reception  and  anticipation  of  benefits.  Love  "  seeketh  not  her  own." 
4.  The  greatness  of  b>ve  may  le  estimated  by  its  relation  to  holiness.  Faith, 
indeed,  is  a  holy  principle,  and  holiness  is  the  result  of  its  influence  and  "peration. 
So  hope  also  is  a  holy  principle,  purging  away  the  defilement  of  sin.     Every  man 


CHAP.  XIII.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  319 

thRt  hath  it  in  him,  purifieth  himself,  as  Christ  is  pure.     But  love  is  holiness 
itself — the  end  for  whicli  these  means  and  instruments  are  employed.     5.  Love  is 
greatest  in  respect  of  the  ultimate  importance  of  the  part  it  lias  to  act.     (1)  'There 
:are  various  respects  in  which  faith  and  hope  are  greater  than  love.     Take  the  case 
of  a  man  convinced   of  his  Ruilt,  and  lon'.'ing  for   pardon  and   acceptance  witlr 
God.     Love  can  do  notliing  there.     When  the  jailer  cried,  "  What  must  I  do  to  be 
saved?  "it  was  faith  ^that  ^was  summoned  to  tlie  rescue.     Take  the  ordinary  case 
•of  God's   people   on  earth,  exposed   to   dang^-r  from  the  world.     Love  would  be 
borne  down  and  put  to  death,  did  not  faith   cover  love  with  the  buckler    of  its 
protection.     Or  take  the  case  of  one  wlio  is  visited  with  protracted  tri  Is  and  afflic- 
tions.   Is  it  love  that  will  keep  him  fi  om  despair  ?     No.    That  is  the  office  of  hope. 
2.  But  then  the  offices  of  faith  and  liope  now  glanced  at  do  not  last  for  ever.     The 
time  is  coming  when  there  will   be  no  such  work  as  we  have   spoken  of  for  faith 
land  hof)e  to  do.     We  do  not  say  that  faith  and  hope  will  then  disappear.     For  the 
redeemed  will  always  trust  in  God,  and  look  to  .Jesus  ;  and  in  viewing  the  et  iniiy 
that  stretches  out  before  tlrem,  they  shall   be  annnated   by  a  hope  on  whicli  tliere 
will  never   be  a  cloud.     But  faith  and  liope  will  not   continue  in  the  front  of  the 
:scene.     They  will  then  confess  themselves  to  be  but  the  handmaids  of  love,  and 
will   make   way   for   love   by  witlidrawing   into   the  shade.     Having  nursed  and 
defended    love    in    her   infancy,    and     watihed    over    her    ripening    years,    and 
having,    at    last,  comlucted    her    to    the    steps    of    her    destined    tlirone,    then- 
work  is  comparatively  finished.    Then  will  be  the  glorious  reign  of  love.    (A.  Gray.) 
Faith,    hope,    love: — I.    The    specific    nature    of    each.      1.    Faith.     As    to    its 
■origin,  it  is  the  gift  of  God  ;  as  to  its  operation,  it  is  thn  work  of  tiie  Spirit ;  as  to 
its  object,  it  fastens  on  Christ ;  as  ti  its  exercise,  it  is  the  disciple's  own  act.     The 
Scriptures  make  much  of  faith — "Precious  faith";  "Thy  faith  hath  saved  thee"; 
"Without  fnith  it  is  impossible  to  please  God."     Faith  is  the  first  stone  of  the 
building,  but  it  is  not  tlie  foundation.     Our  lielp  is  laid  on  One  that  is   mighty. 
But  beware  how  you  come  to  Christ.    Any  work  of  yours,  by  way  of  recommending 
you,  will  be  a  non-conductor  through  which  the  light  of  hfe  from  the   Saviour 
^cannot  run  (Gal.  v.  2).     2.  Hope  is  adapted  to  a  transitory,  imperfect  state.     Its 
office  is  to  diminish  the  sorrows  of  tlie  present  by  drawing  on  the  ston  s  of  future 
joy.     It  is  the  tenant,  not  of  a  heait  that  was  never  broken,  but  of  a  lieart  that 
has  been  broken  and  liealed  again.     A  pute,  brii^ht  star  fix-^d  in  heaven,  it  reaches 
with  its  rays  the  uplifted  eye  of  the  weary  pilgrim.     But  stars  shine  not  in  the 
■day  ;  the  darkness  brings  them  out.     So  grief  summons  hope  to  the  aid  of  the 
sufferer.     When  the  ransiuned  rise  from  the  sleep  of  the  grave,  tliis  gentle  star, 
which  had  often  soothed  them  in  the  night  of  their  pilgrimage,  will  novvliere  be 
found  in  all  the  upper  firmament;  for  in  presence  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness 
hope,  no  longer  needed,  no  more  appears.     3.    Love.     Some  fragments  of   tliis 
heavenly  thing  survive  tlie  fall  and  flourish  in  our  nature.     It  is  beautiful  even  in 
ruins.     We  shall  learn  more  about  its  nature  when  we  are  called  to  consider  its 
magnitude.     II.  The  mutual  relations  of  all.     Hitherto  we  iiave  spoken  of  thetu 
■as  three  rings  lying  beside  each  other  ;  now  we  speak  of  them  as  three  links  witliin 
each  otlier,  so  as  to  constitute  a  chain.     1.  The  relation  between  faith  and  hope. 
Faith  leans  on  Christ,  and  liope  hanp;s  by  faith.     There  is,  iiiileed,  a  species  of 
hope  whicli  has  no  connection  with  faith.     If  in  a  place  of  danger  you  saw  a  chain 
whose  uppermost  link  was  surely  fixed  in  the  living  rock,  and  whose  lowest  link — a 
goodly  iron  ring — was  vibrating  invitingly  near,  you  might  be  induced  to  venture 
your  body's  weight  upon  its  seeming  strength.     If  that  lowest  link  were  not  within 
the  one  above  it,  but  only  attMched  externally  by  some  brittle  twig,  you  would 
■exchange  the  slippery  place  of  danger  for  the  plunge  into  inevitable  dea  h.     It  is 
like  the  fall  of  a  sinner  who  has  risked  his  soul  for  the  great  dav  on  a  hope  not 
linked  to  faith.     2.  The  relation  between  hope  and  love.     Hope  leans  on  faith,  and 
love  on  hiipe.     Love  will  languish  unless  blessed  hcpe  be  uuderneath.     Love's 
■manifold  efforts,  stretching  out  in  every  idrcction  and  leaving  no  space  unoccupied, 
are  like  the  bra'  ches  of  a  fruit  tree.     A  single  stem  suppoits  and  supplies  them 
.all,  while  it  elf  in  turn  is  supported  and  supplied  by  t  e  root.     So  hope,  itself 
sustained  by  faith,  sustains  love  in  its  turn.     Hope  in  the  heart  of  the  Man  of 
Sorrows  b  ire  Him  through  His  lab  )ur<  of  love  (Heb.  x'i  2).     Hope  is  the  main- 
spring of  labouring  love — hope  in  the  Lord,  first  for  yourself,  and  then  for  your 
neiglibour.     III.  The  superior  magnixudu  of  thb  last.     1.  In  its  work  on  earth. 
It  is  the  only  one  of  the  three  that  reaches  other  men  and  directly  acts  upon 
vthem  for  their  good.     (1)  "  Thy  faith  hatli  saved  thee,"  but  what  can  it  do  for 
■/ 


y 


320  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 

thy  brother  ?  It  operates  by  sustaining  and  stimulating  other  graces — "  Faith 
■worlieth  by  love."  (2)  Hope  in  like  manner  begins  and  ends  in  the  heart  of  a 
disciple.  The  less  that  your  hope,  as  such,  protrudes  itself  on  the  notice  of  man- 
kind, the  better  for  its  own  health;  but  the  more  it  swells  within  your  bre^tst,  the 
more  of  love  will  it  send  forth  to  bless  tlie  world.  (3)  On  the  contrary,  it  is  the 
nature  of  love  to  come  out.  Unless  it  act  on  others  it  cannot  be.  Love  teaches 
the  ignorant,  clothes  the  naked,  f^eds  the  hungry,  and  is  the  fulfilhng  of  that  law 
which  came  latest  from  the  Lord's  own  lips  :  "  Go  ye  iuto  all  the  world,  and 
preach  the  g'ispel  unto  every  creature."  2.  In  its  performance  in  heaven.  (W, 
Arnot,  D.D.)  Faith,  hope,  love  : — 1.  What  a  happy  grouping,  so  familiar  now 
that  nothing  seems  more  commonplace ;  but  what  an  inspiration  it  was  wln^n  it 
first  flamed  out  of  the  soul  of  the  great  apostle  !  2.  We  eanuot  forget  that  he  hnd 
the  advantage  of  Greuk  culture,  so  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  he  was  led  to  the 
conception  by  the  three  graces.  But  wbat  a  contrast  between  the  Greek  and  the 
Christian  graces !  The  one  represented  chiefly  the  charms  of  outward  beantv, 
wiusomeness,  gleefulness  ;  the  other  were  not  mere  embellishments  of  life,  but  its 
central  forces,  the  deep  springs  of  all  that  was  true  and  beautiful  and  noble  in 
character.  Was  not  that  a  most  significant  change?  The  word  "  grace  "  retains 
its  Greek  as  well  as  its  Christian  meaning  in  our  language.  We  often  use  it  in  the 
old  sense,  e.g.,  "  grace  in  every  movement  of  the  body,"  or  "  done  with  a  very  good 
grace  "  ;  but  just  think  in  what  a  different  region  of  thought  atid  life  we  are  when 
we  speak  of  grace  in  its  profound  Christian  sense.  There  are  those  who  have  real 
grace  in  the  heart,  whose  maimers  do  but  scant  justice  to  that  wbich  is  within 
them  ;  and  there  a^-e  tliose  who  have  succeeded  in  cultivating  outward  graces  of 
manner,  but  are  utterly  devoid  of  grace  witljin.  Give  us  boih  the  outward  and 
the  inward,  if  it  be  possible ;  but  if  it  must  be  only  one,  let  it  be  that  which  is  real 
and  detp  and  true.  .^.  But  we  must  look  at  the  triad  of  Christian  graces.  The 
apostle  says  that  they  abide  while  other  good  things  pass  away.  4.  The  contrast 
in  regard  to  abiding  is  not  between  the  graces  among  themselves,  but  between  gifts 
and  graces  (ver.  8).  This  contrast  between  knowledge,  as  transitory,  is  especially 
interesting  now  that  there  is  a  disposition  to  .^p  ak  of  faith,  &c.,  as  the  shadowy 
things  which  are  rapidly  vanishing  away,  while  knowledge  is  the  substantial  thing 
which  is  sure  to  hold  its  ground.  Is  not  faith  giving  way  to  agnosticism  ?  Is  not 
hope  fading  before  pessimism?  And  is  not  the  old  idea  that  love  is  creation's  final 
law  giving  way  to  the  new  philosophy  which  resolves  everything  into  matter  and 
force?  5.  Is  there  any  way  of  tesiing  which  is  right?  If  only  we  could  project 
ourselves  forward,  say,  for  2,000  years,  how  very  satisfactorily  we  could  settle  the 
matter  !  Would  a  learned  man  of  the  nineteenth  century  pa?s  for  a  learned  man 
of  the  thirty-ninth ?  Or  would  he  be  only  as  a  child?  But  will  not  faith,  &c., 
be  as  powerful  and  healthful  factors  in  life  as  they  are  now?  But  we  must 
not  prophesy.  But  what  if  we  look  2,000  years  Lack  ?  Where  would  the 
wise  man  of  the  apostle's  time  be  alongside  of  our  mighty  men  of  science 
to-day  ?  Imasine  a  conversation  between  Pliny,  the  elder,  and  Professor  Huxley 
on  biology.  The  great  naturalist  of  the  first  century  would  have  to  go  to 
school  for  twenty  years  before  he  was  ready  to  besin.  Would  the  apostle 
Paul  have  to  go  to  school  for  twenty  years  before  he  could  begin  to  talk 
with  an  advanced  Christian  of  the  nineteenth  century  on  faith  and  hope  and  love? 
The  learning  of  the  time  was  not  at  all  to  be  despised.  Nor  did  the  apostle  at  all 
despise  it ;  only  he  recognises  the  fact  that  it  is  partial — that  in  course  of  time  it 
will  be  obsolete.  We  may  be  sure  that  this  would  by  no  means  please  the  gnostics 
of  the  day,  as  they  called  themselves.  These  learned  men  believed  they  had  reached 
the  ultimate  truth.  The  apostle  did  not  undertake  to  pronounce  on  the  truth  or 
falsehood  of  what  they  taught ;  only  he  plainly  indicated  that  it  would  by  and  by 
be  out  of  date,  whereas  the  heavenly  faith  and  hope  and  love  which  it  was  his  high 
calling  to  set  before  men  would  last.  Where  are  the  gnostics  now?  I  don't  sup- 
pose there  is  one  left  in  all  the  world.  But  faith,  <fec.,  inspire  as  many  men  now  as  they 
did  then,  and  thousands  of  thousands  more  !  6.  And  many  other  knowledges  have 
passed  away  besides  that  of  St.  Paul's  day  in  the  course  of  these  nineteen  centuries. 
A  very  striking  illustration  of  this  is  to  be  found  in  the  "  Paradiso  "  of  Dante.  The 
science  of  his  time  is  so  completely  out  of  date  that,  without  a  special  study  of  it, 
it  is  impossible  to  understand  what  he  means  at  all  when  he  is  trying. to  expound 
it ;  and  after  you  do  find  what  he  means  it  is  not  of  the  slightest  use  or  permanent 
value.  All.  but  when  he  soars  on  the  wings  of  faith  and  hope  and  love,  we  soar 
with  him   yet.    And  they  were  the  same  as  the  apostle's,  only  they   were   not 


CHAP.  XIII.]  I.  COEINTHIANS.  321 

entangled  with  the  errors  of  the  times.  A  most  signal  token  this  of  an  inspiration 
far  transcending  that  of  Dante.  And  here  we  can  go  back  far  more  than  eighteen 
centuries.  Look  at  Genesis.  There  is  tlie  very  oldest  book  in  all  the  world.  Is  it 
obsolete  ?  Compare  it  with  the  work  of  Dante  in  this  respect,  and  what  a  contrast ! 
People  talk  of  the  conflict  between  science  and  faith.  There  is  no  such  conflict. 
It  is  only  the  conflict  between  old  science  and  new.  All  our  troubles  with  scientific 
opinions  have  come  from  our  leaving  the  lofty  regions  of  faith,  i^c,  and  descending 
into  the  troubled  area  of  shifting  scientific  knowledge.  Tlie  holy  men  of  old  who 
spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  kept  quite  clear  of  all  these  questions. 
You  don't  find  them  pronouncing  opinions  on  scientific  subjects.  They  kept  them- 
selves to  their  own  faith  and  hope  and  love.  7.  The  knoiv ledge  that  many  of  us 
are  ambitious,  and  rightly  ambitious,  to  acquii'e  will  no  doubt  be  of  great  service 
for  many  years  to  come  ;  but  faitb,  hope,  and  love  are  just  as  needful  and  service- 
able for  these  years  ;  and  then  their  value  by  no  means  ends  with  these  years,  but 
lasts  on  and  on  for  ever.  They  are  the  coin  current  in  eternity.  Without  them 
we  shall  be  paupers  for  eternity,  however  wise  and  learned  and  well-equipped  for  time. 
(J. Monro  Gihsop,D.D.)  Faith,  hope,chnrity  : — These  three  graces  foim  the  es-ential 
elements  of  the  Christian  character.  They  are  principles  implanted  in  the  heart  of 
every  true  Christiau  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  always  exemplitied  in  his  outward  walk 
and  conversation.  I.  The  nature  and  effects  of  faith,  hope,  and  chakity.  1. 
Faith,  in  its  general  signification,  is  credit  given  to  testimony.  It  is  a  principle  npon 
which  we  are  continually  acting  in  the  ordinary  concerns  of  life.  Now  the  faith 
spoken  of  in  the  text  is  precisely  the  same  principle,  only  having  a  different  object 
and  resting  upon  higher  testimony.  We  cannot  penetrate  the  recesses  of  the 
Divine  counsels.  Faith  is  a  cordial  assent  to  the  truth  of  all  the  declarations  of 
God's  Word.  "  Entei  ing  into  the  daily  habits  and  experience  of  the  Christian, 
this  principle  is  the  spring  of  his  most  holy  tempers,  exertions,  attainments,  and 
consolations.  He  lives — he  walks— he  stands — he  perseveres — be  fights — he  con- 
quers and  triumphs,  by  faith."  2.  Hope  is  a  lively  expectation  of  obtaining  those 
things  which  we  desiie  ;  and  when  we  are  led  by  faith  to  a  knowledge  of  our  real 
condition,  we  shall  obviously  desire  nothing  so  much  as  deliverance  from  that 
condition.  The  principal  object  of  hope  will,  therefore,  be  the  attainment  of 
eternal  salvation  through  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  Hope  differs 
from  presumption.  When  thus  grounded  upoa  the  everlasting  covenant  which 
has  been  confirmed  by  the  oath  of  Jehovah,  it  does  afford  strong  consolation  to 
the  true  Christian.  3.  Charity,  like  faith  and  hope,  is  a  stranger  to  the  natural 
heart.  And  oh  !  what  a  splendid  character  does  it  present  to  us  !  "  How  glorious 
is  it  as  an  emanation  of  Divine  goodness  when  compared  with  the  usual  habits  of 
men ;  when  viewed  in  contrast  with  the  habitually  selfish  doings  of  many  men, 
who  even  profess  and  call  themselves  Christians  !  "  It  is,  at  the  same  time,  a 
character  so  elevated,  that  it  needs  a  certain  measure  of  Christian  grace  to  perceive 
and  to  love  its  excellencies.  II.  In  what  the  superiority  of  charity  consists. 
1.  It  is  more  excellent  in  its  nature.  Perfect  excellency  can  be  found  only  in  God 
Himself.  It  is  by  this  grace,  then,  that  the  restoration  of  the  Divine  image  takes 
place  in  our  hearts.  2.  It  is  more  advanced  in  order.  That  is,  it  lanks  higher  in 
the  scale  of  attainment.  We  must  possess  faith  and  hope  before  we  can  be  actuated 
by  the  principle  of  love.  They  are  the  means  ;  this  is  the  end.  It  is  the  prize 
itself  of  which  faith  and  hope  must  gradually  put  us  in  possession.  A  magnificent 
edifice  cannot  be  erected  without  scaffolding;  yet  the  building  is  greater  than  the 
scaffolding,  being  the  sole  end  for  which  that  is  necessary  :  and  when  it  is  finished 
the  scaffolding  is  removed  as  an  useless  encumbrance.  3.  It  is  more  expansive  in 
its  exercise.  There  is  a  degree  of  selfishness  in  faith  and  hope.  They  benefit 
him  only  who  possesses  them.  But  love,  like  the  sun  in  the  firmament,  diffuses 
its  blessings  far  and  wide,  and  sheds  a  kindly  influence  all  around.  1.  Let  us,  in 
conclusion,  first,  use  these  graces  as  a  test  of  our  state.  2.  Let  us  seek  to  abound 
more  in  them.  {R.  Davies,  M.A.)  Hope: — 1.  Why  should  hope  be  placed  on  a  level 
with  faith  and  charity  ?  We  can  understand  why  faith  should  be  so  singled  out ; 
it  is  the  foundation  of  religion,  the  bond  between  the  creature  and  God.  Still  more 
can  we  understand  it  of  charity,  for  charity  is  the  likeness  of  God.  But  hope  i'* 
thought  of  at  first  sight  as  a  self-regarding  quality,  and  something  delusive  and 
treacherous.  2.  But  it  is  not  really  strange  that  St.  Paul  should  raise  hope  to  a 
Christian  temper  of  the  first  order.  St.  Paul  was  a  student  of  Scripture,  and  what 
is  on  the  very  surface  of  the  Bible  is  the  way  in  which,  from  first  to  last,  it  is  one 
nubroken,  persistent  call  to  hope.  Hope,  never  destroyed  however  overthrown; 
VOL.    II.  21 


322  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiir. 

hope,  never  obscured  amidst  the  storm  and  dust  of  ruin,  is  the  paramount  charac- 
teristic of  the  Old  Testament,  all  leads  bacli  to  hope  ;  if  ever  it  dies,  it  revives 
again  larger  and  more  confident  than  before.  I.  Hope  ei-evates  and  sthkngthens 
AND  INSPIRES.  Tliis  IS  whj  it  is  one  of  the  greatest  elements  of  the  jeligious 
temper.  1'here  may  be  a  faith  almost  without  hope,  a  faith  wliich  believes  though 
it  can  see  nothing  in  God's  truth  and  goodness;  "  Thongli  He  shj  me,  j'et  will  I 
trust  in  Him."  But  hope  is  the  energy  of  vijjjorous  faith,  the  strong  self-awakening 
from  discouragement  and  despair.  What  gives  its  moral  value  to  hope,  is  thnt,  in 
its  higher  form,  it  is  a  real  act  and  striviu'j;  of  the  will  and  moral  nature.  Like 
the  highest  forms  of  courage,  it  is  a  refusal  to  be  borne  down  and  cowed  by  evil,  a 
refusal  to  dwell  on  the  dark  side  of  things.  It  is  thus  that  hope  plays  so  great  a 
part  in  the  spiritual  life,  that  it  fights  with  such  power  on  the  side  of  God  ;  lor  it 
not  only  receives,  welcomes,  trusts  in  God's  promises,  but  it  thioMs  into  them  life 
and  reality.  II.  Hope  is  a  gheat  instkujient  of  spihitual  ano  moral  discipi  ine. 
"We  are  saved  by  hope.  Long  waiting  is  God's  appointed  order  for  t  'C  generHtions 
of  men.  All  kinds  of  forturjes  befall  the  Cnurch,  befall  us  all  who  are  going 
through  our  trial  time,  and  we  ofttn  are  tempted  to  be  tired,  and  opi^ressed,  and 
out  of  lieart.  There  mu-t  often  be  much  to  distress  and  alarm  us,  evils  wliich 
seem  without  remedy,  defeats  which  seem  final.  To  hope  seems  to  us  then  like 
deluding  ourselves.  And  yet  how  often  his  it  happened  in  the  upshot  of  things 
that,  if  in  the  very  darkest  times  of  history  any  one  Ijad  been  bold  enough  to  hope, 
he  would  have  been  amply  justified  !  We  need  not  blind  ourselves  to  f;icts  ;  we 
have  our  part  to  do.  and  we  must  deal  witli  it  as  we  may,  and  as  we  ought.  But 
the  God  of  hope  calls  to  us  out  of  the  darkness,  and  we  are  unfaithfi  1  to  Him  if 
in  our  wilfulness  we  shut  oar  ens  to  His  voice  and  dwell  despondiiigly  on  the 
future  which  is  in  His  hands.     III.  But  all  that  here  invitus  and  DEsrANDS  hope 

IS  BUT  LITTLE  TO  THAT  WHICH  IS    TO    RE    WIIKN    ALL    HERE    SHALL    HAVE    BEEN    PAST    AND 

OVER.  1.  We  may  dare  to  look  forward  to  be  sinless.  Think  of  what  you  know  of 
vour  own  conscitnce,  of  your  own  ten^ptations,  of  your  own  fnll,  of  }our  own 
struggles  for  ior^'iveness  and  lestcration,  and  then  think  what  it  will  be  to  have 
left  all  that  behind.  2.  Then,  wh  itever  the  function  and  employment  of  that 
jjerfect  state  may  be,  whatever  work  God  iriay  have  for  us  to  do,  we  shall  have  the 
will  and  the  power  to  do  it  as  the  angels  do.  The  divideil  service,  the  broken 
purpose,  the  double  mind,  the  treachaies  of  the  will,  the  blindness  of  self-deceit, 
the  lajigard  indolence,  all  that  now  mars  and  cripples  our  sincf-rest  obedience,  will 
then  have  been  pinged  away,  and  in  all  the  fulness  of  truth  we  shall  know  bow  to 
serve  Him  witii  our  whole  heart.  3.  There,  in  infinite  me-sure,  will  be  all  that 
calls  for  human  affection  ;  and  there  human  afT<-ctions  will  be  raised  to  new  powers 
and  strength,  transfigured,  purified,  glorified ;  and  there,  in  ways  we  cannot  dream  of 
now,  we  shall  be  brought  near  to  Christ,  and  be  like  unto  Him,  for  we  shall  see  Him  as 
He  is.  {Dean  Chur.'h.)  Hope: — 1.  Tl  e  root  of  tlie  word  in  Anglo-Sax  n  means, 
to  open  the  eyes  wid^  and  watch  for  what  is  to  dune,  as  wc  have  seen  children  do 
when  they  expect  to  see  some  wonder  or  receive  some  gift.  Indeed,  there  is 
another  word  closely  akin — the  woid  expect,  watching  for  what  is  to  ciine,  the. 
obverse  of  inspect,  looking  at.  what  his  come.  2.  Thi  se  meanings  are  the  delicate 
dividing  line  between  Fai  h  and  Hope.  While  Hope  experts,  FaitW  inspects; 
while  Hope  is  like  Mary,  looking  «;;-ward.  Faith  is  like  Martha,  looking  «^ward  ; 
while  the  light  in  the  eves  of  Hope  is  high,  the  light  in  the  eyes  of  Faith  is 
strong;  while  Hope  trembles  in  expectation.  Faith  is  quiet  in  possession.  Hope 
leaps  out  toward  whnt  will  be.  Faith  holds  on  to  whut  is;  Hoije  idealis' s.  Faith 
realises;  Faith  sees,  Hope  foresees.  3.  And  so  it  comes  that  in  reli:.ion  faith 
is  conservative,  while  hope  is  progressive.  Passing  on  the  Khine  through 
the  fog  and  mist  of  Holland  as  through  a  stagnant  sea,  you  stretch  upward 
league  after  league ;  and  as  you  go  the  country  gradually  changes,  the  air 
grows  cleaver,  the  prospect  finer.  But  the  higher  you  go,  the  harder  is  your 
going.  So  at  last  you  come  into  Switzerland,  where  all  about  you  is  a  vaster 
vision,  and  within  you  an  intenser  inspiiatiim  than  can  ever  be  felt  on  the  foggy 
flats  below.  It  is  tlte  difference  between  faith  alone  and  faith  and  hope  together. 
4.  Consider  hope,  however,  as  a  positive  matter.  Why,  you  say,  hope  is  the  most 
intangible  thing  a  man  can  entertain.  "Hope,"  says  Owen  Feltham,  "is  the 
bladder  a  man  will  take  wherewith  to  learn  to  swim  ;  then  he  goes  beyond  return, 
and  is  lost."  But  what  says  Paul?  He  makes  our  life  a  battle,  and  every  man  a 
soldier,  and  it  is  not  enough  that  the  heart  be  protected  by  the  shield  of  faith,  the 
head  must  be  guarded  also  by  the  helmet  of  hope  :  the  one  is  as  indispensable  as 


CHAP.  XIII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  823 

the  other.  And  a  brief  glance  at  the  life  about  us  will  soon  convince  you  that  the 
:nian  is  right,  that  as  Dr.  Johnson  said,  our  powers  owe  very  much  of  their  eneigy 
•to  our  hojie  ;  and  whatever  enlarges  hope  exalt^^  courage;  and,  where  th^re  is  no 
hope,  there  is  no  endeavour.  Here  is  Cyrus  Field  conceiving  the  idea  of  binding 
the  Atlantic  with  a  cord.  In  carrying  out  his  idea,  the  man  has  two  servants  to 
help  him — the  faith  that  it  can  be  done,  and  the  hope  that  he  shall  do  it.  With 
these  aids  he  goes  to  work.  Eaith  steadies  him  ;  hope  inspires  him.  Faith  works  ; 
hope  flies.  Faith  deliberates  ;  hope  anticipates.  Faith  lets  the  cable  go,  and  it 
breaks,  and  is  lost.  "  Nay,  not  lost,"  cries  iiope.  and  fishes  it  up  again.  Here  is 
Garibaldi  conceiving  the  idea  of  a  new  Italy.  He  has  faith  and  hope.  Austria, 
Naples,  and  Kome  are  against  him.  JJut  no  mau  knows,  or  can  know,  what  faith 
and  hope  t' 'gather  can  do  in  a  man  of  the  pattern  of  Garibaldi.  What  they  have 
done  for  Italy  will  go  riuL^ing  down  the  ages.  Very  curiously,  if  you  will  again, 
you  can  see  the  power  of  faith  without  hope  illustrated  in  China.  When  our 
ancestors  were  savages  they  had  advanced  about  where  they  are  now.  But  who 
■shall  say  that  China,  with  the  noble  qualities  no  doubt  slie  has,  might  not  have 
had  a  peerless  place  in  the  world,  had  she  held  herself  hopeful  and  expei-tant,  con- 
tinually, toward  every  new  idea  and  discovery?  5.  And  this  fact  of  h(ij)e  and  its 
influence  has  some  important  applications.  (1)  To  reli'-iion.  It  is  entirely  es-ential 
to  remember  that,  when  this  mati  tells  his  friends  to  take  for  a  helmet  the  hope  of 
salvation,  he  meant  the  hope  he  himself  was  rushing  through  the  worLl  to  proclaim. 
In  the  England  -of  John  Wesley  numbers  of  men  were  his  peers  in  faith.  But 
Wesley  had  more  hopefulness  in  his  little  finger  than  any  other  man  of  them  had 
in  his  whole  body.  And  so  wherever  Wesley  went  men  caught  the  i-ontagion  <>f  his 
great  hope,  and  then  ran  tirelessly  as  long  as  they  lived,  kindling  over  all  the 
world.  (2)  To  life  generally.  Young  men  and  women,  with  this  life  mainly 
before  you,  get  this  h  p,^.  Make  sure  that  there  is  n(jt  a  day  but  brmgs  you  nearer 
to  some  Divine  surprise  of  blessing,  some  great  unfolding  of  God's  V'-ry  j^ilory.  Men 
and  women  in  middle  life,  with  the  blonm  gone  from  some  things  that  seemed  very 
beautiful  as  they  lay  glistening  in  the  dew  of  the  morning,  whatever  you  do, 
never  let  a  painful  inspection  rob  you  of  a  great  expectation.  If,  as  you  live,  you 
try  to  live  faithfully,  then,  as  the  Lord  liveth,  try  to  live  hopefully,  or  you  will 
miss  the  hetter  half  of  your  living,     {li.  Collyer,  D.D.)  Lnve  .■ — 1.  In  the  text 

the  word  is  translated  charity.  In  Wickliffe's  time,  however,  love  and  charity  were 
;as  H'  arly  related  as  chauty  atid  benevolence  are  now.  Th  s  can  be  understood  if 
we  will  remember  that  charity  and  dear,  in  the  sense  of  precious,  belong  to  the  one 
root.  They  spring  from  what  was  common  enough  when  they  were  b  rn — dearth 
or  scarcity.  Food  was  then  precious,  much  esteemed,  much  loved.  Tlien  good 
bread  was  dear,  not  as  ii  is  now  to  us  in  money  value  merely,  but  in  this  primitive 
value  of  somethinj?  to  love,  a  small  piece  being  given  to  the  children  sometimes  on 
.a  Sunday,  as  a  very  precious  thing.  2.  Wiiat,  then,  is  this  love?  It  is  a  word 
tracealile  to  many  different  roots.  That  could  not  be  otherwise.  Love  would 
naturally  be  one  of  the  very  first  things  the  most  abject  savages  must  find  a  name 
for,  after  getting  a  word  to  exjiress  each  of  the  bate  needs  of  life.  The  first  time 
the  man  of  the  forest  tried  to  win  a  maiden  in  some  higher  way  than  bv  cairying 
her  off  by  force,  he  would  need  the  word.  The  first  time  the  mother  hid  to  tell 
of  the  mysterious  glow  in  her  heart  toward  her  b;ibe  in  its  .helplessness,  she  would 
need  the  word.  And  so  love,  in  one  root,  is  longing;  in  another,  goodness;  in 
another,  preference  ;  but,  to  me,  the  right  rests  at  last,  in  tlie  Teutonic  word  leben 
— life.  "  This  is  life,"  tliese  children  >>f  nature  said,  when  they  first  began  to  be 
•conscious  of  tiiis  glowing  wondei-  in  their  hearts.  "  You  are  my  life,"  the  man  said 
when  he  went  to  win  tlie  maiden;  and  the  mother,  when  she  caught  lier  nursling 
to  her  heart.  Lo^e  is  to  live  ;  and  not  to  love  is  not  to  live.  And  it  was  exactly 
the  definition  of  John,  when  he  wanted  to  tell  of  the  nearest  and  dearest  of  nil  the 
relations  the  soul  can  hoLl  to  G  d.  3  And  so,  while  faith  is  inre  ching,  and  hope 
outlooking,  love  is  inbiing.  By  faith  I  stand ;  h\  hope  I  soar  ;  by  love  I  am. 
Faith  assures  me,  h"pe  inspires  me;  love  is  me,  at  my  best.  4.  And  it  is  only  as 
we  kee(i  clo-e  to  this  iilea  and  fa  t  that  we  can  prevent  love  beiig  confounded  with 
other  and  baser  things,  t  at,  getting  mixed  up  with  it  in  our  own  Jangua'  e,  act  like 
the  liaser  metals  mixed  up  in  ihe  coinMixe  of  a  coiint'y,  giving  the  real  gold  and 
silver  a  lower  relative  value,  and  debasing  the  whole  fair  standarii  of  com  monwealth. 
Love,  for  examplt^,  is  not  hist.  Because  love,  for  whatever  may  In  itself  be  g  od, 
adds  just  so  much  as  there  is  in  what  I  love  to  life  ;  while  lust  tor  that  very  thing 
■exhausts  life.     When  the  yuuug  man,  living  in  a  room,  eating  in  a  restaurant,  and 


324  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 

troubled  about  more  things  than  ever  Martha  was,  feels  at  last  how  contracted  and 
poor  such  a  life  is  at  the  best,  and  says  in  his  heart,  "This  is  not  living:  I  must 
get  me  a  wife,"  whatever  may  be  Ids  iiiea  of  the  wife  he  wants,  the  word  he  uses  to 
describe  his  condition  reaches  away  into  the  truth.  It  is  not  living  ;  it  is  just  half 
living,  and  probably  not  that.  His  heart  is  crying  out  for  the  rest  of  his  life.  But 
there  is  that  calling  itself  love  which  is  lust — something  that  seeks  not  a  life,  but 
an  appanage  to  life,  and  reaps  for  its  sowing  a  harvest  of  gray  ashes.  Love  informs 
life  ;  lust  exhausts  it.  Love  is  the  shining  sun,  lust  is  the  wandering  star.  5. 
But,  beside  such  special  applications,  there  is  no  direction  in  which  we  can  turn 
but  this  spirit  meets  us  with  its  sweet,  solemn  face.  Consider  the  lesson  we  have 
learned  in  our  war.  When  we  plunged  into  that  red  sea,  the  gentlemen  of  England 
were  looking  on.  The  few  said  we  should  hold  our  own  ;  the  multitude  said  we 
had  gone  under.  What  made  this  difference?  The  few  loved  us,  so  that  Faith 
stood  square,  and  Hope  plumed  her  wings,  and  they  became  the  glad  ministers  of 
their  leader  and  guide.  The  many  did  not  love  us.  They  had  no  faith  in  us  and 
no  hope  for  us,  because  they  had  no  love.  W^hen  a  man  really  loves,  it  piles  great 
stores  of  love  into  his  heart ;  so  that  he  may  even  come  to  some  dreadful  pass 
where  faith  and  hope  fail  him,  and  yet  love  shall  carry  him  through.  When  the 
father  wants  to  put  his  son  on  the  way  to  success,  if  he  is  a  wise  man, 
he  most  anxiously  tries  to  find  out  where  the  lad's  love  lies  ;  for  there,  he 
knows,  he  will  have  faith  and  hope,  because  the  love  will  be  a  perpetual 
inspiration ;  while,  to  put  him  to  what  he  can  never  love,  will  only 
exhaust  and  disgust  him,  until  at  last  it,  is  given  up  in  despair,  (Ibid.) 
The  tliree  Divine  si^tr.i : — When  those  three  goddesses,  say  the  poets,  strove  for  tbe 
golden  ball,  Paris  adjudged  it  to  the  queen  of  Love.  Here  are  three  celestial  graces 
striving  for  the  chiefdom  ;  and  our  apostle  gives  it  to  love.  Not  that  other  daughters 
are  black,  but  tbat  Cbarity  excels  in  beauty  (Prov.  xxxi.  29).  All  stars  are  bright, 
tliough  "  one  star  may  differ  from  another  in  glory."  These  are  three  strings  often 
touched  :  faith,  whereby  we  believe  all  God's  jjromises  to  be  true,  and  ours ;  hope, 
whoeby  we  wait  for  them  with  patienC'^ ;  charity,  wheieby  wetestify  what  we  believe 
and  hope.  He  that  hath  fallen  cannot  distru>t ;  he  that  hath  hope  cannot  be  put 
from  anchor ;  he  tliat  hath  charity  will  not  lead  a  licentious  life,  for  "  love  keeps 
the  commandments."  Let  us  tre  it  them — I.  CojtPAKATivELY.  1.  Faith  is  that  grace 
which  makes  Christ  ours,  and  all  His  benefits.  God  gives  it  (Chap.  xii.  9) ;  by  the 
Word  preached  (Kom.  x.  17);  for  Cln-ist's  sake  (Phil.  i.  29).  This  virtue  is  no 
sooner  given  of  God,  but  it  gives  God  (Rom.  viii.  32).  "  Witliout  this  it  is 
impossible  to  please  God  "  (Heb.  xi.  6).  Let  us  not  otherwise  dare  to  come  into 
His  presence.  2.  Hope  is  the  sweetest  friend  that  ever  kept  a  distressed  soul 
company  ;  it  beguiles  the  tediousness  of  the  way,  all  the  miseries  of  our  pilgrimage. 
(1)  It  holds  the  head  whilst  it  aches,  and  gives  invisible  drink  to  the  thirsty  con- 
science. It  is  a  liberty  to  them  that  are  in  prison,  and  the  sweetest  physic  to  the 
sick.  St.  Paul  calls  it  an  anchor  (Heb.  vi.  19).  Let  the  winds  blow,  and  the  storms 
beat,  and  the  waves  swell,  yet  the  anchor  stays  the  ship.  It  breaks  through  all 
difficulties,  and  makes  way  for  tbe  soul  to  follow  it.  It  teacheth  Abraham  to  expect 
fruit  from  a  withered  stock  ;  and  Joseph  in  a  dungeon  to  look  for  tbe  sun  and 
stars'  obeisance.  Though  misery  be  present,  comfort  absent,  tho'igh  thou  canst 
spy  no  deliv'  ranee,  yet  such  is  the  nature  of  hope,  that  it  speaks  of  future  things  as 
if  they  were  present  (Rom.  viii.  24).  (2)  These  are  the  comforts  of  hope.  Now, 
that  you  may  not  be  deceived,  there  is  a  thing  like  hope,  which  is  not  it.  There  is 
a  bold  and  presumi'tuoas  hope,  an  ignorant  security  and  ungrounded  persuasion, 
the  very  illusion  of  the  devil,  that  how  wickedly  soever  a  man  shall  live  himself, 
yet  still  he  hopes  to  be  saved  by  the  mercy  of  God.  Against  this  hope  we  shut  up 
the  bosom  of  consolation.  3.  Charity  is  an  excellent  virtue,  and  therefore  rare. 
The  proper  and  immediate  object  of  our  love  is  God.  This  is  the  great  command- 
ment, "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God,"  etc.  The  suboidinate  object  is  man,  and 
his  love  is  the  effect  of  the  former  cause,  and  an  actual  demonstration  of  the  other 
inward  affection.  Love  is  the  abridgment  of  the  law,  the  new  precept  of  the  gospel. 
Luther  calls  it  the  shortest  and  the  longest  divinity  :  short,  for  the  form  of  words  ; 
long,  yea,  everlasting,  for  the  use  and  practice  ;  for  "  charity  shall  never  cease." 
II.  CoMPAKATiVKLY.  1.  The  distinction  between  faith  and  hope  is  nice.  I  will 
reduce  the  differences  into  three  respects.  (1)  Of  order  :  Paul  gives  faith  the 
precedency  (Heb.  xi.).  Hope  may  in  some  sort  be  said  to  be  the  daughter  of  faith. 
For  it  is  as  impossible  for  a  man  to  hope  for  that  w^iich  be  believes  not,  ns  for 
a  painter  to  draw  a  picture  in  the  air.     Indeed,  more  is  believed  than  is  hoped  for; 


CHAP,  xiri.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  325 

but  nothing  is  hoped  for  which  is  not  believed.  (2)  Of  office  :  faith  is  the  Christian's 
logic  ;  hope  his  rhetoric.  Faith  perceives  what  is  to  be  done,  hope  gives  alacrity 
to  the  doing  it.  The  difference  between  faith  and  hoj^e  is  that  between  wisdom  and 
valour.  Valour  without  wisdom  is  rashness,  wisdom  without  valour  is  cowardice. 
Faith  without  hope  is  knowledge  without  valour  to  resist  Satan;  hope  without  faith 
is  rash  presumption  and  an  indiscreet  daring.  (3)  Of  object:  faitb's  object  is  the 
absolute  word  and  infallible  promise  of  God  :  hope's  object  is  the  thing  promised. 
Faith  looks  to  the  word  of  the  thing,  hope  to  the  thiug  of  the  word.  So  that  faith 
hath  for  its  object  the  truth  of  God ;  hope,  the  goodness  of  Go'l.  Faith  is  of  things 
both  good  and  bad,  hope  of  good  things  only.  A  man  believes  there  is  a  hell 
as  truly  as  he  believes  there  is  a  heaven  ;  but  he  fears  the  one,  and  hoj^es  only  for 
the  other.  In  some  sense  hope  excels  faith.  For  there  is  a  faith  in  the  devils. 
Hope,  a  confident  expectation  of  the  mercy  of  God;  this  they  can  never  have. 
This  is  the  life  of  Christians,  and  the  want  makes  devils  (1  Cor.  xv.  19).  2.  Charity 
differs  from  them  both.  These  three  Divine  graces  are  a  created  trinity;  and  as 
there  the  Son  is  begotten  of  the  Father,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  proceeds  from  them 
both  ;  so  a  true  faith  begets  a  constant  hope,  and  from  them  proceeds  charity. 
"  Thus  is  God's  temple  built  in  our  hearts,"  saith  Augustine :  the  foundation 
whereof  is  faith  ;  hope  the  erection  of  the  walls  ;  charity  the  perfection  of  tlie  roof. 
In  the  godly  all  these  three  are  united.  We  believe  iu  God's  mercy,  we  hope  for 
His  mercy,  and  we  love  Him  for  His  mercy.  Faith  says,  there  are  good  things  pre- 
pared :  hope  says,  they  are  prepared  for  me  :  charity  says,  I  endeavour  to  walk 
woithy  of  them.  III.  Superlatively.  "The  greatest  of  these  is  charity."  1. 
Objections.  (1)  The  principal  promises  are  made  to  believers.  So  no  less  a 
promise  is  made  to  lovers  (Rom.  viii.  28).  "  God,"  saith  the  Psalmist,  "  is  near  to 
those  that  call  upon  Him,"  but  He  is  within  those  that  love  Him  (1  John  iv.  17). 
(2)  If  charity  be  greater  than  faith,  then  is  not  man  justified  by  faith  only.  Incon- 
sequent illation!  St.  Paul  commends  not  love  for  the  virtue  of  justification.  A 
prince  doth  excel  a  peasant :  shall  any  man  therefore  infer  that  he  can  plough 
better,  or  have  more  skill  in  tillage  ?  A  philosopher  doth  excel  a  mechanic,  though 
he  cannot  grind  so  well  as  a  miller,  or  limn  so  cunningly  as  a  painter.  Faith  is 
able  to  justify  of  itself,  not  to  work  of  itself  (Gal.  v.  6).  The  hand  alone  can 
receive  an  alms,  but  cannot  cut  a  piece  of  wood  without  an  axe  or  some  instru- 
ment. Faith  is  in  the  Christian's  hand :  add  love  to  it,  and  it  worketh  by  love. 
So  that  the  one  is  our  justification  before  God,  and  the  other  our  testification  before 
men.  2.  Wherein  consisteth  this  high  transcendency  of  charity?  (1)  For  latitude, 
love  is  the  greatest.  Faith  and  hope  are  restraintd  within  the  limits  of  our  jjar- 
tieular  persons.  "The  just  man  lives  by  his  own  faith,"  and  hopes  good  to 
himself  ;  but  love  is  like  the  vine  (P.«a.  Ixxx.  8),  or  the  sun  in  the  sky,  that  throws 
his  comfortable  beams  upon  all,  and  forbears  not  to  warm  even  that  earth  that 
beareth  weeds.  (2)  For  perpetuity.  Faith  lays  hold  on  God's  gracious  promise  for 
everlasting  salvation  ;  hope  expects  this  with  patience  ;  but  when  God  shall  fulfil 
His  word,  and  us  with  joy,  then  faith  shall  be  at  an  end,  hope  at  an  end,  but  love 
shall  remain  between  Gud  and  us  an  everlasting  bond.  (3)  For  the  honour  and 
likeness  it  hath  unto  God.  Faith  and  hope  make  not  a  man  like  God,  but  charity 
doth.  (4)  In  respect  of  its  titles,  charity  excelleth.  It  is  the  new  commandment: 
faith  was  never  called  so.  It  is  the  bond  of  perfection :  faith  is  not  so  termed.  It 
is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law:  where  hath  failed  such  a  title  ?  (5)  Charity  is  more 
noble,  for  it  is  a  better  thing  to  give  than  to  receive.  Faith  and  hope  are  all  of  the 
taking  hand.  (6)  For  manifestation.  Faith  and  hope  are  things  unseen, 
and  may  be  dissembled,  but  charity  cannot  be  without  visible  fruits  ;  therefore^N 
the  only  trial  of  faith  and  hope  is  by  charity.  Conclusion :  Why  speaks  / 
Paul  of  no  more  than  three?  St.  Peter  mentions  eight  (2  Pet.  i.  6),  and  St. 
Paul  in  another  place  nine  (Gal.  v.  22).  Why  are  all  these  left  out  here? 
Because  they  are  comprehended  under  these  three  :  as  to  the  trade  of  a  stationer, 
some  are  required  to  print,  some  to  correct,  some  to  fold,  others  to  bind,  and 
others  to  garnish  ;  yet  all  belongs  to  one  trade.  There  be  many  rays,  and  but  one 
sun.  2.  As  these  three  fair  sisters  came  down  from  heaven,  so  the  devil  sends  up 
three  foul  fiends  from  hell:  against  faith,  infidelity;  against  hope,  desperation; 
against  charity,  malice.  He  that  entertains  the  elder  sister  "is  already  con- 
demned "  (.John  iii.  18).  He  that  embraceth  the  second,  bars  up  against  himself 
the  possibility  of  all  comfort,  because  he  offends  the  mercy  of  God,  and  tramples 
under  foot  that  blood  which  is  held  out  to  his  unaccepting  hand.  He  that 
welcomes  malice,  welcomes  the  devil  himself.     (T.  Adams.)         The  three  sisters  : — 


326  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 

If  I  were  to  sketch  a  picture  of  these  three  sisters,  I  should  not  make — as  is  often 

done — three  graceful  figures,  beautiful  in  countenance  and  expressive  in  form  and 

attitude,  twiuin«  their  arms  toRether.     That  may  be  very  artistic  and  imaginative ; 

it  is  not  very  practical.     I  should  rather  paint  them  as  in  one  room  together. 

Faith,  beniliiig  over  a  book — the  Book  of  God — her  face  all  glowing  with  hallowed 

emotion,  yet  full  of   the  deep    caltu  of  Divine,  inward   peace,  as  she  reads  the 

"  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises."     Hope,  sitting  in  the  window-seat,  and 

gazing,  with   earnest,  dreaming   eyes,  and  face  serenely  bright,  upon  the  setting 

sun  ;  watching  intently,  as  the  amber  clouds  open  thi-ir  gates,  and,  in  fancy,  admit 

her  into  the  city  of  everlasting  light.     Love,  turning  her  tender  looks  now  on  the- 

one  sister,  and  now  on  the  other,  and  smiling  a  smile  caught  from  Christ,  as  she 

thinks  of  the  widow  and  the  fatherless,  cheered  and  comforted  by  the  garments  at 

which  her  ban  Is  are  working.     {R.  Tuck,  B.A.)         The  three  graces: — I.  Their 

EXCELLENCE.     1.  Faith.     It  Unites  to  Clirist.     It  secures  our  justification.     It  is  the 

great  power  in  our  present  life:    "The  just  shall  live  by  faith."     2.  Hope.     It 

brightens  the  present  by  brightening  the  future.     3.  Love.     What  a  wilderness  the 

world  would  be  without  love  !     II.  Theie  continuance.     It  is  better  to  have  lost  the 

extraordinary  gifts   than   these  graces.      III.  Their   relative  value.     Love  the 

greatest.     1.   It  has  longer   continuance.     2.  It  is  more  useful  to  others.     3.  It 

makes  men  like  God   in  character.       {Clerical   World.)  The  triple  graces: — 

Things  Hud  beings  appear,  in  many  cases,  by  some  law  of  universal  power  and 

faithfulness,  in  groups  and  clusters — stars,  e.g.,  and  flowers,  animals,  &c.     The 

same  law  gives  existence  to  villages  and  towns.     It  is  a  rare  thmg  when  people 

like  to  live  far  away  from  others.     The  same  element  luns  through  all  in  religion. 

People  of  the  same  views,  motives,  and  feelings  cullect  together  for  sympathy  and 

assistance.     The  same   law  governs   pohtics,    science,  commerce.     You   will  find 

virtues  and  graces  in  groujjs.     Consider — I.  These  triple  graces  in  themselves, 

AND    SOME   THINGS   WHEREIN   THEY   DIFFER.     They   are  ill   the   mind;  apart   from 

the  mind  they  can  have  no  existence.     In  themselves  they  are  abstractions,  which 

can  have  no  existence  but  as  parts  or  a<'tions  of  some  other  fit  subjects.     1.   Faith 

is  the  coufiiling  attitude  of  the  mind,  relying  on  some  object  or  resource  believed  by 

itself,  by  ev  dence  or  experience  sufficient  to  sustain  or  meet  its  wants  and  wishes. 

It  is  the  lower  of  uniting  weakness  with  strength,  need  with  plenty,  misery  with 

happiness,  man's  sinfulness  and  despair  with  Divine  grace  and  merciful  prov•i^ion. 

2.  Hope  is  the  soul  turning  its  face  to  the  good  and  happiness  of  the  future.     It  is. 

the  vang  ard  of  the  soul,  on  its  tiavel  forward  in  the  wilderness  of  life.     3.  Charity 

is  the  attitude  of  the  soul  embracing  the  lovely  and  the  pure.     It  is  the  cultivated 

state  of  the  soil  of  the  soul,  like  a  well-weeded,  pulverised  garden,  bearing  rich  and 

fragrant  flowers.     The  soul  in  this  state  moially  is  both  strong  and  happy;  but  to 

make  it  safe  and  broad  it  needs  the  light  and  evidence  of  faith,  and  the  prophetic 

eye  and  encouragement  of  hope.     4.  Though  these  graces  belong  to  one  system, 

they  differ — (1)  In  the  way  they  view  their  objects.     1<  aith  seeks  its  object  tlirough 

the  light  of  evidence,  hope  through  the  good  and  the  happy,  and  charity  through 

the  beautiful  a:  d  lovely.     (2)  In  the  conscious  sentiments  tney  produce  in  the  soul. 

Faith  makes  the  soul  strong  and  confident,  hope  sanguine  and  anxious,  and  charity 

satisfied  and  happy.     (3)  In  the  soil  they  grow  in,  and  the  elements  which  feed  and 

mature   tuem.     Faith   grows   in  the  soil  of  intelligence,   and   is   fed   by  reason, 

evidence,  and  experience  ;  hope  grows  in  sympathy  with  the  future,  and  a  desire  to 

know  and  possess  its  goodness,  and  is  fed  by  its  own  intuitive  faith  and  possession 

of  the  good  and  the  happy  ;  charity  grows  in  tenderness,  beneficence,  and  the  social 

feeling  of  the  i^oul  for  communion  with  the  beautiful  and  lovely,  and  is  fed  by 

manifestation  of  love,  faith,  and  hope.    (4)  In  their  action,  and  the  way  they  express 

themselves.     Faith  acts  boldly,    and   expresses  itself  fearlessly  ;  hope   acts  more 

timidly,  and   expresses  itself  with  patience  and  submission  ;  charity  acts  cwlmly, 

expressing  itself  with  chastened  sweetness  and  joyful  exaltation.     (5)  In  the  service 

they  render  to  the  soul.      Faith  educates  its  intelligence,  and  would  perserve  it 

from  dull  blindness  and  superstitious  ignorance ;  hope  sustains  and  encourages  it 

in  the  dark  day  and  weary  night  of  its  earthly  abode  ;  and  charity  educates  it,  in 

all  its  sentiments,  into  refinement  and  beauty,  so  as  to  make  it  a  happy  companion 

to   itself   and  others.     II.  In  their  union  and  ni'Ckssity.     1.  They  are  united. 

(1)    In  their  source.     Every  good   gift  finally  must  be   traced   to   one   common 

fountain  of  Divine  goodness.     (2)  In  common  sympathy  and  attachment.     They 

are  made  for  one  another;  they  could  not  live  apart.     (3)  In  their  work  and  end. 

What  one  cannot  do  the  other  does ;  and  what  they  cannot  do  separately  they 


CHAP.  XIII.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  327 

complete  unitedly.      (4)  In  the  means  of  their  strength  and   advancement — the 
Spirit  of  God,  tlirougli  the  provision  of  the  economy  of  grace.     2.  Their  necessity 
in  the  system  of  Cliristian  life.     They  are  nefdi'ul — (1)  As  means  by  which  the  soul 
of  man   can  apprehend  tlie  different  sides  in  the  ec  >nomy  of  truth  and  Divine 
provision.     (2)  To  develop  and  perfect  tlie  soul  in  its  various  sides  and  powers. 
(3)  From  the  demands  made  upon  man.     (a)  For  daily  duty,     (b)  For  warfare  and 
defence.     III.  The  pre-eminence  of  chaPvIty.     It  is  the  greatest — 1.  In  the  quality 
of  its  nature.     It  lias  a  refinement  and  purity  which  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  same 
manner  and  degree  in  the  others.     "  God  is  love."     Love  is  the  Divine  nature  in 
man.     2.  In  the  sway  of  its  power.      Faith  is  power,  and  has  done  mighty  works  ; 
so  is  hope,  and  has  long  and  far  walked  over  arid  and  thorny  lands  to  its  Canaan  of 
good;    but  when  faith  falters  and  hope  faints,   love  supports  and  comforts  still. 
3.  As  a  source  of  comfort  and  happiness  to  the  soul.     The  company  of  love  is 
always  sweet.     4.  As  it  approaches  the  nearest  to  God.     God  is  in  the  hand  of 
faith,  He  is  in  the  eye  of  hope,  but  He  is  in  the  heart  of  love.     5.  In  useful  results. 
6.  As  the  greatest  advancing  power.     No  one  can  advance  in  anything  much  unless 
he  loves  it.     7.  In  attraction  and  motive.     Love  drives  no  one  away  ;  it  draws  to 
itself  even  those  who  are  void  of  any  impelling  motive  in  themselves.     IV.  The 
ABIDING  CHABACTEK  OF  THESE  GRACES.     There  is  a  prevalent  belief  that  faith  and 
hope  are  only  transient.     But  what  is  the  evidence  of  such  a  belief  ?     It  is  said  tiiat 
faith  and  hope  will  be  done  away  with,  because  all  will  be  seen  in  heaven.     But 
surely  I  need  it  as  a  power  of  confiding  trust,  when  I  see  the  object  as  well  as  when 
I  do  not  see  it.     Is  hope  also  not  requisite  relative  to  the  continued  safety  and 
duration  of  the  good  we  possess,  as  much  as  the  possession  of  the  unseen  ?     But  we 
cannot  accept  of  the  assertion  that  all  will  be  seen  and  possessed  at  once  in  heaven. 
Can  all  the  future  be  packed  into  one  moment  ?     Can  all  its  objects  and  visions  be 
contracted  into  one  small  point  ?     It  is  again  said,  but  all  will  be  safe.     But  do  I 
not  want  faith  to  comfort  me  as  well  as  to  defend  me,  to  unite  me  with  God,  as 
well  as  to  put  me  under  His  shield?     Do  I  not  also  want  hope  in  the  enjoyment 
of  the  good,  as  well  as  in  the  search  after  it?     Nothing  good  we  have  will  be  taken 
from  us,  but  perfected.     In  order  to  sustain  this  view,  note — 1.  These  powers  are 
essentially  united  tngether,  so  as  to  make  one  system  of  power  in  the  mind.     2. 
They  are  alike  powers  of  the  soul.     Christianity  has  not  created  them  ;  it  has  only 
directed  them  to  higher  objects,  purified  their  quality,  and  given  them  new  direction 
and  impetus.      If   one  of   them  were  to  be  done  away  with,  the  soul  would  be 
incomplete,  and  would  be  unfit  to  do  its  work  and  enjoy  its  blessings.     If  the 
triangle  were  deprived  of  one  of  its  sides,  it  would  no  longer  be  a  triangle ;  so  if  one 
of  these  triangular  sides  of  the  soul  were  done  away  with,  it  would  no  longer  be  the 
rational  and  responsible  identical  soul  which  man  has  in  this  woild ;  he  would  not 
only  be  a  different  being,  but  a  smaller  and  a  less  perfect  one  than  now  he  is. 
8.  Faith  and  hope  are  essential  to  dependent  and  limited  beings.     We  cannot  think 
it  possible  for  finite  beings  to  exist  without  them,  for  the  source  of  their  Ijeing,  and 
the  comprehension  of  their  good,  are  all  outside  themselves.     4.  The  continuance 
of  faith  and  hope  is  needful  for  the  perpetuation  of  love.     Could  you  love  a  person 
or  an  object  in  whom  or  in  which  you  have  no  faith  ?     And  is  not  your  hope  for  the 
good  and  the  beautiful  a  part  of  your  love  towards  them  ?     5.  It  is  difficult  to  think 
that  happiness  is  possible  in  the  absence  of  faith  and  hope.     G.  They  are  among  the 
noblest  of  the  gifts  of  God,  and  such  things  are  not  given  to  be  recalled  or  destroyed. 
{T.  Hughes.)      The  tJin-e  graces : — "Whatever  may  be  the  path  of  our  future  experience 
we  shall  need  as  much  as  ever,  perhaps  more,  the  "  abiding  "  sense  of  the  presence 
and  help  of  this  holy  and  beautiful  sisterhood  of  Christian  virtues.   I.  Faith.   Faith 
has  wings ;  but  unlike  the  wings  that  Solomon  gives  to  riches,  faith  is  busy  in 
gathering  instead  of  scattering  her  treasures.     Faith  has  wings  because  she  is  "  a 
stranger  and  sojourner  "  on  the  earth.     But  although  without  a  home  here  she  has 
a  home,  and  mounting  up  with  the  wings  of  eagles,  she  lives  in  a  congenial  clime, 
"seeing  him  who  is  invisible."     Matthew  Henry  says,  "We  cannot  expect  too 
little  from  man,  nor  too  much  from  God."     But  in  God  we  can  have  faith.     His 
wisdom  is  without  the  admixture  of  error;  His  heart  intinitely  kind;  His  power 
Avithout  restraint.    II.  Hope.    Faith  has  wings,  and  like  the  wings  of  the  cherubim 
in  Ezekiel's  virion,  they  are  "  full  of  eyes  "  ;  and  these  eyes  are  full  of  sparkling 
hope.     By  a  strange  paradox,  the  castles  built  by  sense  are  vapoury  visions,  while 
the  buildings  of  faith  are  substantial  and  enduring.     Hope  builds  on  faith,  and 
faith  builds  on  God,  "  that  our  faith  and  hope  may  be  in  God."    Faith  is  the  child 
in  the  house,  who  knows  his  filial  relationship  though  the  parent  is  absent.     Hop? 


328  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 


IS  tlie  child  at  the  window,  expecting  the  parent's  return.     A  prisoner,  detained  in 
his  cell  for  some  supposable  reason,  after  he  had  received  his  pardon,  would  be 
saved  both  by  faith  and  hope;  faith  m  the  word  that  announced  his  pardon  would 
assure  him  of  salvation  ;  the  pros-psct  of  release  from  his  prison  cell  would  be  his 
bright  hope  ;    at  the  hour  of  his  departure  he  would    "  receive  the  end  of   his 
faith" — full  deliverance.     III.  Chaeity.     1.  Love  is  "greatest"  by  reason  of  its 
dignity.     Both  faith  and  hope  are  receptive  in  their  character  ;  but  love  is  commu- 
nicative, therefore  is  it  "  greatest,"  for  "  it  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive  "  ! 
2,  Love  is  "greatest  "  by  reason  of  age— it  is  the  eldest.     Love  can  say — before 
faith  and  hope  were  "  I  am."     It  was  the  flower  of  Eden,  but  its  first  growth  was 
not  there,  for  it  was  transplanted  from  the  garden  of  heaven,  and  blossomed  in 
the  bosom  of  God  "  from  everlasting."     3.  Love  is  "  greatest "  by  reason  of  its 
strength.     "Love  is  strong  as  death."     How  firm  a  hold  does  death  take  of  its 
captives !     This  aspect  of  love  has  several  relations.     (1)  There  is  God's  love  to 
us.     When  we  see  this  we  are  taken  captive  by  love  at  its  will.     It  is  a  power 
magnetic.    We  love  because  first  loved.    (2)  There  is  our  love  to  God.     How  weak, 
alas  !  the  mea&ure  of  it ;  but  how  potent  its  quality  !     No  motive  for  service  can 
be  compared  with  it ;  nor  anything  in  service  sustain  like  it.     (3)  Hence  our  power 
with  men.     As  God  "  commendeth  His  love  to  us"  by  His  love,  and  we  by  love 
commend  our  service  to  God,  so  must  we  commend  ourselves  to  men.     Love  makes 
us  kingly,  and  hearts  are  ever  ready  to  do  homage  to  all  who  rule  with  love's 
sceptre.     {Anon.)         The  Christian's  ahidint]  qraces  : — I.  The  nature  and  use  of 
THESE  THREE  GRACES.     1.  Faith  meaus  a  belief,  on  the  testimony  of  God,  of  things 
which  we  do  not  perceive  by  our  senses,  and  which  we  could  not  find  out  in  any 
other  way.     It  is  directly  opposed  to  sight,  and  signifies  our  looking  to  things 
invisible.     It  is  the  looking-out  of  the  immortal  spirit  from  its  corporeal  prison- 
house,  to  catch  a  glimpse  of  some  nobler  and  happier  form  of  existence.     It  is  the 
commencement  of  spiritual  life  in  the  soul.     It  may  be  at  first  like  the  springing 
of  seed  sown,  or  like  the  movements  of  life  in  the  newly  breathing  infant.     But 
that,  once  commenced,  is  a  momentous  event ;   the  birth  of  a  principle  which  will 
continue  to  oj)erate  ;  the  beginning  of  a  life  which  will  go  on  without  end.     Faith 
brings  all  the  great  truths  and  motives  of  the  gospel  so  vividly  before  the  mind, 
and  keeps  them  so  habitually  present  to  the  thoughts,  as  to  jDrove  a  most  powerful, 
practical,  and  purifying  principle,  carrying  the  views  beyond  things  seen  to  things 
unseen,  giving  the  soul  a  superiority  over  the  power  of  this  world,  and  so  influ- 
encing effectually  the  whole  conduct  and  course  of  life.     2.  Hope  means  an  expec- 
tation of  those  promised  blessings  as  our  eternal  portion.     Faith   respects  our 
belief  of  these  blessings,  as  provided  for  all  believers  ;  hope  respects  our  expecta- 
tion of  these  blessings,  as  being  ourselves  believers.     Faith  gives  our  souls  a  con- 
nection with  the  Saviour,  which  secures  our  salvation,  though  our  hope  should  be 
but  low.     Hope  imparts  to  our  souls  a  peace  and  support  amidst  the  trials  and 
duties  of  life,  which,  though  not  espential  in  any  particular  degree  to  our  salvation, 
yet  is  requisite  so  far,  as  preventing  despondency  of  mind  under  spiritual  trials,  as 
proving  a  source  of  the  hit/hest  enjoyment  to  the  heart  of  man  in  this  world,  and 
as  supplying  the  strongest  encouragement  to  steadfastness  and  diligence  in  God's 
service.     It  is  not  a  mere  confident  expectation  of  safety  and  happiness,  which 
might  be  a  mere  delusion,  and  which  is  too  often  strongest  where  the  grounds  are 
weakest ;  but  it  is  closely  connected  with  a  humble  acceptance  of  Christ's  salvation, 
and  a  cordial  obedience  to   His   commandments.      3.  Charity  is   the   sovereign 
principle  from  which  every  active  service  to  God  or  irian  must  flow.      II.  The 

PECULIAR    EXCELLENCE  OP  CHARITY  OR  LOVE,  AS  THE  GREATEST  OF  ALL  THESE  CHRISTIAN 

GRACES.  Here,  however,  we  must  beware  of  separating  one  part  of  the  Christian 
character  from  another ;  and  while  we  exalt  one  grace,  must  not  overlook  or  under- 
value the  rest.  Observe  then  distinctly,  that  all  these  three  must  exist  together, 
otherwise  none  of  them  can  be  genuine,  "now  abideth  faith,  hope,  charity;  these 
three."  They  must  all  be  present,  "  these  three  "  ;  all  abide  or  dwell  in  company 
in  our  hearts,  as  heavenly  principles,  implanted  there,  and  necessary  to  be  there 
for  our  salvation.  They  are  thus  not  only  equally  alike  the  work  of  Christ's 
Spirit ;  but  they  derive  much  of  their  respective  excellences  and  uses  from  one 
another,  and  from  operating  along  with  one  another.  As  well  might  you  think  of 
taking  any  part  of  the  body  out  of  its  place,  and  speaking  of  its  beauty  and  use, 
when  thus  sei^arated  from  tlae  rest  of  that  living  frame,  as  to  take  any  of  these 
graces  by  itself,  and  then  speak  of  its  use  or  excellence  without  the  others.  When 
it  is  said,  therefore,  that  "  the  greatest  of  them  is  charity,"  it  is,  first  of  all,  to  be 


CHAP.  XIII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  329 

kept  in  mind  that  charity  is  nothing  without  the  rest,  and  that  from  them  it 
derives  even  much  of  its  greatness.  Charity  is  not  the  gi'eatest,  as  if  it  could 
stand  in  the  place  of  faith  and  hope.  It  is  not  great  at  all  without  them,  and  it 
cannot  do  their  part ;  no  more  than  the  hand  could  do  the  office  of  the  eye  or  the 
ear.  It  is  nevertheless  the  greatest  of  all,  as  here  declnred.  1.  Because  it  is  the 
evidence  of  the  rest,  and  the  earnest  of  that  salvation  being  begun  in  onr  souls, 
which  they  call  us  to  seek  and  look  for,  as  our  portion.  2.  Because  it  is  the  end, 
of  which  faith  and  hope  are  only  the  means.  Faith  and  hope  are  the  heavenly 
renipdies,  the  health-giving  streams,  from  which  we  must  draw  the  reviving  energy 
of  Divine  grace  ;  but  love  is  the  spiritual  soundness,  that  very  state  of  health  in 
the  soul  which  is  the  end  of  these  streams  having  been  opened  to  us,  and  df  our 
being  invited  to  take  freely  their  living  waters.  It  is  the  celestial  fruit,  for  the 
sake  of  which  the  root  of  faith  is  planted,  and  the  blossoms  of  hope  are  cherished : 
it  is  "  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  of  all  grace."  3.  Because  it  is  more  particularly  the 
Spirit  of  God  Himself,  the  peculiar  excellence  which  we  are  called  to  imitate  in 
Him  as  our  Father.  4.  Because  it  is  the  most  permanent  of  all  these  graces,  and 
forms  the  principal  occupation  and  enjoyment  of  the  heavenly  state.  (1)  Inquire 
how  far  these  three  are  abiding  in  your  hearts,  or  how  far  at  least  you  are  desiring 
to  have  th^m  there.  (2)  Follow  after  charity,  as  the  fruit,  the  eviilence,  the 
ornament  of  them  all.  (J.  Breicster.)  The  greatness  of  faith  and  hope: — Here 
are  three  great  and  good  things — man's  untroubled  confidence  in  the  wisHom, 
power,  and  lovingkindness  of  his  Father  in  heaven ;  man's  happy  and  confident 
expectation  of  all  that  which  the  Divine  Word  does  describe  and  promise ;  and  mnn's 
living  likeness  to  the  pity,  patience,  long-suffering,  and  praciousness  of  his  God — 
faith,  hope,  and  charity.  These  three  great  and  good  things  have  one  attribute  in 
common — they  all  abide.  In  many  respects  faith  is  unlike  hope,  ami  both  of  them 
essentially  differ  from  charity.  But  in  the  permanence  of  their  power  and  glory 
they  are  alike  great.  They  are  not  transient  things  speedily  rendering  a  little 
service,  and  then  passing  away  for  ever ;  they  are  not  things  which  may  be  of 
value  to-day,  but  will  be  of  no  use  to-morrow.  In  this  respect  the  apostle  contrasts 
them  with  other  things  of  worth  and  power  mentioned  in  the  preceding  verses  of 
the  chapter,  but  which  were  designed  only  for  special  circumstances  and  for 
temporary  service.  Those  which  did  not  abide  were  the  miraculous  gifts  possessed 
by  the  first  preachers  of  the  Cross  and  their  immediate  successors.  In  forcible 
contrast  to  those  things  which  were  only  transient  and  which  belonged  only  to 
the  age  of  the  Church's  infancy  and  feebleness,  there  are  these  three  which  abide 
— faith,  hope,  and  charity.  Their  beauty  is  immortal,  they  are  unfailing  sources 
of  power,  and  must  be  found  in  the  Church  militHnt  as  long  as  time  shall  last  and 
the  earth  shall  preserve  its  place  amidst  the  circling  woilds.  Yes,  prophets  may 
fail,  and  miiacles  may  cease,  but  the  world  will  always  need  men  who  calmly  trust 
in  God,  and  steadfastly  look  for  bri^diter  days  and  better  thint'S,  and  whose  hearts 
are  being  restored  to  the  lost  image  of  their  Creator.  Amidst  all  changes,  and 
let  perish  what  will  perish,  there  must  abide  these  three — faith,  liope,  charity. 
You  are  aware  that  it  is  not  my  purpose  now  to  speak  of  the  greatest  of  these 
essential  and  abiding  graces.  I  am  to  speak  only  of  the  greatness  of  the  first  and 
second — faith  and  hope.  The  mistake  is  to  disparage  faith  in  order  to  extol 
charity;  the  mistake  of  thinking  that  because  chariry  is  supreme  in  its  greatness 
and  blessedness,  faith  must  be  a  little  matter  and  of  little  moment.  It  is  a  folly  on 
our  part  to  suppose  we  can  magnify  one  virtue  by  depreciatinu  another.  If  a  m^n 
were  to  come  to  me  and  say,  "I  do  not  think  much  of  this  belief,  this  faith,  this 
trust,  about  which  you  speak  so  much,  charity  is  the  greatest  thing,"  the  reply  is 
very  obvious  :  "  Yes,  charity  is  greater  than  faith,  but  if  fnith  he  the  triMing  thing 
you  represent  it,  charity  may  be  greater  and  yet  not  be  a  giant."  He  who  dwarfs 
faith  dwarfs  charity  also;  he  who  magnifies  faith  and  hope,  does  also  magnify 
that  charity  which  is  greater  thnn  they.  If  I  can  show  you  how  gre  't  faith  in 
God  is;  how  much  it  has  to  do  with  the  peace  of  a  man's  conscience,  with  the  joy 
of  a  man's  heart,  with  the  vigour  of  his  s|)iritual  life — how  it  arms  and  nerves  a 
man  for  conflict  with  evil ;  how  it  shields  him  in  temptation  and  sustains  him  in 
affliction ;  if  I  can  show  you  how  great  a  thing  hope  is,  how  it  has  power  to  make 
a  dark  present  bright  with  a  lijjht  borrowed  from  a  far-oif  future  ;  how  it  strengthens 
men  for  work,  and  puts  courage  into  the  fainting  spirit,  I  shall  have  helped  you  to 
form  a  juster  judgment  of  the  gi-eatnt^ss  of  the  b've  which  surpasses  both  the-e 
graces.  It  is  not  often  that  clurity  and  h^pe  are  spoken  of  as  rivals.  Men  do  not 
often  slight  hope  in  order  to  extol  charity.     Faith  suffers  most  from  this  rivalry. 


330  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xiik 

and  I  shall  now  leave  hope  and  confine  my  remarks  entirely  to  faith,  contenting 
myself  with  what  I  have  said  of  the  greatness  of  hope.  lu  pursuing  my  task,  I 
shall  not  attempt  any  metaphysical  analysis  or  elaborate  description  of  faith.  The- 
inspired  apostle,  with  all  his  peerless  gifts,  did  not  adopt  that  difficult  method  of 
treating  the  subject.  In  the  immortal  chapter  in  the  letter  to  the  Hebrews,  there 
is  only  one  brief  definition,  and  there  is  no  description  or  analysis.  Like  a 
practical  man  of  God  as  he  was,  the  apostle  showed  faith  at  work,  and  left 
men  to  learn  its  worth  and  power  from  its  labour  and  its  results,  I  shall 
try  to  show  you  faith  in  action  ;  and  as  we  see  what  it  can  do,  and  what 
it  enables  men  to  do,  we  shall  surely  be  persuaded  that,  though  it  is  not  so- 
great  as  love,  it  is  still  very  great  and  blessed.  I  shall  venture  to  take  my  first 
illustration  from  that  tender  and  touching  story  told  by  our  Lord,  which  never 
loses  its  freshness  or  force.  A  younger  son  was  eager  for  freedom,  and  greedy  of 
pleasure.  In  every  scheme  that  he  formed  for  his  future  felicity  the  central  idea 
was  that  he  should  be  free  from  all  restraint — have  nothing  to  do  and  everything 
to  enjoy,  acknowledge  no  law  but  his  own  devices,  obey  no  lord  but  his  own 
dominant  passions.  He  demanded  his  patrimony,  gathered  all  together,  and  took 
his  journey  into  a  far  country,  where  he  wasted  his  substance  in  riotous  living.. 
One  excess  followed  another  till  everything  was  gone,  and  revelry  and  luxury  had 
to  be  exchanged  for  wretchedness  and  want.  When  his  delusive  dreams  were- 
ended,  he  awoke  to  seriousness  and  sadness.  The  madness  of  passion  passed 
away  and  he  came  to  himself.  At  once  his  thoughts  reverted  to  the  home  he  had 
forsaken,  to  the  father  against  whom  he  had  sinned.  He  determined  to  retrace 
his  wandering  steps,  and  revisit  the  bright  and  happy  spot  where  he  knew,  by- 
personal  experience,  that  love  ruled  and  plenty  prevailed.  But  there  was  some- 
thing deeper  in  the  prodigal's  heart  than  his  sense  of  shame,  and  something, 
stronger  than  his  consciousness  of  guilt ;  it  was  his  confidence  in  his  father's 
lovingkindness.  He  doubted  not,  he  did  not  mistrust.  He  was  covered  with 
shame  and  ignominy,  in  which  his  kinsfolk  must  participate.  His  hope  was 
created  and  sustained  by  his  faith  in  his  father's  compassion.  By  his  faith  he  was. 
saved.  If  he  had  been  destitute  of  that,  he  could  not  have  begun  the  journey,  or, 
beginning  it,  he  could  not  have  persevered  in  it.  Doubtless,  conscience  and 
memory  were  busy,  and  sometimes  they  would  suggest  the  question,  "Will  you  be 
accepted,  will  not  the  door  be  shut  against  you,  will  they  acknowledge  you  for  a. 
kinsman,  a  brother,  a  son?"  And  then  would  faith  rise  and  subdue  these  fears, 
and  would  say,  "  Take  courage,  poor  fainting  heart ! — push  on  in  thy  homeward 
way,  love  waits  for  thee  ;  there,  love  longs  for  thy  coming,  and  will  give  thee  pardon, 
peace,  and  dignity  again."  Was  not  his  faith  a  great  thing  to  the  returning; 
prodigal?  Did  not  it  render  to  him  service  which  charity  could  not  have  rendered? 
Men  and  brethren,  my  comi^anions  in  transgression,  there  are  times  when  our  most 
urgent  want  is,  not  charity  to  each  other,  but  a  living  faith  in  a  gracious  God. 
Our  own  hf^arts  condemn  us,  and  we  remember  that  God  is  greater  than  onr  hearts, 
and  knowetli  all  things.  In  such  seasons,  the  great  thing  to  give  us  peace  and 
hope  is  an  unfaltering  trust  in  the  compassionate  love  of  Him  who  has  made 
provision  for  our  pardon  in  the  death  of  His  own  Son.  Having  seen  the  worth  of 
faith  in  the  heart  of  a  penitent  sinner,  let  ns  next  glance  at  its  importance  to  the 
great  sufferer.  The  experience  of  St.  Paul  will  furnish  us  with  an  illustration. 
There  are  some  people  who  are  so  complaining,  and  who  so  parade  their  troubles 
that  when  first  we  know  them  we  think  them  the  most  afflicted  of  mankind.  There 
are  others  so  bright  and  cheerful  that  their  woes  are  much  hidden  from  us.  When 
we  do  realise  the  multitude  and  magnitude  of  his  troubles,  we  are  amazed  that  his- 
contentment  and  joy  could  live  thi'ough  them  all.  The  secret  is  found  in  his 
unfailing  faith  that  God  was  supreme,  and  would  ordain  nothing  which  was  not 
good,  and  would  permit  nothing  which  he  could  not  overrule  for  good.  Faith  goes 
to  the  home  where  for  years  tliey  have  been  vainly  striving  to  cast  out  poverty ;  to 
the  home  where  atiiiotion  has  long  had  power,  and  where  sorrow  in  some  ghastly 
form  has  mude  its  dwelling-place  ;  she  goes  where  the  chamber  is  darkened,  the 
hearth  desolated,  and  the  heart  broken  by  the  presence  of  death,  and  she  is  ques- 
tioned as  to  the  final  outcome  of  all  these  labouring  evils.  What  are  they,  and 
what  are  they  doing?  She  answers  in  most  emphatic  tones,  "They  are  God's 
workpeople.  They  are  helping  to  weave  robes  of  light  for  the  glorified  to  wear, 
and  to  construct  crowns  for  the  redeemed  to  cast  at  the  Kedeemer's  feet,  and  to 
make  joy-cups  from  which  the  dwellers  in  heaven  shall  drink  !  "  Keason  responds, 
"  I  cannot  see  that  they  are  God's  servants,  much  less  can  I  see   chat  they  are 


CHAP.  XIII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  331 

working  for  such  ends  as  you  afBrm."  Again  faith  replies,"!  know  you  are  too 
dim-sighted  to  see  this,  but  I  am  not  too  feeble  to  believe  it.  "  The  faith  tthich 
can  contemplate  the  sorrows  of  life  in  this  spirit  may  not  be  the  greatest  of  the 
graces,  and  yet  be  able  to  serve  as  efficiently  under  ciroutristances  in  which  charity 
could  not  meet  our  greatest  necessity.  It  is  of  little  direct  use  to  preach  long 
homilies  about  charity  when  troubles  are  many,  and  calairiities  are  crashing.  If 
■we  be  wise  we  shall  then  urge  the  sufferer  to  cherish  simple  faith  in  the  God  of  love. 
We  shall  say,  "  Believe  that  He  who  gives  is  also  He  who  takes  away  !  He  changes 
His  methods  of  action  sometimes;  but  He  ne^er  changes  His  wisdom  for  folly, 
His  love  for  unkindness."  The  faith  in  God  by  which  temptation  was  defeated 
and  the  tempter  was  silenced,  and  by  which  the  Son  of  Man  came  off  more  than  a 
conqueror  in  that  dread  conflict,  on  wliose  issues  the  destinies  of  our  race  seemed 
to  hang,  cannot  be  a  little  thing!  Thousands  of  Christ's  disciples  have  used  the 
same  sliield  with  like  happy  issues.  They  have  been  in  difficulty  and  pc^verty,  and 
have  been  tempted  to  make  their  •  scape  l)y  sinful  methods.  By  their  trust  in  God 
they  have  triumphed.  The  faith  in  God  and  the  Saviour  which  enables  a  man  to 
look  into  the  face  of  the  King  of  Terrors  must  not  be  slighted  or  scorned.  Blessed 
be  the  well-grounded  Christian  conlidence  whidi  can  meet  dt^ath  with  this  greeting: 
"  Thou  art  God's  faithful  messenger  to  me.  Thou  canst  not  destroy  me.  I  am 
sure  that  through  darkness  is  the  way  to  everlasting  light,  and  through  the  anguish 
of  mortality  is  the  way  to  the  gloiies  of  immortality.  Thou  art  only  come  to 
make  me  begin  to  live."  In  the  Word  of  God  the  origin  and  fruitfulness  of  religion 
are  alwa_ys  associated  with  faith.  Is  religion  called  "  a  life  "  ?  The  life  we  live  is 
by  f^ith  in  the  Son  of  God,  who  loved  us  and  gave  Himself  for  us.  Is  religion 
called  a  pilgrimage?  We  walk  by  faith.  Is  the  religious  man  assaulted?  By 
faith  we  stand.  Is  he  a  warrior?  He  is  told  "above  all"  to  take  the  shield  of 
faith.  Does  he  set  his  heart  on  complete  triumph?  This  is  the  victory  that  over- 
cometh  the  world,  even  our  faith.  (C.Vince.)  The  three  stages: — I.  The  thkeefold 
DEVELOPMENT  OF  BELiGioN  IN  THE  soDL.  Faith,  hope,  and  charity  ai'e  not  absolutely 
distinct  principles.  In  each  there  is  a  fusion  of  the  other  two.  In  dealing  with  ihe  bold 
characteristics  of  religious  advancement,  we  must  seek,  not  differences,  but  stages. 
1.  Faith  is  the  apprehension  of  the  truth  as  tlie  means  of  our  salvation.  2.  Hope  is  the 
apprehension  ot  salvation  by  the  truth.  3.  Charity  is  the  outflow  of  salvati<in  from 
the  heart.  The  stages  are  evidf-nt— faith  finds  the  Saviour,  hope  d.  lights  in  Him, 
but  love  desires  to  exhibit  Him  to  others  for  their  acceptance.  We  are  justified  by 
faith,  del'giited  by  hope,  consecrated  by  love.  II.  The  last  stage  is  greater  than 
ITS  FOKERONNERS.  1.  Charity  assimilates  the  heart  to  the  life  of  Christ.  Faith 
brings  us  to  the  Saviour,  but  love  makes  us  like  Him.  2.  Love  makes  the  Church 
a  power  for  good.  The  generous  heart  is  the  power  which  brings  the  love  of  God 
to  bear  on  men's  stubborn  hearts.  There  is  no  cross  too  heavy,  and  no  sacrifice  too 
great  for  love.  3.  The  influence  of  love  is  more  abiding.  Faith  will  be  turned  into 
sight,  and  hope  into  possession,  but  love  will  continue  the  ruling  passion  of  the 
world.      (Weekly  Fulpit.)  The  greatest  gnice  : — Charity   is — I.    Intkinsically 

EXCELLENT.  Faith  and  hope,  however  good  and  useful,  derive  their  value  from  the 
limitation  of  our  nature.  1.  Faith  is  necessary  because  we  have  not  personal 
knowledge  of  objects.  What  is  beyond  the  range  of  our  bodily  organs  and  intuitive 
feelings  is  alone  an  object  of  faith.  2.  And  so  there  is  implied  in  hope  something 
more  or  better  than  we  have  ;  only  those  that  are  imperfectly  blessed  can  hope. 
Faith  implies  something  without,  hope  something  beyond,  us.  3.  God  cannot 
believe,  for  "He  fills  immensity"  ;  He  cannot  hope,  for  "He  inhabits  eternity." 
But  He  can  love ;  and  the  more  we  have  of  this  gracious  disposition,  the  more  we 
are  assimilated  to  that  glorious  Being  who  "  giveth  all  things  "  and  "  needeth  not 
anything,"  who  has  no  necessity  but  that  of  doing  good.  II.  The  most  inde- 
pendent GRACE.  Faith  and  hope,  however  rich  and  strong,  are  recipients,  to  a 
great  extent.  But  it  is  the  glorious  distinction  of  charity  that,  instead  of  recog- 
nising a  good  that  exists,  it  forms  a  plan  of  originating  one  that  is  not.  This  is 
its  description:  "Charity  suffereth  long,  and  is  kind;  seeketh  not  her  own." 
While  faith  and  hope  are  the  ample  vessels  of  grace,  charity  is  its  free  fountain; 
■while  they  are  its  reverent  worshippers,  it  is  its  self-denying  missionary.  They 
accept,  but  it  dispenses  ;  they  regard  self,  it  looks  not  on  its  own  things,  but  on  the 
things  of  others.  III.  The  end  of  which  faith  and  hope  are  means.  Whatever 
is  imparted  to  us,  in  the  form  of  present  truth  and  prospective  good,  is  with  a 
view  to  some  result.  God  can  have  no  lower  or  other  design  than  the  sanctification 
of  our  entire  nature :  and  what  is  that  but  the  shedding  of  His  love  abroad  in  it  by 


332  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 

the  Holy  Ghost,  constraining  us  to  all  good  works  ?  "  Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the 
law,"  and  of  the  gospel.  Faith  is  the  nourishment  of  love,  hope  is  its  luxurious 
entertainment.  Faith  is  the  soil  in  which  it  grows,  hope  is  the  bright  sunshine 
that  quickens  and  beautifies  it.  Love  cannot  be  intelligent  unless  it  be  taught 
of  God,  and  cannot  be  free  and  cheerful  unless  He  smile  upon  it.  IV.  Permanent. 
In  a  sense  doubtless  we  shall  believe  and  hope  in  a  future  state  ;  but  in  that  state 
there  will  be  the  realised  enjoyment  of  the  main  objects  of  present  belief  and 
pursuit.  In  that  state  will  be  fulfilled,  not  comparatively  as  here,  but  to  a  glorious 
extent  of  accomplishment,  the  strong  representations  of  our  context.  We  shall 
"  see  face  to  face,"  we  shall  "  know  even  as  we  are  known."  But  love  will  undergo 
no  change  of  this  sort :  its  change  will  be  of  another  kind.  The  perfection  that 
lessens  the  need  and  intensity  of  other  graces  will  increase  the  power  and  enlarge 
the  sphere  of  love.  Conclusion  :  1.  If  charity  is  the  greatest,  so  manifestly  let  us 
beware  of  losing  sight  of  its  pre-eminent  excellence.  Many  put  faith  before  it. 
Forgetting  the  real  nature  and  office  of  faith,  they  dishonour  the  charity  that  dwells 
in  others,  and  suppress  instead  of  cherishing  it  in  themselves.  No  spectacle  of 
Christian  error  is  more  painful  than  that  of  a  man  taking  his  stand  on  faith  and 
violating  charity.  If  we  must  err  at  all,  let  it  be  on  the  side  of  the  "  greatest " 
thing ;  and,  erring  or  not,  let  us  never  forget  that  whatever  is  accurate  in  belief, 
and  pleasant  in  hope,  is  far  exceeded  by  love,  and  has  its  use  and  worth  only  in  its 
promotion.  2.  Ponder  the  emphatic  words  of  vers.  1-3.  What  a  thought,  for  a 
man  to  be  nothing  !  nothing,  and  yet  gifted  with  spiritual  faculties ;  speaking 
angelic  tongues  ;  though  impoverishing  himself  to  relieve  his  brethren  ;  though 
yielding  up  His  life  in  defence  of  faith  !  Oh,  receive  the  love  of  God  into  your 
hearts,  and  that  shall  be  in  you  a  fountain  of  all  charity ;  you  shall  love  like  God 
as  well  as  rejoice  in  His  love:  and  be  something  for  ever!  (A.  J.  il/oms.) 
The  croicning  <jrace : — Do  not  mistake  Paul,  as  though  he  derogated  from  faith  and 
hope.  He  says  they  are  great,  though  love  is  the  greatpst.  I.  In  point  of  bank. 
Faith  and  hope  are  of  the  operation  of  God,  but  love  is  from  His  heart :  by  love  we 
are  let  into  God.  We  are  called  to  be  strong  in  faith,  to  abound  in  hope,  but  to  be 
perfect  in  love  !  We  are  to  put  on  the  shield  of  faith,  the  helmet  of  hope,  but, 
above  all,  put  on  charity.  1.  It  decides  the  genuineness  of  faith  and  hope.  Faith 
cannot  work  without  love — it  is  the  animation  of  faith.  And  hope  maketh  not 
ashamed,  "  because  the  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts."  Faith  some- 
times has  doubts,  hope  has  fears,  charity  always  hopes ;  yea,  when  faith  and  hope 
both  stop,  charity  believeth,  hopeth,  does  their  work.  2.  It  is  the  end,  of  which 
faith  and  hope  are  hut  the  means ;  the  labour  of  love  raises  the  top  stone.  Faith 
is  the  root,  hope  the  buds,  love  is  the  fruit  of  the  Christian's  tree.  3.  Faith  and  hope 
are  essential  to  man  as  a  sinner,  but  love  was  his  religion  before  he  was  a  sinner, 
and  it  is  now  by  love  that  he  rises  above  his  fall  and  forms  alliance  with  heaven. 
Love  is  the  religion  of  heaven  !  Wonder  not,  then,  that  love  is  the  foremost  fruit 
of  the  Spirit,  the  end  of  the  commandment,  the  fulfilling  of  the  law — the  royal 
law — that  it  sits  on  the  throne — the  queen  of  graces.  II.  In  point  of  utility. 
Faith  and  hope  are  selfish  graces— private  props.  Charity  is  to  others  like  the  sun 
in  the  firmament — goes  about  doing  good.  Personally,  she  visits  the  sick,  feeds 
the  hungry,  clothes  the  naked  ;  has  a  wise  head,  and  attentive  ear,  a  quick  eye,  a 
heart!  makes  others'  woes,  &c. ;  has  an  eloquent  tongue,  an  open  hand:  "When 
the  ear  heard  me,  then  it  blessed  me,  and  when  the  eye  saw  me,  it  gave  witness  to 
me."  Thus  she  pursues  her  way ;  if  contradicted,  is  not  easily  provoked;  whatever 
is  said  of  her,  she  thinketh  no  evil ;  she  overlooks  not  the  temporal  interests  of 
man,  but  chiefly  regards  the  spiritual,  and  such  as  take  in  the  good  of  the  world. 
III.  In  point  of  duration — abideth  for  ever.  Faith  and  hope  are  Moses.  Love 
is  Joshua.  Faith  and  hope  supply  here  the  place  of  vision  :  "  We  see  through  a 
glass  darkly,"  &c.  In  an  evangelical  sense,  faith  and  hr p3  are  not  in  heaven  ;  we 
are  to  hope  to  the  end  ;  but  no  end  in  heaven.  Learn — 1.  Wherein  real  Chris- 
tianity consists.  In  creeds?  professions?  No!  but  in  Divine  principles,  holy 
tempers,  benevolent  actions.  Orthodox  opinions,  Ac,  unaccompanied  with  faith, 
hope,  and  charity,  are  fruitless.  2.  The  excellency  of  real  Christianity.  It  brings 
faith,  it  inspires  hope,  it  fills  with  the  love  of  God ;  and  when  this  principle  is 
universal  in  the  world  !  3.  Is  this  religion  ours  ?  A  man  is  better  known  by  what 
he  loves  than  by  his  faith  and  hope.  Who  loves  strong  drink,  we  know  who  he  is. 
So,  if  man  love  God,  we  know  who  he  is  !  Now  we  look  for  the  effects  of  this  love 
in  his  life  and  conversation.  Does  your  faith  work  by  love  ?  (J.  SummerfieJd,  A.M.) 
Crowning  love  : — Crown  pride,  and  cause  it  to  walk  through  the  chambers  of  the 


oniy 

E    OF  J 

.  the     >/ 


CHAP.  XIII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  333 

soul,  and  there  are  many  faculties  which  hide  themselves  and  say,  "I  will  not  bow 
down  to  Pride,  if  it  be  king  over  me."  Crown  vanity,  and  there  will  be  many  parts 
of  the  soul  that  will  not  yield  to  this  newly-crowned  king,  but  will  say,  "  Nay,  I  am 
higher  than  thou,  and  I  will  never  bow  down  to  King  Vanity."  Crown  the  reason, 
and  there  are  many  feelings  that  will  say,  "We  will  no  more  rise  up  before 
crowned  Eeason,  and  own  it  our  king,  than  the  flowers  will  rise  up  before  an  iceberg 
and  call  it  suiumer. "  Crown  beauty,  and  there  will  be  commotion  in  all  the  soul ; 
but  there  is  not  in  all  the  soul  one  single  faculty  that,  under  stress  of  temptation, 
under  provocation,  or  under  trial,  will  call  out,  "  0  King  Beauty,  save  me  !  " 
Crown  the  conscience,  and  although  more  of  the  faculties  of  the  soul  will  follow 
that  than  anv  other  of  the  leaders  I  have  assumed,  vet  what  will  ensue?  Crown 
conscience — its  crown  is  of  iron  ;  its  sceptre  is  relentless.  If  conscience  be  king, 
the  soul  has  a  despot  on  the  throne ;  and  often  and  often  there  be  many  members 
of  a  man's  nature  that  reluct,  and  resist,  and  refuse  to  obey.  Bring  into  the 
ascendancy  love,  and  crown  it,  and  there  is  not  one  part  of  reason  that  doth  not 
before  love  say,  "It  is  my  master."  There  is  nothing  in  all  the  imagination  that 
is  not  willing  to  twine  round  about  love  and  say,  "  Love  rules  ;  and  it  truly  inspires." 
Pride  and  vanity,  and  all  the  ambitious  forces  of  the  soul,  will  bow  down  in  the 
train  of  love  ;  and  if  that  stand  king  in  the  soul,  all  tlie  faculties  can  find  their 
place,  and  harmoniously  move  tound  about  the  well-adjusied  centre.  It  is  the  only 
feeling  around  which  you  can  reconstruct  the  human  character.  {H.  W.  Beecher 
The   supremacy  of  love  : — Love  is  supreme   because — I.  It  was  the   exkrois 

THIS    VIKTUK    TH.AT  MADE   POSSIBLE   ODR    DELIVERANCE    FROM    SIN.       "  God  SO    lovcd 

world,"  &c.  It  was  Christ's  love  that  constrained  Him  to  do  and  suffer  so  much 
that  the  sinner  might  be  restored.  Of  all  the  Divine  attributes  it  is  love  that  stands 
out  in  grandest  outline.  II.  There  is  no  other  virtue  like  it  to  inspire 
SACRIFICE.  Love  for  God  and  for  man  inspired  Grace  Darling  to  imperil  her  life  to 
rescue  wrecked  mariners  from  a  watery  grave.  It  moved  an  Elizabeth  Fry  to 
abandon  hoitie  to  find  the  criminal  in  his  cell,  and  lead  him  to  a  higher  life.  It 
induces  the  minister  of  the  Cross  to  endanger  life,  that  he  may  save  his  heathen 
brother.  II[.  There  is  no  other  so  effective  for  winning  and  maintaining  the 
GOOD-WILL  OF  OUR  FELT.ow-iMEN.  The  man  of  eminence,  intelligence,  or  aiSuence 
is  envied  if  not  hated  at  times  by  those  less  fortunate  ;  but  a  loving  man  unites  all 
classes  to  him,  and  even  conquers  our  enemies  and  compfls  their  love  in  return. 
"  Alexander,  Caesar,  Charlemagne,  and  myself,"  says  Napoleon,  "  founded  great 
empires;  but  upon  what  did  the  creatinns  of  our  genius  depend?  Upon  force. 
Jesus  alone  founded  His  empire  ui^on  love,  and  to  this  very  day  millions  are  ready 
to  die  for  Him."  William  Penn,  who  lived  for  many  years  in  the  midst  of  six 
warring  Indian  tribes  in  harmony  and  peace,  assured  his  dusky  brethren  of  the 
forest,  "  The  great  God  of  heaven  has  written  His  law  of  love  upon  our  hearts,  by 
which  we  are  taught  and  commanded  to  love,  to  help,  and  to  do  good  to  each  other; 
and  to-day  we  meet  you  in  the  broad  pathway  of  love  and  good-will,  lioping  no 
advantage  may  be  taken  on  either  side."  While  other  colonists  were  building  forts 
and  displacing  their  arms,  and  hence  involved  in  trouble  and  war,  the  flowers  of 
prosperity  and  peace  blossomed  in  the  footprints  of  William  Penn.     IV.  There  is 

NO   OTHER    VIRTUE    THAT    SO    GLADDENS    THE    HEART    AND    ENRICHES    THE    LIFE.       LoVe  is 

to  the  heart  what  summer  is  to  the  year,  maturing  all  the  noblest  and  grandest 
fruits.  The  man  in  whose  heart  the  spirit  of  love  abides  has  a  sort  of  music  within 
to  which  he  may  march  all  the  day  long  without  exhaustion.  His  work,  whether 
spiiitual  or  manual,  on  Sunday  or  Monday,  is  no  servitude,  for  duty  becomes  a 
delight.  Love  "oils"  the  complex  machinery  of  his  whole  being,  and  thus 
prevents  the  daily  friction  that  is  such  an  enemy  to  human  life.  Where  there  is 
love  for  one's  work  there  will  be  no  reluctance  or  hanging  back,  for  love  is  an 
impeiling   motive.       {W.    G.    Thrall.)  The   supreiiiacy    of  love  : — Higher   than 

moriility,  hit'her  than  philanthropy,  higher  than  worship,  comes  love.  That  is  the 
chiefest  tiling.  When  we  have  th:it,  we  reach  the  very  tiling  for  which  the  New 
Testament  scheme  WriS  administered.  Love  !  it  is  that  which  brings  forth  out  of 
obscurity  th»  hidden  God  which  we  seek.  Send  forth  all  the  powers  of  the  soul  to 
search  for  God,  and  thert'  is  not  one  of  them  which,  making  inquisition  according 
to  its  own  nature,  can  find  Him  out  and  reveal  Him,  except  tbis  Divine  Spirit  of 
love!  Put  win^rs  of  imaginhtion  on  Conscience,  and  let  it  fly  forth.  Say  to  it, 
"  Go,  and  find  thy  God  !  "  Flying  through  night  and  through  day ;  above  and 
beneath;  among  chiuds  and  thunder;  through  darkness  and  through  light;  it 
would  return  at  length,  wing-tired,  only  to  say,  "I  have  found  marks  of  God,  ia 


334  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 

law,  in  pain,  and  penalty  ;  I  have  seen  the  traces^  of  thunder,  and  the  path  of 
lightning,  and  the  foundations  of  eternal  power  ;  but  nowhere  have  I  found  the  full 
God."  Give  the  wings  of  faith  to  Reason,  and  send  it,  in  turn,  forth  from  east  to 
west,  around  the  earth,  and  through  the  heavens,  to  see  if  by  searching  it  can  find 
out  God  ;  and  it  shall  say,  "  I  have  seen  the  curious  work  of  His  hand,  and  have 
marked  the  treasures  that  He  hath  heaped  up.  The  whole  earth  is  full  of  His 
glory,  and  the  heavens  are  unsearchalde  by  us.  What  God  hath  done  I  have  felt, 
but  God  Himself  is  hidden  from  my  sight."  Let  Fear,  equipped  with  faith,  pursue 
the  same  errand.  It  would  not  even  know  which  way  to  fly,  and,  turning  down- 
ward, groping  or  flying  directly  amidst  infernal  things,  it  would  rehearse  a  catalogue 
of  terrois,  of  gloomy  fears,  or  brooding  superstitions;  but  the  bright  sun-clad  God 
it  could  not  see.  Let  Eeverence  go  forth.  But  what  there  is  in  reverence  can 
never  interpret  what  there  is  in  God.  This  feeling  can  touch  the  Divine  orb  but  in 
a  single  point.  And  the  Heavens  would  say  to  Reverence,  "  Such  an  one  as  you 
seek  is  not  in  me " ;  and  Hell  would  say,  "He  is  not  in  me  "  ;  and  Earlh  and  Time 
wouM  repeat,  "  He  is  not  in  us !  "  It  is  only  Love  that  can  find  out  God  without 
searching.  Upon  its  eyes  God  dawns.  Wherever  it  looks,  and  whatever  it  sees — that 
is  God  ;  for  God  is  love.  Love  is  that  regent  quality  which  was  meant  to  reveal  the 
Divine  to  us.  It  carries  its  own  hght,  and,  hy  its  own  secret  nature,  is  drawn  instantly 
toward  God,  nnd  reflects  the  knowledue  of  Him  back  upon  us.  (H.  W.  Bcecher.) 
Love  the  qrcateat  poioer  in  mind  : — I.  The  cokeespondence  between  these  n  hkee. 
1.  It  is  implied  by  the  apostle  that  they  are  all  great.  He  speaks  of  "  the  gieatest." 
Faith  is  a  great  ttiing.  It  implies  leason,  truth,  and  the  investigation  of  evidence; 
it  is  a  great  thing  in  business,  in  science,  in  society,  as  well  as  religion ;  it  is  a 
power  that  removes  mountains.  See  a  record  of  its  brilliant  a(  hievements  in  the 
eleventh  chapter  of  Hebrews.  Hope  is  a  great  thing  too.  It  iniplies  the  recognition 
of  good,  adesiie  for  good,  and  an  expectation  of  good  ;  it  bears  as  an  angel  into  the 
brightness  of  the  future;  it  makes  the  greatest  trials  of  the  present  bearable  by  bringing 
into  the  spirit  the  blessedness  of  the  luture.  2.  It  is  implied  by  the  apostle  thsit  they 
are  all  permanent.  There  "  abideth."  II.  The  supeeioeity  of  one  or  the  thkee. 
The  greatest  of  these  three  is  charity.  Why  is  it  the  greatest  ?  1.  It  is  a  virtue 
in  itself.  There  is  no  moral  virtue  in  faith  or  hope.  They  are  under  certain 
conditions  necessary  states  of  mind  ;  but  love,  disinterested,  godly  love,  is  in  itself 
a  virtue.  It  is  in  truth  the  substrntum  of  all  virtuous  states.  2.  It  is  that  quality 
which  alone  gives  virtue  to  all  other  states  of  mind.  Where  this  love  is  not,  faith 
and  hope  are  morally  worthless.  They  are  trees  without  one  leaf  of  virtue  on 
their  branches.  3.  It  is  that  state  of  mind  by  which  the  soul  subor(tinates  the 
universe  to  itself.  The  lovir  g  fouI  can  alone  interpret  the  universe.  The  loving 
soul  alone  appropriates  the  univer.«e.  "All  things  work  together  for  good  to  them 
that  love  G.  d,"  &c.  4.  It  is  that  sta*e  of  mind  which  links  the  spirit  to  all  holy 
intelligences.  Love  is  the  attractive  power  that  binds  the  holy  universe  together. 
Faith  anil  hope  are  not  so.  5.  It  is  that  state  of  mind  which  includes  the  highest 
faith  and  hope.  Love  implies  the  both.  6.  It  is  that  state  of  mind  which  is  in 
itst-lf  happiness.  Love  is  happiiess.  We  cannot  say  so  either  of  faith  or  h<pe. 
7.  Love  is  the  most  Godlike  state  of  the  soul.  (D.  Tlicmas,  D.D.)  The  prcatness 
of  charity  : — Charity  has  a  greatness  whether  considered  as  a  principle,  a  motive 
power,  or  a  perfecting  grace  of  character.  And  fiist  of  all,  what  is  to  he  under- 
stood by  charity  ?  It  is  not  that  sentimental  thing  that  often  goes  hy  its  name, 
that  has  no  appreciation  for  principles,  sees  no  importance  in  doctrines,  and 
ima-'ines  the  woild  can  be  saved  as  well  by  error  as  by  truth.  I  have  four  reasons 
why  charity  is  the  gieatest  of  great  things.  1.  Its  endurance.  Proi-hpcies  fail 
when  the  thing  priphe-ied  takes  place.  Love  has  a  continuous  life.  If  there  is 
anything  destined  to  immortality  that  thing  is  love.  2.  Hence  the  next  reason 
for  esteeoiing  chaiity  as  the  grea'est  of  great  things,  and  that  is,  the  nothingness 
of  all  things  without  it.  Prophetical  insight,  the  profuse  distribution  of  wealth, 
and  the  bravery  of  mart  rdom  its  If,  all — all  are  hollow  where  charity  is  not.  So 
tiue  it  is  that  chari  y  is  the  greatest  of  great  things.  It  gives  a  Divine  substance 
to  human  graces,  and  Ht  its  bidding  that  which  otherwise  were  but  perishing 
beauty  starts,  like  Jairus's  daughter,  from  its  shroud,  and  moves  to  beautify  the 
home  and  give  hapi^iness  there  as  only  the  true  daughter  can.  3.  But  again, 
charity  is  the  greatest  of  great  things,  because  it  sways  the  will.  Duties  that  we 
love  not  are  clogs.  He  that  clings  to  the  world  rather  than  to  Christ  must  look 
the  solemn  fact  in  the  face — that  he  loved  the  world  more  than  Christ,  and  tliat 
love  sways  his  will.     It  is  not  inabiLty — it  is  not  natural  or  moral  infirmity  of  the 


CHAP.  XIII.]  .  I.   COEINTHIANS.  335 

■will  that  keeps  us  from  becoming  more  godly.  It  is  our  loves — our  affections  that 
are  more  fed  and  strengthened  by  sinful  desires  than  by  angels'  food.  4.  And  this 
suggests  the  fourth  reason  why  charity  is  to  be  esteemed  the  greatest  of  gieat 
things,  and  that  is,  it  is  the  fulfihnent  of  the  law.  He  that  wishes  to  do  some- 
thing as  God  does  all  things  has  only  this  to  do — exercise  a  pure  love— an  enduring, 
.an  edifying,  a  will-swaying  love.  He  who  performs  one  act  of  disinterested 
benevolence,  acts  so  far  on  the  high  plane  of  the  Deity.  (H.  Baam.)  The 
pre-eminence  of  rhiritij  : — Before  proceeding  to  examine  some  of  the  proofs  of  the 
pre-eminence  of  charity  let  us  for  a  few  moments  glance  at  the  thing  itself,  for 
the  more  clearly  we  discern  whnt  this  charity  is,  the  more  clearly  we  see  its  fulness 
and  perfection,  the  more  rightly  we  shall  believe  iu  its  pre-eminence,  the  more 
ready  we  shall  be  to  say,  "Faiih  does  well,  hope  does  well,  the  other  graces  of 
the  Christian  character  do  well,  but  this  charity  excels  them  all."  Look  at  some 
■of  the  proofs  of  the  pre-eminence  of  charity.  Faith  must  be  immortal,  because 
man  can  never  dispense  with  his  confiiience  in  God.  Heaven  will  not  destioy  tiie 
need  for  that,  but  will  perfect  the  child-like  trust.  Hope  can  never  die  out,  for  a 
nolile,  blessed  being,  a  child  of  the  Infinite  must  always  be  aspiring  to  f.reater 
perfection,  and  reaching  to  the  days  which  are  before.  1.  Charity,  to  my  view,  is^ 
the  greatest  of  the  three  graces,  becausa  it  is  the  most  God-like.  Faith  believes  ^ 
the  Bible,  hope  rests  upon  it,  charity  enlarges  the  Bible.  There  is  more  liglit  to 
break  forth  over  God's  Word,  and  the  loving  heart  will  be  the  first  to  catch  it. 
This  helps  to  give  chaiity  the  pre-eminence.  2.  Charity  is  pre-eminent,  inasmuch  '^ 
as  it  is  the  greatest  stimulant  to  labour.  The  world  is  so  fashioned,  man  is  so  ' 
placed  that  there  is  always  a  great  and  urgent  need  for  work.  It  is  woik  that  turns 
the  wilderness  into  a  paradise,  whicdi  levels  mountains  and  fills  up  valleys.  Hope 
is  a  great  aid  to  diligence.  The  ploughman  would  not  plough,  by  reason  of  the 
•cold,  if  he  were  not  encouraged  by  hope,  and  shown  in  anti(!ipation  the  verdure  of 
the  next  Fairing,  the  blossoms  of  the  next  summer,  and  the  harvest  of  the  next 
autunm.  But  ofttimes  thi  re  is  work  to  be  done  when  faith  is  feeble  and  hop"  is 
ready  to  die,  and  then  love  alone  can  strengthen  the  labourer  for  the  t:isk.  In  the 
sick  chamber  there  must  be  weary  watchfulness  and  diligence,  hope  cannot  sustain, 
nor  can  faith;  but  the  care  is  as  tender  and  the  diligence  is  as  great  as  ever, 
because  love  is  present  in  the  heart  of  the  watcher  imd  the  worker,  and  love 
sustains  when  every  other  support  has  failed.  We  want  men  who  will  love  the 
world,  and  who  will  work  for  its  enlightenment,  for  its  emancipation  and  its 
redemption,  when  difficulties  are  great,  when  progress  is  almost  invisible,  and 
when  faith  and  hope  are  ready  to  die.  3.  The  way  to  obtain  this  charity  is  to  live\ 
close  to  Him  in  whom  this  charity  was  perfectly  exemplified.  I  must  remind  you  -^ 
of  an  old  story  concerning  the  tomb  of  Orpheus,  who  was  so  skilled  in  melody.  It 
was  said  that  the  nightingale  which  built  her  nest  nearest  to  the  tomb  had  always 
the  sweetest  song.  Here  is  a  man,  a  Divine  man;  Divine  pity  was  expres-ed  in 
tuman  tears,  Divine  love  worked  through  human  hands.  Divine  charity  was 
exemplified  in  human  love.  He  who  lives  nearest  to  Jesus  will  become  the  most 
perfect  iu  this  charity,  and  will  win  the  briglitest  crown  within  his  grasp.  (c\ 
Vince.)  The  supremacy   of  love  : — 1.  The  first  thing  that  must   strike   evf^ry 

mind,  a^iart  from  the  exceeding  beauty  of  the  description,  is  the  many-sidedness 
of  the  quality  portrayed.  It  is  not  one  virtue,  such  as  that  to  whii-h  in  common 
speech  we  have  limited  the  name  of  ch  irity,  but  all  virtues  in  one  that  the  apostle 
is  here  describing.  2.  But  the  many-sidedness  of  love  is  not  the  only  ground  of 
its  supremacy.  St.  Paul  next  draws  attention  to  its  permanmce.  "Love  never 
faileth,"  and  in  this  respect  he  again  contra>^ts  it  with  those  spiritual  gifts  which 
first  occasioned  the  mention  of  it.  3.  And  this  brings  us  to  the  last  of  the  con- 
trasts suggested  in  this  marvellous  chapter.  Love  is  not  only  above  all  gifts,  it  is 
many-sided  while  they  are  single  ;  it  is  permanent  while  they  are  fleeting;  but  it 
is  chief  also  among  the  graces  which  abide,  because  while  they  are  in  their  very 
nature  incomplete,  it  is  already  stamped  with  the  mark  of  petfection.  Truth  may 
-change,  or  rather  the  opinions  which  passed  for  truth,  but  the  blessed  three,  faith, 
Tiope,  and  love,  shall  abide ;  faith  the  evidence,  hope  the  earnest,  love  the  very 
foretaste  of  heaven.  There  is  no  j)utting  of  these  away  as  childliood  passes  into 
Tnanliood.  They  were  born  with  our  birth,  they  will  folow  us  to  the  (.'rave.  They 
are,  whether  we  will  or  no,  the  links  which  bind  us  to  the  invisible.  And  of  these 
love  is  the  greatest,  greater  than  faith,  which  is  trust  in  God  ;  greater  than  hope, 
which  is  desire  after  Him.  It  is  the  source  of  ihem  both.  It  is  God's  own  like- 
•ness  already  revealed  in  our  hearts.     Doubtless  in  this  our  present  state,  love  is 


336  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 

very  far  from  perfect — God  knows  bow  weak  it  is,  how  partial,  how  selfish — but  in 
so  far  as  it  is  love,  I  nay,  it  Las  upon  it  the  stamp  of  perfection.  It  is  the  grace 
which  brought  Christ  clown  to  earth.  It  is  the  grace,  the  only  grace  that  raises 
maij  to  heaven.  Is  your  life  and  mine  in  any  sense  an  endeavour  to  follow  after 
the  pre-eminent  grace  of  love?  To  decide  the  question,  let  us  take  St.  Paul's 
description,  and  honestly  try  ourselves  thereby.      (-E.il/.  Yoting,  M.A.)  Charity 

siifigestive  of  important  lesxoas  : — I.  In  this  single  word  Chkistianity  sums  dp  all 
SOCIAL  morality.  There  is  no  analogy  to  this  in  any  other  religion  or  philo- 
sophy. Did  Greece  or  Rome,  Egypt  or  Assyria,  ever  rear  an  altar  to  such  a 
goddess?  And  who  looks  for  any  acknowledgment  of  her  from  heathenism  now? 
And  the  vaunted  philanthropy  of  socialistic  philosophy,  with  all  other  modern 
substitutes  for  the  gospel,  is  but  a  caricature  of  the  Christian  principle.     II.   How 

STRONCiLY   DOES    THIS    STANDARD    OF    CHARACTER    CONTRAST    WITH    THAT    OF    THE    WORLD  ! 

Who  is  the  man  tliat  the  age  delighteth  to  honour  ?  Is  it  the  gentle,  loving  disciple 
of  Jesus?     Nay,  is  it  not  the  proud,  selfish,  and  ambitious?     III.  His  account  of 

CHARITY    SHEDS    A     REPROVING     LIGHT     UPON     NATIONAL    ANTIPATHIES    AND    WAR.       Why 

should  the  geographical  and  political  divisions  of  the  globe  sever  the  bonds  of 
human  brotuerhood  and  limit  the  sphere  of  Christian  benevolence?  Can  Christ's 
followers   be   murderers?    and  what   is   war   but   wholesale   murder?     IV.    How 

SEVERELY    DOES    CHARITY    CONDEMN    THE    BIGOTRY    OF    SECTARIAN     PREJUDICE     AND    THE 

BITTERNESS  OF  RELIGIOUS  CONTROVERSY  !  Why  should  soiiie  difference  of  opinion  in 
matters  not  fundamental  alienate  from  one  another  hearts  that  were  else  one  in 
Christ?  If  we  differ  in  many  things,  do  we  not  agree  in  more?  and  are  not  those 
in  which  we  agree  much  more  important  than  those  in  which  we  differ  ?     V.  In 

THE  LIGHT  OF  OUR  EXPOSITION,  HOW  ARE  WE  TO  ESTIMATE  THE  GUILT  OF  THOSE  WHO 
CAUSE     RUINOUS    DIVISIONS    IN     THE     HOUSEHOLD     OF    FAITH  ?        If    it    is    SO    gOod     and 

plensant  a  thing  for  brethren  to  dwell  together  in  unity,  who  shall  measure  the 
mischief  done  by  breaking  up  the  family  ?  If  charity  is  the  bond  of  perftctness, 
the  test  of  Christian  character,  the  best  recommendation  of  the  gosp  1,  and  the 
condemnation  of  a  discoidant  world,  what  words  shall  suffice  to  express  the 
repugnance  of  every  true  disciple  to  that  wicked  schismatical  spirit  which  often 
wounds  it  so  recklessly  or  murders  it  outright?  (J.  Cross,  D.D.)  Love: — I. 
Charity  is  the  love  of  God  for  Himself  above  all  things,  and  of  man  for  God 
AND  IN  God.  It  shows  itself  in  outward  acts  of  love  to  man,  or  labour  for  God. 
Acts  of  love  strengthen  the  inward  fire  of  love;  and  love,  which  puts  itself  not 
forth  in  deeds  of  love,  would  go  out,  as  fire  without  fuel ;  but  they  do  not  first  light 
it.  In  God,  Love  is  Himself,  and  God  who  is  Love,  giveth  His  Spirit  who  is  Love, 
to  pour  abroad  lo^e  into  our  hearts.  Love  then  is  the  souice  and  end  of  all  good. 
Without  it,  nothing  avails  ;  with  it,  thou  hast  all  things.  "  Love,"  says  St. 
Laurence,  "is  the  beginning  of  all  good,  because  it  is  from  God,  and  moves  to 
Him.  Love  is  the  means  of  all  good,  for  it  is  accoiding  to  God,  and  fashioneth 
our  deeds  aright.  Love  is  also  the  end  of  all  good ;  for  it  is  for  the  sake  of  God, 
and  directeth  our  works,  and  bringeth  them  to  the  right  end.  It  is  the  end  of  sins, 
because  it  destroyeth  them  ;  the  end  of  the  commandments,  because  it  perfecteth 
them  ;  it  is  the  end  of  all  our  toils,  the  end  of  all  ends  to  us,  for  our  rest  is  in  life 
everlasting,  but  God  is  the  end  in  whom  we  rest."  II.  Whence  hath  love  its 
birth  ?  In  the  infinite  love  of  God,  charity  is  greater  than  faith  and  hope  and  any 
other  grace,  because  it  has  its  source  in  that  which  God  is.  Hence  then  it  is  love 
which  gives  the  value  to  all  deeds  of  faith,  or  devotion,  or  toil,  or  love,  or 
martyrdom ;  because  love  is  of  God,  and  refers  all  to  God.  Noble  self-denying 
deeds  may  be  for  man's  praise  or  in  self-complacency ;  chastity  may  be  proud ; 
alms-giving,  vain-glorious.  Active  service  may  be  its  own  reward  ;  death  itself 
may  be  undergone  amid  obstinacy.  Love  hath  no  end  but  God,  seeketh  nothing 
but  Himself  for  Himself.  All  virtues  are  but  forms  of  love,  for  she  is  the  soul  of 
all.  "  Temperance,"  says  Augustine,  "is  love,  keeping  itself  pure  and  undefiled 
for  God.  Fortitude  is  love,  readily  enduring  all  things  for  the  sake  of  God. 
Justice  is  love  which  serveth  God  alone,  and  so  hath  command  over  all  things 
subject  to  man.  Prudence  is  love,  distingui-;hing  what  helpeth  it  towards  God, 
from  what  hnidereth  it"  ;  or,  "Love,  kiudled  with  entire  holiness  to^vards  God, 
when  it  coveteth  nothing  out  of  God,  is  called  temperance ;  when  it  willingly 
parteth  with  all,  is  called  fortitude."  The  worldlv,  careless,  covetous,  hard-hearted, 
the  lovers  of  pleasure,  cnnnot  love  God,  but  neither  do  they  de-ire  to  love  Him. 
III.  Holy  men  have  distinguished  four  stages  of  love.  1.  The  first  state  of 
fallen  man  is,  alas  !  to  "  love  himself  for  himself."     In  this  state,  he  rather  fears 


cnAP.  xiir.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  337 


God  than  loves  Him.  2.  Yet  man  needs  God ;  and  so  he  begins  by  faith  to  seek 
after  and  love  God,  because  Ijc  rieed.s  Hlin.  And  30  be  is  brought  to  a  second  stage 
of  love,  to  love  God  for  man's  own  sake.  Much  as  a  man  mif.'ht  value  the 
sun,  because  it  warms  him  and  ripens  his  corn,  so  man  malces  Irmself  his  centre, 
and  loves  God  because  he  needs  Him.  Yet  God  so  humble:  li  Himself,  that  He 
willeth  even  thus  to  be  loved.  Nay,  He  has  therefore  surroumled  us  with  the 
blessings  of  nature,  that  all  tilings  arouud  us  may  teaoli  us  to  love  God,  because 
He  made  them  "very  good."  Yet  in  some  such  way  might  a  heatlien  love.  It  ia 
a  Cliri;^tian  form  of  this  love  of  God  for  man's  own  sake,  if  a  man  loves  Him, 
because  He  has  redeemed  him,  because,  without  Him,  he  cannot  be  saved,  and  he 
hopes  to  be  saved  by  Him.  3.  Next  God  becomes  known  to  the  soul,  and 
consequently  sweet  to  it;  and  so,  having  "  tasted  that  tlie  Lord  is  good,"  he  pa'^ses 
to  the  third  degree,  and  loves  God  for  His  own  sake.  Yet  even  in  beginning  to  love 
God  for  His  own  sake,  there  is  a  snare  lest  men  should  love  God  for  sensible 
sweetnesses  and  the  consolations  which,  when  He  sees  good.  He  gives  in  prayer  or 
the  Holy  Sacrament ;  and  so  He  often  withdraws  these  comforts,  and  leaves  the 
soul  in  darkness,  alter  showing  her  His  light,  and  in  dryness,  after  having  bathed 
her  in  His  sweetness,  that  He  may  prove  the  soul  that  she  follows  Him,  not  for  the 
loaves  and  fishes,  but  for  love  of  Himself  alone.  Tliis  is  a  pure  cliaste  love,  which 
loves  God  not  for  any  gifts  of  His,  not  even  for  everlasting  bUss  as  His  gift.  Pure 
love  would  not  be  lontented  with  all  the  glories  and  brightness  and  beauty  of 
heaven  itself:  it  stops  short  of  nothing,  it  could  be  satisfied  with  nothing,  but  the 
love  of  God  Himself.  It  loves  God  "  because  He  is  good  "  ;  and  so  it  loves  the 
will  of  God,  and  becomes  confurmed  to  it,  and  wills,  or  wills  not,  not  for  its  own 
pleasure,  but  for  the  will  of  God.  4,  And  so  the  soul  is  formed  towards  that  last 
stage  of  love,  of  which,  blessed  are  they  who  have  for  a  moment  some  faint  glimpse 
in  this  life,  but  which  is  life  eternal,  that  man  should  love  himself  only  for  the  sake 
of  God.  In  this  the  soul,  borne  out  of  itself  with  Divine  love,  losing  itself  in  a 
manner,  as  though  it  were  not,  emptied  of  itself,  "goeth  forth  wholly  into  God, 
and  cleaving  to  God,  becometh  one  spirit  with  Him,  so  that  it  may  say,  '  My  flesh 
and  my  heart  faileth,  but  Thou  art  the  God  of  my  heart  and  God  my  portion  for 
ever.'"  For  since  God  is  the  centre  of  all  things,  so  the  soul,  when  perfected, 
must  will  to  be  nothing  but  what  God  wills ;  to  be,  only  that  He  may  live  in  it ;  to 
be  dissolved,  as  it  were,  and  wholly  transfused  into  the  will  of  God.  Of  these 
stages  of  love,  the  love  of  God  only  for  one's  own  sake,  is  blessed  as  a  step  tow.irds 
that  which  is  better  ;  yet  there  is  much  danger  lest,  if  God  gives  a  man  not  what 
he  wills,  or  what  he  wills  not,  he  sliould  lose  what  love  he  seemed  to  have.  Tlius 
people  have  become  embittered  or  imijatient  through  misfortunes,  as  though  God 
had  dealt  hnrdly  with  them,  and  have  thrown  off  the  love  of  God.  IV.  How,  then, 
ABE  WE  TO  KNOW  WHETHER  WE  HAVE  LOVE  ;  HOW  GAIN  IT  ?  The  tests  whereby  we  may 
know  whether  we  have  this  love  of  God  for  Himself  are  also  the  means  of  gaining 
it,  or  of  increasing  it.  How  is  it  with  those  whom  you  dearly  love  on  earth  ?  Be 
this  the  proof  of  your  love  of  God.  1.  You  gladly  think  of  them,  when  absent.  You 
are  glad  to  turn  from  converse  with  others,  to  speak  with  them.  One  word  or  look 
of  theirs  is  sweeter  than  all  which  is  not  they.  2.  You  are  glad  to  hear  of  those 
you  love ;  you  are  glad  when  others  speak  good  of  them.  3.  You  love  anything 
which  belongs  to  them  4.  You  gladly  suifer  for  them.  5.  You  have  no  other  will 
than  theirs.  6.  You  are  jealous  for  their  honour.  7.  For  their  sake  you  value 
not  any  outward  things  which  others  prize.  8.  You  do  all  things  for  their  sake 
and  count  nothing  too  little,  nothing  too  great  to  do  for  them.  Couidusion:  Faint 
not,  any  who  would  love  Jesns,  if  ye  find  yourselves  yet  far  short  of  what  He 
Himself  who  is  love  saith  of  the  love  of  Him.  Perfect  love  is  heaven.  When  ye 
are  perfected  in  love,  your  work  on  earth  is  done.  There  is  no  short  road  to 
heaven  or  to  love.  Do  what  in  thee  lies  by  the  grace  of  God,  and  He  vvill  lead  thee 
from  strength  to  strength,  and  grace  to  grace,  and  love  to  love.  1.  Be  diligent  by 
His  grace  to  do  no  wilful  sin ;  for  sin,  wilfully  done,  kills  the  soul,  and  casts  out  of 
it  the  love  of  God.  2.  Seek  to  love  nothing  out  of  God.  God  re-makes  a  broken 
heart  and  fills  it  with  love.  He  cannot  fill  a  divided  heart.  3.  Think  often  of 
God.  For  how  canst  thou  know  or  love  God  if  thou  fillest  thy  mind  with  thouuhts 
of  all  thinas  under  the  sun,  and  thy  thoughts  wander  to  the  ends  of  the  earth,  and 
thou  gatherest  them  not  unto  God  ?  4.  Bring  all  things,  as  thou  mayest,  nigh  to 
God ;  let  not  them  hurry  thee  away  from  Him.  5.  Be  not  held  back  by  any 
thought  of  unworthiness  or  by  failures  from  the  childlike  love  of  God.  6.  Be 
diligent,  after  thy  power,  to  do  deeds  of  love.  Think  nothing  too  little,  nothing 
VOL.  II.  22 


338  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 

too  low,  to  do  lovingly  for  the  sake  of  God.  Bear  with  infirmities,  ungentle 
tempers,  contradictions  ;  visit  the  sick,  relieve  the  poor,  cfec.  7.  Where,  above  all, 
shouldest  thou  seek  for  His  love  but  in  the  feast  of  His  love  ?  Without  it,  ye 
cannot  have  any  true  love.  (E.  B.  Piisei/,  D.D.)  Christian  love: — I.  Is  the 
ESSENTIAL  PRINCIPLE  OF  ALL  GENUINE  EULiGioN.  We  love  God  bccause  He  first 
loved  us.  This  affection  is  in  every  case  called  forth  into  its  strength  by  the 
manifested  affection  of  the  Redeemer.  Here,  then,  is  a  test  for  universal  use  in 
self-examination.  It  is  love  that  makes  the  Cliristian.  It  is  not  talent  (ver  1).  It 
is  not  gifts  (ver.  2).  It  is  not  merit  (ver.  3).  II.  Is  the  pr.iNciPLE  or  all  genuine 
SOCIAL  LIFE.  "  If  God  SO  loves  us,  we  ought  also  to  love  one  another."  Christians 
— 1.  Are  the  children  of  one  Father's  household,  and  hence  must  love  each  other 
as  kindred.  2.  Are  under  equal  exposures.  The  world  drives  up  against  them  on 
the  outside;  they  should  therefore  oiganise  for  mutual  defence.  3.  Have  all  the 
same  work ;  and  it  is  time  we  comforted  each  other  with  a  comparison  of  tasks  and 
of  patience  under  them.  III.  Is  thr  principle  of  eminent  zeal.  1.  Tliere  is  no 
comfort  in  work  where  there  is  not  love  as  the  motive  of  it.  God  loved  the  world ; 
Ciirist  loved  the  souls  He  died  to  redeem  ;  Christians  are  moved  by  love  for  those 
around  them ;  or  else  the  work  is  drudgery,  and  can  never  claim  blessing.  2, 
What  will  not  love  do  and  dare  ?  ^Vith  only  an  eaitlily  object  Love  swam  the 
Hellespont,  and  gave  a  nnme  to  every  hero  who  holds  out  a  torch.  With  no  more 
than  filial  strength,  it  s-nt  Coriolanu^  back  from  treason  at  the  gates,  and  delivered 
Home  from  downfall.  3.  But  then,  how  gentle  this  love  is  also  !  Tliis  is  the  only 
natural  force  that  works  by  tenderness.  It  made  Paul  weep,  it  filled  the  eyes  of 
Jesus  with  tears.  Yet  there  is  no  efi'eminacy  in  it.  John,  who  spoke  most  about 
it,  was  a  "son  of  thunder."  4.  Such  love  is  ei¥ective  uhen  everything  else  would 
fail.  "  I  came  to  break  your  head,"  once  said  a  rough  man  to  Whitetield,  with  a 
big  stone  in  hand  ;  "  but  by  the  grace  of  God  you  have  broken  my  heart."  IV.  Is 
THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  HEAVENLY  ENJ0T5IENT.  This  wouderiul  cliarity  issues  in  a 
C'lnpleteness  at  the  limit  of  life,  that  the  life  itself  which  it  tenanted  never  knew, 
nor  even  suspected  :  "  For  we  know  in  part,  and  we  piophesy  in  part,"  &c.  (C.  S. 
Robinson,  D.D.)  Greatest  of  these  is  cliarity. — Other  graces  not  to  he  dis2>araged : 
— When  the  apostle  speaks  so  highly  of  charity,  he  does  not  mean  to  disparage  the 
other  graces.  They  also  are  altogether  beautiful,  considered  apart  from  charity ; 
only  charity  has  such  a  sun-like  excellence,  that  in  its  presence  all  star-like  beauty, 
and  even  all  moon-like  beauty,  seem  to  grow  dim  and  fade,  as  stars  and  moon  do 
wlien  the  light  of  day  comes  to  fill  our  skj'.  Compare  the  diamond  with  a  common 
wayside  stone,  and  we  may  not  be  greatly  impressed  by  its  beauty  and  supeiiotity, 
for  the  contrast  is  too  great.  But  set  that  diamond  in  a  royal  crown,  encircle  it 
with  pearls,  let  it  compare  with  other  jewels,  with  ruby,  and  garnet,  and  emerald, 
then  the  depths  of  its  crystal  purity  are  so  impre-'sive,  and  the  flashing  of  its  light 
is  so  exquisite.  Put  charity  alongside  humbleness,  bowels  of  mercies,  long- 
suffering,  or  forgiving,  and  then  it  seems  to  gather  up  into  itself  their  charms,  aud 
throw  over  them  its  charms,  and  shine  forth  in  the  very  midst  of  them  the  "  bond 
of  perfectness. "     (R.  Tuck,  B.A.)  The  greatness  of  cliarity  in  the  u-idth  and 

extent  of  its  sphere  : — Other  graces  have  particulHr  things  wilh  which  they  are 
more  intimately  connected  and  concerned — special  parts  of  onr  lives  on  which 
they  throw  the  light  of  their  charms,  spetiial  times  in  which  they  actively  operate. 
They  are  like  the  winds  that  blow  sometimes,  or  tlie  rain  that  falls  sometimes,  or 
the  snow  that  covers  the  eart,h  sometimes,  or  the  lightning  that  purifies  sometimes. 
But  charity  is  like  the  Divine  sunlight,  that  shines  on  always,  works  always, 
tempers  the  winds,  and  warms  the  rains,  and  dissipates  the  mists,  and  melts  the 
snow.  Sometimes  seen  and  felt,  sometimes  unseen,  but  never  ceasing  its  influence, 
and  recognising  no  earth-limits  to  its  sphere.  Charity  covers  the  whole  life  and 
relationships  of  the  Christian — his  inner  thoughts,  his  uttered  feelings,  his  conduct 
and  intercourse,  the  associations  of  the  family  and  society,  and  also  his  relations 
with  the  dependent,  the  poor,  and  the  sufiering.     {Ibid.) 


CHAP.  XIV.]  J.   CORINTHIANS.  339 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

Vers.  1-24.  Follow  after  charity,  and  desire  spiritual  gifts. — Folloning  after 
love  : — You  could  see  Gerald  had  been  running  fast  a  long  way,  for  as  he  came  up 
the  garden  i^ath  to  his  mother  his  face  was  very  red  and  his  hair  quite  damp  with 
the  perspiration  on  his  forehead.     "  What  have  you  been  doing,  my  little  boy  ?  " 
his  mother  asked  him.     "  Oh,  mother,"  he  said,  almost  ready  to  cry,  "  I  have  been 
running  after  the  rainbow,  trying  to  citch  it,  but  when  I  got  to  the  top  of  tbe  hill  it 
was  just  as  far  away  as  before,"  and  the  little  boy  threw  himself  down  with  a  sob 
at  his  mother's  feet.     "Poor  little  fellow,"  she  said,  tenderly,  p. itting  his  head, 
■"  mother  is  sorry  for  you."     She  really  was  sorry,  so  she  said,  "  Gerald,  dear,  if 
you  can  wait  to-day  and  to-morrow,  on  the  next  morning  when  you  wake  up  you 
will  see  a  rainljow  that  you  can  catch."     "  Eeally,  mother;  shall  I  really  see  one 
and  catcli  it '?  "  and  the  boy  looked  up  with  a  hajipy  and  eager  face.     "  Yes,  dear  ; 
and  what  is  more,  you  can  go  on  catching  and  keeping  it  day  by  day  all  through 
your  life."     With  this  Gerald  was  obliged  to  be  content  for  the  present,  although 
he  was  very  impatient  until  the  happy  morning  arrived.     He  woke  early,  and 
eagerly  gazed  round  the  room,  and  over  the  mantelpiece  saw  a  lovely  rainbow.     It 
was  a  beautiful,  large  kind  of  text  in  a  great  number  of  bright  and  lovely  colours. 
He  jumped  out  of  bed  and  stood  close  under  itwith  his  hands  folded.     On  the  sky- 
blue  colour  was  printed  in  letters  of  lovely  dark  blue.  Patience.     On  the  red,  in 
letters  of  white,  was  Ijovc.     On  the  black,  in  silver  letters,  was  Peace.     On  the 
£ream  was  Kindliness,  in  letters  of  gold.     Gentleness  was  printed  in  prettiest  pink, 
the  word  on  cardinal,  and  Charity  was  blended  in  all  the  colours  on  white.     While 
Gerald  was  stiinding  admiring  with  delight,  his  mother  came  quietly  in.     "Well, 
dear,"  she  said,  smiling.  "  how  do  you  like  your  rainbow  ?  "     "  Ou,  I  like  it  so 
much,  mother;  and  is  it  my  very  own?  but  what  do  you  mean  by  catching  it, 
mother?"     "  Well,  suppose  you  beyin  to-day,  and  let  the  first  thing  you  try  to 
«atch  and  keep  be  Love."     "  Oh,  I  see  now,"  said  tlie  little  boy,  and  the  thought 
sank  into  his  heart,  so  that  he  really  tried  to  be  as  loving  as  he  could  to  his  little 
playfellows  and  to  everyhody.     And  every  morning  he  looked  up  to  his  rambow  to 
see  what  he  would  try  and  catch  that  day,  and  then  he  knelt  to  ask  God  to  help 
him.     So  little  Gerald  grew  up  to  be  a  splendid  man,  and  the  rainbow  still  shines 
over  his  mantelpiece  as  one  of  his  greatest  treasures.     (Great  ThoiiriJits.)         The 
proiii2)tiiif!  of  love  : — When  Payson  was  dying  he  exclaimed,  "  I  long  to  hand  a  full 
•cup   of  happiness   to  every  human  being."      This  was  the  language  of  a  heart 
thoroughly  purged  of  all  selfish  affection,  and  filled  with  the  spirit  of  that  love 
■which  led  our  adorable  Jesus  to  give  His  life  for  human  redemption.     If  every 
■Christian  would  go  out  daily  among  men  filled  with  such  longing  for  human  happi- 
ness, what  marvellous  changes  would  soon  be  wrought  in  human  society !     The 
selfish  element  would  be  eliminated  from  the  dealings  of  the  Christian  business 
man.     Not  justice  merely,  but  benevolence,  would  enter  into  his  every  act  of  trade. 
The  same  spirit  would  rule  his  home  and  Church  life.     He  would  b^•come  an  incar-  , 
nation  of  goodwill  toward  all,  and  would  so  preach  the  gospel  by  his  deeds  that  men 
would  see  his  good  works  and  glorify  his  heavenly  Father.     The  spuit  of  Payson  is 
worthy  of  every  man's  imitation.     Hapiw  he  wlio  can  truthfully  say,  "I  long  to 
hand  a  cup  of  happiness  to  every  human  being."         Love  lessening  misery  : — The 
remark  of  the  Kev.  John  Newton  below  deserves  to  be  written  on  the  tablet  of 
€very  heart.      "I  see  in  this  world,"  he  observes,  "two  heaps— one  of  human 
happiness  and  one  of  misery;  now,  if  I  can  take  but  the  smallest  bit  from  the 
second  heap  and  add  to  the  first,  I  carry  a  point.     If,  as  I  go  home,  a  child  has 
dropped  a  halfpenny,  and  if  by  giving  it  another  I  can  wipe  away  its  tears,  I  feel 
that  I  have  done  something.     I  should  be  glad,  indeed,  to  do  great  things,  but  I 
will  not  neglect  such  little  ones  as  this."         Choosing  love  : — Had  I  my  d'oice  of 
all  things  that  might  tend  to  my  present  felicity,  I  would  pitch  upon  this  ;  to  have 
my  heart  possessed  wiih  the  greatest  kindness  and  affei-tion  toward  all  men  in  the 
■world.     I  am  sure  this  would  make  me  partake  in  all  the  happiness  of  othf^rs. 
Certainly,  next  to  the  love  and  enjoyment  of  God,  that  anient  charity  and  affection 
wherewith  blessed  souls  do  embrace  one  another  is  justly  to  be  reckoned  as  the 
greatest  felicity  of  regions  above;  and,  did  it  universally  prevail  in  the  world,  it 
would  anticipate  that  blessedness,  and  make  us  taste  of  the  joys  of  heaven  upon 
earth.     {Scongal.)         Universal  benevolence  : — I.  The  several  considkkations  and 


340  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cbap.  xiv. 

MOTIVES  WHICH  SHOULD  DETERMINE  US  TO  UNIVERSAL  LOVE.  1.  Goodwill  aticT  fiiendship 
to  mankind  are  natural  to  us,  whicli  we  are  led  to  by  the  original  propensions  and 
inclinations  of  our  hearts.  We  are  plainly'  made  for  the  exercise  of  goodness 
and  charity,  and  in  the  very  constitution  of  our  beings  it  is  marked  out  to  us 
as  the  course  of  life  which  we  are  to  follow.  2.  The  circumstances  in  which  we 
are  placed  render  it  necessary  for  us  to  exercise  benevolence  towards  mankind. 
Men  are  a  sort  of  creatures  who  have  a  natural  and  necessary  dependence  upon 
one  another,  and  it  is  impossible  for  tliem  to  subsist — at  least,  to  enjoy  any  com- 
fort in  life — without  mutual  succour  and  an  exchange  of  all  good  offices.  3.  Another 
motive  to  engage  us  to  the  love  of  mankind  may  be  brought  from  the  consideration 
of  its  excellency.  4.  The  exercise  of  humanity  and  kindness  towards  mankind  is 
essential  to  religion,  without  which  it  is  only  an  empty  name,  and  all  pretences  to 
it  are  most  vain  and  impertinent.  5.  The  last  argument  to  engage  us  to  the 
exprcise  of  charity  may  be  brought  from  the  advantages  which  will  from  thence 
accrue  to  ourselves.  It  may  be  justly  expected  that  it  will  have  a  happy  influence 
even  on  our  external  fortune  or  estate  in  the  world  ;  for  charity  is  the  most 
engaging  quality  that  we  can  be  possessed  of,  \\hich  will  not  fail  to  procure  us  the 
esteem  of  others,  and  make  them,  in  any  ca^es  of  difficulty  and  danger  in  which  we 
may  be,  to  contribute  to  our  assistance.  Uut  a  much  more  considerable  instance 
of  happiness  than  any  relating  to  our  external  interest,  which  proceeds  from  the 
exercise  of  charity,  is  that  inward  joy  and  pleasure  which  it  always  affords  us. 
And  besides  all  this,  if  we  consider  the  other  world,  it  is  certain  that  the  practice 
of  cbarity  will  procure  us  the  greatest  advantages  that  can  be  in  it.    II.  Some  rules 

FOR  RAISING  AND  IMPROVING  A  TEMI'ER  OF  SINC]ORE    AND  UNIVERSAL   BENEVOLENCE  IN  US. 

1.  In  order  to  this,  let  us  represent  mankind  in  the  most  favourable  light  that  we 
justly  can  to  ourselves.  We  must  have  some  esteem  of  those  for  whose  advantage 
we  exert  ourselves  with  any  high  degree  of  zenl ;  and  wheu  we  sincerely  esteem  any 
peisons  we  shall  be  always  ready  to  promote  then*  interest  as  we  have  opportunity. 

2.  Another  method  of  raising  and  improving  a  benevolent  tempew  in  us  is  to 
accustom  ourselves  to  frequent  Hiougl  ts  imd  meditations  on  the  goodness  of  God. 

3.  Further,  ht  us  guard  not  only  ag  dnst  all  contempt  of  others  and  unfair  sus- 
picions of  evil  in  them,  but  ngainst  an  indulgence  of  all  immoderately  selfish 
jiassions,  and  of  all  angry,  peevish,  discontented  dispositions,  and  endeavour,  as 
much  as  we  can,  to  preserve  ourselves  in  a  serene  state  of  mind.  4.  It  will  likewise 
be  of  great  use  for  forming  and  increasing  a  temper  of  benevolence  in  us  to  have 
an  habitual  recollection  and  a  lively  conviction  of  its  great  excellence  and  impor- 
tance. (J.  Orr,  D.D.)  S2)infiial  (juts  : — By  gifts  we  understand  those  natural  or 
acquired  endowments  which  may  be  used  for  the  interest  and  edification  of  others: 
by  graces  those  internal  emotions  which  result  from  a  Divine  influence  upon  the 
heart.  Gifts  are  valuable,  but  graces  are  essential.  View  Christian  character  as 
an  edifice ;  gifts  constitute  its  ornamental  and  useful  parts,  but  graces  are  the  founda- 
tion, without  which  it  would  soon  crumble  to  the  dust.  They  are  not  always  found 
in  close  or  corresponding  connection.  Graces  may  exist  where  there  are  scarcely 
any  gifts,  and  vice  versa.  Note — I.  A  few  or  those  gifts  which  form  appropriate- 
OBJECTS  of  the  CHRISTIAN'S  DKSiRE  AND  PURSUIT.  1.  An  ability  for  the  edifying 
and  acceptable  discharge  of  ministerial  duty.  2.  A  facility  of  acceptably  enpaging 
in  social  and  public  praj'er.  3.  A  readiness  for  joining,  or,  if  necessary,  of  leading 
the  exercise  of  social  and  public  praise.  4.  An  aptness  in  turning  to  some  profit- 
able account  the  ordinary  and  social  intercourse  of  life.  5.  A  readiness  in 
administering  to  others  appropriate  adnioniiion,  advice,  or  encouragement.     II. 

The  NATURE  AND    APPROPRIATE    EXERCISE  OF  THE    DESIRE    RECOMMENDED    IN    THE    TEXT. 

1.  It  should  be  operative  and  practical  in  its  character.  We  are  not  to  sit  down 
and  be  satisfied  in  wishing  these  gifts  were  possessed,  but  to  make  an  effort  to 
attain  them.  2.  This  desire  should  be  regulated,  not  by  personal  inclination,  but 
by  an  anxiety  for  usefulness.  III.  Suggestions  to  excite  and  direct  in  pursuing 
THE  attainment  OF  THESE  GIFTS.  We  should — 1.  Clierisli  a  deeper  sense  of  the 
privilege  and  honour  of  being  in  any  way  serviceable  to  the  Church  of  Christ.  2. 
Diligently  and  conscientiously  use  the  gifts  we  already  possess.  They,  like  our 
bodily  or  mental  faculties,  are  ever  improved  by  approiinate  exercise.  3.  More 
assiduously  cultivate  the  graces  of  religion  in  the  s.  ul.  These,  liy  inflaming  the 
heart  more  with  a  Saviour's  love,  would  cou strain  us  to  attempt  honouring  and 
serving  Him  in  every  posfible  way.  {Essex  CoinireunJioital  Jlriiientlirancer.) 
Sjyirihial  gifts  and  public  ivorship  : — I.  The  comparative  vaiue  of  'jirK  two  chief 
spiRiTU.'i.ii "  GIFTS.      1.  Prophesying  is   speaking   for   Go'1,  whclher  the  utterance 


CHAP.  XIV.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  341 

regards  present  or  futui-e  matters.  The  function  of  the  prophet  is  indicated  in 
ver.  3,  and  in  vers.  24-25  the  results  of  prophesyi  g  are  described  in  terms  pre- 
cisely such  as  we  should  use  to  desciibe  tlie  results  of  efHeacious  preaching.  2. 
The  gift  of  tongues,  from  Acts  ii.,  would  seem  to  have  been  the  gift  of  speaking  in 
foreign  languages,  and  was  communicated,  not  as  a  permanent  acquisition,  but 
only  "  as  the  Spirit  gave  utterance."  It  served  the  same  purpose  as  other  miracles; 
it  called  attention  to  the  entr-mce  of  new  powers  into  human  nature  ;  it  was  "  for 
them  that  believe  not,  not  for  them  that  believe."  It  produced  conviction  that 
among  the  followei's  of  Christ  new  powers  were  at  work.  The  evidence  of  this  took 
a  shape  which  seemed  to  intimate  that  the  religion  of  Christ  was  suitable  for  every 
race  of  mankind.  3.  Comparing  these  two  gifts,  Paul  gives  the  preference  to  the 
former,  and  this  mainly  on  the  score  of  its  greater  utility.  Apart  from  interpreta- 
tion speaking  with  tongues  was  like  the  blare  of  a  trumpet,  mere  unintelligible  sound. 
Prophesying,  however,  all  could  understand,  and  profit  by  it.  4.  I'rom  this  pre- 
ference for  the  less  showy  but  more  useful  gift,  we  may  pather  that  to  make  public 
worship  the  occasion  of  self-display  or  sensational  exliibitions  is  to  degrade  it. 
Preachei's  must  resist  the  temptation  to  make  a  sensation,  to  produce  fine  sermon^  ; 
and  worshippers  must  resist  the  temptation  to  merely  exhibit  a  good  voice  or  find 
greater  pleasure  in  what  is  sensational  in  worsliip  than  in  what  is  simple  and 
intelligible.  5.  Worship  in  which  the  understanding  beats  no  part  receives  no 
countenance  from  Paul  (ver.  15).  Where  the  prayers  of  the  Church  are  in  Latin 
the  worshipper  may  indeed  pray  with  the  spirit  and  be  edified,  but  his  worship 
would  be  belter  did  he  pray  with  the  understanding  also.  Music  unaccompanied 
by  words  induces  a  devoutness  which  is  apt  to  be  either  hazy  or  sentimental,  or 
both,  unless  by  the  help  of  words  the  uude)standii'g  goes  iiand  in  hand  with 
feeling.  6.  No  countenance  can  be  found  in  this  chapter  to  the  idea  that  worship 
should  exclude  preaching.  Some  temperaments  incline  towards  worship,  but 
resent  being  preached  to  or  instructed.  St.  Paul,  however,  puts  propliesying  in  the 
forefront.  But  St.  Paul  puts — II.  The  manner  in  which  the  public  sekvices 
SHOULD  BE  coNDLTCTED.  1.  The  scrviccs  at  Corinth  were  characterised  by  great 
freedom  (ver.  26).  Each  member  of  the  congregation  liad  something  to  contribute 
for  the  edification  of  the  Church.  One  with  a  natnial  aptitude  for  poetry  threw 
his  devotional  feeling  into  a  metrical  foim,  and  furnished  the  Church  with  her 
earliest  hymns.  Another  set  forth  some  important  aspect  of  Christian  truth. 
Another,  fresh  from  contact  with  the  world,  entered  the  meeting  with  the  glow  of 
conflict  on  his  face,  and  had  eager  words  of  exhortation  to  utter.  And  so  passed 
the  hours  of  meeting,  without  any  fixed  order,  appointed  ministry,  or  uniformity  of 
service.  And  certainly  the  freshness  and  variety  of  such  services  is  greatly  to  be 
desired.  We  lose  much  by  a  silent  membership.  2.  And  yet,  as  Paul  observes, 
there  was  much  to  be  desired  in  those  Corinthian  services.  To  appeal  to  this  or 
any  part  of  this  letter  in  proof  that  there  should  be  no  distinction  between  clergy 
and  laity  would  be  a  very  bad  policy.  True  there  were  no  rulers  of  any  kind,  but 
then  the  want  of  them  had  given  rise  to  disorder.  The  ideal  condition,  however, 
would  be  one  in  which  autlmiity  sho'ild  be  lodged  in  certain  office-bearers,  while 
the  faculty  and  gift  of  each  member  in  some  way  contributed  to  the  good  of  the 
whole  Church.  3.  While  Paul  abstains  from  appointing  Church  officers,  he  is 
careful  to  lay  down  two  principles  which  should  regulate  their  procedure.  (1)  "  Let 
everything  be  done  decently  and  in  order."  This  ac'ivice  was  greatly  needed  in  a 
Church  in  which  the  public  services  were  sometimes  turned  into  tumults.  (2)  "  Let 
all  things  be  done  unto  edifying."  Keep  the  great  end  of  your  meetings  in  view, 
and  you  need  no  formal  rul>rics.  4.  It  might  be  difficult  to  say  whether  the 
somewhat  selfish  ambition  of  those  Corinthians  to  secure  the  surprising  gifts  of 
the  Spirit  or  our  own  torpid  indifference  and  lack  of  expectation  is  less  to  be 
commended.  Certainly  every  one  who  attaches  himself  to  Christ  ought  to  indulge 
in  great  expectations.  From  Him  we  may  expect  at  least  His  own  Sj)irit.  And  in 
this  "  least  "  there  is  promise  of  all.  But  lack  of  expecation  is  fatal  to  the  Chris- 
tian, (il/.  Dods,  D.D.)  The  gifts  of  prophecy  and  tonaves  : — Just  as  the  hunter 
follows  the  chase  with  the  determination  to  gain  what  he  pursues,  so  are  we  to 
follow  after  charity  ;  but  we  are  only  to  "  desire  "  spiritual  gifts.  The  Corinthians 
were  to  be  filled  with  the  spirit  of  love  at  any  cost,  and  when  they  loved  they  were 
to  desire  all  other  gifts,  but  especially  the  gift  of  prophecy.  Now  it  was  just  the 
reverse  of  this  with  them.  The  gift  they  valued  the  most  was  the  gift  of  tongues  ; 
it  was  this  they  "  followed  after,"  and  so,  when  the  Church  met  for  public  worship, 
a  babel  existed  (vers.  23-26).     I.  The  gift  of  pf.ophecy  was  not  simply  the  power 


342  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

to  predict  future  events.  The  Old  Testament  prophets  predicted,  but  they  had  also 
to  expostulate  and  comfort.  Here  are  tliree  marks  of  a  prophet.  1.  He  speaketh 
unto  man  (ver.  3) — face-to-face  converi-ation.  2.  He  speaketh  to  edification, 
exhortation,  and  comfort.  3.  He  speaketh  so  that  souls  are  converted  (ver.  24). 
II.  The  gift  of  tongues  was  the  power  imparted  to  speak  foreign  languages,  which 
is  plainly  the  teacliing  of  Acts  ii.  One  of  the  great  reasons  for  the  bestowal  of  the 
gift  was  that  the  dis -iples  might  preach  Christ  to  all  without  undergoing  the  usual 
tedions  instruction  in  the  languHge  of  the  hearer.  III.  The  gift  of  phophecy  is 
GRKATEFv  THAN  THE  GIFT  OF  TONGUES.  1.  It  Is  better  to  be  delinitc  than  learned  (vers. 
7-12).  Speak  with  as  many  tongues  as  you  can,  but  take  care  that  whatever  is 
spoken  is  understood.  2.  It  is  better  to  appeal  to  the  understanding  than  to  the 
emotions  (ver.  IG).  I  do  not  undervalue  the  emotional  in  reli^'ious  worship,  but  it 
is  better  for  a  man  to  understand  what  he  feels  than  to  feel  what  he  does  not 
understand.  If  an  unlearned  man  go  into  a  Roman  Catholic  chapel,  e.g.,  every- 
thing appeals  to  the  emotions — the  paintings,  the  music,  the  incense  ;  you  have  a 
sense  of  the  beautiful,  but  you  don't  know  why.  Better  be  in  the  poorest  meeting- 
house listening  to  the  rudest  preacher,  for  then  you  may  learn  what  you  can 
understand  and  apply  what  your  own  soul  can  interpret.  3.  It  is  better  to  be 
useful  than  brilliant  (ver.  19).  4.  It  is  better  to  honour  God  by  winning  souls 
than  to  exf  ite  ridicule  and  contempt  (vers.  23,  24).  Conclusion :  1.  Preaching 
should  be  plain,  but  not  vulgar.  2.  Worship  should  be  intelligent,  not  mystical. 
3.  It  should  be  orderly,  not  confused.  (A.  F.  Barficld.)  Bropliecy  and  tongues  : — 
Ver.  1  contains  a  resume  of  chaps,  xii.-xiii.  Charity  holds  the  first  place,  and  then 
spiritual  gifts  follow,  and  prophecy  is  preferable  to  others.  1.  Note  the  difference 
between  a  grace  and  a  gift.  It  is  not  that  the  former  is  from  God  and  the  latter 
from  nature,  for  both  are  from  God ;  but  grace  is  that  which  has  in  it  some  mnral 
quality.  A  man  may  be  fluent,  learned,  skilful,  &c.,  and  yet  be  a  bad  man.  Now 
this  distinction  explains  at  once  why  graces  are  preferable.  Gracrs  are  what  the 
man  is,  gifts  what  he  has.  He  is  loving,  he  has  eloquence,  &c.  You  only  have  to 
cut  out  his  tongue,  vx  to  im]>air  his  memory,  and  the  gift  is  gone-  But  you  must 
destroy  his  very  being  before  he  ceases  to  be  a  loving  man.  Yet  while  the 
Corinthians  are  to  "follow  after  charity  "  they  are  not  to  undervalue  gifts.  2. 
Many  religious  persons  go  into  the  contrary  extreme ;  they  call  gifts  dangerous  and 
■worldly.  No,  says  the  apostle,  "  desire  "  them  ;  not  as  the  highest  goods,  but  still 
desirable.  Only  remember  you  are  not  worthy  or  good  because  of  them.  And 
remember  other  people  are  not  bound  to  honour  you  for  them.  Admire  a 
Napoleon's  genius,  but  do  not  let  your  admiration  of  that  induce  you  to  give 
honour  to  the  man.  Let  there  be  no  mere  "  hero-worship."  3.  The  apostle  states 
the  principle  on  which  one  gift  is  preferable  to  another.  "Bather  that  ye  may 
prophesy."  He  prefers  those  which  are  useful  to  those  that  are  showy  (!=ee  ver.  12). 
1.  What  was  phophecy?  A  prophet  was  commissioned  to  declare  the  will  of  God 
either  as  to  the  future  or  as  to  the  present.  1.  In  ver.  3  is  the  essence  of  the 
prophet's  office,  but  there  is  not  one  word  sjioken  of  prediction.  In  order  fully  to 
expound  a  spiritual  principle,  or  a  principle  of  Divine  politics,  it  was  ncessary  to. 
foretell  the  result  or  transgression  against  it ;  as  when  the  Captivity,  or  the  fate  of 
Babylon  and  Nineveh  was  predicted :  but  this  was  not  the  essence  of  the  prophet's 
duty  :  that  was  to  reveal  truth.  2.  In  ver.  24  the  exercise  of  this  gift  is  spoken  of 
as  one  specially  instrumental  in  conversion,  with  which  prediction  has  nothing  to 
do,  for  before  a  prediction  could  be  fulfilled  the  unbeliever  "  falls  down,  acknow- 
ledges God,"  &c.  Moreover,  the  prophecy  was  something  which  touched  his 
conscience.  II.  What  is  jieant  by  the  gift  of  tongues.  From  Acts  ii.  it  is 
generally  taken  for  granted  that  it  was  a  miraculous  gift  of  speaking  foreign 
languages,  and  that  the  object  of  such  a  gift  was  the  conversion  of  the  heathen 
world ;  but  I  believe  that  the  gift  was  a  far  higher  one  than  that  of  the  linguist. 
1.  St.  Paul  prefers  prophecy  to  the  gift  of  "  tongues  "  as  more  useful,  since 
prophecy  edified  others,  and  tongues  did  not.  Now  could  he  liave  said  this  had 
the  gift  been  the  power  of  speaking  foreign  languages?  2.  The  "  tongues "  were 
inarticulate  or  incoherent  (ver.  2).  The  man  spoke  "  not  unto  men,  but  unto  God," 
did  not  try  to  make  himself  logically  clear  to  men,  but  poured  out  his  soul  to  God. 
3.  This  gift  was  sometiiing  internal,  a  kind  of  inspired  soliloquy  (ver.  4).  There 
■was  an  unconscious  need  of  expressing  audibly  the  feelings  arising  •within,  but 
when  so  uttered  they  merely  ended  in  "  edifying  "  the  person  who  uttered  them; 
like  the  broken  murmur  of  a  poet  full  of  deep  thought  in  solitude.  4.  The  apostle 
compares  the  gift  with  the  unworded  sounds  of  musical  instruments  (vers.  7,  8), 


CHAP.  XIV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS,  343 

which  have  a  meaning,  but  one  which  is  felt  rather  than  measured  by  the  intellect. 
The  mathematician  would  ask,  "What  does  that  prove?  "  the  historian,  "  What 
information  or  fact  does  it  communicate  ?  "  Have  you  ever  heai  d  the  low  moanings 
of  hopelessness?  or  those,  to  us,  unmelodious  airs  which  to  the  Swiss  mountaineer 
tell  of  home  in  a  language  clearer  than  the  tongue?  or  have  you  ever  listened  to 
the  unmeaning  shouts  of  boyhood  ?  Well,  in  all  these  you  have  dim  illustrations 
of  the  way  in  which  new,  deep,  irrepressible  feelings  found  for  themselves 
utterance  in  sounds  which  were  called  "  tongues."  5.  These  uiteraiic-  s,  weakly 
allowed  full  veut,  were  like  the  ravings  of  insanity  (ver.  23).  So,  indeed,  men  on 
the  day  of  Pentecost  said,  "  These  men  are  full  of  new  wine."  The  apostle  reioinds 
the  Corinthians  that  they  were  bound  to  control  this  power,  lest  it  should 
degenerate  into  imbecility  or  fanaticism.  6.  The  gift  is  coinp;ired  to  a  barbarian 
tongue  (ver.  11),  therefore  not  a  barbarian  tongue  itself.  7.  It  could  be  inter- 
preted (ver.  13).  And  without  this  interpretation  the  "  tongues  "  were  obviously 
useless  (ver.  14).  And  this  power  of  interpretation  is  reckoned  a  spiritual  gift  as 
much  as  tongues,  a  gift  granted  in  answer  to  prayer.  Now  this  we  sliall  best 
understand  by  analogies.  It  is  a  great  principle  that  sympathy  is  the  only  condi- 
tion for  interpretation  of  feeling.  The  aposile  compares  the  gift  of  tongues  to 
music.  Now  music  needs  an  interpreter,  and  the  interpretation  must  be  given,  not 
in  words,  but  in  corresponding  feelings.  There  must  be  "  music  in  the  soul."  To 
him  who  has  not  this  the  language  of  music  is  simply  unintelligible.  Again,  a 
child  is  often  the  subject  of  feelings  which  he  does  not  understand.  Observe  )iow 
he  is  affected  by  the  reading  of  a  tale  or  a  moving  hymn.  He  will  not  s;iy.  How 
toirching,  how  well  imagined!  but  he  will  bide  his  face,  or  he  hums,  or  laui^li-,  or 
becomes  peevish,  because  he  doe-;  not  know  what  is  the  matter  with  hitn.  He  has 
no  words  hke  a  man  to  express  his  new  feelings.  But  the  grown  man  can  int^rpi  et 
them,  and,  sympatliising  with  the  child,  he  says,  "The  child  cannot  contain  his 
feelings."  Or,  take  tlie  instance  of  a  physician  finding  words  for  physical  feelings, 
because  he  understands  them  better  thin  the  patient  who  is  unable  to  express 
them.  In  the  same  way  the  early  Christians,  being  the  subjects  of  new,  deej),  and 
spiritual  feeling,  declared  their  joy  in  inarticulate  utterances.  But  the  explaining 
what  they  felt  was  the  office  of  the  interpreter,  e.g.,  a  stranger  might  have  bi  en  at 
a  loss  to  know  what  was  really  meant.  "  Are  you  happy  or  mi^^erable,  O  Christian, 
by  those  Avild  utterances?  Is  it  madness,  or  new  wine,  or  inspiration?"  And 
none  but  a  person  in  the  same  mood  of  mind,  or  one  who  had  passed  through  it, 
could  say  to  the  stranger,  "  This  is  the  overflow  of  gratefulness ;  he  is 
blessing  in  the  Spirit ;  it  is  a  hymn  of  joy  that  his  heart  is  singing  to  itself  " ; 
or,  "It  is  a  burst  of  prayer"  (vers.  15-17).  (F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.) 
Grace  and  gifts: — I.  The  grace  of  cuAr.irv  is  superior  to  all  endowmunts. 
Whatever  other  endowments  you  may  possess  or  desire,  do  not  neglect  the  cultivation 
of  charity.  II.  Sojie  endowments  are  superior  to  others  (ver.  5).  The  didactic 
faculty  is  greater  than  the  linguistic.  Sense  is  better  than  sound,  ideas  are  better 
than  words.  It  often  happens  that  the  man  who  has  the  most  aptitude  in  ac- 
quiring languages  has  the  least  capacity  either  for  attaining  or  communicating  great 
ideas.  But  the  language  of  which  the  apostle  here  speaks  seems  to  have  been  the 
inarticulate  voice  of  new  and  strong  emotions.  Tender  emotions  often  choke  us. 
If  expressed  at  all  they  can  only  be  in  the  quivering  lip,  and  the  gleaming  eye,  and 
the  convulsive  chest.  Such  have  been  manifested  in  all  great  revivals  of  religion. 
I  have  heard  such  untranslatable  sounds  under  the  mighty  sermons  of  Welsh 
preachers.  These  "tongues"  are  valuable.  Because— 1.  They  are  symptomatic 
of  a  new  spiritual  life.  You  can  talk  aboat  history,  science,  theology,  but  not  about 
the  deepest  and  divinest  things  of  the  heart.  They  only  come  out  in  '_'  groanings 
that  cannot  be  uttered."  2.  In  them  the  soul  expresses  its  devotinns  (vers. 
2,  4,  14).  It  is  delightful  to  think  of  the  haman  soul  generally  so  immersed  in 
the  seltish  and  the  sensuous,  bathing  itself  in  the  rising  tides  of  spiritual  em-itions. 
8.  By  them  the  religious  sympathy  of  the  unbelieving  is  often  excited  (ver.  22). 
Sound  expressive  of  human  emotion  often  strikes  potently  on  the  heart  of  the 
listener.  Take  the  most  thoughtless  man  into  some  vast  congregation  in  Wales, 
when  all  the  people  are  singing  their  plaintive  hymns  in  strains  of  weird  music, 
and  he  will  not  be  long,  even  if  he  understands  not  tlie  la"Kuage,  before  he  feels 
the  influence.  Unsyllabled  speech  is  often  the  migiitiest.  There  are  melodies  that 
carry  into  the  soul  that  which  no  word  can  express.  III.  The  highest  endow- 
ment is  THE  ABILITY  FOR  SPIRITUAL  TEACHING  (vcr^  12,  18).  Teaching  is  not  the 
mere  impartation  of  the   acts  of  the  gospel  but  the  indoctrinating  of  the  soul  with. 


34-1  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 


its  primary  elements  and  spirit.  Note — 1.  That  the  gospel  gives  to  its  genuine 
discij^les  intelligent  convictions  that  should  be  fominuiricated  to  others.  He  who 
has  accepted  the  gosjiel  in  reality  becomes  instinct  with  mighty  and  irrepressible 
ideas ;  ideas  which  he  "  cannot  but  speak,"  for  "  necessity  is  laid  "  upon  him. 
They  are  given  to  him  to  communicate,  not  to  monopolise,  and  on  their  communi- 
cation the  S|iiritual  life,  growth,  and  perfection  of  mankind  <iepend.  2.  That  these 
intelligent  con\ictions  can  only  be  conveyed  to  others  by  intelligible  language 
(vers.  6,  &c.).  Mere  "sound"  is  not  worth  much.  "  Things  without  life,"  such  as 
the  "pipe"  and  the  "  harp,"  produce  sound.  Nay,  more,  unless  the  sound  gives 
out  clear  and  distinct  ideas,  it  is  not  only  useless,  but  injurious  (ver.  8).  If  in 
battle  the  trumpet  does  not  sound  clearly  the  advance  or  retreat  when  intended,  it 
is  worse  than  useless.  So  whatever  might  be  the  unintelligible  utterances, 
whether  an  unvernacular  language  or  the  unsyllabled  expressions  of  emotions. 
Paul  indicates  their  inadequacy  without  interpretation  to  convey  to  the  hearer 
intelligent  convictions  of  gospel  truth  (ver.  9).  3.  That  the  use  of  a  langua^-e  which 
the  listener  cannot  understand  should  not  be  indulged  in.  (1)  Not  in  public 
devotion  (vers.  14-16).  Unintelligible  utterances  in  public  devotion  fail  to  excite 
in  the  assembly  a  spirit  of  united  worship.  So  far  as  the  individual  himself  is 
concerned,  it  does  not  matter  with  what  tongue  he  speaks,  or  whetlier  he  speaks  at 
all.  (2)  Not  in  public  ministration.  Alas  !  it  is  to  be  feared  the  language  of  many 
a  sermon  is  an  "unknown  tongue."  Such  language  gratifies  the  vanity  of  the 
speaker,  but  wastes  the  time  and  tires  the  patience  of  the  hearer  (vers.  18,  19). 
The  apostle  goes  on  to  indicate  that  such  unintelligible  utterances  in  the  Church 
are— (a)  Childish  (ver.  20).  (h)  Useless  (ver.  21).  (c)  Confounding  (ver.  23).  (rf)  To 
be  of  any  service  must  be  interpreted  (vei'.  28).  {D.  Tltomas,  D.U.)  For  he  that 
speaketh  in  an  unknown  tongue. — Spealcinp  in  a  tongue  is  a  sort  of  spiritual 
soliloquy,  and  may  be  compared  with  the  unutterable  groauings  (Eom.  viii.  26,  27), 
whereby  the  Holy  Spirit  intercedes  in  the  believer's  heart.  {Prof.  Godet.)  The 
gift  of  tongues  may  be  considered  as — 1.  A  demonstration  of  Divine  power. 
2.  An  evidence  of  Divine  truth.  3.  A  gift  of  Divine  grace.  {J.  Lgth,  D.D.) 
He  that  prophesieth  speaketh  unto  men  to  edification,  and  exhortation, 
and  comfort.  —  True  preachinri : — I.  Its  design.  Edification,  &c.  II.  Its 
KEQuisiTES.  It  must  be  intelligible.  Scriptural,  &c.  III.  The  source  of  its 
POWEB.  It  is  a  gift  of  the  Spirit  who  qualifies  the  instrument,  and  applies 
the    truth.     (Ibid.)  Edification,    exhortation,    and    comfort    are    co-ordinate. 

I.  Edification  denotes  a  new  development  and  a  confirmation  of  the  faith  by 
somQ  new  view  fitted  to  strengthen  the  soul.  II.  Exhortation  denotes  an 
encouragement  addressed  to  the  will,  an  energetic  impulse  capable  of  effecting  an 
awakening  or  advancement  in  Christian  fidelity,  relating  to  love  as  the  former 
relates  to  faith.  III.  Comfort  jDoints  rather  to  hope,  Trfipni.tv9(h',  to  soothe  the 
ear  with  a  sweet  myth,  putting  pain  to  sleep,  or  reviving  hope.  {I'rif.  Godet.) 
Unedifyinrj  preachiiui : — In  the  town  of  Goslar,  in  the  Hartz  mountains,  tln-re  is  a 
fountain  in  the  principal  square.  It  is  evidently  very  ancient,  and  it  is  very 
beautiful.  There  is,  however,  one  defect  in  it.  Both  the  jets  and  the  basin  into 
which  the  water  falls  are  above  the  reach  of  any  one.  The  way  the  people  have  to 
get  the  water  from  the  fountain  is  for  each  one  to  bring  a  long  spout  or  pipe  with 
him.  This  he  puts  up  to  a  jet  and  the  water  runs  through  it  into  his  pitcher. 
It  seems  never  to  have  occurred  to  the  townspeople  that  it  would  be  a  good  thing 
to  attach  a  pipe  permanently  to  the  fountain  for  general  use.  Some  preacheis  talk 
in  so  lofty  a  style  that  their  hearers  need  to  bring  a  dictionary  with  them  if  they 
are  to  get  any  of  the  water  of  life  from  the  sermon.  They  do  not  seek  to  find 
"acceptable"  words,  hence  their  prea'hing  fails  to  edify.  He  that  speaketh  in 
an  unknown  tongue  edifieth  himself. — Private  and  imhlic  edificntion :—  Obsei  ve — 1. 
What  may  edify  one  does  not  always  edify  another.  2.  Public  worship  contem. 
plates  general  edification.  3.  What,  therefore,  only  ministers  to  private  edifica- 
tion must  give  way  for  the  benefit  of  all.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Now,  brethren,  if 
I  come  unto  you  speaking  with  tongues,  what  shall  it  profit  you  ? — A  Icuxon  for 
preachers  : — I.  The  object  of  preaching.  Not  display,  but  profit.  II.  The 
MODE  OF  PREACHING.  1.  It  supposcs  the  plain  exposition  of  Divine  truth — the  com- 
munication of  Divine  knowledge.  2.  Aims  at  edification  (ver.  3) — at  instruction 
in  righteousness.  (Ibid.)  The  gifts  of  the  Spirit  must  he  wisely  employed: — 
Observe — I.  How  they  mat  be  abused.  1.  By  display  (ver.  6).  2.  By  using 
them  to  no  purpose  (vers.  7-9).  3.  By  employing  them  under  improper  circum- 
stances (vers.   10,  11).     II.  How  they  may  be  improved — by  using  them  for  the 


CHAP.  XIV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  345 


edi6cation  of  others  (ver.  12)— which  must  be  done  intelligently  (vers.  13,  14), 
wisely  (vers.  15-17),  in  the  spirit  of  love  (vers.  18,  19).  (Ihid.)  And  even  things 
•without  life  giving  sound  .  .  ,  except  they  give  a  distinction  in  thfe  sounds, 
how  shall  it  be  known.  —  Tliree  modes  nf  preacliing  : — I.  Pkeaching  to  the  aik — 
sound  without  sense.  II.  Pheaching  to  the  nEAD-sense  without  life.  III.  Preach- 
ing TO  THE  heart— sense  and  life  :  the  thoughts  of  the  Spirit  in  easy  words. 
(Ibid.)  Ineffective    preachinq  : — I.    Its   fobjis.        When    the    preacher  —  1. 

Surpasses  the  understanding  of  liis  audience.  2.  Is  indefinite  in  his  statement  of 
truth.  3.  Is  pointless  and  unimpressive.  II.  Its  folly.  1.  It  is  a  wa.,te  of  energy. 
2.  Profits  nobody.     3.  Occasions  a  fearful  responsibility.     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  8,  9.  For  if  the  trumpet  give  an  uncertain  sound,  who  shall  prepare 
himself  to  the  battle. —  Ihicertaiv  soinids  : — There  are  many  sounds  in  nature  which 
are  uncertain  and  yet  pleasing.  The  murmur  of  the  winds  among  the  leaves  of  the 
forests  ;  the  soft,  regular  lapse  of  the  waves  on  the  sandy  shore ;  the  mar  of  Niagara, 
confused  with  the  cry  of  blended  and  intertangbd  voices,  as  though  every  particle  of 
water  in  falling  uttered  its  own  wail  of  grief  or  shout  of  exultation  or  scream  of  fear ; 
the  hum  of  insects  on  a  summer's  day ;  all  such  sounds  are  uncertain.  Yet  all  awaken 
in  us  some  feeling,  convey  some  sentiment.  The  murmuring  voices  of  nature  seem 
to  express  longing  and  aspiration  :  they  sound  almost  like  prayer  and  praise.  These 
voices  of  nature,  therefore,  though  uncertain,  are  often  full  of  expression.  But  of 
man's  voice  we  require  more.  We  ask  that  it  shall  be  distinct  and  clear;  that  it 
shall  convey  meaning ;  that  it  shall  not  darken  counsel  with  vague  utterance. 
To  speak  plainly,  distinctly,  with  precision,  is  one  of  the  tirst  accimplisliments  to 
be  studied,  and  one  of  the  last  to  be  fully  attained.  Education  begins  and  ends  in 
telling  us  how  to  express  ourselves ;  for  the  word,  in  ancient  langUMges,  means  not 
only  utterance,  but  also  the  reason  which  lies  behind  utterance.  My  friend  f/ives 
himself  to  me  in  his  speech.  If  his  speech  is  obscure,  p:n-plexed,  uncertain, 
vague,  then  he  is  not  in  it.  But  a  fulness  of  thought  and  life  makes  language 
very  clear.  That  is  why  we  like  simple,  direct,  straiglitforward  talk.  It  is  sincere, 
it  is  moral.  "  Let  your  yea  be  yea,  and  your  nay,  nay,"  says  Jesus  ;  "  for  what- 
soever is  more  than  this  cometh  of  evil."  Uncertain  sounds,  inexact  expressions, 
extravagant  utterances,  come  of  evil.  They  meiin  that  the  speaker  cares  more  for 
effect  than  for  truth.  Perhaps  the  most  uncertain  sounds  of  all  are  the  words  of  a 
politician.  Politics,  the  government  of  a  state,  the  laws  whirh  affect  a  nation, 
ou^ht  to  be  the  most  elevating  of  pursuits.  But  it  is  like  religion  or  art  or  |  oetiy. 
They  ennoble  those  who  give  themselves  to  them  with  sincerity  and  love;  but 
make  a  trade  of  them,  and  they  degrade  to  the  utmost.  Make  a  trjide  of  religion, 
and  you  become  a  hypocrite.  Make  a  trade  of  art,  and  you  become  a  charlatan. 
One  of  the  remarkable  exploits  of  Abiabam  Linculn  was  that  he  expresseii  hmi- 
self  so  as  to  be  understood.  His  healthy  Saxon  En-lish  dispelled  the  miasma  of 
falsehood  which  hung  over  Washington.  "  And  one  of  Plutarch's  men  talked  with 
you,  face  to  face."  A  clear,  distinct  meaning  is  so  important  in  a  speaker  that  it 
is  of  itself  almost  enough.  An  audience  will  listen  very  willingly  to  a  man  who 
makes  himself  perfectly  plain,  even  if  he  does  nothing  else.  He  need  not  be 
rhetorical,  he  need  use  no  figures  of  spf  ech,  no  captivating  oratorical  arts ;  he 
need  not  be  original  or  profound.  Let  him  only  be  clear — thMt  of  itself  is  satis- 
factory. In  religion,  especially,  we  want  no  uncertain  sounds.  What  all  men 
need,  what  all  men  long  for,  is  certainty.  We  need  to  know  ;  not  merely  to 
speculate,  not  merely  to  think,  to  hope,  to  wish,  to  fancy  ;  we  need  to  know.  Now 
the  difference  between  Christianity  and  speculation  is  simply  this — that  speculation, 
by  its  very  nature,  gives  an  uncertain  sound;  but  Christianity  gives  certainty. 
Speculation  gives  us  thoughts  about  God,  Christianity  cives  us  the  iaiowledge  of 
God.  I  once  read  a  lecture  by  an  able  writer,  in  which  Christ  and  Socrates  were 
compared,  rather  to  the  disadvantage  of  the  former.  Socrates  was  eonsideied  to 
be,  on  the  whole,  rather  the  stronger  and  more  manly  person  of  the  two.  But,  if 
so,  why  did  he  not  do  more?  Socrates  produced  a  school  in  philosophy;  Christ 
makes  a  religion  for  mankind.  One  gave  thought,  the  other  life.  I  he  li^e  of 
Socrates  is  known  to  a  few  scholars,  the  life  of  Jesus  is  known  to  millions.  The 
words  of  Jesus  bring  strength,  cumfurt,  purity,  peace;  not  to  students  only,  but 
to  the  ignorant,  the  lowly,  the  fallen,  the  desolate.  Why  this  immense  difference 
in  the  work  of  the  two  teachers?  Because  the  words  of  the  one  give  an  uncertain 
sound,  those  of  the  other  a  certain  sound.  One  teaches  us  how  to  speculate,  to 
conjecture,  and  to  think  about  the  realities  of  eternity ;  the  other  lets  us  look  into 


346  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi?. 

the  realities  themselves,  face  to  face.  StriKing  opinions,  noble  speculations,  came 
by  Socrates,  but  truth  itself  came  by  Jesus  Christ.  The  power — the  undying 
power — of  Christianity  is  that  it  is  everywhere  a  new  revelation  of  the  eternal 
truth  and  love  of  God ;  that  it  continually  makes  souls  alive ;  that  it  continually 
renews  itself  in  renewed  souls.  Therefore  it  can  never  grow  old,  any  more  thnn 
birth,  marriage,  death,  love,  can  grow  old.  These  have  been  in  the  world  since  the 
beginning,  but  they  always  come  as  new  as  at  first.  And  Christianity,  appealing 
ever  to  new  hearts,  reforming  manners,  curing  sinners,  saving  the  lost,  ivindling 
the  soul  with  faith,  hope,  and  love,  is  the  one  certain  sound  in  the  world,  never 
vague,  never  confused.  Theology  is  uncertain  ;  speculation  is  uncertain ;  creeds 
are  uncertain  ;  but  Christianity  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.  [Jas. 
Freeman   Clarice.)  The  ministerial    truvipet   giving    an  uncertain  sound  : — I. 

The  *'  BATTLE."  In  every  battle  you  must  suppose  two  parties.  Ever  since 
the  fall  there  always  have  been  two  parties.  In  the  first  family  Cain  was  on  the 
one  side  and  Abel  on  the  other.  And  so  it  was  after  the  flood— it  was  so  in  the 
patriarchial  ages,  the  Mosaical  dispensation,  and  when  Christ  appealed  on  the 
earth,  and  up  to  this  very  moment.  Sometimes  efforts  are  made  to  multiply  these 
divisions — the  righteous  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  wicked  on  the  other,  with 
different  gradations.  But  the  lip  of  truth  says,  "He  that  is  not  with  Me  is 
against  Me."  "  Ye  cannot  serve  God  and  mammon."  Tliere  are  but  two  parties — 
the  people  of  God  and  the  people  against  God  and  with  the  devil.  The  two 
armies  are  in  combat.  What  constitutes  the  sorest  point  is  this — they  have 
separate  interests,  feelings,  hopes,  ambitious.  The  grand  intetest  of  the 
people  of  God  is  the  glory  of  their  Eedeemer  in  the  salvation  of  their  souls ;  the 
other  party  are  for  their  own  glory.  One  man  belongs  to  the  party  because  he 
loves  pleasure,  another  man  because  he  loves  power  and  influence,  another  because 
he  loves  money,  another  because  he  is  the  slave  of  some  lust.  But,  however 
these  regiments  have  a  little  distinction  in  their  facings,  they  have  but  one  heart, 
one  spirit,  one  interest!  2.  Some  people  say,  "There  is  no  need  of  a  battle. 
Cannot  the  irreligious  and  the  people  of  God  go  on  comfortably  and  happy,  and  let 
each  otlier  alone?  "  No;  the  people  of  God  must  beseech  all  those  wlio  are  not 
His  people  "  to  be  reconciled  to  God."  The  great  commander  on  one  side  is 
Christ,  and  on  the  other  the  devil ;  but  let  the  hordes  of  Satan  do  their  best,  Christ 
must  conquer.  II.  The  meaning  of  the  sextence,  "If  the  trumpet  give  an 
UNCERTAIN  SOUND."  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  "  trumpet  "  means  the  gospel 
ministry.  The  gospel  minister  is  to  warn  men  lest  they  peril  and  eventually  ruin 
their  souls,  and  to  press  them  to  secure  the  eternal  happiness  which  is  offered 
them,  drawing  the  telling  conclusion,  "  What  shall  it  profit  a  man  if  he  gain  the 
■whole  world  and  lose  his  own  soul?"  But  the  blessed  trumpet  is  not  (Saly  a 
trumpet  of  warning,  but  is  a  trumpet  of  welcome  to  Calvary's  cross,  to  the 
fountain  for  sin  and  all  uncleanness.  The  trumpet  gives  an  "  uncertain  sound," 
therefore,  if  it  does  not  state — 1.  Man's  entire  inahility.  2.  Completely  and  fully 
the  work  of  Christ.  3.  The  holiness  of  the  gospel.  4.  If  things  of  confessedly 
minor  importance.  Church  government,  discipline,  &c.,  have  an  undue  importance.  . 
{H.  Alton,  D.D.)  The  icortJile^sness  of  mere  sounds,  apart  from  their  meaning  : — 
The  apostle  speaks  of  the  lute,  the  harp,  the  trumpet.  Concerning  this  last 
instrument  it  was  most  of  all  important  that  the  meaning  of  its  ti>nes  should 
be  understood.  For  now,  just  as  the  trumpet  had  its  special  fumtion  in 
pealing  forth  distinct,  definite  sounds,  so  all  things  in  the  economy  of  nature, 
of  human  life,  and  of  Christian  life,  have  their  precise  and  exact  function, 
on  the  right  discharge  of  which  vast  results — results  often  comparable  to 
those  of  a  gigantic  war — are  depending.  I.  The  principle  here  indicated. 
It  is  not  far  to  seek — 1.  In  what  we  may  term  our  a  priori  aigument, 
concerning  a  Divinely  ordered  universe.  Since  all  events  are  related  to  each 
other  in  the  mighty  chain  of  cause  and  effect,  we  should  expect  that  the 
failure  of  any  link  would  involve  disastrous  results.  There  ar^  many  voices 
in  nature — every  law  is  a  voice — and  none  of  them  is  without  signifi- 
cation. Uncertainty  in  the  sound  of  any  of  them  would  be  scarcely  less  evil 
than  silence.  So,  too,  with  every  atom  and  every  event,  as  well  as  every  law. 
2.  In  the  history  of  human  affairs.  On  every  hand,  in  our  march  along  the  great 
highways  of  time,  or  our  research  in  its  quieter  by-ways,  we  confront  instances  of 
the  momentousness  of  a  right  fulfilment  by  the  man,  or  the  institution,  or  the 
nation,  of  the  precise  mission  devolving  on  such  man,  or  institution,  or  nation. 
An  uncertain  sound  at  some  given  epoch,  and  the  course  of  all  succeeding  history. 


CHAP,  xrv.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  347 

would  have  been  changed.  II.  Some  practical  appijcations  of  this  principle. 
It  is  true  in  regard — 1.  To  the  discharge  of  Cliristinn  activities.  There  are 
multiform  methods  of  pbilanthropic  activity  ;  never  so  many  as  to-day.  Each  one 
of  us  has  his  special  adaptation  for  the  use  of  such  methods,  jast  as  each  method 
has  its  peculiar  adaptation  to  some  need.  If  those  who  are  qualified  to  teach,  do 
not  instruct ;  to  console,  do  not  comfort ;  to  contrive,  do  not  organise,  who  shall  ? 
Some  tone  on  the  trumpet  of  truth  depends  on  you.  If  you  refrain,  or  hesitate, 
or  yield  uncertain  sounds,  who  shall  prepare  for  the  day  of  battle?  2.  To  Chris- 
tian giving.  The  gold,  the  silver,  the  cupper  has  to  be  given,  each  metal,  as  it 
were,  making  its  own  music.  Withbold  just  what,  by  claim  and  capacity,  you 
ought  to  have  given,  and  there  is  an  uncertain  sound,  and  that  uncertain  sound 
mciins  beggary  here,  discouragement  yonder,  and  hopeless  inanition  elsewhere. 
Nay,  the  very  spirit  of  the  giving  may  make  all  the  difference,  for  is  not  the 
Bounding  brass  and  tinkling  cymbal^which  is  gift  without  love — an  uncertain 
sound  ?  3.  To  prayers.  Who  can  tell  the  mischief  of  uncertain  sounds  here  in  a 
region  where  Moses  and  Elijah  were  so  mighty?  4.  Of  every  life.  Each  life  is 
trumpet-tongued  with  the  message  of  truth  or  error,  good  or  ill.  Silence  is 
impossible.  Uncertainty  is  failuie,  for  it  misleads  and  bewilders.  Minister, 
parent,  teacher,  if  your  life  gives  an  uncertain  sound  who  sliall  prepare  your  people, 
your  family,  your  class  for  battle? — the  battle  for  which  music  prej^ares,  and 
which  will  be  succeeded  by  yet  nobler  and  sweeter  music.  As  Bishop  Webb 
says,  "  You  are  yourself ;  none  of  you  are  like  your  fellows.  And  you  are  what 
you  are  by  God's  ai^angrment,  because  you  Lave  a  certain  part  to  play  in  God'a 
providence,  in  the  history  of  the  world,  and  the  development  of  the  body  of  Christ. 
God  the  Holy  Ghost  is  brooding  over  you  as  the  great  musician.  He  can  biing  out 
the  music  that  is  wanted.  He  can  enable  you  to  furnish  some  strain  that  would 
be  lacMng  in  the  ears  of  God  if  you  did  not  bring  it,  if  you  did  not  strike  your 
string,   nor  touch    your  key."      {U.   E.  Thomas.)  Thi'.   responsihilitu    of   the 

pulpit : — I.  Its  PowijR.  1.  To  warn.  2.  Arouse.  3.  Direct.  4.  Encourage. 
II.  Its  iNEFFiciEXcy.  No  certain  sound  through  want  of — 1.  Plainness.  2. 
Clearness.  3.  Point.  4.  Spiritual  power.  III.  Disastrous  result.  1.  None 
pr^■pares.  2.  Destruction  comes.  3.  The  unfaithful  watchman  must  bear  the 
responsibility.  (J.  Lyth,  D.I).)  So  likewise  ye,  except  ye  utter  by  the 
tongue  words  easy  to  be  understood,  how  shall  it  toe  known  what  is  spoken  t 
— riain  pvinchinrj : — I.  What  it  ijiilies.  1.  Not  vulgarity.  2.  But  a  plain 
statement  of  the  truth  in  easy  words.  II.  Its  necessity.  1.  Many  are  very 
ignorant.  2.  Some  will  not  take  the  trouble  to  understand  what  costs  tliem  effurt. 
3.  All  are  more  accessible  to  plain  truth.  4.  God  will  have  all  the  glory.  III. 
Its  importance.  1.  Souls  imperilled.  2.  The  preacher  incurs  a  tremendous 
responsibility.      (Ibid.)  Need  of  plain    preaching : — A    lai'y    went    one    day 

to  hear  Dr. preach,  and,  as  usual,  carried  a  pocket  Bible  with  her  that 

she  might  turn  to  any  of  the  passages  the  preacher  might  happen  to  refer  to. 
But  she  found  that  she  had  no  use  for  the  Bible  then,  and  on  coming  away  said  to 
a  friend,  "  I  should  have  left  my  Bible  at  home  to-day,  and  have  brought  my 
dictionary  ;  the  doctor  does  not  deal  in  Scripture,  but  in  such  learned  words  and 
phrases  as  require  the  help  of  an  interpreter  to  render  them  intelligible."  (J.  C.  Crai/.} 
Siniplicitij  in  preaching  : — Whenever  Arcbbishop  Whately  came  to  preach  at  the 
chapel  of  the  i-astle  it  was  observed  that  a  rough  private  soldier  was  always  in  his 
place,  mouth  open,  as  if  in  sympathy  with  his  ears.  Some  of  the  gentlemen  playfully 
took  him  to  ta^k  for  it,  sui:)posing  it  was  due  to  the  usual  vulgar  admiration  of  a 
celebrity.  But  the  man  had  a  better  reason,  and  was  aide  to  give  it.  He  said, 
"That  isn't  it  at  all.  The  archbishop  is  easy  to  understand;  there  are  no  fine 
words  in  him.  A  fellow  like  me,  now,  can  follow  along  and  take  every  bit  of  it  in."^ 
{Sir  Arthur  Helps.) 

Vers.  10,  11.  There  are  .  .  .  voices  .  .  ,  and  none  of  them  is  without  significa- 
tion.—  Voices : — 1.  It  does  not  follow  that  because  the  voice  has  no  meaning  for 
you  that  therefore  it  has  no  meaning  for  others.  I  heard  some  splendid  music 
the  other  day,  and  a  friend  exclaimed,  "What  tenderness,  what  pathos  is  in  it." 
John  Stuart  Mill  said  that  the  first  meaning  of  Wordsworth's  poetry  was  a  new 
birth  to  him  ;  he  felt  himself  a  better  man.  Maurice  often  talked  in  an  unknown 
tongue  once  ;  people  understand  him  now.  You  may  read  a  chapter  of  Christian 
experience  and  it  may  be  in  an  unknown  tongue  to  you.  2.  But  the  dilKculty  will 
be  to  reduce  wliat  you  have  seen  and  heard  into  intelligible  speech  that  will  edifj 


348  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 


others.  A  yonng  person  is  asked  to  sing,  and  she  dashes  at  once  into  a  French 
or  German  song.  What  affectation  it  is  when  there  are  troops  of  English  songs 
with  the  sweet  pathos  of  English  traditions  in  them.  There  are  artists  a  great 
deal  more  silly.  Their  chief  pride  is  that  they  don't  edify.  Many  words  might  be 
spoken  in  praise  of  the  noble  address  from  the  chair  of  the  British  Association ; 
but  I  give  the  highest  praise  when  I  say  you  can  understand  it.  The  best  part  of 
your  creed  is  what  you  can  put  into  a  little  child's  mouth.  If  you  want  to  know 
what  the  essence  of  the  gosjiel  is,  take  a  little  boy  of  eight  between  your  knees  and 
tell  him  the  gospel,  and  what  you  can  make  him  understand  is  its  pith  and  essence. 
3.  There  ai'e  vs\»ny  voices  in  the  world,  and  our  business  is  to  try  to  discover  their 
significance.  There  are  voices  which  are  transitory,  which  speak  to  one  generation 
and  then  cease.  They  startle  one,  and  then  are  heard  no  more,  like  the  rousing 
proclamation  of  some  half-foi gotten  truth  or  a  wail  of  consternation  at  the 
spiritual  condition  of  England.  But  some  voices  speak  on  for  age  and  age,  and 
uninterruptedly.  I.  The  voice  of  the  material  creation.  For  its  scientific  or 
philosopliical  signification.  You  must  listen  to  the  scientific  report  of  the  year. 
What  is  its  spiritual  signification  ?  What  is  there  to  be  converted  into  fuel  that 
can  feed  our  faith  and  enlarge  our  hope?  The  material  world  is  the  revelation  of 
the  Divine  intellect  and  heart.  What  do  we  find  in  this  material  creation  that 
sends  a  message  to  our  spiritual  nature  which  may  be  converted  into  fuel  for  our 
faith  ?  I  think  it  is  this :  You  can  always  calculate  upon  God.  God  has  always 
known  His  own  mind.  He  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.  Think  of 
the  value  of  that  in  your  religious  life.  The  first  instinct  of  your  religions  life  is 
to  have  unchanging  things.  We  have  said  hard  things  about  Nature.  We  have 
called  her  blind  and  pitiless.  There  can  be  not  the  slightest  divergence  from  her 
path.  Every  heart  in  this  creation  may  break,  but  the  earth  will  still  go  on.  But 
there  is  another  side  to  that.  You  can  calculate  always  upon  God,  He  will  never 
disappoint  you.  All  of  our  life  would  break  out  into  panic  if  there  were  any 
disorganisation  of  the  laws  of  nature  of  which  we  complain  sometimes.  The 
farmer  knows  that  the  seasons  will  come  round,  and  the  mariner  goes  out  to 
sea  without  fear.  If  you  care  to  meet  God  this  morning,  there  can  be  no  doubt  as 
to  irhere  to  meet  Him.  There  is  a  certninty  with  regard  to  God  and  our  souls 
which  we  cannot  have  with  regard  to  anything  else.  Take  any  promise  in  His 
Word.  "  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  ai-e  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give 
you  rest."  He  has  never  moved  away  from  that.  If  you  put  your  life  and  the 
lives  of  your  rhiklren  in  God's  path  every  morning,  you  may  be  perfectly  sure  that 
He  will  pass  that  way.  The  Church  oftentime  feels  that  the  paralysis  is  creeping 
over  her  and  that  she  cin  do  nothing.  You  are  not  content  with  things  as  they 
are.  You  want  a  re-vi-val,  a  re-consecration,  are-awakening,  a  fresh  joy  in  the 
gospel  of  Christ,  and  a  fresh  equipment  for  service.  We  can  have  it  without  any 
uncertainty ;  we  have  as  a  Church  only  to  place  ourselves  in  God's  way.  We  have 
only  to  get  out  of  the  things  He  hates,  to  redouble  our  energies  in  the  Sunday 
school,  and  among  the  erring.  I  have  seen,  when  the  heavens  said  there  was  a  great 
shower  coming,  the  housewife  put  out  every  vessel  to  catch  the  rain.  You  must 
range  every  faculty  you  possess  at  God's  disposal.  Be  reaiiy !  God  will  not 
disappoint  you.  If  the  channels  are  doubled  the  rain  is  sure  to  come.'  II.  The 
VOICES  IN  YOUR  OWN  SOULS.  Thesc  are  of  two  kinds.  There  are  the  imperative 
voices.  Then  there  are  the  pathetic  voices.  George  Eliot  said,  "  See  if  the  sigh 
does  not  discover  Him  who  touched  the  heart  into  a  sigh."  What  a  chapter  it 
would  be  if  every  one  in  this  congregation  were  this  morning  to  write  out  one  of 
his  sorest  needs.  We  need  a  living  God,  we  need  the  grasp  of  His  hand,  we  need 
heaven  !  We  want  to  be  forgiven ;  we  want  home.  We  have  loved  and  lost.  And 
oh,  the  unspeakable  blessedness  of  the  voice  of  our  need  in  prayer.  I  have  cried, 
"Father,  I  am  sad,  I  am  lonely."  And  a  voice  has  come  into  my  soul,  saying, 
"Fear  not;  I  am  with  thee."  '  You  may  pile  the  scepticism  of  the  world  then,  but 
it  takes  nothing  of  this  from  me.  And  this  is  the  significance  of  our  nted.  I 
have  read  a  very  wonderful  book,  written  by  a  man  who  sums  up  the  arguments  in 
this  way  :  thfre  is  as  much  to  be  said  for  the  existence  of  God  as  there  is  to  be  said 
against  it,  and  rice  ren^a.  If  this  were  so  it  is  enough  for  me.  If  the  arguments 
for  or  against  the  existence  of  God  were  so  equally  balanced,  my  necessities  and 
needs  would  weigh  the  balance  down.  {Morlais  Jones.)  A  preacher  should  stiuhj 
plain  language : — I.  Language  is  designed  as  the  vehicle  of  thought.  1.  Many 
languages.  2.  All  significant.  II.  Language  ceases  to  be  the  medium  of  thought 
WHEN  NOT  understood.     There  is — 1.  No  instruction.     2.  No  sympathy  of  mind. 


CHAP,  xrv.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  34* 

3.  No  edification.  III.  Plainness  should  therefobe  be  studied — 1.  As  the  most 
excellent  of  gifts.  2.  For  the  benefit  of  the  Church.  With  much  prayer.  (J. 
Lyth,  B.I).)  The  diversity  of  human  lanpuage: — Consider — 1.  Language  as  the 
vehicle  of  thought.  2.  Its  extraordinary  variety.  3.  The  cause.  4.  Its  effect 
upon  the  condition  of  mankind — social  and  moral.  5.  Its  gradual  alleviation.  6. 
Its  final  removal.  {Ibid.)  Sweetiies.<i  of  voice: — There  is  no  power  of  love  so 
hard  to  get  and  keep,  writes  Elihu  Burritt,  a«  a  kind  vuice.  A  kind  hand  is  dead 
and  dumb.  It  may  be  rough  in  flesh  and  blood,  yet  do  the  woik  of  a  soft  heart, 
and  do  it  with  a  soft  touch.  But  there  is  no  one  thing  which  love  so  much  needs 
as  a  sweet  voice,  to  tell  what  it  means  and  feels  ;  and  it  is  hard  to  get  and  keep  in 
the  right  tone.  One  must  start  in  youth,  and  be  on  the  watch  night  and  day,  at 
work  and  at  play,  to  get  and  keep  a  voice  which  shall  speak  at  all  times  the 
thoughts  of  a  kind  heart.  It  is  often  in  youth  that  one  gets  a  voice  or  tone  which 
is  shwrp,  and  it  sticks  to  him  through  life,  and  it  stirs  up  ill-will,  and  falls  like  a 
drop  of  gall  upon  the  sweet  joys  of  home.  Watch  the  voice  day  by  day  as  a  pearl 
of  great  price,  for  it  will  be  worth  more  to  you  in  the  days  to  come  than  the  best 
pear]  hid  in  the  sea.  A  kind  voice  is  to  the  heart  what  light  is  to  the  eye.  It  is 
a  light  which  sings  as  well  as  shines. 

Vers.  12-14.  As  ye  are  zealous  of  spiritual  gifts,  seek  that  ye  may  excel  to 
the  e:lifying  of  the  Church. — Kdijicntioii  consists  both  in  building  up  from  first 
principles  to  theii  practical  application,  and  of  fitting  each  member  of  the  society 
into  the  proper  places  which  the  growth  and  rise  of  the  old  building  require.  It  is 
"  development,"  not  only  in  the  sense  of  unfolding  new  truth,  but  of  unfolding  all 
the  resources  contained  in  the  existing  institution  or  body.  Hence  the  stress  laid 
on  the  excellence  of  "  prnphosying  "  as  the  special  gift  by  which  men  were  led  to 
know  th(m5^1ves  (vers.  24,  25),  and  by  which  (as  throuL-h  the  prophets  of  the  older 
dispens  .(ions)  higher  and  more  spiritual  views  of  life  were  gradually  revealed. 
Hence  thn  repented  injunctions  that  all  the  gifts  should  have  their  proper  honour 
(chap.  xii.  20-30)  ;  that  those  gifts  should  be  most  honoured  by  which  not  a  few, 
but  all,  sliould  benefit  (vers.  1-23);  that  a'l  who  had  the  gift  of  prophecy  sbould 
have  the  opportunity  of  exeicising  that  gift  (vers.  29-31);  that  all  might  have  an 
equal  chance  of  instruction  and  comfort  for  their  own  special  cases  (ver.  40). 
{De/in  Staidei/.)  Doing  one's  best  at  the  best  tiling: — I.  In  doing  our  best  we 
MUST  have  the  best  THING  TO  WORK  AT.  Industry,  concentration,  perseverance,  &c., 
should  not  be  wasted  on  inferior  aims.  Steel  may  be  sharpened  into  tools  for 
making  tMldes  anil  chairs,  and  into  weapons  of  war.  1.  Rivalry  is  condemned  by 
the  very  illustration.  When  rivalry  comes  in  at  the  door,  Christianity  flies  out  at 
tbe  window.  Tbere  can  be  no  rivah'y  between  the  man  who  shapes  the  stones  and 
him  who  makes  them  iuto  a  wall ;  no  rivalry  between  him  who  works  in  stone  and 
him  who  works  in  wood.  2.  But  absence  of  rivalry  is  not  enough.  Co-oppration 
must  be  added.  A  house  can  onlj'  be  built  by  several  men  each  working  according 
to  his  own  particular  handicraft.  He  who  comprehends  that  his  powers  were  given 
him  in  order  to  make  his  contribution  to  a  far  larger  whole,  is  the  man  who  will 
find  all  things  marvellously  working  together  with  him.  Lubricating  influences 
pour  in  from  everywhere.  Friction  diminishes.  3.  The  method  of  successful 
CO  operation  pointed  out.  It  is  not  a  Tower  of  Babel  which  we  work  at;  but  the 
Chuieh  of  Chiist,  an  institution  which  is  for  the  highest  good  of  everybody  in  the 
worlil.  What  can  be  more  dreadful  than  that  a  Christian  should  use  his  place  in 
the  Chiis'ian  company  for  Felf-aggraudisf-ment ?  Some  of  the  Christians  in 
Corinth  were  acting  as  if  a  man  employed  to  put  up  tlie  walls  of  a  building  in  which 
lie  and  all  the  other  workmen  should  afterwards  dwell  and  be  fed  and  clothed  at 
the  employer's  exppnse  were  to  take  the  stones  away  and  try  to  put  up  a  little 
private  and  unsocial  house  of  his  own.  If  we  try  to  use  Christ  for  worldly  ends  we 
are  bound  to  fail ;  if  we  tiy  rather  to  use  the  world  for  Christ  we  are  bound  to 
succeed.  Let  the  perishing  praise  Ihe  perishing;  we  work,  however  obscurely,  at 
a  building  that  will  endure  when  all  Paiiel  fabrics  are  in  ruins.  II.  Having  the 
BEST  thing  to  WORK  AT,  WE  MUST  DO  OUR  BEST.  That  Jcsus  who  Condemns  rivalry, 
equally  condemns  indifference  to  excellence.  That  is  a  poor  soit  of  contentment 
which  has  not  some  noble  and  elevating  element  mixed  up  with  it.  We  are  bound 
to  be  as  g  'od  as  we  can  be.  We  must  not  creep  and  loiter  in  the  way  of  holy 
service.  God's  building:  goes  on  so  slowly,  and  seems  as  yet  so  little  moie  than  a 
neighbourhood  of  fragments,  just  because  the  building  is  crowded  up  from  age  to 
age  with  loiterers  and  ornamental  people.     Their  names  are  down  in  the  list  of 


350  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

workmen,  but  tlipy  do  little  or  nothing.  Indeed  who  is  there  that  does  anything 
like  what  he  oii^'ht  to  do  ?     (D.  Young,  B.A.) 

Ver.  15.  I  will  pray  with  the  spirit  and  .  .  .  with  the  understanding  also. — 

Prayer: — I.  The  wokk  and  business  of  prayer.  1.  Its  object.  2.  Its  several 
parts.  It  may  be  considered  as  either—  (1)  Mental  or  vocal.  ("2)  Private  or  public. 
(3)  Ordinary  or  extraordinary.  II.  Tiik  manner  in  which  the  apostle  was  besirous 
OF  PERFOEJiiNG  THIS  DUTT.  1.  With  the  Spirit.  2.  With  the  understanding. 
Application  :  1.  It  is  good  for  the  saints  to  draw  near  to  God.  2.  The  believer 
has  the  utmost  encouragement  for  this  work.  (J.  Gill,  D.D.)  I'rayer  with  the 
understanding  : — Tbere  are  two  classi  s  of  men,  the  men  of  fire  and  tlie  men  of 
calculation.  The  former  seem  to  shake  the  world's  dust  off  tlieir  f<  et,  and  to  move 
towards  heaven.  All  the  little  cares  and  troubhs  of  this  world  are  forgotten  in  the 
brilliancy  of  the  ascent.  The  latter  class  are  always  considering  what  will  be  the 
best  thing  to  do  or  say  so  as  to  make  both  ends  meet  in  the  present  s.\stem  of 
things.  Paul  combines  both.  He  brings  down  tlie  wings  of  pra.\er  to  the  level  of 
the  common  understanding.  He  refuses  to  allow  that  mighty  bird  of  Paradise  to 
soar  beyond  the  limit  of  common  sense.  His  combination  of  fire  and  prudence  is 
the  most  wonderful  tiling  in  literature.  There  are  three  senses  in  which  prayer 
is  limited  by  the  understanding.  I.  No  peayeb  should  ever  be  utteeicd  as  an 
experimental  test  OF  TRUTH.  We  have  no  riglit  to  make  God  a  magLuan.  The 
mills  of  God  grind  silently  as  well  as  slowly.  Even  when  experimental  prayers  are 
offered  by  good  people  they  are  wrong.  What  if  Elijah's  saciifice  had  not  been 
consumed  by  fire?  Would  that  have  proved  that  there  was  no  God?  I  decline 
all  tests,  and  am  content  to  await  the  slow  grinding  of  the  mills  of  God.  They  will 
grind  out  the  pure  corn,  which  will  prove  in  the  end  to  be  the  old  corn  of  the  land, 

II.    No    prayer    SHOULD    ASK    FOR   A   VIOLATION    OF  MORAL    LAW,  FOR  THAT  wniCII  WOULD 

HURT  ANOTHER.  I  do  uot  say  of  physical  law,  for  we  do  not  know  what  physical 
law  is.  I  have  often  thought  how  it  would  be  if  there  existed  an  island  of  blind 
men,  say  if  the  island  of  Bute  were  inhabited  by  men,  women,  and  children  who 
had  never  seen.  What  would  be  the  relation  of  these  people  to  the  mainland  ?  I 
suspect  there  would  be  three  classes  there— believers,  agnostics,  and  unbelievers. 
The  believer  would  sny,  "  I  heard  a  bird  come  in  last  night,  and  it  must  have  come 
from  somewhere."  The  agnostic  would  say,  "But perhaps  it  belonged  to  our  own 
shores,  and  had  left  us  for  a  while."  But  whether  these  blind  men  believel.  or 
whetlier  they  believed  not,  the  shore  would  stand  firm,  having  tliis  to  its  seal,  the 
Lord  knoweth  tlie  hills  of  Argyll  hire.  We  need  not  fear  physicnl  law;  it  is 
moral  law  we  have  to  do  with.  When  you  ask  any  joy  that  cannot  be  shared  by 
another,  draw  back  from  the  door  of  prayer.  Thou  white- winged  bird  of  prayer,  I 
will  not  let  thee  fly  whithersoever  thou  wilt.  Thou  shalt  not  liy  over  my  br<itiier's 
ground,  not  though  thy  soaring  be  up  to  the  clouds  of  God.  III.  No  prayer  should 
EVER  be  uttered  WITHOUT  THE  USE  OF  MEANS.  My  experience  is  that  God  never 
comes  exc'pt  through  a  chariot,  tliat  is,  except  through  means.  The  prayer  for 
strength  is  answered  by  a  kind  word  from  a  human  friend,  or  it  may  be  by  a  dumb 
agency,  by  a  light  from  the  Pentland  Hills  or  by  a  wind  changing  suddenly  to 
mildness.  We  say  we  are  uplifted  by  the  weather.  No,  it  is  God's  Spirit  that  has 
entered  in,  and  brought  the  Balm  of  Gilead  and  the  Bright  and  Morning  Star. 
God  works  through  sacrainents,  and  through  the  vicarious  sacraments  of  human 
souls.  Still  He  works  in  our  Galileos,  and  our  prayers  are  answered  not  directly, 
but  through  the  ministry  of  the  angels.  Do  you  ask  me  to  give  you  a  prayer  that 
will  stand  all  tests  in  these  days  of  science,  one  that  will  never  be  superannuated 
though  the  eartb  be  removed,  and  thongh  the  moui'tains  be  cairied  into  the  midst 
of  the  seas?  The  GethseniHue  prayer  of  our  Lord  is  such  a  prayer.  I^et  us  make 
it  our  own,  and  the  pr^iyer  of  our  spirit  shall  be  the  prayer  of  our  understanding  also. 
(G.  Matheson,  D.D.)  How  are  we  to  jn'oy  arigitt  ? — We  have  chosen  the  language  of 
the  text  US  fitted  to  lead  our  attention  to  t  a  o  distinct  objects,  both  of  the  greatest  im- 
portiince  in  reference  to  prayer,  viz.,  that  Divine  influence  by  which  it  i-s  directed  and 
rendered  effectual  to  its  end,  and  that  correspondent  exercise  of  our  own  faculties 
necessary  to  our  avaiUng  oursflves  fully  of  the  assistance  thus  afforded — "  praying 
with  the  Spirit,  and  praying  with  the  understanding  also."  To  perceive  the  full  force  of 
the  text,  it  is  essential  to  glance  at  its  original  reference.  The  ap  istle  is  here  speakii'g 
of  those  miraculous  gifts  which  were,  at  tliat  period,  bf-stowed  so  extensively  upi'ii 
the  Church.  Those  gifts  were  various,  and  were  all  indications  of  the  imine'liate 
operation  of  the  hand  of  God.     Some  v.-ere  qualified  to  impress  one  order  of  minds, 


CHAP.  XIV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  351 

some  another.  Some  were  for  signs  to  the  infidel  world  around  ;  some  for  con- 
firmation and  improvement  to  the  Ijelievers  themselves.  Amongst  this  last  class  one 
of  the  most  striking  and  peculiar  was  the  gift  of  tongues,  the  wonderful  power  of 
speaking,  in  a  moment,  languages  before  unknown.  Connected  with  the  gift  of 
tongues  was  certainly,  in  many  cases,  that  of  immediate  inspiration — the  know- 
ledge of  things  eittier  future  or  otherwise  beyond  the  thought  and  cognisance  of  the 
individual  ;  and  it  would  seem  that,  when  speaking  in  a  foreign  tongue  thus 
miraculously  imparted,  the  thoughts  of  the  Chiistiau  preacher  were  much  less 
under  his  personal  and  private  control  than  when  addressing  those  around  him  in 
his  own  language.  He  had  surrendered  himself,  so  to  speak,  to  the  immediate  and 
•exclusive  guidance  of  the  inspiring  Spirit.  A  gift  of  such  a  nature  would  be  especially 
liable  to  abuse.  Not  only  from  ostentation,  and  as  it  was  an  evidence  of  superiority 
or  an  accredited  testimonial  of  oflice,  but  from  other  causes  also,  connected  with 
the  impertVciion  of  human  nature,  there  would  be  much  danger  of  its  undue  and 
unprotitable  disp'ay.  In  opposition  to  this  great  abuse,  the  apostle,  writing  to  the 
Corinthians,  amongst  whom,  from  various  causes,  it  seems  to  have  been  previously 
prevalent,  declares  that  though  he  was  endowed  beyond  all  others  with  this  miracu- 
lous gift,  he  would  "  rather  speak  five  words  with  my  understanding,  that  I  might 
teach  otliers  also,  thnn  ten  thousand  in  an  unknown  tongue."  The  one  of  these  things 
he  calls  speaking  with  the  Spirit,  the  other  with  the  understanding.  I  need  scarcely 
rem^irk  that  the  age  of  inspiration  is  past,  and  the  wonderful  gift  we  have  been 
considering  is  bestowed  no  more  upon  the  Church.     I.  We  come,  then,  to  describe 

THE    MEANIXG  AND  NECESSITY    OF    "PRAYING    WITH    THE    SpIRIT  "— that  is,  aS    WC  have 

endeavoured  to  express  it,  of  cherishing  an  entire  dependence  on  the  grace  and 
sacred  operations  of  this  Divine  agent  in  all  our  addresses  at  the  throne  of  mercy. 
The  necessity  of  this  dependenre  is  a  topic  on  which  we  must  not  enlarge;  it  is 
universally  known  and  admitted  by  all  men  of  piety.  All  the  order  and  propriety 
of  language  and  all  the  appropriateness  of  the  most  accurate  and  solemn  petitions 
will,  as  tbey  at  once  perceive,  avail  nothing  wittiout  this  influence.  What  is  it, 
then,  to  pray  with  the  Spirit?  We  answer,  while  it  is  certainly  to  model  our 
devotions  in  all  things  in  such  a  manner  as  to  indicate  our  humble  dependence  on 
a  Divine  agency,  it  is  especially  to  have  that  state  of  heart  and  those  feelings  of 
piety  and  ardour  and  spirituality  which  such  agency  must  ever  be  qualified  to 
produce.  The  great  cliaracteristic  of  the  exercise  will  ^srobably  be  fervour  and 
earnestness  in  aslcing  for  those  things  wlii(h  may  most  conduce  to  the  increase  of 
our  Chiistian  purity  and  to  our  performance  of  all  the  will  of  God.  We  cannot 
suppose  tiiat  a  man  under  the  immediate  band  of  the  living  Spirit  of  God  can 
be  cold  and  languid  in  his  devotions.  He  that  prays  with  the  Spirit  will  be  filled 
with  a  holy  tire  that  cannot  but  inflame  and  kindle  the  highest  powers  of  the  soul. 
Prayer  thus  offered  will  often  partake  of  that  character  so  strikingly  illustrated  in 
the  history  of  Jacob  when  be  wrestled  with  the  angel  until  the  dawning  of  the  day. 
When  we  express  before  the  th'one  our  sorrow  for  sin  or  our  longing  desire  for 
pardon  we  shall  surely,  if  piaying  with  the  Spirit,  be  humbled  in  a  very  signal 
manner,  as  into  the  dust.  Our  strongest  abhorrence  will  be  excited  against  our- 
.selves  for  our  deep  and  aggravated  puilt.  Sin  will  appear  to  us  exceeding  sinful. 
It  will  not  be  with  a  light  or  hypocritical  feeling  that  we  now  confess  ourselves  to 
be  the  chief  of  sinners.  To  piay  with  the  Spirit  will  often  be  attended  with  a 
sacred  and  elevated  pleasm-e,  such  as  we  cannot  but  ascribe  to  the  experience  of 
the  Divine  favour  and  the  direct  influence  of  the  Saviour's  love.  The  exercise, 
which  we  bave  at  other  times  felt  to  be  a  burden,  and  rejoiced  as  speedily  as 
possible  to  lay  aside,  will  now  affotd  us  a  rich  and  peculiar  delight.  It  is  thus  tbat 
we  realise  the  apostle's  description,  "praying  in  the  Holy  Ghost,"  and  in  such 
instances  there  is  little  dilliculty  in  tracing  out  the  evidences  of  His  operation. 
'That  operation,  however,  may  be  often  present  when  it  is  not  thus  discernible. 
But  the  language  of  our  text  leads  us  to  inquire  again,  How  must  we  avail  our- 
selves of  this  assistance,  and  what  is  it  for  us  to  be  able  to  say,  "  I  will  pray  with 
the  Spirit"?  Thsit  such  influence  is  Sdinetimes  mercifully  imparted  probably 
none  will  deny  ;  b  t  th^m  the  question  may  present  itself.  How  must  it  be 
obtained  ?  I  can  imagine  that  some  may  say,  "  I  would  to  God  that  I  could  but 
pray  in  this  manner."  The  Spirit  of  God  is  infinitely  free  and  sovereign  in  His 
communications,  and  independent  (m  all  the  efforts,  not  less  than  the  meiits,  of 
man.  The  language  of  the  text  speaks  of  this  grace  as  one  we  may  certainly 
possess  and  exercise  ;  and  tiiere  is  nothing  precarious  in  that  character  wherein 
ihat  language  would  lead  us  to  contemplate  its  communications.     "I  will  pray 


352  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

with  the  Spirit."  1.  One  of  the  most  necessary  preparations  for  enjoying  the 
grace  and  assistance  of  the  Spirit  in  prayer  is  to  feel  its  necessity ;  to  cherish  a 
deep  and  abiding  sense  of  our  own  helplessness.  Let  this  need  be  but  devoutly 
acknowledged  and  the  sense  of  it  habitually  felt,  and  there  is  no  leason  to  fear  that 
the  grace  we  require  will  be  denied  us.  2.  Another  is,  to  desire  it  with  sincerity 
and  earnestness  proportionate  to  our  conviction  of  its  importance  ;  to  ad^lress  our- 
i  selves  to  the  great  work  of  prayer  with  an  anxious  wish  that  we  may  not  worship 
in  vain  ;  to  be  concerned  and  solicitous  that  the  duty  niaj'  be  rightly  fultilled  and 
the  blessings  we  implore  actually  obtained.  We  too  often  approacli  God  in  this 
exercise,  but  without  an  object.  We  come  to  pray,  but  not  to  seek  sincerely  an 
ans*er  to  our  prayers.  3.  Akin  to  this  is  another — the  direct  solicitation  of  this 
blessing,  and  th')t  in  the  very  commencement  of  our  prayers,  a  practice  which 
might  seem  prompled  almost  by  decency  itself,  in  public  devotion,  but  which  thei'e 
IS  reason  to  fear  is  but  too  little  observed  in  private.  4.  In  addition  to  these,  we 
shoul  I  endeavour  to  preserve  a  constant  and  humble  expectation  of  the  grace  we 
need.  It  is  due  to  tlie  promises  and  to  the  faithfulness  of  God.  It  will  do  honour 
to  His  love  and  tenderness.  It  is  an  act  resiilting  fionr  the  best  and  highest 
principles  of  piety.  5.  We  must  also  strive  to  retain,  by  every  effort  in  our  power, 
the  eLiect  of  any  Divine  operation  we  have  already  experienced,  and  seek  in  the 
continuance  and  progress  of  our  devotions,  to  fan  and  cherish  the  fi eldest  ilame  of 
love,  or  joy,  or  hope  which  may  have  bi-gun  to  tremble  within  the  breast,  that  it 
may  burn  with  gre  iter  stiengtb  and  brightness.  II.  To  consider  what  is  meant  by 
the  apostle  in  the  remaining  portion  of  this  jjassnge ;  and  to  snow  the  necessity 

AND  NATURE  OF  THAT  EXEECISE  OF  OUR  FACULTIES  IN  PRAYER  WHICH  MAY  BE  PRO- 
PERLY   DENOMINAIED    "PRAYING    WITH    THE    UNDERSTANDING."       Surely    We    are    boUIld 

to  render  to  our  Maker  the  service  of  every  faculty  with  which  He  has  invested 
us.  We  are  wholly  His,  and  should  seek  to  glorify  Him  in  the  consecration  of  all 
our  being  to  His  praise.  It  is  not  enough  that  the  warmest  of  our  alfections  are 
called  forth  if  the  highest  of  our  capacities  be  not  also  tilled  with  the  desire  and 
effort  to  advance  His  honour.  We  grant  that  the  most  short  and  momentaiy 
glancing  of  the  soul  upward  to  th^  throne,  amidst  the  scenes  of  business  or  the 
dangers  of  temptation,  is  truly  and  often  most  successfully  to  pray;  but  we  must 
not  on  this  account  permit  ourselves  to  confine  the  acts  of  devotion  to  such  sudden 
and  casual  addresses.  There  is  danger  of  indulging,  moreover,  in  too  great  a 
latitude  of  expression  and  feeling  wben  we  fail  to  attend  to  this  most  momentous 
subject.  There  is  another  evil  resulting  from  this  neglect.  It  is  frequently 
imagined  that  when  we  have  been  unconscious  in  our  prayers  of  an  immediate 
agency  of  the  Spirit  upon  our  hearts,  even  thoufjh  we  have  gune  with  the  utmost 
seriousness  and  sincerity  to  the  performance  of  this  duty,  we  have  failed  in  our 
design,  and  that  it  was  not  genuine  prayer,  whereas  it  may  be  that  in  these  cases 
we  have  still  cherishod  the  most  deep  and  sacred  concern  to  approve  ourselves  to 
God.  The  inrtuences  of  the  nndeistani.....g  rightly  exercised  in  reference  to  this 
great  duty  will  be  especially  exhibited  in  four  distiuct  respects.  It  will  tend  to  give 
to  our  prayers  the  chaiacter  of  solemnity,  appropriateness,  comprehensiveness,  and 
order.  1.  It  cannot  fail  to  imbue  them  with  boieninity.  We  should  reflect  on  the 
grandeur  of  tbe  Divine  attributes  and  ihe  unsearchable  glories  of  the  Divine 
essence,  on  the  meanness  and  misery  of  man,  on  the  wondrous  scheme  of  recon- 
ciliation, till  the  sense  of  our  own  littleness  will  occupy  every  feeling  of  the 
soul,  and  we  shall  fall  down  with  lowLe-t  reverence  before  the  majesty  of  our 
Creator.  2.  With  equal  certainty  it  will  next  issue  in  the  appropriateness  of  our 
petitions  to  our  circumstances,  to  the  present  demand  either  of  our  external 
situation  or  our  religious  character.  We  shall  be  led  to  ask  ourselves.  What  do 
I  truly  need  ?  What  are  the  diificulties  I  have  now  chiefly  to  apprehend?  or  the 
duties  I  am  called  especially  to  perform  ?  Against  what  temptations  am  I  warned 
to  beware?  or  wbence  msy  they  be  expected  principally  to  arise  ?  And  then  our 
prayers  will  assume  the  aspect  of  our  condition.  We  shall  not  waste  our  devotions 
on  the  general  and  customary  topics  that  would  equally  accord  with  all  varieties  of 
expeiience,  or  rather  have  no  special  adHptation  to  any.  Each  day  will  furnish 
Fome  of  these  varieties,  and  we  shall  be  every  day  increasing  in  a  facility  and 
freedom  which  will  add  continually  new  interest  and  profit  to  the  engagements  of 
devotion.  3.  Its  next  effect  will  be  to  give  to  these  engagements  a  comprehensive- 
ness as  to  the  subjects  we  shall  see  it  necessary  to  embrace  which  the  most  fervent 
piety  would  fail  to  present,  without  the  correspondent  efforts  of  reflection  and 
serious  thought.     We  shall  not  merely  pray  for  ourselves,  but  for  all  with  whom 


CHAP.  XIV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  353 

we  are  in  any  way  connected.  4.  Finally,  this  exercise  of  the  understanding  in 
respect  to  prayer  will  ensure  to  our  devotions  the  important  principle  of  order. 
Instead  of  a  hurried  incongruous  effusion  of  petitions  or  praises,  lamentations  or 
expressions  of  humility  and  penitence,  we  shall,  even  in  sacied  retirement,  and 
much  more  in  the  family,  the  social  meeting,  or  the  great  congregation,  perceive 
the  necessity  of  method  and  of  the  just  and  decorous  arrangement  of  the  several 
parts  of  this  great  and  solemn  duty.  {R.  S.  McAll.)  Public  prayer  shoidd  be  in  a 
known  tongue : — 1.  Public  prayer  must  be  understood  here  (ver.  10).  2.  Praying  iu  the 
Spirit  must  mean  using  the  gift  of  prayer  which  the  Spirit  bestow  s.  To  pray  in  the 
Holy  Gliost  implies  the  having  our  infirmities  helped  by  the  Spirit  of  God  ;  our  graces 
quickened,  our  affections  and  desires  raised  into  strength  and  fervency.  3.  Under- 
standing must  not  be  referred  to  the  understanding  of  the  apostle,  but  to  the 
understanding  of  others  (ver.  19).  Upon  the  words  thus  opened  I  build  this  thesis. 
That  public  prayer  is  not  to  be  made  in  an  unknown  tongue,  but  iu  such  a  language 
as  is  understood  by  the  common  people.  I.  The  judgment  of  Rome  in  the  matter. 
1.  In  their  general  practice.  Their  Mass-book  is  in  Latin  ;  their  Divine  service  is 
perfoimed  in  a  dead  language.  2.  The  council  of  Trent  determines  (Canon  ix), 
"  Whosoever  shall  say  that  the  Mass  ought  to  be  celebrated  only  iu  a  vulgar 
language,  let  him  be  accursed."  II.  P^oblic  peayer  ought  not  to  be  made  in  a 
LANGUAGE  UNKNOWN  TO  THE  PEOPLE.  1.  When  jDrayer  is  made  in  an  unknown 
tongue,  the  name  of  God  is  taken  in  vain  (Matt.  xv.  8,  9).  2.  Prayer  in  an 
unknown  tongue  is  ignorant  worship  (John  iv.  22;  Mark  x.  38).  And  what  is 
ignoi-ant  worship,  if  this  be  not — to  make  unknown  prayers  to  an  unknown  God? 
3.  How  can  such  prayers  as  are  made  in  an  unknown  tongue  be  made  in  faith? 
And  yet  faith  is  a  necessary  ingredient  in  prayer  (James  i.  7).  4.  The  design  of 
prayer  is  not  to  work  any  cbange  in  God,  with  whom  there  is  not  the  least 
"  variableness,  neither  shadow  of  turning  "  ;  but  a  change  in  us  ;  that  by  prayer 
we  may  be  the  better  disposed  for  the  reception  of  what  we  ask.  But  how  can 
prayer  which  is  not  understood  be  here  available?  5.  Though  to  speak  in  an 
unknown  tongue  was  in  the  first  age  a  miraculous  gift,  and  served  much  for  the 
confirmati'in  of  the  Chiistian  faith ;  yet  unless  there  were  an  inteipreter,  the  use 
of  an  unknown  tongue  was  not  permitted  in  the  public  worship  of  God  (ver.  28). 
6.  The  use  of  an  urknown  tongue  in  the  Lord's  service  is  expressly  denied  to  be 
unto  edification  (ver.  2G).  7.  The  apostle,  having  delivered  this  doctrine.  That 
prayer  and  praise  should  be  in  a  known  tongue,  adds  that  he  taught  the  same  "  in 
all  the  Churches  of  the  saints  "  (ver.  33 ;  see  also  ver.  37).  HI.  Antiquity  is 
UTTERLY  against  Rome  IN  THIS  MATTER.  And  bccause  the  council  of  Trent  hath 
anathematised  all  that  are  against  Latin  prayers,  I  will  suppose  another  council, 
and  Paul  himself  to  be  the  president  of  it.  The  question  to  be  debated  is, 
"  Whether  prayer  is  to  be  made  in  a  known  or  in  an  unknown  tongue."  Let  the 
fathers  speak  in  order.  Justin  Martyr  tells  us  :  "  On  the  day  commonly  called 
Sunday,  assemblies  are  made  of  citizens  and  countrymen,  and  the  writings  of  the 
apostles  and  prophets  are  read.  The  reader  giving  over,  the  minister  makes  an 
exhortation  to  the  people,  persuading  to  the  imitation  and  practice  of  those  good 
things  that  are  propounded.  After  this  we  rise  all,  and  pour  out  prayers :  and 
bread  and  wine  are  brought  forth.  And  the  minister,  to  the  utteimost  of  his 
ability,  does  send  forth  prayers  and  praises  unto  God ;  and  the  people  give  their 
consent,  saying,  '  Amen.' "  Behold  the  Scriptures  read  even  to  citizens,  nay,  to 
country-people,  and  prayers  made  whith  they  did  understand,  and  say  Amen  to. 
Origen  may  speak  next :  "  The  Christians  in  their  prayers  use  not  the  very  words  " 
(he  means  the  words  of  the  original)  "  of  the  Scriptures  :  but  they  that  are  Greeks 
do  use  the  Greek  tongue  ;  and  those  that  are  Romans,  the  Roman  tongue.  And  so 
every  one  according  to  his  dialect  does  pray  unto  God,  and  praise  Him  according  to 
his  ability  :  and  He  that  is  the  Lord  of  every  language  does  bear  the  prayers  which 
are  put  up  to  Him  in  every  language."  Cyprian  speaks  thus  :  "  To  pray  otberwise 
than  Christ  has  taught  is  not  only  ignorance  but  a  great  fault ;  for  He  has 
expressly  said,  '  Ye  reject  the  command  of  God,  that  ye  may  establish  your  own 
tradition.'"  Now  where  has  Christ  taught  the  use  of  an  unknown  tongue  in 
prayer?  Ambrose  may  be  heard  in  the  next  place  :  "  If  ye  come  together  to  edify 
the  Church,  those  thincs  ought  to  be  spoken  that  the  hearers  may  understand: 
for  what  does  he  profit  the  people  who  speaks  in  an  unknown  tongue  to  them  ? '' 
And  afterwards  the  same  father  adds:  "There  were  some,  of  the  Hebrews 
especially,  that  used  the  Syriac  and  the  Hebrew  tongue  in  their  services  ;  but  these 
aimed  at  their  own  glory  and  commendation,  not  at  the  people's  benefit."  Let  us 
VOL.  II.  23 


354  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xiv 

hear  Augustine  :  "  We  ought  to  understand  what  we  pray  for,  that  we  may,  not  like 
birds,  but  Uke  men,  sing  unto  God.  For  blackbirds  and  parrots  and  crows  and 
pies,  and  such  kind  of  fowls,  are  taught  to  sound  forth  what  they  understand  not; 
but  to  sing  with  understanding  is  gi'anted,  not  to  a  bird,  but  to  a  man,  through  the 
good  pleasure  of  God."  Jerome  speaks  after  this  manner'  "In  the  Churches  of 
the  city  of  Eome,  the  voice  of  the  people  was  like  heavenly  thunder,  when  they 
answered  aloud  '  Amen '  at  the  end  of  the  prayers  which  they  put  up  unto  God. 
The  people  understood,  and  gave  their  consent  unto,  the  prayers  which  were  used 
in  those  days  ;  but  the  present  Church  of  Home,  alas !  how  much  is  it  altered  from 
what  it  once  was  !  "  Great  Basil  exclaims,  "  Let  thy  tongue  sing,  and  let  thy  mind 
search  the  meaning  of  what  is  spoken  ;  that  thou  mayest  sins^  with  the  spirit,  and 
sing  with  the  understanding  also."  Clirysostom  says;  "Take  notice  how  the 
apostle  does  always  seek  the  Church's  edification.  By  '  the  unlearned  man,'  Paul 
means  the  layman,  and  shows  how  this  unlearned  person  does  sustain  a  very  great 
loss  when  prayers  are  made  in  such  a  language  as  [that]  he,  through  want  of 
understanding,  is  not  able  to  say  Amen  to  tliem."  I  shall  add  unto  these  passages 
of  the  fathers  a  Constitution  of  the  emperor  Justinian  (123)  :  "  We  command  that 
all  bishops  and  presbyters  do  celebrate  the  holy  oblation,  and  prayers  used  in  holy 
baptism,  not  speaking  low,  but  with  a  clear  voice  which  may  be  he^ird  by  the 
people,  that  thereby  the  minds  of  the  people  may  be  stirred  up  with  gieater 
devotion  in  uttering  the  praises  of  the  Lord  God."  And  for  this  is  cited  ver.  16. 
But  now  let  us  hear  the  Romish  doctors  themselves.  Cardinal  Cajetfin  has  these 
words  :  "From  this  doctrine  of  the  Apostle  Paul  it  follows,  that  it  is  better  for  the 
edification  of  the  Church,  that  the  public  prayers  which  the  people  hear  should  be 
made  in  that  language  which  both  the  priests  and  people  understand,  than  that 
they  should  be  made  in  Latin."  Nicolaus  de  Lyra  says :  "If  the  people  under- 
stand the  ijrayer  or  thanksgiving  which  is  performed  by  the  priest,  their  minds  will 
be  brought  the  better  and  nearer  unto  God,  and  with  greater  devoutness  tliey  will 
answer  '  Amen.' "  "The  angelical  doctor,"  Thomas  Aquinas,  saj's :  "He  gains 
most  who  prays  and  understands  the  words  which  he  speaks ;  for  he  is  edified  both 
as  to  his  understanding  and  also  as  to  his  affections."  Again  :  "  It  is  best  that  the 
tongue  which  blesses  should  interpret ;  for  good  words  should  be  spoken  to  the 
edification  of  faitli."  But  now  at  last  let  us  be  determined  by  the  Apostle  Paul 
(vers.  18,  19).  IV.  Answer  the  popish  arguments  to  defend  their  cause.  1. 
Bellarmine  says  that  "prayer  in  an  unknown  tongue  is  not  condemned,  but 
prayer  in  a  known  tongue  only  preferred.  Answer — (1)  Suppose  this  :  why  does 
the  Church  of  Eome  pray  after  the  worse,  and  not  after  the  better,  manner  of  the 
two?  (2)  But  it  is  condemned  by  the  apostle  as  not  being  for  edification.  2.  The 
same  writer  says  that  "  of  old  the  use  of  prayer  was,  that  the  people  might  be 
instructed  and  edified:  but  now  the  end  of  prayer  is  the  yielding  to  God  that 
worship  wliicli  is  due  to  Him."  Answer — (1)  The  apostles  were  as  careful  that 
God  might  have  His  worship  as  the  Papists  ;  nay,  a  great  deal  more  careful.  (2) 
Disjoin  not  God's  worship  and  the  people's  edification  :  and  the  more  the  mind 
understands  and  the  heart  of  the  worshipper  is  affected,  God  is  the  more  honoured 
and  the  better  pleased.  3.  Again,  "Prayer  is  not  made  to  the  i^eople,  but  unto 
God  ;  and  He  understands  all  tongues  alike.  If  a  courtier  should  petition  for  a 
countryman  in  Latin  to  a  king,  the  countryman  might  be  benefited  by  the  Latin 
petition  of  the  courtier,  though  he  should  not  understand  a  word  of  it.  Answer — 
(1)  It  might  have  been  said,  that  God  understands  all  tongues  alike  in  the  ai^ostles' 
days  as  well  as  now.  (2)  The  use  of  prayer  is  not  to  inform  God ;  for  He  knows 
what  things  we  have  need  of  before  we  ask  (Matt.  vi.  8);  but  to  make  ourselves 
more  sensible  of  our  needs,  and  consequently  more  meet  to  be  supplied.  But  how 
can  this  be,  if  prayer  be  locked  up  in  an  unknown  dialect  ?  (3)  The  God  of  heaven 
is  not  like  the  kings  on  earth,  who  will  hear  petitions  made  by  favourites  for 
persons  that  make  no  address  themselves  ;  but  He  requires  that  every  particular 
person  should  ask  if  he  will  receive,  and  understand  what  he  prays  for.  Again, 
if  a  king  should  forbid  petitions  in  a  strange  language,  a  Latin  petition  would  not 
be  acceptable.  But  God  has  forbid  the  use  of  an  unknown  tongue.  Therefore  we 
may  conclude  that  the  Popish  Latin  prayers  are  to  very  little  purpose.  V.  The 
TENDENCY  OF  THIS  PAPAL  DOCTRINE.  1.  It  gratifies  the  lazy  disposition  of  men,  who 
naturally  like  a  liberty  to  rest  in  opere  operato,  "  in  the  work  done."  2.  It  is  a 
notable  device  to  keep  the  people  ignorant,  and  to  make  them  more  dependent 
upon  the  priesthood.  3.  Many  prayers  may  well  be  made  in  Latin  merely  through 
shame.     Application :  1.    Bless   the    Lord    that    the    day-spring  from  on   high 


CHAP.  XIV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  355 

hath  visited  this  land  of  your  nativity,  and  that  Popish  darkness  is  so  much 
disipelled.  2.  It  highly  concerns  yoa  to  fear,  and  to  pray  against,  the  return  of 
Popish  blindness.  3.  Let  the  blind  zeal  of  the  Papists  make  you  more  frequent  in 
your  accesses  to  the  throne  of  grace.  4.  Take  heed  of  distraction  in  prayer,  and  not 
minding  what  you  ask,  or  what  you  are  doing,  when  at  the  mercy-seat.  5.  Content 
not  yourselves  with  bare  understanding  the  words  of  prayer;  but  know  the  Lord 
(whom)  you  pray  to.  6.  Let  understanding  and  faith  in  this  duty  of  prater  be 
joined  together.  (N.  Vincent,  A.M.)  I  will  sing  witli  the  spirit,  and  .  .  .  with 
the  understanding  also. — Singing  ivitli  the  understanding  : — We  are  commanded  to 
s.'ng  with  the  understanding  ;  and  yet  if  we  did,  four  hundred  and  nisiety-hve  out 
of  five  hundred  pieces  of  music  that  are  published  for  singing  would  have  to  go  to 
the  dirt.  I  will  defy  anybody  to  sing  with  the  understanding  the  music  that  is 
trashily  printed  and  tiashily  performed,  whether  it  be  inartii-ulate  on  strmged 
i-nstruments  or  whether  it  be  vocalised  to  words.  Music  has  a  relation  not  sinji^ly 
to  sensuous  pleasure,  which  is  the  lowest  kind  of  pleasure,  but  to  imaginative 
pleasure,  aud  to  pleasure  of  the  understanding  as  well,  which  it  rises  up  round 
about  as  the  atmosphere  rises  round  about  the  pine-trees  and  the  oak-trees  on  tbe 
mountain  side,  washing  them  clean,  and  making  them  stand  out  in  majesty  and 
beauty.  Music  cleanses  the  understanding,  inspires  it,  and  lilts  it  into  a  reilm 
which  it  would  not  reach  if  it  were  left  to  itself.  {H.  W.  B.-eclter.)  How  to  sing 
tcell : — A  girl  once  asked  her  teacher  how  she  might  become  as  good  at  music  as 
her  rival.  "  Cultivate  your  heart,"  was  the  teacher's  excellent  reply.  The  Bible 
says  :  "  Sing  with  the  spirit,  and  with  the  understanding  also."  A  hearty  love  of 
sacred  song  adds  much  to  our  own  and  other's  joys.  The  sick  and  dying  are  often 
soothed  with  singing  when  they  could  not  bear  speaking  or  readujg.  Our  music 
may  gain  the  blessing  of  those  ready  to  parish. 

Vers.  16-19.  Else  when  thou  shalt  bless  with  the  spirit  how  shall  .  .  .  the 
unlearned  say  Amen. — Ptil/lic  prayer  should  be — L  Earnest— with  the  spirit. 
II.  Intelligent — so  that  all  can  understand.  III.  United — all  should  say  Amen. 
{J.  Lytli,  D.IJ.)         Eesjionses  in  prager  : — 1.  Are  not  only  permissible  but  jDioper. 

2.  Should  be  said,  not  shouted.  3.  Should  be  simple,  a|iprupiiute,  intelligent,  and 
heartfelt.  {Ilnd.)  Piihlic  devotion  : — In  this  we  must  keep  in  view — 1.  The 
glory  of  God.  2.  The  edificati'>n  of  others.  3.  Our  own  responsibility.  (Ibid.) 
Directions  for  profitably  joi)iing   in   j)ubUc   j)''(ill^i'  ■ — I-   Pl^blic   prayeu  must    be 

JDILIGENTLY   ATTENDED    TO.       II.    It    MUST    BE    SERIOUSLY   AND    HEARTITjY  CONCURRED  IN. 

1.  Saying  amen,  or  joining  in  public  prayer,  includes  our  assent  to  the  truths 
•declared  and  acknowledged  ;  and  this  with  all  suitable  affections  of  mind.  The 
Hebrew  word  "  amen  "  signifies  truth  ;  and  so  expresseth  an  acknowledgment  that 
what  he  had  said  was  true.  Thus  Christ  stvleth  Himself  "  the  Amen,  the  faithful 
and  true  witness,"  and  the  piomises  of  God  are  said  to  be  "  yea  and  amen"  ;  all 
true,  and  certainly  to  be  accomplished.  Now  this  is  fipplieable  to  the  several  parts 
of  prayer  which  are  not  properly  petitions;  and  you  will  best  understand  my 
meaning  by  a  few  illustrations.  Suppose  a  minister  to  be  adoring  the  perfections 
of  God,  acknowledging  that  He  is  the  greatest  and  the  best  of  beings,  that  He  is 
perfectly  good,long-sntfi'ring.  merciful,  and  gracious,  to  this  you  are  to  say  amen,  that 
is,  your  hearts  are  to  acknowledge  with  the  highest  veneiation  tiiat  it  is  true.  Doth 
the  minister  acknowledge  and  celebrate  the  wonderful  works  of  God,  His  creation 
and  government  of  the  world,  and  that  glory  is  due  to  Him  for  these  ?  You  are  to 
join  in  such  ackuowledgcnents ;  to  confess  and  adore  Him  as  the  Creator,  Governor, 
and  Father  of  the  universe.  Again,  is  a  minister  expressing  a  thankful  sense  of 
God's  favour  and  mercy  to  those  whose  devotion  he  leads  ?  Is  he  praising  God  for 
our  creation,  preservation  ;  for  health,  and  peace,  and  comfort ;  for  our  temp'n  al 
or  spirit'ial  blessings  ?  You  are  to  add  amen  to  this.  2.  Saying  amen,  or  joining 
in  prayer,  includes  our  hearty  consent  to  the  several  desires  and  requests  which 
are  expressed  before  God.  Amen  signifies,  So  be  it !  let  it  be  so  !  tliis  is  what. 
I  earnestly  desire.  Doth  the  minister  pray  that  God  would  be  merciful  to  us  and 
forgive  us?     You  are  to  say  amen  ;    that  is,  "  God  be  nrerciful  to  me,  a  sinner." 

3.  Through  the  whole  of  every  public  and  social  prayer  we  are  to  consider  it  as 
our  own  prayer.  Reflections  :  1.  This  condemns  the  pra'-ti'  e  of  the  Church  of 
Eome  in  appointing  that  their  public  prayers  should  be  in  Latin,  a  language  un- 
known to  almost  every  one  that  attends  upon  them.  It  is  impossible  that  the 
unlearned  should  join  in  such  prayers  and  say  amen  to  them  with  any  devout 
concurrence.     2.  How  few  are  there  in  our  assemblies  that  propeily  join  in  prayer? 


356  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

As  Protestants,  we  have  prayers  in  our  native  language.  Wliat  careless  airs,  what 
lazy  postures  are  seen  in  many  !  How  few  are  there  who  show  the  proper  marks 
of  seriousness  and  reverence  !  and  may  we  not  fear  that  some  of  those  lew  do  not 
heartily  join  ?  Are  they  not  like  the  statues,  or  images  on  monuments,  in  our 
ancient  churches — in  a  praying  posture  indeed,  with  eyes  and  hands  lifted  up  to 
heaven,  but  with  hearts  hard  as  stone,  cold  as  marble  ?  3.  How  much  do  we  need 
the  assistance  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  our  devotion  may  be  pleasing  to  God  and 
comfortable   and   edifying   to  ourselves !      (J.   Orton. )  I  thank  God  I  speak 

with  tongues  more  than  ye  all  :  Yet  in  the  Church  I  had  rather  speak  five 
■words  with  my  understanding  .  .  .  than  ten  thousand  words  in  an  un- 
known tongue. — Fice  words  better  than  ten  tliousand  : — 1.  When  more  intelli- 
gible. 2.  When  wisely  spoken.  3.  When  calculated  to  benefit  others.  4.  When 
uttered  in  the  spirit  of  love.  (Ibid.)  Gifts  and  learnii.g  : — I.  Are  matters  of 
THANKFULNESS  TO  GOD.  II.  Should  BE  WISELY  USED — not  for  display,  but  edifica- 
tion. III.  Should  be  subservient  to  love.  {Ibid.)  Intelligent  piety  : — I. 
Seeks — not  to  astonish,  but  teach.  II.  A ccoiiplishes  its  object — not  by  learned 
disquisitions,  but  by  making  truLh  easy  by  means  of  a  few  and  plain  words.  III. 
PiNDS  GREATER  SATISFACTION — in  the  profit  of  othcrs,  than  in  self  display.     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  20.  Brethren,  be  not  children  in  understanding. — The  wisdom  of  child- 
hood:— I.  We  should  possess  childlike  simplicity  of  character.  To  preserve 
the  freshness  of  childhood  in  the  moral  world  is  the  object  of  the  gospel.  II. 
With  this  we  are  to  unite  manliness  of  understanding.  Our  childlikent-ss  is  to 
be  confined  to  the  moral  natiue  ;  beyond  that,  in  the  reign  of  the  intellect,  will  and 
activities,  we  are  commanded  as  Christians  to  be  men.  (Christian  Age.)  The 
tiianliitcss  of  the  gospel : — 1.  "  Did  it  ever  strike  you  that  St.  Paul  was  mad  ?  "  was 
a  question  asked  once,  not  by  a  scolfer,  but  by  a  man  of  powerlul  intellect,  who  felt 
that  the  question  between  Christianity  and  unbelief  turned  upon  the  case  of  Paul. 
For  if  the  charge  of  Festus  could  be  substantiated,  one  of  the  most  powerful 
chaptirs  of  Christian  evidence  would  be  cancelled.  2.  But  we  commend  to  the 
honest  inquirer  the  stu'ly  of  this  one  chapter.  St.  Paul  is  correcting  an  exaggerated 
idea  of  the  value  of  a  jjarticular  gift.  In  all  times  human  nature  has  been  inclined 
to  put  display  ahove  profiting;  and  it  required  a  sound  and  well-balanced  judgment 
to  keep  gift  in  its  place.  And  who  can  doubt  that  the  true  estimate  was  that  taken 
here  by  St.  Paul  ?  (see  chaps,  xii.  31,  xiv.  1).  It  required  a  very  sound  and  a  very 
sober  judgment  to  subordinate  the  gift  of  tongues  to  the  far  less  brilliant  gift  of 
"prophesying"'  in  which  only  edification  was  aimed  at.  The  maxims  interspersed 
among  the  exhortations  of  this  chap'er  are  eminently  illustrative  of  the  plain  and 
practical  character  of  the  man  whom  it  is  necessary  for  infidelity  to  represent  as  an 
enthusiast,  or  to  hint  into  a  madman  (vers.  14,  15,  19,  26,  32,  33,  40).  3.  The 
subject  thus  introduced  is  larger  and  wider  than  the  mere  question  of  the  sanity  of 
St.  Paul.  The  charge,  "  In  understanding  be  men,"  warns  us  very  seriously  of  a 
danger,  peculiarly  pressing  in  these  times,  that,  namely,  of  divorcing  religion  from 
manliness.  If  this  is  the  gospel  voice,  then  one  otfence,  at  least,  is  rolled  out  of  the 
way.  St.  Paul  says  that  there  may  be  a  childishness  in  the  use  of  Divine  gifts. 
He  boldly  deiilares  even  spiritual  influences  to  be  subordinate  to  considerations  of 
l^ropriety,  of  expediency,  of  common  sense.  No  man  is  to  say,  I  am  no  longer  a 
free  agent;  the  hand  of  God  is  upon  me.  This  is  to  bring  God's  own  gift  into  dis- 
honour. It  is  just  because  it  fits  into  His  other  gifts,  because,  while  it  elevates,  it 
also  sobers,  that  I  see  it  to  be  an  evidence  of  His  interposition.  4.  Now  if  miracle 
itself  is  not  to  be  so  treated  as  to  make  it  childish,  what  shall  we  say  of  the  excuses 
made  in  our  day  for  the  utter  repudiation  of  every  such  criterion  in  reference  to 
matters  which  can  certainly  plead  no  inspired  authority  ?  There  are  two  higher 
classes  of  subjects  upon  the  treatment  of  which  St.  Paul  throws  a  guiding  and 
comforting  light  in  the  weighty  maxim  before  us.  I.  Revelation  of  course  must 
be  above  reason.  What  intellect  could  discover,  God  would  not  reveal.  If  there- 
fore on  any  topic  revelation  exists,  that  is  proof  sufficient  that  on  that  topic  reason 
was  silent.  1.  When  once  the  Divine  origin  of  a  revelation  is  attested  by  evidences 
of  its  being  worthy  of  its  Divine  author,  then  it  speaks,  on  each  point  which  it 
touches,  with  authority.  2.  But  the  office  of  the  understanding  in  tlie  first  weigh- 
ing of  evidences,  does  not  end  here.  The  trying  and  testing  of  professed  books  of 
Scripture  by  the  early  Church  was  felt  to  be  a  heavy  responsibility  of  the  reason. 
Nor  was  the  one  settlement  absolutely  final.  Particular  clauses  are  found,  on  more 
modern  and  searching  scrutinies,  to  be  no  part  of  the  original  text.     And  it  is  true 


CHAP.  XIV.]  I.  COniNTHIANS.  357 

reverence,  as  well  as  true  wisdom,  to  exercise,  upon  all  such  matters,  a  large-minded 
and  a  manly  judgment.  God  will  guard  His  word  written,  and  the  God  of  truth  is 
never  honoured  by  a  disingenuous  treatment  of  the  truth  itself.  3.  But  there 
remains  the  weightiest  matter  of  all,  which  is  the  interpretation  of  doctrine  by  the 
comparison  of  Scripture  with  ScripLure.  And  here  the  mind  must  be  employed  if 
edification  is  to  come  to  the  student.  Yet  there  are  men  who  seem  almost  to  think 
the  contradiction  of  reason  a  sign  of  truth,  and  the  mortification  of  the  intellect  a 
Christian  duty.  II.  Practical  duty.  Sin  makes  great  havoc  of  human  happiness  ; 
but  next  to  it  stands  folly.  1.  Could  you  but  know,  e.g.,  the  utter  foolishness  of 
many  parents  and  teachers  on  the  great  subject  of  education  you  would  not  wonder 
at  the  results,  whether  in  the  wilfulness  of  the  youth  or  the  misery  of  the  manhood. 
Or  again,  would  we  but  look  back  upon  our  own  life's  history,  and  mark  the  giddy 
thoughtlessness  or  the  perverse  infatuation  which  has  characterised  it,  we  could 
not  but  become  conscious  of  the  force  of  St.  Paul's  caution.  2.  But  how  large  i- 
the  action  of  this  unintelligent  childishness  inside  the  Church,  in  the  counsels  and 
examples  of  Christian  men  !  The  whole  theory  of  monasticism,  the  whole  system 
of  "  direction,"  whether  Eomanist  or  Anglican,  all  that  subjects  my  conscience  to 
another  man's  rule,  all  that  encourages  a  grovelling  spirit  in  the  worship  and 
service  of  God  in  place  of  that  honest,  free,  courageous  bearing  which  finds  the  love 
of  God  life,  and  His  service  perfect  freedom,  is  a  contravention  of  Paul's  rule.  3. 
How  childish  are  half  the  biographies,  diaries,  devotions,  of  Christian  saints !  Plow 
little  calculated  to  draw  after  them  into  God's  service  the  strong  inquiring  intellect, 
the  warm  wholesome  heart,  the  j'oung  enterprising  life  !  Conclusion  :  Each  one  of 
us  is  in  some  real  measure  responsible  for  the  look  and  tone  of  Christianity  to  our 
age.  It  is  ours  to  make  it  great  or  to  make  it  little,  noble  or  contemptible.  {Dean 
Vmifjhan.)  Men  in  undertitandinp  : — In  ver.  19  the  word  "  understanding  "  stands 
for  the  intellectual  faculty  itself ;  here  it  refers  to  its  state  of  development,  to  the 
mature  condition  of  mind,  heart,  and  general  character.  The  word  "  children," 
•which  occurs  twice  in  the  text,  first  stands  for  boys,  then  for  babes.  The  word 
"malice"  may  also  be  taken  more  generally  as  designating  all  evil  dispositions  and 
affections.  Lastly,  the  word  "  men  "  signifies  "  perfect,"  and  refers  to  maturity  of 
age,  fulness  of  mental  development,  fitness  for  the  manly  discharge  of  the  duties  of 
life.  Thus  looked  at  the  text  would  seem  to  say,  "  Don't  feel  and  act  like  a  set  of 
ignorant,  conceited  boys — with  respect  to  all  that  is  bad,  indeed,  be  the  veriest  babes  ; 
but  as  to  all  that  is  good,  be  like  those  who,  having  gone  through  a  long  course  of 
discipline,  are  at  once  ripe  in  years,  and  perfectly  equipped  as  to  knowledge  and 
accomplishments,  thorough   "  men."     I.  In  the  text  then  we  have  the  infant, 

THE    BOY,  AND    THE    MAN,  AND    SOMETHING    BELONGING    TO    EACH    USED    FOR    MORAL   AND 

eeltgious  ENDS.  A  human  being  comes  into  the  world  as  a  combination  of  capa- 
bilities— so  much  raw  material.  By  taking  "malice"  and  "  understanding"  as 
representative  terms  we  have  the  two  great  departments  of  human  nature— -tlie 
intellectual  and  the  emotional.  1.  A  little  infant,  then,  has  wrapped  up  within  it 
the  capacities  of  the  intellect  and  Ihe  forces  of  the  passions.  Withcut  referring  to 
the  undeveloped  state  of  an  infant's  understanding,  the  apostle  fixes  attention  on 
the  undeveloped  condition  of  the  passions — the  one  idea  that  he  wanted,  and 
which,  therefore,  he  exclusively  refers  to.  Looking  at  a  little  sweet  babe  the 
apostle  seems  to  says,  "  Whatever  capacity  there  may  be  here  for  wliat  is  bad,  it 
is  not  manifested  yet.  How  free  from  all  that  deforms  society  and  degrades  men! 
True,  all  the  men  in  the  world  were  once  babes ;  would  to  God  that,  in  one  sense, 
they  were  babes  again  !  But  Chi  istians,  by  the  expulsion  of  corruption  through 
the  influences  of  the  regenerating  Spirit,  oupht  "in  malice  to  be  children."  2. 
Next  we  have  the  picture  of  a  number  of  youths,  who  have  advanced  beyond  child- 
hood, but  who  have  not  yet  acquired  the  knowledge,  difpnsitions,  and  habits 
belonging  to  riper  years.  They  are  necessarily  inexpeiienced  ;  they  think  a  great 
deal  of  any  small  acquirement  or  advantage  by  which  they  are  distinguished  ;  there 
are  often  among  them  envyings  and  animosities ;  they  like  pleasure  and  excite- 
ment ;  they  can  hardly  understand  what  is  meant  by  self-sacrifice,  and  know  little 
of  the  greatness  and  beautifulness  of  duty  as  duty.  However  promising  they  may 
be  they  cannot  but  be  defective  in  those  things  which  belong  to  disciplined  virtue 
and  manly  worth.  In  infants  the  reason  and  the  feelings  are  alike  undeveloped; 
in  youth  both  have  unfolded  to  a  certain  extent,  and  the  apostle  directs  attention  to 
the  want  of  proportion  between  the  development  of  the  understanding  and  that  of 
the  passir>ns.  The  understanding  needs  to  be  opened  and  cultivated — the  passions 
grow  of  themselves.     If  the  intellect  be  let  alone,  it  will  not  expand ;  if  the  feelings 


358  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xit. 

be  let  alone,  they  will  expand  the  more.  The  one  requires  to  be  enconiaged  and 
stimulated  ;  the  others  to  be  repressed  and  restrained.  The  consequence  is,  that 
in  early  life  the  inferior  parts  are  strong  and  active,  as  by  the  force  of  an  internal 
impulse.  Hence  we  have  the  phenomena  that  so  often  distinguis^h  immaturity  of 
character,  folly,  vanity,  selfishness,  ignorance,  the  want  of  all  those  things  which 
make  up  that  moral  "  understanding  "  in  which  the  apostle  wished  the  Corinthians 
to  be  men,  but  which  is  seldom  found  to  be  the  characteristic  of  boys.  3.  The 
image  of  full-grown  men,  mature  in  character  as  well  as  in  years.  Tlie  aposlle 
supposes  a  number  of  human  beings  to  have  passed  through  a  thorough  course  of 
culture  and  discipline,  and  to  have  acquired  an  intellectual  equipment,  and  attained 
a  moral  fitness  for  what  they  are  to  be  and  to  do  in  life.     II.  The  appkopriateness 

OF    THIS    mode    of    ILLUSTRAI  ION    TO    THE    CONDITION    OF  3  HE  CoEINTHIAN  ChUECH.       1. 

The  Corii'thians  were  ambitious  of  personal  distinction;  they  each  wished  to  have 
the  highest  gifts  conferred  upon  them  ;  and  those  who  were  entrusted  with  any, 
esjiecially  with  the  power  of  unknown,  or  eloquent  speech,  were  utterly  regardless  of 
order  and  propriety  in  their  use  and  exhibition.  The  Christian  Church  became  a 
theatre  of  display  ;  and  the  Christian  life,  instead  of  being  somethmg  serious  and 
earnest,  put  on  the  appearance  of  a  boisterous  holiday,  and  was  as  little  dignified  as 
a  playtliing  or  a  song.  But,  worse  tlian  this,  with  the  immaturity,  vanity,  and 
folly  of  boys,  there  mingled  at  Corinth  the  passions  of  men.  They  could  not  all  be 
first;  some  must  listen  if  others  speak;  where  some  lead,  others  must  follow. 
But  this  is  difficult  where  all  are  ambitious  ;  and  hence  the  society  was  torn  by 
dissensions,  developed  bad  feelings,  was  combined  with  a  narrow  and  cbildisii 
intellect  and  heart.  2.  It  is  to  this  state  of  things  that  the  admonition  in  the  text 
refers.  The  apostle  endeavours  to  instruct  them  by  laying  down  important  general 
principles,  and  to  reprove  them  by  severe  and  appropriate  censure  ;  aiming  thus  at 
once  to  open  their  understandings,  and  to  subdue  their  passions.  "Be  not  mere 
boys,  without  deep  and  comprehensive  views  of  duty.  In  malice,  indeed,  I  wish 
you  were  even  like  babes,  but  in  wisdom  and  knowledge,  in  mastery  of  yourselves, 
and  in  calm  devotedness  to  the  great  business  of  thf^  Christian  life,  I  wish  you  to  be 
men."  III.  The  advantages  which  attend  the  possession  of  a  chaeactee  like 
THIS.  1.  It  is  favourable  to  stability  both  of  opinion  and  conduct.  One  who  is 
really  a  spiritual  man,  may  be  depended  on.  His  intelligi^nce  is  large ;  his  views 
are  matured  ;  his  principles  are  established  ;  his  habits  are  fixed ;  he  is  not  likely 
to  become  marked  by  the  levity  and  inconstancy  which  are  often  seen  in  the 
ignorant  and  immature,  the  yoimg  and  the  superficial  (see  Eph.  iv.  8-15).  2.  It 
capacitates  for  entering  into  the  profonnder  truths  and  for  enjoying  the  higher 
forms  of  instruction.  In  some  parts  of  the  Church  there  is  the  constant  reiteration 
of  just  the  three  or  four  truths  which  make  up  what  we  call  the  gospel.  The  ptople 
are  thus  always  kept  at  the  alphabet,  or  in  the  spelling-book,  or  in  the  shoitest  and 
easiest  readiig  lessons,  and  aie  never  introduced  to  the  high  arguments  which  lie 
beyond.  Now  without  the  culture  of  their  own  minds,  the  full  development  of 
their  spiritual  faculties,  a  congregation  will  listen  to  the  higher  forms  of  Christian 
teaching,  not  only  without  benefit,  but  with  weariness  and  wonder.  That  it  is  not 
riglit  for  people  to  continue  in  this  stale,  you  learn  from  Heb.  v.,  vi.,  and  1  Cor.  iii. 
1,  2,  i.e.,  let  me  have  hearers  who  "  in  understanding  are  meu,"  and  instead  of  their 
being  fatigued  by  the  demand  upon  them,  or  offended  by  the  form  in  which  I  con- 
vey my  thoughts,  thej'  shall  fe^l  refreshed  and  strengthenc  d  by  the  exercise,  and 
find  themselves  wiper,  better,  and  happier  men.  3.  It  will  correct  religious  taste, 
and  elevate  and  improve  the  general  character.  The  Corinthians  preferred  the 
showy  to  the  substantial.  Their  character  was  flashy,  superficial.  The  apostle 
wished  them  to  be  "  men  in  understanding,"  that  all  this  might  be  thoroughly 
corrected.  And  so  it  will  l^e  still  if  we,  too,  rise  into  the  character  that  has  been 
set  before  us.  Christian  men,  who  in  some  degree  answer  to  this,  are  superior  to 
dependence  on  flash  and  rhetoric,  or  any  of  the  many  and  mean  arts  by  which 
Christian  teaching  is  often  di:fi^'ured.  Having  got  rid  of  the  craving  for  distinc- 
tion, learnt  the  more  excellent  wiiy  of  being  great,  the  extinction  of  selfishnfss, 
and  the  service  of  love,  they  will  be  fiee  from  those  evil  tempers  in  which  small 
and  contracted  souls  indulge.  They  will  delight  in  the  cultivation  of  all  that  is 
noble  and  dignified  in  the  Christian  character,  and  be  distinguished  and  known 
alike  for  the  stientth  and  the  beauties  of  holineps.  4.  Those  who  are  "  men  in 
understanding  "  will  best  know  how  to  receive  the  kingdom  of  heaven  like  little 
children.  But  does  not  the  New  Testament  demand  the  understanding  of  a  child 
in  order  to  the  simple  reception  of  the  faith?     No;  it  is  not  the  childish,  unde- 


CHAP.  xiT.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  35S 

veloped  understanding  that  is  required,  but  the  feeh'ng  in  the  child  that  is  the  effect 
of  this — a  readiness  to  rely  on  authority,  and  to  receive  the  testimony  of  those  whom 
it  looks  up  to,  without  questioning.  But  this  spirit  is  not,  in  a  man,  the  conse- 
quence of  ignorance,  but  the  fruit  of  knowledge.  Those  who  know  nothing,  and 
those  who  know  a  little,  are  often  the  most  conceited.  It  requires  the  cultivated 
understanding  of  the  man  to  know  when  he  has  arrived  at  an  ultimate  fact — where 
it  is  necessary  t©  pause  or  stop  in  curious  inquiries,  and  when  it  is  proper  to 
welcome  the  positive  utterances  of  authority,  and  to  rely  upon  them  like  a  little 
child.  The  most  mature  Christian  will  live  in  the  exccise  of  the  most  simple  faith. 
He  who  knows  most  of  God  will  know  most  of  himself ;  he  will,  therefore,  believe 
when  others  doubt,  and  will  distrust  when  others  presume.  (T.  Brunei/.)  C'liris- 
tian  manliness  : — 1.  The  scholar  alludes  here  to  the  teaching  of  his  Master,  and 
defines  it  (Matt,  xviii.  3,  xi.  25).  It  was  notably  the  manner  of  the  Great  Teacher 
to  fling  out  thoughts  iu  a  round  unguarded  axiom  which  He  trusted  the  good 
sense  of  His  sympatbetic  disciples  to  define  and  limit.  His  very  doing  so  is  of 
itself  conclusive  proof  that  He  meant  His  pupils  to  be  no  children,  but  men,  in 
understanding.  He  might  have  addressed  us  as  Moses  addressed  the  Israelites, 
and  given  us  details  instead  of  principles,  and  an  example  in  the  room  of  an  axiom. 
It  pleased  Him,  on  the  contrary,  to  inaugurate  an  adult  dispensation.  2.  The 
Church,  however,  has  not  entered  into  this  purpose  of  its  Founder.  Others  besidi  s 
the  Galatians  desire  to  turn  back  again  to  be  in  bondage  to  "  beggarly  elements." 
But  if  men  will  be  childish  in  their  religion,  they  shall  not  shelter  themselves  under 
Christ's  injunctions  if  St.  Paul  can  hinder  it.  To  be  children  in  malice  towards 
one  another,  and  in  humility  towards  God,  is  that  state  to  which  alone  the  Father 
reveals  His  grace.  But  to  be  children  in  understanding  ;  to  be  credulous  without 
reflection,  obedient  without  intelligence  ; — this  could  not  appear  to  the  noblest 
intellect  of  his  age  worthy  of  that  gospel  which  reveals  the  wisdom  of  God,  and 
educates  u)an  into  perfect  manhood,  into  the  stature  of  the  fulness  of  Jesus  Christ. 
3.  The  right  use  of  the  understanding  in  regard  to  Christianity  is,  of  course, 
determined  by  the  special  nature  of  the  Christian  faith.  Christianity  rests  upon 
facts  which  are  wholly  supernatural.  It  reveals  mysteries  of  which  reason  can  say 
nothing,  either  to  confirm  or  to  dispute.  At  the  same  time,  a  Divine  system  which 
is  to  recover  man  must  be  fitted  to  men.  It  cannot  override  one  part  of  man,  liis 
reason,  in  reaching  another,  his  spirit.  Consider  the  manly  use  of  the  under- 
standing— I.  In  eefeeence  to  Divine  ti!U1h.  The  revelation  of  God  in  His  Son's 
gospel  asks  of  our  understanding— 1.  To  estimate  its  credentials  with  a  candid 
mind  and  a  pure  heait.  (1)  Suppose  that  I  have  been  educated  within  the  bosom 
of  Christ's  Church,  and  have  thus,  by  the  happy  expeiience  of  a  religious  life,  put 
the  faith  of  Jesus  to  frequent  proof.  In  that  case  I  only  use  my  understanding,  as 
a  man  should,  if  I  decline  to  reopen  without  cause  the  question  of  Christian 
evidences.  A  man  may  know  whom  he  has  trusted,  and  be  no  fool.  (2)  Others, 
however,  have  had  an  educational  belief  in  Christianity,  which  personal  experience 
never  verified.  Before  the  understanding  of  such  men  the  gospel  pleads.  It  »sks 
no  more  than  a  full  hearing  and  an  honest  verdict.  Their  duty  is  to  be,  in  uialice, 
indeed,  children,  but  in  understanding,  men  ;  asking  fair  proof,  and  takino-  no  less ; 
grappling  with  a  robust,  not  finical,  intelbct  tbe  question  of  questions.  There  is  a 
reason  which  can  be  given  for  tbe  faith  that  is  in  us.  2.  The  intelligent  inteipre- 
tation  of  its  records.  A  child's  open  heart  may  drink  in  so  much  of  God's  light 
from  a  text  or  two  as  will  quicki  n  it  into  holy  life  ;  but  God  means  grown  Christians 
to  be  at  pains,  by  manly  research  and  the  use  of  reason,  to  ascertain  the  sense  of 
His  book.  It  is  childish  to  dip  into  its  pages  with  a  pin,  as  if  it  were  a  book  of 
fate  ;  it  is  hardly  less  childish  to  cite  texts  at  random,  out  of  their  connection, 
without  asking  when  Ihey  were  written,  or  with  what  design.  3.  To  grasp  its 
truths  as  a  whole.  There  is  no  intellectual  manliness  in  shunning  all  dogmatic 
statements  of  theological  truth,  as  if,  in  the  haze  of  revelation,  nothing  could 
confidently  be  msde  out.  It  is  true  that  few  propositions  in  tbeology  have  escfiped 
contradiction,  and  that  at  particular  pericds  a  rage  for  defining  and  systematising 
has  been  carried  too  far.  But  when  all  this  has  been  conceded,  the  fact  remains 
that  the  Church,  from  the  second  century  to  the  nineteenth,  has  esercised  its 
understanding  on  the  materials  of  revelation  with  such  substantial  hairnony  that 
all  its  main  doctrines  have  survived  and  commanded  the  assent  of  the  most  opposite 
schools.  But  were  theology  a  chaos  of  conflicting  opinions,  still  it  would  be  manly 
to  grapple  with  the  teaching  of  Scripture,  and  endeavour  to  digest  it  into  a  system. 
Shall  the  facts  of  nature  be  classified  and  not  the  results  of  revelation  ?    4.  An 


3G0  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

attitude  towards  all  truth  of  fearless  and  open-minded  candour,  so  long  as  it  is 
unproved  ;  so  soon  as  it  is  proved  true,  one  of  rejoicing  welcome.  The  crude  and 
hasty  theories  of  the  day,  whose  value  is  chietiy  to  stimulate  and  guide  further 
research,  will  make  no  man  uneasy  who  has  studied  the  history  of  past  discovery. 
The  shadows  which  coming  truths  cast  before  them  are  often  mis-shapen,  after  the 
manner  of  shadows,  and  they  startle  the  timorous  ;  but  the  truth  itself  is  always 
reassuring,  a  cheerful  thing  to  healthy  souls.  Ko  man  ought  to  be  so  eager  in  the 
search  for  truth  as  (he  friend  of  Christ,  nor  can  any  man  afford  to  meet  it  with  a 
manlier  greeting.  II.  In  kefekence  to  human  practice.  1.  It  was  in  connection 
with  a  practical  qv;estion — the  profitable  conduct  of  congregational  worship — that 
St.  Paul  gave  this  injunction.  When  people  are  possessed  by  a  very  high  ideal  of 
duty,  or  ruled  by  their  faith  in  what  is  Divine,  they  come  easily  in  danger  of 
despising  common  sense.  Once  let  men  imagine  tliat  God  can  possibly  be  pleased 
with  a  tiling  which  offends  reason,  and  there  is  nothing  too  irrational  for  them  to 
do  in  His  service.  Or,  let  them  only  suppose  that  He  cares  for  external  form,  apart 
from  the  inner  spirit  of  an  act,  and  the  door  is  opened  at  once  to  childish  trifling 
in  worship  and  a  painful  casuistry  iu  morals.  2.  Two  principles  rationally  applied 
will  solve  many  knots  of  casuistry.  (1)  That  we  are  no  longer  children,  who  please 
our  Father  by  an  unintelligent  observance  of  mere  external  rules,  but  men,  whose 
service,  to  be  worth  anything,  must  proceed  from  intelligent  sympatby  with  His 
mind.  To  do,  or  abstain  from  doing,  this,  that,  or  the  other  petty  act,  because  you 
are  told  you  ought  to,  without  knowing  wliy,  is  to  be  a  child.  Be  men.  (2)  The 
subordination  of  the  morally  smatl  to  the  morally  great.  All  right  things  are 
not  equally  important.  Seek  therefore  to  make  sure  of  "the  weightier  matters  of 
the  law."  For  if  our  eye  is  set  on  the  doing  of  these,  the  "  mint,  anise,  and 
cummin,"  which  are  apt  to  give  us  so  much  trouble,  will  not  be  left  undone. 
Conclusion  :  The  understanding  holds  the  function  in  Christian  life  of  a  regulator, 
nowise  that  of  a  moving  power.  A  Christian  who  is  only  one  intellectually  is 
simply  no  Christian  at  all;  for,  till  the  heart  is  converted  and  become  that  of  a 
little  child,  the  man  cannot  see,  cannot,  by  force  of  intellect,  discern,  the  kingdom 
of  heaven.  Let  us  seek  to  retain  the  heart  of  childhood,  but  let  us  guide  it  by  the 
understanding  of  a  man.  (./.  Oaumld  Dykes,  D.D.)  Christianity  and  manhood : — 
I.  The  DISTINCTION  between  CHiLmsHNEss  AND  CHiLDLiKENESs.  "Be  not  children 
in  mind:  howbeit  in  malice  be  ye  babes."  1.  These  two  ideas  are  frequently  con- 
founded, especially  by  young  Christians.  At  first  awaking  to  the  Divine  life  wonder 
largely  takes  the  place  of  understanding,  and  feeling  that  of  thought.  Being  simple 
in  motives  is  easily  mistaken  for  being  simple  in  ideas  and  rudimentary  in  know- 
ledge. In  the  newly  converted  the  two  simplicities  are  engagingly  combined,  and 
they  may  thus  appear  to  be  essentially  connected.  But  this  is  not  the  case.  The 
experience  which  does  not  strengthen  and  enrich  itself  by  sanctified  thinking  and 
meditation  will  soon  become  unreal,  unwholesome,  and  unsafe.  2.  The  childhood 
which  is  the  ideal  of  Christian  character  is  a  moral  and  not  an  intellectual  child- 
hood. We  are  to  "  put  away  childish  things  "  according  to  the  general  law  of  a 
healthy  intellectual  growth.  "  Leaving  the  first  principles  "  we  are  to  "  go  on  unto 
perfection."  II.  The  summons  to  pekfkct  odp.  nature.  This  applies  to  every 
faculty  we  possess,  in  its  relative  and  normally  harmonious  development.  1. 
"  Muscular  Christianity "  has  still  its  gospel  to  preach.  The  body  has  claims 
which  are  too  much  ignored.  Flabbinessand  effeminacy  are  not  proofs  of  holiness. 
The  qualities  and  accomplishments,  too,  by  which  men  are  enabled  to  fulfil  their 
role  as  business  men,  members  of  society,  citizens,  &c.,  are  well  within  the 
"  calling  "  of  the  Christian,  and  demand  his  attention.  They  may  be  a  "  sign  "  to 
many  who  would  fail  to  appreciate  more  esoteric  doctrines  or  practices.  2.  And  so 
of  knowledge,  this  most  characteristic  and  ennobling  faculty  of  man.  Science,  art, 
philosophy,  and  literature  have  all  their  place  in  providing  us  with  a  true  under- 
standing of  life,  and  perfecting  the  mind  for  higher  things.  The  true  goal  of  all 
these  studies  is  "  Divine  knowledge"  or  "wisdom,"  but  they  lead  only  to  the 
threshold.  Christ  calls  us  to  a  higher  school,  and  even  identifies  the  knowledge  of 
God  and  Himself  with  "  eternal  life."  Conclusion:  The  following  considerations 
may  help  to  prove  that  Christianity,  so  far  from  stunting  or  stereotyping  the  thought 
of  man,  has  a  real  need  for  its  exercise,  and  makes  the  greatest  demands  upon  it. 
1.  Christianity  introduces  its  subjects  to  a  great,  su.L'gestive,  and  stimulating 
experience.  2.  It  reveals  the  profound<-st  principles  of  life,  and  trains  us  in  their 
application.  3.  It  demands  the  wisest  and  most  slulful  service.  4.  It  declai'es  it 
as   its  purpose  to   perfect  man's   nature  and  character.      .5.  It  proclaims  every 


CHAP.  XIV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  3G1 

faculty  sacred,  and  of  the  nature  of  a  Divine  stewardship.  [St.  John  A.  Frere.) 
The  right  tise  of  the  understandinq  in  matters  of  religion: — It  may  be  of  use  to 
premise  an  observation  or  two,  the  truth  of  which  must  be  presupposed  in  all 
directions  given  to  men  about  the  exercise  of  their  understandings  in  reh'gion.  1. 
Eeligion  is  in  itself  an  intelligible  and  rational  thing,  of  which  a  clear  and  consistent 
account  may  be  conveyed  to  the  mind,  and  which  may  be  shown  to  have  a  founda- 
tion in  reason  and  argument,  and  not  in  the  ignorance  and  folly  of  mankind.  2. 
Eeligion  is  a  thing  not  only  barely  intelligible  and  rational,  but  apparently  and 
obviously  so,  which  may  be  easily  understood  and  comprehended  by  mankind. 
Thus  it  must  be,  if  religion  be  indeed  the  subject  of  the  inquiry  and  discussion  of 
all  men ;  because  it  is  certain  that  the  faculties  of  the  greatest  part  of  men  will 
never  allow  them  to  peneti'ate  into  things  that  are  any  way  abstruse  or  difficult. 
Besides,  we  must  conclude  from  the  goodness  of  God  that  He  would  never  make 
anything  upon  which  the  happiness  of  man  depends,  as  it  plainly  does  upon 
religion,  either  impossible  or  hard  to  be  known  or  comprehended  by  them.  I. 
I  shall   now  proceed   to   consider    what  this    exercise    of    the    unbebstanding 

WHICH    IS    REQUIRED    FROM   US   WITH    RESPECT   TO     RELIGION    IMPLIES.         1.     It     implies 

fairness  and  candour  and  care  and  diligence  in  our  religious  inquiries  and 
disquisitions;  that  we  keep  our  intellectual  eye  pure  and  unprejudiced,  and  withal 
lively  and  vigorous,  in  which  state  alone  it  is  capable  of  discerning  and  tracing 
out  the  truths  of  religion.  2.  Another  thing  implied  in  the  exercise  of  our  under- 
standings with  respect  to  religion  is  our  acquiescing  in  the  principles  of  it  upon 
sufficient  evidence  being  laid  before  us  of  their  truth.  As  credulity,  or  an  implicit 
belief,  is  altogether  unbecoming,  so  likewise  is  a  sceptical  humour,  which  pins  us 
upon  evading  evidence,  which  makes  us  doubt  where  there  is  no  occasion  to 
hesitate,  where  there  is  light  enough  to  guide  us,  and  to  determine  our  judgment, 
according  to  the  established  jules  of  reasoning,  and  of  giving  our  ase-ent.  3.  There 
is  one  thing  more  implied  in  the  due  exercise  and  cultivation  of  our  understiindings 
with  respect  to  religion,  which  is  our  improving  and  increasing  our  knowledge  of  it 
in  proportion  to  our  abilities.  If  men  would  but  faithfully  endeavour  to  become 
acquainted  with  the  entire  system  of  religion,  many  of  them,  at  least,  would  in  a 
little  time  find  that  they  were  able  to  penetrate  much  farther  into  it  than,  before 
their  making  the  experiment,  they  were  apt  to  think  they  could  do.  The  case  of 
our  mental  and  bodily  powers  is  in  general  the  same:  both  are  greatly  strengthened 
by  use,  whereas  without  it  they  run  to  rust,  and  contract  a  weakness  and  ineptitude 
for  effecting  things  of  which,  through  practice  and  custom,  they  would  have  been 
very  capable.  II.  I  shall  show  for  what  reasons  we  should  thus  exercise  and 
EMPLOY  our  UNDERSTANDINGS  ABOUT  RELIGION.  1.  Both  our  d'gnity  and  happiness 
depend  upon  our  doing  so.  (1)  What  a  shining  figure  does  that  man  make  who, 
by  means  of  a  well-tutored  and  refined  understanding  and  a  large  stock  of  true  know- 
ledge, can  speak  pertinently  upon  any  important  subject  that  occurs  in  conversation 
and  instruct  others  in  the  useful  or  entertaining  sciences  or  arts  of  life  !  (2)  And  as 
our  dignity  depends  so  much  upon  our  exercising  our  undei  standings  in  the  subjects 
of  religion,  so  likewise  does  our  hapjDiness.  For  as  we  are  foimed  with  a  love  of 
truth  and  a  desire  of  knowledge,  so  every  discovery  of  truth  is  attended  with  a 
most  sensible  delight.  And  the  more  important  and  certain  the  truth  which  is 
discovered  is,  the  greater  is  the  pleasure  which  results  from  the  knowledge  of  it. 
Now,  as  the  great  truths  of  religion  must  to  every  ingenious  man  appear  to  be 
above  all  others  momentous,  and  likewise  very  clear  and  certain,  the  mind  which 
inquires  into  them  and  gradually  traces  them  out  must  be  entertained  with  a  most 
pure  and  continually  increasing  pleasure.  2.  We  should  exercise  our  intelligent 
powers  about  religion,  because  without  this  there  can  be  no  merit  or  virtue  in  our 
religion,  nor  can  it  ever  be  pleasing  and  acceptable  to  God.  Keligion,  according  to 
the  most  obvious  notion  of  it,  is  a  reasonable,  voluntary,  and  libernl  service,  flowing 
from  principles  of  light  and  knowledge,  the  calm  approbation  of  our  minds,  and 
the  generous  affections  of  our  hearts.  Instructions  and  inferences:  1.  We  mny 
see  the  ingenuous  spirit  of  our  religion  which,  disdaining  to  take  advantage  of  the 
ignorance,  credulity,  and  inattention  of  mankind,  lays  itself  open  to  the  examina- 
tion of  all  men,  and  even  invites  and  requires  them  carefully  to  try  and  prove  it. 
2.  We  may  see  that  the  ignorance  of  the  true  nature  and  grounds  of  religion,  or, 
which  is  very  nearly  related  to  it,  the  implicit  belief  of  religion  which  so  commonly 
prevails  among  prol'essed  Christians,  even  in  places  of  the  greatest  liberty,  is  very 
faulty  and  inexcusable.  3,  We  may  infer  the  iniquity  of  all  those  methods  which 
are  used  to  deter  or  discourage  men  in  inquiring  freely  into  religion  and  increasing 


362  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

as  far  as  they  are  able  their  knowledge  of  it.  4.  We  may  see  how  much  it  con- 
cerns every  man  to  raise  and  cultivate  in  himself  a  serious,  honest,  and  diligent 
temper  of  searching  into  religion,  and  to  propagate  the  same  among  others  as  far 
as  it  is  in  his  power  to  do  it ;  because  in  this  temper  the  very  es-sence  of  the  duty 
of  exercising  our  understandings  about  religion  consists,  and  because  it  is  the  seed- 
plot  of  truth  and  virtue  in  men,  the  root  from  whence  the  most  generous  improve- 
ments both  in  the  knowledge  and  practice  of  our  duty  shoot  and  grow.  5.  Let  the 
knowledge  which  we  attain  to  in  consequence  of  the  exercise  of  our  understandings 
about  religion  be  always  substituted  by  us  as  the  foundation  of  a  good  conduct  and, 
virtuous  conversation  in  the  world.  Eelipion  is,  above  all  other  sciences  and 
institutions,  practical.  {J.  Orr,  D.D.)  The  mind  the  standard  of  the  man: — 
Dr.  Watts  once  overheard  a  stranger  say,  "  What !  is  that  the  great  Dr.  Watts  ?  " 
The  Doctor,  who  was  of  low  stature,  turning  to  the  gentleman,  promptly  said — 

"  Were  I  so  tall  to  reach  the  poles. 
Or  mete  the  ocean  with  my  span, 
I  must  be  measured  by  my  soul — 
The  mind's  the  standard  of  the  man." 

The  true  test : — The  true  test  of  any  Church  or  ministry  is  not  so  much  the  know- 
ledge which  it  gives  or  the  order  wljich  it  secures,  as  its  productiveness  of  new  men 
in  Christ  Jesus ;  and  it  is  an  awful  test.  When  I  see  where  there  is  the  least 
disturbance  among  you,  where  there  is  the  slightest  disagreement  in  a  Sunday 
school  matter,  that  the  old  worthy  members  of  my  Church  act  like  anybody  else, 
and  squabble,  and  full  of  answerings,  call  back  and  carry  away  hard  feelings,  I  say 
to  myself,  "  I  have  not  made  any  men  yet,"  my  preaching  has  been  as  pour  as  any 
other  minister's.  One  fails  for  one  reason  and  another  for  another.  When  I 
judge  from  what  you  are,  I  feel  that  I  am  about  as  poor  a  minister  as  I  know  of. 
(H.  W.  Beecher.) 

Vers.  21-23.  In  the  law  it  is  written,  With  men  of  other  tongues  .  .  .  will  I 
speak;.  .  .  and  yet  .  .  .  will  they  not  hear  Me. — The  use  of  tongues  :— 'Examine — 
I.  The  quotation.  1.  Its  original  force  (Isa.  xxviii.  11,  12).  2.  The  apostle's  use 
of  it  indicates  generally  that  the  use  of  tongues  was  a  disadvantage  and  not  a  bless- 
ing to  the  heanr.  II.  The  inferekce.  1.  Tongues  a  sij-n^not  for  the  believer 
who  did  not  requite  it,  but  for  the  unbeliever,  as  a  proof  of  Divine  power.  2.  Pro- 
phesying, on  the  contrary,  could  not  benefit  the  unbeliever,  who  resisted  the  truths 
but  the  believer  by  promoting  bis  edification.     {J.  Lyth,  D.I).)  God's  dealiiigs 

with  a  rebellious  feop^e : — Observe — I.  How  God  speaks  to  them.  1.  By  strange 
instrumentalities.  2.  With  a  strange  tongue.  II.  How  they  persist  in  their 
IMPENITENCE.  1.  They  harden  their  hearts.  2.  Eefuse  to  listen.  3.  Aggravate 
their  guilt  and  punishment.  {Ibid.)  Wherefore  tongues  are  for  a  s'gn,  not  to 
them  that  believe  :  .  .  .  but  prophesying  serveth  .  .  .  lor  them  which  believe. 
— Different  modes  of  dealing  icith  men: — Here  are — I.  Difeekent  gondii  ions  of 
HUMAN  MIND.  1.  Unbelief.  2.  Faith.  II.  Diefeeent  eeqdieements.  1.  In  the 
one  case  conviction.  2.  In  the  other  edification.  HI.  Diffeeent  modes  of  deal- 
ing. 1.  In  the  former  there  must  be  a  sign  of  Divine  power.  2.  In  the  latter  the 
proclamation  of  Divine  truth.  (Ibid.)  If  therefore  .  .  .  all  speak  with  tongues, 
.  .  .  will  they  not  say  that  ye  are  mad? — Coifvmon  in  the  Church: — I.  How  it 
MAY  AEisE.  1.  Instance  the  case  supposed.  2.  Some  errors  of  modern  times.  II. 
Why  it  should  be  avoided.  1.  It  produces  a  false  impression.  2.  Brings  reproach. 
3.  Prevents  good.     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  24,  25.  But  if  all  prophesy,  and  there  come  in  one  that  believeth  not,  or 
one  unlearned,  he  is  convinced  of  all. — Frox>hesy in g  in  the  primitive  Church  : — I. 
Its  nature.  1.  Not  the  prediction  of  future  evtnts  (ver.  3),  nor  ordinarily  the 
discussion  of  Scripture,  since  the  New  Testament  was  not  yet  written.  2.  But  the 
preaching  of  New  Testament  truth  already  learnt  from  the  apostles  and  others, 
under  the  direct  impube  of  the  Spirit  (ver.  30),  which  was  liberally  bestowed  upon 
the  members  of  the  Chunh  (ver.  24).  II.  Its  effects.  1.  The  edification  of  the 
Church.  2.  The  conviction  of  the  ignorant  and  unbelieving — producing  awakening 
of  conscience,  confession  of  sin,  and  the  acknowledgment  of  God's  presence.  III. 
Its  relation  to  modern  preaching.  1.  The  direct  communications  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  are  superseded  by  the  completed  canon  of  Scripture,  which  must  be  carefully 


CHAP.  XIV.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  363 

studied  by  persons  properly  qualified,  and  appointed.  2.  Yet  it  were  well  if  there 
were  less  of  human  art  and  method  and  much  more  of  the  Spirit's  unction  and 
power.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  aivakeiihig  of  the  sinner  : — I.  How  he  enters  the 
Christian  assembly.  1.  Unbelie-ving.  2.  Ignorant.  II.  What  he  hears.  1.  The 
voice  of  the  preaclier.  2.  The  proclaniHtion  of  truth.  3.  The  awakenings  of  con- 
science. III.  What  he  does.  1.  Confesses  his  sin.  2.  Worships  God.  3.  Bears 
testimony  to  His  presence  and  power.     (Ibid.)        Conviction  of  sin  : — I.  Preaching 

THE    GOSPEL    IS    AN    ORDINANCE    OF    GoD,  AND    WAS    CONSTANTLY   USED  IN  THE    PRIMITIVE 

Church  (Matt,  xxviii.  19).  Believing  in  Christ  is  necessary  to  salvation  ;  and 
preachmg  the  gospel  is  generally  necessary  to  believing  (Rom.  x.  14  ;  1  Cor.  i.  21). 
II.  Curiosity  frequently  led  persons  to  the  Christian  assemblies.  The  religion 
of  Christ  made  a  great  stir  in  the  world.  Some  were  greatly  prfjudiced  against  it. 
But  when  they  saw  miracles  performed  before  their  eyes  ;  when  they  saw  some  of 
their  neighbours  forsake  the  altars  of  their  idols,  and  be<!ome  moral  and  lovely  in 
their  conduct,  they  were  forced  to  stop  and  consider  how  these  things  could  be,  and 
some  of  them  would,  of  course,  go  and  hear  for  themselves.  Our  text  supposes 
such  a  thing.  God  often  overruled  this  kind  of  curiosity  for  good.  Zaccheus 
wanted  to  gratify  his  curiosity ;  but  Christ,  in  mercy,  called  and  converted  him. 
And  it  is  happy  for  many  that  they  did  not  suffer  their  own  prejudices,  or  the  fear 
of  man,  to  pi  event  their  judging  for  themselves.     III.  Primitive  preaching  had  a 

TENDENCY  TO  CONVINCE  MEN  OF  THEIR  GUILT  AND  DANGER.       1.    The  unbeliever,  COming 

into  the  assembly,  is  convinced  ;  whoever  preached,  his  doctrine  had  this  tendency, 
to  convince  the  man  of  sin.  This  is  done  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit,  going  along 
with  the  Word  (.John  xvi.  8).  2.  "He  is  judged  of  all";  tried,  and  condemned. 
The  consideration  of  his  own  sin  is  brought  home  to  his  conscience,  as  when 
Nathan  said  to  David,  "  Thou  art  the  man  !  "  He  receives  the  sentence  of  death 
in  himself.  It  is  the  office  of  an  enlightened  conscience  to  anticipHte  the  judgment 
of  the  great  day.  Most  men  have  such  a  noiion  of  the  mercy  of  God  as  to  foiget 
His  just'ce  and  holiness  ;  but  when  a  person  is  convinced  of  sin  he  sees  that  God 
is  holy  and  just  ;  and  he  cannot  but  dread  these  teriible  attributes,  till  he  learns 
from  the  g"spel  how  God  is  at  once  "a  just  God  and  a  Saviour"  (Isa.  xlv.  21; 
Eom.  iii.  36).  IV.  Preaching  the  Word  tends  to  disclose  the  secret  workings 
OF  THE  HEART,  WHICH  WERE  UNOBSERVED  BEFORE.  Most  mcu  are  SO  busicd  in  worldly 
affaus,  or  sti  pefied  with  worldly  pleasures,  that  they  are  great  strangers  to  them- 
sehes.  But  the  faithful  preaching  of  God's  Word  has  a  tendency  to  rouse  men 
from  their  supineness.  The  W^ord  of  God  is  a  mirror  that  shows  men  their  hearts. 
Persons  who  have  not  been  used  to  hear  the  gospel  are  frequently  sui prised,  when 
they  sit  under  a  jiowerful  ministrj',  to  hear  their  own  case  and  character  so  exactly 
described.  This  is  the  proper  effect  of  the  Word  of  God,  which  carries  with  it  a 
mighty  and  convincing  argument  of  its  truth,  as  being  the  Word  of  Him  who 
searcheth  the  heart  and  trieth  the  reins  (Jer.  xvii.  10).  V.  When  a  man  is  con- 
VERTED  TO  GoD  HE  ALWAYS  BEGINS  TO  PRAY.  This  was  the  syuiptom  of  Paul's  own 
conversion  :  "  Behold,  he  prayeth  !  "  It  is  sad  to  think  that  so  many  people  never 
pray.  A  short  form  of  words,  always  the  same,  and  always  unfelt.  Behold  here, 
a  man  so  overpowered  with  a  sense  of  the  majesty  and  justice  of  God  ;  so  deeply 
affected  with  his  daxger  as  a  sinner,  and  so  eagerly  desirous  of  pardoning  mercy, 
that  he  forgets  he  is  surrounded  by  mortals,  and  falls  down  before  his  God  with  the 
publican's  petition  (Luke  xviii.  13).  So  hnve  I  seen  a  condemned  criminal  at  a 
human  bar,  when  the  sentence  of  death  has  been  j^ronounced,  fall  down  on  his 
knees,  and,  regardless  of  the  gazing  throng,  implore  the  favour  of  the  judge.  So 
have  I  seen  dying  persons,  expecting  soon  to  appear  before  God,  cry  aloud  for  mency, 
without  considering  who  surrounded  their  beds.  The  place,  or  the  posture  of 
prayer,  is  of  little  consequence.  It  might  disturb  the  public  worship,  yet  when  a 
person  is  greatly  affected,  it  will  be  difTxcult  to  conceal  his  emotions.  He  will  lift 
up  his  heart,  if  not  his  voice  to  God.  VI.  Converted  persons  drop  all  their 
prejudices  against  the  people  of  God,  and  speak  honourably  of  them.  "He 
will  report  that  God  is  in  you  of  a  truth."  Profane  people  treat  them  with  con- 
tempt and  scorn.  But  no  sooner  does  a  man  come  to  himself,  and  see  things  as 
they  are,  than  he  forms  a  very  different  opinion  of  godly  persons.  He  sees  that 
they  are  the  excellent  of  the  eaith,  the  children  of  God,  and  heirs  of  eternal  glory. 
(G.  Burdcr.)  Conversion  prepared  for: — I.  Conversion  effected  by  means.  1. 
The  door  of  the  sanctuary  should  be  an  open  one  (ver.  23).  Restrictions  should  be 
swept  away.  Non-church-goers  are  often  such  through  the  action  of  church-goers. 
2.  Means  should  constantly  be  employed  in  the  sanctuary.     The  gospel  should  be 


361  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

preached.  The  presence  of  "  unbeUevers  "  and  unlearned  should  be  borne  In  mind. 
II.  Probable  MEANS  OF  CONVERSION.  1.  Order  and  propriety  in  the  sanctuary.  The 
building  is  not  unimportant,  for  there  are  some  churches  in  which  it  is  difficult  to 
be  converted.  The  services  should  be  decorous,  or  the  stranger  may  think  we  are 
mad.  But  diilness  and  coldne-is  are  not  decorous.  2.  Worship.  Song  and  prayer 
have  won  not  a  few— but  both  may  hinder.  3.  Preaching  should  be — (1)  Intelligible 
— not  over  the  heads  of  the  people.  (2)  Sensible — not  under  their  heads.  (3) 
Direct  (ver.  24),  so  that  the  hearer  may  feel  that  it  is  meant  for  hhn.  (4)  Searching 
— manifesting  the  secrets  of  the  heart.  (5)  Scriptural.  III.  Tests  of  the 
SUITABILITY  OP  THE  MEANS.  1.  What  do  the  Unbelieving  and  ignorant  think  of 
them  ?  Some  will  scoff ;  but  what  will  the  common-sense  and  sincere  think  ? 
What  ought  they  to  think  ?  2.  What  results  will  follow?  Are  they  those  of  ver. 
25?  If  not  something  is  amiss.  Is  it  the  want  of  the  Holy  Spirit  ?  {E.  Hurndall, 
M.A.)  Faithful  preaching : — I.  Will  be  a  power  on  unbelievers,  for — 1.  It  is 
the  exertion  of  spiritual  power.  2.  It  will  aroase  and  liberate  the  conscience.  3, 
It  must  include  the  aspects  of  truth  directly  suited  to  reach  the  unbeliever.  II. 
Will  exert  a  particular  kind  of  power  on  unbelievers.  1.  Impression,  "  He  is 
convinced  of  all."  2.  Knowledge  of  self,  "  Secrets  of  heart  made  manifest."  3. 
Sense  of  God  (ver.  25).  (R.  Tuck,  B.A.)  And  thus  are  the  secrets  of  his  heart 
made  manifest. — 'I'he  secrets  of  the  heart: — I.  Thr  heart  is  the  deposiiort  of 
MANY  secrets.  The  assumption  of  knowledge  is  one  of  our  most  besetting  and 
perilous  weaknesses  ;  how  little  we  really  know  of  the  world  around  us  !  We  know 
far  less  of  that  within.  Note  some  of  the  secrets  of  the  heart  of  an  unbelieving 
man.  1 .  There  is  hidden  within  him  an  immense  amount  of  ignorance  and  conceit 
of  which  he  knows  notliing.  He  has  no  true  knowledge  of  himself  as  a  sinner. 
Had  he  such  knowle'lge  he  would  apply  at  once  for  salvation,  and  not  pharisaically 
congratulate  himself  that  he  is  not  as  otlier  men.  2.  A  deep  and  inexhaustible 
depravity  which  alienates  him  from  God.  Of  this  he  knows  nothing,  or  the  know- 
iedge  would  be  such  a  misery  as  would  give  him  no  rest  until  a  remedy  was 
discovered.  3.  Many  unremembered  and  unthmight-of  sins.  Sin  unknowingly  com- 
mitted as  well  as  those  willingly  forgotten  lie  buried  deep  in  the  memory  till  the 
hour  of  revival.  4.  Numerous  latent  fears.  The  child  that  is  happy  in  the  broad 
daylight  knows  nothing  of  those  fears  which  the  dark  and  lonely  night  will  awal<en. 
Even  in  this  world  the  unbeliever's  fears  may  emerge  from  the  caverns  in  which 
they  lie  concealed ;  but  in  the  hereafter  who  can  prognosticate  the  fears  which  will 
be  awakened  by  the  consciousness  of  unforgiven  guilt?  5.  A  sense  of  God,  right, 
truth,  and  immortality.  No  one  is  so  utterly  degraded  as  to  have  no  traces  of  those 
radical  principles.  Not  that  we  are  born  with  any  positive  ideas  of  them,  but  we 
are  born  with  certain  capacities  which  infallibly  secure  to  us  impressions  of  the 
invisible,  infinite,  and  eternal.  And  tliere  will  come  a  time  when  these  will  be  the 
grand  all-absorbinc  truths.  II.  The  manifestaiion  of  those  secrets.  Ignnriintas 
we  are  of  the  depths  of  our  own  nature  there  is  a  limited  but  suihcient  knowledge 
that  we  may  obtain  of  ourselves.  By  the  li^'ht  of  God's  Word  and  the  teaching  of 
His  Spirit  we  may  learn  so  much  as  to  see  the  necessity  and  suitableness  of  God's 
provision  for  our  s  ilvation.  And  oftentimes  it  pleases  God — as  in  the  case  before 
us — to  lead  the  unbeliever  to  the  as-emhly  of  His  peoi^le,  and  by  the  truth  published 
and  the  Spirit  given  there,  to  shed  light  into  the  heart.  As  psalm  and  prayer 
uprise,  as  the  Scriptures  are  read  and  explained,  new  and  surprising  revelations 
are  vouchsafed.  The  slumliering  conscience  is  aroused,  memory  is  quickened, 
the  consciousness  of  God,  judgment,  and  eternity  becomes  vivid,  and  the  once 
unbeliever  is  overpowered,  and  confesses  to  the  Divine  revelation  made  to  his  heart. 
Conclusion  :  If  you  have  not  seen  any  of  these  things,  consider — 1.  Your  fearful 
and  benighted  iv'uorance.  2.  The  danger  of  this  revelation  when  it  will  be  of  no 
avail.  3.  The  necessity  of  the  prayer,  "  Lord,  that  I  may  receive  my  sight."  {W.  T. 
Bull,  B.A.)  The  nature  of  spiritval  gifts,  and  some  directions  for  their  use: — 
1.  A  "  spiritual  gift "  is  the  faculty  in  each  in  which  the  Holy  Spirit  reveals 
Himself.  Every  man  h>is  some  such,  in  which  his  chief  force  lies.  2.  There 
are  certain  creative  epochs  when  intense  fedings  elevate  all  the  powers  preter- 
naturally.  Such,  e.g.,  was  the  close  of  the  last  century,  when  the  revolutionary 
spirit  created  a  preternatural  abundance  of  military  talent.  Such,  too,  was 
the  first  age  of  Christianity.  The  Holy  Spirit  was  poured  out  largely,  and 
whatever  it  touched  it  vivified.  The  Holy  Ghost  may  mingle  with  man  in 
three  ways — with  bis  body,  and  then  you  have  a  miracle ;  with  his  spirit,  and 
then  j'ou  have  that  exalted  feeling  which  finds  vent  in  "  tongues  "  ;  or  with  his 


CHAP.  XIV.]  I.  COrxINTHIANS.  365 

intellect,  and  then  you  have  prophecy.  I.  In  the  case  of  PKopHEcr,  cultivated 
minds  were  themselves  able  by  the  uuderstanding  to  convey  to  the  understanding 
what  the  Spirit  meant.  1.  But  tlie  essential  in  all  this  was  the  Divine  element  of 
life.  Just  as  when  rain  falls  on  dry  ground,  the  resultant  greenness  and  vigour 
are  simply  the  outward  manifestation  of  invisible  life— :;0  the  new  life  penetrated 
the  whole  man,  and  gave  force  to  every  faculty.  2.  Consider  what  this  gift  must 
have  done  in  developing  the  Church  !  Men  came  inio  Christian  assemblies  for 
once,  and  were  astonislied  by  the  flood  of  luminous  and  irresistible  truth  which 
passed  from  the  pruphetic  lips  :  it  became  an  inslrument  of  conversion.  3.  In 
ver.  29  we  learn  that  private  inspiiation  was  always  to  be  judged  by  the  general 
inspiration — i.e.,  it  was  not  to  be  taken  for  granted  becausre  spoken.  Inspiration 
is  one  thing,  infallibiUty  is  another.  God  ihe  Holy  Ghost,  as  a  sanctifying  Spirit, 
dwells  in  human  beings  with  partial  sin.  Did  He  not  do  so,  He  could  not  dwell 
with  man  at  all.  Therefore,  St.  Paul  says  that  the  spirits  of  the  prophets  are  to 
be  subject  to  the  prophets.  Neglect  of  this  has  been  a  fruitful  cause  of  fanaticism. 
The  afflatus  was  not  irresistible  ;  a  man  was  not  to  be  borne  away  by  his  gift,  but 
to  be  master  of  it,  and  responsible  for  it.  II.  Eespecting  tongues,  note  the 
follo\vi)ig  directions.  1.  Repression  of  feeling  in  public.  This  state  of  etstacy  was 
so  pleasurable,  and  the  admiration  awaided  to  it  so  easy  to  be  procured,  that 
numbers,  instead  of  steady  well-doing,  spent  life  in  "  showing  off."  The  American 
camp  meetings,  &c.,  show  how  uncontrolled  reh'gious  feeling  nuiy  overpower  reason 
— mere  animal  feeling  mingling  with  the  movements  of  Divine  life.  There  is 
great  danger  in  this,  and  just  in  proportion  as  feehngs  are  strong  do  they  require 
discipline.  When  religious  life  degenerates  into  mere  indiilgence  of  feeling,  life 
wastes  away,  and  the  man  or  woman  becomes  weak,  instead  of  strong.  What 
a  lesson  !  These  Divine  high  feelings  in  Corinth — to  what  had  tbey  degenerated  ! 
A  stranger  coming  in  would  pronounce  the  speakers  mad!  2.  "Forbid  not  to 
speak  with  tongues."  A  common  mun  would  have  said,  "  All  this  is  wild  fanaticism  ; 
away  with  it!"  St.  Paul  said,  "It  is  not  all  fanaticism:  part  is  true,  part  is 
error."  The  true  is  God's  Spirit.  Learn,  then,  to  sympathise  with  deep  feeling. 
There  are  cold,  intellectual  men,  who  frown  on  every  manifestation  of  feeling  ; 
whereas  only  the  Spirit  can  inteipret  the  Spirit.  3.  To  prefer  gifts  which  are 
useful  to  others,  rather  than  those  wliich  draw  admiration  to  ourselves.  And  yet 
there  are  few  who  would  not  rather  be  the  gifted  sinj^er,  at  whose  strains  breathless 
multitudes  melt  into  tears,  than  some  nur^e  of  a  hospital,  soothing  pain,  or  a 
Diircas  making  garments  for  the  poor.  It  is  better  to  be  useful  than  brilliant.  4. 
The  real  union  of  the  human  race  lies  in  oneness  of  heart.  This  gift  was  not  a 
gift  of  foreign  languages;  a  Greek  might  be  speaking  in  tlie  Spiiit,  and  another 
Greek  might  not  understand  him;  but  a  Roman  or  a  Mesoputamian  might,  and 
this  by  a  gift  of  sympathy.  The  world  is  craving  for  unity;  it  may  be  centuries 
before  it  comes  ;  still  it  is  sometbing  to  be  on  the  right  track.  Christianity  casts 
aside  all  human  plans  and  speculations  as  utterly  insufficient.  It  does  not  look  to 
political  economy,  to  ecclesiastical  drill,  nor  to  the  absorption  of  all  languages  into 
one  ;  but  it  looks  to  the  eternal  Spirit  of  God,  which  proceeds  from  the  eternal  Sod. 
One  heart,  and  then  many  languages  will  be  no  barrier.  One  spiiit,  and  man  will 
understand  man.  Conclusion:  There  are  gifts  which  draw  admiration  to  a  man's 
self,  others  which  solace  and  soothe  him  personally,  and  a  Ihiid  class  which  benefit 
others.  The  world  and  the  Bible  are  at  issue  on  the  comi^arative  woith  of  these. 
A  gifted  singer  soon  makes  a  fortune,  and  men  give  tlieir  guineas  ungrudgingly  for 
a  morning's  enjoyment.  An  humble  teaclier  in  a  school,  or  a  missionary,  can  often 
but  only  just  live.  Only  remember  that,  in  the  sight  of  the  Everlasting  Eye,  the 
one  is  creating  sounds  which  perish  with  the  hour  that  gave  them  birth,  tiie  other 
is  building  for  the  eternal  world  an  immortal  human  spirit.  (F.  W.  Eobertsotif 
M.A.) 

Vers.  20-1:0.  How  is  it  then,  brethren  ?  when  ye  come  together,  every  one  of 
you  hath  a  psalm,  .  .  .  a  doctrine.  — IJIui'^tidii  uH))\iliip : — I.  What  it  inclddes.  1. 
Singing.  2.  Teaching.  3.  Pra\cr.  II.  What  its  objects.  1.  Mutual  edification. 
2.  Instruction.  3.  Comfort.  III.  What  it  requires.  1.  Ordtr.  2.  Attention. 
8.  Peace.  4.  Propriety.  IV.  What  its  spirit.  1.  Humility.  2.  Submission  to 
God's  Word.  3.  Desire.  4.  Eeverence.  {J.  Li/th,  D.D.)  Five  chords  to  the  harp  : — 
This  morning,  in  our  coming  together,  we  have  this  variety  of  living  expeiiences 
and  powers.  We  come  iuto  the  Church  out  of  a  confused  world — confusions  of 
state,  of  science,  of  society,  of  the  man  himself.      It  seems  as  if  we  were  in  an 


366  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

orchestra  in  which  every  instrument  is  out  of  tune  and  every  performer  maintain- 
ing his  performanco  to  be  the  perfection  of  harmony.  And  what  a  confused  Church 
it  seems!  Wliat  rival  theories  and  speculations!  Every  point  is  disputed;  all 
preach  charity,  but  then  it  sliould  be  practised  by  the  other  side;  every  one  hath 
an  inl'alhble  standard,  but  then  no  one  will  submit  to  it.  Every  one  hath  a  psalm, 
doctrine,  tongue,  &c.,  but  little  turns  out  to  edifying.  Yet  this  is  not  the  intention 
of  the  apostle  in  the  text.  First,  it  is  a  voice  to  life,  the  description  of  the  Church 
of  the  living  God,  and  of  the  varied  means  of  grace  by  which  the  sph'it  grows.  It 
is  the  assurance  that  variety  is  no  hindrance  to  edification,  but  rather  the  way  to 
it,  even  as  the  various  materials  of  a  building  do  not  interfere  with  the  unity  of  the 
building,  but  help  it  forward.  Then,  second,  it  is  an  invocatioir  to  the  sanctifica- 
tion  of  speech,  with  which  compare  Exod.  iv.  11.  As  speech  distinguishes  man 
from  all  the  other  inhaiiitants  of  ihe  earth,  so  sacred  speech  especially  distinguishes 
the  Christian  man  from  other  men.  Speech  is  the  glorious  endowment  which  con- 
stitutes the  poet,  the  singer,  the  orator.  Speech  so  Divine  in  its  origin  and  use  is 
to  flow  back  to  G.>d;  it  is  to  be  converteil.  The  song  is  to  be  converted  to  the 
psaltn.  How  dreadful  is  unconverted  speech  and  its  effects  !  When  the  physician 
visits  the  sick  patient,  one  of  the  first  things  he  asks  him  to  do  is  to  put  out  his 
tongue.  He  tests  the  state  of  the  body  by  the  tongue.  And  I  am  almost  disposed 
to  say  to  the  professing  Christian,  "  Put  out  your  tongue."  One  of  the  first  effects 
of  holiness  in  the  life  is  the  purification  of  speech.  "  If  a  man  offend  not  in  word, 
the  same  is  a  perfect  man."  But  we  have  in  the  text  the  constituent  elements  of  a 
Divine  service.  Here  are  the  five  chords  of  a  human  harp,  by  whose  charm  life 
grows  into  fulness  and  proportion.  Every  one  hath  something ;  let  no  one  be 
depressed  on  his  own  account,  let  no  one  be  scornful  on  account  of  his  neifzhbour. 
I.  Strike  the  first  chord — "Every  one  of  you  hath  a  psalm,"  the  musical  adora- 
tion. Every  one  of  you  hath  a  psalm  that  is  the  gladness  of  life — life  realised  as 
good,  when  the  soul  says,  "  0  come,  let  us  sing  unto  the  Lord,"  &c.  Even  as  a 
bird  in  a  dark  grove  is  heard  in  its  sweet  s'raio,  so  let  your  voice  rise,  the  swell  of 
your  praise,  the  sob  of  your  confession,  of  your  grief.  Say  it  first  fur  yourself, 
"  Bless  the  Lord,  0  my  soul !  "  then  say  it  aloud  to  all  the  cong%-egati(m.  II.  Then 
strike  the  second  chord— Every  one  or  you  hath  a  doctrine.  As  there  is  a  psalm 
of  life,  there  is  a  doctrine  of  life.  Man  is  a  being  of  feet  as  well  as  wings.  There 
is  the  practical  aspect  of  Christian  truth.  Surely  every  one  of  you  knows  something ; 
you  have  lines,  you  have  laws  and  statutes,  even  as  the  noblest  mus  ci;m  has  his 
notes  and  bars  and  scale  of  melody!  And  the  doctrine  is  the  guide,  the  law  of 
life.  What  is  arithmetic  without  numbers?  What  is  language  without  letters? 
So  religion  is  intangible  without  creed.  III.  And  then  strike  the  third  chord — 
Every  one  of  you  hath  a  tongue,  i.e.,  language  that  is  especially  his  own.  The 
accent  is  the  soul.  How  different  are  real  words,  real  prayers,  and  yet  the  accent 
is  true.  Some  tongues  are  as  if  tipped  with  shafts  of  fire,  and  some  distil  as  the 
dew.  Some  words  swell  with  passion,  and  some  flow  like  music.  How  varied  are 
the  accents  of  Isaiah,  Jeremi  .h,  Paul,  and  John!  IV.  Then  there  is  the  fourth 
chord — Every  one  of  you  hath  a  revelation.  Every  Christinn  has  had  his  own 
satisfying  vision  ;  this  is  the  story  of  his  soul,  as  when  P«ul  said,  "  It  j^leased  God 
to  reveal  His  Son  in  me  "  ;  but  let  us  not  make  our  revelation  the  absolute  standard 
to  another.  V.  Then  there  is  the  fifth  chord — Every  one  of  you  haih  an  interpre- 
tation, and  that  is  the  consolation  of  hope;  and  as  the  revel-ition  is  to  a  man,  so 
will  his  interpretation  be  ;  what  I  have  seen  and  felt  in  the  Bible  is  that  whi.  h  I 
shall  draw  forth  from  it.  Every  one  hath  his  own  interpretation,  his  own  mode  of 
reading  his  Bible,  if  he  read  it  with  his  own  eyes  ;  and  of  what  avail  is  it  to  me  to 
read  my  Bible  with  the  eyes  of  another  man  ?  Conclusion  :  And  life  does  all  this. 
Life  is  the  spirit  in  which  all  is  performed  ;  no  life  then,  no  psalm,  no  dodrine,  &c. 
On  the  other  hand,  a  living  p-!alm,  a  living  doctrine,  &c.,  that  all  may  be  done  to 
edifying.  [Faxton  Hnod.)  Let  all  things  be  done  tmto  edifying. —  h  dijication 
the  aim  of  Christinn  speech: — When  Handel  s  oratorio  of  the  "  Messiah"  had  won 
the  admiration  of  many  of  the  great.  Lord  Kinnoul  took  occasion  to  pay  him  some 
compliments  on  the  noble  entertainment  which  he  had  lat'  ly  given  tl:e  town.  "  My 
lord,"  said  Handel,  "I  should  be  sorry  if  I  only  entertained  them;  I  wish  to  make 
them  better."  It  is  to  be  feared  that  many  speechm  .kers  at  public  meetings  could 
not  say  as  much  ;  and  yet  how  dare  any  of  us  waste  the  time  of  uur  feUow-immo  tals 
in  mere  amusing  talk!  If  we  have  nothing  to  speak  to  edification,  how  ni'ich 
better  to  hold  onr  tongue!     (C.  H.   Spurgeon.)         Concerning  edift/lng  : — I.  The 

EDIFICATION   OF   OTHEKS  IS  A  DUTY  TO  WHICH  ALL  CHRISTIANS   ARE    OBLIGED.       And   this 


CHAP.  XIV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  367 

•will  appear— 1.  From  its  being  so  much  insisted  on  in  Scripture  (1  Thess.  v. 
11;  Koin.  xiv.  19;  xv.  2).  And  what  he  so  much  recommends  Paul  eminently 
exemplifies.  2.  From  the  relation  that  all  Christians  have  to  Christ  as  to  their 
common  Lord  and  Head.  Whenever  tl  ey  pray  that  His  kinn;dom  may  come,  they 
hereby  declare  that  liiey  desire  to  see  the  enlargeiuent  of  Christ's  kingdom.  And 
how  is  this  consist^^nt  with  being  indii'ferent  and  unconcerned  about  the  edification 
•of  others  ?  Building  is  not  more  properly  the  business  and  employment  of  the 
professed  builder  than  it  is  that  of  the  Christian  in  all  things  to  profit  and  edify  his 
ueighbour.  3.  From  the  relation  men  have  to  one  another,  as  being  jointly  mem- 
bers of  the  mystical  body  of  Christ.  We  are  not  only  memljers  of  Christ's  body, 
but  members  also  one  of  another.  And  it  is  the  great  Liw  of  the  gospel  that,  as 
such,  we  have  love  one  towards  another.  Now  unless  that  charity  can  be  esteemed 
perfect  which  extends  to  men's  bodies  and  not  to  their  souls,  we  must  look  on 
ourselves  as  obliged  as  to  a  very  considerable  branch  of  Christian  charity  to  study 
to  edify  one  another.  And  therefore  Paul  makes  it  a  mark  of  charity  that  it 
"editieth."  II.  That  especial  manner  wheeeint  the  ministees  of  CiintsT  in 
PAETicDLAE  ABE  OBLIGED  TO  EouwARD  THIS  GOOD  WORK.  The  edifying  the  Cliurch  is 
the  particular  business  for  which  they  are  set  apart,  and  therefore  everv  part  of 
their  conduct  should  have  a  particular  tendency  to  this  very  thing.  1.  In  their 
public  instruction-^!.  Instructing  the  ignorant  is  but  one  part  of  the  preacher's 
business.  To  remind  those  thnt  are  careless  and  to  induce  those  who  are  not  so 
ignorant  as  some  others  to  consideration  is  as  much  his  business  as  the  other,  and 
is  every  whit  as  necessary.  And  if  men  are  edified  either  way,  then  is  preaching  a 
•proper  means  of  edification.  2.  When  they  are  officiating  in  holy  things.  Tiiey 
whose  duty  it  is  to  join  with  us  in  prayer  will  be  differently  affected  according  as 
they  observe  the  several  part-^  of  Divine  service  to  be  performed  negligently  and 
perfunctorily,  or  with  fitting  care  and  decency.  In  the  latter  case  they  who  bring 
proper  sentiments  to  the  Louse  of  Goii  will  feel  their  good  dispo-itions  cherished 
and  encournged,  and  will  be  apt  to  relish  devotion  more,  and  to  find  greater  delight 
and  satisfa-tion  in  such  religious  exercises.  And  as  for  those  who  are  thought!'  ss, 
the  decent  and  devotional  deportment  of  those  who  officiate  will  be  a  p  iwerful, 
though  secret,  check  to  their  want  of  attention  and  levity,  and  will  be  the  most 
likely  way  to  awaken  them  from  their  heedlessness  and  indolence.  3.  In  the 
•exemplariness  of  their  lives.  Concerning  Christ,  Lactantius  has  bbperved  that 
"He  did  not  only  point  out  to  us  the  true  way,  but  went  Himself  before  us  in  it, 
and  this  He  did  that  no  one  on  account  of  the  difficulty  should  be  afraid  of  ven- 
turing into  the  ways  of  virtue."  It  is  a  secret  objection  men  are  apt  to  make  within 
themselves  against  the  doctrine  of  the  gosp -1  that  it  is  a  rule  of  too  great  perfection 
to  be  j)ractised,  and  this  objection  cannot  be  more  effectually  removed  than  when 
the  preachers  of  it  are  themselves  examples  of  what  they  teach.  III.  By  way  op 
MOTIVE  TO  THIS  WORK,  NOTE  THE  FOLLOWING  AEGUiiENTS.  1.  The  excellence  of  this 
work.  It  is  doing  our  best  towards  restoring  man  to  the  image  of  his  Maker ;  it  is 
-putting  him  into  a  state  of  liberty,  and  delivering  him  froui  the  servitude  of  sin, 
and  fitting  him  for  God's  favour  and  rewards.  And  what  a  great  honour  is  it  to 
mortal  man  !  2.  The  ^reat  charity  of  this  work,  inasmuch  as  it  consists  in  con- 
verting sinners  from  the  error  of  their  ways,  it  is  saving  of  souls  from  death.  3. 
The  great  necessity  that  we  in  particular  of  the  clergy  are  under  of  having  this 
good  work  very  much  at  heart  (chap.  is.  10).  4.  The  exceeding  great  reward  that 
attends  it  (Dan.  xii.  3).  5.  The  unspeakable  comfort  and  God-like  joy  which  mu^-t 
"be  felt  even  in  this  life  by  ttiose  who  have  been  successful.  It  is  the  only  thing  we 
know  of  tliat  even  in  heaven  itself  can  make  new  joy.  IV.  The  wise  peovision 
MADE  BY  our  Chuech  FOR  THE  EDIFICATION  OF  ITS  MEMBERS.  1.  The  Service  in  the 
vulgar  tongue  is  certainly  much  better  fitted  to  inspire  those  who  are  present  with 
sentiments  of  piety  and  devotion  than  when  it  is  in  a  language  which  they  that 
■hear  it  do  not  understand.  2.  Our  liturgy  is  in  all  its  parts  edifying.  3  It  is  cer- 
tainly more  for  edification  that  the  business  of  public  instruction  should  be  in  the 
hands  of  persons  who  by  their  education  have  been  qualified  for  this  thing,  and 
who  have  been  approved  and  sent  forth  by  the  governors  of  the  Church,  than  t'at 
so  important  a  business  should  be  left  to  every  one's  caprice  who  should  take  it 
into  his  head  that  he  i-<  qualified  for  this  office.  4.  That  judicious  choice  which 
our  Church  has  made  in  retaining  some  ceremonies  and  abolishing  others  is  another 
thing  in  which  our  constit  ition  is  well  fitted  to  edifying.  (Dean  Claijgett.)  Fel- 
lomsliip  in  ordr  to  edification : — This  is  the  only  meeting  where  this  is  the  primary 
•object.    It  is  tharefore  important  as  the  gauge  of  Church  life — at  once  a  barometer, 


368  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

chronometer,  thermometer.  How  far  fellowship  exists  and  how  close  it  is  cannot 
be  judgf^d  by  audiences  on  the  Lord's  day.  Often  the  minister  is  the  personal 
magnet,  and  the  Church  falls  into  disintegiatioQ  when  he  is  withdrawn,  as  a  sheaf 
of  wheat  when  tbe  bond  is  removed.  But  it  is  never  so  when  the  prayer-meeting 
is  central.  Note  the  requisites  of  a  good  prayer-meeting.  I.  Attendance — "  all 
with  one  accord  ia  one  place  "  (A.cts  i.  13,  14).  Blessed  unanimity  ! — itself  a 
promise  and  prophecy  of  Pentecost.  To  promote  this  the  meeting  should  be  made 
attractive.  The  place,  the  time,  the  environment  ought  to  be  all  favourable — 
liuht,  heat,  ventilation,  home  comfort.  A  fervent  meeting  cannot  be  expected  with 
freezing  feet.  The  household  of  believers  should  have  a  home  atmosphere  in  a 
home  gathering.  II.  Agreement  (Matt,  xviii.  19,  20).  A  divided  Church  never 
has  a  true  prayer  service.  Unity  reacts  on  the  meeting,  drawing  together  by  a 
common  motive.  II.  This  sense  of  the  presence  of  the  Mastkr  (Matt,  xviii.  "20  ; 
1  Cor.  v.  4).  Every  attendant  helps  to  make  the  atmosphere  of  the  meeting,  and 
hence  ought  to  go  from  the  closet  impelled  by  the  expeciation  of  seeing  the  Lord. 
IV.  Spontaneity.  Participation  should  be  voluntary.  Anything  constrained  hurts 
the  meeting.  We  need  the  flow  of  a  fountain,  not  the  spurt  of  a  force-pump. 
Spontaneity  indexes  spirituality.  The  measure  of  the  presence  of  the  Spirit  is 
shown  by  voluntariness  of  participation.  If  a  believer  takes  part  against  his  will, 
constramed  by  couitesy  to  the  leailer,  his  help  is  of  doubtful  value.  Selection  is 
too  apt  to  be  guided  by  intellpctiial  standards.  It  is  not  always  the  most  intelligent 
that  most  edify.  V.  Inforjiat.ixy  (Acts  xvi.  13).  The  i^rayer-naeeting  in  primitive 
days  was  held  in  such  plnces  as  suggested  free,  familiar  interchange.  The  nearer 
the  approach  to  a  family  gathering  the  better.  I'ormality  kills;  all  undue  ceremony 
and  dignity  are  hurtful.  VI.  Liberty  (2  Cor.  iii.  17).  This  must  be  cultivated  in 
ourselves  and  encouraged  in  others.  Hypercriticism  is  its  implacable  foe.  An 
aristocrat  persistently  advised  me  to  do  all  the  praying  and  talking,  and  keep 
others  from  taking  part,  except  two  wlioin  he  mentioned.  All  others  "  grated  upon 
Ids  ear."  Alas !  how  are  raw  recruits  to  be  developed  to  veterans  without  practice  ? 
The  ideal  meeting  is  where  every  one,  even  women,  exercise  the  gift  of  the  Spirit 
free'y  as  led  of  God  (Acts  i.  14).  VII.  Simplicity.  Ehetoric  is  generally  addressed 
to  the  audience,  not  God.  Even  of  the  broken  prayer  the  Lord  "takes  the  mean- 
ing." VIII.  A  spiritual,  Scriptural  tone.  If  young  people  and  new  converts 
could  be  gathered  weekly  for  training  by  the  pastor  or  some  competent  person  in 
know  edge  of  the  Word  and  practice  in  public  prayer,  the  prayer-meeting  would 
show  results.  Conclusion  :  A  few  hints  may  be  added  as  to  the  various  exercises. 
1.  Praise.  Song  is  very  important,  yet  often  perverted.  The  prayer-meeting  is 
not  a  concert  or  a  singing-school.  The  time  is  short — all  exercises  should  be  brief ; 
the  instrtnent  should  not  be  abused  for  playing  symphonies  and  interludes.  Awk- 
wardness and  delay  in  finding,  reading,  and  starting  the  hymns  are  hurtful  to 
impression.  2.  Piayer  must  be  audible,  brief,  direct.  3.  The  Word  of  God  should 
be  exalted  always.  Nothing  so  inspires  faith,  hope,  and  love,  as  the  truth  of  God. 
Let  the  leader  give  at  the  outset  one  great  thought  from  the  Word,  and  set  an 
example  of  point,  pith,  power,  practical  suggestion,  and,  above  all,  a  Scriptural, 
spii'itual  frame  of  mind.  (A.  T.  Fiersuu,  D.D.)  The  imporUtnce  of  order  in  the 
Church : — I.  Its  foundation.  1.  The  essential  equality  of  the  members  before 
God ;  they  are  brethren.  II.  Its  objects.  1.  Edification.  2.  Instruction.  3. 
Comfort.  III.  Its  means.  1.  Mutual  service.  2.  Submission.  3.  Self-control. 
IV.  Its  motives.  1.  God  is  the  author  of  peace.  2.  Order  is  a  distinguishing 
feature  of  the  churches  of  the  saints.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Disorder  in  the  Church  : — 
I.  How  occasioned.  By  self-seeking,  forwardness,  &c.  II.  Why  condemned.  Be- 
cause inconsistent  with — 1.  Brotherhood.  2.  Common  edification.  III.  How 
prevented.  1.  By  keeping  the  main  object  in  view.  2.  By  doing  all  things  unto 
edifying.  (Ihid. )  The  excellency  and  usefulness  of  the  common  j)rciier : — Before  we 
prove  that  that  form  in  particular  which  our  Church  hath  presciibed  is  agreeable  to 
this  apostolic  rule,  it  is  necessary  to  prove  first  that  the  prescribing  a  form  in  general 
is  so ;  for  unless  the  prescribing  a  form  in  general  be  according  to  this  rule,  no  form 
in  particular  that  is  prescribed  can  possibly  agree  with  it.  If  every  minister  of  a 
parish  should  be  left  to  his  own  liberty  to  do  what  he  pleased  in  his  own  consjrega- 
tion,  although  some,  perhaps,  might  be  so  wise  and  prudent  as  to  observe  this  rule 
as  well  as  they  could,  yet,  considering  the  corruption  of  human  nature,  we  have 
much  cause  to  fear  that  others  would  not.  And  besides  that  the  prescribing  a 
form  in  general  is  more  for  our  edifying  than  to  leave  every  one  to  do  what  seems 
good  in  his  ov;n  eyes,  we  have  the  concurrent  testimony,  experience,  and  practice 


OHAP.  XIV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  369 

of  the  universal  Church  ;  for  we  never  read  or  heard  of  any  Church  in  the  world 
from  the  apostles'  days  to  ours  but  what  took  this  course.  Nay,  to  oppose  a  form 
is  not  only  to  make  a  man's  self  wiser  than  all  Christians,  but  wiser  tlian  Christ 
Himself,  for  it  is  impossible  to  prescribe  any  form  of  prayer  in  moie  plain  terras 
than  He  hath  done  it  (Luke  xi.  2).  The  same  may  be  proved  also  fiom  the  nature 
of  the  thing  itself  by  such  arguments  which  do  not  only  demonstrate  that  it  is  so, 
but  likewise  sliow  how  it  comes  to  be  so.  For,  first,  in  order  to  our  being  edified, 
so  as  to  be  made  lietter  and  holier  whensoever  we  meet  together  upon  a  religious 
account,  it  is  necessary  that  the  same  good  and  holy  things  be  always  inculcated 
and  pressed  upon  us  after  one  and  the  same  manner,  for  we  cannot  but  all  find  by 
our  own  experience  how  dillicult  it  is  to  fasten  anything  that  is  truly  good  either 
upon  ourselves  or  others,  and  that  it  is  rarely,  if  ever,  effected  without  frequent 
repetitions  of  it.  Moreover,  that  which  couduceth  to  the  quickening  our  souls,  and 
to  the  raising  up  of  onr  affections  in  our  public  devotions,  must  needs  be  acknow- 
ledged to  conduce  much  to  our  edification.  Bat  it  is  plain  that  as  to  such  purposes 
a  set  form  of  xirayer  is  an  extraordinary  help  to  us ;  for  if  I  hear  another  pray,  and 
know  not  beforehand  what  he  will  sny,  I  must  first  listen  to  what  he  will  say  next, 
tben  I  am  to  consider  whether  what  he  saitli  be  agreeable  to  sound  doctrine,  and 
wiiether  it  be  proper  and  lawfnl  for  me  to  join  with  him  in  the  petitions  he  puts  up 
to  Almighty  God,  and  if  I  think  it  is  so,  then  I  am  to  do  it.  But  before  I  can  well 
do  that  he  is  got  to  another  thing,  by  which  means  it  is  very  dillicult,  if  not 
morally  impossible,  to  join  with  him  in  everything  so  regularly  as  I  ought  to  do. 
But  by  a  set  form  of  prayer  all  this  trouble  is  prevented.  I  have  nothing  else  to 
do  while  the  words  aie  sounding  in  mine  ears  but  to  move  my  heart  and  affections 
suitably  to  them,  to  raise  up  my  desires  of  those  good  things  which  are  prayed  for, 
to  fix  my  mind  wholly  upon  God  whilst  I  am  praising  of  Him,  and  so  to  employ, 
quicken,  and  lift  up  my  whole  soul  iu  performing  my  devotions  to  Him.  To  this 
may  be  also  added  that,  if  we  hear  another  praying  a  prayer  of  his  own  private 
composition  or  voluntary  elf  usion,  our  minds  are  wholly  bound  up  and  confined  to 
his  words  and  expressions,  and  to  his  requests  and  petitions,  be  they  what  they 
will,  so  that  at  the  best  we  can  but  pray  his  prayer,  whereas  when  we  pray  by  a 
form  prescribed  by  the  Church  we  pray  the  prayers  of  the  whole  Church  we  live  in, 
which  are  common  to  the  minister  and  people,  to  ourselves,  and  to  all  the  members 
of  the  same  Church,  which  cannot  surely  but  be  more  effectual  for  the  edifying,  not 
only  of  ourselves  in  particular,  but  of  the  Church  in  general,  than  any  piivate 
prayer  can  be.  Lastly,  in  order  to  our  being  edified  by  our  pubUc  devotions,  as  it 
is  necessary  that  we  know  beforehand  what  we  are  to  pray  for,  so  it  is  necessary 
that  we  afterwards  know  what  we  have  prayed  for  when  we  have  done.  Now,  as 
this  is  a  thing  of  greater  consequence,  so  a  set  form  of  prayer  is  a  greater  help  to 
us  in  it  than  it  is  commonly  thought  to  be ;  for  if  we  hear  another  utter  a  prnyer 
extempore  which  he  never  said,  nor  we  heard,  before,  nor  ever  shall  do  it  again, 
it  is  much  if  he  himself  can  remember  the  tenth  part  of  what  he  said,  how  much 
less  can  we  that  heard  him  do  it?  And  if  we  cannot  possibly  remember  what  we 
prayed  for,  how  is  it  possible  for  us  to  expect  it  at  the  hands  of  God  or  to  depend 
upon  Him  for  it?  But  now  it  is  quite  othetwise  when  we  use  a  set  form  of  prayer, 
for  by  this  means,  when  we  have  prayed,  we  can  recollect  ourselves,  look  over  our 
prayers  again,  either  in  a  book  or  in  our  minds,  where  they  are  imprinted  ;  we  can 
consider  distinctly  what  we  have  asked  at  the  hands  of  God,  and  so  act  our  faith 
and  confidence  on  Him  for  the  granting  every  petition  we  have  put  up  unto  Him, 
according  to  the  promises  which  He  hath  made  us  to  that  purpose.  These  things 
being  duly  wei-^hed,  I  shall  now  proceed  to  show  that  that  form  in  particular  which 
our  Church  hath  appointed  to  be  used  upon  such  occasions  is  agreeable  to  the 
apostolic  rule  in  the  text.  Fiist,  as  to  the  language,  you  all  know  that  the  whole 
service  is  pe  formed  in  English,  the  vulgar  and  common  language  of  the  nation, 
which  every  one  understands,  and  so  may  be  edified  by  it.  Ours  is  truly  conimoa 
prayer,  for  it  is  written  and  read  in  that  language  which  is  common  to  all  the 
congregations  in  the  kingdom,  and  to  every  person  in  each  congregation.  So  that 
all  the  people  of  the  land,  whatsoever  rank  or  condition  tliey  are  of,  may  join 
together  in  the  use  of  everything  that  is  in  it,  and  so  be  jointly  edified  by  it.  But 
that  which  is  chiefly  to  be  considered  in  the  language  of  the  common  prayer  is 
that  it  is  not  only  common,  but  proper  too.  Though  the  words  there  used  be  nil 
but  common  words,  yet  they  are  so  used  that  they  properly  express  the  things 
that  are  designed  by  them.  This,  I  confess,  may  seem  to  be  no  great  matter  at 
first  sight,  yet  it  is  that  without  which  we  might  be  subverted  by  that  w)iich  was 
VOL.    II.  21 


370  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

intended  for  our  edification  ;  for  impropriety  of  speech  in  matters  of  religion  hath 
given  occasion  to  all  or  most  of  the  schisms,  errors,  and  heresies  that  ever  infested 
this  or  any  other  Church,  as  might  easily  be  demonstrated.     Hence  the  apostle 
gave  Timothy  a  form  of  sound  words,  and  charged  him  to  hold  it  fast  (2  Tim.  i.  13), 
as  knowing  that  except  the  words  whereby  he  usually  expressed  Divine  truths  were 
sound  and   proper,   it  would  be  impossible  for  his  notions  and  opinions  of  the 
things  themselves  to  be  so.     And  as  the  words  in  the  common  prayer  are  all  as 
eiHfying  as  words  can  be,  so,  in  the  second  place,  is  the  matter  expressed  by  those 
words,  for  there  is  nothing  in  it  but  what  is  necessary  for  our  edification,  and  all 
things  that  are  or  can  be  for  our  edification  are  plainly  in  it.     First,  I  say  there  is 
nothing  in  our  liturgv  but  what  is  necessary  for  our  edification.     There  are  none 
of  those  vain  disputations  and  impertinent  controversies  which  have  been  raised  in 
the  Church,  to  its  great  disturbance,  ra'lier  than  its  edification.     And  as  there  is 
)iothing  in  it  but  what  is  edifying,  so  all  things  that  are  or  can  be  edifying  are 
in  it,  for  nothing  can  be  necessary  to  edify  and  make  us  pnifect  Christians  but 
what  is  necessary  either  to  be  believed  or  done  or  else  obtained  by  us.     But  there 
is  nothing  necessaiy  to  be  known  or  believed  but  we  are  taught  it ;  nothing  neces- 
sary to  be  done  but  we  are  enjf)ined  it;  nothing  necessary  to  be  obtained  but  we 
pray  for  it  in  our  puhlic  form  of  Divine  service.     There  is  no  vice  or  lust  but  we 
desire  it  may  be  subdued  under  us  ;  no  grace  or  virtue  but  we  pray  it  may  be 
planted  and  grow  in  us.     Insomuch  that  we  do  but  constantly  and  sincerely  pray 
over  all  those  prayers,  and  steadfastly  believe  and  tru-t  in  God  for  His  answering 
of  them,  we  cannot  but  be  as  real  and  true  saints,  as  happy  and  blessed  creatures, 
as  it  is  possible  for  us  to  be  in  this  workl.     Neither  do  we  here  pray  for  ourselves 
only,  but,  according  to  the  apostle's  advice,  we  m  ike  supplications,  pi'ayers,  inter- 
cessions, and  giving  of  thanks  for  all  men ;  yea,  for  our  very  enemies,  as  our  Saviour 
hath  commanded  us  (Matt.  v.  44).     And  what  can  be  desired  more  than  all  this  to 
make  the  matter  of  the  common  2^rayer  edifying  either  to  ourselves  or  others?     I 
cannot  i^ass  from  this  head  before  I  have  observed  one  thing  more  unto  you  con- 
cerning the  prayers  in  general,  and  that  is  that  they  are  not  carried  on  in  one 
continued  discourse,  but  divided  into  many  shoit  jDrayers  or  collects,  such  as  that 
is  which  our  Lord  Himself  composed  ;  and  that  might  be  one  reason  wherefore 
our  Church  so  ordered  it,  that  so  she  might  follow  our  Lord's  example  in  it,  who 
best  knew  what  kind  of  prayers  were  fittest  for  us  to  use.     There  is  a  kind  of 
necessity  to   break  off  sometimes  to  give  ourselves  a  breathing   time,  that   our 
thoughts  being  loosened  for  a  while,  they  may  with  more  ease  and  less  danger  of 
distraction  be  tied  up  again,  as  it  is  necessary  they  should  be  aU  the  while  that  we 
are  actually  praying  to  the  Supreme  Being  of  the  world.     Besides  that,  in  order  to 
the  perfomiing  our  devotions  aright  to  the  IMost  High  God,  it  is  necessary  that  our 
souls  be  possessed  all  along  with  due  apprehensions  of  His  greatness  and  glory. 
To  which  purpose  our  short  prayers  contribute  very  much,  for  every  one  of  them 
beginning  with  some  of  the  properties  or  perfections  of  God,  and  so  sui.'gesting  to 
our  minds  right  apprehensions  of  Him  at  first,  it  is  easy  to  preserve  them  in  our 
minds  during  the  space  of  a  short  prayer,  which  in  a  long  one  would  be  apt  to 
scatter  and  vanish  away.     But  that  which  I  look  upon  as  one  of  the  principal 
reasons  why  our  public  devotions  are  and  should  be  divided  into  short  collects  is 
this :  our  blessed  Saviour,  we  know,  hath  often  told  us  that  whatsoever  we  ask  in 
His  name  we  shall  receive.     And  so  we  see  it  is  in  the  common  prayer,  for  what- 
soever it  is  we  ask  of  God,  we  presently  add,  "  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,"  or 
something  to  that   purpose.     The  next   thing  to  be  considered   in  the  common 
prayer  is   the  method,  which  is   admirable,  and  as   edifying,  if  possible,  as  the 
matter  itself.     Confession,  psalms,  scripture,  creeds.     The  last  thing  to  be  con- 
sidered in  it  is  the  manner  of  its  performance,  by  which  I  mean  only  the  several 
postures  of  the  body,  as  standing  and  kneeling,  which  are  used  in  it,  for  they  also 
are  done  to  edifying.     While  we  say  or  sing  the  hymns  and  psalms  to  the  praise 
and  glory  of  God  we  stand  up,  not  only  to  signify,  but  to  excite  the  elevation  of 
our  minds  at  that  time.     So  when  we  pray  unto  Him,  we  fall  down  as  low  as  we 
can  towards  the  earth,  not  daring  to  present  our  supplications  to  the  absolute 
Monarch  of  the  whole  world  any  other  way  than  upon  our  knees.     First,  come  not 
to  our  public  prayers  only  out  of  custom  or  for  fashion's  sake,  as  the  manner  of 
some  is,  but  out  of  a  sincere  obedience  to  God's  commands,  and  with  a  sure  trust 
and  confidence  in  His  promises  for  llis  blessing  upon  what  you  do.     Secondly, 
frequent  our  public  prayers  as  often  as  conveniently  you  can.     The  oftener  you  are 
at  them,  the  better  you  will  like  them  and  the  more  edified  you  will  be  by  them. 


CHAP.  XIV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  371 

Thirdly,  if  possible,  come  always  at  the  beginning  of  Divine  service,  otherwise  you 
will  ceitainly  miss  something  that  would  liave  been  edifying  to  you,  and  perhaps 
of  that  which  at  that  time  might  have  done  you  more  good  than  all  the  rest. 
Fourthly,  all  ihe  while  that  you  are  in  God's  house  cany  yourselves  as  in  His 
special  presence  and  suitably  to  the  work  you  are  about,  standing  while  you  praise 
God  and  kneeling  while  you  pray  unto  Him,  as  our  Church  hath  diieded  you. 
Lastly,  take  special  care  all  along  to  keep  your  minds  intent  upon  the  matter  in 
hand.  By  this  means  you  will  perform  reasonable  service  unto  (jod,  and  by  conse- 
quence that  which  will  be  very  acceptable  unto  Him  and  as  profitable  and  edifying 
to  yourselves.  {Bj}.  Deveridfie. )  If  any  man  speak  in  an  unknown  tongue,  let  it  b3 
by  two,  or  at  the  most  three,  and  that  by  course ;  and  let  one  interpret. — The  Cliri-stian 
Church  in  assemhhj  .•  —Paul  considered  that — I.  It  iiiona'  be  addukssed  by  sevkral 
SPEAKERS  (vers.  27,  29).  If  this  be  so — 1.  Should  Christian  teaching  lie  regarded 
as  a  profession  ?  It  is  so  now.  Men  are  brought  up  to  it,  wnd  live  by  it  as  doctors, 
lawyers,  &c.  Surely  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  should  no  more  be  regardfd  as  a 
profession  than  the  talk  of  loving  parents  to  their  chil  iren.  2.  Is  the  Church 
justified  in  confining  its  ministry  to  one  man?  In  most  congregations  there  are 
some  who,  besides  the  stated  minister,  are  qualified  to  instruct,  comi'ort,  &c.  And 
is  it  not  incumbent  on  every  Christian  to  preach,  i.e.,  call  sinners  to  repentance? 

II.    It    might   ALLOW    IIS    GODLTf    MEN    TO    SPEAK    ON    THE    INSPIRATION  OF    'J  HE    jrOMENT 

(ver.  30).  May  it  not  be  that  under  every  discourse  some  one  or  more  should  be  so 
Divinely  excited  with  a  rush  of  holy  thought  as  to  crave  for  utterance  not  for  his 
own  sake,  but  for  that  of  others  ?  Why,  then,  should  he  not  have  the  opportunity  ? 
What  an  interest  such  an  event  would  add  to  a  religious  service  !     HI.  It  should 

SUBMIT    THE    UTTERANCES    OF    ITS   TEACHKHS    TO    A    DEVOUT    CRITICAL    JUDGMENT.       "  Let 

others  discern  (or  discriminate) "'  (R.V.).  The  people  were  not  to  accept  as  a  matter 
of  course  all  that  was  spoken  ;  they  were  to  act  as  the  Bereans.  IV.  It  should  in 
ALL  its  SERVICES  MAINTAIN  ORDER  (vers.  32,  33).  A  true  teacher,  however  full  of 
inspiration,  will  so  master  his  impulses  as  to  prevent  confusion.  Notwithstanding 
all  the  liberty  of  teaching,  all  the  enthusiain  of  the  new  life,  where  Christianity 
reig.ns  there  will  be  no  disorder.  There  is  order  in  dead  mechanism,  and  there  is 
order,  too,  in  the  roar  of  the  ocean  and  in  the  thunderstorm.  All  that  is  Divine  is 
under  law.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Decenct/  and  order  in  the  Church  : — lleflect  on — ■ 
I.  What  tre  Church  is.  1.  The  Church  of  the  living  God  (1  Tim.  iii.  15).  2.  The 
Church  of  Christ  (Matt.  xvi.  18).  3.  The  abiding  place  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (chap, 
iii.    16).     4.  The   great   instrument    for   the   conversion   of    the   wi  rid.     II.  The 

importance  of  everything  CONNECTED  WITH  IT  BEING  AS  FREE  FROM  FAULT  AS  POSSIBLE. 

Impropriety  in  the  Church — 1.  Dishonours  God.  2.  Grieves  Cluist.  3.  Tends  to 
quench  the  Spirit.  4.  Reduces  it  to  impotence.  III.  What  a  vast  res i'onsibit.ity 
BESTS  UPON  those  WHO  vioL\TE  THE  APOSTOLIC  coMJiAND  (ver.  40).  God  is  a  God  of 
peace,  but  in  this  way  He  is  made  to  appear  a  God  of  contusion.  [E.  HurndaJl, 
M.A.)  The  efficient  conduct  of  public  icorslii}) : — I.  Hinis  as  to  this.  1.  It 
should  be  intelligible  to  all  (ver.  27).  2.  Those  who  cannot  speak  to  edification 
should  be  silent.  3.  As  a  rule  not  moie  than  two  or  three  should  speak  on  one 
occasion,  and  only  one  at  a  time  (ver.  27).  4.  The  rest  should  listen  and  judge. 
5.  Every  one  should  be  ready  to  give  way  to  another.  II.  The  importance  of 
these  hints.  1.  That  all  may  learn.  2.  That  all  may  be  comforted  (ver.  31). 
(J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  For  ye  may  all  prophesy. — In  the  social  gailn-rinris  of  God's 
•people — 1.  All  may  speak.  2.  All  leain.  3.  All  may  find  comfort.  (Ibid.)  Any 
person  loho  xuuh'r.'^tands  Christianity  may  teach  it: — We  complain  of  the  general 
ignorance  of  Christians:  they  do  not  understand  their  own  religion.  Why? 
They  do  not  think  it  a  duty  to  understand  any  other  paits  than  those  which 
immediately  concern  themselves  :  the  rest  they  leave  to  their  teachers.  I  exhort 
you  first  to  se;n-ch  the  Scriptures  on  this  ground:  the  Scriptures  contain  the  whole 
of  revealed  religion.  Our  second  word  of  advice  is,  read  the  Scriptures  as  they 
were  wiitten,  for  they  were  not  written  as  th^y  are  now  printed.  The  proper  way 
of  reading  the  Gospels  is  to  take  what  all  the  four  evanjirelists  say  on  any  one  sub- 
ject, and  to  put  the  whole  together.  The  four  evangelists  stand  before  us  exai'tly 
in  the  light  of  four  witnesses  in  a  court.  Our  third  word  of  advice  is,  as  you  read, 
•dare  to  think  for  you' selves.  Read  the  St-nptures  with  a  generous  love  of  truth, 
and  always  believe  yourselves  as  free  to  thmk  and  judge  for  yourselvs  as  any 
other  creatures  in  the  world  are.  Who  can  enough  df-plore  the  mis.  ry  of  such 
■Christians  as  choose  to  live  and  die  in  sliHckles  ratijer  than  assert  the  liberty 
wherewith  Christ  hath  made  them  free  !     Our  last  word  of  advice  is,  reduce  as 


372  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

much  Christianity  as  you  know  to  practice.     Eemember  the  saying  of  Jesus  Christ 
(John  vii.  17).     For  example,  you  Icnow  it  is  the  duty  of  the  Christian  to  pray. 
Exercise  yourselves  in  prayer,  then.    It  is  the  duty  of  a  Christian  parent  to  teacli  his 
children.      Instruct  your  children,  then  :  and  so   of  the  rest.     As  you  practise 
religion  you  will  make  an  experiment  of  the  ease  and  pleasure  of  religious  practice, 
and  consequently  you  will  grow  more  and  more  into  a  persuasion  that  the  know- 
ledge of  God  is  the  chief  good  of  man.      On  supposition  that  you  understand 
religion  yourselves,  we  proceed  to  show  you  how  to  teach  it  to  others.     We  suppose 
first  the  welfare  of  your  children  to  lie  nearest  your  heart.     In  vain  you  provide 
the  comforts  of  life,  and  a  settlement  in  the  world  for  them  without  training  tliem 
lip  in  the  principles  of  relif.non.     It  is  like  loading  a  boat  with  valuable  commodities 
and  sending  it  down  a  stream  into  the  ocean  without  any  animal  except  a  jackdaw 
aboard.     These  principles  ought  to  be  imparted  in  a  manner  suited  to  their  own 
dignity,  to  yours,  and  to  that  of  your  children.     There  are  two  general  ways  of 
teaching  children  tbe  truths  of  religion.      Some  make  use  of  catechisms,  which 
children  are  made  to  get  by  h^art.     This  is  an  exercise  of  the  memory,  but  not  of 
the  understanding,  and  therefore  nothing  is  more  common  than  to  find  children, 
who  can  repeat  a  wliole  catechism,  without  knowing  anything  more  than  how  to 
repeat  it.      Tlie  other  method  is  by  hearing  them  read   some  little  histories  of 
Scripture,  and  by  asking  them  questions  to  set  them  a-thinking  and  judging  for 
tlieraselves.     This  is  au  exercise  of  the  understanding,  and  when  the  understanding 
is  taught  its  own  use,  it  is  set  a-going  true,  and  if  it  gets  no  future  damage  it  will 
go  true  through  life.     A  third  w;iy  of  teaching  religion  is  by  conference.     There 
the  doubting  man  may  open  all  his  suspicions,  and  confirmed  Christians  will 
ptrengthen  their  belief.     There  the  fearful  may  learn  to  be  valiant  for  the  truth. 
There  the  liberal  may  learn  to  devise  lil)eral  things.      There  the  tongue  of  the 
stammerer  may  learn  to  speak  plainly.     There  Paul  may  withstand  Peter  to  the 
face,  because  he  deserves  to  be  blamed.     There  the  gospel  may  be  communicated 
severally  to  them  of  reputation.      There,  in  one  word,  ye  may  all  prophesy  one  by 
one,  that  all  may  learn,  and  all  may  be-comforted.     Finally,  you  have  all  a  right 
if  you  have  ability  and  opportunity  to  teach  publicly.     The  ability  we  mean  is  at 
an  equal  distance  from  arrogance  and  slavish  fear :  it  is  what  the  Apostle  Paul 
calls  openness,  or  great  plainness  of  speech.     This  ability,  made  up  of  knowledge 
and  utterance,  hath  a  certain  proportion  adapted  to  particular  places,  and  that, 
which  is  equal  to  all  the  purposes  of  instruction  in  a  small  and  obscure  congregation, 
may  be  very  unequal  to  the  edification  of  a  large  and  better  instructed  assembly: 
but  as  there  are  various  assemblies  of  Christians  in  various  circumstances,  the  part 
of  a  discreet  man  is  to  weigh  circumstances  and  abilities  together,  and  so  to  give 
them  all  their  portion  of  meat  in  due  season.     All  methods  of  teaching  must  be 
enforced  by  example,  and  without  example  all  instruction  is  vain,  if  not  wicked  and 
dangerous.     Let  us  finish  by  confirming  the  right  of  such  teachers  as  we  have  been 
describing,  to  exercise  their  abilities  to  the  edification  of  the  Church.     I  said  a  right. 
To  what?     To  teach,  not  to  domineer,  and  play  the  lord  and  master  with  insolence 
and  without  control.     Can  anything  be  so  wretched  as  to  engage  to  think  always 
through  life  as  our  teachers  think,  or,  if  we  judge  otherwise,  to  act  against  our  own 
conviction  for  quiet  sake?     We  said  a  right.     To  what  ?     To  teach,  not  to  make  a 
fortune.     If  any  man  considers  teaching  as  a  trade  to  acquire  wealth  he  renders 
his  virtue  doubtful,  and  if  he  exercises  this  tiade  with  this  view  in  our  poor  churches, 
he  does  no  more  honour  to  his  understanding  than  to  his  heart.     I  said  a  right. 
To  what  ?     To  teach,  and  not  merely  to  talk.     To  fill  up  an  hour,  to  kill  time,  to 
sound  much  and  say  nothing,  to  use  vain  repetitions  ;  how  easy  are  these  to  some 
men!     To  teach  is  to  inform  and  to  impress.     I  said  a  right.     To  what?     To  teach, 
and  not  to  tattle.      Teaching  the  gospel  gives  a  man  no  right  to  interfere  in  the 
secular  affairs  of  his  brethren.     When  we  say  whoever  understands  Christianity 
hath  a  right  to  teach  it,  we  do  not  say  he  hath  a  right  to  be  heard,  for  as  one  man 
hath  a  right  to  teach,  so  another  hath  a  right  to  hear,  or  not  to  hear,  as  he  thinks 
proper  ;  and  the  first  ought  not  to  exercise  his  right  over  the  last  without  his  con- 
sent.     Sum  up  these  articles,  and  they  amount  to  this  :  any  person  who  under- 
stands Christianity  may  teach  it ;  but  his  teaching  gives  him  no  right  to  assume 
the  character  of  a  ruler  over  the  consciences  or  property  of  his  brethren,  no  right 
to  trifle  with  their  precious  time,  to  interfere  in  their  worldly  affairs,  to  oblige  any 
to  hear  without  their  consent,  or  under  any  pretence  whatever  to  introduce  disorder 
and  inequality  into  a  family,  where  one  is  the  Master,  even  Christ,  and  all  the  rest 
without  excepting  one,  all  the  rest  are  brethren,  and  where  the  highest  endowments 


CH-iP.  XIV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  373 

can  make  them  no  more.  (B.  Robinson.)  And  the  spirits  of  the  prophets  are 
subject  to  the  prophets. — Self-control  in  Divine  wovtilii}} — 1.  Is  in  all  ordinary 
cases  possible.  2.  Does  not  interfere  with  the  ojjcrations  of  God's  Spirit.  He  is 
a  God  of  order  and'peace.  3.  Is  a  religious  duty,  for  the  sake  of  edification  and  for 
the  honour  of  religion.     [J.  Lytli,  D.D.) 

Ver.  33.  For  God  is  not  the  author  of  confusion,  hut  of  peace.— ^  God,  not  of 

confusion,  but  of  peace  : — Tiue  religion  teaches  us  to  refer  all  questions  to  the 
highest  tribunal,  and  to  ask,  not  merely.  What  is  agreeable  and  expedient  ?  but 
what  is  the  will  of  God?  At  Corinth  many  disorders  had  arisen,  and  there  were 
many  reasons  wliy  they  should  not  be.  But  here  is  the  highest.  Christians  are 
the  servants  of  God,  who  is  not  the  author  of  confusion,  &c.  Tliis  is  apparent 
from— I.  His  wokk  as  Creator.  The  more  nature  is  studied  the  more  clearly  order 
is  seen  to  be  heaven's  first  law.  Indeed  scientists  affirm  the  universal  presence  of 
law,  and  to  those  who  believe  in  a  Lawgiver  the  regularity  with  whiclr  the  processes 
of  nature  are  conducted  is  an  evidence  of  the  working  of  mind,  and  that  in  accord- 
ance with  the  highest  reason.  II.  His  method  in  revelation.  The  Scriptures 
unfold  a  plan  gradually  and  regularly,  according  to  a  scheme  of  which  the  profound 
wisdom  is  apparent,  although  not  fully,  to  a  created  mind.  Tlie  truth  was  revealed 
first  to  a  family,  then  to  a  nation,  then  to  a  race.  "  The  law  was  given  by  Moses," 
<&c.  The  Bible  is  a  marvellously  organic  whole;  in  its  diversity  is  discernible  a 
unity  which  only  a  Divine  mind  could  impart.  III.  The  work  of  redemption. 
The  whole  motive  of  the  economy  of  grace  was  to  reduce  the  confusion  which  had 
invaded  sinful  humanity  to  order.  To  hush  the  moral  discord  was  the  purpose 
contemplated  by  the  Incarnation  and  the  Cross.  IV.  The  institution  of  civil 
society.  Social  and  political  life  are  attributed  in  the  New  Testament  to  God  the 
Giver  of  all  good.  Jesus  bade  His  discijjles  render  to  Cssar,  &c.,  and  Paul  enjoined 
the  duty  of  loyalty  inasmuch  as  "  the  j^owers  that  be  are  orilained  of  God."  V. 
The  constitution  and  government  of  Christian  Churches.  Is  it  credible  that  the 
God  in  all  whose  wavs  order  is  so  apparent  should  reverse  His  procedure  in  that 
realm  which  is  the  highest  of  all  ?  Ciirist  appointed  apostles;  apostles  constituted 
chun-hes,  ordained  their  officers,  and  gave  instructions  for  worship,  business,  and 
charity.  Confusion  here,  therefore,  is  to  be  traced  to  human  folly.  In  proportion 
as  the  Spirit  of  Christ  lives  and  works  in  any  society  will  subordination,  co-opera- 
tion, and  unity  prevail.  (Prof.  J.  R.  'TJiomson.)  God  the  author,  not  of  conjudon, 
but  of  peace  : — I.  God  is  the  author  of  peace.  Witness  His  operations — 1.  In 
nature.  2.  The  human  heart.  3.  Society.  II.  Consequently  confusion  cannot 
BE  the  WORK  OF  His  Spirit.  1.  It  may  accidentally  be  associated  with  it.  2.  But 
arises  from  human  defect,  the  want  of — (1)  Self-control  (ver.  32).  (2)  Intelligent 
pietj'  (ver.  20).  (3)  Profounder  acquaintance  with  the  God  of  peace.  III.  It  follows 
that  confusion  should  have  no  plack  in  the  Church.  1.  Passion  should  give  way 
to  peace.     2.  Confusion  to  edidcation.     (J.  Lijth,  D.D.) 

Vers.  34,  35.  Let  your  women  keep  silence  in  the  churches. — Woman  : — T.  Her 
sphere.  1.  Not  in  public,  but  at  home.  2.  Not  (except  in  extraordinary  cases, 
chap.  xi.  5)  to  teach,  but  to  learn.  3.  Not  to  command,  but  obey.  II.  Her 
obligation  to  keep  within  it.  1.  Arises  out  of  her  natural  position.  2.  Is 
confirmed  by  the  command  of  God.  3.  Should  be  dictated  by  modesty.  {Ibid. ) 
Women  in  the  Church: — I.  Women  have  a  place  in  the  Church.  Cliristianity 
found  woman  degraded :  it  exalts  her.  In  Christ  there  is  neither  male  nor 
female.  II.  Women  have  many  ministries  connected  with  the  Church.  If 
excluded  from  some  positions  how  many  are  still  open  to  women !  In  not  a  few  of 
these  she  is  unrivalled  by  man,  who  cannot  do  what  she  does.  The  Church  owes  a 
vast  debt  to  its  holy  women.  III.  Women  are  debarked  by  the  apostle  from 
speaking  in  Church  assemblies.  On  the  ground  of  propriety.  Does  not  accord 
with  woman's  true  position  (Gen.  iii.  16  ;  1  Cor.  xi.).  It  had  been  foretold  that 
"  your  sons  and  daughters  shall  prophesy,"  and  we  read  that  Philip's  darighters 
prophesied  ;  but  in  neither  case  is  anything  said  about  prophesying  in  public  and 
mixed  assemblies,  which  is  what  Paul  forbids,  inasmuch  as  it  would  conflict  with 
modesty  and  woman's  rightful  position,  and  would  lead  to  many  evils.  IV.  Woman's 
instruction  encouraged.  To  supplement  instruction  of  the  sanctuaiy,  women 
may  ask  questions  at  home  of  their  husbands  or  relatives  (Il.V.).  We  h  ive  here 
incidentally  indicated — 1.  A  special  and  most  important  sphere  of  woman — the 
home.     A  beautiful  temple  for  her  ministi  y.     Oratorical  females  are  frequently  poo? 


374  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  siv. 

housewives.  2.  A  suggestion  that  hnsbands  should  be  well  furnished  with 
religious  knowledge.  Tlie  head  of  the  household  should  not  be  an  empty  head. 
3.  Evidence  that  women  in  the  religious  sphere  are  not  to  be  mere  automata.  They 
are  not  to  be  dupes  of  priests.  Tliey  are  to  ask  questions,  and  not  to  be  kept  in 
ignorance.  Intelligent  service  is  expected  from  them.  (k).  Hurndall,  M.A.)  Do 
the  Scriptures  forbid  icomen  to  ijrcach  1 — I.  There  are  three  views  of  this 
MAiTHR.  1.  Tliat  this  utterance  is  official  and  conclusive.  Women  are  not  to 
speak,  however  gifted  they  are.  2.  Th;it  the  authority  of  the  apostle  cannot  settle 
the  question.  Paul  forbad  women  to  speak,  but  he  had  no  business  to.  3.  That 
while  the  Scviptaies  are  of  binding  authority  in  matters  of  faith  and  morals,  this 
and  other  injunctions  are  local,  national,  and  therefore  transient.  This  latter  is 
the  position  now  to  be  proved.  I.  It  was  not  the  design  of  Christianity  to  deter- 
mine   MANNERS,     CUSTOMS,    FORMS    OF     GOVERNMENT    AND    ECCLESIASTICAL   INSTITUTIONS. 

Its  aim  was  to  build  a  new  man  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  to  this  inspired  manhood  was 
left  the  utmost  liberty  in  respect  to  externals.  This  view  is  corroborated  by  the 
whole  testiiriony  of  history.  The  modern  Clmrch  is  totally  different  from  the 
assemblies  of  the  first  Christians.  The  civil  state  has  been  revolutionised  since 
the  time  of  Christ.  The  family  has  changed,  and  no  one  organisation  resembles 
the  organisalions  of  two  thousand  years  ago.  The  presumption  is  that  when 
Christ  was  leaving  everything  else  to  the  wisdom  and  experience  of  after  times  it  did 
not  stej)  in  with  this  single  exception  and  fix  the  position  of  women.  Such  a 
course  would  have  been  contrary  to  its  genius  in  every  other  direction.     II.  Such 

A    UNIVERSAL    MIMITATION    COULD  NOT  HAVE  TAKEN  PLACE  WITHOUT  VIOLENCE    TO    JeWISH 

IDEAS.  Woman  was  far  more  nearly  equal  to  man  among  the  Hebiews  than  among 
other  Oriental  nations.  She  was  a  public  instructor.  Note  the  cases  of  Miriam, 
Deborah,  Hannah,  Hnldah,  Anna,  and  the  iDrediction  of  Joel,  "Your  sons  and  your 
daughters  shall  prophesy,"  with  Peter's  comment  in  Acts  ii.  So  when  the  Spirit  of 
God  rests  upon  thr-m,  and  they  have  a  message  to  give,  if  you  undertake  to  set  up 
the  letter  of  Paul  round  about  them,  I  will  set  up  the  message  which  says,  "On 
My  handmnidens  will  I  pour  out  My  Spirit,  and  they  shall  prophesy."  True,  in 
the  synagogue  it  was  forbidden  women  to  teach,  but  the  service  was  not  ex- 
temporary, but  liturgical  and  expository ;  and  women  had  not  the  technical 
eilucation  for  it.  But  outside  the  synagogue  it  was  eminently  in  accordance  with 
the  Hebrew  sentiment  that  women  should  speak  out — and  speak  in  meeting  too. 
III.  Only  to  Greek  Churches  were  there  such  limitations  to  woman's  rights 
AND  privileges.  The  text  and  1  Tim  ii.  11,  12  were  addressed  not  to  Jewish,  but 
to  Greek  assemblies.  Why  this  distinction  ?  Look  at  the  condition  of  Greek 
women.  The  highest  thought  of  womanliood  that  the  Greeks  had  was  that  a 
woman  should  remain  at  home,  that  she  should  serve  her  husbrind  and  his  house- 
hold, and  that  she  should  not  be  known  beyond  her  own  family.  She  was  not 
permitted  to  go  into  the  street  unless  veiled,  otherwise  her  reputation  for  virtue  was 
destroyed.  For  a  woman  to  do  what  is  done  by  women  in  modern  civilised 
nations — to  develop  that  whirh  the  poorest  man  toils  to  give  his  daughters — to 
learn  music,  poetry,  art,  and  philosophy,  was  to  stamp  her  as  a  courtesan.  Such 
being  the  popular  feeling  and  custom,  what  would  have  been  the  eiiect  if  a  Greek 
had  looked  in  on  a  Chiistian  meeting  and  seen  a  woman  rise  uncovered  and  pour 
out  her  heart  ?  He  would  have  sai'l,  "  That  is  Christianity,  is  it  ?  Why,  then  the 
Church  is  but  a  house  of  orgies.  I  understand  your  new  religion.  It  teaches  our 
wives  that  they  must  forsake  their  virtue,  and  go  out  into  public  exposure  and  do 
as  courtesans  do."  Therefore  it  was  that  Paul  said,  "  You  shall  not  violate  the 
customs  of  your  country.  Yon  shall  not  bring  into  discredit  the  religion  of  Christ 
by  doing  that  whicli  can  be  interpreted  but  in  one  direction  by  every  man  who  sees  it. 
I  forbid  your  women  to  te.ich  in  Greek  communities."  IV.  What,  then,  jiay  be 
considered  a  fair  interpretation  of  this?  1.  Is  it  right  to  say  that  this  is  the 
last  word  which  the  genius  of  Christianity  had  for  women?  Are  you  to  take  a 
command  which  had  a  peculiar  intejpretation  in  one  province  of  the  globe  and  in 
no  other,  and  make  it  the  criterion  for  judging  of  woman's  position  and  instruction 
everywhere?  Shall  this  be  done  where  Chiistianity  has  raised  and  inspired 
Avoman,  and  shall  a  manacle,  which  belonged  to  the  degradation  of  the  Greek 
period,  be  put  upon  the  limbs  of  enfranchised  womanliood?  You  might  as  well 
say  that  the  command  of  the  physician  to  the  leper  is  the  prescription  that  yoa 
should  take  care  of  your  children  bj'.  2.  Scripture  commands  are  binding  only 
where  ttiey  apjdy  :  c.//. ,  we  are  commanded  to  "  honour  the  king."  but  what  about' 
countries  where  there  is  no  king?     And  ycu  cannot  give  a  ligid  interpretation  to 


CHAP.  XIV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  375 

the  text  witliout  running  against  the  whole  frnit  of  civilisation  for  the  last  1,800 
years.  Are  you  going  to  put  back  the  shadow  on  the  dial?  Christianity  has 
made  woman  a  prophetess,  and  no  fal-e  interpretation  of  the  text  can  ever  close  her 
mouth.  3.  It  is  fair  to  applf  to  this  subject  the  argument  of  Peter  in  Acts  xi.  17. 
If  in  the  providence  of  God  women  are  called  to  preach,  if  their  discourse  is 
accompanied  with  power  from  on  high,  and  blessed  to  the  salvation  of  souls,  then 
the  Spirit  itself  bears  witness  to  the  right  of  woman  to  speak,  and  who  are  we 
that  we  should  resist  God?  4.  Paul's  doctiine  in  Gal.  iii.  "JT,  28,  is  the  Christian 
doctrine  for  the  future.  "In  Christ  there  is  neither  male  nor  female."  Faith, 
hope,  love,  learning,  eloquence,  &c.,  have  no  sex.  Whoever  can  bring  the  kingdom  of 
God  nearer  to  men  has  the  right  to  do  so.  We  have  trumpets  enough  ;  let  us  liave 
some  flutes.  Women  can  sing  and  speak  in  the  secular  sphere  often  to  mightier 
effect  than  men  ;  why  not,  then,  in  the  Divine  ?     (H.  W.  Becclur.) 

Vers.  3G-38.  What  ?  came  the  Word  of  God  out  from  you  ?  or  came  it  unto  you 
only? — Resistance  to   Hie   Divine   order  in    the  Ckurcii — I.    Peoceeus    fkom   the 

OVERWEENING  OPINION  A  MAN  HAS  OF  HIS  OWN    ENLIGHTENMENT,  Or  of  his  superiority  tO 

others.  II.  Will  never  be  offered  by  a  truly  spiritual  man.  He  acknowledges 
the  supreme  authority  of  God's  Word.  III.  If  persisted  in  through  wilful 
ignorance,  incurs  A  tremendous    RKSrONSIBILITY.      (J.   Lijtli,    D.I>.)  IIoui    the 

gospel  came  to  Britain  : — This  case  is  cited  by  Paul  to  check  tlie  arrogance  of  the 
Corinthians,  and  we  may  very  properly  apply  it  to  ours.  The  Word  of  God  Ciime 
unto  us,  and  did  not  go  out  from  us,  I.  The  affecting  nature  of  the  memento. 
That  the  Word  of  God  should  have  come  unto  us  at  all,  demands  peculiar  gratitude. 
Scarcely  reckoned  among  the  nations,  our  island  seemed  flung  into  the  ocean  of 
nature.  That  we  should  have  been  forgotten  by  the  apostles  would  be  no  great 
wonder.  We  were  out  of  their  path.  What  was  such  a  spot  as  this  when  churches 
were  rising  in  Home,  &c.  ?  It  is  probable,  however,  that  Britain  was  visited  before  the 
apostle's  death  ;  for  in  one  jilace  he  rejoices  that  the  gospel  was  preached  to  every 
creature  under  heaven.  And  who  can  say  that  tlie  prophetic  John  heard  no  notes 
from  Albion  in  the  song  of  all  nations  which  was  presented  before  the  throne  ? 
Cffisar  armed  his  galleys,  and  came  upon  us.  But  he  was  only  the  "  breaker  up  '' 
before  a  most  glorious  influence.  With  nearly  the  promptitude  of  Csesar,  Cl)ristianity 
"came,  it  saw,  it  conquered!"  It  was,  no  doubt,  brought  to  us  by  a  missionary 
given  wholly  to  the  work.  No  marble  marks  his  name;  but  we  cannot  help 
exclaiming,  "How  beautiful  upon  the  mountains  were  his  feet!  "  &e.      II.  This 

SUBJECT  GIVES  RISE  TO  SOME  VERY  INTERESTING  INQUIRIES.       1.  UpOU  what  inipieSsionS 

of  our  state  did  these  missionaries  act?  Enough  of  our  country  was  known  to 
assure  them  that  a  monstrous  superstition  prevailed  among  us.  Some  would  say, 
"  Why  disturb  this  people  ?  They  worship  God  according  to  their  long  established 
custom;  there  is  a  mine  of  philosophy  in  their  legends;  they  are  harmless  and 
simple,  happy  and  content ;  tliey  have  the  means  of  improvement,  if  they  desire  it ; 
the  system  you  would  introduce  is  very  well  for  us,  but  it  is  not  suited  to  tiiem ; 
besides,  they  seek  not  your  interference;  they  might  as  properly  bring  their 
religion  to  you,  as  you  take  yours  to  them."  But  there  were  men  (and  all  genera- 
tions shall  call  them  blessed)  who  took  a  very  different  view  of  the  state  of  our 
aborigines.  However  interesting  a  people  we  might  be,  they  knew  that  we  were 
idolaters:  that,  however  the  emblems  of  our  worship  might  be  inteipreted,  the 
majority  looked  to  the  emblems  alone,  and  that  the  fire,  trees,  &c.,  were  actually 
•worshipped  ;  that  children  and  captives  were  crowded  into  wicker  figures  and 
burned ;  that  the  priests  were  vile  impostors  and  jugglers ;  that  the  system  was  a 
sort  of  parricide  on  reason,  and  nature,  and  God ;  that  it  was  the  prolific  source  of 
all  evil,  the  conjunction  of  all  vices.  Therefoi  e  they  fearlessly  launched  on  the  deep 
to  visit  us,  and  we  know  that  their  entrance  was  not  in  vain.  2.  Under  what 
obligations  were  these  missionaries  laid  ?  No  spiiit  bade  them  go  forth,  nothing 
doubting.  But  a  weight  of  responsibility  pressed  upon  them  ;  they  had  received 
the  gospel ;  a  commission  had  been  given  them  to  preach  it  to  all.  They  were 
always  ready  to  obey  the  Saviour.  Some  might  think  their  labours  should  be 
confined  at  home ;  frivolity  would  simper ;  friendship  would  dissuade ;  prudence 
would  calculate ;  the  whole  mind  would  shrink  at  the  idea  of  danger.  But  a 
feeling  of  duty  was  paramount ;  and  what  they  did,  they  did  heartily,  as  unto  the 
Lord.  But,  if  they  did  what  it  was  only  their  duty  to  do,  how  gross  is  our 
neglect!  3.  By  what  feelings  were  these  missionaries  inspired?  Avarice  and 
ambition  fed  not  their  flame.    It  was  charity  in  its  pure  sublime — a  charity  which 


376  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

never  failed.  Their  business  was  not  with  civilisation  and  science  ;  but  the  soul 
was  their  grand  concern,  because  they  knew  its  source,  its  danger,  and  its  destiny. 
4.  With  what  means  were  these  missionaries  furnished?  It  is  not  very  probable 
that  they  were  furnished  with  miraculous  powers.  Thoy  had  no  red-cross  banners, 
no  pealing  litany,  &c.  ;  but  by  them  the  Word  of  God  came  to  us.  5.  To  what 
sufferings  were  these  missionaries  exposed  ?  They  must  have  had  a  variety  of 
perils  to  encounter.  From  the  necks  of  endeared  friends  they  were  torn  as'inder. 
How  did  the  druid  scowl  at  them  and  the  multitude  clamour  for  them  as  a  sacriiice  ! 
Probably  some  came  to  a  violent  death.  (R.  W.  Hamilton,  D.D.)  The  reason  for 
missions  : — The  text  reminds  us — I.  Of  our  obligation.  1.  Missionaries  came  first  to 
us.  2.  Consider  their  impressions,  obligations,  motives,  means,  siilferings.  II.  Op 
OUR  DUTY.  1.  To  send  the  gospel  to  others,  who  have  equal  need,  equal  claims. 
2.  We  have  the  ability  to  do  it.  3.  Are  under  equal  obligation.  4.  Possess  the 
same  motives.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  If  any  man  think  himself  to  toe  a  prophet,  or 
spiritual,  let  him  acknowledge  that  the  things  I  write  unto  you  are  the  command- 
ments of  the  Lord. — St.  PauVs  axitlioritti  -.—History  repeats  itself.  Modern  heresies 
are  only  ancient  errors.  It  is  the  fashion  now,  as  it  was  at  Corinth,  to  repudiate 
the  apostle's  authority  and  to  claim  the  right  to  criticise  bis  teacliing.  The  cry 
then  was.  Not  Paul,  but  Peter  or  Apollos ;  now  it  is  not  Paul,  but  Cnrist.  Con- 
sider St.  Paul's  authority — I.  In  itself.  1.  Its  nature.  Nothing  can  be  plainer 
than  that  the  words,  "  The  things  I  write  unto  you  are  the  commandments  of  the 
Lord,"  are  a  claim  to  Divine  authority.  His  critics  must  therefore  choose  one  of 
three  theories.  (1)  Imposture.  But  chap.  xiii.  is  sufficient  to  refute  that.  (2) 
Madness.  But  this  Epistle  could  not  have  been  written  by  any  olher  than  a  sane 
man— a  man  whose  mind  was  as  clear  as  his  purpose  was  honest.  (8)  Truth. 
No  honest  or  intelligent  man  could  have  preferred  the  claim  of  our  text  had  it  not 
been  true.  If  true,  then  St.  Paul's  words  carry  the  same  weight  as  the  Ten 
Commandments  or  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  2.  Its  basis.  He  wrote  tlie  com- 
mandments of  the  Lord — i.e.,  those  which  came  from  the  Lord  by  direct  inspiration, 
for  they  are  not  quotations  from  previous  revelations.  (1)  John  xiv.  25,  26  and 
XV.  12,  13  are  a  declaration  at  once  of  the  incompleteness  of  Christ's  personal 
teaching  and  a  promise  of  fuller  instruction  under  the  ministry  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
The  apostles  were  to  know  more  than  Christ  had  taught  them  after  He  had  gone. 
To  compare,  therefore,  the  apostle's  teaching  with  that  of  our  Loid's  to  the 
disparagement  of  the  former  is  simply  to  repudiate  the  authority  of  Christ.  Jesus 
only  began  to  teach  personally  (Acts  i.  1).  His  perfected  teaching  was  through  the 
apostles  after  Pentt  cost.  (2)  Was  Paul  among  the  number  ?  This  Epistle  is  a 
triumphant  answer  to  that  question  [cf.  chap.  xv.  1-3  with  Gal.  i.  1,  11-16).  Again, 
this  is  blasphemy,  insanity,  or  truth.  If  the  last,  then  St.  Paul's  teaching  by  the 
terms  of  his  Master's  declaration  was  on  a  level  with  his  own.  3.  Its  independence 
(ver.  38).  The  apostle  felt  that  any  denial  of  his  claim  was  based  upon  wilful  and 
invincible  ignorance,  and  with  that  he  would  have  no  further  controversy.  And 
this  scathing  satire  loses  none  of  its  severity  in  its  modern  application.  We  have 
no  fear  that  St.  Paul's  authority,  with  all  the  precious  teaching  which  rests  upon  it, 
will  be  shaken.  What  has  been  finely  said  of  Christianity  as  a  whole  may  be  said 
of  it:  "This  anvil  has  been  well  beaten,  but  it  has  worn  out  many  liammers." 
II.  As  A  test.  1.  Of  fitness  to  teach.  "If  any  man  think  himself  a  piophet," 
&c.  There  was  no  arrogance  in  this.  St.  Paul  knew  that  he  had  been  put  in  trust 
with  the  gospel,  and  that  he  had  faithfully  transmitted  the  sacred  deposit.  To 
repudiate  his  authority,  therefore,  was  to  claim  the  liberty  to  tamper  with  Divine 
revelation  and  to  imperil  the  souls  of  men.  Many  who  thought  themselves  prophets 
did  this  with  the  disastrous  results  recorded  in  this  Epi>tle.  No  man  is  fit  to  play 
the  role  of  prophet  who  is  not  prei'a'ed  to  declare  all  the  counsel  of  God.  But  this 
he  cannot  do  if  he  shuns  to  declare  any  of  the  commandments  of  the  Lord  as 
delivered  by  Paul.  2.  Of  spirituality.  "  If  any  man  think  himsell;  to  be 
spiritual"  (c/.  chap.  iii.  1,2).  No  small  amount  of  the  carnal-miudedness  of  the 
Corinthians  is  due  to  their  repudiation  of  Paul's  teaching.  Puffed  up  with  vanity 
and  conceit  they  rejected  "  the  commandments  of  the  Lord  "  and  became  a  law  unto 
themselves.  Hence  their  divisions,  contentions,  laxity,  error.  The  same  test  may 
be  applied  with  unerring  accuracy  in  this  and  every  age.  The  spiritually  minded, 
with  rare  exceptions,  have  been  those  who  have  "  acknowledged  that  the  things 
which  Paul  wrote  are  the  commandments  of  tlie  Lord."  (J.  W,  Burn.)  But  if 
any  man  toe  ignorant,  let  him  toe  ignorant. — Ahundoiimcnt  to  ignorance: — Paul 
humbled  himself,  but  magnified  his  olfice.     Personally  he  was  less  than  the  least 


CHAP.  XIV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  377 

of  all  saints ;  officially  he  was  not  behind  the  chiefest  apostles.  But  there  were 
those  in  Corinth  who  acknowledged  neither  his  authority  nor  that  of  any  but  them- 
selves, and  so  the  ajjostle  knew  that  his  judgment  would  not  go  unchallenged. 

1.  Opinionatedness  and  igkokance  often  go  togethee.  a  little  experience  con- 
vinces us  that  those  who  cling  the  most  tenaciously  to  their  own  opinions  and 
habits  are  not  men  of  the  soundest  judgment.  To  resist  evidence  and  authority  is 
no  sign  of  intellectual  power.  Some  are  obstinate  because  blind  to  all  but  what  is 
acceptable  to  their  own  prejudices.  II.  There  are  those  whom  no  evidence  can 
convince  and  no  aothoeity  overawe.  If  all  men  were  candid  and  followed  the  light 
of  reason,  human  life  and  society  would  be  different.  "  Men  love  darkness  rather 
than  liglit,"  &c.  Young  and  sanguine  ministers  often  begin  with  the  persuasion 
that  tliey  have  only  to  place  the  truth  fairly  before  men  in  order  to  their  conviction 
and  conversion;  but  experience  soon  shows  that  there  is  a  moral  o'uduiacy  which 
is  proof  against  all  efforts.  III.  It  may  be  wise  to  abandon  to  their  loved 
ignorance  those  who  will  not  be  enlightened,  a  benevolent  mind  will  be  slow 
to  adopt  this  course,  and  never  without  the  hope  and  prayer  that  God  will  use  some 
other  methods.  Bat  even  He  seems  to  act  upon  this  principle,  at  all  events, 
for  a  season  and  purpose.  "EpViraim  is  joined  to  his  idols:  let  him  alone."  IV. 
There  is  better  employment  for  Christian  labourers  than  the  endeavours  to 
enlighten  the  invincibly  ignnorant.  There  are  the  young,  the  candid,  the 
earnest  and  prayerful,  all  anxious  for  light.  Here,  then,  is  abundant  scope  for 
effort.     Why  spend  time  in  tilling  the  rock  when  there  is  virgin  soil  ?    V.  There 

13   A   probation   and    A    JUDGMENT    OP    GoD    TO    WHICH   SUCH    CHARACTERS    MUST    NEEDS 

BE  LEFT.  The  Christian  labourer  must  remember  tbat  he  is  not  the  governor  of 
the  world.  This  reflection  will  not  harden  his  heart  against  the  uniielieving; 
he  will  leave  such  in  the  hands  of  the  All-Wise  and  the  All-Merciful.  {Prof.  J.  R. 
Thomson.) 

Ver.  40.  Let  all  things  he  done  decently  and  in  order. — Propriety : — 1.  Be  done  in 
its  proper  time.  2.  Be  kept  to  its  proper  use.  3.  Be  put  in  its  proper  place.  Decently 
and  in  order  : — "  Decently  " — i.e.,  so  as  not  to  interrupt  the  gravity  and  dignity  of 
assemblies.  "In  order" — i.e.,  not  by  hazard  or  impulse,  but  by  design  and 
arrangement.  The  idea  is  not  so  much  of  any  beauty  or  succession  of  parts  in 
the  worshijj,  as  of  that  calm  and  simple  majesty  which  in  the  ancient  world, 
whether  Pagan  or  Jewish,  seems  to  have  characterised  all  solemn  assemblies, 
■whether  civil  or  ecclesiastical,  as  distinct  from  the  frantic  or  enthusiastic  ceremonies 
which  accompanied  illicit  or  extravagant  communities.  The  Koman  senate,  the 
Athenian  areopagus,  were  examples  of  the  former,  as  the  wild  Bacchanalian  or 
Phrygian  orgies  were  of  the  latter.  Hence  the  apostle  has  condemned  the  dis- 
continuance of  the  veil  (chap.  ix.  1-16),  the  speaking  of  women  (ver.  34),  the 
indiscriminate  banquetting  (chap.  xi.  16-34),  the  interruption  of  the  prophets  by 
each  other  (vers.  30-32).  "  The  spirits  of  the  prophets  are  subject  to  the  pro)>hets," 
is  a  principle  of  universal  application,  and  condemns  every  impulse  of  religious 
zeal  or  feehng  which  is  not  strictly  under  the  control  of  those  who  display  it.  A 
world  of  fanaticism  is  exploded  by  this  simple  axiom ;  and  to  those  who  liave 
witnessed  the  religious  frenzy  which  attaches  itself  to  the  various  foims  of  Eastern 
worship,  this  advice  of  the  apostle,  himself  of  Eastern  origin,  will  appear  the  moie 
remarkable.  The  wild  gambols  yearly  celebrated  at  Easrter  by  the  adherents  of  the 
Greek  Church  round  the  chapel  of  the  Holy  Se|)ulclire  at  Jerusalem  show  what 
Eastern  Christianity  may  become ;  they  are  the  living  proofs  of  the  need  of  the 
wisdom  of  the  apostolic  precept.  (Dean  Stanley.)  Decency  and  order  in  Divine 
worship: — These  terms  may  seem  to  be  of  no  very  great  importance;  but  little 
words  may  be  of  great  account  when  they  are  applied  to  the  highest  things ;  and  if 
the  want  of  order  and  decency  is  capable  of  defiling  our  whole  religion,  it  behoves 
us  carefully  to  avoid  it.  Eemember  that — I.  God  is  thr  object  of  wouship.  1.  That 
we  may  think  reverently  of  the  worship  of  God,  let  us  fust  think  of  God  Plim^elf, 
who  and  what  He  is.  If  we  look  beyond  the  heaven  the  eye  of  faith  beholds  Him 
seated  in  light  inaccessible,  and  surrounded  with  myriads  of  angels  excelling  in 
strength  and  wisdom.  If  we  attend  to  the  effects  of  His  power  here  beluw,  we 
must  acknowledge  Him  the  contriver  and  artificer  of  all  those  wonderful  works 
which  delight  the  eye  and  minister  to  the  life   and  comfort  of   His   creatures. 

2.  This  great  Being  is  surely  wot  thy  of  our  attention.  It  is  an  honour  to  us  that 
we  are  invited  to  lift  up  our  eyes  toward  the  place  of  His  dwelling,  and  permitted 

•  to  speak  to  Him  in  prayer.     11.  We  have  no  other  way  of  affronting  God  than 


378  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

BY  NEGLECTING  HiS  SERVICE  AND  MAKING  LIGHT  OF  HiS  INSTITUTIONS.      God  Himself  IS 

not  an  object  of  our  bodily  senses  ;  but  His  religion,  His  Churches,  and  His  altars 
are  present  to  us  ;  and  if  we  despise  them,  we  do  all  that  is  in  our  power  to  show 
that  God  Himself  is  despised  by  us.  The  Bible  teaches  us,  and  reason  must  needs 
assent  to  it,  that  God  will  take  to  Himself  every  act  of  contempt  against  the 
Church  and  its  administration.  Tribute  is  due  from  subjects  to  their  prince :  if 
it  is  paid  in  base  metal,  the  act  is  not  only  deficient,  but  treasonable,  and  would 
be  punish*  d  accordingly.  Worship  is  the  tribute  due  from  man  to  God  ;  it  is  the 
honour  due  to  His  name :  but  if  it  is  an  unholy  worship,  it  is  worse  than  the  silence  and 
ignorance  of  a  savage,  and  will  be  required  of  us  as  an  act  of  treason  and  impiety. 

in.    No  BLESSING  CAN  BE  EXPECTED  UPON  OURSELVES,  BUT  ONLY  SO  FAR  AS  OUR  SERVICE 

IS  ACCEPTABLE.  The  subject  who  pays  the  tribute  that  is  required  of  him  is  rewarded 
with  protection  under  an  execution  of  the  laws  :  and  certainly  God  is  not  so 
unmindful  of  His  subjects  as  to  leave  them  withoutthe  protection  of  His  providence. 
In  what  respects  are  order  and  decency  required  in  a  congregation  of  Christians? 

I.  A  composed  and  serious  mind.  The  want  of  gravity  is  a  sign  of  great  ignorance 
and  ill-breeding  in  the  company  of  men  our  superiors  :  how  much  more,  then,  i& 
gravity  required  in  the  presence  of  our  Maker !  2.  Punctuality.  They  who  come  in  at 
an  unseasonable  time  do  more  harm  to  others  than  their  presence  is  like  to  do  good 
to  themselves :  they  either  drown  the  voice  of  the  minister  with  their  noi^e,  or  take 
off  the  attention  of  the  people  from  their  prayers.  3.  Eeverence  and  attention. 
We  despisf"  the  Turks,  yet  in  this  they  far  exceed  the  Christians.  They  are  called 
to  prayers  by  the  voice  of  a  man  crjing  from  the  tops  of  their  steeples,  at  whose 
voice  they  wash  themselves,  and  having  put  off  their  shoes  at  the  door  of  their 
mosque,  are  ready  to  enter  with  silence  and  gravity  before  their  minister  begins 
his  prayer.  You  will  never  find  one  of  them  coughing,  or  yawning,  or  shifting  his 
place,  or  speaking  a  word  to  his  neighbour.  They  attend  to  nothing  but  the  service, 
and  when  the  service  is  over,  they  put  on  their  shoes  again  in  silence,  and  depart 
without  entering  into  any  impertinent  conversation.  4.  Uuiim  and  earnestness. 
In  the  course  of  our  liturgy  the  offices  are  divided  between  the  minister  and  the 
people.  If  the  minister  were  to  fail  in  his  part,  it  would  be  so  remarkable  that 
every  person  wuukl  observe  it,  and  the  service  would  be  at  a  stand  ;  but  the  peoide, 
being  many,  the  inattention  of  particulars  is  not  so  easily  perceived,  and  therefore 
it  is  too  common  for  many  to  fail  in  making  their  proper  responses.  'J'his  is  a  bad 
custom,  and  should  by  all  means  be  corrected.  Conclusion:  What  I  have  said 
ought  to  dispose  those  v.'ho  have  heard  me  to  join  in  those  words  of  Jacob  :  "  How 
dreadful  is  this  place  !  "  &c.  He  who  blessed  the  piety  of  Jacob,  will  bless  us  also 
if  we  are  the  heirs  of  it.  But  if  we  treat  the  house  of  God,  like  the  profane  Jews, 
who  had  turned  it  into  a  house  of  merchandise  and  a  den  of  thieves,  a  far  worse 
visitation  will  befall  us.  {W.  Jones,  31. A.)  Order  recommended:—!.  In  the 
conduct  of  your  affairs.  2.  In  the  distribution  of  your  time.  3.  In  the  management 
of  your  fortune.  4.  In  the  regulation  of  your  amusements.  5.  In  the  arrangement 
of  your  society.  {J.Lyth,  D.D.)  A  useful  and  general  ride : — I.  How  things  ought  to 
BE  DONE — (tvaxiw'i^'MQ)  consistently — in  oider,  without  discord,  confusion,  tumult. 

II.  Where.     Everywhere — especially  in  the  Church  and  in  the  worship  of  God. 

III.  Why.  For  our  own  credit,  for  the  glory  of  God,  for  the  edification  and 
prosperity  of  the  Church.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Minor  morals  : — Things  cannot  be 
done  decently  and  in  order — I.  Without  thoughtfulness.  There  is  the  thought- 
fulness -1.  Of  servants.  2.  Of  the  feelings  of  others.  A  thousand  times  a  day 
gentlewomen  and  polite  men  say  and  do  things  which  wound  by  their  tLoughtless- 
ness,  because  they  don't  consider  the  peculiarities  of  their  neighbours.  3.  Of  our 
own  reputation.  Stranpe  as  it  may  seem,  the  best  of  people  often  do  things  which 
would  be  a  matter  of  shame  to  persons  in  a  lower  state  of  life.  II.  Without 
carefulness.  1.  In  property.  The  waste  which  is  allowed  in  all  classes  of  house- 
holds is  astonishing.  I"ew  can  realise  how  great  it  is  or  how  sinful  its  results. 
God  allows  nothing  to  waste.  2.  In  habit.  Some  make  a  point  of  keeping  others 
waiting ;  they  know  nothing  of  punctuality.  3.  In  dress.  It  will  not  do  to  be 
carried  away  with  the  infatuation  of  fashion,  nor  to  neglect  due  regaid  to  comely 
appearance.  4.  As  to  cleanliness.  Not  merely  personal,  but  universal;  in  the 
home,  in  the  street,  in  every  detail  of  life.  5.  With  regaid  to  debt,  and  the  strict 
and  just  keeping  of  accounts.  6.  About  the  waste  of  time.  There  should  be  a 
proper  division  of  the  duties  of  life,  and  a  right  use  of  the  valuable  opportunities 
God  has  given  us.  III.  Withoot  self-control.  1.  Of  evil  feelings.  Satan 
suggests  evil  thoughts,  bitter  sentiments.     Even  religious  minds  entertain  rehgious 


CHAP.  XIV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  379 

and  political  animosities.  2.  Of  unseemly  passions.  Passions  of  lust  must  be 
checked  ;  passions  of  anger  and  rage  be  kept  in  hand.  3.  Of  self-esteem.  Proper 
self-esteem  is  valuable,  but  it  may  degenerate  into  pride,  harshness,  haughtiness, 
and  a  cruel,  overbearing  disposition.  The  various  forms  of  egotism  are  numerous, 
and  are  neither  lovely  nor  of  good  report.  4.  Of  actions.  Many  act  from  impulse, 
and  so  bring  upon  themselves  untold  misery  which  can  never  be  rectified.  Con- 
clusion :  These  things  are  part  of  religion.  We  find  them  all  brought  before  us  in 
the  example  of  Christ,  and  in  the  daily  acts  of  His  life.  If  we  neglect  to  carry 
them  out,  we  are  not  acting  up  to  our  religious  profession,  neither  are  we  making 
the  world  better  for  our  being  in  it.  "  Whatsoever  things  are  honest,  just,  lovely, 
of  good  report,  think  on  these  things."     (J.  J.  S.  BircJ.)  On  regularity  in  the 

conduct  of  life : — It  may  seem  to  you  at  first  sight  that  the  observing  of  order 
in  the  various  occupations  and  concerns  of  life  is  not  a  matter  of  such  con- 
sequence as  to  deserve  to  be  much  insisted  on.  It  did  not  seem  so  to  the 
great  apostle,  who  thought  it  not  below  the  dignity  of  his  sacred  ministry  to  re- 
commend it  to  the  Coriuthians  in  the  words  of  my  text.  Nor  can  it  ever  seem  so 
in  the  eye  of  prudence  and  rational  discernment.  I  say  considered  in  a  religious 
light ;  for  although  the  observance  of  order  hold  not  the  highest  rank  among  the 
injunctions  of  the  Christian  religion,  though  it  claim  not  equal  dignity  with  the 
commandment  of  Divine  love,  and  the  exercises  of  faith,  hope,  and  repentance  ;  yet 
it  possesses  its  separate  importance  by  contributing  not  a  little  towards  punctuality 
and  facility  in  the  discharge  of  those  higher  and  more  essential  duties,  and  there- 
fore justly  demands  a  share  of  a  Christian's  attention.  As  in  every  well-connected 
piece  of  mechanism  the  subordinate  springs  or  wheels,  though  apparently  insig- 
nificant, are  each  of  them  necessary  to  the  carrying  on  of  its  operations;  so  in  the 
variety  of  moral  and  religious  i^recepts  one  reflects  light  upon  another,  one  facilitates 
the  observance  of  another,  and  all  jointly  contribute  to  that  perfection  of  character 
to  which  every  Christian  is  bound  to  aspire.  Indeed,  if  you  look  abroad  into  the 
world  you  may  discover,  even  at  the  first  glance,  that  the  life  of  the  wicked  and  of 
the  libertine  is  always  a  life  of  confusion.  1.  First,  then,  as  to  the  duties  of  your 
state  of  life.  Every  man,  in  every  department  of  society— the  king,  the  statesman, 
the  soldier,  the  artisan,  the  master,  the  servant— has  certain  particular  duties  ta 
comply  with,  either  public,  domestic,  or  private,  which  successively  require  his 
attention.  We  in  particular,  who  live  in  the  midst  of  the  agitations  of  the  world, 
are  called  upon  by  Almighty  God  to  exert  ourselves  in  our  respective  stations,  that 
we  may  promote  His  honour  and  glory,  at  the  same  time  that  we  become  useful  to 
ourselves  and  our  fellow-creatures.  In  proportion  as  the  multiplicity  and  variety 
of  your  affairs  increase,  the  observance  of  order  becomes  more  indispensably 
necessary  for  you  ;  and  let  your  train  of  life  be  ever  so  simple  and  uniform,  how- 
ever little  you  may  be  engaged  in  the  hurry  and  bustle  of  life,  yet  you  cannot  fail 
to  lose  something,  and  a  great  deal  too,  by  the  neglect  of  regularity.  For  the 
orderly  conduct  of  your  temporal  affairs  forms  a  very  material  part  of  your  duty  as 
Chiistians.  All  your  employments  are  properly  religious  exeicises.  Who  has 
allotted  you  these  employments?  Doubtless  it  was  that  God  whom  your  rehgion 
honours  and  serves.  In  discliarging  them,  therefore,  you  do  Hun  homage.  Oh  ! 
what  a  train  of  heroic  virtues  might  you  display  in  the  very  meanest  of  your 
employments,  if  you  were  always  careful  to  do  them  well,  with  an  upright  intention, 
actuated  by  a  wish  to  approve  yourselves  to  Heaven  !  The  sanctity  we  aspire  to 
does  not  consist  in  doing  extraordinary  actions,  says  a  great  prelate,  but  in  doing 
our  ordinary  actions  extraordinary  well.  But  will  th^y,  can  they  be  done  without 
regularity?  Will  not  hurry,  perplexity,  and  confusion  take  off  much  from  their 
peifection?  You  well  know  that  for  want  of  your  having  traced  out  for  yourselves 
an  orderly  plan  of  life,  many  of  your  duties  have  been  very  ill  done  ;  ]ierhaps  not 
done  at  all.  By  conducting  your  affairs  with  method  and  order  you  will  be  enabled 
to  give  to  each  duty  a  becoming  share  of  attention.  This  regard  to  order  will  like- 
wise insure  you  an  interior  peace  of  mind  and  constant  cheerfulness  of  temper;  for 
you  will  find  that  a  peevish  and  fretful  disposition  is  ever  the  characteristic  of  such 
as  are  negligent  of  it.  The  hurry  a»d  confusion  in  which  they  live,  the  difficulties 
they  have  to  struggle  with  for  their  dispositions.  But  if  order  must  be  maintained 
in  yonr  affairs,  it  will  be  necessary  that  you  attend  to  order  in  the  distribution  of 
your  time.  2.  That  portion  of  time  which  Providence  hath  allotted  for  the  measure 
of  your  life  is  intended  partly  for  the  concerns  of  this  world,  partly  for  those  of  the 
next;  .\et  so  that  the  interests  of  the  earth  be  made  ever  subordinate  to  those  of 
eternity.     In  the  distribution  of  your  time  give  to  each  of  these  concerns  that  space 


380  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

wliich  proi:)eily  belongs  to  it.  Be  ever  impreFsed  with  a  just  sense  of  the  value  of 
time.  Kemember  that  by  a  fatal  neglect  and  loss  of  it,  you  store  up  for  yourselves 
many  future  pahis  and  miseiies.  3.  Introduce  order  into  the  management  of  your 
fortune.  Wiiatever  be  the  extent  of  yonr  possessions,  whether  great  or  small,  let 
the  administration  of  them  proceed  with  method  and  economy.  Provide  wbat  is 
necessary  before  you  indulge  yourselves  in  anything  superfluous.  Never,  perhaps, 
was  admonition  more  necessary  than  this  is  to  the  age  in  which  we  live  ;  an  age 
manifestly  distinguished  by  a  propensity  to  thoughtless  extravagance.  But  prodi- 
gality does  not  only  sink  men  to  contempt  and  misery;  it  frequently  impels  them 
to  open  crimes.  When  they  have  begun  with  ostentation  and  vanity  they  often 
end  in  infamy  and  guilt.  Be  assured,  then,  that  order,  frugality,  and  economy  are 
the  necessary  supports  of  Cliristian  virtue,  and  will  deliver  you  from  the  assaults 
of  many  very  dangerous  temptations.  How  humble  and  trifling  soever  these 
qualities  may  appear  to  some  people,  tliey  are  the  guardians  of  innocence.  4. 
Observe  onier  in  your  arausements ;  that  is,  allow  them  no  more  than  their  proper 
place  ;  study  to  keejD  them  within  due  bounds  ;  mingle  them  so  prudently  with  your 
serious  duties  that  they  may  relieve  the  mind  and  be  a  preparation  for  acting  with 
more  vigour  in  the  discharge  of  your  obligations.  5.  Preserve  order  likewise  in  the 
choice  of  your  society.  Select  with  prudence  those  with  whom  you  choose  to 
associate,  and  let  virtue  be  the  object  which  determines  your  choice.  Endeavour 
in  the  first  place  to  make  yourselves  happy  at  home.  By  this  fondness  for  home 
it  is  past  conception  how  much  evil  you  may  avoid.     (J.  Archer.) 


CHAPTER  XV. 

Vers.  1-12.  Moreover,  brethren,  I  declare  unto  you  tlie  gospel. — The  ajjostolic 
fiospel : — I.  Cukistianity  is  based  on  historical  facts,  not  on  human  reason  or 
iniiigiwation  ;  it  is  neither  an  ingenious  hypothesis  to  account  for  any  phenomena, 
nor  a  poetic  myth  to  adumbrate  any  truth.  It  is  based  on  facts.  These  facts  are — 
1.  Personal.  They  are  connected  with  a  person,  and  that  person  is  not  Socrates, 
Plato,  nor  Ca;sar,  but  Christ.  2.  Few.  He  "  died,"  He  was  "  buried,"  and  He 
"  rose."  Tliese  facts  are  compendious  facts,  they  imply  many  more.  3.  Well 
attested  (vers.  4-8).  No  facts  on  record  are  better  attested  than  these.  II.  Chris- 
tianity  IS   DESIGNED   FOR   THE   REMOVAL   OF   EVIL.      1.    He    "  died   foT    OUr    siuS."      2. 

It  is  to  "put  away  sin"  from  the  hearts,  literature,  institutions,  customs,  and 
governments  of  mankind  ;  natural  evil  is  but  the  efl'ect  of  moral.  3.  Philosophically, 
there  is  no  system  on  earth  suited  to  destroy  man's  sinful  disposition  and  to  change 
his  heart,  but  Christianity;  and,  hihtorically,  nothing  else  has  ever  done  it.  III. 
Christianity  is  to  be  preached  with  this  design  (ver.  2).  Paul  preached  that 
they  might  be  saved,  but  they  could  only  be  saved  as  they  renounced  and  hated 
sin.  Paul  preached  Christianity — 1.  Convincingly,  "which  also  ye  received." 
They  believed  his  guspel  ;  then  he  must  have  convinced  them  by  arguments. 
Christianity  is  to  be  commended  "to  every  man's  conscience."  2.  Scripturally. 
He  showed  tlose  facts  in  the  light  of  the  Sciiptnres,  "  according  to  the  Scrij^tures." 
3.  Humbly,  "  born  out  of  due  time,"  "  the  least  of  the  apostles,"  &c.  (D.  Thomas, 
D.D.)  'The  (lostpel  which  Paid  preached,  and  in  wliich  the  Corinthians  found 
salvation: — I.  The  RiiCEPTioN  of  the  gospel  by  the  Corinthians,  and  the  use 
WHICH  they  made  OF  IT  (vcrs.  1,  2).  1.  Paul  brought  glad  tidings  wiih  him  to 
Corinth,  and  proclaimed  them  everywhere — in  the  synagogue,  in  the  workshop, 
in  the  marker-place.  2.  Nor  did  he  preach  witliout  effect.  Many  might  listen 
inciedulously,  and  othe's  resist,  but  many  "  received  "  his  glad  tidings.  3.  In  that 
gospel  these  Corinthians  were  now  "standing."  Their  ancient  superstitions  had 
passed  awa\ ,  and  they  "  stood  "  upon  the  rock — "  Jesus  Christ,"  and  the  hope  of 
a  resurrection.  Tliat  recepti<in  of  his  apostolic  message  was  not  only  the  pledge 
of  blessedness  in  the  great  hereal't'r,  it  indic-ited  their  present  security.  Now  they 
were  safe.  The  strong  swimmer,  battling  with  the  waves  of  a  stormy  sea,  may  be 
living,  and  not  without  hope;  but  not  until  his  feet  touch  the  beach  may  he  whisper 
to  himself,  "  Now  I  am  safe  !  "  So  these  Corinthians  had  been  "  saved,"  but  their 
Christian  work  was  not  then  over.     The  sa.^'ed  Christian  is  not  to  stand  still  and 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  381 

think  of  doing  nothing  more.  "Keep  in  memory"  might  ratlier  be  translated 
"  firmly  maintain."  Without  this  they  had  "  believed  ha  vain."  4.  Here,  then, 
we  are  presented  with  the  apostle's  ideas  of  evangelical  conversion.  It  was  a 
process  of  preaching  on  his  part  followed  by  these  steps  on  theirs — reception, 
belief,  steadfast  adherence.  What  Paul  tanght,  that  must  ministers  teach  still. 
What  the  Corinthian  Christians  "received," etc., that  must  we  receive,  stand  upon, 
and  adhere  to,  or  risk  the  salvation  of  our  souls.     II.  The  main  truth  with  which 

HE    DESIRED    THAT    THEIR    MINDS    SHOULD     BE     ESPECIALLY    OCCUPIED    (verS.    3,    4).      In 

these  words  we  have  plainly  an  epitome  of  the  gospel.  He  himself  had  "received" 
this  gospel,  and  felt  it  to  be  the  power  of  God  unto  his  own  personal  salvation ; 
and  now  he  declared  that  he  had  "  delivered  "  it  to  them  as  equally  available  for 
theirs.  Nay,  he  did  so  "first  of  all,"  i.e.,  as  the  chiefest  and  most  important 
statement  in  the  gospel  message.  What  was  the  all-important  truth?  1.  It  was 
tliat  "  Christ  had  died  for  our  sins."  There  was  something  in  tliat  death  which 
possesst^d  an  atoning  virtue,  and  this  was  "  according  to  the  Scriptures  "  (Fsa.  liii.). 

2.  In  token  of  the  reality  of  Christ's  death  Paul  allirms  that  He  was  "  buried." 

3.  In  token  also  that  His  atoning  work  was  completely  efl'cctual,  "  He  rose  from 
the  dead  the  third  day."  (J.  Cochvune,  A.ilJ.)  Faul's  /7osj;eZ  .-  —  Paul's 
GOSPEL  IN  ITS  SUBSTANCE.  "  IIow  that  Clirist  died,"  &c.  "  Good  news "  must 
be  the  record  of  a  fact.  And  this  is  the  great  peculiarity  and  the  great  blessed- 
ness and  sign  of  the  universal  adaptation  of  Christianity,  that  it  is  fu-st  and 
foremost,  the  story  of  things  ihat  happened  on  tliis  green  solid  earth  of  ours. 
It  is  not  airy  speculations  coming  from  the  clouds,  it  is  not  a  mere  morality 
or  republi<!ation  of  man's  duty,  with  new  eiupliasis,  and  with  sweeter  or  more 
terrible  sn notions.  There  is  a  theology  underlying  it,  deducible  from  it,  and  which 
must  be  deduced  from  it.  There  is  a  system  of  morality  in  it,  but  the  beginning  of 
everything  is  the  story  of  a  life,  the  history  of  plain  facts.  And  how  else  can  God 
be  revealed?  You  cannot  reveal  a  person  by  anything  but  deeds.  And  further, 
for  ever  and  ever  it  remains  a  fact  that  the  highest  form  in  which  you  and  I  can 
conceive  of,  or  be  taught  of  God,  is  the  form  of  man.  Tlie  be^'inning  of  the 
gospel  is  the  story  of  the  Clirist.  Clirist  is  Christianity  ;  and  its  first  form  is 
neither  morality,  nor  theology,  nor  pliilosophy,  but  simple  history,  Btill  further, 
there  is  another  thought, here,  and  that  is  that  Paul's  gospel,  fa-tened,  as  its  central 
fact,  on  tire  death  and  accompanying  burial,  and  the  consequent  resurrection  of 
Jesus  Christ.  There  is  the  vital  centre  of  the  gospel.  There!  if  you  tear  that  out 
of  it,  you  have  no  life  left  in  it;  and  its  morality  will  never  get  itself  executed,  and 
the  fair  pattern  will  never  be  reproduced,  and  we  shall  have  but  one  more  of  the 
tragical  multitude  of  systems  that  have  promised  to  us  glorious  crowns  and  left  us 
in  the  dust.  And  there  is  one  more  point  to  be  noticed,  and  tliat  is  Paul's  gospel 
carried,  as  an  integral  part  of  itself,  the  explanation  «,f  the  meaning  of  deatli  and 
resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ.  "  How  that  He  died  for  our  sins  according  to  the 
Scriptures."  What  is  it  that  changes  the  historical  fact  into  an  historical  procla- 
mation of  the  good  news  of  God  ?  Is  it  the  bare  statement  "  Jesus  Christ  died  "'? 
Is  that  a  gospel?  Is  it  nny  more  a  gospel  than  the  statement  that  Socrates  died, 
or  that  anybody  else  died  ?  The  only  statement  about  Christ's  death  that  maizes  it 
a  gospel  is  that  He  died  for  our  sins.  II.  Paul's  gospel  in  its  power.  He  speci- 
fies two  of  its  mighty  influences  upon  men:  "Wherein  ye  stand  .  .  .  by  which 
also  ye  are  saved."  First,  the  reception  of  that  gospel  into  our  hearts  enables  us 
to  "  st'Uid."  In  that  gospel,  received  into  our  believing  hearts,  we  get  firm  footing 
for  our  lives  ;  a  certitude.  Men  all  around  us  are  saying,  ".  ^Vilo  will  show  us  any 
truth  ?  What  are  we  to  believe  about  God,  about  men,  about  the  relations  of  the 
two  ?  What  are  we  to  think  of  the  destiny  of  humanity  ?  Wh  it  are  we  to  think  of 
the  future?  "  The  answer  lies  here.  '•  Christ  died  for  our  sins  "  ;  Christ  is  risen 
again  for  onr  salvation.  In  that  truth,  grasped,  fed  upon,  unfolded  as  the  germs 
unfold  themselves  in  the  sweet  May-days,  will  be  found  the  answer  to  all  perplexities, 
the  certainties  amidst  all  shifting  opinion,  the  b  isis  upon  which  a  whole  life's 
thinking  may  be  reared,  the  ground  of  all  true  morality,  the  sum  and  substance  of 
all  real  theology,  the  germ  of  prophetic  nnticipations  of  the  fortunes  of  men  and  of 
individuals.  Again,  the  word  is  employed  in  another  a-pect.  That  gospel  of 
Christ,  received  into  a  man's  heart,  enables  him  to  resist.  "  Stand  therefore, 
having  your  loins  girt  about  with  truth."  Then  there  is  another  aspect  here  of 
the  power  of  Paul's  gospel  in  that  familiar  word — "By  which  ye  are  saved."  "  By 
which  also  ye  are  being  saved  "  would  be  a  truer  translation.  It  is  a  process  life- 
long, and  that  process,  including  deliverance  from  all  forms  of  evil,  whether  sin  or 


382  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  sv. 

sorrow,  and  investiture  with  all  possibilities  of  good,  whether  righteousness  or  happi- 
ness, begins  with  the  reception  of  Christ  into  the  heart,  and  steadily  runs  parallel, 
with  the  increased  reception  of  His  grace,  until  the  grey  dawn  passes  through  all 
the  shades  of  saffron  yellow,  and  rosy  pink,  and  pearly  white,  and  comes  at  last  to 
the  colourless  conjpleteness  and  unsetting  radiance  of  the  midday  sun.  III.  Paul's 
GOSPEL,  IN  ITS  CONDITIONS.  "  If  ye  kcpp  in  memory,"  or  more  correctly,  "  If  ye  hold 
fast  what  I  preached  unto  you."  "  Unless  ye  have  believed  in  vain."  First,  there 
must  be  a  solid  faith,  not  a  faith  which  is  lightly  and  without  due  cause  taken  up. 
There  is  such  a  thing,  you  know,  as  the  seed  being  sown  upon  stony  places,  with 
an  inch  of  earth  above  a  great  lateral  shelf  of  rock.  And  just  because  the  rock,  into 
which  the  seed  can  never  penetrate,  retains  much  of  the  heat  of  the  midday  sun, 
and  warms  the  film  of  earth  above  it,  it  grows  quickly.  So  in  a  man's  heart,  the 
Word  may  be  sown,  it  may  strike  down  its  little  rootlet?,  and  very  soon  come  to  an 
impenetrable  layer  of  rock.  And  just  because  it  cannot  get  any  deeper  it  begins  to 
germinate  at  once,  "  and  anon  with  joy  they  receive  it."  "  Su^h  endure  but  for  a 
while."  They  believe  rashly,  without  due  consideration.  Their  faith  is  not  the 
deliberate  act  of  the  whole  man.  It  is  a  momentary  emotion  that  produced  it. 
There  is  no  adequate  perception  of  the  facts  which  it  grasps,  or  of  the  necessities 
from  which  it  seeks  to  be  delivered.  "Let  not  that  man  think  Ihathe  shall  receive 
anything  of  the  Lord."  But  then  do  not  forget  that  faith  may  be  genuine  though 
it  be  feeble ;  and  that  all  which  I  have  been  saying  about  a  shallow  confidence  has 
no  bearing  ui)on  people  simply  because  they  find  that  their  faith  is  not  what  it 
ought  to  be ;  or  subject  to  many  a  sad  break  and  gap.  Again,  remember  the  other 
condition  here,  viz.,  the  continuous  grasp  of  the  truih  which  makes  the  essence  of 
the  gospel.  "  Ye  are  being  saved,  if  ye  keep  held  of  what  I  preached  to  you."  The 
gospel  works  upon  us  as  long  as  we  think  about  it,  and  keep  it  in  our  hearts,  and 
not  one  instant  longer.  The  poles'ar  will  guide  you  as  long  as  you  look  at  it ;  but 
if  your  eyes  are  wandering  away  to  the  will-o'-the-wisps  upon  the  marsh,  or  to  the 
comets  that  flasli  across  your  sky,  you  will  lose  your  guide,  and  wander  into  the 
darkness.  It  is  whilst  you  believe  that  the  gospel  is  saving  you.  And,  remember, 
that  continuous  grasp  of  God's  truth  cannot  keep  up  witliont  a  continuous  effort. 
I  have  seen  conjurers  that  have  said  to  a  man,  "Take  that  coin  in  your  hand. 
CL>se  your  hand  upon  it.  Ave  you  sure  you  have  got  it  ?  "  "  Yes  !  "  "  Certain  it 
is  there?"  "Certainly."  "  Oj^en  your  hand!"  Gone!  Ay!  And  the  world, 
the  magician  world,  conjures  his  faith  out  of  many  a  professing  Christian  man's 
clenched  hand.  And  ^shen  he  opens  it — and  perhaps  he  does  not  open  it  till  he 
gets  before  the  throne — an  empty  palm.  Wljere  is  his  faith  ?  Tighten  your  grasp, 
"  lest  at  any  time  you  should  let  them  slip."  {A.  Madaren,  D.D.)  The  certainty 
ofthepoKpel: — I.  Of  its  facts.  1.  Declared  by  competent  witnesses.  2.  Pjeachedto 
us.  11.  Of  its  experience.  1.  We  have  received.  2.  We  stand  in  it.  III.  Of  its 
HOPES.  1.  It  can  save  us  fully  and  for  ever.  2.  If  we  hold  it  fast  by  faith.  (J.  Lyth, 
D.D.)  Hoio  oufilit  the  goxpel  to  he  preacJied? — I.  Faithfully,  according  to  the 

Word  of  Gcd.  1.  Which  is  simple  in  its  details.  2.  Absolutely  true.  II.  Out  of 
PERSONAL  EXPERIENCE.  1.  This  glves  Confidence.  2.  Conveys  li'e.  III.  Humbly. 
1.  With  a  consciousness  of  unfitness.  2.  In  dependence  upon  Divine  grace.  3. 
With  a  full  recognition  of  the  labours  of  others.       (Ibid.)  The  resurrection  of 

Christ: — 1.  Because  this  chapter  forms  part  of  the  Funeral  Service,  and  every 
syllable  stands  associated  with  some  mournful  moment  in  our  lives,  is  one  reason 
wliy  the  exposition  is  attended  with  some  difficulty.  It  sounds  more  like  stately 
music  heard  in  the  stillness  of  night  than  like  an  ai-gument.  2.  The  subjei-t,  like 
almost  all  the  others  treated  of  in  this  Epistle,  had  been  forced  upon  tue  ap  'Stle 
by  the  heresies  which  had  crept  into  the  Corinthian  Church.  Note  the  great 
difference  made  by  the  apostle  between  moral  wrong-doing  and  intellectual  error. 
When  incest  had  been  committed  the  apostle  at  once  CdUimanded  expulsion,  but 
here  he  only  expostulates  with  and  endeavours  to  set  the  heretics  I'ight.  3.  In  the 
present  day  this  error  arises  out  of  materialism.  Now  the  unbelief  of  those  distant 
ages  was  something  very  different  from  this.  But  the  Corinthians  denied  the 
resurrection  of  the  body  because  they  believed  that  matter  was  the  cause  of  all 
evil ;  and  they  hailed  the  gospel  chiefly  because  it  gave  them  the  hope  of  being 
liberated  from  the  flesh  with  its  corrupt  desires.  They  regarded  the  r.  surrection 
therefore  as  a  figurative  expression.  The  apostle  now  controverts  this  error,  and 
he  does  it  by  a  twofold  line  of  argument.  I.  By  historical  proofs  of  the  resue- 
kection  of  Christ  (vers.  4-8).  1.  The  Christian  doctrine  was  not  m<rely  im- 
mortality, but  resurrection  ;  the  historical  fact  of  Christ's  resurrection  being  the 


•CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  383 

substantial  pledge  of  ours.  2.  There  are  two  forms  in  which  it  is  conceivable  that 
Christianity  may  exist — essential  and  historical.  Suppose,  e.g.,  that  witliout  the 
aid  of  Clirist,  a  man  could  arrive  at  the  chief  Cliristian  doctrines — tlie  Fal  herliood 
of  God ;  tliat  it  is  a  Divine  Spirit  wliich  is  the  source  of  all  goodness  in  man ; 
that  the  rigliteousness  acceptable  in  His  siglit  is  not  ceremonial  but  moral  goodness, 

.&c. ,  he  would  have  arrived  at  the  essence  of  Christianity.  And  history  tells  us  that 
before  tlie  Redeemer's  ai^vent  there  were  a  few  who,  by  the  aid  of  the  Spirit  of  God, 
had  reached  to  a  knowledge  which  is  marvellous  to  us.  By  historical  Christianity, 
however,  we  mean  not  tliose  truths  abstra'itedly,  but  considered  as  actually  existing 
in  the  life  of  Clirist.  Ileverence  for  persons  precedes  tiie  belief  in  truths.  A  few 
remarkable  exceptions  have  leacdied  truth  without  knowing  Him  who  is  the  Truth, 
but  this  is  not  the  rule.  Those  truths  wliich  you  hold  deepest,  you  have  gained 
not  by  the  illamiiiation  of  your  intellect,  but  first  by  trusting  in  some  great  or  good 
■one,  and  then,  through  Hiai,  by  obtaining  credible  evidence  of  those  truths.  Take, 
■e.g.,  the  doctrine  of  tlie  resurrection.  The  times  when  it  seemed  almost  incredible 
to  us  were  those  in  which  we  began  to  despair  of  human  nature — wlien  some  great 
crime  or  meanness  had  set  us  wondering  why  such  beings  should  be  panuitted  to 
live  hereafter.  And  the  moments  when  we  believed  most  strongly  in  it  were  the 
moments  when  we  felt  assured  that  human  perfectibility  was  no  dream,  since  we 
saw  the  evidence  of  a  goodness  most  like  God's  which  could  not  be  limited  by 
death.  Carry  on  this  principle,  and  then  you  have  the  very  spirit  of  liisturical 
Christianity.  For  we  do  not  believe  that  tliere  shall  be  a  life  to  come  merely 
because  there  is  something  within  us  which  craves  for  it,  but  because  we  have 
believed  in  the  life  and  death  and  resurrection  of  the  Man  of  Nazareth.  Our 
Christianity  is  not  merely  the  abstract  truths  which  Christ  taught,  but  Cln-ist  Him- 
self. II.  By  TrrE  argument  "  ri'.ductio  ad  absuiiduji  "  (vers.  13-20).  "If  there 
be  no  resurrection — 1.  Then  is  Christ  not  risen."  It  is  an  absurdity  to  believe  that 
that  man  perished.  The  Son  of  Man  grounded  His  pretensions  on  this,  tliat  He 
should  rise  again  from  the  dead.  If,  tlien,  He  did  not,  He  was  an  impostor ;  and 
you  are  driven  to  tliis,  that  a  holy  life  is  not  a  whit  more  certain  of  attaining  to 
God's  truth  than  a  false  one.  2.  The  Christian  faith  is  vain;  ye  are  yet  in  your 
sins.     Except  in  the  belief  of  the  resurrection  the  cpiitting  of  sin  is  impossible. 

'  "  Let  us  eat  and  drink,  for  to-morrow  we  die,"  is  an  inevitable  conclusion.  And 
you  are  driven  also  to  tliis,  that,  just  as  all  other  religions  have  failed  in  redeeming 
man  from  sin,  the  Christian  religion  has  also  failed.  It  lias  become  the  fashion  to 
hold  that  in  proportion  as  a  belief  in  the  resurrecticn  enteis  into  our  motives,  right- 
doing  loses  its  value,  that  he  alone  can  do  any  leally  good  work  who  disbelieves  in 
a  life  hereafter,  because  he  alone  does  good  for  its  own  sake  and  not  from  the  hope 
of  reward.  But — (1)  In  removing  the  hope  of  the  life  to  come  you  have  taken  away 
all  that  makes  life  worth  possessing,  or  mankind  worth  living  for.  Why  should  we 
labour  for  beings  scarcely  higher  than  the  "  half-reasoning  elephant  "  ?  (2)  To  do 
right  Christianly  is  not  doing  so  for  the  sake  of  happiness  in  the  world  to  come,  but 
for  life.  "  It  is  more  life  and  fuller  that  we  want."  3.  The  apostles  would  be  found 
false  witnesses.  There  is  sometliing  touching  in  the  manner  in  wliich  the  apostle 
writes  this.  Tliat  he  should  be  a  false  witness!  He  does  not  leave  room  for 
supposing  the  possibility  of  a  mistake.  It  was  either  true  or  false.  James, 
■Cephas,  the  twelve,  the  five  hundrerl,  either  had  or  had  not  se  n  the  Lord  Jesus; 
Thomas  either  had  or  had  not  put  his  finger  into  the  print  of  the  nails  ;  either  the 
resurrection  was  a  fact,  or  else  the  ajjostles  were  intentional  false  wiuiesses  before 
God.  Now  there  is  a  ceitain  instinct  within  us  gt-iiprallv  which  enables  us  to  detect 
■when  a  man  is  speaking  the  truth.  Truth  has  a  certain  ring  by  which  it  may  be 
known.  Now  this  chai^ter  rings  with  truth;  and  before  yoit  can  believe  that  there 
is  no  resurrection,  you  must  believe  that  tliis  glorious  chapter  was  written  by  one 
■who  knew  at  his  heart  that  he  was  speaking  wJiat  was  false.  Another  witness  to 
this  fact  was  the  Apostle  Peter.  There  are  two  thinj^s  which  rarely  go  together, 
■courage  and  falsehood.  There  are  circumstances  in  wliich  a  brave  and  honest  man 
may  be  betrayed  by  the  sudden  force  of  temptation  into  a  dereliction  from  the  truth, 
and  such  a  thing  had  occurred  in  the  li-fe  of  St.  Peter.  But  after  his  bitter  repen- 
tance he  went  forth  and  stood  as  upon  a  rock,  protesting  that  he  knew  that  the 

''  Lord  was  risen.  There  must  he  a  cause  given  for  this.  Can  we  believe  that  the 
man  who  laid  his  hand  on  the  axe,  or  he  who  asked  that  he  might  be  crucified  with 
his  head  downwards,  as  unworthy  to  die  as  his  Redeemer  died,  that  his  life  was  a 
systematic  and  continued  falsehood  kept  up  to  the  very  last ;  and  that  the  brave, 
true  man  with  his  dying  hps  gave  utterance  to  a  lie?    4.  Those  who  have  fallen 


384  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

asleep  iu  Christ  have  perished,  i.e.,  the  noblest  of  the  human  race  have  lived — ouly 
to  die  for  ever.  You  are  required  to  believe,  moreover,  that  they  attained  to 
this  excelleuceby  believing  what  was  false,  namely,  the  resurrection;  so  that  we  are 
driven  to  this  strange  paradox — that  by  believing  that  wbich  is  false  we  become 
pure  and  noble,  and  by  believing  that  which  is  true  we  becume  base  and  selfish! 
Eelieve  this  who  can  !     {F.  W.  lioherUon,  M.A.)  The  resurrection  of  C'liritit  : — 

I.  Its  pl».ce  in  the  Christian  creed.  1.  What  did  Paul  mejin  by  the  resurrection 
of  Christ?  (1)  He  meant  His  rising  from  the  grave  with  a  body  glorified  or  made 
fit  for  the  heavenly  life  He  had  entered.  Eltsh  and  blood  cannot  enter  upon  that 
life,  but  must  pass  through  a  process  which  entirely  alters  its  material.  (2)  But 
yet  he  always  speaks  as  if  there  were  some  connection  between  the  natural  and 
the  spirituEil  body,  and  regards  the  body  of  Christ  as  that  into  the  likeness  of 
which  the  bodies  of  His  people  are  to  be  transformed.  Now  we  can  oniy  suppose 
that  the  body  which  was  laid  iu  the  sepulchre  was  transformed  into  a  spiritual 
body  by  a  process  whicli  differed  from  that  which  is  to  operate  in  ourselves  only 
by  its  rapidity.  We  do  not  understand  the  process,  but  all  along  the  Hue  which 
marks  off  this  world  from  the  spiritual  world  mystery  broods.  There  are  iu  nature 
many  forces  of  which  we  know  nothing,  and  it  may  one  day  appear  to  us  most 
natural  that  the  spirit  should  clothe  itstlf  with  a  spiritual  body.  As  the  life  that 
is  in  the  body  now  assimilates  material  and  forms  the  body  to  its  particular  mould, 
so  may  the  spirit  hereafter.  Paul  refuses  to  recognise  any  insuperable  difficulty 
here.  2.  Wliat  was  the  position  occupied  by  the  Corinthians?  (1)  In  that  day  the 
resuirection  was  denied  by  materialists,  such  as  the  Sadducees,  who  believed  that 
mental  and  spiritual  life  are  only  manifestations  of  ph_>sical  life  and  dependent 
upon  it.  But  many  who  opposed  materialism  held  that  the  resurreet'ou  of  the 
body  if  not  impossible  was  at  all  events  undesirable.  To  be  free  from  all  connec- 
tion with  matter  was  an  essential  element  in  their  idea  of  salvation.  2.  In  our 
own  day  the  resurrection  of  Christ  is  denied  from  both  jDoints  of  view.  It  is  said 
that  Christ  lay  in  His  grave,  and  the  elements  of  His  body  have  passed  into  the 
bosom  of  nature,  as  ours  will  before  long;  but  His  spirit  lives,  perhaps  iu  us.  On 
the  other  hand,  it  is  said  that  although  the  body  of  Christ  remained  in  the  tomb. 
His  spirit  survived  death,  and  lives  a  disembodied  but  conscious  and  powerful 
life.  But  what  the  apostles  saw  was  a  veritable  body  that  could  stand  hmdling 
and  whose  lips  and  throat  could  utter  sound.  Besides,  if  we  accept  either  view  we 
are  at  once  confronted  with  the  difficulty  that  Christ's  glorification  is  not  yet 
complete.  If  Christ  now  sits  at  God's  right  hand  in  perfect  human  nature,  it  is 
not  as  a  disembodied  spirit,  but  as  a  complete  per.'^on  in  a  glorified  body.  And 
it  must  also  be  remembered  that  the  primitive  faith  and  restored  confidence  in 
Christ  to  which  the  very  existence  of  the  Church  is  due,  were  created  by  the  sight 
of  the  empty  tomb  and  the  glorified  body.  3.  Consider  the  pli'.ce  wiiioh  our  Lord's 
risen  body  had  in  Paul's  conversion.  The  idea  of  a  crucified  Messiah  had  been 
abhorrent  to  him,  but  from  the  moment  when  he  saw  the  risen  Lord  he  undeistood, 
with  the  rest  of  the  discii^les,  that  death  was  the  Messiah's  appointed  path  to 
supreme  spiritual  headship.  So  from  the  first  Paul  put  the  resurrectiou  of  Chiist 
forward  as  an  essential  and  fundamental  i^art  of  the  gospel  he  had  received.  "  If," 
says  Dr.  Fairbairu,  "it  be  true  that  no  living  Christ  ever  issued  from  the  tomb  of 
Joseph,  then  that  tomb  becomes  the  grave,  not  of  a  man,  but  of  a  religion,  with  all 
the  hopes  built  on  it  and  all  the  splendid  enthusiasms  it  has  inspired."  It  is  not 
difficult  to  perceive  what  it  was  in  the  resurrection  of  Christ  which  gave  it  this 
importance.  (1)  It  was  the  conviucing  proof  that  Christ's  words  were  true,  and 
that  He  was  what  He  had  claimed  to  be.  "Destroy  this  temple,"  He  said,  "  and 
in  three  days  I  will  raise  it  again."  As  Jonah  had  been  lost  for  three  days  and 
nights,  but  had  thereby  only  been  forwarded  in  his  mission,  so  with  our  Lord.  In 
order  that  His  claim  to  be  the  Messiah  may  be  understood,  it  was  necessary  that 
He  should  die  ;  but  in  order  that  it  might  be  believed  it  was  needful  that  He 
should  rise.  The  apostles  evidently  accepted  the  resurrection  as  God's  great 
attestation  to  the  person  and  Avork  of  Christ.  It  changed  their  own  thoughts  about 
Him,  and  they  expected  it  would  change  the  thoughts  of  other  men.  They  conld 
now  confidently  say,  "He  died  for  our  sins,  and  was  raised  again  for  our  justifica- 
tion." (2)  There  is  disclosed  by  it  a  real  and  close  connection  between  this  world 
and  the  next.  There  is  no  need  now  of  argument  to  prove  a  life  beyond ;  here  is 
one  who  is  in  it.  It  is  "by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead  that  we 
are  begotten  again  unto  a  lively  hope."  (3)  In  it  we  see  at  once  the  norm  or  type 
of  our  life  here  and  of  our  destiny  hereafter.    Holiness  and  immorlaliiy  are  two 


^ 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  385 

inseparable  aspects  of  the  Divine  life  we  receive  from  Christ.     His   Spirit  is  tlie 
source  of  both  (Eom.  viii.).     The  hope  that  uplifts  and  purifies  every  part  of  the 
Christian's  character  becomes  a  living  hope,  full  of  immortality,  in  all  who  are  now 
actually  drawinf,'  their  life  from  Christ.     Therefore  does  I'aul  so  continuallv  hold 
up  to  us  the  risen  life  of  Christ  as  that  to  which  we  are  to  be  conformeil.     II.  lis 
PKOoF.    As  a  preliminary  to  the  positive  evidence  here  a^lduced,  it  may  lie  remarked 
that  we  have  no  record  of  any  contemporary  denial  of  the  fact,  save  only  the  story 
put  in  the  mouths  of  the  soldiers  by  the  chief  priests.     The  auihorities  resolved 
there  should  be  no  tampering  with  the  grave,  and  accordingly  had  set  their  official 
seal  upon  it  and  placed  a  guard  to  watch.     Their  action  after  the  resurrection 
proves  that  the  tomb  was  empty,  while  their  jsrevious  action  proves  that  it  was 
emptied  by  the  actual  rising  of  Jesus.      So  when  Peter   al'liinied  it  before  the 
Sanhedrin  no   one  was  hardy  enough  to  contradict  him  ;    or  why  dkl  they  not 
jirosecute  the  disciples  for  breaking  the  official  seal?     What  hindered  them  from 
^  ringing  pYoot  that  there  had  been  no  resurrection  ?     If  the  body  was  still  in  the 
grave  nothing  was  easier  than  to  produce  it ;  if  the  grave  was  empty,  as  they 
affirmed,   because  the  disciples  had  stolen   the   body,  no  more   welcome  handle 
against  them  could  have  been  furnished  to  the  authorities.     But  they  could  not 
in  open  court  pretend  any  such  thing.   It  is  admitted  on  all  hanils  that  the  discip'es 
had  a  bond  fi'ie  belief  that  Jesus  had  risen  ;  how  was  that  belief  produced  ?     To 
this  there  are  three  answers.     1.  That  the  disciples  saw  our  Lord  alive  after  the 
crucifixion,  but  He  had  never  been  dead.     This  answer  is  plainly  inade(iuate — 
(1)  As  not  in  harmony  with  the  facts.      His  death  was  certified  by  the  surest 
authority.     Though  the  soldiers  see  that  Jesus  is  dead,  they  make  sure  by  a  spear- 
thrust,  and  Pilate  would  not  give  up  the  body  until  he  had  received  the  necessary 
certificate  that  the  sentence  of  death  had  been  executed.     (2)  As  an  explanation. 
The  Person  the  disciples  saw  was  not  a  crushed,  defeated  man,  who  had  death  still 
to  look  forward  to,  but  one  who  had  passed  through  and  conquered  death,  and  was 
now  alive  for  evermore.      2.    That  the  disciples  only  thought  they  saw  Christ, 
e.g. — (1)  Some  clever  and  scheming  person  may  have  personated  Jesus.     Such 
persouiitions  have  been  made,  but  never  with  such  results.     Imposture,  in  fact, 
does  not  fit  the  cane  before  us  at  all ;  and  the  more  we  consider  the  combination 
of  qualities  required  in  any  one  who  should  jjersonate  the  risen  Lord,  the  more 
we  shall  be  persuaded  that  the  right  explanation  of  the  belief  in  the  resurrection 
is  not  to  be  sought  in  this  direction.     (2)  The  disciples  simply  believed  that  such 
a  soul  could  not  become  extinct.     Quite  so,  they  of  course  believed  that  His  spirit 
was  in  paradise,  and  for  that  very  reason  fully  expected  to  find  His  body  in  the 
tomb:  Avhich  they  did  not.     (3)  Eenan's  account  of  the  growth  of  this  belief  is  that 
"  the  world,  accustomed  to  attribute  to  its  great  men  superhuman  virtues,  cannot 
admit  that  they  have  submitted  to  the  death  common  to  all.     When  Mahomet 
expired  Omar  rushed  from  the  tent,  sword  in  hand,  and  declared  that  he  would  hew 
down  any  one  who  should  dare  to  say  that  the  prophet  was  no  more.     Heroes  do  not 
die.     So  Jesus  had  lived  so  entirely  in  those  who  surrounded  Him  that  they  could 
but  affirm  that  after  His  death  He  was  still  living."     M.  Renan  forgets,  however, 
that  Omar  was   followed   by  Abu   Bekr,    who    said,    "  Whoso  hath   worshipped 
Mahomet,  let  him  know  that  Mahomet  is  dead,  but  whoso  hath  worshipped  God 
that  the  Lord  liveth  and  doth  not  die."     Then,  again,  none  of  the  apostles  said 
that  their  Master  was  not  dead.     Besides,  all  these  hypotheses  omijt  altogether  to 
explain  how  the  disciples  disposed  of  the  tomb  of  our  Lord,  in  which,  according  to 
this  hypothesis,  His  body  was  still  quietly  reposing.    Is  there,  then,  no  possibility  of 
the  disciples  having  been  deceived  ?     Had  the  belief  in  the  resurrection  depended  on 
the  report  of  one  or  a  few  who  were  anxiously  looking  for  the  resurrection  of  Jesus, 
then  these  might  have  persuaded  themselves  they  saw  Him.     But  what  we  have 
here  to  explain  is  how  several  persons,  at  different  times,  in  various  moods,  came 
to  believe  they  had  seen  the  risen  Lord.     He  was  recognised  not  by  persons  who 
expected  to  see  Him  alive,  but  by  women  who  went  to  anoint  Him  dead  ;  not  by 
credulous,  excitable  persons,  but  by  men  who  would  not  believe  till  they  had  gone 
to  and  into  tlie  sepulchre.     I'he  resurrection  formed  no  part  of  the  Jewish  creed 
regarding  the  Messiah  ;  and  the  idea  that  the  disciples  were  expecting  it  is  contra- 
dicted by  the  narrative.     There  was  not  one  person  to  whom  our  Lord  appeared 
who  was  not  taken  wholly  by  surprise.     3.  There  remains,   therefore,  only  the 
explanation  that  the  disciples  did  see  Christ  alive  after  He  had  been  df  ad  and 
buried.     The  men  who  said  they  had  seen  Him  were  men  of  probity,  whose  lives 
and  conduct  are  only  to  be  explained  by  their  having  been  brought  in  contact  with 
VOL.  II.  25 


386  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

the  spiritual  world  in  this  surprising  and  solemnising  manner.     The  testimony  of 
Paul  is  conclusive.     It  is  simply  inconceivable  that  he  should  have  abandoned  all 
his  prospi-cts  and  entered  on  a  wholly  different  life  without  carefully  investigating 
the  chief  fact  which  influenced  him  in  making  this  change.     No  saner  or  more 
commanding  intellect  ever  headed  a  complex  and  difficult  movement.     There  is  no 
one  of  that  generation  whose  testimony  to  the  resurrection  is  more  worth  having, 
and  we  have  it  in  the  most  emphatic  form  of  a  life  based  upon  it.     In  tine,  no  one 
who  takes  a  serious  interest  in  all  this  evidence  can  deny  that  it  would  be  quite 
sufKcient  to    authenticate    any  ordinary  historical    event.      The  majf^rity  of  the 
historical  events  are  accepted  on  much  slenderer  evidence,  and  the  evidence  for 
this  can  be  refused  only  on  the  ground  that  no  evidence,  however  strong,  could 
prove  such  a  miracle.     But  those  who  reject  it  are  compelled  to  accept  a  miracle 
equally  astounding,  viz.,  that  those  who  had  the  best    means  of  ascertaining  the 
truth  and  every  possible  inducemt-nt  to  a'^certaiu  it,  should  all  have  been  deceived, 
and  that  this  deception  should  have  been  the  most  fruitful  source  of  good,  not  only 
to  them,  but  to  the  whole  world.    (M.  Dods,  D.D.)      Difficulties  in  the  vwy  ofdishelief 
in  the  resurrection  of  Chrixt : — I.  Exegetical.     There  is  the  clear  testimony  of  St. 
Paul,  and  the  great  dlstiiction  made  by  the  NewTVstament  between  the  description 
of  visions  and  the  navatives  of  our  Lord's  appearance.     II.  Psychological.     All 
likelihood  is  wanting  for  the  supposition  that  so  many  and  such  very  differently 
constituted  per.^oiis  should,  even  by  luin<lveds  at  a  time,  have  been  simultaneously 
predisposed  to  see  visions.      There    is  the    sud'len    and  thorough  change  in  the 
disciples'  frame  of  mind,  especi 'lly,too,  the  conversion  of  St.  Paul ;  and  tinal'y  the 
cessation  of  Christ's  appearance.     III.  Dogmatical.     Whence  should  the  iuea  of 
an  isolated  individual  resurrection,  hitherto  foreign  to  tluir  belief,    arise  in  the 
minds  of  the   disciples?      IV.    Chkhnological.      Unanimous   liistorical  evidence 
points  to  "  the  third  day,"  and  this  leaves  no  space  for  the  gr-idual  development 
of  visions,  or  fiir  the  trani^location  of  the  fiist  appearances  in  Galilee.     V.  Topo- 
graphical.    There,  in  a  well-known  sj^ot,  stands  the  empty  tomb,  with  its  loud 
question.  Where  is  the  body  ?  vhich  neither  .Jew  nor  Roman  attempts  to  answer, 
though  investigation  would  liave  been  easy.   VI.  Histoeic^l.   There  is  the  immove- 
able belief  of  the  disciples  ;  their  prea  h'ng,  so  full  of  victorious  joy  and  njartyr 
courage  <(  there  is  the  Christian  Church  founded  on  the  rock  of  belief  in  Christ's 
death  and  resurrection.     VII.  Moeal.    There  is  the  regeneration  which  followed 
the  teaching  of  the  apostles.     {Prof.  CliristUrb.)         No-re.'<urrection  ivrpossihle  : — 
1.   The   first   impossible   consequence   may   be   calbd   the  argument  from  mind, 
and    is    thus  expressed:    "If  theie  he  no  resurrection  of  the  dead,   then    Christ 
is    not   raised."      What    Paul    really    menns   to    say   is    this:    If    there   be    no 
immortality   of    the   soul,   Chjist  is    dead  —  the  highest  of   minds   has   become 
extin- 1.      It    may   seem    as    if    this   were    a    mode    of    reasoning   which    never 
would  be  used    in   modern    times.      A  writer  of  our   day  would  certainly  put   it 
differently  ;  he  would  say.  Are  all  the  aspirations  of  the  human  soul  to  count  for 
nothing — all  the  yearnings  after  moral  jiurity,  all  the  search  for  truth,  all  the  thirst 
for  beauty  ?     To  him  the  aspirations  of  the  human  soul  were  all  fulfilled  already  in 
the  image  of  a  perfect  mind.   The  life  of  the  Son  of  Man  was,  for  him,  the  synoiiym 
for   all  that  humnnity  ever  did,  or  even  can  do,  in  the  path  of  greatness;  it  was 
aspiration  crysta'liscd  into  fact.     Accordingly,  when  he  says,  if  there  be  no  im- 
movt»lity,  Chtist  is  drad,  there  is  a  dc  p  sit'nificance  in  his  words.     It  is  quite 
equivalent  to  saying,  what  beci  mes  of  the  dignity  of  man  ?     The  notion  that  Christ 
could  be  deai  was  to  Paul  a  contradiction  in  terms.     Sometimes  a  man  gets  his 
whole  conviction  of  immortality  from  his  inability  to  realise  the  death  of  a  single 
snul.     There  are  presences  in  this  world  so  vivid  and  so  strong  that  their  removal 
by  death  dissipates  the  idea  of  death;  they  are  our  types  of  immortality.     Cut 
what  was  Christ  to  Paul?     To  say  He  was  a  strong  and  vivid  presence  is  to  say 
nothing ;  He  was  a  presence  that  literally  filled  all  things.     That  such   a  being 
should  cease  to  be  was,  for  him,  a  contingency  unthinkable,  that  God  should  suffer 
His  Holy  One  to  see  corruption  was  a  jiaradox  unparalleled.     2.  The  second  of 
those  impossible  conclusions  which  St.  Paul  derives  from  the  denial  of  immortality 
is  expressed   in  the  words :  "  Your  faith  is  vain."     Put  into  modern  form,  his 
meaning  is  this  :  "  If  Christ  be  not  raised  " — if  the  highest  imaginable  powers  of 
the  human  mind  have  been  extinguished  in  death,  then  we  have  an  anomaly  in 
the  universe — a  faculty  without  an  object.     We  must  remember  that,  in  the  view 
of  Paul,  faith  is  not  a  mere  act  of  credulity ;  it  is  a  faculty,  a  power  of  the  soul. 
This  is  shown  by  his  tendency  to  oppose  faith  to  sight,  clearly  implying  that  the 


€HAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  387 

former  is  an  inner  vision,  as  the  latter  is  an  outer  vision.  Wheresoever  he  turns 
he  can  find  no  other  trace  of  a  faculty  without  an  object.  Every  sense  has  its 
•environment,  every  power  its  appropriate  field  of  exercise.  Is  the  sense  of  the 
■supernatural  to  have  no  objei't?  The  sense  of  tlie  supernatural  is  what  Paul  calls 
iaith — that  faculty  which  looks  "to  the  things  that  are  unseen."  These  unseen 
things  are  to  him  at  once  the  symbols  and  the  proofs  of  immortality ;  they  are  not 
■*' temporal  "  but  "  eternal."  If  the  existence  of  these  be  a  delusion,  then  we  have 
an  eye  without  light,  an  ear  without  music,  a  haird  without  materinl  to  work  upon, 
a  sense  of  beauty  without  the  symmetry  to  till  it ;  our  faculty  of  faith  is  useless, 
-objectless,  vain.  From  this  point  of  view  it  becomes  easy  to  understand  St.  Paul's 
collateral  statement,  that  "  our  preaching  is  vain."  It  is  cruel  to  stimulate  a  sense 
•of  want  which  no  scene  of  existence  can  ever  gratify  ;  to  awake  a  power  into  being 
which  no  sphere  of  life  will  ever  require  is  a  pmcess  of  education  which  can  only 
lead  to  pain.  The  fact  that  no  faculty  can  be  vain  is  itself  the  proof  that  "  Christ 
is  risen."  3.  This  brings  us  to  the  third  argument.  It  is  diiferent  in  its  nature 
both  from  those  that  precede  and  from  those  that  follow  it.  They  are  founded 
upon  facts  which  appeal  to  the  universal  nature  of  man ;  this,  in  the  tirst  instance 
at  le  ist,  rests  on  an  historical  experience  of  the  apostle's  own  life  and  on  an  emotion 
induced  by  it.  He  says.  If  there  be  no  resurrection,  and  if  therefore  the  highest 
specimen  of  the  human  mind  be  dead,  then  I  am  found  a  false  witness  for  Christ, 
to  whose  rising  I  testify.  What  Paul  really  m^ans  to  say  is  :  If  there  be  no  resur- 
rection, I  am  myself  an  anomaly ;  "  We  are  found  false  witnesses  for  God,"  i.e., 
for  goodness — false  witnesses  for  the  immortality  of  self-sacrifice.  Such  is  the 
paradox  or  impossible  consequence,  which  Paul  here  designs  to  convey.  One 
■cannot  but  remark  what  a  singular  light  St.  Paul  here  unwittingly  throws  on  his 
•own  character  as  a  witness.  He  suggests  even  more  than  he  means.  He  only 
■wants  to  prove  that  he  is  not  a  false  witness  in  relation  to  others ;  he  powerfully 
impresses  us  with  the  additional  conviction  that  he  is  not  a  false  witness  in  relation 
to  himself.  For,  as  we  follow  him  in  the  foregoing  train  of  thought,  we  see  that 
this  man  even  in  his  Christianity  is  no  fanatic.  4.  St.  Paul  states  his  fourth 
argument  thus  :  "  If  there  be  no  resurrection,  and  if  therefore  Christ  be  not  risen, 
ye  are  yet  in  your  sins."  It  is  an  argunjent  which  is  often  misunderstood.  Paul 
is  speaking,  not  of  a  miserable  consequence,  but  of  an  impossible  consequence. 
What  he  means  is  n  ally  this  :  if  there  be  no  Christian  immortality,  there  cannot 
be  at  this  moment  in  the  world  a  Christian  life  ;  ye  are  in  this  case  yet  in  your  sins  : 
there  is  no  power  keeping  yon  from  evil.  But  your  own  experience  tells  you  that 
this  is  not  tiue  ;  you  are  not  in  your  sins.  Theie  is  a  life  within  you  which  is  not 
part  of  your  natural  life,  nor  a  product  of  that  life — a  spirit  lusting  against  jour 
flesh,  a  law  of  your  mind  wai ring  with  the  law  of  your  members.  What  is  it? 
Whence  came  it  ?  How  do  you  exjjlain  it  ?  If  there  be  nothing  but  earth  and  the 
conditions  of  earth,  in  what  rnannnr  shall  we  account  for  a  sentiment  which  tran- 
scends those  conditions?  If  there  be  no  resurrection,  you  ought  to  be  yet  in  your 
sins  ;  how  comes  it  to  pnss  that  you  are  not  in  your  sins?  To  Kant  the  existence 
of  a  moral  law  within  the  soul  was  the  very  demonstration  of  a  life  transcending 
the  present  order  of  being.  St.  Paul,  instead  of  seeking  the  evidence  of  a  risen 
Christ  in  the  documents  of  antiquity,  seeks  it  in  tlie  Church  of  his  own  day; 
nay,  in  himself  as  a  member  of  that  Church.  He  asks  what  it  is  that  has  given 
rise  to  this  stream  of  Christian  feeling,  which  is  ever  widening  into  an  ocean  of 
universal  love.  He  cannot  find  a  source  for  that  stream  in  the  soil  of  the  natural 
life;  for  it  flows  in  a  channel  the  reverse  of  what  we  call  natu-al.  He  is  forced, 
therefore,  to  seek  it  in  a  life  beyond  nature;  and  the  only  such  life  he  can  find  is 
that  said  to  have  been  lived  by  the  Son  of  Man.  The  evidence  that  Chi  ist  is  risen 
is  the  consciousness  that  we  are  not  in  our  sins.  5.  We  pass  to  St.  Paul's  final 
•argument.  He  says  :  If  there  be  no  possible  resurrection  even  of  the  highest  life, 
if  even  Christ  be  not  risen,  then  they  that  have  fallen  asleep  are  perished.  This, 
then,  is  the  argument  from  affection,  since  it  is  evident  that  here  St.  Paul  directs 
his  main  appeal  to  the  feelings  of  the  heart.  It  would  be  unfair  to  say.  however, 
that  on  this  account  it  is  less  logical  than  his  other  arguments.  The  feelings  of 
the  heart  are  just  as  much  facts  of  nature  as  the  sensations  of  the  bodv,  and  the 
intuitions  of  the  intellect.  St.  Paul,  therefore,  has  a  perfect  right  to  appeal  to  the 
human  I'eart,  whose  instincts  would  be  violated  by  the  denid  of  immortality.  (G, 
Matheson,  D.D.) 

Ver.  2.    By  wMch  also  ye  are  saved,  if  ye  keep  in  memory  what  I  preached 


388  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [chap  xv. 

unto  you. — Hindrances  and  helps  to  memory  in  spiritual  things  : — In  these  words 
we  have  a  discovery — 1.  Of  men's  utmost  happiness — salvation.  2.  Of  the  only 
means  for  the  attaining  of  it — the  gospel.  3.  Of  the  special  grace  necessary  in 
resx^ect  of  this  gospel — believing.  4.  Of  the  particular  faculty  that  is  requisite  for 
this  end — the  memory.  5.  The  relation,  or  influence,  which  this  last  hath  upon 
all  the  rest.  And  this  expressed— (1)  By  way  of  condition,  "  Ye  are  saved,  if  ye 
keep  in  memory."  (2)  By  way  of  exception,  "  Unless  ye  have  believed  in  vain." 
Note — I.  What  the  memory  is.  It  is  that  faculty  of  the  soul  wherein  are  reserved 
the  things  we  know.  Its  office,  however,  is — 1.  To  receive  such  things  as  are  pre- 
sented to  it.  Wherein  it  is  fitly  enough  compared  to  soft  wax,  which  is  prex^ared  to 
leceive  any  impression  made  upon  it.  2.  To  retain  and  preserve  what  is  laid  up 
therein.  There  is  a  little  kiigdom  in  the  soul  of  man.  The  king,  or  rather 
viceroy,  is  the  will,  the  privy  council  is  the  understanding,  the  judge  is  the  con- 
science, and  the  great  treasurer  is  the  memory.  3.  To  recall  or  recover  what  was 
out  of  mir-<l.  II.  The  excellence  of  this  faculty.  The  soul  of  man  is  a  subject 
of  wonder,  and  nothing  more  wonderful  in  it  th  m  the  memory.  It  hath  power  to 
make  things  that  are  in  themselves  absent  and  past  to  be  present.  We  may  see 
the  worth  of  this  faculty  by  those  that  are  dex^rived  of  the  use  of  it,  that  can 
remember  nobody,  nor  the  last  question  that  they  did  ask.  All  a  man's  past  life 
would  be  lost  if  his  memory  were  lost  ;  so  are  the  comforts  of  the  soul  lost  so  far 
as  they  are  forgotten.  III.  The  coRra;PTioN  or  depravation  of  this  faculty. 
This  stands — 1.  In  remembering  those  things  which  we  should  forget.  As — (1) 
Things  unprofitable ;  like  as  if  one  should  crowd  waste-paper,  rags,  and  broken 
pitchers  into  a  cabinet,  which  should  be  stored  with  things  of  value.  (2)  Things 
hurtful.  To  wit,  injuries;  these  usually  stick  in  the  memory  when  better  things 
slip  out.  (3)  Things  sinful.  We  can  remember  a  filthy  story  seven  years  when 
we  do  for(.et  a  saving  sermon  in  seven  hours.  The  depraved  memory  is  herein 
fitly  compared  to  a  sieve  that  lets  the  good  corn  fall  through  and  reserves  only  the 
chaff.  Tht'mistoc  es  said  to  Simonides,  when  he  offered  to  teach  him  the  art  of 
memory,  "Rather,"  says  he,  "teach  me  the  art  of  forgetfulness,  for  the  things 
which  I  would  not  I  remember,  and  lannot  forget  the  things  I  would."  2.  In  for- 
getting those  thin'-'s  which  we  should  remember.  (1)  Our  Creator,  and  what  He 
hath  done  especially  for  us  (Ec<-les.  xii.  1 ;  Jer.  ii.  32).  This  is  most  inexcusable 
(Acts  xvii.  27,  28).  And  th^■n  the  great  thin-.-s  which  He  hath  done,  to  wit,  in  the 
works  of  creation  and  providence,  especially  for  His  Church,  these  we  easily  forget, 
but  should  remember  (Fsa.  Ixxvii.  11) ;  and  x^aiticularly  what  He  hath  done  for  us 
(Deut.  viii.  2).  (2)  Our  Eedeemer.  and  what  He  hath  suffered  for  us.  Else  He 
had  never  instituted  th'^  Lord's  Supper  on  purpose  to  keep  up  the  remembrance 
thereof.  (3)  The  truths  of  religion,  especially  the  most  weighty  (2  Pet.  i.  12-15). 
(4)  The  duties  of  religion  (Exod.  xx.  8;  Heb.  xiii.  2,  3,  16).  All  which,  as  they 
show  our  duty,  so  do  they  imply  our  defectiveness  herein.  (5)  Our  sins  (Ezek. 
xxxvi.  31 ;  Deut.  ix.  7).  (0)  Our  vows  and  obligations  to  God.  (7)  The  Church  of 
God  (Psa.  cxxxvii.  5,  6).  (8)  Our  latter  end  (Isa.  xlvii.  7;  Lam.  i.  9).  IV.  The 
sanctification  of  the  memory.  Which  is  tl)e  lestoring  of  this  faculty  to  its  former 
integrity  and  to  its  proper  objects.  This  is  done — 1.  By  purging  the  faculty. 
And  so  conversion  is  said  to  begin  here  (Psa.  xxii.  27;  Eev.  ii.  5).  2.  By 
strengthening  it.  For  as  sin  weakens,  so  grace  strengthens,  the  faculty  (John  xiv. 
26).  3.  By  reconciling  it  to  good  thiugs,  and  setting  it  apainst  evil  (Psa.  cxix.  16). 
4.  By  filling  it  with  good  things  (Matt.  xii.  3.5).  5.  By  fitting  things  laid  up  in 
memory  for  use  and  practice  (Numb.  xv.  39,  40;  Psii.  ciii.  17,  18).  V.  The  ordi- 
nary IMPEUIMENTS  OF  A  GOOD    MEMORY,  OR    THE    CAUSES    OF  A  BAD  ONE.       1.    A    Weak    Or 

dark  understanding.  2.  A  carnal,  careless  heart.  Such  a  heart  can  retain 
abundance  of  a  play  or  a  song,  but  of  a  chapter  or  sermon  next  to  nothing,  for 
eveiything  keeps  what  is  connatural  to  itself.  Nay,  a  good  man's  memory  in  a 
remiss,  negligent  frame,  quite  differs  from  what  it  was  in  a  leligious  frame.  3.  A 
darling  sin.  Any  bosom  sin,  as  it  fills  and  employs  every  faculty,  so  it  debauches, 
monopolises,  and  disorders  them  all.  Grace,  though  it  rule  every  faculty,  yet 
ruffles  none  ;  it  composes  the  mind,  and  employs  the  memory  in  a  rational  manner. 
4.  Excess  of  worldly  cares.  The  memory  is  but  finite,  though  capacious,  and  a 
superabundance  of  worldly  thoughts  within  must  needs  shoulder  out  better  things 
that  should  be  there.  5.  Surfeiting  and  drunkenness.  These  disorder  the  brain 
and  disable  it  from  its  functions  (Prov.  xxxi.  4,  5).  6.  Violent  passions.  7.  A 
multitude  of  indigested  notions.  If  a  man  have  a  stock  of  methodical  and 
digested  knowledge,  it  is  admirable  how  much  the  memory  will  contain;  but  many 


CHAP,  xv.l  I.   CORINTHIANS.  389 


read  or  hear  too  much  for  their  capacities,  they  have  not  stowage  for  it  (2  Tim.  iii. 
7).  He  who  rides  post  can  never  draw  maps  of  the  country.  VI.  The  proper 
HELPS  TO  IT.  1.  Natural.  (1)  A  sober  diet.  For  if  excesses  in  meat  and  drink  do 
disturb  the  brain,  temperate  diet,  together  with  a  good  air,  is  a  curtain  help  to  the 
memory  (Luke  xxi.  84).  (2)  A  quiet  mind.  For  if  all  passions  that  are  violent 
weaken,  then  a  sedate  ami  quiet  mind  greatly  stiengthons,  the  memory.  2. 
Artificial  or  outwar^i.  (1)  The  repetition  of  those  things  whi  h  we  would  remem- 
ber (Deut.  xi.  18,  19).  (2)  Writing  what  we  would  remember  (Deut.  xi.  20).  (H) 
Custom,  or  using  your  memories.  We  say,  "  Use  legs,  and  have  le;.'S  " ;  nnd  so, 
Use  the  memory,  and  tliou  wilt  have  a  memory.  3.  Spiritual.  (1)  Kepentan(  e 
for  forgetfulness.  (2)  Bewail  your  forgetfulness.  (3)  Prayer.  For  "  every  good 
gift  and  every  perfect  gift,"  whereof  this  is  one,  "  is  from  above."  (4)  Diligent 
attention.  If  the  mind  wander  in  hearing  the  memory  will  be  weak  in  remember- 
ing. (5)  Due  estimation.  The  more  we  love  and  admire  anything  the  better  we 
remember  it  (Psa.  cxix.  16).  (C)  Serious  meditation.  When  j^eople  read  or  hear, 
and  jpresently  plunge  themselves  in  foreign  business,  then  generally  all  is  lost 
(James  i.  24,  25  ;  Psa.  cxix.  11).  VII.  And  so  I  come' to  application.  1.  Magnify 
God  for  your  memories.  2.  Let  ministers  consult  people's  memoiies,  and  to  that 
end  observe  some  proper  method  in  their  books  and  sermons.  3.  Labour  to 
improve  your  memories.  4.  Store  your  memories  in  the  time  of  youth  (Ecides. 
xii.  1).  A  new  ship  is  free  from  leaks,  but  time  and  travel  will  battnr  it.  (N. 
Steele,  A. 31.)  Memory  : — Aristotle  calls  it  the  scribe  of  the  soul ;  and  Bernard 
the  stomach  of  the  soul,  because  it  hath  a  retentive  faculty,  and  turns  heavenly 
food  into  blood  and  spirits.  (T.  Watson.)  Memory,  Cliristian  : — It  was  the 
remark  of  John  Newton,  when  his  memory  had  almost  completely  gone,  that  he 
could  never  forget  two  things.  1.  That  he  was  a  great  sinner.  2.  That  Jesus  Christ 
was  a  great  and  mighty  Saviour.  Meuiory,  cultiration  of: — If  you  have  learned  to 
look  under  your  feet  every  day  while  young,  and  to  cull  the  treasures  of  truth  which 
belong  to  geology,  natural  history,  and  chemistry  ;  if  every  fly  has  furnished  you  a 
study  ;  if  the  incrustation  of  the  frost  is  a  matter  of  interest ;  if  the  trees  that  come 
in  spring,  and  the  birds  that  populate  them,  the  flowers  of  the  meadow,  the  grass  of 
the  field,  the  fishr'S  that  disport  themselves  in  the  water— if  all  tliese  are  to  you  so 
many  souvenirs  of  tbe  working  hand  of  your  God,  you  will  find,  when  you  come 
into  old  age,  that  you  have  great  stores  of  enjoyment  therein.  Let  me  therefore 
recommend  you  to  commit  much  to  memory.  When  a  man  is  blind  his  memory 
is  not  blind.  I  have  seen  many  a  man  who  in  youth  had  committed  much  to 
memory  from  the  Scriptures  and  hymns  and  poems,  who  was  able,  in  old  age,  to 
recall  and  recite  what  he  had  learned,  and  to  fall  back  upon  those  treasures,  his 
own  head  having  thus  become  to  him  a  library.  Oh,  how  much  a  man  may  store 
up  against  old  age  !  What  a  price  is  put  into  the  hamis  of  the  young  wherewith 
to  get  wisdom !  What  provisions  for  old  age  do  they  squander  and  throw  away ! 
It  is  not  merely  that  you  may  be  keen  and  strong  now  ;  it  is  not  for  tlie  poor  ambi- 
tion of  being  esteemed  learned  that  I  urge  you  now  to  lay  such  treasures  up  ;  but 
because  it  is  just  and  right  and  noble  that  yoa  should  be  intell'gent,  and  because 
your  whole  life  is  interested  in  it,  and  your  old  age  pre-eminently  so.  (//.  IV. 
Beecher.)  Unless  ye  have  believed  in  vain. — Belu'vinri  in  vain: — 1.  A  terrible 
peradveiiture  to  have  believed  in  vain.  To  have  spent  a  week,  to  have  risked 
money,  to  have  loved  or  chosen  a  profession  in  vain,  is  dreadful,  and  has  driven 
many  to  despair,  crime,  and  suicide.  What  shall  we  say,  then,  of  having  believed 
id  vain;  of  having  staked  eternity  on  a  delusion  and  a  lie?  2.  There  are  four 
phrases  in  the  Greek  thus  rendered  in  A.V.  (1)  "  In  vain  do  they  worship  Me," 
— i.e.,  idly,  foolishly,  falsely — "  because  their  lieart  is  far  from  Me."  (2)  "  Then 
Christ  is  dead  in  vain,"  i.e.,  gratuitously,  wantonly,  without  return.  (3)  "  That  ye 
receive  not  the  grace  of  God  in  vain  " — unto  emptiness.  (4)  "  Have  ye  suffered  so 
many  things  in  vain  " — are  all  your  endurances  for  Corist  to  be  forfeited  or 
stultified  by  departure  from  the  truth  ?  "  Lest  I  should  have  bestowed  upon  you 
labour  in  vain."  3.  The  word  may  have  had  in  it,  originally,  the  idea  of  seeming, 
as  opposed  to  reality.  But  in  its  use  it  carries  the  sense  of  a  thing  done  by  chance, 
at  hiiphazard,  not  deliber.itelv.  Here  are  two  possibilities  in  one.  I.  A  defect  in 
THE  THING  BELiKVED.  1.  To  belicve  in  vain  may  be  to  believe  a  lie.  There  are 
those  who  say  that  sincerity  is  everytiiing.  If  a  man  be  but  sincere  he  must  be  in 
the  right.  His  opinion  may  be  false,  his  hope  a  dream,  his  faith  a  fable,  yet  if  he 
is  sincere  he  cannot  have  believed  in  vain.  St.  Paul  was  of  another  mind.  Truth 
as  well  as  sincerity  went  with  his  religion.     With  him  the  text  meant  primarily, 


390  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

"  Unless  the  object  of  your  faith  be  a  nullity."  I  transmitted  to  you,  he  says,  a 
definite  body  of  doctrine  based  on  a  series  of  fact — is  it  true  ?  Some  parts  no  one 
doubts — the  death  and  burial.  The  miraculous  part  is  the  resurrection,  which  can 
only  be  proved  by  eviiience — the  evidence  of  eje-\vitues-es.  Those  who  knew 
Christ  saw  Hiiu  alive  after  certain  proof  of  His  death.  2.  Those  who  reject  this 
evidence  tell  us  to  be  of  good  cheer,  for  there  is  nothing  lost.  The  resurrection  is 
spiritual,  and  Christ  risen  means  Clirist  immortal,  successful,  progressive, 
influencing  the  world  by  His  pure  ethics  or  bright  example.  But  Paul  is  not 
SrttisHed  with  these  airy  nothings,  and  snys  that  if  the  resurrection  of  Christ  be  not 
true  those  who  believe  in  Him  have  believed  in  vain.  Their  faith  is  a  random 
faith — tliey  have  not  waited  to  see  that  its  foundation  is  strong  (vers.  12-15).  II. 
A  DEFECT  IN  THE  BELIEVER.  The  faith  m:iy  be  true  and  yet  the  belief  of  it  unsound. 
1.  You  may  have  taken  for  granted  the  faith  of  your  family  or  your  country,  like 
the  Samaritans,  who  "  believed  because  of  the  saying  of "  another.  If  you  had 
been  boru  amongst  Hindoos  for  the  same  reason  you  would  have  been  such  still. 
There  is  nothing  of  conviction,  will,  soul  in  your  belief.  It  is  no  tribute  to  the 
truth.  There  needs  in  you  just  that  step  which  was  expressed  in  the  Samaritans 
who  said,  "  Now  we  believe,  .  .  .  for  we  have  heard  Him  ourselves."  2.  You  may 
have  believed  in  vain  because  you  have  walkt^d  carelessly  and  never  sought  to 
reproduce  the  mind  of  Christ  in  your  lives.  "  Why  call  ye  Me  Lord,  and  do  not 
the  things  which  I  say  ?  "  How  foolish  that  invention  of  our  times  which  would 
apply  the  microscope  to  the  feeling  and  the  telescope  to  the  life  !  wliich  would 
hang  all  the  hoj)e  on  the  warmth  with  which  we  can  say,  "Jesus  is  all,"  and  divert 
every  anxiety  from  consistency  of  conduct !  There  is  a  random  believing  which 
has  mnde  haste  after  safety,  and  has  forgotten  to  fight.  Take  seriously  your 
besetting  sin,  and  count  nothing  done  till  iu  the  name  of  the  risen  Jesus  you  are 
victorious  over  that.     {Bean  Vaughan.) 

Yers.  3,  4.  For  I  delivered  unto  you  first  of  all  that  which  I  also  received, 
how  that  Christ  died  for  our  sins. — First  of  all : — First  of  all  in  his  profoundest 
arguments;  first  of  all  in  his  richest  encouragements ;  first  of  all  in  his  severest 
denunciations  ;  first  of  all  in  his  fervid  exhortations  ;  first  of  all  in  his  impassioned 
expostulations;  first  of  all  in  his  enraptured,  sometimes  his  entrHuced  and  enrap- 
tured and  absorbed  anticipations  of  the  life  and  the  immortality  that  was  to  come. 
If  he  wanted  to  induce  a  habit  of  self-denying  liberality,  mark  him — thus  he  did  it : 
— "  You  know  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Ciirist,  that  though  He  was  rich,  yet  for 
your  sakes  He  became  poor,  that  you,  through  His  poverty,  might  be  made  rich." 
If  he  wanted  to  get  men  to  forbear  with  one  another,  thus  he  did  it : — "  Be  kind 
one  to  another,  tender-hearted,  forgiving  one  another,  even  as  God,  for  Christ's 
sake,  hath  forgiven  j'ou."  When  he  wanted  to  get  men  to  lead  righteous,  sober, 
and  godly  lives,  thus  he  did  it : — "You  are  not  your  own,  you  are  bought  with  a 
l^rice ;  therefore  glorify  God  in  your  bodies  and  in  your  spirits,  which  are  His." 
If  he  wanted,  whenever  he  had  a  congregation  like  this,  to  get  the  impenitent  and 
the  unbelieving  out  of  the  bands  and  out  of  the  snare  of  the  devil,  thus  he  did  it: 
— "There  is  no  other  sacrifice  for  sin  (don't  trifle  with  that  one),  but  a  fearful 
looking  for  of  judgment  and  fiery  indignation  that  shall  devour  the  adversary."  In 
Sb  word,  he  determined  not  to  know  anything  among  men,  but  Jesus  Christ  and 
1/  Him  crucified.  Your  tearhing  cannot  get  on  without  the  alphabet ;  and  Paul 
.  could  not  have  got  on  without  his  alphabet.  And  thus  it  was  evangelically,  that 
wherever  he  went  he  gloried  in  nothing  save  the  Cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
(IF.  Brock,  D.D.)  OriginnUtii  in  preacliing  : — Notice  that  the  preacher  does  not 
make  the  gospel.  If  he  makes  it,  it  is  not  worth  your  having.  Originality  in 
preaching,  if  it  be  originality  in  the  statement  of  doctrine,  is  falsehood.  We  are  not 
makers  and  inventors ;  we  are  repeaters,  we  tell  the  message  we  have  received. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  Apoatle's  creed: — 1.  In  these  verses  we  have  the  earliest 
specimen  of  a  Christian  creed;  the  compendious  form  which  Paul  habitually 
used  in  order  that,  whatever  else  they  forgot,  they  might  not  forget  this,  and  to 
supplv  a  test  of  the  claims  of  those  who  assumed  to  speak  in  the  name  of  Christ. 
Note  how  in  chap.  xi.  23,  St.  Paul  introduces  the  form  of  words  to  be  used  at  the 
Supper  in  precisely  the  same  way  he  introduces  the  creed  before  us.  The  phrase 
seems  to  have  been  that  by  which  St.  Paul  habitually  introduced  settled  and  formal 
statements  of  Divine  truth.  2.  But  if  this  creed  were  ah'eady  familiar,  why  repeat 
it  here?  Simply  because  the  Corinthians  needed  to  hear  it  again  and  again. 
There  were  those  who  held  that  matter  was  the  root  of  all  evil,  that  only  as  tiie 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  391 

spirit  was  redeemed  from  its  thraldom  to  the  body  couhl  men  liope  to  rise  into 
a  happy  spiritual  life.  And  when  Paul  taujht  that  the  dcatli  and  resurrection  of 
Christ  were  virtually  the  death  and  resurrection  of  all  who  lie  ieved  on  Him,  they 
concluded  that  "  the  resurrection  was  past  already."  Nay,  as  they  reflected  on  the 
dignity  of  H'm  who  had  achieved  this  great  spiritual  redemption  for  them,  they 
began  to  do.  b  ■vhither  the  pure  Son  of  God  had  ever  bc^u  broui^'ht  into  immediate 
contact  with  aught  so  vile  and  corrupt  as  matter;  whether  all  that  i^ertains  to  His 
physical  life  was  uot  a  series  of  illusions.  It  was  in  this  mood  that  St.  Paul  met  them. 
I.  The  apostle's  creed  includes  the  theee  following  facts.  1.  That  Christ 
really  died — that  His  death  was  a  genuine  historical  event,  the  date,  manner,  and 
place  of  which  were  all  perfectly  well  known.  2.  That  Christ  was  buried — a  real 
human  body  beiu";  laid  in  an  actual  grave,  a  grave  familiar  to  those  who  dwelt  in 
Jerusalem.  3.  That  Christ  has  been  raised,  as  could  be  proved  by  hundreds  of 
witnesses  still  alive.  These  three  facts  are  the  cardinal  facts  of  Christian  liistory. 
To  believe  in  these  is,  so  far  forth,  to  hold  the  cathoiic  Christian  faith.     II.  Fiioii 

THESE    THREE     FACTS     THE     APOSTLE     DRAWS     TWO     DOCTRINAL     SEQUENCES.       1.     Clirist 

died  ;  but  to  believe  that  will  do  no  more  for  us  than  to  believe  that  Lazarus  died, 
unless  we  also  believe  that  "Christ  died  for  our  sins."  (1)  The  death  of  Christ 
was  not  a  mere  natural  event.  For  in  Him  was  no  sin,  and  death  is  the  natural 
consequence  and  proper  wage  of  sin :  in  Him  was  "  the  power  of  an  endless 
life"  over  which  deatu  had  no  claim  or  sway.  His  death,  therefore,  unlike  ours, 
was  a  willing  s  icrifice.  He  died  fi>r  the  sins  of  those  who  were  dead  in  sin,  that, 
coming  into  their  death,  He  might  give  them  His  life.  (2)  But  St.  Paul  does  not 
embarrass  his  affirmation  with  any  theory  of  the  mode  in  which  the  death  of  ^ 
Christ  takes  away  sin.  He  is  content  to  leave  men  to  theorise  as  they  will, 
if  only  they  receive  the  cardinal  fact.  2.  The  death  and  resurrection  of  Jesus  are 
parts  of  an  ordered  scheme  of  a  Divine  economy.  "  Christ  died,  has  been  raised 
again  according  to  the  Scrii^tures,"  the  law,  the  will  of  God.  Now  thiit  the  Hebrew 
Scriptures  did  foretell  this  (Isa.  liii.  8,  9  ;  Psa.  xvi.  10)  is  obvious.  (1)  Mark  the 
value  of  this  fact.  It  demonstrates  that  tlie  sacrifice  for  our  sins  has  found 
acceptance  in  heaven.  The  p!an  of  the  work  wrought  by  Christ  was  designed  bv 
God.  All  the  lines  of  His  life  were  drawn  by  the  hand  of  God  before  Christ  t  )ok 
our  flesh  to  atoue  our  sin.  And  therefore  to  accept  the  redemption  of  Christ  is  to 
accept  the  redemption  of  God.  We  believe  in  Christ ;  we  also  believe  in  God.  (2) 
But  here  again  St.  Paul  quietly  passes  by  all  the  subtleties  of  soecu'ative  minds.  He 
simply  declares  the  simple  fact  that  the  redeeming  work  of  Chri'-t  was  in  accoi  dance 
with  the  will  of  God.  He  neither  affirms  anything  nor  requires  us  to  believe  any- 
thing as  to  the  mode  in  which  God  accepts  the  righteousness  of  Christ  on  behalf  of 
guilty  men.  All  he  demands  is,  that  we  should  find  here  an  expression  of  the 
good-will  of  God ;  and  he  demands  this  because  to  believe  that  Jesus  died  for  our 
sins  will  be  no  "  gospel  "  to  us,  unless  we  also  believe  that  "  (jod  sent  His  Sou  to 
be  the  propitiation  of  our  sins."  Comdusion:  1.  The  creed  is  brief  enough,  and 
simple  enough  when  compared  with  the  creeds  of  the  Church,  and  yet,  in  the 
judgment  of  an  inspired  apostle,  it  contains  all  that  is  essential  to  the  Christian 
faith.  Nay,  St.  Paul  goes  even  farther  than  this.  There  were  those  at  Corinth 
who,  as  yet,  could  not  adopt  even  tliis  succinct  and  simple  creed  in  its  integrity. 
But  instead  of  expelling  them  from  the  Church,  or  dooming  them  to  everlasting 
perdition,  he  sets  himself  to  tench  them  more  perfectly  the  way  of  life.  2.  The 
lessons  of  St.  Paul's  wise,  gracious  conduct  are — (1)  The  more  accurate  and  full 
a  man's  knowledge  of  Christian  doctrine,  the  greater  will  be  his  help,  of  an 
intellectual  sort,  to  Christian  obedience.  And  therefore  we  should  spare  no  pains 
to  get  and  to  give  him  rounded  and  complete  views  of  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus. 
But  we  must  not  be  impatient  with  him  if  he  is  slow  to  learn.  (2)  If  we  hold  St. 
Paul's  creed  in  St.  Paul's  spirit,  we  shall  be  very  willing  to  hold  as  much  more  as 
we  can.  He  delivered  his  creed  "  first  of  all."  He  delivered  it  first,  because  the 
fact  that  Christ  died  for  our  sins  was  of  all  facts  the  most  momentous  to  sinful 
men — the  very  first  thing  they  needed  to  learn.  But  if  he  taught  this  first,  he  also 
taught  a  good  deal  more  than  this.  Having  taught  the  simple  lesson  of  the  Cross, 
he  was  for  ever  urging  men  to  go  on  to  perfection.  {S.  Cox,  D.IK)  The  iiluriims 
gospel: — I.  Its  great  facts.  1.  Tne death.  2.  The  burial.  3.  The  resurrection 
of  Christ.  II.  Their  paramount  importance.  1.  Sin  expiated.  2.  Death  con- 
quered. 3.  Heaven  opened.  III.  Their  absolute  certainty.  1.  Predicted.  2. 
Attested.  3.  Delivered  to  us  on  the  authority  of  the  Scriptures.  (J.  I. nth,  D.D.) 
The  foundation  facts  of  the  gospel : — I.  The  facts  of  Paul's  gospel.     "  First  of  all 


392  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

...  I  delivered  "  these  things.  And  the  "  first  "  not  only  points  to  the  order  of 
time,  but  to  the  order  of  importance.  1.  The  system  unfolded  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment is  a  simple  record  of  historical  fact.  It  becomes  a  philosophy  and  a  religious 
system ;  but  it  is  first  of  all  a  story  of  something  that  tnok  place  in  the  world. 
If  that  be  so,  let  preachers  never  forget  that  their  business  is  to  insist  upon  the 
truth  of  these  fundamental  facts.  They  must  evolve  all  the  deep  meanings  which 
are  wrapped  up  in  the  facts ;  but  they  will  not  be  faithful  to  their  Lord  unless 
there  be  the  unfaltering  proclamation — "  first  of  all,"  etc.  2.  This  character  of  the 
gospel  makes  short  work  of  a  great  deal  that  calls  itself  "  liberal  Christianity." 
We  are  told  that  it  is  quite  possible  to  be  a  very  pood  Christian,  and  reject  the 
supernatural.  It  may  be  so,  but  I  cannot  understand  how,  if  the  fundamental 
character  of  Christian  teaching  be  the  proclamation  of  certain  facts,  a  man  who 
does  not  believe  those  facts  has  the  right  to  call  himself  a  Christian.  3.  There  is 
an  explanation  which  turns  the  facts  into  a  gosjjel.  (1)  Mark  how  "  that  Christ 
died,"  not  Jesus.  Christ  is  the  name  of  an  office,  into  which  is  condt^nsed  a  whole 
system  of  truth,  declaring  that  it  is  He  who  is  the  Apex,  the  Seal,  and  the  ultimate 
"Word  of  all  Divine  revelation.  (2)  "  He  died  for  our  sins."  Now,  if  the  apostlt^  had 
only  said  "  He  died  for  us,"  that  might  conceivably  have  meant  that,  in  a  multi- 
tude of  different  ways  of  example,  &c.,  His  death  was  of  ui^e  to  manldnd.  But  when 
he  says  "  He  died  for  our  sins,"  that  expression  has  no  meaning,  unless  it  means  that 
He  died  as  the  expiation  for  men's  sins.  (3)  "  He  died  and  rose  .  .  .  according  to 
the  Scriptures,"  fulfilling  the  Divine  purposes  revealed  from  of  old.  These  three 
things  turn  the  narrative  into  a  gospel,  and  without  all  three,  the  death  of  Christ  is 
nothing  to  us,  any  more  than  the  death  of  thousands  of  saintly  men  has  be  n.  Do 
you  think  tbat  these  twelve  fishermen  would  ever  have  shaken  the  world  if  they  had 
gone  out  with  the  story  of  the  Cross  unless  tliey  had  carried  along  with  it  the 
commentary?  And  do  you  suppose  that  the  type  of  Christianity  which  slurs  over 
the  explanation,  and  so  does  not  know  what  to  do  with  the  facts,  will  ever  do  much 
in  the  world,  or  will  ever  touch  men?  Let  us  liberalise  our  Christianity  by  all 
means,  but  do  not  let  us  evaporate  it.  II.  What  establishes  the  facts.  1. 
This  Epistle  is  one  of  the  four  letters  of  Paul  which  nobody  disputes,  and  was 
written  before  the  Gospels,  probably  within  twenty-five  years  of  the  Crucifixion. 
(1)  And  what  do  we  find  alleged  by  it  as  the  state  of  things  at  its  date?  That 
the  belief  in  the  Resurrection  of  Christ  was  universally  taught  in  and  accepted 
by  all  the  Christian  communities.  And  if  that  be  so,  there  is  not,  between  the 
moment  when  Paul  penned  these  words  and  the  day  of  Pentecost,  a  single  chink 
in  the  history  where  you  can  insert  such  a  tremendous  innovation  as  the  full- 
fledged  belief  in  a  resurrection  coming  in  as  something  new.  (2)  Unless  the  belief 
that  Christ  had  risen  originated  at  the  time  of  His  death,  there  would  never  have 
been  a  Church  at  all.  Take  the  nave  out  of  the  wheel  and  what  becomes  of  the 
spokes  ?  A  dead  Christ  could  never  have  been  the  basis  of  a  living  Church.  2. 
The  contemporaneousness  of  the  evidence  is  sufficiently  established.  What  about 
its  good  faiih?  Anybo  ly  that  knows  an  honest  man  when  he  sees  him,  anybody 
that  has  the  least  ear  for  the  tone  of  sincerity  and  the  accent  of  conviction,  must 
say  they  may  have  been  fanatics,  but  one  thing  is  clear,  they  were  not  false 
witnesses  for  God.  3.  What,  then,  about  their  competency  ?  Their  sunplicity ; 
their  ignorance;  their  slowne'^s  to  believe;  their  surprise  when  the  fact  first 
dawned  upon  them,  all  tend  to  make  us  certain  that  there  was  no  hysterical 
turning  of  a  wish  into  a  fact,  on  the  part  of  these  men.  Fancy  five  hundred  people 
all  at  once  smitten  with  the  same  mistake,  imagining  that  they  saw  what  they  did 
not  see  !  4.  "  He  was  buried."  Why  does  Paul  introduce  that  amongst  his  facts? 
Because,  if  the  grave  was  there,  why  did  not  the  rulers  put  an  end  to  the  heresy  by 
saying,  "  Let  us  go  and  see  if  the  body  is  there"?  If  His  body  was  not  in  the 
grave,  what  had  become  of  it?  If  His  friemls  stole  it  away,  then  th'-y  were 
deceivers  of  the  worst  type.  If  His  enemies  took  it  away,  for  which  they  had  no 
motive,  why  did  they  not  produce  it  and  say,  "There  is  an  answer  to  your 
nonsense"?  III.  What  the  facts  establish.  1.  Christ  has  risen  from  the  dead; 
and  that  opens  a  door  wide  enough  to  admit  all  the  rest  of  the  gospel  miiacles. 
2.  The  resurrection  casts  back  a  light  upon  the  Cross,  and  we  understand  that 
His  death  is  the  life  of  the  world,  and  that  "  by  His  stripes  we  are  healed."  3. 
But,  further,  remember  how  He  claimed  to  be  tlie  Son  of  God;  how  He  demanded 
absolute  obedience,  trust,  and  love — and  consider  the  resurrection  as  beating  on  the 
receplion  or  rejection  of  these  tremendous  claims.  We  are  brought  sharp  up  to 
this  alternative — Christ  rose  from  the  dead,  and  was  declared  by  the  resurrection 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  393 

to  be  the  Son  of  God  with  power ;  or  Christ  has  not  risen  from  the  dead — and  what 
then  ?  Then  He  was  either  deceiver  or  deceived,  and  in  eitlier  CHse  has  no  rigljt 
to  my  reverence  and  love.  4.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  teaches  us  that  hfe  has 
nothing  to  do  with  organisation,  but  exists  apart  from  the  body  ;  that  a  man  may 
pass  from  deatli  and  be  unaltered  in  the  substance  of  his  beina; :  and  that  the 
eartbly  house  of  our  tabernacle  may  be  fashioned  like  unto  the  glorious  hou^e  in 
which  He  dwells  now  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  There  is  no  other  absolute  proof 
of  immortality  but  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ.  {A.  iMaclaren,  V.D.) 
Primary  Christian  truths  : — I.  The  primary  truths  which  St.  Paul  delivkhkd 
TO  THE  Corinthians.  1.  Here  is  a  solitary  Jew  visiting  a  great  heathen  city  for  "> 
the  tirst  time,  to  preach  an  entirely  new  religion.  His  bodily  presence  is  weak, 
and  his  speech,  compared  to  that  of  Greek  rhetoricians,  contemptilile.  He  stamls 
almost  alone  in  a  city,  famous  all  over  the  world  for  luxury,  innnoi'ality,  and 
idolatry.  A  more  remarkable  conjuncture  it  is  hard  to  conceive.  And  what  did  he 
say  about  the  Founder  of  the  new  faith  which  he  wanted  them  to  receive  in  place 
of  their  ancient  reli^^ion  ?  (1)  That  He  died,  and  died  as  a  malefactor  on  the  Cross. 
Why  did  St.  Paul  lay  so  much  stress  upon  this  ?  Because  "  He  died  for  our  sins." 
(2)  That  He  rose  from  the  dead.  By  this  amazing  miracle  He  proved,  as  He  had 
frequently  said  He  would,  that  He  was  the  Saviour  foretold  in  prophecy  ;  that  the 
satisfaction  for  sin  He  had  made  by  His  death  was  accepted  by  God  the  Father; 
that  the  work  of  our  redemption  was  completed,  and  that  dealh,  as  well  as  sin,  was 
a  conquered  enemy.  2.  Learn — (1)  What  were  the  leading  principles  of  that 
religion  which,  eighteen  centuries  ago,  came  forth  from  Palestine,  and  turned  the 
world  upside  down.  Christianity  starved  idolatry,  and  emptied  the  heathen 
temples,'  stopped  gladiatorial  couibats,  elevated  the  posiiion  of  women,  raised  the 
whole  tone  of  inoralit,y,  and  improved  the  condition  of  children  and  the  poor. 
These  are  facts  which  we  may  safely  challenge  all  the  enemies  of  revealed  religion 
to  gainsay.  What  did  it  all?  Not  t,he  mere  publication  of  a  higher  code  of  duty, 
but  the  simple  story  of  the  Cross  and  the  sepulchre.  (2)  What  the  foundation  of 
our  own  personal  religion  must  be,  if  we  really  want  inward  spiritual  comfort. 
That  the  early  Christians  possessed  such  comfort  is  plain.  These  men  had  a  firm 
grasp  of  the  two  great  facts  which  St.  Paul  proclaimed  "first  and  foremost "  to 
the  Corinthians.  H.  The  reasons  why  he  was  led  to  assign  to  these  truths 
SUCH  a  prominent  PusiriON.  There  are  three  great  facts  which  stare  us  in  the  face 
everywhere.  1.  Sin.  When  the  sense  of  this  is  really  awakened,  what  can  cure 
it  ?  Nothing  has  ever  been  found  to  do  good  to  a  sin-stricken  soul  but  the  sight  of 
a  Divine  Mediator.  2.  Sorrow.  What  shall  best  help  man  to  meet  and  bear  this  ? 
The  cold  lessons  of  Stoicism  have  no  power  in  them.  Just  here,  the  Pauline  doctrine 
of  a  risen  Christ  comes  in  with  a  marvellous  power,  and  exnctly  meets  our  necessities. 
3.  Death.  At  no  point  do  human  religions  and  philosophies  i)reak  down  so  completely 
as  in  the  article  of  death.  At  the  point  where  all  man-made  systems  are  weakest, 
there  the  gosjDel  is  strongest.  Conclusion:  1.  Do  not  be  ashamed  of  holding  decided' 
views  about  the  first  things — the  foundation  truths  of  religion.  2.  The  only  way 
to  do  good  is  to  walk  in  St.  Paul's  steps,  and  to  tell  men  first,  foremost,  continuall.x , 
that  Jesus  Christ  died  for  their  sins,  and  rose  again  for  their  justitication.  {Bpf 
Ryle. )  On  tlie  atonement : — I.  The  expediency  of  Christ's  interxjosition  for  our  salva- 
tion may  be  inferred  from  the  «i)ilt  and  degradation  of  mankind.  Once,  indeed,  there 
was,  as  it  has  been  called,  a  golden  age;  but  the  same  persons  who  have  described 
it,  also  delineate  the  degeneracy  of  our  race.  Good  men,  according  to  one  ancient 
writer,  were  scnrce  as  the  gates  of  Thebes,  or  the  mouths  of  the  Nile.  Another  tells 
us,  that  peace  had  left  the  earth,  truth  taken  her  departure,  and  fidelity  tied  fnr  away. 
In  consulting  the  records  of  a^es  that  are  past,  amiable  qualities,  no  doubt,  occa- 
sionally appear  which  attract  our  esteem,  and  splendid  virtues  are  displayed  which 
excite  admiration  ;  still,  however,  misconduct  and  crime  are  the  prominent  features. 
Yes,  crimes  follow  in  close  succession,  while  virtues  are  rare  like  those  beautiful 
flowers  which  spring  up  here  and  there  among  tlie  weeds  of  the  wildeiiiess.  They 
who  contemplate  the  wandering  idolaters  in  the  wilds  of  Tartary,  not  to  mention 
the  ancient  votaries  of  su)ierstiLion  in  Greece  and  Kome ;  they  who  behold  the 
Indian  on  the  banks  of  the  Ganges,  or  the  Samoeide  situated  on  the  frozen  ocean, 
must  discern,  in  a  striking  point  of  view,  the  degraded  state  of  humanity,  and  the 
expediency  of  that  plan  of  salvation  vxhicli  the  gospel  unfolds.  The  degiaded  state 
of  humanity,  on  account  of  the  numberless  violations  of  duty,  is  productive  of 
many  apprehensions  and  alarms.  In  the  presence  of  a  Being  of  infinite  jier  ection 
man  has  trembled  to  appear,  being  timorous  and  dismayed,  like  the  progenitor  of 


394  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xv- 


owr  race,  when  he  "  hid  himself  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  among  the  trees  of 
the  garden."     If  he  would  still  hope  for  liappiness,  after  his  manifold  provocations^ 
he  suspects  that  he  cannot  demand  it  fioin  the  inflexible  justice  of  tiie  Almighty, 
but  that  he  must  iutreat  it  from  the  tender  mi^-cy  of  his  God.     Aud  how  astonish- 
ing the  display  of  the  Divine  mercy  to  the  children  of  men!     II.  The  expediency 
of  His  interposition  may  be  deduced  from  the  inefficacy  of  every  oiheii  known 
MODE  OF  atonement  FOR  TRANSGRESSION.     Mucli  effic  icy  has  bccu  ascribed  to  repent- 
ance ;  but  it  is  doubtful  how  far  mere  repentance  is  a  reparation  for  wrong.     Is  not 
guilt  often  attended  with  punishment  which    repentance  alone  cannot  remove? 
Has  not  the  murderer  been  tortured  with  remorse,  after  sincerely  deploring  his- 
crime,  and  firmly  resolving  to  shed  no  more   innocent   blood?      True   penitence 
implies  a  complete  change  of  life:  but  who  ceases  entirely  to  do  evil?     Erring  man 
sins,  repents,  and  sins  again.     Even  his  best  resolutions  are  at  times  fallacious, 
and  as  the  stream  of  brooks  they  pass  away.     Hence  he  is  full  of  anxious  dis- 
quietude, appi'ehensive  that,  while  the  corruptions    of    his  nature  continue,  the 
Divine  displeasure  will  also  remain.      Distrusting  the  efficacy  of  repentance  for 
appeasing  His  anger,  he  naturally  fears,  as  a  great  philosopher  has  justly  remarked, 
lest  the  wisdom  of  God  should  not,  like  the  weakness  of  man,  be  prevailed  on  to 
spare  the  crime  by  the  most  importunate  lamentations  of  the  criminal.     Some 
other  int^'rceasion,  some  other  sacrifice,  some  other  atonement,  he  imagines,  must 
be  made  for  him  beyond  what  he  himself  is  capable  of  making,  before  the  purity  of 
the  Divine  justice  can  be  reconciled  to  his  manifold  offences.     But  legal  oblations 
were  deficient  in  efficacy.     It  was  not  possible,  according  to  the  declaration  of  an 
apostle,  that  these  should  take  away  sin.     A  superior  sacrifice  was  requisite,  and  a 
better  atonement  than  these.     On  the  Saviour's  merits  the  believer  reflects  with 
hope  and  trust,  gratitude  and  transport,  in  his  last  moments.     III.  The  atonement 
was  expedient  to  vindicate  the  honour  of  the  Divine  government.      Mercy  to 
the  guilty  without  suitable  expiation  might  produce  ruinous  effects.     Were  breach 
of  order  not  punished,  all  would  become  anarchy  and  confusion.     When  the  genius 
of  justii-e  seems  to  slumber  for  ages,  she  is  scorned  like  the  threatenings  of  Noah. 
Never  will  that  Omnipotent  Being,  who  is  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  iniquity  but 
with  abhorrence,  allow  guilty  mortals  to  trample  on  the  majesty  of  His  laws,  and 
with  impunity  to  set  examples  of  crimes  the  most  atrocious.     That  obnoxioiisness 
to  punishment  which  results  from  the  violation  of  the  Divine  laws  was  transferred 
to  Christ  when  He  offered  Himself  as  a  substitute  for  sinners.     And  this  substitu- 
tion,   completely  voluntary  on    His    part,  and   consequently   highly  meritorious, 
exalted  in  every  point  of  view,  instead  of  debasing  the  doctrine  of  "  the  natural 
placaliility  of  the  Divine  Being."     IV.  Our  Saviour's  interposition  was  expedient 
as  being  a  subject  of  prophecy,  and  the  Divine  veracity  interested  of  consequence 
in  its  accomplishment.     Many  hundred  years  before  His  appearance  on  earth,  the 
interposition  of  our  Eedeemer  was  predicted  with  the  utmost  perspi<'uity.      The 
whole  scene  of  His  sufferings  passed  before  the  prophets,  and  they  describe  them 
as  circumstantially  as  if  they  had  been  spectators  of  the  crucifixion  on  Mount 
Calvary.      Without  controversy,  it  was  a  great   and   mysterious   sacrifice.      But 
mystery  is  merely  a  relative  term.     To  infinite  intelligence  all  is  plain  in  the  whole 
economy  of  grace,  the  arrangement  of  providence,  and  the  system  of  nature.     Let 
us,  who  are  children  of  the  dust,  receive  with  reverence  every  doctrine  which  is 
revealed  from  heaven,  rather  availing  ourselves  of  the  light  of  the  sun,  so  to  speak, 
than  attempting  to  gaze  on  his  glory.     (T.  Laurie,  D.D.)         Jesus  Clirist  died  for 
the  sins  of  men : — I.  It  was  violent  and  ignominious — a  death  by  crucifixion. 
Christians  living  at  this  remote  age  of  the  Church,  are,  in  some  sense,  disqualified 
to  conceive  of  that  extremity  of  pain  and  shame  which  attended  an  execution  by 
the  cross.      We  have  been  accustomed  to  associate  with  the  cross  whatever  is 
stupendous  in  history,  whatever  is  dear,  and  sacred,  and  sublime  in  truth.     But  it 
was  far  otherwise  in  that  age,  and  with  those  nntious  among  whom  the  apostles 
went  forth  to  proclaim  their  crucified  Lord.     They  knew  the  cross  in  no  other 
character  than  as  the  instrument  of  the  most  horrible  and  most  infamous   of 
punishments.     We  cannot,  therefore,  but  admire,  that  in  the  face  of  this  strong 
and  universal  detestation,  the  apostles  should  so  explicitly  affirm  and  so  earnestly 
iterate  the  fact  of  their  Blaster's  crucifixion.     Far  from  drawing  an  oblivious  veil 
over  the  Cross,  far  from  attempting,  by  partial  or  enigmatical  statements,  to  con- 
ceal the  offensive  fact,  they  assert  it,  they  appeal  to  it,  they  rejoice  and  glory  in 
it !     1.  The  sincerity  of  the  apostles,  and  their  conviction  that  Jesus  is  the  Saviour 
of  the  world.    Had  they  been  insincere,  or  had  they  been  of  doubtful  mind,  as  to 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.   COIUNTHIANS.  395 

the  Christ  of  God,  the  mode  of  their  Master's  death  they  might  well  have  lieptback. 
2.  We  ourselves  may  take  a  lesson  not  to  stumble  at  the  scandal  of  the  Cross. 
Happy  they  who,  feeling  it  to  be  the  power  of  God  and  tbe  wisdom  of  God,  are 
raised  above  the  contempt  of  unbelieving  men,  and  can  glory  in  the  Cross  of  Christ ! 
II.  The  death  of  Christ  was  positive  and  beal — not  fictitious,  not  visionary  i 
"  Christ  died  for  our  sins."  The  importance  of  this  part  of  apostolic  instruction 
we  should  have  much  more  distinctly  perceived  had  we  lived  nearer  the  times  of 
the  apostles.  Very  early  in  tbe  Christian  Church,  yea,  even  in  the  days  of  the 
apostles  themselves,  there  arose  a  sect  of  people  who  denied  the  reality  of  the 
sufferings  and  dentil  of  the  Holy  Jesus,  maintaining  that  the  Jews  spent  their  fury 
on  a  phantom  sent  from  heaven  to  delude  them,  and  that  the  real  Christ  was  far 
removed  above  the  reach  of  their  malignant  and  cruel  hands.  Some  of  these 
persons  had  witnessed  tlie  miracles  which  the  apostles  wrought,  and  probably  some 
of  thetn  those  of  the  Saviour  Himself;  and  we  may  readily  cimceive  how  the 
witnesses  of  such  wonders  should  lind  it  difficult  to  credit,  that  He  who  wrought 
them  could  ever  fall  a  victim  to  wicked  and  impotent  men  !  Be  this  as  it  may,  the 
aposth'S,  those  wise  master  builders,  were  careful  to  guard  against  the  fatal  mistake 
we  have  mentioned.  With  what  particularity  of  circumstance  did  the  sacred 
historians  narrate  the  manner  of  Messiah's  death  !  III.  These  sufferings,  and  this 
death,  were  a  vicarious,  sacrificial  offebing  to  God,  for  the  sins  of  the  world.  1. 
This  account  of  the  Saviour's  death  is  required  by  the  express  and  con-tant  lan- 
guage of  the  inspired  writers.  See  Isa.  liii.  6  ;  1  Tim.  ii.  5,  6;  1  Pet.  ii.  24  ;  IJohn 
ii.  2  ;  llev.  v.  9.  2.  This  view  of  the  sufferings  and  death  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  no 
less  forced  upon  us  by  the  narrative  of  the  event.  I  will  not  Hsk  where  was  the 
goodness,  the  compassion  of  the  Divine  nature?  but  I  will  ask  \\here  was  its 
justice,  its  equity,  its  righteousness  if  the  immaculate  Jesus  could  bear  all  this 
weight  of  woe,  and  yet  not  sacrificially,  not  as  a  substitute,  not  as  the  L;inib  of 
God,  dying  for  the  sins  of  the  world  ?  3.  It  is  when  the  sufferings  and  death  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  are  regarded  in  this  light  that  they  be-'ome,  what  the  sacred  Sciipturea 
represent  them,  the  highest  display  of  the  love  of  God  to  man.  Conclusion  :  1. 
This  vital,  all-momentous  Chri^tian  doctrine  m>iy  serve  to  guide  us  in  our  behaviour 
towards  those  who  deny  the  Lord  that  bought  them.  As  men,  and  as  men  for 
whom  Chiist  died,  they  are  entitled  to  our  respect,  our  pity,  a'ld  our  pmyers;  but 
never  let  us  be  found  lending  ourselves  to  countenance  their  fatal  errors.  2.  The 
exhibition  of  this  great  truth  may  serve  to  make  known  the  aggravated  guilt,  the 
awful  danger  of  an  impenitent  life.  3.  This  blessed  doctrine  ought  especially  to 
bring  encouragement  to  every  one  who  sincerely  mourns  on  account  of  sin.  4. 
Finally,  standing  on  this  bright  and  eternal  truth,  I  have  a  right  to  require  that 
you  unite  with  me  in  ascriptions  of  praise  to  the  adorable  Fountain  of  all  this  love  to 
man.  {J.  Bromlej/.)  Clirist's  death  :  the  jti'imary  teachiiip  of  Christianity  : — The 
phrase  "first  of  all  "means  not  only  first  in  jioint  of  time,  but  first  in  point  of  imiDort- 
ance.  If  we  ask  why?  the  answer  is  that  Christ's  death  is — I.  An  uNANSWEFiABLE  pkoof 
OF  THE  HUJTANiTY  OF  OUR  LoRD.  It  declares  Hira  "Son  of  Man,"  and  therefore 
not  a  phantom  too  high  for  fellowship  and  following.  A  conviction  of  this  ought 
to  be  grasped  by  us,  "  first  of  all,''  because  it  is  essential  to  our  regarding  Him — 1. 
As  Eedeemer.  2.  As  Friend.  3.  As  Example.  II.  The  strongest  utterance  of 
Divine  love.  In  following  the  life  of  Jesus  we  gaze  on  God's  love  in  unwearied  toil,, 
inpatient  endurance, in  keenest  sympathy,  in  bitter  tears.  But  gazing  on  Christ's 
death  we  see  Divine  love  in  agony,  humiliation,  shame.  Man's  highest  love  to 
God  was  when  Abram  offered  his  only  son  Isaac  ;  God's  deepest  love  to  man  is  seen 
in  giving  His  only  begotten  Son  in  sacrifice  on  Calvai-y.  III.  The  mightiest  force 
in  the  salvation  op  the  world.  1.  He  Himself  relied  on  it:  "I,  if  I  be  lifted 
np,  will  draw  all  men."  2.  The  influence  of  His  death  on  many  at  the  crucifixion 
illustrates  it.  3.  The  history  of  Christianity  testifies  to  it.  (U.  Ii.  Tliomas.) 
CiirisVs  death  a  cardinal  fact  and.  doctrine: — Why  did  the  Apostle  Paul  make  it 
the  very  beginning  of  his  preaching?  Because — I.  It  was  most  struck  at  by 
ENEJiiES.  Though  not  a  blind  zealot  who  courted  opp  sition,  and  though  he  knew 
how  to  become  all  things  to  all  men,  he  was  no  trimmer;  and  when  any  known 
doctrine  of  his  Master  was  impugned,  that  was  the  doctrine  to  which  he  devoted 
himself  in  affectionate  defence.  II.  It  is  the  disiinguishing  doctrine  of  Chbisti- 
anity.  In  Christianity  tliere  are  many  things  common  to  it  with  Judfiism, 
Mohammedanism,  and  even  pure  Theism  ;  but  here  is  a  discriminative  mark.  III. 
It  bbings  siEN  down  to  the  earth,  in  a  sense  of  sin,  weakness,  SHAjrE,  and 
danger.     The  gospel  is  a  remedy.     It  seeks,  not  to  improve  what  is  sound,  but  to 


396  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

cure  what  is  dying.  It  is  a  remedy  which  none  accept  but  such  as  despair  of  other 
help.  All  who  ever  received  the  doctrine,  received  it  on  their  knees.  He  that 
huiiibleth  himself  shall  be  exalted.  IV.  It  is  of  all  doctrines  that  which  lies 
NEAREST  THE  HEART  OF  CHRISTIAN  AFFECTION.  It  was  Uppermost  in  the  lit  art  of 
Paul ;  it  throbbed  in  its  inmost  pulses.  It  reminds  him  of  what  he  was,  it  makes 
him  what  he  is.  V.  It  is  the  precise  object  of  saving  faith.  To  be  saved  is  the 
one  thing  needful.  But  to  be  saved  one  thing  is  necessary — faith.  But  in  what? 
In  this  crucified  but  risen  Eedeemer.  The  man  who  believes  in  Him,  with  a 
spirituiil  apprehension  of  what  he  believes,  is  a  saved  man.  VI.  It  is  the  key  to  all 
other  doctrines.  The  symbol  of  Christianity  is  not  the  all-seeing  eye,  the  creative 
hand,  the  sepulchre,  the  sceptre — but  the  Cross.  With  this  you  can  explain  all; 
but  denying  this,  you  go  on  till  to  be  consistent  you  must  deny  all.  VI.  It  is 
the  great  instrubiknt  of  conversion.  This  is  the  very  event  the  recital  of  which, 
even  before  the  end  of  the  generation  then  born,  filled  the  Roman  Empire  with 
converts.  It  is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation  to  every  one  that  believeth.  Con- 
clusion :  1.  These  things  enable  us  to  come  to  a  judgment  with  regard  to  Churches 
and  religious  communities.  The  criterion  is  the  relative  place  which  they  give  to 
the  doctrine  of  Christ's  death.  2.  In  like  manner,  we  may  judge  of  books,  preach- 
ing, and  systems  of  theology.  Try  them  by  this  question,  AVhat  think  ye  of  Christ? 
3.  We  may  here  judge  of  our  own  personal  religion.  {J.  W.  Alexander,  D.D.) 
The  death  of  our  Lord  : — 1.  Its  nature.  We  must  affirm  and  believe  that  it  was  a 
true  and  proper  death,  such  as  that  to  which  all  mortals  are  by  the  law  of  our 
nature  subjected.  Such  is  expressed  by  all  the  terms  appropriated  to  it,  and  by  the 
ordinary  signs  of  death.  II.  Its  pecdliar  adjuncts  and  respects  of  our  Lord's 
death,  which  commend  it  to  our  regard,  and  amplify  its  worth.  1.  Its  being 
a  result  of  God's  eternal  counsel  and  decree  by  which  our  Saviour  was  "  a  Lamb, 
slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world."  2.  Its  being  a  matter  of  free  consent  and 
compact  between  God  and  His  Son.  It  was  pre-ordained  by  God  ;  and  our  Saviour's 
reply  was  :  "  Lo !  I  come  to  do  Thy  will,  0  God."  3.  Its  great  excellency  and 
efhcacy,  appearing  from  manifold  types  foreshadowed,  and  in  divers  prophecies 
foretold.  4.  Its  being  compassed  by  God's  especial  providence  directing  and  dis- 
posing it,  though  not  without  the  active  cimcuirence  of  men;  so  that  although  as 
a  work  of  Divine  Providence  it  was  most  admirable,  yet  as  an  act  of  human  pravity 
it  was  the  most  heinous  ever  committed.  5.  Its  great  commendation  in  the  quality 
of  our  blessed  Saviour's  person  :  how  valuable  must  be  the  death  of  one  so  incom- 
parnbly  transcendent  in  glory!  III.  The  causes  and  principles  whence  it  pro- 
ceeded ;  which  moved  God  to  determine  it,  and  our  Lord  to  undertake  it.  There 
is  in  Scripture  a  threefold  love  of  God  towards  men  intimated.  1.  A  general  love  to 
mankind  antecedent  to  the  sending  of  our  Lord  and  His  performances,  being  the 
ground  of  God's  designing  them.  2.  A  love,  consequent  on  these,  and  procured  by 
them.  3.  A  peculiar  love  of  friendship  and  complacence,  which  God  bears  to  all 
who  repent  of  their  sins  and  embrace  the  gosi>el.  The  like  principles  are  said  to 
move  our  Lord  to  undergo  death  for  us.  To  these  may  be  added  our  sins,  as  the 
meritorious  causes  of  our  Saviour's  death  :  "  He  was  bruised  for  our  iniquities." 
He  died  for  us,  not  only  as  men,  but  as  sinful  and  wretched  men.  IV.  The  ends 
which  it  aims  at.  1.  The  illustration  of  God's  glory,  by  displaying  His  most 
glorious  perfections.  2.  The  dignifying  and  exaltation  of  our  Lord  Himself,  which 
is  what  He  Himself  foresaw  and  foretold.  3.  The  salvation  of  mankind;  wliich  He 
procured  by  appeasing  thnt  wrath  whi-'h  God  bears  towards  iniquity,  and  recon- 
ciling Him  to  men,  who  by  sin  were  alienated  from  Him.  4.  Other  subordinate 
designs  and  effects  are  the  reparation  of  God's  honour  ;  tlie  ratification  of  the  new 
covenant ;  the  reconciliation  of  all  in  heaven  and  earth  ;  the  defeat  of  death,  and 
of  the  powers  of  darkness  ;  the  engaging  us  to  the  practice  of  all  righteousness  and 
obedience  ;  for  attestation  to,  and  confiimation  of  Divine  truth.     V.  The  practical 

INFLUENCES  WHICH  A  CONSIDERATION  OF    THIS  POINT  SHOULD  HAVE   ON  US.       1.  It  should 

beget  in  us  the  highest  degree  of  love  and  gratitude  towards  God  and  our  Saviour. 
2.  It  should  raise  in  us  great  faith  and  hofe  in  God,  excluding  all  distrust  or 
despair.  3.  It  should  comfort  and  satisfy  us  in  regard  to  our  sins,  supposing  that 
we  heartily  repent  of  them.  4.  It  discovers  to  us  their  heinousness,  and  thereby 
should  move  our  detestation  of  them.  5.  It  should  work  in  us  a  kindly  contrition 
and  remorse  for  them.  6.  And  engage  us  carefully  to  avoid  them,  as  "crucifying 
Him  afresh."  7.  It  should  engage  us  to  jiatience  and  resignation  to  the  will  of  God. 
8.  It  obliges  us  to  the  deepest  mortification,  in  conformity  with  Christ's  death,  "being 
with  Him  crucified"  to  the  lusts  of  the  flesh.     9.  It  is  also  a  strong  engagement  to 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  397 

the  fullest  measure  of  charity  towards  our  brethren.  10.  We  are  hence  obliged  to 
yield  ourselves  wholly  up  to  the  service  of  our  Saviour,  to  the  promoting  of  His 
interest  and  glory  ;  since  "  we  are  not  our  own  ;  being  bought  with  a  price,"  &c. 
{I.  Barrow,  D.D.)  The  mystcni  of  death. : — I.  Why  did  Chkist  die  ?  1.  Christ  has 
bequeathed  to  us  the  invaluable  legacy  of  a  true  ideal.  We  desire  to  know  how  to 
conduct  ourselves,  and  our  desire  is  satisfied  by  the  ideal  left  by  Christ.  (1)  There 
was  in  Him  a  sincerity  and  simple-mindedness  which  were  yoked  with  restraiued 
and  yet  unmeasured  power.  It  is  needless  to  say  that  whenever  this  is  realised  in 
life  its  effect  is  overwhelming.  (2)  Tliere  was  in  Him  a  noble-mindedness,  a  loftiness 
of  tone  which  struck  and  moved.  He  touched  the  commonest  things ;  whatever  He 
touched  He  raised  ;  He  carried  contentedly  the  atmosphere  of  eternity  into  the 
work  and  trials  of  time.  (3)  And  what  rendered,  what  renders,  such  an  one  so 
entirely  approachable  ?  His  extraordinary  devotion  to  the  human  race.  2.  Now  to 
complete  tlie  picture  was  needed  the  tragedy  of  death.  Given  absolute  human 
perfection  in  a  world  death-stricken,  then  not  merely,  as  Plato  said,  must  the  good 
man  sulTer  at  the  hands  of  sinners,  but  the  ideal  must  be  perfected  by  subnlis^ion 
to  the  common  doom  of  death.  (1)  Why  did  He  die  ?  Tiie  deepest  mystery 
of  reveLition  is  the  mystery  of  atonement.  Something  within  us  tells  us  of  the 
chasm  between  our  personal  acts  and  the  fulfilment  of  a  righteous  law.  That 
fulfilment  is  in  the  atoning  sacrifice.  (2)  Why  did  He  die?  Certainly  to  complete 
that  sympathetic  tie  that  hinds  Him  to  us  all.  II.  What  is  the  significance  op 
death?  1.  Well,  clearly  death  is  a  fact;  a  fact  of  intimate  and  universal  interest. 
In  a  world  of  infinite  possiiiilities,  and  theiefore  of  immeasurable  uncertainties, 
one  fact  is  certain,  we  shall  die.  Death  is  the  consummation  of  the  tragedy 
of  change.  All  is  cha'  ging — we  ourselves  among  the  many  that  people  this 
mysterious  life.  Now,  death  is  the  crown  of  change.  All  other  changes  are  as 
nothing  couipared  with  this.  There  is  a  tiagic  strain  in  every  life  when,  taking 
account  of  so  much  that  has  been  full  of  love,  Hud  joy,  and  happiness,  we  say,  "It 
can  never  be  again."'  That  tragic  strain  is  heard  in  its  deepest  chords,  in  its 
fullest,  most  heart-rending  music,  in  the  m\stery  of  death.  3.  Death  in  one  sense 
is  an  unparalleled  catastrophe.  The  ancients  when  they  thought  of  it  at  all,  they 
gazed  shuddering  at  a  world  of  gloom.  The  philosophic  thinkers,  the  tragic  poets 
of  the  ancient  world,  tell  the  same  story  by  their  unvarying  strain  of  sadness  ;  do 
what  they  would,  it  was  an  unparalleled  catastrophe.  We  Christians  feel,  in 
a  sense,  the  same.  Did  you  ever  take  from  your  shelves  a  loug-clo'ed  volume,  and 
shake  out  from  its  pages  unawares  a  letter,  written  by  a  dear  dead  hand?  Why 
for  a  moment  are  you  all  unmanned?  "Littera  scripta  manet,"  yes,  "  remains  " 
but  only  to  mock  you.  "  Where  is  he  ?  "  "  How  does  he  feel  to  »«f  ?  "  "Shall  we 
meet  again  ?  "  Whatever  answer  comes,  this  is  certain ;  what  once  was  is  noi. 
Think  one  moment  more.  On  your  table  you  have  the  portrait  of  your  wife,  your 
child,  your  friend.  Are  they  near  you?  You  scarcely  care  to  look  at  it.  Why? 
Because  that  sweet  presence  is  about  the  house.  Absence  comes,  you  love  the 
portrait  better,  for  absence  is  the  first,  faint,  saddening  image  of  the  great 
"farewell."  Let  the  grave  divide.  You  cannot  bear  to  jjart  with  that  portrait 
now.  It  is  all  that  you  have  left  you  of  what  was  once  so  dear,  so  fair.  III.  If 
ouK  Chkistianity  be  agband  eeai.ity,  we  must  view  even  this  saddening  spectacle 
IN  THE  LiGHr  AND  ATMOSPHERE  OF  'J  HE  NEW  CREATION.  1.  We  a)  c  "  in  Chrlst,"  and 
Christ  has  ilied.  Remembering  this,  I  ask  in  an  altogether  happier  temper,  "What 
is  tlie  significance  of  death  ?  "  (1)  Certainly  death  even  "in  Christ  "  is  a  punish- 
ment for  sin.  But  as  surely  also,  "in  Christ,"  it  takes  a  touch  from  the  Passion, 
a  power  from  the  Precious  Blood.  "Right  d' ar  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  is  the 
death  of  His  saints."  (2)  Death  "  in  Christ  "  is  an  e'^cape  from  a  world  of  trouble. 
We  weep,  and  who  can  blame  us?  But  for  the  dear  one  gone,  we  know  it  is 
blef^sed,  "  taken  away  from  the  evil  to  come."  (3)  Deaih  in  Christ  is  an  accident  in 
immortality.  The  great  unity  of  life  lasts  on.  And  further,  one  of  the  bitterest 
pangs  of  life  is  the  pang  of  the  parting  of  friends.  Now,  death  "in  Christ"  is 
the  entrance  lo  n  land  where  partings  are  no  more.  2.  Tliere  always  is,  there 
always  must  be,  soujething  awful  in  the  tlionght  that  I  must  die.  For  death  has 
had  a  fatal  affinity  to  the  Prince  of  Darkness.  True :  but  the  Passion  of  Christ 
conqners  by  transformirg  all.  "In  Christ"  it  is  still  certaiuly  awful,  but  it  is 
blessed  to  die.  If  Christianity  has  made  death  more  serious  by  revealing  hidden 
facts  of  another  life,  has  it  not  also — for  this,  too,  we  must  remember — much  to 
offer  of  compensating  strengtli  ?  To  live  iu  faith  is  to  prepare  to  die.  Christ  by 
His  death  has  given  us  a  ground  of  confidence  in  His  unflagging  tenderness,  and  it 


398  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

is  devotion  to  a  person,  it  is  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  which,  as  it  conquers  the  world, 
so  it  subdues  the  grave.  (Canon  Knox-Little.)  And  that  He  was  buried,  and 
that  He  rose  a^ain. — The  mystery  of  the  grave  : — Tlie  memory  of  tire  burial  of 
Jesus  is  stamped  upon  the  lieart  of  Christendom.  There  are  many  reasons  why  it 
should  be  so.  1.  Since  our  dear  l-ord  is  the  Eternal  Word,  every  act  of  that  most 
sacred  life  and  death  has  its  special  signiticance.  2.  It  is  one  of  that  store  of  mortal 
experiences  laid  up,  not  by  omniscient  power,  but  by  personal  trial,  in  the  heart  of 
God.  3.  It  stands  in  direct  rela'ion  to  that  strange  borderland,  at  the  memory  of 
whose  twilight  indistinctness  voices  are  hushed,  and  dreams  of  ambition  die. 
The  question  is,  Why  was  He  buried?     I.  Death  is  an  act  of  solemn  separation, 

BUT    HENCEFORTH    THE    GEAVE    TO    THE    ChKISTIAN   IS    A    WITNESS    TO — 1.   ItS   meaning. 

Well,  the  souls  of  the  dead  are  robed  in  mystery ;  but  this  at  least  is  clear,  there  is 
some  special  force  in  the  separation  for  the  ennobling  of  the  body  ;  some  peculiar 
power  for  developing  the  energy  of  the  soul.  2.  Its  limits.  It  cannot  last.  The 
strange  dark  sleep  of  death  is  the  prelude  to  a   resurrection  moruing.     II.  The 

BURIAL  NIGHT  OF    THE  REDEEMER  GIVES  A  TENDER  TOUCH  OF    SENTIMENT  TO  THE  GEAVE. 

Nor  is  this  wrong.  False  sentiment  is  never  so  detestable  as  in  religion.  But 
Christianity,  because  it  is  a  religion  of  Divine  everlasting  realities,  rouses  the 
deepest  fee  ing  and  expresses  them  in  sentiments  of  beauty,  as  the  deep  and  massive 
energy  of  the  ocean  flings  up  the  sun-bespangled  spray.  There  is  a  sweet  touch  of 
the  real  truth  of  things  expressed  in  a  pure  poeiic  sentiment,  in  the  Christian 
certainty  that  death  is  sleep.  Now  the  calm  majestic  rest  of  the  Redeemer  is  the 
evident  witness  that  there  is  this  mystery  in  the  grave.  It  is  the  sleej)ing-place  of 
the  weary.  "  They  rest  from  their  labours."  Their  graves  are  symbols  of  faithful 
service.     Ah  !  as  you  love  them  you  would  not  call  them  back  again.     {Ibid.) 

Vers.  5-8.  And  that  He  was  seen  of  Cephas,  then  of  the  twelve.  —  The  in  fallible 
proofs  of  our  Lord's  resiirrictioii : — I.  The  witnesses  were — 1.  Numerous.  2. 
Competent  in  respect  of  their  acquaiutance  with  Christ,  their  intelligence,  their 
opportuniiies  of  sf-eing  Him.  3.  Honest.  II.  Their  evidence.  1.  Was  immedi- 
ately given.  2.  Where  the  facts  occurred.  3.  Harmonious.  4.  Constantly  re- 
peated. 5.  Openly  given  while  hundreds  of  them  were  alive.  6.  Steadily 
maintained  even  unto  death.  (./.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Tlie  evidence  for  the  resnrn'Ction  : 
— As  the  resurrection  of  Christ  is  an  historical  fact,  it  is  to  be  proved  by  historical 
evidence.  The  apostle  therefore  appeals  to  the  testimony  of  competent  witne-ses. 
Confidence  in  such  testimony  is  not  founded  on  experience,  but  on  the  constitution 
of  our  nature.  We  are  so  constituted  that  we  cannot  refuse  assent  to  the  testimony 
of  g'Odmeuto  a  fact  fairly  within  their  knowledge.  To  render  such  testimony 
irresistible  it  is  necessary — 1.  That  the  fact  to  be  proved  should  be  of  a  nature  to 
admit  of  being  certaiuly  known.  2.  That  adequate  opportunity  be  afforded  to  the 
witnesses  to  ascertain  its  nature,  and  to  be  satisfied  of  its  verity.  3.  That  the 
witnesses  be  of  sound  mind  and  discretion.  4.  That  tliev  be  men  of  integrity.  If 
these  conditions  be  fuldlL  d,  human  testimony  estaldislies  the  truth  of  a  fact 
beyond  reasonable  doubt.  If,  however,  in  addition  to  these  grounds  of  confirlence, 
the  witnesses  give  their  testimony  at  the  expense  of  great  personal  saciilice,  or 
confirm  it  with  their  blood;  if,  moreover,  the  occurrence  of  the  fact  in  ([uestion 
had  been  predicted  centuries  before  it  came  to  pass  ;  if  it  had  produced  effects  not 
otherwise  to  be  accounted  for,  effects  extending  to  all  ages  and  nations;  if  the 
system  of  doctrine  with  which  that  fact  is  connected  so  as  to  be  implied  in  it,  com- 
mends itself  as  true  to  the  reason  and  conscience  of  men ;  and  if  God  confirms  not 
only  the  testimony  of  the  original  witnesses  to  the  fact,  but  also  the  tiuth  of  the 
doidrines  of  which  that  fact  is  the  necessary  basis,  by  the  demonstration  of  His 
Spirit,  tiien  it  is  insanity  and  wickedness  to  doubt  it.  All  these  considerations 
concur  in  proof  of  the  resurrc-tion  of  Christ,  and  render  it  the  best  authenticated 
event  in  the  history  of  the  world.  (C  Hodge,  D.D.)  The  appearancis  of  Christ 
after  His  resurrection  : — I.  To  whom  permitted.  1.  To  individuals.  2.  To  the 
twelve.  3.  To  a  large  body  of  disciples.  4.  To  the  faith  of  every  true  believer. 
II.  With  what  dksign.  1.  To  contirm  the  truth.  2.  Establish  the  faith  of  the 
disciples.  3.  Subdue  opposition  as  in  the  case  of  Paul.  4.  Comfort  and  assure 
His  people.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  After  that  He  was  seen  of  above  five  hundred 
brethren  at  once ;  of  whom  the  greater  part  remain,  .  ,  .  but  some  are  fallen 
asleep. — More  than  five  hundred  witnesses  : — I.  The  fact.  1.  Not  elsewhere 
recorded.  2.  Must  have  been  well  known.  3.  Was  widely  published  when  it 
could  easily  have  been  disproved.     4.  Was  never  disputed.     II.  Its  importance. 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  39S 

1.  The  witnesses  of  the  resurrection  were  sufficiently  numerous  and  diverse  in  point 
of  intelligence,  &e.,  to  supply  tbe  seveiest  test  of  its  reality.  2.  To  afford  ample 
means  of  investigation.  3.  To  satisfy  the  most  persistent  unbelief.  III.  Its 
LESSONS.  1.  Chtjst  is  tlie  living  Eedeemer.  2.  Reveals  Himself  to  many  or  few. 
3.  Manifests  Himself  to  His  own  as  He  does  not  unto  the  world.  4.  Shall  finally 
be  revealed  when  eveiy  eye  shall  see  Him.  (Ibid.)  Appearances  of  the  risen 
Redeemer : — We  have  here — I.  A  mighty  peoof  of  the  resdrrection  of  Crrist. 
Two  or  three  witnessis,  intellectually  and  morally  competent,  would  be  regarded  in 
a  court  of  justice  as  sufJicient  to  establish  any  fact,  but  here  are  "  five  hundred." 
To  suppose  that  they  were  all  deceived  would  be  to  suppose  one  of  the  most 
stupendous  miracles  ever  wrought.  Mark,  Paul  statps  this  fact  when  the  "  gr<-ater 
part  "  were  st'll  alive.  Would  any  man,  under  such  circumstances,  dare  to  have 
made  the  as-ertion  had  it  not  been  an  indisputable  fact?  II.  An  interesting 
VIEW  OF  THE  departure  OF  Goou  MEN  FROM  THE  WORLD.  "  Some  are  fa  len 
asleep."     Sleep  does  not  include  extinction  ;  must  exclude  suffering.     Sleep  is — 

1.  A  welcome  rest.  Sleep  is  refreshing.  The  work  of  a  Christian  here  is  hard 
work,  tlie  work  of  cultivation,  building,  battling,  voyaging.  Sleep  reinvigorates 
the  system,  gives  new  tone  to  the  frame,  new  vigour  to  the  limb.  The  holy  dead 
renew  their  strength  in  e'ernity.  2.  An  anticipation  of  waldng.  Men  yield  them- 
selves to  repose  with  the  hope  of  morning ;  a  njorning  in  which  they  will  go  forth 
to  the  joys  and  duties  of  life  with  a  new  zest  and  energy.  Who  dreads  sleep  ? 
No  good  man  need  dread  death.  III.  A  suogestive  event  in  the  experience  of 
THE  APOSTLE  (ver.  8).  When  did  Paul  see  Christ?  W^hen  Christ  was  in  heaven 
(Acts  ix.  ,5).  Then,  though  in  heaven— 1.  He  is  cognisant  of  the  movements  of 
individual  men.  He  knew  all  about  Saul  of  Tarsus.  2.  He  can  reveal  Himself  to 
men  on  earth.  3.  His  love  for  sinners  is  uuahated.  He  spoke  to  Saul  the 
persecutor,  the  "chief  of  sinners."  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  character  and  death 
of  the  saints : — I.  The  character  of  those  of  whom  it  jiay  be  said  when  they 
die,  "they  are  fallen  asleep."  "Brethren,"  and  not  on  account  of  a  natural 
relationship,  but  of  a  spiritual  union.  They  were  brethren,  because  they  had  been 
united  to  "the  Elder  Brother,"  "the  First-born  among  many  brethren";  and 
their  union  to  Him  was  the  foundation  of  their  union  to  each  other.  As  brethren, 
there  was  a  sameness  in  their  principles — in  their  hopes — in  their  consolations — 
in  their  rejoicing  when  they  beheld  a  risen  Saviour.  II.  The  state  of  such 
tersons  after  death.  Sleep  denotes — 1.  Their  rest.  The  time  of  sleep  is  the 
time  of  rest  so  sweet  to  the  labouring  man.  The  believer's  life  here  is  compared 
to  a  day  ;  his  departure  home  to  a  night.  Hence  the  exhortation,  "  Work  while  it 
is  called  day,  for  the  night  cometh  when  no  man  can  work."  Every  description  of 
Christian  character  conveys  the  idea  of  labour.  He  has  to  run,  to  fight,  to  wrestle, 
&e.  :  and  d^ath  is  as  the  connnencing  of  repose  when  the  labour  of  the  day  is  done. 

2.  Their  safety.  We  could  not  go  to  rest  at  night  if  we  knew  that  a  robber  would 
invade  our  dwelling-place,  or  a  fire  consume  it,  or  a  wind  prostrate  it,  or  a 
murderer  attempt  our  lives.  It  is  when  we  have  barred  our  houses  against 
intruders,  and  committed  ourselves  to  the  piotection  of  our  Creator,  that  we 
close  our  eyes  in  hope  that  we  shall  both  lay  ourselves  down  and  sleep  in  peace 
and  safety.  The  figure  illustrates  the  perfect  safety  of  those  who  have  enteied 
into  peace.  It  is  then  that  the  believer  enters  into  regions  which  will  never  be 
ruffled,  and  into  glories  which  will  never  be  obscured,  and  upon  joys  which  will 
never  be  interrupted.  For  no  enemy  can  harass  there,  no  care  oppress,  no  affliction 
try.  And  it  is  a  precious  remeujbrance,  that  the  body  is  safe  too.  The  body  of  the 
saint  in  the  tomb  is  a  precious  deposit.  Christ  will  rescue  it  from  the  darkness 
and  the  disgrace  of  the  tomb,  and  will  invest  it  with  honour  an  1  immortality.  3. 
Their  resurrection.  When  we  sleep  at  night,  it  is  with  a  hope  of  waking  again  in 
the  morning.  Conclusion:  Let  this  subjet — 1.  Comfort  us  concerning  our  departed 
friends.  2.  Comfort  us  under  our  present  trials.  3.  Excite  inquiries  whether, 
if  we  die  at  this  moment,  it  would  be  a  sleep  in  Christ  Jesus.  (W.  Hodson.) 
Wliat  tlie  sipht  of  the  risen  Christ  make^  life  and  death: — Consider — I.  What 
life  may  b' come  to  those  who  see  the  risen  Christ.  The  word  "remain" 
not  only  tells  us  that  the  survivors  were  living,  but  the  kind  of  life  they  lived.  It  i? 
the  same  expression  as  "  If  I  will  that  he  tarry  till  I  come,  what  is  that  to  thee?  " 
Now,  "  that  saying  went  abro;  d  amongst  the  brethren,"  and  it  may  have  been 
floating  in  Paul's  memory,  and  have  determined  his  selection  of  this  expression. 
So,  then,  the  sight  of  a  risen  Christ — 1.  Will  make  life  calm  and  tranquil.  Fancy 
one  of  these  after  that  vision  going  home.    How  small  and  unworthy  to  disturb  the 


400  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

heart  in  which  the  memory  of  that  vision  was  bnrninf^  would  seem  tlae  things  that 
otherwise  would  have  been  important  and  distracting !  Our  faith  in  the  risen 
Christ  ou^ht  to  do  the  same  thing  for  us.  If  we  build  our  nests  amidst  the  tossing 
branches  of  the  world's  trees,  they  will  sway  with  every  wind,  and  perhaps  be 
blown  awny  from  their  hold  altogetlier.  But  we  may  build  our  nests  in  the  clefts 
of  the  rock,  like  the  doves,  and  be  quiet,  as  they  are.  They  who  see  Christ  need 
not  be  troubled.  The  ship  that  is  empty  is  tossed  upon  the  ocean,  that  which  is 
well  laden  is  steady.  The  heart  that  has  Christ  for  a  passenger  nfcd  not  fear 
being  rocked  l>y  any  storm.  Make  Him  your  scale  of  importance,  and  nothing  will 
be  too  small  to  demand  and  be  worthy  of  the  best  efforts  of  your  work,  but  nothing 
will  be  too  great  to  sweep  you  awav  from  the  serenity  of  your  faith.  2.  Will  lead 
to  p  itient  persisteiice  in  duty.  The  risen  Christ  is — (1)  The  Pattern  for  the  men 
who  will  not  be  turned  aside  from  the  path  of  duty  by  any  obstacles,  dangers,  or 
threats.  (2)  The  example  of  glory  fulluwing  ui^on  faithfulness.  (3)  The  helper 
(if  them  that  put  their  trust  in  Him.  By  patient  continuance  in  well-doing  let  us 
commit  the  keeping  of  our  souls  to  Him  and  abide  in  the  calling  wherewith  w-e 
are  called.  3.  Leads  to  a  life  of  calm  expectancy.  That  vision  sent  these  live 
hundred  men  home  to  make  all  the  rest  of  their  lives  one  paiient  expectation  of 
the  return  of  the  Lord.  These  primitive  Christians  expected  tliat  Jesus  Christ 
would  come  speedily.  That  expectation  was  disappointed  in  so  far  as  the  date  was 
concerned,  but  after  nine  een  centuries  it  still  remains  true  that  all  vigorous  and 
vital  Christian  life  must  have  in  it  the  onward  look.  He  has  come.  He  will  come  ; 
He  htisgone,  He  will  come  back.  And  f'lr  us  life  ought  to  be  a  confident  expec- 
tance that  when  He  sliall  be  manifested  we  also  shall  be  manifested  with  Him  in 
glory.  II.  What  death  becojies  to  those  who  have  seen  Christ  risen  from 
THE  PEAD.  The  Christian  reason  for  calling  death  a  sleep  embraces  a  great  deal 
more  than  the  heathen  reason  for  doing  so,  inasmuch  as  to  most  others  who  liave 
used  the  word,  death  has  been  a  sleep  that  knew  no  waking,  whereas  the  Chiistian 
reason  for  employing  the  symbol  is  tliat  it  makes  our  waking  sure.  Tiie  New  Testa- 
ment scarcely  ever  employs  the  words  dying  and  deatli  for  the  act  or  for  the  state. 
It  ke<^i3s  those  grim  words  for  the  reality,  the  separation  of  the  soul  from  Ciod. 
But  the  reason  why  Christianity  uses  melaphors  for  death,  is  the  opposite  of  the 
reason  why  the  world  uses  them.  The  world  is  so  afraid  of  dying  that  it  durst  not 
name  the  grim,  ugly  thing.  The  Christian  faith  is  so  little  afraid  of  death,  that 
It  does  not  think  such  a  triviwl  matter  worth  callinc;  by  the  name,  but  only  names 
it  "fHlling  asleep."  Even  when  the  circumstances  of  that  dropping  off  to  slumber 
are  painful  and  violent,  the  Bible  still  emjiloys  the  term.  Is  it  not  striking  that 
the  first  martyr  dying  a  bloody  death  should  have  been  said  to  fall  asleep?  If  that 
be  true  of  such  a  death,  no  physical  pains  of  any  kind  make  the  sweet  wt)rd  inappro- 
priate for  any.  We  have  heie  not  only  the  designation  of  the  atrt  of  dying,  but 
that  of  the  condition  of  the  dead.  They  are  fallen  asleep,  and  they  continue  asleep. 
There  lies  in  the  figure  the  idea  of — 1.  Ilejiose.  '•  Tiiey  rest  from  their  labours." 
In  that  sleep  there  are  folded  round  the  shepers  the  arms  of  the  Christ  on  whose 
bosom  they  rest,  as  an  infant  dues  on  its  first  and  happiest  home,  its  motlier's 
breast.  2.  Continuous  and  conscious  existence.  It  has  been  argued  from  this 
metaphor  that  the  space  between  death  and  the  resurrection  is  a  period  of 
unconsciousness,  but  the  analogies  seem  to  me  to  be  in  the  opposite  direction. 
A  sleeping  man  does  not  cease  to  know  himself  to  be,  or  to  be  himself.  That 
consciousness  of  personal  identity  survives  dreams  sufficiently  show  us.  And 
therefore  they  that  sleep  know  themselves  to  be,  and  know  where  they  rest.  3. 
Waking.  Sleep  is  a  paienthesis.  If  the  night  comes,  the  moi-ning  comes.  They 
shall  be  satisfied  when  they  awake  with  His  likeness.  Conclusion :  Now,  then, 
the  risen  Christ  is  the  only  ground  of  such  hope,  and  faith  in  Him  is  the  only  state 
of  mind  which  is  entitled  to  clierish  it.  Nothing  proves  immortality  except  that 
open  grave.  Every  other  foundation  is  too  weak  to  bear  the  weight  of  such  a 
superstructure.  The  old  Greek  architects  were  often  careless  of  the  solidity  of  the 
soil  on  which  they  built  their  temples,  and  so  many  of  them  have  fallen  in  ruins. 
The  temple  of  immortality  can  be  built  only  upon  the  rock  of  that  proclamation, 
Jesus  Christ  is  risen  from  the  dead.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.I).)  Fallen  asleep  : — Yes, 
the  companions  of  Jesus  died  one  by  one.  Consider  the  great  value  of  such  men 
and  of  all  good  men  to  the  Church,  and  the  loss  caused  by  ttieir  removal.  Yet  no 
word  of  lamentation  is  used.  It  is  not  said  that  they  have  perished,  or  passed  into 
the  land  of  shades,  but  flint  "they  are  fallen  asleep."  The  spirit  is  with  Jesus 
in  glory :  the  body  rests  till  His  appearing.     "  Fallen  asleep  "   suggests  a  very 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  401 

different  idea  from  that  which  distressed  th^  minds  of  the  heathen  when  they 
tliought  of  deatb.  I.  The  figure  herr  used.  1.  An  act  of  the  most  natural 
Icind:  "fallen  asleep."  (1)  It  is  the  fit  ending  of  a  weary  dny.  (2)  It  is  not 
pnnful,  but  the  end  of  pain.  (3)  It  is  so  desirable  that,  if  denied,  we  should  pray 
for  it.  (4)  It  is  most  sweet  when  the  place  of  our  sleep  is  Jesus.  2.  A  state  of 
which  rest  is  the  main  ingredient.  3.  A  position  of  safety  from  a  thousand  dangers, 
such  as  beset  the  pilgrim,  the  worker,  the  warrior.  4.  A  condition  by  no  means 
destructive.  (1)  Neither  destroys  existence,  nor  even  injures  it.  (2)  Shuuld  not  be 
viewed  as  an  evil.  5.  A  posture  full  of  hope.  (1)  We  shall  awake  from  this  sleep. 
(2)  We  sliall  awake  without  difficulty.  (3)  We  shall  arise  greatly  refreshed.  II. 
The  thoughts  aroused  by  that  figure.  1.  How  did  we  treat  those  that  are  ncAV 
asleep  ?  (1)  Did  we  value  their  living  presence,  work,  and  testimony  ?  (2)  Ought 
we  not  to  be  more  kind  to  those  who  are  yet  alive?  2.  How  can  we  make  up  for 
the  loss  caused  by  their  sleep?  (1)  Should  we  not  fill  their  vacant  lalacesV  i'2) 
Should  we  not  profit  by  their  examples?  3.  How  fit  that  we  should  also  be 
prepared  to  fall  asleep!  (1)  Is  our  house  in  order?  (2)  Is  our  heart  in  order? 
I'd)  Is  our  Christian  work  in  order?  4.  How  much  better  that  the  faitliful  should 
fall  asleep  than  that  the  wicked  should  die  in  their  sins !  5.  How  patiently  should 
we  bear  up  undt^r  the  labours  and  sufferings  of  the  day,  since  there  remaineth  a 
rest  for  the  p^'ople  of  God  !  III.  The  hopes  confirmed  by  that  figure.  1.  The 
sleepers  are  jet  ours,  even  as  those  in  the  house  who  are  asleep  are  numbered  with 
the  rest  of  the  inhabitants.  (1)  They  have  the  same  life  in  them  which  dwells  in 
us.  (2)  They  are  part  of  the  same  family.  "  We  are  seven."  (3)  They  make  up 
one  church.  "  One  church  above,  beneath."  2.  The  sleepers  will  yet  awake.  (1) 
Their  Fatlier's  voice  will  arouse  tht^m.  (2)  They  shall  be  awake  indeed ;  full  of 
health  and  ener;;'y.  (3)  They  shall  have  new  clothes  to  dress  in.  (4)  They  shall 
not  again  fall  asleep.  3.  The  sleepers  and  ourselves  will  enjoy  sweet  fellowship. 
(1)  Sleep  does  not  destroy  the  love  of  brothers  and  sisters  now.  (2)  We  shall  arise 
as  one  unbroken  family,  saved  in  the  Lord.  Conclusion  :  1.  Let  us  not  hopelessly 
sorrow  over  those  asleep.  2.  Let  us  not  ourselves  sleep  till  bed-time  comes.  3. 
Let  us  not  fear  to  sleep  in  such  good  company.  Death  as  sleep  : — God's  finger 
touched  him,  and  he  slept.  (leiimjHon.)  Sleep  the  time  of  (jrowtli : — Physio- 
logists hold  that  it  is  during  sleep  chiefiy  that  we  grow  ;  what  mny  we  not  hope  of 
such  a  sleep  in  such  a  bosom  ?  (S.  T.  Coleridge.)  After  that  He  was  seen  of 
James. — Seen  of  James : — Words  soon  read  and  soon  forgotten,  but  conveying  to 
the  thought  ul  reader  a  world  of  instruction.  "  All  Scripture  .  .  .  is  profitable,"  &c. 
These  incidentnl  allusions  are  meant  to  challenge  inquiry.  I.  Who  was  James? 
"  The  Lord's  brother"  (Gal.  i.  19).  Whether  the  son  of  Mary,  or  the  son  of 
Joseph  by  a  former  wife,  or  our  Lord's  first  cousin,  it  is  impossible  to  say  with 
certainty.  All  we  can  say  is  that  the  relationship  was  very  close.  The  incident  is 
illustrative  of  Christ's  mindfulness  of  His  brethren  according  to  the  flesh.  The 
touching  incident  on  the  Cross  is  paralleled  here.  In  His  humiliation  He  did  not 
forget  His  mother.  In  His  glory  He  did  not  forget  His  brethren.  Nor  does  He 
now  (Heb.  iv.  13-15).  II.  When  did  Christ  appear  to  James?  Placed  where 
this  brief  account  of  the  incident  is,  we  should  infer  that  it  occurred  during  the  forty 
days,  and  Acts  i.  14  confiims  this.  The  appearance  was  therefore — 1.  Early.  2. 
Tangible.  III.  Why  did  Christ  appear  to  James?  To  convict  and  remove  his 
unbelief.  Christ  appeared  to  three  tvpes  of  unbelievers.  1.  To  Thomas  the  pious 
sceptic.  2.  To  Paul  the  inveterate  disbeliever.  3.  To  James  the  scoffing  unbeliever 
(John  vii.  3-5) — the  hardest  of  all,  as  experience  shows,  to  convince.  In  each  case, 
however,  unbelief  gave  way  to  faith.  Faith  is  the  faculty  which  grasps  the  mean- 
ing of  the  vision  of  Clirist ;  but  the  appearance  of  Christ  is  necessary  to  quicken 
the  faith  which  apprehends  it.  Christ  now  appears  to  unbelievers  in  His  Word, 
providence,  &c.  Lord,  open  their  eyes  !  IV.  What  effect  did  the  appearance  of 
Christ  have  on  James?  This  we  can  estimate  by  what  Jwmes  afterwards  became. 
1.  President  of  the  Church  at  Jerusalem.  2.  The  chairman  of  the  Apostolic 
Synod.  3.  The  writer  of  the  most  practical  Epistle  of  the  New  Testament.  The 
vision  of  Christ  is  the  inspiration  of  all  Christian  usefulness.  The  original 
disciples  (John  i.)  and  Paul  saw  Christ  for  themselves,  hence  were  able  to  describe 
Him  to  otliers  and  to  lead  others  to  Him.  V.  What  is  the  evidential  value  op 
this  appearance  ?  James  was  called  the  Just,  bj^  Jews  as  well  as  Christians.  No 
man  was  less  likely  to  deceive  or  be  deceived.     (J.  W.  Burn.) 

Vers.  8-11.  And  last  of  all  He  was  seen  of  me  also. — Me  also  : — Who?     1.  The 
VOL.  II.  26 


402  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

self-righteous  Pharisee  (Phil,  iii.),  .2.  The  bloodthirsty  persecutor  (Acts  vii.  58, 
viii.  1,  ix.  1,  xxii.  4,  xxvi.  10,  11).  3.  The  inveterate  unbeliever  (Acts  xxvi.  14;  1 
Tim.  i.  13).  Conclusion:  1.  Who  then  can  desijair  of  anyone?  2.  Who  then 
need  despair  ?  (1  Tim.  i.  14-16).  {J.  Lytlt,  D.D.)  ChrtsVs  last  axipcarance  : — I. 
Granted  to  Padl.  1.  It  was  real.  2.  Necessary  as  a  seal  of  apostleship.  3. 
Supplies  additional  and  valuable  evidence  of  the  resurrection.  II.  Granted  under 
SPECIAL  CIRCUMSTANCES.  1.  As  to  One  born  out  of  due  time,  after  the  other  apostles. 
2.  Under  unexpected  circumstances.  3.  Before  his  religious  character  was  fully 
developed.  III.  Granted  fok  our  instruction.  1.  As  an  example  of  special  grace. 
2.  Requiring  special  gratitude  and  humility.     {Ibid.)  The  EjiijJhaiu/  to  Saul  of 

Tarstis  : — This  was  the  occasion  of  his  conversion.  Tbe  apostle  has  left  on  record 
a  statement  of  the  magnitude  of  the  revolution  (Phil.  iii.).  How  shall  we  account 
for  it  ?  The  answers  my  all  be  reduced  to  three.  That  Paul's  assertion  that  he 
had  seen  the  rit^en  Lord  was — I.  A  falsrhood.  This  was  the  position  taken  by 
the  Deists  of  the  last  century.  But  what  motive  could  Paul  have  for  asserting  it? 
For  even  men  of  the  feeblest  intellects  do  not  act  without  motives.  But  here  is  a  man 
of  powerful  intellect  persisting  for  thirty  years  in  maintaining  what  he  knew  all  the 
time  to  be  an  absolute  lie.  What  was  his  motive  then  ?  1.  Was  it  hope  of  advance- 
ment? But  to  confess  the  Nazarene  was  the  surest  way  to  be  defeated  in  every 
worldly  ambition.  2.  Was  it  love  of  rank,  or  weal'h,  or  power,  or  ease  ?  But  to 
be  a  follower  of  the  Galilean  was  to  make  morally  certain  toil,  i^oveily,  persecu- 
tion, and  death  (1  Cor.  iv.  9-13  ;  2  Cor.  xi.  23-27).  Thus  on  this  theory  of  impos- 
ture we  see  a  man  of  marvellous  mentnl  breadth  and  moral  height  deliberately 
inventing  a  useless,  monstrous  lie,  and  persistently  adhering  to  it  for  a  quarter  of  a 
century,  conscious  that  his  only  reward  was  pauper  sm,  disgrace,  torture,  martyrdom, 
everlasting  damnation.  II.  An  hallucination.  This  is  the  position  of  the  modern 
philosophical  sceptic,  driven  from  the  theory  of  imposture  by  its  unspeakable 
absurdity.  "Paul,"  it  is  said,  "was  a  man  of  neivous,  excitable  organisation, 
a"d  conscientious  to  the  last  degree.  Coming  into  contact  with  the  Christians, 
their  arguments,  their  self-sacrifice,  their  patient  behaviour  under  persecution,  made 
a  profound  impression  on  his  susceptible  nature.  Doubts  began  to  arise,  and  lieing 
a  Pharisee,  he  would  have  no  difficulty  with  the  doctrine  of  tlie  resurrection.  Then 
the  thrilling  question  came.  May  not  Jesus  really  have  risen?  The  more  he 
pondered  it,  the  more  it  distressed  him  :  the  very  consfientiousness  which  had  made 
him  a  persecutor  began  to  torture  him  with  the  thought  that  he  might  be  fighting 
against  God.  Agonised  by  the  possibility,  in  his  inflamed  imagination  he  fancied 
he  saw  in  the  heavens  the  form  of  the  lisen  .Jesus,"  &c.  But  survey  the  character 
of  Paul.  Susceptible,  imaginative,  impetuous,  he  certainly  was,  yet  the  man  never 
lived  who  had  his  faculties  more  completely  under  control  or  used  them  with  more 
sagacity.  Mark  the  characteristics  of  a  fanatic.  1.  Looseness  of  reasotiing  and 
wildness  of  statement.  But  the  man  never  lived  who  reasoned  more  accurately  than 
Paul  (Rom.;  Gal.,  e.g.).  2.  Utopian  dreaming.  But  no  man  ever  took  broader, 
deeper,  more  sensible  views  of  the  problems  of  society,  or  discussed  them  with  finer 
acumen  than  Paul:  witness  his  exposition  of  the  great  law  of  edification  (Rom. 
xii.-xv.),  and  his  discussion  of  cases  of  conscience  (chaps,  vi.-xiv.).  3.  Impatience, 
intolerance,  obstinacy,  recklessness.  Paul  was  the  antithesis  of  all  this — witness 
his  gentleness,  patience,  tolerance,  magnanimity,  humility,  dignity,  courtesy,  defer- 
ence to  authority,  repudiation  of  outward  form,  self-forgetfulness  in  his  devotion  to 
others.  4.  Destructiveness.  But  the  man  never  lived  who  was  more  absoJutelv 
a  constructor  of  society  than  Paul.  Next  his  Divine  Master  Himself,  the  aposti«  \i. 
the  most  controlling  force  of  Christendom.  If  hallucination  is  capable  of  producins; 
such  characters  as  St.  Paul,  would  God  all  men  were  flighty,  all  earth  a  Bedlam  ; 
III.  A  fact.  This  is  the  position  of  the  Christian  Church,  and  explains  every- 
thing. It  explains — 1.  His  sudden,  radical  revolution  of  character ;  the  risen  Lord 
had  appeared  to  him  and  beckoned  him  up  to  a  diviner  life.  2.  His  cosmopolitan 
ministration  (Acts  xxvi.  16-18).  3.  His  claim  to  be  an  apostle  (chap.  ix.  1).  4.  His 
passionate  sense  of  fellowship  with  the  slain  and  risen  Lord  (Gal.  ii.  20).  5.  His 
career  of  self-sacrifice  (2  Cor.  iv.  5,  10).  6.  His  being  persecuted  in  turn  by  those 
•who  had  been  his  fellow-persecutors.  Deny  that  Epiphany,  and  you  have  in  the 
career  of  Paul  the  most  inexplicable  of  character-problems.  Admit  that  Epiphany, 
and  all  is  clear.  {W,  E.  Boardman,  D.D.)  St.  Paul: — Combining  this  opinion 
of  himself  with  the  story  of  his  conversion  (Acts  ix.)  we  may  learn — I.  Not  to  be 
astonished  if  we  have  to  change  cue  opinions  as  we  gkow  older.  When  we  are 
young  we  are  very  positive  about  this  thing  and  that,  and  ready  to  quarrel  with 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  403 

any  who  differs  fiom  us,  as  St.  Paul  was.  But  let  ten,  twenty  years  roll  over  us, 
and  we  may  find  our  opinions  ntterly  changed,  and  look  back  on  ourselves  with 
astonishment  and  shame  as  St.  Paul  did.  II.  Not  to  be  ashamed  of  chang- 
ing OUK  minds  :  but  if  we  find  ourselves  to  be  in  the  wrong,  to  confess  it  honestly, 
as  St.  Paul  did.  What  a  fearful  wrench  and  humiliation  to  have  to  change 
his  mind  on  all  matters  in  heaven  and  earth  !  What  must  it  not  have  cost 
him  to  throw  up  all  his  friends  and  to  feel  that  henceforth  they  must  look  upon 
him  as  a  madman,  an  intidel,  an  enemy !  But  he  faced  the  straggle  and  con- 
quered, and  the  cons-quence  was  that  he  had,  in  time,  many  Christian  friends  for 
€ach  Jewish  friend  that  lie  had  lost.  III.  That  God  will  not  imi'ute  to  us  our  early 
FOLLIES  AND  MISTAKES,  if  Only  there  be  in  us,  as  there  was  in  St.  Paul,  the  heart 
which  longs  to  know  what  is  true  and  right,  and  bravely  acts  up  to  what  it  knows. 
In  all  things,  wheiher  right  or  wrong,  St.  Paul  was  an  honest,  earnest  seeker  after 
truth  and  righteousness.  He  had  not  yet  the  grace  of  Christ,  which  is  love  to  his 
fellow-men  ;  and  therefore  his  works  were  not  pleasing  to  God.  His  empty  forms 
and  ceremonies  could  not  please  God.  His  persecuting  the  Church  had  plainly  the 
nature  of  sin.  But  there  was  something  which  God  had  put  in  him,  and  that  was, 
the  honest  and  good  heart.  In  that  Christ  sowed  the  word  of  God,  and,  behold,  it 
sprang  up  and  bore  fruit  over  all  Christian  nations  to  this  day.  Keep,  therefore,  if 
you  have  it,  the  honest  and  good  heart.  If  you  have  it  not,  pray  for  it  earnestly. 
IV.  That  though  God  has  forgiven  a  man,  that  is  no  reason  that  he  should  forgive 
HIMSELF.  1.  The  common  teaching  now  is,  that  if  a  man  finds,  or  fancies,  that 
God  has  forgiven  him,  he  may  forgive  himself  at  once,  and  go  boasting  about  the 
world  as  if  he  had  never  sinned  at  all.  That  is  one  extreme.  2.  The  opposite 
■extreme  is  that  of  many  old  saints  who  could  not  forgive  themselves  at  all,  but 
passed  their  whole  lives  in  misery,  bewHiling  their  sins  till  their  dying  day.  That 
was  a  mistake.  3.  Kun  into  neither  extreme.  Look  at  your  past  lives  as  St.  Paul 
looked  at  his.  Tiiere  is  no  sentimental  melancholy  in  him.  He  is  saved,  and  he 
knows  it.  He  is  hupetul,  joyful ;  but  whenever  he  speaks  of  his  past  life  it  is  with 
noble  shame  and  sorrow.  So  let  us  do.  Let  us  thank  God  cheerfully  for  the 
present.  Let  us  look  on  hopefully  to  the  future  ;  let  us  not  look  back  too  much  at 
the  past,  or  rake  up  old  follies  which  liave  been  pardoned  and  done  away.  But  let 
us  thank  God  whenever  He  thinks  fit  to  show  us  the  past,  and  bring  our  sin  to 
our  remembrance  ;  and  learn  as  St.  Paul  learnt,  to  be  charitalde  to  all  who  have  not 
yet  learnt  the  wisdom  which  God  has  tauuht  to  us.  (C.  Kinii^Iei/,  M.A.)  Fori  am 
the  least  of  the  apostles,  ...  I  persecuted  the  Church  of  Cd. — Paul  an  example  : — 
I.  Of  special  grace.  A  persecutor — 1.  Saved  by  extraordinary  interi)Osiliou.  2. 
Called  to  be  an  apostle.  3.  Specially  privileged.  II.  Of  special  gratitude.  1. 
He  attributes  all  to  the  grace  of  God.  2.  Labours  more  abundantly.  3.  Maintains 
a  spirit  of  profound  humility  before  God  and  his  brethren.  (■/.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The 
conversion  of  Paul  viewed  in  reference  to  his  office  : — I.  It  was  a  triumph  over  the 
ENEMY.  When  God  would  convert  the  world,  opening  the  door  of  faith  to  the 
Gentiles,  who  was  the  cliosen  instrument  ?  Not  one  of  Christ's  first  followers.  He 
put  forth  His  hand  into  the  very  midst  of  the  persecutors  of  His  Son,  and  seized 
upon  tlie  most  strenuous  among  tdem.  II.  It  was  a  suitable  introduction  to  his 
OFFICE.  It  was  an  expressive  emblem  of  the  nature  of  God's  general  dealings  with 
tlie  race  of  man.  What  are  we  all  but  rebels  against  God  and  enemies  of  the 
truth?  (Col.  i.  21).  Who  then  could  so  appropriately  fulfil  the  purpose  of  Him  who 
came  to  call  sinners  to  repentance  as  one  who  had  persecuted  the  Church  of  God  ? 
{1  Tim.  i.  16).  III.  His  previous  course  of  life  rendered  him,  perhaps,  afteb 
HIS  conversion,  more  fit  an  instrument  of  God's  purposes  towards  the  Gentiles, 
as  well  as  a  more  striking  specimen  of  it.  We  know  that  St.  Paul's  successes  were 
not  his,  but  through  "  the  grace  of  God  which  was  with  him."  Still,  God  makes  use 
of  human  means,  and  it  is  allowable  to  inquire  what  these  were,  and  why  St.  Paul 
was  employed  to  convert  the  hf-athen  world  rather  than  St.  James  or  St.  John, 
Doubtless  his  intellectual  endowments  and  acquirements  fitted  him  for  his  office. 
Yet  there  was  something  in  his  previous  religious  history  which  especially  disci- 
plined him  to  be  "  all  thinj^s  to  all  men."  His  awful  rashness  and  blindness,  his 
rrtge  against  the  worshippers  of  Christ,  then  his  strange  conversion,  then;  he  three 
years  during  which  he  was  left  to  meditate  in  private  on  all  that  had  happened,  and 
to  anticipate  the  future — all  this  constituted  a  peculiar  preparation  for  the  office  of 
preaching  to  a  lost  world  dead  in  sin.  It.  gave  him  an  extended  insiglit,  on  the  one 
hand,  into  the  ways  and  designs  of  Providence,  and,  on  the  other,  into  the  worl<ings 
of  sin  in  the  human  heait,  and  the  various  modes  of  thinking  in  which  the  mind  is 


404  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv.  ■ 

actually  trained.  It  taught  him  not  to  despair  of  the  "worst  sinners,  and  to  enter 
into  the  various  temptations  to  which  human  nature  is  exposed.  It  wrouglit  in  him 
a  profound  hnniilitv,  which  disposed  him  to  bear  meekly  the  abundance  of  the  reve- 
lations given  him  ;  and  it  imjiarted  to  him  a  practical  wisdom  how  to  apply  them 
to  the  conversion  of  others,  so  as  to  be  the  comfoi  ter,  help,  and  guide  of  his  brethren . 
1.  Now  I  do  not  allege  that  St.  Paul's  previous  sins  made  him  a  more  si)iritnal 
Christian  afterwards,  but  rendered  him  more  fitted,  when  converted,  to  reclaim 
others,  just  as  a  knowlerlge  of  languages  fits  a  man  for  the  office  of  missionary, 
without  tending  in  any  degree  to  make  him  a  better  man.  If  we  take  two  men 
equally  advam-ed  in  grace,  one  of  the  two  would  preach  to  a  variety  of  men  with  the 
greater  success  who  had  the  greater  experience  of  temptation,  the  war  of  flesh  and 
spirit,  sin,  and  victory  over  sin.  2.  But  St.  Paul's  conversion  is  very  far  from  hold- 
ing out  any  encouragement  to  thos^e  who  live  in  sin,  or  any  self-satisfaction  to  those 
wiio  have  lived  in  it;  as  if  their  present  or  former  disobedience  could  be  a  gain  to 
tbem.  Why  was  mercy  shown  to  Saul  ?  "  Because  he  did  it  iunovantly  in  unbelief." 
And  why  w.is  he  "  enabled  "  to  preach  the  gospel  ?  "  Because  Chtist  counti-d  him 
faitliful."  He  differed  from  other  enemies  of  Christ  in  this,  that  he  kept  a  clear 
conscience,  and  habitually  obeyed  God  according  to  his  kiiowledye.  Hear  his  own 
account  of  himself  (Acts  xxvi.  1,  xxiii.  19,  xxvi.  5).  Here  is  no  ease,  no  self-indul- 
gent habits,  no  wilful  sin  against  the  light.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  quenched  by  open 
tiansgressions  of  conscience  and  by  contempt  of  His  authority.  But,  when  men  err 
in  ignorance,  they  are  not  left  by  the  God  of  all  grace.  God  leads  them  on  to  the 
light,  in  spite  of  their  eirors  in  faith,  if  they  continue  strictly  to  obey  what  they 
believe  to  be  His  will.  {J.  II.  }\ewiiian,D.D.)  Self-depreciation  vmst  nnt  liinder 
duty  : — There  are  jDCople  wlio  appreciate  themselves  intellectually  who  are  con- 
staiitly  depreciating  thems-lves  rergionsly.  "lam  not  worthy  to  be  a  Church 
member — a  Christian  disciple."  Whut  pstor  does  not  have  to  encounter  that 
again  and  again  ad  nauseam  ?  What  preacher  wdao  does  not  at  times,  and  sincerely, 
say  within  himself,  "  I  am  on^y  an  abortion  of  a  man,  I  am  not  worthy  to  be  called 
a  preacher."  But  as  Paul  had  to  be  an  upo-tle,  notwithstanding  his  self-deprecia- 
tion, so  you  and  I  have  to  be  that  to  wliich  we  are  called,  or  deny  the  Christ  of  God 
as  an  all-suflicient  Saviour.  It  would  be  an  act  of  deliberate  disobedience  if  I, 
leeling  my  utier  unworthiness  to  be  a  preacher  of  the  gospel,  should  yet  refuse  to 
do  it  when  I  am  called,  inasmuch  asl  believe,  intellectually  and  heartily,  that  Jesus 
is  God's  Christ,  and  canin  to  be  man's  Be  leeiner  and  Saviour.  But  is  it  not  equally 
an  act  of  deliberate  disobedience  on  the  part  of  some  of  you  to  refuse  to  confess 
Christ  before  men,  simply  because  you  ftel  that  you  are  not  worthy  to  do  it? 
(Reuen  llwmas,  D.D.) 

Ver.  10.  But  by  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am  :  and  His  grace  was  not  in 
vain. — Tiie  (jract  uf  Gud  : — I.  The  grace  bestowed.  1.  Conversion.  2.  Privilege. 
3.  Apostleship.  II.  Its  efficiency.  It  worker) — 1.  In  him.  2.  With  him.  3. 
By  him.  III.  Its  expression.  1.  More  abundant  labours.  2.  Profound  humility. 
(./.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Till'  <jrace  of  Gi  d  :—l.  There  are  those  who  regard  themselves 
!is  simply  the  effects  of  natural  causes.  2.  Others  are  wont  to  attribute  their 
cliaracter  to  social  and  ci^il  influences,  the  times  and  institutions  in  which  they 
live.  3.  There  are  men  of  great  Individ  nality  and  power  of  character  who  are  apt 
to  attribute  to  their  own  selves  the  whole  sliill  and  efficiency  of  their  life.  4.  The 
truly  Christian  man  is  wont  to  combine  all  these  as  composing  a  Divine  provi- 
den<-e  ;  and  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God  to  see  his  life  and  character  in  its  relations  to 
God's  superintending  power  and  grace,  profoumdy  sympathises  with  the  text. 
See  it  illustiated  in — I.  Our  personal  history.  No  devout  man  can  calmly  con- 
sider many  of  the  circumstances  of  bis  history  without  pn'foundly  feeling  that 
he  has  been  guided  by  a  wisdom  f^reater  than  his  own  ;  thut  he  is  the  creature  of 
a  God  of  goodness,  who  has  led  him  in  a  way  that  he  knew  not.  1.  The  family 
is  the  grand  starting  place.  (1)  To  many  of  you  family  influences  seem  to  be  the 
very  best  and  britihtest  gifts  of  God.  Your  parents  weie  faithful,  and  their  whole 
life  was  an  engineering  for  yours.  Even  where  men  go  wrong,  thei'e  are  golden 
threads  which  were  wound  around  their  hearts  by  a  mother's  hand,  and  which, 
unwind  as  they  may,  never  break,  and  often  become  a  clue  by  which  they  find 
their  way  back  again  to  God.  (2)  But  there  are  many  who  had  no  such  parental 
influences.  And  where  a  child's  parents  exert  all  their  power  upon  him  for  evil, 
and  he  nevertheless  grows  up  to  honour  and  piety,  I  think  he  is  a  miracle.  Such 
a   man  may  truly  say,  "By  the  grace  of  God  I,  of  all  men,  am  what  I  am."     2. 


CHAP.  XV,]  J.   CORINTHIANS.  405 

Many  of  us  Imve  been  iDOwerfnlly  influenced  by  others  tban  parents.  (1)  It  may 
have  been  a  brother,  a  sister,  or  an  aunt  who  was  more  than  father  or  mother  to 
you.  Or  perhaps  God  raised  rp  a  hxbourer  in  your  neighbourhood,  a  st-rvant, 
some  praying  and  holy  nurse,  some  young  associate,  to  do  you  a  service  which 
has  stood  connected  with  the  safety  of  the  whole  of  your  after  life.  (2)  On  the 
other  hand,  does  there  not  rise  up  before  every  one's  menjory  some  malign  influ- 
ence of  associate,  schoohnate,  shopmate,  whose  shallow  darkened  the  prospect  of 
the  soul?  We  often  say,  "  I  wonder  that  I  was  not  ruined  by  such  a  one."  And 
we  should  have  been  but  for  the  grace  of  God.  3.  Everybody  can  remember  scenes 
in  his  early  life  which  threatened  his  destruction,  and  many,  wh-in  reflecting  upon 
these  things,  are  constrained  to  say,  "I  never  could  uu'ler  t md  why  I  was  not 
crushed."  They  would  have  been  had  not  the  way  in  which  the.y  were  going  been 
obstructed  by  the  grace  of  God.  If  I  had  not  been  taken  out  "of  Boston  at  one 
time,  I  do  not  see  what  would  have  prevented  me  fr.ni  going  to  destruction.  I 
look  back  upon  moments  of  wilfulness,  which  would  have  led  me  to  serious 
disaster,  had  not  events  in  the  providence  of  God  transpire'!  to  check  me  in  my 
course  and  change  my  caieer.  4.  Men  can  often  look  back  and  see  that  the  whole 
complexion  of  their  life  depended  upon  a  single  choice.  Nor  do  they  know  why, 
out  of  a  hundred  choices,  they  should  have  taken  the  only  one  ihit  seems  to  them 
to  be  connected  with  prosperity  and  integrity.  5.  ]\Iany  can  recall  painfid  crises 
of  their  life  when  everything  depended  on  a  single  throw.  Ninety-nine  chances 
out  of  a  hundred  were  against  you,  and  God  gave  you  that  hundredth,  and  by  His 
grace  you  are  what  you  are.  Life  is  like  the  experience  of  an  Alpine  climber.  He 
is  met  by  dangers  at  every  step  ;  and  when  the  ascent  is  accomplished,  he  can 
count  twenty  places  where  he  might  have  been  dashed  in  pieces  for  one  where  he 
was  absolutely  safe.  II.  Ooa  inward  nattibe  and  dispositions.  I  suppose  there 
are  but  few  who  do  not  feel  that  there  are  laid  up  in  them  terrible  powers,  which, 
if  set  on  tire  of  evil,  would  be  desolation  to  their  life.  There  are  criminals  of  every 
description  to-day  whose  early  tendencies  were  as  good  as  yours,  and  who  had  as 
favourable  a  chance  as  you  had  of  making  upright  citizens.  Now,  why  are  they  in 
their  situation,  and  you  in  yours?  There  lias  been  a  grace  of  God  which  for 
mysterious  reasons  has  led  me  in  the  way  in  which  I  have  walked,  and  left  them  in 
the  way  in  which  they  have  walked.  III.  The  develop.mknt  of  the  Divine  life 
IN  THE  soul.  When  a  man  looks  back  upon  the  beginning  of  his  Christian  life, 
and  considers  what  his  then  state  was,  he  wonders  more  and  more  at  the  way  in 
which  God  leads  him  in  his  religious  experience.  At  each  stage,  as  we  have  gone 
on  from  one  grace  to  another,  from  one  victory  to  another,  v,-e  are  obliged  to  say, 
"  By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am."  Conclusion  :  1.  This  is,  in  other  words, 
the  doctiine  of  man's  dependence  upon  God.  It  may  be  so  stated  as  to  be  offensive, 
but  when  it  is  rightfully  stated  it  is  as  sweet  as  tlie  doctrine  of  love  between  a 
child  and  a  parent.  It  is  natural  for  the  weak  to  lean;  but  I  think  none  want  to 
lean  so  much  as  the  strong.  The  practice  of  constantly  depemliig  upon  God  is 
not  opposed  to  activity,  but  promotes  it.  2.  Out  of  this  retrospect,  and  O'lt  of  this 
sense  of  our  dependence  upon  God  in  the  past  for  a'l  that  we  have  bf^en  wnd  all 
that  we  have  had,  there  ought  to  spring  a  future.  That  same  h  nd  that  lias  taken 
care  of  you ;  that  same  power  that  has  taken  the  obstacles  out  of  your  way,  or 
marvellously  put  them  in  your  way  ;  that  same  Providence  that  h;is  coadacted  you 
thus  far  through  life,  yet  exists,  and  rules  over  the  afl'airs  of  men.  "  By  Thy 
grace,  O  God,  in  the  past,  I  have  been  what  I  have  been  ;  and  by  Thy  grace  I 
desire,  in  the  future,  to  be  what  Thou  wilt  have  me  to  be.  Glorify  Thy.-elf,  and  I 
shall  be  satisfied."  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  grace  of  God  and  Paid  : — This  account 
which  Paul  gives  of  himself  implit^s — 1.  That  a  great  change  had  been  wrought 
in  him.  2.  That  he  was  thankfully  conscious  of  it.  3.  That  God  was  the  Author 
ot  it.  By  the  grace  of  God— I.  Paul  was  not  what  he  had  been.  He  had  been 
the  "chief  of  sinners";  he  was  now  a  humble  Christian.  "He  was  before  a 
blasphemer,  persecutor,  injurious,  but  he  obtained  mercy."  "  And  such  were 
some  of  us,  but  we  are  washed,"  &c.  The  grace  of  God  softens  the  heart, 
cleanseth  the  soul,  sweetens  the  temper,  &c.  By  its  power  the  lion  becomes  a 
lamb,  the  vulture  a  dove,  &c.  II.  Paul  was  what  he  did  not  deserve  to  be. 
In  ver.  9  he  tells  us  he  is  "not  meet  to  be  called  an  apostle,"  &c.  If  the  grace  of 
God  were  more  fully  believed  in  and  better  understood,  and  the  necessity  for  it 
more  deeply  felt  by  men,  their  works  of  merit  would  not  be  set  up  in  the  place  of 
the  Saviour,  as  is  too  often  the  case.  All  whose  hearts  are  changed,  whose  sins 
are  forgiven,  whose  souls  are  redeemed,  who  are  children  of  God,  are  great  debtors 


406  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

to  grace.  III.  Paul  was  what  he  never  expected  to  be.  He  did  not  expect  to 
be  coijverted  to  Christ  on  his  way  to  Damascus  ;  and  so  "  men  who  have  come  to 
scoil'  liave  remained  to  pray."  He  is  found  of  some  who  seek  Him  not.  Many 
who  are  now  ministers,  teachers,  mis^ioiiaTies,  were  called,  perhaps  unexpectedly, 
to  the  work.  Conclusion  :  What  God  by  His  grace  did  for  Paul,  He  can  do  for  us. 
In  Paul's  conversion  "  Jesus  Christ  shows  forth  all  longsnffering  for  a  pattern  to 
thi  m  which  shall  hereafter  believe  on  Him  to  li'e  everlasting."  The  grace  of  God 
prepared  Paul  for  life  or  death — it  can  do  this  for  us.  (G.  Type.)  The  grace  of 
God,  i/s  nnlnre  and  effects  : — St.  Paul  does  not  say,  "  By  creative  power,"  nor  "  By 
piovidence";  but.  "  By  the  grace  of  God  I  am,"  etc.,  adiling,  "And  the  grace 
■which,"  &c.  Consider. — I.  What  the  gi;ace  of  God  is.  The  free  favour  of  God 
shown  in  enlightening,  sanctifying,  and  comforting  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
(Heb.  X.  29  ;  xii.  28  ;  xiii.  9;  &c.).  11.  How  this  grace  is  bestowed.  1.  Through 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (chap.  i.  4).  2.  Freely — implied  in  the  word  "  grace  " 
(Pom.  xi.  5).  3.  In  use  of  means — sacraments.  Scriptures,  prayer.  4.  So  as  not 
to  be  distinguishable  from  working  of  human  mind.  5.  Continuously,  from  mo- 
ment to  moment.  III.  The  effects  of  this  grace.  1.  Transition  from  state  of 
sin  and  death  into  state  of  life  and  holiness.  2.  Progressive  sanctification.  3. 
Desire  to  promote  spiritual  welfare  of  others.  4.  Confidence  in  God  as  loving 
Father.  5.  Cheerfur'submission  to  will  of  God.  6.  Jo\ful  expectation  of  future 
glory.  IV.  Practical  use  op  text.  1.  First  clause  suggests  question,  "  Can  I 
say  ?  "  &c.  (1)  Every  one  of  us  may  say.  By  the  creative  i^ower  of  God  I  am,  ifec. 
— a  man  endowed  with  reason  and  human  affections,  capable  not  only  of  sensual, 
but  also  of  intellectual  and  social  enjoyment.  (2)  And,  By  the  proviilence  of  God 
I  am,  (tc.  (3)  But  can  every  one  say,  By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am — a 
Christian?  Do  my  daily  habits  of  life,  objects  of  pursuit,  &c.,  afford  evidence  of 
the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  my  soul  ?  "Whosoever  is  absorbed  with  cares, 
&c.,  of  world,  or  is  addicted  to  uncleanness,  Sabbath-breaking,  or  intemperance, 
cannot  say,  By  the  f/race  of  G<>d,  etc.  2.  To  those  who  can  say  with  the  apostle, 
By  the  grace,  etc.,  the  second  clause  suggests  another  question  :  Has  the  grace 
bestowed  produced  its  due  effects?  Exhortation  to  self-examination  as  to  parti- 
culars, and  to  diligence  lest  we  fail  of,  or  fall  from,  the  grace  of  God.  3.  Do  we 
habituwlly  ascribe  every  good  thought,  word,  and  deed  to  the  grace  of  God  ? 
Danger  lest  Satan  turn  good  works  into  sin  by  causing  us  to  take  the  merit  of 
them.    (Bp.  Ferry.)         The  yrace  uf  God  not  received  in  vain: — I.  The  wonderful 

grace    WHItH    the    APOSTt.E    HAD    RECEIVED,    AND    WHICH    CHANGED    HIM   FROM    WHAT  HE 

HAD  BEEN  TO  WHAT  HE  NOW  WAS.  Tliesc  words  staud  in  close  connection  with  ver. 
9.  1.  He  had  been  an  exceedingly  great  and  atrocious  sinner.  2.  He  became  an 
eminent  apostle  of  Christ.  3.  Hence  it  was,  as  he  here  asserts,  the  free  grace  of 
God  that  caused  the  wonderful  change  (Eom.  i.  5).      II.  The  powerful  effect 

WHICH    the    grace    PaUL     HAD     RECEIVED     HVD     PRODUCED     IN     HIM.         1.    It    WaS    not 

ineffectual  and  fruitless — "not  in  vain"  (Isa.lv.  11;  Acts  xx.  24;  2  Cor.  vi.  1). 
2.  It  produced  more  abunrlant  labours  in  the  cause  of  God.  "I  laboured  more 
abundantly  than  they  all."  He  does  not  say  this  in  a  way  of  boasting,  but 
merely  to  show  the  powerful  effects  of  Divine  grace,  and  to  silence  the  objections 
of  those  who  could  not  allow  that  he  was  an  apostle  at  all,  and  who.  he  elsewhere 
says,  had  compelled  him  to  glory.  The  other  apostles  were  all  unspeakably 
indebted  to  the  grace  of  Christ,  but  none  so  much  as  Saul  the  persecutor;  and 
never  in  any  man  was  that  observation  of  our  Lord  more  remarkably  verified, 
"To  whom  much  is  forgiven,  the  same  loveth  much"  (2  Cor.  xi  23,  etc.).  And 
he  was  none  the  less  laborious  as  a  private  Ciiristian  in  mortifying  sin  and  in 
following  after  holiness  (chap.  ix.  26,   27;  Phil.  iii.   13).      III.  The  care  which 

THE    APOSILE    TAKES    TO    GIVE    ALL    THE     GT  ORY     OF     HIS     EXTRAORDINARY    LABOURS     TO 

God  and  His  grace.  1.  He  renounces  the  thought  that  he  was  to  be  considered 
as  the  performer  of  these  labours.  "  I  laboured  ;  yet  not  I."  2.  He  ascribes  them 
to  the  same  grace  of  God  by  which  he  was  made  a  Christian  and  an  apostle. 
"  Not  I,  but  the  grace  of  God  which  was  with  me."  Conclusion  :  Learn^l.  That 
the  wonderful  grace  shown  to  Saul  the  persecutor  is  well  adapted  to  excite  hope  ifi 
the  worst  of  sinners,  and  encourage  them  in  supplicating  Divine  mercy.  There  is 
nothing  '^  too  hard  for  the  Lord."  2.  Wherever  grace  is  bestowed,  it  effects  a 
happy  and  a  holy  change.  3.  That  the  doctrine  of  being  saved  by  grace,  instead 
of  leading  us  to  indulge  in  sin  or  sloth,  forms  the  strongest  argument  why  we 
should  be  holy  and  diligent.     (Essex  Congregational  Remembrancer.)  Grace,  all 

through  : — Two  or  three  years  before  the  death  of  the  Bev.  John  Newton,  an  aged 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  407 

brother  in  the  ministrj^  called  on  him  to  breal<fast.  Family  prayer  followed;  and 
the  portion  of  Scripture  for  the  day  was  lead  to  him.  lu  it  occurred  the  verse, 
"  By  the  grace  of  GoJ  I  am  what  I  am."  After  the  readmg  of  tliis  text,  he  uttered  this 
affecting  soliloquy :  "  I  am  not  what  I  ought  to  be — ah  !  how  imperfect  and  deficient ! 
I  am  not  what  I  wish  to  be.  i  abhor  wliat  is  evil,  and  I  would  cleave  to  what  is  good. 
I  am  not  wh:it  I  hope  to  be.  Soon,  soon,  shall  I  put  oif  mortality,  and,  with 
mortality,  all  sin  and  imperfection.  Yet  thougli  I  am  not  what  I  ought  to  be,  nor 
what  I  wish  to  be,  nor  what  I  hope  to  be,  I  can  truly  say  I  am  not  what  I  once  was 
— a  slave  to  sin  and  Satan  ;  and  I  can  heartily  join  with  ths  apostle,  and  acknow- 
ledge, 'By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am.'  "  Grace,  daily,  reception  of  :—~ 
We  must  ever  keep  in  mind  that  we  are  only  channels  for  grace,  we  are  not  even 
pools  and  ieservuir.-<,  we  must  have  a  continual  supply  of  Divine  gifts.  We  must 
iiave  anabi.ling  union  with  the  Fountain  of  all  good,  or  we  should  soon  run  dry, 
and  only  as  fresh  streams  flow  into  us  are  we  kept  from  becoming  mere  dry  beds  of 
sand  and  mire,  but  we  know  that  He  will  never  fail  us.  This  spring  is  high  up  in 
heaven  near  the  eternal  throne,  and  it  ripp'es  rlown  through  the  means  of  grace 
from  the  God  of  all  grace,  and  we  receive  daily  of  His  fulness  grace  for  grace. 
Joyful  truth  for  us,  that  because  He  lives  we  must  live  also.  Till  Jesus  bows  His 
head  in  death,  we,  the  living  members  of  His  mystic  body,  can  never  droop  nor 
fail.  His  might  is  our  strength.  His  resources  our  never-failing  supply.  (C.  II. 
Spurgeon.)  Grace,  dijinj  and  living  : — "  How  is  it,"  said  a  pious  but  anxiously 
worrying  lady,  "  that  I  never  can  feel  willing  to  die  ?  I  know  I  ought ;  I  trust 
Christ  fully,  1  believe  in  Him,  and  yet  I  don't  feel  willing  to  die."  And  it  troubled 
her  for  years.  She  went  to  her  pastor  about  it,  and  went  to  many  friends  and 
counsellors,  but  all  to  no  purpose.  No  one  could  help  her.  At  last  an  old  coloured 
"auntie"  heard  her  lamentations,  and  broke  out  upon  her  with,  "  Why,  it  isn't 
dying  grace  ye  want,  cbild  ;  it's  living  grace  ye  want.  Go  ahead  and  do  your  work, 
and  let  the  dying  take  its  own  tinre  and  its  own  grace."  The  bidy  was  comforted, 
and  thenceforth  was  content  to  grow  and  go  step  by  step.  Wlien  she  was  dying 
she  found  abundant  supply  of  dying  grace.  {Christian  Age.)  Grice  in  incurs 
changes: — I.  The  spiritual  EXPKiiiENCE  of  a  belikver  is  not  his  own  woiik,  but 
THE  operation  OF  Divi.N'E  GRACE.  1.  From  the  bias  of  our  fallen  nature  and  the 
fallen  inclinations  of  the  flesh,  we  are  indisposed  towards  spiritual  tliinj^s.  All 
Scripture  and  experience  tend  to  negative  the  idea  that  man  has  in  himself  any 
preilisposition  for  the  things  of  God.  If  he  had,  man  might  have  rendertd  the 
offices  of  the  Spirit  of  grace  unnecessary.  But  as  Paul  sailh,  so  may  every  man, 
"  In  me" — that  is,  in  my  flesh — "dvvelleth  no  good  thing."  Yet  was  he,  therefore, 
incapable  of  grace  ?  No.  "Without  Me  \e  can  do  nothing,"  said  the  Loid  ;  but 
lest  we  should  be  discouraged  at  the  conviction  of  our  utter  weakness,  the  ap  stle 
tells  us,  "  I  can  do  all  things  tlirough  Christ  which  strengthenethme."  2.  Perhaps 
some  of  us  have  lost  sight  of  this  doctrine.  We  may  have  been  labouring  in  our 
own  strength  to  conform  to  the  image  of  Christ,  and  yet  our  repeated  failures  in 
the  attempt  have  not  bumbled  us  to  the  confession,  "  This  thing  is  too  high  for 
me."  If  so,  then  let  us  believe  it,  and  accept  the  Word  of  God,  "No  man 
Cometh  unto  the  Father  but  by  Me  "  ;  and  oti  the  other  hand,  "  No  man  can  come 
unto  Me,  except  the  Father,  who  liath  sent  Me,  draw  him."  There  is  the  mutual 
co-operation  between  the  Father  and  Son.  The  Son  attracts  the  penitent  soul  to 
the  Father,  and  the  Father  gives  the  pardoned  soul  to  tlie  Sun.     II.  Divine  grace 

BEGETS   IN    TUE    GENDINE    SUBJECT    OF    IT    AN    ACTUAL    AND    FELT    CHANGE    OF   VIEWS  .\ND 

PRACTICES  :  "By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am."  1.  This  proposition  may  be 
proved,  as  well  as  illustrated,  by  some  individual  instances  from  Scripture.  Cf. 
Nicodemus,  the  Pbilippian  gaoler,  the  sorcerers  (Acts  xix.  1),  and  Paul.  Thus,  in 
these  instances,  we  behold  the  miraclos  of  mercy  and  omnipotence  of  grace  to 
change  and  transform  the  hardest  heart,  and  that  the  reality  of  such  change  in  the 
inner  man  was  demonstrated  by  an  unmistakable  change  of  the  whole  outer  man. 
"  If  any  man  be  in  Christ  Jesus,  he  is  (not  only)  a  new  creature,  but  old  things 
are  passed  away,  and  all  things  are  become  new."  2.  But  here  I  must  point  out 
an  error,  namely,  the  habit  of  satisfying  ourselves  with  the  reduction  of  some  lusts, 
while  we  indemnify  the  deceitful  heart  by  the  indubjence  of  others  ;  and  thus  the 
whole  labour  is  rendered  in  vain.  A  soul  can  be  slain  by  one  sin  as  fatally  as  by 
a  thousand.  One  stone  could  slay  a  Goliath  as  surely  as  a  thousand  spears.  "  The 
body  of  sin  must  be  destroyed,  that  hencefmth  we  should  not  serve  sin."  Conclu- 
sion :  The  subject  suggests  an  application  to — 1.  The  man  of  the  world  who  some- 
times excuses  his  frailties,  saying,  "I  did  not  make  myself.      Blame  not  me  that 


408  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

'  I  am  what  I  am.'     How  could  I  be  otherwise?"     Now  it  is  freely  granted  that 
if  God  had  proposed  no  remedy  for  tlie  raiUcal  defect  in  our  moral  structure,  we 
might  say,  "  Lord,  I  knew  Thee  that  Thou  art  a  hard  Man,  reaping  where  Thoii 
hast  not  sown,"  &c.     But  when,  on  the  contrary,  a  scheme  of  salvation  is  offered, 
what  a  wickedness  to  say  that  God  has  done  nothin.f;  for  us,  and  therefore  we  are 
at  liberty  to  retaliate  and  do  nothing  for  God!     2.  To  that  man  who  thinks  "he 
is  rich,  and  increased  in  goods,  and  in  need  of  nothing,"  the  terms  of  the  text 
cannot  apply.     He  has  no  right  to  say,  "By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  whit  I  am  "  ; 
but  "  by  the  corruption  of  nature,  by  the  deceitfulness  of  the  flesh,  by  the  subtilty 
of  Satan,  by  the  vanity  and  iniquity  of  my  own  heart,  and  by  the  temj^tations  of 
the  world,  but  not  by  the  grace  of  Ood,  '  I  am  what  I  am.'  "     3.  The  man  of  God 
is  justilied  in  the  profession,  "  By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am."     From  first 
to  last  it  was  throughout  the  work  of  His  grace  that  made  you  what  you  are.     See 
that    you    "receive    not    the   grace   of    God    in    vain."      (J.    B.    Given,   M.A.) 
Divine   grace  : — I.  The  reasons  why  Divine    gtiace    is    indispensably  requisite 
TO  OUR  SPIRITUAL  WELFARE.     The  piogi'oss  of  real  religion  is  not  only  promoted 
by  the  discoveries  of  the  understanding,  but  by  the  state  of  the  affections.     The 
passions  of  love,  hope,  and  fear  aie   the  springs    of    universal    obedience;    and 
these,  when   directed  to  proper  objects,  regulate  and  amend  the  conduct.      But 
the  carnal  mind  is  enmity  with  God.     This  fallen  and  depraved  state  of  human 
nature  is  one  of  the  principal  reasons  why  Divine  grace  is  indispensably  requisite 
to  our  spiritual  welfare.     Without  the  efficacious  oj)erations  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
our  prayers  will  be  languid  and  formal,  our  devotions  careless  and  insipid,  and 
our  lives  irregular  and  unholy.     What  would  be  the  state  of  the  mind  in  spiritual 
concerns,  unaided  by  the  powerful  operations  of  Divine  grace  ?     Would  not  the 
world,  with  all  its  fascinating  charms,  intervene  between  us  and  purer  communion 
witli  God  ?      Are  we  not,  with  every  warning  around  us  of  the  vanity  of  life,  too 
much  attached  to  present  objects  ?     Where  shall  we  find  that  holy  zeal  which  is 
requisite  to  our  perseverance  in  a  Christian  course  without  the  continual  aids  of 
Divine  grace?     As  genuine  piety  is  implanted  in  the  heart  by  the  Spirit  of  God, 
so  it  requires  the  constant  aids  of  the  same  Divine  power  to  cherish  the  growth  of 
pure   and   undefiled   religion.      II.  The  manner    in   which    the    grace    of    God 
operates    on    the    mind.      It   usually   begins    by  alarming  the   conscience   and 
bringing  us   to   a   proper   view   of   our   danger.      The    value    and  worth   of   the 
immortal  soul  is  then  cori-ectly  understood,  and   the   mind    is  alive  to  its  chief 
and  most  important  interests  (Psa.  iv.  6).      Divine   grace    not  only  operates  on 
the  mind  by  causing    us  to  think  seriously,  when  we  were   before  careless   and 
indifferent ;    but  it  enlightens  the  understanding    and    corrects    the    errors  of   a 
mistaken  judgment.     The  efficacious  aids  of  this  Divine  power  are  also  manifest, 
not  only  in  enlarging  the  faculties  of  renson,  and  adding  a  luminous  distinction 
to  the  acuter   determinations  of  the  judgment,  but  al^o  in  directing  our   choice 
to  proper  objects  and  fixing  the  affections  on  heavenly  pursuits.     The  grace  of 
God  operates  on  the  mind  by  inclining  it  to  the  love  of  holiness  ;  by  cherishing 
every  mild,  peaceable,  eharitalde,  and  contented  disposition  which  flows  from  the 
real  dictates  of  pure  and  undefiled  religion.      Divine  grace  does  not  operate  on 
the  mind  by  lessening  our  pleasures,  but  by  regulating  them.      It  teaches  us  to 
distinguish  between  those  joys  which  are  lasting,  and  those  which  only  flatter  to 
destroy.     This  principle,  when  really  implanted  in  the  heart,  will  uniformly  influ- 
ence and  amend  the  life.     Though  it  will  not  in  this  militant  state  constitute  us 
perfect,  yet  it  will    habituady  render  us  altered  men  in  our  character,  conduct, 
and  pursuits.     III.  The  benefits  which  have  uniformly  arisen  from  the  Divine 

ASSISTANCE,    AND    THE    DUTIES    INCUMBENT    ON     ALL     WHO     HAPPILY     ENJOY     IT.        Flrst, 

the  mind  is  prepared  by  the  influence  of  Divine  grace  for  the  performance  of 
works  acceptable  and  pleasing  to  God.  Further,  from  the  powerful  oi^erations 
of  Divine  grace,  we  shall  derive  not  only  the  lively  exercise  of  faith,  genuine 
rei^entance,  but  the  continued  improvement  in  every  Christian  virtue.  Our 
minds  will  be  hereby  elevated  to  the  blissful  enjoyment  of  communion  with  God. 
Let  us  now,  then,  consider  the  duties  which  are  incumbent  on  all  who  happily 
enjoy  this  Divine  aid.  It  is  our  duty  to  be  diligent  in  the  use  of  those  means 
■which  are  connected  with  the  end.  It  is  not  in  the  busy  crowd,  or  amidst  the 
trifling  and  the  gay,  that  we  can  have  the  sublimer  joys  of  religion  ;  but  it  is 
by  a  willing  obedience  to  the  commands  of  God,  a  course  of  habitual  piety, 
and  having  our  minds  with  our  whole  affections  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
It  is  our  duty  to  avoid  every  pursuit  which  may  divide  us  from  God  or   lessen 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  409 

our  love  of  practical  holiness.  Let  us  watch  against  the  beginnings  of  vice, 
and  more  especially  those  temptations  to  which  either  our  calling  in  life  or  our 
natural  inclination  peculiarly  expose  us.      (J.    Grose,    A.M.)  On  the  Divine 

injiuence  in  tJu  concersion  of  sinners: — The  conversion  of  Paul  is  not  to  be 
made  the  test  of  conversion  in  general.  His  case  was  peculiar.  Deeply  preju- 
diced afjainst  the  name  and  religion  of  Christ,  as  well  as  by  the  mode  of  his 
education,  as  by  the  example  of  his  connections  nnd  associates,  more  than 
ordinary  means  were  necessary  to  reconcile  him  to  the  doctrines  of  the  Cross. 
But  we  who  have  lived  under  the  light  of  the  gospel,  and  been  encournged  from 
our  infancy  to  revere  its  doctrines  and  laws,  have  no  more  warrant  to  look  for 
any  immediate  and  palpable  manifestation  of  Divine  power  to  convert  us  from  sin 
to  holiness,  than  to  exfiect  the  gifts  of  prophecy  or  of  tongues.     I.  We  are  bound 

GRATKFOLLY  TO  ACKNOWLEDGE  THE  INKLUENCE  OF  DiVINE  GRACE,  BOTH  IN  DIRECTING 
ODR   ATTENTION    TO  "THE    THINGS    WHICH    BELONG    TO    OUR   PEACE,"  AND    IN    AIDING  OUR 

EXERTIONS  OF  OBEDIENCE  TO  THE  WILL  OF  GoD.  Generally  speaking,  those  who 
are  "  transformed  by  the  renewing  of  their  minds,"  perceive  nothing  which  they 
can  distinguish  as  a  special  impulse  from  above;  but  in  the  exercise  of  their 
rational  faculties  and  in  the  use  of  appointed  means  are  eventually  brought  to 
" choose  that  good  pirt  which  cannot  be  taken  from  them."  It  can  hardly  be 
otherwise,  at  least,  with  such  as  are  virtuously  educated.  Without  any  assignable 
human  cause,  preparatory  to  such  an  effect,  a  deep  conviction  of  guilt  and  danger, 
accompanied  with  anxious  desires  and  endeavours  to  obtain  forgiveness  and  salva- 
tion, suddenly  succeed  a  course  of  heedless  inattention,  neglect,  and  rebellion. 
II.  Without  personal  exertions  of  obedience  to  the  will  op   God,  none   can 

OBTAIN    THE    CHARACTER   AND    REWARDS    OF    THE    FAITHFUL.       LesSOUS  I    1.    We     are   led 

to  remark  the  necessity  of  Divine  assistance  in  the  conversion  and  sanctification 
of  sinful  men.  2.  We  are  taught  that  no  trust  is  to  be  reposed  in  any  impressions, 
however  serious,  or  in  any  resolutions,  however  sincere,  at  the  moment,  which  do 
not  issue  in  a  life  of  uniform  virtue  and  godlines-.  3.  We  are  furnished  with  a 
test  by  which  to  ascertain  and  determine  our  spiritual  state.  4.  We  may  infer 
the  paramount  obligations  imposed  upon  us  to  exercise  charity  toward  all  who 
exemplify  an  undissembled  attachment  to  the  cause  of  Christ  — though  they 
presume  not  confidently  to  describe  the  manner  nor  even  to  assert  the  reality  of 
their  "  deliverance  from  darkness  to  light,"  &c.     {John  Foster,  D.D.)  A  ijood 

wtaJi's  estimate  of  Jdniself : — "By  the  grace  of  God  I  am" — and  he  is  going  to 
say  what  he  is,  but  he  bethinks  himself,  as  if  he  had  reflected.  "  No  !  I  will  leave 
other  people  to  say  what  that  is  !  By  the  grace  of  God  I  am — what  I  am  :  what- 
ever that  be.  And  all  that  I  have  to  say  is  that  God  made  me,  and  that  I  hel|)ed 
Him.  For  the  grace  of  God  which  was  bestowed  upon  me  was  not  in  vain.  You 
Corinthians  may  judge  what  the  product  is.  I  tell  you  how  it  has  come  iibout."  I. 
As  TO  THE  ONE  POWER  THAT  MAKES  MEN.  "By  the  gr.ice  of  God  I  am  what  I  am." 
Now  that  word  "grace"  has  got  to  be  woin  threadb  ire,  and  to  mean  next  to 
nothing  in  the  minds  of  many.  But  Paul  had  a  very  definite  idea  of  what  he 
meant  by  it ;  and  what  he  meant  by  it  was  a  very  large  thing,  as  being  the  only 
thing  which  will  transform  character  and  produce  fmit  that  a  man  need  not  be 
ashamed  of.  The  grace  of  God,  in  Paul's  use  of  the  words,  imidies  these  two 
things  which  are  connected  as  root  and  product — the  active  love  of  God  in  exercise 
towards  us  sinful  creatuies,  and  the  gilts  with  which  that  love  comes  fall  charged 
to  men.  What  is  it  that  men  need  most  for  noble  and  pure  living?  These  two 
things  precisely  :  motive  and  power  to  curry  out  the  dictates  of  conscience.  Every 
man  in  the  woild  knows  enough  of  duty  and  of  right  to  be  a  far  nobler  man  than 
any  man  in  the  world  is.  And  it  is  not  for  want  of  clear  convictions  of  duty,  it 
is  not  for  want  of  recognised  patterns  of  life,  that  men  go  wrong  ;  but  it  is  because 
there  are  these  two  things  lacking,  motives  for  nobler  service,  and  ))Ower  to  do  and 
be  what  they  know  they  ought  to  be.  And  piecisely  here  Paul's  go^pel  comes  in, 
"  By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am."  Tiiat  grace,  considered  in  its  t>vo  sides 
of  love  and  of  giving,  su|iplie-!  all  that  we  want,.  It  supplies  motives.  There  is 
nothing  that  will  bend  a  man's  will  like  the  recognition  of  Divine  love  which  it 
is  blessedness  to  come  in  contact  with,  and  to  obey.  You  may  try  to  swav  him 
by  motives  of  advantage  and  self-interest,  and  there  is  no  adequate  response. 
You  cannot  soften  a  heart  by  the  hammers  of  the  law.  You  cannot  force  a  man 
to  do  right  by  brandishing  before  him  the  wh'p  that  punishes  doing  wiong.  You 
cannot  sway  the  will  byan.>thinK  but  the  heart;  and  when  you  can  touch  that 
deepest  spring  it  moves  the  whole  mass.      The  other  aspect  of  this  same  great 


410  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHAr.  xv. 

word  is,  in  like  manner,  that  whicli  we  nepd.  What  men  want  is,  first  of  all,  the 
will  to  be  noble  and  good  ;  and,  second,  the  power  to  can-y  out  the  will.  It  is 
God  that  worketh  in  us  both  the  willing  and  the  doing.  I  venture  to  affirm  that 
there  is  no  power  known,  either  to  thinkers,  or  p  lilanthroplsts,  or  doctrinaires, 
or  strivers  after  excellence  in  the  world,  which  will  lift  a  life  to  such  heights  of 
beauty  and  self-sacrificing  nobility  as  will  the  power  that  comes  to  us  by  com- 
munication of  the  graee  that  is  in  Jesus  Christ.  And  now,  if  that  be  true,  what 
follows  ?  Surely  this,  that  for  all  you  have,  in  any  measure,  caught  a  glimpse  of 
what  you  ought  to  be,  and  have  been  more  or  less  vainly  trying  to  realise  your 
ideal,  there  is  a  better  way  than  the  way  of  self-centred  and  self-dependent  effort. 
All  noble  life  is  a  building  up  by  slow  degrees  from  the  foundation.  And  can  you 
and  I  complete  the  task  with  our  own  limited  resources  and  our  own  feeble 
strengths?  Will  not  "all  that  pass  by  begin  to  mock  "us  and  say,  "  this  man 
began  to  build  and  was  not  able  to  finish"?  I  need  not,  I  suppose,  linger  tO' 
remind  you  what  important  and  large  lessons  these  thoughts  carry,  not  only  for 
men  who  are  trying  to  work  at  the  task  of  mending  and  making  their  own 
characters,  but  on  the  larger  scale,  for  all  who  seek  to  benefit  and  elevate  their 
fellows.  Nothing  will  truly  re-form  humanity,  society,  the  nation,  the  city,  except 
that  which  re-creates  the  individual ;  "  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  '* 
entering  into  their  midst.  II.  Notice  the  lesson  we  get  here  as  to  how  we  should 
THINK  of  our  owx  ATTAINMENTS.  Well,  then,  it  is  not  necessary  for  a  man  to  be 
ignorant,  or  to  pretend  that  he  is  ignorant,  of  what  he  can  do.  We  hear  a  great 
deal  about  the  unconsciousness  of  genius.  There  is  a  partial  truth  in  it ;  and 
possibly  the  highest  examples  of  power  and  success,  in  any  department  of  mental 
or  intellectual  effort,  are  unaware  of  their  achievements  and  stature.  Eut  if  a 
man  can  do  a  certain  kind  of  service,  there  is  no  hai-m  whatever  in  his  recog- 
nising the  frtct  that  he  can  do  it.  But  the  less  we  think  about  ourselves,  in  any 
way,  the  better.  The  more  entire  our  recognition  of  the  influx  of  grace  on  which 
we  depend  for  keeping  our  reservoir  full,  the  less  likelihood  there  will  be  of  touchy 
self-assertion,  the  less  likelihood  of  the  misuse  of  the  powers  that  we  have.  If 
we  are  to  do  much  for  God,  if  we  are  to  keep  what  we  liave  already  attnined,  we 
must  make  a  conscious  effort  to  cupy  these  two  things,  which  marked  the 
apostle's  estimate  of  himself — a  distinct  recognition  that  we  are  only  reservoirs 
and  nothing  more — "What  hast  thou  that  thou  hast  not  received?  Why  then 
dost  thou  glory  as  if  thou  hadst  not  received  it?" — and  a  humble  waiving  aside 
of  the  attempt  to  determine  what  it  is  that  we  are.     III.  Lastly,  one  word  about 

THE    EESPONSIBILITY     FOB     OL'R     CO-OPERATION     WITH     THE     GRACE,    IN     ORDER    TO    THE 

ACCOMPLISHMENT  OF  ITS  RESULTS.  "  The  gracc  wliioh  was  bestowed  upon  me  was 
not  in  vain,"  says  Paul.  "  Not  I,  but  the  grace  of  God  which  was  with  me,  and  so 
I  laboured  more  abundantly  than  they  all."  That  is  to  say,  God  in  His  giving 
love,  Christ  witli  His  ever  out-flowing  Spirit,  play  round  our  hearts  and  desire  to 
enter.  But  the  grace,  the  love,  the  gifts  of  the  love  may  all  be  put  away  by  our 
unfaithfulness,  by  our  non-receptivity,  by  our  misuse,  and  by  our  negligence. 
Paul  yielded  himself  to  the  grace  that  was  brought  to  work  ujion  him.  Paul 
said,  "  By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am."  This  man,  because  he  knew  that  he 
had  submitted  himself  to  the  often  painful  searching,  crucifying,  self-restraining, 
and  stimulating  influences  of  the  gospel  and  Spirit  of  Christ,  could  say,  "  God's 
grace  has  made  me  what  I  am,  and  I  heliDed  Him  to  make  me."  And  cnn  you 
say  anything  like  that  ?  Take  your  life.  In  how  many  of  its  deeds  has  there 
been  present  the  consciousness  of  God  and  His  love  ?  Is  it  the  grace  of  God,  or 
nature  and  self  and  the  world  and  the  flesh  thnt  have  made  you  what  you  are  ? 
Oh,  let  us  cultivate  the  sense  of  our  need  of  this  Divine  help,  for  it  does  not 
come  where  men  do  not  know  how  weak  they  are,  and  how  much  they  want  it. 
The  mountain  tops  are  high.  Yes,  and  they  are  dry  ;  there  is  no  water  there. 
The  rivers  run  in  the  green  valleys  deep  down.  "  God  resi:^teth  the  proud,  and 
giveth  grace  to  the  humble."  Let  us  see  that  we  open  our  hearts  to  the  recep- 
tion of  these  quickening  and  cleansing  influences,  for  it  is  possible  for  us  to  cover 
ourselves  over  with  such  an  impenetrable  covering  that  that  grace  cannot  pass 
through  it.  Let  us  see  to  it  that  we  keep  ourselves  in  close  contact  with  the 
foundation  of  all  this  grace.     [A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Grace,  power  of: — Grace 

infuseth  a  spirit  of  activity  into  a  person ;  grace  doth  not  lie  dormant  in 
the  soul ;  it  is  not  a  sleepy  habit,  but  it  makes  a  Christian  like  a  seraphim, 
swift-winged  in  his  heavenly  motions.  Grace  is  like  fire,  it  makes  one  burn 
in  love  to  God.     (T.  Watson.)         Wonders  of  grace: — I  recollect  the   story  of 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  411 

a  travellei'  who  at  night  shouted  to  the  keeper  of  a  toll-bridge  to  let  the  gate  rise 
that  he  might  pass  through.  There  was  a  terrific  storm  riiging,  the  night  was 
deluged  in  darl<ness,  and  the  man  could  scavci-ly  be  prevailed  upon,  in  his  tremor, 
to  come  out.  When  he  did  come  out,  he  found  the  traveller  on  the  bridge  eide  of 
the  gate,  and  said  to  him,  "  In  the  name  of  (xod,  where  did  you  come  from  ?  "  The 
traveller  replied,  "I  crossed  the  bridge."  The  man  kept  him  that  night,  and  the 
next  morning  took  him  back  and  showed  him  the  biidge  which  he  had  crossed. 
The  planks  had  all  been  taki^n  up,  so  that  nothing  lemained  except  the  string- 
pieces,  which  were  stretched  from  one  side  to  the  other  of  tbe  chasm.  The  story 
has  it  that  his  faithful  steed  took  the  centre  one  of  tbese  ben.ms,  a  hundred  feet 
beneath  which  was  rushing  a  swollen  flood,  and,  dark  as  the  night  was,  carried  him 
safely  across.  The  man  at  the  time  did  not  know  but  that  he  was  crossing  a 
regular  bridge ;  and  in  the  morning,  when  be  saw  how  near  be  came  to  being 
dashed  to  pieces,  he  fainted.  Are  tbere  not  manv  men  that  can  look  back  and 
see  that  the  providence  of  God  has  carried  them  across  the  bridge  over 
the    pit   of    destruction    on    a    single   beam?      {H.    IF'.    Beecher.)  The    con- 

version of  St.  Paid  .-—I.  Some  aspects  of  the  apostles  life  and  chatiacter 
IN  eelation  to  which  he  would  be  likely  to  use  sdch  language.  By  the  grace  of 
God — 1.  He  was  a  pardoned  and  recovered  sinner.  (1)  It  could  not  l)e  other  than 
a  matter  of  grateful  reflection  to  this  apostle  that  he  was  no  longer,  as  hfi  once  was, 
a  persecutor,  blasphemer,  &c.  "  Wijo  or  what  opened  my  eyes  ?  Did  the  wisdom 
of  Gamaliel  do  it?  Did  my  own  strong  powers  of  reaponing  do  it?  Did  the  light 
of  nature  or  of  conscience  do  it?  No,  it  was  light  from  heaven — fresh,  direct, 
undesired,  unsought.  It  was  convincing  light,  for  1  was  made  to  perceive  it  was 
the  Lord  which  s(  ake  to  me  out  of  the  fire.  It  was  melting  and  tubduing  light, 
for,  in  a  moment,  all  my  iron  enmities  of  soul  were  broken.  Tell  nie,  ye  that  tliink 
hghtly  of  the  gra.-e  of  God,  what  liand  had  Saul  of  Tarsus  in  all  this?  "  (2)  And 
to  the  same  Divine  influence  would  the  apostle  refer  the  change  of  mind  and  spirit 
and  temper  which  followed  upon  his  conversion.  His  original  temperament  was 
not  one  to  fall  in  easily  with  the  meekness  and  gentleness  of  the  gospel  character. 
He  was  proud,  he  was  hasty,  he  was  self-confident,  he  was  impatient  of  contradic- 
tion or  control.  Not  without  much  struggle  and  effort,  we  may  be  sure,  was  a 
spirit  like  this  brought  into  subjection  (Rom.  vii.).  The  grace  which  makes  strong 
in  Christ  Jesus  comes  to  the  rescue,  and  to  the  agonising  and  bewildered  cry, 
"  Wlio  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death?  "  his  own  soul  makes  answer, 
"I  thank  God  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  His  grace  is  sufficient  for  me. 
2.  He  changed  his  former  views  as  a  Pharisee,  and  embraced  those  which  lie  now 
held  as  to  what  would  constitute  acceptance  before  God.  His  own  account  of  him- 
self is  in  Phil.  iii.  4-6.  Yet  how  does  he  estimate  these  privileges  on  becoming  a 
Christian  ?  Why,  as  worthless,  and  something  more  (Phil.  iii.  7-i*).  3.  He  became 
a  chosen  vessel  unto  Christ  to  preach  and  leach  in  His  name.  Certainly  nothing 
could  be  more  unlikely  than  the  choice  of  such  a  man  to  such  a  work.  The  feeling 
wrought  upon  him  powerfully  to  the  end  of  his  days.  "  Necessity  was  laid  upon 
me,"  &c.  II.  Peactical  lessons.  1.  It  is  a  law  of  all  woilds  that,  in  the  way  of 
an>  thing  good  in  His  creatures,  God  alone  maketh  us  to  difi'er.  I  might  go  through 
tbe  ranks  of  the  Seraphim,  and  single  out  one  who  stood  nearest  to  the  throne,  and 
were  I  to  say  to  him,  "What  raised  thee  thus  high?  "  he  would  make  answer, 
"By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am."  I  might  thread  my  way  through  the 
mansions  of  the  just,  but  if  I  should  be  betrayed  into  the  exclamation,  "What  a 
recompense  for  good  works  is  bere  !  "  in  an  instant  ten  thousand  voices  would 
testify  aloud,  "  By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am."  Or  I  might  go  to  one  who, 
through  fourscore  years  of  temptation  and  irial,  had  ever  walked  with  God;  or  to 
one  whose  unselfish  Christianity  had  iirompted  him  to  spend  and  be  spent  in  his 
Master's  service  ;  or  to  one  laiil  lov^  by  suffering  ;  yet  if  I  should  say,  "  There  must 
be  a  claim  to  moral  worthiness  here,"  again  the  response  would  be,  "  By  the  grace 
of  God  I  am  what  I  am."  2.  All  true  conversion  must  have  its  origin  in  a  Divine 
influence.  If  I  am  very  far  gone  from  original  righteousness,  nothing  but  an  influ- 
ence from  on  high  can  bring  me  back;  if  "dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,"  nothing 
short  of  a  regenerating  process  can  give  me  life,  3.  True  conversion  extends  to  tbe 
whole  character.  Look  at  the  proof  of  tbis  in  Paul.  See  it— (1)  In  the  illumination 
of  his  mind.  He  had  studied  under  Gamaliel,  yet  after  his  conversion  he  counts 
all  foolishness.  (2)  In  bis  ambitions,  and  aims,  and  preferences.  Things  which 
had  been  once  a  gain  to  him  are  now  counted  as  loss.  (8)  In  the  chsmge  in  his 
moral  temperament,  in  the  casting  off  of  a  bitter,  furious  hate  for  a  spirit  of  reli- 


^12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

gious  gentleness.  And  in  like  manner  should  we  look  for  the  evidence  of  the 
spiritual  change  in  improved  moral  character.  Conversion  implies  not  only  some- 
thing turned  from,  but  something  turned  to— from  the  world  to  Christ,  from  sin  to 
holiness,  &c.  4.  The  grace  which  has  made  you  what  you  are  alone  can  make  you 
what  you  desire  to  be— (1)  Established  in  holiness.  (2)  Prepared  for  death.  (3) 
meet  for  your  appearing  before  the  great  white  throne.  He  who  begins  must  finish. 
{D.  Moore,  31. A.)  I  laboured  more  abundantly  than  they  all:  yet  not  I,  but 
the  grace  of  God  that  was  with  me.—Iiullriduafiti/  in  the  Christian  life  (text,  and 
Gal.  ii.  20)  :— "  I,  yet  not  I  "  is  characteristic  of  Paul.  Pie  knew  himself.  He  did 
not  ignore  self.  In  his  life,  as  a  man  and  an  apostle,  he  took  the  proportions  of 
his  own  personality,  and  at  the  same  time  confessed  that  all  the  operative  grace 
came  from  God.  The  "I"  within  him  was  regenerated.  I.  Every  man  must 
BECOGNisE  HIS  OWN  INDIVIDUALITY.  Some  Pay  that  this  is  an  intuition,  and  others 
say  that  it  is  a  conviction  which  comes  with  experience.  But  to  us  the  constituent 
elements  in  self  are  more  important.  Though  there  is  a  generic  likeness  among 
men,  yet  each  person  has  his  own  individuality.  One  is  calm,  another  explosive; 
one  logical,  another  intuitional ;  one  prosaic,  another  poetic.  Hence  we  have  a 
Shakespeare  and  Milton,  a  Bacon  and  a  Butler.  II.  Eegenebation  does  not 
DESTROY  THIS  INDIVIDUALITY.  If  Christ  be  in  you,  you  are  "  a  new  creature."  Your 
features  are  the  same,  though  sweetened  or  caline.i,  perhaps,  by  the  peace  of  God'; 
your  intellect  is  the  same,  though  quickened  by  the  new  hfe  of  faith  and  hope.  If 
chperful,  you  are  still  cheerful;  and  if  born  with  tendencies  to  melancholy,  you 
will  still  contend  with  the  temptation  to  despondency.  Peter  was  Peter  to  the  last. 
The  sfime  vehemency  that  Paul  the  persecutor  exhibited  was  shown  in  Paul  the 
apostle.  In  the  annual  regeneration  of  the  visible  creation,  in  the  plumage  and 
song  of  the  bird,  and  in  the  renewing  verdure  of  field  and  garden,  we  see  pictured 
the  unity  yet  beautiful  variety  which  prevails  in  the  world  which  God  has  made. 
III.  The  Spirit  of  God  in  His  work  in  a  jian  uses  this  individuality.  It  colours 
and  qualifies  the  whole  activity  of  a  person.  1.  See  how  it  appears  in  the  writing 
of  the  Scriptures.  Tliey  are  Divinely  inspired,  and  yet  tire  human  and  Divine 
elements  are  mingled.  David  well  says,  "  His  w<ird  was  in  my  tongue."  Moses 
was  wise  in  the  wisdom  of  Egypt,  and  shows  it  in  Iris  writings.  The  lyrics  of  David 
differ  from  the  proverbs  of  Solomon.  The  grandeur  of  Isaiah  contrasts  with  the 
homely  verse  of  the  rude  herdsman  Amos.  The  pungency  of  James  and  the  weird 
magnificence  of  Revelation  again  show  the  "  I  and  yet  not  I."  2.  So  in  character. 
Peter  was  fitted  to  minister  to  the  circumci-ion  and  Paul  to  the  Gentiles.  Augus- 
tine, Luther,  Wesley,  Whitfield,  Ac,  reve  il  the  same  principle.  In  the  Church 
to-day  one  is  fitted  for  Sunday-school  teaching  and  another  for  mission  work.  As 
in  an  orchestra  each  instrument  has  its  place,  and  its  absence  cannot  be  filled  by  a 
different  instrument,  so  there  is  a  place  and  work  for  each  in  the  Church.  We 
must  give  full  play  to  the  inspiring  and  directing  Spirit  of  God  within  us.  3.  We 
must  trace  the  actual  results  to  the  operation  cf  the  Spirit  in  us  and  through  us. 
Give  glory  to  Him  who  uses  us.  In  a  factory  the  machmery  does  variety  of  work, 
but  derives  all  its  motive  power  from  the  engine.  Is  there  anything  too  hard  for 
God  ?  Conclusion  :  1.  Piespect  your  individuality,  and  at  the  same  time  give  God 
the  glory  of  what  you  are  and  do.  Live  your  own  life,  and  do  not  fancj'  that  your 
experience  is  to  be  like  your  neighbour's.  David  was  powerless  wearing  the  armour 
of  Saul.  2.  Be  sure  that  Christ  is  in  you  and  in  your  work.  He  is  au  inner  foun- 
tain, and  He  will  evoke  your  life  as  a  pmductive  and  perennial  stream.  3.  Let  your 
humble  and  hearty  utterance  ever  be,  "  Not  unto  us,  not  unto  us,"  etc.  (IF.  M. 
Taylor,  D.D.)  Individnalily  and  self-negation  : — I.  The  text  is  expressive  op 
THE  highest  type  OF  CHARACTER.  1.  The  more  "  self  "  and  the  less  "  self "  there  is 
in  any  man  the  nobler  he  is.  This  sounds  paradoxical,  but  man  himself  is  a  para- 
dox. He  "  lives,  moves,  and  has  his  being  "  in  Another,  and  yet  is  distinct  from 
that  Other.  This  distinctive  personality  God  seeks  to  fill  out  of  His  own  fulness 
with  a  lich  and  noble  life.  2.  Our  ordinary  language  be^rs  witness  to  this  truth. 
"Self-will,"  "self-seeking,"  "  self-indulgence  "  we  regard  as  the  essence  of  vice, 
and  "  self-sacrifice  "  as  the  climax  of  virtue  ;  yet  we  commend  "  self-reliance."  We 
admire  "  self-possession,"  but  laugh  at  "  self-co'iiplacency  "  ;  and,  whilst  disgusted 
by  "  self-righteousness,"  we  honour  "  self-respect."  We  say  of  a  man  that  he 
"quite  lost  himself" — "quite  forgot  himself."  We  may  be  uttering  either  the 
highest  praise  or  the  severest  censure.  And  although  we  commonly  speak  of 
*'  self-consciousness  "  as  a  fault,  yet  we  feel  that  a  certain  consciousness  of  self  is 
inseparable  from  all  true  greatness.     3.  In  our  estimates  of  men  we  pronounce  that 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  413 

character  defective  which  lacks  either  individuality  or  self-negation.  (1)  Here, 
e.rj.,  is  a  man  whose  individuality  is  clearly  enough  marked ;  he  tiiinks  for  himself, 
but  he  may  pride  himself  on  his  position  or  his  attainments  instead  of  recognising 
his  "  stfcwardshij)  "  and  using  his  gifts  for  the  bsnefit  of  liis  brethren.  He  can  say 
'  I,"  but  he  has  yet  to  learn  to  say  "  Not  I."  Here,  again,  is  a  man  who  is  always 
:leferring  to  tlie  opinions  of  others  ;  but  then  he  has  no  decided  opinions  of  his  own. 
He  is  often  giving  up  his  own  will,  but  he  has  but  little  will  to  give  up.  He  is 
modest,  but  sometimes  he  is  too  u)Oilest  even  to  do  his  duty.  In  such  a  man  there 
may  be  much  to  love,  but  he  would  be  a  nobler  man  if,  whilst  still  able  to  say  "  Not 
I,"  he  could  also  say  "I."  Humility  is  most  divine  when  it  is  the  lowliness  of  a 
great  soul.  And  self-sacrifice  is  lofty  in  proportion  to  the  greatness  and  worth  of 
that  "  self  "  which  is  sacrificed.  4.  The  text  is  well  illustrated  by  the  character  of 
the  apostle.  We  scarcely  know  which  is  tde  more  striking — Paul's  individuality  or 
his  self-negation.  He  says  that  he  is  "  the  least  of  all  tlie  apostles,"  and  then  that 
he  is  "  not  a  whit  behind  the  very  chiefest  apostles."  He  is  conscious  of  his  own 
unworthiness,  and  also  of  the  high  honour  which  God  has  put  upon  him.  His 
letters  are  full  of  dignified  self-assertion  and  noble  independence,  and  yet  he  speaks 
as  if  he  had  no  separate  life  at  all.  "  I  live,  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me." 
5.  We  see  the  positive  and  negative  poles  of  the  same  attractive  nobleness  in  Christ 
Himself.  "  My  doctrine  is  not  Mine,  but  His  that  sent  Me."  In  one  view  Christ's 
ministry  was  a  si  If-proclamation.  "I  am  the  Light  of  the  world,"  &c.  In  another 
view  it  was  a  self-negation.  "I  can  of  Mine  own  self  do  nothing."  II.  Notice 
HOW  THE  Divine  education  of  man  is  designed  and  utted  to  produce  this  type  of 
CHARACTEB.  1.  The  liunian  creature  is  at  first  thiown  entirely  upon  the  care  of 
others,  and  yet  from  the  first  also  lie  has  a  body  distinctively  his  own.  The  pro- 
cesses of  "  isolation  "  and  association  go  on  together.  His  needs,  desires,  pleasures, 
pains,  and,  alas!  sins,  all  lead  him  to  say  "I  ";  his  dependence  on  his  mother's 
love,  Ac,  leads  him  to  feel  "  Not  I."  2.  This  education  God  carries  on  throughout 
our  whole  life.  (1)  He  brings  us  into  circumstances  when  we  must  think  and  act 
for  ourselves,  but  He  likewise  so  binds  us  together  that  we  are  often  impelled  to 
yield  up  our  own  will  to  the  will  of  others.  Love  and  duty  call  upon  us  to  sacrifice 
self  for  ihe  good  of  our  brethren,  and  yet  they  sometimes  call  us  to  stand  upon  our 
rights.  (2)  God  has  also  bi  ought  man  into  such  relations  with  the  material  world 
as  to  give  him  a  feeling  at  once  of  gie.itness  and  of  nothiu-aiess.  Look  at  the 
capacities  of  the  body  in  health  and  its  inipoteuce  in  disease.  You  listen  to  the 
poet,  philosopher,  or  man  of  science,  and  you  see  the  height  to  which  the  mind  iJaay 
rise;  you  w.Jk  through  the  wards  of  the  asylum,  and  see  the  depth  to  which  it  may 
fall!  How  insignificant,  too — and  yet  how  mighty — is  man  in  presence  of  the 
powers  of  nature  !  And  in  front  of  tliose  forces  the  very  condition  of  our  being 
able  to  stand  up  and  say  "  I "  is  that  we  learn  to  say  "  Not  I."  (.3)  God  carries  ou 
this  same  process  of  education  through  the  mediunr  of  His  providence.  His 
'•gentleness  makes  us  great" — evoking  our  powers,  whilst  the  awfulness  of  His 
mysterious  visitations  humbles  us  to  the  dust.  (4)  The  gospel  of  Christ  is  fitted  to 
develop  this  same  composite  character.  Its  word  is,  "  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  And  every  Christian  is  taught  by  the  gospel  to 
recogn  se  his  individual  responsibility  and  privileges,  and  thus  he  m  ly  well  feel  and 
say  "I."  On  the  other  hand  the  gospel  also  cultivates  the  spirit  which  leads  a 
man  to  say  "  Not  I."  Its  very  first  call  a'ldresses  him  as  a  sinner,  and  summons 
him  to  r  pentauce.  The  faith  which  "justifies"  "excludes  boasting."  He  is  also 
perpetually  reminded  that  he  is  "  not  his  own,"  and  that  he  is  bound  to  present  his 
whole  nature  as  a  "  living  sacrifice  "  to  Gorl.  And  the  gospel  leads  him  into  Chris- 
tian fellowship,  and  summons  him  to  the  help  of  tiie  brethren.  3.  And  this  same 
process  of  education  God  carries  on  even  unto  the  end.  To  die  — it  is  to  feel  how 
ins  gniticant  I  am— how  tlie  great  world  will  move  on  all  the  same  without  me! 
and  yet  it  is  to  feel  ihe  preciousness  of  njy  own  being  as  I  nevei'  felt  it  before. 
Alone  I  mu-t  pass  through  this  valley  of  the  shadow,  and  yet  this  lonely  road  is 
the  great  highway  which  all  the  generations  of  men  have  trod  before  me.  4.  This 
same  feeling — "  f,  yet  not  I" — will  al  ide  with  each  of  the  redeemed  in  heaven. 
Heaven  is  not-,  selfish  enjoyment.  The  "  faithful  servant  "  enters  into  "  the  joy  of 
his  Lord."  Yet  heaven  is  not  "  absorption  into  the  Divine  essence."  There  is  no 
destiuction  of  peisonnlity  in  "  the  Father's  house."  Each  child  has  a  "  place  pre- 
pared "  lor  him.  {T.  C.  Finliiyy:un,  D.D.)  The  privUefie  of  working  : — No  one 
ever  had — 1.  A  more  vivid  sense  of  the  grandeur  of  the  work  which  God  was 
carrying  on  in  the  earth  than  the  Apostle  Paul.     2.  More  of  esprit  de  corjjs.     He 


414  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

knew  well  who  was  working  with  him,  and  understood  perfectly  the  grandeur  of  the 
campaign  on  which  he  had  entered.  3.  So  grand  and  magnificent  a  sense  of  the 
final  outcome  of  God's  moral  government  over  this  world  as  he.  L^arn — (1)  This 
subject  may  comfort  those  who  are  weary  of  work,  or,  rather,  rebuke  and  convert 
them.  (2)  It  is  our  duty  to  work  as  long  as  there  is  work,  and  we  have  strength  to 
do  it.     {H.  W.  Beecher.) 

Ver.  11.  Therefore  wlietlier  it  were  I  or  they,  so  we  preach,  and  so  ye  believed. 

. — The  truhj  important  in  preacldnn  : — 1.  Not  the  preacher,  but  the  truth  preached. 
2.  Not  the  hearing,  but  the  belief  of  the  truth.  (-J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  An  example  of 
a  faithful  ministnj  mid  the  conduct  of  a  fnithfiil  people  : — I.  A  faithful  ministry. 
1.  The  gospel  preached.  N..t  scientific  or  philosophical  discussions  occupied  St. 
Paul's  ministry  or  that  of  his  fellow  apostles,  but  he  proclaimed — (1)  Christ's 
atoning  death.  (2)  Cnrist's  cerUfied  resurrection.  These  must  be  ever  the  themes 
of  a  true  minister.  2.  The  character  possessed.  (1)  Humility  breathes  tlirough 
the  words,  "  I  am  not  worthy  to  be  called  an  apostle."  What  true  minister  of  God 
feels  his  worthiness  to  handle  those  sacred  tiuths?  (2)  Dependence  on  Divine 
grace.  "  By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am,"  &c.  3.  The  work  accomplished. 
"I  laboured  more  abundantly  than  they  all."  Follow  the  zealous  work  of  St.  Paul 
from  Damascus  to  Rome.  Labour  for  God  must  be  earliest  and  abundant.  II.  A 
FAITHFUL  PEOPLE.  "  So  ye  believed."  The  death  and  resurrection  of  Christ  preached 
in  the  spirit  of  humility,  and  tlie  co-operation  of  the  grace  of  God,  "  the  grace  of 
God  with  me,"  should  ever  produce  this  result — faith.     (Clerical  World.) 

Vers.  12-19.  Now  if  Christ  be  preached  that  He  rose  from  the  dead,  how  say 
some  among  you  that  there  is  no  resuri-ection  ? — If  tliere  be  no  resurrection : — 
1.  Our  religion  is  not  based  upon  opinions,  but  upon  facts.  Wiratever  your 
"views"  may  be,  is  a  small  matter;  what  are  the  facts  of  the  case?  2.  Wiien 
those  outside  the  Church  deny  tlie  gos^Del  facts,  we  are  not  at  all  asioni-hed  ;  they 
are  unbelievers,  and  they  are  acting  out  their  own  profession.  But  when  men 
inside  the  Church  deny  the  resurrection,  then  is  our  soul  stirred  within  us.  Paul's 
argument  begins.  If  there  be  no  resurrection — I.  Christ  is  not  risen.  Now — 
1.  The  apostles  bore  witness  that  Christ  had  risen.  2.  "But,"  says  one,  "Christ 
might  rise,  and  yet  not  His  people."  Not  so,  for  Christ  is  one  with  Hi;  people. 
When  Adam  sinned,  the  whole  human  race  fell  in  him,  for  they  were  one  with  him. 
In  Adam  all  died.  Now,  Christ  is  the  second  Adam,  and  all  believeis  are  one  with 
Him ;  and  because  He  rose  again,  they  must  rise  again  ;  He  lives  and  they  sball 
live  also.  II.  Apostolic  preaching  f.alls  (vers.  14,  15).  For — 1.  The  apostles 
were  false  witnesses.  When  a  man  bears  false  witness,  he  usually  has  a  motive  for 
doing  so.  What  motive  had  these  men  ?  Surely  they  were  the  most  extraordinary 
false  witnesses  who  ever  lived.  What  were  their  morals?  2.  If  we  suppose  that 
they  were  mistMken  about  this  matter,  we  must  suspect  their  witness  about  every- 
thing else ;  and  the  only  logical  result  is  to  give  up  the  New  Testament  altogether. 
III.  Faith  becomes  delusion.  1.  It  is  the  belief  of  a  lie.  Take  this  home  to  your- 
selves :  if  He  did  not  literal  y  rise,  this  faith  of  yours,  that  gives  you  c  mfort, 
which  has  renewed  you  in  heart  and  life,  which  you  believe  is  leading  you  home  to 
heaven,  must  be  abandoned  ;  it  is  fixed  on  a  falsehood.  2.  The  trial  will  be  too 
great  for  faith  to  endure,  sim-e  it  has  for  the  very  keystone  of  the  arch  the  resur- 
rection o£  Christ  from  the  dead.  If  He  did  not  rise,  your  faith  rests  on  what  never 
happened;  and  ceriainly  your  faiih  will  not  bear  that  trial.  When  you  are  sure 
that  "  the  Lord  is  risen  inde^  d,"  then  you  feel  that  there  is  something  beneath 
your  foot  that  does  not  stir.  IV.  Ye  are  yet  is  your  sins.  For  then — 1.  Tuere 
is  no  atonement  made.  Christ  died,  and  by  His  death  obt-iined  the  full  di-charge 
of  all  onr  obligaiions.  But  His  rising  again  was  the  token  that  He  had  discharged 
the  whole  of  the  dread  liabilities.  2.  There  is  no  life  for  those  who  are  in  Christ. 
If  He  were  still  slumbering  in  the  grave,  where  would  have  been  the  life  that  now 
makes  us  joyful,  and  now  makes  us  asj)ire  after  heavenly  things?  V.  All  the 
PIOUS  dead  have  perished.  1.  One  phrase  must  be  explained  by  the  previous  one  ; 
if  Christ  is  not  risen,  they  are  yet  in  their  sins.  They  died,  and  they  told  ns  that 
they  were  bloo  l-washed  and  forgiven;  but  if  Christ  rose  not  from  the  dead,  there 
is  no  saint  who  ever  died,  who  has  had  any  real  hope  ;  he  has  di^d  under  a 
delusion,  and  he  has  perished.  2.  If  Christ  be  not  raised,  the  godly  dead  are  yet 
in  th'jir  sins,  and  they  can  never  rise ;  tor,  if  Christ  did  not  rise  they  caimot, 
VI.  OaB  SOURCE  OF  JOY  IS  GONE  (vcr.  19).     1.  Believers  have  given  up  sensuous  joys. 


cnAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  415 

If  -we  consider  the  mirth  of  the  worldliDg  to  be  no  better  than  the  husks  of  swine, 
and  there  be  no  b'cad  for  ns,  in  tlie  fact  that  Christ  ro?e  from  the  dead,  then  we 
iire  hungry  indeed.  2.  We  have  now  learned  superior  things — holiness,  comninnion 
with  God.  Now  if,  after  having  tasted  these  superior  joys,  they  all  turn  out  to  be 
nothing,  then  we  are  indeed  of  h11  men  the  most  miserable.  3.  We  have  had  hiph 
hopes  that  have  made  our  hearts  leap  lor  joy.  We  have  been  transported  with  the 
full  conviction  that  our  eyes  "  shall  see  the  King  in  His  beauty,"  etc.,  and  if  that 
be  not  suie,  then  ate  we  of  all  uien  the  most  miserable.  Conclusion :  Everything 
hinges  upon  a  fact,  and  if  that  is  not  a  fact,  it  is  all  up  with  us.  1.  Our  eternal 
holies  do  not  depend  upon  our  moral  condition  ;  for  tliese  luen  in  Corinth  would 
not  have  been  better  or  worse  if  Christ  had  not  risen  from  the  dead.  The  reason 
of  your  being  safe  is  not  the  result  of  what  you  are,  but  of  whut  He  did.  2.  The 
great  hope  you  have  does  not  Iringe  even  upon  your  spiritual  state.  You  must 
lie  born  again ;  but  still,  your  ultimate  hope  is  not  in  what  you  are  spiritually,  but 
in  what  He  is.  2.  Your  being  forgiven  and  saved  depends  not  upon  your  sincerity 
and  your  earnestness.  You  may  be  veiy  sincere,  and  very  earnest,  and  yet  be 
wrong  all  the  while.  (C.  II.  Spurijeon.)  If  there  he  no  resurrection.,  icliat  then  ? — 
The  method  vhich  the  apostle  employs  is  that  known  as  the  argument  from  the 
absurdity  of  the  contrary  supp;>siti(>n.  He  points  out  five  sucb  absurdities.  I. 
Christ  Himself  is  still  dead  (ver.  13).  The  suborned  report  of  the  lloman 
guard  is  true,  the  Sanhedrin  after  all  is  triuttiphant,  ye  are  worshipping  a  corpse. 
II.  The  gospel  is  a  delcsion  (vers.  14,17).  1.  "Vain  is  our  preaciiing."  2. 
■"Vain  also  is  your  faith.''  Ye  have  been  putting  your  trust  in  a  myth.  3.  "  Ye 
ai'e  still  in  your  sins."  The  j)roof  that  Jesus  is  the  Saviour  lies  in  His  resurrection 
(Rom.  i.  4) ;  but  if  Jesus  has  not  been  raised,  then  He  is  not  the  Son  of  God — you 
have  no  Saviour,  your  fate  is  still  among  the  unforgiven.  III.  The  apostles  are 
LIARS  (ver.  15).  Observe  how  St.  Paul  puts  his  own  personal  veracity  and  that  of  his 
fellow  apostles  into  direct  issue.  IV.  The  saintly  are  lost  (ver.  18).  If  it  is  the  fact 
that  there  can  be  no  resurrection  of  the  dead,  then  Christian  morality  is  a  failure. 
Tlie  Heavenly  Father  puts  no  differ ence  between  His  children  and  the  beasts  that 
perish.  V.  Tn«  lifk  ix  Christ  is  a  MisiiEY  (ver.  19.)  To  profess  Chri-t  means 
self-denial,  persecution,  martyrdom.  Moreover,  Christianity  awakens  within  us 
loftiest  aspirations  which  can  never  be  satisfied  in  this  world.  But  if  there  is  no 
resurrection,  then  we  Christians  are  of  all  men  the  most  to  be  pitied.  [G.  D. 
Boardman,   D.IJ.)         Supposing  Jesus  he  not  raised  from  the  d  ad,  xchat  then  7 — 

I.  As  TO  THE  apostles.  We  are  "false  witnesses  " — liars,  the  whole  twelve  of  us. 
Peter  heard  Him  say,  "  Lovest  thou  Me  ?  "  I  heard  Him  ask,  "Why  persecutest  thou 
Me?  "  We  have  risked  our  lives  for  the  pleasure  of  telling  a  lie  which  has  landed 
us  in  poverty  and  disgrace.  What  do  you  take  us  for  ?  Men  now  try  hard  to  find 
some  standing-place  between  the  assertion  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ  of  God,  and 
positive  denial  of  His  claims.  They  talk  of  His  "moral  influence";  what!  the 
moral  influence  of  an  impostor?  Jesus  claimed  a  place  which  no  ordinary  man 
can  claim  without  blasphemy.     Yet  we  never  accuse  Him  of  blasphemy  or  madness. 

II.  As  TO  THE  DISCIPLES.  1.  Thcii's  was  an  empty  faith,  and  they  were  yet  in  their 
sins.  An  empty  or  void  faith  is  one  which  has  no  centre,  an  empty  thing  like  a 
soap-bubble,  a  fllmy  something  floating  in  vacancy.  For  faith  must  have  a  person 
to  whom  to  cling.  Faith  towards  God  will  be  strong  or  weak  according  to  our 
■conception  of  what  God  is.  But  if  God  sent  Christ  into  this  woild,  and  then 
treated  Him  so  as  the  Crucifixion  indicates,  what  kind  of  a  God  is  that  to  trust  in? 
What  an  appalling  ni'stery  that  the  Creator,  whom  we  call  Father,  should  evolve 
into  being  such  a  soul  as  that  of  Jesus,  simply  to  dash  it  into  nothingness  !  No 
doubt  of  this  l)eing  a  devil's  world  then.  2.  They  were  yet  in  their  sins.  The 
idea  that  Christ  lifts  us  out  of  our  sins,  is  one  of  which  we  cannot  make  too  much. 
But  if  man  is  to  die  the  death  of  the  swine,  x\hy  may  he  not  live  the  life  of  the 
swine  ?  III.  As  to  those  who  have  fallen  asleep.  They  are  perished.  Fallen 
asleep  in  Christ !  Suggestive  word — so  full  of  rest  and  quietude !  But  those  of 
whom  we  thus  tliink  are  not  in  this  beatific  state.  If  Christ  be  not  risen,  they 
are  perished.  We  cannot  be'ieve  that.  Our  loved  ones  are  pone  hence.  Their 
going  was  a  loss  to  us  ;  oh,  h<'W  jjreat !  Where  is  he?  she  ?  The  idea  of  immor- 
tality is  in  my  mind.  How  did  it  get  there  ?  How  could  it  pet  into  a  mind  not 
preadapted  to  receive  it?  Then  this  intuition  is  corroborated  by  Jesus  the  Christ. 
"  In  My  Father's  house  are  many  mnnsions  ;  if  it  were  not  so,  I  would  have  told 
you."  "Now  see,"  says  one,  "  what  these  sceptics  require  us  to  believe  :  that  all 
those  who  have  shed  a  sunshine  upon  earth,  and  whose  affections  were  so  pure  and 


416  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

good  that  they  seemed  to  tell  you  of  eternity,  perished  utterly  as  the  se'fish  and 
impure  !  You  are  required  to  believe  that  the  pure  and  wise  of  this  world  have  been 
wrong,  and  the  selfish  and  sensual  all  right."  But  how  can  we  believe  it?  The 
thing  is  impossible.  The  resurrection  of  Jesus  the  Christ  says  that  they  who  have 
fallen  asleep  are  not  perished ;  they  are  in  His  keeping  to  whom  all  power  i^  given 
in  heaven  and  on  earth.  Perished !  Why,  even  the  material  does  not  perish ;  it 
changes,  but   that  is   all.     Why  the  spiritual  ?      {Reiien  Thomas,  D.D.)  The 

certainty  of  the  resurrection  of  Christ: — The  religion  founded  by  Jesus  Christ 
has  mai'y  teachings  in  common  with  other  religious  of  the  world  ;  spiritual  teach- 
ings which  concern  the  i-elaiionship  of  God  to  man,  and  moral  teachings  which 
concein  the  relationship  of  man  to  his  fellow-men.  Eminent  among  the  truths 
thus  exclusively  prop  r  to  Christianity  is  tlie  truth  of  the  resurrection  from  tlie 
dead.  The  resurieciion  is  » ssentiaLy  and  notably  a  distinctive  Christian  truth. 
Other  religions  of  the  world  have  entertained,  with  more  or  less  clearness,  notions 
of  the  immortality  of  the  soul.  Tlie  ancient  religion  of  Egypt  (as  we  learn  from 
the  custom  of  careful  and  costly  embalming,  from  the  erection  of  massive  sepul- 
chral pyramids,  and  from  the  tea  h  ngs  of  the  Eook  of  the  Dead)  manifested  a 
cousciousness  not  only  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  but  also  of  the  ultimate 
re-union  of  the  soul  with  its  revivified  body.  But  none  of  these  ancient  teachings 
are  comparable,  either  in  scope  or  perspicuity  or  inspiring  power,  with  the  Christian 
revelation  concerning  the  risint;  from  the  dead.  None  of  them  unfold,  as  does  St. 
Paul  (chap,  xv.),  the  characteristics  of  the  risen  body  and  the  risen  life.  And, 
what  is  more  import:mt  than  all  else,  it  is  Christianity,  and  Christianity  alone, 
which  has  furnished  to  the  world  a  historic  illustration  and  example  of  the  risen 
life.  No  doubt  there  are  uoany  earnest,  conscientious  persons  who  find  great, 
sometimes  even  insuperable,  difficulty  in  accepting  the  fact  of  Christ's  resunection. 
It  is  a  fact  so  wonderful,  so  awful,  so  glorious,  so  altogether  uniijne  in  majesty 
and  sublimity  :  it  is,  moreover,  a  fact  so  utterly  unlike  anything  which  the  world 
has  ever  witnessed  either  before  or  since  ;  both  science  and  religion  are  helplessly 
unable  to  supply  any  parallel  to  it — that  multitudes  of  thoughtful  people  shrink 
from  accepting,  and  even  utterly  reject  the  fact.  Yet,  while  fully  allowing  the 
possibility  of  hone-tly  doubting,  or  even  denying,  the  resurrection,  still  it  seems  to 
me  that  the  dilficulties  of  doubt  are  greater  than  the  difficulties  of  faith  ;  the  diffi- 
culties of  denial  greater  than  the  dilliculties  of  accep:ance.  1.  For,  first  of  all,  it 
is  clear  that  the  course  of  the  world  is  a  course  of  j^rogress — progiess  frequently 
hindered  by  lapses  and  retrogressions.  It  is  surely,  then,  natural — and  none  the 
less  natural  because  of  the  retrogressions  of  Mohammedanism — to  believe  that  this 
great  law  of  progress  and  ascent  should  applv  to  religious  knowledge  and  religious 
conduct  and  religious  aspiration  ;  and  that  Christianity  should  contain  illumina- 
tions brighter  and  more  heavenly  than  any  of  the  religions  which  preceded  it.  2. 
The  inherent  wonder  of  the  resurrection  is  not  greater  than  the  inherent  wonder  of 
many  every-dHy  occuirences.  In  itself,  and  apart  from  the  frequency  of  its  occur- 
rence, a  birth  is  more  marvellous  tlian  a  resurrection  ;  it  is  more  marvellous  tliat 
a  life  should  begin  to  be  than  that  its  existence  should  be  renewed  and  prolonged. 
If  resurrections  were  as  fre(iuent  as  births,  births  would  be  considered  more  marvel- 
lous than  resurrections.  3.  But  the  non-recurrence  of  the  resurrection,  instead  of 
being  unreasonable  and  unnatural,  is  just  the  opposite.  Fur  why  has  there  been 
only  one  resurrection  in  the  long  history  of  mankind  ?  Simply  because,  during  the 
whole  course  of  that  long  history,  there  has  been  only  one  Christ.  The  resurrection 
was  as  natural,  as  necessary,  to  the  Christ,  as  death  is  natural  and  necessHiy  to 
us.  The  perfections  of  His  holiness,  and  the  prerogatives  of  His  Sonship,  made 
His  corruption  impossible  and  His  resurrection  a  necessity.  If  the  Son  of  God  has, 
indeed,  taken  human  flesh,  then,  I  ask  you,  which  is  the  more  reasonable  and  the  more 
credible  supposition — to  believe  that  His  body  never  saw  corruption,  or  to  believe  that 
His  biidy  is  dead,  eternally  dead  ?  4.  This,  moreover,  is  our  answer  to  those  who 
affirm  that  the  resurrection  of  Christ  goes  contrary  to  the  laws  of  nature.  For  who, 
we  ask,  shall  say  what  was  the  law  of  nature  in  the  instance  of  the  Christ?  If 
thei-e  had  been  many  Christs  and  only  one  of  them  had  risen,  while  all  the  others 
had  turned  to  corruption,  then  we  should  rightly  have  deemed  that  the  one  resur- 
rection was  contrary  to  the  laws  of  nature  operating  upon  the  Christs.  But  as  tlieie 
has  been  only  one  Christ,  we  have  no  means  of  judging  what  were  the  laws  of  nature 
in  His  case,  except  from  what  actually  happened  to  Him.  5.  And  what  is  the 
alternative  of  rejecting  the  resurrection?  The  alternative  is  that  Christianity  is 
founded   on   a  falsehood ;  and  that  Christ  and  His  apostles   are   deceivers  and 


CHAP.  XV.]  J.   CORINTHIANS.  417 

untrue.      {Canon  Diggle.)  Terrible   conclusions   resultiiui  froii.   the    denial   of 

two  great  gospel  facts  : — Conclusions  resulting  from  the  denial  of — I.  The 
GKNEKAL  RESDiuiECTioN.  1.  Tlie  nou-resurrection  of  Christ.  What  is  true  of 
the  whole  is  true  of  all  the  parts.  If  no  man  can  rise  fioni  the  dead,  then 
Christ  is  still  numbered  amongst  the  dead.  2.  That  departed  Christians 
are  no  more.  Those  thousands  who  accepted  Christ,  lived  accordiog  to  His 
teaching,  and  who  quitted  tliis  world  have  perished — can  you  believe  it?  Are 
they  quenched  in  eternal  midnight  ?  3.  That  there  is  no  more  pitiable  condition  in 
this  life  than  that  of  Christians.  It  is  implied — (1)  That  there  are  men  in  a  pitiable 
condition  on  this  earth.  ("2)  That  the  pitiable  condition  exists  in  different  degrees. 
(3)  That  the  degree  of  pitiableness  is  regulated  by  hope.  JMan  is  alwavs  hoping, 
and  therefore  enduring  one  of  the  greatest  elements  of  suffering,  viz.,  disappoint- 
ment. (4)  That  the  hope  of  a  Christian  if  false  will  make  him,  of  all  men,  tlie  most 
to  be  pitied.  The  higher  the  object  of  our  hope,  and  the  more  of  the  soul  that  goes 
into  it,  the  more  overwhelmingly  crushmg  will  be  the  disappointment.  The  man 
who  has  thrown  his  whole  soul  Into  Christianity,  and  who  reaches  a  point  when  he 
is  convinced  of  its  imijosture,  Is  at  that  moment  of  all  "men  the  most  miserable." 
II.  Chiust's  RESHKiiEcrioN.  1.  That  apostolic  Christianity  is  vain.  (1)  It  Is  an 
empty  phantom,  a  worthless  fiction.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  was  the  foundation 
stone  m  the  temjale  of  Paul's  teaching.  Take  that  stone  away,  It  falls  and  beeomes 
worthless  rubbish.  (2)  We  are  Impostors ;  can  you  believe  this?  What  motives 
have  we  to  impos-e?  Either  supposition  is  eternally  inadmi'-sible.  2.  That  the 
faith  of  the  disciples  was  vain.  What  a  wreck  of  faith  Is  Involved  in  the  denial  of 
Christ's  resurrection  !  Vain  Is — (1)  Faith  In  tlie  credibility  of  historic  testimony. 
On  what  stronger  historical  testimony  can  any  fact  rest  than  that  of  the  resurrection 
ol  Christ  ?  (2)  Faith  in  the  accuracy  of  philosophic  deduction.  The  rapid  progress 
of  Christianity  in  the  Eoinan  Empire  In  Its  first  stages,  and  Its  subsequent  influence 
throughout  the  world,  reveal  a  mass  of  phenomena  which  you  cannot  account  for  If 
you  deny  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  (3)  Faith  in  the  moral  value  of  characler. 
Did  a  nobler  character  than  Christ's  ever  exist?  And  yet  if  He  rose  not  then  is  He 
an  impostor.  (4)  Faith  in  the  righteous  government  of  God.  If  a  Being  so 
transcendently  excellent  as  Christ  is  to  be  crushe  1  for  ever  in  the  grave,  then  where 
is  the  justice  of  Heaven?  3.  That  the  followers  of  Christ  are  still  in  their  sins. 
But  the  Christians  at  Corinth  were  conscious  that  they  had  got  out  of  their  sins. 
"  Such  were  some  of  you,  but  ye  are  washed,''  etc.  Consciousness,  the  highest 
ultimate  argument,  protested  against  Paul's  statement  that  they  were  still  in  their 
slus,  hence  It  goes  to  verify  the  fact  of  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  (D.  2'hoimis,D.D.) 
If  there  be  no  resurrection  of  the  dead,  then  is  Christ  not  risen. — If  there  be  no  resur- 
rection Clirist  not  risen  : — Paul  refused  to  consider  Christ's  resurrection  as  a  miracle 
in  the  sense  of  Its  being  exceptional  and  aside  from  the  usual  experience  of  man. 
On  the  contrary,  he  accepts  it  as  the  type  to  which  every  man  Is  to  be  conformed. 
Precedent  in  time,  exceptional  possibly  In  some  of  its  accidental  accompaniments 
it  may  be,  but  nevertheless  as  truly  in  the  line  of  human  development  as  birth,  and 
growth,  and  death.  Christ  being  man  must  submit  to  the  conditions  and  experience 
of  men  in  all  essentials.  In  all  that  characterises  man  as  human.  And  therefore,  if 
resurrection  be  not  a  normal  human  experience,  Christ  has  not  risen.  The  time  at 
•which  resurrection  takes  place,  and  the  Interval  elapsing  between  death  and  resur- 
rection, Paul  makes  nothing  of.  A  child  may  live  but  three  days,  but  It  Is  not  on 
tbat  account  any  the  less  human  than  If  he  had  lived  his  threescore  years  and  ten. 
Similarly  the  fact  of  Christ's  resurrection  identifies  Him  with  the  human  race, 
■while  the  shortness  of  the  interval  elapsing  between  death  and  resurrection  does 
not  separate  Him  from  man,  for  in  point  of  fact  lire  Interval  will  be  less  In  the  case 
of  many.  Both  here  and  elsewhere  Paul  looks  upon  Christ  as  the  representative 
man,  the  one  In  whom  we  can  see  the  ideal  of  manhood.  If  any  of  our  own  friends 
should  die,  and  after  death  should  appear  to  us  alive,  a  strong  probability  that  we 
too  should  live  through  death  would  Inevitably  be  Impressed  on  our  mind.  But 
when  Christ  rises  this  probability  becomes  a  certainty,  because  He  is  the 
type  of  humanity,  the  representative  person.  As  Paul  liere  says,  "  He  Is  the 
fiistfrults  of  them  that  sleep."  W'hen  the  farmer  pulls  the  fh»t  ripe  ears  of 
whtat  and  carries  them  home,  it  is  not  for  their  own  sake  he  values  them, 
but  because  they  are  a  specimen  and  sample  of  the  whole  crop ;  and  when 
God  raised  Christ  from  tlu^  dead,  the  glory  of  the  event  consisted  in  its  being 
a  pledgH  and  specimen  of  the  triumph  of  mankind  over  death.  (71/.  Dads,  D.D.I) 
And  if  Christ  be  not  risen,  then  is  oiir  preaching  vain,  and  your  faith  is  also  vain. 
VOL.  ir.  27 


41S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOE.  [chap.  xv. 

— Bcverse  the  proposition: — I.  Pbeaching  is  not  in  vain.  3.  It  has  power.  2. 
Effects  moral  miracles.  II.  Faith  is  not  in  vain.  It  brings — 1.  Comfort.  2.  Pardon. 
3.  Life.  III.  Therefore  Chmst  IS  RISEN.  {J.  Lyth,  D.I).)  What  comes  of  a  dead 
Christ  :■ — We  do  not  prove  that  an  event  has  hajipened  by  showing  the  advantages 
of  believing  that  it  has.  Paul  here  deals  with  tlie  repults  that  would  follow  from 
the  denial  of  a  Eesurrection  to  show,  not  that  it  has  taken  place,  but  that  tbe  belief 
of  it  is  fundamental  to  Christianity.  With  the  resurrection  of  Christ— I.  The 
whole  gospel  stands  or  falls.  It  is  emptied  of  its  contents.  There  is  nothing 
in  it.  A  dead  Christ  makes  a  hollow  gospel ;  a  living  Christ  makes  a  full  one.  If 
the  Eesurrection  goes — 1.  The  supernatural  goes  ;  if  the  Eesurrection  remains,  the 
door  is  opened  for  the  miraculous.  We  hear  that  all  miracle  is  impossible.  The 
historical  fact  of  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  shatters  all  such  contention. 
That  fact  is  the  key  of  the  jDosition.  Like  some  great  fortress  standing  at  the 
mouth  of  the  pass,  as  long  as  it  holds  out,  the  storm  of  war  is  rolled  back  ;  if  it 
yields,  all  is  surrendered.  2.  All  the  peculiarity  of  Christ's  nature  goes  with  it. 
His  life  is  full  of  claims  to  a  unique  position.  Is  He  in  the  grave  still?  If  so, 
there  is  no  use  in  mincing  the  matter,  Jesus  Christ's  talk  about  Himself  was  false. 
But  if  He  has  risen,  then  He  is  "  declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  by  the  resurrection 
from  the  dead."  3.  The  special  character  and  efficacy  of  His  death  goes.  If  He 
lies  in  the  tomb,  then  it  is  idle  to  talk  of  sacrifice  for  sin  ;  but  if  He  has  coiue 
forth  from  the  grave,  then  we  have  the  great  Divine  attestation  to  the  arceptable- 
ness  of  His  expiation.  So,  if  all  these  things  go,  what  is  left  is  not  Christianity: 
yet  a  great  many  think  all  is  left — viz.,  the  beauty  of  Christ's  words,  the  loveliness 
of  His  character,  His  position  as  our  Pattern.  Yet,  says  Paul,  if  that  is  all  I  have 
to  preach,  I  have  notliing  but  an  empty  shell  to  preach.  II.  The  character  of  the 
WITNESSES  stands  OR  FALLS.  The  apostlc  puts  his  finger  ujjon  the  real  state  of  the 
case  when  he  says,  "  This  is  the  question:  Are  we  liars  or  are  we  not  ?  "  He  points 
out,  too,  the  paljoable  improbability,  when  he  says  that,  if  so,  they  are  "  false  witnesses 
of  God  " — men  believing  themselves  to  be  servants  of  the  God  of  truth,  and  think- 
ing to  advance  His  kingdom  by  telling  a  monstrous  fakehood.  But  the  vulgar  old 
theory  has  been  long  abandoned,  and  now  the  men  that  least  accept  the  ajjostles' 
theory  are  those  who  abound  in  compliment  to  their  moral  elevation,  to  the  purity 
and  beauty  of  their  religious  character.  But  Paul  would  have  said  to  them,  "  I  do 
not  want  your  compliments  ;  my  business  is  to  tell  a  plain  story.  Do  you  believe 
me,  or  do  you  not  ?  "  They  talk  about  illusions.  Strange  illusions  that  sprung  up 
in  a  soil  that  had  nothing  in  it  to  prepare  for  than!  There  was  no  expectation 
which  might  have  become  parent  of  the  belief.  Illusions  shared  by  five  hundred 
people  at  once !  We  are  shut  up  to  the  alternative,  either  Christ  is  risen  or  these 
noble  lives  of  self-sacrifice  and  lofty  morality  are  the  spawn  of  a  lie.  III.  The 
FAITH  OF  the  CHRISTIAN  STANDS  OR  FALLS.  Twicc  the  apostle  says,  according  to 
A. v.,  "Your  faith  is  vain."  But  the  two  words  are  not  the  same.  The  first  means 
"  empty."  The  second  (ver.  17)  means  "  having  no  effect."  A  dead  Christ  makes 
— 1.  An  empty  faith.  There  is  nothing  for  faith  to  lay  hold  of.  It  is  like  a 
di'owning  man  grasping  a  rope's  end  swinging  over  the  side  of  the  ship  which  is 
^  loose  at  the  other  end  and  gives  ;  or  like  some  poor  creature  falling  down  the  face 
of  a  precii^ice,  and  clutching  at  a  tuft  of  grass,  which  comes  away  in  his  hand.  A 
dead  Clirist  is  no  object  for  faith.  Faith  is  empty  of  contents  unless  it  grasps  the 
risen  Lord  ;  and  if  it  lays  hold  of  Him,  it  is  solid  and  full.  2.  A  powerless  faith. 
A  religion  which  does  not  bring  conscious  deliverance  from  sin,  both  as  guilt  and 
as  tendency,  is  not  worth  calling  a  religion.  Unless  for  the  Eesurrection,  we  have 
no  ground  of  belief  in  the  expiation  and  sacrifice  of  the  Cross  ;  and  uuless  we  have 
a  faith  in  a  Christ  that  lives  to  help  and  quicken  and  purify  us,  we  shall  never 
really  be  delivered  from  the  dominion  of  our  sins,  nor  live  a  life  of  purity  and  of 
righteousness.  IV.  The  heaven  of  Christ's  servants  stands  or  falls.  A  dead 
Christ — 1.  Means  dead  Christians  (ver.  18).  The  one  thing  that  makes  immor- 
tality certain  is  the  fact  of  Christ's  resurrection.  A  living  Head  means  living 
members  ;  a  dead  Head  means  members  dead.  2.  Makes  deluded  Christians  (ver. 
19).  People  say,  "  What  a  low  notion  that  is !  Would  it  not  be  better  to  be  a 
Christian  than  not  if  there  were  no  future  life  ?  Did  not  the  Stoic  philosophers, 
•who  said,  "  Virtue  is  its  own  reward,"  reach  a  higher  level  than  this  apostle  ?  I 
do  not  think  so.  Notice,  he  does  not  say  they  are  most  to  be  pitied,  because  of 
any  sorrows  or  trouble  that  they  have  had  here,  but  because  the  nobler  the  hope 
the  more  tragic  its  disappointment.  And  of  all  the  tragedies  of  life  there  would  be 
none  so  great  as  this,  that  Christian  men  cherishing  such  aspirations  should  all  the 


■CHAP.  XT.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  419 

while  have  been  clutchinp;  a  phantom,  grasping  mists.  If  we,  journeying  across 
the  desert,  are  only  cheated  by  mirage  when  we  think  we  see  the  shining  battle- 
ments of  the  eternal  city,  which  are  nothing  l>ut  hot  air  dancing  in  empty  space, 
surely  none  are  more  to  be  pitied  than  we.  On  the  otber  hand,  a  living  Ciirist 
turns  these  h"pes  into  certainties,  and  makes  us,  not  the  most  pitiable,  but  the 
most  blessed  of  the  sous  of  men.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Consequence'^  of  donjiiiij 
■the  resurrection  of  Christ : — If  Christ  be  not  risen,  then  vain  is  our  faith — I.  In 
THE  CREDIBILITY  OF  HIST  iKiCAL  TESTIMONY.  If  their  testimony  is  not  to  be  taken, 
history  is  worth  nothing.  II.  In  the  cektainty  of  philosophical  deduction. 
The  rapid  prevalence  of  Christianity  in  the  Roman  Empir,e,  in  its  first  era,  and  its 
■subsequent  infiuences  tbroughout  the  world,  present  a  mass  of  phenomena,  of 
wliii-h  you  have  no  philosophic  cause,  apart  from  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  Deny 
that,  and  you  find  all  history  teeming  with  effects  of  which  you  can  find  no  suffi- 
■cient  cause.  III.  In  the  worth  of  human  character.  Cliara-ter  is  the  founda- 
tion of  confidence ;  and  earth  never  had  .such  a  character  to  inspire  human  con- 
fidence as  that  of  Christ.  But  if  Hemse  not  from  the  dead,  then  He  is  an  impostor, 
and  there  is  no  character  for  us  to  trust.  IV.  In  a  future  state  of  existence. 
Whatever  probable  evidence  we  may  discover  of  a  future  stifp,  its  power  depends 
on  Christ's  resurrection.  V.  In  the  moral  government  of  God.  If  a  being  like 
•Christ  is  to  be  smitten  and  crushed  for  ever  by  wickedness,  then  where  is  Divine 
justice?  VI.  In  the  power  of  moral  exhortatiun.  "If  ye  then  be  risen  with 
Clu-ist,  seek  those  things,"  &c.  This  is  the  most  powerful  of  all  exho'tations,  yet 
it  is  delusion  if  Christ  be  not  risen.     (IF.  Johnson  Fox.}  If  the  dead  rise  not, 

then  is  not  Christ  raised. — Chnsfs  resurrection  the  {]ronnd  of  belief  in  our  own: 
— Few  of  us  may  have  seen  an  Oriental  pearl,  and  still  fewer  a  collection  of  such 
gems,  but  we  have  no  difficulty  in  believing,  when  we  see  one,  that  such  also  are  the 
others,  win  ther  in  the  re]>'sitoiies  of  the  wealthy,  or  even  within  the  shells  of  the 
pearl-pioducng  animals  living  at  this  moment  at  the  bottom  of  the  eastern  seas. 
We  hold  in  our  hands  a  golden  sovereign  coined  in  the  royal  mint,  and  from  its 
obvious  appearance  an'l  properties  we  infer  the  facts  of  its  origin  and  value,  and 
never  question,  or  think  of  questioning,  the  statement  when  made  to  us,  that  there 
are  millions  of  such  coins  stored  up  in  the  cellais  of  the  Bank  of  Enuland.  So, 
says  the  ap  istle.  we  ought,  to  do  with  r^spict  to  the  doctrines  of  the  Resurrection. 
The  resurrection  of  Christ  is  not  a  solitary  instance  ;  it  is  one  of  a  class.  It  is 
evident  that,  if  Christ  has  been  raised  from  the  dead,  there  can  be  no  likeness  or 
congruity  bet'.veen  Ilim  and  His  people,  unless  in  these  respe(!ts  they  are  assimilated 
to  Him.  The  stock  must  be  like  the  sample — the  coins  in  the  Treasury  to  those  in 
circulation — the  stars  hid,  it  may  be,  behind  a  cloud,  similar  to  that  which  shines 
in  the  clear  heavens.     {J.  Coclirnne,  A.M.)  And  if  Christ  be  not  raised,  your 

faith  is  vain ;  ye  are  yet  in  your  sins. — Logicnl  coiiscqueiices  of  rejecting  Chnstidnitij : 
— There  are  two  kinds  of  doubteis  :  those  who  wisli  to  doubt,  and  seek  materials  to 
strengthen  their  unbelief;  and  those  who  would  be  glad  to  believe,  but  are  per- 
plexed with  doubts  that  they  do  not  cherish.  It  is  imp  issihle  to  assist  the  first  of 
these.  Their  difficulty  is  not  with  the  head,  but  with  the  heart.  I  shall  therefore 
pursue  a  line  nf  thought  adapted  to  assist  the  honest  doubter.  The  text  begins, 
not  with  an  afVirmaticn,  but  witii  a  question  ;  so  I  ask,  What  will  follow  from  the 
assutiiptioi)  that  the  gospel  of  Christ  is  untrue?  I.  That  God  has  never,  in  any 
supernatural  way,  spoKiiN  TO  MAN.  1.  There  is  no  other  religion  that  can  be  put 
into  competition  for  a  moment  with  the  gospel  as  having  claims  to  a  supernatuial 
origin.  Of  course,  Judaism  you  would  reject ;  and  Mohammedanism,  which  is  a 
mixture  of  Judaism,  Cliristianity,  and  heathenism,  in  about  equal  proportions.  2. 
We  come  to  systems  of  p^iilosophy.  Plato  differed  from  Socrates  in  a  grcHt  variety 
of  modes.  And  what  was  the  relation  of  Aristotle  to  Plato  ?  But  what  is  the 
■condition  of  affairs  to-day?  A  friend,  who  has  been  reading  nothing  hut  philosophy 
for  twentv  years,  testified  to  me  that  h'^.  has  not  in  all  his  library  two  works  which 
substantially  agree.  But  upon  the  assumption  that  philosophers  do  agree,  how  can 
they  be  anthentica'ed  ?  Can  a  system  of  philosophy  span  the  river  that  separates 
us  from  tht^  future  state?  Is  it  possible  for  a  system  of  pliilosophy,  without  ins  ruc- 
tion from  God,  to  interpiet  propeily  the  plans  of  God,  involving  the  wh'de  course 
of  human  life  and  the  final  adjustm-nts  of  eternity?  And  there  will  be  nothing 
supernatural  in  it.  3.  Now,  let  us  look  at  it  upon  the  basis  of  Nature.  J.  S.  Mill 
logically  atgued  that  Nature  is  a  contradictory  witness.  Look  at  her  on  one  side, 
and  she  seems  to  say,  "  The  Being  who  made  us  is  good."  Look  at  her  on  the 
•other  side,  and  she  seems  to  say,  "  He  is  not  good."     II.  The  most  elevating 


420  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

PRECEPTS  WE  HAVE  ARE  wixnouT  A  DivixE  SANCTION.  Take,  e.g.,  the  Golden  Eule. 
Some  say  that  it  cau  be  found  outside  the  Bible,  and  I  will  not  deny  it ;  b>it  if  it  is, 
it  is  found  without  a  Divine  sanction.  No  man,  according  to  the  Scriptures,  can 
love  his  neigr.bour  as  himself  unless  he  first  loves  God  and  recognises  the  Father- 
hood of  God  and  tlie  brotherhood  of  man.  Now  take  the  specific  applications  of 
the  Golden  Rule.  If  the  gospel  be  not  true,  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  is  a  purely 
human  production.  "  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit."  Why?  "  For  theirs  is  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  "  ;  and  there  is  no  kingdom  of  heaven  if  the  gospel  be  not  true. 
III.  The  noblest  exa:\ipi.es  are  fictitious.  The  Book  of  Job  must  take  its  place 
by  the  side  of  Shelley's  "Queen  Mab,"  as  a  mere  creation  of  human  fancy.  The 
character  of  Christ  is  but  a  rhapsody.  Paul's  character  is  entirely  inexplicable ; 
and  even  Peter  must  be  set  down  as  a  myth  if  the  gospel  be  not  true.  IV.  It  is 
FOLLY  TO  THINK  OF  PARDON  FOR  SIN.  In  nature  there  is  no  proof,  of  any  kind,  of 
forgiveness.  If  the  gospel  is  not  true,  a  man  cannot  incur  guilt,  and  therefore  may 
dismiss  the  idea  that  he  is  guilty.  It  his  conscience  says  he  is,  he  can  say  to  it, 
"  You  are  a  presumptuous  usurper.  '1  here  is  no  law,  and  I  cannot  be  guilty." 
But  men  cannot  do  that ;  they  know  that  they  are  guilty.  But  the  man  who  bas 
a  sense  of  guilt,  if  the  Bible  be  not  true,  has  no  power  to  secure  its  obliteration 
from  his  conscience.  V.  Thkre  is  no  regenerative  influence.  When  a  man 
for  twenty-live  years  has  tried  to  keep  gooii  resolutions,  and  has  broken  them, 
and  has  to  acknowledge  at  the  end  of  that  time  that  he  has  made  little  pro- 
gress in  purifying  his  heart,  he  will  do  one  of  two  things,  according  to  his 
temperament :  lie  will  sadly  rtlinquish  the  effort  to  obtain  moral  purity,  or  he  will 
continue  on  without  hope  or  any  inward  peace.  The  gospel  of  Christ  declares  that 
there  is  a  regenerative  influence.  Now,  if  the  gospel  be  untrue,  there  is  none  such; 
consequently,  to  doubt  the  gospel  is  to  dnubt  wheiher  there  be  anything  which  can 
possibly  make  men  pure  and  good.  VI  There  is  no  comfort  in  trouble.  It 
has  been  said  by  a  French  writer  that  philosophy  conquers  past  and  future  evils. 
Dr.  Johnson  represents  Easselas  as  goaig  to  iear  a  philosopher,  who  taught  him 
how  to  subdue  liis  passions  and  to  conquer  triiils  without  any  dii'liculty.  The  next 
day,  however,  IlMSSclas  found  the  pliilosopher  teaiing  his  hair  and  walking  up  and 
down  in  great  agony.  "  Why  this  grief?  "  asked  Piasselas.  "Oh!"  said  the  philo- 
sopher, "  my  only  daughter,  the  light  of  my  home  and  comfort  of  my  old  age,  is 
dead  !  "  "  But,  certainly,"  s:iid  Rasselas,  "  the  philosophy  which  you  so  eloquently 
descanted  on  yesterday  conifirts  >ou  now?"  "  Oh,  no,"  cried  the  philo.-opher, 
wringing  his  hands  ;  "  what  can  philo^-ofhy  say  to  me  now,  except  to  show  me  that 
my  condition  is  inevitable  iind  incurable?  "  Easselas  went  to  Imlac  and  told  him 
what  he  had  henrd,  and  he  replied,  "  They  preach  like  angels,  but  they  live  like 
men."  The  gospel  does  offer  comfoit  to  every  class  of  afflicted  persons,  and  Tom 
Moore  only  told  tlie  truth  when  he  said,  "Earth  hath  no  sorrow  that  heaven  cannot 
heal";  or,  as  I  would  say,  earth  has  no  sorrow  that  the  gosrel  does  not  offer  to 
heal.  But  if  the  gospel  be  untrue,  all  these  offers  of  consolation  are  baseless. 
VII.  There  is  no  strength  for  tejiftation.  How  is  a  man  to  subdue  his  passions 
and  propensities?  Probably  lonr-fifths  of  the  persons  who  reject  the  gospel  have 
sophisticated  themselves  into  the  belief  that  what  is  natural  cannot  be  wrong. 
But  there  are  men  who  reject  the  gospel  that  never  have  done  that,  and  they  keep 
on  through  life  struggling  and  failing.  Now  the  {/ost'el  offers  to  man  several  kinds 
of  helps.  1.  The  commands  of  Almighty  God.  2.  Promises  for  every  situation  of 
trial  and  dillicnlty.  3.  Holy  examples  of  men  of  like  passions  with  ourselves.  4. 
The  privilege  of  taking  these  commands  and  of  strengtliening  his  faith  by  them  at 
the  very  throne  of  grace.  But  if  the  gospel  be  untrue,  every  promise  and  com- 
mand in  the  Bible  may  be  thrown  aside  as  a  matter  without  any  foundation  in  fact. 
VIIE.  There  is  no  answer  to  prayer.  A  distinguished  rationalistic  preacher 
ceased  to  preach,  and  a  friend  asked  him  why  he  stopped.  Said  he,  '"I  liked  the 
preaching,  and  could  have  got  along  with  it  very  well  as  long  as  I  lived  ;  but  there 
was  one  thing  I  could  not  get  along  with  at  all,  and  that  was  prayer.  I  did  not 
expect  my  prayers  would  be  answered,  and  never  believed  they  would  ;  and  to  stand 
up  before  the  congregation  and  address  the  Deity  as  if  I  really  believed  that  prayer 
produced  a  result,  seemed  to  me  too  much  like  hypocrisy."  No  man  will  long 
pray  who  has  not  a  specific  promise  upon  which  to  rest.  IX.  The  institution  of 
5IAREIAGE  IS  IMPERILLED.  This  canuot  be  sustained  without  a  religious  sanction, 
and  never  was  in  the  history  of  this  world.  The  heaviest  strain  on  human  nature 
is  chastity,  and  it  cannot  be  sustained  unless  the  obligation  rests  upon  a  solemn 
accountability  to  God,  and  the  human  race  cannot  sustain  it  without  religious 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.   COlilNTHIANS.  421 

sanction  after  marriage,  and  never  have.  Polygimy,  on  the  one  hand,  and  either 
spiritual  or  carnal  or  free  love  on  the  other,  would  certainly  spring  up,  as  they  have 
done,  to  run  riot  all  over  the  world.  X.  Yon  uproo  f  the  whole  idea  of  foture 
ACCOUNTABILITY,  and  the  question  of  whether  a  man  will  live  or  die  becomes  a 
question  of  logic.  What  reason  is  there  why  a  man  utterly  dissatisfied  with  life 
shoulil  not  commit  suicide?  Suppose  the  case  of  a  man  who  has  lost  all  his 
friends,  his  property,  and  his  reputaiion  ?  He  is  too  old  to  begin  again.  Prove 
that  he  ought  not  to  com  nit  suicide.  I  cannot,,  unless  you  give  me  the  gospel.  You 
cannot  find  an  instance  of  a  sane,  devoted,  infelligent  Christian  ctmniitiing  suicide  ; 
but  you  can  produce  a  hundred  instances  of  irieligions  m»^n  nut  insane  committing 
suicii-le.  The  reason  men  are  committing  suicide,  and  making  such  a  trifling  thing 
of  it,  is  the  spread  of  infidelity,  the  spread  of  doubts  as  to  future  accountability. 
XI.  Everything  with  regard  to  a  future  state  of  happiness  must  be  remanded 
TO  THE  realm  of  CONJECTURE.  No  man  can  prove  a  future  state  in  any  proper 
sense  of  the  term.  If  you  could  show  it  to  be  probable,  you  could  not  determine 
the  mode  of  existence,  or  the  relation  between  the  future  and  the  present  life,  or 
get  any  means  whatever  to  do  so.  Then,  if  the  gospel  be  not  true,  let  us  face  the 
issue  and  strike  out,  "In  My  Father's  house  are  many  mansions."  Conclusion: 
Is  it  rational  to  believe  that  God  has  given  no  voice  to  man  ?  Is  it  rational  to 
believe  that  the  noblest  precepts  are  without  a  Divine  sanction,  &c.  ?  It  is  not! 
Kather  than  believe  that,  I  would  believe  "  There  is  no  God!  "  But  because  I 
cannot  say  there  is  no  (iod,  I  must  say  that  He  has  spoken  to  man  ;  and  because  I 
must  say  that,  I  must  believe  that  the  gospel  of  our  Li)rd  .Jesus  Christ  has  a  super- 
natural origin.  (J.  M.  Buckley,  D.D.)  Then  they  also  which  are  fallen  asleep 
in  Christ  are  perished. — Our  lost  ones  : — I.  Their  character.  In  Christ.  II. 
Their  condition.  "  Fallen  asleep,"  implying — 1.  Eest.  2.  Life.  3.  Hope.  III. 
Their  doo.m.  "Perished" — impossible.  Then  the  assumption  is  false  ;  Christ  is 
risen,  and  they  must  also  rise.     (J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 

Ver.  19.  If  in  this  life  only  we  have  hope  in  Christ,  we  are  of  all  men 
most  miserable.  Observe — I.  What  is  implied.  1.  That  all  men  are  miser- 
able. '2.  In  different  degrees,  but  are  comforted  by  hope.  II.  Wh\t  is 
ASSUMED.  1.  That  our  hope  in  Christ  is  false.  2.  That  it  only  extends 
to  this  life.  III.  What  is  hypothetically  asserted.  That  in  such  a  case 
we  are  subject  to  grenter — 1.  Delusion.  2.  Sacrifice.  3.  Dlsax^pointnient.  4. 
Sense  of  destitution.  IV.  What  is  the  fact.  1.  We  are  not  most  miserable. 
2.   Our  hope  is  sure.      (-/.  Lyth,  D.D.)  One  life  only  an  aryinnent  ayahist  God  : 

— If  human  life,  redeemed  by  Christ,  be  limited  to  this  world,  God  has  committed 
a  cruel  mistake  in  creating  man.  The  greatness  <^i  man  becimes  a  terrible  charge 
against  God.  He  has  created  appetites  which  He  cannot  satisfy,  excited  hopes 
which  must  perish,  built  a  great  ship  and  must  destroy  it  because  He  cannot  create 
a  sea  in  wnich  it  can  float.  What  would  lie  thought  of  a  man  who  built  a 
splendid  chnriot  and  could  not  get  it  out  of  the  workshop  ?  A  man  believes  in 
Christ,  and  so  becomes  identified  with  all  that  is  known  ot  purity,  joy,  and  hope. 
He  rejects  the  promises  of  the  world  ;  he  gets  all  that  the  world  can  give  and  finds 
that  it  is  a  stone,  not  bread  ;  his  whole  life  becomes  a  hunger  after  something  higher. 
Having  thus  developed  he  is  told  that  his  grave  is  dug,  and  that  into  it  must  be 
thrown  every  dream,  hope,  desire.  This  world  is  enough  forcreatuies  destitute  of 
aspiration — for  the  lion  and  the  eagle.  They  cannot  hope,  pray,  aspire.  One  life 
only  is  an  argument  against— I.  God's  goodness.  Take  men  like  the  psalmists. 
They  often  sang  as  if  they  had  laid  hold  of  eternal  life.  They  declared  Jehovah  to 
be  all  their  salvation  and  all  their  desire.  To  all  this  God's  answer  is  extinction. 
Can  a  more  revolting  blasphemy  be  conceived  ?  II.  His  wisdom.  Could  not  man 
have  been  made  so  as  to  be  satisfied  with  the  present  world  '?  We  know  how  our 
generosity  may  become  a  pain  and  temptaiion  to  those  upon  whom  we  have 
bestowed  it.  Our  gifts  may  be  large  enough  to  create  dissatisfaction  with  our  daily 
lot,  yet  too  small  to  secure  contentment  with  another.  If  it  is  not  God's  purpose 
to  continue  the  cons-iousness  with  wiiich  He  has  endowed  us,  He  has,  so  to  speak, 
overbuilt  Himself  in  creation.  He  shouM  either  have  gone  farther,  or  not  so  far. 
III.  His  power.  But  herein  is  God  unlike  His  creatures.  Impair  one  of  God's 
attributes  and  you  overturn  the  whole  Go'ihead.  Man  may  have  special  excel- 
lences and  redeeming  points  of  character  ;  but  in  the  case  of  Giid  every  point  must 
be  of  equal  strength  and  glory.  Su|ipose  His  goodness  to  be  infinite,  and  His 
power  limited;  then  He  is  Jehovah  no  more.     Wlien  He  created  man,  did  He  not 


422  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

know  that  His  power  was  incomplete  ?  Has  He  been  taught  the  insufficiency  of  His- 
strength  by  results  which  He  failed  to  foresee  ?  Conclusion  :  1.  We  have  before  us, 
then,  a  strong  presumptive  a)gument  in  favour  of  another  and  higher  life.  That 
life  suggests  itself  as  the  required  complement  of  our  present  existence,  and  urges 
itself  upon  us  in  vindication  of  all  that  is  Divine  in  God.  Whatever  speculative 
difficulties  may  arise  in  connection  with  immortality,  the  practical  difficulties  of 
the  negative  theory  are  insurmountable.  2.  The  theory  of  our  life  only  bears  more 
vividly  up  m  the  mediation  of  Christ.  Ho^v  bitter  the  irony  of  His  appeals,  how 
wasteful  the  sacrifice  of  His  life,  if  a  few  pulsations  be  the  measure  of  our  existence. 
He  spoke  much  of  the  life  eternal :  did  it  all  mean  that  His  most  loving  followers 
must  be  blotted  out  of  existence?  If  so,  His  attempts  at  redemption  aggravated 
the  original  injustice  of  our  creation.  3.  Granted  that  you  never  doubted  the 
existence  of  the  future  life,  this  discussion  is  of  the  first  importance.  We  may  be 
called  upon  to  give  to  others  a  reason  for  the  hope  that  is  in  us,  and  we  ujay  feel 
more  keenly  the  obligations  which  another  life  imposes  on  us  to  live  nobly  in  this 
present  world.  If  there  is  another  life^(l)  In  what  relation  does  our  present 
existence  stand  to  it  ?  Is  it  disciplinary  ?  (2)  What  will  be  its  effect  in  regard  to 
the  moral  confusion  and  restlessness  of  our  present  existence.  Here  virtue  is  often 
undervalued  and  vice  successful.  Is  the  glory  of  the  Divine  righteousness  to  shine 
through  all  the  obscurities  of  the  Divine  government?  Christian  hope  answers, 
Yes !  (3)  Can  they  be  wise  who  exhaust  themselves  within  the  limits  of  the  present 
world?  What  a  fool  is  the  mere  money-gatherer!  How  deluded  is  he  who  mis- 
takes the  part  for  the  whole.  (4)  Is  not  he  the  wise  man  who  regulates  the  present 
by  all  that  is  solemn  and  sublime  in  the  future?  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Hope  in 
this  ivoild  only  : — I.  What  the  text  implies.  1.  That  there  is  misery  amongst 
men  on  tliis  earth.  This  is  obvious.  "  Man  is  born  to  trouble."  But  great  as  it 
is — (1)  It  is  not  as  great  as  man  deserves.  All  suffering  springs  from  sin.  Misery 
does  not  grow  out  of  the  constitution  of  things.  (2)  It  is  not  as  great  as  man's 
'nappiness.  For  days  and  weeks  of  afflictiou  he  has  months  aid  years  of  liappiness. 
(3)  It  is  not  as  gieat  as  the  good  it  will  ultimately  work  out.  2.  That  misery 
amongst  men  exists  in  different  degrees.  Paul  speaks  of  the  "  most  miseiable." 
There  is  a  great  inequality  of  suffering  here.  There  must  come  a  day  for  eternal 
justice  to  balance  these  accounts.  3.  That  the  degree  of  misery  is  sometimes 
regulated  by  hope.  Paul  speaks  of  "  hope  "  as  having  to  do  with  making  men 
"  most  miserable."  '  Man  is  ever  living  in  the  future  ;  he  seldom  turns  willingly  to 
the  past ;  his  past  sins  terrify  him,  and  even  his  j)a^t  pleasures  depress  him.  The 
present  satisfies  him  not.  His  home  is  in  the  future.  It  is  obvious  that  a  prin- 
ciple so  powerful  must  exert  a  wonderful  influence,  either  for  weal  or  woe.  If  the 
hui^e  is  directed  to  i  ight  objects,  and  rightly  forrnded,  it  will  be  as  a  firm  anchor, 
holding  his  ship  securely  amidst  the  tumultuous  billows  of  his  stormy  life.  But 
should  his  hope  be  not  rightly  directed  and  groirnded,  it  is  clear  that  though  it  may 
afford  him  for  a  time  some  amount  of  enJoym^nt,  it  will  ultimately  end  in  his 
confusion  and  distress.  4.  Tliiit  the  hope  of  a  Christinn,  if  false,  will  make  him 
of  "  all  men  most  miserable."  II.  What  the  text  means.  1.  Not — (1)  1  hat  apart 
from  the  resunection  of  Christ,  man  has  no  evidence  of  a  future  state.  All  the 
Jews  except  the  Sadducees  believed  in  the  existence  of  a  future  retribution ;  and 
Paul  as  a  philosopher  knew  that  human  nature  and  hmnan  history  profihesied  a 
futirre  state.  (2)  That  on  the  supposition  that  there  is  no  future  life,  the  practice 
of  virtue  here  would  place  man  in  a  worse  condition  than  that  of  vice.  This  would 
not  be  true;  the  life  of  virtue  as  embodied  in  Christianity  would  give  a  man 
considerable  advantage  even  in  this  world.  (3)  That  apart  from  a  future  state  a 
godly  life  is  not  binding  on  man.  Were  there  no  heaven,  no  hell,  man's 
obligation  to  love  his  Maker  "with  all  his  heai't,  soul,  strength,"  would  still 
remain.  2.  Two  thin'j;s  must  be  distinctly  kept  in  mind  in  order  fully  to  apprehend 
the  idea  of  the  apostle.  (1)  That  he  is  speiikiig  of  himself  and  his  evangelical 
contemporaries.  The  sufferings  which  they  bi ought  upon  themselves  in  conse- 
quence of  their  faitli  in  Chiistianity,  and  their  efforts  to  extend  it  through  the 
world,  were  unique  in  their  enormity.  In  thisagH  our  faith  in  Christianity,  and  our 
endeivours  to  propagate  it,  entail  little  or  no  inconvenience.  (2)  That  he  supposes 
the  disappointed  to  survive  the  discovery  of  the  delusion.  The  very  first  flash  of 
the  terrible  truth,  that  there  was  no  future  blessedness,  would  scathe  their  spirits 
into  everlasting  annihilation,  and  there  would  of  course  be  no  misery  at  all  in  the 
case.  We  must  suppose  the  apostle  therefore  having  the  idea  that  there  was  a 
future  state,  in  which  he  should  live  in  vivid  memories  of  the  past.     Up  to  the 


CHAP.  XV.]  I,  CORINTHIANS.  423 

time  of  discovery,  however  great  their  sufferinp;,  Christians  coiid  not  be  "  most 
miserable."  An  enthusiast,  whatever  his  physic  J  affeetioiis,  is  happ.v  ;  he  revels 
amidst  the  hallucinations  of  his  own  l^rain,  and  requires  none  of  your  pity  if  he 
survive  not  the  discovery  of  his  delusion.     III.  These  supposiiions  enables  us  to 

SEE    THAT   the  MISERY  OF  WHICH  THE  APOSTLE  SPEAKS  IS    THE  MISEllY  OF  A  TKHMENDODS 

DISAPPOINTMENT.  Notc— 1.  The  power  which  the  blighted  hope  had  obtained  over 
the  whole  soul.  There  are  some  hopes  that  take  but  a  slight  hold  upon  the  heart. 
But  there  are  hopes  like  the  tree  that  strikes  its  roots  deep  into  tlie  very  fibre  of 
our  nature.  When  such  hopes  are  torn  away,  it  is  as  the  "giving  up  of  the 
ghost."  Imagine  the  case  of  a  man  who  had  thrown  his  wliole  being  into  Christi- 
anity, being  met  at  the  moment  when  his  hopes  were  at  their  zenith,  and  when  his 
death  was  at  hand,  with  the  conviction  that  all  was  a  delusion  ;  and  you  have  a 
man  of  all  men  "  most  miserable."  Imagine  that  man  still  further  fixed  in  a  future 
state  of  deep  despair,  and  regarding  himself  as  the  hopeless  victim  of  a  life  of  folly. 
Would  he  not  say.  Fool  that  I  liave  been  in  spending  a  whole  life  in  aiming 
at  objects  that  were  purely  visionary.  Had  I  been  wise  I  should  have  adopted  the 
maxim,  "Let  us  eat  and  lirink,  for  to-morrow  we  die."  2.  The  deception  which 
the  blighted  hope  prompted  its  subjects  to  practise.  The  apostle  declares  that  on 
the  assumjition  that  Clirist  rose  from  the  dead,  they  were  "  false  witnesses  of  God." 
Most  assuredly  if  there  be  no  future  state  of  blessedness,  the  whole  life  of  the 
Christian  is  a  living  lie.  His  deception  is — (1)  Earnest.  He  "  counts  not  his  life 
dear  unto  him,"  if  he  can  only  make  men  participate  in  his  creed.  (2)  Systematic. 
It  is  not  an  occasional  or  spasmodic  effort ;  it  is  the  organised  purjiose  of  his  bemg. 
He  rears  temples,  forms  socii-ties,  circulates  books,  preaches  d'scourses,  in  order  to 
win  men  over  to  his  views.  (3)  Influential.  He  succee'^sin  his  proselytism.  Such 
is  the  deception  Christians  practise  on  the  hypothesis  that  there  is  no  future  life  in 
Him.  How  much  would  the  memory  of  their  decepiion  heighten  the  misery  of 
their  disappointment  on  the  discovery  of  their  own  terrible  mistake!  The  feeiing 
that  they  themselves  had  been  deluded  would  be  well-nigh  intolerable ;  but  the 
feeling  that  they  had  deluded  others  would  be  crushing.  3.  The  destitution  in 
which  the  depart,ure  of  the  hope  would  involve  the  soul.  Christianity  works  a 
most  radical  change  in  a  man.  It  effects  a  "regeneration."  Under  its  iniluenee 
man  becomes  "anew  creation";  old  things  pass  away,  all  things  become  new; 
what  he  once  loved  he  loathes,  what  he  once  sought  he  shuns,  what  he  once  valued 
he  despises,  what  things  were  gain  to  him  he  counts  loss.  On  the  discovery  there- 
fore of  the  delusion,  he  would  be  left  in  possession  of  tastes  and  desires  for  winch 
there  was  no  provision.  A  thousand  times  worse  is  the  state  of  such  a  soul  than 
that  of  a  parched  traveller,  who,  beneath  the  agonising  fires  of  thirst,  falls  prostrate 
on  the  Oriental  sands,  many  leagues  away  from  the  refreshing  streams.  Conclu- 
sion :  Thank  God  this  is  only  hypothetic.  The  apostle  does  not  speak  as  if  he  had 
any  doubt,  but  in  order  to  bring  out  the  glorious  tact  on  which  it  )ests  with  greater 
fire  and  force.  "  But  now  in  Christ  risen  from  the  dead,"  &g.  We  have  hope  in  a 
blessed  future,  and  therefore — 1.  When  bereavement  snatches  from  our  embrace 
the  dearest  objects  of  our  heart,  let  us  not  sorrow  as  do  others.  2.  Let  us  not  envy 
the  wicked  in  their  prosperity,  but  bear  up  with  fortitude,  knowing  th>it  "our  light 
afflictions  which  are  but  for  a  moment,"  &c.  3.  Let  us  labour  earnestly  to  indoc- 
trinate all  within  our  reach  with  the  soul-saving  principles  of  the  everlasting  word. 
(Z).  Thomas,  D.D.)  Life  moitt  iitiscriihle  witliout  hope  in  Clirist: — These  words 
have  been  a  cause  of  much  distress.  Christians  have  felt  that  tlieir  hope  in  Christ 
made  this  life  joyful  to  them.  No  doubt  the  very  name  "  hope  "  implies  a  looking 
forward.  But  they  do  not  find  that  the  mere  thought  of  a  change  in  their  pofdtion 
constit.utes  their  blessedness.  "Lo,  I  am  with  you  always";  "My  pe\ce  I  give 
unto  you  "  ;  there,  they  say,  is  the  secret  of  it.  Certainly  they  have  a  right  to  claim 
St.  Paul  in  general  as  the  witness  and  highest  authority  for  their  jDersuasion.  "  All 
things  are  yours,"  Ac,  he  said  to  these  very  Corinthians,  He  speaks  of  himself  as 
"  rejoicing  in  tribulation."  He  wished  that  Ag.'ppa,  Festus,  and  Bernice,  and  all 
■who  heard  him,  "  were  both  almost  and  altogether  such  as  he  was,  except  those 
bonds."  Was,  then,  that  so  terrible  an  exception,  that  he  regarded  the  worshippers 
of  false  gods  less  miserable,  as  far  as  this  life  went,  than  he  was?  Does  any  one 
who  knows  anything  of  St.  Paul's  life  and  words  believe  this?  Those  very  bonds 
became  a  cause  of  exultation  to  him,  because  through  them  Christ's  name  was 
made  known  in  Rome.  He  counted,  not  some  future  promised  felicity,  but  his 
office  as  an  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  which  caused  him  to  be  the  offscouring  of  all 
things,  the  highest  privilege  ever  bestowed  upon  a  mortal.    Is  this  a  man  who  was 


424  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cnAi>.  xv, 

likelyto  say,  "  I  am  utteily  miserable  here ;  but  I  can  endure  my  lot,  for  I  shall  be  well 
paid  hereafter  "  ?    But  if  that  is  not  the  meaning  of  the  words,  what  is  it  ?    1.  The 
Corinthians  had  heard  him  say,  "  We  are  risen  with  Christ."    A  p^rty  of  them  had 
built  on  this  the  conclusion  that  their  spiritual  resurrection  was  all  that  Christ  had 
procured  for  them.     St.  Paul  shows  thtm  that  they  were  turning  this  half-truth, 
not  to  the  destruction  of  the  other  half  merely,  but  of  itself.     If  they  were  not  to 
rise  in  their  bodies,  Christ  their  Lord  had  not  risen  in  His  body.     The  very  ground 
of  the  spiritual  resurrection,  of  which  they  boasted,  was  their  union  with  Him. 
God  had  justified  them  in  Him.     The  new  doctrine,  in  effect,  disclaimed  ibis  rela- 
tion between  them  and  Him.     It  lett  them  a  set  of  poor,  separated,  unredeemed 
creatures  ;  "  yet  in  their  sins."     It  was  very  miserable  to  believe  such  a  cnntradic- 
tion  as  this  would  be.     2.  Christ  h^d  broken  throagh  the  barriers  of  death,  had 
brought  the  visible  and  the  invisible  world  into  one.     Those  who  said  "  The  Resur- 
rection only  concerns  us  here,"  established  this  separation  again,  and  treated  Death 
as  to  all  intents  and  purposes  the  ultimate  ruler,  Life  as  shut  up  within  threescore 
years  and  ten  of  conflict.    This  was  to  confound  the  dim  hope  of  all  nations.    When 
the  sense  of  present  misery  vyas  very  acute,  there  was  a  prophecy,  arising  in  some 
minds  almost  to  a  conviction,  that  the  other  side  of  death  miv'ht  offer  a  compensa- 
tion.   Had  not  St.  Paul  a  right  to  say,  then,  "  If  we  possess  all  that  Christ  came  to 
give  us,  He  has  taken  from  us  something  which  He  has  not  taken  from  any  others. 
That  which  has  never  been  altogether  a  blank  to  them,  in  which  there  have  been 
some  bright  Elysian  spots,  has  become  entirely  a  blank  to  us."    But  it  may  be  Sftid, 
"The  apostle  speaks  of  a  hope  in  Christ.     What  could  such  a  hope  have  to  do 
■with  dreams  of  Greeks  or  Goths  respecting  an  Elysium  or  a  Walhaila  ?     Being 
heathens,  they  certainly  could  not  hope  in  Him."     But  the  principle  which  under- 
lies all  the  apostle's  teaching  is  that  when  Christ  took  flesh  and  dwelt  among  men. 
He  declared  Himself  to  be  that  King,  whose  manifestation  in  His  o>vn  true  and 
proper  nature  all  had  been  desiring.     If  this  be  so,  I  cannot  imagine  how  he  could 
describe  any  hope  which  had  ever  been  entertained  by  any  human  being,  except  as 
a  hope  in  Christ.     The  gods  whom  Greeks  or  Goths  worshipped  could  have  kindled 
no  hopes  in  them,  only  a  vague,  inconceivable  dreail.     Whatever  hope  they  had 
came  from  a  secret  source,  a  liidden  root.     Tne  apostle,  then,  might  truly  say,  that 
if  the  Corinthians  who  professed  to  believe  that  .lesus  was  the  Christ,  made  His 
■work  upon  earth  an  excuse  for  not  looking  beyond  the  earth,  they  had  parted  with 
some  of  the  hope  in  Christ  which  their  heathen  brethren  possessed.     3.  But  there 
is  an  ampler  justification  of  the  apostle's  words.    He  had  a  much  deeper  impression 
of   the   misery  of  the  world  around  him  than  any  person  who  did  not  believe 
in  the  gospel  could  have  had.     The  devil-worship  and  the  siu  which  prevailed  was 
revolting  to  him  who  worshipped  a  God  of  love,  and  who  believed  that  the  Sjnrit  of 
Christ  had  come  among  men  to  make  them  after  His  image.     Feeling  as  he  did 
their  misery,  it  would  absolutely  have  crushed  him  if  in  this  life  only  he  had  had 
hope  in  Christ,  if  he  could  have  measured  the  future  of  mankind  merely  by  any- 
thing that  he  saw  or  had  yet  experienced.     The  thought  which  we  should  often 
bring  before  ourselves  as  we  walk  our  streets,  and  as  we  read  of  what  is  doing  in 
other  parts  of  the  world,  is — Are   our  hopes  in  Christ,  for  those  whom  we  see 
perishing  in  filth,  in  ignorance,  in  moral  debasement,  only  hopes  for  this  life  ?     Is 
the  wisdom  of  rulers,  the  godliness  of  teachers,  the  benevolence  of  societies,  all 
which  seems  to  us  to  intervene  between  them  and  utter,  absolute  ruin  ?     Oh,  then, 
surely  we  must  be  of  all  men  most  miserable  !     To  think  of  all  the  wickedness 
which  is  crowded  into  tlje  most  fortunate  corner  of  this  earth,  and  not  to  feel  some- 
thing very  like  despair,  is  very  difficult.     It  would  be  impossible,  if  we  were  not 
encouraged  and  commanded  to  place  our  hopes,  not  in  what  we  are  doing,  but  in 
what  Christ  has  done  by  His  death,  resurrection,  ascension,  and  gift  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.     If  we  think  that  nothing  is  given  yet ;  that  we  are  merely  to  look  for  some- 
thing to  come,  we  are  most  miserable.     If  we  think  that  all  has  been  gi>en — that 
we  have  nothing  to  long  for — we  are  most  miserable.     But  if  we  accept  the  signs 
and  pledges  of  a  perfect  sacrifice  made  once  for  all,  the  vision  of  Him  who  died 
once  and  reigneth  for  evermore  will  hecome  blighter  and  clearer.     (F.  D.  Maurice, 
M.A.)       "  A  las  for  vs,  if  thou  tcert  all,  nvd  noiKjht  heijoud,  O  earth  "  ; — The  apostle 
does  not  say  that  all  men  are  now  miserable  if  there  be  no  hope  of  the  world  to 
come.     There  are  very  many  who  never  think  of  another  life,  who  are  quite  happy 
in  their  way.    But  he  speaks  of  Christian  people,  who  are  known  by  this,  that  they 
have  hope  in  Christ — hope  in  His  blood  for  pardon,  in  His  righteousness  for  justifi- 
cation, in  His  power  for  support,  in  His  resurrection  for  eternal  glory.     I.  We  abe 


cnAP.  XV.]  I.  COIilNTHIANS.  425 

NOT  OF  ALL  MEN  MOST  MiSEEABLE.  He  who  shall  affirm  that  Christianity  makes 
men  miserable  is  an  utter  stranger  to  it.  For  see — 1.  To  what  a  position  it  exalts 
us  !  It  makes  ns  sons  of  God.  Shall  His  foes  have  mirth,  and  His  own  home- 
born  be  wretched?  We  are  married  unto  Christ,  and  shall  our  great  Bridegroom 
pernrit  His  spouse  to  linger  in  grief  ?  The  Chri-.tian  is  a  kiug,  and  sliall  the  l^ing 
be  the  most  melancholy  of  men?  2.  What  God  has  done  for  us  !  The  Cnristian 
knows  that  his  sins  are  forgiven.  And  shall  the  pardoned  offender  be  less  bappy 
than  the  man  upon  whom  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  ?  Moreover,  we  are  made 
temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  are  these  dark,  dolorous  places?  Our  God  is  a  God 
of  love,  and  it  is  His  very  nature  to  make  His  creatures  happy.  B.  Their  actual 
joy  and  p^ace.  Our  joy  may  not  be  like  that  of  the  sinner,  noisy  and  boisterous. 
"  As  the  crackling  of  thorns  under  a  pot  " — a  great  deal  of  blaze  and  much  noise, 
and  then  a  handful  of  ashes,  and  it  is  all  over.  The  Christian's  joy  does  not 
depend  upon  circumstances.  We  have  seen  the  ]  ap  liest  men  in  the  most 
sorrowful  conditions.  Every  Christian  will  bear  wi  ne  s  that  he  has  found 
his  sad  times  to  be  his  glad  times,  his  losses  to  be  nis  gains,  his  sickness 
means  to  promote  his  soul's  health.  We  can  rejoice  even  in  death.  II. 
Without  the  hope  op  anothek  life  we  should  be  of  all  men  most 
MISERABLE.  This  is  true,  not  merely  of  persecuted,  and  despised,  and  poverty- 
stricken  Christians,  but  of  all  btlievers.  Note  that  the  Christian — 1.  Has 
renounced  those  common  and  ordinary  sources  of  joy  from  which  other  men  drink. 
We  must  have  some  pleasure.  Well,  then,  there  is  a  vessel  filled  with  muddy, 
filthy  water  which  the  camels'  feet  have  stirred:  shall  I  drink  it?  I  t-ee  yonder  a 
cool,  clear  stream,  and  I  say,  "  I  will  not  drink  this  ;  I  will  drink  of  that."  But  if 
it  be  but  the  deceitful  mirjige,  then  I  am  worse  off  than  those  who  were  content 
with  the  muddy  water.  So  the  Christian  passes  by  the  pleasures  of  sin,  bec>iuse  he 
says,  "  I  do  not  care  for  them,  my  happiness  flows  from  the  river  which  springs 
from  the  throne  of  God  and  flows  to  me  through  Christ — I  will  drink  of  that,"  but 
if  that  were  proved  to  be  a  deception,  then  were  we  more  wretched  than  the  profli- 
gate. 2.  Has  learned  the  vanity  of  all  earthly  joys.  We  have  chosen  eternal 
things  which  are  satisfying  to  the  soul.  Bat  it  is  tlie  most  unhappy  to  know  that 
this  world  is  vain,  if  there  be  not  another  world  abundantly  to  compensate  for  all 
our  ills.  There  is  a  poor  lunatic  in  Bedlam  plaiting  straw  into  a  crown  which  he 
puts  upon  his  head,  and  calls  himself  a  king.  Do  you  think  tiiat  I  would  undeceive 
him  ?  Nay,  verily.  If  the  delusion  makes  the  man  happy,  by  all  means  let  him 
indulge  in  it ;  but  you  and  I  have  iieen  undeceived ;  our  dream  of  perfect  bliss 
beneath  the  skies  is  gone  for  ever  ;  what  then  if  there  be  no  world  to  come  ?  3. 
Has  had  high,  noble,  and  great  expectations,  and  this  is  a  very  sad  thing  for  us  if 
our  expectations  be  not  fulfilled.  I  have  known  poor  men  expecting  a  legacy,  and 
the  relative  has  died  and  left  them  nothing;  their  poverty  has  ever  after>\ards 
seemed  to  be  a  heavier  drag  than  before.  Poverty  is  infinitely  better  endured  by 
persons  who  were  always  poor,  than  by  those  who  have  been  rich.  The  Chiistian 
has  learned  to  think  of  eternity,  of  God,  of  Christ,  and  if  indeed  it  be  all  false,  the 
best  thing  he  could  do  would  be  to  sit  down  and  weep  for  ever.  4.  Has  learned  to 
look  upon  everything  here  as  fleeting.  Well,  this  is  a  very  unhappv  thing,  if  there 
be  no  world  to  come.  III.  Our  chief  joy  in  the  hope  of  the  world  to  come. 
There  is — 1.  Best.  2.  Victory.  3.  Happiness.  4.  Perfection.  IV.  Thus  the 
FUTURE  operates  UPON  THE  PRESENT.  Here  is  a  man  who  has  a  machine  for  his 
factory.  He  wants  steam  power  to  work  this  machine.  An  engineer  puts  up  a 
steam  engine  in  a  shed  at  some  distance.  "  Well,"  said  the  other,  "  I  asked  you  to 
bring  stenm  power  here,  to  operate  upon  my  machine."  "That  is  precisely,"  says 
he,  "  what  I  have  done.  I  put  the  euf^ine  there,  you  have  but  to  connect  it  by  a 
hand  and  your  machine  works  as  fast  as  you  like  ;  it  is  not  necessary  that  I  should 
put  it  just  under  your  nose."  So  God  has  been  pleased  to  make  our  hopes  of  the 
future  a  great  engine  wherewith  the  Christian  may  work  the  ordinar*  machine  of 
every-day  life,  for  the  band  of  faith  connects  the  two,  and  makes  all  the  wheels  of 
ordinary  life  revolve  with  rapidity  and  regularity.  To  speak  against  pre  .ching  the 
future  as  tliouwh  it  would  make  people  neglect  the  present  is  as  though  somebody 
would  say,  "  There,  take  away  the  moon,  and  blot  out  the  sun.  What  is  the  use 
of  them — they  are  not  in  this  world  "  !  Precisely  so,  but  take  an-ay  the  moon  and 
you  have  removed  the  tides,  and  the  sea  becomes  a  stagnant,  putrid  p(;ol.  Then 
take  away  the  sun,  and  light,  and  lieat,  and  life;  everything  is  gone.  Do  .\ou 
believe  th  it  apostles  and  martyrs  would  ever  have  sacrificed  their  lives  for  truth's 
sake  if  they  had  not  looked  for  a  hereafter  ?     In  the  heat  of  excitement,  the  soldier 


4^'  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

may  die  for  honour,  but  to  die  in  tortures  and  mockeries  in  cold  blood  needs  a  hope 
beyond  the  grave.  Would  yon  poor  man  go  on  toiling  year  aftt-r  year,  refusing  ta 
sacrifice  his  conscience  for  gain  ;  would  yoii  poor  needle-giii  refuse  to  become  the 
slave  of  lust  if  she  did  not  see  something  brighter  than  earth  can  picture  to 
her  as  the  reward  of  sin?  The  most  piactical  thing  in  all  the  world  is  the 
hope  of  the  world  to  come;  for  it  is  just  this  which  l<eeps  us  from  being 
miserable ;  and  to  keep  a  man  from  being  miserable  it  is  to  do  a  great 
thin»  for  him,  for  a  miserable  Christian— what  is  the  use  of  him?  But  the 
man  who  has  a  hope  of  the  next  world  goes  about  his  work  strong,  for  the  joy  of 
the  Lord  is  our  strength.  V.  This  will  let  ds  see  cleably  what  our  futuue  is 
TO  BE.  There  are  some  persons  here  to  whom  my  text  has  nothing  whatever  to 
say.  Suppose  there  were  no  hereafter,  would  they  be  more  miserable  ?  Why,  no ; 
tbey  would  be  more  happy.  Do  you  see,  then,  this  proves  that  you  are  not  a 
Christian  ;  for  if  you  were,  the  taking  away  of  a  hereafter  would  make  you  miser- 
'  able.  Well,  then,  what  have  I  to  say  to  you?  Why  just  this — that  in  the  world 
to  come  you  will  be  of  all  men  most  miserable.  "What  will  become  of  you?" 
said  an  infidel  once  to  a  Christian  man,  "  supposing  there  should  be  no  heaven  ?  " 
"  Well,"  said  he,  "  I  like  to  have  two  strings  to  my  bow.  If  there  be  no  hereafter 
I  am  as  well  off  as  you  are  ;  if  there  be  I  am  infinitely  better  off."  {C.  H.  Spuryeon.) 
The  importance  of  the  Remrrection  .-—St.  Paul,  in  tbis  great  passage,  makes. 
Christianity  answer  with  its  life  for  the  truth  of  our  Lord's  resurrection  from  the 
dead  (ver.  14).  If  in  this  life  only  we  have  hope  in  Christ,  we  have  made  a  capital 
mistake,  and  are  of  all  men  most  miserable.  I.  What,  then,  is  the  hope  respect- 
ing a  future  which  we  owe  to  our  risen  Lord  ?  Is  it  the  hope  that  we  shall 
exist  for  ever  ?  Is  our  continuous  existence  hereafter  altogether  dependent  upon 
faith  in  and  communion  with  the  risen  Christ?  No,  our  immortality  is  not  a  gift 
of  the  Redeemer ;  it  is  the  gift  of  the  Creator.  Belief  in  a  future  state  does  not 
beoin  with  Christianity.  It  is  as  deeply  rooted  in  the  human  soul  as  belief  in  God. 
In^some  sense  it  is  wellnigh  universal.  The  honour  so  widely  paid  to  the  graves 
of  ancestors  is  a  natural  expression  of  belief  in  their  survival  after  death.  It  was 
this  belief  which  made  an  ancient  Egyptian  deem  the  embalming  of  his  mummy 
the  most  important  thing  that  could  happen  to  him:  it  was  tbis  belief  which  built 
the  pyramids,  which  rendered  the  Greek  mysteries  of  Eleusis  so  welcome  to  those 
upon  whom  the  old  popular  religion  had  lost  its  power,  and  which  made  great 
thinkers,  such  as  Plato,  at  least  in  their  higher  moods,  capable  of  thoughts  and 
aspirations  which  Christians,  in  all  ages,  have  welcomed  as  almost  anticipating 
their  own.  II.  But  to  what  sort  of  immortality  does  this  anticipation  point  ? 
It  is  not  the  immortnlity — 1.  Of  the  race.  How  is  tbis  shadowy  survival  entitled 
to  the  name  of  immortality?  A  race  of  beings  does  not  live  apart  from  the 
individuals  which  compose  it.  2.  Of  fame.  How  many  of  us  will  have  a  place  in 
the  public  memory  and  live  in  history  ?  For  most  of  us  life  is  made  up  of  duties 
of  so  humble  a  kind  that  they  hardly  have  a  place  in  our  own  memories  from  day 
to  day,  much  less  in  those  of  others.  But  if  there  is  no  life  after  dpath,  what  is  to 
become  of  them,  that  is,  what  is  to  become  of  this  kind  of  immortality  in  the  case 
of  the  greater  part  of  the  human  race?  Is  not  this  immortality  only  a  perpeturttion 
of  inecpialities  which  disfigure  our  earthly  life,  and  of  which  a  future  of  absolute 
truth  and  justice  would  know  nothing  ?  3.  Of  our  good  deeds.  To  say  that  a  man 
lives  in  his  good  actions  may  be  Christian  language  (Rev.  xiv.  13).  To  this  day 
the  saints  of  the  Bible  history  live  in  the  works  which  are  recorded  of  them.  But 
there  are  actions  in  all  true  and  saintly  lives  which  are  known  only  to  God,  and 
which,  so  far  as  we  can  see,  have  no  certain  consequences  here.  But  if  the  soul 
perishes  at  death,  in  what  sense  are  th>-y  immortal?  And  are  our  good  deeds  our 
only  deeds?  Have  not  onr  evil  deeds — some  oE  them — consequences;  and  do 
these  consequences  punish  the  agent,  if  he  really  perishes  at  death?  Others  than 
he  are  punished.  No  ;  the  immortality  of  our  actions  is  not  an  immortality  which 
satisfies  the  yearnings  of  the  heart  of  man,  since  this  yearning  is  based  always  and 
especially  on  its  sense  of  justice.  II.  What,  then,  is  the  hope  in  Chuist  which 
redeems  Christian  LIFE  from  the  failure  and  misery  alluded  to  in  the  text? 
It  is  the  hope,  that  through  His  precious  death  and  His  glorious  resurrection,  our 
inevitable  immoriality  will  be  an  im:nortality  of  bliss.  Of  course  it  is  not  denied 
that  He  has  "  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light."  For  multitudes  before  He 
came  it  was  a  vague  and  dreary  anticipation  :  He  has  made  it  a  blessed  and  welcome 
certainty.  He  has  familiarised  us  with  the  idea  that  all  live  unto  God  (Luke  xx. 
37,  38) ;"  and  He  has  further  taught  the  future  resurrection  of  the  body,  as  com- 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.   CORINTHLANS.  427 


pleting  the  life  beyond  the  grave  (John  vi.  40).  He  thus  has  altogether  removed 
the,  question  from  the  region  of  speculation  into  that  of  certainty,  founded  upon 
experience  ;  since  when  He  rose  from  death  He  was  Himself  but  the  first-fruits 
from  the  dead.  But  the  hope  in  Chiist  is  the  hope  of  a  blessfd  immortality.  This 
He  has  won  for  us  by  His  one  perfect  and  sufficient  sacrifice  on  the  Cross,  whereby 
our  sins  are  blotted  out,  and  the  grace  of  His  Spirit  and  His  new  nature  is  secured 
to  us,  so  as  to  fit  us,  by  sanctification,  for  His  eternal  presence.  Aj^art  from  this 
conviction,  Cliristianity  is  a  worthless  dream  ;  the  efforts  and  SMcrifires  of  the 
Christian  life  are  wasted;  we  are  the  victims  of  a  great  delusion ;  we  are  of  all  men 
most  miserable.  Conclusion  :  1.  There  are  signs  in  our  day  that  faith  in  a  future 
after  death  is  Ic^^s  tai\en  for  granted  than  was  the  case  a  generation  ago.  One  of 
these  signs  is  the  increased  number  of  suicides  all  over  Europe.  Tliere  are  not 
mei'ely  the  pathetic  suicides  of  the  very  wretched,  there  are  the  suicides  of  votaries 
of  pleasure,  who  having  exhausted  all  the  facilities  of  enjoyment,  throw  it  away 
like  a  toy  which  has  ceased  to  please.  Suicides  like  these  mean  that  the  oppor- 
tunities for  enjoyment  have  in  certain  classes  outrun  the  power  to  enjoy.  Suicides 
are  only  possible  when  through  continuous  enervation  of  the  moral  nature  the 
awful  realities  of  immortality  have  been  lost  sight  of :  and  their  increase  is  a  serious 
symptom  of  what  must  be  passing  in  large  classes  of  minds.  2.  Much  seems  to 
show  that  in  the  modern  woild  two  entirely  different  beliefs  about  man  are  con- 
founded with  each  other.  According  to  one  of  these  man  is  really  only  the  highest 
of  the  beasts  that  perish.  Opposed  to  this  idea  is  the  Christian  belief  that  man 
differs  from  the  lower  creatures  altogether,  except  in  the  fact  that  he  owns  a  body, 
which  is  governed  bythe  same  laws  as  theirs.  For  man,  his  body,  instead  ui  being 
the  substantive  and  central  part  of  his  being,  is  an  Hppeiidage.  The  soul  of  man 
no  more  dies  when  it  leaves  the  body  than  ihe  musical  genius  which  makes  that 
organ  do  so  much  to  aid  the  devotion  of  God's  people  forfeits  its  knowledge  and  its 
skill  when  it  ceases  to  touch  the  key-board.  In  man  the  central  or  substantive 
feature  is  the  soul ;  and  of  the  life  of  the  soul,  this  earthly  life  in  the  body  is  but  a 
very  small  portion  indeed.  It  is  related  to  what  follows,  as  is  a  brief  preface  to 
a  very  voluminous  book:  it  throws  light  on  what  is  to  come;  it  is  relatively 
insignificant.  "  The  things  which  are  seen  are  temporal :  the  things  which  are 
not  seen  are  eternal."  [CaiiGn  Liddon.)  Tlic  penaUii  of  pietij  and  ita  promise  :  — 
These  words — I.  Demand  explanation  op  rs.  1.  Only  the  heavenly  hope  could 
compensate  for  the  severity  of  their  earthly  experiences  (2  Cor.  vi.  xi.).  Speaking 
for  himself,  and  having  in  view  all  of  every  kind  that  he  was  enduring  for  the  sake 
of  the  gospel,  he  felt  that  all  the  peace  and  comfort  which  solaced  other  men's  lives 
were  absent  from  liis  own,  and  he  concluded  that  without  that  grand  compensation 
which  was  in  store,  he  and  they  were  the  most  to  be  pitied  of  all  men.  2.  In  that 
case  they  were  the  victims  of  a  miserable  delusion.  They  were  basing  their  whole 
life  on  a  faith  which  was  a  falsehood  ;  they  were  building  everything  on  a  rotten 
foundation ;  tliey  were  spending  all  their  energies  and  surrendering  all  their 
opportunities  to  teach  men  that  which  their  disciples  were  bound  to  disbelieve 
(ver.  14).  They  might  well  be  pitied  as  the  dupes  of  a  dream.  II.  Pkovide 
SUGGESTIONS  I'OR  US.  1.  That  there  are  consequences  attending  unswerving  faith- 
fulness we  must  all  be  prepared  to  meet.  Not  now  the  lash  or  the  dungeon.  It 
may  be  the  biting  sarcasm  or  the  polite  irony,  &c.  But  it  must  be  that  "  all  who 
will  live  godly  ia  Christ  Jesus  shall  suffer  jjersecution  "  (2  Tim.  iii.  12).  2.  That 
deliision  is  always  pitiable.  Men  may  be  buoyed  up  by  false  hoi^es,  and  it  may 
seem  at  a  superficial  glance  that  the  cherishing  of  the  error  is  positively  gainful. 
But  it  is  always  better  to  walk  in  the  liglit  than  to  wander  in  the  darkm  ss.  They 
who  give  way  to  plausible  but  unsound  doctrine  are  to  be  pitied,  however  fair  in 
the  face  these  doctrines  may  be,  however  excellent  be  the  spirit  and  intention  of 
those  that  hold  them.  3.  That  genuine  piety  has  within  it  sources  of  i:)ure  and 
lasting  joy  (1  Tim.  iv.  8,  vi.  6) ;  and  if  the  "  Man  of  Sorrows  "  could  speak  of  "  His 
joy  "  so  may  we.     (IF.  Clarkson,  B.A.) 

Ver.  20.  But  now  is  Christ  risen  from  the  dead,  .  .  .  flrst-fruits  of  them 
that  slept. — The  resurrection  cf  Christ : — I.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  as  an 
HiSTOKic  fact.  If  Socrates  died  of  the  fatal  hemlock  in  an  Athenian  prison  ;  if 
Caesar  died  upon  thePioman  senate-floor,  stricken  down  by  the  daggers  of  assassins; 
then  Christ,  our  Piedeemer,  not  only  died  on  Golgotha,  but  on  the  third  day  rose 
again,  leading  captivity  captive.  This  miracle  of  the  resurrection,  as  Ne^iuder  has 
remarked,  is  not  of  the  class  designed  for  the  conviction  of  unbelievers.     It  was 


423  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

rather,  in  the  first  instance,  for  such  as  already  believed  in  Christ,  and  now  needed 
only  that  their  faith  should  be  sealed  and  conlirmed.  II.  The  kesurrection  of 
Christ  in  its  relation  to  previous  economies.  There  were  two  of  these 
economies,  and  under  each  of  them  a  miracle  bearing  some  resemblance  to  the 
resurrection  of  Christ.  Under  the  first,  or  patriarchal  economy,  there  was  the 
miracle  of  Enoch's  translation.  Under  the  second,  or  Jewish  economy,  there  was 
the  miracle  of  Elijah's  being  taken  up  into  heaven  in  a  chariot  of  fire.  Precisely 
what  befel  these  men,  it  is  impossible  to  say.  But  so  much  at  least  is  certain, 
that  these  translations  were  not  rf surrections  :  for  the  men  did  not  die.  The  fact 
proclaimed,  and  the  doctrine  ihustrated  by  their  departure,  was  simply  the 
continued  existence  of  the  soul  in  a  higher  realm  ;  in  a  word,  the  immortality  of 
the  soul,  and  not  the  resurrection  of  the  body.  80,  also,  of  the  resurrections  which 
occurred  under  the  Jewish  economy.  Elijah,  it  is  true,  restored  again  to  life  the 
widow's  SDU  at  Zarephath  ;  Elisha,  the  sou  of  the  Shunemite ;  and  even  Elisha's 
bones  quickened  the  corpse  which  touched  them.  But  these  persons,  thus  recalled 
to  life,  all  died  again.  Like  the  ti-anslations  already  spoken  of,  they  attested  rather 
the  presence  of  a  soul  in  man,  destined  to  survive  the  striking  of  its  tent  of  tiesh. 
They  attested  the  reality  of  a  world  of  spirits,  not  so  far  removed  but  that  those 
who  had  j)assed  behind  its  curtain  might  be  summoned  back.  That  the  body, 
reduced  to  ashes,  should  rise  again,  never  more  to  be  subject  to  decay,  had  only 
been  proclaimed,  not  proved.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  was,  therefore,  a  new 
phenomenon.  He  was  literally  "  the  first-fruits  of  them  that  slept " ;  rising  as 
none  had  ever  risen  before.  III.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  in  its  relation 
TO  OURSELVES.  {R.  D.  HitcJicock,  D.D.)  Christ  the  first-fruits  : — We  might  take 
occasion  hence  to  consider  the  great  fact — Christ  is  risen,  the  symbolical  figure  by 
which  that  fact  might  be  illustrated — the  first-fruits — and  the  favour  which  follows 
— the  resurrection  of  the  pious  dead.  Refer  to  Lev.  xxiii.  10,  &c.  The  first-fruits 
were  a  typical  representation  of  Christ  presented  to  God  after  His  resurrection. 
1.  The  iiist-fruits  were  of  the  same  nature  as  the  after  fruits.  Let  this  remind  us 
that  Christ  is  of  the  same  nature  as  His  penple.  He  took  a  real  human  nature, 
that  in  that  nature  He  might  sanctify  us,  as  the  harvest  was  sanctified  by  offering 
the  first-fruits  to  God.  "For  both  He  that  sanctitieth,  and  they  who  are  sanctified, 
are  all  of  one  ;  tor  which  cause  He  is  not  ashamed  to  call  them  brethren."  Had 
Christ  died  and  risen  in  a  different  nature  from  ours,  it  would  not  have  been  con- 
qupring  death  for  us.  We  could  have  derived  no  benefit  or  consolation  from  it. 
"  The  Man  Christ  "  ;  "  that  Man  whom  He  hath  ordained  "  ;  "a  Man  approved  of 
God  "  ;  "  in  all  things  made  like  unto  His  brethren."  He  had  real  flesh.  He  felt 
hunger,  thirst,  and  weariness,  which  a  mere  spirit  could  not ;  and  He  had  a  real 
human  soul,  which  could  rejoice,  grieve,  be  amazed,  and  angry.  Being  a  Man, 
His  resurrection  to  immortal  life  is  the  first-fmits  of  the  human  race  from  the 
grave.  2.  The  first-fruits  were  of  superior  excellence,  being  the  best — most  early 
ripe,  and  therefore  stronger  and  more  vigorous.  Let  this  remind  us  of  the  excel- 
lency of  Christ's  human  nature.  He  transcends  all  His  brethren.  He  is  without 
sin,  and  so  excels  in  perfect  purity.  His  soul  had  no  base  passions.  His  will  no 
rebellion.  His  understanding  was  not  obscured  by  mistakes,  errors,  or  prejudices ; 
His  body  was  not  influenced  by  bad  habits,  nor  led  astray  by  sensual  appetites. 
Nor  was  He  only  free  from  sin  ;  there  were  all  the  excellences  which  are  comprised 
in  perfection  itself.  He  was,  of  all  the  sons  of  men,  the  first  ripe  for  heaven — His 
ripeness  Avas  perfect,  rich,  delightful  holiness  and  love.  3.  As  the  first-fruits,  being 
first  ripe,  were  of  superior  excellence,  and  so  were  a  shadow  of  Christ,  so  tliey  were 
to  be  first  gathered  in.  And  thus  they  resembled  Christ  as  "  the  first  born  from  the 
dead,"  the  first  of  all  those  who  rose  from  the  grave  to  immortality.  It  was  fit  that  the 
Captain  should  lead  the  way  to  the  soldiers,  that  the  Conqueror  of  death  should  be 
the  first  to  take  possession  of  life,  that  He  who  was  first  in  the  perfection  of  holi- 
ness and  grace  should  be  first  in  the  perfect  possession  of  life  and  glory.  4.  As 
the  first-fruits  were  gathered  on  the  morrow  after  the  Sabbath,  it  is  remarkable 
that  our  Lord  rose,  as  "  the  first-fndts  of  them  that  slept,"  on  the  morrow  after 
the  Sabbath.  5.  The  sheaf  of  first-fruiis  was  lifted  up  by  the  priest,  and  waved  to 
and  fro  in  the  air,  as  an  offering  presented  to  the  Lord.  Christ,  as  a  Priest, 
presented  Himself  as  the  Fii-st-fruits  to  God.  The  sheaf  was  waved,  to  be  accepted 
for  Israel,  and  Christ  presents  Himself  to  God  that  we  may  be  accepted  before 
Him.  As  the  first-fruits  were  presented  to  God,  so  our  risen  Lord  rose  to  Him. 
"  In  that  He  died.  He  died  unto  sin  once  ;  but  in  that  He  liveth.  He  liveth  unto 
God."  6.  The  corn  of  the  first-fruits  was  threshed  out  and  winnowed,  and  the  pure 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  429 

corn  was  pounded,  roasted,  and,  together  with  the  oil  and  frankincense,  was  waved 
before  God.  Then  part  of  it  was  made  an  offering  by  fire  and  the  rest  was  the 
priest's.  When  Christ  arose,  He  lelt  all  that  was  mean,  humiliating,',  and  mortal, 
left  our  sins,  with  His  grave-clothes,  in  the  sepulchre,  as  new  corn  separated  from 
chaff.  And  the  oil  and  frankincense  may  remind  us  of  the  oil  of  gladness  with 
which  the  risen  Saviour  was  anointed  above  His  fellows,  and  the  sweet  frankincense 
of  His  intercession,  which  is  sweet  to  God  ;  and  He  offers  Himself  to  God  in  flames 
of  love,  as  the  firbt-fruits,  with  oil  and  frankincense,  was  offered  on  the  altar  (a 
handful  of  them).  The  rest  was  for  the  priests,  intimating  that  Christ,  as  raised 
from  the  dead,  is  the  sweet  and  pure  food  of  faith  to  whiih  the  spiritual  priesthood 
are  entitled.  On  earth  and  in  heaven,  Christ  is  immortal  Bread,  living  Bread,  and 
souls  feast  on  Him  and  live  and  grow.  7.  The  firs-tfruits  sanctified  the  whole  crop. 
It  might  ihen  be  giithered  in,  but  not  before.  Christ  the  first  fruits  being  raised, 
such  is  the  power  of  His  i-esurrection,  that  the  saints  through  Him  have  riglit  to 
rise  to  a  blessed  immortality.  But  for  that,  they  that  are  fnllen  asleep  in  Christ 
had  perished.  But  by  His  resurrection  they  are  sanctified  for  life  and  glory.  8. 
The  tirst-fruits  being  accejited  of  the  Lord  for  Israel,  not  only  sanctilied  the 
harvest,  but  were  a  plelge  that  the  harvest  should  follow.  He  is  called  the  First- 
fruits,  to  convey  the  idea  that  the  rest  must  come  after.  This  is  the  doctrine  and 
argument  of  this  whole  chapter.  The  favour  pledged  to  the  Church  by  the  resur- 
rection of  Christ  is  the  resurrection  of  all  her  members  in  the  last  day  to  fellow- 
ship with  Christ  in  life,  g'ory,  and  a  blessed  immortality.  That  state  to  which  He 
arose,  do  they  arise  to  also  in  their  measure  and  order.  As  a  prelude  to  this,  some 
arose  alter  His  resurrection.  This  shows  that  the  resurrection  of  Christ  has  a 
retrosi  ective  influence,  and  sheds  the  dew  of  heaven  on  the  ^.-raves  of  all  who  died 
in  faith  froui  the  beginning.  As  He  died  for  the  sins  under  the  first  testament,  so 
shall  the  ancient  believers  arise  by  \irtue  of  His  resurrection.  It  has  also  a 
prospective  influence  on  the  believing  multitudes  yet  unborn.  1.  The  same  power 
is  employed  in  raising  Christ  and  His  people.  "  The  exceeding  preatness  of  His 
mighty  power,  which  He  wrought  in  Christ  when  He  raised  Him  from  the  dead." 
The  uimost  ability  in  man  cannot  re-kiiidle  the  vital  spark.  As  no  creature  was 
employed  to  awaken  Christ,  so  none  shall  quicken  theui.  Here  Omnipotence  will 
work  without  mean-i,  and  the  heavenly  house  will  be  "  a  house  not  made  with 
hands."  2.  As  it  was  the  same  Christ  and  the  same  body  that  arose,  so  the  very 
bodies  which  fall  asleep  in  Christ  will  ayain  awake.  The  harvest  will  resemble 
the  first-fruits  in  this  also.  It  may  not  be  every  particle.  "  This  mortal  shall  put, 
on  immoitality."  3.  The  same  Spirit  that  quickened  Christ  will  quicken  us.  It 
is  spoken  of  as  a  privilege  to  be  quickened  by  the  Spirit  (Rom.  viii.).  The  wicked 
may  be  raised  by  mere  power,  the  saii:ts  by  a  holy  and  gracious  influence.  The 
Holy  S'iiit  will  then  put  forth  His  influence  in  its  fullest  display  of  power,  sweet- 
ness, and  glory  like  the  influences  of  the  spring  on  the  vegetable  world.  4.  The 
whole  Trinity  concurred  in  Christ's,  and  shall  also  in  our  resurrection.  5.  Sin  lay 
on  Cli'ist  before  His  death  ;  and  there  was  still  some  portion  of  the  curse  on  Hiia 
while  He  lay  in  His  grave.  But  He  aiose  free  from  the  burden.  Saints  have  to 
contend  with  sin  while  in  the  body;  but  they  will  rise  free  and  pure.  6.  Christ 
wept  in  His  last  sufferings.  He  rose  to  weep  no  more.  So  from  the  eyes  of  risen 
saints  "  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears."  It  is  a  resurrection  to  joy.  7.  Christ 
rose  with  His  human  soul  full  of  love  to  His  people,  and  they  shall  rise  in  the 
peifection  of  attMchnient  to  all  who  love  the  Lord.  All  envy,  hatred,  and  aliena- 
tion— all  discord,  strife,  and  evil  surmisings  will  be  destroyed  for  ever.  8.  Christ 
rose  with  a  body  fit  for  heaven  ;  and  so  shall  they.  .  '•  Raised  in  power,"  spiritu- 
ality, and  glory,  all  marks  of  their  fallen  ami  degraded  estate  shall  disappear. 
"  Their  bodies  shall  be  fashioned  like  unto  Christ's  ^jlorious  body."  Contemplate, 
then,  the  "  end  of  the  world  "  as  the  Redeemer's  harvest.  See  the  angels  gathering 
the  sheaves  into  the  garner  after  the  first-fruits.  ( The  Evangel  ift. )  The  Resurrection  ; 
— 1.  Thk  fact  of  the  Resurrection.  1.  This  event  is  indisputable.  (1)  Heaven 
attested  it  {see  Matt,  xxviii.  2 ;  Luke  xxiv.  2, 4-7).  (2)  Eaith  also  bare  her  testimony 
(Matt,  xxviii.  2,  xxvii.  52,53).  (3)  Enemies  who  were  oblijied  to  acknowledge  that  the 
body  was  no  longer  in  the  sepulchre,  and  could  only  produce  the  testnnony  of  sleeping 
witnesses  against  it.  2.  The  agency  by  which  it  was  effected.  (1)  Infidels  perceive 
that  the  Christian  system  is  signed  and  sealed  by  a  miracle  that  requires  one  of  the 
mightii-st  displays  of  oinnipolence;  they  cannot  affirm  that  God  has  affixed  the 
broad  seal  of  heaven's  approbation  to  a  lie.  Since,  the-n,  it  is  so  manifest  that  God 
alone  could  effect  it,  they  do  not  presume,  like  the  magicians  of  Pharaoh,  to  stretch 


430  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

forth  the  hand  in  bold  and  impious  imitation.  (2)  We  often  find  it  ascribed  to 
God  wiihout  any  distinction  of  persons  (Act-i  ii.  23,  24,  iii.  13-15).  At  other  limes, 
however,  it  is  referred  to  the  Father  (Eom.  vi.  4) ;  at  others  to  the  Son  (John  ii. 
19,  21) ;  Kt  others  to  the  Spirit  (Ron.  viii.  11).  3.  Its  necessity.  It  was  necessary 
— (1)  Because  Christ  hal  Himself  made  His  resurrection  a  test  of  His  chiims 
(Matt.  xii.).  (2)  Witliout  it  cicdEince  must  be  witlilield  from  the  teacliings  of  His 
apostles  (ver.  14).  (8)  Thnt  He  might  make  efficacious  intercession  for  His  people, 
and  secure  to  them  all  the  blessings  of  the  everlasting  covenant  (Rom.  v.  10 ; 
Heb.  vii.  24,  25).  Remember  you  have  not  "  a  dead  Saviour,"  but  one  who  has 
triumphed  over  death  and  all  y<an-  foes.  When  Suwairow,  the  Russian  general, 
was  being  borne  wounded  from  the  battle-field,  his  soldiers,  discouraged  by  the 
disappearance  of  their  beloved  commander,  fill  into  confusion  and  fled  ;  when  the 
hardy  veteran  perceived  it  he  leapt  from  his  litter,  mounted  his  horse,  bleeding  as 
he  was,  and  exclaiming,  "  My  children,  I  am  still  alive,"  rallied  them,  and  led  them 
back  to  victory  !  And  shall  not  the  discour^iged  Christian  rouse  every  eaei'gy  anew, 
when  he  hears  Jesus,  the  great  Captain  of  bis  salvation,  exclaim,  "  I  am  He  that 
liveth,  and  was  dead,  and,  behold  I  am  alive  for  evermore."     II.  The  bp:lationship 

WHICH,    BY   VIRTUE     OF     HiS     EESURRECTIONT,    IS     FOmiED     BETWEEN     ChRIST    ANP    HiS 

PEOPLE — that  which  exists  between  the  first-fruits  and  the  entire  harvest.  Christ 
the  first-fruits.  His  people  the  plentitude  of  the  ingathf^ring.  Hence  we  learn  that 
the  resurrection  of  Christ  is  inseparable  from  tint  of  His  people.  Christ  cannot  be 
complete  without  His  people.  He  is  the  "  Vine,"  but  where  were  the  perfection  of 
the  vine  without  "  the  branches  "  ?  He  is  the  "  Head,"  but  where  were  the  perfec- 
tion of  the  head  without  "the  meml>ers"?  Where  shall  we  find  completeness, 
perfection,  beauty,  in  the  "Husband  "  without  the  "  bride,"  in  the  "  Foundation  " 
without  the  superstructure,  in  the  "  First-fruits  "  without  the  fulness  of  the  ingatlier- 
ing?  Notice— 1.  That  Christ  is  the  "first-fruits"  of  the  Resurrection  of  His 
believing  people  only.  It  is  true  that  by  His  power  all  shall  rise  again.  But  it  is 
with  believers  only  that  this  relationshiij  will  be  recognised.  The  term  employed 
is,  "  them  that  slept,"  which  evidently  refers  to  the  children  of  God  (ver.  18). 
As  He  was  the  "first-fruits  of  them  that  slept"  on  the  resurrection  morning 
(Matt,  xxvii.  53),  so  also  "  them  which  sleep  in  Jesus"  to  the  end  of  time,  "  will 
God  liring  with  Him."  But  ere  you  can  "fall  asleep  in  Jesus,"  you  must  live  a 
life  of  holiness  in  Jesus.  If  you  go  down  to  the  grave  with  a  heart  un'enewed,  you 
will  rise  again,  indeed  ;  but  it  will  be  "  to  the  resurrection  of  damnation."  2.  The 
order  of  the  Resurrection.  The  righteous  and  the  wicked  will  simultaneously  rise 
from  their  graves.  One  common  resurrection  will  precede  one  common  judgruent 
(John  V.  28,  29  ;  Matt.  xxv.  31-34,  41-46  ;  2  Thess.  i.  7-10;  Rev.  xx.  12,  18).  3. 
The  nature  of  the  change  which  will  pass  on  the  bodies  of  the  saints.  It  will  be  a 
change  from  all  that  is  earthly  and  gross  and  vile  to  that  which  is  heavenly  and 
holy  and  refined  (ver.  35,  &c. ).  By  wh'it  mode  this  marvellous  change  shall  be 
effected  we  know  not.  It  is  enough  for  us  to  know  that  our  jjresent  vile  and  wasting 
body  shall  undergo  a  great  and  ennobling  change,  divesting  it  of  all  that  is  gross 
and  fading,  and  clothing  it  in  a  robe  of  brilliance  and  maJHsty  which  shall  make  it 
"shine  as  the  brightness  of  the  firmament,  as  the  stais  for  ever  and  ever.'"  Con- 
clusion :  The  subject  affords  ground  of  consolition — 1.  For  those  who  are  suffering 
from  bereavement.  2.  To  those  whose  Lit  is  sickness  and  poverty  in  this  vale  of 
tenrs.     (J.    Gaakin,    M.A.)  The  certainty  and  jo}j  of  the    Resurrection  : — The 

apostle  has  been  contemplating  the  dismal  consequences  which  would  arise  if  we 
only  had  a  dead  Christ.  Then  he  turns  away  from  that  dreary  picture,  an  i  with  a 
change  of  key,  from  the  wailing  minors  of  the  preceding  verses,  he  breaks  into  this 
burst  of  triumph.  I.  The  certainty  of  Christ's  resurrection.  "  N'>w  ?s  Christ 
risen."  The  way  to  prove  a  fact  is  by  the  evidence  of  witnesses.  I,  therefore, 
protest  against  confusing  the  issues  which  is  popular  nowadays,  when  we  are  told 
that  mirncle  is  impos-ible,  and  therefore  there  has  been  no  Resurrection,  or  that 
death  is  the  end  of  human  existence,  and  that  therefore  there  has  been  no  Resurec- 
tion.  The  men  who  argue  thus  are  no  more  logical  than  the  reasoner  who,  when 
told  that  fa(5ts  were  against  him,  with  sublime  confidence  in  his  own  infallibility, 
said,  "  So  much  the  worse  for  the  facts."  Let  us  deal  with  evidence,  and  not  with 
theory.  1.  In  this  chapter  we  have  a  record  of  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  older 
than,  and  ahoge'her  independent  of,  tbe  Gospels;  that  this  Epistle  is  one  of  the 
four  undisputed  Epistles  of  the  apostle  ;  that,  therefore,  this  chapter,  written  at  the 
latest,  some  twenty-seven  years  after  the  Crucifixion,  carries  us  up  very  close  to  that 
event ;  that  it  shows  that  the  Resurrection  was  believed  all  over  the  Church,  and 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  431 

therefore  must  have  thrn  been  long  believed  ;  that  it  enables  us  to  trace  the  same 
belief  among  the  Churches  at  the  time  of  Paul's  conversion,  some  five  or  six  years 
after  the  Crucifixion,  and  that  so  we  have  absolutely  contemporaneous  testimony. 
This  is  not  a  case  in  which  a  belief  slowly  and  gradually  grew  up.  2.  And  the 
witnesses  are  leliable  and  corapetent.  It  would  be  an  anomaly,  far  greats  r  than 
the  Eesmreciion,  to  believe  that  these  people  were  conspirators  in  a  lie,  and  that 
the  fairest  morality  and  the  noblest  consecration  grew  up  out  of  a  fiand.  But  the 
apostle  avers  that  that  is  the  only  tenable  alternative.  "  If  Christ  be  not  risen, 
then  are  we  men  who  are  lying  to  please  God."  The  fashionable  modern  theiiry, 
that  it  was  hallucination  is  pieposteious.  Hallucinations  that  live  hundred  people 
at  once  shared  ;  that  lasted  all  through  long  talks,  spread  at  intervals  over  more 
than  a  month  ;  that  included  eating,  di  inking,  the  clasp  of  the  band,  and  the  feeling 
■of  the  brpatli ;  that  culminated  in  the  fancy  that  a  gather(Hl  multitude  of  tliem  saw 
Him  going  up  into  heaven  !  The  hallucination  is  on  the  other  side,  I  think.  3. 
Another  valuable  way  of  estaldishing  facts  is  to  i)oint  to  others  which  indispensably 
require  them  for  their  explanation.  I  do  not  understand  how  it  was  possible  for 
the  Church  to  exist  for  a  week  after  the  Crucifixion,  unless  Je^us  Christ  lose  agfiin. 
How  came  it  that  these  people,  with  their  Master  taken  away,  and  their  bond  of 
union  removed,  and  all  their  hopes  crushed,  did  not  say,  "We  have  made  a 
mistake,  let  us  take  to  our  fishing  again,  and  try  and  forget  our  bright  illusions." 
That  is  wliat  John  the  Baptist's  followers  did  when  he  died.  Why  did  not  Christ's 
•do  the  same?  Because  Christ  rose  again  and  re-knit  them  toget'  er.  ChristiHuity 
"with  a  dead  Chiist,  and  a  Church  gathered  round  a  grave  from  which  the  stone  lias 
not  henn  rolled  away,  is  more  unbelievable  than  the  miracle,  for  it  is  an  absurdity. 
4.  Then  tliere  is  another  thing.  Suppose,  afier  the  execution  of  Charles  I.,  a 
pretender  bar)  sprung  up  and  said,  "  I  am  the  king  !  "  the  way  to  end  that  would 
have  been  for  the  Puritan  leaders  to  have  taken  people  to  Westminster  Abbey,  and 
said,  "  Look  !  there  is  the  coffin,  there  is  the  body,  is  that  the  king  or  is  it  not?  " 
Jesus  Christ  was  said  to  have  risen  again.  The  rulers  could  have  put  an  end  to 
the  nonsense  in  two  minutes,  if  it  had  been  nonsense,  by  the  simple  process  of 
saying,  "  Go  and  look  at  the  tomb  and  you  will  see  Him  there."  But  this  question 
has  never  been  answered,  and  never  will  be.  What  became  of  that  sacred  corpse  if 
Christ  did  not  rise  again  from  the  dead?  The  clumsy  lie,  that  the  disciples  had 
stolen  away  the  body,  was  the  acknowledgment  that  the  grave  was  empty.  If  the 
grave  were  empty,  either  Plis  servants  were  imjiostois,  wbi(di  we  have  seen  is 
incredible,  or  the  Christ  was  risen  again.  II.  The  triumph  in  the  ceetitude  of 
THAT  KEsuRKECTioN.  The  apostlc  has  been  speaking  about  the  consequences  which 
would  follow  from  the  fact  that  Christ  was  not  raised.  If  we  take  these  and  reverse 
them,  we  understand  this  great  burst  of  triumi'h  from  the  apostle's  lips.  1.  Tlie 
risen  Christ  gives  us  a  complete  gospel.  A  dead  Clirist  annihilates  it.  "  If  Christ 
be  not  risen,  our  preaching  i><  vain,"  i.e.,  empty — a  blown  bladder;  nothing  in  it 
hut  wind.  Strike  the  Kesurrection  out,  and  v\ hat  have  you  left?  Some  beautiful 
bits  of  moral  teaching,  a  lovely  life,  marred  by  tremendous  mistakes  about  Himself 
and  His  relation  to  men  and  to  God  ;  but  you  have  (.'ot  nolliing  left  that  is  worth 
calling  a  gospel.  2.  A  living  Christ  gives  faith  something  to  lay  hold  of.  A  dead 
Christ,  makes  our  faith  "  vain," /.e.,  "  of  none  effect  "  or  "  powerless."  (1)  The 
risen  Christ  gives  something  for  faith  to  lay  hold  of.  Who  can  trust  a  dead  Christ, 
or  a  human  Christ?  It  is  only  when  we  recognise  Hm  as  declared  to  be  the  Son 
of  God,  and  that  by  the  Resurrection,  that  our  faith  has  anything  roi'nd  wnich  it 
can  twine,  and  to  which  it  can  cleave.  (2)  If  Cbris-t  be  dead,  our  faith,  if  it  could 
exist,  would  be  as  de-^oid  of  etTeot  as  it  would  be  empty  of  substance.  It  would  be 
like  an  infant  seeking  nourishment  at  a  dead  mother's  breast,  or  men  trying  to 
kindle  their  torches  at  an  extinguished  lamp.  It  would  fail  to  bring  deliverance 
from  sin.  3.  The  risen  Christ  gives  us  the  certitude  of  our  Eesurrection.  M^ny 
men  talked  about  a  western  continent,  but  Colunibuswent  there  and  came  ba^dj  again, 
and  that  ended  doubt.  Many  men  before,  and  apart  from  Jesus,  have  cherished 
thoughts  of  an  immortal  life,  but  He  has  been  there  and  returned.  And  that  only 
puts  the  doctrine  of  immortality  upon  an  irrefragable  foundation.  Conclusion  :  If 
you  will  let  Him,  He  will  make  yon  pirtakers  of  His  own  immortal  life.  1.  '•  The 
first-fruits  of  them  that  slept  "  is  the  pledge  and  the  propiiecy  of  all  the  waving 
abundance  of  golden  grain  that  shall  be  gathered  into  the  great  husbandman's  barns. 
The  apostle  goeson  to  represent  the  resurrection  of  ''them  that  are  Ci  ris*'s"as  aeon- 
sequence  of  their  union  to  Jesus.  He  has  conquered  for  us  all.  2.  There  are  two 
resurrections  ;  one,  that  of  Christ's  servants ;  one,  that  of  others.     They  are  not  the 


432  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

same  in  principle — and,  alas  !  tliey  are  awfully  different  in  issue.  "  Some  shall  awake 
to  eveilasting  life,  and  some  to  shame  and  everlasting  contempt."  (A.iJacl<(ren,D.D.)  f 
llie  1(110  of  the  resurrection  : — 1.  Our  common  ideas  and  fears  of  death  are  mora;' 
Pagan  tlian  Christian.  Death  to  many  men  is  the  blanii  wall  around  lie  beyoni 
which  they  look  or  plan  for  nothing.  Bat  pliysical  deatli  does  not  liokl  the  first 
place  in  the  economy  of  rtdemption.  The  Bible  assigns  it  a  subordinate  place. 
Sin,  indeed,  entailed  the  certainty  of  death  for  man  ;  but  Adam  was  not  com- 
manded by  the  Lord  to  live  every  daj-  a  slave  bound  under  the  fear  of  dea'li.  Man 
is  to  work  out  his  time  here,  and  to  pass  through  death,  as  born  under  the  higher 
law  of  the  Spirit,  and  with  the  possibility  of  eternal  life  always  before  him.  And 
in  the  New  Testament  the  chit  f  use  made  of  the  fact  of  death  is  as  a  metaphor. 
Sin  is  death  ;  the  maid  whom  the  people  thought  dead  Christ  said  "  sleeijeth."  The 
importance  of  natural  death  falls  into  the  background,  and  the  new  birlh  of  the 
Spirit  comes  into  the  foreground.  2.  Tlie  Christian  doctiine  of  the  Resurrection  is 
a  Rtumblinj;-block  to  faith  because  of  this  exaggerated  estimate  of  death.  We 
speak  as  though  death  were  the  ultimate  law  of  life,  and  thus  we  have  to  smuL'gle 
in  our  hope  of  the  resurrection  as  a  miraculous  exception.  Exactly  the  opposite  is 
true.  Life  is  the  law  of  nature,  and  death  a  natural  means  to  more  life  ana  better. 
The  resurrection  of  Jesus  was  not  the  great  exception  to  natural  law  ;  it  is  an 
exemplilicntion  of  the  higher,  universal  law  of  life.  In  the  opinion  of  the  apostle 
the  lesurrection  of  Jesus  was  no  more  out  ci  the  Divine  order  of  things  than  the 
first-fruits  of  the  sun-mer  are  exceptions  to  the  general  law  which  in  the  autumn 
shall  j-how  its  universal  power  in  every  harvest-field.  3.  The  resurrection  of  Jesus 
is  the  great  miracle  of  history,  the  corner-stone  of  the  evidences  of  supernatural 
religion.  But  the  miracle  was  not  the  fact  itself,  i)ut  in  that  He  was  raised  before 
the  last  great  day,  and  that  He  should  be  seen  by  men  in  His  intermedia' e  state 
between  earth  and  heaven.  And  the  God  of  the  living  had  His  own  sufficient 
reason  for  making  this  one  exceptiim.  It  was  partly  for  our  sakes,  that  the  world 
mi'jht  believe.  Was  it  not  due  also  to  the  person  of  Jesus  that  He  should  not  wait 
with  all  the  saints  for  the  day  of  tinal  redemption?  The  miraculous  thus  in 
Jesus'  resurrection  pertains  to  tiie  manner  and  time  of  it  rather  than  to  the  essen- 
tial fact  of  it.  It  was  an  exceptional  fruit  apiiearmg  before  the  harvest,  which  is 
the  end  of  the  world.  If  you  should  see  a  tree  bloss'im,  and  the  next  morning  find 
the  fruit  already  ripe,  you  would  sny,  Tliat  is  extraordinary !  It  is  not  indeed 
contrary  to  the  nature  of  the  tree  that  fruit  should  ripen,  yet  contrary  to  ad  our 
experience  of  growth  that  the  fruit  should  lipen  in  a  day.  And  it  would  not  be 
impossible  to  conceive  a  quickening  of  nature's  forces  which  might  cause  a  plant  to 
break  into  fruitfulness  contrary  to  our  experience  of  its  us;)al  times  and  seasons. 
Somewhat  so  is  Jesus' resnrieciion  a  first-fruit  of  the  tree  of  life;  not  in  itself 
contrary  to  the  law  of  life,  but  in  its  manner  and  time  out  of  the  common  order. 
I.  There  is  no  little  Scriptoeal  evidence  for  the  belief  that  the  resurrection 
or  Jesus,  although  exceptional  in  time  and  manner,  is  an  instance  of  a  general 
LAW  of  keslrrection.  1.  This  was  Jesus'  teachini.'.  He  answered  the  Saddacees 
by  asserting  that  the  dead  shall  be  raised,  but  He  placed  the  fiict  of  the  Resurrection 
upon  ihe  fundamental  principle  that  life,  not  death,  is  God's  first  law.  The 
highest  law  of  human  nature  according  to  Christ  is  that  it  should  "  live  unto 
God  "  ;  if  there  is  to  be  eternal  d-^alh,  that  death  must  come  in  as  the  exception,  as 
the  failing  back  of  a  soul  from  the  kind  of  life  for  which  it  was  created  to  the 
lower  powers  of  corruption.  It  is  born  for  freedom  and  life  in  constant  relation  to 
the  living  God  ;  if  it  is  to  perish  it  can  only  be  by  making  itself,  through  some  inner 
falsehood,  subject  to  corruption.  2.  The  Lord's  own  resurrection  is  set  forth  as  an 
event  which  could  not  possibly  have  failed  to  occur  (Acts  ii.  2J;,  27).  How  can  holiness 
see  corruption  ?  how  can  life  itself  be  given  over  to  death  ?  Impossible  !  It  would 
have  been  a  miracle  had  not  Jesus  risen  from  the  dead — a  miracle  without  reason, 
a  miracle  against  the  living  God,  had  He  not  risen  from  the  dead — the  first-fruits 
of  this  power  and  order  of  Divine  life  in  the  creation.  3.  The  same  truth  comes 
out  grandly  in  the  apostolic  gospel  of  the  Resurrection.  What  is  this  wonderful 
chapter  but  a  setting  forth  of  the  glorious  law  of  the  resurrection?  First  the  his- 
torical fact  that  Jesus  was  seen  after  His  death  is  solemnly  attested  ;  then  Jesus' 
resurrection  is  declared  to  be  the  first-fruits  of  the  whole  harvest  of  life  which  is  to 
follow  ;  and  then  this  process  of  the  resurrection  is  shown  to  be  in  the  largest  and 
profoundest  sense  natural.  It  is  a  spiritual  outgrowth  from  this  body  of  death. 
(1)  The  nature  of  the  resurrection  is  in  accordance  with  law.  If  there  is  a  natural 
body  there  is  also  a  spiritual  bodj' — the  latter  is  just  as  much  in  the  Divine  order 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  43J 

of  things  as  is  the  former — the  creation  is  made  and  constituted  for  the  higher 
spiritual  body  as  much  as  lor  the  lower  natural  body.  (2)  Its  method  is  in 
accordance  with  law.  First  the  God-given  seed,  then  its  quickening  in  the  earth, 
then  its  springing  up  out  of  its  earthliness  into  its  own  element,  and  its  being 
clothed  upon  with  its  own  proper  form  and  texture,  as  God  gives  "  to  each  seed  a 
body  of  its  own."  (3)  Its  whole  process  is  in  accordance  with  law  (vers.  46,  47). 
TLe  apostle  was  not  standing  dazed  before  a  miracle.  He  has  caught  a  glimpse 
into  the  first  principles  of  life  which  go  deeper  than  death.  He  has  learned  that 
the  resurrection  is  the  promised  fulfiliiient  of  tbe  laws  of  life  which  have  been  with 
God  from  before  the  foundation  of  the  woild.  The  stars  which  differ  in  Rlory  are 
no  more  miracles  in  the  sky  than  is  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  to  the  apostle  who 
had  seen  the  risen  Lord.  The  sun  and  the  moon  are  no  more  exceptions  to  the 
ancient  order  of  the  heavens  than  the  souls  of  men  raised  from  the  dead,  and 
clcithed  upon  with  the  shining  glory  of  the  celestial,  are  out  of  the  Divine  order  and 
harmony  to  the  eye  of  the  apostle  who  has  seen  the  risen  Lord.     II.  The  Biblical 

TEACHING  OF  THE  EKSCRRECTION  IS  THAT  IT  IS  l^  ACCORDANCE  WITH  LAW.     WuY  SIIOOLD 

IT  sicEM  OTHERWISE  TO  US  ?  1.  Why  should  we  regard  it  as  a  thing  incretlible  that 
God  should  raise  the  d^ad  ?  Is  there  anything  which  we  have  seen  upon  this 
earth  which  contradicts  the  spiritual  law  of  our  full  redemption  ?  Apparent  con- 
tradictions to  this  gospel  there  are,  but  not  one  which  is  real.  On  the  oiber  hand, 
thtre  are  positive  facts  arranging  themselves  now  in  lengthening  lines,  over  which 
we  look  straight  out  into  the  unseen  and  the  eternal.  As  I  cannot  think  of  a  star 
except  as  I  think  of  it  as  in  the  sky,  so  I  cannot  think  of  this  visible  sphere  of 
things  or  nature  except  as  existing  in  some  invisible  realm  and  larger  presence. 
And  particularly  in  confirmation  of  this  Scriptural  faith  in  the  Divine  orderliness 
of  the  resurrection  and  eternal  life,  let  me  now  merely  suggt-st  these  considerations. 
(1)  We  do  know  this,  that  death  is  not  the  only  law  of  nature ;  there  is  also  the 
law  of  life.  (2)  It  is  a  fact  that  of  the  two  laws  life,  not  death,  is  the  higher  and 
prevailing  power  so  far  as  we  can  see.  The  earth  was  dead,  so  they  tell  us,  ages 
ago.  Now  how  this  earth  lives!  (3)  Even  here,  where  death  reigns,  life  has  been 
growing  higher,  more  complex,  more  capable  of  larger  correspondences  with  things. 
Between  the  lowest  living  thing  and  the  brain  of  man  there  is  a  difference  of  life 
wide  as  the  distance  between  the  earth  and  the  heavens.  Plainly,  then,  without 
any  doubt,  liie  is  something  stronger  thus  far  upon  this  earth  than  death.  Not- 
withstanding death,  life  grows  to  be  more  and  rrcher.  2.  But  this  is  not  all.  W^hat 
is  death,  so  far  as  we  can  see  ?  Here  is  a  minute  living  thing  in  a  glass  of  water. 
You  turn  the  water  out.  That  living  particle  is  now  mere  dust  upon  the  glass. 
Dead — that  is,  it  is  no  longer  moving  in  an  element  corresponding  to  its  capacity  ly^ 
of  vital  movements.  Death,  then,  is  simply  some  wrong  or  imperfect  adjustment  ^"'^ 
of  life  to  external  conditions.  But  death  may  be  partial,  then,  not  entire.  A  part 
of  the  body  may  be  dead.  A  man  may  be  dead  in  some  relations,  and  still  live  in 
others.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  we  die  daily.  Life  is  the  principle,  the  force, 
the  law ;  death  the  limitation,  the  accident,  the  partial  negation  of  God's  great 
affirmation  of  life  in  things.  Now  see  where  this  thought  leads.  (1)  Death  is  the 
sundering  of  certain  relations  of  life  towards  outward  things.  (2)  Therefore,  when 
the  body  finally  is  wholly  dead  and  buried,  when  all  these  physical  relations  are 
wholly  broken  off,  so  much  of  life  is  certainly  gone,  but  nothing  else  in  a  man,  if 
there  is  anything  more  of  him,  is  dead.  "  You  may  catch  me  if  you  can  find  me," 
said  Socrates,  as  he  let  his  body  go.  And  the  Scripture  says,  "  God  is  not  the  God 
of  the  dead,  but  of  the  living.  3.  This  view  of  the  partial  and  negative  iDOwer  and 
function  of  death  opens  up  a  further  rational  ijossibility  of  life.  We  have  only  to 
suppose  a  living  sonl  in  perfect  adjustment  to  God,  and  all  God's  laws  of  things,  to 
conceive  of  a  being  possessing  eternal  life.  "  This  is  life  eternal  that  they  might 
know  Thee,"  &c.  In  such  i^erfect  adjustment  of  being  to  God  and  His  laws  the 
finite  spirit  would  exist  in  its  final  spiritual  embodiment.  Eternal  life  would  be 
the  perfect  harmony  of  the  inwai-d  and  outward  conditions — the  final  union  of  the 
spirit  of  the  just  made  perfect  wifh  God  and  His  universe.  Conclusion:  If  these 
things  be  so  it  follows  that  our  true  life  consists  in  our  coming  at  once  into  the 
right  correspondence  with  that  which  is  the  real  and  eternal  element  of  life — with 
God  and  His  righteousness.  We  are  made  to  live  in  perfect  harmony  with  all  good, 
beautiful,  and  true  things,  or  in  communion  with  God.  The  only  thing  to  be 
feared  is  spiritual  death.  That  is  non-adjustment  of  our  heaits  to  God.  There  is 
one  thing  which  I  cannot  but  fear,  and  that  is  the  loss  of  one's  own  soul.  And  I 
am  afraid  of  the  death  which  I  see  already  going  beyond  the  physical  man, 
VOL.   II.  28 


484  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xv 

benumbing  the  conscience,  and  chilling  the  very  souls  of  men.  He  that  hath  the 
Son  hath  life  ;  he  that  hath  not  the  Son  of  God  hath  not  life.  {Neivman  Smyth, 
D.D.)  The  resurrection  of  Christ : — Contemplate  this  as — I.  An  established 
FACT.  It  is  established — 1.  On  the  testimony  of  the  most  competent  witnesses — 
those  who  had  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  facts,  and  such  an  invincible  love  for 
truth  as  would  render  it  impossible  for  tbem  to  misrepresent  them.  2.  On  the 
very  existence  of  Christendom.  What  gave  birth  to  Claristendom  ?  The  gospel ; 
and  the  truth  of  the  gospel  rests  on  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  3.  On  the  con- 
sciousness of  genuine  disciples.  Such  consciousness  attests  that  they  are  "not  in 
their  sins,"  and  they  feel  that  this  deliverance  came  from  the  gospel.  II.  A  sig- 
nificant FACT.  The  reference  here  is  (o  the  "  first-fruits  "  of  tlie  harvest  (see  Lev. 
xxiii.  12-19).  Those  first-fruits  were  both  an  earnest  and  a  sample  of  the  full 
harvest  at  hand.  Hence  Christ's  resurrection  was  regarded — 1.  As  a  pledge  of  the 
resurrection.  As  He  ro?e  so  will  all  rise.  2.  As  a  pattern.  The  sheaf  waved 
before  the  Lord  was  a  specimen  or  sample  of  what  remained  in  the  field  to  be 
gathered  in.  "  Our  vile  bodies  shall  be  fashioned  and  made  like  unto  His  glorious 
body  "  (vers.  21,  22).  III.  An  influential  fact.  Iletween  the  influence  of  Adam 
and  that  of  Christ  on  the  race  there  is — 1.  A  resemblance.  The  resemblance  is  in 
its  extensibility.  Though  Adam's  influence  upon  the  race  is  more  extensive  at 
present  than  that  of  Christ,  it  is  not  more  extensible.  It  has  in  it  the  power  of 
extending  over  the  whole  race  down  through  all  times,  and  it  will  do  so.  2.  A 
contrast.  The  influence  of  the  one  is  destructive,  the  influence  of  the  other 
quickening.  If  by  death  here  bodily  death  is  meant,  then  the  idea  is  that  Clirist 
will  quicken  to  life  all  that  have  died.  But  wliat.  does  it  mean  to  be  in  Adam  and 
in  Christ.  In  the  sense  of  character.  All  men  live  in  the  characters  of  others; 
children  in  the  character  of  their  parents,  )iuiiils  in  their  masters,  the  present 
generation  in  the  preceding.  The  characters  of  the  men  of  past  ages  constitute  the 
moral  atmosphere  of  existing  men.  In  Adam's  character — the  character  of 
selfishness,  carnality,  unbelief — all  unregenerate  men  live  to-day,  his  principles 
pulsate  in  all  hearts.  In  the  character  of  Clnist,  in  His  self-sacrificing  love,  spot- 
less purity,  and  godly  devotion,  all  the  godly  live  to-day.  Now  those  who  live  in 
the  character  of  Adam  must  die,  not  merely  in  the  sense  of  the  dissolution  of  the 
soul  from  the  body,  but  in  the  more  awful  sense  of  th<^  dissolution  of  the  soul  from 
God  ;  whereas  those  who  live  in  the  character  of  Christ  live  by  a  vital  cunnection 
with  the  Eternal  Fountain  of  all  life.  {D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Christ's  resurrec- 
tion : — I.  Odk  Lord's  EESunREcrioN  fkom  the  deau  is  the  pledge  and  earnest  of 
AiiL  Christian  hope.  1.  That  it  should  be  the  corner-stone  of  Christian  doctrine 
strikes  at  the  root  of  all  religious  theories  which  ignore  the  miraculous  in  Chris- 
tianity. The  story  of  Christ  bet^ins  and  closes  with  the  supernatural — the  incarna- 
tion and  the  resurrection.  2.  It  is  constantly  represented  as  the  su]5reme  fact  in 
Christianity.  (1)  Christ  often  foretells  it  as  such  (Matt.  xvii.  9 ;  Mark  viii.  31; 
Luke  ix.  22;  Matt.  xii.  40;  John  ii.  19,  xi.  25,  &c.).  He  thus  committed  Himself 
to  a  test  by  which  His  claims  might  be  proved,  or  the  reverse,  (a)  If  He  did  not 
rise  men  would  know  He  was  a  self-deceiver,  if  not  an  impostor,  (b)  As  the  Holy 
Son  of  God  He  could  not  remain  in  the  power  of  death,  which  is  a  penalty  for  sin. 
(c)  As  such,  moreover,  He  might  give  Himself  up  to  death  for  a  time,  to  secure  a 
great  end  in  the  economy  of  salvation,  but  He  must  have  life,  indestructible,  in 
Himself — must  rise.  (2)  The  ajDostles  made  it  the  supreme  fact  in  iheir  preaclung 
(Acts  iv.  2,  i.  22,  iv.  33,  xxiii.  6  ;  Rom.  iv.  1,  vi.  5 ;  Phil.  iii.  10;  1  Pet.  i.  3,  iii.  21). 
3.  It  was  established  by  evidence  which  admitted  no  question  in  the  mind  of  St. 
Paul,  long  the  bitter  ojiponent  of  Christianity  (vers.  5-8).  II.  Why  so  much  stress 
IS  LAID  ON  the  resurrection  OF  Chbist.  1.  It  was  the  confirmation  of  ail  His 
promises  as  the  founder  of  a  new  religion.  (1)  Had  He  lain  in  the  grave  the  proof  to 
which  He  appealed,  of  being  sent  to  save  men,  would  have  been  wanting.  (2)  His 
resurrection  was  a  confirmation  of  His  claims  by  the  Eternal  Father,  (a)  Of  His 
claims  to  be  an  atoning  sacrifice  for  sin.  Of  His  being,  in  reality,  the  Son  of  God. 
"  Declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  with  power,"  &c.  (b)  Of  His  having  entered  into 
His  glory  at  the  head  of  the  new  spiritual  kingdom  He  had  founded.  (B)  In  the 
presence  of  His  resurrection  all  doubts  vanish  from  the  minds  of  the  apostles  as  to 
His  being  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  all  who  come  to  God  through  Him  (vers. 
14,  17-19  ;  cf.  Eom.  viii.  34).  (4)  But,  now  that  He  is  risen,  all  is  bright  with  a 
glorious  hope.  "  He  was  raised  for  our  justification,  having  obtained  eternal 
redemption  for  us."  "  We  have  an  advocate  with  the  Father."  "He  ever  liveth 
to  make  intercession  for  us."    2.  It  was  the  pledge  of  our  own  resurrection  and 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  435 

futui-e  hnppiness.  The  words  spoken  over  the  tomb  of  Lazarus  come  back  with 
awful  power  from  the  heavens  now  Christ  is  risen — "  I  am  the  resurrection  and  the 
hfe."  Tliose,  also,  spoken  to  His  disciples — "  Because  I  live  ye  shall  live  also."' 
•(1)  In  Him  humanity  conquered  death.  The  destiny  of  man  linked  with  Him. 
He  is  the  first-fruits.  Tlie  strf^amer  that  heralds  the  day.  The  bud  of  spring  that 
foretells  the  glory  of  June.  (2)  He  has  thus  brought  lite  and  immortality  to  light 
through  the  gospel.  The  contrast  between  the  darkness  of  the  futui'e  before  Christ 
■and  its  holy  radiance  since.  Ciesar  demanding  that  Cataline  should  be  spared 
since  dnath  ended  existence.  Cicero  bewailing  his  daughter's  death  without  a  ray 
of  hope  beyond  earth.  (3)  Christ's  resurrection  has  "  begotten  us  again  to  a  lively 
hope."  It  has  attracted  us  to  the  eternal  world  as  ttie  home  of  our  Elder  Brother. 
3.  It  is  the  constraining  impulse  to  a  holy  life.  (1)  To  be  like  Christ  the  ideal  (f 
His  followers,  since  He  showed  us  the  path  by  wliich  alone  we  can  pain  a  happy 
immortality.  Gratitude  and  love  draws  out  the  heart  ti  an  absolute  devotion  to 
His  service,  that  service  being  a  holy  life.  As  He  has  risen,  so  we  are  constrained 
Ito  seek  a  sj^iutual  resurrection  from  our  old  selves  to  nt^wness  of  life,  to  be  like 
Him,  and  hereafter  rejoin  Him.  (2)  His  resurrection  has  secured  us  heavenly 
grace  to  assist  us  on  this  course  (Acts  ii.  23  :  John  xvi.  7).  (3)  The  resurrection  of 
Christ  is  a  pledge  of  the  future  triumph  of  His  kingdom.  "  All  power  given  Him  in 
heaven  and  on  earth."  "He  must  reign."  (Cunninfiham  Geikle,  D.D.)  The 
resnnection :  Clirint  t]ie  first-fniits : — I.  The  pictdkes  heee  given  of  the  death  of 
THE  SAINTS.  1.  As  a  sleep.  Not  that  the  soul  sleeps,  but  the  body  in  its  lonely  bed 
'of  earth,  beneath  the  coverlet  of  grass,  with  the  cold  clay  for  its  pillow.  (1)  With 
sleep  we  associate  the  ideas  of — {a)  Rest.  On  yonder  conch,  however  hard,  the 
labourer  shakes  off  his  toil,  the  mercliant  his  care,  the  thinker  his  difficultifs,  and 
the  sufferer  his  pains.  Sleep  makes  each  night  a  Sabbath  for  the  day.  So  is  it 
with  the  body  while  it  sleeps  in  the  tomb.  The  weary  are  at  rest ;  the  servant  is 
as  much  at  ease  as  his  lord.  (/;)  Forgetfulness.  The  sonl  forgets  not,  and  we 
have  no  reason  to  believe  that  the  glorified  me  ignorant  of  what  is  going  on  below. 
But  what  do  tUeir  bodies  know?  Take  up  the  skull,  see  if  there  be  memory  there. 
See  where  once  the  heart  was  if  there  be  any  emotion  there.  Gather  the  bones, 
see  if  they  are  still  obedient  to  mnsrles  which  could  be  moved  at  will  as  passing 
events  m  ght  affect  the  mind.  (c)  Benefit.  In  the  old  tradition  Medet,  the 
enchantress,  cast  the  limbs  of  old  inen  into  her  cauldron  that  they  might  come 
forth  young  again.  Sleep  does  all  this  in  its  fashion.  The  righteous  are  put  into 
their  graves  all  weary  and  worn,  but  such  they  will  not  rise.  (2)  The  sleep  of 
death  is  not — {n)  A  dreamy  slumber.  The  involuntary  action  of  the  mind  prevents 
us  at  times  from  taking  rest  in  sleep.  But  not  so  with  the  dear  departed.  In  that 
sleep  of  death  no  dienins  can  come,  (b)  A  hopeless  sleep.  We  have  seen  persons 
sleep  who  have  been  long  emaciated  by  sickness,  when  we  have  said,  "  That  eye 
will  never  open  again  ;  lie  will  sleep  himself  into  eternity."  But  it  is  not  so  here. 
They  sleep  a  bealthy  sleep — they  sleep  to  wake,  and  not  to  die  the  second  death  ; 
tlo  w.ike  in  joyous  fellowship  when  the  Eedeemer  stands  in  the  latter  day  upon  the 
■earth.  (3)  Ought  not  this  view  of  death  to  prevent  our  looking  upon  it  in  so 
repulsive  a  light?  Did  you  ever  feel  horror  at  a  sleeping  child  or  husband  or  wife? 
And  do  not  wish  the  departed  back  again.  Would  you  wake  your  friend  who  has 
fallen  asleep  after  excruciating  paiu?  2.  As  a  sowing.  The  mould  has  been 
ploughed,  and  the  husbandman  scatters  his  seeds.  They  fall  into  the  earth,  the 
clods  are  raked  over  them,  and  they  disappear.  So  it  is  with  us.  We  call  Death  a 
reaper — I  call  him  a  sower.  He  tnkes  these  bodies  and  sows  us  broadcast  in  the 
ground.  And  if  this  is  so  let  us  have  done  with  all  faithless  sorrow.  "  The  granary 
is  empty,"  says  the  farmer.  Yes,  but  he  does  not  siuh  over  it ;  for  the  seed  is  put 
into  ihe  ground  in  order  that  the  granary  may  be  filled  again.  "  Our  family  circle 
has  been  broken,"  say  you.  Yes,  but  only  broken  that  it  may  be  re-formed.  The 
:stars  are  st-tting  here  to  rise  in  other  skies  to  set  no  more.  II.  The  connection 
BETWEEN  THE  RESURREci'iON  OF  Christ  AND  THAT  OF  beIjIevers.  Some  tnke  very 
.great  delight  in  the  hope  that  they  mav  be  "  alive  and  remain  "'  at  the  coming  fif 
'Christ,  but  not  to  die  would  be  to  lose  the  great  privilege  of  relationship  with 
Christ  as  "  the  first-fruits."  The  allusion  is  to  the  Jewisli  feast,  when  the  first 
■sh  af  was  brought  out  from  the  barvest  as  a  token  of  the  whole,  and  first  of  all 
heaved  upward  as  a  he  ive-otfering,  and  then  waived  to  a'ul  fro  as  a  waive-offering, 
being  thus  dedicated  to  God  in  testimony  of  the  gratitude  for  the  harvest.  The 
Passover  was  celebrated  first,  then  came  a  Sabbath-day,  then  after  that  came  the 
feast  of  first-fruits.     So  Christ  died  on  the  Passover  day,  the  next  day  was  the 


436  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xv. 

Sabbatic  rest.  Christ's  bocly  therefore  tarried  in  the  grave ;  then  early  iu  the 
morning  of  tlie  first  clay,  the  feast  of  the  first-fruits,  Christ  rose.  Christ  was 
the  first  that  rose— 1.  In  order  of  time.  All  who  were  raised  before  died  again, 
and,  \vith  the  exception  of  Lazarus,  none  were  ever  buried.  Christ  was  the  first 
who  really  rose  no  more  to  die.  He  leads  the  vanguard  through  the  dark  defile, 
and  His  brow  first  salutes  the  light  of  heaven.  We  admire  the  man  who  discovers 
a  new  country.  Christ  is  the  first  who  returned  from  the  jaws  of  death  to  tell  of 
immortality  and  light.  2.  In  point  of  cause;  for  as  He  comes  back  from  the  grave 
He  brings  all  His  followers  behind  Him  in  one  glorious  train.  We  read  of  Hercules 
descending  into  Hades  and  bringing  up  his  friend.  Verily  went  Christ  tliither,  and 
He  gave  no  sop  to  Cerberus,  but  cut  off  his  head.  3.  In  point  of  pledge.  The 
first-fruits  were  a  pledge  of  the  harvest.  4.  As  the  representative  of  the  whole. 
When  the  first-fruit  shenf  had  been  waved  before  God  it  was  considered  that  all  the 
harvest  had  been  brought  into  the  sanctuar3^  So  when  Christ  rose  He  consecrated 
the  whole  harvest.  All  the  righ'eous  dead  were  virtually  risen  in  Him.  III.  The 
iNFLUEXCH!  OF  THIS  DOCTRINE.  1.  Let  US  loolv  Well  to  the  holiness  of  our  bodies. 
"  Know  ye  not  that  your  bodies  are  the  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost?  "  Now  if  our 
eyes  look  upon  vanity  we  have  defiled  the  windows  of  God's  house  ;  if  our  tongues 
speak  evil  we  have  desecrated  its  gates.  Let  us  see  to  it  that  our  feet  carry  us 
nowhere  but  where  our  Master  can  go  with  us,  and  that  our  hands  be  outstretched 
for  naught  but  that  which  is  pure  and  lovely.  2.  Are  we  among  those  for  whom 
Christ  stands  as  first-fruits?  [C.  II.  Sjnirc/eon.)  Christ  the  first-fruits  : — All 
shall  rise  at  the  last  day,  and  be  clothed  with  their  bodies  again.  But  will  all  that 
rise  enter  into  Christ's  joy?  Only  if  they  rise  after  His  likeness.  The  crop  from 
which  the  fit  st-fruits  were  picked  was  not  all  of  the  same  quality.  There  may 
have  been  wild  grapes  and  truit  of  bramldi  s  amid  the  crop  of  the  vineyard,  and 
there  may  have  been  tares  and  thistles  among  the  crop  of  corn.  These  would  be 
cast  into  the  fire,  and  none  but  what  are  of  the  same  kind  as  the  first-fruits, 
grapes  and  com,  laid  up  in  store.  So  it  will  be  at  the  resurrection  harvest.  None 
but  such  as  are  like  to  Christ,  t  e  first-fiuits,  will  be  admitted  into  the  kingdom  of 
heaven.  There  is,  therefore,  much  to  "  arn  uk  here.  Thiit  which  goes  into  the 
ground  as  seed  of  bramble  or  tli-tln  will  rise  brninlle  or  thistle,  so  he  that  goes 
mto  the  grave  a  child  of  wrath  will  rise  a  chid  of  wrath.     Note — I.  T/iat  which  is 

THE  GRAND    PROPERTY  OF  EVEUYTIIIKG    THAT    BEARS  FRUIT,  GROWTH.       As    all   men    bear 

fruit  of  some  kind,  they  are  grooving  up  from  something  and  to  something.  1. 
What,  then,  is  the  seed  in  our  hearts  from  which  we  are  growing?  Is  it  the  good 
seed  of  the  Word  of  God?  It  is  easy  to  rleteimine.  The  manner  of  the  plant's 
growth  decljires  its  seed.  (1)  Is  there  in  the  hcHrt — (a)  A  spreading  forth  of  the 
love  of  God  ?  (h)  A  continual  r.s  ■,  as  if  of  lively  sap,  of  the  sense  of  the  mercies  in 
Christ,  of  the  experience  of  the  earnest  of  His  |iromises,of  the  motions  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  of  the  i)roiiptings  of  good  thoughts,  godly  meditations,  heavenly  affections  ? 
(c)  The  shooting  upwards  of  the  stem  of  the  seeking  of  God,  the  believing  in 
Christ,  the  hoping  if  the  good  things  to  come,  the  raising  of  the  desires?  {d)  The 
shooting  downward  of  a  good  hold  of  faith,  of  a  rooting  in  love,  of  a  seeking  of 
spiiitual  nourishment?  {e)  Shooting  sideways  into  branches  of  love  toward  the 
brethien,  of  exercise  in  good  works,  of  exnmple  to  edification?  Who  can  doubt 
the  seed  of  such  a  jjlant?  (2)  But,  on  the  contrary,  if  the  heart — (a)  Eise  and 
swell  with  the  motions  of  ungodliness.  (/;)  Shooting  upward  in  rebellion  against 
God.  (f)  Shoot  downward  in  carnal  desiri  s,  earihly  affections,  devilish  inclina- 
tions. (fZ)  Shoot  sideways  in  carelessnefs  of  living,  bad  example,  indifference  to 
God's  honour  and  glory — who  does  not  know  thit  it  is  the  bad  seed  sown  by  the 
devil  in  the  heart  of  man  when  he  was  asleep  in  the  unwatchfulness  of  this  world  ? 
And  who  is  not  certain  of  the  nature  of  its  fruit,  that  it  will  be  a  poisonous  berry, 
to  the  shame  and  scandal  of  tlie  vineyard  and  field  of  God  in  which  he  has  been 
suffered  to  grow  up?  2.  What  is  the  fruit  to  which  we  are  growing.  There  can 
be  no  doubt  of  a  plant  bearing  its  natural  fruit,  but  there  may  be  a  doubt  of  its 
bearing  fruit  at  all.  But  we  hardly  ever  see  worthless  plants  disabled  from  bearing 
fruit.  Who  ever  saw  the  thistle  blighted  ?  It  is  the  valuable  fruits  that  are  so 
uncertain,  and  the  more  precious  they  are  so  much  the  more  tender  they  are,  and 
require  greater  care  to  bring  them  to  perfection,  for  they  are  not  in  their  natural 
climate.  And  is  the  sinful  world  the  natural  climate  for  the  precious  fruits  of 
holiness?  No;  all  ungodliness  thrives  in  it,  blossoms  without  fail  and  in  all 
abundance,  and  brings  forth  fruit  most  plentifully.  But  bow  different  is  it  with 
the  plant  which  comes  up  in  the  heart  from  the  seed  of  the  Word  of  God.     The 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  437 

heat  of  temptation,  the  cold  of  indifference,  the  blight  of  unbelief,  the  floods  of 
ungodliness,  are  all  against  it,  and  it  requires  to  be  nursed  carefully,  watched  con- 
tinually. II.  On  ouk  gkowth,  whethkr  for  good  or  for  evil  fruii',  depknds  our 
PLACE  on  the  day  OF  THE  HARVEST  of  v\hich  Christ  is  the  first-fruits.  Our  charac- 
ters ai'e  decided  for  holy  or  unholy  when  we  go  into  the  ^aave  ;  our  ijlace  is 
decided,  for  happiness  or  misery,  on  the  day  that  we  rise  out  of  it.  It  is  astonish- 
ing how  watchful  some  men  Hre  in  keeping  out  such  thoughts;  it  would  be  well  if 
others  would  be  as  watchful  in  keeping  them  in.  A  person  may  indeed  look 
forward  to  a  happy  resurrection  without  attaining  it,  because  he  may  delude  him- 
self with  false  hop  s ;  liut  no  one  will  ever  attain  a  haj^py  resurrection  without 
looking  forward  to  it.     {R.  W.  Evans,  D.I).) 

Vers.  21-22.  For  since  by  man  came  deatb,  by  man  came  also  the  resurrection 
of  the  dead. — ^'alvation  hij  man: — -When  Paul  savs  "by  man"  he  refers  t'> 
Christ;  only  taking  advantage  of  the  fiict  that,  since  the  Son  of  God  incarnate  is 
become  a  proper  man,  it  is  permitted  us  to  regard  the  power  of  salvation  as 
included  in  humanity  itself.  Chiist  is  not  so  much  to  be  thought  of  as  being 
external,  but  as  a  regenerative  power  so  inserted  in  humanity  as  to  be,  in  a 
sense,  of  it.  The  word  "  since  "  supposes  an  impression  felt  of  inherent  fitness, 
requiring  the  corporate  disadvantages  of  the  fall  to  be  made  good  by  a  corporate 
remedy.  Consider,  then — I.  The  antecedent  probability  of  such  a  Ri;MEriY, 
INDICATED  BY  FAMILIAR  ANALOGIES.  It  is  God's  manner  to  make  all  things  largely 
self-remedial  when  attacked  by  disorder.  The  bush  that  is  bent,  as  soon  as  it 
is  let  go  springs  up  suddenly  by  an  elastic  force  with'n.  Cut  it  down  and  it  will 
set  to  new  growths.  Every  animal  body  has  a  distinct  self-medicating  force  in  its 
own  nature,  called  by  physiologists  the  vis  medicatri.v.  The  same  is  true  of  all 
defections  of  character,  the  man  must  repair  his  losses  by  a  process  of  recovery 
undertaken  by  himself ;  the  whole  world  toiling  at  his  vices  and  dishonors  could 
not  repair  one  of  them.  The  same  is  true  of  society.  What,  then,  shall  we 
expect  when  humanity  is  broken  by  sin,  but  that  if  God  organises  redemption.  He 
will  do  it  in  a  way  to  have  it  appear  as  a  redemption  from  within,  executed  in  a 
sense  hy  man?  II.  We  not  only  want  a  supernatural  salvation  (for  nothing  less 
than  that  can  possibly  regenerate  the  fall  of  nature),  but  in  order  to  have  any 
steady  faith  in  it  we  must  have  it  wrought  into  nature  and  made  to  be,  as  it 
WERE,  ONE  OF  ITS  OWN  sTccK  POWERS.  Note  the  eagemess  that  turns  such  multitudes 
of  our  time  after  the  doctrme  of  progress.  1.  Yet  there  is  no  fi  tion  more  baseless 
than  a  strictly  natural  progress,  for  after  the  fact  of  sin  the  progress  of  the  race 
must  be  (as  we  see  it  is)  from  bad  to  worse.  We  wunt  a  salvation  that  is  to  us  all 
that  this  doctrine  of  progress  pretends  to  be,  and  God  gives  us  to  see  the  general 
humanity  so  penetratd  with  the  supernatural  by  Christ  living  in  it,  as  to  be,  in  a 
sense,  working  out  redemption  from  within  it-elf.  2.  Meantime,  if  it  were  possible 
to  restore  the  fall  of  our  lace  by  any  kind  of  wholly  external  agency,  supposing  no 
concurrent  struggles  operating  from  withm,  it  would  reduce  our  cliaracter  and  grade 
of  insignificance  to  a  virtual  nullity.  Eut  the  Saviour  being  or  becoming  man,  the 
salvation  dignifies  and  raises  man  even  befoie  he  receives  it.  III.  Since  it  is 
continually  assumed  in  Scripture  that  we  fall  as  a  corporate  whole,  we 
naturally  look  for  some  recuperative  grace  to  be  entered  into  the  r\cf,  ]!y 

which    so    GREAT    A    DISADVANTAGE    JIAY    BE    REPAID    OR    OVERCOME.       True,  we    are    not 

born  of  Christ  physiologically.  The  correspondence  must  not  be  understood  to 
hold  in  any  but  a  general  and  qualified  way.  Let  it  be  enough  that  as  Adam  is  our 
head  physiologically,  so  is  Christ  onr  head  by  the  head  infiuences  He  inaugurates. 
Good  souls  have  a  power  to  get  into  the  race  by  collateral  propagations  of  their 
goodness,  when  bad  souls  have  almost  no  such  pnver  at  all.  They  have  a  destiny 
of  headship,  becoming  Adams  in  the  sublime  fatherhood  ot  their  power.  And  so 
it  is,  illustiatinK  the  Divine  by  the  human,  that  the  incarnate  Word  of  God's 
eternity,  coming  into  birth  and  living  and  dying  as  a  man,  fills  the  race  with  new 
possibilities  and  powers,  starts  resurgent  activities,  and  overtops  the  sin  abounding 
with  a  grace  that  so  much  more  abounds.  IV.  Consider  now  some  of  the 
Scripture  evidence  of  the  subject.  It  declares  that  the  seed  of  the  woman  shall 
bruise  the  serpent's  head.  The  woman's  whole  posterity,  including  Christ,  shall 
do  it,  God  being  always  present  in  the  struggle.  Here  and  there  the  hidden 
method  is  departed  from,  and  God  does  something  for  or  upon  our  humanity  and 
not  throuKh  it,  but  nothing  works  like  a  power  that  does  not  work  by  man.  When 
Christ  comes,  perfect  in  all  JJivinity,  He  gets  into  the  common  family  register  as 


438  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

man,  and  puts  the  struggle  on  as  being  a  struggle  of  race.  And  when  He  is  gone 
a  gospel  is  born,  and,  tbough  there  seems  nothing  here  hut  the  same  humanity 
there  was  before,  it  is  a  very  different  fight  as  respects  the  power  of  it.  Observe 
how  even  Holy  Scripture  is  written  by  man,  bearing  in  every  book  the  stamp  of 
the  particular  mind  in  whose  personnl  conception  it  was  shaped.  And  the  gospel 
of  Christ  is  to  be  preached  by  human  ministers,  and  the  disciples  are  to  be  newer 
incarnations  of  Clirist,  and,  in  a  sense,  by  their  gifts,  prayers,  and  sufferings, 
vehicles,  also,  of  the  Spirit.  "Ye  are  the  light  of  the  world."  Conclusion: 
1.  We  have,  then,  a  very  significant  presumption  raised,  that  when  any  breakage 
or  damage  occurs  in  any  legitimate  institution  of  the  world,  God  has  put  in  some- 
where some  kind  of  self-remedial  force  to  mend  it.  2.  Note  the  immense  responsi- 
bihty  thrown  upon  Christ's  followers.  Christ  lays  it  on  them  to  be  gospellers  with 
Him,  and  to  really  believe  is  to  come  into  the  great  life-struggle  of  Jesus.  3.  Lift 
up  your  heads,  6  ye  drooping  ones !  Christ  is  in  the  world.  He  is  about  us,, 
within  us,  going  through  all  things,  moving  onward  in  all.  Leaven  does  not  make 
a  noise  when  it  works,  and  yet  it  works.  No  river  runs  to  the  sea  more  certainly 
or  steadily  than  the  great  salvation  by  man  runs  to  conquest  and  a  kingdom. 
3.  Observe  the  beautiful  delicacy  of  God  in  His  plan  of  salvation.  He  makes  it 
not  a  salvation  for  man  only,  but  contrives  to  make  it,  as  far  as  possible,  a. 
salvation  bij  man.  True,  it  is  all  by  Christ,  and  yet  it  is  by  ihe  Christ  within — the 
law  of  the  spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus.  And  so,  instead  of  maknig  His  mercy  a 
mere  pity  that  kills  respect.  He  makes  it  a  power  that  lifts  into  character  and 
everlasting  manhood.  And  when  we  shall  go  home  to  be  with  Christ,  what  shall 
we  do  but  confess  in  lowliest  homage — "  Unto  Him  that  loved  us  and  washed  us. 
from  our  sins  in  His  own  blood  "  ;  raising  our  finale,  also,  to  sing,  in  the  glorified 
majesty  of  our  feeling,  "And  hath  made  us  kings  and  priests  unto  God."  (H. 
Biiishncll,  D.D.)  For  as  in  Adam  all  die,  even  so  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made 
alive. — Adam  and  Chrht : — Consider — I.  The  points  of  resemblance  between 
these  two  beings  as  traced  out  in  different  parts  of  Scrij^ture.  1.  Adam  was  the 
immediate  creation  of  God.  He  had  no  other  father— neither  had  Christ's  human 
nature.  2.  In  the  perfect  beauty  of  holiness  was  Adam  created.  And  of  Christ 
we  are  told  that  He  was  "holy,  harmless,  undefiled."  3.  The  crown  of  dominion 
over  the  earth  and  the  creatures  was  set  upon  the  head  of  Adam  ;  but  this  is  more 
fully  verified  in  the  exalted  humanity  of  Christ  (Heb.  ii.  8,  9).  4.  Adam  was 
transpoited  from  the  part  of  the  earth  where  he  was  created  to  Edeu  ;  Christ 
ascended  from  the  world  to  the  heavenly  Paradise.  IL  The  points  of  dissimilarity 
between  them.  There  is  between  them  the  distance  of  humanity  and  deity.  Christ 
was  able  to  vivify  His  own  body.  He  was  made  a  "  quickening  spirit  "  ;  but  Adam 
"was  made  a  living  soul "  only.  III.  The  relation  in  which  these  personages. 
STAND  TO  HUMAN  BEINGS,  and  the  manner  in  which  it  is  formed.  To  Adam  all  stand 
related  by  a  natural  connection — our  bond  with  Christ  is  a  bond  of  faith.     IV.  The: 

CONSFQUENCES    ACCRUING    TO    US    FROM    THIS    RELATION.       1.    The  baueful  cffectS  of   OUr 

connection  with  Adam.  2.  The  benefits  which  come  to  us  from  our  bond  with 
Christ.  {J.  Lcifchild,  D.D.)  The  Adam  and  the  Cliri^it : — The  apostle  is  not 
content  with  affirming  the  obvious  fact,  that  as  Adam  died,  so  all  men  die.  He 
traces  the  death  of  all  to  the  death  of  the  one,  and  affirms  the  woik  of  Christ  to  be 
coextensive  and  coefficient  with  the  work  of  Adam.  Just  as  in  Eom.  v.  12-21  he 
connects  the  results  of  [Christ's  redemption  with  the  sin  which  brought  death  iuto 
the  world  and  all  our  woe.  I.  Throughout  tlie  Scriptures  Christ  is  set  forth  as. 
THE  Creative  Word  and  wisdom  of  God.  Without  Him  was  not  anything  made 
that  was  made.  By  Him,  "  the  Quickening  Spirit,"  Adam  was  made  in  His  image, 
after  His  similitude.  Adam,  by  his  trespass,  defaced  that  Divine  image;  but  he 
did  not  altogether  obliterate  it.  He  brought  evil  and  death  into  our  nature;  but 
there  was  still  in  that  nature  some  remnant  of  its  original  bfauty  and  goodness. 
And  to  this  day  our  nature  is  a  compound  in  which  good  and  evil  are  strangely 
blended  ;  the  good  of  God,  the  evil  of  ourselves.  In  every  child  we  see  some 
bad,  some  good  tendencies.  Whence  do  they  derive  that  goodness  ?  From  Christ, 
the  Cieative  Word.  All  in  himself  and  in  us  that  Adam  could  not,  or  did  not, 
wholly  spoil,  is  a  remnant  of  man's  original  endowment ;  it  is  the  work  and  gift  of 
Christ.  And  therefore  it  is  that  the  better  man,  the  better  self,  in  us  speaks  with 
an  authority  which  the  worse  self  never  claims.     II.  But  it  is  not  as  Creator 

ALONE    TH,\T    ChRIST    SAVES    US    AND    GIVES    US    LIFE  :    IT    IS    ALSO    AS    PiEDEEMEE,    THE 

"  Second  Man,  the  Lord  from  heaven,"  who  took  our  flesh  and  dwelt  among  us. 
Whatever  our  view  of  "  original  sin,"  we  all  admit  that  the  sins  of  the  father  do 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  439 

affect  the  very  nature  of  his  children  ;  and  that  therefore,  if  by  transgression  our 
first  parents  fell  from  their  purity,  it  may  very  well  be  that  v\e  are  the  worse  for 
their  transgression.  But  it  is  not  equally  easy  to  see  how  tl\e  redemption  of  Jesus 
should  have  a  similar  eifect  on  us  before  we  believe  on  Him.  Yet  a  little  con- 
sideration may  suffice  to  show  us  that  whatever  Christ  does  must  affect  the  whole 
human  race  in  the  same  way  in  which  it  is  affected  by  Adam's  sin.  For  what  gave 
Adam  his  power  over  us  and  the  conditions  of  our  life  ?  Simply  the  fact  that  he 
was  our  father ;  in  the  subordinate  sense,  our  maker.  Like  i^egets  like.  God 
begot  Adam  in  His  likeness  ;  Adam  begot  men  in  his  likeness.  As  he  trausgressed, 
we  suffer  for  his  transgression.  But  who  made  Adam  ?  Christ,  the  Creative  Word, 
that  afterwards  took  flesh  and  became  man.  If,  then,  whatever  Adam  did  affects 
us,  simply  because  we  descend  from  him,  will  not  whatever  Christ — from  whom 
also  we  descend — does,  affect  us  ?  and  affect  us  by  so  much  the  move  as  Christ  is 
greater  than  Adam?  If  we  can  conceive  that  Christ,  the  Living  and  Creative 
Word,  should  have  perished,  should  not  we  all  have  perished  in  Hiui  ?  And  if  He, 
our  Maker,  assumes  our  nature,  and  renders  a  perfect  obedience,  must  we  i.ot  all 
be  the  better  for  His  obedience?  As  well  might  the  sun  move  from  its  place 
without  influencing,  in  every  part,  the  whole  solar  system,  as  the  eternal  Christ 
descend  to  earth,  and  dwell  a  Man  among  men,  without  sending  a  vital  influence 
through  the  whole  of  humanity.  III.  But  how  are  all.  men  thk  better  for  the 
GRACE  OF  Christ?  Death,  moral  and  physical,  was  the  consequence  of  Adam's 
transgression.  Had  he  become  only  what  he  had  made  himself,  he  would  have 
sunk  irremediably  into  evil.  Had  we  in  our  nature  only  that  which,  in  the 
strictest  sense,  we  derive  from  him,  we  should  be  only  evil.  That  he  did  not,  that 
we  do  not,  become  the  mere  bondslaves  of  evil,  is  all  of  "  prace  " ;  it  is  bc-ause  we 
derive  from  Christ  other  and  better  qualities  than  we  inherit  from  Adam,  because 
Adam  derived  from  Christ  other  and  better  qualities  than  those  which  he  super- 
induced upon  his  nature.  As  we  have  seen,  even  before  we  believe  in  Chi  ist  we 
have  a  better  and  a  worse  self  contending  in  us  for  the  mastery.  Consider  tlie 
children  you  know.  Nay,  consider  the  very  worst  man  you  know.  Is  there  not  a 
douhle  nature  in  him  ?  Has  not  even  he  a  better  self  ?  Does  he  not  know  that  it 
is  the  better,  and  that  it  should  he  supreme  ?  Tiiis  is  the  benefit  all  men  derive 
from  the  redemption  of  Christ,  that  they  have  "  the  Christ  "  in  them,  just  as  the 
harm  they  in'^^rit  frona  Adam  is  that  they  have  "  the  Adam  "  in  them.  But  for 
the  grace  of  Christ  they  would  never  have  had  that  "better  self,"  of  which  they 
are  conscious  even  when  they  wrong  it  by  sinning  against  it.  Conclusion :  P.  rhaps 
it  may  be  objected,  "But  Adam  was  the  first  man.  Christ  did  not  come  into  the 
•world  for  four  thousand  years  after  sin  was  in  the  world."  It  might  be  eno',i<;h  to 
reply  that  Christ  was  in  tiie  world  before  Adam,  or  how  could  He  have  made  Adam? 
that"  He  has  never  left  the  world :  that  He  was  in  Adam  as  a  spirit  of  righteousness 
and  truth  after  the  Fall,  and  in  uU  who  lived  before  the  Advent :  for  how  else  could 
He  have  taught  them  what  they  knew  of  the  spiritual  and  eternal  world  ?  how  else 
could  they  have  striven  against  His  Spirit?  how  else  could  they  have  templed 
Christ  (chap.  x.  9).  How  else  could  all  the  fathers  drink  of  the  spiritual  Bock  that 
followed  them,  and  the  Rock  was  Christ?  (chap.  x.  1-4;  cf.  Heb.  xi.  26).  But 
this  objection  springs  from  our  purely  humnn  way  of  regarding  things.  We  are  in 
time,  and  judge  events  by  the  measures  of  time.  We  are  so  made  that  we  can 
only  conceive  of  events  locally  and  in  succession— i.e.,  within  the  limitations  of 
time  and  space.  But  these  limitations  do  not  restrain  the  Inhabitant  of  Eternity. 
There  is  no  before  and  after  wilh  Him.  If  the  eternal  Christ  had  been  the  last 
man  on  the  earth,  none  the  less  His  redemption  would  have  passed  in  its  effects 
through  all  the  eras  of  time,  and  have  moulded  the  destinies  of  all  generations. 
We  indeed  cannot  tell  how  ;  bat  neither  can  we  comprehend  the  mere  conception 
of  eternity:  how,  then,  can  we  hopi  to  comprehend  Him  who  sits  above  all  of 
time,  or  to  calculate  the  issues  of  His  redeeming  work  ?  2.  Again,  it  may  be 
asked,  "  But  if  all  men  are  to  live  in  Christ  as  all  men  die  in  Adam,  does  not  the 
parallel  involve  the  ultimate  recovery  of  the  whole  human  race?  No;  both  the 
Adam  and  the  Christ  are  in  us  :  the  Adam  with  his  "  offence,"  the  Christ  with  His 
"grace";  the  Adam  with  his  "disobedience,"  the  Christ  with  His  "gift  of 
righteousness."  And  we  have  to  choose  between  them.  Yielding  to  the  Adam,  we 
die;  but  if  we  yield  to  the  Christ,  we  shall  "never  die,"  but  "reign  in  life" 
through  Him.  If  we  are  not  obliged  to  yield  to  Adam's  sin,  why  should  we  be 
obliged  to  yield  to  Christ's  grace  ?  (.">.  Cox,  D.D.)  The  soUdaritij  of  salvation  : — 
1.  A  friend  we  love,  how  distinct  and  individual  seems  to  us  all  he  says  and  does ! 


440  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

And  his  most  marked  peculiarities  become  dear  to  us  simply  because  they  are  his 
and  his  only.  2.  And  ytt,  if  we  go  home  with  him,  counter-discoveries  greet  us  on 
every  side.  We  see  in  his  father  whence  came  that  looii  in  the  eyes,  and  in  his 
motlier  thnt  turn  of  the  mouth,  tliat  shade  of  colour  in  the  hair,  and  his  voice  in 
his  young  brother.  But  is  he  any  tlie  less  a  distinct  character?  3.  How  deep  our 
searching  might  go  if  we  penetrated  the  hidden  ground  of  our  friend's  life.  And 
science  could  take  up  his  mannerisms,  and  show  us  their  exact  parallel  not  only 
in  the  locality  where  lie  was  born,  but  in  the  ancient  homes  of  the  English  in  the 
far  north.  Nor  is  it  his  body  only  into  which  these  multitudinous  influences  have 
entered,  but  into  his  character  and  mind.  We  are  using  the  stored  experiences  of 
bygone  generations,  and  cannot  throw  off  the  domination  of  their  hidden  forces, 
for  they  lie  at  the  most  secret  places  of  our  souls.  Old  faces,  long  buried,  look  out 
of  our  eyes ;  voices  from  out  of  forgotten  and  unknown  graves  speak  through  our 
lips.  Yet  nothing  of  all  this  burdens  us ;  we  are  ourselves ;  we  miss  nothing  of 
our  free  manhood.  We  all  of  us  live  one  life.  Out  of  the  same  earth  we  grow, 
like  plants  out  of  a  common  soil,  and  each  of  us  puts  out  our  own  colour,  and 
shape,  and  scent.  And  it  is  by  this  unily  of  race  that  we  effect  a  combined 
advance;  civilisation  is  only  possible,  because  the  genius  of  each  generation  can  be 
retained  and  transmitted.  4.  But,  then,  we  cannot  accept  the  gains  of  heredity 
and  refuse  the  losses.  And  why,  then,  are  we  perplexed,  if,  by  this  same  habitual 
law,  we  all  in  Adam  die?  We  men  form  one  body;  and  to  prohibit  poison,  once 
intiodnced,  from  spreading  over  the  whole,  wonld  be  done  only  at  the  cost  of 
forbidding  that  body  to  perform  its  functions,  at  the  cost  of  wrecking  its  stru<-.tural 
life.  Let  Adam  once  have  sinned,  and  we,  who  are  in  Adam,  have  the  seeds  of  sin 
within  us.  Our  freedom  is  all  the  more  free  when  it  acts  under  the  uf,lifting 
pressure  of  a  splendid  inheritance ;  nor  is  it  at  all  sensible  of  any  diminution 
because  its  sin  bears  witness  to  the  miserable  story  of  a  guilty  stock.  5.  "In  Adam 
all  die."  Yes  !  but  hidden  in  this  very  mystei'y  is  the  possibility  of  a  redemption. 
The  transmission  that  makes  for  the  corruption  of  all,  can  be  turned  to  the  needs 
and  uses  of  the  regeneration.  God  converts  the  conditions  of  the  curse  into  the 
very  instruments  of  the  blessing.  In  Adam,  it  is  true,  all  would  die;  but,  then,  in 
Christ,  all  may  be  made  alive.  So,  in  the  Beloved  Son,  man  becomes  new-begotten 
of  God.  6.  And  now  let  us  measure  His  task.  His  virtue  must  imbed  it-elf  by 
roots  as  deep  and  strong  as  those  by  which  sin  has  dug  its  dire  fangs  into  the 
inherited  flesh.  It  must  pervade  and  embrace  the  entire  bulk  of  fallen  and  human 
nature.  Everything  that  is  ours  He  must  make  His.  And  ours,  now,  was  a  life 
bound  down  nnder  a  curse,  smitten  with  the  blight  of  sorrow.  Yet  He  became 
ours  ;  wholly  human,  wholly  knit  into  our  common  fate,  implicated  with  us  in  all 
our  woe.  And  yet,  lo  !  He  has  brought  with  Him  into  onr  burdened  da'S  the  new 
vitality.     The  entire  movement  in  which  we  had  found  ourselves  lield  is  reversed. 

7.  As  that  old  sin  spread  out  its  baneful  influence,  ring  upon  ring,  circle  upon 
circle,  so  this  new  life  issues  out  over  the  whole,  in  circle  after  circle, 
in  ring  upon  ring.  There  is  the  outermost  ring  of  that  dim  heathen  world 
which  has  been  brought  nigh,  in  the  Eisen  Christ,  to  the  Father.  And  they,  even 
they,  amid  ugly  and  fdul  confusions,  are  not  insensible  to  that  strange  stirring 
which  is  the  movement  witliin  them  of  the  resurrection — a  movement  blind  yet 
prophetic — prompting  them  to  deeds  which  Christ  will  yet  own  as  His  at  the  Last 
Day.  And  within  that  ring  is  the  ring  of  a  civilisation  that,  for  all  its  miserable 
stains,  has  >  et  this  mark  of  Christ  upon  it ;  it  can  never  lose  its  hope — a  hope  thnt 
has  in  it  nlways  the  power  of  a  recovery.  We  cannot  despair,  though  the  Lord 
delayeth  His  coming.  And  within  that  ring  is  the  ring  of  those  who  cling  to 
Christ.  The  Lord  knows  them  that  are  His,  and  He  showers  down  favour  upon 
them  as  they  look  up  to  Him.  And  within  this  ring,  again,  its  very  heart  and 
core,  is  Christ's  liviig  Chuich.  Christ's  love  beats  like  a  great  heart,  pulse  upon 
pulse,  expelling  that  slow  death  which  has  crept  over  the  body  of  humanity.  And, 
thus,  "  in  Christ,  all  are  made  alive."  You  and  I,  we  are  none  the  less  free, 
because  in  Adam  we  all  died ;  and  then  in  Christ,  in  some  strange  recovery, 
achieved  for  and  by  God,  we  all  were  made  alive.  Just  as  we  won  the  free  exercise 
of  our  English  name  out  of  the  very  necessities  which  had  made  us  English  ;  so, 
out  of  our  very  bond  to  Christ,  we  win  the  energy  to  become  free  friends  of  Chiist. 
Out  of  His  action  we  are  made  free,  and  the  more  He  does  for  us,  the  more  we  are 
enabled  to  do  for  ourselves.    You  are  free  this  very  minute  to  rise  and  follow  Christ. 

8.  But  such  high  freedom  cannot  but  be  perilous.  It  is  not  yours  to  choose 
whether  you  will  rise  with  Christ  or  no.     All  rise  with  Him  ;  all  through  Him  are 


ciup.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  441 

dragged  through  the  darkness  of  the  grave,  and  will  stand  before  the  judgment  of 
God.  As  we  must  have  died  in  Adam,  so  we  must  rise  in  Christ.  And  wlut  is 
it,  then,  that  strikes  chill  as  fear  upon  our  hearts?  Can  it,  indeed,  be  tliat  the 
freedom  regained  in  Christ  can  itself  be  turned  against  the  name  of  Him  who 
inspires  it?  Yet  this  can  be.  We  shall  rise;  but  where  will  that  order  be  in 
which  we  shall  have  placed  ourselves  ?  What  if  our  approach  to  God  be  as  the 
Hearing  of  a  great  heat  that  scorches  and  kills  ?  Hohness  is  as  a  fire  to  sin. 
{Canon  Scott-Holland.)  Spiritual  death: — Adam,  as  used  in  this  passage,  is,  so 
far  as  we  shall  regard  it,  only  a  synonym  for  sinfulness.  1.  We  a«sume  tliat 
human  nature  is  sinful.  The  degree  of  this  sinfulness,  I  care  nothing  about. 
Look  wherever  you  may  and  you  will  find  the  trace  and  evidence  of  deep  depravity. 
2.  Note  also  that  there  is  no  sin  without  a  sinner.  Sin  is  not  a  vague,  weird, 
devil-like  shadow,  which  no  one  can  grasp  and  define;  it  is  a  palpable  fact. 
Whenever  you  find  it,  you  find  it  in  the  shape  of  a  deed  done  by  some  doer.  3. 
Human  nature  in  its  rudiments  is  precisely  what  it  has  always  been ;  the  world  in 
the  aggregate  is  just  what  it  wns  a  thousand  years  ago.  We  flush  to  the  same 
wicked  passions  to-day  that  flamed  in  the  lusts  of  our  fathers.  The  old  Adam  still 
lives,  sins,  dies.  If  you  demand  proof,  I  point  to  your  gaols,  to  your  gallows,  to 
yourselves.  4.  There  are  those  who  do  not  resist  temptarion  ;  some  becau^^e  they 
have  never  been  successful  in  their  resistance,  and  hence  despair  has  entered  into 
their  souls.  When  Satan  has  threaded  the  very  fibres  of  hope  out  of  man,  he  has 
won  a  triumph  indeed.  The  gambler  that  can  take  another's  money,  and  feel  no 
compunction,  illustrates  how  thoroughly  sin  can  get  the  mastery  of  a  human  being. 
Such  peoi:)le  are  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  You  run  a  pin  into  your  body  and 
you  scream  because  it  is  a  live  body.  And  so,  while  conscience  is  alive,  the  thrust 
of  a  wicked  thought  through  it  causes  exquisite  torture.  But  when  one  can  lie, 
and  steal,  and  be  drunken — when  these  barbed  iniquities  can  be  driven  day  by  day 
into  the  very  centre  of  a  man's  life,  and  conscience  receives  the  stab  witliout  a 
spasm — then  is  it  dead.  Hence,  sin  is  moral  suicide.  This  is  what  men  mean  by 
the  phrase  :  "  He  has  no  conscience."  5.  All  sin  is  a  sin  against  God.  He  stand-; 
embodied  in  every  creation  th;it  He  has  made.  Sin  is  an  electric  current,  and  it 
matters  not  along  what  wire  the  shock  of  it  is  delivered,  it  finally  enters  His  breast. 
Do  you  wonder  that  He  is  quick  to  interpret  the  insult?  Does  not  a  mother  resent 
any  injury  done  to  her  child?  Whoever  sins  against  himself  sins  against  God. 
For  all  that  makes  us  to  differ  from  the  beasts  of  the  field  is  the  Divinity  within 
us.  6.  We  can  never  know  how  evil  sin  is,  because  we  cannot  measure  the  evil  it 
works.  And  this  because  we  cannot  know  how  sublime  are  the  possibilities  in  the 
nature  which  it  destroys.  He  who  without  cause  breaks  a  bud  from  a  stem,  has 
done  a  deed  the  evil  of  which  we  can  measure.  He  has  destroyed  a  rose.  But  he 
who  murders  a  child  has  done  a  deed  the  sin  of  which  we  cannot  measure ;  for  we 
cannot  tell  how  much  good  that  child  might  have  done.  Much  less  can  you 
measure  the  evil  which  sin  works  when  it  destroys  a  soul.  For  none,  save  God, 
knows  what  are  the  possibilities  of  a  soul.  In  front  of  all  our  sinfulness  stands 
the  great  fact,  staring  us  in  the  face,  that  we  cannot  keep  it  to  ourselves.  For 
whatever  makes  me  worse,  makes  all  worse  who  intimately  know  me.  Nor  is  there 
any  knowing  where  sin  ends.  The  Bible  says  that  parental  transgressions  lap  over 
five  generations.  The  tide  of  human  life  flows  on  still  turbid  and  dark  ;  and  even 
the  filter  of  Christianity  seems  incapable  of  purifying  the  unsightly  stream.  We 
have  done  nothing  evil  that  is  not  to-day  as  chemically  potent  to  darken  the  purity 
of  the  world,  as  on  that  day  and  at  that  hour  when  the  sinful  deeil,  or  word,  or 
imagination  dropped,  like  a  black  globule,  into  it.  The  young  vidture,  once 
having  broken  its  chain,  or  overflown  the  wire,  returns  no  more.  So  it  is  with  sin. 
Once  out  of  our  reach  it  is  for  ever  beyond  our  control.  [W.  H.  H.  Murray.) 
Spiritual  life: — 1.  At  the  root  of  all  higher  life  in  man  is  a  protest  against  his 
living  a  lower  life.  This  protest  we  call  conscience.  Without  it,  men  would  be 
devils  at  birth.  Within  you  all  is  this  root  of  holiness.  If  you  do  evil,  it 
condemns;  if  you  do  well,  it  applauds.  Christ  means  the  Anointed,  the  Con- 
secrated, the  Kingly  One.  Whatever,  therefore,  is  kingly  and  consecrated  in  you. 
He  represents.  He  is,  as  it  were,  your  best  self.  Y'our  higher  life,  therefore,  is 
Divine.  So  far  as  you  live  in  it  you  live  in  God.  And  out  of  this  thought  comes 
great  hope  for  many.  For  there  be  many,  I  feel,  that  live  in  God  and  know  it  not. 
2.  Now  the  glory  of  the  whole  world  is  the  glory  of  the  life  that  is  in  it.  A  land- 
scape in  which  there  is  no  green,  prowthful  thing,  a  level  stretch  of  sea  without 
ripple  or  current,  a  house  in  which  no  life  stirs,  a  human  face,  set,  colourless, 


412  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

rigid  in  all  its  lines — there  is  no  glory  in  all  Ihese.  Wherever  you  look,  your  eyes 
instiuctively  search  for  life.  If  you  find  it  not,  your  soul  instinctively  draws  back 
within  it«elf.  Death  is  universal  horror.  Life  demands  life.  It  lives  on  com- 
panionships. These  are  to  it  what  sunshine  and  moisture  are  to  plants.  Only  in 
this  connection  do  we  apprehend  that  tine  eulogy  of  Christ,  "  In  Him  was  life,  and 
the  life  was  the  light  of  men."  3.  Now  all  life  is  not  the  same  life.  There  is  the 
life  of  beast,  of  bird,  of  man.  Beyond  we  come  to  the  life  of  angels,  of  spirits ; 
and  over  all  we  find  the  Great  Spirit,  in  whom  all  life  is,  and  out  of  whom  all  life- 
comes  :  God.  In  man  you  find  the  indwelling  life  graded  as  to  quality  and  use. 
There  is  body-life,  mind-life  and  soul-life.  And  the  qualities  and  expressions  of 
the  last  are  finer  than  the  qualities  and  expressions  of  the  others.  Now  the  life 
which  we  have  in  Christ  is  the  life  of  the  finest  qualities  in  us.  It  is  the  life 
contained  in  those  faculties  and  powers  which  are  not  only  immortal,  but  which 
are  adapted  in  iheir  nature  for  the  finest  uses.  4.  Life  which  is  simply  continued 
existeuce,  is  a  low  order  of  life.  There  is  a  life,  the  result  of  which  is  a  curse.  A. 
bird  which  should  lose  its  bird  instincts  and  become  swinish,  would  offer  to  our 
gaze  a  spectacle  abhorrent  to  that  sense  in  us  which  interprets  the  eternal  fitness 
of  things.  And  so  when  the  man  forgets  that  he  is  a  spirit,  when  he  deserts 
heaven  and  makes  his  home  in  the  earth,  offers  a  spectacle  abhorrent  to  every 
instinct  of  justice  and  propriety.  5.  Now,  there  is  no  denying  that  the  earthly 
tendency  is  in  us  all.  Neither  is  there  any  denying  that  the  heavenly  impulse  is 
in  all  who  allow  it  to  dwell  in  them.  Man  is  not  an  empty  vase.  He  is  filled, 
inwardly,  with  soul-life  capacities.  And  in  these  capacities  are  seed-like  qualities 
which  need  only  Divine  quickening  to  germinate  to  holiness.  The  best  I'ecoguition 
of  this  native  nobility  in  man  is  seen  in  the  incarnation.  I  thus  swing  myself  up 
to  God's  standpoint  and  looking  down  upon  the  reckless  of  earth,  exclaim  :  "  What 
a  pity  that  such  a  creation  should  misdeinean  himself  in  that  style !  "  When  I 
see  one  engnged  in  brave  battle  with  some  appetite,  breasting  up  against  some 
passion,  or  striving  against  unfortunate  circumstances  to  better  himself,  I  say 
"  The  original  impulse  to  virtue  has  not  wholly  left  the  race  yet."  My  angels  are 
not  in  the  sky,  but  in  the  bosoms  of  men  find  women  striving  to  be  belter.  God  is 
born  in  some  men,  and  He  groweth  with  their  growth.  The  patience,  the  courage, 
the  abhorrence  of  evil,  the  shrinking  from  coarseness,  the  innate  love  of  pure 
things  which  are  in  the  Divine  nature,  are  iii  them.  6.  Now  this  Divine  element 
in  human  nature,  this  something  in  man  which  is  finer  than  man,  had  perfect 
expression  in  .Jesus.  It  was  the  moral  perfection  of  the  human  being,  Jt-sus,  that 
made  Him  worthy  to  be  called  Christ.  The  title  was  descriptive  of  the  mnn.  7. 
Pattern  your  lives  after  the  model  presented  for  your  guidance  and  your  inspira- 
tion in  the  character  of  this  matchless  being.  In  Him,  standing  here,  behold  the 
union  of  both  worlds;  the  humanity  of  earth  inspired  with  the  diviniiy  of  the 
skies.  Do  you  wonder  that  such  a  being  should  say,  "  The  kingdom  of  God  is 
within  you  "  ?  Nay  !  For  He  felt  that  the  foundations  of  that  kingdom  were  laid 
in  the  capacities  of  His  own  bosom.  As  David  said  touching  the  Father,  so  we  can 
say  touching  our  Elder  Brother,  "  I  shall  be  content  when  I  awake  in  Thy  likeness." 
Let  the  dead  within  you  hear  the  voice  lo-day  which  calls  it  from  its  grave,  and  let 
it  come  forth  and  stand  ready  for  action  in  the  front  rank  of  your  purposes  and 
endeavours.  "  If  ye  then  be  risen  with  Christ,  seek  those  things  which  are  above, 
where  Christ  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  God."  Every  man  must  make  his  own 
world,  as  Jesus  made  His.  And  all  who  live  upon  the  earth  who  would  be  like 
Him,  must  live  above  it.  8.  This  must  be  observed  also,  that  whoever  comes  into 
that  way  of  living  which  Christ  had,  comes  into  it  first  by  the  way  of  positive 
resolution.  And  this  resolution  is  his  own.  Ii  is  conduct  which  makes  charMctei'. 
Aud  you  can  make  your  conduct  whatever  you  j)lease.  Now  he  who  continues  in 
good  conduct,  continues  in  Christ  (John  xv.  4,  6).  The  man  who  ceases  to 
practise  the  actual  virtues  that  Christ  practised,  is  a  withered  man,  morally.  (Ibid.) 
The  C]iri-tian''s  life  in  Christ: — 1.  All  which  our  Lord  has  is  ours,  if  we  are  indeed 
His.  As  Man,  He  received  gifts,  that  He  might  give  them  to  men.  As  Man,  He 
received  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  He  might  af.ain  dwell  in  man,  and  clothe  us  with  the 
holiness  which  we  lost  iu  Adam.  For  our  sakes  He  sanctified  Himself,  that  we 
also  might  be  sanctified  by  the  truth.  His  shame  is  our  glory ;  His  blood  our 
ransom  ;  His  wounded  side  our  hiding-place  from  our  own  sins  and  Satan's  wrath  ; 
His  death  our  life.  And  what,  then,  should  His  life  be  ?  What  but  the  seahng  to 
us  of  all  which  He  had  wrou{<ht  for  us  ?  What  but  the  bursting  of  the  bars  of  our 
prison-house,  the  opening  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ?     2.  All  this  is  to  us  "  in 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  443 

Christ."  "In  Christ  shall  all  be  marie  alive."  We  shall  live  then,  not  only  as 
having  our  souls  restored  to  our  bodies,  and  souls  and  b<idi"s  living  on  in  the 
presence  of  Alniij^hty  God.  There  is  a  higher  blessedness  yet  in  store,  viz.,  to 
live  on  "  in  Christ."  For  that  implies  Chiist's  living  on  in  us.  For  we  can  only 
dwell  in  God  by  His  dwelling  in  uh.  To  dwell  in  God  is  not  to  dwell  on  God  only. 
He  takes  us  out  of  our  state  of  nnture,  in  which  we  were,  fallen,  estranged,  in  a  far 
country,  out  of  and  away  from  Him  and  takes  us  up  into  Himst^lf.  3.  This  is  the 
great  difference  between  us  and  the  brute  creation.  Thpy  are  not  capable  of  the 
presence  of  God.  He  made  them  ;  He  extendeth  His  providence  over  them.  Yet 
their  spirit  goeth  downwards  to  tlie  earth,  not  upwards  to  the  God  who  gave  it. 
This  is  also  the  great  difference  between  us  and  those  who  lived  under  the  Old 
Testament.  Closer  is  the  nearness  of  God  to  those  who  will  receive  Him,  than 
when  He  walked  with  Adam  in  Paradise,  or  seemed  to  sit  with  Abraham,  or  to 
speak  to  Moses  lace  to  face,  or  when  the  angel  in  whom  His  presence  was,  wrestled 
with  Jacob,  or  wlien  One,  in  the  form  of  a  Son  of  Man,  was  with  the  three  children 
in  the  fire  ;  yea,  nearer  yet,  than  when,  in  the  flesh,  His  disciples  did  eat  and  drink 
with  Him.  For  all  this  nearness  was  still  outward  only.  Such  nearness  had 
Judas  also,  who  kissed  Him.  Such  nearness  shall  they  plead  to  whom  He  shall 
say,  "I  never  knew  you;  depart  from  Me,  ye  that  work  iniquity."  4.  The 
Christian's  nearness  He  hath  told.  "We  will  come  unto  Him,  and  make  our 
abode  with  Him,"  in  holiness,  peace,  bliss,  cleansing  love.  It  is  not  a  presence  to 
be  seen,  heaul,  felt  by  our  bodily  senses  ;  yet  nearer  still,  because  when  the  bodily 
senses  fail  the  inward  eye  sees  a  light  brighter  than  all  earthly  joy  ;  the  inward 
ear  hears  His  voice  ;  the  inmost  soul  feels  the  thrill  of  His  touch  ;  the  "  heart  of 
h-arts  "  tastes  the  sweetness  of  the  love  of  the  jiresence  of  its  Lord  and  its  God. 
The  Everlasting  Son  dwelleth  not  as  He  doth  in  the  material  heavens,  nor  as  He 
sanctified  this  hou'^e  of  God,  nor  as  He  did  in  the  tabernacle,  but  united  with  the 
soul,  and,  in  substance,  dwelling  in  her,  as  He  did  perscmally  in  the  man  Christ 
Jesus.  5.  This  then,  as  it  is  the  special  mystery  of  the  gospil,  so  is  it  of  the 
Resurrectiiin — to  be  "in  Christ."  This  is  our  justification,  sanctification, 
redemption,  in  Him  ;  this  our  hope  for  those  who  are  departed  before  us,  that  they 
are  "fallen  asleep  in  Him";  are  dead,  but  in  Him  (1  Thess.  iv.  16)  ;  this  is  our 
hope  in  the  day  of  judgment,  that  we  "  may  be  found  in  Him  "  ;  this  our  perfecting 
(Col.  i.  28),  this  our  endless  life  (ver.  22),  this  is  the  consummation  of  all  things 
(Eph.  i.  10).  Through  Chiist's  resurrection  we  have  a  new  principle  of  life  in  us. 
The  Spirit,  which  dwelt  in  Him  "without  measure,"  He  has  imported  to  us  Hia 
members,  that  it  may  sanctify  us,  spiritualise  our  very  bodies  here,  keep  in  us  the 
true  life,  if  we  forfeit  it  not,  and  so,  through  that  Spirit,  shall  our  dust  again  be 
quickened,  and  we  be  raised  at  the  last  day  to  life  (Rom.  viii.  9).  0.  The  Spirit 
not  only  "  cometh  upon"  those  who  are  Christ's,  as  of  old,  but  is  within  them, 
(Rom.  viii.  9, 10).  And  if  the  Spirit  abide  in  us,  how  should  not  the  body,  so  lived 
in,  have  life?  (Rom.  viii.  11).  The  resurrection,  then,  of  our  Lord  is  not  only  a 
pledge  of  our  own  ;  it  is  our  own,  if  we  be  His.  His  body  is  a  pattern  of  what  is  in 
store  for  ours,  since  we,  if  His,  are  a  part  of  it.  Conclusion  :  Since  these  things 
are  so,  we  may  well  stand  in  awe  of  our  very  selves  and  of  the  majesty  bestowed 
upon  our  frail  nature  (chap.  iii.  16).  "Grieve  not"  away  "the  Holy  Spirit  of 
God."  Fur  if  the  evil  spirit  find  the  dwelling-place  whence  he  was  cast  out 
"  empty,"  "  he  will  take  to  himself  seven  spirits  more  wicked  than  himself,  and  will 
re-enter  and  dwell  there."  Let  us  then,  as  we  would  hope  at  the  last  day  to  "  rise 
to  life,"  and  not  to  "  shame  and  everlasting  contempt,"  seek,  and  watch,  and  pray, 
to  rise  with  our  risen  Lord  now.  (/<;.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  The  poirer  of  the 
resurrection: — The  resurrection  of  Chri>t— I.  Is  the  great  pitblic  manifestation 
OF  His  AUTHORITY  OVER  PHYSICAL  DECAY  AND  DEATH.  This  it  is  by  beinK  H^s  own 
personal  conquest  of  that  power  as  it  had  been  exerci.-ed  upon  Himself:  a 
characteristic  which  separates  it  from  all  other  instances  of  similar  miraculous 
restorations.  All  others,  in  whatsoever  age  of  tlie  world,  had  been  raised  by  a 
power  from  without :  He  alone  by  Himself.  The  power  that  revived  all,  stands 
self-revived.  II.  Being  a  self-restierectjon,  stands  alone  as  a  moni-ment  of  His 
INHERENT  POWER  OF  LIFE.  There  secms  a  sort  of  progrest-ive  scale  of  the  other 
resurrections  noted  in  the  gospel  history.  The  daughter  of  Jairus  was  raised 
before  she  was  conveyed  from  her  chamber;  the  son  of  the  widow  of  Nain  was 
being  carried  out  to  burial ;  Lazarus  had  been  four  days  in  his  grave.  Neither 
were  self-raised;   Christ  was  self-raised.     III.  Was  the  result  of  a  power  that 

DID    NOT    CEASE    AT    HiS    DEPARTURE    FROM    THE    WORLD.       The    wliole    Church    is    the 


444  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

monument  of  its  existence  and  its  exercise  ;  it  is  built  upon  His  resurrection.  For 
there  is  a  spiritual  resurrection  and  there  is  a  physical  resurrection.  The  latter 
was  wrought  liy  Christ  when  on  earth,  as  a  visible  symbol  of  the  other,  and  a  proof 
of  His  power  to  effect  it.  His  own  resurrection  from  the  dead  mysteriously 
exemplified  both  :  the  general  resurrection  of  the  just  at  the  consummation  of  all 
things  shall  again  and  for  ever  combine  them.  The  resurrection  of  Christ,  once 
performed  in  act,  is  immortal  in  energy ;  He  rises  again  in  every  new-born  child  of 
God.     IV.  Should  pkompt  the  besire  for  the  final  consummation  of  His  work, 

THE  BESTORATION  OF  AN  IMM0RTA.L  BODY   TO   AN    IMMORTAL    SOUL.       "  In  Christ  shall  all 

be  made  alive."  All  men  are  to  be  made  alive  spiritually  and  physically.  Behold  ! 
we  stand  alone  in  creation ;  earth,  sea,  and  sky  can  show  nothing  so  awful  as  we 
are  !  The  rooted  hills  shall  flee  before  the  fiery  glance  of  the  Almightj'  Judge  ;  the 
mountains  shall  become  dust,  the  ocean  a  vapour  ;  the  very  stars  of  heaven  shall 
fall  as  the  fig-tree  casts  her  untimely  fruit !  Yea,  heaven  and  earth  shall  pass 
away,  but  the  humblest,  poorest,  lowliest  among  us  is  born  for  undying  life.  Amid 
all  the  terrors  of  dissolving  nature,  the  band  of  immortals  shall  stand  before  their 
Judge.       (IF.    Arclier  Butler,   M.A.)  The   results    of    Christ's  resurrection: — 

Consider — 1.  The  results  of  Christ's  resurrection  to  us.  It  is  a  pledge  of  the 
resurrection  of  all  who  share  in  His  humanity.  1.  Why  does  this  result  take 
place?  (ver.  22).  Do  not  understand  the  apostle  as  if  he  merely  said,  "  If  you  sin 
as  Adam  sinned,  you  will  die  as  Adam  died."  This  was  meie  Pelagianism,  and  is 
expressly  condemned  in  the  article  on  Original  Sin.  According  to  the  Scriptures 
we  inherit  the  first  man's  nature,  and  that  nature  has  in  it  the  mortal,  not  the 
immortal.  And  yet  there  are  in  all  of  ns  two  natures,  that  of  the  animal  and  that 
of  the  Spirit,  an  Adam  and  a  Christ.  St.  Paul  explains  himself:  "The  first  man 
was  of  the  eaith,  earthy";  and  again,  "The  first  man  Adam  was  made  a  living 
soul."  (1)  Recollect  that  the  term  "a  living  soul"  means  a  mere  natural  man 
endowed  with  intellectual  powers,  with  passions,  and  with  those  appetites  which 
belong  to  us  in  common  with  the  animals.  In  this  our  immortality  does  not 
reside  ;  and  it  is  from  fixing  our  attention  on  the  decay  of  these  that  doubt  of  our 
immortality  begins.  It  is  a  dismal  and  appalling  thing  to  witness  the  slow  failure 
of  living  poweis;  as  life  goes  on  to  watch  the  eye  losing  its  lustre,  and  the  cheek 
its  roundness  ;  to  see  the  limbs  becoming  feeble  and  worn  ;  to  perceive  the  memory 
wander,  and  the  features  no  longer  bright  with  the  light  of  expression  ;  to  mark 
the  mind  relax  its  grasp  ;  and  to  ask  the  dreary  question — Are  these  things 
immortal?  You  cannot  but  disbelieve,  if  you  rest  your  hope  of  immortality  on 
their  endurance.  Now  the  simple  reply  is,  that  the  extinction  of  these  powers  is 
no  proof  against  immortality,  because  tlipy  are  not  the  seat  of  the  immortal.  They 
belong  to  the  animal — to  the  organs  of  our  intercourse  with  the  visible  world. 
Therefore  it  is  not  in  what  we  inherit  from  Adam  the  man,  but  in  what  we  hold 
from  Christ  the  Spirit,  that  our  immortality  resides.  (2)  Nay  more,  the  growth 
of  the  Christ  within  us  is  in  exact  proportion  to  the  decay  of  the  Adam.  "  Though 
our  outward  man  perish,  yet  the  inward  man  is  renewed  day  by  day."  And  this 
evidence  of  our  immortality  is  perpetually  before  us.  It  is  no  strange  thing  to  see 
the  spirit  ripening  in  exact  proportion  to  the  decay  of  the  body.  Many  an  aged 
one  there  is  who  loses  one  by  one  all  his  physical  powers,  and  yet  the  spiritual  in 
him  is  mightiest  at  the  last.  2.  When  will  this  result  take  place?  (vers.  23,  &c.) 
Note — (1)  That  the  resurrection  cannot  be  till  the  kingdom  is  complete.  (2)  That 
certain  hindrances  at  j)resent  prevent  the  perfect  operation  of  God  in  our  souls. 
We  are  the  victims  of  physical  and  moral  evil,  and  till  this  is  put  down  for  ever, 
the  completeness  of  the  individual  cannot  be  ;  for  we  are  bound  up  with  tbe 
universe.  Talk  of  the  perfect  happiness  of  any  unit  man  while  the  race  still 
mourns  and  while  the  spiritual  kingdom  is  incomplete  !  No,  the  golden  close  is  yet  to 
come,  and  the  blessing  of  the  individual  parts  can  only  be  with  the  blessing  of  the 
whole.  And  so  the  apostle  speaks  of  the  whole  creation  groaning  and  travailing  in 
pain  together  until  now,  "  waiting  for  the  adoption,  to  wit,  the  redemption  of  our 
body."  (3)  That  the  mediatorial  king^lom  of  Christ  shall  be  superseded  by  an 
immediate  one  ;  therefore  the  present  form  in  which  God  has  revealed  Himself  is 
only  temporary.  When  the  object  of  the  present  kingdom  of  Christ  has  been 
attained  in  the  conquest  of  evil,  there  will  be  no  longer  need  of  a  mediator.  Then 
God  will  be  known  immediately.  Then,  when  the  last  hindrance,  the  last  enemy, 
is  removed,  we  shall  see  Him  face  to  fai^e,  know  Him  even  as  we  are  known,  awake 
up  satisfied  in  His  likeness,  and  be  transformed  into  pure  reciijients  of  the 
Divine  glory.     That  will  be  the  resurrection.     II.  Corroborative  proofs.     These 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  44^ 

are  two  in  number,  and  both  are  arpiimenta  ad  Jiominem.  They  are  not  proofs  valid 
to  all  men,  but  cogent  only  to  Christians.  1.  When  baptized,  Christians  made  a 
profession  of  a  belief  in  a  resurrection,  and  St.  Paul  asks  them  hete,  "  What,  then, 
was  the  meaning  of  their  profession?  Why  were  they  baj^tized  into  the  faith  of  a 
resurrection,  if  there  were  none  ?  "  (ver.  29).  2.  "Why  stand  we  in  jeopardy 
every  hour  ?  "  (1)  If  the  future  life  were  no  Christian  doctrine,  then  the  whole 
apostolic  life — nay,  the  whole  Christian  life,  were  a  monstrous  and  senseless  folly. 
(2)  And  again.  Christian  life,  not  merely  apostolic  devotedness,  is  "a  grand 
impertinence."  "Let  us  eat  and  drink,  for  to-morrow  we  die,"  and  if  this  life  be 
all,  we  defy  you  to  disprove  the  wisdom  of  such  reasoning.  How  many  of  the 
myriads  of  the  human  race  would  do  right,  for  the  sake  of  right,  if  they  were  only 
to  live  fifty  years,  and  then  die  for  evermore?  Go  to  the  sensualist,  and  tell  him 
that  a  noble  life  is  better  than  a  base  one,  even  for  that  time,  and  he  will  answer : 
"  I  like  pleasure  better  than  virtue :  you  can  do  as  you  please  ;  for  me,  I  will 
wisely  enjoy  my  time.  It  is  merely  a  matter  of  taste.  By  taking  away  my  hope 
of  a  resurrection  yuu  have  dwarfed  good  and  evil,  and  shortened  their  consequences. 
If  I  am  only  to  live  sixty  or  seventy  years,  there  is  no  eternal  right  or  wrong.  By 
destroying  the  thought  of  immortality  I  have  lost  the  sense  of  the  infinitude  of 
evil,  and  tlie  eternal  nature  of  good."  (3)  Besides,  with  our  hopes  of  immortrtlity 
gone,  the  value  of  humanity  ceases,  and  people  become  not  worth  living  for.  We 
have  not  got  a  motive  strong  enough  to  keep  us  from  sin.  Christianity  is  to 
redeem  from  evil  :  it  loses  its  power  if  the  idea  of  immortal  life  be  taken  away. 
(F.  JV.  lloberlson,  M.A.) 

Vers.  23,  24.  But  every  man  in  his  own  order  :  Christ  the  first-fruits  ;  afterward 
they  that  are  Christ's  at  His  coming. — Tlte  nequencrs  of  the  resurreciiun  : — I.  When 
AND  HOW  WILL  THE  DEAD  BE  RAISED?  1.  Generally  Paul's  auswer  amouuts  to  this. 
The  resurrection  is  not  a  single  act.  All  men  are  to  be  raised,  "  but  every  one  in 
his  own  order,"  i.e.,  "in  his  own  troop. "  The  ajiosile  sees  an  universal  conflict 
between  li'e  and  death.  Christ  the  Lord  of  life  has  already  achieved  a  personal 
victory;  but  all  otheis  are  still  in  the  thick  of  the  conflict.  What  is  to  be  the 
issue  ?  Through  the  power  of  Christ's  liie,  troop  after  troop  ihey  will  achieve  their 
conquest,  and  defile  before  their  victorious  Cajstain  with  joyful  acclamation. 
Christ's  resurrection,  "  the  first-fruits,"  is  the  first  triumph  in  a  series  of  triumphs 
over  death  ;  the  second  that  of  those  "  who  are  Christ's  at  His  coming."  It  is 
impossib  e  that  they,  with  His  life  in  them,  should  be  holden  of  death,  though 
death  may  keep  theui  in  ward  for  a  while.  2.  Do  the  dead  in  Christ  rise  before 
the  other  df  ad  ?  (1)  Let  us  ask  St.  Paul  to  be  his  own  interpreter.  His  fullest 
utterance  is  1  Thess.  iv.  13-17.  The  Thessalonians  apprehended  that  only  those  who 
were  alive  when  Christ  came  would  reign  with  Him.  Hence  they  mourned,  as 
those  without  hope,  over  their  bretliren  who  departed  this  life,  and  thus  lost  their 
thrones.  To  comfort  them,  the  aposile  affirmed  that  those  who  are  alive  and 
remain  will  have  no  advantage  over  the  Christian  dead.  The  dead  in  Christ  will 
rise  first ;  and  then  those  who  are  alive  will  be  caught  up  to  meet  Him.  Here, 
then,  though  he  does  not  speak  of  a  general  resurrectiou,  St.  Paul  does  speak  of 
one  in  which  only  those  who  sleep  in  Christ  will  take  pait,  (2)  As  his  meaning  is 
still  obscure,  let  us  call  in  another  interpreter.  In  Kev.  xx.  St.  John  describes  at 
leng  h  the  time  and  scene  which  were  in  St  Paul's  mind.  "But  the  rest  of  the 
dead  lived  not  again  until  the  thousand  years  were  finished.  This  is  the  first 
resurrection."  How  much  of  this  vision  is  symbol,  we  cannot  tell.  But  it  is  im- 
possilile  to  read  it  without  admitting  that,  at  least  in  St.  John's  thought,  there 
were  to  be  in  the  future  two  successive  triiimplis  of  life  over  death  ;  the  first,  at 
the  resurrection  of  those  who  are  in  Christ ;  the  second,  at  the  general  resurrection 
of  all  the  df.id.  (3)  Tliis  view  of  the  future  illustrotes  many  other  Scriptures,  and 
is  confiruied  and  expanded  by  them  (Jude  1-1,  15  ;  1  Cor.  vi.  2).  But  how  should 
the  saints  come  with  the  Lord  to  judye  the  world,  unless  they  hnd  had  part  in  the 
first  ivi-urrection  ?  (4)  The  great  Scripture,  however,  is  Matt.  xxv.  (a)  The 
discourse  commences  with  the  parable  of  the  ten  virgins.  When  the  Bride- 
groom comes  ihe  lamps  of  five  are  "going  out"  — at  the  point  to  expire.  And  so, 
when  the  Lord  comes,  they  are  not  ready  foi-  Him.  Yet  they  may  be  saved.  For 
all  we  are  told  is  that  they  are  too  late  for  that  time  ;  not  that  when  they  went  to 
buy  oil,  the  shops  were  shut.  They  were  buying  oil  when  they  i-hould  have  been 
burning  it,  and  therefore  were  too  late  for  the  marriage  supper.  It  is  not  the  final 
judgment  which  is  here  set  before  us.     Those  who  miss  the  first  may  be  in  time 


446  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  x v. 

for  the  second  resurrection,  (b)  The  same  thought  expressed  in  the  parable  of 
the  talents.  All  who  received  talents  from  "  the  lord  "  are  of  his  household.  Two 
are  faithful  to  their  trust.  One  servant  fails.  The  foolish  virgins  thought  their 
task  too  easy  :  the  slothful  servant  thinks  his  too  hard.  Wlien  his  ninsier  comes, 
he  has  notiiing  but  excuses  to  offer,  and  bases  his  excuses  on  a  wilful  miscon- 
ception of  the  master's  character.  He  is  cast  into  the  outer  darkness.  This  is  a 
parabolic  dehneation  of  the  first  resurrection,  of  the  judgment  of  the  Church 
rather  than  of  the  world.  For  there  are  many  in  tlie  Church  who  misconceive  tlie 
character  of  God.  Among  the  awful  possibilities  of  life  there  is  also  this  :  that 
"  those  who  have  once  been  enlightened,"  &c.  (Heb.  vi.  4-6),  may  fall  away  beyond 
the  reach  of  penitence,  and  theietore  beyond  the  leach  of  redemption,  (c)  But  at  this 
point  we  puss  from  the  first  to  the  second  resurrection,  from  the  judgment  of  the 
Church — which  may  extend  througli  tlie  millennium — to  the  judgment  of  the  world. 
For  now  "  all  the  nations  "  are  gathered  before  the  Son  of  Man.  'Ihose  wlio  stand 
on  the  right  are  the  "  shei  p  who  were  not  of  this  fold,"  the  men  of  every  nation  who, 
taught  by  His  Spirit  though  not  through  His  gospel,  have  wrought  righteousness. 
To  them" the  King  will  say,  "Come,  ye  blessed  of  My  Father,"  &c.  Mark  their 
response.  They  cannot  say,  "  Lord,  Thou  didst  not  entrust  us  with  talents."  They 
do  not  know  Him,  nor  His  gifts.  Mark  also  the  Lord's  reply  :  "  Liasmuch  as  ye 
did  it  to  one  of  the  least  of  these  My  brethren  " — and  here  we  must  suppose  Him 
pointing  to  the  saints  who  have  come  with  Him  to  the  judjment — "  ye  did  it  unto 
Me."  In  short,  all  the  details  of  this  solemn  scene  indicate  that  "  the  saints  "  are 
distinct  from  "  the  righteous  "  ;  that  they  are  already  with  Christ  in  glory,  not 
before  Him  for  judgment.  II.  "  Then  the  end,"  etc.  (ver.  24).  These  words  are 
expanded  in  the  verses  which  follow.  All  this  means  that  all  the  authority  of  man 
over  man,  all  the  power  of  death  over  the  race,  and  even  all  the  grace  of  Christ 
in  the  Cliurch,  are  Divine  expedients  for  delivering  men  from  their  bondage  to  the 
lusts  which  destroy  them,  and  for  quickening  them  into  a  new  better  life:  that  the 
authority  of  man  and  the  power  of  death  only  reach  their  true  and  benignant  ends 
as  they  are  penetrated  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ :  that  Christ,  therefore,  must  reign  till 
these  various  forms  of  rule  are  suffused  by  His  Spirit ;  and  that  tht-n,  when  h11  these 
have  achieved  their  jnurpo-e,  "  the  end  "  will  come;  the  Divine  pxpedien's,  having 
served  their  turn,  will  vanish  away,  and  higher  forms  of  life  take  their  place;  we 
shall  know  God,  not  only  through  the  Son,  but  as  He  is  in  Himself,  and  th  ■  God 
■whom  as  yet  we  know  only  through  Christ,  even  the  Father,  will  become  all  in  all 
of  us.  1.  It  is  not  difficult  to  see  liow  all  forms  of  human  rule  and  authority  are,  at 
least,  intended  to  check  the  evil  dispositions  of  men,  to  save  us  from  anaichy,  from 
the  tyranny  of  brute  force  and  unbridled  selfishness.  Bad  as  the  worid  is  it  would 
be  far  worse  but  for  the  restraints  of  domestic  and  political  authority.  Nor  is  it 
difficult  to  see  that  even  the  death  we  often  fear  is  a  wholesome  check  upon  us. 
The  mere  fear  of  it  holds  back  the  tyrant  from  mnny  crimes,  the  criminal  from 
many  oBences.  2.  Nevertheless  human  rule  is  apt  to  be  ausiere  and  unlovely. 
Till  it  is  penetrated  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  if  it  does  some  good,  it  also  does  much 
harm  ;  and,  in  so  far  as  it  does  harm  to  men,  it  is  the  enemy  of  Christ.  Deatli, 
again,  is  a  horror,  till  the  light  of  life  and  immortaiity  shine  throuyh  it ;  and,  in  so 
far  as  it  inspires  the  fear  that  hath  torment,  deatii  is  the  enemy  of  Christ.  There- 
fore God  has  ordamed  that  Christ  shall  reign  till  He  has  put  all  enemies  beneath 
His  feet,  till  His  Spirit  has  penetrat^d  all  forms  of  domestiu  and  civil  control,  and 
suffused  death  itself  with  tlie  splendours  of  life.  But  w-hen  He  shnll  thus  have 
drawn  all  things  under  Him,  the  reign  of  Christ  will  have  achieved  its  purpose ; 
the  world  will  be  full  of  living  meu  who  dwell  to^'ether  in  charity,  and  to  whom 
death  means  more  life  and  fuller.  Having  ai-hieved  its  purp  ise,  the  reign  of 
Christ  may  well  come  to  an  end.  It  will  be  merged  in  the  universal  kingdom  of 
the  Father.  Tiie  Mediator  will  be  lost  in  the  God  to  whom  He  has  reconciled  m11 
men,  from  whom  they  can  never  more  be  alienated.  God,  even  the  F  .ther,  will  be 
all  in  all.  Unlike  tlie  princes  of  this  world,  the  Divine  King  will  reign,  not  when, 
but  only  until,  He  has  put  all  enemies  under  His  feet.  3.  This,  then,  is  the  glorious 
prospect  which  lies  before  us.  To  our  mortal  weakness,  indeed,  we  may  tind  no 
beauty  in  it  that  we  should  desire  it.  For  we  do  not  care  to  rise  nbo^  e  our  need  of 
Christ :  the  thought  of  losing  Him  is  intolerable  to  us.  Let  us  therefore  remember 
that  we  do  not  lose  a  child  when  we  find  and  love  his  father.  We  then  nally  tind 
the  child,  under.stnnd  him  better,  love  him  more.  And,  in  like  manner,  we  sliall 
not,  in  finding  God,  lose  Christ.  We  shall  then  first  truly  find  Him,  know  Him  as 
we  never  knew  Him  before,  love  Him  with  a  more  perfect  love.     4.  Whatever  else 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  447 

and  more  may  be  meant  by  Christ  delivering  the  kingdom  to  His  Father,  and  God 
becoming  all  in  all,  at  least  this  must  be  meant :  that  the  future  is  to  be  a  grand 
progress,  a  golden  ladder  which  we  shall  climb,  round  after  round,  till  we  stand 
amid  the  awful  an  I  tranf-figuring  splendours  of  the  eternal  throne;  a  constant 
.advance  towards  the  central  light,  a  constant  increase  in  life,  power,  wisdom, 
■charity:  a  beatiHc  vision,  which  giows  and  spreads  as  we  gaze  upon  it,  and  pours 
an  enlarging  volume  of  energy  and  peace  into  our  souls.  (S.  Cox,  D.D.) 
Chrht  the  firnt-fniits : — I.  The  figure  suggests  the  idea  of  PRECEnENCE.  As  the 
prfsmting  of  the  first-ripe  fruits  preceded  the  gathering  in  of  the  remainder  of  the 
harvest — so  Christ's  rising  from  the  grave,  and,  on  His  ascension,  nppcariug  before 
■God,  was  the  prelude  of  the  rising  of  all  His  people  and  their  gathering  in  to  ever- 
lasting life.  The  resurrection  of  the  ble-sed  surety  was  the  first  irrecoverable  and 
permanent  rescue  from  the  power  of  the  grave.  He  was  the  first  released  victim 
which  death  was  never  to  get  back.  II.  The  second  idea  suggested  by  the  type  is 
that  of  SEcrEiTY.  The  first-fruits,  when  duly  offered  to  the  Lord,  in  obedience  to 
His  prescription,  and  as  a  becoming  exjjression  of  dependence  and  thankfulness, 
ioimed  a  ]»iud  of  Divine  pledge  to  Israel  of  the  remaining  harvest.  There  are  two 
ways  in  which  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  may  be  considered  as  giving  assurance  of 
the  resurrection  of  His  people.  1.  It  involved  in  it  an  attestation,  on  the  part  of 
the  Father  that  sent  Him,  to  the  divinity  of  His  mission,  and  to  the  truth  of  all 
His  testimony.  2.  It  was  closely  connected  with  His  death,  as  the  principal  proof 
of  its  having  answered  its  end.  That  end  was  atonement.  It  is  not  the  tact  that 
CJhiist  died,  even  connected  with  the  additional  fact  of  His  rising  again,  that  consti- 
tutes the  gospel.  Both  the  facts  may  be  believed,  and  yet  the  gospel  rejected. 
The  gospel  lies  in  the  purpose  of  His  death — "  He  died  for  our  sins '' ;  and  then 
His  resurrection  becomes  the  evidence  of  the  purpose  having  been  effectually 
answeied — of  the  Father's  having  accepted  the  propitiation.  III.  The  last  idea 
suggested  by  the  figure  in  the  text  is  heskmklakce.  The  first  ripe  fndts  were  a 
specimen  of  the  harvest.  They  were  to  be  the  best  indeed  in  quality;  and  had  it 
been  otherwist^,  the  type  would  ill  have  agreed  with  what  tlie  apostle  represents  it 
as  having  prefigured.  For  we  must  never  fancy  that,  in  the  case  before  us,  resem- 
blance means  the  same  as  e(]uality.  The  glory  of  His  people  can  never  be  sup|iosed 
equal  in  degree  to  that  of  Jesus  Himself.  I3ut  the  glory  shall  be  the  same  in  kind  ; 
His  the  gl(  ry  of  the  sun,  ours  of  those  stars  that  receive  and  reflect  His  light. 
See  Phil.  iii.  20,  21 ;  1  John  iii.  2  ;  Col.  iii.  4.  And  oh,  is  not  this  enough  ? — enough 
to  kindle  all  the  ardour  of  desire,  enough  to  fill  the  conceptions  of  the  most 
capacious  mind,  enough  to  exhaust  the  efforts  of  the  boldest  and  loftiest  imagina- 
tion ?  To  be  like  Christ  I  Oh,  what  is  therf!  higher,  holier,  or  happier,  which  it  is 
l^nssille  for  you  to  wish,  either  for  yourselves  or  for  the  dearest  objects  of  your 
love?      (li.    Wardlnir,   D.D.)  Then   cometh    the   end,  when   He   shall   have 

delivered  up  the  kingdom  to  Gcd. — T]ie  comiiui  of  the  end  : — Tlie  end  comes 
— I.  To  man's  gkeatnkss.  Alexander  the  Great  conquered  all  that  was 
known  of  the  world,  and  sighed  because  there  was  only  one  world  to  con- 
quer, and  yi-t  one  small  grave  in  Babylon  was  large  enough  to  hold  him 
and  his  greatness.  Solomon's  wisdom  and  greatness  were  such  that  there 
was  none  like  unto  him,  and  yet  he  "w.s  buried  in  the  city  of  David  his 
father."  If  I  visit  the  Pyramids  of  Egypt,  I  am  reminded  of  the  glory  of  the 
Pharaohs,  yet  if  I  were  to  touch  one  of  these  Pliaiaohs  roughly  he  would  crumble 
into  dust.  William  the  Conqueror  was  a  mif^hty  king,  yet  his  horse  stumbling 
■over  the  hot  ashes  of  a  burning  town  brought  all  this  greatness  to  an  end. 
Napoleon's  ambition  knew  no  bounds,  and  yet  a  lonely  tomb  holds  all  thatrt-mains 
of  that  mighty  conqueror.  II.  To  our  opportuxities  for  good.  All  have  these 
opportunities,  yet  some  of  von  are  not  using  t'  era.  An  end  will  come  to  them- 
•God  will  not  always  strive  with  man,  and  theu  the  recording  augel  will  point  sadly 
to  the  text,  "Then  cometh  the  end."  III.  To  aiife  of  open  sin  and  dissipation. 
I  see  men  and  women  staggering  out  of  taverns,  I  see  them  gambling  in  reeking 
rooms.  I  see  women  hovering  through  the  streets  seeking  whom  they  may  devour, 
then  I  open  my  Bible  sadly  and  read  the  text,  "  Tht-n  cometh  the  end."  And  it  is 
nearer  by  forty,  or  fifty,  or  sixty  years  than  when  you  were  born.  What  sort  of 
^nd  is  it  tJoing  ti>  be?  Conclusion:  1.  There  are  only  two  kinds  of  en  lings 
possible  for  you  :  if  you  are  in  C-^rist  Jesus,  then  the  end  will  be  for  you  the  end  of 
Waiting,  of  toil,  of  sorrow,  and  it  will  be  the  begmning  of  peace,  of  joy,  of  rest 
everlasting.  But  for  those  who  die  in  their  sins,  the  end  must  be  the  end  of  all 
hope,  of  all  amendment,  and  the  beginning  of  the  blackness  of  darkness  for  ever. 


448  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

2.  Choose  then  this  clay,  whom  you  will  serve  !     (II.  J.  W.  Buxton,  M.A.)  Tlie 

certain  end  : — I.  It  is  not  possible  to  rule  these  wokds  got  of  life.  1.  You  tell 
of  any  process;  but  always  by  and  by  the  process  is  exhausted.  "Then  cometh 
the  end."  Your  story  has  to  round  itself  with  tliat.  (1)  We  see  a  child  growing 
up  from  childhood  into  manhood;  but  at  last  "  cometh  the  end."  (2)  You  start 
upon  a  new  business,  build  you  a  new  house,  begin  some  new  study,  whatever  you 
do,  "  then  cometh  the  end,"  is  written,  however  far  away,  as  the  conclusion  which 
all  must  reai'li.  (3)  Our  text  tells  that  even  of  the  great  work  Christ  is  doing  it  is 
written,  "  Then  cometh  the  end."  2.  This  constant  lecurrenee  of  ends  in  life 
must  certainly  mean  something.  It  may  beget  a  mere  frivolity.  It  may  make  it 
seem  as  if  nothing  were  worth  beginning  or  prosecuting  very  thoroughly.  Or  it 
may  give  a  freshness  and  vitality  to  living.  "  Now  or  never."  II.  What  sort  op 
temper  it  ought  to  produce.  1.  Note  the  way  in  which  men's  desire  and  men's 
dread  are  both  called  out.  (1)  Look  at  man's  desire  of  the  end.  (a)  It  is  a  part 
of  his  dread  of  monotony.  There  is  something  very  pathetic  in  man's  instinctive 
tear  of  being  weaii<-d  with  even  the  most  delightful  and  satisfactory  experiences. 
Is  it  not  a  sign  of  man's  sem^e  that  liis  nature  is  made  for  larger  worlds  than  this  ? 
"  I  would  not  live  alway,"  has  been  a  true  cry  of  the  human  soul,  (h)  But  there 
is  something  deeper.  Very  early  there  comes  the  sense  of  imperfection  and  failui'e, 
and  the  wish  that  it  were  possible  to  begin  the  game  again.  And  as  life  goes  on  that 
conviction  grows.  Tell  any  man  that  he,  out  of  all  these  mortals,  was  never  to 
die,  and  by  and  by  must  come  something  like  dismay  ;  for  every  man  has  gathered 
something  which  he  must  get  rid  of,  and  so  there  is  promise  to  him  in,  "  Then 
cometh  the  end."  (c)  But  so  far  as  life  has  been  a  success,  the  same  satisfaction 
comes.  It  is  a  poor  thing  for  a  traveller  along  a  dreary  and  difhcult  road  to  be 
able  to  say,  "  Tliank  God,  there  is  an  end  to  this!  "  Buc  for  a  man  to  say,  "  This 
road  is  glorious,  but  no  doubt  beyond  is  something  yet  more  glorious  still,"  that  is 
a  fine  impatience.  The  noblest  human  natures  are  built  thus.  "Let  the  life  be 
filled  with  the  spirit  of  the  springtime,  and  the  end  which  comes  shall  be  the 
luxuriance  of  summer  !  "  And  so  in  many  tones,  yet  all  of  them  tones  of  satisfac- 
tioD,  men  desire  the  end.  It  is  like  a  great  company  of  travellers  coming  together 
in  sight  of  the  resiing-place  where  they  are  to  spend  the  night,  and  lifting  up  all 
together  one  great  shout  of  joy.  Their  hearts  have  various  feelings.  Sume  are 
glad  because  their  day's  task  is  done,  others  because  of  the  new  task  which  they 
can  see  opening  out  beyond  them  for  to-morrow.  (2)  Turn  to  the  other  side  and 
think  of  the  dread  with  which  men  think  of  the  coming  of  ends  in  life.  Can  we 
give  any  account  of  this  dread  ?  (a)  It  is  the  sheer  force  of  habit.  That  this 
which  is  should  cease  to  be  is  shocking  and  sui prising.  Even  in  that  dread  there 
is  something  which  is  good.  It  is  good  for  the  tree  to  love  the  soil  in  which  it 
grows  and  to  consent  with  difficuly  to  transplanting.  It  is  good  that  the  burden  of 
proof  should  be  on  the  side  of  change,  (b)  Men  shrink  from  the  announcement  of 
the  coming  end  because  they  know  how  far  they  are  from  having  exhausted  their 
present  condition.  A  boy  has  longed  to  be  a  man,  but  when  he  stands  upon  the 
brink  of  manhood  and  looks  behind  him  over  the  yet-unreaped  acres  of  his  youth, 
he  is  almost  ready  to  go  hack  and  postpone  his  manhood  till  he  has  taken  richer 
possession  of  those  harvest  fields.  And  so  of  the  great  end.  Who  wants  to  die 
so  long  as  this  great  rich  world  has  only  had  the  very  borders  of  its  riches  touched? 
(c)  But  even  more  than  this,  perhaps,  comes  in  the  great  uncertainty  wliich 
envelops  every  experience  which  is  untried.  The  passage  from  light  into  light 
must  be  always  through  a  zone  of  darkness.  How  we  are  feeling  this  in  these 
da.ys !  Old  social  conditions  are  ceasing  to  be  possible  any  longer.  In  their  jjlace 
new  ones  are  evidently  coming,  and  who  is  not  conscious  of  misgiving  and  of  dread 
as  he  enters  with  his  time  into  the  cloud  of  disturbance  that  hovers  between  the 
old  and  the  new  ?  This  is  a  large  part  of  the  reason  why  the  most  miserable  cling 
to  life,  counting  it  better  "  To  bear  the  ills  they  have  than  flee  to  others  which  they 
know  not  of."  2.  Blessed  indeed  it  is  for  man,  standing  in  such  confused  and 
mingled  mood,  that  the  end  of  things  does  not  depend  upon  his  choice,  but  comes 
by  a  will  more  large,  more  wise  than  his.  The  workman's  voice  has  not  to  summon 
out  of  the  east  the  shadows  of  the  night  in  which  no  man  can  work.  "  It  comes  of 
itself,"  we  say.  We  mean,  "  God  sends  it."  (1)  How  many  things  there  are  of 
■which  we  say,  "  I  thank  God  I  may  do  this,  but  I  thank  God  also  that  the  time  will 
come  when  I  shall  stop  doing  it!  "  Our  business  associations,  journeys,  schools, 
homes,  are  of  this  sort.  They  are  good  and  welcome  because  they  are  but  for  a 
while.     Our  mortal  life,  that  too  we  are  thankful  for,  but  thankful  also  that  it  shall 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  449 

not  last  for  ever.  But  all  this  satisfaction  in  the  temporariness  comes  only  from  its 
being  eufolded  and  embraced  within  the  eternity  of  the  eternal.  There  must  be 
something  which  does  not  i^ass  away,  something  to  which  comes  no  end.  The 
soul  and  its  character,  God  and  His  love  and  glory — it  is  because  within  these  as 
the  ends  of  life  all  other  things  are  enfolded  as  the  means  of  life,  that  we  can  be 
reconciled  to,  nay,  even  can  rejoice  in  the  knowledge  that  the  means  must  cea'^e 
I  when  they  shall  have  made  their  contribution  to  the  end  which  must  endure  for 
ever.  But  to  know  no  everlasting  end  or  purpose,  to  have  nothing  but  the  means 
to  rest  on,  to  see  th^^m  sUpping  out  of  our  grasp  and  leaving  nothing  permanent 
behind — that  is  terrible !  How  is  it  with  you?  There  comes  an  end  to  all  these 
things  which  you  are  doing  now  !  Not  because  God  snatches  them  out  of  your 
hands,  but  because  they  exhaust  tliemselves  and  expire,  because  they  are  by  their 
nature  temporary  and  perishing,  tliey  die.  Have  you  anything  to  which  there 
comes  no  end  ?  Any  passion  for  the  character  and  love  of  God  ?  Those  are 
eternnl.  There  is  no  end  to  the  great  ends  of  life.  (2)  A  noble  independence  this 
gives  to  a  man's  soul.  Poverty  comes  up  and  joins  you,  and  you  say,  "  Welcome, 
Poverty.  We  will  walk  together  for  a  while,  and  when  you  have  done  for  me  all 
that  you  cnn,  then  I  will  dismiss  you  with  my  thanks."  Eiches  comes  rolling  up 
to  be  your  fellow-traveller,  and  you  say,  "  Welcome,  Eiohes.  There  will  come  an 
end  to  you;  but  while  you  last  we  will  be  friends,  and  you  shall  help  me."  The 
more  your  soul  is  set  upon  the  ends  of  life,  the  more  you  use  its  means  in  indepen- 
dence. You  use  them  as  a  workman  uses  his  tools,  taking  them  up  in  quick 
succession,  casting  down  one  after  the  other,  never  falling  in  love  wjlh  the  tool 
because  the  work  possesses  him.  (Dp.  PhiUijis  Brooks.)  The  end  of  the  kingdom 
of  (trace  : — Consider — I.  W^hat  that  kingdom  is  which  Christ  is  to  sukkender. 
1.  There  is  the  kingdom  of  nature,  presided  over  not  by  the  God  of  grace,  but  by 
the  God  of  proviiience.  In  it  there  is  system,  order,  reasun,  laws,  everything  that 
makes  up  a  kingdom.  But  this  is  not  the  kingdom  spoken  of  here,  because  it  is 
not  peculiarly  Christ's,  and  tliere  is  no  necessity  it  should  pass  away.  There  are 
many  reasons  for  believing  that  all  its  glory  and  richness  only  separated  from 
man's  sinfulness  shall  be  jireserved.  2.  Now,  there  is  over  and  above  this  the 
hiyh,  celestial,  glorious  kingdom  in  which  the  Lord  reigns  amongst  His  peoi^le  and 
His  angels  in  unveiled  majesty.  But  this  is  not  the  kingdom  whereof  the  apostle 
is  speaking;  for  what  reason  is  there  that  it  should  end?  It  is  a  kingdom  in  which 
God  has  gathered  together  the  very  choicest  of  all  creatures.  No;  unless  all 
Scripture  be  untrue,  this  kingdom  of  recompense  and  of  glory  is  meant  to  be 
indestructible.  3.  There  is,  however,  a  kingdom  which  is  neither  the  kingdom  of 
nature  nor  the  kingdom  of  glory,  but  something  between  the  two  :  but  neverthe- 
less, it  belongs  to  earth  in  one  respect,  and  to  heaven  in  another.  Its  great  object 
is  to  rescue  sinners,  and  to  build  them  up  in  holiness  ;  and  therefore  the  subjects 
of  this  kingdom  are  those  that  have  been  once  rebellious,  but,  through  the  grnce  of 
God,  Lave  been  brought  into  a  state  of  loyalty  and  allegiance  to  the  Lord.  One  of 
the  grandest  sketches  we  have  of  this  kingdon  is  in  Psa.  ex.,  where  we  see  the 
Lord's  will  ng  people  being  established,  and  His  enemies  crushed,  and  Christ 
reigning  till  He  hath  put  all  enemies  under  His  feet.  All  men  being  originally 
God's  enemies,  are  predestined  to  be  subdued — subdued  by  grace,  or  subdued  by 
power.  It  is  simply  a  question  for  ourselves  in  what  department  we  shall  find  our- 
selves placed — enemies  who  have  been  reduced  into  friends,  or  enemies  wlio  are 
destined  to  be  "  broken."  Now  this  kingdom  being  provisional,  is  destined  to  pass 
away.  Why  should  the  scaffolding  remain  when  the  building  is  completed  ?  When 
God's  mighty  work  is  finished,  should  there  be  ministers,  ordinances,  means  of 
grace  ?  II.  The  particdlak  time  at  which  this  is  to  be  done.  1.  At  the  moment 
that  Christianity  was  launched,  calamities  began  to  thicken  u2)ou  the  house  of 
Israel.  Jewish  tribulation  is  running  its  conrse,  but  that  will  come  to  an  "  end." 
"  Jerusalem  shall  be  trodden  down  of  the  Gentiles,  until  the  tiiues  of  the  Gentiles 
be  fulfilled."  2.  There  is  another  dispensation  that  has  set  in  concurrently  with 
that  of  Gentile  mercies.  In  "  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  "  we  are  now  living.  But 
this  dispensation  must  come  to  its  "  end."  3.  Another  dispensation  seems  to  have 
smarted  concurrently  with  the  dispensation  of  Christianity;  that  of  Antichrist. 
Paul  tells  us  in  Thess.  and  1  Tim.  that  in  the  last  days  perilous  times  shall  come; 
and  that  this  antichrist  shall  go  on  until  the  Lord  shall  "  consume  him  with  the 
Spirit  of  His  mouth,  and  destroy  him  with  the  brightness  of  His  coming."  So  that 
will  have  an  "end."  4.  There  is  another  grand  expectation,  viz.,  that  of  the 
returning  Redeemer.  And  now  take  up  these  scattered  threads  and  bring  them,  as 
VOL.    IT.  29 


450  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 


they  require,  to  a  definite  point  connected  with  the  second  advent  of  our  Master. 
Now  is  it  not  something  to  stand  upon  the  mountain-top,  and  to  look  down  upon  all 
these  railway  trains  making  their  way  to  one  point  ?  To  one  plunging  on  with  the  title 
of  "  Jewish  doctrines,"  and  another  with  the  title  "  Gentile  privileges,"  and  another 
with  the  title  "Antichrist"  stamped  upon  them?  Is  it  not  something  in  the  far 
distance  to  see  the  faintest  glimmer  of  an  unearthly  light,  and  to  see  by  the 
direction  of  all  these  various  forces  that  they  are  hurrying  one  and  all  precisely  to 
the  same  point,  and  eventually  meeting  at  the  world's  great  centre,  the  returning 
Saviour?  When  all  these  destinies  come  to  receive  their  concurring  fulfilment, 
then  the  prophecy  before  us  stands  accomplished.  And  when  that  end  comes  there 
shall  come  a  crush  of  kingdoms,  for  everything  that  is  earthy  shall  fall  into 
destruction,  and  "  The  kingdoms  of  this  world  shall  become  the  kingdoms  of  our 
Lord  and  of  His  Christ  "  ;  and  the  Master  shall  be  all  in  all.  There  shall  also  be  the 
crush  of  a  kingdom.  The  kingdom  of  grace  is  wanted  no  longer  ;  it  has  done  its 
necessary,  its  devoted  work,  long  enough  ;  for  it  has  educated  the  Lord's  people 
for  their  privileges.  And  then  the  mighty  President  shall  take  it  in  His  hands, 
and  lay  it  down  before  the  throne  of  His  Eternal  Father.  Christ's  official 
existence,  not  His  natural  and  intrinsic  glory,  will  terminate,  and  then,  without 
distinccions  of  official  character,  "God  shall  be  all  in  all."  {Dean  lioyd.)  The 
transitury  and  the  eternal: — We  never  jepeat  these  words  in  reference  to  that 
which  is  charming  without  a  certain  sense  of  pain.  Yet  it  is  true  in  regard  to  all 
that  pertains  to  us  or  to  our  surroundings.  Tlie  longest,  brightest  day  must  end. 
Each  season,  each  journey,  vacation,  however  pleasant  or  prosperous,  every  human 
relationship,  must  end.  The  earthly  life  of  each,  though  lengthened  to  a  century 
and  full  of  gladness,  must  come  to  an  end.  The  structures  built  by  man  outlive 
the  builder,  and  seem  to  say,  "  We  only  are  left  b^hind,  while  the  people  once  here 
ai'e  for  ever  gone  !  "  "  The  mountains  shall  depart  and  the  hills  be  removed." 
The  globe  grows  old  and  the  new  heavens  and  earth  hasten.  Even  the  mediatorial 
system  is  but  for  a  time.  So  with  everything  with  but  one  notable  excei)tion. 
The  soul's  life  is  not  to  end.  These  facts  suggest  some  practical  lessons. 
I.  These  things  which   are   passing   away  are   ^0T   to   become   the   object   of 

THE    SUPKEIIE    DESIKE    OF    THE    SPIRIT    WHICH    IS    NOT    TO    COME     TO    AN    END.       It    is     of 

course  possible  to  go  to  extremes.  1.  Some  affect  a  disgust  for  pleasure  and 
property,  but  by  right  enjoyment  we  are  recreated.  We  are  not  to  undervalue  it. 
Again,  property  may  be  held  without  undue  ambition  or  worldly  pride.  Chris- 
tianity honours  toil  and  reminds  men  that  Jesus  was  a  working  man,  and  Paul  as 
well.  Economy  is  good.  Omnipotence  has  recognised  it.  True  religion  is  not 
hostile  to  the  spirit  of  thrift  and  carefulness  in  acquisition.  2.  But  there  is  peril 
in  the  other  extreme.  We  are  apt  to  love  pleasure  and  property  inordinately.  The 
soul's  welfare  is  subordinate,  and  so  the  hsson  of  the  text  is  timely,  "  Then  cometh 
the   end."     The  most  ojiulent  wealth  will  pass   away.     II.  There   is   a  Divine 

PURPOSE    in    these     FLEETING     OBJECTS    AND     EXPERIENCES,     '10    WIT  :     TO     SERVE     THE 

CULTURE  OF  THE  SOUL  WHICH  DOES  NOT  PASS  AWAY.  1.  The  beauty  and  enjoyment 
He  furnishes  us  so  richly  is  intended  to  give  tone  and  tincture  to  our  taste;  and  by 
a  crntemplation  of  His  handiwork  our  minds  are  affiliated  with  His.  2.  So,  too, 
by  the  proper  grati6cation  of  the  instinct  of  possession  our  will  force  is  invigorated. 
Ttie  more  means  we  possess,  the  more  of  culture  we  can  give  ourselves  and  house- 
holds, the  more  useful  we  can  be  in  the  world.  Moreover,  character  is  unfolded  in 
these  activities.  There  is  an  Italian  proverb  that  "  The  solitary  man  is  either  a 
beast  or  an  angel."  3.  The  body,  too,  is  a  means  of  spiritunl  culture.  Our 
appetites  are  to  be  curbed  and  our  passions  confined,  and  so  physical  forces  may 
now  aid  in  our  spiritual  enrichment.  4.  This  world,  though  it  is  to  come  to 
an  end,  is  another  educational  power.  Its  wealth  we  are  to  garner,  its  mines 
explore,  and  its  forces  subdue.  All  things  are  to  minister  to  man,  and  to  be 
subordinate  to  the  soul's  life.     III.  To  the  soul  that  has  thus  wisely  used  the 

TRANSITORY  THINGS  OF  TIME,  "  THE  END  OF  ALL  THINGS  "  DOES  NOT  IN  ANY  SENSE 

MEAN  DEFEAT,  DISASTER.  What  IS  the  end  of  a  campaign  ?  Victory.  Of  a 
revolution  like  that  of  1776?  A  new  nation.  The  end  of  some  superb  cathedral, 
like  that  of  Cologne,  six  centuries  in  building,  is  a  poem  in  stone.  The  end 
of  a  true  life  is  not  destruction,  but  consummation.  The  river  finds  its  end 
in  the  distant  sea,  and  the  day  its  end  in  the  glory  of  a  star-lit  sky,  a  glory 
only  seen  when  the  day  has  found  its  close.  We  should  not  be  sad,  therefore,  as 
the  summer  is  ended,  the  harvest  past,  the  journey  completed,  and  the  friendly 
associations  terminated  which  cheered  us  for  a  season.     The  traveller  passes  the 


.  CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  451 

river,  the  village,  or  city  on  his  way  home,  and  is  not  disappointed,  for  lae  journeys 
to  an  end,  his  liome.  We  seek  an  end.  {R.  S.  Siorr.-i,  D.D.)  CIiri.it  r,-sig)iin(j  His 
administration: — Tliere  are  two  diiferent  ideas  attached  to  "kingdom."  One 
regards  it  as  the  empire  of  Satan,  and  the  other  as  the  empire  of  Christ.  If  the 
former  be  adopted,  then  the  passage  teaclies-that  when  Christ  has  subdued  all  the 
principalities  and  powers  of  this  kingdom.  He  will  deliver  the  whole  up  to  the 
Father.  Tlien  "the  kingdoms  of  this  world  will  have  become  the  kingdoms  of  our 
God  and  of  His  Christ,  and  He  shall  reign  for  ever."  If  the  latter,  then  it  means 
that  when  Christ,  in  the  exercise  of  His  mediatorial  autliority,  has  subjugated  all 
the  powers  of  moral  evil,  He  will  deliver  np  His  commission  to  God,  who  will  then 
be  acknowledged  as  the  absolute  ruler  of  all.  The  latter  is  the  most  plausible. 
Learn  then — I.  That  thk  government  of  oub  world  is  administered  by  Christ. 
The  New  Testament  is  full  of  the  doctrine  that  Christ  reigns  over  our  world,  and 
this  explains  several  things  otherwise  inexplicable.  1.  The  perpetuation  of  the 
human  race.  Death  was  threatened  on  Adam  if  he  sinned.  He  sinned,  and  died 
not,  but  becan:e  the  father  of  the  human  family.  The  Biblical  doctrine  of 
mediation  is  the  only  principle  that  explains  this.  2.  The  coexistence  of  sin  and 
happiness  in  the  same  individual.  Under  the  government  of  absolute  righteous- 
ness we  should  antecedentlv  expect  that  wherever  there  was  sin  there  would  be 
misery  proportioned  to  it.  There  is  perfect  happiness  in  heaven,  because  there  is 
perfect  holiness  ;  there  is  unmitigated  misery  in  bell,  because  there  is  unmixed 
depi-avity  ;  but  here  tliere  is  sin  and  happiness.  The  mediative  government  is  the 
only  principle  that  explains  this  3.  The  offer  of  pardon,  and  tbe  application  of 
remedial  influences  to  the  condemned  and  corrupt.  Under  a  righteous  government, 
how  is  this  to  be  explained  ?  This  is  explicable  only  on  the  ground  that  He  is 
"exalted  to  be  a  Piince  and  a  Saviour,  to  give  repentance,"  &c.     II.  That  Cueist 

ADMINISTERS     THE     GOVERNMENT     OF    OOR    WORLD  IN    ORDER   TO     PUT    DOWN    ALL    HUMAN 

EVILS.  There  are  two  classes  of  evil  referred  to.  1.  Moral.  "All  rule,  all 
authority,  and  power."  Sinful  piinciples  are  the  moral  potentates  of  this  woild — 
"  the  principalities  and  powers  of  darkness."  Christ's  government  is  to  p'lt  them 
•down  from  governments,  churches,  books,  hearts,  &g.  2.  Physical.  "  The  last 
enemy  that  shall  be  destroyed  is  death."  Death  is  the  issue — the  totality  of  all 
physical  evils.  Christ  will  destroy  this.  He  will  one  day  open  the  graves  of  the 
globe.  III.  That  whicn  these  evils  are  entirely  put  down,  CniiisT  will  resign 
His  administration  into  the  hands  of  the  everlasting  Father.  Moral  evil 
■shall  be  exterminated,  and  deatli  swallowed  up  in  victory.  Then  comes  the  end. 
■Christ  having  finished  the  work  that  whs  given  Him  to  do,  resigns  His  office.  The 
end  realised,  the  means  are  no  longer  needed.  Patriarehalism  had  its  day;  and 
Abraham  delivering  up  his  ministration  to  Moses.  Judaism  had  its  day:  and 
Moses  delivered  up  his  ministration  to  Christ.  Mediation  is  having  its  day  ;  and 
when  it  shall  have  realised  its  der-ign,  Christ  will  deliver  up  His  administration  to 
the  primal  founain  of  all  authority  and  power.  IV.  That  when  Christ  shall 
HAVE  resigned  His  adbiinistration,  God  "will  be  all  in  all."  1.  This  does 
not  mean — (1)  That  th^re  will  be  dissolution  in  the  human  and  Divine  in  the 
constitution  of  Christ.  (2)  Th  it  Christ  will  lose  any  part  of  His  influence  in  the 
Divine  empire.  Christ  will  ever  rise  in  the  esteem  and  devotion  of  all  who  know 
His  history,  and  especially  of  all  who  have  been  saved  by  His  grace.  (H)  That  God 
■will  become  something  different  to  the  universe  in  general  thnn  He  has  ever  been. 
To  the  unfahen  districts  of  His  vast  kimdom  He  has  ever  been  "  all  in  all."  2. 
The  apostle  is  speaking  of  humanity,  and  what  he  means,  I  presume,  is  that  God 
will  become  "all  in  all"  to  it- that  He  will  become  to  man,  after  this,  very 
•different  to  what  He  liad  ever  been.  Two  facts  will  illustrate  this.  (1)  He 
will  treat  all  men  after  this  on  the  ground  of  their  own  moral  merits.  From  the 
fall  up  to  this  period  He  had  treated  them,  during  their  existence  in  this  world,  on 
the  ground  of  Christ's  mediation  ;  but  now,  the  mediation  removed,  each  man  shall 
"reap  the  fruit  of  his  own  doings."  (2)  All  good  men  will,  after  this,  subjectively 
realise  the  absolute  one  as  they  have  never  done  before.  The  atm  sphere  of  their 
nature  purified.  He  shall  appeir  within  them  as  the  central  orb,  revealing  every- 
thing in  its  light — uncovering  the  Infinite  above  and  the  finite  beneath — making 
the  finite  manifest  and  glorious  in  the  conscious  light  of  the  Infinite.  {D.  Thoma.i, 
D.D.)  The  end  of  the  viedin'orial  reiijn  : — The  Scriptures  constantly  tench  that 

■Christ's  kingdom  is  an  everlastirg  kingdom,  and  of  His  dominion  there  is  no  end. 
In  what  sense,  th'  n,  can  He  be  said  to  deliver  up  His  kingdom  ?  It  must  be  re- 
membered that  the  Scriptures  speak  of  a  threefold  kingdom  as  belonging  to  Christ. 


452  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 


1.  That  which  necessarily  helongs  to  Him  as  a  Divine  person,  <ixtencling  over  all 
creatures,  and  of  which  He  can  never  divest  Himself.  2.  That  which  belongs  to 
Him  as  the  incarnate  Son  of  God,  extending  over  His  own  people.  This  also  is 
everlasting.  He  will  for  ever  remain  the  head  and  sovereign  of  the  redeemed.  3. 
That  dominion  to  which  He  was  exalted  after  His  resurreciion,  when  all  power  in 
heaven  and  earth  was  committed  to  His  hands.  This  kingdom,  which  He  exercises 
as  the  Theanthropos,  and  which  extends  over  all  principalities  and  powers.  He  is 
to  deliver  up  when  the  work  of  redemption  is  accomplished.  He  was  invested  with 
this  dominion  in  His  mediatorial  churacter  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  on  His  work 
to  its  consmntnation.  When  that  is  done,  i.e.,  when  He  has  subdued  all  His 
enemies,  then  He  will  no  longer  reign  over  the  universe  as  Mediator,  but 
only  as  God  :  while  His  headship  over  His  people  is  to  continue  tor  ever.  (C. 
Hodge,  D.D.) 

Ver.  25.  For  He  must  rai^,  till  He  hath  put  all  enemies  \mder  His  feet.— The 
reign  of  Christ : — This  world  is  His  batt  efield  now  ;  and  when  this  conflict  is  at  an 

end  there  will  be  an  end  to  som  thing  else,  "  He  shall  reign  till ,"  and  no  longer. 

I.  Who  ABE  Chuist's  enemies  ?  1.  All  tho^e  agencies  in  the  world  which  are  opposed 
to  God.  Christ  is  on  the  thione  for  God  ;  so  that  whatever  in  evil  spirits,  in  bad 
men,  in  society,  in  institutions,  habits,  experiences,  is  warring  against  God,  is 
against  Christ,  and  He  is  again.-t  it.  2.  AU  those  agencies  in  the  world  which  are 
against  us.  He  is  on  the  turone  for  us.  Our  cause  is  His.  Every  evil  which  injures 
or  threatens  us.  (1)  All  our  intellectual  enemies — ignorance  or  error.  (2)  All  our 
moral  enemies — sin  in  every  form.  (3)  All  our  physical  enemies  — pain,  sickness, 
disciise,  death — all  these  are  included  among  Christ's  enemies.  3.  We  may  answer 
the  question  by  referring  to  Christ's  life  in  the  tlesh.  He  came  here  to  do  battle  ; 
and  all  His  life  He  was  engaged  in  the  condict,  attacking — not  men  ;  He  never 
touched  a  man  in  any  way  but  to  bless  him  —  but  He  was  in  conflict  with  all  the 
powers  of  evil  of  which  men  were  the  instruments  and  victims.  And  the  battle  is 
still  the  same.  Through  His  true  people  He  is  now  carrying  on  the  war  with 
ignorance,  unrighteousness,  pain.  And  we  may  be  sure  ihut  He  will  be  victorious, 
not  only  because  it  is  said  in  the  Bible,  and  we  therefore  believe  it,  but  because  it 
is  God  thnt  is  engaged  in  the  conliiL-t.  II.  What  should  be  our  supkemest  cares 
IN  reference  to  this  great  conelict?  1.  To  be  ourselves  delivered.  We  must 
each  ask  himself,  will  He  put  my  enemies  under  His  feet?  It  depends  on 
whether  you  Avill  let  Him  undertake  for  you.  Your  faith  must  lay  hold  of  His 
strength.  2.  To  take  our  pirt  in  it  on  His  side.  In  this  great  conflict  there  is  no 
neutrality.  And  for  what  reasons  should  it  be  our  great  care  to  range  ourselves  in 
this  battle  on  His  side?  Because — (1)  It  is  an  honourable  service.  Frenchmen 
si^eak  with  no  unnatural  pride  of  having  served  under  the  "  Grt- at  Napoleon." 
Something  of  the  lustre  of  the  name  and  achievements  of  the  great  captain  is 
reflected  in  his  humblest  follower.  And  so  it  is  in  the  spiritual  conflict.  (2)  Christ 
his  a  claim  upon  our  strvice.  It  is  our  cause  that  He  is  contending  for,  and  it  cost 
Hinr  His  life.  (3)  It  is  a  strife  fur  goodness  and  human  happiness.  (4)  There  is 
victory  with  that  side.  3.  To  engage  ourselves  in  that  part  of  the  tield  where 
spiritual  evils  are  the  enemies  comliated  against.  Noble -is  it  to  follow  Christ 
in  the  war  He  waaed  with  physical  evils  ;  but  the  noblest  work  is  to  spread  Christ's 
truth,  for  where  that  is  hpiead  all  evils  diminish.  And  further,  what  is  the  life  of 
the  body  compared  wilh  the  life  of  the  soul?  (I).  Thomas,  B.A.)  ClirisVs  con- 
quests : — This  world  is  a  vast  stagn,  erected  for  the  display  and  consummation  of  a 
mighty  design  by  the  power  of  the  1  ord  Jesus.  Scripture  has  distinctly  allirmed 
that  "all  things  were  created  by  Him  and  for  Him."  The  world  was  made  for 
Jesus ;  and  man,  the  most  distinguished  of  its  tenants,  was  called  into  existence 
chiefly  that  he  might  add  to  the  Mediator's  glory.  In  His  glory  the  eternal 
blessedness  of  millions  is  involved  ;  and  the  consunnnation  of  His  mii.'hty  work  will 
be  the  seal  and  fulness  of  the  felicity  of  the  redeemed.  Now  in  the  mauagt-meut 
of  this  stupendous  design,  the  Mediator  is  pursuing  His  way  to  the  gh'ry  which 
awaits  Him  through  the  midst  of  foes.  There  are  foes  in  whose  destruction  we 
may  not  be  able  to  trace  any  of  that  consolation  which  it  is  the  apostle's  object  to 
afford.  The  priests  and  Scribes  of  Israel  constituted  themselves  His  personal 
enemies,  and  "  the  stone  which  the  buildei-s  rejected  "  has  fallen  upon  them  and 
crushed  them  to  powder;  but  our  comfort  or  advantage  appears  to  be  this,  that  the 
enemies  rather  of  the  Saviour's  cause  than  of  His  jDeison  are  spoken  of ;  and  with 
that  cause  Jesus  has  so  entirely  identified  Himself,  that  He  reckons  hostility  to  it 


CHAP,  sv.]  I.   CORISTIIIANS.  ioi 


as  hostility  againfh,  Himself.  There  is — I.  Svtan,  who  from  the  first  has  evinced 
himself  the  foe  of  th6  cause  of  Jesus.  But  his  power  is  day  by  day  contracting  ; 
and  one  by  one  are  his  sironghoLls  wrested  out  of  his  hands.  His  most  formid- 
able opposition  was  his  personal  struggle  with  the  Saviour,  ia  which  he  enjoyed  a 
momentary  triariiph ;  but  it  was  a  triumph  wliich  placed  a  lever  underneath  the 
foundations  of  his  throne.  The  gospel  of  which  that  day's  achievement  forms  both 
the  power  and  tlie  theme,  has  gone  forth  under  the  sanction  of  the  He  leemer's 
command,  over  those  tracts  and  territories  where  "  the  god  of  tnis  world  "  had  long 
held  unbroken  sway.  And  the  means  by  which  the  Saviour  lias  enlarged  His 
kingdom  are  marvellous.  Satan,  as  he  was  upon  the  day  of  the  world's  redempi- 
tion,  is  defeated  with  his  own  weapons.  Tho'igh  covetousness  may  have  sent 
ships  to  far  distant  shores,  and  rapine  may  have  subju'/ated  one  country  to 
another,  and  injustice  may  have  torn  the  slave  from  kimired  and  from  home — still 
see  we  not,  that  in  more  territories  being  laid  open  to  the  inroads  of  the  gospel, 
and  other  influences  being  brought  to  bear  upon  benighted  lands,  that  Satan  has  bc^n 
foiled  by  superior  wisdom,  and  the  empire  of  the  Mediator  increased  by  his  defeated 
policy!  n.  Corruption  in  the  hkarts  of  God's  believing  people.  I'he 
Mediator's  most  glorious  title  is  "the  King  of  Saints";  and  that  which  chiefly 
prevents  Him  from  being  so  now,  in  the  fulness  and  majesty  of  the  expression,  is 
the  existence  of  that  secret  and  unholy  principle  in  the  hearts  of  Christians.  But 
this  corruption  under  the  laws  of  the  Mediator's  reign  is  destined  at  length  to  be 
totally  dethroned.  The  work  of  subduing  it  is  one  of  mystery  and  time,  and  for 
the  subduing  of  it  Jesus  has  a  train  of  instrumentalities  at  His  disposal.  By 
troubles,  trials,  disappointments,  the  hand  of  illness  and  bereavemi-nts.  In  every 
child  of  God  it  is  daily  WHxing  more  feeble,  which  shows  that,  ultimately,  it  must 
be  utterly  extinguished,  for  "  Jesus  must  reign,"  etc.  HI.  The  ungodly.  These 
may  not  all  take  Paine  for  their  text-book,  or  Voltaire  for  their  leader ;  but  yet  from 
the  circumstance  of  their  being  unconverted,  they  must  be  reckoned  among  His 
enemies.  "  The  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God  " — "  They  that  are  in  the  flesh 
cannot  please  God."  Now  such  the  Mediator  will  put  under  His  feet.  Contrary 
to  the  usual  course  of  His  government.  He  will  do  little  towards  effecti'ig  this  object 
here.  But,  while  an  enemy  remains  uni)unished,  the  throne  of  the  Mediator  must 
stand.  IV.  De.^th.  The  tropliy  and  the  triumph  of  the  Satanic  hosts.  It  was 
among  the  firstfruits  of  their  victory.  But  in  the  arrangements  of  the  Mediator's 
rule  this  enemy  is  destined  for  destruction  !  Even  now  is  his  power  abridged,  and 
his  strength  much  departed  from  him  ;  for  Jesus  has  gone  down  into  death's 
domains,  and,  in  the  dark  seclusion  of  the  tomb,  passed  thro'^gh  a  conflict  wiili 
him,  from  which  He  has  returned  a  conqueror  !  And  this  viclory  He  perpetuates  in 
the  persons  of  the  members  of  His  kingdom  ;  for  tliere  is  not  one  of  them  who  feels 
not  that  death,  though  he  may  awe,  can  no  longer  terrify.  Even  upcm  this  world, 
death  to  them  has  ceased  to  be  an  enemy  ;  but  oh  !  if  we  would  see  him,  not  smiply 
shorn  of  his  strength,  but  strijiped  of  Ins  existence,  "  e  must  throw  forward  our  glance 
to  the  resurrection  morning.  That  hour  shall  see  all  enemies  subdued.  (Dean  Uojid.) 
The  victories  of  Christ i a Jii t ij  :— How  real  was  the  faith  of  St.  Paul!  Onlv  some 
twenty  years  had  passed  since  the  Crucifixion.  I'he  memory  of  it  was  fresh  ;  the 
shame  and  sti^jma  recent.  Nevertheless,  the  apostle  declares  his  faith  not  only  in 
the  resuirection  of  Jesus,  but  in  His  universal  d(miinion.  The  vividness  and 
reality  of  the  apostle's  faith  was  common  to  all  the  Christians  of  that  first  age,  and  is 
very  quickening  and  reassuiing  to  ours.  Wlien  St.  Paul  wrote  these  \vords  the 
believers  were  but  a  handful.  As  yet  they  had  mastered  no  stronghold  of  the 
enemy.  In  but  three  or  four  of  the  great  cities  of  the  world  they  had  barely 
effected  a  lod^'ment.  At  Rome  they  had  scarcely  as  yet  been  heard  of.  And  yet 
says  the  apostle,  "  He  must  reign,"  &c.  The  apostle's  grent  word  is  now  in  course 
of  fulfilment.  Though  even  yet  we  by  no  means  see  all  things  put  under  Christ, 
still  the  pledge  has  been  already  afl'oi  ded  of  victory  in  every  kind  and  over  every  form 
of  opposition.     We  have  but  to  pursue  the  advantages  we  have  gained.     I.  The 

EARLIEST   TRIUMPHS    OF    CHRISTIANITY   OVER    IDOLATRY   ARE    THE    PLEDGE    TO    US  OF  HER 

ULTIMATE  VICTORY  OVER  EVERY  FORM  OF  HEATHENISM.  1.  The  two  great  historical 
triumphs  were — (1)  Over  classic  paganif.m  and  other  old-world  idolatries.  When 
Paul  and  Barnabas  set  forth  from  Antioch  on  the  first  missionary  advance,  the 
whole  world  was  "wholly  given  to  idolatry."  Heaven,  earth,  ocean,  and  the 
great  underworld  teemed  with  divinities.  Idolatry  coloured  all  life,  embraced 
every  relalion  of  being,  held  all  things  whatsoever  under  its  spell  and  its  thraldom. 
How  wonderful  an  undertaking,  then,  was  it  for  the  obscure  missionaries  to  set 


454  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xv 

forth  upon  their  errand !  Can  we  wonder  greatly  that  John  and  Mark  shrank  back 
from  snch  an  enterprise?  And  what  must  have  been  the  courage  and  faith 
of  Paul  when,  in  the  renowned  "  eye  of  Greece,"  he  stood  up,  without  a  friend 
or  comrade,  to  cliallenge  alilce  philosophers  and  idolaters?  or  when  he  undertook 
at  Corinth — the  lascivious  and  the  worldly — to  preach  Christ  and  Him  crucified, 
as  Wis(iom,  Righteousness,  and  Sauctificatiou,  and  Kedemption?  or  when  he 
planted  himself  at  Ephesns,  where  all  the  inhabitants  were  fanatics  in  their 
worship  of  their  "gieat  gdddess"?  But  the  word  of  God  everywhere  grew 
miglitily  and  prevailed.  And  so  with  the  otlna-  Christian  pioneers.  The  work  spread 
and  leapt  from  province  to  province,  from  shore  to  shore,  from  age  to  age.  About 
the  beginning  of  the  second  centnry,  Pliny  wrote  that  in  Bithynia  the  new 
faith  had  so  spread  that  the  temples  were  everywhere  deserted.  Half  a  century 
later  Justin  Martyr  testifies  that  there  was  no  nation  in  whose  language  prayers 
and  thanksgivings  were  not  offered  to  God  in  the  name  of  Jesus.  Yet  a  little  later 
— TertuUian  grandly  boasts  that,  though  "but  a  people  of  yesterday,"  the 
Christians  had  filled  every  place  except  the  heathen  temples.  For  three  centuries 
did  the  Boman  State  keep  up  a  relentless  persecution,  but  all  in  vain.  At  length, 
Diocletian  having  exliausted  in  vain  all  the  resources  of  power  and  cruelty,  the 
Christian  Church  came  forth  finally  victorious.  (2)  Scarcely,  however,  was  this 
struggle  over  be.'ore  another  began.  After  the  destruction  of  the  Western  Empire 
by  the  barbarian  invaders,  Christianity  had  to  address  itself  anew  to  the  task  of 
conquering  the  conquerors  of  the  world.  But  tlie  Northern  tribes  in  succession 
came  within  the  pale  of  Christian  profession.  The  Christian  faith  survived  the 
wreck  of  all  things  else.  A  deep,  dense  night  rested  upon  the  face  of  the  mingled 
nations.  But  the  Spirit  of  God  in  the  midst  of  the  thick  darkness  was  moving 
upon  the  chaotic  waters,  and  by  the  results,  when  the  curtain  began  to  lift,  we 
know  that  the  work  was  going  on.  The  victory  over  the  Northern  barbarians  won 
Europe  for  Christ,  and  we  inherit  its  results  in  the  purer,  more  vigorous  and 
enlightened  Christianity  of  to-day.  2.  These  things  being  so,  how  can  we  doubt 
what  the  results  must  be  of  the  contest  now  being  waged  by  Christianity  against 
heathenism  ?  Tlie  Christianity  of  the  present  day  is  in  all  respects  superior  to 
that  of  the  age  of  Constautine,  and  to  that  which  overcame  the  heathenism  of  the 
Goth,  the  Teuton,  and  the  Kelt.  (1)  How  then  can  the  heathenism  of  India  and 
China  withstand  it?  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  progi'ess  of  Christianity  in  some 
parts  of  India,  and  especially  in  Ceylon,  during  the  last  forty  years  has  been  such 
as  to  demonstrate  that  in  less  time  than  it  took  for  our  holy  religion  to  vanquish 
Eoman  idolatry  the  heathenism  of  India  shall  yet  yield  to  the  power  of  Christ's 
gospel.  As  for  China,  we  have  hardly  taken  hold  of  its  fringe,  but  we  have 
already  seen  enough  to  prove  that  the  iDower  of  Christianity  needs  only  to  be 
faithfully  applied  by  an  adequate  missionary  force,  and  China,  like  all  the 
world  besides,  must  yield  to  the  gospel.  (2)  As  for  the  Larbarian  idolatries  of 
to-day,  we  have  evidence  all  the  world  over  how  surely  and  swiftly  they  are 
vanquished  by  the  word  of  Christ.  The  negro  race  has  already  largely  yielded 
to  the  truth.  New  Zealanders  and  American  Indians,  Fijian  and  Burmese 
have  accepted  the  faith  of  Jesus.  Everywhere  the  like  result  must  follow. 
II.  In  the  past  successes  of  Christianity  we  have  a  pledge  of  the  triumph 

OF    FREE     and     PURE      CHRISTIAN     FAITH     OVER     PoPISH     TYRANNY     AND     CORRUPTION. 

1.  Popery  proper,  tbe  special  creation  of  the  Roman  Ecclesiastical  Court  and 
Empire,  is  a  priestly  growth  and  usurpation.  It  is  a  selfish  corruption — and 
throughout  there  has  been  a  struggling  protest  against  it.  There  has  been  a 
lay  mind  in  continual  revolt,  and  many  even  among  the  priesthood  abhor  the 
yoke  by  which  they  are  bound.  The  jDretensious  of  the  Papacy  are  doubtless 
as  arrogant  and  as  blasphemous  as  ever.  But  this  is  perfectly  consistent  with 
the  real  weakening  of  tlie  Roman  jDower.  Pius  IX.  could  not  enact  the  part 
of  a  Hildebraiid,  though  he  did  summon  a  so-called  (Ecumenical  Council.  He 
could  claim  for  himself  infallibility,  but  he  could  not  set  his  foot  upon  the 
neck  of  princes  nor  cast  an  interdict  over  an  empire.  He  could  not  even  prevent 
his  holy  city  from  being  wrested  from  his  hands  and  made  the  capital  of  a 
free  kingdom.  The  Pope  is  no  longer  the  great  Potentate  of  the  world.  2.  The 
effect  of  the  Vatican  Council  has  been  to  produce  alienation  in  the  minds  of 
the  noblest  among  those  who  felt  the  spell  and  attraction  of  a  Church  so  ancient, 
so  vast,  and  in  many  respects  so  grand  in  its  memories  and  its  achievements. 
3.  Immense  was  the  power  of  the  Papacy,  forty  years  ago,  over  every  Catholic 
country    of    Europe.      Now   there    is   scarcely   one    land    in   which    religion    is 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  453 

not,  at  least  professedly,  free,  and  the  gospel  of  Christ  in  its  purity  is  not  more  or 
less  preached.  4.  Now  if  the  Christianity  of  the  fourth  cemiu'y  prevailed  to  subdue 
the  Imperial  heathenism  of  Rome,  much  more  shall  tae  purer,  more  powerful,  and 
better  organised  evangelic  J  Christiau  life  and  truth  of  to-day  prevail  over  this 
Pajial  heatheuiam.  Wliat  is  needed  is  thnt  the  tiuih  and  the  falsehood  should  be 
distinctly  defined  and  discriminated,  that  the  gospel  should  be  known  as  gospel,  and 
the  heathen  superstition  discerned  as  heathen  superstition.  If  we  cannot  yet  say 
that  "Babylon  is  fallen  " — though  assuredly  some  of  its  grandest  towers  have  been 
overthrown  never  to  be  restored — we  may  at  least  be  confident  that  the  politico- 
ecclesiastic  power  of  Rome  is  now  at  an  end,  and  that  she  can  no  lougi-r,  as  in  the 
past,  cause  the  nations  to  drink  of  the  mingled  cup  of  her  abominations.  III.  Thk 
PAsr  viCTOiuES  OF  Chiustianity  over  heathen  a\d  sceptical  philosophy  ap.e  the 
PLEDGE  OF  ITS  FUTURE  TPauMPHS.  It  is  often  Said  that  science  is  the  great  enemy  of 
faith.  But  science,  as  sucli,  has  nothing  to  say  as  to  the  contents  of  Revelation 
or  the  articles  of  our  faith.  Its  proper  sphere  lies  wholly  Hpart.  Some  of  the 
profoundest  men  of  science  have  found  no  incompntibihty  whatever  between  their 
science  and  the  faith  of  a  Christian.  It  remains,  accordingly,  that  the  sources  of 
scepticism  must  be  in  whiit  are  called  pliilosophical  doubts  or  in  historical  criticism. 
1.  Whether  Atheistic  or  Pantheistic  in  its  form.  Philosophical  Scepticism  can 
never  extensively  prevail.  It  has  many  times  st  iven  to  assert  itself  against  the 
Christian  faith,  but  always  only  to  be  defeated.  Of  old  the  philosophy  of  Epicurus 
and  his  school  was  overborne  by  the  living  witness  of  Christianity.  The  pliiloso- 
phers,  whether  Stoic  or  Platonic,  could  not  arrest  the  triumphant  progress  of 
St.  Paul.  The  Pantheistical  Neo-Platonism  of  Alexandria  did  its  utmost  to  oppose 
the  power  of  Christianity,  but  in  the  end  was  entirely  overthrown.  In  modern 
times  Hume  found  his  sulitlety  vain  against  the  lising  tide  of  evangelical  failh  and 
power.  The  infidelity  of  France  was  rebuked  and  put  to  shame  by  the  horrors  of 
the  French  Revolution,  so  manifestly  the  fruit  of  French  infideliiy.  And  to-day 
what  is  the  weight,  the  force,  of  speculative  philosophy  in  comparison  of  the  living 
powers  and  forces  of  Christianity,  which  were  never  so  might.v  as  they  are  at  this 
present  time?  2.  As  to  historicaJ  criticism,  the  ess-ntial  aiguments  on  behalf  of 
Christianity  to-day  are  the  same  as  those  which  tiiumphed  in  the  last  century. 
The  forms  of  objection  are,  doubtless,  varied,  and  the  details  differ,  but  the  nature 
of  them  is  essentially  the  same,  and  the  answer  is  essentially  the  samp.  The 
victory  won  in  the  last  century  will  not  be  lost  in  this.  And  to-day  the  vaunting 
foes  of  Christianity  are  boldly  met,  and  the  battle  is  turned  to  the  gate.  N  -v^v 
■was  there  so  goodly  a  company  of  Christiau  believers  gathered  from  every  raok  of 
life,  and  including  not  only  men  of  oidinary  capacity  and  of  average  character  and 
influence,  but  the  highest  intellects  and  the  most  influential  personalities  in  the 
land.  (J.  H.  lUi/p,  D.D.)  Good  iwas  fur  loijal  subjcct.-i : — "Must"  is  for  the 
king;  and  concerning  King  Jesus  there  is  a  Divine  necessity  that  He  must  reign. 
He  was  once  the  King  of  miser\ — in  that  kingdom  He  reigned  supreme.  That 
thorn-crown  is  pre-eminent  in  the  sorrows  which  it  signifies.  To-day  He  is  the 
King  of  glory,  enthroned  far  above  all  principalities  and  powers.  He  must  reign 
because  He  is  God.  "  The  Lord  reigneth  "  must  ever  stand  a  truth.  He  must 
reign  as  man  ;  for  the  Lord  has  made  a  covenant  with  David  that  of  his  seed  there 
should  sit  upon  the  throne  of  Israel  for  ever  a  King  to  rule  in  righteousness,  and 
Jesus  of  Nazareth  is  tliat  King.  He  must  reign  also  as  the  JMediator.  At  this  time 
the  sovereignty  of  the  world  is  committed  to  Plis  keeping,  the  headship  of  His 
Church,  the  government  of  providence,  the  ruling  of  heaven,  and  earth,  and  hell,  as  the 
mediatorial  monarch.  I.  What  are  the  reasons  for  this  "  must  "?  The  lamb  as 
seen  by  John  had  seven  horns  of  power,  and  here  are  seven  reasons  why  he  should 
possess  the  throne  for  ever.  1.  His  empire  in  itself  is  such  as  to  ensure  perpetuity. 
There  have  been  many  empires  of  which  men  said  that  if  they  were  overthrown, 
the  very  pillars  of  the  earth  would  be  removed ;  yet  in  due  time  they  were  swept 
away.  Christ  must  reign  because — (1)  His  reign  over  the  human  mind  is  based 
upon  truth.  At  one  time  Plato  reigned  supreme  over  thoughtful  minds  ;  then 
Aristotle ;  but  another  philosophy  supplanted  him,  to  be  in  its  turn  subverted 
by  the  next.  Things  which  were  accounted  sure  and  wise  are  now  ridiculed. 
And  why?  Pfecause  these  systems  of  philosophy  and  thought  have  not  been  based 
upon  truth.  But  the  truth  which  Jesus  taught,  reads  as  if  it  were  delivered  but 
yesterday.  Christianity  is  as  suitable  to  the  nineteenth  century  as  to  the  first. 
(2)  His  dominion  over  human  hearts  is  based  upon  love.  Napoleon  said  at 
St.  Helena:— "My  empire  has  passed  away.    I  founded  it  upon  the  sword,  and 


456  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

it  is  gone.     Jesus  Christ  established  an  empire  upon  love,  and  it  will  last  for 
ever."     His  i^erson  is  the  incarnation  of  love,  His  teachings  are  the  doctrines 
of  love,  His  precepts  are  the  rule  of  love,  His  Spirit  is  the  creator  of  love.  His 
\yhole  religion   is  saturated  with  love,  and  because  of  this  His  kingdom  cannot 
be   moved.      (3)    It   is   the  one  great   remely  which  this  sad  woe-begone  world 
requires.     The  world  is  like  the  troubled  sea  that  cannot  rest,  and  there  is  but 
one  foot  which  can  tread  its  waves,  and  but  one  voice  which  can  say,  "Peace, 
be  still."     Jesus  is  the  true  liberator  of  captive  nations.     The  agonising  groans 
of  earth  demand  the  sovereignty  of  Jesus,  and  therefoie  we  believe  that  He  must 
reign,  for  God  will  yet  give  His  creature  what  it  needs.     His  Father  decrees  it. 
Up  till  now  God  has  maintained  the  throne  of  His  Son.     Read  Psnlm  ii.  and  see. 
3.  Divine  justice  demands  it.    The  Father  jaromised  that  He  should  be  a  leader  and 
a  commander  of  the  peo2Dle,  and  determined  as  the  result  of  His  hufuiliatipu  that 
He  should  mount  to  a  superior  thi'one  as  the  Son  of  man  and  the  Son  of  God. 
Shall    God  belie  His  word?      4.    It  is  inwrought  into  the  order  of  providence. 
A  few  months  ago  the  trees  were  bare  ;  but  it  was  in  the  order  of  providence  that 
there  should  be  a  spring,  and  here  it  is.     We  cannot  say  that  in  any  one  day  it 
seemed  to  make  any  great  advance.     Even  when  the  days  lengthened  we  saw  no 
great  progress,  but,  surely  and  steadily  the  veins  of  the  trees  were  filled  with  sap 
and  the  bads  first  swelled  and  then  revealed  their  glories.     So  Christ's  reigning  is 
woven  into  the  warp  and  woof  of  providence,  and  though  He  has  not  yet  drawn  all 
men  unto  Him,  it  is  coming.     5.  The  Holy  Spirit  has  been  given  to  the  Church  to 
subserve  this  glorious  end.      He  can  soften  the  most  obdurate.  He  can  turn  to 
kindness   the   most   cruel,   and   lead   into   light   the   mo'-t   darkened.      Now,  the 
possession  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  Church's  treasury.     Here  is  her  battleaxe,  and 
here  are  her  weapons  of  war.     You  who  preach  Christ,  or  teach  Him  in  the  school, 
do  not  become  discouraged  under  difficulties,  when  you  recollect   that   you   are 
workers  together  with  God.    6.  Christ  is  naturally  the  chief  of  the  human  lace.    "  He 
is  the  chief  among  ten  thousand  and  the  altogether  lovely."     There  is  none  to  rival 
Him.     7.  The  power  to  reign  belongs  to  Him.     "All  power  is  given  unto  Me  in 
heaven  and  in  earth."     "Go  ye,  therefore,"  saith  He,  "and  teach  all  nations." 
Jesus  Christ  is  no  puny  pretender  to  the  throne,  nor  a  righful  owner  without  power 
to  win  His  own,  but  as  His  cause  is  good,  His  arm  is  strong.     Ours  is  no  desperate 
warfare,  but  a  royal  crusade,  in  which  every  soldier  is  even  now  a  priest  and  a 
king,  and  is  on  the  way  to  the  bauquetting-halls  where  men  feast  with  God,  and 
Jesus  for  ever  and  ever  wears  the  fadeless  diadem.     II.   The  encouragement  to  be 
GATHEEED   FROM  THIS  "  MUST."      If  Christ  must  reign,  then — 1.  All  our  enemies 
shall  be  subdued.     (1)  Now,    you   are   called   to   fight   daily  with   sin,  and  here 
is  your  consolation,  Jesus  must  reign.      The  Christ  in  you   must   bruise   Satan 
under   your   feet.      He  shall  put  His  foot  on  the  neck  of  my   pride,   and  shall 
command  my  every  thought  and  wish.    Where  I  cannot  rule,  Jesus  can.    Jesus  has 
made  us  kings  and  priests  that  we  may  reign  over  the  triple  monarchy  of  our 
nature — si^irit,  soul,  and  body,  and  that,  by  our  self-conquest.  He  may  be  umlisputed 
sovereign  of  the  Isle  of  Man.     Corruption  is  very  strong,  but  Christ  is  stronger. 
(2)    When  the    last    enemy  appears   in  view,  it    shall    only   be   an    op^jortunity 
for   new  triumphs,  when   the   Lord   of  lifs   shall   reveal   Himself  witu    renewed 
splendour.     2.  Our  efforts  are,  after  all,  not  in  vain.     If  Christ  must  reign,  then 
every  soldier  who  fights  for  Christ  is  contributing  to  the  victory,  and  every  one  who 
in  any  way  advances  the  cause  is  working  with  sure  and  great  results.     3.  What 
becomes  of  us  is  of  no  consequence  at  all.     If  He  will  only  take  me  into  the  royal 
galley,  and  let  me  pull  till  I  have  no  more  life  left,  I  will  be  satisfied,  if  I  may  but 
row  my  Lord  towards  His  throne,  and  have  but  the  smallest  share  in  making  Him 
glorious  in  the  eyes  of  men  and  angels.     What  cares  my  heart  for  herself  if  she 
may  but  see  Jesus  set  on  high?    How  this  ought  to  inspirit  all  of  you  who  grow 
downhearted  about  the  cause  of  Christ !    Do  you  not  believe  in  the  gospel  as  the 
power  of  God  ?     III.    An  admonition.     1.    "  Jesus  must  reign."     You  have  been 
opposing  Him,  have  you  ?    You  are  kicking  against  the  pricks  with  naked  feet :  you 
are  stumbling  upon  this  stone,  and  you  will  be  broken  ;   and  if  the  stone  shall  take 
to  rolling  down,  like  a  massive  rock,  on  you,  it  will  grind  you  to  i^owder.     2.  If 
Jesus  Christ  must  reign,  then  you  who  have  never  submitted  yourselves  to  Him  to 
accept  Him  as  your  monarch,  will  find  His  reign  as  terrible  as  it  is  sure.     He  will 
reign  over  you,  either  by  your  own  consent  or  without  it.     (C  H.  Spurtjcon.) 

Ver.  26.  The  last  enemy  that  shall  be  destroyed  is  death  — Deatli,  the  last  enemy, 


CHAP,  xv.j  I.  CORINTHIANS.  457 

shall  he  destroyed  : — I.  The  natdre  of  that  enemy.     Consider — 1.  The  dissolution  of 
the  human  trame.  The  body  is  a  wonderful  machine,  which  bears  the  mark  of  Divine 
wisdom  and  skill.     If  we  look  upon  the  Goths  and  Vandals  as  the  enemies  of 
society   because  they  destroyed   tlie  ancient  monuments   of    art,  what    must  we 
think  of  deatli  ?     2.  Death  jjuts  an  end  to  all  that  is  terrestrial.     All  schemes  and 
thoughts  tiiat  relate  only  to  time  are  destroyed.   As  much,  therefore,  as  the  world  is 
worth,  so  much  is  death  to  be  considered  as  a  formidable  foe.     Say,  ye  ambitious, 
ye  lovers  of  weilth  or  pleasure,  what  will  these  things  avail  you  \\hen  you  are 
summoned  to  meet  this  last  enemy  ?     3.  It  dissolves  tue  tenderest  ties  of  nature 
and  affection.     Deatli  tears  asunder  husbands  and  wives,  parents  and  daldrcii, 
&c.     One  part  of  the  mortal  compound  is  left  by  him  to  mourn  wliile  the  other 
part   is   mingled   with   corruption.     Deatli    so   mars   the  features  tliat  the  most 
passionate  arhnirers  of  beauty  are  constrained  to  say,  "Bury  my  dead  out  of  my 
sight."     All  the  fruits  of  friendsliip  are  withered  by  his  breath.     Nor  is  there  any 
union  so  closely  foimed  but  it  will  be  cut  asunder   by  this  great   enemy.     4.   Its 
moral  or  eternal  consequences  (ver.  5G).     The  death  of  the  body  is  by  no  mean-s 
the  full  infliction  of  the  penalty  of  the  Divine  law.     It  is  but  a  preparation  ;  like 
knocking  off  the  chains  and  fetters  from  a  pri-^oner  who  is  about  to  be  led  forth  to 
the  place  of  execution  (Rom.  vi.  23).     5.  There  are  many  properties  of  this  enemy 
which  give  him  the  pre-eminence  of    terror.     (1)  He   is  an   inexorable   enemy. 
Others  may  be  bribed   by  riches,  soothed  by  flatteries,  moved  by   the   tears  and 
sorrows  of  a  suppliant,  or  reconciled  by  a  mediator  ;  but  not  he.     (2)  Death  is  an 
impartiaj  en^my.     Other  enemies  have  particular  grounds  of  quarrel ;  they  do  not 
oppose  the  whole  of  the  spscies,  but  some  individu  il,  or  individuals  ;  but  every 
one  of  the  human  race  is  the  object  of  his  enmity  ;  his  arrows  will  level  all  in  the 
dust.     (3)  Like    other   great   monarchs   he   also   has   harbingers    to    herald    his 
approach— pains,  afflictions,  diseases,  &c.     (4)  As  these  are  his  forerunners,  so  he 
has  dreadful   instruments  for  destruction  — famine,  pestilence,  war,  the  lightning, 
and  the  earthquake.     Tlie  air,  the  elements,  food,  &c.,  are  often  converted   into 
instruments  of  death.     II.  Why    he  is  called    the  "  last  enemy."     To   denote 
the  completeness  of  the  Redeemer's  conquest :  nothing  remains  after  the   last. 
1.  This   is   the   last   enemy   of  the   Church   of    God   iu   its   collective   capacity. 
Persecution   shall   cease,  affliction   be   removed,  fears   and   terrors  of  conscience 
quelled,  temptations  overcome,  and  Satan  subdued  :  still  the  triumphs  of  death 
will  remain  ;  a  large  portion  of  what  the  Lord  has  redeemed  will  remain  under  His 
dominion ;  the    bodies    of   believers    will    continue    in   the   grave   till   the   final 
consummation  of  all  things.     2.  He  is  the  last  enemy  of   every  believer.     The 
Christian  obiains  a  hope  of  pardon;  he  goes  on  conquering  one  temptation  after 
another,  but  he  knows  that,  after  all,  his  body  must  come  under  the  power  of  this 
enemy,  and   remain  for   a  season   in  liis  dark  domain.     3.  To  other  men  what 
ougiit  I  to  say  of  the  last  enemy  ?     However  long  they  have  escaped  his  power, 
he  will  meet  th^m  at  last,  and  tliey  must  conquer  him  or  be  defeated  and  lost  for 
ever.     III.  Chkist    has    conquered    this    enkmy    in  part    and    will  ultihatp.ly 
destroy  him.     Note — 1.  The  degrees  and  stages  by  which  Christ   conquers  death. 
(1)  By  His  incarnation  and  passion  He  purchased  a  right,  in  behalf  of  the  human 
race,  to  conquer  death.     Power  and  light  are  two  distinct  things;  and,   among 
men,  the  former  is  frequently  opposed  to  the  latter.      Christ,  as  God,  had  power  to 
put  down  death ;  but  it   was  necess.iry,  in   order  that  it  might   be  put   down  fitly 
and  properly,  that  such  an  expiation  should  be  maile  as  would  remove  the  guilt  on 
account   of  which  mankind  were  doomel  to  die  (Heb.  ii.  10,  14,  15).     (2)  Christ, 
by  His  Spirit,  gives  the  earnest  and  the  pledge  of  victory  over  the  last  enemy  :  He 
takes  away  the  power  of  sin,  which  is  the  sting  of  d  ath,  and  He  comujunicates 
the  principle  of  life.     Whoever  is  enabled,  thiough  the  Spirit,  to  hiy  hold  of  Jesus 
Christ  by  faith  lays  hold  of    Him  who  is  the  "  resurrection  nnd  the  life."     2. 
When  these  preparat'U'v  measures  have  taken  place  the  i  mpire  of  death  shall  be 
sapped  to  the  foundation.     It  has,  ii  deed,  bfe-i  a  widely  exte   dcd  empiie,  founded 
on,  or  spreading  over,  the  ruins  of  all  other  en  pire.-^  :  it  has  comprehendeil  within 
its  domains  all  the  seed  of  Adum  :  it  has  continued  from  age  to  age.     But  the  final 
stroke   will   produce   the  entire   overthrow   of  this   wide   and   lasting   dominion. 
Conclusion:  "What  is  the  pn  per  improvement  of  this  subject?     1.  To  raise  our 
eyes    in    adoration    and   gratitude  to   the   conqueror   of    death.     2.  To    elevate 
beiinvers  above  the  sonows  and  afflictions  of  tune!     This  enemy  is  the  "last"; 
when  he  is  destroyed,  the  field  wib  be  (|uite  clear  ;  the  vast  field  of  eternity  will  be 
free  from  every   molestation.      {R.  Hull,  M.A.)         The    la-it  eneDuj  destiotied: — 


458  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 


Consider  death  as — I.  An  enemy.  1.  It  is  always  repugnant  to  the  nature  of  living 
creatures  to  die.  God  has  made  self-preservation  one  of  the  first  laws  of  our 
nature.  We  are  bound  to  prize  life.  2.  It  entered  into  the  world  through  our 
worst  enemy — viz.,  sin.  It  came  not  in  accordance  to  the  course  of  nature,  but 
according  to  the  course  of  evil.  Physiologists  have  said  that  they  do  not  detect 
any  particular  reason  why  man  should  die  at  fourscore  years.  The  same  wheels- 
which  have  gone  on  for  forty  years  might  have  continued  their  revolutions  even  for 
centuries,  so  far  as  their  own  se'f-renewing  power  is  concerned.  3.  It  embitters 
existence.  4.  It  has  made  fearful  breaches  in  our  daily  comforts.  The  widow 
has  lost  her  stay;  the  children  have  been  left  desolate.  0  death  !  thou  art  the 
cruel  enemy  of  our  hearths  and  homes.  5.  It  has  taken  away  from  us  One  who  is 
dearer  to  us  than  all  others.  On  yonder  Cross  behold  death's  most  dreadful  work. 
Could  it  not  spare  Him  ?  Were  there  not  enough  of  us  ?  6.  It  bears  us  away 
from  all  our  prized  possessions.  "  These  things,"  said  one,  as  he  walked  through 
his  grand  estate,  "  make  it  hard  to  die."  When  the  rich  man  has  made  his 
fortune  he  wins  six  foot  of  earth  and  nothing  more,  and  what  less  bath  he  who 
died  a  pauper  ?  7.  It  carries  us  away  from  choice  society.  8.  It  breaks  up  all  our 
enjoyments  and  employments  and  successes.  9.  It  is  accompanied  with  many 
pains,  infirmities,  and  since  the  decay  and  utter  dissolution  of  the  body  is  in  itself 
a  most  terrible  thing,  we  are  alarmed  at  the  prospect  of  it.  He  is  an  enemy,  nay 
the  enemy,  the  very  worst  enemy  that  our  fears  could  conjure  up,  for  we  could 
fight  with  Satan  and  overcome  him,  but  who  can  overcome  death  ?  II.  The  last 
ENEMY.  1.  The  dreaded  reserve  of  the  army  of  hell.  When  Satan  shall  have 
brought  up  eve>y  other  adversary,  and  all  these  shall  have  been  overcome  through 
.the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  then  the  last,  the  strongest,  the  most  terrible,  shall  assail 
us !  The  soldiers  of  the  Cross  have  pursued  the  foe  up  to  the  city  walls,  as  if  the 
Lord  had  said  to  his  soldier,  "  There  are  more  laurels  yet  to  win."  2.  But  if 
death  be  tlie  last  enemy  we  have  not  to  fight  with  him  now ;  we  have  other 
enemies,  and  in  attending  to  these  we  shall  best  be  found  prepared  to  die.  To  live 
well  is  the  way  to  die  well.  3.  Notice — for  herein  lies  the  savour  of  the  thought — 
it  is  the  last  enemy.  Picture  our  brave  soldiers  at  the  battle  of  Waterloo  ;  for 
many  weary  hours  they  have  been  face  to  face  with  the  foe  ;  now  the  commander 
announces  that  thev  have  only  to  endure  one  more  onslaught.  How  cheerfully  do 
the  ranks  close  !  The  last  enemy  !  Soldiers  of  Christ,  do  not  the  words  animate 
you?  Courage!  the  tide  must  turn  after  this,  it  is  the  highest  wave  that  now 
dashes  over  tliee.  4.  Having  overcome  death,  peace  is  proclaimed,  the  sword  is 
sheathed,  the  banners  furled,  and  you  are  for  ever  more  than  a  conqueror  thi'ough 
Him  that  loved  you.  III.  An  enemy  to  be  destroyed.  At  the  resurrection, 
death's  castle,  the  tomb,  will  be  demolished,  and  all  its  captives  must  go  free. 
But  although  this  is  a  great  truth  with  regard  to  the  future,  I  desire  just  to  conduct 
you  over  the  road  by  which  Christ  has,  in  effect,  virtually  destroyed  death  already. 
He  has  taken  away — 1.  The  shame  of  death.  A  man  might  hold  his  head  low  in 
the  presence  of  angels  who  could  not  die,  but  now  we  can  talk  of  death  in  the 
presence  of  archangels  and  not  be  ashamed,  for  Jesus  died.  2.  The  sting  of 
death.  Christmas  Evans  represents  the  monster  as  driving  its  dart  right  through 
the  Saviour,  till  it  stuck  in  the  Cross  on  the  other  side,  and  so  has  never  been  able 
to  draw  it  out  again.  3.  Its  slavery.  The  bondage  of  death  arises  from  man's 
fearing  to  die.  4.  Its  greatest  sorrows.  Death  snatches  us  away  from  the  society 
of  those  we  love,  but  it  introduces  us  into  nobler  society  far.  We  l^ave  the 
imperfect  Church  on  earth,  but  for  the  perfect  Church  in  heaven.  We  leave 
possessions,  but  death  gives  us  infinitely  more  than  he  takes  away.  Death  takes  us 
from  sacred  employments  ;  but  he  ushers  us  into  nobler.  If  death  doth  but  give 
us  a  sight  of  Jesus,  then  let  him  come  when  he  wills,  we  will  scarcely  call  him 
enemy  again.  An  enemy  destroyed  in  this  case  becomes  a  friend,  IV.  The  last 
enemy  that  will  be  destkoyed.  Do  not,  therefore,  give  yourself  so  much 
concern  if  you  do  not  feel  death  to  be  destroyed  in  you  at  present.  Eemember 
that  dying  grace  is  of  no  value  in  living  moments.  Expect  that  if  your  faith  is  not 
faith  enough  to  die  with,  yet  as  a  grain  of  mustard  seed  it  will  grow,  and  enable 
you  to  die  triumphantly  when  dying  time  conies.  You  have  many  enemies  who  are 
not  destroyed,  e.g.,  inbred  sins.  Look  well  to  them.  Until  they  are  all  gone  you 
must  not  exp)ect  death  to  be  destroyed,  for  he  is  the  last  to  die.  Expect  to  lose 
thy  dear  ones  still,  for  death  is  not  destrojed.  Hold  them  with  a  loose  hand;  do 
not  count  that  to  be  freehold  which  are  only  le.'isehold  ;  do  not  call  that  yours 
which  is  only  lent  you.     And  then  remember  that  you  too  must  die.     (C.  H, 


CHAP.  xv.J  I.  CORINTHIANS.  459 

Spurgeon).  The  last  enemy  destroyed  .-—Note— I.  What  death  the  apostle  heke 
SPEAKS  OF  AND  STYLES  AN  ENEMY.  We  may  view  this  death  with  reference  to — 
1.  The  creature  it  divides.  We  live  by  the  conjunction  of  soul  and  body,  and  the 
separation  of  them  is  death.  2.  The  state  it  puts  an  end  to.  We  are  here  iu  a  state 
of  probation,  wherein  heaven  is  to  be  won  or  lost.  Death  ends  this  state.  3.  What 
follows  upon  it  (Eccles  xii.  7).  II.  What  kind  of  enemy  it  is.  1.  A  common  enemy  ; 
common  to  young  and  old,  rich  and  poor,  saints  and  sinners.  2.  A  hidden  enemy. 
We  know  that  there  is  such  an  enemy  ;  but  know  not  when  it  will  make  its  assault 
upon  us.  3.  An  enemy  we  are  always  liable  to.  In  the  midst  of  life  we  are  in 
death.  4.  A  most  powerful  and  irresistible  enemy.  There  is  no  defence  against 
its  stroke,  nor  way  to  escape  or  prevent  it.  5.  An  authorised  enemy.  It 
comes  by  commission  from  heaven,  and  acts  according  to  His  order,  in  whose  hand 
all  our  times  are.  6.  An  inexorable  enemy.  No  wealth  can  bribe,  nor  eloquence 
persuade,  nor  cries  or  entreaties  move,  nor  holiness  awe,  or  otheiwise  prevail  with 
it  to  spare.  7.  A  formidable  enemy.  And  it  may  be  said  to  be  so  in  regard  of — 
(1)  Its  forerunners,  the  sicknesses,  pains,  and  wearisome  restless  days  aud  nights 
that  L  ad  it  on.  (2)  What  it  is,  and  comes  to  do,  und  of  what  follows  upon  it. 
III.  The  rank  death  holds  among  our  enemies.     It  is  the  last.     This  intimates 

1.  That  there  are  others  that  we  are  not  to 'overlook  and  be  unconcerned  about. 
A  Christian's  life  is  a  continual  warfare,  aud  he  is  to  finish  tlie  contlict  by  dying. 

2.  Whatever  enemies  go  before  it,  death,  to  a  believer,  will  be  the  last.  After 
this  tlie  warfare  will  be  over.  IV.  That  it  is  to  be  destroyed.  1.  The  way  of 
its  dnstruction  is  to  be  by  the  resurrection.  2.  Of  this  we  are  secured  by  Christ's 
death  and  resurrection,  whereby  He  hath  laid  the  foundation  of  His  people's 
happiness,  and  hath  obtained  all  power  in  heaven  and  earth  to  complete  it.  V. 
Death,  as  it  is  to  be  destroyed,  is  to  be  destroyed  last.  (Z).  Wilcox.) 
The  last  enemy  destroyed  : — 1.  Death  is  represented  in  Scripture  under  very  different 
aspects;  at  one  time  he  is  tlie  king  of  terrors — at  another  a  slave ;  now  in  full 
possession  of  all  his  power — and  then  spoiled  and  abolished.  In  one  place  you 
will  find  the  inspired  writer  speaking  of  it  as  a  gainful  thing  to  die,  whilst  in 
another  he  seems  to  shrink  from  dissolution.  There  is  no  great  difficulty  in  under- 
standing why  these  oiDposite  representations  should  thus  be  given.  If  he  still 
reign,  it  is  by  sufferance,  no  longer  by  right,  as  a  minister  employed  by  God  in  the 
effecting  certain  purposes,  and  not  as  a  ruler  exercising'  undisputed  supremacy.  2, 
But  whilst  there  is  this  variety  we  may  safely  say  that  death  is  never  represented 
as  desirable  in  itself.  Death  may,  in  some  sense,  be  made  to  perform  towards  us 
the  part  of  a  friend ;  but,  nevertheless,  death  is  never  set  before  us  in  Scripture  as 
a  friend,  but  invariably  as  an  enemy.  It  came  into  the  world  with  sin,  constituting 
the  burden  of  the  curse  which  sin  had  provoked  ;  and  though,  through  the 
interference  of  Christ,  provision  has  been  made  for  the  complete  removal  of  the 
curse,  death  still  retains  so  much  of  its  original  ch.n-acter  that  it  cannot  be 
regarded  as  anything  but  a  foe.  Consider— I.  Wrrn  what  justice  death  is  styled 
AN  ENEiiY.  1.  Coming  into  households  and  filling  them  with  mourning,  marring 
the  might  and  withering  the  beauty  of  man,  snatching  away  the  wise  in  the 
midst  of  their  searchings  after  knowledge,  and  the  useful  ere  they  have  half 
perfected  their  benevolent  plans,  what  enemy  is  so  destructive  as  death  ? 
What  conqueror  ever  made  such  ravages?  Whose  pro-ress  ever  caused 
so  much  terror?  Witness  the  tears  of  orphans  and  widows;  witness  the 
rapid  pains  which  attend  the  taking  down  of  the  "earthly  house  of  this 
tabernacle";  witness  the  dishonours  of  the  grave.  And  if  we  consider 
that  death  sends  the  immortal  part  to  the  judgment-seat  of  God,  cutting 
off  all  opportunities  for  repentance,  no  language  can  exaggerate  this  enemy's 
office.  2.  But  death  is  an  enemy  even  to  the  righteous.  Is  it  nothing  that  the 
soul  has  to  go  alone  into  the  invisible  world,  without  that  body,  through  wliose 
organs  it  has  seen  and  heard  and  gathered  in  knowledge  while  a  sojourner  beL>w? 
We  do  not  dispute  that  the  soul  will  have  great  enjoyment  in  the  separate  state. 
The  saint  has  exchanged  labour  for  repose,  danger  for  security;  but  in  making  the 
exchange  he  has  laid  aside  his  weapons  as  well  as  his  anxieties,  and  must  rest  in 
compaiative  inactivity  till  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  Man  revivify  his  lost  memleis. 
Then  count  it  not  strange  that  we  suppose  the  souls  of  the  buried  saints  crying 
out  like  those  which  St.  John  saw  beneath  the  altar.  "How  Ions,  0  Lord,  how 
long?"  These  souls  do  not  feel  that  eveiy  enemy  i<  yet  trampled  underfoot, 
though  they  do  feel  the  final  conquest  to  be  as  certain  as  though  already  were  the 
last  foe  annihilated.     II.  Why   is  the   destruction    op    this   enemy  deferred? 


460  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

1.  Certainly  this  does  seem  strange.  We  cannot  but  feel  that  so  comi^lete  was  the 
victory  won  by  the  Redeemer  that  death  might  have  been  at  once  annihilated. 
The  original  curse  was  exhausted  wben  that  sinless  One  who  made  Himself  our 
substitute  expired  on  the  Cross,  and  it  would  only  be  allowing  the  consequences  of 
Christ's  work  to  take  immediate  and  continued  effect,  had  He  been  the  last  human 
being  who  died.  We  know  that  numbers  are  to  be  living  on  the  earth  at  the  time 
of  Christ's  second  appearing,  and  that  these  are  to  escape  death  altogether,  and  to 
become  instantaneously  what  they  would  have  been  had  they  undergone  dissolution, 
and  we  may  certainly  learn  from  this  that  there  might  be  universHlly  the  "  swallowing 
up  of  mortality  in  life."  2.  And  it  is  very  irjteresting  to  consider  why  tliis  is  not 
the  case.  Were  it  so — (1)  Men  would  still  have  to  live  a  period  of  probation  ;  but 
the  difference  would  be,  that  when  the  period  of  probation  came  to  a  close,  there 
would  be  no  intermediate  state.  The  righteous  and  unrighteous  would  disappear 
altogether  from  the  scene,  the  one  entering  immediately  body  and  soul  into 
heaven,  the  other  into  hell.  But  now  there  is  something  so  humiliating  about 
death  and  the  grave,  something  which  so  demonstrates  the  evil  of  sin,  that  we 
feel  as  though  it  would  be  to  take  from  us  what  is  most  wholesome  and  instructive 
to  sab^titute  the  procf-ss  of  translation  for  the  process  of  dissolution.  It  is  hardly 
possible  now  to  put  away  altogether  some  such  thought  as  this — What  must  sin  be, 
which  could  bring  such  a  doom  on  a  creature  that  was  made  in  the  likeness  of 
God  !  (2)  There  would  be  no  resurrection,  and  a  resurrection  is  just  that  article 
of  faith  which  lays  a  vast  demand  on  our  submissiveness  and  belief.  We  can 
afford  to  spare  nothing  which  tends  to  show  the  nature  of  transgression  or  to  lead 
us  to  the  simply  taking  the  Almighty  at  His  word.  (3)  Survivors  would  miss  much 
comfort,  and  be  liable  to  great  errors.  We  appear  not  to  have  lost  all  connection 
with  the  dead,  so  long  as  we  have  their  graves.  And  over  and  above  all  this  the 
vanishing  away  of  matter  wi)uld  be  very  likely  to  induce  a  persuasion  that  man 
M'as  actually  annihilated,  or  give  rise  lo  theories  as  to  the  nonentity  of  matter. 
(4)  There  could  be  no  general  resurrection,  and  of  all  the  wonderful  proofs  of 
Divine  almightiness,  probably  none  is  to  be  compared  with  this :  and  this  besides 
will  constitute  the  majestic  triumph  of  Christ.  He  who  was  a  "  Man  of  sorrows  " 
and  refused  a  resting-place  shall  speak  the  word  and  bid  Himself  be 
attended  as  a  conqueror  by  multitudes.  And  shall  we  doubt  that  the 
spirits  of  the  righteous  in  the  separate  state  thankfully  forego  the  being 
advanced  at  once  to  their  summit  of  happiness,  inasmuch  as  the  delay  is 
to  contribute  to  the  splendour  of  His  final  manifestation.  (H.  Melrill,  B.D.) 
Christ  the  Destroyer  of  death  : — I.  Death  an  enemy.  1.  It  was  so  born.  Death  is  the 
child  of  our  direst  foe,  for  "sin  when  it  is  finished  bringeth  forth  death."  "  Sin 
entered  into  the  world  and  death  by  sin."  2.  It  does  an  enemy's  work.  It  tears 
in  pieces  that  comely  handiwork  of  God,  the  fiibric  of  the  human  body.  This 
Vandal  spares  no  work  of  life,  however  full  of  wisdom,  or  beauty,  for  it  looseth 
the  silver  cord  and  breaketh  the  golden  bowl.  Whither  can  we  go  to  find  no 
sepulchres?  The  tear  of  the  bereaved,  the  wail  of  the  widow,  and  the  moan  of  the 
orphan — these  have  been  death's  war  music,  and  be  has  found  therein  a  song  of 
victory.  War  is  nothing  better  than  death  holding  carnival,  and  devouring  his 
prey  a  little  more  in  haste  than  is  his  common  wont.  Death  has  done  the  work  of 
an  enemy — (1)  To  those  of  us  who  have  as  yet  escaped  his  arrows.  Those  who 
have  lately  stood  around  a  new-made  grave  and  buried  half  their  hearts  can  tell 
you  what  an  enemy  death  is.  What  head  of  a  family  among  us  has  not  had  to  say 
to  him,  "  Me  thou  hast  bereaved  again  and  again!  "  Especially  is  dfath  an  enemy 
to  the  living  when  he  invades  God's  house.  The  most  usi  ful  ministers  and  most 
earnest  workers  are  taken  away.  (2)  To  those  who  die.  All  that  a  man  hath  will 
he  give  for  his  life,  yet  death  cannot  be  bribed.  When  death  cometh  even  to  the 
good  man  he  is  attended  by  such  tenihle  heralds  and  grim  outriders  as  do  greatly 
scare  us.  And  what  comes  he  to  do  to  our  bodies?  He  comes  to  take  the  light 
from  the  eyes,  the  hearing  from  the  ears,  the  speech  fr<  m  the  tongue,  the  activity 
from  t)ie  hand,  and  the  thought  from  the  brain.  3.  It  is  a  subtle  enemy,  lurking 
everywhere,  even  in  the  most  harmless  things.  4.  It  is  an  enemy  whom  none  of 
us  will  be  able  to  avoid,  take  what  hy-paths  we  may,  nor  can  we  escape  from  him 
when  our  hour  is  come.  5.  Snddt-n,  too,  fall  often,  are  its  assaults.  II.  An 
ENEMY  TO  BE  DESTROYED.  1.  Christ  has  alreaily  subdued  death.  (1)  By  having 
delivered  His  people  from  spiritual  death.  "  And  you  hath  He  quickened  who  were 
dead  in  trespasses  and  sins."  (2)  By  restoring  certain  individuals  to  life.  (3)  By 
removing  from  it  its  penal  character  through  His  death  on  the  Cross.    Why  die  the 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  4G1 

saints  then?  Because  their  bodies  must  be  changed  ere  they  can  enter  heaven. 
"Flesh  and  blood"  as  they  are  "  cannot  inherit  the  kin;^dom  of  God."  (4)  By  His 
resurrection.  As  surely  as  Christ  ros^  so  di  i  He  guarantee  as  an  absolute  certaiuty 
"ihe  resurrection  of  all  His  saints.  (5)  By  the  work  of  His  Spirit  in  the  saints,  who 
snables  them  to  face  the  last  enemy  without  alarm.  2.  But  death  in  the  sense 
meant  by  the  text  is  not  destroyed  yet.  He  is  to  be  destroyed,  and  how  will  that  be  ? 
(1)  At  the  coming  of  Christ,  those  who  are  alive  and  remain  shall  not  see  death, 
iiut  in  the  case  of  the  sleeping  ones,  death  shall  be  destroyed,  for  they  shall  rise 
from  the  tomb.  The  resurrection  is  the  destruction  of  death.  (2)  Those  who  rise 
will  not  be  one  whit  the  worse  for  having  died.  There  will  be  no  trace  upon  them 
of  the  feebleness  of  old  age,  none  of  the  marks  of  long  and  wearying  sickness.  (3) 
There  shall  be  no  more  death.  "  Christ  being  raised  from  the  dead  dieth  no  more, 
death  hath  no  moie  dominion  over  Him  "  ;  and  so  also  the  quickened  ones,  His  own 
redeemed,  tln^y  too  shall  die  no  more.  "  Because  I  live,  ye  sball  live  also."  III. 
Death  is  to  be  destkoyed  last.  1.  Because  he  came  in  last  he  must  go  out  last. 
First  came  the  devil,  then  sin,  then  death.  Death  is  not  the  worst  of  enemies.  It 
were  better  to  die  a  thousand  times  than  to  sin.  2.  Deatli  is  the  last  enemy  to 
each  individual  Christian ;  therefoi-e  leave  him  to  be  the  la^t.'  You  do  not  want 
dying  grace  till  dying  mo:ueuts.  Ask  for  living  grace,  and  glorify  Christ  thereby, 
and  then  you  shall  have  dying  grace  when  dying  time  comes.  3.  Why  is  death 
left  to  the  last?  Because  Christ  can  make  much  use  of  him.  (1)  There  are, 
perhaps,  no  sermons  like  the  deaths  which  have  happened  in  our  households.  (2) 
If  theie  had  been  no  death  the  saints  would  not  iiave  had  the  o|iportunity  to 
exhibit  the  highest  ardour  of  their  love.  Wlu  re  has  love  to  Christ  triumphed  most  ? 
Why,  in  the  death  of  the  martyrs  at  the  stiike  and  on  the  rack.  So  is  it  in  their 
measure  with  saints  who  die  from  ordinary  deaths;  they  would  have  had  no  such 
test  for  faith  and  work  for  patience  as  they  now  have  if  theie  had  been  no  death. 
(3)  Without  death  we  should  not  be  so  conformed  to  Christ  as  we  shall  be  if  we 
tall  asleep  in  Him.  (4)  Death  brings  the  saints  home.  He  does  but  come  to  them 
and  whisper  his  message,  and  in  a  moment  ihey  are  supremely  blessed.  (C.  H. 
Spiirncoii.)  The  last  eneiiiy  destroyed : — There  is  an  enemy  before  every  one  of  us,  and 
we  are  all  advancing  to  encounter  bim  ;  let  each  ask  himself.  In  what  spirit,  in  what 
strength,  under  whose  banner,  and  with  what  hope  ?  I.  I  will  mention  three 
RHASONs  WHY  DEATH  SHOULD  BE  CALLED  AN  ENEMY.  First,  because  of  his  probable 
antecedents.  Secondly,  because  of  his  certain  concomitants.  And  thirdly,  because 
of  his  possible  consequences.  A  brief  word  upon  each.  1.  The  latest  stage  of 
earthly  1  fe  is  commonly  a  time  of  trial — a  very  valley  of  humiliation.  The  con- 
sciousness of  reduced  strength  inust  be  very  trying  to  a  man  of  vigour.  2.  Still 
the  antecedents  of  death  are  but  probable ;  he  himself  may  prevent  them  by  an 
earlier  stroke  than  is  usual.  But  of  the  concomitants  of  death  we  cannot  say  even 
this.  Th-^y  are  certain ;  they  must  be.  And  what  are  they  ?  I  will  name  but 
one — separation.  Death  is  loneliness  in  its  strongest  sense.  3.  I  hasten  to  the 
consequences  of  death.  I  called  the  antecedents  probable.  I  called  the  concomi- 
tants certain.  I  must  call  the  conseqnences  (blessed  be  God)  only  possible.  Still 
that  possibility  is  dreadful.  I  supp  'se  a  man  to  be  pondering  the  old  question — 
What  shall  be  after  death?  What  shall  I  be,  and  where?  An  anxious  and  (apart 
from  the  gospel)  an  indeterminable  imjuiry.  Only  there  is  something  within  me 
which  see  us  to  tell  me  that  I  shall  be  after  death.  Can  I  be  quite  sure  that  things 
done  in  the  body  will  not  influence  or  affect  that  future  existence?  Can  I  be  quite 
sure  that  wtu'ds  which  have  done  injury  to  others,  and  imaginations  which  have 
done  injury  to  myself,  may  not,  in  some  strange  way,  be  bearing  fruit  in  that  state 
into  which  death  shall  usher  me  ?  And  if  all  this  be  (as  we  are  at  this  moment 
supposing  it  to  be)  less  than  certain,  i-iill  is  not  the  possibility  serious  enough? 
Does  it  not  make  me  feel  that  "  enemy"  is  the  only  name  bebtting  him  who  is  to 
introduce  me  into  a  condition,  at  the  very  worst,  so  mysterious  and  so  critical  ? 

II.  We  THANK  JjCSUS  ChKIST  fob  not  REQUIRING  rS  TO  DO  VIOLENCE  TO  NATURAL 
CONVICTIONS,    BY     CHANGING    THE    APPELLATION    OF    THAT     TERRIFIC     FOE,     whom    eacll 

one  of  us  has  inevitably  to  encounter.  But  we  thank  Him  still  ixmre  for  having 
revealed  to  us  on^  way  of  meeting  and  conquering  this  foe  ;  yea,  for  words  stronger 
far  than  any  p'omise  of  lesistanoe  or  of  victory — "The  last  enemy  that  shall  be 
destroyed  is  Death  !  "  1.  The  foundation  is  laid  for  the  individual  destruction  of 
death,  when  a  man  heartily  believes  in  Jesus  Christ  as  his  Saviour.  A  young  man 
is  alarme.l  by  the  first  tuucdi  of  serious  illness — none  so  timid  on  this  point — lest 
it  should  run  on  iuto  that  which  is  fatal.     And  the  feeling  lasts ;  which  of  us  has 


462  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

got  over  it  ?  But  whenever  in  any  particular  instance  a  man  turns  heartily  to 
Christ  as  his  Saviour,  then  is  the  foundation  laid,  in  liis  case,  for  that  which  St. 
Paul  hern  calls  the  destruction  or  tlie  abolition  of  death.  2.  Again,  we  rea  I  at  the 
end  of  this  chapter,  that  "  the  sting  of  death  is  sin."  And  we  must  distinguish  at 
all  times  between  whai;  is  ciiUeii  the  guilt  of  sin  and  what  we  all  understand  by  the 
power  of  sin.  It  is  sad  that  we  should  be  obUged  to  do  so.  But,  unhappily,  all 
experience  tells  us— and  we  need  the  warning  most  of  all  for  ourselves — that  a 
peison  may  take  to  himself  the  comforts  of  the  gospel  without  knowing  anything 
really  of  its  living  strength.  Therefore  I  say  thar,  we  must  separate  that  first  step 
towa'ds  the  destruction  of  death — -faith  in  the  merits  of  Jesus  Clirist — from  this 
second  step,  the  habitual  growing  mastery  over  self  and  sin  by  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  of  God,  given  to  all  who  ask  for  Him  in  the  name  of  Jesus.  3.  The 
next  siep  carries  us  far  onward;  it  is  a  death-bed  cheered  by  the  sense  of  a 
Saviour's  presence.  This  is  the  result  of  the  other  two.  4.  And  yet,  thus  far, 
although  death  has  been  boldly  encountered,  and  although,  in  one  sense,  he  has 
been  vanquisi  ed,  yet  to  the  end,  in  another  sense,  the  victory  has  remained  with 
him.  The  lifeless  bo'ly  has  been  left  his  prey ;  he  has  carried  it  off,  he  has 
triumphed  over  it,  he  has  made  it  his  very  sport  and  trophy.  Not  till  all  the  dead 
shall  have  been  raistd  in  newness  of  life  can  the  Destroyer  of  death  be  said  to  have 
fuliilled  His  mission.  Till  then,  death  may  have  been  overruled,  may  have  been 
made  tolerable,  may  have  been  even,  in  certain  cases,  converted  into  an  instrument 
of  blessing ;  as  when  the  same  apostle  said,  "  I  have  a  desire  to  depart,  and  to  be 
with  Christ,  which  is  far  better  ";  but  never  till  then  will  death  have  been  abolished 
and  annihilated  ;  never  till  then  will  the  corruptible  have  put  on  iucorruption,  and 
mortality  have  been  swallowed  up  of  life.     (Dean  Vauglian.) 

Ver.  28.  And  when  all  things  shall  be  subdued  unto  Him,  then  shall  the 
Son  ...  be  subject. — Christ  suhjicting  Hhnself : — I.  Christ  reigning.  Our  text 
si^eaks  of  tbe  time  when  ver.  25  shall  be  accomplished.  1.  Christ's  kingdom  is  to 
exist  till  all  things  are  subjugated  to  it.  It  is  set  up  to  bring  to  obedience  those 
who  are  reb.ls  to  God's  government.  (1)  It  virtually  began  with  the  first  human 
rebel ;  when  thf^  promise  was  made  that  "  the  seed  of  tbe  woman  should  bruise  tbe 
serpent's  head."  (2)  Aft-r  Christ's  death  and  resurrection.  His  kingdom  was 
actually  established,  and  His  "  ambassadors  "  have  ever  since  been  "  beseeching 
men  in  Christ's  stead  to  be  reconciled  to  God."  (3)  Christ's  kingdom  is  remedial 
rather  than  judicial,  and  He  seeks  to  rule  by  constraint  rather  than  restraint.  2. 
This  kingdom  will  eventually  be  universal.  Here  is  no  uncertainty,  no  speculation. 
"  The  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it."  "I  have  sworn  by  myself,  .  .  .  that 
unto  Me  every  knee  shall  bow,  every  tongue  shall  swear."  II.  Christ  scbjectixg 
Himself.  1.  Humanly  speaking,  Christ  subjected  Himself  to  the  Father  when  He 
assumed  our  nature,  and  submitted  to  the  death  of  the  Cross.  His  present  exalta- 
tion is  the  reward  of  that  submission  (Phil,  ii.),  and  consists  of  a  relative  dominion 
which  will  come  to  an  end  when  Christ  has  finished  the  peculiar  work  for  which  it 
was  established.  2.  The  relative  subjection  of  the  incarnation  was  voluntarily  and 
not  derogatory  to  His  Divinity.  Christ  was  God  manifested  in  the  flesh.  3.  Nor 
will  it  be  derogatory  to  Christ's  Divinity  to  "  subject  Himself  "  by  yielding  up  the 
lordship  of  the  mediatorial  kingdom.  His  glory  and  dominion  will  be  the  same, 
it  will  merely  be  a  change  in  the  form  of  administration.  III.  God  as  "all  in 
ALL."  1.  This  does  not  mean  that  God  the  Son  shall  be  lost  in  the  Father,  for 
(  hiist  is  one  with  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Spirit.  This  expressicm  is  also  used 
of  Ciirist.  He  is  spoken  of  as  "  the  fulness  of  Him  that  filleth  all  things,"  and  as 
"  all,  a>d  in  all."  God  the  Father  is  not  "  all  in  all  "  to  the  exclusion  of  the  Son, 
but  with  tbe  Son,  and  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  2.  It  is  the  Triune  God  that  is  here 
spoken  of  as  "  all  in  all."  The  medintorial  kingdom  having  come  to  an  end,  the 
relative  position  of  Clirist  being  no  longer  required,  there  is  seen  only  the  Divine 
abs')luteness  in  the  never  divided  Trinity.  3.  The  Triune  God  "  all  in  all  "  uieacs 
t'  at  the  Divine  will  be  supreme  by  a  universnl,  volunt  .ry,  glad  consent.  When 
Gud  is  absnlutely  our  "  all  in  all  "  we  shull  have  secured  the  highest  hajipiness  we 
are  capable  of.  [Homiletic  Magazine.)  The  final  snhmission  of  the  Son  to  the 
Fritter: — That  fiom  tbe  moment  of  His  final  triumph  the  Son  will  bow  to  the 
Father  in  a  sense  in  which  He  does  not  now,  must  be  expounded  in  harmi>ny  with 
Luke  i.  33.  "Of  His  kingdom  tbere  will  be  no  end";  and  with  Kev.  xi.  1.5, 
"The  kingdom  of  the  world  has  become  our  Lord's  and  His  Christ's:  and  He 
V7ill  reign  for  ever  and  ever."    In  this  latter  passage  the  united  reign  of  the  Father 


CHAP.  XV.]  /.  CORINTHIANS.  463 


and  Son  is  dpscriv.ed  by  the  remarkable  words,  "He  will  reign."  Perhaps  the 
following  imperfect  human  comparison  may  help  to  harmonise  these  apparently 
contradictory  assertions.  Conceive  a  king  who  never  leaves  his  palace,  but  commits 
all  public  acts  of  royalty  to  his  son,  who  performs  them  in  the  name,  and  at  the 
bidding  and  accoiding  to  the  will,  of  his  father,  whose  will  his  son  always  approves. 
Such  a  son  we  might  call  a  sharer  of  his  father's  tbrone  ;  and,  in  another  sense, 
the  sole  ruler  of  his  father's  realm.  Conceive  now  that  a  province  is  in  rebellion, 
and  that,  to  bring  it  into  submission,  the  king  invests  his  son,  far  the  time  of  the 
rebellion,  with  full  royal  authority.  The  son  begins  in  person  the  war  against  the 
rebels  ;  but  before  its  completion  he  returns  to  the  capital  in  which  his  father 
reigns  and  directs  thence  the  war  until  order  is  completely  lestored.  Even  in  the 
presence  of  his  father  he  exercises  the  full  reu'al  authority  given  to  him  for  the 
suppression  of  the  revolt.  While  the  rebellion  lasts  he  seems  to  be  an  independent 
ruler ;  though  really  ruling  only  at  the  bidding,  and  to  work  out  the  will,  and 
restore  the  authority  of  his  father.  But  when  order  is  restored,  the  son  gives  back 
to  the  father  this  delegated  royalty :  and  even  the  apparent  independence  of  the 
son's  rule  ceases.  Henceforth  the  father  reigns  with  undisputed  sway.  The 
dilference  between  the  special  authority  delegated  to  the  Son  for  the  suppression  of 
the  revolt  and  afterwards  laid  down  and  the  abiding  authority  of  the  Son  as  the 
Father's  representative,  I  cannot  define.  Probably  it  is  connected  with  the  fact 
that  in  consequence  of  sin  the  Son  did  what  the  Father  never  did,  viz.,  became  man 
and  died.  May  it  not  be  that  in  consequence  of  this  He  exercises  now  an  authority 
Avhich  is  specially  His  own,  and  which  will  continue  only  for  a  time  ?  {Frof.  Beet.) 
Our  rehitions  to  Christ  in  the  future  life  : — That  Christ  is  to  be  in  some  sense 
eternal,  and  the  eternal  joy  of  all  believers,  we  cannot  willingly  doubt.  What  kind 
of  personal  relation  to  Christ  we  are  to  hope  for  and  hold,  as  our  authorised  and 
fixed  expectations  for  the  future  life  ?  Among  those  who  hold  tlie  Trinity  inore 
lightly,  or  in  a  more  nenrly  Sabellian  way,  as  a  dramatising  of  God  to  serve  the 
ocaasional  uses  of  redeu'ption,  it  is  common  to  assume  the  discontinuance  of  it, 
when  the  uses  ef  redemption  no  longer  require  it.  But  there  is  a  fatal  want  of  depth 
in  this  cnnception.  If  there  was  a  neces.■^ity  of  the  Three  to  carry  on  the  redemption 
of  the  world,  as  this  jiartly  Sabellian  view  supposes,  it  was  not  a  necessity  of  sin, 
but  of  mind — finite  iiaind,  all  finite  mind  ;  existing  therefore  ah  cetcrno  in  ceternum. 
We  have  now  a  great  first  point  established,  viz.,  that  when  the  Son  is  spoken  of  as 
finally  to  be  made  subject,  or  so  far  discontinued  as  to  let  God  be  all  in  all,  it  can- 
not be  meant  that  the  Son  is  to  be  taken  away,  or  disappear,  in  any  sense  that 
modifies  at  all  the  fact  of  Trinity.  If  God  is  to  be  all  in  all,  it  must  be  as  Trinity 
and  not  otherwise.  How  then  shall  we  understand  the  apostle  when  he  testifies 
that  the  "  Son"  shall  be  subject  or  retired  from  the  view  ?  He  is  speaking  plainly 
of  the  Son  as  incarnate,  or  externalised  in  the  flesh,  visible  outwardly  in  the  man- 
form  and  known  as  the  Son  of  Mary.  He  it  is  that,  after  having — as  a  king 
outwardly  regnant — put  all  things  under  His  feet,  is  in  turn  to  become  subject  also 
Himself,  that  God  njay  be  all  in  all,  and  the  machineries  hitherto  conspicuous  be 
for  ever  taken  back  as  before  the  advent.  The  only  objection  I  perceive  to  this 
•construction  is,  that  the  woi'd  Son  here  appears  to  be  used  in  connection  with  the 
word  Father — "  delivei'ed  up  the  kingdom  to  God  even  the  Fa.ther," — "  then  shall 
the  Son  also  " — as  if  it  were  intended  to  say  that  the  Son  as  in  Trinity  is  to  give 
place  to  the  Father  f)s  in  Trinity,  and  He  to  be  henceforth  sole  Deity,  But  there  is 
a  two-fold  relationship  of  Father  and  Son  appearing  and  reappearing  constantly; 
viz.,  that  of  the  Father  to  the  incarnate  Son  and  that  of  the  Father  to  the  jDre- 
incarnate  Son  ;  that  which  gives  Him  earthly  Fatherliood  and  that  which  gives 
Him  celestial,  ante-mudane  Fatherhood.  The  apostle  was  not  careful  here  to  put 
a  guard  for  the  saving'  of  the  eternal  Sonship,  because  he  did  not  imagine  the  need  of 
saving  that,  anymore  than  of  saving  Deity  itself.  He  w<ts  only  thinking  of  the  mortal 
Sonship,  and  giving  us  to  see  the  essentially  temporal  date  of  its  continuance. 
Trinity  then  as  He  conceives  will  remain,  but  the  mortal  Sonship,  the  man,  will 
disappear  and  be  no  more  visible.  And  let  us  not  too  hastily  recoil  from  this.  It 
may  be  that  we  have  been  promising  ourselves  a  felicity  in  the  future  world,  made 
up  almost  wholly  of  the  fact  that  we  shall  be  with  Christ  in  His  humanly  personal 
form,  and  have  used  this  hope  to  feed  our  longings,  quite  apart  from  all  higher 
relations  to  His  Eternal  Sonship.  I  heir  word  is  Jesus,  always  Jesus,  never  the 
Christ ;  and  if  they  can  see  Jesus  in  the  world  to  come,  they  do  not  specially  look 
for  anything  more.  Heaven  is  fully  made  wp,  to  their  low  type  of  expiectation,  if 
they  can  but  apprehend  the  Man  and  be  with  Him.    Eeligion  reaches  after  God,  and 


4C4  THE  BIBLICAL   ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

God  is  Trinity,  and  all  the  gospel  does,  or  can  do,  by  the  name  and  human  person 
of  Jesus,  is  to  bring  us  in  and  up  to  a  God  who  is  eternally  above  that  name.  Our 
relations  to  Christ,  then,  in  the  future  life,  are  to  be  relations  to  God  in  Christ,  and 
never  to  the  Jesus  in  Christ.  There  is,  I  know,  a  conception  of  oar  gospel  which 
has  its  blessedness  in  Jesus,  because  it  meet^  God  in  Him,  and  is  specially  drawn  to 
His  humanity,  because  it  even  finds  the  fulness  of  God  bowed  low  in  His  person. 
This  so  far  is  genuine  gospel.  And  it  would  not  be  strange  if  a  disciple  thus 
wonted  in  God  should  imagine  that  the  joy  of  his  faith  is  conditioned  for  ever  by 
the  human  person  at  whose  ministry  or  from  whose  love  it  began.  Wh^t,  then,  is 
the  future  glory,  he  will  ask,  if  he  does  not  bring  him  in,  where  he  can  see  the 
very  Man  of  the  Cross  ?  And  who  is  this  but  Him  that  you  seek  ?  Surely  He  is 
somehow  here,  and  this  is  somehow  He.  You  missed  Him,  perchance,  because 
you  were  looking  too  low  down,  out  of  the  range  of  Deity,  to  finci  Him  ;  whereas 
now  you  find  Him  throned  in  God,  hymned  in  God,  as  the  everlasting  Son  of  the 
Father — and  yet  He  is  somehow  Son  of  Mfiry  still,  even  as  He  is  the  Lamb  that  was 
slain.  (H.  Bttshnell.)  'Tin'  terinhiaiion  of  the  medio lurial  kiufidont: — There  are 
two  great  tiuths  presented  by  this  verse  and  its  context — the  one,  that  Christ  is  now 
vested  with  a  kingly  authority  which  He  nmst  hereafter  resign ;  the  other,  that,  as 
a  consequence  on  this  resignation,  God  Himself  will  become  all  in  all  to  the 
universe.  We  begin  by  observi'  g  the  importance  of  carefully  distinguishing 
between  what  the  Scriptures  iiflirm  of  the  attributes,  and  what  of  the  otiices,  of 
the  ijersons  in  the  Trinity,  lu  regard  of  the  attril)utes,  you  will  find  that  the 
employed  language  marks  perfect  equality  ;  the  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit  being 
alike  spoken  of  as  Eternal,  Oniniscient,  Onmipotent,  Omnipresent.  But  in  regard 
of  the  offices,  there  can  be  no  dispute  lliat  the  Lmguage  indicates  inequality,  and 
that  both  the  Son  and  Spirit  are  represented  ms  inlerior  to  the  Father.  I  his  may 
readily  be  accounted  for  from  the  nature  of  the  i)lan  of  redenip:ion.  This  plan 
demanded  that  the  Son  should  humble  Hin>  elf,  and  assume  our  nature  ;  and  that 
the  Spirit  should  condescend  to  be  sent  as  a  renovating  agent ;  whilst  the  Father 
was  to  remain  in  the  sublimity  a'ld  hapi  iaess  of  Godhead.  And  it  is  oidy  by  thus 
distinguishing  between  the  attrilmtes  and  the  offices  that  we  can  satisfactorily 
explain  our  text  and  its  context.  The  apostle  expres.->ly  declares  of  Christ,  that  He  is 
to  deliver  up  His  kmgdoni  to  the  Father,  and  to  become  Himself  subject  to  the  Father. 
And  the  question  naturally  projioses  itself,  how  are  statements  such  as  these  to  be 
reconciled  with  other  poitions  of  Scripture,  which  speak  of  Christ  as  an  everlasting 
King,  and  declare  His  dominion  to  be  that  which  shdl  not  be  destroyed?  There 
is  no  difficulty  in  reconciling  these  appar.-ntly  conflicting  assertions  if  we  consider 
Christ  as  spoken  of  in  the  one  ca-e  as  God,  in  the  other  as  Mediator.  And  you 
cannot  be  acquainted  with  the  scIk  me  of  our  redemption  and  not  know  that  the 
office  of  the  Mediator  warrant ■;  our  supposing  a  kingd  'in  which  will  be  finally 
surrendered.  The  grand  design  of  redemption  has  all  along  been  the  exterminating 
evil  from  the  universe,  and  the  restoring  harmony  throughout  God's  disorganised 
empire.  He  was  not  indeed  fully  and  visibly  invested  with  the  kingly  office  until 
after  His  death  and  resurrection  :  for  then  it  was  that  He  declared  to  His  disciples, 
"All  power  is  given  unto  Me  in  heaven  and  earth."  Kevertheless  the  mediatorial 
kingdom  had  commenced  with  the  commencement  of  human  guilt  and  misery. 
But  when,  through  death,  He  had  destroyed  "Him  that  had  the  power  of  death," 
the  Mediator  became  emphatically  a  King.  He  "  ascended  up  on  high,  and  led 
cajptivity  captive,"  in  that  very  nature  in  which  He  had  "  borne  our  griefs  and 
carried  our  sorrows."  He  sat  down  at  the  right  hand  of  God  the  very  person  that 
had  been  made  a  curse  for  us.  It  is  certainly  the  representation  of  Scripture,  that 
Christ  has  beon  exalted  to  a  throne,  in  recompense  of  His  humiliation  and  suffer- 
ing ;  and  that,  seated  on  this  throne,  He  governs  all  things  in  heaven  and  earth. 
And  we  call  this  throne  the  meiliatorial  throne,  because  it  was  only  as  Mediator 
that  Christ  could  be  exalted.  The  great  object  for  which  the  kingdom  has  been 
erected,  is,  that  He  who  occupies  the  throne  may  subdue  those  principalities  and 
powers  which  have  set  thomselves  against  the  goverumpnt  of  God.  And  when 
this  noble  result,  is  brought  round,  and  the  whole  globe  man  led  with  righteousness, 
there  will  yet  remain  much  to  be  done  ere  the  mediatorial  work  is  coujplete.  The 
throne  must  set  for  judgment;  the  enactments  of  a  retributive  economy  take 
eiJect ;  the  dead  be  raised,  and  all  men  receive  the  things  done  in  the  body.  Then 
will  evil  be  finally  expelled  from  the  universe,  and  God  may  »gain  look  forth  on 
His  unliiriited  empire,  and  declare  it  not  defiled  by  a  solitary  stain.  Now  it  haa 
been  our  object,  up  to  this  point,  to  prove  to  you,  on  scriptural  authority,  that  the 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  4G5 

Mediator  is  a  King,  and  that  Christ,  as  God-man,  is  invested  with  a  dominion  not 
to  be  confounded  with  that  which  belongs  to  Him  as  God.  You  are  now  therefore 
prepared  for  tlie  question,  wliether  Christ  has  not  a  kingdom  wliich  must  be  ulti- 
mately resigned.  We  think  it  evident  that,  as  Mediator,  Christ  has  certain  func- 
tions to  discharge,  which,  from  their  very  nature,  cannot  be  eternal.  When  the 
last  of  God's  elect  family  shall  have  been  gathered  in,  there  will  be  none  to  need 
the  blood  of  spiiukling,  none  to  require  the  intercession  of  "  an  advocate  with  the 
Father."  Then  shall  all  that  sovereignty  which,  for  magnificent  but  temporary 
purposes,  has  been  wielded  by  and  through  the  humanity  of  Christ,  pass  again  to 
the  Godhead  whence  it  was  derived.  Then  shall  the  Creator,  acting  no  longer 
through  the  instrnmentality  of  a  Mediator,  assume  visibly,  amid  the  worshippings 
of  the  whole  intelligent  creation,  the  dominion  over  His  infinite  and  now  purified 
empire,  aud  administer  its  every  concern  without  the  intervention  of  one  "  found  in 
fashion  as  a  man."  "  God  shall  henceforwards  be  all  in  all."  Now  it  is  upon  this 
latter  expression,  indicative  as  it  is  of  what  we  may  call  the  universal  diffusion  of 
Peity,  that  we  design  to  employ  the  remainder  of  our  time.  We  wish  to  examine 
into  the  truLlis  involved  in  the  assertion  that  God  is  to  be  finally  all  in  all.  It  is  an 
assertion  which,  the  more  it  is  pondered,  the  more  comprehensive  will  it  appear.  You 
may  remember  that  the  same  expression  is  used  of  Christ  in  the  Epistle  to  the 
Colossians — "Christ  is  all  and  in  all."  There  is  no  disagreement  between  the 
assertions.  In  the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians  St.  Paul  speaks  of  what  takes  place 
under  the  mediatorial  kingdom  ;  whereas  in  that  to  the  Corinthians  he  describes 
what  will  occur  when  that  kingdom  shall  have  terminated.  We  learn,  then,  from 
the  expression  in  question,  however  unable  we  may  be  to  explain  the  amazing 
transition,  that  there  is  to  be  a  removal  of  the  apparatus  constructed  for  allowing 
us  communications  with  Godhead ;  and  that  we  shall  not  need  those  offices  of  an 
Intercessor,  without  which  there  could  now  be  no  access  to  our  Maker.  There  is 
something  very  grand  and  animating  in  this  announcement.  If  we  were  unfallen 
creatures,  we  should  need  no  Mediator.  The  mediatorial  office,  independently  on 
which  we  must  have  been  everlastingly  outcasts,  is  evidence,  throughout  the  whole 
of  its  continuance,  that  the  human  race  does  not  yet  occupy  the  place  whence  it 
fell.  But  with  the  termination  of  this  office  shall  be  the  admission  of  man  into 
all  the  privileges  of  direct  access  to  his  Maker.  In  ceasing  to  have  a  Mediator  the 
last  barrier  is  t'^ken  down  ;  and  man,  who  has  thrown  himself  to  an  unmeasured 
distance  from  God,  passes  into  those  direct  associations  with  Him  "  that  inhabiteth 
eternity,"  which  can  be  granted  to  none  but  those  who  never  fell,  or  who,  having 
fallen,  have  been  recovered  from  every  consequence  of  apostacy.  And  therefore  it 
is  not  that  we  depreciate,  or  undervalue,  the  blessedness  of  that  condition  in  which 
Christ  is  all  in  all  to  His  Church.  We  cannot  compute  this  blessedness,  and  we 
feel  that  the  best  praises  fall  far  short  of  its  deserts  ;  and  yet  we  can  believe  of  this 
blessedness,  that  it  is  only  preparatory  to  a  richer  and  a  higher.  To  tell  me  that  I 
should  need  a  Mediator  through  eternity,  were  to  tell  me  that  I  should  be  in  danger 
of  death,  and  at  a  distance  from  God.  There  is,  however,  no  reason  for  supposing 
that  the  human  race  alone  will  be  affected  by  the  resignation  of  the  mediatorial 
kingdom.  We  may  not  believe  that  it  is  only  over  ourselves  that  Christ  Jesus  has 
been  invested  with  sovereignty.  It  would  rather  appear,  since  all  power  has  been 
given  Him  in  heaven  and  earth,  that  the  mediatorial  kingdom  embraces  different 
worlds,  and  ditferent  orders  of  intelligence  ;  and  that  the  chief  affan-s  of  the 
universe  are  administered  by  Christ  in  His  glorified  humanity.  It  is  therefore 
possible  that  even  unto  angels  the  Godhead  does  not  now  immediately  manifest 
itself ;  but  that  these  glorious  creatures  are  governed,  like  ourselves,  through  the 
instrumentality  of  the  Mediator.  Hence  it  will  be  a  g'cat  transition  to  the  whole 
intelligent  creation,  and  not  merely  to  an  inconsiderable  fraction,  when  the  Son 
shall  give  up  the  kingdom  to  the  Father.  It  will  be  the  visible  enthronement  of 
Deity.  The  Creator  will  come  forth  from  His  subhme  solitude,  and  assume  the 
sceptre  of  His  boundless  empire.  And  it  is  not,  we  think,  possible  to  give  a  finer 
description  of  universal  harmony  and  happiness  than  is  contained  in  the  sentence, 
"  God  all  in  all,"  when  supposed  to  have  reference  to  every  rank  in  creation.  Let 
us  consider  for  a  moment  what  the  sentence  implies.  It  implies  that  there  shall 
be  but  one  mind,  and  that  the  Divine  mind,  throughout  the  universe.  Every 
creature  shall  be  so  actuated  by  Deity,  that  the  Creator  shall  have  only  to  will,  and 
the  whole  mass  of  intelligent  being  will  be  conscious  of  the  same  wish,  and  the 
same  purpose.  It  is  not  merely  that  every  creature  will  be  under  the  government 
of  the  Creator,  as  a  subject  is  under  that  of  his  prince.  It  is  more  than  all  this. 
VOL.   II.  30 


466  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

It  is  that  there  shall  be  such  fibres  of  association  between  the  Creator  and  the 
creatures,  that  every  other  will  shall  move  simultaneously  with  the  Divine,  and  the 
resolve  of  Deity  be  instantly  felt  as  one  mighty  impulse  pervading  the  vast  expan- 
sion of  mind.  God  all  in  all — it  is  that  from  the  highest  order  to  the  lowest, 
archangel,  and  angel,  and  man,  and  principality,  and  power,  there  shall  be  but  one 
desire,  one  object.  This  is  making  God  more  than  the  universal  Euler  :  it  is  making 
Him  the  universal  Actuator.  But  if  the  expression  mark  the  harmony,  it  marks 
also  the  happiness  of  eternity.  It  is  undeniable  that,  even  whilst  on  earth,  we 
find  things  more  beautiful  and  precious  in  proportion  as  we  are  accustomed  to 
find  God  in  them,  to  view  them  as  gifts,  and  to  love  them  for  the  sake  of  the  giver. 
It  is  not  the  poet,  nor  the  naturalist,  who  has  the  richest  enjoyment  when  surveying 
the  landscape,  or  tracmg  the  manifestations  of  creative  power  and  contrivance. 
It  is  the  Christian,  who  recognises  a  Father's  hand  in  the  glorious  development  of 
mountain  and  valley,  and  discovers  the  loving-kindness  of  an  ever-watchful 
guardian  in  each  example  of  the  adaptation  of  the  earth  to  its  inhabitants.  What 
will  it  be  when  God  shall  be  literally  all  iu  all  ?  It  were  little  to  tell  us,  that, 
admittf  d  into  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  we  should  worship  in  a  temple  magnificent 
in  architecture,  and  bow  down  at  a  shrine  whence  flashed  the  effulgence  and  issued 
the  voice  of  Jehovah.  The  mighty  and  overwhelming  thing  is,  that,  according  to 
the  vision  of  St.  John,  there  shall  be  no  temple  there;  but  that  so  actually  shall 
God  be  all,  that  Deity  itself  will  lie  our  sanctuary,  and  our  adorations  be  rendered 
in  the  sublime  recessf-s  of  the  Omnipoteut  Himself.  And  if  we  think  on  future 
intercourse  with  beings  of  our  own  race,  or  of  loftier  ranks,  then  only  ate  the 
anticipations  rapturous  and  inspiriting,  when  Deity  seems  blended  with  every 
association.  The  child  may  be  again  loved  and  embraced.  But  the  emotions  will 
have  none  of  that  selfishness  into  which  the  purest  and  deepest  of  our  feelings  may 
now  be  too  much  resolved  :  it  will  be  God  th-it  the  child  loves  iu  the  parent,  and  it 
will  be  God  that  the  parent  loves  in  the  child ;  and  the  gladness  with  which  the 
heart  of  each  swells,  as  they  recognise  one  the  other  in  the  celestial  city,  will  be  a 
gladness  of  which  Deity  is  the  spring,  a  gladness  of  which  Deity  is  the  object. 
Thus  shall  it  be  also  in  regard  of  every  element  which  can  be  supposed  to  enter 
into  future  happiness.  It  is  certain,  th:it,  if  God  be  all  in  all,  there  will  be  excited 
in  us  no  wish  which  we  shall  be  required  to  repress,  none  which  shall  not  be 
gratified  so  soon  as  formed.  Having  God  in  ourselves,  we  shall  have  capacities  of 
enjoyment  immeasurably  larger  than  at  present;  having  God  in  all  around  us,  we 
shall  find  everywhere  material  of  enjoyment  commensurate  with  q;ir  amplified 
powers.  Let  us  put  from  us  confused  and  indeterminate  notions  ot  happiness, 
and  the  simple  description,  that  God  shall  be  all  in  all,  sets  before  us  the  very 
perfection  of  felicity.  The  only  sound  definition  of  happiness  is  that  every  faculty 
has  its  proper  object.  And  we  believe  of  man,  that  God  endowed  him  with  various 
capacities,  intending  to  be  Himself  their  supply.  Thus,  at  present,  we  make  little 
or  no  approach  towards  knowing  God  as  He  is,  because  God  hath  not  yet  made 
Himself  all  in  all  to  His  creatures.  But  let  there  once  come  this  universal  diffusion 
of  Deity,  and  we  may  find  in  God  Himself  the  objects  which  answer  to  our  matured 
and  spiritualised  faculties.  We  profess  not  to  be  competent  to  the  understanding 
the  mysterious  change  which  is  thus  indicated  as  passing  on  the  universe.  But  we 
can  perceive  it  to  be  a  change  which  shall  be  full  of  glory,  full  of  happiness.  Thus 
we  look  forward  to  the  termination  of  the  mediatorial  kingdom  as  the  event  with 
which  stands  associated  our  reaching  the  summit  of  our  felicity.  There  is  then 
to  be  a  removal  of  all  that  is  now  intermediate  in  our  communications  with  Deity, 
and  the  substitution  of  God  Himself  for  the  objects  which  He  has  now  adapted  to 
the  giving  us  delight.  God  Himself  will  be  an  object  to  our  faculties ;  God  Him- 
self will  be  our  happiness.  We  can  only  add  that  it  becomes  us  to  examine 
whether  we  are  now  subjects  of  the  mediatorial  kingdom,  or  whether  we  are  of  those 
who  will  not  that  Christ  should  reign  over  them.  If  God  is  hereafter  to  be  all  in 
all,  it  behoves  us  to  inquire  what  He  is  to  us  now.  Can  we  say  with  the  Psalmist, 
"  Whom  have  I  in  heaven  but  Thee,  and  there  is  none  upon  earth  that  I  desire  in 
comparison  of  Thee?"  How  vain  must  be  our  hope  of  entering  into  heaven  if 
we  have  no  present  delight  in  what  are  said  to  be  its  joys  !  Again  we  say,  that,  if 
it  be  heaven  towards  which  we  journey,  it  will  be  holiness  in  which  we  delight :  for 
if  we  cannot  now  rejoice  in  having  God  for  our  portion,  where  is  our  meetness  for 
a  world  in  which  God  is  to  be  all  in  all  for  ever  and  for  ever?  (H.  3Ielvill,  B.D.) 
That  God  may  be  all  in  all. — God  all  in  all : — I.  In  the  shifting  scenes  of  the 
world's  life.     When  we  look  out  upon  the  tangled  web  of  history,  the  rise  and 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  4G7 

<the  fall  of  mighty  empires,  the  changing  flynasties,  the  successive  forms  of  govern- 
ment and  social  life,  tbe  instability  of  all  things,  the  recurring  cycle  of  events,  the 
growth  which  ends  only  in  decay,  the  constant  ebb  and  flow  of  political  life,  our 
he.irt  will  sometimes  ask.  Is  there  any  thread  which  strings  together  this  chaotic 
;mnss,  is  there  any  design  which  is  growing  towards  maturity  by  these  accumulations 
:of  tlie  ages?  Are  we  to  believe  in  the  world's  i^rogressive  life,  or  are  we  to  resign 
•ourselves  to  despair,  looking  out  upon  the  present  and  the  past  as  an  ever-varying 
kaleidoscope,  in  which  the  combinations  seem  to  follow  one  another  at  random, 
:and  with  no  fixed  law  ?  In  the  text  we  re;id  the  answer.  Beyond  and  above  the 
busy  turmoil  of  earth,  the  blt^ssed  Trinity  lives  and  loves,  the  same  yesterday,  and 
to-day,  and  for  ever.  A  Divine  purpose  runs  throughout  the  ages,  and  under  the 
ever-changing  forms  of  life,  God  is  fulfilling  Himself  in  many  ways.  II.  In  the 
DESTINIES  OF  THE  Chukch.  If  iit  times  We  feel  anxious  as  we  think  of  her  conflicts  ; 
if  at  certain  eras  Christ  seems  to  sleep  within  the  tempest-tossed  barque ;  if  she  no 
longer  goes  forth  as  in  her  early  days,  in  the  freshness  of  her  strength  and  joy,  to 
-convert  the  world  to  the  obedience  of  the  faith,  yet  we  know  tint  she  ceases  not  to 
■be  the  bride  of  her  unchan;^ing  Spouse;  the  eternal  Trinity  is  in  the  midst  of  her, 
therefore  shall  she  not  be  removed ;  God  is  working  where  we  can  see  nothing  but 
ihe  perversity  and  tbe  strivings  of  man  ;  He  is  ail  in  all.  III.  In  our  temporal  life. 
Looking  at  life  from  one  point  of  view,  how  baffling,  how  meaningless  does  it 
appear  !  What  mean  the  complaints  which  reach  us  in  so  mmy  forms,  not  so  much 
■of  life's  deep  sorrows,  as  of  its  inconsistencies  and  apparent  aimlessness,  its  want 
of  harmony  and  completeness  of  any  kind  ?  Purposes  unfulfilled,  aspirations 
unrealised,  emotions  wasted,  paths  which  seem  to  lead  nowhither,  these  lie  a 
heavy  weight  upon  the  heart  of  humanity.  Where  is  to  be  found  the  note  which 
shall  simplify  this  complex  life  of  ours  ?  how  shall  we  be  enabled  to  look  back  upon 
it  with  quietness  and  confidence,  and  feel  that  all  has  been  working  together  for  our 
final  perfection  and  happiness?  If  we  have  been  in  any  de^-ree  clierishing  the 
spiritual  life  within  us,  such  a  power  is  to  be  found  in  the  tliought  of  Him,  who  has 
done  all  thinj^s  well,  who,  behind  the  restless,  ceaseless  changes  of  life,  has  been 
carrying  out  His  eternal  purposes  concerning  us,  has  been  step  by  step  training  our 
,soul  for  its  everlasting  home — who  out  of  the  unchan;,'eableness  of  His  own 
eternity  has  seen  the  end  from  the  beginning,  and  been  Himself  the  real  but  unseen 
ragent  in  all  that  hus  befallen  us.  IV.  In  oub  spiritual  life.  This  also  is  full  of 
•change  and  variety  ;  it  needs  to  be  reduced  to  some  principle  of  unity.  There  is  the 
varied  atmosphere  of  the  inner  life,  times  of  joy  and  refreshment,  times  of  fears  and 
misgivings — there  is  the  oft-renewed  struggle  with  some  besetting  sin,  the  con- 
sciousness of  God's  grace  working  within  us  to  its  weakening  or  overthrow.  There 
is  an  element  of  restlessness  even  in  our  deepest,  truest  life.  F^ut  God  is  working 
within  us  to  will  and  to  do  of  His  good  pleasure ;  He  is  Himself  the  Way,  by  which 
we  travel  to  Himself  the  end ;  Himself  the  Life  in  whom  alone  we  live  ;  Himself 
the  prize  when  all  our  warfare  is  accomplished.  God  is  our  all  in  all.  Conclusion: 
Thus  we  find  that  all  centres  at  last  in  God  ;  all  existence  stands  at  length  in  refa- 
ction to  Him,  who  is  the  Fount  of  all  being.  The  life  of  nations  as  well  as  that  of 
individuals  springs  out  of  the  exhaustless  depths  of  His  eternal  counsels.  Life  is 
indeed  many-si<ied  and  discordant  when  we  look  at  it  out  of  our  own  human  weak- 
.ness  and  imperfection,  but  as  we  view  it  in  the  light  of  God  we  learn  to  believe 
that  all  is  well.  Apart  from  Him  its  greatest  achievements  appear  poor  and 
unsatisfactory:  when  referred  to  Him  its  smallest  details  are  dignified  and  ennobled. 
»(S.  IF.  SkeJjUujton,  M.A.) 

Ver.  29.  Else  what  shall  they  do  wMch  are  baptized  for  the  dead,  if  the  dead  rise 
not  at  all. — Bnptisia  jor  the  dead  : — The  baptized  for  the  dead  mean  all  th^se  persons 
who,  saved  from  a  world  of  sin,  from  Pagan  ignorance,  and  from  the  power  of  Satan, 
passed  through  the  ordinance  of  initiatory  baptism,  there  to  fill  the  places  and  to 
•carry  on  the  work  of  the  dead  martyrs,  as  fresh  soldiers  fill  the  ranks  of  those 
who  are  slain  in  battle.  What  shall  they  do?  Secular  motives  for  such  a  profes- 
sion they  had  none.  What  must  be  their  disappointment  if  the  ho^jes  of  spiritual 
recompense  were  delusive  ?  This  method  of  interpretation  suggests — I.  That  the 
disciples  of  CiirasT  are  always  described  as  a  peculiar  people.  1,  They  are 
separated  from  the  world — "  I  have  chosen  you  out  of  the  world."  The  duty  such 
a,  separation  involves  is  manifest.  2.  They  are  avowedly  united  one  to  another — 
in  the  fellowship  of  holy  love.  We  much  neglect  our  duty  and  our  privilege  if  we 
■-neglect  or  refuse  such  communion  with  the  people  of  God.     3.  They  form   an 


468  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

organised  and  well  connected  body,  in  which  every  member  has  his  proj^er  place 
and  office.  The  Church  is  likmed  to  a  kingdom,  a  house,  a  body,  an  army.  II. 
That  the  individual  disciples  of  Chkist  are  frequently  removed,  and  their 
PLACES  RENDERED  VACANT  BY  DEATH.  The  ranks  of  Christ's  army  are  constantly 
being  thinned.  When  the  text  was  written  many  lost  them  through  the  bitterness 
of  persecution.  But  ihe  ordinary  causes  of  death  still  exist.  The  best  must  die. 
1.  We  see  vacant  places  in  the  leadership ;  ministers,  rulers,  governors  must  lay 
down  their  authority.  2.  We  see  vacant  places  among  the  rank  and  file.  Our 
beloved  companious  are  called  away  one  after  another,  and  our  own  turn  must 
soon  arrive.  III.  That  God  always  will  raise  up  others  to  take  the  place 
OF  those  who  are  removed.  The  Church  of  Christ  is  unchangpable  and  lasting 
as  tbe  throne  of  God,  and,  as  such,  neither  can  the  gates  of  hell  prevail  against 
it,  nor  the  change  of  time  affect  its  constitution,  nor  the  deaths  of  its  individual 
members  occasion  its  dissolution.  It  mny  suffer  a  temporal y  eclipse  by  the  loss  of 
its  brightest  ornaments,  but  it  is  never  abandoned,  and  others  soon  rise  to  take 
the  place  of  those  gone  before.  The  v\h(ile  history  of  the  past  is  a  living  com- 
mentary on  this  truth.  IV.  That  the  prospect  of  the  resurrection  to  a 
future  life  is  the  consoling  element  in  all  the  changes  of  the  present. 
If  it  were  not  for  this  prospect  all  else  would  be  utter  loss.  "Else  what  shall 
they  do  who  are  baptized  for  the  dead,  if  Christ  had  not  become  the  first-fruits  of 
them  that  slept?  "  All  their  labour  \»ould  have  been  in  vain  and  their  duty  lost. 
{HoudUst.)  Baptism  for  the  dead  : — I.  Many  com.mentators  have  declined  to 
accept  these  words  in  their  obvious  sense.  Here  are  some  of  their  interpreta- 
tions :  "What  shall  they  gain  who  are  baptized  only  to  die?"  "What  shall 
they  gain  who  are  baptized  when  dying,  as  a  sign  that  their  dead  bodies  shnll  be 
rais-  d  ?  "  "  W" hat  shall  they  gain  who  are  baptized  for  the  removal  of  their  dead 
works?"  "What  shall  they  gain  who  are  bajjiized  into  the  death  of  Christ?" 
"  What  shall  they  gain  who  are  baptized  for  the  hope  of  the  resurrection  of  the 
dead?"  "What  shall  they  gain  who  are  baptized  into  the  place  of  the  dead 
martyrs  ?  "  "  Wh^t  shall  they  t;ain  who  are  baptized  into  the  name  of  the  dead  ?  " 
"  What  shall  they  gain  who  are  baptized  in  ot  der  to  convert  those  who  are  dead  ia 
sin?  "  "  Wbat  shall  tlieygain  who  are  baptized  over  the  graves  of  the  dead  ?  "  i.e., 
martyrs— a  custom  wbich  existed  in  the  pust-;ipostolic  Church.  "  What  shall  they 
gain  who  are  baptized  for  the  good  of  thr  Cliri^tiau  deaii  ?  "  i.e.,  to  accomplish  the 
ijumber  of  the  elect,  and  to  hasten  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  Taken  together,  these 
sound  like  a  series  of  ingenious  answers  to  a  conundrum,  no  one  of  which  is  the 
true  answer.  And  thus  they  read  us  a  most  impressive  homily  against  putting 
forced,  or  "  spiritual  "  meanings  on  the  piain  words  of  Scripture.  These  opposing 
constructions  of  St.  Paul's  words  refute  each  other,  and  warn  us  that  we  must 
abide  by  the  natural  and  obvious  sense  of  the  passage,  in  whatever  difficulties  it 
may  land  us.  Take  them  liierally  and  St.  Paul  says,  that  in  the  Corinthian 
Church  men  were  bajitized  for,  in  the  stead  of,  the  unbaptiztd   dead.     II.  We 

HAVE      many     historical     TRACES      OF     THE      CUSTOM     OF     BAPTIZING     FOR     THE     DEAD. 

Tertullian  and  Chr\s>stom  attest  that  it  existed  among  the  Marcionites  (a.d. 
130-150).  Epiphanius  relates  that  a  similar  custom  prevailed  among  the  Corin- 
thians, a  still  earlier  sect,  and  adds:  "Ti  ere  was  an  uncertain  tradition  handed 
down  that  it  was  also  to  be  found  among  some  heretics  in  Asia,  especially  in  Galatia, 
in  the  times  of  the  apostles."  St.  Chrysostoni  ^ives  us  a  graphic  picture  of  such  a 
baptism.  He  says  :  "  After  a  catechumen  was  dead,  they  hid  a  living  man  under 
the  bed  of  the  deceased  ;  then,  coming  to  the  bed  of  the  dead  man,  they  spake  to 
him  and  asked  whether  he  would  receive  baptis^m,  wnd  he  making  no  answer,  the 
other  rei^lied  in  his  stead,  and  so  they  baptized  the  living  for  the  dead."  Similar 
observances  have  obtained  in  all  ages.  The  Eebruarian  lustrations  for  the  dead 
are  familiar  to  all  readers  of  Ovid.  Tertullian  refers  to  them  as  very  much  on  a 
level  with  the  Corinthian  baptism  for  the  dead.  They  were  designed  to  contribute 
in  some  indefinite  way  to  the  welfare  and  happiness  of  the  Roman  dead.  With 
the  Jews,  if  any  man  died  in  a  state  of  ceremonial  uncleanness,  which  would  have 
required  ablution,  one  of  his  friends  perfurmed  the  ablution  ;  he  was  washed,  and 
the  dead  man  was  accounted  clean.  In  a  kindred  s[i  it  the  Patiistic  Church  once 
placed  the  eucharistical  elements  in  the  mouths  or  Lands  of  the  dead.  III.  Now 
A  custom  WHICH  HAS  OBTAINED  SO  WIDELY,  and  which  Still  livcs  virtually  in  the 
Eoman  "  masses  for  the  dead,"  must  have  had  some  humane  and  noble  motive. 
Nor,  I  think,  is  the  motive  far  to  seek.  Death  often  lends  new  life  to  love. 
When  we  have  lost  those  who  were  nearest  to  us,  we  long  to  do  something  to  prove 


CHAP.  XV.]  J.   CORINTHIANS.  469 

the  sincerity  of  our  love.  Suppose,  then,  that  in  Corinth  a  son,  who  had  often 
listened  to  the  Christian  preachers,  lost  the  fatlier  who  had  listened  with  him. 
Both,  let  us  assume,  have  been  impre-^sed  by  the  truth,  but  they  have  not  been 
drawn  by  it  into  the  Christian  fellowshii^.  The  father  dies  :  aud  now  the  son 
resolves  that  he  will  hesitate  no  longer.  He  will  put  on  Christ  l)y  baptism.  But 
the  dear  fdtlier  now  dea'1 — can  nothing  be  done  for  him?  He  might  have  been 
baptized  had  he  lived  a  littl-  longer  :  perliaps,  as  he  lay  a-dying,  he  lamented  that 
he  had  not  been  bolder.  Are  bis  good  intentions,  his  rejjrets,  to  come  to  nothing? 
May  not  his  sou's  baptism  be  in  some  sort  the  fatliei's  too  ?  Mny  not  the  son  say 
to  the  minister  of  the  Church,  "My  father  would  have  been  bapiized  had  he  livei* ; 
I  will  be  baptized  for  him  "  ?  If  he  did  say  that,  we  may  be  sure  the  minister 
would  respect  his  feeling;  possibly  he  might  even  share  it.  For  we  must  not 
forget  how  ignorant  the  Corinthians  were,  and  that  on  the  main  sacramental  and 
doctrinal  points.  And  if  vicarious  baptism  were  administered  by  any  one  teacher, 
if  those  were  admitted  to  baptism  who  were  moved  thereto  by  love  of  the  dead  as 
well  as  by  love  for  Christ,  we  can  easily  see  how  a  superstitious  custom  would 
soon  grow  up  in  the  Church.  IV.  Bitt  Paul  knew  this  to  be  a  mere  supersti- 
tion. Can  we  suppose  that  he  would  argue  from  it  without  condemning  it. 
1.  And  yet,  did  he  not,  in  becoming  all  thing-;  to  all  men,  that  he  might  save 
some,  often  accommodate  himself  to  the  views  and  feelings  of  those  whom  he 
addressed  when  he  could  not  share  them  ?  We  can  hardly  suppose  that  St. 
Paul  admired  the  allegorical  method  of  interpretation  which  was  so  dear  to  mHny 
of  the  Jews.  Yet,  in  speaking  or  in  writmg  to  men  who  used  this  method,  he 
often  adopted  it  (Gal.  iv.  21-31).  So  again,  as  he  passi-d  through  Athens,  he  saw 
an  altar  with  this  inscription,  "  To  tlie  Unknown  God."  The  Atheninns  meant 
only  some  god  whom  they  di<l  not  clearly  know,  who  might  well  consort  with  the 
crowd  of  divinities  in  their  Pantheon.  "  Him,"  s:iys  St.  Paul,  "  I  declare  unto 
you."  But  it  was  not  any  such  god  as  was  in  tbeir  thouglits,  but  the  only  wise 
and  true  God.  Here  again,  therefore,  he  was  accommodating  himself  to  views 
which  he  could  not  share;  he  appealed  to  the  polytheism  of  a  heathen  race  in 
order  to  set  forth  Jesus  as  the  Saviour  and  life  of  m"n.  So,  once  more,  when  he 
took  a  Jewish  vow,  and,  after  a  Jewish  custom,  shaved  his  head  at  Cenchrea  ;  or 
when  he  went  and  putified  himself  in  the  Temple,  or  when  he  caused  his  "son 
Timothy  "  to  be  circumcised,  he  became  as  a  Jew  that  he  might,  gain  the  Jews.  Is  it 
impossible,  then,  that,  in  persuading  the  Corinthians  of  a  resnriection,  he  should 
appeal  to  a  superstitious  custom  which  he  him-elf  did  not  apjjrove?  2.  Neveithe- 
less,  one  does  not  like  to  conceive  of  St.  Paul  as  doing  that.  The  least  we  should 
expect  of  him  is  that,  if  he  condescended  to  use  surh  an  argument  at  all,  he  would 
disconnect  himself  from  the  superstition  on  which  it  was  based,  and  hint  his 
disapproval  of  it.  And  this  much,  I  think,  he  does.  There  are  traces  of  his  tacit 
disapprobation  of  this  baptism  for  the  dead  even  in  our  English  version.  Mark 
the  tone  of  his  argnnient  before  and  aft^r  the  29th  verse,  and  you  will  see  how 
completely  he  identifies  himself  with  his  friends  at  Coiinth.  If  tlie  dead  rise  not, 
he  says  in  the  previous  verses,  oh?-  preaching  is  vain,  your  faith  is  vain,  &c.  It  is 
all  tof  and  you.  The  same  tone  dominates  the  subsequent  verses.  Contrast  with 
this  the  tone  of  ver.  29.  "  Else,"  i.e.,  if  the  dead  rise  not,  "  what  sliall  tJ^ci/  do 
who  are  baptized  for  the  dead?"  St.  Paul  no  longer  speaks  of  2ce  and  you,  but  of 
they  aud  them,  as  though  he  were  speaking  of  men  with  whom  neither  he  nor  his 
friends  were  in  perfect  sympathy.  And  this  change  of  tone  is  much  more  marked 
and  obvious  in  the  Greek.  To  give  effect  to  his  change  of  tone  and  the  niceties 
of  his  grammar,  we  may  paraphrase  his  question  thus :  "  What  will  become  of 
those,"  or,  "  What  good  account  of  themselves  can  tlieu  give,  who  are  in  the  habit 
of  being  baptized  fur  the  dead,  if  the  dead  rise  not  ?  The  very  ground  and  motive 
of  their  custom  is  cut  from  under  their  feet  by  a  denial  of  the  resurrection,  and 
therefore  they,  of  all  men,  should  be  the  very  last  to  deny  it."  V.  Note  one  of 
the  grave  moral  questions  the  subject  suggests.  I  have  spoken  of  the 
humane  and  universal  feeling  in  which  this  vicarious  baptism  probably  had  its 
rise  and  strength.  We  have  lost  those  who  were  dour  to  us,  and  if  we  have  hope  for 
all  our  dead,  we  can  synjpathise  with  the  anguish  of  those  who  have  no  hope.  We 
can  see  that  if  fears  for  their  eternal  welfare  had  been  added  to  our  sorrow  at  the 
loss  of  those  who  were  very  dear  to  us,  that  added  burden  would  have  been  enough 
to  break  our  hearts.  And  the  question  I  would  fain  suggest  is — Are  your  children 
to  long,  when  you  are  taken  from  them,  that  they  could  be  baptized  for  the  dead? 
If  only  because  you  love  those  who  will  be  after  you,  and  would  save  them  from. 


470  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xv., 

vain  longings  and  inconsolable  regrets,  it  will  be  well  for  you  to  consider  this- 
question,  and  to  act  out  your  answer  to  it  without  delay.  [S.  Cox,  D.D.) 
Baptism  for  the  dead  : — I.  The  connection  of  the  passage.  It  is  connected  with 
ver.  20,  the  intervening  verses  being  a  parenthesis.  Paul  has  been  speaking  of 
the  vanity  of  the  Christian  life  apart  from  the  resurrection  (vers.  19,  20),  and 
then  after  a  digression  on  the  order  of  the  resurrection,  suggeeted  by  the  word 
"first-fruits,"  he  resumes  his  argLinient.  "Else,"  if  Christ  be  not  risen,  "what 
shall  they  do  that  are  baptized  for  the  dead?"  But  whilst  the  pa-sage  is  thus 
disconnected  from  what  precedes,  it  is  directly  connected  with  what  follows- 
(ver.  30).  If  Christ  be  not  risen,  what  is  the  use  of  our  enduring  sufferings  for  our 
faith  in  Him  ?  II.  The  apostle's  train  of  thought.  1.  His  chief  argument  is 
that  derived  from  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  "  If  there  be  no  resurrection  of  the 
dead,  then  is  not  Christ  risen,"  consequently  "  your  faith  is  vain,  ye  are  yet  in  your 
sins,"  and  in  testifying  to  it  "we  are  found  false  witnesses."  But  we  have  the 
most  convincing  proofs,  from  numerous  and  unquestionable  witnesses,  of  Christ's 
resurrection,  which  is  a  proof  and  pledge  of  ours.  2.  If  there  be  no  resurrection, 
then  dead  believers  are  annihilated  (ver.  18),  and  their  Christianity,  as  it  is 
inseparably  connected  with  suffering,  has  augmented  the  misery  of  human 
existence  (ver.  19).  But  this  is  a  consequence  that  cannot  be  admitted  (ver.  20). 
3.  And  analogoiTs  to  this  the  apostle  argues  that  if  there  be  no  resurrection,  all 
the  trials  of  believers  ate  useless ;  not  the  practice  of  the  Christians,  but  that  of 
the  Epicureans,  is  reasonable  (vers.  30-33).  Now  it  is  evident  that  it  is  to  this  argu- 
ment that  the  text  belongs;  therefore,  baptism  for  the  dead  must  be  connected  with' 
the  sufferings  of  believers.  III.  The  text  therefore  means  baptism  to  fill  the  place 
OF  the  dead.  1.  The  a}iostle  represents  one  set  of  Curistians  succeeding  another: 
when  their  ranks  were  thinned  by  death  others  rushed  in  to  supply  tbeir  place. 
But  why  so  if  there  be  no  resurrection?  Why  do  they  voluntarily  submit  to  like 
suifering  for  their  faith  ?  Such  an  interpretation  agrees  well  with  what  follows. 
And  what  a  noble  idea  does  this  give  of  Christians.  They  fill  up  the  ranks  and- 
fight  in  the  battle  in  which  their  comjianions  have  fallen.  And  what  a  touching 
scene  it  must  have  been  in  times  of  persecution  to  see  the  baptized,  like  soldiers, 
occupying  the  breach  which  death  had  made  in  their  ranks,  thus  verifying  the 
observation  that  "the  blood  of  the  martyrs  is  the  seed  of  the  Church."  2. 
This  interpretation  gives  us  a  striking  view  of  the  nature  of  baptism.  It 
unites  the  baptized  living  with  the  baptized  dead  ;  it  is  the  ceremony  for  our 
enrolment  into  the  great  army  of  the  living  God ;  it  ensures  the  perpetuity  of  the 
Church,  and  supplies  it  with  a  constant  succession  of  those  who  bear  the  name  of 
Jesus  ;  it  is  a  solemn  consecration  to  the  service  of  Christ,  and  imposes  ui)on  us 
the  duties  which  our  predecessors  performed,  and  enables  us  to  look  forward  to 
those    rewards   which    they  now   enjoy.      (P.  J.  Gloafi,  D.D.)  Baptized   for 

the  dead: — The  words,  "baptized  for  the  dead,"  do  not,  either  necessarily 
or  naturally,  imply  (in  the  original)  a  vicarious  baptism:  the  "for"  is  "in 
behalf  of,"  rather  than  "  instead  of" — at  the  utmost  "for  the  benefit  of,"  whatever 
sense  may  be  given  to  it — as  champions  or  advocates,  rather  than  as  proxies  or 
substitutes.  I.  St.  Paul  speaks  (we  venture  to  think)  not  of  a  caiuice,  iind  not  of 
a  superstition — not  of  a  local  custom,  not  of  a  human  invention,  not  of  a  pious 
fancy,  and  not  of  a  morbid  and  perilous  addition  to  the  faith  and  rule  of  the 
Churches  :  he  speaks,  we  believe,  of  the  ordinance  of  baptism  as  the  risen  and 
departing  Saviour  instituted  it,  and  he  unfolds  to  us  here  in  brief,  as  elsewhere  in 
detail,  the  connection  of  that  ordinance  with  the  fouudation-fact  of  the  resurrec- 
tion. Every  Christian  baptism  is  a  baptism  for  tlie  dead.  Not  only  is  the 
resurrection  of  the  dead  one  of  the  articles  of  the  apostles'  creed  which  the  person 
to  be  baptized  professes  himself  to  believe — as  Chrysostoni  says,  commenting  upon 
this  passage,  "  When  we  are  about  to  bnptize,  we  bid  the  man  say,  '  1  believe  in 
the  resurrection  of  the  dead,'  and  after  this  confession  he  is  plunged  in  the  sacred 
fountain " — not  only  is  there  this  connection  between  the  sacrament  and  the 
doctrine — but  also,  as  the  same  great  writer  goes  on  to  explain,  the  very  immersion 
in,  and  emergence  from,  the  baptismal  waters,  is  a  symbol  of  the  burial  and  the 
resurrection  that  shall  be — it  is  an  insertion  into  the  Saviour  dead  and  risen,  it  is  the 
typical  foreacting  of  that  funeral  and  that  revival,  tlie  anticipation  of  which  is  the 
saint's  life,  the  lealisation  of  which  is  the  saint's  glory.  To  be  "baptized  for  the 
dead"  is  to  vindicate,  by  our  baptism,  the  sure  hope  of  the  dead — namely  (to  use 
again  St.  Paul's  words),  that,  as  we  believe  that  Christ  died  and  rose  again,  even 
BO  "them  also  which  have  been  laid  to  sleep  through  Jesus  shall  God  bring  with 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  -  47J 


Him."  If  there  is  no  such  hope — "  if  tlie  dpal  rise  not  at,  all  " — what  shall  they 
do,  which  way  shall  they  turn  themselves,  who  have  beau  subjected,  on  becoming 
6elievers,  to  that  Christian  baptism,  which  is,  being  interp.etecl,  tlie  assertion  of  the 
right  of  the  dead,  not  only  to  immortality  in  a  world  of  spirits,  but,  definitely  and 
specifically,  to  a  resurrection  of  the  body  ?  "  Why,"  he  adds,  "  if  there  be  no  such 
hope,  are  the  generations  of  the  faithful  thus  '  baptized  for  the  dead  '  ?  "  II.  Tlie 
saying  opens  to  us  a  new  region  of  duty.  We  are  apt  to  imagine  that  death 
breaks  all  ties.  Certainly  it  breaks  some.  Ties  of  office — ties  of  courtesy — ties  of 
parentage  and  wedlock — death  breaks  these — as  to  their  form.  But  not  even  these, 
surely,  as  to  their  substance.  What  shall  we  say  of  the  son  whose  heart  does  not 
burn  within  him  at  the  slighting  mention  of  a  dead  father — what  shall  we  say  of 
the  patriot  who  has  no  sense  of  shame  at  the  ridicule  of  a  great  statesman  departed, 
or  of  the  subject  who  is  capable  of  no  resentment  when  he  reads  some  cowardly 
outrage  upon  the  memory  of  a  dead  sovereign  ?  Yes — "  cowardly  "  I  call  it,  if  it 
concerns  the  dead.  The  characters  of  the  dead  are  the  heirlooms  of  the  living. 
To  disparage  a  dead  man  is  like  injuring  a  ciiild  or  insulting  a  woman.  If  you 
must  calumniate  the  departed,  begin  on  the  day  of  the  funeral — while  at  least 
there  may  be  some  one  to  answer  you — son,  brother,  friend — some  one  to  call  you 
to  the  reckoning — some  one  to  challenge  you  to  the  proof.  These,  indeed,  are 
more  or  less  personal  matters.  They  affect  but  a  few — generallv  the  more  famous, 
the  more  illustrious,  of  mankind.  But  St.  Paul  tells  us  that  there  is  an  honour, 
and  by  consequence  a  dishonour,  which  may  be  done  to  all  the  dead.  There  is  a 
way  in  which  we  can  disparage,  or  in  which  we  can  vindicate  them,  as  a  class. 
We  may  be  baptized  for  them.  And  when  he  explains  himself  he  says.  We  may 
either  assert  for  them,  or  doubt  for  them,  or  deny  to  them,  a  resurrectidu — which 
is,  in  other  words,  an  immortality  of  complete  being.  Let  us  not  forget  that  we 
ourselves  shall  soon  have  gone  across  from  this  world  to  that.  "  Baptized  fc.r  the 
dead  ?  "  then,  baptized  for  ourselves.  Let  us  cling  now  to  that  Easier  which  shall 
be  our  all  then  !  1.  Let  us  thank  God  for  the  gospel.  The  gospel  is  true  or  not 
true — but  at  least  it  is  clearly  defined  and  very  simple.  Christ  died  for  our  sins, 
and  was  buried,  and  the  third  day  rose.  In  Him  we  live — He  is  the  Ilesurrection 
and  the  Life.  Let  us  settle  these  matters.  To  live  in  suspense  about  Jesus  Christ 
is  to  live  in  a  trance,  incapable  of  true  speech  or  true  action.  Settle  that  question 
— and  let  it  settle  all  else.  I  can  recognise, no  plea  for  waiting.  That  whicn  will 
be  true  at  your  death  is  true  to-day.  If  true,  it  involves  duties.  Amongst  oiheis 
—and  of  that  the  text  speaks— 2.  A  duty  towarJs  the  departed.  How  often  have 
we  turned  back  from  the  open  grave,  as  from  a  closed  book  or  a  career  ended! 
Anxieties  we  have  silenced  by  a  peradventure,  unuttered  but  tolerated,  that  all 
may  be  well  because  all  may  be  nothing.  Prayers  for  the  dead  are  un-ProtestMnt — the 
dead  are  in  the  hands  of  God.  Duties  to  the  dead  are  ended-  neglected  or  done,  they 
are  of  the  past.  Let  them  rest  in  peace.  Nay,  we  have  still  to  be  their 
champions.  We  have  still  to  think  of  them  as  being  and  to  be — as  members  of 
the  Church,  as  possessors  of  the  Spirit.  We  have  still  to  be  in  communion  with 
them — meeting  them  when  we  pray — meeting  them  when  we  worship — meeting 
them  when  we  communicate.  We  have  still  to  feel,  when  we  bring  a  little  child  to 
baptism,  we  are  standingup  for  the  dead.  We  are  asserting  the  resurrection  of 
the   body.       {Dean    I'aiighan.)  Baptism  for   the   dead  :— Just   as    Christ    died 

both  for  us  and  our  sins,  i.e.,  with  a  mind  bent  "  over  us,"  in  order  to 
our  redemption,  or  "  over  our  sins,"  with  an  eye  to  their  abolition  (see 
ver.  3),  even  so  catechumens  in  baptism  emerged  from  the  hallowed  streams 
with  their  thoughts  busy  about  or  intent  upon  the  dead,  not  as  particular  persons, 
but  as  a  general  class,  distinct  from  the  living  on  earth.  And  both  context 
and  circumstance  together  proclaim  that  the  ulterior  view  of  a  neophite's  mind, 
bending  over  the  long  roll  of  the  dead,  is  their  resurrection.  But  to  make  cer- 
tainty doubly  certain,  St.  Paul  adds,  "If  absolutely  not  raised  are  dead  men,  why 
do  persons  actually  receive  baptism  on  their  account?"  Between  the  death  of  the 
Duke  of  Wehington  and  his  public  funeral,  I  remember  a  lady,  pointing  to  some 
crape  near  her,  saying,  "  This  will  be  of  use  for  the  Duke  of  Wellington."  The 
text  came  immediately  to  my  mind  as  parallel  in  structure  to  the  sentence  uttered, 
which,  expanded  in  fall,  signified,  "  This  crape  will  be  of  use  for  me  to  wear  on 
the  day  of  Wellington's  funeral. "  {Canon  Evans.)  The  Church-icorld  : — Thei-e 
is  a  community  of  men  whose  principles,  spirit,  aim,  character,  and  destiny, 
distinguish  them  from  every  other  class  of  human  society.  The  text  pre- 
sents this   Church-world : — I.  As   thinned   by   death — "  the  dead."    The  great 


472  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

law  of  mortality  enters  this  realm.  The  intelligence,  virtues,  devotions,  and 
usefulness  of  this  Church-realm,  constitute  no  barrier  to  the  entrance  of  death.  But 
— 1.  He  appears  here  as  the  messenger  of  mercy — outside  as  the  officer  of  justice. 
2.  He  leaves  behind  him  here  consolation  for  the  suivivors,  but  outside  unmiti- 
gated sorrow.  II.  As  keplenished  by  conversion.  By  those  who  are  baptized 
for  the  dead  I  understand  those  who,  from  Pagun  darkness,  were  converted  by  the 
gospel,  and  were  admitted  into  the  visible  Church,  there  to  fill  up  the  place  of 
those  who,  by  martyrdom  or  otherwise,  had  been  called  away  by  death.  The  new 
convert  then  took  the  place  of  the  departed  saint.  No  sooner  is  one  Christian 
removed  from  his  station  than  another  is  raised  up  by  God  to  supply  the  loss.  As 
Joshua  succeeded  Moses,  Elisha  Elijah,  Eleazer  Aaron,  so  one  man  is  ever  raised 
in  the  Church  to  take  the  place  of  another.  This  succession  affords  a  lesson — 
1.  For  humility.  The  man  of  most  brilliant  talents,  distinguished  position,  and 
extensive  usefulness  in  the  Church,  has  nothing  whereof  to  flntter  himself ; 
however  important  he  may  be,  the  Church  can  do  without  him.  When  he  falls, 
others  are  ready  to  step  into  his  place,  and  to  be  baptized  for  the  dead.  2.  For 
encouragement.  God's  redemptive  plan  will  go  on,  whatever  happens  to 
individual  agents.  "  He  buries  His  workmen,  but  carries  on  His  work."  Let  us 
learn  to  trust  God  rather  than  His  most  distinguished  servants.  The  treasure  is 
only  in  earthern  vessels — vessels  that  must  crumble.  III.  As  living  in  hope. 
This  language  implies  that  the  hope  of  a  future  state,  of  a  resurrection,  was  a 
vital  thing  in  the  exj)erieiice  of  the  Church  ;  and  so  it  has  ever  been,  is,  and  will 
ever  be.  The  Church  lives  in  hope.  It  "  reckons  that  the  sufferings  of  the 
present  time  are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  glories  that  shall  be."  It  is 
"  waiting  for  the  adoption "  ;  it  is  "  looking  for  the  blessed  appearing,"  &c. 
Paul  does  not  mean,  however,  that  the  religion  of  Christ  is  of  no  service  to  man  if 
there  be  no  future  state.  Let  us  answer  his  two  questions.  1.  "What  shall  they 
do  ?  "  We  venture  to  reply,  not  renounce  religion,  but  continue  faithful  for  ever. 
Should  there  be  no  future.  Christian  virtue  is  good.  You  will  lose  nothing  by  it 
should  you  be  annihilated  :  you  will  not  feel  even  the  disappointment,  but  you  will 
gain  immensely  by  it,  even  in  the  present  life.  "  Godliness  is  profitable  unto  all 
things."  2.  "  Why  are  they  then  baptized  ?  "  We  answer,  because  the  claims  of 
religion  are  independent  of  the  future  state.  Were  there  no  heaven,  no  hell,  we 
should  be  bound  to  be  truthful,  honest,  benevolent,  God  loving,  &c.  (D.  Thomas, 
D.D.) 

Vers.  30-34.  And  why  stand  we  in  jeopardy  every  hour? — The  hourly 
jeopardy  :  the  daily  death : — We  have  now  reached  the  second  of  St.  Paul's 
argumenta  ad  hominem.  The  first  is  the  argument  for  the  resurrection  from  the 
baptism  of  the  dead.  The  second  is  the  argument  which  he  derives  from  his 
perils  and  sufferings.  Admit  that  his  hope  would  not  make  him  ashamed,  and  his 
career  was  noble  and  heroic  :  deny  it,  and  his  career  was  a  senseless  bravado. 
Good  trees  do  not  s^jring  from  evil  roots.  Devotion  to  truth,  a  charity  capable  of 
all  sacrifices — these  are  qualities  which  do  not  grow  out  of  a  lie,  or  faith  in  a  lie. 
That  cannot  be  a  lie  which  made  St.  Paul  so  true  and  great  a  man.  St.  Paul 
begins  by  asking,  "  If  the  dead  rise  not,  why  stand  we  in  jeopardy  evei'y  hour?" 
and  he  affirms,  "  I  die  daily  ''  (vers.  30,  31).  We  know  what  his  life  was  like.  I. 
The  apostle's  life  was  a  daily  death,  an  hourly  jeopardy.  1.  Elsewhere,  he 
furnishes  us  with  a  more  detailed  description,  and  thus  supplies  us  with  the  best 
commentary  on  these  words  (2  Cor.  xi.  23-28.)  But  mark  how  he  says  it  (ver.  31). 
Instead  of  "  I  protest,"  read,  "  I  swear  "  ;  for  St.  Paul  here  uses  a  common  Greek 
form  of  oath.  He  frequently  employs  the  most  solemn  adjurations.  Christ's 
"  Verily,  verily,"  is  an  oatli.  Nay,  tbe  Almighty  Himself  is  represented  as  swearing 
by  Himself  (Heb.  vi.  16-18 ;  Gen.  xxii.  16-18).  But  let  us  also  note  by  what  Paul 
swears — "  by  my  boast  of  you  which  I  have  in  Christ  Jesus."  The  Corinthians 
were  the  seal  of  his  apostlesbip.  His  very  oath,  therefore,  must  have  touched  their 
hearts,  and  have  predisposed  them  to  a  cordial  acceptance  of  that  which  he  was 
about  to  advance.  It  is,  indeed,  by  these  delicate  touches  of  a  most  tender  and 
loving  nature,  that  St.  PhuI  declares  himself  to  us  and  constrains  us  to  love  and 
admire  him.  2.  The  apostle  cites  one  special  instance  of  the  jeopardy  in  which  he 
always  stood  (ver.  22).  If  we  assume  that  St.  Paul  did  on  one  occasion  fight  with 
beasts  in  the  Ephesian  stadium,  his  argument  is  plain.  It  means  that  here  again 
he  was  a  mere  idiot  to  incur  deadly  peril,  if  he  were  teaching  a  lie.  But  this  is 
improbable.     Paul  was  a  Koman  citizen,  and  could  not  therefore  be  legally  con- 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  473 

Jemned  to  the  arena,  he  could  very  hardly  have  escaped  from  it  with  his  life.  In 
the  Acts,  moreover,  there  is  no  hint  of  any  such  conflict ;  nor  does  the  apostle 
ever  refer  to  one  in  any  catalogue  of  his  dangers.  On  all  these  grounds  we 
conclude  that  he  is  here  speaking  metaphorically,  viz.,  that  he  had  to  encounter 
men  as  brutish  and  fierce  as  wild  beasts.  Such  figures  of  speech  are  common  in 
all  ages  and  lands.  Heraclitns  expressly  calls  the  Epliesians  "beasts,"  using  the 
very  word  which  St.  Paul  employs.  And  no  one  who  reads  Acts  xix.  will  deny  the 
propriety  of  the  epithet.  The  multitude  rushed  into  the  theatre  lil<eaherd  of  bulls 
in  wild  stampede,  and,  like  bulls,  bellowed  some  one  thim;,  and  some  another  :  and 
then,  like  beasts  iiritated  by  a  red  rag,  as  soon  as  they  heard  that  Alexander  was 
a  Jew,  went  mad  with  rage,  more  like  beasts  that  want  discourse  of  rtr'ason  than 
rational  men.  As  St.  Paul  listened  to  their  din,  the  epithet  of  Heraditus  may  have 
occurred  to  him  and  have  fixed  itself  on  his  memory.  And  if  his  letters  to  the 
Corinthians  were  written  after  the  tumult  at  Ephesus,  he  may  here  allude  to  that 
confused  and  terrible  scene.  In  Ephesus,  as  elsewhere,  he  risked  all,  because  he 
believed  in  Christ  as  the  resurrection  and  the  life  (cf.  2  Cvy.  i.  8-10).     II.  To  b0n 

SUCH  A  RISK  DAILY  AND  HOUKLY,  St.  PaUL  AFFIRMS  TO  BE  IMPOSSIBLE    TO    MEN  WHO    DID 

NOT  BELIEVE  IN  A  FUTURE  LIFE  (ver.  32).  1.  Tliose  who  believc  that  dead  men  are 
not  raised  have  as  their  motto,  "Let  us  eat  and  drink,  for  to-morrow  we  die," 
which  the  apostle  cites  from  (Isaiah  xxii.  13).  Yet  it  is  curious  to  note  that  at 
Anchiale  in  Cilicia  (the  apostle  being  of  Tarsus  in  Cilicia)  there  was  a  statue  wiih 
this  inscription  :  "  Sardanapalus,  the  son  of  Anacyndraxes  (Sennacherib),  built 
Anchiale  and  Tarsus  in  one  day.  Stranger,  eat,  drink,  and  play,  for  all  the  rest  is 
not  worth  this  " — this  being  a  fillip  which  the  fingers  of  tlie  statue  were  in  the  act 
of  giving.  In  the  prophet  it  has  a  special  historical  reference.  Jerusahm  was 
besieged  by  the  Babylonians.  The  slain  lay  unburied  in  its  streets.  Dearth 
preyed  on  the  living.  By  all  these  calamites  God  was  calling  His  people  to 
repentance.  Instead  of  responding  and  waxing  desperate  with  despair,  they  gave 
themselves  to  reckless  mirth  and  revelry,  crying,  "Lft  us  eat  and  drink,  for  to- 
morrow we  die."  It  is  this  outcry  of  desperate  ghastly  mirth — which  has  been 
heard  in  Athens,  in  Florence,  in  London,  in  Paris,  as  well  as  in  Jerusalem — which 
St.  Paul  quotes,  which  he  puts  into  the  mouth  of  those  who  deny  a  resurrection. 
To  them,  human  life  is  a  mere  siege.  The  hosts  of  death  are  encamped  agiiinst  it. 
The  fatal  assault  may  be  delivered  at  any  moment.  Wljy  should  they  restrain 
their  appetites  ?  Why  deny  themselves  to-day  for  a  to-morrow  that  may  never 
dawn?  Why  desire  a  morrow  which  brings  no  hope  with  it?  Batter  eat  and 
drink,  and  snatch  what  little  pleasure  may  be  had  !  (rf.  Wisdom  of  Solomon 
ii.  1-9).  2.  This  was  the  tone  taken  in  the  apostle's  time  by  the  degenerate 
Epicurean  school.  It  was  the  prevalent  tone  of  the  empire.  In  Corinth  the 
ghastly  revel  was  at  its  height.  3.  Hence  it  is  that  St.  Paul,  when  writing  to  thf* 
Corinthians,  lays  such  emphasis  on  the  resurrection.  If  he  can  help  it,  he  will  not 
so  much  as  have  them  listen  to  those  who  jest  about  the  future  life,  or  deny  it,  or 
urge  them  to  riot  and  excess  because  they  must  soon  perish.  Th^y  may  think 
there  can  be  no  great  harm  in  hearing  what  these  sccffers  have  to  say.  "  There  is 
harm  in  it,"  replies  St.  Paul.  One  of  your  own  poets  long  since  said,  "  Vile 
speeches  honest  customs  do  corrupt."  And  if  you  listen  to  the  Epicuvfan  speeches 
which  are  rife  about  you,  your  habits  of  thought  and  life  will  degenerate.  And  we 
have  not  outgrown  the  need  of  this  proverb.  I  have  known  men  listen  com- 
placently to  jests  against  good  morals  or  religious  truths,  although  they  themselves 
condemn  irreligion  and  immorality.  Their  excuse  is  that  it  is  "  only  a  jest,"  that 
"  words  break  no  bones,"  that  "  a  little  freedom  of  speech  does  no  harm."  The  wise 
Greek  poet  was  not  of  their  mind;  nor  was  the  holy  ap  stle.  4.  From  the  words  with 
which  St.  Paul  closes  this  paragraph  (ver.  34)  there  is  reason  to  fear  that  the  good 
Christian  customs  of  some  of  the  Corinthians  had  suffered  from  the  vile  speeches  of 
the  heathen.  "  Wake  up  from  your  orgies,"  he  exclaims.  Their  only  hope  lay 
in  rousing  themselves  to  righteousness.  They  would  come  to  "the  knowUdgeof 
God  "  as  they  set  themselves  to  do  His  will.  They  would  learn  that  there  was 
a  resurrection  unto  life  as  they  ordered  their  present  life  wisely,  holily,  and  in  the 
fear  of  God.  Conclusion  :  Of  the  many  points  of  interest  incidentally  suggested  by 
these  verses,  none,  perhaps,  is  more  pertinent  to  the  present  time  than  St.  Paul's 
use  of  the  Greek  poets ;  for  there  are  still  good  people  who  object  to  the  intro- 
duction of  what  they  call  secular  topics  into  religious  discussions  or  exhortations, 
and  object  to  a  classical  curriculum  for  students  destined  for  the  Christian  ministry, 
and,  therefore,  it  may  be  well  to  ask  them  to  consider  the  example  of  St.  Paul. 


474  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

Here,  if  he  quotes  from  a  Hebrew  prophet,  he  also  quotes  from  a  Greek  poet ;  and 
it  would  be  hard  to  deny  that  the  same  spirit  which  moved  him  to  cite  Isaiah  also- 
moved  him  to  cite  Menander  (see  also  his  quotation  from  Aratus  and  Kleanthes 
in  Acts  xvii.  28,  and  from  Epimenides  in  Titus  ii.  12).  The  probability  is,  that  he 
had  studied  the  Greek  poets  only  less  earnesily  than  the  Hebrew  prophets.  His 
use  of  them  sanctions  our  use  of  them.  There  is  also  abundant  proof  that  the 
apostle  was  as  familiar  with  the  Greek  philosophy  as  with  Greek  poetry  :  we  cannot 
so  much  as  gather  his  meaning  in  many  parts  of  his  Epistles  to  the  Ephesians, 
Colossians,  Philippians,  &c.,  except  as  we  acquaint  ourselves  with  the  themes  and 
terms  of  Hellenic  speculation.  This  is  a  sufficient  proof  that  secular  learning  is 
lawful  and  desirable  in  those  who  handle  "  the  things  of  the  Spirit "  ;  that  this,  like 
all  other  gifts  or  accomplishments,  may  be  and  ought  to  be  devoted  to  the  service  of 
God  and  of  His  Christ.     (S.  Cox,  D.D.) 

Ver.  31.  I  protest  ...  I  die  daily. — I  die  daily : — I.  Inevitably — by  the 
natural  decay  of  nature.  II.  Vqluntaeily — by  self-mortification.  III.  Experi- 
mentally— by  a  growing  indifference  to  the  world.  IV.  Believingly — in  hope  of  a 
better  life.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  I  die  daily  : — 1.  Deposit  my  soul  in  Clirist's  hands. 
2.  Kesign  the  interests  of  earth.  3.  Cultivate  a  closer  communication  with  another 
world.  4.  Realise  death  as  the  means  of  attaining  my  wishes.  5.  Subdue  the 
corruptions  of  nature.  {Ibid.)  Dying  daily  : — 1.  In  a  certain  sense  we  all  do 
this.  The  very  moment  we  begin  to  live  we  commence  to  die.  The  whole  of  our 
life  is  like  an  ebbing  tide.  2.  Of  some  also  this  may  be  affirmed  in  a  very  painful 
and  unhappy  sense.  They  die  daily  because  they  feel  a  thousand  deaths  in  fearing 
one.  *'  Through  fear  of  death  they  are  all  their  lifetime  subject  to  bondage." 
They  are  afraid  to  die,  and  yet  are  so  fascinated  by  death  that  they  cannot  take 
their  eyes  from  off  it.  3.  Paul  used  this  expression  in  an  heroic  sense  ;  every  day 
he  deliberately  put  his  life  in  jeopardy  for  the  cause  of  Jesus  Christ.  In  these 
more  silken  days,  we  cannot  run  sucli  serious  risks.  We  know  professors  who- 
cannot  imperil  their  business  or  venture  the  breaking  of  some  fond  connection  for 
the  sake  of  Christ.  Alas  !  many  are  ashamed  of  Jesus.  4.  Our  text  we  shall  now 
take  in  a  practical  spiritiiHl  sense.  Note — I.  Some  previous  necessaries  for  the 
PRACTICE  OF  THIS  ART.  The  Christian— 1.  Must  be  willing  to  die ;  for  if  he  shall 
shrink  at  death,  and  covet  life,  it  will  be  a  miserable  necessity  to  him  that  he  will 
have  to  die  one  day.  In  order  that  a  man  should  be  willing  to  die  daily  he  must  be 
a  saved  man,  and  know  it.  2.  Must  be  even  desirous  of  depaiture,  and  cheered 
with  the  hope  of  the  better  land.  To  an  ungodly  man,  to  die  can  never  be  a  thing 
to  be  desired,  for  what  remaineth  to  him  after  deatli  ?  But  to  the  believer  death  is 
gain.  3.  Should  have  a  good  understanding,  and  a  clear  knowledge  as  to  what 
death  really  is,  and  what  are  the  matters  that  follow  upon  it.  What  is  it  to  die? 
Is  it  to  cease  to  be  ?  Is  it  to  part  with  every  comfort  ?  If  so,  we  might  indeed  be 
excused  if  we  shut  our  eyes  to  the  dreary  prospect.  To  die  is  nothing,  but  to  be 
at  once  with  Jesus  in  paradise.  II.  Wherein  it  consists.  1.  To  consider  every 
day  the  certainty  of  death.  We  are  but  strangers  and  sojourners ;  we  are  only 
right  when  we  act  as  such.  The  Lord  knowing  that  we  should  try  to  shake  off  the 
remembrance  of  death,  has  so  helped  us  as  almost  to  force  us  to  it ;  by — (1)  The 
frequent  departures  of  others.  God  rings  the  funeral  knell  in  our  ears,  and  bids  us 
remember  that  the  bell  may  next  toll  for  us.  (2)  The  course  of  nature.  Look  at 
the  year  travelling  from  spring  to  \\  inter,  and  the  day  from  morning  to  night. 
Every  flower  blooms  that  it  may  wither.  (3)  The  premonitions  of  death  in  our- 
selves. What  is  that  grey  hair  but  the  foretoken  of  the  coming  winter  which  shall 
freeze  the  life  current  ?  What  are  those  aches  and  pains,  that  decay  of  the  eye- 
sight, that  dulness  of  hearing,  those  tottering  knees?  Don't  avoid  these  thoughts 
because  they  seem  sombre  ;  familiarise  yourself  a  little  with  the  grey  tints  of 
death,  and  they  will  brighten  before  your  eyes.  2.  To  put  your  soul,  by  faith, 
through  the  whole  process  of  death.  Anticipate  the  final  stroke,  the  upward 
mounting,  the  eternal  beatific  vision.  3.  To  hold  this  world  with  a  very  loose  hand. 
Birdlime  so  much  abounds.  When  a  man  wins  a  little  gain  it  sticks  to  hiru.  Our 
dear  friends  and  children  are  all  strong  chains,  binding  our  eagle-souls  to  the 
rock  of  earth.  "Ah,"  said  one,  as  he  was  shown  a  rich  man's  ample  house  and 
luxuriant  gardens,  "  these  are  the  things  that  make  it  hard  to  die."  Our  bereave- 
ments would  not  be  half  so  sharp  if  we  always  viewed  our  friends  as  being  lent  to 
us.  A  man  does  not  cry  when  he  has  to  return  a  tool  which  he  has  borrowed. 
Rejoice  to  say,  "  The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away,"  &c.    4.  To  test 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  47.& 

our  hope  and  experience  every  day.  Alas  I  for  that  evil  habit  of  taking  our  religion- 
for  granted.  Each  day  examine  yourself  whether  you  be  in  the  faith.  The  man' 
who  is  in  a  sound  business  does  not  object  to  overhaul  his  stock  and  examine  his> 
books  ;  but  the  man  to  whom  bankruptcy  is  imminent  generally  seeks  to  shut  hi& 
eyes  to  his  actual  position.  5.  To  come  every  day,  just  as  you  did  at  conversion, 
to  the  Cross  of  Christ ;  and  if  you  fan  always  live  as  a  lost  siimer  saved  wholly  by 
a  precious  Saviour,  you  are  then  fit  to  live  and  fit  to  die.  6.  To  take  care  to  be 
always  in  such  a  place  and  state  that  we  should  not  be  ashamed  to  die  therein. 
Hence,  the  believer  has  no  licence  to  be  found  in  places  of  ungodly  amusement. 
The  Christian,  also,  should  never  be  in  a  state  of  temper  in  which  he  would  be 
ashamed  to  die.  7.  To  have  all  our  affairs  in  such  a  condition  that  we  are  ready  to 
die.  (1)  Wbitefield  would  not  go  to  bed  until  everything  was  in  order,  for  he  said, 
"  I  should  not  like  to  die  with  a  pair  of  gloves  out  of  place  "  ;  and  yet  I  know  some 
believers  who  have  not  made  their  wills,  and  if  they  were  to  die  to-day  a  wile  whom 
they  love  so  well  might  be  put  to  serious  suffering.  (2)  So  should  it  be  with  all 
our  acts  towards  God.  Some  of  you  have  not  yet  iulfilled  the  Master's  command 
■with  rcK'ard  to  baptism.  Some  of  you  have  unconverted  children,  and  you  have 
not  spoken  to  them  about  their  souls.  III.  Its  phactical  benefit.  1.  It  will  help 
us  to  live  well.  We  should  not  be  covetous  and  grasping  if  we  knew  that  the  heap 
would  soon  melt  or  we  should  be  taken  from  it.  We  siiould  not  attach  so  much 
importance  to  trifles,  if  we  felt  that  there  were  grander  things  close  at  our  heels.  If 
we  saw  our  candle  flickering  in  its  socket,  we  should  be  far  more  diligent.  2.  It 
will  he  Ip  us  to  die.  No  man  would  find  it  difficult  to  die  who  died  every  day.  He 
would  have  practised  it  so  often,  that  he  would  otdy  have  to  die  but  once  more. 
3.  The  benefits  of  dying  daily  are  commensurate — (1)  With  the  whole  period  of 
human  existence.  You  young  people  would  not  be  likely  to  plunge  into  youthful 
gaieties  to  your  own  damage,  if  you  felt  that  you  might  die  young.  You  men  of 
middle  age,  how  it  would  check  you  in  that  hasting  to  be  rich,  if  you  felt  that  you 
must  soon  be  parted  from  it !  And  you  who  totter  on  a  staff,  nothing  will  ke-  p  you 
in  holier  or  happier  frame  than  to  be  always  dying  the  death  of  Jesus  that  you 
might  live  His  life.  (2)  With  every  position.  Is  a  Christian  rich?  he  will  not  be 
purse-proud.  Is  he  poor?  He  will  not  murmur,  for  he  recollects  the  streets  of 
gold.  If  he  is  seeking  after  knowledge,  he  will  mingle  with  it  the  knowledge  of 
Christ  crucified.  If  he  be  toiling  for  a  livelihood,  he  will  seek  first  the  kingdom  of 
God  and  His  righteousness.  Make  a  beh'ever  a  king  or  a  pauper,  and  the  art  of 
dving  daily  will  help  him  in  either  position.  Put  him  under  every  temptation,  and 
this  will  help  him,  for  he  will  not  be  tempted  by  the  offers  of  so  brief  a  happiness. 
Daily  dying  is  as  useful  to  the  saint  in  his  joys  as  in  his  griefs,  in  his  exaltations 
as   in   iris   depressions.      (C.   //.   Spurgeon.)  The    Christian's   dutx)    of  dyin(j 

daily : — I.  Show  you  what  the  duty  is.  To  die  once  is  a  lot  appointed  for 
all ;  to  die  daily  is  a  duty  practised,  a  blessing  obtained  by  few  ;  most  live 
as  if  they  were  never  to  die  ;  because  the  day  is  evil,  they  put  it  far  from 
them.  1.  To  die  daily  is  to  set  death  always  before  us  as  a  change  which 
"  will  one  dsiy  certainly  come."  2.  It  is  to  be  ready  to  meet  death,  as  a  change 
which  may  suddenly  come.  3.  To  die  daily  is  tn  Wiiit  for  our  change,  as  what  we 
desire,  were  it  God's  will,  should  come  spf  edily  (Phil.  i.  23).  4.  To  die  daily  is  ta 
resign  our  souls  solemnly  into  our  Eedeemer's  hands,  as  those  who  know  not 
whether  they  have  another  day  to  live.  To  leave  them  with  His  faithfulness,  love 
and  care,  who  hath  said, «'  I  will  not  fail  thee,  nor  forsake  thee."  II.  Why  ahe  we 
TO  BE  FOUND  IN  THE  CONSTANT  PRACTICE  OF  IT  ?  1.  Tliis  redounds  greatly  to  Ihe 
glory  of  God.  He  is  honoured  by  a  lively  frame  and  an  upright  walk.  For  the 
sons  of  God,  and  of  glory,  to  live  wholly  strangers  to  death,  or  to  be  afraid  of  it ; 
how  does  this  sully  their  character  and  shame  their  profession  !  2.  It  makes  much 
for  the  establishment  and  consolation  of  other  Christians.  It  greatly  saddens  the 
hearts  of  younger  Christians  to  hear  those  that  are  going  off  the  stage  of  life 
mourning  and  complaining,  as  if  they  were  wholly  in  suspense  as  to  their  eternal 
state.  Sure,  were  you  to  converse  more  with  God,  you  would  sjDeak  more  for  Hirn. 
What  though  your  hopes  for  ihe  present  fail,  the  God  of  your  hopes  lives.  3.  This 
is  a  frame  which  is  highly  beneficial  to  our  souls.     III.  How  does  the  regular 

PRACTICE    OP    THIS   DUTY  REDOUND    TO    THE    COMFORT    OF    OUR    OWN    SOULS   WHEN   DEATH 

REALLY  COMES?  1.  They  that  die  daily  die  comfortably,  because  by  this  means 
we  make  death  familiar  to  us,  and  those  we  are  well  acquainted  with  we  are  but 
little  afraid  of.  2.  Dying  daily  has  a  farther  influence  upon  our  comforts,  because 
hereby  we  are  "weaned  from  the  world,"  and  all  worldly  enjoyments,  and  those 


476  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  sv. 

things  which  we  are  weary  of  we  are  glad  to  leave  behind  us.  3.  By  dying  daily 
our  "  accounts  are  clearly  stated"  between  God  and  us;  and  what  condemnation 
have  we  then  to  fear?  4.  By  dying  daily  we  learn  to  look  beyond  death  while  we 
are  looking  at  it ;  and  all  is  peace  and  joy  there  for  ever  and  ever.  I  shall  now 
close  all  with  a  few  remarks.  1.  How  dreadful  is  it  for  tbem  to  think  of  dying 
who  have  not  as  yet  begun  to  live.  2.  The  truest  wisdom  is  to  be  prepared  acainst 
the  greatest  danger  ;  our  everlasting  all  depends  upon  our  dying  well.  3.  Unless 
we  know  Christ  savingly  we  can  neither  die  daily  nor  die  comfortably.  He  is  the 
Lord  our  righteousness,  and  our  strength.  4.  It  is  dangerous  living,  even  for  the 
Christian  himself,  without  keeping  his  dying  time  ever  in  view  ;  for  a  view  of  death 
is  the  greatest  bridle  upon  indwelling  sin,  next  to  an  immediate  grant  of  mortifying 
grace  from  above.  5.  Should  we  not  make  haste  with  our  living  work  when  we 
know  not  how  soon  our  living  time  may  cease  ?  6.  Learn  hence  the  excellency  and 
sweetness  of  tbe  Christian's  life.  Interest  m  Christ  makes  life  pleasant  and  death 
joyful.       (J.    Hill.)  Of  dying   daily: — 1.    We    must    die   while  we   live,   in 

order  that  we  may  live  when  we  die.  We  must  habitually  consider  ourselves 
as  mere  strangers  in  this  world,  who  are  on  pilgrimage  to  another.  Our 
mortal  life  mu>t  be  a  daily  death,  in  conformity  with  the  sufferings  of  Christ. 
2.  This  description  of  the  Christian's  life  on  earth  may  seem  to  some  repulsive. 
Kemember  this,  then,  that  in  the  language  of  Scripture  you  are  dead  already. 
When  born  into  the  world  you  were  dead  in  tre^^pas-es  and  sins ;  but  now  "  Ye  are 
dead,  and  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God."  We  are  thus  taught  to  look  upon 
ourselves  as  dead  to  this  world,  from  the  moment  we  are  brought  into  covenant 
with  God.  3.  But  since,  to  each  of  us  is  allotted  a  longer  or  shorter  period  of 
sojourning  therein,  our  condition  may  be  fairly  spoken  of  as  a  dying  daily — i.e., 
we  have  to  "crucify  the  old  man,"  those  corrupt  tempers  and  appetites  which 
remain  in  us  though  we  have  been  made  regenerate,  but  which  are  at  variance  with 
the  love  of  God.  And  this  can  only  be  done  by  a  process  slow  and  lingering,  like 
that  experienced  by  the  victim  on  the  cross.  We  cannot  cast  out  the  evil  spirit  at 
once  ;  all  we  can  do  is  to  struggle  with  it,  to  keep  every  entrance  by  which  it  could 
gain  admission  fast  and  closed.  We  cannot  destroy  the  noxious  plant  at  once,  but 
we  may  tear  off  each  bud  as  it  shoots  forth.  Yet,  as  all  this  is  an  anxious  and  a 
toilsome  process,  those  who  are  engaged  in  it  may  be  described  as  dying  daily. 
4.  Now,  it  is  not  to  be  denied  that  religion,  viewed  as  involving  a  continual 
struggle  with  our  natural  appetites,  has  something  unattractive  in  it ;  and  it  seems 
hard  at  first  to  understand  how  her  ways  can  be  ways  of  pleasantness,  and  that  all 
her  paths  are  peace.  But  the  question  for  persons  to  decide  is,  not  whether  they 
like  the  prospect  of  mortification  and  self-denial,  but  whether  it  is  not  far  preferable 
to  submit  to  any  amount  of  suffering  rather  than,  after  spending  a  few  short  years 
in  selfish  gratification,  to  pass  to  death  eternal  ?  It  is  hard  when  the  world 
invites,  to  renounce  it ;  when  Satan  allures,  to  resist  him ;  when  the  flesh  tempts, 
to  deny  it ;  but  if  these,  when  yielded  to,  will  keep  me  for  ever  from  God,  then 
I  will  fight  against  them  all  the  day  long,  and,  the  Lord  being  my  helper,  they  shall 
gain  no  mastery  over  me.  It  is  hard  to  mortify  the  members ;  to  say  to  the  eyes,  see 
not ;  to  the  ears,  hear  not ;  to  the  tongue,  taste  not ;  to  the  hands,  touch  not.  But 
if  these  things  place  my  soul  in  jeopardy,  I  will  rule  them  with  a  rod  of  iron.  It  is 
hard  to  submit  one's  own  will  to  God's,  but  it  were  harder  still  to  be  shut  out  from 
His  presence  for  ever.  4.  Application  :  The  first  step  towards  dying  daily  is  to 
establish  within  ourselves,  practically,  the  fteling  that  we  may  die  any  day. 
Another  step  is  to  learn  to  discipline  our  earthly  affections,  by  dwelling  upon  the 
thought  that,  though  relations  and  friends  are  blessinps  for  wliich  it  behoves  us  to 
be  very  thankful,  still  they  are  only  loans  lent  us  by  the  Lord.  And  ihe  same  rule 
which  applies  to  our  earthly  friends  mui-t  be  brought  to  bear  on  our  worldly 
possessions.  We  must  discipline  ourselves  to  part  with  them  by  voluntary 
privations  (chap,  vii.29,  30.)  (F.  E.  Paget,  31. A.)  Daily  dying: — There  is  a 
daily  dying  that  is — I.  Inevitable.  There  is  a  daily  dying  of — 1.  Our  corpoi'eal 
frame.  In  each  human  body  the  seed  of  death  is  implanted,  the  law  of  mortality 
is  at  work.  There  is  decay  with  evei-y  respiration  and  heart-throb.  The  water 
does  not  more  naturally  roll  towards  the  ocean,  or  a  falling  body  gravitate  towards 
the  centre  of  the  earth,  than  the  human  ftame  runs  every  moment  to  dissolution. 
This  fact  should  teach  us — (1)  That  worldly-uiindedness  is  an  infraction  of  reason. 
What  a  monstrous  absurdity  it  is  to  set  our  supreme  affections  upon  objects  from 
which  we  are  departing  every  moment !  No  anchor  can  stop  this  ship  of  destiny. 
All  "Life  Insurance  "  ofiices  recognise  and  act  upon  this  fact.    Everv  man's  life  is 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  477 

less  valuable  to-day  than  it  was  \psterclay.  (2)  That  sorrow  for  the  departed  should 
be  moderated.  Their  departure  was  but  obedience  to  the  resistless  Inw  of  their 
aature,  and  that  same  law  is  daily  bearing  us  whither  they  are  gone.  Why  battle 
with  dtstiny  ?  (3)  That  Christianity  is  an  invaluable  boon  to  mortals.  It  does  two 
things — it  teaches  us  that  there  is  a  future  world  of  blessedness,  and  points  us  the 
way  by  which  that  blessed  world  is  reached.  2.  Our  social  world.  We  live  not 
only  with  others  but  by  them.  But  the  social  circumstances  which  feed  our  life 
are  changing  every  day.  The  circle  of  the  nursery  in  which  we  once  lived  is  gone ; 
the  circle  of  the  school  and  other  circles  in  which  we  lived  have  broken  up  long  ago. 
3.  Our  mental  motivity.  The  motives  that  influence  us  to  action  are  elements  of 
life,  and  they  are  constantly  dying.  A  realised  pui-pose  has  lost  its  motivity.  Many 
of  the  loves,  hopes,  fears,  romances,  arubitions,  which  once  formed  much  of  oui* 
life,  have  been  buiied  long  ago  in  the  ever-widen'ng  cemetery  of  the  soul.  II. 
Optional.  Tliis  death  is  of  two  kinds.  1.  There  is  the  criminal.  In  the  depraved 
soul,  sensibility  of  conscience,  generosity  of  impulse,  elasticity  of  intellect,  freedom 
of  thought,  spirituality  of  feeling — the  sinner  is  constantly  murdering  these,  and 
their  blood  ciies  to  heaven  for  vengeance.  "To  be  carnally  minded  is  death." 
2.  There  is  the  virtuous.  The  highest  life  of  man  is  a  daily  dying  to  all  that  is 
mean,  false,  mercenary,  unspiritual,  and  uncharitable.  The  apostle  felt  this 
when  he  said,  "7,"  that  is  my  carnal  self,  "nm  crucified  with  Christ"; 
nevertheless,  "I,"  that  is  my  spiritual  self,  "  live,"  &c.,  &c.  {D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
On  the  utility  of  medilatlvg  on  death: — Such  meditation — I.  Teaches  us  to  value 
ALL  EARTHLY  THINGS  ARIGHT,  and  perpetually  corrects  the  fallacy  of  our  calculations 
by  reminding  us  of  the  period  to  which  they  apply  ;  it  discourages  those  schemes  of 
injustice  and  ambition,  the  fruits  of  which  are  distant,  by  reminding  us  that 
that  distance  we  may  never  reach.  II.  Improves  the  mind — 1.  By  destroying  in  it 
trifling  discontents,  and  by  blunting  the  force  of  all  the  malevolent  passions. 
Jealousy  and  hatred  cannot  coexist  with  the  prospect  of  the  last  hour.  It  diminishes 
the  importance  of  the  offence  we  have  suffered,  awakens  that  candour  which  self- 
love  bas  bet  to  sleep,  and  makes  us  think,  not  of  the  trilling  bcenes  which  are  past, 
but  of  the  awful  events  which  are  to  come.  2.  It  aggrandises  the  mind  as  the  near 
approach  of  death  itself  is  commonly  accustomed  to  do  ;  for  men  on  their  death  bed 
often  evince  an  heroism  of  which  thi  ir  lives  have  afforded  little  or  no  symptom, 
forgive  injuries  which  should  have  been  forgiven  years  before,  faults  which  should 
have  been  rectified  before  half  the  race  of  life  was  run,  confession  of  Christ  who 
had  been  denied  bef<ae  the  world.  The  distant  contemplation  of  death  leaves  us 
greater  time  lor  godly  actions — whatever  seeds  it  casts  into  the  mind  may  spring  up 
and  fructify.  III.  Induces  us  to  consider  by  what  means  we  shall  avert  its 
TERRORS.  Can  we  figure  to  ourselves  anything  more  dreadful  than  a  human  being 
at  the  brink  of  death  who  has  never  once  reflected  that  he  is  to  die?  Let  us,  then, 
in  youth  and  strength  gather  a  decent  firmnets  for  that  trial.  IV.  Opens  up  the 
PRosPEci'  OF  ETERNITY.  In  the  Contemplation  of  heaven  the  persecuted  man  figures 
to  himself  a  state  of  rest ;  the  poor,  an  exemption  from  want ;  the  i-ick,  health ;  the 
weak,  power  ;  the  ignorant,  knowledge  ;  the  timid,  safety  ;  the  mean,  glory ;  the 
parent  looks  for  his  lost  child  across  the  great  gulph,  and  the  widow  for  her  hus- 
band ;  the  soul  lifts  itself  up  to  the  great  Author  of  our  being  who  has  sanctified 
and  redeemed  us  by  the  blood  of  Christ.  V.  Teaches  us  ihat  the  evil  is  not 
wiiiiouT  I'js  REMEDY.  That  through  Christ  we  are  become  the  lords  of  death,  that 
the  mere  Sf-paration  of  matter  and  spirit  is  a  pang  of  so  short  a  moment  that  it  is 
hardly  a  rational  obji^ct  of  fear,  that  the  real  p^ng  is  the  remembrance  of  a  misspent 
life.  If  .■^ou  think  the  accumulation  of  such  thoughts  is  awful  take  care  that  they 
do  not  acv^^umulate.  Conclusion  :  Tlie  choice  is,  IShall  we  meditate  voluntarily  on 
death  as  a  religious  exercise,  or  shall  we  be  haunted  by  the  iniMge  of  death  as  a 
terrific  spectre?  Shall  we  gain  wisdom  by  meeting  the  danger,  or  shall  we,  like 
childrt-n,  be  bribed  by  the  tranquillity  of  a  moment  to  keep  it  ott' ?  The  image  of 
deatli  f  l!ows  the  man  who  fears  it,  it  rises  up  at  feas-ts  and  banquets;  no  melody 
can  soothe  it ;  it  is  undaunted  by  the  sceptre  or  the  crown.  All  men  suffer  from 
the  dread  of  death  ;  it  is  folly  to  hope  you  can  escape  it.  Our  business  is  to 
receive  the  image,  to  gaze  upon  it,  to  prepare  fur  it,  to  seek  it,  and  by 
these  means  to  disarm.     {Si/diiei/  Simtli.)  God's  gladiators  : — There  is  a  well 

known  pi  -lure  which  represents  a  band  of  gladiators  who  are  going  to  fight  in  the 
Roman  Amiihitheat'e  ;  with  shields  lifted  and  bowed  heads,  they  address  the 
Emperor  thus — ^' Ave  Ciesar  !  MorUvri  te  salutant"  (Kail  Csesa.r  \  we  are  going  to 
die,  salute  thee).     And  so  they  go  to  the  hard  fight  which  can  only  have  one  end- 


4f8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

iiig.  St.  Piiul  was  thinking  of  such  a  scene  (vers.  31,  32).  He  would  have  us 
.understand  that  we  are  all  God's  pladiators  sent  into  the  arena  of  this  world  to 
iight,  and  that  in  that  battle  we  must  turn  our  eyes  to  Christ,  and  ever  say,  "  Hail, 
iMaster  !  we  who  are  dying  daily,  salute  Thee."  I.  We  most  fight.  1.  Tnis  world 
is  one  long  battle  to  the  Christian.  It  is  the  coward  alone  who  yields  without  a 
struggle,  who  gives  himself  up  as  the  slave  of  sin.  (1)  Sometimes  God's  gladiators 
are  called  to  fight  with  wild  beasts  out  in  this  busy  world.  The  sins  and  tempta- 
tions of  socieiy,  the  evil  words  and  works  of  our  fellow-men  meet  us.  (2)  Some- 
times the  wild  beast  is  caged  within  ourselves.  It  may  be  the  lion  of  our  angry, 
cruel  temper,  or  of  a  proud  rebellious  spirit,  or  of  an  impure  desire,  or  of  a  faithless, 
discontented  thought.  2.  And  there  is  but  one  thing  for  us  to  do,  we  must  fight  or 
perish.  Some  of  the  hardest  battles  are  fought  by  our  bedside,  or  when  we  lie,  like 
tlie  sinful  woman,  prostrate  in  the  dust,  where  Jesus  wrote  His  words  of  pardon. 
H.  We  must  die.  1.  God's  gbidiators  can  only  come  out  of  the  battle  when  death 
sets  them  free ;  they  leave  their  bodies  scarred  by  many  a  wound,  to  rest  here  on 
the  batile-field  of  earth,  but  God's  angels  bear  their  spirits  to  paradise.  Every  day 
we  live  we  see  a  comrade  falling  in  the  ranks  of  battle,  but  still  the  Church  marches 
on  to  victory;  another  fills  his  place.  In  the  American  war  a  wounded  soldier 
heard  the  bugles  of  the  enemy  close  at  hand  ;  weak  as  he  was,  he  crawled  out  of  the 
ambulance,  and  seizing  a  rifle,  tried  to  march  to  the  front.  The  doctor  assured  him 
that  he  was  too  feeble,  and  that  the  exertion  would  kill  him.  "  If  I  must  die,"  said 
the  soldier,  "  I  would  rather  die  in  battle  than  in  an  ambulance."  2.  Happy  are 
God's  gladiators  who  die  fighting.  There  are  signs  and  tokens  all  around  to  show 
us  that  we  die  daily.  Read  the  dim  writing  of  old  letters,  look  at  your  book  of 
photographs,  turn  tenderly  to  the  dead  flowers  between  the  leaves  of  your  Bible,  or 
gaze  un  the  picture  which  childish  fingers  coloured,  what  do  they  say  to  us  ?  We 
understand  now  what  these  relics  say  to  us,  "  Behold,  we  die  daily."  The  vacant 
places  around  us  teach  us  that  our  place  will  one  day  know  us  no  more,  that  we, 
like  our  brethren,  shall  pass  to  the  land  which  has  never  been  surveyed,  and  the 
great  secret  which  is  between  God  and  His  creatures.  But  not  till  our  fight  is  over, 
and  our  work  finished,  "  man  is  immortal  till  his  work  is  done."     III.  We  must 

PVER    LOOK    UNTO    JeSUS,   WHO    WILL    RAISE    UP    FROM   THE   DEAD.       (H.  J.    IV.   BltXtOU.) 

Daily  dying: — We  die  daily.  We  are  constantly  returning  to  the  earth  the 
materials  we  received  from  it.  Every  movement  of  our  bodies,  every  exercise  of 
jthought  and  will,  every  muscular  and  nervous  effort,  is  accompanied  by  a  cot  re- 
sponding change  in  the  structure  of  our  frames — exhausts  the  vitality  of  so  much 
brain,  and  nerve,  and  muscle.  Every  part  of  our  body  is  undergoing  a  process  of 
disintegration  and  renovation;  constantly  throwing  off  old  effete  matter,  and  con- 
stantly receiving  depo-its  of  new  and  living  matter.  Day  and  night,  sleeping  and 
waking,  this  ceaseless  dying  and  ceaseless  resurrection  is  going  on  with  more  or  less 
rapiditv ;  the  river  of  life  flows  on  changi>ig  its  particles,  but  preserving  the  same 
form  and  appearance.  In  seven  years  the  whole  structure  is  altered  down  to  the 
minutest  paiticles.  It  becomes  essentially  a  different  body,  though  the  individunl 
still  retains  his  original  form  and  his  personal  identity  unimpaired.  (Scientific 
Illustrations  and  Synibuls.) 

.  Vers.  32.  If  after  the  manner  of  men  I  have  fougtit  witli  beasts  at  Ephesus,  what 
advantageth  it  me  if  the  dead  rise  not  ? — Beasts  at  E2yhesus  :  — Note  here — I.  A  low 
JUDGMENT  OF  HUMAN  NATURE.  1.  There  is  no  good  reason  for  taking  the  text  literally. 
Had  such  a  terrible  struggle  taken  place  it  would  have  been  recorded  in  the  Acts, 
and  often  referred  to  by  Paul  himself.  2.  By  wild  beasts  he  means  men,  gross  and 
Ravage  in  wickedness.  Heraclitus  called  the  Enhesians  6r)pia.  If  we  refer  to  Acts 
xix.  we  shall  find  that  certain  men  were  entitled  to  the  designation.  We  read  of 
them  "being  full  of  wrath,"  of  the  whole  city  "filled  with  confusion,"  of  some 
^'crying  out  one  thing  and  some  another."  They  seem  to  have  been  bereft  of 
reason  and  given  up  to  the  wildest  fury  of  passion.  3.  Paul  was  not  wlone  in 
classifying  such  men  with  beasts.  Tiie  Baptist  called  some  of  his  hearers  vipers, 
^nd  Christ  compared  such  men  to  swine.  The  Bible  speaks  of  wicked  men  in  two 
stages  lower  than  iiumanity.  (1)  The  sensual,  who  are  in  a  state  where  the  senses 
rule  the  soul,  where  the  animal  is  supreme.  Is  not  this  the  state  of  the  mass  of 
men?  The  great  question  is.  What  shall  we  eat,  what  shall  we  drink?  &c.  (2)  The 
devilish.  Men  have  the  power  of  getting  lower  than  the  beasts.  By  the  power  of 
^heir  imaginations  they  kindle  their  passions  into  a  diabidical  heat,  and,  by  bringing 
the  elements  of  nature  into  new  combinations,  they  generate  and  nourish  unnatural 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  479 

appetites.  II.  A  fierce  struggle  for  human  nature.  "  I  have  fought  with." 
Paul  fought  with  men  for  men.  1.  The  battle  was  inevitable  to  his  mission.  He 
was  the  messenger  of  trutlis  Ihat  struck  directly  at  their  prejudices,  their  habits, 
their  greed  (Acts  six.  27).  2.  The  battle  was  most  benevolent  on  his  part.  Love, 
not  anger,  was  its  inspiration.  He  fought  for  them  by  tiphting  against  their  pre- 
judices and  their  sins.  3.  The  battle  was  most  unequal  in  circumstances.  Numbers, 
authority,  influence,  wealth,  were  all  arrayed  against  one  penniless  foreigner.  In 
moral  battles  numbers  are  an  irierior  consideration.  One  man  in  truth  may  con- 
quer a  nation  in  error.  III.  A  great  problem  for  human  nature.  "What  advan- 
tageth  it  me  ?  "  &c.  The  apostle  does  not  say  either  that  there  would  be  no 
advantage  in  a  godly  struggle  for  truth  were  tiiere  no  future  life,  nor  that  such  a 
struggle  was  to  be  conducted  with  a  view  of  advantage.  He  puts  the  question  and 
leav.  s  it  to  be  answered.  Our  answer  will  be  that  on  the  assumption  that  there  is 
no  future  life,  godliness  will  be — 1.  Of  pliysical  advantage  to  man.  The  habits  of 
life  promoted  by  Christianity  are  conducive  to  bodily  health  and  longevity.  2.  Of 
mentiil  advantage  to  man.  It  generates  sentiments,  it  starts  trains  of  thoughts,  it 
awakens  hopes,  which  yield  to  the  mind  a  happiness  whiclr  nothing  else  on  <-aith 
■can  ait'oi'd.  If  Christianity  is  only  a  dream,  it  is  a  dream  from  which  we  would  not 
awalce.  3.  Of  social  advantaue  to  man.  Christianity  has  proved  itself  to  be  infi- 
nitely the  best  system  for  promoting  the  peace  of  families,  the  order  of  society,  the 
j)rosperity   of  nations.       {U.   Thomas,  D.D.)  Fighting   beasts  at  Ephesus  : — It 

would  be  greatly  to  the  satisfaction  of  our  curiosity  if  we  could  mention  exactly 
what  was  the  historic  form  of  this  trial.  And  there  is  an  interpretation  of  this 
passage  which  insists  that  Paul  was  once  compelled  to  fight  literally  with  wild 
beasts.  Indeed,  tradition  has  caught  up  the  story,  and  told  us  that  he  braved  the 
beasts  most  daunllessly  in  the  attack,  and,  while  the  audience  waited  to  see  liim 
torn  in  pieces,  he  suddenly  invoked  the  powerful  interposition  of  high  heaven  with 
a  wonderful  gesture  of  his  outstretched  hand.  The  suppliant  animals  refused  to  do 
him  harm.  Lions  came  cringing  to  his  feet,  and,  like  so  many  tame  dogs,  began 
licking  his  wounds  wl^ere  the  scourge  blows  had  broken  the  skin.  Now  we  have  in 
2  Cor.  a  complete  catalogue  of  Paul's  sufferings ;  but  fighting  in  the  arena  is  not 
among  them.  We  understand  tliis  text,  therefore,  as  a  figurative  descripti'n  of  the 
great  conflict  he  had  with  wild  Ephesian  men  ;  and  with  such  an  interpretation  the 
question  comes  within  the  reach  of  every  Cliristian  put  under  severe  conflict.  When 
any  good  man  is  forced  into  a  figlit  he  is  often  constrained  to  ask,  "  What  advan- 
tageth  it  me  ?  "  It  so  happens  that  the  inquiry  lias  a  right  noble  answer.  I.  The 
fine  possession  of  a  m\ni.y  reminiscence.  We  always  have  a  high  respect  for  a 
•difficulty  we  have  actually  Siirmouuted.  Evermore  there  remains  deep  in  our  hearts 
the  joyous  consciousness  for  once  at  least  of  having  stood  true  v»-hen  under  fire. 
If.  Quickened  growth  in  grace.  Conflict  makes  men  sober  and  thoughtful; 
then  it  makes  them  gentle  and  kind  ;  then  it  makes  them  forbearing  and 
charitable.  HI.  Power  for  leadei^ship  ajiong  men.  Men  trust  the  veterans  from 
hard-fought  fields.  IV.  Fellowship  with  Christ  (Heb.  xii.  3).  Those  who  are 
persecuted  for  Christ's  sake  receive  precisely  what  He  received  ;  the  disciple  is 
not  above  his  Master,  nor  the  servant  above  his  Lord.  V.  It  renders  more  lumin- 
ously WELCOME  THE  HEAVENLY  OUTLOOK.  "  No  HoH  shall  be  there,  nor  any  ravenous 
beast."  All  will  be  pea'-e  and  rest  and  satisfaction.  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.) 
Let  us  eat  and  drink,  for  to-morrow  we  die. — I'he  liouse  of  feasting ,  or  the  epicure^s 
measures : — 1.  The  text  is  the  epicure's  proverb,  began  on  a  weak  mistake,  thought 
witty  by  an  undiscerning  company,  and  prevailing  greatly  because  it  strikes  the 
fancy  and  maintains  the  merry  meeting.  The  pngans  recommended  sensuality  in 
this  life  because  they  knew  of  no  enjoyments  in  another.  2.  They  are  to  be  excused 
rather  than  us.  They  placed  themselves  in  the  order  of  beasts,  making  their 
bodies  but  receptacles  of  flesh  and  wine ;  therefore  they  treated  themselves 
accordingly.  Bnt  why  should  we  do  the  same  things  who  have  higher  principles, 
and  the  revelation  of  immortality  ?  3.  To  reprove  the  follies  of  mankind  and  their 
improper  motions  towards  felicity.  Note — I.  That  plenty  and  the  pleasures  of 
■THE  WORLD  ARE  NO  PROPER  INSTRUMENTS  OP  HAPPINESS.  A  man  must  have  soms 
violence  done  to  himself  ere  he  can  receive  them.  If  we  go  beyond  what  is  needful, 
we  put  that  to  hazard  which  nature  has  secured.  It  is  not  nature  that  desires 
superfluities,  but  lust.  By  a  disc  a  e  we  acquire  the  passion  for  luxuries,  which 
eventually  become  necessaries,  and  then  cease  to  gratify.  Contrast  the  happiness 
of  the  virtuous  poor  man  in  his  cottage,  his  sound  sleep,  quiet  breast,  easy  provision, 
«ober  night,  healthful  morning,  and  joyous  heart,  with  the  noises,  diseases,  passions, 


480  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  x v. 

which  fill  the  houses  of  the  luxurious  and  the  hearts  of  the  ambitious.     II.  Intem- 

PEKANCE     IN     EATING     AND      DRINKING     IS    OPPOSED     TO     THE     EPICDRe's     DESIGN.       The 

voluptuous  man  has  tlie  least  share  of  pleasure.  1.  It  is  an  enemy  to  health 
which  is  a  handle  by  which  we  can  apprehend  pleasure,  and  the  same  which  makes 
life  delicious.  For  what  content  can  a  full  table  administer  to  a  man  in  a  fever? 
Health  carries  us  to  Church,  and  makes  us  rejoice  in  the  communion  of  saints; 
but  an  intemperate  table  makes  us  lose  all  this.  It  bears  part  of  its  punishment  in 
this  life,  and  has  this  appendage,  that  unless  it  be  repented  of  it  is  not  remitted  in 
the  life  to  come.  The  epicure's  genial  proverb  might  be  a  little  altered.  "  Let  us 
eat  and  drink,  for  hij  this  means  to-morrow  we  shall  die  "  ;  yet  it  is  not  so,  for  such 
men  lead  a  healthless  life  ;  they  are  long  in  dying,  and  die  in  torment.  What  folly 
for  men  to  pray  for  healthy  bodies,  and  then  pour  in  loads  of  flesh  and  seas  of  wine. 
The  temptiitions  which  men  meet  with  from  without  in  these  cases  are  in  them- 
selves most  unreasonable,  and  soonest  confuted.  He  that  tempts  me  to  drink 
beyond  measure,  what  does  he,  but  tempt  me  to  lay  aside  my  reason,  or  civilly 
invite  me  to  a  fever  ?  When  Athens  was  nestroyed  by  the  plague,  Socrates  escaped 
throut;h  the  temperate  diet  to  which  he  had  accustomed  himself.  He  had  enough 
for  health,  study,  philosophy,  and  religion  ;  but  he  had  no  sui^erfluities  to  bring  on 
groans  and  sickly  nights.  AH  gluttons  are  convinced  of  the  excellence  of  temper- 
ance in  order  to  moral  felicity  and  health ;  for  after  they  have  lost  both  they  are 
obliged  to  go  to  temiDerance  ti  recover  them.  Fools,  not  to  keep  their  health  by 
the  means  which  they  seek  to  lesiore  it !  Such  men  "heap  up  wrath  against  the 
day  of  wrath."  When  the  heathen  feasted  their  gods  they  gave  nothing  but  an 
animil,  poured  a  little  wine  on  the  ahar,  and  burnt  a  little  frankincense  :  but  when 
thev  feasted  themselves  they  had  many  vessels  of  Campanian  wine,  turtles,  beeves, 
wild  boars,  &c.  And  little  do  we  spend  on  chatity  and  religion  ;  but  we  spend  so 
much  on  ourselves  that  we  make  ourselves  sick,  and  seem  to  be  in  love  with  our 
own  mischief.  2.  A  constant  full  table  is  less  pleasant  than  the  temperate  provi- 
sions of  the  virtuous,  or  the  natural  banquets  of  the  poor.  "  Thanks  be  to  the  God 
of  nature,"  said  Epicurus,  "  that  He  hath  made  that  which  is  necessary  to  be  ready 
at  hand,  and  easy  to  be  had  ;  whilst  that  whicli  cannot  easily  be  obtained  is  not 
necessary  at  all,"  i.e.,  in  effect  it  cannot  be  constantly  pleasant :  for  want  makes 
the  appetite  and  the  appetite  makes  the  jDleasure ;  so  that  men  are  greatly  mis- 
taken when  they  despise  tlie  poor  man's  table.  Fortune  and  art  give  delicacies, 
natnre  gives  meat  and  drink  ;  and  what  nature  gives  fortune  cannot  take  away, 
whilst  every  change  can  take  away  what  is  only  given  by  fortune.  Moreover,  he 
that  feasts  every  day,  feasts  no  day;  and  however  a  man  treats  himself,  he  will 
sometimes  need  to  be  refreshed  beyond  it.  A  perpetual  fulness  will  make  you  glad 
to  beg  pleasure  from  emptiness  and  variety  from  humble  fare.  3.  Intemperance  is 
the  nurse  of  vice,  and  no  man  dare  pray  to  God  for  a  pure  soul  in  a  chaste  body, 
if  he  lives  intemperately,  "  making  provision  for  the  flesh,  to  fulfil  the  lusts 
tbereof."  For  in  this  case  he  will  find  "  that  which  enters  him  shall  defile  him," 
more  than  he  can  be  cleansed  by  vain  prayers  that  come  from  his  tongue  and  not 
from  his  heart.  4.  Intemperance  is  the  destruction  of  wisdom.  "  A  full  t^orged 
belly  never  produt-ed  a  spriuhtly  mind."  The  heavy  and  foul  state  of  an  intem- 
perate person  may  be  compared  to  the  sun,  clouded  with  fogs  and  vapours,  when  it 
has  drawn  too  freely  from  the  moisture  of  nature.  But  temperance  is  reason's 
girdle  and  passion's  bridle,  the  strength  of  the  soul  and  the  foundation  of  virtue. 
5.  Intemperance  is  a  dishonour  to  the  nature,  person,  and  manners  of  a  man. 
But  naturally  men  are  ashamed  of  it,  and  night  is  generally  a  veil  to  their  gluttony 
and  drunkeimess.  III.  Some  rules  and  measures  of  temperance.  1.  Our 
natural  needs.  Hunger,  thirst,  and  cold,  are  the  natural  diseas'-s  of  the  body  ;  food 
and  raiment  are  their  remedies,  and  therefore  the  measures.  But  in  this  there  are 
two  cautions— (1)  These  are  only  to  be  extinguished  when  they  are  violent  or 
troublesome,  and  not  to  the  utmost  extent  and  possibilities  of  nature.  (2)  These 
must  be  natural,  not  artificial  and  provoked  :  for  many  men  make  necessities  to 
themselves,  and  then  think  they  are  bound  to  provide  for  them.  2.  Reason.  Eating 
and  drinking  so  as  to  make  the  reason  useless  or  troubled  is  intemperate.  Reason  is 
the  limit  beyond  which  temperance  never  wanders.  Intemperate  men  are  so 
stripped  of  the  use  of  reason  that  they  are  not  only  uspless  as  wise  counsels,  but 
have  not  reason  enough  to  avoid  inflicting  evils  upon  themselves.  3.  The  fitness 
of  the  body  for  useful  service.  Overloaded  with  food  or  drink,  the  mind  cannot 
think,  nor  the  bodywork  with  any  sprightliness.  (Jeremy  Taylor.)  The  folly 
of  thoughtlessness  of  religion  : — Is  it  not  foolish  to  be  living  in  this  world  without 


CHAP,  XT.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  481 

a  thought  of  what  you  will  do  at  last  ?  A  man  goes  into  an  inn,  and  as  soon  as  he 
sits  down  he  begins  to  order  his  wine,  his  dinner,  his  bed ;  there  is  no  delicacy  in 
season  which  he  forgets  to  bespeak.     He  stops  at  the  inn  for  some  time.     By  and 

by  the  bill  is  forthcoming,  and  it  takes  him  by  surprise.    "  I  never  thought  of  that 

I  never  thought  of  that!"  "Why,"  says  the  landlord,  "here  is  a  man  who  is 
either  a  born  fool  or  else  a  knave.  What !  never  thought  of  the  reckoning — never 
thought  of  settling  with  me  !  "  After  this  fashion  too  many  live.  They  eat,  and 
drink,  and  sin,  but  they  forget  the  inevitable  hereafter,  when  for  all  the  deeds  done 
in  the  body  the  Lord  will  bring  us  into  judgment.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  33.  Be  not  deceived :  evil  communications  corrupt  good  manners.— .SeZ/- 
dect'ption : — Of  all  species  of  deception,  self-deception  is  the  most  detrimental ;  it 
is  like  having  a  traitor  m  the  fortress  who  betrays  his  country  to  an  enemy.  Be 
not  deceived — I.  By  a  cokrupt  heart.  An  eminent  man  said  once,  "  Paris  is 
France  "  ;  it  is  more  correct  to  say,  "  Tiie  heart  is  the  man" ;  "  As  a  man  thmketh 
iu  his  heart,  so  is  he."  The  seed  contains  the  future  flower,  the  small  acorn  the 
majestic  oak,  the  egg  the  poisonous  viper ;  so  also  the  heart  contains  the  germ  of 
the  future  glorified  saint  or  doomed  spirit  (Matt.  xv.  19).  Every  healthy  man  can 
easily  see  that  consumptives  are  gradually  approaching  the  great  change  ;  but  they 
tell  you  they  are  improving  in  health,  and  persist  in  deceiving  themselves  to  the 
last.  We  have  people  that  are  morally  consumptive,  "  whose  end  is  destruction." 
'ihey  do  not  believe  it.  "  The  heart  is  deceitful  above  all  things,"  &c.  These 
obstinately  refuse  the  aid  of  the  Great  Physician,  until  their  moral  nature  falls  into 
the  second  death.  "  Create  in  me  a  clean  heart,  O  God,"  etc.  II.  By  a  polluted 
IMAGINATION.  Imagination — 1.  Is  like  a  merchant's  ship,  she  bringeth  her  food 
from  afar.  The  poet  mounts  upon  the  wings  of  this  imperial  faculty,  and  brings 
back  rich  treasures  from  fairy  land,  and  presents  them  to  us  in  the  foim  of  poems 
and  dramas.  In  ancient  mythology  spring  is  pictured  as  a  young  maiden  whose 
lap  is  full  of  flowers,  and  all  the  paths  slie  walks  are  strewn  with  them.  2.  Is  a 
beautiful  maiden,  whose  voice  is  enchanting  as  the  song  of  the  nightingale.  But, 
alas !  she  is  not  always  chaste.  When  celebrating  the  inhumanities  of  the  hero, 
her  skirts  drop  human  blood.  When  she  ministers  to  the  lusts  and  passions  of 
men  her  crown  is  tarnished  :  she  becomes  a  wanton  coquette  at  the  bidding  of 
Horace,  Ovid,  and  Byron  ;  but  at  the  biddmg  of  Job,  Isaiah,  and  Milton  she  becomes 
"a  woman  clothed  with  the  sun, "  etc.  The  reason  why  imagination  someiimes 
wanders  to  forbidden  paths  is  because  she  is  the  slave  of  the  heart.  The  influence 
of  the  moon  upon  the  tide  is  not  more  regular  and  absolute  than  that  of  the  heart 
over  the  imagination.  III.  By  the  habits  of  society.  The  phrase  "good 
manners "  is  not  used  now  in  the  sense  in  which  it  is  used  here.  We  mean 
etiquette;  but  Paul  meant  virtue — all  that  is  noble  and  heroic.  Be  not  deceived. 
One  may  have  the  beauty  of  Venus  and  the  charms  of  Cleopatra ;  and  another  the 
figure  of  Adonis  and  the  polish  of  Chesterfield,  and  still  be  void  of  "good" 
manners.  What  are  the  genteel  habits  without  religion  ?  Apples  of  Sodom,  having 
a  charming  outside,  but  an  inside  of  dust ;  a  dead  body  dressed  in  a  white  winding- 
sheet  and  decked  with  flowers  which  only  hide  a  mass  of  putrefaction.  So  refine- 
ment, polish,  and  accomplishments  are  often  only  the  adornments  of  one  "  dead  in 
trespasses  and  sins  "  (1  Sam.  xvi.  7).  {W.  A.  Griffiths.)  Evil  communica lions  : — 
I.  Good  manners  are  supposed  as  the  result  of — 1.  Early  training.  2.  Beligious 
influence.  II.  May  be  corrupted.  1.  The  tendency  of  the  heart  is  evil.  2.  The 
world  is  wicked.  3.  The  influence  of  its  exami^le  pernicious.  4.  There  needs 
decision  and  watchfulness.  III.  Will  certainly  be  corrupted  by  evil  com- 
munications. 1.  The  choice  of  bad  company  shows  the  inclination  to  evil.  2. 
Such  company  is  insinuating.  3.  Insensibly  lowers  the  tone  of  morality.  4. 
Destroys  shame.  5.  Hardens  the  heart.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Evil  communications  : — 
Let  me — I.  Explain  this  doctrine.  1.  Good  manners,  although  applied  by 
St.  Paul  to  those  Christian  principles  from  which  his  converts  were  in  danger  of 
being  seduced,  may  be  understood  as  including  both  right  sentiments  and  holy 
practice.    2.  The  term  "evil  communications,"  means  the  associating  with  evil  men. 

3.  Such  evil  communications  corrupt  the  mind,  sap  the  principles,  and  taint  the 
conduct.  In  the  case  of  the  upright  Christian,  whose  duty  leads  him  to  intercourse 
with  the  world,  this  tendency  may,  indeed,  be  counteracted  by  watchfulness  and 
prayer,  and  by  the  preventing  grace  of  Go  J.  But  if,  without  this  defence,  a  man 
will  freely  associate  with  the  ungodly,  the  effect  will  soon  be  visible  in  his  character. 

4.  The  injurious  effect  of  evil  communications  is  not  described  as  taking  place  in 

VOL.    II.  31 


482  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

any  sudden  or  striking  manner.  Corruption  is  a  gradual  change.  Silently,  but 
surely,  evil  communications  corrupt  good  manners.  II.  Confiem  it,  by  an  appeal 
to— 1.  The  Word  of  God  (Prov.  iv.  14,  &c.,  ix.  6,  xiii.  6  ;  2  Pet.  ii.).  2.  Maxims  of 
wise  men.  St.  Paul's  words  are  borrowed  from  a  heathen  writer.  This  shows  that 
Eeason  without  the  aid  of  Inspiration  has  led  men  to  the  very  same  conclusion 
with  the  apostle.  To  this  I  will  add  the  modern  saying  of  "  a  man  is  known  by 
the  company  he  keeps."  3.  Take  the  cases  of  Lot,  Solomon,  &c.  4.  Personal 
experience.  Look  back  through  your  past  lives,  and  recollect  in  how  many 
instances  your  views  and  conduct  have  been  influenced  by  the  example  of  those 
among  whom  you  lived.  III.  Apply  it.  Be  not  deceived.  1.  As  to  the  reality  of 
your  danger  from  ungodly  society.  We  soon  perceive  the  perilous  situation  of  a 
son,  a  daughter,  or  a  friend  ;  but  we  are  apt  to  be  ve>y  blind  when  the  case  becomes 
our  own.  There  is  no  safety  in  the  society  of  those  who  have  not  the  fear  of  God 
before  their  eyes.  If  they  be  openly  immoral  or  unprincipled,  all  connection  with 
them  is  perilous  in  the  extreme.  But  their  society  is  scaicely  less  dangerous  to  a 
true  Christian,  if,  while  destitute  of  religion,  their  outward  behaviour  is  plausible 
and  decorous.  2.  As  to  your  al)ility  for  resisting  the  influence  of  evil  communi- 
cations. A  man  may  say,  "I  kuow  that  there  is  danger,  but  my  principles  are 
fixed  :  and,  as  I  do  not  go  into  such  company,  out  of  any  love  tor  their  bad 
conduct,  I  shall  easily  avoid  what  I  know  to  be  wron?."  The  man  who  talks  thus 
is  ignorant  both  of  the  power  of  temptation  and  of  the  weakness  of  his  own  heart, 
and  he  that  trusteth  in  his  own  heart  is  a  fool.  And  should  the  tempter  suggest,  as 
he  did  to  Jesus,  that  God  will  give  His  angels  charge  over  you  to  keep  you, 
recollect  that  there  is  no  promise  of  such  protection  to  tho-e  who  quit  the  path  in 
which  the  Lord  requires  them  to  walk.  3.  As  to  the  possibility  of  separating  your- 
self from  ungoJly  connections.  4.  As  to  the  final  tendency  of  that  corruption, 
which  arises  from  evil  communications.  (J.  Jowett,  lU.A.)     Evil  covinntni cations: — 

I.  The  import  of  the  phease.      1.  Bad  books.      2.  Company.     3.  Associations. 

II.  Their  EVIL  tendency.  1.  They  corrupt  the  heart.  2.  Deprave  the  chaiacter. 
3.  Destroy  reputation.  4.  Spoil  happiness.  5.  Kuin  the  soul.  III.  The  means 
OF  ESCAPING  them.  1.  Avoid  them.  2.  Cultivate  the  company  of  the  good.  3. 
Study  the  Bible.  4.  Watch  unto  prayer.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Evil  communi- 
cotions: — The  text  is  a  quotation  from  the  Greek  comic  playwright  Menander, 
which  illustrates  chap.  ix.  22,  23.  In  this  sceptical  age  all  teachers  should  go 
to  the  forges  of  the  Philistines  to  sharpen  their  intellectual  tools,  so  as  to  be  able  to 
meet  their  enemies  on  their  own  ground.  1.  What  are  these  evil  communications  ? 
They  are  those  of — 1.  The  tongue.  (1)  Lying.  The  Bible  shows,  by  precept 
and  example,  that  God  hates  the  liar  (Prov.  xii.  22).  (2)  Foolish  and  profane  talk. 
Certainly  we  do  not  condemn  mirth  and  wit ;  but  great  care  must  be  taken  lest  the 
comic  should  predominate  in  us.  "  A  hearty  laugh  inaketh  glad  the  heart,  but  the 
laughter  of  the  fool  is  as  the  crackling  of  tborns  under  a  jaot."  Moreover  there  is  a 
kind  of  talk  which  blunts  the  moral  feelings  and  lowers  the  dignity  of  man.  The 
slandering  gossip  of  the  drawing-room  and  the  coarse  humour  of  the  tap-room  are 
equally  condemned  (Eph.  iv.  29).  (3)  Swearing.  This  mean  habit  is  too  prevalent 
amongst  all  grades  of  society.  2.  The  pen.  In  former  times  the  evils  of  the  pen 
were  comparatively  small,  because  only  few  could  read  what  fewer  still  could  write. 
But  in  this  age  of  cheap  literature  the  evil  of  the  pen  rivals  the  evil  of  the  tongue  in 
its  magnitude.  There  is — (1)  The  novel.  Every  young  man  and  woman  should  read 
the  masterpieces  of  imaginative  literature  as  recreation  ;  yet  the  greatest  admirers 
of  fiiition  admit  that  for  every  good  novel  there  is  a  dozen  bad  ones.  Truth  after 
all  is  stranger  than  fiction  ;  get  good  books,  read  and  study  them.  (2)  The  theatre, 
which  has  been  all  along  one  of  the  principal  enemies  of  the  Church :  one  is  the 
nursery  of  rectitude,  honesty,  and  charity :  the  other  is  the  school  of  infidelity  and 
genteel  licentiousness.  3.  The  pencil.  Nothing  contributes  more  towards  the 
education  of  the  heart  and  the  refinement  of  the  feelings  than  familiarity  with  high 
art ;  but  on  the  other  hand,  nothing  is  more  infectious  than  familiarity  with  lewd 
pictures.  II.  How  to  eradicate  these  evil  communications.  1.  Form  a  close  and 
frequent  intercourse  with  the  people  of  God.  The  help  afforded  to  Christians 
by  mutual  interchange  of  thought,  feeling,  and  experience  will  be  found  to  be 
wonderfully  effective  ;  as  will  also  the  biographies  of  good  men.  2.  Form  a  close 
and  frequent  intercourse  with  Christ.  Enter  into  a  covenant  with  Him,  and  He 
will  keep  thee  in  all  thy  ways.  (W.  A,  Griffiths.)  Nature  a7id  danger  of  evil 
communications : — This  maxim  of  the  heathen  poet  Menander  accords  with 
universal  experience,  and  was  worthy,  therefore,  of  being  adopted  as  a  portion  of 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  COBINTHIANS.  483 


the  sacred  record.  The  connection  is  not  that  in  which  we  should  have  expected 
such  a  maxim ;  but  the  occasion  of  it  was  this :  by  a  mixture  of  the  corrupt  com- 
munications of  false  teacliers  the  Corinthians  had  been  led  off  from  the  funda- 
mental doctrine  of  the  gospel.  Hence  we  may  learn  the  necessity  of  being  on  our 
guard  in  tills  respect.  I.  What  abb  evil  communications?  We  cannot,  of  course, 
entirely  avoid  intercourse  with  bad  men;  this  would  be  "to  go  out  of  the 
world"  (chap.  v.  10,  11).  Tiie  intercourse  of  society  must  be  maintained,  without 
respect  to  the  cbara'-ters  of  men,  to  such  an  extent  as  the  business  of  life  requires. 
An  unsocial  spirit  that  would  lead  us,  like  the  Essenes  of  old,  into  the  solitudes 
of  the  wilderness,  would  be  inconsistent  with  the  genius  of  Christianity  and  the 
example  of  our  Lord.  But  still,  we  must  not,  under  pretence  of  yielding  to  the 
necessary  calls  of  business,  cultivate  and  cherish  that  "  evilcomimmication  "  which 
"  Corrupts  good  manners."     Those  communications  may  be  justly  regarded  evil — 

I.  Which  have  a  tendency  to  taint  the  purity  of  the  mind  by  associations  of  a 
lascivious  and  sensual  nature.  2.  In  which  religion  is  not  adverted  to,  or  has  no 
hold  upon  the  mind,  where  the  fear  of  God  is  evidently  dismissf^d,  and  tbere  is  no 
scriptural  rule  of  action.  3.  Which  abounds  with  objections  to  Christianity,  and  is 
■calculated  to  produce  a  doubt,  either  of  its  Divine  origin,  or  of  the  certainty  of  its 
most  important  truths.  4.  Which  is  avowedly  and  aggressively  infidel  (2  John  9, 10). 
5.  Which  proceed  from  those  whose  moral  principles  are  loose,  with  respect  to  the 
great  obligations  of  justice  and  equity,  and  who  indulge  in  dishonourable  practices. 

II.  The  WAT  IN  WHICH  EVIL  communication  opekates  in  corrupting  good  manners. 
It  is  one  of  the  fundamental  laws  of  nature,  that  our  minds  should  be  subject  to 
perpetual  modification  from  the  minds  of  others.     We  may  determine  what  society 
we  will  keep,  but  not  what  influence  that  society  shall  have  upon  us.     One  of  the 
first  feelings  of  every  person  who  goes  into  company  is  to  please  and  be  ]deased. 
Hence  we  plainly  perceive  that  there  is  a  preparation  in  the  very  nature  of  society 
for  an  assimilation  of  our  minds  to  the  principles  and  dispositions  of  those  with 
whom  we  converse.     1.  Let  us  suppose,  then,  that  the  society  into  which  we  enter 
is  not  positively  vicious,  in  any  other  sense  than  as  it  is  distinguished  by  a  total 
absence  of  religion  ;  it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  this  society  will  possess  a  very 
pernicious  infinence  over  any  mind.      It  is  dangerous  to  be  accustomed  to  the 
absence  ot  religion.     Next  to  the  infusion  of  positive  impiety,  the  most  evil  element 
in  which  the  mind  can  be  placed,  is  that  out  of  which  religion  is  expelled.     2. 
SujDpose  the  society  into  which  we  enter  be  impure,  such  communications  must 
corrupt  good  manners.     Must  not  the  primary  effect  be,  at  lenst,  gradunlly  to  enure 
the  mind  to  the  contemplation  of  vicious  objects,  without  horror  and  disgust  ? 
3.  Suppose  that  the  society  into  which  we  enter  be  distinguished  by  a  rejection  of 
Christianity,  or  of  its  great  doctrines.     To  hear  the  cause  of  Christ  attacked  without 
being  in  a  situntion,  in  a  becoming  manner,  to  undertake  its  defence,  must  have  an 
injurious  tendency.     Conversation,  if  we  intend  to  please  and  be  pleased,  should 
never  be  a  scene  of  continual  dispute;  we  must  either  relinquish  such  society  or 
hold  our  peace.     III.  The  caution  is  strongly  implied  in  the  words,  "  Be  not 
deceived."     Be  not  dece  ved — 1.  By  the  adduction  of  fahe  precedents.     Onr  Lord 
mingled  indiscriminately  with  all  descri|itions  of  persons  ;  but  do  not  imagine  that 
it  would  be  safe  fur  you  to  do  so.     Recollect  the  infinite  disparity  of  His  situation 
and  character,  and  yours.     2.  By  your  past  experience.     You  have  been  frequently 
exposed  to  vicious  society,  and  perceived  none  of  these  evils.     "  Be  not  deceived '' ; 
you  are  very  ill  judges,  it  may  be,   of  the  state  of  your  own  minds  ;  you  may 
imagine  that  you  have  received  no  injury,  but  what  has  been  the  effect  of  such 
society   on  your  private  devotions  ?     Has  it   endeared  to  you  the  Scriptures,  or 
estranged  you  from  them?     3.  By  any  complacent  reference  to  the  time  of  life  at 
which  you  have  arrived,  or  the  progress  in  religion  which  you  have  already  made. 
At  whatever  period  of  life  you  have  arrived,  "  evil  communications  "  will  "  corrupt 
good  manners."     Solomon,  in  his  youth,  feared  God,  but  when  old  age  came  upon 
him,  through  the  contagious  example  of  his  idolatrous  wives,  he  forsook  the  God  of 
his  fathers.     4.  By  any  supposed  strength  of  resolution  with  which  you  may  enter 
into  such  society.     When  confederacies  are  formed  it  requires  a  powerful  effort  to 
break  them.     It  is  far  less  difficult  to  keep  out  of  society  than  to  resist  its  current. 
Conclusion :  Let  me  sugL^est  one  or  two  cautions  of  prudence.     1.  Let  those  who 
have  a  serious  sense  of  religion  bind  tliemselves  with  the  vows  of  God,  and  enter  on 
a  solemn  profession  of  them  at  an  early  period  of  life.     Let  all  young  persons  unite 
themselves  to  those  whom  God  has  touchi  d  by  His  Spirit,  and  is  guiding,  under  the 
convoy  of  the  Captain  of  salvation,  to  eternal  glory.     The  Church  will  willingly 


484  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

receive  all  such  as  are  desirous  of  uniting  themselves  to  the  Lord  in  an  everlasting 
covenant.  2.  Let  it  be  rememb  red,  that  with  those  with  whom  you  voluntarily 
associate  here,  you  shall  be  associated  hereafter  by  the  disposer  of  all  things,  for 
ever.  With  whom  would  you  have  your  everlasting  portion?  (R.  Hall,  31. A.) 
The  influence  of  association: — When  we  find  the  heathen  and  Chiistian  giving 
utterance  to  the  same  sentiment  we  ou^ht  the  more  to  heed  its  importance.  We 
are  so  constituted  and  circumstanced  that  none  of  us  can  live  to  himself,  and  none 
of  us  can  die  to  himself.  Each  necessarily  exerts  a  great  influeuce  on  many  others, 
and  is  acted  on  in  turn  by  those  with  whom  he  is  associated.  If  "  evil  communi- 
cations corrupt  good  manners,"  it  is  to  be  inferred  that  good  communications  work 
for  good  upon  the  character.  Of  course  in  each  case  it  must  be  supposed  that  the 
association  is  both  intimate  and  voluntary.  It  does  not  always  come  to  pass  that 
the  child  of  religious  parents  is  religious  himself  ;  neither  is  every  one  who  lives 
with  the  ungodly  a  partaker  in  their  ungodliness.  I.  There  is  in  all  of  us  a 
coNSiDEKABLE  DESIRE  OF  BEING  ESTEEMED  OR  APPROVED.  This  desirc  is  morally 
allied  to  that  dislike  of  being  singular  which  has  so  mighty  an  operation  upon 
men.  With  those  with  whom  we  arc  in  constant  intercourse,  we  wish,  if  possible,  to 
stand  well,  and  we  feel  tliat  this  cannot  be,  so  long  as  there  is  distinct  opposition  in 
their  principles  and  motives  to  our  own  ;  arid  it  is  almost  a  necessary  consequence 
that  we  shall  gradually  assimilate  ourselves  to  their  tastes  and  tendencies,  and  thus 
seek  to  escape  the  unpleasantness  of  being  singular,  and  therefore  of  being  tacitly 
disapproved,  by  acquiring  resemblance,  or  softening  down  points  of  difference. 
For  instance,  suppose  a  man,  not  of  vicious  habits  himself,  thrown  continually  into 
association  with  the  dissolute.  He  will  feel  tliat  there  is  no  affinity  between  himself 
and  his  companions,  and  it  will  be  very  galling  to  feel  h  mself  thus  an  object  of 
dii^like,  whilst  his  desire  is  to  be  esteemed.  But  what  is  gnlling  he  will  endeavour 
to  escape  from.  Then  the  question  is  as  to  the  mode  of  escape.  If  he  be  possessed 
of  great  moial  courage,  he  may  break  loose  from  the  pernicious  associations  ;  but  if 
not  he  will  cease  to  be  singular  by  becoming  like.  He  may  not  form  any  distinct 
resolution  of  this,  but  the  aim  st  certainty  is  that  his  virtuous  principles  will  be 
undermined,  and  he  will  gradually  get  )id  of  what  was  unpleasant  in  his  situation 
by  getting  rid  of  what  was  offensive  in  his  character.  II.  Over  and  above  this 
DESIRE  of  approval,  CONSIDER  THE  FORI E  OF  iiXAMPLE.  Our  nature  is  prone  to 
imitation,  and  practically  seeing  a  thing  iione  is  more  likelv  to  move  us  to  the  doing 
of  the  SHme  than  any  precept  we  can  enforce.  Umlonbtedly  men  do  feel  encouraged 
to  do  evil  by  seeing  others  do  it,  just  as  though  less  dun^er  were  incurred  by  break- 
ing God's  laws  in  company  than  in  breaking  them  alone.  A  man  whose  conscience 
has  been  active,  remonstiating  against  a  particular  sin  while  he  has  not  mixed  with 
those  who  are  in  the  habit  of  that  sin— place  him  with  such  persons,  and  you  know 
very  well  that  he  will  be  led  th'ough  the  mere  force  of  example  to  its  habitual 
commission.  Conclusinn  :  We  think  we  have  said  enough  to  warrant  us  in  urging, 
especially  upon  the  yuuug,  tlie  vast  import^ince  of  taking  heed  wiih  whom  they 
make  their  association.  We  might  almost  dare  to  say  on  the  strength  of  the 
foregoing  statements,  that  m  choosing  your  companions  for  time  30U  choose  your 
companions  for  eternity.  Never,  therefore,  let  it  be  thought  that  it  can  be  a  trivial 
or  unimportant  thing  with  wh'nn  you  contract  intimacies.  Eatlier  be  assured,  that 
such  is  necessarily  th-  influence  of  man  upon  man,  that  to  make  friends  with  the 
righteous  is  to  gain  a  Viist  assistance  towrr  s  saving  the  soul,  and  to  make  friends 
with  the  wicked  is  toailvancealong  stage  towards  everlasting  ruin.  (H.iMelrill,B.D.) 
The  erils  of  had  compuny  : — I.  It  is  dangerous  to  our  cuakacters.  To  have  the 
same  attflchmsnts  and  dislikes,  the  same  pur^uits  and  aversions,  has  always  been 
esteemed  the  foundation  of  friendship  ;  similarity  of  disposition,  of  sentiments,  of 
manners,  is  the  usual  bond  which  unites  companions  together.  The  world  forms 
its  judgments  by  general  rules ;  when  it  sees  a  man  a  frequent  spectator  of  the 
excesses  of  the  vicious,  it  takes  for  granted  that  he  is  a  partaker  also,  and  an 
approver  of  them.  II.  It  will  have  a  proportionable  pernicious  influence  on 
OUR  fortunes.  Keputation  has  been  always  looked  on  as  the  surest  step  to  wealth 
and  preferment.  Whoever  wishes  to  advance  himself  esteems  a  good  character  as 
useful,  if  not  essential,  to  that  end,  and  is  as  anxious  to  preserve  it  as  the  miser  to 
preserve  his  gold.  Let  the  ambitious,  the  covetous,  those  who  aspire  after  dignity 
or  wealth,  think  of  this,  and  if  they  have  no  better  motive  for  declining  the  society 
of  the  vicious,  let  them  decline  it  as  tbey  have  regard  to  the  gratification  of  their 
favourite  passion ;  let  them  be  restrained  by  their  interes-t,  if  they  have  lost  their 
virtue.     Bad  company  may  likewise  hurt  our  advancement  in  life   another  way, 


CHAP.  XV.]  -  I.  CORINTHIANS.  485, 

as  it  usually  involves  us  in  idleness  and  extravagancp,  and  leads  us  to  dissipate,  or, 
at  least,  to  neglect  to  improve,  the  provision  bp(]ueathed  us  by  our  ancestors.  III. 
It  is  dangerous  to  oue  quiet.  As  he  who  takes  a  uper  frequently  to  his  bosom, 
though  he  m^iy  awhile  escape  with  impunity,  will  one  lime  or  other  certainly  repent 
of  his  rashness  ;  so  let  that  man  be^vare  who  has  ma'Ie  clioice  of  a  confirmed 
vicious  character  for  his  intimate,  for  however  strong  in  appearance  his  attachment 
be,  if  appetite  or  intere-t  iiivite,  he  will  certainh  sting  hiiu  to  the  beart.  Can  any 
reliance  be  placed  on  him  who  lives  in  a  continued  stat»^  of  disobedience  wnd  ingrati- 
tude to  his  Creator,  Preserver,  and  Eedeemer,  that  he  will  not,  when  nny  imagmary 
pleasure  or  profit  may  accrue  to  him  iiy  it,  betiay  or  even  ruin  bis  fellow-cieatures  ? 
But  if,  added  to  this  state  of  rebellion  towards  G.^d,  he  has  been  known  in  his 
general  commerce  with  his  brethren  to  be  false  and  treacherous,  is  it  not  the  height 
of  folly  in  any  individual  to  expose  his  family  and  affairs  to  his  machinations,  under 
the  vain  hope  that  he  should  belie  his  general  conduct  to  be  truM  to  him  alone? 
IV.  It  is  pkejudicial  to  our  morals,  and  of  consequknce  dangerous  to  oub 
ETERNAL  SALVATION.  Man  is  by  nature  prone  to  imit  ition  ;  1his  is  observed  by 
every  wise  parent,  and  turned  as  much  as  possible  to  ihe  r  children's  advantage  by 
every  good  one.  What  we  are  taught,  however  wise,  virtuous,  and  prudent,  will 
have  little  effect  on  us  if  it  be  contradicted  by  what  we  see.  If  a  \oung  person 
perceives  that  vice  is  no  exclusion  from  the  countenance  and  familiarity  of  those 
whom  he  has  been  accustomed  to  honour,  it  cannot  but  greatly  diminish  the  abhor- 
rence in  which  he  has  been  taught  to  hold  it.  It  is  the  property  of  vice  to  end-  avour 
to  draw  over  to  its  party  all  who  come  wiihin  its  influence — the  libertine,  the 
drunkard,  and  all  the  other  votaries  of  profligacy,  have  ever  taken  delight  to  render 
others  as  wickei  as  tbemselves  ;  to  compass  tbis  point  they  spare  no  argumems, 
no  solicitations — the  sons  of  virtue,  I  fear,  are  not  half  so  anxious  to  make  cmiverts 
as  the  cliildren  of  darkness  to  make  apostates.  (G.  Hafjgitt,  M.A.)  On  the 
progress   of  vice  : — I.    The   contagion  which  is   diffused   by  bad  examples,  and 

HEIGHTENED    BT     PAEUCULAR    CONNECTIONS     WITH     PERSONS     OF    LOOSE    PRINCIPLES     OR 

DISSOLUTE  MORALS.  This,  in  a  licentious  state  of  society,  is  the  most  common 
source  of  those  vices  and  disorders  which  so  much  abound  in  great  cities.  It  is 
indeed  disagreeable  to  contemplate  human  nature  in  this  downward  course  of  its 
progress.  But  it  is  alwaj'S  profitable  to  know  our  own  infirmities  and  dang-r^i. 
There  are  few  but  who  set  out  at  first  in  the  world  with  good  dispositions.  The 
warmth  which  belongs  to  youth  naturally  exerts  itself  in  generous  feelings  and 
sentiments  of  honour;  in  strong  attachments  to  friends,  and  the  other  emotions  of 
a  kind  and  tender  heart.  At  that  period  they  repudiate  whatever  is  mean  or  base. 
It  is  pleasing  to  them  to  think  of  commanding  the  esteem  of  those  among  whom 
they  live,  and  of  acquiring  a  name  among  men.  But,  alas!  how  soon  does  this 
flattering  prospect  begin  to  be  overcast.  How  many  pass  away  some  of  the  most 
valunble  years  of  their  life  tossed  in  a  whirlpool  of  what  cannot  be  called  pleasure 
so  much  as  mere  giddiness  and  folly.  There  are  certain  degrees  of  vice  which  are 
chiefly  stamped  with  the  chara'ter  of  the  ridiculous  and  the  contemptible;  and 
thei'e  are  also  certain  limits  beyond  which  if  it  pass  it  becomes  odious  and 
execrable.  If  to  the  other  corruptions  which  the  heart  has  already  received  be 
added  the  infusion  of  sceptical  principles,  that  worst  of  all  the  evil  communic  itions 
of  sinners,  the  whole  of  morals  is  then  on  the  point  of  being  overthrown.  For  every 
crime  can  then  be  palliated  to  conscience,  every  check  and  restraint  winch  had 
hitherto  remained  is  taken  away.  Miserable  and  deluded  man  !  to  what  art  thou 
come  at  the  last  ?  Dost  thou  pretend  to  follow  nature,  when  thou  art  contemning 
the  laws  of  the  God  of  nature?  when  thou  art  stifling  His  voice  within  thee,  which 
remonstrates  against  thy  crimes?  when  thou  art  violating  the  best  part  of  thy 
nature  by  counteracting  the  dictates  of  justice  and  humanity?  II.  This  brings  me 
to  the  next  head  of  discourse ;  to  suggest  some  means  that  may  be  used  for 
STOPPING  IN  time  THE  PROGRESS  OF  SUCH  MISCHIEFS  ;  to  point  out  some  remedies 
against  the  fatal  infection  of  evil  communications.  1.  The  first  and  most 
obvious  is,  to  withdraw  from  all  associations  with  bad  men,  with  persons  either 
of  licentious  principles  or  of  disorderly  conduct.  The  circumstances  which 
chiefly  attract  the  liking  and  the  friendship  of  youth  are  vivacity,  good  humour, 
engaging  manners,  and  a  cheerful  or  easy  temper;  qualities,  I  confess,  amiable  in 
themselves,  and  useful  and  valuable  in  their  place.  But  I  intieat  you  to  remember 
that  these  are  not  all  the  qualities  recjuisite  to  form  an  intimate  companion  or 
friend.  Something  more  is  still  to  be  looked  for  ;  a  sound  understanding,  a  steady 
mind,  a  firm  attachment  to  principle,  to  virtue,  and  honour.     As  only  solid  bodies 


486  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

polish  well,  it  is  only  on  the  substantial  ground  of  these  manly  endowments  that 
the   other  amiable  qualities  can  receive  their  proper  lustre.     Destitute  of  these 
essential  requisites  they  shine  with  no  more  than  a  tinsel  brilliancy.     Allow  me  to 
warn  you  that  the  most  gay  and  pleasing  are  sometimes  the  most  insidious  and 
dangerous  companions.     2.  In  order  to  prevent  the  influence  of  evil  communica- 
tions it  is  farther  needful  that  you  fix  to  yourselves  certain  principles  of  conduct, 
and  to  be  resolved  and  determined  on  no  occasion  to  swerve  from  them.     Setting 
the  consideration  of  religion  and  virtue  aside,  and  attending  merely  to  interest  and 
reputation,  it  will  be  found  that  he  wlio  enters  on  active  life  without  having  a'^cer- 
tained  some  regular  plan,  according  to  which  he  is   to   guide   himself,  will   be 
unprosperous  in  the  whole   of   his   subsequent  progress.     But  when  conduct  is 
viewed  in  a  moral  and  religious  light,  the  eiJect  of  having  fixed  no  principles  of 
action,  of  having  formed  no  laudable  standard  of  character,  becomes  more  obviously 
fatal.   From  hence  it  is  that  the  young  and  thoughtless  imbibe  so  readily  the  poison 
of  evil  communications,  and  fall  a  prey  to  every  seducer.     They  have  no  internal 
guide  whom  they  are  accustomed  to  follow  and  obey  ;  nothing  within  themselves 
that   can   give   firmness  to   their  conduct.     They  are,  of   course,  the  victims   of 
momentary  inclination  or  caprice.     3.  As  a  farther  corrective  of  evil  communica- 
tions, and  as  a  foundation  to  those  principles  which  you  lay  down  for  conduct,  let 
me  advise  you  sometimes  to  think  seriously  of  what  constitutes  real  enjoyment  and 
happiness.     Your  days  cannot  be  entirely  spent  in  company  and  pleasure.     Seize 
that  sober  hour  of  retirement  and  silence.     Indulge  the  meditations  which  then 
begin  to  rise.     Cast  your  eye  backwards  on  what  is  past  of  your  life  ;  look  forward 
to  what  is  probably  to  come.     Think  of  the  part  you  are  now  acting,  and  of  what 
remains  to  be  acted,  perhaps  to  be  suffered,  before  you  die.     If  your  hearts  secretly 
reproach  you  for  the  wrong  choice  you  have  made,  bethink  yourselves  that  the  evil 
is  not  irreparable.     Still  there  is  time  for  repentance  and  retreat ;  and  a  return  to 
wisdom  is  always  honourable.     Were  such  meditations  often  indulged,  the  evil 
communications  of  sinners  would  die  away  before  them  ;  the  force  of  their  poison 
would  evaporate  ;  the  world  would  begin  to  assume  in  your  eyes  a  new  form  and 
shape.    4.  Let  me  once  more  advise  you  to  look  forward  sometimes  beyond  old  age  ; 
to  look  to  a  future  world.     Amidst  evil  communications  let  your  belief  and  your 
character  as  Christians  arise  to  your  view.    Think  of  the  sacred  name  in  which  you 
were  baptized.     Think  of  the  God  whom  your  fathers  honoured  and  worshipped ; 
of  the  religion  in  which  they  trained  you  up  ;  of  the  venerable  rites  in  which  they 
brought  you  to  partake.    {H.Blair,  D.D.)       On  evil  co»nnnnication: — I.  In  almost 
EVERY  CASE  THE  YOUNG  BEGIN  WELL.    They  comc  out  of  the  hand  of  nature  pure  and 
uncorrupted.     II.  It  is  wise  in  them,  in  the  second  place,  to  eeflect  for  what 
IT  IS  that  they  were  born,  and  in  what  consists  thk  real  happiness  of  mortal 
LIFE.     III.  It  is  wise  in  them,  in  the  last  place,  to  look  beyond  the  world,  and 
to  consider  the  FINAL  DESTINY  OF  THEIR  BEING.     And  to  US,  my  elder  brethren, 
it  is  a  reflection  of  no  common  interest — that  our  folly  and  imprudence  may  thus 
poison  the  minds  of  the  pure,  and  introduce  guilt  and  woe  into  the  innocent  family 
of  God.     1.  There  is,  in  the  first  place,  an  "  evil  communication"  to  the  young, 
which  proceeds  from  the  abuse  of  rank  and  affluence.     These  are  the  high  and  the 
valued  situations  of  life,  to  which  all  others  naturally  look  up — and  it  is  their 
manners  which  necessarily  give  the  tone  and  fashion  to  their  age.     Of  what  fatal 
consequence  it  is  to  every  generation  when  rank  and  fash'on  are  only  the  leaders  of 
folly,  and  when  riches  are  employed  in  vice  and  sordid  dissipation ;  and,  what  is  even 
worse,' when  the  manners  of  the  higher  ranks  of  mankind  are  assimilated  to  all  that 
is  base  or  degrading  in  the  lower.     How  many,  alas  !  of  the  young  are  the  victims 
of  these  abuses  of  prosperity  ?     2.  There  is,  in  the  second  place,  an  evil  commu- 
nication to  the  young  which  arises  from  the  abuse  of  learning  and  talents.     Of  all 
the  employments  of  human  wisdom,  the  noblest  certainly,  and  the  most  genuine  is 
that  of  the  instruction  of  the  ignoiance,  and  the  support  of  the  innocence  of  youth. 
Yet  the  world  shows  us  that  there  are  men  who  have  deserted  this  sublimest  duty — 
who  please  themselves  in  spreading  doubt  and  unbelief,  and  who  delight  to  employ 
their  powers  with  withdrawing   all   the   most   sacred  principles   of   religion  and 
morality.     3.  There  is,  in  the  last  place,  an   evil  communication   to   the  young 
from    the   society  of   the  aged  in   vice   itself.      {A.    Allison.)  Fatal  tendency 

of  evil  associations : — While  seeking  for  a  rainbow  in  the  Handeck  Falls 
another  lesson  was  learned.  A  beautiful  butterfly  was  sporting  in  the  sun- 
shine, and  either  through  carelessness,  or  the  fascination  of  the  pearly  drops 
which  shot  from  the  fall  in  profusion,  went  too  near,  was  caught  in  the  falling 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  487 

shower,  and  hurled  to  destruction  in  the  awful  gnjf  two  hundred  feet  below.  Who 
does  not  see  in  this  an  every-day  occurrence  ?  Young  psopie,  in  the  thoughtlessness 
which  the  pursuit  of  pleasure  engenders,  go  to  places  ui  winch  they  "  see  no  harm," 
and,  alas!  are  soon  hurled  into  the  gulf  of  disgrace  here,  and  of  everlasting  despair 
hereafter.       (Gavin  Kirkham.)  Depraved   hy   ecil   associations : — Sir  Thomas 

Lawrence,  the  eminent  painter  and  president  of  the  Koyal  Academy,  commended 
the  pictures  of  a  young  artist,  and  then  said  to  him  :  "  You  have  round  your  room 
two  or  three  rough,  clever,  but  coarse  Flemish  sketches.  If  I  were  you  1  would  not 
allow  my  eye  to  become  familiarised  with  any  but  the  highest  forms  of  art.  If  ^  ou 
cannot  afford  to  buy  good  oil-pnintings,  buy  good  engravings  of  great  picures,  or 
have  nothing  at  all  upon  your  walls.  You  allow,  in  intercourse  with  your  fellows, 
that  '  Evil  communications  corrupt  good  manneis.'  So  is  it  with  pictures.  If  you 
allow  your  eye  to  bei-ome  familiar  with  what  is  vulgar  in  conception,  however  tree 
and  dashing  the  handling,  and  however  excellent  the  feeling  for  colour,  your  taste 
will  insensibly  become  depraved.  Whereas,  if  you  habituate  your  eye  to  look  i-nly 
on  what  is  pure  and  grand,  or  refined  and  lo\ely,  your  taste  will  insensibly  become 
elevated."  Sir  Thomas's  advice,  which  is  as  applicable  to  books  as  to  pictures, 
was  enforced  by  an  anecdote.  The  artist  of  reputation,  who  had  never  seen  an\  of 
the  works  of  the  greatest  painters,  went  with  Sir  Thomas  to  see  one  of  the  bast 
collections  on  the  Continent.  It  was  arranged  according  to  the  different  schools — 
beginning  with  the  German,  proceeding  to  the  Flemish,  Dutch,  Spanish,  Bolounese, 
the  Venetian,  and  ending  with  the  Umi)rian.  Tiie artist  was  so  fascinated  with  the 
vigour,  the  colour,  the  inveution,  and  the  drawing  of  Eubens's  pictures  that  Sir 
Thomas  had  difficulty  in  dragging  him  away  from  tuem.  Aft^r  visiting  the  several 
schools  they  came  to  the  Italian  collection,  with  its  Gaidos,  Titians,  and  Kaphaels, 
before  which  they  lingered  until  the  hour  for  closing  the  gallery.  The  con  em- 
plation  of  these  beautiful,  chastened  works  of  the  Italian  ma~ters  so  educated  the 
visitor's  taste  that,  on  repassing  the  Kubens  pictures,  which  a  few  hours  before  had 
delighted  hiin,  he  shuddered  at  their  grossness.  Eniironment : — That  environ- 
ment is  an  immense  and  controlling  natural  law  for  the  sustenance  of  life  has  come, 
to  be  a  fact  as  conceded  and  confessed  as  that  Biogenesis,  or  life  onlv  proceeding 
from  life,  is  the  inexorable  natural  law  for  the  beginning  of  life.  Environment,  as 
the  natural  law  for  the  sustenance  of  life,  is  energetic,  with  two  Uiain  influences , 
upon  life.  The  first  influence  is  that  of  variation.  The  life  itself  vaiies  as  the 
environment  gets  changed.  Hunter  put  a  sea-gull  into  such  environment  that  it 
could  only  get  grain  to  eat.  The  result  was  that  the  stomach  of  a  bird,  no  mally 
adapted  to  a  fish  diet,  came  in  time  to  resemble  in  structure  the  gizzard  of  a  grain 
feeder  like  the  23igeon.  Holmgren  fed  pigeons  for  a  lengthened  peiiod  o  i  meat 
diet,  and  their  gizzards  became  carni>;'t)rous  stomachs.  How  constant  and  con- 
trolling this  varying  power  upon  life  is,  is  seen  in  the  adjustment  of  animals  to  their 
habitat — the  flounder,  burying  himself  in  the  mud  and  sand  at  the  bottom  of  its  sea 
or  river,  takes  on  its  hue ;  the  fur  of  the  polar  bear  is  white  as  are  the  Arctic  snows 
amid  which  it  lives;  the  alternating  narrow  stripes  of  shadovv  and  sunshine  inter- 
braided  amid  the  tangled  Indian  jungles  are  photographed  and  stereotyped  upon 
the  Bengal  tiger  which  seeks  its  prey  among  them.  But  is  not  this  varying  force 
of  environment  upon  life  a  natural  law  for  life  as  thoroughly  energetic  in  the 
spiritual  world  as  in  what  we  call  the  natural  ?  What  man's  spiritual  life  does  not 
get  shape  and  take  on  colour  from  his  environment  ?  The  books  he  reails,  the 
social  atmosphere  in  which  he  is  immersed,  the  daily  business  to  which  he  sets  his 
hand,  the  companionships  he  chooses — how  do  their  varieties,  their  purities  or 
impurities,  their  nobleness  or  lowness,  react  into  variations  within  himself.  The  law 
of  environment  which,  in  the  natural  world,  bleaches  the  brown  coat  of  the  hare  into 
the  white  coat  of  it  in  the  Arctic  regions,  is  only  the  same  law  plying  its  changes 
upon  man  in  the  spiritual  world. 

Ver.  34.  Awake  to  righteousness. —  Moral  resurrection  : — This  chapter  generally 
deals  with  the  resurrection  of  the  body  ;  but  the  text  refers  to  the  resurrection  of 
the  soul.  And  this  is  a  greater  and  more  glorious  work  than  the  other,  because — 
1.  The  soul  is  greater  than  the  body.  What  is  the  casket  to  the  jewel,  the  house 
to  the  tenant,  the  barque  to  the  crew?  "  Heap  worlds  on  worlds ;  one  soul  out- 
weighs them  all."  2.  It  can  only  be  accomplished  with  the  full  concurrence  of  the 
man.  In  the  material  resurrection  the  man  has  no  choice,  but  the  soul  will  not 
rise  without  its  own  consent.  3.  It  requires  a  higher  agency.  Mere  volition  and 
force  will  effect  the  material  resurrection.     Christ  had  only  to  say  to  Lazarus, 


488  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

"Come  forth";  but  thousands  of  souls  dead  in  sin  He  appealed  to,  yet  but  few 
came  out  of  their  spiritual  graves.  Mere  vulition  will  not  do  it ;  it  requires  argu- 
ment, suasion,  love,  example.  4.  It  is  an  invaluable  blessing  in  itself.  The 
material  resurrection  will  be  an  intolerable  curse  to  the  wicked ;  but  the  resurrec- 
tion of  the  soul  is  evermore  a  blessing.  5.  It  is  necessary  to  qualify  us  to  under- 
stand the  resurrection  of  the  body.  This  is  suggested  by  the  text  when  viewed  ia 
connection  with  tbe  apostle's  object.  Eectitude  of  soul  is  a  better  interpreter 
than  any  hermeneutic  skill.  Note — I.  The  condition  from  which  man  is  summoned. 
What  is  moral  sleep?  1.  It  is  not  the  sleep  of — (1)  The  animal  faculties;  they 
are  often  more  active  in  consequence  of  the  s.eep  of  the  soul.  (2)  The  intellectual 
powers;  the  imagination  may  be  as  active  as  Byron's,  the  reason  as  Voltaire's,  and 
yet  the  soul  may  be  asleep.  (3)  The  social  sympathies  ;  they  are  active  when  the  soul 
is  asleep.  2.  When  is  the  soul  asleep  ?  When  it  is  not  inspired  in  all  its  powers 
by  supreme  love  to  God.  This  is  not  like  sleep— (1)  In  being  the  ordination  of 
God,  as  is  natural  sleep  ;  it  is  contrary  to  His  desire  and  command.  (2)  In  being 
the  means  of  refreshment.  Moral  sleep  is  a  cormding  and  an  exhausting  state. 
3.  There  are  certain  points  of  resemblance  which  warrant  the  figure.  (1)  Insensi- 
bility. There  is  a  world  of  grand  and  solemn  realities  around  the  sinner ;  voices 
deep  and  loud  speak  to  him  ;  and  visions  of  awful  majesty  pass  before  him.  Yet 
he  is  dead  to  all.  He  is  dead  to  himself  and  to  God.  (2)  Fictitiousness.  Objects 
flit  before  the  natural  sleeper  that  have  no  real  existence  ;  to  the  moral  sleeper, 
heaven,  hell,  God,  eternity,  are  but  as  dreams.  Sometimes  they  may  startle  the 
man,  but  like  tbe  dream,  the  impression  soon  departs.  The  life  of  a  sinner  is 
fiction — a  great  lie.  (3)  Transitoriness.  Sleep  is  not  a  permanent  state.  "  They 
that  sleep,  sleep  in  the  night."  There  is  a  dark  spiritual  night  brooding  over  the 
moral  sleeper,  and  one  of  two  very  different  mornings  must  break  the  slumbers  of 
all.  (a)  There  is  the  morning  of  spiritual  reformation — the  morning  when  "  God 
commands  the  light,"  &c.  Then  the  soul  awakes,  and  finds  itself  in  a  new  world — 
a  world  full  of  God,  and  exclaims,  "  Surely  God  is  in  this  place,"  &c.  (h)  The 
other  morning  is  the  morning  of  retribution.  The  awful  manifestations  of  that 
morning  will  startle  the  most  sleepy  into  active  consciousness.  II.  The  state 
INTO  WHICH  WE  ARE  SUMMONED.  Men  are  not  required  to  awake  to  business,  pleasure, 
or  fashion ;  they  are  all  alive  in  relation  to  these  things.  But  concerning  righteous- 
ness they  are  asleep.  1.  The  state  of  righteousness  includes — (1)  Living  rigbteously 
towards  God  and  His  universe,  [a]  Be  just  to  yourself ;  that  is  virtue,  {b)  Be  just 
to  others  ;  that  is  morality,  (c)  Be  just  to  God  ;  this  is  piety,  (2)  Being  treated 
as  righteous.  2.  The  getting  of  man  into  this  righteous  state  is  ascribed  to  Christ. 
He  furnishes — (1)  The  moral  force  by  which  it  is  done.  (2)  The  moral  reasons  by 
which  the  past  wrongs  may  be  overlooked.  "  He  is  made  unto  us,"  <&c.  3.  This 
righteous  state  includes — (1)  Harmonious  action.  (2)  Social  usefulness.  (3) 
Spiritual  progress.  (4)  Heavenly  fellowshi23s.  III.  The  voice  by  which  wk  are 
SUMMONED.  "Awake."  Paul  is  but  tbe  organ  of  the  Divine  voice.  This  Divine 
voice  sounds  through — 1.  All  history.  Turn  over  the  sin-stained  annals  of  the 
■world,  and  you  will  find  every  chapter  pealing  with  the  word,  "Awake."  All  the 
miseries  of  the  awful  past  sprang  from  tbe  want  of  righteousness.  2.  The  moral 
constitution  of  our  nature.  Conscience,  with  more  or  less  emphasis,  calls  upon 
every  man  to  "  awake."  3.  The  memories  of  sainted  friends.  4.  The  whole  Bible 
of  God.  (D.  Thomaa,  D.D.)  A  call  to  the  unconverted  : — I.  A  lamentable  con- 
dition. "  Some  have  not  tbe  knowledge  of  God."  II.  A  merited  reproof.  This 
is  "shameful  "  with  all  the  means  of  enlightenment  around  you,  and  implies  the 
love  of  darkness.  III.  An  earnest  call  to  a  better  life.  1.  Awake.  Seek  for- 
giveness. 2.  Put  away  sin  and  follow  after  holiness.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  I. 
Observe  that  a  state  of  sin  is  here  represented  by  sleep.  1.  Unconcerned. 
2.  Unapprehensive  of  danger.  II.  Observe  that  man,  being  careless  and  secure 
IN  the  midst  of  the  greatest  dangers,  he  is  called  upon  to  "awake."  This 
is  an  instance  of  the  care  and  compassion  of  God.  He  calls  us  by  His  providences, 
His  Holy  Spirit,  His  Word,  His  ministers,  &c.     III.   Observe  that  we  are  called 

TO    AWAKE    TO    RIGHTEOUSNESS,  AND  TO    RENOUNCE  SIN.       1.  "  Awakc  to  righteOUSneSS." 

(1)  To  a  sense  of  the  necessity  of  righteousness.  (2)  To  the  practice  and  pursuit 
of  righteousness.  2.  "And  sin  not."  (1)  Sin  not,  in  hope  that  there  is  no  resur- 
rection. (2)  Sin  not,  in  hope  that  there  is  no  judgment.  (3)  Sin  not,  in  hope  that; 
there  is  no  state  of  future  punishment.  (4)  Sin  not,  in  hope  of  future  repentance. 
(5)  Sin  no  more.  Why  shouldst  thou  destroy  thyself,  and  "  stand  in  jenpaidy  every 
hour?  "     "  The  soul  that  sinneth  shall  die."     "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death."     IV. 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  489 

Obseeve  the  charge  alleged  against  some  of  the  Corinthians.  "  Some  have 
not  the  knowledge  of  God.''  May  not  the  same  thing  be  charged  iipnn  some  of  us  ? 
Do  we  know  God,  so  as  to  fear  Him,  so  as  to  be  reconciled  unto  Him  by  Christ,  so 
as  to  love  Him,  so  as  to  serve  Him  with  a  perfect  heart  and  willing  mind  ?  If  not, 
then  in  the  apostle's  sense  we  do  not  know  Him.  "  I  speak  this  to  your  shame." 
It  is  our  shame.  Because  we  have  so  many  means  of  knowing  Him,  so  many  reasons 
to    know   Him   drawn    from    our   wants,   &c.       (J.    Walker,  D.D.)  Sin  not. — 

Sin  not : — I.  The  condition  implied.  1.  Ignorance.  2.  Insensibility.  3.  Peril. 
II.  The  earnest  call.  1.  To  serious  reflection.  2.  To  righteousness,  both  the 
knowledge  and  practise  of  it.  3.  To  vigilance.  {Ibid.)  The  sins  Ecuter  Day 
condemns: — This  warning,  in  the  miiist  of  an  elaborate  argument  about  the 
resurrection,  reminds  us  that  Christianity  is  intended  to  be  a  r'  gulative  ratlier 
than  a  speculative  system,  that  it  is  a  law  for  our  life,  not  merely  a  theme  for  our 
thought.  Paul  brings  to  bear  the  resurrection  as  an  argument  against  sirming.  It 
is  an  argument  against — I.  Degrading  the  body.  It  is  the  budy  that  is  to  rise  as 
well  as  the  spiiit.  Avoid,  then,  both  the  extreme  of  pampering  it  in  animalism,  and 
of  despising  it  in  asceticism.  II.  Absorption  in  this  world.  Beyond  the  time- 
world  there  is  another ;  beneath  the  sense-world  there  is  anotlier.  Live  for  the 
unseen  and  the  eternal.  III.  Wronging  Christ,  For  us  He  was  the  Conqueror, 
which  implies  that  for  us  He  went  tlu'ough  the  battle.  The  resurrection  is— 1.  The 
seal  of  His  Divinity.  Shall  we  slight  His  Divinity?  2.  The  sign  of  His  power. 
Shall  we  defy  His  power?  3.  The  token  of  His  love.  Shall  we  neglect  His  love? 
{U.  11.  Tliomas.)  For  some  have  not  the  knowledge  of  God:  I  speak  this  to  your 
shame. — The  knoxcledge  of  God  : — 1.  Knowledge  lies  at  the  foundation  of  religion  ; 
for,  if  we  are  to  serve  and  worship  God  we  ought  to  know  who  and  why  we  are  to 
worship  ;  and  it  is  this  which  renders  religion  a  reasonable  service.  2.  lynorance 
is  the  fruitful  source  of  wickedness.  The  heathen  were  devoted  to  the  grossest 
abominations — because  "  they  did  not  like  to  retain  God  in  th^ir  knowledge,"  the 
Corinthians  were  erroneous  in  doctrine  and  licentious  in  practice,  because  "they 
had  not  the  knowledge  of  God."  I.  What  is  this  knowledge?  It  cannot  be  a 
knowledge  of  the  Divine  essence ;  for  of  the  essence  of  anything  we  know  just  no- 
thing at  all.  "  Canst  thou,  by  searching,  find  out  God  ?"  &c.  Th  s  knowledge  must 
be  considered  as — 1.  Theoretical  to  begin  with.  From  the  visible  things  of  creation 
may  be  clearly  inferred  the  existence  and  perfections  of  a  great  First  Cause  ;  but  we 
can  learn  nothing  of  His  justice  or  His  mercy,  or  of  the  method  of  reconciliation 
with  Him  through  Christ  from  nature.  The  Bible  is  the  only  bo^k  whence  we  can 
acquire  a  satisfactory  knowledge  of  God  ;  because  there  God  has  been  pleased  to 
give  a  revelation  of  Himself.  Here  He  is  si-en  as  the  just  God  and  the  com- 
passionate Saviour,  giving  His  Son  to  death  that  He  may  make  the  sinner  alive.  2. 
Experimental.  A  person  may  study  navigation  at  school  and  acquu-e  a  theoretical 
knowledge  of  it,  but  he  must  reduce  that  knowledge  to  practice,  then,  becoming  a  skil- 
ful pilot,  his  knowledge  is  experimental.  We  may  study  medicine  by  b  ok-;,  or  at  a 
university;  but  until  we  walk  the  hospitals  our  knowledge  is  not  experimental. 
Now,  we  may  believe  that  God  knows  all  things,  and  our  belief  may  be  merely 
theory  ;  but  when  He  has  removed  the  veil  from  our  understandings,  and  shown 
us  all  tiiat  is  in  our  hearts,  then  we  have  experience  of  the  infinite  knowledge  of 
God.  We  mRy  believe  that  God  is  pure,  and  this  may  be  all  theory  ;  but  when  we 
have  been  given  to  see  sin  as  exceeding  sinful,  then  we  have  an  experience  of  tlie 
purity  of  God.  We  believe  that  God  is  almighty — but  that,  too,  may  be  all  theorv. 
When,  however,  He  has  effected  a  change  in  our  moral  nature,  which  is  nothing 
less  than  a  new  creation,  then  have  we  experimental  proof  of  the  power  of  God. 
We  may  believe  that  Christ  is  a  Saviour ;  but  this  may  be  nothing  more  than  a 
mere  general  apprehension  ;  but  when  we  have  seen  ourselves  guilty  and  undone, 
and  when  He  has  said,  "  Thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee,"  we  ex))erimentally  know  the 
power  of  the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  3.  Practical.  There  is  no  peife'tion  of  God 
but  which,  if  experimentally  known,  will  have  a  practical  influence  up  ai  us.  If  we 
know  His  greatness  and  condescension,  this  will  humble  us  ;  if  "e  know  His  holiness, 
we  shall  abhor  whatever  is  offensive  to  His  purity  ;  if  we  know  His  justice,  we  shall 
tremble  at  His  power  and  be  driven  for  a  refuge  to  the  great  atonement ;  if  vve  know 
the  whole  Divine  character,  we  shall  love  Him  with  all  our  heart,  and  serve  Him 
with  all  our  powers.  That  knowledge  which  does  not  improve  the  life  is  very  little 
wortti.  Hence  the  character  of  a  wicked  man  is  included  in  this,  that  "  he  knows 
the  God."  II.  Some  have  NOT  this  KNOWLEDGE.  1.  They  do  not  admit  the  truth 
of  God.     2.  They  do  nut  fear  Him.     They  who  know  God,  know  that  He  is  awful 


490  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

in  power,  glorious  in  holiness,  and  that  it  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  His  hands. 
As  such,  they  fear  to  offend  Him,  and  reverence  His  law.  3.  They  do  not  trust  in 
Him.  Every  instance  of  doubt  or  of  unbelief  ate  just  a  total  or  partial  ignorance 
of  the  Divine  character;  for  "  They  that  know  Thy  Nume  will  put  their  trust  in 
Thee."  4.  They  do  not  love  Him.  III.  The  want  of  the  knowledge  of  God  is  a  gkeat 
SHAME.  1.  Nothing  can  be  more  important  than  that  ignorant  creatures  should 
know  their  safety;  that  weak  and  perishing  creatures  should  know  where  their 
strength  lies  ;  that  the  miserable  should  know  where  happiness  is  to  be  found  ;  and 
that  an  immortal  spirit  should  know  its  portion.  2.  This  knowledge  will  have 
considerable  influence  upon  our  duties.  We  are  called  to  serve  God,  and  we  cannot 
serve  an  unknown  God.  3.  We  have  adequate  means  put  into  our  hands  to  acquire 
this  knowledge,  if  we  have  inclination  to  avail  ourselves  of  them  in  nature,  the 
Scriptures,  through  the  Holy  Spirit,  &c.  4.  For  this  knowledge,  too,  we  have  also 
adequate  faculties.  Can  it  be  said  that  our  faculties  are  adequate  to  the  attain- 
ment of  every  other  kind  of  knowledge  but  that  which  most  concerns  us  to  be 
acquainted  with  ?  5.  We  have  the  most  important  and  positive  motives  to  urge  us 
on  to  secure  this  knowledge.  "Godliness  is  profitable  unto  all  things,"  etc.  In 
this  knowledge  standeth  our  eternal  life.  Conclusion  :  This  is  interesting  to  us  all ; 
and  every  man  ought  to  inquire  of  his  own  conscience,  "Do  I  know  God?"  1. 
Alas  !  of  some  it  may  be  said — by  your  fruits  your  ignorance  of  God  is  too  clearly 
manifested.  2.  There  are  some  who  profess  to  know  God — but  is  that  knowledge 
real?    is  it  experimental?      (IF.  Atherton.)  The  shame  of  living  tvithout  the 

knowledge  of  God : — I.  The  knowledge  op  God.  1.  There  is  a  knowledge 
of  God  obtained  by  reflecting  on  His  works.  3.  There  is  a  knowledge  of 
God  obtained  by  perusing  His  Word.  8.  There  is  a  knowledge  of  God  by  a 
revelation  of  Himself  to  the  mind.  This  knowledge  has  been  usually  termed 
experimental.  H.  Some  have  not  this  knowledge.  1.  Avowed  infiiiels  Jiave  not 
the  knowledge  of   God.      2.   Profligate  sinners  have  not  tlie  knowL  dge  of   God. 

3.  Nominal  Christians  have  not  the  knowledge  of  God.  III.  This  was  spoken  to 
THEIR  SHAME.  1.  Consider  the  object  of  this  knowledge.  A  Being  who  unites  in 
Himself  all  possible  perfections.  How  disgraceful  to  live  in  ignorance  of  God !  2. 
Consider  the  congeniality  of  this  knowledge  with  the  nature  of  man.  Our  first 
parents  were  invested  with  a  large  share  of  it ;  and  the  human  soul  was  formed  for 
its  possession.     3.  Consider  the  means  afforded  us  for  obtaining  this  knowledge. 

4.  Consider  the  ease  with  which  this  knowledge  may  be  secured.  Human  know- 
ledge is  often  obtained  with  difficulty.  5.  Consider  the  happiness  which  you  will 
forego,  and  the  misery  you  will  share,  by  living  without  this  knowledge.  We  con- 
clude by  observing — 1.  How  important  is  the  knowledge  of  God  !  How  insignificant 
is  human  science  when  put  into  competition  with  this  !  2.  How  solicitous  should 
we  be  to  ascertain  whether  we  are  in  the  possession  of  this  knowledge.  3.  How 
shameful  to  live  without  the  knowledge  of  God!  {Sketches  of  Sermons.)  The 
immediate  knowledge  of  God: — Who,  then,  are  these  Corinthian  disciples,  that  they 
have  not  so  much  as  the  knowledge  of  God?  Plainly  enough  our  apostle  is  not 
charging  them  here  with  ignorance,  but  with  some  lack  of  the  Divine  illumination 
which  ought,  if  they  are  true  disciples,  to  be  in  them.  They  certainly  know  God  in 
the  traditional  and  merely  cognitive  way.  Indeed,  the  apostle  is  discoursing  to  them 
here  of  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  which  is  itself  a  matter  based  in  Christian 
ideas.  We  shall  best  understand  the  point  assumed  in  this  impeachment,  I  think, 
if  we  raise  the  distinction  between  knowing  God,  and  knowing  about  God.  Doubt- 
less it  is  much  to  know  about  God,  about  His  operations.  His  works.  His  plans,  His 
laws.  His  truth.  His  perfect  attributes.  His  saving  mercies.  But  true  faith  itself 
discovers  another  and  more  absolute  kind  of  knowledge,  a  knowledge  of  God  Him- 
self ;  immediate,  personal  knowledge,  coming  out  of  no  report,  or  statement,  or 
anything  called  truth,  as  being  taught  in  language.  It  is  knowing  God  within,  even 
as  we  know  ourselves.  The  other  is  only  a  knowing  about  God,  as  from  a  distance. 
It  may  be  well  to  say  that  we  have  two  denials  set  against  this  doctrine.  One  is 
the  denial  of  the  philosophers  outside  of  Christianity,  speculating  there  about  the 
cognitive  functions,  and  making  what  they  conceive  to  be  their  specially  profound 
discovery,  that  knowledges  are  possible  only  of  things  relative.  Therefore,  God 
being  infinite,  cannot  be  known — God  is  unknowable.  They  say  nothing  of  faith, 
they  have  no  conception  of  any  such  super-eminent,  almost  Divine  talent  in  our 
humanity.  Could  they  simply  trust  themselves  over  to  God,  to  live  by  His  tender 
guidance  and  true  inward  revelation,  they  would  never  again  call  Him  the  Unknow- 
able.    The  other  and  second  form  of  denial  as  regards  the  immediate  knowledge  of 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  491 

God,  sets  up  its  flag  inside  of  the  Christian  Church  and  among  the  muniments  of 
doctrine.  Here  the  possibility  of  faith  is  admitted,  and  tlie  necessity  of  it  abun- 
dantly magnified.  But  the  faith  power  is  used  up,  it  is  conceived,  on  propositions  ; 
that  is  propositions  which  aflirm  something  about  God.  It  does  not  go  through, 
and  over,  and  beyond,  such  propositions,  to  meet  the  inward  revelation  or  discovery 
of  God  Himself.  They  do  not  even  conceive  it  as  a  possibility,  that  we  should  know 
God  Himself  as  a  presence  operative  m  us ;  even  as  we  know  the  summer  heat  by 
its  pervasive  action  in  our  bodies.  We  do  not  know  the  lieat  by  report,  or  debate, 
or  inference,  or  scientific  truth  interpreting  medially  between  us  and  it ;  we  do  not 
see  it,  or  hear  it,  or  handle  it,  and  yet  we  have  it  and  know  that  we  have,  by  the 
inward  sense  it  creates.  What  tlien  is  the  truth  of  this  matter  ?  Why  it  is  that 
human  souls  or  minds  are  just  as  truly  made  to  be  filled  with  God's  internal 
actuating  presence,  as  human  bodies  are  to  be  tempered  internally  by  heat,  or  as 
matter  is  made  to  be  swayed  by  gravity,  or  the  sky-space  to  be  irradiated  by  the  day. 
God  is  to  them  heat,  gravity,  day,  immediately  felt  as  such,  and  known  by  the  self- 
revelation  of  His  person.  So  Ht  least  it  was  originally  to  be,  and  so  it  would  be  now, 
had  not  tliis  presence  of  God  internally  and  personally  to  souls,  this  quickening, 
life-giving  God-sense,  been  shut  off  by  sin.  Is  it,  then,  to  be  said  or  imagined  tliat, 
in  the  new  birth,  or  new-begun  life  of  faith,  the  subject  really  knows  God  by  an 
immediate  knowledge?  He  may  not  so  conceive  it,  I  answer,  but  it  is  none  the  less 
true.  He  will  speak,  it  may  be,  only  of  his  peace,  but  it  will  seem  to  him  to  be  a 
kind  of  Divine  peace.  Thus  you  have  every  one  two  kinds  of  knowledge  relating 
toyouiS(-lf.  One  is  what  you  know  mediately  about  yourself,  through  language, 
and  one  that  which  you  have  immediately  as  being  conscious  of  yourself.  Under 
the  first  you  learn  who  your  parents  were,  what  others  think  of  you,  what  effects 
the  woild  has  on  you,  what  power  you  have  over  it,  and  what  is  thought  to  be  the 
science,  it  may  be,  of  your  natitre,  as  an  intelligent  being.  Und^r  the  second  you 
have  a  knowledge  of  yourself  so  immediate,  that  there  is  no  language  in  it,  no 
thought,  no  act  of  judgment  or  opinion,  you  simply  have  a  self-feeling  that  is 
ini  uitive  and  direct.  Now  you  were  made  to  have  just  such  an  immediate  knowledge 
of  God  as  of  yourself ;  to  be  conscious  of  God ;  only  this  consciousness  of  God  has 
been  closed  up  by  your  sin  and  is  now  set  open  by  your  faith  ;  and  this  exactly  is 
wlrat  distinguishes  every  soul  enlightened  by  the  Spirit,  and  born  of  God.  Observe 
now  in  what  manner  the  Scriptures  speak  on  this  subject.  And  the  time  would  fail 
me  to  merely  recount  the  ways  in  which  it  is  given  as  the  distinction  of  faith  or  holy 
experience,  that  it  carries,  in  some  way,  the  knowledge  of  Uod,  and  differs  the  sub- 
ject in  that  manner  from  all  that  are  under  the  blindness  of  mere  nature.  The 
Holy  Sjiirit,  in  like  manner,  is  si^oken  of  in  a  great  many  ways,  as  the  intercoursing 
life  and  immediate  inward  manifestation  of  God.  But  there  is  an  objection  to 
this  mode  of  conceiving  holy  experience,  as  implying  an  immediate  discovery  of 
God,  which  I  am  properly  required  to  notice.  Wliat  is  the  use,  in  this  view,  some 
will  ask,  if  a  Bible,  or  external  revelation ?  what  use  of  the  incarnation  itself  ? 
Does  it  follow  that  because  we  have  an  immediate  knowlei'ge  of  he.it  we  have 
therefore  no  use  at  all  for  the  scientific  doctrine  of  heat,  or  the  laws  by  which  it  is 
expounded  ?  There  is  also  another  objection  to  be  noticed  here,  which  moves  in 
the  exactly  opposite  direction,  where  those  who  know  not  God  complain  that, 
revelation,  as  they  look  upon  it,  does  not  reveal  Him,  and  that  God  is  daik  to  them 
still,  as  they  could  not  expect  Him  to  be.  If  there  be  a  God,  they  ask,  why  does 
He  not  stand  forth  and  be  known  as  a  Father  to  His  children  ?  Why  allow  us  to 
grope  and  stumble  after  Him,  or  finally  miss  Him  altogether?  They  are  not 
satisfied  with  the  Bible,  and  if  we  call  it  a  revelation  of  God,  they  do  not  see  it. 
We  must  not  make  Him  responsible  for  the  blear  and  self-blinding  of  our  sin.  And 
if  it  were  not  for  this  I  think  we  should  all  see  Him  plainly  enough,  and  always, 
and  everywhere.  For  it  is  the  whole  endeavour  of  His  management  to  be  known. 
Now  this  exposition  of  God's  truth  converges  practically,  as  I  conceive,  on  a  single 
point  of  broadest  consequence;  correcting  a  mistake  almost  universally  prevalent 
in  some  greater  or  less  degree  ;  the  mistake  I  mean  of  being  overmm  h  occnpied  in 
religion  with  matters  of  the  head.  The  true  evidence  of  discipleship  is  knowing 
God.  Other  men  know  something  about  Him.  The  Christian  knows  Him,  has 
Him  as  a  friend.  And  there  is  no  substitute  tor  this.  Observances,  beliefs, 
opinions,  self-testing  severities — all  these  are  idle  and  prove  nnthing.  If  a  man 
knows  God,  it  is  a  fact  so  grand,  so  full  of  meaning,  that  he  wants  no  evidence 
beside.  Now  as  these  keep  off  the  light  of  their  day  by  the  ever-busy  meddling  of 
their  understanding,  there  is  another  class  who  have  never  found  the  day  by  reason 


492  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

of  their  over-busy,  over-curious  endeavours  to  make  ready  for  it.  They  are  waiting, 
and  reading,  and  reasoning,  as  they  think,  to  get  light  for  conversion.  They  are 
going  to  be  converted  rationally,  nursing  all  the  while  a  subtle  pride  of  this,  which 
only  makes  them  darker  and  puts  them  farther  off.  After  all  you  have  reasoned, 
faith  is  still  to  come.  The  roads  of  the  natural  understanding  are  in  a  lower  plane, 
you  must  rise,  you  must  go  up  into  trust  and  know  God — God  Himself — by  the 
inward  discovery  of  His  infinite  spirit  and  person.  What  is  wanted,  therefore,  for 
us  all,  is  summed  uo  in  this  Christian  word  faith — faith  in  Christ,  or  faith  in  God ; 
for  it  makes  no  difference.  Thmking  and  questioning  stir  the  mind  about  God, 
faith  discerns  Hini,  and  by  it,  as  the  soul's  open  window,  he  enters  to  be  discerned. 
Would  that  all  of  you  could  know  how  much  this  means.  (H.  Bushnell, 
D.D.)  On  the  knoicledge  of  God  : — How  deplorable   would  be   our  condition 

if  universal  knowledge  were  necessary  in  order  to  our  happiness !  For,  alas  ! 
how  very  little  do  the  wisest  know !  There  is,  however,  a  certain  kind  of 
knowledge  essentially  necessary  to  our  happiness,  viz.,  "  the  knowledge  of 
God."  If  we  would  enjoy  peace,  and  secure  future  good,  we  must  be  "  ac- 
quainted with  Him  "  (Job  xxii.  21).  This  knowledge  infallibly  leads  to  eternal 
life,  and  is,  in  fast,  an  anticipation  of  it  (John  xvii.  3),  whereas  they  who  are 
destitute  of  it  remain  in  spiritual  death  (2  Thess.  i.  7,  8).  And  quite  agreeable  to 
Scripture  is  the  testimony  of  reason.  As  creatures  who  are  dependent  continually 
upon  God  for  ad  we  have  or  hope  for,  we  owe  to  Him  our  worship  and  service.  But  to 
worship  and  serve  Him  in  air  acceptable  manner  is  impossible  if  we  do  not  know 
Him.  Consider — I.  The  nature  and  origin  of  the  knowledge  oe  God.  He  is 
infinite  and  incomprehensible  to  our  limited  faculties.  He  is  a  Spirit,  and  invisible 
to  our  bodily  eyes.  If  therefore  He  do  not  reveal  Himself  to  us,  we  can  never 
know  Him.  But  He  does  reveal  Himself  in  the  works  of  creation  and  providence, 
in  the  Bible,  in  His  Son,  and  by  the  illumination  of  His  Spirit.  II.  The  fruits  of 
THIS  KNOWLEDGE.  1.  Humility.  2.  Confidence  attended  with  inward  peace  (Psa. 
ix.  10  ;  Isa.  xxvi.  3).     3.  Love  (1  John  iv.  8).     (J.  Benson.) 

Vers.  35-44.  But  some  man  will  say.  How  are  the  dead  raised  up  ?  and  witli 
what  body  do  they  come  ? — How  are  the  dead  raised  up  ? — I.  These  words  meant, 
*'How  can  THE  DEAD  BE  RAISED  UP?  "  Let  US  try  to  find  an  answer  to  it.  1.  If 
any  man  really  believe  in  the  existence  of  a  Great  First  Cause,  his  answer  would  at 
once  be,  "With  God  all  things  are  possible."  He  who  built  the  house,  and  allowed 
it  to  be  pulled  down,  can  rebuild  it.  But  we  should  not  rest  the  answer  upon 
this.  2.  What  has  been  done  can  be.  Now,  we  affirm — and  it  is  the  subject  of 
this  chapter — that  there  is  now  passed  into  the  heavens  a  man  who  was  once  dead 
— Christ.  And  this  fact  rests  upon  the  irrefragable  evidence  adduced  in  this 
chapter ;  and  this  evidence  is  such  that  when  a  great  infidel  went  to  work  to  prove 
Christianity  untrue,  it  ended  in  his  being  convinced,  by  the  candid  examination  of  it ; 
and  Gilbert  West's  book  is  a  standing  evidence  of  the  truth  of  the  resurrection.  We 
answer  the  question,  "  How  are  the  dead  raised  up  ?  "  by  saying.  It  has  been  done. 
What  God  has  done  He  can  do  again.  II.  But  the  question  may  mean  the  curious 
inquiry  as  to  the  manner  of  the  resurrection.  With  what  body  will  they  rise  ? 
Will  it  be  the  same  body  that  was  buried?  Will  all  its  particles  be  the  same? 
Will  the  ashes  of  Wickliffe,  e.g.,  that,  after  the  body  was  dug  up  and  burned,  were 
thrown  into  the  river,  which  carried  them  into  another  river,  which  carried  them 
into  the  sea — will  all  those  ashes  be  brought  togetlier  ?  Now  I  shall  answer  this  by 
■showing  that  when  we  shall  be  raised — 1.  We  shall  know  that  we  are  the  same  persons 
that  lived.  It  is  a  fact  well  known  th'it  our  bodies  are  continually  changing. 
Unless  there  were  particles  being  continually  taken  up,  how  would  the  meals  that 
we  regularly  take  to  repair  the  waste,  increase  the  size  of  the  body?  The  boy  of 
seven,  the  youth  of  fourteen,  the  young  man  of  twenty-one,  and  the  full-grown  man 
of  thirty,  has  really  and  truly  had  a  fresh  body  every  seven  years.  Yetwhicii  of  us 
is  not  conscious  that  we  are  the  same  persons  that  we  were  as  little  children — not 
the  same  pieces  of  matter,  but  the  same  peisons?  And  this  is  necessary  for  the 
judgment.  It  is  a  principle  of  English  law  that  it  is  the  person  that  did  Ihe 
offence  that  must  be  tried  for  it.  Twenty  yens  may  have  elapsed  since  the 
murderer  did  the  deed  ;  the  hand  that  shed  the  blood  may  have  been  changed  in 
that  time  ;  yet  he  is  the  same  man,  knows  that  he  is  the  same,  and  is  answerable 
for  the  crime  that  was  done  twenty  years  ago.  We  shall,  in  this  sense,  be  the  same, 
and  have  to  give  account  of  the  things  done  in  the  body.  2.  Others  will  know  us  to 
be  the  same.     The  great  missionary  Moffat,  in  one  of  his  journeys,  fell  in  with  an 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  493 

African  king,  and  began  to  tell  him  of  the  resurrection  ;  and  as  he  went  on  he  saw 
that  iron  niiin's  face  begin  to  work  convulsively ;  and  when  the  king  could  speak 
he  said,  trembling  all  over,  "What!  do  you  say  that  I  shall  see  ihe  men  whom  I 
have  slauglitered  in  battle?"  He  seemed  as  if  he  saw  before  him  the  victims  of 
his  courage,  as  he  had  thought,  but  of  his  cruelty,  as  he  now  began  to  think.  At  the 
great  day  others  will  know  us,  however  changed  we  maybe.  Seducer,  you  shall 
recognise  the  woman  whom  you  have  tiung  heartless  on  a  cold  world,  and  left  to 
vice,  misery,  and  an  early  death.  Tempter  of  yduth,  you  shall  recognise  the 
thoughtless  boys  you  enticed  from  duly,  and  they  shall  know  you.  Infidel,  you 
shall  recognise  those  whose  little  faiih  you  sapped  hj  specious  arguments,  whose 
little  hope  you  took  away.  Hume  is  related  to  have  shaken  the  faith  of  his  mother, 
and  when  that  mother  was  dying,  finding  that  his  argnmenis  would  not  support 
her,  she  sent  for  him  to  tell  her  again  what  he  had  tofd  her  before,  for  she  found 
she  was  sinking  into  eternity  with  nothing  under  her  feet.  Hume  shall  meet  his 
mother,  and  his  mother  know  her  son  that  did  this  unfilial  work  upon  the  soul. 
And  you  who  are  really  Chiistians,  you  shall  recognise  everyone  of  tliose  whom  you 
lead  to  Cli list.  3.  And  yet  weshad  bf' chamjed.  (1)  From  corruption  to  incorruption. 
Decay  is  sown  in  our  blood,  and  when  we  arn  laid  in  the  grave  we  are  sown  in  corrup- 
tion ;  when  we  are  raised  we  shall  be  incapable  of  decay.  (2)  From  dishonour  to  glory. 
"  It  is  sown  in  dislionour."  Who  of  us  <ioes  not  know  thut  ?  But  wljen  the  body  is 
raised  it  will  be  in  the  glory  of  Chnst  as  He  shone  on  tlie  Mount  of  Transfiguration. 
(3)  From  weakness  to  power.  How  soon  are  we  tired  !  How  soon  does  our  mind 
exhaust  our  body  1  How  soon  are  we  wearied  with  work,  ard  with  pleasure  too  1 
But  when  these  bodies  are  raised  they  will  be  incapable  of  fatigue,  and  capable  of 
exertion  such  as  we  rannot  dream  of  now.  "  They  rest  not  dny  nor  night."  (4) 
Suddenly — in  the  t^inkhng  of  an  eye — at  the  last  trump.  Conclusion:  "They 
that  have  done  good,  uuio  the  resurrection  of  life,  and  they  that  have  done  evil, 
unto   the   resurrection  of   condemnation."      {W.    W.   Chumpneys.)  The  resur- 

rection h-<ihj  (with  Phil.  iii.  21)  : — When  the  fact  of  the  resurrection  has 
been  esttiblished,  there  remains  a  number  of  very  interesting  and  important  ques- 
tions concerning  the  mn,m  er  and  the  time  of  the  resuirection,  and  the  relation  of 
the  resurrection-body  to  the  present  one.  These  questions  are  not  simply  for  the 
delc'dation  of  our  curiesity,  because  clear  views  of  the  nature  of  our  future  life  and 
of  the  transformation  whi'-h  our  present  life  is  to  undeigo  through  the  energy  of 
the  power  of  Christ  cannot  fall  to  influence  our  pr-  sent  life  and  to  inspire  us  with 
enthusiasm  for  the  Lord  whose  glory  we  are  to  share.     I.   What,  then,  are  the 

PEINCIPLKS  OF  THK  RESURUKCTIO.V  AS  GIVEN    IN    THE  WORDS   BEFORE  CS  ?       1.    Take  first 

of  all  the  jiassage  in  Thilippians,  and  you  will  find  it  assert  the  following  principles 
— (1)  In  the  resuireclinn  the  spirits  of  the  just  will  appear  not  in  a  disembodied, 
but  in  an  embodied,  state.  (2)  Between  these  two  bodies  there  is  a  relation  of 
continuity.  (3)  The  transformation  is  effected  through  a  spiritual  energy  within 
us.  The  word  here  translated  "  working  "  has  an  intensely  "  inward  "  significance. 
It  means  in-woiking,  a  working  in  the  heart  of  things,  and  p  nticulaidy  in  the 
spiritual  processes  ot  life.  The  "  working  of  the  power  by  which  Christ  sulidues  all 
things  to  Himself"  is  the  spiiitual  force  with  which  He  floods  the  centre  of  things, 
and  sn  leavens  and  transforms  the  whole.  So  the  power  that  forms  the  new  body 
must  be  sought  in  spirit,  (4)  The  comj^lete  resurrection-body  is  not  existent  until 
the  final  appearing  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Cnrist.  (5)  The  power  and  prim  iple  of  this 
resuriec'ion  have  their  tvpe  and  origin  in  Christ.  2.  Now,  if  you  turn  to  the  pas- 
sage in  Corinthians,  you  will  find  several  of  these  principles  over  again,  with  some 
supplementary  matter.  (1)  The  transition  from  the  body  of  humiliation  to  tbe 
body  of  ^loiyis  elfected  through  a  development  which  is  in  the  truest  sense  natural, 
that  is,  in  a'-coi dance  with  the  laws  of  ideal  human  life.  (2)  The  natural  and  the 
sinritual  body  are  not  to  be  conceived  as  consisting  ot  i'tentical  particles,  but  as 
different  s'ages  in  a  process  of  development,  which  are  said  to  be  identical  owing  to 
the  continuity  of  the  life  that  fills  them.  II.  Having  these  definite  principles  to 
clieck  and  to  direct  us,  we  wish  to  ixamine  in  the  lighi'  op  them  such  conceptions 

AS  AR"',  OR  MA^  BE,  FOKMED  OF  THE  MANNER  IN  WHICH  THE  RESURRECTION-BODY  SHALL 
COME  IN  10  BEING  AND  BE  UNITED    10  THE  spiuiT  TO  WHICH  IT  BELONGS.     The  ScripturC- 

phrns",  "the  resurrection  of  the  dead"  does  not  refer  either  to  spirit  or  body  in 
separaion  from  one  another,  but  to  the  reappearance  of  the  complete  human  life 
in  a  state  of  glory.  The  theory  that  flings  the  body  away  as  a  temporary  fetter, 
and  denies  it  a  share  in  the  resurrection-life  is  clearly  and  emphatically  condemned. 
It  is  in  violent  opposition  to  the  whole  genius  of  Christian  thought.     It  is  foreign 


494  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 


to  all  that  we  know  of  the  miad  of  Jesus  Christ  and  His  apostles.  The  •'  ego  "  of 
Christ's  conception  is  certainly  not  an  independent  spiritual  essence,  wiiether 
embodied  or  disembodied.  It  is  always  the  entire  life  in  its  association  of  soul  and 
body.  Whether  He  directs  his  attention  to  this  life  or  the  next,  the  human  "  unit  " 
is  always  a  complex  one.  How,  then,  is  the  resurrection-bodj'  produced,  and  what 
is  its  relation  to  the  body  which  is  placed  in  the  grave  ?  If  we  turn  to  our  prin- 
ciples we  shall  find  tliat  they  clearly  contradict  the  resurrection  of  the  identical 
particles  laid  in  the  grave.  The  whole  spirit  of  the  passage  in  Phili|ipians  is  in 
opposition  to  it,  for  instead  of  the  idea  of  an  inert  mass  being  indued  with  life 
again  after  a  long  period  of  death,  the  passage  glows  with  the  conception  of  a  con- 
tinuous energy,  and  a  great  transformation  effected  by  an  informing  process  of  life. 
The  passage  from  the  epistle  to  the  Corinthians  is  still  more  explicit  in  its  testimony. 
For  thn  two  principles  we  found  there,  viz.,  that  the  resurrection-body  is  produced  by 
a  development  in  accordance  with  true  laws  and  processes  of  life,  and,  that  it  does  not 
reproduce  the  identical  particles  of  the  earthly  body — are  both  in  dir  ect  contradiction 
to  the  commonly  received  theory  of  the  resunection.  Probably  the  misconception 
has  arisen  through  mistaking  the  bearing  of  Paul's  beautiful  series  of  antitheses  re- 
specting 1he  resurrection.  When  Paul  says,  "It  is  sown.  ...  It  is  raised,"  he  is 
not  speaking  of  the  body  only,  but  of  the  entire  man  as  he  appears  first  in  the 
earthly,  and  afterwards  in  the  heavenly,  state.  It  is  this  earthly  life  of  ours  that 
"cannot  be  quickened  except  it  die,"  and  that  through  death  shall  inherit  incor- 
ruption.  The  tiansition,  therefore,  is  one  of  spirit  and  life.  It  is  a  living  tran>ition 
from  the  present  living  as^ociatiim  of  soul  and  body  to  a  higher  form  of  such 
association,  the  development  of  the  "  higher  "  body  requiring  as  its  necessary  con- 
dition the  death  of  tlie  lower  body,  as  the  living  seed  tlings  off  its  old  body  that  a 
higher  embodiment  of  the  life  of  the  seed  may  take  its  place.  Some  obscure 
questions  remain,  which  may  become  clearer  to  Christian  thought  by  and  by. 
They  are  such  as  these :  Does  the  new  body  co-exist  at  any  period  with  the  earthly 
body,  and  has  it  aheady  reached  any  staye  of  development  at  the  hour  of  death? 
Or  is  it  at  death  only  a  "  latency,"  ready  to  leap  into  full  development  and  activity 
at  the  appearing  of  Jesirs  Christ  ?  If  so,  how  will  this  non-development  affect  the 
present  life  of  the  blessed  dead?  These  questions  open  up  a  vast  field  of  thought 
that  has  scarcely  been  entered  except  by  one  here  and  another  there.  But  we  may 
lay  down  one  thing  more  as  clear  and  certain,  namely,  that  the  full  development 
of  the  "  body  of  glory"  will  not  take  place  until  the  Lord  appears.  III.  I  trust  that 
this  discussion  will  have  impressed  upon  you  that  the  ScRiPTnKE-TEACHixG  con- 
cerning THE  BESCREECTION-EODY  TRENCHES  UPON  GREAT  QUESTIONS  OF  DiVINE  POWER 
AND  GLORY,  AND  EMBODIES  GREAT  PRINCIPLES  OF  TRANSFORMATION  AND  DEVELOPMENT  I  HAT 
MAY  WELL   IMPRESS    OUR   IMAGINATION,  AND,  EVEN  THOUGH  BUT  OBSCURELY  UNDERSTOOD, 

May  PROFOUNDLY  INSPIRE  OUR  LIFE.  1.  One  rcsult  of  this  faith  is,  that  it  gives  ful- 
ness and  substantiality  to  our  future  life.  The  human  body  is  no  encumbrance 
fastened  upon  the  spirit,  like  a  fetter  on  powerful  wrists,  so  that  the  sfurit  would 
be  more  complete  without  it.  Gnd  never  loaded  a  life  with  a  useless  encumbrance 
of  that  kind.  Rather,  the  body  is  necessary  for  the  complete  life  of  the  man,  to 
give  it  individuality  and  fulness.  We  that  are  in  this  tabernacle  do  groan,  beng 
burdened ;  not  for  that  we  would  be  unclothed— su<h  an  anticipation  would  be  too 
shadowy  and  ghostly.  2.  Belief  in  the  resurrection-body  is  ultimately  bound  up 
with  faith  in  the  foundations  of  Christianity.  I  do  not  say  that  disbelief  in  the  full 
resurrection  of  the  dead  is  at  once  and  always  attended  by  disbelief  in  the  cenlral 
truths  of  Christianity.  Fortunately  or  unfortunately,  men  are  not  always  con- 
sistent, and  may  for  a  time  hold  together  beliefs  that  are  destructive  of  one  anoth  r. 
Yet  I  have  no  doubt  that  disbelief  in  a  re.>-urrection-body  is  a  logical  denial  of  the 
foundations  of  Christianity,  and  must  be  constantly  exerting  an  influence  that 
tends  to  draw  away  a  man  from  the  heart  of  Christian  truth.  For  it  must  be  noted 
that  the  distinguishing  feature,  the  very  soul  of  Christianity  is  belief  in  a  person. 
Jesus  is  infinitely  more  than  a  mark  in  history  to  suugest  noble  ideas.  He  is  life, 
and  the  certainty  of  life  for  us.  In  Him  we  see,  in  full  view  on  the  stage  of  human 
life,  the  battle  of  humanity  fought  and  won.  If  any  one  attenuates  the  saints' 
future  life  into  an  intangible  "ego"  he  cannot  heartih  believe  in  that  living,  I  may 
almost  say  eatthly,  portraiture  of  immortality  which  Christ  gave.  Generally  you 
will  find  such  an  one  attach  ever  lessening  importance  to  the  earthly  life  of  Jesus, 
until  His  Christianity  is  a  philosophic  rationalism,  with  the  name  of  Christ  mean 
inglessly  attached  to  it.  3.  The  Christian  view  of  the  resurrection  sets  great  value 
on  our  present  life,  even  on  its  physical  relations.    Therefore,  it  is  able  to  say  with 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  495 

an  authority  of  iU  own :  Give  to  God  tlie  full  service  of  body,  soul,  and  spirit,  for 
eternity  shall  glorify  you  in  the  whole  range  of  your  life.  {John  Thomas,  M.A.)  The 
resurrection  : — To  the  scejDtical  question,  "  Witli  what  body  do  they  come  ?  "  Paul's 
answer  is — I.  Not  in  the  same  as  that  which  was  deposited  in  the  gkave.  The  old 
bo  ly  is  destroyed.  The  death  of  tliat  seed  from  which  the  plant  springs  is  the  mere 
destruction  ot  its  husk.  Its  hid<Ien  life,  something  altogether  distinct  from  its 
clothing,  germinated  and  broke  through  its  husky  garb,  which  dissolved  in  the 
earth.  So  "  flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  The  gross 
is  gone  for  ever.  11.  With  a  body  that  will  have  an  organic  connection  with 
THE  BuiuED  ONE.  The  oak,  though  it  lias  not  a  particle  of  the  old  acorn  in  it ;  the 
butterfly,  though  it  has  not  a  particle  of  the  grub  egg  from  which  it  sprung  in  it ; 
the  stalwart  man,  tliough  he  has  not  one  particle  of  that  matter  which  he  had  when 
an  infant  on  his  mother's  knee,  has  an  orgnuic  connection  with  it.  So  Paul 
virtually  says  of  the  resurrection  body,  though  it  has  nothing  in  it  of  the  old 
materials,  it  has  a  casual  connection  with  it.  What  is  that  mystic  thing  which 
connects  the  acorn  with  the  oak,  the  man  with  the  infant  ?  Tell  me  that,  and  I  may 
perhaps  tell  you  that  which  connects  the  resurrection  body  with  that  which  was 
buried.  We  know  that  seeils  that  have  been  buried  in  darkness  for  thousands  of 
year?,  will,  when  brought  into  thf-  genial  air  and  sunhenm,  bieak  into  life;  may  it 
not  he  that  in  the  human  body  there  is  an  invisihle,  indestructible  germ — what  "the 
old  Jew  called  the  "  immortal  bone,"  and  Goethe  the  "monad" — that  will  spiing 
to  life  when,  by  the  interposition  of  Heaven,  all  the  graves  of  the  world  shall  be 
thrown  open  ?  Is  there  an  undying  embryo  in  this  gross  body  of  ours  out  of  which 
will  spring  one  day  a  glorious  body?  HI.  With  a  body  which  God  in  His 
SOVEREIGNTY  WILL  BESTOW.  1.  God  clothes  life.  "  To  every  seed  his  own  body." 
There  is  no  doubt  that  in  the  universe  there  is  life  unclothed  by  matter.  It  may  be 
so  with  the  angfls ;  it  is  so  with  God.  Around  us  there  may  be  immcfisurable 
oceans  of  naked  lile;  but  we  only  know  something  of  the  embodied.  No  science 
has  as  yet  told  us  what  life  is.  2.  God  clothes  life  with  the  fittest  body.  "  All  flesh 
is  not  the  same  flesh."  Life  has  boundless  varieties,  but  God  gives  to  each  its 
fitting  body.  The  hare  and  the  elephant,  the  wren  and  the  eagle,  the  minnow  and 
the  leviathan,  all  have  bodies  fitted  to  the  peculiarities  of  their  distinctive  life.  3. 
God  clothes  life  aci-nrding  to  His  own  pleasure.  "  Giveth  a  body  as  it  hath  pleased 
Him."  He  chose  the  form,  the  hue,  the  garb,  of  each  life.  Our  resurrection  body 
will  be  as  it  "  hath  pleased  Him."  Then — (1)  It  w'ill  be  beautiful,  for  He  is  the 
God  of  all  taste,  the  Fountain  of  all  beauty,  the  Standard  of  all  aesthetics.  (2) 
Useful,  for  He  is  the  God  of  benevolence.  Exquisitely  suited  to  our  pi'esent  sphere 
are  the  bodies  we  now  have.  (.3)  Glorious.  "  There  is  one  glory  of  the  sun,"  &c. ; 
so  also  with  the  resurrection  of  the  just.  IV.  With  a  body  that  will  be  a  vast 
IMPROVEMENT  ON  THE  OLD  ONE.  Paul  attributes  three  predicates  to  the  present  body 
— corrutition,  dishonour,  weakness  ;  to  the  resurrection  body,  three  predicates — 
immortality,  glory,  and  power.  What  an  improvement!  (D.  llwmas,  D.D.) 
The  resurrectivJi  body  : — I.  This  quhstion  wr  have  all  asked.  1.  At  death  some- 
thing goes  out  of  the  body — that  which  vitalised  it,  that  which  we  could  not  touch, 
nor  weigh,  nor  measure.  No  sooner  has  this  something  gone,  than  the  body  imme- 
diately begins  to  return  to  its  dust.  Nothing  can  arrest  it.  We  may  make  a 
muimny  of  it,  but  a  mummy  is  not  a  body.  In  the  British  Museum  are  many 
specimens  of  mummies.  They  excite  no  human  interest,  only  appeal  to  curiosity 
and  create  aversion.  2.  The  necessity  for  this  material  body  of  ours  arises  from 
the  fact  that  we  belong,  temporarily  at  least,  to  a  material  world.  Without  such 
bodies  we  could  not  see,  or  feel,  or  touch,  or  recognise  this  world.  It  would  not 
exist  for  us.  3.  Recall  what  Paul  snys  elsewhere  in  other  parts  of  his  letters  about 
the  b  dy.  Writing  to  Roman  Christians,  he  calls  it  a  "  body  of  death."  To  the 
Corinthians  he  sjjeaks  of  it  as  a  wild  beast  to  be  kept  in  subjection.  To  the  Philip- 
piaus  he  speaks  of  '•  this  body  of  our  humiliation."  And  yet,  when  we  have  said 
everything  to  its  disadvantHge,  we  cannot  withhold  a  recognition  of  the  wonderful 
way  in  which  the  body  sympathises  with  and  serves  the  purpose  of  the  mind  and 
S)>irit.  The  old  Greeks  recognised  its  lines  of  beauty  in  their  Dianas  and  ApoUos. 
They  lived  intellii'ently  and  artistically  for  the  body.  But  they  proved  to  the  world 
that  the  Sf-rviceof  the  boily,  even  when  artistically  pursued,  issues  inenfeeblement, 
effeminacy,  and  corruption.  Art  refines  to  a  degree,  but  only  to  a  degree.  They 
who  talk  of  regenerating  men  by  opening  art  museums  and  multiplying  picture 
galleries  must  be  people  with  but  little  reflection.  In  Athens  of  yesterday,  and  in 
Paris  of  to-day,  we  have  the  most  salncious  of  all  populations.    When,  however,  we 


496  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOIi,  [chap.  xv. 

study  the  body  under  the  influence  of  the  mind  and  spirit,  how  admivaMe  it  often 
is — revealing  and  conceahng  the  thought  of  the  mind — the  feehng  of  the  soul ! 
suggesting  to  us  how  possible  it  is  to  elevate  even  this  body,  and  treat  it  as  if  it  were 
a  temple — a  temple  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.  4.  This  body  is  a  body  of  humilia- 
tion, and  yet  it  suggests  a  body  of  a  very  much  higher  and  nobler  kind.  As  the 
mind  develops,  as  the  heart  enlarges,  this  body  becomes  more  and  mure  unadapted 
to  it.  Age  is  not  of  the  mind  and  heart  ;  it  is  of  the  body  only.  Spiritually- 
minded  men  do  not  become  in  feeling  aud  spirit  old,  like  men  of  the  world.  There 
is  nothing  that  preserves  juvenility  like  true  piety.  There  is  nothing  ages  men  and 
women  like  the  opposites  of  the  graces  of  the  spirit.  Envy,  hatred,  jealousy,  un- 
ohat  itableiiess — these  bring  the  wrinkles  into  the  face,  and  the  age  into  the  soul.    II. 

But  the  body  TH.\T  is,  is  the  only  rORERUNNEB  OF  THE  BODY  THAT  SHALL  BE.   All 

the  way  through  this  chap  er  the  apostle  is  fighting  the  thought  that  sve  ourselves 
put  into  the  phrase  "  disembodied  spirits."  1.  Hn  goes  to  nature  and  finds  a  sug- 
gestion there  Why,  even  in  nature,  lie  says,  you  sow  not  the  body  that  shall  be, 
only  a  bare  grain— the  vital  -lenient  that  rises  above  the  earth  takes  to  itself  a  body 
suited  to  it.  Every  vital  thing  has  in  it  a  tend<-ncy  to  gather  to  itself  a  bodily  form 
suited  to  its  necessities  and  conditions.  The  grub  in  its  grub  state  is  embodied  in 
one  form  and  way  ;  by  and  by,  hs  it  advances  in  its  life,  that  body  is  no  longer 
suited  to  it,  but  a  new  body  is  developing :  soon  it  seems  to  die  into  its  chrysalis  state  ; 
but,  lo,  an  entirely  new  cri^ature,  no  longer  with  the  limitations  of  the  grub  body, 
emerges  ;  a  creature  that  now  sports  in  the  air,  and  no  longer  crawls  ou  the  earth. 
It  has  its  own  body,  but  how  different  fi  om  the  giub  body  ;  yet  there  is  a  vital  con- 
nection between  the  one  and  the  other.  E  cli  stage  in  it  has  been  preparing  for 
the  next.  And  ev<-rytliing  has  its  osvo  bo.ly  suitfd  to  its  state  anden>  ironment.  And 
not  sameness,  but  variety,  is  the  order  of  creation.  There  are  terresirial  bodies — 
bodies  that  belong  to  eaith.  There  are  celestial  bodies — bodies  that  belong  to  the 
heavens.  And  each  and  all  of  these  have  iheir  special  gloiy  and  beauty.  A  star  is 
of  one  order,  a  sun  of  another,  but  each  has  its  own  glory.  And  so  with  bodies. 
There  is  a  bndy  that  belongs  to  man  in  his  state  of  dislionour.  Another  which 
belongs  to  him  in  his  state  of  glory.  2.  The  natural  body  is  the  tyjpe  and  promise 
of  the  spiritual  body,  but  it  is  not  the  spiritual  body.  It  has  the  same  relation  to 
it  as  the  terrestrial  has  to  the  celestial,  -as  corruption  has  to  incorrnption,  &c. 
Every! hing  lower  points  to  a  higher.  Man  is  never  disembodied  ;  all  through  time 
he  is  an  fmbudied  spirit,  and  when  he  has  sloughed  otf  his  time  body,  liis  earth 
body,  he  has  still  a  body,  but  one  suiied  to  him  in  a  way  and  to  a  degree  to  which 
this  body  has  never  been  suited  (vers.  48,  49).  All  earth  (orces  and  powers  and  laws 
have  been  in  our  earth  body.  Like  the  earth,  it  has  been  subject  to  the  law  of 
gravitation  and  decay,  to  constant  change.  We  have  borne  the  image  of  the  earthy. 
"  We  shall  also  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly."  The  one  is  not  complete  without 
the  other.  The  spirit  of  man  in  its  next  stage  of  being  will  have  a  body  suited  to 
it.  Not  a  body  suljject  to  all  the  diseases,  infirmities,  neuralgias,  aches,  and  pains  to 
which  this  is  subject.  Eveiy  one  shall  have  his  own  body,  tlie  ijody  suited  to  express 
his  inward  character ;  but  it  shall  be  as  superior  to  this  present  material  body  as  the 
body  of  the  butterfly  is  to  that  of  the  grub.  (Reuen  Tliomas,  D.D.)  The  rennrrec- 
tinn  of  the  hodij  : — Note — I.  Tbe  difficulties  iv  which  that  fact  seems  involved. 
The  resurrection  is  exhibited  in  the  Uible,  not  as  a  spe -ulative  truth,  but  as  so 
intimately  bound  up  with  our  salvation,  that  to  prove  it  false  were  to  prove  the 
human  race  unredeemed  (vers.  16,  17).  It  were  useless,  then,  to  adduce  proofs  from 
revelation,  seeing  that  we  have  it  explicitly  declared  that,  unless  the  dead  rise, 
Christianity  would  be  reduced  into  fable.  The  question,  tlien,  is  whether  there  lie 
such  objections  against  the  resurrection  as  make  it  incredible,  and  thus  justify  us 
in  rejecting  the  testimony  of  Scripture.  1.  Can  we  demonstrate  that  the  resurrec- 
tion falls  without  the  limit  of  possibility,  and  that  the  effecting  of  it  would  over- 
pass Omnipotence  ?  If  we  are  not  prepared  with  such  a  demonstration,  it  is 
childishness  to  argue  against  the  resurrection  from  its  difficulty.  If  the  Bible  had 
ascribed  it  to  a  finite  agent,  reason  might  fairly  have  argued  that  the  disproportion 
between  the  thing  done  and  the  doer  furnishes  ground  enough  for  rejecting  the 
statement.  But  will  any  one  declare  that  the  resurrection  exceeds  the  capability  of 
Him  who  is  to  achieve  it?  No  man  who  admits  that  God  created  everything  out 
of  nothing  should  hesitate  to  admit  that  God  can  raise  the  dead.  2.  We  allow, 
however,  that  this  general  demonstration  is  scarcely  sufficient  for  the  case;  and  we 
proceed,  therefore,  to  consider  certain  difficulties  M'hich  still  suggest  themselves. 
We  begin  by  warning  you  against  the  idea  that,  provided  the  soul  be  hereafter 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  497 

united  to  a  body,  it  will  matter  nothing  whether  it  be  the  same  body  which  it 
tenanted  on  earth.  The  grand  use  of  the  resurrection  is  that  the  same  beings  may 
stand  in  judgment  as  have  here  been  on  probation ;  but  they  are  not  the  same  beingg 
unless  compounded  of  the  same  body  and  soul.  But  our  bodies,  it  may  be  said, 
are  h^re  perpetually  changing.  Yes,  but  such  change  in  no  degree  interferes  with 
the  thorough  sameness  of  the  person.  Suppose  a  man  to  have  committed  a  murder, 
and  that  atie;  thirty  years  tbe  guilt  is  brouyht  to  light,  and  the  assassin  put  on 
trial,  what  would  the  juilge  and  jury  say  if  the  criminal  should  plead  that,  because 
in  thirty  years  his  body  had  been  often  changed,  he  was  not  the  same  person  as 
committed  the  murder  ?  And  supposing,  that  in  place  of  being  discovered  by  hia 
fellow-men,  the  mmderer  had  remained  undetected  till  arraigned  at  the  judgment 
bar  of  Christ,  in  what  body  must  he  appear  in  order  that  the  identity  of  the  man 
may  be  rigidly  preserved  ?  Certainly  it  will  not  be  necessary  that  he  appear  in  the 
very  body  which  he  had  when  he  took  away  a  fellow-creature's  life;  nothing  is 
necessary  but  that  his  soul  be  clothed  in  matter  which  had  once  before  clothed  it. 
It  is  unquestionnble  that  the  same  matter  must  enter  at  different  times  into  the 
construction  of  dillereiit  bodies;  nourished  by  seed,  which  seed  is  itself  nourished 
by  the  earth,  which  earlh  is  the  receptacle  of  the  dust  of  human  kind  :  it  is  indeed 
possible  that  there  are  component  jjarticles  in  the  arm  which  I  now  lift  which 
liave  entered  successively  into  the  limbs  of  men  of  bygone  generations,  and  that 
the  portion  wrought  up  into  the  members  of  the  men  of  one  age  will  yet  again  be 
moulded  into  flesh.  And  if  the  same  matter  may  belong  successively  to  different 
men,  to  whom  sliall  that  matter  belong  in  the  resurrection?  We  observe  on  this 
that  the  man  is  the  same  man  if  his  future  body  be  composed  of  particles  which  at 
any  time  have  mnde  up  his  present.  It  is  not  necessary  that  all  the  dust  which  hath 
ever  been  wrought  into  his  corruptible  members  should  hereafter  be  wrought  into 
his  incorruptible  :  indeed,  we  know  not  how  small  a  portion  of  the  same  matter 
may  suf3Sce  for  the  preservation  of  identity :  this  we  know,  that  the  man  is  the 
same  man  in  the  vigour  and  efflorescence  of  health,  and  when  wasted  by  long  sick- 
ness into  a  skeleton  :  the  abstraction  at  one  time,  and  the  addition  at  another,  of 
large  masses  of  animate  matter,  interfere  not  at  all  with  i^ersonal  identity.  Hence 
it  is  evident,  that,  even  if  much  which  now  belongs  to  my  body  belonged  at  other 
times  to  the  boilies  of  other  men,  there  may  yet  be  enough  belonging  exclusively  to 
myself,  and  kept  distinct  by  the  omniscience  and  omnipotence  of  God  to  cause, 
when  wrought  into  a  dwelUng-place  for  my  soul,  that  I  shall  be  the  same  individual 
who  now  pleads  in  the  earthly  sanctuary,  and  tells  his  fellow-men  of  re-opened 
graves  and  quickened  generations.  II.  What  answer  may  be  given  to  the  ques- 
tions OF  THE  TEXT  ?  The  grand  characteristic  of  our  resurrection  bodies  i^  to  be 
likeness  to  the  glorified  body  of  Christ  (Phil.  iii.  21).  Now  there  is  every  reason 
for  concluding  that  Christ  when  transfigured  appeared  in  that  glorified  humanity 
in  which  He  now  sits  at  the  Father's  ri>;ht  hand.  And  if  Christ,  when  transfigured, 
exhibited  humanity  in  its  glorified  comhtion,  we  learn  that  our  bodies,  though  made 
wondrously  radiant,  shall  be  distinguishtd,  as  now,  the  one  from  the  other,  by  their 
characteristic  features.  The  Saviour  was  not  so  altered  as  not  to  be  known.  And 
if  we  would  examine  more  minutely  into  the  change  which  shall  pass  ui^on  our 
bodies,  enough  is  told  us  in  this  chapter.  1.  "It  is  sown  in  corruption":  the 
principle  of  dissolution  is  in  this  framework  of  matter,  and,  whatever  for  a  time  its 
comeliness  and  vigour,  it  is  the  heir  of  death,  and  must  say  to  corruption,  "  Thou 
art  my  father,"  &c.  But  "  it  is  raised  in  incorruption,"  imperishable  and  unchange- 
able. 2.  "  It  is  sown  in  dishonour."  Here  the  body  is  a  degraded  thing,  and  the 
grand  business  of  a  Clnistian  isto  "crucify  the  flesh  with  its  affections  and  lusts. " 
But  "  it  is  raised  in  glory  "  :  no  longer  the  seat  of  unholy  propensities,  no  longer 
.furnishing  inlets  by  its  senses  and  appetites  for  manifold  temptations.  3.  "It  is 
sown  in  weakness."  Who  feels  not  how  the  body  is  now  a  clog  upon  the  spirit, 
impeding  it  in  its  stretchings  after  knowledge,  as  well  as  in  its  strivings  after  holi- 
ness ?  But  "  it  shall  be  raised  in  power  "  :  no  longer  needing  rest,  no  longer  subject 
to  waste,  the  body  shall  be  an  auxiliary  to  the  soul  in  all  her  searchings  after  truth. 
4.  "  It  is  sown  a  natural  body  ;  it  is  raised  a  spiritual  body."  The  body  of 
the  risen  Redeemer,  though  certainly  material,  yet  it  had  in  a  high  degree  the 
attributes  of  spirit,  for  it  could  be  made  invisible,  and  could  enter  a  chamber  with 
closed  doors,  thus  proving  itself  no  longer  subject  to  the  laws  which  matter  now 
obe.vs;  and  so  matter  shall  partake  much  of  the  independence  of  spirit,  and  the 
.body  be  fitted  for  accompanying  the  soul  in  all  her  marchings  over  the  area  of  the 
universe,  and  in  all  her  divings  into  its  most  secret  recesses.  Th^  natural  body  is 
VOL.  II.  32 


498  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x> 

a  structure  which  belongs  fitly  to  the  natural  man  who  "  receiveth  not  the  things  ol 
God."  Conclusion  :  We  are  told  nothing  of  the  body  with  which  the  wicked  shall 
come.  The  natural  body  may  remain  the  natural,  and  if  the  rpsurrection  consigns 
this  to  be  sown  a  natural  body  and  to  be  raised  a  natural  body,  you  reach  the 
summit  of  all  that  is  terrible  in  conception ;  when  you  suppose  the  grave  thus 
sending  up  the  drunliard  thirsting  for  wine  where  there  is  no  wine,  and  the  miser 
always  hankering  for  gold  where  there  is  no  gold,  and  the  sensualist  to  be  galled 
by  the  impress  of  voluptuousne.^s  where  there  may  exist  the  sense,  but  not  the 
objects,  of  concupiscence.  Seeing,  then,  there  is  no  escaping  the  resurrection, 
ought  not  each  one  of  us  to  ask  himself  solemnly  the  question,  "  With  what 
body  shall  I  come — with  the  natural  or  wilh  the  spiritual?"  {H.  Melrill,  B.D.) 
The  resurrection,  credibilily  of: — ''How  are  the  dead  raised?"  This  Paul 
answers  by  argnmen^s  from  analogy.  I.  The  nature  of  tije  argument.  1. 
Analogy  is  probability  fronr  a  parallel  case.  We  assume  that  the  same  law  which 
operates  in  the  one  case  will  operate  in  another  if  there  be  a  resemblance  between 
tbe  relations  of  the  two  t'nings  compaied.  Tiius,  when  Christ  said,  "  Except  a  corn 
of  wheat  fall  into  the  ground, "  &c.  As  in  nature  life  comes  through  death,  so  also 
is  it  in  the  world  of  spiiit.  Tlie  law  of  sacrifice,  which  accounts  for  the  one  fact, 
will  also  explain  the  oilier.  Thus  St.  Paul  shows  that  the  life  of  the  seed  is  con- 
tinued after  apparent  death  in  a  higher  form,  and  argues,  that  in  like  manner  the 
human  spirit  may  be  reunited  to  form.  2.  How  far  this  aigument  is  valid.  It 
does  not  amount  to  proof ;  it  only  shows  that  the  tiling  in  question  is  credible.  It 
dues  not  demonstrate  that  a  resurrection  must  be,  it  only  shows  that  it  may  be.  3. 
Now,  it  is  in  this  way  that  St.  Paul  concluiJes  his  masterly  argument.  He  proves 
the  resurrection  from  tlie  historical  fact,  and  by  the  alisurdity  which  follows  from 
denial  of  it,  and  then  he  shows  that  so  proved,  it  is  only  parallel  to  the  dying  and 
upspringing  corn,  and  the  diverse  glories  of  the  sun,  and  moon,  and  stars  Lut  it 
is  not  on  these  grounds  that  our  belief  rests.  We  fetch  our  proofs  from  the  Word 
of  God,  and  the  nature  of  the  human  soul.  II.  The  cri'Dibility  of  the  eesuu- 
r.ECTioN.  1.  There  aie  two  difliculties  advanced.  (1)  The  question,  How  are  the 
dead  raised  ?  may  be  a  philosophical  one.  We  are  told  that  the  entire  human  body 
undergoes  a  complete  change  every  certain  number  of  years,  and  that  it  is  dissolved 
in  various  ways.  Those  who  are  wise  in  such  matters  tell  us  that  there  is  not  a 
single  portion  of  the  globe  which  has  not,  some  time  or  other,  been  organic  form. 
(2)  The  other  question  is  merely  a  sneer,  "  With  what  body  do  they  come  ?  "  It  is 
as  if  the  objector  had  said,  "  Let  there  be  nothing  vague  :  tell  us  all  about  it,  you 
who  assert  you  are  inspired."  2.  Now,  to  these  objections  Paul  replies.  He 
discerns  in  this  world  three  principles.  (1)  That  life,  even  in  its  lowest  form,  has 
the  power  of  assimilnting  to  itself  atoms :  he  takes  the  corn  of  wheat,  which,  after 
being  apparently  destroyed,  risjs  again,  appropriating,  as  it  grows,  all  that  has 
affinity  with  itself  :  that  body  with  which  it  is  raised  may  be  called  its  own  body, 
and  jet  it  is  a  ncv  body.  (2)  The  marvellous  superabundance  of  the  creative 
power  of  God.  "  There  is  one  glory  of  the  sun,"  &c.  ;  and  yet  there  is  a  difference 
between  them.  There  are  gradations  in  all  thc^e  forms — bodies  celestial  and 
bodies  terrestrial.  Now,  are  we  to  believe  that  God's  wisdom  and  power  should  be 
insufficient  to  find  for  the  glorified  spirit  a  form  fit  for  it  ?  We  simply  reply  to  the 
objection,  "  With  wliat  body  do  they  come  ?  "  "  Look  at  the  creative  power  of 
God !  "  (3)  Tiie  principle  of  progress.  The  law  of  the  universe  is  not  Pharisaism, 
the  law  of  custom  stereotyped.  Just  as  it  was  in  creation,  first  the  lower  and  then 
the  higher,  so  (ver.  4G)  at  first  we  lead  a  mere  animal  life,  the  life  of  instinct ; 
then,  as  we  grow  older,  passion  succeeds,  and  after  the  era  of  passion  our  spiritu- 
ality comes,  if  it  comes  at  all.  St.  Paul  draws  a  probability  from  this,  that  what 
our  childhood  was  to  our  manhood — something  imperfect  followed  by  that  which 
is  more  perfect — so  will  it  be  hereafter.  3.  St.  Paul  finds  that  all  this  coincides 
with  the  yearnings  of  the  human  heart  (ver.  54).  This  is  the  substance  of  two 
prophecies,  one  in  Isaiah,  the  other  in  Hosea,  and  expresses  the  yearnings  of  the 
heart  for  immortality.  No  man,  in  a  high  mood,  ever  felt  that  this  life  was  really 
all,  ever  looked  on  life  and  was  satisfied,  ever  looked  at  the  world  without  hoping 
that  a  time  is  coming  when  that  creation  which  is  now  groaning  and  travailing  in 
bondage,  shall  be  brought  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  Son  of  God.  And  this  feeling, 
felt  in  a  much  greater  and  higher  degree,  becomes  prophecy.  And  when  we  look 
around,  instead  of  finding  something  which  damps  our  aspirations,  we  find  the 
external  world  corroborating  them.  Then  how  shall  we  account  for  this  marvellous 
coincidence  ?    Shall  we  beUeve  that  God  our  Father  has  cheated  us  with  a  lie  ? 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  499 

{F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.)  The  natural  resurrection: — The  day  dies  into  night, 

and  is  buried  la  silence  and  darkness  ;  in  the  next  morning  it  appeareth  again  and 
reviveth,  opening  the  grave  of  darkness,  rising  from  the  dead  of  night:  this  is  a 
diurnal  resurrection.  As  the  day  dies  into  night,  so  doth  the  summer  into  winter  ; 
the  s  ip  is  said  to  descend  into  the  root,  and  there  it  lies  buried  in  the  ground  ;  the 
earth  is  covered  with  snow  or  crusted  with  frost,  and  becomes  a  general  sepulchre  ; 
when  the  spring  appeareth  all  begin  to  rise ;  the  plants  and  flowers  peep  out  of 
their  graves,  revive,  and  grow,  and  flourish  :  tuis  is  the  annual  resurrection.  The 
corn  by  which  we  live,  and  for  want  of  which  we  parish  with  famine,  is  notwith- 
standing cast  upon  the  earth  and  buried  in  the  ground  with  a  design  that  it  may 
corru25t,  and  being  corruijted,  may  revive  and  multiply  ;  our  bodies  are  fed  by  this 
constant  experiment,  and  we  continue  tliis  p'esent  life  by  sncces^iion  of  resur- 
rections. Thus  all  things  are  repaired  by  corrupting,  are  preserved  by  perishing, 
and  revive  by  dying ;  and  can  we  think  that  man,  the  lord  of  all  these  things 
which  thus  die  and  revive  for  him,  should  be  so  detained  in  death  as  never  to 
live  again?      (Dr.  John  Pearson.)  The  resurrection  pos.iihle  : — To    understand 

the  apostle's  reply  to  the  question  we  must  lay  firm  hold  of  these  two  things: 
fi'st,  that  he  is  siieaking  of  the  man,  who  is  deail,  not  of  the  mass  of  matter 
umJergoing  dissolution  in  the  earth  ;  second,  that  his  purpose  is  to  point  out 
analogies  to  the  fundamental  conception  on  which  his  proof  rests,  viz.,  t^e  con- 
ception of  a  progress  that  is  not  checked  but  realised  through  death.  I.  In  the 
RELATION  OF  THE  SEED  TO  THE  PLANT  \ve  recognise — 1.  That  death  is,  in  some 
cases  at  least,  necessary  to  the  perpetuation  of  life.  2.  That  this  p:^rpetuaiion 
involves  a  development.  3.  That  this  development  is  not  automatic,  but  the  con- 
sequence of  a  creative  and  beneficent  act  of  Gud.  4.  That  in  this  act  God  appro- 
priates indefinite  material  to  produce  tlie  development  of  deiimte  kinds.  II.  The 
ANALOGY  OF  THE  VAMODS  KINDS  OF  FLESH  teachcs  US  that  tilis  limiting  of  the  limit- 
less in  the  formation  and  development  of  kinds  consists  in  differentiating  their 
physical  constituti'm.  III.  The  analogy  of  the  various  glomus  in  sun,  &c., 
intimates  that  such  a  differentiation  of  nature  implies  a  diff'erence  also  in  sphere  of 
action.  Conclusion  :  To  apply  all  this  to  the  subject  in  hand,  it  means— 1.  That 
the  believer's  relation  to  Christ  involves  development.  2.  That  this  development 
implies  deith  as  one  of  its  conditions.  3.  That  this  develofiment  is  brought  about 
through  God's  creative  and  beneficent  act.  4.  That  it  is  a  development  within 
the  limits  of  kind.  5.  That  it  involves  a  change  in  mode  of  existence.  6. 
That  it  necessitates  and  secures  transference  of  the  entire  man  into  another 
sphere.        (Principal    Edwards.)  The    analofjiei    of   nature  : — Note — I.     The 

death  is  often  a  condition  of  new  and  higheb  life.  Paul  first  teaches 
us  the  parable  of  the  seed  (vers.  37,  38).  Is  that  which  thou  so  west  the 
body  that  will  be  ?  No  :  a  new  body  springs  from  the  corruption  of  the  old, 
more  complex,  beautiful,  and  adapted  to  the  higher  region  in  which  it  has  its 
life.  But  though  the  form  of  the  grain  be  changed  its  identity  is  not  lost.  To 
each  of  the  seeds  God  gives  its  own  body.  If  you  sow  wheat,  you  reap  wheat ;  if 
you  sow  bailey,  you  reap  barley,  etc.  The  form  is  changed,  but  the  identity  is 
preserved.  We  draw  no  proof  from  the  analogy;  but  we  feel  that  it  is  not  so  diffi- 
cult for  us  to  conceive  the  resurrection  of  the  body  now  that  this  natural  resurrec- 
tion of  the  seed  is  brought  liome  to  our  thouglits.  We  see,  e.r/.— l.That  dissolution 
•do  s  not  inevitably  imply  destruction,  nay,  tliat  it  affords  no  clear  presumption  of 
it  even.  Nothing  sown  is  quickened  exi'e[)t  it  die.  And  therefore,  it  may  be  that 
the  dissolution  of  the  body  is  not  its  destruction  :  it  may  pass  through  death  to  a 
form  more  comely  and  perfect,  to  a  more  fruitful  service,  to  more  life  and  fuller. 
2.  When  form  is  changed  identity  mav  be  preserved.  The  grain  rots  and  dies  that 
the  vital  germ  may  be  quickened  and  fed,  and  each  grain  takes  its  own  new  body  : 
■wheat  remains  wheat,  and  rice,  rice.  An  i  so  if  we  ask,  "How  are  the  scattered 
and  vapourised  paiticies  of  whiidi  our  bodies  are  composed  to  be  recovered  and 
compacted  into  a  new  organis'u  ?  "  Nature  replies,  "  That  may  not  be  necessary. 
Much  may  die.  and  yet  the  vital  germ  may  live."  If  we  s  ly,  "  We  do  not  care 
simply  to  live,  but  to  beourselves,"  Nature  replies,  "  To  ea^diof  theseeds  Godgiveth 
its  own  body,  not  another's.  And  therefore,  though  your  new  form  mav  differ  from 
the  old,  it  may  be  that  you  will  remain  the  same,  and  find  the  same  friends  about  you, 
each  in  its  own  likeness,  though  enlarged  and  glorified.  You  may  have  exchanged  the 
winter  of  seed-time  for  the  golden  splendours  of  an  eternal  summer ;  but  neverthe- 
less you  may  still  be  what  you  were."  II.  The  same  substance  may  take  various 
roRMS.      1.  Earthly  bodies  differ  from  each  other  (ver.  39).    Men,  beasts,  fish, 


500  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xv 

birds  are  all  composed  of  flesh  and  blood.  Yet  this  one  flesh — how  infinite  its 
variety  of  forms  !  2.  If  then  of  one  flesh  God  can  weave  tliese  infinite  varieties  of 
animal  life,  each  exquisitely  adapted  to  its  peculiar  element  and  conditions,  can  we 
suppose  that  His  power  is  exhausted  by  the  forms  now  visible  to  us  ?  Is  it  not  in 
accordance  with  all  the  teaehingn  of  Nature  that,  if  at  death  men  pass  into  a  new 
element  and  new  conditions  of  life,  God  should  adapt  their  organism  to  its  new 
conditions,  that  He  sliould  develop  in  it  new  faculties  and  powers?  3.  Heavenly 
bodies  differ  from  earthly  (ver.  40).  There  is  one  matter  as  there  is  one  flesh. 
Compare  snn,  moon,  stars,  planets,  comets  with  the  various  orders  of  beasts,  fish, 
birds,  or  with  moantains,  streams,  trees,  flowers ;  and  how  immeasurable  is  the 
diversity !  Yet  God  made  them  all  and  made  them  of  the  same  substttnce,  and  if 
it  please  Him,  He  can  mould  the  identical  substance  of  wliioh  all  physical  nature 
is  composed  into  new  forms.  Nay,  more  ;  the  matter  of  the  heavenly  bodies  is  in 
each  case  adapted  to  its  conditious,  and  varies  as  these  vary.  And  therefore  the 
presumption  is  strong  that  if  deatu  should  greatly  change  our  conditions,  our 
physical  orgmism  will  change  with  them,  and  be  adapted  to  them.  If  death 
should  lift  us  to  heaven,  we  may  well  believe  that,  as  we  were  here  adapted  to  an 
earthly  lot,  so  there  we  shall  be  adiipttd  for  a  heavenly  lot.  4.  Heavenly  bodies 
differ  from  each  other  (ver.  41).  It  is  not  simply  that  each  of  the  heavenly  bodies 
had  its  own  light :  it  has  its  own  glory,  its  peculiar  characteristics,  its  proper 
excellence.  From  the  e  irliest  ages,  when  men  tilled  the  fertile  plans  of  Chaldfea, 
they  have  distinguished  differences  of  light  even  in  the  planets — the  blue  ray  of 
Mercury,  the  golden  lustre  of  Venus,  the  red  and  bloody  portent  of  Mars,  the  deep 
orange  gleam  of  Jupiter,  the  leaden  line  of  Saturn.  And  these  differences  of  light 
speak  of  dilfe'euces  of  p'aee,  magnitude,  structure.  The  one  glory  of  the  heavens 
is  a  complex  of  many  different  g  ories.  And  if  of  one  substance  God  has  woven 
the  infinite  and  differing  globes  of  light,  how  incommensurate  our  thought  of  Him, 
did  we  suppose  that  He  could  not  out  of  the  one  substance  of  this  mortal  body 
weave  many  dilferent  bodies,  en  eh  perfect  in  its  kind  and  for  its  purpose,  each 
answering  to  its  conditi'ms  ;.nd  rising  as  they  rise!  [S.  Cox,  D.D.)  Harvest 
seniion : — It  is  evident  that  St.  Paul  had  not  walked  in  the  corn  fields  in  vain. 
Nor  let  us  do  so.     Note — I.  The  SENTiMiCiNTS  and  feelings  with  which  we  should 

CONTEMPLATE    THE    CORN    FIELDS,    AS    THEY    GHOW  RIPE  UNTO  THE  HABVEST.       1.    DeVOUt 

reverence  and  awe.  I  syiii|iathise  with  Dr.  Johnson,  who  uncovered  his  head 
whenever  he  passed  a  church,  und  worshipped  with  bare  head  in  the  corn  fields. 
What  a  manifestation  of  the  living  Go  1,  in  i|uiet,  ceaseless,  beautiful,  benign 
energy!  2.  Joyful  gratitude.  In  ever\  thing  give  thanks,  for  a  bad  as  well  as  a 
good  crop  ;  for  thus  God  teaches  us  thit  man  does  not  live  by  bread  alone.  3. 
Practical  brotherly  kindaess.  Tne  heart  can  scaicely  fail  to  expand  at  the  sight  of 
the  exceeding  bountitulne-s  of  the  great  Father,  into  some  jo.^ful  sense  of  oneness 
with  all  our  brethren  of  mankind.  II.  The  analogies  which  the  corn  fields  supply  ; 
or  rather  the  lessons  whieh  th<-se  anab^gies  teach.  1.  That  much  in  the  moral 
and  spiritual  world  which  app  ars  to  perish  wholly,  still  lives,  at  least,  in  its  issues 
and  results.  It  is  thus  with  our  sins — thus  with  words  and  works  of  truth  and 
charity.  2.  That  in  order  to  the  preservati  n  and  reproduction  of  life,  there  must 
be  change,  dissolution,  death.  This  is  true  of  institutions,  forms  of  thought  and 
doctrine,  generations,  persons,  illustrated  in  the  solemn  law  of  self-sacritice 
adduced  (chap.  xi.  24,  25.)  3.  That  in  preserving  and  developing  truth  and  holi- 
ness in  successive  generations,  and  bringing  all  hi^h  and  beuit^n  purposes  to  their 
is^ue,  God  does  far  more  than  man,  operates  more  powerfully  and  constantly. 
"  God  gives  it  a  body  "  (Mark  iv.  26,  Vl).  It  belongs  to  man  to  hope  and  quietly 
wait,  as  well  as  to  w.^rk,  and  to  remember  that  all  great  changes  wrought  in  man, 
either  in  the  community  or  the  individual,  resemble  rather  the  pi-ocesses  and  results 
of  agriculture,  than  those  of  manufacture.  4.  That  results  often  little  accord  with, 
and  far  surpass  our  designs  and  expectations:  "as  it  hath  pleased  Him. "  Illus- 
trated in  Protestantism,  in  the  Divinely  shajied  result  of  Luther's  attack  on  indul- 
gencies  ;  in  the  United  States,  in  the  result  of  the  emigration  of  the  Pilgrim  Fathers  ; 
in  what  will  be  probably  the  issue  of  those  efforts  many  are  now  making  for  church 
reformation.  Let  us  be  true  to  principles  and  trust  in  God  for  their  future 
embodiment.  5.  That,  nevertheless,  results  are  appropriate  and  fixed.  God  acts 
by  law  and  not  with  caprice  and  fickleness.  "  To  every  seed  his  own  body." 
Apply  to  individual  conscience.  "  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,"  &c.  6.  That  the 
harvest  of  the  world  shall  come.  God's  purposes  ripen  to  their  accomplishment  as 
certainly  as  grain,  in  spite  of  exceptional  cases,  ripens  for  the  sickle.  "  Be  patient, 
therefore,  brethren,"  &c.     {J.  Glyde.) 


C5AP.  XV.]'  .  J.   CORINTHIANS.  501' 

Vers.  36-40.  Thou  fool,  that  which  thou  sowest  is  not  quickened,  except  it  die. 

— The  reproof  of  scepticism  : — I.  Justly  severe.  "Thiufool. "  Because — Litis 
opposed  to  God  and  Diyine  trutli.  2.  Is  based  in  ignorance  and  self-conceit.  II, 
Severely  jost.  Because — 1.  It  ignores  the  analogy  between  natural  facts,  and 
the  higher  purposes  of  God.  2.  Cannot  realise  anvthing  beyond  the  domain  of 
natuval  sense.     3.  Denies  evf-rything  it  cannot  lealise.      (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  From 

death  to  life  : — The  text  may  be  applied  to — I.  The  facts  of  nature  as  here.     II.  • 
The  events  of  history.     1.  In  general.     Note  the  fate  of  emi)ires.     They  are  born, 
grow,  decay,  die  (ir  are  killed,  and  out  of  their  ruins,  phoenix  bke,  the  new  emerge  : 
evolution  succeeds  revolution.     So  with  the  dynasties  who  rule  these  empires.     2. 
la  particular  rulers  and  statesmen  die  to  give  birth  to  their  successors.     Moses 
dies,  but  Joshua  rises.     Jobn  must  decrease  that  Christ  must  increase.     Saul  holds 
the   mantle  of    martyred   Stephen  and  then   wears  it.       III.    The  phenomena  of 
PROVIDENCE.     "The  old  order  changeth,  giving  birth  to  new,"  &e.     "Our  little 
systems  have  their  day,"  Ac.     Each  age  has  its  own  mission,  and  having  accom- 
plished it,  it  dies  only,  however,  to  hand  on  the  results  of  its  mission  which  are 
embodied  in  the  work  of  the  next.     IV.  The  development  of  the  Church.     This 
is  marked  by  a  series  of  burials  and  resurrections,  beginning  with  the  burial  and 
resurrection  of  its  great  Head.     "  The  blood  of  the  martyrs  was  the  seed  of  the 
Church."     What  was  more  completely  dead  than  Cliristendom  before  the  reformers 
awoke  it  into  life  !     What  was  deader  than  religion  in  England  before  the  great 
evangelists  of  the  last  century  aroused  it  into  activity !      What  are   revivals  but 
resurrections  of  dead  churches  ?     V.  The  progress  of  the  soul.     True  manhood 
is  ever  mounting  on  its  dead  self  to  nobler  things.     This  is  true. — 1.  Mentally. 
What  intellectual  revolutions  a  tboughtful  man  passes  through !     How  dead  are 
the  dreams  of  childhood,  the  ideals  of  youth,  the  purpo-es  of  later  years  !     How 
opinions,  principles,  beliefs  change,  and  how  necessary  for  the  mind's  giowth  that 
they  should !     2.   Spiritually.     From  the  moment  when  a  man  passes  from  death 
to  life  to  the  moment  the  mortal  jjuts  on  immortality  moial  giowlh  consists  of  a 
perpetual  dying  to  sin  that  righteousness  may  live.      (J.  IV.  Burn.)         And  .   .  . 
thou  sowest  not  that  body  that  shall  he. — The  present  and  future  of  the  bud;/  : — 
1.  Christianity  does  not  teaoh  us  to  despise  even  the  mortal  body.     We  are  taught 
that  Christ  Himself—"  without  whom  was  not  anything  made  that  was  made  "— 
formed  man  of  the  dust  of  the  earth.     The  body,  theiefore,  is  a  sacred  thing  ;  the 
very  handiwork  of  Christ,  though  sadly  marred  and  spoiled.     By  His  incarnation  a 
new  sacredness  has  been  added  to  it.     God  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us. 
The  instrument  whose  stiirgs  could  be  made  to  express  the  harmonies  of  a  Divine 
perfection,  cannot  be  too  feeble  for  the  lowlier  music  of  the  holiness  pi-oj)er  to 
humanity.     2.  Although  we  are  tan<.'ht  to  expect  that  this  mortal    body  must  be 
transfigured  before  our  feet  can  stand  on  the  pa-  ement  of  the  city  of  Go^i,  yet  how 
wonderful  a  thing  it  is  even  now  !     I  do  not  refer  to  the  marvels  of  its  mere  physical 
structure,  the  miracles  of  skill  wbich  the  anatomist  delights  to  celebrate.     I  refer 
to  the  relationship  which  exists  between  every  part  of  your  iih\sical  nature  and 
your  thoughts,  your  affections,  your  conscience  and  your  will.     It  is  the  necessary 
servant,  and  sometimes  the  imperial  master  of  an  immortal  nature  which  S|  rang 
direct  from  God,  and  is  still  capable  of  intercourse  with  Him.     Take  the  e>e,  and 
dissect  it  as  skilfully  as  you  please ;  but  for  that  the  soul  would  he  a  stranger  to 
the  splendid  pageantry  of  nature,  and  to  the  more  affecting  beauty  wldch  irradiates 
the  faces  that  we  love.     And,  what  is,  if  possible,  more  wonderful  still,  the  body  is 
gradually  moulded  and  transformed  by  the  energy  or  feebleness,  the  purity  or  the 
wickedness  of  the  soul  within.     The  inward  kindness  makes  the  eye  gentle — the 
inward  fury  makes  it  burn  with  a  terrible  fire.     The  very  lines  of  the  face  are 
gradually  determined  by  the  thoughts  which  occupy  the  most  secret  sanctuary  of 
the  soul,  and  the  passions  by  which  the  depths  of  the  heart  are  agitated.     3.  But 
yet,  mighty  as  are  the  susceptibilities  of  our  physical  being,  it  is  not  yet  equal  to 
the  high  claims  of  its  spiritual  alliance.     We  are  hindered  and  eufeebbd  by  it 
continually.     Hardly  have  we  plunged  into  our  work  before  fatigue  compels  us  to 
lay  it  aside  ;  hardly  has  the  day  begun  liefore  the  night  returns,  and  with  it  the 
necessity  of  sleep.     By  the  most  trifling  pbysical  accidents  the  very  mightiest  are 
made  powerless.     No  brilliance  of  genius,  no  heroism  of  moral  nature  can  wholly 
defy  the  tyranny  of  weakness  and  suffering.     The  richest  wisilom,  the  noblest 
moral  energy,  may  all  be  made  nearly  useless  by  pbysical  infirmity,  and  must  at 
last  be  driven  away  from  the  world  altoj-'ether  by  physical  death.     4.  Let  us  be 
thankful  that  we  sow  "not  that  body  that  shall  be."     "Bare  grain"  is  cast  into 


502  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

the  ground,  but  after  a  few  months  the  hidden  life  reappears  in  the  slender  and 
graceful  stalk,  and  the  richly  laden  ear.     So  shall  it  be  m  the  resurrection  of  the 
just.     The  body  will  rise  again  ;  but,  thank  God,  not  the  same  body  (ver.  34).     As 
yet  we  cannot  imagine  the  nature  or  the  results  of  that  transforming  process  which 
our  "  flesh  and  blood  "  must  undergo  before  they  can  inherit  the  "  kingdom  of  God  "  ; 
but  the  unsuspected  capabilities  of  human  nature,  even  on  its  inferior  side,  have 
already  been  most  wonderfully  illustrated  in  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  and  His 
enthronement  at  God's  right  hand.     He  reigns  not  as  God  merely,  but  as  man. 
His  entire  nature  has  been  received  into  glory.     The  body  in  which  He  endured  the 
feebleness,  and  suffering,  which  made  up   His   earthly  history,  He  wears   still. 
Think,  then,  of  the  vast  and  tremendous  duties  to  which  the  Redeemer  of  man  has 
been  appointed.     And  yet,  in  the  discharge  of  thn  duties  of  His  high  government, 
His  brain  knows  no  weariness,  His  strength  no  exhaustion.     A  few  hours  of  public 
teaching,  when  He  was  on  earth,  made  it  necessary  that  He  should  lay  His  head 
on  a  pillow  and  seek  repose,  though  the  night  was  dark,  and  the  winds  were  loud, 
and  tlie  billows  rough.     But  there  is  no  danger  now  when  the  tempest  is  raging, 
of  finding  Him  asleep.     And  our  vile  bodies  are  to  be  made  like  to  His  glorious 
body.    (jR.  W.Dale,  D.D.)        Four  important  2)rincij)lcshea)ing  ujion  the  doctrine  of 
the  resurrection : — I.  Change  of  form — thou  sowest  not,  &c.  II.  Identity  of  body— to 
every  seed  his  own  body.     III.  Identity  of  species — wheat  cannot  produce  tares  or 
tares  wheat — neither  can  the  sinner  be  raised  a  glorified  saint  nor  the  saint  a  reprobate 
sinner.     IV.  Difference  in  the  degree  of  developjient  in  the  same  species — one 
stalk  of  wheat  is  move  fairly  developed  than  another, ' '  God  givetb, "  &g. — so  also  in  the 
resurrection   of   the    dead.     {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)         But  bare  grain. — Bare  grain: — 
During  the   last  week  we   have   had   a   second   edition   of   our   summer,   which 
seemed    almost   gone — a   second   edition,    abridged,   condensed  into  a  few   days, 
but    charming,    because    unexpected.      No   wonder    the    poor    Indian,   with    un- 
tutored  mind,    lonely   in   his   narrow   thought,   feeling    after   God,    if   haply  he 
might  find  Him,  dream'  d  that  he  saw  in  the  haze  illumined  sky  of  October  some 
glimpse  of  the  haipy  h.mting-fields  where  his  fathers  roamed.     Work-penple  in 
Europe,  besides  their  regular  wages,  expect  some  little  extra  gift,  which  they  call, 
in  Italian,  huoiio-mano.     And  they  seem  to  take  more  pleasure  in  their  buono-mano 
than  in  their  regular  wages.     These  warm  days  in  September  are  Nature's  huoiio- 
mano.     God  has  left  this  margin  of  the  unexpected,  the  casual,  around  all  the 
majestic  machinery  of  law,  in  order  to  give  us  the  joy  of  feeling  the  gift,  to  give 
Himself  the  joy  of  being  loved  as  the  Giver.  Let  us  be  thankful  that  there  are  some 
surprises  in  the  world,  some  things  which  elude  mathematics,  some  Indian  summer 
days  which  come  when  no  one  has  predicted  them,  to  warm  the  heart  through  and 
through  ;  because  being  unlooked  for,  they  seem  more  like  a  direct  gift  from  God. 
This  return  of  summer  in  the  form  of  Indian  summer  lias  suggested  to  me  the  sub- 
ject of  returning  events,  of  recurrence  in  human  affairs,  of  the  circular  and  spiral 
movement  in  history  and  life.     Things  come  back,  but  when  they  come  back  they 
are  seldom  exactly  what  they  were  before.     Summer  returns  as  Indian  summer ; 
history  is  always  repeating  itself,  but  on  a  higher  plane.     The  difference  between 
two  men,  one  having  Christian  faith  and  the  other  not  having  it,  is  this  :  both 
commit  the  same  faults,  and  repeat  the  same  experience,  but  the  one  repeats  it 
always  high  up.     He  has  more  faith,  more  hi'pe,  more  love  to  God  and  man. 
Thus  he  takes  the  past  with  him,  as  precious  seed  of  a  better  future.     His  youth 
departs,  with  its  golden  summer  days,  but  returns  again  an  Indian  summer  with 
mellower  warmth,  and  a  more  enchanting  peace.     The  Christian  army  marches 
ever  to  the  east,  with  the  dawn  shining  on  its  white  shields  of  expectation.     But 
just  in  proportion  as  this  faith  is  wanting,  life  goes  round  and  round,  in  a  mere 
mill-horse  circle  of  routine.    If  we  look  only  at  this,  life  grows  very  tiresome.    The 
despair  of  the  Book  of  Ecclesiastes  comes  over  us,  and  we  say,  "  What  profit  has  a 
man  of  all  his  labour  that  he  takes  under  the  sun?"     For  all  "things  return, 
according  to  their  circuit."     But  the  New  Testament  teaches  anotlier  lesson  than 
the  Book  of  Ecclesiastes.     It  is  a  proof  of  the  Divine  origin  of  these  gospels  and 
epistles — that  they  are  full,  through  and  through,  of  the  spirit  of  hope.     Through- 
out they  cry  to  us  :  "  The  life  we  sow  to-day  is  seed  of  something  better  to  come 
to-morrow.     We  do  not  plant  that  which  is  to  be,  but  only  its  seed.     Our  present 
life,  which  we  are  leading  now,  compared  to  that  which  is  to  come  to  us,  is  only  as 
naked  seed  is  to  the  green  and  graceful  plant  which  sjjriugs  from  it."     The  Old 
World  of  Pagan  religion  and  philosophy  was  very  much  enmiyed.     It  expected 
nothing,  it  had  little  hope  left  in  its  heart.     Now,  the  new  life  of  Christianity  con- 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  503 

sisted  very  mucb  in  giving  hope  to  the  world.  As  when  a  glacier  pours  its  enormous 
river  of  ice  through  Alpine  ravines,  descending  into  the  valleys,  it  wastes  a^vay 
imperceptibly,  and  turns  to  moist  vapours,  filling  the  valley  with  masses  of  foliage 
— so  this  glacier  of  despair  melted  in  the  warm  breath  of  the  new  Christian  life. 
The  letters  of  Paul  and  Peter  are  full  of  expectation  of  Christ's  coming  to  reign  on 
earth.  That  great  expectation  of  Christ's  coming  was  the  seed  that  the  New 
Testament  planted  in  civilisation;  and  it  has  borne  its  fruits  in  all  human  pro- 
gress. The  one  tbing  needful,  the  only  essential  in  Christianity,  is  to  have  Christ 
formed  within  us,  the  hope  of  glory ;  hope  of  glory  here,  in  all  forms  of  growing 
goodness,  generosity,  honour  ;  and  of  glory,  honour,  immortality  hereafter.  Christ 
Himself  was  the  seed  planted  in  Palestine,  which  has  come  up  in  Ciiristianity  in 
that  new  body  which  pleased  God.  When  in  the  world  Jesus  worked  outward, 
physical  miracles.  He  works  miracles  still,  but  in  a  new  way.  "  The  blind  receive 
their  sight,  the  lame  walk,  the  deaf  hear,  the  dead  are  raised,"  but  not  now  by  a 
mere  touch  or  word.  We  have  blind  asylums,  and  deaf  and  dumb  asylums,  and 
sanitary  associations.  These  all  proceed  from  the  Christian  spirit  of  humanity, 
and  so  come  from  the  seed  which  Christ's  miracles  planted.  Those  miracles  were 
bare  grain,  to  which  God  gave  the  body  which  pleased  Him.  Visitors  to  Eome, 
looking  out  from  its  lofty  walls  over  the  Campagua,  see  with  delight  the  long  line 
of  arches  which  cross  the  plain,  converging  towards  the  city  from  the  distant 
mountains.  They  are  the  remains  of  the  ancient  aqueducts,  which  formerly  brought 
supplies  of  water  to  the  immense  population  of  ancient  Rome.  Visitors  to  Chicago 
are  carried  down  to  see  a  tunnel  running  two  miles  under  the  lake,  which  brings 
pure  water  in  inexhaustible  supplies  to  that  new-born  metropolis  of  the  prairies. 
The  methods  differ,  the  water  is  the  same.  Forms  change,  but  the  needs  of  men 
remain.  So  the  soul  of  man  needs  always  to  drink  the  same  living  water  of  faith 
and  hope.  The  water  is  the  same,  whether  it  is  drawn  up  from  Jacob's  spring,  or 
brought  through  a  Eoman  aqueduct,  or  spouts  from  an  artesian  well,  or  is  pumped 
up  throuu'h  a  Chicago  tunnel.  So,  if  we  have  love  to  God  and  man,  and  have 
faith  in  the  great  and  blessed  future,  if  we  believe  good  stronger  than  es'il,  and  life 
more  permanent  than  death,  it  is  no  matter  by  what  Jewish  or  Eoman  aqueduct  or 
modern  creed  that  pure  water  comes.  God  gives  it  the  body  which  has  pleased  Him, 
and  to  every  seed  its  own  body.  {Jas.  Freeman  Clarke.)  But  God  giveth  it  a  body  as 
it  hath  pleased  Him,  and  to  every  seed  Ms  own  body. — The  permanence  of  human 
identity  : — I.  Natural  life  precedes  spiritual  life — in  the  sinner.  II.  Natural  life 
IS  cojiiiiNED  WITH  SPIRITUAL  LIFE — in  the  believer.  III.  Spiritual  life  is  consummated 
IN  the  glorified  natural  life — in  the  risen  saint,  yet  the  man  loses  nothing  essential 
to  his  identity.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  All  flesh  is  not  the  same  flesh. — The  wealth  of 
Divine  power  disjjlai/ed  :—l.  In  the  visible  creation.  1.  Variety  of  living  forms. 
2.  Adapiation  to  different  spheres.  3.  Degrees  of  glory  and  beauty.  II.  In  the 
EESOERECTioN.  1.  The  Same  body  yet  Wonderfully  changed.  2.  Adapted  to  heaven 
and  hell.  3.  Differing  in  glory.  (Ibid.)  The  falsity  of  the  development  theory  : — 
I.  All  flesh  is  not  the  same  flesh.  1.  Man  differs  from  a  beast  in  the  very 
constitution  of  his  flesh,  blood,  nervous  system — as  also  other  genera  of  animal 
life.  2.  Modification  is  possible,  but  change  is  a  pure  assumption  unsu stained  by 
facts,  and  contradicted  by  revelation.  II.  Much  less  is  all  spirit  the  same  spirit. 
1.  The  spirit  of  the  beast  goeth  downward.  2.  The  spirit  of  man  returns  to  God. 
HI.  The  folly  of  such  assujiptions  is  manifest — they  contradict.  1.  Fact.  2. 
Eeason.  3.  Eternal  and  infallible  truth.  4.  And  incur  a  terrible  responsibility. 
(Ibid.)  The  resurrection  body  will  he  wonderfully  changed  :—I.  In  its  tissues. 
Though  its  elements  be  substantially  the  same,  the  variety  of  flesh  proves  the 
possibility  (ver.  39),  the  Word  of  God  asserts  its  certainty  (ver.  50).  II.  In  its 
adaptations — to  a  new  and  heavenly  sphere — there  are  bodies  celestial  and  terres- 
trial. HI.  In  its  appearance— all  glorious— yet  one  glory  of  the  sun,  &c.  The 
first  shall  be  last,  &c.     {Ibid.) 

Vers.  41,  42.  There  is  one  glory  of  the  sun,  and  another  glory  of  the  moon. — 

Degrees  of  glory  in  heaven  : — I.  What  this  means.  That  as  the  Lord  has  displayed 
His  mercy  and  His  love  to  holiness,  by  rewarding  a  short  and  imperfect  obedience 
by  an  eternal  glory,  so  it  is  accordant  with  these  perfections  to  confer  higher 
degrees  of  this  glory  on  those  whose  obedience  has  been  more  constant,  and  piety 
more  ardent.  While  we  maintain  this— 1.  We  allow  that  all  will  nevertheless  be 
perfectly  happy,  according  to  their  faculties  and  power  of  enjoyment.  2.  We  also 
maintain  that  in  many  things  their  felicity  will  be  common.     It  will  be  common 


504  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  sv. 

in — (1)  Its  object,  the  blessed  God  and  a'lorable  Redeemer.  (2)  In  its  subject, 
all  the  powers  of  the  glorified  body  and  soul.  (3)  In  its  duration,  which  will  ba 
eternal.  (4)  In  its  security,  since  all  the  blest  are  sustained  by  the  Divine  promise 
and  faithfulness.  (5)  In  the  full  satisfaction  of  soul  which  all  will  possess.  II. 
This  is  proved — 1.  I3y  Scripture.  (1)  By  all  those  passages  which  lay  down,  in 
general  terms,  the  great  rule  of  G'  d's  proceedings  with  the  children  of  men  (2  Cor. 
V.  10  ;  Eoin.  ii.  6  ;  2  Cor.  ix.  6  ;  Gal.  vi.  7-9).  (2)  From  the  account  which  Paul 
gives  of  the  diffeient  rewaids  which  will  be  given  to  the  ministers  of  the  gospel 
(chfip.  iii.  12-15).  In  this  representation  there  are  persons  who  obtain  salvation, 
and  yet  have  not  the  recompense  which  the  wiser  administrators  of  the  Word 
receive.  And  therefore  we  conclude  that  there  will  be  the  SHme  difference  between 
hearers,  according  to  the  manner  they  have  pr.  fited.  (3)  From  Dan.  xii.  8.  As 
there  is  a  difference  between  the  general  brilliancy  of  the  firmament  and  the  lustre 
of  the  stars,  so  there  shall  be  a  difference  between  those  ordinary  Christians  who  obtain 
felicity  and  those  zealous  persons  who  have  been  the  instruments  of  the  conversion  of 
many  sinners.  (4)  From  theparable  of  the  pounds  (Luke  xix.).  (5)  From  those  passages 
where  we  find  the  patriarchs,  the  prophets,  and  the  apostles  represented  as  occup>  ing  a 
more  conspicuous  situation  in  glory  than  ordinary  be'ievers  (Matt.  viii.  11,  xix.  28; 
Luke  xsii.  30).  2.  From  analogy.  Look  at — (1)  Nature.  In  what  an  infinite 
variety  of  methods  do  you  see  the  Creator  displaying  His  perfections !  (2)  The 
operations  of  grace.  "  There  are  diversities  of  ^ifts,  though  but  one  Spirit."  (3) 
Christians.  How  various  their  attainment.'!,  knowledge,  holiness,  and  joy,  though 
all  beloved  by  God  !  (4)  The  heavenly  host.  Though  all  holy  and  happy,  there 
are  archangels,  and  angels,  thrones,  dominions,  principjilities,  and  powers.  3. 
From  the  transactions  of  the  judgment-day,  and  the  nature  of  the  future  felicity 
(Matt.  XXV.).  III.  The  objections  that  have  been  made  against  it.  1.  Perhaps 
the  most  plausible  hns  been  drawn  from  the  parable  of  the  labouiers  in  Matt.  xx. 
1-1.5.  But  how  can  the  reward  signify  eternal  life,  since  it  is  given  to  the 
murmurers  and  envious  (ver.  14).  The  design  of  the  parable  is  to  repress  the 
pride  of  the  Jews,  and  show  the  propriety  of  the  vocation  of  the  Gentiles.  It  has 
no  reference  whatever  to  future  reward.  2.  "Are  not  all  believers,  through  the 
merits  of  Christ,  alike  justified  and  adopted,  and  must  they  not  therefore  be  alike 
glorified?"  But  do  the  blessinps  of  God  spring  less  from  grace  because  He  has 
establislied  a  wise  order  in  the  distribuion  of  them?  There  are  different  degrees 
of  holiness  and  comfort  enjoyed  by  Christians  upon  earth ;  then,  there  may  be 
different  degrees  of  glory  in  the  world  to  come.  The  objection  is  precisely  hs  strong 
against  a  difference  in  sanctification  as  against  a  difference  in  gloiification.  3. 
"  As  all  the  blessed  are  perfectly  holy,  they  must  all  be  perfectly  and  alike  happy.'' 
The  conclusion  by  no  m^  ans  follows.  Are  the  angels  alike  elevated  because  they 
are  all  perfectly  holy  ?  We  know  that  there  are  distinctions  among  them.  If  two 
diamonds  are  of  the  same  water  and  perfection,  does  it  follow  tl  at  theie  may  not 
be  a  difference  in  their  weight  and  value?  4.  "  They  all  derive  their  felicity  from 
the  same  sciurce,  the  heaiific  vision  of  God',  and  therefore  their  felicity  must  be 
equal."  But  may  we  not  view  the  same  sun,  and  receive  its  rays  differently  ?  When 
vessels  of  capacity  cast  into  the  satne  ocean  are  filled  by  the  same  mass  of  waters, 
must  the  quantity  they  receive  be  alike  ?  5.  "  The  titles  given  to  the  redeemed  are  the 
same  ;  they  are  all  calkd  kings,  the  sons  of  God,  the  spouse,  the  members  of  Christ." 
And  are  uot  these  names  given  to  1  elievtrs  on  earth,  and.notwithstiinding,  do  we  not 
see  a  great  diversity  among  them  ?  Are  all  l- ings  equal  in  power  ?  Have  all  sons  the 
same  inheritance?  Have  all  members  of  the  body  equal  honour?  (H.  KoUuck,  D.D.) 
Diverdty  in  the  henvenly  iuhahitavta  :  —Such  a  variety  is — I.  A  fact  well  sus- 
tained. 1.  By  all  analogy.  No  two  objects  are  exactly  alike.  This  variety  reveals 
the  illimitable  inventiveness  of  the  Di\ine  mind,  and  gives  to  the  universe  its 
freshne.^s  and  charm.  2.  It  meets  the  instinctive  love  for  the  new  in  human  souls. 
All  souls  loathe  monoi  nv.  A  dend  uniformity  would  crush  out  its  life.  3.  It 
agrees  with  the  varieties  found  amongst  men  heie.  No  two  minds  are  alike.  Is  it 
conceivable  that  in  the  higher  world  all  souls  will  run  into  a  common  mould? 
4.  It  accords  with  the  f.'eneral  teaching  of  the  Scriptures.  Paul  speaks  of  the 
temple  of  the  good  as  composed  of  gold,  silver,  and  precious  stones.  Christ  refers 
to  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  as  sustaining  the  most  honourable  positions  at  the 
heavenly  feast.  II.  Essential  to  sociai,  blessedness.  Suppose  a  society,  all  of 
whose  members  shall  be  exactly  alike  in  temporament,  experience,  attainments, 
modes  of  thought,  and  forms  of  expression.  Why,  such  a  state  of  things  would 
be  incompatible,  not  cnly  with  .social  enjoyment,  but  with  social  life.  The  monotony 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  505 

would  become  intolerable.  Tiie  utmost  variety  in  speculative  thought  is  compatible 
with  unity  of  heart ;  and  the  larger  variety  in  spiritual  temperament  and  conception 
in  any  circ'e — where  all  hearts  are  one — the  higher  the  social  enjoyment.  Most 
unwise,  most  impious  have  been  the  attempts  to  force  on  all  men  the  same  system 
of  thought  and  form  of  worship.  III.  Consistknt  with  the  highest  unity. 
Whatever  variety  in  the  stars — 1.  They  have  one  centre.  Some  larger,  some 
smaller,  some  dimmer,  some  brighter,  some  moving  more  quickly,  and  some  more 
slowly,  yet  all  move  round  ihe  same  central  orb  :  so  with  sainted  souls.  Whatever 
their  diversities,  they  revolve  round  one  great  centre -God.  2.  They  are  controlled 
by  one  law.  Attraction  moves  all,  regulates  all,  keeps  each  in  its  place  and  sp'.ed. 
One  law,  the  law  of  love,  rules  all  saintel  souls  above,  however  illimitable  their 
varieties.  3.  They  fulfil  one  mission.  They  all  catch  the  light  from  the  central 
orb,  and  flash  their  borrowed  radiance  abroad  through  all  their  spheres.  So  with 
souls  above.  They  are  all  the  recipients  and  reflectors  of  Divine  light  and  love. 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Identity  and  variety  :—'No\e— I.  The  idea  of  identity 
AND  VARIETY  MiNisTEHiNo  TO  EACH  OTHER.  1.  St.  Paul  bas^-s  the  argimient  fur 
immortality  upon  the  richness  and  splendour  of  this  mortal  life.  Often  have 
men  made  heaven  a  compensation  for  the  woes  of  earth  ;  St.  Paul  makes  it  not  a 
compensation,  but  a  development.  How  much  nobler  is  this  !  For  he  who  finds 
the  manifold  glories  of  this  mortal  life  to  be  the  symbols  of  immortality,  will 
always  be  led  to  live  this  life  as  intensely  and  profoundly  as  he  can,  in  order  that 
the  higher  life  may  become  real  and  attractive  to  him.  2.  Identity  and  variety 
express  the  tone  and  feeling  which  life  demands.  Identity  is  sound,  solid,  and 
substantial;  variety  is  vital,  interesting,  and  novel.  To  quicken  identity  with 
variety,  to  steady  variety  with  identity,  is  to  mnke  a  man  always  keep  himself  and 
yet  alwiiys  feel  the  power  of  new  conditions  around  him.  Think  of  the  best  men 
you  have  known,  and  you  will  find  in  them  these  qualities  in  their  highest  union. 
3.  See  how  largely  this  union  pervades  the  universe,  and  liow,  wherever  it  appears, 
it  gives  richness  and  depth.  (1)  Take  nature.  Lark  and  lily,  sunbeam  and  cloud, 
river  and  mountain,  ocean  and  land  ;  it  takes  but  the  most  elementiiry  knowledge 
to  feel  the  oneness  of  them  all ;  still  all  our  senses  are  tingling  with  the  tidings  of 
their  differences  that  they  are  always  sending  to  us.  (2)  Take  the  history  of 
man.  This  cannot  be  rightly  understood  unless  illumined  by  this  double  truth. 
Ages  come  and  go,  each  stamped  with  its  own  character.  There  are  uges  of  war 
and  ages  of  peace,  centuries  of  thought  and  centuries  of  action,  &c.,  itc.  Each 
has  its  own  glory.  In  the  eyes  of  the  inha'dtants  of  each  it  seems  as  if  all  other 
times  were  inglorious.  We  rejoice  in  the  nineteenth  century  ;  but  greater  is  the 
sum  of  nil  centuries,  this  ever  changing  life  of  man.  The  ages  of  the  cloisters  and 
castles,  of  dreams  and  of  mysteries,  are  all  needed;  each  of  thetn,  while  it  is 
different,  may  be  proud  of  all  the  rest.  (3)  So  with  nations.  England,  France, 
America — e.ich  is  a  living  being  with  a  character  unlike  all  the  others,  and  yet 
bearing  a  true  identity  with  them  because  boih  it  and  they  are  made  up  of  men, 
and  have  shaped  all  their  ways  and  institutions  out  of  the  needs  of  the  same  old 
manhood,  living  on  the  same  old  earth.  Nations,  like  children,  match  themselves 
with  each  other,  and  are  as  apt  to  envy  or  contemn  others  as  they  are  gre 't  or 
small;  but  Palestine,  Greece,  Rome,  America,  or  England,  who  can  decide  which  is 
greater?  "There  is  one  glory  of  the  sun,"  &e.  ;  and,  altogether,  they  fil  the 
radiant  sky.  (4)  Take  the  occupations  of  mankind.  Three  men  are  close  together 
in  the  street ;  one  of  them  makes  shoes,  another  writes  books,  another  is  the 
mayor.  It  is  foolish  and  false  to  say  that  there  is  no  rank  or  precedence  here. 
One  of  them  demands  higher  powers  and  education  than  the  others.  It  is  per- 
fectly right  that  the  shoemaker,  if  he  has  power  to  rise,  should  leave  his  bench 
and  write  a  book,  or  become  mayor.  But  there  are  other  truths  besides  this. 
(a)  That  each  of  these  arts  hsis  its  o*n  Hbsolute  standard,  its  own  good  or  bad 
ways  of  doing  its  own  work,  (h)  That  each  art,  so  far  as  it  lives  up  to  its  own 
standard,  becomes  a  true  utterance  of  the  universal  human  nature,  which  gets  its 
value  from  the  fact  that  it  is  at  once  identical  with  and  different  from  all  other 
utterances.  These  truths  make  the  richness  and  harmony  of  all  active  life.  (5)  And 
so  with  men.  We  have  the  greatest  varieties  of  man,  the  thoughtful  or  the  active, 
the  Conservative  or  the  Radical,  etc.;  but  below  h11  n  en  are  men,  and  every  man  is 
man.  If  variety  fails,  mankind  is  a  great  dreary,  undistinguishable  monotony  ;  if 
identity  fails,  mankind  is  a  great  tumult  of  confused  and  inharmonious  particles. 
How  unchristian  either  of  these  views  is  the  Incnrnation  teaches.  Christ  is  at 
once  the  inspiration  of  the  individual  and  the  assertion  of  the  identity  of  man. 


606  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

He  is  the  revealer  of  the  Fatherhood  of  God,  and  thus  builcJs  mankind  into  a. 
family  where  each  is  distinct  and  yet  all  are  one.     II.  Its  consequences,  and  uhk. 

SOKT    OF    LIFE    AND    CHARACTER    IT    WILL    MAKE    IN    HIM    WHO    ENTEKTAINS    AND    ACCEPTS. 

IT.     1.  It  will  produce  self-respect.     Here  are  you,  seemingly  iusigniticant,  yet — 
(1)  You  are  a  different  creature  from  any  that  the  world  has  ever  seen.     (2)  You 
are  a  branch  of  the  tree  of  life  from  which  sjirang  Isaiah  and  St.  John.     God 
forbid  if  you  are  really  a  sun  and  not  a  star,  that  any  compulsion  of  your  fellow- 
men  should  keep  you  in  the  star's  place,  and  shut  you  out  of  the  sun's.     But  you 
do  know  yourself ;   you  are  a  star,  and  not  a  sun ;  your  place  is  subordinate, 
secondary.     What  then?    If  you  do  your  work  with  perfect  faithfulness,  you  are 
making  just  as  genuine  a  contribution  to  the  substance  of  the  universal  good  as  is 
the  most  brilliant  worker.     It  is  the  fable  of  the  mountain  and  the  squirrel :  "  If 
I  cannot  carry  a  forest  on  my  back,  neither  can  you  crack  a  nut."     "  There  is  one 
glory  of  the  sun,"  &c.     2.  Kespect  for  others  is  bound  up  in  such  self-respect  as 
this.     The  philanthropist,  all  eager  to  set  right  the  woild,  is  apt  to  become  furious 
at  the  sight  of  the  scholar ;  and  the  scholar,  in  his  turn,  is  ready  to  despise  the 
bustling  restlessness  of  the  man  who  is  for  ever  organising  committees,  petitioning 
legislators,  and  screwing  up  the  loosened  machinery  of  charity.     "  There  is  one 
glory  of  the  sun,"  &e.     Surely  it  must  be  possible  for  men  to  be  devoted  to  their 
own  work  and  yet  thankful  for  the  work  which  other  men  are  doing,  which  they 
can  neither  do  nor  understand.     "  All  things  are  yours,  and  you  are  Christ's,  and 
Christ  is  God's."     3.  This  truth  may  also  apply  to  the  different  degrees  and  condi- 
tions in  which  our  own  lives  are  passing.     You  and  I  are  this  to-day ;  to-moirow 
or  the  next  year  we  may  be   something  quite    different.      To-day   we   may  be 
insignificant,  to-morrow  or  the  next  year  we  may  be  prominent,  or  vice  versa. 
How  shall  we  look  upon  this  uncertainty  of  human  life  ?     Let  us  look  upon  each 
as  a  distinct  thing,  with  its  own  values  and  meaning,  and  yet  feel  how  our  human 
life  may  still  be  the  same,  ever  spreading  itself  out  to  larger  things.     This  har- 
monises everything.     Conclusion  :  To  Paul  this  truth  was  a  proof  of  immortality. 
He  would  have  men  live  upon  earth,  yet  conscious  of  their  capacity  for  heaven.     Is 
not  that  what  we  want — the  life  of  earth  now,  the  life  of  heaven  by  and  by,  each 
clear  with  its  own  glory,  and  our  humanity  capable  of  them  both  ?     We  must  not 
lose  either  of  them  in  the  other.     We  must  not  be  so  full  of  hope  of  the  future 
that  we  cannot  do  our  daily  work  here  upon  the  road.     We  must  not  be  so  lost  in 
dull  work  on  the  eai  th  that  we  shall  not  be  perpetually  inspired  by  the  hope  of 
heaven.     (Bp.  Phillips  Brooks.)         Death  and  the  grave  the  physical  preparation 
for  the  perfect  humanity  of  tJie  resurrection  state  : — A  dewdrop,  so  says  the  Oriental 
lable,  hung  on  a  rose  leaf.     It  was  a  summer  morning ;  and  delighted  with  itself 
and  the  calm  loveliness  around,  it  could  have  hung  there  for  ever.     But,  alas  !  it 
soon  fell  to  the  ground.     What  a  change  !     Earth  for  the  bright  sky,  and  darkness 
for  the  ten  thousand  hues  of  nature's  loveliness !     But  through  its  dark  prison- 
house  in  the  earth  it  gradually  passed  till  it  reached  a  river,  by  which  it  was  con- 
veyed to  the  ocean  ;  and  there,  deposited  in  one  of  its  rocky  cavities,  it  became  a 
brilliant  and  costly  gem.     In  due  course  the  hand  of  man  reached  it ;  and  from  its 
long  rest  in  isolation  and  darkness,  it  was  taken,  polished,  and  set  in  gold — finally 
terminating  its  career  by  occupying  the  place  of  honour  in  the  very  diadem  of 
majesty  itself  !     Such  is  the  fable  which  illustrates  the  principle  of  development 
affirmed  here.     "  It  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be,"  Ac.     Our  connection 
with  this  world  is  very  insecure,  and  in  a  moment  that  connection  may  be  dissolved. 
We  hang  like  the  dew-drop  on  the  odorous  petals  of  the  rose ;  and  some  of  us, 
perchance,  would  be  willing  to  hang  there  for  ever.     But  a  touch  suffices  to  loosen 
the  attachment,  and  downwards  we  are  carried  to  the  darkness  of  the  earth.     Are 
we  then  extinguished?     Far  from  it;  we  have  only  passed  from  one  domain  of 
creative  instrumentality  to  another.     The  river  of  God  will  bear  us  to  the  ocean  at 
length.     There  our  resting-place  shall  be  provided  ;  but  from  the  secret  recesses  of 
the  spirit-world  we  shall  emerge  again,  like  a  gem  of  purest  water  and  costliest 
price,  to  adorn  the  diadem  of  the  King  of  kings.     The  apostle  asserts  that  this 
principle  of   development  universally  prevails  throughout  nature,  and  that  the 
"  glory  "  of  mundane  arrangements  is  mainly  dependent  upon  it.     Childhood  has 
its  glory ;  so  has  youth  ;  so  has  mature  manhood  ;  so  even  has  old  age ;  and  when 
man  reappears  at  the  i-esurrection,  it  will  be  to  supply  another  illustration.    As 
sun,  moon,  and  stars  all  differ  from  one  another  in  glory,  so  will  the  risen  and 
immortal  man  be   distinguished  from  man  fallen  and  immortal.      I.   All   the 

EEDEEMED    ARE     ON    THEIR    JOURNEY    TOWARDS    MENTAL    AND    CORPOREAL   PERFECTION  ; 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  507 

AND    ALL   THE    PHRNOMENA   OF   THE   PBESENT   LIFE    HAVE    A  BEARING    ON    THAT    DESTINY. 

There  are  two  preliminary  stages  of  human  existence — the  first  beginning  at  birth 
and  ending  at  death,  the  second  commencing  wiih  death  and  terminating  at  the 
resurrection.  Ever\  thing  in  the  universe  proceeds  by  steps.  The  acorn  does  not 
bound  in  an  instant  to  the  dimensions  of  the  full-grown  oak.  Why  should  not 
man,  therefore,  the  most  wonderful  of  all  God's  works,  be  Divinely  carried  through 
many  preliminaries  ?  Before  birth  man  passes  through  various  stages  of  develop- 
ment, and  could  we  but  realise  our  arrival  at  physical  perfection,  and  take,  in  con- 
nection with  that,  the  certainty  that  every  stage  and  event  going  before  contributes 
towards  it,  we  would  be  much  more  patient  under  trials.  The  afflictions  of  the 
present  life,  being  temporary,  will  soon  pass  away  ;  but  the  obedient  submission  to 
the  will  of  God,  the  compassion  for  the  afflicted,  and  the  other  virtues  which  they 
have  fostered  and  brought  to  maturity,  are  permanent  improvements  in  our 
chai'acter,  and  may  be  needed  even  in  eternity.  So  in  the  intermediate  state 
influences  are  at  work  upon  both  which  bear  with  prodigious  force  on  our  final 
perfection.  What  we  shall  be  in  eternity  is  as  much  the  result  of  causes  operating 
there,  as  the  full-grown  man  is  the  product  of  the  causes  which  carry  the  infant 
from  childhood  to  maturity.  Such  reflections  ought  to  mitigate  the  fear  of  death, 
and  comfort  all  mourning  friends.  II.  We  may  akkive  at  some  explanation  of  the 
FACT  itself.  1.  The  Shorter  Catechism,  in  answer  to  the  question, "  What  benefits 
do  believers  receive  from  Christ  at  death  ?  "  says,  "  Tlie  souls  of  believers  are  at  their 
denth  made  peifect  in  holiness,  and  do  immediately  pass  into  glory  ;  and  their 
bodies,  being  still  united  to  Chi'ist,  do  rest  in  their  graves  till  the  resurrection." 
The  biidy,  although  left  behind  to  decay,  is  not  fort'otten ;  it  is  still  "  united  to 
Christ."  The  living  Christ  in  heaven  regards  it,  even  then,  as  part  of  His  spiritual 
body — "  not  dead,  but  only  sleeping,"  and  by  that  repose  preparing  for  the  awaken- 
ing of  the  resurrection  day.  And  as,  when  children  or  other  loved  ones  go  to  rest, 
care  is  taken  to  jirovide  a  place  of  security  for  them,  and,  if  need  be,  a  guard  set 
over  their  slumbers,  so,  we  may  be  sure,  there  is  a  specinl  superintendency  of  the 
dead,  with  a  view  to  prepare  for  what  is  to  come.  The  crooked  may  be  made 
straight,  the  defective  supplied,  the  hideous  made  beautiful.  And  who  is  to  aflirm 
that  there  may  not  be  influences  in  nature  quite  competent  to  produce  this  result? 
The  acorn  has  a  wonderful  power  of  extracting  such  substances  from  the  earth  as 
are  fitted  to  constitute  an  oak  ;  and  so  is  it  with  every  other  seed.  Nay,  it  is  within 
the  competency  of  science  and  skill  greatly  to  modify  and  improve  the  various 
products  of  the  vegetable  creation.  There  are  chemical  affinities  also  whose  opera- 
tion can  exhibit  the  most  extraordinary  changes.  What  is  so  cheap  and  worthless 
as  a  piece  of  charcoal;  what  so  precious  as  a  diamond? — and  jet  in  constitution 
they  are  absolutely  identical.  The  grave  may  thus  become  the  alembic  in  which 
the  clay  of  man's  fallen  humanity  is  transmuted  into  the  gold  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven.  2.  Then  again  the  believer  is  a  teuiple  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  effect  of 
this  is  to  consecrate  the  body,  or  to  make  it  holy.  Why,  then,  should  we  imagine 
that  the  Holy  Spirit  should  maintain  His  union  with  the  soul,  and  abandon, 
altogether  the  body?  The  separated  snirit  cannot  but  think  much  and  often  of 
its  ancient  and  close  companion,  and  God  the  Spirit  cannot  possibly  be  divorced 
from  any  member  or  fragment  of  that  temple  wherein  He  had  a  loved  abode.  (J. 
Cochrane,  A.M.) 

Vers.  42-45.  So  also  is  the  resurrection  of  the  dead.  It  is  sown  in  corruption  ; 
it  is  raised  in  incorruption. — Tlie  resurrection  .-—I.  Its  essential  character.  1. 
It  is  not  the  work  of  an  age,  but  of  a  moment— not  a  gradual  process,  but  an 
instantaneous  act.  2.  It  is  to  be  distinguished  in  its  nature  from — (1)  An  awakening 
out  of  a  soul  sleep.  (2)  A  clothing  of  the  unclothed  spirit.  (3)  A  restoration  of 
our  flesh  and  bone  in  like  form  as  before.  3.  It  is  a  work  of  perfect  beauty.  II. 
Its  certainty.  A  threefold  voice  testifies  to  it.  1.  The  voice  of  nature,  which 
shadows  it  forth.  2.  The  testimony  of  the  ScripMire,  which  confirms  it.  3.  The 
testimony  of  the  spirit  within,  which  awakens  the  expectation  of  it.  Ilf.  Its 
glory.  1.  The  enemy  which  at  this  hour  shall  be  annihilated.  2.  The  condition 
of  happiness  which  begins  now.  3.  The  kingdom  of  Go  I  which  will  now  be  com- 
pleted. (Prof.  Van  Oosterzee.)  The  resurrection  body  : — I.  Its  sdrstance.  1. 
Material  and  identical :  that  which  is  sown  is  raised,  and  not  by  any  process  but 
by  the  Word  of  God.  II.  Its  properties.  1.  No  longer  corruptible,  but  undecay- 
ing,  vigorous,  and  immortal.  2.  No  longer  dishonoured  by  sin  and  defect,  but 
holy,  beautiful,  glorious.     3.  No  longer  weak  and  frail,  but  endued  with  extraordi- 


508  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOE.  [chap.  XV. 

nary  capabilities  and  strength.  4.  No  longer  a  natural  body  subject  to  sense, 
passion,  and  the  necessities  of  the  earthly  nature,  but  governed  by  the  Spirit.  III. 
Its  life.  Not  natural,  but  mysteriously  sustained  by  the  life-giving  Spirit:  for 
there  is  a  natural  and  there  is  a  spiritual  body.     (J.  L;ith,  D.D.)  The  resurrec- 

tion harvest : — Look  at  those  crassy  mounds  in  the  light  of  this  truth  ;  the  eye  of 
faith  sees  them  change  into  a  field  sown  with  the  seeds  of  immortality.      Blessed 
field!  what  flowers  shall  spring  there  !     What  a  harvest  shRll  be  gathered  there! 
In  the  neighbouring  fields,  "  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  he  shall  also  reap." 
But  here  how  great  the  difference  between  what  is  sown  amid  mourners'  tears,  and 
what  shall  be  reaped  amid  angels'  joys  ;  between  the  poor  body  that  we  restore  to 
the  earth,  and  the  noble  form  that  shall  spring  from  its  ashes.     Those  who  saw 
Lazarus'  putrid  corpse,  with  health  glowing  on  its  cheek,  saw  nothing  to  match  the 
<ihange  the  giave  shall  work  on  these  mouldering  bones.     (T.  Guthrie.)         The 
resurrection  of  the  dead:— I.  The  doctrine  teaches  that  the  same  body  shall  be 
raised  in  glory  to  a  nobler  life.     11.  Its  evidence.     1.  The  Word  of  God.     2.  The 
resurrection  of  Christ.     3.  The  quickening   Spirit  within  us.     III.  Its  use.     It 
teaches  us  to  take  care  of  the  soul  first — then  the  body,  not  to  enfeeble  it  by  folly, 
pollute  it  with  sin,  neglect  it  in  suffering,  or  mourn  it  when  dead.     {J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
The  resurrection,  of  the '<aint : — I.  The  body  is  sown,  not  buried.     No  exact  analogy 
with  the  seed  ;  life  is  extinct.      Yet  it  is  sown  in  hope  of  a  new  life.      II.  Will  be 
GLORIOUSLY  transformed — from  corruption  to  incorruption,  &c.      III.    Will    be 
tashioned  after  the  example  of  Christ.    [Ihid.)         The  old  house  and  the  new  : — 
When  we  pluck  down  a  house,  with  the  intent  to  rebuild  it,  or  repair  the  ruins  of  it, 
we  warn  the  inhabitHuts  out  of  it,  lest  they  should  be  soiled  with  the  dust  and 
rubbish,  or  offended  with  the  noise,  and  so  for  a  time  provide  some  other  place  for 
them ;  but,  when  we  have  newly  trimmed  and  dressf-d  up  the  house,  then  we  bring 
them  back  to  a  better  habitation.   Thus  God,  when  He  overturneth  this  rotten  room 
of  our  flesh,  calleth  out  the  soul  for  a  little  time,  and  lodf^eth  it  with  Himself  in 
some  corner  of  His  kingdom,  repaireth  the  imperfections  of  our  bodies  against  the 
resurrection,  and  then,  having  made  them  beautiful — yea,  glorious  and  incorruptible 
• — He  doth  put  our  souls  back  again  into  their  acquainted  mansions.    (Chrysostom.) 
Life  in  heaven  a  spiritual  life  in  a  ylorified  body  : — I.  The  body  will  be  a  fit 
organ  for  the  spikit.     1.  A  new  body,  incorruptible,  glorious,  vigorous,  spiritual. 
2.  Yet  substantially  the  same  that  was  sown  in  the  grave,  therefore  glorified  by 
the  power  of  God  as  the  organ  of  the  redeemed  spirit.     II.  The  spirit  will  be 
developed  in  its  full  perfection.     1.  Freed  from  ignorance  and  sin,  from  the 
control  of  the  body,  from  the  capability  of  suffering.     2.  Yet  retaining  its  peculiar 
properties.     (1)  Knowledge,  which  must  then  be  perfected  in  sight.     (2)  Will,  that 
shall  then  be  clothed  with  power.    (B)  Sensibility,  that  will  be  filled  with  enjoyment. 
(/.  Lyth,  D.D.)        It  is  sown  in  dishonour ;  it  is  raised  in  glory.— Dishonour 
belongs  to  the  corpse  of  even  the  richest  and  the  noblest  in  the  land.  You  may  conceal 
that  humiliation  by  a  splendid  coffin,  a  rich  funeral  pall,  the  pomp  of  lying  in  state, 
and  a  costly  monument ;  but  the  corpse  is  a  poor,  poor  thing,  with  all  your  elaborate 
attempt  to  conceal  its  shame.     The  loveliest,  sweetest  maiden  that  you  know  sooo 
becoojes  ghastly  in  the  cofiin,  and  you  long  to  put  the  body  out  of  sij^ht.    It  was  the 
shock  of  such  a  sight  that  made  Don  Francis  Borgia,  one  of  the  founders  of  the 
Jesuits,  renounce  the  world  and  devote  himself  to  a  religious  life.     It  was  the 
custom  in  Spain  not  to  bury  any  of  the  royal  family  until  some  grandee  of  the 
highest  rank  should  look  within  the  coffin  and  identify  the  body.     Queen  Isabella, 
to  whom  Francis  had  been  much  attached,  was  smitten  down  by  death.      Don 
Francis  was  chosen  to  look  within  the  coffin  and  say  whether  or  not  it  was  the 
corpse  of  the  queen,  whose  eyes,  now  closed  in  death,  had  always  turned  in  kind- 
ness unto  him ;  whose  every  facial  lineament  was  perfectly  familiar  unto  him. 
Amidst  the  half -uttered  j^rayers  which  commended  her  soul  to  the  Divine  mercy 
and  the  low  dirge  of  the  organ,  Francis  advanced  with  streaming  eyes  and  reverently 
raised  the  covering  which  concealed  the  secrets  of  the  grave  ;  .   .  .  but  the  horrible 
change  which  death  had  wrought  upon  the  queen's  countenance  was  so  loathsome 
and  appalling  that  Francis  turned  aside  to  shudder  and  to  pray,  and  from  that  day 
the  courtier  became  a  monk.     Verily  Queen  Isaliella's  body  was  sown  in  corruption 
and  dishonour,  in  spite  of  all  the  funeral  pomp  and  show  1   But  the  resurrection  body 
of  every  Christian  shall  be  incorruptible,  spiritual,  powerful,  and  glorious.    (F.  W. 
Aveling,  M.A.)      It  is  sown  in  weakness;  it  is  raised  in  power. — At  Stratford-on- 
Bow,  in  the  days  of  Queen  Mary,  there  was  once  a  stake  erected  for  the  burning  of  two 
martyrs,  one  of  them  a  lame  man,  the  other  a  blind  man.   Just  when  the  fire  was  lit, 


.CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORTNTHIANS.  509 

the  lame  man  hurled  awiy  his  staff,  and  turning  round  said  to  the  blind  man, 
"  Courage,  brother,  this  fire  will  cure  us  both."  Bo  can  the  righteous  say  of  the 
grave,  "  Courage,  the  grave  will  cure  us  all ;  we  shall  leave  our  infirmities  behind 
us."  (C.  H.  Spurgi'on.)  It  is  sown  a  natural  toody ;  it  Is  raised  a  spiritual 
body.  —  The  natural  body  and  the  spiritual  bndi/  : — At  first  the  phrase  "a  spiritual 
body  "  seems  a  contradiction  in  teims.  "Body"  and  "  spirit  "  are  not  only  dis- 
tinct in   our  thoughts,   but   opposite.     I.  St.  Paul  has  in  part  prepared  us  to 

UNDERSTAND    THE    PHRASE    BY   HIS     ARGUMENT     FROM    THE    ANALOGIES     OF    NATURE.         1. 

He  has  taught  us  that  one  life,  one  fiesii,  one  tilorj',  may  take  many  forms  ;  the 
same  flesh  :  it  cloihes  itself  in  many  forms  in  man,  in  beasts,  in  fishes,  in  birds, 
modified  by  the  external  conditions  in  which  it  is  placed.  So,  also,  there  is  one 
glory  of  light ;  but  it  takes  many  and  diverse  forms  in  the  suns,  the  moons,  the 
stars.  And  that  bodies  answer  to  the  quality  of  the  inward  lite,  and  are  adapted  to 
it,  and  to  the  conditions  in  which  it  is  to  act.  This  is  the  law  of  the  universe.  2.  Let 
us  illustrate  this.  (1)  Take  the  parable  of  the  Grain  of  Wheat.  The  seed  is  cast 
into  the  ground.  In  the  husk  are  whatever  the  vital  germ  needs  for  its  sustenance  ; 
and  tliesi--,  by  the  process  of  fermentation,  are  reduced  to  the  very  state  in  which 
the  germ  can  most  pa-ily  assimilate  them.  Its  roots  strike  downwards,  the  stem 
sprint-'S  upward,  and  soon  we  get  the  blale,  the  ear,  and  the  full  corn  in  the  ear. 
And  this  new  body,  no  less  than  the  old,  has  all  tWat  it  needs  for  the  nouri^-hment 
of  its  life,  and  is  no  less  exactly  adapted  to  its  conditions.  But  how  vast  the  change  ! 
From  an  earthly,  it  has  become  an  aerial  b'^'y,  which  draws  vigour  and  comeliness 
from  the  bountiful  heavens.  (2)  Take  the  G  eek  parable  of  the  butterfly.  Psyche, 
the  butterfly,  has  two  bodies.  Fir^^t,  it  is  a  worm,  crei^ping  slowly  on  the  earth, 
ugly,  liable  to  be  crushed,  destroying  the  leaves  on  wlich  it  feeds,  and  the  fruit 
which  they  should  shelter.  Finding  itself  grow  sick  with  age,  it  spins  its  own 
shroud,  coifin,  grave,  all  in  one — to  prepare  for  its  ri-surrection.  At  length,  when 
the  apnointed  t  me  has  come,  out  of  the  body  of  the  crawling  worm  there  breaks  a 
new  bo  !y,  all  the  old  imperfections  taken  away.  Instead  of  creeping  on  the  earth, 
it  flies  ;  for  ugliness,  it  is  clothed  in  beauty,  instead  of  destroy  ing  that  on  which  it 
feeds,  it  now  feeds  on  the  delicate  fragrant  flowers,  and  fertilises  them  by  carrying 
pollen  from  plant  to  plant:  the  lovely  flowers  paying  a  williny;  tribute  to  the  yet 
hi.i^her  loveliness  of  the  flower  angt^l.  (3)  Once  more ;  as  I  stood  looking  at  my 
marine  aquarium  one  hot  summer  day,  I  saw  on  the  surface  of  the  water  a  tiny 
creature — half  tish,  half  snake — not  an  inch  long,  writhing  as  in  a  mortal  agony. 
I  was  stretcliing  out  my  hand  to  remove  it,  lest  it  should  sink  and  die  and  pollute 
the  clear  wateis  ;  when  lo,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  its  skin  split  from  end  to  end, 
and  there  sprans;  outadelicate  fly.  Balancing  itself  fur  an  iustant  on  its  discarded 
skin,  it  preened  its  gossamer  wings,  and  then  flew  out  of  an  open  window.  Afterward 
,1  saw  the  marvel  repeated  again  and  again,  and  thus  I  learned  that  on  sea  as  on 
land  God  bears  perpetual  varied  witness  to  the  mystery  of  the  resurrection.  3. 
Therefore  we  may  fairly  assume  that  this  universal  law  holds  goo  1  of  man,  that  he 
too  will  pass  into  a  new  form,  a  form  more  heavenly  and  spiritual,  as  his  capacities 
are  spiritualised  and  he  rises  into  more  heavenly  conditions.     II.  If  we  look  a 

LITTLE  MORE  CLOSI'.LY  INTO  THE  WORD  TRANSLATED  "A  NATURAL  BODY,"  PaUL's  MEAN- 
ING   WILL    GROW    UPON  US,  AND    THE  ARGUMENT    BECOME  MORE  COGENT.       1.    The  Greeks 

called  the  soul  psyche,  as  well  as  the  butterfly.  And  as  psyche  stood  for  soul,  of 
course  psychical  stood  for  soulish,  or  of  the  soul.  So  St.  Paul  speaks  here  of  a  soulish 
and  of  a  spiritual  body,  just  as  elsewhere  he  speaks  of  a  soulish  and  a  spiritual 
man.  He  lield,  as  Aii>toile  held  before  him,  and  as  the  ablest  metaphysicians 
still  hold,  that  man  is  c. imposed  of  body,  soul,  and  spirit.  He  meant — (1)  By  the 
soul  all  of  intelligence  and  emotion  which  we  possess  in  common  with  other  animals, 
though  in  higher  digree.  (2)  By  the  spirit,  our  moral  nature  ;  the  higher  reason 
and  conscience.  With  him  the  psychical  man  is  the  man  in  wlnmi  the  psyche  rules ; 
the  man  who  is  intelligent,  but  uses  his  intelligence  for  ends  bounded  by  time  and 
space  ;  but  the  spiritual  man  is  the  man  in  whom  the  spirit  rules  ;  in  whom  con- 
science, faith,  love,  are  supreme.  2.  St.  Paul  holds  that  so  long  as  we  remain 
soulish  men,  we  have  the  very  body  adap  ed  to  our  present  stage  of  life  and  to  the 
conditions  of  our  life.  But  he  also  holds  that  if  we  live  in  the  spirit,  and  walk 
in  the  spirit,  we  thus  develop  capacities  and  graces  t  >  which  the  present  body 
gives  neither  full  scope  nor  adequate  expression.     Therefore  it  is  that,  like  the  seed 

.which  has  the  life  of  wheat  in  it,  our  bo  lies  must  be  sown  in  the  earth  that  they 
may  spring  up  heavenly  bodies.     Therefore  it  is  that,  as  the  caterpillar,  which  has 

tin  it  the  gerrn  of  a  nobler  life, digs  down  in  death  that  its  life  may  pass  into  a  new 


510  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xt. 

aerial  body,  so  we  must  lie  down  in  the  grave  that,  sliedding  these  earthly  husks, 
we  may  be  clothed  upon  with  a  spiritual  body,  incorrupt,  immortal,  stiong,  glorious. 
3.  Our  piesint  body  only  imperfectly  expresses  our  spiritual  life  ;  it  veils  from  us 
many  of  "  the  things  of  the  Spirit,"  it  impedes  us  in  the  pursuit  of  spiritual  excel- 
lence. When  the  spirit  is  willing,  how  often  is  the  flesh  weak  !  The  more  spiritual 
we  are,  so  much  the  more  do  we  feel  that  we  are  in  bondage  to  the  flesh,  and  crave 
that  spiritual  body  which,  instead  of  veiling  and  clogging,  will  further  and  express 
all  that  is  highest  in  us  and  best.  How  bright  and  animating  the  hope,  then,  that 
one  day  we  too  shall  have  a  body  as  quick  and  responsive  to  the  spirit  in  us  as  the 
mortal  body  to  the  soul,  a  body  whose  organs  will  minister  as  dehcately  and  per- 
fectly to  our  spiritual  capacities,  energies,  virtues,  graces,  as  the  senses  now  minister 
to  the  energies  and  pa'^sions  of  the  soul !  (.9.  Cox,  D.D.)  A  spiritual  body  is 
a  bodily  organism  adapted  to  the  life  of  the  spirit,  and  controlled  thereby.  In  it 
the  f-oul  h«s  taken  its  proper  position  of  subordination  :  mau's  spirit  now  holds  the 
administrative  power,  and,  ruled  by  God's  Spirit,  rules  the  body  through  the  execu- 
tive medium  of  the  willing  soul.  Man  is  at  last  what  God  originally  intended  him 
to  be,  a  creature  in  whom  the  spirit  is  the  personifying  principle  and  the  seat  of 
government :  his  proper  self  down  from  his  own  spirit,  as  from  a  throne,  reigns 
supreme  over  the  soul,  and  through  that  over  the  body,  in  a  threefold  harmony : 
the  harmony  of  the  parts  is  the  harmony  of  the  whole:  for  the  body  is  now  recon- 
stituted meet  for  the  new  government :  it  is  pneumatic,  no  longer  psychical.  In 
the  hour  of  Adam's  probation,  as  his  spirit  was  to  him  the  vehicle  of  fellowship 
with  the  Holy  Spiiit  and  his  body  the  channel  of  communication  with  the  sensible 
world,  so  his  soul  or  self-living  nature  had  to  decide  between  two  attractions,  a 
higher  and  a  lower,  whether  it  would  consent  in  accordance  with  the  Divine  inten- 
tion to  be  determined  by  the  spirit  and  thereby  continue  in  fellowship  with  God, 
or  would  conclude  against  God  and  choose  a  life  of  selfish  independence.  By  the 
fall  of  Adam  his  fellowship  with  God  was  dissolved,  and  the  Divine  life  of  his  spirit 
was  quenched,  although  its  Divine  substance  remained,  but  not  unimpaired. 
{Canon  Evan.i.)  The  relation  between  resurrection  and  immortality  : —The  doc- 
trines of  immortality  and  resurrection  stand  somewhat  in  the  same  relation  as  a 
block  of  marble  to  a  finished  statue.  The  Christian  doctrine  of  resurrection  is  the 
natural  fact  of  immortality  wrought  into  shape.  We  may  know  there  is  a  statue 
in  the  marble,  but  how  beautiful  it  may  be,  in  what  grace  of  posture  it  may  stand, 
what  emblems  may  hang  upon  its  neck  or  crown  its  head,  what  spirit  may  breathe 
from  its  features,  we  do  not  know  till  the  inspired  sculptor  has  uncovered  his  ideal 
and  brought  it  to  light.  The  analogy  may  go  farther.  As  an  artist  works  a  mass 
of  marble  into  a  statue,  putting  mental  conceptions  and  meanings  into  it  that  are 
no  part  of  the  marble,  so  Christ  has  given  a  Divine  shape  to  immortality  and  filled 
it  with  beautiful  suggestions  and  gracious  meaning.  We  see  in  the  statue  the  mind 
of  the  sculptor  as  well  as  the  marble  ;  so  in  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  we  see 
the  mind  and  purpose  of  Christ  as  well  as  the  bare  fact  of  future  existence.  Our 
spiritual  bodies  : — Our  spiritual  bodies  will  doubtless  have  new  powers,  and  new 
glories,  as  much  beyond  those  we  now  have  as  the  flower  in  the  sunshine,  beautiful 
and  frogrant,  is  beyond  the  seed  under  ground.  May  it  not  be  that  the  wonderful 
development  of  our  national  powers  by  the  inventions  of  Christian  civilisation  are 
but  hints  and  glimpses  and  foretastes  of  the  enlarged  powers  of  our  sjjiritual  bodies  ? 
In  the  microscope,  in  the  telescope,  in  the  telegraph  and  telephone,  incur  facilities 
of  travel,  in  the  connection  of  mind  with  mind  hinted  at  in  some  of  the  facts  of 
mesmerism,  all  which  a  few  years  ago  were  but  wildest  dreams,  but  have  more 
than  realised  the  fables  of  the  "  Arabian  Nights,"  may  we  not  have  gleams  of  the 
dawning  rays  of  our  spiritual  bodies  when  the  resurrection  morn  shall  have  come  ? 
A  curious  illustration  of  the  possibilities  of  our  spiritual  bodies  was  given  not  long 
ago  in  the  American  Popular  Science  Monthly.  Sound  is  the  vibration  produced 
on  us  when  the  vibrations  of  the  air  strike  on  the  drum  of  our  ear.  When  they  are 
few,  the  sound  is  deep ;  as  they  increase  in  number,  it  becomes  shriller  and  shriller  ; 
but  when  they  reach  forty  thousand  in  a  second  they  cease  to  be  audible.  Light  is 
the  effect  produced  on  us  when  waves  of  light  strike  on  the  eye.  When  four  hun- 
dred millions  of  millions  of  vibrations  of  ether  strike  the  retina  in  a  second,  they 
produce  red,  and  as  the  number  increases  the  colour  passes  into  orange,  then 
yellow,  then  green,  blue,  and  violet.  But  between  forty  thousand  vibrations  in  a 
second  and  four  hundred  millions  of  millions  we  have  no  organ  of  sense  capable  of 
receiving  the  impression.  Yet  between  these  limits  any  number  of  sensations  may 
■exist.    We  have  five  senses,  and  sometimes  fancy  that  no  other  is  possible.    But 


CHAP.  XV.]  J.  CORINTHIANS.  511 

it  is  obvious  that  we  cannot  measure  the  infinite  by  our  own  narrow  limitations. 
{Cliristian  Age.) 

Vers.  45-50.  The  first  man  Adam  was  made  a  living  soul. — Adam  and  Christ,  or 
the  mystery  of  life  contemplated  : — I.  In  its  sources.  1.  Adam  was  endued  with 
natural  life,  Christ  with  a  life-giving  Spirit.  2.  The  natuial  preceded  the  spiritual. 
3.  The  natural  is  of  the  earth,  the  spiritual  is  the  Lord  from  heaven.  II.  In  its 
•coMMDNicATioN.  1.  From  Adam  we  derive  the  earthy  or  natural  life,  from 
Christ  ihe  heavenly.  2.  The  image  of  the  earthy  precedes  the  heavei)ly.  3.  As 
the  earthy  bofly  (flesh  and  blood)  c  amot  inherit  heaven,  it  must  be  exchanged  for 
An  incdnuptible  body.  (J.  LytJi,  D.D.)  The  two  Adams  : — I.  The  EESicMBt.AxcK. 
1.  'I  lie  existence  of  each  rose  not  in  tlie  ordinary  course  of  nature.  Neitlier  came 
by  the  urdinary  laws  of  human  generat  on.  (1)  The  first  was  formed  out  of  the 
•dust  of  the  earth,  and  derived  his  sjjiiit  from  the  breath  of  God.  (2)  The  second 
was  conceived  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  pedigree  of  each  is  unparalleled  in  the 
history  of  the  race.  2.  Each  commenced  free  from  sin.  (1)  The  first  was  created 
in  the  image  of  God;  all  his  faculties  were  well  balanced  and  free  from  all  bias  to 
wrong.  (iJ)  The  latter  was  harmless,  undefiled,  separate  from  sinners.  3.  Each 
had  a  nature  capable  of  temptation.  Temptability  is  an  attribute  of  all  creatf'd 
intelligences.  AVhere  there  is  no  power  to  go  wrong,  there  is  no  virtue  in  keeping 
right.  (1)  The  first  Adam  was  tempted,  and  was  conquered.  (2)  Tire  second  was 
templed,  and  triumphed.  4.  The  character  of  each  exerts  a  momentous  influence 
upon  the  whole  race.  (1)  The  character  of  the  first  generated  a  moral  atmof-phere 
■of  sensuality,  ambition,  selfishness,  unbelief.  (2)  The  charat-ter  of  the  second 
generated  an  atmosphere  that  is  morally  salubrious,  sunny,  and  invigorating.  He 
who  lives  in  the  first  atmosphere  is  still  in  Adam,  and  is  earthy.  He  who  lives  in 
the  second  is  Christly  and  spiritual.  II.  The  dissimilarity.  1.  The  one  had  a 
sublimer  connection  with  God  ilian  the  other.  Adam  was  the  offspring,  repn'sen- 
tative,  and  steward  of  God.  Christ  was  God-man.  God  was  in  Him  in  a  special 
sense,  unfolding  truths,  working  mirades,  and  reconciling  the  world  unto  Himself. 
He  was  God  "manifested  in  the  flesh."  The  one  yielded  to  the  devil,  the  other 
conquered  him.  2.  The  One  possessed  a  higher  type  of  moral  excellence  than  the 
other.  The  character  of  the  first  was  innocence,  not  holiness.  Holiness  implies 
intellig'nce,  convictions,  efforts,  habits.  This  had  not  Adam.  Hence  he  gave 
Avay  to  the  first  and  simplest  temptation.  This  holiness  Christ  had  in  the  sublimest 
degree  ;  and  He  triumphed  over  prineipalities  and  po»\ers  of  evil,  and  maile  a  show 
of  them  openly.  3.  The  influeme  of  the  one  upon  the  rane  has  been  infinitely 
pernicious,  that  of  the  other  infiniiely  beneficent.  The  fiist  planted  that  upas 
"whcse  pfstiferous  branches  have  spread  over  all  men,  and  whose  poisonous  food  all 
have  tasted  and  been  injured.  Th"  other  planted  the  tree  of  life,  beiring  fruit 
for  the  healing  of  the  nations.  4.  The  moral  influence  of  the  one  is  destined  to 
decrease,  the  other  to  increase.  "  Where  sin  abounded,  grace  will  much  more 
abound."  "  The  kingdoms  of  our  God  shall  become  the  kingdoms  of  His  Christ, 
and  He  sh^ll  reign  for  ever."  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  first  and  the  Inst  Adam  : — 
1.  St.  Paul  bases  his  assertion  that  "  if  there  is  a  psychical  body,  there  is  also  a 
spiritual,"  first,  on  the  analogies  of  Nature;  second,  on  the  nature  of  Man  as 
revealed  in  Holy  Writ  (peever.  44)  ;  third,  on  the  historical  facts  that  Adam  had  the 
one  and  Christ  the  other.  2.  Note,  however,  some  interesting  preliminaries.  The 
opening  clause  of  the  text  is  almost  an  exact  quotation  from  Gen.  ii.  7;  that  the 
second  refers  to  Christ  is  proved  by  these  two  facts  :  th^it  with  the  rabbis,  at  whose 
feet  Paul  sat,  "  the  last  Adam  "  was  a  common  name  for  "  tlie  Messiah  "  ;  and  that 
St.  Paul  never  uses  the  designations  "the  Sfrcond  Man,"  or  "the  la-it  Adam,"  of 
any  one  but  Christ.  Again  the  rabhis  bid  us  note  that  Moses  says,  not  "  man  was 
made,  but  became  a  living  soul."  They  hold  that  when  God  br<athed  the  breath 
of  life  into  Adam,  He  conferred  on  him  the  higher  spiritual  nature  of  man  ;  but 
that,  when  Adam  sinned,  he  fell,  and  became  a  man  in  whom  the  soul  ruled  rather 
than  the  spirit.  And  the  rabbis  have  the  Scriptures  on  their  side.  What  was 
"  the  fall  "  l)ut  a  fall  from  the  higher  life  of  the  spirit  into  the  lower  life  of  the 
soul,  into  a  life  of  mere  intelligence  and  passion  as  distinguished  from  a  life  of 
righteousness,  faith,  love,  joy,  peace?  Why  was  he  debarred  from  "the  tree  of 
life  "  but  because  that  it  was  no  longer  meet  that  his  body  should  put  on  ineor- 
ruption  and  immortality  ?  I.  The  fiust  man  Adam  became  a  living  soul.  1. 
The  psychical  or  soulish  mnn  is  a  man  in  whom  the  soul  is  supreme.  Conscience, 
righteousness,  faith,  God,  <&c.,  do  not  stand  iirst  with  him;  but  man,  time,  earth, 


.612  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

the  gratiScations  of  ssas-^  and  intellect.  Was  not  Adam  a  man  of  this  type? 
When  the  spiritual  crisis  came  his  faith  failed  him.  God  was  not  first  with  him, 
nor  God's  will.  2.  A  soulish  man  he  came  to  have  a  s  mlish  body.  Indications 
of  this  are  seen  in — (1)  Adam's  newborn  shame  of  his  nakedness.  (2)  The  passion 
whicdi  made  Cain  a  muiderer.  (3)  The  infirmities,  the  special  forrus  of  ueach  and 
corruption,  to  which  Adam  and  his  children  became  liable.  Nevertheless,  as  our 
own  experience  proves,  the  body,  even  when  thus  changed  and  depraved,  was 
nevertliplej^^s  perfect  in  its  adaptation  to  the  faculties,  fuuciious,  cravings,  needs  of 
the  soul.  If.  Christ,  the  last  Adam,  was  a  life-giving  Spikit.  1.  He  was  the 
true  spiritual  Man  ;  for  in  Him  all  faculties  and  passions  of  the  soul  wt-re  in  sub- 
jection to  the  spirit.  To  Him,  living  and  walking  in  tlLC  spirit,  all  that  is  of  earth 
and  time  and  soul  was  as  nothing  when  compared  with  the  eternal  realities.  And 
therefore  He  could  refuse  all  the  kingdoms  of  this  world,  and  could  hasten  to  help 
any  mau,  however  lowly,  however  earthly,  and  seek  to  quicken  in  him,  by  help  to 
the  body,  the  life  of  the  spirit.  Of  a  charity  so  intense  that  He  loved  every  man, 
of  a  faitb  so  clear  and  strong  that  He  looked  through  all  the  shows  of  time  to  the 
eter  al  substance,  of  a  hope  so  livelv  that  He  desp  dred  of  uo  man,  of  a  righteous- 
ni-ss  so  pure  that  even  the  practised  eyes  of  incarnate  evil  could  find  nothing  in 
Him,  of  a  peace  so  peifect  tliat  even  His  unparalleled  labour  and  conflict  could  not 
impair  it ;  in  heaven  even  while  He  was  on  earth  ;  making  His  Father's  will  His 
daily  food,  He  stands  before  "s  the  one  true  spiritual  Man.  2.  So  also  the  last 
Adam  teaches  us  what  the  spiritu  1  b  dy  is.  (1)  He  had  a  bodv  like  to  ours,  yet 
not  altogether  the  same  as  ours.  Conceived  of  a  Virgin  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  Christ 
took  our  flesh  as  Adam  took  it,  from  the  hands  of  God,  immaculate  ;  receiving  a 
physical  body  which  might  rhanjj;e  and  lise  into  "  a  spiviiual  body  "  without  passing, 
as  our  bodies  must,  throu'.'h  the  purifications  of  corruption.  We  die  perforce.  But  He 
"  laid  down  "  His  life.  He  saw  no  corruption.  It  was  not  possible  that  He  should 
be  holden  of  death,  (a)  And  therefore  we  see  signs  of  the  spiritual  body  even  in 
the  body  of  His  humiliation.  Virtue  went  out  of  Him.  He  lived  not  by  bread 
alone.  He  walked  on  the  sroim-tosspil  waves.  On  Mount  Tabor  He  stood  before 
the  eyes  of  His  amazed  and  dazzled  disciples  a  spiritual  man  in  a  spiritual  body. 
(/;)  But  all  these  signs  of  the  spiritual  in  the  physical  region  of  His  life  were 
ju-ompted  by  that  which  is  of  the  spirit,  not  by  that  which  is  of  the  soul.  It  was 
at  the  touch  of  faith,  of  spiritual  need  and  desire  and  trust,  that  virtue  went  out  of 
Him.  It  was  that  He  might  feed  tlie  hungry,  succour  the  distressed,  or  deliver  the 
imperilled,  that  He  exerted  a  supernatur.il  control  over  natural  laws  :  and  He  fed, 
succoured,  delivered  men  th^it  they  m'ght  come  to  know  Him,  and  God  in  Him, 
and  thus  possess  themselves  of  eternal  life.  When  the  weak  physical  frame  was 
transfigured  with  an  immortal  strength  and  splendour,  it  was  because  His  si)irit  was 
rapt  in  the  ecstasies  of  redeeming  love  hs  He  talked  with  Moses  and  Elias,  because  He 
saw  that  the  work  of  His  redemption  would  be  triumphantly  accomplished.  (2) 
After  His  death  and  resurrection,  the  signs  that  He  inhabits  a  spiritual  body  grow 
more  apparent.  Though  He  can  still  eat  and  drink,  &c.,  He  glides  tbroiigh  closed 
doors,  ])asses  as  in  an  instant  from  place  to  place,  vanishes  from  their  siglit  as  the 
disciides  recognise  Him.  At  His  will.  He  is  visible  or  invisible  :  He  is  here.  He  is 
there  ;  the  spiritual  body  being  now  as  perfect  a  servant  of  the  spirit  in  Him  as  the 
psychical  body  of  the  soul.  He  can  eat,  but  He  does  not  need  to  eat.  His  body  is 
raised  into  higher  conditions,  endowed  wiih  loftier  powers.  It  is  heavenly,  not 
earthly;  it  is  spiritual  ratlier  than  physical  or  psychical.  Cjnclusion :  Do  any 
ask:  "But  what  is  all  this  to  us?  Adam  and  Christ  were  both  exceptional  men.  If 
the  first  Adam  was  a  iDsychical  man  and  the  last  Adam  a  spiritual  man,  how  does 
that  bear  on  St.  Paul's  argument  ?  "  It  is  much — nay,  it  is  everything — to  us  ;  and 
that  precisely  because  both  Adam  and  Christ  were  exceptional  men,  who  stand  in 
an  exceptional  relation  to  the  human  race.  For  (ver.  22)  both  the  Adam  and  the 
Christ  are  in  us,  and  in  all  men  ;  that  they  contend  together  in  us  for  the  mastery ; 
that  it  is  at  our  own  option  to  side  either  with  the  one  or  with  the  other  ;  and  that, 
according  as  we  espouse  the  first  Adam  or  the  last,  we  become  earthly  or  heavenly, 
psychical  or  spiritual  men.  If  we  permit  the  Christ  to  reign  in  us,  in  our  mortal 
members,  our  mortality  will  put  on  immortality — as  His  did,  and  be  swallowed  up 
of  life — as  His  was.  Like  His,  our  spiritual  manhood  will  demand  and  receive  a 
spiritual  body.  And  therefore  St.  Paul  may  fairly  exhort  us  that,  "  as  we  bear 
the  image  of  "the  earthly  (man),  so  also  we  should  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly." 
(S.  Cox,  D.D. )  The  second  Adam  "  a  quickening  Spirit "  ; — Human  relationships 
correspond  with,  those  which  subsist  between  Jesus  Christ  and  His  people,  and 


CHAP.  XV,]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  513 

doubtless  were  constituted  to  shadow  it  forth.  In  procuring  the  redemption  of  His 
peojile,  Christ  assumes  the  standing  of  a  husband,  who,  by  uniting  Himself  to  us, 
made  Himself  capable  of  standing  in  our  place,  and  answering  for  our  acts.  In 
advocating  our  cause,  that  He  may  do  this  effectually,  and  with  an  experimental 
feeling  of  our  wants,  He  assumes  the  place  of  a  brother  unto  us.  By  His  resurrec- 
tion He  assumes  the  relationship  of  a  father,  the  giver  of  life  and  of  being  to  His 
people.  As  the  natural  life,  or  life  of  the  soul,  is  to  be  traced  to  tbe  first  man 
Adam,  so  the  spiritual  life  in  the  believer  is  to  be  traced  to  Clirist,  the  last  Adam. 
Eut  here,  however,  the  resemblance  ends.  Adam  was  but  a  living  soul,  capable  of 
continuing  the  same  life  in  others  who  should  succeed  him;  but  Christ,  by  His 
resurrection  from  the  dead,  has  become  "  a  quickening  spirit,"  capable  of  giving 
life  unto  the  deaii.  Note  the  bearing  of  tbe  text — I.  On  the  foundation  oi^  the 
Cheistian's  salvation.  1.  The  apostle  here  enumerates  only  two  men  of  all  that 
have  ever  lived :  because  all  men  stand  in  such  a  relationship  to  tlie  first  Adam, 
and  all  believers  stand  in  sdch  a  relationship  to  the  second,  as  they  can  standin  tono 
olher  man.  We  do  not  see,  in  the  ordinary  course  of  human  generation,  that  all 
chiltiren  are  bom  with  what  is  peculiar  in  the  sinful  propensities  of  their  immediate 
progenitors.  By  dint  of  care  you  may  guard  against  the  outbreaking  of  those  sins 
which  Ijave  been  peculiar  to  the  immediate  progenitor  ;  but  you  will  not  be  able  by 
your  utmost  care  to  root  out  the  evil  which  is  in  the  heart  of  man.  And  the  infer- 
ence from  this  is  that  there  is  a  connection  between  us  and  the  first  man  Adam 
which  does  not  subsist  between  us  and  our  immediate  parents,  or  any  intermediate 
link  of  the  chain  by  which  we  are  connected  with  our  first  progenitor.  And  so  it 
is  written  of  Adam,  that  he  "begot  a  son  in  his  own  image,  alter  hi3  own  like- 
ness "  ;  who  tluis  deriving  from  him  his  life  of  nature,  shared  with  Adam  in  all  the 
mis'^rable  circumstances  of  his  fallen  condition.  When  God  created  Adam,  He 
created  all  men  ;  all  tlierefore  stood,  and  all  fell  in  Adam  :  all  in  him  became  not 
only  exposed  to  the  consequences,  but  also  infected  with  the  very  nature  of  his  sin. 
2.  Now  there  is  no  greater  difficulty  in  the  idea  that  having  union  with  the  last 
Adam  as  a  quickening  Spirit,  we  are  endowed  with  His  life  and  His  likeness,  than 
in  the  former  iilea.  This  is  tbe  only  foundation  of  our  salvation.  Salvation  is  not 
to  be  found  in  the  reformation  of  conduct,  in  a  difference  of  feeling,  in  an  act  of 
the  mind,  but  in  a  vital  union  with  Christ.  II.  On  the  trials  of  the  Christian's 
pkesent  condition.  The  great  peculiarity  in  the  Christian's  condition  is  that  while 
he  is  a  quickened  spirit  in  union  with  Christ  the  quickening  Spirit,  he  yet  has  a 
body  proper  only  to  a  soul,  by  still  having,  in  his  own  nature,  union  with  the  first 
Adam.  This  tlirows  a  striking  light  on  many  passages  in  Scripture  which  are 
descrijjtive  of  tlie  Christian  experience  (2  Cor.  v.  1-4;  Eom.  viii.  22,  23,  vii.  24). 
What  do  these  (and  a  variety  of  similar  passages)  express  but  the  desires  of  the 
quickened  spirit  to  be  released  from  this  prison-house  in  which  it  is  pent  up?  And 
does  not  this  also  point  out  the  Christian's  resource  under  such  trials?  What  is  it 
but  to  walk  by  faith  and  not  by  sight  ?  (Rom.  viii.  10-13  ;  Col.  iii.  1-5).  III.  On 
THE  Christian's  future  prospects.  We  are  as  yet,  indeed,  in  the  natural  body — 
tbe  body  proper  to  a  soul ;  but  there  is  a  spiritual  body ;  and  as  we  are  now  by 
faith  quickened  in  spirit,  so  there  is  a  renewal  unto  holiness  to  this  body  also, 
which  shall  be  revived,  and  glorified,  and  changed  into  the  likeness  of  Christ's 
glorious  body.  For  as  the  resurrection  of  CLirist  shows  us  the  perfection  and 
sufficiency  of  Christ's  work,  so  ours  will  bring  to  perfection  in  us  the  fruit  of  His 
work.  As  it  was  His  resurrection  that  showed  Him  to  have  come  out  from  under 
the  effects  of  imputed  sin,  into  the  possession  of  the  glory  which  He  had  with  the 
Father  before  tbe  world  was  ;  so  ours  will  show  us  to  have  come  out  of  the  course 
of  sin  and  of  the  flesh  into  the  enjoyment  of  that  glory.  As  it  was  His  resurrection 
that  sliowed  Him  to  be  the  Conqueror  of  Satan  ;  so  ours  will  show  us  to  be  con- 
querors over  all  evil  through  Him.  As  it  was  by  His  resurrection  that  He  was 
declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  with  power ;  so  it  is  ours  by  which  we  shall  be  mani- 
fested to  be  sons  of  God.  (IF.  Dochworth,  31. A.)  The  last  Adam: — Note — I. 
The  relation  BiiTWEEN  Christ  and  Adam  which  is  implied  in  the  name.  A 
name  used  to  designate  a  party  whose  pioper  name  it  is  not,  expresses  a  sym- 
bolical or  typical  relation  between  the  two  (Rom.  v.  14).  Adam  j)refigured  Christ— 
1.  In  the  holiness  of  his  nature.  Tliere  have  been  only  two  men  who  were  free 
from  every  taint  of  sin  when  they  came  into  the  world  ;  and  there  never  will  be 
more.  2.  In  his  dominion  (Psa.  viii ;  cf.  Heb.  ii.).  Adam  as  the  lord  of  this  world, 
and  the  creatures  contained  in  it,  symbolised  that  King  who  has  on  His  head  many 
crowns.  3.  In  his  marriage  (Eph.  v.  25-33).  4.  In  his  trial.  (1)  By  God.  i 
VOL.  II.  33 


514  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xv 

course  of  obedience  was  prescribed  to  him,  and  a  reward  was  promised  if  he  followed 
it.     Do  this  and  thou  shalt  live,  was  the  substance  of  what  God  said  to  Adam.     To 
the  Son  of  God  also  a  course  of  obedience  was  prescribed  :  and  on  this  account  He 
took  the  form  of  a  servant.     To  Him,  too,  it  was  said.  Do  this  and  live.     (2)  His 
trial  by  Satan.     5.  In  his   covenant   headship.     The   covenant   with   Adam  was 
expressed  in  the  form  of  a  threatening  (Gen.  ii.  16,  17),  while  the  covenant  with 
Christ  was  expressed  in  the  form  of  a  promise  (Gal.  iii.   16)  ;   but  the  fact  is 
unaltered  that  there  was  a  covenant  with  each.     Now  Adam,  in  his  headship, 
typified  Christ  in — (1)  The  representative  character  which  he  bore.     Tiie  first  pro- 
genitor represented  his  posterity.     Such  representation  is  not  unusual.     Parents 
represent  their  children,  and  princes  their  subjects.     But  the  only  case  which  for 
magnitude  and  grandeur  can  be  likened  to  that  of  Adaiu,  is  the  case  of  Christ.     (2) 
The  vicarious  action  of  Adam  under  the  covenant,  which  furnishes  a  tyi:)ical  illus- 
trutiou  of  that  which  was  vii-arious  in  the  Saviour's  career.     (3)  The  imputation 
and  legal  reckoning  of  Adam's  vicarious  procedure  to  his  posterity.     Analogous,  in 
some  measure,  to  this,  is  the  legal  reckoning  which  we  see  applied  to  great  trading 
companies  for  the  doing-;  of  their  manttgers.     So  vicarious  action  was  binding  on 
Christ  (Kom.  V.  12-19  ;  Gal.  iii.  13).     (4)  The  transmission  of  moral  qualities  and 
tendencies  from  Adam  to  all  his  isosterity.     The  first  man,  by  his  fall,  not  only 
contracted  guilt,  but  brought  upon  his  nature  the  taint  of  corruption  ;  and  that 
taint  is  communicated  tlirough  him  to  all  mankind.     In  Christ,  the  Son  of  God, 
there  is  a  holy  human  nature.     And  by  the  power  of  His  Holy  Spirit,  effecting  a 
real  and  vital  union  between  Him  and  His  jjeople,  they  become  holy  as  He  is  holy. 
II.  The  belation   which   is   iuplied   by   prefixing   to   the    name  "Adam"  the 
TERM  "last."     Christ  is  called  "  David"  and  "Solomon."     But  He  is  not  called 
"  the  last  David,"  or  "  the  last  Solomon."     John  ihe  Baptist  is  called  "  Elias,"  but 
not  "  the  last  Elias."     These  were  types  and  only  types.     But  Adam  was  not  a 
mere  type.     There  was,  beyond  this,  a  public  and  official  relation  between  him  and 
Christ ;  so  that  if  Adam  had  not  gone  before,  or  if  he  had  been  other  than  he  was, 
or  had  act^d  otherwise  than  he  did,  there  would  have  been  no  need  of  Christ.     The 
common  name  is  suggestive  of  the  unity  of  obligation  being  derived  from  the  first 
member  of  the  series.     The  special  term  "last"  is  suggestive  of  the  obligation 
being  at  last  fulfilled.     1.  Let  the  two  Adams  be  contrasted.     (1)  In  respect  of 
what  they  were  (vers.  45,  47).     (2)  In  respect  of  what  they  accomplished,     (a)  The 
fiist  Adam  entailed  only  sin  upon  his  posterity;  the  last  Adam  has  for  His  people 
righteousness:  He  is  their  righ'eousness  (Rom.  v.  19).     (h)  The  first  Adam  con- 
demns all ;  the  last  Adam  justifies  all  (Eom.  v.  18).     (c)  In  the  first  Adam,  all  die, 
all  are  dead  (Rom.  v.  15-17) ;  in  the  last  Adam,  Christ,  all  are  made  alive  (chap. 
XV.  22,  XV.  18,  19).     2.  Let  our  Ijord's  success,  as  the  last  Adam,  be  considered  in 
opposition  to  the  failure  of  the  first  Adam.     Chiist,  as  the  last  Adam,  succeeded  by 
fulfilling  the  obedience  to  the  law  in  which  the  first  Adam  failed,  and  by  over- 
coming the  obstacle  which  the  first,  Alani's  failure  created.     The  last  Adam  is 
perfect,  as  a  compel itor  for  the  prize — eternnl  life  to  man — -which  the  first  Adam 
lost;  as  a  worker  at  the  task  in  which  the  first  Adam  broke  down.     (1)  In  respect 
of  his  vicarious  action.     In  that  respect  he  is  emphatically  the  "  last  Adam."     His 
vicarious  action  was  perfect.     There  was  no  flaw  in  it  (Ileb.  v.  8,  9  ;  Eom.  v.  19). 
(2)  In  respect  of  the  imjaitation  and  legal  reckoning  of  his  vicarious  action  (Rom. 
V.  18).     (3)  In  respect  of  the  actual  transmission  and  communication  of  all  the  life 
and  holiness  wliich  His  vicarious  action  involves.     As  the  last  Adam,  He  has  the 
Holy  Spirit  to  give.     And  by  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  He  effectually  secures  the 
Falvation  of  all  who  are  His.     (A.  Gray.)         Christ  the  arclietype  of  Adam: — Some- 
times, after  an  engraven  steel-plate  has  given  forth  some  pictures  it  is  destroyed,  in 
order  to  enhance  tlie  value  of  the  copies  thrown  off.    If  the  copies  were  all  destroyed, 
then  the  ideal  would  be  lost.     But  when  one  type  was  thrown  o&  and  planted  in 
paradise,  the  original  remained  when  the  copy  was  spoiled.     Man  still  remained — 
the  Eternal  Son  remained.      [W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  The  wonderful  contrast: — I. 

Adam  was  a  living  soul,  which  includes — 1.  Reason ;  thus  above  the  brute,  and 
able  actively  to  glorify  God.  They  passively  praise  Him.  2.  Spirituality,  or 
knowledge,  righteousness,  and  true  holiness  in  mind  and  soul.  Nothing  can  com- 
prehend holiness  but  the  image  of  that  holiness.  3.  Happiness.  Holiness  is 
happiness ;  God  infinitely  happy,  because  infinitely  holy.  He  must  delight  in  His 
own  image,  and  for  us  to  wear  that  image  is  a  greater  honour  than,  if  it  were 
possible  to  be  invested  with  creative  power.  4.  Immortality.  We  are  immortal, 
but  not  independently  so ;   God  alone  is  (1  Tim.  vi.  16).    II.  The  last  Adah  a 


«HAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  515 

QuicKENiNO  Spirit.  He  quickens — 1.  From  spiritual  death  (Eph.  ii.  5).  2.  The 
afflicted  (Psa.  cxix.  50).  3.  The  backslider  (Hos.  xiv.  4).  4.  From  the  grave  (Phil, 
iii.  20,  21).  We  manifest  our  oneness  with  Adam  by  our  disobedience,  and  our 
oneness  with  Chiist  by  our  obedience.  The  most  glorious  work  of  God  is  the 
renewal  of  a  human  soul,  and  its  transitiou  from  grace  to  glory.  How  grateful  we 
should  be  that  God  has  promised  that  His  work  within  us  shall  be  as  perfect  as  His 
work  for  us  (Eph.  V.  14).  [HomUclic  Monthly.)  Natural  and  spiritual  life  : — I. 
Adam  was  made  a  living  sodl.  1.  Endued  with  natural  life.  2.  His  body  pos- 
sessed no  inherent  immortality.  3.  Its  perpetuated  life  depended  upon  obedience 
and  his  access  to  the  tree  of  life.  4.  Conspqnently  he  could  not  in  any  case  confer 
immortality  upon  his  descendants.     II.  Christ   was   made  a  quickening    Spirit. 

1.  Pos'iessed  life  in  Plimself,  heni'e  His  resurrection.  2.  Communicates  it  to  all 
who  believe  in  Him.  3.  Hence  also  He  will  raise  them  up  in  the  last  day.  (</. 
Lyth,  D.D.) 

Ver.  46.  How'oeit  that  was  not  first  which  is  spiritual,  but  that  which  is 
natural. — Tlie  natural  and  the  sjiirltual: — I.  The  natural  precedes  the  spiritual. 
This  is  seen  in — 1.  Nature.  Not  until  the  earth  was  complete  did  God  create  man, 
a  spiritual  being,  "  in  His  own  image  and  after  His  own  likeness,"  &c.  Thus  man 
stands  at  the  head  of  the  creatinn.  By  his  physical  organisation,  which  is  natural, 
lie  is  connected  with  all  that  is  below  him.  But  by  his  higher  nature,  which  is 
spiritual,  he  is  allieil  with  God.  2.  History.  A  nation  is  well  advanced  before  it 
exhibits  marked  spiritual  characteristics.  Our  own  ancfstors  were  rude  men.  Now 
the  Anglo-Saxon  race  leads  the  world  of  thought.  8.  The  pi  ogress  of  revelation. 
'J  he  Old  Testament  histories  and  genealogies  prepare  the  way  for  Christian  doctrine. 
Bible  study  proceeds  from  the  natural  to  the  spiritual.  4.  The  development  of 
religious  life.  "  When  I  was  a  child  I  spake  as  a  child,"  &c.  The  existence  of 
such  a  firinciple  suggests  ttie  necessity  of  great  consideration  for  weakness.  "  We 
then  that  are  strong  ought  to  bear,"  &c.  Weakness  may  be  on  the  way  to  strength. 
Therefore  it  should  be  encouraged.  II.  The  natural  conditions  the  spiritual. 
'The  spiritual  life  must  inevitaMy  be  affected  by  the  natural  life  witli  which  it  is 
ass'ciated.  What  a  help  health  is  to  the  spiritual  faculties!  wliat  a  restraint 
•sickness  is !  As  dissipation  enfeebles  the  body,  it  very  soon  weakens  the  mind. 
How  distressing  it  is  to  see  a  really  great  man  like  Solomon  or  Alexander  a  slave 
to  dissipation!  We  feel  that  this  is  rolibeiy.  The  spiritual  power  of  such  men 
requires  the  best  assistance  of  their  natural  powers.  How  much  has  been  lost  in 
this  way!  III.  Tue  spiritual  governs  the  natural.  1.  The  questions,  What 
shall  I  eat?  What  shall  I  drink?  What  is  the  limit  of  indulgence?  are  answered 
here.  The  natural  is  for  the  spiritual,  the  spiritual  governs  the  natural.  That 
which  is  truly  best  for  the  sjjiritual  must  dcteimine  the  activities  of  the  natural, 

2.  The  more  spiritual  classes  cannot  thrive  if  the  less  spiritual  classes  are  neglected. 
The  thought  and  the  fjmpathy  of  the  palace  must  enter  the  hut  and  transform  it 
into  a  neat  cottage.  The  thought  and  the  sympathy  of  the  hut  must  go  out  to  the 
palace,  that  the  helping  hand  of  kindly  interest  may  be  grasped.  The  masses 
must  be  instructed.  But  if  the  masses  need  education,  then  surely  they  must  be 
willing  to  be  taujiht.  Cliristianiiy  urges  all  men  to  be  considerate,  the  higher  to 
■consider  the  lower,  the  lower  to  consi'ler  the  higher.  IV.  The  natural  is  to 
give  W.AY  TO  THE  SPIRITUAL.  Not  Until  the  spiritual  is  compL  tely  realised  does 
man  discover  the  end  of  his  existence.  A  tree  lives,  blossoms,  b  ars  fruit,  and 
dies.  It  has  accomplished  the  purpose  of  its  existence.  Not  so,  however,  with 
man.  He  just  begins  to  live  when  he  dies.  How  emphatic  are  the  words  of 
Christ !  "  I  am  thn  Ptesurrection  and  the  Life,"  &c.  "  I  am  come  that  they  might 
have  life,"  &c.  (II.  M.  Booth.)  The  true  develojyment : — I.  Natural  life 
NECESSARILY  PRECEDES  THE  SPIRITUAL,  OT  heavenly.  1.  Progr^ssi'in  is  the  law  of 
all  life.  2.  So  man  was  created  in  a  lower  condition  with  the  prospect  of 
advancing  to  a  higher.  3.  Natural  life,  so  f;tr  from  rendering  a  nobler  life  doubt- 
ful, much  rather  justifies  the  hope  of  it  (vers.  45,  46).  II.  The  natural  and  the 
SPIRITUAL  life  ARE  MYSTEiiiousLY  UNITED.  1.  Apparently  tlipy  are  distinct,  as  in 
the  first  and  second  Adam  (vers.  47,  48).  2.  But  the.v  are  really  thn  same  nature 
under  different  forms  (vers.  49)  3.  Hence  when  the  earthly  is  lost  in  the  heavenly 
humanity  is  still  essentially  the  same.  Ilf.  The  spiritual  life  is  the  glorifi- 
cation OF  THE  natural  LIFE.  Mau's  destiny  is  immortality  (ver.  50).  The  present 
mode  of  life  (flesh  and  blood)  is  temporary,  therefore  must  the  natural  be  gloiitied 
that  man  may  live  for  ever.    (J.  Lijlh,  D.D.)       The  natural  precedes  the  spiritual : — 


616-  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOn.  [chap.  xv.  , 

Many  an  objector,  on  hearing  the  saying  of  ver.  44,  might  say.  Why  should  not  God 
create  the  iDL-rfect  spiritual  life  at  once?     St.  Paul  in  answer  applies  a  general  law 
of  the  universe  to  the  case  before  him.     It  would  be  contrary  to  the  Divine  order 
in  God'a  creation,  which  is  first  the  natural,  and  afterward  the  spiritual.     Consider 
— I.  The  universality  of  this  law.     This  is  disclosed — 1.  In  the  order  of  creation. 
Note  the  principle  of  gradation  on  which  the  universe  arose  in  Genesis.     And  this 
is  confirmed  at  every  step  by  science.     First,  the  formless  earth,  then  the  green ' 
herb,  then  the  lowest  forms  of  animal  existence,  then  the  highest  types,  then  man, 
the  last   and  noblest.     And  then,  perhaps,  an  age  to  come,  with  a  hi'^her  and 
nobler  race  of  beings.     2.  In  the  progress  of  the  Jewish  nation.     Kecollect  their 
origin.     They  were  a  nation  of  slaves.     Originally,  too,  they  were  of  a  rude,  hard 
stock,    and  became   in   Egypt  and  in  Palestine  sensual,  idolatrous,  and  money- 
loving.     You   are  reminded  of  one  of  those  trees  whose  expo-ed  roots  are  seen 
gnarled  and  twisted,  hard  as  iron,  nmre  like  rock  than  wood,  and  yet  whose  foliage 
above  is  rich  and  noble  :  below  extends  the  basis  of  the  coarse  and  natural,  above 
are  manifested  the  beautiful  and  spiritual.     By  slow  gradations  did  this  nation  of 
slaves  rise  into  a  spiritual  people.     3.  In  the  progress  of  the  human  race.     St. 
Paul  says,  Adam  was  "of  the  earth,  earthy"  ;  and  again,  he  calls  him  "a  living 
soul,"  that  is,  a  natural  man — a  man  with  intelligence,  perception,  and  a  moral 
sense,  with  power  to  form  a  society  and  to  subdue  Nature  to  herself.     The  fall, 
then,  was  a  step  downwards  from  innocence,  but  also  it  was  a  giant  step  in  human 
progress.     It  made   goodness  possible :  for  to  know  the  evil,  and  to  conquer  it 
and  choose  the  good,  is  far  nobler  than  a  state  which  only  consists  in  our  ignorance 
of  both.     Until  the  step  of  nature  has  been  passed,  the  step  of  spirituality  cannot 
be  made.     Thus  did  the  race  begin  to  shave  in  the  spiritual ;  and  among  many 
nations,  and  by  means  of  many  men,  was  the  progress  of  mankind  evolved  ;  but 
their  light  was  too  scattered,  and  their  isolated  lives  imparted  little  life.     So  the 
next  stage  in  the  progress  of  the  race  was  the  coming  of  Christ,  the  spiritual  Man, 
wViose  prerogative  it  was,  not  as  the  first  Adam,  to  live  in  Eden  for  Himself,  but  as 
the  second  Adam,  to  die  on  Calvary  for  others ;  not  as  the  fi)st  Adam,  to  receive 
happiness,  but  as  the  second  A'am,  to  confer  life.     It  was  no  longer  the  natural 
man,  but  the  quickening  Spirit,  that  represented  the  race  to  God.     II.  This  law 
IS  TBDE  OF  us  AS  MEN.     1.  Our  naturiil  affections  precede  our  spiritual.     According 
to  the  two  great  commandments,  in  the  order  of  importance  the  love  of  God  is 
first ;  in  the  order  of  time  the  love  of  mm.     Love  to  man  also  begins  lower  down. 
We  do  not  love  our  neighbours  first,  nor  embrace  the  race  in  our  affection  all  at 
once ;  we  ascend  from  a  lower  point.     The  table  given  on  Sinai  only  specifies  one 
kind  of  love,  but  in  the  fifth  connnandment  they  all  lie  as  the  future  oak-tree  lies 
in  the  acorn ;  the  root  of  all  the  other  develoiiments  of  love  is  love  and  honour 
unto  parents.     "  The  child  is  father  to  the  man."     The  friend,  the  husband,  the 
citizen  are  formed  at  the  domestic  hearth.     Out  of  human  love  grows  love  to  God. 
For  a  time  the  father  represents  God  to  the  child.     He  is  to  train  the  affections 
which  afterwards  shall  be  given  to  God  ;  and  the  brother  those  which  shall  expand 
hereafter  for  Christ.     You  cannot  force  love  to  God.     2.  The  moral  precedes  the 
spiritual.     There  is  a  time  when  the  Ad.im  is  formed  within  us,  when  the  Christ 
begins  to  be  formed,  when  we  feel  wit'iin  us  the  sense  of  "  Christ  in  us,  the  hope 
of  glory,"   when   the   "living   soul,"   as   ruler   of   the   man,  gives   place  to   the 
"quickening  spirit."     But  theie  are  two  stages  through  which  we  pass.     (1)  It 
was  through  temptation  that  the  first  Adam  fell  from  a  state  of  nature.     It  was 
through  temptation,  too,  that  the  second  Adam  redeemed  humanity  into  a  state  of 
grace.     (2)  Through  sorrow.     [F.  W.  Robertson,  M. A.)         The  law  of  tJie  psijcliical 
and  the  sjyirttual : — It  is  in  the  history  of  the  individual  man  that  we  find  our  best 
illustration  of   St.  Paul's  law.     As  babes  and  sucklings,  our  life  is  animal  and 
instinctive.     We  are  a  mere  complex  of  appetites — appetite  for  food,  for  warmth, 
for  sleep :  the  mind  is  dormant.     Soon  however  we  begin  to  take  notice,  and  to 
respond  to  notice  ;  to  imitate  sounds;  to  pry  into  the  nature  of  the  things  around 
us  and  their  relation  to  us.     Then  we  learn  to  name  them,  to  speak  about  them,  to 
like  and  dislike  them.     Intellect  awakens;  we  master  our  first  abstractions;  we 
learn  to  put  words  for  things.     Our  schooling  commences ;  perception,  inifigination, 
memory,  understanding  are  developed  :  all  the  intellectual  facets  of  the  soul  are 
polished  :  and  still  we  carry  into  this  new  stage  of  our  life  manv  of  the  animal  and 
instinctive  qualities  of  the  earlier  stage.     After,  and  in  much  blended  with,  the 
intellectual  comes  the  passionate  era.     We  rise  into  that  tine  frenzy  in  which  we 
live  in  another  heart,  in  which  we  prefer,  or  fancy  we  prefer,  another's  good  to 


CHAP.  XV.}  I.  CORINTHIANS.  SIT 

onr  own.  With  love  comes  the  long  train — desire,  envy,  jealousy,  hatred  of  rivals, 
indifference  to  former  affections,  ambition  to  shine  and  to  please.  It  is  the 
passionate  stage  of  our  existence.  In  and  througli  all  tJiese  earlier  stages  there 
may  be  the  rudiments  of  spiritual  life.  We  may  have  formed  some  conception 
of  God,  of  His  goodness  ;  we  may  have  felt  some  love,  some  trust  in  Him.  But, 
as  a  rule,  the  proper  life  of  the  spirit  is  kindled  within  us,  or  becomes  regnant 
within  us,  only  after  we  liave  passed  through  the  intellectual  au'l  passionate  stnges 
of  our  course.  Th^  spiritual  is  not  first  in  us,  bat  the  psychical.  Nay,  however 
early  we  may  begin  to  think  of  God  and  to  love  Him,  it  is  obvious  that  we  must 
have  learned  to  think  before  we  can  think  of  God.  that  we  must  have  learned  to 
love  before  we  can  love  God.  [S.  Cox,  D.D.)  Tlie  two  grand  ti/pa  of  character  : 
■ — The  words  show— I.  That  man  has  skt  before  him  two  mor\l  images  or  types 
OF  charactkr.  The  "earthy"  and  the  "heavenly."  These  two  are  essentially 
distinct.  1.  The  one  is  sensuous,  the  other  S|uritual.  (1)  The  earthy  man  is 
material,  partially  developed — {a)  In  his  views  of  happiness.  All  his  pleasures  aie 
of  a  sensuous  or^ier.  {h)  In  his  view'^  of  wealtli,  viz.,  worldly  prujjerty.  (c)  In  his 
views  of  dignity,  viz.,  the  highest  worldly  position.  (2)  Tlie  spiritual  man  lives 
behind  the  visible  phenomena,  realises  the  eternal.  To  him  tlie  invisible  is  the 
only  reality;  moral  excellence,  the  only  wealth  ami  dignity.  Tli  mgh  in  the  world, 
he  is  not  of  the  world.  He  has  citizenship  in  heaven.  2.  The  one  is  practically 
selfish,  the  other  is  benevolent.  (1)  The  eai  thy  man  is  controlled  by  a  regird  to 
his  own  pleasures  and  aggrandisements.  All  outside  of  himself  he  values  only  so 
far  as  it  serves  him.  (2)  The  heavenly  man  is  benevolent.  His  personal  feelings 
are  submerged  in  the  ever-rising  seas  of  sympnthy  with  humanity  and  God.  l/ike 
Christ,  he  pleases  not  himself.  3.  The  one  is  practically  atheistic,  the  other  is 
godly.  (1)  The  earthy  man  s"e^  nothing  but  natural  law,  order,  &a.  "  God  is 
not  in  all  his  thoughts."  Tlie  universe  to  liini  is  only  either  an  eternal  or  a  self- 
produced  and  self-regulating  machine,  a  house  that  either  has  never  had  a  builder, 
or  whose  builder  has  deserted  it.  (2)  The  heavenly  man  sees  God  in  all,  like 
David,  and,  like  Enoch,  walks  ever  with  Him.  11.  Th\t  man  does  bear  the 
ONE  ;  HE  should  bear  tue  other.  Every  man,  in  the  first  stages  of  his  life,  bears 
the  image  of  the  "earthy."  This  fact  is  at  once  the  crime  and  the  calamity  of 
the  race.  But  whilst  we  do  bear  the  one  image  Ht  first,  we  should  strive  to  bear 
the  other  because — 1.  It  is  right.  This  heavenly  image  realises  the  soul's  highest 
ideal  of  excellence.  It  is  that  for  which  we  unconsciously  hnn.,'er,  and  for  which 
we  shall  hunger  for  ever  unless  we  get  it.  2.  It  i«  practicable.  (1)  We  liave  the 
model  in  its  more  iniitable  form  in  Christ.  He  was  pre-eminently  spiritual, 
benevolent,  godly  ;  and  never  was  there  a  character  ni"re  imitahle  than  Christ's — 
the  most  admirable,  transparent,  unchangeable.  (2)  We  liave  the  means  in  the 
most  effective  forms.  The  gospel  reveals  the  mod '1,  sujjtilies  tiie  motives,  and 
pledges  the  spiritual  influences  of  heaven.  3.  It  is  urgent.  To  da  this  is  the  gra'id 
mission  of  life.  Unless  the  work  is  fulfilled  our  existence  becomes  a  failure  and  a 
curse.  To  pass  from  the  "  earthy"  to  the  "  heavenly  "  is  to  pass  from  darkness  to 
light,  from  sin  to  holiness,  from  Satan  to  God.  (/).  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  Divine 
order  : — The  method  of  God's  working  is  upward  progress.  His  path  is  "  as  the 
shining  ligiit,"  &c.  I.  In  the  creation  op  tke  material  world.  First,  (here  was 
the  globe  without  life  ;  then  a  world  filled  with  life  and  beauty.  First  the  proto- 
zoans, molluscs,  and  sponges  of  the  primeval  world;  after  that,  man  created  in  the 
image  of  God.  II.  In  the  natural  development  of  each  individual  man.  1. 
There  is  helpless  infancy.  Physical,  mental,  spiritual  forces,  and  wild  passions 
sleep  in  that  little  nebulous  mass  like  thunderstorms  in  the  quiet  clouds  ol'  summer. 
2.  By  and  by  we  arrive  at  youth,  this  blossoming  season  of  our  nature,  the  time  of 
fancy.  3.  After  that  conies  manhood.  There  is  now  fulness  of  reason  and  strength 
and  responsibility.  III.  In  the  dispensations  of  revealed  religion.  "The  law  was 
given  by  Moses  ;  but  Kiace  and  truth  came  by  Jesus  Christ."  Moses  was  an  inspired 
man  :  Christ  is  "  God  mauifest  in  the  flesh."  Moses  was  faithful  as  a  servant  over 
"all  his  house — Christ  as  a  Son  in  His  own  house,  whose  house  are  we;  and  the  grace 
and  truth  are  more  excellent  than  the  liw.  The  law  demands  obedience,  but  gives 
no  help  to  obey;  tlie  gospel  creates  within  us  new  hearts  which  make  obedience  a 
delight.  The  la^v  revealed  sin  ;  the  gospel  proclaims  pardon.  The  law  threatens; 
the  gospel  invites.  Tlie  great  promise  of  the  law  was,  "  Thou  shalt  inherit  the 
land  "  ;  that  of  the  gospel  is,  "  I  give  unto  them  eteriiHl  life,"  &c.  The  law  was 
for  one  nation ;  the  gospel  is  for  the  whole  world.  The  law  was  the  shadow  ;  the 
gospel  is  the  substance.     The  law  was  bondage ;    the  gospel  is  liberty.     IV.  In 


518  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xv. 

Christian  expkeiknce  and  in  the  development  of  Christian  chaeactee.  1. 
Paith  in  religion  is  easy  in  childhood.  Litile  children  fresh  from  the  hand  of  God 
are  not  sceptics.  They  have  the  puwer  of  r'-verence  and  faith.  For  a  time  they 
■worship  father  and  mother.  They  never  regard  the  material  universe  as  a  thing 
to  be  weighed,  and  understood,  and  measured.  It  is  to  them  a  solemn  mystery. 
Being  thus  constituted,  it  is  the  easiest  thing  in  the  world  to  teach  a  child  to  utter 
words  of  prayer.  2.  The  young  man  discovers  that  much  ignorance  has  mingled 
•with  the  reverence  of  childhood,  and  has  not  sufficient  experience  to  replace  his 
early  fancy  witli  the  solid  structure  of  reality  and  truth,  liesides,  the  powers  of 
childhood  become  full  in  .vouth.  Self-will  is  strong,  and  the  whole  republic  of  the 
passions  is  up  in  arms  against  the  authority  of  reason  and  conscience.  But  Christ 
is  there,  and  His  voice  is  heard  amid  the  arrogant  and  noisy  voices  of  the  flesh. 
There  is  a  long  struggle.  Tlie  young  man  wavers ;  but,  thank  God  !  Christ 
perseveres,  and  the  "  Lord,  what  wilt  Tliou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  shows  that  Christ 
has  taken  possession  of  his  will.  3.  The  struL'gle  is  not  yet  over.  A  time  of  deep 
thought  and  anxious  reflection  arrives,  and  brings  with  it  an  intense  desire  to  know 
the  reason  of  faith,  the  basis  of  belief.  The  intellect  demands  greater  evidence 
than  is  or  can  be  given.  It  asks  for  demonstration.  But  during  this  time  of 
intellectual  revolt  Christ  is  there  ;  Christ  speaks  with  authority  and  love,  "  Believe 
on  Me  when  thou  canst  not  know.  Worship  before  the  mystery;  what  thou 
knowest  not  now  thou  shalt  know  hereafter."  Christ  is  victorious  again,  and  the 
pridfi  of  the  intellect  subsides,  and  the  mind  bows  before  Christ,  saying,  "  Thou  art 
the  power  and  wisdom  of  God;  and  I  wish  to  be  Thine  for  ever  and  ever."  4.  After 
this  comes  old  age — tbe  best  period  of  all  by  far.  Childhood  is  untried  innocence; 
youth  little  better  than  rebellion  against  Christ ;  manhood  a  struggle  against 
intellectual  difficulties  and  spiritual  enemies  ;  but  as  the  years  pass  on,  the  man's 
whole  nature  is  subdued  and  sanctified.  The  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  his 
heart.  The  peace  of  God,  which  passeth  understanding,  keeps  his  heart  and  mind 
in  Christ  Jesus.  Joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory  flows  in  plentifully  upon  his 
spirit.  By  and  by  visitors  from  the  unseen  come  and  say,  in  tones  never  heard 
before,  "Brother,  come  away."  What  is  best  in  the  tree  is  the  last  to  get 
perfect.  V.  In  'jhe  increase  of  the  spiEiTr'At,  kingdom  in  the  woeld.  Here 
we  may  well  ask,  Can  the  gospel  live  and  multiply  ?  'I'hink  of  China  and  India, 
whose  very  nature  is  engrained  with  their  fa^e  religion  and  their  fantastic 
philosophy.  Can  they  be  changed  ?  But  we  need  not  go  so  far  to  seek  difficulties. 
Think  of  the  state  of  things  here  in  England.  Think,  e.g.,  of  the  adoration  of 
wealth  and  appearances.  Can  religion  live  in  this  dense  atmosphere  of  worldliness  ? 
Think  again  of  the  unbelief  of  the  age  in  which  we  live.  There  are  unhealthy 
summer  days  wlien  physical  activity  is  almost  an  impossibility.  A  heavy,  oppres- 
sive, stagnant  atmosphere  weighs  down  ui)on  the  land.  That  is  a  symbol  of  the 
spiritual  atmosphere  of  Europe  to-day.  It  is  permeated  with  a  spirit  of  unbelief. 
I  ask  again,  then.  Can  Christianity  live?  Yes.  1.  It  has  lived  and  increased  in 
spite  of  the  most  determined  opp'sition.  After  eighteen  hundred  years  of  trial 
and  opposition,  "the  foundation  of  God  standf^th  sure."  The  powers  of  men  and 
the  powers  of  darkness  have  exerted  themselves  to  remove  this  foundation,  but  it 
standeth  sure,  in  spite  of  persecution  and  in  spite  of  criticism.  2.  Christianity 
has  affinities  with  all  good  things.  Truth,  virtue,  love,  science,  philosophy, 
literature,  are  good,  and  the  gospel  is  nearly  related  to  all  these.  It  creates 
them  where  they  do  not  already  exist ;  and  where  they  exist,  it  inspires  and  pro- 
motes them.  Nothing  good  dies.  It  is  falsehood,  and  not  trutti ;  evil,  and  not 
good;  moral  deformity,  and  not  moral  beauty,  that  is  going  to  disappear.  The 
gospel  is  the  grandest  truth,  the  greatest  good,  the  most  beiutiful  revelation  ever 
given  to  man;  and  therefore  it  cannot  joerish.  "  The  word  of  the  Lord  endureth 
for  ever."  3.  We  have  the  old  promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Goethe's  last  words 
were,  "  More  light !  more  light !  "  This  is  the  cry  of  the  age.  It  is  not  more 
external  evidence  that  is  needed,  but  more  internal  illumination,  more  power  of 
s))iritual  vision  in  the  minds  of  men.  The  light  is  here  in  Divine  plenitude. 
Christianity  is  either  supernatural  or  it  is  nothing.  Christianity  makes  its  way  in 
the  world  by  the  coming  of  the  Spirit  of  God  into  contact  with  the  spirits  of  men. 
Conclusion :  The  progress  is  not  rapid.  But  let  the  Church  calm  her  heart.  Let 
us  learn  to  wait  and  work.  And,  above  all  things,  let  ns  not  be  afraid.  "He  that 
believeth  shall  not  make  haste."  God's  method  is  upward  progress,  and  that 
upward  progress  is  slow  in  its  development.  But  the  progress  is  certain,  and  the 
end  is  sure.     (2'.  Jones,  D.D.) 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  519 

"Vers.  47-49.  The  first  man  is  of  the  earth,  earthy :  the  second  man  is  the  Lord 
from  heaven. — The  first  and  second  man: — I.  The  rnisr — is  of  the  earth,  earthy — 
consequently — 1.  Confined  to  earth.  2.  Perishes  with  the  e;irth.  II.  The  second 
—from  heaven,  heavenly.  1.  Eules  the  earth.  2.  Opens  he  iven.  3.  Lives  for 
ever.  (J.  Lytlt,  D.D.)  Of  the  earth,  earthy  : — Xo'ucoe  properly  means  "  clayey," 
but  is  here  used  to  express  man's  terrestrial  nature.  Because  he  is  of  the  earth 
in  his  origin — i.e.,  as  to  his  body,  there  is  a  terrestrial  side  to  his  nature  and  sphere 
of  action.  From  this  we  may  infer — I.  That  man  in  his  sinlkss  state  had  a  body 
CAPABLE  oy  DYING.  If  he  had  continued  sinless,  his  body  would  have  been  rendered 
immortal  by  a  Divine  act,  and  we  gather  from  Gen.  iii.  22  that  the  tree  of  life  was 
the  appointed  sacrament  of  immortality.  This  is  consistent  with  Rom.  v.  12.  In 
the  case  of  man  sin  broujjht  death,  not  mortality,  into  the  world.  The  correctness 
of  tliis  hypothesis  is  confirmed  by  the  side  light  it  throws  upon  the  voluntariness 
of  Christ's  death.  As  Christ  was  sinless,  death  was  not  a  necessity  to  Him,  though 
He  had  a  mortal  body ;  and  as  He  was  Divine  as  well  as  sinless,  death  was  im- 
possible to  Him  without  a  voluntary  act  of  "  la\  ing  down  "  His  life.  II.  That 
THE  Divine  image  in  Adam  consisted,  negatively,  in  sinlessness  and,  positively,  in  a 
potential  and  rudimentary  poodness  ;  by  no  means  in  the  full  perfection  of  human 
nature.  Christ  does  infinitely  more  than  restore  our  original  state  [rf.  Wisdom  viii. 
1).  {Principal  Edwards.)  The  second  man: — In  what  sense  is  our  Lord  the 
second  man?  There  were  so  many  millions  intervening  between  Him  and  Adam. 
The  answer  is  that  all  the  others  were  mere  copies  of  the  first;  whereas  Christ 
introduced  a  new  kind  of  man,  and  became  the  head  of  a  new  family.  I.  The 
differences  between  Adam  and  Christ.  There  is  a  difference.  1.  Of  origin. 
(1)  "  The  first  man  is  of  the  earth,  earthy."  («)  Whatever  may  be  said  of  Adam's 
Divine  parentage,  according  to  his  physical  nature,  he  and  his  belong  essentially 
to  this  e:irth  ;  they  are  part  of  its  fauna,  and  stand  at  the  head  of  long  lines  of 
animal  life,  which,  commencing  with  the  lowest  of  sensitive  creatures,  find  their 
liighest  term  in  man.  All  the  materials  of  his  physical  life  and  being  belong  to 
the  j)lanet  of  which  he  is  the  chief  inhabitant,  of  whose  vital  forces  he  is  simply 
the  highest  outcome,  the  most  elaborated  product.  (6)  There  are  many  who  tell 
us  that  man  is  "  of  the  earth,  earthy,"  in  the  sense  of  being  descended  from  the 
lower  forms  of  animal  life  through  the  process  of  natural  selection ;  but  this  can 
only  be  received  as  an  hypothesis ;  yet  there  is  nothing  in  it  contrary  to  Scripture. 
If  true  it  gives  a  new  and  most  marvellous  aspect  to  the  Incarnation.  Of  course, 
if  our  ancestors  were  "maiine  ascidians,"  so  were  His;  and  thus  we  see  Him  in 
an  unexpected  sense,  gathering  together  in  one,  and  summing  up  in  Himself  all 
created  life  (Eph  i.  10),  and  reuniting  it  unto  God.  I  do  not  know  why  a  Christian 
should  be  staggered  at  the  thought  of  one  unbroken  continuity  of  life  ;  for  the 
great  gap  in  the  cycle  of  life,  which  seemed  to  be  eternally  impassable,  was  above 
man,  not  below  him,  and  yet  we  know  th  it  this  gulf  which  separated  the  highest 
creature  by  an  infinite  distance  from  the  Creator  was  bridged  by  the  condescension 
of  the  Son.  (2)  For  the  second  man  was  the  Lord  from  heaven.  His  origin  was 
as  distinctly  Divine  and  heavenly  as  Adam's  origin  was  earthy.  2.  Of  nature. 
This  difference  was  not  in  wealth,  happiness,  beauty,  nor  in  any  of  those  things 
which  ordinarily  make  one  man  superior  to  another,  for  in  all  these  things  Christ 
voluntarily  placed  Himself  at  a  disadvantage;  but  it  was  in  holiness.  (1)  Adam 
was  a  rebel,  a  sinner ;  and  after  him  all  we  are  the  same.  No  doctrine  of  the 
Scripture  is  more  confirmed  by  constant  experience,  or  more  in  accordance  with 
modern  science  than  that  of  hereditary  sin.  For  not  only  does  every  child  afford 
a  fresh  example  of  the  tendency  to  do  wrong,  but  as  the  instinct  by  which  the 
young  bird  feeds  itself  is  the  transmitted  experience  of  its  remote  ancestors,  so  the 
mortal  evil  which  began  in  Adam  has  become  an  inseparable  characteristic  of  his 
race.  (2)  But  Christ  was  not  sinful.  Coming  into  the  world  by  a  miraculous 
and  immaculate  conception,  it  was  said  to  Mary,  "That  holy  thing  which  shall  be 
born  of  thee  shall  be  called  the  Son  of  God";  and  this  holiness,  which  belonged 
to  Him  by  virtue  of  His  origin,  He  kept  spotless  amidst  all  the  temptations  of  His 
earthly  life.  And  what  was  the  consequence  of  this  holiness?  This — that  He 
was  by  right  immortal  and  incorruptible,  even  as  man ;  death  and  the  grave  could 
have  no  claim  on  One  who  had  no  sin.  But  did  He  not  die?  Yes,  truly  ;  but  it 
was  by  His  own  permission.  Being  holy,  although  He  was  capable  of  death,  it 
was  not  possible  that  He  should  be  holden  of  it.  I  have  seen  some  large  insect  fly 
into  a  spider's  web,  and  the  hungry  spider  has  come  forth  with  haste,  thinking  he 
has  caught  a  finer  prize  than  has  fallen  into  his  clutches  for  many  a  long  day.    But 


'520  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

the  prisoner  is  stronger  than  any  for  which  the  web  was  made;  he  gathers  up  his 
miglit,  he  throws  Iduiself  hither  and  thither,  he  shakes  the  web  violently,  he  rends 
it  from  top  to  bottimi — he  is  gone,  and  has  left  the  broken  net  and  the  baffled 
spider  be'dnd  liim.  Even  so  death  had  spread  his  snares  for  the  sons  of  men,  and 
had  caught  them  all  one  by  one,  and  had  held  them  fast ;  at  last  came  the  Son  of 
Man,  and  He,  too,  die!  like  men,  and  death  and  hell  rejoiced  together  over  their 
notable  captive.  But  they  did  not  rejoice  long;  their  toils  were  not  made  for  Him. 
The  bands  of  death  were  to  Him  as  the  "  green  withes  "  were  to  Samson.  As  the 
flush  of  morning  comes  back  upon  the  earth,  as  the  tin's  of  spring  return  upon  the 
trees,  and  we  cannot  say  at  wlnit  moment  it  begins,  so  did  C'nrist  rise,  we  know  not 
when  ;  it  needed  no  effort  nor  preparation  ;  it  was  as  natural  and  proper  to  Him  to 
live,  to  be  abroad  in  tlie  freedom  of  unfettered  life,  as  it  is  for  the  dew  to  rise  when 
the  sun  is  warm.  II.  Cheist  is  called  the  second  Adam  because — 1.  He  intro- 
duced into  the  world  a  new  type,  a  new  order  of  humanity—  a  child  of  man, 
indeed,  but  such  a  child  of  man  as  had  never  been  seen  be'ore.  He  was  the  beait 
ideal  of  the  honiiin  race  ;  all  that  is  noble  and  lovely  in  other  human  beings  was 
united  in  Him,  and  all  that  is  noble  and  lovely  in  our  dreams  and  fancies  about 
what  human  beings  might  be  was  realised  in  Him.  You  have  heard  of  those 
tropical  plants  which  are  said  to  blossom  but  once  in  a  hundred  years,  then, 
having  thrown  up  a  single  spike  of  exquisite  white  blossom,  to  die.  This  (how- 
ever exaggeiated  in  fact)  may  serve  to  illustrate  the  relation  of  Christ  to  the  human 
race :  once,  and  once  only,  humanity  blossomed  up  and  put  forth  one  exquisite 
faultless  flower,  in  which  its  entire  life  culminated,  in  which  all  its  i^ossibilities 
■were  exhansted ;  that  flower  was  Christ,  tlte  Son  of  Man,  pa?'  excellence,  the 
second  man.  2.  But  Adam  not  only  set  a  type,  but  he  began  a  race,  a  series  like 
himself,  and  thus  he  became  the  fountain-head  of  a  guilty  and  perishing  humanity. 
In  like  manner  Christ  began  a  new  race,  and  became  the  fountain-head  of  a  new 
regenerate  human  life,  cleansing  itself  from  sin,  rising  victorious  over  death. 
(R.  Winteihothnm,  JSI.A.)  The  heliever^s  jyedigree  : — 1.  On  tire  one  side  traced  to 
Adam  who  is  of  the  earf.h — on  the  other  to  Christ  who  is  tlie  Lord  from  heaven. 
2.  On  the  one  side  he  derives  an  earthly  nature,  on  the  other  a  heavenly.  3.  On 
the  one  side  he  is  stamped  with  the  features  of  the  earthy,  on  the  other  with  those 
of  the  heavenly.  4.  On  the  one  side  he  can  claim  no  inheritance  in  the  kingdom 
of  God,  on  the  ot^er  becomes  heir  of  all  things.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  As  is  the 
earthy,  such  are  they  also  that  are  earthy. — The  earthy  and  the  heavenly: — 
I.  The  eakthy — frail,  sensual,  dying — can  only  produce  his  like.  II.  The 
HEAVENLY — pure,  Spiritual,  immortal — communicates  His  own  nature  by  a  new 
birth,  to  be  consummated  in  the  resurrection.  {Ibid.}  As  is  the  heavenly,  such 
are  they  also  that  are  heavenly. — The  asdvtllatinn  of  Christians  to  the  Redeemer: — 

I.  The  llicDEEMER  OF  THE  WORLD  IS  THE  HEAVENLY.  1.  The  Scriptures  represent 
Him  as  the  express  char'cterof  God's  person,  the  bvightness  of  His  glory.  The 
perffctions  of  the  Divine  nature  indeed  shine  forth  in  all  the  works  of  creation; 
but  there  is  a  clearer  and  more  glorious  display  of  them  all  in  "  God  manifest  in 
the  flesh."      2.    His  life  and  character  demonstrate  Him  to  be   the  Heavenly. 

II.  The  points  of  similarity  beiween  the  heavenly  and  those  with  whom  He 
STANDS  connected.  1.  That  we  may  be  humble,  contemi^late  the  di.-simiiarity. 
There  is  in  Him  the  complete  perTection  of  those  various  graces  and  virtues  of 
which,  in  the  saints,  there  is  only  an  extremely  remote  resemblance.  2.  But 
although  the  dissimilarity  be  great,  there  is  an  obvious  similarity.  (1)  In  heaven- 
liness  of  mind.  A  carnal  Christian  is  a  contradiction  in  terms.  (2)  In  faith. 
Like  Christ,  they  put  their  trust  in  their  heavenly  Father.  (3)  In  being  of  a 
devotional  spirit.  (4)  In  humility.  (.5)  In  their  conversation.  ((3)  In  active  goodness. 
(T.  Swan.)  On  heareidy-inindediics:.^ : — A  soul  chained  down  to  earth  is  as  little  suited 
for  the  occupations  of  heaven  as  is  a  body  framed  of  the  dust  for  becoming  the  eternal 
tenement  of  a  spirit  that  liveth  for  ever.  Temi^ei",  in  its  widest  acceptation,  is  the 
uniform  frame  of  the  mind;  the  dispo-ition,  \\liich  it  partly  derives  from  nature 
and  partly  from  circnmstance  ;  but  to  which,  in  its  better  condition,  it  is  principally 
reduced  by  Divine  grace  and  by  religious  cultivation.  Thought  is  a  sudden  con- 
ception or  a  process  of  the  intellect,  and  the  fitful  spring  of  action.  Passion  is  a 
desultory  violence  of  the  soul  when  roused  by  external  impressions.  Both  thou}.'ht 
and  passion  are  subject  to  variations  in  the  same  breast,  and  both  may  have  inter- 
vals of  cessation.  liut  disposition  is  the  inward  light — the  permanent  hue  of  the 
heart,  which  tinctures  the  moral  complexion,  and  blends  with  the  whole  course  of 
thought,  action,  passion  and  existence.    What,  then,  is  that  spirit,  that  di«positii''n, 


cnAr.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  521 

which  prevails  among  the  b'essed  above,  and  by  imitating  which  we  may  humbly 
aspire  to  be  joined  to  their  liigh  and  holy  a>sociation  ?  1.  In  its  refeience  to  God 
it  implies  a  spirit  of  devotion.  To  acquire  the  habit  of  coutempbiting,  under  all 
circumstances,  the  bond  whi'-h  connects  earth  vviih  heaven,  and  of  ackno^lc'lKing 
the  impulse  which  all  the  atfiiiis  of  life  are  constantly  receiving  from  an  unseen 
arm  :  to  discoser  providence  where  ignorance  sees  but  ch Tce,  or  where  pride  con- 
fesses onlythe  power  of  man;  to  hear  the  voifeof  Godiu  the  accenlsof  instrnftion; 
to  trace  His  woikmanship  in  the  magnificence  of  Nature  ;  to  ailmire  His  "uen  Kcence 
throughout  the  varied  year,  whether  crowned  with  i'lo.-;soms  or  laden  witii  sbeave-^ 
■: — this  is  to  imbibe  the  spiiit  of  the  heavenly;  for  the  works  and  tl'e  won^'eis  of 
Providence,  we  may  rest  assured,  for  ever  occupy  the  meditations,  the  converse, 
and  the  praises,  of  the  blessed,  in  the  courts  of  light.  2.  The  temper  and  spirit  of 
heaven  may  be  considered,  secondly,  as  it  relates  to  our  neighbour.  Charity  is  the 
bond  of  union  among  the  blessed  above ;  all  is  tbere  harmonious  as  the  silent 
chime  of  the  spheres.  3.  It  now  remains  to  consider  heavenly-mindedness  in  its 
immediate  relation  to  ourselves.  Homilityis  the  pre-eminent  virtue  of  the  heavens. 
Another  feature  in  the  disposition  which  looks  towards  a  heavenly  prototype,  and 
a  feature  relating  to  ourselves,  is  purity.  The  enjoyments  of  heaven,  and  the 
affections  of  its  inhabitants,  we  may  be  sure,  are  unstained  by  the  cloud  or  f^hadow 
of  a  thought  that  may  suffuse  the  mind  with  the  tinge  of  shame.  But  the  crowning 
ijuality  of  temper,  which  at  once  unites  and  assimilates  probationary  morials  unto 
the  multitude — the  Sabaoth  of  heaven — is  serenity.  To  this  entire  compo-^ure  it 
cannot  be  expected  that  creatures  such  as  we,  in  a  state  like  that  which  we  inherit, 
can  attain.  But  here,  too,  though  all  may  not  be  achieved  or  hoped,  the  task  is 
not  to  be  wholly  relinquished.  Some  self-discipline  is  practicable;  and  what  is 
practicable  is  what  God  expects.  We  have  the  treasury  of  grace  for  our  feebleness 
— we   have   devotion   as   the   key   which   unlocks  it.      {J.    Grant,    M.A.)  As 

vre  have  borne  the  image  of  the  earthy,  we  shall  also  bear  the  image  of 
the  heavenly. — The  image  of  the  earthy  and  of  tlie  havenhj: — I.  The  image 
OF  THE  EAKTHY.  1.  Sin.  2.  Sorrow.  3.  Death.  II.  The  image  of  the 
HEAVENLY.      1.  Holiness.     2.  Happiness.     3.  Life.     (F.  A.  Cox,  LL.D.)  The 

altaiinnent  of  the  image  of  the  heavenly: — The  great  hindrance  to  our  reception 
of  the  full  power  of  these  words  lies  in  the  difficulty  of  realising  them  as  a  present 
experience.  We  fancy  that  death  is  the  great  magician.  Paul  contemplated  the 
change  as  actually  begun.  We  were  once  merely  natural  men,  and  knew  nothing 
of  the  higher  spiritual  world.  Then  quickened  by  the  grace  of  God  in  Christ  we 
became  spiritual.  Thus  because  the  quickening  Spirit  of  Christ  is  forming  His 
image  in  us  now,  the  earthly  shall  perish,  and  we  shall  wear  the  image  of  the 
heavenly.  Just  as  the  flowers  which  open  beneath  the  summer  sunshine  are 
folded  in  the  dark  buds  which  are  beaten  and  tossed  in  the  winter  winds  ;  just  as 
the  strength  of  will,  the  fire  of  feeling,  &c.,  of  a  man  are  hidden  in  the  child,  so 
the  heavenly  life  is  within  us  now,  and  because  it  is  there  it  is  possible  for  us  to 
reach  the  full  formed  image  of  the  heavenly,  I.  The  geeat  aim  of  Christian 
ASPiiiATiox — "  to  bear  the  image,"  &c.  This  is  one  of  the  deepest  longings  of  the 
soul.  We  yearn  for  rest,  for  service,  for  happiness  ;  but  there  is  a  deeper  longing ; 
we  want  to  be  holier,  heavenlier  men.  This  is  also  the  all-embracing  Christian 
aim.  Every  praver  for  light,  blessedness,  strength,  is  gathered  up  and  centred  in 
the  aim  to  be  like  Christ.  Observe  His  image  has  three  great  features.  1.  Divine 
vision — the  spiritual  insight  that  realises  the  presence  of  God  and  the  unseen 
world.  It  is  true  that  we  cannot  see  God  and  the  radiance  of  eternity  with  the 
bodily  eye ;  but  were  we  like  Christ,  we  should  apprehend  them  through  the 
sympathies  of  the  soul.  2.  Divine  love.  We  admit  the  feebleness  of  our  love  to 
God,  yet  in  many  ways  we  aspire  after  a  deeper  love.  What  means  our  perpetual 
unrest,  our  constant  effort  after  the  unattained,  &c.,  but  the  yearning  after  that 
love  of  God  which  alone  can  fill  us,  our  longing  after  the  image  of  Christ  who 
realised  it  fully.  3.  Divine  power.  II.  The  hindeance  to  its  attainment.  "The 
image  of  the  earthy,"  i.e.,  the  b'  dy  of  corruption  whose  tendency  is— 1.  To  limit 
aspiration  to  the  earthy.  2.  To  become  an  aid  to  the  sin  of  the  soul.  Conclusion  : 
1.  Our  aspirations  must  be  earnest  and  real.  What  we  sincerely  aspire  to  be  we 
may  become.  2.  Our  endeavour  must  be  practical.  Meditation  alone  will  do  but 
little.  3.  God  will  aid  us  by  the  discipline  of  hfe.  Many  strokes  may  be  needed ; 
but  as  the  form  of  immortal  loveliness  lies  concealed  in  the  block  of  stone,  and  is 
being  moulded  stroke  by  stroke  by  the  sculptor's  genius,  so  the  heavenly  form  in 
man  is  being  developed  by  the  Eternal  Sculptor,  who  by  His  discipline  is  unveihng 


522  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

in  us  the  image   of   His  S  m.     {E.  L.  Hull,  B.A.)  Perfection  in   heaven: — 

1.  Wheeein  consists  the  image  of  the  eakihy.  1.  In  innocent  infirmities; 
hunger,  tliirst,  weariness,  &c.,  and  tlie  like.  How  unlike  are  we  in  this  respect  to 
the  blessed  who  hungpr  no  more,  and  thirst  no  more,  and  rest  not  day  nor  night. 

2.  In  sinful  imperfections,  commonly  expressed  by  thrf  want  of  original  righteous- 
ness, and  the  corruption  of  nature.  3.  In  the  eons 'ijuences.  (1)  fhe  miseries  of 
this  life.  (2)  Death.  (3)  A  liableness  to  suffer  under  the  wrath  and  curse  of  God 
for  ever.  II.  The  iu-:spects  in  which  true  believeks  shall  bear  the  image  of  the 
HEAVENLY.  1.  In  the  glorious  spirituality  of  the  body.  How  vastly  will  it  differ 
from  whut  it  now  is  (vers.  42-44).  2.  In  the  perfect  holiness  of  the  soul.  3.  In 
complete  haiDpiness.  4.  In  immortality.  (D.  Whittey.)  The  believer's  assimila- 
tion to  Chritit : — I.  The  characters  here  placed  in  contrast.  1.  The  earthy. 
2.  The  heavenly.  II.  The  fact  assumed — "  that  we  have  all  borne,"  &c.  1.  The 
first  man  is  emphatically  styled  earthy  (ver.  47).  (1)  On  account  of  his  origin. 
(2)  Because  of  his  tendency.  (3)  Because  of  his  apostasy.  2.  But  Christ  is  the 
heavenly  One,  because  of — (1)  His  pre-existence.  (2)  The  moral  beauty  and  glory 
displayed  by  Him  while  on  earth.  3.  Therefore  it  is  said  that  we  have  borne  the  image 
of  the  earthy.  4.  And  not  only  because  of  this,  but  also  because  the  first  man's  moral 
image  has  become  characteristic  of  us.  III.  The  promise  in  reference  to  brlievfrs. 
A  perfect  moral  resemblance  to  Christ  will  be  attained  at  the  last  day.  (J.  Scott.) 
Man'' s present  and  future: — I.  Confirm  the  lamentable  fact  that,  by  nature,  we 
all  bear  the  image  of  the  earthly.  So  sa.vs  my  text ;  so  says  my  experience, 
the  melancholy  experience  of  all  ages  and  nations  ;  so  witness  our  own  feelings  in 
the  endurance  of  those  ills  to  which  mortality  is  subject.  Behold  it — 1.  In  our 
bodies,  which  are  earthly,  frail,  and  tending  to  dissolution.  What  is  that  in  the 
cold  corpse  which  shocks  the  feelings  of  humanity,  and  harrows  up  the  soul  ?  It 
is  the  image  of  the  earthly  Adam  !  And  ere  long  you  shall  bear  it  too.  2.  We  all 
bear  this  imsge  in  our  souls.  (1)  Our  souls  are  defiled  with  sin.  (2)  Our  souls  are. 
exposed  to  Divine  wrath,  and  thus  bear  the  image  of  the  earthly.     II.  Rejoice  in 

THE    glorious    TRUTH    THAT,   AS   BELIEVERS,    WE    SHALL    ALSO    BEAR    THE    IMAGE    OF    THE 

Lord  from  heaven.  1.  It  is  first  impressed  upon  us  at  the  time  of  our  regeneration. 
Effectual  grace  then  gives  a  new  bias  to  the  mind,  and  tlie  Father  of  the  spirits  of 
all  flesh  then  makes  us  new  creatures  in  Christ  Jesus.  The  Saviour  iiupurted  to 
us  the  principle  of  grace ;  He  made  us,  who  before  lived  only  for  folly  and  sin,  to 
pant  after  holincis  as  our  nolilest  pursuit ;  to  grasp  after  purity  as  our  noblest 
attainment.  2.  This  image  shall  visibly  discover  itself  through  the  whole  course 
of  the  Christian's  life,  producing  a  happy  effect  upon  his  temper,  his  passions,  his 
pursuits  ;  it  shall  make  him  to  speak,  to  look,  to  live,  like  the  childi'en  of  God.  3. 
This  image  shall  be  rendered  more  striking  and  glorious  on  the  resurrection  morn- 
ing.    [T.  Spuncer.) 

Vers.  50-54.  Flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God. —  Flesh  and 
hlood  cannot  enter  the  liingdom  of  God: — I.  The  general  law.  1.  This  carries 
with  it  its  own  proof :  for,  obviously,  darkness  might  as  well  become  light,  or  death 
life,  as  that  which  is  corrupt  rise  into  the  incorruptible.  On  this  point  St.  Paul  is 
earnest  and  absolute.  The  exception  of  ver.  51  is  only  an  apparent  one.  Those 
who  are  alive  when  Christ  comes  will  nevertheless  be  changed  (ver.  52).  2.  Note 
the  significance  of  this  law.  Flesh  and  blood  is  a  Scripture  term  for  the  lusts  and 
passions  of  our  lower  nature.  Jewish  readers  would  instantly  apprehend  its  force. 
To  them  "  the  blood  was  the  life  "  ;  and  therefore  it  was  shed  in  sacrifice.  It  was 
the  seat  of  passion  and  desire,  of  all  that  is  lawless  and  irregular  ;  and  therefore 
they  were  not  permitted  to  partake  of  it.  Their  conception  finds  utterance  to-day 
in  such  phrases  as,  "His  blood  is  up,"  or,  "A  hot-blooded  fellow."  St.  Paul  uses 
the  term  here  as  the  symbol  of  this  life,  these  lusts,  these  corruptions,  which  cannot 
inherit  iucorruption.  3.  Mark  the  dift'ereut  use  of  the  phrases  "  flesh  and  blood  " 
and  "  flesh  and  bones  "  in  the  New  Testament.  "  Flesh  and  blood  "  cannot  inherit 
the  incorrupt  and  heavenly  kingdom,  but  "  flesh  and  bones"  may  and  do.  After 
His  resurrection  Christ  had  flesh  and  bones  (Luke  xxiv.  37-39) ;  and  Christians  are 
members  of  His  body,  of  His  flesh  and  of  His  bones  "  (Eph.  v.  30).  Christ's  blood 
as  the  symbol  of  life  has  been  shed  for  the  redemption  of  the  world  :  as  the  symbol 
of  corruption,  it  is  poured  out,  exhausted.  "  Flesh  and  bones "  may  still  be 
retained  even  when  the  natural  becomes  a  spiritual  body  ;  but  the  life  that  pulses 
through  it  is  that  of  a  higher  than  mortal  existence.  II.  The  truths  and  hopes 
WHICH  underlie  IT.    1.  The  truth  for  which  St.  Paul  contends  is  not  the  immortality 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  623 

of  the  soul,  but  the  resurrection  of  the  body.  Centuries  before  Christ  the  Greeks 
had  believeil  that  the  souls  of  the  departed  survived  the  pangs  of  death.  But  these 
souls  were  not  tlifinselves,  they  were  but  their  shades.  Eiysium  was  as  thin  and 
unsubstantial  in  its  avocations  and  joys  as  the  poor  gliosts  that  tnnanted  it.  And 
as  nature  shrinks  from  disembodiment,  the  Greeks  were  accuslomed  to  offer  rich 
garments  on  the  tombs  of  heroes,  if  so  be  that,  being  thus  clothed,  they  might  not 
be  found  naked,  and  a  Corinthian  queen  is  said  to  have  appeared  to  her  husband 
after  death,  intreatiug  him  to  burn  dresses  for  her  as  a  coveiing  for  her  disembodied 
spirit.  We  may  smile  at  all  this,  but  none  the  less  we  are  touched  by  this  naive 
childish  testimony  to  the  universal  dread  of  disembodiment,  the  universal  desire  to 
be  clothed  upon  with  some  vesture  whether  of  ear.h  or  heaven.  To  men  gazing 
thus  sadly  into  the  future  St.  Paul's  strong  hearty  words  must  have  been  as  health 
to  the  sick.  So,  then,  they  were  not  to  become  disembodied  spirits,  but  to 
be  clothed  upon  with  a  body  more  exquisitely  attuned  to  the  faculties  and 
energies  of  their  spiritual  life  !  2.  In  our  Lord's  risen  body  we  have  the  express 
type  of  the  spiritual  bodies  we  are  to  wear.  (1)  The  body  which  His  disciples 
recognised  was  essentially  the  same  although  it  had  undergone  a  mysterious  change. 
What  that  change  was  St.  Paul  hints  in  the  phrase,"  deshaud  blood  cannot  inherit, 
the  kingdom  of  God."  Consequently  we  tir.d  that  they  did  not  instantly  recognise 
Him  when  He  came  to  them.  They  knew  Him  only  as  He  was  pleased  to  m^ke 
Himself  known.  He  was  not  bound  by  material  laws.  He  is  found  present,  no 
one  knows  from  whence.  He  passes  away,  no  one  knows  whither  (John  xx.  19  ; 
Luke  xxiv.  31 ;  Acts  i.  9).  In  the  person  of  Christ  we  see  the  whole  man — body, 
soul,  and  sph'it — raised  from  the  grave.  We  see  all  the  intellig-  nt  and  passionate 
faculties  of  the  soul  held  in  perfect  subjection  to  the  higher  claims  of  the  spirit. 
The  hoiiy  is  not  simply  restm-ed  to  its  pristine  vigour  and  purity,  but  lifted  lo  a 
higher  and  more  spiiiiual  pitch.  It  is  not  unclothed,  but  clotht-d  upon.  "The 
corruptii'le  has  put  on  incoiruption,  the  mortal  has  pur  on  immoitality."  (2)  Aiid 
this  is  the  chnnge  that  must  pass  on  us,  if  indeed  "  Chri^t  be  in  us,  the  Lope  of 
glory."  Like  Hun  we  are  to  put  on  immortality  and  incorruption  :  not  to  break 
with  the  past,  nor  to  lose  our  identity ;  not  to  be  changed  beyond  our  own  lecogni- 
tion  or  that  of  our  fiiends,  but  to  be  purged  from  the  corruptible  and  baser 
elements  of  our  nature,  to  be  redeemed  from  our  bondage  to  sense,  and  its  laws  ;  to 
be  transfigured,  that  the  spirit  which  Christ  has  quickened  in  us  may  dwell  in  a 
quick  spiritual  body — a  body  that  shall  not  check,  nor  thwart,  nor  dull,  but  per- 
fectly second  and  express,  the  untiring  ener^jies  of  our  higher  and  renewed  nature. 
As  a  man  awaking  for  a  moment  from  a  mortal  trance,  so  we  may  wake  from  the 
sleep  of  death,  and  say,  nothing  is  lost,  but,  ah,  how  much  gained  !  (S.  Cox,  D.D.) 
The  change  required  that  ice  may  inherit  the  liingdom  of  God  : — I.  The  kingdom 
INTENDED.  I.  Not  the  kingdom  of  Christ  on  earth.  2.  But  the  kingdom  of  God 
in  glory,  which  is  heavenly  and  eternal.  II.  The  unfitness  of  man  for  it.  1.  His 
nature  is  morally  corrupt.  2.  Physically  it  is  earthly  and  corruptible.  III.  The 
change  NECESSAiiY.  1.  A  ncw  birth.  2.  A  resurrection.  (/.  Lytlt,  D.D.) 
Corporeal  tiansformation  .-—Paul  here  speaks  of  a  bodily  transformation  that  is — I. 
Indispensable  (ver.  50).  "  l^'lesh  and  blood,"  i.e.,  our  mortal  nature,  cannot 
inherit  the  heavenly  world.  He  does  not  say  why — whelher  the  state  of  the 
atmosphere,  or  the  means  of  subsistence,  or  the  force  of  gravitation,  or  the  forms 
and  means  of  vision,  or  the  conditions  of  receiving  and  communicating  knowledge, 
or  the  nature  of  the  services  required.  "  Flesh  and  blood  "  can  no  more  exist 
yonder,  than  the  tenants  of  the  ocenn  can  exist  on  the  sun-burnt  hills.  In  such 
corporeal  transformations  there  is  nothing  extraordinary,  for  naturalists  point  us 
to  spheres  of  existences  where  they  are  as  regular  as  the  laws  of  nature.  11. 
Ceetain  (ver.  51).  "  Mystery  "  here  does  not  point  to  the  unknowable,  but  to  the 
hitherto  unknown,  viz.,  that  "  we  shall  all  be  changed."  "  We  shall  not  all  sleep." 
1.  Some  will  be  living  when  the  day  dawns.  "  As  in  the  days  of  Noah,  so  shall  it 
be  in  the  days  of  the  Son  of  Man,  they  ate,  they  diank,"  &(i.  2.  Both  those  who 
will  be  living  and  those  who  will  be  sleeping  in  the  dust  will  undergo  corporeal 
transformation.  III.  Instantaneous  (ver.  52).  "  The  day  of  the  Lord  will  come  as 
a  thief  in  the  night,"  &c.  IV.  Glorious  (vers.  58,  54).  The  transformation  is 
from  mortality  to  immortality,  from  the  dying  to  the  undying;  "death  will  be 
swallowed  up  in  victory."  The  idea  njay  be  taken  of  a  whirlpool  or  maelstrom 
that  absorbs  all  that  comes  near  it.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  necessity  of  the 
believer's  resurrection  arises — I.  Out  or  the  nature  or  the  kingdoji  of  God, 
wliich  is — 1.  Heavenly.     ,2,  Spiritual.       3.  Incorruptible.     4.  Divine.      5.  Holy. 


■524  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  x v. 

II.  Out  of  the  impebfection  of  the  human  body,  which  is — 1.  Earthly.  2. 
Sensual.  3.  Corruptible.  4.  Sinful.  III.  Out  of  the  purpose  of  God.  1.  It  is 
His  good  pleasure  to  give  us  the  kingdom.  2.  The  body  of  fiesh  and  blood  cannot 
inherit  it.  3.  Therefore  it  must  be  subject  to  a  marvellous  change.  (/.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
Neither  doth  corruption  inherit  incorruption. — Corruption  cannot  inherit  incorrnp- 
tion: — I.  Corruption.  1.  Imiilies  dissolution.  2.  Is  on  earth  a  natural  law.  3, 
Overtakes  man  in  consequence  of  sin.  4.  Includes  decay,  disease,  death,  decom- 
position. II.  Incorruption.  1.  Implies  immortality.  2.  Is  the  distinguishing 
feature  of  the  heavenly  world.  3.  Eesults  from  the  immediate  presence  and  po\v*er 
of  God.  4.  Secures  purity,  happiness,  immortal  vigour,  eternal  life.  III.  The 
iNCOMPATiBifiiTY  OF  THE  TWO.  1.  Is  obvious.  2.  Hcuce  the  absolute  necessity  of  a 
change  not  only  in  man's  moral  but  physical  condition,  3.  To  be  eiiected  in  the 
lesurrection.  .  4.  That  man  may  inherit  eternal  life.  (Ibid.)  Behold,  I  shew 
you  a  mystery  :  we  shall  not  all  sleep,  tout  we  shall  all  toe  changed. — The  mystery 
of  the  resurrection  revealed  :— I.  The  great  change.  1.  Its  nature.  (1)  The 
resurrection  of  the  dead.  (2)  The  transformation  of  the  living.  2.  When  and  how 
effected.  (1)  At  the  last  trump.  (2)  In  a  moment.  (3)  By  the  power  of  God.  3. 
Its  absolute  certainty.  II.  The  triumph.  1.  Death  swallowed  up  in  victory,  2. 
Hence  the  exultation  of  the  redeemed  over  death  and  the  grave.  III.  The  means 
OF  participation  in  it.  The  victory  is — 1.  The  free  gift  of  grace.  2.  Through 
Christ.  3.  By  the  destruction  of  sin,  IV.  The  practical  lesson.  1.  Steadfast- 
ness. 2,  Abundant  toil.  3.  Confident  hope.  [Ibid.)  Change: — I.  Our  life 
ON  earth  is  full  of  change.  Every  hour  brings  changes  and  chances.  The  sun 
which  rises  to  shine  on  happy  children's  faces,  bright  with  laughter,  sets  over  a 
desolate  home.  Have  you  ever  seen  the  famous  picture  of  "  The  Railway  Station  "  ? 
That,  or  the  reality,  ^Yill  show  you  any  day  what  "  a  tangle  "  life  is.  There  you 
will  see  youth  and  age,  joy  and  sorrow,  suci'css  and  failure,  hope  and  despair,  going 
their  several  ways  in  the  great  journey  of  life.  II.  15ut  the  greatest  change  of  all 
IS  YET  to  comb.  Theie  will  be  a  change — 1,  In  our  bodies.  The  poor,  worn-out 
clothing  of  flesh  wh  ch  was  laid  in  the  gi'ave  to  decay,  will  be  no  longer  needed.  As 
the  trees  are  clad  with  new  clothing  in  the  spring-time,  so  will  our  souls  be  at  the 
great  spring-time  of  the  Lord's  coming.  As  the  beggar  forgets  his  rags  when 
wrapped  in  soft  raiment,  so  shall  we  doubtless  forget  our  poor  bodies,  or  remember 
them  only  as  a  dream  when  one  awaketh.  Here  they  are  constantly  getting  out  of 
repair.  When  we  are  changed,  we  may  believe  it  will  be  always  well  with  us  in 
body.  2.  In  our  minds  and  feelings.  We  shall  be  improved  by  the  lessons  we 
learn,  just  as  we  see  a  child  altered  by  wise  and  careful  schooling.  The  man  of 
science  has  a  world  of  knowledge  and  beauty  open  to  him  which  the  unlearned 
does  not  dream  of.  So  in  the  sctiool  beyoud  there  must  be  a  still  wider  world  of 
which  the  cleverest  men  know  nothing.  Then  our  mind,  no  longer  warped  by 
prejudice,  will  understand  rightly;  then  "we  shall  know  even  as  we  are  known." 
We  shall  see  clearly  what  seemed  so  dark  and  perplexing  before.  We  shall  under- 
stand how  some  of  God's  dealings  with  us,  which  appeared  so  strange  and  hard, 
were  the  best  of  blessings  for  us.     III.  The  change  will  be  very  great,  but  we 

SHALL  BE  fitted  FOR  IT.       IV.    ThE  CHANGE  WILL  NOT  MAKE  US  FEEL  LONELY.       In  that 

land  none  ai-e  strangers.  Sometimes  when  one  is  going  to  emigrate,  I  have  asked 
him  if  he  did  not  expect  to  feel  very  strange  and  lonely,  and  the  answer  was,  "  Oh 
no,  I  have  fi'iends  waiting  for  me  there."  And  so  with  us.  V.  Though  the  great 
CHANGE  comes  THEN,  THERE  MUST  BE  A  CHANGE  IN  US  NOW.  Our  most  consfaut,  prayer 
should  be,  "  Give  me  a  clean  heart,  0  Lord,  and  renew  a  right  spirit  within  me." 
{H.  J.  W.  Buxton,  M.A.)  Thefmul  cham/e  : — This  is  one  in  which  you  will  be, 
not  merely  spectators,  but  parties  concerned.  It  is  an  event  the  most  certain.  It 
is  a  solemnity  that  is  continually  drawing  near.  Note — I.  The  union  there  is 
AMONG  THE  FOLLOWERS  OF  THE  REDEEMER.  "  We  shall  not  all  slcep,  but  we  shall  all 
be  changed."  1.  Of  the  number  of  this  universal  Church,  some  "  sleep.''  Death 
is  often  an  alarming  subject,  and  to  reduce  this  dread  we  should  do  well  to  view  it 
as  Scripture  does  as  a  departure — a  going  home — a  sleep.  Man  is  called  to  labour, 
and  "  the  sleep  of  a  labouring  man  is  sweet,  whether  he  eat  little  or  much."  So 
Christians  must  "work  while  it  is  day,"  &c.  But  then  they  will  "  rest  from  their 
labours."  Sleep  is  a  state  from  which  you  niHy  be  easily  awakened  ;  and,  lo  !  "  all 
that  are  in  their  graves  shall  hear  Christ's  voice,  and  come  forth."  2.  Many  will 
be  found  alive.  The  earth's  inhabitants  will  not  be  gradually  consumed  till  none 
are  left :  the  world  will  be  full ;  and  all  the  common  concerns  of  life  will  be  pursued 
with  the  same  engerness  as  before.     And,  "  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  Noah,"  &c. 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  525 

Many  of  the  Lord's  people  too  will  be  found  alive  ;  and  perhaps  they  will  be  much 
move  numerous  than  at  any  former  period.     II.  In  what  mannkk  will  this  be  dis- 
posed or?     "  We  shall  all  be  chanf^e.l."     We  are  always  varying  now.     But  what 
a  change  is  here  from  time  to  eternity,  from  earth  to  heaven,  from  the  company  of 
the  wicked  to  the  presence  of  the  blessed  God:  from  ignorance  to  knowledge; 
from  painful  infirmities  to  be  "  piesented  faultless  before  the  presence  of  His  glory 
with  exceeding  joy  !  "     But  the  change  principally  refers  to  the  body:  "for  fiesli 
and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God,"  &c.     Enoch  and  Elias,  though  they 
did  not  die,  passed  through  a  change  equivalent  to  death.     The  same  change  which 
will  be  produced  in  the  dead  by  the  resurrection  will  be  accomplished  in  the  bodies 
of  the  living  by  this  transformation  ;  and  of  this  we  have  the  clearest  assurance 
(vers.  42-41).    III.  The  ease  and  despatch  with  which  all  this  will  be  performed. 
"  In  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye."     What  a  view  does  this  give  us  of  the 
dominion  and  power  of  God!     Think  of  the  numbers  that  will  be  alive — all  these 
metamorphosed  in  one  instant.   And  "  why  should  it  be  thought  a  thing  incredible  ?  " 
"  Is  anything  too  haul  for  the  Lord?  "   IV.  The  signal.    "At  the  last  trump,"  &c. 
When  the  Lord  came  down  on  Horeb  to  puldish  the  law,  "  the  voice  of  the  trumpet 
waxed  ex(?eeding  loud."     By  the  sound  of  the  trumpet  the  approach  of  kings  has 
been  announced.     Judges  in  our  country  enter  the  place  of  assize  preceded  by  the 
same  shrill  sound.     And  those  who  have  witnessed  the  procession  well  know  what 
an  awe  it  impresses,  and  what  sentiments  it  excites.     Will  the  last  trump  call  you 
to  "  lamentation,  and  mourning,  and  woe  " ?  or  will  its  language  be,  "Lift  up  your 
heads  with  joy,  for  your  re  iemption  draweth  nigh"?     Conclusion:  He  who  will 
then  be  the  Judge,  is  now  the  Saviour.     He  will  then  say  to  the  wicked,  "  Depart  " 
— but  He  does   not   say  so   now  to   any — His  language  is,  "  Come."     ()]\  Joy.) 
For  the  trumpet  shall  sound,  and  the  dead  shall  be  raised  incorruptible. — Jlie 
tnnnpet  shall   soaiid  : — It  is  said  when  Lord   Nelson   was  buried    at    St.    Paul's 
Cathedral,  all  London  whs  stirred.     As  the  funeral  procession  passed  on,  it  moved 
amid  the  sobbing  of  a  nation.     Tliirly  trumpeters  stood  at  the  door  of  the  cathedral 
with  musical  instruments  in  hand,  and  when  the  illustrious  dead  arri\ed  at  the 
gates  of  St.  Paul's  Cithedral  these  thirty  trumpeters  blew  one  united  blast ;  but  the 
trumpets  did  not  wake  the  dead.     He  slept  ri;:ht  on.     What  thirty  trumpets  could 
not  do  for  one  man,  one  trumpet  will  do  for  all  nations.         The  trumpet  of  judij- 
ment : — 'I  he  blowing  of  trumpets  at  particular  seasons  was  a  statute  for  Israel. 
The  trumpet  was  to  be  blown  on  the  solemn  feast  day,  to  assemble  the  people 
together,  to  direct  their  march  when  the  camp  was  to  be  moved,  they  were  to  be 
sounded  over  the  burnt-offerings,  and  at  the  new  moons,  and  when  the  year  of 
jubilee  anived  to  proclaim  libeity,  also  to  summon  the  people  to  war.     To  this  St. 
Paul  alludes,  when  he  says,  "If  the  trumpet  give  an  unceriain  sound,  who  shall 
prepare  hiu}self  to  the  battle  ?  "     All  this  whs  typical  of  the  trumpet  of  the  gospel 
which  is  to  re-ound  till  all  are  warned  to  flee  from  tlie  wrath  to  come  (Psa.  Ixxxix. 
15).     But  there  is  another  trumpet  we  must   all  hear.      I.  The  m.vnner  of  its 
SOUND.     1.  Sudoen.     Our  Lord  intimates  this  (MaU.  xxiv.  33,  etc.).     The  destruc- 
tion of  Jemsfileni  was  a  fit  representation  of  this,  it  was  awfully  sudden.     When 
the  trumpet  sounds  to  judgment  there   shall  be  the  gidily  and  profane  pursuing 
their  unhallowed  pleasures.     In  a  moment !  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  the  trumpet 
shall  sound!     Oh!  to  be  found  watching,  waiting,  praying,  ready.     "Blessed  is 
that   servant  who,  when  his  Lord  cometh,  shall  be  found  so  doing."     2.  Uni- 
versnl.     It  shall  re-echo  in  heaven,  reach  every  corner  of  earth,  and  penetrate 
the  dark  ahvss  of  hell.     Every  soul  shall  hear  it  that  ever  lived  in  the  world  from 
the  dnys  of  Ailam  to  the  period  when  the  last  infant  shall  be  born,  the  king  and 
the  peas  lilt,  the  righteous  and  wicked,  etc.     You  who   dislike  the   sound  of  the 
gospel ;   you  who  neglect  the  great  salvation  ;    you,  formal  professor,   and  self- 
righteous  phnrisee ;  you,  hypocrite  with  the  mask  of  religion — all  must  hear  it. 
3.  I'inal.     It  is  the  close  of  all  things,  the  termination  of  our  probation.     There  is 
a  period  whon  you  shall  hear  of  salvation,  when  yuu  shall  attend  the  sanctuary, 
wnen   you  shall  read  the  Bible  and  surround   the  sacramental  table  for  the  last 
time.     II.  Th!-'.  ihpout  of  its  accents.     The  sound  shall  proclaim — 1.  The  end  of 
time.     How  solemn  the  thought  !     Now  we  have  the  seasons  in  regular  succession, 
times   of  business,  recreation,  devotion,  &c.     But  soon  time   shall  be  no  longer. 
The  river  of  time  will  be  em|itied  in  the  ocean  of  eternity.     Oh  !  then,  now  seize  it, 
and  sail  in  the  ship  of  tlie  gospel,  and  you  shall  be  safely  conducted  by  the  Divine 
Pilot  till  you  glide  safely  into  an  ocean  of  bliss,  that  knows  not  the  ruffle  of  a 
wave.     2.  The  resurrection  of  the  dead.    3.  The  approach  of  the  Judge.    It  shall 


.526  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xy. 

be  glorious.  How  unlike  His  first  advent.  The  scene  will  be  majestic  beyond 
■description.  How  great  the  designs  of  His  coming  !  Nut  to  present  an  atoning 
sacrifice,  but  to  hold  the  last  assize.  He  shall  come  to  explain  the  mysteries  of 
His  providence,  to  display  the  rii-hes  of  His  grace,  in  the  consummation  of  the 
iiHppiness  of  His  people,  to  vindicate  His  justice  in  the  everlasting  destruction  of 
His  foes.  III.  The  soi.eiixity  or  its  results.  1.  The  final  triumphs  of  the 
righteous.  2.  The  eternal  punishment  of  the  wicked.  (Ebenezer  Temple.)  The 
resurrection: — I.  What  are  we  to  unherstand  by  the  sounding  of  the  trumpet? 
That  this  will  announce  our  Saviour's  coming  to  judgment  is  frequently  asserted 
<Matt.  xxiv.  31  ;  1  Thess.  iv.  IG).  As  at  the  giving  of  the  law,  so  at  the  judging  of 
men  according  to  that  law,  God  shall  cause  some  such  sound  to  be  utterei  as  shall 
be  heard  over  the  whole  world,  and  summon  all  men  to  appear  before  His  judg- 
ment-seat, and  when  this  sounds  then  shall  the  dead  be  raised.  H.  Who  are 
those  dead  that  shall  be  raised  at  the  sound  of  this  trumpet  ?  1.  Tliere  is 
a  threefold  life  :  natural,  the  union  of  the  soul  to  the  body  ;  spiritual,  the  union  of 
•Christ  to  the  soul ;  eternal,  the  communion  of  the  soul  with  God.  Answerable  to 
this  there  is  a  threefold  death.  (1)  Natural,  when  the  soul  and  body  are  divorced 
fiom  one  another.  (2)  Spiritual,  which  is  the  separation  of  the  soul  from  Christ. 
'Though  many  by  grace  are  redeemed  from  this,  yet  all  by  nature  are  subject  to  it. 
And  as  all  by  nature  are  suliject  to  it,  so  do  most  by  practice  still  lie  under  it. 
Dead  as  to  all  ser-se  of  sin,  as  to  all  spiritual  graces,  as  to  all  heavenly  comforts, 
as  to  that  life  of  faith  which  the  children  of  God  are  quickened  with.  (3)  Eternal, 
the  separation  of  the  soul  from  God  ;  and  you  that  lie  under  the  spiritual  death  of 
sin  must  either  get  yourselves  quickened  by  the  life  of  faith  in  Christ,  or  else 
•exiicpt  by  eternal  death  to  be  separated  from  the  Lord  of  Life.  2.  Which  of  these 
shall  be  raised  ?  All  of  them,  and  yet  it  is  the  naturally  dead  which  are  chiefly  to 
■be  understood  here.  III.  How  shall  the  dead  be  raised?  When  the  trumpet 
shall  sound  by  the  power  of  the  most  high  God,  every  man's  body  being  made  fit  to 
receive  its  soul,  the  soul  shall  immediately  be  united  to  it,  and  so  we,  even  the  very 
self-same  persons  that  now  we  are,  shall  be  raised  to  answer  for  what  we  have  done 
here.  IV.  How  doth  it  appear  that  the  dead  shall  thus  be  raised  ?  1.  From 
Scripture  (Isa.  xxvi.  19  ;  Dan.  xii.  2  ;  John  v.  28,  29  ;  Matt.  xxii.  31,  32).  2.  Fiom 
reason.  (1)  Christ  has  been  raised.  (2)  The  soul  is  immortal,  and  it  is  against 
all  reason  that  one  essential  part  of  man  should  be  continued  in  its  being,  and  the 
other  should  be  turned  to  nothing.  (3)  Justice  requires  that  thny  that  are 
■co-partners  in  vice  and  virtues  should  be  co-partners  also  in  punishments  and 
rewards.  Though  a  sin  would  not  be  a  sin  witliout  the  soul,  yet  it  would  not  be 
committed  without  the  body.  The  body  could  not  sin  unless  the  soul  consented; 
the  soul  would  not  sin  so  often  unless  the  body  tempted.  V.  How  shall  they  be 
raised  incorruptible?  The  apostle  here  treats  of  principally  the  resurrection  of 
the  saints,  who  shall  be  raised  incorruptible.  1.  In  their  souls,  whi<h  being 
■wrought  up  into  an  exact  conformity  to  the  will  of  God,  will  be  emptied  of  all  cor- 
ruptions, and  bles-ed  with  all  perfections.  2.  In  body.  As  our  souls  shall  be 
void  of  all  corruptions,  so  shall  our  bodies  be  of  all  imperfections,  for  these  our 
vile  bodies  shall  be  made  like  unto  Christ's  glorious  body.  What  is  sown  a  natural 
shall  be  raised  a  spiritual  body;  it  shall  not  any  longer  be  a  clog  to  us  in  the  per- 
formance of  duties  to  God  ;  but  it  shall  be  as  quick,  agile,  and  subset vient  as  if  it 
was  advanced  beyond  the  degree  of  a  body,  and  had  commenced  a  soul.  3.  In 
their  happiness.  There  shall  be  no  crosses  in  their  relations,  no  losses  in  their 
posses-sions,  no  disgrace  in  their  honours,  no  fears  in  their  preferments,  no 
irrcKnlarities  in  their  affections,  no  sorrow  in  their  joys,  no  darkness  in  their  light, 
not  one  drop  of  misery  in  the  whole  ocean  of  happiness  they  shall  enjoy.  VI. 
What  is  mrant  by  we  shall  be  changed  ?  There  will  be  a  change  in — 1.  Our 
opinions.  We  shall  think  otherwise  of  most  things.  Here  we  are  apt  to  look  upon 
sin  as  amiable,  and  grace  as  not  desirable ;  but  then  we  that  once  esteemed  all 
things  before  God,  shall  look  upon  God  as  to  be  esteemed  above  all  things.  2. 
Our  conditions.  A  Dives  in  this  may  become  a  Lazarus  in  the  other  world; 
aaid  a  Lazarus  here,  a  Dives  there,      (Bp.  Beveridge.) 

Vers.  53-57.  For  tills  corruptible  must  put  on  incorruption. — The  great 
change : — The  apostle  presents  this — I.  As  a  contrast  betwixt  what  man  now 
IS  AND  WHAT  HE  WILL  BE.  1.  Twicc  over  the  apostle  affirms  the  change  from 
corrupiit'le  to  incorruption,  and  from  mortal  to  immortality;  first  as  a  matter 
of  necessity,  then  as  a  matter  of  fact.     Four  times  over,  also,  he  uses  the  same 


OHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  527 

word,  translated  "put  on,"  which  means,  to  "go  into,"  as  into  a  place  of  covering 
or  shelter ;  and  hence  to  go  into  one's  clothes,  to  attire,  to  array  one's  self  or 
others  in  gaiunents,  ornaments,  or  tlie  like  (2  Cor.  v.  2).  2.  Death,  then,  is 
a  mere  "  unclothing  "  of  the  man,  and  if  there  is  any  propriety  in  the  analog.y  the 
"  unclothing  "  leaves  him  in  posses-ion  of  the  full  integrity  of  his  being  :  he  has 
simply  stripped  off  his  garments,  and  for  a  season  laid  them  aside.  It  is  still 
compi'tent  for  him  to  resun  «  them,  or  to  array  himself  in  different  attire  ;  and 
on  reinvestment  he  cannot  be  other  than  he  was  before.  Very  great  may  the  change 
be  betwixt  the  "clothing"  before  death  and  tliat  which  is  "put  on"  at  the  I'esurrec- 
tinn,  but  the  language  of  the  apostle  implies  that  its  use  and  puri^ose  in  both  cases 
are  the  same.  3.  Then,  again,  the  apostle  informs  us,  twice  over,  that  that  which 
in  the  one  state  is  corruptible  and  mortal,  becomes  in  the  other  stute  ineorrupiible 
and  immortal.  The  thing  is  the  same  in  both  states,  but  placed  under  different 
conditions.  At  present  it  is  organised  matter,  liable  to  decay,  injury,  and  dissolu- 
tion;  but  that  same  organised  matter  will  be  found  in  a  state  of  "  incorruption  " 
and  "  immortality."  II.  As  A  victory  over  death  and  the  grave.  1.  The  wot ds 
mean  properly  "  unto  victory  " ;  the  idea  being  that  the  process  of  extermination 
goes  on  like  a  battle  that  is  waged  until  a  triumphant  victory  is  secured — that 
is,  "aye  and  until"  death  is  totally  abolished.  Death  at  the  resurrection 
is  destined  to  be  cast,  like  a  stone,  into  an  abyss,  so  profound  that  it  never 
will  be  brought  up  or  appear  again.  2.  Death  is  compared  to  a  venomous 
reptile  which  has  wounded  its  victims  and  introduced  into  their  body  its  deadly 
poison.  Dissidution,  it  is  true,  does  not  immediately  follow  the  implanting  of 
the  sting,  but  there  is  pain  and  anguish,  and  eath  ensues  in  due  course  of 
time.  And  then  conn  s  the  victory  of  the  grave,  or  Hades.  Like  a  resistless 
conqueror,  it  lays  hold  of  those  whom  death  has  prostrated,  consigns  the  body 
to  the  house  appointed  for  all  living,  and  the  soul  to  the  mysterious  con- 
dition of  disembodied  consciousness.  Well  may  this  be  called  a  victory,  for 
nothing  can  be  conceived  of  as  a  more  complete  overthrow  of  human  hopes  and 
desires  ;  but  introduce  the  idea  of  resurrection  and  it  is  plain  the  victory  passes 
over  to  the  other  side.  The  conqueror  is  despoiled  of  his  triumph ;  and  from  being 
a  victim,  sin-ruined  and  dying  man,  restored  to  that  high  standard  of  corporeal 
life  for  which  he  was  originally  designed,  is  in  his  turn  a  conqueror,  all  the  more 
distinguished  and  glorious  that  his  triumph  lasts  for  ever.     III.  As  a  boon  for 

WHICH    GRATITUDE    OUGHT    TO    BE     FELT     AND     THANKS     EETURNED.        Gratitude    is    the 

appropriate  sequel  of  benefits  bestowed  and  appreciated.  But  to  realise  to  the  full 
the  emotion  of  gratitude  of  which  the  apostle  here  speaks,  we  must  actually  close 
with  and  appropriate  the  glorious  boon.  This  is  the  office  of  faith.  None  are 
excluded  from  the  offers  of  the  gospel :  all  are  invited  to  partake  of  its  blessed 
privileges;  and  however  great  and  precious  these  privileges  may  be,  so  far  as  the 
present  world  is  concerned,  the  actual  consummation  is  the  resurrection  of  the 
body  and  a  portion  in  tlie  kingdom  of  God.  When  the  wilderness  journey  was 
over,  and  the  wars  of  the  settlement  in  Canaan  at  an  end,  how  gladsome  would 
every  household  be  and  every  heart  in  Israel  as  they  sat  down  each  one  under  his 
vine  and  fig-tree,  and  none  to  make  tbeiu  afraid  !  But  this  was  only  a  type  of  far 
more  glorious  things  to  come,  when  the  epoch  of  sorrow  and  death  is  over,  and  the 
entire  company  of  God's  reileemed  enters  upon  the  long-promised  inheritance.  (J. 
Cochrane,  M.A.)        Tlie  celestial  body  of  a  CIn-istian  after  the  resurrection  : — I.  The 

GROUNDS  OF    THE    BELIEF    OF   A    CHRISTIAN    CONCERNING  THIS  CHANGE  OF  A  CORRUPTIBLE 

AND  MORTAL  INTO  AN  INCORRUPTIBLE  AND  iMjroRTAL  BODY.  I  appeal  to  all  Sensible  men 
whether  that  God,  wIto  is  the  Author  of  motion,  by  which  all  alterations  in  bodies  are 
made,  who  brought  this  goodly  frame  of  the  world  out  of  an  heap  of  indigested  matter, 
who  formed  the  body  of  Adam  out  of  the  dust,  who  has  so  framed  nature,  that  a 
Fpring  of  vegetables  should  succeed  their  death  in  winter ;  who  caused  even  the 
dry  rod  of  Aaron  to  bud,  and  blossom,  and  bring  forth  almonds  ;  who  has  given 
skill  and  power  to  men,  by  fire  and  o'her  natural  causes,  to  open  and  refine  the 
grossest  bodies  ;  whether  that  God  who  hath  done  these  great  things  is  not  able  to 
put  together  the  parts  of  an  humane  body  which  He  made,  contrived,  and  formerly 
joined,  and  to  advance  the  frame  of  it  from  grossness  to  purity.  To  think  He  is 
not  is  next  to  no  thinking  at  all,  and  it  is  to  reproach  God's  power  and  knowledge  and 
wisdom.  It  is  more  than  barely  credible,  it  is  certain,  that  God  who  can  do  all 
this  will  at  last  do  it  because  He  has  said  He  will.     II.  The  consequence  of  this 

BELIEF  IS  very  COMFORTABLE  ;  FOR  GREAT  AND  MANY  ARE  THE  ADVANTAGES  DERIVED 

TO  Christians  by  being   clothed   with   a   celestial  body.     There  is   scarce  a 


528  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

compnvi^^on  to  be  admitted  betwixt  this  eart.lily  body  and  that  which  shall  be  at 
the  asce'ision  of  ChrisLians.  Tlaey  differ  more  tlian  the  least  and  dimmest  star, 
and  the  brightest  and  greatest  luminary  in  tlie  firmament  of  heaven.  Tlie  happi- 
ness derived  from  the  change  of  a  natural  to  a  spiritual  body  consisteth  in  a 
deliverance — 1.  From  the  grossness  of  the  former,  as  it  is  a  body  of  this  flesh  and 
blood.  2.  From  the  disorderly  motions  of  it,  as  it  is  a  corruptible  body.  3.  From 
the  perishing  nature,  decay,  and  fall  of  it,  as  it  is  both  a  corruptible  and  mortal 
boily.     III.  What    shall    we    do    that  we    may   come   at   these   several  great 

AOVANTAGES    OF   LIVING    AT    LAST    IN   AN    HEWENLY   BODY?       The    Way    tO     have     b  'tter 

bodies  is  to  have  more  virtuous  souls.  God  hath  put  us  into  this  body,  as  into  the 
habit  of  a  pilgrim  on  earth,  as  probitioners  for  a  more  excellent  clothing.  And, 
according  to  our  patience,  our  self-denial,  our  keeping  the  body  in  subjection  to  the 
mind,  our  governing  the  appetites  and  passions  of  it,  so  shall  the  resurrection  and  as- 
f  eusion  of  it  be.  (Ahp.  I'enison.)  TMs  mortal  must  put  on  immortality. — The  mortal 
immortalised : — Thi'se  who  take  thought  for  immortality  are  divided  into  two  sclmols, 
the  sensuous  and  the  spiritual.  The  one  picture  to  themselves  a  heaven  of  physical 
biesseduess,  a  glorified  earth — immortality  only  the  state  of  the  well-developed 
mortal !  The  other  class  regard  heaven  as  a  state  utterly  unlike  the  mortal — 
where  the  soul  shall  exist  in  the  transcendental  majesty  of  a  risen  spirit  rather 
than  as  a  redeemed  and  yet  veritable  man  in  Christ  Jesus.  Now  both  of  these 
notions  are  alike  unphilosophic  and  unscriptural.  The  text  teaches  not  trausub- 
stantiation,  but  transrtffuratiou — a  change  not  of  an  essence,  but  only  of  aspects — 
and  gives  us  twofold  data  for   solving  the  problem  of  the   after  state.     I.  The 

IDENTITY    OF    THE    IMMORTAL    CREATURE    WITH     THE    BIORTAL.         TllOUgll     at     death     WB 

are  unquestionably  to  lose  whatever  belongs  only  to  this  rudimental  life — as  the 
chi-ysalis  drops  the  exuviae  in  developing  the  wings — yet  all  faculties  and  functions 
essentially  human  are  to  be  ours  for  ever.  1.  Even  in  regard  of  the  body  is  this 
strictly  true.  Whatever  may  be  the  bliss  of  the  intermediate  state  yet  reason  and 
revelation  alike  declare  it  to  be  unnatural,  and  so  imperfect.  Death,  self-cousideted, 
cannot  be  a  benefit.  It  is  not  a  step  in  a  progress — it  is  an  interruption,  a  judicial 
infliction,  God's  curse  upon  sin.  Indeed,  how  the  soul  can  act  when  divested  of 
this  body  we  cannot  understand.  And  therefore  from  the  dust,  as  a  trophy  of  the 
mediatorship,  is  to  be  reconstructed  a  new  body  like  Christ's,  to  be  part  of  the 
redeemed  and  immortal  man.  2.  This  identity  is  more  manifestly  true  in  regard 
to  the  mind.  Even  as  a  philosophic  inquiry  there  appears  no  reason  why  death 
should  work  any  change  in  our  rational  nature.  Accepting  immortality  as  a  simple 
matter  of  faith  we  should  expect  that,  as  the  last  enemy  rocked  its  dwelling  into 
dust,  it  would  emerge  from  the  ruins  with  all  its  peculiar  habits  of  thought,  and 
at  precisely  its  attained  point  of  progress.  3.  And  so  with  the  affections.  There 
is  no  strangtT  mistake  than  that  which  regards  these  as  the  specialities  of  the 
present  life.  The  heart  is  among  the  most  indestructible  elempnts  of  our  being. 
Pure  intellect,  unsoftened  by  affection,  is  simply  monstrous.  Entering  heaven  witii 
our  logic  intensified  and  our  love  gone,  our  sympathies  would  be  fiendish.  In  this 
respect  *'  the  mortal  does  put  on  immortality."  Said  our  Saviour,  standing  by  the 
beloved  dead  with  the  sisters  of  Bethany,  "He  shall  rise  again  'your  brother' 
still."  Death  annihilates  no  pure  affection  wherein  a  Christian  heart  rejoices. 
"  The  water  of  life  "  is  no  Lethe  of  forgetfulness.  Death,  then,  does  not  destroy 
nor  mutilate  the  mortal.  The  immortal  creature  will  be  man  with  a  human  body, 
a  human  intellect,  a  human  heart.  II.  The  marvellous  and  all-glorious  trans- 
figuration OF  that  nature.  The  word  "immortality"  is  a  simple  negative. 
There  are  things  for  which  human  language  can  have  no  name.  While  we  remain 
mortal,  inspiration  can  only  describe  the  future  in  negatives.  1.  The  body  shall  be 
the  same  with  eye  to  see  and  tongne  to  speak,  but  as  the  seed  is  transfigured  into 
the  queenly  flower,  so  great  shall  the  change  be.  With  what  new  senses  and  organs 
it  may  be  furnished  God  hath  not  told  us.  In  this  very  chapter  Paul  seems  strug- 
gling under  the  burden  of  the  magnificent  description — "  It  is  sown  in  corruption, 
it  is  raised  in  incorruption."  And  what  notion  cfin  we  form  of  incorruptible 
matter?  "  It  is  sown  in  dishonour,  it  is  raised  in  glory."  The  body,  a  house  of 
leprosy,  with  all  its  senses  instruments  of  temptation,  is  to  be  reconstructed  into 
a  palace  of  the  higher  life — fashioned  like  Christ's  glorious  body  !  "It  is  sown  in 
weakness,  it  is  raised  in  power."  This  poor,  imperfect  instrument  of  the  intellect, 
requiring  constant  care  lest  it  be  injured  by  the  using,  shall  be  changed  into  a 
mightv  and  imperishable  engine  wherewith  to  work  out  unwearied  the  grand 
ministries  of  eternity  1     "  It  is  sown  a  natural  body,  it  is  raised  a  spiritual  body." 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  529 

Its  material  elements,  no  longer  controlled  by  material  inertia,  impenetrability, 
and  attraction,  but  (like  Chiist's  raised  body,  which  could  pass  closed  doors  and 
float  up  to  the  firmament)  shall  be  the  equipment  of  the  soul  when  it  would  exj^lore 
the  mysteries  of  creation  and  traverse  immensity  in  adoring  contemplation.  2.  If 
the  dwelling-place  be  thus  glorified  what  a  transfiguration  must  await  the  spirit- 
inhabitant  !  This  intellect,  how  it  sometimes  towers  and  triumphs  I  Whai; 
discoveries  it  hath  made  !  Milton's  song  !  Newton's  march  through  the  universe! 
Yet  all  this  was  the  mortal ;  the  doings  of  the  cradled  child  with  its  plavtliings. 
And  who  f-hall  tell  us,  then,  of  the  child's  manhood?  3.  But  unto  man's  heart 
rather  than  to  his  head  shall  be  accorded  the  loftiest  prizes  of  eternity  !  To  think 
of  that  (>vhile  unchanged  in  all  its  gentle,  blessed,  earthly  affections)  i3utting  on 
immortality,  is  the  highest  conception  we  can  form  of  man's  kingship  and  })riest- 
hood  in  the  city  of  God.     (C   IVadsworth.)  Mortality    and   iinmortallty  : — I. 

We  ake  mortal.  As  a  simple  statement  of  truth,  this  i^ioposition  needs 
neither  proof  nor  illustration.  If  it  did,  the  one  might  be  found  in  the 
churcliyard,  the  other  in  the  sighs  of  the  mourner.  Bat;  while  we  all  know 
and  ackn'>wleilge  the  fact  of  our  mortality,  it  is  strange  how  seldom  we  con- 
sider it,  how  little  we  are  affected  by  it.  Those  among  us  who  are  the  most 
devoted  to  pleasure  are  universally  found  to  be  the  most  regardless  of  death. 
This  can  be  accounted  for  only  on  the  supposition  that  they  thinlc  not  at  all,  either 
of  mortality  or  innnortality,  that  sensual  pleasure  is  an  opiate  poweiful  enough  to 
lull  every  anxiety,  to  preclude  every  solemn  reflection.  And  yet  it  seems  incom- 
prehensible how  any  thinking  being  should  be  able  to  shut  his  eyes  to  the  fact  that 
he  is  dying.  The  world  is  full  of  death,  from  the  first  and  feeblest  ef!forts  of  life, 
up  to  its  most  peifect  examples.  II.  We  aee  immoktal;  and  it  is  from  this 
second  fact  in  our  destinies  that  death  derives  most  of  its  solemnity,  and  all  its 
moral  force.  It  is  fearful  to  think  that  this  very  spirit,  busied  now  with  trifles, 
must  continue  to  exist,  busied  with  something,  for  ever  and  ever.  Mere  fatigue 
may  lull  the  most  wretched  here  into  the  repose  of  a  little  slumber  ;  but  when  this 
mortal  shall  put  on  immortality,  there  shall  be  no  opiate  for  ever  and  ever  to  soothe 
the  spirit's  sorest  anguish,  not  even  a  troubled  dream  to  vary  the  uniformity  of 
torture.  The  spirit  may  prey  for  ever  on  itself,  but  shall  never  be  consumed — it 
may   weep  and  wail  for  ever,  without  wailing  itself   to   rest.     III.   The  change 

BETWEEN    'iHE    PEESKNT    AND     FUTDIIE     CONDITIONS     OF     MAN     WILL     NOT    DESTROY    THE 

iDENiiTY  EITHER  OF  HIS  PERSON  OR  CHARACTER.  There  is  uo  alchemy  in  death  to 
distil  charitable  and  holy  dispositions  from  the  gross  elements  of  selfishness  and 
malignity — in  it  there  is  no  purgatorial  fire  to  change  our  base  metal  into  refiner's 
gold.  As  the  soul  enters  the  troubled  waters  of  dissolution,  so  must  it  pass  out  of 
them  on  the  other  side,  bearmg  that  very  transcript  of  character  which  time  and 
the  world  have  written  on  it.  Are  we  striving,  then,  day  by  clay,  incessantly,  to  lay 
the  restraints  of  go.Uiness  on  our  naturally  rampant  corruption  ?  Are  we  watching 
and  pra.^ing  to  guard  our  hearts  from  temptation  by  all  the  defences  of  piety  and 
devotion?       {W.   Stevenson.)  The  mind  exchanging   the   mortal  for   tlie  im- 

mortal : — Paul  uses  this  language  in  relation  to  the  body,  but  it  may  be  useful 
to  apply  it  to  the  mental  and  moral  part  of  human  nature.  To — I.  Systems  of 
THOUGHT.  All  errors  of  judgment  are  mortal  and  must  perish.  And  what  system 
of  human  thonght  is  not  intermixed  with  ideas  not  true  ?  Look  at  systems — 1, 
Of  philos 'phy.  Many  have  already  died  out  because  of  their  errors;  and  existing 
systems  because  they  are  often  contradictory  reveal  their  errabiHty,  and  consequently 
must  die.  The  sensational,  idealistic,  mj-stic,  and  eclectic  schools  are  all  shifting 
as  the  clouds.  It  will  not  be  always  so  ;  the  true  must  take  the  place  of  the  false 
in  the  realm  of  thoui;ht.  2.  Of  theology.  How  contradictory  are  most  of  them 
to  each  otlier  and  to  some  of  the  most  vital  things  embodied  in  the  life  and  teach- 
ings of  Jesus.  Many  have  died  ;  some  are  dying ;  and  all  will  sooner  or  later  die. 
Human  souls  will  one  day  have  the  "  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus."  "  Our  little  systems 
have  their  day.  They  have  their  day  and  cease  to  be."  II.  Elements  of  human 
CHARACTER.  Analyse  the  character  of  unrenewed  men,  and  you  will  find  moral 
piinciples  that  must  die  out  if  there  be  a  God  of  justice  and  benevolence  in  the 
univeise— c.//.,  avarice,  envy,  pride,  malice,  ambition,  and  selfishness.  The 
human  mind  was  never  formed  to  be  ini  uenced  by  these.  The  fact  that  they  are 
antagonistic  to  the  moral  constitution  of  the  hnman  soul,  to  the  character  of  God, 
and  to  the  order  and  well-being  of  all,  show  that  they  must  sooner  or  later  die. 
Human  souls  will  one  day  put  off  this  mortal  and  "put  on"  the  immortal; 
"  Bight-  ousness,  joy,  and  peace  in  the  Holy  Ghost,"  &c.  III.  Institutions  of 
VOL.    II.  3i 


gaO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

PUMAN  LIFE.  1.  Our  political  institutions  are  mortal.  Human  governments  are 
constantly  dying.  The  unwisdom  in  thfir  method  of  management,  the  unrighteous- 
ness of  some  of  their  laws,  the  haughtiness  of  those  in  power,  and  their  constant 
fattening  upon  the  overtaxed  millions  give  mortality  to  governments.  ]\Ian  will 
one  day  put  off  these  and  put  on  the  government  of  common  sense,  common  justice, 
common  benevolence.  Men  are  craving  not  for  the  aristocratic  or  democratic,  but 
for  the  theocratic,  the  reign  of  God,  which  is  the  reign  of  honesty  and  love.  2. 
Our  ecclesiastical  institutions  are  mortal.  Whether  they  are  Papal,  Episcopal, 
Wesleyan,  or  Congregat'onal,  they  are  more  or  less  mixed  with  error  and  must  die. 
IV.  Types  of  hubian  greatness.  Some  see  the  highest  greatness  in  the  millionaire, 
some  in  the  triumphant  conqueror,  some  in  a  monarch,  some  in  ancestry  and  high- 
sounding  title  s.  But  such  types  of  greatness  agree  neither  with  the  reason  nor  the 
conscience  of  humanity.  Because  they  are  false  they  are  mortal,  and  they  will 
have  to  be  exchanged  for  the  immortal.  The  time  will  come  when  men  will  regard 
Christ  as  the  only  true  txjie  of  greatness.  Conclusion:  What  a  glorious  change 
awaits  hunnnity  !  St.  Paul  speaks  of  the  resurrection  of  the  body.  But  there  is 
a  more  glorious  resurrection — a  resurrection  of  the  soul  from  the  false,  the  un- 
righteous, the  impure,  to  the  true,  the  right,  and  the  holy.  (D.  'lltowas,  D.D.) 
So  when  this  corruptible  shall  have  put  on  Incorruption.  .  .  .  Death  is  swallowed 
up  in  victory. — Death  is  contemplated — I.  As  an  enemy.  Because  it — 1.  Inter- 
feres with  human  happiness.  2.  Divides  us  from  our  friends,  &c.  3.  Separates 
soul  and  body.  II.  As  an  enemy  that  must  be  fought.  1.  All  must  die.  2. 
The  struggle  is  often  bitter  and  painful.  3.  Must  be  maintained  by  fnith,  &c.  III. 
As  AN  enemy  that  shall  be  utxekly  r>ESTE0YEi).  1.  In  the  resurrection  to  eternal 
life.  2.  By  Jesus  Christ.  (J.  Lytli,  D.D.)  DraOi  snalloired  ttj)  :—l.  The  desith 
of  sin  in  the  life  of  grace.  2.  The  death  of  the  body  in  the  hope  of  life.  8.  The 
corruption  of  death  in  incorruption.  {Ibid.)  Death  swnUoiced  vp  in  victory  : — 
The  victory  is — I.  Gioiuous.  1.  The  body  rises.  2.  Is  clothed  with  immortality. 
II.  Is  complete.  There  is  no  more  sickness — pain— death.  III.  Triumphant. 
1.  Christ  celebrates  the  triumph  of  His  grace.  2.  Saints  participate  in  it.  (Ibid.) 
Death  swallowed  up  in  victory  : — It  is  a  dreadful  sight  to  see  an  army  routed  and 
flying.  But  in  uiy  text  is  a  worse  discomfiture.  It  seems  that  a  black  giant 
proposed  to  conqner  the  earth.  He  gathered  for  his  host  all  the  aches  and  pains 
and  maladies  of  the. ages.  He  threw  up  barricades  of  gvave-mound.  He  pitched 
tent  of  charnel-house.  Some  of  the  troops  marched  with  slow  tread,  commanded 
by  consumptions :  some  in  double-quick,  commamied  by  pneumonias.  Some  he 
took  by  long  besicgenient  of  evil  habit,  and  some  by  one  stroke  of  the  battle-axe 
of  casualty.  He  won  all  the  victdries  in  all  the  battle-fields.  Forward,  march ! 
the  conqueror  of  conquerors  ;  and  all  the  generals,  p'esidents,  and  kings,  drop 
under  the  feet  of  his  war  charger.  But  one  Cbristmas  night  his  antagonist  was 
born.  As  most  of  the  pbigues  and  sicknesses  and  despotisms  came  out  of  the 
East  it  was  appropriate  that  the  new  conqueror  should  come  out  of  the  same 
quarter.  Power  is  given  Him  to  awaken  all  the  fallen  of  all  the  centuries.  Fields 
have  already  been  won,  but  the  last  day  will  see  the  decisive  battle.  When  Christ 
shall  lead  forth  His  two  brigades,  the  risen  dead  and  the  ceh  stial  host,  the  black 
giant  will  fall  back,  and  the  brigade  from  the  riven  sepnlclnes  will  take  him  from 
beneath,  and  the  bripade  of  the  descending  immortals  will  take  him  from  above,  and 
"death  shall  be  swallowed  up  in  victory."  {T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  Victory  over 
death  : — Here  is — I.  A  formidable  enemy.  Death,  "  the  last  enemy."  Death  is  here 
personified  and  represented  as  a  devouring  being,  swallowing  up  all  the  generations 
of  men.  "  Death  reigned  from  Adam  to  Moses  "  ;  witness  its  ravages!  Death  is 
an  enemy — certain,  solemn,  universal,  and  sometimes  sudden.  See  Rachels  weeping 
for  their  children.  II.  A  powerful  conqueror.  God  the  Saviour.  Death  could 
not  be  conquered  but  by  death.  Oh  how  costly  was  that  victory !  the  Lord  of  life 
suffered  and  died,  and  ascended  into  heaven  leading  death  captive  and  triumphing 
over  it  as  our  surety  and  representative.  III.  A  complete  victory.  "Death  is 
swallowed  up  in  victory,"  or  for  ever  swallowed,  abolished,  destroyed  in  victory,  or 
into  victory,  Christ  has  secured  the  immortality  of  the  body — delivered  from  death 
and  the  grave  ;  an  entire  destruction  of  the  empire  of  death  (Rev.  xx,  14  ;  John  xi. 
25,  26).  After  you  have  died  you  never  can  have  the  conflict  again.  Remember 
it  is  the  last  enemy  ;  the  cup  of  trembling  shall  no  more  be  put  into  the  hand,  for 
"  there  will  be  no  more  death  " ;  the  inhabitants  shall  no  more  say  they  are  sick  ; 
all  tears  shall  be  wiped  away  (Isa.  xxv.  8  ;  Rev.  xxi.  4),  There  shall  exist  nothing 
but  eternal  life,     "  Because  I  live  ye  shall  live  also."     Thus  every  enemy  is  put 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  531 

down.  {J.  Boyd.)  Triumph  over  death  : — I.  What  is  it  to  triumph  over  death  ? 
1.  Negatively.  (1)  Not  to  die  as  the  brutes,  witliout  any  appreciation  of  what 
death  is.  (2)  Not  to  die  as  sceptics  who  do  not  believe  in  a  future  stMte.  (3)  Nor 
as  the  stoics  who  submit  in  silence  to  an  unavoidable  evil.  2.  Positively  it  implies 
— (1)  An  intelligent  apprehension  of  what  it  is  for  a  man  to  die.  (2)  A  scriptural 
and  well-founded  persuasion  that  the  power  of  death  to  injure  us  is  destroyed.  (3) 
A  joyful  assurance  that  to  die  is  gain.  II.  The  way  in  which  the  power  of  death 
IS  DESTROYED.  1.  It  is  Only  so  far  as  death  is  a  final  evil,  and  as  it  separates  us 
from  God,  that  it  is  to  be  dreaded.  2.  'Jlierefore  it  is  only  to  sinners,  and  on 
account  of  sin,  that  death  is  the  king  of  terrors.  3.  Sin,  however,  derives  its 
power  from  the  law,  which  gives  sin  its  power  to  condemn.  4.  What,  therefore, 
satisfies  the  law  destroys  the  power  of  sin,  and  thus  deprives  death  of  its  sting. 
6.  Clirist  having  satisfied  the  demands  of  the  law  gives  us  the  victory  over  death. 

III.  How  ARE  WE    TO  AVAIL   OURSELVES  OF  THIS  PROVISION    FOR   OUR    TRIUMPH?       1.    We 

must  be  clothed  in  the  righteousness  of  Christ.  2.  We  must  know  that  we  are 
in  Him.  3.  We  must  be  prepared  to  give  up  the  treasures  and  pleasures  of  this  life 
for  heaven.     4.  We  must  therefore  live  near  to  God  and  elevated  atiove  the  world. 

IV.  The  EXPERIENCE  OF  God's  people.  1,  Some  die  in  doubt.  2.  Some  in  praise. 
3.  Some  in  triumph.  It  matters  little,  provided  we  are  only  in  Christ.  But  it  is 
of  great  moment  that  when  death  comes  we  shall  have  nothing  to  do  Imt  die.  (C. 
Hodge,  D.D.)  The  heliever^s  trhtmph  : — I.  Our  bodies,  in  the  present  state 
OF  existence,  are  characterised  by  attributes  of  degradation.  Onr  bodit^s  bear 
many  circumstances  of  dignity  and  grandeur.  We  are  "  fearfully  and  wonderfully 
made  "  ;  and  there  is  that  in  every  man  which  may  lead  us  to  see  that  he  bears 
the  im.ige  of  God.  But  we  are — ].  Corruptible.  2.  Mortal.  We  are  subject  to 
innumerable  diseases  and  accidents,  to  languor  and  decline.  We  wear  down  by 
slow  degrees,  or  are  snapped  asunder  in  a  moment.  3.  What  is  the  reason  that 
we  are  subject  to  such  an  allotment?  The  answer  is,  sin  (Pioni.  v.).  We  cannot 
look  on  one  grave  that  was  not  opened  by  sin,  nor  on  one  body  that  was  not  laid 
low  by  sin.  II.  A  period  is  ordained  when  our  bodies  are  to  be  invested  with 
PRiNciPi;Es  OF  restoration.  If  wc  could  look  on  no  prospect  but  the  tomb,  then 
we  might  freely  admit  that  human  existence,  with  all  its  circumstances  of  joy, 
would  yet  be  but  misery.  But  by  the  gospel  "  life  and  immortality  "  are  "  broup;ht 
to  light."  Notice  three  thii  gs  in  referei  ce  to  this  change.  1.  The  agency  by  which 
it  is  to  be  effected.  All  those  events  whi'-h  concern  our  acceptance  and  final  salva- 
tion are  committed  to  Christ.  As  He  has  made  peace  by  the  blood  of  atonement, 
and  as  He  is  the  medium  of  all  grace  and  blessing,  so  by  Him  is  to  be  the  great 
adjudication  wliich  shall  fix  our  destiny.  Divine  must  be  His  attributes  at  whose 
bidding  all  the  graves  shall  uncharnel,  and  all  their  countless  inhabitants  stand 
before  Him.  2.  The  attril)utes  of  whii-h  it  is  to  consist.  By  connecting  the 
attributes  of  incorrujition  and  immortality  with  the  res-urrection,  we  may  be 
furnished  with  two  ideas  respecting  our  future  change.  It  is  to  consist — (1)  Of 
an  entire  conformation  to  the  image  of  Christ  (ver.  49).  (2)  In  an  introduction 
to  the  perpetuity  of  perfect  happinr  ss.  Eternal  life  is  only  another  word  for 
eternal  happiness.  3.  The  certainty  with  which  it  is  invested.  "  In  Christ  shall 
all  be  made  alive."  "Th  s  cor!U|itible  must  put  on  incorruption."  III.  The 
arrival  of  this  period  shall  be  known  as  one  of  splendid  triumph.  By  a  fine 
poetic  figure  death  is  set  forth  as  a  powerful  foe;  and  all  the  pains,  &c. ,  which 
death  has  inflicted  are  to  be  regarded  as  so  many  victories  achieved  by  him.  But 
there  is  a  counter  foe ;  and  there  is  a  victory  achieved  over  this  formidable  foe. 
Glorious  will  bethat  victory !  (1)  A  sul'ticient  payment  for  all  the  trials  of  mortality. 
(2)  A  complete  and  satisfactory  explanation  of  all  the  dark  passages  in  the  moral 
government  of  God  upon  earth.  When  all  the  rf  deemed  shall  join  in  one  loud 
melodious  song — "Unto  Him  that  loved  us,"  &c.  Conclusion:  The  subject 
furnishes — 1.  A  ground  of  substantial  consolation  while  we  contemplate  the 
departure  of  our  Christian  friends.  2.  A  ground  for  solemn  and  serious  examina- 
tion as  to  our  state  in  reference  to  the  arrival  of  that  solemn  hour.  (J.  Parsons.) 
The  Chrhtian's  triumph  over  death  : — I.  Death  m.\y  naturally  be  considered 
AS  an  enemy.  II.  True  Christians  shall  obtain  a  complete  victory  over 
death.  1.  The  victory  is  in  some  measure  obtained  even  in  the  present 
life.  Death  hath  now,  in  effect,  changed  its  nature.  It  only  hurts  the 
body,  not  the  soul.  It  only  puts  an  end  to  those  pursuits,  employments,  and 
entertainments  which  are  suited  to  the  body  and  this  pre-^ent  worlds  but  not 
tut  hose  about  which  holy  souls  are  engaged,  and  with  which  they  are  delighted 


o32  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [chap.  xt. 

and  improved.  Nay,  it  is  become,  on  many  accounts,  a  benefit;  as  it  puts  an  end 
to  their  temptations  and  conHicts,  doubts  and  fears.  A  present  victory  is  obtained 
by  the  calmness  with  whiclr  the  saints  die;  and  that  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of 
glory,  with  which  the  Spirit  of  Christ  sometimes  replenishes  their  hearts,  when  the 
flesh  is  sinking  into  the  dust.  2.  The  victory  shall  be  perfected  in  the  future 
world.  (1)  All  the  faithful  servants  of  Christ  shall  be  raised  again.  (2)  Their 
bodies  shall  be  transformed  into  the  image  of  Christ's  body.  (3)  They  shall  be 
fixed  in  a  state  of  complete  and  everlasting  happiness.  Reflections :  1.  Let  us 
contemplate  the  power  and  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  so  illustriously  displayed 
in  this  triumph  over  death.  2.  Let  us  reflect  on  the  difference  between  good  and 
bad  men  with  regard  to  the  consequences  of  denth.  3.  Lastly,  let  the  servants  of 
Christ  be  calm  and  resigned  in  the  view  of  their  own  death,  and  when  their  pious 
friends  are  removed.     {J.  Orto7t.) 

Vers.  55-58.  0  death,  where  is  thy  sting?    0  grave,  where  is  thy  victory? — 

Death  in  idea  : — There  are  tv\o  aspects  in  wliich  this  language  might  be  regarded. 
1.  As  the  sentiment  of  the  redepmed  after  the  resurrection.  Literally,  then,  death 
will  have  lost  its  sting,  and  the  grave  its  victory.  2.  As  the  expression  of  an 
exultant  sentiment  which  the  apostle  felt  even  now,  and  which  may  be  enjoyed  by 
all  true  Christians.  This  is  the  view  that  we  now  adopt.  Death  was  to  the 
apostle,  as  yet,  an  idea,  and  it  is  worthy  of  our  notice  that  death  affects  us,  while 
living,  only  in  idea.  It  is  a  friend  or  foe — victim  or  victor — according  to  our 
mental  conception.  If  our  ideas  be  gloomy,  it  will  cloud  the  sunshine  of  life;  but 
if  bright,  we  shall  spend  our  days  in  cheerful  usefulness,  and  view  the  grave  as  a 
lumined  pathway  to  an  immortal  future.  The  passage  suggests — I.  The  popular 
IDEA.  It  is  implied  that  the  bulk  of  men  vi<wed  not  death  as  the  writer  did. 
The  popular  idea — 1.  Has  a  "sting."  The  Rllu'^ion  is  to  some  venomous  serpent, 
having  not  merely  mortality,  but  agony,  in  his  sting.  There  is  no  idea  that  stings 
an  ungodly  man  like  that  of  death.  2.  A  "victory."  It  not  only  stings  like  a 
serpent,  but  crushes  like  a  conqueror  not  merely  the  body  but  the  soul — the  man. 
Some  are  all  their  lifetime  subject  to  bondage  through  this  idea.  The  boldest 
worldling  cowers  and  turns  pale  before  it.  Hence  on  deathbeds  princely  fortunes 
have  been  offered  for  its  postponement.  Dr.  Johtson  was  the  slave  of  this  idea. 
3.  A  felt  connection  with  sin.  The  sinner  s  sense  of  guilt  will  be  according  to  his 
knowledge  of  law,  and  the  terror  of  death  will  be  according  to  his  sense  of  guilt. 
The  apostle  means  either  that  sin  is  the  cause  of  death,  or  the  cause  of  the 
poignancy  of  the  idea.  Both  facts  are  equally  true,  but  the  latter  is  most  to  our 
present  purpose.  It  is  felt  guilt  that  gives  a  "  sting  "  and  "  victory  "  to  the  idea 
of  dying.  All  that  is  horritic  in  the  idea  starts  from  a  sin-stricken  conscience. 
Such,  then,  is  the  popular  idea  of  death.  Wherever  Christianity  is  not  received, 
you  find  it.  Hence  it  is  pictured  as  a  cruel  hunter  laying  snares  for  men  ;  an 
horrific  angel,  with  a  cup  of  pidson  in  his  hand;  a  gaunt  and  ghastly  skeleton ; 
a  mower,  with  his  scythe,  cutting  down  every  blade  in  the  field  of  humanity  ;  and 
sometimes  a  king  of  terrors,  treading  empires  in  the  dust.  II.  The  Christian 
IDEA.  1.  Has  neither  sting  nor  victory.  "Where  is  thy  sting?"  "Where  is 
thy  victory  ?  "  They  once  existed,  but  ae  gone.  2.  Instead  of  sting  and  victory, 
has  rapture  and  triumph.  "Thanks  be  unto  God,"  etc.  The  victor  has  become 
the  victim — the  anguish  of  the  sting  has  ^'iven  place  to  the  ecstacy  of  the  song. 
3.  Comes  to  man  through  one  medium.  The  old  idea  of  death  has  given  way  to 
this,  not  through  the  philosophies  or  religions  of  the  world,  but  through  Christ. 
(1)  How  does  Christ  give  this  idea?  The  common  answer  is,  by  taking  away  the 
senile  of  guilt,  and  bringing  "life  and  immortality  to  liglit."  This  chapter  sug- 
gests, by  awakening  in  the  soul  a  new  spiritual  life.  No  intellectual  conviction 
could  ever  plant  this  idea  in  a  soul  "  dead  in  trespasses  and  sin."  (2)  But  how 
docs  a  new  spiritual  life  do  this?  Because  it  involves — {a)  A  stronger  sympathy 
with  the  Arbiter  of  our  destiny  than  with  any  other  being — a  moral  oneness  with 
that  God  in  "  whose  hands  our  breath  is,  and  before  whom  are  all  our  ways." 
Where  this  is  not,  there  can  never  be  anything  but  gloom  in  death  :  a  dread  of 
God  must  give  a  dread  of  death,  {h)  A  stronger  sympathy  with  the  spiritual  than 
the  material.  Wherever  the  attachments  of  life  are  on  the  material,  the  idea  of 
death  must  ever  be  distressing,  on  account  of  the  separations  it  involves ;  but 
where  the  most  sympathy  is  with  the  "  unseen  and  eternal,"  death  will  be  regarded, 
not  as  severing  connections,  but  as  uniting  them  in  closer  and  dearer  fellowship, 
and  will  therefore  be  joyously  welcomed,     (c)  A  stronger  sympathy  with  the  future 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  633 

world  than  the  present.  Where  there  is  a  stronger  sympathy  with  the  present 
world  than  the  future,  the  idea  of  SHverance  must  e-er  be  painful  ;  but  where  it  is 
otherwise,  the  event  will  be  hailed,  (o)  Now,  this  sidritual  life  comes  to  man 
through  Christ.  To  give  it  was  the  object  of  His  mi-sion.  "  I  am  come  that  ye 
might  have  life,"  &c.  What,  indeed,  could  give  a  controlling  sympnthy  with  the 
Eternal  but  Christ's  revelations  of  His  inHnite  love?  What  could  remuve  guilt 
from  the  conscience,  but  fail  h  in  His  sacrifice  ?  What  could  awaken  a  generous 
sympathy  with  the  si'irilual  and  the  future  but  His  disclosuies  of  the  "many 
mansions  "  ?  His  doctrines,  works,  example,  death,  si^irit,  all  are  to  quicken  the 
spirit  in  this  new  life.  Conclusion  :  The  subject  supplies — 1.  An  argument  for 
the  value  of  Christianity.  The  world's  idea  of  death  is  a  miserable  one  :  whatever 
mind  it  possesses,  it  paralyses.  Christianity  alone  can  de-troy  this  ide  i,  and  help 
man  to  meet  his  fate  with  a  halcyon  soul.  2.  A  criterion  of  cliaracter.  What  is 
your  idea  of  death?  Are  you  its  victim  or  its  victor?  I  take  this  to  be  a  testing- 
question.  Fear  of  death  is  heathenism,  not  Christianity.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
No  stiiif)  in  dfuth : — I.  What  is  this  "sting  of  death"?  It  is  not  so  much  any 
actual  pain  in  dying.  We  go  through  greater  piins  very  often  during  life.  It  lies 
in — 1.  'J'he  parting.  The  very  thought  of  being  sepavateiil  from  those  we  love  is 
anguish.  2.  The  general  dread  of  the  unknown.  No  hand  to  clasp  !  No  voice  to 
hear !  However  we  have  lived,  it  will  be  a  solitary  thing  to  die.  3.  A  sense  of 
shame.  "  I  am  a«hamed  to  meet  some  whom  I  shall  see  again.  I  am  ashamed  to 
give  up  a  life  so  little  usfd,  so  sadly  wasted !  "  4.  The  sense  of  actual  sin.  "  I  am 
going  to  a  God  I  have  offended,  and  whose  law  I  have  broken.  Must  He  not  in 
very  justice  cast  me  out?"  And  where  shall  I  go?  What  suffering  do  I  not 
richly  deserve?  And  the  fear  rankles  in  the  breast,  and  conscience  wakes  up  its 
phantoms  and  its  horrors.  II.  Its  cube.  The  whole  "sting  "of  sin,  and  there- 
fore the  whole  "  sting  of  death,"  passed  into  Christ,  and  deatli  is  left  stintless  to 
all  who  believe  and  accept  Him.  See  the  actual  results.  1.  Pavtmg  ?  It  is 
nominal.  Death  does  not  change  or  interfere  with  the  communion  of  saints.  For 
a  little  while  the  departed  are  invisible,  but  they  will  very  soon  be  visible  again. 
2.  The  darkness  cannot  be.  If  He  is  there  who  is  the  light,  how  can  there  be 
darkness  ?  3.  How  can  the  passage  be  lonely?  "  When  thou  passest  through  the 
waters  I  will  be  with  thee."  And  are  we  not  attended  by  angels?  4.  And 
f^hame.  Am  I  not  clothed  in  His  perfect  righteousness  ?  And  Jesus  is  with  me. 
Where  is  the  shame  ?  And  be  my  sins  what  they  may,  they  are  cast  into  the 
depths  of  the  sea  ;  they  will  not  be  mentioned ;  they  are  no  more.  5.  And  what 
room  can  tliere  be  for  fear  ?  "  Fear  thou  not,  for  I  am  with  thee."  (J.  Vuiiftlian, 
31. A.)  The  sling  of  death  extracted: — The  reason  I  like  the  gospel  is  that  it  has 
taken  out  of  my  path  the  worst  enemies  I  ever  had.  IMy  mind  goi  s  back  to  twenty 
years  ago,  before  I  was  converted,  and  I  think  very  often  how  dark  it  used  to  seem 
at  times  as  I  thought  of  the  future.  There  was  death!  what  a  terrible  enemy  it 
seemed!  I  was  brought  up  in  a  little  village  in  New  England.  It  was  the  custom 
there  when  a  person  was  buried  to  toll  out  the  age  of  the  man  at  his  funeral.  I 
used  to  count  the  strokes  of  the  bell.  Death  never  entered  that  villnge,  and  toi'e 
away  one  of  the  inhabitants,  but  I  always  used  to  count  the  tolling  of  the  bell. 
Sometimes  it  would  be  away  up  to  seventy,  or  between  seventy  and  eighty  ;  beyond 
the  life  allotted  to  man,  when  man  seemed  living  on  borrowed  time  when  cut  off. 
Sometimes  it  would  be  clear  down  in  the  teens  and  childhood,  for  death  had  taken 
away  one  of  my  own  age.  It  used  to  make  a  solemn  impression  on  me  ;  I  used  to 
be  a  gi'eat  coward.  When  it  comes  to  death,  some  men  say,  "  I  do  not  fear  it." 
I  feared  it,  and  felt  terriMy  afraid  when  I  thought  of  the  cold  hand  of  death  feeling 
for  the  cords  of  life,  and  thought  of  being  launched  into  eternity,  to  go  to  an  un- 
known world.  I  used  to  have  dreadful  thoughts  of  God  ;  but  they  are  all  gone 
now.  Death  has  lost  its  sting.  And  as  I  go  on  through  the  world  I  can  shout 
now,  when  the  bell  is  tollins;,  "  0  death,  where  is  thy  sting  ?  "  And  I  hear  a  voice 
come  rolling  down  from  Calvary  :  "  Buried  in  the  bosom  of  the  Son  of  God."  He 
robbed  death  of  its  stuig  ;  He  took  away  the  sting  of  death  when  He  gave  His  own 
bosom  to  the  strol-e.     [D.  L.  Moody.)  The  cojiqtiest  of  death,: — I.  Wherein  it 

CONSISTS.  1.  Christ  has  overcome  death  ;  delivers  them  that  were  in  liondage 
through  fear  of  death  ;  takes  away  the  siing  in  the  article  of  death.  2.  Has  con- 
quered the  grHve  by  His  resurrection,  and  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light  by 
the  gospel.  II.  How  it  is  secored.  1.  By  faith  in  Christ,  which  destroys  sin 
and  satisfies  the  law.  2.  By  abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
Victory   over   death : — I.    It  is  from  actual  sin  that  death  derives  his  power. 


534  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

We  speak  of  death  as  coming  in  the  course  of  nature ;  but  it  is  a  penal  infliction, 
and  pertains  to  man,  not  as  a  creature,  but  as  a  sinner.  But  for  sin,  death  had 
never  been.  I  have  no  doubt  that  from  the  mind  of  Christ  when  He  was  on  earth, 
this  association  was  never  absent.  In  all  the  temporal  woes  which  He  witnessed. 
He  saw  sin.  If  tbis  association  were  more  strongly  and  habitually  in  our  minds 
we  should  benefit  more  than  we  do  by  scenes  of  death  and  visits  to  the  gi'ave. 
Every  time  we  are  reminded  of  our  mortality  we  ought  to  be  reminded  of  our 
sinfulness  and  the  consequent  value  to  us  of  salvation.  II.  It  is  from  conscious 
SIN  THAT  DEATH  i>EiuvES  HIS  TEKEOKS.  I  grant  there  is  something  that  awes 
the  spiiit  in  the  unknown  sensations  of  dying,  in  the  dissolution  of  soul  and  body, 
in  the  dissolution  of  the  ties  that  connect  us  with  friends,  and  in  the  darkness  and 
loathsomeness  of  the  grave.  Yet  admitting  all  this,  still  it  is  no  one  nor  all  of 
these  that  constitutes  the  cause  of  our  dread  in  the  anticipation  of  death.  It  is 
the  assurance  that  "after  death"  is  "the  judgment."  Could  this  be  removed, 
what  a  large  proportion  of  the  terrors  of  death  would  be  instantly  dispelled  !  An 
awakened  conscience  is  fearful ;  yet  an  unawakened  conscience  is  still  moi'e  so. 

III.    It    is    by   THE    DEATH    OF    ChiUST  THAT    DEATH    IS    BEREFT    OF    HIS    POWER.       If  tllB 

power  of  death  arise  from  sin,  then  the  only  way  in  which  it  can  be  done  away  is 
by  the  expiation  and  forgiveness  of  sin  ;  sin  must  be  atoned  if  death  is  to  be 
destroyed.  The  Bible  accordingly  is  full  of  this  doctrine.  The  dt^ath  of  Jesus  was 
the  finishing  of  His  atonement.  In  His  resurrection  we  iiave  tlie  Divine  attestation 
of  the  atonement  having  been  satisfactory  and  accepted  ;  His  rising  from  the  dead 
was  His  full  release  as  the  Substitute  of  the  guilty  for  whom  He  died.  But  how  is 
it,  then,  that  Christians  die?  It  is  not  God's  plan  that  the  final  destinies  of  indi- 
viduals should  be  publicly  ma.nifested  and  settled  befoie  the  time  ;  it  would  super- 
sede the  final  judgment,  and  interfere  with  the  grand  final  manifestation  of  the 
power  of  the  risen  Lord  in  the  winding  up  of  tlie  scheme  of  redemption.  But 
observe— 1.  The  curse  is  taken  out  of  death  to  all  who  are  in  Christ.  Death  is  the 
messenger  of  peace  that  calls  their  souls  to  heaven.  2.  The  power  of  death  is 
destroyed  by  the  death  of  Christ,  inasmuch  as  then  was  the  virtual,  though  not  the 
actual  destruction  of  that  power.      "  I  am  the  resurrection  and  the  life,"  &c.      IV. 

It    is    by    faith    in    the    death    of    CiIEIST    that  death    is  divested    op   his  TERRORS. 

If  a  sense  of  guiit  inspires  the  fear,  by  what  can  the  fear  possibly  be  quelled  but 
by  a  firm  belief  in  the  Divine  propitiation  ?  It  was  when  Jesus  "  through  death 
destroyed  the  power  of  death,"  that  He  "  delivered  them,  who  through  fear  of  death 
were  all  their  lifetime  subject  to  bondage  "  ;  but  that  deliverance  can  only  be  en- 
joyed through  faith  in  Him,  who  gained  the  victory,  who  "  spoiled  principalities 
and  powers,"  &c.  (R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  Victory  over  death  : — I.  Death  and  its 
STING.  1.  Sin  gave  death  his  being,  and  it  also  gives  him  his  terrors.  With  the 
utmost  propriety  is  sin  compared  to  a  sting  ;  for  it  at  once  pierces,  pains,  and 
poisons.  Sharpened  by  temptation,  and  nicely  smoothed  and  polished  by  a  thou- 
sand alleviating  ciicumstances  and  plausible  excuses,  it  enters  insensibly  into  the 
soul,  and,  before  we  are  aware,  torments  our  consciences  with  pain,  and  poisons 
our  faculties  with  its  malignant  influence.  Its  power  pierces,  its  guilt  pains,  and 
its  pollution  and  defilement  are  its  poison.  And  every  time  we  commit  it,  it 
wounds  us  afresh,  puts  us  to  fresh  pain,  and  spreads  its  poison  wider  and  deeper  : 
and,  alas!  so  often  have  we  committed  it,  that  our  whole  soul  is  infected,  and  all 
its  powers  corrupted.  2.  Now  sin  derives  its  strength  from  the  law.  Not  that  the 
law  encourages  sin  :  far  from  it.  Tlie  law  forbids  it,  and  denounces  "  indignation 
and  wrath  "  upon  all  that  commit  it.  But,  the  fountain  of  our  nature  being 
polluted,  and  continually  pouring  forth  the  most  baleful  streams,  the  law,  like  a 
mound  placed  in  the  way  of  a  torrent,  opposes,  indeed,  the  rapid  course  of  this 
overflowing  of  ungodliness,  but,  not  drying  up  its  source,  only  makes  it  rise  the 
higher,  and,  in  the  end,  flow  with  greater  force  and  rapidity.  For  men,  finding 
that  they  have  sinned,  and  are  still  inclined  to  sin,  and  that  they  are  condeinned 
on  that  account,  are  wont  to  grow  desperate  in  sin,  till  sin,  thus  manifested,  irri- 
tated, and  increased,  "  by  the  commandment,  becomes  exceeding  sinful."  3,  In 
the  meantime  the  sinner,  while  urged  forward  by  "  the  law  in  his  members," 
"which  "  wars  against  the  law  of  his  mind,"  observes  how  be  perpetually  advances 
towards  the  precipice  of  death,  and  is  led  lo  fear  he  shall  fall  into  "the  lake 
burning  with  fire  and  brimstone,  which  is  the  second  death."  Hence,  oppressed 
with  horror  and  despair,  he  cries  out,  "  0  wretched  man  that  I  am !  who  shall 
deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death  ?  "  Who  shall  draw  the  sting  of  death,  and 
show  him  to  be  a  disarmed  enemy  ?     This  is  the  language  of  every  awakened 


CHAP.  XV,]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  535 

sinner's  heart.     Being  enlightened  to  see  the  spirituality,  obligation,  and  extent  of 
the  Divine  law ;  being  convinced  he  has  repeatedly  transi^iessed  it,  and  is,  there- 
fore, involved  in  the  curse  of  it,  he  finds  himself  in  dreadful  bondage  tlirough  fear 
of  death.     And  in  thi^  condition  he  continues  till  he  becomes  acquainted  with 
Him  who  took  part  of  our  Hesh  and  blood,  that  "  by  death  He  might  destroy  him 
that  had  the  power  of  death,"  &c.     H.  How  death  is  dis\rmkd  of  his  stino  and 
WE  ARE  ENABLED  TO  TRIUMPH  OVER  Hisi.      It  is  Christ  who  disarms  death  of  his 
sting,  and  this  He  does  by  removing  the  guilt,  breaking  the  power,  and  washing 
away  the  defilement  of  sin.     When  we  come  under  grace  as  a  living  and  powerful 
dispensation,  sin  hath  no  more  dominion  over  us,  and  the  wrath  of  God  being 
removed  with  the  guilt  of  sin,   and  an  accusing  conscience  departing  with  the 
power    of    sin,    we    have    peace    both    within    and    without,    and    "  rejoice    in 
hope    of    the    glory    of    God."      And   thus   our   fear   of    death    and   hell   is   ex- 
changed for  a  blessed  hope  of  immortality  and  joy.      (J.   Benson.)  Victory 
over   death   and  the   grave  : — The   apostle  has  demonstrated  the  resurrection  by 
au  elaborate  argumeut,  and  states   his  conclusion  as  the  fulfilment  of  Isaiah's 
prophecy  (xxv.  5;.     He  remembers  the  protuise  of  God  by  Hosea  (xiii.  14),  and  in 
a  burst  of  eloquent  exultation  he  defies  his  former  enemies.     I.  The  challenge 
(ver.  55).     1.  Where  is  the  sting  of  death  ?     Alas  !  and  is  it  nothing  to  die?     Is  it 
nothing  to  leave  this  fair  earth,  our  pleasant  homes,  our  loving  friends,  &c.,  and  to 
be  buried  and  become  as  dust  beneath  the  sod?     Has  death  no  sting  when  we 
hold  the  beloved,  who  made  life  precious  and  the  world  beautiful,  by  so  frail,  brief, 
melancholy  a  tenure  ?     Has  it  no  sting  in  that  "  life-long  pang  a  widowed  spirit 
bears"?     Is  there  one  among  us  such  a  miracle  of  uninterrupted  happiness,  so 
insensible  to  others'  grief,  as  not  to  have  felt  its  keen  and  lingering  sharpness  ?     2, 
Where  is  the  victory  of  the  grave?     Where  is  it  not?     Power  cannot  resist  it. 
Eiches  can  purchase  no  allies  skilful  to  avert  it.     There  is  no  discharge  in  this  war 
for  wisdom,  or  youth,  or  virtue,  or  strength.     3.  Yet,  were  there  nothing  beside 
this,  the  calamity  would  be  light.     A.  gloomy  anticipation,  a  few  tears,  a  sharp 
pang,  and  all  would  be  over.     We  should  sleep,  and  dream  not.     But  there  is  more 
than  this.     Whence  came  death?    God  is  angry  with  us,  and  death  is  the  executioner 
of  a  Divine  sentence,  the  avenger  of  a  broken  law.     Death  had  no  sting  for  man, 
and  the  grave  no  victory,  till  sin  entered  into  the  world  ;  but  now  "  death  hath 
passed  upon  all  men,  for  that  all  have  sinned."     The  law  of  God,  which  condemns 
the  sinner,  gives  death  power  to  seize  and  hold  him  fast.     Wherever  there  is  sin, 
its  wages  are  death.     Wherever  death  is,  there  must  be  sin.     Yes  !  even  in  the 
death  of  the  sinless  Lamb  of  God,  for  He  bore  our  sins.     Plere  is  the  sharpness  of 
death's  sting.     It  is  the  evidence  and  punishment  of  sin.    What  a  strange  letliargy 
must  that  sinner  be  in  who  feels  it  not,  but  sleeps  stupidly  on,  dreaming  of  lust, 
and  giiu,  and  pride,  till  death  wakens  him  with  eternal  agony!     4.  Here  we  see 
the  strength  and  valour  of  Christian  faith ;  for,  knowing  that  he  must  die,  and  the 
grave  cover  him,  Paul  stands  up  bravely,  and  flings  defiance  in  their  faces.     To 
learn  the  secret  of  his  courage,  we  must  consider — II.  The  thanksgiving  (ver.  67). 
This,  with  the  iireceding  verse,  answers  three  questions :  1.  Whence  is  the  victory  ? 
God  gives  death  its  sting  and  the  grave  its  victory.     So  long  as  God  arms  them,  it 
is  impossible  to  resist  them.     God,  therefore,  alone  can  give  us  the  victory,  by 
becoming  our  Friend.     When  He  is  our  Friend,  His  ministers,  which  were  our 
enemies,  must   be  our  servants.      2.   How  is  the  victory  given  ?      Death  is  the 
penalty  of  sin,  and,  while  the  law  condemns  the  sinner,  he  must  remain  captive  to 
death  and  the  grave.     But  Christ,  by  satisfying  the  law,  plucked  out  the  sting  of 
death,  and  ravished  the  victory  from  the  grave  (Heb.  ii.  14,  15).    More  than  this,  He 
demonstrated  His  victory  over  the  grave;  bursting  the  bars  asunder.  He  dragged  forth 
captivity  captive,  making  an  ostentation  of  His  spoils,  openly  triumphing.    But  the 
full  manifestation  of  His  triumph  and  ours  is  kept  for  the  day  of  the  resurrection.    3. 
Wherein  does  our  victory  consist  ?     The  believer  triumphs — (1)  In  Christ's  jjerfect 
atonement.  (2)  In  Christ's  resurrection.  (3)  In  the  final  resurrection.  ( G.  W.  Bethune.) 
Fear  of  dentli :  its  causes  and  remedies  : — The  fear  of  death  is  almost  universal.     It 
affects  individuals  in  various  degrees,  but  suffers  few  to  entirely  escape  it.     Let  us 
examine,  then,  the  causes  which  render  death  so  formidable,  and  then   the  con- 
siderations which  will  deprive  it  of  its  sting,  and  the  grave  of  its  victory.     A 
primary  cause,  which  renders  death  so  formidable  to  mankind,  consists  in  their 
natural  love  of  existence.     This  is  an  instinct  held  in  common  with  the  brutes. 
All  kinds  of  life  cling  to  their  being  with  inveterate  tenacity.     Even  the  martyr  or 
patriot,  sacrificing  their  lives  for  their   country  or  faith,  experience  a  secret  dis- 


636  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xv. 

inclination  to  make  the  oCfering.  The  di contented — the  wearied — the  afflicted  in 
mind,  body,  or  estate — at  the  last  dread,  and,  if  possible,  avoid  the  conflict.  God 
has  implanted  in  man  an  instinct  whicii  will  not  ijerniit  him  to  yield  existence 
without  a  struggle  or  a  pang.  The  solemnities,  too,  with  which  we  surround  it, 
invest  death  with  many  of  its  terrors.  We  render  it  as  ghastly  as  po>sible.  It 
should  rather  be  regarded  as  a  passage  from  the  troubles  of  life  into  the  happiness 
of  eternity.  Presented  under  this  light  it  is  a  joyful  occurrence,  and  therefore 
should  be  less  drearily  apparelled.  The  obscurity,  moreover,  which  veils  the 
eternal  state,  arms  death  with  many  of  its  terrors.  Unbelievers,  of  course,  labour 
under  no  uncertainty.  Materialists  by  conviction,  death  in  their  view  is  followed 
by  annihilation.  Or,  should  this  creed  be  erroneous,  condemnation  must  be  the 
result  of  their  unbelief.  Any  way  their  case  is  lost.  Hence,  bj'  them  death  is 
regarded  with  ppcaliar  dread.  Nor  are  believers  without  their  misgivings  as  to  the 
future.  Even  though  certain  as  to  a  future  state,  doubts  will  arise  as  to  their 
position  in  it.  They  know  the  conditions  of  salvation,  but  have  they  been  fulfilled  ? 
is  their  title  good  to  the  promised  inheritance  ?  Kemorse  of  conscience,  too,  with 
many,  produces  similar  results.  Kecollection  of  the  past  gives  sorry  promise  for 
the  future.  While  death  is  distant  the  harsh  monitor  may  be  hushed.  But,  wlien 
nigh,  de  'th  is  sure  to  rouse  it,  if  guilt  lies  heavy  on  the  heart.  Even  the  unbeliever 
cannot  avoid  its  stings,  nor  the  hardened  repid  them.  The  sick-bed  bears  fre(iuent 
witness  to  the  agonies  which  they  inflict  on  the  stricken  reprobate.  Neither  is  the 
Christian  entirely  free  from  them.  The  best  have  much  to  answer  for.  And,  lastly, 
fear  of  punishment  makes  him  an  object  of  dread  to  many.  But  are  there  no  means 
of  diminishing  this  intluence  which  death  possesses  over  us  ?  Christians  have  been 
known  to  meet  death  cheerfallj',  and  for  their  faith  even  court  its  embraces.  In 
Christianity,  then,  we  shall  discover  the  means  of  eniRUcipation  from  this  slavery. 
From  the  gospel  we  shall  obtain  power  to  deprive  death  of  its  sting,  and  the  grave 
of  its  victory.  Are  we  too  enamoured  of  life  ?  Do  we  put  on  it  too  high  a  value? 
Do  we  cling  to  it  with  too  much  tenacity  ?  Let  us  learn  from  the  gospel  to  prize  it 
no  higher  than  its  real  woith.  Surrounded  with  gloomy  pomp,  with  sombre 
trappings,  do  we  regard  deatli  with  superstitious  dread  ?  Let  us  learn  from  the 
gospel  to  strip  it  of  thf  se  adventitious  terrors.  Do  we  fear  death  as  the  tyrant, 
which  separates  us  from  friends  and  relatives — which  entails  loss  of  wealth  and 
honour,  of  titles  and  subslance  ?  Let  us  learn  from  the  gospel  to  estimate  these 
advantages  at  their  real  value — to  consider  them  as  transitory,  mutable,  and 
unsatisfactory.  Do  we  doubt  as  to  the  state  beyond  the  gi'ave?  Is  it  to  us  an 
unknown  country  ?  Or,  known,  do  we  question  our  title  to  its  possession  ?  Let  us 
go  to  the  gospel.  There  life  and  immortality  are  brought  to  lij-'ht.  Is  remorse 
active  ?  Has  conscience  sharpened  its  stings  ?  By  the  gospel,  again,  we  learn 
that  no  case  is  hopeless  while  life  remains ;  that  there  is  balm  for  the  most  wounded 
spirit,  and  that  to  the  prayer  of  repentance  and  faith  no  leqiiest  is  denied.  And 
do  we  dread  the  retril>ution  beyond  the  grave?  Let  us  again  turn  to  the  gospel. 
There  we  shall  find  words  of  hope  and  consolation.  There  we  shall  find  means  of 
escape  from  impending  judgment.  There  we  shall  discover  that  "  witli  the  Lord 
there  is  mercy,  and  with  Him  is  plenteous  redemption."  (Jolin  Biidijen,  M.A.) 
Death  and  the  firare  : — When  tyrants  aie  overthrown  the  nations  of  the  earth 
breathe  freely;  from  prince  to  peasant  all  rejoice,  and  every  heart  is  raised  to 
heaven,  and  hallelujahs  go  up  to  the  throne  of  God,  and  the  Prince  of  P.  ace  is 
blessed  for  biinging  back  h'  pe  to  the  world,  and  driving  fear  from  its  dwellings.  I, 
"  The  sting  of  death  is  sin."  The  shame  and  the  defornjifcy  of  guilt,  the  degradation 
of  a  nature  fallen  from  the  image  of  God,  the  pains  of  remorse — these  are  some  of 
the  forms  in  which  death  stings  the  soul  through  sin;  and  who  that  hiis  seen  the 
terror-stricken  conscience  craving  a  few  more  days  of  life.  II.  But  what  if  death 
cannot  sting  the  soul  in  the  hour  of  its  last  lif.'-trial,  it  can  surely  sting  the  heart. 
"  All  that  a  man  hnth  will  he  give  for  his  life  "  ;  it  is  sad  to  part  with  this.  To 
leave  the  work  of  our  hands  for  others  to  perfect,  to  give  up  our  pleasant  ministry 
and  all  the  rewards  that  went  with  it,  surely  this  is  bitter,  and  herein  at  least  death 
has  for  a  moment  its  victory  and  its  sting.  Such  is  not  the  experience  of  faithful 
hearts,  hearts  which  have  been  taught  that  "  to  live  is  Christ  and  to  die  is  gain  "  ; 
who  have  learnt  that  if  to  abide  in  the  flesh  be  pleasant  for  the  sake  of  those  who 
remain,  to  depart  nnd  be  with  Christ  is  far  better.  III.  Let  it  be  granted,  then,  that 
death  has  no  sting  for  the  soul  of  the  Christian,  nor  can  he  fasten  his  sharp  fangs 
upon  the  heart  which  is  taught  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  But  what  of  the  body  ?  Can 
we  look  upon  that  thin  frame  so  worn  that  the  very  mother  scarcely  knows  her  own 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  537 

child,  and  then  deny  that  death  at  least  enn  torture  the  body  if  it  cannot  torment 
the  soul  of  the  faithful  ?  When  death  laid  his  hand  upon  the  Son  of  God,  and  saw 
His  body,  weary  with  watching  and  worn  out  with  pfrsecauon  and  agony,  sink  under 
the  burthen  of  His  Cross,  and  then  lifted  up  and  nniled  through  His  tender  hands 
and  feet  to  the  tree  He  was  too  weak  to  carry,  He  may  have  cried  in  triumph, 
"Behold,  the  sting  of  death  !  "  And  yet  it  was  tli^t  very  agony  that  enabled  His 
Victim  and  His  Conqueror  to  say  as  He  gave  np  the  j^host,  "  It  is  finished." 
When  the  faithful  heart  is  taught  by  grace  how  glorious  it  is  to  be  made 
partaker  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  that  its  pains  are  not  sent  in  wanton- 
ness, but  to  remind  it  of  its  Redeemer's  power  to  help  and  presence  to  heal, 
that  every  pang  that  waits  on  the  soul's  last  struggle  to  be  free  is  another  step 
towards  the  liberty  it  so  desires,  then  the  sense  of  physical  suffering  is  swallowed 
up  in  the  prospect  of  what  lies  so  nigh.  IV.  But  if  the  sting  of  death  affects  the 
dying  Christian  himself  neither  in  body  nor  in  spirit,  there  are  surviving  hearts 
in  tears  and  deep  sadness.  Here,  tlien,  is  the  stin«  of  death  piercing  the  sotjls 
OF  THE  LIVING,  if  it  has  no  torment  for  tlie  dying.  V.  Death  then  retire's  before  the 
power  of  faith  and  acknowledges  that  its  power  is  gone,  the  sharpness  of  its  sting 
made  void.  But  the  grave  !  there  is  the  victory  ;  tiiere  is  the  curse  carried  out  to 
its  humbling  accomplishment;  "dust  thou  art,  and  to  dust  shalt  thou  return." 
Alns,  how  are  the  mighty  fallen !  huniblrd  indeed  to  the  dust  and  brought  down  to 
the  dwelling  of  the  wm'm  !  0  grave,  great  is  thy  victory,  if  this  be  all  of  what  was 
once  so  great  and  dear  and  beanliful  and  good.  But  is  it  all  ?  What  do  we  read  ? 
"  It  is  sown  in  corruption,  it  is  raised  in  incorruption,"  &g.  (A.  J.  Macleane, 
M.A.)  Victory  over  death  and  the  grace: — Con-ider — I.    The   interrogatory 

OP  THE  APOSTLE.  1.  What  is  the  sting  of  death?  (1)  The  sting  of  natural 
fear.  The  feeUng  is  one  common  to  all  nations.  Our  very  nature  chills  at 
the  thought  of  it.  (2)  But  the  manner  of  death  is  a  part  of  the  sting,  and  many 
consequently  are  afraid  of  their  supports  failing  them  in  the  last  encounter — their 
mind's  decay,  their  adversary's  concentrated  strength  and  malice.  (3)  To  the  apostle, 
however,  the  sting  of  death  lay  in  its  retributive  character.  Hence,  when  men  are 
afraid  of  death,  it  is  not  so  much  nature  trembling  at  what  she  mav  liave  to  suffer, 
as  conscience  affrighted  at  the  jjenalties  it  feel^  to  deserve.  W^e  call  deatli  the  king 
of  terrors,  and  that  which  makes  him  so,  which  makes  his  reign  terrible,  his  night 
gloomy,  Ids  valley  dark,  is  the  implanted  feeling  of  our  nature  that  he  is  the  com- 
missioned mnglstrate  of  heaven  come  to  reckon  with  us  for  our  sins.  "  The  wages 
of  sin  is  death."  2.  But  our  text  assumes  these  wages  to  have  been  paid,  and  this 
king  of  terrors  to  have  been  disarmed.  Now,  this  change  in  the  moral  aspect  and 
attributes  of  death,  whilst  as  an  endured  penalty  it  must  remain,  is  effected  by 
Christ — (1)  As  the  destroyer  of  death  by  the  Cross.  TIjc  lordship  of  death  stands 
in  this,  that  he  is  the  executioner  and  instrument  of  the  law  of  God  which  man 
has  broken.  But  Christ  satisfied,  discharged,  magnified  this  law,  and  thus  van- 
quished the  death  which  had  its  strange  behests  to  do.  And  now  this  minister  of 
justice  lacks  his  authority.  There  is  no  judjxe  to  deliver  us  to  the  officer.  "  Tliere 
is  no  condemnation  to  them  that  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  "  Who  is  he  that  con- 
demneth?  it  is  Christ  that  died."  "0  death,  where  is  now  thy  sting?"  (2)  As 
the  Lord  of  the  invisible  world.  "0  crave,  where  is  thy  victory?  "  Seeing  that 
beyond  the  third  day  the  soul  of  Christ  was  not  left  in  the  grave,  neither  did  His 
flesh  see  corruption  ?  Yet  not  for  Plimself  did  Christ  obtain  this  victory.  It  was 
rather  in  order  to  an  exhibited  demonstration  of  His  sovereignty  over  the  mansions 
of  the  dead,  a  comforting  assurance  to  those  who  were  about  to  walk  through  the 
dark  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death  that  they  need  fear  no  evil.     II.   Seeing,  then, 

WE  HAVE  SUCH  A  HOPE  IN  THE  PROSPECT  OF  DEATH,  "  LET  NOT  YOUR  HEART  BE 

teourled,  Ni'iTHER  LET  IT  BE  AFRAID."  1.  It  may  be  a  part  of  the  sting  of  death 
to  think  that  thereby  thine  eyes  must  close  eternally  on  the  things  of  this  present 
world;  but  if  "  blessed  are  tlie  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord,  for  they  rest  from  their 
labours,  and  their  works  do  follow  tlitm,"  O  death,  where  is  that  sting?  2.  It  may 
be  a  part  of  the  sting  of  death  to  think  of  the  friends  you  must  leave  behind  yuu  ; 
but  if,  besides  re-union  with  these  friends,  we  are  to  have  converse  with  the 
Eedeemer,  with  angels,  what  becomes  of  that  sting?  3.  It  may  be  a  part  of  the 
sting  of  death  that  your  children  will  be  fatherless  and  your  wife  a  widow;  yet  if 
He  is  faithful  that  promises,  "Leave  the  fatherhss  children,  I  will  preserve  them 
alive;  and  let  thy  widows  trust  in  Me,"  then  what  becomes  of  that  sting?  (D. 
Moore,  M.A.)  The  last  trivviphavt  conflict : — I.  Its  bitterness.     1.  Death  has 

a  sting.     2.  The  grave  a  victory.     II.  Its  issue.     1.  The  sting  drawn.     2.  The 


538  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

victory  reversed.  IIT.  Its  certainty  skcored  to  every  believer.  1.  Through 
Christ.     2.  In  the  hope  of  the  resurrection.     (J.  Lyth,  B.D.)  The  sting  of 

death  is  sin ;  and  the  strength  of  sin  is  the  law.  But  thanks  be  to  God,  which 
giveth  us  the  victory  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. — Dmitli : — I.  lis  sting. 
Sin  occasions  the  pangs  of — 1.  Separation.  2.  Conscience.  3.  Fear  at  the  pros- 
pect of  meeting  God.  4.  Apprehension  in  the  tliought  of  judgment.  II.  Its 
POWER.  Derived  from  the  law,  because — 1.  It  announces  tlie  penalty  of  sin.  2. 
Manifests  the  evil  of  sin.  3.  Enforces  the  punishment  of  sin  and  perpetuates  it. 
III.  Its  DEFEAT.  1.  Through  Christ.  2.  Achieved  by  every  believer.  (Ibid.) 
Death : — I.  Unveiled.  It  derives — 1.  Its  power  from  actual  sin.  2.  Its  terrors 
from  conscious  sin.  II.  Conquered.  1.  Clirist  takes  away  its  power.  2.  Faith 
takes  away  its  terrors.     (Ihid.)  Death  and  fear  : — When  Sir  Henry  Vane  was 

eondeuined  and  awaiting  execution,  a  friend  spoke  of  prayer,  that  for  the  present 
the  cup  of  death  might  be  averted.  "Why  should  we  fear  death  ?"  answered 
Vane.  "  I  find  it  rather  shrinks  from  me  than  I  from  it."  (Little's  Historical 
Lights.)  No  fear  of  death  : — Among  the  few  remains  of  Sir  John  Franklm  that 
were  found  far  up  in  the  Polar  regions  there  was  a  leaf  of  the  "  Student's  Manual," 
by  Dr.  John  Todd — the  only  relic  of  a  book.  From  the  way  in  which  the  leaf  was 
turned  down,  the  following  portion  of  a  dialogue  was  prominent:  "Are  you  not 
afraid  to  die  ?  "  "No."  "No!  Why  does  the  uncertamty  of  another  state  give 
you  no  Concern?  "  "Because  God  has  said  to  me,  'Fear  not.  Wlien  tliou  passest 
through  the  waters  I  will  be  with  thee ;  and  through  the  rivers,  they  shall  not 
overfiow  thee.' "  This  leaf  is  preserved  in  the  Museum  of  Greenwich  Hospital, 
among  the  relics  of  Sir  John  Franklin.  Sting  of  death  .-—As  his  (Simeon's)  drew 

near,  he  broke  out,  "  It  is  said,  '  O  death,  where  is  thy  sting?  '  "  Then,  looking 
at  us  as  we  stood  round  his  bed,  he  askeil,  in  his  own  peculiarly  iiiijDressive 
manner,  "  Do  you  see  any  sting  here?  "  (Life  of  Simeon.)  ^  The  sting  of  death 
is  sin: — That  is,  death  would  have  no  power  to  injure  us  if  it  were  not  for  sin. 
This  is  true  for  two  reasons.  1.  Because  if  there  were  no  sin  there  would  be  no 
death.  De  ith  is  by  sin  (Rom.  v.  12).  2.  Because  sin  gives  death,  when  it  has 
been  introduced,  all  its  terrors.  If  sin  be  pardoned,  death  is  harmless.  It  can 
inflict  no  evil.  It  becomes  a  mere  transition  from  a  lower  to  a  higher  state. 
(C.  Hodges,  D.D.)  The  sting  of  death  is  sin  : — I.  There  is  a  sting  in  di5ath. 

1.  That  there  is  such  a  sting  in  death  appears  from — (1)  The  horrors  of  wicked 
m.en  when  they  come  to  die.  (2)  The  unwillingness,  even  of  the  dearest  of  God's 
children,  to  undergo  this  last,  rude,  and  violent  shock  of  death.  (3)  The  attitude 
of  Christ  towards  it  (Matt.  xxvi.  39).  2.  What  there  is  in  death  that  should  make 
its  sting  so  sharp  and  poignant,  and  cause  such  a  natural  antipathy  against  it  in 
us?  (1)  The  harbingers,  which  go  before  it,  to  prepare  its  way — languishing 
diseases,  racking  pains,  &c.  (2)  Its  annihilation  of  all  the  comforts  and  enjoy- 
ments of  life.  (3)  The  separation  of  those  dear  companions,  the  soul  and  body. 
(4)  The  consideration  of  those  dishonours  and  disgraces  which  shall  befall  the  body 
upon  this  separation.  (5)  The  deliverance  over  into  eternity,  whicli  we  have 
deserved,  should  be  infinitely  miserable  to  us.  II.  The  sting  of  death  is  sin. 
1.  It  was  only  sin  that  brought  death  into  the  world  (Rom.  v.  12).  2.  Death 
received  its  terrors  from  sin  (Heb.  ii.  15).  Conclusion  :  If  sin  be  the  sting  of  death 
—1.  Let  us  beware  that  we  add  not  more  poison  to  this  sting.  2.  Then  the  only 
way  to  disarm  death  is  by  cleansing  thyself  from  sin.  3.  How  unspeakably  happy  are 
those  to  whom  the  s  ling  of  death  is  taken  out  by  the  death  of  Christ !  (E.Hopkins,  D.D.) 
The  sting  of  death  : — A  slight  acquaintance  with  man  will  convince  us  of  the  truth 
of  two  propositions.  1.  That  every  man  is  labouring  to  obtain  some  object.  2. 
That  according  to  the  intensity  of  the  interest  he  feels  in  the  object  will  be  his 
delight  in  pursuing  it.  The  merchant  is  looking  onward  to  retirement  from 
business.  The  same  principle  actuates  the  warrior  on  the  battle-field.  His  object 
is  military  glory,  a  name  in  the  annals  of  fame,  the  applause  of  the  brave.  You 
have  an  object  before  you — a  happy  dying  hour — rest  alter  the  storms  of  life  are 
past.  That  is  the  object  before  jou  ;  and,  if  you  would  secure  it,  you  must  get  rid 
of  the  sting  of  death,  you  must  go  on  to  perfection.  We  lay  down,  then,  for  our 
discussion,  one  proposition — tbat,  it  a  hajpi^y  and  triumphant  death-bed  be  desir- 
able, and  if  a  gloomy  and  miserable  death- bed  is  to  be  deprecated,  then  go  on  to 
perfection.  We  do  not  mean  to  dwell  upon  the  nature  of  Christian  peifection,  but 
simply  upon  the  results  of  perfection  upon  a  dying  hour.  •  How  solemn  is  life's  last 
hour!  The  journey  is  ended,  the  immortal  candidate  is  on  life's  last  shore. 
Memory  retouches  all  the  past,  and  in  a  few  minutes  he  seems  to  live  the  whole  of 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  539 

life  over  again.  Here  the  soul  seems  to  say  to  the  body,  "  We  have  been  com- 
panions long,  we  have  travelltd  together  life's  rough  road,  but  now  home  is  in 
view.  The  spirit  has  now  launched  into  eternity;  it  has  c  nimenced  its  upward 
flight ;  the  earth,  like  a  little  dark  spot,  grows  less  and  less  ;  heaven  opens  upon 
the  vision.  There  is  nothing  in  heaven  or  earth  can  give  a  ray  of  light  to  an 
expiring  infidel.  How  are  we  to  account  for  these  gloomy  death-bed  scenes  among 
professors  of  religion  ?  I  answer — First,  a  want  of  regeneration  ;  many  of  them 
have  never  been  bom  again.  Secondly,  backsliding.  •'  I  was  converted,"  says  one  ;, 
••I  could  tell  the  time  and  place  of  my  conversion."  Ah  !  but  you  are  a  backslider 
now.  Thirdly,  remaining  depravity.  Can  you  say,  I  have  been  free  from  the 
slightest  touch  of  sin  since  I  believed  ?  I  don't  think  one  of  you  can  say  so  !  The 
remains  of  sin  in  the  heart  sre  like  powder  ;  and  only  let  a  spark  fall  into  it,  and 
there  will  be  an  explosion.  There  has  been  powder  enough  in  our  heai  ts,  and  this 
■world  is  full  of  sparks.  One  is  saying,  "  I  contracted  an  unsuitable  marriage  ;  I 
•was  unequally  yoked,  and  all  has  been  wrong  ever  since."  Another  is  saying,  "  I 
formed  an  improper  connection  in  business."  "  I,"  says  another,  "  fell — gave  way 
to  bad  tempers,  angry  passions  ;  and,  oh !  there  are  a  thousand  witnesses  in  ray 
own  breast."  Conscience  bears  witness — loud,  distinct,  and  clear;  but  God  has 
brought  the  wanderer  back — back  to  the  throne  of  grace.  If  you  harbour  and 
indnlge  these  enemies  of  God  in  your  heart,  what  kind  of  a  death  will  you  have? 
Only  get  this  sting  removed,  and  your  na'ure  purified,  and  then  you  will  liave  a 
happy  death-bed.  Bless  God,  you  may  start  for  glory,  and  never  strike  a  rock ! 
See  !  see  that  vessel  leaving  the  port  of  Liverpool.  She  p\sses  the  pier-head  ;  she 
jostles  her  way  through  the  crowd  of  shijiping  that  obstructs  her  passage  ;  she 
clears  every  dangerous  point ;  she  escapes  the  sandbanks  that  lie  concealed  under 
the  waters  ;  she  gets  fairly  out  on  the  ocean  ;  by  and  by  she  gets  an  overhaul,  and 
all's  right.  Every  inch  of  canvas  is  now  crowded  on,  and  on  she  bound?;  before 
the  breeze.  At  length  the  shout,  "  Land  ahead  !  "  is  heard ;  she  heaves  in  sight  of 
port ;  she  reaches  it.  As  the  captain  steps  ashore  his  friends  hail  him  with  spark- 
ling eyes,  "  Well,  captain,  what  sort  of  a  voyage?"  "Oh,  capital;  'tis  true  we 
have  had  a  few  tremendous  gales,  but  we  have  never  split  a  sail,  snapped  a  rope,  or 
lost  a  spar;  and  here  we  are  safe  in  harbour !  "  "  Well,  captain,  we  congratulate 
you  on  your  voyage."  Glory  to  God  !  you  may  yet  get  sate  out  of  harbour,  clear 
every  rock,  and  pass,  full  sail,  into  the  port  of  glory,  amidst  the  congratulations  of 
the  iieiivenly  host.  "My  grace  is  sulFicient  for  you."  If  you  would  have  a  happy 
death,  go  on  to  perfection.  A  holy  Christian  will  have  a  happy  death  ;  this  is  the 
rule ;  I  know  there  are  exceptions  to  every  rule,  and  there  are  exceptions  to  this. 
(J.    Cavfjhey.)  The   strength    of   sin    is    the    laio  .-—This  must  be   the    law 

of  God  in  its  widest  sense ;  not  the  Mosaic  law,  which  would  make  the 
declaration  amount  to  nothing.  The  law  is  the  strength  of  sin,  because— 
L  Without  law  there  would  be  no  sin  (Rom.  iv.  15).  The  very  idea  of  sin 
is  want  of  conformity  on  the  part  of  moral  creature-  to  the  law  of  God.  If  there 
be  no  standard  to  which  we  are  bound  to  be  conformed,  there  can  be  no  such 
thing  as  want  of  conformity.  Sin  is  the  correlative,  not  of  reason,  nor  of  expe- 
diency, but  of  law.  If  you  take  away  law,  men  may  act  unreasonably,  or  in  a 
way  injurious  to  themselves  or  others,  but  they  cannot  sin.  II.  If  theke  be  no 
LAW  THERE  CAN  BE  NO  coNiiEMNATioN.  Sin  is  uot  imputed  where  there  is  no  law 
(Rom.  V.  13).     III.  The  law  not  only  reveals  and  condemns  sin,  but  exaspehates 

AND   excites   it,    AND    THUS    GIVES   IT    STRENGTH  (Rom.   vli.  8-12).       (C.   HoiUje,  D.D.) 

The  strength  of  sin  is  the  law  .•-*^The  law— I.  Discovers  sin,  and  makes  it  appear 
in  its  own  colours ;  the  more  light  and  knowledge  of  the  law,  the  more  sense  of  sin, 
as  in  transparent  vt  ssels  dregs  are  soon  discerned  (Rom.  vii.  9).  When  by  a  sound 
conviction  disguises  are  taken  off  from  the  conscience,  we  find  sin  to  be  sin  indeed. 
Paul  was  alive  before— that  is,  in  his  own  hopes — as  many  a  stupid  soul  makes  full 
account  he  shall  go  to  heaven,  till  conscience  he  opened,  and  then  they  find  them- 
selves in  the  mouih  of  death  and  hell.  II.  Gives  strkngth  to  sin  in  regard  of 
THE  OBLiGAiioN  OF  IT;  it  bindeth  over  a  sinner  to  the  curse  and  wrath  of  God. 
God  has  made  a  righteous  law,  which  must  have  satisfaction  ;  and  till  the  lav.^  be 
satisfied,  we  hf^ar  no  news  but  of  a  curse,  and  that  makes  death  to  be  full  of  horrors 
(Heb.  x.  27).  III.  Augments  and  inchkases  sin  by  forbidding  it;  lusts  are  exas- 
perated and  rage  upon  a  restraint,  as  the  yoke  makes  the  young  bullock  rnore 
unruly.  Now,  put  all  together,  and  you  will  unden-tand  the  force  of  the  expression, 
"The  strength  of  sin  is  the  law."  The  discovery  of  tbe  law  stops  the  sinner's 
mouth,  and  the  curse  of  the  law  siiuts  him  up,  and  holds  him  fast  unto  the  judg- 


540  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

ment  of  the  great  day,  by  which  restraint  sin  grows  the  more  raging  and  furious  ; 
all  which,  put  together,  ujal^e  death  terrible  ;  not  an  end  of  misery,  but  a  door  to 
open  into  hell.  (2'.  Manton,  D.D.)  'The  laio  is  the  slrenqfh  of  sin  : — 1.  Any  man 
who  tbinks  or  feels  at  all  about  i-in  knows  that  it  is  the  strongest  principle  witbin 
him.  Plis  will  is  adequate  for  all  other  undertakings,  but  it  tails  the  moment  it 
attempts  to  conquer  and  subdue  itself.  The  experience  of  the  Christian  likewise 
demonstrates  that  sin  is  the  most  powerful  antHgonist  that  man  has  to  contend 
with.  Nay,  more,  this  heat  and  stress  of  tlie  Christian  race  and  fight  evinces  that 
man  must  be  "  strong  in  the  Lord  "  in  order  to  overcame  sin.  2.  The  cause  of 
this  mighty  strength  of  sin  is  the  law  of  God.  By  the  law  is  meant  the  sum  of  all 
that  a  rational  being  ought  to  do,  under  all  circumstances  and  at  all  times.  It  is 
equivalent  to  duty,  and  includes  all  that  is  implied  in  the  word  "  right,"  and 
excludes  all  that  we  mean  by  "  wrong."  At  first  sight  it  appears  strange  that  this 
should  be  said  to  be  the  strength  of  sin.  Yet  such  is  the  assertion  here  and  in 
Eom.  vii.  8,  9,  11  ;  and  we  cannot  understand  these  statements  unless  we  take 
into  view  the  difference  in  the  relation  which  a  holy  and  a  sinful  being  respectively 
sustains  to  the  moral  law.  St.  Paul  means  that  tbe  law  is  the  strength  of  sin  for 
a  sinner.  For  the  saint,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  the  strength  of  holiness.  In  a  holy 
being,  the  law  of  righteousness  is  an  inward  and  actuating  principle;  but  for  a 
sinful  being  it  is  only  an  outward  rule.  Law  does  not  work  pleasantly  witbin  the 
sinner,  but  stiinds  stern  outside  of  and  over  him,  commandmg  and  threatening. 
If  he  attempts  to  obey  it,  he  does  so  from  fear  or  self-interest,  and  not  from  the  love  of 
it.  Tlie  "law  of  sin"  is  the  sole  inward  principle  that  rules  him,  and  his  service 
of  sin  is  spontaneous  and  willing.  3.  Hence  the  Scriptures  describe  regeneration 
as  the  inwardising  of  tbe  moral  law  (Jer.  xxxi.  33).  To  regenerHte  a  man  is  to 
convert  duty  into  inclination,  so  that  the  man  shall  know  no  difference  between 
the  commands  of  Gud  and  the  desires  of  his  own  heart.  The  two  principles,  or 
"laws,"  of  holiness  and  sin,  in  order  to  have  efficiency,  must  be  within  the  heart 
and  will.  They  a^e  like  the  great  fruitful  laws  that  work  and  weave  in  the  world 
of  nature.  All  these  laws  start  from  within  and  work  outward.  The  law  of  holi- 
ness cannot  bear  fruit  until  it  ceases  to  be  external  and  thrcHtening,  and  becomes 
internal  and  complacent.  So  long  as  the  law  of  God  is  a  letter  on  the  statute- 
book  of  the  constuenee,  but  not  in  the  fleshy  tablet  of  the  heart,  so  long  must  it  be 
inoperative,  except  in  the  way  of  death  and  misery.  This  righteous  law,  then,  is 
*'  the  strength  of  sin  "  in  us,  so  long  as  it  merely  weighs  down  with  a  mountain's 
weight  upon  our  enslaved  wills,  so  long  as  it  merely  holds  a  whip  over  our  opposing 
inclination,  and  lashes  it  into  anger  and  resistance.  How  can  there  be  any  moral 
growth  in  the  midst  of  such  a  hatred  and  hostility  between  the  human  heart  and 
the  moral  law  ?  Flowers  and  fruits  cannot  grow  on  a  batt'e-field.  As  well  might 
we  suppose  that  the  vegetation  which  now  constitutes  the  coal-beds  grew  up  in  that 
geological  era  when  fire  and  water  were  contending  for  possession  of  the  planet,  as 
to  suppose  that  the  fruits  of  holiness  can  spring  up  when  the  human  will  is  in 
obstinate  and  deadly  conflict  with  the  human  conscience.  So  long  as  the  law 
sustains  this  extraneous  relation  to  the  heart  and  will — I.  There  is  no  genuine 
OBEDIENCE.  1.  For  genuine  obedience  is  voluntai-y,  cheerful,  and  spontaneous. 
The  child  does  not  truly  obey  its  parent  when  it  performs  an  outward  act,  outwardly 
insisted  upon  by  its  superior,  from  no  inward  genial  impulse,  but  solely  from  the 
force  of  fear.  Here  lies  the  difference  between  a  moral  and  a  religious  man.  The 
moralist  attempts,  from  considerations  of  prudence,  fear,  and  self-interest,  to 
externally  obey  the  external  law.  It  is  not  a  law  that  he  loves,  but  one  which  he 
would  keep  because  of  the  penalty  attached  to  it.  And  yet,  after  all  his  attempts 
at  obedience,  he  is  conscious  of  utter  failure.  But  the  renewed  and  sanctified  man 
*' obeys  from  the  heart  the  form  of  doctrine  that  is  delivered  "  unto  him.  The 
Holy  Spirit  has  inwardised  it.  He  acts  naturally,  he  acts  holily,  and  when  he  sins 
he  is  uneasy,  because  sin  is  unnatural  to  a  renewed  heart.  2.  Eveiything  that  is 
genuine,  spontaneous,  and  volnntitry  wears  the  garb  of  grace  and  beauty;  while 
that  which  is  false,  pretended,  and  constrained  has  the  look  of  deformity.  We 
admire  the  living  plant,  but  we  turn  away  from  the  artificial  flower.  So  is  it  with 
the  appearance  which  the  moralist  and  the  believer  respectively  presents.  The  one 
is  rigiil,  hard,  and  formal;  he  rather  endures  his  religion  than  enjoys  it.  The 
other  is  free,  cheerful,  pliant ;  the  Son  hath  made  him  free,  and  he  is  free  indeed. 
3.  Another  criterion  of  genuine  obedience  is  love.  But  so  long  as  the  law  sustains 
this  extraneous  and  hostile  relation  to  the  heart  and  will,  there  is  no  love  of  it  or 
its  Author.     No  man  can  have  a  cordial  affection  for  it  until  it  becomes  the  inward 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  541 

and  actuating  principle,  the  real  inclination  of  his  will.  Yet  the  law  overhangs  him 
all  this  while ;  and  since  it  cannot  produce  the  fruits  of  peace  and  holiness,  it  betakes 
itself  to  its  other  function,  and  elicits  his  corruption,  and  exasperates  liis  depravity. 
II.  Obedience  is  impossible.  1.  For  the  law  is  entirely  outside  the  executive 
faculty.  It  is  in  the  conscience,  but  not  iu  the  heart.  It  consequently  gives 
no  impulse  and  aid  to  right  action.  The  law  sternly  tells  the  man  that  by  his 
own  determination  and  fault  he  is  "  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,"  and  condemns 
him  therefor ;  but  so  long  as  it  is  merely  didactic  and  comminatory,  and  not  impul- 
sive and  indwelling,  he  derives  from  it  none  of  that  strength  which  empowers  to 
righteousness.  2.  But  in  the  Christian,  the  law  of  holiness,  by  virtue  of  his 
regeneration  and  union  with  Ciirist,  has  become  inward,  spontaneous,  and  volun- 
tary. It  is  no  longer  a  mere  fiery  letter  in  his  conscience,  giving  him  knowledge 
of  his  sinfulness,  and  distressing  him  therefor ;  but  it  is  a  glowing  and  genial 
impulse  in  his  heart.  His  duty  is  now  his  inclination,  and  his  now  holy  inclina- 
tion is  his  duty.  Conclusion:  This  subject  shows — 1.  That  it  is  an  immense 
work  to  make  such  an  entire  change  and  reversal  in  the  relations  that  now  exist 
between  man's  will  and  the  Divine  law.  The  problem  is,  to  transmute  the  law  of 
God  into  the  very  inclination  of  a  man,  so  that  the  two  shall  be  one  and  the  same 
tiling  in  the  personal  experience,  and  the  man  shall  know  no  difference  between 
the  dictates  of  his  conscience  and  the  desires  of  his  heart.  2.  It  is  the  work  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  It  is  the  result  of  God's  "working  in  man  to  will  and  to  do."  {Prof. 
Sliedd.)  ^  Thoughts  on  the  last  battle  : — I.  The  sting  of  death.  1.  Sin  brought  death 
into  the  world.  Men  could  be  more  content  to  die  if  they  did  not  know  it  was  a 
punishment.  "  In  Adam  all  die."  By  his  sin  everyone  of  us  become  subject  to  the 
penalty  of  death.  2.  That  which  shall  make  death  most  terrible  to  man  will  be 
sin,  if  it  is  not  firpiven.  Consider  a  man  dying,  and  looking  back  on  his  past  life. 
To  feel  remorse  is  to  have  eternal  torment  commenced  within  the  soul.  'S.  But  if 
sin  in  the  retrospect  be  the  stmg  of  death,  what  must  sin  in  the  prospect  be?  The 
moment  we  die  the  voice  of  justice  cries,  "  Seal  up  the  fountain  of  forgiveness:  he 
that  is  holy  let  him  be  holy  still ;  he  that  is  filthy  let  him  be  filthy  still."  The 
hour  of  death  is  like  that  celebrated  picture  of  Perseus  holding  up  the  head  of 
Medusa.  That  head  turned  all  persons  into  stone  who  looked  upon  it.  What  I 
am  when  death  is  held  before  me,  tliat  I  must  be  for  ever.  II.  The  strength  of 
SIN  IS  THE  LAW.  Most  men  think  that  sin  has  no  strength  at  all.  "Oh,"  say 
many,  "we  mny  have  sinned  very  much,  but  we  will  repent,  and  we  will  be  better  ; 
God  is  merciful,  and  He  will  forgive  us."  The  strength  of  sin  is  the  law  in  that — 
1.  The  law  being  spiritual,  it  is  quite  impossible  for  us  to  live  without  sin.  It  is 
not  merely  the  act,  it  is  the  thought ;  it  is  not  the  deed  simply,  it  is  the  very 
imagination,  that  is  a  sin.  Oh,  now,  sinner,  how  canst  thou  get  rid  of  sin?  Thy 
very  thoughts  are  crimes.  Is  there  not,  now,  strength  in  sin?  Hath  not  the  law 
nerved  sin  with  such  a  power  that  all  thy  strength  cannot  hope  to  wipe  away  thy 
transgrehsi~in?  2.  It  will  not  abate  one  tittle  of  its  stern  demands.  It  says  to 
every  man  who  breaks  it,  "  I  will  not  forgive  you."  You  hear  persons  talk  about 
God's  mercy.  Now,  if  they  do  not  believe  in  the  gospel  they  must  be  under  the 
law  ;  but  where  in  the  law  do  we  read  of  mercy  ?  The  law  thunders  out,  without 
the  slightest  mitii^ation,  "  The  soul  that  sinneth  it  shall  die."  If  any  of  you  desire 
to  be  saved  by  works,  remember,  one  sin  will  spoil  your  righteousness.  3.  For 
every  trans^^ression  it  will  exact  a  punishment.  The  law  never  remits  a  farthing 
of  debt.  Now,  if  ye  consider  all  this,  are  you  prepared  to  take  away  the  sting  of 
death  in  your  own  peisons?  If  you  think  so,  go,  0  foolish  one,  go,  twist  thy  rope 
of  sand;  go,  build  a  pyramid  of  air;  but  know  it  will  be  a  dream  with  an  awful 
awakening.  III.  The  victoky  of  faith.  Christ  has  taken  away  the  strength  of 
sin.  1.  He  ha«  removed  the  law.  We  are  not  under  bondage,  but  under  grace. 
The  principle  that  I  must  do  a  thing — that  is  to  say,  the  principle  of  law,  "  do,  or 
be  punished,  or  be  rewarded,"  is  not  the  motive  of  the  ChristiMn's  life  ;  his  principle 
is,  "  God  hrts  done  so  much  for  m^,  what  ought  I  to  do  for  Him  ?  "  2.  He  has  com- 
pletely sa'i  fieil  it.     The  law  di  m  nds  a  perfect  righteousness  ;  Christ  says,  "  Law, 

.  thou  hast  it :  find  fault  with  Me  ;  i.  am  ttie  sinner's  substitute."  "  Who  shall  now  lay 
anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  ? "  Now  the  law  is  satisfied,  sin  is  gone  ;  and 
now  surely  we  need  not  fear  the  sting  of  the  dragon.  (C  H.  Simrgeon.)  The 
victory  : — I.  Thk  victory.  Victory  supposes  warfare,  and  warfare  enemies.  Let  us 
mention  a  few  of  these.     1.  Sin.    This  is  the  cause  of  all  the  rest,  but  the  name  of 

■  Jesus  was  given  to  the  Saviour  because  He  was  to  save  His  people  from  their  sins. 
His  people  consider  sin  as  their  chief  enemy,  and  they  rejoice  that  their  Saviour 


649  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

gave  Himself  for  them  "  to  redeem  tliem  from  all  iniquity,"  &c.  Let  us  examine 
this  victory.  Sin,  even  now,  is  to  be  fnund  in  a  believer ;  but  though  sin  lives  in 
him,  he  does  not  live  in  sin,  aid  though  sin  be  not  destroyed  in  him,  it  is  dethroned 
in  him.  There  is  as  much  diffeieiice  between  sin  found  in  a  Christian,  and  sin 
found  in  a  natural  man,  as  theie  is  between  poison  found  in  a  serpent,  and  found 
in  a  man.  Poison  is  found  in  a  serpent,  but  it  does  him  no  injury — Why?  Because 
it  is  natural  to  him,  it  is  a  part  of  his  system  ;  but  poison  in  a  man  makes  him 
sick,  it  is  no  part  of  bis  nature.  2.  The  world.  Our  vSaviour  said  to  His  disciples, 
"  Be  of  good  cheer  ;  I  have  overcome  the  world."  But  what  is  this  victory  ?  It  is 
not  fleeing  from  the  world — fleeing  is  not  fighting — but  it  is  your  abiding  in  the 
calling  in  which  you  are  placed  by  God  ;  discharging  with  diligence  and  zeal  the 
duties  pertaining  to  it ;  resi-ting  the  temptations  belonging  to  it ;  and  using  all 
the  oppoitunities  it  affords  to  do  good.  The  man  who  thus  lives  overcomes  the 
world.  "Who  is  he  that  overcometh  the  world?"  &c.  3.  Satan.  "I  will  put 
enmity  between  thee  and  the  woman,"  &c.  "  For  this  purpose,  therefore,  was  the 
Son  of  God  manifested,  that  He  might  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil."  But  you 
Bay,  Did  He  not  fall  in  the  struggle  ?  True,  but  it  was  in  falling  that  He  conquered. 
"  He  spoiled  principalities  and  powers,"  &c.  "  And  because  the  children  are  par- 
takers of  flesh  and  blood.  He  also  Himself  likewise  took  part  of  the  same,"  &c. 
4'.  Death  and  the  grave.  He  ceitainly  conquers  death — (1)  Who  is  not  and  cannot 
be  injured  by  it,  and  to  whom  it  is  therefore  expressly  harmless.  This  is  the  case 
with  every  Christian.  Death  stung  once,  and  a  dreadful  sting  it  was ;  it  stung  our 
Surety,  who  took  our  plaoe  for  us  ;  but  it  left  its  sting  in  Him,  so  that  there  is 
none  for  the  Christian.  (2)  Who  will  be  improved  by  it.  The  Christian  rises  with 
a  better  body  than  he  laid  down.  (3)  Who  will  rise  above  the  apprehension  of  it 
(2  Cor.  V.  1).  II.  The  acqpisition.  In  other  cases  winning  a  victory  is  gaining  a 
victory,  but  here — 1.  It  is  given.  It  is  true  we  gain  it ;  but  He  gives  it.  It  is  true 
we  fight ;  but  it  is  He  causes  us  to  triumj^h.  He  not  only  furnishes  the  crown,  but 
He  also  gives  us  the  capacity  by  which  we  acquire  it.  2.  It  is  dispensed  thioi^gh 
the  mediation  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  From  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  our  salvation, 
the  propriety,  expediency,  necessity  of  Jesus  as  a  mediator  is  not  for  one  moment 
left  out.  "  He  is  all  in  all."  3.  It  is  gradually  exemplified  and  accomplished.  It 
is  not  said  that  He  will  give,  though  this  is  true,  for  it  is  already  jjromised  ;  nor 
that  He  has  given  us  the  victory,  though  this  is  true,  for  that  is  already  promised  ; 
but  He  giveth  us  the  victory  ;  and  this  is  true  because  it  is  gradually  confiriued  and 
experienced.  III.  The  gbatitdde.  If  you  feel  gratitude  to  your  fellow-creatures 
for  iheir  favours,  surelv  you  will  not  forget  the  boon  of  your  salvation.  There  is 
nothing  perhaps  so  vile  as  ingratitisde.  But  how  are  we  to  express  our  thanks- 
givings? Gratitude  consists  in  the  return  of  a  benefit  received,  and  though  we 
cannot  make  an  adequate  return,  yet  we  may  make  a  suitable  return.  "  Thanks- 
giving," sRys  Philip  Henry,  "  is  good,  but  thanksliving  is  much  better."  Tne  best 
way  in  which  a  scholar  can  testify  the  honour  of  his  tutor  is  by  his  proficiency. 
And  our  Saviour  says,  "  Herein  is  My  Father  glorifi^  d  that  ye  bear  mucb  fruit." 
As  a  stimulus  to  gratitude.  1.  Dwell  upon  the  blessings  themselves.  2.  Get  an 
increasing  sense  of  your  own  unwortliiness.  3.  Get  an  assurance  of  your  own 
interest  in  the  blessedness  of  the  Lord.  [W.  Jay.)  '  Our  victory  : — I.  Over  sin. 
1.  The  great  fnult  and  peril  of  sin  is  not  so  prominent  as  it  was.  Is  there  not  too 
often  the  sanguine  expectation  that  the  disease  will  be  cured  by  external  remedies? 
You  persuade,  for  instance,  the  drunkard  to  take  the  pledge,  but  you  have  not 
changed  his  heart.  You  destroy  the  rookery,  and  build  the  model  lodging-house, 
but  you  have  not  destroyed  the  fascinations  of  crime.  Unless  we  deal  with  sin,  all 
our  attempts  at  reformation  will  be  in  vain ;  the  malady  lies  too  deej)  for  our 
supeificial  ap)ilications.  2.  The  gospel  d' es  not  palliate  sin;  on  the  contrary,  it 
drags  off  its  disguises,  and  reveals  it  in  its  naked  def'  rmity.  It  shows  sin  to  be  a 
perversion  of  the  moial  being;  it  is  the  alienation  of  the  heart  from  the  love,  the 
alienation  of  the  will  from  the  law  of  God;  it  is  rebellion;  it  is  that  which  God  hates; 
it  is  that  wl  ich  must  be  put  away  before  man  can  enter  into  fellowship  with  God. 
The  gospel  alone  dares  to  reveal  sin,  because  it  gives  us  the  power  to  conqner  it. 
(1)  In  presenting  to  us  a  perfect  life  it  shows  us  what  human  nature  is  capable  of, 
and  its  present  degradation.  It  first  reveals  sin  in  plncing  it  in  the  full  light  of  the 
Divine  example,  and  seci'ndly,  in  the  ligh^  of  the  Cross  it  condemns  sin.  Jt  shows 
it  there  in  all  its  iniquity  which  only  the  blessed  blood  of  the  spotless  victim  can 
temove.  (2)  But  if  Christ  had  only  been  this.  He  would  not  have  been  our  Saviour 
(ver.  17).     If  He  had  only  died,  then  death  had  the  mastery  over  Him ;  we  must 


CHAP,  xv.l  I.  CORINTHIANS.  543 

be  still  crushed  under  the  burden  of  sin,  for  we  have  no  atonement ;  there  is  no 
righteousness  in  which  we  can  be  clothed  ;  we  cannot  be  partakers  of  a  new  life, 
since  there  is  no  source  of  life  for  us.  "  But  now  is  Christ  risen  from  the  dead  "  ; 
and  in  the  power  of  this  resurrection  we  have  the  victory  over  sin.  God,  in  raising 
Him  from  ihe  dead,  lias  not  only  proclnimed  that  He  has  accepted  the  propitiation, 
but  has  exalted  Him  to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour  to  lift  off  from  us  the  burden 
of  guilt,  and  to  pour  into  our  diseased  spirits  the  life  of  His  resurrection,  the  life 
of  His  Spirit,  that  we  may  gain  the  victory  over  sin.  In  no  other  way  can  we  gain 
it;  no  efforts  to  1  >p  off  here  and  there  the  heads  of  that  hydra-headed  monster 
will  prevail.  The  desire  we  thought  we  had  beaten  down,  the  passions  we  thought 
we  had  conquered,  will  reassert  their  mastery.  But  He,  the  risen  Lord,  has  given 
us  His  life,  has  made  us  one  with  Himself,  and  in  that  loving  union  with  Him  the 
victory  is  onrs.^  H.  Over  death.  Death  is  a  very  real  enemy.  The  fear  of  death; 
is  not  this  the  most  terrible  fear  that  assaults  men  ?  What  is  the  fear  of  sickness, 
poverty,  sorrow,  oM  age,  natural  infirmities,  compared  with  the  fear  of  death?  It 
is  an  awful  thing  to  die  ;  above  all,  if  we  do  not  know  where  we  are  going.  1.  Death 
is  an  agony,  for  it  is  the  separation  of  body  and  soul;  it  is  the  dissolution  of  the 
man.  And  yet  regarded  in  this  light  men  do  not  always  recoil  from  it.  There  are 
those  who,  not  only  in  the  excitement  of  battle,  can  meet  death  with  steady  nerve  ; 
there  are  those  who,  tired  of  life's  eiforts  and  disappointments,  have  welcomed 
death  as  a  friend,  and  the  bed  of  death  has  been  like  a  sleep.  2.  The  agony  of 
death  does  not  trouble  all,  but  the  mystery  of  death,  the  thought  of  passage 
from  a  world  of  known  existence  to  an  undiscovered  country,  wliere  men  must  give 
an  account  of  dee'is  done  in  the  body,  this  has  made  the  bravest  heart  tremble. 
Two  officers  were  riding  together  just  before  a  battle.  One  of  them,  an  earnest 
Christian,  turned  and  said  to  the  other,  "Are  you  prepared  to  die?"  "Death; 
don't  talk  to  me  of  death,"  was  the  reply,  "  it  will  unnerve  me."  The  man  was 
not  a  coward,  but  death  was  an  awful  thing  to  think  of.  No  wonder  that  Paul 
speaks  of  men  being  suhjfct  to  bondage  through  the  fear  of  death.  3.  Then  beside, 
there  is  the  anguish  of  bereavement.  How  many  hearts  has  death  broken,  how 
many  lives  has  he  made  dnsolate  ?  Who  has  not  felt  that  awful  power  ?  Must  we 
shudder,  and  walk  with  faltering  steps  in  presence  of  this  dreadful  enemy  ?  "  No," 
says  the  aposUe.  "  Thanks  be  to  God,  which  giveth  us  the  victory  through  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ."  St.  Paul  insists  upon  this  fact  as  involving  the  resurrection  of 
mankind.  For  it  is  not  a  simple  human  being  that  rises  out  of  that  grave  ;  it  is 
the  everlasting  Lord  of  Life,  who,  having  life  in  Himself,  took  our  human  nature, 
and  in  that  nature  confronted  death,  and  vanquished  death,  and  rose  victoriou.s 
from  the  tnmb.  Conclusion:  Are  we  partakers  of  this  victory?  We  may  repeat 
the  Creed,  "  I  believe  in  the  resurrection  of  the  body,"  and  yet,  alas  !  we  may  have 
no  victory  over  death.  How  many  baptized  Christi'ins  have  no  doubt  of  another 
life,  and  yet  live  and  die  as  if  this  world  were  all  ?  And  j^et  there  is  such  a  victory. 
Christ's  risen  life  may  be  ours.  It  is  by  a  close  actual  union  with  Christ  that  we 
share  in  His  victory.  "Whosoever  liveth  aud  believeth  in  Me  shall  never  die." 
{Bj}.  Perowne.)  Victory  over  sin,   death,  and  the  grave: — I.  "  Thk   sting   op 

DEATH  IS  SIN."  The  meaning  is,  that,  to  a  man  conscious  of  unpardoned  sin,  death 
is  armed  with  a  peculiar  pungency.  Consider — 1.  The  loss  of  the  world.  Has  he 
been  a  man  of  pleasure?  His  pleasures  vanish.  Is  he  a  man  eager  in  his  pursuit 
of  wealth  ?  His  plans  are  broken,  and  his  wealth  goes  to  others.  Has  he  ranked 
among  the  proud  and  mighty?  The  grave  which  opens  for  him  knows  no  dis- 
tinction (Isa.  xiv.  10).  When  these  thoughts  pass  through  the  mind,  how  they 
sting  !  2.  On  the  approach  of  death  sin  is  presented  in  its  true  aspect.  Its  nature 
is  to  deceive.  It  assumes  the  forms  of  pleasure,  interest,  nay,  sometimes  of  virtue. 
But  when  death  approaches  and  lets  in  the  searching  light  of  eternity,  all  these 
false  appearances  are  dissipated.  Memory  opens  her  secret  stores;  aggravations, 
before  thought  little,  now  appear  great ;  sins  against  light,  mercy,  warning,  con- 
viction, resolutions,  appear  in  all  their  enormity.  The  man  is  unfit  for  a  holy 
heaven,  and  must,  if  no  mercy  intervene,  be  thrust  out.  3.  It  renders  terrible  that 
presence  of  God,  into  which,  after  death,  the  soul  must  immediately  enter.  Is  he 
in  the  i^resence  of  the  Father?  He  has  refused  His  calls,  and  slighted  His 
love.  Is  he  in  the  presence  of  the  Son  ?  Will  he  not  then  remember  the 
"agony  and  bloody  sweat,"  and  not  he  filled  with  horror  at  his  ingratitude? 
Is  he  in  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  "  grieved  "  often,  and  now  for  ever 
*' quenched  "  ?  4.  The  banishment  of  the  soul  from  God.  Whither  shall  he  go? 
(Jude  6).     II.  The  stbength  of  sin  is  the  law.     Because — 1.  It  is  that  which 


■«!?•■ 


f-    ^'^ 


544  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

connects  the  penalty  of  drath  with  sin.  "Where  no  law  is,  there  is  no  trans- 
gression." 2.  In  prdpoitiim  as  the  law  is  manifested,  sin  is  aggravated;  and 
therefore  its  eondemnimj:  piAver  is  increased.  "The  law  entered,  tliat  the  offence 
might  abound";  not  that  men  might  sin,  but  see  the  aboumling  of  their  sins. 
What  strength,  then,  has  sin  to  condemn  in  our  day  !  The  law  was  manifested  to 
the  patriarchs,  more  clearly  to  the  Jews,  most  clearly  to  us  ;  and  hence  our  guilt 
is  aggravated  beyond  all  previous  example.  3.  Its  rigour  is  never  abated.  It 
cannot  relax,  because  it  is  "holy,  jnst,  and  good."  If  "holy,"  it  can  never 
sanction  unholiness ;  if  "just,"  it  must  demand  Ihe  penalty;  if  "good,"  or 
benevolent,  it  must  be  enforced ;  for  it  is  mercy  to  the  whole  cieation  to  punis^h 
offenders,  4,  It  is  eternal.  The  subjects  of  its  government  are  immortal.  They 
will  always  be  under  this  law,  wliich  has  no  remedy  for  their  sin,  and  yet  eternally 
enforces  its  own  penally.  III.  Thanks  be  to  God,  m'Hich  givkth  us  the 
VICTORY.  1.  The  means  by  which  the  victory  is  made  possible;  "through  our 
Lord  Jesus  Chri'^t."  This  work  of  Christ  had  several  parts.  (1)  His  incarn»tion. 
What  He  was  to  do  was  for  us,  hence  He  had  to  assume  our  nature.  (2)  His 
sacrificial  death.  He  came  to  take  the  penalty  of  our  sin ;  to  magnify  the  law, 
and  redeem  us  from  its  curse.  Hence  He  died  as  our  substitute.  (3)  His  resur- 
rection. He  rose  to  plead  His  death  in  our  behalf.  (4)  The  effusion  of  the  Spirit. 
He  gives  the  Spirit  to  awaken  us  to  a  sense  of  our  condition ;  to  lead  us  to  Himself ; 
and  cure  the  plague  of  sin,  the  sting  of  death,  in  our  consciences.  (5)  His  judge- 
ship, that,  at  the  resurrection.  He  might  claim  His  own  people,  and  glorify  them 
for  ever  with  Himself.  Yet  even  this  gives  us  not  the  victory.  If  Christ  he- 
neglected  and  slit^hted,  this  but  heightens  the  guilt  and  envenoms  the  sting.  There, 
is,  then — 2.  A  victory  for  us.  How  do  we  obtain  it  ?  Faith  in  the  atonement 
secures  deliverance  from  the  curse  of  the  law.  The  sense  of  pardon  takes  away 
the  sense  of  guilt.  The  spirit  of  bondage  gives  place  to  the  Spirit  of  adoption. 
Behold,  then,  victory — (1)  Over  death.  He,  too,  must  die.  Yet  it  has  no  sting; 
for  he  is  saved  from  sin.  He  is  at  peace  with  God,  and  in  another  world  he  shall 
be  at  peace  with  Him.  (2)  Over  the  grave.  It  has  had  its  victory,  which  has 
been  nearly  universal  over  the  strength,  the  art,  the  conditions,  the  pleasures, 
the  cares,  and  tenderest  relations  of  men.  Yet  upon  the  brink  of  the  all- 
devouring  grave  itself  may  the  Christian  stand,  and  shout,  "0  grave,  where  is 
thy  victory?"  It  has  been  once  conquered — on  the  illustrious  morning  of  our 
Lord's  resurrection.  Its  key  was  taken  into  His  hand.  It  holds  the  dust  of  His 
saints  but  as  a  deposit;  and  it  shall  yield  them  up  at  His  call.  (R.  Watson.) 
The  triumphant  Christian  : — This  is  a  subject  wliich  can  never  be  unnecessary  to  » 
Christian  auditory,  when  death's  shafts  have  been  flying  thick  around  us.  On  this 
side  and  on  that  we  see  our  friends  or  relatives  dropping  like  leaves  in  autumn. 
Death  spares  neither  the  poor  from  pity,  nor  the  rich  from  terror.  I.  The 
IMPORTANT  TRUTHS  STATED  IN  THE  TEXT.  1.  "  The  stlng  of  death  is  siu."  Death, 
properly  speaking,  is  not  a  debt  due  to  nature,  but  to  the  justice  of  God.  Man  did 
not  die  from  the  same  physical  necessity  as  plants  or  animals.  God  could  have 
also  communicated  to  them  everlasting  duration  ;  but  He  did  not  see  meet  to  do  so. 
Man  alone  was  created  immortal,  and  he  forfeited  his  immortality  by  sinning 
against  God.  2.  "  The  strength  of  sin  is  the  law."  "  Where  there  is  no  law  there 
is  no  transgression";  and  did  not  man  transgress  and  violate  God's  holy  and 
righteous  law,  death  should  never  have  had  dominion  over  us.  3Jl  God  in  His  rich 
and  sovereign  grace  has  given  us  the  victory  over  sin  and  death,  through  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  Oh,  what  an  unspeakable  source  of  consolation  is  here  opened  to  our 
view  1  That  death,  our  worst  enemy,  is  converted  into  our  best  friend ;  and  now 
he  is  constrained,  like  Haman,to  confer  splendour  and  feli-ity  on  "the  man  whom 
the  King  "  of  heaven  "  dehghteth  to  honour."  Christ  by  His  death  destroyed  death. 
He  wrested  the  sword  from  his  hand,  and  so  destroyed  this  mighty  foe  with  his  own 
weapon.  In  consequence  of  the  Divine  dignity  of  His  person,  He  not  only  fulfilled 
the  law  to  the  uttermost,  both  in  its  precept  and  its  penalty,  but  has  in  fact  magni- 
fied the  law  and  made  it  honourable,  so  that  it  is  more  dignified  and  exalted  by  the 
Eedeemer's  righteousness  than  it  was  dishonoured  and  degraded  by  man's  trans- 
gression. The  law,  then,  which  is  the  strength  of  sin,  instead  of  being  hostile  to 
our  salvation,  deniiinds  from  Divine  justice,  as  the  price  of  Christ's  atonement,  that 
the  bodies  of  all  who  sleep  in  Jesus  shall  be  raided  up  from  the  dead  incorruptible 
and  glorious.  II.  The  fervour  of  mind  expressed  in  our  text.  1.  The  words  of 
•  the  ap'  stle  express  victorious  faith.  Whence  is  it,  then,  that  our  faith  is  so  inferior 
;to  his  in  ecstasy  and  felicity  ?     Whence  is  it  that  our  hearts  are  so  intimidated  and 


CHAP  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  545 

alarmed  when  looking  forward  to  our  conflict  witla  the  king  of  terrors  ?  Is  it 
because  the  promises  of  God  are  less  precious  and  unchanging  now  than  they  were 
then?  Is  it  because  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  has  lost  the  chief  of  its  virtue  and 
eflicacy  in  the  service  of  the  whole  Church  hitherto  ?  Is  it  because  the  arm  of  the 
risen  ilf'ileemer  has  become  shortened  that  it  cannot  save?  or  is  His  ear  become 
heavy  that  He  cannot  hear  ?  Ah,  no  !  But  it  is  because  of  our  unl)elief.  2.  Tlie 
woids  are  expressive  of  lively  gratitude.  Paul  is  very  joyful  to  award  the  praise  and 
the  glory  to  Him  to  whom  alone  it  is  due,  "  vvho  loved  ns,  and  washed  us  from  our  sins 
in  His  own  blood."  He  does  not  ascribe  the  victory  to  the  work  of  his  own  hands. 
He  had  long  before  that  i^eriod  learned  to  renounce  his  own  righteousness,  wiiioh 
was  of  the  law ;  and  to  rfly  entirely  and  implicitly  on  the  righteousness  which  is  of 
God  by  failli.  Nor  dues  he  ascribe  the  victory  to  his  tears  of  penite^itial  sorrow- 
tears  which  he  never  spoke  liglitly  of — which  God  beholds  with  pity,  and  which 
cause  joy  among  the  angels  of  heaven.  But  he  rejoices  in  Christ  Ji'sus  alone, 
having  no  confidence  in  the  flesh.  III.  The  tkiujiph  anticipatkd.  "  0  death, 
where  is  thy  sting  ?  "  "  Thanks  be  to  God,  woich  give^h  us  the  victory  tbrnui^li  our 
Lord  Jesus  Chri:!.t."  Deiith  still  reigns,  and  is  conducting  millions  of  mil  inns  to 
corruption  in  the  grave,  from  which  no  power  in  earth  or  heaven  can  restme  them, 
till  that  appointed  morning  when  "  pains  and  groans,  and  grie's  and  fears,  and 
death  itself,  shall  die. "  It  is  this  glorious  and  joyful  event  to  which  the  apostle 
looks  forward  in  the  preceding  verses.  In  the  text  he  anticipates  the  glorious  and 
iitial  triumph  which  all  the  ransomed  of  the  Lord  shall  then  obtain  over  sin  and 
death  and  hell,  as  conquerors,  yea,  and  more  than  coufiufrors,  "  through  Him  that 
loved  them."  He  speaks  as  if  the  believer  had  ahea'ly  entered  into  tne  heavenly 
temple,  in  both  body  and  soul  perfectly  conformed  to  the  image  of  the  Saviour,  to 
dwell  for  ever  with  the  Lord.  Neither  is  this  presumptuous  confidence,  or  hope 
that  will  make  ashamed.  The  great  God  our  Savinur  has  "  s;iid  it,  and  He  will  do 
it ;  He  has  spoken,  and  He  will  make  it  good."  1.  Whence  is  it  that  the  Christian, 
though  justified  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  saved  from  wratli  thro  igh  11  im,  is  yet 
subjected  to  death  ?  I  answer,  tl'afc  Christ  has  relieved  us  so  far  as  it  is  a  curse 
inflicted  by  the  broken  law.  There  is  nothing  penal  in  t!ie  believer's  death.  It  is 
not  now  God's  vengeance,  but  is  conducted  in  love  as  a  rich  new  covenant  blessing, 
purfhased  with  the  Saviour's  blood.  2.  Nothing  but  a  life  of  faith  in  t'le  Son  of 
God  can  render  tlie  prospect  of  death  pleasing  or  desiral)le.  It  is  told  of  the  mother 
of  a  celebrated  deist,  who  had  been  once  acustomed  to  reid  the  Scriptuies  with 
pleasure,  but  had  been  brought  at  length  to  adopt  the  infidel  opinions  of  her  son, 
that  she  made  this  bitter  reflection  on  her  death-bed — "  My  son  has  deprived  me 
of  the  comfort  and  serenity  I  once  possessed  in  my  Bible ;  and,  with  all  his  philo- 
sophy, he  has  not  been  able  to  substitute  an^  thing  in  its  place."  [Jtis.  Hnij,  D.D.) 
The  believer's  victory  : — Whose  language  is  this  ?  whom  does  it  suit  ?  or  when  may 
it  be  used  ?  1.  It  suits  believers,  and  it  may  be  used  by  them  in  view  of  their  own 
dissolution.  Feeling  that  they  are  mortal,  having  received  the  sentence  of  deatli  in 
themsehes,  and  contemplating  the  corruption  of  the  grave  as  their  speedy  and 
unavoidable  portion;  faith  in  the  promised  glories  which  await  them,  dissipates 
the  gloom  that  is  ready  to  arise,  inspires  with  joy,  and  elevates  to  triumph.  Thus 
a  personal  comfort  is  attained,  a  dying  bed  loses  its  horrors,  and  the  songs  of 
heaven  employ  the  soul  even  among  the  wrecks  of  nature.  To  such  an  application 
the  apostle  has  directed  us  (2  Cor.  v.  1).  2.  The  language  is  suitable,  when  our 
believing  friends  and  relatives  become  the  prey  of  death,  and  we  are  called  to 
commit  their  mortal  remains  to  the  tomb.  These  are  s-ome  of  the  heaviest  trials  of 
the  present  state.     But  when  nature  fails,  faith  administers  relief.     I.  Consider 

THE  enemies  here  VIEWED  BY  THE  SODL,  AND  WHICH  ARE  THE  OBJECTS  OF  ITS  TRIUMPH. 

1.  Death  and  the  grave  are  here  conjoined.  The  former  prepares  for  the  latter; 
and  in  a  sense  both  are  inimical  to  the  believer.  "  The  last  enemy  that  shall  be 
destroyed  is  death."  It  is  such  in  itself,  though  by  grace  its  nature  is  utterly 
changed.  Death  separates  the  soul  from  the  body.  Death  dissolves  all  natural 
ties.  Death  removes  us  from  a  present  world,  to  which  we  can  never  more  return. 
Death  fits  for  the  grave.  That  is  the  common  receptacle  for  the  subjects  of  death, 
and  as  such  is  noticed  in  the  text.  The  grave  !  how  gloomy  its  prospect !  how 
affecting  its  appearance !  how  awful  its  dominion  !  2.  Death  and  the  grave  are 
distressing  and  destructive  to  those  who  become  their  prey.  What  arms  death  with 
terrors,  and  the  grave  with  a  curse?  It  is  sin.  As  sin  occasioned  the  entrance  of 
death,  and  procured  the  grave  for  mortals,  so  it  is  the  continued  cause  of  all  the 
pains,  the  sorrows,  and  miseries  these  occasion  to  the  human  race.  3.  The 
VOL..  II.  85 


546  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

dominion  of  death,  and  the  power  of  the  grave,  form  a  part  of  the  righteous  dis- 
pensation of  God.  They  are  under  His  immediate  direction  and  government,  and 
are  made  subservient  to  the  purposes  of  His  glory.  God's  faithfuhiess  to  His 
threatening:^.  His  indignation  against  sin,  and  His  inflexible  righteousness  in 
punishing  it,  are  marked  in  every  fear  of  death  by  which  we  are  agitated — in  every 
bereaving  providence  with  which  we  are  visited — and  in  every  opening  grave  that 
presents  to  our  view.  II.  The  triumph  over  death  and  the  grave.  "  O  death, 
where  is  thy  sting  ?  C  grave,  where  is  thy  victory  ?  "  "  Put  forth  and  strike  with 
the  one,  show  and  maintain  the  other,  if  you  can.  One  that  is  mighty  hath  inter- 
posed, and  we  are,  and  shall  be,  more  than  conquerors  in  and  through  Him." 
Concerning  this  attainment  we  must  observe  it  is  a  triumph  of  faith.  The 
circumstances  and  the  situation  of  believers  in  a  present  world,  render  this  grace 
needful,  give  occasion  for  its  exercise,  and  manifest  its  strength  and  excellency. 
The  inquiry  here  arises,  What  are  those  discoveries  of  faith  wliich  have  such  a 
transporting  influence  on  the  soul?  answer  to  this  inquiry,  I  shall  only  refer  to 
this  chapter,  in  which  those  truths  are  declared,  the  discovery  of  which  by  faith 
makes  the  soul  thus  to  boast  and  triumph.  1.  Death  and  the  grave  are  changed 
in  their  nature  and  their  original  design.  In  itself  death  is  a  curse  :  it  is  an  evil 
biou<.'ht  upon  mankind  by  their  fall :  it  is  the  executioner  of  the  Divine  threatening. 
As  descriptive  of  the  change  that  hath  passed  on  tliem,  the  apostle  represents  the 
condition  of  believers,  who  have  become  their  prey,  by  sleep  (ver.  IS).  Such  a 
discovery  gives  occasion  for  the  exclamntion  in  the  text.  "  What  power  hast  thou, 
O  death,  to  hurt  me  ?  or  why  should  I  be  affrighted  at  thee,  0  noisome  grave  ? 
Death  will  only  put  an  end  to  my  sorrows,  and  the  grave  prove  a  place  to  me,  where 
the  wicked  shall  cease  from  troubling,  and  my  weary  limbs  shall  experience  rest." 
Another  discovery  of  faith  is — 2.  The  advantage  derived  by  believers  from  death 
and  the  grave.  So  far  are  these  from  being  prejudicial,  that  they  prove  highly 
beneficial.  Death,  though  an  enemy  to  nature,  is  a  friend  to  gi'ace.  In  the  inven- 
tory of  the  believer's  privileges,  drawn  up  by  infinite  wisdom,  and  written  by  an 
inspired  pen,  we  read — "  Life  or  death — all  are  yours  "  (chap.  iii.  22).  The  same 
truth  is  explained  and  confirmed  in  this  chapter  (vers.  18, 19).  "  To  me  to  live  (said 
the  apostle)  is  Christ,  and  to  die  is  gain  "  (Phil.  i.  21).  "  Where  now  is  thy  sting,  O 
death  ?  Where  is  thy  boasted  victory,  0  grave  ?  My  best  interests  are  beyond 
your  reach,  my  everlasting  benefit  and  glory  shnll  be  promoted  by  your  instrumen- 
tality." 3.  Faith  descries  their  final  destruction,  which  is  another  cause  of  its 
triumph.  This  is  foretold  in  the  Word  of  God,  and  shall  be  accomplished  by  His 
power.  The  bands  of  death  shall  be  broken — every  grave  shall  be  opened — the 
dead  shall  be  raised — and  not  one  be  left  behind.  Then  "this  corruptible  shall  put 
on  incorruption,"  &c.  III.  The  soul's  thankful  acknowledgment  of  Divine  grace, 
AS  THE  CAUSE  OF  THIS  HIGH  ATTAINMENT.  1.  Tliis  triumph  is  obtained  through  the 
mediation  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  alone.  Our  faith,  our  hope,  our  comfort — all 
must  perish  if  we  lose  sight  of  Him.  2.  An  expeiience  of  Divine  grace  is  tlie  cause 
of  this  triumph.  Grace  is  not  only  provided ;  it  is  also  applied  and  communicated. 
The  victory  is  sure — the  victory  is  gained — it  is  our  attainment,  happiness,  and 
honour.  3.  This  attainment  excites  the  soul  to  praise.  God  is  acknowledged  to  be 
the  author  of  this  happiness,  and  the  soul  renders  the  whole  glory  of  it  to  Him. 
Lessons :  1.  How  astonishing  are  the  exploits  of  the  Saviour's  love  !  2.  How  needful  is 
a  saving  interest  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  for  us !  3.  What  a  source  of  consolation  have 
we  when  our  godly  friends  and  relatives  are  removed  from  us  !  4.  How  much  does  it 
concern  us,  living  and  dying,  to  exercise  faith  upon  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ !  {J.  Kello.) 
Victory  through  Christ : — I.  A  great  duty — Thankfulness.  In  all  tilings  giving 
thanks  ;  but  more  especially  for  what  pertains  to  our  eternal  interest.  II.  A  great 
GIFT — Victory — over  sin,  over  sorrow,  over  death.  III.  A  great  medium — Through 
Jesus  Christ.  It  was  His  work  that  rendered  our  victory  possible.  It  was  accom- 
plished— 1.  By  His  life.  2.  By  His  work.  3.  By  His  death.  IV.  A  great  giver— 
God.  Thanks  be  to  God,  the  highest  object  in  the  universe,  the  source  of  all  power, 
glory,  and  honour.  He  does  not  require  our  thanks,  but  He  will  accept  them. 
(T.  Heath.)  •*  Victory  over  death: — I.  The  awfolness  which  hangs  round  the 
DYING  HOUR.  It  is  HO  mark  of  courage  to  speak  lightly  of  dying.  We  may  do  it  in 
bravado,  or  in  wantonness  ;  but  no  man  who  thinks  can  call  it  a  trifling  thing  to 
die.  He  has  been  waiting  for  death  all  his  life,  and  now  it  is  come ;  and  through- 
out all  eternity  that  sensation  can  come  but  once.  1.  Now  what  in  general  makes 
it  a  solemn  thing  to  die  ?  (1)  The  instinctive  cleaving  of  everything  that  lives  to 
its  own  existence.     It  is  the  first  and  the  intensest  desire  of  living  things  to  be. 


CHAP.  XV.]  I,  COJRINTHIANS.  547 

What  are  war,  trade,  labour,  and  professions  but  the  result  of  struggling  to  be? 
Now  it  is  with  this  the  idea  of  death  clashes.  Wlien  we  die,  we  arc  surrenderirjg 
all  with  which  we  have  associated  existence.  (2)  The  parting  with  all  round  which 
the  heart's  best  affections  have  twined  themselves.  (3)  The  sensation  of  loneliness. 
If  we  have  ever  seen  a  ship  with  its  load  of  emigrants,  we  know  what  that  deso- 
lation is  which  comes  from  feeling  unfriended  on  a  new  and  untried  excursion. 
This  is  but  a  feeble  image  of  death.  We  die  alone.  Frieuds  are  beside  our  bed, 
they  must  stay  behind.  2.  But  none  of  these  ideas  the  apostle  selected  as  the 
crowning  bitterness  of  dyii'g.  "  Tlie  sting  of  death  is  sin."  (1)  There  is  something 
that  appals  in  death  when  separate  acts  of  guilt  rest  on  the  memory.  All  these  are 
sins  which  you  can  count  up  and  number,  and  the  recollection  of  them  is  remorse. 
(2)  But  with  most  men  it  is  not  guilty  acts,  but  guiltiness  of  heart  that  weighs  the 
heaviest.  This  is  the  sting  of  sinfulness,  the  feeling,  "  God  is  not  my  friend ;  I  am 
going  on  to  the  grave,  and  no  man  can  say  auglit  against  me,  but  my  heart  is  not 
right.  It  is  not  so  much  what  I  have  done  ;  it  is  what  I  am.  Who  shall  save  me 
from  mysell  ?  "  8.  All  this  power  of  sin  to  agonise  is  traced  by  the  apostle  to  the 
law,  by  which  he  means  to  say  that  sin  would  not  be  so  violent  if  it  were  not  for  the 
attempt  of  God's  law  to  restrain  it.  Law  is  what  forbids  and  threatens  ;  law  bears 
gallingly  on  those  who  want  to  break  it.  And  St.  Paul  declares  this,  that  no  law, 
not  even  God's  law,  can  make  men  righteous  in  heart,  unless  the  Spirit  has  taught 
men's  hearts  to  acquiesce  in  the  law.  It  can  only  foice  out  into  rebellion  the  sin 
that  is  in  them.  II.  Faith  coNQUERiNa  in  death.  1.  Before  we  enter  upon  this 
topic,  note — (1)  The  elevating  power  of  faith.  Nothing  ever  led  man  on  to  real 
victory  but  faith.  Even  in  this  life  he  is  a  greater  man  who  is  steadily  pursuing 
a  plan  that  requires  son)e  years  to  accomplish,  than  he  who  is  living  by  the  day. 
And  therefore  it  is,  that  nothing  but  faith  gives  victory  in  death.  It  is  that 
elevation  of  character  which  we  get  from  looking  forward,  till  eternity  becomes  a 
real  home  to  us,  that  enables  us  to  look  down  upon  the  last  stiUL-gle,  and  only  as 
something  that  stands  between  us  and  the  end.  (2)  Ours  is  not  merely  to  be 
victory,  it  is  to  be  victory  through  Christ.  Mere  victory  over  death  is  no  unearthly 
thing,  (rt)  Only  let  a  man  sin  long  and  desperately  enough  to  shut  judgment  alto- 
gether out  of  his  creed,  and  then  you  have  a  man  who  can  bid  d(  fiance  to  the 
grave,  (h)  Mere  manhood  may  give  us  a  victory.  We  have  steel  and  nerve  enough 
in  our  hearts  to  dare  anything.  Felons  died  on  the  scaffold  like  men  ;  soldiers  can 
be  hired  by  tens  of  thousands,  for  a  few  pence  a  day,  to  front  death  in  its  worst 
form,  (c)  Necessity  can  make  man  conqueror  over  death.  We  can  m-tke  up  our 
minds  to  anything  when  it  once  becomes  inevitable.  Death  is  more  dreadful  in  the 
distance  than  in  the  reality:  2.  It  is  quite  another  thing  from  all  this  that  Paul 
meant  by  victory.  It  is  the  prerogative  of  a  Christian  to  be  conqueror  over — (1) 
Doubt.  We  pi"ay  till  we  begin  to  ask.  Is  there  one  who  hears,  or  am  I  whispering  to 
myself?  We  see  the  coffin  lowered  into  the  grave,  and  the  thought  c  mes,  What  if  all 
this  doctrine  of  a  life  to  come  be  but  a  dream  ?  Now  Christ  gives  us  victory  over 
that  terrible  suspicion,  (a)  By  His  own  resurrection.  We  have  got  a  fact  there  that 
all  the  metaphssics  about  impossibility  cannot  rob  us  of.  (b)  By  living  in  Christ. 
All  doubt  comes  from  living  out  of  h'lbits  of  affectionate  obedience  to  God.  By  idle- 
ness, by  neglected  prayer,  we  lose  our  power  of  realising  things  not  seen.  Doubts 
can  only  be  dispelled  by  that  kind  of  active  life  that  realises  Christ.  When  such 
a  man  comes  near  the  opening  of  a  vault,  he  is  only  going  to  see  things  that  he  has 
felt,  for  he  has  b^  en  living  in  heaven.  (2)  The  fear  of  death.  It  mav  be  rapture  or 
it  may  not.  All  that  depends  very  muth  on  temperament.  Generally  a  Christian 
conqueror  dies  calmly.  Brave  men  in  battle  do  not  boast  that  the.v  are  not  afraid. 
There  are  more  triumphant  death-beds  than  we  count,  if  we  only  rememi  er  this— 
true  fearlessness  makes  no  parade.  (3)  Death  itself  by  the  resurrection.  This 
is  chiefly  what  the  apostle  means.  And  it  is  a  rhetorical  expression  rather  than  a 
sober  truth  when  we  call  anything,  except  the  resurrection,  victory  over  death.  We 
may  conquer  doubt  and  fear  when  we  are  dying,  but  that  is  not  conquering  death. 
It  is  like  a  warrior  crushed  by  a  superior  antagonist  bearing  the  glance  of  defiance 
to  the  last.  You  feel  that  he  is  an  unconquerable  spirit,  but  he  is  not  the  con- 
queror. And  when  you  see  flesh  melting  away,  &c.,  the  victory  is  on  the  side  of 
death,  not  on  the  side  of  the  dying.  And  if  we  would  enter  into  the  full  feeling 
of  triumph  here,  we  imagine  what  thi><  world  would  be  without  the  thought  of  a 
resurrection— the  sons  of  man  mounting  into  a  bright  existence,  and  one  after 
another  falling  back  into  nothingness,  like  soldiers  trying  to  mount  an  impracticable 
breach,  and  falling  back  crushed  and  mangled  into  the  dittdi  before  the  fire  of  their 


548  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

conquerors.    Misery  and  guilt,  look  which  way  yon  will,  till  the  heart  gets  sick  with 
looking  at  it.     Until  a  man  looks  on  evil  till  it  seems  almost  a  real  personal  enemy, 
he  can  si-arcely  conceive  the  deep  rapture  which  rushed  into  the  mind  of  Paul.     A 
day  was  coming  when  this  sad  world  was  to  put  off  for  ever  its  misery,  and  the 
grave  was  to  be  robbed  of  its  victory.     Conclusion  :  If  we  would  be  conquerors,  we 
must  realise  God's  love  in  Clirist.     Take  care  not  to  be  under  the  law.     Constraint 
never  yet  made  a  conqueror;  the  utmost  it  can  do  is  to  make  either  a  rebel  or  a 
slave.     Never  shall  we  conquer  self  till  we  have  learned  to  love.     {F.  W.  liohertson, 
31. A.)        Death  and  victory  : — I.  Death.     1.  Death  has  a  sting.     The  fear  of  death 
is  the  commonest  and  strongest  of  all  man's  fears.    2.  The  srting  of  death.    What  is 
it  ?     (1)  Scime  say  the  pain  of  dying.     But  this  is  not  necessarily  greater  than  many 
non-mortals.     The  piiin  of  dying  is  but  the  smart  of  a  wound  which  the  sting  of 
death  inflicts.     (2)  Others  say   the   distressing   changes  that   accompany   death. 
Death  separates  friends,  &c.    (3)  Paul  says,  "  The  sting  of  drath  is  sin" — that  which 
gives  death  the  power  to  wound,  to  torment,  to  kill.     («)  This  sting  is  unlike  that 
of  other  stings  which  are  material,  and  can  only  hurt  or  kill  the  body.     But  the 
sting  of  death  wounds,  poisons,  and  destroys  the  soul.     (/))  This  sting  inflicts  a 
dreadful  kind  of  killing.     No  tongue  can  portray  the  case  of  a  murdered  soul.    And 
this  sort  of  killing  is  not  soon  over :  it  is  a  work  of  eternity.     3.  The  strength  of  sin 
is  the  law  :  its  passive  strength,  its  strength  of  resistance  is  dealt  with  in  the  process 
of  sanctification.    Its  active  strength  is  now  meant,  and  it  lies  in  tbe  law.    The  law 
attaches  a  curse  to  sin  ;  and  thus  gives  sin  its  stinging  power.     If  tlie  law  had  no 
curse  for  sin,  sin  would  not  be  terrible,  though  it  would  be  hateful.    II.  The  victobtc 
OVER  DEATH.     1.  The  conqucrors  of  death.     "Us" — i.e.,  believers.     Each  of  us 
meets  him  in  single  combat,  one  by  one,  and  severally  bruise  him  under  their  feet! 
2.  The  nature  of  the  victory.     (1)  Negatively.     It  does  not  consist — (a)  In  giving 
death  the  slip.     In  war,  by  masterly  mai;oeuvres,  sometimes  advantages  may  be 
secured,  having  all  the  value  of  a  decisive  victory,  although  the  enemy's  face  has 
never  been  seen.      In  this  way  Enoch  and  Elijah  overcame.     But  not  thus  did 
Christ,  nor  will  E[is  followers,     (h)  In    sustaining  no  immediate  hurt  from  the 
encounter.      Barely,   indeed,    does   the   conqueror   win   without   injury.      In   the 
believer's  conflict  wilh  death  the  feelings  may  be  wounded,  and  the  body  is  always 
laid  low  for  a  time.     Even  Christ  was  brought  down  to  the  grave,     (c)  In  contempt 
of  death.     There  are  enemies  who  may  be  overcome  in  this  way.    A  powerless  foe 
has  no  chance,  unless  he  can  hide  his  imposture  and  work  upon  our  fears ;  to 
despise  him  is  to  disarm  and  to  conquer  him.      But  death  is  not  powerless.     Con- 
tempt of  him  is  not  victory  over  him.     (2)  Positively.     The  victory  over  death 
consists  simply  in  being  too  strong  for  him.     (a)  In  prevailing  over  him,  and 
thereby  frustrating  his  attempts  and  defeating  his  designs,     {b)  In  subduing  him. 
He  is  not  only  hindered  from  doing  what  he  wants  to  do,  he  is  compelled  to  do 
something   very    different.     He   seeKs  to   be   the  master  and  the   tyrant;   he  is 
reduced  to  the  stale  of  a  slave,  and  is  forced  to  co-operate  with  the  angels  in 
translating  the  believer  to  heaven.      3.  How   is  it  brought   about?      "  Through 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."    In  a  fight  amongst  men,  much  of  the  issue  may  depend  on 
a  single  champion  or  leader.     Christ  is  the  chanipionand  the  leader  of  His  people, 
and  as  such  He  enables  them  to  conquer  death.     (1)  Through  His  achievements. 
The  sting  of  death  was  paralysed  by  Christ,  bcause  He  took  upon  Himself  the 
curse  of  the  law.     (2)  Through  His  arrangements  and  preparations.     The  soldier's 
success  in  the  day  of  battle  depends  much  upon  these,     (a)  Christ  furnishes  His 
people  with  faith.     This  is  the  victoiy  that  overcometh  the  world,  even  our  faith. 
(b)  Christ  washes  His  people  in  His  own  blood,  in  consequence  of  v.hich  believers 
are  not  only  invulnerable,  like  Acliilles,  in  every  place  but  one — they  are  invul- 
nerable  everywhere.     Death   has   not   even   a   chance   against  them,     (r)  Christ 
removes  the  sting  of  death.     He  deprived  the  sting  of  its  strength  by  enduring  the 
curse.      But   He   does  more.      As    death  approaches,   tbe  sting  is  not  growing 
larger,  but,  on  the  contrary,  is  ever  growing  less,  until  at  last  the  sting  disappears 
altogether,     (d)  Christ  fixes  the  time  of  the  believer's  conflict  with  death,  and  takes 
care  that  it  shall  not    happen  before  the  believer    is    ready.      Death  is  Christ's 
captive,  and  cannot  assail  the  believer  till  Christ  gives  him  leave.     (3)  By  His 
encouragements.     Believers  have  the  encouragement  of — (a)  Christ's  example.    An 
example  of  cowardice  has  a  tendency  to  make  cowards   of  us  ;  and  an  example 
of  courage  has  a  tendency  to  make  us  bold,     {b)  Christ's  presence.     You  know 
what  deeds  of  gallantry  a  warrior  may  perform,  when  he  figbts  under  the  eye  of  his 
leader  or  his  sovereign,     (c)  Christ's  words.     It  is  your  Father's  good  pleasure  to 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  549 

give  you  the  kingdom.  "All  things  are  yours  " — li'e  is  yours,  death  is  yours,  and 
as  to  the  ultimate  destiny  of  death.  And  tliere  shall  lie  no  more  death,  (d)  Christ's 
Spirit.  This  it  is  which  makes  ev^r\  other  encouragement  tell.  We  are  strung 
with  a  Divine  energy,  and  s  irr.-d  to  a  dauntless  courage  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 
4.  Its  fruits  and  rewards.  We  are  ndt  to  suppose  th-it  "thanks"  are  here  given 
for  a  barren  victory.  (1)  It  closes  tli'^  Christian's  warfare  for  ever.  It  is  like  one 
of  those  decisive  battles  by  which  the  wars  pf  hostile  nations  are  terminal ed. 
(2)  The  believer  will  enter  iuto  life.  Death  over^-ome,  there  is  nothing  between  him 
andlfe.  (3)  The  b  liever  will  receive  a  heavenly  inheritance.  5.  To  whom  the 
honour  of  a  victory  so  great  and  so  fruitful  pertains — "to  God."  (1)  To  the 
Sacred  Three  collectively — in  respect  of  tlie  eternal  covenant  of  redemption.  (2)  To 
God  the  Father — in  respect  of  the  gift  of  the  Son.  (ii)  To  <iod  the  Son — in  the  way 
we  have  seen.  (4)  To  Goil  the  Holy  Ghost — in  respect  of  His  worlc  in  the  human 
nature  of  Christ;  and  inasmuch  as  Christ  employs  Him  to  take  away  the  sin  of 
helievors,  and  to  arm  them,  and  give  them  effectuid  encouragement.  {A.  Gray.) 
'The  Cliristian's  triuiiij)h  in  contlict : — There  are  two  symbi>lic  works  of  art,  t!ie 
Laocoon  ard  St.  Geoi'ge  and  the  Dragon,  which  may  be  taken  as  setting  forth  in 
contrasted  forms  the  irrepressible  conflict  of  man  with  the  alien  forces  of  the  s]>irit 
world  which  undeilies  all  mythologies  and  religions.  lu  the  Laocoon,  that  peerless 
work  of  ancient  sculpture,  the  death-like  struggles  of  the  priest-father  as  he  vainly 
endeavours  to  tear  the  co  ling  serpents  from  himself  and  children  presents  a  picture 
of  man  contending  in  his  own  might  against  the  mightier  powers  of  evil.  Tlie 
artist  has  caught  the  passion  at  its  highest  point,  as  Lessing  with  fine  critical 
insight  has  pointed  out.  In  the  midst  of  a  tempest  of  agony  there  is  a  calm  like 
the  peaceful  depths  beneath  the  wind-tossed  surface  of  the  sea.  But  the  calm 
wliich  oveispreads  the  face,  snti'using  with  sublime  power  the  lines  of  pain,  is  not 
the  ca'm  of  resignation  or  of  hope,  but  of  mute,  heroic  despair.  The  Laocoon  is  a 
confession  in  marb'e  of  the  failure  of  man  at  his  best  to  gain  the  mastery  over  evil. 
In  St.  George  and  the  Dragon  the  same  struggle  is  portrayed,  but  here  the  saint  is 
victor,  i' Entering  the  lists  against  the  devouring,  anarchic  principle,  of  which  the 
Itragon  IS  the  emblem,  he  returns  from  the  conflict  in  triumph.  Tlie  greatest 
object  of  human  effort  is  attained,  the  highest  hope  of  the  human  heart  is  met,  the 
Dragon  is  slain,  and  man  delivered.  Deliverance  is  wrought  out  thiough  the 
interposition  of  another.  One  who-e  heart  lieaven  has  touched  with  the  spirit 
of  holy  chivalry  wins,  with  his  own  strong  arm,  redemption  for  the  weak. 
Fit  emblem  of  the  greater  victory  won  by  the  "  Strong  Son  of  God,"  who  came 
down  to  eaith  to  rescue  perishmg  souls  from  the  powers  of  darkness  and  sin  ! 
Therefore,  ...  be  ye  steadfast,  unmovable,  always  abounding  in  the  work  of 
the  Lord. — Steadfast )iesii  hi  relirjion  :  —  l.  The  natuke  and  extent  of  the  duties 
INCDLCATED.  1.  A  Steadfast  adherence  to  the  faith  of  the  gospel,  in  opposition  to 
prevailing  error.  "Be  steadfast."  See  that  your  faith  do  not  stand  in  the  wisdom 
of  men,  but  hy  the  power  of  God.  Light  shines  around;  it  beams  with  steady 
lustre  f  I  om  the  oracles  of  truth ;  and  will  you,  with  the  means  of  having  your 
feet  guided  in  the  ways  of  peace,  prefer  the  glimmerings  of  human  reason,  allow 
yourselves  to  be  blinded  by  the  influence  of  error,  and  walk  in  that  road  of  sia 
which  leads  directly  to  the  chambers  of  hell?  2.  Unshaken  firmness  in  main- 
taining the  profession  of  the  gospel,  in  opposition  to  every  temptation  and  danger. 
Be  "  unmovable,"  or  unmoved.  Is  there  nothing  dangerous  in  the  corruption  of 
our  own  hearts — in  those  remaining  roots  of  sin  which  so  often  spring  up  unsus- 
pecteil,  and  overspread  our  minds  with  the  noxious  weeds  of  carnal  affection, 
unhallowed  passion,  licentious  desires,  and  even  sinful  resolutions?  These  are 
enemies  too  near  us  to  be  viewed  with  indifference;  and  to  submit  to  their  influ- 
ence is  virtually  to  rennunce  the  profession  which  we  ought  habitually  to  maintain. 
Is  there  nothing  dangerous  in  those  allurements  of  the  world  which  are  scattered 
around  us  ?  Is  there  nothing  dangerous  in  those  unseen  yet  real  temptations  with 
which  the  enemy  of  God  and  of  mau  as«ails  us?  These  are  temptations  that 
require  caution  as  well  as  fortitude — watchfulness  and  faith  and  prayer.  In 
opposition  to  these  and  similar  dangers,  we  are  exhoited  to  be  steadfast  and 
unmoved.  And  why  s^hrink  from  these  confiicis  of  patience  and  faith? — why 
relinquish  the  hopes  with  which  our  Divine  Master  encourages  us  to  perseverance? 
3.  We  are  exhorted  to  be  habitually  and  increasingly  employed  in  the  service  of 
Christ — "  al » ays  abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord."  The  duties  of  the  Christian 
life  are  emphatically  styled  a  work  and  a  labour.  Its  difficulties  do  not  arise 
wholly  from  exierual  temptations,  nor  is  the  service  which  it  requires  confined  to 


550  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xv, 

the  resistance  of  sin.  There  are  graces  and  virtues  which  must  be  brought  into 
actual  and  vigorous  exercise,  and  duties  which  every  man  in  his  own  station  must 
labour  diligently  and  faithfully  to  perform.  Shall  we  not  feel  every  labour 
sweetened,  every  pain  alleviated,  to  believe  that  we  are  thus  expressing  our  grati- 
tude to  Him  who  loved  us  and  gave  Himself  for  us — our  obedience  to  Him  who 
ransomed  us  from  destruction  by  His  own  precious  blood?  Where  is  there  a 
relation  in  which  we  stand  to  God  or  to  our  fellow-men,  in  discharging  the  duties 
of  which  He  did  not  stand  forth  the  pattern  of  perfection  to  the  universe  and  to 
us  ?  What  energy  must  it  impart  to  the  Christian,  farther,  to  be  persuaded  that 
strength  shall  be  furnished  him  for  this  service !  Yes,  it  is  a  labour  in  the  Lord. 
He  who  has  been  perfected  through  sufferings — He  who  possesses  all  the  treasures 
of  knowledge,  and  wisdom,  and  grace,  is  the  strength  of  His  disciples.  He  is 
their  sun  and  their  shield,  their  light  and  their  life.  1^'inally,  on  this  part  of  the 
subject  we  are  exhorted  to  abound  always  in  the  work  of  the  Lord.  How  little 
have  we  done  for  the  glory  of  God  and  the  advancement  of  our  own  holiness,  ia 
comparison  of  what  we  might  and  should  have  done!  Not  only  how  imperfect, 
but  how  polluted  often  are  our  services.  Let  us  arise,  then,  and  be  found  retrieving 
what  we  have  lost ;  doing  what  we  ought  already  to  have  done  ;  more  habitually 
abounding  in  the  work  of  our  Lord.  Let  us  set  no  limit  to  our  exertions  ;  let  us 
not  measure  our  attainments  by  those  of  others,  far  less  let  us  sit  down  in  sloth 

^  and  carelessness.  II.  The  powekful  incitement  by  which  the  peactice  of  these 
DUTIES  IS  ENFORCED.  "  Your  labour  shall  not  be  in  vain  in  the  Lord."  Even  the 
hope  of  success  is  a  strong  incitement  to  exertion  ;  what  influence,  then,  must  not 
the  certainty  of  attaining  our  object  have?     This  is  possessed  by  all  who  abound 

^n  the  work  of  the  Lord.  1.  Even  in  this  world  they  reap  the  fruit  of  their 
labours.  The  more  enlarged  views  of  Divine  truth  which  they  gradually  acquire — • 
the  more  habitual  conformity  to  the  image,  and  submission  to  the  will,  of  their 
Lord  which  they  attain — the  progressive  dethronement  of  the  power  of  sin,  which 
is  the  result  of  this  belief  of  the  truth  and  sanctification  of  the  Spirit — and  that 
more  steady  zeal  for  the  interests  of  pure  and  undefiled  religion  in  themselves  and 
in  the  world  to  which  they  are  excited— are  the  sources  of  a  happiness  pure  as  the 
fountain  from  which  it  springs,  and  motives  to  increased  alacrity  in  the  work  of 

Uthe  Lord.  2.  The  resurrection  day  is  appointed  as  the  period  when  the  complete 
triumph  of  the  Christian  shall  commence.  Are  you,  then,  the  humble  yet  praying 
and  faithful  followers  of  Jtsus?  Be  strong  in  the  Lord  and  in  the  power  of  His 
mi^ht,  giving  glory  to  God;  and  through  Him  your  admission  into  heaven  is  sure! 
Why  should  you  be  sorrowful?  why  languid?  why  unbelieving?  why  unsteady  in 
your  course?  Your  labours  may  be  severe,  your  difficulties  numerous,  your  duties 
painful,  your  afflictions  heavy ;  but  they  shall  not  be  in  vain,  if  endured  in  the 
Lord.  (D.  DicknoiL,  D.D.)  Constancy  and  perseverance : — Next  to  sincerity,  and 
indeed  as  very  closely  connected  with  it,  fixedness  or  steadiness  may  properly  be 
considered  as  a  general  qualification,  which  ought  to  run  through  every  branch  of 
the  Christian  temper.  I.  Explain  this  qualification.  1.  The  Christian  temper 
and  course  must  be  habitual  and  constant,  in  opposition  to  that  which  is  merely 
occasional,  or  by  fits  and  starts.  It  is  not  enough  that  now  and  then  we  attend  to 
religion  ;  but  the  ordinary  bent  of  our  spirits  must  run  this  way,  and  customary 
practice  coi'respond  with  it.'  (1)  Our  design  and  purpose  should  be  for  a  constant 
adherence  to  God  and  our  duty  at  all  times.  (2)  Religion  must  be  made  our 
stated  and  ordinary  business,  to  denominate  us  witli  any  propriety  constant  in  it. 
(3)  Deliberate  and  presumptuous  sins  must  be  carefully  avoided  ;  or  a  breach  will 
be  made  upon  our  constancy  and  steadfastness  in  the  work  of  the  Lord,  in  the  mild 
and  favourable  sense  of  the  gospel.  (4)  Upon  any  known  falls  there  should  be  a 
fpeedy  and  proportionable  repentance.  2.  The  Christian  temper  and  course  must 
be  persisted  in  to  the  end  of  life.  This  is  to  be  steadfast  and  unmovable  in  it. 
(1)  That  we  be  not  wearied  out  by  the  lei>gth  of  our  way.  (2)  That  we  suffer  not 
ourselves  to  give  over  our  work  in  despondency,  because  of  tire  slow  progiess  and 
small  success  we  discern.  (3)  That  we  are  not  affrighted  from  our  steadfastness 
by  the  approach  of  sufferings,  but  resolutely  adhere  to  God  and  a  good  conscience, 
"  withstanding  in  an  evil  day,  that  having  donfi  all  we  may  stand."  (4)  That  we 
suffer  not  ourselves  to  be  drawn  aside  from  the  faith  or  practice  of  the  gospel  by 
giving  heed  to  them  that  lie  in  wait  to  deceive  ;  but  "  beware,  lest  being  led  away 
by  the  error  of  the  wicked,  we  fall  from  our  own  steadfastness  "  (2  Pet.  iii.  17). 
(o)  That  we  be  not  insensibly  drawn  on  to  apostacy  by  the  importunate  allurements 
of  present  temptations.     II.  The  necessity  of  this  qualification  of  steadfast- 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  551 

NESS    IN    THE     WHOLE     CHRISTIAN     TEMPER    AND    WORK.         1.    It    is     neceSSai'y    tO     OUr 

acceptance  with  God  and  our  final  happiness  by  Divine  constitution.  2.  It  is 
necessary  to  the  credit  of  our  holy  profession.  Nothing  is  so  great  a  disparagement 
to  religion,  and  so  freely  opens  the  mouths  of  its  enemies,  as  any  scandalous  falls, 
and  especially  the  open  apostasy  of  those  who  have  made  a  distinguishing  pretence 
to  it.  3.  It  is  necessary,  in  conformity  to  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  we  may  pre- 
vailingly hear  His  resemblance,  though  we  cannot  in  this  world  do  it  perfectly. 
By  way  of  reflection — 1.  We  have  here  a  rule  for  trying  the  goodness  of  our 
state,  as  far  as  we  are  advanced  in  life,  by  inquiring  into  the  evangelical  constancy 
of  the  Christian  temper  and  course,  since  we  have  given  up  our  names  to  be  the 
Lord's.  Whether  it  has  been  the  daily  settled  bent  of  our  souls  to  please  God  and 
avoid  every  known  sin?  2.  The  best  have  room  to  censure  themselves  for  the 
lesser  unevennesses  of  their  frames  and  course.  3.  We  have  all  reason  to  be 
excited  to  the  greatest  concern  and  care  that  we  may  always  be  steadfast  and 
unmovable  in  the  work  of  the  Lord.  {J.  Evans,  D.D.)  On  steadfast7iess  in  the 
profession'  and  jjrdctice  of  religion : — I.  Explain  the  exhortation  in  the  text.  ' 
1.  The  first  particular  in  the  text  is  steadfastness,  which  refers  both  to  doctrine  \J 
and  practice.  (1)  First,  then,  to  doctrine.  Men  often  embrace  opinions  without 
examining  sufliciently  iuto  the  foundations  of  them.  When  the  assent  is  thus 
hastily  given,  it  is  easily  shaken,  and  every  succeeding  teacher  is  thus  able  to 
subvert  the  tenets  of  his  immediate  predecessor.  Before  a  man  forms  an  opinion, 
he  ought  to  judge  maturely;  and,  after  it  is  formed,  he  ought  to  be  open  to  con- 
viction. There  is  an  obstinacy  in  persisting  in  a  wrong  opinion  which  is  as 
culpable  as  unsteady  adherence  to  a  right  one.  Having  embraced  the  truth,  we 
ought  to  continue  in  it,  that  we  may  grow  up  in  all  things  to  Him,  who  is  the 
head.  (2)  Agiiin,  we  must  be  steadfast  in  practice.  The  steadfastness  which  the 
apustle  enjoins  takes  the  law  of  God  for  the  rule  of  conduct,  and  by  this  law  it 
abides.  It  makes  religion  the  unremitting  business  of  life.  It  is  a  regular,  uni- 
form, a'ld  persevering  principle;  it  neither  rises  nor  falls;  it  neither  ebbs  nor 
flows ;  it  neither  blazes  forth  with  extravagant  fervour,  nor  is  chilled  with  frigid 
indifference.  The  path  of  the  steadfast  is  as  the  shining  light,  which  shineth 
more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day.  2.  The  duty  of  being  "  immovable  "  has  / 
probably  a  I'eference  to  those  temptations  to  which,  in  the  early  ages  of  Christianity, 
all  were  exposed  who  embraced  the  gospel ;  and  which,  consideruig  the  weakness 
of  human  nature,  had  a  strong  tendency  to  remove  them  from  the  good  way  which 
they  had  eo  lately  chosen.  But  though  we  have  nothnig  to  fear  from  religious 
peisecution,  and  though  our  faith  be  not  tried  by  sufferings  such  as  theirs,  there 
are  still  many  temptations  that  may  render  us  movable.  Piiches  still  catch  the 
eye,  and  kindle  the  desire  of  the  covetous.  Licentious  pleasures  still  allure  the 
voluptuous.  There  are  still  honours  to  tempt  the  ambitious.  And  these  render 
men  as  movable  as  persecution  itself.  To  be  immovable  implies  that  we  live  under 
habitual  impressions  of  religion ;  and  though  from  infirmity,  from  the  strength  of 
passion,  or  the  power  of  temptHtion,  we  may  be  led  astray,  yet  it  is  our  earnest 
desire  to  walk  in  the  ways  of  holiness,  and  to  have  respect  to  all  God's  command- 
ments. This  is  to  be  the  prevailing  desire  of  the  heart.  This  is  to  be  the  pre- 
dominating principle  of  the  conduct.  Nothing  is  better  calculated  to  render  us 
immovable  in  our  Christian  progress  than  a  firm  and  lively  faith.  Would  all  the 
]ileasures  or  riches  of  the  world  ten'pt  a  man  under  a  thorough  conviction  that  by 
gaining  them  he  should  lose  his  own  soul?  3.  By  "the  work  of  the  Lord  "  we  ^ 
are  to  understand  a  life  and  conversation  regulated  by  the  precepts  of  the  gospel. 
"Abounding"  in  this  work  implies  that  we  embrace  every  opportunity  of  doing 
our  duty  ;  that  in  situations  in  which  we  are  called  forth  to  exhibit  our  duty  to 
God,  we  perform  it  in  conformity  to  His  Holy  Word  ;  that  a  similar  performance  is 
given  to  what  refers  to  our  fellow-creatures  ;  that  in  all  things  respecting  God,  our 
neighbour,  or  ourselves,  our  condnct  is  directed  by  His  law,  and  agreeable  to  it. 
But  it  is  not  enough  that  we  acquire  all  the  virtues  of  the  Christian  character ; 
these  we  must  possess  in  the  highest  degree  ;  we  must  make  continual  progress  in 
holiness  ;  we  must  be  advancing  from  one  degree  of  grace  and  perfection  to 
another;  we  must  study  to  arrive  at  the  fulness  of  the  stature  of  the  perfect 
man,  which  is  in  God,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  II.  The  encouragement 
which  we  have  to  comply  with  the  exhortation  in  the  text.  "  Our  labour  in 
the  Lord  is  not  in  vain."  1.  It  is  not  "  in  vain  "  even  in  this  world.  Ihough  \/ 
piety  and  virtue  be  not  attended  with  a  complete  reward  in  this  life,  and  though, 
in  some  cases,  they  may  expose  to  temporal  loss,  yet  the  advantages  resulting  from 


552  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xv. 

them  are  more  than  sufficient  to  counterbalance  any  sufferings  to  which  their 
practice  may  expose  us.  Peace  of  mind  and  inward  satisfaction  are  their  peculiar 
reward.  A  good  man  is  at  all  times  satisfied  from  himself ;  a  good  conscience  is 
a  perpetual  feast.  Happiness,  indeed  for  a  time,  may  be  changed  into  misery; 
health,  in  the  course  of  human  life,  may  be  turned  into  sickness,  but  the  peace  of 
conscience  continues  for  ever.  "  Great  peace  have  they,"  says  the  psalmist, 
"  which  love  Thy  law."  But  the  reward  of  the  virtuous  consists  not  merely  of 
inward  peace.  In  the  ordinary  tiansactions  of  life  the  effects  of  piety  and  virtue 
are  seen  and  felt.  It  will  be  found  that,  even  with  regard  to  temporal  affairs,  "he 
that  walketh  uprightly,  walketh  surely."  A  fair  character  and  unsullied  reputation 
carry  a  man  forward  in  the  world,  and  contribute  more  effectually  to  promote  his 
w  prosperity  than  all  the  unworthy  arts  of  falsehood  and  dishonesty.  2.  It  is  in  the 
future  life  that  the  rewards  of  the  righteous  will  be  full  and  adequate.  There  the 
seeds  that  are  now  sown  shall  arrive  at  maturity,  and  flourish  for  ever  ;  there 
the  righteous  shall  receive  that  crown  of  glory  which  fadeth  not  away  ;  there  they 
shall  be  priests  and  kings  unto  God,  and  live  with  Him  for  ever.  (G.  Golclie.) 
Steadfastness,  icork,  and  hope : — There  are  many  places  in  St.  Paul's  writings 
where  the  "  therefores  "  are  to  be  cart  fully  noted.  But  there  is  no  place,  except 
perhaps  in  Piom.  viii.  1,  where  the  "  therefore"  is  so  emphatic  as  here.  We  have 
not  only  hope  in  this  life,  our  faith  is  not  vain,  &c.,  therefore  "  be  ye  steadfast,"  etc. 
We  know  by  what  is  revealed  in  this  chapter  that  our  labour  is  not  in  vain,  "  there- 
fore "  let  us  labour.  We  have  here — I.  Immoveable  steadfastness.  In  what?  1. 
In  the  belief  of  the  actual  resurrection  of  Christ.  It  is  the  apostle's  design  to 
show  that  that  is  the  foundation  of  our  faith,  and  that  if  that  can  be  overthrown 
all  our  hopes  are  vain  ;  but  that  if  Christ  be  indeed  risen,  then  we  are  to  feel 
assured  that  our  forgiveness  is  secure,  and  that  we  have  a  full  answer  to  the 
demands  of  the  broken  law  of  God.  2,  But  we  are  warranted  in  regaiding  this 
exhortation  as  also  pointing  to  steadfastness  in  every  fundamental  Christian  trutb. 
There  are  many  questions  on  which  men  may  differ  with  the  widest  charity.  But 
we  are  not  allowed  to  give  and  take  on  such  matters  as  the  atonement,  &c.  And 
in  these  days  when  men  are  being  driven  by  every  wind  of  doctrine  away  from 
their  moorings  it  is  specially  needful  for  us  to  pray  to  be  kept  steadfast  in  the 
faith.  Of  course  it  is  the  duty  of  the  Church  to  adapt  itself  to  the  changed 
circumstances  of  the  age,  but  with  regard  to  the  truth  of  God  there  must 
^v/  be  no  compromise.  II.  Abounding  wouk.  1.  Before  we  get  outside  our  own 
homes,  before  we  use  our  telescopes  to  look  for  distant  objects,  un<^erstand 
that  the  Lord's  work  is  your  own  proper  duties  discharged  as  unto  God.  The 
first  way  in  which  the  humblest  and  the  highest  is  to  do  the  work  of  the 
Lord  is  by  bringing  tbe  religion  of  .Jesus  in  its  lofty  principles  and  noble  motives 
into  the  duties  of  daily  life.  The  Christian  servant  can  do  the  work  of  1he 
Lord  by  being  a  good  servant,  the  young  man  in  a  place  of  trust  by  promoting  his 
employer's  interest.  Before  you  talk  of  Sunday-schools,  Christian  associations, 
&c.,  go  to  the  kitchen,  counting-bouse,  &c.,  with  the  feeling — this  is  the  work  which 
V^  God  has  given  me  to  do.  2.  Yet  there  must  be  many  who  by  self-denial  and 
economy  can  undertake  some  religions  work.  A  henrt  hungering  for  duty  will  be 
sure  to  find  it.  If  you  are  ready  to  say,  "Lord,  give  me  some  work  to  do,"  the 
Lord  will  respond.  Here  I  would  appeal  particularly  to  young  women,  for  they 
have  greater  opportunities — Are  you  worKing  for  God  or  killing  your  time — pre- 
tending to  do  woik  with  >our  fingers  ^^hit•h  is  all  but  useless  or,  far  worse,  poison- 
ing your  mind  with  frivolous  or  impure  novels?  3.  But  the  apostle  presses  you 
furtlier.  He  asl<s  not  only  are  you  working,  but  are  you  abounding  in  the  work. 
'  "  Herein  is  My  Father  glorified  that  ye  bear  much  fruit  " — not  a  little  or  an  occa- 
sional bearinti;  of  fruit.  Pielitaon  is  not  a  thing  of  fits  and  starts,  a  life  of  spiritual 
spasms.  4.  Paul  presses  you  still  fuither.  "Always."  You  are  to  err  rather  by 
excess  than  by  defeat.  And  while  so  much  is  being  done,  how  much  remains  to 
be  done  !  III.  A  suhe  hope.  It  is  not  forasmuch  as  ye  trust,  speculate,  think,  but 
"know,"  that  your  labour  is  not  in  vain.  It  is  not  in  vain  because — 1.  No  real 
■work  for  God  can  be  in  vain.  We  are  constantly  tempted  to  think  we  have  failed; 
yet  we  must  know  a  great  deal  more  about  providence,  the  issues  of  things,  and  the 
bearings  of  what  we  have  done  before  we  so  conclude.  Many  a  minister,  Sunday- 
school  teacher  has  so  f(>lt  about  men  and  boys  who  are  now  earnest  Christians.  2. 
For  evei-y  work  of  God  there  is  a  rewaid — not  of  merit,  but  of  grace.  "  God  is  not 
unrighteous,"  &c.  "  Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant."  {Canon  Miller.) 
Motiies  for  stendfastness  : — The  apostle  had  been  proving  the  resurrection,  yet  he 


CHAP.  XV.]  I.   CORINTHIANS. 


■was  not  to  forget  to  make  practical  use  of  the  doctrine  which  he  estaWished.  He 
was  not  like  tliose  who  hew  down  trees  and  siiuare  them,  but  forgot  to  build  the  house 
therewith.  He  brin^^s  to  light  the  great  stones  of  truth  :  but  he  is  not  content  with 
being  a  mere  quair.yman,  he  labours  to  erect  the  tenjple  of  Christian  holiness.  He 
does  not  merely  grope  among  the  lower  strata  of  truth  ;  he  ploughs  the  rich  upper 
soil,  sows,  reaps,  gathers  in  a  harvest,  and  feeds  many.  Thus  should  the  practical 
ever  flow  from  the  doctrinal  like  wine  from  the  clusters  of  the  grape.  Note  here — 
I.  Two  GREAT  POINTS  OF  CiiKisTiAN  CHARACTEK.  1.  "  Be  ve  steadlast,  unmoveable." 
Two  things  are  wanted  in  a  good  soldier,  steadiness  under  fire  and  entliusiasm 
during  a  charge.  The  first  is  the  more  essential  in  most  battles,  ttie  most  essential 
virtue  for  victory  is  for  a  soldier  to  know  how,  "  haviig  done  all  to  stand."  (1)  Be 
ye  steadfast,  (a)  In  the  doctrines  of  tlie  gospel.  Know  what  you  know,  and, 
knowing  it,  cling  to  it.  There  are  certain  things  which  are  true;  find  them  out, 
grapple  them  to  you  as  with  hooks  of  steel.  Buy  the  truth  at  any  price  and  sell  it  ^ 
at  no  price,  {b)  In  not  being  changeable.  Some  have  one  creed  to-day  and  another 
to-morrow,  variably  as  a  lady's  fashions.  There  are  many  like  those  described  by 
Whitfield,  "  yi)U  might  as  well  try  to  measure  the  moon  for  a  suit  of  clothes  as  to 
tell  what  they  believed."  How  can  a  tree  giow  when  perpetually  shifted  ?  How  can 
a  soul  make  progress  if  it  is  evernmre  changing  its  course  ?  (c)  In  character.  Alas  ! 
many  Christians  have  started  aside  as  a  deceitful  bow.  Their  integrity  was  once 
unquestioned,  but  now  they  have  learned  the  ways  of  a  faithless  world ;  truth  was 
on  their  lij),  but  now  they  have  learned  to  flatter ;  they  were  once  zealous,  but  are 
now  careless.  Be  ye  not  corrupte^l  by  evil  communications,  (d)  In  attainments.  Is 
not  Christian  life  with  many  like  the  sea  which  spends  its  force  in  perpetual  ebb 
and  flow :  to-day  all  earnest,  to-morrow  all  indifferent ;  to-day  generous,  to-morrow 
mean?  What  they  build  wilh  one  hand  they  pull  down  wiih  the  other.  Be  ye 
steadfast.  When  ye  climb  ask  for  grace  to  keep  there.  Columbus  would  not  have 
discovered  a  new  world  if  he  had  sailed  a  little  way  and  then  had  turned  his  timid 
prow  towards  port,  (e)  In  Chiistian  work.  Perseverance  is  at  once  the  crown  and 
the  cross  of  service.  Have  you  taken  a  class  in  the  Salibath  school  ?  The  novelty  of 
it  may  cai'ry  you  through  a  month  or  two,  but  be  steadfast  and  hold  on  year  after 
year,  for  thei'ein  will  lie  your  honour  and  success.  Noah  preached  for  120  years, 
and  where  were  his  converts?  He  may  have  had  a  great  many,  but  they  were  all 
dead  and  buried  with  the  exception  of  himself  and  family.  (2)  "  Be  ye  unmove- 
able." Be  "  steadfast"  in  times  of  peace,  like  rocks  in  the  midst  of  a  calm  and 
glassy  sea ;  be  unmoveable  like  those  same  rocks  when  the  billows  dash  against 
them.  Be  unmoveable — (a)  When  you  are  assailed  by  argument.  No  man  can 
answer  all  the  queries  which  others  can  raise,  or  reply  to  all  objections  which  may  be 
brought  against  the  most  obvious  facts.  It  will  be  your  jight  course  to  be  unmove- 
able, that  your  adversary  may  see  that  his  sophisms  are  of  no  avail,  (b)  When  you 
are  met  by  bad  example.  The  world  never  overcame  the  Church  in  argument  yet, 
for  it  has  always  refuted  itself ;  but  its  example  has  often  told  upon  the  soLiiers  of 
Christ  with  powerful  effect.  The  current  of  the  world  runs  furiously  towards  sin,  and 
the  fear  is  lest  the  Lord's  swimmers  should  not  be  able  to  stem  the  flood,  (c)  In  the 
fear  of  the  world's  persecutions  and  its  smiles.  2.  "  Always  aboundiiig  in  the  work 
of  the  Lord."  (1)  Every  Christian  ought  to  be  engaged  "  in  the  woik  of  the  Lord." 
True,  our  every-ilay  labour  ought  to  be  so  done  as  to  honour  His  name,  but  every 
Christian  should  be  labouring  in  seme  sphere  of  holy  service.  (2)  He  is  to  aViound 
in  it.  Do  much,  very  much,  all  you  can  do,  and  a  litt'e  more.  Our  vessels  are 
never  full  till  they  run  over.  (3)  He  is  to  be  "always  abounding."  Borne  Chris- 
tians think  it  enough  to  abound  on  Sundays.  When  you  are  young  abound  in 
service,  and  in  miodle  and  old  age.  (4)  In  the  work  of  the  Lord.  We  must  never 
become  proud,  but  remember  that  it  is  God's  work,  and  whiitever  we  accomp'ish  is 
accomplished  rather  by  God  in  us  than  by  us  for  God.  II.  The  motive  which 
TJEGES  us  TO  THESE  TWO  DUTIES.  Let  US  be  stcaclfast,  for — 1.  Our  principles  are  true. 
If  Christ  has  not  risen,  then  we  are  the  dupes  of  an  imposition,  and  let  us  give  it 
up.  But  if  Chiist  hath  risen,  then  our  doctrines  are  true,  and  let  ns  hold  Ihena 
firmly  and  promulgate  them  earnestly.  Since  our  cause  is  a  good  one  let  ns  seek  to 
advance  it.  2.  Christ  is  risen,  therefore  what  we  do  is  not  done  for  a  dead  Christ. 
We  are  not  contending  for  an  effete  dynasty,  "or  a  name  to  conjure  by,  but  we  have 
a  living  King,  one  who  is  able  both  to  occupy  the  throne  and  to  lead  on  our  hosts 
to  battle.  If  it  could  be  proved  to-morrow  that  Napoleon  still  lived,  there  might  be 
some  hope  for  his  party,  but  with  the  chieftain  dead  the  cause  faints.  3.  We  shall 
rise  again.     If  what  we  do  for  God  were  to  have  its  only  reward  on  earth  it  were  a 


r' 


554  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

poor  prospect.     Never  think  of  diminishing  your  service,  rather  increase  it,  for  the 
revrard  is  at  hand.     And  remember  that  as  you  will  rise  again,  so  those  whom  you 

V  come  in  contact  with  will  also  rise.  [C.  H.  Sparqeon.)  Unmoveahly  steadfast: — 
There  is  no  tautology  here.  Be  "steadfast"  when  all  goes  well,  and  "  uumove- 
able  "  when  it  goes  otherwise.  That  is  where  many  fail.  They  are  steadfast  so 
long  as  all  goes  j^leasautly ;  but  when  the  slightest  ci  oss  comes,  then  they  go  ;  they  are 
not  unmovcrible.  Yonder  oak  is  steadfast  in  tlie  summer  sunset,  when  the  western 
glory  rests  its  blessedness  upon  its  head,  and  the  evening  breeze  whispers  through 
its  branches ;  it  is  unmoveable  in  the  black  midnight  when  the  howling  storm  tears 
through  the  forest,  and  eveiy  other  tree  is  uprooted  and  flung  to  the  earth.  That 
rock  in  the  sea  is  steadfast  when  the  ocean  around  it  is  only  a  broad,  bright  mirror 
to  catch  the  glories  of  heaven  and  pour  them  back  again  on  the  sky ;  and  it  is 
"  unmoveable  "  when  the  ocean  stoim  is  raging  round,  and  seeks  to  hurl  it  from  its 

'X^base  or  tear  it  up  from  its  foundations.  (J.  P.  Chown.)  The  tuovk  of  the  Lord 
(to  the  young) : — I.  Oun  work.  Work  is  the  law  of  the  universe.  Man  is  the  only 
idler.  God  works  in  nature,  providence,  and  grace.  The  law  of  the  Chuich  is 
work.  Our  work  must  begin  with  ourselves.  It  is  very  much  easier  to  recommend 
religion  to  others  than  it  is  to  secure  it  ourselves.  Religion,  like  charity,  must  begin 
athume.  1.  "Be  steadfast,"  settled,  decided.  "  Unstable  as  watej'.iliou  shalt  not 
exceL"  (1)  That  is  ihe  weak  place  with  thousands  of  young  men  and  women. 
They  are  tossed  about  by  every  wind,  halting  between  two  opinions.  And  remember, 
the  man  who  has  not  decided  is  decided  not  to  be  a  Christian.  (2)  You  must  decide 
yourself.  Your  mother  can  plead  for  you,  but  she  cannot  decide  for  you.  God 
Himself  cannot  decide.  Christ  says,  "I  have  died  for  you."  The  Spirit  says,, 
"  I  have  striven  for  you  "  ;  heaven  and  earth  are  waiting  for  you.  Gud  help 
/70U  to  say,  "  His  people  shall  be  ray  people,  and  their  God  my  God."  2.  Having 
Vgot  right,  keep  right — "  uinnoveable."  That  is  not.  ea^^y  work.  You  have  mighty 
toes.  You  are  bound  for  the  kingdom,  and  the  devil  is  bound  to  hinder  you  if  he 
can.  The  world  comes  in.  What  are  yt.u  to  do  ?  You  are  on  the  rock — (1)  Now 
fortify  yourself — -"add  to  your  faith  viitue,  and  to  virtue  knowledge,"  &c. ;  build 
these  all  round  you,  and  then  when  the  sweep  of  the  wave  comes  you  will  be 
"  unmoveable."  (2)  Treasure  the  promises.  Faith  must  have  God's  Word  to  stand 
upon.  (3)  Bead  carefully  the  history  of  God's  dealings  with  His  people.  Some 
people  are  all  promises,  but  God  is  a  performing  God.  Bead  the  record  outside  the 
book,  for  God  lias  not  left  off  woikmg.  (4)  Keep  up  your  close  union  with  God, 
"  Taste  and  see  tlmt  the  Lord  is  Kood."  ])o  not  be  content  with  a  second-hand 
religion  ;  it  does  not  wear  well.  If  a  man  has  once  tasted  honey,  all  the  scientific 
men  in  the  world  cannot  persuade  him  that  it  is  not  sweet.  3.  Care  for  others. 
The  Christian  religion  is  the  determined  and  constant  enemy  of  selfishness.  Did 
Jesus  teach  us  to  pray,  "  take  me  to  heaven  "  ?  No.  "  Thy  kingdom  come."  The 
work  of  the  Lord  is  tne  same  kind  of  woi'k  that  Jesus  did,  who  left  ur.  an  example 
that  we  should  tread  in  His  steiis.  "  He  went  about  doing  good."  The  Church  is 
the  body  of  Christ,  and  we  as  members  of  that  body  must  ask,  "  Lord,  what  wilt 
Thou  have  me  to  do?  "  Some  people  seem  to  fancy  that  they  cannot  be  doing  the 
work  of  the  Lord  unless  they  get  into  a  pulpit  or  take  a  Bible-class.  Jesus  fed  the 
hungry,  comforted  the  sorrowful,  healed  the  sick,  saved  the  lost.  Everylhing  that 
is  for  the  good  of  man  is  the  work  of  the  Lord.  Dr.  Arnold,  of  Eugby,  said  that 
the  work  of  the  Lord  was  to  make  earth  like  heaven  and  every  man  like  God.  Now> 
set  to  work  at  home  ;  try  to  make  your  home  like  heaven.  Practise  good  temper. 
Do  everything  you  can,  remembering  that  you  are  Christ's  representative.  Do  you 
know  of  a  young  man  out  of  woik  ?  Try  to  get  him  a  shop.  There  is  a  poor  fellow 
going  wrong ;  now  you  try  and  get  him  to  sign  the  pledge.     II.  How  are  we  to  do 

Y  THIS  WORK?  1.  Heartily,  "  abounding."  VVe  are  not  hirelings;  we  are  sons  and 
daughters.  We  serve  Him  not  grudgingly  or  of  necessity,  but  our  hearts  are  in  our 
work.  Not  only  are  we  not  hirelings,  hut  we  are  not  Jews.  They  were  surrounded 
by  a  network  of  law ;  but  we  are  under  love,  and  love  does  not  want  commands — 
it  only  wants  opportunity.  Under  the  dominion  of  love  you  are  not  asked  for  an 
Eight  Hours  Bill.     Love  can  never  do  enough.     Think  of  a  mother  with  an  Eight 

/Hours  Bill !  2.  "  Always  abounding  " — in  youth,  in  manhood,  in  old  age.  Not 
spasmodic.  Some  of  our  people  are  rockets.  Y'^ou  hear  nothing  of  them  except 
when  some  revival  is  on.  Then  you  think  they  are  going  to  take  the  world  by 
\ystorm  ;  but  in  a  month  you  cannot  find  them  anywhere.  III.  The  reward.  It  is 
not  in  vain.  1.  It  will  make  you  strong.  How  is  the  arm  made  strong?  By 
jiulting  it  in  a  sling  ?     No ;  by  using  it.     Whom  do  you  go  to  when  you  want 


CHAP,  sv.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  655 

money?     Not  to  the  man  who  never  gives,  but  to  the  man  who  is  always  giving. 
2.  It  will  malce  yon  happier.     I  have  heard  wives  say  they  chvad  their  husbands 
being  out  ol:  work  because  then  tliey  are  always  grumbling  and  out  of  temper  ;  but 
when  there  is  plenty  of  work  tliey  are  all  right.     So  it  is  wiLh  religion.     3.  You  will 
have  an  exceeding  great  reward  by  and  by.   Christ  will  never  forget  a  kindness.    "  I 
was  hungry  and  you  fed  Me,"  &a.     "i'.nter  into  My  joy,  and  sit  down  on  My 
thione  I  "     (C.  Garrett.)         The  work  of  the  Lord: — I.  The  Chmstian  has  a  Lord. 
We  all  know  that  we  have  in  Christ  a  Saviour,  and  we  realise  and  live  upon  this 
every  day.     But  we  do  not  so  constantly  bear  in  mind  that  because  He  is  our 
Saviour  He  is  our  Lord.     And  yet  read  Rom.  xiv.  7,  &c.     Israel,  the  type  of  God's 
people,  were  redeemed  from  a  service  to  a  service ;  they  were  redeemed  from  the 
brick  kilns  of  Egypt  to  be  the  grateful  servants  of  the  God  who  had  delivered  them. 
And  so  with  the  Christian.     The  same  blood  which  speaks  our  peace  with  God  is 
the  ransom  which  buys  us  back  to  loyal  service  to  our  Master.     Paul  chose  as  his 
highest  title — "A  servant  of  Jesus  Christ."     "Whose  I  am,  and  whom  I  serve." 
II.  The  Christian's  Lord  has  a  work  for  him  to  do.    How  soh  mnly  is  this  brought 
before  us  in  our  Lord's  parable  of  the  talents !    "  He  left  unto  every  man  his  work  "  ; 
not  to  some  of  them,  but  "  to  every  man."     So  we  find,  that  when  men  are  really 
converted  t"  God  they  become  working  men.     Paul  reminds  the  Thessalonians  of 
the  effect  whic-h  the  gospel  had  upon  them  when  he  speaks  of  their  work  of  faith  ; 
not  talk  of  faith  and  labour  of  love:  not  your  mere  emotion,  excitement  of  love. 
We  would  not  so  preach  as  to  make  you  imagine  that  you  are  to  enjoy  no  sweet  and 
tranquil  emotions  ;  but  we  would  most  solemnly  warn  you  against  that  religion 
which  is  the  result  of  mere  feeling  and  excitement,  and  we  would  solemnly  call 
upon  you  if  you  profess  Christ  as  the  Lord,  to  work  for  Him.     Oh  !  it  makes  one's 
heart  sink  to  see  how  many  there  are  with  time  and  energy,  which  is  frittered  aw-ay 
for  vanity,  for  the  world.    How  few  liees  there  are,  and  how  many  liutterflies  !    The 
bee  enjoys  the  "  shining  hour,"  but  improves  it  also.     The  Christian  has  an  aim, 
which  is  the  aim  of  every  day,  week,  year,  of  his  whole  life — the  very  same  end 
wliich  is  before  the  archangel  who  stands  nighest  to  the  throne  of  God,  viz.,  the 
glory  of  Go'l ;  and  we  may  well  thank  God  when  by  promoting  the  salvation  of  the 
sinner  or  a  little  child  we  are  at  the  same  time  promoting  the  glory  of  that  God 
who  made  him,  and  the  glory  of  that  Saviour  who  bought  him  with  His  blood. 
How  strikii  gly  your  Lord  Himself  is  an  example  of  devotedness  to  the  great  work 
for  which  He  came  into  the  world  I     As  a  child  He  said,  "  Wist  ye  not  that  I  must 
be  about  My  Father's  business?  "     In  His  mid  career,  "  My  meat,"  He  says,  "  is  to 
do  the  will  of  Him  that  sent  Me,  and  to  finish  His  work."     And  then  at  the  end  of 
His  career,  "  I  have  finished  the  work  which  Thou  gavest  Me  to  do."     Here  is  not 
only  your  Lord,  but  your  pattern.   III.  The  Christian  is  to  be  abundant  in  Christ's 
WORK.     1.  This  expression  not  only  seems  to  imply  much  labour,  but  a  cheerful- 
ness of  heart  in  doing  our  work.    Oh  !  what  a  thing  it  is  to  do  one's  work  cheerfully 
— to  recollect  that  we  are  not  to  be  doling  out  to  Christ  as  little  as  we  possibly  can. 
This  was  th*^  case  with  the  early  Christians  and  with  the  apostle  himself  (ver.  10  ; 
Horn.  xvi.  12  ;  Phil.  iv.  3).     2.  And  whrtt  is  to  give  us  the  motive  for  this  cheerful 
and  this  abounding  exertion  ?  (Gal.  ii.  2).     And  when  once  that  motive  gets  into  the 
heart  theie  is  no  sacrifice,  no  labours  too  great  for  it  to  carry  you  through.     3. 
Here  is  a  question  for  us  all.     What  action  can  we  put  our  hands  upon  now,  and 
say,  in  the  sight  of  God,  that  action  was  done  from  love  to  Christ  ?     We  could  have 
no  ditiiculty  in  proving  that  we  love  our  parents,  that  we  love  our  children,  &c.    IV. 
The  Christian's  work  for  Christ  is  a  constant  work.    "  Always  abounding."     We 
are  not  to  be  Christians  by  fits  and  starts.     Some  Christians  are  full  of  activity  and 
effort  one  day,  when  they  have  taken  up  something  new  ;  but  when  the  novelty  has 
gone  off  there  is  a  collapse.    There  must  be  a  perseverance  in  every  work  we  under- 
take for  Christ,  and  there  must  be  an  endeavour  to  have  Christ's  glory  continually 
before  us.     There  is  no  work  for  Christ  which  deserves  so  much  of  Chrisiian  per- 
severance as  the  work  of  Sunday-school  teachers.   Young  pi  rsons  especially  are  apt 
to  form  an  unreal  view  of  the  work  they  are  going  to  undertake.     They  think  there 
is  something  beautiful,  romantic,  in  feeding  the  lambs  of  Christ's  flock.    And  when 
they  enter  the  Sunday-school,  what  have  they  got?     Perhaps  a  class  of  idle,  way- 
WHrd,  fretful,  dull  children  ;  and  they  find  that  the  feeding  of  the  lambs  of  Chtist's 
flock  is  a  far  heavier  trial  of  their  Christian  principle  and  their  Christian  failh  than 
they  had  any  idea  of.    And  what  is  the  result  ?     How  many  are  there  of  those  who, 
having  entererl  tlie  work  under  mistaken  notions  of  it,  are  going  on  in  it  without 
throwing  their  hearts  into  it,  and  consequently  without  efficiency  !   Go  into  Sunday- 


556  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

school  after  Sunclay-school,  and  see  those  six  or  eight  little  children  sitting  down 
there  :  and  they  are  doing  nothing.  Why  not  ?  There  is  no  teacher  present.  He  is 
not  kept  away  by  the  providence  of  God  ;  but  it  was  not  convenient  or  pleasant  for 
him  to  come  that  morning  ;  and  the  little  children  go  home,  and  are  constrained  to 
report  to  their  parents  that  they  were  at  school,  and  that  there  was  no  one  there  to 
teach  them.  Conclusion:  Do  not  think  I  am  not  recognising  what  God  has 
done  by  means  of  many  faithful  teachers ;  but  I  have  long  ago  come  to  this 
conviction,  that  the  teacher  makes  tbe  class,  and  consequently  that  teachers 
make  the  school.  And  therefore  tlie  work  really  is  a  solemn  responsibility. 
If  you  enter  on  that  work  you  are  bound  to  do  everything  in  your  power — in 
the  spirit  of  prayer,  invoking  the  aid  of  that  Holy  Spirit  without  whom  all 
effort  is  worthless — to   bring  the   children  to   Christ.      (Canon   Miller.)  The 

work  of  u-orks : — "Therefore" — because  death  is  not  your  end,  because  you 
are  to  live  body  and  soul  in  a  future  state—"  be  ye  steadfast."  The  work  of  soul 
restoration  is — I.  Specially  Divine.  It  is  "  the  work  of  the  Lord."  The  work  of 
the  Lord  is  seen  in  the  universe  and  in  providence,  but  the  spiritual  restoration 
of  mankind  is  in  a  special  sense  His.  It  is  His  great  work.  Think — 1.  Of  the 
preparation  for  this  work ;  four  thousand  years  of  priests,  seers,  miracles,  as 
preliminary.  2.  Of  the  sacrifices  made  to  accomplish  it.  The  incarnate  God  lived, 
suffered,  and  died.  3.  Of  the  unceasing  agency  of  tlie  Divine  Spirit  in  order  to 
effect  it.  He  is  always  striving  with  men  from  age  to  age  and  in  all  lands.  4.  Of 
its  wonderful  results.  Millions  of  lost  souls  redeemed  to  the  knowledge,  image, 
fellowship,  and  service  of  Almighty  God.  II.  Demands  the  most  earnest  efforts 
OF  MANKIND.  There  are  some  works  of  the  Lord  in  which  we  cannot  engage,  but 
here  we  are  "  labourers  together  with  Him."  Our  labour  must  be — 1.  Invincible, 
The  two  words,  "  steadfast  and  unmoveable,"  express  this.  So  many  are  the 
impulses  within,  so  many  are  the  forces  without,  opposing  the  work,  that  nothing 
but  an  invincible  determination  can  carry  us  through.  "  This  one  thing  I  do." 
2.  "Abounding."  The  spirit  of  this  work  should  reign  in  us,  everywhere  and  at 
all  times.  As  the  parental  element  inspires  the  mother,  and  mingles  with  all  her 
domestic  arrangements  and  pleasures,  so  this  spirit  must  inspire  us  and  mingle 
with  all  our  undertakings.  R(  ligion  in  a  man  is  either  everywhere  or  nowhere, 
everything  or  nothing.  III.  Must  inevitably  succeitd.  1.  There  are  two  kinds 
of  vain  labour — (1)  That  which  aims  at  a  worthless  end.  Therefore,  if  it  succeeds, 
it  is  useless.  (2)  That  which  is  directed  to  a  good  end,  but  can  never  realise  it, 
simply  because  it  is  too  indeterminate  and  feeble.  2.  But  here  is  a  work  that  must 
succeed.  Every  true  thought,  earnest  prayer,  godly  deed,  carry  in  themselves 
success.  As  all  tlie  elements  and  forces  of  this  world  go  to  build  up  a  new  stratum 
around  the  globe's  surface,  for  geologists  of  coming  ages  to  study,  so  all  that  I  do 
and  think  and  say  in  the  work  of  the  Lord  goes  to  give  blessedness  to  my  being. 
IV".  Will  folly  realise  its  success  in  the  future  world.  "  Therefore,"  says 
Paul,  "were  this  life  our  all,  our  spiritual  laiiour  mijiht  be  considered  vain."  What 
boots  our  striving  after  knowledge,  our  efforts  to  build  up  a  noble  character,  if  the 
grave  be  our  end  ?  JUit  there  is  a  future,  and  in  it  there  is  a  full  reward.  All  the 
waters  of  holy  thought  and  effort  we  now  receive  into  our  being  go  to  make  a  well 
within  us  that  shall  spring  up  to  everlasting  life.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Christian 
activity  : — I.  The  nature  of  the  duty  here  stated.  "  The  work  of  the  Lord," 
i.e. — 1.  The  work  in  which  the  Lord  Himself  was  employed.  Here,  Christian, 
behold  thy  model,  thy  motive,  and  thy  honour.  How  does  it  stimulate  the  faithful 
servant  to  see  his  mnster  labouring  by  his  side  ;  and  what  servant  is  he  who  can 
take  ease  or  be  idle  while  his  lord  is  toiling  in  the  field  ?  2.  The  work  which  the 
Lord  has  commanded.  Besides  the  pursuit  of  our  own  personal  salvation,  we  are 
enjoined  to  seek  the  advancement  of  Christ's  cause.  3.  The  work  in  tbe  results 
of  which  the  Lord  will  be  glorified.  When,  therefore,  we  propagate  His  gospel,  and 
are  successful  in  converting  sinners,  we  collect  His  tribute  and  gather  His  reward. 
4.  The  work  to  which  the  Lord  alone  can  give  success.  "  It  is  not  by  mif.'ht  or  by 
power,  but  by  His  Spirit."  II.  The  manner  in  which  this  duty  should  be 
PERFORMED.  1.  Abundantly.  It  may  be  said  of  many  sciolists  that  they  half  know 
everything,  and  of  some  Christians  that  they  half  do  everything.  This  is  in  direct 
opposition  to  the  Scripture,  which  requires  us  to  do  everything  in  the  service  of 
God  with  all  our  lieart  and  sonl  and  ^.trength-  Our  fruit  should  not  only  be 
excellent  in  quality,  but  plenteous  in  quantity.  This  expression  implies — (1)  That 
our  exertions  should  be  proportioned  to  our  ability.  "  Unto  whom  much  is  given, 
from  them  much  is  required.'      Propoition  is  the  great  rule  of  man's  accountability, 


cnAP.  XV.]  J.  CORINTHIANS.  557 

both  in  giving  and  doing.  (2)  That  we  eagerly  embrace  and  seek  out  for  oppor- 
tunities of  doing  good.  (3)  That  we  esteem  it  our  privilege,  and  not  our  hardship, 
to  do  the  woik  of  the  Lord.  2.  Perseveringly.  We  must  be  steadfast  and  immove- 
able. These  expressions  seem  to  imply  some  opposition  which  will  try  our  constancy. 
It  will  be  tried^(l)  By  the  misajiprehension  of  your  njotivcs  and  designs.  But 
Raphael  would  not  have  altered  the  masterpieces  of  his  pencil  to  please  a  blind 
critic,  nor  Handel  his  "Messiah"  at  the  suggestion  of  one  who  was  ignorant  of 
music.  (2)  By  ingratitude.  The  world  has  not  always  kncwn  its  best  friends,  nor 
should  the  world's  best  friends,  on  this  account,  bpcoine  its  enemies.  (3)  By 
derision.  (4)  By  apparent  want  of  succi  ss.  (5)  By  a  spirit  of  lukewaimness. 
The  rock  which  the  fury  of  a  thousjind  storms  could  not  shalte  m^y  waste  away  in 
time  from  some  principle  of  decomposition  concealed  wilhin  itself,  HI.  The 
MOTIVE  BY  WHICH  IT  IS  ENFOnCED.  1.  It  shall  uot  be  Unrewarded.  If,  indfed, 
we  were  not  permitted  to  look  beyond  the  present  world  for  our  reward,  we  should 
find  it  here.  The  spirit  of  Chiistian  zeal  is  a  source  of  unfailing  happiness  to 
itself.  Then  there  is  a  rich  reward,  which,  after  ripening  througlj  the  yeais  of 
time,  we  shall  enjoy  tlirou^-h  the  ages  <i  ^terni1y.  2.  It  shall  not  be  unsuccessful. 
The  language  of  the  text  implies- — (1)  Natural  tendency.  Such  labour  as  I  now 
enjoin — Bible  and  tract  distribution,  home  and  foreign  missions,  &c. — have  a 
peculiar  adaptation,  under  the  blessing  of  God,  to  effect  the  conversion  of  sinners. 
(2)  Ultimate  and  general  efficiency.  The  work  of  the  Lord,  wiih  whatever  local  or 
temporary  failures  it  may  be  attended,  shall  triumph  eventually  over  every  obstacle. 
The  truth  of  God  has  declared  it,  and  has  given  the  promise  into  the  band  of 
Omnipotence  to   be  performed.      (J.  Aiiriell  Jcniie.':.)  Labour  and  rtunrd  of  a 

Chrisiian: — I.  The  natuke  of  the  sekvice  or  God:  "Labour."  It  is  laborious 
because  of — 1.  The  vast  circumference  of  the  duty.  2.  The  conditions  required. 
3.  The  care  to  be  taken.  4.  The  opposition  encountered.  11.  The  eewadd  that 
sweetens  this  labour.  1.  Present.  (1)  Skill  and  ability  in  the  work.  (2)  Pro- 
tection and  security.  (3)  Peace.  2.  Future.  (W.  Gtirnall.)  Certain  reward  : — 
"  Wherefore  "■ — taking  these  facts,  Irutlis,  reasonings,  "  be  ye  steadfast,"  Ac. 
Every  new  truth  means  a  new  work.  No  truth  is  given  to  man  to  be  hoarded 
by  him.  One  reason  why  many  are  always  learning  and  never  coming  to  a  know- 
ledge of  the  truth  is  that  they  have  no  set  intent  and  purpose  to  use  truth.  They 
want  it  for  comfort  simply,  not  to  direct  them  along  the  road  of  duty.  The  leading 
ideas  of  our  text  are — I.  Eestfdlness.  1.  In  every  life  there  needs  to  be  a  restful 
centre  if  there  is  to  be  a  wise  and  well-ordered  activity.  The  ocean  itself  could 
not  bring  back  into  quiet  and  order  its  foaming  waves  if  it  had  not  a  deep  peace 
underneath.  But  in  our  day  the  question,  "What  shall  I  do  next?"  is  asked 
before  we  have  well  finished  that  which  went  before ;  and  so,  much  of  our  activity 
is  merely  consuming  time.  Therefore  it  is  that  the  apostle  says,  "  Be  ye  steadfast, 
unmoveable."  Consider  who  it  is  that  says  this.  It  is  the  man  of  all  others  most 
intensely  active;  but  his  activity  was  all  of  a  piece.  It  was  animated  by  a  single 
purpose — that  of  making  known  to  men  the  truth  that  had  come  to  us  in  Christ 
Jesus.  In  that  he  rested.  2.  When  the  Eternal  Father  gave  us  Christ  He  gave 
us  one  who  is  pre-harmocised  to  our  necessities.  When  the  mind  rests  in  Him  it 
rests  as  the  astronomer  rests  who  has  found  his  sun.  For  every  heart  there  must 
be  a  centre  of  affection,  for  every  mind  a  centre  of  light  to  which  we  can  look, 
alwa.vs  and  ever,  without  doubt  and  fear,  without  vacillation  and  variableness.  Can 
it  be  that  there  is  no  one  to  meet  that  necessity  ?  Wherever  you  find  hunger  you 
find  food;  wherever  you  find  intelligence  you  find  objects  which  appeal  to  it.  In 
Christ  Jesus,  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever,  is  God's  answer  to  our  need. 
In  Him  rest.  II.  Activity.  When  you  have  attained  rest  in  Christ  then  your 
activity  will  have  an  area  large  enough  for  the  employment  of  all  your  faculties. 
As  to  time,  we  are  to  work  "  always."  As  to  quantity,  we  are  to  "  abound  "  in  it. 
As  to  the  kind  of  work,  it  is  to  be  "  the  work  of  the  Lord."  There  is  room  for 
every  kind  of  work  on  which  a  man  can  ask  God's  blessing.  We  must  not  limit 
the  work  of  the  Lord  to  that  which  is  strictly  ecclesiastical.  Evevytbiug  which 
does  good  to  the  bodies,  minds,  souls  of  men  is  the  work  of  the  Loid  ;  and  "  they 
also  serve  who  only  stand  and  wait."  But  some  form  of  Christian  service  is  sure 
to  follow  a  vigorous  inwaid  faith.  Fill  a  man's  mind  with  such  truth  as  St.  Paul 
has  put  into  this  chapter,  and  he  will  want  to  incorporate  it  in  some  way.  Truth 
acts  on  the  mind  precisely  as  material  food  acts  on  the  body.  It  either  creates 
warmth  and  energy  or  it  creates  indigestion.  I  think  that  there  can  be  no  doubt 
that  good,  solid  Biblical  truth  does  not  agree  with  some   constitutions.     Their 


•558  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

mental  digestion  has  been  ruined  by  the  ice-cream  of  rationaUsm  and  the  luscious 
confections  of  an  emotional  and  superstitious  form  of  religion.  ]jut  to  those  who 
can  digest  "  strong  meat,"  what  nutriment  there  is  in  it! — what  inward  warmth  it 
creates!  what  energy  it  generates !  what  varied  activities  ensue  !— so  that  of  such 
it  may  be  said,  "  They  are  always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord."  III.  Con- 
fidence :  "  Forasmuch  as  ye  know  that  your  labour  is  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord." 
Every  Christian  worker  needs,  at  some  time  or  otlier,  just  these  words.  The  apostle 
himself  had  been  seemingly  defeated  again  and  again.  Yet  lie  was  ahvays  confident. 
A  man  working  along  the  lines  of  a  true  Christian  effoi't  can  never  work  in  vain. 
At  the  end  of  Christ's  earthly  life  there  was  nothing  to  show  but  a  small  band  of 
poor  wo'king  men  and  a  Cross.  Yet  that  defeat,  as  we  now  see  it,  was  the  most 
splendid  victory.  And  there  are  hundreds  of  men  who,  in  doing  the  work  of  the 
Lord,  have  had  to  bear  a  heavy  cro^;s.  I  believe  that  many  such  cases  will,  in  the 
judgment  of  the  Master,  have  been  victory.  With  the  New  Testament  in  my  hand, 
I  cannot  believe  in  some  of  our  methods  of  estimating  the  value  of  Church  work. 
Arithmetical  figures  can  never  express  spiritual  results.  We  cannot  introduce  the 
spirit  of  ecclesiastical  competition  into  our  Church  life  without  lowering  our 
spiritual  tone.  When  any  of  us  work  for  the  approval  and  applause  of  men  rather 
than  out  of  a  feeling  of  service  to  God  we  shall  have  our  reward,  but  it  will  never 
satisfy  us.  But  if,  seeing  the  excellency  of  Christian  work  as  well  as  its  necessity, 
we  are  willing  to  take  any  place  that  seems  to  need  us,  then  we  have  a  right  to 
believe  that  our  labour  shall  not  be  in  vain  in  the  Lord.  God  will  be  glorified; 
into  ourselves  there  will  come  a  character  which  shall  adapt  us  to  the  next  stage  of 
life,  and  our  souls  will  inevitably  be  influenced.  (Reuen  I'hovias,  D.D.)  The  joy 
of  ivorking  for  God  : — It  is  said  that  after  the  toils  of  the  day  Michael  Angelo 
would  sometimes  be  so  wearied  that  he  would  get  into  bed  without  undressing,  and 
as  soon  as  refreshed  by  sleep  would  get  up  again,  and  with  a  candle  stuck  in  his 
hat,  so  that  the  light  might  fall  properly  on  the  figure  on  which  he  was  at  work,  he 
would  pursue  his  beloved  art.  Living  in  a  state  of  celibacy,  he  was  accustomed  to 
say  his  art  was  his  wife  and  his  works  his  children,  and  when  some  persons 
reproached  him  with  leading  so  melancholy  a  life,  he  said,  "Art  is  jealous;  she 
requires  the  whole  and  entire  man."  So  in  the  work  in  which  we  are  engnged  we 
may  need  seasons  of  hard  and  difficult  and  solitary  labour.  But  how  wonderfully 
are  we  sustained  !  Then  work  becomes  a  joy.  The  most  difficult  employment  for 
the  Master  is  performed  with  a  great  deal  of  interest.  Work  is  not  only  a  joy,  but 
we  become  anxious  to  do  all  we  can  to  complete,  if  possible,  what  seems  to  be  our 
part  in  the  work  of  life.  Christian  work  a  safeguard  : — Whilst  the  stream  keeps 
running  it  keeps  clear ;  but  if  it  comes  once  to  a  standing  water,  then  it  breeds 
frogs  and  toads  and  all  manner  of  filth.  The  keys  that  men  keep  in  their  pockets, 
and  use  every  day,  wax  brighter  and  brighter ;  but  if  they  be  laid  aside  and  hang 
by  the  walls,  they  soon  grow  rusty.  Thus  it  is  said  that  action  is  the  very  life  of 
the  soul.  "  Always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord  "  is  the  way  to  keep  clear 
and  free  from  the  pollutions  of  the  world.  The  Lord's  tvorkers  should  be  unremit- 
ting : — In  common  with  hundreds  of  others,  I  visited  some  time  ago  the  garden  of 

a  Mr.  C to  see  a  century-plant  which  was  in  bloom.     Within  a  few  weeks  it 

shot  up  from  a  moderate-sized  shrub  to  a  stalk  thirty  feet  high  ;  it  sent  forth  two 
dozen  branches,  on  the  ends  of  which  were  several  hundreds  of  minute  yellow 

flowers.     That  aloe-plant  has  been  in  Mr.  C 's  garden  for  many  a  long  year, 

hut  it  never  attracted  my  atterrtion  before.  In  a  few  days  the  brief  blossoms 
dropped  off,  and  then  for  another  century  it  has  sunk  again  into  insignificance. 
But  the  neighbourmg  geraniums  and  rose-bushes  which  flower  out  every  season 
are  worth  an  army  of  periodical  monsters  which  can  be  admired  only  once  in  a  life- 
time. There  are  too  many  Church  members  who  are  like  that  aloe :  their  everyday 
appearance  is  very  unattractive,  and  it  is  only  on  very  rare  and  extraordinary 
occasions  that  they  show  any  blossoms  of  godliness.  This  world  will  not  be 
converted  by  century-plant  Christians  any  sooner  than  the  skies  will  be  steadily 
lighted  bj  cometa. 


CHAP.  XVI.]  I.  COBINTHIANS.  559 


CHAPTER   XVI. 

Vers.  1-4.  Now  concerning  the  collection. — CnJlectinn  in  church  : — This  is  in 
close  connection  with  the  subUnie  argument  about  the  resurrection.  There  is  nn 
gulf  between  doctrine  and  duty ;  rather,  most  intimate  union  between  the  h  pa  of 
heaven  and  details  of  common  life  on  earth.  Duty  is  the  fruit  of  rightly  believed 
doctrine;  character  is  the  index  and  result  of  crec').  I.  The  gift  of  puopkkty  is 
God's  spkcial  sehvice,  and  the  umpulse  of  all  oodly  jien.  It  may  be  in  His 
service  in  commerce  and  art,  but  in  religion  and  philanthropy  it  is  specially 
devoted  to  Him.  Love  must  give.  Lovers  of  God  give  to  Him.  Jacob  at 
Bethel;  David  asking,  "What  shall  I  render?"  &e.;  Mary  bringing  the  alabaster 
box.  II.  The  gift  of  property  to  God  is  enjoined  as  an  obligation  in  Scripiure. 
There  are — 1.  Literal  commands.  (1)  To  tlie  Hebrews,  tithes,  etc.  (2)  To  the 
Christians,  as  in  this  chapter.  2.  Promises  of  consequent  blessings.  "  Prove  Me 
now  herewith,"  &c. ;  "It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive."  III.  The  gift 
of  piioPHRTY  to  God  should  bk  systematic.  1.  Universal.  "  Every  one  of  you. " 
2.  Thoughtful.  It  is  to  be  by  a  laying  by,  which  means  frequent  thought,  and  on 
the  first  day  of  the  week,  when  associations  may  well  make  tlie  thouf^ht  sacred.  3. 
Propoitionate.  "As  God  hath  prospered."  4.  Thoroughly  unselfish.  Here  was 
a  Gentile  subscriiition  for  the  needs  of  Jews — Corinth  caring  for  Jerusalem.  (U^ 
E.  Tliuiiias.)  Cidlections  : — Deacon  Hanson  Parker,  of  New  York,  says:  "It  is 
all  very  well  to  talk  about  the  cattle  of  a  thousand  hills  being  the  Lord's,  but  the 
fact  is,  some  one  must  collect  them  together  and  drive  them  to  market  before  they 
can  be  of  much  service  to  the  Lord's  cause."  This  is  a  most  sensible  remark.  In 
our  churches  there  might  be  abundant  funds  for  the  work  of  the  Lord  if  a  more 
businesslike  method  was  taken  to  collect  the  money.  The  poor  pastor  pines  in 
poverty,  and  many  loving  hes-rts  are  ignorant  of  his  need,  or,  being  unsolicited,  do 
not  dare  to  offer  a  supply.  The  silver  and  tlie  gold  are  the  Lord's,  but  a  kindly, 
genial  person  to  collect  tiie  precious  metals  is  often  needed.  We  know  a  Church 
which  contributes  more  than  £300  to  missions,  but  this  was  not  the  cnse  till  an 
enthusiastic  deacon  took  up  the  laborious  task  of  going  round  to  the  friends.  Are 
there  not  gifts  of  collection  as  well  as  gifts  of  preaching?  If  some  deacons  were 
really  to  care  about  their  minister,  miKht  tlipy  not  save  him  from  downright  want 
by  personally  looking  up  the  seat  subscriptions?  It  is  wisdom  to  go  round  the 
thousand  hills,  if  there  be  so  many  within  reach,  and  fetch  home  some  of  the  cattle, 
large  and  small,  that  there  may  be  meat  in  the  Lord's  House.  Clirintian  giving  • — 
Christian  giving,  this  passage  teaches  us,  is — I.  Positive.  "  As  I  have  given 
orders."  II.  Personal.  "  Let  every  one  of  you."  III.  Private.  "Lay  by  him." 
IV.  Periodical.  "Upon  the  first  day  of  the  week,"  weekly.  V.  Pious.  "Upon 
the  first  day  of  the  week."  VI.  Prospective.  "  That  there  be  no  gatherings  wlien 
I  come."  VII.  Proportional.  "  As  God  has  prospered  him."  (J.  T.  C.  (hiJlan.) 
Charitg  :  its  principles  and  methods  : — We  have  here  an  illustration  of  one  peculiar 
use  of  Scripture.  This  distress  was  long  since  relieved.  The  apostle  wrote  for  his 
own  time,  yet  the  whole  account  is  as  fresh  and  in>^tructive  to  us  as  it  was  to  the 
Corinthians.  Note— I.  The  call  for  charity.  We  learn  from  Eom.  xv.  '2f)  that 
the  Jewish  converts  were  in  great  distress,  and  that  St.  Paul  summoned  the  Gentile 
converts  in  Achaia,  Galatia,  and  Eome  to  relieve  them.  Observe — 1.  How  all  (lis- 
tinctions  of  race  melt  away  before  Christianity.  Collections  had  often  bt  en  sent  by 
foreign  Jews,  but  here  was  a  Jewish  object  supported  by  Gentiles — a  new  thing  in 
the  world.  Christ  was  the  Man,  the  Saviour,  not  of  one  people,  but  of  the  world, 
and  in  Him  all  were  one.  Henceforth  there  was  neither  Jew  nor  Greek,  &c.  2. 
Jerusalem,  Corinth,  and  Galatia  were  linked  by  a  common  oliject.  You  have  seen 
a  magnet  applied  to  a  mass  of  iron  fihngs,  and  watched  the  multitude  of  delicate 
points  all  adhering  to  each  other,  through  the  invisible  influence  which,  sent 
throughout  them  all,  makes  each  in  its  turn  a  magnet.  To  scattered  races, 
separate  castes  and  ancient  enmities,  Christ  was  the  Magnet  which  united  ail.  3. 
This  had  been  done  before  by  war  and  trade.  In  earlier  times  the  different  and 
even  opposing  tribes  of  the  Eoman  republic  were  united  on  the  field  of  l)attle;  they 
felt  they  were  warring  for  the  same  cause.  Later  we  find  that  trade  united  men  by 
mutual  interest.  "We  will  not  injure  others,  because,  by  .so_doiner,  we  shall  injure 
ourselves."  Christianity  unites,  not  through  a  common  hatred  or  interest,  but 
through  a  common  love.  4.  Eemark  how  in  God's  counsels  sorrow  draws  out  good. 
Pain  and  sorrow  are  mysteries.      The  sufferers  at   Jerusalem  could  not   see  the 


5G0  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xvi, 

meaning  of  thoir  porrow;  nor  did  they  know  iiow  many  a  Greek  and  Roman  was 
weekly  laying  up  his  store  for  them;  nor  how,  through  their  pain,  Galatia  and 
Corinth  and  liome  were  drawn  by  cords  of  love  together.  So  we  often  suffer,  and 
see  no  good  result  from  it.  But  assuredly,  we  are  not  suffering  in  vain.  Suffering 
works  out  for  us  a  weight  of  g'ory,  which  tells  how  our  characters  are  perfected 
through  suffering ;  but  tliere  is  a  higher  Christian  light  to  see  our  pain  in  :  it  blesses 
others.  This  is  the  blessedness  of  the  suffering  of  Christ ;  it  is  the  law  of  the  Cross. 
To  be  willing  to  bear  in  order  to  teach  others! — to  lose,  in  order  that  ot)iers  may 
"  through  us  noblier  live  " — that  is  to  know  something  of  the  blessedness  He  knew. 
II.  The  principle  of  its  exercise.  1.  Systematic  in  manner  (ver.  2).  That  is, 
instead  of  waiting  for  one  stining  apostolic  apiJeal,  they  were  to  make  charity  the 
business  of  their  lives.  This  contribution  was  to  be  a  matter  of  principle,  and  not 
of  impulse.  One  burning  speech  of  St.  Paul's  might  have  elicited  a  lai'ger  sum. 
But  he  preferred  the  effects  of  steady  perseverance  to  those  of  vehement  emotion. 
For  impulse  is  often  mere  luxury.  To  give  largely,  to  strip  off  a  coat  to  give  to  a 
shivering  man,  may  after  all  be  nothing  more  than  a  relief  from  importunity,  or  a 
compact  with  conscience,  or  a  compromise  with  laziness.  On  the  contrary,  this 
systematic  plan  of  St.  Paul's — (1)  Costs  something,  and  (2)  teaches — {a)  The  habit 
of  a  thoughtful  life ;  it  reminds  us  continually  tliat  there  is  something  which  is 
owed  to  God,  and  therefore  is  not  our  own;  and  it  is  well  that,  by  an  outward 
system,  we  should  train  our  inward  spirit  to  the  unforgetful  thought  of  our  debt  to 
Him.  (ft)  Self-denial.  It  gradually  lays  the  foundation  of  a  life  of  Christian 
economy;  not  that  which  sacrifices  one  pleasure  for  anothei"  for  this  is  but  mere 
prudence ;  but  that  which  abridges  pleasure,  in  order  that  we  may  be  able  to  give 
to  God.  2.  The  measure  of  liberality  was  "  as  God  hath  prospered  him."  (1)  St. 
Paul  establishes  a  principle  here.  He  lays  down  no  rabbinical  maxim  of  one-tenth 
or  one-fourth.  He  leaves  the  measure  to  our  own  conscience.  "  Ask  thyself,"  he 
says  to  each,  " how  much  owest  thou  unto  thy  Lord?  "  (2)  Besides  a  wide  margin 
is  here  left  necessarily  for  variety  of  circumstances.  God  prospers  one  man  in 
fortune ;  another,  in  time ;  another,  in  talent ;  and  time,  talents,  sympathy,  are 
often  better  gifts  than  money.  "  Silver  and  gold  have  I  none,"  said  St.  Peter, 
"  but  that  which  I  have  I  give  unto  thee,"  and  the  man  was  healed.  So  now,  often 
the  greatest  exercise  of  charity  is  where  there  is  nothing  given,  but  where  the 
deserving  are  assisted  to  sujiport  themselves.  Often  the  highest  charity  is  simply 
to  pay  liberally  for  all  things  had  or  done  for  you ;  because  to  underpay  workmen, 
and  then  be  bountiful,  is  not  charity.  On  the  other  hand,  to  give,  when  by  so  doing 
you  support  idleness,  is  most  pernicious.  3.  Now,  the  first  principle  will  explain 
why  the  second  is  not  realised.  Men  do  not  give  as  God  hath  prospered  them, 
because  they  do  not  give  systematically.  They  who  have  most  are  not  they  who 
give  most,  but  the  reverse,  as  is  proved  by  the  annals  of  all  societies.  Many  are 
the  touching  cases  where  the  givings  of  a  servant,  a  governess,  a  workman,  have 
more  than  equalled  the  munificence  of  the  rich.  So  also  was  St.  Paul's  experience 
(2  Cor.  viii.  1-4).  The  reason  of  this  strange  difference  is,  that  system  is  easier 
with  little  than  with  much.  The  man  of  thousands  squanders :  every  impulse  is 
satisfied  immediately;  he  denies  himself  nothing;  he  gives  as  freely  when  he  is 
touched  by  a  tale  of  woe,  as  he  indulges  when  he  wants  indulgence.  But  his  luxuries 
grow  into  necessities,  and  he  then  complains  of  his  larger  liabilities  and  establish- 
ment. Now  let  me  appeal  to  those  who  really  wish  to  do  right  in  this  thing.  St. 
Paul's  principle  is  the  only  safe  or  true  one.  Systematise  your  charity.  Save,  by 
surrendering  superfluities  first.  Feel  that  there  is  a  sacred  fund,  which  will  be 
made  less  by  every  unnecessary  expense.  (F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.)  Christian 
philanlhropij  : — I.  Its  claims  zealously  advocated.  In  this  matter  Paul  pi'oposes 
the  Galatians  as  an  example  to  the  Corinthians,  the  Corinthians  an  example  to  the 
Macedonians,  and  both  as  an  example  to  the  Eomans  (2  Cor.  ix.  2;  Rom.  xv.  26). 
Were  it  not  for  the  earnest  advocacy  of  Christly  men,  practical  social  sympathy 
would  become  extinct.  It  is  the  living  ministry  of  the  gospel  that  keeps  it  alive, 
and  in  this  it  fulfils  the  grandest  of  all  missions.  II.  Its  operations  wisely 
DIRECTED.  Paul  directed  that  the  contributions  should  be — 1.  Personal.  "Every 
one  of  you."  No  one  was  exempted,  however  poor;  the  widow's  mite  was  accept- 
able. If  no  coin,  then  give  service.  2.  Systemntic.  Begin  the  week  with  deeds  of 
practical  benevolence.  3.  Religious.  "  As  God  hath  prospered  him."  IWere  this 
principle  acted  upon,  some  of  the  men  who  subscribe  their  thousands  would  be  found 
to  be  churls,  and  those  who  subscribed  their  few  shillings  would  appear  as  princes 
in  the  domain  of  practical  charity.)  But,  alas!  how  men  reverse  this  principle! 


CHAP.  XVI.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  561 

The  more  they  have  the  less  they  give.  III.  Its  contributions  honestly  dis- 
tributed. How  sadly  is  this  duty  frequently  neglected,  how  much  money  given  for_ 
charitable  purposes  is  dishonestly  used,  and  misappropriated  every  year !  (D. 
Thomas,  D.D.)  The  gladness  of  giving  : — A  Methodist  minister  says  that  in  one 
of  liis  charges  a  good  man  regularly  gave  every  Sabbath  £1  for  the  support  of  the 
Church.  A  poor  widow  was  also  a  member  of  the  same  Church,  who  supported 
herself  and  six  children  by  washing.  She  was  as  regular  as  the  rich  man  in  making 
her  offering  of  twopence  per  week,  which  was  all  £-he  could  spare  from  her  scant 
earnings.  One  day  the  rich  man  came  to  the  minister  and  said  that  tlie  poor 
woman  ought  not  to  give  anything,  and  that  he  would  pay  the  twopence  for  her 
every  week.  The  pastor  called  to  tell  her  of  the  offer,  which  lie  did  in  a  considerate 
manner.  Tears  came  to  the  woman's  eyes  as  she  replied  :  "  Do  they  want  to  take 
from  me  the  comfort  I  experience  in  giving  to  the  Lord?  Think  how  much  I  owe 
to  Him.  My  health  is  good,  my  children  keep  well,  and  I  receive  so  many  blessings 
that  I  feel  I  could  not  live  if  I  did  not  make  my  little  offering  to  Jesus  each  week." 
How  many  there  are  who  know  nothing  of  the  privilege  of  regulaily  giving  some- 
thing to  the  Lord's  work  !  Tlie  poor  : — Several  causes  had  contributed  to  this 
poverty;  and,  among  others,  perhaps  the  persecution  promoted  by  Paul.  Many 
Christijins  were  driven  from  their  homes,  and  many  more  must  have  lost  their 
means  of  earning  a  livelihood.  But  it  is  likely  that  Paul  was  anxious  to  relieve 
this  poverty,  mostly  because  he  saw  in  it  an  opportunity  for  bringing  more  closely 
together  the  two  great  parties  in  the  Church  (Gal.  ii.  9,  10).  He  saw  that  no 
doctrinal  explanations  were  likely  to  be  so  fruitful  in  kindly  feeling  and  true  unity 
as  this  simple  expression  of  brotherly  kindness.  I.  In  our  own  day  tovekty  has 
AssuMKD  a  much  MORE  SERIOUS  ASPECT.  The  poverty  wliich  results  from  accident, 
or  even  from  wroug-duing  or  indolence,  could  easily  be  met  by  individual  charity  or 
national  institutions.  Put  the  poverty  we  are  now  confronted  with  is  that  which 
results  from  competition.  So  overstocked  is  the  labour-market  that  the  employer 
can  name  his  own  terms.  Where  he  wants  one  man,  a  hundred  offer  their  services, 
so  that  necessarily  wages  are  pressed  down  by  competition  to  the  very  lowest  figure. 
In  all  our  large  cities  there  are  thousands  who  by  workmg  sixteen  hours  a  day  earn 
only  what  suffices  to  maintain  the  most  wretched  existence.  1.  The  most  painful 
and  alarming  feature  of  this  condition  of  things  is,  that  every  new  meihod  of 
facilitating  business,  every  improvement  in  machinery,  makes  life  more  difficult  to 
the  mass  of  men.  Individual  charity  is  here  a  mere  mop  in  the  face  of  the  tide. 
Wliat  is  wanted  is  not  larger  workhouses  where  the  aged  poor  may  be  sheltered, 
but  such  a  system  as  wiU  enable  the  working  man  to  provide  for  himself  against 
old  age.  What  is  wanted  is  not  that  the  charitable  should  eke  out  the  earnings  of 
the  labouring  classes,  but  that  these  earnings  should  be  such  as  to  amply  cover  all 
ordinary  human  wants.  What  the  working  classes  at  present  demand  is,  not  charity, 
but  justice.  II.  Is  there  any  system  which  could  check  the  evils  resulting  from 
competition?  1.  The  essence  of  the  demand  of  socialism  is  that  "  whereas  industry 
is  at  present  carried  on  by  private  capitalists  served  by  wage-labour,  it  must  in  the 
future  be  conducted  by  associated  or  co-operating  workmen  jointly  owning  the  means 
of  production."  The  difficulty  in  pronouncing  judgment  on  such  a  demand  arises 
from  the  fact  that  very  few  have  sufficient  imagination  and  suthcient  knowledge  of 
our  complicated  social  system  to  be  able  to  forecast  the  results  of  so  great  a  change. 
In  the  present  stage  of  human  progress  personal  interest  is  undoubtedly  one  of  the 
strongest  incentives  to  industry,  and  to  this  motive  the  present  system  of  competi- 
tion appeals.  The  organisation  of  all  industries  and  the  management  and  re- 
muneration of  all  labour  demand  a  machinery  so  colossal  that  it  is  feared  it  would 
fall  to  pieces  by  its  own  weight.  2.  Some  of  those  who  have  given  greatest  attention 
to  social  subjects,  and  have  made  the  gi'eatest  personal  sacrifices  in  behalf  of  the 
poor,  believe  that  deliverance  is  only  to  be  found  in  the  application  of  Christian 
principles  to  the  working  of  the  present  competitive  system.  True  progress  here, 
as  elsewhere,  begins  in  character.  3.  Appeal  is  confidently  made  to  Christ  by  both 
parties.  By  the  one  it  is  affirmed  that  were  He  now  on  earth  He  would  be  a  com- 
munist. Communism  has  been  tried  to  some  extent  in  the  Church.  In  monastic 
societies  private  property  is  surrendered  for  the  good  of  the  community,  and  this 
practice  professes  to  find  its  sanction  in  the  communism  of  the  primitive  Church. 
But  the  account  we  have  of  that  communism  shows  that  it  was  neither  compulsory 
nor  permanent.  4.  It  is  perhaps  of  more  importance  to  observe  that  our  Lord  took 
no  part  in  any  political  movement.  He  was  no  agitator,  although  He  lived  in  an 
age  abounding  in  abuses.  And  this  limitation  of  His  work  was  due  to  no  mere 
VOL.   II.  3G 


563  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

shrinking  from  the  rougher  work  of  life,  but  to  His  perception  that  His  own  task 
was  to  touch  what  was  deepest  in  man,  and  to  lotlge  in  human  nature  forces  which 
ultimately  would  achieve  all  that  was  desirable.      It  was  by  the  regeneration  of 
individuals  society  was  to  be  regenerated.     The  leaven  which  contact  witb  Him 
imparted  to  the  individual  would  touch  and  purify  the  whole  social  fabric.     III. 
In  any  case  the  duty  of  individual  Christians  is  plain.     1.  To  seclude  ourselves 
in  our  own  comfortable  homes  and  shut  out  all  sounds  and  signs  of  misery  is  simply 
to  furuish  proof  that  we  know  nothhig  of  the  spirit  of  Christ.     We  may  find  our- 
selves quite  unable  to  rectify  abuses  on  a  larger  scale,  but  we  can  do  something  to 
brighten  some  lives ;  we  can  ask  ourselves  whetber  we  are  quite  free  from  blood- 
guiltiness  in  using  articles  which  are  cheap  to  us  because  wrung  out  of  underpaid 
and  starving  hands.     2.  The  method  of  collecting  which  Paul  recoinmends  was  in 
all  probability  that  which  he  himself  practised  (ver.  2).     But  wliat  is  chiefly  to  be 
noticed  is  that  Paul,  who  ordinarily  is  so  free  from  preciseness  and  form,  here 
enjoins  the  precise  method  in  which  the  collection  might   best  be   made.      He 
believed  in  methodical  giving.     He  laid  it  on  each  man's  conscience  deliberately  to 
say  how  much  he  would  give.     He  wished  no  one  to  give  in  the  dark.     He  knew 
how  men  seem  to  themselves  to  be  giving  much  more  than  they  are  if  they  do  not 
keep  an  exact  account  of  what  they  give,  how  some  men  shrink  from  knowing 
definitely  the  proportion  they  give  away.     And  therefore  he  presents  it  as  a  duty  to 
determine  what  proportion  we  can  give  away,  and  if  God  prospers  us  and  increases 
our   incomes,  to  what   extent  we  should  increase  our   personal   expenditure   and 
to  what  extent  use  for  charitable  objects  the  additional  gain.      {M.  Dods,  IJ.D.) 
Upon  the  first  day  of  the  week  let  every  one  of  you  lay  by  him  in  store,  as 
God   hath    prospered     him. — The    iceekly    offcritui : — Let  us — I.    Consider   some 
general  principles  in  relation  to  Christian  gifts.      1.  Eeal  religion  demands 
the  consecration  of  some  part  of  our  worldly  substance  to  God.     Gratitude  to  God 
constrains  us  to  inquire,  "  What  shall  I  render  unto  the  Lord  for  all  His  benefits  ?  " 
And  God  is  pleased  to  encourage  in  us  free-will  offerings,  and  He  has  in  all  ages 
regarded  them  as  a  portion  of  His  worship.     Before  the  flood  men  took  the  first- 
lings of  their  flock  and  gave  them  to  God.     When  Noah  came  out  of  the  ark  he 
took  of  every  clean  beast,  &c.,  and  gave  them  to  God.     Abraham  tithed  the  spoil 
of  battle  for  the  service  of  God  ;  and  Jacob,  on  the  plains  of  Bethel,  vowed  a  tenth 
to  God.      In  all  the  solemnities   of  Jewish  worship   the  command  went  forth, 
"  None  shall  appear  before  the  Lord  empty,"  and  there  were  seasons  when  the 
spontaneous  liberality  of    the   people  overflowed  all  the  bounds  of    calculation. 
Further  on  the  prophets  dwelt  upon  the  time  when  the  Church  of  Christ  should 
emulate  and  even  surpass  the  enthusiasm  of  her  elder  sister.     "  The  abundance  of 
the  sea  shall  be  converted  unto  thee,  the  forces  of  the  Gentiles  shall  come  unto 
thee."     "  For  brass  I  will  bring  gold,"  ttc.     The  Magi  brought  their  costly  tribute 
to  the  infant  Saviour,  typifying  the  great  consecration  that  si'all  one  day  ensue  of 
the  world's  wealth  to  Him.     Mark  Christ's  approval  of  the  widow's  mites,  and  His 
rebuke  of  Judas.     In  apostolic  times  Barnabas  sells  his  estates  and  gives  the  pi'O- 
ceeds  for  the  furtherance  of  the  gospel.     Name  alter  name  is  recorded  of  both 
fexes  as  distinguished  for  high-minded  self-denial  in  the  same  good  cause.     Each 
Epistle  contains  some  reference  to  the  universal  duty.     2.   The  genius  of  Christi- 
anity loudly  calls  for  enlai'ged  benevolence.     (1)  The  system  of  redemption  is,  from 
first  to  last,  one  prodigious  process  of  gift.     God  loved  the  world  and  gave  His  only 
begotten  Son.     The  Son  loved  us,  and  gave  Himself  to  death  for  us  all.     The  self- 
sacrifice  of  Christ  has  taught  us  more  pathetically  than  words  could  say,  "  It  is 
more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive."     The  patriarch  might  bring  his  first-fruits 
and  his  flocks  with  thankfulness  as  a  recognition  of  the  great  Landlord  of  the 
world.     The  Jew  in  his  tithes  and  offeiings  professed  his  attachment  to  the  theo- 
cracy.    But  we  have  holier  motives.     The  blessings  obtained  by  sharing  in  salva- 
tion  are   so   vast    that   they   constitute   the   substance   of   which   all   antecedent 
privileges  were  but  the  shadow.     Shall  we  then  feel  less  of  love,  and  practise  less 
of  self-denial  ?     (2)  Moreover,  we  have  in  the  teachings  and  examp'e  of  Jesus 
infallible  lessons  in  the  art  of  self -surrender.     Wherein  is  our  disciples  bip  manifest 
if  it  be  not  by  a  preference  of  the  glory  of  God  to  all  inferior  motives  of  time  and 
sense  ?     (3)  The  coming  of  Christ  and  the  completion  of  His  great  work  of  atone- 
ment have  greatly  extended  the  responsibilities  of  His  Church,  for  in  Him  there  is 
neither  Greek  nor  Jew,  &c.     With  His  Church  the  Saviour  has  left  injunctions  to 
subdue  the  whole  world.     3.  God  has  in  all  ages  greatly  honoured  the  consecration 
of  wealth  to  His  service.     "  Honour  the  Lord  with  thy  substance,  and  with  the 


CHAP.  XVI.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  563 

first-fruits  of  all  thine  increase.  So  shall  thy  barns  be  filled,"  &c.  Many  Chris- 
tians will  testify  that  their  success  in  life  is  due  to  their  dedication  of  their  gains 
to  God.  We  have  yet  to  meet  the  man  who  has  been  impoverished  by  charity. 
But  there  are  rewards  of  a  holier  kind.  The  illiberal  man  robs  himseU  of  the  joy 
of  being  like  God :  he  narrows  the  circle  of  his  gratifications  and  limits  their 
sources.  II.  Examine  the  apostolic  instkcctions  contained  in  the  text.  What 
force  has  this  precept  now  ?  The  reply  is  not  difficult.  An  inspired  ap  'Stle  is  the 
highest  human  authority  in  all  that  relates  to  Chiistian  duty.  Should  any  upon 
the  basis  of  this  Scripiure  adopt  the  custom  of  weekly  offeriugs,  th'  y  cannot  be 
acting  wrong.  Nay,  the  strong  presumption  is  that  th^y  are  adopting  the  only 
course  that  is  right.  The  objection  that  this  is  the  only  prei'cpt  of  the  kind  is  not 
valid,  for  upon  one  passa','e  in  this  same  Epistle  we  establish  our  mode  of  com- 
meiiiurating  the  Saviour's  love  to  us,  may  we  not  also  upon  anoiher  pa'-sage,  that 
now  before  us,  rest  our  mode  of  exhibiting  our  love  to  Him  ?  In  our  text  we  find 
— 1.  The  time  appointed  for  religious  gifts.  The  advantag  s  that  attach  to  this 
apostolic  rule  are  numerous  and  important.  Here  is  an  appointed  time  i<i  fiequent 
occurrence,  and  tliereby  the  duty  is  kept  constantly  before  our  attention.  The 
Lord's  day  presents  the  leisure  required  for  deliberate  thought  and  finds  us  in  the 
happiest  state  of  mind  for  the  performance  of  the  obligation.  The  cultivation  of  a 
spirit  of  liberality  becomes  a  part  of  the  great  work  of  Cliristian  edification  which 
belongs  pre-eminently  to  the  first  day  in  the  week.  The  present  desultory  mode  is 
inconvenient  in  the  extreme ;  it  jumbles  together  the  peri^lexities  of  husine-s  and 
the  service  of  love ;  it  has  produced  not  a  little  ill-temper,  and  thjrefore  we 
commend  to  you  this  financial  system  of  the  New  Testament.  Put  by  each  Sab- 
bath what  you  ought  to  give.  Have  somewhere  a  store  which  is  not  your  own,  but 
God's  ;  and  when  applicants  come  meet  them  as  a  steward,  who  is  disp-nsing  what 
is  his  master's,  not  his  own.  This  system  is  one  that  commends  itself  for  its  great 
facility.  The  working  man  could  easily  put  by  his  one,  two,  or  three-pence  a  week, 
whereas  five,  ten,  or  fifteen  shillings  would  be  an  impossibility  to  him  at  the  year's 
end.  The  tradesman  who  would  not  miss  his  ten  shillings  or  sovereign  eacli 
Sabbath  would  be  troubled  to  surrrender  at  one  effort  the  twenty  or  fifty  pounds 
which  he  ought  to  give  annually  to  the  treasury  of  God.  2.  The  peisons  addi  essed — 
"  Every  one  of  you."  All  who  have  received  the  gospel  are  bound  to  do  what  they 
can  for  its  diffusion.  Smallness  of  means  does  not  procure  exem|ition.  As  under 
the  law  the  poor  man's  pigeon  was  equally  acceptable  to  God  with  the  bnllor-ks  of 
his  wealthier  brother,  so  also  were  they  equally  required.  The  small  contributions 
of  the  great  number  are  even  more  desirable  than  the  magnificent  offerings  of  the 
wealthy  few.  3.  The  rule  and  measure  of  contribution — "As  God  hath  prospered 
him."  (1)  It  is  true  that  the  New  Testament  does  not  assign  the  spe.-ilic  arithme- 
tical amount  which  we  shall  dedicate  to  God.  Amongst  the  Jews  eich  head  of  a 
family  was  bound  to  give  one-tenth  to  the  support  of  the  tribe  of  Levi,  a  second 
tenth  for  the  great  festivals  of  his  nation,  a  third  tenth  for  the  poor.  Beside  these, 
there  were  free-will  offerings,  trespass  offerings,  and  costly  journeys  to  the  temple. 
The  aggregate  of  religious  gifts  among  the  Jews  could  not  have  been  less  than  onet- 
fiflh  of  each  man's  income,  and  more  probably  involved  one-third  of  it.  (2)  Now, 
while  the  spirit  of  the  gospel  is  love,  still  it  does  give  directions  to  regulate  our 
conduct  in  relation  to  contributions.  If  love  does  not  stoop  to  arithmetical  calcu- 
lation, it  is  only  because  this  grace  is  profuse  beyond  all  calculation.  {^)  The  rule 
of  the  text  requires  that  there  should  be  a  continual  relation  between  our  temp  >ral 
circumstances  and  our  religious  benefactions.  A  Christian's  wealth  is  not  to 
increase  and  his  subscriptions  rennin  stationary.  The  more  the  Almighty  prospers 
a  man,  the  more  He  expects  him  to  bestow  (Deut.  xvi.  17).  (IF.  G.  Lftois.)  On 
liviiiij  hy  rule : — 1.  St.  Paul,  the  most  disenthralled  of  all  the  apostles  from  the 
bondage  of  Judaism,  here  gives  a  rule  on  the  subject  of  almsgiving.  The  wisdom  of 
such  a  rule  is  obvious.  A  considerable  sum  would  thus  be  gradually  accumulated, 
which  a  man  might  hesitate  to  give  in  one  lump.  And  then,  again,  such  a  rule 
ensured  a  gradual  discipline  in  Christian  benevolence  \\hich  would  be  far  more 
beneficial  and  a  far  greater  test  of  character  than  one  great  effort.  A  great  effort 
may  be  made  in  a  moment  of  excitement ;  but  continual  lirtle  efforts  can  only  be 
made  on  principle.  Lastly,  the  collection  would  be  over  before  the  apostle's  visit, 
and  their  minds  would  be  ready  to  receive  the  spiritual  benetits  of  his  ministry.  2. 
Still,  a  rule  it  is.  It  defines  the  exact  method  and  period.  And  it  has  all  the 
narrowness  inherent  in  the  nature  of  rules,  it  is  not  adapted  to  the  circumstances 
of  all  men.     In  the  case  of  incomes  not  accruing  weekly,  the  rule  would  require  to 


564  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

be  recast.  And  there  is  probably  no  modern  Christian  who  thinks  himself  bound 
to  its  literal  observance  however  much  we  may  be  bound  to  the  spirit  of  it.  3.  It 
is  surprising,  until  we  come  to  consider  it,  what  a  dearth  of  rules  there  is  in  the 
New  Testament.  The  field  of  nature  presents  in  this  respect  a  remarkable 
resemblance  to  the  field  of  Scripture  ;  she  furnishes  materials  for  all  the  arts  of  life 
even  as  Scripture  furnishes  principles  for  holy  living.  There  is  stone  in  her 
quarries,  clay  in  her  soils,  timber  in  her  forests,  coal  in  her  mines,  &c.  The' 
various  arts  of  life  develop  these  resources  for  the  well-being  of  man.  Without 
architecture  we  must  sleep  under  the  canopy  of  the  sky,  without  the  weaver's  art 
we  should  be  none  the  better  for  the  sheep's  fleece,  and  without  tbe  industry  and 
ingenuity  of  man  corn  could  not  be  converted  into  bread.  Now  just  as  nature 
furnishes  all  the  materials  of  life,  which  art  develops  and  makes  up  for  use,  so 
Holy  Scripture  furnishes  the  materials  for  all  rules  of  holy  living,  which  rules  the 
spiritual  instinct  and  experience  of  the  children  of  God  extracts  and  draws  up  in 
form.  4.  I'rom  this  very  simple  analogy,  then,  we  learn  the  great  importance  as 
well  as  the  subordinate  position  of  rules.  It  was  not  the  scope  of  the  Scriptures  to 
do  anything  beyond  furnishing  the  principles  of  duty,  just  as  it  was  not  the  scope 
of  the  Creator  in  nature  to  do  anything  beyond  furnisbing  materials  for  the  supply 
of  man's  various  wants.  Yet  we  cannot  gather  from  hence  that  rules  are  not 
absolutely  necessary  for  a  holy  life.  5.  But  be  it  observed  that  the  adoption  of 
rules  is  recommended  not  as  a  bondage  but  as  a  help  to  the  will  and  as  a  discipline 
for  bracing  and  hardening  it.  What  Christian  man  can  say  with  truth  that  he 
has  rise  n  above  the  necessity  of  all  such  rules  ?  What  Christian  man  could  safely 
afford  to  dispense,  e.g.,  with  the  obligation  of  private  prayer  morning  and  evening, 
and  of  stated  public  worship,  although  these  obligations  are  bound  upon  him,  not 
by  the  explicit  letter  of  Holy  Scripture,  but  by  the  godly  customs  and  traditional 
usages  of  the  Christian  Church  ?  As  to  almsgiving,  some  rule  surely  must  be  felt 
by  all  of  us  to  be  urgently  needed,  and  here  especially  the  form  and  shape  which 
the  duty  will  take  will  be  almost  infinitely  various.  Let  each  man  only  make  sure 
of  securing  by  his  practice  the  principle,  wliich  is  that  God  has  a  claim  ujDon  a 
certain  fair  proportion  of  our  annual  income,  and  that  to  withhold  from  Him  such 
a  proportion  independently  of  the  dishonour  done  to  Him  thereby,  is  as  likely  to  be 
prejudicial  to  our  spiritual  interests  as  the  withholding  from  Him  a  portion  of  our 
time  for  the  exercises  of  dtvotion.  Let  this  principle  be  deeply  settled  in  the  mind 
and  then  the  details  adjusted  honestly  in  accordance  with  it.  6.  In  any  case  let 
our  rules  be  such  as  may  be  easily  and  cheerfully  observed,  remembering  that  we 
are  to  serve  God  in  the  newness  of  the  spirit,  not  in  the  oldness  of  the  letter.  Let 
the  object  be  to  make  them  a  help,  not  to  convert  them  into  a  penance.  (Dean 
Goulhurn.)  TIte  theology  of  money  (Deut.  viii.  18  and  text) : —  I.  God  gives 
THE  POWER  TO  GET  WEALTH.  1.  Remember  that  and  industry  is  turned  into  a  sacra- 
ment, and  you  will  feel  yourself  working  side  by  side  with  God  in  the  field,  ware- 
house, puljiit,  &c.  2.  This  text  strikes  a  blow  at  that  most  popular  and 
mischievous  fallacy  that  man  is  the  maker  of  his  own  money.  Men  who  can  see 
God  moulding  worlds,  cannot  see  Him  suggesting  our  idea  in  business,  or  smiling 
on  the  plough.  We  have  dethroned  Him  in  the  realm  of  commerce,  and  have  put 
foul  little  gods  called  Trick  and  Cunning  into  the  holy  place.  We  have  locked 
God  up  in  the  church.  3.  There  is  always  a  danger  of  becoming  entangled  in  the 
intricacies  of  second  causes.  If  money  fell  like  rain  we  should  more  readily  con- 
cede that  it  came  from  God  ;  but  because  it  comes  through  circuitous  channels  we 
see  on  it  no  nobler  image  than  Ca3sar's.  But  He  who  pours  down  the  sunlight 
pours  out  the  oil.  He  who  arrays  Lebanon  in  all  the  pomp  of  summer  foliage 
gives  wool  and  flax  to  cover  the  nakedness  of  man.  4.  God  wishes  the  fact  to  be 
treasured  in  the  memory  of  His  saints.  Mark  the  consequences  of  this  grateful 
recollection.  (1)  God  and  wealth  will  be  ever  associated.  "The  silver  and  the 
gold  are  Mine."  (2)  It  will  promote  humility.  "  What  hast  thou  that  thou  hast  not 
received  ?  "  (3)  It  will  restore  every  act  of  life  to  its  direct  and  vital  relation  to 
the  centre  of  the  universe.  The  man  who  can  be  atheistic  in  business  could  be 
atheistic  in  heaven  itself.  The  man  who  never  turns  his  warehouse  into  a  church 
will  turn  the  church  into  a  warehouse.  (4)  It  will  put  a  check  on  all  wastefulness. 
A  man  who  outruns  his  resources  is  dishonest ;  his  lite  is  a  perpetual  felony.  (5) 
It  will  beget  a  becoming  gratitude  and  turn  our  heart  and  eye  heavenward.  11. 
The  pkactical  kecognition  this  kequiees.  Paul  turns  the  principle  to  practical 
account.  A  time  is  named — God's  elect  day.  The  Sabbath  is  emphatically  a  day 
of   remembrance.     The   measure   is   fixed  :    God's  gift  of  power,  "  As  God  hath 


CHAP.  XVI J  I.   CORINTHIANS.  565 

prospered."  There  is  not  a  word  about  tenth,  or  fifth,  or  twentieth.  The  whole 
New  Testament  arithmetic  is  moral.  The  student  is  at  liberty,  indeed,  to  go  back 
into  the  oldest  Biblical  records,  and  to  discover  what  grateful  men  did  in  dividing 
and  dedicating  proioerty,  but  the  service  here  demanded  is  a  service  of  love,  grati- 
tude, memorial ;  the  heart  will  soon  arrange  the  best  methods  of  marshalling 
details.  Note  the  results  which  would  mnrk  the  adoption  of  this  apostolic  plan. 
1.  The  fickleness  and  fitEulness  of  benevolence  would  be  terminated.  Benevolence 
is  now  very  largely  a  question  of  impulse.  2.  The  benevolent  operations  of  the 
Church  would  be  immensely  facilitated.  When  help  is  required  there  is  no  diffi- 
culty with  men  who  systematically  store  a  portion  for  God.  3.  The  gratitude  of 
tbe  individual  Christian  would  be  kept  in  lively  exercise.  On  every  Lord's  day  he 
would  not  only  pray  for  the  kingdom,  but  show  the  reality  of  his  word  by  the 
practical  reality  of  his  deed.  Conclusion :  1.  You  may  suggest  that  it  is  ti-ouble- 
some  to  be  dividing  every  week :  is  it  troublesome  to  be  receiving  every  week  ?  2. 
If  you  remember  the  Lord  your  God  He  will  remember  you.  "  Honour  the  Lord 
with  thy  substance,"  &c.  "  He  which  soweth  sparingly  shall  reap  sparingly,"  &c. 
{J.  Parker,  D.D.)  And  when  I  come,  whomsoever  ye  shall  approve. — TIte  co- 
operation of  Church  and  minister  : — Observe  generally — 1.  That  in  matters  of  public 
interest  the  Church  and  the  minister  should  co-operate.  2.  That  the  Church  approves 
and  the  minister  commissions.  3.  That  the  minister,  where  any  solid  advantage  is  to 
be  gained,  should  be  ready  for  any  service  imposed  upon  him  (ver.  4).  [J.  Lytli,  D.D. ) 

Vers.  5-9.  Now  I  will  come  unto  you,  when  I  shall  pass  through  Macedonia. — 

God' s%ciU  the  rule  and  sjnriUial  usefulness  the  end  of  life  : — I.  God's  will  should 
BE  THE  RDLE  OF  LIFE.  Paul  had  made  a  plan  to  visit  the  Corinthians,  to  "  tarry  a 
while  "  with  them,  but  he  rests  this  plan  (no  doubt  dear  to  his  heart)  on  "  if  the 
Lord  permit. "  1.  A  belief  is  implied  here,  viz. ,  that  God  is  in  the  history  of  individual 
man.  He  is  not  merely  in  the  material  universe,  in  angelic  hierarchies,  in  human 
communities,  churches,  families.  He  is  not  too  absorbed  or  too  great  for  this. 
Paul  believed  that  God  was  interested  in  him  personally,  and  that  He  arranged  for 
him  personally.  There  is  something  bracing  and  ennobling  in  this  thought.  2. 
An  acquiescence  is  implied  here.  I  have  no  will  of  my  own.  Personally,  I  should 
like  to  winter  with  you,  but  I  subordinate  my  will  to  the  will  of  my  God.  I  am  in 
His  hands,  and  am  ready  to  act  in  everything  according  to  His  arrangements.  II. 
Spiritual  usefulness  sbould  be  the  aim  of  life  (vers.  8,  9).  1.  Wherever  the 
gospel  signally  triumphs,  great  opposition  may  be  anticipated.  Paul  was  now  at 
Ephesus,  where  he  had  laboured  for  a  considerable  time,  and  with  such  success 
that  passionate  opposition  was  excited  (Acts  xix.  9-20).  It  has  ever  been  so  : 
wherever  there  has  been  a  great  revival  of  religion  there  has  been  unusual  opposi- 
tion. The  latent  enmity  of  the  serpent  is  ever  roused  by  the  dissemination  of 
spiritual  light.  Christ  kindled  a  fire  upon  the  earth.  2.  Opposition  to  the  gospel 
often  affords  specially  favourable  opportunities  for  the  labour  of  the  evangelist. 
Eeligious  excitement  is  ever  more  favourable  to  the  spread  of  religion  than  religious 
monotony.  You  stand  a  better  chance  of  converting  an  earnest  sceptic  than  a 
stagnant  religionist.  Excitement  opens  a  "  door."  3.  The  true  evangelist  will  be 
stimulated  rather  thandiscouraged  by  opposition.  It  is  only  little  souls  who  are  dis- 
mayed by  difficulties.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  I  will  tarry  at  Ephesus  until  Pente- 
cost.—  What  Christianity  does  for  ainan  : — 1.  These  sentences,  casually  thrown  in, 
as  it  were,  at  the  end  of  a  letter,  reveal  incidentally,  and  therefore  really,  the  spiri- 
tual quality  and  tone  of  the  writer.  It  is  one  thing  to  make  a  formal  statement  of 
what  Christianity  has  done,  and  another  to  show  its  results  without  any  attempt 
at  composition  or  eye  to  effect.  An  incidental  touch  will  reveal  the  whole  man.  2. 
Paul  comes  within  sight  in  these  instructions.  In  the  previous  chapter  he  was 
quite  beyond  the  range  of  our  vision.  Here  he  becomes  more  like  one  of  ourselves. 
These  are  only  little  sentences  after  the  great  thunder-bursts  of  the  resurrection 
chapter,  and  come  too  soon  to  get  their  full  force  and  value  ;  but  they  show  what 
Christianity  did  for  Paul.  It  made  him — I.  Most  dauntless  under  circumstances 
OF  AN  intensely  DISCOURAGING  KIND.  Paul  looked  at  the  door  rather  than  at  the 
adversaries,  and  therein  the  quality  of  the  man  is  disclosed.  The  great  soldier 
must  be  in  the  thick  of  ihe  figlit.  When  the  wolf  is  most  dangerous,  the  shepherd 
must  be  most  watchful.  Paul  seemed  to  have  a  kind  of  inborn  liking  for  danger. 
Herein  he  wa^  most  Christ-like,  and  quietly  but  severely  rebukes  the  most  of  his 
successors.  What  an  eye  we  have  for  the  adversaries  !  and  therein  is  our  quality 
revealed.     What  moaning  there  is  in  the  ministry  and  the  Church  I     The  neigh- 


666  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

bourhood  is  going  down;  the  population  is  moving;  trade  is  bad;  pf^ople  are 
opposed  to  us.  Tliere  are  many  adversaries  :  Paul  is  perfectly  aware  of  that ;  and 
he  counted  them  one  by  one,  and  said,  "  Humanly  speaking,  they  are  an  overwhelm- 
ing majority,  but  Divinely  speaking,  they  are  for  ever  in  a  minority,  for  He  that  is 
for  us  is  more  thnn  they  that  be  against  us."  We  must  take  the  completer  view, 
and  then  we  shall  see  that  the  great  host  that  is  encamped  against  the  Lord  is  but 
a  handful  of  moths.  And  so  every  adversary  should  be  a  stimulus  to  nobler 
endeavour — a  prick  in  the  side  causing  us  to  spring  forward  with  more  vital  alert- 
ness and  determination  to  win  the  battle  of  the  Lord.  We  should  have  said  that 
there  being  many  adversaries  was  an  excellent  reason  for  leaving  Ephesus ;  Paul 
made  it  a  substantial  reason  for  remaining  there.  II.  Paternally  and  most 
TENDEELY  CONSIDERATE  (vcrs.  10,  11).  Timotheus  was  young  in  experience;  the 
kind  of  man  that  would  soon  be  lost  in  a  crowd ;  shrinking,  modest,  one  who  would 
never  count  for  much  if  tumult  were  to  rule  the  day.  See,  then,  says  Paul,  "  see  that 
he  may  be  witli  you  without  fear."  When  you  shake  hands  with  him,  let  him  feel 
the  pressure  of  love  in  the  grip  which  welunmes  him  by  holy  symbol:  under 
encouragement  he  can  do  a  great  deal.  If  he  find  you  critical,  pedantic,  fault- 
finding, bis  young  lieart  will  sink.  To  be  with  the  Cliurch  without  fear — that  is 
to  elicit  all  that  is  best  in  the  young  minister.  "  The  fear  of  man  bringeth  a 
snare."  III.  Magnanimous  (ver.  12).  ApoUos  was  "  an  eloquent  man,  and 
mighty  in  the  Scriptures,"  Paul's  "  bodily  presence  was  weak,  and  his  speech 
contemptible."  He  knew  that,  yet  he  says,  "  As  touching  our  brother  Apollos," 
— there  is  tenderness  in  the  very  utterance  of  the  man's  name  ;  he  is  not 
"Apollos,"  but  "  o'.ir  brother  Apollo^"  &c.  We  are  now  and  then  very 
human  :  there  is  perhaps  a  temptation  to  persuade  Apollos  to  go  in  some 
other  direction  and  so  keep  out  of  our  particular  way.  Conclusion :  We  can- 
not put  these  things  on  from  the  outside  ;  these  are  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit.  AU 
assumed  courage  is  cowardice,  a  pretended  considerHteness  is  the  most  objection- 
able patronage,  an  affected  magnanimity  is  hypocrisy.  We  must  grow  in  these 
graces,  but  the  growth  must  be  from  within  ;  these  are  not  to  be  taught  or  learned 
in  the  schools :  these  are  the  victories  of  grace,  the  miracles  of  God.  {J.  Parker, 
D.D.)  Counsel  and  ch'ivacter  : — It  is  not  an  unnatural  demand  that  counsel 

should  correspond  with  the  character  of  the  counsellor.  How  much  Seneca  and 
Bacon  have  lost  in  moral  influence  through  the  discrepancy  between  what  they 
wrote  and  what  they  were  !  St.  Paul's  consistency  comes  out  in  a  comparison 
between  his  advice  in  vers.  13,  14  and  his  revelation  of  himself  in  vers.  8,  9.  The 
Corinthians  were  exhnrted  to — I.  Vigilance.  Well,  was  Paul  careless  ?  He 
resolves  to  tarry  at  Ephesus.  Here  he  had  to  watch — 1.  Against  the  surprises  of 
temptation.  He  was  not  ignorant  of  Satan's  devices,  and  was  incessantly  watchful 
"lest  Satan  should  get  an  advantage  over  him."  "  He  kept  under  his  body,"  &c. 
2.  Afiainst  the  vicis-iiudes  which  might  otherwise  have  thwarted  his  plans  and 
marred  his  work.  Acts  xix.  tells  us  of  some  of  these  vicissitudes  and  how  Paul 
turned  them  to  his  own  account.  It  was  this  Church  he  addressed  when  he  urged 
this  duty  by  the  force  of  his  well-known  example  (Acts  xx.  31).  3.  For  ojjpor- 
tunitit^s.  It  rt  quired  no  oidinary  vigilance  to  detect  in  John's  disciples  the  raw 
material  of  Christian  missionaries,  and  to  secure  sufficient  influence  with  the  con- 
tradictory elements  in  the  Jewish  synagogue  and  the  school  of  Tyrannus  (cf.  chap, 
ix.  19-22).  II.  Steadfastness.  Tliis  quiility  is  tested  in  two  ways.  1.  By  dis- 
heartening ditliculties.  These  tried  Paul  to  no  ordinary  degree  in  a  city  whose 
population  "  deserved  to  be  throttled  man  by  man,"  a  city  notorious  for  licentious- 
ness, superstition,  and  idolatry.  He  was  in  jeopardy  every  hour  ;  he  died  daily, 
yet  his  faith  never  wavered  (chap.  iv.  9-l.S).  No  small  portion  of  the  trials 
enumerat»d  in  2  Cor.  xi.  23-28  must  have  falh-n  to  his  lot  at  Ephesus.  2.  By  the 
existence  of  an  apparently  legitimate  excuse  for  the  want  of  it.  A  man  is  some- 
times comielled  to  stand  fast  because  he  cannot  move.  The  real  test  is  when  a 
way  of  escape  opens.  Such  a  way  opened  to  Paul  in  the  shape  of  an  invitation  to 
Corinth,  and  tlie  seeming  desirableness  of  accepting  it.  How  mi:ch  his  presence 
was  needed  at  Corinth  ;  and  the  work  at  Ephesus  surely  would  not  suffer  under  the 
superintendence  of  Aquila,  Priscilla,  and  Apollos.  The  change  would  do  him  good. 
But  no  ;  his  busine-s  was  to  do  the  work  in  hand  so  that  it  woubl  not  require  to 
be  done  a  second  time.  So  he  sent  a  letter  with  an  influential  deputation  to 
Corinth,  and  chose  to  abide  "at  Ephesus  till  Pentecost."  How  many  Christians 
beguile  their  conscience  with  the  persuasion  that  an  invitation  to  another  sphere  is 
a  legitimate  excuse  for  the  abandonment  of  their  present  one  of  difficulty,  whereas 


CHAP.  XVI.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  567 

it  may  be  only  a  subtle  attack  of  the  adversary  on  their  steadfastness  !  Our  text 
went  further  to  strengthen  a  previous  exhortation  to  abide  in  the  calling  wherein 
they  were  called  in  God.  So  it  comes  to  us.  III.  Courage.  He  who  said  "  Quit 
you  like  men,"  &c.,  illustrated  his  own  counsel  by  resolving  to  "  tarry  at  Ephesus," 
becau'^e— 1.  Tiiere  was  "  a  great  door  and  effectual "  there.  A  great  opportunity 
tests  courage  because  it  requires  coolness,  self-control,  fortitude,  and  all  the 
elements  of  tlie  nobler  heroism.  Many  a  soldier  who  has  nerve  to  f<illow  when 
called  to  command  or  carry  a  forlorn  hope,  loses  heart,  not  because  of  the  danger, 
but  because  of  the  responsibility.  2.  There  were  many  adversaries — Jews,  magi- 
cian=!,  &c.  IV.  Charity.  Charity — 1.  "  Is  kind,"  and  he  who  is  so  anxious  that 
"  all  things  should  he-  done  in  charity,"  sets  the  example  (ver.  10).  Timothy  had 
a  delicate  task  to  perform,  and  Paul  therefore  asked  that  he  might  perform  it  under 
conditions  which  would  ensure  credit  and  success.  How  many  a  promising  youth 
for  the  want  of  a  kind  word  or  a  helping  hand  has  gone  to  wreck  !  2.  "  Envieth 
rot."  It  is  as  alien  from  the  selfishness  of  jealousy  as  from  the  selfishness  of  greed. 
Now  if  any  one  could  have  excited  Paul's  jealousy  it  was  Apollos,  and  yet  hear  what 
he  s:iys  of  him  (ver.  12).  With  what  force  does  the  exhortation  come  to  all  factions 
and  rivalries,  backed  as  it  is  by  Paul's  conduct  "  as  touching  his  brother  Apollos." 
(,/.  W.  Burn. )        A  great  door  and  effectual  is  opened  unto  me. — An  open  door : — 

1.  St.  Jo!in  beheld  a  door  opened  ia  heaven.  A  door  opened  before  him  into  the 
mysteries  of  the  unseen,  invited  him  to  expatriate  there.  It  was  a  door  opened  for 
ministerial  labour  and  achievement  on  earth  of  which  St.  Paul  tells  us.  Whose 
portion  would  you  choose  ?  The  chance  of  getting  behind  the  veil  would  bo  very 
tempting  ;  yet  however  passionately  we  might  yearn,  and  with  no  unworthy  yearn- 
ing, to  piprce  the  inscrutable,  would  it  not  be  a  diviner  impulse  that  should  lead  us 
to  accept  the  opportunity  of  bettering  ill  conditions  or  supplying  needs  that  cry  ? 

2.  Which  was  the  happier  of  the  two,  St.  John  or  St.  Paul  ?  In  the  case  of  the 
former  there  would  be  a  blis-ful  excitement  that  bore  in  it  a  throb  of  pain,  a  sense 
of  oppression,  a  half-fearful  expectancy.  Would  his  strength  be  sufficient  for  the 
scenes  that  would  burst  upon  him  ?  St.  Paul's  happiness,  you  may  depeud,  was 
the  simjjler,  pnrer  of  the  two,  as  in  ihe  populous  heathen  city  he  found  himself  at 
liberty  to  tell  his  grand  stoiy,  and  felt  around  him  a  great  field  waiting  for  the  good 
seed  which  the  husbandman  is  enger  to  sow.  With  what  buoyancy  he  would  rise 
every  morning  to  resume  his  hopeful  work ;  how  peacefully  he  would  fall  asleep 
each  night,  thinking  of  the  scenes  which  had  cheered  him,  meditating  on  the  pro- 
ceedings for  the  morrow  !  And  are  we  ever  happier  than  in  moments  when  scope 
is  given  us  for  doing  what  we  have  been  craving  to  be  able  to  do  ?  The  text  suggests 
many  thoughts.  I.  An  open  door — what  would  we  noi  give  for  it?  1.  The 
feeling  is  something  like  the  anxiety  which  a  painter  was  under  to  put  an  open 
window  or  gateway  in  his  picture  which  without  that  would  be  heavy;  or  a  sick 
man's  longing  for  tbe  northern  coolness  and  whispering  breeze  amidst  the  breath- 
less, motionless  evergreen  forest  of  the  South.  We  have  a  suffocating  sense  of 
fainting,  of  closeness,  and  ache  to  get  out  into  fresher  air  and  ampler  space  ;  but 
things  hem  us  in  from  being  and  doing  as  we  would.  We  can  see  perhaps  a  simpler, 
healthier,  more  rational  life  to  live,  and  we  inwardly  desii-e  to  live  it.  There  are 
interests  that  cliain  us  down,  and  around  us  is  a  world  of  convention  and  custom 
throngh  which  we  are  unable  to  break.  We  are  shut  up  to  a  daily  round,  so  we 
are  iuipxtient.  Have  we  not  sighed  thus  at  times  for  an  open  door  to  let  us  out? 
2.  Or,  again,  in  earnest  thought  and  contemplation  we  have  felt  that  light  was 
near;  a  faint  glimmer  has  been  decried  by  us.  It  seemed  to  us  that  only  another 
step  was  required  to  carry  us  right  into  the  light,  and  then  just  there  we  were 
stopped  ;  on  the  verge  of  it,  we  were  like  a  man  groping  about  in  a  dark  room  for 
some  article  which  he  knows  is  very  close  by  waiting  to  be  grasped  by  his  hand, 
but  which  he  feels  after  in  vain.  Oh,  for  one  further  suggestion  that  would  surely 
bring  us  to  the  land  on  the  borders  of  which  we  are  !  3.  So  once  more,  when 
wandering  solitary  in  the  summer  fields,  or  in  the  silence  of  the  lonely  wood, 
watching  the  wonch'ous  sunset  at  sea,  has  there  never  been  a  feeling  with  us  that, 
ho-vever  natin-e  might  be  speaking  to  our  minds  and  our  hearts,  there  was  some- 
thing further,  deeper,  which  it  had  to  say — something  for  the  communication  of 
which  only  a  little  more  faith,  or  delicacy,  or  peace  in  ourselves  was  needed?  II. 
But  we  have  had  the  happy  experience  of  the  opening  of  the  door.  And  how 
charming  it  was  when  the  means  of  doing  what  we  have  been  craving  to  do  presented 
itself,  and  we  were  free  to  follow  the  hitherto  thwarted  impulses !  Suddenly  or 
gradually  a  new  view  of  a  subject  has  come  as  with  the  opening  of  a  window,  and 


563  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

the  whole  aspect  of  things  has  undergone  cliange.  Or  we  have  stumbled  upon 
facts  with  which  we  were  previously  acquainted  which  promised  to  elucidate  for  us 
that  which  was  previously  inextricable  ;  or,  getting  hold  of  a  principle,  we  have 
found  we  could  apply  it  for  guidance  in  relation  to  matters  in  dealing  with  which 
before  we  have  been  dubious  or  confused.  Or  the  reading  of  some  book,  maybe 
the  intercourse  with  some  person  has  given  us  a  new  vision  of  life.  III.  Theke  is 
SUCH  A  THING  AS  LIVING  ALWAYS  WITH  A  DOOR  OPEN  BEFOEE  US.  As  every  man  is  his 
own  strait  gate,  and  the  main  difficulty  in  his  way  of  improvement,  so  every  man 
may  be  if  he  will  his  own  open  door.  The  secret  of  the  difference  between  men 
in  their  growth  is  that  some  are  receptive,  and  some  are  not.  Some  are  standing 
every  day  to  appropriate  and  assimilate  all  that  meets  them ;  and  some  are  with 
souls  more  or  less  enclosed — angels  walk  by  their  thresholds  and  they  do  not  ask 
them  in  ;  Jesus  of  Nazareth  passes  by  and  they  are  not  about.  1.  Cultivate  at  the 
height  of  every  achievement  an  ingenuous  discontent.  Evermore  say,  "This  is  good, 
yet  is  there  better  than  this."  2.  Try  to  discipline  yourself  to  equanimity  in  the  pre- 
sence of  petty  troubles  and  grievances.  Eevery  particular  to  have  your  mental  chamber 
kept  free  from  the  disturbance  of  a  host  of  sliabby  visitors.  Many  men  live  and  die 
excludedfromhigher  impressions,  just  because  their  avenues  are  all  blocked.  3.  Cul- 
tivate cheerfulness,  resist  gloom  and  despondency,  than  which  nothing  operates  more 
to  pre  vent  appreciation  and  discer  I  ment  of  the  good  that  offers  itself.  {S.  A.  Tipple.) 
The  openmfi  of  a  great  and  effectual  door: — I.  Impoets — 1.  Opportunity.  2. 
Success.  II.  May  occur  in  a  most  unlikely  place.  III.  Invites  us  to  enter 
IT.  IV.  Usually  awakens  opposition.  V.  Should  inspire  persistent  courage 
AND  effort.  (J.  Lytli,  D.D.)  A  great  and  effectual  door  opeued : — Consider — I. 
The  great  and  effectual  door  opened.  1.  A  few  years  back  and  Ephesus  was 
"  a  door  "  not  open  to  Christ.  The  temple  of  Diana  was  open,  and  thronged  with 
worshippers  from  "all  Asia  and  the  world."  Tlie  theatre  was  open,  nourisbing 
the  worst  passions  of  our  fallen  nature.  Craftsmen  had  their  open  shops  for  the 
sale  of  models  of  the  ten)ple  and  images  of  the  goddess.  And  yet  Ephesus  was  a 
most  important  place,  teeming  with  population,  the  capital  of  Proconsular  Asia. 
How  sad  to  see  it  a  closed  "  door  "  !  And  is  there  no  closed  "  door  "  in  the  present 
day  ?  I  speak  not  now  of  many  a  heathen  city,  but  of  those  closed  "  doors  "  in  the 
densely  populated  paiishes  of  Christian  England,  where  mammon  has  her  open 
shops,  licentiousness  her  open  hells,  infidelity  her  open  halls.  How  distressing  to 
see  the  "door"  of  "  the  broad  way  "  wide  open,  and  the  many  crowding  through 
it,  while  "  the  strait  gate  "  is,  to  numbers,  virtually  the  closed  "  door  "  !  2.  But 
see  the  "  great  and  effectual  door  opened  1  "  The  apostle  came  and  laboured  there 
for  the  space  of  three  years.  It  was  in  the  course  of  this  period  that  he  saw  "  a 
great  door  and  effectual  opened."  In  his  opportunity  of  making  known  the  gospel, 
and  in  its  ready  admission  to  the  hearts  of  many.  Some  so  ignorant  that  they  had 
not  so  much  as  heard  "  whether  there  were  any  Holy  Ghost,"  became  well-instructed 
Christians.  "  Many  of  them  also  which  used  curious  arts  brought  their  books 
together,  and  burned  then).  So  mightily  grew  the  Word  of  God  and  prevailed." 
And  the  gospel  and  the  grace  of  God  is  still  the  same.  Wherever  faithful  men 
labour  in  the  spirit  of  the  apostle,  using  the  same  instrument,  and  depending  on 
the  same  grace,  they  commonly  soon  see,  with  delight  and  thankfulness,  a  "  great 
and  effectual  door  "  opening  before  them.  II.  The  many  advers.^.ries.  When  we 
engage  in  any  work  for  God  we  are  taught  to  expect  difficulties.  In  seeking  our 
own  salvation  we  are  exborted  to  count  the  cost ;  in  co-operating  to  save  souls 
we  must  calculate  on  opposition.  The  adversaries  are — 1.  General.  Satan,  the 
adversary  of  God  and  man,  always  in  every  place  opposing  the  work  of  God,  and 
man's  natural  corruption  rendf^'S  him  an  easy  prey  to  the  enemy  seeking  his 
destruction.  See  how  the  apostle  reminded  the  Ephesians  of  both  these  in  his 
Epistle.  2.  Special.  (1)  The  Jews  the  emboiliment  of  that  self-righteousness 
whi(^h  is  one  of  our  mo-^t  potent  adversaries  to-day.  Have  not  we  often  had  to 
contend,  ni«t  only  with  open  ungodliness,  but  also  with  this  subtle  adversary,  work- 
ing in  the  hearts  of  the  more  decent  yet  formal  professors  of  religion?  (2)  The 
exorcists.  So  we  must  not  be  surprised  if,  when  the  true  gospel  is  preached,  there 
be  counterfeits  of  the  gospel  circulated  from  corrupt  motives  by  ungodly  men.  (3) 
Demetrius  and  the  craftsmen.  These,  seeing  the  open  "door,"  endeavoured  to 
close  it  by  violence  And  is  there  no  such  storm  fast  gathering  around  us  in  the 
present  day  ?  III.  What  is  the  consequent  duty  ?  1.  To  acknowledge  the  hand  of 
God.  Who  but  He,  with  His  Divine  hand,  oxipned  that  "  great  door  and  effectual "  in 
Ephesus?     And  the  Founlain-head  continues  the  same — inexhaustible  and  Divine. 


cmp.  XVI.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  5G9 

Hence  all  our  hopps  and  consolations.  2.  To  press  forward.  3.  Where  we  see  the 
"great  door  and  effectual  opened,"  althonprh  "  there  are  many  adversaries."  "  The 
liinsdom  of  heaven  sufferetli  violence,  and  the  violent  take  it  bj'  force."  It  is  not  by  an 
indolent  wish,  an  occasional  imjiulse  of  feeling,  but  by  faithful  perseveiaiice,  even 
"  unto  death,"  that  «e  shall  liave  '•  an  entrance  ministered  to  us  abundantly,"  &c. 
(J.    Ilamhleton,    M.A.)  Opi'ortnnity  :—l.  This  word    "opportunity"    springs 

FROM  AN  old  ROOT  FirrNiFYiNG  "AT  POUT,"  or  "  in  tljc  harbour,"  suggestive  of  the 
lines  :  "  There  is  a  tide  in  the  affairs  of  men  which,  taken  at  the  flood,  leads  on  to 
fortune."  Thus  we  think  of  the  trader  watching  the  maiket,  ready  to  pounce  upon 
every  opportunity  that  he  may  turn  it  to  gold.  Thousands  fail  in  life  through 
neglect  of  such  chances.  When  tbe  Blucher  of  opportunity  presents  itself,  they 
have  not  "  pluck  "  enough  to  charge,  and  so  win  their  Waterloo.  There  are  great 
national  opportunities  which  present  themselves  once  or  twice  in  the  lifetime  of  a 
country  or  community  and  never  come  again.  Such  an  opportunity  the  Church  of 
Rome  had  when  some  of  her  most  faithful  sons  pointed  out  the  sins  and  excesses 
which  led  to  the  Eefonnation.  Such  an  opportunity  the  Cliurch  of  England  had 
in  1G62,  when  she  drove  out  the  crown  and  flower  of  her  ministerial  ranks.  Such 
an  opportunity  France  had  at  the  time  of  the  Reformation  of  ridding  herself  of  a 
blind  superstition  on  tlie  one  liand,  and  a  hopeless  atheism  on  the  other.  Such  an 
opportunity  Jerusalem  had  nineteen  centuries  ago ;  but  she  spurned  it,  rejected  it, 
and  finally  quenched  it  in  the  blood  of  the  innocent  (Luke  xix.  41-44).     II.  Tiikre 

ARE  OPPORTUNITIES  WHICH  BELONG  TO  CERTAIN  PERIODS  OF    LIFE.       There  is  the  SeaSOH 

of  youth.  How  full  it  is  of  opportunities— for  mental  improvement,  forming  good 
habits,  moulding  the  character,  determining  on  a  future  line  of  action.  Use  it,  ttiere- 
fore,  as  the  springtime  which  soon  depavteth,  and  wherein  thou  oughtest  to  plant 
and  sow  provisions  for  a  long  and  happy  life.  Now  if  this  be  true  with  regard  to 
the  physical  and  mental,  how  much  more  with  regaril  to  the  moral  and  the 
spiritual !  Says  the  poet :  "  Heaven  lies  near  us  in  our  infancy."  The  heart  has 
not  become  stained  and  soiled  ;  tbe  conscience  has  not  become  seared  and  hardened. 
There  are  no  hosannas  so  sweet  to  Christ  as  the  hosannas  of  the  young.  Others, 
again,  are  becoming  more  advanced  in  years.  Gradually  they  find  themselves 
farther  and  farther  away  from  the  time  "  when  they  were  boys  " — they  have  reached 
the  autumn  of  life.  Ob,  what  opportunities  they  have  had  !  But  while  men  were 
busy  here  and  there,  the  golden  opportunity  was  gone.  Consider  our  opportunities 
of  usefulness.  Take  the  home,  c.//.,  what  a  splendid  chance  it  presents  to  Christian 
parents  of  influencing  tlieir  children  goodwards  at  the  very  gateway  of  life  !  And 
to  a  certain  extent  the  same  thing  holds  good  with  regard  to  visitors.  When  Lord 
Peterborough  lodged  with  Fenelon  for  a  season,  he  said,  on  leaving,  "  After  this  I 
shall  be  a  Christian  in  spite  of  myself."  Or  possibly  you  occupy  a  position  in  some 
place  of  business,  and  one  morning  a  child  with  a  distressed  look  comes  to  say  that 
"  father  is  very  ill,  and  cannot  come  to-day."  Next  morning  an  intimation  reaches 
you  that  he  is  dead.  Instantly  a  "  still,  small  voice  "  within  whispers  reproach- 
fully, "  I  have  never  in  all  these  years  spoken  one  word  to  this  man  about  Divine 
things.  I  have  lost  an  opportunity  tbat  will  never  return."  Oh,  there  is  a  day 
coming  when  these  lost  opportunities  will  appear  in  a  clearer  light  and  with  more 
teriible  and  startling  distinctness.  "  Because  I  have  called  and  ye  refused,"  &c. 
(Prov.  i.  24-28).  "  Consequences  are  unpitying."  So,  then,  as  we  have  oppor- 
tunity, let  us  work  that  which  is  good  toward  all  men,  and  especially  toward  them 
that  are  of  the  household  of  the  faith.     (/.  Dijmond.) 

Vers.  10-16.  Now  if  Timotheus  come,  see  that  he  may  be  with  you  without  fear. 

—PauVs  affectionate  recoiiniiendalion  of  Timothy  teaches  us  that  young  ministers — 
1.  Often  need  encouragement.  2.  Should  be  respected  for  their  works'  sake.  3. 
Ought  not  to  be  despised.  4.  Must  be  treated  with  tenderness  and  consideration. 
5.  Have  a  claim  on  the  affectionate  sympathy  of  their  elder  brethren.  {J.  Lyth, 
D.D.)  3Iimsterial  solicitude: — We  are  reminded — I.  That  human  plans  and 
PURPOSES  ARE  FRAUGHT  WITH  CONTINGENCY.  "If  Tiuiotlieus  comc."  Uncertainty 
is  an  important  factor  in  human  calculations.  1.  Even  Paul  could  not  project  his 
plans  into  the  future  positive  ly.  (1)  The  Macedonian  cry  of  some  more  needy 
Church  might  be  heard ;  new  doors  constantly  openiiig,  fresh  emergencies  might 
arise.  (2)  Fiery  persecutions  were  rife,  the  murderer's  hand  might  smite,  bonds 
and  impri-onment  might  hold.  (3)  Escaping  all  these,  death  was  still  on  his  track 
— accident  or  disease  miglit  prevent.  Paul  was  wise  in  saying,  "  If  he  come."  2. 
So  you  are  expecting  your  Timotheus,  my  successor.    Do  not  forget  the  extent  and 


570  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chab.  xvi. 

variety  of  the  interests  to  be  looked  after,  or  the  contingencies  tbat  may  arise  in 
adjusting  the  ruany  claims.  'I'he  cause  you  are  interested  in  is  God's,  so  ave  the 
men.  Let  uot  your  over-anxiety  fence  Him  off  from  having  a  hand  in  selecting 
your  pastor.  II.  Of  the  state  of  mixd  essential  to  ministerial  success. 
"  With  you  without  fear."  Paul  wanted  this  young  man  to  start  off  well  on  his 
new  charge.  He  who  is  not  "  without  fear"  is  in  bad  company.  He  lets  rooms, 
or,  rather,  helplessly  admits  an  enemy  who  ties  him  hand  and  foot,  and  robs  him 
of  happiness  and  success.  Every  man  "  who  is  a  shepherd,  and  not  an  hireling," 
will  have  a  natural  fear  or  timidity  in  taking  charge  of  an  important  Church.  You 
have  the  power  to  confirm  or  remove  this  fteling.  It  is  with  our  people  to  swing 
us  out  into  the  tropics,  or  create  a  winter  about  us,  and — oh,  how  cold  it  feels  ! 
III.  Of  the  duty  of  the  Church  in  this  important  matter.  "See  that  he," 
&c.,  i.e.,  make  it  your  business.  Take  pains  to  let  him  know  that  he  is  appreciated,. 
and  has  your  goodwill  and  co-operation.  Banish  the  insulting  suspicion  ihat  you^ 
might  make  him  proud  if  you  tcld  him  you  like  his  sermons.  If  such  be  the  case, 
have  the  honesty  to  let  him  know  it.  If  he  be  a  man  of  God  it  will  make  him  a 
better  pi  eacher  and  more  humble.  "  Now  if  Timotheus  come,  see  that" — 1.  You 
do  not,  by  needlessly  eulogising  your  former  pastor,  produce  in  his  mind  the  fear 
that  he  will  never  be  able  to  till  "  the  aching  void."  2.  You  do  not,  by  needlessly 
unkind  criticism,  and  fault-finding  references  to  your  former  pastors,  produce  iu 
him  the  "fear"  that  he  is  among  an  unkind,  fault-finding  people;  and  that,, 
possibly  in  a  few  months,  they  may  be  equally  bitter  against  himself.  Do  not  ba 
in  too  givat  a  hurry  to  weigh  "Timotheus,  if  he  come";  give  him  a  chance. 
When  you  do  weigh  him,  put  him  on  a  decent  scale,  and  not  one  that  weighs  every- 
thing on  a  sharp  hook.  See  that  he  is  without  fear  when  you  put  him  on  the 
scales;  if  fear  go  on  with  him,  he  will  not  register  half  his  weight  or  worth.  IV. 
That  God's  faithful  ministers  are  all  men  of  one  work.  "  He  worketh 
the  work  of  the  Lord,  as  I  also  do."  He  in  his  wny,  I  in  mine.  Sanctified 
individuality  is  the  great  want  of  the  times.  Every  man  has  his  own  mission,  and, 
sanctified  to  God  and  duty,  he  can  do  a  work  which  no  other  being  on  earlh  can 
do  as  well.  Better  wield  the  siin23le  sling  of  David  than  the  cumbersome  armour  of 
Saul.  (2'.  Kellij.)  Wliolesome  te<tchi)ig  for  the  older  ministers  : — I.  Show  a  tender 
REGARD  for  THIS  INTERESTS  OF  YOUNG  MINISTERS.  Timotliy  was  youug  ill  ycars 
and  in  the  faith  ;  a  man,  too,  i^erhaps  of  delicate  frame  and  nervous  temperament, 
and  probably  not  distinguished  by  any  great  gilt.  In  Corinth  there  were  philoso- 
phers and  orators  in  whose  presence  he  would  perhaps  feel  somewhat  abashed. 
Hence  Paul  asks  the  Corinthians  to  tre^tt  him  kindly,  not  to  "  despite  him,"  nor  in 
any  way  to  dispirit  him.  Alas!  it  is  not  an  uncommon  thing  for  elder  ministers  to 
disparage  the  younger  ones,  and  often  treat  them  with  disrespect,  and  even  rude- 
ness. II.  EisE  SUPERIOR  TO  ALL  MINISTERIAL  JEALOUSIES.  If  Paul  had  been  capable 
of  jealousy  it  would  have  been  towards  ApoUos.  He  was  a  man  of  distinguished 
ability,  and  perhaps  more  popular  even  than  Paul  himself.  Had  he  been  jealous, 
Paul  would  have  kept  him  out  of  Corinth  as  long  as  he  could,  instead  of  which  he 
says  (ver.  12).  Jealousy  amongst  nrinisters,  though  most  anti-Christian,  is  not 
an  uncommon  thing ;  and  shows  itself  often  in  detracting  innuendoes  and  symbolic 
looks  and  shiugs.  III.  Be  not  displeased  if  inferior  brethren  acquiesce  not. 
IN  your  desires.  Both  the  Chiistiim  exi^erience  and  ministerial  ability  of  Apollos 
were  inferior  to  that  of  Paul.  Notwithstanding  this  he  did  not  comply  with  Paul's 
rei]uest ;  nor  did  Paul  seem  displeased  (ver.  12).  If  Paul  did  not  enforce  his  wishes 
on  his  brethren,  how  arrogant  it  seems  for  any  uninsijired  minister  to  attempt  it! 
The  only  auth-rity  which  one  genuine  minister  has  over  another  is  the  authority 
of  superior  intelligence,  experience,  and  moral  force.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Personal 
notices : — Note — 1.  That  with  St.  Paul  personal  considerations  were  not  lost  in 
general  philanthropy.  It  is  common  enough  to  profess  great  zeal  for  humanity, 
whilst  there  is  indifference  about  individual  men.  But  St.  Paul's  love  was  to  the 
Church  generally,  and  besides  to  Aquila,  Priscilla,  &c.  And  is  not  this  too  the 
nature  of  God's  love,  who  provides  for  the  universe,  and  yet  spends  an  infinity  of 
care  on  the  fibre  of  a  leaf  ?  2.  The  value  of  the  courtesies  of  life.  There  are  many 
minds  which  are  indifferent  to  such  things,  and  fancy  themselves  above  them. 
Prescott  observes  that  "  liberty  is  dependent  upon  forms."  Did  not  the  slow, 
solemn  change  in  the  English  constitution,  and  our  freedom  from  violent  sub- 
versions, ari^e  from  the  way  in  whi(di  precedent  has  been  consulted  in  the  manner 
of  every  change  ?  But  more  love  is  dependent  ujion  forms — courtesy  of  etiquette 
guards  and  jDrotects  courtesy  of  heart.     There  are  three  persons  chiefly  mentioned 


CHAP.  XVI.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  571 

here.  I.  Timothy  (ver.  10).  Paul  bespeaks  for  him  official  respect  and  personal 
consideration.  Consider  the  circumstances  in  which  young  Timothy  was  placed  in 
coming  to  a  city  where  gifts  were  imdnly  reverenced,  and  where  even  the  authority 
of  St.  Paul  was  treated  lightly.  Think  how  Timothy's  own  modesty  would  have 
silenced  hmi,  and  how  his  young  enthusiasm  might  have  been  withered  by  ridicule 
or  asperity !  1.  St.  Paul's  pleading  is  an  encouragement  of  goodness  while  yet  in 
its  tender  bud.  There  is  a  danger  of  our  paralysing  young  enthusiasm  by  coldness 
or  by  sneers.  There  are  few  periods  in  life  more  critical  tliau  that  in  which 
sensibilities  and  strong  feeling  begin  to  develop  themselves.  The  question  is  about 
to  be  decided  whether  what  is  at  present  merely  romantic  feeling  is  to  become 
generous  devotion,  and  to  end  by  maturing  into  self-denial  ;  or  whether  it  is  to 
remain  only  a  sickly  sentiment,  and  by  reaction  degenerate  into  a  bitter  and  a 
sneering  tone.  2.  Nowhere  is  feeling  met  with  so  little  sympathy,  or  enthusiasm  so 
kept  down  as  here  ;  nowhere  do  young  persons  learn  so  soon  the  fashionable  tone 
of  strongly  admiring  nothing,  reverencing  nothing.  And  this  was  a  danger  which 
Paul  knew  well,  and  could  not  overlook.  In  earlier  days  Apollos  himself  ran  the 
same  risk.  He  set  out  preaching  all  the  truth  that  he  knew  enthu'-iastically.  It 
was  lamentably  incomplete.  Had  the  Christians  met  him — "  this  young  upstart 
does  not  preach  the  gospel  " — there  had  been  either  a  gi'eat  teacher  blighted,  or  else 
a  strong  mind  embittered  into  defiance  and  heresy.  But  from  this  he  was  delivered 
by  the  love  and  prudence  of  Aquiia  and  Priscilla,  "  who  expounded  unto  him  the 
way  of  God  more  perfectly."  II.  Apollos  (ver.  12).  Note — 1.  The  perfect  absence 
of  all  mean  jealousy  in  St.  Paul's  mind.  Compare  this  passage  with  his  earnest 
rebuke  of  the  party  of  Apollos  in  the  fir^t  chapter.  On  reading  that  it  might  appear 
natural  to  say,  "  Oh,  he  cannot  bear  a  rival!  "  But  behold,  it  was  zeal  for  Ciirist, 
and  not  jealousy  of  Apollos.  These  are  some  of  the  fine  tonches  by  which  we  learn 
what  tliat  sublime  apostle  was,  and  what  the  grace  of  God  had  made  him.  2.  The 
apostle's  earnest  desire  to  make  Apollos  stand  well  with  the  Corinthians.  A  meaner 
S|jirit  would  either  have  left  his  conduct  unexplained,  or  would  have  caught  at  the 
suspicion  resting  on  hiui ;  why  did  he  stay  away  ?  But  St.  Paul  would  leave  no 
inisundersianding  to  smoulder.  He  simply  stated  that  Apollos  had  reasons  for  not 
coming  ;  "  but  he  will  come."  This  is  magnanimity  and  true  delicacy  of  heart. 
III.  The  house  of  Stephanas  (vers.  15,  16).  1.  See  what  Christianity  is — equality, 
but  not  levelling.  God's  universe  is  built  on  subordination  ;  so  is  God's  Church. 
The  spirit  of  the  woi  Id's  liberty  says,  "  Let  no  man  lord  it  over  you";  but  the 
spirit  of  the  gospel  liberty  says,  "  Submit  yourselves  one  to  another."  2.  They 
had  addicted  themselves  to  the  ministry,  ^^ho  had  called  them  to  it?  No  one, 
except  God  by  an  inward  fitness.  Tiiere  are  certain  things  to  be  done  in  this  world 
which  require  peculiar  instruments  and  qualilicatious.  A  call  from  God  to  do  such 
a  work  is  often  shown  by  a  willingness  to  do  it ;  a  readiness  to  stand  forward  and 
take  the  lead.  When  this  is  the  case,  and  such  men  t'y  to  do  good,  they  are  often 
met  with  innumerable  hindrances,  as  in  the  cases  of  Howard  and  Mrs.  Fry.  Now 
St.  Paul  says.  This  is  wrong  ;  you  ought  rather  to  lif^lp  such.  Let  them  take  the 
lead — follow  in  their  wake,  and  do  not  mar  the  work  by  any  petty  jealousy. 
Observe,  then,  it  is  as  much  an  apostolic  duty  to  obey  persons  who  have  "  addicted 
th'-mselses"  from  inward  fitness,  as  it  is  to  respect  an  outward  constitutional 
authority.  (F.  W.  liobcrtson,  31.  A.)  As  touching  our  brotber  Apollos. — Etiquette 
amongst  ministers  : — I.  Is  founued  in  theik  bkotheely  bklation.  1.  As  children 
of  one  Father.  2.  As  co-workers  in  one  cause.  II.  Excludes  all  undue  assump- 
tion OF  authoeity — all  right  of  dictation.  III.  Pkompxs  them  to  think  and  speak 
kindly  of  each  other.     {J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 

Vers.  13-14.  Watch  ye,  stand  fast  in  the  faith,  quit  you  like  men,  toe  strong.— 

The  reqaireinents  of  the  Cliristian  lourfnre  : — The  associations  of  war  and  b:ittle 
bi'eathe  in  every  word  of  this  exhortation.  It  touches  the  heart  as  the  spirit- 
stirring  address  of  a  trusted  leader  touches  the  hearts  of  his  comrades  at  some 
great  emergency  of  the  conflict.  As  the  foe  gathers  in  the  distance,  hnlf  hidden 
behind  the  brow  of  the  hill  or  beneath  the  shadow  of  the  forest,  and  it  remains 
doubtful  for  the  momi-nt  at  what  quarter  the  storm  will  break,  his  warning  voice 
calls  to  vigilance — "Watch  ye."  As  the  tide  of  war  rolls  its  threatening  masses 
onwards,  and  the  advancing  column  of  the  enemy,  grim  and  ominous  as  a  thunder- 
cloud, threatens  to  overwhelm  the  slender  line  of  defenders,  the  leader's  clear  voice 
is  heard  in  the  momentary  husii  of  suspense,  exhorting  them  to  steadiness  and 
constancy — "  Stand  fast."     As  the  opposing  lines   break  in  the  shock  of  battle 


,572  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

confusedly,  like  the  meeting  of  two  angry  tides,  and  warrior  contends  band  to 
hand  with  warrior,  the  fumiliar  voice  still  sounds  amid  the  tumult,  "  Quit  you  like 
men."  As  beneath  the  fury  of  the  assault  the  line  of  the  patriot  host  shakes  and 
wavers,  and  the  crisis  calls  for  a  courage  prepared  to  die,  but  never  to  yield,  I 
picture  to  myself  the  figure  of  the  diiuntless  leader  as  he  lifts  his  banner  aloft  and 
shouts,  "  Be  strong."  {Canon  Garbett.)  The  demands  of  Christianity  : — I.  Vigi- 
lance. There  were  many  evils  in  the  Corinthian  Church — dissensions,  heresies, 
unchastity,  intemperanne,  &o.  Hence  the  necessity  for  watchfulness.  IBut  where 
do  not  evils  abound?  Hosts  surround  us  all;  hence  "Watch  ye."  "Watch  and 
pray."  II.  Stability.  Do  not  be  wavering,  vacillating,  "  tossed  about  by  every 
wind  of  doctrine."  Strike  the  roots  of  your  faith  deep  into  the  soil  of  eternal  truth. 
Firmness  is  no  more  obstinacy  than  the  strong  rock  or  the  deep-rooted  oak.  III. 
Manliness.  There  is  nothing  higher  than  this.  There  are  great  philosophers, 
poets,  statesmen,  &c.,  who  are  small  men  leagues  away  from  the  ideal.  IV.  Charity 
(ver.  14).  Man's  life  consists  of  many  "  things  done."  Activity  is  at  once  the  law 
and  necessity  of  his  nature.  He  only  really  lives  as  he  acts.  But  while  acts  are 
varied,  the  animating  spirit  should  be  one,  and  that  is  love.  (D.  Thomis,  D.D.) 
Four  lyoints  in  the  Christian  life: — The  text  contains  four  points  that  should 
characterise  the  Ciiristian  life.  I.  Vigilance.  It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that 
we  should  set  a  watch  over  our  minds  ;  for  error  is,  so  to  sj)eak,  in  the  air.  And 
since  the  ruling  ideas  of  the  mind  colour  all  <air  thoughts,  and  affect  all  our  actions, 
we  cannot  be  too  careful,  when  idoas  seek  admittance  into  our  minds,  to  test  them, 
that  we  may  know  their  character ;  for  false  and  evil  ideas  corrupt  good  and 
healthy  minds.  We  see  every  object  presented  to  the  mind  in  the  light  of  our 
rnling  ideas ;  like  coloured  glass  they  transform  everything  into  their  own 
particular  shade.  In  religious  matters  this  is  specially  important.  Whenever  any 
object  is  presented  to  the  mind  for  our  acceptance,  as  religious  men  and  women  let 
us  at  once  betake  ourselves  "  to  the  law  and  to  the  testimony."  This  is  all  the 
more  imperative  since  error  can  put  on  the  manners  of  truth,  and  actually  pretend 
to  do  truth's  work.  There  are  many  false  teachers  in  our  day,  and  error  is  ex- 
ceedingly busy;  let  us,  therefore,  vigilantly  guard  the  door  of  our  minds,  that  no 
false  principles  tnke  possession  of  them  to  pervert  our  thoughts  and  best  feelings. 
We  need  also  set  a  watch  over  our  hearts.  Tlie  majority  of  people  are  easier 
influenced  through  their  emotions  than  by  means  of  their  intellects.  That  is  the 
seci'et  of  the  numerous  fascinating  shows  that  are  so  carefully  and  strikingly  got 
up  and  presented  to  the  eye  ;  the  exhibitors  know  that  men  are  moved  by  such 
things,  and  that  when  they  are  in  such  an  excited  state,  they  may  be  carried  away 
and  made  anything  of,  whether  for  good  or  for  evil,  just  as  they  may  feel  disposed. 
Whenever  any  serious  attempt  is  made  to  excite  our  heart's  affections  we  should 
be  very  careful  to  ask  ourselves  the  questions,  "Are  these  appeals  to  my  heart 
true  ? "  "  Are  the  means  used  for  this  purpose  true  in  the  highest  and  best  sense  ?  " 
We  should  also  be  careful  to  ask  ourselves  the  question,  "  Whether  the  objects  that 
are  seeking  entrance  into  our  hearts  are  pure  ?  "  The  "  wisdom  that  is  from  above, 
is  first  pure."  We  should  also  ask  ourselves  the  further  important  question, 
"Whether  the  things  that  are  seeking  our  hearts  are  character-making  in  the 
truest  sense?"  Whether  they  are  likely  to  make  us  true,  just,  honourable,  pure, 
lovely,  and  thoroughly  virtuous?  Fnrther,  we  must  set  a  watch  upon  our  spirits  to 
guard  our  spirituality.  The  sharp  edge  of  a  knife,  if  pressed  carelessly  against  a 
hard  substance,  will  blunt  and  become  unfit  for  use.  Great  care  should  be  taken 
by  Christian  people  to  preserve  the  tone  of  the  spirituality  and  vigorous  point. 
Whatever  lowers  the  tone  of  a  person's  spirituality  hinders  the  progress  of 
his  higher  and  nobler  life.  If  mingled  with  a  given  society;  if  going  to  the 
theatre;  if  reading  a  certain  class  of  book  ;  if  either  of  these  things,  or  any  other 
practice,  chills  the  spirit,  and  imlisposes  it  to  pray,  it  should  certamly  be  abandoned 
as  dangerous.  We  need,  therefoie,  to  set  a  vigilant  watch  over  our  spirits,  that  we 
may  preserve  a  healthy  and  vigorous  tone  of  spirituality  that  will  thoroughly 
command  our  carnal  passions  and  keep  them  in  subjection.  "  But  I  say.  Walk  by 
the  Spirit,  and  ye  shall  not  fulfil  the  lust  of  the  flesh,"  &c.  II.  Steadfastness.  [ 
"  Stand  fast  in  the  faith."  1.  In  our  faith  is  the  one  true  and  living  God.  The  ' 
bane  of  Greece  was  the  multitude  of  her  gods.  The  idolatrous  upbringing  of  the 
Corinthians  was,  no  doubt,  a  great  hindrance  to  their  spiritual  growth.  With 
many  Christians  God  is  a  "  God  afar  off,"  it  is  to  be  feared  ;  hence  their  apathy 
and  inertness  in  regard  to  religion  and  the  state  of  their  fellow-creatures  around 
them.     There  were  daring  unbelievers  in  Corinth  when  Paul  wrote  this  Epistle  .who 


CHAP.  XVI.]  I,  CORINTHIANS.  573 

denied  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  and  who  weie  scattering  error  broadcast 
amongst  the  peojile.  Let  us  sland  fast  in  our  faith  in  God,  then,  that  He  is  a  "  very  I 
present  God,"  who  never  leaves  nor  forsaises  those  who  trust  in  Hiin.  2.  Let  us  be 
firm  in  our  faith  in  Christ  as  tlie  only  and  sufficient  Saviour.  The  Corinthians 
were  in  danger,  from  tlie  special  importance  whicli  the  Greeks  attached  to  wisdom. 
And  if  wisdom  did  not  actually  save  humanity,  according  to  them  only  the  wise,  in 
their  sense  of  tlie  term,  would  be  saved.  Paul  combats  this  erroneous  idea  in  the 
first  chapter  of  this  Epistle.  So  it  is  faith  that  saves,  not  wisdom— not  true 
wisdom  even.  It  is  not  morality  that  saves  either.  If  it  conid  have  saved  any  one, 
it  most  cei'tainly  would  have  saved  the  rich  young  ruler  in  the  Gospels.  3.  Let  us 
"  stand  fast  in  the  faith,"  that  the  Scriptures  are  the  only  ami  sufficient  rule  of 
faith.'  III.  Manliness.  "Quit  you  like  njen."  The-ewoids  have  a  martial  air 
about  them  ;  they  sound  like  the  utterance  of  a  great  general  on  tlie  eve  of  a 
critical  battle  that  was  to  decide  the  destiny  of  a  mightj'  nation.  The  manliness 
of  which  the  text  speaks  includes  several  parts.  1.  In  the  first  place,  it  includes 
-Uprightness.  Man  was  made  i^hysically  eiect  that  he  mi.i^ht  look  heavenward  with 
ease  am)  pleasure.  And  man's  moral  conduct  is  to  resemble  his  physical  fiame ; 
it  is  to  be  upriyht.  It  must  not  have  any  twists  in  it,  n>r  angles  of  any  kind.  The 
eloquent  statesman,  Henry  Clay,  propounded  a  pnHtical  scheme  to  a  friend  once. 
"  It  will  ruin  your  prospects  lor  tho  Presidency,"  sugge-ted  the  friend.  "  Is  it 
right?"  asked  Clay.  "Yes,"  was  tlie  answer.  Mr.  C'ay  continued,  "I  would 
rather  be  right  than  President."  Every  Christian  should  do  ri;^ht ;  his  Christian 
manliness  demands  it  of  him.  Anything  like  unprincipled  policy  or  time-serving 
is  utterly  out  of  place  in  a  disciple  of  Christ's.  2.  It  also  includes  tiuth.  The 
manly  Christian  is  a  true  man.  He  does  not  think  one  tliiiig  and  speak  another. 
His  words  as  truly  represent  his  thoughts  as  the  sound  of  a  correct  key  in  an  organ 
represents  a  particular  part  of  music.  The  same  consistency  is  apparent  between 
his  feelings  and  his  actions.  Among  the  important  objects  of  his  life  are  "  What- 
soever things  are  true."  3.  And,  further,  it  includes  courage.  Christian  manliness 
is  full  of  true  valour.  Fortitude  is  as  prominent  a  feature  of  the  genuinely  good 
man's  life  as  uprightness  and  truth.  They  will  boldly  enter  a  lion's  den  rather 
than  deny  their  God.  IV.  True  and  manly  vigour.  "  Be  strong."  The  spiritual  ( 
life  is  capable  of  great  strength — that  is  clear  from  the  characters  of  the  faithful 
of  all  ages.  Intellectual  greatness  may  only  be  possible  to  a  few ;  but  great 
spiritual  might  is  practically  possible  to  all  true  Christians.  1.  Be,  strong  in  con- 
viction. If  we  will  but  allow  the  light  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel  to  penetrate  our 
minds,  we  shall  be  deeply  convinced  of  its  saving  power,  and  the  result  will  be  that 
we  shall  "be  strong"  in  our  adherence  to  the  truth.  Let  us  be  careful  not  to 
mistake  mere  tradition  for  truth.  2.  Be  strong  in  love.  In  the  verse  which 
immediately  follows  the  text  the  apostle  cfirects  the  Corinthians,  "Let  all  that  ye 
do  be  done  in  love."  Love  is  a  special  feature  of  Christianity.  Love  can  do  what 
no  other  faculty  can ;  what  many  other  faculties  combined  cannot  do;  hence  our 
Lord's  "  new  commandment."  The  loving  man  is  a  great  actor — he  is  no  dreamer, 
but  a  doer  of  the  work  of  Christ.  3.  Be  strong  in  will.  Strength  of  will  is  re- 1 
quired  in  our  struggles  with  the  corruptions  of  our  own  hearts,  and  the  sin  that  so 
abounds  without  and  around  us.  (D.  Ehys  Jenkins.)  A  manly  Christianity  is — I. 
Watchful.  Because  it — 1.  Is  enlightened.  2.  Knows  the  danger.  3.  Provides  against 
it.  II.  Steadfast.  Because — 1.  It  understands  the  faith.  2.  Appreciates  its  value. 
3.  Eesists  unto  blood.  III.  Strong — I.  In  experience  and  purpose.  2.  Hence  immov- 
able, always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord.  {J.  Lyth.)  Wise  counsels  : — 1. 
Guard  against  temptation.  2.  Hold  fast  your  principles.  3.  Act  with  courage.  4, 
Persevere  with  constancy.  5.  Do  all  in  the  spirit  of  love.  (Ibid.)  Three  kinds 
of  temptation : — There  is  an  indissoluble  connection  bptween  a  man's  character  and 
his  view  of  life.  As  a  man  is  in  moral  quality,  so  will  he  conceive  life  to  be.  It  is 
only  the  feeble  and  the  worthless  who  ask,  Is  life  woith  living?  The  brave  and 
the  good  live  worthily,  and  so  feel  life  full  of  worth.  Sin  produces  despair.  Holi- 
ness begets  courage  and  faith.  Take,  as  an  instance,  the  man  who  writes  these 
words.  He  had  known  hardness;  his  life  iiad  been  a  life  of  trouble  and  change, 
yet  he  had  dared  to  brave  it.  And  now,  summing  up  the  lesson  of  his  life  to  the 
men  he  loved,  he  says,  "Watch  ye,"  &c.  He  enforces  the  duty.  They  are  to 
watch.  That  duty  is  personal,  and  involves  another:  "stand  fast  in  the  faith." 
As  they  watch  they  keep  the  faith.  As  they  keep  the  faith  they  quit  themselves 
like  men.  As  these  three  are  together  bound  and  realised  in  one  character  they  i 
are  strong.    I.  Watch.     The  duty  of  watchfulness  implies  its  need,  and  the  needil 


57 J:  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

of  watchfulness  springs  from  the  manifoldness  of  temptation.  1.  There  are  three  - 
great  conditions  or  forms  under  which  temptations  coiue.  (1)  Social.  True 
society  is  better  than  it  was.  Public  life  is  purer  and  its  standard  hig-Tiei'.  Educa- 
tion is  more  widely  distributed,  and  as  men  say  no  man  shall  be  ignorant,  so  they 
must  come  to  nay  that  no  man  shall  make  for  us  laws  unless  he  be  a  moral  man. 
Our  commerce,  too,  has  much  of  its  ancient  character  of  honour.  But  while  we 
have  much  cause  for  gratitude,  we  have  greater  cause  for  watchfulness.  Our 
society  is  sadly  destitute  of  true  economy,  which  means  labour  wisely  directed  and 
applied,  the  power  of  gathering  in  and  reaping  its  abundant  fruits,  the  skill  and  the 
will  to  make  of  these  the  most  equal,  ample  distribution,  so  that  they  make  wealth 
not  simply  for  the  few,  but  the  whole.  Our  dangers  grow  from  accumulation  in 
the  h  m'ls  of  the  few,  witliout  distribution  into  the  homes  and  for  the  comfort  of  the 
many.  We  spend  their  thirty  millions  on  instruments  of  war,  their  three  millions 
or  a  little  more  on  education  and  the  forming  of  men.  Yet  where  lieth  the  strength 
of  a  people?  Not  in  its  arsenals,  not  in  its  army  or  navy,  but  in  its  men.  The 
snpreine  need  of  a  peojile  is  the  forming  of  the  people.  There  is  something  higher 
than  the  making  of  wealth  ;  there  is  the  making  of  men.  The  highest  of  all  social 
necessities  is  the  making  of  new  men ;  tliat  is  possible  only  by  the  preaching  and 
the  teaching  of  the  gosj)el  of  Christ.  (2)  Moral.  There  are  dangers  when  conven- 
tional standards  of  mornlity  are  unreal  and  unjust.  See  a  banker  who  has  for  ni^h 
a  whole  generation  lived  on  the  savings  of  the  hard-working  man,  the  store  of  the 
widow  and  orphan.  See  him  hardly  punished — it  seems  a  little  more  than  a  severe 
rebuke;  and  sonie  tempted  lad,  in  some  hour  of  great  need,  for  miserable  theft 
Btamped  through  years  a  criminal.  Look  at  the  seducer  fresh  from  his  guilt, 
judged  to  be  fit  by  mother  to  wed  the  daughter.  And  see  the  victim,  by  the  same, 
cast  out,  a  thing  unclean.  There  is  nothing  more  mischievous  than  standards  of 
that  kind.  (3)  Intellectual.  These  are  often  said  to  rise  from  increased  knowledge 
and  activity.  Nay,  they  rise  from  ignorance  and  intellectual  frivolity.  Newspapers 
to  have  power  must  be  spiced.  People  must  be  tempted  to  read.  And  the  result 
too  often  is  that  the  mind  grows  so  shallow  that  it  cannot  reflect  the  infinite  heaven, 
so  rulHeJ  iu  its  shallowness  that  it  answers  to  every  breeze  of  wind,  and  faileth 
ever  to  settle  into  an  eternal  calm,  is  a  mind  lost  to  holiest  things,  clo.'-ed  to  dearest 
realities.  Look  at  truth  as  neeiied  by  men  for  living,  for  dying,  for  eternity;  and 
then  dare  no  longer  to  be  frivolous,  come  to  have  the  truth,  to  seek  the  holy,  to 
love  the  good,  that  is  only  of  God.  2.  All  these  dangers  must  be  guarded  against. 
Watch !  Where  a  man  carries  that  which  is  precious  he  ought  ever  to  carefully 
guard  it.  Crossed  you  ever  the  mighty  ocean  on  board  a  steamship  that  travels  so 
stately  and  bears  its  hundreds  in  comfort  and  in  joy?  But,  while  all  is  lightness, 
there  walks  alone,  solitary,  watching  in  the  very  sunshine  for  sign  of  coming  storm, 
the  man  who  bears  in  his  spirit  that  stately  ship,  these  hundreds  of  lives,  all  the 
■wealth  she  cairies  in  her  hold.  And  think  you  ever  man  went  to  sea,  ever  sailor 
guided  across  the  ocean  bark  half  so  precious  as  you  carry?  Gifted  with  a  nature 
so  rich,  a  cargo  so  precious,  the  spirit  ought  to  be  all  directed  to  the  watching  of 
€vil,  to  the  discovery  of  the  good,  and  the  place  that  is  the  haven  of  rest.  II.  Stand 
FAST  IN  THE  FAiTfT.  The  man  that  watcbes  will  stand.  From  him  it  will  not  be 
taken — faith  in  God  our  Father,  vet  our  King;  in  Christ  who  is  our  Brother,  yet  our 
Priest ;  in  that  Spirit  who  is  our  Comforter,  yet  our  Advocate.  Stand  fast  tlierein. 
See  that  no  man  spoil  you  by  vain  deceit.  See  that  no  passion  rob  you  by  promised 
momentary  pleasure.  Keep  the  faith.  God  gave  it  you,  and  the  faith  cannot  be 
kept  pure  without  keeping  pure  the  spirit.  III.  Be  men.  What  is  it  to  be  a  man  ? 
It  is  to  bear  God's  imase.  Let  the  young  man  dare  to  be  a  man,  let  him,  face  to 
face  with  temptation,  look  to  Him  who  only  hath  the  power  to  save.  Lost  in  the 
multitude,  men  in  the  multitude  lose  themselves.  "  Quit  you  like  men."  Dare  to 
be  innocent  of  vice,  shut  up  the  impure  book,  close  the  paragraph  that  speaks  the 
■unholy  thing,  and  to  be  virtuous  in  thought,  in  speech,  in  feeling,  knowing  this, 
that  the  man  who  keepeth  his  own  spirit  pure  is  the  man  most  approved  of  the 
Father.  {^Principal  A.  31,  Fairhaini.)  Watchfulness,  steadfastn  ss,  vianliness, 
strenpth : —1.  Watch  ye.  1.  What  is  it  to  watch?  (1)  It  is  opposed  to  carnal 
security.  (2)  It  implies  a  care  of  our  souls  (Eph.  v.  15).  2.  What  must  we  watch 
over  ?  (1)  Our  thoughts  (Psa.  cxxxix.  2).  (2)  Our  affections  (Prov.  iv.  23 ;  Col. 
iii.  2).  (3)  Our  words  (Psa.  xvii.  3,  xxxix.  1,  cxli.  3).  (4)  Our  actions  (1  Sam.  xv. 
"22  ;  1  Cor.  x.  31).  3.  What  must  we  watch  against  ?  (1)  Ourselves  (Jer.  xvii.  9 ; 
James  i.  22).  (2)  Satan  (1  Pet.  v.  8).  (3)  The  world  (1  John  ii,  15).  (4)  Men. 
{a)  That  they  seduce  us  not  into  sin  (Prov.  i.  10,  11).     (&)  Nor  into  error  (Acts  xx. 


CHAP.  XVI.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  575 

29,  30,  31;  Matt.  vii.  15;  2  Pet.  ii.  1,  iii.  17).  4.  What  must  we  watch  for?  (1) 
Por  opportunities  of  cluing  good  (Gal.  vi.  10),  and  performing  our  duty.  (2)  For 
death  (1  Thess.  v.  2,  3).  (3)  For  the  coming  of  Christ  (Matt.  xxiv.  44).  5.  When 
must  we  watch  ?  (1)  In  time  of  prosperity.  («)  That  you  be  not  proud  of  it  (Jer. 
ix.  23;  1  Tim.  vi.  17).  (b)  Nor  trust  in  it  (1  Tim.  vi.  17 ;  I'sa.  xlix.  G,  Hi.  7).  (c) 
Nor  abase  it  (James  iv.  3).  (d)  Nor  set  your  hearts  upon  it  (Psa.  Ixii.  10).  {c)  To 
improve  it  to  God's  glory  (Prov.  iii.  9).  (2)  In  time  of  adversity  (Eccles.  vii.  14). 
(a)  Not  to  be  impatient  (E/ra  ix.  13;  Lam.  iii.  39).  (b)  But  to  be  thankful  (Job 
i.  21).  (c)  Not  to  charge  God  with  injustice  (Job  i.  22).  (d)  Nor  draw  sinful 
inferences  from  it  (Eccles.  ix.  1).  (e)  To  be  better  by  it  (Psa.  cxix.  71;  Heb.  xii. 
10).  (3)  At  all  times  (Luke  xxi.  36;  2  Tim.  iv.  5).  0.  Why  must  we  watch? 
(1)  It  is  for  your  lives  (2  Cor.  vi.  5).  (2)  Many  enemies  watch  against  you  (1  Pet. 
V.  8).  (3)  Unless  ye  watch,  no  siu  but  you  may  fall  into  (1  Coi-.  x.  12).  (4)  The 
more  we  watch  over  ourselves,  the  more  God  will  watch  over  us  (Psa.  cxxi.  1, 
cxxvii.  1).  (5)  The  more  watchful  we  are,  the  more  comfortably  we  shall  live. 
(G)  We  have  but  a  short  time  to  watch  (Matt.  xxvi.  40).  (7)  Eternity  depends 
upon  it  (Matt.  xxv.  12,  13).  (8)  We  know  not  when  our  Lord  will  come  (Mark  xiii. 
33,  37  ;  Lulvc  xii.  37).  II.  Stand  fast  in  the  fa'th.  1.  What  faith  must  we  stand 
fast  in  ?  (1)  That  God  is  (Heb.  xi.  G).  (2)  That  He  is  a  rewarder  of  all  ihat  come 
to  Him  (Heb.  xi.  G).  (3)  That  tiie  way  to  come  to  Him  is  by  Christ  (Heb.  vii.  25). 
(4)  That  this  Christ  is  God-man  (John  i.  14).  (;3)  And  hath  satisfied  for  our  sins 
(1  John  ii.  1,  2).  (G)  And  nov^r  intercedes  for  our  souls  (Heb.  vii.  25).  (7)  That  by 
His  satisfaction  and  intercession  our  sins  may  be  pardoned  (Rom.  viii.  33,  34).  (8) 
That  He  will  come  again  at  the  last  day  (Acts.  i.  11).  (9)  That  He  will  judge  all 
the  world  (2  Cor.  v.  10).  (10)  That  the  wicked  will  then  be  condemned  to  hell,  and 
the  righteous  received  up  into  glory  (Matt.  xxv.  46).  2.  Why  stand  fast  in  this 
faith?  (1)  Otherwise  we  can  do  no  acts  of  piety  (Heb.  xi.  G).  (2)  Nor  have  our 
sins  remitted  (Gal.  ii.  16).  (3)  Nor  our  souls  saved  (Acts  iv.  12).  3.  What  are  the 
means  of  this  steadfastness?  (1)  Search  the  S<a-iptures  (John  v.  39).  (2)  Converse 
much  with  God  in  jirayer.  (3)  Entertain  no  doubting  thouiihts.  (4)  Indulge  no 
sin,  lest  it  debauch  jour  principles.  (5)  Oft  frequent  the  jjublic  ordinances  (ilom. 
X.  17).  III.  Quit  you  like  been.  1.  What  is  it  to  quit  yourselves  like  men  ?  (1) 
Carry  yourselves  like  men.  (a)  Like  rational  creatures.  What  mnre  rational  than 
that  we  should  serve  Him  that  made  us  (1  Cor.  vi.  20) ;  choose  the  best  things 
before  the  worst  (Isa.  Iv.  1,  2);  mind  our  own  good  and  welfare  (Matt.  xvi.  26); 
do  to  others  as  we  would  have  others  do  to  us  (Matt.  vii.  12) ;  and  submit  to  God's 
will  (Lam.  iii.  39).  (/<)  Like  those  wlio  have  immortal  souls  (Gen.  ii.  7).  (c)  Like 
those  who  are  capable  of  the  enjoyment  of  God  Himself  (1  Cor.  xiii.  12).  (2)  Be 
valiant  and  courageous  as  men  (Eph.  vi.  10,  11).  (a)  Be  not  daunted  with  afflic- 
tions (2  Cor.  iv.  16,  17).  (b)  Nor  drawn  aside  with  prosperity  (Mark  iv.  19).  (c) 
Press  through  all  difficulties  for  heaven  (Acts  siv.  22).  2.  Why  quit  ourselves  thus 
like  men?  (1)  We  have  many  potent  enemies  (Eph.  vi.  11,  12).  (2)  Without 
spiritual  courage  we  can  never  conquer  them.  (3)  The  reward  will  make  amends 
for  all  (1  Cor.  XV.  58).  IV.  Be  stt.ong— 1.  In  faith  (Matt.  xv.  28;  Rom.  iv.  20). 
2.  Love  (Matt.  xxii.  37).  3.  Trust  on  God  (Job  xiii.  15  ;  Heb.  xiii.  5,  6).  4.  Why? 
Be  strong  and  courageous.  (1)  The  stronger  your  graces  are  the  weaker  will  your 
temptrttions  be.  (2)  The  stronger  your  grace  is  the  f-Teater  will  your  comf  rt  be 
(John  xiv.  1).  (3)  Be  but  strong,  and  you  need  not  fear  but  to  press  through  all 
difficulties,  and  get  to  heaven.  {Bp.  Beveridge.)  Standfast  in  the  faith: — I. 
The  object  indicated.  1.  The  gospel  requires  faith.  2.  Has  a  right  to  demand  it. 
II.  The  duty  enjoined.  1.  Adlierence  to  its  doctrines.  2.  Conformity  to  its  pre- 
cepts. 3.  Advocacy  of  its  claims.  III.  The  importance  of  this  duty.  In  its 
bearing  upon — 1.  Ourselves.  2.  Others.  3.  The  cause  of  God.  [J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
Christiati  steadfastness : — We  address  this  to  new  converts,  restored  bai-ksliders, 
and  to  Christians  generally.  I.  The  necessity  for  Christian  steadfastness.  1. 
Many  foes  to  contend  against.  2.  Much  difficult  service  to  perform.  3  Only  the 
steadfast  know  true  happiness  and  peaCe.  4.  Lack  of  stearifastnes'^  is  dishonouring 
to  God.  II.  Its  means.  1.  Prayer.  2.  Watchfulness.  3.  Use  of  every  possible 
means  of  grace.  4.  Faithful,  open  profes-ion  of  allegiance  to  Christ.  III.  Its 
END.  1.  A  place  on  Christ's  own  throne  (Rev.  iii.  21).  2.  A  ci'own  of  hfe  (Rev.  ii. 
10).  3.  A  call  to  the  service  of  heaven.  (John  Stevens.)  Standing  fast  in  the 
faith: — We  might  infer  from  magaziuf-s  and  newspapers  that  orthodoxv,  or  stead- 
fastness in  faith,  is  becoming  very  unpopular.  But  philosophy,  mathematics,  &c., 
have  their  "doctrines"  as  well  as  Christianity.     Note  a  few  reasons  for  steadfast- 


376  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOIt.  [chap.  xvi. 

ness  in  the  truth.     I.  The  mind  is  so  constituted  as  not  to  be  satisfied  with 
ANYTHING  LESS  THAN  cKiiTiTUDE.     As  nature  abhors  a  vacuum,  so  the  mind  dreads 
doubt — dreads  to  be  like  a  ship  drifting  in  darkness  and  storm  with  neitlier  star 
nor  sun,  compass  nor  rudder.     What  would  one  not  give  to  be  on  solid  earth,  who, 
like  Noah's  dove,  is  thus  driven?     Stand  fasi   n  the  faith  !     Buy  the  truth  and  sell  i 
it  not.     II.  This  steadfastness  is  needed  to  withstand  the  influences  wor.KiNsf?' 
AGAINST  US.     A  soldier  in  battle  needs  to  stand,  a  tree  in  tempests  needs  to  be  ' 
rooted,  and  a  ship  needs  an  anchor ;  so  we,  in  meeting  the  hostility  of  atheism  and 
science,  falsely  so  called,  or  kid-gloved,  effeminate  worldliness,  or  the  supineness  and 
apathy  of  the  Church,  need  more  than  a  feeble  conviction  of  the  truth,  such  as 
would  be  upset  by  some  newly-discovered  bone.     Be  rooted  and  grounded  and  able 
to  give  an  answer,  to  him  who  asks  you,  of  your  faith.    III.  Only  by  stead  easiness 

IN  THE  truth  can  WE  RENDER    COIIPETENT    SERVICE  TO  THE  CAUSE  OF    ChRIST.       A  mau 

of  negative  opinion,  though  right,  is  a  feebler  power  than  he  who  is  earnesily 
wrong.  But,  to  be  positively  right,  believing  with  all  the  soul,  is  to  be  an  increment 
of  might.  Such  were  Luther  an,d  Whitfield.  Such  is  Moody,  who  never  even 
ventured  to  lean  against  the  corner  of  a  college.  Truth  did  not  run  over  such 
souls,  but  into  them,  becoming  a  part  of  their  moral  fibre,  making  them 
aggressive  and  progressive.  Such  are  not  literary  Sybarites.  (T.  B.  McLeod.) 
Be  strong  : — I.  In  Body.  Parity  and  (where  God  gives  health)  strength  of  body 
seemed  ever  to  St.  Paul  one  ingredient  in  his  estimate  of  true  manliness.  What 
is  brutal  and  sensual  in  your  bodies  Christianity  tells  you  to  conquer,  so  that  that 
body  and  its  merely  animal  propensities  shall  not  become  your  master.  All  thrtt  is 
innocent  and  pure  in  the  manly  exercise  of  it,  all  that  is  fearless  in  the  brave  uses 
of  it,  you  should  cultivate,  ennoble,  strengthen.  If  you  have  to  fight  for  country, 
truth,  or  right,  then  be  utterly  indifferent  to  danger  or  to  death.  II.  In  soul,  i.e., 
in  intellect.  "  Be  not  children  in  understanding,  but  be  ye  men."  The  empty  boast 
that  there  must  be  a  divorce  between  intellect  and  religion  is  false.  True 
"  unsanctified  intellect"  has  become  too  common  a  phrase;  but  there  is  such  a 
thing  too  as  "unsanctified  stupidity,"  and  perhaps  the  Church  has  suffered  just  as 
much  from  one  as  from  the  other.  There  is  a  poor  weak  thing  that  calls  itself 
"  advanced  thought " — in  which  the  thought  is  imaginary,  and  the  advancement 
retrogressive — and  which  is,  after  all,  merely  the  ghosts  of  old  heresies,  coming 
forth  from  their  graves  to  frighten  the  nervous  and  unthinking.  But  real  science, 
real  philosophy,  may  ever  win  the  homage  of  the  holiest  and  most  reverent  souls. 
The  truth  they  discover  can  never  contradict  the  eternal  truth  of  God.  Antago- 
nism between  intellect  and  religion !  Why  the  ablest  thinkers  have  been  Christians. 
The  noblest  high  priests  of  science  have  also  been  the  devoutest  ministers  at  the 
altar  of  God.  III.  In  spirit.  The  influence  of  the  spirit  of  man,  acted  on  and 
illuminated  by  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  will  raise  him  to  the  true  dignity  of  man- 
hood in  all  his  nature.  There  is  nothing  "manly"  in  being  irreligious  or 
indifferent.  Would  you  consider  him  a  man  who  was  guilty  of  the  basest  ingrati- 
tude? And  shall  we  consider  the  ingratitude  less  base — shall  the  unmauliness  be 
diminished,  because  towards  Him  who  "  emptied  Himself"  of  the  splendour  of  the 
Godheadand  died  for  us  !  (T.  T.  Shore,  M.A.)  Manliness  in  relig ton  : — 1.  When 
Francis  Xavier  was  passing  through  Navarre  to  his  great  life  mission,  he  had  to 
pass  his  ancestral  castle.  His  companion  asked  whether  he  did  not  mean  to  visit 
his  friends  before  he  left  Spain  for  ever.  "  I  defer  that  happiness,"  he  quietly 
answered,  "  until  I  shall  see  them  in  heaven."  It  was  the  manly  utterance  of 
a  noble  heart.  2.  In  the  days  of  chivalry  there  was  an  ideal  life,  which  our  own 
matter-of-fact  generation  is  disposed  to  despise.  Underneath  much  that  was  over- 
strained and  unnatural,  there  was  taught  a  spirit  of  reverence,  obedience,  truth,  and 
virtue,  which  it  would  be  well  for  the  world  if  they  might  be  again  brought  back 
among  us.  3.  Even  after  the  Fall  man  did  not  altogether  lose  the  image  of  his 
Maker,  and  there  is  still  left  to  him  a  portion  which  we  call  manliness.  It  is  dis- 
played by  heroes  on  battle-fields,  but  the  highest  manifestation  of  it  is  in  the  con- 
sistent lives  of  devoted  Christians.  True  manliness — I.  Is  wholly  incompatible 
with  a  half-way  and  RELUCTANT  OBEDIENCE.  If  the  religion  of  Christ  be  true,  it  is 
manly  to  confess  it,  and  to  act  out  our  belief.  They  who  receive  the  gospel  in  a 
manly  s^Dirit  will  shrink  from  no  duty  nor  danger.  Even  the  world  will  respect  us 
when  we  are  true  to  our  principles.  When  Charles  II.  visited  Winchester  during 
the  building  of  his  palace  there.  Dr.  Ken  was  asked  to  entertain  one  of  the 
king's  concubines.  This  the  good  clergyman  positively  refused  to  do  and 
Charles  was  much  incensed.     Again  the  application  was  made,  and  the   stern 


CHAP.  XVI.]  I.  COBINTHIANS.  577 

response  was,  "  Not  for  his  kingdom  !  "  Not  long  after,  the  bishopric  of  Bath  and 
Wells  became  vacant,  and  Charles  said,  "  No  one  shall  have  it  but  the  little  fellow 
who  would  not  give  poor  Nelly  a  lodging! "  II.  Supposes  persevering  persistency 
IN  THE  RIGHT,  no  matter  what  dangers  may  threaten.  Soon  after  the  Christian 
missionaries  had  settled  in  Fiji,  the  heathen  held  a  cannibal  feast  in  front  of  their 
rtsidence.  Shocked  at  the  sight,  the  good  men  closed  their  doors  and  windows, 
when  the  savages  insisted  that  they  should  come  out  and  witness  the  custom.  The 
captain  of  an  American  ship-of-war,  hearing  the  startling  tidings,  came  at  once  to 
the  relief  of  the  brave  men,  and  offered  to  remove  them  to  a  place  of  safety. 
"No,"  was  the  firm  response;  "  the  worse  these  people  are,  the  more  need  of  our 
stnying  where  we  are  to  teach  them  better."  When  an  insurrection  broke  out  in 
Madagascar  some  time  ago,  before  the  soldiers  set  off,  the  gre-it  national  idol  was 
to  be  ilraj-'ged  forth  to  strengthen  them  for  the  conflict.  It  so  happened  that  three 
hundred  of  the  soldiers  had  cast  off  idolatry,  many  of  whom  began  to  waver,  some 
through  fear  of  death,  others  through  love  of  wife  and  children.  The  leader  of  the 
party  then  read  from  the  New  Testament,  "  He  that  loveth  father  or  mother  more 
than  Me,  is  not  worthy  of  Mo"  ;  "He  that  loveth  his  life  more  than  Me,  is  not 
worthy  of  Me."  It  was  enough,  and  all  agreed  to  stand  the  fiery  ordeal.  The 
commanding  officer  was  much  enraged,  and  said,  in  a  threatening  tone,  "  The  Kod 
will  avenge  himself  upon  them  !  "  The  army  marched  forth  to  meet  the  insurgents, 
and  came  up  to  them  in  a  deep  ravine.  Here  the  Christians  were  made  to  take  the 
front  rank,  and  their  enemies  beheved  that  their  destruction  was  inevitable.  The 
hand  of  God  so  arranged  the  order  of  battle,  that  the  expected  course  of  events 
was  reversed,  and  the  Christians  were  left  unharmed.  III.  Means  indifference  to 
THE  SHAFTS  OF  RiDicQLE.  A  poor  man,  being  much  laughed  at  for  his  religion,  was 
asked  whether  these  constant,  petty  persecutions  did  not  sometimes  half  tempt  him 
to  abandon  it.  "  No,  indeed,"  he  answered  ;  "  if  ChristiaK-s  are  so  foolish  as  to  let 
such  people  laugh  them  out  of  their  religion,  until  at  last  tbey  drop  into  hell,  it  is 
certain  they  cannot  langh  them  out  again."  A  young  friend  was  making  his  first 
trip  in  a  steamer,  when  his  acquaintance  was  cultivated  by  a  handsomely  dressed 
person,  who  did  his  best  to  play  the  agreeable.  Toward  the  close  of  day,  the 
stranger  remarked,  in  an  indifferent  tone,  "  Some  friends  of  mine  are  to  have  a  nice 
game  to-night,  in  my  state-room,  and  we  shall  be  glad  to  have  you  join  us." 
Taking  out  his  pocket  pra.yer-book,  he  answered,  "  This  is  the  only  card  I  ever  play 
with !  "  IV.  Involves  prompt  and  vigorous  action.  Good  resolutions  are  not 
enough  ;  they  must  be  followed  up  closely  and  persistently  by  becoming  deeds.  A 
little  boy  in  Holland  was  returning  home  one  night,  when  he  observed  the  water 
trickling  through  a  narrow  crevice  in  the  dyke.  He  had  often  heard  of  the  sad 
disasters  which  had  happened  from  these  small  beginnings,  and  his  first  thought 
was  to  hasten  home  for  help,  but  he  remembered  that  even  during  his  brief 
absence  the  opening  might  so  increase  as  to  defy  all  attempts  to  close  it.  Seating 
himself  on  the  bank  of  the  canal,  he  stopped  the  leakage  with  his  hand,  and  in  cold 
and  darkness  sat  by  his  post  of  duty  until  dawn  of  day.  Assistance  then  came,  the 
dyke  was  repaired,  and  hundreds  of  lives  were  saved.  Do  you  ever  think  what 
a  tide  of  wretchedness  and  ruin  you  may  be  the  means  of  turning  aside  from 
multitudes  of  immortal  beings,  if  you  would  faithfully  use  your  daily  and  hourly 
opportunities  of  good?  {J.  N.  ]Slorton,  D.D.)  The  manliness  of  goclliness  : — 
I.  Things  which  are  not  manly.  1.  To  believe  without  evidence.  Credulity,  the, 
readiness  to  receive  every  assertion  for  truth,  is  childish  ;  and  it  is  worse  than 
childish,  when  evil  reports  are  easily  credited  and  at  all  welcomed.  We  must 
believe  much  which  we  can  never  comprehend,  and  therefore  cannot  prove  ;  but  we 
must  be  sure  that  the  witness  is  true.  2.  To  neglect  known  duty.  Excuses  are  not 
atguments.  "  That  servant  which  knew  his  Lord's  will,  and  did  it  not,  shall  be 
beaten  with  many  stripes,"  &c.  From  which  it  is  evident  that  every  one's  duty  is 
according  to  the  knowledge  which  he  has,  might,  and  ought  to  have.  3.  To  prefer 
pleasure  to  business.  In  this  generation  there  is  neither  honour  nor  hope  for  the 
idler.  And  why  should  not  this  principle  hold  as  to  heavenly  things?  4.  To 
find  fault  with  any  one  unless  it  be  needful,  and  then  face  to  face.  "  I  withstood 
him  to  the  face,"  says  Paul  about  Peter,  "  because  he  was  to  be  blamed."  If 
mankind  would  but  obey  this  rule,  the  happiness  of  the  world  would  be  doubled  at 
once.  The  apostle  is  very  severe  against  "  whisperers,  backbiters  and  inventors  of 
evil  things."  5.  To  live  only  for  the  passing  day.  Brutes  live  for  the  present,  men 
for  the  future.  Forethought  and  prudence  distinguiNh  our  nature  from  theirs. 
The  wise  man  sent  men  to  school  to  "  the  ant "  :  and  that  provident  little  creature 
VOL.  II.  37 


678  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xyi. 

is  a  very  good  tutor  even  for  Christians.  II.  Things  which  ake  manly.  There  are 
strai'ge  ideas  abroad  upon  this  subject,  some  concluding  that  scepticism,  self-will, 
and  sweariug  itself  is  manly.  Some  think  that  the  more  heartless,  the  more  daring, 
the  more  manly.  I  give  every  one  of  sound  mind  at  least  the  credit  of  knowing 
better.  I  am  persuaded  that  there  is  truth  in  the  saying,  "  I  dare  do  all  things 
that  become  a  man  ;  and  he  who  dares  do  more  is  none."  It  is  manly — 1.  To  fiud 
out  and  hold  fast  the  truth.  All  truth  is  precious,  and  "  the  truth  "  is  of  all  things 
most  precious.  "  Little  children,  I  have  not  written  unto  you  because  ye  know  not 
the  truth,  but  because  ye  know  it,  and  that  no  lie  is  of  the  truth."  Surely  in  know- 
ledge and  discernmeut  these  little  children  were  men.  2.  To  be  serious  about 
serious  things.  Men  were  made  to  laugh  as  well  as  to  weep ;  but  there  is  also 
abundant  reason  in  the  charge,  "  Bo  sober."  Some  affect  to  smile  at  those  who  are 
religious  for  looking  grave  and  speaking  solemnly  ;  but  life  and  death,  sin  and 
holiness,  are  matters  for  deep  thought ;  and  tbe  gospel  which  delivers  from  sin  and 
death,  and  entitles  to  li'e  through  righteousness,  is  in  its  very  nature  maiter  to 
make  men  serious.  3.  To  be  kindly  to  all,  and  most  to  the  weakest.  The  man- 
liness of  Christ  consi^ted  largely  in  His  gentleness.  4.  To  fear  God  more  than  any 
man  or  all  men.  "  Fear  Him,  ye  saints,  and  you  will  then  have  nothing  else  to 
fear."  5.  To  overcome  the  devil  himself  by  God's  help.  Conclusion  :  1.  You 
reed  not  despair  of  doing  this  very  thing.  2.  By  doing  this  you  will  recommend 
Christianity.     (./.   Be  Keirer   Williams.)  True   vianUnesa  : — (To   young  men. 

1  Kings  ii.  2,  and  text).  Buckminster  says  that  the  sublimest  thing  in  nature  is  \ 
true  manhood.  But  long  befoie  Buckminster,  Terence  said,  "  I  am  a  man,  and  I 
regard  nothing  pertaining  to  humanity  as  foreign  to  me."  And  long  before  him 
David  said  to  his  sou  and  successor,  "  Show  thyself  a  man."  And  long  since  then 
we  find  Paul  saying,  "  Quit  you  like  men,  be  strong  "  ;  "  Be  strong  in  the  Lord,  and 
in  the  power  of  His  might."  True  manliness  does  not  consist  in — I.  The  strength 
AND  SIZE  OF  the  HUJtAN  BODY.  This  is  the  barbarian  idea  of  manliood.  II. 
Intellectual  greatness — which  our  Maker  confers  on  vei'y  few  persons  in  any  age. 
We  are  not  rcbponsible  for  the  lack  of  gieat  tiilents,  but  only  for  the  culture  and 
use  of  what  we  have.  Tme,iiuiailiness  lies  j-iLlieart  power  and  conscience  power. 
III.  Chafing  under  whoi.esojie  restraints.  It  is  no  uncommon  thing  to  find 
young  persons  who  think  an  indeiDcndent  disregard  of  authority  is  manly,  and 
when  constrained  by  unavoidable  circumstances  to  feel  that  the  proper  domain  of 
their  liberties  has  been  invaded.  This  mistaken  and  unmanly  feeling  is  apt  to  show 
itself,  first  of  all,  in  opposition  to  parental  authority.  And  the  boy  that  frets  under 
the  restraints  of  home,  will  fret  under  the  restraints  of  the  school-room.  And,  having 
disregarded  the  wholesome  restraints  of  home  and  of  the  school,  be  is  now  rt-ady  to 
disregard  those  of  society ;  and  it  is  no  uuconmion  thing  to  si  e  a  young  man,  who 
commenced  his  unmanly  course  of  disobedience  in  the  family,  graduating  in  prison. 
"  Show  yourself  a  man,"  then,  in  living  in  harmony  with  the  Word  of  God,  your  con- 
science, and  your  environment.  IV.  Imitating,  indiscriminately,  the  conduct 
or  habits  of  others.  Tliere  are  many  great  men  who  have  their  eccentricities 
and  defects  ;  and  yet  it  is  just  these  that  younger  and  smaller  mt^n  almost  always 
imitate.  Many  of  the  admirers  of  Alexander  the  Great  imitated  his  intemperance, 
and  not  his  chastity  and  liberality ;  and  many  of  the  pupils  of  Plato  imitated  his 
crooked  shoulders  instead  of  his  philosophy.  "  Show  yourself  a  man,"  then,  not 
'  by  merely  imitating,  but  emulating  the  virtues  of  others  and  by  shunning  their 
\  vices.  V.  Following  popular  opinion,  right  or  wrong,  or  any  party,  right  or 
wrong.  Popular  opinion  is  geneially  fickle  and  very  often  wrong.  It  imprisoned 
Galileo,  and  erected  the  guillotine  in  France.  In  the  Southern  States  it  raised  the 
standard  of  rebellion.  Tliere  is  a  great  deal  of  blind  leading,  and  "  when  the  blind 
lead  the  blind,  both  shall  fall  into  the  ditch."  "  Show  yourself  a  man,"  by  think- 
ing and  investigating  for  yourself.  Study  both  sides  of  every  important  question. 
VI.  A  reckless  disregard  of  the  opinions  of  others.  It  is  not  manly  to  say, 
"  I  don't  care  what  others  think  of  me."  Every  true  man  cares,  and  ought  to  care. 
While  every  true  man  maintains  his  own  independence  of  character,  he  is 
ambitious,  at  the  same  time,  to  merit  the  golden  opinions  of  the  virtuous  and  the 
good.  When  a  man  enjoys  the  love  and  confidence  of  a  virtuous  woman  he  enjoys! 
next  to  the  love  of  God,  the  noblest  thing  on  earth.  "  Show  yourself  a  man,"  thenf 
by  showing  yourself  worthy  of  such  confidence  and  such  love.  A^ain,  if  you  would 
have  others  respect  you,  you  must  respect  yourself.  If  you  would  enjoy  the  friend 
ship  of  your  fellow-men,  you  must  be  a  true  friend  to  yourself.  Often  the  worst 
enemy  a  young  man  has  is  himself.     "  Show  yourself  a  man,"  then,  by  being  true 


CDAP.  XVI.]  /.  CORINTHIANS.  579 

to  yourself  and  to  your  principles.     VII.  It  is  in  vain  to  look  for  true  manliness 

WHEBE  THERE  IS    NO  VIRTUE    OR    UONESTY    OR    HONOUR.       The   WOld  virtUB    COlUeS  from 

"  vir,"  which  means  a  man  ;  and  to  be  virtaons,  etymologically,  is  to  be  manly  in  the 
true  sense  ;  "  an  honest  man  is  the  noblest  work  of  God."  In  the  modern  sense, 
virtue  means  manly  purity  as  well  as  mainly  dii^nity.  1.  Now,  then,  lie  that  would  be 
honest  in  the  much  tuust  be  honest  iu  the  little.  A  young  aspirant  for  olMce  arriving 
at  the  hotel  where  the  governor  was  stopping,  and  seeing  a  man  whom  he  supjjosed 
to  be  the  porter,  ordered  him  to  take  his  trunk  to  his  room.  The  supposed  p  u'ter 
•charged  him  twenty-five  cents,  which  he  paid  with  a  marked  silver  quarter  worth 
only  twenty  cents.  The  young  ollice-seeker  then  said,  "  Here,  porter,  take  my  card 
to  Governor  Grimes'  room  and  tell  him  I  wish  an  interview  with  him  at  his  earliest 
convenience."  "  I  am  Governor  Grimes,  sir."  "  Oil !  I  did  not  know  _yoa  were 
Governor  Grimes!  I  beg  a  thousand  pardons!"  "None  needed,"  replied  the 
governor.  "  I  was  rather  favourablv  impressed  with  your  letter,  and  had  thought 
you  well  suitt-d  for  the  office  you  desire  "  ;  and  holding  up  before  him  the  defective 
quarter,  he  said :  "Any  man  who  would  swindle  a  poor  labourer  out  of  the  paltry 
sum  of  five  cents  would  defraud  the  public  treasury  if  he  had  the  opporiunity. 
■Good  evening,  sir."  Again,  it  is  dishonest  and  unmanly  to  try  to  sell  an  article  for 
more  than  it  is  worth,  or  to  try  to  buy  an  article  for  less  than  its  market  value. 
2.  "  Show  yourself  a  man,"  too,  by  respecting  your  own  rights  and  honour,  even  if 
others  do  not ;  and  at  the  same  time  remember  that  others  have  rights  which  are 
entithd  to  respect.  "  Be  courteous."  St.  Paul  shows  what  should  be  the  deport- 
ment of  a  true  gentleman  or  a  true  lady  in  these  few  words :  "  In  honour  pre- 
ferring one  another."  3.  "  Show  yourself  a  man,"  by  your  moral  courage  and 
stability  of  character.  "  Dare  to  do  right,  dare  to  be  true."  Dare  to  say 
No,  when  you  are  tempted  to  do  wrong,  or  to  go  to  a  wrong  place.  4. 
"  Show  yourself  a  man,"  by  emulating  the  virtues  of  the  great  and  the  good. 
5.  And  at  the  same  time  that  you  are  developing  and  using  aright  your  own  manly  ^ 
resources,  do  not  fail  to  recognise  the  real  source  of  your  success  in  life,  to  wit :  the  j 
grace  of  God.  The  inspired  apostle  who  says,  "  Quit  you  like  men,"  also  says,  / 
"  Stand  fast  in  the  faith."  And  it  is  a  fact  that  the  great  men  of  the  world — the  / 
men  whose  names  and  whose  deeds  stand  brightest  on  the  scroll  of  fame,  were  men  V 
of  faith  in  God.  Conclusion  :  Diogenes  is  said  to  have  gone  through  the  streets  of  f 
Athens,  in  broad  daylight,  with  a  lighted  lantern  in  his  hand,  and  when  asked  by 
a  citizen  for  the  object  of  his  search,  he  replied,  saying  :  "  A  man,  sir,  a  man.  I 
have  found  children  in  Sparta  and  women  in  Athens,  but  I  have  not  found  a  man." 
Now,  I  grant  tliat  smce  man  fell  from  his  climax  in  Eden,  a  man,  a  perfect  man, 
has  not  been  found  save  in  the  humanity  of  Jesus.  Do  you  want  a  mod'-l  of  true 
manhood  ?  You  have  it  in  Him.  He  has  won  His  title  to  our  heart-faith  and  our 
sui^reme  regard  by  His  God-like  character.  "  Christ  died  for  us."  Tlien  "  show 
yourself  a  man,"  by  showiny;  yourself  capable  of  appreciating  such  love  aa  His  ;  by 
giving  Him  your  heart.  Then  and  only  then  will  you  be  in  the  line  of  your  own 
true    manhood.      (IV.    B.    Stnvart,  D.D.)  True   manhood: — What,    then,    is 

manliness  ?  1.  First,  it  is  self-respect.  I  need  hardly  warn  you  that  self- 
I'espect  has  an  analogy  to  pride,  or  to  the  wretched  vulgar  ape  of  pride  which 
is  self-conceit.  2.  And  next  to  self-respect,  manliness  is  resistance.  The 
true  man  will  not  bend  like  a  reed  to  every  passing  gust  of  that  insolent 
ignorance  which  sometimes  in  the  light-headedness  of  nations  arrog  ites  to 
itself  the  name  of  public  opinion.  He  will  not  swim  with  the  stream  either  in  the 
Cburch  or  in  the  State,  but  will  strike  out  against  its  fiercest  waves.  He  will  not 
spread  his  sail  to  the  soft  breeze  of  flattery  and  self-interest,  but  even  when 
menaced  with  shipwrei-k  will  opf^ose  his  constancy  and  his  convictions  to  the  fury 
of  the  storm.  Eesist  the  temptations  to  be  idle,  self  indulgent,  vicious,  and  all  the 
more  if  those  around  you  are  so.  Eesist  the  prejudices  and  the  liitleness  of  your 
own  ijrofession  or  school  or  party ;  resist  the  temptations  of  the  impulses  of  your 
lower  nature ;  and  so  far  from  being  weakened  by  the  struggle,  the  strength  and 
fire  of  the  conquered  temptation  shall  be  to  you  an  a'kled  element  of  force,  even  as 
the  Indiati  warrior  believes  thai;  the  strength  of  his  vanquished  enemy  passes  into 
his  own  right  arm.  Resist  difficulties!  Shov  that  you  have  some  iron  in  you, 
and  are  not  all  of  straw !  There  are  many  spurious  forms  of  courage,  and  that 
which  is  often  most  admired  is  the  lowest  and  poorest,  like  that  of  the  brutes. 
The  manliest  courage  is  that  which  rises  superior  to  the  fear  of  man.  The  manly 
.youth  will  have  a  certain  disdain  and  impatience  of  evil,  a  certain  violence  of 
truthfulness,  a  certain  impetuosity  of  principle,  conquering  and  combating  all  that 


( 


580  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

is  hollow  and  base  and  mean.  He  will  not  be  at  the  mercy  of  a  wicked  code  of  a 
few  silly  or  deju-aved  companions  for  a  few  brief  years,  at  the  cost  of  having  to 
reproach  himself  as  a  fool  all  the  rest  of  his  life.  3.  And  again,  manliness  is  self- 
mastery.  It  sits  self-governed  in  tije  fiery  prime  of  youth  obedient  at  the  feet  of 
law.  And  this  self-mastery  cannot  be  had  without  self-sacrifice.  Any  fool,  the 
weakest,  dullest,  paltriest  that  ever  was,  can  make  a  drunkard  or  a  debauchee. 
There  is  no  human  clay  so  vile,  no  sludge  and  scum  of  humanity  so  despicable,  but 
out  of  it  you  may  make  an  effeminate  corrupter,  or  lying  schemer  ;  but  it  takes 
God's  own  gold  to  make  a  man.  No  lacquer  work,  no  tinsel  suffices  for  the 
cherubim  of  tlie  sanctuary.  They  must  be  hammered  out  of  pure  gold,  seven 
times  purified  in  the  fire.  (Ardideacon  Farrar.)  Manliness: — Manliness  is  not 
i:)opularly  associatt  d  with  Christianity,  and  it  is  not  difficult  to  see  how  this  mistake 
has  arisen.  First  of  all,  it  has  arisen  because  of  the  very  prominence  that  is  given 
in  the  New  Testament  to  what  it  calls  the  virtues  of  meekness  and  forgiveness. 
Agnin,  another  cause  for  this  popular  misunderstanding  arises  from  the  mannerism 
of  religious  people.  They  get  into  a  weak,  muuillin  condition,  and  adopt  a  voice 
and  manner  that  repels  anj^  person  who  has  got  a  spark  of  manliness  in  him,  and 
thus  there  comes  a  certain  smallness  of  mind,  and  a  morose  stupidity,  that  does 
much  to  strengthen  the  idea  that  to  be  a  Christian  is  either  to  be  a  fanatic  or  an 
efft^minate  person.  Another  cause  is  distinctly  attributable  to  the  characters  so 
often  drawn  by  novelists  of  what  a  religious  person  is.  They  represent  a  man  as 
a  brave,  generous,  fine  fellow,  who  was  no  religion  at  all.  Furthermore,  people 
have  become  accustomed  to  think  of  religion  as  something  connected  with  death- 
bed scenes,  with  sickness,  or  as  bearing  an  aspect  of  grim  severity,  and  not  at  all 
enticing  to  any  one  who  likes  the  free  breezes  blowing  across  the  sea  and  across  the 
mocrs,  who  likes  a  manly  life,  and  wishes  to  take  a  manly  part  in  it.  What  is 
Christian  manliness  ?  I  answer  that  Christian  manliness  is  the  courage  of  duty, 
according  to  the  Christian  ideal.  Now  let  us  try  to  understand  this.  Manliness  is 
the  courage  of  duty,  because  duty  is  the  essence  of  all  manliness.  Courage  separ- 
ated from  duty  ceases  to  be  manliness.  There  is  a  great  deal  of  courage  even  in 
the  criminal.  That  is  the  courage  of  the  madman  or  of  the  devil.  So  more 
physical  courage  may  not  be  tlie  courage  of  njauliness  in  its  best  sense.  The 
ferocity  which  makes  the  pugilist  or  the  prize-fighter  refuse  to  give  in,  that  is  not 
a  bit  more  wonderful  than  what  you  find  in  brutes.  The  bulldog  will  do  the  same 
thing,  so  will  the  wild-cat,  so  will  ihe  ferret.  That  species  of  courage  is  not 
necessarily  a  high  standar()  of  courage.  There  is  a  certain  spirit  of  self-assertion 
which  is  sometimes  mistaken  for  manliness.  The  rough,  impudent,  "  I  am  as 
good  as  you,"  is  no  indication  of  the  possession  of  a  manly  spirit.  There  is  a 
spirit  of  arrogance  which  has  nothing  to  do  with  manly  independence.  It  is  little 
more  than  rude  mcivility,  arising  from  want  of  consideration  from  others.  Manli- 
ness, as  the  courage  of  duty,  must  forbid  such  things  as  degrade  a  man.  Look  at 
Christ,  the  ideal  man  !  Tliore  was  a  life  of  courage  under  duty  to  God  and  to 
others,  with  no  thought  of  self.  Christ's  life  was  one  continual  self-sacrifice. 
Duty  to  God  and  man  is  the  climax  of  manliness.  The  great  test  of  character  is 
to  be  found  in  the  manner  in  whirh  the  common  details  of  life  are  met.  It  is  far 
easier  for  the  soldier  in  the  rusli  of  baitle  lo  do  noble  deeds  than  to  live  a  faithful 
life  in  the  barrnck-yard,  or  in  attending  to  daily  drill.  (D.  Maclcod,  D.D.)  Christian 
war/are : — I.  The  enejiies  with  which  you  have  lo  contend.  1.  The  devil.  2.  The 
world.  (1)  The  men  of  the  world  engage  on  the  side  of  the  devil.  (2)  The  things  of 
the  world — honours,  profits,  and  pleasures,  how  dangerous  are  these  1  3.  The  flesh, 
by  which  is  meant  the  corrupt  nature,  is  the  most  dangerous  enemy  of  all.  II.  This 
EXHORTATION  IMPLIES — 1.  That  you  baulsh  unnecessary  fears,  and  engage  in  the 
warfare  with  boldness  and  resolution.  2.  That  you  fi^ht  in  Divine  strength.  3. 
That  you  persevere  in  the  combat.  III.  Motives.  1.  Your  cause  is  good  and  highly 
important.  It  is  "  the  good  fight  of  faith."  2.  You  are  engaged  in  the  presence 
of  many  spectators.  (1)  God,  whose  eye  penetrates  into  the  inmost  recesses  of 
your  hearts.  He  will  be  your  impartial  judge.  (2)  Angels.  Shall  we  disgrace 
ourselves  in  the  sight  of  heaven  ?  3.  You  fight  under  Jesus  Christ,  the  Captain 
of  salvation.  4.  You  are  sure  of  victory  in  the  end.  (W.  Linn,  D.D.) 
Christ  satisfying  the  instinct  of  courage : — I.  Padl  here  appeals  to  the  instinct 
OP  COURAGE.  In  becoming  Christians  we  do  not  cease  to  be  men.  1.  Courage  lies 
midway  between  timidity  and  recklessness.  In  matters  of  daring  there  is  a 
deficiency  which  is  cowardice,  and  an  excess  which  is  foolhardiness.  (1)  Timidity 
is  common.     Many  shrink  from  pain,  fly  from  danger,  and  in  matters  of  principle 


CHAP.  XVI.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  581 

more  afraid  of  man  that  shall  die  than  of  God  who  must  judge.  (2)  Foolhardiness 
is  common.  What  mad  prank  cannot  a  schoolboy  be  daved  to  do?  Who  has  not 
been  culpably  indifferent  to  health,  iiilluence,  ai.d  character?  But  often  the  fool- 
hardy is  a  coward.  The  man  who  will  undermine  his  constitution  by  vice  is  afraid 
of  infection.  We  refuse  to  either  of  these  the  sacred  name  of  instinct.  They  are 
pervetsious,  distortions  of  nature.  2.  Nature  is  brave.  Nowhere  is  cowardice 
honoured.  (1)  Greeks  and  Eomans  had  but  one  word  for  courage  and  virtue.  The 
coward  in  battle  had  better  not  return  to  face  either  his  country  or  his  home.  The 
man  who  left  wife  or  child  a  piey  to  violence  or  fie  was  henceforth  an  outlaw.  (2) 
Courage  is  the  idol  of  the  young.  It  is  this  which  underhes  the  hero  worship  of 
the  river,  the  course,  the  field.  (3)  Nor  will  either  young  or  old,  so  long  as 
England  is  free  or  Europe  Christian,  fail  to  honour  the  sincerity  that  must  speak 
the  truth,  and  the  conscience  that  would  go  to  the  stake  for  duty.  3.  Yet  courage 
has  its  abuses.  (1)  There  is  an  intellectual  foolhardiness  seen  in  the  upsetting  of 
established  convictions,  the  inversion  of  established  convictions,  the  establishment 
of  some  exploded  error.  Many  heresies  liave  sprung  (nit  of  intellectunl  bravery. 
It  has  seemed  so  manly  to  contradict  traditions  and  belief.^.  But  there  is  a  mental 
audacity  as  perilous  as  and  more  culpable  than  that  which  flings  away  life  in 
Alpine  iilimbing  or  in  the  circus  or  hunting  field.  (2)  The  same  false  courage  has 
a  more  fatal  place  in  things  spiritual.  What  is  it  that  sends  the  young  traveller 
without  arms,  map,  or  guide  on  the  journey  of  life  ?  What  is  it  that  induces  one 
who  has  been  vanquished  fifty  times  on  a  particular  battlefield  of  temptation  to  try 
his  chance  there  again  ?  It  was  this  instinct  of  courage  that  Satan  appealed  to  in 
the  wilderness.  He  had  found  it  in  its  perversion  in  the  fallen,  but  not  in  the 
perfect  Man.  4.  Though  there  is  an  instinct  of  courage  in  us,  there  are  many 
counteracting  in-tincts,  insomuch  that  it  must  be,  practically,  either  a  rare  gift,  or 
else  an  acquired  grace.  (1)  Few  soldiers  probably  go  into  the  battle  eager  for  the 
fray.  The  very  faith  of  our  immortality  forliids  it.  (2)  We  reverence  and  ought 
to  reverence  more  the  grace  than  the  gift.  If  we  know  a  person  naturally  sensi- 
tive, delicately  organised,  we  admire  far  more  in  that  person  acquired  courage, 
than  the  stolid  acquiescence  of  one  who  has  neither  brain  to  throb,  nor  nerve  to 
quiver.  Christ's  courage  was  of  this  nobler,  less  constitutional  kind,  as  we  see 
from  His  natural  shrinking  from  death,  and  yet  His  persistence  in  the  path  of 
sacrifice.  II.  Christ  satisfies  this  instinct — 1.  Of  physical  courage  by  showing 
in  Himself  how  they  who  may  have  not  the  gift  may  have  the  grace.  Wonderful 
has  been  the  issue.  Witness  the  martyrs.  But  excitement  of  love,  hate,  bigotry, 
&c.,  have  had  their  martyrs.  But  there  is  a  courage  unsupported  by  excitement  y 
and  sympathy,  in  the  strength  of  which  Christians  have  endured  in  unmurmuring 
patience  lifelong  pains,  want,  &c.  2.  Of  moral  courage.  There  is  nothing  in 
Christ's  character  more  pervasive  than  this.  We  see  it  in  His  fearless  antagonism 
to  the  doctors  of  His  age.  He  dared  to  speak  the  truth  regardless  of  consequences. 
And  thus  He  taught  us  courage.  He  bade  us  never  fear  truth — a  thing  necessary 
to  remember  in  the  face  of  the  present  attitude  of  Faith  and  Science.  The  moral 
courage  which  He  showed  in  His  teaching  He  also  showed  in  His  conduct ;  and  it 
is  here  that  we  want  most  to  cultivate  it.  Think  of  His  solemn  warnings  against 
moral  cowardice.  How  He  bade  us  not  be  ashamed  of  Him  and  His  words,  and  not 
to  fear  them  who  kill  the  body.  3.  Of  spiritual  courage.  (1)  The  coinage  of 
enterprise  and  Aggression.  (2)  The  courage  of  resistance.  [Dean  Vautjiian.) 
Be  stronr/ :—l.  Weakness  is  always  miserable;  sometimes  sinful.  If  a  man,  e.//., 
abstain  from  food,  having  food  before  him  ;  if  he  neglect  necessary  exercise  and 
become,  through  inaction,  enervated ;  if  he  pamper  the  body  ;  if  he  curtail  rest ; 
under  such  circumstances,  to  be  weak  is  to  be  sinful.  It  is  to  such  weakness  that 
the  apostle  refers  here.  2.  Our  prayer  for  you  is  that  you  may  be  strong  ;  and  our 
hope  of  your  strength  is  not  entirely  in  our  prayer,  nor  in  yout  s.  Something  more 
is  necessary.  In  answer  to  such  prayer,  God  would  say  to  you,  "You  must  layj 
aside  that  weight,  and  that  sin,  which  doth  so  easily  beset  you."  "  If  you  would  I 
be  strong,  you  must  nourish  your  spirit  with  that  food  which  I  give  you."  Suppose 
that,  instead  of  laying  aside  that  weight,  you  retain  it,  and  refuse  the  food  offered 
you.  God  has  answered  your  prayer  in  the  directions  He  has  given  you,  and  in 
bringing  before  you  the  provision  for  your  strength.  The  apostle  had  his  eye  upon 
these  provisions  and  directions  when  he  said,  "  Quit  you  like  men,  be  strong."  I. 
The  things  that  ake  necessary  to  spiritual  strength.  1.  Eight  and  sound 
principle.  "  God  hath  not  given  us  the  spirit  of  fear  ;  but  the  spiiit  of  power,  of 
love,  and  of  a  sound  mind."    Fear  is  a  source  of  weakness,  and  love  is  a  source  of 


< 


582  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

strength.  If  your  religion  is  based  upon  dreading  God,  you  will  never  be  strong, 
if  it  is  built  up  upon  loving  God  you  will  he  sl^rong.  2.  Mental  and  emotional 
nutriment.  To  have  a  strong  mind,  you  must  get  God's  thoughts  into  it.  To  have 
a  strong  heart,  God  must  be  the  supieme  object  of  affection.  3.  Work.  The  doing 
that  which  God  bids  us  to  do,  for  inactivity  invariably  brings  weakness.  The  more 
you  do,  the  more  you  will  be  able  to  do.  You  find  this  in  prayer,  and  in  the 
ministrations  of  benevolence.  4.  Self-control  and  government.  "  I  keep  under 
my  body."  5.  Seasonable  rest.  You  must  have  repose  ;  and  if  you  do  not  get  it, 
your  iDower  of  doing  sinks  and  dies  out.  You  see  this  everywhere,  and  nowhere 
more  than  in  the  Christian  Church.  6.  Genial  influences  upon  us.  That  which 
we  may  call  light  and  sunshine — the  "love  of  God  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by 
the  Holy  Spirit  given  unto  us."  Flowers  will  not  bloom  in  darkness ;  and  you 
cannot  get  a  strong  character,  except  in  the  love  of  your  God.  "  Thy  gentleness 
hath  made  me  great."  There  are  those  who  expose  their  children  to  all  sorts  of 
rigors  to  make  them  hardy,  and  perhaps  sink  them  to  the  grave.  The  genial 
influence  of  real  love  makes  the  strongest  character.  7.  A  good  atmosphere.  8. 
Help  wisely  aduiiuistered.  If,  in  teaching  a  child,  you  do  everything  for  him,  he 
will  do  nothing.  In  helping  the  poor,  if  you  do  everything,  you  impoverish  them. 
God  never  does  this  ;  but  He  so  helps  us  as  to  bring  out  our  own  resources.  9. 
Abstinence  from  all  enervating  influences.  From  the  principle  of  fear,  e.g.,  and 
from  carefulness  run  to  seed,  "Casting  all  your  care  upon  Him."  "  Fear  not,  say 
to  them  of  timid  heart,  be  strong."     10.  A  will  to  be  strong.     II.  All  which  is 

ESSENTIAL     TO     STBENGTH     WE     HAVE     IN     POSSESSION,     OR     WITHIN     EEACH.       1.     Eight 

principle  is  given  by  God  in  revelation,  and  by  His  Spirit.     2.  Bread  of  life  has/ 
come  down  to  us  from  heaven ;  the  well  of  the  water  of  life  has  been  opened  tcM 
us.     3.    There  is  work  God  requires  us  to  do.     4.    We  have  directions  for  self- 
control,  and  we  have  examples.     5.  Rest  is  divinely  promised.     6.  There  is  pure  j 
air  in  the  house  of  prayer,  in  the  Church  of  Christ,  and  always  on  the  mount  of  I 
religious  meditation.     8.  Help  may  be  always  obtained  of  God.     We  can  lay  aside' 
every  weight,  or  it  would  not  be  commanded.     All  that  is  necessary  to  make  you 
strong  is  provided.     Do  you  suppose  the  Saviour  has  left  His  work  half  done  ?  or 
'that  He  is  doing  it  now  partially  ?    Conclusion  :  Be  strong  in  your  whole  spirit,  but 
especially  in  faith,  in  hope,  and  in  love.     (S.  Martin.)         Christian  sirentjth  : — I. 
The  exhoetation  :  "  Be  strong."     1.  It  is  not  natural,  but  moral  strength  that  isj 
here  intended.     A  man  may  be  as  strong  as  Goliath,  and  at  the  same  time  quite  as 
wicked.     He  may  have  the  courage  and  magnanimity  of  an  Alexander  or  a  Cajsar, 
and  yet  be  a  slave  to  his  own  lusts.     The  strength  which  Paul  speaks  of,  like 
wisdom,  it  "  cometh  from  above,"  and  consists  in  our  being  strengthened  with  all 
might  by  God's  Spirit  in  the  inner  man  (Prov.  xvi.  32;  James  iii.  17  ;  Eph.  iii.  16). 

2.  The  exhortation  is  addressed  to  all  Chvistians,  whatever  be  their  circumstances 
or  situation,  whether  in  a  public  or  jjrivate  capacity  (Isa.  xxxv.  4;  Zech.  x.  6). 

3.  We  need  to  be  reminded  that  our  strength  lies  not  in  ourselves,  but  in  Christ 
our  head  (2  Cor.  xii.  9,  10).  II.  The  pakticular  cases  to  which  the  exhortation 
is  applicable.  We  must  be  strong — 1.  To  labour.  The  Christian's  woik  is 
constant  and  complicated  ;  "  it  is  not  the  work  of  a  day  or  two,"  as  Ezra  said 
respecting  the  reformation  to  be  wrought  in  Israel,  but  of  a  whole  life.  As  to  the 
things  of  this  life,  he  is  not  to  be  slothful  in  business,  but  fervent  in  spirit,  serving 
the  Lord.  But  the  labours  of  the  spiritual  life  are  still  more  arduous,  and  require 
greater  efforts  and  greater  self-denial  (Acts  xx.  24;  1  Cor.  xv.  10;  2  Cor.  i.  8). 
2.  To  conquer.  Christians  are  not  only  labourers,  but  soldiers;  and  as  such  they 
are  called  to  endure  hardness.     Seeing  that  so  many  forces  are  combined  against 

,  us,  it  is  necessavy  that  great  strength  be  exerted.  We  must  not  indulge  a  spirit  of 
fear,  but  of  power,  and  of  love,  and  of  a  sound  mind  (Eph.  vi.  11,  12).  3.  To 
suffer  (Rom.  v.  3  ;  Col.  i.  11).  God's  grace  is  sufficient  for  us,  though  nothing  else 
is.  If  thou  faint  in  the  day  of  adversity,  thy  strength  is  small.  4.  To  die.  In 
order  to  obtain  the  victory  and  to  die  happy,  we  shall  need — (1)  A  strong  and  lively 
faith,  well  founded  and  brought  into  vigorous  exercise  (Gen.  xlix.  18  ;  Psa.  xxiii.  4 ; 
Ixxiii.  26 ;  2  Tim,  iv.  6-8).  (2)  A  well-founded  and  animating  hope.  (3)  Great 
strength  of  affection,  desiring  to  depart  and  be  with  Christ,  which  is  far  better 
(1  Thess.  i.  10;  2  Pet.  iii.  12).  (4)  Strong  consolation,  and  a  joy  that  is  un- 
speakable and  full  of  glory,  (B.  BedJome,  3LA.)  Strenpth: — Kever  would 
Christianity  have  made  any  impression  upon  the  godless  world  which,  eiphteen 
centuries  ago,  it  confronted  and  withstood,  had  its  first  teachers  and  dis- 
ciples  not    been   men  of   strength.      It   may  be   well,  therefore,  to   consider — 1. ' 


CHAP.  XVI.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  583 

The  nature.  2.  Tbe  extent.  3.  The  source  of  Christian  sti-ength.  (1)  What 
land  of  strength  is  required?  Mere  physical  courage  is  not  enough:  we  share 
that  with  the  lower  animals.  Nor  will  intelleitual  power  alme  suffice;  that 
may  be  sudly  perverted  and  misused.  Both  of  these  are  good  in  their  way;  but 
notliing  save  spititual  strength  will  carry  the  Christian  triumphantly  through  the 
battle  of  life.  This  may  co-exist  with  great  natural  timidity.  (2)  When  do  we 
need  to  be  strong  ?  At  all  times  and  in  all  circumstances  :  more  than  ever  before, 
now  that  the  line  of  demarcation  between  the  kingdom  of  this  world  and  the 
kingdom  of  God  is  so  finely  drawn.  To  live  a  consistent  Christian  life  in  these 
days,  steering  clear  of  the  dishonesties  practised  in  the  name  of  "  business,"  and 
tlie  shaius  countenanced  in  the  code  of  "society  ";  to  denounce,  heedless  of  self- 
interest,  with  firm  faith  in  the  ultimate  victory  of  goodness  and  truth,  will  assui'cdly 
tax  our  strength  to  the  utmost.  (3)  Whence  are  we  to  derive  this  strength  ?  In 
ourselves  it  cannot  be  found;  its  source  lies  beyond  the  range  of  our  natural 
abilities.  It  comes  only  from  God,  the  Lord  of  all  power  and  might,  wittiout 
whom  nothing  is  strong,  nothing  is  holy.  He  waits  to  infuse  into  each  soldier  of 
His  the  invincible  strength  which  carries  all  before  it.  Those  who  profess  to 
serve  Him  have  no  excuse  for  weakness.  The  weaker  the  instrument  is  by  nature, 
the  more  splendid  is  the  triumph  of  Divine  grace  and  the  testimony  to  the  sovereign 
power   of   God.      (J.   H.    Burn,    B.D.)  True   strength: — We   mistake   strong 

feelings  for  strong  character.  A  man  who  bears  all  before  him — before  whose 
frown  domestics  tremble,  and  whose  bursts  of  fury  make  the  children  of  the  house 
quake — because  he  has  his  will  obeyed  and  his  own  way  in  all  things,  we  call  him 
the  strong  man.  The  truth  is,  that  is  the  weak  man :  it  is  his  passions  that  are 
strong  ;  he,  mastered  bv  them,  is  weak.  You  must  measui'e  the  strength  of  a  man 
by  the  power  of  the  feelings  he  subdues,  not  by  tbe  power  of  those  which  subdue 
him.  And  hence  composure  is  often  the  highest  result  of  strength.  Did  we 
never  see  a  man  receive  a  fingrant  insult,  and  only  grow  a  little  pale,  and  then  reply 
quietly?  That  was  a  man  spiritually  strong.  Or  did  we  j  ever  see  a  man  in 
anguish  stand  as  if  carved  out  of  solid  rock,  mastering  himself?  Or  one  bearing  a 
hopeless  daily  trial  remain  silent,  and  never  tell  the  world  what  it  was  that 
cankered  his  home  peace  ?  That  is  strength.  He  who,  with  strong  passions, 
remains  chaste — he  who,  keenly  sensitive,  with  manly  power  of  indignation  in  him, 
can  be  provoked,  yet  can  restrain  himself  and  forgive — these  are  strong  men, 
spiritual  heroes.  (Neu'  York  Observer.)  Vigilnnce  needed: — If  we  travel  by  river 
stea'Tier  we  are  admonished  by  an  inscription  just  below  the  steersman's  platform. 
"  not  to  speak  to  the  man  at  t!ie  wheel."  A  momentary  distraction  from  attention 
to  his  duties  might,  in  some  circumstances,  involve  a  deviation  from  the  vessel's 
course  full  of  danger  to  all  on  board.  Like  vigilance  is  needful  in  spiritual  things.- 
The  soul  must  "look  right  on,"  uudistracted  by  the  vain  conversation  of  a  babbling  • 
world,  if  she  would  steer  her  course  well  for  eternity,  and  avoid  making  shipwreck - 
of  her  ftith.  (J.  Halsey.)  WatcJij'iilncss  weded  : — A.  thoughtful  scholar  of  a 
generation  that  is  passing  away  was  once  asked  if  he  would  take  some  bread  and  a 
glass  of  wine.  His  answer  was,  "  No  ;  I  will  take  some  bread  and  a  glass  of  water." 
His  friend  siuilingly  answered,  "Bread  and  water — that  is  jprison  fare."  "No," 
paid  he,  "  not  prison  fare,  but  garrison  fare."  And  it  is  garrison  time  down  here. 
/We  can't  afford  to  be  off  our  watch,  not  keeping  a  constant  look-out  for  dangers 
(that  are  veiy  real  and  imminent.     "  What  I  say  unto  you  I  say  unto  all.  Watch !  " 

Ver.  11.  Let  all  your  things  be  done  with  charity. — Love  more  effective  than 
lorjic  : — As  means  towards  the  attainment  of  the  best  ends  there  is  no  comi^arison 
between  these.  The  latter  may  convince  the  understanding  and  leave  the  heart 
unchanged,  but  the  former  will  win  the  heart,  and  with  that  gained,  the  under- 
standing will  usually  soon  succumb.  Tlie  difference  between  them  is  similar  to 
that  between  a  mallet  and  the  sun  in  reducing  ice  to  water.  The  mallet  may  break 
the  ice  into  small  jparticles,  but  each  particle  will  remain  ice  still,  while  the  sun's 
heat  falling  upon  the  ice  will  melt  it  into  a  fluid,  and  so  impregnate  the  fluid  with 
its  warmth  that  while  that  warmth  is  continued  the  water  cannot  assume  ngain  its 
icy  condition.  So  in  changing  opinions  and  reforming  habits.  Arguments  will  be 
of  little  avail  without  a  loving  disposition  behind  them.  The  opinions,  afle;-  all 
ciild  pure  arguments,  will  remain  generally  unchanged,  or  probably  assume  another 
false  complexion,  and  the  habits,  if  broken  up  for  a  little,  will  soon  resume  their 
wonted  round.  But  if  love  prevails,  the  eyes  looking  it,  the  face  beaming  it,  the 
words  expressing  it,  the  whole  demeanour  demonstrating  it,  the  citadel  of  opinion 


58i  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

will  melt  before  the  loving  assault,  and  the  heart  will  become  ablaze  with  the  sacred 
glow.  Love  and  logic  should  at  least  go  hand  in  hand  in  seeking  the  ref-'ene ration 
of  the  world.  Love  as  a  motive  : — Ask  j'ourselves  what  is  the  leading  motive  which 
actuates  you  while  you  are  at  work.  I  do  not  ask  what  your  leading  motive  is  for 
working,  that  is  a  different  thing  ;  you  may  have  families  to  support,  parents  to 
help,  brides  to  win  ;  you  may  have  all  these,  or  other  such  sacred  and  pre-eminent 
motives  to  press  the  morning's  labour  and  prompt  the  twilight  thought.  But  when 
you  are  fairly  at  the  work,  what  is  the  motive  which  tells  upon  every  touch  of  it  ?  If 
it  is  the  love  of  that  which  your  work  represents — if,  being  a  landscape  painter,  it  is 
love  of  hills  and  trees  that  move  you — if,  being  a  figure  painter,  it  is  love  of  human 
beauty  and  human  soul  that  moves  you — if,  being  a  flower  or  an  animal  painter,  it 
is  love,  and  wonder,  and  delight  in  petal  and  in  limb  that  move  you,  then  the  spirit 
is  upon  you,  and  the  earth  is  yours,  and  the  fulness  thereof.  But  if,  on  the  other 
hand,  it  is  petty  self-complacency  in  your  own  skill,  trust  in  precepts  and  laws, 
hope  for  academical  or  popular  approbation,  or  avarice  of  wealth,  it  is  quite  possible 
that  by  sturdy  industry,  or  even  by  fortunate  chance,  you  may  win  the  applause, 
the  position,  the  fortune  that  you  desire,  but  one  touch  of  true  art  you  will  never 
lay  on  canvas  or  on  stone  as  long  as  you  live.     {J.  Buskin.)         A  universalrule  : — 

1.  The  spieit  of  it  is  love.  II.  The  application  of  it  is  universal.  III.  The 
MOTIVE  of  it.     1.  To  promote  peace  and  love.     2.  Prevent  strife  and  contention. 

3.  Subdue  enmity  and  opposition.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  universal  rule  : — I.  To 
WHAT  APPLIED.  To  all  our — 1.  Thoughts.  2.  Feelings.  3.  Actions.  4.  Devotions. 
5.  Church  activities.  II.  Fob  whom  contemplated.  All  our — 1.  Family.  2. 
Eelations.  3.  Friends.  4.  Neighbours.  5.  Countrymen.  6.  Kace.  III.  With 
what  result.     The  promotion  of  all.     1.  Righteousness.     2.  Culture.     3.  Holiness. 

4.  Happiness.  (J.  W.  Burn.)  The  key  which  sets  tlie  world  to  music  : — Man's  life 
consists  of  many  "  things  done."  Activity  is  at  once  the  law  and  the  necessity  of 
his  nature.  He  only  really  lives  as  he  acts,  inactivity  is  death.  But  whilst  the 
acts  of  men  are  numerous  and  varied,  the  animating  and  controlling  spirit  should 
be  one,  viz.,  love.  It  is  thus  in  heaven,  through  all  hierarchies.  It  should  be  thus 
on  earth,  and  must  be  if  earth  is  to  have  a  millennium.  This  one  spirit  will — I. 
Make  us  happy  in  all  our  activities.  The  labour  of  love  is  the  music  of  life.  All 
labour,  however  menial,  if  wrought  under  tbe  inspiration  of  love,  must  yield 
happiness.  II.  Make  us  useful  in  all  our  activities.  Every  work  performed  by 
love  is  beneficent,  it  has  a  brightness  in  it  to  enlighten,  a  balm  in  it  to  soothe,  a 
music  in  it  to  charm,  an  aroma  in  it  to  please.  III.  Give  unity  to  all  our  activities. 
As  the  circulating  sap  binds  the  root,  the  trunk,  and  the  branches,  the  leafage, 
blossoms,  and  fruit,  into  one  organic  unity,  so  love  will  give  a  harmony  and 
completeness  to  all  the  numerous  and  varied  acts  of  life.  Why  are  men  every- 
where so  unhajipy  in  their  labours,  and  their  labours  so  socially  pernici;ius,  so  dis- 
harmonious and  divided  ?  Because  they  are  not  animated  and  governed  by  this 
one  spirit — love.  The  human  labours  of  the  world  that  spring  from  greed, 
ambition,  vanity,  blind  impulse,  envy,  and  resentment,  keep  individuals,  communi- 
ties, and  nations  in  constant  conflict  and  confusion.     (D.  Tliomas,  D.D.) 

Vers.  15-18.  Ye  know  the  house  of  Stephanas,  that  it  is  the  firstfruits  of 
Achaia. — The  house  of  Stephanas : — I.  Its  happiness — united  in — 1.  Faith.  2. 
Hope.     3.  Purpose.     11.  Its   true   nobility — precedence   of — 1.  Heavenly  birth. 

2.  Experience.  3.  Rank.  4.  Influence.  III.  Its  devoted  service.  1.  Love  to 
the  bretbren.  2.  Liberality  of  spirit.  3.  Sincere  attachment  to  the  cause  of 
Christ.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Tlie  natural  right  of  priority  : — We  all  feel  interested 
in  firstborn  children,  first  forms  of  enterprise,  firstfruits  of  our  labour.  Natural 
feeling  gives  all  first  things  )irominence.  First  things — I.  Are  done  with  intense 
FEELING,  as  we  see  in  the  youth  beginning  business,  the  man  entering  on  a  new 
undertaking.  Men  brace  themselves  up  for  first  things,  and  having  no  experience  as 
to  what  strength  is  required,  often  j^ut  too  much  into  it.  Hapi)ily  life  is  full  of 
these  first  things,  especially  early  life,  and  they  exert  a  most  gracious  influence  on 
us.  II.  Have  a  natural  pre-ejiinence.  The  position  and  rights  of  the  firstborn 
are  an  illustration  of  tliis.  First  things  are  felt  to  have  a  representative  character. 
When  a  servant  comes  into  a  bouse  the  employers  watch  the  first  actions  to  see 
how  they  will  frame.  When  a  convert  joins  a  Church  the  firs-t  forms  in  which 
Christian  responsibility  is  met  are  closely  scrutinised.  Turning  his  mind  back  to 
their  hopeful  first  things  the  apostle  says  to  the  Galatians,  "  Ye  did  run  well ;  who 
did  hinder  you  ?  "     III.  Have  promise  for  following  things — as  firstfruits  have 


CHAP.  XVI.]  J.  CORINTHIANS.  585 

for  harvest.  A  man's  first  work  need  not  be  his  maximum  standard,  but  it  ought 
to  be  his  minimum  standard.  A  first  result  may  tell  of  power,  and  power  always 
holds  the  promise  of  what  culture  can  make  it.  One  convert  made  in  a  new  sphere 
of  labour  holds  the  i^romisH  of  a  great  ingathering.  IV.  Keep  a  prominent  place 
IN  THE  MEMOEY,  e.fj.,  our  fii'st  school,  first  place  of  business,  first  love,  first  sickuf  ss, 
&c.  {R.  Tuck,  B.A.)  That  they  have  addicted  themselves  to  the  ministry  of 
the  saints. — Ministering  to  tlie  saints  : — I.  A  very  needful  work.  Muny  of  God's 
children  are  poor,  and  need  the  necessaries  of  life;  many  are  afflicted,  and  need 
sympathy  ;  many  are  weak,  and  need  taking  by  the  hand  (Gal.  vi.  10).  II.  A  very 
HNOOURABLE  AND  BEAUTiruL  WORK.  1.  Angel-like  (Heb.  i.  14).  2.  Chiist-like 
(Matt.  XX.  28,  XXV.  40).  III.  A  work  that  may  be  exercised  in  many  ways.  Thus 
it  is  suited  to  all.  IV.  A  work  that  merits  recognition  on  the  part  of  the 
Church.  Those  so  engaged  should  be — 1.  Highly  esteemed.  They  do  much  to 
elevate  the  tone  of  the  Church  ;  much  to  preserve  it  in  peace  and  content ;  much  to 
stimulate  its  zeal.  2.  Encouraged.  The  work  is  trying.  Those  who  encourage 
others  often  want  much  encourHgement  themselves.  3.  Aided.  This  is  probably 
what  the  apostle  meant  in  ver.  16.  "  As  they  serve  you,  serve  thfm."  V.  A  work 
VERY  beneficial  TO  THE  WORKERS.  "  They  wlio  Water  others  shall  themselves  be 
watered."  We  grow  rich  by  bestowing.  A  sure  way  of  getting  to  heaven  is  to  get 
others  there.  ()F.  E.  Hurmlall,  M.A.)  That  ye  submit  yourselves  unto  such. — ■ 
Submission  due  to  the  elders  of  the  Church  : — I.  Its  obligation  arises  out  of  their 
— 1.  Age.  2.  Experience.  3.  Services.  II.  Its  extent  reaches  as  far  as  they 
act. — 1.  In  conformity  with  the  apostolic  faith;  and  2.  Help  forward  its  interests. 
III.  Its  FRUITS.  1.  Order.  2.  Edification.  3.  Unity.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Service 
and  honour : — I.  The  vocation  to  spiritual  ministry.  1.  Its  first  condition  is 
sincere  personal  adhesion  to  Christianity  (ver.  15).  2.  Christian  ministers  are  of 
the  most  various  kinds.  They  vary  with  capacity,  opportunity,  necessity.  3.  Such 
services  involve  co-operation.  Some  leading,  others  following,  ttc.  4.  "  Minister- 
ing unto  the  snints  "  is  an  especial  form  of  acceptable  service.     II.  The  honour 

AND    subjection    DUE    TO    THOSE    ENGAGED    IN    SPIRITUAL    MINISTRY.        1.    Eegard    and 

gratitude.  Paul  here  sets  the  example.  2.  Help.  3.  Submission.  There  are 
many  who  should  be  ready  not  only  to  work  with,  but  to  work  under.  {Pre/.  J.  R. 
Thomson,  M.A.)  Our  duty  to  tlie  truly  vseful: — We  should — I.  Cherish  the 
HIGHEST  RESPECT  FOR  THEM.  Stephanas  was  one  of  Paul's  first  converts  in  Achaia, 
and  his  family  the  only  one  Paul  baptized  in  Corinth.  He  and  hiswere  addicted  to 
the  ministries  of  love.  Fortunatus  and  Achaicus  had  supplied  to  Paul  what  the 
Corinthians  had  neglected.  The  truly  useful  are  the  only  truly  honourable.  A 
man  is  to  be  honoured  not  because  of  his  ancestry,  his  office,  his  wealth,  but 
because  of  what  he  is  morally,  and  what  he  does  generously  in  the  way  of  helping 
the  race.  The  philanthropist  is  the  true  prince.  II.  Heartily  co-operate 
(ver.  16).  1.  Co-operate  with  useful  men.  2.  In  your  co-operation  let  them  take 
the  lead.  They  have  proved  themselves  worthy  of  your  co-operation.  {D. 
Thomas,  D.D.) 

Vers.  17,  18.  I  am  glad  of  the  coming  of  Stephanas,  ...  for  they 
have  refreshed  my  spirit  and  yours. — Spiritual  refreshment : — These  three 
honoured  meuibers  of  the  Corinthian  Church  came  to  consult  the  apostle  on 
matters  of  faith  and  practice.  But  their  visit  was  not  simply  official,  for  they 
were  personally  attached  to  Paul,  and  his  grateful  language  is  suggestive  of  the 
refreshment  of  spirit  which  is  the  result  of  Christian  association.  I.  The  need  of 
spiritual  refreshment.  1.  Work  may  weigh  down  the  soul  as  well  as  the  body. 
2.  Trials  such  as  desertion,  disappointment,  may  dispose  to  melancholy.  3.  Living 
much  alone  is  wearisome ;  the  energies  fiag,  the  work  suffers.  II.  Its  appointed 
AGENTS.  Letters  and  books  are  precious,  but  often  inadequate.  Living  fellowship 
with  those  likeminded  with  ourselves  has  a  peculiar  power  in  restoring  the 
equilibrium  of  the  soul.  Paul  felt,  as  we  do,  it  hard  to  work  without  the  smiles 
and  personal  encouragements  of  his  friends.  III.  Its  means.  The  presence  of 
Christian  friends  is  much,  but  the  opening  of  their  hearts,  the  inquiry  concerning 
cur  successes  and  failures,  are  more.  IV.  Its  results.  1.  Depression  gives  way 
to  cheerfulness.  2.  Weariness  to  vigour.  3.  Sluggishness  to  vivacity.  4, 
Des-pondency  to  hope.     [Rrof.   J.  R.    Thomson.) 

Vers.  19-21.  The  Churches  of  Asia  salute  you. — The  social  temperature  of  a 
Church  : — While  doctrines  are  being  discussed   in  the  pulpit,  and  ecclesiastical 


586  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

distinctions  expressed  in  nrndes  of  worship  and  of  discipline,  there  remains  to  be 
studied  something  quite  as  essential  as  these  to  the  future  of  religion,  in  the 
common  life  that  is  going  on  beneath  them,  the  varying  pliases  of  which  it  is 
impossible  for  any  definition  to  express.  Not  second  in  importance  to  a  Church's 
teaching  or  organisation,  is  the  question  of  its  temper  iture.  The  necessity  of 
urging  tliis  is  not  diminished  by  the  considerati  n  of  the  extreme  diflicult'y  of 
ascertaining  what,  in  Church  life,  is  the  exact  figure  at  which  the  social  thermo- 
meter should  stand.  The  social  habits  of  our  English  churches,  to  confine  our- 
selves for  a  moment  to  them,  will  necessarily  be  determined  to  a  large  extent  by 
our  characteristics  as  a  race  ;  and  enthusiastic  sociability  is  not,  as  a  rule,  regarded 
as  one  of  these.  A  witty  Frenchman  has  observed  that  not  only  is  England  an 
island,  but  every  Englishman  is  an  island.  The  haughty  reserve  of  manner  for 
which  he  is  celebrated  on  the  Continent,  and  which  at  honie  carries  him  through  a 
long  day's  journey  in  a  railway  carriage  without  opening  his  lips  to  his  neighbour, 
is  not  likely  to  be  cast  on  one  side  when  he  enters  the  church  door.  The  difficulty 
in  piaking  advances  to  strangers  in  congregations  is  greatly  enhanced  by  the 
presence  in  no  inconsiderable  numbers  of  this  class.  They  resent  the  friendly 
greeting  as  an  intrusion,  and  are  capable  of  rewarding  it  with  the  look 
which,  in  one  of  Lord  Beaconsfield's  novels,  a  great  lady  bestows  upon  a 
person  just  introduced  to  her ;  a  look  conveying  to  its  recipient  the  impres- 
sion that  she  has  never  seen  him  before,  that  she  has  no  interest  in  seeing 
him  now,  and  not  the  slightest  desire  ever  to  set  eyes  on  him  again.  One  of  the 
indispensable  elements  in  the  training  of  a  Church  social  tactician  is  the  cultivation 
of  the  faculty  of  recognising  these  people  at  a  glance,  and  of  knowing  how  to  deal 
with  them.  There  are  those  who  value  social  recognition,  and  to  whom  the 
extension  of  a  ready  sympathy  is  of  the  first  importance,  both  in  regard  to  their 
own  comfort  and  as  a  means  of  attaching  them  to  the  fellowship.  Here,  again, 
however,  there  are  subdivis^ions.  Some  of  tliese  people  posse-s  in  themselves  the 
social  faculty.  They  have  "the  coming  on  humour,"  and  without  much  outside 
help  will  by  the  force  of  their  own  general  attractiveness  and  geniality,  speedily 
make  their  way  and  find  themselves  at  home.  Others,  dej)ending  equally  on  the 
appreciation  and  sympathy  of  their  fellows,  and  equally  expecting  it,  embarrass 
their  neighbours  by  the  fact  that  they  hoist  no  signals  for  a  parley.  They  shut 
themselves  up  in  their  own  interior,  the  windows  of  their  nature  shut,  and  the 
blinds  drawn,  and  then  are  astonished  and  aggrieved  that  no  one  knocks  at  the 
door.  The  question  of  the  social  temperature  of  a  Chuich  depends  for  its  answer 
to  a  considerable  extent  on  the  kind  of  heating  apparatus  tliere  is  in  the  pulpit. 
But  warmth,  fervour,  and  good-heartedness  in  the  preacher  are  not  enough. 
There  must  be  organisation  as  well.  Apart  from  this,  the  most  impassioned  dis- 
course on  brotherly  love  will  not  break  through  the  reserve  which  prevents  Jones  in 
the  pew  from  holding  out  a  hand  to  Brown,  the  unknown,  in  the  aisle.  The  idea  of  an 
"  Outlook  Committee  "  attached  to  each  Church  is  excellent.  It  should  be  a  tolerably 
large  one,  of  both  sexes,  and  representing  the  cream  of  the  community  in 
intelligence,  tact,  good  feeling,  kiiowledge  of  the  congregation  and  of  human 
nature  in  general.  A  military  officer  once  s-aid  that  in  a  reputedly  brave  regiment 
perhaps  one  in  ten  would  be  really  brave,  it  being  the  example  of  this  tenth  that 
kept  the  others  in  line.  In  a  reputedly  sociable  Church  there  may,  perhaps,  be 
one  in  ten  with  the  genuine  social  gift.  It  is  fiom  these,  the  men  and  women 
whose  natural  grace  of  temperament  has  been  heightened  and  enriched  by  the 
spirit  of  Clirist ;  who  have  the  quick  intelligence  that  both  reads  and  remembers 
faces ;  who  know  and  respect  the  social  couvenancex,  when  to  speak  and  when  to 
refrain  from  sj^eaking ;  whose  heart  knows  by  instinct  the  lonely  and  friendless, 
and  by  instinct  goes  out  towards  them,  that  the  Look-out  Committee  should  be 
recruited.  Where  it  is  not  aheady  in  existence  it  is  time  to  organise  it.  There  is 
plenty  for  it  to  do.  The  proper  comprehension  of  the  conditions  of  this  form 
of  service,  and  the  systematic  development  of  all  its  caijabilities,  will  put  a  new 
face  upon  many  a  community  that  is  now  languishing  from  neglectof  a  vital  point. 
(Christian  IVorld.)  The  apustolic  salutations  indicate — I.  The  unity  of  the 
Chdkch  of  Christ.  1.  All  the  churches  are  united  by  common  bonds.  2.  Should 
maintain  a  friendly  intercourfC.     II.    The    interest  which  individuals  should 

FEEL   FOR   THE    SPIRITUAL    WELL-BEING    OF    THOSE   AT    A    DISTANCE.       It    Should    be — 1. 

Heartfelt.  2.  Prayerful.  III.  The  universal  brotherhood  of  Christians  and 
its  fitting  expression.  IV.  The  loving  relation  between  minister  and  people. 
Christian  greetings: — I.  From   and   to  whom?     1.  Individuals.     2.  Households. 


CHAP.  XVI.]  I.CORINTHIANS.  587 

3.  Churches.  II.  Or  what  kind  ?  1.  Fiatevnal.  2.  Cordial.  3.  Mutual.  III. 
Upon  w-hat  basis?  1.  Not  upon  that  of  mere  courtesy,  common  interests,  or 
expediency.  2.  But  "  in  the  Lord."  (1)  In  fulfilment  of  His  command.  (2)  In 
imitation  of  His  conduct.  (.3)  Under  tlie  influence  of  His  Spirit.  (Prof.  J.  E. 
Thomson.)  Aquila  and  Priscilla  salute  you  much  in  the  Lord.— Aqiiila  and 
Priscilla :—  The  excellences  of  this  worthy  couple.  They — 1.  Were  members  of 
the  Church — in  Ephesus.  2.  Hospitable.  3.  Well  instructed  in  the  truth  (Acts 
xviii.  2G).  4.  Had  a  Church  in  iheir  house.  5.  Felt  a  deep  interest  in  the  CImrch 
at  home  and  abroad.  (J.  Lytli,  D.D.)  With  the  Church  that  is  in  their  house. 
— A  Church  in  the  luiuxe  .-—I.  What  this  Chukch  is  and  when  our  families  may  be 
called  Churches.  Churches  are  societies — 1.  Devoted  to  God,  called  out  of  this 
world.     2.    Employed   for   God,   pursuant   to   this   dedication.     H.   Motives    to 

PEKSUADE    YOU    TO    TURN    YOUR    FAMILIES   INTO   CHURCHES.       1.    God  will  dwell  in  them. 

2.  If  ymi  make  them  not  churches  Satan  will  have  a  seat  there.  3.  It  will  be 
comfortable  to  yourselves.  4.  A  good  legacy.  5.  It  will  help  to  prosper  the 
Church  of  God  in  the  nation.  (Biblical  Museum.)  The  Church  in  the  houxe 
(Rom.  xvi.  5)  imports  the  Church  meeting  in  their  house,  consequently  implies — I. 
The  good  feeling  op  the  entertainer.  II.  The  privilege  of  the  household 
— Christ  in  the  midst.  III.  The  projiise  of  blessing  upon  the  neighbourhood. 
IV.  The  hope  of  reunion  in  heaven.  (J.  LytJi,  D.D.)  The  Cliurch  in  the 
hmisc : — I.  The  simplest  conception  of  a  Church.  A  meetina;  or  assembly. 
The  term  can  only  be  applied  to  an  organised  body  or  material  building  figuratively. 
Two  or  three  agreeing  to  meet  together  for  worship  may  properly  be  called  a  church. 
II.  Its  close  association  with  a  home.  It  is  interesting  to  note  tliat  the  Christian 
assemblies  were  first  sanctified  homes.  They  did  not  need  at  first  any  archi- 
tectural aids.  lil.  Its  fundamental  features.  Family  religion  extendt-d  to 
embrace  family  friends.  IV.  The  lines  of  its  probable  development.  Tl  ese 
were  fixed  by — 1.  Increase  of  numbers.  2.  Growth  of  wealth,  bringing  wdth  it 
artistic  sentiment  and  desires.  3.  Rise  of  distinction  between  priesthood  and  kity^ 
and  the  consequent  development  of  ritual.  (K.  Tuck,  B.A.)  Family  ijraijer  : — 
This  is  a  general  custom  in  the  households  of  evangelical  Christians.  No  man 
ought  to  consider  his  piety  of  an  active  stamp  who  neglects  to  institute  "  the 
Church"  in  his  house.  I.  It  is  a  duty.  The  Bible  nowhere  directly  commands 
it ;  but — 1.  It  is  a  duty  by  inference.  When  Abraham  moved  his  tent  to  the  plain 
of  Mamre,  he  built  there  an  altar  unto  the  Lord  (Gen.  xid.  18).  The  pious  take 
their  religion  with  them  wherever  they  go.  When  David  says,  "  Seven  times  a 
day  do  I  praise  Thee,"  remember  there  was  no  temple,  and  that  at  least  two 
of  these  times  may  refer  to  morning  and  evening  worship  in  the  household. 
Daniel  "  prayed  in  his  house,  sometimes  himself  alone,  and  sometimes  with  his 
family  about  him  "  (Dan.  vi.  10).  Cornelius  was  a  man  that  prayed  in  his  house 
{Acts  X.  30).  Paul  delighted  to  honour  Priscilla  and  Aquila,  and  twice  spoke  of 
"the  Church  that  is  in  their  house"  (Text  and  Rom.  xvi.  5).  This  is  interpreted 
by  some  to  mean  "  that  their  home  was  a  sanctuary  and  their  family  a  Church  "  ; 
but  if  others  may  assemble  in  the  home  for  worship,  liow  much  more  may  not  the 
family  ?  We  may  certainly  claim  that  family  prayer  conforms  to  the  command, 
and  is  entitled  to  the  promise  contained  in  .Tames  iv.  8.  2.  A  duty  by  example. 
It  can  hardly  be  doubted  that  the  de»ply  pious  in  all  times  have  prayed  with  theii\ 
family  in  their  households.  Abraham,  .Joshua,  David,  Job,  Daniel,  all  worshipped 
God  in  the  family,  and  our  Saviour  confirmed  tlie  obligation;  for  He  often  prayed 
with  His  disciples,  as  His  family  or  household.  11.  It  is  a  privilege.  Family 
prayer  binds  the  household  more  closely  and  lovingly  together.  It  is  a  great  boon 
to  consecrate  the  day  with  prayer  before  the  household  separates  on  its  divers  ways 
and  on  its  manifold  duties.  What  if  they  sbould  never  all  meet  again  ?  To  have 
omitted  it  on  such  a  day  would  prove  a  lasting  regret.  How  precious  at  night  to 
commit  our  souls  and  bodies  to  that  Guardian  of  Israel  who  neither  slumbers  nor 
sleeps  !  This  gives  a  gracious  opportunity  to  pray  with  our  children  and  for  our 
children.  Says  Cecil,  "  It  may  be  used  as  an  engine  of  vast  power  in  the  family. 
It  diffuses  a  sympathy  through  the  membeis.  It  calls  the  mind  off  from  the 
deadening  effects  of  worldly  affairs.  It  arrests  every  member  with  a  morning  and 
evening  sermon,  in  the  midst  of  all  the  hurries  and  cares  of  life.  It  says,  '  There 
is  a  God  ! '  '  There  is  a  spiritual  world  ! '  '  Tliere  is  a  life  to  come  !  '  It  fixes  the 
idea  of  responsiliility  in  the  mind.  It  furni-lies  a  tender  and  judicious  father 
or  master  with  an  opportunitA'  of  gently  glancing  at  faults,  where  a  direct  admoni- 
tion might  be  inexpedient.     It  enables  him  to  relieve  tlie  weight  with  which  sub- 


588  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

ordination  or  service  sits  on  minds  of  inferiors."  III.  Inquiries.  1.  Are  we 
prayerless  Christians?  2.  Do  we  keep  the  fires  burning  brightly  and  continually 
upon  the  family  altar  ?  3.  Do  we  excuse  ourselves  because  of  non-ability  and  lack 
of  confidence?  Remember  the  man  who  hid  his  talent  in  a  napkin.  4.  Do 
we  make  it  cheerful  with  song,  instructive  with  Scri)iture,  hallowed  with  prayer 
and   precious  with   all   its   memories  ?      [Homiletic  Monthly.)  A   church  in 

the  house : — I.    Chueches  are   societies   devoted   to    God,  called   got   of   the 

WORLD,    TAKEN   IN     OUT     OF    THE     COMMON     TO     BE     INCLOSDEES     FOE     GoD.        He    hath 

set  them  apart  for  Himself;  and,  because  He  hath  chosen  them,  they  also 
have  chosen  Him,  and  set  themselves  apart  for  Him.  The  Jewish  Church  was 
separated  to  God  for  a  peculiar  people,  a  kingdom  of  priests.  Thus  our  houses 
must  be  churches  ;  with  ourselves  we  must  give  up  our  houses  to  the  Lord,  to  be  to 
Him  for  a  name  and  a  people.  All  the  interest  we  have,  both  in  our  relations  and 
in  our  possessions,  must  be  consecrated  to  God ;  as,  under  the  law,  all  that  the 
servant  had  was  his  master's  for  ever,  after  he  had  consented  to  have  his  ear  bored 
to  the  door-post.  II.  Chueches  are  societies  employed  foe  God,  pursuant  to 
THE  teue  intent  AND  MEANING  OF  THIS  DEDICATION.  1.  Keep  up  family  doctrine. 
(1)  You  must  read  the  Scriptures  to  your  families,  inquiring  sometimes  whether 
they  understand  what  you  read.  (2)  You  must  also  catechise  your  children  and 
servants  so  long  as  they  continue  in  that  age  of  life  which  needs  this  milk.  2. 
Keep  up  family  worship.  You  must  not  only,  as  prophets,  teach  your  families,  but 
as  priests,  must  go  before  them  in  offering  the  spiritual  sacrifice  of  jirayer  and 
pvHise.  (1)  You  ought  to  make  family  acknowledgments  of  your  dependence  upon 
God  and  His  providence,  as  you  are  a  family.  (2)  You  ought  to  make  family  con- 
fessions of  your  sins  against  God  ;  those  sins  you  have  contracted  the  guilt  of  in 
your  family  capacity.  (3)  You  ought  to  offer  up  family  thanksgivings  fur  the  bless- 
ings which  you,  with  your  families,  receive  from  God.  (4)  Yoa  ought  to  present 
your  family  petitions  for  the  mercy  and  grace  which  your  families  stand  in  need  of. 
(5)  You  ought  to  make  family  intercessions  for  others  also.  There  are  families  you 
stand  related  to,  or  which  by  neighbourhood,  friendship,  or  acquaintance  you 
become  interested  in,  and  concerned  for,  and  these  you  should  recommend  in  your 
prayers  to  the  grace  of  God,  and  your  family  that  are  joined  with  you  in  the 
alliances  should  join  with  you  in  those  prayers.  3.  Keep  up  family  discipline,  that 
so  you  have  a  complete  church  in  your  house,  though  in  little.  Eeason  teacheth 
us,  "  that  every  mau  should  bear  rule  in  his  own  house  "  (Esther  i.  22).  And  since 
that,  as  well  as  other  power,  is  of  God,  it  ought  to  be  employed  for  God,  and  they 
that  so  rule,  must  be  just,  ruling  in  His  fear.  (1)  Countenance  everything  that 
is  good  and  praiseworthy  in  your  children  and  servants.  (2)  Discountenance  every- 
thing that  is  evil  in  your  children  and  servants.  Use  your  authority  for  the 
preventing  of  sin,  and  the  suppressing  of  every  root  of  bitterness,  lest  it  spring  up 
and  trouble  you,  and  thereby  many  be  defiled.     (S.  Haytoard.) 

Ver.  22.— If  any  man  love  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  let  him  be  Anathema 
Maran-atha. — Looe  to  Christ  (Eph.  vi.  24  and  Text)  :— Though  so  dissimilar,  both 
texts  teach  the  same  truth,  viz.,  that  love  to  Christ  is  the  indispensable  condition 
of  salvation.  I.  Why  is  love  to  Christ  thus  necessary?  Because — 1.  Christ  is 
God — God  in  the  clearest  form  of  manifestation — the  sum  of  the  Divine  perfections. 
All  that  there  is  in  God  to  command  the  supreme  duty  of  loving  Him  is  in  Christ, 
therefore  it  is  impossible  to  love  God  without  loving  Christ,  and  not  to  love  Christ 
is  not  to  love  God.  2.  Christ  is  God  in  our  nature,  and  is  thus  invested  with 
special  attractions,  because — (1)  Possessed  of  another  kind'  of  excellence.  (2) 
Brought  into  a  relation  to  us  He  sustains  to  no  other  order  of  beings.  3.  Christ  has 
loved  us  a*nd  given  Himself  for  us.  To  be  insensible  of  this  claim  on  our  affection 
is  indicative  of  the  greatest  moral  depravity.  4.  By  His  love  and  death  Christ  has 
opened  a  way  to  us  from  degradation  and  misery  to  eternal  life  and  glory.  5. 
We  are  shut  up  to  the  necessity  of  loving  Christ  or  Satan.  There  are  but  two 
sovereigns,  and  you  must  choose  between  them.  II.  What  is  it  to  love  Chhist, 
AND  how  can  we  TELL  WHETHER  WE  LOVE  HiM  OE  NOT?  Where this  love  is  there 
will  be — 1.  A  feeling  of  reverence  and  complacency  which  prevents  us  from  ever 
treating  Him  with  neglect  or  indignity,  and  which  makes  His  society  delightful. 
2.  Zeal  for  His  honour.  Any  disrespect  shown  Him  is  painful  to  us,  and  any- 
thing  which  promotes  His  glory  is  a  source  of  delight  to  us.  3.  A  desire  to  please 
Him,  to  do  His  will.  (C.  Hodye,  D.D.)  The  iv^iortance  of  love  to  Christ: — 
I.  The   Lord  Jesus   Christ  is  truly  and  eminently  lovely,  and  is  therefore 


CHAP.  XVI.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  589 

TO  BE  LOVED.  Cousiiler  the  nature  and  actings  of  this  grace.  1.  If  Christ  be 
considered  as  able  to  do  that  for  us,  and  communicate  that  to  us,  which  we  want, 
love  is  evinced  by  desire.  The  believer  cannot  be  satisfied  witliout  Him.  2.  If 
He  be  considered  as  having  already  manifested  Himself  to  the  soul,  then  love 
exerts  itself  in  a  way  of  delight.  "  Whom  having  not  seen,  ye  love,"  etc.  3.  As 
Christ  has  an  interest  to  be  carried  on  in  the  world,  love  displays  itself  in  zeal  for 
His  honour.  "  If  ye  love  Me,  keep  My  commandments."  4.  If  we  consider  Christ 
as  offended  with  our  sins,  and  having  suffered  for  them,  love  manifests  itself  in  grief 
and  sympathy.  "  I  am  crucified  with  Christ,"  says  the  apostle,  "  and  I  could  not  do 
less."  5.  If  we  consider  Christ  as  glorified  in  heaven,  love  expresses  itself  in  joy  and 
triumph.  II.  Notwithstanwng  all  this  ajiiablexess  in  Christ,  theke  are  some 
WHO  DO  NOT  LOVE  HiM.  Sucli  persons  have — 1.  No  real  esteem  for  the  Saviour. 
"Unto  you  that  believe.  He  is  precious."  2.  No  true  faith  in  Christ.  3.  No 
obedience  and  subjection  to  Christ.  "  If  a  man  love  Me,  he  will  keep  My  words." 
III.  All  who  love  not  the  Lokd  Jesus  Christ,  ake  chargeable  with  aggravated 

GUILT,    AND     EXPOSE    THE5ISELVES    TO    THE    SEVEREST    DISPLEASURE    OF    GoD.       BecaUSe 

— 1.  He  is  so  dearly  beloved  of  God.  2.  He  is  so  lovely  and  desirable  in  Himself. 
3.  He  has  given  the  most  astonishing  proofs  of  His  love  to  sinners.  Consequently 
the  want  of  love  to  Christ  will  be  destructive  of  religion  heie,  and  happiness  here- 
after. This  one  defect  destroys  the  excellency  and  life  of  all  religion.  Without 
love,  faith  is  dead,  repentance  legal,  fear  slavish ;  and  all  duties  void  of 
this  principle  are  vain.  As  to  future  happiness,  heaven  is  a  place  of  love ; 
and  to  entertain  one  person  there  who  is  not  a  lover  of  Christ,  would  disturb 
the  order  and  break  the  harmony  of  that  blessed  society.  Conclusion : — 1. 
Love  to  Christ  may  be  easily  discovered.  (1)  By  the  current  of  your  thoughts. 
What  persons  love,  they  think  much  upon ;  and  the  i^leasant  image  is 
continually  before  them.  (2)  By  the  care  of  your  lives.  Can  you  say  that 
to  you  to  live  is  Christ  ?  Now,  then,  let  conscience  do  its  office,  and  it  will 
easily  tell  you  whether  you  love  Christ  or  not.  2.  Not  to  love  Christ  is  a  crime 
of  tremendous  guilt,  wh'ch  is  attended  with  dreadful  aggravations;  for — (1)  It  is 
a  sin  without  cause.  It  admits  of  no  reason  or  excuse.  (2)  It  is  also  a  sin 
against  many  causes.  (3)  It  is  the  cause  of  many  other  sins.  (S.  Lavington.) 
Loviiui  Christ  and  the  penalty  of  neglecting  it : — Note  the  position  which  this  verse 
occupies.  1.  This  Epistle  was  dictated  to  an  amanuensis,  and  now  Paul  adds  "The 
salutation  of  me  Paul  with  my  own  hand  "  :  a  form  immediately  followed,  in  most 
of  his  Epistles,  by  the  aisostolic  benediction :  but  here  he  interposes  the  text.  I 
think  this  shows  us  the  state  of  his  heart,  which  was  full  of  Christ :  he  could  not 
sujipress  the  strong  affection  he  entertained  for  the  Saviour,  and  here  he  overflows. 
2.  Interposed  as  it  is  between  the  signature  and  the  benediction,  he  intends  it  to 
have  all  the  weight  which  apostolical  authority  can  give  it.  Note — I.  The  duty 
ENJOINED.  1.  Its  object.  (1)  The  old  law  was  comprehended  in  two  command- 
ments, of  which  the  first  was  greatest,  "  Thou  shalt  love  Jehovah  thy  God,"  &c. 
The  New  Testament  puts  forward  a  similar  claim  on  behalf  of  Christ ;  and  it  were 
easy  to  argue  from  this,  that  Christ  is  the  one  Jehovah  for  whom  the  old  law 
challengi  s  our  supreme  and  undivided  love.  Indeed,  this  very  name  is  here 
applied  to  Him  :  He  is  set  before  us,  while  claiming  our  affections,  as  "  the  Lord." 
(2)  He  who  claims  our  love  bears  not  only  the  incommunicable  name,  but  a  name 
common  to  many  of  His  fellow-men  :  Jesus.  (3)  Bears  another  name,  or  rather 
title — Christ,  or  Anointed ;  because  He  sustains  those  offices  into  which  men  were 
commonly  inducted  by  anointing,  and  which,  as  God-man,  He  sustains  on  behalf  of 
mankind — Prophet,  Priest,  and  King.  God,  Man,  Mediator  between  God  and  men 
—whoever  does  not  present  Him  in  these  three  aspects  robs  Him  of  a  part  of  that 
which  essentially  belongs  to  Him  :  whoever  does  not  exhibit  Him  under  this  three- 
fold character  does  not  show  you  the  Christ  of  the  Scriptures,  but  some  idol  of  his 
own  invention.  2.  The  love  which  is  claimed  in  His  behalf  must  be— (1)  Sincere. 
You  find  a  distinction  made  in  the  Scriptures  between  loving  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
in  sincerity,  and  pretending  to  love  Him.  (2)  Supreme.  "  If  any  man  will  come 
after  Me  " — "■  if  any  man  will  be  My  disciple,"  hemu.-t  be  prepared  to  "  hate  father, 
mother,"  etc.  At  the  time  when  this  was  spoken,  there  went  great  multitudes  after 
Him  :  but  this  was  the  doctrine  by  which  He  proved  them.  There  are  multitudes 
who  will  come  after  Him  still,  if  He  will  be  content  to  follow  in  the  train  of  some 
beloved  pursuit,  or  lust.  Religion  would  be  the  most  po^Dular  thing  in  the  world, 
and  would  carry  the  whole  world  before  it,  if  it  were  at  liberty  to  waive  this  point. 
But  Christ  will  have  the  first  place  in  our  affections  :  whatever  stands  opposed  to 


590  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

Him  we  must  hate  ;  whatever  is  in  harmony  with  Him,  and  dependent  upon  Him, 
must  beloved  in  subordination  to  Him.  (3)  Ardent.  Tlie  Scri|)tnres  are  wont  to 
illustrate  t'nis  subject  by  a  comparison  takeu  from  fire.  There  may  be  a  spark,  and 
if  that  spark  is  blown,  it  may  ri-^e  to  a  vehement  rianie  which  many  waters  cannot 
quench.  You  have  only  to  neglect  it,  and  it  will  expire.  But  yon  are  told  that  you 
must  stir  up  the  gift  of  God.  (4)  Constant ;  and  that  because  He  is  always  the 
same  ;  what  is  due  to  Him  at  one  time  is  due  to  Him  at  all  times.  (5)  Practical. 
"  This  is  the  love  of  God.  that  we  keep  His  commandments."  3.  The  evidences 
of  this  love.  I  cannot  help  thinking,  tLiat  in  the  case  of  every  human  object  of 
affection,  the  love  which  there  was  need  to  try  by  many  signs,  would  hardly  be 
counted  worth  having  ;  that  where  there  is  so  much  uncertainty  whether  we  love 
Christ  or  no,  one  thing  is  certaui — that  we  do  not  love  Him  very  much  :  but  still, 
for  the  sake  of  those  who  love,  and  who  search  after  the  signs  and  marks,  let  me 
give  you  one  or  two.  (1)  The  love  of  the  brethren,  i.e.,  the  brethren  of  Christ,  as 
well  as  ours  :  and  it  is  in  that  light  that  they  are  principally  to  be  regarded.  If  a 
man  feels  hi^  heart  expanded  towards  all  Christians — if  he  is  willing  to  bear  with 
their  weaknesses,  and  relieve  their  necessities,  for  Christ's  sake — he  loves  Christ. 
But  on  the  other  hand,  if  he  will  stand  aloof  from  tliem,  does  he  love  Christ  ?  If 
he  savs  he  does,  Christ  Himself  says  he  is  a  liar.  He  tells  you  tlipy  are  His  repre- 
sentatives, and  whoever  does  not  to  them  as  he  would  to  Christ,  if  Christ  stood  in 
person  before  him,  does  not  love  Chri,-t  as  he  ouyht.  "  By  this  shall  all  men  know 
that  ye  are  My  disciples,  if  ye  love  one  another."  (2)  Whoever  loves  Christ, 
rejoices  in  the  return  of  the  Lord's  Day.  You  have  days  of  meeting  among  friends  ; 
and  the  offering  of  every  exptessiou  of  joy  is  appropriate  to  such  meetings.  This 
is  the  day  whicli  Christ  sets  apart  to  meet  His  friends.  Do  you  love  His  Sabbath, 
and  do  you  rejoice  in  its  return  ?  Do  you  honour  the  Lord  and  keep  His  ordi- 
nances? If  so,  there  is  ground  to  hope  you  love  Christ.  But  if  the  Sabbath  is  a 
weariness,  your  love  to  Christ  is  yet  tint  a  name — there  is  no  substance  in  it.  (3) 
Tlje  Bible  i^  Chri-it's  love-letter  to  His  people.  Wiio  loves  to  read  and  honour  it? 
Who  comes  to  it  with  a  rehsh,  as  a  friend  reads  a  letter  from  a  loved  friend?  He 
loves  Christ :  this  is  a  sign  whi  h  cannot  be  mistaken.  II.  The  tisnalty  de- 
nounced. Whoever  will  not  stand  this  test,  what  is  to  become  of  him  ?  "  Let  him 
be  accursed :  our  Lord  is  coming."  This  form  of  expression  is  said  to  he  taken 
from  the  practice  in  the  synago^'ues  in  excommunicating  offenders.  They  had 
three  forms  of  excommunication,  in  the  last  or  liigliest  of  which  they  used  this 
€xpression,  and  this  was  always  understood  to  imply  the  sentence  of  final  and  irre- 
vocable ruin.  Now,  says  the  apostle,  this  is  the  doom  of  all  who  do  notlovn  Christ. 
2.  The  curse  does  not  fall  now  :  the  lovers  of  Christ  and  those  who  do  not  love  Him 
go  on,  perhaps,  very  mucli  with  equal  steps  through  life.  But  "  the  Lord  is 
coming  "  ;  and  at  His  comincr  He  is  to  separate  between  those  who  love  Him  and 
those  who  do  not  love  Him.  The  tares  and  the  wheat  grow  together  tdl  the  harvi  st ; 
we  cannot  separate  the  hypocrite  from  the  sincere  until  some  overt  action  incon- 
testably  proves  that  the  profession  is  false.  The  day  of  separation  is  at  the  end  of 
the  world  ;  and  to  tins  St.  Paul  alludes,  '■  The  Lord  is  coming,"  to  discern  between 
the  true  professor  and  the  false.  3.  The  Lord  delayeth  His  coming :  but  why  ? 
Not  out  of  weakness,  not  out  of  forgetfulness,  but  that  in  the  interval  the  curse  may 
be  averted.  4.  I  know  that  you  cannot  command  your  affections,  but  I  tell  you 
what  you  can  do — you  can  go  to  the  throne  of  grace  and  pray  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
may  shed  it  abroad  in  your  hearts,     ('r.  Oshorn,  D.D.)  Want  of  lone  to  Clirist 

is — I.  Rebklt.ion  against  'inE  highest  authority.  "  This  is  My  beloved  Son,  hear 
ye  Him."  Want  of  love  is  iherefore  transgression  of  the  will  of  God  and  rebellion 
against  Him.  II.  Contempt  of  the  highest  excellence.  Whei her  you  consider 
tliH  Divine  na'ure  of  our  Lord,  or  His  human  nature,  or  His  mediatorial  character, 
there  is  in  Him  everything  calculated  to  attract.  "He  is  altogeiher  lovely"; 
therefore  not  to  love  Him  is  to  have  a  degraded  mind,  and  to  throw  contempt  on 
the  highest  manif  station  of  human  excellence  and  Divine  love.  III.  Ingratitude 
TO  the  highest  Benefactor.  Consider  what  we  owe  Him  in  connection  with  His 
incarnation,  di  ath,  intercession.  Tliink  of  the  sinfulness  of  rejecting  Him  in  the 
lig  it  of  the  truth  that  those  who  despise  Him  live  because  of  His  intei-cession. 
Conclusion  :  Is  there  anyttjingto  be  said  in  extenuation  of  this  guilt  ?  The  greatest 
argument  for  love  is  love.  "  We  love  Him  because  He  first  loved  us."  You  cannot 
foice  the  slave  to  love  his  mast  r  ;  but  what  do  you  think  of  the  child  that,  after 
receiving  increasing  kindness,  refuses  to  love  a  parent  ?  One  sees  the  guilt  in  such 
a  case.     God  is  not  a  hard  Master  ;  Christ  does  not  treit  us  as  slaves.     Oh,  if  His 


CHAP,  xvr.]  I.  COFxINTHIANS.  591 

love  is  not  in  our  hearts  we  are  indeed  hard,  unfeeling,  thankless,  justly  under  the 

anathema  of  God.     {]]'.  Cadinnn,  MA.)       Not  loving  Christ  and  its  consequences  : 

I.  What  ake  the  claims  of  ChpvIst  upon  our  love  ?  1.  He  is  God.  If  this  were 
the  only  ground,  He  would  surely  have  every  right  to  expect  our  love.  He  who  is 
the  Author  of  every  mercy  therefore  demands  our  love.  2.  And  yet,  having  failed  of 
obtaining  it  as  Creator,  having  had  His  laws  insulted  and  His  majesty  dishonouied, 
He  hath  sought  to  win  our  love  by  such  an  act  of  love  as  even  exceeds  the  mercies 
of  creation,  viz.,  redemption.  Whatever  you  require  for  your  admission  into 
heaven,  His  love  hath  done  it  all.  And  now  He  offers  His  salvation  freely.  3. 
Now,  is  this  Friend  of  our  lost  souls  unreasonable  when  He  asks  our  hearts  of  us  ? 
"We  give  them  to  our  friends  on  earth.  II.  Who  are  the  men  that  "  love  not  "  that 
Lover  of  their  soitls  ?  1.  The  world.  Here  are  a  great  variety  of  character--,  but  all 
are  alike  in  this,  they  "  love  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  They  live  without  Him, 
negl  ct  His  Word,  discountenance  His  cause,  love  and  follow  practices  which  are  His 
abomination.  2.  Hypocritical  professors,  Christ's  own  definition  of  those  who 
"  love  Him  not "  is  "  He  that  loveth  Me  not  keepeth  not  My  sayings."  True,  they 
may  say  high  things  of  Him,  yet  all  this  is  like  the  kiss  of  Judas,  whilst  they  are 
doing  all  tiings  in  their  life  and  practice  to  dishonour  and  affront  Him.  They  love 
sin.  III.  The  guilt  these  men  in  ur.  Who  can  fathom  the  depth  of  their 
ingratitude  !  To  have  forgotten  the  me  cies  of  creation  is  an  awful  blot  upon  our 
nature  ;  but  when  He  dies  for  our  inii^u.iies,  and  calls  us  to  His  pardoning  mercies, 
who  shall  estimate  the  blackness  of  his  guilt  who  treats  this  Saviour  lightly  ?  "  If  I 
had  not  come  and  spoken  to  them  they  had  not  had  sin  "  ;  all  our  other  sins  look 
nothing  when  compared  to  this.  IV.  The  awful  doom  of  all  those  who  "  love 
NOT  the  Lord  .Jesus  Christ."  "  Let  them  be  accursed  at  the  second  coming  of 
the  Lord."  There  is  a  curse  which  rests  upon  the  head  of  every  man  by  nature  as 
a  breaker  of  the  law  of  God  (Deut.  xxvii.  2G) ;  and  to  deliver  our  souls  from  this  was 
the  great  end  of  our  Eedeemer's  death  (Gal.  iii.  13).  To  those  therefore  who 
receive  Him  and  rely  upon  Him  this  curse  is  turned  into  a  blessing  (Rom.  viii.  1). 
But  they  who  "love  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  "  remain  under  that  curse  from 
which  He  died  to  set  them  free  (John  iii.  36;  1  Cor.  xv.  17).  To  reject  a  Saviour, 
as  it  is  a  more  agt^'ravated  sin  than  to  reject  the  law,  so  will  it  meet  with  a  more 
aggravated  condemnation  (Heb.  x.  28,  29).  "  The  curse  of  the  law  "  is  terrible  ; 
but  "  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb  " !  what  will  that  be  ?  (A.  Eoberts,  M.A.)  The  sin 
and  doom  of  the  loveless: — I.  Why  is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  be  loved? 
This  love  was  the  pervading  emotion  of  early  times,  and  its  fervour  quailed  not  at 
martyrdom.  The  memory  of  the  Cross  was  fresh,  and  faith  wrought  by  love.  That 
love  was  a  distinct  and  personal  attaclmient,  and  is  so  still.  For  this  love  is  a 
rational  affection.  It  is  not  an  emotion  which  springs  uy>,  none  can  tell  how  or  why. 
Nor  is  it  any  caprice  or  feverish  excitement.  It  rests  on  a  sure  foundation — on  a 
"  tried  eoru'-r-stone,"  viz.,  the  knowledge  of  Christ's  person  and  claims.  1.  Is  He 
not  "  the  cliiefest  among  ten  thousand  "  as  a  man?  and  were  He  not  more  than 
man,  you  cannot  but  Lne  Him.  "  Thou  art  fairer  than  the  sons  of  men."  The 
sexes  divide  between  them  the  elements  of  perfection,  and  a  perfect  man  or  woman 
might  not  be  a  perfect  being.  But  all  that  is  tender  and  graceful  in  woman,  and 
all  that  is  noble  and  robust  in  man,  met  together  in  Jesus.  Nature  is  never  prodigal 
of  her  gifts.  Birds  of  gay  plumage  have  no  song ;  strength  is  denied  to  creatures 
endowed  with  swiftness.  As  one  man  is  generahy  distinguished  by  the  predomi- 
nance of  one  class  of  virtues,  and  another  man  by  another,  so  the  union  of  both 
might  realise  perfection.  Had  the  peculiar  gifts  of  John  and  Paul  been  blended, 
the  result  miglit  have  been  a  perfect  apos-le.  Were  the  intrepidity  of  Luther,  the 
tenderness  of  Melancthon,  and  the  calm  intellect  of  Calvin  combined  in  one  person, 
you  would  have  the  model  of  a  faulthss  reformer.  But  every  grace  that  adorns 
humanity  was  in  Jesns  in  fulness  and  symmetry.  No  virtue  jostled  another  out  of 
its  place.  None  rose  into  extravagance — none  pined  in  feeble  restriction.  Perfect 
in  every  relation  of  life,  wise  in  ispeech,  pure  in  conduct,  large  in  compassion, 
intense  in  beneficence,  replete  with  everything  that  charms  into  attachment  and 
rapture.  He  was  the  incarnation  of  universal  loveliness.  2.  But  Christ's  humanity 
was  assumed  into  a  personal  union  with  a  higher  nature.  To  take  a  nature  so  low, 
to  save  a  race  so  guilty,  and  by  an  agony  so  awful,  was  the  effect  of  a  love  that 
could  only  dwell  in  the  bosom  of  Jehovah.  And  oh  what  a  labour  He  accomplished  ! 
He  secured  for  us  the  best  of  boons,  and  delivered  us  from  the  worst  of  evils.  And 
suiely  we  must  "love  Him,  because  He  first  loved  us."  II.  How  Jesus  is  to  be 
iovED.     If  our  erted  be,  there  is  none  like  Christ,  then  the  language  of  our  heart 


692  TUB  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  svi. 

will  be — None  but  Christ !  His  claims  aie  paramount,  and  therefore  love  to  Him 
must  not  only  be  ardetit,  liut  supreme.  Now,  it  is  not  of  the  absence  of  love  in  the 
Church  we  complain  so  much  as  of  its  lukewarmnt'ss.  In  many  love  only  warms 
tow^irds  Christ  on  the  first  day  of  the  week,  and  falls  into  slumber  on  the  other  six 
days.  The  plant  could  not  maintain  its  life  by  th3  enjoyment  of  air,  soil,  and 
water  once  a  week,  and  the  animal  would  drag  out  an  enfeebled  existenue  if  it 
depended  on  a  similar  periodical  nutrition.  No  ;  it  is  of  the  nature  of  love  to  give 
its  object  au  immediate  and  permanent  existence  in  the  heart.  If  Christ  were 
loved.  His  image  would  ever  dwell  within  us  ;  and  were  He  loved  supremely,  that 
image  would  gather  in  upon  itself  our  deepest  attachment,  and  exercise  an  undivided 
sway  over  thought,  purpose,  speech,  and  action.  III.  The  sin  and  danger  of  not 
LOVING  Christ.  It  implies — 1.  Ignorance  of  His  person,  claims,  and  work.  The 
more  men  know  Him,  the  more  does  their  heart  burn  with  this  gracious  and 
absorbing  affection.  And  surely  ignorance  of  Him  must  bring  a  merited  anath-ma. 
For  such  ignorance  is  wholly  inexcusable,  with  the  Bible  before  it  and  the  Cross  in 
its  view.  2.  Unbelief.  "  Faith  worketh  by  love."  But  if  absence  of  love  imply 
absence  of  faith,  what  a  curse  must  follow:  "He  that  believeth  is  saved,  but  he 
that  believeth  not  is  condemned  already."  Severed  from  Christ,  the  soul  is  lost 
for  ever.  3.  Unlikeness  to  God,  And  if,  on  a  point  so  tender,  he  is  unlike  G  d, 
will  not  God  frown  upon  the  sinner  and  punish  him  ?  4.  Unfitness  for  heaven. 
Heaven  is  a  region  where  love  to  Jesus  predominates — where  it  gla'ldens  every 
bosom,  and  gives  music  to  every  anthem.  But  the  unloving  mind  is  not  allowed  to 
join  in  these  warblings,  for  none  but  the  new  heart  can  sing  the  new  song.  Without 
love  to  Him,  because  unconscious  of  any  salvation  from  Him,  it  would  feel  no 
reason  to  bless  Him.  5.  The  certainty  of  the  curse — "  Our  Lord  cometh."  The 
Church  rejoices  in  that  motto,  but  it  is  the  terror  of  the  wicked.  The  cloud  that 
guided  Israel  consumed  and  terrified  the  amazed  EgyiDtian.  And  He  comes  for  the 
very  purpose  of  making  inquisition — of  ascertaining  who  have  responded  to  His 
love,  and  confided  in  His  atonement.  Nor  can  He  be  deceived.  His  eye,  as  it 
looks  upon  the  mass,  scans  every  individual  and  looks  doAvn  into  his  heart.  Nay, 
the  heart  without  love  will  at  once  discover  itself  by  its  tremor.  Nor  can  it  escape. 
Subterfuge  and  evasion  are  alike  impossible.  But  not  only  does  the  awful  formula 
certify  the  curse,  it  also  embitters  it— Our  Lord  cometh — He  whom  men  are  bound 
to  love  as  Saviour  pronounces  the  dead  anathema.  From  other  lips  it  would  not  be 
so  awful ;  but  surely  such  an  anathema  from  the  lips  of  Love  must  arm  itself  with 
a  burning  and  unbearable  terror.  (J,  Eadie,  D.D.)  A  negative  crime  and  a 
positive  j)unishinent : — This  expression  ma,y  be  regarded — 1.  As  a  grand  charac- 
teristic of  Biblical  appeal.  It  appeals  to  the  heart,  and  seeks  the  reformation  of 
the  world  by  the  reformation  of  the  individual,  and  the  reformation  of  the  individual 
by  the  reformation  of  the  heart.  2.  As  an  incidental  argument  of  the  Godhead  of 
Christ.  The  Biide  claims  for  Him  supreme  love,  but  supreme  affection  belongs  to 
God.  Paul  makes  our  destiny  depend  upon  love  to  Christ.  Would  he  make  our 
destiny  depend  upon  mere  love  to  man,  to  Abraham,  David,  Isaiah,  or  John  ?  3. 
As  a  solemn  test  of  a  true  character.  The  essence  of  a  true  character  consists  not 
in  ideas  or  mere  actions,  but  in  love,  and  in  love  for  Christ.  "Lovest  thou  Me  ?  " 
said  Christ  to  Peter.  The  text  contains — I.  A  negative  crime.  This  state  of 
mind  in  relation  to  Christ  is — 1.  Unreasonable.  There  is  everything  in  Him  to 
call  out  the  highest  love.  There  are  three  kinds  of  love  of  which  we  are  suscepiible 
— gratitude,  esteem,  and  benevolence.  The  first  requires  manifestation  of  kind- 
ness; the  second,  of  moral  excellence ;  the  third,  a  purpose  for  the  common  good. 
Christ  manifests  all  these,  and  therefore  deserves  our  highest  love.  There  may  be 
men  who  have  power  to  excite  in  our  natures,  in  some  degree,  love  in  some  of  these 
forms ;  but  Chri.st  alone  has  power  to  excite  all  in  the  highest  degree.  2.  As^cer- 
tainable.  We  can  soon  ascertain  whether  we  love  Christ  or  not.  The  chief  object 
of  love  will  always  be — (1)  The  mo«t  engrossing  subject  of  thought.  (2)  The  attrac- 
tive theme  of  conversation.  (3)  The  source  of  the  greatest  delight  in  pleasing. 
(4)  The  most  transforming  power  of  character.  (5)  The  most  identified  with  our 
conscious  life.  3.  Deplorable.  This  love  is  the  only  true  regulative  power  of  the 
soul.  Where  this  is  not,  or  where  it  is  misdirected,  all  the  powers  of  our  nature  are 
misemployed,  and  all  is  confusion.  Then,  indeed,  the  life  of  the  soul  is  dead  to 
virtue  and  to  happiness.  Our  hapj)iness  consists  in  supreme  affection,  and  our 
supreme  aftVctiou,  to  yield  happiness,  must  be  directed  to  an  object  absolutely  per- 
fect, reciprocative,  and  ever  enduring.  Such  an  object  is  Christ,  and  such  only  is 
He.     II.  A  POSITIVE  punishment.     1.  Its  nature.     "  Let  him  be  Anathema."  The 


CHAP.  XVI.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  593 

word  primarily  means  anything  that  is  laid  up,  or  set  apart  for  some  particular 
purpose.  The  secondary  and  general  meaning  is  "  accursed,"  devoted  to  ruin  (c/. 
Gal.  i.  7,  8  ;  Kom.  ix.  3).  It  is  one  of  Paul's  strong  words  to  express  a  terrible  evil. 
Cut  off  the  planet  from  the  sun,  and  it  rushes  to  ruin  ;  the  river  from  the  fountain, 
and  it  is  gone ;  the  branch  from  the  tree,  and  the  limb  from  the  body,  and  they 
die.  The  soul,  cut  off  from  Christ — its  centre,  fountain,  root,  life — is  destroyed. 
2.  Its  certainty.  "  Maran-alha,"  "the  Loid  will  come."  Christ  will  come  to 
execute  judgment  upon  those  who  love  Him  not.  Paul  had  written  the  other 
part  of  his  letter  by  an  amanuensis,  but  to  write  these  terrible  words  he  takes 
up  the  pen  himself.  Men  are  accursed,  not  merely  because  they  hate  Christ, 
rebel  against  His  authority,  profane  His  ordinances,  but  because  they  do  not 
love  Him;  whatever  else  they  do  in  philanthropy,  &c.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
Anathema  :■ — I.  The  crime  supi'osed.  Not  to  love  Christ  supremely  is — 1. 
Unreasonable — He  is  supremely  lovely.  2.  Ungrateful — He  has  loved  us.  3. 
Unjust — He  has  a  right  to  our  love.  II.  The  punishment  threatened.  1.  The 
punishment.  2.  The  time.  3.  The  certainty.  Application — ^(1)  It  is  the  duty  of 
all  men  to  love  Christ.  (2)  Christ  knows  those  who  love  Him.  (G.  Wliitefield.) 
Anathema  and  prace  : — 1.  Terror  and  tenderness  are  strangely  mingled  in  this 
parting  salutation.  Paul  has  been  obliged,  throughout  the  whole  Epistle,  to 
assume  a  tone  of  remonstrance,  and  here  he  traces  all  their  vices  to  their 
fountain-head — the  defect  of  love  to  Jesus  Christ — and  warns  of  their  fatal  issue. 
2.  But  he  will  not  leave  these  terrible  words  for  his  last.  The  thunder  is  followed 
by  gentle  rain,  and  the  sun  glistens  on  tbe  dewdrops  (ver.  23).  Nor  for  himself 
will  he  let  the  last  impression  be  one  of  rebuke  or  even  of  warning  (ver.  24).  Is 
not  that  beautiful  ?  And  does  it  not  go  deeper  tban  the  revelation  of  Paul's 
character  ?  May  we  not  see  in  these  terrible  and  tender  thoughts  a  revelation  of 
the  true  nature  both  of  the  terror  and  the  tenderness  of  the  gospel  which  Paul 
jireached  ?  Note — I.  The  terror  op  the  fate  of  the  itnloving.  "  Anathema  " 
means  an  offering,  or  a  thing  devoted.  In  the  story  of  th3  conquest  of  Canaan, 
e.g.,  we  read  of  places,  persons,  or  things  that  were  "  accursed,"  i.e.,  devoted  or 
put  under  a  ban.  And  this  "devotion"  was  of  such  a  sort  as  that  the  subjects 
were  doomed  to  destruction.  So  Paul  tells  us  that  the  unloving,  like  those  cities 
full  of  uncleanness,  when  they  are  brought  into  contact  with  the  infinite  love  of  the 
coming  Judge,  shrivel  up  and  are  destroyed.  "  Maran-atha "  is  a  separate 
sentence.  It  means  "  our  Lord  conies,"  and  was  perhaps  a  kind  of  watchword. 
The  use  of  it  here  is  to  confirm  the  warning  of  the  previous  clause,  by  pointing  to 
tbe  time  at  which  that  warning  shall  be  fulfilled.  1.  "  The  Lord  comes."  Paul's 
Christianity  gathered  round  two  facts  and  moments — one  in  the  past,  Christ  has 
come ;  one  in  the  future,  Cbrist  will  come.  For  memory,  the  coming  by  the 
cradle  and  the  Cross  ;  for  hope,  the  coming  on  His  throne  in  glory.  And  between 
these  two  moments,  like  the  solid  piers  of  a  suspension  bridge,  the  frail  structure 
of  the  present  hangs  swinging.  There  have  been  many  comings  in  the  past, 
besides  the  coming  in  the  flesh.  One  characteristic  is  stami:)ed  upon  them  all,  and 
that  is  the  swift  annibilatiim  of  what  is  opposed  to  Him.  The  Bible  has  a  set  of 
standing  metaphors  by  which  to  illustrate  this  thought — "  A  flood,"  "  a  harvest," 
the  waking  of  God  from  slumber,  etc.  The  second  coming  will  include  and 
surpass  all  the  characteristics  which  these  lesser  and  premouitoi'y  judgment  days 
presented  in  miniature.  2.  The  coming  of  the  Lord  of  love  is  the  destruction  of 
the  unloving — not  the  cessation  of  their  being,  but  a  death  worse  than  death, 
because  a  death  in  life.  Suppose  a  man  with  all  his  past  annihilated,  with  all  its 
effort  crushed,  with  all  its  possessions  gone,  and  with  his  memory  and  his 
conscience  stung  into  clear-sighted  activity,  so  as  that  he  looks  back  upon  his 
former  and  into  his  present  self,  and  feels  that  it  is  all  chaos,  would  not  that  fulfil 
tbe  word,  "  Let  him  be  Anathema  "?  And  suppose  that  such  a  man,  in  addition 
to  these  thoughts,  and  as  the  root  and  the  source  of  them,  had  ever  the  quivering 
consciousness  that  he  was  in  the  presence  of  an  unloved  Judge  I  The  unloving 
lieurt  is  always  ill  at  ease  in  the  presence  of  Ilim  whom  it  does  not  love.  The 
unloving  heart  does  not  love,  because  it  does  not  trust  nor  see  the  love.  Therefore, 
the  unloving  heart  is  a  heart  that  is  only  capable  of  apprehending  the  wrathful 
side  of  Christ's  character.  So  there  is  no  cruelty,  no  arldtrariness  in  the  decree 
that  the  heart  that  loves  not  when  brought  into  contact  witli  the  infinite  Lord  of 
love  must  find  in  the  touch  death  and  not  life,  darkness  and  not  light,  terror  and 
not  hope.  3.  Paul  does  not  say  "  he  that  hateth,"  but  he  that  does  not  love.  The 
absence  of  love,  '.yhich  is  the  child  of  faith,  the  parent  of  righteousness,  the 
VOL.  II.  38 


694  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvr. 

condition  of  joy  in  His  presence,  is  sufficient  to  ensure  that  this  fate  shall  fall  upon 
a  man.  II.  The  present  grace  of  the  coming  Lord.  "Our  Lord  cometh." 
"  The  grace,"  &o.  (ver.  23).  1.  Tbese  two  things  are  not  contradictory,  but  we 
often  deal  with  them  as  if  they  were  But  the  real  doctrine  says  there  is  no 
terror  without  tenderness,  and  there  is  no  tenderness  without  terror.  You  cannot 
have  love  which  is  anylhing  nobler  than  facile  good  nature  and  unrighteous 
indifference,  unless  you  have  along  with  it  aspects  of  God's  character  and 
government  which  ought  to  make  some  men  afraid.  And  you  cannot  keep  these 
lalter  aspects  from  being  exaggerated  and  darkened  into  a  Moloch  of  cruelty  unless 
you  remember  that  underlying  them  and  deti^rmining  them  are  aspects  of  the 
Divine  nature,  to  which  ouly  child-like  confidence  and  love  rigbtly  respond. 
The  terror  of  the  Lord  is  a  garb  which  our  sins  forces  upon  the  love  of  the  Lord. 
2.  Note  what  the  present  grace  is.  A  tenderness  which  gathers  into  its  embrace 
all  these  imperfect,  immoral,  lax,  heretical  people  in  Corinth,  as  well  as  everywhere 
else — "  with  you  all."  And  surely  the  love  which  gathers  in  such  people  leaves  none 
outside  its  sweep.  Let  nothing  rob  you  of  this  assurance,  that  the  coming  Lord 
is  present  with  us  all,  and  all  we  need,  in  order  to  get  its  full  sunshine  into  our 
hearts,  is  that  we  trust  Him  utterly,  and,  so  trusting,  love  Him  back  again  with 
that  love  which  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law  and  the  crown  of  the  gospel.     HI.  The 

TENDERNESS,  CAUGHT  FROM  THE  MASTER  HiMSELF,  OP  THE  SERVANT  WHO  REBUKES  (ver. 

24).  There  is  no  other  instance  where  he  introduces  himself  and  his  own  love  at 
the  end,  after  he  has  pronounced  the  solemn  benediction.  But  here,  as  if  he  had 
felt  that  he  must  leave  an  impression  of  himself  on  their  minds  which  corresponded 
to  the  impression  of  his  Master  that  he  desired  to  leave,  he  deviates  from  his 
ordinary  habit,  and  makes  his  last  word  a  personal  word — "My  love  be  with  you 
all  in  Christ  Jesus."  Paul  embraces  all  v/hom  he  has  been  rebuking  in  the  warm 
embrace  of  his  proffered  love,  wliich  was  the  very  cause  of  his  rebuke.  The  healing 
balm  of  this  closing  message  was  to  be  applied  to  the  wounds  which  his  keen  edged 
words  had  made,  and  to  show  that  they  were  wounds  by  a  surgeon,  not  by  a  foe. 
Because  the  gospel  is  a  gospel,  it  must  speak  plainly  about  death  and  destruction 
to  the  unloving.  The  danger  signal  is  not  to  be  blamed  for  a  collision.  "  Knowing, 
therefore,  the  terror  of  the  Lord,  we  persuade  men."  (A.  Madaren,  D.D.) 
Loving  Jesus  Christ : — First,  love  Christ  so  far  as  to  lay  down  the  pleasures  of  this 
life  for  Him,  and  so  far  as  to  lay  down  the  life  itself  for  Him.  2.  Love  Him,  then, 
as  He  is  presented  to  thee  here  :  love  the  Lord,  love  Christ,  love  Jesus.  As  He  is 
the  Lord,  thou  wilt  fear  Him ;  but  no  man  fears  God  truly,  but  that  that  fear  ends 
in  love.  Love  Him  as  He  is  the  Lord,  that  would  have  nothing  perish  that  He 
hath  made.  And  love  Him  as  He  is  Christ,  that  hath  made  Himself  man  too,  that 
thou  mightest  not  perish.  Love  Him  as  the  Lord  that  could  show  mercy,  and  love 
Him  as  Christ  who  is  that  way  of  mercy  which  the  Lord  hath  chosen.  I  have 
found  Him,  and  found  that  He,  who  by  His  incarnation  was  made  alile  to  save  me 
(so  He  was  Christ),  by  His  actual  passion  hath  saved  me,  and  so  I  love  Him  as 
Jesus.  When  I  conceit,  when  I  contemplate  my  Saviour  thus,  I  love  the  Lord,  and 
there  is  a  reverent  adoration  in  that  love  ;  I  love  Christ,  and  there  is  a  mysterious 
admiration  in  that  love  ;  but  I  love  Jesus,  and  there  is  a  tender  compassion  in  that 
love,  and  I  am  content  to  suffer  with  Him  and  to  suffer  for  Him  rather  than  see 
any  diminution  of  His  glory  by  my  prevarication.  And  he  that  loves  not  thus,  that 
loves  not  the  Lord  God,  and  God  manifested  in  Clnist,  Anathema,  i\Iaranatha, 
which  is  our  next  and  our  last  part.  Whether  this  Anathema  be  denounced  by  the 
apostle  by  way  of  imprecation,  that  he  wished  it  so,  or  pronounced  by  way  of 
excommunication,  that  others  sh(juld  esteem  them  so  and  avoid  them,  as  such 
persons,  is  sometimes  debated  amongst  us  in  our  books.  But  we  rather  take  this  in 
the  text  to  be  an  excommunication  denounced  by  the  apostle,  than  an  imprecation. 
Now  the  excommunication  is  in  the  Anathema,  and  the  aggravating  thereof  in  the 
other  words,  Maranatha.  The  word  Anatliema  had  two  significations :  that  which 
for  some  excellency  in  it  was  separated  from  the  use  of  man  to  the  service  of  God, 
or  that  which  for  some  great  fault  in  it  was  separated  from  God  and  man  too. 
From  the  first  kind  men  abstained  because  they  were  consecrated  to  God,  and  from 
the  other  because  they  were  aliened  from  God.  By  the  light  of  nature,  by  the  light 
of  grace  we  should  separate  ourselves  fiom  irreligious  and  from  idolatrous  persons, 
and  that  with  that  earnestness  which  the  apostle  exi^resses  in  the  last  words, 
Maranatha.  It  is  superabundant  perveiseness  to  resist  Christ  now,  now  that  He 
hath  appeared  already  and  established  to  Himself  a  kingdom  in  the  world.  And 
so  St.  Chrysostom  seems  to  take  it  too.    "  Christ  is  come  already,"  says  he.    If  any 


CHAP.  XVI.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  595 

excuse  could  he  pretended  before,  yet  since  Christ  is  come,  none  can  be.     But  that 
is  not  all  that  is  intended  by  the  apostle  in  this  place.     It  is  not  only  a  censorious 
speech,  it  is  a  shame  for  them,  and  an  inexcusable  thing  in  them,  if  they  do  not 
love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  but  it  is  a  judiciary  speech,  thus  much  more,  since 
they  do  not  love  the  Lord.     "  The  Lord  judge  them  when  He  comes."     "  I,"  says 
the  apostle,  "take  away  none  of  His  mercy  when  He  comes,   but  I  will  have 
nothing  to  do  with  them  till  He  comes  ;  to  me  He  shall  be  Anathema,  Maranutha, 
separated  from  me  till  then ;  then  the  Lord,  who  shows  mercy  in  minutes,  do  His  will 
upon  him."    To  end  all,  if  a  man  love  not  the  Lord,  if  he  love  not  God,  which  is,  which 
■was,  and  which  is  to  come,  what  will  please  him,  whom  will  he  love  ?     {J.  Donne.) 
Affection  ungratefully  withheld  .-—After  Joan  of  Arc  had  won  the  great  victory  at 
Orleans,  and  made  clear  the  way  for  Charles  the  Seventh  to  be  crowned  king,  she 
was  taken  prisoner,  and  subjected  to  the  most  brutal  treatment  at  the  hands  of  her 
enemies  ;  still  her  ungrateful  king  refused  to  make  a  single  move  to  liberate  the 
one  who  had  freed  his  subjects,  and  made  him  heir  and  king.     My  unsaved  friend, 
you  are  doing  the  same  thing.     As  yon  read  the  simple  narrative,  you  doubtless 
will  say,  "King  Charles  was  ungrateful,  and  deserved  punishment."     Yet  Jesus 
Christ  left  His  heavenly  home,  came  down  to  earth,  suffered,  and  died  that  you 
might  be  crowned  the  "  child  of  a  King,"  and  you  refuse  to  even  acknowledge  Hira. 
Should  the  anger  of  God  consume  you,  could   you  say  aught  in  your  defence? 
{Sharpened  Arrows.)         The  sin  of  not  loving  Christ :—'' To  refuse  to  luve  Jesus 
Christ,  I  affirm,  is  to  do  Him  all  the  evil  which  an  open  enemy  could,  or  at  least 
would  do.     If  Jesus  Christ  bad  come  into  the  world,  as  a  king  into  a  revolted 
province,  in  order  to  extinguish  rebellion,  and  cause  the  silence  of  terror  to  reign  in 
it,  He  might  be  satisfied  with  a  trembling  submission,  and  care  nothing  for  the 
evil  we  do  Him.     But  sucli  a  submission  He  did  not  desire,  nor  can  desire.     That 
alone  which  He  desired,  that  alone  for  which  He  descended  to  the  earth,  the  end 
to  which  He  directed  all  His  toils,  was  the  conquest  of  our  heart.     Separate  from 
that  triumph,   every   other  is  nothing  to  Him.     (Dr.  Vinet.)         Want  of  love  to 
Christ   a  fatal  sin  .-—How   great   is  the  sin  of  not  loving  your  Lord  and  your 
Saviour!     "Oh!  but  you  see,  sir,  that  is  a  mere  negative  thing.     It  is  what  we 
do  that  we  are  accountable  for  to  God ;  it  is  our  positive  actions  that  we  must 
render  an  account  for  at  the  last."     Is  that  so  ?     Is  there  no  sin  in  not  doing  what 
you  ought  to  do  ?     If  your  neighbour's  house  were  in  flames  to-night.,  and  you  saw 
them  belching  out  of  the  windows,  would  it  be  no  sin  for  you  to  sit  calmly  in  your 
own  dwelling,  and  not  go  at  midnight  to  raise  the  family  from  their  fatal  sleep  ? 
Would  you  think  so  if  to-morrow  morning  you  looked  at  their  skeletons  amid  the 
charred  and  blackened  ruins  ?     Suppose  there  is  some  man  in  this  chapel  to-night, 
•who  lives  in  a  comfortable  and  luxurious  mansion,  but  his  own  mother  is  in  an 
almshouse,  I  say  to  him,  "  Where  is  your  old  mother  ?  "     He  says,  "  In  the  poor- 
house."    "  Do  you  know,  sir,  that  you  are  practising  a  diabolical  cruelty  ?  "    "  Oh  ! 
but  I  am  doing  nothing  to  my  mother."     "  It  is  your  not  doing  ;  it  is  your  hving 
in  luxury,  and  she  lying  there  on  that  hard  bed  of  poverty  and  neglect  that  stamps 
you,  sir,  with  that  most  damnable  sin  of  breaking  God's  fifth  commandment.     It 
is  what  you  do  not  do  that  stamps  you  as  an  ingiate  to  her  that  bore  you."     Oh  ! 
my  friends,  yet  out  of  Christ,  it  is  the  sin  of  not  loving  Cnrist  that  makes  you 
giiilty  before  God.     Not  loving  Him  is  pronounced  in  all  cases  a  positive  and  fatal 
sin.    (T.  L.  Cuyler.)      Hoio  he  came  to  say  it  .-—How  came  the  tender-hearted  Paul 
to  throw  those  red-hot  words  at  the  Corinthians?     Not  to  love  Christ  is— I.   Un- 
BEASONABLE  AND  UNNATURAL.     Tradition  tells  us  that  He  was  the  most  infinitely 
beautiful  being  that  ever  walked  our  small  earth,  and  to  a  lovely  exterior  He  joined 
all  loveliness  of  disposition.     The  sunshine  of  His  love  mingling  with  the  shadows 
of  His  sorrows,  crossed  by  the  crystalline  stream  of  His  teais  and  the  crimson  of 
His  blood,  make  a  picture  worthy  of  being  called  the  masterpiece  of  the  eternities. 
He  was  altogether  lovely — always  lovely,  and  lovely  in  everything.     Lovely  in  His 
sacrifice.     Why,  He  gave  up  everything  for  us,  and  He  took  everybody's  trouble. 
Now  suppose  that,  notwithstanding  all  this,  a  man  cannot  have  a'  y  affection  for 
Him.    Why  "  After  all  this,  '  if  a  man  love  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  let  himbe 
Anathema  Maran-atha.'  "     II.  Unjust.     Just  look  at  the  injustice  of  not  loving 
Him.     There  is  nothing  that  excites  a  man  like  injustice.     If  there  ever  wa-^  a  fair 
and  square  purchase   of   anything,   then   Christ   purchase  1   us.     If  anything  is 
purchased  and  paid  for,  ought  not  the  goods  to  be  delivered  ?     And  you  will  go  to 
law  for  it,  and,  if  need  be,  hurl  the  defaulter  into  jail.     Such  injustice  as  between 
man  and  man  is  bad  enough,  but  between  man  and  God  it  is  reprehensible  and 


596  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

intolerable.  After  all  this  purchase  "  if  any  man  love  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
let  him  be  Anathema  Maran  atha."  III.  Suicidal.  If  a  man  gets  into  trouble, 
and  he  cannot  get  out,  we  have  only  one  feeHng  towards  him,  sympathy  and  a 
desire  to  help  him.  But  suppose  the  day  before  he  failed,  W.  E.  Dodge  had  come 
into  his  stoie  and  said:  "  My  friend,  I  bear  you  are  in  trouble.  I  have  come  to 
help  you,"  and  supjjose  the  man  were  to  say,  "  I  don't  want  it ;  I  would  rather  fail 
than  talie  it ;  I  don't  even  thank  you  for  oiiering  it."  Your  sympathy  for  that  man 
would  cease  immediatel}'.  Now  Christ  hears  of  our  spiritual  embariassments.  He 
finds  the  law  saying,  "  Pay  me  what  thou  owest."  Pay?  We  cannot  pay  a  farthing 
of  all  the  millions  of  obli;-'ation.  Well,  Christ  comes  in  and  says,  "  You  can  use 
My  name."  Now  suppose  the  soul  says,  "0  Christ,  I  want  not  Thy  help.  Go 
away  from  me."  Y"ou  would  say,  "  Alter  all  this  ingratitude  and  rejection,  '  if  any 
man  love  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  let  him  be  Anathema  Maran-atha.'  "  IV. 
Cruel.  The  meanest  thing  I  could  do  for  you  would  be  needlessly  to  hurt  your 
feelings.  Now,  Christ  is  a  bundle  of  delicacy  and  sensitiveness.  Oh,  what  rough 
treatment  He  has  received  sometimes  from  our  hands!  Every  time  you  rejected 
tLe  Lord  you  struck  Him.  How  you  have  broken  His  heart !  Do  you  know  there 
is  a  crucifixion  going  on  now  ?  You  say,  "  Where  ?  "  Here !  When  a  man  refuses 
to  love  Clirist  and  rejects  Him,  the  apostle  intimates  that.  He  "  crucifies  the  Lord 
afresh."  By  our  sins  we  have  done  this.  When  I  think  of  all  this,  my  surprise 
at  the  apostle  ceases.     (T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.) 

Ver.  24.  My  love  be  with  you  all. — PauVs  love  to  the  Gorintliians  was  —  I. 
Sincere.  Witness  the  Epistle.  1.  Its  faithful  dealing.  2.  Wise  counsels.  3. 
Earnest  admonitions.  4.  Sublime  lessons.  5.  Patient  and  loving  spirit.  II. 
CosiPREHENSivE — including  all,  even  those  who  had  offended.  III.  Christian  in 
its  source,  nature,  operation,  and  effect.     {J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 


•"I'm  I'lll  I  mYi"!!?  1  111'  M  ""'"^''"^''"'  '-''"^'' 


1    1012  01086  9628 


Date  Due 


^■^^ 


^******<*ll»W>?l) 


JiL 


IN   U.    S.   A. 


I'  J 
M ;"  J, ' !  1 


ilili 


