(^^. ;  t- 3f>! 


./  ^"*' 


4 '5  •.'2. 


;jSSrOF  PHWc, 


1^3 


THE 


^^. 


(tLOGlGM^l^ 


Biblical  Illustrator 


OR 

Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  Illustradom; 
Expository,  Scientific,  Geographical,  His- 
torical, and  Homiletic,  Gathered  fron* 
«  Wide  Range  of  Home  and  Foreign 
Literature,   on  the    Verses   of   the    Bible 


BV 

Rev.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 


SJINT  JOHN,  Vol.  II 


Nrw  York         Chicago         Toronto 

Fleming   H.  Revell   Company 

London    and    Edxnborgh 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOB. 

ST.  JOHN. 

CHAPTEB  VUL 

Intndv^ttfon  to  vert.  1*11. — ^These  verses,  with  vii.  53,  form,  perhaps,  the  grsTMl 
nritioal  diffioolty  in  the  New  Testament.    I.  Thb  abocuknts  aoainst  the  passage. 

1.  That  it  is  not  found  in  some  of  the  oldest  and  best  MSS.  2.  That  it  is  wanting 
in  some  of  the  earlier  versions.  3.  That  it  is  not  commented  on  by  Greek  Fathers, 
Origen,  Cyril,  Chrysostom,  and  Theophylaot,  in  their  exposition  of  St.  John,  nor 
quoted  or  referred  to  by  Tertullian  and  Cyprian,  i,  That  it  diSers  in  style  from 
tiie  rest  of  St.  John's  Gospel,  and  contains  several  words  and  forms  of  expression 
which  are  nowhere  else  used  in  his  writings.  5.  That  the  moral  tendency  of  the 
passage  is  somewhat  doubtful,  and  that  it  seems  to  represent  oar  Lord  as  palliating 
a  heinous  sin.  II.  Thb  abouments  in  7avoub  of  the  passage  are  as  follows :  1. 
That  it  is  found  in  many  old  manuscripts,  if  not  in  the  very  oldest  and  .^est.  2. 
That  it  is  found  in  the  Vulgate  Latin,  and  in  the  Arabic,  Coptic,  Persian,  and 
Ethiopian  versions.  3.  That  it  is  commented  on  by  Augustine  in  his  exposition  of 
this  Gospel ;  while  in  another  of  his  writings  he  expressly  refers  to  and  explains 
its  omission  from  some  manuscripts ;  that  it  is  quoted  and  defended  by  Ambrose, 
referred  to  by  Jerome,  and  treated  as  genuine  in  the  Apostolical  constitutions.  4. 
That  there  is  no  proof  whatever  that  there  is  any  immoral  tendency  in  'the  )assage. 
Our  Lord  pronounced  no  opinion  on  the  sin  of  adultery,  but  simply  declined  the 
office  of  8  judge.  I  lean  decidedly  to  the  side  of  those  who  think  the  passage  is 
genuine,  for  the  following  reasons :  1.  The  argument  from  manuscripts  appefurs  to 
me  inconclusive.  We  possess  comparatively  few  very  ancient  ones.  Even  o  them, 
some  favour  the  genuineness  of  the  passage.  The  same  remark  applies  to  the 
ancient  versions.    Testimony  of  this  kind,  to  be  conclusive,  should  be  unan  mous. 

2.  The  argument  from  the  Fathers  seems  to  me  more  in  favour  of  the  passage  tha 
against  it.  On  the  one  side  the  reasons  are  simply  negative.  Certain  Fathers  say 
nothing  about  the  passage,  but  at  the  same  time  say  nothing  against  it.  On  the 
other  side  the  reasons  are  positive.  Men  of  such  high  authority  as  Augustine  and 
Ambrose  not  only  comment  on  the  passage,  but  defend  its  genuineness,  and  assign 
reasons  for  its  omission  by  some  mistaken  tramscribers.  Let  me  add  to  this,  that 
the  negative  evidence  of  the  Fathers  is  not  so  weighty  as  it  appears.  Cy  il  of 
Alexandria  is  one.  But  his  commentary  on  this  chapter  is  lost,  and  what  we  have 
was  supplied  by  a  modem  hand  in  1510.  Chrysostcsn's  commentary  on  John  oon- 
sists  of  popular  public  homilies,  in  which  we  can  easily  imagine  such  a  passa  e  as 
this  might  possibly  be  omitted.  Theophylact  was  notoriously  a  copier  and  imi  ator 
of  Chrysostom.  Origen,  the  only  remaining  commentator,  is  one  whose  testimony 
is  not  of  first-rate  value,  and  he  has  omitted  many  things  in  his  exposition  f  St. 
John.  The  silence  of  Tertullian  and  Cyprian  is,  perhaps,  accountable  on  the  same 
principles  by  which  Augustine  explains  the  omission  of  the  passage  in  some  rf)pies 
of  this  Gospel  in  his  own  time.  Some,  as  Calovius,  Maldonatus,  Flacius,  Aietins, 
and  Piscator,  think  that  Chrysostom  distinctly  refers  to  this  passage  in  his  Si  itietb 
Homily  on  John,  though  he  passes  it  over  in  exposition.  8.  The  argument  from 
alleged  discrepancies  between  the  style  and  language  of  this  passage,  and  the  Dsnal 
style  of  St.  John's  writing,  is  one  which  should  be  received  with  much  cat  tion. 
We  are  not  dealing  with  an  uninspired,  but  with  an  inspired,  writer.  Sorely  it  i 
not  too  much  to  say  that  an  inspired  writer  may  occasionally  use  words  and  oon« 

veil.  U.  1 


S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chip.  rva. 

struotions  and  modes  of  expression  which  he  generally  doea  not  nse,  and  that  it  ii 
no  proof  that  he  did  not  write  a  passage  because  he  wrote  it  in  a  pecnliar  way. 
The  whole  disoassion  may  leave  in  onr  minds,  at  any  rate,  one  comfortable  thought. 
If  even  in  the  case  of  this  notoriously  disputed  passage — more  controverted  and 
doubted  than  any  in  the  New  Testament — so  much  can  be  said  in  its  favour,  how 
immensely  strong  is  the  foundation  on  which  the  whole  volume  of  Scripture  rests  I 
If  even  against  &is  passage  the  arguments  of  opponents  are  not  conclusive,  we 
have  no  reason  to  fear  for  the  rest  of  the  Bible.  After  all,  there  is  much  ground  for 
thinking  that  some  critical  difSoulties  have  been  purposely  left  by  God't  providence 
in  the  text  of  the  New  Testament,  in  order  to  prove  the  faith  and  patience  of 
Christian  people.  They  serve  to  test  the  humility  of  those  to  whom  intellectual 
difficulties  are  a  far  greater  cross  than  either  doctrinal  or  practical  ones.  To  such 
minds  it  is  trying,  but  useful,  discipline  to  find  occasional  passages  involving  knota 
which  they  cannot  quite  untie,  and  problems  which  they  cannot  quite  solve.  Of 
such  passages  the  verses  before  us  are  a  striking  instance.  That  the  text  of  them 
is  "  a  hard  thing "  it  would  be  wrong  to  deny.  But  I  believe  our  duty  is  not  to 
reject  it  hastily,  but  to  sit  still  and  wait.  In  these  matters,  "  he  that  believeth 
shall  not  make  haste."  {Bp.  Ryle.)  The  internal  evidence  in  favour  of  tha 
passage : — It  bears  the  same  relation  to  revelation  as  a  ray  of  light  does  to  the  stm. 
Its  consummate  knowledge  of  the  human  heart ;  its  masterly  harmonizing  of  th« 
demands  of  the  Mosaic  law  with  the  gospel ;  its  triumphant  turning  of  the  tables 
in  the  presence  of  insolent  foes  ;  its  matchless  teachings  of  mercy,  mingled  with 
the  sternest  rebuke  to  sin ;  its  complete  and  glorious  victory  in  their  terrible  defeat 
and  shame,  all  point  out  and  prove  the  handwriting  of  God.  God's  Word  is  a 
great  fact  in  the  moral  world,  as  the  Alps  are  in  the  naturaL  A  fragment  of 
granite  taJcen  from  the  Alps  proves  God  its  Creator  quite  as  fully  as  the  mountain 
range.  (JT.  H.  Van  Doren,I).D.)  The  intrinsic  truthfulness  of  the  passage: — 
Were  the  critical  evidence  against  its  genuineness  far  more  overwhelming  than  it  is, 
it  would  yet  bear  npon  its  surface  the  strongest  proof  of  its  authenticity.  It  is 
hardly  too  much  to  say  that  the  mixture  which  it  displays  of  tragedy  and  tender- 
ness— the  contrast  which  it  involves  between  low,  cruel  cunning,  and  exalted 
nobility  of  intellect  and  emotion — transcends  all  power  of  the  human  imagination 
to  have  invented  it ;  while  the  picture  of  a  divine  insight  reading  the  inmost 
thoughts  of  the  heart,  and  a  yet  diviner  love  which  sees  those  inmost  secrets  with 
larger  eyes  than  ours,  furnish  us  with  a  conception  of  Christ's  power  and  person  at 
once  too  lofty  and  too  original  to  have  been  founded  on  anything  but  fact.  No  ono 
could  have  invented,  for  few  could  even  appreciate,  the  sovereign  purity  and  ineffable 
charm — the  serene  authority  of  condemnation  and  pardon — by  which  the  story  is 
BO  deeply  characterized.  The  repeated  instances  in  which,  without  a  moment's 
hesitation,  He  foiled  the  crafty  designs  of  His  enemies,  and  in  foiling  them  taught 
for  ever  some  etern^  principles  of  thought  and  action,  are  among  the  most  unique 
and  decisive  proofs  of  His  more  than  human  wisdom ;  and  yet  not  one  of  those 
gleams  of  sacred  light  which  were  struck  from  Him  by  collision  with  the  malice  of 
man  was  brighter  or  more  beautiful  than  this.  The  very  fact  that  the  narrative 
found  so  little  favour  in  ihe  early  centuries ;  the  fact  that  whole  Churches  regarded 
the  narrative  as  dangerous  in  its  tendency ;  the  fact  that  eminent  Fathers  either 
ignore  it  or  speak  of  it  in  a  semi-apologetic  tone — in  these  facts  we  see  the  most 
decisive  proof  that  its  real  moral  and  meaning  are  too  transcendent  to  admit  of 
its  having  been  originally  invented  or  interpolated  without  adequate  authority  into 
the  sacred  text.  Yet  it  is  strange  that  any  should  have  failed  to  see  that,  in  the  ray 
of  mercy  which  thus  streamed  from  heaven  upon  the  wretched  sinner,  the  sin 
assumed  an  aspect  tenfold  more  hideous  and  repulsive  to  the  conscience  of  man- 
kind.   (Archdeacon  Farrar.) 

Ver.  1.  Jesus  went  to  the  Mount  of  Olives. — The  habits  of  Jesus : — At  the  close 
of  the  day  Jesus  withdrew  to  the  Mount  of  Olives,  and  it  is  interesting  to  trace  in 
Him  once  more  that  dislike  of  crowded  cities,  that  love  for  the  pure,  sweet,  fresh 
air,  and  for  the  quiet  of  the  lonely  hiU,  which  we  see  in  all  parts  of  His  career. 
There  was,  indeed,  in  Him  nothing  of  that  supercilious  sentimentality  and  morbid 
egotism  which  makes  men  shrink  from  all  contact  with  their  brother-men  ;  nor  can 
they  who  would  be  His  true  servants  belong  to  those  merely  fantastic  philanthro- 
pists "  who,"  as  Coleridge  says,  "  sigh  for  wretchedness,  yet  shun  the  wretched, 
nursing  in  some  delicious  solitude  their  dainty  loves  and  slothful  sympathies."  On 
the  contrary,  day  after  day,  while  His  daytime  of  work  continued,  we  find  Him 


ma.  Tin.)  8T,  JOHN.  8 

cacrificing  all  that  was  dearest  and  most  elevating  to  His  soul,  and  in  spite  of  heat 
and  pressure  and  conflict  and  weariness,  calmly  pursuing  His  labours  of  love  amid 
••  the  madding  crowd's  ignoble  strife."  But  in  the  night-time,  when  men  cannot 
work,  no  call  of  duty  required  His  presence  within  the  walls  of  Jerusalem ;  and 
those  who  are  familiar  with  the  oppressive  foulness  of  ancient  cities  can  best 
imagine  the  relief  His  spirit  must  have  felt  when  He  could  escape  from  the  close 
streets  and  thronged  bazaars,  to  cross  the  ravine,  and  climb  the  green  slope  beyond 
it,  and  be  alone  with  His  heavenly  Father  under  the  starry  night.  But  when  the 
day  dawned  His  duties  lay  once  more  within  the  city  walls,  and  in  that  part  of  the 
city  where,  almost  alone,  we  hear  of  His  presence  in  the  courts  of  His  Father's 
house.  And  with  the  very  dawn  His  enemies  contrived  a  fresh  plot  against  Him, 
the  circumstances  of  which  made  their  malice  more  actually  painful  than  it 
was  intentionally  periloas.  {Archdeacon  Farrar.)  Praying  must  alternate  with 
preaching  .-—Jesus  went  unto  the  Mount  of  Olives.  His  usual  oratory.  There  He 
prayed  by  night,  and  then  early  in  the  morning  He  came  unto  the  Temple  to  preach. 
Thus  He  divided  His  time  betwixt  praying  and  preaching.  So  must  all  that  will 
do  good  of  it  (see  1  Cor.  iii.  6).  {J.  Trapp.)  Preachers  must  pray  much  : — Look 
at  Baxter  1  he  stained  his  study  walls  with  praying  breath,  and,  after  he  got 
anointed  with  the  unction  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  sent  a  river  of  living  water  over 
Kidderminster,  and  converted  hundreds.  Luther  and  his  coadjutors  were  men  of 
each  mighty  pleading  with  God,  that  they  broke  the  spell  of  ages,  and  laid  nations 
subdued  at  the  foot  of  the  cross.  John  Knox  grasped  in  his  strong  arms  of  faith 
all  Scotland :  his  prayers  terrified  tyrants.  Whitefield,  after  much  holy,  faithful 
closet-pleading,  went  to  the  devil's  fair,  and  took  more  than  a  thousand  souls  out 
of  the  paw  of  the  lion  in  one  day.  See  a  praying  Wesley  turn  more  than  ten 
thousand  souls  to  the  Lord  t  Look  at  the  praying  Finney,  whose  prayers,  faith, 
sermons,  and  writings  have  shaken  the  half  of  America,  and  sent  a  wave  through 
the  British  churches.    (C.  D.  Fom».) 

Yer.  9.  And  early  In  the  mornli^  He  came  again  nnto  the  Temple. — The 
Temple :— We  have  in  our  version  only  one  word,  "Temple,"  with  which  we  render 
both  Upov  and  vaoc,  but  there  is  a  very  real  distinction  between  the  two,  and  one 
the  marking  of  which  would  often  add  much  to  the  clearness  and  precision  of  the 
sacred  narrative.  'Upov  ( =templum)  is  the  whole  compass  of  the  sacred  enclosure, 
the  rsftevoe,  including  the  outer  courts,  the  porches,  porticoes,  and  other  buildings 
subordinated  to  the  Temple  itself.  But  vaot  (=8Bdes),  from  vaiio,  habito,  as  the 
proper  habitation  of  God  (Acts  vii.  48 ;  xvii.  24 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  19) :  the  oI<cr>f  rov  9eov 
(Matt.  xii.  4 ;  cf.  Exod.  xxiii.  19)  is  the  Temple  itself,  that  by  especial  right  so 
called,  being  the  heart  and  centre  of  the  whole ;  the  Holy,  and  the  Holy  of  Holies, 
called  often  ay'iaafia.  (1  Maco.  i.  37 ;  iii.  45).  This  distinction,  one  that  existed 
«nd  was  acknowledged  in  profane  Greek,  and  with  reference  to  heathen  temples, 
quite  as  much  as  in  sacred  Greek,  and  with  relation  to  the  Temple  of  the  true 
God  (see  Herodotus  i.  181-3 ;  Thucydides  v.  18 ;  Acts  xix.  24-27)  is,  I  beUeve, 
always  assumed  in  all  passages  relating  to  the  Temple  at  Jerusalem,  alike  by 
Josephus,  by  Philo,  by  the  Septuagint  translators,  and  in  the  New  Testament.  .  .  . 
The  distinction  may  be  brought  to  bear  with  advantage  on  several  passages  in  the 
New  Testament.  When  Zacharias  entered  into  "  the  Temple  of  the  Lord  "  to  burn 
incense,  the  people  who  waited  His  return,  and  who  are  described  as  standing 
*•  without "  (Luke  i.  10)  were  in  one  sense  in  the  Temple  too — that  is,  in  the  Upov, 
while  he  alone  entered  into  the  vaoQ,  the  ••  Temple  "  in  its  more  limited  and  auguster 
«ense.  We  read  continually  of  Christ  teaching  "  in  the  Temple  "  (Matt.  xxvi.  65  ; 
Luke  xxi.  87 ;  John  viii.  21),  and  perhaps  are  at  a  loss  to  understand  how  this  could 
have  been  so,  or  how  long  conversations  could  there  have  been  maintained,  without 
interrupting  the  service  of  God.  But  this  is  ever  the  Upov,  the  porches  and 
porticoes  of  which  were  eminently  adapted  to  such  purposes,  as  they  were  intended 
for  them.  Into  the  vaoi  the  Lord  never  entered  during  His  earthly  course :  nor, 
indeed,  being  made  onder  the  law,  could  He  do  so,  that  being  reserved  for  the 
priests  alone.  It  need  hardly  be  said  that  the  money-changers,  the  buyers  and 
sellers,  with  the  sheep  and  oxen,  whom  the  Lord  drives  out.  He  repels  from  the  Upov, 
and  not  from  the  va6Q.  Irreverent  as  was  their  intrusion,  they  yet  had  not  dared 
to  establish  themselves  in  the  Temple  properly  so  called.  (Matt.  xxL  12  ;  John  ii. 
14).  On  the  other  hand,  when  we  read  of  another  Zacharias  slain  "  between  the 
Temple  and  the  altar  "  (Matt.  xxiiL  S5)  we  have  only  to  remember  that  ••  Temple  "  is 
vaoi,  here,  at  onee  to  get  rid  of  a  difficulty,  which  may  perhaps  have  presented 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.     *  [OHA».  na 


itself  to  many— this,  namely,  Was  not  the  iJtar  in  the  Temple?    How,  then,  oool4 
any  locality  be  described  as  between  these  two  ?    In  the  Upov,  donbtlesB  was  th« 
brazen  altar  to  whieh  allusion  is  here  made,  but  not  in  the  va6c,  **  in  the  ooort "  of 
the  House  of  the  Lord  (c/.  Josephus,  "Antiq."viii.  4, 1),  where  the  sacred  historian 
(2  Chron.  xziv.  21)  lays  the  scene  of  this  murder,  but  not  in  the  House  of  the  Lord, 
or  vooc,  itselt     Again,  how  vividly  does  it  set  forth  to  as  the  despair  and  defiance 
of  Judas,  that  he  presses  even  into  the  vaoc  itself  (Matt,  xxwii.  6),  into  the  "adytum  " 
which  was  set  apart  for  the  priests  alone,  and  there  casts  down  before  them  the 
accursed  price  of  blood.    Those  expositors  who  affirm  that  here  va6t  stands  for 
iepov  should  adduce  some  other  passage  in  which  the  one  is  put  for  the  other. 
(Abp.  Trench.)        And  He  sat  down  and  taught. — Chritt  a*  a  religiovu  Teacher : — 
I.  He  was  devoutly  studious.     It  was  from  the  solitudes  of  Olivet  where  He  had 
spent  title  previous  night  that  He  goes  into  the  Temple.    To  preach  the  gospel  three 
things  are  essential,  and  these  can  come  only  by  solitude.    1.  Self-formed  convic- 
tion of  gospel  truth.    The  gospel  is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation ;  but  how  ia 
it  to  be  wielded — by  Bible  circulation,  recitation  of  its  contents,  or  repeating  the 
comments  of   others?     All  these  are    useful,  but  conviction  is  indispensable. 
Heaven  has  so  honoured  our  nature  that  the  gospel,  to  win  its  victories,  must  pass 
as  living  beliefs  through  the  soul  of  the  teacher.    The  men  who  teach  it  without 
such  convictions — conventional  preachers — can  never  enrich  the  world.     They  are 
echoes  of  old  voices,  mere  channels  through  which  old  dogmas  flow.    But  he  wha 
speaks  what  he  believes  and  because  he  believes,  the  doctrine  comes  from  him 
instinct  and  warm  with  life.     His  individuality  is  impressed  upon  it.     The  world 
never  had  it  in  that  exact  form  before.    Now,  devout  solitude  is  necessary  to  this. 
Alone  with  God  you  can  search  the  prospel  to  its  foundation,  and  feel  the  con- 
gruity  of  its  doctrine  with  your  reason,  its  claims  with  your  conscience,  its  provisions 
with  your  wants.    2.  Unconquerable  love  for  gospel  truth.     There  is  an  immense 
practical  opposition  to  it.    Men's  pride,  prejudice,  pleasures,  pursuits,  and  temporal 
interests  are  against  it.    It  follows,  therefore,  that  those  who  think  more  of  the 
favour  of   society  than  of   the  claims  of  truth,  will  not  deal  with  it  honestly, 
earnestly,  and  therefore  successfully.    The  man  only  who  loves  truth  more  than 
even  life,  can  so  use  it  really  to  benefit  mankind.     In  devout  solitude  you  can  cul- 
tivals  this  invincible  attachment  to  truth,  and  you  may  be  made  to  feel  with  Paul,  "  X 
count  all  things  but  loss  for  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ."    8.  ▲ 
living  expression  of  gospel  truth.      Our  conduct  must  confirm  and  illumine  the 
doctrines  which  our  lips  declare.    For  this  there  must  be  seasons  of  solitude. 
When  Moses  talked  with  God  the  skin  of  his  face  shone.    But  in  devout  seclusion 
our  whole  nature  may  become  luminous.      John  the  Baptist  gained  invincible 
energy  in  the  wilderness ;  Paul  prepared  for  apostleship  in  Arabia ;  and  in  Geth* 
semane  Jesus  was  prepared  for  His  work.  II.  He  was  sublimelt  cottbaqeous.  On  the 
previous  day  His  life  had  been  threatened  and  His  arrest  attempted,  yet  with  • 
noble  daring  He  goes  ••  early  in  the  morning  "  to  the  same  scene.    Distinguish  this 
spirit  from  what  the  world  calls  courage.    1.  Brute  courage  is  dead  to  the  sacred- 
ness  of  Ufe.      Soldiers   hold   life  cheaply,  and  their  courage  is  an  animal  and 
mercenary  thing.    But  Christ  deeply  felt  and  frequently  taught  the  sanctity  of  Ufe. 
He  came  not  to  r'estroy  men's  lives,  &c. :  ••  What  shall  it  profit,  &o."    2.  Brute 
courage  is  indifferent  to  the  grand  mission  of  life.    The  man  of  brute  valour  is  not 
inspired  with  the  question,  What  is  the  grand  object  of  my  life?    Am  I  here  to 
work  out  the  great  designs  of  my  Maker  or  to  be  a  mere  fighting  machine  t    On 
the  contrary,  Christ's  regard  for  the  grand  mission  of  His  life  made  Him  courageous. 
He  came  to  bear  witness  to  the  truth ;  and  to  fulfil  this  work  He  willingly  risked  His 
own  mortal  life.     8.  Brute  courage  is  always  inspired  by  mere  animal  passion. 
It  is  when  the  blood  is  up  the  man  is  daring,  the  mere  blood  of  the  enraged  tiger 
or  the  infuriated  lion.    When  the  blood  cools  down  the  man's  courage,  such  as  it 
is,  collapses.     Not  so  with  the  valour  of  Christ,  which  was  that  of  deep  conviction 
of  duty.    "  As  Luther,"  Dr.  D'Aubign6  informs  us,  "  drew  near  the  door  which 
was  about  to  admit  him  into  the  presence  of  his  judges  (the  Diet  of  Worms),  he 
met  a  valiant  knight,  the  celebrated  George  of  Freundsberg,  who,  four  years  later, 
at  the  head  of  his  German  lansquenets,  bent  the  knee  with  his  soldiers  on  the  field 
of  Pavia,  and  then,  charging  to  the  left  of  the  Freneh  army,  drove  it  into  the  Ticino, 
and  in  •  great  measure  decided  the  captivity  of  the  King  of  France.    The  old 
general,  seeiug  Luther  pass,  tapped  him  on  the  shoulder,  and  shaking  his  head, 
blanched  in   many  battles,    said  kindly,   •  Poor    monk,    poor    monk  I    thou    art 
DOW  going  to  make  a  nobler  stand  than  I  or  any  other  captain  have  ever  made  in 


CHAP.  TOT,]  ST.  JOHN.  5 

the  bloodiest  of  oar  battles.  Bat  if  thy  cause  is  just,  and  thou  art  sure  of  it,  go 
forward  in  God's  name  and  fear  nothing.  God  will  not  forsake  thee.'  A  noble 
tribute  of  respect  paid  by  the  courage  of  the  sword  to  the  courage  of  the  mind." 
Nothing  is  more  necessary  for  a  religious  teacher  than  courage,  for  his  mission  is  to 
strike  hard  against  tbe  prejudices,  self  interests,  dishonesties,  &c.,  of  the  masses. 
No  man  without  valour  can  do  the  work  of  a  religious  teacher.  The  popular 
preacher  must  more  or  less  be  cowardly  conciliatory.  Dead  fish  swim  with  the 
stream;  it  requires  living  ones  with  much  inner  force  to  cut  up  against  the  current. 
III.  He  was  sublimelt  eaknest.  «'  Early  in  the  morning  "  He  did  not  indulge  Himself 
sleep — "  I  must  work,"  <fec.  Two  things  should  make  the  preacher  earnestly  diligent. 
1.  The  transcendent  importance  of  His  mission — to  enlighten  and  regenerate  im- 
perishable spirits  that  are  in  a  morally  ruinous  condition.  What  is  involved  in 
the  loss  of  one  soul  ?  2.  The  brevity  of  life.  How  short  the  time,  even  in  the 
longest-lived  for  this  greatest  of  human  understandings.  IV.  He  was  beautifully 
NATUKAL.  *'  He  sat  down,"  Ac.  There  was  nothing  stiff  or  official.  All  was  free, 
fresh,  and  elastic  as  nature.  1.  He  was  natural  in  attitude.  Modem  rhetoric  has 
rules  to  guide  a  public  speaker  as  to  his  posture,  &c.  All  such  miserable  directions 
are  not  only  unlike  Christ,  but  degrading  to  the  moral  nature  of  the  speaker,  and 
detrimental  to  his  oratoric  influence.  Let  a  man  be  charged  with  great  thoughts, 
and  those  thoughts  will  throw  his  frame  into  the  most  beseeming  attitudes.  2. 
He  was  natural  in  expression.  He  attended  to  no  classic  rule  of  composition  ;  the 
words  and  similes  He  employed  were  such  as  His  thoughts  ran  into  first,  and  such 
as  His  hearers  could  well  understand.  To  many  modern  preachers  composition  is 
everything.  What  solemn  trifling  with  gospel  truth !  3.  He  was  natural  in  tones. 
The  tones  of  His  voice,  we  may  rest  assured,  rose  and  fell  according  to  the  thoughts 
that  occupied  His  soul.  The  voice  of  the  modern  teacher  is  often  hideously 
artificial.  Just  so  far  as  a  speaker  goes  away  from  his  nature,  either  in  language, 
attitude,  or  tone,  he  loses  seLt-respeet,  inward  vigour,  and  social  force.  (D.  Thomas, 
D.D.)  We  must  do  good  against  great  opposition : — That  is  a  poor  engine  that 
can  only  drive  water  through  pipes  down  hill.  Those  vast  giants  of  iron  at  the 
Eidgway  waterworks,  which  supply  this  city  day  and  night,  easily  lifting  a  ton  of 
water  at  every  gush,  so  that  all  the  many  thirsty  faucet  mouths  throughout  our 
streets  cannot  exhaust  their  fulness ;  those  are  the  engines  that  I  admire.  (H.  W. 
Beecher.) 

Vers.  3-11.  And  the  Scribes  and  the  Pharisees  brought  onto  Him  a  woman 
taJcen  In  adultery. — The  scene  and  its  significance : — It  is  probable  that,  the  hilarity 
and  abandonment  of  the  feast,  which  had  grown  to  be  a  kind  of  vintage  festival, 
would  often  degenerate  into  acts  of  licence  and  immorality ;  and  these  would  find 
more  numerous  opportunities  in  the  general  disturbance  of  ordinary  life  oaased 
by  the  dwelling  of  the  whole  people  in  their  little  leafy  booths.  One  such  act  had 
been  detected  during  the  night,  and  the  guilty  woman  had  been  handed  over  to  the 
Scribes  and  Pharisees.  Even  had  the  morals  of  the  nation  at  that  time  been  as 
clean  as  in  the  d»ys  when  Moses  ordained  the  fearful  ordeal  of  the  "  water  of 
jealousy  " — even  had  those  rulers  and  teachers  of  the  nation  been  elevated  as  far 
above  their  contemporaries  in  the  real  as  in  the  professed  sanctity  of  their  lives — 
the  discovery,  and  the  threatened  punishment  of  this  miserable  adulteress  could 
hardly  have  failed  to  move  every  pure  mind  to  a  compassion  which  would  have 
mingled  largely  with  the  horror  which  her  sin  inspired.  They  might  then  have 
inflicted  the  penalty  with  a  sternness  as  inflexible  as  that  of  the  Pilgrim  Fathers  ; 
but  the  sternness  of  a  severe  and  pure-hearted  judge  is  a  sternness  which  would  not 
inflict  one  unnecessary  pang  and  is  wholly  incompatible  with  a  spirit  of  malignant 
levity.  But  the  spirit  of  these  Scribes  and  Pharisees  was  not  by  any  means  tbe 
spirit  of  a  sincere  and  outraged  purity.  In  the  decadence  of  national  life,  in  the 
daily  familiarity  with  heathen  degradations,  in  the  gradual  substitution  of  a 
Levitical  scrupulosity  for  a  heartfelt  religion,  the  morals  of  the  nation  had  grown 
utterly  corrnpt.  The  ordeal  of  the  "  water  of  jealousy  "  had  long  been  abolished, 
and  the  death  by  stoning  as  a  punishment  for  adultery  had  long  been  suffered  to 
fall  into  desuetude.  Not  even  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  for  all  their  external 
religiosity,  had  any  genuine  horror  of  an  impurity  with  which  their  own  lives  were 
often  stained.  They  saw  nothing  but  a  chance  of  annoying  and  endangering  One 
whom  they  regarded  as  th«ir  deadliest  enemy.  It  was  a  carious  custom  among  the 
J«ws  to  oonault  distinguished  Eabbis  in  cases  of  difficulty ;  but  there  was  no  diffi 
enlty  here.     It  was  long  since  the  law  of  death  had  been  demanded ;  and  even  had 


6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CH1».  TtB. 

this  not  been  th«  case  the  Boman  law  wonld  have  interfered.    On  the  other  hand, 
divorce  was  open  to  the  injured  husband,  and  the  case  of  this  woman  differed  from 
that  of  no  other  who  had  similarly  transgressed.     And  even  if  they  had  sincerely 
desired  the  opinion  of  Jesus  there  was  not  the  slightest  excuse  for  haling  this 
woman  into  His  presence,  and  thus  subjecting  her  to  a  moral  torture,  all  the  more 
insupportable  from  the  close  seclusion  of  women  in  the  East.  And  therefore  to  subject 
her  to  the  superfluous  horror  of  this  odious  publicity — to  drag  her  fresh  from  the 
agony  of  detection  into  the  sacred  precincts  of  the  Temple — to  subject  this  unveiled, 
dishevelled,  terror-stricken  woman  to  the  cold  and  sensual  ourioflity  of  a  malignant 
mob,  and  this  merely  to  gratify  a  calculating  malice — showed  a  brutality  of  heart  and 
conscience  which  could  not  but  prove  revoking  to  One  who  was  infinitely  tender 
because  infinitely  pure.    {Archdeacon  Farrar.)        Virtue  taught: — This  remarkable 
story  is  a  signal  instance  of  the  magical  passing  of  virtue  out  of  the  virtuous  man 
into  the  hearts  of  those  vrith  whom  he  comes  in  contact,  and  illustrates  the  difference 
between  scholastic  or  scientific  and  living  or  instinctive  virtue.    It  occurred  to  the 
religious  leaders  that  the  case  afforded  a  good  opportunity  of  making  an  experiment 
on  Christ.    They  might  use  it  to  discover  how  He  regarded  the  Mosaic  law.    That 
He  was  heterodox  on  this  subject  they  had  reason  to  believe,  and  to  satisfy  them, 
selves  and  the  people  on  this  point  they  asked  Christ  whether  He  agreed  with 
Moses  on  the  subject  of  adultery.    A  judgment  He  gave  them,  but  quite  different 
from  what  they  had  expected.     In  thinking  of  the  "  case  "  they  had  forgotten  the 
woman  and  even  the  deed.     What  became  of  the  criminal  appeared  to  them  wholly 
unimportant ;  towards  her  crime  or  her  character  they  had  no  feeling  whatever. 
If  they  had  been  asked  about  her  they  might  probably  have  answered,  with 
Mephistopbeles,  "  She  is  not  the  first " ;  nor  would  they  have  thought  their  answer 
fiendish — only  practical  and  business-like.    Perhaps  they  might  on  reflection  have 
admitted  that  their  frame  of  mind  was  not  strictly  moral,  that  it  woald  have  been 
better  if  they  could  have  found  leisure  for  some  shame  at  the  scandal  and  some 
hatred  for  the  sinner.    But  they  would  have  argued  that  such  strict  propriety  is  not 
possible  in  this  world,  that  we  have  too  much  on  our  hands  to  think  of  these 
niceties,  that  a  man  who  makes  leisure  for  such  refinements  will  find  his  work  in 
arrears  at  the  end  of  the  day,  and  probably  also  that  he  is  doing  injustice  to  those 
dependent  upon  him.    Thus  they  might  fluently  have  urged.    But  the  judgment  of 
Christ  was  upon  them,  making  all  things  seem  new  and  shining  like  the  lightning. 
The  shame  of  the  deed  itself,  and  the  brazen  hardness  of  the  prosecutors,  the 
legality  which  had  no  justice  and  did  not  pretend  to  have  mercy,  the  religious 
malice  that  could  make  its  advantage  out  of  the  fall  and  ignominious  death  of  a 
fellow-creature — all  this  was  rudely  thrust  before  His  mind  at  once.     The  effect 
upon  Him  was  such  as  might  have  been  produced  upon  many  since,  but  perhaps 
upon  scarcely  any  man  that  ever  lived  before.    He  was  seized  with  an  intolerable 
sense  of  shame.     He  could  not  meet  the  eye  of  the  crowd.     In  His  burning  em- 
barrassment He  stooped  down  so  as  to  hide  His  face,  and  began  writing  on  the 
ground.     His  tormentors  continued  their  clamour  until  He  raised  His  head  for 
a  moment  and  said,  "  He  that  is  without  sin,"  &o,,  and  then  instantly  retnmed  to 
His  former  attitude.     They  had  a  glimpse,  perhaps,  of  the  glowing  blush  upon  His 
face,  and  awoke  suddenly  with  astonishment  to  a  new  sense  of  their  condition  and 
conduct.    The  older  men  naturally  felt  it  first  and  slunk  away;   the  younger 
followed  their  example.     The  crowd  dissolved  and  left  Christ  alone  with  the  woman 
Not  till  then  could  He  bear  to  stand  upright ;  and  then,  consistently  with  His 
principle,  He  dismissed  the  woman,  as  having  no  commission  to  interfere  with  the 
office  of  civil  judge.    But  the  mighty  power  of  living  purity  had  done  its  work. 
He  had  refused  to  judge  a  woman,  but  He  had  judged  a  whole  crowd.     He  had 
awakened  the  slumbering  conscience  in  many  hardened  hearts,  giving  them  a  new 
delicacy,  a  new  ideal,  a  new  view  and  reading  of  the  Mosaic  law.    And  yet  this 
crowd  was  either  indifferent  or  bitterly  hostile  to  Him.    Let  us  imagine  the  cor- 
recting, elevating  influence  of  His  presence  upon  those  who  were  bound  to  Him  by 
the  ties  which  bind  a  soldier  to  his  officer,  a  clansman  to  his  chief,  a  subject  to  • 
king  ruling  by  Divine  right,  aye,  and  by  ties  far  «loser.     The  ancient  philosophers 
were  accustOMied  to  inquire  about  virtue,  whether  it  can  be  taught.     Yes  !  it  can, 
and  in  this  way.    But  if  this  way  be  abandoned,  and  moral  philosophy  be  set  up  to 
do  that  which  in  the  nature  of  things  it  can  never  do,  the  effect  will  appear  in  a 
certain  slow  deterioration  of  manners  which  it  would  be  hard  to  describe  had  it  not 
been  described  already  in  well-known  words  :  "  Sophistry  and  calculation  "  will  take 
4he  place  of  "chivalry."    There  will  be  no  more  "generous  loyalty,"  no  mor« 


OTA*,  vm.]  ST.  JOHN.  7 

"  proad  Bubmission,"  no  more  "  dignified  obedience."  A  stain  will  be  no  more  felt 
like  a  wound,  and  oar  hardened  and  coarsened  manners  will  lose  the  "sensibility 
of  principle  and  the  chastity  of  honour."  (Eece  Homo.)  The  woman  taken  in 
adultery : — Note :  I.  That  the  vilest  sinnsbs  abe  often  the  obeatest  accusebs. 
We^e  there  a  worse  lot  of  men  in  Judea  or  on  the  round  earth  than  these  Scribes 
and  Pharisees,  and  members  of  the  Sanhedrim,  who  now  accused  this  woman  ?  It 
is  ever  so :  the  more  base  and  corrupt  a  man  is,  the  more  ready  to  charge  crimes 
on  others  and  the  more  severe  in  his  censures.  II.  That  the  sevebest  judge  op 
•iNNEBS  IS  tbeib  OWN  CONSCIENCE.  "  They  which  heard  Him,  being  convicted  by 
their  own  conscience,  went  out  one  by  one."  Observe  two  things — 1.  Christ's 
method  of  awakening  their  conscience.  (1)  He  expresses  by  a  symbolical  act  His 
superiority  over  their  malignant  purposes.  He  stoops  down  as  if  He  were  utterly 
indifferent.  (2)  He  puts  the  question  of  the  woman's  punishment  upon  their  own 
eonsciences.  "  He  that  is  without  sin,"  &o.  Observe — 2.  The  force  of  their 
awakened  consciences.  They  were  convicted,  and  went  out  one  by  one.  Ah  1  there 
is  no  judge  so  severe  and  crushing  in  his  sentence  as  that  of  a  guilty  conscience. 
ni.  That  THE  GBEATEST  iniEND  OF  8INNEB8  IS  Jesds  Cheist.  The  accuseis  are 
gone,  but  the  accused  remains  with  Jesus  alone.  Observe — 1.  He  declines  pro- 
nouncing a  judicial  condemnation  upon  her.  "  Neither  do  I  condemn  thee."  He 
does  not  mean  that  He  did  not  disapprove  of  her  conduct  and  condemn  her 
morally,  but  judicially.  He  declines  to  pronounce  judgment.  2.  He  dischargea 
her  with  a  merciful  admonition.  "  Go,  and  sin  no  more."  An  expression,  this, 
implying  (1)  That  she  had  sinned.  Adultery  is  a  terrible  moral  crime.  (2)  That 
He  forgave  her.  "  Go."  I  absolve  thee.  (3)  That  her  future  should  be  free  from 
sin.  *•  Sin  no  more. "  Let  bygones  be  bygones ;  let  oblivion  cover  thy  past ; 
let  virtue  crown  thy  future.  Thus  Jesus  deals  with  sinners.  Desolate,  branded, 
forsaken  of  all,  He  alone  will  stand  by  thee.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The 
judges  judged : — Parts  of  this  story  are  not  fitted  for  public  discourse.  But  if 
we  may  not  preach  about  the  woman,  we  may  and  ought  about  her  accusers,  and 
the  sin  of  fault-finding  of  which  they  were  guilty.  I.  Censobiodsness  geows  fbom 
AN  EVIL  eagebness.  Many  forms  of  eagerness  are  invaluable — diligence  in  business, 
promptitude  in  doing  good,  in  giving,  helping,  &c.  Here  was  an  occasion  in  which 
eagerness  of  kindness  was  much  ne&ded.  "  If  ox  or  ass  fall  into  a  pit,  straightway 
pull  him  out " — if  man  or  woman,  be  quicker  still.  But  this  was  an  evil  eagerness, 
as  seen — 1.  In  the  needless  number  of  accusers — one  or  two  would  have  done. 

2.  In  their  want  of  delicacy,  disregarding  the  crowd  and  the  woman's  feelings. 

3.  In  their  unfairness.  The  law  of  Moses  awarded  the  same  penalty  to  man  and 
woman ;  probably  the  fear  of  the  knife  of  the  man  makes  them  more  content  with 
the  capture  of  the  woman,  and  so  they  come  with  no  thoughts  of  her  shaiae  and 
painful  future,  but  clamour  for  her  condemnation.  How  common  is  this  evil 
eagerness.  Some  lose  languor  with  scandal  as  if  it  were  a  tonic.  Some  faces  are 
never  so  full  of  interest  as  when  telling  or  investigating  something  which  the 
generous  heart  would  cover  and  for  which  the  devout  heart  would  pray.  Perhaps  like 
these  men  you  would  find  your  fault-finding  has  its  root  not  in  virtuous  indignation, 
but  in  an  evil  eagerness.  II.  Censorious.sess  generally  has  otheb  grave  faults 
CONNECTED  WITH  IT.  It  is  quito  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  more  faults  a  ruan 
finds  the  less  he  has.  On  the  contrary,  the  censorious  are  never  faultless.  "  Being 
convicted  in  their  own  consciences  "  means  convicted  of  having  committed  similar 
crimes.  Their  bitterness  was  not  the  indignation  of  the  innocent  against  the 
guilty,  but  of  the  "not  found  out"  against  the  "found  out."  Purity  does  not 
clamour  for  vengeance,  but  the  worse  we  are  the  less  patient  are  we  with  others  as 
bad.  It  is  hard  to  conceive  of  such  hypocrisy,  but  a  little  thought  will  show  how 
it  would  grow.  1.  They  want  credit  for  character,  and  denunciation  is  the  cheapest 
way  of  getting  it:  therefore  are  frequently  taken.  By  condemning  evil  they  are 
the  more  likely  to  be  taken  for  good.  2.  They  had,  like  us,  two  standards  of  good- 
ness— one  for  themselves  and  one  for  their  neighbours.  Divers  weights  are  an 
abomination  te  God,  but  a  comfort  to  us.  We  weigh  our  duties  by  one  set  and  our 
neighbours  by  another.  "  If  I  am  angry  it  is  nervous  irritability,  or  a  habit  of 
speaking  my  mind ;  but  if  you  are,  you  are  ill-mannered."  So  we  all  reason.  So 
these  men  did.  Their  delinquencies  were  "gaieties,"  "hot  blood  of  youth," 
"  occasional  excesses  unimportant  in  their  character,"  balanced  by  superior  virtues. 
But  for  a  woman  to  so  act  was  intolerable.  We  like  a  monoply  of  our  vices :  no 
one  most  poach  on  our  preserves.  So  we  dislike  men  of  our  own  faults  with  an 
intensity  the  innocent  never  feel.    Tou  will  learn  the  faults  men  have  by  listening 


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tm. 

to  their  fa  irourite  charges.  It  is  the  proud  who  jadge  most  severely  the  proad ;  lo 
with  the  greedy,  the  dishonourable,  the  selfish.  Are  you  censorious?  Take  it  as  a 
sign  of  faultiness,  and  let  severity  begin  at  home.  III.  Gensoi»ousnbss  dibtbesses 
THE  HEABT  OF  Chbist.  He  stooped  down  as  though  He  heard  them  not,  distressed 
at  sinners  accusing  a  fellow-sinner.  He  is  the  Great  Judge,  and  soon  all  will  be 
gathered  at  His  bar ;  and  yet  they  come  accusing  one  another  to  Him.  He  sees 
how  much  each  needs  mercy,  but  instead  of  supplicating  it,  here  are  eleven  sinners 
asking  condemnation  to  the  twelfth.  No  wonder  he  was  shocked  at  the  incongruity. 
Astonished  that  so  few  use  their  neighbours'  faults  as  mirrors,  and  that  for  tb« 
mercy  they  could  get  there  are  so  few  applicants,  and  for  the  censure  He  was  so 
slow  to  give,  so  many.  This  unseemliness  attaches  to  all  severity!  He  still, 
though  unseen,  overhears  the  slighting  speech,  &c.,  and  turns  His  head  from  one 
of  the  most  grievous  activities  that  dishonour  human  nature.  IV.  Censobiodsness 
BOONEB  oB  LATEB  IS  GBiEvousLT  PUT  TO  SHAME.  There  Is  more  here  than  the 
shame  of  unholy  censure — there  is  failure  of  a  snare  laid  for  Christ,  and  the  awfol 
rebuke  of  the  Saviour's  glance  and  speech.  They  came  secure  in  being  unknown 
to  Him,  forgetting  that  every  fault  leaves  a  mark — vice,  some  coarseness  of  feature 
as  well  as  thought ;  pride,  some  line  of  scorn ;  falseness,  some  restlessness  of  eye. 
The  Son  of  Man  had  only  to  look  and  see.  Their  souls  wither  beneath  His  strange 
words,  "He  that  is  without  sin,"  <fcc.  What  a  terrible  rebuke  in  the  Temple;  in 
the  presence  of  the  people  whose  reverence  they  had  won  by  hypocrisy;  and  it 
wrought  no  relenting.  No  one  says  "  I  perceive  Thou  art  a  prophet,"  or  "  Depart 
from  me  for  I  am  a  sinful  man,"  or  ••  Whence  knowest  Thou  me  ?  Thou  art  the 
Son  of  God,  the  King  of  Israel."  Only  shame  and  bitterness  fill  them.  Doubtless 
all  made  excuses.  One  had  a  committee  requiring  immediate  attendance ;  another 
willing  to  be  the  expositor  declines  to  be  the  executioner  of  the  law;  another 
vaunted  his  exemption  from  any  such  vice,  but  had  eome  to  get  the  law  sanctioned ; 
another  was  going  to  Jericho  and  wanted  to  catch  the  caravan — but  ail  suddenly 
abandoned  the  charge  and  in  confusion  left  the  place.     V.  Censobiocsness  and  its 

METHODS  STANDS  IN   DTTEB  CONTEAST  WITH   ChEIST   AND   HiS   METHODS.      The  ScriboS 

have  a  zeal  for  public  welfare  and  so  has  Christ.  In  their  case  coarse  sin  mixed 
with  cruel  anger  unite  to  destroy  a  poor  sinner ;  in  His  infinite  purity  mixed  with 
tenderest  love  unite  to  destroy  sin  and  save  the  sinner.  He  does  not  pardon  because 
she  has  not  yet  repented ;  but,  declining  to  condemn  her.  He  bids  her  "  go  and  sin 
no  more."  {R.  Glover.)  Christ  and  woman: — It  has  been  often  urged,  to  the 
disparagement  of  Christianity,  that  modern  civilization  lacks  a  certain  severity  of 
tone  and  simplicity  of  manners  very  observable  in  classic  antiquity ;  and  the  ch^ge 
is  not  without  a  plausible  foundation.  But  to  argue  that  the  lack  is  a  loss  or  a  step 
backward  is  quite  another  thing.  In  ancient  times  woman  occupied  a  very  inferior 
position;  her  influence  upon  society  was  hardly  perceptible;  consequently  she 
scarcely  entered  as  a  moulding  power  into  education  and  civilization.  There  was  a 
certain  severe  hardness,  or  hardiness,  if  you  like,  characterizing  men  of  classical 
lands.  But  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world  "  made  of  a  woman,"  reproducing  in 
His  person  and  life  the  finer  features  of  a  woman.  By  His  means  female  influence 
became  a  factor  in  the  history  of  the  world,  and  entered  as  a  softening,  trans- 
forming element  into  education  and  civilization ;  and  as  an  inevitable  result  the 
severe  manly  hardness  of  olden  times  has  been  much  tempered.  The  equipoise  has 
not  hitherto  been  definitely  fixed,  for  the  world  is  only  in  its  transition  state ;  but 
the  recognized  ideal  of  Christianity  is  indisputable — it  is  the  happy  anion  of 
masculine  simplicity  and  firmness  with  feminine  delicacy  and  grace.  {J.  Cynd. 
dylan  Jones,  D.D.)  Paraded  piety  unreal : — In  the  olden  times,  even  the  beat 
rooms  were  usually  of  bare  brick  or  stone,  damp  and  mouldy,  but  over  these  in  great 
houses,  when  the  family  was  resident,  were  hung  up  arras,  or  hangings  of  rich 
material,  between  which  and  the  wall  persons  might  conceal  themselves,  so  that 
literally  walls  bad  ears.  It  is  to  be  feared  that  many  a  brave  show  of  godliness  is 
but  an  arras  to  conceal  rank  hypocrisy ;  and  this  accounts  for  some  men's  religion 
being  but  occasional,  since  it  is  folded  up  or  exposed  to  view  as  need  may  demand. 
Is  there  no  room  for  conscience  to  pry  between  thy  feigned  profession  and  thy  real 
ungodliness,  and  bear  witness  against  thee?  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  An  adulterett 
and  murderess  detected : — When  Dr.  Donne  took  possession  of  his  first  living,  he 
walked  into  the  churchyard  as  the  sexton  was  digging  a  grave ;  and  on  his  throwing 
op  a  skull,  the  doctor  took  it  into  his  hands,  to  indulge  in  serious  contemplation. 
On  looking  at  it,  he  found  a  headless  nail  sticking  in  the  temple,  which  he  secretly 
drew  out,  and  wrapped  it  in  the  corner  of  his  handkerchief.    He  then  asked  the 


CHAT,  rux.]  ST.  JOHN.  t 

sraTedigger  whether  h«  knew  who&e  skull  it  was.  He  said  he  did,  adding  it  had 
been  a  man's  who  kept  a  brandy-shop — a  drunken  fellow,  who  one  night,  having 
taken  two  quarts  of  ardent  spirits,  was  found  dead  in  his  bed  the  next  morning. 
"Had  he  a  wife?"  "Yes."  ••  Is  she  living ? "  "Yes."  ••  What  character 
does  she  bear  ?  "  "A  very  good  one ;  only  her  neighbours  reflect  on  her  because 
•he  married  the  day  after  her  husband  was  buried."  Tnis  was  enough  for 
the  doctor,  who,  in  the  course  of  visiting  his  parishioners,  called  on  her.  He 
asked  her  several  questions,  and,  among  others,  of  what  sickness  her  husband 
died.  She  giving  him  the  same  account,  he  suddenly  opened  the  handkerchief, 
and  cried,  in  an  authoritative  voice,  "Woman,  do  you  know  this  nail?"  She 
was  struck  with  horror  at  the  unexpected  question,  instantly  acknowledged 
that  she  had  murdered  her  husband,  and  was  afterwards  tried  and  executed. 
Moses  In  the  law  commanded  us  that  such  should  he  stoned.  This  is  the 
legitimate  conclusion  of  the  two  texts,  Lev.  xx.  10  and  Deut.  xxii.  22,  when  com- 
pared. There  seems  no  ground  for  the  comment  of  some  writers,  that  Moses  did 
not  command  an  adulteress  to  be  put  to  death  by  stoning.  (Bp.  Ryle.)  The 
dilemvia: — They  knew  His  clemency  and  expected  He  would  show  it.  A  noble 
testimony  from  His  enemies  to  His  well-known  mercy.  He  had  hinted  that  publicans 
and  harlots  might  find  forgiveness  (Matt.  xxi.  31).  They  hoped  that  He,  professing 
to  be  Messiah  would  contradict  Moses.  They  knew  that  Messiah,  was  bound  to 
sustain  Moses'  law.  If  He  bade  them  stone  her.  He  would  give  twofold  offence — 
1.  He  would  condemn  a  laxity  of  morals  sadly  and  widely  prevalent.  2.  He  would 
infringe  on  Boman  authority  and  offend  the  rulers,  as  Jews  had  no  longer  the  right 
of  capital  punishment.  They  challenged  Him  to  carry  out  a  law  which  prevailing 
licence  had  rendered  a  dead  letter.  .They  expected  a  very  favourable  decision  from 
the  past  (Luke  vii.  47 ;  Matt.  xi.  28 ;  Luke  xv.  11).  Thus  the  trap  was  cunningly 
laid.  If  He  say  that  the  law  must  be  executed  the  Boman  authorities  would  object ; 
if  that  the  law  must  be  waived,  then  Moses  would  be  sacrificed.  (W.  H.  Van  Doren, 
D.D.)  Death  by  itoning : — The  offender  was  led  to  a  place  without  the  gates, 
two  cubits  high,  his  hands  being  bound.  From  hence  one  of  the  witnesses 
knocked  him  down  by  a  blow  upon  the  loins.  If  that  killed  him  not,  the  witness 
lifted  up  a  stone,  being  the  weight  of  two  men,  which  chiefly  the  other  witness 
cast  upon  him.  If  that  killed  him  not,  all  Israel  threw  stones  upon  him.  The 
party  thus  executed  was  afterwards,  in  greater  ignominy,  hanged  on  a  tree  till 
towards  the  sunset,  at  which  time  both  he  and  the  tree  were  buried.  (Godwin.) 
Jesus  stooped  down,  and  with  His  finger  wrote  on  the  ground. — A  sense  of  all 
their  baseness,  their  hardness,  their  malice,  their  cynical  parade  of  every  feeling 
which  pity  would  temper  and  delicacy  repress,  rushed  over  the  mind  of  Jesus.  He 
blushed  for  His  nation,  for  His  race ;  He  blushed  not  for  the  miserable  accused,  but 
for  the  deeper  guilt  of  her  unblushing  accusers.  Glowing  with  uncontrollable 
disgust  that  modes  of  opposition  so  irredeemable  in  their  meanness  should  be  put 
in  play  against  Him,  and  that  He  should  be  made  the  involuntary  centre  of  such  a 
shameful  scene — indignant  that  the  sacredness  of  His  personal  reserve  should  thus 
be  shamelessly  violated,  and  that  those  things  which  belong  to  the  sphere  of  a 
noble  reticence  should  be  thus  cynically  obtruded  on  His  notice — He  bent  His  face 
forward  from  His  seat,  and,  as  though  He  did  not  or  would  not  hear,  stooped  and 
wrote  on  the  ground.  For  any  others  but  such  as  these  it  would  have  been  enough. 
Even  if  they  failed  to  see  in  the  action  a  symbol  of  forgiveness — a  symbol  that  the 
memory  of  things  thus  written  in  the  dust  might  be  obliterated  and  forgotten — still 
any  but  these  could  hardly  have  failed  to  interpret  the  gesture  into  a  distinct  indi- 
cation that  in  such  a  matter  Jesus  would  not  mix  Himself.  But  they  saw  nothing 
and  understood  nothing,  and  stood  there  unabashed,  still  pressing  their  brutal 
question,  still  holding,  pointing  to,  jeering  at  the  woman,  with  no  compunction  in 
their  cunning  glances  and  no  relenting  in  their  steeled  hearts.  {Archdeacon 
Farrar.)  The  iignificance  of  the  writing  on  the  ground : — As  St.  John  gives  no 
explanation,  we  are  left  to  conjecture.  1.  Some  think,  as  Bede,  Bupertus,  and 
Lvnpe,  that  our  Lord  wrote  on  the  ground  the  texts  of  Scripture  which  settled  the 
question  brought  before  Him,  as  the  seventh  commandment,  and  Lev.  zx.  10,  and 
Dent.  xxii.  22.  The  action  would  then  imply,  "Why  do  ye  ask  Me?  What  is 
written  in  the  law,  that  law  which  God  wrote  with  His  own  finger  as  I  am  writing 
now  ?  "  2.  Some  think,  as  Lightfoot  and  Burgon,  that  our  Lord  meant  to  refer  to 
the  law  of  Moses  for  the  trial  of  jealoasy,  in  which  an  accused  woman  was  obliged 
to  drink  water  into  which  dust  from  the  floor  of  the  Tabernacle  or  Temple  had  been 
put  by  the  priest  (Num.  v.  17).     The  action  would  then  imply,  "Has  the  law  for 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chip.  vm. 

trying  such  an  one  as  this  been  tried  ?  Look  at  the  dnst  on  which  I  am  writing 
Has  the  woman  been  placed  before  the  priest,  and  drank  of  the  dust  and  water  ?  "• 
3.  Some  think,  as  Augustine,  Melancthon,  Brentins,  Toletus,  and  &  Lapide,  that 
our  Lord's  action  was  a  silent  reference  to  the  text,  Jer.  xvii.  13:  "They  that 
depart  from  Me  shall  be  written  in  the  earth."  4.  One  rationalist  writer  suggesta 
that  our  Lord  "  stooped  down  "  from  feelings  of  modesty,  as  if  ashamed  of  the 
sight  before  Him,  and  of  the  story  told  to  Him.  The  idea  is  preposterous,  and 
entirely  out  of  harmony  with  our  Lord's  public  demeanour.  6.  Some  think,  as 
Euthymius,  Calvin,  Bollock,  Chemnitius,  Diodati,  Flavins,  Piscator,  Grotius, 
Poole,  and  Hutcheson,  that  our  Lord  did  not  mean  anything  at  all  by  this 
writing  on  the  ground,  and  that  He  only  signified  that  He  would  give  no  answer, 
and  would  neither  listen  to  nor  interfere  in  such  matters  as  the  one  brought  befor* 
Him.  Calvin  remarks :  "  Christ  intended,  by  doing  nothing,  to  show  how  unworthy 
they  were  of  being  heard ;  just  as  if  any  one,  while  another  was  speaking  to  him, 
were  to  draw  lines  on  the  wall,  or  to  turn  his  back,  or  to  show  by  any  other  sign 
that  he  was  not  attending  to  what  was  said."  I  must  leave  the  reader  to  choose 
which  solution  he  prefers.  To  my  eyes,  I  confess,  there  are  difficulties  in  eaoh 
view.  If  I  must  select  one,  I  prefer  the  last  of  the  five,  as  the  simplest.  Quesnell 
remarks :  "  We  never  read  that  Jesus  Christ  wrote  but  once  in  His  life.  Let 
men  learn  from  hence  never  to  write  but  when  it  is  necessary  or  useful,  and 
to  do  it  with  humility  and  modesty,  on  a  principle  of  charity,  and  not  of 
malice.  {Bp.  Ryle.)  The  literary  silence  of  Christ  : — Most  religious  leaders 
have  given  important  writings  to  their  followers — Moses  the  Law,  Mohammed 
the  Koran.  The  reformers,  Wiclif,  Luther,  Calvin,  &c.,  wielded  as  mnch 
power  by  their  pen  as  by  their  tongue.  But  the  only  writing  ascribed  to  Jesus 
is  that  of  the  text,  and  now  doubt  is  thrown  even  upon  that.  Consider  the 
significance  of  this.  It  could  not  be  to  discourage  literature,  because — 1.  Christ 
was  a  great  teacher,  and  dealt  with  ideas  as  well  as  conduct.  2.  His  disciples 
wrote  under  His  commission.  What,  then,  may  we  learn  from  the  literary  silenc* 
of  Christ?  I.  Christ  was  cabeless  op  fame.  It  came,  but  unsought.  Among 
tbose  Galilean  hills  Jesus  spoke  words  which  make  the  most  brilliant  sayings  of  the 
Greek  philosophers  and  poets  look  commonplace.  Yet  He  had  no  thought  ol 
attracting  the  world's  admiration.  His  words  are  like  wild  flowers.  We  set  our 
plants  in  conspicuous  beds  in  trim  gardens  where  our  friends  can  admire  them. 
God  scatters  His  flowers  in  pathless  woods,  on  lonely  moors,  &c.  They  bloom  in 
the  wilderness,  but  fade  in  the  city.  Consider  how  some  of  the  best  of  Christ's 
words  were  spoken  to  one  individual — to  Nicodemus,  the  woman  of  Samaria, 
Martha,  Ac.  Trae  they  have  been  reported  ;  but — 1.  There  is  no  reason  to  suppose 
that  Jesus  thought  of  any  record  being  made  of  them.  2.  He  must  have  said  many 
other  similarly  great  and  beautiful  things  of  which  there  is  no  report  (chap.  xxi. 
25).  Learn  simplicity,  humihty,  and  self-forgetfulness  from  this  literary  silence. 
Let  it  silence  the  pretentions  of  literary  vanity.    II.  Chbist  was  more  coNCEBNEn 

WITH   THE    SUBSTANCE    THAN   WITH   THE    rOBU    OF    HiS    TEACHING.      He    did    UOt    Only 

speak  for  the  benefit  of  His  contemporaries ;  He  entrusted  His  teaching  to  apostles. 
No  doubt  memory  was  stronger  then  than  now  we  have  injured  it  by  the  use  of 
memoranda.  Moreover,  Christ  promised  the  Spirit  to  help  the  memories  of  His 
apostles.  Nevertheless,  they  did  not  report  their  Master's  sayings  with  that  abso- 
lute verbal  accuracy  which  would  have  marked  His  writing  of  them.  This  is  proved 
by  differences  in  the  records.  Hence  learn — 1.  That  Christ  condemns  worship  of 
the  letter.  "The  letter  killeth."  2.  That  the  method  of  studying  Scripture  by 
means  of  the  minute  pedantic  analysis  of  texts  and  the  building  of  ponderouff 
arguments  on  small  phrases — unstable  as  inverted  pyramids  —  is  wrong.  We 
should  seek  rather  for  the  broad  lessons  of  a  passage.  3.  That  distress  and  doubt, 
occasioned  by  various  readings,  changes  in  the  Eevised  Version,  alternative  mar- 
ginal renderings,  &c.,  are  due  to  a  mistaken  idea  of  Scripture.  In  the  essence  of 
revelation  no  vital  truth  is  shaken  by  these  variations.  III.  The  person  of  Christ 
IS  MOBE  IHPOBTANT  THAN  His  woBDS.  People  Bay  the  Press  is  crushing  the  pulpit. 
The  work  of  Christ  is  the  greatest  proof  of  the  power  of  a  living  personal  presence. 
Some  men  put  their  best  selves  in  their  books  ;  but  it  is  better  to  be  loved  by  on* 
friend  than  admired  by  ten  thousand  readers.  Jesus  was  loved  best  by  those  who 
knew  Him  most.  His  influence  is  still  powerful  because  personal.  1.  We  have  to 
note  in  the  Gospels  not  merely  the  words  of  Christ,  but  His  whole  life,  death, 
resorreotion ;  and  for  ns  the  words  are  chiefly  valuable  as  revealing  the  son!  of 
the  speaker.     2.  We  have  a  living  Christ,  unspen  hut  n'-psent.     IV.  The  wobk  o» 


.  Tin.]  ST.  JOHN.  11 

Chmst  IB  GBEATEK  THAK  HiB  TEACHiNo.  Chrfst's  claims  are  essentially  different  in 
kind  as  well  as  degree  from  those  of  Socrates.  He  is  the  grandest  of  Teachers, 
bat  He  is  more ;  He  is  the  Saviour  of  the  world  and  the  King  of  the  new  heavenly 
kingdom.  His  chief  mission  lay  not  in  His  preaching,  but  in  His  doing  the  work 
of  the  kingdom  of  God.  It  does  not  centre  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  but  in  the 
death  on  Calvary.  V.  Thb  trainino  of  men  is  mobe  important  than  the  publica- 
tion or  IDEAS.  Socrates  resembles  Christ  in  writing  nothing  and  being  chiefly 
concerned  with  the  work  of  training  the  characters  of  disciples.  1.  All  Christian 
work  must  have  this  practical  aim.  In  the  mission,  the  Church,  the  Sunday-school, 
the  kind  of  teaching  must  be  the  training  of  souls.  The  teacher  who  simply  pro- 
pagates ideas  is  as  sounding  brass.  2.  Christ's  work  in  us  is  personal  and  spiritual. 
We  may  study  His  sayings,  but  we  shall  be  no  Christians  till  our  lives  are  quick- 
ened by  His  life.  (W.  F.  Adeney,  M.A.)  Christ'i  mission  non-literary  : — No 
thoughtful  Christian  can  fail  to  have  been  struck  by  the  fact  that  except  these 
few  words  Christ  wrote  nothing.  He  did  not  bow  down  over  a  table  piled  with 
manuscripts,  and  in  hours  of  meditative  thought,  during  which  He  outwatched  the 
stars,  erect  a  monument  which  might  be  admired  by  a  succession  of  sages  and 
critics ;  He  did  not  write  out  the  complete  text  of  an  elaborate  system  of  theology. 
He  went  out  into  the  throng  of  men.  He  spoke  by  the  highways  and  the  lake-side, 
in  words  which,  if  they  were  high  as  heaven  and  deep  as  the  transparent  lake,  were 
in  form  broad  and  popular.  When  we  consider  the  analogy  of  the  "  tables  which 
were  the  work  of  God"  and  "the  writing  which  was  the  writing  of  God"  (Exod. 
zzxii.  16),  and  the  value  of  books  in  excluding  error  and  securing  permanence,  we 
ask  why  He  did  not  write.  There  is  one  reason  derived  from  His  nature.  In  great 
books  the  truest  element  of  greatness  is  the  conviction  that  we  can  trace  the  path- 
way of  a  superior  mind  in  pursuit  of  truth.  When  he  seems  to  have  found  it,  the 
writer  quivers  with  delight.  With  the  Word  made  flesh,  truth  cannot  be  an  effort 
and  a  conquest — the  conclusion  toilfally  drawn  from  premises  laboriously  acquired. 
Bather  the  truth  dwells  in  Him.  He  does  not  say:  "After  long  communion 
with  Divinely-inspired  books,  after  long  self-questioning,  prompted  sometimes  by 
voices  that  seemed  to  come  from  the  ancient  hills,  and  the  glory  of  the  sunlit 
heaven,  I  gradually  worked  out  My  system."  He  does  not  say :  " I  h&we  found  the 
truth."  He  does  say:  "I  am  the  Truth."  We  may  answer  the  question  why 
Christ  did  not  write — His  thought  is  preserved  in  a  Diviner  way.  *•  I  will  put  My 
law  in  their  mind,  and  write  it  in  their  heart."  (Bp.  Alexander.)  Why  Christ 
wrote  no  book : — 1.  It  might  seem  that  Christ  ought  to  have  written ;  for — (1) 
Writing  is  best  for  an  immortal  doctrine  (Luke  xxi.  33).  (2)  Analogy  of  old  law 
(Deut.  xxiv.  1 ;  xxxii.  16 ;  xxxi.  18;  xxiv.  12).  (3)  Exclusion  of  error.  2.  Christ 
wrote  nothing  because — (1)  The  more  excellent  mode  suited  the  most  excellent 
Teacher  (Matt.  vii.  1).  The  greatest  teachers — Socrates  and  Pythagorus,  e.g. — wrote 
nothing.  (2)  Most  excellent  doctrine  cannot  be  cramped  into  books  (John  xxi.  25). 
(3)  Due  order  through  disciples  to  people  (Prov.  ix.  3).  3.  Again — (1)  What  waa 
done  by  the  members  (apostles,  evangelists)  was  done  by  the  Head.  (2)  Old  law 
might  be  written,  but  2  Cor.  iii.  3.  (3)  Those  who  believed  not  apostles  would  not 
have  believed  Christ.  (T.  Aquinas.)  The  writing  in  the  dust : — Perhaps  He  thus 
wrote  to  show  that  sin,  which  is  written  before  God,  and  graven,  as  it  were,  with  a  pen 
of  iron,  and  with  the  pane  of  a  diamond,  is  pardoned  and  blotted  out  by  Christ  as  easily 
as  a  writing  slightly  made  in  the  dust.  {J.  Trapp.)  So  when  they  continued  asking 
Him,  He  lifted  Himself  np. — Jesus  is  writing  as  one  in  an  office,  absorbed  in  some 
account,  might  write,  not  hearing  the  question  another  had  put  to  Him,  They  think 
He  will  answer  directly,  but  He  continues  writing.  They  continue  asking,  and 
press  Him  for  a  reply.  Possibly  they  enlarge  on  the  heinousness  of  the  offence — 
an  easy  task  and  a  sort  of  solace  for  a  bad  conscience.  These  men  knew  that  they 
had  committed  sin  enough,  which  should  have  made  them  charitable,  but  it  did 
not,  Christ  is  never  in  a  hurry  to  condemn ;  hence  His  silence.  Moreover,  He 
had  no  wish  to  be  judge.  "  Who  made  Me  a  ruler  and  a  judge  over  you  J  " 
They  think  Jesus  is  pondering  a  reply;  He  has  no  need,  for  one  is  ready.  He  keeps 
it  back  for  some  time,  knowing  that  silence  up  to  a  certain  point  is  more  powerful 
than  speech.  They  ask  Him  the  more  vehemently,  for  the  silence  now  becomes 
painful.  How  they  wish  He  would  cease  that  writing  and  say  something  1  They 
could  bear  an  open  accusation.  That  could  be  rebutted  with  all  the  force  of 
aggrieved  innocence.  But  to  be  treated  as  though  unworthy  an  answer,  as  though 
uncharitable  in  wishing  to  have  the  woman  condemned,  or  as  though  mean  in  trying 
(o  entrap  Christ— this  ii  terrible  i  a  taste  of  Gehenna.    They  press  Him  further  j 


It  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  no. 

and  now,  rising,  He  glances  first  on  the  accused  and  then  on  the  accusers.  Slowly, 
quietly,  witheringly,  He  utters  a  vivid  sentence :  "He  that  is  without  sin,"  &o.  Ha 
looks  away  from  law  to  conscience.  Again  He  stoops  and  writes.  Was  it  imagi* 
nation  that  deceived  them  ?  His  look  was  a  lightning  flash,  quickly  gone.  Hia 
voice  was  as  the  blare  of  the  judgment  trumpet,  echoing  to  the  innermost  recesses 
of  their  souls.  They  realized  now  the  report  of  their  ofiQcers — "  Never  man  spake," 
Ac. — and  were  almost  as  overpowered  as  the  armed  band  in  Gethsemane.  Th« 
power  of  Christ's  words  lay  in  His  character.  He  alone  could  say, "  Which  of  yoa 
convinceth  Me  of  sin  ?  "  H6  was  therefore  the  only  one  who  had  a  right  to  con- 
demn. We  have  in  this  a  foreshadowing  of  Christ's  power  at  the  Day  of  Judgment. 
How  silently,  surely,  quickly,  we  shall  be  judged  1  Suppose  now  we  had  heard  these 
words.  Are  we  without  sin  ?  We  must  not  hear  for  others,  but  listen  for  self.  It 
is  necessary  to  isolate  each  one,  as  I  once  saw  the  prisoners  in  the  chapel  of  a 
prison.  Each  one  was  in  a  wooden  enclosure,  and  no  one  could  look  at  them  but 
the  chaplain.  His  eye  could  almost  see  into  the  heart  of  each.  Thus  we  have  to 
be  isolated  by  the  Word  of  Christ.  As  we  feel  His  eye  resting  upon  us,  can  we 
say  that  we  are  without  sin  ?  Enter  those  long-locked  chambers  of  memory  I  Can 
you  now  blame  others  ?  Whatever  we  do,  we  should  beware  of  playing  the  critic.  The 
critic  in  society  or  in  the  house  is  a  disagreeable  person, and  harms  himself  most  by  hia 
criticisms.  If  manners  or  persons  or  utterances  do  not  please,  we  may  hide  our 
dislike.  We  may  take  persons  as  we  find  them.  Those  who  cannot  please 
soon  cease  to  try.  Oh,  that  fault-finders  would  remember  these  words  I  It  is  good 
to  look  to  ourselves.  We  shall  find  failings  enough  to  make  us  charitable.  There 
is  an  old  parable  of  a  rusty  shield  that  prayed,  "  0  sun,  illumine  me,"  to  which 
the  sun  replied,  "First,  polish  yourself."  We  need  to  remember  this  and  be  pure  our- 
selves. In  men's  eyes  those  respectable,  well-dressed,  pious-looking  priests  appeared 
of  enviable  purity,  but  a  keen  Eye  saw  their  sin  and  sees  ours.  {F.  Hastings. )  And 
again  He  stooped  down. — Respectable  sin : — It  is  with  sins  as  with  men,  some  have 
pedigree  and  some  have  not ;  for  some  are,  and  have  always  been,  held  in  respect  and 
others  in  contempt.  The  sins  of  place,  power,  bravery,  genius,  and  those  of  felony, 
vice,  brutality,  are  judged  differently.  These  distinctions  had  little  weight  with  Christ, 
and  He  deals  with  the  hypocrisies  of  religion,  the  impostures  of  learning,  and  the 
gilded  shows  gotten  by  extortion  in  terms  of  abhorrence.  Hence  the  jealousy  with 
which  He  was  watched,  and  the  endeavours  of  the  rabbis  to  draw  Him  into  some 
kind  of  treason  in  His  doctrine,  because  they  feared  His  influence  with  the  people, 
and  lest  He  might  head  a  revolution  which  would  subvert  the  present  social  order. 
Hence  the  plot  here  so  signally  frustrated.  And  now  look  upon  these  scribes,  (&o., 
as  they  withdraw  and  follow  them  as  Christ  and  the  whole  assembly  did.  Observe 
the  orderly  manner  of  their  shame,  "  beginning  at  the  eldest,"  Sco.  See  how  care> 
fully  they  keep  the  sacred  rules  of  good  breeding  and  deference  to  age,  even  in  their 
snivelling  defeat,  and  you  will  find  how  base  a  thing  may  take  on  airs  of  dignity, 
and  how  contemptible  these  airs  of  dignity  may  be.    I.  To  oleab  thb  mFLxnsNCE  o? 

A  rALSE  OB  DEFECTIVB  IMPRESSION  OROWIKQ  OUT  OP  THE  PACT  THAT  WE  LIVB  SO  ENTIBELT 

iM  THE  ATMOSPHEBE  OP  DECENCZ.  OuT  range  of  life  is  SO  walled  in  by  the  respecta- 
bility of  our  associations,  that  what  is  on  the  other  side  of  the  wall  is  a  world 
nnknown.  Hence  we  have  no  such  impression  of  sin  as  we  ought  to  have.  It  ia 
with  us  in  aU  our  associations  much  as  it  is  with  us  in  church.  Sitting  here  how 
can  you  suffer  any  just  impression  of  that  evil  which  wears  a  look  so  plausible?  II 
there  came  in  a  fair  representation  of  the  vice  and  drunkenness,  &o,,  of  the  town, 
how  different  it  would  be  for  me  to  speak  of  sin  and  for  you  to  hear.  And  so  of  the 
associations  of  life  generally.  Sin  in  its  revolting  forms  seldom  gets  near  enough 
to  meet  your  eye.  H.  We  need  also  to  cleab  another  wbono  impression  orowino 
OUT  op  the  tendency  to  identipt  bin  with  vice,  and  therefore  to  judge  that  what- 
ever sin  is  respectable  is  no  sin  at  all.  All  vice  presupposes  sin,  but  sin  may  be  the 
reigning  principle  of  the  life  and  never  produce  one  scar  of  vice  or  blameable  injury. 
Indeed,  virtue,  as  the  term  is  commonly  used,  classes  under  sin — conduct  approved 
irrespectively  of  any  good  principle  of  conduct — a  goodness  wholly  negative  and 
consisting  in  abstinence  from  what  is  base.  But  sin  is  the  negation  of  good  aa 
respects  the  principle  of  good,  anything  which  is  not  in  the  positive  power  of 
universal  love.  Virtue,  therefore,  which  consists  in  barely  not  doing  is  sin,  because 
not  in  any  positive  principle  of  love  or  duty  to  God — respectable  indeed,  but  having 
the  same  root  with  all  sin,  viz. :  the  not  being  in  a  state  of  positive  allegiance  to  God. 

in.   BeBPECTABIiB    sin  18  NOT  LESS  OTTILTY  BECAUSE  IT   HAS    A  LESS  REVOLTINQ    ASPECT. 

Even  those  who  blame  themselves  for  not  being  Christians  think  their  blame  of  • 


«HAP,  Ttn.]  ST.  JOHN.  IS 

higher  quality  than  it  would  be  under  the  excesses  which  many  practise,  whereas  all 
Bin  is  of  the  same  principle.  There  are  different  kinds  of  vice,  but  onlyone  kind  of  sin, 
viz. :  the  state  of  being  without  God.  Eespectable  sin  shades  into  the  unrespectable 
as  twilight  shades  into  night.  The  evil  spirit  may  be  trained  up  to  politeness  and  be 
elegant,  cultivated  sin,  exclusive  and  fashionable  sin,  industrious  thrifty  sin ;  it  may 
be  a  great  political  manager,  commercial  operator,  inventor ;  it  may  be  learned, 
eloquent,  poetic  sin ;  still  it  is  sin,  and  has  the  same  radical  quality  which  in  its 
tanker  conditions  produce  all  the  most  hideous  crimes.  There  is,  of  course,  a  differ- 
«uce  between  a  courteous  and  an  ill-natured  man,  a  pure  and  a  lewd  man,  &g.,  yet 
both  are  twin  brothers  ;  only  you  see  in  one  how  well  he  may  be  made  to  look,  and 
in  the  other  how  both  woiUd  look  if  that  which  is  in  both  were  allowed  to  work 
unrestrained.  IV,  Bespectable  sin  is  oftkn  mobe  base  in  spirit  than  that  which 
18  DESPISED.  This  is  not  the  judgment  of  those  who  are  apt  to  rule  the  judgments 
of  the  world.  The  lies  of  high  life,  e.g.,  are  the  liberties  asserted  by  power  and 
respectable  audacity ;  those  of  commoners  are  fatal  dishonour.  The  conqueror  who 
desolates  a  kingdom  will  be  named  with  respect  by  history,  when  probably  God  will 
look  upon  him  with  much  greater  abhorrence  than  if  he  had  robbed  a  hen  roost. 
How  very  respectable  those  learned  imposters  and  sanctimonious  extortioners  !  How 
base  those  publicans  and  sinners.  But  Christ,  who  regarded  no  man's  appearance, 
was  of  a  different  opinion.  It  is  not  a  show  of  sin  that  makes  it  base,  but  what  is 
in  motive,  feeling,  thought.  V.  Bespectable  sin  is  commonlt  more  inexccsablb. 
The  depraved  classes  have  to  a  great  extent  been  trained  up  to  the  very  life  they 
lead.  They  are  ignorant  by  right  of  their  origin,  accustomed  only  to  what  is 
lowest.  Sometimes  the  want  of  bread  makes  them  desperate.  They  are  criminal, 
but  who  does  not  pity  them  ?  It  is  incredible  to  you  that  in  your  own  decent  life  of  sin, 
taken  as  related  to  your  high  advantages,  there  may  even  be  a  degree  of  criminality, 
which  as  God  estimates  crime  is  far  more  inexcusable  than  that  for  which  many 
are  doomed  to  suffer  the  penalties  of  the  law.  YI.  Bespectable  sin  is  more 
iNJTTBious.  The  baser  forms  of  vicious  abandonment  create  for  us  greater  publio 
burdens  in  the  way  of  charity  and  justice,  and  annoy  as  more.  But  have  they  not  a 
wholesome  influence  ?  They  tempt  no  one  but  warn  away.  They  hang  out  a  ffag  of 
distress  upon  every  shoal  of  temptation.  We  should  never  conceive  the  inherent 
baseness  of  sin  if  it  were  not  shown  us  in  their  experiment;  revealed  in 
their  deUrium,  rags,  bloated  faces,  <&o.  Meanwhile,  respectable  sin — how 
attractive  its  pleasures,  gay  hours,  courteous  society — even  its  excesses  are  only  a 
name  for  spirit  I  Nay,  church-going  sin  is  the  most  plausible,  and  therefore  the 
most  dangerous ;  for  if  a  man  never  goes  to  a  place  of  worship,  we  take  his  sin  as 
a  warning,  but  if  he  is  regular  at  church,  a  sober,  correct  character,  then  how  many 
wiU  be  ready  to  imagine  that  there  is  one  form  of  sin  that  is  about  as  good  as  piety 
itself.  Vn.  Applications.  1.  With  how  little  reason  are  Christians  cowed  by  the 
mere  name  and  standing  of  those  who  are  living  under  the  power  of  sin.  Doubt- 
less it  is  well  enough  to  respect  them,  but,  however  high  they  are,  allow  them  never 
to  overtop  your  pity.  How  can  a  true  Christian  ennobled  by  the  glorious  heirship  be 
intimidated  by  what  is  only  respectable  sin.  If  he  goes  to  God  with  boldness,  how 
much  more  should  he  stand  before  them  and  speak  of  Christ  and  His  salvation. 
To  falter  is  a  great  wrong  to  our  Master's  gospel,  which  puts  the  humblest  far 
above  the  most  honoured  sinner.  2.  It  is  impossible  in  such  a  subject  as  this  not 
to  raise  the  question  of  morality.  (1)  Morality,  apart  from  religion,  is  but  another 
name  for  decency  in  sin.  There  is  no  more  heart  of  holy  principle  in  it  than  in  the 
worst  of  felonies.  It  is  the  same  thing  as  respects  denial  of  God  or  His  claims  as 
reprobacy,  only  well  dressed.  Will  that  save  you  ?  (2)  A  far  greater  danger  is 
that  the  decent  character  of  your  sin  will  keep  you  from  the  discovery  of  its  real 
nature  as  a  root  of  character.  How  difficult  is  true  conviction  when  its  appearances 
are  so  fair,  when  it  creeps  so  insidiously  into  our  amiable  qualities.  (3)  How 
necessary  it  is,  then,  to  make  a  study  of  this  subtle,  cunningly  veiled,  reputable  sin 
long  enough  to  fashion  its  real  import.  Ask  how,  if  unrestrained,  it  would  look. 
{4)  Another  motive  is,  no  matter  how  respectable,  you  can  never  tell  where  it  will 
end.  You  may  be  confident  that  virtuous  irreligious  living  will  not  lead  to  murder. 
Perhaps  not.  Avoiding  what  is  bloody,  you  may  fall  into  what  is  false  or  low,  or  if 
you  keep  your  decency  here,  the  proper  end  will  show  itself  hereafter,  and  then  it 
will  be  seen  how  deep  in  criminality  is  every  soul  becoming,  even  under  the  fairest 
shows,  coupled  with  neglect  of  God.  S.  Advancing  a  step,  observe  that  it  is  on 
just  this  view  of  humau  character  under  sin  that  Christianity  is  based.  Christ 
makes  no  distinction  of  resptctable  and  unrespectable  as  regards  the  common  waui 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHA».  rm. 

of  salvation.  Hence  the  declared  impossibility  of  eternal  life  even  to  a  NfcodemoB  o» 
a  young  ruler  save  by  a  radical  change  of  character,  but  the  most  fallen,  like  thie 
woman,  Christ  wants  to  raise.  4.  And  so,  when  you  go  to  stand  before  God,  it  will 
not  be  even  your  virtues,  however  much  commended  here,  that  will  give  yon  aa 
entrance  among  the  glorified.  Respectable  sin  will  not  pass  there  as  here,  and  aa 
both  forms  are  the  same  in  principle,  the  world  of  retribution  must  be  a  world  of 
strange  companionships.  The  spirits  of  guilty  men  will  not  be  assorted  by  their 
tastes,  but  by  their  demerits.  Those  now  pleasing  themselves  in  the  dignity  of 
their  virtues  may  fall  into  group  with  those  now  avoided  with  revulsion.  (H. 
Bushnell,  D.D.)  Being  convicted  In  their  own  conscience. — Spiritual  eonvic' 
tions : — I.  Pbeliminabv  distinctions  as  to  conscience  itselp.  It  may  be  considered 
as — 1.  Ignorant  or  enlightened.  The  former,  being  vitiated  by  error  or  corrupted 
by  prejudice,  is  an  unsafe  guide.  It  may  condemn  virtue  and  canonize  vice. 
Hence  the  Jews  persecuted  Christians,  thinWng  to  do  God  service,  and  Christiana 
have  persecuted  one  another.  But  the  latter,  freed  from  corrupt  influence  and 
acquainted  with  the  rule  of  duty,  distinguishing  between  things  that  differ  and 
approving  those  that  are  excellent,  is  a  great  blessing  (Heb.  xiii.  8).  2.  Unneces- 
sarily scrupulous  or  daringly  presumptive.  The  former  makes  that  a  sin  which 
God  has  not  declared  sinful,  and  is  a  weak  conscience  (1  Cor.  viii.  7  ;  x.  12).  The 
latter  has  no  scruples,  and  bids  defiance  to  the  laws  and  vengeance  of  heaven 
(Deut.  xxix.  19).  8.  Pure  or  defiled.  The  one  is  purged  by  the  blood  of  Christ 
from  guilt,  and  is  thus  pacified ;  the  other  is  contaminated  by  sin,  and  lavs  no 
restraint  on  the  appetites,  nor  reproves  the  motions  of  sin  (1  Tim.  iii.  9 ;  Heb.  x. 
22;  1  Tim.  i.  15).  4.  Tender  or  seared.  The  one  is  a  faithful  monitor,  and 
trembles  at  the  Divine  threatenings  (Prov.  xx.  27) ;  the  other  is  free  from  all  fear, 
and  too  stupid  to  perform  its  functions  (Zech.  vii.  12).  6.  Peaceable  or  trouble- 
some. The  one  conscious  of  pardoned  guilt  and  mortified  corruptions  is  one  of  the 
greatest  mercies  this  side  of  heaven.  It  arms  ns  against  the  most  virulent  reproachea 
and  supports  under  the  most  agonizing  afflictions.  The  other  is  a  worm  at  the  root 
of  all  our  comfort ;  there  can  hardly  be  a  greater  calamity  (Prov.xviii.  14).  6.  Natural 
and  renewed.  The  first  does  not  entirely  neglect  its  duty,  but  performs  it  in  an 
imperfect  manner  (Bom.  ii.) ;  but  the  other  fulfils  its  functions  more  perfectly. 
The  conscience  here  spoken  of  is  the  former,  awakened  for  a  time,  and  then  falling 
asleep  again.     II.   Whebein  consists  the  diffebencb  between  the  convictions 

WHICH  arise   FBOM   CONSCIENCE   AND  THOSE  IMPRESSED  BY  THE  SPIRIT  OF  GoD.      There 

is  a  great  difference  in  spiritual  convictions.  Some  are  sudden  (Acts  ii.  37),  others 
more  gradual ;  some  visible  and  violent,  others  invisible  and  easy,  as  in  the  case  of 
the  jailor  and  Lydia.  But  the  distinction  between  these  and  natural  lies  in  such 
things  as  these.  1.  Natural  convictions  respect  only  the  gnilt  of  sin,  spiritual  are 
attended  with  a  painful  sense  of  inherent  pollution.  The  former  are  illustrated  in 
the  cases  of  Cain,  Lamech,  Pharoah,  Ahab,  and  Judas  ;  the  latter  in  the  case  of  the 
Prodigal,  Peter,  and  Paul.  2.  In  natural  convictions  the  soul  is  actuated  by  slavish 
fear  of  temporal  and  eternal  punishments.  Persons  may  dread  the  consequences 
of  sin,  and  yet  be  addicted  to  it.  But  spiritual  convictions  have  a  respect  to  the 
honour  and  love  of  God,  hence  "  against  Thee,  Thee  only  have  I  sinned."  Godly 
sorrow  proceeds  from  this.  3.  Natural  convictions  extend  only  to  some  sins,  and 
those  generally  of  a  more  gross  and  heinous  nature,  as  Achan  and  Judas.  It  is 
true  that  the  Spirit  of  God  in  conviction  fastens  some  particular  sin,  often,  on  the 
conscience ;  but  He  does  not  stop  there,  but  leads  to  the  corrupt  fountain  of  sin  in 
the  heart,  and  to  those  spiritual  sins  which  are  beyond  natural  convictions,  pride» 
avarice,  &o.  4.  Natural  convictions  are  temporary  and  vanishing,  as  in  the  case  of 
Nebuchadnezzar  and  Felix.  The  unclean  spirit  quits  its  abode,  but  not  its  claim, 
and  returns  with  seven  other  spirits,  &o.  It  is  otherwise  with  the  truly  awakened. 
He  not  only  lies  under  conviction,  bat  yields  to  the  force  of  it,  and  acts  permanently 
under  it.  5.  Natural  convictions  may  consist  with  the  love  of  sin.  The  legs^ 
convict  is  as  much  an  enemy  to  real  hohness  as  ever ;  but  spiritual  convictions 
are  always  attended  with  an  abhorrence  of  sin.  {B.  Beddome.)  Conviction  of 
eonteience : — I.  Notwithstandino  a  bold  and  confident  appearance.  Innocence 
has  boldness,  so  has  guilt.  Hides  in  imaginary  concealment.  But  let  there  be  a 
sense  of  impossibility  of  prevarication,  as  nnder  the  searching  eye  of  God,  and 
conscience  condemns — 1.  As  to  any  special  sin :  Achan,  David.  2.  Sin  generally. 
What  a  spectacle  would  the  hearts  of  an  assembly  possess  under  the  full  persuasioa 
of  Divine  omniscience  t  IL  Often  bt  the  simplest  thino.  No  fierce  reproba- 
tions necessary.     Calm,  quiet  words,  enough,  e.g. — 1.  "  Son,  remember."    Tht^ 


•HAT.  Tin.]  ST.  JOHN.  U 

bnrial  places  of  memory  give  np  their  dead.  2.  "Even  thou  wast  one  of  them. '"^ 
Christ  rejected.  3.  "  What  dost  thon  more  than  others  ?  "  Slothful  professor. 
When  the  rocks  out  of  the  "  hell  gate  "  in  New  Tork  harbour  were  to  be  cleared 
away,  the  explosion  of  dynamite  required  no  army  to  effect  it,  only  the  touch  of  a 
child  on  the  battery.  III.  Leads  to  withdbawai.  trom  others.  1.  Sometimes 
for  suUenness  and  anger,  as  probably  here.  2.  Sometimes  for  disastrous  results, 
suicide,  e.g.,  Judas.  3.  If  wise,  for  penitence  and  prayer.  Learn — 1.  The  help- 
lessness of  the  law  admits  no  excuse  or  escape.  2.  The  method  of  the  gospel  begins 
with  forgiveness.  3.  The  blessedness  of  the  mission  of  Christ.  He  came  not  to 
hear  accusations,  but  to  save.  (O.  McMichael,  B.A.)  The  penitent's  gospel : — 
I.  The  sinner's  way  of  tbeatiko  sin.  It  is  a  terrible  thing  for  a  sinner  to  fall 
into  the  hands  of  his  fellow  sinners.  There  is  little  hope  for  the  sinner  at  hands 
like  these.  They  may  send  him  to  the  judge  and  the  officer ;  to  the  gaol  or  the 
reformatory.  They  may  make  the  case  one  for  light  gossip  and  casuistical  dis- 
tinctions, studying  it  as  an  anatomical  deformity.  II.  The  law's  way  of  tbeatino 
BIN. — "  Moses  said  that  such  an  one  should  be  stoned."  It  is  with  the  moral,  as 
with  natural  law — the  least  violation  of  its  provisions  is  immediately  and  terribly 
avenged.  III.  The  Saviour's  way  of  treating  bin.  In  that  bowed  head  and 
hidden  face  we  get  a  slight  indication  of  how  much  it  costs  Him.  Sin  cannot 
change  His  royal  heart,  or  staunch  His  pity,  or  freeze  the  fountains  of  His  com- 
passion. Nay,  it  makes  Him  more  careful  to  show  His  tender,  pitying,  pleading 
love.  He  sometimes  seems  to  wait  ere  He  utters  the  words  of  peace.  But  this  is 
from  no  tardiness  in  His  love.  (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  The  awakening  of  con- 
tcience : — King  Bichard  I.  of  England,  on  his  way  to  the  Holy  Land,  was  taken 
captive,  and  thrown  into  an  unknown  dungeon.  He  had  a  favourite  minstrel  named 
Blondel,  who  knew  only  that  his  master  was  imprisoned  somewhere  in  a  castle 
dungeon  among  the  mountain  forests.  From  one  to  another  of  these  he  travelled, 
playing  some  well-known  airs  before  the  dungeon  bars,  till  at  last  his  music  with- 
out was  answered  by  the  voice  of  his  king  within.  This  discovery  led  to  Richard's 
return  from  exile,  and  restoration  to  his  throne.  "  Thus  the  spirit  of  man  sits  like 
a  captive  king  in  a  dungeon,  until  the  voice  of  divine  music  wakes  echoes  hitherto 
unknown  along  his  prison-house,  and  stirs  him  with  new  knowledge,  new  conscious- 
ness." CoTiscience: — More  than  one  hundred  years  ago  there  graduated  at  Har- 
vard University  a  man  by  the  name  of  Grindoll  Rawson,  who  subsequently  settled 
in  the  ministry  at  Yarmouth,  on  Cape  Cod.  He  used  to  preach  very  pointed 
sermons.  Having  heard  that  some  of  his  parishioners  were  in  the  habit  of  making 
him  the  object  of  their  mirth  at  a  tavern,  he  one  Sabbath  preached  a  discourse  from 
the  text,  "  And  I  was  the  song  of  the  drunkard."  His  remarks  were  of  a  very 
moving  character — so  much  so  that  many  of  bis  hearers  rose  and  left  the  house  in 
the  midst  of  the  sermon.  A  short  time  afterwards  the  preacher  delivered  a  dis- 
coorse  still  more  pointed  than  the  first,  from  the  text,  "  And  they,  being  convicted 
oat  of  their  own  conscience,  went  out  one  by  one."  On  this  occasion  no  one 
ventured  to  retire  from  the  assembly,  but  the  guilty  ones  resigned  themselves,  with 
as  good  a  grace  as  possible,  to  the  lash  of  their  pastor.  {W.  Baxendale.)  Con- 
tcience : — It  is  related  of  Mr.  Richard  Garratt  that  he  used  to  walk  to  Petworth 
every  Monday.  In  one  of  these  walks  a  country  fellow  that  had  been  his  hearer 
the  day  before,  and  had  been  cut  to  the  heart  by  somewhat  he  had  delivered,  came 
np  to  him  with  his  scythe  upon  his  shoulders,  and  in  a  mighty  rage  told  him  he 
would  be  the  death  of  him,  for  he  was  sure  he  was  a  witch,  he  having  told  him  the 
day  before  what  no  man  in  the  world  knew  of  him  but  God  and  the  devil,  and  there- 
fore he  most  certainly  dealt  with  the  devil.  {Ibid.)  Condemning  conscience: — 
Where  is  there  a  power  to  be  found  comparable  to  that  of  an  accusing  conscience, 
which,  with  its  condemning  voice,  fills  even  heroes  with  dismay,  who  otherwise 
would  not  have  trembled  before  thousands;  and,  stronger  than  death,  deprives 
mighty  men,  who  are  accustomed  to  fear  nothing  and  no  one,  and  even  to  look 
death  in  the  face,  of  the  brazen  armour  of  their  courage,  and  their  confidence  in 
a  moment ;  which  is  able  to  make  us  feel  the  validity  of  its  sentence,  even  though 
the  whole  world  should  deny  it,  and  applaud  and  eulogize  our  names  in  opposition 
to  it ;  and  which  transmutes  into  gall  that  which  is  the  most  valuable  to  us  in  the 
world,  if  we  are  obliged  to  enjoy  it  under  the  thunder  of  its  reproaches  ?  {Krum- 
mocker.)  The  danger  of  uilencing  conscience  : — You  may  dim  the  surface  of  the 
glass,  so  that  it  shall  no  longer  be  painfully  bright,  like  a  little  sun  lying  on  the 
ground ;  but  your  puny  operation  does  not  extinguish  the  great  light  that  glows  in 
heaven.     Thus  to  trample  conscience  in  the  mire,  so  that  it  shall  no  longer  refieot 


16  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOR,  [chap.  Tin 

God's  holiness,  does  not  discharge  holiness  from  the  character  of  Qod.  He  will 
come  to  judge  the  world,  although  the  world  madly  silence  the  witness  who  tells  of 
His  coming.  (W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  The  two  eonvictioru : — The  Pharisees,  convicted 
by  their  conscience,  go  away  from  Jesus ;  the  woman,  convicted  by  her  conscience, 
remains  with  Jesus ;  the  Pharisees  conceal  and  withdraw  from  the  Saviour  their 
sin,  which  yet  they  cannot  deny  ;  the  woman  surrenders  her  sin  to  Jesus,  for  the 
burden  of  it  she  cannot  bear.  In  short,  the  woman  is  penitent — the  Pharisees  are 
not.  Thus  it  came  to  pass  that  the  proceeding  which  the  Pharisees  were  led  to 
adopt  through  malignity  only  served  to  drive  a  lost  sheep  into  the  arms  of  the  good 
Shepherd.  {B.  Besser.)  Conscisnce  a  provision  of  mercy : — A  man  may  be  saved 
from  death  by  seeing  the  reflection  of  danger  in  a  mirror,  when  the  danger  itself 
could  not  be  directly  seen.  The  executioner  with  his  weapon  is  stealthily  approaching 
through  a  corridor  of  the  castle  to  the  spot  where  the  devoted  invalid  reclines.  In  his 
musings  the  captive  has  turned  his  vacant  eye  towards  a  mirror  on  the  wall,  and 
the  faithful  witness  reveals  the  impending  stroke  in  time  to  secure  the  escape  of  the 
victim.  It  is  thus  that  the  mirror  in  a  man's  breast  has  become  in  a  sense  the 
man's  saviour,  by  revealing  the  wrath  to  come  before  its  coming.  Happy  they  who 
take  the  warning — happy  they  who  turn  and  live!  {Dr.  Arnot.)  Conscience 
stricken : — Father  Andr6,  preaching  one  day  at  Paris  against  the  vices  of  gallantry 
and  intrigue,  threatened  to  name  a  lady  present  as  being  one  of  the  guilty.  He,  how- 
ever, conected  himself,  saying,  in  Christian  charity  he  would  only  throw  his  skull- 
cap  in  the  direction  where  the  lady  sat.  As  soon  as  he  took  his  cap  in  his  hand  every 
woman  present  bobbed  down  her  head,  for  fear  it  should  come  to  her.  {W.  Baxendale.) 
And  Jesus  was  left  alone,  and  the  woman  standing  In  the  midst. — Mercy  and 
misery  met  together : — A  sinner  and  the  Saviour  in  the  temple  of  God,  face  to  face 
and  alone.  How  solemn  the  interview  I  How  suggestive  the  incident  I  Note — I. 
That  sinnees  need  not  dread  a  personal  interview  with  Jesus  now.  Her  accusers 
had  placed  the  woman  "  in  the  midst,"  and  now  they  had  departed,  and  she  might 
have  gone,  there  she  still  stood.  Solitary  woman,  guilty  sinner,  ashamed  and 
awed  by  her  situation,  she  is  strangely  bound  to  the  spot.  Not  an  effort  made  to 
escape  His  judgment.  Condemned  already  by  the  law  of  Moses,  what  has  she  to 
fear  from  Him  ?  If  the  worst  should  happen,  she  could  bat  die ;  but  perhaps  her 
misery  may  find  mercy.  How  instructive  to  sinners  this  conduct  i  1.  From  the 
hour  of  the  first  transgression  sinners  have  feared  a  personal  interview  with  Qod. 
Jacob  thought  Bethel  a  dreadful  place;  Moses  did  exceedingly  fear  and  quake; 
Monoah  thought  he  would  die  because  he  had  seen  God.  And  now  sinners  try  to 
do  what  Adam  and  Eve  failed  to  do — "  hide  themselves  from  the  presence  of  the 
Lord."  2.  But  to  exorcise  this  demon  of  guilty  dread  God  was  manifest  in  the 
flesh.  The  Son  of  Man  came  to  seek  and  to  save,  and  to  be  the  Friend  of  sinners. 
None  has  cause  to  shun  Jesus.  He  does  not  repel,  He  invites.  Known  to  Him  is 
my  sinful  history ;  and  whither  shall  I  flee  from  His  presence  ?  There  is  no  need, 
for  He  is  a  just  God  and  a  Saviour.  II.  That  "Jesus  alone"  is  the  sinneb's 
COURT  or  APPEAL  FROM  ALL  ACCU8EBS.  Thcsc  men  never  dreamed  of  the  gospel  truth 
they  were  signally  illustrating.  The  woman  was  under  legal  penalty  of  death. 
The  representatives  of  the  law  arraigned  her,  quoting  the  Mosaic  statute,  and  by 
asking  Jesus  to  adjudicate,  perhaps  in  irony  of  His  Messianic  claims,  they  appealed 
from  Moses  to  Christ.  And  when  the  accusers,  themselves  condemned,  had  left, 
she  allowed  her  case  to  remain  where  they  had  lodged  it,  in  the  supreme  court  of 
appeal,  and  from  His  lips  only  would  she  receive  her  doom.  Our  case  is  parallel. 
1.  Our  sinfulness  is  indisputable.  The  penal  sentence  in  the  law  has  been  promul- 
gated :  "  The  soul  that  sinneth  it  shall  die."  Moses  indicts  us,  and  demands 
judgment.  2.  But  our  appeal  is  lodged  in  the  gospel  court.  We  are  "  come  to 
Jesus  and  the  blood  of  sprinkling."  He  satisfies  the  demands  of  the  law  and 
silences  the  accusers  of  all  whom  He  shields  with  His  mercy.  UI.  That  when  a 
sinker  trustfully  leaves  his  case  with  Jesus  alone  the  issue  cannot  be  doubt- 
ful. By  tarrying  she  signified  a  wish  that  Christ  should  adjudicate,  and  thus  gave 
evidence  of  her  trust  in  His  mercy.  The  verdict  was  not  delayed  :  "  Neither  do  I 
cond'mn  thee,"  &c.  Primarily  the  words  refer  to  the  civil  penalty  of  death,  which 
Jesus  had  been  asked  to  confirm,  and  which,  not  being  a  magistrate.  He  declined  to 
do.  But  this  carried  with  it  religious  reprobation,  and  therefore  Christ  could  not 
pronounce  the  words  of  judicial  doom,  "  For  God  sent  not  His  Son  into  the  world 
to  condemn,"  &c.  If  there  be  no  man  to  cast  the  stone,  the  merciful  Kedeemer 
will  not  do  so;  He  will  save.  There  is  no  questionable  leniency  here.  A  more 
decisive  censm'e  eould  not  have  been  uttered.    Yat  while  there  was  iu  the  admoni. 


CHAP.  Tm.]  ST.  JOHN.  17 

tion  "  sin  no  more"  an  emphatic  reproof  of  her  former  sin,  the  words  "  Neither  do 
I  condemn  thee  :  go,"  mast  have  brought  Divine  absolution,     "  Blessed  is  the  man 
imto  whom  the  Lord  imputeth  not  iniquity."     Let  sinners  be  encouraged  to  come 
to  Jesus.    This  woman,  who  was  brought  to  Him  as  a  Judge,  found  Him  a  Saviour; 
the  bar  of  judgment  became  the  throne  of  grace.     We  are  invited  to  come.    The 
eoming  is  a  confession  of  need,  an  indication  of  penitence,  a  confession  of  trust; 
(A.  A.  Ramsay.)         Sin  and  its  treatment : — "  How  do  you  make  your  living  ?  " 
"  I  hsuig  about  the  drinking  saloons,"  she  replied.     Not  quite  taking  in  the  meaning 
of  her  answer,  I  asked  her  again,  "  What  are  your  means  of  life  ?  "    But  she 
laughed  and  gave  no  other  answer.     Hereupon  the  master  of  the  lodging  came  in, 
and,  casting  a  stem  look  at  her,  said,  "  She  is  a  prostitute,  sir  1 "     After  saying 
that  to  me,  he  turned  to  the  woman  as  though  she  was  a  dog.    "  You  hang  about 
the  drinking  saloons.     Well  I  give  the  answer  you  ought  to  give — prostitute.     She 
does  not  know  her  own  name."    His  tone  pained  me.     "  We  have  no  right  to 
insult  her,"  I  said.     "  If  we  men  lived  as  God  would  have  us  live,  there  would  b« 
no  prostitutes.     We  ought  rather  to  pity  them  than  to  blame  them."     I  had  no 
sooner  said  this  than  I  heard  th«  boards  of  the  beds  creaking  in  the  next  room. 
Above  the  partition  (which  did  not  reach  to  the  ceiling)  there  appeared  a  curly 
bead,  with  little  swollen  eyes,  and  a  dark  red  face ;  then  another  head  popped  up ; 
and  still  another.      These  women  had  doubtless  got  on  their  beds  to  look  over,  and 
all  stared  at  me  earnestly.    There  was  an  awkward  silence.     The  master  of  the 
lodging  cast  his  eyes  down  in  confusion.      The  women  drew  in  their  breath  and 
waited.    I  felt  more  confused  than  any.    I  had  never  thought  that  a  word  dropped 
thus  casually  could  have  produced  such  an  effect.    It  was  almost  like  the  move- 
ment of  the  dry  bones  in  Ezekiel's  vision.     I  had  uttered  without  thought  a  word 
of  love  and  pity,  and  that  word  had  thrilled  them  all.    They  all  looked  at  me  as  if 
they  expected  me  to  speak  the  words  and  do  the  deeds  whereby  these  bones  might 
come  together,  cover  themselves  with  flesh,  and  live  again.      (Count   Tolstoi.} 
When  Jesas  had  lifted  Himself  up,  and  saw  none  but  the  woman.  —  Shaineful 
life  : — I.  The  fact  of  shameful  life  itself.   1.  In  the  midst  of  the  great  city,  with 
all  its  grandeur  and  luxury,  there  hangs  the  dark  shadow  of  one  prevailing  sin,  the 
presence  of  which  every  one  knows  and  feels,  but  of  which  no  one  dare  speak.     We 
deprecate  the  contamination  of  the  statement,  while  we  suffer  the  curse  of  the  fact. 
It  is  an  ancient  shame,  coeval  with  the  eaiUest  corruption  of  the  human  heart ; 
stalking  in  its  painted  abominations  amongst  the  most  splendid  reflnements  ; 
mingling  its  polluted  stream  with  the  foremost  tides  of  civilization ;  moving  with 
colonies;  as  sure  to  be  found  in  every  city  as  crime  or  death.     2.  As  in  this 
passage,  so  everywhere,  it  is  woman  who  stands  in  the  foreground,  and  upon  her 
the  malediction  falls.    Consider  this  army  of  six  thousand  women,  so  many  of 
them  mere  children,  some  of  them  from  homes  of  sanctity  where  grey  hairs  have 
gone  down,  through  them,  in  sorrow  to  the  grave.    Some  indeed  were  born  so  low 
that  they  could  not  fall ;  but  to  many  it  has  been  a  fall  as  awful  as  that  of  a  star 
from  its  sphere.    It  may  be  easy  to  iorget  a  lower  state  in  rising  to  a  higher,  but 
never  in  the  profoundest  degradation  the  condition  from  which  we  have  lapsed. 
Eemorse  can  never  abandon  the  human  soul.     This  remorse  accompanies  the  lost 
girl  in  her  descending  career.    In  the  early  stages  there  is  an  incongruity  between 
that  "  soul's  tragedy  "  and  the  gay  welcome  into  the  world  of  the  lost ;  but  as  with 
rapid  descent  the  steps  go  downward  God's  violated  law  of  purity  makes  known  ite 
awful  vindications.    On  that  pallet  of  straw,  in  that  damp,  dark  cellar  reeking  with 
the  miasma  of  debauchery  and  death,  the  woman  dies.    3.  If  the  sufferings  of  the 
victim  furnishes  no  reason  for  calling  this  fact  before  us,  the  peril  of  the  young 
and  innocent  should.     Silence  and  apathy  are  not  justifled  by  any  motives  of 
deUcacy.    The  curse  is  in  having  a  social  cancer,  not  in  talking  about  one.    The 
only  possibility  of  curing  a  wrong  is  to  become  clearly  conscious  of  it.    To  prevent 
talk  there  is  on  the  one  hand  a  morbid  sensitiveness,  and  on  the  other  frivolity, 
which  only  finds  the  subject  an  occasion  for  jest  or  an  insinuation  that  the 
reformer  knows  more  about  it  than  he  ought.     At  least  there  is  an  unconscious- 
ness of  danger  wbich  cries,  "  Don't  disturb  this  matter  ;  let  it  rest  as  something 
that  cannot  be  helped,  or  with  which  we  have  nothing  to  do."    Is  it  so  that  inno- 
cent lives  are  in  no  danger  ?     Is  there  a  moral  swamp  whose  foul  vapours  ever 
spread?     We  must  have  quarantine  for  pestilence.     We  break  laws  and  bum 
buildings  it  it  come  too  near.    But  a  moral  evil  that  oozes  its  damnation  through 
brick  walls,  and  saps  the  city  with  corruption,  that  breaks  the  hearts  of  goodi 
VOL.  Q.  2 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  nxL 

women — this  we  mnst  not  speak  about,  but  let  alone.  So,  then,  it  is  a  safe  danger, 
is  it  ?  Who  is  safe  ?  Are  you  in  your  respectability,  O  father  I  while  this  tempta- 
tion waits  for  your  sons  ?  Are  you  in  your  honour,  O  mother  I  while  mothers  are 
broken-hearted  for  their  daughters'  shame  ?  Are  you,  O  citizen  I  with  this  many- 
headed  fountain  of  poverty  and  crime  ?  Preach  to  the  heathen,  but  this  devU- 
worship — as  to  that  walk  about  in  silence.  This  is  neither  delicacy  nor  sense. 
No  !  bring  into  open  view  the  shame,  even  as  this  woman  was ;  let  it  be  marked,  that 
the  full  light  of  Christ's  truth  and  purity  may  stream  upon  it.  II.  The  belation  of 
IT  to  those  who  ABE  NOT  PEESONALLY  INVOLVED  IN  IT.  1.  The  accuscrs  felt  by  the 
Saviour's  reply  that  in  some  way  they  were  related  to  the  woman's  guilt.  Not  by 
that,  it  may  be,  but  by  some  sin.  Bat  how  many  are  conscious  of  this  special 
crime  ?  People  think  the  text  a  lesson  of  charity,  but  it  is  a  lesson  of  justice  also. 
But  what  justice  is  there  in  our  modern  custom  that  scarcely  frowns  on  the  guilty 
man — sometimes  laughs  at  and  even  patronizes  him — and  pours  all  its  vials  of  wrath 
upon  the  woman,  the  victim  of  his  falsehood  and  meanness  ?  What  justice,  honour, 
and  delicacy,  0  refined  woman  1  who,  recoiling  with  virtuous  scorn  from  that  fallen 
sister,  will  welcome  him  by  whom  she  fell  7  I  suppose  the  mantle  of  Christian  charity 
should  cover  everybody ;  but  if  there  is  anybody  that  it  won't  cover,  and  that  ought 
$0  have  the  privilege  of  lying  outside  the  hem  of  it  in  the  cold  blast  and  biting 
frost,  it  is  that  man  who  trades  in  a  woman's  affections,  and  leaves  her  to  suffer  in 
the  guilt,  and  goes  on  to  new  conquests,  and  boasts  of  his  victories  —  smooth, 
flattered,  welcomed  in  refined  society,  when  his  only  use  in  the  world  seems  to  be 
to  make  men  feel  that  any  particular  devil  is  unnecessary.  No  I  I  insist  that  the 
shame  should  be  divided,  and  that  the  sinning  man  should  be  branded  as  distinctly 
as  the  sinning  woman.  2.  The  accusers  went  out  one  by  one,  beginning  at  the 
«ldest,  being  convicted  by  their  conscience.  Yes,  conscience,  if  nothing  else,  con- 
victs— (1)  The  aged  of  participation  in  the  shameful  life.  It  is  most  awful  to 
contemplate — a  profligate  old  man  without  even  a  sinful  excuse  for  his  corruption. 
(2)  And  youth.  Vain  attempt  to  paint  a  picture  which  needs  not  to  be  painted,  so 
terribly  is  every  lineament  of  it  drawn  in  thousands  of  faces,  in  hundreds  of  homes, 
in  ruined  character,  in  diseased  manhood,  in  beautiful  life  recklessly  thrown  away 
into  untimely  graves.  3.  What  are  the  causes  ?  Well,  one  is  want.  Thousands 
have  struggled  to  the  last  thread  of  subsistence  before  yielding  to  temptation,  and 
have,  poor  wretches  1  resorted  to  the  streets  to  eke  out  a  living.  If  you  ask  what 
jou  have  to  do  with  this  matter,  you  have  to  cease  to  glory  in  buying  cheap,  which 
involves  starvation  wages.  III.  Chbist's  treatment  op  it.  1.  The  first  idea  of 
All  Christian  treatment  is  to  get  rid  of  sin — not  to  palliate  it.  How  ?  The  very 
least  we  can  do  is  to  recognize  our  obligation  of  personal  purity.  2.  The  other 
point  of  treatment  is  mercy,  giving  a  chance  of  repentance  and  reformation  to  the 
sinner.  This  was  what  Christ  did,  and  if  He  did,  who  shall  refuse  ?  But  Society 
makes  a  Dante's  hell  of  the  state  of  shameful  life ;  closes  its  doors  and  writes  over 
them,  "No  hope."  Consider  the  words  of  a  poor  girl:  "Now  I  have  once  done 
wrong,  I  can't  get  any  one  to  give  me  work,  and  I  mnst  either  stay  here  or  starve." 
Have  we  any  right  to  establish  such  an  inexorable  barrier  ?  Conclusion :  We  hardly 
comprehend  the  full  meaning  of  "  Ye  scribes  and  Pharisees,  hypocrites — the  pub- 
licans and  harlots  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven  before  you."  The  Christian  idea  ia 
to  seek  and  to  save  the  lost.  Some  one  may  suggest  that  those  we  may  save  are 
only  like  a  drop  in  the  ocean.  But  every  drop  is  a  soul.  Mercy  is  justice  in  this' 
case.  Christ  has  proposed  the  true  test :  "  Let  him  that  is  without  sin,"  &o.  No 
one  can  do  that.  But  He  interposes  with  His  more  excellent  way — of  hope  and 
newUfe;  and  He  says,  and  requires  us  to  say,  "Go  and  sin  no  more."  {E.  H. 
Chapin,  D.D.)  Neither  do  I  condemn  thee. — Sin  not  palliated  though  par- 
doned:— What?  does  our  Lord  favour  sin?  No;  observe  what  follows:  "Go 
and  sin  no  more."  Therefore  He  condemned  sin  and  pardoned  the  sinner. 
Let  them  who  love  Christ's  mercy  also  fear  His  truth,  for  "  gracious  and 
righteous  is  the  Lord"  (Psa.  xxv.  7).  Observe  also  that  this  acquittal  was 
pronounced  by  Christ  nnder  special  circumstance,  viz.,  when  the  teachers 
of  the  law  were  breakers  of  the  law,  as  was  shown  by  our  Lord's  test :  "  He 
that  is  without  sin,"  &c. ;  and  consequently  great  indulgence  was  due  to  those 
who  were  subject  to  their  teaching  and  looked  to  their  example.  Hence  our  Lord'* 
merciful  reply.  But  let  it  not  be  abused  by  misapplication  to  the  times  of  the 
gospel,  when  the  sin  of  adultery  has  been  made  more  heinous  by  the  Incarnation, 
and  by  clearer  teaching  on  the  sanctity  of  marriage  (Eph.  v.  32),  and  by  still  more 
awfol  denunciation  on  the  sins  of  uncleanness  (1  Cor.  vi.  9 ;  Eph.  v.  3,  5 ;  1  Thesa. 


«BA».  Tin.]  ST.  JOHN.  1» 

iv.  6-7  ;  Heb.  xiii.  4  ;  Bev.  xxi.  8),  Christ  is  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  as  well 
as  the  Lamb  of  God.  Let  us  not  presume  on  the  meekness  of  the  Lamb,  lest  we 
feel  the  wrath  of  the  Lion.  {Bp.  Wordsworth.)  Tenderness  to  the  erring  : — 
Perhaps  the  most  eminently  practical  grace  which  could  be  given  to  a  man  or  a 
woman  is  the  gift  of  tenderness  in  dealiug  with  the  erring.  "Where  pitiless  severity 
would  harden,  where  cold  contempt  would  embitter,  a  few  words  of  tender  human 
sympathy  will  often  open  the  heart  of  one  not  yet  wholly  depraved  to  the  teaching, 
SEd  to  the  grace  of  Christ.  Nothing  thaws  the  frozen  ground  more  quickly  than 
the  warm  rains  of  spring ;  nothing  will  thaw  a  frozen  heart  like  the  warm  rains  of 
a  Christian  sympathy  that  can  weep  for  the  sins,  as  well  as  the  woes,  of  others. 
Nearly  ten  years  ago  a  minister  was  invited  to  address  the  inmates  of  a  home  for 
those  who  had  been  saved  out  of  an  infamy  worse  than  death.  As  he  rose  to  hia 
feet,  and  saw,  upturned  to  his,  a  hundred  faces  marred  by  the  blight  of  lost  inno- 
cence, a  great  wave  of  emotion  surged  over  his  soul,  and  he  found  himself  unable 
to  utter  a  word.  For  a  moment  he  laced  his  audience  ;  then  he  bowed  his  head  on 
the  readiug-desk  with  a  great  sob.  During  that  moment's  hush  all  held  their 
breath,  wondering  at  his  silence.  When  he  bowed  his  head  to  hide  his  tears,  the 
strong  wave  of  emotion  surged  from  his  heart  to  theirs,  and  in  a  few  seconds,  while 
yet  no  word  had  been  uttered,  nothing  could  be  heard  but  the  sobs  of  those  bewail- 
ing their  lost  innocence.  That  wordless  sermon  was,  in  its  results,  the  most 
effective  sermon  that  had  ever  been  preached  in  that  institution.  The  sympathetic 
tenderness  of  that  minister  had  done  more  than  his  logic  could  have  done.  Perhaps 
some  of  us  would  have  more  of  his  success  in  reaching  the  lost  if  we  had  more  of 
that  loving  and  sorrowing  regard  for  the  sinner  which  enabled  him  to  realize  so 
profoundly  the  pathos  and  the  tragedy  of  those  wrecked  hves  before  him.  (H.  C, 
Trumbull,  D.D.)  If  Christ  condemn  us  not,  we  need  not  fear  men : — A  prisoner 
standing  at  the  bar  in  the  time  of  his  trial  seemed  to  smile  when  heavy  things  were 
laid  against  him.  One  that  stood  by  asked  him  why  he  smiled.  "  Oh  I  "  said  he, 
"it  is  no  matter  what  the  evidence  say,  so  long  as  the  judge  says  nothing."  Care 
for  the  fallen  : — A  writer  relates  that  during  a  conversation  with  George  Eliot,  not 
long  before  her  death,  a  vase  toppled  over  on  the  mantelpiece.  The  great  authoress 
quickly  and  unconsciously  put  out  her  hand  to  stop  its  fall.  "I  hope,"  said  she, 
replacing  it,  "  that  the  time  will  come  when  we  shall  instinctively  hold  up  the  man 
or  woman  who  begins  to  fall  as  naturally  and  unconsciously  as  we  arrest  a  falling 
piece  of  furniture."     (W.  Baxendale.) 

Vers.  12-20.  Then  spake  Jesus  again  unto  them.  The  connection  of  ChrisfB 
discourse  with  the  previous  incident  and  the  feast : — The  feast  of  tabernacles  was 
over.  The  water  of  Siloab  was  no  more  poured  out  by  the  altar ;  the  golden  lights 
no  longer  burned  in  the  fore-court  of  the  Temple.  But  like  as  Jesus  Christ,  the  True 
Well  of  salvation,  offered  from  His  inexhaustible  spring  living  water  to  all  who 
were  athirst,  so  also  as  the  True  Light,  He  shone  with  a  never-dying  lustre,  in  order 
that  He  might  lead  sinners  out  of  the  darkness  of  death  into  the  light  of  life. 
What  power  the  perishable,  earthly  hght  of  the  Temple  had,  how  impotent  it  was  to 
enlighten  the  hearts  of  those  who  participated  in  the  festival,  had  been  exhibited  to 
all  in  the  narrative  of  this  momiLig.  In  the  midst  of  the  bright  shining  of  the 
tabernacle  lights,  that  woman  was  wandering  in  the  darkness  of  adulterous  lust, 
and  her  accusers  in  the  darkness  of  arrogant  self-conceit.  Not  until  the  light  of 
Jesus  broke  in  upon  the  woman's  heart  did  she  become  a  penitent  sinner,  or  forsake 
the  love  of  darkness ;  whilst  on  the  other  hand,  the  Pharisees,  when  shone  upon  by 
the  light  of  the  Searcher  of  hearts,  became  convicted  sinners,  and  went  out  because 
they  loved  darkness  rather  than  light.  And  the  requirement  that  the  Lord  made  of 
the  woman  upon  whom  the  light  of  His  grace  had  shone,  "Go  and  sin  no  more," 
is  now  included  in  the  word  of  promise :  "  He  that  followeth  Me  shall  not  walk  in 
darkness,  but  shall  have  the  light  of  life."  Ouce  upon  a  time,  the  people  had 
followed  the  light  of  the  pillar  of  fire  in  the  wilderness ;  and  of  this  they  were 
reminded  by  the  light  of  the  feast  of  tabernacles.  But  now  many  in  the  wilderness 
followed  that  hght  and  yet  wandered  in  darkness,  because  the  light  of  life  was  not 
theirs  I — they  had  it  not  I  How  many,  too,  were  there  now  who  rejoiced  in  the 
lustre  of  the  tabernacle  light,  yet  were  wandering  in  darkness,  because  they  too  had 
not  the  light  of  life  1  Yes,  how  many  heard  the  law  read  aloud  in  the  assembly  of 
the  feast  of  tabernacles,  and  yet  learnt  it  not  (Deut.  xxxi.  10,  &c.),  because  they 
would  not  learn  the  End  of  the  law,  which  was  Jesus  Christ  1  Thus  they  were  shone 
upon  by  the  light  of  Divine  revelation,  and  boasted  of  being  a  people  of  light,  and 


20  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLLSTRATOR.  [chap,  ym, 

yet  remained  in  darkness.    Different  is  the  case  with  the  true  followers  of  the  light* 
Their  following  consists  in  faith,  and  faith  makes  Christ  to  dwell  in  their  hearts 
(chap.  xii.  36,  46  ;  Eph.  iii.  17) ;   and  because  they  then  have  the  Ught  of  life,  they 
no  longer  walk  in  darkness,  neither  in  the  love,  nor  in  the  terror  of  it ;   they  no 
longer  walk  in  sins,  nor  in  death,  no  more  according  to  the  pleasure,  no  more  in  the 
power  of  the  devil.    (R.  Besser,  D.D.)        I  am  the  Light  of  the  world.    The 
incident: — When  these  words  were  spoken  it  was  early  morning.    They  had  parted 
last  night,  after  a  day  of  commotion  and  danger ;  but  at  daybreak  Jesus  was  back 
again  in  the  midst  of  the  people.     "  And  early  in  the  morning  He  came  again  into 
the  Temple,  and  all  the  people  came  unto  Him ;  and  He  sat  down  and  taught  them." 
We  can  picture  to  ourselves  the  imfolding  splendours  of  the  new  morning.    The 
eyes  of  the  people  gazed  as,  without  wave  or  sound,  as  with  increasing  vigour  and 
imsullied  purity,  the  light  streamed  in  from  the  east.    It  disclosed  the  green  fields 
and  well  kept  vineyards  and  pleasant  groves  of  the  valleys ;   it  lit  up  the  city  and 
its  splendid  palaces  and  gorgeous  Temple;   and  it  revealed  all  around  them  the 
majestic  forms  of  the  mountains.     How  it  gilded  everything,  and  beautified  the 
pinnacles  of  the  Temple,  and  touched  the  hiUs  with  gold  1    How  it  aroused  the 
wicked,  who  then  as  now  turned  night  into  day,  and  worked  deeds  of  violence  and 
wrong  under  cover  of  black  night  1    How  it  cleansed  the  earth,  and  lifted  the  thick 
veil  of  mist,  and  drove  away  the  pestilential  vapours  1    Even  the  beasts,  savage  and 
dangerous,  who  through  the  night  had  been  seeking  and  securing  their  prey,  owned 
its  power,  and  retired  from  the  light  into  the  caves  and  dens  of  the  earth.    All  this 
was  present  to  the  thoughts  of  the  people,  and  standing  there  in  the  midst  of  them 
Jesus  said,  **  This  is  the  emblem  of  My  mission :   I  am  the  Light  of  the  world." 
(C.  Vince.)        The  force  of  the  allusion: — He  was  seated  at  that  moment  in  the 
Treasury — either  some  special  building  in  the  Temple  so  called,  or  that  part  of  the 
court  of  the  women  which  contained  the  thirteen  chests  with  trumpet-shaped  open- 
ings,  called  shopheroth,  into  which  the  people,  and  especially  the  Pharisees,  used  to 
cast  their  gifts.     In  this  court,  and  therefore  close  beside  Him,  were  two  gigantic 
candelabra,  fifty  cubits  high  and  sumptuously  gilded,  on  the  summit  of  which  nightly 
during  the  feast  of  tabernacles,  lamps  were  lit  which  shed  their  soft  light  over 
all  the  city.    Round  these  lamps  the  people,  in  their  joyful  enthusiasm,  and  even 
the  stateliest  priests  and  Pharisees,  joined  in  festal  dances;  while,  to  the  sound  of 
flutes  and  other  music,  the  Levites,  drawn  up  in  array  on  the  fifteen  steps  which  led 
up  to  the  court,  chanted  the  beautiful  psalms  which  early  received  the  title  ot 
"  Songs  of  Degrees."  In  allusion  to  these  great  lamps,  on  which  some  circumstance 
of    the    moment  may  have    concentrated   the  attention  of  the  hearers,  Christ 
exclaimed  to  them,  "  I  am  the  Light  of  the  world."    (Archdeacon  Farrar.)        The 
Light  of  the  world : — Note — I.  The  great  assumed  teuth  which  lees  dndeenbath 
THE  WHOLE  VEBSE  is  the  fall  of  man.  The  world  is  in  a  state  of  moral  and  spiritual 
darkness.    Naturally  men  know  nothing  rightly  of  themselves,  God,  holiness,  or 
heaven.   They  need  light.     II.  The  full  and  bold  manner  of  ooe  Lord's  declara- 
tion.    He  proclaims  Himself  to  be  "  the  Light  of  the  world."  None  could  truly  say 
this  but  one,  who  knew  that  He  was  very  God.   No  prophet  or  apostle  ever  said  h 
III.  How  OOB  Lord  says  that  He  is  "  the  Light  or  the  world."  He  is  not  for 
a  few  only,  but  for  all  mankind.    Like  the  sun  He  shines  for  the  benefit  of  all, 
though  all  may  not  value  or  use  His  light.    IV.  The  man  to  whom  the  promise  is 
MADE.    It  is  to  him  "  that  foUoweth  Me."    To  follow  a  leader,  if  we  are  blind,  or 
ignorant,  or  in  the  dark,  or  out  of  the  way,  requires  trust  and  confidence.    This  is 
just  what  the  Lord  Jesus  requires  of  sinners  who  want  to  be  saved.    Let  them 
commit  themselves  to  Christ,  and  He  will  lead  them  safe  to  heaven.   If  a  man  can 
do  nothing  for  himself,  he  cannot  do  better  than  trust  another  and  follow  him. 
V.  The  thing  promised  to  him  who  follows  Jesus — deliverance  from  darkness 
and  possession  of  Hght.    This  is  precisely  what  Christianity  brings  to  a  believer. 
He  feels  and  sees,  and  has  a  sense  of  possessing  something  he  had  not  before.   God 
"  shines  into  his  heart  and  gives  light."   He  is  "  called  out  of  darkness  into  marvel- 
lous light"  (2  Cor.  iv.  4-6;  1  Pet.  ii.  9).  (Bp.  Ryle.)       The  Light  of  the  world:— Chxiat 
as  Light  is — I.  Wondrously  revealing.  Light  is  a  revealing  element.  When  the  son 
goes  down  and  darkness  reigns,  the  whole  of  the  beautiful  world  is  concealed,  all  on 
ocean  and  land  is  hidden.    The  sun  arises,  and  all  stands  forth  to  view.  What  does 
Christ  reveal  ?    God,  a  spiritual  universe,  a  moral  government,  a  future  state  of 
retribution,  a  remedial  system  by  which  fallen  humanity  can  be  restored  to  the  know- 
ledge, the  image,  the  friendship,  and  the  enjoyment  of  the  eternal  Father.  ^  Men 
have  appeared  here  in  different  ages  and  regions  who  have  been  called  lights 


CHAP.  vm.l  8T.  JOHN.  tl 

Prophets  ;  John  the  Baptist ;  the  apostles ;  some  of  the  heathen  sages  ;  and  many 
of  the  modern  philosophers  and  scientists.  But  Christ  is  the  Light.  Other  lights 
are  borrowed ;  He  is  the  original  Fountain.  Other  lights  only  reveal  dimly  a  few 
things  in  some  narrow  space ;  He  reveals  all  things  fully  through  all  regions  ol 
moral  being.  Other  light  shone  a  little,  and,  like  meteors,  went  out ;  He  burns  on 
forever — the  "  Light  of  the  world. "  IL  Humanity  guidino.  "  He  that  followeth 
Me,"  (fee.  The  sun  may  shine  in  its  noontide  radiance,  and  yet  men  may  walk  in 
darkness;  they  may  shut  their  eyes  or  keep  in  cells  or  caverns.  It  is  so  with 
Christ.  Though  He  is  the  moral  Sun  of  the  world,  the  millions  "  walk  in  darkness." 
Christ  is  to  be  followed— 1.  Doctrinally.  2.  Ethically.  3.  Spiritually.  Men  who 
follow  Him  thus  will  always  be  in  the  "light."  HL  Spibituallt  quickening. 
The  natural  sun  is  the  fountain  of  life  to  the  world ;  his  beams  quicken  all.  Christ 
is  the  Life  of  the  world.  "In  Him  was  life."  He  quickens  the  intellect,  the 
conscience,  the  soul.  There  is  no  spiritual  life  apart  from  Him.  Conclusion : — 
How  great  the  obligation  of  the  world  to  Christ  1  What  would  this  earth  be  withoat 
the  sun  ?  Its  condition  would  be  wretched  beyond  conception;  and  yet  it  would  be 
better  off  than  humanity  without  Christ.  Were  all  that  Christ  has  been  to  humanity, 
and  still  is,  to  be  withdrawn,  into  what  a  Stygian  condition  it  would  sink.  •'  Thanks 
be  unto  God  for  His  unspeakable  gift  I  "  {Homilist.)  The  Light  of  the  world : — 
Light  and  life  are  intimately  associated.  "  Let  there  be  light "  was  the  first  creative 
act — essential  for  the  life  that  was  to  follow.  How  true  of  the  soul  I  A  chaos  of 
death  and  darkness — then  the  shining  of  the  life-giving  Sun  of  Bighteousness. 

I,  In  what  sense  is  Christ  the  Light  or  the  world.  1.  The  light  He  com- 
municates is  not  derived.  Christ  is  not  a  reflector,  but  the  Spring  and  Source. 
None  ever  taught  Him  wisdom ;  eternity  did  not  increase  His  knowledge,  "  God  is 
Light "  and  Christ  is  God.  2.  He  is  the  Medium  through  which  it  is  revealed  to 
men.  When  the  world  through  sin  had  become  exposed  to  the  withdrawal  of  all 
heavenly  light,  then  by  Christ's  interposition  was  a  gentle  ray  preserved.  This 
grew  till  in  His  own  Person  He  brought  the  full  and  living  manifestation  of  glory. 

II.  The  character  of  the  Light.  1.  Christ  brought  into  the  world  knowledge. 
No  small  advance  had  been  made  in  knowledge  before  Christ  came — art,  science, 
and  philosophy  had  flourished.  But  the  knowledge  of  God  and  futurity  had  almost 
died  out.  And  the  advances  of  the  human  intellect  would  seem  to  have  been 
permitted  to  prove  that  men  by  searching  could  not  find  out  God.  2.  Christ 
brought  into  the  world  holiness.  Light  and  purity,  darkness  and  nnholiness  are 
eynonymous  terms.  "  Ye  were  once  darkness,  but  now  are  ye  light  in  the  Lord." 
The  wisdom  of  the  world  may  exist  with  the  grossest  passions,  but  the  "  Light  of 
the  world  "  cleanses  as  well  as  instructs.  Ill,  The  relation  of  the  Light  to  thb 
iNDiviDUAi.  souii.  "  He  that  followeth  Me  shall  not  walk  in  darkness,  but  shall 
have  the  light  of  life."  Following  the  course  of  the  sun,  we  cannot  but  have  the 
"light  of  life."  As  the  flowers,  drawn  by  the  attracting  power  of  the  sun's  rays, 
turn  round  and  follow  the  great  light  of  day  in  his  course  in  the  heavens,  drinking 
in  with  avidity  every  beam,  developing  new  beauties,  giving  forth  fresh  odours  with 
every  ray  of  light  received,  so  the  Christian,  drawn  by  the  magnetic  influence  of 
Divine  love,  Uving  in  constant  intercourse  with  the  source  of  all  inspiration, 
following  closely  the  light  of  truth  which  radiates  from  the  eternal  son,  develops 
fresh  beauties  of  character,  gives  forth  the  sweet  perfume  of  true  nobleness  of  life, 
adorning  the  doctrines  of  Christ  the  Saviour.  (T.  Mirams.)  The  Light  of  ike 
world :— All  that  the  sun  is  to  the  natural  world  Christ  is  to  the  moral  and  the 
spiritual.  It  is  not  He  that  is  like  the  sun,  but  rather  the  sun  that  is  like  Him.  Thus 
understood,  the  words  of  the  text  recall  the  prophecy  "The  Sun  of  Righteousness  shall 
arise  with  healing  in  His  wings."  What  a  marvellous  assertion  it  is !  In  the  mouth 
even  of  an  extraordinary  man  it  would  be  ridiculous,  and  no  intellectual  eminence 
could  redeem  it  from  the  charge  of  vanity.  We  can  save  it  from  the  accusation 
only  by  regarding  it  as  the  utterance  of  Incarnate  Deity.  And  it  is  only  in  the 
same  way  that  we  can  harmonize  it  with  those  qualities  of  truthfulness  and  humility 
by  which  at  all  times  the  Man  Christ  Jesus  was  distinguished.  The  text  suggests — 
I.  The  pdritt  of  the  Lord's  personal  character.  A  ray  of  light  is  the  cleanest 
thing  we  know,  and  though  it  may  pass  through  the  most  polluted  medium,  it 
comes  out  of  it  as  immaculate  as  when  it  entered  it.  Christ  was  from  the  very  first 
"  a  holy  thing."  There  are  spots  on  the  sun,  but  nothing  ever  appeared  to  mar  the 
beauty  of  His  holiness,  by  the  constant  emanation  of  His  own  purity,  he  kept  the 
evil  from  approaching  Him.  Now  this  purity  consisted  not  bo  much  in  the  absence 
of  aU  Bin  as  in  the  presence  of  all  excellence.    Jast  as  the  white  light  of  the  sun  is 


2S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Till. 

composed  of  the  seven  primary  colours,  each  in  its  own  proportion,  and  having  its 
own  properties,  so  the  holiness  of  Christ,  when  analyzed,  reveals  the  presence  in  its 
normal  degree  of  each  of  the  virtues.  His  love  contributed  warmth,  His  troth 
imparts  its  sharp  actinic  influence,  whereby  the  correct  outlines  of  all  subjects  on 
which  He  shone  were  clearly  defined  I  His  humility  gave  its  violet  beauty  to  mellow 
the  lustre  of  His  character;  His  courage  lent  its  yellow  tinge  to  complete  the 
harmony;  while  His  meekness  contributed  its  soft  green  hue,  and  His  justice 
brought  the  fiery  red,  which  burned  in  His  withering  denunciation  of  all  hypocrisy 
and  wrong.  Peerless  as  the  sun  in  the  firmament  shines  the  character  of  Jesus 
Christ.  No  keen-eyed  sceptic  has  ever  been  able  to  detect  in  it  a  flaw.  II.  Thb 
BRIGHTNESS  OF  THE  REVELATION  WHICH  He  MADE.  His  adveut  chascd  away 
darkness,  and  brought  new  truths  into  view.  We  have  been  so  long  accustomed 
to  the  lustre  of  His  beams,  that  it  is  difficult  to  estimate  how  much  we  owe  to  Him 
in  this  respect,  for  the  things  which  we  now  teach  to  children  were  far  beyond  the 
reach  of  the  educated  minds  of  antiquity.  1.  Look  at  the  views  which  He  has 
given  us  of  God.  By  that  one  utterance  "  God  is  a  spirit "  <fec.  He  threw  a  flood 
of  light  on  questions  which  had  puzzled  the  wisest  heathens.  That  we  are 
not  idolaters  we  owe  entirely  to  the  light  which  Christ  has  shed  for  us,  on  the 
spirituality,  omnipresence,  supremacy,  and  fatherhood  of  God.  2.  Look  at  the  matter 
of  atonement,  and  see  what  radiance  He  has  cast  on  that  dark  subject.  When  He 
came  into  the  world,  victims  were  smoking  daily  upon  altars,  and  everywhere  they 
were  at  once  the  expression  of  a  want  and  confession  of  a  failure.  They  gave  inar- 
ticulate witness  to  the  longing  of  men's  souls  for  acceptance  with  God,  on  the  ground 
of  expiation,  while  their  continued  repetition  acknowledged  that  they  who  offered 
them  could  not  rest  long  in  their  offering.  But  Christ  offered  Himself,  and  it  was 
at  once  seen  by  all  who  believed  on  Him,  that  His  sacrifice  met  the  case,  for  His 
resurrection  demonstrated  that  it  was  accepted  by  God,  and  so  they  could  rest 
perfectly  content.  This  accounts  for  the  fact,  that  wherever  Jesus  was  received 
sacrifices  disappeared.  3.  Look  how  the  revelation  brought  by  Christ  has  illuminated 
the  future  liie.  He  has  "brought  life  and  immortality  to  light  by  the  gospel." 
The  immortality  of  the  soul  was  a  wish  rather  than  an  object  of  faith  among  the 
most  of  the  ancients,  and  they  knew  nothing  whatever  about  resurrection.  But 
when  Christ  rose  from  the  tomb  He  left  its  portal  open  ;  and  when  He  ascended  He 
took  possession  of  heaven  in  His  people's  name.  Absence  from  the  body  is  now 
presence  with  the  Lord.  III.  The  beneficent  influences  thai  radiate  from 
Christ.  There  are  few  natural  agents  more  valuable  than  the  light.  1.  It  ministers 
largely  to  health.  Even  the  plants  cannot  thrive  without  the  sunshine,  and  a  shrub 
taken  to  the  bottom  of  a  mine  speedily  withers ;  while  the  very  weed  that  grows  in 
the  cave  turns  ever  with  a  wonderful  instinct  towards  the  light.  So  it  is  a  common 
aphorism  that  the  sunny  side  of  the  street  or  house  is  healthier.  Christ  gives 
health  to  the  soul  by  bestowing  upon  it  regeneration,  while  the  influence  of  His 
instructions  strengthens  the  intellect,  gives  sensitiveness  to  the  conscience,  stiffens 
the  will,  settles  and  centres  the  affections,  and  broadens  and  deepens  the  character. 
2.  It  contributes  materially  to  happiness.  Everybody  knows  a  difference  between  a 
clear  and  a  dull  day.  The  one,  as  it  were,  electrifies  the  system,  and  we  go  forth 
into  it  with  joyous  exhilaration ;  the  other  is  heavy  and  depressing.  We  are  ill  at 
ease  with  ourselves  and  cross  with  everybody  else.  So  again,  we  know  a  difference 
between  day  and  night.  The  light  has  that  in  it  which  somehow  keeps  as  up,  bat 
darkness  has  become  a  common  metaphor  for  heaviness  of  heart.  Now  Jesus  is 
the  Author  of  joy.  He  takes  away  from  us  sin  which  is  the  source  of  all  sadness. 
He  adds  the  gladness  of  fellowship  with  Himself  to  all  oar  other  delights  ;  and  when 
the  joys  of  earth  grow  dim.  He  remains  to  be  to  us  as  full  of  satisfaction  as  He  was 
before.  3.  It  contributes  to  our  safety.  Unless  we  see  where  we  are  going  we  may 
stumble  or  fall,  to  the  serious  injury  of  our  bodies ;  and  so,  especially  when  the  way 
is  rough  and  dangerous,  it  is  always  better  to  travel  in  the  daytime.  In  moral 
things,  it  is  just  as  essential  that  we  see  what  we  are  doing.  We  must  mark  the 
tendencies  of  things,  lest  we  should  take  a  wrong  direction.  We  must  look  well  to 
our  little  steps  of  daily  conduct,  lest  we  should  be  tripped  up,  and  bring  dishonour 
on  our  Lord  and  on  ourselves.  And  for  this  reason  it  is  of  the  greatest  importance 
that  we  keep  near  to  Jesus.  Safety  lies  in  walking  in  His  light.  It  is  not  earthly 
philosophy ;  it  is  not  worldly  prudence ;  it  is  not  caution  or  canniness  that  will 
keep  a  man  secure.  All  these  are  in  the  main  but  modes  of  selfishness,  and 
selfishness  is  always  like  a  mole  burrowing  in  the  dark  and  trapped  at  last  by  the 
higher  art  of  the  hunter.    But  Christ's  light  is  love,  the  love  of  God  and  our 


OHAT.  vm.]  ST.  JOHN.  28 

neighbour.  IV.  The  manneb  in  which  we  become  partakees  of  the  blessings 
WHICH  Christ  beings.  We  are  enlightened  by  opening  our  eyes  to  the  light.  In  the 
morning  we  raise  our  blinds,  and  let  in  the  blessed  sunbeams,  whereby  our  hearts 
are  gladdened  and  our  homes  are  brightened.  And  in  the  same  way  we  are  to 
become  illuminated  by  the  rays  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness.  We  must  open  our 
eyes  and  behold  His  glory ;  we  must  open  our  intellects  to  receive  His  instructions ; 
we  must  open  our  hearts  to  let  Him  into  our  affections ;  we  must  open  our  Uves  to 
let  Him  rule  over  our  actions.  Here  our  great  duty,  as  also  our  great  difficulty,  is  to 
be  simply  receptive.  {W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The  Light  of  the  world: — Christ 
was  His  own  great  theme.  What  He  said  about  Himself  was  very  unlike  language 
becoming  a  wise  and  humble  teacher.  This  is  only  reconcileable  with  our  concep- 
tion of  His  nature  that  He  is  God  manifest  in  the  flesh.  Are  such  words  as  these 
fit  to  be  spoken  by  any  man  conscious  of  his  own  imperfections.  They  assert  that 
Christ  is  the  only  source  of  illumination  for  the  whole  world,  that  follo'Adng  Him  is 
the  sure  deliverance  from  error  and  sin  and  gives  the  follower  a  light  which  is  life. 
And  the  world,  instead  of  turning  away  from  such  monstrous  assumptions,  has  largely 
beUeved  them  and  has  not  felt  them  to  mar  the  beauty  of  meekness,  which,  by  a 
strange  anomaly,  this  Man  says  He  has.  I.  The  symbolism.  What  was  the 
meaning  of  those  great  lights  that  went  flashing  through  the  warm  autumn  nights 
of  the  feast  of  tabernacles.  All  the  parts  of  that  feast  were  intended  to  recall 
some  feature  of  the  wilderness  wanderings;  and  the  lights  by  the  altar  were 
memorials  of  the  pillar  of  cloud  and  fire.  Jesus,  then,  declares  Himself  to  be  in 
reality,  for  all,  and  for  ever  what  that  pillar  was  in  outward  seeming  to  one  genera- 
ation.  1.  It  was  the  visible  vehicle  of  the  Divine  presence.  It  manifested  and  hid 
God,  and  was  thus  no  unworthy  symbol  of  Him  who  remains  after  all  revelation 
onrevealed.  The  fire  is  ever  folded  in  the  cloud,  and  the  thick  darkness  in  which 
He  dwells  is  but  the  "  glorious  privacy  "  of  perfect  light.  That  pillar,  a  cloud  to 
shelter  from  the  scorching  heat,  a  fire  to  cheer  in  the  blackness  of  night,  spread 
itself  above  the  sanctuary,  and  "  the  glory  of  the  Lord  filled  the  Tabernacle,"  and 
when  that  vas  replaced  by  the  Temple  "the  cloud  filled  the  house  of  the  Lord," 
and  there,  dwelling  between  the  cherubim,  types  of  all  creatural  life ;  and  above  the 
mercy  seat  that  spoke  of  pardon,  and  the  ark  that  held  the  law ;  and  behind  the 
veil  where  no  feet  trod  save  those  of  the  priest  bearing  the  blood  of  atonement  once 
a  year — shone  the  light  of  the  visible  majesty  of  present  Deity.  2.  But  centuries  had 
passed  since  that  Light  had  departed.  Shall  we  not,  then,  see  a  deep  reference  to 
that  awful  blank,  when  Jesus,  standing  before  that  shrine  which  was  in  a  most  sad 
sense  empty,  pointed  to  the  quenched  lamps  which  commemorated  a  departed 
Shekinah,  and  said,  "  I  am  the  Light  of  the  world."  He  is  that  because  in  Him 
is  the  glory  of  God.  The  cloud  of  the  humanity  "  the  veU,  that  is  to  say,  His  flesh," 
enfolds  and  tempers  ;  and  through  its  transparent  folds  reveals  while  it  swathes  the 
Godhead.  Like  some  fleecy  vapour  flitting  across  the  sun  and  irradiated  by  its 
light,  it  enables  our  weak  eyes  to  see  light  and  not  darkness  in  the  else  intolerable 
blaze.  "  The  Word  was  made  flesh  and  dwelt,"  &c.  II.  The  privilege  and  dutt. 
1.  Christ,  like  that  pillar,  guides  us  in  our  pilgrimage.  Numb.  iz.  dwells  upon  the 
absolute  control  of  all  the  marches  and  halts  by  the  cloud.  As  long  as  it  lay  spread 
above  the  tabernacle,  there  they  stayed.  Impatient  eyes  might  look  and  impatient 
spirits  chafe — no  matter.  And  whenever  it  lifted  itself  no  matter  how  short  had 
been  the  halt,  footsore  the  people,  or  pleasant  the  resting-place — up  with  the  tent- 
pegs  immediately,  and  away.  There  was  the  commander  of  their  march — not 
Moses  nor  Jethro.  2.  We  have  in  Christ  a  better  Guide  through  worse  perplexities 
than  theirs.  By  His  Spirit,  example,  Word,  providence,  Jesus  is  our  Guide — 
gentle,  loving,  wise,  sure.  He  does  not  say '•  Go,"  but  "Come."  "I  will  guide 
thee  with  Mine  eye  " — not  a  blow,  but  a  look  of  directing  love  which  heartens  to 
and  tells  duty.  We  must  be  near  Him  to  catch  it  and  in  sympathy  with  Him  to 
understand  it,  and  be  swift  to  obey.  Our  eyes  must  be  ever  toward  the  Lord,  or  we 
shall  be  marching  on  unwitting  that  the  pillar  has  spread  itself  for  rest,  or  dawdling 
when  it  has  gathered  itself  up  for  the  march.  Do  not  let  impatience  lead  you  to 
hasty  interpretations  of  His  plans  before  they  are  fairly  evolved.  Take  care  of 
*•  running  before  you  are  sent. "  But  do  not  let  the  warmth  of  the  camp  fires  or 
the  pleasantness  of  the  shady  place  keep  you  when  the  cloud  lifts.  3.  All  true 
following  begins  with  or  rather  is  faith  (chap  xii.  46).  Faith  the  condition  and 
following  the  operation  and  test  of  faith.  None  but  they  who  trust  follow  Him. 
To  follow  means  the  submission  of  the  will,  the  effort  to  reproduce  His  example, 
the  adoption  of  His  command  as  my  law,  His  fellowship  as  my  joy ;  and  the  took 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  nu. 

of  this  is  coming  to  Him  conscious  of  darkness  and  trustful  i^  His  light.     IH.  Thb 
PBOMiSB.     In  the  measure  in  which  we  fulfil  the  duty  the  wonderful  saying  will  b« 
verified  and  anderstood  by  us.     1.  "  Shall  not  walk  in  darkness  "  refers  (1)  to 
practical  life  and  its  perplexities.     Nobody  who  has  not  tried  it  would  believe  how 
many  difficulties  are  cleared  away  by  the  simple  act  of  trying  to  follow  Christ.     It 
is  a  reluctant  will  and  intrusive  likings  and  dislikings  that  obscure  the  way  oftenei 
than  real  obscmity  in  the  way  itself.    It  is  seldom  impossible  to  di'scem  the  Divine 
will  when  we  only  wish  to  do  it.     And  if  ever  it  is  impossible,  that  is  the  cloud 
resting  on  the  Tabernacle.    Be  still,  wait  and  watch.     (2)  But  *'  darkness  "  is  the 
name  for  the  whole  condition  of  the  soul  averted  from  God.    There  is  the  darkness 
of  ignorance,  impurity,  sorrow,  thickening  to  a  darkness  of  death.    To  follow 
Christ  is  the  true  deliverance,  and  the  feeblest  beginnings  of  trust  in  Him,  and  the 
first  tottering  steps  that  try  to  tread  in  His  bring  us  unto  the  light.     2.  "  Shall 
have  the  light  of  life, "  a  giander  gift — not  the  light  which  illuminates  the  life,  but 
like  similar  phrases,  "  bread  of  life,"  •'  water  of  life," — light  which  is  life.     ••  In 
Him  was  life,"  &c.      "With  Thee  is  the  foundation  of  life,  &c."    The  pillar 
remained  apart,  this  Guide  dwells  in  our  souls.   Conclusion :  Christ,  like  His  symbol 
of    old,  has   ft  double  aspect — dai-kness  for  Egypt,  light  to  Israel.      Trusted, 
followed.  He  is  light;  neglected,  turned  from,  He  is  darkness.   (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
The  Light  of  the  world  (In  conjunction  with  Matt.  t.  14) : — A  startling  combina- 
tion !  The  two  ends  of  a  chain  of  teaching,  of  which  the  middle  links  are  supplied 
by  the  apostle  who  speaks  of  "  Christ  in  you,"  and  of  the  saints  as  "  light  in  the 
Lord."    L  Whebein  does  Chbist's  lioht  diffeb  fbom  oubs  ?    1.  As  ordinary  white 
light — the  light  of  the  sun — is  an  exquisite  blending  of  all  hues  of  light,  so  Christ 
combines  all  the  varied  features  of  goodness  in  Himself.     He  is  the  Unity  of  all 
enlightening,  cheering,  quickening  qualities.    2.  But  as  the  light  is  broken  up  and 
reflected,  so  the  scattered  rays  of  goodness  are  reflected  from  each  disciple  in  his 
own  character  and  ministry  amongst  his  fellows.     II.  Whebein  is  odb  reflected 
LIGHT  AS  Christ's  ?   1.  It  may  reveal,  as  He  did,  the  Father.    2.  It  may  guide  and 
cheer,  as  He  did,  the  sons  of  men.    3.  As  His  exposed  the  evil  in  men,  so  may  ours 
expose  and  shame  those  who  come  into  contact  with  us.    4.  As  He,  like  light, 
coaxes  the  plant  to  thrive,  causes  men's  natures  to  bloom  and  bear  fruit,  so  may  we 
develop  men's  latent  capacities  for  goodness  by  contact  with  us.     5.  As  His  light 
-vsas  diJEFused,  so  may  ours  go  forth  upon  unknown  ministries.     {W.   Hawkins.) 
Light  for  us : — I.  Chbist  is  the  Light  fob  life  which  guides.     1.  Christ  is  such 
guiding  light  because  He  i^  the  Light.     Moral  guidance  shines  from  Him,  because 
He  is  the  one  perfect  specimen  of  moral  living.     2.  Christ  is  such  a  guiding  Light 
because  He  is  a  light  so  placed  that  all  may  see  it.    II.  Chbist  is  the  Light  which 
noubishes  and  makes  stbong  the  tbue  life  m  EVEBT  MAN.     Christ  promises,  if  He 
be  followed,  a  man  shall  have  the  light  of  life.      Here  is  a  pale  leaf.    Why  is  it  so 
pale  ?    It  has  been  denied  the  sunlight.    Put  it  in  the  sunlight,  and  it  will  grow 
green  and  strong.    Here  is  a  leaf  of  noble  resolution.    But  it  is  very  pale  and 
sickly.    What  will  give  it  strength  and  colour  ?    Bring  it  into  the  shining  of  Him 
who  is  the  Light.     HI.   How  we  may  enteb  into  this  guidance  and  invigoba- 
TioN.    "  He  that  followeth   Me,"  (&o.     Some  one  has  said  :    "  Nobody  who  has 
not  tried  it  would  believe  how  many  difficulties  are  cleared  out  of  a  man's  road 
by  the  simple  act  of  trying  to  follow  Christ."     No  doubt  there  will  still  remain 
obscurities  enough  as  to  what  we  ought  to  do,  to  call  for  the  best  exercise  of  patient 
wisdom ;  but  an  enormous  proportion  of  them  vanish  Uke  mist,  when  the  sun  looks 
through,  when  once  we  honestlv  set  ourselves  to  find  out  where  the  Light  is  guiding. 
It  is  a  reluctant  will  and  intrusive  likings  and  dislikings  that  obscure  the  way  for  us, 
much  oftener  then  real  obscurity  in  the  way  itself.     It  is  seldom  impossible  to 
discern   the  Divine  will,  when  we  only  wish   to  know  it  that   we  may  do  it. 
{W.  Hoyt,  D.D.^      Christ  the  Light  of  the  world : — Do  you  see  what  I  mean  ?  When 
the  sun  rose  this  morning  it  found  the  world  here.    It  did  not  make  the  world.    It 
did  not  fiing  forth  on  its  earliest  ray  this  solid  globe,  which  was  not  and  would  not 
have  been  but  for  the  sun's  rising.     What  did  it  do  ?    It  found  the  world  in  dark- 
ness, torpid  and  heavy  and  asleep ;  with  powers  all  wrapped  up  in  sluggishness ; 
with  life  that  was  hardly  better  or  more  aUve  than  death.     The  sun  found  this 
great  sleeping  world  and  woke  it.     It  bade  it  be  itself.    It  quickened  every  slow  and 
sluggish  faculty.     It  called  to  the  dull  streams,  and  said,  '•  Be  quick  "  ;  to  the  dull 
birds  and  bade  them  sing ;  to  the  dull  fields  and  made  them  grow ;  to  the  dull  meo 
and  bade  them  talk  and  think  and  work.     It  flashed  electric  invitation  to  the  whole 
anass  of  sleeping  power  which  really  was  the  world,  and  summoned  it  to  action.    It 


CHAf.  Tin.]  ST.  JOHN.  S5 

did  not  make  the  world.  It  did  not  sweep  a  dead  world  ofi  and  set  a  live  world  in 
its  place.  It  did  not  start  another  set  of  processes  unhke  those  which  had  been 
sluggishly  moving  in  the  darkness.  It  poured  strength  into  the  essential  processes 
which  belonged  to  the  very  nature  of  the  earth  which  it  illuminated.  It  glorified, 
intensified,  fulfilled  the  earth  ;  so  that  with  the  sun's  work  incomplete,  with  part  of 
the  earth  illuminated  and  the  rest  lying  in  the  darkness  still,  we  can  most  easily 
conceive  of  the  dark  region  looking  in  its  half-life  drowsily  over  to  the  region  which 
was  flooded  with  light,  and  saying,  '*  There,  there  is  the  true  earth  1  That  is  the 
real  planet.  In  light  and  not  in  darkness  the  earth  truly  is  iiself."  That  is  the 
parable  of  the  light.  And  now  it  seems  to  me  to  be  of  all  importance  to  remember 
and  assert  all  that  to  be  distinctly  a  true  parable  of  Christ.  He  says  it  is  :  "I  am 
the  Light  of  the  world."  A  thousand  things  that  means.  A  thousand  subtle, 
mystic  miracles  of  deep  and  intricate  relationship  between  Christ  and  humanity 
must  be  enfolded  in  those  words ;  but  over  and  behind  and  within  all  other  mean- 
ings, it  means  this — the  essential  richness  and  possibility  of  humanity  and  its 
essential  belonging  to  Divinity.  Christ  is  unspeakably  great  and  glorious 
in  Himself.  The  glory  which  He  had  with  His  Father  '*  before  the  world 
was,"  of  that  we  can  only  meditate  and  wonder  ;  but  the  glory  which  He 
has  had  since  the  world  was,  the  glory  which  He  has  had  in  relation  to  the 
world,  is  all  bound  up  with  the  world's  possibihties,  has  all  consisted  in  the 
utterance  and  revelation  and  fulfilment  of  capacities  which  were  in  the  very  nature 
of  the  world  on  which  His  Light  has  shone.  Do  you  see  what  I  mean  ?  Christ 
rises  on  a  soul.  Christ  rises  on  the  world.  I  speak  in  crude  and  superficial 
language.  For  the  moment  I  make  no  account  of  the  deep  and  sacred  truth — the 
truth  which  alone  is  finally  and  absolutely  true — that  Christ  has  always  been  with 
every  soul  and  all  the  world.  I  talk  in  crude  and  superficial  words,  and  say  Christ 
comes  to  any  soul  or  to  the  world.  What  is  it  that  happens  ?  If  the  figure  of  the 
light  is  true,  Christ  when  He  comes  finds  the  soul  or  the  world  really  existent, 
really  having  within  itself  its  holiest  capabilities  really  moving,  though  dimly  and 
darkly,  in  spite  of  all  its  hindiances,  in  its  true  directions;  and  what  He  does  for  it 
is  to  quicken  it  through  and  through,  to  sound  the  bugle  of  its  true  Hfe  in  its  ears, 
to  make  it  feel  the  nobleness  of  movements  which  have  seemed  to  it  ignoble,  the 
hopefulness  of  impulses  which  have  seemed  hopeless,  to  bid  it  be  itself.  The  little 
lives  which  do  in  little  ways  that  which  the  life  of  Jesus  does  completely,  the  noble 
characters  of  which  we  think  we  have  the  right  to  say  that  they  are  the  hghts 
of  human  history,  this  is  true  also  of  them.  They  reveal  and  they  inspire.  The 
worthless  becomes  full  of  worth,  the  insignificant  becomes  full  of  meaning  at  their 
touch.  They  faintly  catch  the  feeble  reflection  of  His  life  who  is  the  true  Light  of 
the  world,  the  real  illumination  and  inspiration  of  humanity.  Let  us  then  leave 
the  figure,  and  try  to  grasp  the  truth  in  its  complete  simplicity  and  see  what  some  of 
its  applications  are.  The  truth  is  that  every  higher  Ufe  to  which  man  comes,  and 
especially  the  highest  life  in  Christ,  is  in  the  true  line  of  man's  humanity ;  there  is 
no  transportation  to  a  foreign  region.  There  is  the  quickening  and  fulfilling  of 
what  man  by  the  very  essence  of  his  nature  is.  The  more  man  becomes  irradiated 
with  Divinity,  the  more,  not  the  less,  truly  he  is  man.  Tae  fullest  Cinistian 
experience  is  simply  the  fullest  life.  !I'o  enter  into  it  therefore  is  no  wise  strange. 
The  wonder  and  the  unnaturalness  is  that  any  child  of  God  should  live  outside  of 
it,  and  so  in  all  his  life  should  never  be  himself.  And  yet  how  clear  the  Bible  is 
about  it  all  1  How  clear  Christ  ia  1  It  is  redemption  and  fulfilment  which  He  comes 
to  bring  to  man.  Those  are  His  words.  There  is  a  true  humanity  which  is  to  be 
restored,  and  all  whose  unattained  possibilities  are  to  be  tilled  out.  Let  us  see  how 
all  this  ia  true  in  various  applications.  Apply  it  first  to  the  standards  of  character. 
We  talk  of  Christian  character  as  if  it  were  some  separate  and  special  thing 
unattempted,  unsuggested  by  the  human  soul  until  it  became  aware  of  Christ.  The 
Christian  graces  are  nothing  but  the  natural  virtues  held  up  into  the  light  of  Christ. 
They  are  made  of  the  same  stuff;  they  are  lifted  along  the  same  lines;  but  they 
have  found  their  pinnacle.  They  have  caught  the  illumiuation  which  their  souls 
desire.  Manliness  has  not  been  changed  into  Godliness ;  it  has  fulfilled  itself  in 
Godliness.  Aa  soon  as  we  understand  all  this,  thon  what  a  great  clear  thing 
salvation  becomes.  Does  tins  make  smaller  or  less  important  that  great  power  of 
God  whereby  the  human  life  passes  from  the  old  condition  to  the  new — the  power  of 
conversion?  Certainly  not !  What  task  could  be  more  worthy  of  the  Father's 
power  and  love  than  this  assertion  and  fulfilment  of  His  child  ?  Great  is  the  power 
of  a  Ufe  which  knows  that  its  highest  experiences  are  its  truest  experiences,  that  it 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cha».  vm. 

is  most  itself  when  it  is  at  its  best.  For  it  each  high  achievement,  each  splendid 
vision,  is  a  sign  and  token  of  the  whole  nature's  possibility.  What  a  piece  of  the 
man  was  for  that  shining  instant,  it  is  the  duty  of  the  whole  man  to  be  always. 
When  the  hand  has  once  touched  the  rock  the  heart  cannot  be  satisfied  until  the 
whole  frame  has  been  drawn  up  out  of  the  waves  and  stands  firm  on  its  two  feet 
on  the  solid  stone.  {Phillips  Brooks^  D.D.)  The  Light  of  the  world  : — 
Christ  is  this  because — L  Hb  brings  God  neab  and  makes  Him  beaii  to  mam. 
Every  scientific  discoverer  half  acknowledges  that  He  interprets  the  arrange- 
ments of  a  single  intelligence.  And  yet  it  is  easy  to  leave  out  of  view  the 
higher  relations  of  scientific  thinking;  to  stop  with  force  and  law,  and  not 
go  on  to  the  Agent  who  is  assumed  in  both.  But  this  Atheism,  now  so 
fashionable,  brings  darkness  into  the  mind.  It  may  not  interfere  with  a  limited 
department  of  research,  but  it  is  always  held  at  the  expense  of  liberal  thinking. 
It  may  now  and  then  perfect  man  as  an  observing  machine,  but  it  has  never  yet 
brought  a  ray  of  Ught  to  the  intellect  or  glow  to  the  heart.  Christ  teaches  no 
science,  no  philosophy,  and  yet  He  is  a  Light  to  both,  not  by  what  He  teaches  but 
by  what  He  is.  He  simply  manifests  God  as  living  and  personal,  and  fills  the 
universe  to  the  believing  mind  and  loving  soul  with  a  sense  of  His  presence. 
He  not  only  tells  us  of  a  Father  in  heaven,  but  says:  "He  that  hath  seen 
Me  hath  seen  the  Father."  And  thus  Christ  holds  the  attention  of  men  in 
every  science  to  truths  concerning  God  which  science  assumes  and  confirms. 
II.  He  confirms  man's  confidence  in  man's  power  to  know  the  troth.  Christ 
teaches  caution,  docility,  and  a  certain  quality  of  self-distrust ;  but  He  couples  with 
it  the  quality  of  clear  and  tenacious  conviction.  He  knows  nothing  of  that 
fashionable  scepticism  which  suggests  that  knowledge  is  but  uncertain  guess-work, 
that  thinking  is  a  changing  product  of  a  material  organization,  that  the  truths  of 
one  generation  are  the  dreams  of  the  next.  The  capacity  of  man  to  know  the  truth, 
his  obhgation  to  defend  it,  and  if  need  be  to  die  for  it  is  positively  enforced  by 
Christ.  It  is  said  that  Christians  are  committed  to  a  creed  and  therefore  incapable 
of  new  ideas.  To  one  conviction  they  are  committed,  viz.,  that  truth  is  possible 
and  that  man  is  bound  to  attain  it.  III.  He  asserts  fob  man  his  true  dionitt  and 
HIS  RIGHTFUL  PLACE  IN  THE  UNIVERSE.  In  nothing  has  Christ  wrought  so  signal  a 
revolution  as  in  this,  and  that  not  by  teaching  a  new  philosophy,  but  by  living  a 
new  life  and  consecrating  that  life  by  His  death.  He  came  to  save  man  because 
man  was  lost,  yet  could  be  exalted  to  wisdom  and  holiness,  and  therein  declared  the 
intrinsic  worth  of  the  lowliest  in  the  judgment  of  God.  He  consorted  with  publicana 
and  sinners,  not  because  He  sympathized  with  what  they  were ,  but  because  He 
knew  what  they  might  become.  Before  Christ  man's  insignificance  was  contrasted 
with  Nature's  greatness ;  or  when  set  in  other  relations  the  old  thinkers  argued 
"  the  state,  the  race  remains ;  the  individual  perishes — let  Him  go.  What  is  one 
among  so  many  when  God  will  forget  every  one  of  us  ?  "  Christ  has  reversed  all 
these  estimates.  He  emphasized  each  man's  personality  by  recognizing  his 
responsibility.  As  responsible  he  is  capable  of  personal  rights  as  the  condition 
of  the  exercise  of  his  moral  freedom,  and  the  development  of  his  character.  Aa 
such  he  is  king  over  nature,  being  made  in  God's  image.  His  education  is  the 
supreme  end  for  which  nature  exists  and  society  goes  on  ;  and  this  education  is  the 
story  of  redemption.  What  we  call  Christian  civilization  is  either  flower  or  fruit 
of  faiths  in  respect  to  man's  place  in  nature  and  the  plan  of  God.  It  is  proposed  to 
change  all  this.  Man  is  the  product  and  slave  of  nature,  and  at  length  its  victim. 
Personality  and  character  are  poetic  abstractions ;  right  and  wrong  are  the  outcome 
of  social  forces ;  conscience  the  reflex  of  average  judgments  of  our  community ;  the 
right  of  the  individual  non-existent  as  against  society  ;  our  protests  against  injustice 
irrational.  That  this  new  philosophy  must  be  inhuman  in  its  tendency  need  not  be 
argued.  May  God  spare  us  when  insane  enthusiasts  or  maddened  criminals  act  it 
out.  After  the  scenes  of  horror  shall  be  over  and  society  begin  to  reorganize  itself, 
Christ  will  be  the  light  of  its  schools  of  thought.  lY.  He  is  the  light  of  human 
CULTURE  in  that  He  BOTH  STIMULATES  AND  BEFiNES  IT.  So  far  as  art  and  literature 
are  concerned,  we  may  concede  that  Greece  gave  to  the  world  the  perfection  of  form  ; 
but  Christ  breathed  into  those  forms  a  living  soul.  In  manners  Christ  has  done 
still  more.  The  graces  of  modem  life  are  the  products  of  the  unselfish,  sympa- 
thizing, forgiving,  patient.  Son  of  Man.  No  sooner  is  Christ  received  into  any  com- 
munity than  the  unbought  graces  of  life  are  a  natural  consequence.  But  culture 
has  its  dangers.  It  degenerates  as  soon  as  it  becomes  an  end  and  not  a  means.  It 
is  substituted  for  duty  or  made  an  excuse  for  sin  often  with  terrific  results.    Some 


CHAP,  vin.]  ST.  JOHN.  27 

of  its  devotees  are  too  dainty  in  their  tastes  to  do  the  work  of  life,  and  not  a  few 
sink  into  unmanly  fastidiousness.  Christ  reforms  these  abuses ;  in  His  school  no 
man  liveth  or  dieth  to  Himself,  and  man  is  refined  by  the  presence  and  approval  of 
his  Maker.  Y.  Hb  makes  clbab  and  possible  to  man  anotheb  and  a  betteb  life. 
He  has  not  demonstrated  it  to  reason,  but  has  verified  it  as  a  fact  "  Because  I  live, " 
&o.  In  former  times  men  were  esteemed  profound,  aspiring,  brave  and  strong 
according  as  they  reflected  about  another  life.  In  these,  man  is  counted  shallow  if 
he  accepts  it ;  sordid  if  he  derives  motives  from  it ;  cowardly  if  he  cannot  brave 
death  without  it ;  and  weak  if  he  cannot  substitute  for  it  the  immortality  of  his 
thoughts  as  repeated  in  other  minds.  This  seems  unnatural  and  inhuman.  It  is 
the  cant  of  a  clique  to  attempt  to  ailence  the  outcry  of  every  longing  of  man 
with  the  sneer  of  sentimentalism.  All  this  is  a  striking  proof  that  the  risen  and 
personal  Christ  is  as  much  needed  as  ever  as  the  Light  of  the  world.  And  when 
science  becomes  more  simple  and  earnest,  and  culture  more  sincere  and  humane, 
both  will  turn  to  Him.  VI.  He  gives  wobth  and  sionificancb  to  the  life-wobk  op 
BVEBY  man.  There  is  a  strong  tendency  to  depreciate  the  present  life ;  and  if  there 
is  no  God  but  nature,  and  he  locked  in  the  bands  of  fate ;  if  knowledge  is  guess- 
work, and  man  the  sport  of  agencies  that  feel  not,  life  is  at  best  a  dull  farce  or  a 
weary  tragedy,  and  the  sooner  the  play  is  over  the  better.  Bat  Christ  teaches 
differently.  Under  the  light  which  He  cast  no  event  is  insignificant,  no  joy  empty, 
no  sorrow  to  be  spared.  The  hopes  and  regrets,  the  successes  and  defeats  are  all 
steps  of  discipline  for  immortality.  To  every  individual  a  place  in  life  is  assigned, 
if  he  will  occupy  it,  and  success  assured  if  he  will  rightly  estimate  success.  Every 
life  which  Christ  guides  by  His  light,  and  cheers  with  His  smile,  and  crowns  with 
His  reward  is  thoroughly  worth  living  for  its  experience  and  its  rewards.  (Noah 
Porter,  LL.D.)  The  Light  of  the  world  : — Compare  the  impression  the  text 

must  have  produced  when  first  uttered  and  that  which  it  produces  now.  In  a 
despised  country,  among  a  conquered  people,  speaking  a  degenerated  language,  a 
humble  man  from  an  obscure  village,  says  "  I  am  the  hght,"  &c.,  not  one  more 
light,  but  light  in  the  absolute  sense.  What  would  a  contemporary  thinker  of 
Athens  or  Bome  have  said  ?  Just  what  the  Pharisees  in  their  language  said.  Now 
let  1,800  years  pass  by.  Look  at  the  world,  not  as  Christians,  but  as  impartial 
witnesses,  and  you  are  obliged  to  acknowledge  that  the  saying  which  seemed 
senseless  is  an  historical  fact.  Jesus  is  so  much  the  hght  of  the  world  that 
outside  the  regions  over  which  His  brightness  is  shed  there  is  no  more  progress. 
To-day  millions  salute  Jesus  as  the  Sun  of  souls,  and  those  who  are  at  one  in 
nothing  else  are  at  one  in  this.  In  what  sense  is  Jesus  what  He  said,  and  what  is 
the  domain  in  which  He  sheds  His  light?  I.  Bt  lioht  wb  oenebally  mean 
SCIENTIFIC  TBUTH  whcu  the  word  is  used  in  other  than  a  material  sense.  But  one  of 
the  most  original  features  of  Christ's  teaching  is  that  He  never  learnt  science  nor 
professed  to  solve  its  problems.  1.  Christians  have  been  often  mistaken  here, 
and  the  irritation  of  scientists,  when  Christians  interfere  with  their  demonstrations, 
is  legitimate.  They  demand  independence,  and  the  demand  should  be  conceded. 
But  they  must  also  grant  independence  in  the  domain  of  the  moral  and  religious 
order  which  has  its  own  laws  and  evidences.  Christianity  is  never  called  upon  to 
anathematize  science — rather  let  it  increase  under  the  Divine  benediction.  2,  But 
we  cannot  be  mistaken — the  whole  progress  of  science  has  not  shed  one  ray  of  light 
on  the  problem  of  problems.  We  are  told  that  we  should  be  indifferent  here,  and 
Positivism  enjoins  humanity  to  enclose  itself  between  the  cradle  and  the  tomb,  and 
know  nothing  beyond.  But  it  cannot  succeed.  In  our  time,  when  all  that  can 
distract,  absorb,  enchant  is  multiplied,  man  doggedly  raises  the  problems  of  the 
invisible  world.  All  become  acquainted  with  anguish  and  need  consolation,  and 
ask,  therefore,  for  light.  3.  An  answer  is  necessary,  and  that  answer  the  intellect 
reduced  to  its  own  forces  is  incapable  of  finding.  With  what  courage  and  perse- 
▼erance  it  has  striven  all  history  attests.  Has  science  ever  consoled  any  one  ?  When 
your  conscience  is  troubled  will  you  ask  for  a  philosophical  consultation  ?  When 
you  are  near  a  death-bed  will  you  call  in  a  savant  f  This  century  has  made  an 
idol  of  science  with  the  inevitable  result  (Psa.  cxv.  5, 6).  U.  Hebe  Ghbist  appeabs. 
His  light  has  not  been  poured  on  scientific  problems — that  domain  God  has  left  to 
the  intellect — but  He  has  illumined  the  spiritual  world.  How  ?  By  His  teaching  f 
What  then  does  He  teach?  Himself.  He  is  not  so  much  the  Prophet  as  the 
Truth ;  the  light-bearer  as  the  Light.  1.  He  has  revealed  what  God  is.  Not 
that  He  delivered  discourses  about  God,  or  gave  metaphysical  definitions  of 
Ood ;  but    He    has    shown   Him    to    us — "  He  that  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen 


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  CHAP.  Tm. 

the  Father "  (Heb.    i.    3 ;   Col.    i.    15).     Moses    had    revealed   the   only,    tbt 

holy,  the  all-mighty,  the  just  God;  Jesus  reveals  the  God  who  is  Love. 
What  could  be  added  to  the  idea?  2.  A  new  ideal  of  humanity  has  appeared 
in  Jesus.  He  never  taught  a  systematio  and  scientific  morahty;  bat  simply 
replaced  the  moral  world  on  its  right  axis — the  love  of  God  and  the  love  of 
man.  For  the  first  time  was  seen  in  Him  a  life  absolutely  fulfilling  the  moral 
law — a  life  in  which  there  is  not  a  word,  thought,  movement,  which  is  not  in- 
spired and  filled  by  the  love  of  God  and  man.  In  Him  was  seen  for  the  first 
time  the  admirable  assemblage  of  all  the  virtues  which  seem  opposed  and  which 
ordinarily  exclude  one  another ;  authority  and  simplicity,  majesty  and  humility, 
strength  and  gentleness,  horror  of  evil,  and  tender  mercy,  purity  without  asceti- 
cism, and  familiarity  wiliiout  vulgarity,  so  that,  as  the  diverse  colours  which  the 
prism  decomposes — red,  orange,  yellow,  green,  blue,  violet — form  the  splendid  white, 
to  all  these  diverse  traits,  which  make  op  the  figure  of  Christ,  are  blended  into  so 
vivid  a  harmony  that  it  is  imprinted  on  the  conscience  of  humanity  for  ever. 
In  Him  is  seen  man  as  he  ought  to  be.  3.  He  has  thrown  light  on  the  abyss 
which  separates  man  from  God.  The  more  luminous  His  holiness,  the  more 
obvious  our  imperfection.  He  makes  as  discern  the  evil  we  have  done,  and 
the  good  we  have  neglected.  Never  before  Him  was  our  nature  so  sorely  judged 
(Luke  ii.  35).  4.  But  the  light  would  leave  us  without  hope,  did  it  not  reveal 
a  love  in  God  greater  than  our  revolt,  a  pardon  greater  than  our  iniquity ;  but 
the  text  nowhere  is  truer  than  as  it  falls  from  the  Cross,  at  whose  foot  the 
sinner  divines  and  receives  a  grace  worthy  of  God,  because  it  secures  His  justice 
while  revealing  His  mercy;  he  there  sees  sin  both  judged  and  remitted.  All 
other  religions  and  philosophies  must  compound  with  evil  and  attenuate  it; 
the  religion  of  the  Cross  alone  dares  to  see  it,  because  it  alone  can  crush  it. 
(E.  Bersier,  D.D.)  The  Light  of  the  world: — In  a  physical  sense  this  is 
the  sun,  and  with  it  Jesus  may  be  compared.  The  sun  is — I.  One,  and  throughout 
the  extent  of  our  planetary  system,  it  is  the  one  source  of  light.  Towards  it 
each  planet,  with  its  satellites,  turns  every  portion  of  its  surface  to  receive  light. 
There  is  but  one  Saviour — without  whom  every  soul  is  wrapt  in  darkness,  bat 
from  whom  all  believers  obtain  all  blessings.  II.  The  bbiohtest  luuinabv.  In 
His  splendour  the  moon  and  stars  pale.  Jesus  in  all  things  has  the  pre-eminence, 
and  is  "the  chiefest  among  ten  thousand."  The  man  of  the  world  walks  by 
taper  light ;  the  Christian  by  sunlight.  What  are  10,000,000  tapers  to  the 
sun  ?  III.  Of  prodigious  magnitude.  Our  earth  is  25,000  miles  round  and 
has  a  surface  of  200,000,000  square  miles.  But  what  is  it  to  the  sun  ?  about  one 
to  a  million  1  The  highest  mountain  bears  the  proportion  to  the  whole  earth 
of  a  grain  of  sand  to  an  18in.  globe ;  man  less,  animals  still  less.  What  then 
the  tiny  fiower  and  the  insects  that  float  in  the  sunbeam.  Yet  the  light  that 
streams  97,000,000  miles  gladdens  and  enlightens  all.  But  greater  still  is  its 
Creator — Jesus — who  is  rich  in  mercy  to  all  who  call  upon  Him.  IV.  Eminently 
BEAUTIFUL  AND  BEAUTIFYING.  Pure  light  is  provcd  to  consist  of  seven  opposite 
colours — so  in  Jesus  there  is  a  combination  of  all  excellences.  He  is  "  all  fair." 
The  beauties  of  the  landscape  are  derived  from  the  sun ;  the  variety  of  hues 
that  meet  the  eye  are  painted  by  Him.  So  saints  are  beautiful  through  the 
comeliness  that  Jesus  puts  upon  them,  varying  as  it  does  in  character,  differing  as 
it  does  in  position.  V.  Most  beneficial.  Light,  heat,  and  fertility  flow  from  his 
beams.  Blot  out  the  sun  and  our  earth  would  be  destroyed.  Without  him  what 
would  be  the  blessing  of  sight  ?  So  without  Jesus  we  should  have  no  spiritual 
knowledge,  no  happy  love  to  God  or  man,  no  fruitfulness.  Conclusion — 1.  We 
may  gather  some  thoughts  of  Jesus  from  the  laws  of  light,  or  the  modes  of 
its  operation.  Is  the  sun  an  un exhaustible  fountain  of  light  ?  In  Jesus  there 
is  an  infinite  fulness  of  grace.  Does  the  light  travel  with  amazing  rapidity  ? 
How  swiftly  do  the  thoughts  of  Jesus  flow  out  towards  His  servants — "  Before 
they  call  I  will  answer."  Does  light  travel  only  in  straight  hnes?  Jesus 
is  a  holy  Saviour ;  His  eyes  look  straight  before  Him  in  the  prosecution  of  Hi« 
Father's  purposes.  Is  the  angle  of  reflection  always  equal  to  the  angle  of  inci- 
dence? The  Christian  knows  that  the  light  he  receives  from  heaven,  he  will  find 
it  his  honour  and  happiness  to  reflect  on  earth.  Is  light  a  radiant  force,  an4 
does  a  small  approximation  to  its  centre  bring  an  increase  of  influence?  So  in 
proportion  to  our  nearness  to  Christ  will  be  our  reaUzation  of  His  grace.  2. 
Beflect  on  what  ia  popularly  called  the  rising  of  the  sun.  ' See  how  he  cUmba 
higher  and  higher.    Even  so  was  it  with  Jeyus.     Mark  the  first  streak  of  light 


CHAP.  Tm.]  ST.  JOHN,  2t 

in  the  first  promise — broader  streaks  in  those  succeeding  to  Abraham,  Jacob — 
then  the  typea  and  ceremonies;  then  the  great  prophecies,  until  Christ  could 
proclaim  the  text.  So  with  the  preaching  of  Christ  to  nations,  and  His  reception 
by  iudividaals.  {J.  M.  Bandall.)     The  Light  of   the  world: — ^Light    is — I. 

Bevsalino.  1.  Every  morning  it  removes  the  dark  veil  from  the  face  of  nature, 
and  enables  ns  to  go  wherever  our  duty  calls  us.  2.  What  blanks  there  would 
have  been  in  science,  philosophy,  and  poetry,  if  there  had  been  no  Newton, 
Bacon,  Milton ;  but  what  a  famine  of  knowledge  there  would  have  been  regarding 
God  and  man,  (&o.,  without  the  Bible.  Other  books  speak  to  us  on  these  subjects, 
but,  Uke  the  light  of  every  star,  their  light  is  borrowed.  The  Bible  has  been  the 
means  of  suggesting  more  thoughts,  and  expanding  more  minds,  than  all  other 
books  combined.  The  artist,  historian,  poet,  novelist,  scientist,  traveller,  are  all 
indebted  to  it.  Every  syllable  has  been  carefully  examined,  and  out  of  this 
examination  vast  libraries  have  been  formed.  If  all  the  rays  of  mental  light 
which  have  streamed  from  it  could  be  brought  back  to  it,  and  if  it  were  to  be 
totally  eclipsed,  as  the  sun  has  been,  what  would  be  the  condition  of  the  world 
of  mind  ?  3.  To  whom  are  we  indebted  for  the  Bible  ?  To  Christ  I  If  He  had 
not  lived  and  died  the  New  Testament  could  not  have  been  written,  nor  the  Old, 
since  the  latter  is  to  the  former  what  the  germ  is  to  the  fruit.  He  is  the  Alpha  and 
Omega  of  its  subject  matter,  and  the  cause  of  its  existence.  U.  Mysterious.  1. 
In  the  morning  it  appears  to  come  from  the  east,  it  travels  at  the  rate  of  90,000,000 
miles  in  eight  minutes  ;  and  in  the  evening  seems  to  retire  in  the  west.  Where 
does  it  come  from  and  go  to?  How  shall  we  account  for  its  inconceivable  speed? 
For  thousands  of  years  it  has  punctually  visited  our  planet ;  why  does  it  continue 
as  fresh  as  on  the  day  of  its  creation  ?  What  is  it  ?  Newton  says  that  luminous 
particles  actually  proceed  from  the  sun;  and  Huyghens,  that  the  sun  only 
occasions  a  disturbance  of  the  ether  which  extends  in  the  same  manner  as  a  wave 
spreads  itself  on  the  surface  of  a  lake ;  but  no  one  can  give  a  thoroughly  satis- 
factory answer.  It  is  a  mystery.  2.  Christ  was  human — but  He  was  also  Divine ; 
and  as  we  think  of  Him  existing  from  eternity,  as  incarnate,  as  swaying  the 
sceptre  of  the  aniverse,  and  upholding  all  things,  the  mystery  is  deep  indeed.  We 
are  advised  to  renounce  His  Divinity  as  a  means  of  clearing  the  mystery ;  but 
that  would  only  deepen  it.  A  mere  boy  astonishing  learned  rabbis,  a  mere  man 
stepping  into  the  first  rank  of  the  world's  teachers,  working  miracles,  penetrating 
the  future,  giving  away  His  soul  for  sinners  as  willingly  as  He  gave  them 
advice,  bursting  the  barriers  of  the  tomb  1 — to  reject  His  Divinity  is  to  plunge 
into  Egyptian  darkness  1 — 3.  What  then  shall  we  do  ?  Because  of  the  mystery  turn 
infidels,  or  stand  in  suspense — perplexed  and  miserable?  The  mystery  of  light 
does  not  disturb  our  equanimity ;  we  place  it  among  matters  which  our  reason 
cannot  just  now  grasp.  Inasmuch,  however,  we  cannot  live  without  it,  ws 
welcome  it.  In  the  same  way  let  us  do  with  the  mystery  of  Christ — a  hmnan 
leader,  saviour,  will  not  do  for  us;  He  must  be  Divine  or  we  are  lost.  Let  na 
trust  Him  and  leave  the  mystery  till  removed  by  the  perfect  light  of  heaven. 
III.  Felicitous.  1.  Who  loves  the  darkness  ?  Not  the  Uttle  child,  who  fears  it. 
Not  the  virtuous  youth,  who,  although  he  may  have  nothing  to  do,  when 
evening  comes  wishes  for  a  light ;  not  the  righteous  old  man.  Those  only  love 
the  darkness  whose  hearts  are  set  on  evil  deeds.  "  Truly  the  light  is  sweet,"  &o. 
In  its  presence  flowers  open  themselves,  landscapes  smile,  and  birds  sing.  2.  It 
is  thus  an  emblem  of  that  felicity  the  blessed  God  wishes  every  man  to  have ; 
but  it  will  never  come  to  us  as  pleasure  comes  to  the  beasts  of  the  field.  We 
must  go  in  quest  of  it.  Whither?  To  wealth,  honour,  fame,  Ac?  These  will 
only  disappoint ;  but  if  we  go  to  Christ  He  will  give  as  every  element  of 
happiness  in  abundance— pardon,  comfort,  strength,  heaven.  IV.  Undefileo.  1. 
The  water^  as  it  proceeds  from  its  distant  home  is  clear  as  crystal,  but 
becomes  impure ;  the  snow  in  a  Uttle  time  becomes  mixed  with  the 
muddy  soil;  the  winds,  pure  in  their  origin,  become  unwholesome  passing 
through  pestiferous  regions ;  but  the  light — stainless  it  comes  to  us,  chases  away 
the  darkness  from  St.  Giles's  as  freely  as  from  Windsor  Palace,  enters  abodes  of 
sickness  as  cheerfully  as  abodes  of  health,  and  having  brightened  and  beautified 
every  object  pursues  its  way  as  pure  as  when  it  came.  2.  What  a  true  image  of  Jesus  I 
For  twenty-eight  years  He  resided  in  Nazareth,  a  place  proverbial  for  wickedness. 
He  was  tempted  of  the  devil,  and  mingled  with  the  most  sinful,  yet  what  was  the 
result  ?  The  nearer  we  approach  a  work  of  art  the  less  we  admire  it,  and  the  closer 
we  come  to  some  men  the  more  imperfect  they  appear ;  but  the  more  w«  inspect 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tim 

the  character  of  Jesus  the  brighter  does  it  shine.  He  came  into  the  world  pare,  con- 
tinued  in  it  pure,  and  returned  pure.  This  was  the  testimony  of  His  enemies,  Hie 
friends.  Himself.  8.  To  resemble  Jesus  in  this  is  the  principal  duty  of  His  followers — 
"Ye  are  the  light  of  the  world,"  '•  Let  your  light  so  shine,"  &o.  Were  this  duty  dis- 
charged the  moral  darkness  of  the  world  would  be  swiftly  chased  away.  {A.  McAuslane, 
D.D.)  The  relation  of  the  Light  of  the  world  to  the  Ineamation : — Light  within, 
by  His  Godhead  enlightening  the  mind;  hght  without,  by  His  manhood  guiding,  by 
miracles,  by  word,  by  example.  (I.  Williams,  B.D.)  Moderated  light: — By  this 
Light  the  sun's  hght  was  made ;  and  the  Light  which  made  the  sun,  under  which  also 
He  made  us,  was  made  under  the  sun  for  our  sake.  Do  not  despise  the  cloud  of 
the  flesh ;  with  that  cloud  it  is  covered,  not  to  be  obscured,  but  to  be  moderated. 
{Augustine.^  Revelations  of  light : — As  dust  in  a  chamber  cannot  be  seen  until 
light  is  let  m,  so  no  man  can  know  himself  until  this  Light  reveals  him  to  himself. 
(W.  H.  Van  Doren,  D.D.)  Light  the  emblem  of  gladness  : — A  little  child  dislikes 
the  darkness  instinctively,  and  at  night,  as  soon  as  the  candle  is  put  out,  it  hides 
its  head  under  the  bed-clothes,  shuts  its  eyes  resolutely,  and  tries  to  forget  all  about 
the  darkness.  But  when  the  morning  comes  the  light  streams  in  through  the  win- 
dow, the  little  child  awakens,  rejoicing  that  the  night  has  gone.  It  shakes  its  little 
spirit  free  from  fear,  and  comes  out  of  its  sepulchre  of  clothes  ;  for  its  heart  is  full 
of  gladness  which  the  light  has  brought.  Jesus  is  the  Light  of  the  world  in  this 
sense  also.  He  came  not  to  condemn  but  to  forgive,  and  to  save  those  who  were 
lost.  And  BO  He  brought  gladness  and  peace  and  great  joy  into  the  world.  (C. 
Vince.)  The  saving  and  health-giving  influence  of  light: — The  inscription  on 
Eddystone  lighthouse  is,  "To  give  light  and  to  save  life."  This  is  a  motto  that 
also  may  be  used  to  show  the  purpose  of  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  He  came  to 
give  light  and  to  impart  life.  We  erect  a  hghthouse  on  rocks  that  have  been  proved 
to  be  dangerous  to  life — we  put  it  on  the  rocks — and,  likewise,  when  souls  were 
wrecked  by  the  corruption  of  human  nature,  the  Light  of  the  world  shone  from  the 
human  nature  of  Christ  Jesus.  His  sacred  light  warns  us  from  the  sin  and  corrup- 
tion that  have  been  proved  to  be  so  fatal  to  the  peace  and  life  of  human  souls  ;  and, 
like  a  lighthouse,  it  also  shows  the  safe  path  to  the  harbour  of  heaven.  God  is 
Light ;  and  the  body  of  Jesus  is  the  lighthouse  from  which  the  fulness  of  the 
Almighty  shone  forth  on  a  dying  world.  The  sun  is  spoken  of  as  an  angel  with 
healing  in  its  wings.  Yon  may  not  be  aware  that  persons  who  live  in  a  room  which 
opens  only  to  the  north,  are  more  in  danger  of  sickness  than  if  they  lived  in  a  room 
which  faced  the  opposite  point  of  the  compass.  Statistics  tell  us  that  the  unsunned 
rooms  of  a  barracks  or  hospital  are  much  less  healthful  than  those  parts  on  which 
the  sun  shines  through  the  day.  It  is  said  that  the  absence  of  the  direct  rays  of 
the  sun  increases  the  mortaUty  twenty  per  cent.,  as  compared  with  the  places  on 
which  it  shines  continually.  The  sun  is  our  best  doctor  and  sunshine  is  oar 
cheapest  and  most  efficient  physio.  Narrow  streets,  blind-alleys,  and  back-slums  in 
which  the  rays  of  the  sun  never  shine  are  a  disgrace  to  our  humanity.  In  such 
places  you  see,  like  as  you  see  in  that  part  of  your  garden  on  which  the  sun  does 
not  shine,  stunted  and  diseased  human  plants.  If  you  give  the  people  wide  streets 
and  good  houses,  and  provide  three  times  the  number  of  gaslights  at  night,  you  will 
have  a  more  healthful  and  a  more  holy  city  than  we  have  just  now.  The  sun  shines 
away  disease,  and  a  powerful  light  scares  away  sin.  {W.  Birch.)  Light  brings 
power ; — The  day  closed  with  heavy  showers.  The  plants  in  my  garden  were 
beaten  down  before  the  pelting  storm,  and  I  saw  one  flower  that  I  had  admired  for 
its  beauty  and  loved  for  its  fragrance  exposed  to  the  pitiless  storm.  The  flower  fell, 
shut  up  its  petals,  drooped  its  head,  and  I  saw  that  all  its  glory  was  gone.  "  I  must 
wait  till  next  year,"  I  said,  "  before  I  see  that  beautiful  thing  again. "  And  the 
night  passed,  and  morning  came,  the  sun  shone  again,  and  the  morning  brought 
strength  to  the  flower.  The  light  looked  at  it,  and  the  flower  looked  at  the  light. 
There  was  contact  and  communion,  and  power  passed  into  the  flower.  It  held  up 
its  head,  opened  its  petals,  regained  its  glory,  and  seemed  fairer  than  before.  I 
wonder  how  it  took  place — this  feeble  thing  coming  into  contact  with  the  strong 
thing,  and  gaining  strength!  By  devout  communion  and  contact  a  soul  gains 
strength  from  Christ.  I  cannot  tell  how  it  is  that  I  should  be  able  to  receive  into 
my  being  a  power  to  do  and  to  bear  by  this  communion,  but  I  know  that  it 
is  a  fact.  Is  there  a  peril  from  riches  or  from  trial  which  you  are  afraid  will 
endanger  your  Christian  consistency  ?  Seek  this  communion,  and  you  will  receive 
strength  and  be  able  to  conquer  the  peril.  (C.  Vince.)  The  effects  of  sunlight: — 
ia  autumnal  mornings  mists  settle  over  the  Connecticut  Valley,  and  lie  cold  and 


CHAP.  Tin.]  ST.  JOHN.  81 

damp  upon  the  meadows  and  the  hill  sides,  and  it  is  not  till  the  sun  rises  and 
Bhines  down  warm  upon  them  that  they  begin  to  move  ;  and  then  there  are  sway- 
ings,  and  wreathings,  and  openings,  till  at  length  the  spirit  which  has  tormented 
the  valley  can  stay  no  longer,  but  rises  and  disappears  in  the  air.  So  is  it  when 
the  Sun  of  Eighteousness  shines  upon  the  troubles  which  brood  over  our  souls. 
Shining  but  a  little,  they  only  fluctuate ;  but  if  the  Sun  will  shine  long,  they  lift 
themselves  and  vanish  in  the  unclouded  heaven.  (If.  W.  Beecher.)  The  light  of 
life  : — He  declares  that  to  all  the  pilgrim  hosts  of  men.  He  is  what  the  cloud  with 
its  heart  of  fire  was  to  that  race  of  desert  wanderers  (Bxod.  xiii.  21  and  Numb.  ix. 
15-23).  I.  As  TO  ITS  NATURE.  That  fire  in  the  heart  of  the  cloud  was  prophetic 
of  our  Lord's  Deity,  enfolded  and  enshrined  in  His  humanity.  IL  As  to  its 
ruNCTiONS.  The  work  of  the  fire-cloud  was  threefold.  1.  It  led. — The  wilderness 
was  a  trackless  waste  to  the  hosts  of  Israel,  and  they  were  absolutely  dependent  on 
the  cloud  to  show  their  path,  and  to  find  out  a  resting-place  each  night.  2.  It 
shielded.  3.  It  gave  light.  III.  As  to  the  conditions.  "  He  that  followeth  Me. 
.  .  ."  We  must  put  Christ  first.  He  must  hold  the  position  of  Leader  and 
Guide.  Which  way  is  He  taking  ?  We  may  generally  ascertain  this  as  we  endea- 
vour to  answer  one  of  the  following  questions :  1.  What  is  the  law  of  Christ  ?  2. 
What  is  the  will  of  Christ  T  3.  What  would  Christ  do  under  the  circumstances  ? 
If  we  are  not  sure,  we  must  wait  till  we  are ;  but  knowing,  we  must  follow  at  all 
costs.  We  cannot  foUow  Jesus  except  we  leave  all — our  own  judgment  and 
wisdom,  our  schemes  and  preferences,  our  predilections  and  fancies.  1.  Shall  not 
walk  in  darkness.  2.  But  shall  have  the  light  of  life.  (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  We 
must  not  refuse  the  light : — I  once  happened  to  be  on  a  visit  to  a  great  castle  situate 
on  the  top  of  a  hill.  There  was  a  steep  cliff,  at  the  bottom  of  which  was  a  rapid 
river.  Late  one  night,  there  was  a  person  anxious  to  get  home  from  that  castle,  in 
the  midst  of  a  thunderstorm.  The  night  was  blackness  itself.  The  woman  was 
asked  to  stop  till  the  storm  was  over ;  but  she  declined :  next  they  begged  her  to 
take  a  lantern,  that  she  might  be  able  to  keep  upon  the  road  from  the  castle  to  her 
home.  She  said  she  did  not  require  a  lantern,  but  could  do  very  well  without  one. 
She  went.  Perhaps  she  was  frightened  by  the  storm  (I  know  not  the  cause) ;  but 
in  the  midst  of  the  darkness  she  wandered  from  the  path,  and  fell  over  the  cliff : 
the  next  day  that  swollen  river  washed  to  the  shore  the  poor  lifeless  body  of  this 
foolish  woman.  {Bp.  Villiers.)  Bays  from  the  Sun  of  Righteousness : — All  the 
light  that  comes  to  us  from  the  sun  is  made  up  of  the  beams,  which  he  is  con- 
tinually pouring  forth.  When  this  light  is  decomposed,  it  is  found  to  be  made  up 
of  seven  different  coloured  rays.  There  are  blue,  and  red,  and  orange,  and  yellow, 
and  so  on.  These  rays  differ  from  each  other  in  other  things.  The  red  has  more 
heat  in  it ;  the  yellow  is  the  coldest ;  and  the  violet  is  the  quickest  in  its  motion. 
And  if  we  wish  to  understand  the  ligbt,  we  must  find  out  all  we  can  about  the 
different  rays.  And  so,  if  we  would  have  a  right  knowledge  of  Jesus,  we  must 
study  the  different  rays  that  shine  from  Him  as  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness.  We 
are  dependent  on  the  sun  for — I.  Life.  The  light  of  the  sun  has  no  power  to  make 
dead  things  alive  by  shining  upon  them.  Suppose  we  take  a  dead  body,  or  plant, 
and  lay  it  down  where  the  light  of  the  sun  can  shine  on  it ;  the  light  has  no  power 
to  give  life  when  it  does  not  exist ;  but  it  can  help  to  preserve  it.  The  light  of  the 
sun  is  needed  in  order  to  keep  everything  alive.  If  .the  light  were  taken  away, 
everything  would  die.  And  for  this  reason,  Jesus  might  well  say  of  Himself,  "  I 
am  the  Light  of  the  world. "  He  is  more  necessary  for  the  life  of  our  souls  than 
the  light  of  the  sun  is  for  the  life  of  our  bodies.  The  light  which  shines  from 
Jesus  is  made  up  of  the  truths  taught  us  in  the  Bible  about  His  character  and 
work.  The  light  which  shines  from  Jesus  has  the  power  of  giving  life  to  souls  that 
are  dead,  as  weU  as  of  keeping  them  alive  when  it  is  given.  When  ministers  preach 
the  gospel,  or  when  Christian  people  read  it,  or  preach  it  to  others,  they  are 
scattering  light  from  Jesus,  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness.  And  the  light  thus  scattered 
has  the  power  of  giving  life  to  souls  that  were  dead  in  sins.  H.  Geowth.  If  the  hght 
were  taken  away  from  plants,  and  they  were  kept  in  the  dark,  they  would  not  grow. 
Suppose  you  have  a  lot  of  potatoes  in  your  cellar.  If  there  is  no  window  the  potatoes 
will  rot.  But  if  there  is  a  window  those  potatoes  will  begin  to  grow  over  towards  the 
window.  As  yon  see  them  straggling  across  the  cellar  floor,  it  looks  as  if  the  potatoes 
were  stretching  out  their  arms  towards  the  light,  and  begging  it  to  come  and  help 
them  to  grow.  And  it  is  the  same  with  the  flowers  and  the  trees,  and  with  every 
other  kind  of  vegetable.  Each,  in  its  place,  is  dependent  on  the  light.  None  of 
them  can  grow  without  it.    Here  is  an  acorn.     What  a  tiny  littlo  thing  it  is  I    Yet, 


BS  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  riu. 

there  is  »  big  oak-tree  stowed  away  in  this  little  cup.  But,  then,  that  tree  can 
never  get  out  of  the  acorn  and  grow  up  to  its  proper  size  without  the  help  of  the 
sunlight.  It  needs  the  light  to  make  it  begin  to  grow.  Then  it  springs  op  a  tender 
little  sprouting  thing,  which  an  infant's  foot  could  crush.  But  every  year  it  grows 
higher,  and  broader,  and  stronger.  And,  as  it  goes  on  increasing  in  size  and 
strength,  the  trunk  depends  on  the  branches,  and  the  branches  depend  on  the 
leaves,  and  the  leaves  depend  on  the  sunlight  for  all  they  need  to  make  the  tree  grow. 
And  just  in  the  same  way  our  souls  depend  for  their  growth  on  the  light  that  Jesna 
gives.  A  young  Christian,  just  converted,  is  like  an  acorn  just  beginning  to  grow.  A 
mature  Christian,  who  has  reached  what  the  Apostle  Paul  calls  "  the  stature  of  a 
perfect  man  in  Christ,"  is  like  the  tree  that  has  grown  up  to  its  full  size  out  of  the 
little  acorn.  The  tree  can  only  grow  by  the  help  of  the  light  which  the  sun  gives,  and 
the  soul  can  only  grow  by  the  help  of  the  light  which  Jesus  gives.  III.  Beauty. 
Light  is  one  of  the  most  beautiful  things  that  God  has  made,  and  it  makes  other 
things  beautiful.  All  the  beauty  that  we  see  in  the  world  around  us  we  owe  to  the 
light.  Suppose  you  go  into  a  garden  fuU  of  flowers  on  a  dark  night.  How  many 
colours  will  you  see  among  the  flowers  ?  Only  one.  Black.  Suppose  you  go  and 
look  at  a  gallery  of  beautiful  paintings  in  the  dark.  How  many  colours  wUl  you 
see  ?  Only  black.  Suppose  you  look  at  a  great  mass  of  clouds  in  the  western  sky 
at  the  close  of  the  afternoon.  They  are  all  of  one  colour ;  and  this  is  a  dark  grey, 
almost  black.  There  is  very  Uttle  beauty  in  those  clouds.  But  presently  the  sun 
gets  behind  them.  He  pours  a  flood  of  light  over  them  and  through  them ;  and 
what  a  change  takes  place  in  a  moment.  What  different  colours  are  there !  How 
beautiful  they  are  !  And  what  has  made  this  change  ?  The  hght  has  done  it.  All 
those  beautifol  colours  are  made  by  the  light.  And  Jesus  may  well  be  called  "  the 
Light  of  the  world  "  on  this  account.  Like  the  light,  He  is  beautiful  in  Himself, 
and  He  makes  others  beautiful.  Jesus  is  a  glorious  sun,  and  the  light  that  He 
gives  comes  to  us  like  sunbeams,  that  spread  brightness  and  beauty  everywhere. 
IV.  Safety.  There  is  danger  in  darkness.  We  cannot  see  the  evils  that  threaten 
us  then,  nor  how  to  escape  them.  It  is  under  the  cover  of  darkness  that  thieves  go 
forth  to  rob,  and  murderers  to  kill,  and  all  sorts  of  wicked  people  to  do  bad  things 
(chap.  iii.  20).  Our  merchants  and  shop-keepers  have  found  out  there  is  safety  in 
light ;  and  they  are  putting  this  knowledge  to  a  good  use.  When  I  was  a  boy,  I 
remember  that  at  night  the  jeweller's  stores,  and  others  that  had  valuable  things  in 
them,  used  to  have  heavy  wooden  or  iron  shutters  to  the  windows;  and  these 
would  be  fastened  with  locks,  or  great  iron  bolts  or  bars.  And  all  this  was  done  for 
safety.  But  now  many  of  those  stores  have  no  shutters  at  all  to  them ;  and  others 
only  have  a  thin  wire  grating  over  them.  But,  if  you  stop  and  look  through  one 
of  those  windows  at  night,  you  will  And  that  the  gas  is  lighted  in  the  store,  and 
kept  burning.  If  a  thief  should  get  in  there  and  begin  to  steal,  he  would  be  seen 
by  the  watchman,  or  the  people  going  by.  And  so  the  thieves  stay  away.  They 
are  afraid  to  go  into  a  shop  where  the  gas  is  burning.  This  shows  us  that  there  is 
safety  in  light.  And  Jesus  may  well  be  called  «*  the  Light  of  the  world,"  because 
He  brings  salvation  wherever  He  comes.  And  salvation  means  safety.  When  we 
learn  to  know  Him,  and  trust  in  Him,  we  are  safe  (Fro v.  zviii.  10 ;  Psa.  xci.  4 ;  Matt, 
xxiii.  37).  But  He  does  this  for  all  who  love  Him.  When  we  learn  to  know  Him 
and  trust  Him,  it  is  just  as  if  a  beam  of  light  had  shined  down  on  our  path  to  show 
us  the  way  to  a  safe  hiding-place.  (Richard  Newton,  D.D.)  Light  intercepted:— 
What  a  poor  and  contemptible  light-bearer  does  the  sun  seem  when  barely  discerned 
through  a  fog.  Is  it  any  wonder,  therefore,  that  those  who  behold  the  Sun  of 
Righteousness  only  through  the  mist  of  prejudice  and  misrepresentation  can  dis- 
cern nothing  wonderful  either  in  Himself  or  in  the  light  wherewith  He  lightens  the 
world  ?  But  we  who  have  seen  the  Sun  on  a  bright  day  know  that  He  is,  indeed, 
the  Light  of  the  world,  and  we  are  not  troubled  because  those  deny  it  who  have  only 
seen  Him  through  the  mist ;  nor  yet  are  we  disheartened  when  our  own  view  of  Him 
is  partially  obscured  through  a  temporary  phase  of  our  local  atmosphere.  {H>  C. 
Trumbull,  D.D.)  He  that  followeth  Me  shall  not  walk  In  darkness,  but  shall 
Iiave  the  light  of  life.  Strong  and  full  of  hope  as  these  words  are  in  the  EngUsh 
rendering,  the  Greek  is  more  emphatic  still.  The  negative  is  in  its  strongest  form, 
♦•  shall  by  no  means,"  "  shall  in  no  wise ; "  possibility  is  excluded  from  the  thought. 
"  God  is  light,"  &o.  If  a  man  makes  a  false  step  in  life,  it  is  because  he  seeks  other 
guides  in  his  own  thoughts  or  in  subjection  to  the  thoughts  of  other  men.  He  that 
seeks  to  follow  the  true  Light — to  follow,  not  precede  it ;  to  follow  always,  not  only 
when  it  coincides  with  his  own  will ;  to  follow  patiently  and  trustfully,  step  by  step^ 


«BiP.  Tza.]  ST.  JOHN.  St 

wherever  it  may  lead — cannot  walk  in  darkness,  for  lie  is  never  without  the  presence 
of  the  Light.  Here,  as  so  often,  stress  is  laid  on  the  certainty  and  aniversality  of 
the  Divine  love  on  the  one  side,  and  the  action  of  the  human  will  on  the  other.  1. 
There  can  be  no  doubt,  "  shall  by  no  means  walk,"  &o.  2.  There  can  be  no  limit, 
"  he  that  followeth."  3.  There  can  be  no  halting,  ••  he  that  followeth."  The  light 
ever  points  the  way ;  it  is  he  who  day  by  day  follows  it  who  cannot  miss  the  way. 
Perception  of  truth  attends  its  practice.  The  true  journey  of  this  life  is  here  pre> 
Bented  as  a  constant  activity ;  in  chap.  vii.  37  the  source  of  this  action  is  found  in 
a  constant  receptivity.  {Archdeacon  Watkina.)  Following  Christ : — Here  is  a  sum- 
mary  of  the  Christian  hfe ;  its  rules  and  its  promises ;  its  duties  and  its  joys  ;  its 
sacrifices  and  its  recompenses.  The  two  great  objects  of  Christ's  life  were  salva- 
tion and  example.  Let  us  consider  the  latter.  Christ  the  model  Man.  The  way  to 
follow  is  to  have  the  eye  constantly  on  the  pattern,  not  so  much  on  the  copy. 
Most  persons  do  exactly  the  reverse.  Note  that  our  Lord's  hfe  was  a  life  of — I. 
Concentration.  He  came  for  one  great  end — the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of 
man — and  from  that  He  never  turned  His  eye.  It  was  a  life  with  one  grand  master 
idea ;  and  that  is  what  every  life  requires.  Few  lives  are  dedicated  to  one  object 
which  satisfies  our  aspirations.  Give  your  life  a  goal,  a  worthy  one,  the  one  Christ 
had.  Without  this  your  life  will  be  weak,  desultory,  wasted.  II.  Hdmility.  From 
first  to  last  it  was  a  descent — from  heaven  to  the  grave — yet  all  the  while  it  was  a 
constant  ascent.  The  secret  of  men's  want  of  peace,  influence,  and  power,  is  that 
they  do  not  go  low  enough.  Follow  Christ  in  His  continual  self-abasement.  TTT. 
Stmpatht.  This  was  intense.  He  threw  Himself  into  every  heart,  every  circum- 
stance. That  sympathy  was  the  key  of  His  influence  and  the  basis  of  His  power. 
Follow  that.  Live  less  in  your  own  narrow  and  selfish  circle  ;  go  out  into  the  larger 
sphere  of  other  people's  hearts.  IV.  Labour.  Christ  never  played  with  life.  From 
early  morning  to  late  evening,  in  private  and  public,  physically  and  mentally,  Christ 
worked,  not  as  a  duty  merely,  but  as  a  privilege.  None  can  be  said  to  live  indeed 
who  do  not  work,  Uke  Him,  for  God  and  man.  V.  Lovb.  Life  and  love  with  Christ 
were  one  and  the  same — from  him  who  lay  upon  His  bosom  to  His  very  murderers 
— all  were  the  objects  of  His  love.  What  we  have  to  do  is  to  put  more  love  into 
life,  not  dreamy  love,  the  love  that  is  only  felt,  but  is  silent  and  inactive,  but  love 
that  shows  and  sacrifices  itself,  in  the  home,  church,  business,  all  hfe.  Conclusion : 
Wherever  two  ways  meet,  and  you  cannot  tell  which  to  take,  ask  yourself  honestly, 
••  Which  would  the  Master  take  ?  "  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Following  Christ : — 
1.  Every  promise  has  its  condition.  Here  light  is  the  promise ;  following  is  the 
condition.  2.  The  promise  exactly  meets  our  need.  In  every  point  hfe  WEints 
brightness — more  light — the  mind  clearness,  the  will  definiteness,  the  path  guid- 
ance, the  heart  joy,  the  hope  vividness.  3.  All  nature  teaches  the  essential  union 
between  ♦*  light  "  and  '*  life."  Take  away  Ught  and  all  creation  pines.  Therefore 
*'  light "  was  the  first  creation  because  necessary  to  all  else.  And  as  at  the  begin- 
ning so  at  the  end.  "  No  night  there."  4.  Following  Christ  gives  the  light  of  life. 
The  measure  of  the  Ught  we  receive  will  depend  on  the  nearness  of  the  following. 
All  who  follow  Christ  will  catch  some  rays ;  but  only  those  who  keep  very  close  may 
claim  the  promise  in  its  fulness.  The  secret  of  this  is  that  Christ  Himself,  not  His 
doctrines,  is  the  fountain  of  life  and  light ;  and  note  that  the  rays  which  are  in  Christ 
attract  as  much  as  they  emit — draw  the  follower  while  they  cheer  and  vivify  him — 
just,  in  fact,  as  the  sun  acts  on  the  tangible  system,  and  is  at  once  its  magnet  and 
its  light.  5.  Kemember  that  there  are  latent  beauties  in  everything.  What  they 
need  is  some  ray  to  bring  out  to  view  the  hidden  grace  and  dehcate  colours.  Bat 
how  does  following  Christ  bring  this  Ught  to  life  ?  I.  The  imitation  of  Christ 
BRINGS  LIGHT  TO  THE  PRACTICAL  LITE.  We  havo  but  to  copy  the  great  Pattern 
and  this  alone  would  make  the  path  so  clear  that  we  should  never  be  left  in 
the  dark  as  to  what  we  ought  to  do.  II.  Fellowship  with  Christ  brinqs  light 
TO  THE  INTELLECTUAL  LIFE.  Persous  who  bccomc  more  religious  become  more 
intelligent.  Minds  naturally  weak  and  dull  are  made  tolerably  clear  by  the  simple 
power  of  their  piety.  It  may  be  through  the  habit  of  concentration  of  thought  on 
the  beauty  of  Christ,  through  the  tendency  of  the  Christian  life  to  disencumber  the 
inteUect  from  the  carnal  hindrances  and  obscurity  of  sin ;  from  the  power  of  Christ's 
Spirit ;  but  in  some  way  the  process  is  sure.  III.  Lovino  Christ  brings  li?b  to 
THE  emotional  LIFE.  There  is  a  talent  in  love,  and  love  to  Christ  clears  it  of  im- 
perfection and  strengthens  it.  He  who  foUows  Christ  follows  a  path  which  is  all 
love,  and  this  love  exercises  and  refines  all  the  other  afieotions,  and  directs  them 
towards  their  true  objects.  lY.  Faith  in  Christ  bbinge  light  xo  xhs  religious  lhv. 
VOL.  n.  8 


B4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohi».  juu 

How  many  real  Christians  are  in  darkness  because  of  the  imperfection  of  their  faith  1 
This  only  can  bring  the  consciousness  of  pardon  and  acceptance,  make  hope  bright, 
and  kindle  joy,  and  this  consciousness,  &c.,  will  be  in  proportion  to  the  quantity 
and  quality  of  faith.  V.  Companionship  with  Chkist  will  beino  liqht  to  thb 
UFB  or  HEAVEN.  "  The  Lamb  is  the  light  thereof."  "In  Thy  light  shall  we  see 
light."  {Ibid.)  Walking  in  the  light : — Thomas  k  Kempis,  shut  in  the  monastery 
of  St.  Agnes,  in  the  fifteenth  century,  began  his  immortal  treatise  "  On  the  imita- 
tion of  Christ "  with  the  sentence,  "  He  that  keepeth  My  words  shall  not  walk  in 
darkness,  saith  the  Lord."  And  according  to  his  faith  was  it  unto  him.  Li  the 
superstitious  darkness  of  that  day,  leading  an  obscure  life,  celebrated  for  his  skill 
and  diligence  in  copying  pious  books,  Kempis  did  not  walk  in  darkness.  Hia 
devout  book  shows  that  he  walked  in  light ;  and  the  Father,  who  sees  in  secret,  set 
the  candle  upon  a  candlestick,  so  that  the  light  of  the  German  monk's  meditations 
has  enlightened  the  hearts  of  men  in  every  nation  of  Christendom  unto  this  day. 
It  was  in  Bedford  gaol,  with  no  hope  of  release,  that  John  Bunyan  drew  that  noble 
portrait  of  the  brave  Christian,  who  kept  heart  in  the  Shadow  of  Death,  and  over- 
threw Apollyon ;  and  there  he  had  that  vision  of  the  Delectable  Mountains.  No 
circumstances  can  darken  the  soul  of  him  who  walks  in  the  light,  {Clerical 
Library.)  Follotving  Christ  the  path  of  life : — If  we  will  only  have  patience  with 
God's  leading.  He  will  always  show  us  the  way  as  fast  as  we  are  really  ready  to  go  on. 
The  trouble  with  most  of  us  is  that  we  want  to  see  the  path  through  to  the  end,  before 
we  take  the  first  step.  We  want  to  know,  before  we  start,  how  we  are  to  come  oat. 
But  this  is  not  God's  way  for  us.  A  man  who  is  travelling  in  a  dark  night  on  a 
country  road,  does  not  have  the  whole  way  lighted  at  once  by  the  lantern  he  carries. 
It  shows  him  only  one  step  ;  but  as  he  takes  that,  the  lantern  is  borne  forward,  and 
another  step  is  lighted,  and  then  another  and  another,  until  in  the  end  the  whole 
has  been  illumined,  and  he  is  safe  at  his  destination.  God's  Word,  as  a  guiding 
light,  is  a  lamp  unto  our  feet,  not  a  sun  flooding  a  hemisphere.  In  the  darkest 
night  it  will  always  show  us  the  next  step ;  then,  when  we  have  taken  that,  it  will 
show  ns  another ;  and  thus  on,  till  it  brings  as  out  into  the  full,  clear  sunlight  of 
the  coming  day.  We  need  to  learn  well  the  lesson  of  patience,  if  we  would  have 
God  guide  as.  Many  of  us  cannot  wait  for  Him,  but  insist  in  running  on  faster 
than  He  leads,  and  then  we  wonder  why  there  is  no  light  on  the  path,  and  we  com- 
plain, and  are  discouraged  because  we  stumble  so  often.  If  we  stay  back  with  the 
lantern,  it  will  be  aU  right  with  as  in  our  journeying.  {H.  C.  Trumbull, 
D.D,)  Perpetual  daylight  for  the  Christian: — If  a  man  could  continually 
follow  the  sun,  he  would  be  always  in  broad  daylight  in  every  part  of  the  globe. 
So  with  Christ  and  believers.  Always  following  Him  they  will  always  have 
ight.  {Brentius.)  Christ  an  unsetting  light : — It  seems  to  thee,  suppose, 
that  thou  must  follow  the  sun,  and  thou  also  traveUest  thyself  towards  the 
west,  whither  it  also  travels ;  let  ns  see  after  it  has  set,  if  thou  wilt  not  walk 
in  darkness.  See,  how,  although  thoa  art  not  willing  to  desert  it,  yet  it  will 
desert  thee.  But  the  Lord  Jesus  is  a  sun  which  never  sets :  if  thou  wilt  not  fall 
off  from  Him  He  will  not  fall  off  from  thee.  {Augustine.)  The  believer's  life 
is  a  walk : — Walking  imphes  activity ;  but  it  must  be  of  a  continuous  kind.  Neither 
this  step,  nor  that,  nor  the  next,  can  make  a  walk.  We  must  be  moving  onward 
and  onward,  and  remain  in  that  exercise,  or  we  cease  from  walking.  Holy  walking 
includes  perseverance  in  obedience,  and  continuance  in  service.  Not  he  that  begins, 
but  he  that  continues  is  the  true  Christian ;  final  perseverance  enters  into  the  very 
essence  of  the  beUever's  life :  the  true  pilgrims  of  Zion  go  from  strength  to  strength. 
This  suggests  that  walking  implies  progress.  He  that  takes  one  step,  and  another 
step,  and  still  stands  where  he  was,  has  not  walked.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  the 
goose-step,  and  I  am  afraid  many  Christians  are  wonderfully  familiar  with  it :  they 
are  where  they  used  to  be,  and  are  half  inclined  to  congratulate  themselves  upon 
that  fa«t,  since  they  might  have  backslidden.  They  have  not  advanced  in  the 
heavenly  pilgrimage,  and  how  can  they  be  said  to  walk  ?  My  hearer,  is  your  life  a 
walk  with  God  and  towards  God  ?  If  so,  our  subject  has  to  deal  with  you.  May 
the  Spirit  of  all  grace  lead  us  into  the  heart  of  it  1  (C.  H.  Spur g eon.)  We  must 
walk  in  the  light  : — Not  only  must  the  light  be  around  us,  but  in  us,  before  we  can 
be  said  to  Uve  in  it  and  walk  in  it.  A  blind  man  is  surrounded  by  the  sunlight  a« 
any  one  else  is,  but  he  does  not  live  in  it ;  he  does  not  walk  in  it ;  he  cannot  enjoy 
it.  Why  not  ?  Simply  because  it  is  not  in  him.  We  must  have  e.yes ;  and  these 
eyes  must  be  opened  to  receive  the  light  into  the  body,  so  that  we  may  live  in  it, 
walk  in  it,  and  enjoy  it.    And  in  the  same  way  must  the  eye  of  faith  be  opened  to 


OHAF.  Tm.]  ST.  JOHN.  W 

s«o«iTe  the  heavenly  light  into  the  soul  before  we  can  even  be  aware  of  its  presence  ; 
and  it  must  be  kept  open  in  order  that  we  may  "  walk  in  the  light  as  He  is  in  the 
light."  Christ  must  be  in  us  by  His  Holy  Spirit  in  order  that  we  may  live  in  Him. 
We  mutt  follow  Christ : — If  a  man,  whose  body  was  radiant  and  bright  as  the  sun, 
were  walking  through  a  land  of  Egyptian  darkness,  all  who  followed  him  would 
•otually  walk  in  the  light,  and  the  closer  they  kept  to  him  the  clearer  their  light 
would  be  and  the  safer  their  road.  He  who  follows  Christ  follows  one  from  whom 
light  streams  upon  the  road  we  are  to  go — an  illuminated  man — laying  bare  its 
hidden  pitfalls — discovering  its  stumbling-stones — showing  all  its  turnings  and 
windings,  and  enabling  us  to  walk  safely,  surely,  and  cheerfully  on  our  way  (chap. 
▼iii.  12).  The  tafety  of  light : — Our  steamer  was  crossing  the  Gulf  of  Mexico 
and  approaching  the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi  river.  As  the  sun  went  down  a  cold 
and  furious  blast  from  the  north  came  down  suddenly  upon  us.  The  darkness 
became  intense.  Here  and  there  were  shoals  and  other  dangers.  Great  anxiety 
prevailed  among  all  on  board.  Suddenly  came  a  shout  from  the  sailor  on  the  for- 
ward, "  There's  the  light."  The  joyful  sound  rang  through  the  ship,  to  the  great 
relief  of  every  passenger.  The  true  position  of  the  steamer  was  now  known. 
Anxiety  was  over,  and  quietness  in  a  sense  of  safety  was  restored.  We  were  soon 
in  the  quiet  waters  of  the  river.    (H.  B.  Hooker.) 

Vebs.  14-17.  Though  1  bear  record  of  Myself,  yet  My  record  Is  true. — The  $elf' 

evidencing  power  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  : — The  sun  pours  forth  his  beams  so 
that  it  becomes  bright  day,  and  we  question  not  his  being  the  sun,  because  he  bears 
witness  of  himself ;  and  shall  we  say  to  the  eternal  Sun,  who  is  shedding  His  light 
npon  us,  "  Thou  bearest  record  of  Thyself,  Thy  record  is  not  true  ?  "  Be  that  far 
irom  us  I  A  light  not  only  reveals  other  things,  but  itself  also.  Therefore  the 
light  bears  witness  of  itself ;  the  eye,  if  healthy,  it  brightens  up  and  is  its 
own  witness  that  we  may  know  it  as  being  the  light.  {Augustine.)  Christ'$ 
witness  to  Himself : — Consider  what  this  witness  is.  If  any  of  us  know  a  holy 
man,  we  know  a  humble  man.  The  holiest  are  the  most  conscious  of  their 
sinfulness.  It  is  not  a  fashion  of  speech.  It  is  not  cant  or  hypocrisy.  The 
writer  who  is  perfectly  satisfied  with  his  lines  is  not  a  poet.  The  painters  or 
sculptors  who  have  no  noble  dissatisfaction  with  their  work  may  be  ingenious 
and  dexterous,  but  they  are  not  artists.  They  have  none  of  that  straining 
forward  to  an  unattained  ideal  of  beauty  which  is  the  heritage  of  genius.  So, 
too,  the  man  who  is  perfectly  content  with  his  own  spiritual  condition  may  have 
a  mechanical  regularity  of  habit.  He  may  be  a  respectable  Pharisee  ;  but  he  is 
utterly  without  saintlmess,  which  is,  as  it  were,  the  genius  of  goodness.  Now 
Jesus  had  the  loftiest  idea  of  duty.  He  was  also  the  meekest  and  humblest  of 
men.  Yet  in  His  life  there  is  one  fundamental  difference  from  the  lives  of  the 
saints.  They  are  full  of  burning  words  of  penitence;  they  are  burdened  with 
cries  of  confession.  But  we  have  long  discourses  of  Jesus.  We  have  one  soliloquy 
with  His  Father  in  chap.  xvii.  Yet  tliere  is  no  confession  of  sin.  He  can  bare 
His  noble  breast  to  His  enemies,  and  say,  "  Which  of  you  convinceth  Me  of 
sin?"  He  can  go  further:  He  can  declare,  "  The  prince  of  this  world  cometh, 
and  hath  nothing  in  Me."  Farther  yet — in  those  solemn  moments  when  death  is 
near ;  when  moral  natures,  seemingly  made  of  the  strongest  granite,  crack  and 
crumble  before  the  fire  of  eternity — He  can  lift  His  calm  and  trustful  eyes  to  heaven 
and  say,  "  I  have  glorified  Thee  on  the  earth ;  I  have  finished  the  work  which 
Thou  gavest  me  to  do."  And  with  this  we  know  that  His  spiritual  insight  was  so 
keen  and  piercing,  that  not  one  mote  could  have  floated  on  the  tide  of  his  purity 
without  being  detected  by  that  eagle  eye  ;  that  one  speck  or  stain  conld  not  have 
rested  on  the  very  skirts  of  the  garment  of  His  humanity  without  soiling  in  His 
sight  the  raiment  that  was  white  as  snow.  This  holy  Man,  with  the  highest  idea 
of  duty ;  this  humble  Man,  who  prays  falling  upon  His  face ;  this  keen-sighted 
Man,  who  sees  further  into  sin  than  any  other,  declares  that  His  hfe  and  the 
perfect  rule  of  goodness  are  in  unbroken  harmony.  What  witness  is  comparable  to 
ihis  witness  of  Jesus  to  Himself  ?  (Bp.  Alexander.)  Ye  judge  after  the  flesh: 
I  Judge  no  man. — Is  this  not  in  conflict  with  chap.  v.  22,  and  with  the  whole 
tenor  of  the  New  Testament,  viz.,  that  Christ  is  the  present  and  flnal  Judge  of 
all  men?  No.  Christ  was  indeed  Judge  ;  but  there  were  some  manner  of  judg- 
ments which  He  never  exercised,  and  had  no  commission  to  execute ;  for  He  did 
all  His  Father's  will.  1.  Christ  usurps  no  man's  jurisdiction ;  that  were  against 
justice.     2.  Christ  imputes  no  false  things  to  any  man  ;  that  were  against  charity. 


36  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tin, 

8.  Christ  induces  no  man  to  desperation ;  that  were  against  faith :  and  against 
justice,  charity,  and  faith,  Christ  judges  not.  Christ,  then,  judgeth  not — I.  Li 
SECuiiAB  jruDOMENTS.  1.  In  civil  matters  (Luke  xii.  13).  2.  In  criminal  matteza 
(ver.  11).  When  Christ  says  this,  may  we  not  ask  of  His  pretended  vicar,  "  Who 
made  you  judge  of  kings  that  you  should  depose  them  ?  or  proprietory  of  kingdom! 
that  you  should  dispose  of  them?"  If  he  says,  Christ ;  did  He  it  in  BUs  doctrine? 
If  so,  where  ?  Did  He  do  it  by  His  example  ?  Yes,  when  He  whipped  the  traders 
out  of  the  Temple  and  destrojed  the  herd  of  swine.  But  these  were  miracles  ;  and 
though  it  might  seem  half  a  miracle  that  a  bishop  should  exercise  so  much 
authority,  yet  when  we  see  his  means,  massacres,  assassinations,  &c.,  we  reply  that 
miracles  are  without  means.  II.  By  calumny,  as  did  the  Pharisees  when  they 
judged  Him.  1.  Calumny  is — (1)  Direct,  (a)  To  lay  a  false  imputation,  (fc)  To 
aggravate  a  just  imputation  with  unnecessary  circumstances,  (c)  To  reveal  a  secret 
fault  when  not  bound  by  duty.  (2)  Indirect,  (a)  To  deny  expressly  some  good  in 
another.  (6)  To  smother  it  in  silence  when  our  testimony  is  due.  (c)  To  diminish 
his  good  parts.  2.  These  Pharisees  calumniated  Jesus  with  the  bitterest  of  all 
calumny — scorn  and  derision.  3.  Since  Christ,  then,  judges  no  man  as  they  did, 
judge  not  you.  (1)  "  Judge  not,  that  ye  be  not  judged  " — i.e.,  when  you  see  God's 
judgments  fall  upon  a  man,  do  not  judge  that  he  sinned  more  than  others,  or  that 
his  father  sinned  and  not  yours.  (2)  Especially  speak  not  evil  of  the  deaf  that 
hear  not  (Lev.  xix.  14) — i-e.,  calumniate  not  him  who  is  absent  and  cannot  defend 
himself.  It  is  the  devil's  office  to  be  the  accuser  of  the  brethren.  (3)  Always 
remember  David's  case,  who  judged  more  severely  than  the  law  admitted,  which  we 
do  when  in  a  passion.  But  Christ  judges  no  man ;  for  Christ  is  love,  and  love 
thinks  no  evil.  III.  So  as  to  give  a  final  condemnation  here.  There  is  a  verdict 
against  every  man  in  the  law,  the  consequence  of  which  men  might  well  despair ; 
but  before  judgment,  God  would  have  every  man  saved  by  the  application  of  the 
promises  of  the  gospel  (chap.  iii.  17).  Do  not,  therefore,  give  malicious  evidence 
against  thyself  ;  do  not  weaken  the  merit  or  lessen  the  value  of  the  Saviour's  blood, 
as  though  thy  sin  were  greater  than  it.  Can  God  desire  thy  blood  now,  when  He 
hath  abundantly  satisfied  His  justice  with  the  blood  of  His  Son  for  thee? 
{J.  Donne,  D.D.)  Judging  "after  the  fiesh"  is  often  altogether  misleading: — 
Were  men  to  be  guided  by  the  appearance  of  things  only  in  forming  their  judg- 
ment, how  erroneous  and  deceptive  it  would  be  I  The  sun  would  be  no  more  than 
a  few  miles  distant  and  a  few  inches  in  diameter  ;  the  moon  would  be  a  span  wide 
and  half  a  mile  away;  the  stars  would  be  little  sparks  glistening  in  the  atmosphere ; 
the  earth  would  be  a  plain,  bounded  by  the  horizon  a  few  miles  from  us  :  the  sun 
would  travel  and  the  earth  stand  still ;  nature  would  be  dead  in  winter  and  only 
alive  in  summer  :  men  would  sometimes  be  women,  and  women  men ;  truth  would 
often  be  error,  and  error  truth  :  honest  men  would  be  rogues,  and  rogues  honest 
men  ;  wealth  would  be  poverty,  and  poverty  wealth ;  piety  would  be  wickedness, 
and  wickedness  piety.  In  fine,  there  is  scarcely  any  rule  so  deceptive  as  the  rule 
of  appearance  ;  and  there  are  multitudes  who,  in  many  things,  have  no  other  rule 
by  which  they  form  their  judgment.  Hence  the  errors  of  their  speech  and  life ; 
ridicule  and  blunders  into  which  they  plunge  themselves  before  the  world.  (John 
Bate.)  False  judgments  : — If  you  go  into  a  churchyard  some  snowy  day,  when 
the  snow  has  been  falling  thick  enough  to  cover  every  monument  and  tombstone, 
how  beautiful  and  white  does  everything  appear  1  But  remove  the  snow,  dig  down 
beneath,  and  you  find  rottenness  and  putrefaction,  "  dead  men's  bones,  and  all 
nncleanness."  How  like  that  churchyard  on  such  a  day  is  the  mere  professor- 
fair  outside ;  sinful,  unholy  within  I  The  grass  grows  green  upon  the  sides  of  a 
mountain  that  holds  a  volcano  in  its  bowels.     (Dr.    Guthrie.)  Judging  by 

appearances  fallacious : — We  are  shallow  judges  of  the  happiness  or  misery  of 
others,  if  we  estimate  it  by  any  marks  that  distinguish  them  from  ourselves; 
if,  for  instance,  we  say  that  because  they  have  more  money  they  are  happier,  or 
because  they  live  more  meagrely  they  are  more  wretched^  For  men  are  allied 
by  much  more  than  they  differ.  The  rich  man,  rolhng  by  in  his  chariot,  and 
the  beggar,  shivering  in  his  rags,  are  allied  by  much  more  than  they  differ.  It 
is  safer,  therefore,  to  estimate  our  neighbour's  real  condition  by  what  we  find 

in  our  own  lot,  than  by  what  we  do  not  find  there Surely,  you  will  not 

calculate  any  essential  difference  from  mere  appearances ;  for  the  light  laughter 
that  bubbles  on  the  lip  often  mantles  over  brackish  depths  of  sadness,  and  the 
serious  look  may  be  the  sober  veil  that  covers  a  Divine  peace.  You  know  that  the 
bosom  can  ache  beneath  diamond  brooches ;  and  how  many  blithe  hearts  dance  undez 


OHA».  vni.]  ST.  JOHN.  81 

9oarBe  wool  I  {E.  H.  Chapin,  D.D.)  And  If  I  judge,  My  judgment  is  true. — TJu 
eoncurrent  jtidgment  of  the  Father  aiid  the  Son  : — The  Mosaic  law  required  at  least 
two  or  three  witnesses  to  make  a  testimony  valid  (Deut.  xvii.  6;  lix.  15).  Jesus 
declared  that  He  satisfied  this  rule  because  the  Father  united  His  testimony  to  that 
which  He  bore  of  Himself.  Where  the  fleshly  eye  saw  but  one  witness,  there  were 
in  reality  two.  It  is  usual  to  refer  this  testimony  to  miracles,  in  accordance  with 
chap.  V.  36.  But  ver.  16  sets  us  on  the  road  to  a  far  more  profound  explanation. 
Jesus  was  here  describing  an  inward  fact,  applicable  both  to  the  judgments  Ha 
pronounced  on  others  and  the  statements  by  which  He  testified  to  Himself.  He 
was  aware  that  the  knowledge  He  possessed  of  His  origin  and  mission  was  not 
based  wholly  on  the  fact  of  consciousness.  He  felt  that  it  was  in  the  light  of  God 
that  He  knew  Himself.  He  knew,  moreover,  that  the  testimony  by  which  He 
manifested  His  inward  feeling  bore,  in  the  eyes  of  all  who  had  a  sense  for  the  per- 
ception of  Deity,  the  seal  of  this  Divine  attestation.  An  anecdote  may  perhaps 
better  explain  this.  About  1660,  Hedinger,  chaplain  to  the  Duke  of  Wurtemburg, 
took  the  liberty  of  censuring  his  sovereign — at  first  in  private,  but  afterwards  in 
public— for  a  serious  fault.  The  latter,  much  enraged,  sent  for  him  and  resolved 
to  punish  him.  Hedinger,  after  seeking  strength  by  prayer,  repaired  to  the  prince, 
the  expression  of  his  countenance  betokening  the  peace  of  God  and  the  feeling  of 
His  presence  in  his  heart.  The  prince,  after  beholding  him  for  a  time,  said, 
"  Hedinger,  why  did  you  not  come  alone,  as  I  commanded  you  ?  "  "  Pardon  me, 
your  highness,  I  am  alone."  The  duke,  persisting,  with  increasing  a'^itation, 
Hedinger  said,  "  Certainly,  your  highness,  I  came  alone ;  but  I  cannot  tell 
whether  it  has  pleased  God  to  send  an  angel  with  me."  The  duke  dismissed 
him  onharmed.  The  vital  communion  of  this  servant  of  God  with  his  God 
was  a  sensible  fact,  even  to  one  whom  anger  had  exasperated.  (F.  Oodet,  D.D.) 
I  am  one  that  bear  witness  of  Myself.  The  witness  of  Christ  as  seen  in  some  con- 
tradictory phenomena  of  His  life  and  character : — The  conflict  of  Christianity  is  ever 
being  narrowed  to  the  question  of  the  person  of  Christ.  Unitarians  have  either 
abandoned  their  old  positions  and  Christianity  with  them,  or  returned  to  views  not 
easily  distinguished  from  orthodox.  Both  friends  and  foes  write  lives  of  Jesus,  and 
seek  in  that  for  proof  of  Lordship  or  evidence  of  delusion.  Men  have  largely  for- 
saken metaphysical  arguments.  "  What  think  ye  of  Christ  ?  "  is  the  question  of 
apologist  and  infidel.  The  issue  here  is  vital.  Victorious  at  this  point  all  the  rest 
is  easy  ;  defeated  here  the  Christian  Church  expires.  In  this  line  of  argument  it 
is  natural  to  ask  what  testimony  Christ  gives  of  Himself,  and  we  propose  to  point 
out  certain  paradoxes  and  find  their  explanation.  I.  The  phenomena.  A  candid 
observer  will  notice  in  Jesus — 1.  His  sublime  self-consciousness  of  Divinity,  together 
with  His  ceaseless  subjection  to  God.  (1)  Compare  Him  with  all  religious  teachers, 
and  we  find  Him  dreaming  no  dreams,  seeing  no  visions.  We  never  hear  Him 
saying,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,"  but  "  I  say  unto  you."  He  consoles  His  disciples. 
"Let  not  your  hearts  be  troubled."  Why?  "Ye  believe  in  God,  believe  also  in 
Me."  *•  Show  us  the  Father,"  says  one :  the  response  is,  "  He  that  hath  seen  Me," 
&c.  In  discussion  with  Jews  He  says,  "  Abraham  rejoiced  to  see  My  day  " — wild 
words  to  scribe  and  Pharisee.  ♦*  Thou  art  not  yet  fifty  years  old  " ;  the  rejoinder 
is,  "Before  Abraham  was  I  am."  There  is  an  endeavour  to  explain  away  the 
simple  meaning  of  all  this.  Much  greater  force  will  therefore  be  found  in  the 
indirect  words  of  Christ.  Take  one,  "  If  I  go  not  away  the  Comforter  will  not 
come,"  &G.  What  must  He  claim  who  says  He  will  send  God's  Spirit?  and  who 
must  He  believe  Himself  to  be?  (2)  On  the  other  hand,  a  young  man  asks, 
"  Good  Master,  what  good  thing,"  &o.  Jesus  replies,  "  Why  callest  thou  Me  good," 
&c.  ?  Although  He  said,  "I  and  My  Father  are  one,"  He  also  says,  "The 
Father  is  greater  than  I."  "  I  came  not  to  do  My  own  will."  Nowhere  does  the 
contrast  appear  more  distinctly  than  in  that  scene  in  the  Temple,  "  Wist  ye  not  that 
I  must  be  about  My  Father's  business  ; "  and  then  He  meekly  places  His  hand  in 
His  mother's  and  becomes  "  subject  unto  Joseph  and  Mary."  2.  His  pronounced 
self-assertion  and  His  humility  and  self-abnegation.  (1)  He  appeals  to  no  authority 
but  His  own  as  the  ground  on  which  men  should  accept  Him,  When  He  propounded 
His  law  on  the  Mount,  He  contrasts  His  teaching  with  that  of  the  ancient  law, 
although  Divinely  given,  with  the  words,  "I  say  unto  you."  What  a  significant 
scene  is  that  in  which  He  upbraids  the  cities  for  their  unbelief,  and  then  hearken 
to  the  words  which  follow,  "  Gome  unto  Me  all  ye  that  labour,"  &o.  From  Hia 
disciples  He  learns  how  men  misunderstand  Him  ;  and  how  calm,  resolute,  inspiring, 
the  words  in  which  He  replies  to  these  misapprehensions,  and  rewards  the  confes- 


t8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHA».  rta, 

non  of  Peter.    "  On  this  rock  I  will  build  My  Church,"  &o.     Is  this  arrogance, 
egotism  7    It  is  the  sublimest  ever  witnessed.     If  true,  tlae  noblest ;  if  unfounded, 
the  wildest  and  most  vain.     (2)  But  what  a  contrast.    The  child  of  a  carpenter'a 
wife  ;  He  is  fitly  born  in  the  outhouse  of  an  inn,  and  moved  for  thirty  years  amidst 
the  humblest  surroundings.    When  He  came  into  public  life  His  career  opened  to 
Him  no  affluence  or  dignity.     "  The  foxes  have  holes,"  &o.     His  moral  charac- 
teristics were  in  keeping  with  His  circumstances.    "  I  am  Meek  and  lowly  of  heart." 
*'  He  is  led  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter,"  and  prays  for  His  murderers.    3.  Infinite 
power  combined  with  noteworthy  weakness.     (1)  Mark  the  works  of  Jesus — how 
easily  performed.    "Let  there  be  light,"  says  God,  "and  there  was  light."     He 
opens  the  windows  of  heaven  and  a  race  is  overwhelmed.     And  thus  Christ  works. 
It  is  in  a  storm  ;  the  Master  sleeps.     The  disciples  cry,  **  We  perish  1 "    He  rises, 
speaks,  and  there  is  a  great  calm.     In  His  dealings  with  disease,  a  touch  upon  the 
eyelid  pours  daylight  on  the  darkened  orb.     "  Be  clean,"  He  says  to  the  leper,  and 
the  loathsome  disease  is  gone.     Another  word,  and  the  man  who  had  become  a 
wild  beast  is  sitting  at  His  feet  in  his  right  mind.    Here  ia  no  paraphanalia  of  the 
magician,  or  the  exercise  of  delegated  power.    (2)  In  contrast  with  this  is  Christ's 
meekness.    Take  the  supernatmal  out  of  His  life,  and  what  feebleness  1     He  who 
can  multiply  the  bread  is  familiar  with  hunger.    "Give  me  to  drink,"  He  says  to 
one  to  whom  He  gives  living  water.     With  His  hand  upon  a  universe  He  is  as  help- 
less as  a  child.    4.  The  complete  absence  of  any  sense  of  sinfulness  or  moral  defect. 
The  religious  life  of  the  leaders  of  human  thought  has  been  marked  by  a  profound 
sense  of  personal  unworthiness,  but  there  is  no  trace  of  this  in  Jesus.     "  Which  of 
you  convinceth  Me  of  sin  ?  "  asks  Jesus  of  the  ages.     "  I  find  no  fault  in  Him,"  re- 
echo well  nigh  two  milleniums.     6.  In  these  series  of  contrasts  we  have  noted  two 
contradictory  quahties — infinity  and  limitation.     The  last  scenes  of  His  life  exhibit 
these.     Our  Lord  comforts  His  disciples.    Calm  and  helpful,  He  promises  them 
Divine  strength.    But  see  Him  a  few  moments  after  in  His  agony.    Where  in  all 
literature  is  an  artistic  contrast  so  striking  ?    And  this  only  the  simple  story  of  the 
unlettered,  who  tell  the  story  as  they  knew  it  best.    But  what  is  this.    An  armed 
band  approaches,  and  at  a  word  from  Him  they  fall  to  the  ground — yet  He  submits 
to  be  led  away.     II.  Somb  of  the  explanations  which  have  been  given.     1.  That 
Christ  is  a  natural  product,  the  outgrowth  of  the  ages ;  that  all  preceding  genera- 
tions gatbered  in  Him,  and  produced  the  ideal  man.    But  where  in  Judaea,  Greece, 
or  Borne,  can  be  found  the  elements  from  which  the  nature  of  Christ  could  be  com- 
pounded ?    And  if  one  Christ  could  be  produced  why  not  others  ?     2.  That  Christ 
is  a  Uterary  product,  the  ideal  of  an  individual  mind — the  grandest  triumph  of 
human  imagination,  but  altogether  fictitioua     But  who  was  the  romancer  who 
must  have  been  greater  than  His  romance  ?    8.  That  Christ  is  a  mythical  product ; 
that  a  remarkable  individual  did  exist  who  founded  a  school,  and  after  death  was 
slowly  changed  by  the  loving  regard  of  His  followers  into  the  heroic,  and  at  last 
into  the  Divine.    Granted  that  such  a  myth  may  have  grown  up  in  a  century,  how 
is  it  that  we  have  the  unique  Divine  nature  of  Jesus  made  the  ground  of  a  fiiiished 
argument  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Bomans,  published  witbin  a  generation  from  the 
time  of  Christ,  by  one  whose  Ufe  overlapped  His  ?    4.  The  theory  that  Christ  was 
a  deceiver  or  deceived  hardly  merits  notice.     A  knave  ought  to  recognize  that  Christ 
was  truthful,  and  a  fool,  would  he  open  his  eyes,  might  see  that  He  was  perfectly 
self-possessed.    lU.  The  theory  which   alone   satisfies  all  the  conditions  or 
THE  CASE.     In  these  phenomena — 1.  We  find  evidence  of  a  personality  altogether 
anique.     There  are  contrasts,  but  there  is  a  unity  about  the  Person,  and  a  con- 
sistency in  the  life  which  make  us  feel  confident  of  the  truthfulness  of  the  Bible 
record.    All  things  fall  into  their  place  when  we  are  taught  that  Christ  is  at  once 
the  Son  of  God  and  the  Son  of  Man.     He  is  Divine,  and  all  the  Divinity  of  Hia 
being  is  thus  accounted  for.     He  is  human,  and  all  the  humanity  of  His  lot  is 
wholly  explained.    2.  The  origin  of  this  unique  personality  must  be  traced  to  God. 
The  human  race  could  produce  no  such  being.    Even  were  the  ideal  conception 
possible,  which  is  doubtful,  a  person  who  had  formed  the  idea  could  never  have 
realized  it.     But  with  God  all  things  are  possible.     3.  The  purpose  for  which  auch 
a  unique  being  was  sent  by  God  must  have  been  to  accomplish  some  special  work. 
(1)  A  mere  teacher  or  reformer  might  have  been  only  man.    (2)  God  would  not 
have  become  man  for  His  own  sake.     He  can  require  nothing  which  H^  cannot 
supply.     (3)  Christ  is  evidently  not  the  first  of  a  new  species,  for  He  has  no  suc- 
cessor.   (4)  His  mission  therefore  must  have  been  ffirman,  to  establish  some  new,  or 
modify  some  old  relation  between  God  and  man.    Such  an  object  is  declared  by 


«BAr.  TnLj  ST.  JOHN.  89 

Boriptore  to  have  been  sought  by  God  and  accomplished  by  Christ,  and  for  this 
Bach  a  Personality  as  has  been  described  was  suited  and  designed.  {LI.  D.  Bevan, 
DJ).)  Then  said  they  unto  Him,  Wbere  Is  Thy  Father  7 — The  question  indicates 
assumed  ignorance  of  Christ's  meaning,  or  a  scornful  fling  at  His  ever  imagining 
that  Gk)d  was  His  Father.  How  difierent  to  the  child-hke  simplicity  of  Philip 
{chap.  xiT.  8)  I  Their  earthborn  idea  was,  "  If  you  are  visible,  can't  we  see  some- 
thing of  your  Father  ?  "  They  ask  about  the  Father,  He  replies  as  to  Himself ;  and 
when  asked  about  Himself  He  (vers.  25-27)  replies  concerning  the  Father.  The 
primitive  Christians  were  called  atheists  because  they  could  not  show  their  God. 
In  every  age  the  sneering  challenge  is  repeated.  At  Orleans  the  Papists  asked  the 
Huguenots  in  the  flames,  "Where  is  now  your  God?"  Mary  Queen  of  Scots, 
having  by  French  mercenaries  forced  Protestants  into  the  bleak  hills,  cried,  "  Where 
is  John  Knox's  God  ?  "  In  Fotberingay  Castle  she  had  time  to  answer  her  own 
question.    {W,  H.  Van  Doren,  D.D.) 

Ver.  20.  These  words  spake  Jesus  in  the  Treasury. — The  Treasury : — From  Mark 
xii.  41  and  Luke  zxi.  1  it  is  clear  that  this  word  was  applied  to  the  brazen  trumpet- 
shaped  chests  placed  in  the  Court  of  the  Women  for  the  reception  of  alms.  There 
were  thirteen  of  them,  and  each  bore  an  inscription  showing  to  what  purpose  the 
alms  placed  in  it  would  be  devoted.  Here  the  word  is  apparently  used  of  the  place 
itself,  in  which  the  chests  were  deposited.  This  notice  is  interesting  in  many 
ways.  The  Court  of  the  Women  was  one  of  the  most  public  places  in  the  Temple 
area.  Christ  taught  there  openly  and  fearlessly.  The  chamber  in  which  the 
Sanhedrim  held  their  session  was  between  the  Court  of  the  Women  and  that  of  the 
Men.  They  had  on  that  or  the  previous  day  been  assembled  to  take  counsel  against 
Him  (chap.  vii.  45-52),  This  gives  point  to  the  words  which  here  follow.  (Archdeacon 
Watkins.)  No  man  laid  hands  on  Him ;  for  His  hour  was  not  yet  come, — 
Divine  Providence — I.  Exerts  a  eestkaining  poweb  on  wicked  men,  "  No  man," 
&c.  Why  ?  Jewish  rage  was  almost  at  its  height ;  the  Sanhedrims  lacked  neither 
disposition,  muscular  power,  nor  public  co-operation.  It  was  because  '*  His  hour 
was  not  yet  come,"  There  was  a  mysterious  power  holding  them  back,  an  invisible 
hand  restraining  them.  In  relation  to  this  restraining  power  of  God's  moral 
government  of  the  world,  note — 1.  It  is  not  always  a  matter  of  consciousness.  Some- 
times, it  may  be,  men  feel  that  they  are  reined  in,  some  mysterious  power  prevent- 
ing them  from  doing  what  they  desire.  History  presents  us  with  monsters  that 
have  felt  themselves  like  caged  lions.  But  as  a  rule  the  restraining  force  is  so 
subtle,  so  delicate,  that  men  are  unconscious  of  it.  2.  It  interferes  not  with  human 
freedom.  A  man  is  not  free  from  the  guilt  of  a  wrong  act  because  he  has  not  the 
power  or  the  opportunity  to  embody  it.  The  guilt  is  in  the  desire,  the  volition. 
"  As  a  man  thinketh  in  his  heart,  so  is  he."  At  first  sight  it  seems  morally  absurd 
that  God  should  restrain  a  man  from  committing  a  crime,  and  yet  hold  him  guilty 
for  it.  The  solution  is  here :  the  crime  is  in  the  wish.  3.  It  is  an  incalculable 
advantage  to  the  race.  What  was  in  the  Alexanders,  the  Caligulas,  the  Napoleons, 
the  Lauds,  and  the  Bonners,  is  for  the  most  part  in  every  unregenerate  soul.  Were 
there  no  restraining  hand  upon  depraved  hearts,  all  social  decency,  order,  peace, 
and  enjoyment  would  be  at  an  end.  The  world  would  be  a  Pandemonium.  We 
rejoice  that  He  who  reigns  in  the  ocean  and  keeps  it  within  bounds,  holds  in  the 
passions  and  impulses  of  the  depraved  soul.  ••  The  king's  heart  is  in  the  hand  of 
the  Lord,"  &c.  II,  Has  settled  periods  fob  the  development  op  events, 
"  For  His  hour  was  not  yet  come,"  Christ  recognized  that  there  was  a  particular 
hour  or  crisis  for  everything  He  had  to  do.  There  was  an  hour  for  the  commence- 
ment of  His  miracles,  for  His  baptism,  for  His  death.  His  death  was  the  hour  of 
hours,  '*  Father,  the  hour  has  come,"  God  has  appointed  scenes  in  space  and  in 
duration  for  all  things  that  occur  in  His  vast  dominion.  Nothing  He  allows  to  be 
done  in  one  scene  that  is  intended  to  occur  in  another,  nothing  in  one  season  that 
is  fixed  for  another.  "To  everything  there  is  a  season."  Every  orb  that  rolls 
through  immensity  has  a  point  it  is  bound  to  reach,  aud  an  "  hour  " ;  it  is  never 
behind  its  time.  So  it  is  not  only  in  the  epochs  and  eras  of  human  history,  but  in 
all  the  events  of  individual  life.  Man's  decrees  and  purposes  often  fail  from  the 
fickleness  of  his  own  mind,  from  his  want  of  foresight,  and  from  his  want  of  power. 
It  is  altogether  otherwise  with  the  designs  of  the  Almighty.  When  His  set  time  for 
working  comes,  not  all  the  power  in  the  universe  can  stay  Hia  hand.  When  we 
first  look  abroad,  indeed,  upon  the  busy  field  of  human  affairs,  and  observe  the 
Qomerous  actors,  all  moving,  planning,  arranging,  we  may  be  tempted  for  the 


K)  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  mt. 

moment  to  imagine  that  destiny  itself  is  in  their  hands.  But  when  we  have  looked 
a  little  longer  and  have  seen  aU  their  schemes  deranged,  and  a  result  emerging  ths 
▼ery  opposite,  it  may  be,  we  begin  to  discover  that  there  is  a  power  ont  of  sight 
mightier  than  all — "  One  whose  purposes  are  from  everlasting  to  everlasting,  whos* 
counsel  shall  stand,  and  who  will  do  all  His  pleasure."    (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Yer.  21-24.  I  go  My  way,  and  ye  shall  seek  Me,  and  shall  die  In  yonr  sins. — Sin 
here  means  the  departure  of  the  heart  from  God,  general  alienation  from  Him,  and 
in  ver.  24  the  particular  manifestations  of  such  a  disposition.  In  chap.  ziii.  33 
Jesus  speaks  to  the  apostles  of  the  impossibility  of  following  Him  in  the  sam« 
terms  as  at  the  end  of  this  verse ;  but  for  them  this  impossibility  would  be  but 
temporary,  for  He  will  return  to  fetch  them  (chap.  xiv.  6).  For  the  Jews,  on  th« 
contrary,  there  will  be  no  longer  a  bridge  between  earth  and  heaven ;  their  separa* 
tion  will  be  consummated  by  their  rejection  of  Him  without  whom  no  man  cometh 
nnto  the  Father.  {F.  Godet,  D.D.)  Christ  and  men: — I.  The  withdbawment 
OP  Chkist  from  bien.  1.  Christ  had  a  way — undoubtedly  that  through  the  Gross 
to  His  native  heavens.  What  a  way  1  It  will  be  the  study  of  eternity.  2.  Christ 
pursued  His  way  voluntarily.  "I  go."  You  cannot  force  Me.  (1)  This  is  no 
extenuation  of  the  guilt  of  His  murderers.  "The  Son  of  Man  goeth  .  .  .  but  woe 
nnto  the  man  by  whom  He  is  betrayed."  (2)  This  is  the  glory  of  His  history. 
Why  has  Christ's  death  the  power  not  only  to  save  humanity  but  to  charm  the 
universe?  Because  it  was  free.  "I  have  power  to  lay  down  my  life,"  &c.  (3) 
A  more  terrible  calamity  cannot  happen  than  this — far  greater  than  the  withdraw- 
ment  of  the  sun.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  Christ  withdraws  from  impenitent 
men  now.  II.  The  fbditless  beekino  op  Christ  by  men.  This  is  a  repetition  of 
chap.  vii.  34.  When  I  am  gone,  and  the  judgments  of  heaven  will  descend  on  your 
country,  you  will  be  seeking  Me,  but  you  will  not  find  Me ;  you  will  have  filled  np 
the  measure  of  your  iniquity,  the  things  that  belong  to  your  peace  will  be  hid  from 
your  eyes.  1.  The  fruitless  seeking  is  possible.  The  day  of  grace  closes  with  some 
men  even  while  they  are  in  the  world.  In  the  judgment  He  will  be  earnestly 
sought,  but  shall  not  be  found.  "  Many  shall  say  unto  Me  on  that  day,"  &o.,  Ac. 
2.  This  fruitless  seeking  is  lamentable.  ••  Ye  shall  die  in  your  sins."  Sin  is  like 
quicksand,  the  man  who  walks  on  it  must  ultimately  sink  and  be  lost.  "  It  some- 
times happens  on  the  coast  of  Britain  or  Scotland  that  a  person  walking  on  the 
sand  will  suddenly  find  a  difficulty  in  walking.  The  shore  is  like  pitch,  to  which 
the  soles  of  his  feet  cling.  The  coast  appears  perfectly  dry,  but  the  footprints  that 
he  leaves  are  immediately  filled  with  water.  Nothing  distinguishes  the  sand  which 
is  solid  and  that  which  is  not.  He  passes  on  unaware  of  his  danger.  Suddenly  he 
sinks.  He  wishes  to  turn  back,  but  it  is  already  too  late.  The  slow  burial  of  hours 
continues  ;  the  sand  reaches  to  his  waist,  to  his  chest,  to  his  neck ;  now  only  his 
face  is  visible.  He  cries ;  the  sand  fills  his  mouth,  and  all  is  silent."  What  a 
striking  emblem  of  the  danger  of  sin  1  III.  The  eternal  separation  op  Christ 
PBOM  MEN.  "  Whither  I  go  ye  cannot  come."  The  separation  will  be  complete 
and  irreversible.  "  Ye  cannot  come."  Christ  had  said  this  before  (chap.  vii.  34), 
and  He  refers  to  it  again  (chap.  xiii.  33).  So  that  to  Him  the  words  had  a  terrible 
meaning.  More  terrible  words  than  these  could  not  be  sounded  in  human  ears, 
"  Ye  cannot  come."  It  means  incorrigible  depravity,  hopeless  misery.  Separation 
from  Christ  is  hell.  The  commission  of  every  sin  contributes  to  the  construction 
of  the  impassable  gulf.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Final  impenitence  : — From  the  time 
that  our  Lord  left  the  world  down  to  this  day,  the  expression  has  been  peculiarly 
true  of  the  Jewish  nation.  They  have  been  perpetually,  in  a  sense,  "  seeking  " 
and  hungering  after  a  Messiah,,  and  yet  unable  to  find  Him,  because  they  have  not 
sought  aright.  In  saying  this  we  must  carefully  remember  that  our  Lord  did  not 
mean  to  say  that  any  of  His  hearers  were  too  sinful  and  bad  to  be  forgiven.  On 
the  contrary,  not  a  few  of  them  that  crucified  Him  found  mercy  on  the  day  of 
Pentecost,  when  Peter  preached  (Acts  ii.  22-41).  But  our  Lord  did  mean  to  say, 
prophetically,  that  the  Jewish  nation,  as  a  nation,  would  be  specially  hardened  and 
nnbelieving,  and  that  many  of  them,  though  an  elect  remnant  might  be  saved, 
would  "  die  in  their  sins."  In  proof  of  this  peculiar  blindness  and  unbelief  of  th» 
Jewish  nation  we  should  study  Acts  xxviii.  25-27,  Romans  xi.  7,  and  1  Thess.  ii. 
15,  16.  The  Greek  expression  for  "sins"  in  this  verse  confirms  the  view.  It  is 
not,  literally  rendered,  "  sins,"  but  "  sin  " :  your  special  sin  of  unbelief.  Let  us 
note  that — I.  It  is  possible  to  seek  Christ  too  late,  or  from  a  wrong  motfte, 
and  bo  to  seek  Him  in  vain.    This  is  a  very  important  principle  of  Scripture.    True 


OHAP.  vni.)  ST.  JOHN.  41 

repentance,  doubtless,  is  never  too  late,  bat  late  repentance  is  seldom  trna.  There 
is  mercy  to  the  uttermost  in  Christ ;  but  if  men  wilfully  reject  Him,  turn  away 
from  Him,  and  put  off  seeking  Him  in  earnest,  there  is  such  a  thing  as  "  seeking 
Christ "  in  vain.  Such  passages  as  Prov.  i.  24-32 ;  Matt.  xxv.  11,  12  ;  Luke  xiii. 
24-27 ;  Heb.  vi.  4-8  and  x.  26-31,  ought  to  be  carefully  studied.  IL  That  it  is 
POSSIBLE  FOR  MEN  TO  "  DIB  IN  THEiB  BINS,"  and  never  come  to  the  heaven  where  He 
has  gone.  This  is  flatly  contrary  to  the  doctrine  taught  by  some  in  the  present 
day,  that  there  is  no  future  punishment,  and  that  all  will  finally  be  forgiven.  It  is 
worthy  of  remark  that  our  Lord's  words,  "  Ye  shall  seek  Me,"  and  "  Whither  I  go 
ye  cannot  come,"  are  used  three  times  in  this  Gospel — twice  to  the  unbelieving 
Jews,  here  and  at  chap.  vii.  34,  and  once  to  the  disciples,  chap.  xiii.  33.  But  the 
careful  reader  will  observe  that  in  the  two  first  instances  the  expression  is  coupled 
with,  "  Ye  shall  not  find  Me,"  and  "  Ye  shall  die  in  your  sins."  In  the  last,  it 
evidently  means  the  temporary  separation  between  Christ  and  His  disciples  which 
would  be  caused  by  His  ascension.  {Bp.  Eyle.)  Unbelief  fatal : — Observe  the 
infinite  difference  between  dying  in  our  sins,  and  dying  not  in  our  sins.  Lazarus, 
and  Dives  the  rich  man,  both  died — one  in  his  palace,  but  in  his  sins ;  the 
other  famished  at  the  gate,  but  not  in  his  sins.  Stephen  was  stoned  to 
death,  but  not  in  his  sins,  for  he  could  say  "Lord  Jesus,  receive  my  spirit," 
•*  I  see  the  Son  of  man,"  &o. ;  but  Judas,  in  his  sins,  went  and  hanged  himself. 
Ananias  and  Sapphira  died  in  their  sins,  but  the  thief  upon  the  cross  cast  his 
last  look  upon  the  Saviour,  and  his  sins,  though  many,  were  instantly  forgiven. 
I.  Let  us  contemplate  this  feabful  prediction  of  the  certain  end  of  auj 
mTBELiEVEBs.  1.  They  die  under  the  sentence  of  Divine  condemnation  for  their 
sins.  2.  They  die  under  the  dominion  or  power  of  them.  3.  Under  the  guilt  and 
misery  of  sin.  4.  They  die  to  experience  the  immediate  and  everlasting  punish- 
ment denounced  upon  them.  II.  The  exclusive  condition  upon  which  this 
FEARFUL  AND  IMPENDING  DOOM  CAN  BE  AVERTED.  It  is  involvcd  in  the  oonvcrse  of  the 
text — if  ye  believe  not,  ye  shall  die — but  if  ye  believe,  ye  shall  not  die.  1.  The 
object  of  their  believing.  2.  The  nature  of  their  belief.  Must  be  cordial,  entire, 
practical,  "With  the  heart  man  believeth  unto  righteousness."  3.  The  spiritual 
importance  and  efficacy  of  such  faith.  Saving  in  its  effects  by  divine  appointment. 
ni.  Application.  1.  Let  those  who  have  faith  exercise  it  on  the  glorious  object. 
Appreciate  the  glory  and  grace  of  that  Saviour  by  faith  in  whom  they  have  life 
everlasting.  2.  Let  those  who  believe  not  in  Jesus  remember — "  They  are  con- 
demned already,  because  they  have  not  believed  in  the  name  of  the  only  begotten 
Son  of  God."  {The  Evangelist.)  To  die  in  sin  is  the  most  terrible  death: — 
This  is  a  heavy  doom,  and  the  very  door  of  damnation.  It  is  a  sad  thing  to 
die  in  prison,  to  die  in  a  ditch,  but  far  worse  to  die  in  your  sins.  Death  to  the 
wicked  is  as  a  trap-door  to  let  them  into  hell ;  so  that  it  is  a  just  wonder  that, 
foreseeing  their  danger,  they  do  not  go  roaring  and  raving  out  of  the  world.  {J, 
Trapp.)  Dying  in  sin: — Charles  IX.   (who  gave  order  for  the  massacre  on 

^t.  Bartholomew's  day,  1575)  expired  bathed  in  his  own  blood  from  his  veins, 
wliilst  he  said,  "  What  blood— what  murders — I  know  not  where  I  am — how  will 
aU  this  end  f  What  shall  I  do  ?  I  am  lost  for  ever.  I  know  it."  Francis  Spira, 
an  Italian  apostate,  exclaimed,  just  before  death,  *•  My  sin  is  greater  than  the 
mercy  of  God.  I  have  denied  Christ  voluntarily;  I  feel  that  He  hardens  me,  and 
allows  me  no  hope."  Hobbes — "  I  am  taking  a  fearful  leap  into  the  dark."  Sinners 
warned  of  death : — On  a  very  dark,  stormy  night,  out  West,  the  wind  blew  down 
a  part  of  a  railroad  bridge.  A  freight  train  came  along,  and  it  crashed  into 
the  ruin,  and  the  engineer  and  conductor  perished.  There  was  a  girl  living  in 
her  father's  cabin  near  the  disaster,  and  she  heard  the  crash  of  the  freight 
train,  and  she  knew  that  in  a  few  moments  an  express  train  was  due.  She 
lighted  a  lantern,  and  climbed  up  on  the  one  beam  of  the  wrecked  bridge,  and 
then  on  the  main  part  of  the  bridge,  which  was  trestle-work,  and  started  to  cross 
amid  the  thunder  and  the  lightning  of  the  tempest  and  the  raging  of  the  torrent 
beneath.  One  misstep  and  it  would  have  been  death.  Amid  all  that  horror  the 
lantern  went  out.  Crawling  sometimes  and  sometimes  walking  over  the  slippery 
rails  and  over  the  trestle-work,  she  came  to  the  other  side  of  the  river.  She  wanted 
to  get  to  the  telegraph  station  where  the  express  train  did  not  stop,  so  that  the 
danger  might  be  telegraphed  to  the  station  where  the  train  did  stop.  The  train  was 
due  in  five  minutes.  She  was  one  mile  off  from  the  telegraph  station,  but  fortu- 
nately the  train  was  late.  With  cut  and  bruised  feet  she  flew  like  the  wind.  Coming 
up  to  the  telegraph  station  panting,  with  almost  deathly  exhaustion,  she  had  only 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vr» 

strength  to  shout,  "  The  bridge  is  down  1  "  when  she  became  unconscions,  and 
could  hardly  be  resuscitated.  The  message  was  sent  from  the  station  to  the  next 
station,  and  the  train  halted,  and  that  night  the  brave  girl  saved  the  lives  of 
hundredo  of  passengers,  and  saved  many  homes  from  desolation.  But  every  street 
is  a  track,  and  every  style  of  business  is  a  track,  and  every  day  is  a  track,  and  every 
night  is  a  track,  and  multitudes  under  the  power  of  temptation  come  sweeping  on 
and  sweeping  down  toward  perils  raging  and  terrific.  God  help  us  to  go  out  and 
stop  the  train.  Let  us  throw  some  signal.  Let  us  give  some  warning.  By  the 
throne  of  God  let  us  flash  some  influence  to  stop  the  downward  progress.  Beware  I 
Beware  1  The  bridge  is  down,  the  chasm  is  deep,  and  the  lightnings  of  God  set 
all  the  night  of  sin  on  fire  with  this  warning,  "  He  that  being  often  reproved 
hardeneth  his  neck,  shall  suddenly  be  destroyed,  and  that  without  remedy."  (De 
Witt  Talmage.)  Then  said  th«  Jews,  Will  He  kill  Himself? — Afterwards  at  the 
siege  of  Jerusalem  by  Titus,  many  of  the  desperate  Jews  did  the  very  thing  tbey  her© 
said  of  our  Lord — they  killed  themselves  in  madness  of  despair.  (Rupertus.)  Self- 
murder  was,  by  the  Jews,  esteemed  the  most  aggravated  of  crimes — a  crime  which 
sent  every  one  after  death  to  Gehenna,  the  place  of  damnation.  Josephus,  in  the 
weighty  speech  wherein  he  warns  his  companions  in  war,  who  had  been  hemmed  in 
by  the  enemy,  to  refrain  from  self-murder,  says  of  suicides,  "  a  darker  hell  receives 
the  souls  of  such."  The  Jews,  no  doubt,  perceived  very  well  what  Christ  meant  to 
say.  But,  instead  of  permitting  themselves  to  be  humbled,  their  only  purpose  was  to 
retort  upon  Christ  the  cutting  expression,  '•  Ye  shall  die  in  your  sins,"  and,  therefore, 
they  contemptuously  utter  the  taunt,  "  Well,  if  He  is  determined  to  take  His  own 
life  and  go  to  Gehenna,  He  is  indeed  correct  when  He  says  that  no  one  will  follow 
Him  thither."  {Tholvck.)  Ye  are  from  beneath:  lam  from  above. — An  abyss 
separates  heaven,  life  in  God,  the  home  of  Jesus,  and  earth  the  life  of  this  world, 
the  natural  and  moral  home  of  tbe  Jews ;  and  faith  in  Jesus  could  alone  have 
bridged  over  this  abyss.  Hence  their  perdition  is,  if  they  refuse  to  embrace 
Him,  certain,  since  He  alone  could  have  raised  them  to  heaven.  (F.  Godet, 
D.D.)  Jesus    lived    and    moved    in    a   different  world.      His  motives  were 

pure,  honest,  kind,  self-sacrificing.  His  joys  were  holy,  spiritual,  expanding, 
enduring.  Divine.  He  had  heaven  in  His  soul,  and  they  had  hell  begun  in  theirs. 
A  gulf  impassable  between  them,  except  by  repentance.  One  must  think  with 
Christ,  will  with  Him,  toil  with  Him,  endure  with  Him,  and  die  with  Him,  so  as 
to  dwell  with  Him  for  ever.  (W.  H.  Van  Doren,  D.D.)  ChrisVs  moral  elevation: — 
The  expression  is  susceptible  of  two  interpretations.  1.  Physical  or  local,  in  which 
sense  Christ  must  have  meant  that  He  came  from  the  heavenly  world,  and  they  had 
their  origin  on  the  earth.  But  the  latter  is  only  true  of  their  bodies  ;  all  souls,  as 
did  the  Divine  personality  of  Christ,  come  from  God.  2.  Moral.  The  language 
must  apply  to  character,  its  elevation  and  degradation.  Christ's  moral  character 
was  from  above — lofty,  divine :  their's  from  beneath — mean,  selfish,  low  as  helL 
Li  this  sense  Christ  was  as  distant  from  His  age  and  all  anregenerate  mankind  as 
heaven  from  hell.  Concerning  this  distance,  note — I.  It  was  manifested  in  His 
EABTHLT  LiFK.  1.  It  was  secu  in  the  conduct  of  the  Jews  and  others  in  relation  to 
Him.  The  Gospels  abound  with  instances  illustrative  of  the  felt  disparity  between 
Christ  and  the  people  with  whom  He  lived  (Luke  iv.  14-27  ;  Matt.  viii.  5-13  :  xxi. 
12 ;  John  viii.  1-11).  It  was  thus  with  the  soldiers  in  Gethsemane,  Pilate,  the 
spectators  of  the  Crucifixion.  Whence  arose  this  felt  distance  ?  It  cannot  be 
accounted  for  on  the  grounds  of — (1)  Social  superiority :  He  was  a  humble  Peasant. 
(2)  Non-sociality  :  He  mingled  with  the  people.  It  was — (3)  Simply  distance  of 
character.  His  incorruptible  truthfulness,  immaculate  purity,  cahn  reverence, 
warm  and  overflowing  benevolence  struck  them  with  awe.  2.  It  was  seen  in  the 
conduct  of  Christ  in  relation  to  the  people.  He  felt  and  manifested  a  moral  loneli- 
ness.  The  crowd  had  nothing  in  common  with  Him.  What  they  honoured,  He  des 
pised  ;  what  He  loved,  they  hated.  Hence,  He  only  felt  akin  to  those  who  had 
kindred  sympathy.  "  My  mother  and  brethren  are  those  who  do  My  will."  Hence, 
too.  His  frequent  withdrawal  from  the  people  to  pour  out  His  sorrows  to  the  Father. 
And  in  His  lonely  hours  He  bewails  the  moral  character  of  His  age :  "  0  righteous 
Father,  the  world  hath  not  known  Thee."  He  was  morally  above  them.  They  were 
mere  flickering  lamps,  dim  and  sooty ;  He  rolled  as  a  bright  star  above  them.  II. 
It  WAS  DEMONSTRATIVE  OF  His  SEAii  DiviNiTY.  Whence  came  such  a  character  as 
this  ?  1.  Intellectually  there  was  nothing,  either  in  Jewish  or  Gentile  mind,  to  give 
rise  to  such  a  doctrinal  system  as  that  propounded  by  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  Hii 
rerelation  of  Ood's  love  transcended  all  human  conception.    2.  And  morally  there 


CHAP.  Tin.]  ST.  JOHN.  48 

was  nothing  in  His  age  to  produce  such  a  character.    How  could  immaculate  purity 
come  out  of  an  age  of  corruption — incorruptible  truth  come  out  of  a  world  of  false- 
hood— self-sacrificing  love  out  of  a  world  of  selfishness?     Men's  characters  are 
formed  on  the  principle  of  ioaitation;  but  Christ's  character  could  not  be  thus 
formed.     He  had  no  perfect  form  to  imitate.    Even  the  best  of  the  patriarchs  and 
the  holiest  of  the  prophets  were  imperfect.     How  can  you  account  for  the  existence 
of  such  a  character  as  His  ?    Tell  me  not  it  came  of  the  earth.     Do  grapes  grow  on 
thorns  ?  Did  the  flaming  pillar  in  the  wilderness  grow  out  of  the  sand  ?  (1)  His  perfect 
moral  excellence  was  universally  felt,  not  because  there  was  no  effort  employed  to 
discover  imperfections  in  Him  ;  the  keen  eye  of  His  age  was  always  on  the  watch, 
to  descry  some  moral  defect.  And  Pilate,  who  had  every  faciUty  for  knowing  Him,  and 
every  motive  for  condemning  Him,  said,  "  I  find  no  fault  in  Him."     (2)  This  moral 
excellence  was  retained  to  the  last,  not  because  He  was  not  assailed  by  temptation. 
Never  came  the  great  tempter  to  any  man  in  a  more  powerful  form  than  to  Christ. 
How  then  shall  we  account  for  such  a  character  as  this  ?    Only  on  the  principle 
that  He  was  indeed  the  "  Son  of  God."    III.  It  was  ESSENTiAii  to  His  Redeemeb- 
BHip.     Had  He  not  been  thus  morally  above  mankind.  He  had  lacked  the  qualifica- 
tion to  redeem  souls.    Holiness  has  the  power  to  convict,  to  renovate,  to  sanctify, 
and  to  save.    A  man  who  is  one  with  sinners,  morally  standing  on  the  same  plat- 
form, can  never  save  them.    Because  Christ  is  "  above  "  them,  He  rolls  His  moral 
thunders  down  to  alarm  the  careless :  pours  His  sunbeams  to  quicken  the  dead ; 
rains  His  fertilizing  showers  to  make  moral  deserts  blossom  as  the  rose.    As  the 
well-being  of  the  earth  depends  upon  the  heavens,  so  the  spiritual  progress  of 
humanity  depends  upon  that  Character  that  is  stretched  over  us  Uke  the  sunny  skies. 
Conclusion:  The  subject  predicates— 1.  The  way  to  true  elevation.      Men  are 
endowed  with  aspirations.    But  what  altitudes  should  they  scale  to  reach  true 
dignity  ?  Commerce,  literature,  scholarship,  war  ?  No ;  from  all  these  heights  man 
must  fall — fall  like  Lucifer,  the  sun  of  the  morning.     The  altitude  of  imitating 
Christ  is  that  which  conducts  to  glory.     Seek  the  things  "above."     Press  on  to 
assimilation  to  that  character  that  is  above  you.    It  will  always  be  above  you,  and 
BO  far  it  meets  the  unbounded  moral  aspirations  of  your  heart.     •'  Be  ye  holy,  even 
as  God  is  holy."    Christ's  character  is  everlastingly  saying  to  you,  "Come  up 
hither."    2.  Reveals  the  only  way  by  which  we  can  regenerate  the  world.    Keep  at 
a  moral  distance  from  mankind.    Let  the  people  amongst  whom  we  live  feel  that 
we  are  morally  above  them.    In  this  age,  what  is  called  the  Church  is  morally  so 
identified  with  the  spirit  that  moves  the  world,  that  it  is  on  the  same  moral  plane 
as  the  market,  the  theatre.     3.  Presents  motives  for  the  highest  gratitude.     The 
grandest  fact  in  the  history  of  our  planet  is,  that  a  perfect  moral  character  has 
been  here,  wearing  our  nature.    Though  His  physical  personality  is  gone,  His 
character  is  here  still.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)        Methods  of  living  .-—There  are  three 
methods  of  living — from  beneath,  from  within,  from  above.     We  none  of  us  live 
after  one  single  method.    There  has  been  but  one  self -consistent  man,  Jesus,  who 
followed  one  method  throughout.     But  no  other  man  is  either  whoUy  good  or  con- 
sistently bad.    Three  distant  principles,  however,  of  the  formation  of  character  are 
clearly  manifest.     I.  Life  fbom  beneath  we  can  easily  recognize.    The  world  has 
received  Christian  education  enough  to  lead  it  publicly,  at  least  to  repudiate  tha 
method  of  the  devil,  even  though  they  may  foUow  it  privately.    II.  Life  fbom 
WITHIN  is  good  so  far  as  it  goes.     It  is  the  effort  to  live  as  a  human  being  may  best 
live  in  the  powers  of  his  own  reason,  and  out  of  the  motives  of  his  own  heart  with- 
out seeking  help  from  above.    And  it  is  fair  to  say  that  some  who  follow  it  reach 
admirable  results.    Christian  faith  need  not  make  us  blind  to  natural  virtues.     III. 
Bdt  Scbiptdee  fails  to  becognize  this  kjtebmediate  METHOD  OF  LIVING.  Yet  Jesus 
must  have  looked  out  upon  life  with  as  quick  an  appreciation  of  anything  lair  in  it  as 
any  of  us  can  ever  feel,  and  was  always  ready  to  see  good  where  we  cannot.   Never- 
theless, He  admits  of  only  two  sharply  defined  principles  and  tendencies — one  of 
this  world  and  tending  towards  that  which  is  beneath ;  and  the  other  like  His  own 
higher  life  rising  towards  that  which  is  above.    This  is  admittedly  a  difficulty.    We 
observe  a  good  deal  of  loveableness  and  goodness  in  the  world  growing  out  of  men's 
hearts  without  any  religious  vitality  in  it ;  Christ  recognized  nothing  of  the  kind. 
Which  is  right  ?  1.  Remember  that  Jesus  went  beyond  all  that  is  temporary  in  human 
conduct,  and  that  His  judgments  have  reference  to  radical  principles  and  final  issues. 
When,  therefore,  He  distinguishes  two  opposite  methods  of  life  only,  while  human 
experience  shows  us  a  third,  the  question  arises  whether  hf e  can  go  on  much  farther 
in  the  half-way  fashion  t    Is  not  this  intermediate  way  a  path  that  must  break  ofl 


M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha*.  tiu. 

somewhere,  and  he  who  follows  it  be  compelled  to  scale  the  height  or  plunge  into 
the  abyss  ?    Is  it  anything  more  than  a  provisional  method,  and  so  cannot  be  jasti  ■ 
fied  as  a  necessary  and  reasonable  expedient  for  a  life  1  2.  It  is  a  great  presumption 
against  it  that  it  i»  an  expedient,  and  cannot  possibly  be  the  full,  final  method  of  an 
immortal  soul.    It  is  a  serious  disadvantage  that  the  plan  must  be  held  subject  to 
death,  and  will  have  to  be  dropped  in  the  grave.    As  thinking,  acting  beings,  we 
want  to  plan  our  lives  for  ages,  not  for  years ;  and  who  of  us  expect  to  Uve  one 
single  day  after  death  without  finding  ourselves  obliged  to  take  God  and  the  whole 
kingdom  of  righteousness  into  our  account  of  life  ?  I  cannot  live  fifty,  one  hun- 
dred, one  thousand  years  hence,  still  drifting  on  in  unconcern  about  the  greatest  and 
final  realities  of  the  universe.   3.  Some  will  admit  this  disadvantage,  but,  however 
they  may  wish  to  believe  as  their  mothers  have,  say,  "  I  must  build  my  life  upon 
known  facts  and  truths  which  experience  can  substantiate."  So  be  it,  give  me  facts 
to  build  into  the  substantial  arch  of  a  hfe,  but  let  me  not  neglect  the  Keystone, 
because  life  can  be  carried  so  high  without  it,  and  the  temporary  scaffolding  hold  all 
in  place  for  the  present.    And  if  the  gospel  brings  the  facts  which  are  necessary  to 
maJie  life  entire  we  ought  at  once  to  use  them.    Is  faith  in  Christ,  this  Keystone, 
which  completes  and  secures  all,  and  that  with  no  temporary  scaffolding  of  our  own 
construction,  but  with  the  righteousness  of  God  ?    4.  Let  me  ask  you  who  are  try- 
ing to  Uve  honourably  without  religion  to  search  the  scriptures  of  your  heart,  and 
of  providence,  and  see  if  the  present  fact  of  a  living  God  is  not  everywhere  pressed 
upon  you?    But  beside  this  there  is  a  whole  range  of  Divine  facts  in  the  world 
called  Christianity,  as  positive  facts  of  history  as  the  rocky  mountains  are  facts  of 
geography;  and  one  might  as  reasonably  attempt  to  engineer  a  railroad  across 
America  without  taking  the  mountains  into  account  as  to  seek  to  stretch  a  purpose 
across  this  life  without  taking  Christianity  into  his  plan.    From  these  facts  let  us 
specify — (1)  The  person  of  Christ.   Pilate  did  not  know  what  to  do  with  it  and  would 
wash  his  hands ;  but  the  world  cannot  evade  its  responsibility.   Christ  stands  before 
the  judgment  throne  of  every  soul,  and  the  final  question  of  our  lives,  whether  we  will 
or  no,  becomes, "  What  shall  I  do  with  Jesus?  "  &o.     (2)  The  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
in  the  lives  of  men.    This  is  a  fact  which  runs  through  the  whole  range  of  Christian 
history,  and  is  not  unknown  outside  it,  or  whence  those  instinctive  prayers,  great 
ideas,  visions  of  better  things  ?    6.  We  must  allow  that  a  provisional  way  of  living 
is  justifiable  only  on  the  supposition  that  it  is  necessary.    One  may  live  as  well  as 
he  can  in  a  tent,  provided  there  is  no  material  of  which  he  can  build  a  house.  One 
may  camp  out  under  a  mere  moral  theory  of  life,  provided  a  religious  home  is  an 
impossibility.     But  there  are  materials  sound  and  ample  for  a  Christian  home  in 
life  in  the  Christian  Church.     Do  not  then  camp  out,  but  come  in.     Conclusion : 
Note  some  considerations  which  show  the  completeness  of  the  Christian  method  of 
living  and  the  incompleteness  of  the  best  method  which  is  not  clearly  Christian. 
1.  The  Christian  method  is  life  from  above.    Christ  finds  the  lost  child  and  seta 
him  in  tha  midst  of  the  Divine  Fatherhood,  and  thus  brings  life  into  union  with 
God.     2.  It  harmonizes  everything  in  and  around  ns,  and  the  growing  harmony  of 
life  is  the  sure  proof  that  the  method  cannot  be  wrong.      S.  Without  these 
reconciliations  the  best  life  must  be  imperfect,  and  its  method  therefore  to  be 
eschewed.    (Newman  Smyth,  D.D.)         If  ye  believe  not  that  I  am  He,  ye  shall 
die  In  your  sins. — Our  Lord  spoke  as  One  having  authority,  as  a  king  from  the 
throne,  a  judge  from  the  tribunal.    I.  What  is  included  in  odb  believing  in 
Chbist.     1.  A  deep  sense  of  our  need  of  Him  as  the  only  and  all-sufficient 
Saviour.    "  They  that  are  whole  need  not  a  physician  "  (Isa.  xxvii.  13  ;  Matt.  ix. 
12).    2.  A  giving  full  credit  to  the  gospel  revelation  concerning  Him  in  His  Person, 
offices,  and  work.     8.  A  full  conviction  of  conscience  arising — (1)  From  a  discern- 
ment of  the  excellency  of  what  is  revealed.     (2)  From  the  manner  in  which  it  is 
revealed.      4.  A  removal  of  all  enmity  and  aversion   to  Christ,     5.  A  powerful 
attraction  of  the  whole  soul  to  Christ,  a  closing  in  with  the  gospel  way  of  salvation, 
and  a  cleaving  to  Him  with  full  purpose  of  heart.    IL  The  awful  consequences  of 
IJHBELIEF   (Ezek.   iii.   18).      Unbelievers — 1.  Die  in  a  state  of   guilt  and   under 
condemnation.    Their  conscience  condemns  them  because  they  have  defiled  it ;  the 
law,  because  they  have  broken  it ;  the  gospel,  because  they  have  rejected  it.      This 
condemnation  is  now  (chap  iii.  18).     2.  Die     nder  the  power  and  dominion  of  sin 
(Bev.  xxii.  11),    3.  Dying  in  their  sins,  they  sink  under  everlasting  punishment. 
Those  who  sin  against  the  remedy  perish  wit  out  it.     {B.  Beddom^,  M.A.)  The 

greatest  calamity: — I.  To  dee  in  one's  sins  is  the  gbeatest  calamity.      To  die 
is  *  terribly  so^nm  thing,  for  it  involves  separation  from  home,  business,  ao 


CBAP.  vni.]  ST.  JOHN.  U 

quaintance,  world,  the  very  body  itself,  and  introduction  into  •  mysterions, 
untried,  spiritual  state  of  retribution.  But  to  die  in  sin  adds  immeasurably  to 
its  solemnity.  Sin  is  the  sting  of  death.  To  die  in  one's  sins  means — 1.  To 
die  having  misused  this  life  with  all  its  blessings.  Life's  grand  purpose  is  the 
cultivation  of  a  holy  character.  For  this— (1)  All  physical  blessings  are  given : 
health,  time,  nature.  (2)  All  social  pleasures  and  happy  interchanges  of  thought, 
feeling,  and  souL  (3)  All  mental  blessings,  literature,  science,  poetry,  schools,  &b. 
(4)  All  redemptive  blessings — the  gospel  with  its  soul-saving  appliances.  He  who 
dies,  in  his  sins  has  abused  all.  2.  To  die  with  all  the  conditions  of  misery — 
conflicting  passions,  tormenting  conscience,  a  dreaded  God,  foreboding  anguish.  If 
this  is  not  hell,  what  is  it  ?  Better  a  thousand  times  to  die  in  a  pauper's  hovel  or 
in  a  martyr's  tortures  than  to  die  in  sin.  II.  Unbelief  in  Chbist  bendebs  this 
GEEATEBT  OF  CAiiAMiTiEB  INEVITABLE.  Belief  in  Christ,  as  the  Eevealer  of  God,  is 
essential  to  the  deUverance  of  man  from  the  guilt,  power,  and  consequence  of  sins. 
1.  This  deliverance  requires  the  awaking  in  the  soul  of  a  supreme  affection  for  God. 
Love  to  God  only  can  destroy  the  old  man.  2.  A  supreme  affection  for  God 
requires  a  certain  revelation  of  Him.  In  what  aspects  must  the  Eternal  appear 
to  man  before  this  love  can  be  awakened  ?  He  must  appear  personally,  forgiviugly, 
and  sublimely  perfect.  3.  This  certain  revelation  is  nowhere  but  in  Christ.  Belief 
in  Him  therefore  is  essential  to  a  deliverance  of  the  soul  from  sin.  (D.  Thomas, 
D.D.)  Unbelief  is  a  sin — 1.  Heavy  with  the  burden  of  ingratitude  (Luke  xvii. 

17).  2.  Heavy  with  the  burden  of  a  broken  law  (GaL  iii.  10).  8.  Heavy  with 
impending  wrath  of  God  (John  iii.  36).  4.  Crimsoned  with  blood  (Isa.  i.  18 ;  Heb. 
X.  26;  Hos,  i.  2).  {W.  H.  Van  Doren,  D.D.)  Unbelief  :—L  Is  the  thing  that 
BPECiALLT  BniNS  MEN.  All  manner  of  sin  may  be  forgiven.  But  unbelief  bars  the 
door  against  mercy  (Mark  zvi.  16 ;  John  iii.  86).  II.  Was  the  secbet  of  the 
Jews  being  bo  thoboughlt  "of  the  wobld."  If  they  would  only  have  believed 
in  Christ,  they  would  have  been  •'  delivered  from  this  present  evil  world."  The 
victory  that  overcomes  the  world  is  faith.  Once  beUeving  on  a  heavenly  Saviour 
a  man  has  a  portion  and  a  heart  in  heaven  (Gal.  i.  4 ;  1  John  v.  4,  5).  III.  Thebb 
IB  nothing  habd  OB  unchabitablb  in  wabning  men  plainly  of  the  consequences 
OF  unbelief.  Never  to  speak  of  hell  is  not  acting  as  Christ  did.  (Bp.  Ryle.) 
Unbelief  will  destroy  the  soul : — If  but  one  sin  be  unrepented  of,  the  man  con- 
tinues still  a  bond-slave  of  hell.  By  one  little  hole,  a  ship  will  sink  into  the 
bottom  of  the  sea.  The  stab  of  a  penknife  to  the  heart  will  as  well  destroy  a 
man  as  all  the  daggers  that  killed  Caesar  in  the  senate-house.  The  soul  will  be 
strangled  with  one  cord  of  vanity  as  well  as  with  all  the  cart-ropes  of  iniquity  : 
only  the  more  sins,  tbe  more  plagues  and  fiercer  flames  in  hell;  but  he  that  lives 
and  dies  impenitent  in  one,  it  wUl  be  his  destruction.  One  dram  of  poison  will 
despatch  a  man,  and  one  reigning  sin  will  bring  him  to  endless  misery.  {R.  Bolton.) 
Dying  in  sin  : — A  dying  woman,  after  a  life  of  frivolity,  said  to  me,  "  Do  you  think 
that  I  can  be  pardoned  ?  "  I  said,  "  Oh,  yes,"  Then,  gathering  herself  up  in  the 
concentrated  dismay  of  a  departing  spirit,  she  looked  at  me  and  said,  "  Sir,  I  know 
I  shall  not  1  "  Then  she  looked  up  as  though  she  heard  the  click  of  the  hoofs  of 
the  pale  horse,  and  her  long  locks  tossed  on  the  pillow  as  she  whispered,  "  The 
summer  is  ended. "  {T.  DeWitt  Talmage.)  We  must  believe  or  perish : — Unbelief 
stops  the  current  of  God's  mercy  from  running ;  it  shuts  ap  God's  bowels,  closeth 
the  orifice  of  Christ's  wounds,  that  no  healing  virtue  will  come  out.  "He  could 
not  do  many  mighty  works  there,  because  of  their  unbehef  "  (Matt.  xiii.  53).  (T. 
Watson.)  Judgment   overtakes    $in  suddenly  : — The   Rev.  F.   W.  Holland  in 

1867  was  encamped  in  Wady  Feiram,  near  the  base  of  Mount  Serbal.  He  says : 
"A  tremendous  thunderstorm  burst  upon  us.  After  little  more  than  an  hour's 
rain  the  water  rose  so  rapidly  in  the  previously  dry  wady  (valley),  that  I  had 
to  run  fir  my  life,  and  with  great  difficulty  succeeded  in  saving  my  tent  and 
goods,  my  boots,  which  I  had  not  time  to  pick  up,  being  washed  away.  In 
less  than  two  hours  a  dry  desert  wady,  upwards  of  300  yards  broad,  was  turned 
into  a  foaming  torrent  from  eight  to  ten  feet  deep,  roaring  and  tearing  down, 
and  bearing  everything  before  it — tangled  masses  of  tamarisks,  hundreds  of 
beautiful  palm  trees,  scores  of  sheep  and  goats,  camels,  donkeys,  and  even  men, 
women,  and  children,  for  a  whole  encampment  of  Arabs  was  washed  away  a 
few  miles  above  me.  The  storm  commenced  at  five  o'clock  in  the  evening,  and 
at  half-past  nine  the  waters  were  rapidly  subsiding,  and  it  was  evident  that  the 
flood  had  spent  its  force.  In  the  morning  a  gently  flowing  stream,  but  a  few 
yards  broad  and  a  few  inches  deep,  was  all  that  remained  of  it.      But  the  whole 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vint 

bed  of  the  valley  was  changed.  Here  great  heaps  of  boalders  were  piled  np,  where 
hollows  had  been  the  daj  before ;  there  holes  had  taken  the  place  of  banks  covered 
with  trees.  Two  miles  of  tamarisk  wood,  which  was  situated  above  the  palm 
grove,  had  been  completely  washed  away,  and  upwards  of  a  thousand  palm  trees 
swept  down  to  the  sea.  The  change  was  so  great  that  I  could  not  have  believed  it 
possible  in  so  short  a  time  had  I  not  witnessed  it  with  my  own  eyes."  So  sudden, 
and  greater  far  will  be  the  final  ruin  of  those  who  build  their  hopes  of  eternal  life 
on  the  sand  of  human  doing,  and  not  upon  the  "  Bock  " — Christ  Jesus. 

Vers.  25-27.  Then  said  they  nnto  Him,  Who  art  Thou?  .  .  .  Even  the  same- 
that  I  said  unto  you  from  the  beginning. — By  thus  expressing  Himself,  Jesus 
evidently  declared  Himself  to  be  the  expected  One.  He  avoided,  however,  the 
term  "  Messiah,"  as  subject  to  too  much  misunderstanding  among  the  Jews.  It 
was,  however,  just  this  term  which  His  hearers  desired  to  extort  from  Him,  and  it 
was  with  this  object  that  they  asked  the  question  :  '•  Who  art  Thou  ?  "  In  other 
words:  "Have  at  least  the  courage  to  speak  out  plainly."  In  fact,  an  express 
declaration  on  this  point  might  have  furnished  them  matter  for  a  capital  accusa- 
tion. The  answer  of  Jesus  is  :  Absolutely  what  I  also  declared  unto  you — 
neither  more  nor  less  than  My  words  imply.  He  appeals  to  His  own  testimony 
as  the  adequate  expression  of  His  nature.  They  have  only  to  fathom  the  series  of 
statements  He  has  made  concerning  Himself,  and  they  will  find  therein  a  complete 
analysis  of  His  mission  and  essence.  The  application  of  this  reply  of  Jesus  waa 
that,  to  discover  His  true  nature  and  the  position  He  filled  towards  Israel  and  the 
world,  it  was  sufficient  to  weigh  the  testimony  which  He  had  for  some  time  borne 
to  Himself.  Neither  more  nor  less  was  to  be  expected  from  Him  than  He  Himself 
stated.  In  this  manner  He  would  be  successively  recognized  as  the  true  Temple 
(chap,  ii.) ;  the  Living  Water  (chap,  iv.) ;  the  true  Son  of  God  (chap,  v.) ;  the 
Bread  of  heaven  (chap.  vi. ) ;  <fec.  And  thus  His  name  of  Christ  would  be  spelt 
put  in  some  sort,  letter  by  letter,  in  the  heart  of  the  believer,  would  there  take  the 
form  of  a  spontaneous  discovery,  which  would  be  infinitely  more  advantageous 
than  if  learnt  by  rote  under  external  teaching.  In  fact,  the  confession  "Thou  art 
the  Christ,"  to  be  a  saving  one,  must  be  as  with  St.  Peter  (chap.  vi.  66-69),  the 
fruit  of  the  experience  of  faith  (Matt.  xvi.  17).  Jesus  never  sought  or  accepted  an 
adherence  arising  from  any  other  principle.  This  reply  is  one  of  the  most 
characteristic  traits  of  our  Lord's  wisdom,  and  perfectly  explains  why  He  so 
frequently  forbade  the  twelve  to  say  that  He  was  the  Christ.  {F.  Godet,  D.D.) 
Christ's  teaching  is — I.  Consistent  (ver.  25).  Probably  it  was  desired  that  He 
should  make  a  proclamation  of  Himself  inconsistent  with  His  former  utterances ; 
if  so  it  was  disappointed.  All  His  utterances  meet  in  Him  as  rays  meet  in  the 
sun.  This  is  remarkable  if  we  consider — 1.  The  various  and  trying  circumstances 
under  which  He  spoke.  It  was  often  under  intense  suffering  and  great  provoca- 
tion, and  often  in  answer  to  men  who  did  their  utmost  to  make  Him  contradict 
Himself.  2.  The  diversity  in  the  minds  and  circumstances  of  those  who  reported 
His  speeches.  How  different  in  faculties,  taste,  culture,  habits,  and  angles  of 
observation  were  His  four  biographers  ;  and  yet  their  reports  agree.  II.  PKOGKEssivB 
(ver.  26).  Christ  stilted  His  teaching  to  the  capacities  and  characters  of  His 
hearers.  In  His  mind  there  was  an  infinite  treasury  of  truth  ;  but  His  adminis- 
tration of  it  was  gradual.  Indeed  no  finite  intelligence  could  take  in  all  that  was 
in  the  mind  of  Christ ;  it  would  take  Eternity  to  unfold  all  His  wonderful  thoughts. 
This  progressiveness — 1.  Supplies  a  motive  to  stimulate  human  inquiry.  Christ 
will  teach  you  according  to  your  capacity.  The  more  you  learn  of  Him,  the  more 
He  will  teach  you.  2.  Shows  His  suitability  as  a  Teacher  for  mankind.  Men 
have  naturally  a  craving  for  knowledge ;  and  the  more  they  know,  the  more 
intense  their  craving  becomes.  They  therefore  want  a  teacher  of  boundless 
resources.  IIL  Divine.  "He  that  sent  Me,"  &c.  (ver.  26).  He  taught  not 
human  things,  but  the  things  of  God — absolute  realities — concerning  the  Divine 
nature,  government,  claims,  Ac.  IV.  Not  always  understood  (ver.  27).  In  this 
they  represent  an  enormous  class  in  every  age,  who  understand  not  Christ,  but 
misinterpret  Him.  Conclusion — Have  we  put  to  Christ  in  earnest  the  question, 
"Who  art  Thou?"  and  have  we  received  in  docility,  faith,  and  love  back  inta 
our  own  hearts  an  answer  from  Him  ?     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver.  28,  29.  When  ye  have  lifted  up  the  Son  of  Man. — As  instruments  they 
would  lift  Him  to  the  cross ;  as  a  result  He  would  ascend  to  His  throne.     (JF.  H, 


CHAJ.  nn,}  *  ST.  JOHN,  47 

Van  Doren,  D.D.)  Christ  forecasting  His  death  and  destiny  : — Christ's  languag* 
liere — I.  Kevealb  His  bdblime  heroism  in  thb  peospect  of  a  tkbbible  death. 
••  When  ye  have  lifted  up,"  an  expression  more  than  once  nsed  to  signify  His 
erncifixion.  This  was — 1.  The  culmination  of  human  wickedness.  This  could 
reach  no  higher  point  than  the  putting  to  death  of  the  Son  of  God.  2.  The 
culmination  of  human  suffering.  Crucifixion  involved  ignominy,  insult,  torture. 
Yet  how  calmly  Christ  speaks  about  it — "  He  endured  the  Cross  and  despised  the 
shame."  There  was  no  faltering  note,  no  complaint,  no  perturbation,  dismay. 
II.  Expresses  His  unshaken  faith  in  the  teiumph  op  His  cause.  "  Then  shaU  ye 
know,"  &c.  1.  He  was  not  discouraged  by  apparent  failure.  To  the  world  His  Ufe 
ending  in  crucifixion  would  appear  a  stupendous  failure :  to  Him  it  was  a  success. 
His  death  was  as  a  seed  falMng  into  the  earth.  2.  He  did  not  despair  of  man's 
improvability.  He  believed  that  there  would  come  a  reaction  in  men's  minds 
concerning  Him.  When  He  was  gone  they  would  begin  to  think,  recognize,  and 
give  Him  credit  for  excellency,  which  they  did  not  when  He  was  amongst  them. 
3.  He  was  not  doubtful  of  ultimate  success.  He  saw  the  day  of  Pentecost,  the 
result  of  apostolic  labours,  the  triumph  of  His  truth  through  all  Buccessive  ages, 
and  at  last  His  character  moulding  the  race  to  His  own  ideal.  IH.  Implies  a 
PBiNciPLB  OF  CONDUCT  COMMON  IN  ALL  HISTORY :  viz.,  that  good  mcH  Undervalued  in 
life  are  appreciated  when  gone.  We  see  this  principle — 1.  In  the  family.  Members 
may  live  together  for  yeaiB,  and  through  iirfirmity  of  temper,  clashing  of  tastes, 
collision  of  opinion,  &o.,  excellencies  may  be  entirely  overlooked.  One  dies — father, 
mother,  brother,  sister — and  then  attributes  of  goodness  come  up  in  the  memory 
that  never  appeared  before.  2.  In  the  State.  PubUc  men,  devoted  to  the  common 
good,  and  loyal  to  conscience,  clash  with  popular  opinions  and  prejudices  and  are 
bitterly  denounced.  They  die,  and  their  virtues  emerge,  and  fill  the  social  atmos- 
phere wiUi  fragrance.  Burke,  Hume,  and  Cobden  are  examples  of  this.  3.  In  the 
Church.  A  minister  labours  for  years  among  a  people — too  thoughtful  to  be 
appreciated  by  the  thoughtless,  too  honest  to  bow  to  current  prejudices — so  that 
his  work  passes  unacknowledged  and  unrequited.  He  dies,  and  has  a  moral 
epiphany.  It  was  so  with  Arnold  and  Robertson.  IV.  Indicates  a  consciousness 
OF  His  PEOULiAB  RELATION  TO  THE  ETERNAL  Fatheb.  "  As  my  Father  hath  taught 
me,"  Ac.  (ver.  29).  1.  He  was  the  Pupil  of  the  Father.  2.  He  was  the  Companion  ot 
the  Father.  3.  He  was  the  servant  of  the  Father.  ••  I  do  always  those  things 
that  please  Him,"  though  I  displease  you.  Conclusion :  1.  This  subject  reveals  the 
sublime  uniqueness  of  Christ.  Who,  amongst  all  the  millions  of  men  that  have 
appeared,  could  use  such  language  as  this  ?  Who  could  forecast  such  a  terrible 
future  with  such  accuracy  and  composure  ?  Who  could  proclaim  such  a  Divine 
relationship?    As  our  system  has  but  one  sun,  our  universe  has  but  one  Christ. 

2.  This  subject  suggests  the  Christ  verifying  force  of  human  history.  What  Christ 
here  predicts  history  has  established.  Through  His  crucifixion  ever  increasing 
multitudes  have  been  convinced  that  He  is  the  true  Messiah.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
He  that  hath  sent  Me  is  with  Me. — 1.  Unity  of  essence.    2.  Communion  of  spirit. 

3.  Consciousness  of  favour.  4.  Present  help.  6.  One  in  eternal  plans.  Jehovah 
was  ever  at  His  right  hand  in  might,  majesty,  and  love.  To  be  with  God  is  to  have 
light  without  darkness,  truth  without  falsehood,  power  without  weakness,  love 
without  hmit.  The  sunbeams  spread  their  golden  wings  over  us,  and  yet  abide 
with  the  Bun,  from  whence  they  flow.  He  who  sent  His  Son  into  the  world  was  so 
with  Him,  that  He  shared,  so  to  speak,  all  the  opprobrium  and  enmity  with  which 
His  mission  was  met.  In  the  same  manner  is  Christ  with  His  people.  (Matt.  xxv. 
40).  (W.  H.  Van  Doren,  D.D.)  The  exeviplary  life  : — I.  Life  commissioned  by 
God.  "  Sent  me."  Christ  was  appointed  by  God  to  His  Work  (1  John  iv.  14). 
Every  life  is  a  plan  of  God.  Cunning  workmen  in  building  the  Temple  were 
faispired  by  Him.  He  sends  to  aU  kinds  of  lawful  work.  Lowly  workers  reahze 
this,  it  wiU  exalt  and  encourage  you.  II.  Life  approved  of  God.  Our  Lord's  life 
and  work  were  ever  well  pleasing  to  God.  So  may  our  Ufe  and  work  be  if,  by  His 
help,  we  are  diligent,  faithful,  unselfish,  and  do  all  as  unto  Him.  IH.  Life 
accompanied  by  God.  Please  God  in  your  life  and  you  will  realize  His  gracious 
presence.  His  presence  is  an  assurance  of  support  in  trial,  victory  in  conflict, 
guidance,  progress,  &c.  ( IV.  Jones.)  Tbe  Father  hath  not  left  Me  alone.  Let 
UB  not  think  holiness  in  the  hearts  of  men  here  in  the  world  is  a  forlorn,  forsaken, 
and  outcast  thing  from  God,  that  He  hath  no  regard  of.  Holiness,  wherever  it  is, 
thouRh  never  so  small,  if  it  be  but  hearty  and  sincere,  it  can  no  more  be  ent  off  and 
di&continued  from  God,  than  a  sunbeam  here  upon  earth  can  be  broken  off  from  its 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  tm. 

intercourse  with  the  sun,  and  be  left  alone  amidst  the  mire  and  dust  of  this  world. 
The  sun  may  as  well  discard  its  own  rays,  and  banish  them  from  itself,  into  some 
region  of  darkness,  far  remote  from  it,  where  they  shall  have  no  dependance  at  all 
npon  it,  as  God  can  forsake  and  abandon  holiness  in  the  world,  and  leave  it  a  poor 
orphan  thing,  that  shall  have  no  influence  at  aU  from  Him  to  preserve  and  keep  it. 
HoUness  is  something  of  God,  wherever  it  is ;  it  is  an  efflux  from  Him,  that  always 
hangs  upon  Him,  and  lives  in  Him  :  as  the  sunbeams,  though  they  gild  this  lower 
world,  and  spread  their  golden  wings  over  us,  yet  they  are  not  so  much  here,  where 
they  shine,  as  in  the  sun,  from  whence  they  flow.     God  cannot  draw  a  curtain 
betwixt  Himself  and  holiness,  which  is  nothing  but  the  splendour  and  shining  of 
Himself.    He  cannot  hide  His  face  from  it ;  He  cannot  desert  it,  in  the  world 
(Matt,  xxviii.  20  ;  Acts  ix.  4,  5  ;  2  Tim.  iv.  17).     (R.  Cudworth.)    I  do  always  those 
things  which  please  Him. — Eternally,  past,  present,  and  future  at  all  times,  every- 
where, in  all  ways.  He  requires  from  all,  and  teaches  aU  those  things  which  please 
God.    Of  whom  but  the  eternal  Son  and  Spirit  can  this  be  said  ?    {W.  H.  Van 
Daren,  D.D.)      The  Christian's  motto: — Observe  Christ  as — I.  The  Mzdiatob.  Our 
text  is  true  of  our  Lord  every  way.    1.  Of  His  incarnation  we  read,  "  Lo,  I 
come  ...  I  delight  to  do  Thy  will."    He  did  the  thing  which  pleased  the  Father 
during  His  obscure  life  as  the  carpenter's  Son.     He  was  "  The  holy  child  Jesus." 
At  the  end  of  His  retirement  the  Father  set  His  seal  upon  His  beloved  Son  in  whom 
He  was  well  pleased  at  His  baptism,  when  He  fulfilled  all  righteousness,  a  type  of 
the  perfect  obedience  He  intended  to  render.    His  temptation  and  victory  were  well 
pleasing  to  God,  the  token  whereof  was  the  ministration  of  angels.     Throughout 
His  life  He  fulfilled  Isa.  xhi.  21.    He  magnified  the  ceremonial  law  by  coming 
under  it  and  observing  it  until  the  time  when  it  passed  away ;  and  the  moral  law  by 
Buch  obedience  as  enabled  Him  to  say,  "Which  of  you  convinceth  Me  of  sin."  Hence 
the  same  attestation  at  the  Transfiguration  as  at  the  Baptism,  and  the  answer  to  Hia 
prayer,  "Father,  glorify  Thy  name."     The  miracles  were  tokens  of  the  Father's 
pleasure  (Acts  ii.  22).    In  His  death  "  it  pleased  the  Father  to  bruise  Him."     It 
pleased  God  that  He  should  ascend,  for  "He  received  gifts  for  men."  God  is  pleased 
with  His  intercession,  for  it  is  all  prevalent.    It  will  please  that  He  should  come 
again  ;  for  all  judgment  is  committed  to  His  hands.     2.  The  saving  works  of  Jesus 
are  lovely  in  the  Father's  eyes.     "  The  pleasure  of  the  Lord  shaU  prosper,"  &c. 
"  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death,"  &o.     3.  The  benefits  which  Christ  confers  on 
the  saints  please  the  Father ;  "  for  it  pleased  the  Father  that  in  Him  should  all 
fulness  dwell,"  and  it  pleases  Him  when  of  His  fulness  we  receive  grace  for  grace. 
II.  The   model.      In  taking  Christ  as  our  example — 1.  It  implied  that  we  our- 
selves are  rendered  pleasing  to  God.    As  long  as  a  man  is  obnoxious  to  God,  aU  he 
does  is  obnoxious.    "  They  that  are  in  the  flesh  cannot  please  God."    2.  Included 
in  this  is  the  avoiding  all  things  that  displease  Him.     (1)  Pride,  whether  of  talent, 
self -righteousness,  wealth,  dress,  rank.   "  The  Lord  resisted  the  proud."  (2)  Sloth — 
which  God  couples  with  wickedness.  (3)  Unwatchfulness,  carelessness,  indifference, 
neglect.  (4)  Anger,  oppression,  craftiness,  covetousness,  worldliness.  (5)  Unbelief — 
doubts  of  His  power  and  faithfulness.     (6)  Murmuring.    3.  It  should  be  our  intent 
and  earnest  design  to  please  God.    We  shall  not  do  this  by  accident ;  we  must  give 
our  whole  souls  to  it.    4.  The  text  is  positive  and  practical.    "  Do."    (1)  Christ  was 
prayerful,  and  it  cannot  please  the  Father  for  His  child  not  to  speak  to  Him. 
(2)  Christ  loved  God  and  man.     (3)  Christ  pleased  not  Himself,  and  to  please  God 
we  must  deny  ourselves.     (4)  Christ  was  separate  from  sinners,  and  we  must  not 
be  conformed  to  the  world.    (5)  To  please  God  note  Psa.  Ixix.  30,  and  Heb.  xiii. 
16,  and  learn  to  cultivate  a  thankful  spirit ;  note — 1.  John  iii.  22,  and  Heb.  xi.  6,  6. 
and  believe ;  note  Col.  i.  10,  and  learn  that  resignation  is  pleasing  to  God.    5. 
These  things  must  be  actually  done.     "  I  do."    It  will  not  sufiice  to  talk  or  pray 
about  them  or  to  be  charmed  with  them.     6.  "  Always."     At  home  as  husband  or 
wife,  &c. ;  at  business  as  master  or  servant.    There  must  not  be  at  any  moment 
anything  that  we  should  not  like  God  to  see,  nor  be  where  we  should  not  like  Christ 
to  find  us.     7.  By  doing  the  things  that  please  God.     (1)  We  shall  enjoy  and  retain 
the  presence  of  the  Father,  not  otherwise.     (2)  We  shall  be  girded  with  strength ; 
otherwise  we   shall  be  impotent.     (3)  The  Lord  will  be  with  us  in  our  work. 
Conclusion  :  1.  Is  this  too  high  a  model  ?  Would  you  prefer  an  example  that  would 
let  you  be  contented  with  a  measure  of  sin  ?    Do  you  think  it  an  impossible  ideal  ? 
But  what  about  the  promised  help  of  the  Spirit  ?    2.  Have  you  failed  ?    Then 
grieve  over  it,  and  try  again.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)         We  must  please  God  always  : — • 
It  will  not  suflice  to  say  I  do  the  things  which  please  God  when  I  go  out  to  woiship. 


CHAP.  Tni.]  ST.  JOHN.  49 

The  Christian  must  aim  to  say  "  I  do  always."  I  have  known  some  persons  take  a 
holiday  from  Christ's  service  sometimes.  They  say  "  Once  a  year  surely  one 
may  indulge."  If  holiness  is  slavery  then  surely  you  are  the  slave  of  sin. 
{Ibid. )  Conduct  inspired  by  love : — A  child  had  a  beautiful  canary,  which 
eang  to  him  from  early  morning.  The  mother  of  the  child  was  ill — so  ill  that  the 
Bong  of  the  httle  bird,  which  to  the  boy  was  delicious  music,  disturbed  and  distressed 
her  so  that  she  could  scarcely  bear  to  hear  it.  He  put  it  in  a  room  far  away,  but 
the  bird's  notes  reached  the  sick  bed,  and  caused  pain  to  her  in  her  long,  feverish 
days.  One  morning,  as  the  child  stood  holding  his  mother's  hand,  he  saw  that 
when  his  pet  sang,  an  expression  of  pain  passed  over  her  dear  face.  She  had  never 
yet  told  him  that  she  could  not  bear  the  noise,  but  she  did  so  now.  "  It  is  no 
musio  to  me,"  she  said,  as  he  asked  her  if  the  notes  were  not  pretty.  He  looked  at 
her  in  wonder.  "And  do  you  really  dislike  the  sound?"  "Indeed  I  do,"  she 
Bald.  The  child,  full  of  love  to  his  mother,  left  the  room.  The  golden  feathers  of 
the  pretty  canary  were  glistening  in  the  sunshine,  and  he  was  trilling  forth  his 
loveliest  notes  ;  but  they  had  ceased  to  please  the  boy.  They  were  no  longer  pretty 
or  soothing  to  him,  and  taking  the  cage  in  his  hand  he  left  the  house.  When  he 
returned  he  told  his  mother  that  the  bird  would  disturb  her  rest  no  more,  for  he 
had  given  it  to  his  little  cousin.  "  But  you  loved  it  so,"  Bhe  said  ;  "  how  could  you 
part  with  the  canary ?  "  "I  loved  the  canary,  mother,"  he  replied  ;  "  but  I  love 
you  more.  I  could  not  really  love  anything  that  gave  you  pain.  It  would  not  be 
true  love  if  I  did."  (Quiver.)  As  He  spake  these  words  many  believed  on  Him. — 
The  force  of  truth : — A  woman  in  Scotland,  who  was  determined,  as  far  as  pos- 
sible, not  to  have  anything  to  do  with  religion,  threw  her  Bible  and  all  the 
tracts  she  could  find  in  her  house  into  the  fire.  One  of  the  tracts  fell  down  out  of 
the  fiames,  so  she  picked  it  up  and  thrust  it  in  again.  A  second  time  it  slipped 
down,  and  once  more  she  put  it  back.  Again  her  evil  intention  was  frustrated,  but 
the  next  time  she  was  more  successful,  though,  even  then  only  half  of  it  was 
consumed.  Taking  up  the  portion  that  fell  out  of  the  fire,  she  exclaimed, "  Surely 
the  devil  is  in  that  tract,  for  it  won't  burn."  Her  curiosity  was  excited  ;  she  began 
to  read  it,  and  it  was  the  means  of  her  conversion.  It  was  one  of  my  sermons. 
Verily  that  sermon,  and  the  woman  too,  "  were  saved,  yet  so  as  by  fire."  What 
wondrous  ways  the  Lord  has  of  bringing  home  the  truth  I  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  A 
word  in  season : — Lady  Huntingdon  once  spoke  to  a  workman  who  was  repairing 
a  garden  wall,  and  pressed  him  to  thoughtfulneBS  on  the  state  of  his  soul. 
Some  years  afterwards,  she  was  speaking  to  another  man  on  the  same  subject,  and 
Baid,  "Thomas,  I  fear  you  never  pray,  nor  look  to  Jesus  Christ  for  salvation." 
•♦  Your  ladyship  is  mistaken,"  answered  the  man ;  "  I  heard  what  passed  between 
yon  and  James  at  such  a  time,  and  the  word  you  designed  for  him  took  effect  on 
me."  "How  did  you  hear  it?"  "  I  heard  it  on  the  other  side  of  the  garden, 
through  a  hole  in  the  wall,  and  shall  never  forget  the  impression  I  received." 

Vers.  31-59.  Then  said  Jesus  unto  those  Jews  which  believed  on  Him. — A  gloriou$ 
liberator: — I.  Freedom  peoffeeed.  1.  Sin  makes  bondage  (ver.  34;  Matt.  vi. 24; 
Luke  xvi.  13 ;  Rom.  vi.  16, 17 ;  Gal.  iv.  25  ;  2  Pet.  ii.  19).  2.  Truth  brings  freedom 
(ver.  32 ;  Rom.  vi.  14,  18,  vii.  6 ;  Gal.  v.  18 ;  Jas.  1.  25 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  16).  3.  Christ 
gives  freedom  (ver.  36 ;  Psa.  xl.  2,  cxviii.  5 ;  Eom.  vi.  23,  viii.  2 ;  1  Cor.  vii.  22 ; 
Gal.  V.  1).  II.  Bondage  demonstbated.  1.  By  doing  evil  deeds  (ver.  44 ;  Gen.  iii.  13, 
vi.  5 ;  Matt,  xiii  88 ;  Mark  vii.  23 ;  Acts  xiii.  10 ;  1  John  iii.  8).  2.  By  disbeliev- 
ing the  Lord  (ver.  45 ;  Isa.  liii.  1 ;  Luke  xxii.  67 ;  John  iv.  48,  v.  58,  vi.  86, 
ivii.  24).  3.  By  not  hearing  truth  (ver.  47  ;  Isai  vi.  9;  Matt.  xiii.  15,  Mark  iv.  9 ; 
John  iii.  12,  v.  47, 1  John  iv.  6).  III.  Death  vanquished.  1.  A  dying  race  (ver.  53  ; 
Gen.  iii.  19  ;  Psa.  Ixxxix.  48 ;  Eccl.  xil  6  ;  Zech.  i.  5  ;  Eom.  v.  12 ;  Heb.  ix.  27).  2. 
A  life-giving  obedience  (ver.  51 ;  Deut.  xi.  27  ;  Jer.  vii.  23  ;  Acts  v.  29 ;  Rom.  vi.  16 ; 
Heb.  T  9;  1  Pet.  L  22).  3.  An  ever-hving  Saviour  (ver.  68;  Psa.  xo.  1; 
John  i.  1,  xvii.  5;  Col.  i  17;  Heb.  i.  10;  Rev.  i.  18).  (Sunday  School 
Times.)  Bondage  and  freedom : — I.  Phtsicaii  bondage.  1.  An  ancient  insti- 
tution (Gen.  is.  25,  26).  2.  Called  bondmen  (Gen.  xliii.  18,  xliv.  9).  3.  Some  bom 
in  bondage  (Gen.  xiv.  14  ;  Psa.  cxvi.  16).  4.  Some  captured  in  war  (Deut.  xx.  14  ; 
2  Kings  V.  2).  5.  Subject  to  sale  (Gen.  xvii.  27,  xxxvii.  28-36).  6.  Debtors  sold 
into  bondage  (2  Kings  iv.  1 ;  Matt,  xviii.  25).  7.  Thieves  sold  into  bondage 
(Exod.  xxli.  8).  8.  Bondage  of  Israelites  not  perpetual  (Exod.  xxi.  2;  Lev.  xxv.  10). 
II.  SpntiTUAi.  BONDAGE.  1.  Is  to  the  devil  (1  Tim.  iii.  7 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  26).  2.  Is  to 
fear  of  death  (Heb.  iL  14, 15).    3.  Is  to  sm  (John  ylii.  34 ;  Rom.  vi.  16).    4.  Is  (o 

VOL.  n.  4 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILI USTEATOR.  [chap.  vnt. 

corruption  (2  Pet.  ii.  19 ;  Eom.  viii.  21).  6.  Is  to  iniquity  (Acts.  xiii.  23).  6.  la 
to  the  •world  (Gal.  iv.  3).  7.  Is  to  spiritual  death  (Eom.  vii.  24).  8.  Is  un- 
known by  its  subjects  (John  viii.  33).  III.  Spibitual  fbeedom.  1.  Promised 
(Isa.  xlii.  6,  7,  Ixi.  1).  2.  Typified  (Exod,  i.  13, 14  with  Deut.  iv.  20).  3.  Through 
Christ  (John  viii.  36;  Bom.  vii.  24,  25).  4.  Proffered  by  the  gospel  (Luke  iv.  17-21). 
6.  Through  the  truth  (John  viii.  32).  6.  Testified  by  the  Spirit  (Bom.  viii.  15; 
GaL  iv.  6,  6).  7.  Enjoyed  by  saints  (Bom.  vi.  18-22).  8.  Saints  should  abide  in 
it  (Gal.  V.  1).  (Ibid.)  The  Kingdom  of  the  Truth: — I.  Those  who  abb  not  its 
SUBJECTS  though  THEY  SAT  THEY  ABE.  1.  Accepting  a  mere  dead  orthodoxy  does 
not  constitute  one  a  genuine  subject  of  the  Kingdom  of  Truth  (vers.  31-33).  This 
declaration  is  levelled  against  the  traditional  faiths  and  old  maxims  which  those  Jews 
were  holding  as  their  birthright  blessing.  2.  Nor  being  bom  of  respectable  and 
even  believing  lineage.  Our  Lord  was  confronted  with  the  dry  statement  that  they 
descended  from  Abraham,  and  that  they  were  never  slaves  even  in  morality. 
*•  Professing  themselves  wise,  they  became  fools."  Christ  answered  with  directness 
that  the  plain  reason  why  they  did  not  believe  in  Him,  was  that  they  were  not  bom 
of  God.  All  there  was  of  good  in  their  boasted  ancestor  was  due  to  his  having 
by  faith  seen  Christ's  day.  And  when  this  maddened  them,  He  raised  His  word  to 
an  imperial  utterance,  such  as  only  the  King  of  the  Kingdom  of  Truth  could  make 
(ver.  58).  There  are  two  things  in  this :  (1)  He  that  is  not  in  Christ's  kingdom  is  in 
Satan's.  (2)  He  who  is  not  a  Christian  cannot  be  a  true  man  in  life,  thought, 
temper,  &o.  3.  Nor  following  mere  blind  formulas  of  performance.  Education  has 
value ;  but  the  truest  men  in  an  age  Hke  ours  must  sometimes  turn  back  upon  their 
training  with  a  free  judgment.  Antiquity  is  no  proof  of  soundness  in  the  right. 
The  devil  has  aU  the  force  of  the  argument  in  that  direction,  and  Jesus  told  these 
Jews  that  Satan  was  their  first  father.  4.  Nor  insisting  on  mere  sincere  con- 
victions. One  may  have  honest  preferences  for  an  absolutely  false  standard.  It  is 
possible  that  the  afiections  have  grown  perverted.  The  later  histoij  of  Turner  can 
be  explained  only  on  the  supposition  of  a  disease  in  his  eyes  ;  this  threw  aU  his 
work  out  of  drawing.  He  was  as  honest  and  industrious  as  ever;  his  sense  of 
eolour  was  as  fine  as  in  his  early  days,  but  his  eyes  had  become  mechanically 
untrastworthy.  The  men,  arguing  here  with  our  Lord,  did  not  believe  in  Him,  not 
because  what  He  told  them  was  not  true,  but  because  they,  in  their  innermost 
hearts,  were  not  true ;  there  was  a  distorted  image  upon  their  souls.  IL  Those 
WHO  ABK  ITS  SUBJECTS.  1.  A  true  man  will  accept  true  doctrines.  "As  he 
•thinketh  in  his  heart,  so  is  he."  The  two  grand  divisions  of  our  race  have  always 
been  ranged  around  Christ  and  Anti-Christ  (1  John  iv.  2-6).  2.  A  true  man  will 
cherish  true  principles.  Joseph  said  he  must  refuse  sin  because  he  could  not  offend 
against  God.  Hazael  had  no  more  to  offer  in  objection  than  that  he  was  afraid  he 
might  be  thought  only  a  dog.  Expediency  is  not  enough,  genuineness  of  principle 
is  needed.  3.  A  true  man  will  cultivate  true  tastes.  He  may  not  always  get  in  love 
with  some  forms  and  phases  of  religion.  He  may  find  that  La  has  to  get  himself 
into  a  more  amiable  and  trustful  frame  of  mind  before  he  is  anything  but  the 
artificial  being  that  training  for  a  bad  life-time  has  made  him.  If  he  does  not  love 
gentleness,  or  humility,  or  charity,  or  temperance,  or  godliness,  when  he  sees  it,  it 
is  a  task  for  him  to  set  about  to  grow  to  love  it  as  soon  as  he  can.  For  a  critic 
who  does  not  Uke  a  true  painting  is  not  himself  true.  If  one  prefers  Turkish  jargon 
to  a  harmonious  tune,  he  is  not  true.  And  when  one  turns  away  from  a  true  child 
of  God,  it  is  because  he  is  not  trae.  4.  A  true  man  will  manifest  true  consis- 
tency. Christ  gave  us  the  Word  of  God  as  the  standard  of  reference.  The  New 
Testament  is  tiie  book  of  manners  in  the  social  circle  of  the  Kingdom  of  Truth. 
6.  A  true  man  will  live  a  true  life.  There  will  be  a  fine,  high  unconsciousness  that 
anything  else  could  be  expected  of  him.  He  never  wiU  seek  to  pose ;  he  means  to 
be.  Pure  and  noble,  he  wishes  only  for  a  career  "  without  fear  and  without  re- 
proach." Can  any  one  tell  why  the  old  college-song  still  thriUs  us  when  we  are 
quite  on  in  life ?  There  is  a  wonderful  power  in  the  famous  "Integer  Vitae "  of  our 
early  days.  We  would  like  to  be  reckoned  as  integers — whole  numbers — when  the 
world  adds  up  the  columns  of  its  remembered  worthies  (Psa.  xv.  1-4).  (C  S. 
Bobinson,  B.I).)  Jesus  and  Abraham  : — I.  The  beligion  of  these  Jews.  1.  It 
was  a  matter  of  blood  and  ancestory.  There  were,  it  is  true,  certain  ceremonies  to  be 
observed,  but  it  was  enough  to  be  "  Abraham's  seed  "  to  secure  the  favour  of  Jehovah. 
Without  that  the  most  ddhgent  piety  could  not  avail.  Good  parentage  no  one  will 
despise.  If  we  have  got  our  vigour  from  virtuous  ancestors,  we  may  well  be  thankf  uL 
£veD  if  prodigal  of  such  an  inheritance,  we  shall  still  have  an  advantage  in  the  batila 


«HAf .  vm.]  8T.  JOHN.  51 

of  life.  Aaron  Barr  was  a  stouter  sinner  because  his  mother  was  Jonathan  Edward's 
daughter.  Bobert  Bums  exhausted  himself  at  thirty-eight,  but  what  did  he  not 
«we  to  an  honest  and  frugal  parentage?  The  first  generation  of  sinners  lasts 
longer  than  the  second ;  much  longer  than  the  third.  But  it  will  not  do  to  trust 
blood  as  a  substitute  for  religion.  "  Who  is  your  father  ?  "  may  be  the  first 
question,  but  "  Who  are  you  ?  "  comes  next.  Many  a  boy  disclosing  his  father's 
name  has  excited  surprise  in  the  police-court,  but  the  father's  good  name  does  nok 
keep  him  out  of  prison.  Absalom  was  David's  son,  and  Judas  Abraham's.  2. 
Christ  told  the  Jews  that  this  dead  faith  in  our  ancestor  was  really  a  bondage  to  the 
devil  (vers.  34-44).  Their  ancestors  had  been  slaves  in  Egypt  and  Babylon,  and 
now  the  Eoman  Eagle  had  them  in  its  talons.  Yet  by  some  legerdemain  of  logio 
they  reasoned  that  to  be  a  Hebrew  was  to  be  a  free  man.  At  once  Jesus  set  them 
on  a  deeper  search  (ver.  44).  What  a  hard  master  the  devil  is  1  For  Paradise  Eve 
^ets  an  apple.  See  this  illustrated  in  the  case  of  Gain,  Esau,  Samson,  Saul,  Judas, 
Agrippa.  The  prodigal  is  sure  to  be  set  on  the  lowest  tasks,  and  left  to  crave  even 
husks.  Nor  has  the  devil  grown  kinder  since.  3.  Of  course  the  bondsmen  of 
Satan  ♦•  cannot  bear  "  the  truth  (vers.  43,  45,  47),  neither  receive  nor  recognize  it. 
Paul  thought  he  was  doing  God  service  when  killing  Christians,  and  perhaps  these 
Jews  were  sincere,  but  with  the  maladroitness  of  those  who  give  themselves  to  the 
service  of  evil  they  reserve  their  criticisms  for  that  which  was  most  fair,  and  direct 
their  assaults  when  the  line  was  most  secure.  Our  Lord's  treatment  of  the  woman 
was  apparently  the  cause  of  their  hostility.  The  truth  and  goodness  which  angered 
them  angers  sinners  now.  II.  Chbist's  disciples.  1.  They  are  those  who  abide  in 
Christ's  Word.  The  dead  religion  was  a  mere  name,  an  accident  of  birth ;  the 
new  religion  laid  hold  of  the  soul  and  was  light  and  life  (vers.  31,  32,  47).  What 
the  mind  must  have  is  truth.  A  man  who  believes  a  lie  warms  a  serpent  in  his 
bosom.  Christ's  heel  has  crushed  the  head  of  the  serpent  of  falsehood,  and  for  Hia 
disciples  its  charm  is  broken.  Having  come  to  the  light  the  real  children  of 
Abraham  continue  in  it.  Bartimseus  has  no  wish  to  return  to  his  blindness.  The 
Christian's  love  of  the  truth  is  one  that  lasts.  And  Christians  obey  the  trnth 
^ver.  81 ;  c/.  Pet.  i.  22 ;  Gal.  iii.  1,  6,  7).  The  truth  not  only  touches  their  intellect, 
judgment,  conscience,  but  quickens,  guides  and  establishes  their  will  (ver.  39).  2. 
xet  they  enjoy  a  real  freedom — a  further  contrast  (vers.  32,  36;  cf.  Bom.  vi.  14-22). 
Subjection  to  Christ's  word  is  not  slavery.  Freedom  does  not  destroy  law  norover« 
turn  authority.  The  best  liberty  finds  its  satisfaction  within  the  limits  of  a  law 
which  is  loved.  Note  the  Divine  order ;  first  a  change  of  heart,  then  morality  and 
piety.  To  require  these  bloodthirsty  children  of  Abraham  to  do  his  works  would 
be  to  put  an  intolerable  yoke  upon  them.  The  Bible  is  a  weary  book  to  a  bad  man. 
Prayer  to  the  worldly  is  a  burden.  For  the  dissolute  no  shackles  so  heavy  as  the 
rules  of  virtue.  But  change  a  man's  mind,  and  his  world  is  changed.  Obedience 
becomes  a  song.  Besides  this,  there  is  the  liberty  from  the  penalty  of  sin  by  Christ's 
Cross.  3.  As  a  result  of  all  comes  an  assurance  of  endless  life  (ver.  61,  &c.). 
{H.  A.  Ed$on,  D.D.)  The  grace  of  continuance : — I.  A  preparatory  stage  o» 
DisciPLESHip.  The  mind,  heart,  will,  moved,  but  the  soul  not  yet  made  new  in 
Christ.  The  vestibule  of  salvation.  All  depends  on  holding  on.  The  seed  is  in 
the  soil,  but  needs  to  get  root  and  grow.  Satan  then  tries  to  check  it.  II.  Thb 
BESDiiis  OF  CONTINUANCE.  1.  Confirmation  of  discipleship.  2.  Bevelation  of 
truth.  3.  Emancipation  from  sin.  III.  Oub  Lord  gives  His  followers  some* 
THZNO — 1.  To  do.  2.  To  prove.  8.  To  know.  4.  To  become.  (A.  T.  Pierson,  D.D.) 
Disciples  indeed : — I.  The  character  of  a  disciple  indeed.  Let  us  look  at  Christ's 
first  disciples.  1.  They  forsook  all  they  had.  See  the  case  of  Paul  (Phil.  iii.  7,  8). 
Every  sin,  idol,  circumstance  inconsistent  with  Christ's  claim  must  be  renounced. 
%  They  were  docile.  Christ  taught  them  as  they  were  able  to  hear.  They  had 
much  ignorance  and  many  prejudices,  but  they  willingly  sat  at  Christ's  feet.  This 
is  requisite  in  all  true  disciples  (Matt,  xviii.  2,  3) .  3.  They  had  a  spiritual  know- 
ledge of  Christ  (chap.  xvii.  6-8),  although  the  world  knew  Him  not.  So  it  is  still 
(2  Cor.  iv.  6).  4.  They  enjoyed  the  friendship  of  Christ  (chap.  xv.  15).  The  secret  of 
the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  Him  (1  John  i.  3) .  5.  They  were  engaged  in  Christ's 
service  (chap.  xv.  16).  "None  of  us  liveth  to  himself."  II.  The  privilegb 
PROMISED  TO  Christ's  disciples.  "Te  shall  know  the  truth."  1.  The  truth 
referred  to.  Christ  is  the  truth  (chap.  xiv.  6).  We  read  (Eph.  iv.  21)  of  the  truth 
as  in  Jesus — the  truth  full  of  Christ's  personal  glory,  love,  power  to  save.  There  is 
truth  in  His  holy  character,  in  His  STiblime  life,  in  His  vicarious  death.  He  speaks 
liere  of  the  redemptive  truth  of  which  He  Himself  was  the  sum  and  substance !    2. 


Sa  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tin, 

The  knowledge  spoken,  of  "  Ye  shall  know,"  not  as  mere  theory,  but  living  power, 
spiritually,  experimentally.  The  inner  eye  is  opened,  the  inner  ear  is  unstopped, 
the  heart  is  melted,  the  soul  is  subdued.  Truth  must  be  engrafted  in  the  soul 
(James  i.  21).  3.  The  result  predicated.  The  truth  in  Jesus  emancipates  the  soul 
from  the — (1)  Condemnation  (Rom.  viii.  1) ;  (2)  the  power  and  depravity  of  sin 
(Bom.  vi.  23 ;  viii.  30) ;  (3)  harassing  fear  of  the  wrath  to  come  (1  Thess.  i.  9, 10) ;  (4) 
the  depressing  anxieties  of  life ;  (5)  from  the  dark  and  gloomy  forebodings  of  death 
(Heb.  ii.  14,  15).  III.  The  crowning  evidence  that  one  is  a  disciple  indeed. 
"  If  ye  continue  in  My  word."  Many  of  Christ's  professing  disciples  do  not  continue 
in  His  word.  See  the  parable  of  the  sower.  But  all  Christ's  true  disciples  do. 
1.  His  word  is  engrafted  in  their  souls.  The  gospel  is  a  living  shoot  that  produces 
fruit  of  its  own.  That  soul  thus  Divinely  operated  on  continues  in  Christ's  word, 
and  Christ's  word  continues  in  it.  2.  They  are  joined  to  the  Lord  in  an  everlasting 
covenant.  Every  true  disciple  has  entered  into  a  perpetual  covenant  to  be  Christ's, 
having  found  that  he  is  interested  in  God's  everlasting  covenant,  ratified  and 
established  for  ever  by  the  blood  of  the  Surety  1  His  motto  is,  "I  am  not  My 
own  1 "  3.  They  are  sealed  by  the  Holy  Spirit  of  promise.  Without  the  indwelling, 
ever-abiding  Spirit,  there  is  no  spiritual  life,  power,  worship  or  service ;  without  Him 
there  is  no  safety.  He  comes  as  our  life,  and  He  seals  us  as  God's  for  ever  and  ever. 
4.  They  are  kept  by  the  power  of  God  through  faith  unto  final  salvation  (Pet.  i.  15 ; 
Johnxiii.  1, 2).  His  Almighty  arms  of  unchanging  love  are  placed  underneath,  and 
round  about  (Deut.  xxxiii.  27  ;  Isa.  xxvii.  3).  God's  true  people  are  kept  not  in  mere 
safety,  but  in  a  Uf e  of  holy  love  and  devotedness ;  not  in  sloth  and  indolence,  bat 
in  holy  activity  and  spiritual  dihgence.  {T.  G.  Horton.)  Continuous  piety  i$ 
piety  indeed : — It  is  the  evening  that  crowns  the  day,  and  the  last  act  that  com* 
mends  the  whole  scene.  Temporary  flashings  are  but  like  conducts  running  with 
wine  at  the  coronation,  that  will  not  hold,  or  Uke  a  land-flood,  that  seems  to  be  a 
great  sea,  but  comes  to  nothing.  (J.  Trapp.)  Constancy  a  severe  test  of  piety  : — 
Many  who  have  gone  into  the  field,  and  liked  the  work  of  a  soldier  for  a  battle  or 
two,  soon  have  had  enough,  and  come  running  home  again ;  whereas  few  can  bear 
it  as  a  constant  trade :  war  is  a  thing  that  they  could  willingly  woo  for  their  pleasure, 
but  are  loath  to  wed  upon  what  terms  soever.  Thus  many  are  easily  persuaded  to 
take  up  a  profession  of  religion,  and  as  easily  persuaded  to  lay  it  down.  Oh  I 
this  constancy  and  persevering  is  a  hard  word ;  this  taking  up  the  cross  daily ;  this 
praying  always ;  this  watching  night  and  day,  and  never  laying  aside  our  clothes 
and  armour,  indulging  ourselves  to  remit  and  unbend  in  our  holy  waiting  upon 
God,  and  walking  with  God,  this  sends  many  sorrowful  from  Christ ;  yet  this  is  the 
saint's  duty,  to  make  religion  his  every  day's  work,  without  any  vacation  from  one 
end  of  the  year  to  the  other.  {J.  Spencer.)  The  best  service  is  constant : — After 
a  great  snowstorm  a  little  fellow  began  to  shovel  a  path  through  a  large  snow  bank 
before  his  grandmother's  door.  He  had  nothing  but  a  small  shovel  to  work  with. 
" How  do  you  expect  to  get  through  that  drift?  "  asked  a  man  passing  along.  " By 
keeping  at  it,"  said  the  boy,  cheerfully.  "  That's  how. "  That  is  the  secret  of 
mastering  almost  every  difiiculty  under  the  sun.  If  a  hard  task  is  set  before  you, 
stick  to  it.  Do  not  keep  thinking  how  large  or  how  hard  it  is,  but  go  at  it,  and 
little  by  little  it  will  grow  smaller,  until  it  is  done.  If  a  bard  lesson  is  to  be 
learned,  do  not  spend  a  moment  in  fretting ;  do  not  lose  breath  in  saying,  "  I  can't," 
or  "  I  don't  see  how ; "  but  go  at  it,  and  keep  at  it — steady.  That  is  the  only  way 
to  conquer  it.  If  you  have  entered  your  Master's  service  and  are  trying  to  be  good, 
you  will  sometimes  find  hills  of  difficulty  in  the  way.  Things  will  often  look  dis- 
couraging, and  you  will  not  seem  to  make  any  progress  at  all ;  but  keep  at  it.  Never 
forget  "  that's  how."  Evidence  of  discipleship : — A  soldier's  confidence  in  his 
commander  is  evidenced  by  the  soldier  obeying  his  commander's  orders.  A 
patient's  trust  in  his  physician  is  shown  by  the  patient  following  the  physician  8 
directions.  A  disciple's  sincerity  in  his  professions  of  discipleship  is  proved  by  the 
disciple  walking  according  to  the  Master's  teaching.  It  is  not  that  there  is  any 
merit  in  the  obedience  itself ;  but  it  is  that  there  is  no  sincerity  in  a  profession  of 
faith  where  there  is  no  obedience.  (H.  C.Trumbull.)  Truth  and  liberty  : — Faith 
Cometh  by  hearing  (ver.  30).  It  is  in  connection  with  the  word  of  truth  that  the 
Holy  Spirit  works  in  us.  I.  The  beception  of  Christ's  word  begins  discipleship. 
There  may  be  alarm,  disquietude,  inquiry,  before  this,  but  these  are  not  discipleship. 
They  are  but  inquiries  after  a  school  and  a  teacher  which  will  meet  the 
wants,  capacities,  and  longings.  All  men  are  saying,  "Who  will  show  ua 
any  good?"    Discipleship  begins,  not  with  doing  some  great  thing,  but  with 


«HAP.  Tin.]  ST.  JOHN.  63 

reoeiving  Christ's  word  as  the  scholar  receives  the  master's  teaching.  What  does 
He  teach  ?  1.  The  Father.  2.  Himself.  From  the  moment  that  we  accept  this 
we  become  disciples — taught  not  of  man,  but  of  God.  II.  Continuance  in  that 
woBD  18  THB  TEST  OF  TBUB  DI8CIPLESHIP.  This  is  not  contlnuance  in  general 
adherence  to  His  cause  ;  but  continuance  in  the  word  by  which  we  become 
disciples.  As  it  is  by  holding  the  beginning  of  our  confidence  that  we  are 
made  partakers  of  Christ,  so  by  continuing  in  the  word  we  make  good  the 
genuineness  of  our  discipleship.  "  Let  the  word  of  Christ  dwell  in  you  richly  " 
— -in  that  word  is  everything  we  need.  1.  It  is  an  expansive  word :  ever  widening 
its  dimensions ;  growing  upon  us ;  never  old,  ever  new ;  in  which  we  make 
continual  discoveries ;  the  same  tree,  but  ever  putting  forth  new  brajiches  and  leaves ; 
the  same  river,  but  ever  swelling  and  widening — loosing  none  of  its  old  water,  yet 
ever  receiving  accessions.  2.  It  is  a  quickening  word :  maintaining  old  life,  yet 
producing  new — "  Thy  word  Lord  hath  quickened  me."  3.  It  is  a  strengthening 
word :  nerving  and  invigorating  us ;  lifting  us  when  bowed  down ;  imparting 
iieaith,  courage,  resolution,  persistency.  4.  It  is  a  sanctifying  word :  it  detects 
the  evil  and  purges  it  away,  pouring  holiness  into  the  soul.  Let  as  continue  in 
this  word ;  not  weary  of  it,  not  losing  relish  for  it.  III.  Knowledge  of  the 
TBUTH  IS  THE  BESULT  OF  DISCIPLESHIP.  All  that  enter  Christ's  school  are  taught  of 
God.  Consequently  they  know  the  truth ;  not  a  truth  or  part  of  it,  but  the  truth 
— ^not  error — Him  who  is  the  Truth.  They  shall  know  it ;  not  guess  at  it,  speculate 
on  it,  get  a  glimpse  of  it  ;  but  make  choice  of  it,  realize  it,  appreciate  it.  Blessed 
promise  in  a  day  of  doubt  and  error  I  IV.  This  truth  la  liberty.  All  truth  is, 
BO  far,  liberty,  and  all  error  bondage ;  some  truth  is  greater  liberty,  some  error 
greater  bondage.  Bondage,  with  many,  is  simply  associated  with  tyranny,  bad 
government,  evil  or  ecclesiastical  despotism.  Christ's  words  go  deeper,  to  the  root 
of  the  evil.  The  real  chains,  prison,  bondage  are  within — so  true  liberty.  It 
springs  from  what  a  man  knows  of  God  and  of  his  Christ.  Seldom  do  men  realize 
this.  Error,  bondage  1  How  can  that  be  if  the  error  be  the  man's  own  voluntary 
doing — the  result  of  his  intellectual  effort  ?  But  the  Master  is  very  explicit.  The 
truth  shall  make  you  free.  There  is  no  other  freedom  worthy  of  the  name.  "  He  is 
a  free  man  whom  the  truth  makes  free ;  and  all  are  slaves  besides."  (H.  Bonar, 
D.D.)  Ye  shall  know  the  truth  and  the,  truth  shall  make  you  free, — True 
freedom : — 1.  Three  mighty  thoughts — knowledge,  truth,  freedom.  2.  Men  claim 
to  be  free  bom  or  to  attain  freedom  at  a  great  price ;  yet  he  who  sins  is  a  slave  of 
sin.  (1)  Political  freedom  is  but  the  bark,  intellectual  freedom  but  the  fibre,  of 
the  tree  spiritual :  freedom  is  the  sap.  Men  contend  for  bark  and  fibre,  Christ 
gives  the  sap.  Sometimes  we  have  political  freedom,  but  formal,  sapless,  as  dead 
as  telegraph  poles  strung  with  the  wires  of  politicians.  3.  Circumstances  cannot 
fetter  freedom  or  confer  it.  Joseph  was  as  free  in  the  dungeon  as  on  the  throne. 
"  Stone  walls  do  not  a  prison  make,  nor  iron  bars  a  cage."  The  Israelites  in  the 
desert  were  a  nation  of  slaves  despite  their  liberty.  It  matters  not  where  I  place  my 
watch,  so  I  wind  it,  it  is  really  free ;  if  I  interfere  with  the  works,  wherever  it  may 
be,  it  is  in  bondage.  So  of  man — laind,  chain,  imprison ;  if  the  soul  be  in  sym- 
pathy with  God,  sustained  by  truth,  you  have  a  free  man  ;  if  the  reverse,  you  have 
a  slave.  John,  though  in  prison,  was  free ;  Herod,  though  on  the  throne,  was  a 
slave — Christ  and  Pilate.  Freedom,  like  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  is  within.  The 
text  teaches  a  threefold  lesson — man  may  know ;  truth  is :  the  knowledge  of  the 
truth  brings  freedom.  I.  The  word  know  carries  us  back  to  the  dawn  of  history. 
1.  Two  possibilities  are  placed  before  man — Ufe  or  knowledge.  Full  of  Ufe,  he 
chooses  knowledge  at  the  risk  of  life.  2.  The  race  is  true  to  its  head — exploration, 
geographical,  scientific,  philosophical.  3.  Yet  men  were  then  setting  up  altars  to 
the  unknown  God :  men  now  to  God  unknowable.  The  great  Teacher  says :  "  Ye 
shall  know."  4.  The  promise  implies  that  man  can  trust  himself  and  the  results 
of  his  research  and  experiences.  IL  The  subject  of  knowledge  is  teuth.  Truth 
stands  in  contrast — 1.  With  a  lie.  tlhrist  accuses  His  hearers  of  being  children  of 
the  devil.  To-day  as  then  men  lie ;  wilfully  misrepresent  in  business,  political,  and 
social  life.  2.  With  veracity.  Truth  is  consistency  between  what  we  think  and 
say  and  what  is.  Veracity  is  consistency  between  what  we  say  and  think;  bat 
we  may  think  wrongly.  3.  Truth  is  reality  as  opposed  to  a  lie  and  to  appearance. 
Christ,  as  Son  of  God  and  Son  of  Man,  sets  forth  certain  realities  regarding  both, 
and  the  relation  between  the  two.  That  God  is,  what  God  is,  cmd  what  man 
is :  alienation  and  possible  reconciliation ;  regeneration  by  the  Spirit ;  the  resulti 
of    separation    from    and    reconciliation    with    God.      These  facts,  relations, 


54  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  Tin. 

results,  are  truth,  and  may  be  known.  III.  The  results  of  buoh  xnowledge  is 
FREEDOM.  1.  Freedom  from  the  past,  ••  Son,  remember;"  but  the  knowledge  of 
God's  reconciliation  blots  out  the  sin-stained  past  as  a  cloud.  2.  Freedom 
from  fears  for  the  future  based  upon  the  past.  IV.  The  one  condition  of  all  this 
IS  BELIEF  IN  Christ.  Faith  as  a  grain  of  mustard  seed  grows  into  knowledge, 
(fee.  (0.  P.  Gifford.)  Freedom  by  the  truth.  : — Observe — 1.  The  greatness  of 
Christ's  aim — to  make  all  men  free.  He  saw  around  Him  man  in  slavery  to  man, 
race  to  race  ;  men  trembling  before  priestcraft,  and  those  who  were  politically  and 
ecclesiastically  free,  in  worse  bondage  to  their  own  passions.  Conscious  of  Hia 
Deity  and  His  Father's  intentions.  He,  without  the  excitement  of  an  earthly 
liberator,  calmly  said:  "Ye  shall  be  free."  2.  The  wisdom  of  the  means.  The 
craving  for  liberty  was  not  new,  nor  the  promise  of  satisfying  it ;  but  the  promise 
had  been  vain.  Men  had  tried — (1)  Force  :  and  force  in  the  cause  of  freedom  is  to 
be  honoured,  and  those  who  have  used  it  have  been  esteemed  as  the  world's  bene- 
factors— Judas  Maccabseus,  &c.  Had  Christ  willed  so  to  come,  success  was  certain. 
Men  were  ripe  for  revolt,  and  at  a  word,  thrice  three  hundred  thousand  swords  would 
have  started  from  their  scabbards  ;  but  in  that  case  one  nation  only  would  have 
gained  independence,  and  that  merely  from  foreign  oppression.  (2)  Legislative 
enactments.  By  this  England  could  and  did  emancipate  her  slaves ;  but  she  could 
not  fit  them  for  freedom,  nor  make  it  lasting.  The  stroke  of  a  monarch's  pen 
will  do  the  one — the  discipline  of  ages  is  needed  for  the  other.  Give  a  constitution 
to-morrow  to  some  feeble  Eastern  nation,  and  in  half  a  century  they  will  be 
subjected  again.  Therefore  Christ  did  not  come  to  free  the  world  in  this  way.  (3) 
CiviUzation.  Every  step  of  civilization  is  a  victory  over  some  lower  instinct ;  but 
it  contains  elements  of  fresh  servitude.  Man  conquers  the  powers  of  nature,  and 
becomes  in  turn  their  slave.  The  workman  is  in  bondage  to  his  machinery,  which 
determines  hours,  wages,  habits.  The  rich  man  acquires  luxuries,  and  then 
cannot  do  without  them.  Members  of  a  highly  civilized  community  are  slaves 
to  dress,  hours,  etiquette.  Therefore  Christ  did  not  talk  of  the  progress  of  the 
species ;  he  freed  the  inner  man  that  so  the  outer  might  become  free.  Note— I. 
The  truth  that  liberates. — The  truth  Christ  taught  was  chiefly  about:  1. 
God.  Blot  out  that  thought  and  existence  becomes  unmeaning,  resolve  is  left 
without  a  stay,  aspiration  and  duty  without  a  support.  Christ  exhibited  God  as — 
(1)  Love ;  and  so  that  fearful  bondage  to  fate  was  broken.  (2)  A  Spirit,  requiring 
spiritual  worship  ;  and  thus  the  chain  of  superstition  was  rent  asimder.  2.  Man. 
We  are  a  mystery  to  ourselves.  So  where  nations  exhibit  their  wealth  and 
inventions,  before  the  victories  of  mind  you  stand  in  reverence.  Then  look 
at  those  who  have  attained  that  civilization,  their  low  aims  and  mean  lives, 
and  you  are  humbled.  And  so  of  individuals.  How  noble  a  given  man's  thoughts 
at  one  moment,  how  base  at  another  I  Christ  solved  this  riddle.  He  regarded 
man  as  fallen,  but  magnificent  in  his  ruin.  Beneath  the  vilest  He  saw  a  soul 
capable  of  endless  growth ;  hence  He  treated  with  respect  all  who  approached 
Him,  because  they  were  men.  Here  was  a  germ  for  freedom.  It  is  not  the 
shackle  that  constitutes  the  slave,  but  the  loss  of  self-respect — to  be  treated  as 
degraded  tiU  he  feels  degraded.  Liberty  is  to  suspect  and  yet  reverence  self.  3. 
Immortality.  If  there  be  an  idea  that  cramps  and  enslaves  the  soul  it  is  that 
this  life  is  all.  If  there  be  one  which  expands  and  elevates  it  it  is  that  of  immor- 
tality. This  was  the  martyrs'  strength.  In  the  hope  and  knowledge  of  that  truth 
they  were  free  from  the  fear  of  pain  of  death.  II.  The  liberty  which  truth 
GIVES.  1.  Political  freedom.  Christianity  does  not  directly  interfere  with  political 
questions,  but  mediately  it  must  influence  them.  Christ  did  not  promise  this 
freedom,  but  He  gave  it  more  surely  than  conqueror,  reformer,  or  patriot.  And 
this  not  by  theories  or  constitutions,  but  by  truths.  God  a  Spirit,  man  His 
redeemed  child ;  before  that  spiritual  equality  aU  distinctions  vanish.  2.  Mental 
independence.  Slavery  is  that  which  cramps  powers,  and  the  worst  is  that 
which  cramps  the  noblest  powers.  Worse  therefore  than  he  who  manacles  the 
body  is  he  who  puts  fetters  on  the  mind,  and  demands  that  men  shall  think  and 
believe  as  others  have  done.  In  Judsea  life  was  a  set  of  forms  and  religion — 
a  congeries  of  traditions.  One  living  word  from  Christ,  and  the  mind  of  the  world 
was  free.  Later  a  mountain  mass  of  superstition  had  gathered  round  the  Church. 
Men  said  that  the  soul  was  to  be  saved  only  by  doing  what  the  priesthood 
taught.  Then  the  heroes  of  the  Beformation  said  the  soul  is  saved  by  the  grace 
of  God ;  and  once  more  the  mind  of  the  world  was  set  free  by  truth.  There  is  a 
tendency  to  think,  not  what  is  true,  but  what  is  respectable,  authorized.    It  comes 


CHAP.  Tin.]  ST.  JOHN.  55 

partly  from  eowordioe,  partly  from  habit.     Now  truth  frees  ns  from  this  by 
warning  of   individual  responsibility  which  cannot  be  delegated  to  another,  and 
thrown  oft  on  a  ohorch.    Do  not  confound  mental  independence  with  mental 
pride.    It  ought  to  co-exist  with  the  deepest  humility.   For  that  mind  alone  is  free 
which,  conscious  of  its  liability  to  err,  and,  turning  thankfully  to  any  light,  refuses 
to  surrender  the  Divinely  given  right  and  responsibility  of  judging  for  itself  and 
having  an  opinion  of  its  own.    3.  Superiority  to  temptation.     It  is  not  enough  to 
say  that  Christ  promises  freedom  from  sin.    Childhood,  paralysis,  impotence  of 
old  a^j,  may  remove  the  desire  of  transgressions.    Therefore  we  must  add  that  one 
whom  Christ  liberates  is  free  by  his  own  will.     It  is  not   that  he  would  and 
cannot ;  but  that  he  can  and  will  not.     Christian  liberty  is  right  well  sustained  by 
love,  and  made  firm  by  faith  in  Christ.    This  may  be  seen  by  considering  moral 
bondage.  Go  to  the  intemperate  man  in  the  morning,  when  his  head  aches  and  his 
whole  frame  unstrung :  he  is  ashamed,  hates  his  sin,  and  would  not  do  it.     Go  to 
him  at  night  when  the  power  of  habit  is  upon  him,  and  he  obeys  the  mastery  of 
his  craving.     Every  more  refined  instance  of  slavery  is  just  as  real.    Wherever  a 
man  would  and  cannot,  there  is  servitude.     4.  Superiority  to  fear.    Fear  enslaves, 
courage  liberates.     The  apprehension  of  pain,  fear  of  death,  dread  of  the  world's 
laugh  at  poverty,  or  loss  of  reputation,  enslave  alike.    From  all  such  Christ  frees. 
He  who  lives  in  the  habitual  contemplation  of  immortality,  cannot  be  in  bondage 
to  time;  he  who  feels  his  soul's  dignity  cannot  cringe.     (F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.) 
Spiritiial  and  scientific  truth : — There  is  a  well-known  picture  by  Eetzsch,  in  which 
Satan  is  represented  as  playing  at  chess  with  a  man  for  his  soul.    The  pieces 
on  the  board  seem  to  represent  the  virtues  and  the  deadly  sins.     The  man  is 
evidently  losing  the  game,  while  in  the  background  stands  an  angel  sad  and  help- 
less, and  statue-like.     We  need  not  stay  to  criticize  the  false  theology  inplied  in 
that  picture,  because  our  immediate  concern  is  with  a  meaning  which  has  been  read 
into  that  picture  by  a  great  scientific  teacher  of  our  day.    We  have  been  told  by 
Professor  Huxley,  that  if  we  "  substitute  for  the  mocking  fiend  in  that  picture  a 
calm,  strong  angel  who  is  playing,  as  we  say,  for  love,  and  would  rather  lose  than 
win,"  we  shall  have  a  true  picture  of  the  relation  of  man  to  nature.    "  The  chess- 
board is  the  world ;  the  pieces  are  the  phenomena  of  the  universe  ;  the  rules  of  the 
game  are  what  we  call  the  laws  of  nature.     The  player  on  the  other  side  is  hidden 
from  us.     We  know  that  his  play  is  always  fair,  and  just,  and  patient.    But  also 
we  know,  to  our  cost,  that  he  never  overlooks  a  mistake,  or  makes  the  smallest 
allowance  for  ignorance."     Such  is  the  modern  reading  of  the  picture.     And  here 
there  is  a  great  truth,  or  at  least  one  side  of  a  great  truth,  expressed.    It  puts 
before  us  in  a  very  real  and  concrete  form  the  fact  that,  in  our  mere  physical  life, 
we  are  engaged  in  a  great  struggle.    We  must  learn  to  adapt  ourselves  truly  to  the 
physical  conditions  of  our  life,  or  we  must  perish  in  a  fruitless  opposition  to 
natural  laws.    But  that  physical  life  which  we  live  is  not  our  whole  life,  nor  are 
what  we  call  the  laws  of  external  nature  the  only  laws  which  we  need  to  know.    We 
are  surrounded  by  spiritual  forces  in  which  our  moral  life  is  lived.     In  that  more 
real  Ufe  we  have  relations  with  spiritual  beings,  some  like  ourselves  and  some 
above  us,  and  One  whom  we  love  to  call  our  Father,  which  is  in  heaven.     Are  there 
no  laws  in  that  spiritual  world  ?    No  truths  there,  the  knowledge  of  which  will 
make  us  free  ?    If  the  violation  of  physical  law  is  death,  is  there  no  death  in  the 
moral  and  spiritual  sphere  ?    Is  the  life  of  the  soul  less  real,  its  death  less  terrible 
than  that  of  the  body  ?    And  if  not,  what  do  we  know  of  the  great  spiritual  realities 
which  environ  life  ?    1.  All  truth  gives  freedom.     To  know  nature  is  to  gain  free- 
dom in  regard  to  her ;  to  know  her  fully  ia  to  conform  ourselves  to  her.     And  to 
know  God  is  to  cease  to  be  afraid  of  Him,  to  know  Him  fully  is  to  love  Him  per- 
fectly, and  to  conform  ourselves  to  His  likeness.     2.  Why,  tlien,  is  there  such  fear 
and  jealousy  of  dogma  amongst  men  who  gladly  welcome  every  new  truth  about 
their  physical  Ufe  ?    If  all  truth  is  from  God,  and  every  truth  sets  us  free,  why  is 
it  that  men  hesitate  to  allow  these  characteristics  to  that  which,  above  all,  claims 
to  be  from  God,  and  to  give  us  perfect  freedom  7    It  is  here  that  we  touch  the 
characteristic  difference  which  exists  between  the  laws  of  the  spiritual  and  the  laws 
of  the  material  world.    The  laws  of  nature  are  discoveries  ;  the  laws  of  the  spiritual 
world  are  revelations.     The  former  are  found  out ;   the  latter  are  given.     The 
former  are  confessedly  imperfect,  added  to  continually  as  years  go  by  ;  the  latter 
are  complete,  the  same  yesterday,  to  day,  and  for  ever.    The  former  lay  claim  to 
no  finality ;  they  may  be  challenged,  put  upon  their  trial,  called  upon  to  justify 
themselves.    The  latter,  if  they  are  from  God,  claim  oar  reverence,  our  obedience, 


56  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

our  willing  submission.  {Aubrey  L.  Moore,  M.A.)  Freedom  only  to  he  found  in 
God : — Last  summer  the  good  ship  Wieland  brought  over  a  large  number  of  caged 
birds.  When  we  were  about  mid-ocean  one  restless  bird  escaped  from  his  cage. 
In  ecstasy  he  swept  through  the  air,  away  and  away  from  his  prison.  How  he 
bounded  with  outspread  wings  1  Freedom  I  How  sweet  he  thought  it !  Across 
the  pathless  waste  he  entirely  disappeared.  But  after  hours  had  passed,  to  our 
amazement,  he  appeared  again,  struggUng  towards  the  ship  with  heavy  wing. 
Panting  and  breathless,  he  settled  upon  the  deck.  Far,  far  over  the  boundless 
deep,  how  eagerly,  how  painfully  had  he  sought  the  ship  again,  now  no  longer  a 
prison,  but  his  dear  home.  As  I  watched  him  nestle  down  on  the  deck,  I  thought 
of  the  restless  human  heart  that  breaks  away  from  the  restraints  of  religion.  With 
buoyant  wing  he  bounds  away  from  Church  the  prison,  and  God  the  prison.  But  if 
he  is  not  lost  on  the  remorseless  deep,  he  comes  back  again  with  panting,  eager 
heart,  to  Church  the  home,  and  God  the  home.  The  Church  is  not  a  prison  to  any 
man.  It  gives  the  most  perfect  freedom  in  all  that  is  good  and  all  that  is  safe.  It 
gives  him  Uberty  to  do  what  is  right,  and  to  do  what  is  wrovg,  there  is  no  rightful 
place  to  any  man  in  all  the  boundless  universe.  (R.  S.  Barrett.)  Freedom 
by  the  truth : — The  truth  shall  set  us  free  from — I.  Physical  suffering.  The 
laws  of  nature  are  the  laws  of  God,  and  to  know  and  obey  them  will  liberate 
us  from  every  sickness  except  that  of  death.  There  is — 1.  The  law  of  heredity. 
This  is  a  Bible  law ;  for  it  states  that  the  sins  of  the  fathers  shall  be  carried  down 
to  the  third  and  fourth  generation.  Know  that,  and  care  for  the  health  of  your 
bodies,  and  your  posterity  will  be  free  from  the  taint  of  hereditary  disease.  2.  The 
law  of  sanitation.  Know  that,  and  obey  it,  and  you  free  your  cities  from  fevers 
and  infectious  diseases.  Much  suffering  is  entailed  by  ignorance,  apathy,  or  wilful 
negligence  about  this  truth.  3.  The  law  of  temperance ;  that  obeyed  will  make 
you  free  from  the  suffering  of  bodily  anguish  and  the  sense  of  degradation.  II. 
Social  disakbangement.  This  is  one  of  our  most  rampant  evils.  Contrast  the 
suburbs  with  their  villas  and  the  slums  with  their  hovels.  These  extremes  should 
not  exist  in  a  Christian  country.  What  is  the  cure  ?  The  truth  that  humanity  is 
one.  1.  The  strong  should  help  the  weak.  The  rich,  who  enjoy  their  libraries, 
drawing-rooms,  gardens,  should  not  be  satisfied  that  the  poor  should  have  to  tramp 
long  distances  to  see  a  tree  or  read  a  book.  Parks,  museums,  baths,  libraries, 
should  be  within  reach ;  and  by  recognising  the  truth  on  this  matter,  the  wealthy 
should  lend  a  helping  hand.  2.  The  weak  should  help  themselves.  Too  much 
help  would  pauperize.  The  poor  must  be  taught  and  encouraged  to  raise  them- 
selves. Much  can  be  effected  by  co-operation.  If  the  money  spent  in  beer  were 
utilized  for  this  purpose,  the  millenium  would  be  hastened.  IIL  Christian 
antagonism.  What  a  pity  it  is  to  see  the  strife  of  sects  over  nice  doctrinal  or  cere- 
monial points.  Christ  wants  His  Church  to  be  one,  and  so  do  good  men.  But  the 
truth  only  will  unify ;  and  there  is  enough  truth  held  in  common  by  all  churches, 
which,  if  recognized,  would  soon  bring  Christian  unity.  All  are  agreed  that 
Christ's  life  should  be  lived  by  His  followers.  Surely  this  is  a  good  working  truth; 
and  as  all  hold  it,  all  should  act  upon  it,  and  be  one.  IV.  Alienation  from  God. 
What  a  slave  was  the  prodigal,  and  all  his  degradation  arose  from  his  distance 
from  God.  But  when  the  vision  of  his  father  arose  before  his  mind,  he  arose 
and  went  back.  What  sinful  men  want  to  know  is,  the  truth  about  God  as 
revealed  by  Christ ;  how  He  loves  the  sinner,  and  would  save  him  from  his  sins. 
(W.  Birch.)  Freedom,  by  the  truth : — It  is  no  strange  thing  for  truth  to  set  people 
free.  What  delivers  men  from  terror — e.g.,  over  prodigies,  &c. — but  the  truth 
about  them  ?  In  the  darkness,  which  invests  harmless  objects  with  weird  appear- 
ances, the  imaginative  man  is  as  timid  as  a  child.  But  let  the  day  dawn,  and  the 
truth  of  things  be  revealed,  and  fear  vanishes.  The  truth  sets  us  free  from — I.  Thb 
DREADS  OF  LIFE.  1.  Those  which  )3elong  to  our  physical  life — dreads  of  want, 
disease,  poisoned  air,  accidents.  Christ  frees  us  from  these  by  revealing  the  pro- 
vidence  of  God  (Matt,  vi.  26-28),  2.  Social  fears — fears  of  what  men  can  do  unto 
us.  Christ  says,  "  Fear  not  tnem  which  kill  the  body,"  &c.  Their  wrath  la 
restrained  by  our  Father ;  and  at  their  worst  they  can  only  drive  man  closer  to 
God,  and  bring  him  nearer  home.  8.  Spiritual  fears — about  God.  Christ  frees 
from  this  by  His  truth — "  Our  Father."  II.  The  sins  of  life.  These  make  the 
real  bondage.  Our  fears  weaken  us,  but  our  sins  corrupt,  and  lead  to  death.  They 
bind  in  two  ways.  1.  By  spreading  their  shame  through  our  soul  (Ezra  ix.  6). 
Christ  frees  us  by  His  declaration  (chap.  iii.  17),  and  His  own  treatment  of  a  sinner 
in  shame  (vers.  3-11).     2.  By  weakening  our  will,  so  that  when  we  woold  do  good 


CBAP.  Till.]  ST.  JOHN.  57 

we  cannot.  Christ  brings  not  only  pardon  to  banish  shame,  bat  power  to  put  away 
Bin  (1  Tim.  i.  13).  III.  Dwabfed  conditions  of  life.  1.  In  oharch  life — from 
the  tyranny  of  forms  and  places  (chap.  iv.  21-23).  2.  In  individnal  life.  The 
trath  of  Jesus  liberates  the  highest  faculties  —  faith,  hope,  love,  conscience. 
(J,  Todd.)  Freedom  by  the  truth : — Christ,  by  His  truth,  delivers  man — I.  From 
the  bondage  of  ionorance.  That  truth  enlightens,  invigorates,  instructs.  II.  From 
the  bondage  of  ebbob.  1.  Intellectual — scepticism  or  superstition.  2.  Practical ; 
for  with  it  He  gives  His  example  and  His  guiding  spirit.  III.  From  the  bondage  of 
rsAB.  1.  The  fear  of  death  and  judgment.  2.  Of  God's  conscience-searching 
word.  3.  Of  the  supernatural.  IV.  From  the  bondage  of  sin.  1.  As  a  fetter. 
2.  As  a  service.  V.  From  the  bondage  of  the  law.  1.  The  ritual,  which  is 
abolished.  2.  The  moral,  which  by  grace  becomes  perfect  freedom.  (P.  N.  Zah- 
ri»kie,  D.D.)  Truth  and  liberty  : — God's  grace  reveals  itself  in  endless  diverse 
forms.  The  thousand  changing  colours  which  play  upon  sea,  land,  and  sky,  in  the 
high  day  of  summer,  are  but  variations  of  the  one  clear  and  transparent  light  which 
comes  down  from  above ;  and  the  same  water  of  the  sea  is  the  same  water  of  the 
sea,  whether  it  is  called  ocean,  gulf,  or  strait.  A  recognition  of  this  truth  is 
essential  to  the  understanding  of  what  Christian  liberty  is.  It  is  the  liberty  of  the 
light  which,  always  opposed  to  darkness,  yet  reveals  itself  in  constantly  new  tints 
and  shades  of  colour ;  it  is  the  liberty  of  the  water,  ever  cleansing  and  ever  essen- 
tial  to  life,  which  yet  takes  its  shape  from  the  vessel  into  which  it  is  poured.  It  is 
the  liberty  of  the  tree  to  be  green,  of  the  sea  to  be  blue,  of  the  sunset  to  be  crimson, 
of  the  sand  to  be  yellow — each  obtaining  its  own  tint  from  God's  clear  Ught,  and 
no  one  quarrelling  with  the  beauty  of  the  other.  So  God's  grace  reveals  itself  in 
the  lives  of  God's  true  children.  In  each  it  is  the  same  grace,  yet  in  each  it  takes 
a  special  form  and  colour — that  of  the  individuality  in  which  it  reveals  itself. 
And  the  liberty  for  which  Christ  has  made  us  free,  is  the  liberty  for  each  of  us  to 
grow  into  that  special  manifestation  of  grace  for  which  his  nature  is  most  fitted. 
It  is  freedom  for  us  to  grow  in  our  own  way,  without  conforming  at  all  points  to 
the  growth  of  another ;  and  (what  we  are  more  likely  to  forget)  it  is  liberty  for 
others  to  grow  in  their  way  without  conforming  at  all  points  to  our  way  of  growth. 
.  If  we  compare  the  Church  to  "  a  garden  shut  up,"  we  ought  to  remember  that  the 
wise  cultivator  does  not  expect  the  tender  vine  to  grow  in  the  same  way  as  the 
Btnrdy  oak,  nor  does  he  expect  the  apple  or  the  pear-tree  to  bring  forth  grapes  or 
figs.     {U.  C.  Trumbull,  D.D.)  Spiritual  liberty  : — Liberty  is  a  matter  which 

interests  every  one.  But  it  is  sadly  limited.  By  it  men  mean  political,  intellectual, 
physical,  and  some,  alasl  sinful  freedom.  Christ  proclaims  real  liberty — that  of  the 
Boul.  Secure  this,  and  all  that  is  worth  the  name  of  liberty  will  follow.  Christ 
effects  this  emancipation  by  the  truth.  We  must  accept  the  truth,  not  as  theory 
in  our  minds,  or  sentiment  in  our  hearts,  but  by  experience  and  practice  ;  then  we 
shall  be  free.  The  truth  thus  received  liberates  from  —I.  The  fettebs  of  ignobancb, 
bupebstition,  and  pbejudice — three  links  in  a  mighty  chain.  1.  We  have  but  to 
pass  the  line  of  Christendom  to  behold  a  world  ignorant  of  God  and  Divine  truth. 
What  follows  T  The  most  debasing  superstition,  idolatry,  witchcraft,  (fee.  Hence 
the  almost  invincible  prejudice  there  is  at  first  against  the  reception  of  the  gospel. 
2.  But  within  Christendom  and  in  its  most  cultivated  circles,  how  many  men  learned 
in  this  world's  wisdom  are  utterly  ignorant  of  the  things  of  God  ?  And  what  can 
result  here  but  superstition,  the  worship  of  the  idols  of  the  mind,  and  putting  light 
for  darkness,  bitter  for  sweet  1  The  consequence  is  sceptical  prejudice.  3.  The 
same  holds  good  in  regard  to  Popery.  The  Bible-prohibited  people  are  in  gross 
darkness ;  believe  what  they  are  told  to  believe,  however  irrational ;  bow  to  images, 
and  worship  the  creature  above  the  Creator ;  and  therefore  bitterly  oppose,  and, 
where  they  can,  persecute  the  gospel.  4.  From  all  this  Christ's  truth  sets  us  free. 
(1)  By  throwing  light  on  the  darkness  of  ignorance,  and  bringing  knowledge  to  mind 
and  heart.  (2)  This  knowledge  removes  the  grounds  of  superstition  and  prejudice. 
II.  Thk  thbaldom  of  SATAN.  However  manifold  the  links  bound  round  the  soul 
led  captive  by  the  devil,  the  last  link  is  in  his  hand.  Men  are  either  slaves  of 
Satan  or  free  men  of  Christ.  Christ  comes  as  a  strong  man  armed  to  break  the 
links  of  the  chain,  which  are  mainly  three.  1.  Guilt,  and  the  consequent  curse  of 
God.  For  this  Christ  provides  pardon,  and  secures  God's  blessing.  2.  CorruptioE , 
and  consequent  moral  impotence.  For  this  Christ  provides  the  grace  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  8.  The  world  and  the  fear  of  man,  that  bringeth  a  snare.  But  "  this  is 
the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world,  even  our  faith."  III.  The  bondage  of  the 
nun  OF  DEATH.     Spite  of  his  boasting,  no  man  is  so  hardy  but  he  shrinks  from 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vni. 

death.  Why?  Because  "  after  death  the  judgment."  This  is  seen  in  the  mad 
recklessness  of  the  profligate,  and  the  unspiritnal  service  of  the  moralist,  the 
religious  inventions  of  the  devotee.  Momentary  oblivion  of  the  dread  spectre  is 
all  that  these  can  produce.  But  he  who  receives  the  truth  of  Christ  triumphs 
over  death.  Conclusion  :  This  hberty  includes  a  service,  bat  it  is  perfect 
freedom.     (Canon  Stowell.)  Spiritual  emancipation: — These  words  suggest 

— I.  That  a    knowledge    op    the    truth    may    be    secured.      II.    That    this 

ENOWLEDOE  IS  MENTAL  AND  EXPERIMENTAL.  III.  ThAT  EXPERIMENTAL  KNOWLEDGE  IS 
ALONE  SAVING.       IV.   WhAT  IS  THE  ESSENTIAL  TRUTH,  THE    EXPERIMENTAL   KNOWLEDOB 

OF  WHICH  MAKES  FREE.  1.  We  may  know  the  truth  as  we  know  language,  science, 
&o. ;  as  a  mass  of  doctrines ;  Christ  a  historical  character  like  PUate.  All  this 
knowledge  may  have  no  effect  on  the  heart  or  life.  2.  The  new  man  obtains  his 
knowledge  by  a  different  process.  He  experiments,  verifies,  proves.  Truth  becomes 
the  prevailing  principle  of  action,  and  enthrones  itself.  To  be  sure  a  man  must 
become  possessed  of  Christian  facts  and  doctrines.  These  are  the  bones  for  the 
body  of  holiness.  3.  An  experimental  knowledge  of  the  truth  frees  man  morally, 
and  from  the  bondage  of  merely  human  views,  and  introduces  man  into  the  broad 
province  of  ideas  world  wide  in  their  grasp  and  extending  back  to  the  Creation.  4. 
The  condition  of  the  freedom  promised  by  Christ  is  belief  in  His  Divine  sonship, 
"  as  many  as  received  Him,"  &c.  The  emancipating  power  of  this  truth  is  mads 
to  us — (1)  Wisdom,  by  enhghtening  us  and  thus  freeing  the  mind  ;  (2)  Eighteous- 
ness,  by  justifying  us  and  thus  freeing  us  from  the  law ;  (3)  Sanctification,  by 
purifying  us  and  thus  freeing  our  hearts :  (4)  Redemption  by  the  union  of  them  all, 
thus  purchasing  us  into  blessed  immortality.  {J.  M.  King,  D.D.)  The  hour  of 
emancipation : — August  1,  1834,  was  the  day  on  which  700,000  of  our  colonial  slaves 
were  made  free.  Throughout  the  colonies  the  churches  and  chapels  were  thrown 
open,  and  the  slaves  crowded  into  them  on  the  evening  of  the  31st.  July.  As  the 
hour  of  midnight  approached  they  fell  upon  their  knees  and  awaited  the  solemn 
moment,  all  hushed  in  silent  prayer.  When  12  o'clock  sounded,  they  sprang  upon 
their  feet,  and  through  every  island  rang  the  glad  sound  of  thanksgiving  to  the 
Father  of  all,  for  the  chains  were  broken  and  the  slaves  were  free.  (Heroes  of 
Britain.)  The  freedom  which  Christ  gives  : — It  is  a  freedom  from  the  servitude 
of  sin,  from  the  seduction  of  a  misguided  judgment,  and  the  allurement  of  any 
ensnaring  forbidden  object :  consisting  in  an  unbounded  amplitude  and  enlarged- 
ness  of  soul  towards  God,  and  indetermination  to  any  inferior  good ;  resulting  from 
an  entire  subjection  to  the  Divine  will,  a  submission  to  the  order  of  God,  and  steady 
adherence  to  Him.  (John  Howe.)  Spiritual  freedom : — They  make  a  great  fuss 
when  they  give  a  man  the  freedom  of  the  City  of  London.  There  is  a  fine  gold 
casket  to  put  it  in.  You  have  got  the  hberty  of  the  New  Jerusalem,  and  your  faith, 
like  a  golden  box,  holds  the  deeds  of  your  freemanship.  Take  care  of  them  and 
rejoice  in  them  to-night.  (C.  H,  Spurgeon.)  We  be  Abraham's  seed,  and 
were  never  In  bondage  to  any  man. — Moral  bondage  : — Note  that  its  subjects — I, 
Are  unconscious  of  it  (ver.  38).  This  was  an  interruption  of  Christ's  discourse  on 
freedom.  As  much  as  to  say  "  Why  talk  of  freedom  to  us?  We  are  free  men." 
But  in  the  eye  of  Christ  tbey  were  in  the  most  miserable  captivity.  It  is  common 
here  in  England  to  hear  men — 1.  Boast  of  religious  liberty  who  have  no  reUgion.  Some 
of  its  most  strenuous  advocates  are  destitute  of  reverence  to  God,  and  charity  to 
men.  These  will  repeat  the  boast  while  they  are  in  bondage  to  their  own  prejudices, 
exclusiveness,  love  of  fame  or  gain.  2.  Boast  of  civil  freedom  who  are  moral  slaves. 
Men  who  are  under  the  tyranny  of  their  own  lusts  and  greed,  who  are  even  governed, 
as  Carlyle  says,  "  by  a  pot  of  heavy  wet  "  and  a  clay  pipe,  peal  out  in  thunderous 
chorus  "  Britons  never  shall  be  slaves."  The  worst  part  of  this  bondage  is  that  meu 
are  unconscious  of  it.  Hence  they  are  mere  creatures  of  circumstances.  It  is  the 
more  sad  because  it  precludes  any  aspiration  for  self -manumission ;  and  it  is  only 
self-effort  that  can  liberate.  Other  men  may  deliver  the  prisoner  from  his  dungeon, 
or  the  slave  from  his  tyrant,  or  the  serf  from  his  despot ;  but  no  one  can  deliver  him 
from  bondage  but  himself,  "  He  who  would  be  free,  himself  must  strike  the  blow." 
n.  Abe  the  authors  of  it  (ver.  34).  It  is  not  the  sin  of  another  man  that  makes 
me  a  slave,  but  my  own.  Solomon  says, "  His  own  iniquities  shall  take  the  wicked." 
Paul  says,  "  To  whom  ye  yield  yourselves  to  obey  his  servants  ye  are,"  <fec.  Shake- 
epeare  says,  •'  Vice  is  imprisonment."  Every  sin  a  man  commits  forges  a  new  Unk 
in  the  chain  that  manacles  his  soul.  The  longer  a  man  pursues  a  certain  course  of 
conduct  the  more  wedded  he  becomes  to  it,  and  the  less  power  he  has  to  abandon 
it.    Habit  is  a  cord  strengthened  with  every  action,  at  first  it  is  as  fine  as  silk,  and 


CHAP.  Tin.]  ST.  JOHN.  69 

can  be  easily  broken.  Ab  it  proceeds  it  becomes  a  cable.  Habit  is  a  momentam, 
increasing  with  motion.  At  first  a  childs  band  can  obstmct  the  progress,  by  and 
by  an  army  of  giants  cannot  arrest  it.  Habit  is  a  river,  at  its  spring  yon  can  divert 
its  oonrse  with  ease,  as  it  approaches  the  ocean  it  defies  opposition.  HI.  Car  bs 
DELiTEKED  FBOM  IT  (ver.  36).  How  does  Christ  make  the  soul  free  ?  By  generating 
in  the  heart  supreme  love  to  the  supremely  good.  It  is  a  law  of  mind  to  have  some 
permanent  object  of  affection,  and  that  object  limits  its  field  of  operation.  The 
man  who  loves  money  most  will  have  all  his  faculties  confined  to  that  region.  The 
same  with  him  who  loves  fame,  or  pleasure,  &o.  But  all  these  objects  are  limited ; 
hence  the  soul  is  hemmed  in  as  in  a  cage.  In  order  to  have  freedom  the  heart 
should  be  centred  on  an  infinite  object,  and  this  Christ  does.  And  with  QoA  as 
the  centre  of  the  heart  aU  the  faculties  have  unbounded  scope.  Conclusion  :  All 
souls  not  made  free  by  Christ  are  in  slavery.  Even  the  heathen  considered  the 
virtues  essential  to  true  freedom.  Cicero  said  "  The  wise  man  alone  is  free." 
Plato  represents  the  lusts  as  the  hardest  tyrants.  Seneca  speaks  of  the  passions  as  < 
the  worst  thraldom.  Epictetus  said  "  Liberty  is  the  name  of  virtue."  And  this 
virtue  is  obtained  only  through  Christ.  (D.  Thomou,  D.D.)  The  vain  boast 
of  the  Jews: — The  whole  past  history  of  their  nation  was  the  record  of  one 
bondage  following  hard  on  another,  they  for  their  sins  having  come  at  one  time 
or  another  under  the  yoke  of  almost  every  people  round  about  them.  They 
have  been,  by  turns,  in  bondage  to  the  Canaanites,  in  bondage  to  the  Philis- 
tines, in  bondage  to  the  Syrians,  in  bondage  to  the  Chaldaans;  then  again  to 
the  GrsBOo-Syrian  kings;  and  now,  even  at  the  very  moment  when  this  indig- 
nant disclaimer  is  uttered,  the  signs  of  a  foreign  rule,  of  the  domination  of  the 
stranger,  everywhere  met  their  eye.  They  bought  and  sold  with  Roman  money ; 
they  paid  tribute  to  a  Boman  emperor;  a  Boman  governor  sat  in  their  judge- 
ment hall ;  a  Boman  garrison  occupied  the  fortress  of  their  city.  And  yet, 
with  all  this  plain  before  their  eyes,  brought  home  to  their  daily,  hourly  expe- 
rience, they  angrily  put  back  the  promise  of  Christ,  "The  truth  shall  make 
you  free,"  as  though  it  conveyed  sm  insult :  "  How  sayest  thou,  ye  shall  be 
made  free?  We  were  never  in  bondage  to  any  man."  (Abp.  Trench.)  Who- 
soever commlttetli  sin  Is  the  servant  of  sin. — Sin  i$  spiritual  slavery : — Sin  is 
the  suicidal  action  of  the  human  will.  It  destroys  the  power  to  do  right,  which  is 
man's  true  freedom.  The  effect  of  vicious  habit  in  diminishing  a  man's  ability  to 
resist  temptation  is  proverbial.  But  what  is  habit  but  a  constant  repetition  of  wrong 
decisions.  The  will  cannot  be  forced  or  ruined  from  outside.  But  if  we  watch  the 
influence  upon  the  will  of  its  own  yielding  to  temptation,  we  shall  discover  that  the 
voluntary  faculty  may  be  ruined  from  within.  Whatever  springs  from  will  we  are 
responsible  for.  The  drunkard's  powerlessness  issues  from  his  own  inclination  and 
therefore  is  no  excuse.  "  If  weakness  may  excuse,  what  murderer,  what  traitor, 
parricide,  incestuous,  sacrilegeous,  may  not  plead  it?  All  wickedness  is  weakness." 
Sin  is  spiritual  slavery,  if  viewed  in  reference — L  To  mam's  sensb  of  oblioatiom 
TO  BE  PERFECTLY  HOLT.  1.  The  obligation  to  be  holy  as  God  is  rests  upon  every 
rational  being,  and  he  is  a  debtor  to  this  obligation  until  he  has  fully  met  it.  Hence 
even  the  holiest  are  conscious  of  sin,  because  they  are  not  completely  up  to  this 
high  calling.  This  sense  is  as  "  exceeding  broad  "  as  the  commandment,  and  will 
not  let  us  off  with  the  performance  of  a  part  of  our  duty.  It  is  also  exceeding  deep, 
for  it  outlives  all  others.  In  the  hour  of  death  it  grows  more  vivid  and  painful  as 
all  else  grows  dimmer.  A  man  forgets  then  whether  he  has  been  prosperous  or 
unsuccessful  and  remembers  only  that  he  has  been  a  sinner.  It  might  seem  that 
this  sense  would  be  sufficient  to  overcome  sin,  and  bring  man  up  to  the  discharge  of 
duty ;  but  experience  shows  that  in  proportion  as  a  man  hears  the  voice  of  con- 
science, in  this  particular  does  he  become  aware  of  the  bondage  of  his  will.  2.  In 
our  careless  unawakened  state  we  sin  on,  just  as  we  live  on  without  being  distinctly 
aware  of  it.  A  healthy  man  does  not  go  about  holding  his  fingers  on  his  wrist, 
neither  does  a  sinner  as  he  goes  about  his  business  think  of  his  transgressions.  Yet 
the  pulse  beats,  and  the  will  transgresses  none  the  less.  Though  the  chains  are 
Actually  about  us  they  do  not  gall  us.  "  We  are  alive  without  the  law."  But  as 
the  Spirit  of  God  awakens  the  conscience,  that  sense  of  the  obligation  to  be  perfectly 
holy  starts  up  and  man  begins  to  form  an  estimate  of  what  has  been  done  in 
reference  to  it.  Now  the  commandment  comes,  shows  us  what  we  ought  to  be  and 
what  we  are,  and  we  die  (Bom.  vii.  9-11).  The  muscle  has  been  cut  by  the  sword  of 
truth,  and  the  limb  drops  helpless,  and  we  learn  in  a  most  affecting  manner  that 
''*  whosoever  committeth  sin  is  the  slave  of  sin."    But  suppose  after  thu  discovery  we 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  via, 

endeavour  to  comply  with  the  obligation :  this  only  renders  as  more  painfully 
sensible  of  the  truth  of  the  text.  II,  To  the  aspirations  of  the  sotji..  All  those 
serious  impressions  and  painful  anxieties  concerning  salvation,  which  require  to  be 
followed  up  by  a  mighty  power  from  God  to  prevent  their  being  suppressed  again  by 
the  love  of  sin  and  the  world.  For  though  man  has  fallen  into  a  state  of  death  in 
sins,  yet  through  the  common  influences  of  the  Spirit  of  Grace,  and  the  workings  of 
rational  nature,  he  is  at  times  the  subject  of  aspirations  which  indicate  the  heights 
from  which  he  fell  The  minds  of  the  greatest  of  the  ancient  pagans  were  the 
subjects  of  these  aspirations,  and  they  confess  their  utter  inability  to  realize  them. 
The  journals  of  the  missionary  disclose  the  same  in  modem  heathenism.  All  these 
phenomena  show  the  rigid  bondage  of  sin.  The  drunkard  in  his  sober  moments 
longs  to  be  free  and  resolves  never  to  drink  again.  But  the  sin  is  strong  and  the 
appetite  that  feeds  it  is  in  his  blood.  Temptation  comes  before  the  enslaved  wilL 
He  aspires  to  resist  bat  will  not ;  and  never  is  he  more  conscious  of  being  a  slave  to 
himself  than  when  he  thus  ineffectually  aspires  to  be  deUvered  from  himself.  This 
applies  to  all  sin.  There  is  no  independent  and  self -realizing  power  in  mere  aspira- 
tion, and  when,  under  the  influence  of  God's  common  grace,  a  man  endeavours  to 
extirpate  the  inveterate  depravity  of  his  heart,  he  feels  his  bondage  more  thoroughly 
than  ever.  III.  To  the  peaks  of  the  soul.  1.  The  sinful  spirit  fears  the  death 
of  the  body,  and  therefore  we  are  all  our  lifetime  subject  to  bondage.  We  know  that 
bodUy  dissolution  can  have  no  effect  on  the  imperishable  essence,  yet  we  shrink  back 
from  it.  2.  The  spirit  fears  that  "  fearful  something  after  death  " — eternal  judgment. 
We  tremble  having  to  give  an  account  of  our  own  actions,  and  to  reap  the  harvest, 
the  seed  of  which  we  have  sown.  3.  The  spirit  has  an  awful  dread  of  eternity. 
Though  this  invisible  realm  is  the  proper  home  of  the  soul,  never  is  the  soul  stirred 
to  so  great  depths  as  when  it  feels  the  power  of  an  endless  life.  Men  will  labour 
convulsively  day  and  night  for  money,  power,  fame,  pleasure;  but  what  is  the 
paroxysm  of  this  activity  compared  with  those  throes,  when  the  startled  sinner  sees 
the  eternal  world  looming  into  view.  4.  If,  now,  we  view  sin  in  relation  to  these 
three  great  fears  we  see  that  it  is  spiritual  slavery.  Our  terror  is  no  more  able  to 
deliver  us  than  our  aspirations.  The  dread  that  goes  down  to  hell  can  no  more 
save  us  than  the  aspiration  that  goes  op  to  heaven.  Conclusion  :  1.  This  bondage 
is  self-inflicted,  and  therefore  the  way  of  release  is  not  to  throw  the  burden  of 
it  upon  God.  2.  The  way  out  of  it  is  to  accept  the  method  of  deliverance 
afforded  by  Christ.  {Prof.  Shedd.)  The  progress  of  the  lost  soul  to  destruc- 
tion : — I.  Note  OF  whom  oub  Lord  speaks.  "  He  that  committeth  sin " — i.e., 
he  who  has  become  a  doer  of  sin ;  the  habitual,  conscious,  wilful  sinner.  He 
is  the  bondslave,  the  absolute  thraJl,  the  hopeless  subject  of  an  overmastering 
tyranny.  It  will  help  us  to  obtain  a  completer  view  of  what  this  implies  if  we 
^ace  the  steps  by  which  the  end  is  reached.  1.  We  must  begin  by  having  a 
clear  idea  of  what  temptation  is.  It  is  the  suggestion  to  our  mind  of  the  pleasure 
or  good  to  be  got  by  doing  or  allowing  something  which  is  against  the  will  of  God, 
and  so  against  the  perfectness  of  our  own  true  nature.  Such  suggestions  are 
innumerable  and  take  their  peculiar  colour  from  the  temperament  of  our  own 
mental  and  bodily  constitution.  For  as  there  is  a  special  excellence  to  which  we 
may  attain,  so  there  must  be,  in  the  perversion  of  that  excellence,  a  special  character 
of  evil  to  which  we  are  most  prone.  In  the  mere  entrance  of  this  suggestion  there 
is  nothing  sinful.  Such  were  cast  into  the  mind  of  our  Lord.  Sin  begins  when 
the  mind  rests  with  pleasure  upon  the  evil  suggestion,  but  if  this  is  resisted  there  is 
no  sin.  But  when  the  sweet  morsel  is  rolled  under  the  tongue,  the  acting  of  sin 
has  begun,  and  the  next  step  is  near  the  consent  of  the  will  to  the  suggestion.  2. 
How  the  bond  is  wound  around  the  soul,  the  contemplation  of  the  progress  of  sin 
suggests  to  us.  One  impure  thought  cherished,  still  more  one  impure  act  allowed, 
is  the  certain  cause  of  after  suggestions  of  impurity  :  and  so  it  is  of  every  other  sin. 
The  harbouring  of  anger  opens  the  mind  to  new  suggestions  of  wrath ;  the  allowance 
of  one  wandering  thought  in  prayer,  invites  the  disturbing  presence  of  a  crowd  of 
others  :  the  nursing  one  doubt  multiplies  after  its  kind.  3.  He  who  has  allowed  hig 
spirit  to  rest  on  the  conscious  sweetness  of  sin  has  made  that  indulgence  a  necessity 
to  him  :  and  then,  as  this,  like  all  other  sweetness,  soon  palls  upon  the  taste,  be  has 
made  it  needful  in  order  to  obtain  the  same  gratification,  to  yield  hunsell  more  com- 
pletely to  it,  and  to  seek  it  in  its  larger  mea  ures  and  fiercer  qualities.  And  so  his 
taste  becomes  degi  aded  and  his  gratifications  coarser ;  until  the  power  of  relishing 
purer  pleasures  is  rapidly  becoming  extinguished  ;  they  seem  used  up  and  insipid; 
and  thus  he  is  led  to  the  one  step  farther  of  consenting  to  the  evil  which  has  miser- 


CHAP.  VIII.]  ST.  JOHN.  61 

ably  become  his  good.  Then  indeed  the  chain  is  bound  about  him.  For  though 
every  indulgence  lessens  the  pleasure  of  indulging,  yet  the  growing  power  of  habit 
more  than  supplies  the  place  of  the  energy  of  enjoyment,  nay,  the  pleasure  of  sin  may 
not  only  be  kbsened,  but  be  gone;  the  chain  may  even  gall  him,  but  he  cannot  break 
it.  4.  Other  bonds  besides  those  of  habit  are  winding  themselves  around  him.  (1) 
There  is  from  the  conscience,  commixing  continually  with  pollution,  a  daily  lower- 
ing of  the  standard  of  the  soul,  which  makes  it  with  less  consciousness  of  its  degrada- 
tion bow  itself  to  greater  evils,  until  the  infirmity  is  such  that  it  can  in  no  wise 
lift  itself  up.  (2)  With  this  growing  disorder  of  the  conscience  the  other  faculties 
sympathize.  The  will  which  was  once  calm,  ready,  resolute,  grows  vehement  and 
irresolute,  passionate  and  yet  tardy,  an  uncrowned  king,  the  helpless  sport  of 
insolent  menials.  6.  Even  this  is  not  all.  For  higher  powers  and  greater  endow- 
ments have  been  passing  from  his  soul  in  the  sad  process  of  its  enchaining ;  it  has 
been  denyiag  its  fellowship  with  Christ,  resisting  and  grieving  the  Holy  Spirit;  and 
as  that  free  Spirit  withdraws  itself,  all  true  liberty  for  the  soul  is  lost,  and  the  evil 
spirit  comes  in  and  dwells  there,  making  the  slavery  complete.  6.  All  this  is  true  of 
spiritual  sins.  The  suggestion  of  doubt — e.g.,  involves  no  sin ;  for  into  the  mind  of 
Jesus  was  thrown  the  question,  "  If  Thou  be  the  Son  of  God  ?  "  But  if  the  sugges- 
tion, instead  of  being  cast  out,  is  gloated  on ;  if  the  pleasant  thought  is  indulged  of 
loeing  a  great  thinker,  and  being  able  to  manifest  a  certain  shallow  ability  by  the 
utterance  of  petulant  flippancy,  then  assuredly  sin  enters,  and  the  assent  of  the  soul 
to  that  which  at  first  startled  or  offended  it  soon  follows.  Then  comes  boldness  and 
rudeness  of  spirit  in  dealing  with  heavenly  mysteries.  The  mind  becomes  darkened, 
and  the  eyes  blind,  and  then  comes  the  end  of  the  dungeon  and  the  chain.  The 
lamentations  which  sometimes  break  forth  from  the  prison  are  the  saddest  to  be  heard 
on  earth ;  the  voice  of  the  despairing  soul  crying  aloud  for  its  early  power  of  believing, 
sad  echo  of  this  note  of  warning,  "  He  that  committeth  sin  is  the  servant  of  sin."  II. 
Thb  chief  pb&cticai<  guards  aoainst  the  enemt.  1.  Guard  especially  against  the  be« 
ginnings  of  temptation.  Galling  as  is  the  end  of  the  sinner's  captivity,  the  separate 
bonds  by  which  it  is  secured  are  seldom  heavy.  The  soul  is  the  giant  who  is  being 
manacled  unawares,  by  the  winding  round  him  of  a  multitude  of  threads ;  those 
painted  gossamers  which  float  so  brightly  in  the  dewy  morning  will  grow  into 
fetters,  and  you  will  lose  the  power  of  resisting  before  you  know  that  it  is 
threatened.  Moreover,  temptations  in  their  early  stages  are  mostly  to  little  sins, 
which  severally  do  not  alarm  the  conscience,  and  thus  men  grow  to  sin  securely. 
The  snowflakes,  with  their  featherly  lightness,  choke  the  highway  with  an  immov- 
able barrier,  whilst  the  giant  tree  which  falls  across  it,  is  but  the  obstruction  of  an 
hour.  A  waterspout  bursts,  makes  a  moment's  inundation,  and  disappears ;  whilst 
tiie  small  but  numberless  drops  of  rain  furnish  the  deep  floods  which  fill  the  banks 
of  mighty  rivers.  2.  Realize  your  own  place  in  the  kingdom  of  grace.  Despair  is 
destruction ;  and  self -trust  only  despair  in  its  early  unsuspected  actings.  Only  in 
the  streugth  of  God's  grace  can  we  resist  sin.  3.  Seek  a  living  union  with  Christ. 
If  thou  art  one  with  Him,  thou  canst  not  be  enslaved.  But  for  this,  more  is  needed 
than  profession,  or  baptism ;  there  must  be  personal  surrender  to  Christ.  He  must 
be  the  centre  round  which  thy  life  moves.  (Bp.  Samuel  Wilberforce.)  The 
serrant  abideth  not  in  the  house  for  ever,  but  the  Son  abideth  ever. — 1.  Our 
Lord  is  speaking  of  servant  and  son  generically.  A  son  is  a  natural  inalienable 
part  of  the  family ;  a  slave  is  not.  He  may  be  acquired,  sold,  given  away,  set 
free.  There  was  in  Jewish  servitude  provision  against  the  slaves  continuing 
"  in  the  houses  for  ever,"  at  the  Jubilee,  unless  he  gave  himself  to  his  master,  in 
which  case  bondage  was  exchanged  for  consecration :  he  was  free.  But  a  son  is 
bound  to  his  father's  household  by  a  tie  which  no  distance  breaks,  and  no  time 
wears  away.  2.  The  application  of  this  is  not  that  the  servants  are  the  Jews,  who 
were  such  because  of  their  constrained  obedience,  and  would,  therefore,  forfeit  their 
national  privileges,  and  be  cast  out  of  the  house ;  for  in  ver.  34  the  master  of  the 
slave  is  distinctly  specified  '♦  Sin,"  and  therefore  cannot  be  "  God"  in  this  verse. 
3.  The  force  of  the  thought,  "  Slave's  sin  does  not  abide  in  sin's  house,"  is  that, 
however  hard  the  bondage  of  sin,  the  slave  is  not  in  his  true  home,  nor  incor- 
porated hopelessly  into  his  taskmaster's  family.  4.  Into  the  midst  of  this  tyrant's 
household  there  has  come  one  who  is  a  Son,  and  abides  for  ever  in  the  household 
of  God,  even  Christ.  Sin's  house,  in  so  far  as  that  expression  denotes  this  fair 
world,  belongs  to  God,  and  the  tyranny  is  usurpation.  Into  the  midst  of  human 
society  He  comes  who  is  a  Son  for  ever,  and  the  emancipation  He  effects  is  adop- 
tion.   L  The  possible  ensu^q  ot  zhb  ttsaknx  or  sm.    "  A  slave  abides  not  in  the 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  fin. 

house  for  ever. "  All  the  world  has  dimly  hoped  that  it  was  so  ;  but  no  man  ha» 
been  sure  of  it,  apart  from  revelation.  Christ  has  shown  that  sin  is  not  natural  to 
man,  as  God  meant  him  to  be,  howsoever  it  may  have  twined  around  his  life.  L 
We  see  that  from  our  own  constitution.  Look  at  these  minds  of  ours,  originating 
thoughts,  born  for  immortality;  these  hearts  with  their  rich  treasures  of  trans- 
cendent affections ;  these  wills  so  weak,  yet  so  strong,  craving  for  authority,  and  yet 
striving  to  be  a  law  unto  themselves ;  these  consciences  so  sensitive  and  yet  so  dull, 
waking  up  only  when  the  evil  is  done,  voices  which  have  no  means  of  getting  their 
behests  obeyed,  and  yet  are  the  echo  of  the  supreme  Law-giver's  voice  ;  the  mani- 
fest disproportion  between  what  we  are,  and  might,  and  ought  to  be ;  and  then  say 
whether  the  universal  condition  of  sinfulness  is  not  unnatural,  a  fungus,  not  a  true 
growth.  2.  Then  there  is  no  such  relation  between  a  sinner  and  his  sin  as  that 
deliverance  should  be  impossible.  It  must  be  possible  to  part  them,  and  to  leavo 
the  man  stronger  for  the  loss  of  what  made  him  weak.  We  may  be  brought  to  cor 
true  home  in  our  Father's  house.  Howsoever  the  fetters  may  have  galled  and 
mortified  the  limbs  they  may  be  struck  off.  3.  Men  have  alwajs  cherished  these 
convictions,  and  in  spite  of  history  and  experience.  They  have  tried  to  set  them- 
selves free,  and  their  attempts  have  come  to  nothing — and  yet  after  all  failures  this 
hope  has  sprung  immortal.  True,  we  cannot  effect  the  deliverance.  It  is  like 
some  cancer — a  blood  disease.  We  may  pare  and  cut  away  the  rotting  flesh — the 
single  manifestations  of  evil  we  can  do  something  to  reduce ;  but  a  deeper  surgery 
is  needed.  Sin  is  not  our  personahty,  and  so  we  may  have  it  removed  and  hve, 
but  sin  has  become  so  entangled  with  ourselves  that  we  cannot  undo  it.  The 
demoniac,  who,  in  his  confused  consciousness,  did  not  know  which  was  devil  and 
which  man — "my  name  is  legion,  for  we  are  many" — could  not  shake  off  the 
demon.  But  the  voice  that  said  "  Come  out  of  him"  has  power  still.  II.  The  actual 
Delfveber.  "  The  Son  abideth  ever,"  while  a  general  statement,  has  a  specific 
reference  to  our  Lord,  and  if  so  the  two  houses  must  be  the  same,  or  at  least  the 
Son,  who  is  ever  in  His  Father's  house,  must  yet  be  in  the  midst  of  the  bondsmen  in 
the  dark  fortress  of  the  tyrant.  That  is  but  a  figurative  way  of  putting  the  necessity 
that  our  freedom  must  come  from  outside  humanity,  and  yet  be  diffused  from  a 
source  within.  Unless  it  come  from  above  it  will  not  be  able  to  lift  us,  but  unless  it 
be  on  our  level  we  shall  not  be  able  to  grasp  it.  The  Deliverer  must  Himself  be  free, 
therefore  must  be  removed  from  the  fatal  continuity  of  evil ;  but  he  must  be  a 
eharer  in  their  condition  whom  He  would  set  free.  These  contradictory  require- 
ments meet  in  Him  who  has  been  anointed  to  proclaim  liberty  to  the  captives 
(chap.  iii.  13).  Two  things  are  required,  that  the  DeUverer  should  be  the  Son  of 
God,  and  that  He  should  be  the  Son  for  ever  (GaL  iv.  4,  5).  We  have  to  trust  to  a 
living  Saviour  who  is  as  near  the  latest  generations  as  to  the  first.  **  This  man 
because  he  coutinueth  ever  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost."  III.  The  abidzno 
SoNSHip  WHICH  CONSTITUTES  THE  slavb's  EMANCIPATION.  The  process  of  deUverauce 
is  the  transfer  from  the  one  household  to  the  other.  We  are  set  free  from  our 
bondage  when  through  Christ  we  receive  the  adoption,  and  cry,  "Abba !  Father!  " 
This  filial  spirit,  the  spirit  of  life  which  was  in  Christ  Jesus,  "  makes  us  free  from 
the  law  of  sin  and  death."  Conclusion :  There  are  but  two  conditions  in  which  we 
can  stand — slaves  of  sin  or  sons  of  God.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  son  and  the 
tlave  contrasted : — This  contrast  between  the  position  of  the  slave,  who  is  a  chattel 
that  msy  be  bought  or  bartered  or  sold,  and  has  no  affinity  with  the  members  of  the 
house,  and  no  permanent  right  in  it ;  and  the  son,  in  whose  veins  is  the  master's 
blood,  and  who  is  heir  of  all  things,  is  obvious  and  general ;  but  here,  again,  the 
present  meaning  is  special.  They  claim  to  be  the  seed  of  Abraham,  Did  they 
remember  the  history  of  Isaac  and  Ishmael  ?  The  son  of  the  freewoman  abideth  in 
the  house;  the  son  of  the  bondmaid  is  cast  out.  {Archdeacon  Watkins.)  It 
the  Son  therefore  shall  make  you  free,  ye  shall  be  free  indeed. — In  Rome,  and  in 
other  ancient  communities,  it  was  no  unusual  occurrence  for  a  son,  on  coming  into 
his  inheritance,  to  set  free  the  slaves  who  had  been  bom  in  the  house.  The  form 
of  setting  a  slave  free  was  very  picturesque.  The  master,  the  slave,  and  some  third 
person,  appeared  before  one  of  the  higher  magistrates.  This  third  person  touched 
the  slave's  head,  saying,  as  he  did  so,  "  I  claim  that  this  man  is  free."  The  master 
then  took  hold  of  the  slave,  turned  him  around,  and  said :  "  I  concede  that  this 
man  is  free."  The  slave  was  then  pronounced  free  by  the  magistrate,  and  thence- 
forth he  was  free  indeed.  Man  being  a  slave,  and  not  having  any  permanent  authority 
— not  abiding  in  the  house  forever — cannot  endow  others  with  freedom  that  endures 
to  eternity ;  but  that  freedom  the  Son  can  give,  who  abideth  in  the  house  forever 


CHAP.  Tin.]  ST.  JOHN.  63 

with  the  Father.  (S.  S.  Times.)  The  Englith  slave ;  or,  the  man  who  was  afraid  of 
hit  neighbours : — A  common  objection  of  workingmen  to  going  to  church  is  that 
they  will  be  brought  into  subjection  to  the  priesthood.  They  stay  away  therefore 
to  protect  their  freedom.  Now  let  us  look  at — I.  The  English  slave  who  goes  to 
CHUBCH.  He  is  a  man  who  dares  not  think  for  himself,  or  dares  not  say  what  he 
thinks.  1.  No  one  can  deny  that  some  forms  of  religion  frighten  people  from  the 
use  of  their  faculties  on  religious  subjects ;  hence  they  give  themselves  over  to  a 
pnasthood  who  tell  them  how  they  must  and  how  they  must  not  thiuk.  And  so 
wherever  we  find  religious  teachers  organized  into  a  priesthood,  we  find  a  mighty 
instrument  for  the  enslavement  of  the  mind.  It  was  so  of  old.  Whenever  there 
was  an  organized  national  priesthood,  the  nation  lost  its  senses,  and  became  slaves 
to  caste,  as  in  Eygpt  and  India;  but  wherever  the  priests  of  the  differeut  temples 
had  no  organic  connection,  or  the  monarch  was  priest,  as  in  Greece,  and  Borne, 
there  the  people  retained  some  of  their  freedom.  The  same  holds  good  in  England 
to-day.  In  proportion  as  priests  congregate  in  councils,  unchecked  by  the  laity,  to 
issue  decrees,  candid  thought  is  extinguished.  But  to  what  a  miserable  condition 
is  the  man  reduced  whose  soul  is  a  sort  of  parrot,  kept  by  a  priest  to  repeat  the 
phrases  authority  has  taught  him.  2.  But  there  are  slaves  who  are  not  under  the 
thumb  of  the  priesthood,  but  dare  not  think  or  speak  for  themselves  for  fear  of 
their  congregation  or  party.  Thus  it  is  that  so  many  persons  never  grow  wiser. 
In  order  to  grow  wiser  you  must  drop  some  old  opinion  or  form  some  new  one ; 
and  to  do  either  of  these  you  must  defy  the  world  and  use  your  faculties  without 
asking  anyone's  leave.  And  this  is  what  many  are  not  prepared  to  do,  because  it 
might  involve  loss  of  repute,  friends  or  position.  3.  Now,  whatever  they  may 
profess,  neither  the  priest  or  party  ridden  are  true  worshippers  of  God. 
True  worship  is  based  on  personal  conviction — "  In  vain  do  they  worship  Me, 
teaching  for  doctrines  the  commandments  of  men."  Let  every  man  be 
fully  persuaded  in  his  own  mind.  II.  The  English  slave  who  does  not 
oo  TO  CHDBCH.  The  infiuence  of  men  upon  each  other  is  at  its  maxi- 
mum  where  there  is  the  closest  association  and  the  freest  speech.  This  is 
the  case  among  the  working  classes.  Here,  therefore,  it  requires  most  courage  for  a 
man  to  stand  on  his  own  feet  and  be  true  to  his  own  conscience.  And  there  is  a 
large  proportion  of  skilled  artizans  who  are  not  strong  minded  enough  to  resist  the 
dictation  of  their  leaders  or  equals.  Suppose  a  man  who  works  in  a  large  factory 
finds  himself  in  the  midst  of  a  system  of  drinking  and  conversation  which  disgusts 
bis  better  nature,  and  where  his  conscience  commands  him  not  to  go  with  this  mul- 
titude to  do  evil,  but  to  assert  his  manhood ;  does  every  skilled  workman  obey  that 
inward  voice  ?  Is  it  not  notorious  that  thousands  dare  not  ?  And  is  it  not  as  bad 
to  be  in  slavery  to  bad  people  as  to  good  ?  Or  if  an  intelligent  workman  finds 
himself  surrounded  by  men  who  have  resolved  that  the  clumsy  and  idle  shall  be 
paid  at  the  same  rate  as  the  industrious  and  skilful,  and  who  in  his  heart  abhors 
this  part  of  the  system,  has  he  the  courage  to  say  so  and  to  act  accordingly?  There 
is  in  some  parts  a  reign  of  terrorism,  so  tuat  few  would  dare  to  say  that  the  present 
exaggerated  system  of  combination  and  intimidation  in  strikes  is  crushing  the 
spirit  of  personal  liberty,  and  the  chivalrous,  independent  character  of  the  old 
English  artificer.  Now  such,  notwithstanding  all  their  other  excellencies,  are  the 
last  who  ought  to  point  to  the  enslavement  of  men's  minds  in  the  churches.  The 
secret  of  national  greatness  and  dignity  is  the  setting  free  of  thought,  labour,  trade, 
capital.  Combine  voluntarily  for  trade  purpose  as  much  as  you  please,  but  intimi- 
date no  man.  III.  The  true  method  of  becoming  free.  1.  Slavery  requires 
'  two  parties — the  tyrant  who  domineers,  and  the  slave  who  submits.  The  true 
remedy  therefore  is  to  teach  men  not  to  submit  to  unlawful  authority  ;  and  this  is 
what  Christ  came  to  do.  All  external  slavery  proceeds  from  internal.  When  men 
dare  to  think  and  speak  honestly,  and  act  out  their  convictions,  the  tyrant's  occupa- 
tion is  gone.  To  set  free  the  thinking  power,  therefore,  is  the  secret  of  all  other 
liberties.  But  this  is  enslaved.  What  is  freedom?  To  have  the  proper  use  of 
one's  powers  and  faculties.  The  condition  of  the  free  action  of  the  understanding 
is  that  the  animal  appetites  be  restrained  within  certain  limits.  If  a  man  give  way 
to  his  thirst  for  drink,  then  his  intellect  ceawes  to  act  freely,  and  thus  he  is  a  slave. 
And  so  with  the  other  passions.  2.  Christ  offers  to  set  us  free.  (1)  By  setting 
before  us  the  only  Being  who  has  a  right  to  control  our  thoughts,  and  by  demand- 
ing that  we  should  fear  Him  and  no  one  else.  Out  of  this  springs  all  true  freedom. 
This  is  what  gave  boldness  to  the  earlv  Christians.  '*  We  ought  to  obey  God  rathet 
than  man."    (2)  By  supplying  the  only  adequate  motive — love  to  God  and  mn-i^. 


M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chaf.  Tin. 

{E.  White.)  The  spiritual  slavery  of  man : — I.  The  affecting  bepbesemIfatios 
WHICH  God's  Wobd  gives  of  men  as  sinnebs.  The  text  goes  upon  the  suppositioD 
that  freedom  is  required.  The  idea  of  bondage  represents — 1.  Our  relation  to  God 
as  sinners.  We  have  violated  the  law,  which  consequently  has  its  hand  npon  qb. 
We  are  therefore  convicted  criminals,  shut  ap  until  the  judgment  shall  be  executed. 
2.  Our  moral  condition,  which  is  under  the  control  of  diabolical  powers  who  reign 
in  the  children  of  disobedience.  This  spiritual  slavery  may  differ  much.  There 
are  some  who  have  practised  upon  them,  and  who  practise  on  others,  a  splendid 
imposition.  Their  chains  are  gilded.  Their  tyrants  put  on  the  appearance  of 
virtue.  But  others  are  slaves  to  the  lowest  and  most  degrading  appetites.  II. 
Scripture  gives  us  a  contrast — lzberty.  1.  With  respect  to  our  relation  to  God. 
The  law  takes  off  its  hand,  the  man  is  loosened,  and  he  comes  forth  to  the  liberty  of 
the  child  of  God,  forgiven,  justified.  2.  With  respect  to  the  bondage  of  the  devil. 
As  the  man  once  gave  up  his  members,  servants  of  unrighteousness,  he  now  yields 
himself  to  God  as  a  servant  of  holiness.  III.  How  this  emancipation  is  effected. 
It  is  evidently  of  such  a  nature  that  it  could  not  effect  itself.  Observe  that  bondage 
may  be  a  matter  of  justice  or  of  usurpation.  Then  freedom  in  the  former  case 
must  be  a  matter  of  righteous  arrangement,  in  the  latter  of  force.  1.  With  respect 
to  bondage  as  a  matter  of  justice,  the  case  of  the  sinner  in  relation  to  God,  the  lav 
has  a  righteous  demand  on  the  sinner,  for  it  is  holy  and  good  and  cannot  be  violated. 
Hence  we  find  there  is  a  righteous  arrangement — a  consideration,  a  ransom — the 
atoning  death  of  Christ.  "  Christ  has  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,"  &o. 
2.  With  respect  to  the  usurpation.  Sin  and  Satan  are  usurpers.  Man  was  made 
for  God,  not  for  sin  ;  for  truth,  not  for  error.  Hence  there  is  a  positive  operation 
of  mind.  God  comes  down  upon  a  man's  heart  by  the  power  of  His  Spirit  and 
renews  him.  8.  All  this  is  accomplished  in  consistency  with  our  rational  nature. 
There  is  something  to  be  observed  in  the  mind  of  man.  The  ransom  being  paid, 
the  mind  of  man  must  be  brought  to  harmonize  with  the  mind  of  Crod.  There  are 
three  stages  in  the  process  of  delivery  from  the  bondage  which  is  matter  of  justice. 
(1)  The  offended  Moral  Governor  admitting  an  arrangement  at  all ;  it  is  matter  ol 
grace  entirely.  (2)  This  arrangement  being  effected  is  acknowledged  and  accepted 
by  God,  and  then  published  to  the  individuals  concerned,  that  they  may  know  that 
their  loss  will  henceforth  be  their  own.  (3)  Bepentance,  and  faith  in  the  means, 
thus  harmonizing  with  the  arrangement  of  God.  But  this  faith  which  justifies 
also  sanctifies.  Faith  leads  to  the  acceptance  of  the  proffered  Deliverer,  who  frees 
us  from  the  bondage  of  corruption.  IV.  The  perfection  and  reality  of  thb 
gosPEL — •'  free  indeed."  1.  Freedom  from  bondage  by  ransom  is  complete  in  every 
sense.  2.  Freedom  by  power  brings  the  highest  liberty  of  a  rational  and  moral 
nature.  3.  When  God  gives  the  one  He  always  gives  the  other.  You  may  emanci- 
pate the  slave,  but  you  cannot  give  him  the  virtues  of  a  freeman,  but  when  God 
sets  you  free  He  operates  on  the  character,  and  thus  we  are  free  indeed.  V.  Prac- 
tical OBSERVATIONS.  1.  We  rcjoice  in  the  liberty  of  the  slave,  and  we  do  well,  but 
how  dreadful  to  think  that  many  who  do  this  are  slaves  themselves.  The  slave 
often  fixed  his  hope  on  death,  which  would  terminate  his  agony,  but  if  you  die  in 
slavery  it  will  continue  for  ever.  2.  Let  your  minds  be  affected  by  the  splendour 
of  that  ransom  which  has  been  paid  for  your  freedom.  We  talk  about  the  twenty 
millions  that  we  gave  for  the  liberty  of  the  slave,  but  "  Ye  were  not  redeemed  with 
corruptible  things,"  &o.  3.  If  you  profess  to  be  the  subjects  of  God's  delivering 
mercy,  walk  worthy  of  your  profession.  "  Ye  are  debtors,  not  to  the  flesh  to  hve 
after  the  fiesh."  4.  Rejoice  in  that  which  is  to  come.  (1)  The  liberating  kingdom 
of  Christ.  (2)  The  deliverance  of  the  whole  creation  from  bondage.  {T.  Binney.) 
The  Great  Liberator : — Blessed  is  that  word  "  free,"  and  blessed  He  who  Uves  to 
make  men  so.  Political  slavery  is  an  intolerable  evil,  and  blessed  the  man  who 
hurls  down  the  despot  and  gives  men  their  true  rights.  But  men  may  have  political 
liberty  and  yet  be  slaves,  for  there  is  religious  bondage,  and  he  who  cringes  before 
the  priest  is  a  slave.  Blessed  are  our  eyes  that  see  the  light  of  gospel  liberty,  and 
are  no  longer  immured  in  Popish  darkness.  Yet  a  man  may  be  delivered  from  the 
bond  of  superstition  only  to  become  a  slave  to  his  own  lusts.  He  only  is  a  free  man 
who  is  master  of  himself  by  the  grace  of  God.  I.  Fbbedoh  is  possible.  The  Son 
of  God  can  make  the  prisoner  free.  1.  Negatively.  (1)  From  past  guilt  which 
weighs  BO  heavily  upon  many — for  His  blood  "  cleanseth  from  all  sin."  (2)  From 
the  punishment  of  sin,  the  fear  of  which  is  grievous  bondage,  for  He  has  borne  it  in 
oar  place.  (3)  From  the  power  of  sin,  the  same  blood  which  purifies  enables  a  man 
4o  OTeroome.    They  in  heaven  washed  their  robes  and  overcame  through  the  blood 


CHAP,  nn.]  8T.  JOHN.  M 

of  the  Lamb.  (4)  From  the  fear  of  death,  which  keeps  many  "  all  their  lifetime 
subject  to  bondage."  When  sin  is  pardoned  the  law  is  satisfied,  and  the  strength 
of  sin  therefore  broken  and  the  sting  taken  out  of  death.  If  we  believe  in  Christ 
we  shall  fall  asleep,  but  never  die.  2.  Positively.  We  are  not  only  free  from,  but 
free  to.  When  persons  receive  the  freedom  of  a  city  certain  privileges  are  bestowed. 
1\>  be  made  free  by  Christ  is  to  be  free  to  call  oneself  God's  child,  to  claim  His  pro- 
tection and  blessing,  to  sit  at  His  table,  to  enter  His  Church,  and  at  last  to  be  free 
of  the  New  Jerusalem.  11.  Beware  op  false  libebty.  Every  good  thing  is  imi- 
tated  by  Satan.  There  is — 1.  Antimonian  liberty.  "I  am  not  under  the  law, 
therefore  I  may  do  as  I  Uke."  A  blessed  truth  followed  by  an  atrocious  inference. 
To  be  under  the  law  is  to  give  God  the  service  of  a  slave  who  fears  the  lash,  but  to 
be  under  grace  is  to  serve  God  out  of  pure  love.  2.  National  professional  freedom, 
based  upon  baptism,  and  regular  attendance  at  religious  ordinances,  and  perform- 
ance of  outward  religious  duties.  But  a  good  many  people  dream  that  they  are 
what  they  are  not.  Christ  must  have  come  and  shown  you  your  slavery,  and  you 
must  have  found  through  Him  the  way  of  escape  or  you  are  enslaved.  3.  The 
liberty  of  natural  self -righteousness  and  the  power  of  the  flesh.    III.  Teub  freedom 

COMES  TO  us   THEODGH  HiM  WHO  IS  IN  THE  HIGHEST  SENSE  "  THE  SoN."      No  man  getS 

free  but  as  he  comes  to  Christ ;  otherwise  he  will  only  rivet  on  his  fetters.  This 
liberty — 1.  Is  righteously  bestowed.  Christ  has  the  right  to  make  men  free.  2. 
Was  dearly  purchased.  Christ  speaks  it  by  His  power,  but  He  bought  it  by  His 
blood.  He  makes  free,  but  by  His  own  bonds.  3.  Is  freely  given.  Jesus  asks 
nothing  of  us  for  it.  He  saves  sinners  just  as  they  are.  4.  Is  instantaneously 
received.  The  captive  has  often  to  pass  through  many  doors — but  the  moment  we 
believe  we  are  free,  although  we  may  have  been  fettered  at  ten  thousand  points.  6. 
Is  done  for  ever.  When  Christ  sets  free  no  chains  can  bind  again.  IV.  Are  wb 
FREE  ?  If  so,  then — 1.  We  have  changed  our  lodging-place,  for  the  slave  and  the 
Son  sleep  not  in  the  same  room.  The  things  which  satisfied  the  servant  will  not 
satisy  the  Son.  2.  We  live  not  as  we  used  to  do.  We  go  not  to  slaves'  work,  to 
toil  and  sweat  to  earn  the  wages  of  sin ;  but  now  as  a  Son  serveth  His  Father  we 
do  Son's  work.  8.  We  strive  to  set  others  free ;  if  we  have  no  zeal  for  the  emanci- 
pation of  others  we  are  slaves  still.  4.  We  hate  all  sorts  of  chains,  all  kinds  of  sin, 
and  will  never  willingly  put  on  the  fetters  any  more.  (G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Liberty : — 
Free  indeed  1  Eeally  freel  Then  there  must  be  an  unreal,  imaginary  freedom. 
1.  A  whole  family  or  nation  in  bondage  is  a  sad  sight,  but  it  is  sadder  if  their  eyes 
are  out,  so  that  they  fondly  dream  themselves  free.  2.  The  most  melancholy  thing 
in  a  madhouse  is  the  poor  patient  who  weaves  a  crown  ei  rags  and  gives  orders  as 
a  king,  casting  all  the  while  stolen  and  startled  glances  on  the  iron  bars,  and 
trembling  under  the  keeper's  glance.  3.  You  have  lain  down  wearily  to  sleep,  and 
dreamt  that  you  soared  in  the  upper  air ;  but  when  you  awoke  your  limbs  were 
Btiffer  and  heavier.  Flying  was  a  dream ;  the  cold  reality  was  only  a  painful 
dragging  of  benumbed  limbs.  4.  In  literary  and  political  circles  Liberty  is  plentiful 
as  a  profession,  but  scanty  as  a  power.  Independence  is  frequently  a  term  of 
sarcasm  when  men  desire  to  make  sport  of  bondage.  5.  But  the  cases  are  most 
numerous  of  men  loudly  boasting  of  their  liberty,  while  vice,  like  a  possessing 
spirit  rules  in  the  heart,  and  lashes  to  a  degrading  task.  Apart  from  Christ'" 
redemption  and  the  Spirit's  renewal,  the  struggles  of  a  sinful  race  to  shako 
off  their  bonds  are  like  those  of  Samson  when  his  locks  were  shorn  and  his 
eyes  put  out,  with  the  Philistines  making  sport.  6.  The  Jews  took  it  ill  that 
Jesus  should  propose  to  make  them  free.  "  We  were  never  in  bondage,"  and 
yet  the  Komans  held  them  in  their  grip.  7.  Our  inherited  and  actual  bond- 
age has  two  sides,  corresponding  to  the  two  sides  in  Christ's  liberty.  Spiritual 
slavery  is  guilt  on  the  conscience  and  rebellion  in  the  will.  Like  the  relation 
between  perpendicular  pressure  and  horizontal  motion  is  the  relation  between  these 
two.  Sin  and  the  wrath  it  deserves  constitute  the  dead  weight  which  presses  the 
spirit  down,  and  thus  it  cannot  go  forward  in  duty.  When  God's  anger  is  removed 
we  yield  ourselves  willing  instruments  of  His  righteousness.  When  the  Son,  by 
redeeming  us  from  the  guilt  and  power  of  sin,  has  made  us  free,  we  are  free  indeed. 
I.  The  main  element  of  the  bondage  is  guilt  and  apprehension  of  judgment.  1. 
The  book  in  which  our  debt  is  registered  lies  far  above,  out  of  our  sight ;  but  the 
charge  against  a  man  is  led  by  an  electric  wire  from  God's  secret  book  right  into  the 
man's  own  bosom,  disturbing  his  rest  and  blighting  all  his  joys.  Conscience  is  a 
mysterious,  susceptible  instrument,  bringing  the  man  in  close  and  mysterious  coa> 
VOL.  u.  6 


M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chai.  vm. 

nection  with  the  great  white  throne  and  the  living  God.  The  pain  is  in  practice 
deadened  more  or  less  bj  a  hardening  of  the  instrument,  bo  that  it  loses  a  measure 
of  its  susceptibility  ;  but  mysterious  beatings  sometimes  thrill  through  all  its 
searings  and  compel  the  sinner  to  realize  the  presence  of  the  living  God.  2.  It  is 
natural  that  the  slave,  wearied  of  such  inspection,  should  cast  about  for  means  of 
becoming  free.  To  quench  this  burning  of  the  unclean  conscience  all  the  bloody 
sacrifices  of  the  heathen  were  offered,  all  the  efforts  of  self -righteousness  are 
directed.  They  are  so  many  blows  to  sever  the  connecting-rod,  so  that  the  Judge's 
anger  may  not  be  felt ;  but  "  there  is  no  peace  to  the  wicked."  3.  But  a  real  liberty 
is  possible.  The  Son  can  open  the  seven-sealed  book  and  blot  out  the  reckoning: 
"The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  cleanseth  from  aU  sin."  The  Mediator  has  placed 
Himself  in  the  line  of  communication  between  the  Judge  and  the  culprit.  The 
frown  of  justice  due  to  sin  is  changed  into  love  as  it  passes  through  the  Mediator, 
no  longer  a  consuming  fire,  but  the  light  of  life.  On  the  other  side,  my  sins  are 
absorbed  in  the  suffering  Saviour  as  they  pass,  and  His  righteousness  ascends  as 
mine  and  for  me.     H.  Thekb  is  a  false  fbeedom  with  which  men  deludb  thbu- 

6ELVE8,  AND  A  BEAL  FBEEDOM  WHICH  ChBIST  BESTOWS  UPON  HiS  OWN.       1.    The  eSSeUCO 

of  slavery  lies  in  the  terror  of  the  master,  that  sits  like  a  stone  npon  the  heart. 
After  the  slave  has  accomplished  his  task,  something  occurs  that  he  ought  to  have 
done,  and  he  asks  tremblingly,  "  What  lack  I  yet  ?  "    There  may  be  a  good  deal  of 
work  without  reconciliation,  but  there  is  no  liberty  in  it  and  no  love.     It  is  the 
heavy  weight  of  unf  orgiven  sin  that  prevents  a  man  bounding  fleetly  on  the  errands 
of  his  Lord.    When  condemnation  is  taken  away  obedience  begins  (Psa.  cxvi.  16). 
2.  Those  who  are  strangers  to  the  liberty  of  dear  children  misunderstand  this 
obedience.     Here  is  a  man  who  lives  for  pleasure.    He  is  good-natured,  and  if  ha 
would  not  suffer  much  to  promote  the  happiness  of  others  he  would  not  injure 
them.     He  knows  another  who  denies  himself,  and  prosecutes  some  difficult  line  of 
benevolence,  and  cannot  understand  him.     If  the  Christian  were  morose  and  gloomy 
he  could  explain  his  conduct,  but  he  is  precisely  the  reverse.    He  counts  that  liberty 
which  the  Christian  counts  bondage,  and  that  bondage  which  the  Christian  oonnts 
liberty.     But  the  disciple  of  Christ  has  changed,  and  therefore  cannot  be  under- 
stood  :  he  has  been  made  willing  in  the  day  of  God's  power,  which  the  worldling 
has  never  felt.     {W.  Amot,  D.D.)        True  liberty: — It  is  impossible  to  misttika 
the  charm  and  power  which  attach  to  the  word  "  liberty."    There  is  something  in 
our  nature  which  at  once  responds  to  it.     It  appeals  to  sympathies  which  ar« 
aniversal  and  profound.     Liberty  is  itself,  in  one  particular  sense,  the  excellence  of 
man  as  man,  i.e.,  of  man  as  endowed  with  a  free  wilL     As  man  compares  himself 
with  the  inanimate  creation  and  the  lower  animals  he  knows  that  he  is  what  they 
are  not.    The  sense  of  this  prerogative  is  the  ground  of  human  self-respect.    To 
attempt  to  crush  the  exercise  of  this  endowment  is  regarded  as  a  crime  against 
human  nature,  while  the  undertaking  to  strengthen  its  vigour  and  enlarge  its  scope 
appeals  to  man's  profound  desire  to  make  the  best  of  that  which  is  his  central  selL 
But  when  in  this  connection  we  use  the  word  two  different  things  are  often  intended 
The  liberty  to  choose  between  good  and  evil,  with  an  existing  inclination  in  the 
direction  of  evil  is  one  thing ;  the  true  moral  hberty  of  man  is  another.    Man's 
true  Hberty  may  be  described  as  the  unimpeded  movement  of  his  will  towards  God ; 
but  the  only  liberty  with  which  many  speakers  and  writers  trouble  themselves  is  a 
liberty  to  choose  between  good  and  evil,  as  though  we  could  not  conceive  of  a  liberty 
which  did  not  include  the  choice  of  evil — as  though  the  power  of  choosing  evil  was 
an  integral  element  of  real  human  liberty.    Let  us  rid  ourselves  of  this  miserable 
misconception.    True  liberty  is  secured  when  the  will  moves  freely  within  its  true 
element,  which  is  moral  good.    Moral  good  is  to  the  human  will  what  the  air  is  to 
the  bird,  what  water  is  to  the  fish.    Bird  and  fish  have  freedom  enough  in  their 
respective  elements.    Water  is  death  to  the  bird  as  air  is  death  to  the  fish.    A  bird 
can  sometimes  drown  itself ;  a  fish  can  leap  out  of  the  water  and  die  upon  the  bank ; 
but  the  liberty  of  fish  and  bird  is  sufficiently  complete  without  this  added  capacity 
for  self-destruction.     And  so  it  is  with  man.     Moral  good,  the  moral  law  of  God,  ia 
the  element  within  which  the  human  will  may  safely  find  room  for  its  utmost 
capacities  of  healthful  exercise  and  invigoration ;  and  when  a  man  takes  it  iuto  his 
head  that  his  freedom  is  incomplete  if  it  does  not  include  a  license  to  do  wrong,  he 
is  in  a  fair  way  to  precipitate  himself  out  of  his  true  vital  element,  to  the  enslave- 
ment and  ruin  of  his  will.     Every  Christian  will  understand  this.    He  knows  that 
be  would  gain  nothing  in  the  way  of  moral  freedom  by  a  murder  or  a  lie.     He  knows 
that  our  Lord,  who  did  no  sin,  was  not,  therefore,  other  than  morally  free,  since  it 


OTAP.vm.]  8T.  JOHN.  67 

was  Hie  freedom  in  giving  Himself  to  death,  which  is  the  essence  of  His  self- 
sacrifice  for  the  sins  of  the  world.  Nay,  a  Christian  knows,  too,  that  God  could  not 
choose  evil  without  doing  violence  to  His  essential  nature.  But  is  God,  therefore, 
without  moral  freedom  1  And  does  it  not  follow  that  the  more  closely  man 
approaches  the  holiness  of  God,  the  more  closely  does  he  approach  to  the  true  idea 
of  liberty.  {Canon  Liddon.)  The  liberty  of  believers : — I.  What  believers  abb 
NOT  FSEED  FBOM  IN  THIS  woBLD.  1.  From  obediencB  to  the  moral  law.  It  is  true 
that  we  are  not  under  it  as  a  covenant  for  justification,  but  we  are  still  under  it  as 
a  rule  for  direction.  Its  matter  is  as  unchangeable  as  the  nature  of  good  and  evil 
is  (Matt  V.  17-18).  Its  precepts  are  still  urged  under  the  gospel  to  enforce  duties 
(Eph.  vi.  12).  It  is  therefore  a  vain  distinction  of  the  Libertines  that  it  binds  us 
as  creatures,  not  as  Christians;  the  unregenerate  part,  but  not  the  regenerate.  But 
this  is  a  sure  truth  that  they  who  are  freed  from  its  penalties  are  still  under  its 
precepts,  and  though  no  more  under  its  curse.  Christians  are  still  under  its  conduct. 
The  law  sends  us  to  Christ  to  be  justified,  Christ  sends  us  to  the  law  to  be  regulated 
(Psa.  cxix.  4,  5).  2.  From  the  temptations  and  assaults  of  Satan.  Even  those 
who  are  freed  from  his  dominion  are  not  free  from  his  molestation  (Eom.  xvi.  20 ; 
2  Cor.  xii.  7).  Though  he  cannot  kill  them,  he  can  and  does  afiiict  them  (Eph.  vi. 
16).  3.  From  the  motions  of  indwelling  sin  (Rom.  vii.  21-24).  Corruptions,  like 
Canaanites,  are  still  left  to  be  thorns  in  the  side.  4.  From  inward  troubles  and 
«xercise8  on  account  of  sin  (Job  vii.  19  ;  Psa.  Ixxxviii.  14,  16 ;  xxxviii.  1-11).  5. 
From  the  rods  of  affliction.  God  in  giving  us  liberty  does  not  abridge  His  own 
(Psa.  Ixxxix.  32;.  All  God's  children  are  made  free,  yet  what  son  is  there  that  his 
father  chasteneth  not  (Heb.  xii.  8).  Exemption  from  affliction  is  rather  the  mark 
of  a  slave.  6.  From  the  stroke  of  death,  though  they  are  freed  from  its  sting 
(Bom.  viii.  10).  IL  What  that  bondage  is  from  which  evert  believer  is  freed 
BY  Chbist.  1.  From  the  rigour  and  curse  of  the  law,  which  is  replaced  by  the 
gentle  and  easy  yoke  of  Christ  (Matt.  xi.  28).  The  law  required  perfect  working 
under  the  pain  of  a  curse  (Gal.  iii.  10),  accepted  of  no  short  endeavours  and  no 
repentance,  gave  no  strength.  But  now  strength  is  given  (PhiL  iv.  13),  sincerity  is 
reckoned  perfection  (Job.  i.  1),  duty  becomes  delight,  and  failings  hinder  not 
acceptance.  2,  From  the  guilt  of  sin.  It  may  trouble,  but  it  cannot  condemn  them 
(Bom.  viii.  33),  the  handwriting  against  them  is  cancelled  (Col.  ii.  14).  3.  From 
the  dominion  of  sin  (Rom.  vi.  14;  viii.  2).  4.  From  the  power  of  Satan  (Luke  xi. 
21,  22).  (1)  By  price.  The  blood  of  Christ  purchases  believers  out  of  the  hand  of 
justice  by  satisfying  the  law  for  them,  which  being  done,  Satan's  authority  falls  of 
course,  as  the  power  of  a  jailer  over  the  prisoner  when  he  has  a  legal  discharge 
<Heb.  ii.  14).  (2)  By  power  (Acts  xxvi.  18  ;  2  Cor.  x.  5 ;  Col.  ii.  15).  5.  From  the 
poisonous  sting  and  hurt  of  death  (1  Cor.  xv.  55,  56).  Where  there  is  no  hurt 
there  should  be  no  horror.  III.  What  kind  of  freedom  that  is  which  commences 
UPON  believing.  There  are  two  kinds  of  liberty.  1.  Civil,  which  belongs  not  to 
the  present  business.  Behevers  are  not  freed  from  the  duties  they  owe  to  their 
superiors,  whether  servants  (Eph.  vi.  5)  or  citizens  (Rom.  xiii.  4).  2.  Spiritual. 
That  which  believers  have  now  is  but  a  beginning — they  are  free  only  in  part — but 
it  is  growing  every  day  and  will  be  complete  at  last.  IV.  The  excellency  of  this 
STATE  OP  SPIRITUAL  FREEDOM.  1.  It  is  a  wondeiful  liberty  never  enough  to  be 
admired.  (1)  We  owed  God  more  than  we  could  pay.  (2)  We  were  in  the  posses- 
sion of  the  strong  man,  armed.  (3)  We  were  bound  with  many  chains — the 
understanding  with  ignorance,  the  will  with  obstinacy,  the  heart  with  hardness,  the 
aftections  with  bewitching  vanities.  For  such  to  be  set  at  liberty  is  a  w(mder  of 
■wonders.  2.  It  is  a  peculiar  freedom — one  which  few  obtain,  the  great  multitude 
abiding  still  in  bondage  (2  Cor.  iv.  4).  3.  A  Uberty  dearly  purchased.  What  the 
captain  said  (Acts  xxii.  28)  may  be  much  more  said  of  ours  (1  Pet.  i.  18).  4.  A 
growing  and  increasing  liberty  (Rom.  xiii.  11).  5.  A  comfortable  freedom  (1  Cor. 
vii.  22).  It  ranks  the  slave  above  the  noble.  6.  Perpetual  and  final  (Acts  xxvi.  18). 
Improvement.  1.  How  rational  is  the  joy  of  Christians  above  the  joy  of  all  others 
in  the  world  (Psa.  cxxvi.  1,  2;  Luke  xv.  24).  2.  How  unreasonable  and  inexcusable 
the  sin  of  apostasy.  Will  a  deUvered  captive  return  to  his  shackles  (Matt.  xii. 
44,  45).  3.  How  well-becoming  is  a  free  spirit  in  believers  to  their  state  of  liberty.  4. 
Let  no  man  wonder  at  the  opposition  of  Satan  to  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  (Acts  xxvi. 
18).  5.  How  careful  should  Christians  be  to  maintain  their  spiritual  liberty  (Gal.  v.  1  ; 
•2Cor.  i.  24).  6.  Let  Satan's  captives  be  encoura.ged  to  come  to  Christ.  (J.Flavel.) 
Only  in  the  Son  does  human  nature  come  to  hberty,  to  the  free  use  of  all  its  powers. 
to  the  reaUzation  of  all  its  privileges,  to  the  full  satisfaction  of  all  its  desires 


C8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHAP.vm 

Christ  gives  ns  freedom  from  sin.     I.  As  sin  beveaIiB  irsBur  n  tmBELXSv.     L 
Peter  says  of  some,  "  they  cannot  see  afar  off."    They  are  short-Bigbted,  they  can 
only  see  what  is  close  to  them  :  food  on  the  table,  a  five-poand  note,  title-deeds, 
the  earth  and  the  stars,  but  they  cannot  see  the  highest  universe,  its  grandeurs,  its 
treasures,  its  delights.     Thousands  of  men  apparently  free  are  reaUy  the  poorest  of 
slaves — the  slaves  of  the  senses.    Some  of  these  look  round  and  think  it  a  big  cage, 
but  the  physical  is  only  a  cage,  ample  as  it  may  seem.    Many  contrive  to  make 
themselves  comfortable  in  their  captivity;   they  trim  their  feathers,  peck  their 
sugar,  sing  their  song,  yet  is  the  earthly  life  at  its  best  but  a  captivity.     It  ia  only 
when  man  emerges  into  the  spiritual  element  that  he  gets  into  the  sky,  stretches  his 
wings,  and  tastes  the  pleasures  for  which  he  was  born.     2.  The  truth  as  it  is  in 
Jesus  makes  us  free  from  the  tyranny  of  the  senses  ;  it  opens  our  eyes  and  causes 
us  to  see  the  world  behind  the  world,  the  sun  behind  the  sun ;  it  strengthens  as  that 
those  heavenly  places  become  accessible  to  us.     Oh  I  how  the  walls  of  the  prison- 
house  of  sense  would  close  in  upon  us  quite  if  it  were  not  for  Jesus  Christ.    How 
the  Lord's  Prayer  brings  us  into  the  full  presence  of  the  spiritual  nniverse — the 
Divine  Father,  the  Divine  kingdom,  the  Divine  will,  the  Divine  grace,  the  Divine 
and  everlasting  goal  I    With  that  prayer  realized  in  our  heart,  we  feel  there  is 
something  more  than  physiology,  mechanism,  and  victuals ;  we  have  dropped  the 
fetters  of  sense,  we  have  got  our  feet  out  of  the  clogging  bird-lime  of  earthUness, 
we  are  free,  gloriously  free,  like  Tennyson's  eagle  "  ringed  round  with  the  asure 
sky  1 "    3.  We  hear  much  in  these  days  about  "  free-thought,"  but  free-thought  in 
the  truest,  noblest  sense  is  realized  only  in  Jesus  Christ.     The  bondage  of  thought 
is  the  tyranny  of  materialism.    Christ  frees  us  from  the  most  terrible  illusions  of 
all,  the  illusions  of  time  and  sense,  and  causes  us  to  see  that  real  universe,  that 
glorious  city  of  God  of  which  this  earth  is  but  the  shadow.    II.  As  bin  beteals 
Itself  in  disobedience.     1.  "Whosoever  committeth  sin  is  the  slave  of  sin."    Sin 
makes  slaves  of  us  in  a  variety  of  practical  irregularities.     Some  of  these  are 
coarser,  some  more  refined,  but  how  impossible  thousands  find  it  to  shake  off  the 
tyranny  of  those  evil  habits  which  have  established  themselves  through  years  1 
One  man  is  the  victim  of  vanity,  another  of  covetousness,  another  of  ambition, 
another  of  appetite.    A  man's  will  can  do  much,  but  it  sadly  fails  here.    You  will 
see  sometimes  u  performer  at  a  fair  with  an  electric  machine.    At  length  a  bumpkin 
comes  up,  and  at  the  invitation  of  the  professor  smilingly  seizes  the  handles.    In 
a  moment  the  poor  fellow  is  convulsed,  dances  in  pain,  and  cries  for  deliverance. 
Why  does  he  not  drop  the  thing  ?     He  cannot.    Does  not  the  crowd  help  ?    No ; 
the  crowd  grins — the  crowd  always  grins.     The  poor  simpleton  is  at  the  mercy  of 
the  operator,  and  he  goes  on  grinding.     So  it  is  to-day  with  thousands  of  men  in 
sin  ;  they  are  ashamed  of  themselves,  horrified  at  themselves,  filled  full  of  torment 
and  remorse  ;  but  they  are  powerless  under  the  mysterious  spell,  and  do  again  and 
again  the  thing  they  execrate.     2.  But  here  again  Christ  can  make  you  free  indeed. 
Some  of  you  think  you  will  have  to  be  buried  in  your  fetters.    Let  me  assure  you 
Christ,  by  His  mighty  truth,  and  love,  and  grace,  can  strengthen  you  to  burst  these 
miserable  bonds  as  Samson  burst  the  green  withes  wherewith  he  was  bound.  Where 
is  the  proof  ?    I  will  give  you  the  best  logical  proof  in  the  world — thousands  of 
living  men  and  women  who  have  attained  full  mastery  by  the  spirit  of  Christ. 
•'  Know  ye  not  that  the  unrighteous  shall  not  inherit  the  Kingdom  of  God  f  .  .  . 
And  such  were  some  of  you,"  &c.     III.  As  bin  beveals  itseu  in  lubt.     1.  Christ 
does  not  repeal  the  moral  law.    He  does  not  accommodate  it  to  our  weakness ;  on 
the  contrary,  He  brings  out  more  fully  its  deep,  wide  meaning,  making  it  more 
imperative  than  ever.    One  of  our  sceptical  writers  tells  us  that  when  she  got  rid  of 
Christianity  she  felt  she  emerged  on  "  the  broad  breezy  common  of  nature."    Well, 
we  are  bound  to  accept  her  testimony.    But,  is  there  anything  so  very  desirable 
about  "breezy  commons? "    I  never  understood  that  the  best  things  grew  there ; 
ferns  and  furze  bushes  are  there,  brambles,  and  crab-apples  ;  but  the  ripe  orchards, 
the  golden  com,  the  purple  clusters,  the  richest  blooms  and  blossoms,  these  are  not 
found  on  breezy   commons.     I  never  understood   that  breezy  commons  were 
very  desirable  places  to  live  on.    And  I  never  understood  that  the  picturesque 
parties  who  usually  pitch  their  tents  and  Uve  on  breezy  commons  constitute  the 
cream  of  the  world's  population.   There  was  far  more  truth  in  that  lady's  words  than 
she  suspected.     To  get  rid  of  Christianity,  its  laws,  its  hopes,  its  fears,  its  inspira- 
tions, its  reverence  and  love,  is  to  emerge  on  a  breezy  common,  all  the  best  things 
Host  for  ever.     If  our  countrymen  are  to  repudiate  Christ,  our  country  will  emerge 
on  that  breezy  common,  and  we  shall  dwell  there  as  our  Druidical  fathers  did  befor« 


CHAP.  Tin.]  ST,  JOHN.  m 

OS.  It  has  taken  as  more  than  a  millennium  to  get  off  that  breezy  common,  and 
find  the  goodly  heritage  of  our  present  civilization,  and  every  step  of  our  progress 
has  been  through  self-denial,  self-limitation,  renunciation,  subordination,  obedience. 
We  have  nothing  to  gain  by  license.  2.  Christ  does  not  give  us  hberty  by  modifying 
the  law  to  suit  our  weakness.  He  destroys  in  us  the  element  of  lust  or  irregular 
desire.  We  find  in  ourselves  what  the  theologian  calls  our  fallen  self,  what  the 
evolutionist  calls  our  animal  self,  and  this  contradicts  our  best  reason,  and  brings 
us  into  bondage.  "  The  fieshlusteth  against  the  spirit,"  &a.  A  man  is  a  real  slave 
when  he  is  a  slave  at  heart,  when  he  cannot  follow  out  delightfully  the  noble 
impulses  and  aspirations  of  his  nature,  and  such  slaves  are  we  all  by  birth.  Christ 
m^es  us  "  free  indeed  "  by  putting  God's  laws  into  our  heart  and  writing  them  in 
our  mind ;  by  filling  us  with  high,  pure,  bright,  strong,  expansive  feeling ;  by  making 
Ds  to  say  with  Himself,  in  His  strength,  "  I  delight  to  do  Thy  will,  0  God."  This 
is  the  true  liberty,  to  will  the  good,  to  delight  in  it,  to  follow  it  passionately,  to  find 
our  only  heaven  in  it.  And  this  is  the  freedom  wherewith  Christ  maketh  free.  IV. 
As  BIN  BEVEAL8  iTSELS'  IN  FEAB.  1.  The  slavo  serves  in  fear.  Now  Christ,  the 
Son,  makes  us  sons,  and,  filling  our  heart  with  love  to  our  heavenly  Father,  makes 
all  life's  duty  hght.  In  the  power  of  a  subUme  love  we  accomplish  the  loftiest  law, 
and  taste  the  utmost  freedom.  Science  tells  us  that  the  atmosphere  presses  upon  us 
io  the  extent  of  something  like  fifteen  pounds  to  the  square  inch,  and  an  average 
sized  man  carries  about  with  him  something  like  fifteen  tons  weight.  But  we  feel 
the  atmosphere  no  burden — it  is  a  pleasure  to  breathe,  to  feel  it  around  us ;  "  light 
as  air  "  is  a  proverb.  Why  is  this?  The  inward  pressure  of  gases  in  our  body  is 
equal  to  the  external  weight,  so  we  suffer  no  inconvenience — the  air  is  no  burden, 
it  is  life,  joy,  to  all  healthy  organizations.  So,  as  John  shows,  when  we  love  God 
"  His  commandments  are  not  grievous."  The  inward  pressure,  joy,  power,  hope, 
are  equal  to  every  exaction  of  the  outward  law,  and  so  far  from  the  commandment 
being  a  burden  to  us,  it  is  a  delight  and  glory.  2.  And  then,  as  to  the  future,  sin 
fills  us  with  fear.  As  Christ  shows  us  in  this  place,  sin  disinherits  us.  '« The  slave 
has  no  permanent  place  in  the  household."  And  so  we  look  forward  with  dismal 
apprehension.  We  are  all  our  lifetime  subject  to  the  fear  of  death.  Here  Christ, 
by  making  us  sons,  changes  fear  to  hope,  and  so  gives  us  precious  liberty.  "  The 
sting  of  death  is  sin,"  &o.  (W.  L.  Watk^nson^  Ye  shall  be  free  indeed,  or  in 
reality : — The  word  is  not  the  same  as  in  ver.  31.  The  Jews  claimed  political  freedom, 
but  they  were  in  reality  the  subjects  of  Kome.  They  claimed  religious  freedom,  but 
they  were  in  reality  slaves  to  the  letter.  They  claimed  moral  freedom,  but  they 
were  in  reality  the  bondmen  of  sin.  The  freedom  which  the  Son  proclaimed  was  in 
reality  freedom,  for  it  was  the  freedom  of  their  true  life,  delivered  from  the  thraldom 
of  sin  and  brought  into  union  with  God.  For  the  spirit  of  man,  that  in  knowledge 
of  the  truth  revealed  through  the  Son  can  contemplate  the  Father  and  the  eternal 
home,  there  is  a  real  freedom  that  no  power  can  restrain.  All  through  this  contest 
the  thoughts  pass  unbidden  to  the  teaching  of  St.  Paul,  the  great  apostle  of  freedom. 
There  could  be  no  fuller  illustration  of  the  words  than  is  furnished  by  his  life.  He, 
like  St.  Peter  and  St.  John  (Rom.  i,  1  ;  2  Pet.  i.  1 ;  Eev.  i.  1),  had  learned  to  regard 
himself  as  a  "  bondservant,"  but  it  was  of  Christ, "  whose  service  is  perfect  freedom." 
We  feel,  as  we  think  of  him  in  bonds  before  Agrippa,  or  as  a  prisoner  at  Rome,  that 
he  is  more  truly  free  than  he  himself  was  when  armed  with  authority  to  bind  men 
and  women  because  they  were  Christians.  The  chains  that  bind  the  body  cannot 
bind  the  spirit  whose  chains  have  been  loosed.  (Archdeacon  Watkins.)  The 
method  of  Christian  freedom: — A  ship  outward  bound  has  struck  on  a  sunken 
rock  ere  she  has  well  cleared  out  of  the  harbour.  There  she  lies  in  the  water, 
a  mile  from  land,  with  the  ocean  all  clear  before  her  from  that  spot  to  her 
journey's  end  ;  but  she  moves  not.  What  will  make  her  move  ?  The  mechanical 
resources  of  our  time  could  bring  an  enormous  accumulation  of  force  to  bear 
upon  her,  but  under  all  its  pressure  she  will  remain  stationary.  If  yoa  incresMe 
the  dragging  power  beyond  a  certain  point,  you  will  wrench  her  asunder  limb 
from  limb,  but  you  will  not  win  her  forward  on  her  voyage.  No ;  not  this 
way — not  by  any  such  method  can  the  ship  be  set  free  to  prosecute  her  voyage. 
How,  then  1  Let  the  tide  rise,  and  the  ship  with  it :  now  you  may  heave  off 
your  hawsers  and  send  home  your  steamers.  Hoist  the  sail,  and  the  ship  will 
nerself  move  away  like  a  bird  on  the  wing.  It  is  thus  that  a  soul  may  be  set  free  to 
bound  forward  on  the  path  of  obedience.  Dragging  will  not  do  it.  A  Boul  cleaving 
to  the  dost  is  like  a  ship  aground — it  cannot  go  forward  until  it  be  lifted  up ;  but 
\?hen  it  is  lifted  up,  it  will  go  forward  without  any  violent  drawing.    Further :  tha 


TO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  Tia, 

Bonl  cleaving  to  the  dust  is  lifted,  as  the  ship  was,  by  a  secret  but  mighty  attraction 
in  the  far-off  heaven.  Elevated  by  a  winning  from  above,  it  courses  over  life  with 
freedom.  "  I  will  run  in  the  way  of  Thy  commandments,  when  Thou  hast  enlarged 
my  heart."  {W.  Arnot.)  Freedom  aided  by  God: — Three  hundred  years  ago, 
in  Holland,  about  one  million  of  people  stood  for  Protestantism  and  freedom  in 
opposition  to  the  mightiest  empire  of  that  age,  whose  banners  the  Pope  had  blessed, 
William,  the  Prince  of  Orange,  a  man  who  feared  God,  was  the  champion  of  the 
righteous  cause.  In  the  heat  of  the  struggle,  when  the  young  republic  seemed  about 
to  be  overwhelmed,  William  received  a  missive  from  one  of  his  generals,  then  in 
command  of  an  important  post,  inquiring,  among  other  things,  if  he  had  succeeded 
in  effecting  a  treaty  with  any  foreign  power,  as  France  or  England,  such  as  would 
secure  aid.  His  reply  was,  "You  ask  me  if  I  have  made  a  treaty  for  aid  with  any 
great  foreign  power ;  and  I  answer,  that,  before  I  undertook  the  cause  of  the 
oppressed  Christians  in  these  provinces,  I  made  a  close  alliance  with  the  King  of 
kings  ;  and  I  doubt  not  that  He  will  give  us  the  victory."  And  so  it  proved. 
Freedom  and  responsibility  ; — Every  man  because  he  is  free  has  the  responsibiUty 
laid  upon  him  by  the  hand  of  God  of  using  His  freedom  in  finding  out  the  truth 
of  duty,  the  obligations  of  conduct,  the  conditions  of  character.  It  is  not  enough  to 
reject  the  authority  of  the  Church ;  it  is  not  enough  to  reject  the  authority  of  the 
minister ;  it  is  not  enough  to  rail  at  the  past ;  it  is  not  enough  to  separate  yourself 
from  sects.  You  are  to  exercise  this  prerogative  of  liberty,  not  for  the  sake  of  forming 
systematic  views,  but  for  the  sake  of  so  shaping  your  life  as  to  prepare  yourselves 
for  your  eternal  destiny.  I  lay  that  responsibility  upon  your  liberty.  Use,  then, 
your  liberty  of  judgment  and  conscience,  but  in  God's  name  I  enjoin  you  to  use  it 
for  your  salvation.  (II.  W.  Beecher.)  Bondage  and  deliverance  : — Take  your 
stand  on  the  margin  of  the  ocean,  on  the  western  coast  of  this  island,  where  the 
shore  is  a  bold  rugged  rock,  and  when  a  long  blue  ground-swell  is  rolling  towards 
the  land.  I  know  not  any  aspect  of  merely  inanimate  nature  that  tends  so  strongly 
to  make  one's  heart  sad.  I  have  stood  and  gazed  upon  it  until  I  was  beguiled  into 
a  painfully  tender  sympathy  with  a  mute  struggling  captive.  Slowly,  meekly,  but 
withal  mightily,  the  sea- wave  comes  on  in  long,  regular  array,  and  striking  with  its 
extended  front  at  all  points  simultaneously  against  the  pitiless  rock,  is  broken  into 
white  fragments  and  thrown  on  its  back  all  thrilling  and  hissing  with  expiring 
agony.  Sullen  and  sore  the  broken  remnants  of  the  first  rank  steal  away  to  the  rear, 
and  hide  themselves  in  the  capacious  bosom  of  the  mother  sea.  Anon,  you  perceive 
another  long  blue  wave  gathering  its  strength  at  a  distance ;  with  gloomy,  unhopeful 
brow,  as  if  warned  by  the  fate  of  its  predecessor,  and  hurried  onward  to  its  own,  it 
rushes  forward  and  delivers  another  assault  against  the  rocky  shore.  It  shares  the 
fortune  of  the  last.  Again,  and  yet  again,  the  water  wearily  gathers  up  its  huge 
bulk,  and  again  strongly  but  despairingly  launches  itself  upon  its  prison  walls, 
to  be  again  broken  and  thrown  back  in  utter  discomfiture.  Yon  weep  for  the 
great  helpless  prisoner,  who  cannot  weep  for  himself  Year  after  year,  century 
after  century,  era  after  era,  that  prisoner  toils  and  strikes  upon  the  walls  of 
his  prison,  but  never  once  succeeds  in  clearing  the  barrier  and  flowing  across  the 
continent  free.  That  mighty  creature,  with  its  sublime  strength,  and  dumb,  patient, 
unceasing  labour,  never  succeeds  in  breaking  its  bonds — never  leaps  into  liberty. 
Here  you  find  a  picture,  such  as  no  aitist  could  ever  make,  of  a  sinner,  or  a 
worldful  of  sinners  in  the  aggregate,  as  they  lie  in  their  prison,  ceaselessly  striving 
for  enlargement,  but  never  attaining  it.  "  The  wicked  are  like  the  troubled  sea, 
when  it  cannot  rest."  And  can  this  water  never  get  freedom  ?  Is  it  doomed  to  lie 
weltering  for  ever  in  its  prison  ?  Cannot  the  prisoner  by  any  means  be  ever  set  free  ? 
The  captive  may  be  set  at  liberty ;  the  captive  is  set  at  liberty  day  by  day.  Above  the 
firmament  are  waters,  as  well  as  in  the  hollow  which  constitutes  the  ocean's  bed. 
They  are  higher  up — nearer  heaven — as  you  see,  these  aerial  waters ;  but  being 
high  in  heaven,  they  are  therefore  free  to  move  across  the  earth.  Nothing  conveys 
a  more  lively  idea  of  quick,  soft,  unimpeded  motion,  than  a  flying  cloud.  Here  is 
none  of  the  effort  visible  even  in  the  flight  of  birds.  Absolutely  free  they  are  ;  and 
sweetly  swiftly  do  the  free  run  on  the  errands  of  their  Lord.  In  this  respect  there 
is  a  sublime  contrast  between  these  waters  that  have  been  made  free  and  those  that 
are  still  enslaved — held  down  by  their  own  dead  weight  within  their  prison  walls. 
It  is  thus  that  human  spirits  advance  in  fleet,  gladsome  obedience,  when  the  weight 
is  Ufted  off,  and  they  are  permitted  to  rise.  It  is  when  you  are  raised  up  into  favour 
that  you  can  go  onward  to  serve.  "  0  Lord,  truly  I  am  Thy  servant."  That  is  a 
(reat  attainment,  David ;  how  did  you  reach  it  ?  Hear  him  give  the  reason :  "  Thoa 


«H1P,  Tm.]  ST.  JOHN.  Tl 

hast  loosed  my  bonds  "  (Psa.  cxvi.  16).  {W.  Amot,  DJ).)  Spiritual  liberty  ;— 
What  a  thrifty,  robust  plant  is  the  potato  when  oat  in  the  field  it  grows  beneath 
the  Ban  I  Its  leaf  so  coarse  and  green,  its  stem  so  stout  and  succulent,  it  is  a 
pleasure  to  look  upon  a  thing  which  seems  so  to  take  hold  of  all  the  elements  of 
life.  But  when  it  has  sprouted  in  the  cellar,  which  has  but  one  north  window,  half- 
closed,  it  is  a  poor,  cadaverous,  etiolated,  melancholy  vine,  growing  up  to  that 
little  flicker  of  light ;  sickly,  blanched,  and  brittle.  Like  the  cellar-growing  vine  is 
the  Christian  who  lives  in  the  darkness  and  bondage  of  fear.  But  let  him  go  forth, 
with  the  liberty  of  God,  into  the  light  of  love,  and  he  will  be  like  the  plant  in  the 
field,  healthy,  robust,  and  joyful.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Glorious  liberty : — What  a 
difference  must  a  Christian  and  a  minister  feel,  between  the  trammels  of  some 
systems  of  divinity  and  the  advantage  of  Scripture  freedom,  the  glorious  liberty  of 
the  sons  of  God.  The  one  is  the  horse  standing  in  the  street  in  harness,  feeding 
indeed,  but  on  the  contents  of  a  bag  tossed  ap  and  down;  the  other,  the  same 
animal  in  a  large,  fine  meadow,  where  he  lies  down  in  green  pastures,  and  feeds 
beside  the  still  waters.  (W.  Jay.)  Freeing  the  slave  : — In  early  British  times  the 
ceremony  of  freeing  slaves  was  very  striking.  They  were  usually  set  free  before  the 
altar  or  in  the  church-porch,  and  the  gospel-book  bore  written  on  its  margins  the 
record  of  their  emancipation.  Sometimes  his  lord  placed  him  at  the  spot  where 
four  roads  met,  and  bade  him  go  whither  he  would.  In  the  more  solemn  form  of 
the  law  his  master  took  him  by  the  hand  in  full  shire-meeting,  showed  him  open 
road  and  door,  and  gave  him  the  lance  and  sword  of  the  freeman.  Spiritual 
freedom  a  gift : — A  poor  slave  who  has  never  seen  any  diamonds  but  those  that  are 
worn  upon  the  breasts  of  his  master,  his  mistress,  and  their  family  and  friends,  is 
sent  to  the  mines.  Working  away  there,  he  picks  up  a  large  stone,  which  looks  as 
if  it  might  be  a  diamond,  if  it  was  only  bright ;  but  the  negro  don't  know  what  to 
think  of  it.  He  says  it  can't  be  a  diamond ;  but  a  companion  thinks  that  it  is  one. 
The  slave  takes  it  to  his  master,  who  seizes  it  with  exclamations,  and  declares  to 
the  slave,  "  You  are  a  free  man.  There  never  before  was  such  a  diamond  found  in 
these  mines  I "  "  What,  massa  !  "  says  the  trembling  slave,  in  great  trepidation 
and  bewilderment  of  joy — for  bad  as  freedom  is  for  negroes,  it  always  excites  in 
them  powerful  emotions  of  pleasure — "  what,  massa !  dat  dull  stone  a  diamond  t  It 
don't  look  like  what  massa  wear  in  his  shirt  bosom."  "But,  don't  you  know, 
Sambo,  that  diamonds  have  always  to  be  taken  to  the  lapidary,  and  ground  and 
polisbed,  sometimes  for  two  or  three  years,  before  they  are  ready  to  wear  ?  This  ia 
a  most  valuable  diamond ;  and  you  are,  from  this  very  moment,  a  free  man."  It  ia 
not  so  that  spiritual  freedom  is  obtained.  It  is  in  no  sense  earned  or  merited  ;  it 
is  Christ's  free  gift.  Christ  sets  free  the  sinful : — I  have  heard  that  a  great 
English  prince  on  one  occasion  went  to  visit  a  famous  king  of  Spain.  The  prince 
was  taken  down  to  the  gaUeys,  to  see  the  men  who  were  chained  to  the  oars,  and 
doomed  to  be  slaves  for  life.  The  King  of  Spain  promised,  in  honour  of  the  prince's 
visit,  that  he  would  set  free  any  one  of  these  men  that  the  prince  might  choose.  So 
the  prince  went  to  one  prisoner  and  said,  "  My  poor  fellow,  I  am  sorry  to  see  you 
in  this  plight ;  how  came  you  here  ?  "  ••  Ah  I  sire,"  he  answered,  •♦  false  witnesses 
gave  evidence  against  me  ;  I  am  suffering  wrongfully."  "  Indeed  I "  said  the  prince, 
and  passed  on  to  the  next  man.  •*  My  poor  fellow,  I  am  sorry  to  see  you  here  ;  how 
did  it  happen  ?  "  "  Sire,  I  certainly  did  wrong,  but  not  to  any  great  extent.  I 
ought  not  to  be  here."  "  Indeed  !  "  said  the  prince,  and  he  went  on  to  others,  who 
told  him  similar  tales.  At  last  he  came  to  one  prisoner,  who  said,  "  Sire,  I  am 
often  thankful  that  I  am  here ;  for  I  am  sorry  to  own  that  if  I  had  received  my  due 
I  should  have  been  executed.  I  am  certainly  guilty  of  all  that  was  laid  to  my 
charge,  and  my  severest  punishment  is  just."  The  prince  replied  wittily  to  him, 
"  It  is  a  pity  that  such  a  guilty  wretch  as  you  are  should  be  chained  among  these 
innocent  men,  and  therefore  I  will  set  you  free."  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  My  Word  hath 
no  place  in  you. — Where  the  Word  of  Jesus  ought  at  once  to  be  received,  it  is  often 
rejected.  These  Jews  were  Abraham's  seed,  but  they  had  not  Abraham's  faith. 
Jesus  knows  where  His  Word  is  received,  and  where  it  has  no  place.  He  declares 
that  all  else  is  unavailing  :  it  was  in  vain  that  they  were  of  the  favoured  race  if  they 
did  not  admit  the  Saviour's  Word  into  their  hearts.  The  practical  result  appeared 
in  their  lives  :  they  sought  to  kill  Jesus.  Let  us  honestly  consider — I.  What  plack 
THB  WoBD  SHOULD  HAVE  IN  MEN'S  HEABTS.  The  Word  comes  from  Jesus,  the 
appointed  Messenger  of  God ;  it  is  true,  weighty,  saving ;  and  therefore  it  must 
have  a  place  among  those  who  hear  it.  It  ought  to  obtain  and  retain — 1.  An  inside 
place  :  in  the  thoughts,  the  memory,  the  conscience,  the  affections.     "  Thj  Word 


72  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohaj.  vni 

have  I  hid  in  mine  heart "  (Psa.  cxix.  11.  See  also  Jer.  zv.  16 ;  C!oI.  iii.  16).  2.  A 
place  of  honour :  it  should  receive  attention,  reverence,  faith,  obedience  (chap.  viii. 
47  ;  Luke  vi.  46 ;  Matt.  viL  24,  25).  3.  A  place  of  trust.  We  ought  in  all  things 
to  rely  upon  the  sure  Word  of  promise,  since  God  will  neither  lie,  nor  err,  nor 
change  (Isa.  vii.  9  ;  1  Sam.  xv.  29  ;  Titus  i.  2).  4.  A  place  of  role.  The  Word  of 
Jesus  is  the  law  of  a  Christian.  5.  A  place  of  love.  It  should  be  prized  above  our 
daily  food,  and  defended  with  our  lives  (Job  xxiii.  12 ;  Jude  3).  6.  A  permanent 
place.  It  must  bo  transform  ns  as  to  abide  in  us.  II.  Wht  it  has  no  fi.a.cb  m 
MANY  MEN.  If  auj  man  be  unconverted,  let  us  help  him  to  a  reason  applicable  to 
his  case.  1.  You  are  too  busy,  and  so  you  cannot  admit  it.  There  is  no  room  for 
Jesus  in  the  inn  of  your  life.  Think  of  it — "  You  are  too  much  occupied  to  be 
saved  1 "  2.  It  does  not  come  as  a  novelty,  and  therefore  you  refuse  it.  You  are 
weary  of  the  old,  old  story.  Are  you  wearied  of  bread  ?  of  air  ?  of  water  f  of  life  ? 
8.  Another  occupies  the  place  the  Word  of  Jesus  should  have.  You  prefer  the  word 
of  man,  of  superstition,  of  scepticism.  Is  this  a  wise  preference?  4.  Yoa  think 
Christ's  Word  too  holy,  too  spiritual.  This  f r  ct  should  startle  you,  for  it  oondemns 
you.  5.  It  is  cold  comfort  to  you,  and  so  you  give  it  no  place.  This  shows  that 
your  nature  is  depraved ;  for  the  saints  rejoice  in  it.  6.  Yon  are  too  wise,  too 
rnltured.  too  genteel,  to  yield  yourself  to  the  government  of  Jesus  (chap.  v.  44 ; 
Bom.  i.  22).  7.  Is  the  reason  of  your  rejection  of  the  Word  one  of  these — That 
you  are  not  in  earnest  ?  that  you  are  fond  of  sin  ?  that  you  are  greedy  of  evil  gain  ? 
that  you  need  a  change  of  heart  ?  III.  What  will  come  of  the  Word  of  Chbisi 
HAviNQ  NO  PLACE  IN  Tou.  1.  Evcry  past  rejection  of  that  Word  has  involved  you  in 
sin.  2.  The  Word  may  cease  to  ask  for  a  place  in  you.  3.  Yoa  may  yourself 
become  hardened  so  as  to  dechne  even  to  outwardly  hear  that  Word.  4.  You  may 
become  the  violent  opponent  of  that  Word,  like  these  Jews.  5.  That  Word  will 
condemn  you  at  the  last  day  (chap.  xii.  48).  Conclusion :  Let  us  reason  with  yoa. 
1.  Why  do  you  not  give  place  to  it?  2.  All  that  is  asked  of  you  is  to  give  it  a 
place.  It  will  bring  with  it  all  that  you  need.  3.  Open  wide  the  door  and  bid  it 
enter.  (Ibid.)  No  place  for  the  Word : — Only  a  short  time  ago  a  friend  of  mine 
was  preaching  in  one  of  our  cathedral  churches.  As  he  was  going  to  select  for  his 
text  a  prominent  passage  in  one  of  the  portions  for  the  day,  he  thought  it  expedient 
to  inquire  of  the  clerk,  "  What  did  the  Canon  preach  from  this  morning  ?  "  The 
clerk  became  very  pensive,  seemed  quite  disposed  to  cudgel  his  brains  for  the 
proper  answer ;  but,  somehow  or  other,  he  really  could  not  think  of  it  just  then. 
All  the  men  of  the  choir  were  robing  in  the  adjacent  vestry,  so  he  said  that  he 
would  go  and  ask  them.  Accordingly,  the  question  was  passed  round  the  choir, 
and  produced  the  same  perplexity.  At  length  the  sagacious  clerk  returned,  with 
the  highly  explicit  answer,  ♦•  It  was  upon  the  Christian  religion,  sir  I "  I  think 
those  good  people  must  have  needed  a  reminder  as  to  how  we  should  hear ;  don't 
you  T  (W.  M.  E.  Aitken,  M.A.)  The  only  reason  why  so  many  are  against  the 
Bible  is  because  they  know  the  Bible  is  against  them.  {G.  S.  Bowes.)  The  effects 
of  the  rejection  and  the  reception  of  the  Word : — The  Bible  has  been  expelled  for 
centuries,  by  atheistic  or  sacerdotal  hate,  from  the  dwelhngs  of  many  of  the 
European  nations.  As  a  matter  of  course,  the  domestic  virtues  have  declined ;  the 
conjugal  relation  is  disparaged ;  deception  and  intrigue  have  supplanted  mutual 
confidence ;  and  Society  has  become  diseased  to  its  very  core.  The  very  best  thing 
we  can  do — the  only  thing  which  will  be  eflScient — to  arrest  these  evils,  is  to  restore 
to  those  nations  the  Word  of  God ;  to  replace  in  their  houses  that  Bible  of  which 
they  have  been  robbed.  Only  do  for  France  and  Italy,  Belgium  and  Spain,  Portugal 
and  Austria,  what  has  been  attempted,  and  to  a  great  extent  accomplished,  for  our 
country ;  put  a  Bible  in  every  family,  and  a  mightier  change  will  pass  over  Europe 
than  can  be  effected  by  all  the  diplomacy  of  her  statesmen,  or  all  the  revolutiona 
projected  by  her  patriots.     (The  Leisure  Eour.) 

Vers.  38-47.  I  speak  that  which  I  have  seen  with  My  Father;  and  ye  do  that 
which  ye  have  seen  with  your  Father. — The  marks  of  Divine  and  diabolic  relation- 
ship : — Christ  had  admitted  (ver.  37)  that  the  Jews  were  the  seed  of  Abraham  :  He 
now  proceeds  to  show  that  they  had  another  Father.  Those  who  degenerate  from  a 
virtuous  stock  forfeit  the  honours  of  their  race.  "  These  are  your  forefathers  if  you 
show  yourselves  worthy  of  them."  L  The  mabks  of  the  childben  of  the  devil. 
1.  Hatred  of  the  truth  (vers.  40,  44-47).  This  was  the  real  ground  of  their 
unbelief.  They  disliked  Christ's  doctrines.  Had  He  spoken  so  as  to  gratify 
their  pride,  they  might  have  been  disposed  to  accept  Him.    The  same  principle 


«HAP.  Tin.]  ST.  JOHN.  78 

operates  in  all  opponents  of  the  gospel.  The  tendency  of  Christ's  trnth  is  stUl  to 
humble,  and  so  it  is  still  hated.  The  Jews  said,  "  We  are  Abraham's  seed ;  we  are 
no  idolaters."  And  so  many  think  it  sufficient  to  belong  to  a  pure  Church,  to  be 
outwardly  moral;  hence  where  the  necessity  of  Chri'-t  and  His  salvation?  2. 
Enmity  against  God  and  His  people.  The  Jews  were  not  content  with  rejecting 
Christ ;  they  went  about  to  kill  Him,  In  every  age  he  who  is  born  after  the  flesh 
persecutes  him  who  is  bom  after  the  Spirit.  Stephen  asked  the  Jews  which  of  the 
prophets  their  fathers  had  not  persecuted.  They  themselves  murdered  the  Just 
One ;  and  as  they  treated  the  Master  so  they  treated  His  servants.  The  heathen 
followed  their  example,  and  these,  again,  were  succeeded  by  the  persecutors  of 
Popery.  And  in  spite  of  the  Beformation,  the  offence  of  the  Cross  has  not  ceased. 
Godly  persons  in  the  nineteenth  century  find  foes  in  their  own  households,  and  that 
their  religion  stands  in  the  way  of  worldly  advancement.  IL  The  mabks  op  thb 
CHILDREN  OF  GoD.  1.  Heating  the  Word  of  God.  This  the  Jews  could  not  do, 
because  they  were  prejudiced  against  it.  But  those  who  are  bom  of  God  do  not 
dictate  to  Him  what  He  should  say ;  but,  conscious  of  their  own  ignorance,  they 
gladly  listen  to  and  learn  from  Divine  teaching.  2.  Doing  the  works  of  Abraham. 
His  distinguishing  work  was  faith.  He  believed  God,  and  it  was  counted  to  Him 
for  righteousness.  And  what  a  practical  faith  it  was  !  Obedient,  he  left  his 
father's  house  and  offered  his  only  son.  Faith  expressed  in  obedience  is  the  special 
characteristic  of  the  child  of  God.  3.  Loving  Christ — (1)  Because  the  Father 
loves  Him.  Can  the  children  of  God  do  otherwise  than  love  whom  their  Father 
loves.  (2)  For  what  He  is  in  Himself — the  altogether  lovely.  (J,  Fawcett,  M.A.) 
Abraham  is  our  father. ...  If  ye  were  Abraham's  children,  ye  would  do  the 
works  of  Abraham. — The  toorks  of  Abraham  and  the  works  of  the  Jews : — Abraham 
believed  God ;  they  disbelieved  God's  testimony  on  behalf  of  Christ.  Abraham  was 
just  and  merciful ;  they  strove  to  compass  the  death  of  One  whose  only  offence  was 
that  He  told  them  the  truth.  Abraham  honoured  Melchisedeo;  they  insulted, 
rejected,  and  killed  Him  of  whom  Melchisedec  was  a  type.  Abraham  interceded  for 
Sodom  ;  they  shut  the  kingdom  of  God  against  men.  Hereditary  and  spiritual 
interest  in  the  covenant : — The  Jew  was  to  have  a  double  being  in  the  covenant,  an 
hereditary,  a  possessary;  the  hereditary  was  nothing  but  the  birthright,  which 
gave  him  JUS  ad  rem;  he,  that  lineally  descended  from  Abraham,  might  claim  to  be 
admitted  into  the  covenant  which  God  made  with  him.  The  possessary  consisted 
in  his  personal  grace,  which  gave  him  jus  in  re,  when  he  did  not  only  descend  from 
Abraham,  according  to  the  flesh,  but  communicated  also  with  him  in  the  graces  of 
the  Spirit.  These  two  beings  in  the  covenant  were  to  concur  in  every  Jew ;  and 
they  could  not  be  severed  without  danger,  danger  not  to  the  covenant,  but  to  the 
Jew  (Eom.  ii.  25-29  ;  Gal.  iii.  9,  29).  {Bp.  Lake.)  The  true  children  of 
God : — We  have  our  spiritual  affinities,  and  these  determine  our  true  relations 
and  standing.  The  Jews  were  not  the  children  of  Abraham's  good  qualities; 
they  were  not  the  children  of  faith  and  love ;  they  were  the  children  of  the 
spirit  of  untruth  and  murder.  These  were  qualities  of  the  devil  and  not  of 
Abraham.  The  devil  is  the  father  of  untruth.  He  lied  to  Eve  in  the  garden  of 
Eden  and  to  Christ  on  the  mountain  of  temptation.  The  devil  is  the  father  of 
the  spirit  of  murder.  He  tried  to  murder  the  whole  human  race  spiritually.  The 
disposition  which  the  Jews  manifested  toward  Christ  was  altogether  un-Abrahamic ; 
it  was  Satanic,  and  Christ  told  them  so.  He  traced  their  pedigree  back  to  Satan 
and  then  He  offered  them  freedom  from  the  Satanic.  True  family  likeness  consists 
in  character  and  in  actions,  not  in  bearing  the  same  name.  Sometimes  descendants 
are  a  spiritual  burlesque  upon  ancestors.  The  life  which  they  live  makes  the 
name  which  they  bear  a  laughable  farce.  Think  of  a  puny  sickly  dwarf  bearing 
the  name  of  Goliath  !  Think  of  a  man  bearing  the  name  of  Jonathan  Edwards 
writing  an  exultant  treatise  upon  the  decline  of  Galvanism,  and  sending  it  broadcast 
through  New  England  1  Think  of  a  man  bearing  the  honoured  name  of  Stephen  or 
Paul  or  James,  men  who  died  for  the  Church,  and  yet  living  outside  of  the  Church 
and  despising  itl  We  often  burlesque  the  names  we  wear;  by  our  lives  and 
principles  and  characters  we  often  slander  the  men  whom  we  delight  to  call  our 
fathers.  We  are  often  un-Abrahamic,  while  we  boast  that  we  are  the  children  of 
Abraham.  Let  me  ask  a  practical  question  at  this  point.  Just  what  is  the  liberty 
which  Christ  gives  men  through  the  truth  ?  Paul  may  be  chosen  as  an  answer  to 
the  question.  As  we  become  acquainted  with  Paul's  life  through  his  words,  we  find 
it  full  to  overflowing  with  the  spirit  of  freedom.  He  had  freedom  from  false 
theologies,  and  from  the  condemnation  of  the  law,  and  from  the  fear  of  death,  and 


T4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vnt 

from  anxieties  with  regard  to  the  things  of  this  life,  and  from  caste  prejudices,  and 
from  the  tyranny  of  the  world,  and  from  the  power  of  evil  habits,  and  from  low  and 
carnal  views  of  the  Christian's  privileges  and  of  the  Christian's  Christ.    Now  thi» 
is  not  picture  painting,  this  is  not  declamation,  this  is  simply  the  assertion  of  fact 
taken  from  the  life  of  Paul.     Here  is  the  life  of  Paul,  full  and  broad  and  manly, 
built  up  after  magnificent  ideals,  replete  with  the  peace  of  God,  beautiful  with  th« 
reproduction  of  Christly  characteristics,  and  magnificent  with  noble  sacrifices  for 
the  elevation  of  the  human  raca.     The  Jews  thought  that  they  were  already  free, 
they  were  not.     This  is  the  mistake  which  many  in  the  Christian  Church  make. 
Are  you  free  ?    Your  Christian  profession  says,  Yes.    But  what  does  your  life  say  ? 
How  do  you  perform  the  duties  of  the  Christian  life  ?    To  the  free  Christian,  every- 
thing is  a  privilege;  church-going,  Bible-reading,  prayer,  religious  contributing. 
There  is  a  great  difference  between  doing  things  under  compulsion  and  doing  the 
same  things  because  they  are  privileges.     Privileges  are  duties  transfigured.     (D. 
Gi'^OO-)        The  children  of  God  and  of  Satan : — I.  The  childeen  of  God  (vers. 
31-36),     What  do  these  verses  teach  us  concerning  the  children  of  God?    God  has 
His  children  in  this  world,  and  some  of  their  traits  are  here  presented  to  our 
notice.     1.  They  believe  in  Christ  (ver.  3).     To  believe  in  Christ  is  more  than 
simply  to  conclude  in  a  general  way  that  He  is  worthy  of  credence.     It  mean3 
belief,  confidence,  submission,  obedience,  all  in  one.     This  believing  is  the  condi> 
tion  of  all  blessings  under  the   gospel.     2.  They  abide  in  Christ's  word  (ver.  31). 
They  manifest  their  faith  by  their  fidelity.    There  is  no  "  six  weeks'  religion " 
during  a  warm  revival,  dropping  into  coldness  and  deadness  when  the  meetings 
cease.     It  is  a  continued  service  proceeding  from  a  constant  faith.     3.  They  know 
the  truth  (ver.  32).     The  word  in  the  original  for  *'  know  "  is  the  verb  meaning  •*  to 
have  full  knowledge."    He  who  learns  the  truth  by  fellowship  with  Christ  receives 
it  at  fountain-head,  and  understands  it  thoroughly.     4.  They  have  freedom  (vers. 
32-36).     Every  sinner  is  a  slave,  for  a  power  outside  of  himself  directs  his  action. 
The  drunkard  says,  "  I  can't  help  myself ;  an  appetite  drives  me  to  drink."    The 
passionate  man  says,  *'  I  am  not  my  own  master  when  I  get  angry."    Are  they  not 
slaves  to  a  power  above  their  own  will  ?    The  free  man  is  the  disciple  of  Clirist. 
II.  The  children  of  Satan.     Then  there  is  a  devil  who  would  make  men  believe 
that  he  is  not,  and  that  consequently  they  need  not  fear  him.     The  Scriptures  are 
as  clear  concerning  the  existence  of  Satan  as  they  are  concerning  the  existence  ol 
God.     The  traits  of  Satan's  children,  as  here  set  forth,  are — 1.  They  are  slaves 
(vers.  33-36).     2.  They  are  enemies  of  Christ  (ver.  37).      These  slaves  of  Satan 
were  ready  to  kill  Christ.    3.  They  show  a  likeness  to  their  father  (vers.  39-44). 
These  Jews  claimed  to  be    the  children  of  Abraham.      "  Not   so,"  said   Jesus. 
"If  you  were  the  children  of  Abraham,  you  would  be  like  Abraham.    But  you 
show  the  traits  ol  your  true  father,  the  devil,"    4.  They  have  no  afiSnity  with 
God  (vers.  45-47).     They  do  not  like  God's  truth  (ver.  45) ;  they  will  not  hear 
God's  words  (ver.  47).    Just  as  oil  and  water  will  not  mix,  so  the  children  of  Satan 
have  an  aloofness  of  nature  with  respect  to  God,     (J.  L.  Hurlhat,  D.D.)        Piovs 
relatives  or  friends  cannot  save  us : — It  was  poor  comfort  to  Dives,  in  flames, 
that  Abraham  called  him   "son";  to  Judas  that  Christ  called  him  "friend"; 
or  to  the  rebellious  Jews  that  God  called  them  His  people.     (J.  Trapp.)        Now 
ye  seek  to  kill  Me, — Notice  here  the  gradation.    1.  To  kill  a  num.    2.  A  man 
who  is  an  organ  of  tJie  truth.     3.  Of  the  truth   which    comes  from    God.     (F. 
Godet,  D.D.)      The  fate  of  the  truth-teller : — When  the  Egyptians  first  conquered 
Nubia,  a  regiment  perished  thus:  The  desert  was  long,  water  failed,  and  men 
were  half-mad  with  thirst.     Then  arose  the  mirage,  looking  Lke  a  beautiful  lake. 
The  troops  were  delighted,  and  started  to  reach  the  lake  to  slake  their  thirst  in 
its  delicious  water ;  but  the  guide  told  them  that  it  was  all  a  delusion.    Vainly 
he  appealed  to  them  and  warned  them.     At  last  he  threw  himself  in  the  way, 
and  pointing   with  his  finger   in   another  direction,  said,  "  That  is  the  way  to 
the  water " ;  but  they  answered  him  with  blows,  and  leaving  him  dead  on  the 
sand,  rushed  after  the  phantom  lake.    Eagerly  they  pressed  on  for  several  days, 
when  their  goal  disappeared  and  mocked  them.    One  by  one  they  died — far  from 
the  path  on  which  their  faithful  guide  lay  murdered.  Unregenerate  souls  do 

not  love  the  truth  : — The  nature  of  the  soil  must  be  changed  before  the  heavenly 
plant  will  thrive.  Plants  grow  not  upon  stones,  nor  this  heavenly  plant  in  a  stony 
heart.  A  stone  receives  the  rain  apon  it,  not  into  it.  It  falls  off  or  dries  up,  but  a 
new  heart,  a  heart  of  fiesh,  sucks  in  the  dew  of  the  Word,  and  grows  thereby.  (8, 
Charnock.)         Men  hate  the  truth : — As  the  friar  wittily  told  the  people  that  ih« 


CHIP.  THi.)  8T.  JOHN.  7B 

y  truth  he  then  preached  onto  them  seemed  to  be  like  holy  water,  which  every  one 
called  for  apace,  jii  when  it  came  to  be  cast  upon  them,  they  turned  aside  their 
faces  as  though  they  did  not  like  it.  Men  love  truth  when  it  only  pleads  itself:  they 
'would  have  it  shine  out  into  all  the  world  in  its  glory,  but  by  no  means  so  much  as 
peep  out  to  reprove  their  own  errors.     {Senhouse.)  The  thief  hates  the  break 

of  day ;  not  but  that  he  naturally  loves  the  light  as  well  as  other  men,  but  his  con- 
dition makes  him  dread  and  abhor  that  which,  of  all  things,  he  knows  to  be  the 
likeliest  means  of  his  discovery.  (i2.  Smith.)  Noble  minds  welcome  the  truth : — If 
Archimedes,  upon  the  discovery  of  a  mathematical  truth,  was  so  ravished  that  he  cried 
out, "  I  havia  found  it,  I  have  found  it  I "  what  pleasure  must  the  discovery  of  a  Divine 
truth  give  to  a  sanctified  soul  1  "  Thy  words  were  found  of  me,"  says  Jeremiah, 
"and  I  did  eat  them;  and  Thy  word  was  to  me  the  joy  and  rejoicing  of  my  heart." 
Truth  lies  deep,  as  the  rich  veins  of  gold  do :  if  we  will  get  the  treasure,  we  must 
wot  only  beg,  but  dig  also.  (J.  Fletcher.)  We  be  not  bom  of  fornication. — The 
Jews,  having  nothing  effectual  to  object,  take  advantage  of  the  moral  sense  in 
which  Jesus  had  spoken  of  parentage,  and  try  to  cite  it  in  their  own  favour :  If 
Thou  wilt  have  it  so,  we  will  leave  oS  speaking  of  Abraham ;  for  after  all  in  that 
spiritual  sphere,  of  which  it  seems  Thou  art  thinking,  God  is  our  Father.  To 
ianderstaud  these  words,  which  have  been  so  variously  interpreted,  it  must  be 
k'emembered  that  marriage  with  a  heathen  woman  was,  after  the  return  from 
Babylon  (see  Nahum  and  Malachi),  regarded  as  impure,  and  the  children  of  such 
marriage  as  illegitimate,  as  belonging  through  one  parent  to  the  family  of  Satan,  the 
^od  of  the  heathen.  The  Jews,  then,  meant  to  say :  "  We  were  bom  under  perfectly 
legal  conditions ;  we  have  no  idolatrous  blood  in  our  veins ;  we  are  Hebrews,  born 
of  Hebrews  (Phil.  iii.  5),  and  are  hence  by  our  very  birth  protected  from  all  pagan  and 
diabolic  affiliation.  As  truly  as  they  are  pure  descendants  of  Abraham,  so  certainly 
do  they  believe  themselves  to  be  descended,  in  a  moral  point  of  view,  from  God 
alone ;  and  even  when  rising  with  our  Lord  to  the  moral  point  of  view,  they  are 
incapable  of  freeing  themselves  from  their  own  idea  of  natural  parentage.  (F. 
Godet,  D.D.)  These  words  have  been  explained  as  signifying  that  the  Jews  were 
not  descended,  like  Ishmael,  from  any  secondary  marriage  like  that  of  the  patriarch 
with  Hagar — which,  however,  could  scarcely  be  called  "  fornication  " — or  from 
Sarah  through  another  man  than  her  lawful  husband ;  but  are  probably  to  be  under- 
stood as  asserting  that  their  pure  Abrahamio  descent  had  been  corrupted  by  no  ad- 
mixture of  heathen  blood,  or  better,  that  their  relation  of  sonship  to  Jehovah  had 
not  been  rendered  impure  by  the  worship  of  false  gods,  in  which  case  they  had 
been  "  children  of  whoredom  "  (Hos.  ii.  4),  but  that,  as  they  were  physically  Abra- 
ham's seed,  so  were  they  spiritually  God's  children.  This  interpretation  seems  to 
be  demanded  by  the  next  words :  "  We  have  one  Father  even  God."  By  this  they 
signified,  not  that  "  God  alone  "  in  opposition  to  heathen  divinities  was  their  Father, 
but  that  spiritually  as  well  as  corporeally,  they  traced  their  descent  back  to  one 
parentage,  as  in  the  latter  case  to  Abraham,  so  in  the  former  case  to  God  (MaL  ii. 
10).  (T.  Whitelaw,  D.D.)  If  God  were  your  Father  ye  would  love  Me. — Love  to 
Jesus  tlie  great  test. — The  order  of  salvation  is  first  to  believe  in  Christ.  By  this  we 
become  sons  of  God,  and  the  proof  of  our  sonship  is  loving  what  God  loves — Christ. 
I.  LovK  TO  Chbist  is  in  itself  essenii&l.  The  absence  of  this  love  is — 1.  The  loss 
of  the  greatest  of  spiritual  pleasures.  What  a  loss  is  that  of  the  sense  of  taste  and 
emell  ?  The  fairest  rose  cannot  salute  the  nostrils  with  its  perfume,  nor  the  most 
dainty  flavour  delight  the  palate.  But  it  is  infinitely  more  terrible  not  to  perceive 
the  fragrance  of  the  name  of  Jesus,  and  to  taste  the  richness  of  the  bread  and  wine 
of  heaven.  2.  A  sign  of  very  grievous  degradation.  It  is  the  mark  of  an  animal 
that  it  cannot  enter  into  intellectual  pursuits,  and  when  man  loses  the  power  to  love 
his  God  he  sinks  to  a  level  with  the  brutes.  We  greatly  pity  those  poor  creatures 
who  cannot  reason,  but  what  shall  we  think  of  those  who  cannot  love  ?  Yet  not  to 
love  Jesus  reveals  a  moral  imbecility  far  worse  than  mental  incapacity,  because  it 
is  wilful  and  involves  a  crime  of  the  heart.  3.  A  clear  proof  that  the  whole  man- 
hood is  out  of  order.  (1)  The  understanding,  were  it  well  balanced,  would  judge 
that  Christ  is  before  all,  and  give  Him  the  pre-eminence.  (2)  If  the  heart  were 
what  it  should  be  it  would  love  the  good,  the  true,  the  beautiful,  and  nothing  is  more 
•o  than  Jesus.  4.  A  sure  token  that  we  have  no  part  in  His  salvation.  (1)  The 
very  first  effect  of  salvation  is  love  to  Jesus.  ^2)  This  love  is  the  mainspring  of 
the  Spiritual  life.  It  "  constraineth  us,"  and  is  the  grand  power  which  keeps  us 
back  from  evil  and  impels  us  towards  holiness.  (3)  Without  this  love  we  incur  the 
heaviest  condemnation — '  If  any  man  love  not  the  Lord  Jesas  Christ,"  do.    IL 


76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  tot. 


LoTB  TO  Chbi3t  IB  THE  TEST  OF  BONSHip.  Our  Lord  plainly  declares  that  God  ia  nol 
the  Father  of  those  who  do  not  love  Him.  The  Jews  were  by  nature  and  descent, 
if  any  were,  the  children  of  God.  They  were  the  seed  of  Abraliam,  God's  chosen, 
had  observed  God's  ceremonies,  bore  the  mark  of  His  covenant,  were  the  only 
people  who  worshipped  one  God,  and  incurred  the  greatest  obloquy  in  consequence 
— yet  as  they  did  not  love  Christ  they  were  no  sons  of  God.  1.  The  child  of  God 
loves  Christ  because  he  loves  what  his  Father  loves :  his  nature,  descended  from 
God,  runs  in  the  same  channel,  and  since  God  loves  Christ  supremely  so  does  he. 
2.  He  sees  God  in  Jesus — the  express  image  of  His  Person.  3.  He  ia  like  Christ. 
Every  man  loves  what  is  like  himself.  If  yon  are  born  of  God  yoa  are  holy  and 
true  and  loving,  and  as  He  is  all  that  you  must  love  Him.  4.  He  is  essentially 
divine.  "I  proceeded  and  came  forth,"  Ac.  6.  Of  His  mission — (1)  We  must 
love  that  which  comes  from  God  if  we  love  God.  It  matters  not  how  small  the 
trifle,  you  prize  it  if  it  comes  from  someone  you  revere.  How  much  more  sheuld  we 
love  ifim  who  came  from  God ;  and  came  not  as  a  relic  or  memorial,  but  as  His 
living,  loving  voice  (2)  Remember  the  message  Christ  brought — a  message  of 
pardon,  restoration,  acceptance,  eternal  life  and  glory.  6.  He  came  not  of 
Himself.  When  a  man  lives  only  to  serve  himself  our  love  dries  up.  But 
Jesus'  aims  were  entirely  for  the  Father  and  for  us — so  our  heart  must  go  out 
towards  Him.  III.  This  test  it  is  important  fob  us  to  apply  now.  Do  you 
love  Him  or  no?  If  you  do  then,  you  will — 1.  Trust  Him  and  lean  on  Him 
with  all  your  weight.  Have  you  any  other  hope  besides  that  which  springs  from 
His  Cross  ?  2.  Keep  His  Word.  How  about  your  neglected  Bible  ?  How  about 
those  parts  of  Scripture  you  have  never  understood,  because  afraid  they  were 
different  from  the  creed  of  your  church  and  family?  3.  Keep  His  command- 
ments. Do  yoa  obey  Christ?  If  His  commands  are  of  little  importance,  then 
your  heart  is  not  with  Him.  4.  Imitate  Him.  It  is  the  nature  of  love  to  be  imi- 
tative. Are  you  trying  to  be  Christ-like  ?  5.  Love  His  people — not  because  they 
are  sweet  in  their  tempers  or  belong  to  your  denomination,  but  because  they  are 
His.  6.  Svmpathize  with  His  objects.  Whenever  we  love  another  we  begin  to 
love  the  things  which  he  loves.  He  delights  to  save  men,  do  you  ?  7.  Serve  His 
cause.  Love  that  never  leads  to  action  is  no  love  at  all.  Are  you  speaking  for 
Him,  giving  to  Him  t  8.  Desire  to  be  with  Him.  {G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  If  we  love 
God  we  shall  receive  Christ : — If  a  child  were  far  away  in  India,  and  he  had  not 
heard  from  home  for  some  time,  and  he  at  last  received  a  letter,  how  sweet  it  would 
be !  It  comes  from  father.  How  pleased  he  is  to  get  it  I  But  suppose  a  messenger 
should  come  and  say,  "  I  come  from  your  father,"  why,  he  would  at  once  feel  the 
deepest  interest  in  him.  Would  you  shut  your  door  against  your  father's 
messenger  ?  No  :  but  you  would  say,  "  Come  in.  though  it  be  in  the  middle  of  the 
night,  I  shall  always  have  an  ear  for  you."  Shall  we  not  thus  welcome  Jesus  ? 
{Ibid.)  Men  ought  to  love  Christ  as  coming  from  God : — I  know  when  I  left  the  village 
where  I  was  first  pastor,  and  where  I  had  loved  the  people  much  and  they  had  loved 
me,  I  used  to  say  that  if  I  saw  even  a  dog  which  came  from  that  parish,  I  should 
be  glad  to  see  him  for  I  felt  a  love  to  everybody  and  everything  coming  from  that 
spot.  How  much  more  should  we  love  Christ  because  He  came  from  God !  (Ibid.) 
I  proceeded  forth  and  came  from  God. — The  inner  life  of  Christ : — Notwithstanding 
the  multitude  of  books  v^ritten  on  the  life  of  Christ  we  want  one  more.  We  have 
outward  lives  more  than  enough  that  tell  us  about  places  and  date  and  occurrences. 
We  want  an  inner  "  life  "  of  thoughts,  purposes,  feelings.  Until  we  study  this  inner 
life,  all  the  outward  life  will  be  a  plague  to  our  intellect  and  a  mortificaticQ  to  our 
heart.  The  inward  always  explains  the  outward.  1.  Suppose  wo  saw  one  of  the 
miracles  of  Christ,  the  raising  of  the  dead.  Hero  is  the  dead  man,  there  the  living 
Christ,  yonder  the  mourning  friends ;  presently  the  dead  man  rises.  But  how  ?  Ia 
it  trick  or  miracle — an  illusion  or  a  fact?  I  cannot  determine,  because  my  eyes 
have  been  so  often  deceived.  I  saw  a  man  get  up — but  the  conjuror  comes  along 
and  says.  '•  I  will  show  you  something  equally  deceiving."  I  see  his  avowed  trick  ; 
it  does  baffle  me  ;  and  if  then  he  says,  "  It  was  just  the  same  with  what  you  thoui^ht 
the  raising  of  the  dead,"  he  leaves  me  in  a  state  of  intellectual  torment.  Then 
what  am  I  to  do  ?  Leave  the  outward.  Watch  the  miracle  Worker — listen  to 
Him.  If  His  mental  triumphs  are  equal  to  His  physical  miracles,  then  admire, 
trust,  and  love  Him.  Take  the  conjuror :  when  on  the  stage  he  seems  to  be  working 
miracles,  but  when  he  comes  oft  and  talks  on  general  subjects  I  feel  my  equality 
with  him  rising  and  asserting  itself.  So  when  I  go  to  Christ  as  a  mere  stranger  and 
see  His  miracles,  I  say,  "  This  Man  may  be  but  the  cleverest  of  the  host."    But 


BHAP.  vm.]  ST.  JOHN.  77 

when  He  begins  to  speak  His  words  are  equal  to  His  works.  He  is  the  same  off  the 
platform  as  on.  I  am  bound  to  account  fur  this  consistency.  All  other  men  have 
been  manifestations  of  self-inequality.  We  know  clever  men  who  are  fools,  strong 
men  who  are  weak,  &c.,  and  this  want  of  self -consistency  is  a  proof  of  their  being 
merely  men.  But  if  I  find  a  Man  in  whom  this  inequality  does  not  exist,  who  says 
that  if  I  could  follow  Him  still  higher  I  should  find  Him  greater  in  thinking  than 
is  possible  for  any  mere  man  to  be  in  acting,  then  I  have  to  account  for  this  con- 
sistency, which  I  have  found  nowhere  else,  and  listen  to  His  explanation  of  it.  "  I 
proceeded  forth  and  came  from  God. "  That  explanation  alone  will  cover  all  the 
ground  He  permanently  occupies.  2.  It  will  be  interesting  to  make  ourselves  as 
familiar  with  His  thoughts  as  we  are  with  His  works.  We  shall  then  come  to  value 
His  miracles  as  He  did.  Did  He  value  them  for  their  own  sake  ?  Sound  a  trumpet  and 
convoke  a  mighty  host  to  see  them  ?  Never.  He  regarded  them  as  elementary  and 
introductory — examples  and  symbols.  Why?  Because  He  was  greater  within  than 
without.  Had  He  performed  them  with  His  fingers  only.  He  might  have  been  proud 
of  them,  but  when  they  fell  out  of  the  infinity  of  His  thinking  they  were  mere  drops 
trembling  on  the  bucket.  We  might  as  well  follow  some  poor  breathing  of  ours,  and 
say,  "  How  wonderful  that  sighing  in  the  wind  !  "  It  is  nothing  because  of  the  greater 
life.  It  is  very  remarkable  that  this  Man  once  said,  "  Greater  works  than  these  shall 
ye  do,"  but  never  "  Greater  thoughts  than  these  shall  ye  think."  Let  us  look  at  thia 
inner  life  of  Christ  from  two  or  three  points.  I.  I  watch  this  man,  struck  with  wonder 
at  His  power,  and  the  question  arises,  what  is  the  impellino  sense  or  His  dutt  ? 
He  answers,  ♦'  I  must  be  about  My  Father's  buciness."  Never  did  prophet  give 
that  explanation  before.  In  working  from  His  Father's  point  of  view.  He 
gives  us  His  key.  Put  it  where  you  Uke,  the  lock  answers  to  it ;  and  is  no  credit  to 
be  given  to  a  speaker,  who  at  twelve  years  of  age,  put  the  key  into  the 
hands  of  inquirers,  and  told  them  to  go  round  the  whole  circle  of  His  life  with  that 
key.  Can  he  keep  up  that  strain  ?  Listen,  "  My  Father  worketh  hitherto  and  I 
work."  Can  He  sustain  that  high  key  when  He  is  in  trouble  ?  "  Father,  into  Thy 
h&nds  I  commend  my  Spirit."  II.  Arguing  from  that  point,  if  this  Man  is  about  His 
Father's  business,  what  is  His  sdpkeme  feelino  ?  Concern  for  the  dignity  of  the 
law  ?  Jealousy  for  the  righteousness  of  God  I  No  ;  from  beginning  to  end  of  His 
life  He  is  "  moved  with  compassion,"  and  when  people  come  to  Him  they  seemed 
to  know  this  sympathetically,  for  they  cried,  *'  Have  mercy  on  os."  He  speaks  like 
a  Son  and  is  thus  faithful  to  His  Father^t  message.  What  explanation  does  He 
give  of  His  own  miracles,  "  Virtue  hath  gone  out  of  Me."  He  did  not  say  "  I  have 
performed  this  with  My  fingers" — no  trickster,  but  a  mighty  sympathizer.  What- 
ever He  did  took  something  out  of  Him.  Behold  the  difference  between  the 
artificial  and  the  real.  The  healing  of  one  poor  sufferer  took  *'  Virtue  out  of  Him." 
What  did  the  redemption  of  the  world  take  out  of  Him  when  He  said,  "  My  God, 
My  God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me  ?  "  The  last  pulse  is  gone  and  He  is  self — 
consistent  still.  III.  To  what  aee  all  His  triumphs  eventually  befebred? 
Not  to  intellectual  ability,  skill  of  finger  or  physicial  endurance,  but  to  His  soul — 
"He  shall  see  of  the  travail  of  His  soul,"  &c.  You  know  the  meaning  of  the  word 
in  some  degree.  One  man  paints  with  paint,  another  with  His  soul.  One  man 
speaks  with  his  tongue,  another  with  his  soul ;  they  are  the  same  words,  but  not  the 
same,  as  the  bush  was  not  the  same  before  the  fire  came  into  it.  Thus  Christ  shall 
see  the  travail  of  His  seal,  &o.  He  was  often  wearied  with  journeying,  when  was 
He  wearied  with  miracles?  His  bones  were  tired,  when  was  His  mind  enfeebled — 
when  did  the  word  ever  come  with  less  than  the  old  emphasis — the  fiat  that  made 
the  eun  ?  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Christ's  claim  : — I.  What  did  He  claim  fob  Him- 
self? 1.  God  announced  Himself  to  Moses  as  "  I  am  " — a  marvellous  name,  which 
seemed  as  if  it  were  going  to  be  a  revelation  ;  but  suddenly  it  returned  upon  itself 
and  finished  with  "  that  I  am,"  as  if  the  sun  were  just  about  to  come  from  behind  a 
great  cloud,  and  suddenly,  after  one  dazzling  gleam,  hide  itself  before  one  denser 
still — God's  "  hour  "  was  not  yet.  He  had  said  "  I  am,"  but  w?iat  He  did  not  say. 
2.  Does  Jesus  connect  Himself  with  this  mysterious  name?  We  cannot  read  His 
life  without  constantly  coming  across  it,  but  He  adds  to  the  name  simple  earthly 
words,  everything  that  human  fancy  ever  conceived  concerning  strength,  beauty, 
sympathy,  tenderness,  and  redeujption — "  I  am  the  vine. "  WTiat  a  stoop  1  Could 
any  but  God  have  taken  up  that  figure  ?  Forget  your  familiarity  with  it  and  then 
consider  that  One  has  said  without  qualification,  "  I  am  the  Vine,"  ••  I  am  the 
Light."  We  know  what  that  is  :  it  is  here,  there,  everywhere — takes  up  no  room, 
yet  filU  all  space ;  warms  the  plants,  yet  does  not  crush  a  twig.      The  "  I  am  '*  fell 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.^  [CHU.  Tin 

upon  as  like  a  mighty  thondering,  "  I  am  the  Light "  came  to  as  like  a  child's  lesson 
in  oar  mother's  nursery.  "  I  am  the  Door."  That  is  not  a  mean  figure,  if  we 
interpret  it  aright,  a  door  is  more  than  a  deal  arrangement  swinging  on  hinges.  It 
is  welcome,  hospitality,  home,  honour,  sonship.  "  I  am  the  Bread,  the  Water,  th» 
Good  Shepherd,  the  Way,  the  Truth,  the  Life."  How  any  man  coald  be  a  mere 
man,  and  yet  take  up  these  figures,  it  is  impossible  to  believe.  It  is  easier  to  say 
"  My  Lord  and  My  God,"  II.  What  does  Hb  claim  fbom  men  ?  Everything.  In 
mean  moods  I  have  wondered  at  His  Divine  voracity.  Once  a  woman  came  to  Him 
who  had  only  one  box  of  spikenard  and  He  took  it  all.  Would  your  humanity  have 
allowed  you  to  do  it  ?  Surely  you  would  have  said,  "  Part  of  it ;  I  must  not  have  it 
all."  And  another  woman — she  might  have  touched  His  heart,  for  she  wore  widows' 
weeds.  I  expected  Him  to  say,  "  Poor  soul,  I  can  take  nothing  from  you."  But  He 
took  her  two  mites — all  that  she  had.  He  is  doing  the  same  to  day.  How  many 
things  has  that  only  boy  been  in  his  father's  dreams !  One  day  the  mother  feels 
that  something  is  going  to  happen,  and  what  does  happen  is  a  proposal  that  the 
boy  should  become  a  missionary  I  He  must  go.  Humanity  would  have  spared 
him — but  Christ  takes  him.  III.  How  did  the  betteb  class  of  His  contemfobabieb 
BEOABD  HIM.  Here  is  a  typical  man — a  man  of  letters  and  of  local  renown — who  says, 
"  Rabbi,  Thoa  art  a  teacher  come  from  God."  Evidence  of  that  kind  must  not  go 
for  nothing,  Send  men  of  another  type — shrewd,  keen  men  of  the  world :  what  say 
they?  "  Never  man  spake  like  this  Man."  Here  are  women  coming  back  from 
having  seen  the  Lord :  what  will  they  say  ?  Never  yet  did  women  speak  one  word 
against  the  Son  of  God  1  Mothers,  women  of  pure  souls  1  sensitive  as  keenest  life : 
what  saw  ye  ?  "  The  holiness  of  God."  Pass  Him  on  to  a  judge — cold,  observant, 
not  easily  hoodwinked.  What  sayest  thou?  "  I  find  no  fault  in  Him."  What  is 
that  coming  ?  A  message  from  the  judge's  wife,  "  Have  thou  nothing  to  do  with 
this  just  person.  Let  Him  go."  Crucify  Him ;  will  anybody  speak  about  Him 
now?  The  oenturion,  aooastomed  to  this  sight  of  blood,  said,  "  Truly  this  was  the 
Son  of  God."  Pot  these  testimonies  of  observers,  accumulate  them  into  a  complete 
appeal,  and  then  say  whether  it  be  not  easier  for  the  imagination  and  judgment  and 
heart  to  say,  "  My  Lord  and  my  God,"  than  to  use  meaner  terms.  IV.  Fbom  soch 
A  Man  what  tbachino  mat  bb  expected  ?  1.  Extemporaneousness.  He  cannot 
waut  time  to  make  His  sermons,  or  He  is  not  what  He  claims  to  be.  Does  He 
retire  and  compose  elaborate  sentences  and  come  forth  a  literary  artist,  leaving  the 
impression  that  He  has  wasted  the  midnight  oil  ?  No ;  His  is  simple  graphic  talk. 
2.  InstantaneousnesB  of  reply.  God  cannot  want  time  to  think  what  He  will  say  7 
Does  Christ  ?  He  answers  immediately  and  finally.  He  had  just  thrown  off  the 
apron ;  rabbinical  culture  He  had  none,  and  yet  there  was  an  instantaneousness  about 
Him  to  which  there  is  no  parallel  but  in  the  "  Let  there  be  light,  and  there  was 
light."  Give  every  man  credit  for  ability,  and  give  this  Man  credit  for  having 
extorted  from  His  enemies,  "  Never  man  spake  like  this  Man."  8.  What  do  I  find 
in  Christ's  teaching  ?  Incarnations  of  the  Spiritual.  He  Himself  was  an  incarna- 
tion. He  had  to  embody  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  hence  He  said,  "  It  is  like  unto  " — 
To  embody  the  bodiless  was  the  all-culminating  miracle  of  the  Peasant  of  Galilee. 
4.  Christ's  is  seminal  teaching — that  which  survives  all  the  changes  of  time. 
Where  are  the  grand  and  stately  sermons  of  the  great  Doctors  ?  Gone  into  the 
stately  past.  V.  Did  this  Man  live  op  to  His  own  principles  ?  Some  people  say 
that  the  teaching  of  Jesus  conveyed  high  theories,  but  too  romantic  to  be  embodied 
in  actual  behaviour.  What  said  He  ?  "  Bless  them  that  persecute  you."  Did  He 
doit?  •'When  He  was  reviled  He  reviled  not  again."  What  said  He?  *•  Pray 
for  them  that  dispitefully  use  you."  Did  He  do  it?  "Father  forgive  them,"  &c. 
{Ibid.)  Ye  axe  of  year  father  the  devlL — The  children  of  the  devil : — I.  Who  is 
the  devil  ?  With  regard  to  that  remarkable  being  termed  elsewhere  "  Satan," 
•♦the  tempter,"  "the  old  serpent,"  "the  destroyer,"  our  information,  though 
limited,  is  distinct.  He  is  a  being  of  the  angelic  order,  formed,  like  all  intelligent 
beings,  in  a  state  of  moral  integrity,  who,  at  a  period  anterior  to  the  fall,  in  conse- 
quence of  violating  the  Divine  law,  in  a  manner  zt  which  we  are  not  particularly 
informed,  was  (along  with  a  number  of  other  spirits  who,  in  consequence  of  being 
seduced  by  him,  were  partakers  in  his  guilt)  cast  out  of  heaven,  placed  in  a  state  of 
degradation  and  punishment,  and  reserved  to  deeper  shame  and  fiercer  pains,  at 
the  Judgment.  Through  his  malignity  and  falsehood  man,  who  was  innocent,  holy, 
and  happy  and  immortal,  became  guilty,  depraved,  miserable  and  liable  to  death. 
Over  the  minds  of  the  unregenerate  he  exercises  a  powerful,  though  not  irresistible, 
infiuence,  and  hence  is  termed  "the  prince,"  "the  god  of  this  world,"  i&c.,  who- 


CHAP,  vm.]  ST.  JOHN.  79 

leads  men  captive  at  his  will.  He  exerts  himself,  by  his  numerous  agents,  in 
counter- working  the  Divine  plan  for  the  salvation  of  men,  throwing  obstacles  oJ 
varions  kinds  in  the  way  of  their  conversion,  and  spreading  his  snares  for,  and 
aiming  his  fiery  darts  at,  those  who  have  thrown  off  his  yoke.  Error,  sin,  and 
misery,  in  all  their  forms,  are  ultimately  his  works ;  and  his  leading  object  is  to 
uphold  and  extend  the  empire  of  evil  in  the  universe  of  God.  II.  What  is  meant  by  his 
BEiNO  THE  Jews'  father.  The  term  is  figurative.  That  being  is,  in  a  moral  point  of  view, 
my  father,  under  whose  influence  my  character  has  been  formed ,  and  whose  sea  timents 
and  feelings  and  conduct  are  the  model  after  which  mine  are  fashioned.  These  Jews 
instead  of  having  a  spiritual  character  formed  under  divine  influence,  had  one  formed 
under  a  diabolical  influence ;  and  instead  of  being  formed  in  God's  likeness,  or  in  the 
likeness  of  Abraham  his  friend,  they  resemb'.ed  the  grand  enemy  of  God  and  man. 
III.  What  is  it  to  be  of  the  devil?  "Of"  expresses  a  relation  of  property. 
To  be  "  of  the  world,"  is  to  be  the  world's  own.  "  The  world  loves  its  own  " — 
those  who  are  •'  of  it."  To  be  "  of  God,"  or  "  God's,"  is  to  belong  to  God,  to  be 
God's  property  and  possession.  To  be  "  of  Christ,"  or  "  Christ's,"  is  to  belong  to 
Him.  To  be  •*  of  the  devil,"  or  "the  devil's,"  is  to  belong  to  him,  to  be,  as  it  were, 
his  property.  All  created  beings  are,  and  must  be,  in  the  most  important  sense, 
God's  property.  The  devil  himself  is  God's,  subject  to  His  control,  and  will  be 
made  to  serve  His  pui-pose.  But  in  another  sense,  the  Jews,  and  all  who  possess 
the  same  character,  are  the  property  of  the  wicked  one  ;  they  practically  renounce 
their  dependence  on  God;  they  deny  His  proprietorship,  and  they  practically 
surrender  themselves  to  the  wicked  one,  yielding  themselves  his  slaves.  It  is  as  if 
our  Lord  had  said,  "  Ye  say  that  ye  are  God's  peculiar  people,  but  ye  are  really 
the  devil's  self-sold  slaves."  IV.  What  ake  the  lusts  op  the  devil  ?  "  Lust " 
Bignifiea  not  merely  desire,  properly  so  called,  but  the  object  of  desire.  "  The  lust 
of  the  eye  "  is  a  general  name  for  those  things  which,  contemplated  by  the  eye, 
excite  desire — what  is  splendid  or  beautiful.  "  The  lusts  of  the  devil "  are  to  be 
understood  in  this  way,  not  of  his  individual  desires  or  longings — for  how  could 
the  Jews  do  these  ? — but  of  the  things  which  are  the  object  of  his  desires — such  as 
the  establishment  and  permanence  of  error,  vice,  and  misery  among  men — whatever 
is  calculated  to  gratify  his  impious  malignant  mind,  a  mind  of  which,  as  Milton 
powerfully  expresses  it,  "evil  is  the  good."  To  do  the  things  which  the  devil 
desires  is  to  oppose  truth  and  to  increase  sin  and  misery.  These  things  the  Jews 
did — habitually  did.  V.  What  is  it  to  will  those  i.usts?  The  terpa  "will"  is 
not  here  the  mere  sign  of  futurition — it  denotes  disposition,  determination,  choice. 
"  Te  will  do  the  evil  things  which  your  infernal  father  wishes  for. "  It  is  a  phrase  of  the 
same  kind  as:  **If  any  man  will  be  My  disciple"  (chap.  vii.  17).  The  Jews  were  not 
merely  occasionally  by  strong  temptation  induced  to  do  what  is  in  accordance  with 
the  devil's  desires,  but  their  desires  were  so  habitually  consentaneous  with  his,  that 
in  seeking  to  gratify  themselves  they  produced  the  result  which  he  desired.  They 
were  cheerful  servants — voluntary  slaves.  (J.  Brown,  D.D.)  Children  of  th* 
devil: — It  is  said  of  Mr.  Haynes,  the  coloured  preacher,  that,  some  time  after 
the  publication  of  his  sermon  on  the  text,  "  Ye  shall  not  surely  die,"  two  reckless 
young  men  having  agreed  together  to  try  his  wit,  one  of  them  said,  "Father 
Haynes,  have  you  heard  the  good  news?"  "No,"  said  Mr.  Haynes,  "what  is 
it?"  "It  is  great  news  indeed,"  said  the  other ;  "and,  if  true,  your  business  is 
gone.']  "  What  is  it  ?  "  again  inquired  Mr.  Haynes.  "  Why,"  said  the  first,  "the 
devil  is  dead."  In  a  moment  the  old  gentleman  replied,  lifting  up  both  hands, 
and  placing  them  on  the  heads  of  the  young  men,  and  in  a  tone  of  solemn  concern, 
"Oh,  poor  fatherless  children  1  what  will  become  of  you?"  {W.  Baxendale.) 
The  devil  a  liar  and  a  murderer  : — King  Ciinute  promised  to  make  him  the  highest 
man  in  England  who  should  kill  King  Edmund,  his  rival ;  which,  when  he  had 
performed,  and  expected  his  reward,  he  commanded  him  to  be  hung  on  the 
highest  tower  in  London.  So  Satan  promises  great  things  to  people  in  pursuit  of 
their  lusts,  but  he  puts  them  off  with  great  mischief.  The  promised  crown  turns 
to  a  halter,  the  promised  comfort  to  a  torment,  the  promised  honour  into  shame, 
the  promised  consolation  into  desolation,  and  the  promised  heaven  turns  into  a 
hell.  The  lusts  of  your  father  ye  will  do.— It  is  a  frightful  "will,"  and  as 
frightful  a  "must,"  which  governs  the  soul  of  an  ungodly  man.  Such  a  soul 
either  is  a  slave  of  the  "must,"  or  a  free  agent  of  the  "will";  and  the  most 
fearful  feature  of  all  is  that  it  is  guilty  as  being  a  free  agent,  and  the  more  guilty  it 
is  so  much  the  more  enslaved,  and  therefore  the  more  it  is  free  to  will  by  so  much 
the  more  enslaved.      (Aug%istine.)         Satan  hath  no  impulsive  nower;  he  may 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  fin. 

Btrike  fire  till  he  be  weary  (if  his  malice  can  weary) ;  except  man's  corruption 
brings  the  tinder,  the  match  cannot  be  lighted  (Acts  v.  4 ;  James  i.  lS-16).  (Tho$. 
Fuller.)  He  was  a  murderer  from  the  beglmilng  (comp.  Wisd.  ii.  23,  24 ;  Bom. 
T.  12). — The  Fall  was  the  murder  of  the  human  race ;  and  it  is  in  reference  to 
this,  of  which  the  fratricide  in  the  first  family  was  a  signal  result,  that  the  tempter 
is  called  a  murderer  from  the  beginning  (comp.  1  John  iii.  8-12,  where  the  thought 
is  expanded).  The  reference  to  the  murderer  is  suggested  here  by  the  fact  that  the 
Jews  had  been  seeking  to  kill  our  Lord  (ver.  40).  They  are  true  to  the  nature 
which  their  father  had  from  the  beginning.  (Archdeacon  Watkins.)  He  abode 
(Bevised  Version,  "  stood")  not  in  the  truth  because  there  is  no  truth  in  Mtm. — 
Standing  in  the  truth : — 1.  This  chapter  shows  Jesus'  power  of  bringing  men  out 
of  their  fictions  of  Ufe,  and  of  discovering  the  essential  thing  in  life.  Here  He 
discloses  the  condition  under  which  it  is  possible  for  a  created  being  to  stand  in 
the  truth.  It  is  no  little  thing  to  stand  in  the  truth.  You  may  have  stood  on  some 
rare  evening  upon  a  mountain  top.  The  mists  had  been  lifted  from  the  valleys,  the 
villages,  &o.,  were  etched  on  the  map  before  you ;  on  the  far  horizon  sea  and  sky 
met,  the  few  lingering  clouds  showed  their  upper  edges  turned  to  gold,  while 
the  whole  air  seemed  to  have  become  some  clear  crystal  to  let  the  sun  shine 
through.  So  it  is  to  stand  in  the  truth,  and  to  do  so  were  worth  the  effort  of  a 
lifetime.  So  without  long  climbing  Jesus  stood.  2.  Thus  more  is  meant  than  is 
suggested  to  us  by  "  stand  fast  in  the  truth."  Men  may  only  mean  by  that — Be 
obstinate  on  our  side,  standing  steadfastly  in  some  limited  conception  of  truth ;  or 
merely  to  stand  where  we  are  without  inquiring  how  the  mind  is  to  find  its  place, 
sure,  serene,  and  sunny  in  the  truth ;  or  when  men  are  debating  it  may  be  some 
battle  call  to  fight  for  some  truth  at  the  expense  of  abiding  in  all  truth.  3.  Jesus 
shows  the  real  thing  to  be  desired  in  our  anxiety  to  stand  in  the  truth — the  truth 
must  be  in  us.  Having  no  truthfulness  within  the  Evil  One  lost  his  standing  in 
the  truth  of  God's  universe  without.  This  extremest  case  illustrates  the  whole 
process  of  descent  of  some  from  truth.  I.  This  nmvEBSE  is  a  mobaii  ttntvebse, 
AND  A  MAN  TO  STAND  IN  IT  MUST  BE  MOBALLT  SOUND.  Au  immoral  man  cau  have 
no  permanent  standing  in  a  moral  universe.  1.  There  is  no  untruthfulness,  dis- 
honesty, or  vice  in  the  constitution  of  things.  Nature  invariably  gives  the  same 
answer.  The  creation  made  in  truth  continues  in  truth.  The  ocean  tides  keep 
true  time  and  measure ;  the  sun  is  steadfast ;  Nature  throughout  is  one  piece  of 
honest  work,  and  its  veracity  lies  at  the  foundation  of  our  industries.  Every  rail- 
road is  built  upon  it,  and  every  man  works  in  faith  that  earth  and  sky  will  keep 
their  primal  covenant.  2.  Now  when  a  man  born  to  stand  here  takes  up  some  lie 
into  his  soul,  what  happens  ?  That  fate  which  befell  the  father  of  lies.  He  cannot 
stand.  Suppose  a  man  conceives  a  fraudulent  thought  and  says  I  will  succeed  in 
my  business  with  that  fraud  in  my  mind,  what  is  the  end  ?  Defaulters  behind 
prison  bars  might  answer.  Defalcations  always  begin  in  a  man  himself,  sometimes 
years,  before  they  begin  at  the  office.  The  fall  began  when  he  let  some  falsehood 
come  into  his  life  ;  when  he  sought  to  keep  up  an  appearance  that  was  not  true. 
At  last  men  were  shocked  to  discover  that  he  stood  not  in  the  truth  because  the 
truth  was  not  in  him.  3.  Perhaps  the  end  has  not  come  yet,  and  men  who  are  not 
truthful  within  seem  to  stand  as  though  the  universe  were  in  their  favour.  Never- 
theless, sooner  or  later,  the  end  of  inward  untruthfulness  is  as  certain  as  the 
law  of  gravitation.  The  moral  universe  can  be  relied  upon  to  throw  out  eventually 
every  immoral  man.  "  Without  is  every  one  that  loveth  and  maketh  a  lie."  And 
we  do  not  have  to  wait  till  the  last  day.  (1)  A  man  cannot  stand  long  in  the 
world's  credit  if  the  truth  of  personal  integrity  is  not  in  him.  (2)  A  rich  or 
popular  man  cannot  stand  always  in  good  society  if  his  heart  is  becoming  rotten 
— in  the  end  it  must  cast  him  out.  (3)  Even  in  politics  many  a  leader  has  not 
stood  in  the  truth  of  the  people's  final  judgment  because  the  truth  was  not  in  him 
(4)  The  same  condition  pertains  to  the  realm  of  science.  Nature  wants  character 
in  her  pupil  even  when  teaching  her  laws  of  numbers.  Clerk  Maxwell's  character 
was  part  of  his  fitness  for  high  scientific  work,  (5)  And  certainly  this  same  law 
has  been  confirmed  over  and  over  again  in  the  history  of  literature.  What  a  poet 
for  the  coming  years  Byron  might  have  been,  had  there  been  in  him  higher  and 
holier  truth  !  II.  The  univekse  is  a  Divine  univekse,  and  no  man  can  stand  in 
ITS  TRUTH  WHO  WISHES  TO  SATT  IN  HIS  HEAKT,  "  Theke  IS  NO  GoD."  There  is  some 
Divine  reality  behind  all  these  shifting  appearances  of  things.  There  is  an 
expression  of  Divine  intelligence  playing  over  the  face  of  Nature.      And  what  ia 


CHAT.  Till.]  ST.  JOHN.  81 

Been  and  touched  is  not  half  of  the  glory  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  Faith  ia 
Btanding  in  this  Diviner  glory.  We  would  all  like  to  stand  in  this  truth,  but  John 
says,  "  If  a  man  says,  '  I  love  God,'  and  hateth  his  brother,  he  is  a  liar."  When 
a  man  is  thinking  a  hateful  thought,  he  does  not  then  believe  in  God,  though  he 
be  making  an  argument  to  piove  one,  and  saying,  "Lord,  Lord!  "  And  it  is  no 
avail  for  any  of  us  to  try  and  believe  in  God  or  the  unseen  universe  simply  by 
thinking  about  them  or  discussing  their  natural  probabilities,  unless  we  are  first 
eager  to  have  some  truth  of  God  in  ourselves,  and  so  by  the  truth  within  ua  find 
that  we  stand  in  the  Divine  truth  of  the  world.  Live  like  a  brute,  and  believe  like 
a  son  of  God?  Never.  Does  any  man  want  to  prove  the  existence  of  God?  Let 
bim  search  the  book  of  his  life,  and  if  he  finds  that  he  did  some  truth  of  God, 
then  find  God  aud  worship  Him.      III.  This  univekse  is  a  Christian  univeesb, 

AND   IF  A  MAN   HAS   NOT   THE     SpIEIT     OF    ChKIST,    HE    CANNOT     STAND     IN     ITS     FULI., 

ITNAI/  Chbistianitt.  All  things  were  made  by  Christ,  and  in  Him  aU  things 
consist.  The  universe  is  Christian  because  created  for  Christ,  and  reaching  ita 
consummation  in  Him ;  because  God  has  shown  Himself  to  be  Christian  in  His 
eternal  thought  and  purpose  towards  the  world,  and  because  its  last  great  day  shall 
be  the  Christian  judgment.  Hence  if  we  would  stand  in  this  full  and  final  truth, 
we  must  have  some  Christian  truth  in  us  which  shall  answer  to  the  Christian 
character  of  the  universe.  If  we  should  fail  of  this,  how  could  we  hope  to  stand 
when  whatever  is  not  Christian  must  eventually  be  cast  out,  for  Christ  must  reign 
until  all  enemies  be  put  under  His  feet.  Sin  must  go,  and  death,  and  all 
nncharitablenesd,  and  all  deceit,  to  make  room  for  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth. 
{Newman  Smyth,  D.D.)  He  is  a  liar,  and  the  father  thereof. — Lying  is  well- 
nigh  universal  in  the  East.  It  is  not  only  practised,  but  its  wisdom  is  defended 
by  Orientals  generally.  "Lying  is  the  salt  of  a  man,"  say  the  Arabs.  The 
Hindoos  say  that  Brahma  lied  when  there  was  no  gain  in  lying ;  and  so  far  they 
are  ready  to  follow  Brahma's  example.  Yet  Orientals  recognize  the  truth  that 
lying  is  essentially  sinful,  however  necessary  it  may  seem.  The  Arabs  to-day 
will  trust  a  Christian's  word  when  they  would  not  believe  each  other.  They  also 
admit  that  a  liar  cannot  long  prosper.  And  the  Hindoos  have  a  saying  that  the 
telling  of  a  lie  is  a  greater  sin  than  the  killing  of  a  Brahman.  It  was  an  appeal 
to  the  innermost  consciences  of  His  Oriental  hearers  when  Jesus  charged  them  with 
showing  in  their  practice  that  they  were  children  of  the  father  of  lies.  (S.  S. 
Times.)  Because  I  tell  you  the  truth,  ye  believe  Me  not. — Generally,  the 
reason  why  a  man  is  believed  is  that  he  speaks  the  truth.  But  the  experience  of 
Jesus  was,  in  the  case  of  the  Jews,  the  opposite.  They  were  so  ruled  by  the  lies 
with  which  their  father  had  blinded  their  hearts,  that  it  was  just  because  He 
spoke  the  truth  that  He  obtained  no  credence  from  them,  (F.  Godet,  D.D.)  The 
rationale  of  unbelief: — I.  Repugnance  to  the  tkcth  (ver.  45).  Had  He  given 
them  popular  dogmas  or  speculative  disquisitions,  they  might  have  believed  Him ; 
but  He  gave  them  truth  that  addressed  itself  with  imperial  force  to  their  central 
being.  They  were  living  in  falsehood,  appearances,  and  shams,  far  away  from  the 
awful  region  of  spiritual  reaUties.  The  truth  came  in  direct  collision  with  their 
prepossessions,  pride,  interests,  habits ;  and  they  would  not  have  it.  This  repugnance 
— 1.  Reveals  man's  abnormal  condition.  His  soul  is  as  truly  organized  for  truth 
as  his  eyes  for  light.  Truth  is  its  natural  atmosphere,  scenery,  food.  2. 
Suggests  his  awful  future.  The  soul  and  truth  will  not  always  be  kept 
apart.  The  time  must  come  when  the  intervening  falsehoods  shall  melt  away 
and  the  interspacing  gulfs  bridged  over,  and  when  the  soul  shall  feel  itself  in  con- 
scious contact  with  moral  realities.  II.  The  pueitt  of  Cheist  (ver.  46).  Christ  is 
the  Truth,  and  His  invincible  intolerance  of  all  sin  repels  the  depraved  heart. 
*'  Men  love  darkness,"  &o.  The  first  beams  of  the  morning  are  not  half  so  repulsive 
to  a  burglar  as  the  rays  of  Christ's  truth  are  to  a  depraved  heart.  Purity  makes 
the  hell  of  depravity.  III.  Esteangement  feom  God  (ver.  47).  Divine  filial 
sympathies  are  essential  to  true  faith.  The  more  a  child  loves  his  parent,  the  more 
he  believes  in  his  word.  Unregenerate  men  have  not  this  sympathy,  hence  their 
unbelief.  They  do  not  like  to  retain  God  in  their  thoughts.  "  He  that  loveth  not 
knoweth  not  God."  IV.  Pkide  of  intellect  (ver.  48).  They  had  said  this  before, 
and  here  they  pride  themselves  on  their  sagacity.  "Say  we  not  well?"  Are  we 
not  clever  ?  What  an  insight  we  have  into  character  1  Infidels  have  ever  been  too 
scientific  to  believe  in  miracles,  too  philosophic  to  require  a  revelation,  too  indepen- 
dent to  require  Christ,  too  moral  to  need  inward  reformation.  *'  Say  we  not  well  ?  "  ia 
their  spirit.  It  comes  out  in  their  books,  lectures,  converse,  daily  life.  "  We  are 
voim  n.  ft 


M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  yta, 

the  wise  men,  and  wisdom  will  die  with  ns."    This  pride  is  essentially  inimical  to 
trae  faith.     *'  Whosoever  shall  not  receive  the  kingdom  of  God  as  a  little  child," 
<&o.    V.  Ukcbabitablbness  of  disposition  (ver.  48).    Suppose  He  was  a  Samaritan, 
are  they  all  bad  ?    Yes,  said  they,  and  because  thon  art  a  Samaritan  thou  hast  a 
devil.     This  uncharitable  reasoning  has  ever  characterized  infidelity.    All  Christians 
are  hypocrites,  all  preachers  crafty  mercenaries,  all  churches  nurseries  of  supersti- 
tion ;  hence  we  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  it.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)         Which  of 
you  convlncetli  Me  of  sin  ? — The  Christ  of  history  the  revelation  of  the  perfect  man : — 
This  sinlessness  of  Jesus  stands  alone  in  history  in  that — I.  Jbsus  claimed  it  fob 
Himself.    Even  those  who  have  rejected  His  Divinity  admit  that  He  was  pre- 
eminently holy ;  yet  no  other  man  has  ever  claimed  or  had  claimed  for  him  this 
sinlessness.     On  the  contrary,  in  proportion  to  a  man's  saintliness  he  realizes  the 
exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin.    It  is  the  guiltiest  who  do  not  feel  guilt.     The  cry  of 
the  sin-wounded  heart  is  wrung  from  a  David,  not  from  a  Herod  ;  from  a  F6n61on, 
not  from  a  RicheHeu.    We  hear  its  groaning  in  the  poems  of  a  Cowper,  not  of  a 
Byron ;  in  the  writings  of  a  Milton,  not  of  a  Voltaire.    That  Jesus  should  have 
claimed  to  be  sinless,  and  to  have  acted  all  through  on  that  assumption,  can  never 
be  explained  except  upon  the  ground  of  His  Godhead.    If  He  were  not  sinless  and 
Divine,  He  would  be  lower  than  His  saints,  for  then  He  would  have  made  falsa 
claims,  and  been  guilty  of  presumptuous  and  dishonouring  self-exaltation.    II 
This  claim  has  not  and  cannot  be  impcoked.    1.  The  Jews  could  not  meet  His 
challenge.    It  was  not  from  want  of  desire.    There  is  a  vein  of  natural  baseness  in 
fallen  natures  which  delights  in  dragging  down  the  loftiest.    Whom  has  not  envy 
striven  to  wound  ?    And  has  it  not  ever  been  at  the  very  highest  that  the  mud  is 
thrown  ?    Even  Francis  of  Assissi,  Vincent  de  Paul,  Whitefield,  did  not  escape  the 
pestilent  breath  of  slander.     Yet,  though  Jesus  lived  in  familiar  intercourse  with 
publicans  and  sinners,  not  even  His  deadliest  enemies  breathed  the  least  suspicion 
of  His  spotless  innocence.  They  said,  in  their  coarse  rage,  "  Thou  art  a  Samaritan," 
&o.,  but  none  said,  "Thou  art  a  sinner."    "Have  nothing  to  do  with  that  just 
Man,"  exclaimed  the  Roman  lady.    "  I  find  no  fault  in  Him,"  declared  the  blood- 
stained Pilate.     "  There  is  no  harm  in  Him,"  was  the  practical  verdict  of  Herod. 
"  This  Man  has  done  nothing  amiss,"  moaned  the  dying  malefactor.     "  I  have  shed 
innocent  blood,"  shrieked  the  miserable  Judas.    His  most  eager  accusers  stammered 
into  self-refuting  lies ;  and  the  crowds  around  the  cross,  smiting  on  their  breasts, 
assented  to  the  cry  of  the  heathen  centurion,  "  Truly  this  was  the  Son  of  God." 
2.  Subsequent  ages  have  conceded  this  sinlessness.    The  fierce  hght  of  unbelief 
and  anger  has  been  turned  upon  His  hfe,  and  the  microscope  of  historical  criticism 
and  the  spectrum  analysis  of  psychological  inquiry,  without  finding  one  speck  on 
ihe  white  light  of  His  holiness.     The  Talmud  alludes  to  Him  with  intensest  indig- 
nation, yet  dares  not  invent  the  shadow  of  a  crime.    Outspoken  modern  rationalists 
seem  as  they  gaze  at  Tfim  in  dubious  wonder  to  fall  unbidden  at  His  feet.    Spinosa 
sees  in  Him  the  best  symbol  of  heavenly  wisdom,  Eant  of  ideal  perfection,  Hegel 
of  nnion  between  the  human  and  the  Divine.    Rosseaa  said  that,  if  the  death  of 
Socrates  was  that  of  a  sage,  the  death  of  Jesus  was  that  of  a  God.    His  transcen- 
dent holiness  moved  the  flippant  soul  of  Voltaire.    Strauss  wrote  whole  volumes 
to  disprove  His  Divinity,  yet  he  calls  Him  "  the  highest  object  we  can  imagine 
with  respect  to  religion ;  the  Being  without  whose  presence  in  the  mind  reUgion  is 
impossible."    Comte  tried  to  find  a  new  religion,  yet  made  a  daily  study  of  the 
*'  Imitation  of   Christ."     Renan  has  undermined  the  faith  of  thousands,   yet 
admits  "  His  beauty  is  eternal,  and  His  reign  will  never  end."    How  can  all  this 
admiration  be  justified  if  He,  of  all  God's  children,  claimed  a  sinlessness  which,  if 
He  were  not  Divine,  was  a  sin  to  claim  ?    IH.  Might  not  His  voice  ase  ns  across 

THE    CENTUE1K8,    "  To  WHOM   WILL  IB   LIKEN   Me   AND   SHALL  I   BE   EQUAL  ?  "        I    dO 

not  ask  what  religion  yon  would  prefer  to  Christianity.  Christianity  is  the  true 
reUgion,  or  there  is  none.  No  man  would  dream  of  matching  the  best  thoughts  of 
the  world's  greatest  thinkers,  or  the  highest  truths  of  the  best  religion,  with 
Christianity.  Not,  certainly,  the  senile  proprieties  of  Confucianism,  the  dreary, 
negations,  and  perverted  bodily  service  of  Buddhism,  or  the  mere  retrogade  Judaism 
of  the  Moslem  ;  and  if  not  these,  certainly  no  other.  1.  But  compare  the  founders 
of  these  religions  witn  our  Lord.  The  personality  of  Sakya  Mouni  is  lost  in  a  mass 
of  monstrous  traditions  ;  but  his  ideal,  as  far  as  we  can  disentangle  it,  was  impos- 
sible and  unnatural.  The  life  of  Confucius  is  tainted  with  insincerity ;  and  he  not  only 
repudiated  perfection,  but  placed  himself  below  other  sages.  Mohammed  stands 
eelf-condemned  of  adultery  and  treachery.    Socrates  and  Marcus  Aareiius  were  the 


«Hi».  TDO.]  ST,  JOHN.  88 

noblest  characters  of  secalar  history,  but  those  who  know  them  best  confess  that 
the  golden  image  stands  on  feet  of  clay.  2.  If  you  turn  to  sacred  history,  which 
will  yoa  choose  to  compare  with  Him  whom,  in  dim  Messianic  hope,  they  saw  afar 
off  ?  Adam  ?  but  he  lost  us  Paradise.  Moses  ?  but  he  was  not  suffered  to  enter 
the  promised  land.  David  ?  but  does  not  the  ghost  of  Uriah  rise  again  ?  3.  But 
are  there  not  in  the  long  Christian  centuries  some  as  sinless  as  He,  since  they  have 
had  His  example  to  follow  and  His  grace  to  help  ?  Look  up  to  the  galaxy  of 
Christian  examples,  and  it  is  but  full  of  stars,  of  which  each  one  disclaims  all 
glory  save  such  as  it  derives  from  the  sun.  Many  have  caught  some  one  bright  colour, 
but  in  Him  only  you  see  the  sevenfold  perfection  of  undivided  light.  And  none 
have  been  able  to  appreciate  the  many  sided  glory.  All  see  in  Him  the  one  excel- 
lence they  most  admire.  The  knights  saw  in  Him  the  model  of  all  chivalry,  the 
monks  the  model  of  all  asceticism,  the  philosophers  the  source  of  all  enlighten- 
ment. To  F6n61on  He  was  the  most  rapt  of  mystics,  to  Vincent  de  Paul  the  most 
practical  of  philanthropists,  to  an  English  poet  "  The  first  true  gentleman  that 
ever  breathed."  His  life  was  the  copy  over  which  was  faintly  traced  the  biography 
of  all  the  greatest  saints,  but  each  of  them  presented  but  a  pale  image  of  His 
Divine  humanity.  The  wisdom  of  apostles,  the  faith  of  martyrs,  the  self-conquest 
of  hermits,  were  but  parts  of  Him.  In  the  tenderness  of  Francis,  the  thunderinga 
of  Savonarola,  the  strength  of  Luther,  the  sincerity  of  Wesley,  the  zeal  of  White- 
field,  the  self-devotion  of  Howard,  we  but  catch  the  single  gleams  of  His  radiance. 
His  life  was  not  the  type  of  any  one  excellence,  but  the  consummation  of  all.  No 
mind  has  been  large  enough  to  comprehend  its  glorious  contradictions — its  clinging 
friendship  and  its  sublime  independence ;  its  tender  patriotism  and  humanitarian 
breadth  ;  its  passionate  emotion  and  unruffled  peace ;  its  unapproachable  majesty 
ftnd  childUke  sweetness.  IV.  Wb  have  not  found  His  equal — can  we  imagine 
OB  INVENT  IT  ?  Has  this  ever  been  done  ?  The  greatest  poets  and  thinkers  have 
striven  to  picture  characters  faultlessly  ideal.  Have  they — Homer,  Sophocles,  Virgil, 
Dante,  Shakespeare,  Milton — done  so  ?  No.  Why  ?  Because  the  ideal  of  every 
man  must  be  stained  more  or  less  with  his  own  individuality,  and  therefore  imper- 
fection. Had  the  evangelists  invented  the  character  of  Jesus,  it  must  have  been  so 
in  their  case,  too.  Christ  transcends  the  utmost  capacity  of  the  combined  apostles. 
In  the  apocryphal  gospels  invention  and  forgery  were  at  work — and  with  what 
result  ?  The  "  Imitatio  Christi "  is  a  precious  and  profound  work,  yet  even  that  realizes 
but  one  phase  of  the  Redeemer's  holiness.  (Archdeacon  Farrar.)  The  per- 
fect character  of  Jestu  Christ: — The  persons  thus  challenged  would  have  been 
glad  enough  to  accept  the  challenge  had  the  least  hope  existed  of  their  being  able 
to  convict  of  sin,  or  even  of  fault,  one  whom  they  so  thoroughly  hated.  Surely 
in  no  respect  were  the  aged  Simeon's  words  more  true  respecting  our  Lord  than 
this :  Christ's  moral  and  religious  character  is  "  a  light  to  lighten  the  Gentiles  and 
the  glory  of  God's  people  Israel."  1.  In  the  first  place,  we  may  notice  its  gradual 
even  growths.  Like  the  gentle  imfolding  of  the  bud  or  blossom  of  a  tree,  even  in 
Bpite  of  obstacles,  Jesus  went  on  from  day  to  day,  and  year  to  year,  showing  more 
and  more  of  that  inward  perfection  of  heart  and  mind  which  won  for  Him  the 
approbation  first  of  His  earthly  guardians,  then  of  His  Heavenly  Father,  and,  in 
the  end,  of  those  who  condemned  and  executed  Him.  What,  we  ask,  was  the  one 
quality  which  marks  every  period  of  His  life,  and  which  secured  this  marvellous 
agreement  in  His  praise  and  favour?  It  was  innocence — simple,  guileless,  child- 
like innocence.  He  is  everywhere,  and  at  all  times  the  same,  "  in  malice  a  child," 
"the  Lamb  of  God,"  gentle,  pure,  and  innocent.  But  with  this  innocence,  this 
Bimplicity,  what  sti-ength,  what  manliness,  what  courage  are  combined  1  In  word 
and  deed,  in  teaching  and  in  conduct,  the  tenderest  soul  that  ever  drew  the  breath 
of  heaven,  the  man  whom  children  loved,  and  the  common  people  deHghted  to  listen 
to,  and  the  sick  welcomed,  and  publicans  and  sinners  were  attracted  by,  was  also 
forward  and  energetic  in  action,  unceasing  in  labour,  inured  to  hardship,  bold  in 
declaring  truth,  uncompromising  in  speech,  fearless  in  opposing  wrong.  How  are 
we  to  account  for  this  remarkable  union  of  qualities  which  general  experience  has 
shown  to  be  so  rare  that  men  had  come  to  think  it  incredible  ?  Next  to  this  comes 
another  and  a  deeper  aspect  of  this  part  of  His  character  on  the  side  of  rehgion. 
For  2.  whereas  in  all  ordinary  cases  repentance  forms  a  great  part  of  religion, 
Jesus  owns  to  no  sin,  breathes  no  word  of  repentance,  and  on  no  occasion  expresses, 
however  faintly,  the  least  consciousness  of  imperfection  in  His  relations  and  behaviour 
towards  God  His  Father.  Advancing  a  step,  we  shall  be  able  to  observe  how  there 
is  exiiibited  in  the  person  and  character,  the  works  and  teaching  of  Jesus  Christ,  a 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tin. 

kind  of  universality,  which  connects  Him  with  mankind  generally.  By  race  He  ii 
a  Jew,  reared  np  in  the  traditions  and  hopes  of  Israel,  bred  up  from  infancy  to 
Jewish  customs,  steeped  in  the  spirit  of  Hebrew  literature ;  nevertheless,  He  does 
not  reflect  the  peculiar  dispositions  of  the  Jew.  But  in  Him  there  blend  all  the 
common  traits  of  humanity.  The  Gentile  finds  his  true  ideal  in  Jesus  Christ  equally 
with  the  Jew.  And,  what  is  more,  the  men  of  every  race  and  clime,  and  of  every 
degree  of  culture  and  civilization  not  only  may,  but  have  regarded  and  do  regard 
Him  as  their  own,  recognize  Him  as  their  brother,  and  follow  Him  as  their  guide. 
Nor  ought  we  to  forget  the  words  which  Christ  Himself  has  spoken  respecting  Hia 
proper  relation  to  mankind  in  general ;  words  which,  while  they  give  emphasis  to 
that  aspect  of  His  moral  character  and  teaching  which  I  have  dwelt  upon,  do  in 
effect  state  claims  of  the  widest  extent  (see  John  vi.  61 ;  viii.  12 ;  xii.  32  ;  xiv.  6 ; 
xvi.  28 ;  xvii.  3 ;  Matt.  x.  37 ;  xi.  28).  Now  these  sayings,  with  many  others  of  like 
nature,  have  a  two-fold  bearing.  In  the  first  place,  they  assert  claims  so  exalted, 
60  imperial,  so  exacting,  that  nothing  short  of  the  most  literal  and  entire  corre- 
spondence, in  fact,  can  be  admitted  in  justification  of  their  being  laid  down.  Either 
they  are  simply,  UteraUy,  exactly,  and  absolutely  true,  or  they  must  be  regarded  as 
the  ravings  of  a  maniac  or  the  blasphemies  of  an  impostor.  They  can  only  be  true 
on  condition  that  the  utterer  is  truly  a  Divine  person.  On  the  other  hand,  such 
sayings,  being  at  the  time  of  their  utterance  entirely  novel  in  themselves  and  ad- 
mitted to  be  hard  to  accept,  must  certainly  have  excited  in  the  minds  of  all  who 
heard  them  a  keen  curiosity  respecting  the  private  life  and  character  of  Jesus, 
both  amongst  His  disciples  and  His  opponents.  And  both  these  classes  enjoyed 
abundant  opportunities  for  scrutiny.  What,  then,  is  the  result  ?  All  the  watching 
of  His  adversaries  can  detect  no  flaw  in  His  Ufe  or  conversation.  The  banquet-hall 
and  the  synagogue,  the  mountain-top  and  the  seashore,  the  market  and  the  Temple, 
are  searched  in  vain  for  »  just  record  against  Him.  On  the  contrary,  the  better 
He  is  known  by  His  friends,  the  more  highly  is  He  appreciated.  That  familiarity 
which  scorches  and  shrivels  so  many  reputations  in  the  estimate  of  those  who  are 
admitted  to  close  intimacy  left  His  untouched  with  damage.  No  little  weak- 
nesses took  off  the  edge  of  His  grand  public  discourses.  No  infirmities  of 
temper  lowered  His  just  claims  to  men's  admiring  homage.  He  shared  human  pain 
but  not  human  impatience.  A  calm  evenness  of  soul  accompanied  Him  every- 
where, the  offspring  not  so  much  of  self-restraint  as  of  a  perpetual  sunshine  beam- 
ing with  love  and  devotion.  Hardship  fails  to  ruffle  Him.  The  most  factious 
opposition  provokes  Him  indeed  to  a  holy  severity,  but  a  severity  entirely  free  from 
personal  resentment  or  bitterness.  The  terrible  knowledge  that  one  of  His  own 
chosen  companions  is  ready  to  betray  Him  haunts  and  oppresses  His  spirit,  but  He 
has  no  threatenings.  Even  the  tortures  of  the  cross  extracted  no  complaints  from 
those  sacred  lips,  but  only  prayers  for  His  murderers,  and  the  cry  of  His  extreme 
desolation  is  blended  with  a  holy  confidence  and  subsides  into  hopeful  resignation. 
Looking  back  upon  this  poor  outline  of  the  character  of  Jesus  Christ,  we  are 
entitled  to  ask  of  all  who  admit  the  facts.  How  do  you  account  for  such  a  pheno- 
mena ?  under  what  classification  will  you  bring  it  ?  Is  it  of  the  earth,  earthy  ?  or 
is  it  superhuman,  supernatural,  heavenly  ?  The  Catholic  Church,  with  her 
doctrine  of  incarnation,  points  to  her  Lord's  character,  as  delineated  in  the  Gospels, 
with  triumphant  certainty.  All  who  share  that  belief  experience  no  difficulty  in 
discerning  a  Divine  personahty  through  the  veil  of  His  human  perfection.  Jesus  is 
Divine.  {D.  Trinder,  M.A.)  Does  Christ  here  assert  His  own  sinlessness  : — The 
doctrine  of  Christ's  sinlessness  rests  on  foundations  far  too  strong  to  be  shaken  by 
the  removal  of  one  stone  which  has  been  generally  supposed  to  form  part  of  them. 
When  we  read  concerning  Jesus  (^  Cor.  v.  21 ;  Heb.  iv.  15  ;  vii.  26 ;  1  John  iii.  6X 
what  need  have  we  to  demand  further  documentary  demonstration  of  a  truth  so 
explicitly  stated,  and  so  implicitly  believed  by  every  genuine  Christian  ?  It  has  been 
held,  however,  with  considerable  unanimity  that  in  this  passage  Christ  Himself 
bears  witness  to,  and  calls  upon  His  adversaries,  the  Jews,  to  impugn,  if  they  can, 
that  sinlessness  of  His.  Yet  I  would  submit  that  this  is  not  the  meaning  of  our 
Lord's  question.  The  whole  argument  is  concerned,  not  with  action,  but  with 
speech.  In  ver.  43  Jesus  says:  "  Why  do  ye  not  apprehend  My  language?  Be- 
cause ye  cannot  hear  My  word."  Then,  describing  the  devil,  He  declares :  "  There 
is  no  truth  in  him  ;  when  he  speaks  falsehood,  he  draws  out  of  his  own  store,  for 
he  is  a  Uar  and  the  father  of  it  (falsehood).  But  as  for  Me,  because  I  say  the  truth, 
ye  do  not  believe  Me."  Then  comes  the  question  under  consideration,  with  the 
words  immediately  following  (vers.  46,  47) :  "If  I  say  truth,  why  do  ye  not  believ* 


CHIP.  Tm.]  ST.  JOHN.  81 

Me?  Ha  who  is  of  God  hears  the  words  of  God ;  therefore  ye  hear  not,  because  ye 
are  not  of  God."  And  so  the  discourse  for  the  moment  closes.  And  we  see  that  it 
is  the  language  of  Jesus  which  is  on  the  rack ;  that  truth  which,  as  God's  Prophet, 
He  declares  to  nnwilling  ears,  and  tries  to  drive  home  to  sin-hardened  hearts.  They 
will  not  listen  to  Him  that  they  may  have  life.  They  cannot  confute,  yet  they 
cavil.  Though  He  tells  them  the  truth,  and  they  cannot  deny  it,  they  wilfully  re- 
fuse to  believe  Him,  for  to  do  so  was  to  condemn  themselves.  ( W.  S.  Wood,  M.A .) 
ChrisVs  languane  about  sin  : — "  Which  of  you  proves  Me  mistaken  in  My  language 
about  sin  ?  "  What  had  He  said  of  sin  ?  It  is  the  prophet's  place  to  rouse  the 
conscience  of  the  sinner,  to  show  him  his  guilt  in  its  true  light.  Aud  this  Jesus 
had  done.  He  had  striven,  alas  I  for  the  most  part  in  vain,  to  clear  away  the  film 
from  the  eyes  and  hearts  of  these  self-righteous,  self-deceived  Jews,  who  would 
have  all  men  to  be  sinners  save  themselves.  He  had  charged  them,  using  the  piti- 
less logic  of  facts,  with  being  neither  true  descendants  of  upright  Abraham,  nor 
genuine  children  of  God,  but  in  reality  the  devil's  brood,  and  the  natural  heirs  of 
his  false  and  murderous  disposition  and  designs.  For  sin  is  of  the  devil ;  and  "the 
works  of  your  father  ye  do"  (ver.  41).  Moreover,  He  had  spoken  to  them  of  sin's 
necessary  issues.  Like  an  echo  of  the  old  prophet's  sentence  (Ezek.  xviii.  4,  20), 
had  rung  out  His  awful  warning,  "  By  (means  of)  your  sin  ye  shall  die  "  ;  and  ••  Ye 
shall  die  by  your  sins;  for  if  ye  believe  not  that  I  am  He,  ye  shall  die  by  your  sins" 
(vers.  21,  24).  But  not  only  had  He  warned  them.  He  had  also  made  known  to 
them  the  one  possible  means  of  escape  from  the  threatened  fate  (vers.  34-36).  Sin 
brings  death  in  its  train.  Freedom  from  sin,  and  so  from  death,  is  the  gift  of  Jesus 
Christ  to  all  who  put  their  trust  in  Him.  It  is  with  such  declaration  as  to  sin,  its 
nature  and  genesis,  its  consequences,  its  cure,  still  sounding  in  their  ears,  and  their 
own  self -accusing  conscience  ready,  unless  silenced,  to  bear  Him  witness,  that 
Christ  asks  the  Jews :  "  Which  of  you  proves  Me  wrong  in  My  account  and  judg- 
ment of  sin?  If  I  say  truth,  why  do  ye  not  believe  Me?"  No  answer  to  this 
appeal  is  possible.  They  know  that  He  is  right,  but  decline  to  own  that  they  are 
wrong.  {Ibid.)  Christ's  challenge  to  the  world  : — He  who  was  the  Word  of 
God  never  spoke  words  which  involved  consequences  so  momentous  as  these. 
This  challenge  was  uttered  in  the  presence  of  those  who  had  known  Him  from 
the  first;  of  others  who  had  walked  up  and  down  with  Him  every  day  since 
His  ministry  began;  of  not  a  few  who  were  watching  for  His  halting.  But 
one  and  all  were  silent.  This  was  much,  but  there  lay  in  the  challenge  not 
merely  a  confidence  that  He  had  given  no  occasion  which  any  man  could 
take  hold  of,  but  His  consciousness  that  He  had  no  sin.  We  cannot  suppose 
that  He  took  advantage  of  the  partial  acquaintance  of  His  hearers  with  the 
facts  of  His  life  to  claim  for  Himself  freedom  from  all  sin,  which  prerogative 
they  could  not  impugn,  but  which  all  the  time  He  knew  was  not  rightfully  His 
own.  In  this  challenge  He  implicitly  declared  that,  being  conformed  in  everything 
else  to  His  brethren,  He  was  not  conformed  to  them  in  this ;  that  He  was  holy, 
harmless,  undefiled,  and,  in  the  matter  of  sin,  separate  from  all  his  fellow-men. 
He  everywhere  asserts  the  same.  He  teaches  His  disciples  to  say,  "  Forgive  us 
our  trespasses "  ;  but  no  word  implying  that  He  needed  forgiveness  ever  escaped 
His  lips.  Many  words  and  acts,  on  the  contrary,  are  totally  irreconcilable  with  any 
Buch  assumption.  He  gives  His  life  a  ransom  for  many,  which  it  could  not  be  if  a 
life  forfeited.  He  forgives  sins,  and  that  not  in  another's  name,  but  in  His  own. 
He  sets  Himself  at  tiie  central  point  of  humanity,  an  intolerable  presumption, 
had  He  differed  from  others  only  in  degree,  not  in  kind.  In  every  other  man  of 
spiritual  eminence  there  reveals  itself  a  sense  of  discord  and  dissatisfaction.  He 
Bees  before  him  heights  of  which  he  has  fallen  infinitely  short.  If  he  has  attained 
to  any  exemplary  goodness,  it  has  only  been  through  failure  and  error ;  he  is  at 
beat  a  diamond  which,  if  polished  at  all,  has  been  polished  in  its  own  dust.  And 
the  nobler  the  moral  elements  working  in  any  man's  life,  so  much  the  more  distinct 
and  earnest  are  confessions  of  sin  and  shortcoming.  But  no  Ughtest  confession 
ever  falls  from  His  lips.  There  is  in  Him  a  perfect  self-complacency.  He  is,  and 
is  perfectly,  and  has  always  been,  all  which  He  ought  to  be,  or  desires  to 
be.  Christ  presented  Himself  to  the  world  as  the  absolutely  sinless  One, 
demanded  to  be  recognized  as  such  by  all,  and  bore  Himself  ai  such,  not 
merely  to  men,  bat  to  God.  I.  What  abb  the  explanations  of  this?  Three 
only  are  possible.  1.  That  He  had  sin  and  did  not  know  it.  Bot  this  seta 
Him  infinitely  below  the  saints  of  the  New  Testament,  of  whom  one  of 
the  Bainthest  has  declared,  "If  we  say  we  have  no  sin  we  deceive  ourselves"; 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tin, 

below  the  saints  of  the  Old  Testament  who  cried  out  with  anguish  when  in  the  pre- 
sence of  the  Holy  One ;  below  any  of  the  sages  of  this  world,  for  which  of  these 
has  not  owned  and  lamented  the  conflict  of  good  and  evil  within  him !  2.  That 
conscious  of  His  identity,  in  this  matter,  with  other  men  He  concealed  it ;  nay,  made 
claims  on  His  own  behalf  which  were  irreconcilable  with  this  consciousness ;  and, 
Betting  Himself  forth  as  the  exemplar  to  all  other  men  in  their  bearing  to  God, 
omitted  altogether  those  humiliations  which  every  other  man  has  felt  at  the  best 
moments  of  his  life  to  constitute  the  truest,  indeed  the  only,  attitude  which  he  can 
assume  in  His  presence.  You  will  hardly  admit  this  explanation.  3.  But  then,  if 
you  can  accept  neither  the  one  nor  the  other  of  these  explanations,  you  are  shut  up 
by  a  blessed  necessity  to  that  which  the  Holy  Catholic  Church  throughout  all  the 
world  has  accepted,  that  which  it  utters  in  those  words  of  adoration  and  praise, 
"  Thou  only  art  holy,  Thou  only  art  the  Lord  ;  Thou  only,  0  Christ,  with  the  Holy 
Ghost,  art  most  high  in  the  glory  of  God  the  Father."  II.  The  inevitableness  of 
THE  Chkisiian  EXPLANATION.  1,  Are  any  of  us  prepared  to  render  unto  Christ  every 
homage  short  of  this,  to  honour  Him  with  an  affection  and  a  reverence  yielded  to 
no  other,  to  recognize  Him  as  nearer  to  moral  perfection  than  every  other,  with  sin 
reduced  in  Him  to  a  minimum,  the  greatest  religious  reformer,  the  most  original 
religious  genius,  the  man  most  taught  of  God  whom  the  world  has  ever  seen  ;  but 
here  to  stop  short.  There  is  no  standing  ground  here.  If  the  Gospels  are  a  faith- 
ful record,  and  unless  in  all  their  main  features  they  are  so,  the  whole  superstructure 
of  Christian  faith  has  no  foundation  whatever — they  leave  no  room  for  any  such  posi- 
tion as  this,  half  way  between  the  camps  of  faith  and  unbelief,  which  now  divide  the 
world.  When  the  question  of  questions,  ••  "What  think  ye  of  Christ?  "  presents  it- 
self, and  will  not  go  without  an  answer,  you  must  leave  this  equivocal  position  and 
declare  that  He  was  much  more  than  this,  or  that  He  was  much  less.  2.  You  will 
not  deny  that  He  said  He  was  much  more.  If  this  He  was  not,  then  in  saying  this. 
He  deceived  others,  or  else  that  He  Himself  was  deceived.  But  allowing  to  Him 
what  you  do,  you  have  no  choice  but  to  reject  them  both.  Take  Him,  then,  for  that 
which  He  announced  Himself  to  be,  the  one  Man  who  could  challenge  all  the  world, 
"  Which  of  you  conceiveth  Me  of  sin  ?  "  the  one  champion  who  entering  the  lists, 
and  having  no  blot  on  his  own  scutcheon,  no  flaw  in  his  own  armour,  could  win  the 
battle  which  every  other  man  had  lost ;  the  one  physician  who  could  heal  all  others, 
inasmuch  as  He  did  not  need  Himself  to  be  healed ;  sole  of  the  whole  Adamic  race 
who  had  a  right  to  say,  "The prince  of  this  world  cometh,  and  hath  nothing  in  Me." 
{Archbishop  Trench.)  The  absolute  sinlessnegs  of  Christ: — 1.  It  has  been  inferred 
from  the  context  that  "  sin  "  here  means  intellectual  rather  than  moral  failure. 
But  the  word  means  the  latter  throughout  the  New  Testament ;  and  our  Lord  is 
arguing  from  the  absence  of  moral  evil  in  Him  generally  to  the  absence  of  a  specific 
form  of  that  evil — viz.,  falsehood.  As  they  cannot  detect  the  one  they  must  not 
credit  Him  with  the  other.  2.  It  has  been  also  thought  that  He  only  challenges 
the  detective  power  of  the  Jews.  But  the  challenge  would  hardly  have  been  made 
unless  the  Speaker  had  been  conscious  of  something  more  than  guiltlessness  of 
public  acts  which  might  be  pointed  out  as  in  some  measure  sinful.  Sin  is  not 
merely  a  series  of  acts  which  may  be  measured  and  dated ;  it  is  a  particular  con- 
dition of  the  will  and  its  presence  is  perceptible  where  there  is  no  act  of  transgres- 
sion. Our  Lord  then  claims  to  be  sinless  in  a  very  different  sense  from  that  in 
which  a  man  might  defy  an  opponent  to  convict  him  in  a  court  of  law.  3.  But  is 
sinlessness  possible  ?  It  has  been  affirmed  that  experience  says  no,  as  does  Scrip- 
ture also.  But  this  is  not  at  variance  with  the  existence  of  an  exception  to  the 
rule.  And  man's  capacity  for  moral  improvement  leads  up  to  the  idea  of  one  who 
has  reached  the  summit.  That  God  should  have  given  man  this  capacity  points  to 
a  purpose  in  the  Divine  mind  of  which  we  should  expect  some  typical  reaUzation. 
Now — I.  All  that  we  know  about  oub  Lord  goes  to  show  that  He  was  sinless. 
The  impression  that  He  was  so  was  produced  most  strongly  on  those  who  were 
brought  into  closest  contact  with  Him.  1.  After  the  miraculous  draught  of  fishes 
St.  Peter  exclaims,  "  Depart  from  me,  for  I  am  " — not  a  weak  and  failing,  but — "  a 
sinful  man."  It  is  not  Christ's  power  over  nature  but  His  sanctity  that  awes  the 
apostle.  Again,  after  the  denial,  a  look  from  Jesus  sufficed  to  produce  the  keenest 
anguish.  Had  St.  Peter  been  able  to  trace  one  sinful  trait,  he  might  have  felt  in 
the  tragedy  the  presence  of  something  like  retributive  justice.  It  was  his  convic- 
tion of  Christ's  absolute  purity  which  filled  him  with  remorse.  2.  This  impression 
is  observable  in  the  worldly  and  time-serving  Pilate,  in  the  restless  anxiety  of  hia 
\nfe,  in  the  declaration  of  the  centurion,  and  above  all  in  the  remorse  of  Judas,  who 


«HiP.  vin.]  8T.  JOHN.  8T 

would  gladly  have  foond  in  his  three  years'  intimacy  something  that  oonld  justify 
the  betrayaL  3.  In  the  hatred  of  the  Sanhedrists  the  parity  of  Christ's  character  is 
not  less  discernible.  It  ia  the  high  prerogative  of  goodness  and  trath  that  they 
cannot  be  approached  in  a  spirit  of  neutrality.  They  must  repel  where  they  do  not 
attract.  The  Pharisees  would  have  treated  an  opposing  teacher  in  whom  there  was 
any  moral  flaw  with  contemptuous  indifference.  The  sinless  Jeeus  excited  their 
implacable  hostility.  4.  This  sinlessness  is  dwelt  upon  by  the  apostles  as  an  im- 
portant feature  of  their  message.  St.  Peter's  earliest  sermons  are  full  of  it.  The 
climax  of  Stephen's  indictment  was  that  they  had  murdered  the  Just  One,  the  very 
title  that  Ananias  proclaimed  to  the  blinded  Saul.  In  his  epistles  St.  Paul  is  careful 
to  say  that  God  sent  His  Son  in  the  "  likeness  "  of  sinful  flesh.  St.  Peter  dwells  on 
our  Lord's  sinlessness  as  bearing  on  His  example  and  atoning  death.  In  St.  John 
Christ's  sinlessness  is  connected  with  His  intercession  (1  John  ii.  1);  with  His  re- 
generating power  (  1  John  ii.  29) ;  with  the  real  moral  force  of  His  example  (1  John 
iii.  7).  Especially  is  this  sanctity  connected  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  with  His 
priestly  office.  Although  tempted  as  we  are  it  was  without]^sin.  Holy,  harmless, 
undefiled,  separate  from  sinners.  II.  This  sinlessxess  has  been  supposed  to  bb 
coMPBOMisEo.  1.  By  the  condition  of  the  development  of  His  life  as  man.  (1)  He 
learned  obedience  by  the  things  that  He  suffered,  and  consequently  it  has  been 
argaed  must  have  progressed  from  moral  deficiency  to  moral  sufficiency.  But  it 
does  not  follow  that  such  a  growth  involved  sin  as  its  starting  point.  A  progress 
from  a  less  to  a  more  expanded  degree  of  perfection  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  a 
progress  from  sin  to  holiness.  (2)  A  more  formidable  difficulty,  it  is  urged,  is  pre- 
sented by  the  temptation.  A  bond  Jide  temptation,  it  is  contended,  implies  at  least 
a  minimum  of  sympathy  with  evil  which  is  incompatible  with  perfect  sinlessness. 
Either,  therefore,  Jesus  was  not  really  tempted,  in  which  case  He  fails  as  an 
example ;  or  the  reality  of  His  temptation  is  fatal  to  His  literal  sinfulness.  But  the 
apostles  say,  "  He  was  tempted  in  all  points  without  sin."  What  is  temptation? 
An  influence  by  which  a  man  may  receive  a  momentum  in  the  direction  of  evil. 
This  influence  may  be  an  evil  inclination  within,  or  a  motive  presented  from  with- 
out.  The  former  was  impossible  in  the  case  of  Christ ;  but  the  motive  from  without 
could  only  have  become  real  temptation  by  making  a  place  for  itself  in  the  mind. 
How  could  that  be  while  leaving  sinlessness  intact  ?  The  answer  is  that  an  im- 
pression on  thought  or  sense  is  possible  short  of  the  point  at  which  it  produces  a 
distinct  determination  of  the  will  towards  evil,  and  it  is  only  when  this  point  is 
reached  that  sinlessness  is  compromised.  So  long  as  the  will  is  not  an  accomplice 
the  impressions  of  the  tempter  do  not  touch  the  moral  being,  and  it  is  perfectly  clear 
in  both  temptations  that  our  Lord's  will  throughout  maintained  a  steady  attitude 
of  resistance.  2.  By  particular  acts,  such  as — (1)  His  cursing  the  barren  fig  tree. 
But  that  our  Lord  betrayed  irritation  is  disposed  of  by  prophetic  character  of  the 
act — the  tree  being  a  symbol  of  the  fruitless  Jewish  people.  (2)  His  expulsion  of 
the  buyers  and  sellers  from  the  temple  was  not  the  effect  of  sudden  personal  passion, 
but  strictly  in  the  prophetical  and  theocratic  spirit.  (3)  His  driving  the  devUs  into 
the  swine  was  an  interference  with  the  rights  of  property  only  on  the  denial  that 
Jesus  is  God's  plenipotentiary,  and  of  His  right  to  subordinate  material  to  moral 
interests.  (4)  His  relation  to  Judas,  it  is  said,  shows  a  want  of  moral  penetration 
to  say  nothing  of  superhuman  knowledge ;  or  if  not,  why  was  He  chosen  ?  The 
answer  is  that  Christ  was  acting  as  God  acts  in  providence,  not  only  permitting  it 
but  overruling  it  for  final  good.  3.  By  His  denial,  "  Why  callest  thou  Me  good," 
<&c.  But  this  was  merely  a  rejection  of  an  offhand,  unmeaning  compliment. 
God  alone  is  good :  but  the  Divinity  of  Jesus  is  a  truth  too  high  for  mastery  by 
one  whose  eyes  have  not  been  turned  away  from  beholding  vanity.  But 
Christ  again  and  again  places  Himself  in  the  position  of  this  "  good 
God,"  and  claims  man's  love  and  obedience  as  such.  This  claim,  indeed, 
would  be  unjustifiable  unless  well  grounded.  But  the  ground  of  it  is  His  proved 
sinlessness,  and  words  and  works  such  as  we  should  expect  a  superhuman  sinless 
one  to  speak  and  do.  III.  The  sinless  Chbist  satisfies  deep  wants  in  the  human 
BOUL.  1.  The  want  of  an  ideal.  No  man  can  attempt  a  sculpture,  a  painting, 
without  an  ideal ;  and  an  ideal  is  no  whit  more  necessary  in  art  than  in  conduct. 
If  men  have  not  worthy  ideals,  they  will  have  unworthy  ones.  Each  nation  has 
its  ideals,  each  family,  profession,  school  of  thought,  and  how  powerfully  these 
energetic  phantoms  of  the  past  can  control  the  present  is  obvious  to  all.  There  is 
no  truer  test  of  a  man's  character  than  the  ideals  which  excite  his  genuine  enthn- 
siasm.     And  Christendom  has  its  ideals.    But  all  these,  great  as  they  are,  telV 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  Tm 

short  in  some  particular.  There  is  One,  only  One,  beyond  them  all  who  does  not 
fail.  They,  standing  beneath  His  throne,  say,  "  Be  ye  followers  of  us  as  we  are  of 
Christ " ;  He,  above  them  all,  asks  each  generation  of  His  worshippers  and  Hia 
critics,  •'  Which  of  you  convinceth  Me  of  sin?  "  2.  The  want  of  a  Redeemer,  He 
offers  Himself  as  such,  but  the  offer  presupposes  His  sinlessness.  Let  us  conceive 
that  one  sin  could  be  charged  upon  Him;  and  what  becomes  of  the  stoning 
character  of  His  death  J  How  is  it  conceivable  that  being  consciously  guilty.  He 
should  have  willed  to  die  for  a  guilty  world  f  He  offered  Himself  without  spot  to 
God — the  crowning  act  of  a  life  which  throughout  had  been  sacrificial ;  but  had  He 
been  couscious  of  inward  stain,  bow  could  He  have  dared  to  offer  Himself  to  free  a 
world  from  sin?  But  His  absolute  sinlessness  makes  it  certain  that  He  died  as  He 
lived,  for  others.  3.  As  our  ideal  and  Eedeemer,  Christ  is  the  heart  and  focus  of 
Christendom.  {Canon  Liddon.)  If  I  say  the  truth,  why  do  ye  not  believe  Met 
Nominal  Christians — real  Infidels  : — We  mourn  over  the  professed  unbelief  of  the 
age,  but  the  practical  unbelief  of  professed  Christians  is  more  dangerous  and 
lamentable.  This  is  seen  in  the  number  of  theoretical  believers  who  are  still  un- 
converted, and  in  those  Protestant  Churches  who  say,  "  The  Bible  alone  is  our 
religion,"  and  yet  adopt  practices  which  are  not  found  in  it  or  which  it  condemns. 
To  deal  with  the  former  class :  I.  The  text  sets  forth  tour  inconsistency.  U 
you  say,  "  I  am  not  converted  because  I  do  not  believe  in  the  mission  of  Christ 
and  in  the  inspiration  of  Scripture,  your  position  is  consistent  though  terrible,  but 
where  you  believe  in  both  and  remain  unconverted,  your  position  is  extraordinarily 
inconsistent.  Bemember  that — 1.  Christ  has  revealed  your  need — (1)  Of  re- 
generation. (2)  Of  conversion.  (3)  Of  returning  to  God.  And  you  believe  it  all. 
Why,  then,  not  act  upon  it  ?  2.  Christ  has  set  forth  His  claims.  He  demands : 
(1)  Repentance — change  of  mind  with  reference  to  sin,  holiness,  Himself.  (2) 
Faith  which  will  accept  Him  as  the  sole  Saviour  and  possessor  of  the  soul.  Are 
these  demands  hard  ?  If  they  be  just,  why  not  accede  to  them  ?  3.  Christ  pro- 
vides the  remedy  for  your  soul.  He  did  not  preach  a  gospel  out  of  the  reach  of 
sinners,  but  a  real,  ready  and  available  salvation.  You  profess  this  is  true.  Why 
not  then  receive  it  ?  The  medicine  offered  will  cure  you,  and  you  wUl  not  receive 
it,  although  you  know  its  healing  virtue.  4.  Christ  reveals  the  freeness  of  Hia 
grace.  You  say  •' Yes."  Why  then  stand  shivering  and  refusing  to  lay  hold?  U 
the  gospel  were  hedged  with  thorns  or  guarded  with  bayonets,  you  would  do  well  to 
fling  yourself  upon  them,  but  when  the  door  is  opened  and  Christ  woos  you  to  come, 
how  is  it  you  do  not  enter  ?  6.  Christ  points  out  the  danger  of  unregenerate  souls. 
No  preacher  was  ever  so  awfully  explicit  on  future  punishment.  You  do  not  sus- 
pect Him  of  exaggeration.  Why  then  do  ye  not  believe  Him?  Ye  do  not;  that 
is  clear.  You  would  not  sit  so  quietly  if  you  really  believed  that  in  an  instant  you 
might  be  in  hell.  6.  Christ  has  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light.  What 
glowing  pictures  does  the  Word  of  God  give  of  the  state  of  the  blessed.  You 
believe  that  Jesus  has  revealed  what  eve  hath  not  seen,  &c.  If  you  believed  it  you 
would  strive  to  enter  into  the  straight  gate.  If  Christ's  word  be  no  fiction, 
how  can  you  remain  as  you  are?  II.  You  offer  bomb  defence  of  your  incon- 
sistency, BUT  it  does  not  MEET  THE  CASE.  1.  '•  I  do  uot  feel  mysclf  entitled  to 
come  to  Christ,  because  I  do  not  feel  my  need  as  I  should."  This  is  no  excuse.  In 
matters  relating  to  the  body  we  feel  first,  and  then  believe.  My  hand  smarts, 
and  therefore  I  believe  it  has  been  wounded.  But  in  soul  matters  we  believe  first 
and  feel  afterwards.  A  mother  cannot  feel  grief  for  the  loss  of  her  child  till  she 
believes  she  has  lost  it,  and  it  is  impossible  for  her  to  believe  that  and  not  to  weep. 
So  if  you  believed  in  your  heart  sin  to  be  as  dreadful  as  God  says  it  is,  you  would 
feel  conviction  and  repentance  necessary.  2.  "I  do  not  see  how  faith  can  save  me." 
Here,  again,  is  no  excuse.  Who  says  that  faith  saves?  The  Bible  says  Christ 
•aves  whom  faith  accepts.  3,  You  think  the  good  things  promised  too  good  to  be 
true  ;  that  conscious  of  being  a  lost  sinner  you  have  not  the  presumption  to  believe 
that  if  you  were  to  trust  Christ  now  you  would  be  forgiven.  What  is  this  but  to 
think  meanly  of  God?  You  think  He  has  but  little  mercy,  whereas  the  Book 
which  you  allow  to  be  true  tells  you  that  "though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,"  &c. 
4.  You  are  not  quite  sure  that  the  promise  is  made  to  you.  But  God  did  not  send 
you  the  Bible  to  piay  with  you,  and  do  not  the  invitations  say,  "  Whosoever  vill  ?  " 
6.  You  will  think  of  this,  but  the  time  has  not  yet  come.  If  you  believed  as  the 
Bible  describes  that  life  is  short,  death  certain,  and  eternity  near,  yon  would  cry 
out,  "  Lord,  save,  or  I  perish."  III.  The  real  reason  why  some  do  not  beleevb 
(ver.  45).    Some  of  you  do  not  believe  the  truth.    1.  Simply  because  it  is  the  truth. 


flttip.  Tin.]  ST.  JOHN.  8* 

Borne  make  it  becanse  it  is  too  severe,  e.g.,  "Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall 
he  also  reap."  2.  The  Pharisees  hated  God's  truth  deliberately.  You  say,  •'  I  do 
not  do  that."  But  how  long  does  it  take  to  make  an  action  deliberate.  Some  of 
you  have  heard  the  gospel  forty  years,  and  prove  that  you  hate  the  truth  by  living 
in  sin.  You,  young  man,  were  impressed  the  other  Sunday  that  you  must  yield  to 
God.  A  companion  meets  you,  and  you  did  deliberately  choose  your  own  dam- 
nation when  you  chose  sin.  3.  But  the  Pharisees  scoffed  at  it.  Yes ;  and  is  your 
silent  contempt  any  better.  Conclusion :  If  these  things  be  true,  why  not  believe 
in  them?  What  hinders?  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  courage  and  triumph  of 
truth : — Truth  has  nothing  to  fear  from  the  fullest  investigation.  Error  may  well 
deprecate  all  searching  and  sifting  processes;  but  truth,  like  gold,  can  not  only 
stand  tkuy  fitting  test,  but  welcome  it.  He  who  fears  for  Truth  has  scarcely  so 
much  as  gazed  on  her  majestic  countenance,  nor  does  he  know  the  might  of  that 
more  than  diamond  mirror  which  she  flashes  on  the  mental  eye  that  is  not  willingly 
closed  to  her  light.  Give  but  a  fair  field,  and  then  when  Truth  and  Error  en- 
counter, what  loyal  heart  can  fear  for  the  result.  (H.  H.  Dobney.)  Conditions  of 
belief  of  the  truth : — The  condition  of  arriving  at  truth  is  not  severe^  habits  of 
investigation,  but  innocence  of  life  and  humbleness  of  heart.  Truth  is  felt,  not 
reasoned  out ;  and  if  there  be  any  truths  which  are  only  appreciable  by  the  acute 
understanding,  we  may  be  sure  at  once  that  these  do  not  constitute  the  soul's  life. 
{F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.)  Some  men  are  physically  incapacitated  for  perceiving 
the  truth.  A  man  who  is  colour-blind,  e.g.,  is  unable  to  distinguish  the  red  rays  of 
the  spectrum.  A  danger  signal  on  the  railway  would  convey  no  warning  to  a  man 
10  constituted,  and  a  rose  for  him  would  have  little  beauty.  There  is  an  analogue 
to  this  in  the  moral  world.  While  the  converted  man  perceives  the  warning  of 
God's  judgments  and  the  beauty  of  the  Rose  of  Sharon,  the  carnally-minded  per- 
ceives neither.  llie  need  of  spiritual  insiqht  to  the  discernment  of  the  truth: — 
"  Any  tyro  can  see  the  facts  for  himself  if  he  is  provided  with  those  not  rare 
articles — a  nettle  and  a  microscope."  These  words  are  Mr.  Huxley's.  But  why 
the  microscope  ?  Suppose  the  tyro  should  be  provided  with  a  nettle  only  ?  These 
inquiries  point  in  a  direction  which  materialists  are  not  willing  to  pursue.  The 
introduction  of  the  microscope  is  an  admission  that  even  the  keenest  eyes  cannot 
see  certain  substances,  forms  and  movements,  and  great  store  must  be  set  by  it.  It 
requires  in  material  investigation  precisely  what  is  demanded  in  spiritual  inquiry. 
Suppose  any  one  should  insist  upon  examining  the  nettle  without  the  aid  of  the 
microscope,  and  should  declare  that  he  is  unable  to  verify  Mr.  Huxley's  obser- 
vations. Mr.  Huxley  would  properly  reply  that  the  inner  structure  and  life  of 
the  nettle  could  not  be  seen  by  the  naked  eye  for  they  are  microscopically  discerned. 
Nor  can  the  inquirer  into  spiritual  truth  discern  and  understand  without  a  spiritual 
organ  adapted  to  the  investigation.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Love  of  the  truth  essential 
to  its  reception : — To  whom  will  nature  reveal  herself  ?  To  the  clown  or  the  poet  ? 
The  poet  gets  something  out  of  "  the  meanest  flower  that  blows."  The  wise  man 
hears  music  in  the  wind,  the  stream,  the  twitter  of  birds.  What  does  the  clown 
hear,  or  the  sordid  man  ?  Noises — tongues  unknown  and  uninterpreted.  Nature 
says  precisely  what  Christ  says:  "I  will  manifest  myself  to  Him  that  loveth  me." 
(Ibid.)  Unbelief,  its  cause : — Scepticism  is  not  intellectual  only,  it  is  rnoral  also 
— a  chronic  atrophy  and  disease  of  the  whole  soul.  A  man  lives  by  believing  some- 
thing, not  by  debating  and  arguing  about  many  things.  A  sad  case  for  him  when 
all  he  can  manage  to  believe  is  something  he  can  button  in  his  pocket — something 
he  can  eat  and  digest.  Lower  than  that  he  will  not  get.  (T.  Carlyle.)  TJie  folly 
of  unbelief: — What  would  you  think  if  there  were  to  be  an  insurrection  in  a 
hospital,  and  sick  men  should  conspire  with  sick  men,  and  on  a  certain  day  they 
should  rise  up  and  reject  the  doctors  and  nurses  ?  There  they  would  be — sickness 
and  disease  within,  and  all  the  help  without  I  Yet  what  is  a  hospital  compared 
to  this  fever-ridden  world,  which  goes  on  swinging  in  pain  through  the  centuries, 
where  men  say  "we  have  got  rid  of  the  Atonement  and  the  Bible?"  Yes,  and  you 
have  rid  yourselves  of  salvation.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  "Can  you  tell  me  anything 
about  the  revision  of  the  Bible  ?  "  asked  an  intelligent  working  man  the  other  day. 
"  Because  I've  been  told  they're  taking  out  all  the  contradictions  in  it."  The  same 
man  another  day  expressed  his  inaptitude  for  faith  in  these  words  :  ••  Why,  to  look 
at  them  stars  and  think  they're  all  worlds,  and  to  believe  there's  something  beyond 
all  that  again — it's  more  than  I  can  beheve."  Could  the  attitude  of  unbelief  have 
expressed  itself  better  ?  The  very  sight  that  to  some  minds  forces  home  the  con- 
viction  that  a  God  exists — the  sight  of  the  star-sown  fields  of  heaven — was  to  thi» 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  Tin. 

man  only  a  stumbling-block  and  rock  of  offence.  (C  C.  Liddell.)  He  that  is  of 
God  liearetli  God's  words. — I.  Heabing  God's  Woeds.  What  is  implied?  1. 
Attention  of  the  body.  2.  Intention  of  the  mind.  3.  Betention  of  the  memory. 
II.  Not  heakino  God's  words.  1.  Some  defiantly  refuse  to  come  where  they  may 
hear.  2.  Others  intend  to  disregard,  loving  the  present  world  (2  Tim.  iv.  10). 
3.  Others  hear  for  a  while,  but  continue  not  in  well  doing.  (1)  Truth  is  rejected, 
but  it  does  not  keep  silence.  (2)  Truth  is  reviled,  but  it  wearies  not.  (3)  Truth  ia 
persecuted,  but  it  does  not  yield.  III.  The  test.  "Not  of  God."  "Of  G^d." 
1.  He  loves  God,  and  so  loves  His  Word.  2.  He  is  in  sympathy  with  the  Word, 
and  so  delights  to  hear  it.  3.  He  wants  to  obey  the  Word,  and  so  listens  to  it. 
But  the  carnal  mind  cannot  receive  the  things  of  God.  The  Word  rebukes  him, 
threatens  him  ;  he  hates  it.  {Family  Churchman.)  The  hearer  of  God's  Word : — 
The  word  "  hear  "  signifies  serious  attention  and  regard  (Matt.  xvii.  6 ;  Lev.  xvi.  29; 
John  X.  3  :  Bev.  ii.  8).  It  is  clear  that  all  other  hearing  must  be  unprofitable,  and 
in  respect  to  the  Word  of  God  condemnatory.  When  man  speaks,  to  hear  without 
attending  is  useless ;  when  God  speaks,  sinful.  I.  Who  they  abb  who  heab  thh 
Word.  "He  that  is  of  God."  1.  All  God's  true  children.  Not  all  who  are 
brought  into  covenant  with  God ;  for  such  were  the  Pharisees.  Holy  ordinances  do 
not  necessarily  convey  the  continuance  of  sonship.  2.  All  who  are  girded  and 
governed  by  God's  Spirit  (Bom.  viii.  14).  3.  All  who  love  God  (Luke  x.  27).  II. 
Aiiii  BDCE  OF  NECESSITY  HEAB  God's  Wobds.  1.  It  is  not  merely  because  they  know 
them  to  be  words  of  wisdom  and  life,  bringing  happiness  here  and  hereafter  :  there 
is  rooted  in  their  hearts  an  intense  desire  for  all  good  and  holy  things,  a  profound 
respect  for  all  that  belongs  to  God.  It  would  be  repugnant  to  their  new  nature  to 
do  otherwise.  2.  Their  own  mind  immediately  draws  a  distinction  between  the 
Word  of  God  and  that  of  man.  The  latter  has  to  be  considered  before  it  is 
received ;  the  former  permits  no  consideration.  3.  Nor  can  there  be  the  least 
evasion  or  compromise,  no  distinguishiDg  between  great  and  small.  4.  There  is  no 
consultation  of  flesh  and  blood.  It  is  the  Word,  and  that  is  sufficient  (1  Thess. 
ii.  13).  III.  They  who  abe  not  of  God  necessarily  neglect  God's  Word.  1.  II 
condemns  many  worldly  pursuits  and  pleasures,  and  insists  upon  self-denial  and 
the  daily  cross.  Assuredly  none  who  are  not  of  God  will  listen  to  this,  and  follow 
the  Lamb  whithersoever  He  goeth.  2.  They  do  not  understand  the  nature  of 
spiritual  truth ;  its  promises  and  threatenings  appeal  to  them  in  vain  (1  Cor.  ii.  14). 
3.  In  proportion  as  men  are  governed  by  natural  maxims  and  feelings  and 
principles,  and  by  their  own  self-will,  they  deprive  themselves  of  the  capacity  of 
appreciating  God's  Word.     {J.  Slade,  M.A.) 

Vers.  48-51.  Say  we  not  well  that  Thou  art  a  Samaritan  and  bast  a  devlL — 
The  Anti-diabolism  of  Christ : — I.  Christ  honours  the  Father  ;  the  devil  does 
NOT  (ver.  49).  1.  How  does  Christ  honour  the  Father  ?  (1)  By  a  faithful  repre- 
sentation of  the  Father's  character.  The  revelation  of  the  Infinite  in  the  material 
creation  is  dim  compared  with  His  who  is  the  "  faithful  and  true  witness  "  and  "  the 
express  image  of  "  the  Father's  "  Person."  (2)  By  supreme  devotion  to  the  Father's 
will.  He  came  to  this  world  to  work  out  the  Divine  will  in  relation  to  humanity,  to 
substitute  truth  for  error,  purity  for  pollution,  benevolence  for  selfishness,  God  for 
the  devil — in  one  word,  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself.  2.  Now  this  is 
what  the  devil  does  not  do.  He  seeks  to  dishonour  God — (1)  By  misrepresenting 
Him,  calumniating  Him.  (2)  By  opposing  His  will.  II.  Christ  seeks  not  His 
OWN  GLOEY ;  the  DEVIL  DOES  (ver.  50).  1.  Ambition  and  self-seeking  had  no  place 
in  Christ.  "  He  made  Himself  of  no  reputation,"  <&c.  Love  to  the  Infinite  Father 
seemed  to  swallow  up  His  ego-isva.  He  was  self-oblivious.  Often  does  He  say,  "  I 
seek  not  my  own  will."  Had  He  sought  His  own  glory,  He  would  have  been  the 
Leader  of  all  armies,  the  Emperor  of  all  nations,  instead  of  which.  He  was  bom  in 
a  stable,  lived  without  a  home,  and  died  upon  a  cross.  2.  All  this  is  Anti-diabolic. 
Ambition  is  the  inspiration  of  Satan.  His  motto  is,  *'  Better  reign  in  hell  than 
serve  in  heaven."  He  cares  for  no  one  else,  and  would  kindle  hells  for  a  thousand 
generations  in  order  to  maintain  his  own  dominion  and  gratify  his  own  ambition. 
3.  Just  so  far  as  a  man  loses  his  own  e^ro-ism  in  love  for  the  Infinite,  He  is  Christ- 
like. Just  so  far  as  he  is  self-conscious  and  aiming  at  his  own  personal  ends,  he 
is  devil-like.  III.  Christ  delivebs  from  death  ;  the  devil  cannot  (ver.  51).  What 
does  He  mean  by  death  here  ?  1.  Not  the  dissolution  of  soul  and  body,  for  all  the 
millions  that  "  kept  His  sayings"  have  gone  down  to  the  grave.  2.  Does  He  mean 
extinction  of  existence?    If  so,  it  is  true.     All  genuine  disciples  of  Christ  will 


OHA».  vm.]  8T.  JOHN.  91 

fakberit  perpetual  ezietenoe.  This  He  Himself  has  tanght  (chap.  vi.  40).  3.  Does 
He  mean  the  destraotion  of  that  which  makes  death  repugnant  to  man's  natare  ? 
If  BO,  the  dying  experience  of  millions  demonstrates  its  truth.  The  sting  of  death 
is  sin.  Take  sin  away,  and  the  dissolution  of  soul  and  body  becomes  the  brightest 
prospect  in  the  pilgrimage  of  souls.  It  is  a  mere  step  over  a  river  from  a  wilderness 
into  a  Canaan ;  the  mere  opening  of  the  door  from  a  cell  into  a  palace.  Now  the 
devil  cannot  deliver  from  death ;  and  if  he  could  he  would  not.  Destruction  is  the 
gratification  of  his  malignant  nature.  He  goes  about  seeking  whom  he  may  devour. 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  ChrisVt  controversy  with  the  Jewt: — I.  The  accusations.  1. 
•*  Thou  art  a  Samaritan,"  and  not  only  worthy  of  the  contempt  of  a  Jew,  but  one 
whose  declaration  on  a  matter  of  faith  was  unworthy  of  regard,  inasmuch  as  He 
was  a  heretic.  The  charge  has  reference — (1)  To  the  fact  that  He  followed  not  the 
rigid  traditions  of  the  elders,  which  constituted  in  the  minds  of  the  people,  the 
very  essence  of  their  religion.  (2)  Because  He  had  held  intercourse  with  the 
Samaritans,  had  preached  to  them,  and  had  been  received  by  them.  (3)  Because 
in  one  of  His  recorded  parables,  as  doubtless  in  others  not  recorded,  He  had  com- 
mended one  of  this  nation  for  his  charity,  and  had  held  him  up  as  an  example  to 
His  Jewish  bearers.  (4)  Because,  as  the  Samaritans  had  mingled  their  own  Gen- 
tile traditions  with  the  law  of  Moses,  so  our  Blessed  Lord,  in  expounding  the  law, 
had  drawn  out  its  spiritual  meaning,  which  was  as  alien  to  the  teaching  of  the 
Scribes  and  Pharisees  as  the  traditions  of  the  Samaritans.  (5)  There  may  have 
been  also  a  special  reference  to  the  circumstance,  that  Nazareth,  where  He  had  been 
brought  up,  was  nigh  to  the  country  of  the  Samaritans.  By  this  first  term  of  re- 
proach they  declared  that  He  had  no  interest  in  the  promises  made  by  God  to 
IsraeL  2.  "  Thou  hast  a  devil."  They  denied  that  He  had  any  fellowship  with 
the  God  of  Israel.  He  had  a  devil — (1)  Because,  as  they  said.  He  did  His  miracles 
by  the  power  of  Beelzebub,  the  chief  of  the  devils.  (2)  Because,  as  the  devil 
attempted  to  make  himself  equal  with  God,  so  did  Christ  declare  Himself  to  be 
equal  to  and  one  with  the  Father.  (3)  The  seeming  folly  of  His  words  and  pre- 
tensions was  another  reason  for  attributing  His  actions  to  the  inspiration  of  the 
Evil  Spirit.  He  hath  a  devil,  and  is  mad,  why  hear  ye  Him  ?  IL  Thb  defbnob. 
1.  To  the  first  accusation  He  made  no  reply.  Q)  It  was  personal,  and  did  not 
concern  His  life  and  doctrine,  and  so  He  passes  it  dv.  One  mark  of  His  sinlessness 
is  the  absence  of  all  anger  at  personal  slights.  It  is  the  mark  of  a  mind  enfeebled 
by  sin  not  to  be  able  to  bear  personal  affronts,  as  it  is  the  mark  of  a  diseased  body  to 
shrink  from  touch.  (2)  Since  He  came  to  break  down  the  wall  of  separation 
between  Jew  and  Gentile,  He  would  not,  by  replying  to  this  charge,  sanction  the 
contempt  of  the  Jews  for  the  Samaritans,  a  people  called  to  salvation  equally  with 
themselves.  (3)  He  passes  over  this  charge,  it  may  be  also,  in  tenderness  to  the 
Samaritans,  amongst  whom  were  many  who  believed  on  Him.  When  Christ  would 
abate  the  pride  of  those  who  flocked  around  Him,  which  was  the  cause  of  so  much 
of  their  blindness  of  heart.  He  at  times  used  roughness ;  now,  when  He  had  to 
suffer  rebuke,  He  answers  with  the  greatest  mildness,  leaving  us  a  lesson  to  be 
strict  and  uncompromising  in  everything  that  really  concerns  God,  whilst  we  are 
indifferent  to  all  things  that  merely  regard  ourselves.  2.  "  I  have  not  a  devil,"  He 
says.  None  of  us  are  free  from  having  a  devil,  for  all  sin  in  some  measure  cornea 
from  him ;  so  that  here  again  we  have  a  declaration  of  the  perfect  sinlessness  of  the 
Son  of  Man.  He,  and  He  only,  never  had  a  devil.  Again,  His  words  reach  beyond 
this ;  I  cannot,  He  says,  do  these  things  by  the  power  and  assistance  of  Satan,  for 
I  at  the  same  time  honour  My  Father,  who  is  the  enemy  of  Satan  (1)  By  the  holi- 
ness of  My  life ;  for  which  of  you  convinceth  Me  of  sin  ?  (2)  By  condemning  the 
works  of  the  devil — murder,  and  lying,  and  all  those  other  sins  which  are  his 
special  works.  (3)  By  not  attempting  to  do  what  Satan  is  always  striving  to  do  in 
seeking  to  usurp  to  himself  the  glory  which  belongs  to  the  Father.  Our  Blessed 
Lord's  argument  to  those  who  blasphemed  Him  is  this :  No  one  who  has  a  devil 
honours  God  or  can  honour  Him,  but  on  the  other  hand  he  dishonours  Him ;  but  I 
honour  my  Father— God :  therefore  I  have  not  a  devil.  {W.  Denton,  M.A.)  The 
force  ojf  the  accusation : — The  rendering  "  devil "  cannot  now  be  improved.  Wiolifa 
word  is  "  fiend,"  which  in  this  sense  is  obsolete.  But  every  reader  of  the  Greek 
must  feel  how  little  our  English  word  can  represent  the  two  distinct  ideas  repre- 
sented by  two  distinct  words,  here  and  in  ver.  44.  "  Demon,"  used  originally  for 
the  lower  divinities,  and  not  unfrequently  for  the  gods,  passed  in  the  Scripturea, 
which  taught  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God,  into  the  sense  of  an  evil  spirit.  Thuc 
the  word  which  could  represent  the  attendant  genius  of  Socrates  came  to  expreat 


n  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  chip.  Tin. 

what  we  speak  of  as  demoniacal  possession,  and  the  sapposed  power  of  witchcraft 
and  sorcery.  Socrates  is  made  to  say:  "For  this  reason,  therefore,  rather  than 
for  any  other,  he  calls  them  demons,  because  they  were  prudent  and  knowing." 
The  history  of  Simon  Magna  reminds  us  that  the  people  of  Samaria,  from  the  least 
to  the  greatest,  had  been  for  a  long  time  under  the  influence  of  his  sorceries  (Acta 
viii.  9,  &c.),  and  it  is  probable  that  there  is  a  special  connection  in  the  words  here, 
"Samaritan"  and  "devil."  (Archdeacon  Watkins.)  A  hard  name  eaty : — K 
hard  name  is  easier  than  a  hard  argument.     (Van  Doren.) 

Yer.  51.  If  any  man  keep  My  saying  he  shall  never  see  death.  I.  Tbb 
CHARACTER  DK8CRIBED.  1.  The  "  sayiug "  of  Christ  means  the  whole  system  of 
truth  which  He  has  taught,  and  includes — (1)  All  the  doctrines  and  precepts 
publicly  inculcated  by  Himself  as  reported  by  the  Evangelists.  (2)  Those  which 
He  taught  more  privately  to  His  apostles,  the  meaning  of  which  was  disclosed 
after  His  departure.  Eeserve  on  certain  points  during  His  lifetime  was  necessary. 
Had  He  expUcitly  avowed  His  divinity,  e.g.,  it  is  hard  to  conceive  how  those 
prophecies  which  foretold  His  sufferings  and  death  would  have  received  fulfilment. 
After  Pentecost  the  apostles  were  guided  into  all  the  truth.  (3)  The  inspired 
sayings  of  the  apostles,  because  dictated  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  (4)  The  whole 
canon  of  Scripture,  for  the  Old  Testament  was  written  under  the  influence  of  <ha 
Spirit  of  Jesus.  2.  To  keep  this  "  saying  "  implies — (1)  A  knowledge  and  belief  of 
the  Divine  truth  by  the  understanding.  A  man  cannot  keep  what  he  does  not  know. 
This  involves  careful  study  with  the  use  of  every  help,  and  prayer  for  the  illumina- 
tion of  the  Spirit.  (2)  Betention  of  it  in  the  memory.  "  Ye  are  saved  if  ye  keep 
in  memoiy"  (see  2  Peter  ii.  3).  This  is  accomplished  only  by  continuous  and 
diligent  study  and  meditation.  (3)  Love  of  it.  No  knowledge  of  Christ's  doctrine 
is  of  any  utUity,  unless  the  heart  be  interested.  (4)  A  practical  attention  to  its 
requirements:  its  adoption  as  the  rule  of  life.  (5)  A  stedfast  adherence  to  the 
cause  of  truth,  and  a  profession  of  it  according  to  our  opportunities.  To  "  keep  " 
is  opposed  to  desertion.  Hence  we  must  "abide  in  Christ's  word."  II.  Thb 
PRIVILEGE  ATTACHED  TO  THIS  CHABACTEB.  "  Ncvcr  ses  death  "  means — 1.  Negatively. 
(1)  Not  exemption  from  natural  death.  This  is  "  appointed  unto  all  men."  Enoch 
and  Elijah  were  exempted :  so  will  those  be  who  are  alive  at  Christ's  coming.  And 
God  could  easily  have  extended  the  benefit  of  translation,  but  there  are  good 
reasons  why  He  has  not — (a)  Such  a  course  would  Lave  involved  a  perpetual 
miracle,  and  so  have  involved  a  waste  of  Divine  power,  (h)  By  death  Christ's 
people  become  more  exactly  conformed  to  their  Head,  (c)  Death  maintains  a 
constant  memorial  of  the  evil  of  sin.  (d)  The  present  abolition  of  death  woold 
deprive  Christ's  second  advent  of  half  its  splendour,  and  render  the  last  judgment 
practically  useless.  (2)  Not  continued  ejustence  merely  to  good  men  in  opposition 
to  annihilation.  In  this  sense  none  shall  see  death.  Continued  existence  will  be 
the  ciuse  of  the  nngodly.  They  shall  seek  death,  but  death  shall  fiee  away  from 
them.  2.  Positively.  Christ's  faithful  people  shall  not  see  death — (1)  In  its 
natural  horrors.  Apart  from  the  gospel  death  is  a  fearful  enemy;  but  grace 
transforms  it  into  a  blessing,  and  makes  it  one  of  the  things  which  work  together 
for  good.  "  Death  is  yours "  if  "  ye  are  Christ's " — a  friendly  messenger  of 
deliverance.  Hence  the  happy  deaths  of  many  Christians.  (2)  Inasmuch  as  the 
prospect  of  death  is  neutralized  by  that  of  a  joyful  resurrection.  (Jjibet  Bunting^ 
D.D.)  Christ' $  saying  and  the  reward  of  keeping  it: — L  What  is  Christ's 
sATiNO  t  1.  The  law,  promulgated  in  spirit  and  effect  in  Paradise,  republished  a^ 
Sinai,  and  reinforced  by  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  This  law  was  given  to  create 
a  sense  of  sin  and  of  the  necessity  of  a  Saviour,  and  so  prepared  the  way  for— 3. 
The  gospel  (Bom.  viii.  2,  3).  The  law  is  the  storm  that  drives  the  traveller  to  the 
shelter,  the  condenmation  that  makes  the  criminal  long  for  and  use  the  means  tor 
securing  a  reprieve.  II.  What  is  n  to  seep  Christ's  bavinq7  1.  Beading  it 
carefully  and  constantly.  2.  Hearing  it,  "  Faith  cometh  by  hearing."  3.  Under, 
standing  it.  What  we  thoroughly  understand  we  do  not  easily  forget.  4.  Obeying 
it.  This  fixes  it  in  the  memory.  III.  Tee  reward  or  keepiko  Christ's  satmo. 
He  shall  never  see — (1)  Spiritual  death.  The  word  which  is  spirit  and  hfe  is  the 
seed  of  regeneration.  (2)  Eternal  death.  Christ's  saying  is  a  promise  of  a  blessed 
immortality  which  the  keeper  thereof  by  faith  has  made  his  own.  (J.  Saunders.) 
What  saying  is  it  to  which  our  Lord  refers  I — Our  Lord  uttered  multitudes  of  sayings 
while  He  was  apon  the  earth.  He  was  a  great  speaker ;  no  man  spake  like  Him. 
He  was  the  greatest  of  talkers ;  and  hence  innumerable  sayings  dropped  from  His 


«BAf.  Tin.]  ST.  JOHN.  93 

lips parables,  proverbs,  oritioisms,  invitations,  exhortations,  warnings,  command- 
ments, remonstrances,  encoaragements,  and  exceeding  great  and  precious  pro- 
mises. To  which  of  His  sayings,  then,  is  it  that  He  here  refers  ?  I  would  say  in 
reply,  that  it  is  not  to  any  single  saying  in  particular,  any  detached  or  separate 
"  saying,"  that  our  Lord  had  reference.  To  hit  at  random  on  any  one  of  Hii 
moltitudinous  sayings  would  indicate  an  utter  ineptitude  for  the  grasp  of  the 
Saviour's  ideas,  or  indeed  for  the  grasp  of  any  one's  ideas.  What  then?  The 
■aying  referred  to  is  manifestly  that  grand  multiple  message  from  God  to  men 
which  constituted  the  sum  total  of  our  Lord's  teaching.  Or  we  might  put  it  thus : 
It  is  the  sum  total  or  condensed  essence  of  all  the  revelations  that  were  divinely 
made  by  our  Lord,  in  our  Lord,  and  through  our  Lord.  And  what  is  that  ?  It  is 
evidently  the  glorious  gospel  of  God's  grace,  the  good  news  and  glad  tidings  coming 
from  behind  the  veil  of  all  terrestrial  things,  and  manifesting  to  men  a  living, 
loving,  compassionating,  sin-hating,  yet  sin-forgiving  God.  It  is,  in  short,  the  joyful 
announcement  of  free  and  full  salvation  for  the  chief  of  sinners.  That,  that  is  the 
"  saying,"  the  life-giving  "  sajdng,"  of  Christ  Jesus,  which,  if  a  man  keeps,  he 
shall  never  see  death.  "  Whosoever  liveth,"  said  our  Lord  to  Martha,  "  and 
believeth  in  Me  shall  never  die."  (J.  Morison,  D.D.)  Would  you  wish  to  be  in 
the  blissful  condition  depicted  in  our  Saviour's  language  ?  Then  keep  His  saying. 
Keep  His  words.  Keep  His  Word.  Keep  the  truth  about  Himself ;  keep  Himself, 
the  living  Word,  the  living  gospel.  Keep  Him  in  your  thoughts,  affections,  mind, 
heart.  Let  everything  slip  and  pass  away  from  you  which  you  cannot  keep  side  by 
side  with  Him.  (Ibid.)  Immunity  from  death : — What  means  the  Saviour  ?  Death 
is.  It  is  a  reality.  It  exists  far  and  wide  over  the  length  and  breadth  of  this 
world,  in  which  we  are  all  tenants  at  will.  But  in  the  profounder  and  only 
"awful"  acceptation  of  the  term,  "death"  will  never  come  nigh  the  man  who 
keeps  Christ's  saying.  1.  The  grave  is  dark.  Death  to  the  unbeliever  is  like  a  sky 
with  neither  sun,  nor  moon,  nor  stars  overhead,  and  no  prospect  of  a  dawn  on  the 
morrow.  Is  it  not  so  ?  Is  not  that  the  death  that  is  looming  over  the  impenitent  ? 
If  it  be,  never  shall  the  man  who  believes  in  Jesus,  and  who  keeps  the  saying  of  Jesus, 
never  shall  he  see  death,  never  shall  he  die.  The  true  believer  of  Christ's  gospel  dwells 
in  true  '*  light  "  ;  and  lives  in  it.  Contact  with  Jesus  insures  his  illumination ;  and 
all  the  way  along  life's  highways  and  byways  he  enjoys  the  light.  2.  Many  regard 
death  as  the  total  and  final  rupture  and  cessation  of  all  further  possibilities  of  sweet 
companionship  and  friendship.  He  who  dies  enters  inevitably,  according  to  their 
anticipation,  into  utter  loneliness  and  dreariness.  He  is  deserted  for  ever.  But, 
most  assuredly,  there  is  no  such  death  to  the  believing.  Their  true  life  is  not  cut 
short  at  the  end,  or  arrested  midway,  or  otherwise  impaired.  It  has  no  end  and 
no  interruption.  It  is  "life  everlasting."  And  one  of  the  many  true  elements 
that  enter  into  the  blessedness  that  is  its  nature  is  everlasting  companionship  with 
the  holy  and  the  happy  in  glory.  3.  To  multitudes  death  means  violent  removal 
from  aU  their  carefully  accumulated  treasures,  all  their  most  highly-prized  posses- 
sions. Death  to  the  unbeUever  is  the  loss,  not  only  of  all  these  things,  but  likewise 
of  all  possibility  of  the  enjoyment  of  them,  and  of  the  enjoyment  of  any  possession 
whatsoever.  But  if  so,  if  all  this  be  death,  then  the  believer  in  Jesus  will  never  see 
it ;  for  that  which  men  call  death,  in  their  common  parlance  with  one  another, 
will  only  translate  the  believer  into  the  possession  of  the  fulness  of  life  and  joy, 
Neither  things  present,  nor  things  to  come,  neither  things  below,  nor  things 
above,  no  depth,  no  height,  no  length,  no  breadth,  will  be  able  to  separate  the 
believer  from  that  love  of  God  and  of  Jesus  which  is  the  never-failing  source  and  foun* 
tain  of  inextinguishable  bUss.  (Ibid.)  Theunimportanceof  death  to  a  Christian:^ 
It  is  a  matter  of  small  importance  how  a  man  dies.  If  he  is  prepared,  if  he  is  a 
Christian,  it  matters  not  how  he  goes  to  his  crown.  There  have  been  some 
triumphant  deaths,  some  wonderful  deaths,  before  which  the  gates  of  paradise 
seem  to  swing  open  and  flood  them  with  light,  and  the  superior  splendour  of  the 
invisible  turned  the  dying  hour  into  the  soul's  nuptials.  Such  were  the  deaths  of 
St.  Stephen  and  Poly  carp,  of  Latimer  and  Payson  and  Hervey,  and  of  some  known 
to  you  and  to  me.  But  such  angels'  visits  to  the  dying  couch  are  few  and  far 
between.  Most  souls  go  out  in  clouds  or  storms ;  in  unconsciousness  or  pain. 
But  what  does  it  matter  ?  The  only  sinless  soul  that  ever  descended  the  valley  of 
the  shadow  of  death  cried  from  the  Stygian  darkness  and  solitude,  "  My  God,  My 
God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me  ?  "  But  in  that  hour  He  conquered  I  He  vanquished 
death  and  robbed  the  grave  of  its  victory.  What  does  it  matter,  then,  if  we  follow 
Him  through  the  darkness  to  the  light,  through  the  battle  to  the  triumph  t  What  does 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  rtn 

it  matter  if  I  tremble  ?  Underneath  me  are  the  everlasting  arms.  What  does  il 
matter  if  I  cannot  see  ?  He  is  leading  me  through  the  ebon  shades.  What  does  it 
matter  if  I  seem  alone  ?  He  goes  with  me,  as  He  has  gone  so  often  with  others 
before,  through  what  seems  the  untrod  solitudes  of  death.  The  last  hoar  of  the 
labourer's  summer  day  may  be  hot  and  weary,  but  the  rest  of  eventide  will  be 
sweet,  and  the  night  will  be  cool.  The  last  mile  of  the  homeward  journey  may 
burn  the  traveller's  bleeding  feet,  but  love  and  welcome  will  soothe  the  pain  and 
wipe  the  pilgrim's  brow.  As  we  approach  the  land,  the  winds  may  be  boisterous, 
and  the  waves  break  loud  upon  the  rocky  coast ;  but  the  harbour  will  throw  its 
protecting  arms  around  the  home-bound  ship,  and  we  shall  be  safe.  (R.  S.  Barrett.} 
The  antidote  of  death : — I.  The  antidote  itself.  The  text  suggests — 1.  The  life- 
giving  power  of  the  Word  of  Christ.  We  all  know  something  of  the  power  of  a 
word — of  an  orator  on  his  audience,  of  a  general  on  his  army,  of  a  friend  on  his 
tempted  or  afflicted  associate.  Hence,  we  may  conceive  how  a  saying  of  Christ 
may  have  power.  He  in  fact  is  "  the  Word,"  and  His  "  words  are  spirit  and  life." 
Thus  we  read  that  we  are  bom  again  by  it,  and  that  it  must  dwell  in  us  richly, 
which  shows  that  the  Word  of  Christ  is  the  seed-corn  of  the  soul's  life,  which 
sown  in  the  heart  germinates  into  the  tree  of  righteousness.  2.  The  reception 
which  the  Word  of  Christ  requires.  It  is  necessary  that  it  should  be  listened  to, 
nnderstood  and  remembered :  but  all  this  may  be  done  without  the  experience  of 
its  life-giving  virtue.  It  must  as  seed  be  hid  in  the  soul  accompanied  by  the  energy 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  We  do  not  keep  it  unless  we  live  in  Christ,  walk  ia  Christ, 
and  have  our  whole  being  fashioned  after  Him.  Without  this  literary  knowledge 
and  controversial  defence  of  it  are  worthless.  3.  Here  we  see — (1)  The  proof  of 
the  conscious  Divinity  of  our  Lord.  None  else  ever  dared  to  say  this.  (2)  The 
extent  of  His  life-giving  power.  This  wonderful  saying  is  confined  to  none. 
(3)  The  necessity  of  a  Christian  life  here.  The  antidote  must  be  applied  before 
the  mischief  has  done  its  last  and  fatal  work.    II.  The  operation  of  this  antidotb. 

1.  Negatively.  Not  exemption  from  the  common  lot.  (1)  Constantly  occuring 
facts  forbid  this.  The  righteous  man  dies  as  well  as  the  sinner.  (2)  The  necessities 
and  frailties  of  our  own  frame  forbid  this.  We  no  sooner  begin  to  live  than  we 
begin  to  die.  (3)  Scripture  forbids  this.  2.  Positively.  The  leading  thought  is 
brought  out  fully  in  chap.  t.  24.  (1)  The  penalties  of  the  second  death  will  be 
avoided.  (2)  The  terrors  of  physical  death  will  be  mitigated.  (3)  The  con- 
sequences  of  physical  death  will  be  overcome.  (4)  The  soul's  highest  life  will  be 
perfected.  Conclusion — 1.  See  the  power  of  Christianity.  Nothing  else  can 
conquer  death — no  philosophy,  morality,  religion.  2.  Hence  the  importance  of 
keeping  the  saying  of  Christ — not  admiring  it  merely.  3.  What  solace  does  this 
truth  afford  a  dying  world  ?  {H.  Gammidge.)  The  undying  : — This  is  part  of 
Christ's  answer  to  the  charge  of  ver.  48.  The  latter  portion  of  the  charge  was 
answered  in  vers.  49,  50 ;  the  former,  "  Thou  art  a  Samaritan,"_answered  here. 
The  Samaritans  held  the  Sadducee's  doctrine  of  annihilation.  Christ  proves  that 
He  is  not  a  Samaritan,  but  He  proves  far  more.  I.  A  duty  of  the  pbesbnt. 
"  If  a  man  keep,"  «fec.  1.  The  "  Word  "  of  Christ  is  a  comprehensive  term  for  the 
substance  of  His  teaching:  repentance;  trust  in  the  saving  grace  of  God  in  Christ; 
response    to    the    love    of    God;     the    practice    of    holiness,   philanthropy,  &c. 

2.  "  Keeping  "  His  Word  impUes  that  it  is — (1)  A  revelation  to  be  retained  in  the 
mind.    (2)  A  stay  and  comfort  for  the  heart.    (3)  A  rule  of  conduct  for  the  life. 

3.  "If  a  man"  makes  the  statement  universally  applicable.  Therefoie  its  efficacy 
is  essential,  not  accidental  or  arbitrary.  H.  A  doctbine  of  the  future.  "He 
shall  never,"  &o.  One  interpretation  is  that  certain  persons  mortal  by  nature  are 
to  be  made  immortal.  The  meaning  to  be  preferred  is  that  to  such  the  earthly 
experience  of  dying  will  not  be  the  same  as  to  the  unrighteous,  that  for  them  there 
is  and  will  be  the  realization  of  a  deathless  life.  Look  at  this — 1.  As  a  revelation. 
It  is  of  the  first  magnitude.  The  Rig  Veda — oldest  of  Hindoo  sacred  books — does 
not  even  hint  this.  Moses  is  silent,  at  least  oracular.  There  gradually  grew  np  in 
Judaism  a  hope  of  it.  In  Christ's  time  Jewish  opinion  was  divided.  Christ  speaks 
clearly,  authoritatively.  The  words  are  best  taken  simply,  and  mean  that  what 
makes  death  truly  death  will  be  removed.  The  sting  of  death,  and  consequent 
separation  from  God  will  no  longer  exist.  As  this  involves  a  continuity  of  experience 
from  the  present  to  the  heavenly  state,  it  is  obvious  that  the  believer  is  conceived 
of  as  at  once  entering  into  eternal  life  with  the  first  act  of  faith  that  unites  him  to 
Christ.  The  Ufe  thus  begun  and  continued  is  one  life,  and  must  signify,  therefore, 
more  than  mere  duration,  viz.,  a  spiritual  relation  and  condition.    2.  As  a  con- 


«HAP.vm.]  ST,  JOHN.  95 

ditional  promise.  "  If  a  man  keep,"  &o.,  discovers — (1)  The  basis  of  this  life — a 
"Word,"  or  Christ  Himself  as  the  Word,  i.e.,  a  spiritual,  intelligible  entity  (Is  not 
this  mortal  life  built  upon  and  out  of  ideas  ?).  "  My  Words,  they  are  spirit  and 
life."  The  Divine  life  of  the  spirit  of  man  is — (a)  Word  created,  (b)  Word 
sustained  and  continued,  (c)  Word  enlarged  and  glorified.  (2)  That  it  is  a  con- 
tingent and  not  an  absolute  possession.  "  Keep."  With  what  earnestness  ought  we 
to  lay  hold  on  this  life,  and  so  guard  and  cultivate  it  that  we  shall  never  lose  it ! 
He  that  keeps  Christ's  word  will  be  kept  by  it.  (A.  F.  Muir,  M.A.)  Death 
invisible  to  the  Christian : — He  who  follows  the  light  of  life  which  shines  from  the 
words  of  Jesus,  does  not  see  death,  just  as  one  who  goes  to  meet  the  sun  does  not 
eee  the  shadows  behind  him.  (Rieger.)  Christians  do  not  taste  of  death : — A 
daughter  of  Mrs.  Gov.  Wright  recently  passed  away  amid  Tabor  splendour.  As 
she  approached  death,  she  said,  '•  I'm  going  up  I  I'm  going  up  1  You  see  I'm 
going  up  on  the  ineffable  glory.  What  a  glorious  approach ! "  To  her  husband 
she  said,  "  Oh  !  il  you  could  only  see  what  I  see,  you  would  know  why  I  long  to 
go."  To  her  pastor,  who  was  reading  of  the  "  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death," 
she  said,  "  There  is  no  valley."  The  night  preceding  her  death,  she  abode  in  the 
third  heaven  of  rapture.  Being  informed  that  her  feet  were  in  the  Jordan,  she 
said,  *•  Oh,  I  am  so  glad  I "  Her  last  words  were,  "  Jesus  is  peace."  {C.  D.  Foss.) 
♦•  Oh  what  has  the  Lord  discovered  to  me  this  night  I  Oh  the  glory  of  God !  the 
glory  of  God  and  heaven  I  Oh  the  lovely  beauty,  the  happiness,  of  paradise !  God 
is  ail  love.  He  is  nothing  but  love.  Oh,  help  me  praise  Him  1  Oh,  help  me  to 
praise  Him!  I  shall  praise  Him  for  ever  1  I  shall  praise  Him  for  ever."  {Robert 
Wilkinson.)  "Glory  to  God  in  the  height  of  His  Divinity  1  Glory  to  God  in 
the  depths  of  His  humanity  I  Glory  to  God  in  His  all-sufi5ciency.  Into  His 
hands  I  commend  my  spirit."  (Edward  Perronet.)  Believers  never  see  death: — 
His  (John  Wesley's)  death  scene  was  one  of  the  most  peaceful  and  triumphant 
in  the  annals  of  the  Church.  Prayer,  praise,  and  thankfulness  were  ever  on 
His  lips.  Many  golden  sentences,  worthy  to  be  had  in  everlasting  remembrance, 
were  uttered  during  his  last  hours.  "Our  friend  Lazarus  sleepeth,"  "He 
is  all  I  He  is  all  1 "  "  There  is  no  need  for  more  than  what  I  said  in  Bristol ; 
my  words  then  were — '  I  the  chief  of  sinners  am.  But  Jesus  died  for  me  1  * " 
••We  have  boldness  to  enter  i;ito  the  holiest  by  the  blood  of  Jesus."  "  That  is  the 
foundation,  the  only  foundation,  and  there  is  no  other."  "  How  necessary  it  is  for 
every  one  to  be  on  the  right  foundation  1 "  ••  The  Lord  is  with  us,  the  God  of  Jacob 
is  our  refuge."  "Never  mind  the  poor  carcase."  ''The  clouds  drop  fatness." 
*•  He  giveth  His  servants  rest."  "  He  causeth  His  servants  to  lie  down  in  peace." 
*♦  I'll  praise :  I'll  praise. "  "  Lord,  Thou  givest  strength  to  those  that  can  speak, 
and  to  those  that  cannot.  Speak,  Lord,  to  all  our  hearts,  and  let  them  know  that 
Thou  looseth  the  tongue."  "  Jesus !  Jesus  I  "  His  lips  are  wetted,  and  he  says 
his  usual  grace,  "  We  thank  Thee,  0  Lord,  for  these  and  all  Thy  mercies.  Bless 
the  Church  and  king;  and  grant  us  truth  and  peace,  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord,  for  ever  and  ever."  Those  who  look  out  of  the  windows  are  darkened,  and 
he  sees  only  the  shadow  of  his  friends  around  his  bed :  "  Who  are  these  ?  "  "  We 
are  come  to  rejoice  with  you  :  you  are  going  to  receive  your  crown."  "  It  is  the 
Lord's  doing,"  he  calmly  replies,  "and  marvellous  in  our  eyes."  " I  will  write,'* 
he  exclaims,  and  the  materials  are  placed  within  his  reach ;  but  the  "  right  hand 
has  forgotten  her  cunning,"  and  "the  pen  of  the  once  ready  writer"  refuses  to 
move.  "Let  me  write  for  you,  sir,"  says  an  attendant.  "  What  would  you  say?  "" 
♦•Nothing,  but  that  God  is  with  us."  "Now  we  have  done  all.  Let  us  all  go.'* 
And  now,  with  all  his  remaining  strength,  he  cries  out,  "  The  best  of  all  is,  God  i» 
with  us  1 "  And  again,  lifting  up  his  fleshless  arm  in  token  of  victory,  and  raising 
his  failing  voice  to  a  pitch  of  holy  triumph,  he  repeats  the  heart-reviving  words, 
••  The  best  of  all  is,  God  is  with  us  I "  A  few  minutes  before  ten  o'clock  on  the 
morning  of  the  2nd  of  March,  1791,  he  slowly  and  feebly  whispered,  '•Farewell I 
farewell  1 " — and,  literally,  "  without  a  lingering  groan,"  calmly  "  fell  on  sleep, 
having  served  his  generation  by  the  will  of  God."  (H.  Moore.)  Happy  dying : — 
"  I  am  so  far  from  fearing  death,  which  to  others  is  the  king  of  terrors,"  exclaimed 
Dr.  Dorme,  "  that  I  long  for  the  time  of  dissolution."  When  Mr.  Venn  inquired  of 
the  Bev.  W.  Grimshaw  how  he  did,  "  As  happy  as  I  can  be  on  earth,  and  as  sure 
of  glory  as  if  I  were  in  it :  I  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  step  out  of  this  bed  into 
heaven."  The  fear  of  death  destroyed : — Fox  relates,  in  his  "  Acts  and  Monu- 
ments," that  a  Dutch  martyr,  feeling  the  flames,  said,  "  Ah,  what  a  small  pain  ia 
this,  compared  with  the  glory  to  come !  "    The  same  author  tells  us  that  John  Noyea 


9S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tin, 

took  np  a  faggot  at  the  fire,  and  kissing  it,  said,  *'  Blessed  be  the  time  that  ever  I 
was  born,  to  come  to  this  preferment."  When  an  ancient  martyr  was  severely 
threatened  by  his  persecutors,  he  replied,  *'  There  is  nothing  visible  or  invisible 
that  I  fear.  I  will  stand  to  my  profession  of  the  name  and  faith  of  Christ,  come 
of  it  what  will."  Hilary  said  to  his  soul,  "  Thou  hast  served  Christ  this  seventy 
years,  and  art  thou  afraid  of  death?  Go  out,  soul,  go  out  I"  An  old  minister 
remarked,  a  little  before  his  death,  "  I  cannot  say  I  have  so  lived  as  that  I  should 
not  now  be  afraid  to  die ;  but  I  can  say  I  have  so  learned  Christ  that  I  am  not 
afraid  to  die."  A  friend,  surprised  at  the  serenity  and  cheerfulness  which  the  Bev. 
Ebenezer  Erskine  possessed  in  the  immediate  view  of  death  and  eternity,  proposed 
the  question, "  Sir,  are  you  not  afraid  of  your  sins  ?  "  "  Indeed,  no,"  was  his  answer ; 
"  ever  since  I  knew  Christ  I  have  never  thought  highly  of  my  frames  and  duties, 
nor  am  I  slavishly  afraid  of  my  sins."  (Religious  Tract  Society  Anecdotei.) 
Contrasts  in  death : — One  of  our  old  Scottish  ministers,  two  hundred  years  ago,  lay 
dying.  At  his  bedside  were  several  of  his  beloved  brethren,  watching  his  departure. 
Opening  his  eyes,  he  spoke  to  them  these  singular  words :  "  Fellow-passengers  to 
glory,  how  far  am  I  from  the  New  Jerusalem  ?  "  ••  Not  very  far,"  was  the  loving 
answer ;  and  the  good  man  departed,  to  be  with  Christ,  "  I'm  dying,"  said  one  of 
a  different  stamp,  "and  I  don't  know  where  I'm  going."  "I'm  dying,"  said 
another,  "and  it's  all  dark."  "I  feel,"  said  another,  "as  if  I  were  going  down, 
down,  down  I "  "A  great  and  a  terrible  God,"  said  another,  three  times  over;  "  I 
dare  not  meet  Him."  "  Stop  that  clock  1 "  cried  another,  whose  eye  rested  intently 
on  a  clock  which  hung  opposite  the  bed.  He  knew  he  was  dying,  and  he  was 
unready.  He  had  the  impression  that  he  was  to  die  at  midnight.  He  heard  the 
ticking  of  the  clock,  and  it  was  agony  in  his  ear.  He  saw  the  hands,  minute  by 
minute,  approaching  the  dreaded  hour,  and  he  had  no  hope.  In  his  blind  terror 
he  cried  out,  "  Stop  that  clock  1 "  Alas !  what  would  the  stopping  of  the  clock  do 
for  him  ?  Time  would  move  on  all  the  same.  Eternity  would  approach  all  the 
same.  The  stopping  of  the  clock  would  not  prepare  him  to  meet  his  God. 
Realizations  of  the  text: — "Throw  back  the  shutters  and  let  the  sun  in,"  said 
dying  Scoville  M'CoUum,  one  of  my  Sabbath-school  boys.  {Talmage.)  "  Light 
breaks  in  I  hght  breaks  in !  Hallelujah  1 "  exclaimed  one  when  dying.  Sargeant, 
the  biographer  of  Martyn,  spoke  of  "glory,  glory,"  and  of  that  "bright  light"; 
and  when  asked,  "  What  light  ?  "  answered,  his  face  kindling  into  a  holy  fervour, 
"  The  light  of  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness."  A  blind  Hindoo  boy,  when  dying,  said 
joyfully,  "  I  see  1  now  I  have  light.  I  see  Him  in  His  beauty.  Tell  the  missionary 
that  the  blind  see.  I  glory  in  Christ."  Thomas  Jewett,  referring  to  the  dying 
expression  of  the  Enghsh  infidel,  "  I'm  going  to  take  a  leap  in  the  dark,"  said  to 
those  at  his  bedside,  "  I'm  going  to  take  a  leap  in  the  light."  While  still  another 
dying  saint  said,  "  I  am  not  afraid  to  plunge  into  eternity."  A  wounded  soldier, 
when  asked  if  he  were  prepared  to  depart,  said,  "  Oh  yes ;  my  Saviour,  in  whom  I 
have  long  trusted,  is  with  me  now,  and  His  smile  lights  up  the  dark  valley  for  me." 
A  dying  minister  said,  "  It  is  just  as  I  said  it  would  be,  •  There  is  no  valley,' " 
emphatically  repeating,  "  Oh,  no  valley.  It  is  clear  and  bright — a  king's  highway." 
The  light  of  an  everlasting  life  seemed  to  dawn  upon  his  heart ;  and  touched  with 
its  glory,  he  went,  already  crowned,  into  the  New  Jerusalem.  A  Christian  woman 
lay  dying.  Visions  of  heaven  came  to  her.  She  was  asked  if  she  really  saw 
heaven.  Her  answer  was,  "  I  know  I  saw  heaven ;  but  one  thing  I  did  not  see,  the 
valley  of  the  shadow  of  death.  I  saw  the  suburbs."  A  young  man  who  had  but 
lately  found  Jesus  was  laid  upon  his  dying  bed.  A  friend  who  stood  over  him 
asked,  "Is  it  dark?"  "I  shall  never,"  said  he,  "forget  his  reply.  'No,  no,'  he 
exclaimed, '  it  is  all  light  1  light  1  light  1 ' "  and  thus  triumphantly  passed  away. 
{American  Messenger.) 

Vers.  52-59.  Abraham  is  dead  and  the  prophets. — Abraham  and  Jesus: — I.  Thb 
GEEATNEss  OF  Abbaham.  1.  The  ancestor  of  the  Jews.  "  Our  father,"  said  they 
(ver.  53) ;  "  Your  father,"  conceded  Christ  (ver.  56).  It  was  no  small  distinction 
to  be  the  progenitor  of  so  renowned  a  race.  2.  The  father  of  the  faithful.  He 
believed  in  God's  promise  (Gen.  xv.  6 ;  Bom.  iv.  20),  and  became  the  head  of  a 
spiritnal  progeny  who  will  far  outnumber  the  natural.  3.  A  conqueror  of  death. 
Christ's  word  (ver.  51)  signified  that  to  all  His  believing  people,  who  were  Abraham's 
children,  and  therefore  to  Abraham  himself  who  had  kept  God's  word,  death  was 
practically  abolished  (Matt.  xxii.  32).  4.  A  beholder  of  Christ's  day.  Not  an 
«xultant  anticipator,  but  an  actual  witness  either  prophetically  from  Moriah  oi 


CEAP.  vm.  8T.  JOHN.  97 

from  Paradise.  II.  The  superiority  of  Jesus.  1.  Of  loftier  calling.  Abraham, 
a  prophet ;  Christ,  a  Saviour ;  Abraham,  the  ancestor  of  the  promised  seed  ; 
Christ,  the  promised  seed;  Abraham,  the  progenitor  of  Christ,  according  to  the 
ftesh ;  Christ,  the  redeemer  of  Abraham,  according  to  the  Spirit.  The  Jews 
exulted  in  their  physical  connection  with  Abraham ;  Abraham  in  his  spiritual 
connection  with  Christ.  2.  Of  nobler  name.  Abraham,  a  servant ;  Christ,  the 
Son.  Abraham  called  the  Divine  Being  "  God " ;  Christ  addressed  Him  as 
"Father."  3.  Of  older  existence.  Abraham  was  not  before  He  came  into  thij 
world ;  Christ  was  before  Abraham  was  born.  4.  Of  higher  being.  Abraham 
began  to  be ;  Christ  always  was.  Abraham  was  a  creature ;  Christ  the  Creator, 
"  I  am."  Lessons :  1.  The  Supreme  Divinity  of  Christ.  2.  The  power  of  faith. 
3.  The  certainty  of  existence  after  death.  4.  The  true  secret  of  soul  joy.  5,  The 
one  object  of  faith  in  all  ages  and  for  all  peoples — Christ's  day.  (T.  Whitelaw, 
D.D.)  Christ  and  Abraham  : — I.  Christ  is  greater  than  Abraham  (vers.  52, 53). 
Notice  :  1.  The  implied  denial  of  the  Jews  that  Christ  was  greater  than  Abraham. 
In  this  we  see  (1)  a  sensuous  interpretation,  "  Abraham  is  dead."  They  took  death 
in  its  mere  material  sense  ;  they  had  no  profounder  idea  of  it  than  the  dissolution 
of  mind  from  matter.  The  dissolution  of  mind  from  truth,  virtue,  happiness, 
(Jod — which  is  of  all  deaths  the  worst,  and  of  which  corporeal  death  is  but  the 
palpable — tvpe,  had  not  entered  their  carnal  souls.  (2)  Their  ancestral  pride 
(ver.  53).  This  led  them  to  believe  that  Abraham  was  the  greatest  man  in  the 
universe,  and  themselves  consequently  as  the  greatest  people.  These  two  have 
always  been  among  the  greatest  obstructions  to  the  spread  of  truth.  2.  The  reply 
of  Christ  to  this  implied  denial.  (1)  He  asserts  that  He  honoured  the  Father, 
which  they  did  not  (ver.  54).  (2)  He  knew  the  Father,  which  they  did  not  (ver.  55). 
(3)  He  served  the  Father,  which  they  did  not  (ver.  65).  3.  The  declaration  of  His 
superiority  to  Abraham  (ver.  56).  IL  Christ  is  older  than  Abraham  (ver.  58). 
This  declaration  struck  them :  1.  As  absurd  (ver.  57).  2.  As  blasphemous,  and 
to  be  punished  as  such  (ver.  59).     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver.  54,  If  I  honour  Myself,  My  honour  is  nothing. — The  Father  honouring  the 
Son: — To  honour  is  to  do  or  to  speak  of  a  person  so  as  not  only  to  show  our 
esteem,  but  to  make  others  esteem.  Thus  God  honoured  Abel,  Enoch,  Abraham, 
Moses,  David,  &c.  This  is  specially  seen  in  His  dealings  with  His  Son — the 
purpose  of  His  delight  in  Him  is  to  secure  for  Him  the  delight  of  all  in  earth 
and  heaven.  I.  The  bestower  op  the  honour.  The  value  of  the  honour  depends 
on  him  who  bestows  it.  Honour  bestowed  for  price,  or  by  self,  unworthy  hands, 
or  those  incapable  of  judging,  is  worthless.  It  was  no  honour  for  Felix  to  be 
flattered  by  Tertullus.  The  Father,  however,  knows  what  He  is  bestowing,  and 
Him  on  whom  He  is  bestowing  it.  He  is  a  fit  judge  of  both  the  Person  and  the 
honour.  We  may  be  well  assured,  therefore,  that  the  honour  received  by  Christ. is 
well  bestowed.  II.  The  Beceiver  or  the  honour.  The  Son — very  God  and  very 
Man.  The  God-Man  in  whom  the  two  natures  meet.  A  new  thing  on  earth  and 
in  heaven.  One  in  whom  all  created  and  uncreated  perfection  meet.  The  only 
one  without  flaw.  III.  The  nature  of  the  honour.  1.  It  is  Divine  honour  ;  but  it 
is  more.  It  is  not  only  all  the  honour  which  the  Father  and  the  Spirit  receive,  it 
is  something  arising  out  of  the  superadded  humanity,  and  which  neither  the 
Father  nor  the  Spirit  can  receive.  2.  It  is  human  honour — honour  in  connection 
with  His  perfect  manhood,  of  which  He  is  the  only  example,  and  as  such  is 
entitled  to  all  the  honour  which  God  intended  for  the  race.  Nay,  more  ;  honour 
such  as  Adam  could  not  receive,  because  arising  from  His  manhood's  connection 
with  the  Godhead.  Thus  the  Godhead  gets  an  honour  such  as  it  could  not  have 
got  save  in  virtue  of  its  connection  with  the  creaturehood,  and  vice  versa.  There 
is  in  this  way  a  peculiar  honour  created,  and  a  peculiar  vessel  for  receiving  it. 
From  this  too  springs  peculiar  honour  to  the  Father  such  as  no  one  else  can  give. 
IV.  The  times  and  ways  in  which  this  honour  is  bestowed.  At  His  birth, 
baptism,  transfiguration,  resurrection,  ascension,  second  coming.  Every  day, 
dishonoured  by  man,  the  Father  honoured  Him  when  here.  At  present,  in  heaven. 
He  receives  glory  and  honour.  Hereafter  in  His  kingdom,  the  honour  is  to  be 
fully  bestowed.  V.  The  results  op  all  this.  The  bearings  of  this  honour  on 
the  universe  are  inconceivable.  It  is  the  pledge  and  measure  of  all  the  blessings  the 
oniverse  shall  receive  for  ever.  The  results  are :  1.  To  the  Father.  Through  thia 
honour  the  Father  is  more  fully  manifested  and  glorified ;  for  all  that  the  Son 
receives  and  does  is  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father.  2.  To  the  Holy  Spirit.  It  is 
VOL.   u.  7 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  no, 

the  Spirit's  office  to  glorify  the  Son,  and  by  means  of  this  His  Godhead  is  declared 
and  illustrated,  and  His  wisdom  and  power  displayed.  3.  To  the  whole  Godhead. 
4.  To  the  Church.  Christ's  honour  is  hers ;  for  all  that  He  has  is  hers.  The 
Bridegroom's  glory  is  not  for  Himself  alone.  She  shares  His  riches.  His  inheritance. 
His  kingdom,  by  faith  now,  in  reality  by  and  by.  5.  To  heaven.  The  greatness  of 
the  King's  honour  adds  to  the  glory  of  His  palace,  and  metropolis.  6.  To  angels. 
He  is  their  head  as  well  as  ours,  though  not  so  closely  knit  to  them  as  to  as.^ 
They  are  His  hosts,  His  servants,  His  royal  retinue,  and  each  shines  more  brightly 
from  the  glory  put  upon  Him.  7.  To  earth.  At  present  we  do  not  see  any  change, 
but  the  curse  is  to  pass  away,  and  earth  to  be  made  more  fair  than  Paradise.  For 
was  it  not  His  birthplace,  and  His  body  of  its  dust?  8.  To  the  universe.  Every 
planet  and  fragment  of  creation  shall  receive  fresh  lustre  from  this  newly  lighted 
sun.  Conclusion :  Let  us  honour  Christ  now.  He  will  be  honoured  hereafter,  but 
now  that  He  receives  so  much  dishonour  let  as  honour  Him.  Sinner,  honour  Him 
by  coming  to  Him  for  salvation.  The  honour  which  the  Father  puts  upon  Him 
is  the  security  for  a  present  pardon,  and  God  honours  Him  by  blessing  you.  (fl. 
Bonar,  D.D.) 

Ver,  55.  Ye  have  not  known  Him;  but  I  know  Him. — 1.  The  Jews'  ignorances. 

1.  They  knew  Him  not  in  His  majesty,  His  infinity.  His  mercifulness,  since  they 
conceived  of  Him  only  after  a  low  and  material  idea.  2.  They  knew  Him  as  the 
Maker  of  the  world,  but  not  as  the  Almighty  Father  of  mankind ;  they  saw  in  Him 
only  their  own  God,  and  refused  to  think  of  Him  as  the  God  of  the  whole  human 
race.  3.  They  knew  Him  not  as  He  is,  one  in  essence  though  three  in  person ;  as 
the  Eternal  Father,  by  whom  the  Eternal  Son  was  begotten,  and  from  both  of 
whom  proceeds  the  one  Sanctifying  and  Eternal  Spirit.  Hence  their  blindness  to 
the  meaning  of  the  words  of  Christ  and  their  rejection  of  Him  as  the  Messiah. 
4.  They  knew  Him  not  through  the  way  of  obedience  to  His  laws,  without  which 
there  can  be  no  real  knowledge  of  the  Father.  Thus,  although  their  faith  came 
from  God,  and  was  based  upon  His  revelation  of  Himself,  their  works  were  from 
Satan,  and  in  this  way  they  proved  that  they  knew  not  God  who  is  One  in  His 
faith  and  in  His  works.  Thus  were  they  liars,  not  because  they  said  He  had  a 
devil,  which  is  not  the  meaning  here,  but  because  they  declared  that  they  knew 
God  whilst  every  one  of  their  actions  declared  that  they  had  no  true  real  know- 
ledge of  Him.  n.  Cheist's  knowledoe.  1.  As  being  Himself  God,  of  the  same 
substance  and  nature  with  the  Father,  dwelling  from  all  eternity  in  the  bosom  of 
the  Father,  and  so  always  beholding  Him  as  He  is  in  His  essential  Godhead. 

2.  As  the  man  Christ  Jesus  He  knew  Him,  since  He  had  the  knowledge  of  Divine 
things  by  impartation  from  the  Father.  3.  As  man,  again,  He  knew  Him  through 
His  perfect  obedience  to  the  whole  will  of  the  Father,  and  His  doing  all  things 
which  were  well  pleasing  in  the  sight  of  the  Eternal  Father.  We  also,  if  we  would 
receive  and  retain  God  in  our  thoughts,  and  come  to  the  knowledge  of  Him,  most 
receive  and  keep  His  saying.     {W.  Denton,  M.A.) 

Ver.  56.  Your  father  Abraham  rejoiced  to  see  My  day. — Ahra7iam''$  vision  of 
Christ't  day  (Christmas-day  Sermon) : — Here  is  joy,  joy  at  a  sight,  at  the  sight  of  a 
day,  and  that  day  Christ's,  and  no  day  is  so  properly  His  as  His  birth-day.  First, 
Christ  has  a  day  proper  to  Him.  "  My  day."  Secondly,  this  day  is  a  day  of  double 
joy — "  rejoiced,"  "  was  glad."  Thirdly,  this  was  so  to  Abraham.  Lastly,  all  this 
nothing  displeasing  to  Christ,  for  it  is  spoken  to  the  praise  of  Abraham  that  did  it, 
and  to  the  dispraise  of  the  Jews  who  did  it  not.  We  are  now  disposing  ourselves 
to  this,  and  have  a  threefold  warrant.  1.  We  have  Abraham  for  our  example.  We 
do  but  as  he  in  making  Christ's  day  a  day  of  joy.  2.  Abraham's  example  approved 
by  Christ,  who  commends  the  patriarch,  not  that  he  rejoiced  at  the  sight  of  Him, 
but  of  His  day.  Verily,  the  speech  is  in  honour  of  Christmas.  3.  He  reproves  the 
Jews  for  not  doing  herein  as  Abraham,  which  is  against  them  that  have  a  spleen  at 
this  ffiast,  and  think  they  can  joy  in  Him  and  yet  set  by  His  dav.  Nay,  love  Him, 
love  His  day.  They  teU  us  that  to  keep  it  they  would  Judaize  (Gal.  iv.  10),  but  the 
context  shows  not  to  keep  it  is  to  Judaize.  I.  The  object.  "  My  day."  1.  Not  as 
the  Son  of  God.  He  has  no  day.  (1)  Day  and  night  are  parts  of  time,  but  His 
goings  forth  are  from  eternity  (Micah  v.  2).  (2)  If  we  would  improperly  call  it  a 
day,  no  day  to  be  seen  (1  Tim.  vi.  16).  (3)  If  we  could  see  it  and  Him  in  His 
Deity,  yet  there  is  small  joy.  2.  But  as  the  Son  of  Man  He  hath  more  days  than 
one ;  but  this  notes  one  above  the  rest,  a  day  with  the  double  article.    There  ar« 


.OTAP.  vncl  -Sr.  JOHN.  «9 

two  such  eminent  days.  Of  His  Genesis,  and  of  His  Exodus;  of  His  nativity  and 
His  passion.  (1)  Not  of  His  passion  ;  for  that  was  none  of  His  (Lukexxii.  53),  but 
ours  :  and  no  day,  but  rather  night ;  and  no  day  of  joy  (Luke  xxiiL  48).  (2)  But 
of  His  birth,  and  so  the  angel  calls  it  (Luke  ii.  11).  And  His  day  because  every 
man  has  a  property  in  His  birthday ;  as  kings  in  the  day  of  the  beginning  of  their 
reigns  ;  as  Churches,  when  they  are  first  dedicate ;  as  cities,  when  their  first  trench 
is  cast.  And  a  day  of  joy  in  heaven  and  earth  (Luke  ii.  10-14) :  to  all  people,  not 
only  on  and  after  it,  but  before,  and  so  to  Abraham.  Of  course  "  day  "  must  be 
taken  for  the  whole  time  of  Christ's  life ;  yet  that  time  had  its  beginning  on  a  day, 
and  that  day  even  for  that  beginning  may  challenge  a  right  in  the  word.  H.  The 
ACTS.  1.  Abraham's  first  act — his  desire.  (1)  The  cause  of  it.  Why  should 
Abraham  so  desire  two  thousand  years  before?  What  was  it  to  him?  You 
remember  Job's  Easter  (xix.  25).  The  joy  of  this  was  the  same  as  Abraham's 
Christmas ;  even  that  a  day  should  come  when  his  Redeemer  should  come  into  the 
■world.  For  a  Redeemer  he  needed,  and  therefore  desired  His  day  (Isa.  xxix.  22). 
The  time  when  he  had  this  day  first  shown  him  he  complains  of  his  need  (Gen. 
xviii.  27).  (2)  The  manner  of  it.  We  may  take  measure  of  the  greatness  of  the 
day  by  the  greatness  of  his  desire.  The  nature  of  the  word  is,  ♦'  he  did  even  fetch 
a  spring  for  joy,"  and  that  not  once  but  often.  He  could  not  contain  his  affection, 
it  must  out  in  bodily  gesture.  Think  of  a  staid,  discreet  man  being  so  exceedingly 
moved ;  and  to  do  all  this  only  in  the  desire.  2.  Abraham's  second  act.  "  He 
saw  it,"  though  "  afar  off  "  (Heb.  xi.  13),  "  as  in  a  perspective  glass"  (1  Cor.  xiii.  12). 
He  did  not  know  precisely  the  day,  but  that  such  a  day  should  come.  How  did  he 
see  it?  (1)  Not  as  if  he  could  not  see  it  unless  Christ  had  been  in  the  fiesh  in  His 
day.  So  Simeon  saw  (Luke  ii.  30).  But  better  than  this,  for  if  Simeon  had  not 
seen  in  Abraham's  manner,  he  had  been  no  nearer  than  the  Jews  who  stoned  Christ. 
(2)  If  not  with  the  eyes,  then  how  ?  There  is  in  every  man  two  men — outward  and 
inward.  Now  if  there  be  an  inward  we  must  allow  him  senses,  and  so  eyes  (Eph.  i. 
18) ;  it  was  with  these  that  Abraham  saw,  and  by  no  other  do  we  see.  (3)  By  what 
light  saw  he  ?  He  was  a  prophet,  and  might  be  in  the  Spirit,  and  have  the  vision 
clearly  represented  before  him ;  but  he  was  a  faithful  man  (Gal.  iii.  9),  and  saw  it 
in  the  light  of  faith  (Heb.  xi.  1,  27).  (4)  Where  was  this  and  when  ?  The  text  is 
enough,  but  the  Fathers  hold  that  he  saw  his  birth  at  Mamre,  His  passion  at 
Moriah  (Gen.  xvii.  19,  xviii.  10).  But  this  day  he  saw  at  Mamre.  Christ  was  in 
person  there,  one  of  the  three.  8.  Abraham's  third  act.  He  that  was  glad  that  he 
should  see  it  must  needs  be  glad  when  he  did  see  it ;  accomplishment  is  more  joyful 
than  desire.  And  what  grounds  (Gen.  xxvi.  4)  1  Conclusion:  The  reference  to  us. 
1.  Our  desire.  We  have  greater  cause  to  desire  this  day  because  we  have  greater 
need.  2.  Our  sight  is  much  clearer  than  his.  For  though  we  see  as  he,  and  he  as 
we,  by  the  light  of  faith ;  yet  he  in  the  faith  of  prophecy  yet  to  come,  we  in  the 
iaith  of  history  now  past.  3.  Our  joy  is  to  be  above  his,  as  we  have  the  greater 
cause  and  the  better  sight.  Rules  for  our  joy.  (1)  Here  are  two  sorts — (o)  Our 
exultation,  a  motion  of  the  body,  (b)  The  other,  joy,  a  fruit  of  the  spirit.  Let 
the  former  have  its  part,  but  should  not  have  so  large  an  allowance  of  time  and  cost 
as  to  leave  little  or  nothing  for  the  spirit.  (2)  That  our  joy  in  Christ's  day  be  for 
Him.  We  joy  in  it  as  it  is  His.  The  common  sort  wish  for  it  and  joy  in  it  as  it  is 
something  else,  viz.,  a  time  of  cheer  and  feasting,  sports  and  revelling,  and  so  you 
have  a  golden  calf 's  holiday.  (Bp.Andrewes.)  Abrahami's  sight  of  faith: — L  Thb 
GEOUND  OF  Abraham's  faith — the  promise  of  God  (Gen.  xii.  3,  xxii.  18).  To  open 
this  promise  we  must  inquire — 1.  What  was  this  seed  ?  We  must  distinguish  of  a 
twofold  seed ;  that  to  whom  the  blessing  was  promised,  and  that  in  whom  both 
Abraham,  his  seed,  and  all  nations  were  to  be  blessed  (Gen.  xvii.  7).  Now  this 
promise  was  either  to  his  carnal  seed  or  to  his  spiritual  seed  (Gal.  iii.  7).  But  then 
thore  was  another  seed — the  Messiah.  2.  What  was  this  blessedness  ?  All  the  good 
which  results  to  us  from  God's  covenant.  (1)  Our  reconciliation  with  God  con- 
sisting of — (a)  remission  of  sins  (Psa.  xxxii.  1, 2),  which  is  included  in  the  blessing 
of  Abraham  (Gal.  iii.  8).  (6)  Regeneration  (Acts  iii.  25,  26).  (2)  Eternal  life,  (a) 
The  patriarchs  sought  it  by  virtue  of  this  promise  (Heb.  xi.  13-15).  (6)  Unless  this 
had  been  included  God  could  not  act  suitably  to  the  greatness  of  His  covenant 
relation  (Heb.  xi.  16  ;  Matt.  xxii.  31,  82).  II.  The  steenoth  of  his  faith.  1.  His 
clear  vision  of  Christ.  "He  saw  my  day."  Three  things  argue  the  strength  of 
bodily  sight.  (1)  When  what  we  see  is  far  off.  Thousands  of  years  intervened, 
yet  they  went  to  the  grave  in  full  assurance.  The  nature  of  faith  is  that  it  can 
look  upon  things  absent  and  future  as  sure  and  near,  but  without  it  man  looks  no 


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tltt 

further  than  present  probabilities.  (2)  When  there  are  clouds  between.  Now  when 
the  promise  was  made  it  was  impossible  in  the  coarse  of  nature  for  Abraham  to 
have  a  son  ;  but  when  the  son  was  miraculously  given  he  was  commanded  to  sacri- 
fice him.  Now  to  strive  against  these  and  other  difiBculties  argues  strong  faith 
(Rom.  iv.  18).  (3)  When  there  is  little  light  to  see  by.  The  revelation  was  obscure ; 
the  patriarchs  had  only  Gen.  iii.  15 ;  Abraham's  was  a  little  clearer,  but  it  was  a 
small  glimmering  compared  with  what  we  enjoy.  Yet  they  could  do  more  with 
their  faith  than  we  with  ours.  What,  then,  is  this  clear  vision  of  Christ  to  us  ? 
How  shall  we  judge  of  the  strength  of  our  faith  by  this?  Ans. — (1)  As  to  Christ 
there  is  a  sight  of  Him — (a)  Past.  To  see  Him  whom  we  have  not  seen,  as  if  we 
had  seen  Him  in  the  flesh,  is  the  work  of  faith  (Gal.  iii.  1).  (b)  Present.  To  see 
Him  so  as  to  make  Him  the  object  of  our  love  and  trust  (John  vi.40  ;  Acts  vii.  56). 
(c)  Future.  We  must  be  ^.ssured  of  His  second  coming  and  that  we  shall  see  Him 
(Job  xix.  25-27).  (2)  As  to  the  glory  and  blessedness  of  the  world  to  come.  Faith 
is  the  perspective  of  the  soul,  by  which  it  can  see  things  distant  as  present  (Heb. 
xi.  26,  vi.  18,  xii.  2).  2,  His  deep  affection  or  rejoicing  in  Christ.  (1)  No  other 
affection  will  become  Christ  but  great  joy  (Luke  ii.  10,  xix.  6  ;  Acts  xiii.  48,  viii.  39, 
xvi.  34).  (2)  The  reasons  for  this  joy.  (o)  The  excellency  of  the  object  in  Himself 
and  His  work  (John  iii.  16) ;  in  His  necessity  to  ns  (Micah  vi.  6,  7  ;  Psa.  xlix.  7,  8  ; 
Job  xxxiii.  24) ;  in  His  benefit  (1  Cor.  i.  30, 31).  (6)  The  subjects  are  delivered 
from  their  misery  and  find  their  happiness  in  God.  (c)  The  causes — the  Holy 
Ghost  and  faith  as  His  instrument  (Rom.  xiv.  17  ;  1  Thess.  i.  6  ;  Rom.  xv.  13  ;  1 
Pet.  i.  8).  (3)  The  nature  of  this  joy  and  its  solid  effects,  (a)  It  enlarges  our 
hearts  m  duty  and  strengthens  us  in  the  way  of  God  (Neh.  viii.  10 ;  Psa.  cxix.  14). 
(b)  It  sweetens  our  calamities  (Heb.  iii.  17, 18).  (c)  It  draws  as  off  from  the  vain 
delights  of  the  flesh  (Psa.  iv.  7,  xliii.  4).  (T.  Manton,  D.D.)  Abraham  beholding 
Christ's  day : — I.  The  day  of  Christ.  Not  a  period  of  twenty-four  hours,  but,  aa 
is  usual  in  the  Bible,  a  dispensation.  1.  Some  of  the  remarkable  days  that 
Abraham  saw.  (1)  Looking  back  he  saw  the  day  when  the  Everlasting  Father 
embraced  Abraham  and  all  His  chosen  in  Christ  and  designed  their  salvation  (Prov. 
viii.  23).  (2)  The  day  of  Christ's  incarnation.  "  In  thy  seed,"  &c.  (3)  The  day 
of  Christ's  oblation.  (4)  The  day  of  Christ's  resurrection.  (5)  The  day  of  Christ's 
ascension.  (6)  The  day  of  Pentecost.  (7)  The  day  of  judgment  as  winding  up  the 
dispensation  and  completing  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise.  2.  The  characteristics 
of  this  day.  It  was  a  day  of— (1)  Light.  (2)  Gladness.  (3)  Life.  (4)  Love.  (5) 
Peace.  (6)  Salvation.  II.  The  blessed  vtEW  which  faith  takes  op  this  dat.  1. 
It  could  not  have  been  a  sensible  view — for  sense  never  can  discover  God.  The 
natural  man  receiveth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  2.  It  was  a  spiritual 
view — a  sight  by  faith.  Faith,  like  the  bodily  eye,  is — (1)  A  recipient  organ.  (2) 
An  assuring  organ.  When  a  man  sees  a  thing  he  cannot  be  mistaken  if  his  sight  is 
good,  so  a  man  cannot  believe  without  knowing  he  is  saved.  (3)  A  directing  organ. 
By  the  eye  we  are  guided  in  our  daily  life,  and  by  faith  we  walk  in  the  light.  (4) 
While  a  small,  the  eye  is  a  capacious  organ.  What  a  wide  prospect  it  can  take  in  I 
So  the  least  faith  pierces  the  invisible.  (5)  An  impressible  organ.  As  scenes  are 
impressed  on  the  retina,  so  is  Christ  on  faitn.  III.  The  jot  and  gladness  arising 
CUT  OF  THIS  SIGHT.  It  was  not  carnal  but  spiritual  joy,  including — 1.  Spiritual 
health  (Psa.  xxxiii.  1).  2.  Soul  satisfaction  (Psa.  xxxvi.  8).  3.  Enlargement  of 
soul.  4.  It  is  cordial,  hidden  and  unknown  to  the  world,  lasting,  matchless  and 
transcendent.  (T.  Bagnall-Baker,  M.A.)  Christian  piety  in  relation  to  the  future: 
Christian  piety — I.  Tckns  the  sodl  towards  the  future.  Piety  seems  to  have 
turned  Abraham's  mind  to  the  "  day  "  of  Christ.  This  refers,  undoubtedly,  to 
Christ's  incarnation,  personal  ministry,  and  spiritual  reign.  Nineteen  long  centuries 
rolled  between.  Still  he  saw  it.  In  relation  to  the  future.  Christian  piety — 1.  Givea 
an  interesting  revelation  of  it.  Science,  poetry,  Uterature,  shed  no  light  on  the 
on-coming  periods  of  our  being ;  but  the  Bible  does.  It  opens  up  the  history  of  the 
race.  2.  Gives  a  felt  interest  in  the  blessedness  of  the  future.  It  gave  Abraham  a 
felt  interest  in  the  day  of  Christ.  It  gives  the  good  a  felt  interest  in  the  glories  that 
are  coming.  And  what  glorious  things  are  on  their  march  I  II.  Fastens  the  soul 
UPON  Christ  in  the  future.  "My  day."  To  the  godly  Christ  is  everything  in 
the  future.  Do  the  rivers  point  to  the  sea,  the  needle  to  the  pole,  the  plants  to  the 
sun  ?  Does  hunger  cry  for  food,  Ufe  pant  for  air  ?  Even  so  does  the  heart  of  piety 
point  to  Christ  in  the  future.  He  has  a  "  day,"  a  universal  day  of  His  glorious 
revelation  to  come.  IH.  Brings  joy  to  the  soul  from  the  future,  Abraham  waa 
•'  glad  " — 1.  With  a  benevolent  gladness  ;  he  knew  the  world  would  be  blessed  by 


OBAP.  Tin.]  ST.  JOHN.  101 

ChriBt's  advent.  2.  With  a  religious  gladness ;  he  knew  that  God  would  be  glorified 
by  His  advent.  Several  reasons  might  make  us  glad  as  we  think  of  the  coming  day 
of  Christ.  (1)  There  will  be  a  solution  of  all  difficulties.  (2)  A  termination  of  all 
imperfections,  physical,  mental,  spiritual.  (3)  A  consummation  of  unending 
blessedness.  Conclusion :  Learn — 1.  The  congruity  of  Christianity  with  the 
prospective  tendency  of  the  soul.  The  soul  is  always  pointing  to  the  future. 
Christianity  meets  this  tendency  and  satisfies  it.  2.  The  antidote  of  Chris- 
tianity to  the  forebodings  of  the  soul.  Some  souls  are  always  boding  evil, 
and  well  all  the  ungodly  may.  Christianity  lights  up  the  future.  3.  The 
fitness  of  Christianity  to  the  aspirations  of  the  soul.  Wonderful  is  the  good  after 
which  some  souls  are  aspiring  in  the  future.  The  present  and  the  material  have 
lost  for  them  their  attractions.  Man  caimot  aspire  after  anything  higher  than  that 
which  Christianity  supplies.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Christ  seen  afar  off: — Avery 
lofty  mountain,  rising  in  lonely  grandeur  on  the  horizon  to  cleave  the  blue  sky  with 
its  snowy  pinnacles,  is  descried  from  afar.  We  see  it  a  long  way  off — from  where 
hiUs  and  heights,  shaggy  forests,  silent  uplands,  and  busy  towns,  and  all  other 
individual  objects  that  lie  between,  are  lost  in  distance,  and  present  the  appearance 
of  a  level  plain.  So,  just  so,  Adam  and  Eve  descried  a  child  of  theirs  rising  above 
the  common  level  of  mankind,  at  the  long  distance  of  four  thousand  years.  Of  the 
millions  who  were  to  spring  from  them  and  people  the  earth  of  which  they  were  the 
lonely  tenants,  this  distinguished  child  was  the  only  one  on  whom,  on  whose  birth, 
and  life,  and  death,  and  works,  their  weeping  eyes  and  eager  hopes,  were  fixed. 
Christ  before  Abrahavi : — But  how  did  Abraham  see  Him  and  His  day  ?  One 
answer  is,  Abraham  was  in  heaven  when  the  Son  of  God  left  the  seat  of  glory  and 
came  to  earth.  He  saw  the  return  of  the  trooping  bands  of  angels  whose  faces 
flashed  out  in  the  sky  above  the  plains  of  Bethlehem,  and  whose  voices  sang  the 
anthem  of  incarnation,  "  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  and  on  earth  peace,  goodwill 
toward  men  1 "  All  heaven  was  stirred  from  its  centre  to  its  outermost  rim  over 
the  coming  of  Christ  to  earth  and  over  the  great  work  which  brought  Him  among 
men.  Abraham  was  in  the  midst  of  this  stir.  There  is  another  answer.  You  find 
it  upon  the  page  of  Old  Testament  history.  There  we  are  taught  that  the  Son  of 
God  did  not  always  maintain  invisibility  prior  to  Bethlehem.  Under  the  former 
religious  economy  He  fellowshiped  with  men.  He  walked  with  Adam  in  Eden  and 
communed  with  him  in  the  cool  of  the  day.  There  is  quite  a  long  chapter  in  the 
Old  Testament  concerning  His  visit  to  Abraham :  how  He  found  his  tent ;  what 
Abraham  was  doing  ;  how  He  was  received ;  how  a  kid  was  dressed  and  cakes  were 
baked  ;  how  He  ate  and  refreshed  Himself  at  Abraham's  table ;  even  a  report  is  given 
of  the  conversation  which  passed  between  them.  From  the  declaration  of  superiority 
to  Abraham,  the  Jewish  ideal  of  superior  human  greatness,  Jesus  passes  to  the 
declaration  of  His  equality  with  God.  Christianity's  Christ  is  a  distinct  and  a  well- 
defined  person.  Everything  about  him  is  sharply  cut  and  fearlessly  stated.  He 
speaks  for  himself.  He  entraps  no  man  into  discipleship.  He  is  not  afraid  of  the 
light,  nor  of  the  witness-stand,  nor  of  the  crucible.  He  asks  no  blind  faith,  but 
submits  himself  to  scrutiny.  The  man  with  a  true  Christ  is  a  true  man.  The 
Christ  and  the  man  always  correspond.    (David  Gregg.) 

Ver.  58.  Before  Abraham  was,  I  am. — Here  the  Saviour  claims  with  a  double 
"Amen"  the  Incommunicable  Name  (Exod.  iii.  14).  It  signifies  unchangeable 
essence  and  everlasting  duration.  This  is  the  name  which  the  Jews  for  centuries 
had  not  dared  to  utter.  Silently  they  had  read  it,  used  another  in  its  stead,  revered 
and  adored  it.  Now  the  humble  Nazarene  openly  assumes  and  claims  it.  God's 
word  to  Moses  implies  the  impossibility  of  a  full  definition  of  the  name,  or  that  finite 
creatures  could  not  comprehend  it  if  given.  He  does  not  say,  "  I  am  their  Light, 
Life,  Guide,  Strength,  or  Tower."  He  sets  His  hand  to  a  blank,  that  faith  may 
write  her  prayer.  Are  believers  weary  7  I  am  their  strength.  Poor  ?  I  am  their 
riches.  In  trouble  ?  I  am  their  comfort.  Sick  ?  I  am  their  health.  Dying  ?  I 
Mxa  their  life.  I  am  justice  and  mercy,  grace  and  goodness,  glory,  beauty,  holiness, 
perfaotion — all-sufficient  through  eternity.  (W.  H.  Van  Doren,  D.D.)  lain: — 
This  title  teaches  us — I.  The  self-existence  of  Christ.  The  creature  is  a  de- 
pendent being  ;  God  alone  is  independent  and  self-existent.  II.  His  unchanqeable- 
NxnB.  Change  is  vrritten  on  everything  earthly.  The  billows  of  a  thousand 
generations  may  sweep  over  the  rock,  but  it  is  steadfast.  Jesus  is  "the  same  to- 
day, yesterday,  and  for  ever."  III.  His  all-stjiticiency.  We  are  at  liberty  to 
write  what  we  like  after  "  I  am."     Whatever  you  want  to  make  you  happy,  put  in 


IM  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  via, 

there.  (J.  M.  Randall.)  The  eternity  of  Chiist: — With  filial  pride  the  Jew 
thought  of  "  Father  Abraham."  So  hearing  of  our  Lord's  lofty  claims  they  asked, 
"Art  thon  greater  than  he?"  "Yes.  He  rejoiced  to  see  My  day."  With  pro- 
phetic vision,  doubtless  ;  but  surely  more  than  this  is  meant.  When  did  Christ's 
"  day  "  begin?  Away  back  at  the  time  of  the  first  promise  it  broke.  God,  called 
also  "  the  Angel  of  the  Lord,"  or  Christ  Himself  temporarily  assuming  human 
form,  appeared  to  Abraham  more  tban  once,  and  perhaps  here  is  a  reference  to  a 
revelation  of  Christ,  brighter  than  the  rest,  but  made  known  to  none  other.  Then 
the  Jews  said,  "  Thou  art  not  fifty  years  old,"  <S:c.  Our  Lord  replied  (literally), 
"Before  Abraham  was  brought  into  being,  I  exist."  The  statement  is  not  that 
Christ  came  into  existence  before  Abraham,  but  that  He  never  came  into  being  at 
alL  The  Jews  understood  this  as  a  Divine  claim,  and  took  up  stones  against  Him 
as  a  blasphemer.  1.  Then  we  think  of  the  eternity  of  Christ.  There  never  was  a 
point  when  He  began  to  be.  Not  so  with  man,  angels,  the  universe.  Go  back 
eighteen  hundred  years  to  the  time  of  Abraham ;  back  further  still  to  the  time  of 
Noah,  Enoch,  Adam ;  back  before  any  creature  existed :  "  Li  the  beginning  was  the 
Word,"  <fec.  Meet  Him  anywhere  in  eternity  past  or  in  eternity  to  come,  and  He 
Bays,  "  I  am."  2.  How  can  we  think  of  the  eternity  of  Christ  ?  What  know  we  of 
eternity  ?  Suppose  the  patriarchs  were  living  now,  with  what  awe  should  we 
listen  to  their  words  weighty  with  the  experience  of  millenniums.  But  they  had  a 
beginning.  Let  the  ages  be  reckoned  back  to  when  the  world  was  not,  and  added 
to  those  which  shall  follow  till  it  shall  cease  to  be,  and  what  shall  we  pay  for  the 
stupendous  sum  total?  But  this  is  not  eternity.  Call  in  angelio  numeration, 
and  gather  into  one  gigantic  aggregate  the  sands  of  the  shore,  the  drops  of  the 
ocean,  and  the  stars  of  the  sky ;  what  would  it  be  ?  Only  a  spot  of  spray  to  the 
immeasurable  ocean.  3.  But  the  eternity  of  Christ  is  a  doctrine  most  blessed  and 
practical,  because  related  to  the  Divinity  of  Christ.  We  need  a  Divine  as  well  as 
human  Saviour,  and  we  have  one  in  the  "I  am."  L  Is  Christ  eternal?  Then 
ASSUBEO  IS  THE  LIFE  OF  AiiL  uviNO  THINGS,  "  By  Him  all  things  consist."  Because 
He  is  eternal,  the  stars  wax  not  dim ;  they  are  as  bright  to  us  as  they  were  to 
Abraham.  Because  He  is  eternal,  the  flowers  of  each  coming  spring  are  as  fair  as 
their  blooming  ancestry  in  the  dawn  of  the  world.  Because  He  lives,  "  While  the 
earth  remaineth,  seed  time  and  harvest  .  .  .  shall  not  cease."  Because  He  hves 
man  lives.  How  sweet  and  fresh  the  beauty  of  the  new-born  child  t  The  hand  of 
the  Eternal  has  moulded  it.  And  so  come  the  successive  generations  of  children. 
The  years  bring  changes,  and  the  man  is  unlike  the  child.  Yet  the  soul  that  hves 
in  Christ  is  never  old  ;  it  is  "  renewed  day  by  day."  H.  Is  Christ  eternal?  Thebb 
IS  HOPE,  THEN,  FOB  EVEET  MAN.  Withdrawn  from  human  sight,  He  ever  Uveth  to 
make  intercession  for  us.  Stephen  saw  Him,  and  Paul,  and  John  ;  and  now  He 
reaches  forth  His  invisible  hand  to  save.  IIL  Is  Christ  eternal  ?  Then  wb  have 
ONE  ABIDING  Feiend.  We  cau  lose  much  here ;  much,  thank  God,  that  it  is  well  to 
lose — ignorance,  bad  habits,  sin.  But  there  are  some  bereavements  that  impoverish 
QS,  through  injustice,  misfortune,  accident,  loss  of  friends.  But  if  Christ  is  ours 
we  have  an  eternal  possession.  He  loves  us  to  the  end.  Lose  what  we  may,  who 
ean  be  poor  with  Him.  "Who  shall  separate  us,"  &c.  IV.  Is  Christ  eternal? 
Then  His  kingdom  though  delayed  shall  come.  We  wonder  at  the  tardy  steps  of 
Truth.  But  what  are  the  millenniums  to  Christ  ?  His  name  shall  endure  for  ever. 
(G.  T.  Coster.)  The  pre-existence  of  Christ : — Does  it  appear  that  Christ  was 
eonscioas  of  having  existed  previously  to  His  human  life  ?  Suppose  that  He  is 
only  a  good  man  enjoying  the  highest  degree  of  intercommunion  with  God,  no 
reference  to  a  pre-existent  life  can  be  anticipated.  There  is  nothing  to  warrant  it 
in  the  Mosaic  revelation,  and  to  have  professed  it  on  the  soil  of  Palestine  would 
have  been  regarded  as  proof  of  derangement.  But  believe  that  Christ  is  the  Only- 
begotten  Son  of  God,  and  some  references  to  a  consciousness  extending  backwards 
into  a  boundless  eternity  are  to  be  looked  for.  Let  us  then  listen  to  Him  as  He 
proclaims, "  If  a  man  keep  My  saying  He  shall  never  see  death"  (ver.  52).  The  Jews 
exclaim  that  by  such  an  announcement  He  assumes  to  be  greater  than  Abraham. 
The  response  to  this  is,  "  Your  father  Abraham  rejoiced  to  see  My  day,"  <fec. 
Abraham  had  seen  the  day  of  Messiah  by  the  light  of  prophecy,  and  accordingly 
this  statement  was  a  claim  on  the  part  of  Jesus  to  be  the  true  Messiah.  Of  itseU 
Bach  a  claim  would  not  have  shocked  the  Jews ;  they  would  have  discussed  it  on 
its  merits.  They  had  latterly  looked  for  a  political  chief,  victorious  but  human,  in 
their  expected  Messiah ;  they  would  have  welcomed  any  prospect  of  realizing  their 
expectations.    But  they  detected  a  deeper  and  less  welcome  meaning.     He  had 


tour  vra.]  ST.  JOHN.  103 

meant,  they  thought,  by  His  "  day,"  something  more  than  the  years  of  His  human 
life.  At  any  rate,  they  would  ask  Him  a  question,  which  would  at  once  justify  their 
suspieioDS  ot  enable  Him  to  clear  Himself  (ver.  57).  Now  if  our  Lord  had  only 
claimed  to  be  a  human  Messiah  He  must  have  earnestly  disavowed  any  such 
inference.  He  might  have  replied  that  if  Abraham  saw  Him  by  the  light  of 
prophecy,  this  did  not  of  itself  imply  that  He  was  Abraham's  contemporary.  But 
His  actual  answer  more  than  justified  the  most  extreme  suspicions,  "Before 
Abraham  was,  I  am."  In  these  tremendous  words  the  Speaker  institutes  a  double 
contrast  in  respect  both  of  the  duration  and  the  mode  of  His  existence,  between 
Himself  and  the  great  ancestor  of  Israel.  Abraham  had  come  into  existence  at 
some  given  point  of  time,  and  did  not  exist  until  his  parents  gave  him  birth.  But 
*'  I  AM."  Here  is  a  simple  existence,  with  no  note  of  beginning  or  end.  Our  Lord 
claims  pre-existence  indeed,  but  not  merely  pre-existence  ;  He  unveils  a  conscious- 
ness of  Eternal  Being.  He  speaks  as  one  on  whom  time  has  no  effect,  and  for 
whom  it  has  no  meanmg.  He  is  the  "  I  am  "  of  ancient  Israel ;  He  knows  no  past 
as  He  knows  no  future;  He  is  unbeginning,  unending  Being;  He  is  the  eternal 
*♦  Now."  This  is  the  plain  sense  of  his  language,  and  perhaps  the  most  instructive 
commentary  on  its  force  is  to  be  found  in  the  violent  expedients  to  which  Humani- 
tarian  writers  have  been  driven  in  order  to  evade  it.     (CaTion  Liddon.) 

Ver.  69.  Then  took  they  up  stones  to  cast  at  Him. — Stones  of  the  visible  Temple 
east  at  the  comer  stone  of  the  Temple  of  God.  (W.  H.  Van  Doren,  D.D.)  The 
Jews  and  Jesus : — Followeth  now  the  issue  of  this  long  dispute,  and  particularly  of 
this  last  contest.  They  look  upon  Him  as  so  absurd  in  what  He  had  just  spoken 
that  they  will  reason  no  more,  but  seek  to  cut  Him  off  as  a  blasphemer ;  and  He 
takes  no  more  pains  to  convince  them,  but  delivers  EQmself  miraculously  from  their 
fury.  Whence  learn — 1.  Malicious  persecutors  will  not  hearken  to  truth,  though 
never  so  clearly  told  them ;  but  when  all  arguments  fail  them,  they  will  betake  them- 
selves to  violence ;  for  "  then  they  take  up  stones  to  cast  at  Him,"  wherein  they 
were  injurious,  in  returning  Him  the  reward  of  a  blasphemer,  who  had  told  them 
the  truth,  and  unjust,  in  their  tumultuous  procedure,  and  not  taking  a  legal  way. 
And  this  is  it  which  may  be  expected  of  all  contradictors  of  Christ's  doctrine,  if 
they  get  power  and  be  not  bridled.  2.  It  is  lawful  for  God's  servants  to  withdraw 
from  the  fury  of  bloody  persecutors,  when  the  persecution  is  personal,  as  Christ's 
example  doth  teach.  3.  Our  blessed  Lord  did  condescend  to  sanctify  all  the  weak 
means  prescribed  to  His  people  in  hard  times,  in  His  own  person ;  for,  He  who 
could  have  destroyed  them,  "  hid  Himself,"  and  made  use  of  fleeing,  "  He  went 
out,"  &o.  4.  Christ  can  disappoint  persecutors,  and  deliver  His  people,  even  in 
greatest  extremity;  for,  when  they  have  Him  among  their  hands  in  the  Temple, 
He  first  "  hid  Himself,"  and  then  "went  out  of  the  Temple,  going  through  the 
midst  of  them,"  &c.  Either  he  dazzled  their  eyes,  and  made  Himself  invisible, 
both  when  He  hid  Himself,  and  went  away  ;  or  having  done  so  for  a  while,  while 
he  hid  Himself,  He  did  bind  up  their  hands  that  they  could  not  touch  Him  when 
He  went  openly  through  them  out  of  the  Temple.  And  so  He  evinced  His  great 
power  even  in  His  infirmity,  and  so  also  doth  He  make  His  people  prove  strong 
while  they  are  weak,  and  perfects  His  strength  in  their  weakness.  (G.  Hutcheson.) 
Hatred  of  the  truth  : — Truth  is  hated  because— I.  It  sees  too  deeplt.  II.  Speaks 
TOO  PLAINLY.  III.  JuDGES  TOO  SEVERELY.  (Schnur.)  Jesus  Md  Himself,  and 
went  out  of  the  Temple. — Christ  and  His  Church  in  a  bad  world  : — The  escape  of 
our  Lord  was  no  doubt  a  great  miracle.  As  an  old  Divine  remarks  on  it,  "  Christ 
here  hides  Himself,  not  by  shrinking  behind  partition  walls,  nor  by  interposing  any- 
thing  else  between  them  and  His  own  Body,  but  by  the  power  of  His  Godhead 
making  Himself  invisible  to  those  who  sought  Him."  Once  before,  as  it  seems,  He 
had  wrought  the  same  wonder,  but  not  in  the  same  place,  nor  among  the  same 
people  (Luke  iv.  29,  30).  Thus,  as  another  old  writer  observes,  "you  may  under- 
stand that  our  Lord's  passion  was  endured  not  of  constraint,  but  willingly :  that 
He  was  not  so  much  taken  by  the  Jews,  as  offered  by  Himself.  For  when  He  will, 
He  is  taken ;  when  He  will,  He  escapes ;  when  He  will,  He  is  hanged  on  a  tree ; 
when  He  will,  they  can  lay  no  hold  on  Him.  "  St.  John  says.  He  hid  Himself ;  St. 
Luke  does  not  say  so — therefore  it  may  be,  that  in  the  one  case  His  enemies  could 
not  see  Him,  any  more  than  Balaam  could  the  angel ;  in  the  other  case,  that  though 
they  saw  Him,  the  hand  of  God  was  on  them  in  some  remarkable  way,  to  keep 
them  from  laying  hands  on  Him.  Another  circumstance  much  to  be  observed,  in 
oar  Lord's  manner,  in  both  these  two  several  miracles,  is  His  passing  immediately 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,    n, 

from  Hia  danger  and  the  midst  of  His  enemies,  to  the  performance  of  works  ol 
mercy  among  worthier  and  more  thankful  people.  When  He  became  visible  again, 
it  was  to  heal  those  who  had  need  of  healing.  The  particular  way  in  which  at 
present  I  wish  to  consider  this  great  miracle  is  the  following :  How  it  throws  light 
on  the  true  condition  of  Christ  and  His  servants  here  in  this  evil  world.  It  shows 
us  what  the  true  Church  of  Christ  and  what  true  Christians  must  expect ;  and  it 
shows  us  also  how  they  may  behave  themselves,  in  such  trials,  worthy  of  Him  whom 
they  serve.  The  plain  doctrine  of  Scripture  is,  that  as  affliction  is  the  lot  of  all 
men — for  man  is  born  to  trouble  as  surely  as  the  sparks  fly  upward — so  persecution 
is  the  lot  of  Christians.  They  declare  themselves  in  baptism  bound  to  be  always  at 
war  with  the  world  aud  the  devil ;  and  the  world  and  the  devil  for  their  part  will 
never  leave  them  alone.  But  further:  the  attack  on  our  Lord  on  this  occasion 
seems  to  show  what  way  of  thinking  it  is,  and  what  particular  part  of  the  Church's 
doctrine,  which  is  most  apt  to  draw  on  itself  the  censure  and  enmity  of  the  world. 
Why  did  the  Jews  try  to  stone  our  Lord  ?  because  He  represented  Himself  as  having 
been  before  Abraham.  So  a  while  after,  when  He  plainly  said  to  them,  "  I  and  My 
Father  are  one,"  they  presently  took  up  stones  to  stone  Him.  And  His  final  con- 
demnation to  death  by  the  High  Priest  went  on  no  other  ground.  Thus  it  has  ever 
been  between  Christ  and  the  wicked  world.  They  would  hear  him  teach  many 
things — speak  in  praise  of  love  and  charity,  or  utter  His  great  unspeakable 
promises.  But  when  it  comes  to  this.  You  are  members  of  Christ,  walk  worthy, 
then,  of  the  vocation  wherewith  ye  are  called ;  Christ,  who  accounts  you  part  of 
Himself,  is  the  Most  High  God ;  you,  as  united  to  Him,  are  partakers  of  the  Divine 
Nature ;  therefore  you  must  really  keep  the  commandments,  you  must  be  inwardly 
and  really  holy  as  He  is  holy :  when  this  kind  of  doctrine  is  put  forth,  and  urged 
home  to  the  hearts  of  men,  they  grow  uneasy,  and  start  objections,  and  make  diffi- 
culties, and  say  it  is  requiring  too  much ;  they  never  can  come  up  to  so  high  a 
standard,  and  they  take  people  to  have  become  their  enemies,  who  talk  to  them  in 
such  a  tone.  This  of  course  makes  our  duty,  in  respect  of  God's  Truth  and  wor- 
ship, harder  to  perform  ;  but  it  does  not  in  the  least  make  it  obscure  or  doabtfuL 
We  must  not  neglect,  or  forget,  high  and  mysterious  doctrines,  or  severe  rules, 
because  those  with  whom  we  are  concerned  are  impatient  of  being  put  in  mind  of 
them  ;  yet  again,  we  must  so  teach  them  as  they  may  be  able  to  bear — tempting 
them  as  little  as  possible  to  irreverent  hearing  and  careless  forgetting.  Jesus 
Christ,  His  hour  being  not  yet  come,  retired  out  of  the  way  of  His  enemies,  and 
gave  them  time  to  consider  and  repent.  So  it  becomes  us,  when  we  bear  witness  to 
the  truth,  to  be  full  of  that  great  charity,  which  will  make  us  put  ourselves  in  the 
gainsayers'  place,  and  always  consider  what  is  most  likely  to  do  them  good,  and 
bring  them  to  a  better  mind.  As  for  example  :  if  a  bad  or  profane  word  is  spoken 
in  our  hearing,  it  can  never  of  course  be  right  to  seem  amused  at  it,  or  in  any  way 
to  become  partaker  of  the  sin  ;  but  it  may  often  be  best  not  openly  to  reboke  it  at 
the  time,  but  rather  to  turn  the  discourse  for  the  present,  and  await  some  oppor- 
tunity, when  we  can  speak  with  the  offender  alone,  and  he  is  otherwise  more  dis- 
posed to  listen  to  us.  This  is  withdrawing  the  name  of  our  Lord  out  of  the  w»y 
of  reproach,  as  He  did  His  Person  from  the  stones  that  were  cast  at  Him.  Only  we 
must  be  very  careful,  that  we  do  not  so  retire  through  cowardice  or  sloth,  or  out  of 
care  what  men  may  say  of  us  :  and  the  proof  of  this  will  be,  if  we  seek  anxiously 
afterwards  for  opportunities  of  doing  the  good,  which  we  thought  we  could  not  do 
at  that  time  ;  and  if  we  deny  ourselves  something  for  the  sake  of  doing  it.  (Flain 
Sei-uwHs  by  Contributors  to  "  Tracti  for  the  Times.") 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Tbbs.  I-2S.  And  as  Jesus  passed  by  He  saw  a  man  which  was  blind  from  bl* 
birth. — Jesus  and  the  blind  man  : — I.  Chronic  blindness.  1.  A  type  of  spiritual  need 
(ver.  1;  Eph.  iv.  18;  2  Cor.  iv.  4;  Luke  ii.  34;  Isa.  Ux,  9;  Prov.  iv.  19;  Isa. 
lix.  10).  2.  Common  to  the  human  race  (ver.  2 ;  Eom.  iii.  23;  Psa.  xiv.  3;  1  John 
V.  19 ;  Rom.  v.  12,  14,  21).  II.  Help  geanted.  1.  For  the  glory  of  God  (ver.  3 ;  John 
vii.  18,  viii.  49,  50,  xi.  4,  xiv.  13).  2.  Because  the  time  was  short  (ver.  4 ;  John 
xii.  35,  xiii.  1,  xiv.  12;  Matt.  xxvi.  24  ;  Luke  xii.  50).    3.  To  show  Christ's  errand 


CHAP.  II.]  8T.  JOHN.  104 

on  earth  (ver.  4 ;  John  iii.  17,  iv.  34,  vi.  38 ;  Luke  ii.  49 ;  Psa.  xL  7 ;  1  John 
iv.  14).  4.  To  fulfil  prophecy.  (1)  As  light  of  the  world  (ver.  5  ;  Mai.  iv.  2 ;  Luke 
i.  78 ;  Num.  xxiv.  17 ;  Isa.  ix.  2,  xlii.  6).  (2)  As  opener  of  eyes  of  blind 
(ver.  6 ;  Isa.  xxix.  18,  xxxii.  3,  xxv.  6,  xlii.  7,  16).  5.  To  reward  faith  (ver.  7 ; 
Matt.  ix.  22,  29,  xlii.  58,  xv.  28 ;  Acts  iii.  16J.  IIL  Doubts  of  unbelievees.  L  As 
to  the  reality  of  the  miracle  (ver.  9  ;  John  vii.  12 ;  Matt.  ix.  3,  24,  xxviii.  15 ;  Acts 
i.  13).  2.  As  to  the  fitness  of  the  time  (ver.  14 ;  Matt.  xii.  2, 10 ;  John  v.  16,  18 ; 
Luke  vi.  7).  3.  As  to  the  character  of  Jesus  (ver.  16 ;  John  vii.  20,  ix.  24,  29 ;  Luke 
XV.  2  ;  Matt.  xi.  19 ;  Mark  iii.  22).  (S.  S.  TimeB.)  Jesiis  and  the  blind  man : — Here 
are  three  distinct  types  of  character  all  seeking  for  information.  1.  The  gossip-loving 
neighbours  whose  sole  desire  seems  to  have  been  to  see  or  hear  some  new  thing. 
2.  The  prejudiced  Pharisees  who  are  bound  not  to  know  anything  that  conflicts 
with  their  cherished  views.  3.  The  parents  who  are  afraid  that  they  know  too 
much.  4.  The  one  man  who  did  know  something  and  was  not  afraid  to  own  it, 
I.  Thebe  webe  mant  things  the  blind  man  did  not  know.  He  had  never  till  now 
seen  the  light  of  day.  Objects  familiar  to  a  child,  grass,  trees,  sun,  moon,  &c., 
were  unknown  to  him.  His  creed  was  very  short  and  contained  but  one  article, 
but  this  was  the  most  important  because  containing  that  rarest  of  all  knowledge- 
self-knowledge.  What  do  you  know,  boy  or  girl?  Something  about  grammar, 
arithmetic,  geography,  &o  ?  But  do  you  know  something  about  yourself  ?  Here 
yon  are  in  the  world ;  you  know  that  in  some  sense,  but  do  you  realize  it  as  the 
man  did  his  blindness,  so  that  it  affects  every  action  and  thought  ?  Do  yon  know 
that  you  will  not  stay  in  the  flesh  for  ever  ?  "  Yes,  ever  since  I  wrote  in  my  copy- 
book, •  All  men  are  mortal.'  "  But  do  you  know  it  as  the  man  knew  that  he  waa 
blind,  so  that  you  are  willing  to  accept  the  gift  of  heaven  through  Christ  t  IL 
What  the  blind  man  knew  he  knew  thorodghlt.  Aboat  this  one  article  he  had 
no  question.  There  was  no  ••  if  "  or  "  perhaps  "  abont  it,  no  room  for  Agnosticism 
in  it.  He  had  only  one  answer  for  his  neighbours  and  the  Pharisees,  and  could 
not  be  cajoled  or  frightened  out  of  what  he  knew.  It  is  best  to  believe  a  little 
thoroughly  than  much  superficially.  Not  that  creeds  are  to  be  despised,  but  as  a 
matter  of  fact  every  man  has  his  own  private  creed  which  does  not  coincide  with 
all  the  creed  of  his  church,  but  which  is  a  matter  of  experience.  This  man's 
creed  was,  "  One  thing  I  know ;  whereas  I  was  blind,"  &o.  The  deaf  mute's  creed 
was,  "  One  thing  I  know,  whereas  I  was  dumb,"  &c.  So  with  the  cleansed  leper. 
These  creeds  differed  in  their  premises,  but  they  all  led  to  the  same  conclusion,  that 
there  was  one  Healer.  We  may  have  been  brought  to  our  belief  through  different 
doors — one  through  that  of  sorrow,  another  through  that  of  providential  deliverance, 
&o.,  yet  there  is  one  conclusion,  that  Jesus  is  the  only  Saviour  of  sinners.  UL 
Thb  qbadual  way  in  which  he  appboachbd  to  a  knowledqb  of  Chbist.  1.  He  is 
only  conscious  of  an  unusual  presence  in  the  throng  about  him  who  exerts  a  strange 
influence  over  him,  then  stops  and  anoints  his  eyes,  commands  him  to  wash,  which 
doing  he  sees.  At  once  he  says,  "  A  man  that  is  called  Jesus,"  &a.  That  is  some* 
thing.  He  has  time  to  think  the  matter  over.  2.  When  the  next  questioner  asks, 
"  What  sayest  thou  of  Him  "  ?  he  answers  unhesitatingly,  "  He  is  a  prophet."  He 
is  getting  on  rapidly  now.  Not  more  quickly  do  his  newly-opened  eyes  take  in  the 
marvels  of  nature  than  his  newly-awakened  spiritual  vision  takes  in  the  glories  of 
Christ's  character.  3.  Next  he  hears  them  call  Jesus  a  sinner.  Nay,  he  says, 
"  God  heareth  not  sinners  " — a  further  stpp.  The  healer  is  a  sinless  one.  4.  A 
moment  later  he  avers  that  Jesua  comes  from  God.  5.  A  httle  later  comes  worship 
of  and  faith  in  Christ  as  the  Son  of  God,  where  he  reaches  the  limit  of  knowledge. 
IV.  Note  that  veey  little  knowledge  of  Christ  is  sufficient  fob  salvation.  A 
child  knows  more  than  that  beggar  did  of  Christ,  but  he  knew  enough  to  do  as  he 
was  bidden,  and  that  was  enough  to  save  him.  Christ  did  not  wait  untU  he  folly 
apprehended  His  character  before  He  healed  him.  "  He  that  willeth  to  do  His 
will  shall  know,"  &c.  V.  There  is  one  class  in  this  stort  who  made  themselves 
THE  world's  laughing-stock — the  Pharisees.  They  would  not  believe  their  own 
eyes.  They  were  so  eager  to  establish  their  point  that  they  made  themselves 
ridiculous.  There  are  many  people  now  who  disbelieve  in  tiie  face  of  stronger 
evidence,  and  who  do  not  believe  for  the  same  reason  as  the  Pharisees — because 
they  will  not.  VI.  An  ounce  of  expeeience  is  worth  a  ton  op  theoey.  The  blind 
man,  alone  and  ignorant,  had  the  advantage  of  the  whole  college  of  rabbis  becanse 
he  had  experience  on  his  side.  He  could  establish  a  fact  when  they  coold  only  ask 
questions.  It  is  better  to  know  one  thing  than  to  guess  a  good  many.  (Sermont 
by  the  Monday  Club.)        The  history  of  the  man  who  was  bom  bUnd:—!.  The 


lOe  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap,  nt 

miracle,  or  the  power  of  the  love  of  Christ.  2.  The  trial,  or  the  power  of  nprighi 
simplicity  and  gratitude.  3.  The  issue,  or  the  victory  of  faith  over  the  strongest 
temptation.  4.  The  profound  interpretation  and  lofty  significances  of  th«  event. 
{J.  P.  Langi,  D.D.)  The  healing  of  the  man  born  blind: — I.  The  greatness  of 
HIS  ATFLiCTiON.  His  blindness — 1.  Deprived  him  of  an  important  means  of  know- 
ledge. The  blind  may  acquire  a  word  knowledge  of  men  and  things,  but  he  ift 
powerless  to  form  any  corresponding  mental  picture.  Locke  speaks  of  one  who, 
after  listening  to  an  explanation  of  scarlet,  thought  it  resembled  the  blast  of  a 
trumpet ;  and  so  of  the  man  here.  There  he  stands  at  the  gate  of  the  Temple ;  his 
features  familiar  to  the  worshippers,  but  the  gorgeous  service  within,  and  all  the 
life  and  beauty  without,  he  had  never  beheld,  and  as  he  now  stood  beneath  the 
Redeemer's  gaze  he  was  unconscious  whose  pitying  look  rested  on  him.  We  are 
all  born  blind.  The  eyes  of  the  soul  are  there,  but  they  see  not.  For  many  years 
some  have  heard  the  disfiguration  our  moral  visage  described  and  the  beauty 
of  Jesus  depicted,  and  are  as  insensible  to  both  as  this  blind  man.  2.  Denied  him 
a  grand  source  of  enjoyment.  The  eye  is  the  channel  of  some  of  our  purest 
pleasures.  The  blind  know  nothing  of  the  beauties  of  nature,  art,  literature, 
friendship ;  and  the  spiritually  blind  are  dead  to  the  perception  of  a  Father's 
presence  and  a  Father's  love.  3.  Unfitted  him  for  the  discharge  of  life's  duties. 
Instead  of  being  able  to  care  for  others,  he  needed  others  to  care  for  him.  He 
whose  mind  is  blinded  by  unbelief,  prejudice,  or  passion  can  never  rightly  dis- 
charge his  duty.  The  light  of  God's  renewing  grace  within  is  the  only  sufficient 
qualification  for  doing  the  works  of  righteousness.  II.  The  manneb  op  his  cttbb. 
1.  There  was  the  Divine  employment  of  a  material  element.  A  medicinal  value 
was  attributed  to  the  saliva,  but  the  clay  could  only  have  further  injured  the  eyes. 
So  that  the  ointment  was  not  an  assistance  to  Divine  power  but  only  to  human 
faith.  2.  There  was  implicit  obedience  to  the  Divine  command.  Without  question 
or  debate,  and  actuated  only  by  hope  of  cure,  the  man  did  as  he  was  told.  What- 
ever God  appoints  as  a  condition  of  blessing  we  are  bound  to  instantly  accept.  If 
He  commands  us  wash  in  the  Saviour's  blood,  and  move  with  the  feet  of  prayer 
to  the  place  of  healing,  it  is  for  us  not  to  question  but  to  obey.  3.  There  was  the 
evident  operation  of  Divine  power.  The  clay  and  Siloam  were  only  outward  and 
visible  signs  of  Christ's  curative  energy.  The  cure  of  spiritual  blindness  is  possible 
only  to  the  power  of  God.  Neither  priestly  incantations  nor  clay-cold  creeds  can 
make  the  blind  to  see.  HI.  The  characteb  of  his  testimony.  1.  It  was  the 
embodiment  of  personal  experience.  He  does  not  attempt  to  explain  the  how  of 
the  cure,  nor  does  he  allow  himself  to  be  shaken  by  the  Pharipees'  objection  to  the 
Author  of  his  cure.  He  keeps  to  the  one  thing  he  knows.  There  is  no  evidence 
so  valuable  as  experimental.  If  we  have  been  brought  out  of  darkness  into  mar- 
vellous light  no  objector  can  destroy  that  fact  of  consciousness.  2.  It  was  sustained 
by  visible  proof.  His  neighbours  could  not  at  first  agree  as  to  his  identity,  there 
was  so  great  a  change.  So  by  their  fruits  regenerate  Christians  are  known.  3.  It 
was  borne  with  unflinching  boldness.  He  dared  and  suffered  that  which  a  Jew 
dreaded  most.  It  is  an  easy  thing  to  confess  Christ  when  the  confession  involves 
no  sacrifice.  But  to  witness  for  Him  when  convenience  and  custom  would  counsel 
silence ;  to  lose  a  good  situation  rather  than  deny  our  Lord — that  requires  courage. 
But  Christ  made  up  to  the  man  more  than  he  had  lost,  and  so  He  will  do  to  us. 
{W.  Kirkman.)  Opening  the  eyes  of  one  blind  from  his  birth: — I.  The  pee- 
LiMiNABiBB  OF  THIS  UEMORABLE  MiRACus.  1.  A  Strange  questiou  (ver.  2).  2.  A 
conclusive  reply  (ver.  3).  3.  A  solemn  reflection  (ver.  4).  4.  A  glorious  announce- 
ment (ver.  6).  li.  The  pecullab  manneb  in  which  it  was  wrought.  1.  The  action 
(ver.  6).  2.  The  command,  "Go"  (ver.  6).  The  design  of  which  was — (1)  To  try 
the  man's  faith,  as  Naaman's  was  tried.  (2)  To  give  greater  publicity  to  the 
miracle.  8.  The  result,  "Came  seeing"  (ver.  7).  IH.  The  various  disputes  an© 
INQDIBIEB  which  THE  MiBACLE  OCCASIONED.  Several  parties  are  introduced.  1.  The 
man's  neighbours  and  casual  acquaintances  (vers.  8-12).  2.  The  Pharisees  (ver. 
13,  Ac).  8.  Our  Lord  (ver.  35,  Ac).  Congenital  blindness : — While  I  was  living 
in  Geneva  I  became  acquainted  with  Dr.  Dufour  of  Lausanne,  just  after  his  suc- 
cessful operation  on  a  patient  blind  from  birth.  The  case  is  by  no  means  unpre- 
cedented, but  it  is  not  common,  and  when  it  occurs,  the  study  of  the  processes  by 
which  one  thus  put  in  possession  of  a  new  sense  comes  to  the  intelligent  use  of 
it,  and  to  the  power  of  apprehending  anything  in  the  mind  by  means  of  it, 
is  a  study  of  the  profoundest  interest  both  to  the  physician  and  to  the  mental 
philosopher.    There  are  very  apt  to  be  oircomstances  unfavourable  to  such  study. 


CWAP.  n.)  ST.  JOHN.  107 

The  form  of  blindness  from  birth  which  is  susceptible  of  cure  is  that  of  "  con- 
genital cataract ;  "  and  this  is  often  so  complicated  with  other  defects  of  the  organ 
of  vision  that  even  after  it  is  removed  the  patient  cannot  see  distinctly  ;  or  there  is 
a  deficiency  of  the  intellectual  faculties;  or  the  original  blindness  was  not  complete, 
80  that  the  case  does  not  furnish  an  example  of  the  actual  beginning  of  vision ;  or 
the  operation  is  effected  at  an  age  at  which  the  child  cannot  give  a  full  and 
intelligent  account  of  his  sensations.  The  case  which  Dr.  Dufour  treated  was  that 
of  a  man  of  twenty,  both  whose  eyes  had  been  covered  from  birth  by  an 
opaque  chalky  deposit  which  barely  permitted  him  to  perceive  a  difference  between 
light  and  darkness ;  only  when  a  strong  colour  was  made  to  shine  obliquely  into 
the  pupil  he  had  been  able  to  recognize  the  difference  between  red,  yellow,  and 
blue.  But  he  had  never  seen  the  form  of  anything,  a  surface,  or  an  outline 
After  the  operation  the  patient  was  kept  for  a  considerable  time  in  a  dark  room 
with  the  eyes  bandaged  ;  and  at  last  when  the  healing  was  sufficiently  advanced, 
he  was  brought  to  the  light.  He  groped,  and  sought  for  leading,  and  behaved  so 
like  a  blind  man  that  the  doctor  began  to  doubt  whether  there  was  not  a  deeper 
seated  blindness  that  would  defeat  the  effect  of  his  operation.  The  patient  was 
seated  with  his  back  to  the  window,  and  the  doctor,  in  front,  moved  his  hand  to 
and  fro  over  his  black  coat.  "  Do  you  see  anything?  "  he  asked.  "  Yes,"  said  the 
patient ;  "  I  see  something  light."  (He  already  knew  the  difference  between  light 
and  darkness).  "  What  is  it?  "  "  It's— it's — it's—"  This  is  all  that  could  be  got 
from  him.  The  doctor  tried  once  more,  putting  his  hand  before  the  patient,  some- 
times at  rest,  sometimes  in  motion.  "  Do  you  see  anything  move?  "  "  Move  ?  " 
The  doctor  kept  trying,  and  the  patient  gazed  intently  ;  but  the  most  of  an  answer 
that  could  be  got  from  the  young  man  was  that  he  saw  "  something  white."  The 
next  day  the  patient  was  seated  again  as  before,  and  the  doctor  showed  him 
a  watch.  He  said  at  once,  "  I  see  something  bright."  "  Is  it  round  or  square?  " 
No  answer.  "  Do  yon  know  what  square  means  ?  "  He  made  the  shape  with  his 
hands,  and  likewise  a  circle.  But  all  the  time,  looking  eagerly  at  the  watch,  he 
was  totally  unable  to  tell  whether  it  was  round  or  square.  The  next  day 
the  same  question  was  put,  with  the  same  failure  to  answer.  At  length  the 
doctor  let  him  touch  the  watch.  Instantly  he  spoke  up  :  "  It's  round  1 
It's  a  watch  1  "  Two  strips  of  paper  were  shown  him.  He  could  not 
tell  by  the  eye  which  was  the  longer,  or  whether  they  were  of  equal  length, 
until  he  was  allowed  to  touch  them.  He  was  shown  two  pieces  of  paper,  one 
square,  the  other  round.  "  Do  you  see  any  difference  between  these  papers  ?  " 
"Yes."  "  What  is  the  difference  ?  "  No  answer.  *' Well,  one  of  them  is  round, 
and  the  other  square ;  which  is  the  square  ?  "  He  hesitated  awhile,  and  being  told 
to  touch  them,  he  laid  his  hand  on  the  square  piece,  and,  feeling  the  corner  of  it, 
exclaimed,  "  This  is  the  square  I  "  Then  he  handled  the  round  piece  attentively, 
and  from  that  time  forth  had  no  difficulty  in  distinguishing  round  objects  by  the 
eye.  The  results  of  a  long  series  of  careful  experiments  with  this  patient  is  thus 
summed  up :  His  visual  sensations  were  clear  and  definite  enough,  but  he  had  no 
power  of  interpreting  them.  Each  sensation  required  a  special  intellectual  act  of 
comparing  the  impression  on  the  eye  with  the  impression  on  the  touch.  The  image 
of  external  objects  impressed  on  his  retina  was  nothing  to  him  but  an  assemblage 
of  outlines  and  colours,  in  which  he  perceived  no  order,  and  from  which  he  derived 
no  notion,  whether  of  form,  or  of  distance,  or  of  motion.  This  result  corresponds 
to  the  result  reached  in  the  half-dozen  like  oases  that  have  been  studied  and 
recorded,  beginning  with  Cheselden's  famous  case  in  1728.  The  incident  of  restora- 
tion of  sight  to  the  blind  has  been  used  in  modern  fiction  by  Wilkie  Collins  in 
"  Poor  Miss  Finch,"  and  by  Bulwer  in  "  The  Pilgrims  of  the  Ehine,"  and  used  in  a 
way  utterly  irreconcilable  with  fact  or  possibility.  Shakespeare,  as  might  be 
expected,  deals  more  shrewdly  with  the  subject  ("King  Henry  VI.,"  part  2).  Now,  it 
is  a  very  notable  fact,  that  in  the  gospel  accounts  of  the  heahng  of  the  blind, 
written  in  an  age  when  "  it  had  not  been  heard  since  the  world  began  that  any  one 
had  opened  the  eyes  of  a  man  bom  blind,"  there  is  not  a  syllable  that  is  incon- 
sistent with  the  facts  of  psycho-physiology  as  they  have  been  demonstrated  so  many 
centuries  later.  The  most  ingenious  tale-writers  of  our  own  day  fall  inadvertently 
into  such  inconsistencies.  These  plain  narrators  of  eighteen  hundred  years  ago 
•void  them.  How  t  They  must  have  been  going  by  facts  that  they  had  seen.  It 
was  in  my  thought  to  speak  of  the  peedagogic  interest  of  the  case.  Dr.  Dofour  was 
so  unprepared  for  the  incapacity  of  perception  in  his  patient,  that  he  was  ready  to 
believe  his  operation  a  failure,  because  of  the  slenderness  of  the  first  results.    Ii 


108  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (OHAP.  a. 

there  any  oommoner  source  of  discouragement  to  teachers  than  their  own  mistaka 
in  taking  too  much  for  granted  7  Is  it  easy  to  under-estimate  the  acquired  know- 
ledge of  a  little  child  f  A  careful  statistical  study  of  *'The  Contents  of  a  Child's 
Mind,"  lately  made  by  the  examination  of  candidates  for  the  primary  schools  of 
Boston,  yielded  results  of  a  sort  most  instructive  to  the  teachers  of  primary  classes, 
BB  showing  how  often  those  notions  which  we  should  assume  as  a  matter  of  course 
as  being  part  of  the  mental  furniture  of  the  least  and  dullest,  are  lacking  in  the 
minds  even  of  bright  children.  (L.  W.  Bacon,  D.D,)  Characteristics  of  blind- 
ness : — I  knew  such  a  blind  man  once — sharp,  shrewd,  clever.  I  was  staying  on 
the  Cornish  coast,  and  the  good  man  of  the  house  sat  in  the  settle  by  the  fiire.  I 
was  anxious  to  make  his  acquaintance,  and  seeing  he  was  blind,  I  said,  with  as 
much  sympathy  as  I  could,  "  Yours  is  a  great  affliction,  my  friend."  To  my 
astonishment  he  got  up  and  turned  upon  me  angrily,  and  denied  it  utterly.  "  No,  it 
is  not,"  said  he — '*  not  a  bit."  And  he  groped  his  way  out.  His  wife  hurried  in  to 
apologise  and  explain.  "  Oh,  sir,  I  am  so  sorry  ;  I  meant  to  have  asked  you  not 
to  say  anything  about  my  husband's  blindness.  He  always  gets  so  angry.  You 
know,  he  thinks  eyes  are  such  stupid  things.  And  he  can  do  a  great  deal  more 
without  his  eyes  than  many  men  can  do  with  them."  That  blind  man  opened  my 
eyes.  I  watched  henceforth  most  carefully,  and  I  think  I  learned  this — that, 
generally  speaking,  a  blind  man  is  not  conscious  of  his  infirmity.  A  deaf  man 
sees  that  he  is  deaf,  but  a  blind  man  cannot  see  that  he  is  blind.  As  the  result  of 
my  altered  manner  I  got  an  invitation  to  address  some  two  or  three  hundred  blind 
people.  I  was  almost  shocked  at  the  reason  given  for  asking  me.  "  He  won't  pity 
us."  Not  pity  the  poor  blind  1 — why,  it  was  the  appeal  that  had  often  diverted  my 
earliest  pence  from  some  indulgence.  But  I  knew  what  they  meant,  and  was  glad 
that  they  had  discerned  my  knowledge — the  blind  only  know  that  they  are  blind  by 
being  pitied.  {M.  G.  Pearse. )  Characteristics  of  the  miracle : — 1.  It  is  only 
related  by  St.  John.  2.  Like  each  of  the  few  miracles  in  St.  John,  it  is  described 
with  great  minuteness  and  particularity.  3.  It  is  one  of  the  four  miracles  wrought 
in  Judaea,  or  near  Jerusalem,  mentioned  in  St.  John.  He  records  eight  great 
miracles  together :  four  in  Galilee — turning  the  water  into  wine,  healing  the  noble- 
man's son,  feeding  the  multitude,  and  walking  on  the  water  (chaps,  ii.,  iv.,^.id  vi.); 
and  four  in  Judaea — purifying  the  Temple,  healing  the  impotent  man,  restoring 
sight  to  the  blind,  and  raising  Lazarus  (chaps,  ii.,  v.,  vi.,  and  ix.).  4.  It  is  one  of 
those  miracles  which  the  Jews  were  especially  taught  to  expect  in  Messiah's  time  : 
"  Li  that  day  shall  the  eyes  of  the  blind  see  out  of  obscurity  "  (Isa.  xxix.  18).  5. 
It  is  one  of  those  signs  of  Messiah  having  come,  to  which  Jesus  particularly 
directed  John  the  Baptist's  attention  :  "  The  blind  receive  their  sight "  (Matt.  xi. 
6).  6.  It  was  a  miracle  worked  in  so  public  a  place,  and  on  a  man  so  well  known, 
that  it  was  impossible  for  the  Jerusalem  Jews  to  deny  it.  It  is  hardly  necessary, 
perhaps,  to  bid  any  well-instructed  Christian  observe  the  singularly  instructive  and 
typical  character  of  each  of  the  eight  miracles  which  John  was  inspired  to  record. 
Each  was  a  vivid  picture  of  spiritual  things.  Hengstenberg  observes,  that  three  of 
the  four  great  miracles  wrought  by  Christ  in  Judaea,  exactly  represent  the  three 
classes  of  works  referred  to  in  Matt.  xi.  5 :  "  The  lame  walk,  |the  blind  see, 
the  dead  are  raised  up  "  (John  v.,  ix.,  xi. ).  (Bp.  Ryle.)  General  remarks  on  the 
miracle : — More  miracles  are  recorded  as  to  the  blind  than  any  other  disease.  One 
of  palsy,  one  of  dropsy,  two  of  leprosy,  two  of  fever.  Three  dead  were  raised,  but  four 
blind  were  restored  to  sight.  Some  writers  extend  the  number  to  six  (Matt.  xii.  22). 
Isaiah  alludes  oftener  to  curing  the  blind  than  to  the  removal  of  any  other  form  of 
misery.  This  miracle  strikes  as  with  the  greater  power — the  only  one  bom  blind 
(ver.  32).  IW.  H.  Van  Doren,  D.D.)  Miracle  authenticated : — Benan  declared 
himself  ready  to  believe  a  miracle  in  case  it  be  examined  and  established  by  a  com- 
mittee especially  nominated  and  authorized  beforehand  for  that  purpose.  Should 
we  not  be  almost  tempted  to  speak  of  a  holy  irony  of  history,  which  has  already 
fulfilled  this  arbitrary  demand  many  centuries  before  it  was  uttered?  For,  in 
truth,  an  examination  is  here  conducted  by  the  most  acute  and  hostile  eyes,  the 
witnesses  are  called,  opinions  are  heard,  and  the  various  possibilities  are  weighed 
against  each  other  as  though  on  gold  scales — and  what  is  the  result  ?  It  is  this. 
While  the  miracle  remains  incomprehensible,  its  invention  is  inconceivable.  I 
know  what  your  answer  will  be  when  I  ask  yon,  whether  you  regard  these  parti> 
eolars  as  invented — the  astonishment  of  the  neighbours  ;  the  diversity  of  opinions ; 
the  dissention  of  the  Pharisees ;  the  cunning  and  forbearance  of  the  parents ;  thfl 
immoTable  calmness,  the  increasing  frankness,  the  confidence  of  the  man  in  pre- 


OTA».  XX. J  ST.  JOHN.  109 

eenting  the  knowledge  of  his  experience  as  of  equal  weight  with  the  knowledge  of 
the  Pharisees  ;  and  that  bumble  confession  of  his  faith  in  our  Lord.  We  are  no 
more  surprised  that  the  restored  blind  man  was  cast  out  than  we  hear  him  confer 
Bing  after  this  event  that  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God.  It  would  excite  our  wonder 
more  if  one  or  the  other  of  these  circumstances  had  not  been  mentioned.  In  fact, 
as  we  look  at  the  critical  objections  that  are  presented  with  the  most  important  air 
imaginable,  we  can  hardly  refrain  from  askinu,  "  Are  these  men  serious  or  jesting?  " 
(J.  J.  Van  Oosterzee,  D.D.)  Instances  of  blinditess : — Homer,  Ossian,  Milton, 
Blacklock  (only  saw  the  light  five  months,  yet  linguist  and  poet),  Sanderson,  cele- 
brated Mathematician  and  Lucasian  Professor  at  Cambridge  (blind  before  one  year 
old) ;  Euler,  mathematician  ;  Huber  (Nat.  Hist.,  "  Habits  of  Bees ") ;  Holman, 
traveller  round  the  world  ;  William  Metcalf,  builder  of  roads  and  bridges ;  John 
Metcalf  (Manchenter),  guide  to  those  travelling  through  intricate  roads  by  night, 
when  covered  with  snow,  afterwards  a  projector  and  surveyor  of  roads  in  different 
mountainous  parts,  most  of  the  roads  about  the  Peak,  and  near  Buxton,  were 
altered  by  his  direction ;  Laura  Bridgman,  neither  sight,  hearing,  nor  speech,  yet 
learned  to  know  herself  a  sinner,  and  Christ  a  Saviour ;  Milburn,  the  blind 
American  preacher ;  Prescot,  the  historian ;  Goodrich  ('•  Peter  Parley  ") ;  Eev.  J. 
Crcsse,  Vicar  of  Bradford.  Hence  learn — 1.  God's  sovereignty  in  creation  :  Why 
were  you  bom  blind?  (Matt.  xi.  26).  2.  God's  goodness  in  providence:  that 
blind  men  so  often  see  more  than  those  who  have  sight.  The  blind  are  proverbially 
cheerful.  3.  God's  riches  in  grace.  Spiritual  blindness  : — A  gentleman,  in  pas- 
sing a  coal  mine  in  Pennsylvania,  saw  a  field  full  of  mules.  In  answer  to  his 
inquiry  a  boy  told  him :  "  These  are  the  mules  that  work  aU  the  week  down  in  the 
mine ;  but  on  Sunday  they  have  to  come  up  to  the  light,  or  else  in  a  little  while 
they  go  blind."  So  with  men.  Keep  them  delving  and  digging  in  dust  and  dark- 
ness seven  days  in  a  week,  and  all  the  days  of  the  fifty-two  weeks  in  a  year,  and 
how  long  can  they  be  expected  to  have  any  discernment  for  Divine  things?  The 
eyes  of  their  understandings  are  necessarily  bedimmed.  Christ's  sight  of  sin- 
TMt : — This  man  could  not  see  Jesus,  but,  what  was  better,  Jesus  could  see  him ; 
and  we  read,  "  As  Jesus  passed  by.  He  saw  a  man  which  was  bhnd  from  his  birth." 
Many  other  blind  men  there  were  in  Israel,  but  Jesus  saw  this  man  with  a  special 
eye.  I  think  I  see  the  Saviour  standing  still,  and  looking  at  him,  taking  stock  of 
him,  listening  to  his  quaint  speeches,  noting  what  kind  of  man  he  is,  and  exhibiting 
special  interest  in  him.  This  morning  there  is  one  in  the  Tabernacle  who  cannot 
see  Jesus,  for  he  has  no  spiritual  eyes ;  but  I  am  convinced  that  my  Master  is  now 
looking  at  him,  searching  him  from  head  to  foot,  and  reading  him  with  discerning 
eye.  He  is  considering  what  he  will  make  of  him  by-and-by,  for  he  has  the  great 
and  gracious  intent  that  He  will  take  this  sinner,  who  is  spiritually  like  the  blind 
beggar,  and  enlighten  him,  and  give  him  to  behold  His  glory.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  compassion  of  Christ : — "  He  saw,"  &o.  This  was  enough  to  move  Christ  to 
mercy,  the  sight  of  a  fit  object.  (J.  Trapp.)  Types  of  character  in  relation  to 
ChrisVs  work  : — As  this  chapter  is  the  history  of  one  event,  its  several  sections  may 
be  thus  treated ; — Those  who  consciously  need  the  work  of  Christ ;  those  who  are 
speculatively  interested  in  it;  those  who  are  malignantly  prejudiced  against  it; 
those  who  are  heartily  interested  in  it ;  and  those  who  are  experimentally  restored 
by  it.  Looking  at  the  blind  man  as  representing  the  consciously  needy  class  note 
— I.  The  wretchedness  of  theib  condition.  1.  This  man  was  afflicted  with  blind- 
ness. Those  windows  through  which  the  soul  looks  out  upon,  and  which  the  soul 
lets  in  the  beauty  of  God's  creation,  had  never  been  opened.  2.  He  was  afflicted 
with  beggary.  He  lived  perhaps  all  his  life  on  the  precarious  charity  of  those  who 
visited  the  temple.  3.  He  was  afflicted  with  social  heartlessness.  With  what  pai» 
must  he  have  heard  the  question  of  ver.  2.  This  was  a  common  error  among  the 
Jews  ;  but  the  whole  book  of  Job  seems  to  have  been  written  to  correct  it,  and 
Christ  Himself  exposed  it  (Luke  xiii.  1-4).  The  sufferings  of  individuals  are  no 
just  criterion  of  moral  character.  Spiritually  all  in  their  unregenerate  condition 
are  as  needy  as  this  man.  Alas !  but  few  realize  it.  II.  The  natdbe  07  theib 
DKLivEEANCE.  This  is — 1.  The  predetermined  work  of  God  (ver.  3).  Christ  does 
not  mean  that  either  was  free  from  sin,  but  that  sin  was  not  the  cause  of  the 
bhndness,  but  that  the  blindness  was  to  afford  scope  for  His  remedial  agency. 
God's  restorative  agency  reveals  Him  often  in  more  striking  aspects  than  even  His 
creative  and  preserving.  2.  Was  elTected  by  Christ  (ver.  4).  This  He  did — (1) 
Systematically,  not  capriciously  or  desultorily,  but  by  a  Divine  programme.  Ha 
did  the  right  work  in  the  righi  place,  on  the  right  person,  at  the  right  time.    (8) 


110  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  IS» 

Diligently.  He  knew  that  His  work  was  great,  but  Hia  time  limited.  These  work* 
suggest  that— (a)  There  is  a  Divine  purpose  in  every  man's  life.  (6)  A  Divine 
work,  (c)  A  Divine  limit.  (3)  Appropriately  (ver.  6).  He  assumes  a  character 
corresponding  to  the  exigencies  of  the  sufferer.  To  the  woman  at  the  well  He  was 
••  living  water  " ;  to  the  sisters  of  Lazarus,  "  the  Besurrection  and  the  Life."  (4V 
Unasked;  as  He  "passed  by."  (5)  Instrumentally  (ver.  6).  (D.  Thomas  D.D.) 
Christ  and  the  blind  man : — I.  Infirmities  and  disabiIiItie8  may  be  the  occasions 
FOB  showing  the  Divine  poweb  and  obace.  "  But  that  the  works  of  God  should 
be  made  manifest  in  him "  was  the  infallible  solution  of  this  trouble.  The 
calamities  and  penalties  under  which  multitudes  lie  are  clearly  of  their  own 
intelligent  seeking.  If  the  works  of  God  are  made  manifest  in  them,  it  is  but  the 
stern  and  startling  exhibition  of  the  fact  that "  he  is  not  mocked,"  and  that "  what- 
soever a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap."  Here  we  have  illustration  of  how 
small  and  empty  our  measures  and  judgments  are  apt  to  be,  when  they  would 
gauge  the  purposes  and  deeds  of  the  Infinite.  What  confusion  and  rebuke  when 
he  stoops  to  offer  the  true  explanation  1  In  a  flash,  as  it  were,  he  solves  much  of 
the  mystery  of  the  existence  of  evil  and  sorrow  in  the  world.  He  does  not  deny 
the  means  by  which  they  have  appeared.  Adam  or  one's  parents  may  have  violated 
some  beneficent  rule  of  life  and  the  child  comes  into  being,  having  the  marks  of 
it,  the  curse  of  it.  A  remote  or  near  offender  may  have  doomed  Byron  to  the  club- 
foot, and  Cowper  to  melancholia,  and  the  Emperor  William  to  a  withered  arm. 
The  keenest  experts  are  often  baffled  in  tracing  the  genesis  of  disease.  All  agree 
that  "  affliction  cometh  not  forth  of  the  dust,  neither  doth  trouble  spring  out  of 
the  ground."  Here  God  has  prepared  the  ground  on  which  to  display  the  marvels 
of  his  power.  Beautiful  characters  may  appear,  as  the  brilliant  blossom  on  the 
ugly  and  thorny  cactus.  And  not  for  the  observers'  sake  simply,  but  chiefly  for 
those  subject  to  infirmity  is  it  laid  upon  them.  If  patience  and  restfulness  of 
spirit  and  self-forgetfulness  can  be  thus  developed,  it  is  well.  These  are  God's- 
works.  "Philosophy  may  infuse  stubbornness,"  said  Cecil,  "but  religion  only 
can  give  patience."  If  correct  estimates  of  worldly  and  unworldly  treasures  can 
be  gained  only  in  the  white-heats  of  furnace  pains,  then  these  are  well.  Every 
untoward  condition  of  our  human  Ufe  has  some  beneficent  and  glorious  possibility 
in  it.  God  only  knows  what  that  is.  He  only  can  bring  it  out.  II.  Diligence  in 
IMPROVING  opportunities.  HI.  OuTWARD  MEANS  THE  TEST  OF  FAITH.  Some  ignore  His 
Church,  its  ordinances  and  methods,  as  needless  in  the  regeneration  of  society  or  of 
the  individual.  But  some  movement  must  be  made  to  catch  its  message ;  some  step 
toward  its  cleansing  pools;  some  regard  for  its  simplest  rites  there  must  be  before  any 
who  have  "closed  their  eyes  lest  haply  they  should  perceive  "  can  obtain  the  Christly 
healing.  IV.  Jesus  peveals  Himself  to  those  who  suffer  fob  His  bake,  and  con- 
firms THEiB  FAITH.  They  who  escape  the  great  fight  of  affliction  because  they  are 
Christ's  do  it  perhaps  to  their  own  loss.  Not  so  real,  so  vivid,  is  He  to  those  who 
have  much  beside.  Fame  and  ease  and  abundance  may  dull  that  strong  and  saving 
sense  of  His  presence  which  is  the  disciple's  chief  need.  (De  Witt  S.  Clark.) 
Christ  and  the  blind  man : — Wherever  help  was  most  needed  thither  His  merciful 
heart  drew  Him,  and  whoever  craved  pity  and  succour  gravitated  to  Him  as  streams 
to  the  sea.  Others,  who  are  immersed  in  their  own  satisfactions,  may  find  this  a 
very  comfortable  and  happy  world.  They  do  not  see  the  sorrows  for  which  they  have 
no  sympathy,  and  pass  by  the  griefs  which  they  do  not  feel.  In  their  presence  the 
wounded  instinctively  bide  themselves  away,  and  the  eloquence  of  want  is  sup- 
pressed and  silent.  While  the  gardener  is  bending  over  the  prone  and  helpless 
plant,  seeking  how  he  may  lift  it  up  and  restore  it  to  bloom  and  beauty,  wise 
botanists  begin  to  botanize — "  Master,  who  did  sin,  this  man,  or  his  parents  that 
he  was  born  blind  ?  "  I.  The  peoblem.  Here  is  a  problem,  old  as  man  is  old,  and 
wide  as  the  world  is  wide,  the  vast  problem  of  evil — the  existence  of  pain  in  the 
universe  of  a  good  God.  Jesus  does  not  say  that  this  man  or  his  parents  had  never 
sinned.  All  pain  is  not  penal.  Pain  may  be  remedial,  medicinal — a  means  of 
grace,  a  surgery  of  soul — a  crucible  of  character,  a  revelation  of  the  Divine  good- 
ness, an  u  timate  disclosure  of  the  Divine  glory.  His  blindness  is  an  infirmity,  not 
a  punishment.  It  is  something  given,  and  not  something  inflicted.  II.  Thb 
miracle.  The  works  of  God  are  at  last  to  be  made  manifest.^  The  method  of  the 
miracle  here  as  everywhere  is  a  method  which  keeps  the  miraculous  as  close  as 
possible  to  ordinary  means  and  agencies.  He  always  sought  some  fulcrum  in 
nature  on  which  to  rest  the  leverage  of  supernatural  power.  He  startles  with  re- 
sults, never  with  processes.    He  honours  nature  even  when  He  would  transcend 


CHA».  IX.]  ST.  JOHN.  Ill 

nature.  Bat  the  works  of  God  are  made  manifest  in  no  startling  and  spectacular 
way.  As  the  dawn  widens  into  the  day,  so  this  child  of  darkness  is  led  into 
the  marvellous  light.  Having  anointed  the  blind  man's  eyes,  Jesus  said,  "Ck>, 
wash  in  the  pool  of  Siloam."  He  sends  him  away  from  Himself,  away  from  His 
own  ministry,  to  the  ministry  of  nature,  to  the  recuperative  energies  which  are 
beating  in  every  pulse  of  creation.  There  is  a  human  as  well  as  a  Divine  side  in 
all  this  great  mystery  of  human  healing  and  human  redemption.  The  man  is  a 
small  but  necessary  factor  in  the  redemptive  process,  in  the  ultimate  result.  When 
Jesus  would  test  our  faith  He  gives  us  not  merely  something  to  believe  but  some- 
thing to  do.  Action  is  the  ultimate  speech  of  conviction,  the  measure  of  its 
strength,  the  test  of  its  sincerity.  The  faith  that  worketh  is  a  faith  which  may  be 
counted  on.  The  test  of  a  locomotive  is  not  the  noise  in  the  whistle,  but  the  pull 
in  the  cylinders.  Every  escape  from  ignorance  into  intelligence,  from  weakness 
into  power,  from  savagery  into  civilization,  from  darkness  into  the  light,  is  by  way 
of  the  Pool  of  Siloam — is  a  salvation  by  faith.  UI.  The  testimony.  The  return 
of  this  man,  radiant  in  the  joy  of  vision,  was  the  sensation  of  the  hour.  He  was 
not  overawed  by  their  authority,  nor  deceived  by  their  sophistry.  He  could  not  be 
coerced  into  suppression  nor  corrupted  into  a  lie.  Agaiust  all  blandishment  and 
all  abuse  that  indomitable  man  was  loyal  to  his  benefactor  and  true  to  himself. 
IV.  The  recognition.  Such  fidelity  was  too  rare  and  too  precious  to  fail  of  its 
reward.  (Boston  Homilies.)  The  opening  of  the  eyes  of  a  man  born  blind: — 
Even  amid  the  fury  of  the  crowd  Christ  was  entirely  self-possessed,  and  the  inci- 
dent here  recorded  may  have  been  introduced  by  the  Evangelist  for  this,  among 
other  reasons,  that  he  might  bring  out,  by  the  force  of  the  contrast  that  is  here 
suggested  between  the  excited  violence  of  a  multitude  and  the  calmness  of  Christ, 
the  vast,  nay,  infinite,  superiority  of  Jesus  to  all  other  men.  He  was  not  excited. 
The  beginning  of  all  good  to  the  sinner  is  when  Jesus  sees  him  thus  ;  even  as  it 
was  His  perception  of  the  ruined  state  of  man,  at  first,  that  moved  Him  to  become 
the  Redeemer  of  the  race.  Now  here  we  have  a  great  general  law  pervading  the 
Providence  of  God.  It  does  not  explain  the  origin  of  evil,  but  it  shows  how  God 
brings  good  out  of  evil,  and  therefore  helps  to  reconcile  us  to  its  existence.  The 
anointing  of  the  eyes  with  clay  formed  in  the  manner  here  described,  was  better 
calculated  to  make  a  seeing  man  blind,  than  to  make  a  blind  man  see.  Why,  then, 
was  such  an  application  made  ?  Perhaps  to  help  the  faith  of  the  man  who  was  to 
be  cured.  It  gave  him  something  to  build  upon.  It  gave  him  something  to  build 
npon.  It  raised  his  hope — nay,  it  led  him  to  expect  a  cure ;  and  that  helps  to 
account  for  the  promptitude  of  his  obedience.  Then  the  command,  "  Go,  wash  in 
Siloam,"  suggests  that  in  spiritual  operations  God  has  His  work,  and  we  have 
ours.  Now  let  us  observe  two  things  in  this  brief  account  of  a  great  miracle.  The 
first  is,  the  promptitude  of  the  man's  obedience.  "  He  went  away,  therefore,  and 
washed."  Without  any  delay ;  without  any  reluctance ;  probably,  also,  without 
any  misgiving — he  went  and  did  what  he  was  told.  Then  observe  also  the  per- 
fection of  the  cure,  "  He  came  seeing."  Seeing  is  a  thing  which,  in  all  ordinary 
cases,  needs  to  be  learned.  What  Jesus  did  for  him,  He  did  perfectly ;  and  when 
He  opens  the  soul's  eyes,  they  see  clearly  and  correctly  "  wonderful  things  oat  of 
God's  law."  1  have  time  now  for  only  two  practical  lessons  and  to  get  them  we 
shall  go  back  to  the  very  beginning  of  this  remarkable  chapter.    I.  The  first  is, 

THAT  THB  MAINTENANCE  OF  A  CALM  AND  UNTROUBLED  SPIRIT  IS  ESSENTIAL  BOTH  TO 
THE   PERCEPTION  AND  PERFORMANCE   OF  THE    WORKS    WHICH    OUR    FATHER    HAS    OITBM 

trs  TO  DO.  Peace  of  spirit  is  essential  if  we  would  keep  ourselves  abreast  of  oar 
opportunities  and  do  each  work  at  its  own  hour.  Let  as  try  to  imitate  the  Saviour 
here ;  and  to  this  end  let  us  cultivate  entire  confidence  in  God,  for  trust  in  Him  is 
peace.    II.  The  second  practical  lesson  is,  that  the  raisino  of  questions  in  thb 

DOMAIN  OF   mere  SPECULATION  INTERFERES  WITH  THB   PERFORMANCE  OF  THB  PRBSSnTO 

DUTIES  OF  PRACTICAL  LIFE.  Not  the  Speculative,  but  the  practical,  demands  oar 
care.  {W.M.Taylor.)  The  Saviour  and  the  sufferer : — L  The  Savioub.  What 
He  was  then  in  giving  sight,  He  is  still  in  giving  salvation.  Notice  His  peculiar 
traits  in  this  miracle.  1.  Compassion.  Christ  saw  the  blind  man  before  Hia 
disciples  saw  him,  and  His  look  awakened  their  interest.  Everywhere  we  read  of 
His  sympathy  with  those  in  trouble.  He  saw  what  others  would  gladly  refrain 
from  seeing — the  woes  of  men  (ver.  1).  2.  Omniscience.  He  saw  the  past  history 
of  this  man  and  His  parents ;  and  saw,  too,  hia  future  history,  how  boldly,  nay, 
how  doggedly  he  would  confess  Christ,  and  how  abundantly  he  would  glorify  God. 
He  saw  in  this  blind  beggar  splendid  possibihties.    So  He  saw  Paul  in  the  perM* 


in  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  nc 

euting  Saul,  the  reformer  in  the  monk  Martin  Luther.  So  He  sees  what  erery  man 
may  become  under  Divine  grace  (vers.  2,  3).  3.  Activity.  Seeing  these  possibilities 
in  this  man  He  set  at  work  to  bring  them  oat.  His  aim  was  to  make  out  of  this 
beggar  a  man  of  God.  Toward  this  all  instrumentalities  combined — the  clay,  th« 
pool,  the  tests  to  the  man's  character  from  neighbours  and  rulers.  Do  we  realise 
that  Jesus  is  taking  the  same  pains  to  bring  out  of  us  the  best  that  is  in  us  (ver. 
4-7)  ?  4.  Kingly  authority.  He  gave  His  command  hke  a  king,  "  Go,  wash." 
There  were  man-made  customs  in  the  way,  but  He  brushed  them  aside  as  one  who 
spoke  with  authority.  The  hearts  of  men  need  just  such  a  Master  as  this  (ver.  7). 
5.  Divine  power.  Only  the  Divine  physician  could  give  sight  to  the  blind-born. 
And  only  the  Son  of  God  has  the  right  to  claim  the  faith  and  worship  of  men 
(vers.  7,  35-38).  II.  Turn  we  now  to  the  sdffbeeb  :  A  most  interesting  character, 
as  unfolded  by  the  Gospel-writer.  Note  his  condition,  and  his  steps  from  darkness 
to  light.  1.  His  darkness.  He  was  like  the  sinner,  who  cannot  see  God ;  whose 
nature  is  undeveloped,  and  who  gropes  in  ignorance.  Note  texts  showing  blindness 
as  a  type  of  sin  (John  xi.  10 ;  xii.  35 ;  Eev.  iii.  17  ;  Isa.  Ix.  2 ;  Eph.  iv.  18 ;  1  Cor. 
ii.  14).  2.  His  opportunity.  One  day  Jesus  of  Nazareth  passed  by,  looked  upon 
him,  and  called  to  him.  This  was  the  opportunity  of  his  life.  Such  an  opportunity 
comes  to  every  soul  when  God's  Spirit  strives  within  him,  or  God's  Church  invites 
him  to  salvation.  3.  His  obedience.  This  was  the  obedience  of  faith.  4.  His 
transformation.  A  wonderful  change,  from  darkness  to  light,  placing  the  man  in 
new  relations  with  the  universe.  But  it  is  a  greater  change  when  God  converts 
a  soul  and  makes  all  things  new.  5.  His  testimony.  Notice  how  positive, 
how  repeated,  how  consistent  was  this  man's  testimony  to  the  work  wrought 
in  him.  He  did  not  falter  when  his  witnessing  cost  him  expulsion  from  the 
synagogue.  So  should  every  one  tell  his  experience  of  salvation.  {J.  L.  Hurlbut.) 
The  Light  of  the  world  .-—Jesus  was  passing  out  to  avoid  stoning ;  but  without  fear 
or  hurry.  An  object  of  misery  arrests  His  attention,  and  in  spite  of  danger  He  stops. 
I.  A  SAD  CASE.  The  blind  man  had  never  seen  father,  mother,  friend,  books,  land- 
scape. As  the  miracle  was  a  "  sign  "  of  salvation,  blindness  is  typical  of  the  con- 
dition of  the  sinner.  1.  The  blind  man  was  reduced  to  the  necessity  of  guiding 
himself  through  the  lower  sense  of  touch.  He  picked  his  way  through  the  streets 
with  the  point  of  his  staff  or  the  instinct  of  his  dog.  So  the  sinner  guides  him- 
self by  merely  earthly  considerations.  He  feels  his  way  by  the  staff  of  interest, 
pleasure,  opinions  of  others,  &o.  2.  The  blind  man  has  no  idea  of  distance  or  of 
the  relation  of  one  object  to  another.  He  knows  only  those  things  he  can  feel  all 
over.  He  may  grope  round  a  tree,  but  he  can  form  no  idea  of  its  position  in  the 
landscape  ;  he  may  have  some  idea  of  the  earth  he  treads  on,  but  none  of  its  rela- 
tion to  the  heavenly  bodies.  So  the  sinner  has  no  proper  notion  of  the  connection 
between  this  life  and  the  next,  or  of  the  relation  of  spiritual  things  to  God.  He 
may  be  more  than  usually  expert  in  other  departments,  even  as  a  blind  man  may 
have  a  more  delicate  touch ;  but  in  this  region  he  is  helpless.  3.  One  point  of 
difference  is  to  be  noted.  This  man's  bUndness  was  a  misfortune  (ver.  2,  3).  He 
was  not  to  blame  for  it ;  bat  the  sinner's  blindness  is  culpable.  He  has  kept  his 
eyes  shut  so  long  that  the  capacity  for  seeing  has  gone.  Satan  blinds  the  sinner, 
it  is  true,  as  the  Philistines  blinded  Samson ;  but  as  Samson  was  to  blame  for 
letting  himself  fall  into  the  enemies'  hands,  so  is  tbe  sinner.  II.  A  bingolab 
SATiKO  (vers.  4,  5).  1.  An  essential  dignity.  "These  are  strange  words  if  Jesus  was 
a  mere  man.  Had  He  been  insane  we  could  have  put  them  aside  ;  but  He  had  a 
mind  of  exquisite  balance.  Had  He  been  a  vain  man,  we  might  have  set  them 
down  to  vanity,  but  we  know  He  was  humble.  Had  He  been  untruthful,  we  might 
have  pronounced  them  false ;  but  we  know  that  He  was  incapable  of  a  lie.  There- 
fore we  can  explain  them  in  harmony  with  His  general  character  only  when  we 
nnderstand  them  as  used  by  one  who  was  God.  2.  An  ofiQcial  subjection.  Though 
God,  Jesas  as  incarnate  was  in  a  condition  of  voluntary  humiliation.  Yet  the 
"  must "  refers  not  to  external  compulsion,  but  to  an  inner  impulse  ;  it  was  the 
language  of  love  within.  3.  A  limited  opportunity.  His  work  was  to  be  done  in  a 
given  time.  This  would  elapse  when  His  "  hour  "  was  come,  and  He  would  say, 
"  It  is  finished."  IH.  A  OBAciotrs  cuke.  Christ  had  no  stereotyped  method.  _  He 
▼aried  the  accessories,  probably  from  some  reference  to  the  character  of  the  indi- 
▼idnals  (Matt.  ix.  ;  Mark  viii.  23).  It  seems  strange  that  He  should  seal  up  the 
man's  eyes  into  a  blinder  darkness ;  bat  sometimes  He  acts  in  this  way  (e.g.,  Saul) 
when  He  opens  the  eyes  of  the  soul.  In  any  case,  the  whole  procedure  was  a  trisj 
of  the  man's  faith,  for  there  was  nothing  in  the  means.     IV.  A  simple  xkstimomt 


«HA».  n.]  ST.  JOHN.  118 

(ver.  11),  which  was  consistently  maintained,  and  was  impregnable  because  experi- 
mental. He  was  not  to  be  argued  or  bullied  out  of  it.  So  with  the  convert.  When 
men  ask  How  ?  He  cannot  tell ;  he  only  sa^s,  "  I  went  and  heard  such  a  sermon, 
«bc.,  and  I  came  away  and  believed,  and  now  I  am  a  new  man."  There  is  no 
eridence  like  this.  Lessons :  1.  Let  us  beware  of  uncharitable  judgments,  and 
guard  against  supposing  that  uncommon  suffering  indicates  uncommon  sin.  Job 
was  not  a  sinner  above  others,  but  God  was  glorified  in  him  above  many.  2.  Let 
us  work  while  the  day  lasts.  Dr.  Johnson  had  "  the  night  cometh  "  engraved  on 
the  dial  of  his  watch ;  let  us  have  the  truths  they  teach  written  on  our  hearts. 
3.  Let  us  have  compassion  on  the  blind ;  and  if  we  cannot  open  their  eyes,  let  us, 
at  least,  seek  to  mitigate  their  misery.  4.  Let  us  tell  simply  and  eagerly  what 
Christ  has  done  for  us.    (Christian  Age.) 

Vers.  2-8.  Wlio  did  sin,  this  man,  or  his  parents? — What  the  Master  and  what 
the  disciple$  $aw: — At  such  a  time  it  was  very  wonderful  that  He  should  see 
anything  bat  the  way  out.  His  life  was  in  peril.  The  plot  was  thickening,  the 
pursuers  were  more  than  ever  determined  to  murder  Him.  At  such  times  men 
are  likely  to  see  only  what  concerns  themselves  and  their  own  safety.  It  is  a 
blessed  proof  of  the  way  in  which  that  most  gracious  heart  lay  open  to  all  the 
sorrow  and  needs  of  men.  Find  out  what  people  see,  and  you  will  know  what 
they  are.  People  mostly  see  what  they  look  for ;  and  they  look  for  what  they  want. 
It  is  curious  to  listen  to  the  account  of  what  people  have  seen ;  how  some  saw 
a  dress,  and  some  a  face,  and  some  saw  nothing.  "  He  looked  for  the  worms,  I 
for  the  gods,"  was  the  complaint  of  a  certain  singer.  Jesus  saw  a  blind  man. 
Some  people  are  very  blind  to  blind  men.  There  is,  you  know,  a  colour  blindness, 
that  cannot  discern  certain  colours.  There  is,  too,  an  inner  colour  blindness, 
that  never  sees  sorrow,  need,  sickness,  or  any  other  adversity.  It  looks  on  the 
bright  side  of  things  by  looking  away  from  all  that  is  wretched.  Ah,  never 
was  there  such  an  eye  for  sad  hearts  as  Jesus  Christ's.  Once  seeing  the  blind 
man.  He  can  go  no  further.  Pharisees  and  perils  are  alike  forgotten.  Pity  saw 
her  opportunity,  and  she  could  not  be  denied.  Oh,  what  a  Christ  is  this  !  Well 
may  His  name  be  called  wonderful.  And  the  only  Christianity  that  is  worth  the 
name  is  that  which  makes  us  like  Him.  So  that  however  we  be  driven,  harassed, 
threatened,  there  is  within  the  soul  a  great  atmosphere  where  love  dwelleth. 
In  this  great  London  of  ours,  with  its  turmoil  of  the  streets,  the  hurry  of  the 
thousands  on  its  pavements,  the  roll  and  rumble  of  its  traffic — ^yet  you  know  how 
God's  sky  bends  over  it,  and  God's  great  sun  shines  upon  it,  and  God's  kindly 
Btars  do  look  down  upon  it.  That  is  the  very  purpose  of  Christ's  coming — to  open 
up  in  our  narrow,  little,  earthly,  busy  lives  a  whole  heaven  of  pity,  of  love,  of 
gracious  help.  The  Master  saw  a  blind  man.  What  did  the  disciples  see  ?  His 
face  was  full  of  pity  only;  theirs  was  full  of  a  curious  prying.  With  them  it  was 
•  case  for  dissection,  a  poor  body  for  their  anatomy,  and  they  began  at  once  with 
the  scalpel  knife.  "  Master,  who  did  sin,"  &c.  ?  Alas  1  how  full  the  world  ia 
of  people  who  are  ready  to  cast  stones  at  those  who  are  down — stones  that 
may  break  no  bones,  but  that  do  bruise  spirits  and  break  hearts  I  What  a  strange 
lack  of  feeling  1  And  what  an  extraordinary  notion  I  Bad  enough  to  be  blind,  and 
bad  enough  to  be  poor ;  but  to  be  both  might  well  move  our  pity.  But  no ;  to 
be  poor  shows  that  he  is  bad ;  to  be  blind  shows  that  he  must  be  very  bad.  It  is 
a  horrible  notion !  Yet  it  lives  and  thrives  to-day.  Would  not  any  stranger 
coming  into  our  midst  suppose  that  the  rich  people  must  be  good — bom  good  ? 
It  ia  the  poor  who  are  so  bad — so  very  bad.  Who  are  city  missionaries  for,  and 
tract  distributors,  and  district  visitors,  and  Bible  women  ?  All  for  the  poor ;  until 
one  might  think  that  the  Scripture,  which  says  that  the  poor  have  the  gospel 
preached  to  them,  implies  that  the  rich  do  not  need  it.  Has  it  not  been  said  in 
scores  of  good  books  that  the  subject  was  born  of  "  poor  but  pious  parents  "  ?  Why, 
indeed,  the  but  ?  "  Of  rich  but  pious  parents"  is  a  phrase  I  never  heard,  and 
yet  it  were  the  greater  wonder.  Cold-blooded  discussion  of  great  social  problems 
that  involve  the  lives  of  men  and  women  and  little  children  is  bad  enough,  bat 
ten  thousand  times  worse  is  it  when  good  people  stand  tip-toe  and  look  down  from 
their  lofty  superiority  with  cold,  steel  eyes  and  lips  of  scorn  and  talk  of  the  poor 
as  a  "  drunken,  lazy  lot."  It  is  enough  to  provoke  men  and  women  to  curse  the 
very  name  of  religion.  Nothing  could  be  more  unlike  that  blessed  Saviour  who 
eaved  the  world  by  loving  it.  What  a  gulf  is  there  oftentimes  between  the  Master 
and  His  followers  1   Very  notable  is  the  answer  of  Jep,us.     "  This  blindness  has  not 

VOL.  n.  8 


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  a. 

come  from  sin,  bat  for  your  sakes,  that  His  blindness  may  open  yonr  eyei;  for 
you  are  blind  except  this  blind  man  give  you  sight. "  A  Divine  homoeopathy,  like 
curing  like.  I  constantly  have  my  eyes  opened  by  blind  men.  I  never  Imow, 
indeed,  that  I  have  any  eyes  until  I  see  s  blind  man ;  then  I  go  on  my  way 
thanking  God  for  this  wondrous  gift  of  sight.  That  he  may  show  forth  the  works 
of  God.  Who  most  enriched  the  world  when  Christ  was  upon  earth — the  rich  man 
or  the  beggars  7  Think  how  infinitely  poorer  all  the  ages  had  been  if,  when  Christ 
came,  there  had  been  no  sick,  no  suffering,  no  need  in  the  world.  What  depths  of 
tenderness,  what  hope  for  all  men,  what  mighty  helpfulness,  what  revelations 
of  Christ  are  ours  to-day,  because  there  sat  of  old  blind  beggars  and  such  needy 
sufferers !  Surely  when  men  are  rewarded  according  to  their  service,  these  shall 
have  great  recompense.  (M.  G.  Pearse.)  The  purpose  of  chronic  suffering : — 
While  our  Lord  perceived  only  another  opportunity  of  lifting  a  shadow,  the  disci- 
ples caught  a  new  chance  of  repeating  the  weary  and  worn  question  of  the  ages 
as  to  the  source  of  the  shadow.  Christ  did  not  find  any  fault  with  His  followers  for 
inquiring ;  only  He  asserted  that  they  had  entirely  misapprehended  the  philosophy 
of  the  poor  creature's  history.  And  then  He  immediately  put  forth  His  almighty 
power,  and  bestowed  upon  him  his  sight  as  a  new  sense.  Note — I.  The  patiencb 
OP  Jesus  in  beaeinq  with  human  misconceptions  of  Divine  pbovidence.  It  would 
be  unfair  for  one  to  indulge  in  any  sharp  comment  upon  the  ignorance  of  the 
disciples.  For  other  explanations  of  the  origin  of  evil  are  in  vogue  and  have 
continually  been  offered  quite  as  wild  as  that  which  they  proposed.  II.  Thb 
disposition  op  some  men  to  interpose  in  the  goveenment  of  God's  wobld.  One  of 
the  ancient  theories  employed  to  reconcile  suffering  with  benevolence,  and  relieve 
its  mystery,  has  kept  its  place  till  our  day — the  existence  of  two  spirits  or 
principles  of  good  and  ill,  warring  with  each  other.  The  classic  notion  was  that 
the  Jealous  deities  antagonized  each  other's  plans  on  Olympus.  Wrathful  gods 
and  goddesses  cut  at  those  who  confronted  them,  and  men  sometimes  were  caught 
on  both  sides,  like  unfortunate  cloth  between  the  shears.  There  were  furies 
as  well  as  fates;  and  it  was  the  elements  of  disturbance  in  heaven  which 
stirred  up  the  affairs  of  mortals  so  on  the  earth.  This  story  corrects  everything  in 
each  a  heathen  mistake.  III.  The  becobd  of  foolish  judoments  in  the  Bible  is  not 
TO  bb  tasem  as  an  inspibed  decision.  Some  island  people,  when  Paul  was 
shipwrecked,  openly  stated  that  the  reason  why  a  viper  fastened  on  his  hand  was 
because  he  was  in  all  likelihood  a  murderer.  When  Job's  trials  were  at  the 
highest,  his  miserable  comforters  accused  him  of  sin,  and  that  he  had  been  in 
some  way  a  hypocrite.  It  is  an  old  and  common  insinuation  which  interprets 
misfortunes  very  much  as  Jesus'  followers  did  on  this  occasion :  and  it  is  to  be 
feared  that  this  ungenerous  world  will  never  admit  its  mistakes  in  such  particulars. 
Men  call  other  people's  troubles  judgments ;  and  their  own  calamities.  IV.  Suffer- 
ing HAS  SOME  unmistakable  CONNECTION  WITH  SIN  SOMEWHERE.  For  wheu  our  Lord 
told  His  disciples  that  neither  this  man  nor  his  parents  bad  sinned,  we  are  not 
to  understand  Him  as  pronouncing  them  sinless.  What  He  intended  was  that 
it  was  in  no  sense  either  a  reckless  calamity  or  a  righteous  retribution ;  for  he 
was  blind  his  whole  life.  And  yet,  we  are  not  at  liberty  to  pass  by  the  warning 
which  Christ  gave,  when  the  surmise  was  made  concerning  some  on  whom  the 
tower  of  Siloam  feU.  A  real  connection  must  be  admitted  between  the  guilt  of 
the  race  and  the  pain  of  the  race.  The  conscientious  conviction  of  mankind  has 
a  basis  of  truth.  The  wisest  man  there  ever  was  on  earth  was  inspired  to  say : 
"As  the  swallow  by  flying,  so  the  curse  causeless  shall  not  come. "  V.  All  chronic 
PAIN  IN  ANT  LIFE  IS  PAST  OF  THE  WISE  PLAN  OF  GoD.  Such  a  life,  which,  HO  doubt, 
bad  to  himself  seemed  restrictive  when  men  talked  about  the  beauties  that  never 
gleamed  in  on  his  soul,  was  one  definite  part  of  the  Divine  purpose  in  the  plan 
of  redemption.  And  so  in  that  splendid  flash  of  vast  disclosure,  it  was  revealed 
that  the  eventful  history  of  those  darkened  eyes  was  just  a  piece  of  God's 
biography,  rather  than  of  man's — a  chapter  in  the  book  that  records  the  dealings 
of  our  Mi^er  with  His  creatures.  And  all  this  worried  existence  on  earth  was 
already  written  on  the  luminous  pages  of  a  volume  of  annals  in  heaven,  before 
the  blind  baby  was  bom  in  Judsea.  YI.  Suffebinq  in  this  world,  in  almost  evert 
DiSiANOE,  MAT  BE  ASSUMED  TO  HAVE  ▲  VICARIOUS  BEACH.  There  Is  in  it  an  element 
bearing  outwardly  on  others.  Some  trials  are  the  direct  punishment  of  personal 
transgression ;  and  others  are  the  hereditary  consequences  of  parental  wickedness. 
Bot  there  is  a  class  of  chronic  disabilities  which  seem  beyond  any  reference  to 
■in.    Sac^  may  have  in  them  a  discipline  for  those  nearest  the  sufferer.    Who 


4BUP.  n.]  ST.  JOHN.  115 

shall  say  how  mneh  this  blind  man's  darkness  may  have  been  instrumental  in 
mellowing  the  tempers  and  softening  the  hearts  of  his  family?  Hardly  any 
household  can  be  found  now  in  which  there  is  not  some  victim  of  pain  ;  and  those 
who  are  watching  and  waiting  are  likely  to  grow  gentle  and  considerate,  and 
ingenious  with  expedients  of  alleviation,  under  the  long  scholarship.     VII.  Those 

WHO  AKE   UNDEB   flUCH    DISABILITIES   AEB   MOST   OFTEN   THB    BRAVEST.      Generally  the 

bystanders  put  the  questions,  rather  than  those  who  are  under  the  infliction.  It 
was  the  disciples,  and  not  the  blind  man,  who  raised  the  inquiry.  For  the  poor 
groper  never  really  knew  what  he  lacked  in  his  senses ;  he  was  only  like  a  man 
who  is  told  that  it  is  a  pity  he  has  no  ear  for  musio ;  he  cannot  be  made  to 
appreciate  the  symphony  the  musicians  give  him.  Possibly  he  had  borne  the 
life  into  which  his  deprivation  drove  him  so  long  that  he  had  become  quite  tame 
about  it.  There  is  nothing  more  beautiful  or  helpful  than  the  cheer  of  some 
who  are  shadowed  by  great  trials.  VIII.  Underltino  every  gift  of  our  loving 
Saviour  is  a  supreme  Spiritual  grace.  When  the  wonder  of  healing  had  been 
wrought,  was  the  final  cause  of  the  man's  blindness  reached  ?  Had  he  served  but 
the  same  purpose  as  the  jars  of  water,  the  fish  with  the  coin,  the  barren  fig-tree, 
the  barley  loaves?  Had  he  groped  around  all  these  years  in  order  to  be  ready 
when  Christ  wanted  a  thing  to  work  a  miracle  upon  ?  And  had  he  when  he  had 
become  an  evidence  of  Christianity,  and  when  he  had  humbled  a  few  Pharisees 
to  there  vanish  ?  No,  indeed  1  He  was  looked  up  in  the  Temple,  where  he  waa 
nsing  his  new  eyes,  and  there  a  fresh  benediction  met  his  believing  soul.  (C.  S. 
Robinson,  D.D.)  Blindness  a  talent  to  be  used  for  God's  glory : — The 
excellent  Mr.  Moon,  of  Brighton,  the  blind  friend  of  the  blind,  was  present 
&t  a  recent  meeting  of  blind  people  at  Manchester,  and  among  the  remarks 
he  made  was  this:  "When  I  became  blind,  as  a  young  boy,  people  condoled 
with  my  mother  on  the  'heavy  dispensation*  with  which  I  was  afflicted. 
They  were  wrong,  my  friends.  God  gave  me  blindness  as  a  talent  to  be  used  for 
His  glory.  Without  blindness  I  should  never  have  been  able  to  see  the  needs  of 
the  blind."  It  is  worthy  of  note  that  this  excellent  man,  Mr.  Moon,  as  one 
of  the  uses  of  this  "  talent,"  has  given  the  gospel  published,  in  raised  type,  in 
nearly  two  hundred  different  languages  and  dialects  to  the  blind  throughout  the 
world  1  Blindness  leading  to  Spiritual  sight: — •*  Eob  Eoy  "  says  in  his  description 
of  Mr.  Mott's  mission  to  the  blind  at  Beyrout :  "  That  poor  fellow  who  sits  on  the 
form  there  was  utterly  ignorant.  See  how  his  delicate  fingers  run  over  the  raised 
types  of  his  Bible;  and  he  reads  aloud,  and  blesses  God  in  his  heart  for  the 
precious  news,  and  for  those  who  gave  him  the  avenue  for  truth  to  his  heart. 
'Jesus  Christ  will  be  the  first  person  I  shall  ever  see,'  he  says;  'for  my  eyes 
will  be  opened  in  heaven.'  Thus  even  this  man  becomes  a  missionary.  At  the 
annual  examination  of  this  school  one  of  the  scholars  said,  •  I  am  a  Uttle  blind 
boy.  Once  I  could  see ;  but  then  I  fell  asleep — a  long,  long  sleep — I  thought  I 
should  never  wake.  And  I  slept  till  a  kind  gentleman,  called  Mr.  Mott, 
came  and  opened  my  eyes  ;  not  these  eyes,'  pointing  to  his  sightless 
eyeballs,  '  but  these,'  lifting  up  his  tiny  fingers ;  these  eyes.  And,  oh  I 
they  see  such  sweet  words  of  Jesus,  and  how  He  loved  the  blind.'"  Who  did 
Bin,  this  man,  or  his  parents? — Explanations  of  the  disciples'  question.  1. 
Some  think  that  the  Jews  had  imbibed  the  common  Oriental  notion  of 
the  pre-existence  and  transmigration  of  souls  from  one  body  to  another,  and 
that  the  disciples  supposed  that  in  some  previous  state  of  existence  this 
blind  man  must  have  committed  some  great  sin,  for  which  he  was  now 
punished,  2.  Some  think  that  the  question  refers  to  a  strange  notion  current 
among  some  Jews,  that  infants  might  sin  before  they  were  born.  In  support  of  this 
view  they  quote  Gen.  xxv.  22  and  Gen.  xxviii.  28,  29.  3.  The  most  probable 
view  is,  that  the  question  arose  from  a  misapplication  of  such  passages  of 
Scripture  as  the  second  commandment,  where  God  speaks  of  "  visiting  the 
iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children  "  (Exod.  xx.  5),  and  from  a  forgetfulness 
of  Ezek.  xviii.  20,  &o.  There  are  few  notions  that  men  seem  to  cling  to  so 
naturally,  as  the  notion  that  bodily  sufferings,  and  all  affliction,  are  the  direct 
consequences  of  sin,  and  that  a  diseased  or  afflicted  person  must  necessarily  be  a 
▼ery  wicked  man.  This  was  precisely  the  short-sighted  view  that  Job's  three 
friends  took  up  when  they  came  to  visit  him,  and  against  which  Job  contended. 
This  was  the  idea  of  the  people  at  Melita,  when  Paul  was  bitten  by  the  viper, 
after  the  shipwreck  •  "  This  man  is  a  murderer."  (Acts,  xxviii.  4).  This  appears 
•to  have  been  at  the  bottom  of  the  question  of  the  disciples:  "There  is  Bufiering; 


116  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  »k 

then  there  must  have  been  sin.     Whose  sin  was  it  ? "     (Bishop  Ryle.)        Suf- 
fering :  its  causet  and  privileges : — There  was  no  special  connection  between  the 
parents'  sin  in  this  instance  and  the  blindness  of  their  offspring.      "On  the  con- 
trary," Christ  seems  to  say,  "  great  sufferers  are  not  always  or  of  necessity  great 
sinners,  or  the  children  of  great  sinners.  Far  otherwise.  There  is  pain  and  soffering 
caused  by  no  vice  in  the  sufferer,  inherited  from  no  transgressions  of  their  parents : 
pain  and  suffering,  not  indeed  created  by  God,  but  allowed  by  God,  allowed  in  mercy 
as  a  favour,  and  in  proof  of  love.     The  natal  blindness  of  this  afflicted  man  was  for 
the  glory  of  God."     And  to  suffer  for  such  a  purpose  and  with  such  a  result  is  not 
a  punishment  bat  a  privilege — a  distinct  and  honourable  privilege.     This  Divine 
philosophy  of  suffering  was  a  new  revelation  given  to  the  world  by  Jesus  Christ. 
It  was  a  revelation  which  apparelled  suffering  in  robes  of  attractiveness,  and  turned 
the  murmurs  of  lamentation  into  songs  of  rejoicing.    The  apostles  gloried  in  suffer- 
ing, directly  the  purpose  of  it  had  been  unfolded  and  interpreted  by  their  Lord. 
When  they  understood  that  the  cause  of  suffering  lay  sometimes  in  the  privilege  of 
the  sufferer  to  be  the  means  of  the  manifestation,  through  his  sufferings,  of  the 
Divine  glory,  they  "  rejoiced  in  their  infirmities,  if  so  be  the  power  of  God  might  be 
manifested  in  them."     They  "counted  it  all  joy  "  when  it  pleased  God  to  let  them 
fall  into  manifold  trials,  inasmuch  as  their  trials  afforded  an  opportunity  for  the 
glorification  of  God.   Many  other  acknowledged  advantages  flow  from  suffering.    It 
tends  to  wean  men  from  the  world,  to  purge  away  the  dross  of  selfishness  and  strip 
off  the  tinsel  from  conceit.  There  is  nothing  like  an  abundance  of  trouble  for  keep- 
ing a  man  straight  and  helping  him  to  remember  his  prayers.     Suffering  is  not 
seldom  thus  its  own  reward.  .  .  .  Yet  it  is  one  thing  to  realize  the  benefits  of 
suffering,  another  and  far  higher  thing  to  realize  its  privilege.     Think,  e.g.,  of  the 
man  blind  from  his  birth.     How  many  long  and  weary  hours  he  had  sat  near  the 
Temple  Gate,  dark,  lonely,  miserable  1     How  dreary  his  existence  had  been — sight- 
less and  hopeless,  a  stranger  to  the  sense  of  beauty,  looking  only  through  the  deep 
darkness  of  life  to  the  still  deeper  darkness  of  death  1    And  yet  how  truly  privileged 
he  was !     What  a  recompense  after  all  those  years  of  weary  bhndness  to  be  per- 
mitted to  be  the  instrument  for  "  showing  forth  the  glory  of  God  1 "    It  was  worth 
being  a  blind  and  desolate  beggar  for  I    We,  of  this  latter  day,  are  not  permitted  to 
be  the  instruments  for  showing  forth  the  glory  of  God  miraculously.    Our  blind  do 
not  receive  their  sight,  our  dead  are  not  raised,  our  lepers  are  not  cleansed.    But 
none  the  less  truly  does  every  Christian  glorify  God  in  his  suffering  body  and  his 
suffering  spirit,  whenever,  by  sweet  holiness  of  patience,  and  heavenly-minded 
rejoicing  in  tribulation,  he  convinces  the  world  that  though  the  cause  of  all  suffering 
is  sin,  yet  no  Christian  suffering  is  without  privilege.  (J.  W.  Diggle,  M.A.)    Blind' 
ness  not  judgment : — A  German  pastor  had  made  an  engagement  to  preach  before  a 
meeting  of  the  Gustavus  Adolphus  Society,  at  a  distance  of  eighteen  miles  from  hia 
village.    He  had  to  walk  all  the  way.    The  weather,  which  was  fine  at  first,  changed 
to  violent  rain,  so  that  after  walking  half  way  with  great  difficulty,  it  seemed  hope- 
less to  proceed,  as  he  could  hardly  drag  his  feet  out  of  the  mire.     Greatly  cast 
down,  he  found  himself  impatiently  asking  why  it  should  rain  so  just  that  day, 
when  he  espied  a  solitary  cottage,  and  gladly  sought  shelter  in  it.     A  young  and 
sad  looking  woman  was  nursing  her  babe.    Being  invited  to  rest  and  dry  himself, 
the  pastor  soon  found  that  the  beautiful  babe  was  the  cause  of  the  mother's 
sorrow,  for  he  had  been  born  blind.     "  The  worst  of  it  is,"  said  the  poor  woman, 
"no  doubt  it  is  all  my  fault;  such   a  misfortune  could  only  befall  a  child  on 
account  of  its  parents,  for  the  poor  dear  children  are  innocent  enough.  _  For  the 
last  four  months  I  have  been  tormenting  myself  to  discover  by  what  sin  I  can 
have  brought  upon  it  such  a  calamity."     Her  tears  choked  her  voice,  and  she 
sobbed  convulsively.     The  poor  creature  was  quite  ignorant  of  this  beautiful  story, 
but  the  pastor   read  it   and   expounded  it.     When  he  prepared   to  resume  hia 
toilsome  walk,  it  was  with  feeUngs  of  joy  and  gratitude  not  unmingled  with  shame. 
He  confessed  how  the  rain  had  vexed  him,  and  that  he  had  repeatedly  asked 
"Why  it  must  fall  just  to-day."    "  Oh,  my  dear  sir"  she  replied  joyfully,  "I 
know    very    welll"      (J.   F.    B.    Tinling,    B.A.)        Neither    hath    this    man 
Binned  nor  his  parents :  hut  that  the  works  of  God  should  be   made   manifest 
in    him. — Christ's  explanation    of  suffering : — 1.  The  man  was  sitting   near  to 
the  Temple.     It  has  been  the  custom  in  all  ages  for  the  needy  of  all  kinds  to 
get  as  near  as  they  can  to  God's  house.     It  is  on  their  part   an  instinctive 
homage  to  reUgion.     If  any  man  become  known  as  professing  religion  he  will  have 
many  applications  for  his  pity.    A  congregational  collection  iS  the  resort  of  every 


OHAT.  a.]  ST.  JOHN.  117 

charitable  institation.  2.  If  Jesas  had  seen  this  man  on  EQs  way  to  or  from 
worship,  His  conduct  would  not  have  excited  special  wonder.  But  it  was  when 
driven  from  the  Temple  and  with  His  life  in  peril.  But  He  forgot  His  danger  in 
the  fulness  of  His  pity.  3.  The  disciples  supposed  that  by  making  the  man  a 
•ubject  for  pity,  Christ  made  him  a  fit  subject  for  speculation.  Some  thought  this 
ealamity  a  fruit  of  parental  sin,  others  a  punishment  for  prospective  guilt.  They 
were  wrong,  but  not  so  wrong  as  those  who  believe  that  sin  will  never  be  punished 
at  all.  4.  Christ's  solution  of  their  difficulties  suggests  some  important  rejections. 
I.  That  scffeeiuo  is  the  fbuit  of  bin.  Our  Lord  did  not  deny  this  incontestible 
principle  in  general,  but  only  in  this  particular  case.  God's  laws  in  relation  to  the 
body,  those  of  chastity,  sobriety,  industry  and  cleanliness,  cannot  be  broken  with, 
impunity.  If  drunkenness  and  debauchery  were  checked  the  welfare  of  the  country 
would  be  promoted  and  pestilence  confined  to  a  narrower  region.  If  our  great  cities 
were  governed  with  wisdom,  if  they  were  properly  drained,  the  poor  properly 
housed,  the  water  pure  and  abundant,  disease  would  be  checked  and  good  morals 
•nd  happiness  promoted.  Asylums  for  the  destitute,  and  hospitals  for  the  sick  are 
great  necessities  and  embodiments  of  Christian  loving  kindness  ;  but  there  wants 
something  more  than  grappling  with  results,  a  grappling  with  the  proMfic  cause. 
The  great  work  of  the  Christain  Church  then  is  to  deal  with  sin.  Without  sin  our 
gaols  would  be  superfluous,  our  workhouses  not  one  tithe  of  their  present  magni- 
tude, and  half  our  hospitable  beds  empty.  II.  That  a  good  deal  of  suffering  is 
NOT  THE  FBUIT  OF  SIN.  Pcople  sometimes  say  "  had  there  been  no  sin  there  had 
been  no  sorrow."  But  where  does  the  Bible  say  so  ?  It  is  true  that  in  heaven  there 
is  no  sorrow,  but  then  that  is  a  place  of  rest  and  recompense,  whereas  earth  is  a 
place  of  trial  and  discipline.  But  there  is  this  startling  fact  that  the  only  sinless 
Being  the  world  ever  saw  "  learned  obedience  by  the  things  which  He  suffered." 
Don't  then  say  in  the  case  of  a  given  sufferer  "  Here  is  the  wrath  of  God,"  for  the 
varied  forms  of  affliction  are  often  Divine  appliances  for  testing  our  principles, 
developing  our  graces  and  practising  our  virtues.  III.  Pebsonal  scfferinq  is 
BOMETiiiEs  FOB  THE  SAKE  OF  OTBEBS,  that  their  patieuco  may  be  disciplined,  their 
sympathy  elicited,  their  character  get  its  necessary  training.  It  was  so  in  the  case 
of  Lazarus — "  I  am  glad  I  was  not  there,"  &o.  But  some  may  ask,  *•  What  is  to 
become  of  the  people  who  bear  the  cross  that  others  may  have  these  opportunities?" 
Leave  them  with  God.  He  has  a  vast  universe  and  long  ages  to  recompense  them 
in.  Jesus  wore  a  crown  of  thorns,  how  glad  to-day  He  is  that  He  wore  it  I  Mary 
and  Martha  were  glad  after  he  was  raised  that  their  brother  died.  Look  at  some  of 
the  sorrows  of  life.  Why  do  the  thorns  grow  ?  That  you  may  have  to  pull  them  op 
and  get  improvement  of  character  from  the  weeding.  Why  are  children  bom  ignorant 
and  helpless  ?  That  you  may  care  for  them  and  teach  them.  Why  do  accidents  hap- 
pen? That  you  may  minister.  {G.  Vince.)  Our  proper  attitude  towards  mysteries  :— 
Before  a  confessed  and  unconquerable  difficulty  (such  as  the  origin  and  extent  of 
evil)  my  mind  reposes  as  quietly  as  in  possession  of  a  discovered  truth.  (T. 
Arnold,  D.D.)  Origin  of  evil : — Wise  men  will  regard  the  entrance  of  evil  as  a 
man  views  a  fire  already  begun  in  his  house :  it  is  too  late  to  ask  "  How  came  this?" 
or  "  Where  did  the  fire  begin?"  His  single  question  will  be,  how  he  and  his  family 
and  property  can  be  secured.  (R.  Cecil,  M.A.)  Christ  and  the  blind  man: — 1. 
We  may  learn  from  it  to  abstain  from  those  superficial  and  dogmatic  judgments  on 
human  life  which,  seeming  to  honour  God  with  ready  explanations  of  evil,  re«lly 
dishonour  Him,  and  which  are  often  cruelly  unjust  to  men.  Evil  is  in  the  world, 
and  man  is  sinful  as  well  as  unfortunate.  Wickedness  works  wretchedness,  and 
penalty  follows  iniquity  as  echo  follows  voice,  or  pain  the  incision  of  the  knife. 
But  not  all  pains  are  punishments.  Let  despairing  as  well  as  cynical  doubt  ba 
silent.  Great  as  sin  is,  God  is  greater.  Where  sin  abounds,  grace  snperabounds. 
This  is  not  the  devil's  world,  but  God's.  2.  Let  us  learn  that  the  supreme  business 
of  life  is  unselfish  service,  and  that  the  time  for  service  is  now.  3.  Let  us  learn 
the  wisdom  and  power  of  Jesus'  method  in  reaching  men.  He  authenticates  Him« 
self  to  men  by  His  works  as  well  as  by  His  word — not  merely  by  miraculous  works, 
but  by  works  that  are  Divine  in  their  goodness.  The  Healer  and  Helper  of  men 
thus  convincingly  justifies  His  claim  of  Divine  kinship.  Bring  men  face  to  face 
with  Jesus ;  then  they  too,  like  the  blind  man  who  was  healed,  will  at  last  saj, 
**Lord,  I  believe,"  and  their  faith  will  express  itself  in  homage  and  service. 
4.  Finally,  let  us  learn  the  true  nature  of  faith.  Faith  is  not  mere  credulity, 
it  is  an  attitude  and  an  act  of  the  soul.  Its  object  is  not  a  proposition,  but 
a  person.  It  reposes  not  on  greatness  or  power  alone,  but  on  goodness.  (History, 
Prophecy,  and  Gospel.)        The  blind  man^»  eyes  opened;  or,  practical  Christi- 


118  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chaf.  ix. 

anity : — Observe  how  little  disconcerted  our  Lord  was  by  the  most  violent  enmity. 
Almost  the  moment  after  He  bad  escaped  stoning,|He  paused  before  and  healed  the 
blind  man.  One  of  His  most  noticeable  characteristics  was  His  marvellous  calm- 
ness in  the  presence  of  His  foes.  The  reasons  were — 1.  He  was  never  elated  by 
the  praise  of  men.  2.  His  unbroken  communion  with  the  Father.  3.  His  heart 
was  so  set  upon  His  work  that  He  would  not  be  turned  from  it.  Note — L  The 
woEKEE — a  well-earned  title.  1.  There  are  many  who  ignore  sorrow.  The  easiest 
thing  to  do  with  wicked  London  is  not  to  know  much  about  it.  There  are  flights 
which  might  melt  a  heart  of  steel  and  make  a  nabob  generous.  Bat  it  is  an  easy 
way  of  escaping  from  the  exercise  of  benevolence  to  shut  your  eyes.  It  is  not  so 
with  Jesus.    He  has  a  quick  eye  to  see  the  blind  beggar  if  He  sees  nothing  else. 

2.  There  are  others  who  see  misery  but  instead  of  diminishing  it,  increase  it  by 
cold  logical  conclusions.  Poverty  they  say  is  brought  on  by  drunkenness,  laziness, 
&c.  Sickness  is  caused  by  wicked  habits  and  neglect  of  sanitary  laws.  This  may 
be  true,  but  don't  teach  it  till  you  are  ill  yourself.  The  disciples  held  this  view  and 
Job's  comforters.  Cheap  moral  observations  steeped  in  vinegar  make  a  poor  dish 
for  an  invalid.  But  Christ  "  Upbraided  not, "  2.  Others,  who  if  not  indifferent  or 
cruel  to  sorrow,  speculate  where  speculation  is  worthless.  There  is  the  question  of 
the  origin  of  evil.  Such  was  the  subject  here  proposed — foreseen  guilt  or  hereditary 
taint?  The  master  breaks  up  the  fine  speculation  by  practical  service.  "  Father," 
said  a  boy,  ♦'  the  cows  are  in  the  corn.  How  ever  did  they  get  in  ?  "  "  Boy,"  said 
the  father,  ••  never  mind  how  they  got  in,  let  us  hurry  to  get  them  out."  Postpone 
the  inquiries  till  after  the  day  of  judgment,  just  now  our  business  is  to  get  evil  out 
of  the  world.  A  man  saw  a  boy  drowning  and  lectured  him  on  the  imprudence  of 
bathing  out  of  his  depth.    Let  us  rescue  him  and  tell  him  not  to  go  there  again. 

3.  In  this  non-speculating,  kind,  helpful  spirit,  let  us  imitate  the  Master.  What 
have  we  done  to  bless  our  feUow-men?  But  if  Jesus  be  such  a  worker  what  hope 
there  is  for  us  who  need  His  services !  II.  The  woekeoom.  Every  worker  needs  a 
place  to  work  in.  Christ  selected  the  fittest  place,  1.  One  of  the  works  of  God 
is  creation,  and  if  Jesus  is  to  perform  it  He  must  find  out  where  something  is  miss- 
ing which  He  can  supply.  The  blind  man  gave  occasion  for  Christ  to  give  sight 
If  there  is  anything  wanting  in  you  there  is  room  for  Christ  to  work ;  if  you  are 
perfect  there  is  no  room.  2.  This  man's  ignorance  required  almighty  aid.  God 
can  not  only  create.  He  can  illuminate.  This  man  was  as  dark  in  mind  as  in  body. 
He  did  not  know  the  Son  of  God.  Is  that  your  case  ?  Are  you  converted  ?  Then 
there  is  space  in  you  for  Christ  to  work  by  converting  grace.  If  you  were  not  lost, 
you  could  not  be  saved.  3.  All  affliction  may  be  regarded  as  affording  opportunity  for 
the  mercy  work  of  God.  Whenever  you  see  a  man  in  trouble,  do  not  blame  him  and 
ask  how  he  came  there,  but  say  "  He  is  an  opening  for  God's  almighty  love."  And 
do  not  kick  at  or  be  cast  down  by  your  own  afflictions,  regard  them  as  opening! 
for  mercy,  and  the  valley  of  Achor  shall  be  a  door  of  hope.  Sin  itself  makes  room 
for  God's  mercy.  How  could  the  unspeakable  gift  have  been  bestowed  il  there  had 
been  no  sinners.  IH,  The  woek  bell.  You  hear  in  early  morning  a  bell  which 
arouses  the  workers  from  their  beds.  Christ's  work-bell  was  the  sight  of  the  blind 
man.  Then  he  said  '•  I  must  work."  The  man  had  not  said  anything,  but  his 
sightless  eyeballs  spoke  eloquently  to  the  heart  of  Jesus.  1.  Why  must  He  work  ? 
Because— (1)  He  had  come  all  the  way  from  heaven  on  purpose.  (2)  He  had  inward 
impulses  which  forced  Him  to  work.  2.  Let  us  learn  this  lesson.  Wherever  we  see 
suffering,  feel  "I  must  work."  3.  What  a  blessing  if  you  want  to  be  saved  to  know 
that  there  is  an  impulse  on  Jesus  to  save !  IV.  The  woek  day.  1.  This  is  meant 
of  our  Lord's  earthly  life.  There  was  a  certain  day  on  which  He  could  bless  men, 
and  that  over  He  would  be  gone.  He  occupied  thirty  years  in  getting  ready  for  it, 
and  then  in  three  years  it  was  done.  And  how  much  He  crowded  into  them  I  Some 
of  us  have  had  thirty  years  of  work  and  have  done  very  little  ;  what  if  we  have  only 
three  more.  If  we  omit  any  part  of  our  life  work  we  can  never  make  up  the 
omission.  No  appendix  is  possible  to  the  book  of  life.  2.  If  our  Lord  was  so 
dihgent  to  bless  men  while  here,  He  is  not  less  diligent  now.    (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  4.  I  must  work  the  works  of  Him  that  sent  Me  while  It  Is  day. — When  the 
Master  (Him  who  sent)  who  has  entrusted  a  task  to  the  worker  gives  the  signal,  the 
latter  must  continue  to  work  as  long  as  the  hours  of  labour  last.  This  signal  Jesus 
had  just  recognized ;  and  even  though  it  was  the  Sabbath  He  could  not  delay 
obeying  it  till  to-morrow.  He  might  perhaps  at  this  moment  have  been  contem- 
plating the  sun  descending  towards  the  horizon.  "  When  the  night  comes  "  said 
He,  **  the  workman's  labour  ceases.    My  work  is  to  enlighten  the  world  as  the  sun 


WtAP.  IX,]  ST.  JOHN.  119 

does ;  but  in  a  short  time  I,  like  him,  shall  disappear,  and  my  work  will  cease. 
Hence  I  have  not  a  moment  to  lose."  (F.  Godet,  D.D.)  1.  Nothing  could 
discourage  Christ  from  doing  His  work  (Luke  xiii.  32).  2.  All  Christ's  works 
were  the  works  of  God  (chap.  iv.  34  ;  v.  30-36 ;  vi.  38 ;  Lake  xxii.  42).  3.  Christ 
was  obliged  to  do  what  He  did — •'  I  must."  (1)  Not  as  God  (Phil.  ii.  6) ;  but  (2)  ag 
man.  (3)  As  Mediator  (chap.  v.  30).  4.  Christ  had  His  time  limited  wherein  to 
do  His  work  (Acts  ii.  23).  5.  Christ  in  that  time  did  finish  His  work  (chap.  xvii.  4). 
Which  was — (1)  To  demonstrate  Himself  to  be  what  He  was  (chap.  x.  25).  (a)  The 
Son  of  God.  (b)  Sent  from  the  Father  (chap.  v.  36).  (c)  The  true  Messiah  (chap. 
XX.  31).  (2)  To  redeem  mankind  from  sin  (Acts  iii.  26),  and  misery  (1  Thess.  i.  10). 
Than  be  thankful  to  Christ  and  love  Him  (1  Cor.  xvi.  22) ;  believe  in  Him  (chap, 
iii.  16 ;  imitate  Him  (1  Cor.  xi.  1).  I.  Wb  ought  to  do  the  works  oi"  Him  that 
BENT  vs.  1.  Works  of  piety  (1  Cor.  vi.  20).  (1)  Loving  God  (Matt.  xxii.  37).  (2) 
Trusting  on  Him  (Prov.  iii.  6).  (3)  Submitting  to  Him  (1  Sam.  iii.  18 ;  Luke  xxii. 
42).  (4)  Fearing  Him  (Isa.  viii.  13).  (5)  Rejoicing  in  Him  (Phil.  iv.  4).  Thank- 
ing the  Father  for  our  creation ;  beUeving  the  Son  for  our  redemption ;  hearkning  to 
the  Spirit  for  our  sanctification.  2.  Works  of  equity  to  our  neighbours  (1)  so  aa 
to  wrong  none  (Levit.  xix.  11-13).  (2)  So  as  to  help  all  (Gal.  vi.  10).  8.  Works 
of  charity  to  the  poor  (1  Tim.  vi.  17-19).  (1)  Obedientially  to  God's  command.  (2) 
Proportionably  to  our  means  (1  Cor.  xvi.  1,  2, 17).  4.  Works  of  sobriety.  (1) 
Keeping  the  flesh  under  (1  Cor.  ix.  27).  (2)  And  so  mortifying  all  our  sins  (Gal. 
iii.  6).  II.  We  abe  to  do  these  works  while  it  is  day.  1.  What  is  meant  by  day  ? 
(1)  The  time  of  life  (Job.  xiv.  6).  (2)  The  time  of  grace  (Luke  xix.  42).  (3)  The 
present  time  (Psa.  xcv.  7 ;  Heb.  iii.  7).  2. "  Why  should  we  do  these  works  presently.'* 
Consider — (1)  How  much  time  has  been  spent  in  vain.  (2)  How  uncertain  you  are — 
(a)  Of  life  (Isa.  ii.  22).  (6)  Of  your  senses  and  reason  (Dan.  iv.  32, 33).  (c)  Of  the 
gospel  (Rev.  ii.  6).  (d)  Of  the  motions  of  God's  Spirit  (Gen.  vi  8).  3.  The  longer 
yon  procrastinate  the  harder  it  will  be.  4.  You  cannot  do  it  in  the  world  to  come 
(Eccles.  ix.  10).  5.  You  are  in  continual  danger  till  the  work  be  done.  6.  Objec- 
tions. (1)  I'll  consider  it — it  is  not  a  thing  to  be  considered  but  to  be  done.  (2) 
When  my  present  business  is  over  I'll  begin  (Matt.  vi.  33) — all  other  business  must 
give  way  to  this.  (Bp.  Beveridge. )  Day  and  night : — To  speak  of  life  and  death 
AS  day  and  night  is  bo  natural  that  one  does  not  think  of  it  as  a  metaphor.  Every 
man  has  his  day.  One  longer,  another  shorter ;  one  bright,  another  shaded  and 
even  stormy.  Then  night  falls  perhaps  suddenly,  as  in  the  tropics,  where  there  is 
no  twilight;  perhaps  with  a  gentle  descent  as  in  the  north  or  south.  L  Thb 
BBBViTY  OF  THE  DAT.  Christ  would  impress  us  with  the  value  of  time  and  oppor- 
tunity and  to  lay  out  our  short  day  to  good  account.  How  brief  His  was,  yet  in 
calm  trust  He  worked  on  and  found  it  long  enough  in  which  to  finish  His  work ; 
and  the  Jews  with  all  their  craft  could  not  shorten  it  by  one  hour.  II.  Ths 
WORK  OF  THE  DAT.  Christ's  was  to  Open  the  blind  man's  eyes.  In  this  we  can- 
not follow  Him,  but  in  the  general  direction  and  use  of  life  we  must.  1.  We 
must  work  in  order  to  live.  Idlers  are  few,  and  are  not  to  be  envied.  Jesus 
did  not  claim  Exemption  from  this  rule.  In  his  obscurity  at  Nazareth  He  earned 
the  plain  bread  of  a  carpenter's  table,  and  afterwards  only  accepted  the  minis- 
trations of  others  as  a  recognition  of  His  public  work.  Thus  He  would  have 
as  industrious  in  our  daily  callings.  2.  Our  first  work  is  to  believe  on  Him 
(chap.  vi.  28,  29).  This  excludes  working  for  justification.  Our  good  works  can- 
not obliterate  our  misdeeds.  Divine  grace  is  our  only  refuge.  Yet  this  must 
not  be  turned  into  a  bed  of  sloth.  The  law  said — Do  and  live!  The  gospel 
says — Live  and  do!  3.  There  is  the  obligation  to  do  good  unto  all  men,  &a. 
The  care  of  our  own  spiritual  life  is  apt  to  become  morbid  unless  accompanied 
by  unselfish  exertion  for  others.  IIL  Fob  all  there  is  but  a  dat.  The  time 
is  long  enough  for  the  work  but  too  short  to  allow  trifling.  It  is  well  when 
men  begin  early.  Alas,  some  are  no  more  than  morning  Christians.  They 
promise  well  in  childhood,  but  as  morning  passes  on  to  noon  they  fall  away 
?Hosea.  vi.  4).  Others  postpone  their  religion  till  the  evening.  This  is  to  run  a 
dreadful  risk,  for  the  night  may  come  suddenly ;  and  even  if  they  do  find  time  it 
is  a  poor  homage  to  God  to  offer  the  dregs  of  life.  IV.  Dat  is  followed  bt 
NIGHT.  In  western  countries,  through  the  exigencies  of  trade,  night  is  often 
turned  into  day.  But  in  the  East  when  the  sun  goes  down  work  closes  (Psa. 
civ.  20-23).  Here  part  of  the  thought  is  that  rest  follows  toil.  How  welcome 
is  night  to  those  who  have  spent  a  long  and  busy  day,  when  ••He  gives  His 
beloved  sleep."  But  this  night  is  brief  and  is  only  a  prelude  to  the  eternal 
morning.     (D.  Frater,  D.D.)         The  day  and  its  toil: — 1.  The  works  of  Gtod 


120  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [CHA».  a 

mean  (1)  Buch  as  are  Ood  appointed.      Christ  wronght  as  one  in  possession  oi 
a  chart,  each  hour  charged  with  its  special   commission.      Hence  the  speed  and 
certainty  with  which  each  work  was  done.      Amidst  all  the  multiplicity  of  Hia 
activities  He  never  hesitates,  recalls  a  step,  or  regrets  it,  "  Faithful  to  Him  that 
appointed  Him,"  during  these  long  years  of  self-repression  at  Nazareth,  and  up  to 
the  time  when  He  died  at  the  moment  the  Father  had  appointed.     (2)  Such  as  are 
God  revealing.     There  is  not  an  act  that  is  not  in  some  way  reflective  of  God 
or  contributive  to  our  knowledge  of  God,  "  He  that  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen  th« 
Father,"  and  every  relation  and  step  adds  its  own  special  touch  to  the  picture.     Hia 
miracles  of  mercy  tell  something  of  the  Father's  love ;  His  miracles  of  judgment  of 
the  Father's  wrath.    The  Cross  discloses  every  attribute  of  the  Father  at  once.     2. 
Making  allowance  for  the  difference  of  power  and  vocation,  the  works  of  the  servant 
should  possess  the  same  twofold  character  as  those  of  the  master.     Here  we  have 
the  Christian  theory  of  work.     Much  is  said  about  work  now-a-days.    But  work  for 
work's  sake  is  a  doubtful  evangel  to  preach.   Inactivity  has  its  sins,  but  so  has  work. 
Some  work  till  they  are  carnalized.    Wrong  work  may  be  done,  and  right  work 
wrongly.     Let  us  illustrate  the  rule  as  it  runs  through  a  threefold  relationship.    (1) 
Toward  the  world  our  work  should  be — (a)  God  assigned.     Our  daily  callings,  how- 
ever worldly  or  menial,  can  be  conscientiously  regarded  as  the  appointment  of  God, 
But  here  inclination,  parental  wishes,  advantageous  prospects,  &c.  often  hold  sway. 
There  are  few  things  more  critical  than  the  choice  of  a  profession,  and  one  may 
miss  one's  way  grievously.     But  let  us  feel  "  This  is  the  task  appointed  me,"  and 
then  we  may  regard  it  as  sacred,  and  among  the  works  of  Him  who  hath  sent  us. 
(b)  God  revealing.     Your  faithfulness  will  be  a  miniature  of  Him  who  is  faithful  in 
all  things ;  your  punctuality  will  be  God-like  because  a  reflection  of  Him  who  is  true  to 
His  promises;  your  patience  under  business  provocations  will  resembleHis  longsuffer- 
ing,  who  is  slow  to  wrath  ;  your  conscientiousness  will  be  the  reflection  of  Him  who 
never  begins  but  He  finishes.      Nor  will  any  vocation  be  too  mean  for  this,      from 
the  statesman  down  to  the  shop  lad  the  principle  is  the  same.     (2)  Towards  the 
Church.    Our  works — (a)  Must  be  God  appointed.     "  But,"  some  say,  "  I  have  no 
special  sphere  in  the  Church.     Beyond  the  fact  that  I  avail  myself  of  its  privileges 
Church  life  has  no  interest  for  me.     What  was  assigned  to  me  as  my  work  I  found 
unsuitable  or  too  taxing."    The  excuse  will  hardly  pass  muster.     Christ  "  is  as  one 
taking  a  far  journey,  and  left  His  house,  and  gave  every  man  his  work."    That 
house  is  the  Church.     "  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  unto  a  husbandman  who 
went  out  .  .  .  to  hire  labourers  for  his  vineyard."      That  vineyard  is  the  Church; 
and  it  can  scarcely  be  argued  that  they  who  enjoy  the  shelter  of  the  one  and  the  frtiits 
of  the  other  can  absolve  themselves  from  the  duty  of  serving  in  them.      More 
generous  and  consistent  is  the  spirit  which  says,  "Give  me  some  door  to  keep,  some 
plot  to  till.     Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do?  "     (b)  When  once  we  feel  our 
work  God  appointed  we  shall  try  to  make  it  God  revealing  in  its  thoroughness,  for 
the  God  we  represent  is  a  God  of  order ;  in  its  perseverance  because  we  testify  to  a 
God  who  faints  not,  neither  is  weary ;  in  its  humility,  not  losing  interest  in  a  work 
because  others  are  preferred  in  it,  realizing  that  I  bear  witness  to  a  God  who 
"  humbled  Himself."     (3)  Towards  your  personal  life  and  the  care  and  culture  it 
demands.    Pre-eminently  is  this  task  the  appointment  of  God,  for  His  will  concern- 
ing us  is  our  sanctification  :  and  pre-eminently,  too,  is  the  task  a  revelation  of  God 
"  for  herein  is  My  Father  glorified,  that  ye  bear  much  fruit. "     II.  The  motive.     If 
Christ  kept  before  Him  a  coming  night  much  more  should  we.    For  Christ  knew 
the  length  of  His  day,  and  could  have  told  how  many  hours  were  left,  but  we  are 
^norant  here.     We  know  what  lies  behind,  and  how  we  have  cheated  ourselves 
with  purposes  and  dreamings,  but  we  cannot  cheat  time.     With  some  the  freshness 
and  dew  of  the  morning  have  given  place  to  the  burden  and  dust  of  the  mid-day ; 
with  some  that  is  succeeded  by  a  grey  and  monotonous  afternoon  ;  while  others  are 
passing  on  amidst  the  frosts  and  dreariness  of  the  fast  falling  twilight.     And  the 
thought  may  never  have  been  faced,  yet  "  the  night  is  coming  to  me."    What  shall 
we  say  to  these  things  ?  "  Whatsoever  thy  hand  findeth  to  do,"  &c.     (W.  A.  Gray.) 
Work : — A  speculative  question  was  put  to  Christ,  and  this  is  His  answer,  "  Yoa 
may  think,  talk,  argue,  I  must  work."    The  Saviour  has  a  greater  respect  for  work 
than  for  speculation.    I.  A  necessity  to  laboub.    With  Christ  it  was  not  "1 
may  if  I  will,"  "I  can  if  I  like,"  but  ""I  must."    The  cords  which  bound  Him, 
however,  were  the  cords  of   duty — the  cords  of  love   bound  Him  who  is  love. 
1.    It  was    because    He    loved    them  so   well    that   He    could   not    sit  down 
still  And  see  them  perish.    2    The  sorrow  without  compelled  Him.    That  blind 


OBAV.  n.]  ST.  JOHN.  121 

nuui  had  toached  the  secret  chord  that  eet  His  soul  on  work.  3.  He  had  oome  into 
this  world  with  an  aim  that  was  not  to  be  achieved  without  work ;  and  therefore  Ha 
mast  work  because  He  desired  to  achieve  His  end.  The  salvation  of  the  many  the 
Fatbar  had  given  Him  ;  the  finding  of  the  lost  sheep,  &o. — He  must  accomplish  all 
this.  4.  Do  we  feel  that  we  must  work?  (1)  There  are  those  who  feel  that 
they  must  be  fed.  (2)  There  are  others  who  feel  that  they  must  find  fault.  (3) 
Others  who  will  dodge  anyhow  to  get  off  any  task.  Do  be  a  Christian  or  else  give 
op  being  called  one  1  (4)  But  some  must  work.  Why  f  To  be  saved  ?  No  ;  but 
because  they  are  saved  and  Christ's  love  constrains  them  to  save  others.  II.  A 
BPEcuuTY  OF  woBE.  There  are  plenty  who  say,  «•  I  must  work  "  to  get  rich,  to 
support  a  family,  to  become  famous.  Christ  did  not  pick  or  choose.  He  worked 
the  "  works,"  not  some  but  all,  whether  of  drudgery  or  honour,  suffering  or  relief 
from  suffering,  prayer  or  preaching.  It  is  easy  to  work  our  own  works,  even  in 
spiritual  things,  but  difficult  to  be  brought  to  this  "  I  must  work,"  &o.  Many  think 
it  their  business  to  preach  who  had  much  better  hear  a  little  longer.  Others  think 
their  work  the  headship  of  a  class,  whereas  they  would  be  useful  in  giving 
away  tracts.  Our  prayer  should  be,  "  Show  me  in  particular  what  Thou  wouldst 
have  me  to  do."  All  Christians  have  not  yet  learned  that  each  is  personally  to  do 
the  will  of  Him  that  sent  him.  We  cannot  work  by  proxy.  III.  A  limitation  of 
TIME.  Christ  the  immortal  says  this.  If  any  one  could  have  postponed  work  it 
was  He.  Work — 1.  While  it  ia  day  to  you.  Some  days  are  very  short.  Young 
brother  or  sister,  your  sun  may  go  down  ere  it  reaches  noon.  Mother,  if  you  knew 
you  had  only  another  month,  how  you  would  pray  with  your  children  1  So  Sunday- 
school  teacher.  2.  While  it  is  day  with  the  objects  of  your  care.  You  will  not 
have  the  opportunity  of  speaking  to  some  in  London  to-morrow,  for  they  vrill  die 
to-night.  With  some  their  "  day  "  is  brief  although  they  may  live  long ;  it  is  only 
the  one  occasion  when  they  go  to  a  place  of  worship,  when  there  is  sickness  in  the 
house  and  the  missionary  enters,  when  a  Christian  comes  across  their  path.  IV. 
A  BXMEMBRANOBB  OF  OCR  MORTALITY.  "  The  night  comcth. "  You  caunot  put  it  off, 
however  much  you  may  dread  it.  It  comes  for  the  pastor,  missionary,  father, 
mother,  <feo.  The  warrior  who  loses  a  battle  may  yet  live  to  win  the  campaign  ;  the 
bankrupt  may  yet  be  rich ;  but  if  you  lose  the  battle  of  life  you  shall  never  have  it 
to  fight  again,  and  bankruptcy  in  spiritual  service  is  bankruptcy  for  ever.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  The  work  of  life : — Note — I.  That  to  evert  man  a  work  is  given. 
What  is  it?  I.  Negatively:  Not — (1)  business;  (2)  pleasure;  (3)  learning — how- 
ever important  these  may  be  relatively.  2.  Positively :  to  "  work  out  our  own 
salvation,"  &c.  This  is  a  work — (1)  Of  repentance  ;  (2)  of  faith  ;  (3)  of  obedience. 
3.  Without  Christ  in  this  great  work  we  can  do  nothing ;  but  His  grace  is  sufficient 
for  us.  II.  That  a  period  of  time  in  which  the  performance  of  this  work  may  be 
ACCOMPLISHED  IS  ASSIGNED  TO  EVERY  MAN.  Within  the  day  of  life  there  are  days 
specially  favourable.  1.  The  day  of  youth.  2.  The  day  of  health.  3.  The  day  of 
religious  opportunity.  4.  The  day  of  spiritual  influence.  III.  That  at  the  ex- 
piration OF  the  allotted  season  the  performance  op  this  work  is  impossible. 
"  The  night  cometh " — 1.  Of  affliction.  2.  Of  religious  abandonment.  3.  Of 
death — "  when  no  man  can  work."  {J.  Bowers.)  Work,  and  work  rightly  : — It 
is  not  enough  to  work,  we  must  work  in  the  right  way.  To  do  this — I.  We  most 
BE  prepared  for  THE  WORK,  and  since  it  is  Divine,  by  God  Himself.  It  is  not  by 
might  nor  by  power,  physical  or  intellectual.  There  is  no  tendency  in  the  uncon- 
verted to  seek  the  Father's  glory,  and  therefore  we  must  be  regenerated  by  the 
Spirit.  Excitement  may  press  us  into  the  fieW,  an  anxious  feeling  may  give  us  a 
momentary  energy,  but  a  few  cold  blasts  from  the  world,  and  a  little  of  the  irksome- 
ness  of  the  task  will  soon  extinguish  the  flame  and  drive  us  from  the  field.  II. 
Wk  must  work  with  all  otjb  HEART.  God's  demand  is  not  "  Give  me  thy  body  or 
thine  intellect"  but  "  thy  heart."  Half-heartedness  in  His  cause  is  an  abomina- 
tion in  His  sight.  God  will  not  have  a  man  swing  between  the  world  and  Himself, 
halting  between  two  opinions.  And  surely  the  character  of  the  Master,  the  nature 
of  the  wiirk  and  its  reward,  are  enough  to  engage  the  energies  of  the  whole  soul. 
in.  We  must  work  expecting  success.  We  are  ot  to  imagine  that  we  embark  on 
Bn  impossibility ;  if  we  do  we  shall  lose  nerve  d  fail  in  application.  We  must 
be  buoyed  up  by  the  conviction  that  God  will  bless  us  in  our  labour  of  love.  This 
He  pledges  Himself  to  do,  and  this  should  stimulate  us,  especially  when  we  remem- 
ber that  success  means  the  salvation  of  souls,  an  that  God  has  granted  this  to 
other  labourers.  lY.  Ws  must  work  and  not  be  ashamed  of  it.  There  is  a  good 
deal  of  cowardice  in  religious  work  which  contrasts  strangely  with  the  courage  wa 


122  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tx. 

display  in  business,  &c.  And  yet  if  manliness  be  demanded  in  anything  it  is  in 
this.  We  are  to  be  good  soldiers  of  Jesus  Christ,  witnesses  for  Ood,  and  are  to  act 
in  capacities  where  boldness  is  the  one  thing  needful.  And  what  is  there  to  be 
ashamed  of? — the  Master?  the  work?  the  fellow-workmen?  the  reward?  Re- 
member— 1.  The  object  you  have  in  view.  Would  you  be  ashamed  to  awaken  the 
sleeper  in  the  burning  house,  to  cry  to  the  foundering  sailor  to  grasp  the  rope?  2. 
That  if  you  are  ashamed  of  Christ  here,  He  will  be  ashamed  of  you  at  the  Judg- 
ment.  V.  We  must  work  though  wb  see  no  pbospect  of  success.  Duty  is  ours» 
results  are  God's.  But  we  have  room  for  encouragement,  for  the  nnlikeUest  field 
has  often  become  the  most  prolific.  Eemember  Mary  Magdalene,  the  dying  thief, 
Saul  of  Tarsus.  But,  whatever  the  likelihood  or  otherwise  of  success,  we  must 
work.  We  must  realize  that  we  are  our  brother's  keeper,  and  not  wait  to  inquire 
about  his  characteristics,  but  acquaint  him  with  his  want  and  bring  the  supply.  If 
he  rejects  it  that  is  his  responsibility,  not  ours.  YI.  We  must  wobk  habd — 1. 
Because  the  adversary  is  active.  2.  Because  our  time  is  drawing  to  a  close.  (J. 
McConnell  Hussey,  D.D.)  The  Divine  dignity  of  work: — Like  Jesus — I.  Wb 
HAVE  EACH  ouB  MISSION.  We  are  Divinely  sent.  It  is  by  no  act  of  ours  that  we  are 
here,  by  no  migration  from  a  pre-existent  life,  still  less  did  we  construct  this  abode 
of  ours.  Yet  here  we  are  on  the  theatre  of  this  particular  world,  and  as  its  lords 
to  replenish  and  subdue  it,  but  confined  to  it.  Whence  have  we  this  range,  so 
large  and  yet  so  defined  ?  Because  we  have  a  definite  mission,  which  missed  or 
marred,  the  result  is  tragic.  II.  We  have  each  a  pbacxical  mission.  We  are  sent 
to  "  work."  There  are  some  nobles  who  are  sent  on  mere  missions  of  pageantry  or 
pleasure  ;  one  as  ambassador,  to  gratify  at  some  refined  court  his  taste  for  music 
and  the  fine  arts.  Another,  fond  of  travel,  contrives  in  this  way  to  see  classic  or 
romantic  lands.  But  man's  mission  from  the  Eing  of  kings  is  sternly  practical. 
Had  he  kept  his  first  estate  it  would  have  been  so,  for  work  is  Divine  and  older 
than  the  fall.  All  legitimate  work  is — 1.  Productive.  Other  is  not  so — the  thief, 
e.g.,  the  marauding  conqueror,  the  publican.  But  the  mechanic,  merchant, 
explorer,  Ac,  are  productive,  whether  of  food,  comforts,  wealth,  or  knowledge, 
which  is  power.  2.  Ennobling,  directly  contributing  to  the  decencies  and  moralities 
of  life  as  may  be  seen  when  we  contrast  the  condition  of  the  poorest  in  this  city 
with  that  of  the  savage.  The  Jews  had  an  excellent  proverb :  "  He  that  has  not 
learned  to  work,  is  brother  to  him  that  is  a  thief."  From  this  let  every  man  learn 
to  honour  productive  and  useful  work  wherever  found.  Let  not  the  operative  refuse 
the  name  of  workman  to  the  thinker,  because  the  fabric  of  his  thoughts  cannot  be 
seen ;  for  our  manufactures,  buildings,  machines  are  but  the  vesture  of  previous 
thought.  And  let  not  the  non-manual  class  look  down  on  the  brawny  arm  and 
homy  hand  !  for  they  are  the  solid  basis  of  the  social  pyramid.  III.  We  have  a 
MISSION  TO  Divine  and  God-like  wobks.  1.  Our  daily  callings,  if  they  are  honest 
and  honourable,  and  done  inside  our  Father's  vineyard,  and  for  Him,  and  not  out- 
side the  sacred  ground  as  done  for  man  merely  or  self.  "  I  have  not  time  to  serve 
God  "  was  once  said  to  an  evangeUst.  "  God  wants  no  more  of  your  time  than  yon 
give  to  the  devil,"  was  the  reply.  2.  The  more  special  works  God  has  laid  upon 
us  in  the  culture  of  personal  religion  and  in  the  works  of  philanthrophy.  We  need 
but  read  the  context  to  find  out  what  works  Christ  meant,  such  works  as  are 
grouped  in  the  formula,  "  He  went  about  doing  good."  3.  The  bulk  of  these  works 
is  individually  not  great  but  little.  The  entire  pyramid  of  human  progress  is  made 
up  of  littles.  The  vast  ocean  is  made  up  of  drops,  and  the  great  globe  of  atoms; 
and  just  so  in  the  intellectual,  moral,  and  spiritual  world  Ufe  is  made  up  of  little 
duties.  Great  and  brilliant  services  are  possible  only  to  a  few,  and  in  rare  emer- 
gencies, and  weighed  against  the  ordinary,  they  are  but  of  small  account.  What 
keeps  the  world  moving  is  not  the  great  deeds  of  kings,  conquerors,  &c.,  but  the 
brave,  patient,  prayerful  work  of  fathers  and  mothers,  husbands  and  wives,  &o. 
4.  In  order  to  these  little  works  being  good  works  there  is  a  previous  work,  viz., 
believing  in  Jesus  aud  being  reconciled  to  God.  IV.  Wb  have  a  mission  that  is 
URGENT.  1.  Beware  of  the  many  things  that  seek  to  rob  us  of  one  day.  2.  Time 
lost  can  never  be  retrieved.  3.  Time  is  inestimably  precious  for  all  our  interests, 
but  infinitely  more  as  involving  our  eternity.  4.  Flee  to  Jesus  without  delay,  for 
•'  now  is  the  accepted  time,"  <fec.  {T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  The  benefit  of  work  : — In 
seeking  others'  good  we  achieve  good  ourselves.  I  know  of  no  way  to  get  rid  of  a 
good  deal  of  the  prevalent  dulness  and  drowsiness  and  spiritual  ennui  with  which 
many  Christians  are  afflicted  than  by  shaking  it  off  like  cobwebs  and  going  to  work. 
Work  is  the  pre-requisite  of  growth,  and  exercise  of  health  and  developmenb 


OHAt.  IX.]  8T.  JOHN.  128 

Wbsn  good  people  tell  me  aboat  being  in  a  saddened  condition,  and  confess  to 
Bpiritn^  stagnation,  it  does  not  seem  wonderful  at  all.  The  man  who  does  not 
work  has  no  right  to  expect  anything  but  distrust,  dissatisfaction,  and  ultimate 
degradation,  and  he  will  get  it.  For  any  Christian  man  to  suppose  that  he  is 
eimply  a  sanctified  sponge,  to  continuously  absorb  the  light  and  life  of  others  and 
grow,  is  sheer  nonsense.  He  will  by  and  by  rot  I  He  will  not  be  able  to  keep 
even  with  salt.  If  you  would  be  healthily  developed,  work.  If  there  is  a  single 
organ  in  the  body  that  is  weak,  use  it  well,  and  strength  will  come  to  it.  So  with 
regard  to  your  spiritual  life.  There  is  no  such  beneficent  arrangement  for  spiritual 
growth,  like  the  effort  to  prove  a  blessing  to  mankind.  {Family  Churchman.) 
The  work  of  life — I.  Oub  Heavenly  Father  sent  us  into  this  wobld  to  do  His 
WORK  AND  TO  LIVE  FOR  His  GLORY.  We  are  bidden  to  "  replenish  the  earth  and 
Bubdue  it "  ;  fill  it,  that  is,  with  all  things  right  and  good,  and  bound  to  do  our  best 
to  make  ourselves  and  all  men  more  like  the  true  image  of  the  Holy  God,  and  to 
leave  the  world  better  than  we  found  it.  II.  Oub  life  on  eabth  is  as  a  day,  and  no 
UORE  than  a  day.  It  has  its  morning,  for  preparation ;  its  sunny  hours,  for  labour ; 
its  evening,  for  meditation  ;  and  then  the  night  cometh,  when  all  is  over.  Life  is 
but  as  a  day ;  no  more.  Wherefore  it  is  foUy  and  madness  to  indulge  ourselves  in 
the  fancy  that  we  have  time  to  loiter,  a  time  to  be  idle.  No.  The  longest  day  is 
short  enough  for  all  that  a  wise  man  wishes  to  put  into  it ;  and  the  longest  life  is 
not  too  long  to  spend  in  the  earnest  seeking  after  God.  For  the  soul  of  man  is  like 
some  primeval  forest,  which  contains  in  itself  a  glorious  fertility,  and  an  almost 
boundless  capacity  for  bearing  fruitful  harvests  for  the  careful  tiller  of  the  soil ;  but 
mitil  it  is  tilled  and  tended,  it  is  but  the  haunt  of  wild  beasts — it  is  but  a  rauk, 
dark,  silent,  wilderness,  where  the  ranker  and  more  noxious  the  weed,  the  stronger 
and  ruder  is  its  growth ;  but  if  the  brave  husbandman  begins  to  labour,  if  the 
enn  of  heaven  shines  through  the  sullen  gloom,  and  the  winds  of  God  blow 
softly  through  the  branches,  and  the  watchful  eye  seeks  out  the  poisonous 
plants,  and  the  careful  hand  fosters  the  fruitful  soil,  then,  by  and  by,  but  only 
after  a  long  time  of  travail,  the  wilderness  and  the  solitary  place  will  be  glad, 
and  the  desert  will  rejoice  and  blossom  as  the  rose.  (A.  Jessop,  D.D.)  Earnest 
views  of  life: — Christian  earnestness  has  for  its  elements — I.  A  conscientioub 
BSTiMAXB  OF  THE  WORTH  OF  TIME.  Life  is  uot  a  day  too  long.  Go  into  the  Mint, 
and  you  will  find  the  gold-room  constructed  with  double  floors.  The  upper  one 
acts  like  a  sieve,  and  the  lower  one  catches  and  retains  the  infinitesimal  particles 
of  gold  which  are  sifted  through.  Every  human  life  needs  some  such  contrivance 
for  the  economy  of  fragments  of  time.  Lord  Nelson  said :  "  I  have  always  been 
fifteen  minutes  before  the  time,  and  it  has  made  a  man  of  me."  Napoleon  said: 
"Bemember,  that  every  lost  moment  is  a  chance  of  future  misfortune."  Sir 
Walter  Scott,  when  asked  what  was  the  secret  of  the  marvellous  fertility  of  his  pen, 
replied :  *'  I  have  always  made  it  a  rule  never  to  be  doing  nothing."  An  intruder 
npon  the  morning  study  hours  of  Baxter  apologized:  "Perhaps  I  interrupt  you." 
Baxter  answered  rudely,  but  honestly :  "  To  be  sure  yon  do."  The  spirit  of  saoh 
men,  refined  by  Christian  culture,  is  the  spirit  with  which,  in  the  Christian  view 
of  life,  time  is  to  be  valued.  Every  life  is  made  of  moments ;  a  kingdom  could  not 
purchase  one  of  them.  An  earnest  man  will  often  reckon  time  as  if  he  were  on  a 
death-bed.  There  are  hours  in  every  man's  life  in  which  the  tick  of  a  watch  is 
more  thrilling  to  an  earnest  spirit  than  the  roll  of  thunder.  There  come  moments 
in  which  the  beat  of  a  pulse  is  more  awful  than  the  roar  of  Niagara.  U.  Absti* 
NENCE  FROM  FRIVOLITY  OF  SPEECH.  Do  WO  adequately  revere  the  sacredness  of  lan« 
guage?  All  nations  have  a  tradition  that  it  came  down  from  heaven.  We  all 
have  respect  for  a  man  of  reticent  speech.  If  a  man  talks  twaddle,  there  is  mora 
hope  of  a  fool  than  of  him.  The  Scriptures  pronounce  him  a  great  man  who  can 
rule  his  own  spirit ;  but  the  chief  element  in  that  power  is  the  power  to  govern  his 
tongue.  Many  times  one  word  has  saved  life.  Peace  and  war  between  rival 
nations  have  often  trembled  in  scales  which  the  utterance  of  one  word  has  decided. 
A  certain  man  attributed  his  salvation  to  one  word  in  a  sermon  preached  by 
Whitefield.  "A  word  spoken  in  season,  how  good  is  itt"  There  are  men 
who  specially  need  to  correct  the  overgrowth  of  risibility  in  their  habits.  They 
make  a  pet  of  frivolous  speech.  There  are  men  whose  reputation  for  levity  was  so 
great  that  their  very  rising  in  a  public  assembly  set  going  a  ripple  of  laughter 
before  they  had  opened  their  ps.  There  are  worse  things  in  the  world  tlum  a 
laugh,  but  no  earnest  mar.  will  make  a  business  of  it.  Men  of  frivolous  tongue  are 
apt  to  have  a  frisky  intellect.    That  is  worse  than  SL  Yitus's  dance.    A  certain 


IM  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n 


nervous  disease  relaxes  the  risible  muscles  from  control,  and  gives  to  the  counten- 
ance the  smile  of  idiocy.  So  are  there  certain  minds  which  by  habitual  levity  ol 
tongue  become  morally  idiotic.  They  cannot  think  intensely,  nor  feel  profoundly. 
In  God's  estimate  of  things,  what  must  be  the  verdict  when  such  a  debilitated  mind 
is  weighed  in  the  balances  I  What  must  be  the  ending  of  such  an  impoverished 
and  wasted  life ?  "The  wicked  is  snared  by  the  transgression  of  his  lips."  III. 
The  conseceation  or  lifk  to  great  designs.  Aurungzebe,  an  Indian  prince,  had 
lived,  as  other  Oriental  monarchs  do,  in  selfish  and  sensoal  indulgences.  In  a 
farewell  letter  to  his  son  he  says  :  "  I  came  a  stranger  into  the  world,  and  a  stranger 
I  go  out  of  it.  I  know  nothing  about  myself,  what  I  am  or  what  is  my  destiny. 
My  life  has  been  passed  vainly,  and  now  the  breath  which  rose  is  gone,  and  has 
left  not  even  a  hope  behind."  This  is  in  every  respect  just  what  the  Christian  idea 
of  life  is  not.  A  Christian  life  in  its  true  conception  is  a  great  and  a  good  one.  It 
is  devoted  to  objects  worthy  of  a  man.  Dr.  Arnold  expresses  it  in  brief  when  he 
says :  "  I  feel  more  and  more  the  need  of  intercourse  with  men  who  take  life  in 
earnest.  It  is  painful  to  me  to  be  always  on  the  surface  of  things.  Not  that  I 
wish  for  much  of  what  is  called  religious  conversation.  That  is  often  apt  to  be  on 
the  surface.  But  I  want  a  sign  winch  one  catches  by  a  sort  of  masonry,  that  a  man 
knows  what  he  is  about  in  life.  Wtien  I  find  this,  it  opens  my  heart  with  as  fresh 
a  s^^mpathy  as  when  I  was  twenty  years  younger,"  One  of  the  merchant  princes 
of  Philadelphia  made  it  a  rule  to  build  at  his  own  cost  one  church  every  year. 
When  he  began  his  career  he  was  a  mechanic,  engaged  in  making  trinkets.  But 
one  day  the  thought  came  to  him :  "  This  is  a  small  business;  I  am  manufacturing 
little  things,  and  things  useless  to  the  world."  It  was  no  sin,  but  it  did  not  seem 
to  him  a  man's  work.  It  made  him  restless  till  he  changed  his  trade,  and  became 
as  expert  in  the  manufacture  of  locomotives  as  he  had  been  before  in  that  of  ear- 
rings and  gewgaws.  The  Christian  spirit  in  the  very  germ  of  it  is  essentially  a 
great  spirit,  an  ambitious  spirit,  which  is  not  content  till  it  identifies  life  with 
great  and  commanding  objects.  It  puts  into  a  man  the  will  to  do,  and  so  develops 
in  him  the  power  to  do  grand  things,  in  which  the  doing  shall  be  as  grand  as  the 
thing  done.  Christianity  has  bestowed  on  the  world  a  magnificent  gift  in  the 
single  principle  of  the  dignity  of  labour.  It  is  a  sublime  thing  to  work  for  one's 
living.  To  do  well  the  thing  a  man  is  created  for  is  a  splendid  achievement.  A 
rich  fool  once  said  to  a  rising  lawyer:  "I  remember  the  time  when  you  had  to 
black  my  father's  boots,  sir."  "  Did  I  not  do  them  well  ?  "  was  the  reply,  and  it 
spoke  inborn  greatness.  Our  Lord  disclosed  the  same  spirit  when  in  His  early 
boyhood  He  said  :  "  Wist  ye  not  that  I  must  be  about  my  Father's  business  ?  " 
Every  Christian  young  man  has  his  Father's  business  to  attend  to,  and  he  is  not 
a  full-grown  man  till  he  gets  about  it.  IV.  The  resolve  to  give  life  to  the  same 
OBJECTS  FOK  WHICH  Chkist  LIVED.  Trades  and  professions,  and  recreations  even, 
can  be  made  Christ-like.  He  was  a  mistaken  and  untrained  Christian  who  gave 
np  a  large  practice  at  the  bar,  because,  he  said,  a  man  could  not  be  a  Christian 
lawyer.  A  man  can  be  a  Christian  in  anything  tbat  is  necessary  to  the  welfare  of 
mankind.  Everything  in  this  world  belongs  to  Christ,  and  can  be  used  for  Him. 
One  of  the  humblest  of  the  mechanical  trades  has  been  glorified  by  the  fact  that 
Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  a  carpenter.  Making  money  is  a  Christian  thing,  if  a  man 
will  do  it  in  Christian  ways.  If  it  is  some  men's  duty  to  be  poor,  it  is  other  men's 
duty  to  be  rich.  Both  should  identify  life  with  Christ's  life.  This  was  Paul's 
ambition:  "  To  me  to  live  is  Christ."  Let  a  man  once  get  thoroughly  wrought 
into  and  through  his  whole  being  the  fact  that  this  world  is  to  be  converted  to  Jesus 
Christ,  and  thut  bis  own  business  here  is  to  work  into  line  with  God's  enterprize  in 
this  thing,  and  he  cannot  help  realizing  in  his  own  person  the  Christian  theory 
of  hving.  He  will  meditate  on  it,  he  will  study  it,  he  will  inform  himself  about  it, 
he  will  talk  of  it,  he  will  work  for  it,  he  will  dream  of  it,  he  will  give  his  money  to 
it,  if  need  be  he  will  suffer  for  it  and  die  for  it.  Such  a  life  of  active  thoughtful 
sympathy  with  Christ  will  make  a  man  of  anybody.  No  matter  who  or  what  he  is, 
no  matter  how  poor,  how  ignorant,  how  small  in  the  world's  esteem,  such  a  life 
will  make  him  a  great  man.  Angels  will  respect  him.  God  will  own  him.  {A. 
Phelps,   D.D.)  Two  ways   of  lengthening  life  : — An  eminent  divine   suffering 

from  a  chronic  disease,  consulted  three  physicians,  who  declared,  on  being 
questioned  by  the  sick  man,  that  his  disease  would  be  followed  by  death  in  a 
shorter  or  longer  time,  according  to  the  maimer  in  which  he  lived;  but  they 
unanimously  advised  him  to  give  up  his  ofiice,  because,  in  his  situation,  mental 
agitation  would  be  fatal  to  him.     "  If  I  give  myself  to  repose,"  inquired  the  divine. 


-ssAP.  rx.]  8T.  JOHN.  12« 

"how  long  will  you  goarantee  my  life?"    "Six  years,"  answered  the  doctors. 
«•  And  if  I  should  continue  in  oflBcef"     "Three  years  at  most,"    "Thank  you, 


enough  for  the  general  if  he  directs  the  battle,  but  Jesus  fought  in  the  ranks.    As 
the  great  Architect  He  supervises  all,  yet  He  helps  to  build  the  Spiritual  Temple 
with  His  own  hauds.    It  made  Alexander's  soldiers  valiant,  because,  when  they  were 
wearied  with  long  marches,  he  dismounted  and  walked  with  them  ;  and  if  a  river 
had  to  be  crossed  in  the  teeth  of  opposition,  foremost  amidst  all  the  risk  was  the 
general.     2.  He  laid  great  stress  on  the  gracious  work  which  was  laid  upon  Him. 
There  were  some  things  He  would  not  do — dividing  inheritances,  &c.     But  when 
it  came  to  the  work  of  blessing  souls,  this  He  must  do,  and  He  did  it  with  all 
His  might.     The  unity  of  Hia  purpose  was  never  broken.     3.  He  rightly  describes 
this  work  as  the  work  of  God.    If  ever  there  was  one  who  might  have  taken  the 
honour  to  himself  it  was  Jesus ;  yet  He  ever  says,  *'  The  Father  doeth  the  works." 
He  sets  us  the  example  of  confessing  that  whatever  we  do  God  does  it  and  should 
have  the  glory.    4.  He  owned  His  true  position.     He  had  not  come  forth  on  His 
own  account.    He  was  not  here  as  a  principal,  but  as  a  subordinate,  an  ambas- 
sador sent  by  the  king.    God  gave  Him  a  commission  and  the  grace  to  carry  it 
out.    5.  He  threw  a  hearty  earnestness  into  the  work  He  undertook.     Though 
sent,  the  commission  was  so  genial  to  His  nature  that  He  worked  with  all  the 
alacrity  of  a  volunteer.     He  was  commissioned,  but  His  own  wiU  was  the  main 
compulsion.     6.  He  clearly  saw  that  there  was  a  fitting  time  to  work,  and  that 
this  time  would  have  an  end.    He  called  his  lifetime  a  day :  to  show  us  that  He 
was  impressed  with  the  shortness  of  it.     Thou  hast  but  a  day— youth  is  the 
morning,  manhood  the  noon,  old  age  the  evening.    Be  up  and  doing,  for  beyond 
that  is  night.     But  as  with  Christ,  so  with  us.      We  cannot  die  till  our  day  is 
over.     n.   Ourselves  as  wobkebs  undbb  Him.      1.  On   us  there  rests  personal 
obligation.    We  are  in  danger  of  losing  ourselves  in  societies  and  associations. 
The  old  histories  are  rich  in  records  of  personal  daring.     There  is  little  of  that 
now  because  fighting  is  done  so  much  by  masses  and  machinery.     So  our  Christian 
work  is  in  danger  of  getting  mechanical,  so  much  en  masse  that  there  is  barely 
room  for  singular  deeds  of  valour.    Yet  the  success  of  the  Church  will  lie  in  this 
last.     Each  man  should  feel  "  I  have  something  to  do  for  Christ  which  an  angel 
could  not  do  for  me."    2.  Our  personal  obligation  compels  us  to  just  such  work  as 
Christ  did.    We  are  not  called  meritoriously  to  save  souls,  for  He  is  the  only 
Saviour,  but  we  are  called  to  enlighten  them.     This  work  must  be  done,  whatever 
else  is  left  undone.    And  how  paltry  is  every  other  gain  compared  with  that  of  a 
saved  soul  1    We  have  our  secular  callings  and  ought  to  have  them,  but  we  have  a 
high  calling  of  God  in  Christ,  and  while  other  things  may  be  this  must  be.    3.  It 
is  God's  work  we  are  called  upon  to  do.    What  greater  motive  can  we  have  than 
to  have  a  Divine  work  and  Divine  strength  to  do  it  ?    Your  mission  is  not  less 
honourable  than  that  of  angels,  and  how  blessed  it  is  !    How  desperate  the  case  of 
those  we  are  sent  to  save,  and  how  short  the  time  in  which  to  save  them  I     (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)        The  night  cometh  when  no  man  can  work. — Although  our  Lord's 
ministry  began  late,  it  was  marked  by  incessant  activity.    His  disciples  marvelled 
at  it,  and  He  accounts  for  it  by  the  fact  that  He  had  much  to  do  and  but  little 
time  to  do  it  in.    This  declaration  is  worth  attention.    It  is  not  wise  to  dwell  in 
a  cold  sense  of  death.    Dying  need  not  be  gloomy;  but  life  has  a  certain  duration, 
and  there  is  allotted  to  every  man  a  certain  round  of  duties ;  and  as  in  a  journey 
a  man  divides  the  distance  into  stages  according  to  the  time  he  has  to  accom- 
plish it,  so  a  man  ought  to  look  forward  to  death  in  order  to  accomplish  in  life 
the  things  that  are  to  be  done.    The  husbandman  says,  "  If  nay  ground  does  not 
receive  the  seed  early  in  the  spring,  I  shall  have  no  harvest  in  the  autumn.     I 
know  the  measure  of  the  summer  and  labour  accordingly."     I.  I  address  those 
WHO  LIVE  AIMLESS  LIVES.     Many  of  you  will  not  live  long,  and  yet   there  are 
incumbent  upon  you  great   duties  toward  God,  man,  yourselves.     You  may  not 
be  stained  with  vice ;  but  there  is  great  wrong  done  by  every  man  who  in   Ufe 
has  no  plan  but  that  of  idly  floating  out  of  one  day  into  another.    That  is  to 
surrender  the  dignity  of  life  and  to  make  yourselves  like  the  gauzy  ephemeridea 
that  float  in  the  air.    But  you  are  not  born  to  be  insects,  and  however  cheerful 
yon  may  be  you  ought  to  answer  the  great  questions :  "  What  am  I  bom  for  ? 
Bcw  long  have  I  to  stay  here  ? "     II.  I  also  address  thoss  who  abb  alwaii 


126  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR  [ohaj.  n* 

INTENDIKO  TO  DO  THE  THINGS  THEY  ASMTBB.  How  many  are  Baying,  •*  When  thet* 
is  a  more  convenient  season  it  is  my  purpose  to  reform."  But  no  man  ifi  wise 
■who  does  not  say  day  by  day,  "  What  I  do  I  must  hasten  to  do,  for  life  is 
not  very  long  for  me."  For  whatever  you  mean  to  do  you  have  no  time  to 
spare.  Patting  off  till  prosperity  is  established  is  substantially  putting  off  for 
ever.  They  who  late  in  life  attain  to  any  considerable  excellence  are  rare 
exceptions.  Men  usually  plant  in  childhood  the  seeds  which  blossom  and  bear 
the  fruits  on  which  they  feed  in  later  years.  III.  In  the  spirit  op  this  teaching 
MAN  SHOULD  MEASURE  CERTAIN  PRACTICAL  DUTIES.  1.  It  Is  part  of  a  Christian 
man's  duty  to  make  provision  for  his  household.  No  man  has  a  right  to  leave 
out  of  view  the  fact  tiiat  he  may  be  taken  away,  and  when  that  is  the  case  the 
bread-winner  is  gone.  It  is  wicked  therefore  for  a  man,  because  he  admires  his 
wife  and  loves  his  children,  to  live  beyond  his  means  to  gratify  their  tastes  or 
whims.  Where  a  man  does  this,  when  the  collapse  comes  there  is  nothing  but 
misery.  2.  It  is  a  Christian  man's  duty  to  secure  the  provision  he  has  made. 
There  are  many  men  whose  business  is  in  such  a  state  that  if  they  were  to  die 
their  affairs  would  be  like  a  ship  from  whose  rudder  the  pilot  has  been  shot  down. 
"  Set  thy  house  in  order,"  then.  Make  your  will,  and  have  your  affairs  so  straight 
that  it  will  be  easy  to  wind  them  up  and  dispose  them  according  to  your 
wishes,  IV.  The  sentiment  of  the  text  rules  in  the  religious  sphere.  I. 
In  personal  spiritual  growth.  The  time  for  the  development  of  the  graces,  ths 
acquisition  of  knowledge,  the  contraction  of  good  habits  is  brief — make  the  most 
of  it.  2.  In  Christian  work.  If  you  have  anything  to  do  for  the  poor,  for  the 
Church,  for  the  world's  purity  and  happiness,  you  have  no  time  to  lose.  And  yet 
how  few,  however  active,  are  using  the  whole  economy  of  their  natures  according 
to  the  power  that  is  in  them  ?  (H.  W  Beecher.)  The  night  cometh : — Therefore 
— I.  Do  not  set  tour  affections  oh  earthly  things.  Wealth,  reputation, 
pleasure,  &c.,  will  then  perish.  You  would  not  tie  yonr  earthly  happiness  to  a 
flower  that  is  to  fade  at  sunset ;  and  is  it  more  reasonable  for  a  being  who  is  to 
live  for  ever  to  choose  for  his  portion  what  must  pass  from  his  grasp  whenever  the 
sun  of  this  short  life  goes  down  ?  II.  Do  not  repine  and  lose  heart  amid  toub 
CARE  AND  SORROWS.  The  occasions  of  these  last  only  for  life's  Uttle  day,  and  dark 
as  that  day  may  be,  it  wiU  drag  through  at  last.  And  sweet  as  is  the  evening  hour 
of  rest  for  the  labourer,  that  is  nothing  to  the  rest  that  remaineth  for  the  people 
of  God,  Let  this  prospect  infuse  courage  and  hope  to  endure  our  loss  and  to  bear 
our  cross.  III.  Do  not  weary  of  your  duties.  Some  of  them  are  delightful 
enough,  but  others  are  burdensome ;  but  the  time  is  coming  when  both  will  be 
laid  aside  and  the  reward  bestowed.  IV.  Work  out  your  own  salvation,  for  that 
can  only  be  accomplished  during  the  day.  And  who  knows  how  many  hours 
remain  and  what  accident  may  not  cut  it  short  ?  {A.  K.  H.  Boyd,  D.D.)  The 
night  cometh : — There  is  a  difference  between  the  ancient  Oriental  and  the  modern 
Occidental  idea  of  night,  owing  to  the  comparative  security  of  life  and  property 
in  modem  times.  In  the  ancient  East  (and  it  is  so  still  in  the  modem  East),  the 
man  who  camped  outside  of  the  city  walls  was  liable  to  attack  from  prowUng 
Bedouins,  from  professional  thieves,  and  from  wild  animals ;  while  he  who  slept 
within  city  walls  hardly  dared  to  venture  out  of  doors  by  night,  for  fear  of  the 
troops  of  half-savage  dogs  that  scoured  through  the  narrow  streets,  fighting  each 
other  for  the  offal  which  they  found  there.  The  darkness  was  also  the  time  when 
evil  spirits  had  most  power :  Lilith,  the  female  demon,  and  Asmodai,  and  other 
evil  spirits,  hid  in  dark  places  during  the  day ;  but  during  the  night  they  issued 
forth  to  prey  upon  mankind.  A  certain  trace  of  this  same  feeling  is  seen  in  the 
evil  epithets  applied  to  night  by  the  classical  writers.  The  night  is  "  terrible," 
«♦  destructive,"  To  these  writers,  as  well  as  to  the  Orientals,  the  night  was  the 
time  of  peril  and  of  enforced  cessation  from  work.  To  us,  night  is  the  period  ol 
repose  and  safety.    (S.  S.  Times.)        Diligence  in  the  work  of  religion: — I.  Therb 

IS  A  WORK  allotted   TO   EVERY    MAN    TO    BE    PERFORMED     WHILE     HE     LIVES     IN    THE 

WORLD.  1.  As  he  is  a  member  of  the  body  politic,  he  is  obliged  to  contribute  his 
proportion  of  help  to  the  public  as  sharing  the  benefits  of  society.  2,  As  he  is  a 
subject  of  a  spiritual  kingdom,  he  is  to  pursue  the  interest  of  his  salvation.  He 
is  sent  into  this  world  to  make  sure  of  a  better.  These  two  capacities  are  very 
different :  by  the  former  a  man  is  to  ap  rove  himself  a  good  citizen ;  by  the  latter 
a  good  Christian.  The  former  too  is  subordinate  to  the  latter,  and  when  it  clashes 
with  it  must  give  way.  According  to  these  capacities  there  is  a  double  work.  1. 
Temporal,  by  which  a  man  is  to  fill  some  place  in  the  commonwealth  by  the  exer 


«HAP.  n.]  ST.  JOHN.  1« 

taae  of  some  nsefnl  profession ;  and  God,  who  has  ordained  society  and  order, 
accounts  Himself  served  by  each  man's  diligent  pursuit,  though  of  the  meanest 
trade,  and  requires  no  man  to  be  praying  or  reading  when  he  ought  to  ba 
hammering  or  sewing.  The  great  Master  is  stiU  calling  upon  all  His  servants  to 
work :  a  thing  so  much  disdained  by  the  gallant  and  epicure,  is  yet  the  price 
which  God  and  Nature  has  set  upon  every  enjoyment  (2  Thess.  iii.  10).  2. 
Spiritual.  This  is  threefold.  (1)  To  make  our  peace  with  God.  God  is 
indeed  reconciled  by  the  satisfaction  made  by  Christ,  and  peace  is  now 
.offered,  but  upon  conditions,  viz.,  repentance  and  faith.  (2)  To  get  our 
Bins  mortified.  For  after  we  are  transplanted  into  a  state  of  grace,  we 
are  not  to  think  that  our  work  is  wholly  done.  Every  man  has  sinful 
habits  with  which  he  is  to  wage  war,  and  this  is  the  most  afflicting  part  of 
his  duty.  (3)  To  get  his  heart  replenished  with  the  proper  virtues  of  a  Christian. 
Christianity  ends  not  in  negatives.  No  man  clears  his  garden  of  weeds,  but  in 
order  to  the  planting  of  flowers  and  herbs.  And  as  every  trade  requires  toil,  so 
this.  II.  The  tiiiib  of  this  lifb  beino  expired,  thebe  is  no  possibility  of  peb- 
FOEMiNO  THIS  WORK.  There  is  no  repenting,  believing,  doing  the  works  of  charity 
in  the  grave.  A  day  notes — 1.  The  shortness  of  it.  What  is  a  day  but  a  few 
minutes'  sunshine,  an  indiscernable  shred  of  that  life  which  is  itself  but  a  span. 
God  allows  us  but  one  day,  wtich  shows  what  value  He  puts  on  our  opportunities  by 
dispensing  them  so  sparingly.  Our  hfe  is  a  day's  journey,  therefore  it  concerns  us 
to  manage  it  so  that  we  may  have  comfort  at  our  journey's  end.  2.  Its  sufficiency. 
A  day,  short  as  it  is,  equals  the  business  of  the  day  ;  and  he  that  repents  not  during 
his  short  life  would  not  were  it  prolonged  five  hundred  years.  3.  Its  determinate 
limitation.  As  after  a  number  of  hours  it  will  unavoidably  be  night,  and  there  is 
no  stopping  the  setting  sun,  so  after  we  have  passed  such  a  measure  of  our  time, 
our  season  has  its  period — we  are  benighted,  and  must  bid  adieu  to  our  opportunities. 
III.   The  consideration  of  this  ought  to  be  the  most  pressing  argument  to 

EVERT   MAN   TO   D8E   HIS   UTMOST   DILIGENCB  IN  THE  DISCHARGE  OF  THIS  WORK.      1.    The 

work  is  most  difficult.  It  is  '•  warfare,"  "wrestling,"  "resisting  the  devil,"  and 
"  unto  blood."  "  Agonizing  "  before  the  door  is  closed  to  enter  in.  Hard  work, 
and  little  time  to  do  it  in.  He  that  has  far  to  go  and  much  to  do  should  rise  early, 
and  mate  the  difficulty  of  the  business  with  the  diligence  of  the  prosecution.  2.  It 
is  necessary,  in  so  far  as  it  is  necessary  for  a  man  to  be  saved ;  which  argument 
will  be  heightened  by  comparing  this  necessity  with  the  limitation  of  time.  There 
is  no  to-morrow  in  a  Christian's  calendar.  {R.  South,  D.D.)  Time  cannot  be 
lengthened  out  by  man : — As  the  light  was  fading  away  on  the  evening  before  the 
battle  of  Waterloo,  Napoleon,  pointing  towards  the  setting  sun,  said,  "  What  would 
I  not  give  to  be  this  day  possessed  of  the  power  of  Joshua — enabled  to  retard  thy 
march  for  two  hours  1 "  (J.  Abbott.)  The  inevitableness  of  death  : — "  The  time 
is  short " — or  as  we  might  perhaps  render  it,  so  as  to  give  the  full  force  of  the 
metaphor,  "  the  time  is  pressed  together."  It  is  being  squeezed  into  narrower  com- 
pass, like  a  sponge  in  a  strong  hand.  There  is  an  old  story  of  a  prisoner  in  a  cell 
with  contractile  walls.  Day  by  day  his  space  lessens.  He  saw  the  whole  of  that 
window  yesterday  ;  he  sees  only  half  of  it  to-day.  Nearer  and  nearer  the  walls  are 
drawn  together,  till  they  meet  and  crush  him  between  them.  So  the  walls  of  our 
home,  which  we  have  made  our  prison,  are  closing  in  upon  us.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.} 
The  need  of  preparation  for  death: — A  young  prince  asked  his  tutor  to  give 
him  some  instruction  about  preparing  for  death.  "Plenty  of  time  for  thai 
when  you  are  older,"  was  the  reply.  "No,"  said  the  child;  "I  have  been  ta 
the  churchyard  and  measured  the  graves,  and  there  are  many  shorter  than  I 
am. "  A  courtier,  who  had  passed  his  life  in  the  service  of  his  prince,  having  fallen 
dangerously  ill,  the  prince  went  to  visit  him,  accompanied  by  his  other  courtiers. 
He  found  him  in  an  agony  of  suffering,  and  at  the  point  of  death.  Touched  with 
the  sad  spectacle,  he  said,  "  Is  there  anything  I  can  do  for  you  ?  Ask  unhesita- 
tingly, and  fear  not  that  you  will  be  refused."  "  Prince,"  replied  the  sufferer,  ♦•  in 
the  sad  situation  in  which  you  see  me,  I  have  but  one  thing  to  ask  of  you ;  give  me 
a  quarter  of  an  hour  of  life."  "  Alas  I "  said  the  prince,  •*  what  you  demand  is  not 
in  my  power  to  give;  ask  something  else,  if  you  wish  me  to  aid  you."  "Oh,. 
what!"  said  the  dying  man,  "I  have  served  you  for  fifty  years, and  you  cannot  give 
me  a  quarter  of  an  hour  of  life  1  Ah  1  if  I  had  served  the  Lord  thus  faithfully,  Ha 
would  have  given  me,  not  a  quarter  of  an  hour  of  life,  but  an  eternity  of  happiness." 
Very  soon  after  he  died.  Happy  if  he  himself  profited  by  the  lesson  which  he 
gave  to  others  on  the  nothingness  of  human  life  and  the  necessity  of  working  out 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ix, 

one's  own  salvation.  {Ponder  and  Pray.)  The  folly  of  delay  : — After  the  battle 
of  Chancellorsville,  General  Hooker,  instead  of  quickly  following  up  his  victory 
with  another  attack,  delayed  it  for  a  day.  The  golden  moment  was  thus  lost,  and 
It  never  afterwards  appeared  to  the  same  extent.  Soldiers'  legs  have  as  much  to  do 
with  winning  great  victories  as  their  arms.  {H.  0.  Mackey. )  Definite  workers  : 
—Generalities  in  religion  are  always  to  be  avoided,  more  especially  generalities  in 
service.  If  a  man  waits  upon  you  for  a  situation,  and  you  say  to  him,  "  What  are 
you  ?  '•  if  he  replies,  "  I  am  a  painter,"  or  "  a  carpenter,"  you  can  find  him  work 
perhaps ;  bat  if  he  says,  **  Oh  1  I  can  do  anything,"  you  understand  that  he  can. 
do  nothing.  So  it  is  with  a  sort  of  spiritual  jobbers  who  profess  to  be  able  to  do 
anything  in  the  Church,  but  who  really  do  nothing.  I  want  my  conscript  brethren 
to-night  to  consider  what  they  are  henceforth  going  to  do,  and  I  beg  them  to  con- 
sider it  with  such  deliberation,  that  when  once  they  have  come  to  a  conclusion  that 
they  will  not  need  to  change  it,  for  changes  involve  lasses.  What  can  you  do? 
What  is  your  calling?  Bagged  schools?  Sunday  schools?  Street  preaching? 
Tract  distribution  ?  Here  is  a  choice  for  you ;  which  do  you  select  ?  Waste  no 
time,  but  say,  **  This  is  my  calling,  and  by  God's  grace  I  will  give  myself  up  to  it, 
meaning  to  do  it  as  well  as  any  man  ever  did  do  it."  (C.H.  Sptirgeon.)  Lost 
opportunities : — "  Ah  I  Mr.  Hervey,"  said  a  dying  man,  ••  the  day  in  which  I  ought 
to  have  worked  is  over,  and  I  now  see  a  horrible  night  approaching,  bringing  with 
it  the  blackness  of  darkness  for  ever.  Woe  is  me  1  When  God  called,  I  refused. 
Now  I  am  in  sore  anguish ;  and  yet  this  is  but  the  beginning  of  sorrows.  I  shall 
be  destroyed  with  an  everlasting  destruction."  A  motive  for  diligence : — The  old 
naturalists,  who  tell  us  a  good  many  things  which  are  not  true,  as  well  as  some 
which  are,  say  that  the  birds  of  Norway  always  fly  more  swiftly  than  any  others, 
because  the  summer  days  are  so  short,  and  therefore  they  have  so  much  to  do  in 
such  a  little  time.  Surely  we  should  fly  more  swiftly  to  do  our  Lord's  work  if  we 
would  only  meditate  upon  the  fact  that  the  day  is  so  short,  and  that  the  night  is  so 
near  at  hand.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  All  must  work : — "  Oh  I  I  could  not  do  much," 
says  one.  Then  do  what  you  can.  No  one  flower  makes  a  garden,  but  altogether 
the  fair  blossoms  of  spring  create  a  paradise  of  beauty.  Let  all  the  Lord's  flowers 
contribute  in  their  proportion  to  the  beauty  of  the  garden  of  the  Lord.  "  But  I  am 
BO  unused  to  it. "  Then,  my  brother,  that  is  a  very  powerful  reason  why  yon  should 
do  twice  as  much,  so  as  to  make  up  for  your  past  idleness.  "  Oh !  but  I  am  afraid 
nothing  would  come  of  it."  What  has  that  to  do  with  yon?  God  has  promised  a 
blessing,  and  if  the  blessing  should  not  come  in  your  day,  yet,  if  you  have  done 
what  the  Master  bade  you,  you  will  not  be  blamed  for  want  of  success.  • '  Sir," 
asks  another,  *•  will  you  give  me  some  work  to  do  ?"  "No,  I  will  not ;  for  if  you  are 
good  for  anything,  you  will  find  it  for  yourself."  (Ibid.)  Work  while  it  is  day : 
— In  the  Californian  bee-pastures,  on  the  sun-days  of  summer,  one  may  readily 
infer  the  time  of  day  from  the  comparative  energy  of  bee-movements  alone :  drowsy 
and  moderate  in  the  cool  of  the  morning,  increasing  in  energy  with  the  ascending 
Bun,  and  at  high  noon  thrilling  and  quivering  in  wild  ecstasy,  then  gradually 
declining  again  to  the  stillness  of  nigbt.  Is  it  not,  or  should  it  not  be,  a  picture  of 
our  life  7  (H.  O.Mackeif.)  Responsibility  to  God : — Daniel  Webster  was  present 
one  day  at  a  dinner-party  given  at  Astor  House  by  some  New  York  friends,  and,  in 
order  to  draw  him  out,  one  of  the  company  put  to  him  the  following  question : 
"  Would  you  please  tell  us,  Mr.  Webster,  what  was  the  most  important  thought 
that  ever  occupied  your  mind  ?  "  Mr.  Webster  merely  raised  his  head,  and  passing 
his  hand  slowly  over  his  forehead,  said,  "  Is  there  any  one  here  who  doesn't  know 
me?"  "No,  sir,"  was  the  reply;  "we  all  know  you,  and  are  your  friends." 
"Then,"  said  he,  looking  over  the  table,  "the  most  important  thought  that  ever 
Dcoupied  my  mind  was  that  of  my  individual  responsibility  to  God,"  Upon  which 
subject  he  then  spoke  for  twenty  minutes.  (Ibid.)  Work  whileit  is  day : — When 
some  one  expostulated  with  Duncan  Matheson,  the  evangelist,  that  he  was  killing 
himself  with  his  labours,  and  ought  to  have  rest,  he  replied:  "I  cannot  rest  while 
■cols  are  being  lost ;  there  is  all  eternity  in  which  to  rest  after  life  is  done."  (Ibid.) 
Life  a  sphere  of  work : — We  are  not  sent  into  life  as  a  butterfly  is  sent  into  summer, 
gorgeously  hovering  over  the  flowers,  as  if  the  interior  spirits  of  the  rainbow  had 
come  down  to  greet  these  kisses  of  the  season  npon  the  ground ;  but  to  labour  for 
the  world's  advancement,  and  to  mould  our  characters  into  God's  likeness,  and  so, 
through  toil  and  achievement,  to  gain  happiness.  I  would  rather  break  stones  upon 
the  road,  if  it  were  not  for  the  disgrace  of  being  in  a  chain  gang,  than  to  be  one 
«f  those  contemptible  joy-mongers,  who  are  so  rich  and  so  empty  that  they  arc 


OHAP.n.]  ST.  JOHN.  12« 

continually  going  about  to  find  something  to  make  them  happy.  {H.  W.  Beecher.) 
We  must  work  with  our  whole  heart: — It  is  one  of  the  first  and  last  qualifications  of 
a  good  workman  for  God  that  he  should  put  his  heart  into  hia  work.  I  have  heard 
mistresses  tell  servants  when  polishing  tables  that  elbow-grease  was  a  fine  thing 
for  such  work ;  and  so  it  is.  Hard  work  is  a  splendid  thing.  It  will  make  a  way 
under  a  river,  or  through  an  Alp.  Hard  work  will  do  almost  everything  ;  but  in 
God's  service  it  must  not  only  be  hard  work,  but  hot  work.  The  heart  must  be  on 
fire.  The  heart  must  be  set  upon  its  design.  See  how  a  child  cries  1  Though  I 
am  not  fond  of  hearing  it,  yet  I  note  that  some  children  cry  all  over;  when  they 
want  a  thing,  they  cry  from  the  tips  of  their  toes  to  the  last  hair  of  their  heads. 
That  is  the  way  to  preach,  and  that  is  the  way  to  pray,  and  that  is  the  way  to 
live  :  the  whole  man  must  be  heartily  engaged  in  holy  work.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Christians  feel  that  they  must  work  : — When  I  have  been  unable  to  preach  through 
physical  pain,  I  have  taken  my  pen  to  write,  and  found  much  joy  in  making  books 
for  Jesus ;  and  when  my  hand  has  been  unable  to  wield  the  pen,  I  have  wanted  to 
talk  about  my  master  to  somebody  or  other,  and  I  have  tried  to  do  so.  I  remember 
that  David  Brainerd,  when  he  was  very  ill,  and  could  not  preach  to  the  Indians, 
was  found  sitting  up  in  bed,  teaching  a  little  Indian  boy  his  letters,  that  he  might 
read  the  Bible ;  and  so  he  said,  "  If  I  cannot  serve  God  one  way,  I  will  another.  I 
will  never  leave  off  this  blessed  service."  (Ibid.)  Work  is  healthful: — On  one 
occasion  a  neighbouring  minister  warned  Dr.  Morison,  of  Chelsea,  that  he  was 
doing  too  much  work.  "  Depend  upon  it,"  said  Dr.  Morison,  *'  the  lazy  minister  dies 
first."  Six  months  afterwards  he  was  sent  for  by  his  friendly  monitor,  and  found 
him  dying.  "  Do  you  remember  what  you  once  said  to  me  ?  "  inquired  the  dying 
man.  Stunned  by  finding  his  words  so  vividly  remembered  at  this  time,  he  replied, 
••  Oh,  don't  speak  of  that."  "  Yes,  I  must  speak  of  it,"  said  his  friend.  •'  It  was 
the  truth  1  Work,  work  while  it  is  called  day;  for  now  the  night  is  coming,  when 
I  cannot  work."  Soul  winning  is  our  work: — I  like  that  expression  of  Mr. 

Wesley's  preachers,  when  they  were  asked  to  interfere  in  this  or  that  political 
struggle,  they  replied,  "  Our  work  is  to  win  souls,  and  we  give  ourselves  to  it." 
Oh,  that  churches  would  hsten  to  this  just  now!     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  We  must 

do  God's  work : — There  are  men,  there  are  women — men  and  women  of  high 
capacities,  of  great  mental  endowment—  who,  in  every  division  of  human  thought 
and  human  labour,  have  furrowed  their  track  deep  in  the  fields  of  history.  There 
are  men,  as  you  all  know,  of  scientific  attainments,  who  have  been  powerful  in 
illuminating  the  meaning  of  the  laws  of  God  with  regard  to  the  physical  creation 
before  the  minds  of  their  fellow -men ;  men  who  have  drawn  out  the  secrets  from 
this  world,  who  have  exposed  to  us  the  meaning  of  much  that  once  we  believed  to 
be  almost  magical,  and  now  is  known  to  be  only  natural.  There  are  men  of  hia 
torical  power,  who  have  been  able  to  co-orJinate  the  various  human  motives  and 
thoughts  which  have  gone  to  form  the  springs  of  history,  until  they  have  succeeded, 
in  part  at  least,  in  reading  some  of  those  general  laws  of  our  Great  Creator,  even 
in  fields  belonging  not  strictly  to  His  divine  revelation.  There  are,  again,  men  of 
artistic  faculties,  who  have  been  able — in  tlirowing  out  thoughts  upon  canvas, 
which  have  startled  us,  sometimes  with  the  beauty  of  execution,  and  always  with 
the  wonderful  mystery  of  various  colourings,  combining  into  one  picture  before 
the  eye — have  been  able,  I  say,  thereby  to  exhibit  to  us  things  that  all  mankind, 
more  or  less,  have  dreamed  of,  but  that  all  mankind  found  themselves  incapable  to 
express.  There  have  been  men — as  you  and  I,  who  live  in  this  great  city,  know — 
who,  by  the  mere  activity  of  their  life,  have  left  a  very  deep  impress  upon  their 
generation.  But,  after  all,  when  we  turn  to  the  Christian  life,  we  have  to  acknow- 
ledge, even  without  the  divine  revelation,  that  all  that  kind  of  work,  all  that  out- 
come of  what.  18  mere  human  activity,  is  not  at  all  work  in  the  sense  in  which 
Christ  means  it,  as  becoming  and  glorifying  an  immortal.  Not  at  all  I  {Knox 
Little.)  We  must  do  our  work  promptly : — In  the  private  journal  of  a  lady  in 
Kew  York,  recently  deceased,  were  found  these  words  :  "  I  expect  to  pass  through 
this  world  but  once.  Any  good  thing,  therefore,  that  I  can  do,  or  any  kindness 
that  I  can  show  to  any  fellow-creature,  let  me  do  it  now.  Let  me  not  defer  or 
neglect  it,  for  I  shall  not  pass  this  way  again."  To  every  man  his  work  : — We 

have  all  of  us  special  endowments ;  each  has  got  some  place  in  the  providential 
ordering  of  God ;  not  one  soul  but  has  his  or  her  place.  God  has  given  each  a 
work.  His  will  for  you  is  to  be  measured  by  the  capabilities  that  you  have.  Some 
have  power  of  brain,  some  of  heart,  some  of  hand.  Some  can  illuminate  a  quiet 
bo  til  e  by  the  tender  brightness  of  a  holy  life  ;  some  can  lead  vast  masses  of  their 
vol..  u.  Q 


130  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  nt 

fellow-creatures  by  a  splendid  example  of  energetic  and  determined  fixity  of  pur- 
pose ;  some  can  think  of  God  with  peculiar  depth  and  power  in  quiet  times,  when 
alone  with  Him.  They  can  so  meditate  that  the  meditation  of  their  soul  is  felt, 
rather  than  heard,  by  those  who  associate  with  them  in  life.  Some  can  go  forth 
into  the  great  working  world,  and  speak  or  do  a  work  for  God  amongst  those  around 
them.  But  for  each  one,  old  or  young — 0  loved  of  God  I  0  child  of  Jesus  1  0  turned 
to  the  Master  with  a  whole  heart  and  a  loving  determination  1 — for  each,  therefore 
for  you,  there  is  a  special  work  in  the  history  of  this  universe.  (Knox  Little.)  Signs 
of  night : — You  will  find  within  your  breast  the  waning  power  of  the  exercise  of 
influence  you  had  in  your  home ;  you  find  the  difficulty,  more  than  ever,  of  fighting 
down  some  wretched  habit  for  which  not  only  do  yon  want  forgiveness,  but  which, 
too,  you  desire  to  conquer  for  the  love  of  Jesus  ;  you  find,  perhaps  the  witness  of  a 
failing  memory,  or  of  failing  health ;  you  find  that  in  some  way  or  other  the  finger 
of  God  is  touching  you.  The  world  may  not  see  it ;  friends  may  not  read  it ;  those 
who  are  d«ar  to  you  ma,y  not  tell  it ;  but  you  know  it — the  witness,  whatever  it  is, 
is  come  —is  coming.  It  speaks  to  you  in  the  silence  of  the  night.  It  wakens  with 
you  when  you  waken  in  the  morning ;  it  travels  with  you  as  a  settled  consciousness 
when  you  are  going  about  the  world ;  it  is  the  whisper  of  that  unrelenting  law  of 
unchanging  changefulness — "the  night  is  coming."  {Ibid.)  The  works  of  God: — 
The  utter  restfulness  which  filled  the  heart  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  beautifully  mani- 
fested in  the  introductory  verses  of  this  chapter,  I.  The  conditions  in  which 
God's  wobks  ake  done.  The  phrase,  "  works  of  God,"  is  a  familiar  one  throughous 
this  Gospel.  To  do  them  fed  the  Redeemer's  soul  (chap.  iv.  34) ;  they  were  in  an 
ever  ascending  scale  (chap.  v.  20) ;  they  were  of  a  certain  definite  number,  given 
Him  to  finish  (chap.  v.  36) ;  they  were  the  signs  and  seals  of  His  mission  (chap. 
X.  38) ;  they  were  not  His  own,  but  wrought  through  Him  by  the  Father  (chap, 
xiv.  10) ;  they  were  unique  in  the  history  of  the  world  (chap,  xvi  24) ;  they  were 
defiinitely  finished  ere  He  left  it  (chap.  xvii.  4).  But  it  becomes  us  to  learn  the 
conditions  under  which  they  were  wrought,  that  we  may  be  able  to  do  those  greater 
works  of  which  He  spoke.  1.  His  heart  was  at  rest  in  God.  Nature  herself  teaches 
the  need  of  repose  for  the  putting  forth  of  her  mightiest  efforts.  It  is  in  the  closet, 
the  study,  the  cave,  the  woodland  retreat  that  problems  have  been  solved,  resolves 
formed,  and  schemes  matured.  It  is  not  possible  for  us  aU  to  have  a  life  of  outward 
calm.  But  beneath  all  the  heart  may  keep  its  Sabbath.  2.  He  was  specially 
endued  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  3.  He  was  willing  that  the  Father  should  work 
through  Him.  11.  The  need  roB  these  wobks.  "A  man  blind  from  his  birth." 
If  there  is  need  for  the  works  of  God  to  be  manifested,  we  must  be  at  hand,  and 
willing  at  all  costs  to  manifest  them.  If  there  is  the  opportunity  for  the 
glorifying  of  Christ,  we  must  not  be  slow  to  seize  it.  Make  haste,  the  night 
is  coming,  in  which  no  man  can  work.  What  works  await  us  yonder  we  cannot 
telL  But  the  unique  work  of  healing  blindness  and  enriching  beggary  is  con- 
fined to  earth,  and  we  must  hasten  to  do  all  of  this  allotted  to  us  before  the 
nightfall.  He  lives  intensely  whose  eye  is  fixed  on  the  fingers  of  the  dial,  as 
the  poor  sempstress  works  swiftly  whose  last  small  wick  of  candle  is  rapidly 
burning  down  in  its  socket.  III.  The  subject  of  these  wobks.  What  a 
contrast  between  the  opening  and  the  close  of  the  chapter.  The  soul  ignorant 
of  Christ  owns  Him  as  Son  of  God.  And  all  this  because  of  the  individual 
interest  our  Lord  took  in  him.  1.  He  detected  what  was  working  in  his  mind. 
Beneath  that  unpromising  exterior  were  the  elements  of  a  noble  character.  2.  He 
developed  the  latent  power  of  faith.  It  was  there,  but  it  had  nothing  to  evoke  it, 
and  yet  it  must  be  evoked  ere  Christ  could  give  him  sight.  He  could  feel,  though 
he  could  not  see.  3.  He  found  him  when  cast  out  by  all  besides.  Does  not  Jesus 
always  steal  to  our  side  when  we  are  cast  out,  or  deserted  by  our  friends?  4.  He 
answered  his  hunger  for  faith.  "  Dost  thou  beheve  on  the  Son  of  God  ?  "  If  we 
live  up  to  what  we  know,  at  all  costs,  we  shall  most  certainly  be  led  into  further 
discoveries  of  truth.  We  think  we  are  going  to  plough  a  field,  and  we  suddenly 
come  on  a  box  of  treasure,  struck  by  our  plough,  which  makes  us  independent  of 
work  for  the  rest  of  our  lives.  And  so  obedience  passes  into  worship,  and  we  see 
that  He  who  has  made  our  life  His  care,  tending  us  when  we  knew  Him  not,  is  the 
Christ  of  God,  in  whom  are  hid  all  the  riches  of  time,  all  the  treasures  of  eternity : 
and  we  worship  Him.  (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  We  must  not  trifle: — Eev.  Charlea 
Simeon  kept  the  picture  of  Henry  Martyn  in  his  study.  Move  where  he  would 
through  the  apartment,  it  seemed  to  keep  its  eyes  upon  him,  and  ever  to  say  to 
him,  "  Be  earnest,  be  earnest  t  don't  trifle,  don't  trifle  1 "    And  the   good  Simeon 


CHIP,  n.]  ST.  JOHN.  181 

would  gently  bow  to  the  speaking  pictare,  and,  with  a  smile,  reply,  "  Yes,  I  will  be 
in  earnest ;  I  will,  I  will  be  in  earnest ;  I  wiU  not  trifle  ;  for  souls  are  perishing, 
and  Jesus  is  to  be  glorified."  0  Christian!  look  away  to  Martyn's  Master,  to 
Ijimeon's  Saviour,  to  the  Omniscient  One.  Ever  realize  the  inspection  of  His  eye, 
and  hear  His  voice.     {S.  J.  Moore.) 

Ver.  5.  As  long  as  I  am  In  the  world  I  am  the  Light  of  the  world. — The  Word 
as  Light  visited  men  before  the  Incarnation  (cLap.  i.  9,  &c.;  comp.  v.  38;  Eom.  ii. 
15,  &c.);  at  the  Incarnation  (chap.  viii.  12;  xii.  46;  iii.  19-21;  comp.  xi.  9,  &c.); 
and  He  still  comes  (chap.  xiv.  21) ;  even  as  the  Spirit  who  still  interprets  His 
"  name  "  (chap.  xiv.  25  ;  xvi.  13  ;  comp.  1  John  ii.  20-27).     St.  John  draws  no  dis- 
tinction in  essence  between  these  three  different  forma  of  revelation,  in  nature,  in 
conscience,  and  in  history  ;  all  alike  are  natural  or  superuatural,  parts  of  the  same 
harmonious  plan.    But  man  has  not  independently  light  in  himself.     The  under- 
standing of  the  outward  revelation  depends  upon  the  abiding  of  the  Divine  Word 
■within  (chap.  v.  37,  &c.).     Love  is  the  condition  of  illumination  (chap.  xiv.  22,  &c.). 
And  the  end  of  Christ's  coming  was  that  those  who  believe  in  EUm  may  move  in  a 
new  region  of  life  (chap.  xii.  46),  and  themselves  become  sons  of  light  (chap.  xii. 
35,  Ac),  and  so  in  the  last  issue  of  faith  have  the  light  of  life  (cbap.  viii.  12).     {Bp. 
Westcott.)        Christ,  the  Light: — Among  all  created  excellencies,  none  can  be 
borrowed  more  fitly  representing  Christ,  than  that  of  light.     1.  Light  is  primum 
visibile,  the  first  object  of  sight :  and  Jesus  Christ,  whom  the  apostle  styles  "  God 
over  all.  Blessed  for  ever,"  is  primum  intelligibile.    2.  Light  being  the  first  thing 
■visible,  all  things  are  seen  by  it,  and  it  by  itself.     Thus  is  Christ  among  spiritual 
things,  in  the  elect  world  of  His  Church  (Eph.  v.  13,  14 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  3).    The  rays 
of  Christ's  light  are  displayed  through  both  His  Testaments,  and  in  them  we  see 
Him  (Psa.  xxxvi.  9).     3.  No  one  is  ignorant  there  is  light ;  yet  what  light  is  few 
know  (Job  xxxviii.  19).     The  "  generation"  of  Christ  "who  shall  declare?"  (Isa. 
liii.  8).    4.  Light  resembles  Christ  in  purity:  it  visits  many  impure  places,  and 
lights  upon  the  basest  parts  of  the  earth,  and  yet  remains  most  pure  and  undefiled. 
Though  Christ  was  conversant  with  sinners,  to  communicate  to  them  His  goodness, 
yet  He  was  "  separate  from  sinners,"  in  immunity  from  their  evil  (Heb.  vii.  26).    5. 
The  light  of  the  sun  is  neither  parted  nor  diminished,  by  being  imparted  to  many 
several  people  and  nations,  that  behold  it  at  one  time  :  nor  is  the  righteousness  of 
this  Sun  of  Bighteousness  either  lessened  to  Himself  or  to  individual  believers,  by 
many  partaking  of  it  at  once  :  it  is  wholly  conferred  upon  each  one  of  them,  and 
remains  whole  in  itself.     6.  The  sun  hath  a  vivifying  power,  a  special  influence  in 
the  generation  of  man.     The  sun  we  speak  of  is  the  proper  and  principal  instrument 
in  man's  regeneration  (chap.  i.  4).    7.  The  sun  drives  away  the  sharp  frosts  and  the 
heavy  fogs  of  winter,  it  clears  the  heavens,  decks  the  earth  with  variety  of  plants 
and  flowers,  and  awalies  the  birds  to  the  pleasant  strains  of  their  natural  music. 
When  Christ,  after  a  kind  of  wintry  absence,  returns  to  visit  a  declining  Church,  or 
•  deserted  forsaken  soul,  admirable  is  the  change  thrt  He  produces,  &c.  (Isa.  Iv.  12, 
13 ;  Cant.  ii.  10-13).     8.  All  darkness  flies  before  light :  so  Christ  arising  in  the 
world  made  the  day  break,  and  the  shadows  flee  away,  the  types  and  shadows  of  the 
law,  ignorance,  idolatry,  the  night  of  sin,  misery,  &c.     All  the  stars,  and  the  moon 
with  them,  cannot  make  it  day  in  the  world :  this  is  the  sun's  peculiar :  nor  can 
nature's  highest  light,  the  most  refined  science  and  morality,  make  it  day  in  the 
soul ;  for  this  is  Christ's  (chap.  viii.  12,  xii.  35 ;  Psa.  xix. ;  Wisd.  vii.  26,  27 ;  St. 
Luke  i.  78,  79;  Eph.  v.  8).     {Abp.  Leighton.)         The  Light  of  tlie  world: — I. 
Christ  the  Light  of  the  wokld.     1.  I  am  the  Light  of  the  world  (John  ix.  5).    2. 
That  was  the  true  Light  (chap.  i.  9).     3.  For  a  Light  of  the  Gentiles  (Isa.  xlii.  6). 
4.  A  Light  to  lighten  the  Gentiles  (Luke  ii.  32).     5.  He  that  foUoweth  Me  .  .  .  shall 
have  the  Light  i(John  viii.  12).     6.  I  am  come  a  Light  into  the  world  (chap.  xii.  46). 
7.  The  Sun  of  righteousness  (Mai.  iv.  2).     8.  The  Dayspring  from  on  high  (Luke  i. 
78).    9.  The  Bright  and  Morning  Star  (Kev.  xxii.  16).     10.  The  Daystar  (2  Pet.  i.  19). 
II.  Cheistians  the  light  or  the  wobld.     1.  Walk  as  children  of  light  (Eph.  v.  8). 
2.  Ye  are  all  the  children  of  Ught  (1  Thess.  v.  5).     3.  Ye  are  the  light  of  the  world 
{Matt.  V.  14).    4.  That  ye  may  be  the  children  of  light  (John  xii.  36).     5.  Let  your 
light  so  shine  (Matt.  v.  16).    6.  The  path  of  the  just  is  as  the  shining  light  (Prov. 
\v.  18).     7.  He  [John]  was  a  burning  and  a  shining  light  (John  v.  35).    8.  Among 
»i?hom  ye  shine  as  lights  in  the  world  (Phil.  ii.  15)      9.  Let  us  put  on  ihe  armour  of 
3ight  (Eom.  xiii.  12).     10.  They  that  be  wise  shall  shine  (Dan.  xii.  3).     {S.  8.  Times.) 
Light  in  death : — For  the  last  dav  or  two  he  (Sir  D.  Brewster)  was  attended  by  hla 


IS'i  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chai    oe. 

friend,  Sir  James  Simpson,  a  man  of  kindred  geniug  and  of  kindred  Christiatt 
hopes.  •'  The  like  of  this  I  never  saw,"  he  said,  as  we  met  him  coming  fresh  from 
the  dying  chamber.  •'  There  is  Sir  David  resting  like  a  little  child  on  Jesus,  and 
speaking  as  if  in  a  few  hours  he  will  get  all  his  problems  solved  by  Him."  For  in 
that  supreme  hour  of  dawning  immortality  his  past  studies  were  all  associated  with 
the  name  and  person  of  the  Redeemer.  "  I  shall  see  Jesus,"  he  said ;  "  and  that 
will  be  grand.  I  shall  see  Him  who  made  the  worlds,"  with  allusion  to  those 
wonderful  verses  in  Hebrews  which  had  formed  the  subject  of  the  last  sermon  he 
ever  heard,  a  few  weeks  before.  Thus,  tracing  all  to  the  Creator-Redeemer,  he  felt 
no  incongruity  even  in  these  hours  in  describing  to  Sir  James  Simpson,  in  a  "fluent 
etream  of  well-chosen  words,"  some  beautiful  phenomena  in  his  favourite  science. 
Reference  was  made  to  the  privilege  he  had  enjoyed  in  throwing  light  upon  the 
••  great  and  marvellous  works  of  God."  "  Yes,"  he  said,  "  I  found  them  to  be  great 
and  marvellous,  and  I  felt  them  to  be  His."  He  had  little  pain  but  such  as  came 
from  intense  weakness.  The  light  was  with  him  all  through  the  valley.  "  I  have 
had  the  light  for  many  years,"  he  whfspered  slowly,  and  with  emphasis ;  "  and  oh, 
how  bright  it  is  1  I  feel  so  safe,  so  satisfied  1 "  And  so,  in  childlike  reliance  and 
adoring  love,  he  gently  fell  asleep  in  Jesus  on  the  evening  of  Monday,  February  10th, 
1868.   On  the  Saturday  following  he  was  laid  beside  kindred  dust.   {Sunday  at  Home.) 

Yer.  6.  He  spat  on  the  grotind  and  made  clay  of  the  spittle  and  He  anointed  the 
eyes. — The  blind  made  to  see,  and  the  seeing  made  blind : — I.  We  have  here  our  Lord 

XJNVEIIiING  His  DEEPEST  MOTIVES  FOE  BESTOWING  AN  UNSOUGHT  BLESSING.  It  is  remark- 
able that  out  of  the  eight  miracles  recorded  in  this  Gospel,  there  is  only  one  in 
which  our  Lord  responds  to  a  request  to  manifest  His  miraculous  power ;  the  others 
are  all  spontaneous.  In  the  other  Gosfiels  He  heals  sometimes  because  of  the 
pleading  of  the  sufferer ;  sometimes  because  of  the  request  of  the  compassionate 
friends  or  bystanders ;  sometimes  unasked,  because  His  own  heart  went  out  to  those 
that  were  in  pain  and  sickness.  But  in  John's  Gospel,  predominantly  we  have  the 
Son  of  God,  who  acts  throughout  as  moved  by  His  own  deep  heart.  That  view  of 
Christ  reaches  its  climax  in  His  own  profound  words  about  His  own  laying  down  of 
His  life :  "  I  came  forth  from  the  Father,  and  am  come  into  the  world.  Again,  I  leave 
the  world  and  go  unto  the  Father."  So,  not  so  much  influenced  by  others  as 
deriving  motive  and  impulse  and  law  from  Himself,  He  moves  upon  earth  a  foun- 
tain and  not  a  reservoir,  the  Originator  and  Beginner  of  the  blessings  that  He  bears. 
Thus,  moved  by  sorrow,  recognizing  in  man's  misery  the  dumb  cry  for  help,  seeing 
in  it  the  opportunity  for  the  manifestation  of  the  higher  mercy  of  God  ;  taking  all 
evil  to  be  the  occasion  for  a  brighter  display  of  the  love  and  the  good  which  are 
Divine ;  feeling  that  His  one  purpose  on  earth  was  to  crowd  the  moments  with 
obedience  to  the  will,  and  with  the  doing  of  the  works  of  Him  that  sent  Him  ;  and 
possessing  the  sole  and  strange  consciousness  that  from  His  person  streams  out  all 
the  light  which  illuminates  the  world — the  Christ  pauses  before  the  unconscious 
blind  man,  and  looking  upon  the  poor,  useless  eyeballs,  unaware  how  near  light  and 
sight  stood,  obeys  the  impulse  that  shapes  His  whole  life.  "  And  when  He  had 
spoken  this  "  proceeds  to  the  strange  cure.  II.  So  we  come,  in  the  next  place,  to 
consider  Chkist  as  veiling  His  powee  under  material  means.  This  healing  by 
material  means  in  order  to  accommodate  Himself  to  the  weak  faith  which  He  seeks 
to  evoke,  and  to  strengthen  thereby,  is  parallel,  in  principles,  to  His  own  incarna- 
tion, and  to  His  appointment  of  external  rites  and  ordinances.  Baptism,  the  Lord's 
Supper,  a  visible  Church,  outward  means  of  worship,  and  so  on,  all  these  come  under 
the  same  category.  There  is  no  life  nor  power  in  them  except  His  will  works  through 
them,  but  they  are  crutches  and  helps  for  a  weak  and  sense-bound  faith  to  climb  to 
the  apprehension  of  the  spiritual  reality.  It  is  not  the  clay,  it  is  not  the  water,  it  is  not 
the  Church,  the  ordinances,  the  outward  worship,  the  form  of  prayer,  the  Sacrament — 
it  is  none  of  these  things  that  have  the  healing  and  the  giace  in  them.  They  are 
only  ladders  by  which  we  may  ascend  to  Him.  UI.  Then,  still  farther,  wb  havb 
■EBE  OUB  Lord  suspending  healing  on  obedience.  •'  Go  and  wash."  As  He 
said  to  the  impotent  man :  "  Stretch  forth  thine  hand  "  ;  as  He  said  to  the  paralytic 
in  this  Gospel :  "  Take  up  thy  bed  and  walk  " ;  so  here  He  says,  "  Go  and  wash." 
And  some  friendly  hand  being  stretched  out  to  the  blind  man,  or  he  himself  feeling 
his  way  over  the  familiar  path,  he  comes  to  the  pool  and  washes,  and  returns 
seeing.  There  is,  first,  the  general  truth  that  healing  is  suspended  by  Christ  on  the 
compliance  with  His  conditions.  He  does  not  simply  say  to  any  man.  Be  whole. 
He  could  and  did  say  so  sometimes  in  regard  to  bodily  healing.    But  He  cannot  da 


CHAP.  IX.  J  ST.  JOHN.  13S 

wo  as  regards  the  cure  of  our  blind  souls.  To  the  sin-sick  and  sin-blinded  man  Ha 
gays,  "  Thou  shalt  be  whole,  if" — or  "  I  will  make  thee  whole,  provided  that" — 
■what  ? — provided  that  thou  goest  to  the  fountain  where  He  has  lodged  the  healing 
power.  The  condition  on  which  sight  comes  to  the  blind  is  compliance  with  Christ's 
invitation,  "  Come  to  Me  ;  trust  in  Me ;  and  thou  shalt  be  whole."  Then  there  is 
a  second  lesson  here,  and  that  is,  Obedience  brings  sight.  "  If  any  man  will  do  Hia 
will  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine."  Are  there  any  of  you  groping  in  darkness,  com- 
passed about  with  theological  perplexities  and  religious  doubts  ?  Bow  yourwills  to  the 
recognized  truth.  He  who  has  made  all  his  knowledge  into  action  will  get  mora 
knowledge  as  soon  as  he  needs  it.  **  Go  and  wash  ;  and  he  went,  and  came  seeing." 
IV.  And  now,  lastly,  we  have  here  our  Lobd  shadowing  His  highest  work  as  thh 
Healer  of  blind  souls.  The  blind  man  stands  for  an  example  of  honest  ignorance, 
knowing  itself  ignorant,  and  not  to  be  coaxed  or  frightened  or  in  any  way  provoked 
to  pretending  to  knowledge  which  it  does  not  possess,  firmly  holding  by  what  it  does 
know,  and  because  conscious  of  its  little  knowledge,  therefore  waiting  for  light  and 
willing  to  be  led.  Hence  he  is  at  once  humble  and  sturdy,  docile  and  independent, 
ready  to  listen  to  any  voice  which  can  really  teach,  and  formidably  quick  to  prick 
with  wholesome  sarcasm  the  inflated  claims  of  mere  official  pretenders.  The 
Pharisees,  on  the  other  hand,  are  sure  that  they  know  everything  that  can  be  known 
about  anything  in  the  region  of  religion  and  morality,  and  in  their  absolute  confi- 
dence in  their  absolute  possession  of  the  truth,  in  their  blank  unconsciousness  that 
it  was  more  than  their  official  property  and  stock-in-trade,  in  their  complete  inca- 
pacity to.  discern  the  glory  of  a  miracle  which  contravened  ecclesiastical  proprieties 
and  conventionaUties,  in  their  contempt  for  the  ignorance  which  they  were  respon- 
sible for  and  never  thought  of  enlightening,  in  their  cruel  taunt  directed  against  the 
man's  calamity,  and  in  their  swift  resort  to  the  weapon  of  excommunication  of  one 
whom  it  was  much  easier  to  cast  out  than  to  answer,  are  but  too  plain  a  type  of  a 
character  which  is  as  ready  to  corrupt  the  teachers  of  the  Church  as  of  the  syna- 
gogue. {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  use  of  means  : — Our  Lord  would  teach  us,  by  Hia 
peculiar  mode  of  proceeding  here,  that  He  is  not  tied  to  any  one  means  of  doing  good, 
and  that  we  may  expect  to  find  variety  in  His  methods  of  dealing  with  souls  as  well  as 
with  bodies.  May  He  not  also  wish  io  teach  us  that  He  can,  when  He  thinks  fit,  invest 
material  things  with  an  efficacy  which  is  not  inherent  in  them  ?  We  are  not  to 
despise  Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper,  because  water,  bread,  and  wine  are  mere 
material  elements.  To  many  who  use  them,  no  doubt  they  are  nothing  more  than 
mere  material  things,  and  never  do  them  the  slightest  good.  But  to  those  who  use 
the  sacraments  rightly,  worthily,  and  with  faith,  Christ  can  make  water,  bread,  and 
wine,  instruments  of  doing  real  good.  He  that  was  pleased  to  use  clay  in  healing 
a  blind  man  may  surely  use  material  things,  if  He  thinks  fit,  in  His  own  ordinances. 
The  water  in  Baptism,  and  the  bread  and  wine  in  the  Lord's  Supper,  while  they  are 
not  to  be  treated  as  idols,  ought  not  to  be  treated  with  irreverence  and  contempt. 
It  was,  of  course,  not  the  clay  that  healed  the  blind  man,  but  Christ's  word  and 
power.  Nevertheless  the  clay  was  used.  So  the  brazen  serpent  in  itself  had  no 
medicinal  power  to  cure  the  bitten  Israelites.  But  without  it  they  were  not  cured. 
The  selection  of  clay  for  anointing  the  blind  man's  eyes  is  thought  by  some  to  be 
significant,  and  to  contain  a  possible  reference  to  the  original  formation  of  man  out 
of  the  dust.  He  that  formed  man  with  all  his  bodily  faculties  out  of  the  dust  could 
easily  restore  one  of  those  lost  faculties,  even  sight,  when  He  thought  fit.  He  that 
healed  these  blind  eyes  with  clay  was  the  same  Being  who  originally  formed  man  out 
of  the  clay.  {Bp.  Ryle.)  The  use  of  common  agencies : — This  cure  is  distinguished 
from  most  others  by  the  careful  use  in  it  of  intermediate  agencies.  Christ  does  not 
merely  speak  the  word ;  there  is  a  process  of  healing,  and  the  use  of  these  agencies 
is  part  of  the  sign  to  which  St.  John  wishes  to  draw  our  attention.  If  the  other  signs 
testified  that  there  is  an  invisible  power  at  work  in  all  the  springs  of  our  life — that 
there  is  a  Fountain  of  life  from  which  these  springs  are  continually  renewed — did 
not  this  testify  that  there  is  a  potency  and  virtue  in  the  commonest  things ;  that 
God  has  stored  all  nature  with  instruments  for  the  blessing  and  healing  of  Hia 
creatures  ?  The  mere  miracle  worker  who  draws  glory  to  himself  wishes  to  dispense 
with  these  things  lest  he  should  be  confounded  with  the  ordinary  physician.  The 
Great  Physician,  who  works  because  His  Father  works,puts  an  honour  on  earth  and 
water  as  well  as  upon  all  art  which  has  true  observation  and  knowledge  for  its 
basis.  He  only  distinguishes  Himself  from  other  healers  by  showing  that  the  source 
of  their  healing  and  renovatmg  power  is  in  Him.  We  have  put  our  faith  and  our 
science  at  an  immeasurable  distance  from  each  other.    May  not  the  separation  lead 


134  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  a. 

to  the  ruin  of  both.  {F.  D.  Maurice,  M.A.)  The  meaning  of  Christ's  action:-^ 
Jesus  would  not  try  weak  faith  too  sternly.  Just  as  you  would  not  give  a  little 
'shild  the  moral  law  in  all  its  baldness  and  harshness  to  keep,  but  first  sweeten  the 
way  of  obedience  by  little  rewards  and  promises  which  become  helps  to  the  doing 
of  right,  80  the  kindly  Healer  of  all  deals  with  the  people,  who  were  as  little 
children  in  faith  and  spiritual  insight.  He  knew  a  medicinal  value  was  attributed 
to  saliva  for  diseases  of  the  eye.  It  was  a  little  harmless  giving  way  to  superstition 
to  let  the  man  have  the  heln  of  his  old  belief,  such  as  it  was.  If  you  could  heal  a 
fchild's  hurt  by  the  magic  of  a  wot  d,  the  child  would  not  feel  half  as  cured  as  if 
you  had  applied  some  salve.  Jesus  applies  harmless  salve  that  the  man  might  be 
helped  to  beheve  by  having  something  external  done  to  him.  Your  straitlaced 
dogmatists  wUl  never  see  the  kindly  spirit  of  such  action  as  this.  They  would  see 
the  man  blind  all  his  days  before  they  would  "  pander  "  to  such  notions.  Theirs 
are  the  unkindly  hands  which  try  to  make  the  child  climb  to  heaven  by,  first  of  all 
knocking  down  the  ladders  of  childish  fancy  which  its  untaught  thinking  has 
reared,  instead  of  fixing  their  ladder  to  the  end  of  the  child's.  Jesus  is  more  kindly 
reasonable.  He  does  not  attempt  to  argue  the  notion  out  of  the  man's  mind.  He 
simply  lets  it  alone,  and  helps  the  man  through  his  grandmotherly  beliefs  to  healing, 
and  filially  to  a  strong  faith  in  the  Divine  power.  If  my  child  believed  that  the 
Heavenly  Father  came  down  to  the  park  every  night  to  wrap  up  the  birds  in  their 
nests  I  would  not  destroy  that  idea  of  Providence  till  I  could  graft  a  richer  one 
upon  it.  Let  us  learn  the  Christlike  lesson  of  being  weak  to  the  weak  and  ignorant 
to  the  ignorant.  (E.  H.  Higgins.)  The  way  of  faith  criticised  by  the  world  : — It 
meets  with  many  modern  criticisms.  In  the  first  place,  the  mode  of  cure  seems  very 
eccentric.  Spat  and  made  clay  with  the  spittle  and  the  dust !  Very  singular  I 
Very  odd  1  Thus  odd  and  singular  is  the  gospel  in  the  judgment  of  the  worldly-wise. 
"  Why,"  saith  one,  *•  it  seems  such  a  strange  thing  that  we  are  to  be  saved  by 
believing."  Men  think  it  so  odd  that  fifty  other  ways  are  invented  straightway. 
Though  the  new  methods  are  not  one  of  them  worth  describing,  yet  everybody 
seems  to  think  that  the  old-fashioned  way  of  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ " 
might  have  been  greatly  improved  upon.  (C.  H,  Spurgeon.)  The  way  of  faith 
glorifies  Christ : — Suppose,  instead  thereof.  He  had  put  His  hand  into  His  pocket  aud 
had  taken  out  a  gold  or  ivory  box,  and  out  of  this  box  He  had  taken  a  little  crystal 
bottle.  Suppose  He  had  taken  out  the  stopper,  and  then  had  poured  a  drop  on 
each  of  those  blind  eyes,  and  they  had  been  opened,  what  would  have  been  the 
result?  Everybody  would  have  said,  *'  What  a  wonderful  medicine  1  I  wonder  what 
it  was  1  How  was  it  compounded  ?  Who  wrote  the  prescription  ?  Perhaps  He 
found  the  charm  in  the  writings  of  Solomon,  and  so  He  learned  to  distil  the 
matchless  drops."  Thus  you  see  the  attention  would  have  bsen  fixed  on  the  means 
used,  and  the  cure  would  have  been  ascribed  to  the  medicine  rather  than  to  God. 
Our  Saviour  used  no  such  rare  oils  or  choice  spirits,  but  simply  spat  and  made  clay 
of  the  spittle;  for  He  knew  that  nobody  would  say,  "  The  spittle  did  it,"  or  "It 
was  the  clay  that  did  it."  No,  if  our  Lord  seems  to  be  eccentric  in  the  choice  of 
means,  yet  is  He  eminently  prudent.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  7.  (So  wash  In  the  pool  of  Siloam.— Rounding  the  southern  end  of  Ophel, 

the  south-east  span  of  Moriah,  you  reach  this  famous  pool.  It  is  fifty-two  feet  long 
and  eighteen  feet  wide,  some  piers,  like  flying  buttresses,  standing  on  its  north  side, 
while  part  of  s  colunm  rises  in  the  middle  of  it.  These  are  the  remains  of  an  old 
church,  built  over  it  1,300  years  ago,  or  a  monastery  of  the  twelth  century.  The 
miracle  invested  the  pool  with  such  peculiar  sacredness  that  baths  were  erected 
under  the  ancient  church,  to  let  the  sick  have  the  benefit  of  the  wondrous  stream. 
You  go  down  eight  ancient  stone  steps  to  reach  the  water,  which  is  used  by  the 
people  for  drinking,  washing  their  not  over  clean  linen,  and  for  bathing.  Every- 
thing around  is  dilapidated.  At  the  north  end  a  small  tunnel  opens  in  the  rock, 
bringing  the  water  from  the  spring  of  the  Virgin,  which  lies  1,700  feet  higher  nip  the 
valley.  This  ancient  engineering  work  is  about  two  feet  wide,  and  from  two  to 
sixteen  feet  in  height,  with  a  branch  cut  due  west  from  it  to  a  shallow  basin  within 
the  line  of  the  ancient  walls,  where  a  round  shaft  more  than  forty  feet  deep  haa 
been  sunk  to  reach  it.  On  the  top  of  this  a  great  chamber  hewn  in  the  rock,  with 
ft  flight  of  steps  leading  down  to  it,  made  it  possible  for  the  citizens,  by  covering  and 
hiding  the  spring  outside,  to  cut  off  the  supply  of  water  from  an  enemy,  while 
thenaselves,  by  means  of  this  striking  arrangement,  enjoying  it  in  safety  without 
leaving  their  defences.    A  notable  discovery  connected  with  the  cutting  of  the 


CHAP,  n.]  ST.  JOHN.  135 

main  tunnel  was  made  in  1880  by  a  youth  while  wading  up  its  mouth.  Losing 
his  footing,  he  noticed,  as  hs  was  picking  himself  up,  some  letters  cut  in  the  rocky 
side,  which  proved  to  be  an  inscription  left  by  the  workmen  when  they  had  finished 
their  great  undertaking.  From  this  it  appears  that  they  began  at  both  ends,  but  as 
engineering  was  hardly  at  its  best  3,000  years  ago  their  course  was  very  far  from 
being  exactly  straight,  windings  of  more  than  two  hundred  yards,  like  the  course  o£ 
a  river,  marking  their  work.  There  are  several  short  branches  showing  where  the 
excavators  found  themselves  going  in  a  wrong  direction,  and  abruptly  stopped,  to 
resume  work  in  a  truer  line,  when  at  last  they  met  they  proved  to  be  a  little  on  one 
side  of  each  other  and  had  to  connect  their  excavations  by  a  short  side  cutting. 
Prof.  Sayce  thinks  that  this  undertaking  dates  from  about  the  eight  century  b.c, 
and  Prof.  Muhlan  refers  it  to  the  time  of  Hezekiah,  while  others  think  it  in  part, 
at  least,  a  reUc  of  the  early  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  before  David.  The  depth  of 
the  tunnel  below  the  surface,  at  its  lowest,  is  one  hundred  and  fifty  feet.  The  slope 
is  very  small,  so  that  the  water  must  always  have  flowed  with  a  gentle  leisure  from 
the  spring  to  the  pool  (Isa.  viii.  6).  The  remains  of  four  other  basins  have  been 
discovered,  which  were  apparently  once  connected  with  the  pool,  and  a  little  way 
from  it  down  the  valley,  is  an  ancient  "  Lower  Pool,"  but  now  has  its  bottom  over- 
grown with  trees,  the  overflow  from  the  higher  pool  having  for  centuries  trickled 
past  it  instead  of  filling  it.  This  is  known  as  the  Red  Pool — from  the  colour  of  its 
soil — and  is  famous  for  an  old  mulberry-tree  said  to  mark  the  spot  where  Isaiah  waa 
sawn  asunder  by  Manasseh.  The  Virgin's  Well,  from  which  the  whole  supply  comes, 
lies  at  the  bottom  of  two  flights  of  broken  stone  steps — thirty  in  all — and  has  the 
glory  of  being  the  only  spring  rising  in  the  Temple  Mount.  The  taste  of  the  water 
is  very  unpleasant,  from  its  having  filtered  through  the  vast  mass  of  foul  rubbish 
on  which  the  city  stands,  and  which  has  been  soaked  by  the  sewage  of  many 
centuries.  The  sides  of  the  tunnel  are  covered  to  a  height  of  about  three  feet  with 
thin  red  cement,  very  hard  and  full  of  pounded  potsherds.  The  bed  is  covered 
with  a  black  slimy  deposit  two  or  three  inches  thick,  which  makes  the  water  still 
worse  at  Siloam  than  at  the  Virgin's  Well.  Still  from  time  to  time  water-carriers 
come  to  fill  their  skins,  and  women  with  their  great  j-ars  on  their  shoulders.  Yet 
Siloam  must  have  been  far  liveher  than  now  in  olden  times,  when  a  fine  church 
rose  over  the  spring  and  pilgrims  bathed  in  the  great  tank  beneath  it.  Already  in 
the  days  of  Christ,  perhaps  from  the  thought  of  the  healing  powers  of  the  pool  as 
issuing  from  Moriah,  it  must  have  been  the  custom  to  wash  in  it,  else  the  blind  man 
would  hardly  have  been  directed  in  so  few  words  to  do  so.  (G.  Geikie,  D.D.) 
Which  Is  by  Interpretation,  Sent. — By  a  solemn  and  daily  libation,  the  fount  of 
Siloam  had  figured  during  the  recent  feast  as  the  emblem  of  theocratic  favours  and 
the  pledge  of  all  Messianic  blessings.  This  rite  harmonized  with  the  Old  Testament, 
which  had  already  contrasted  this  humble  fountain  with  the  brute  force  of  the  foes  of 
the  theocracy  (Isa.  viii.  7).  We  have  seen  that  Jesus  applied  to  Himself  the  theocratic 
symbols  of  the  feast  ;  why  should  He  not  in  the  present  instance  also  express  by 
an  act  what  He  had  hitherto  declared  in  words.  By  adding  to  the  real  bUndness, 
which  He  alone  could  cure,  that  artificial  and  symbolic  blindness  which  the  waters 
of  Siloam  were  to  remove,  He  declared  in  fact :  What  Siloam  effects  typically  I 
accomplish  in  reality.  Perhaps  it  is  by  the  symbolic  part  given  to  Siloam  that  the 
explanation  "  Sent  "  of  the  Evangelist  must  be  explained.  In  a  philologic  point  of 
view,  the  correctness  of  John's  translation  is  not  disputed,  and  the  origin  of  the 
name  has  been  explained  by  the  circumstance  that  the  water  of  the  pool  was  "  sent " 
from  the  distant  spring  of  the  Virgin,  or  because  springs  are  regarded  in  the  East 
as  gifts  of  God.  In  any  case,  Israelite  consciousness  was  struck  by  the  fact  that 
the  spring  flowed  from  the  Temple  hill,  the  residence  of  Jehovah,  and  had  from 
the  prophetic  era  attached  to  this  water,  a  Messianic  signification.  It  was  un- 
doubtedly this  relation,  with  which  the  mind  of  the  whole  nation  was  penetrated,  that 
John  meant  to  bring  forward  in  the  parenthesis.  Go  to  Siloam  (the  typically  sent), 
to  cleanse  thyself  from  what  causes  thine  artificial  blindness  ;  come  by  faith  to  Me 
(the  really  Sent),  who  alone  can  cure  thy  blindness,  both  physical  and  moral.  (F. 
Godet,  D.D.)  The  way  of  faith  is  simple: — "Go  wash  in  the  pool."  Go  to 
the  pool,  and  wash  the  clay  into  it.  Any  boy  can  wash  his  eyes.  The  task  was 
simplicity  itself.  So  is  the  gospel  as  plain  as  a  pikestaff.  You  have  not  to  perform 
twenty  genuflections  or  postuiings,  each  one  peculiar,  nor  have  you  to  go  to  school 
to  learn  a  dozen  languages,  each  one  more  difficult  than  the  other.  No,  the  saving 
deed  is  one  and  simple.  *'  Believe  and  live. "  Trust,  trust  Christ ;  rely  upon  Him, 
rest  in  fJ^m.    Accept  His  work  upon  the  cross  as  the  atonement  for  your  sin,  Hia 


13fi  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha*.  a, 

righteousness  as  your  acceptance  before  God, His  person  as  the  delight  of  yonr  sonl. 
(C.  H.  Spiirgeon.)  Faith  and  obedience : — He  obeyed  Christ  blindly.  He  looked 
not  upon  Siloam  with  Syrian  eyes  as  Naaman  did  upon  Jordan,  but,  passing  by  the 
unlikelihood  of  a  cure  by  such  means,  be  believeth  and  doth  as  he  was  bidden. 
His  blind  obedience  made  him  see.  Let  God  be  obeyed  readily  without  reasoning 
or  wrangling,  and  success  shall  not  be  wanting.    (J.  Trapp.) 

Vers.  8-13.  The  neigrbtiours,  therefore  .  .  .  said.  Is  not  this  he  that  sat  and 
begged. — Types  of  character  in  relation  to  Christ's  work — Those  wlw  are  only 
speculatively  interested  in  the  work : — As  a  stone  cast  into  a  lake  throws  the  whole 
mass  of  water  into  agitation,  producing  circle  after  circle  to  its  utmost  bounds,  thia 
healing  threw  into  excitement  the  whole  social  sphere  in  which  it  occurred.  *•  No 
man  liveth  unto  himself."  What  affects  one  will  affect  many.  Society  is  a  chain 
of  which  every  man  is  a  link,  and  the  motion  of  one  link  may  vibrate  through  the 
whole  chain.  Society  is  a  body  of  which  every  man  is  a  member ;  the  pulsation  of 
one  heart  will  throb  through  every  limb.  The  feelings  produced  in  this  case  were 
various.  Note,  concerning  inquiries  of  the  class  we  here  deal  with — L  Theib  lack 
OF  EABNESTNESS.  They  related — 1.  To  the  identity  of  the  man.  The  question  (ver. 
8)  seems  to  have  been  asked  out  of  mere  curiosity.  Their  difficulty  (ver.  9)  arose 
partly  from  the  change  the  opened  eye  would  make  in  his  countenance,  giving  it  a 
new  character ;  and  partly  from  the  unaccountableness  of  the  result.  2.  To  the 
method  of  his  restoration  (ver  10).  In  this  there  is  no  ring  of  earnestness,  only 
curiosity.  3.  To  the  whereabouts  of  the  Restorer  (ver.  12).  But  what  is  He?  All 
they  meant  was  we  should  like  to  see  this  wonder  worker.  Those  who  have  a  mere 
speculative  interest  in  Christianity  are  constantly  asking  such  questions  with  no 
genuine  thirst  for  truth.  II.  Teeib  lack  of  genekositt.  They  utter  no  congratulatory 
word.  Had  they  been  true  men,  the  event  would  have  touched  them  into  the 
enthusiasm  of  social  affection.  But  there  is  not  one  spark  of  it.  Their  intellect 
Beems  to  move  in  ice.  So  is  it  ever  with  this  class.  There  is  no  heart  exultation 
over  the  millions  Christianity  has  blessed,  only  a  cold  inquiry  about  details.  HI. 
Their  lack  of  independency  (ver,  13).  They  brought  Him  to  the  judicial  court  to 
try  the  question  of  His  identity.  They  were  not  in  earnest  enough  to  reach  a  con- 
clusion that  would  satisfy  themselves.  Conclusion:  How  lamentable  that  there 
should  be  a  class  only  speculatively  interested  in  the  wonderful  works  of  Christ. 
What  then  men  saw  should  have  led  them  to  hearty  acceptance  and  consecration. 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  change  effected  in  the  man: — The  want  or  the  sudden 
presence  of  an  eye,  much  more  of  both,  must  needs  make  a  great  change  in  the 
face  ;  those  little  balls  of  light,  which  no  doubt  were  more  clear  than  nature  could 
have  made  them,  could  not  but  give  a  new  life  to  the  countenance.  I  marvel  not  if 
the  neighbours,  who  had  wont  to  see  this  dark  visage  led  by  a  guide,  and  supported 
by  a  staff,  seeing  him  now  walking  confidently  alone  out  of  his  own  inward  light, 
and  looking  them  cheerfully  in  the  face,  doubted  whether  this  were  he.  The 
miraculous  cures  of  God  work  a  sensible  alteration  in  men,  not  more  in  their  own 
apprehension  than  in  the  judgment  of  others.  So,  in  the  redress  of  the  spiritual 
blindness,  the  whole  habit  of  the  man  is  changed.  Where  before  his  face  looked 
dull  and  earthly,  now  there  is  a  sprightly  cheerfulness  in  it,  through  the  comfort- 
able knowledge  of  God  and  heavenly  things.  {Bishop  Hall.)  I  am  the  man 
myself: — In  a  town  filled  with  Eomanists,  Gideon  Ouseley,  as  was  his  custom, 
hired  the  bellman  to  announce  through  the  streets  the  preaching  in  the  evening. 
The  man,  afraid  of  opposition,  uttered  the  announcement  timidly  and  indistinctly. 
Ouseley,  passing  in  the  street,  heard  him,  and  taking  the  bell,  rang  it  himself,  pro- 
claiming aloud,  "  This  is  to  give  notice,  that  Gideon  Ouseley,  the  Irish  Missionary, 
is  to  preach  this  evening  in  such  a  place,  and  at  such  an  hour.  And  I  am  the  man 
myself?"  {Stevens*  "History  of  Methodism.")  We  ought  boldly  to  confess 
Christ : — We  do  not  bear  enough  testimony  for  our  Lord.  I  am  sure  I  felt  quite 
taken  aback  the  other  day  when  a  flyman  said  to  me,  "  You  believe  that  the  Lord 
directs  the  way  of  His  people,  don't  you,  sir  ?  "  I  said,  "  That  I  do.  Do  you  know 
anything  about  it?"  "Why,"  he  said,  "  Yes.  This  morning  I  was  praying  the 
Lord  to  direct  my  way,  and  you  engaged  me ;  and  I  felt  that  it  was  a  good  begin- 
ning for  the  day."  We  began  talking  about  the  things  of  God  directly.  That 
flyman  ought  not  to  have  been  the  first  to  speak :  as  a  minister  of  the  gospel  I 
ought  to  have  had  the  first  word.  We  have  much  to  blame  ourselves  for  in  thia 
respect.  We  hold  our  tongues  because  we  do  not  know  how  a  word  might  be  re- 
ceived; but,  we  might  as  w^ll  make  the  experiment.     No  harm  ooold  come  oi 


CHA?.  IT.]  8T.  JOHN.  1*7 

trying.  Suppose  yon  were  to  go  into  a  place  where  persons  were  sick  and  dying, 
and  you  have  medicine  about  you  which  would  heal  them,  would  yon  not  b« 
anxious  to  give  them  some  of  it  ?  Would  you  say  nothing  about  it  because  you 
could  not  tell  how  it  might  be  received  ?  How  could  you  know  how  it  would  be 
received  except  by  making  this  offer  ?  Tell  poor  souls  about  Jesus.  Tell  them 
how  His  grace  healed  you,  and  perhaps  they  will  answer,  "  You  are  the  very  person 
I  need ;  you  have  brought  me  the  news  I  have  longed  to  hear."  (C.  E.  Spurgeon.) 
Haw  Christian  lost  his  burden: — He  ran  thus  till  he  came  to  a  place  somewhat 
ascending,  and  upon  that  place  stood  a  cross,  and  a  little  below  in  the  bottom  a 
sepulchre.  So  I  saw  in  my  dream,  that  just  as  Christian  came  up  with  the  cross 
his  burden  loosed  from  off  his  shoulders,  and  fell  from  his  back,  and  began  to 
tumble,  and  so  continued  to  do  till  it  came  to  the  mouth  of  the  sepulchre,  where  it 
fell  in  and  I  saw  it  no  more.  Then  was  Christian  glad  and  lightsome  and  said 
with  a  merry  heart, "  He  hath  given  me  rest  by  His  sorrows  and  life  by  His  death." 
{J. Bunyan.)  Jesus  all  in  all  to  new  converts: — In  this  man's  mind,  as  soon  as 
ever  he  received  sight,  "  a  man  that  was  named  Jesus  "  came  to  the  forefront. 
Jesus  was  to  him  the  most  important  person  in  existence.  All  that  he  knew  of 
Him  at  first  was,  that  He  was  a  man  that  was  named  Jesus ;  and  under  that 
character  Jesus  filled  the  whole  horizon  of  His  vision.  He  was  more  to  him  than 
those  learned  Pharisees,  or  than  all  his  neighbours  put  together.  Jesus  was 
exceeding  great,  for  He  had  opened  his  eyes.  By-and-by,  fixing  his  mind  upon 
that  figure,  he  saw  more  in  it,  and  he  declared,  "  He  is  a  prophet."  He  boldly 
said  this  when  he  was  running  great  risks  by  doing  so.  To  their  faces  he  told 
the  carping  Pharisees  •  *  He  is  a  prophet "  A  little  further  on  he  came  to  this,  that 
he  believed  Him  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  and  worshipped  Him.  Now,  my  dear  friend, 
if  you  are  saved  by  Jesus  your  star  must  set,  bat  the  star  of  Jesus  must  rise  and 
increase  in  brilliance  till  it  becomes  no  more  a  star,  but  a  sun,  making  your  day, 
and  flooding  your  whole  soul  with  light.  If  we  are  saved  Christ  Jesns  must  and 
will  have  the  glory.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Converts  must  testify  of  Christ: — After 
this  man  had  received  sight  his  testimony  was  all  of  Jesus.  It  was  Jesns  that  spat, 
it  was  Jesus  that  made  the  clay,  it  was  Jesus  that  anointed  his  eyes.  So  will  it  be 
in  your  mind  with  the  gospel  of  your  salvation :  it  wiU  be  •'  Jesus  only."  It  is 
Jesus  who  became  the  surety  of  the  covenant,  Jesus  who  became  the  atoning  Sacri- 
fice, Jesus  is  the  Iciest,  the  Interposer,  the  Mediator,  the  Eedeemer.  We  know 
Jesus  as  Alpha,  and  Jesus  as  Omega.  He  is  the  first,  and  He  is  the  last.  In  your 
salvation  there  will  be  no  mistake  about  it,  and  no  mixture  in  it;  yon  will 
have  nothing  to  say  about  man,  or  man's  merit,  or  man's  will;  bat  on  the 
head  which  once  was  wounded  with  the  thorns,  you  will  put  all  your  crowns. 
Jesus  did  it,  did  it  all,  and  He  must  be  praised.     {Ibid. ) 

Vers.  13-18.  They  brought  to  the  Pharisees  him. — TJte  first  examination  of  the 
Man : — ^I.  An  impobtant  admission.  The  Pharisees  recognized  that  the  man  saw  (ver. 
13).  If  therefore  he  had  been  previously  blind,  there  must  have  been  a  miracle. 
II.  An  ibbelevant  question.  They  wished  to  know  how  the  man  had  received  his 
sight  fver.  15),  when  all  that  they  had  to  determine  was  whether  he  had  received 
his  signt.  III.  A  straiqhtfobward  answer.  The  man  having  nothing  to  conceal, 
gave  a  simple  recitation  of  what  had  taken  place  (ver  15).  IV.  A  palpablb  evasion. 
Some  of  the  Pharisees  attempted  to  avoid  giving  judgment  as  to  the  miracle  by 
pronouncing  on  a  question  that  was  not  before  themj  viz.,  the  character  of  Christ, 
whom  they  declared  could  not  be  "  from  God,"  because  He  kept  not  the  Sabbath 
(ver.  16).  V.  A  sound  conclusion.  Others  reasoned  that  the  miracle  had  been 
proved,  and  decided  that  the  worker  of  such  a  '•  sign  "  could  not  be  a  sinner,  and 
therefore  could  not  have  really  violated  the  Sabbath  law  (ver.  16).  VI.  A  safe  de- 
duction. The  healed  man  inferred,  as  Nicodemus  had  done  (chap.  iii.  2),  that  the 
Physician  who  had  cured  him  was  a  prophet  (ver.  17).  VII.  A  disingenuous  pbo- 
CKDUBE.  The  matter  seemed  settled  and  the  miracle  made  out ;  but  the  hostile 
party,  unwilling  to  allow  a  verdict  so  favourable  for  Jesus  to  go  forth,  determined  to 
hold  the  man  an  imposter,  or  at  least  to  suspend  their  judgment  until  they  had 
heard  the  man's  parents.  (T.  Whitelaw,  D.D.)  Types  of  character  in  relation  to 
ChrisVs  work — Those  who  are  bitterly  prejudiced  against  it : — Four  things  marked 
the  character  of  these  Pharisees.  I.  Thet  webe  technical  batheb  than  mobal  in 
THEiB  standard  OP  JUDGMENT  (vcr.  16).  Christ,  in  performing  the  miracle  on  th? 
Sabbath,  struck  a  blow  at  their  prejudices,  and  declared  "  The  Sabbath  was  made  for 
man."  Listead  of  thanking  God  that  their  poor  brother  had  been  healed,  and  seeking 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  «. 

acquaintance  with  the  Healer,  they  endeavour  to  make  the  whole  thing  a  ceremonial 
crime.  They  had  more  respect  for  ceremonies  than  for  souls.  They  exalted  the 
letter  above  the  spirit,  the  ritual  above  the  moral.  11  Thet  were  biassed  batheb 
THAN  CANDID  IN  THEiB  EXAMINATION  OP  EVIDENCE.  Tbcy  had  made  Up  their  minds 
not  to  believe,  and  all  their  questionings  and  cross-questionings  were  intended  to 
throw  discredit  on  the  fact.  They  did  not  want  evidence,  and  if  it  came  up  they 
would  suppress  or  misinterpret  it.  This  spirit  is  too  common  in  every  age,  and 
shows  the  bhndness  of  prejudice  and  the  heartlessness  of  technical  religion.  111. 
They  were  divided  batheb  than  united  in  their  conclusions.  "  There  was  a  divi- 
sion."  There  were  some,  perhaps  Joseph  of  Arimathea  and  Nicodemus,  touched 
with  candour,  who  could  not  but  see  the  Divinity  of  the  act.  Infidels  ridicule 
Christians  for  their  divisions,  whilst  they  themselves  are  never  agreed.  Error  ia 
necessarily  schismatic;  evil  has  no  power  to  unite.  IV.  Thet  were  malignant 
batheb  than  generous  in  theib  aims.  Had  they  been  generous  they  would  have 
been  disposed  to  believe  in  the  mission  of  the  Divine  Eestorer.  Instead  of  that 
they  repudiate  the  fact.  Their  browbeating  of  the  young  man,  their  accusation 
that  Christ  was  a  sinner,  and  their  excommunication  of  those  who  believed  on  Him 
show  that  the  malign  not  the  benign  was  their  inspiration.  Conclusion :  This 
class  is  not  extinct.  There  are  those  who  are  bitterly  prejudiced  against  Christi- 
anity everywhere.  They  are  proof  against  all  evidence  and  argument.  Prejudice 
turns  a  man's  heart  into  stone.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Power  of  prejudice : — Voltaire 
once  said, "  If  in  the  market  of  Paris,  before  the  eyes  of  a  thousand  men,  and  before 
my  own  eyes  a  miracle  should  be  performed,  I  would  much  rather  disbelieve  the  two 
thousand  eyes  and  my  own  too,  than  believe  it."  So  here,  these  men,  fleeing  as  they 
do  from  the  light  and  choosing  the  darkness,  take  np  the  matter  over  again,  in  the 
hope  of  being  able  to  detect  some  traces  of  fraud.  {R.  Besser,  D.D.)  What  will  not 
prejudice  do  ?  It  was  that  which  made  the  Jews  call  Christ  a  Samaritan,  a  devil,  a 
winebibber,'a  friend  of  publicans  and  sinners.  It  was  that  which  made  them  hale  the 
apostles  to  their  governors,  and  cry  out,  "  Away  with  them  1  it  is  not  fit  that  they 
should  live."  It  was  this  made  Ahab  hate  the  upright  Micaiah,  and  the  Athenian  con- 
demn the  just  Aristides,  though  he  had  never  seen  him.  It  was  this  made  the  poor 
man,  who  knew  not  what  John  Huss's  doctrine  was,  so  busy  and  industrious  to  cany 
wood  for  his  funeral-pile,  and  as  zealous  to  kindle  it,  inasmuch  that  the  martyr 
could  not  but  cry  out,  "  0  holy  simplicity  !  "  It  is  this  sets  men  against  considera- 
tion of  their  ways,  and  makes  them  give  out  that  it  will  crack  their  brains  and  dis- 
order their  underHtanding.  {Anthony  Horneck.)  True  conversion  evident  to  all : — 
None  of  the  Pharisees  said  to  him,  "  Are  you  sure  you  can  see  ?  "  Those  twinkling 
eyes  of  his,  so  full  of  fun  and  wit,  and  sarcasm,  were  proofs  most  plain  that  he  could 
see.  Ah  1  your  friends  at  home  will  know  that  you  are  converted  if  it  is  really  so  ; 
they  will  hardly  want  telling,  they  will  find  it  out.  The  very  way  you  eat  your 
dinner  will  show  it.  It  will  I  You  eat  it  with  gratitude,  and  seek  a  blessing  on  it. 
The  way  you  will  go  to  bed  will  show  it.  I  remember  a  poor  man  who  was  con- 
verted, but  he  was  dreadfully  afraid  of  his  wife — not  the  only  man  in  the  world  that 
is  in  that  fear — and  therefore  he  was  fearful  that  she  would  ridicule  him  if  he  knelt  to 
pray.  He  crept  upstairs  in  his  stockings  that  he  might  not  be  heard,  but  might  have 
a  few  minutes'  prayer  before  she  knew  he  was  there.  His  scheme  broke  down.  His 
wife  soon  found  him  out.  Genuine  conversion  is  no  more  to  be  hidden  than  a  candle 
in  a  dark  room.  You  cannot  hide  a  cough.  If  a  man  has  a  cough,  he  must  cough ; 
and  if  a  man  has  grace  in  his  heart,  he  will  show  grace  in  his  life.  Why  should  we 
wish  to  hide  it?  Oh,  may  the  Lord  give  you  such  an  eye-opening  this  day  that 
friends  and  relatives  shall  know  that  your  eyes  have  been  opened  I   (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  16.  This  Man  Is  not  of  God  because  He  keepeth  not  the  Sabbath  day. — It  is  in- 
teresting to  note  that  one  of  the  things  which  is  specially  forbidden  in  the  talmudio 
law  of  the  Sabbath  is  the  application  of  saliva  to  the  eyes  on  that  day.  It  was 
not  permissible  to  anoint  the  eye  itself  with  wine  on  the  Sabbath  ;  but  one  might, 
without  guilt,  wash  his  eyebrows  in  wine.  In  the  case  of  saliva,  however,  it  was  not 
permissible  to  anoint  even  the  outside  of  the  eyes  on  the  Sabbath.  Jesus,  in  the 
mode  of  cure  which  He  adopted,  infringed  one  of  the  rules  of  the  Talmud ;  probably 
with  the  very  purpose  of  showing  his  contempt  for  the  traditions  of  man  by  which 
the  woird  of  God  was  made  void.  (S.  S.  Times. )  Uncharitable  judgments  : — 
There  is  no  word  or  action  but  may  be  taken  with  two  hands ;  either  with  the  right 
hand  of  charitable  construction,  or  the  sinister  interpretation  of  malice  and  suspi- 
cion :  and  ail  things  do  succeed  as  they  are  taken,     to  construe  an  evil  action  well 


CHAP,  rt.]  ST.  JOHN.  139 

Is  but  a  pleasing  and  profitable  deceit  to  myself ;  but  to  misconstrae  a  good  thing 
is  a  treble  wrong  to  myself,  the  action,  and  the  author  (Eom.  xiv.  10).  (Bp.  Hall^ 
There  is  an  odious  spirit  in  many  men,  who  are  better  pleased  to  detect  a  fault  than 
commend  a  virtue.    (Lord  Ccvpel.) 

Vers.  19-23.  Is  this  your  son  1 — The  testimony  of  the  man^a  parents : — I.  JoYiorii 
BECOQNiTiON.  They  identified  him  as  their  son.  The  neighbours  could  only  say  he 
was  like  the  beggar  they  had  known  (ver.  9) :  the  man's  parents  had  no  doubt.  II. 
SoBROWTDL  CONCESSION.  The  sou's  report  as  to  his  blindness  was  correct.  He  had 
never  known  the  light  of  day.  III.  Cautious  negation.  They  declared  ignorance 
of  how  the  miracle  had  been  wrought ;  so  far,  at  least  as  their  own  observation  want. 
IV.  Pbudbnt  suooestion.  The  questioners  might  inquire  of  their  son,  who  was 
responsible  and  was  able  to  answer  for  himself.  (T.  Whitelaw,  D.D.)  Types  of 
character  in  relation  to  Christ's  work — Those  who  practically  ignore  it : — The 
parents  who  instead  of  avowing  that  Christ  had  healed  their  son,  evaded  the 
question  for  fear  of  the  Jews.  That  they  felt  some  interest  in  one  who  had  conferred 
Buch  a  benefit  on  their  son  can  scarcely  be  doubted,  but  it  was  not  enough  to  make 
them  courageous  for  the  truth.  The  great  majority  now  belong  to  this  class.  They 
have  no  prejudice  against  Christ,  but  they  have  not  sufficient  interest  in  Him  to  avow 
Him.  The  parents  ignored  Christ's  work — I.  Although  they  had  evekt  oppor- 
tunity OF  KNOWING  it.  This  is  the  case  with  millions — wherever  they  look  there 
are  monuments  of  Christ's  beneficent  operations.  In  every  social  circle  is  some 
faithful  disciple  ready  to  proclaim  Him.  II.  When  gratitude  should  have  urged 
THEM  TO  acknowledge  IT.  Christ  had  given  their  son  a  capacity  to  contribute  to 
their  interests.  All  that  is  solutary  in  government,  ennobling  in  literature,  fair  in 
commerce,  loving  in  friendship,  progressive  in  intelligence,  morality  and  happiness 
must  be  ascribed  to  Christ.  Take  from  England  aU  she  owes  to  Christ  and  you 
leave  her  in  all  the  confusion,  horrors  and  cruelties  of  heathenism.  UI.  Fbou 
cowabdly  meanness  OS"  SOUL  (ver.  22).  Is  not  Christ  ignored  to-day  from  the 
fear  of  losing  property,  sacrificing  friendships,  &c.  Strange  that  thousands  who 
have  the  courage  to  confront  an  army  are  too  cowardly  to  avow  Christ.  (D. 
Thomas,  D.D.)  Cowardly  testimony  is  despicable : — They  answered  obliquely  and 
over-warily ;  out  Christ  deserved  better  of  them.  Squirrels  ever  set  their  holes  to 
the  ■unny  side.  PoUtic  professors,  neuter-passive  Christians  will  be  sure  to  keep  on 
the  warmer  side  of  the  hedge ;  neither  will  they  launch  farther  into  the  sea  than 
they  may  be  sure  to  return  safely  to  the  shore.  {J.  Trapp.)  By  what  means  he 
now  seeth  we  know  not. — Agnosticism : — This  means  Not-know-ism,  or  Know- 
nothing-ism,  and  describes  the  state  of  mind  of  those  who  say  about  God,  the  Bible, 
and  the  spiritual  world,  that  they  do  not  know  anything.  They  do  not  deny,  are 
not  profane  atheists,  they  occupy  a  negative  position.  Amongst  them  are  dis- 
tinguished men  to  whom  we  are  much  indebted  ;  but  if  they  are  right,  we  are  fatally 
wrong.  We  ought,  therefore,  to  find  out  what  foothold  we  have.  1.  There  is  a 
Book  which  professes  to  tell  us  about  God,  the  spiritual  world  and  the  future.  They 
ignore  its  testimony,  saying  they  do  not  know  who  wrote  it,  or  by  what  authority 
it  was  written.  This  is  a  very  serious  responsibility  in  relation  to  such  a  Book — a 
Book  so  distinctively  moral  in  its  tone.  2.  If  we  are  at  liberty  to  ignore  such  evidence 
as  is  tendered  without  giving  our  reason,  there  is  no  ground  for  believing  anything 
in  history.  I  do  not  know  that  geology  has  made  any  progress.  But  there  are  the 
books  which  prove  it ;  but  I  ignore  them ;  they  may  be  corrected ;  I  know  nothing 
of  the  men  who  wrote  them,  or  their  qualifications.  If  you  tell  me  they  do  not 
claim  infallibility,  I  reply  that  fallibility  constitutes  no  claim  on  my  confidence. 
Suppose  I  say  that  I  cannot  be  troubled  with  the  examination  of  fallible  theories, 
and  that  I  will  wait  until  some  theory  is  finally  established ;  then  that  very  theory 
would  bring  upon  it  the  identical  charge  brought  against  the  Bible,  viz.,  that  it 
staggers  mankind  by  the  supremacy  of  its  claim.  3.  Now  the  Bible  is  as  positive 
in  its  statements  as  possible.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord."  This  fact  increases  the 
responsibility  of  those  who  ignore  the  Book.  The  mere  claim  of  course  settles 
nothing,  nor  does  ignoring  the  claim.  Our  object  is  to  ascertain  with  all  the  posi- 
tiveness  of  positive  science  what  we  unquestionably  know  about  the  Bible.  If 
certain  facts  are  established  we  are  entitled  to  say  to  agnostics,  "  Why  herein  is  a 
marvellous  thing,"  (fee.  (ver.  30).  I.  It  is  a  fact  that  bad  men  dislikb  it,  avoid 
IT,  AND  ABE  AJBAiD  OF  IT.  As  a  practical  argument  this  amounts  to  a  great  deal. 
No  onrighteousness  can  be  vindicated  by  Christian  revelation ;  not  only  so ;  no  un- 
holy thought  or  dlskonourable  motive  is  tolerated  by  it.    For  these  reasons  bad 


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  IX. 

men  do  not  oonsnlt  it,  gnilty  men  flee  from  its  jndgments,  mean  men  shrink  from 
its  standards.  If  a  rnler  is  a  terror  to  evil  doers,  the  presumption  is  that  he  repre- 
sents the  spirit  of  jnstice ;  and  if  the  Bible  is  avoided  by  bad  men  the  presumption 
is  that  its  moral  tone  ia  intolerable  to  their  reproachful  consciences.     II.  It  is  a 

fact    THAT   WHEBE   IT   IS    EECEIVED   AND   THOROUGHLY  ACTED    UPON    THE   EESULT    IS   A 

PURIFIED  MOBALiTT.  You  will  find  the  proof  of  this  alike  in  the  humblest  and  loftiest 
circles.  When  men  stand  up  in  the  court  of  this  world  and  give  their  histories, 
names,  and  addresses,  you  are  bound  either  to  accept  their  evidence  or  disprove  it. 
It  is  trifling  with  a  great  question  simply  to  ignore  it.  The  change  they  attribute  to 
Christianity  is  a  fact  or  not  a  fact;  and  if  it  be  scientific  to  mark  the  progress  of  a 
horse's  development,  it  cannot  be  despicable  to  trace  the  advances  of  a  human  mind. 
III.  It  is  a  fact  that  it  compels  those  who  really  bslievb  it  to  exert  them. 

SELVES  IN   EVERY   POSSIBLE   WAT  FOB   THE   GOOD   OF   MANKIND.       It   doeS  DOt  leave  this 

an  open  question.  It  allows  no  ignoble  ease,  smites  every  self-indulgent  excuse, 
and  approves  all  labour  for  others.  If  a  man  falls  below  this  standard  he  brings 
upon  himself  unsparing  condemnation.     IV.  It  is  a  fact  that  in  those  counikies 

THAT   ARE    NOTED   FOR   ALLOWING   THE    FREE    USE  OF    THE  BiBLE,    LIBERTY,    EDUCATION, 

SCIENCE,  ABE  HELD  IN  THE  HIGHEST  HONOUR.  This  is  not  a  matter  of  speculation. 
It  is  proved  in  England,  Germany,  and  America.  (J.  Parker,  D.D. )  He  is  of 
age ;  ask  him ;  he  shall  speak  for  himself, — Speak  for  yourself.  A  challenge : — 
1.  There  are  times  when  saved  men  are  compelled  to  speak  fob  themselves.  1. 
When  their  friends  desert  them.  These  parents  were  willing  to  own  that  the  young 
man  was  their  son,  and  that  he  was  born  bhnd ;  but  they  would  not  go  any  further 
for  fear  of  excommunication.  So,  declining  any  responsibility,  for  they  had  a  well- 
founded  confidence  in  their  son's  power  to  take  care  of  himself,  they  threw  upon 
him  the  onus  of  giving  an  answer  likely  to  incur  obloquy,  and  backed  out  of  it. 
There  are  times  with  young  people  when  their  parents  turn  the  cold  shoulder  to 
them,  and  some  who  hold  back  suspiciously,  leaving  others  to  champion  the 
Master's  cause  when  it  comes  to  a  hard  push,  quietly  observing  something  about 
casting  pearls  before  swine.  But  the  most  likely  explanation  of  such  cowardice  is 
that  they  have  no  pearls  to  cast.  It  is  lamentable  how  many  seem  afraid  to  com- 
promise themselves.  But  whenever  a  man  finds  himself  thus  deserted,  let  him  say 
gallantly,  "  I  am  of  age ;  I  will  speak  for  myself."  2.  When  they  are  much 
pressed.  The  Pharisees  question  the  man  very  closely,  and  he  does  not  seem  to 
have  been  disconcerted,  but  acquitted  himself  grandly.  When  we  are  brought  to 
book,  let  us  not  be  ashamed  to  own  our  Lord.  If  it  comes  to  s  challenge,  let  us 
say  boldly,  "I  am  on  the  side  of  Christ."  3.  When  others  revile  and  slander  our 
Lord.  When  they  said  "  This  man  is  a  sinner,"  ••  He  hath  opened  mine  eyes,"  was 
the  response ;  and  when  they  averred  that  they  knew  not  whence  Christ  was,  the 
man  twitted  them  on  their  marvellous  ignorance,  and  fought  for  his  Healer  bo 
trenchantly  that  they  threw  away  the  weapons  of  debate  and  took  up  stones  of  abuse. 
When  men  speak  ill  of  Christ,  shall  we  be  quiet  ?  No  1  let  ns  throw  the  gauntlet 
down  for  Him.  Christian  people  do  not  take  hall  the  liberty  they  might.  If  we 
speak  of  religion,  or  open  our  Bibles  in  a  railway  carriage,  it  is  "  cant."  They  may 
play  cards,  and  atter  all  sorts  of  profanity  with  impunity.  In  the  name  of  every 
thing  that  is  free  we  will  have  our  turn.  So  we  see  that  there  are  times  when  men, 
however  quiet  and  reserved,  must  speak.  II.  It  is  always  well  to  be  prepared  to 
BPEAK  FOR  yourself.  When  the  parents  said,  "  Ask  him,"  there  was  a  little  twinkle 
in  their  eye  as  much  as  to  say,  •*  You  will  catch  a  Tartar."  He  can  speak  for  him- 
self. We  want  Christians  of  this  sort  who,  when  asked  about  their  faith,  can  so 
answer  as  to  be  more  than  a  match  for  their  adversaries.  1.  Cultivate  a  general 
habit  of  open  heartedness  and  boldness.  We  have  no  need  to  push  ourselves  and  so 
become  a  nuisance  and  a  bore ;  but  let  us  walk  through  the  world  as  those  who  have 
nothing  to  conceal.  2.  Be  sure  of  your  ground.  "  Whether  He  be  a  sinner  or  no 
I  know  not."  So  he  offered  no  opinion  on  a  subject  on  which  he  could  not  be  posi- 
tive. But  when  he  had  a  hard  fact  there  was  nothing  vague  in  his  statement  (ver. 
25).  And  there  are  some  of  yon  in  whom  such  a  change  has  taken  place.  Put  your 
foot  down,  then,  and  say,  "  You  cannot  misjudge  this."  8.  Have  the  facts  ready  to 
adduce  (ver.  11).  Let  them  have  the  plan  of  salvation,  as  you  first  perceived  it, 
very  plainly  put  before  them.  "  Be  ready  to  give  a  reason  for  the  hope  that  is  in 
you."  4.  Be  prepared  to  bear  abuse  (ver.  28,  34).  The  man  cared  not  an  atom 
for  their  insinuations.  Their  scorn  could  not  deprive  him  of  his  sight.  He  merely 
ehook  his  head  and  said,  "  I  can  see."  Some  people  are  very  sensitive  of  ••  chaff  "  ; 
kut  what  a  baby  a  man  is  who  cannot  brave  a  fool'a  laugh  1    What  does  it  matvar  ^i 


CHAP.  II.]  ST.  JOHN.  141 

yon  are  twitted  with  being  a  Methodist  if  yon  are  saved  J  They  will  be  tired  of 
teasing  when  they  find  that  our  temper  triumphs  over  their  senseless  tricks.  5.  Feel 
intense  gratitude  to  the  Saviour  for  what  He  has  done.  III.  Evert  saved  man  should 
WILLINGLY  SPEAK  FOB  HIMSELF  ABOUT  Chkist.  1.  Are  We  not  all  debtors  to  Clirist  if, 
indeed,  He  has  saved  us  ?  How  can  we  acknowledge  the  debt  if  we  are  ashamed 
of  Him  ?  2.  We  each  of  ns  know  most  about  what  He  has  done  for  us.  No  one  ^ 
else  can  know  so  much.  8.  The  more  individual  testimonies  are  borne  to  Christ  the 
more  weight  there  is  in  the  accumulated  force  of  the  great  aggregate.  A  sceptical 
lawyer  attended  an  experience  meeting  amongst  his  neighbours  and  took  notes. 
When  he  reviewed  the  evidence  he  said,  "  If  I  had  these  persons  in  the  witness-box 
on  my  side,  I  should  feel  quite  sure  of  carrying  my  case.  Though  each  has  told 
his  own  tale,  they  all  bear  witness  to  the  power  of  God's  grace  to  change  the  heart. 
I  am  bound  to  believe  after  this  testimony."  And  he  did,  and  became  a  Christian, 
Do  you  say,  "  They  can  do  without  my  story."  Nay,  it  has  its  own  special  interest, 
and  may  touch  the  heart  of  somebody  like  yourself.  (1)  You  are  only  a  nursemaid, 
but  your  testimony  will  suit  another  lass  like  yourself.  Who  could  have  told  her 
mistress  that  there  was  healing  for  Naaman  but  the  captive  maid  ?  (2)  You  are  old 
and  feeble ;  but  you  are  just  the  man  whose  few  words  have  full  weight.  (3)  You 
are  only  a  working  man  ;  but  who  can  tell  working  men  about  your  changed  character 
and  home  like  yourself?  IV.  As  every  Christun,  being  op  age,  has  to  speak  fob 
HIMSELF,  WB  MEAN  TO  DO  IT.  You  caunot  all  preach,  and  should  not  try ;  if  you  all 
did,  what  a  tumult  there  be  I  And  there  would  be  no  hearers  left  if  all  were  preachers. 
Your  work  is  to  speak  and  to  let  your  influence  be  felt  among  your  servants,  children, 
tradespeople.  You  say  "  I  am  so  retiring."  Well,  then  drop  a  little  of  your  modesty, 
and  distinguish  yourself  a  little  more  for  your  manliness.  A  soldier  who  was  retir- 
ing in  the  day  of  battle  they  shot  for  a  coward.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Accounta- 
bility : — I.  Individual  accountability.  The  Bible  lays  down  no  clearly-defined 
line  between  the  ages  when  God  does  and  does  not  regard  the  child  morally  account- 
able for  sinful  actions.  This  must  depend  on  the  varying  circumstances  of  intelli- 
gence, temperament,  and  social  surroundings  of  the  child.  But  the  time  does  come 
when  with  no  hesitation  we  can  throw  upon  the  youth's  conscience  the  full  weight 
of  his  individual  responsibility,  saying  with  emphasis:  "He  is  of  age."  He  must 
answer  "  for  himself."  II.  Parental  accountability.  Up  to  a  certain  age  the 
parent  has  no  doubt  of  the  salvation  of  the  child.  The  Saviour's  atonement  satisfies 
the  requirements  of  every  child  dying  at  an  early  age.  Nevertheless,  during  this 
tender  age  character  is  being  formed  for  future  development ;  and  God  holds  the 
parents  accountable  for  the  manifold  influences  that  are  affecting  the  child's  mental 
and  moral  vision,  saying  to  them  :  ♦•  Is  this  your  son  ?  "  "  How  then  doth  he  now 
Bee  ?"  Does  your  child  "  see  "  kindly  glances,  Christ-like  actions,  devout  conduct, 
devotional  observances,  &c.  III.  Mutual  accountability  The  spirit  of  Cain  has 
impregnated  human  history.  *•  Am  I  my  brother's  keeper  "  is  still  largely  the  covert 
of  a  mean  soul  that  wants  to  shirk  the  duty  of  fraternal  help  and  counsel,  or  defence. 
The  fear  that  here  padlocked  the  parents'  lips  is  a  sin  that  thrives  in  too  many  hearts. 
How  often  has  an  accused  one  gone  to  the  grave  under  a  dark  cloud  that  might 
have  been  dispersed,  if  friends  had  been  found  of  sufficient  courage  to  contradict 
patronizing  accusers.  But  no  1  Speaking  the  truth  would  have  damaged  the  selfish 
interests  of  those  who  said :  "  Let  him  speak  for  himself."  IV.  The  personaii 
ACCOUNTABILITY  OF  Church  RELATIONS.  Our  knowledge  of  each  other  is  very  limited. 
Large  significance  belongs  to  the  apostle's  words :  "  We  know  in  part."  An  indi- 
vidual presents  himself  for  Church  membership.  The  question  goes  round,  and  very 
properly  so,  ••  What  do  you  know  of  him  ?  "  But  our  knowledge  here  often  proves 
strangely  false,  whether  the  testimony  is  pro  or  core.  The  voice  of  God  is,  "  Let  him 
speak  for  himself."  Take  the  applicant  on  personal  confession,  unless  his  or  her  life  is 
palpably  false.  Wasnoteven  Judas  admitted  on  personal  confession?  When  the  falsity 
of  character  is  seen  then  is  the  time  for  unchurching.  We  are  familiar  with  the 
account  of  the  poor  Scotch  woman,  who,  on  applying  for  church  membership,  was  so 
ignorant  of  the  theological  queries  put  to  her  by  her  pastor,  that  she  was  sent  away  as 
temporarily  disqualified.  On  leaving,  she  said,  with  deep  emotion  :  "  I  canna  speak 
for  Him,  but  I  could  die  for  Him."  (The  Study.)  Speak  for  Christ : — A  Chris- 
tian man  (Mr,  Moody)  in  a  Western  city  resolved  that  he  would  never  allow  a  day 
to  pass  without  speaking  to  some  one  on  the  subject  of  personal  salvation.  He  was 
returning  home  late  one  evening,  burdened  with  the  thought  that  the  day  had  gone  by, 
and  no  one  had  been  invited  to  Christ.  He  saw  a  man  leaning  against  a  lamp-post, 
put  his  hand  gently  on  the  shoulder  of  the  stranger,  and  said,  "  May  I  ask  you  if 
you  love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  1  "    The  stranger  resented  the  freedom,  and  replied 


142  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohat.  O^ 

curtly,  that  that  was  a  personal  matter  in  which  nobody  else  had  any  concern.  But 
the  Christian  replied  kindly,  that  they  were  feUow-travellers  to  another  world,  and 
one  could  not  be  indifferent  whether  others  had  a  good  hope  of  entering  heaven. 
After  a  few  more  words  had  passed  between  them,  they  parted,  the  Christian  fearing 
that  he  had  given  offence,  but  carrying  the  matter  to  the  closet  for  earnest  prayer. 
'Three  months  after,  just  as  he  had  retired  for  the  night,  a  knock  was  heard  at  the 
door.  He  inquired  what  was  wanted ;  and  a  gentleman  replied  he  would  like 
to  see  him.  On  opening  the  door,  he  recognized  the  stranger  met  at  the  lamp-post. 
The  latter  grasped  him  convulsively  by  the  hand,  and  said,  "The  question  you  put 
to  me,  '  Do  you  love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ?  '  has  been  ringing  ever  since  in  my 
ear ;  and  I  have  come  to  ask  you  what  I  must  do  to  be  saved."  They  prayed  and. 
talked  together;  and  in  a  few  days  the  stranger  was  rejoicing  in  the  hope  of  pardon. 
He  became  an  earnest  and  devoted  Christian.     {E.  Foster.) 

Ver.  22.  If  any  man  did  confess  that  he  was  Christ. — Confession  of  Christ : — 1. 
Confession,  ofioXoyiiv,  is — (1)  To  say  the  same  thing  with  others.  To  agree  with.  (2) 
To  promise.  (3)  To  acknowledge,  to  declare  a  person  or  thing  to  be  what  he  or  it 
really  is.  2.  To  confess  Christ  is  therefore  to  acknowledge  Him  to  be  what  He 
really  is  and  declares  Himself  to  be.  (1)  The  Son  of  God ;  (2)  God  manifest  in  the 
flesh  ;  (3)  The  Saviour  of  the  world ;  (4)  The  Lord.  I.  The  nat0Be  of  this  confession. 
1.  It  is  not  enough  that  we  cherish  the  conviction  in  our  hearts,  or  confess  it  to 
ourselves,  to  God,  or  to  friends  who  agree  with  us.  2.  It  must  be  done  pubhcly,  or 
before  men,  friends  and  foes  :  amid  good  and  evil  report ;  when  it  brings  reproach 
and  dauger  as  well  as  when  it  incurs  no  risk.  3.  It  must  be  with  the  mouth.  It  ia 
not  enough  that  men  may  infer  from  our  conduct  that  we  are  Christians.  We  must 
audibly  declare  it.  4.  This  must  be  done — (1)  In  our  ordinary  intercourse.  (2)  In. 
the  way  of  God's  appointment,  i.e.,  by  Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper.  5.  It 
must  be  sincere.  •'  Not  every  one  that  saith  Lord,  Lord,"  <fec.  It  ia  only  when  the 
outward  act  is  a  revelation  of  the  heart  that  it  has  any  value.  II.  Its  advantages. 
1.  It  strengthens  faith.  2.  It  is  a  proof  of  regeneration,  because  it  supposes  the 
apprehension  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ.  3.  It  is  an  Indis- 
pensable condition  of  salvation.  Because — (1)  God  requires  it.  (2)  Not  to  confess 
is  to  deny.  (3)  Denial  implies  want  of  faith  or  devotion.  4.  Christ  will  acknow- 
ledge them  who  acknowledge  Him — publicly,  before  the  angels,  and  to  our  eternal 
salvation.  III.  Its  duty.  1.  It  is  not  merely  a  commandment.  2.  It  is  the 
highest  moral  duty  to  acknowledge  the  truth,  and  especially  to  acknowledge  God  to 
be  God.  3.  It  is  the  most  direct  means  we  can  take  to  honour  Christ,  and  to  bring 
others  to  acknowledge  Him  (see  Matt.  x.  82 ;  Luke  xii.  8 ;  Mark  viii.  38  ;  Bom.  z. 
9-10 ;  2  Tim.  ii  12 ;  1  John  iv.  2,  15).  {G.  Hodge,  D.D.)  He  should  be  put  out  of 
the  synagogue. — Excommunication  (cf.  chap,  xvi,  2 ;  Luke  vi.  22) : — 1.  The  lightest 
kind  of  excommunication  continued  for  thirty  days  and  prescribed  four  cubits  as  a 
distance  within  which  the  person  may  not  approach  any  one,  not  even  wife  and 
children ;  with  this  limitation  it  did  not  make  exclusion  from  the  synagogue 
necessary.  2.  The  severer  included  absolute  banishment  from  all  religions 
meetings,  and  absolute  giving  up  of  intercourse  with  all  persons,  and  was  formally 
pronounced  with  curses.  3.  The  severest  was  a  perpetual  banishment  from  all 
meetings  and  a  practical  exclusion  from  the  fellowship  of  God's  people.  It  has  been 
sometimes  supposed  that  the  words  of  Luke  vi.  22 — (1)  "Separate  you;"  (2) 
"  reproach  you ;  "  (3)  "  cast  out  your  name  "  refer  to  these  gradations,  but  probably 
the  only  practice  known  in  the  time  of  our  Lord  was  that  which  was  later  regarded 
as  the  intermediate  form,  falling  short  of  perpetual  banishment,  but  being,  while 
the  ban  lasted,  exclusion  from  sJl  the  cherished  privileges  of  an  Israelite.  {Arch- 
deacon Watkins.) 

Vers.  24-34.  Then  again  called  they  the  man. — The  second  examination  of  the 
man: — I.  Intimidation.  The  hostile  section  sought  to  overbear  the  man's  judgment 
by  their  superior  knowledge  and  position.  They,  the  heaven-appointed  leaders  of 
the  people  and  guardians  of  morality,  were  satisfied  that  Christ  was  a  sinner.  He 
had  broken  the  Sabbath  by  manufacturing  clay  and  spreading  it  over  the  man's  eyes 
as  an  artizan  might  have  plastered  it  upon  a  wall.  Consequently  there  could  have 
been  no  such  thing  as  a  miracle  ;  and  he  had  better  confess  himself  a  deceiver  and 
Christ  an  imposter  (ver.  24).  To  all  this  the  man  opposes  his  personal  exiierience 
(ver  25).  II.  Entanglement.  By  cross-examination  they  hoped  to  make  him^ 
contradict  himself  (ver.  26).     But  the  man,  too  clever  to  be  caught  by  such  ao 


CHAP,  n.]  ST.  JOHN.  143 

artifice  (Prov.  i.  17),  declined  their  invitation,  reminding  them  that  he  had  supplied 
all  the  information  he  possessed,  and  inquiring,  with  fine  irony,  if  they  desired  to 
become  Christ's  disciples  (ver.  27).  III.  Kepeoach.  They  reviled  Him  as  the 
follower,  not  of  Moses,  the  great  commissioner  of  Jehovah,  but  of  a  nameless 
fellow  about  whom  no  one  knew  anything  (ver.  29).  To  this  the  man  replied  with 
crushing  logic  how  no  honest  mind  could  evade  the  conclusion  that  Christ  mast  at 
least  be  a  prophet  no  less  than  Moses  (vers.  30-33).  IV.  Expulsion.  They  could 
not  answer  the  man's  syllogism,  but  tbey  could  do  what  foiled  controversialists 
commonly  do  (ver.  34).  Lessons  :  1.  The  danger  of  approaching  religious  questions 
with  pre-conceived  notions.  2.  The  power  Christianity  has  to  convince  all  sincere 
inquirers  of  its  heavenly  origin.  3.  The  duty  of  standing  true  to  Christ  in  the  fac& 
of  all  opposition.  4.  The  certainty  that  Christ's  witnesses  will  suffer  persecution.  5. 
The  helplessness  of  man's  wisdom  in  opposing  the  truth.  (T.  Whitelaw,  D.D,) 
Types  of  character  in  relation  to  Christ's  work — Those  who  are  consciously  restored 
ly  it :— We  find  the  man  doing  two  things  which  are  done  by  all  who  are  spiritually 
restored  by  Christ.  I.  Maintaining  truth  in  the  fack  op  fierce  opposition. 
See  bow  he  holds  his  own.  1.  In  a  noble  spirit.  His  conduct  stands  in  subUm© 
contrast  to  that  of  his  parents  and  others  concerned.  Mark — (1)  His  candour. 
Hearing  men  disputing,  without  hesitation  he  says  "  I  am  he."  Outspokenness  is 
the  ring  of  a  great  nature.  (2)  His  courage.  In  defiance  of  the  Sanhedrim  he 
declares  that  the  hated  Jesus  was  his  Healer.  The  genuine  alone  are  brave ;  honest 
souls  dread  a  lie  more  than  the  frowns  of  a  thousand  despots.  (3)  His  consistency. 
In  spite  of  all  questions  and  brow-beating,  he  never  varies  in  his  statements.  Truth 
is  that  subtle  element  which  alone  gives  unity  to  all  the  varied  parts  of  a  man's 
life.  Error  makes  man  contradict  himself.  The  whole  subject  shows  us  that  there 
may  be  grandeur  of  soul  where  there  is  social  obscurity  and  physical  infirmity.  2. 
By  sound  argument.  (1)  His  answer  was  built  upon  consciousness  (ver.  25).  The 
logic  of  a  school  of  Aristotles  could  not  disturb  his  conviction.  It  is  so  with  a  true 
Christian ;  he  feels  the  change  and  no  argument  can  touch  it.  3.  His  argument 
was  formulated  by  common  sense.  When  his  judges  pressed  him  (ver.  26)  he 
reproves  them  for  repeating  questions  already  answered  and  with  withering  irony 
asks  (ver.  27).  He  states  his  argument  thus  :  that  his  cure,  of  which  he  was 
conscious,  was  a  miracle  (ver.  30),  which  they  could  not  deny.  Is  it  not  a  doctrine 
with  you  that  no  one  without  Divine  authority  can  perform  miracles  ?  Why  ask 
such  questions  ?  And  not  only  has  the  Healer  Divine  authority  but  a  holy  character 
(ver.  31).  II.  Following  Christ  when  cast  out  from  men.  The  best  men  in 
every  age  are  "  cast  out  "  by  the  ungodly.  But,  when  cast  out,  what  became  of 
him  ?  1.  Christ  sought  him  (ver  35),  and  found  him  out.  Sometimes  men  have 
found  Christ  out  by  their  own  searching,  e.g.,  Zacchaeus  and  Bartimseus.  But  here 
Christ  finds  the  man  out,  as  He  did  the  woman  of  Samaria,  irrespective  of  His 
search,  2.  Christ  revealed  Himself  to  him  (ver.  35-37).  3.  Christ  was  followed 
by  him  (ver.  38).  (D.  Thonms,  D.D.)  Carping  criticism  : — My  hearers,  this  was 
a  wretched  business,  was  it  not  ?  It  was  a  very  poor  business  to  go  to  the  house  of 
God  to  criticize  a  fellow-mortal  who  is  sincerely  trying  to  do  us  good.  Was  it 
Garlyle  who  spoke  of  the  cricket  as  chirping  amid  the  crack  of  doom  ?  I  am  apt  to 
think  that  many  people  are  like  that  cricket ;  they  go  on  with  their  idle  chit-chat 
when  Christ  Himself  is  set  before  them  on  the  cross.  Assuredly  this  is  poor  work. 
I  am  hungry ;  I  come  to  a  banquet ;  but  instead  of  feasting  upon  the  viands  I  begin 
to  criticize  the  dress  of  the  waiters,  abuse  the  arrangements  of  the  banqueting-hall, 
and  vilify  the  provisions.  I  shall  go  home  as  hungry  as  I  came  ;  and  who  will  be 
blamed  for  it?  The  best  criticism  that  you  can  possibly  give  of  your  friend's 
entertainment  is  to  be  hearty  in  partaking  of  it.  The  greatest  honour  that  we  can 
do  to  Christ  Jesus  is  to  feed  upon  Him,  to  receive  Him,  to  trust  Him,  to  live  upon 
Him.  Merely  to  carp  and  to  question  will  briug  no  good  to  the  most  clever  of  you. 
How  can  it  ?  It  is  a  pitiful  waste  of  time  for  yourself,  and  a  trial  of  temper  to 
others.    (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  25.  One  thing  I  know,  that,  whereas  I  was  blind,  now  Z  see. — Truly  diet 
Christ  say,  "  I  came  not  to  send  peace  on  the  earth."  Little  did  the  man  dream 
of  the  stir  the  miracle  would  make.  So  our  blessings  often  get  us  into  trouble,  and 
become  tests  of  character.  The  man  here  was  tested  as  to  whether  he  would  stand 
by  the  truth.  Let  us  not  imagine  that  we  can  travel  through  life  unchallenged. 
All  the  circumstances  here  are  of  a  deeply  interesting  character.  1.  Look  at  the 
parents.    Sometimes  yon  will  find  character  transmitted  with  marvellous  accuracy. 


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOR.  [chap,  k, 

•'  Like  parents,  like  children. "    Occasionally  children  degenerate  from  the  type  of 
their  parents,  and  in  others  are  a  manifest  improvement.     This  seems  to  have  been 
the  case  with  this  young  man.     His  parents  were  timid.     This  fear  of  man  alwava 
brings  a  snare.     What  multitudes  there  are  who  dare  not  tell  the  truth  or  do  the 
right  for  fear  of  the  Gentiles,  or  the  Church,  society,  or  clique.     There  is  no  hope 
for  them  but  in  tlmt  perfect  love  which  "casteth  out  fear."    2.  Look  at  the 
Pharisees.     They  heard  enough,  surely,  for  conviction,  but  they  were  afraid  of  the 
conclusion,  and  hence  sought  to  terrify  the  parents  and  extract  a  contradiction 
from  the  young  man.    Then  they  reviled  him.    Men  must  have  keen  eyes  who  can 
detect  in  these  men  any  of  that  instinctive  love  of  truth  which  is  vaunted  as  the 
glorious  attribute  of  humanity.     "  Men  love  darkness,"  &c.,  is  the  testimony  alike 
of  Scripture  and  experience.    Men  are  much  more  anxious  to  have   the  truth 
on  their  side  than  to  be  on  the  side  of  truth.    The  mind  does  not  turn  to  the 
truth  as  the  flower  turns  to  the  sun.     No  one  is  very  sanguine  of  dislodging  men 
from  a  theology  which  screens  them  in  their  sins,  or  in  separating  them  from  an 
iniquitous  traffic  in  which  they  are  gaining  wealth ;  and  the  more  truth  you  put 
before  them,  the  more  they  will  hate  both  you  and  it.     3.  Note,  as  in  the  case  ol 
the  young  man,  that  experimental  evidence  of  religion  is  marked  by — I.  Its  ceb- 
TAiNTY.     "  One  thing  I  know."    1.  It  is  too  common  to  imagine  that  the  term 
knowledge  ought  to  be  restricted  to  gcience,  and  is  too  strong  to  be  introduced  into 
the  realm  of  religion,  where  we  can  only  expect  strong  probability.    But  it  would 
be  strange  if  the  greatest  and  most  essential  realities  were  the  most  doubtful.    Men 
think  of  religion  as  something  shadowy  and  impalpable.     They  can  understand 
what  can  be  placed  on  a  table  and  seen  and  Angered,  but  to  talk  of  strong  and  weak 
faith,  high  and  low  hopes,  knowing  whom  you  have  believed,  &c.,  as  fanaticism. 
2.  It  must  be  acknowledged  that  religious  assurance  does  not  rest  on  precisely  the 
same  grounds  as  in  other  relations.    From  the  fact  that  religion  involves  the  exer- 
cise of  the  moral  faculties,  its  evidence  must  not  be  such  as  to  overbear  irresistibly 
these  moral  conditions.    A  religion  that  should  make  its  evidence  glare  upon  U9 
like  the  sun  would  be  no  religion  at  all.    If  religion  be  the  willing  service  of  the 
soul,  the  soul  must  be  left  free  in  its  exercise.    To  leave  no  room  for  doubt  would 
be  to  reduce  religion  to  the  low  level  of  material  things.     God  is  not  as  visible  as 
His  universe ;  but  those  who  are  willing  to  see  Him  come  at  length  to  believe  in 
Him  as  firmly  as  in  the  universe,  and  just  as  they  say  every  house  is  built  by  soma 
man,  whether  they  have  Been  him  or  not,  so  they  exclaim,  "  He  that  built  all  things 
is  God."    3.  With  this  exclamation  we  affirm  that  the  evidence  which  God  haa 
BuppUed  to  give  the  soul  religious  assurance  is  as  abundant  as  any  that  He  has 
given  us  on  any  matter.    There  is  in  the  Word  of  God,  and  may  be  in  our  life, 
enough  evidence  to  make  our  salvation  the  most  assured  thing  in  the  universe. 
Other  evidences  are  of  great  value.    When  men  are  showing  the  actual  rooting  of 
Christianity  in  the  soil  of  history,  it  is  for  us  to  welcome  their  efforts.     But  this 
sort  of  evidence  must  be  inaccessible  to  many.     "To  the  poor  the  gospel  is 
preached,"  and  this  preaching  was  meant  to  be  its  own  light  and  proof,  so  that 
men  should  say,  "  One  thing  I  know,"  &o.    4.  When  one  carries  his  evidence 
within  him  he  is  thrice  armed.    Not  that  every  strong  feeling  indicates  faith.     We 
may  have  a  fanatical  joy,  and  be  the  dupes  of  sentimentalisms  and  early  prejudices. 
But  where  we  can  distinctly  recognize  that  we  are  not  what  we  once  were ;  that 
God,  who  was  scarcely  at  the  circumference  of  our  life,  is  now  its  centre ;  that 
Christ,  who  was  once  a  root  out  of  a  dry  ground,  is  not  the  altogether  lovely,  &c., 
this  is  evidence  that  can  withstand  the  assaults  of  men  and  devils.  II.  Its  modesty. 
"  07ie  thing."    He  strictly  stated  the  facts  as  he  knew  them.     What  is  required  of 
a  vrftness  is  to  testify  what  he  knows,  and  no  more.     His  thoughts  and  speculations 
will  compromise  his  evidence  and  render  it  worthless.     Had  the  man  reasoned  with 
the  learned  Pharisees  they  would  have  worsted  him.     He  did  not  philosophize  about 
the  mode  of  his  cure,  because  he  knew  nothing  about  it.    And  so  with  spiritual 
illumination.    We  can  form  no  philosophy  of  salvation.     It  transcends  our  reason. 
It  is  accomplished  in  different  ways,  as  in  the  case  of  Lydia  and  the  jailor.     Some- 
times men  know  the  time  and  instrumentality  ;  sometimes  they  do  not.     The  main 
thing  is.  Am  I  saved?    Are  these  doctrines  you  cannot  comprehend?    Do  men 
puzzle  you  with  the  mysteries  of  the  Trinity,  the  origin  of  evil.  Providence,  pro- 
phecy ?     Oppose  to  them  the  one  thing  you  know.     1.  "  One  thing."    It  might 
seem  a  scanty  knowledge,  but  it  is  with  knowledge,  as  other  things,  its  value  is 
detc'rmined  by  what  constitutes  its  object  matter.     You  might  possess  a  thousand 
Viwels,  but  one  Koh-i-noor  would  outweigh  them  alL     2.  "  One  thing,"  but  what  a 


CHAi.  a.]  ST.  JOHN.  141 

thing — the  one  thing  needful.     {E.  Mellor,  D.D.)        The  blind  man's  creed  : — 1.  A 
whole  chapter  is  taken  up  with  this  poor  man.     This  is  unusual.     Though  an 
author  be  inspired,  we  can  tell  what  he  enjoys.     An  evangehst,  as  well  as  a  Gibbon, 
betrays  his  interest  and  his  sympathies.     2.  In  some  unusual  way  the  blind  man 
was  wrought  into  the  plan  of  Christ's  ministry.    He  had  been  born  blind,  and 
remained  so  that  when  Jesus  passed  by  he  might  be  ready  to  be  healed  by  Him. 
All  lives  and  events  are  wrought  into  that  scheme.    3.  The  blind  man  was  the  first 
confessor.     He  was  the  sort  of  person  that  our  Lord  found  it  pleasant  to  do  some- 
thing for.    He  was  ready  to  do  what  he  could  for  himself,  and  what  he  could  not 
do  the  Lord  would  do  for  him.     Unlike  Naaman,  willingness  was  one  characteristic 
of  him,  sturdiness  was  another.    He  spoke  hi3  mind  at  the  risk  of  excommunica- 
tion.    His  thoughts  were  distinct,  and  therefore  his  utterances  were  so.     Crisp 
thinking  makes  crisp  speaking.    Let  us  look  at  his  creed.     I.  It  was  shobt.    A 
creed  with  one  article.     Soon  it  enlarged,  but  it  all  developed  out  of  this  "  one 
thing,"  &c.     It  is  no  matter  whether  a  creed  be  long  or  short,  provided  a  man 
believes  it  as  this  man  believes  his.     What  would  a  Christian  be  capable  of  if  he  so 
believed  the  Apostles*  Creed  ?    If  a  creed  is  believed,  the  longer  it  is  the  better ; 
otherwise  the  shorter  the  better.     Creed  is  like  stature,  it  has  to  be  reached  by  the 
individual,  by  slow  growth  from  a  small  beginning.    The  vitality  of  a  seed  will 
determine  how  much  wiU  come  out  of  it.     Every  fire  begins  with  a  spark.     Some 
of  us  are  trying  to  believe  too  much ;  not  more  than  is  true,  or  more  than  we 
ought,  but  more  than  we  have  at  present  inward  strength  for.    We  may  extinguish 
a  fire  by  putting  on  too  much  fuel.     II.  It  was  founded  in  expeeience.     "  I  know 
I  see."    You  notice  how  close  the  connection  between  the  creed  and  the  confessor. 
His  creed  was  not  separable  from  himself.    It  was  wrought  in  him,  and  so  was  one 
he  could  not  forget.     Whenever  the  sun  shone  or  a  star  twinkled,  he  would  feel  his 
creed  over  again.     We  might  be  perplexed  to  tell  what  we  believe  if  we  had  it  not 
in  print  to  refer  to ;  but  experience  can  dispense  with  type.     We  used  to  hear  a  good 
deal  about  experiencing  religion :  is  the  expression  going  because  the  thing  is  going? 
Christ  works  a  work  in  me  and  I  feel  it.     That  is  experiencing  religion,  although 
the  feehng  may  be  differently  marked  in  different  people.     Even  the  truths  of  God 
to  become  my  true  creed  have  got  to  be  reproduced  in  the  soil  of  my  own  thinking 
and  feeling.     Faith  is  languid  because  experience  is  languid.    The  creed  of  our 
confessor  began  in  one  article,  but  it  did  not  end  there.     Soon  we  hear  him  saying 
he  believed  that  Christ  was  the  Son  of  God.    Our  creeds  have  got  to  come  out  of 
our  experience  of  God,  and  not  out  of  our  Prayer  Book.    That  is  a  poor  tree  that 
looks  and  measures  as  it  did  a  year  ago.    He  is  a  poor  believer  who  believes  exactly 
as  he  did  a  year  ago.    HI.  It  was  personaij  and  peculiar.     Two  living  Christiana 
cannot  believe  alike  any  more  than  two  trees  can  grow  alike.     Two  posts  may. 
Two  men  only  think  alike,  as  they  think  not  at  all,  but  leave  it  to  a  third  party  to 
do  it  in  their  stead.     Excessive  doctrinal  quietness  implies  lethargy.    It  is  only 
dead  men  who  never  turn  over.     In  nothing  does  a  man  need  to  be  loyal  to  hia 
individuality  as  in  his  religion.     This  is  what  makes  the  Bible  so  rich.     The 
inspired  writers  did  not  throw  away  their  peculiarities.     Each  man's  experience 
will  be  characteristic,  and  so,  then,  must  his  creed  be  that  grows  out  of  it.     A 
man's  proper  creed  is  the  name  we  give  to  his  individuality,  when  inspired  by  the 
Holy  Ghost.    Is  it  not  a  splendid  tribute  to  Jesus  that  we  can  each  of  us  come  to 
Him  with  our  peculiarity  and  find  exactly  that  in  Him  which  will  meet  and  satisfy 
it?    There  is  only  one  Christ,  but  He  is  like  the  sun,  which  shines  on  aU  objecta 
and  gives  to  each  what  helps  it  to  be  at  its  best.     No  two  alike,  the  sea  not  the 
forest,  &c. ,  but  each  finding  in  the  sun  that  which  helps  it  to  be  itself  perfectly. 
The  poor  man  obtains  from  Him  just  what  he  needs,  and  the  rich  man,  the  Fijian, 
and  the  Greek,  &c.    IV.  It  did  not  embarrass  itself  with  matter  foreign  to 
the  main  point.     "  Whether  He  be  a  sinner  or  no,  I  know  not."     The  point  with 
him  was  that  he  could  see,  not  honr  he  could  see.     Sight  does  not  consist  in  under* 
standing  how  we  see,  nor  health  in  understanding  the  organs  of  the  body,  nor  salva- 
tion in  knowing  how  we  are  saved.    The  physician  can  cure  an  ignorant  man  aa 
readily  as  a  scholar,  because  his  medicine  does  not  depend  on  the  intelligence  of 
the  patient ;  so  Christ  can  be  the  physician  of  all,  because  salvation  consists  just 
simply  in  being  saved.     (G.  H.  Parkhurst,  D.D.)        Experimental  evidence: — 
There  is  a  man  who  is  enjoying  his  food.     He  seems  healthy  and  strong.    He  saya 
he  is  so.    You  assure  him,  however,  that  his  mode  of  life  is  wholly  wrong.    You  have 
been  reading  some  learned  work  on  dietetics,  and,  full  of  tbeoretio  wisdom,  and  you 
warn  him  that  he  la  not  observing  the  due  proportions  of  nitrogen  and  carbon  and 
TOL.   II.  10 


146  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohaj.  «. 

the  other  elements,  and  that,  according  to  your  principles,  he  ought  to  be  out  of 
health  and  ready  to  perish.    With  what  calmness  he  listens  to  your  serious  homily, 
and  smiles  as  he  finishes  his  repast  1    He  is  but  an  ignorant  man,  knows  nothing 
about  the  high-sounding  names  you  have  used  to  denote  the  chemical  constituents 
of  food,  tells  you  that  whether  he  is  eating  according  to  learned  books  or  not  he 
knows  not,  but  one  thing  he  knows,  that  what  he  does  eat  agrees  with  him, 
Btrengthens  him,  and  enables  him  to  do  his  work ;  and  so  he  letB  learned  men  and 
books  talk  on.      A  friend  has  been  sick,  and  is  now  recovering.      You  ask 
him  wbat  medicine  he  has  been  taking,  and  on  learning  it  yon  are  astonished. 
On  hearing  who  his  physician  is,  you  venture  a  doubt  as  to  his  qualifications, 
whereon  the  valetudiniarian  says,  "Well,  I  know  nothing  about  the  properties 
of  medicine,  or  the  technical  qualifications  of  the  physician ;   but  one  thing  I 
know,  that  eveiy  dose  of  the  medicine  has  been  to  me  like  life  from  the  dead." 
This  was  the  spirit  of  the  reply  of  the  healed  man.    (E.  Mellor,  D.D.)        "  We 
hnoiD  "  : — One  cannot  but  notice  how  constantly  the  phrase  •*  we  know  "  occurs. 
The  parents  of  the  man  used  it  thrice.      The  Pharisees   have  it  on  their  lips 
in  their  first  interview  with  him — "  We  know  that  this  man  is  a  sinner."    He 
answers,  declining  to  aflfirm  anything  about  the  character  of  the  Man   Jesus, 
because  he,  for  his  part,  "  knows  not,"  but  standing  firmly  by  the  solid  reaUty 
which  he  •*  knows  "  in  a  very  solid  fashion,  that  his  eyes  have  been  opened.    So  we 
have  the  first  encounter  between  knowledge  which  is  ignorant  and  ignorance  that 
knows,  to  the  manifest  victory  of  the  latter.    Again,  in  the  second  round,  they  try 
to  overbear  the  cool  sarcasm  with  their  vehement  assertion  of  knowledge  that  God 
epake  to  Moses,  but  by  the  admission  that  even  their  knowledge  did  not  reach  to 
the  determination  of  the  question  of  the  origin  of  Jesus'  mission,  lay  themselves 
©pen  to  the  sudden  trust  of  keen-eyed,  honest  humility's  sharp  rapier-like  retort. 
*'  Herein  is  a  marvellous  thing,"  that  you  know-alls,  whose  business  it  is  to  know 
where  a  professed  miracle-worker  comes  from,  "  know  not  from  whence  He  is,  and 
yet  He  hath  opened  mine  eyes."    "  Now  we  know  "  (to  use  your  own  words)  •'  that 
God  heareth  not  sinners,  but  if  any  man  be  a  worshipper  of  God,  and  doeth  His 
will,  him  He  heareth."     Then  observe  how,  on  both  sides,  a  process  is  going  on. 
The  man  is  getting  more  and  more  light  at  each  step.     He  begins  with  '•  A  Man 
which  is  called  Jesus."     Then  he  gets  to  a  ♦•prophet,"  then  he  comes  to  "a 
worshipper  of  God,  and  one  that  does  His  will."    Then  he  comes  to  '♦  If  this  man 
were  not  of  God,"  in  some  very  special  sense,  "He  can  do  nothing."     These  are 
his  own  reflections,  the  working  out  of  the  impression  made  by  the  fact  on  an 
honest  mind,  and  because  he  had  so  used  the  light  which  he  had,  therefore  Jesus 
^ives  him  more,  and  finds  him  with  the  question,  "  Dost  thou  believe  on  the  Son 
of  God?"    Then  the  man  who  had  shown  himself  so  strong  in  his  own  convictions, 
«o  independent,  and  hard  to  cajole  or  coerce,  shows  himself  now  all  docile  and  sub- 
missive, and  ready  to  accept  whatever  Jesus  says — "  Lord,  who  is  He,  that  I  might 
believe  on  Him?  "    That  was  not  credulity.     He  already  knew  enough  of  Christ  to 
know  that  he  ought  to  trust  Him.     And  to  his  docility  there  is  given  the  full 
revelation ;  and  he  hears  the  words  which  Pharisees  and  unrighteous  men  were  not 
worthy  to  hear :  "  Thou  hast  both  seen  Him — with  these  eyes  to  which  I  have  given 
sight — and  it  is  He  that  talketh  with  thee."    Then  intellectual  conviction,  moral 
reliance,  and  the  utter  prostration  and  devotion  of  the  whole  man  bow  him  at 
Christ's  feet.     "  Lord,  I  beheve;  and  he  worshipped  Him."    There  is  the  story  of 
the  progress  of  an  honest,  ignorant  soul  that  knew  itself  blind,  into  the  illumina- 
tion of  perfect  vision.     And  as  He  went  upwards,  so  steadily  and  tragically, 
downwards  went  the  others.    For  they  had  hght,  and  they  would  not  look  at  it ; 
and  it  blasted  and  blinded  them.     (A,  Maclaren,  D.D.)        The  power  of  a  fact : — 
This  man,  who  is  released  from  his  native  blindness  by  Christ,  is  one  of  the 
strongest  characters  which  the  Gospels  paint  for  us  about  the  person  of  our  Lord. 
Pollow  him  through  the  chapter,  and  through  all  its  various  situations  and  discus- 
«ions,  and  you  feel  that  he  is  the  man  of  the  most  real  manhood  among  them  all — 
disciples,  neighbours,  parents,  and  Pharisees.    Wherein  does  his  great  strength 
lie  7    What  is  it  that  makes  him  so  real  and  firm  a  man  ?    It  is,  I  believe,  the 
consciousness  of  a  fact,  a  great  fact,  in  his  life's  history.    "  One  thing  I  know,"  he 
says,  "  that  whereas  I  was  blind,  now  I  see.    That  is  the  great,  wonderful  event 
which  has  happened  to  me,  which  fills  all  my  consciousness,  before  which  every- 
thing else  is  little,  which  influences  and  colours  everything,  and  the  remembrance, 
of  which  rules  me."    In  every  knot  of  men  which  clusters  around  him,  with  their 
tittle  wondering  questions  of  curiosity  or  maUce,  he  simply  tells  his  one  great  fact 


«HAP.  tr.]  ST.  JOHN.  147 

We  can  hardly  think  of  him  as  the  former  beggar.  He  is  too  imperious  for  a  beggar 
now.  1,  See  how  this  man  first  appears  after  his  cure  by  Christ.  The  neighboura 
and  his  former  acquaintance  gather  around  him,  and  begm  to  qiiestion  as  to  his 
identity :  "  Is  not  this  he  that  sat  and  begged  ?  "  Some  said,  "  Yes,  this  is  he." 
Others,  "He  is  like  him."  But  he  said,  "I  am  he."  There  is  the  first  effect  of 
the  coming  of  this  great  fact  into  his  life,  to  make  him  honest  in  regard  to  self.  It 
is  as  if  he  had  said,  "  Here  is  a  great  event  that  has  happened  to  me,  unprecedented 
and  marvellous.  I  am  its  subject.  Such  an  attention  has  been  bestowed  upon  me 
and  my  wants  and  my  condition  as  I  never  heard  of,  as  shows  that  I  am  the  object 
of  care  to  a  Divine  mind  and  power.  A  new  value  has  been  given  to  my  nature.  I 
have  a  new,  stronger  sense  of  self.  Tes,  I  am  he.  I  was  blind,  and  now  I  see. 
I  will  not  leave  you  to  dispute  my  identity."  That  is  the  first  great  value  of  the 
consciousness  of  a  fact  in  one's  life-history,  the  new  honest  view  of  self  and  its 
value.  Oh,  my  friends,  the  system  which  teaches  us  to  know  ourselves  the  best  is 
that  which  brings  the  greatest  fact  into  our  history — the  gospel  and  its  fact.  And 
yet  multitudes  of  us  go  through  life,  while  all  about  us,  above  us,  and  beneath  us 
point  to  us,  "  Is  not  this  one  for  whom  Christ  died  ?  Is  not  this  one  of  those 
wonderful  saved  human  natures  ?  "  and  we  practically  deny  ourselves,  because  our 
consciousness  is  so  dead.  2.  Go  on  in  the  chapter  to  the  next  appearance  of  this 
man  who  knows  one  thing — the  critical  event  of  life.  See  how  concentrated  it 
makes  him  !  They  ask  him,  "  Where  is  He,  your  healer  ?  "  He  says,  "  I  know 
not.  All  I  know  is  this."  To  know  one  great  fact  and  to  be  full  of  it  makes  him 
unwilling  to  guess  a  conjecture  about  other  things.  He  either  knows  or  he  knows 
not.  He  has  leanit  what  true  knowledge  is.  We  should  save  much  stumbling  and 
sorrow  in  life  if  we 'would  not  so  often  build  the  air-castles  of  conjecture  and  live  in 
them  as  though  their  walls  were  of  the  solid  masonry  of  real  knowledge.  The 
disaster  is  most  serious  in  the  spiritual  sphere,  when  one  does  not  know  where  to 
say,  "I  know,"  and  where  "I  know  not,"  when  religion  is  only  a  broad  field  of 
conjecture.  Many  are  anxious  concerning  such  unessentials  as  the  origin  of  evil, 
predestination,  spiritualism,  the  exact  nature  of  the  future  life,  &o. ;  forgetful  that, 
the  one  fact  of  practical  religion — man's  salvation  and  purification  by  Christ — being 
known,  you  may  for  the  present  safely  say,  "I  know  not,"  to  other  items  which 
cannot  be  yet  known  in  the  same  personal  way.  3.  The  chapter  goes  on  to  furnish 
another  instance  of  the  strengthening  value  of  this  one  possession  of  the  healed 
man.  It  makes  him  a  messenger,  a  continual  repeater  of  his  wonderful  story,  as 
often  as  he  can  relate  it.  Any  man,  however  ignorant  and  humble,  is  listened  to  if 
he  have  a  genuine  event  of  life  to  tell.  Facts  never  grow  old.  This  man,  the 
relater  of  a  fact,  represents  Christianity.  Christianity  has  gone  on  from  age  to 
age,  from  circle  to  circle,  giving  its  simple,  solid,  eventful  massage  —  human 
redemption  and  enlightenment  by  Christ.  4.  But,  still  again,  as  this  man  so  full 
of  his  story  tells  it,  the  Pharisee  says  to  him,  "  Give  God  the  glory.  Do  not  ascribe 
it  to  this  Man.  He  is  a  sinner."  They  endeavour  to  hush  his  statement  by  a 
command,  "  Do  not  say.  He  (Jesus)  opened  mine  eyes."  That  is  to  say,  these  men 
were  striving  to  do  what  has  been  a  very  usual  human  infatuation — to  legislate 
against  events,  by  simple  authority,  as  when  the  old  Saxon  king  sat  by  the  water's 
edge  and  with  his  kingly  decree  forbad  the  sea  to  come  nearer  or  its  tide  to  rise 
higher.  These  men  did  not  appreciate  the  firmness  of  a  fact.  They  did  not  know 
that  commands  were  merely  pebbles  that  rebounded  shattered  from  its  rocky 
nndisturbed  surface.  All  men  fall  into  this  error — good  men  legislating  against  an 
evil  fact,  evil  men  legislating  against  a  good  fact.  To  bid  it  be  different  is  nothing 
at  all.  This  is  another  value  of  the  bUnd  man's  possession.  He  was  instantly 
above  all  mere  commands,  all  mere  human  assertion  ol  power.  This  is  the  value 
of  Christianity  always — its  exaltation  of  a  man  above  earthly  power.  The  world, 
by  its  persecution  or  force  and  might,  says,  "  Deny  Christ."  But  if  you  conceive 
of  Christ  £ind  His  gospel  as  the  world's  great  fact,  if  His  influence  is  an  event  in 
jonr  own  life,  you  will  be  able  to  answer,  "  How  can  I  deny  a  fact  ?  I  should  onlv 
stultify  myself  to  do  that.  One  thing  I  know,  I  was  blind,  and  now  I  see.  That 
will  last  after  your  command  has  been  forgotten."  There  is  no  fear,  no  servility  in 
this  man,  who  is  armed  with  his  great  conscious  fact  of  life,  beggar  as  he  had  been 
of  old.  The  Pharisees  cast  him  out.  Ay,  and  the  worse  for  them.  They  cast  out 
the  only  man  resting  on  solid  truth,  and  remained  upon  their  fictions.  5.  Once 
more,  as  this  man  goes  out  into  the  outer  cold  solitariness  of  excommunication, 
yet  happy  and  warm  in  the  garment  of  the  consciousness  of  that  wonderful  miracle, 
Christ  meets  him,  and  says,  "  Now  you  must  believe  on  Me,  for  you  have  ieen 


148  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  is. 

Me."    Think  how  it  must  have  sounded,  how  the  warm  heart  must  have  been 
doubly  grateful  for  that  word  "  seen."    "  Yes,  I  see  at  last,  I  see,  I  who  was  blind." 
It  is  as  if  Christ  were  echoing  his  own  thoughts,  his  own  one  piece  of  all-absorbing 
knowledge.     Now,  that  piece  of  knowledge  must  lead  to  beUef .    Fact  must  lead  to 
faith.     A  fact  mei«ly  means  a  thing  done,  and  there  must  be  a  doer,  greater  in  his 
invisibility  than  the  great  thing  itself  in  its  visibility.     That  is  the  faith  of 
Christianity  ;   it  rests  on  real  events,  on  actual  things  done.     It  does  not  ask 
faith  with  no  basis.    But  it  furnishes  the  greatest  event  of  history  as  a  founda- 
tion, an  event  happening  to  us  and  yet  not  through  our  means ;  and  any  man  full 
of  that  great  event  wiU  say,  "  I  will  and  must  believe  in  its  doer. "  Just  as  the  building 
which  has  the  broadest  base  upon  the  ground  can  rise  to  the  highest  upward  point  in 
safety,  so  he  who  is  fullest  of  the  greatest  seen  fact  of  life  is  fullest  also  of  the 
richest,  most  aspiring,  most  practical   and  most  spiritul  faith.     (Fred   Brooks.) 
The  experimental  evidence  of  Christianity  : — Here  we  see  a  practical  conviction  of 
the  claims  of  Christ  set  against  speculative  doubts  of  those  claims  ;  and  so  this 
dispute  between  the  restored  blind  man  and  the  Pharisees  is  a  symbol  of  what  often 
happens  in  the  world.   It  would  be  easy  to  find  men  now  who  have  doubts  concerning 
Christianity  born  of  intellectual  inquiry,  which  they  find  it  impossible  to  appease ; 
while  there  is  another  class  of  persons  who  feel  a  confidence  in  Christianity  born  of 
inward  experience,  which  it  would  be  impossible  to  overthrow.     And  if  two  persons 
representing  these  two  classes  should  meet  and  attempt  a  discussion,  they  could  not 
understand  each  other,  for  their  souls  would  not  touch.    The  believing  man  could 
not  confute  nor  dispel  the  doubts  that  would  be  reported  to  him  by  his  opponent, 
because  he  had  never  felt  those  doubts,  and  could  not  judge  of  their  vahdity.    The 
sceptical  man  could  receive  no  immediate  aid  from  the  practical  conviction  of  the 
believer,  for  that  conviction  could  not  be  trau  slated  from  feeling  into  effective 
statement  in  words.     One  is  troubled  with  doubts  about  the  miracles ;  the  other 
can  tell  only  of  the  sweet  peace  of  Christian  duty  and  a  sense  of  pardoned  sin. 
One  cannot  see  that  the  links  are  complete  in  the  historical  chain  of  evidence  for 
the  authenticity  of  the  four  Gospels ;  the  other  can  only  answer  that  the  words  of 
those  Gospels  have  nourished  his  soul,  and  made  life  a  more  noble  experience,  and 
bereavement  less  painful,  and  the  tomb  less  dark.      One  cannot  be  entirely  sure 
that  such  a  person  as  Christ  ever  lived ;  the  other  feels  that  it  is  his  highest 
privilege  to  follow  the  spirit  of  the  recorded  Christ  and  to  be  a  disciple  of  His 
pubhshed  temper.      One  may  anxiously  be  waiting  for  the  last  book  by  some  great 
German  theological  scholar,  to  settle  or  confirm  his  wavering  mind  upon  some  point 
of  the  evidence ;  the  other  strengthens  his  faith  by  the  daily  responses  that  are 
vouchsafed  to  Christian  prayers.     One  questions  from  a  darkened  intellect;  the 
other  answers  from  a  sunlit  soul.     One  cannot  but  say,  from  the  force  of  the 
doubts  which  his  philosophy  has  started,  "  As  for  this  Man  Jesus,  I  know  not  from 
whence  He  is  " ;  the  other  replies,  "  Why,  herein  is  a  marvellous  thing,  that  you 
know  not  from  whence  He  is,  and  yet  He  hath  opened  mine  eyes !  "     A  truly 
Christian  man,  although  he  may  never  have  looked  into  a  volume  of  the  evidence 
for  the  genuineness  of  the  Christian  records,  feels  a  testimony  for  the  Christian 
religion  in  his  own  heart  which  raises  him  above  scepticism  about  the  record. 
Jesus  referred  to  this  proof  when  He  said  (chap.  vii.  17).    Perhaps  such  a  man  had 
long  been  wholly  selfish  and  worldly.    But  by  being  brought  within  the  circle  of 
Christian  influences  his  best  faculties  have  been  awakened  and  developed.    And 
now  he  sees  hfe  in  a  different  light.   The  wisdom  and  goodness  of  God  are  suggested 
to  him  from  every  side  of  nature ;  it  is  a  delight  to  cherish  a  sense  of  reliance 
upon  the  Deity  and  to  feel  at  all  times  that  God  is  the  Father  ;  the  darkness  of 
selfishness  is  exchanged  for  the  deep  satisfaction  of  devotion  to  duty,  the  slavery 
of  passion  for  the  peace  of  purity,  the  misery  of  fear  for  the  joy  of  love,  the  fever 
thirst  after  worldly  goods  for  the  serene  bliss  of  faith,  and  holy  longings  for  the 
favour  of  God  and  the  perfectness  of  Christ ;  existence  is  recognized  as  a  spiritual 
privilege,  death  regarded  as  the  door  to  immortality,  and  the  universe  becomes  a 
temple  for  the  worship  of  the  Almighty.    Find  a  heart  In  which  this  conversion  of 
principles,  feelings,  and  aims  has  been  experienced,  and  you  find  a  heart  that  feelfl 
an  immovable  conviction  of  the  truth  of  Christianity.      Its  peace,  its  joys,  ita 
consciousness  of  spiritual  health,  its  insight  into  a  new  world  of  which  before  it 
had  no  conception,  all  bear  testimony  to  the  reality  of  Christ's  religion.      {T, 
Starr  King.)         Experience  the  condition  of  Church  membership  : — When  Moody, 
the  great  evangelist,  wanted   to    join  the  Church  in  Boston,  under  the  pastof 
of   which  he    had    been   awakened,  he   was  questioned   about  dootrines,   aoi 


CHA».  n.]  8T.  JOHN.  149 

Beemed  to  know  nothing  about  them.  He  could  only  say,  "  Whereas  I  was  blind, 
now  I  see."  He  applied  to  this  Church  three  times  before  he  could  get  in.  (J.  F. 
B.  Tinling,  B.A.)  An  undoubted  cure  : — George  Moore  once  dislocated  his 
ehoulder,  and  after  suffering  great  agony  for  weeks,  all  the  surgeons  failing  to 
relieve  him,  he  went  to  Mr.  Button,  the  bone-setter,  who  in  a  few  minutes  gave 
him  lasting  relief.  He  was  much  taken  to  task  then  by  his  professional  friends  for 
going  to  a  quack.  "  Well,"  said  he,  "  quack  or  no  quack,  he  cured  me,  and  that 
was  what  I  wanted.  Whereas  I  was  blind,  now  I  see."  {S.  Smiles.)  Living  Chrit- 
tians  an  argument  for  Christianity : — An  unhappy  woman  who  has  associated  her- 
self with  a  notorious  atheist  in  this  country,  went  down  to  a  great  northern  city  in 
England  to  deliver  a  lecture  against  Christiauity,  and  the  object  of  her  able 
deliverance  was  to  prove  that  Christ  was  a  myth.  A  great  crowd  of  working-men 
assembled  to  hear  her,  drawn  together,  as  I  believe  they  often  are  on  such  occasions, 
a  good  deal  more  by  curiosity  than  by  sympathy  with  the  lecturer.  When  the  lady 
had  finished,  a  man  got  up  at  the  other  end  of  the  room  and  said,  "  My  friends, 
you  know  me.  I  have  lived  among  you  for  twenty-five  years.  Twenty-five  years 
ago  I  was  a  drunken  brute.  I  used  to  beat  my  wife  and  make  my  home  a  hell  upon 
earth.  Now,  this  lady  says  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  is  a  myth.  I  am  not  quite  sure 
that  I  know  what  a  myth  is,  but  I  suppose  that  she  means  that  He  never  existed, 
or,  at  any  rate,  is  not  what  we  declare  Him  to  be.  Now,  my  friends,  twenty-five 
years  ago,  when  I  was  a  drunken,  wife-beating  rascal,  Jesus  of  Nazareth  met  me 
and  opened  my  eyes,  and  I  saw  that  I  was  a  sinner,  and  He  forgave  my  sins ;  and 
you  know  what  a  change  took  place  in  me  then,  and  you  know  what  sort  of  a  man 
I  have  been  for  the  last  twenty-five  years.  Perhaps  the  lady  will  be  kind  enough 
to  explain  me."  Down  he  sat.  The  lady  said  that  she  could  not  explain  him,  and 
Bhe  did  not  deliver  the  two  other  lectures  in  that  course,  I  have  no  doubt  that  she 
was  perfectly  familiar  with  all  that  Strauss  has  written,  and  with  what  Eenan  says, 
and  with  the  difficulties  which  the  great  men  of  science  have  suggested,  and  she 
went  down  to  that  northern  city  flushed  with  the  anticipation  of  victory ;  but  there 
was  one  very  awkward  fact  which  she  had  overlooked — that  there  happened  to  be 
living  in  that  very  city  a  well-known  man  whose  eyes  Jesus  of  Nazareth  had  opened 
twenty-five  years  ago.  What  is  the  use  of  making  most  difficult  and  endless  in- 
quiries into  the  origin  of  ancient  documents  until  you  have  explained  me?  And 
standing  here  addressing  some  whom  I  shall  never  meet  again  until  we  meet  at  the 
judgment-seat,  I  present  myself  as  a  living  witness.  What  you  have  to  explain  is 
me.  My  mind  goes  back  twenty-three  years,  when,  in  a  beautiful  little  village  in 
Wales,  Jesus  of  Nazareth  opened  my  eyes,  and  I  saw  that  He  was  my  Saviour,  and 
that  God  was  my  Father ;  and  in  that  light  I  have  been  walking  with  perfect  happi- 
ness for  twenty-three  years.  That  is  what  you  have  to  explain,  and  you  are  in  a 
very  great  difficulty,  because  there  are  so  many  of  us.  Two  thousand  years  ago 
there  was  only  one  at  Jerusalem,  and  they  were  able  to  dispose  of  him  pretty  quickly. 
They  lost  their  tempers ;  and  bullied  him,  and  finally  excommunicated  him.  But 
you  cannot  excommunicate  us  all.  Let  every  man  speak  of  that  which  he  knows. 
\H.  p.  Hughes,  M.A.)  Agnosticism  and  Christian  experience: — Is  there  a  God? 
Don't  know  I  Is  the  soul  immortal  ?  Don't  know  1  If  we  should  meet  each  other  in 
the  future  world  will  we  recognize  each  other  ?  Don't  know  I  This  man  proposes 
to  substitute  the  religion  of  •*  Don't  know  "  for  the  religion  of  "  I  know."  ♦'  I  know 
whom  I  have  believed."  "I  know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth."  Infidelity  pro- 
poses to  substitute  a  religion  of  awful  negatives  for  our  religion  of  glorious  positives, 
showing  right  before  us  a  world  of  reunion  and  ecstasy,  and  high  companionship, 
and  glorious  worship,  and  stupendous  victory  ;  the  mightiest  joy  of  earth  not  high 
enough  to  reach  to  the  base  of  the  Himalaya  of  uplifted  splendour  awaiting  all 
those  who  on  the  wings  of  Christian  faith  will  soar  toward  it.  (T.  Be  Witt  Tal' 
mage.)  Conversion  a  real  experience: — This  man  knew  that  he  could  see. 
Possibly  some  of  you  have  been  decent  people  all  your  lives,  and  yet  you  do 
not  know  whether  you  are  saved  or  not.  This  is  poor  religion.  Cold  comfort  1 
Saved,  and  not  know  it  !  Surely  it  must  be  as  lean  a  salvation  as  that 
man's  breakfast  when  he  did  not  know  whether  he  had  eaten  it  or  not.  The 
salvation  which  comes  of  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  conscious  salvation. 
Tour  eyes  shall  be  so  opened  that  you  shall  no  longer  question  whether  you  can 
Bee.  He  could  see,  and  he  knew  that  he  could  see.  Oh,  that  you  would  beheve  in 
Jesus,  and  know  that  you  have  believed  and  are  saved  I  Oh,  that  you  might  get 
into  a  new  world,  and  enter  upon  a  new  state  of  things  altogether  1  May  that 
which  was  totally  unknown  to  you  before  be  made  known  to  you  at  this  hoar  b; 


150  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xx 

Almighty  grace.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Value  of  a  personal  knowledge  of  salva- 
tion : — I  recollect  the  lesson  which  I  learned  from  my  Sunday-school  class  :  I  waa 
taught,  if  the  other  boys  were  not.  Though  yet  a  youth,  I  was  teaching  the  gospel 
to  boys,  and  I  said,  "  He  that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved."  One  of 
them  asked  somewhat  earnestly,  "  Teacher,  are  you  saved  ?  "  I  answered,  "  I  hope 
BO. "  The  boy  replied,  "  Teacher,  don't  you  know  ?  "  As  if  he  had  been  sent  to 
push  the  matter  home  to  me,  he  further  inquired,  "  Teacher,  have  you  believed  ?  " 
I  said,  "  Yes."  "  Well,  then,"  he  argued,  "  you  are  saved."  I  was  happy  to  answer, 
"  Yes,  I  £im  " ;  but  I  had  hardly  dared  to  say  that  before.  I  found  that  if  I  had  to 
teach  other  people  the  truth  I  must  know  and  believe  its  sweet  result  upon  myself. 
I  believe,  dear  friends,  that  you  will  seldom  comfort  others  except  it  be  by  the 
comfort  with  which  you  yourself  are  comforted  of  God.  (Ibid.)  The  value  of  ex- 
perience:— A  hundred  thousand  tongues  may  discourse  to  you  about  the  sweetness 
of  honey,  but  you  can  never  have  such  knowledge  of  it  as  by  taste.  So  a  word  full 
of  books  may  tell  you  wonders  of  the  things  of  God  in  rehgion,  but  you  can  never 
understand  them  exactly  but  by  the  taste  of  experience.  (N.  Caussin.)  Personal 
knowledge  valuable :  —  The  first  qualification,  then,  of  a  faithful  witness  is  a 
personal  knowledge  of  the  facts  to  which  he  witnesses.  If  a  witness  in  a  court  of 
justice  begins  to  talk  of  what  he  thinks,  feels,  and  believes,  '*  Oh  1  hush,  hush," 
Bays  the  judge,  "  we  can't  have  that ;  we  want  to  know  what  you  know — what  you 
have  seen,  heard,  and  felt  of  this  case ;  "  and  these  are  the  sort  of  witnesses  Jesus 
Christ  wants,  who  get  up  and  say,  "  I  know ! "  That  is  what  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
wants — ^people  who  know,  who  experience,  who  realize,  who  live  the  things  they 
witness  to.  This  is  what  the  world  is  dying  for — people  who  can  get  up  and  say, 
"  I  know."  What  did  He  to  thee. — The  quibbles  of  infidelity  : — Pertness  and 
ignorance  may  ask  a  question  in  three  lines,  which  it  will  cost  learning  and 
ingenuity  thirty  pages  to  answer.  When  this  is  done  the  same  question  will  be 
triumphantly  asked  again  next  year,  as  if  nothing  had  ever  been  written  on  the 
subject ;  and  as  people  in  general,  for  one  reason  or  other,  like  short  objections 
better  than  long  answers,  in  tb'is  mode  of  disputation,  if  it  can  be  styled  such,  the 
odds  must  ever  be  against  us ;  and  we  must  be  content  with  those  of  our  friends, 
who  have  honesty  and  erudition,  candour  and  patience,  to  study  both  sides  of  the 
question  (chap.  x.  25).  {Bp.  Home.)  Infidelity  can  only  go  round  and  round  the 
same  topics  in  an  eternal  circle,  without  advancing  one  step  further.  It  produces  no 
new  forces :  it  only  brings  those  again  into  the  field  which  have  been  so  often 
baffled,  maimed,  and  disabled,  that  in  pity  to  them  they  ought  to  be  dismissed,  and 
discharged  from  suiy  further  service  (Acts  xix.  28,  34).  (J.  Seed.)  Will  ye  also 
1)0  His  disciples  7 — Bold  irony  this — to  ask  these  stately,  ruffled,  scrupulous  Sanhe- 
drists.  Whether  he  was  really  to  regard  them  as  anxious  and  sincere  inquirers 
about  the  claims  of  the  Nazarene  prophet !  Clearly  here  was  a  man  whose  pre> 
sumptuous  honesty  would  neither  be  bullied  into  suppression,  or  corrupted  into  a 
lie.  He  was  quite  impracticable.  So,  since  authority,  threats,  blandishments  had 
all  failed,  they  broke  into  abuse,  "  Thou  art  His  disciple,"  &c.  "  Strange,"  ha 
replied,  "  that  you  should  know  nothing  of  a  man  who  has  wrought  such  a  miracle 
as  not  even  Moses  wrought ;  and  we  know  that  neither  he  nor  anyone  else  could 
have  done  it  unless  he  was  from  God."  What !  Shades  of  Hillel  and  Shammai  I 
Was  a  mere  blind  beggar,  a  natural  ignorant  heretic,  altogether  born  in  sins,  to  be 
teaching  them  f  Unable  to  control  any  longer  their  transport  of  indignation,  they 
flung  biTTi  out  of  the  hall,  and  out  of  the  synagogue.  {Archdeacon  Farrar.)  Thou 
art  His  disciple. — I.  Thb  oharacteb  of  a  tbck  disciple.  This  was  the  first  name 
attached  to  Christ's  followers.  It  is  a  correlative  to  His  title,  **  Teacher  " :  hence 
tiiey  who  received  His  instructions  were  His  disciples.  And  when  they  obtained 
the  more  distinctive  name  of  their  Master,  this  was  recognized,  "  The  disciples  were 
first  called  Christians  at  Antiooh."  Names  are  but  arbitrary  signs  of  things,  and 
are  really  characteristic  no  further  than  as  the  things  themselves  exist.  The 
Christians  were  no  worse  for  being  called  Nazarenes,  and  Judas  was  no  bditer  for 
being  called  an  apostle.  Hence  the  necessity  of  distinguishing  between  the  proper 
and  the  lax  use  of  words.  A  man  may  be  a  disciple  universally  or  really.  Such  a 
distinction  is  coeval  with  the  use  of  the  term.  "  Many  of  His  disciples  went  back," 
"Ye  are  My  disciples  indeed."  A  true  disciple  —  L  Believingly  embraces  the 
doctrines  of  Christ.  They  are  received  into  His  heart  as  the  basis  of  conduct ;  they 
are  the  mould  which  gives  its  impression  to  the  character.  Such  doctrines  as 
credible,  require  faith ;  as  authoritative,  bind ;  as  graciously  given,  are  to  be  used 
for  the  benefit  of  a  guUty  and  erring  mind.    So  close  is  the  affinity  between  Christ 


CHAP.  IX.]  8T.  JOHN.  151 

and  His  troth,  that  believing  His  Word  is  belifeving  in  Him.  But  it  is  one  thing  to 
believe  the  gospel  to  be  trne,  and  another  to  behave  its  necessity  to  our  own  well- 
being ;  the  former  will  make  a  man  a  disciple  in  name,  the  latter  in  truth.  2. 
Cherishes  an  ardent  affection  for  Christ's  person.  Faith  is  His  word  by  realizing 
to  the  mind  His  great  excellencies  and  gifts,  engages  its  esteem,  desire,  and  delight. 
It  opens  the  springs  of  gratitude  and  awakens  the  purest  sensibilities.  This  love 
is  a  master  grace,  leading  a  train  of  other  virtues,  which  receive  their  highest 
worth  from  it.  3.  Devotes  himself  to  the  cause  of  Christ — giving  himself  up  to 
Christ's  disposal — living  or  dying.  This  devotedness  includes  seli-denial,  confes- 
sion of  Christ  before  men,  lively  activity  in  extending  His  kingdom.    H.  Thb 

NECESSITY    AND    IMPORTANCE    OF    BEING     A    TEUE    DISCIPLE.        1.    From    the    absoluto 

requirement  of  God,  "My  son  give  me  thy  heart."  Everything  short  of  this  is 
robbery.  He  who  delays  obedience  holds  out  his  enmity  against  God ;  and  can 
this  succeed  ?  2.  From  a  principle  of  consistency.  Shall  God  be  treated  as  wa 
deem  it  base  for  man  to  be  treated  ?  In  common  affairs  mere  outward  respect  ia 
insulting.  With  whom  do  men  trifle  when  they  assume  the  form  of  godliness 
without  a  care  of  the  power.  3.  From  a  regard  to  our  safety  and  peace.  {CongrC' 
fiational  Remembrancer.) 

Ver.  31.  Now  we  know  that  God  heareth  not  sinners. — True  and  not  true : — 1.  It 
is  ill  to  wrench  passages  of  the  Bible  out  of  their  context,  and  treat  them  as  in- 
fallible scripture  when  they  are  only  sayings  of  men.  By  acting  thus  foolishly  we 
oould  prove  that  there  is  no  God  (Fsa.  xiv.  1),  that  God  hath  forgotten  His  people 
(Isa.  xhx.  14),  that  Christ  was  a  winebibber  (Matt.  ix.  19),  and  that  we  ought  to 
worship  the  devil  (Matt.  iv.  19).  This  will  never  do.  We  must  inquire  who  uttered 
the  sentence  before  we  venture  to  preach  from  it.  2.  Our  text  is  the  saying  of  a 
shrewd  blind  man  who  was  far  from  being  well  instructed.  It  is  to  be  taken  for 
what  it  is  worth ;  but  by  no  means  to  be  regarded  as  Christ's  teaching.  The 
Pharisees  evidently  admitted  its  force,  and  were  puzzled  by  it.  It  was  good  argu- 
ment as  against  them.  It  is  true  or  false  as  we  may  happen  to  view  it.  I.  It  la 
MOT  TRUE  IN  SOME  SENSES.  We  oould  uot  Say  absolutely  that  God  heareth  not 
sinners,  for — 1.  God  does  hear  men  who  sin,  or  else  He  would  hear  no  one :  for  there 
is  no  man  that  sinneth  not  (1  Kings  viii.  46)  ;  not  a  saint  would  be  heard,  for  even 
saints  are  sinners.  2.  God  does  sometimes  hear  and  answer  unregenerate  men. 
(1)  To  show  that  He  is  truly  God,  and  make  them  own  it  (Psa.  cvi.  44).  (2)  To 
manifest  His  great  compassion,  whereby  He  even  hears  the  ravens'  cry  (Psa.  cxlvii). 
(3)  To  lead  them  to  repentance  (1  Kings  xxi.  27).     (4)  To  leave  them  without  excuse 

iExod.  z.  16,  17).  (5)  To  punish  them,  as  when  He  sent  quails  to  the  murmurera 
Numb.  xi.  33),  and  gave  Israel  a  king  (1  Sam.  xii.  17),  in  His  anger.  8.  God  does 
graciously  hear  sinners  when  they  cry  for  mercy.  Not  to  believe  this  were — (1)  To 
render  the  gospel  no  gospel.  (2)  To  deny  facta.  David,  Manasseh,  the  dying  thief, 
the  publican,  the  prodigal,  confirm  this  testimony.  (3)  To  deny  promises  (Isa.  zl. 
7).  II.  It  IB  TRUE  IN  OTHER  SENSES.  The  Lord  does  not  hear  sinners  as  He  heara 
His  own  people.  1.  He  hears  no  sinner's  prayer  apart  from  the  mediation  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  (1  Tim.  li.  5 ;  £ph.  ii.  18).  2.  He  will  not  hear  a  wicked,  formal,  heart- 
less prayer  (Prov.  xv.  29).  3.  He  will  not  hear  the  man  who  wilfully  continues  in 
sin,  and  abides  in  unbeUef  (Jer.  xiv.  12 ;  Isa.  i.  15].  4.  He  will  not  bear  the  hypo- 
crite's mockery  of  prayer  (Job  xxvii.  9).  5.  He  will  not  hear  the  unforgiving  (Mark 
xi.  25,  26).  6.  He  will  not  hear  even  His  people  when  sin  is  wilfully  indulged,  and 
entertained  in  their  hearts  (Psa.  Ixvi.  18).  7.  He  will  not  hear  those  who  refuse  to 
hear  His  Word,  or  to  regard  His  ordinances  (Prov.  xxviii.  9).  8.  He  will  not  hear 
those  who  harden  their  hearts  against  the  monitions  of  His  Spirit,  the  warnings  of 
His  providence,  the  appeals  of  His  ministers,  the  strivings  of  conscience,  and  so 
forth.  9.  He  will  not  hear  those  who  refuse  to  be  saved  by  grace,  or  who  trust  in 
their  own  prayers  as  the  cause  of  salvation.  10.  He  will  not  hear  sinners  who  die 
impenitent.  At  the  last  He  will  close  His  ear  to  them,  as  to  the  foolish  virgins, 
who  cried,  "  Lord,  Lord,  open  to  us  I  "  (Matt.  xxv.  11).  Conclusion :  One  or  two 
things  are  very  clear  and  sure.  1,  He  cannot  hear  those  who  never  speak  to  Him. 
2.  He  has  never  yet  given  any  one  of  us  a  flat  refusal.  3.  He  permits  us  at  this 
moment  to  pray,  and  it  will  be  well  for  us  to  do  so,  and  see  if  He  does  not  hear  as. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  return  of  prayers : — It  is  difficult  to  determine  which  is  the 
greater  wonder,  that  prayer  should  produce  such  vast  and  blessed  effects,  or  that 
we  should  be  unwilling  to  use  such  an  instrument  for  procuring  them.  The  first 
declares  God's  goodness,  the  second  our  folly  and  weakness.    That  "  Qod  heareth 


152  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  «, 

not  einners  "  was  a  proverbial  saying  and  supported  by  Scripture  (Job  xxviL  9 ; 
Psa.  Ixvi.  18 ;  Prov.  i.  28  ;  Isa.  i.  15  ;  Jer.  xiv.  10,  12).  The  proposition  may  be 
considered — 1.  According  to  the  purpose  of  the  blind  man :  God  heareth  not  sinners 
in  that  they  are  sinners,  though  a  sinner  may  be  heard  in  bis  prayer  to  confirm  hia 
faith.  God  hears  him  not  at  all  in  that  wherein  he  sins  ;  for  God  is  truth  and  can- 
not confirm  a  lie.  2.  In  a  manner  that  concerns  us  more  nearly ;  i.e.,  if  we  be  not 
good  men,  our  prayers  will  do  us  no  good,  God  turns  away  from  the  unwholesome 
breathings  of  corruption.  I.  Whosoevee  prays  while  he  is  in  a  state  of  sin,  his 
PEAYEE  la  AN  ABOMINATION  TO  GoD.  This  truth  was  believed  by  the  ancient  world  ; 
hence  the  appointment  of  baptisms  and  ceremonial  expiations.  1.  It  is  an  act  of 
profanation  for  an  unholy  person  to  handle  holy  things  and  offices.  2.  A  wicked 
person,  while  he  remains  in  that  condition,  is  not  a  natural  object  of  pity.  S. 
Purity  is  recommended  by  the  necessary  appendages  of  prayer — (1)  fasting,  (2) 
almsgiving,  (3)  and  by  the  various  indecencies  which  are  prohibited,  not  only  for 
their  general  malignity  but  because  they  hinder  prayer,  such  as  unmercifulness, 
which  unfits  us  to  receive  pardon  for  our  own  trespasses  ;  lust  and  uncleanliness 
which  defile  the  temple  and  take  from  us  all  affection  to  spuitual  things.  4.  After 
these  evidences  of  Scripture  and  reason  there  is  less  necessity  to  take  notice  of 
those  objections  derived  from  the  prosperity  of  evil  persons.  If  such  ask  things 
hurtful  and  sinful  if  God  hears  them  not  it  is  in  mercy;  but  there  are  many 
instances  of  success  in  improper  prayers  which  have  turned  out  to  the  disad- 
vantage of  the  petitioners.  II.  Many  times  good  men  peat,  and  not  sinfully,  but 
IT  eetuens  empty.  Because  although  the  man  may  be,  yet  the  prayer  is  not  in 
proper  disposition.  Prayers  are  hindered — 1.  By  anger,  or  a  storm  in  the  spirit 
of  him  who  prays.  Prayer  is  an  action  or  state  of  intercourse  exactly  contrary  to 
the  character  of  anger,  its  spirit  being  gentle  and  meek,  and  its  influences  calm 
and  soothing.  2.  By  indifference  and  easiness  of  desire.  He  that  is  cold  and 
tame  in  his  prayers  has  not  tasted  the  delight  of  religion  and  the  goodness  of  God ; 
he  is  a  stranger  to  the  secrets  of  His  kingdom.  What  examples  we  have  of  fervency 
in  Scripture,  more  particularly  in  the  case  of  Christ  and  St.  Paul  I  Under  this 
head  may  be  placed  cautions  against — (1)  Want  of  attention,  which  is  an  effect  of 
lukewarmness  and  infirmity,  which  is  only  remedied  as  our  prayers  are  made 
zealous  and  our  infirmities  are  strengthened  by  the  Spirit.  (2)  Want  of  persever- 
ance. When  our  prayer  is  for  a  great  matter  and  a  great  necessity,  how  often  do 
we  pursue  it  only  by  chance  or  humour  ;  or  else  our  choice  is  cool  as  soon  as  it  is 
hot,  and  our  prayer  without  fruit  because  the  desire  does  not  last.  If  we  would 
secure  the  blessing  we  must  pray  on  until  it  comes.  3.  By  the  want  of  their  being 
put  up  in  good  company.  For  sometimes  an  obnoxious  person  has  so  secured  a 
mischief  that  those  who  stay  with  him  share  his  punishment  as  the  sailors  did 
Jonah's.  But  when  good  men  pray  with  one  heart,  and  in  a  holy  assembly,  when 
they  are  holy  in  their  desires  and  lawful  in  their  authority,  then  their  prayers  ascend 
like  the  hymns  of  angels.  III.  What  degrees  and  circumstances  of  piety  aeb 
eequired  to  make  us  fit  to  be  intercessors  for  others  and  to  pray  foe  them  with 
PROBABLE  EFFECT.  No  piayers,  of  course,  can  prevail  with  regard  to  an  indisposed 
person  ;  as  the  sun  cannot  enlighten  a  blind  eye.  1.  Those  who  pray  for  others 
should  be  persons  of  extraordinary  piety.  This  is  exemplified  in  the  case  of  Job 
(xlii.  7,  8)  and  Phinehas.  It  was  also  a  vast  blessing  entailed  on  the  posterity  of 
Abraham,  Isaac  and  Jacob  ;  because  they  had  great  religion  they  had  great  power 
with  God.  A  man  of  little  piety  cannot  water  another  man's  garden  and  bless  it 
with  a  gracious  shower ;  he  must  look  to  himself.  But  what  an  encouragement 
this  is  to  a  holy  Ufe  ;  what  an  advantage  it  may  be  to  our  relatives,  country,  &c. 
How  useless  and  vile  the  man  whose  prayers  avail  not  for  the  meanest  person  1 
And  yet  every  one  in  a  state  of  grace  may  intercede  for  others,  a  duty  prescribed 
throughout  Scripture.  2.  We  must  take  care  that  as  our  piety,  so  also  our  offices 
be  extraordinary.  He  that  prays  to  reverse  a  sentence  of  God,  &c.,  must  not  expect 
great  effects  from  a  morning  or  evening  collect,  or  from  an  honest  wish.  But  in 
our  importunity  we  must  not  make  our  account  by  a  multitude  of  words,  but  by 
measures  of  the  spirit,  holiness  of  soul,  justness  of  the  desire,  and  the  usefulness  of 
the  request  to  God's  glory.  We  must  not  be  ashamed  or  backward  in  asking,  but 
our  modesty  to  God  in  prayer  has  no  measures  but  these — self-distrust,  eonfidenca 
in  God,  humility,  reverence  and  submission  to  God's  will.  These  being  observed 
our  importunity  should  be  as  great  as  possible,  and  it  will  be  likely  to  prevail.  3. 
It  is  another  great  advantage  that  he  who  prays  be  a  person  of  superior  dignity 
or  employment.    For  God  has  appointed  sotue  re'  son  bv  their  callings  to  pray  fo* 


CHAP,  n.]  ST.  JOHN.  16S 

others,  as  fathers  for  their  children,  ministers  for  their  flocks,  kings  for  theii 
BDbjects.  And  it  is  well  this  is  so,  since  so  few  understand  their  duties  to  them- 
selves and  others.  But  if  God  heareth  not  princes,  of  what  necessity  is  it  that 
euch  should  be  holy.  IV.  The  signs  of  oub  prayebs  beino  heabd.  This  requires 
little  observation ;  for  if  our  prayers  be  according  to  the  warrant  of  God's  Word, 
and  if  we  ask  according  to  God's  will  what  is  right  and  profitable,  we  may  rely 
on  the  promises,  and  be  sure  that  our  prayers  are  heard.    {Jeremy  Taylor.) 

Yer.  32.  Since  the  world  began  It  was  not  heard  that  any  man  opened  the  eyes 
of  one  that  was  bom  blind. — This  was  quite  true  at  the  time.  In  1728,  Dr. 
Cheselden,  of  St.  Thomas's  Hospital,  for  the  first  time  gave  sight  to  a  man  who 
had  been  blind  from  his  youth  up,  and  since  then  couching  has  been  several  times 
performed  on  those  who  were  born  blind.  With  regard  to  this  man  note — I.  The 
pECTJLiAEiTT  OF  HIS  CASE.  1.  It  was  not  the  case  of  want  of  light;  that  might  have 
been  remedied.  There  are  millions  who  have  no  light,  and  while  we  cannot  give 
men  eyes  we  can  give  them  light.  There  are  children  of  God  who  walk  in  darkness 
and  are  immured  in  Doubting  Castle.  May  it  be  ours  by  explanation  and  example 
to  illumine  them.  2.  This  was  not  a  case  of  accidental  blindness.  Here  again 
man's  help  might  have  been  of  service.  Persons  who  have  been  struck  with  blind- 
ness have  been  recovered.  We  can  do  much  in  cases  where  blindness  is  traceable 
to  circumstances,  e.g.,  to  prejudice,  which  might  be  removed  by  a  wise  and  tender 
statement  of  the  truth.  3.  The  man  was  blind  from  his  birth.  His  was  a  bhnd- 
ness  of  nature  which,  therefore,  baffled  all  surgical  skill.  (1)  Since  the 
beginning  of  the  world  no  one  has  opened  the  eyes  of  one  afflicted  with  sin. 
Man's  understanding  is  blind  because — (a)  His  whole  nature  la  disordered.  His 
other  faculties  act  upon  his  mind  and  prevent  it  operating  in  a  proper  manner. 
(6)  His  natural  pride  and  self-reliance  revolt  against  the  gospel,  (c)  He 
judges  spiritual  things  by  the  senses,  and  with  as  much  success  as  a  man 
who  measures  the  heavens  with  a  foot  rule,  (d)  He  is  at  a  distance  from 
God  and  consequently  does  not  believe  in  Him.  If  we  lived  near  to  God 
our  understanding  would  be  clarified  by  its  contact  with  truth.  (2)  Some  imagine 
that  they  can  open  the  sinner's  blind  eye — (a)  By  rhetoric.  As  well  hope  of 
sing  a  stone  into  sensibility.  Sinners  have  been  dazzled  a  thousand  times  by 
the  pyrotechnics  of  oratory  and  have  remained  as  blind  as  ever.  (6)  By  argument ; 
but  reason  alone  gives  no  man  the  power  to  see  the  light  of  heaven,  (c)  By 
earnest  gospel  appeals ;  but  how  many  in  our  congregations  are  proof  against 
these!  II.  The  sPECiAiiiTiES  of  the  cure.  Not  of  this  man's  only.  1.  It  is 
usually  accomplished  by  the  most  simple  means.  It  is  very  humbling  to  a  preacher 
to  find  that  God  cares  little  for  him  or  his  sermon,  and  that  a  stray  remark  of  his 
in  the  street  is  what  God  has  blessed.  Souls  are  not  usually  converted  by  bodies 
of  divinity  and  theological  discussions.  When  David  put  oft  Saul's  armour  and 
took  the  sling  and  the  stone  he  slew  the  giant.  We  must  keep  to  the  simple 
gospel  plainly  preached.  The  clay  and  the  spittle  were  not  an  artistic  combina- 
tion, yet  by  tht^se  and  a  wash  in  Siloam  eyes  were  opened.  2.  In  every  case  it  is 
a  Divine  work.  No  eye  is  ever  opened  to  see  Jesus  except  by  Jesus.  Blindness  of 
soul  yields  only  to  the  voice  which  said,  '•  Let  there  be  light. "  3.  It  is  often  instan- 
taneous, and  when  the  eye  is  opened  it  frequently  sees  as  perfectly  as  if  it  had 
been  always  seeing,  though  in  other  cases  it  is  gradual.  4.  It  brings  new  sensations, 
and  tl leief ore  should  surprise  us.  Do  you  remember  the  first  sight  you  had  of  Christ  ? 
There  is  fixed  in  the  memories  of  some  of  us  the  first  time  we  saw  the  sea,  or  the 
Alps,  but  these  were  nothing.  It  is  not  surprising  that  young  converts  should  get 
excited.  5.  It  is  very  clear  to  the  man  himself.  Others  may  doubt  but  not  he.  6. 
The  restored  faculty  is  capable  of  abundant  use.  The  man  who  could  see  the 
Pharisees  could  by  and  by  see  Jesus.  Once  give  a  man  spiritual  sight  and  he  has  a 
capacity  to  see  Divine  mysteries.  III.  The  condition  of  the  healed  man.  1.  He 
had  strong  impressions  in  favour  of  his  Healer.  First  He  was  a  prophet,  then  the 
object  of  worship.  No  man  has  his  eyes  opened  without  intense  love  for  Jesus,  and 
without  believing  in  His  Deity,  and  worshipping  Him  as  the  Son  of  God.  2.  He 
becomes  from  that  moment  a  coufessor  of  Christ,  the  first  of  his  class.  If  the  Lord 
has  opened  our  eyes  we  shall  not  hesitate  to  say  so.  3.  He  became  an  advocate 
for  Christ,  and  an  able  one,  for  the  facts  which  were  his  arguments  baffled  his 
adversaries.  You  will  never  meet  infidelity  except  with  such  facts.  4.  He  was 
driven  out  of  the  synagogue.  One  of  the  worst  things  that  can  happen  as  far  as 
this  world  is  concerned  is  to  know  too  much.     If  you  will  bravely  keep  abreast  ol 


164  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i^ 

the  times  yon  may  be  tolerated,  but  if  you  get  ahead  of  it  you  must  expect  ill-treat* 
ment.  5.  Christ  found  him.  What  a  blessing  to  lose  the  Pharisees  and  to  find 
the  Saviour  1    What  a  mercy  when  the  world  casts  as  out !    (C.  E.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  35-38.  Jesus  beard  that  they  had  cast  him  out  and  .  .  .  said  nnto  him. 
Dost  thou  believe  on  the  Son  of  God  7 — The  verdict  of  Christ  on  the  whole  case : — 
I.  The  demand  Christ  makes  upon  the  human  heaet — Faith  (ver.  35).  1.  PersonaL 
It  must  be  the  trust  of  the  individual  soul.  2.  Immediate.  It  must  be  exercised 
now  without  delay.  3.  Intelligent.  It  must  be  directed  to  the  right  object — the  Son 
of  God.  II.  Thb  homage  Chbist  accepts  fbom  the  human  heart— Worship 
(vet.  38).  1.  Adoring :  more  than  outward  courtesy  and  formal  obeisance — even 
the  prostration  of  the  spirit.  2.  Believing:  rooted  in  and  proceeding  from  the 
soul's  faith  in  Christ.  3.  Joyous.  III.  The  wore  Christ  pebfoems  on  the  human 
HEABT — Judgment  (ver.  39-41).  1.  Indirect.  It  follows  as  an  inevitable  result  of 
His  presenting  Himself  as  the  Light  of  the  World.  2.  Eeal.  It  infallibly  results 
in — (1)  Separating  men  into  two  classes — "  the  not  seeing"  and  "the  seeing."  (2) 
Betributively  acting  upon  them  in  accordance  with  their  ascertained  characters  and 
dispositions.  3.  Progressive.  This  work  is  going  on  as  truly  and  efficiently  as 
when  Christ  was  upon  earth.  4.  Permanent.  Lessons :  1.  The  importance  of 
ascertaining  in  which  group  one  is  placed  by  Christ's  judicial  work.  2.  The  necessity 
of  faith  corresponding  in  fulness  to  the  revelation  of  Himself  which  Christ  has 
given.  8.  The  propriety  of  making  Christ  the  object  as  well  as  the  ground  and 
medium  of  our  worship.  {T.  Whitelaw,  D.D.)  The  excommunicated  man:— 
I.  The  AFFLICTIVE  SITUATION  OF  THIS  MAN — cast  out.  When  he  was  a  blind  beggar 
he  was  an  object  of  compassion ;  but  much  more  now.  At  that  time  he  would 
have  the  favour  of  friends  and  the  advantage  of  rehgion — but  he  was  now  an  outcast 
from  society  and  the  Church.  IL  The  attentive  begard  of  Christ.  1.  Jesas 
heard.  His  ear  is  always  open  to  cases  of  distress,  2.  Jesus  found.  "  The  Lord 
knoweth  them  that  are  His,"  and  where  they  are,  and  how  they  are.    III.  Thb 

INTERESTINO  CONVERSATION  WHICH  PASSED   BETWEEN  THEM.      1.  The  qUestiOH  implying 

the  indispensableness  of  faith,  2.  The  reply.  (1)  Natural  "Who  is  He."  (2) 
Sincere.  "  That  I  might  believe."  3.  The  response  suggesting  the  proper  object  for 
restored  vision.  IV,  The  pleasing  result.  1.  The  man's  faith.  2,  His  open 
declaration  of  his  faith.  3,  His  worship.  Befiections.  1.  Men  may  suffer  for  the 
sake  of  Christ,  2.  Those  who  do  suffer  lose  nothing  by  it.  3.  To  act  honestly 
according  to  the  light  we  have  is  the  way  to  be  favoured  with  greater  illumination. 
4.  When  we  are  most  earnest  in  our  inquiries  after  Christ,  then  He  is  nearest 
tons.  {F.  Kidd.)  The  important  question : — L  The  importance  of  the  question. 
1.  It  is  of  great  extent  and  includes  things  of  the  highest  moment.  It  is  not  am  I 
a  Churchman  or  a  Dissenter,  &c„  but  am  I  a  beUever  in  Christ,  regenerate  or 
unregenerate  ?  a  friend  of  God  or  His  enemy  ?  on  my  way  to  heaven  or  hell  f  2. 
We  are  apt  to  take  it  for  granted  that  we  believe  in  Christ  without  sufficient  evidence. 
But  if  we  hate  to  be  imposed  upon  in  little  matters  let  as  not  impose  upon  ourselves 
in  this.  Is  it  a  thing  of  inheritance  or  of  conscious  exercise  ?  3.  The  decision  of 
this  question  can  be  in  no  way  hurtful  to  us,  but  may  be  much  to  our  advantage. 
If  we  do  not  believe  and  are  not  saved,  now  is  the  accepted  time,  believe  now.  4. 
The  question  will  be  decided  some  day.  Whether  a  believer  or  not  will  be  ascer- 
tained at  the  judgment-seat,  11.  Its  application.  1.  Have  we  ever  been  convinced 
of  sin  ?  We  must  know  that  we  are  diseased  ere  we  trust  the  physician.  2.  Have 
we  ever  been  stripped  of  our  vain  hopes  and  carnal  confidences  ?  Till  we  have  we 
shall  not  see  the  necessity  of  Christ.  3.  What  is  oar  disposition  with  respect  to  real 
godliness?  If  we  do  not  love  holiness  we  shall  not  believe  (1  Tim.  L  15).  4.  Is 
Christ  exceedingly  precious  to  our  esteem  ?  An  infallible  evidence  of  saving  faith 
(1  Pet  ii.  7),  5.  Have  we  peace  (Rom.  v.  1),  (B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  The  test 
question: — I.  The  question  in  relation  to  Christ.  1.  We  have  before  as  a 
distinct  personality.  2.  The  Divinity  of  Christ  is  the  resting  place  of  faith.  How 
miserable  the  attempts  to  reduce  Him  to  a  teacher  or  martyr  1  II.  The  question  at 
relation  to  ourselves.  It  is  here — 1.  We  resolve  all  doubts  and  find  a  firm 
foundation  for  our  faith,  2.  We  find  relief  and  rest,  3,  We  commune  with  God. 
4.  We  advance  towards  the  consummation  of  our  life.  {Weekly  Pulpit.)  Tht 
supreme  inquiry  : — I,  The  nature  of  the  belief.  Not  mere  intellectual  assent  to 
some  truth  ;  not  belief  requiring  learning  or  research.  Jesas  addressed  a  blind 
beggar.  II.  The  importance  of  the  question.  The  Jews  affirmed  that  the  man 
was  "  born  in  his  sins."    Jesus  asked  nothing  about  his  pedigree,  creed,  or  past 


CHAP,  IX.]  ST.  JOHN.  155 

life.  1.  He  requires  only  an  answer  to  this  one  question.  2.  It  is  a  question  that 
must  be  answered  prior  to  any  progress  in  spiritual  life.  It  is  life's  watershed.  3. 
On  its  answer  hangs  the  fate  of  eternity.  III.  The  personal  character  of  the 
<jiTB8Ti0N.  1.  Every  man  must  have  it.  2.  Each  man  must  answer  it  for  himself. 
IV.  But  one  of  two  answers  can  be  given.  Yes  or  no.  You  cannot  evade  it. 
(Homiletic  Monthly.)  Believing  on  the  Son  of  God : — This  question  was  addressed 
to  one  solitary  man.  Jesus  eomes  into  personal  contact  with  single  individuals. 
"  Thou."  "  Whom  ? "  It  was  a  large  question,  especially  when  the  man  was 
smarting  under  a  bitter  penalty.  Yet  Jesus  knew  his  want  and  met  him  at  the 
point  of  conscious  need,  ready  to  more  than  compensate  him.  I.  What  is  faith  ? 
Note — 1.  Its  simplicity.  Whatever  mysteries  there  may  be  in  the  Bible,  this  about 
believing  is  very  plain.  A  converted  Hindoo  when  asked  what  it  was,  replied, 
"  The  heart  clasping  Jesus  Christ."  2.  Complete  surrender  to  Christ.  The  frank 
siraplicity  of  a  little  child,  giving  itself  entirely  into  the  hands  of  the  Father,  full 
dependence  in  the  Father's  power  and  love,  a  simple  trusting  and  resting  without 
concern  about  the  next  step,  and  the  next.  But  people  say  that  this  is  an 
irrational  thing  and  altogether  unmanning.  Not  so ;  you  invest  your  money  in  the 
Government  Funds,  and  would  be  surprised  at  any  question  of  the  reasonableness 
of  the  act,  and  yet  you  do  not  think  about  the  nature  of  those  funds.  You  hold  a 
Government  security,  and  feel  perfectly  safe  in  trusting  the  source  of  your  income  in 
the  hands  of  the  State.  You  decide  to  cross  the  Atlantic ;  the  sea-worthiness  of  the 
vessel  and  the  skill  of  the  captain  are  the  only  matters  of  concern.  Assured  of 
these  you  give  yourselves  entirely  into  the  hands  of  the  officer.  But  is  not  this 
irrational.  Ought  you  not  first  to  study  ship-building  and  navigation,  and  then, 
standing  on  your  manliness,  persist  in  taking  a  share  in  the  management  of  the 
vessel  ?  Now  this  surrendering  of  self  to  Christ  is  God's  plan  of  saving  humanity 
and  conveying  it  to  heaven.  3.  This  believing  in  the  Son  of  God  is  a  saving  act. 
Not  that  faith  itself  saves,  however.  It  is  the  link  that  connects  to  Christ,  who 
saves.  It  is  not  the  door  but  the  hand  that  knocks ;  not  the  sun  but  the  eye  that 
sees  the  sun.  4.  This  faith  is  elevating  in  its  tendency.  There  is,  first  of  all,  a 
breaking  down  of  poor,  proud  self,  and  then  a  giving  back,  not  of  the  old  self  in 
its  original  impurity,  but  renewed,  cleansed  and  arrayed  in  the  robe  of  righteous- 
ness. And  in  answer  to  this  faith  a  tide  of  gracious  infiuences  sets  in  which  gives  the 
soul  beauty,  richness,  expansion,  dignity,  making  the  believer  a  citizen  of  the 
kingdom  of  heaven.  6.  This  faith  is  life — the  1  Ighest  thing  that  can  be  said  about 
it.  This  life  is  a  conscious,  healthy,  happy,  ever-growing  life.  II.  The  object  of 
vaitb — "  The  Son  of  God."  1.  A  person,  not  a  system.  Jesus  did  not  ask  the  man 
about  his  former  life  or  religious  whereabouts,  nor  did  He  inform  him  about  His 
doctrines  cr  the  nature  of  His  kingdom.  One  thing  only  is  of  moment — faith  in 
Him.  All  else  will  follow  from  that.  And  the  man  was  concerned  about  nothing 
else.  "  Who  is  He  ?  "  One  may  have  a  clear  belief  in  Christianity  and  yet  be 
devoid  of  saving  faith.  He  may  be  able  to  prove  it  Divine  and  yet  know  nothing  ol 
its  salvation.  Notice  the  "  on,"  suggesting  dependence,  trust,  reliance,  which  is 
something  more  than  "  in."  2.  Christ  is  every  way  adapted  as  the  object  of  faith. 
One  with  the  Father  and  yet  submissive  as  a  Son.  We  must  keep  close  to  this  truth, 
or  Christ's  sacrifice  is  deprived  of  its  power.  If  Christ  is  not  Divine,  He  is  a 
sinner,  and  if  a  sinner,  in  the  least  degree,  He  cannot  atone  for  others,  but  needs 
atonement  for  Himself.  When  a  great  good  is  promised,  the  question  is.  Has  the 
promiser  the  power  and  will  to  redeem  his  engagement?  The  New  Testament  is 
emphatic  on  these  two  qualities  in  the  Son  of  God.  AH  power  is  given  unto  Him, 
and  He  says  to  the  wide  world,  "  Come  unto  Me."  IH.  Christ  is  the  appointed 
AND  onijT  object  OF  FAITH.  "  There  remaineth  no  more  sacrifice  for  sin,"  and 
what  need  we  of  any  other?  for  the  claims  of  heaven  and  needs  of  earth  are 
met.  1.  This  faith  is  the  only  source  of  life  to  the  Church.  Architecture, 
music,  wealth,  fashion,  talent,  &o.,  will  not  keep  a  church  alive.  2.  This  faith 
is  the  secret  of  Church  aggression.  3.  This  faith  is  the  spring  of  the  Church's 
beauty.  (J.  H.  Higgins.)  Faith  reasonable : — Faith  is  a  plant  which  is  intended 
to  /ise  upward  by  twining  round  the  pillar  of  evidence.  _  (Bp.  Alexander.) 
An  important  question : — L  Thb  natu  b  of  this  question.  Faith  implies — 1.  Im- 
plicitly to  credit  the  records  of  God  co  ceming  His  Son.  2.  Genuine  trust  in  Him, 
sealed  by  ti^e  Holy  Spirit.  8.  Divine  reception  of  Him.  4.  It  is  also  to  realize 
His  gracious  presence  in  the  soul  in  the  Uvely  exercise  of  every  Christian  duty. 
II.  Helps  towards  ambwerino  this  question.  1.  Faith  is  a  Divine  principle,  anit 
is  Divinely  bestowed.    2.  Faith  is  a  self-evident  principle,  and  if  yoa  believe  ou 


156  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  n. 

Christ  yon  are  assured  of  it.  3.  Faith  is  a  victorious  principle,  and  conquers 
all  adverse  powers.  4.  Faith  is  a  practical  principle,  and  evinces  itself  in 
believers.  III.  Reasons  why  an  answer  should  be  retuened  to  this  questioit 
1.  This  question  is  most  important,  both  from  the  person  proposing  it,  and  the 
tremendous  consequences  connected  therewith.  2.  This  question  is  personal.  3. 
This  question  is  simple,  and  not  complex ;  so  that  under  the  DiAdne  and  covenant 
teaching  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  a  child  may  understand  it.  4.  This  question  is  doubt- 
ful, because  all  men  have  not  faith.  (T.  B.  Baker,  M.A.)  A  vital  question : — 
I.  The  question  proposed — 1.  Relates  to  Christ  as  the  eternal  Son  of  God.  2. 
Refers  to  faith  in  Christ  as  the  Son  of  God.  3.  Relates  to  each  individually.  II. 
Some  evidences  of  being  ENABiiED  TO  ANSWER  THE  QUESTION.  If  we  really  believe 
we  shall — 1.  Remember  the  means  of  bringing  us  into  faith.  2.  Have  the  Spirit  in 
our  souls.  3.  Highly  esteem  and  value  Christ.  4.  Enjoy  peace  and  comfort  of 
mind.  5.  Be  filled  with  love  to  God  and  the  Church.  6.  Be  subject  to  the 
authority  of  Christ.  HI.  The  persons  to  whom  the  words  may  be  addressed. 
1.  To  all  who  have  been  baptized  in  the  name  of  Christ.  2.  To  all  who  only 
profess  Christianity.  3.  To  all  who  manifest  much  zeal  in  the  cause  of  Christ.  4. 
Let  Christians  inquire  after  the  evidences  of  their  faith.  6.  Let  Christians  pray  to 
grow  in  faith.  6.  He  that  hath  not  faith  must  perish.  7.  All  the  blessings  of  the 
gospel  are  given  to  faith.  Improvement :  (1)  The  true  believer  is  in  an  infallible 
state  of  salvation  now.  (2)  The  true  believer  is  in  possession  of  internal 
assurance.  (3)  The  true  believer  is  in  possession  of  internal  peace.  (4)  The 
true  believer  will  live  with  Christ  in  glory.  (Ibid.)  Faith  in  Christ: — A 
Christian  merchant  had  in  his  employ  a  man  awakened  to  a  sense  of  sin,  and 
earnestly  desiring  salvation,  but  stumbled  at  this  believing  on  the  Son  of  God 
— its  very  simplicity  was  a  problem.  His  employer  sent  him  a  note,  asking 
him  to  his  office  on  a  certain  day,  at  a  given  hour.  Promptly,  at  tbe  specified 
time,  the  man  appeared  at  the  office.  His  master  looked  up  in  feigned  surprise, 
and  said,  "  Well,  James,  did  you  want  to  see  me  ?  "  "  Your  note,  sir,"  said  the 
servant,  showing  him  the  missive.  "Oh,  yes,  my  note,  then  you  really  believed  I 
was  sincere  when  I  sent  you  that  ?  "  *•  Of  course  I  did,"  said  James  emphatically, 
but  with  surprise.  "  Then  you  really  thought  I  would  keep  this  appointment.* 
*'  I  had  no  doubt  about  it,"  again  with  surprise.  "  Well,  here  is  a  strange  thing," 
said  the  merchant,  •'!  sent  you  this  one  short  note  asking  for  this  interview,  and 
you  promptly  respond  with  the  utmost  confidence,  and  yet  Jesus  Christ  has  given 
you  so  many  invitations  to  go  to  Him,  and  accept  His  pardon,  and  you  will  not, 
because  of  unbelief."  "  Is  it  like  that?  "  said  the  man,  light  breaking  in  upon  his 
mind.  "  Just  Uke  that,  James.  Go  to  Christ  as  promptly  and  as  trustingly  as  you 
have  come  to  me,  and  pardon  and  peace  are  yours ;  "  and,  acting  on  this  simple  plan, 
the  servant  found  tlie  Son  of  God  as  his  Saviour.  {J.  H.  Higgins. )  The  unknown 
Christ : — 1.  The  man  is  cast  out,  but  he  carries  with  him  the  immovable  conviction 
of  ver.  33.  Every  power  for  good  in  this  world  is  of  God,  whether  in  the  form  of 
material  science,  conquering  disease,  and  lightening  labour;  or  in  that  of  political  and 
social  reform,  purifying  the  pohty  of  nations  and  making  the  brotherhood  of  man 
more  real ;  or  in  that  of  spiritual  teaching,  stirring  deeper  fountains  and  casting 
higher  lights.  Let  us  believe  that  "  every  good  and  perfect  gift  cometh  from  God."  2. 
The  rumour  of  his  expulsion  reaches  Christ,  and  indignation  at  the  injustice  done, 
and  yearnings  after  a  soul  so  true  and  simple,  unite  in  urging  Him  instantly  to  seek 
the  despised  outcast.  And  so  through  the  great  Jerusalem  of  the  world  Christ  ia 
still  passing,  seeking  every  brave  and  honest  witness  to  the  vision  he  as  yet  sees. 
Be  faithful  to  your  sense  of  duty  at  whatever  cost,  and  Christ,  though  unseen,  is 
following  yoa  to  find  you.  3.  Christ  perceived  that  the  man  was  able  to  bear  a 
purer  light  than  that  of  nature,  that  his  trust  in  divine  goodness  had  prepared  him 
for  the  manifestation  of  the  life  of  God.  So  He  puts  the  question,  •'  Dost  thou 
beheve,"  &c.,  and  lifts  the  man's  thoughts  above  the  circumstances  of  the  hour. 
There  is  no  dwelhng  on  the  recent  miracle,  no  indulgence  in  invective  against  the 
Pharisees,  no  discussion  of  the  man's  prospects.  It  was  as  if  a  Utile  crowded,  noisy 
room  were  changed  for  the  vastness  and  hush  of  a  great  cathedral.  Let  us  be  thank- 
ful  to  the  Master  who  is  still  arresting  us  as  we  go  on  our  selfish,  earthly  way  with 
the  same  tranquilizing,  purifying  question.  4.  Certain  underlying  beliefs  are 
assumed  in  the  words  of  our  Lord.  (1)  The  fatherhood  of  God.  The  duty  here  is 
no  va:rue  abstraction.  Most  religions  have  a  faint  glimmering  of  Christ's  truth — 
but  it  was  left  for  Christ  to  start  the  cry  in  the  prodigal,  "  I  will  arise  and  go  to  my 
father."    (2)  But  Christ  claimed  to  be  in  an  unique  sense  the  Son  of  God,  and  tb« 


CHAP,  n.]  ST.  JOHN.  157 

man  bo  understood  Him.  Messianic  ideas  were  started  in  the  man's  mind  by  the  ques« 
tion,  and  his  thoughts  would  go  back  to  that  fourth  form  which  was  seen  walking  in 
the  Babylonian  furnace.  He,  therefore,  simply  asks,  "  Who  is  He,"  &o.  The  tones  of 
our  Lord's  voice  probably  revealed  who  the  questioner  was,  for  this  was  the  first 
time  the  man  had  seen  Jesus.  5.  Spiritually  the  man  was  in  a  quickened  state. 
His  fidelity  to  truth  had  been  manifested  amidst  sore  temptations.  His  religious 
convictions  had  been  forced  into  practical  assertion.  And  now,  whilst  his  ears  are 
yet  ringing  with  the  taimts  of  sacerdotal  pride,  and  whilst  he  is  trembling  with 
righteous  indignation  against  those  who  blasphemed  goodness,  this  wondrous 
stranger  demands  faith  in  Him  for  whose  coming  every  pious  Israelite  yearned.  All 
that  the  man  had  ever  beheved  and  felt  now  welled  up  into  that  •♦  Who  is  He." 
Have  we  not  here  the  attitude  of  many  honest  and  reverent  thinkers  to-day  in  the 
presence  of  the  great  problems  of  religion  and  life  ?  The  great  question  now  is, 
"  What  think  ye  of  Christ  ?  "  And  the  answer  is  gathering  volume  and  distinct- 
ness which  confesses  Him  the  Son  of  God  and  the  Son  of  Man.  The  inspiring  pur- 
pose of  the  man  was  "that  I  may  believe,"  and  the  same  purpose  underlies  much 
of  modern  intellectual  restlessness.  6.  "  Thou  hast  both  seen  Him,"  &c.,  was  the 
reply  of  Christ.  It  is  possible  then  to  be  in  the  presence  of  Christ,  and  yet  not 
know  Him  to  be  the  Son  of  God.  The  world  is  full  of  Christ's  presence.  (1)  Hos- 
pitals, orphanages,  &q.,  witness  that  Jesus  is  still  passing  through  the  crowded  high- 
ways of  modern  life.  These  spring  from  the  seeds  which  Christ  sowed ;  yet  there 
are  those  who  fail  to  recognize  Him.  (2)  StiU  more  is  Christ  a  living  presence  in 
those  He  sends  forth  on  missions  of  mercy  at  which  the  world  is  filled  with  reverent 
wonder.  (3)  And  shall  we  not  claim  for  the  Church  the  indwelling  presence  of  her 
Lord.  7.  But  there  are  grounds  for  the  hope  that  all  who  approach  in  the  spirit  of 
the  man  born  bhnd,  evidences  of  Christ's  power  and  presence,  will  say  with  him, 
"Lord,  I  beUeve."  (J.  R.  S.  Harrington.)  Relationship  with  Christ  and  itt 
obligations  : — I.  Those  who  abe  in  any  way  connected  with  Chbist  abe  undeb 

OBLIGATIONS  TO  FAITH  IN  HiM  WHICH  C0BBE8P0ND  WITH   THAT  CONNECTION.      This  man 

was  connected  with  Christ — (1)  By  the  reception  of  sight — a  dispensation  of  provi- 
dence. (2)  By  his  defence  of  Christ  against  the  cavillings  of  the  Pharisees.  This 
was  before  he  was  united  to  Christ  by  faith  and  formed  the  basis  of  Christ's  appeal. 
So  now — 1.  There  are  those  who  possess  temporal  advantages  which  may  be  traced 
directly  to  Christ.  (1)  We  are  bom  in  a  land  distinguished  by  liberty,  knowledge, 
civihzation,  benevolence ;  but  once  there  were  no  such  things.  All  who  are  born 
on  British  soil  owe  their  national  advantages  to  Christ.  Hence  we  may  with  pro- 
priety ask,  "  Thou  who  art  reaping  the  benefits  which  Christ,  by  the  estabUshment 
of  His  kingdom,  has  conferred  upon  your  native  country,  •  Dost  thon  believe '  "  f 
&c.  (2)  Take  the  case  of  pious  households.  How  much  are  the  children  of  godly 
parents,  and  servants  of  godly  masters  indebted  to  the  Saviour.  By  gratitude  such 
seem  to  be  bound  to  inquire  after  the  Son  of  God,  and  to  regard  Him  as  their  Lord 
and  Saviour.  2.  There  are  those  who  identify  themselves  with  the  kingdom  of 
Christ.  This  man  might  have  enjoyed  the  miracle,  and  yet  never  have  defended 
Christ  and  brought  trouble  upon  hunself.  But  he  could  not  do  this,  and  so  was 
identified  by  the  Pharisees  with  the  cause  of  Christ.  On  this  ground  Christ  made 
His  appeal.  "  The  Pharisees  by  your  conduct  imagine  you  have  this  faith ; 
have  you  ?  "  And  are  there  not  men  who  defend  Christianity  against  the  infidel 
and  the  scoffer,  Christ's  Deity  against  the  Socinian,  spiritual  Christianity 
against  Popery,  who  are  not  yet  connected  by  the  faith  which  saves  to  Christ?  To 
such,  therefore,  we  appeal.  If  gratitude  would  seem  in  one  case  consistency  in  the 
other  should  constrain.  Is  it  consistent  to  be  mixed  up  with  Christianity  nominally  ? 
Is  it  right  to  be  thought  a  disciple  of  Christ  without  beheving  on  EUm  ?    U.  Teb 

COUBSE  WHICH  THOSE  WHO  ABE  EXTEBNALLY  CONNECTED  WITH   ChBIST   SHOUIiD   PUBStJE. 

1.  The  man  began  to  inquire,  and  inquiry  is  the  course  for  those  to  whom  the 
narrative  applies.  For  what  ?  not  for  a  creed,  an  ism,  ordinances,  church  govern- 
ment, but  for  Christ.  We  may  know  the  former  which  will  not  save,  and  not  know 
the  latter  who  will.  2.  For  what  end  are  we  to  inquire  ?  Not  for  the  qualification 
of  curiosity  or  so  as  to  be  able  to  dispute  about  theology.  All  truth  is  revealed  not 
to  be  speculated  upon,  not  to  be  judged  by  reason  and  be  either  rejected  or  received; 
but  for  faith  "  that  I  might  beheve."  III.  The  facilitieb  which  such  possess  w 
THE  PUBSDiT  OF  THIS  couBSE.  "  Thou  hast  Seen  Him,"  <fec.  We  have  present  access 
to  Christ,  not,  it  is  trne,  as  this  man  had,  but  He  is  here  as  really  in  His  spiritual 
presence.  1.  He  is  here  in  the  testimony  we  have  in  the  Bible  concerning  Him. 
YoQ  may  find  patriarchs,  prophets,  evangelists,  and  apostles  revealing  Christ.    2t 


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  O, 

Go  to  converted  men,  there  you  have  Christ's  image,  faint  and  imperfect,  it  is  true,, 
but  real ;  ask  them  what  they  have  tasted  and  felt  concerning  Christ.  3.  You  have 
access  to  the  ministry  of  the  gospel  which  is  the  ministry  of  Christ,  "  for  we  preach 
not  ourselves,"  &c.  4.  The  Holy  Ghost  was  given  to  testify  of  Christ.  You  have 
not  to  cry,  "  0 1  that  I  knew  where  I  might  find  Him."  In  all  these  ways  "  Thoa 
hast  both  seen  Him,"  &c.  IV.  The  end  which  those  who  pukstte  this  coubse  wili» 
ATTAiK.  1.  Faith  in  Christ  must  follow  tbis  inquiry,  "Lord,  I  beUeve."  "Faith 
cometh  by  hearing."  He  who  is  a  sincere  inquirer  will  be  guided ;  God  never  left 
such  to  wander.  Listen  not  to  those  who  say  'tis  no  use  to  seek :  God  has  said 
that  those  who  seek  shall  find.  2.  Faith  in  Christ  will  never  be  a  secret.  The  soul 
that  regards  Christ  as  the  Son  of  God  must  at  once  tell  Him  bo.  "  He  worshipped 
Him,"  Conclusion :  There  is  a  day  coming  when  all  must  hear  this  question  put  to 
them.  You  may  put  off  the  answer  to  it  now  but  not  then.  Answer  it  now.  (S. 
Martin.)  True  Christians  will  learn  of  any  one  : — A  mortified  man  will  yield  to 
learn  of  any  one.  A  little  child  shall  '•  lead  them."  Learned  ApoUos  was  instructed 
by  a  couple  of  poor  tentmakers.  (J.  Trapp.)  Faithfulness  Twt  unnoticed  by  God  : — 
The  pious  Lutheran  minister  at  Berlin,  Paul  Gerhard,  was  deposed  from  his  office, 
and  banished  the  country  in  1666  by  the  elector,  Frederick  William  the  Great,  on 
account  of  the  faithful  discharge  of  his  ministerial  duties.  Not  knowing  whither  to 
go,  he  and  his  wife  passed  out  of  the  city,  and  finally  stopped  at  a  tavern,  oppressed 
with  care  and  grief.  Gerhard  endeavoured  to  comfort  his  partner  by  the  text, 
"  Commit  thy  way  unto  the  Lord,  trust  also  in  Him ;  and  He  shall  bring  it  to  pass." 
Then  he  wrote  a  hymn  embodying  this  sentiment.  Before  he  had  finished  its 
perusal,  the  agents  of  Duke  Christian  of  Mersburg  invited  him  to  an  interview  with 
that  prince,  by  whom  he  was  appointed  Archdeacon  at  Luebben.  The  importance 
of  belienng  : — The  root  of  a  tree  is  a  ragged  and  a  jagged  thing— no  shape,  no  pro- 
portion, no  comeliness  in  it,  and  therefore  keeps  itself  in  the  earth,  as  unwilling  to 
be  seen ;  yet  all  the  beauty  that  is  in  the  tree — the  straightness  of  the  bulk  and 
body,  the  spreading  fairness  of  the  branches,  the  glory  of  the  leaves  and  flowers, 
the  commodity  of  the  fruits — proceed  from  the  root :  by  that  the  whole  subsisteth. 
So  faith  seems  to  be  but  a  sorry  grace,  a  virtue  of  no  regard ;  devotion  is  acceptable, 
for  it  honours  God  ;  cbarity  is  noble,  for  it  does  good  to  men ;  holiness  is  the  image 
of  heaven,  therefore  beauteous;  thankfulness  is  the  tune  of  angels,  therefore 
melodious.  But  what  is  faith  good  for?  Yes:  it  is  good  for  every  good  purpose — 
the  foundation  and  root  of  all  graces.  All  the  prayers  made  by  devotion,  all  the 
good  works  done  by  charity,  all  the  actual  expressions  of  holiness,  all  the  praises 
sounded  forth  by  thankfulness,  come  from  the  root  of  faith,  that  is  the  life  of  them 
all.  Faith  doth  animate  works,  as  the  body  lives  by  the  soul.  (J.  Spencer.)  The 
impor lance  of  self  examination: — It  is  a  great  deal  better  to  sift  an  affair  to  the 
bottom  than  it  is  to  be  always  tormented  by  suspicion.  If  I  must  go  to  sea, 
and  I  suspect  the  soundness  of  the  vessel,  I  shall  demand  that  the  ship  be 
surveyed,  and  that  I  know  whether  it  is  a  rotten  old  coffin,  or  whether  it  is 
a  good  substantial  ship.  I  do  not  think  it  is  a  healthy  state  of  things  for 
man  to  be  always  singing  —  "'Tis  a  point  I  long  to  know."  Brother,  you 
Dught  to  know  whether  you  love  the  Lord  or  no.  Your  love  must  be  very  cold 
and  feeble  if  it  be  a  matter  of  question.  Warmth  of  love  proves  its  own-  existence 
in  many  ways.  (<7.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Faith  must  lay  hold  on  Christ : — Look  at 
that  locomotive  as  it  snorts  like  a  giant  war-horse  to  its  place  in  the  station  at 
head  of  the  train.  You  have  in  that  engine  power  of  amplest  capacity  to  drag  at 
swiftest  pace  the  far-stretching  carriages.  Boiler,  tubes,  pistons,  fire,  steam — all 
are  in  perfect  order  ;  and  that  broad-browed  man  gives  assurance  of  tried  abihty  to 
guide  the  charge  committed  to  him.  You  look  :  carriage  after  carriage  is  filled,  the 
hour  has  struck,  the  bell  rung ;  and  yet  there  is  no  departure,  no  movement,  nor 
would  be  till  "  crack  of  doom,"  if  one  thing  remained  as  it  now  is.  Aha  I  the  lack 
is  discovered :  the  uniting  hooks  that  bind  engine  and  train  together  were  wanting. 
They  have  been  supplied.  Like  two  great  hands,  they  have  clasped ;  and  a  screw 
has  so  riveted  engine  and  carriage,  that  they  form,  as  it  were,  one  thing,  one  whole; 
and  away  through  the  dark  sweeps  the  heavy-laden  train  with  its  freight  of 
immortals.  Mark  I  no  one  ever  supposes  that  it  is  the  uniting  hook,  or  link,  or 
coupling  that  draws  the  train.  A  child  knows  that  it  is  the  engine  that  draws  it. 
Nevertheless,  without  that  hook,  or  link,  or  coupling,  all  the  power  of  the  engine 
were  of  no  avail ;  the  train  would  stand  still  for  ever.  Exactly  so  is  it  in  the 
relation  of  faith  to  Christ.  It  is  not  our  faith  that  saves  as,  bat  Christ.  (A.  B 
Gro$art.) 


CHAP.  n.J  ST.  JOHN.  159 

Vers.  39-41.  For  Judgment  I  liave  come  Into  the  world. — Christ's  jnission  to  ths 
world — I.  Has  two  appabently  opposite  results.     1.  Of  these — (1)  One  is  the 
greatest  blessing :  "  That  they  which  see  not  might  see."     All  unregenerate  men 
are  blind  spiritually.   God  and  the  moral  universe  are  as  much  concealed  from  them 
as  the  beauties  of  this  mundane  scene  are  from  those  born  blind.   They  grope  their 
way  through  life  and  stumble  on  the  great  future.    A  greater  blessing  is  not  con- 
ceivable than  the  opening  of  the  spiritual  eye.     It  involves  the  soul's  translation 
into  the  real  paradise  of  being.     (2)  The  other  is  the  greatest  curse  :  "  That  they 
which  see,"  &c.,  i.e.,  that  those  who  are  unconscious  of  their  blindness  and  con- 
ceitedly fancy  they  see  would  be  incalculably  injured.     By  rejecting  the  remedial 
agency  of  Christ  they  would  augment  their  guilt  and  gloom.     These  two  results  are 
taking  place  every  day.     2.  Of  these — (1)  One  is  intentional.     The  grand  and 
definite  purpose  of  Christ  is  to  give  "  recovery  of  sight  to  the  blind."    (2)  The  other 
is  incidental  and  directly  opposed  to  His  supreme  aim.     It  comes  because  Christ 
does  not  coerce  men,  but  treats  them  as  free  agents,  and  also  because  of  the 
perversity  of  the  unregenerate  heart.     As  men  may  get  food  out  of  the  earth  or 
poison,  fire  out  of  the  sun  that  shall  burn  them  to  ashes,  or  genial  light  that  shali 
cheer  and  invigorate  them,  so  men  get  salvation  or  damnation  out  of  Christ  mission, 
II.  Is  MISINTERPRETED  AND  ABUSED.    1.  Misinterpreted  (ver.  40).    Dost  thou  mean 
that  we,  educated  men,  trained  in  the  laws  and  religion  of  our  forefathers,  and 
devoted  to  the  work  of  teaching  the  nation,  are  blind  ?    They  would  not  understand 
that  our  Lord  meant  blindness  of  heart.     So  the  great  purpose  of  Christ's  mission 
has  ever  been  misinterpreted.     Some  treat  the  gospel  as  if  its  object  were  to  give  a 
speculative  creed,  an  ecclesiastical  polity,  a  civil  government,  a  social  order,  whil© 
they  practically  ignore  that  its  grand  object  is  to  open  the  spiritual  eyes  of  men,  so 
that  they  may  see,  not  men's  forms  and  phenomena,  but  spiritual  realities.     2. 
Abused  (ver.  41).    Notwithstanding  My  mission,  "  Ye  say,  We  see."    With  Me  you- 
have  the  opportunity  of  illumination ;   without  that  your  blindness  would  be  a 
calamity,  but  now  it  is  a  crime.  •'  Therefore  your  sin  remaineth."  If,  like  this  man, 
you  were  without  the  power  of  seeing,  and  had  no  opportunity  of  cure,  you  would 
have  no  sin ;  for  no  man  is  required  to  use  a  power  he  has  not.    What  should  we 
think  of  a  man  living  in  the  midst  of  beautiful  scenery  but  refusing  to  open 
his  eyes  ?     But  the  case  of  the  spiritually  blind,  with  the  faculties  of  reason 
and  conscience  and  the  sun   of  the  gospel  streaming  on  them,   is  worse  than 
this.     "  Men  love  darkness  rather  than  light,"  &g.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)        The 
opening  of  the  eyes : — The  man  had  been  blind  all  his  life ;  he  was  blind  that 
morning ;  now,  at  night,  he  saw.     The  wonderful  beauty  of  the  world  had  burst 
upon  him.    The  greatest  luxury  of  sense  that  man  enjoys  was  his,  and  he  was 
revelUng  in  its  new-found  enjoyment.    He  was  intensely  grateful  to  the  Friend  who 
had  given  it  to  him.     He  loved  Him  and  thanked  Him  with  his  whole  heart.    And 
just  then  Jesus  steps  in  and  questions  him ;  not,  '*  Are  you  glad  and  grateful  ?  " 
but,  "  Dost  thou  believe  on  the  Son  of  God?  "     It  is  a  new  thought,  a  new  view 
altogether.     We  can  almost  see  the  surprise  and  bewilderment  creep  over  his  glad 
face.     He  had  it  on  his  lips  to  thank  his  Friend,  and  lo  !  suddenly  he  was  dealing 
with  God,  and  with  the  infinite  relations  between  God  and  man.     I.  The  Lord's 
QUESTION.    What  does  it  mean  ?    This :  Are  you  glad  and  grateful  for  these  thing* 
as  httle  separate  sensations  of  pleasure  ?    That  amounts  to  nothing.    Or  are  you' 
thankful  for  them  as  manifestations  of  the  Divine  Ufe  to  yours,  as  tokens  of  that 
fatherhood  of  God  which  found  its  great  utterance,  including  all  others,  in  the 
Incarnation  of  His  Son  ?    That  is  everything.     No  wonder  that  such  a  question 
brings  surprise.      It  is  so  much  more  than  you  expected.    It  is  like  the  poor 
Neapohtan  peasant,  who  struck  his  spade  into  the  soil  to  dig  a  well,  and  the  spade 
went  through  into  free  space,  and  he  had  discovered  all  the  hidden  wealth  of  Her- 
culaneum.     No  wonder  there  is  surprise  at  first ;  but  afterward  you  see  that  in  the 
belief  in  a  manifested  Son  of  God,  if  you  could  gain  it,  you  would  have  just  the 
principle  of  spiritual  unity  in  which  your  life  is  wanting,  and  the  lack  of  which 
makes  so  much  of  its  very  best  so  valueless.    If  you  could  beUeve  in  one  great 
utterance  of  God,  one  incarnate  word,  the  manifested  pity  of  God,  and  the  illus- 
trated possibility  of  man  at  once — then,  with  such  a  central  point,  there  could  be 
no  more  fragmentariness  anywhere.    All  must  fall  into  its  relation  to  it,  to  Him, 
and  BO  the  unity  of  life  show  forth.     II.  The  man's  answer.    "  I  do  not  know,*" 
he  seems  to  say,  "  I  did  not  mean  anything  like  that ;  I  did  not  seem  to  beUeve, 
but  yet  I  have  not  evidently  exhausted  or  fathomed  my  own  thought.    There  it 
something  below  that  I  have  not  realized.    Perhaps  I  do  believe.    At  any  rate  i 


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  li 

should  like  to.  The  vague  notian  attracts  me.  I  will  believe  if  I  can.  Who  is  He, 
Lord,  that  I  might  believe  on  Him  ?  "  The  simplicity  and  frankness,  the  guileless, 
ness  and  openness  of  the  man  makes  us  like  him  more  than  ever.  There  is  evi- 
dently for  him  a  chance,  nay,  a  certainty,  that  he  will  be  greater,  fuller,  better  than 
he  is.  Some  natures  are  inclasive  ;  some  are  exclusive.  Some  men  seem  to  be 
always  asking,  "  How  much  can  I  take  in  ?  "  and  some  are  always  asking,  "  How 
much  can  I  shut  out  ?  "  One  man  wants  to  believe ;  he  welcomes  evidence.  Ha 
asks,  "  Who  is  He,  that  I  may  believe  on  Him  ?  "  Another  man  seems  to  dread  to 
believe ;  he  has  ingenuity  in  discovering  the  flaws  of  proof.  If  he  asks  for  more 
information,  it  is  because  he  is  sure  that  some  objection  or  discrepancy  will  appear 
which  will  release  him  from  the  unwelcome  duty  of  believing.  We  see  the  two 
tendencies,  all  of  us,  in  people  that  we  know.  Carried  to  their  extremes,  they 
develop  on  one  side  the  superstitious,  on  the  other  the  sceptical  spirit.  More  than 
we  think,  far  more,  depends  upon  this  first  attitude  of  the  whole  nature — upon 
whether  we  want  to  believe  or  to  disbelieve.  To  one  who  finds  the  forces  of  this 
life  sufficient,  an  incarnation,  a  supernatural  salvation,  is  incredible.  To  one  who, 
looking  deeper,  knows  there  must  be  some  infinite  force  which  it  has  not  found 
yet — some  loving,  living  force  of  Emmanuel,  of  God  with  man — the  Son  of  God  is 
waiting  on  the  threshold  and  will  immediately  come.  III.  How  will  He  come  ? 
Bead  thb  Lobd's  reply.  "  Thou  hast  both  seen  Him,  and  it  is  He  that  talketh 
with  thee."  The  teaching  that  seems  to  me  to  be  here  for  us  is  this — that  when 
Christ  "  comes,"  as  we  say,  to  a  human  soul,  it  is  only  to  the  consciousness  of  the 
soul  that  He  is  introduced,  not  to  the  soul  itself;  He  has  been  at  the  doors  of  that  from 
its  very  beginning.  We  live  in  a  redeemed  world — a  world  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
for  ever  doing  Christ's  work,  for  ever  taking  of  the  things  of  Christ  and  showing 
them  to  us.  That  Christ  so  shown  is  the  most  real,  most  present  power  in  this  new 
Christian  world.  Men  see  Him,  talk  with  Him  continually.  They  do  not  recognize 
Him  ;  they  do  not  know  what  lofty  converse  they  are  holding ;  but  some  day  when 
a  man  has  become  really  earnest  and  wants  to  believe  in  the  Son  of  God,  and  ia 
asking,  '*  Who  is  He  that  I  may  believe  on  Him  ?  "  then  that  Son  of  God  comes  to 
him — not  as  a  new  guest  from  the  lofty  heaven,  but  as  the  familiar  and  slighted 
Friend,  who  has  waited  and  watched  at  the  doorstep,  who  has  already  from  the 
very  first  filled  the  soul's  house  with  such  measure  of  His  influence  as  the  soul's 
obstinacy  of  indiflerence  would  allow,  and  who  now,  as  He  steps  in  at  the  soul's 
eager  call  to  take  complete  and  final  possession  of  its  life,  does  not  proclaim  His 
coming  in  awful,  new,  unfamiliar  words,  but  says  in  tones  which  the  soul  recognizes 
and  wonders  that  it  has  not  known  long  before,  "  Thou  hast  seen  Me,  I  have  talked 
with  thee."  (Phillips  Brooks,  D.D.)  Sight  for  those  wlio  see  not: — Jesus  has 
come  into  the  world  for  judgment,  but  not  for  the  last  and  unchangeable  judg- 
•  ment.  "  His  fan  is  in  His  hand."  He  sits  as  a  refiner.  His  cross  has  revealed  the 
thoughts  of  many  hearts,  and  everywhere  His  gospel  acts  as  a  discoverer,  a  separator, 
A  test  by  which  men  may  judge  themselves  if  they  will.  Light  no  sooner  comes 
than  it  begins  to  judge  the  darkness.  When  the  gospel  comes,  some  hearts  receive 
it  at  once,  and  are  judged  to  be  "  honest  and  good  ground,"  and  "  come  to  the  light, 
that  their  deeds  may  be  made  manifest,"  &c.  Other  hearts  at  once  hate  the  truth, 
because  their  deeds  are  evil.  Observe — 1.  Wherever  Christ  comes  the  most  decided 
effects  will  follow.  Whoever  you  are,  the  gospel  must  be  to  you  a  savour  of  life  or 
of  death,  antidote  or  poison,  curing  or  killing.  It  will  make  you  see,  or  else, 
because  you  fancy  you  see,  its  very  brightness  will  make  you  bliod.  If  you  live 
without  it,  you  will  die ;  if  you  feel  that  you  are  dead  without  it,  it  will  make  you 
live.  2.  Christ  has  come  that  those  who  see  not  may  see.  (1)  The  gospel  is  meant 
for  people  who  think  themselves  most  unsuited  for  it  and  undeserving  of  it ;  it  is  a 
sight  for  those  who  see  not.  (2)  Since  Christ  has  come  to  open  men's  eyes,  I  know 
He  did  not  come  to  open  those  bright  eyes  that  seem  to  say,  "  No  ocuUst  is  needed 
here."  When  there  is  a  charity  breakfast  the  invited  guests  are  not  the  royal 
fajnily.  So  Christ  comes  to  the  needy.  3,  Let  us  take  the  blind  man  for  a  model. 
I.  Hb  knew  that  he  was  blind,  and  took  up  his  proper  position  as  a  beggar. 
Many  of  you  are  too  high,  and  must  come  down.  Tou  fancy  that  you  have  kept  the 
law  from  your  youth,  are  and  all  that  you  ought  to  be.  As  long  as  you  think  thus 
the  blessing  is  delayed.  But  some  of  you  say  :  "  I  scarcely  know  my  condition.  I 
am  not  right,  I  know  ;  I  feel  so  blind."  You  are  on  your  way  to  a  cure.  H.  Hb 
BAD  A  bincbbe  desibe  TO  BE  ENLIGHTENED.  Christ  hcals  HO  OHO  who  evinces  no 
desire  to  be  healed.  lU.  He  was  veby  obedient.  As  soon  as  the  Lord  said,  "  Go, 
wash,"  ha  went ;  he  had  no  Abana  and  Pharpar  which  he  preferred  to  the  pool. 


CHAP.  IX.]  ST.  JOHN.  lei 

That  is  a  good  word  in  the  prophet,  "  O  Lord,  Thou  art  the  Potter  and  we  are  th« 
clay."  What  can  the  clay  do  to  help  the  potter?  Be  pliable.  IV.  Whbn  hb 
BAW,  HB  OWNED  IT.  The  least  that  you  can  do  for  your  Healer  is  to  confess  Him. 
V.  He  began  to  defend  the  Man  who  opened  his  eyes.  When  the  Lord  opened 
the  eyes  of  a  great  blind  sinner,  that  man  will  not  have  Him  spoken  against.  Some 
of  your  genteel  Christians  do  not  speak  for  Christ  above  once  in  six  mouths.  VI. 
When  his  eyes  were  opened,  he  wished  to  enow  moee.  "  Who  is  He  ?  "  And 
when  he  found  that  He  was  the  Son  of  God,  he  worshipped  Him.  If  you  have  not 
Been  Jesus  of  Nazareth  to  be  "  very  God  of  very  God,"  you  have  seen  nothing.  VH. 
How  IS  IT  that  such  blind  men  come  to  see  ?  1.  They  have  no  conceit  to  hinder 
Christ.  It  is  easier  to  save  us  from  our  sins  than  from  our  righteousness.  2.  They 
refuse  to  speculate ;  they  want  certainties.  When  a  man  feels  his  blindness,  if  yoa 
discuss  before  him  the  five  nothings  of  modern  theology,  he  says:  "  I  do  not  want 
them :  there  is  no  comfort  in  them  to  a  lost  soul."  3.  They  are  glad  to  lean  on 
God,  (<7.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Are  we  blind  also  7 — All  quarrelling  is  about  the 
application  of  general  granted  rules  to  personal  private  cases.  (Epictetus. )  There 
Ls  no  such  hindrance  to  proficiency  as  too  timely  a  conceit  of  knowledge  (Rev.  iii. 
17;  Luke  viii.  13,  15).  {Dr.  Hammond.)  I  suppose  that  many  might  have 
attained  to  wisdom  had  they  not  thought  they  had  already  attained  to  it  (Jer.  viiL 
8,  9;  Isa.  xlii.  18-20).  {Seneca.)  It  is  a  woeful  condition  of  a  Church  when  no 
man  will  allow  himself  to  be  ignorant  (Psa.  xii.  4).  {Bp.  Hall.)  If  ye  were 
blind,  ye  should  have  no  sin. — The  sense  of  sin  leads  to  holiness  and  the  conceit  of 
hcliness  to  sin : — Some  of  the  most  significant  of  Christ's  teachings  are  put  in  the 
form  of  a  verbal  contradiction :  '•  He  that  findeth  his  life  shall  lose  it,"  &o. ; 
"Whosoever  hath  not  from  him  shall  be  taken,"  &c.  But  the  impressiveness  of 
the  truth  taught  is  all  the  greater  from  being  couched  in  terms  that  would  nonplus 
a  mere  verbal  critic.  It  is  so  with  regard  to  ver.  39  and  the  text.  I.  The  sense  of 
BIN  COND0CT8  TO  HOLINESS  upon  the  general  principle  of  supply  and  demand.  This 
law  holds  good — 1.  In  our  earthly  affairs.  If  one  nation  requires  grain  from  abroad, 
another  will  sow  and  reap  to  meet  the  requisition.  If  om-  country  requires  fabrics 
it  cannot  well  produce,  another  will  toil  to  furnish  them.  From  year  to  year  the 
wants  of  mankind  are  thus  met.  2.  In  the  operations  of  Providence.  God's  good- 
ness  is  over  all  His  works.  He  opens  His  hand  and  satisfies  the  desire  of  every 
living  thing.  Famines  are  the  exception  and  not  the  rule.  Seedtime  and  harvest 
fail  not  from  century  to  century,  and  there  is  no  surplus  to  be  wanted.  3.  In  tha 
kingdom  of  grace.  If  God  is  ready  to  feed  the  ravens,  He  is  more  ready  to  supply 
the  spiritual  wants  of  His  sinful  creatures.  He  takes  more  pleasure  in  filling  the 
hungry  soul  than  the  hungry  mouth.  "  If  ye,  being  evil,"  &c.  If  there  were  only 
a  demand  for  heavenly  food  as  importunate  as  there  is  for  earthly,  the  supply 
would  be  at  once  forthcoming  in  infinite  abundance.  For  no  sinful  creature  can 
know  his  religious  necessities  without  crying  out  for  a  supply.  Can  a  man  hunger 
without  begging  food  ?  No  more  can  a  conscious  sinner  without  crying,  "  Create  ia 
me  a  clean  heart,"  <fec.  And  the  promises  are  more  explicit  in  respect  to  heavenly 
blessings.  You  may  beg  God  to  restore  you  to  health,  to  give  you  a  competence, 
and  He  may  not  see  fit  to  grant  your  prayer.  But  if  you  say,  "  God  be  merciful  to 
me,  a  sinner,"  you  will  certainly  obtain  an  answer,  for  this  will  not  injure  you  aa 
the  other  may ;  and  God  has  expressly  said  that  it  is  always  His  will  that  man 
should  seek  mercy,  and  always  His  delight  to  grant  it.  Come,  then,  for  all  things 
are  now  ready  (1  John  v.  14,  15).  II.  The  conceit  of  holiness  leads  to  sin. 
We  are  met  at  the  very  outset  with  the  fact  that  a  conceit  is  in  its  own  nature  sin. 
It  is  self-deception.  The  disposition  of  the  Pharisee  to  say,  "We  see,"  is  an 
insuperable  obstacle  to  every  gracious  affection.  Christianity  is  a  religion  for  the 
poor  in  spirit.  Conceit  opposes  this,  and  puffs  up  a  man  with  pride  and  fills  him 
with  sin.  1.  Religion  is  a  matter  of  the  understanding,  and  consists  in  a  tnie 
knowledge  of  Divine  things.  Self-flattery  is  fatal  to  all  spiritual  discernment. 
(1)  It  prevents  a  true  knowledge  of  one's  own  heart.  The  Pharisee  who  said, "  God, 
I  thank  Thee,"  &c.,  was  utterly  ignorant  of  his  own  heart,  and  impervious  to  any 
light  that  might  fall  upon  it.  (2)  It  precluded  all  true  knowledge  of  God.  Humility 
is  necessary  to  spiritual  discernment.  God  repulses  a  proud  intellect,  and  shuts 
Himself  up  from  all  haughty  scrutiny.  "  To  this  man  will  I  look,"  &c.  2.  Religion 
is  a  matter  of  the  affections,  and  the  injurious  influence  of  a  conceit  of  hcliness  in 
these  is  even  more  apparent.  Nothing  is  more  deadening  to  emotion  than  pride. 
If  you  would  extinguish  all  religious  sensibility  within  yourself,  become  a  Pharisee. 
Conclusion :  1.  Tiie  practical  lesson  is  the  necessity  of  obtaining  a  sense  ol  ma, 
VOL.   U.  11 


162  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  r 

So  long  as  we  think  or  say  that  we  "  see  "  we  are  out  of  all  saving  relations  to  the 
gospel.  The  foundation  of  true  science  is  willingness  to  be  ignorant,  and  so  it  is 
in  religion.  The  instant  a  vacuum  is  produced  the  air  will  rush  into  it,  and  the 
instant  any  soul  becomes  emptied  of  its  conceit  of  holiness,  and  becomes  an  aching 
void,  and  reaches  out  after  something  purer  and  better,  it  is  filled  with  what  it 
wants.  2.  As  an  encouragement  to  this  we  may  depend  on  the  aid  of  the  Holy 
Bpirit.  {Prof.  Shedd.)  Blind  yet  seeing  : — A  blind  boy,  that  had  suffered  im- 
prisonment at  Gloucester  not  long  before,  was  brought  to  Bishop  Hooper  the  day 
before  his  death.  Mr.  Hooper,  after  he  had  examined  of  his  faith  and  the  cause  of 
his  imprisonment,  beheld  him  steadfastly,  and  the  water  appearing  in  his  eyes,  said 
unto  him,  "  Ah  I  poor  boy,  God  hath  taken  from  thee  thy  outward  sight,  but  hath 
given  thee  another  sight  much  more  precious ;  for  He  hath  endued  thy  soul  with  the 
eye  of  knowledge  and  faith."  (J.  Trapp.)  Help  for  the  needy: — I  have  felt 
a  wonderful  satisfaction  in  feeding  a  poor  half-starved  dog  that  had  no  master 
and  nothing  to  eat.  How  he  has  looked  up  with  pleasure  in  my  face  when 
he  has  been  fed  to  the  full !  Depend  upon  it  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  wiU  take 
delight  in  feeding  a  poor  hungry  sinner.  You  feel  like  a  poor  dog,  do  you  not  ? 
Then  Jesus  cares  for  you.  (c.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  emptiness  of  self-righteou$ 
boasting  : — The  governor  of  a  besieged  city  threw  loaves  of  bread  over  the  wall  to 
the  besiegers,  to  make  them  believe  that  the  citizens  had  such  large  supplies  that 
they  could  afford  to  throw  them  away ;  yet  they  were  starving  all  the  while.  There 
are  some  men  of  like  manners  ;  they  have  nothing  that  they  can  offer  unto  God, 
but  yet  they  exhibit  a  glittering  self-righteousness.  Oh  !  they  have  been  so  good, 
Buch  superior  people,  so  praiseworthy  from  their  youth  up ;  they  never  did  any- 
thing  much  amiss ;  there  may  be  a  little  speck  here  and  there  upon  their  garments, 
but  that  will  brush  off  when  it  is  dry.  They  make  a  fair  show  in  the  flesh  with 
morality  and  formality,  and  a  smattering  of  generosity.  Besides,  they  profess  to 
be  religious  :  they  attend  Divine  service,  and  pay  their  quota  of  the  expenses.  Who 
could  find  any  fault  with  such  good  people  ?  Just  so ;  this  profession  is  the  fine 
horse  and  trap  with  which  they  too  are  cutting  a  dash  just  before  going  through  the 
court.  There  is  nothing  at  all  in  you,  and  there  never  was.  {Ibid. )  Misery  of 
unconscious  blindness : — In  this  unconsciousness  hes  the  heart  of  the  mischief. 
Helpless  man  la  unconscious  of  his  own  helplessness.  Because  they  say, "  We  see," 
therefore  their  sin  remaineth.  If  they  were  blind  and  knew  it,  it  were  another 
matter,  and  signs  of  hope  would  be  visible ;  but  to  be  blind  and  yet  to  boast  of 
having  superior  sight,  and  to  ridicule  those  who  see,  is  the  lamentable  condition  of 
not  a  few.  They  will  not  thank  us  for  our  pity,  but  much  they  need  it.  Eyes  have 
they,  but  they  see  not,  and  yet  they  glory  in  their  far-sightedness.  Multitudes 
around  us  are  in  this  plight.  When  the  prophet  says,  "Bring  forth  the  blind 
people  that  have  eyes,"  we  can  only  wonder  where  we  should  put  them  all  if  they 
were  willing  to  assemble  in  one  place.    (Ibid.) 


CHAPTER  X. 

Introduetion  t  The  oeeasion  of  Christ's  teaching : — The  special  form  which  the 
discourse  here  takes  is  probably  and  almost  certainly  due  to  the  actual  presence  of 
a  sheepfold  with  the  shepherds  and  their  flocks.  We  know  that  Bethesda  was 
near  the  "  sheepgate,"  which  is  possibly  to  be  identified  with  a  covered  portion  of 
the  pool  of  Siloam.  We  have,  in  any  case,  to  think  of  an  open  fold  surrounded  by 
a  wall  or  railing,  into  which,  at  eventide,  the  shepherds  lead  their  flocks,  commit- 
ting them,  during  tb«  night,  to  the  care  of  an  under-shepherd,  who  guards  the  door. 
In  the  morning  they  knock  and  the  porter  opens  the  door,  which  has  been  securely 
fastened,  and  each  shepherd  calls  his  own  sheep,  who  know  his  voice  and  follow 
him.  But  we  must  remember  that  our  Lord's  mind  and  theirs  was  full  of  thoughts 
ready  to  pass  into  a  train  like  this.  •'  Thy  servants  are  shepherds,  both  we  and 
also  our  fathers  "  (Gen.  xlvii.  3),  was  the  statement  of  the  first  sons  of  Israel,  and 
it  was  true  of  their  descendants.  Their  greatest  heroes — Abraham,  Jacob,  Moses, 
Daniel — had  all  been  shepherds,  and  no  imagery  is  more  frequent  in  psalm  or 
prophecy  than  that  drawn  from  the  shepherd's  work.  We  must  fill  our  minds  with 
these  Old  Testament  thoughts  if  we  would  understand  the  chapter.    Let  any  one 


OT».  X.]  ST.  JOHN.  165 

before  commencing  it  read  thoughtfully  Psa.  xxiii ;  Isa,  xl.  11 ;  Jer.  zxziii.  1-4 ; 
Ezek.  xxxi? ;  and  especially  Zech.  xi.  4-17,  and  he  will  have  the  key  which  un- 
locks most  of  its  difficulties.  We  have,  then,  the  scene  passing  before  their  eyes, 
and  the  Old  Testament  thoughts  of  the  shepherd  connected  as  they  were,  on  the 
one  hand  with  Jehovah  and  tiie  Messiah,  and  on  the  other  with  the  oireless  shep- 
herds of  Israel,  dwelling  in  their  minds;  and  we  have  in  the  events  wnich  have  just 
taken  place,  that  whicli  furnishes  the  starting-point  and  gives  to  what  follows  its 
fulness  of  meaning.  The  Pharisees  claimed  to  be  shepherds  of  Israel.  They 
decreed  who  should  be  admitted  to  and  cast  out  from  the  fold.  They  professed  to 
be  interpreters  of  God's  truth,  and  with  it  to  feed  His  flock.  Pharisees,  shepherds  I 
What  did  they,  with  their  curses  and  excommunications,  know  of  the  tenderness  of 
the  Shepherd,  "  who  shall  gather  the  lambs  with  His  arm,"  &o.  7  Pharisees,  feed 
the  flock  of  God  I  What  had  they,  with  their  pride  and  self -righteousness,  ever 
known  of  the  infinite  love  and  mercy  of  God ;  or  what  had  their  hearts  ever  felt  of 
the  wants  and  woes  of  the  masses  of  mankind  ?  This  blind  beggar  was  an  example 
of  their  treatment  of  the  weaker  ones  of  the  flock.  The  true  Shepherd  had  sought 
and  found  this  lost  sheep,  who  is  now  standing  near,  in  His  presence  and  that  of 
the  false  shepherds.  He  teaches  who  the  shepherd  is  and  what  the  flock  of  God 
really  are.  (Archdeacon  Watkiiis.)  The  pastoral  aimilitudes  : — I.  Foub  are  on  thb 
BIDS  ow  GOOD ;  and  in  all  these  may  be  various  manifestations  of  Christ.  1.  The 
door,  as  affording  the  sole  admission  to  the  Father.  2.  The  porter  as  bearing 
the  keys  of  David,  the  keys  of  death  and  of  hell.  3.  The  shepherd  as  the  guide 
and  guardian  of  the  sheep.  4.  And  Himself  the  sheep  also,  as  being  made  one 
with  them,  in  order  that  He  might  be  a  sacrifice  for  them.  II.  Four  abe  on  thb 
BtDB  OF  EVIL.  1.  The  thievcs.  2.  The  robbers ;  both  such  as  enter  not  by  the  door, 
but  prey  upon  the  flock,  whether  Pharisees,  infidels,  or  heretics.  3.  The  mercenary, 
who,  though  he  may  enter  by  the  door,  is  of  those  who  "seek  their  own,  not  the 
things  which  are  Jesas  Christ's."  4.  The  wolf,  which  is  the  enemy  of  the  sheep, 
nnder  whatsoever  form  he  may  assume.     (I.  Williamt,  B.D.) 

Vers.  1-18.  He  that  entereth  not  by  the  door  Into  the  sheepfold. — Shepherd- 
hood  : — The  simple  lesson  which  our  Lord  intended  to  teach  in  this  f  amihar  passage 
has  often  been  strangely  mistaken.  The  minds  of  men  have  been  so  fixed  upon 
certain  ecclesiastical  conclusions  which  have  been  commonly  derived  from  it,  that 
the  simpler  but  far  profounder  teaching  which  the  Master  had  in  mind  to  give  has 
been  overlooked.  He  was  not  defending  the  formal  authority  of  His  own  or  of  any 
office.  He  was  not  discussing  the  regularity  or  lawfulness  of  His  own  or  of  any 
ministry.  He  was  not  pointing  out  the  mode  of  entrance  into  shepherdhood,  but 
He  was  telhng  how  the  function  for  all  true  shepherdhood  must  be  discharged. 
He  was  laying  down  the  rule  of  good  conduct  and  right  service  in  all  true  leader- 
ship— a  rule  which  He  Himself  exemplified  and  fulfilled,  and  which  all  must  obey 
who  hope  in  any  degree  to  be  worthy  leaders  of  men.  He  was  propounding  a  lesson 
which  it  behoves  all  men  to  ponder  well  who  hope  to  influence  their  fellow-men  for 
good  rank,  office,  order,  culture,  property — be  the  authority,  the  privilege,  the  right 
of  these  what  they  may,  the  eternal  law  of  God,  as  exemplified  in  the  life  of  His 
Son,  and  taught  in  His  Holy  Word,  and  illustrated  in  human  history,  is  this  :  that 
none  of  these,  no  matter  how  commissioned  or  sent,  can  exercise  any  real  shepherd- 
hood over  men  except  as  they  are  in  sympathy  with  them.  This  is  true  in  Church 
and  State;  of  the  employers  of  labour ;  of  the  heads  of  households ;  of  civil  rulers 
and  political  leaders ;  of  bishops,  priests,  and  deacons — the  power  to  lead  men  Ues 
in  sympathizing  with  them,  and  walking  in  the  same  way  with  them.  The  man  of 
influence  is  the  man  of  sympathy  ;  the  man  of  power  is  the  man  of  service.  He 
that  loves  is  he  that  leads.  He  that  serves  is  he  that  rules.  Think  for  a  moment, 
and  you  will  see  why  it  must  be  so.  Man  is  free.  The  soul  is  free  in  the  truest, 
deepest  sense  of  the  word.  God  royally  made  it  so,  and  even  He  cannot  control  it 
by  any  merely  external  force  or  power.  It  is  free  to  think,  to  will,  and  choose,  to 
love,  and  no  mere  force  or  authority  from  without  can  control  it  in  these  operations 
in  which  its  sovereign  self-hood  is  realized.  You  may  chain  the  limbs  of  a  man — 
yon  may  coerce  his  actions  or  even  his  words ;  but  how  can  you  get  into  communion 
with  the  soul,  and  rule  its  will  and  affections  ?  There  is  only  one  way.  If  you 
would  influence  men  intimately,  profoundly,  really,  no  matter  what  your  authority 
or  station,  you  must  enter  into  sympathy  with  them.  You  must  walk  in  the  same 
path  and  enter  in  by  the  same  door,  or  you  can  never  be  the  shepherd  of  the  sheep. 
This  is  what  St.  Paul  meant  when  he  saug  the  praise  of  love  (1  Cor.  xiii.).    Among 


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chai  x, 

men  love  is  power.    And  a  greater  than  St.  Paul  taagnt  the  same  lesson  and  con- 
firmed it  by  His  own  Divine  experience.    The  Good  Shepherd  proved  and  illustrated 
Pia  own  good  shepherdhood  by  sympathy  and  love.   It  was  by  no  flash  of  splendour 
or  miracle  of  external  power  that  He  proved  His  Divine  leadership  over  the  hearts 
of  men ;  but  by  comiug  to  walk  with  them,  to  toil  and  hunger,  and  suffer  with 
them.    He  entered  into  mortal  life  by  the  same  lowly  door  of  human  birth ;  He 
passed  through  it  by  the  same  path  of  toil  and  daily  care  ;  He  made  His  exit  from 
jt  through  the  same  portal  of  suffering  and  death.  In  life  and  death  He  walked  with 
the  sheep.     Therefore  He  could  say,  "  I  am  the  Good  Shepherd,  not  merely  because 
I  am  commissioned  and  sent  of  My  Father,  not  merely  because  I  wield  the  power 
ot  omnipotence,"  but  "  I  am  the  Good  Shepherd,"  He  said,  because  •*  I  know  My 
Bheep  and  am  known  of  Mine."    (Bp.  S.  S.  Harris.)      Jesus  tlie  Good  Shepherd : — 
jjote — I.  The  individuaIj  caee  and  guidance  of  oub  Loed  for  every  soul  that  trusts 
Him.    In  modern  stock  raising  in  Western  lands  there  is  nothing  of  that  personal 
knowledge  and  attachment  which  bound  together  an  Oriental  shepherd  and  his  flock. 
1.  It  is  an  infirmity  of  Christian  people  to  suppose  that  they  are  lost  in  the  crowd, 
that  God  deals  with  them  in  the  gross  as  a  general  might  deal  with  his  army,  with 
rare  notice  of  individuals  least  of  all  of  privates.    Yet  in  nothing  do  we  wrong  Him 
more.     "  The  hairs  of  our  head  are  all  numbered."    2.  Christ  showed  nothing 
clearer  than  His  attention  to  every  personal  want  within  His  reach.     We  have 
reason  as  Paul  had  to  appropriate  His  atoning  work  as  though  it  were  our  monopoly 
(Gal.  ii.  20 ;  Heb.  ii.  9).     Indeed  He  promises  a  friendship  so  intimate  that  it 
becomes  a  system  of  cipher  messages  between  them  and  their  Lord  (Rev.  ii.  17).  3, 
We  talk  about  how  to  convert  "  the  masses,"  when  we  had  better  think  of  single 
Bouls.     II.  The  singclab  community  of  sympathy  between  Chbist  and  Chbistians 
(ver.  4,  14,  R.  V.).     It  is  compared  for  closeness  and  depth  to  that  which  subsists 
between  the  Father  and  the  Son.     1.  In  Christ's  case  we  might  charge  His  know- 
ledge on  His  omniscience,  but  we  cannot  so  account  for  ours.     Take  Christ  upon 
His  more  human  side  and  you  have  the  explanation.     Who  has  not  felt  the  mystic 
thrill  of  sympathy  and  repulsion  when  we  discover  the  congenial  or  uncongenial  to 
ourselves  in  another  character.     So  Christ  felt  the  unlikeness  to  Himself  of  hatred, 
falseness  ;  but  He  was  drawn  with  unerring  affinity  towards  the  faintest  uprisings 
of  human  penitence  and  trust.    2.  "  My  sheep  know  Me  "  ;  not  merely  something 
about  me.     Not  by  the  mere  investigation  of  the  shepherd's  clothing  or  crook,  to 
eee  if  both  are  genuine,  as  men  puzzle  themselves  over  churches,  creeds,  ordinances. 
But  as  one  friend  recognizes  another  by  a  glance  if  he  can  be  seen ;  by  his  voice  if 
out  of  sight.     The  test  of  truth  is  the  character  within  us.    We  know  God  by 
resembling  Him.     These  Jews  could  not  be  satisfied  with  our  Lord's  credent 'als, 
but  certain  Samaritans  felt  the  Divine  life  (chap.  iv.  42).    III.  God's  exclosivb 
WAT  of  mebcy.     Thebes  had  a  hundred  gates,  but  salvation  only  one  (ver.  9).     An 
engine  off  the  track  is  not  more  a  failure  than  a  man  off  the  track  of  God's  condi- 
tions.   All  entrance  to  spiritual  hope  and  safety  is  through  Christ.     He  will  endure 
no  rival.     Mingle  anything  with  Him  as  our  hope  and  the  mixture  fails.     IV.  Thb 
ADVANTAGES  TO  WHICH  Chbist  OPENS  THB  DOOB  (vcr.  9).     1.  Safety.     It  reminds  us  of 
some  fugitive  running  for  his  life  to  the  city  of  refuge.    2.  Xiberty.     A  Christian  is 
no  jail-bird,  so  closely  guarded  that  he  finds  himself  a  prisoner.    No  slave  on  a 
plantation,  but  a  child  in  the  family.    He  knows  the  truth,  and  that  makes  him 
free  to  go  where  and  do  what  he  pleases  if  he  only  pleases  right.     3.  Plenty.    V. 
The  geand  puepose  of  Chbist's  advent  (ver.  10).     Nothing  is  so  precious  as  life. 
It  was  forfeited  by  sin ;  but  Christ  restored  it  at  the  expense  of  His  own  (ver.  11). 
And  it  is  to  be  had  now.    The  young  are  eager  to  "  see  "  and  •'  enjoy  life."    And 
they  are  right  if  they  wUl  not  look  for  it  in  the  wrong  way.     In  Ciuist  is  the  way 
to  gain  it,  not  in  the  low  average  of  worldly  attainment,  but  "  more  abundantly  " 
in  all  that  makes  life  worth  living.   "VI.  The  method  of  Chbist's  rdle.   "  Leadeih  " 

"  goeth  before."    An  Eastern  shepherd  does  not  drive  his  flock ;  and  Christ  goes 

before,  never  behind,  saying  not "  Go,"  but  "  Come."  (C.  S.  Pomeroy,  D.D.)  The 
Shepherd  and  the  flock  : — I.  The  appeopbiateness  of  the  simile.  1.  To  Israelites. 
From  the  beginning  they  had  been  shepherds ;  hence  all  along  God  had  been 
calUng  Himself  their  Shepherd.  2.  To  Christians.  The  gathered  force  of  all  that 
psalmists  sang  and  prophets  spoke  has  come  down  to  the  "  little  flock."  II.  Thb 
ANALOGIES  SUGGESTED  BY  THE  SIMILE.  1.  The  shcphcrd  is  the  rightful  owner  6f  the 
fold,  and  treats  his  flock  in  an  honest  way.  He  enters  by  the  door,  is  recognized 
as  the  master,  and  has  no  semblance  of  the  thief,  &c.  2.  The  shepherd  is  the  true 
pastor  of  the  sheep.    He  admits  responsibilitj  for  the  care  he  has  assumed.     ▲ 


CHAT.x.]  ST,  JOHN.  161 

hireling  would  flee,  •  robber  steal  and  kill,  but  the  good  shepherd  has  thonghtf  al 
and  affectionate  care  for  the  whole  flock.  3.  Between  the  pastor  and  the  flock 
there  is  the  relation  of  individual  acquaintance.  III.  The  application  of  thh 
BiMiLB.  1.  Christ  as  a  Saviour  sustains  an  individual  relationship  to  every  soul 
He  saves.  Each  needs  the  atonement  and  the  work  of  the  Spirit  precisely  as  each 
needs  the  entire  sunshine  aud  atmosphere  in  order  to  see  and  breathe.  2.  Christ 
as  a  leader  is  acquainted  with  every  Christian  personally.  He  knows  if  he  is  absent 
from  the  communion  table,  and  looks  at  him  when  he  imagines  himself  out  of  sight 
as  to  love  or  duty.  3.  Christ  as  a  model  expects  each  believer  to  be  wholly  con- 
formed to  His  likeness.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  one  Christian  is  to  exhibit 
gentleness  and  another  force,  Ac.  4.  Christ  as  a  master  is  specially  direct  in  laying 
His  commands  on  every  individual  He  chooses.  He  knows  the  one  He  wants  and 
calls  him  by  name — Samuel,  Zacchasus,  Mary,  Simon,  Saul.  5.  Christ  as  a  comforter 
deals  with  each  believer  as  His  personal  friend  (Isa.  xliii.  1-2).  6.  Christ  as  a 
judge  will  close  His  last  account  with  each  individually  and  alone  (Matt.  xxv,).  (C. 
S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  The  fold  of  the  sheep  : — A  place  of — ^I.  Separation.  II. 
SuPEEVisiON.  III.  Safety.  {S.  S.  Times.)  The  fold  and  the  door: — Not  to 
enter  by  the  door  is  a  characteristic  of  Oriental  thieves,  from  the  Nile  to  the  Ganges. 
When  a  tent  is  to  be  attacked,  the  common  method  is  to  approach  it  under  cover 
of  the  darkness,  cut  a  hole  large  enough  to  crawl  through,  and  then  silently  to 
enter  and  as  silently  to  retire  with  the  booty.  Bolder  robbers  will  occasionally  dig 
through  the  walls  of  a  house  in  the  same  way.  The  experience  of  a  British  ofiicer 
in  India  affords  a  curious  illustration  of  the  skill  of  Oriental  thieves.  During  the 
officer's  absence  in  the  evening,  a  man  crept  quietly  up  to  the  tent  without  attract- 
ing the  attention  of  the  sentry  on  guard,  cut  an  opening  in  the  rear  of  the  tent,  and 
began  to  collect  his  booty.  While  be  was  engaged  in  this  process,  the  officer 
relumed.  The  Hindoo  instantly  fixed  himself,  silent  as  a  statue,  close  to  the  tent 
wall,  with  arm  drawn  up  and  hand  slightly  extended.  The  officer  came  in,  and 
proceeded  in  the  half-darkness  to  prepare  for  rest.  Noticing  the  extended  hand  of 
the  thief,  and  mistaking  it  for  a  pin  of  some  sort,  he  hung  his  helmet  and  his  coat 
upon  it.  The  thief  stood  silently  holding  the  helmet  and  the  coat  nntil  the  officer  was 
asleep,  when  he  retired  as  he  came,  taking  the  helmet  and  the  coat  with  the  rest  of  his 
booty.  Next  morning  the  hole  in  the  tent  and  the  missing '  *  pin  "  told  the  whole  story-. 
{Ibid.)  CUmbethup  some  other  way. — 1.  Even  thieves  and  robbers  seek  a  place  within 
the  fold.  2.  The  basest  motives  may  impel  to  a  place  in  the  fold.  3.  Any  way  but 
God's  way  suits  base  men.  4.  Some  climb  up  rather  than  walk  in ;  they  prefer 
works  to  faith.  (Ibid.)  Wrong  ways  to  heaven: — Let  the  Pagans,  the  Jews,  the 
heretics  say,  "  We  lead  a  good  life."  If  they  enter  not  by  the  door,  what  availeth 
it  ?  A  good  life  only  profiteth  if  it  lead  to  life  eternal.  Indeed,  those  cannot  be 
said  to  lead  a  good  life,  who  are  either  blindly  ignorant  of,  or  wilfully  despise  the 
end  of  good  living.  No  one  can  hope  for  eternal  life  who  knows  not  Christ,  who  is 
the  Life,  and  by  that  door  enters  the  fold.  (Augtistine.)  Entrance  without 
qualification : — George  Moore  tells  the  following  striking  incident :  *'  After  I  had 
been  about  two  years  in  London,  I  had  a  great  and  anxious  desire  to  see  the  House 
of  Commons.  I  got  a  half-holiday  for  the  purpose.  I  didn't  think  of  getting  an 
order  from  an  M.P.  Indeed  I  hadn't  the  slightest  doubt  of  getting  into  the  House. 
I  first  tried  to  get  into  the  Strangers'  Gallery,  but  failed.  I  then  hung  about  the 
entrance  to  see  whether  I  could  find  some  opportunity.  I  saw  three  or  four  mem- 
bers hurrying  in,  and  I  hurried  in  with  them.  The  door-keepers  did  not  notice  me. 
I  walked  into  the  middle  of  the  House.  When  I  got  in  I  almost  fainted  with  fear 
lest  I  should  be  discovered.  I  first  got  into  a  seat  with  the  name  of  '  Canning ' 
upon  it.  I  then  proceeded  to  a  seat  behind,  and  sat  there  all  the  evening.  I  heard 
Mr.  Canning  bring  forward  his  motion  to  reduce  the  duty  on  com.  He  made  a 
brilliant  speech  and  was  followed  by  many  others.  I  sat  oat  the  whole  debate. 
Had  I  been  discovered  I  might  have  been  taken  up  for  breach  of  privilege."  (£f.  0. 
Mackey.)  Climbing  up  gome  other  way  into  heaven : — I  heard  of  a  man  some 

time  ago  who  was  going  to  get  into  heaven  in  his  own  way.  He  did  not  believe  in 
the  Bible  or  the  love  of  God,  but  was  going  to  get  in  on  account  of  his  good  deeds. 
He  was  very  liberal,  gave  a  great  deal  of  money,  and  he  thought  the  more  he  gave 
the  better  it  would  be  for  him  in  the  other  world.  I  don't,  as  a  general  thing, 
beheve  in  dreams,  but  sometimes  they  teach  good  lessons.  Well,  this  man  dreamed 
one  night  that  he  was  building  a  ladder  to  heaven,  and  he  dreamed  that  every  good 
deed  he  did  put  him  one  round  higher  on  this  ladder,  and  when  he  did  an  extra 
good  deed  it  put  him  up  a  good  many  rounds ;  and  in  his  dream  he  kept  going. 


166  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [OHAP.  K, 

going  up,  until  at  last  he  got  out  of  sight,  and  he  went  on  and  on  doing  hie  good 
deeds,  and  the  ladder  went  up  higher  and  higher,  until  at  last  he  thought  he  saw  it 
run  up  to  the  very  throne  of  God.  Then  in  his  dream  he  thought  he  died,  and  that 
a  mighty  voice  came  rolling  down  from  above  :  "  He  that  cUmbeth  np  some  other 
way,  the  same  is  a  thief  and  a  robber,"  and  down  came  his  ladder,  and  he  woke 
from  his  sleep,  and  thought :  "  If  I  go  to  heaven,  I  must  go  some  other  way.*'  My 
friends,  it  is  by  the  way  of  the  blood  of  Christ  that  we  are  to  go  to  heaven.  If  a 
man  has  got  to  work  his  way  there,  who  will  ever  get  there  ?  (D.  L.  Moody.) 
Thieves  and  robbers. — These  words  do  not  constitute  a  tautology  or  mere  rhetorical 
amplification  (Obad.  5).  The  one  and  the  other  appropriate  what  is  not  theirs, 
but  the  thief  by  fraud  and  in  secret  (Matt.  xxiv.  43  ;  John  xii.  6  ;  cf.  Exod.  xxii. 
2 ;  Jer.  ii.  26),  the  robber  by  violence  and  openly  (2  Cor.  xi.  26  ;  cf.  Hos.  ix.  1 ; 
Jer.  vii.  11).  The  one  steals,  the  other  plunders,  as  his  name  in  the  Greek  (as  our 
own  from  rau&,  "booty "),  sufficiently  declares.  The  latter  should  be  substituted 
for  the  former  in  Matt.  xxi.  13 ;  xxvi.  55 ;  Luke  x.  30 ;  xxiii.  39-43.  {Archbp. 
Trench.)  Sheep  to  be  fed,  not  sheared  : — Dr.  Johnson  declined  a  rectory  in  youth 
with  "  I  cannot  in  conscience  shear  the  sheep  which  I  am  unable  to  feed." 

Vers.  3-5.  To  Mtti  the  porter  openeth. — The  porter  of  the  door : — Who  is  the 
Porter?     Christ  we  know  is  the  Door.     He  says  so  Himself  (vers.  7,  9).     But  who 
is  the  Porter  ?     An  old  Father  of  the  Church  writes,  "  Christ  is  the  Door  of  the 
fold,  and  the  Keeper  of  the  Door,  as  well  as  the  Shepherd  of  the  sheep    He  is  the 
Truth,  and  opens  Himself  and  reveals  to  us  His  Truth."    But  in  spite  of  this — all 
very  beautiful — all  most  true  in  a  certain  sense,  yet  not  the  whole  truth,  we  must 
seek  elsewhere  for  a  satisfactory  explanation  of  this  difficulty.     I  say  difficulty, 
because  a  distinct  personality  is  ascribed  to  the  Porter.     He  opens  the  Door.     "To 
him  the  Porter  openeth."     It  is  through  His  instrumentality  that  both  the  true 
shepherds  and  the  sheep  enter  into  the  fold.    No !     The  only  satisfactory  explana- 
tion is  to  see  in  the  Porter  the  office  and  work  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost.     Our 
understanding  is  darkened,  our  hearts  are  sealed,  our  ears  are  closed,  unless  the 
Porter  openeth.    Even  the  fold  of  Christ's  Church  is  closed  against  us  unless  the 
Porter  openeth  the  Door  in  holy  baptism.     The  presence  of  the  Lord  is  real  in  the 
blessed  Sacrament  of  the  altar,  but  unless  the  Porter  openeth.  His  presence  is  not 
real  to  us.     Many  thronged  around  Him,  but  only  one  poor  woman  touched  Him 
and  was  healed  ;  so  at  the  altar  the  virtue  to  heal  is  there,  but  the  power  to  draw  it 
into  our  soul's  health  is  to  the  heart  touched  by  the  breath  of  the  Spirit — to  him 
the  Porter  openeth  1     So  it  is  with  the  words  of  absolution — they  pass  along  with  a 
sound  and  leave  no  blessing  behind  unless  the  Porter  openeth.     And  so  it  is  with 
the  Bible — we  read  our  Bibles,  but  unless  the  Porter  openeth,  the  voices  of  the 
evangelists  and  apostles  are  but  as  a  pleasant  tale  :  listened  to,  but  soon  forgotten, 
or  they  are  like  "  the  idle  wind  that  we  regard  not  1 "     And  then  there  is  that 
other  book — the  book  of  Nature — which  lies  open  before  us.   But  we  hear  no  sounds 
in  the  noisy  brook,  we  see  nothing  in  the  opening  buds  and   flowers  of  early 
summer;     but    once    the    Porter   opens    the    door,    then    suddenly — "Earth's 
crammed  with  heaven,   And  every  common  bush   afire  with   God."     Or  if  we 
look  upon  the  pages  of   history.      To    the  natural  man  they  contain  only  a 
record  of  battles  lost  and  won,  a  long  succession  of  kings,  some  good,  some  bad, 
of  dynasties  set  up  or  hurled  to  the  ground ;  but  when  the  Porter  opens  wide  the 
door,  and  the  light  falls  upon  the  pages,  then  we  seem  to  read  between  the  lines. 
We  see  how  evil  haunts  the  wicked  person  to  destroy  him  and  his  seed  for  ever,  we 
see  men  sowing  the  wind  and  in  after  years,  long  after  the  sowing  has  faded  from 
the  memory,  reaping  the  whirlwind  1     To  read  history  without  the  illumination  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  is  like  looking  at  a  beautiful  landscape  by  the  pale  light  of  the 
moon.     We  see  indeed  the  dark  forms  of  the  hills  standing  out ;  we  note  the  trees 
in  their  solemn  gloom  ;  we  hear  and  see  the  white  foam  splashing  against  the  rocky 
shore ;  but  the  flowers  and  blades  of  grass,  the  leaves  with  their  countless  tints, 
the  life  and  colour  of  the  whole  scene  can  only  be  seen  by  the  light  of  the  clear, 
noon-day  sun.      So  the  manifold  workings  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  every  successive 
generation  can  only  be  seen  when  the  Porter  has  opened  the  door  and  enlightened 
our  understanding,  and  given  us  a  right  judgment  in  all  things.  {J.  Louis  Spencer.) 

The  Advent  message  of  the  Baptist  .-—I.  We  have  been  looking  at  the  Pobteb  aleeadt 
THIS  Advent,  and  he  has  not  always  been  the  same.     We  have  seen  some  sitting 

there  ;  we  might  have  seen  others.      At  one  time,  as  we  saw,  it  was  the  patriarchs 

who  were  sitting  there.     And  they  said  :  "  Go  after  Him,  follow  Him.   Hispromis* 


CHAP.  I.]  ST.  JOHN.  16T 

is  trne  and  faithful :  He  will  never  leave  thee  nor  forsake  thee."  And  the  angels 
Bat  there  and  taught  ns  the  thrice  holy  hymn,  and  how  the  incense  goes  up  before 
the  throne,  and  the  worship  of  the  elders,  and  the  great  water-rush  of  the  Alle- 
luias, whose  spray  falls  in  a  golden  mist  over  our  worship  here  below  ;  and  they 
eaid  :  "  Go  out  with  Him,  and  going  through  the  vale  of  misery  use  it  as  a  well." 
And  their  message  was,  **  Worship  Him."  And  the  Law  sat  there  in  ita  sternness 
and  said,  "  You  must,"  and  "  You  shall  not,"  and  so  braced  us  up.  And  the 
prophets  sat  there,  with  their  messages  from  another  world,  their  devotion 
and  their  calm  endurance.  And  they  said,  "Be  patient,  brethren,  unto 
the  coming  of  the  Lord."  Yes ;  and  we  might  have  paused  to  see  sitting 
there  also  the  Gentile  world  with  its  splendid  natural  virtues,  ita  beauty, 
dignity,  and  strength,  and  have  heard  them  point  ua  to  the  beautiful  Shep- 
herd, and  bid  as  aim  alwaya  at  the  true,  the  beautiful,  and  the  good.  But 
to-day  we  must  contemplate  the  last  figure  that  sat  at  the  gate  of  the  sheep-fold — 
the  precursor  of  the  Shepherd  of  His  people,  the  forerunner  of  the  King.  Then, 
when  the  Jewish  fold  was  about  to  give  up  its  sheep,  once  and  for  all,  to  be  merged 
into  something  higher,  there  sits  St.  John  the  Baptist ;  and  his  message  is  repent- 
ance. His  message  to  the  sheep,  as  they  pass  out  to  forget  him,  to  leave  him,  to 
lose  him,  in  another  and  mightier  than  himself  is,  "  Eepent."  "  To  Him  the 
porter  openeth."  The  Baptist  is  the  last  and  truest  teacher  and  porter  of  the 
Jewish  Church,  and  hia  great  message  is,  "  Eepent."  II.  And  now  let  us  turn  to 
St.  John  the  Baptist,  and  see  what  repentance  m  his  modth  meant  as  a  prepara- 
tion FOR  Christ.  And  we  are  attracted  at  once  with  the  dignity,  the  magnitude  of  the 
word.  It  is  not  quite  the  most  popular  method — Eepent.  And  when  he  said  this,  he 
asked  them  to  feel  sorrow.  The  Pharisee  must  feel,  "  Well,  I  have  made  a  false 
start."  This  satisfaction  is  not  a  good  sign;  the  remedies  I  have  chosen  have  not 
been  painful,  but  they  have  not  touched  the  seat  of  the  disease.  The  knife  and 
the  burning  is  what  I  need.  Oh,  that  sore  I  It  ia  a  humiliating  thought  to 
remember  how  it  came  there  as  I  tear  away  the  covering  which  conceals  it.  And 
he  meant  more  than  this.  They  were  baptized  of  him  in  Jordan  "  confessing  their 
flins."  It  would  be  easy  and  in  perfect  good  taste  to  soften  down  the  too  striking 
contour  of  a  proud  individuality  with  a  confession  which  does  but  "bless  with  faint 
blame."  But  no,  he  wants  more.  He  wants  each  to  face  for  himself  the  accumu- 
lation of  a  lifetime,  to  watch  the  tale  of  sin  mounting  up  to  its  deadly  total,  until 
like  a  spendthrift,  who  having  had  a  general  idea  that  he  had  been  extravagant,  ia 
astonished  as  each  bill  adds  its  quota  to  the  heavy  debt,  some  forgotten,  some 
nnder-estimated,  some  put  aside  to  another  day — he  faces  the  accumulating  mass 
and  realizes  the  enormity  of  the  debt  which  he  believed  that  he  some  day  would  be 
able  to  pay  if  God  would  but  extend  patience  to  him.  No  ;  repentance  on  any  other 
principle  would  lack,  I  had  almost  said,  that  business-like  air  which  should  cha- 
racterize all  our  dealings  with  our  souls.  It  would  lack  that  element  of  humble 
acknowledgment  which,  when  it  concerns  ourselves,  we  call  an  apology,  to  an  all- 
knowing  God  who,  indeed,  can  trace  far  better  than  we  can  right  up  into  the  hidden 
springs  of  motive,  the  history  of  our  sins,  but  yet  waits  for  us  with  our  own  mouths 
to  tell  Him.  And  then  he  had  for  each  his  own  method  of  amendment.  Such  ia 
the  message  of  that  porter  who  held  the  gate  at  the  last  moment  before  the  Dawn, 
such  was  his  teaching  of  repentance  which  was  to  prepare  the  way  of  the  Lord. 
III.  And  still  the  message  op  the  nearer  Advent  is  repentance.  Would  that  we 
learned  more  that  penitence  is  a  pre-requisite  to  entering  on  the  service^  of  God  ! 
And  then,  lastly,  "  Eepent "  is  the  message  before  the  last,  the  final  coming  of  the 
Lord  to  each  soul  in  death.  And  here  again  the  Church,  just  about  to  give  up  the 
eheep  into  the  hands  of  the  Good  Shepherd,  still  murmurs  through  the  voice  of  the 
porter — "Eepent."  And  so  the  porter  waits  the  coming  of  Christ  to  claim  Hia 
own.  *'  Eepent."  His  voice  is  stern,  but  the  lis^ht  gets  brighter,  the  heaven  ia 
ablaze,  His  footsteps  sound  across  the  distance,  the  Bridegroom  cometh  go  ye  forth 
to  meet  Him.  {W.  C.  E.  Newbolt,  M.A.)  The  conscience  a  porter : — The  moral 
nature  does  not  jar  at  the  entrance  of  Christ  or  of  the  "  Truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus." 
The  porter,  which  is  the  conscience  and  heart  of  man,  never  refuses  the  answer  to 
the  true  voice.  {Monday  Club  Sermons.)  The  office  of  a  true  shepherd  :— It  is 
not  the  chief  shepherd  who  is  here  spoken  of,  but  an  under  shepherd,  a  minister  of 
Christ.  I.  He  is  led  into  his  office  by  the  Holt  Spirit.  "  To  him  the  porter 
openeth  "  (Acts  xiv.  27  ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  9 ;  2  Cor.  ii.  12  ;  Col.  iv.  3).  II.  His  teaohing 
IS  EECooNizED  AS  FROM  GoD.  "  The  sheep  hear  His  voice."  This  can  only  be 
when  it  is  drawn  from  and  is  in  harmony  with  God's  Word.     IIL  H«  rAixmrCLLS 


168  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cKAJ.  x. 

ACQUAINTS  H1MSEI.F  WITH  H18  PEOPLE.  "  He  calleth  His  own  sheep  by  name."  He 
is  familiar  with  the  names,  faces,  and  circumstances  of  His  flock.  IV.  He  bets 
BEroBE  His  flock  an  example  they  may  safely  follow.  "  He  leadeth  them  out." 
In  His  teaching  and  life  He  points  the  way  they  may  safely  go — "  allures  to 
brighter  worlds  and  leads  the  way."  Every  shepherd  will  have  to  give  an  account 
for  his  flock  to  the  Gocid  Shepherd  (I  Pet.  v.  4).  (Family  Churchman.)  He 
calleth  His  own  sheep  by  name,  and  leadeth  them  out. — The  personal  love  and  lead 
of  Christ  : — I.  The  peesonal  love  of  Chbist.  The  parable  is  designed  to  correct 
the  belief  that  while  God  has  a  real  care  of  the  Church  He  can  have  no  personal 
recognition  of  its  individual  members.  There  could  not  be  a  greater  mistake.  1. 
For  the  relation  God  holds  to  objects  of  knowledge  is  different  in  all  respects  from 
that  which  is  held  by  us.  Our  general  terms,  man,  tree,  &c.,  are  names  of  single 
specimens  extended  to  species,  and  comes  to  stand  for  millions  of  men,  &«.,  we 
never  can  know.  But  God  does  not  generalize  in  this  manner.  His  knowledge  of 
wholes  is  real  and  complete  as  being  a  distinct  knowledge  of  particulars.  What- 
ever particulars  exist  were  known  by  Him  as  being  thought  before  they  became  fact. 
Holding  in  His  thought  the  eternal  archetypes  of  species,  He  also  thought  each 
individual  in  its  particular  type  as  dominated  by  the  common  archetype.  This  on 
God's  part  is  inevitable ;  for  the  sun  can  no  more  shine  on  the  world  without 
touching  every  atom  than  God  can  know  or  love  whole  bodies  of  saints  without 
knowing  or  loving  individuals.  Being  a  perfect  mind  and  not  a  mere  spark  of 
intelligence  Uke  us,  He  cannot  fall  into  our  imperfections  when  we  strain  ourselves  to 
set  up  generals  to  piece  out  and  hide  our  ignorance.  2.  One  of  the  great  uses  of 
the  Incarnation  was  to  humanize  God  that  we  might  believe  in  His  personal  love. 
In  Christ  was  visible  one  of  us  and  was  attentive  to  every  personal  want  of  the 
world.  When  a  lone  woman  came  up  in  a  crowd  to  steal  as  it  were  some  healing 
power  He  would  not  let  her  off  in  that  impersonal,  .unrecognizing  way.  He  even 
hunts  up  the  youth  He  has  healed  of  his  blindness  and  opens  up  to  him  the  secrets 
of  His  Messiahship.  He  tasted  death  for  every  man.  He  calls  us  friends  because 
He  is  on  the  private  footing  of  personal  confidence,  and  promises  a  friendship  so 
personal  that  it  shall  be  a  cipher  of  mutual  understanding,  giving  us  a  white  stone 
and  in  the  stone  a  new  name  which  no  man  knoweth  saving  he  that  receiveth  it. 
3.  Every  particular  work  of  this  Gospel  shows  how  personal  it  is.  What  is  com- 
munion that  is  not  fellowship  with  particular  souls  ?  We  speak  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
as  falling  on  communities,  but  He  reaches  the  general  body  only  through  individuals, 
save  that  there  is  an  effect  of  mutual  excitement,  which  is  secondary,  and  comes 
from  their  sense  of  what  is  revealed  in  each  other  and  under  the  power  of  the  Spirit 
in  each.  So  with  everything  included  in  salvation,  in  the  renewing,  fashioning, 
guidance,  discipline,  and  final  crowning  in  glory ;  so  that  a  Christian  is  finally  saved 
not  as  some  one  led  forth  in  the  flock,  but  as  the  Master's  dear  Simon,  James, 
Martha,  whose  name  is  so  recorded  in  the  Lamb's  Book  of  Life.  4.  It  is  in  this 
view  that  the  Church  in  baptizing  her  children  takes  with  a  beautiful  propriety  the 
"  Christian  name,"  in  which  Christ  recognizes  the  child's  discipleship.  II.  The  peb- 
SONAL  lead  of  Christ.  1.  Here  is  the  glory  of  Christ  as  a  Saviour  that  He  goes  always 
before,  never  behind.  His  flock.  He  begins  with  infancy  that  He  may  show  a  grace 
for  childhood.  He  is  made  under  the  Law  and  fulfils  all  righteousness,  that  He  may 
sanctify  the  law  to  us  and  make  it  honourable.  He  goes  before  us  in  temptations 
that  we  may  bear  them  after  Him.  He  taught  us  forgiveness  by  forgiving  His 
enemies.  He  bore  His  cross  and  commands  us  to  bear  it  after  Him.  And  then  He 
went  before  us  in  the  bursting  of  the  grave,  and  ascended  as  our  Forerunner  whom 
we  are  to  follow  even  there.  2.  This  spirit  entered  into  those  whom  He  gave  to  lead 
the  flock.  They  followed  Him  in  the  regeneration  and  took  it  upon  them  as  their 
Master's  law  to  require  nothing  in  which  they  were  not  forward  themselves.  "  Fol- 
low me  as  I  follow  Christ."  We  have  seen  it  differently — teachers  that  lay  heavy 
burdens  on  men's  shoulders,  feeding  themselves  out  of  charities  extorted  from  the 
poor ;  philanthropists  publishing  great  swelling  words  of  equality  and  tapering  off 
in  virtues  they  neither  practise  nor  like.  All  such  drive  a  flock.  Applications :  1. 
Men  make  a  great  mistake  when  they  regard  Christian  life  as  a  legal  and  constrained 
service.  This  image  represents  the  freedom  of  the  disciple.  He  is  led  by  a  per- 
Bonal  influence  and  answers  to  the  name  by  which  he  is  called.  No  Christian  is  to 
go  to  his  duty  because  he  must,  but  only  because  his  heart  is  in  it,  for  his  heart  ia 
in  his  Master's  love,  and  he  follows  Him  gladly.  2.  We  discover  what  to  think  of 
that  class  who  aspire  to  be  specially  faithful  but  are  principally  strenuous  in  putting 
forward  and  laying  burdens  on  others,  and  slide  over  their  own  deficiency  in  the 


«HA».  X.]  ST.  JOHN.  161 

very  things  they  insist  on,  by  extolling  the  modesty  which  does  not  profess  to  be  an 
example  to  others.  How  much  more  faithful  and  modest  should  we  be  if  we  judged 
only  a?  we  practiced,  and  fortified  our  words  by  our  example  I  3.  Consider  what  is 
true  of  any  disciple  who  is  straying  from  Christ  that  his  Shepherd  still  cares  for 
him,  and  calls  him  personally.  (H.  Bushnell,  D.D.)  The  personal  relationship 
between  the  Shepherd  and  the  sheep : — You  are  seated  by  your  fireside  on  a  winter 
night  when  the  announcement  is  made — "  A  friend  has  come  I  "  That  announce- 
ment makes  you  benevolently  expectant ;  yet  your  state  of  mind  is  then  only  vague 
and  uncertain,  for  there  are  friends,  and  friends.  But  in  the  next  moment  the 
name  is  spoken,  or  the  face  of  your  friend  shines  in  the  door  of  your  room ;  and 
that  face  appearing,  or  that  name  uttered,  in  a  moment  calls  up  the  proper  feeling. 
No  other  face  appearing  there,  nor  any  other  name  that  could  be  pronounced  in 
your  hearing,  would  call  up  exactly  the  same  feeling.  Each  friend  has  his  own 
place  in  your  heart,  and  gets  his  own  welcome  when  he  comes.  There  is  a  general 
affection  which  you  bear  to  all  your  friends ;  there  is  a  specific  and  differentiated 
affection  which  you  bear  to  each.  So  it  is  with  the  Shepherd  and  the  flock.  The 
whole  flock  is  known,  and  loved,  and  led ;  but  each  has  separate  and  individual 
love  and  leading.  {A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)  The  calling  of  the  sheep: — We  of  the 
West  are  accustomed  to  give  names  to  dogs,  horses,  and  even  to  cows,  and  are  not 
surprised  that  these  animals  are  intelligent  enough  to  recognize  their  own  names. 
In  the  ancient  East,  it  was  not  unusual  to  give  names  to  sheep  in  the  same  way. 
The  classical  scholar  will  recall  the  instance  in  Theocritus,  where  the  shepherd 
calls  several  of  his  sheep  to  him  by  their  individual  names.  I.  Cbbist  calls — 1. 
How.  2.  Whom.  3.  Whence.  4.  Whither.  6.  Why.  U.  Christ  oaiiLS  by  name. 
1.  By  our  worldly  names  ;  for  He  knows  each  personally  and  particularly.  2.  By 
our  spiritual  names ;  for  He  knows  our  standing  and  destiny.  (<Si.  8.  Times. ) 
The  individualizing  knowledge  of  Christ : — It  is  hard  to  realize  that  Jesus  has  an 
individual  acquaintance  with  each  of  us  separately.  The  very  thought  is  bewilder* 
ing  in  its  magnitude,  in  view  of  the  myriads  of  the  redeemed.  I  once  heard 
General  Grant  say  that  when  he  was  colonel  of  a  regiment  he  knew  every  man  of 
hi«  command  by  name;  but  as  he  rose  in  command  he  found  it  necessary  to 
diminish  the  scope  of  his  knowledge  of  individuals,  until,  when  he  was  at  the  head 
of  the  entire  army,  he  gave  little  thought  to  individuals  below  the  rank  of  a  division 
commander.  An  army  comrade  of  mine,  who  was  with  General  Sherman's  army 
in  its  northward  march  from  Savannah,  told  me  of  an  incident  which  illustrated  in 
another  way  the  magnitude  of  the  thought  that  every  soldier  had  a  personal  indi- 
viduality.  The  army  was  passing  along  ararely  frequented  roadway  in  North  Carolina. 
A  woman  stood  in  the  doorway  of  her  cabin,  and  saw  regiment  after  regiment  of  men 
similar  in  appearance  and  dress  pass  by,  until,  as  the  thousands  upon  thousands 
came  and  went,  she  said  in  wonderment :  "  I  reckon  you  'uns  ain't  all  got  names." 
It  seemed  to  her  an  impossibility  that  each  soldier  was  a  distinct  and  recognized 
identity.  It  would  have  seemed  stranger  yet  to  think  that  one  man  could  know 
each  soldier  there  by  name.  Yet  far  beyond  these  suggestions  of  human 
limitation  of  personal  knowledge  and  of  personal  sympathy,  there  comes  the 
assurance  that  Jesus  knows  His  every  disciple  by  name,  and  that  He  daily 
and  hourly  speaks  loving  words  of  tenderness  and  counsel  and  guidance  accord* 
ingly.  {H.  G.  Trumbull,  D.D.)  The  leading  of  the  flock : — We  have  here  not  a 
mere  everyday  description  of  the  shepherd's  act,  but  a  precise  statement  of  a 
definite  historical  situation.  The  time  had  come  for  Jesus  to  lead  His  flock  out  of 
the  theocracy  which  was  devoted  to  destruction.  He  recognized  the  sequel  of  this 
inevitable  rupture  in  the  expulsion  of  the  man  (chap.  ix.  24),  in  the  decree  of 
excommunication  which  struck  both  Himself  and  His  followers,  and  generally  in 
the  violent  hostility  of  which  He  found  Himself  the  object.  {F.  Godet,  D.D.) 
Chrisft  guidance : — He  always  comes  to  "  lead,"  never  to  linger  and  stay.  If  He 
finds  one  so  wounded  and  torn  and  near  to  death  as  to  be  unable  to  follow,  Ee  will 
lay  that  sheep  on  His  shoulder.  If  He  finds  a  lamb  faint  and  homeless,  He  will 
"  carry  it  in  His  bosom."  But  in  most  instances  He  gives  from  the  first  the  strength 
to  follow,  and  expects  it  to  be  used.  "  He  leadeth  them  out " — "  out,"  of  course, 
from  the  whole  natural  sinful  life,  from  all  its  darkness  and  misery,  into  the  light 
and  joy  of  acceptance  ;  ♦•  out "  of  infantine  feebleness  into  manly  strength  ;  "  out" 
of  narrow  views  into  wider  ;  "  out "  of  first  experiences  into  more  matured ;  "  out " 
of  mistakes  and  disappointments  into  wiser  ways  and  better  fortunes ;  "  oat "  of 
dreamy  indolence  into  those  activities  by  which  alone  it  can  be  escaped ;  "  cat "  of 
overstrained  activity  into  some  quiet  hour  or  time  of  "  refreshing  from  the  presence 


170  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ami.  Z. 

of  the  Lord  ; "  "  out "  of  besetting  sin  into  waiting  duty.    Sometimes  you  think  if 
the  Good  Shepherd  were  really  leading  you  it  would  be  into  other  fields  than  thosa 
through  which  you  have  of  late  been  passing.    Be  careful  here.    I  have  seen  a 
shepherd,  on  a  bitter  snowy  day,  gathering  all  hia  sheep  carefully  to  the  windy  side 
of  the  hill.     The  silly  creatures,  left  to  themselves,  would  all  take  the  other  side ; 
they  would  go  straight  to  the  most  dangerous  places,  to  the  sheltered  spots  where 
the  deep  snow-wreaths  form  silently,  in  which  they  would  soon  find  at  once  a  refuge 
and  a  grave.    On  such  a  day  the  life  of  some  of  the  sheep  depends  on  facing  the 
blast.     The  shepherd  would  not  let  the  youngest,  he  would  not  let  the  weakest  one 
of  the  flock,  lie  down  in  the  shelter.    For  the  very  love  he  bears  it,  "  he  calls  it  by 
name,  and  leads  it  out,"  or  drives,  or  carries — even  in  such  an  hour  as  that — facing 
the  bitter  wind  and  the  blinding  snow  1   And  if  we  knew  the  personal  love  of  Christ, 
we  shall  not  be  so  apt  to  distinguish  and  select  certain  special  modes  for  its  mani- 
festation as  alone  suitable  and  proper.    One  mode  will  seem  to  us  almost  as  good  aa 
another  if  it  be  the  one  that  He  selects,  and  we  shall  hear  the  loving  voice  in  the 
darkness  as  well  as  in  the  light ;  in  the  roar  of  the  wintry  storm  as  in  the  hush  of 
the  summer  silence.    (A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)        He  goeth  before  them. — This  is  a  sight 
which  may  still  be  seen  in  the  East.    With  as  sheep  are  driven ;  with  the  Orientals 
they  are  led.    The  shepherd  goes  on  before,  and  the  sheep  follow  after,  much  aa 
dogs  follow  their  master  in  the  West,  but  without  the  briskness  and  vigour  of  dogs. 
It  is  not  unusual  to  see  the  shepherd  leading  the  sheep  thus,  and  at  the  same  time 
carrying  upon  his  shoulder  some  tender  youngling  of  the  fiock.    L  Christ  pbb- 
CBDES — 1.  To  open  the  way.   2.  To  present  an  example.  3.  To  destroy  the  enemies. 
II.  His  flock  shoxtlo  follow — 1.  Closely.    2.  Obediently.     8.  Courageously.    4* 
Hopefully.    {S.  S.  Times.)       Christ  the  Leader  of  His  people : — I  have  read  of  a  dis- 
tinguished general  who  conducted  an  army  by  forced  marches  through  a  sterile  aa 
well  as  hostile  country.    They  were  footsore,  worn,  and  weary ;  supplied  with  the 
scantiest  fare,  and  toiling  all  day  long,  through  heavy  sands,  and  beneath  a  scorch- 
ing sun.    Yet  his  brave  men  pressed  on — such  as  fell  out  of  the  line  by  day,  nnlesa 
shot  down  by  the  foe  who  crouched  like  tigers  in  every  bush,  and  hung  in  clouds  on 
their  flanks  and  rear,  rejoining  their  ranks  in  the  cool  and  darkness  of  the  night. 
Thus  this  gallant  army,  undaunted  and  indomitable,  accomplished  a  great  achieve- 
ment in  arms.     And  how  ?    They  were  inspired  by  their  commander.     Foregoing 
the  privileges  of  his  rank,  he  dismounted  from  his  horse  to  put  himself  not  onJy  at 
the  head  of  his  men,  but  on  a  level  with  them.    He  shared  their  hard  bed ;  he  lived 
on  their  scanty  rations ;  every  foot  they  walked  he  walked ;  every  foe  they  faced  he 
faced ;  every  hardship  they  endured  he  bore ;  and  with  cheek  as  brown,  and  limbs 
as  weary,  and  couch  as  rude  as  theirs,  he  came  down  to  their  condition — ^touched 
by  their  infirmities,  and  teaching  them  by  bis  example  what  part  to  act,  and  with 
what  patience  to  endure.    They  would  have  followed  him  to  the  cannon's  mouth — 
his  cry  not  Forward  but  Follow.  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)     They  know  Ms  voice  .  .  .  they 
loiow  not  the  voice  of  strangers. — The  voice  of  the  shepherd  known : — An  American, 
who  was  travelling  in  Syria,  saw  three  native  shepherds  bring  their  flocks  to  the 
same  brook,  and  the  flocks  drank  there  together.    At  length  one  shepherd  arose 
and  called  out  "  Men-ah  1  Men-ah  1 "  the  Arabic  for  *•  Follow  me."    His  sheep  came 
out  of  the  common  herd  and  followed  him  up  the  hillside.    Then  the  next  shepherd 
did  the  same,  and  his  sheep  went  away  with  him,  and  the  man  did  not  even  stop  to 
count  them.    The  traveller  said  to  the  remaining  shepherd — "  Just  give  me  your 
turban  and  crook,  and  see  if  they  will  not  follow  me  as  soon  as  you."    So  he  put 
on  the  shepherd's  dress  and  called  out  "  Men-ah  1  Men-ah  I"  but  not  a  sheep 
moved.    "They  know  not  the  voice  of  a  stranger."    "Will  your  flock  never 
follow   anybody   but   you?"    inquired   the  gentleman.     The   Syrian  shepherd 
replied,  "Oh,  yes;    sometimes  a  sheep  gets  sick  and  then  he  will  follow  any 
one."    Is  it  not  so  with  the  flock  of  Christ?    {Christian  Age.)        Sheep  wilt 
not  follow  strangers : — A  man  in  India  was  accused  of  stealing  a  sheep.    He 
was  brought  before  the  judge,  and  the  supposed  owner  of  the  shaep  was  present. 
Both  claimed  the  sheep,  and  had  witnesses  to  prove  their  claims ;  so  it  was  not  easy 
to  decide  to  whom  the  sheep  belonged.    Knowing  the  habits  of  the  shepherds  and 
the  sheep,  the  judge  ordered  the  animal  to  be  brought  into  court,  and  sent^  one  of 
the  two  men  into  another  room  while  he  told  the  other  to  call  the  sheep.    Bat  the 
poor  sheep  not  knowing  the  voice  of  the  stranger  would  not  go  to  him.     In  the 
meantime,  the  other  man  in  the  adjoining  room  growing  impatient  gave  a  kind  of  a 
** chuck,"  upon  which  the  sheep  bounded  away  towards  him  at  once.  This  "chuck" 
was  the  way  in  which  he  had  been  used  to  call  the  sheep,  and  it  was  atonoe  decided 


CHAP.  X.]  ST.  JOHN.  in 

that  he  was  the  real  owner.  (TT.  Baxendale.)  Falte  teaehen  not  trusted: — This 
verse  justifies  true  Christians  in  not  listening  to  false  teachers.  For  leaving  their 
parish  church,  perhaps  under  these  circumstances,  many  reproach  them.  Yet  the 
very  men  who  reproach  them  would  not  trust  their  worldly  affairs  to  an  ignorant 
and  dishonest  lawyer,  or  their  bodies  to  an  incompetent  doctor  1  Can  it  be  wrong 
to  act  on  the  same  principles  for  our  souls?  (T.  Scott,  M.A.)  False  teachert 
$hunned: — Placilla,  the  Empress,  when  Theodosius  (senior)  desired  to  confer 
with  Eunomius  the  heretic,  dissuaded  her  husband  very  earnestly;  lest,  being 
perverted  by  his  speeches,  he  might  fall  into  heresy.  Anastasius  II.,  Bishop 
of  Bome  (497),  whilst  he  sought  to  convince  Acacius  the  heretic,  was  seduced  by 
him.  A  httle  leaven  soon  soureth  the  whole  lump.  One  spoonful  of  vinegar  wiU 
soon  tart  a  great  deal  of  sweet  milk,  but  a  great  deal  of  milk  will  not  so  soon 
sweeten  one  spoonful  of  vinegar.  (J.  Trapp.)  Satisfaction  only  in  following 
Christ: — It  is  said  that  man  is  a  religious  animal.  He  must  have  some 
religion.  To  any  Christian  it  must  be  the  religion  of  Christ:  that  or  none.  We 
cannot  go  back  to  paganism.  We  cannot  return  to  Judaism.  Judaism  is  nothing 
but  a  promissory  note.  If  Christ  is  not  the  Messiah,  that  note  is  two  thousand 
years  past  due,  and  daily  becoming  more  worthless  and  more  hopeless.  We  cannot 
go  to  Mahomet,  riding  armour-clad  and  blood-stained,  leading  us  to  a  life  of  revenge 
and  a  heaven  of  sensuality.  We  cannot  accept  Brahmanism,  with  its  vedas  and  its 
Hindoo  gods,  with  its  metaphysical  quibbles  and  its  social  tyrannies.  Every  woman, 
and  every  man  with  wife  aud  sister  and  daughter  says,  We  will  have  no  Brah- 
manism. We  cannot  be  atheists,  and  say,  "  There  is  no  God  1 "  for  then  woald 
Nature's  heart  cease  to  beat,  and  we  could  only  stand  orphaned  by  its  mighty 
corpse,  and  wait  without  hope  till  we  are  buried  at  last  in  the  same  eternal  grave  of 
rayless  night.  {R.  8.  Barrett.)  I  am  the  Door  of  the  sheep. — The  connection 
between  the  two  similitudes : — The  picture  (vers.  1-5)  which  described  the  forming 
of  the  Messianic  flock,  and  its  departure  from  the  theocratic  fold  was  a  morning 
scene.  This,  which  describes  the  life  of  the  flock  when  formed  and  led  by  the 
Messiah,  is  taken  from  a  scene  at  mid-day.  The  sheep  go  at  will  in  and  out  of 
a  fold  situated  in  the  midst  of  the  pasture.  When  they  desire  shelter  they 
enter  it :  when  hunger  urges  them  they  leave  it,  for  its  door  is  constantly  open 
to  them.  They  thus  possess  both  safety  and  abundance,  the  two  essentials  to 
the  prosperity  of  the  flock.  In  this  new  image  the  shepherd  disappears,  and  it 
is  the  door  which  plays  the  chief  part.  The  fold  no  longer  represents  the  ancient 
covenant,  but  Messiah's  salvation,  and  that  complete  happiness  which  believers 
who  have  accepted  Him  enjoy.  In  the  former  parable,  God  caused  the  por- 
ter to  open  the  door  to  the  shepherd ;  in  this  the  Messiah  Himself  is  to  His  sheep 
the  door  of  a  constant  and  daily  salvation,  {F.  Godet,  D.D.)  The  door  and  the 
shepherds : — I.  The  doob.  1.  Of  the  sheep — the  entrance  through  which  a  soul 
passes  into  God's  fold.  This  Christ  claims  to  be — (1)  Personally.  "  I,"  not  My 
teaching,  example,  propitiation.  (2)  Exclusively.  "  The."  As  a  Saviour  Christ 
stands  alone,  shares  His  honours  with  no  colleague,  not  even  with  a  Moses,  far 
less  with  a  Zoroaster,  Confucius,  Mohammed,  angel,  virgin,  priest,  or  pope.  (3) 
Universally — "any"(Heb.  vii.  25).  (4)  Certainly — "Shall  be  saved."  (5)  Com- 
pletely :  Salvation — (a)  The  most  desirable  in  quality ;  perfect  freedom.  (6)  The  most 
abundant  in  quantity;  ample  satisfaction.  2.  To  the  sheep— the  entrance  by 
which  the  shepherds  find  access.  This  also  Christ  claims  to  be,  and  therefore  no 
one  has  a  right  to  be  shepherd  who  does  not — (1)  Derive  such  an  ofiice  from  Christ 
(Eph.  iv.  11).  (2)  Approach  men  through  His  own  personal  acquaintance  with 
Christ  (2  Cor.  iv.  13).  (3)  Seek  to  lead  men  to  a  believing  acceptance  of  Christ 
(1  Cor.  ii.  2).  (4)  Devote  himself  to  the  spiritual  edification  of  those  who  have 
believed  on  Christ  (Eph.  iv.  12  ;  1  Tim.  iv.  6  ;  2  Tim.  iv.  2).  II.  The  shepherds. 
1.  False.  (1)  The  time  they  appeared — "  before  Christ."  (2)  Their  character — 
♦'  thieves,  Ac."  (3)Their  objects — tosteal,  kill,  &c.,  for  their  own  enrichment  (ver.  10). 
(4)  Their  experience  (ver.  8).  2.  The  true  Shepherd.  (1)  Whence  He  came :  from 
above,  from  heaven,  from  God.  (2)  When  He  appeared:  in  the  fulness  of  the 
times.  (3)  What  He  sought :  the  welfare  of  God's  flock — (a)  That  men  might  have 
life.  (6)  That  believers  might  have  it  abundantly  (chap.  1. 16).  {T.  Whitelaw,  D.D.) 
Christ  the  Door : — 1.  None  can  enter  without  the  permission  of  Christ.  2.  Without 
the  knowledge  of  Christ.  3.  Without  the  image  of  Christ.  4.  Without  faith  in  the 
blood  of  Christ.  5.  Without  sharing  in  the  blessedness  of  Christ.  Christ  is  the 
door  to  a  right  understanding  of  nature,  providence,  history,  the  Bible  By  Him 
Alone  we  have  access  to  the  Father,  the  enjoyment  of  salvation,  the  title  to  heaven. 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip,  i, 

(W.  E.  Van  Dor  en,  P.  P.)        Christ  the  Door: — ^The  simile  is  at  first  sight  a  strange 
one.    A  door  is  seldom  a  thing  of  beauty  or  impresBiveness — a  mere  instrument  of 
convenience.    Yet  upon  further  thought  there  will  come  to  mind  so  many  uses  that 
admiration  will  take  the  place  of  surprise.    A  door  is  an  emblem — 1.  Of  separation. 
On  one  side  are  the  passions,  tbe  driving  cares  of  the  world ;  on  the  other  love  and 
quietness.    2.  Of  protection.     The  things  that  are  happening  in  the  community 
roU  up  to  the  door  and,  like  a  wave  on  the  beach,  they  break  and  pass  away.    And 
we  can  bring  up  our  children,  thanks  to  the  Door,  in  the  midst  of  temptations  safely. 
3.  Of  hospitality.     To  keep  an  open  door  is  equivalent  to  the  declaration  that  one 
employs  it  as  one  instrument  of  pleasure  to  others.     At  the  door  too  we  greet  the 
returning  children  and  the  much  prized  guests.     When  Christ,  therefore,  called 
Himself  a  door  no  more  significant  symbol  could  well  have  been  selected.    He  is 
the  Door  to  the  home.    Christ  is  the  door — I.  Fob  the  tkoubled.    There  is  no 
sound  in  the  household  sweeter  than  the  opening  and  closing  door  when  love  reigns. 
All  day  long  the  father  strives  at  business.     The  whole  day  has  been  full  of  care  and 
wrangling.    The  head  is  hot  and  tbe  Hmbs  weary.     But  the  day  is  over  at  last  and 
he  prepares  for  home.     He  draws  near.    The  door  opens.     The  children  hear  it  and 
run.     Now  every  wrinkle  is  gone  and  he  looks  round  with  a  sense  of  grateful  rest 
and  thanks  God  that  the  sound  of  that  shutting  door  was  the  last  echo  of  the  thunder 
of  care  and  trouble.    "  I  am  the  Door,"  says  Christ ;  opening  you  shall  be  within 
the  circle  of  love.    What  the  home  is  to  the  troubled  that  is  Christ  to  those  who 
know  how  to  make  use  of  Him.     Speak  ye  that  have  proved  it.    Mothers  who  have 
been  sustained  in  the  midst  of  troubles  that  rasped  the  soul  to  the  very  quick : 
fathers  who  have  gone  through  the  burden  and  heat  of  the  world.     There  are 
bereaved  hearts  who  need  the  refuge  you  have  found.     Publish  the  invitation  you 
have  accepted.     "Come  unto  Me  all   ye,"  &o.    H.  Fob  the  petitioneb.    If  the 
journey  of  the  hearts  of  petitioners  to  the  doors  of  men  of  wealth,  influence,  wisdom, 
skill,  could  be  written,  how  full  of  pathos  it  would  be !     Who  can  imagine  the 
solicitude  of  one  deUcately  reared  but  reduced  to  poverty  as  she  seeks  aid  that  she 
may  rescue  from  suffering  and  death  her  ofispring.    Tom  between  delicacy  and 
affection  how  hesitating  she  goes  to  the  door  of  the  rich  man  for  help  I    But  it  ia 
opened,  and  scarcely  has  she  seated  herself  before  her  benefactor  comes  and  makes 
her  sorrow  his  own.    But  have  there  not  been  those  who  have  gone  to  Christ  for 
themselves  or  their  children  with  as  little  faith,  with  anguish  unspeakable  ?     And, 
or  ever  they  knew  it,  the  cloud  was  lifted;  the  door  was  opened;  the  Christ  was 
manifest ;  and  His  bounty  flooded  their  souls.    lU.  Fob  the  docbteb.     There  is 
no  experience  more  dreary  for  a  noble  nature  than  doubt.    It  may  do  for  dry  natures ; 
but  I  would  rather  have  superstition.     Admitting  that  that  is  dead  at  the  root,  yet, 
like  a  tree  covered  with  mistletoe,  there  is  some  life  and  freshness.     But  the  doubter 
is  dead  from  top  to  root.    Or  he  may  be  compared  to  one  lost  in  a  snow-storm  in 
an  open  prairie.    The  road  he  travels  on  is  soon  obliterated.    There  is  now  nothing 
by  which  he  can  direct  his  course.    He  begins  to  be  uncertain  and  is  alarmed. 
With  this  comes  exertion,  which  makes  matters  worse.    He  wanders  round  and 
round,  grows  chilly  and  numb,  drowsiness  steals  over  him;  and,  just  as  he  is 
tempted  to  take  the  fatal  rest,  he  discerns  a  light,  follows  it,  stumbles  upon  the  door 
of  the  cottage,  which  bursts  open,  and  there  he  sinks  down  as  one  dead.  But  behind 
that  door  he  is  safe.    And  so  there  are  those  who  have  wandered  from  church  to 
church,  from  theory  to  theory,  from  behef  to  unbelief.    Bound  and  round  they 
wander ;  as  they  are  about  to  give  up  there  comes  the  opening  of  a  door  through 
which  streams  the  light  of  Christ.     Men  want  to  be  argued  out  of  doubt ;  but  what 
men  need  is  not  more  reasoning,  persuading,  showing,  but  more  Christ.    Only  love 
can  cure.     IV.    Fob  those  who  in  beligion  find  unexpected  heabt  biches. 
There  are  many  who  live  in  a  plain  way,  unconscious  that  there  are  great  treasures 
near,  and  are  brought  unexpectedly  into  a  full  fruition  of  them.    How  many  go  to 
Christ  as  to  a  captain  on  a  battle-field,  a  master  in  a  workshop,  expecting  suffering 
and  toil,  and  find  Him  instead  to  be  the  door  to  a  beautiful  home  where  they  find 
comfort  and  wealth  in  abundance.    V.  Fob  those  in  danoeb.     David  represents 
God  as  a  strong  tower  into  which  he  may  run  and  be  safe  from  the  victorious  and 
pursuing  enemy  or  the  pitiless  storm.    Christ  is  the  door  of  refuge  to  souls  in  all 
kinds  of  peril.    VI.  Fob  wandebers.    There  is  a  vagrant  child  who  has  proved  the 
folly  of  his  course.     He  hesitates  about  going  back  ;  but  he  goes  and  finds  the  door 
open,  however  long  he  may  have  been  away.     There  is  the  child  who  has  honour- 
ably wandered  and  is  on  his  return.    How  the  vision  of  the  door  haunts  him  !    And 
tiiat  daughter  who  has  wandered  to  the  brink  of  hell,  the  door  held  open  by  a 


CHAP.  X.]  8T.  JOHN.  173 

mother's  love  invites  her  return.  And  what  the  open  door  of  home  is  to  the 
penitent  Jesus  is  to  the  worst.  VII.  Of  death  ;  but  He  is  a  gate  of  pearl.  {H.  W. 
Beecher.)  Christ  the  door: — I.  A  doob  suggests  entrance  into  an  enciosube — 
either  a  home  or  a  sanctuary.  The  enclosure  of  which  Christ  is  the  Door  is — I. 
The  Church,  to  which  He  affords  entrance  by  His  atonement.  2.  Heaven,  of  which 
He  is  the  Door,  because  He  is  the  Door  of  the  Church;  for  both  are  in  the  same 
enclosure,  the  one  being  the  vestibule  of  the  other.  "  He  that  believeth  .  .  .  hath 
eternal  life."  II.  The  characteristics  of  the  Doob:  breadth  and  narrowness. 
One  class  of  Scriptures  disclose  the  Door  as  wide  as  the  world  in  the  light  of  the 
ample  provision  made  for  salvation.  But  when  viewed  in  its  altitude  towards  sin  it 
is  so  narrow  that  the  smallest  sin  cannot  enter.  The  rich  moralist  found  it  too 
narrow  with  his  single  sin,  but  it  was  broad  enough  to  admit  the  penitent  "  chief  of 
einners."  III.  This  Doob  is  both  east  and  difficult  to  open.  There  are  doors 
60  arranged  that  the  pressure  of  a  child's  finger  on  a  spring  will  cause  them  to 
swing  wide  open,  when  otherwise  the  strongest  force  could  not  move  them.  The 
Spring  of  this  door  will  yield  to  the  weakest  touch  of  faith,  but  the  Door  will  not 
move  by  the  mightiest  other  means.  See  this  illustrated  in  the  case  of  the  publican 
and  Pharisee.  IV.  Christ  is  the  only  Dooe,  "  No  man  cometh  unto  the  Father 
but  by  Me."  "Neither  is  there  salvation  in  any  other."  True,  John  saw  twelve 
gates.  One  door  into  the  Church,  many  into  heaven.  Each  gate  is  some  beautiful 
pearl  of  Christ's  grace — His  love,  wisdom,  faithfulness,  &o.  But  they  are  all 
one  in  Christ.  V.  This  Doob  is  a  sure  defence  to  those  who  have  taken 
BEFUGB  within  IT.  No  enemy  shall  be  able  to  force  an  entrance.  "  The  gates 
of  heU  shall  not  prevail  against  it."  [M.  W.  Hamma,  D.D.)  Christ  the  Door : — 
Our  Lord  sets  Himself  forth  very  condescendingly.  The  most  sublime  and  poetical 
figures  are  none  too  glorious  to  describe  Him ;  but  He  chooses  homely  ones,  which 
the  most  prosaic  minds  can  apprehend.  1.  A  door  is  a  common  object.  Jesus 
would  have  us  often  think  of  Him.  2.  A  door  makes  a  very  simple  emblem.  Jesus 
would  have  the  lowliest  know  Him,  and  use  Him.  3.  A  door  to  a  sheepfold  is  the 
poorest  form  of  door.  Jesus  condescends  to  be  anything,  so  that  He  may  serve 
and  save  His  people.  I.  The  doob.  In  this  homely  illustration  we  see — 1. 
Necessity.  Suppose  there  had  been  none,  we  could  never  have  entered  in  to  God, 
peace,  truth,  salvation,  purity,  or  heaven.  2.  Singularity.  There  is  only  one 
door ;  let  us  not  weary  ourselves  to  find  another  (Acts  iv.  12).  3.  Personality. 
Jesus  is  Himself  the  door ;  not  ceremonies,  doctrines,  professions,  achievements, 
but  Himself.  4.  Suitability.  He  Is  suited  to  be  the  communication  between  man 
and  God7 seeing  He  unites  both  in  His  own  person,  and  thus  lies  open  both  earth- 
ward and  heavenward  (1  Tim.  ii.  5).  5.  Perpetuity.  His  "  I  am  "  is  for  all  times 
and  agee  (Matt,  xxviii.  20).  We  can  still  come  to  the  Father  by  Him  (John  xiv.  6 ; 
Heb.  vii.  25).  II.  The  usebs  of  it.  1.  They  are  not  mere  observers,  or  knockers 
at  the  door,  or  sitters  down  before  it,  or  guards  marching  to  and  fro  in  front  of  it. 
But  they  enter  in  by  faith,  love,  experience,  communion.  2.  They  are  not  certain 
persons  who  have  special  qualifications,  such  as  those  of  race,  rank,  education, 
office,  or  wealth.  Not  lords  and  ladies  are  spoken  of  ;  but  "  any  man."  3.  They 
are  persons  who  have  the  one  qualification :  they  do  "  enter  in."  The  person  is 
••  any  man,"  but  the  essential  distinction  is  entrance.  This  is  intended  to  exclude 
— (1)  Character  previously  acquired  as  a  fitness  for  entrance.  (2)  Feeling  either  of 
grief  or  joy,  as  a  preparation  for  admission.  (3)  Action,  otherwise  than  that  of 
entering  in,  as  a  term  of  reception.  4.  A  door  may  be  marked  private,  and  then 
few  will  enter.  A  door  which  is  conspicuously  marked  as  the  door  is  evidently 
meant  to  be  used.  The  remarkable  advertisement  of  "  I  am  the  door,"  and  the 
special  promises  appended  to  it,  are  the  most  liberal  invitation  imaginable.  Come 
then,  ye  who  long  to  enter  in  lifel  III.  The  privileges  op  these  users.  They 
belong  to  all  who  enter ;  no  exception  is  made.  1.  Salvation.  *'  He  shall  be 
saved."  2.  Liberty.  He  "  shall  go  in  and  out."  3.  Access.  "Shall  go  in":  for 
pleading,  hiding,  fellowship,  instruction,  enjoyment.  4.  Egress.  "  He  shall  go 
out " :  for  service,  progress,  &o.  5.  Nourishment.  ••  And  find  pasture."  Our 
spiritual  food  is  found  through  Christ,  in  Christ,  and  around  Christ.  Conclusion  : 
Let  us  enter.  1.  A  door  is  easy  of  access  ;  we  shall  not  have  to  climb  over  some 
lofty  wall.  2  It  is  a  door  for  sheep,  who  have  no  wisdom.  3.  The  door  is  Jesus  ; 
we  need  not  fear  to  draw  nigh  to  Him,  for  He  is  meek  and  lowly  in  heart.  (C,  H. ' 
Spurgeon.)  Tlie parable  of  the  door: — Two  distinct  allegories  in  this  part  of  thi 
chapter ;  they  should  be  carefully  distinguished.  The  parable  of  the  Good  Shep- 
herd is  sustained  at  greater  length,  and  has  foimd  first  place  in  the  popular  mind  • 


174  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [0H1».  X. 

bat  thiB  parable  of  the  door  has  a  beaaty  of  its  own.  Two  ideas  are  prominent.  I. 
Satbty.  "  He  shall  be  saved."  1.  The  sinner  pursued  by  grim  memories  of  guilt 
that  are  like  a  pack  of  wolves,  makes  for  this  stout  Door :  as  he  passes  in  it  closes 
npon  all  the  fierce  pursuers,  and  the  hunted  victim  may  breathe  freely  again.  2. 
The  saint  too  needs  shelter.  (1)  He  must  earn  money,  and  mammon  lurks  near. 
(2)  He  must  sustain  himself,  and  selfishness  is  not  far  off.  (3)  He  must  hsv& 
recreation,  and  the  lust  of  pleasure  lies  in  wait.  (4)  He  must  mix  with  men,  and 
pride  and  fear  alternately  threaten  to  devour  him.  (5)  He  must  play  the  citizen, 
and  the  spirit  of  party  bitterness  couches  near.  But  he  too  can  make  for  this 
shelter  when  chased  by  these  spirits  of  evil,  and  once  across  this  threshold  may 
leave  the  rabble,  howling  but  harmless,  the  wrong  side  of  the  door.  II.  Libkrtt. 
•♦  He  shall  go  in  and  out,"  Ac.  There  is  a  passing  out  through  Christ  into  the 
world.  The  Christian  life  is  no  life  of  isolation  ;  we  still  remain  under  obligation 
to  deal  with  mundane  affairs.  But  it  is  possible  to  share  Christ's  view  of  Ufe,  ta 
see  all  its  duties  in  the  light  of  His  Cross,  so  that  we  pass  in  and  out  between  the 
Church  and  the  world  unharmed.  (Walter  Hawkins.)  Christ  the  only  Door:—!, 
How  TO  ENTER  THE  Chtjbch.  1.  Negatively.  We  cannot  get  into  it — (1)  By  baptism. 
Millions  are  baptized  with  water,  but  unless  they  come  to  Christ  by  true  faith  they 
are  no  better  than  baptized  pagans.  (2)  By  birthright.  It  is  a  great  privilege  to 
have  Christian  parents,  but,  "  except  a  man  be  born  again,"  &o.  Your  father  and 
mother  are  not  the  door,  but  Christ  only.  (3)  By  profession.  A  professor  may 
prove  himself  a  hypocrite,  but  he  cannot  prove  himself  a  Christian  by  mere  profes- 
sion. Men  do  not  get  rich  by  professing  to  be  wealthy.  They  must  hold  their  title 
deeds,  and  have  cash  in  the  strong  box.  (4)  By  admission  to  the  visible  Church. 
If  a  man  leaves  the  door  alone  and  climbs  over  the  wall  and  gets  into  the  outward 
Church  without  Christ,  he  is  a  thief,  <fec.  If  you  have  not  Christ  your  Church  certifi- 
cates are  waste  paper.  2.  Positively.  By  faith  in  Christ.  (1)  If  you  exercise  this 
it  makes  it  plain  that  you  enter  by  Christ,  the  Door,  because  faith  leads  to  obedience. 
♦'  By  their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them."  (2)  If  we  have  entered  through  that  Door 
it  does  not  matter  what  priest  or  pope  may  say.  II.  The  pbivileqes  of  knterino 
BY  THAT  DooB.  1.  He  shall  be  saved — as  the  manslayer  from  the  avenger ;  as  Noah 
and  his  family.  2.  He  shall  go  in— (1)  To  rest  and  peace,  for  there  is  no  condemna- 
tion (Kom.  viii.  1).  (2)  To  secret  knowledge.  (3)  To  God,  with  holy  boldness  in 
prayer  as  the  adopted  heir  of  heaven.  (4)  To  the  highest  attainment  in  spiritual 
things,  for  a  man  does  not  tarry  just  inside  the  threshold  of  his  home.  Do  not 
stop  where  you  are.  Go  further  in  to  get  more  holiness,  joy,  &q.  3.  He  shall  go 
out — (1)  To  his  daily  business.  The  way  to  do  that  calmly  and  justly  is  to  go  to  it 
through  Christ.  Do  you  neglect  your  morning  prayer.  (2)  To  suffering.  (3)  To  con- 
flict with  temptation.  (4)  To  Christian  service.  It  makes  all  the  difference  between 
success  and  failure  whether  we  go  on  not  out  through  "  the  Door."  4,  He  shall  find 
pasture  (Psa.  xxiii.).  (C.  H.  Spurgeon. )  The  Door  always  open : — In  olden  times, 
cathedrals  were  regarded  as  places  of  sanctuary,  where  criminals  and  others  might 
take  refuge.  Over  the  north  porch  of  Durham  Cathedral  was  a  room  where  two  door- 
keepers kept  watch  alternately  to  admit  any  who  at  any  time,  either  by  day  or  by 
night  knocked  at  the  gate,  and  claimed  the  protection  of  St.  Cuthbert.  Whoever  comes 
to  the  door  of  our  house  of  refuge,  and  at  whatever  time,  finds  ready  admittance. 
(Ibid.)  Of  all  means  of  protection,  the  least  trustworthy  are  those  which  are  trust- 
worthy only  at  times.  Ship's  boats  that  cannot  be  lowered  at  the  critical  moment  ; 
fire-escapes  that  can  be  swept  by  the  rushing  flames ;  towers  of  refuge  that  are  locked 
and  barred  when  the  need  for  refuge  comes ; — all  these  inspire  a  false  confidence, 
and  are  the  more  untrustworthy  that  they  seem  so  trustworchy.  It  was  a  wise  pro- 
vision of  the  Romans  when  they  instituted  the  office  of  Tribune  of  the  Plebs  for 
the  protection  of  the  common  people,  that  the  doors  of  the  Tribune  should  stand 
open  night  and  day.  And  so  they  stood ;  and  to  these  wide-open  doors  of  refuge  the 
oppressed  plebeian  could  flee  by  day  or  by  night,  sure  of  always  finding  a  refuge 
there.  Such,  too,  is  the  Christian's  privilege.  (H.  C.  Trumbull,  D.D.)  Door-. 
keepers  dismissed : — The  work  of  the  reformation  was  thus  described  by  Stem,  a  Ger- 
man statesman :  ♦♦  Thank  heaven.  Dr.  Luther  has  made  the  entrance  into  heaven 
somewhat  shorter,  by  dismissing  a  crowd  of  door-keepers,  chamberlains,  and  masters 
of  ceremony. "  Christ  the  only  Door  into  the  kingdom  of  God : — The  old  city  of  Troy 
had  but  one  gate.  Go  round  and  round  and  round  the  city,  and  you  could  find  no 
other.  If  yon  wanted  to  get  in,  there  was  but  one  way,  and  no  other.  So  to  the  strong 
and  beautiful  city  of  heaven  there  is  but  one  gate  and  no  other.  Do  you  know  what 
it  is  ?    Christ  says,  "  I  am  the  Door."    (J.  L.  Nye.)        He  shall  be  saved,  and) 


CHAP,  xl]  ST.  JOHN.  175 

shall  go  In  and  out,  and  find  pasture. — The  fulness  of  Christian  life  is 
exhibited  in  its  three  elements — safety,  liberty,  support.  Admission  to  the 
fold  brings  with  it,  first,  security.  But  this  security  is  not  gained  by  isolation. 
The  believer  goes  in  and  out  •without  endangering  his  position  (Numb,  xxvii. 
17 ;  Deut.  xxxi.  2) ;  he  exercises  the  sum  of  all  his  powers,  claiming  his  share 
in  the  inheritance  of  the  world,  secure  in  his  home.  And  while  he  does  so 
he  finds  pasture.  He  is  able  to  convert  to  Divinest  uses  all  the  fruits  of 
the  earth.  But  in  all  this  he  retains  his  life  "in  Christ,"  and  he  approacbea 
all  else  "  through  Christ,"  who  brings  not  only  redemption,  but  the  satisfaction 
of   man's  true   wants   (c/.  chap.    vii.    37).      {Bp.    Westcott.)  Salvation: — I. 

read  a  story  the  other  day  of  some  Kussians  crossing  wide  plains  studded  over  here 
and  there  with  forests.  The  wolves  were  out,  the  horses  were  rushing  forward 
madly,  the  travellers  could  hear  the  baying;  and,  though  the  horses  tore  along  with 
all  speed,  yet  the  wolves  were  fast  behind,  and  they  only  escaped,  as  we  say,  "  by 
the  skin  of  their  teeth,"  managing  just  to  get  inside  some  hut  that  stood  in  the 
road,  and  to  shut-to  the  door.  Then  they  could  hear  the  wolves  leap  on  the  roof  ; 
they  could  hear  tLem  dash  against  the  sides  of  the  hut ;  they  could  hear  them  gnaw- 
ing at  the  door,  and  howling,  and  making  all  sorts  of  dismal  noises ;  but  the  travel- 
lers were  safe,  because  they  had  entered  in  by  the  door,  and  the  door  was  shut. 
Now,  when  a  man  is  in  Christ,  he  can  hear,  as  it  were,  the  devils  howUng  like 
wolves,  all  fierce  and  hungry  for  him  ;  and  his  own  sins,  like  wolves,  are  seeking  to 
drag  him  down  to  destruction.  But  he  has  got  in  to  Christ,  and  that  is  such  a 
shelter  that  all  the  devils  in  the  world,  if  they  were  to  come  at  once,  could  not  start 
a  single  beam  of  that  eternal  refuge :  it  must  stand  fast,  though  the  earth  and 
heaven  should  pass  away.  ( G.  U.  Spurgeon.)  To  go  in  and  out  is  an  expression 
frequently  ustd  in  Scripture  to  designate  the  free  use  of  an  abode  into  which  one 
may  enter  and  from  which  one  may  depart,  without  hindrance,  which  supposes  that 
the  individual  so  acting  belongs  to  the  house,  and  is  at  home  there  (Deut.  xxvii.  6  ; 
xxxi.  2 ;  Jer.  xxxvii.  4  ;  Acts  i.  21).  Jesus  here  uses  the  term  "  to  go  in  "  to  denote 
the  satisfaction  of  a  desire  for  repose,  the  possession  of  a  safe  retreat ;  and  "  to  go 
out "  to  indicate  the  satisfaction  of  the  need  of  nourishment,  the  enjoyment  of  rich 
pasturage.  The  idea  of  pasture  is  further  developed  in  ver,  10  by  that  of  life,  to 
which  is  added  the  idea  of  abundance,  of  superfluity.  {F.  Godet,  D.D.)  "  Go  in  " 
means  entering  by  faith,  "  go  out  "  means  dying  in  faith  and  the  resultant  life  in 
glory.  (Auyustine.)  Christian  liberty  : — The  fold  of  Christ  is  not  a  prison.  It 
does  not  shut  men  in  forcibly.  Those  who  belong  in  it  can  pass  and  repass  at  their 
pleasure,  seeking  pasture  everywhere  in  the  exercise  of  Christian  liberty.  There  are 
no  persons  on  earth  so  free  to  gather  knowledge  from  all  sources,  and  to  hunt  out 
the  good  from  all  directions,  as  Christian  scientists.  And  no  man  can  know  so  much 
about  any  good  there  is  in  all  the  outside  religions  of  the  world  as  the  intelligent 
disciple  of  Jesus  who  is  competent  to  recognize  truth  even  when  commingled  with 
error,  and  who  therefore  has  power  to  distinguish  between  truth  and  error.  The 
man  who  has  not  yet  been  inside  of  the  Christian  fold  is  of  all  men  less  capable  of 
comparing  that  fold  with  the  religions  of  the  world  outside  of  it.  There  is  a  vast 
difference  between  him  who  keeps  outside  all  the  time,  and  him  who  goes  in  and 
goes  out  finding  pasture,  (if.  C.  Trumbull,  D.D.)  Christian  pasturage : — Many 
fields  has  He  in  this  great  pasture-land  of  life  ;  and  He  has  some  of  the  well-loved 
eheep  in  them  all.  There  are  the  fields  of  peace,  much  sought  after,  which,  how- 
ever, are  apt  to  lose  their  charm  and  stay  their  benefits  when  too  long  tarried  in. 
There  are  the  fields  of  toil,  where  the  nourishment  comes  by  working  more  than 
by  eating.  There  are  the  fields  of  danger,  where  all  the  senses  need  to  be  in  exer- 
cise, and  all  the  energy  bent  towards  getting  through.  There  are  the  fields  of  dark- 
ness, where  the  sheep  crowd  close  to  the  shepherd  in  timid  trustfulness.  There  are 
the  fields  of  prospect,  where  at  times  refreshing  sight  may  be  had  of  the  higher 
pasture-land  up  to  which  all  the  flock  will  be  led  one  day  amid  celestial  light  and 
song.  And  again  we  say  that  every  one  of  these  fields  is  as  a  trysting-place,  where 
the  Divine  lover  of  human  souls  can  meet  with  such  of  them  as  for  the  time  He 
may  "  call,"  and  where  He  can  give  them,  one  by  one,  such  tokens  of  His  love  and 
care  as  their  needs  for  the  time  require.  Nor  will  it  be  long  until  He  leads  them 
through  the  particular  field,  and  into  the  gate  of  some  new  "time"  or  "  season" 

which  has  meanwhile  arrived.     {A.  Raleigii,  D.D.)        The  gifts  to  the  flock: 

Jesus  Christ  presents  Himself  before  the  whole  race  of  man,  and  declares  Himseli 
able  to  deal  with  the  needs  of  every  individual  in  the  tremendous  whole.  "  If  any 
man  " — no  matter  who,  where,  when.     For  all  noble  and  happy  life  there  are  at 


176  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ». 

least  three  things  needed :  security,  sustenance,  and  a  field  for  the  exercise  d 
activity.  To  provide  these  is  the  end  of  all  human  society  and  government.  Jesua 
Christ  here  says  that  He  can  give  all  these  for  everybody.  The  imagery  of  the 
sheep  and  the  fold  is  still,  of  course,  in  His  mind,  and  colours  the  form  of  the  repre- 
sentation. But  the  substance  is  the  declaration  that,  to  any  and  every  soul, 
no  matter  how  ringed  about  with  danger,  no  matter  how  hampered  and  hindered  in 
work,  no  matter  how  barren  of  all  supply  earth  may  be,  He  will  give  these  the 
primal  requisites  of  life.  "  He  shall  be  saved,  and  shall  go  in  and  out,  and  find 
pasture."  L  In  and  thbough  Chbist  an?  man  may  be  saved."  1.  The  word  "  saved  " 
here  is  rather  used  with  reference  to  the  imagery  of  the  parable  than  in  its  full 
Christian  sense,  and  means  "  safe,"  rather  than  "  saved."  At  the  same  time,  the  two 
ideas  pass  into  one  another ;  and  the  declaration  of  my  text  is  that  because,  step  by 
step,  conflict  by  conflict,  in  passing  danger  after  danger,  external  and  internal,  Ji>sua 
Christ,  through  our  union  with  Him,  wiU  keep  us  safe,  at  the  last  we  shall  reach  ever- 
lasting salvation.  Too  and  I  have  to  betake  ourselves  behind  the  defences  of  that 
strong  love  and  mighty  hand  if  ever  we  are  to  pass  through  life  without  fatal  harm. 
For  consider  that,  even  in  regard  of  outward  danger,  union  with  Jesus  Christ 
defends  and  delivers  us.  Suppose  two  Manchester  merchants,  made  bankrupt  by 
the  same  commercial  crisis ;  or  two  shipwrecked  sailors  lashed  upon  a  raft ;  or  two 
men  sitting  side  by  side  in  a  railway  carriage  and  smashed  by  the  same  collision.  One 
is  a  Christian  and  the  other  is  not.  The  same  blow  is  altogether  diflerent  in  aspect 
and  actual  effect  upon  the  two  men.  The  one  is  crushed,  or  embittered,  or  driven 
to  despair,  or  to  drink,  or  something  or  other,  to  soothe  the  bitterness ;  the  other 
bows  himself  with  "  It  is  the  Lord  1  Let  Him  do  what  seemeth  Him  good."  So 
the  two  disasters  are  utterly  different,  though  in  form  they  may  be  the  same,  and 
he  that  has  entered  into  the  fold  by  Jesus  Christ  is  safe,  not  from  outward 
disaster — that  would  be  but  a  poor  thing — but  in  it.  2.  In  our  union  with  Jesus 
Christ,  by  simple  faith  in  Him  and  loyal  submission  and  obedience,  we  do  receive 
an  impenetrable  defence  against  the  true  evils,  and  the  only  things  worth  calUng 
dangers.  For  the  only  real  evil  is  the  peril  that  we  shall  lose  our  confidence  and 
be  untrue  to  our  best  selves,  and  depart  from  the  living  God.  Nothing  is  evil  except 
that  which  tempts,  and  succeeds  in  tempting,  us  away  from  Him.  Eeal  gift  of  power 
from  Jesus  Christ,  the  influx  of  His  strength  into  our  weakness  of  some  portion  of 
the  spirit  of  life  that  was  in  Him  into  our  deadness  is  promised,  and  the  promise 
is  abundantly  fulfilled  to  all  men  who  trust  Him.  Oh,  brother,  do  not  trust  your- 
self out  amongst  the  pitfalls  and  snares  of  life  without  Him.  And  so,  kept  safe 
from  each  danger  and  in  each  moment  of  temptation,  the  aggregate  and  sum  of 
the  several  deUverances  will  amount  to  the  everlasting  salvation  which  shall  be 
perfected  in  the  heavens.  3.  Eemember  the  condition,  "  By  Me  if  any  man  enter 
in."  That  is  not  a  thing  to  be  done  once  for  all,  but  needs  perpetual  repetition. 
When  we  clasp  anything  in  our  hands,  however  tight  the  initial  grasp,  unless  there 
is  a  continual  effort  of  renewed  tightening,  the  muscles  become  lax,  and  you  have 
to  renew  the  tension  if  you  are  to  keep  the  grasp.  So  in  our  Christian  life  it  ia 
only  the  continual  repetition  of  the  act  which  our  Master  here  calls  "  entering  in 
by  Him  "  that  will  bring  to  us  this  continual  exemption  from,  and  immunity  in,  the 
dangers  that  beset  us.  Keep  Christ  between  you  and  the  storm.  Keep  on  the  lee 
side  of  the  Eock  of  Ages.  Keep  behind  the  breakwater,  for  there  is  a  wild  sea  run- 
ning outside ;  and  your  little  boat,  undecked  and  with  a  feeble  hand  at  the  helm, 
will  soon  be  swamped.  Keep  within  the  fold,  for  wolves  and  lions  lie  in  every  bush. 
Live  moment  by  moment  in  the  realizing  of  Christ's  presence,  power,  and  grace. 
Only  so  shall  we  be  safe.  II.  In  Jesus  Christ  ant  man  may  find  a  field  fob 
UNEESTKicTED  ACTIVITY.  That  metaphor  of  "  going  in  and  out  "  is  partly  explained 
to  as  by  the  image  of  the  flock,  which  passes  into  the  fold  for  peaceful  repose,  and 
out  again,  without  danger,  for  exercise  and  food ;  and  partly  by  its  frequent  use 
in  the  Old  Testament,  and  in  common  conversation,  as  the  designation  of  the 
two-sided  activity  of  human  life.  The  one  side  is  the  contemplative  life  of 
interior  union  with  Jesus  Christ  by  faith  and  love;  the  other  the  active  life  of 
practical  obedience  in  the  field  of  work  which  God  provides  for  us.  1.  "He  shall 
go  in."  That  comes  first,  though  it  interferes  with  the  propriety  of  the  metaphor, 
because  the  condition  of  this  "  going  in  "  is  the  other  "  entering  in  by  Me,  the 
door."  That  is  to  say,  that,  given  the  union  with  Jesus  Christ  by  faith,  there  must 
then,  as  the  basis  of  all  activity,  follow  very  frequent  and  deep  inward  acts  of  con- 
templation, of  faith,  and  aspiration,  and  desire.  You  must  go  into  the  depths  ol 
God  through  Christ.  You  must  go  into  the  depths  of  your  own  soulo  through  Him. 


CHAP.  J.]  ST.  JOHN.  177 

It  is  throngh  Christ  that  we  draw  near  to  the  depths  of  Deity.  It  is  through  Him 
that  we  learn  the  length  and  breadth  and  height  and  depth  of  the  largest  and 
loftiest  and  noblest  truths  that  can  concern  the  Spirit.  It  is  through  Him  that  we 
become  familiar  with  the  inmost  secrets  of  our  own  selves.  And  only  they  who 
habitually  Uve  this  hidden  and  sunken  life  of  solitary  and  secret  communion  will 
ever  do  much  in  the  field  of  outward  work.  Eemember  the  Lord  said  first, 
"He  shall  go  in."  And  unless  you  do  you  will  not  be  "saved."  2.  But  if 
there  have  been,  and  continue  to  be,  this  unrestricted  exercise  through  Christ  of 
that  sweet  and  silent  life  of  solitary  communion  with  Him,  then  there  will  follow 
npon  that  an  enlargement  of  opportunity,  and  power  for  outward  service  such  as 
nothing  but  the  emancipation  by  faith  in  Him  can  ever  bring.  Howsoever  by  ex- 
ternal circumstances  you  and  I  may  be  hampered  and  hindered,  however  often  we 
may  feel  that  if  something  outside  of  us  were  different  the  development  of  our 
active  powers  would  be  far  more  satisfactory,  and  we  could  do  a  great  deal  more  in 
Christ's  cause,  the  true  hindrance  lies  never  without,  but  within ;  and  is  only  to  be 
overcome  by  that  plunging  into  the  depths  of  fellowship  with  Him.  III.  In 
Jesds  Chbist  any  man  may  keceivb  sustenance.  ••  They  shall  find  pasture."  The 
imagery  of  the  sheep  and  the  fold  is  still,  of  course,  present  to  the  Master's  mind,  and 
shapes  the  form  in  which  this  great  promise  is  set  forth.  I  need  only  remind  you, 
in  illustration  of  it,  of  two  facts,  one,  that  in  Jesus  Christ  Himself  all  the  true 
needs  of  humanity  are  met  and  satisfied.  He  is  "  the  bread  of  God  that  came  down 
from  heaven  to  give  life  to  the  world."  Do  I  want  an  outward  object  for  my  Intel* 
lect  ?  I  have  it  in  Him.  Does  my  heart  feel  with  its  tendrils,  which  have  no  eyes 
at  the  ends  of  them,  after  something  round  which  it  may  twine,  and  not  fear  that 
the  prop  shall  ever  rot  or  be  cut  down  or  pulled  up  ?  Jesus  Christ  is  the  home  of 
love  in  which  the  dove  may  fold  its  wings  and  be  at  rest.  Do  I  want  an  absolute 
and  authoritative  command  to  be  laid  upon  my  will ;  someone  *'  Whose  looks  en- 
join, Whose  lightest  words  are  spells  ?  "  I  find  absolute  authority,  with  no  taint  of 
tyranny,  and  no  degradation  to  the  subject,  in  that  infinite  will  of  His.  Does  my 
conscience  need  some  strong  detergent  to  be  laid  upon  it  which  shall  take  out  the 
Btains  that  are  most  indurated,  inveterate,  and  engrained  ?  I  find  it  only  in  the 
blood  that  cleanseth  from  all  sin.  Do  my  aspirations  and  desires  seek  for  some  solid 
and  substantial  and  unquestionable  and  imperishable  good  to  which,  reaching  out, 
they  may  be  sure  that  they  are  not  anchoring  on  cloudland  ?  Christ  is  our  hope. 
For  all  this  complicated  and  craving  commonwealth  that  I  carry  within  my  soul, 
there  is  but  one  satisfaction,  even  Jesus  Christ  Himself.  Nothing  else  nourishes 
the  whole  man  at  once,  but  in  Him  are  all  the  constituents  that  the  human  system 
requires  for  its  nutriment  and  its  growth  in  every  part.  So  in  and  through  Christ 
we  find  pasture.  But  beyond  that,  if  we  are  knit  to  Him  by  simple  and  continual 
faith,  love,  and  obedience,  then  what  is  else  barrenness  becomes  full  of  nourish- 
ment, and  the  unsatisfying  gifts  of  the  world  become  rich  and  precious.  They  are 
nought  when  they  are  put  first,  they  are  much  when  they  are  put  second.  I  remember 
when  I  was  in  Australia  seeing  some  wretched  cattle  trying  to  find  grass  on  a  yellow 
pasture  where  there  was  nothing  but  here  and  there  a  brown  stalk  that  crumbled  to 
dust  in  their  mouths  as  they  tried  to  eat  it.  That  is  the  world  without  Jesus  Christ. 
And  I  saw  the  same  pasture  six  weeks  after,  when  the  rains  had  come,  and  the  grass 
was  high,  rich,  juicy,  satisfying.  That  is  what  the  world  may  be  to  you  if  you  will  put 
it  second,  and  seek  first  that  your  souls  shall  be  fed  on  Jesus  Christ.  (A.  Maelaren, 
D.D.)  The  privileges  of  the  sheep : — Jesus  names  three  privileges  accruing  to  those 
who  accept  Him  as  Shepherd  and  Door,  and  by  Him  enter  into  the  life  of  God.  1. 
First,  they  have  safety.  ••  They  shall  be  saved."  This  is  a  great  word,  and  implies 
all  that  God  has  to  give  to  men.  Especially,  though,  they  shall  be  saved  from  sin 
and  death,  also  they  shall  be  saved  from  thieves  and  robbers,  and  from  the  wild 
beasts  of  sin,  even  from  Satan  himself,  however  he  may  try  te  get  them.  2. 
Second,  they  have  freedom.  "  They  shall  go  in  and  out."  The  salvation  which 
Jesus  gives  is  not  bondage  but  freedom.  "  He  hath  not  given  us  the  spirit  of  bon- 
dage, but  the  spirit  of  adoption."  The  Christian  is  not  bound  by  rules  and  statutes 
as  a  slave  is,  but  as  a  son  he  has  the  liberty  of  God's  house.  He  comes  and  goes 
as  a  son  comes  and  goes,  being  always  guided  and  governed  by  parental  love,  and 
not  by  hard  rule.  3.  Third,  they  have  a  sufiBciency  of  all  things.  "And  find 
pasture."  "All  things  are  yours."  " Having  nothing,  we  yet  possess  all  things.** 
"  No  good  thing  wiU  He  withhold  from  them  that  walk  uprightly. "  "  My  God  shall 
supply  all  your  need  according  to  His  riches  in  glory  by  Jesus  Christ."  {G.F.Pentecost.) 
I  am  come  that  they  might  have  life,  and  that  they  might  have  it  more  ahnndantly. 

VOL.   II.  12 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  X. 

— The  great  contratt : — We  should  not  feel  satisfied,  however,  to  limit  the  import  of 
the  Saviour's  words  to  thp  scribes  and  Pharisees  merely.  They  were  but  the  tools 
by  which  the  great  enemy  carried  on  his  work — the  weapons  wielded  in  unhallowed 
warfare  by  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air.  He  was  the  hidden  agent,  the 
powerful  adversary,  the  thief,  whose  unhallowed  design  was  to  steal,  and  to  kill, 
and  to  destroy.  The  words  before  us  are  descriptive  of  the  diverse  modes  of  the 
tempter's  operations.  By  the  expression  "  to  steal "  we  may  understand  those  vague 
and  covert  schemes  of  the  enemy  which  constitute  that  cunning  craftiness  whereby 
he  lieth  in  wait  to  deceive.  •*  To  kill "  implies  a  bolder  game,  a  mailed  and  formid- 
able combatant,  an  open  declaration,  a  war,  that  sort  of  attack  which  he  may  be 
supposed  to  employ  when  he  comes  under  the  similitude  of  a  roaring  lion.  "  To 
destroy  "  signifies  a  labour,  a  plotting,  a  refinement  of  ingsnuity  and  torture,  the 
weaving  of  some  subtle  net  in  whose  meshes  to  entangle  and  betray — that  sort  of 
attack  which  he  may  be  supposed  to  employ  when  he  comes  under  the  similitude 
of  an  angel  of  light.  Such  is  the  constant  purpose  of  the  adversary,  of  the  thief — 
his  purpose,  however  interrupted ;  his  purpose,  however  discouraged  ;  and  it  is  in 
direct  and  impressive  contrast  to  this,  and  not  in  the  comparatively  contemptible 
operations  of  the  tools  of  his  power,  that  the  Saviour  brings  out  so  forcibly  the 
design  of  his  own  manifestation — "  I  am  come  that  they  might  have  life,  and  that 
they  might  have  it  more  abundantly."  We  may  notice,  in  the  exposition  of  this 
Bobject  to  you,  the  source,  the  worthiness,  and  the  measure  of  this  promised  life. 
I.  And  in  the  first  place,  let  us  endeavour  to  comprehend  the  bouece  op  this  life. 
"  I  am  come  that  they  might  have  life."  There  are  prerogatives  in  the  power  of 
kings,  you  know,  which  are  never  delegated  to  inferior  authority.  The  monarch 
has  his  regalia,  which  it  were  treason  for  any  one  else  to  wear.  Life  is  the 
gift  of  God — always  the  gift  of  God.  This  is  a  part  of  the  prerogative 
which  He  has  never  communicated — that  act  of  His  royalty  which  has 
never  been  usurped  by  another.  Man,  to  be  sure,  has  done  his  utmost 
to  create.  The  sculptor  has  chiselled  upon  the  shapeless  marble  the  features 
of  the  human  face,  and  proportion  has  been  observed,  and  attitude  has  been 
successful,  and  a  gazing  multitude  has  been  loud  in  admiration  of  the  artist's 
skill ;  but  though  the  eye  reposed  in  beauty,  no  sparkle  flashed  from  it ;  though 
the  cheek  was  well  rounded  and  symmetrical,  it  had  no  mantling  blush ;  though 
the  Ups  were  true  to  nature,  they  could  not  speak  the  thrill  of  the  soul.  1.  Life, 
then,  is  always  the  gift  of  God.  If  we  speak  of  natural  hfe,  for  example,  it  is  the 
gift  of  God.  2.  If  we  speak  of  intellectual  Ufe,  again,  that  also  is  the  gift  of  God. 
3.  If  we  speak  of  spiritual  Ufe,  again,  that  also  is  the  gift  of  God.  II.  I  have 
deemed  these  observations  necessary  in  order  to  guard  us  against  misapprehension 
or  mistake.  I  come,  in  the  second  place,  to  notice,  brethren,  the  wobteiness  of 
THIS  FBOMiSED  LiFB.  God's  gifts  must  be  like  Himself.  Himself  perfect.  He  has 
made  everything  perfect  in  its  kind.  1.  In  the  first  place,  then,  the  Spirit  is 
revealed  to  us  as  the  Enlighten  er,  and  we  may  gather,  therefore,  that  this  life  is 
comprehensive  of  knowledge — "  For  this  is  life  eternal,  that  they  may  know  thee, 
the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ,  whom  thou  has  sent."  2.  Then,  secondly, 
the  Spirit  is  revealed  in  us  as  the  Sanctifier ;  and  we  may  gather,  therefore,  that 
this  Ufe  is  comprehensive  of  hoUness.  "  To  be  spiritually -minded  is  life."  3. 
Then,  again,  the  Spirit  is  revealed  to  us  as  the  Comforter ;  and  we  may  gather,  there- 
fore, that  this  life  is  comprehensive  of  happiness — "  for  it  is  not  a  vain  thing  for 
you,  because  it  is  your  life."  God  is  love,  and  love  is  happiness.  4.  Then,  again, 
this  Spirit  is  revealed  to  us  as  the  Living  Spirit.  We  may  gather,  therefore,  that 
this  life  is  comprehensive  of  immortality.  Yon  know,  brethren,  that  death  is  not 
an  original  arrangement  of  the  universe.  It  was  an  ordained  penalty  in  case  of 
transgression.  Nothing  that  God  ever  made  in  the  beginning  shall  be  found 
wanting  in  the  end ;  but  death  came  in  after,  and  it  shall  go  out  before.  III.  I 
have  not  time  to  dweU  largely  upon  the  meabueb  of  the  promised  life — more 
abundantly.  I  will  just  give  you  one  or  two  thoughts.  "More  abundantly." 
That  implies  comparison.  More  abundantly  than  something  else.  More  abundantly 
than  what?  Well,  first  more  abimdantly  than  the  life  of  Paradise — that  is  a 
wonderful  thing  to  think  about — the  glorious  life — the  life  in  Paradise.  Each  leaf 
spoke  there  of  the  loveliness  of  nature ;  every  sound  breathed  heavenly  melody, 
and  every  breath  was  imbued  with  fragrance,  and  angels  ministered  in  those 
sweet  soUtudes,  and  the  voice  of  the  Lord  came  down  in  delicious  com- 
panionship at  the  close  of  the  day.  It  was  a  glorious  thing  to  live  in  Paradise, 
to  be  amongst  the  favoured  ones  of   the  Creator.     Ah,  but  Christ    is  coma 


OTAP,  X.]  8T.  JOHN.  17» 

*<th»t  we  may  have  life,  and  that  we  may  have  it  more  abundantly."  "In 
Christ  the  sons  of  Adam  boast  More  blessings  than  their  fathers  lost."  More 
abundantly  than  what?  More  abundantly  than  under  the  Levitical  dispensa- 
tion. That  was  a  noble  life.  It  was  a  grand  thing  to  think  that  they  had  the 
oracles  Divine,  that  the  Urim  and  Thummin  always  flashed  on  the  breastplate  of 
the  high  priest ;  that  any  man  could  at  any  time  tell,  by  going  to  the  oracles, 
whether  he  was  in  condemnation  or  in  acceptance.  And  it  was  a  glorious  scene 
that  on  the  day  of  atonement,  when  all  the  gathered  multitudes  of  Israel  went  up 
to  the  Temple  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  high  priest  came  out  in  solemn  garments, 
and  confessed  the  sins  of  the  people,  and  then  went  into  the  holy  place,  and 
«prinkled  the  blood  on  the  mercy-seat,  and  then  came  out  richly  robed,  and 
with  uplifted  hands  pronounced  the  benediction  on  all  that  heard  him,  and  when 
every  man  of  that  great  multitude  went  to  his  home  at  night  a  justified  and 
forgiven  man.  It  was  a  glorious  life  that,  but  •*  that  which  was  made  glorious  had 
no  glory  in  this  respect,  by  reason  of  the  glory  that  excelleth."  "  He  is  come  that 
we  may  have  life,  aQd  that  we  may  have  it  more  abundantly "  than  that.  More 
abundantly  than  what  ?  Why,  more  abundantly  than  we  could  ever  have  imagined. 
And  that,  in  some  sort,  is  the  most  wonderful  of  all.  We  have  various  messengers 
at  command.  The  eye  beareth  witness  of  wonders,  but  these  transcend  them  by 
far ;  the  ear  hath  the  winds  at  its  command — many  a  marvellous  strain  they  waft 
on  their  wings — but  the  winds  do  not  bear  a  story  like  this.  Brethren,  there  is  a 
phrase  which  we  sometimes  use — I  don't  know  that  I  ever  felt  its  peculiar 
significance  so  much  as  I  feel  it  to-night,  especially  in  connection  with  the  subject 
I  have  feebly  endeavoured  to  bring  before  you.  It  is  this :  "  I  stand  between  the 
living  and  the  dead  I "  Literally  it  is  true.  I  stand  between  the  living  and  the 
dead.  To  which  do  you  belong  ?  Those  are  living  who  have  come  to  Christ,  and 
are  resting  upon  Him.  Those  are  dead  who  are  yet  in  a  state  of  nature,  or  who 
have  fled  for  refuge  to  any  refuge  of  lies.  I  stand  between  the  living  and  the  dead. 
The  living  and  the  dead  1  Some  of  you  are  living  perhaps.  Are  you?  You  hardly 
know,  you  say.  Your  only  evidence  of  life  is  that  you  are  conscious  of  your  dead- 
ness.  Well,  there  is  life  there,  and  that  is  more  than  a  dead  man  can  say.  Con 
flciousness  of  deadness  is  itself  a  sign  of  life.  Oh,  I  do  rejoice  that  I  can  come  to 
you  to-night  with  the  publication  of  life.  I  can  stand  upon  the  sepulchre  and  roll 
the  stone  away,  and  in  the  name  of  my  Master  exclaim :  "  He  that  believeth  in 
Jesus,  even  though  he  were  dead,  yet  shall  he  live.  Whosoever  liveth  and  beUeveth 
in  Jesus  shall  never  die."  Don't  kill  yourselves.  You  will  do  it  if  you  die.  God 
will  not  kill  you.  He  has  never  decreed  the  murder  of  any  creature  He  has  made. 
Ministers  will  not  kill  you  ;  they  would  fain  have  you  live.  They  sound  warnings 
in  your  ears,  that  you  may  live.  But  lo  1  a  terrible  scene  rises  up  before  me.  I 
fancy  myseK  somewhere,  it  may  be  in  the  country  parts  of  this  beautiful  island  of 
ours.  We  will  put  the  scene  where  I  have  sometimes  seen  it,  at  the  corner  of  four 
green  lanes.  There  is  something  there,  although  everything  in  the  external  aspect 
seems  to  smile — there  is  something  there  that  makes  the  peasant  whistle  as  he  goes 
by,  or  pass  it  with  bated  breath,  and  the  children  don't  choose  that  place  to  play  in ; 
everything  about  it  seems  haunted  with  strange  and  nameless  horror ;  and  if  you 
ask  about  it,  some  peasant  lowers  his  voice  into  a  whisper,  as  he  says,  "  It  is  the 
grave  of  a  suicide."  An  unhonoured  sod  just  thrown  up,  nameless  and  unknown, 
at  the  corner  of  four  cross-roads,  at  midnight — the  grave  of  one  who  put  himself 
out  of  life,  and  beyond  the  rites  of  Christian  burial — the  grave  of  a  suicide.  Oh, 
brethren,  it  is  a  fearful  thing,  but  I  must  pursue  the  analogy.  If  any  of  you,  after 
repeated  admonitions  and  warnings,  should  perish,  you  have  struck  the  suicide's 
blow  upon  your  own  souls,  and  wherever  your  nameless  grave  may  be,  angels  who 
delight  to  minister  to  those  who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation,  looking  at  the  place 
where  your  ashes  may  repose,  will  have  to  say,  "  It  is  the  grave  of  a  suicide — of  one 
who  is  self-murdered,  and  spiritually  dead — of  one  who  has  driven  the  dagger  of 
perdition  into  his  own  soul."  Oh,  don't  do  that ;  I  beseech  you  don't  do  that.  Live, 
live !  That  one  word  is  the  gospel,  because  Christ  has  promised  life,  and  the  Spirit 
is  waiting  to  impart  it.  {W.  M.  Punshon.)  The  gift  of  abundant  life: — Our 
Lord  here  delares  the  great  end  for  which  He  came  into  the  world,  that  we  "  might 
have  life."  He  had  already  said  this  (John  iii.  16  ;  vi.  33  ;  v.  40).  But  here  He 
epeaks  with  a  still  greater  fulness  of  meaning :  *•  that  they  might  have  it  more 
abundantly  "  ;  promising  some  great  endowment,  some  greater  gift  of  God  than 
man  had  ever  before  received.  This  is  the  great  grace  of  the  gospel,  the  abundant 
gift  of  life.    I.  The  gift  a  spirit  of  life  dwells  in  those  who  are  united  to  Christ,  ia 


180  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

a  FXTiiNXss  more  abundant  than  was  ever  revealed  before.  The  life  possessed  by 
Adam  was  in  the  measure  of  his  own  infirmity  ;  the  life  which  is  in  Christ  is  in  the 
fulness  of  a  Divine  manhood.  Adam  was  united  to  God  only  by  God's  grace  and 
power,  Christ  is  God  made  man.  The  humanity  of  Adam  was  only  human  ;  in 
Christ  the  manhood  is  become  Divine.  The  union  of  the  Godhead  with  the  manhood 
endowed  it  with  a  substantial  grace  whereby  it  was  deified.  And  it  was  from  the 
miraculous  conception  filled  with  the  fulness  of  all  graces.  His  very  manhood 
became  the  fountain,  a  great  deep  of  all  giace.  Therefore  He  said  (John  v.  21,  26). 
This  was  the  prophecy  of  the  Baptist  (Matt.  iii.  11).  And  it  was  His  own  promise 
(John  vii.  37-39).  And  after  He  had  entered  into  His  glory,  St.  John  bare  witness 
that  this  promise  had  been  fulfilled  (John  i.  14,  16) ;  that  is  to  say,  the  anointing 
which  was  upon  Him  has  flowed  down  to  us.  The  Spirit  which  descended  upon  our 
Head  hath  run  down  to  the  least  member  of  His  body,  even  "  to  the  skirts  of  His 
clothing."  When  he  ascended  into  Heaven,  He  "  received  gifts  for  men  " ;  that  is, 
the  full  dispensation  of  grace  was  committed  unto  the  Second  Adam.  U.  The  gift 
of  life  is  abundant  also  in  its  continuance.  By  the  regeneration  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
we  are  engrafted  into  the  second  Adam,  very  man,  not  frail  and  weak,  but  also  very 
God,  changeless  and  almighty.  We  are  gathered  under  a  Head  which  cannot  fail ; 
and  are  members  of  Him  who  hath  revealed  His  own  Divine  name :  ••  I  am — the 
Life."  We  cannot  die  in  our  Head,  because  He  is  ^-ife  eternal ;  nor  can  we  die  in 
ourselves,  except  we  cast  out  the  Giver  of  life,  who  is  in  us.  Our  first  head  fell,  and 
drew  us  with  him  into  the  grave ;  our  second  Head  is  in  heaven,  and  •*  our  life  is 
hid  with  Him  in  God."  Lessons :  1.  We  hereby  know  that  in  all  our  acts  there 
is  a  Presence  higher  than  our  own  natural  and  moral  powers.  We  were  united  to 
Christ  by  the  present  of  the  Holy  Spirit  from  our  baptism.  There  has  never  been 
a  moment  from  the  first  dawn  of  consciousness,  from  the  first  twilight  of  reason, 
and  the  first  motions  of  the  will,  when  the  Spirit  of  life  has  not  been  present  with 
as.  He  has  created  in  as  the  first  dispositions  to  truth  and  holiness ;  prevented 
ns  in  all  good  intentions,  restrained  us  in  all  evil ;  beset  our  whole  spiritual  nature, 
and  encompassed  us  on  all  sides,  guiding  us  into  the  will  of  God.  2.  This  Spirit 
works  in  us  according  to  the  revealed  and  fixed  laws  of  our  probation.  His 
persuasions  are  by  illuminations  of  truth  and  inspirations  of  holiness  ;  and  these 
are  powers  which  act  not  by  force,  but  like  the  lights  and  dews  of  heaven,  by  a 
piercing  virtue,  infusing  new  gifts  of  fruitfulness  and  power  into  the  works  of  God. 
What  we  receive  of  the  Divine  Spirit  is  so  given  to  us  as  to  become  our  own,  and  as 
our  own  we  use  it  with  a  perfect  freedom  of  the  will.  3.  Lastly,  we  may  learn  that 
the  union  of  this  Divine  Presence  with  us  in  our  probation,  issues  in  the  last  and 
crowning  grace  of  this  life,  the  gift  of  perseverance  (Phil.  i.  6 ;  1  Thess.  v.  24). 
When  did  we  ever  set  ourselves  sincerely  to  any  work  according  to  the  will  of  God, 
and  fail  for  want-of  strength?  It  was  not  that  strength  failed  the  will,  but  that  the 
will  failed  first.  {Archdeacon  Manning.)  Life  more  abundantly : — God  supplies 
ns  at  birth  with  a  certain  amount  of  animal  vitality,  and  with  certain  faculties 
tending  to  various  kinds  and  degrees  of  good  in  the  universe,  and  by  means  of  these 
we  are  to  draw  our  life  from  the  treasury  of  the  creation  and  from  God.  Our 
success  during  our  stay  on  the  earth  is  to  be  measured  by  the  amount  and  kind  of 
life  we  derive  from  the  fountains  that  flow  from  the  Infinite  fulness.  Life  may  be 
increased.  Even  in  the  physical  department  we  may  have  it  "  more  abundantly  " 
by  obeving  the  plain  conditions.  We  are  not  fated  to  a  short  allowance  or  a  fixed 
amount,  but  are  endowed  with  the  power  of  growing,  and  are  tempted  by  a  large, 
unmeasured  possibility.  Through  exercise,  and  the  proper  choice  and  economy  in 
food,  we  not  only  keep  well,  but  we  enlarge  the  stream  of  vitality.  And  the  law  by 
which  a  man  purifies  and  refreshes  the  currents  of  his  blood,  makes  the  eye  clean, 
the  tendons  taut,  the  nerves  calm,  the  chest  capacious,  the  step  elastic,  and  knots 
the  muscles  by  discipline  to  such  sturdiness  that,  though  once  they  were  tired  with 
a  sMght  burden,  now  they  wUl  lift  nearly  half-a-ton,  is  a  law  that  can  be  traced  up 
into  the  mental  and  moral  regions,  and  be  seen  to  govern  the  spirit  as  well  as  the 
frame.  1.  Life  may  be  increased.  Many  try  to  increase  it  by  intensity.  There  is 
a  story  of  an  Eastern  monarch  who  had  been  a  noble  ruler,  but  who  received  a 
message  from  an  oracle  that  he  was  to  live  only  twelve  years  more.  He  instantly 
resolved  that  he  would  turn  these  to  the  most  account,  and  double  his  life  in  spite 
of  destiny.  He  fitted  up  his  palace  gorgeously.  He  denied  himself  no  form  of 
pleasure.  His  magnificent  gardens  were  brilliantly  lighted  from  sunset  to  sunrise,  so 
that  darkness  was  never  experienced  within  the  circuit  of  his  estate;  so  that,  when- 
•vez  he  was  awake,  the  stream  of  pleasure  was  ever  flowing,  and  even  the  sound  of 


CHAP.  X.J  ST.  JOHN.  181 

revelry  was  never  still.  Thus  he  determined  to  outwit  the  oracle  by  living  nearly 
twenty-four  years  in  twelve.  But  at  the  end  of  six  years  he  died.  The  oracle  fore- 
knew and  made  allowance  for  his  cunning  scheme..  No  doubt,  on  his  death-bed, 
the  monarch  saw  the  vigour  and  despotism  of  the  laws  of  life,  with  which  it  is  vain 
for  finite  art  and  will  to  wrestle.  The  story  is  true  in  the  spirit,  though  it  may  be 
fable  in  its  details.  What  is  gained  in  intensity  is  lost  in  time.  You  cannot  "  have 
life  more  abundantly  "  by  making  the  soul  crouch  down  into  the  body,  and  diffusing 
it  through  the  fleshy  envelope,  so  that  it  loses  the  acquaintance  with  its  own  higher 
realm  in  the  added  zest  of  mortal  pleasure.  There  is  the  most  tragic  waste  of 
faculty.  The  end  of  such  effort  is  disgust,  weariness,  and,  in  the  inmost  being,  the 
sense  of  emptiness,  folly  and  unrest.  2.  There  is  another  kind  of  life  that  we  may 
call  broad.  Life  is  increased  in  this  way  by  putting  out  more  faculties  into  com- 
munication with  nature  and  society.  In  fact,  it  is  by  the  unfolding  of  faculties 
that  all  additions  to  life  are  received.  Each  one  of  our  powers  is  a  receptacle  for 
some  element  of  the  Divine  good,  but  it  is  not  like  a  goblet,  and  it  does  not  receive 
as  water  is  poured  into  a  vase;  its  method  is  rather  that  of  a  seed.  When  put  into 
proper  relations  with  its  objects  it  germinates  and  absorbs  from  the  currents  and 
forces  outside  of  it,  and  transmutes  them  into  its  own  quality  of  substance.  It  is 
inspiring  to  think  how  some  natures  live  broadly  enough  to  take  in  elements  of 
growth  from  the  farthest  quarters  of  the  visible  universe.  There  are  great 
naturalists  living  now  that  have  received  nutriment  from  the  lowest  discovered 
stratum  of  the  earth  and  from  the  most  distant  patch  of  milky  light  in  immensity. 
This  is  a  method  of  receiving  life  "  more  abundantly,"  and  in  saying  now  that, 
according  to  the  Christian  wisdom,  it  is  not  the  highest  way,  I  am  not  going  to 
criticize  it  but  to  commend  it.  I  delight  to  think  of  men  like  Humboldt  and  Arago, 
Eerschel  and  Agassiz,  and  to  see  in  them  that  the  riches  of  infinite  truth  are  not 
wholly  wasted  on  us  ;  that  God  does  not  rain  His  wisdom  through  all  our  air  and 
pack  His  treasures  beneath  our  soil  entirely  for  nothing,  so  far  as  the  enlarging  of 
the  boundaries  of  human  spirits  is  concerned.  3.  Yet  this  life,  though  broad  as  we 
have  thus  interpreted  it,  may  be  superficial.  The  true  abundance  comes  not  from 
intensity,  and  not  alone  from  the  number  of  objects  with  which  we  are  in 
communion,  but  from  depth.  A  life  is  rich  in  the  proportion  that  it  is  deep ;  and 
it  is  deep  to  the  extent  that  the  moral  and  spiritual  sentiments  are  active  and 
healthy.  The  spirit  that  has  a  sense  of  justice  quick  and  large,  and  lives  by  it  in 
relation  to  his  fellows,  and  tries  to  organize  more  of  it  through  himself  in  society, 
lives  deeper  than  the  man  of  intellect  and  infinitely,  deeper  than  the  man  of  pleasure. 
The  affections  are  richer  than  the  money-making  and  the  truth-seeking  capacities  ; 
and  the  richest  affections  are  those  which  bind  us  consciously  to  the  infinite.  Of 
course,  a  thoroughly  proportioned  life  will  have  both  breadth  and  depth  ;  but  wa 
must  not  fail  to  see  that  depth  is  the  essential  thing.  That  is  connected  with 
religion  ;  that  every  mind  may  have.  It  is  offered  to  you  and  me  independently  of 
our  strength  of  mind  or  fulness  of  learning.  Astronomy  we  may  not  have  time  to 
study,  or  ability  to  master  ;  but  God,  who  made  all  worlds,  is  as  near  to  this  one 
as  to  any,  and  as  ready  to  fill  our  spirits  as  those  that  live  in  the  most  distant  or 
brilliant  star.  And  the  religious  life  may  be  developed  independently  of  all  our 
learning.  How  much  knowledge  do  you  need  to  eonvinco  you  that  you  ought  to 
obey  conscience  ?  How  wide  acquaintance  with  literature  to  prove  to  you  that  you 
ought  to  bridle  your  selfishness,  and  trample  a  foul  passion  beneath  your  will  ?  How 
great  familiarity  with  libraries  to  assure  you  that  a  disposition  of  prayer  and  trust 
brings  back  a  rich  reward  through  inward  harmony  and  a  sense  of  peace  ?  This  is 
the  deep  Uf  e,  and  we  may  have  it  though  we  be  hindered,  though  we  have  little  time 
for  the  cultivation  of  mental  powers,  and  the  faculties  that  make  life  graceful. 
(T.  Starr  King.)  The  mission  of  Christ : — I.  The  peesons.  "  I."  "  They." 
1.  God,  who  is  more  than  all,  and  man,  who  is  infinitely  less  than  nothing.  2.  The 
God  of  peace  to  His  professed  enemy.  Nothing  else  in  the  world  is  God's  enemy. 
Sin  is  enmity  because — (1)  It  violates  the  majesty  of  God,  inasmuch  as  in  sin  we 
seem  to  try  conclusions  whether  God  can  see  a  sin,  or  be  affected  with  it,  or  cares 
to  punish  it ;  as  though  we  doubted  whether  God  were  present,  pure  or  powerful. 
(2)  It  is  surrender  to  the  enemy  of  His  kingdom,  Satan,  and  that  for  small  wages 
(Bom.  vi.  21).  And  yet  for  all  this  the  Lord  of  Hosts  comes,  and  to  an  enemy  so 
incapable  of  carrying  out  his  enmity.  Some  men  will  continue  kind  when  they  find 
a  thankful  receiver,  but  God  is  kind  to  the  unthankful.  There  may  be  found  a 
man  who  will  die  for  his  friends,  but  God  died  for  His  foes.  3.  God  to  all  men ; 
*'  they  "  hath  no  limitation.     The  merit  of  Christ  is  sufficient  for  all,  and  whether 


182  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [OBAT.  z. 

this  sufficiency  grows  out  of  the  nature  of  the  merit,  the  dignity  of  the  person  being 
considered,  or  out  of  the  acceptation  of  the  Father  and  the  contrast  between  Him 
and  the  Son,  we  will  not  dispute.    AU  agree  that  there  is  enough  done  for  all. 
Would,  then,  God  receive  enough  for  aU,  and  then  exclude  some  of  Himself? 
God  forbid.     Well  said  Augustine,  "  0  good  and  mighty  God,  who  art  as  loving 
to    every  man    as    to    all    mankind,  and  meanest  as  well  to  all  mankind  aa 
to    any    man."    Moses  desired  that   God  would  show  him  His  "ways,"  His 
dealings  with    men   (Exod.   xxxiii.    13)  ;    that  which  he  calls    His  glory  (ver. 
18),  how   he  glorifies   Himself  upon  man.      God    promises   (ver.    19)   that    He 
will  show  Him  all  His  "goodness";  and  then,  in  chap,  xxxiv.  6,  He  shows  him 
His  way,  goodness,  glory ;  and  here  are  thirteen  attributes,  and  only  one  of  them 
tastes  of  judgment — the  rpst  are  wholly  mercy.     Such  a  proposition  has  His  mercy, 
that  there  is  no  cause  in  Him  if  all  men  be  not  partakers  of  it.    II.  The  action. 
♦•  I  came."     1.  He  who  is  omnipresent  in  love  to  man,  studied  a  new  way  of  coming, 
of  communicating  Himself  to  man,  and  by  assuming  our  nature  in  the  blessed 
Virgin.     That  this  Virgin  should  not  only  have  a  Son,  but  that  this  Son  should  be 
the  Son  of  the  Eternal  God  in  such  a  coming  of  Him  who  was  here  before,  as  that 
if  it  had  not  arisen  in  His  goodness  no  man  would  ever  have  thought  of  it.    2.  He 
who  came  to  the  old  world  in  promises,  prophecies,  and  figures,  is  actually,  really, 
and  presentially  come  to  us  ;  of  which  difference  that  man  will  have  the  best  sense 
who  languishes  under  the  heavy  expectation  of  a  reversion,  or  has  felt  the  joy  of 
actual  possession.    III.  The  end.      1.  That  they  might  have  life.     Life  is  the 
character  by  which  Christ  denominates  Himself  (chap.  xiv.  6 ;  Acts  iii.  14).     God 
has  included  all  that  is  good  in  the  name  of  Life,  and  all  that  is  ill  in  the  name  of 
Death  (Deut.  xxx.  15).     The  reward  proposed  to  our  faith  is  to  Uve  by  it  (Heb.  ii. 
4) ;  and  this  fulness  of  happiness,  life  and  the  life  of  life,  spiritual  life  and  its 
exaltation  into  eternal  life,  is  the  end  of  Christ's  coming.     (1)  That  there  might  be 
life  to  be  had.     For  chaos  was  not  a  deader  lump  before  the  Spirit  of  God  moved 
upon  it  than  mankind  was  before  the  influence  of  Christ's  commg  wrought  upon  it. 
But  now  that  God  has  so  loved  the  world  that  He  gave  His  only  begotten  Son,  all 
may  have  life.     (2)  But  this  life  must  be  received.    There  is  air  enough  to  give 
breath  to  everything,  but  everything  does  not  breathe.     If  a  tree  does  not  breathe, 
it  is  not  because  it  wants  air,  but  because  it  wants  means  to  receive  it.     That  man 
that  is  blind  shall  see  no  more  sun  in  summer  than  in  winter.     2.  That  they 
might  have  it  more  abundantly.      God  can  do  nothing  penuriously.     (1)^  The 
natural  man  more  than  any  other  creature.    Animals,  &c.,  have  life ;  man  is  life 
(Gen.  ii.  7),  and  will  live  after  death.     (2)  The  Jews  more  than  the  Gentiles. 
Christ  came  to  the  Jews  in  promises,  types,  sacrifices ;  and  thus  they  had  better 
means  to  preserve  that  life,  to  illustrate  the  image  of  God,  to  conform  themselves 
to  God,  and  make  their  immortaUty  eternal  happiness,  than  other  nations.     (3) 
Christians  more  than  Jews.     Christ  has  come  to  Christians  really  and  in  substance. 
(4)  In  the  Christian  Church  Christ  has  given  us  means  to  be  better  to-day  than 
yesterday,  to-morrow  than  to-day.     The  grace  which  God  offers  us  does  not  only 
fill,  but  enlarges  our  capacity  for  all  that  goes  to  make  up  life— holiness,  assurance, 
happiness,  heaven.    {J.  Donne,  D.D.)        The  mission  of  Christ : — I.  Christ  is  thb 
GivEB  or  LIFE.    1.  Life  in  New  Testament  language  has  a  special  fulness  of  mean- 
ing.    It  is  more  than  mere  existence.     There  is  a  death  in  life,  in  which  the  great 
end  of  existence  is  ignored,  to  which  life's  true  blessedness  is  impossible,  and  in 
which  its  higher  powers  are  dormant  or  polluted.    The  true  life  is  pure  and  free ;  it  is 
the  life  of  reason,  conscience,  will,  and  affections.    It  is  not  inherent  in  human 
nature,  acquired  by  human  means,  possible  to  human  strength,  but  is  found  only 
in  Christ  the  Life-giver.    2.  In  this  our  Lord  is  not  a  subordinate  agent,  but  the 
primal  source  of  life.     The  gift  to  men  is  out  of  the  fulness  of  His  own  eternal 
Being.    In  Him  was  life  essentially,  and  of  His  fulness  we  receive  hfe.     3.  Lite  is 
His  gift.     (1)  As  it  is  possessed  by  men.    (a)  In  all  states  of  being.    In  its  dawn  of 
religious  infancy ;  its  meridian  of  manhood  ;  its  evening  radiancy,  when  its  sun  is 
setting ;  it  is  given,  sustained,  and  perfected  by  Christ.     (5)  In  all  the  dispensa- 
tions.     In  its  paradisaical  innocency ;  its  patriarchal  simplicity ;  its  Mosaic  com- 
plexity ;    its  latter-day  glory.      (2)  As  He  has  made  good  man's  lost  title  to  its 
possession.     He  has  redeemed  man  from  sin  and  death,  bestowed  the  quickening 
and  sanctijfying  Spirit,  and  thus  resolved  the  forfeited  creative  life.    II.  The  life 
BESTOWED  BY  Chbist  hab  ITS  MORE  ABUNDANT  MEASURES,  as  Compared  with— 1.  The 
.  life  of  the  former  dispensation.    Life  and  light  are  closely  related.     The  dimness  of 
Judaism  was  necessarily  connected  with  Umited  and  imperfect  life.    2.  Present  or 


«Hip.  X.]  ST.  JOHN.  183 

future  measures  of  its  possession.  It  is  like  a  river  whose  channel  broadens  and 
deepens  as  it  flows  onward.  In  its  progress  sterility  and  death  vanish  :  all  other 
lUe  lives  anew.  To  its  necessities  and  enlargement  all  other  life  becomes  service- 
able.  3.  The  primal  gift.  The  life  of  redemption  is  more  abundant  than  that  of 
Creation,  as  it  involves  the  more  perfect  manifestation  of  Him,  in  the  knowledge  of 
whom  standeth  eternal  life.  4.  Present  or  future  Christian  attainments.  It  is  not 
a  succession  of  labours,  to  end  in  the  rest  of  heaven ;  it  is  growth  in  knowledge, 
purity,  power,  grace.  In  the  freshness  and  beauty  of  new-born  life,  in  the  expan- 
sion and  maturity  of  its  full  age,  in  its  ripe  and  mellow  eventide,  it  is  still  capable 
of  increase ;  and  when  at  length  it  escapes  from  earthly  limitations,  there  will  still 
remain  the  more  abundant  life  of  progress  and  blessedness.  Conclusion  :  This  life 
is  in  Christ,  and  is  attained  by  faith.  Let,  therefore,  faith  rest  on  Him  who  is 
"  able  to  do  exceeding  abundantly,"  Ac.  (T.  Stephenson.)  Life  in  Christ : — 
Christ  represents  Himself  in  contrast  with  a  type  of  character  which  He  calls  "  the 
thief."  When  He  applies  this  to  those  who  come  before  Him,  He  means  not  only 
in  time,  but  apart  from  Him  in  design.  Not  Moses  and  the  prophets,  who  were 
gent  of  God  and  spake  of  Him,  but  those  unspiritual  commentators  on  the  law  of 
former  days,  including  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  of  His  own.  And  well  do  the 
modern  forms  of  this  teaching  deserve  the  name.  Nothing  is  more  destructive. 
The  contrast  between  Christ  and  the  robbers  is  drawn  out.  They  came  to  gather 
for  their  own  benefit — "  to  steal."  Christ  came  to  give.  They  came  without  skill, 
handling  the  souls  of  men  with  rough  barbarity — "  to  kill."  Christ  came  to  save. 
They  came  regarding  men  as  instruments  to  be  used  for  themselves  or  their  party ; 
and  so,  if  need  were,  to  "  destroy,"  aye,  even  by  fire  and  sword.  Christ  came  to 
sacrifice  Himself  for  man's  good.  In  one  word.  His  purpose  was  to  give  life.  I. 
What  soet  op  lipe  did  Christ  come  to  bring  ?  The  proper  life  of  man.  There 
is  a  form  of  life  which,  in  proportion  to  its  possession,  constitutes  one  truly,  and  in 
the  full  sense,  a  man.  1.  That  life  must  be  co-ordinate  with  man's  faculties ;  grow 
out  of,  and  be  measured  by,  its  powers.  This  is  true  of  all  life.  Look  at  the  life 
of  a  bird  ;  its  whole  structure  is  a  beautiful  machinery  for  living  in  the  air.  So 
wi{h  the  fish ;  it  is  adapted  for  the  water,  and  the  mollusc  for  the  rock.  And  the 
vealth  and  circuit  of  life  develop  in  proportion  to  faculty.  Life  is  full  and  rich 
where  there  are  many  and  diverse  abilities,  and  poor  where  there  are  few.  2.  Then 
the  life  of  man  should  be  the  grandest  in  the  world,  for  no  creature  is  so  richly 
endowed.  Life  ought  to  pour  in  upon  him  from  every  side  and  through  every 
avenue.  The  senses  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  intellect  and  affections  on  the  other, 
should  teem  with  the  materials  of  vivid  and  happy  consciousness,  and  the  sense  of 
God  and  the  Spiritual  world  should  put  the  last  touch  of  refinement  on  our  plea- 
sure and  of  gentleness  on  our  love.  But  it  is  not  so.  Life  is  poor  and  mean,  and, 
for  the  masses  of  men,  sensual  and  degrading.  The  very  capacities  of  our  life  are 
obscuted.  We  have  never  felt  it  at  its  best,  and  do  not  know,  therefore,  what  its 
best  would  be.  Only  one  true  man  has  lived.  We  may  study  life  in  Christ  as  in 
its  realized  ideal.  II.  Christ  comes  to  enrich  our  life,  until  it  is  renewed  in 
THE  likeness  OF  His  OWN.  1.  By  setting  it  in  its  true  course.  He  would  take  the 
river  at  its  source,  and  turn  it  into  its  proper  channel.  Our  face  is  turned  the 
wrong  way.  The  first  step,  therefore,  is  to  bring  this  fatal  blunder  home  to  our 
minds,  and  create  the  consciousness  of  sin.  Let  a  man  once  feel  his  need  and 
repentance,  conversion,  turning  to  God  for  pardon  and  acceptance  will  follow.  2. 
By  revealing  the  truths,  on  a  right  apprehension  of  which  the  tone  of  thought  and 
activity  depends.  Life  turns  on  the  poles  of  thought.  It  is  folly  to  say  that  it  is 
of  no  consequence  what  a  man  believes.  All  history  proves  the  contrary.'  A  good 
life  implies  a  true  creed,  and  such  a  creed  Christ  comes  to  give.  In  His  own  Person 
He  manifests  God,  so  that  we  can  know  and  love  Him.  The  nature,  responsibility, 
capacity,  and  destiny  of  the  soul  are  for  ever  on  His  lips.  So,  too,  of  our  duty,  its 
principles,  claims,  spirit.  The  love  of  God,  and  the  way  of  peace  with  Him ;  all 
this,  and  more.  He  teaches.  How  ?  Not  in  words  only.  He  is  the  Word.  He 
reveals  God  by  being  "  the  express  image  of  His  person  " ;  man,  by  fulfilling  the 
idea  of  perfect  manhood ;  duty,  by  reducing  it  to  a  living  embodiment.  In  Him 
only  the  ideal  and  the  actual  have  met.  And  His  teaching  is  as  perfect  in  form  as 
in  essence.  It  is  gathered  into  a  life  history.  No  method  is  so  interesting,  impres- 
sive, significant,  suggestive.  3.  By  kindling  an  enthusiasm  for  goodness,  and  by 
revealing  it  as  an  object  for  pursuit.  It  is  a  great,  but  by  no  means  easy,  thing  to 
know  our  duty.  For  more  than  two  thousand  years  the  problems  of  morals  have 
been  debated.    Bat  it  is  greater  still  to  feel  the  full  force  of  the  reasons  on  whiob 


184  THE  BIBLICAI  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  X. 

it  rests,  and  to  feel  the  sublimity  of  goodness.  For  the  life  of  goodness  is  an 
essential  part  of  the  life  of  man,  as  the  word  "  virtue  "  indicates — the  condition 
appropriate  to  vir,  man.  Now  Christ  quickens  the  love  of  goodness  by  winning 
our  souls  to  HimHP.If ;  and  a  great  analyst  of  human  nature  has  said  that  our  very 

Eossibilities  of  virtue  have  been  altered  by  the  coming  of  Christ.  We  can  love, 
ope,  endure,  dare  more  since  His  face  has  shone  from  the  canvas  of  history. 
Catch  inspiration  from  that  grand  life,  and  you  will  have  life  more  abundantly.  4. 
By  enlarging  the  circle  of  our  benevolent  regards.  There  is  a  strong  element  of 
selfishness  in  men,  which  tends  to  narrow  our  sympathies.  "  Every  man  for  him- 
self." And  yet  the  best  parts  of  life  reach  outside  of  ourselves.  Children  live  in 
the  love  of  those  about  them.  There  are  our  boyish  friendships.  Then  comes 
the  love  of  woman.  By  and  by  tiny  feet  patter  on  our  household  floor.  Love 
multiplies  and  deepens  as  life  goes  on.  We  learn  to  care  for  our  party,  church, 
country,  the  world.  Christ  sanctifies  all  this,  and  makes  it  fruitful.  The  love  of 
Christ  can  cure  our  selfishness,  and  we  shall  do  some  good  in  the  world  when  we 
love  men  as  Christ  loved  them,  and  not  tiU  then.  5.  By  becoming  a  spring  of  joy 
in  our  hearts.  All  true  life  is,  or  may  be,  joyous.  "  The  water  that  I  shall  give 
him,"  &o.  Paul  lays  it  down  as  our  duty  to  "  rejoice  evermore."  (J.  F.  Stevenson, 
D.D.)  Life  a  gain : — 1.  A  strange  question  has  come  under  discussion — "  Is 

life  worth  living  ?  " — strange,  until  we  recollect  that  a  prevalent  philosophy  has  as 
its  main  theses  that  life  is  not  worth  living.  It  is  not  hard  to  trace  the  genesis  of 
this.  When  one  begins  to  doubt  the  goodness  of  God,  one  begins  to  doubt  if  life  has 
much  value.  2.  This  question  is  very  audacious.  We  might  perhaps  question  a 
future  of  life ;  but  this  points  life  itself  with  an  interrogation,  and,  answered  in  the 
negative,  involves  the  wish  that  both  created  and  the  Creation  were  blotted  out.  But 
to  empty  and  then  annihilate  the  universe  is  an  audacity  that  sinks  to  the  ridi- 
culous. "Oh,  that  I  had  never  been  bom!"  said  one.  *'  But  you  are  born,  and  you 
cannot  help  it,"  was  the  truly  philosophical  reply.  A  philosophy  that  flies  in  the  face 
of  the  inevitable  forfeits  its  name.  3.  The  proposition  to  get  rid  of  this  undesirable 
life  need  not  awaken  concern ;  the  greater  part  will  prefer  to  live  it  out  to 
the  end.  And  then  it  may  be  impossible  to  escape  by  so-called  self-destruction. 
We  may  throw  ourselves  over  the  battlements  of  the  life  that  now  is,  but  who  can 
say  that  we  may  not  be  seized  by  the  mysterious  force  that  sent  us  here  and  be 
thrust  back  into  this  world  or  into  one  no  better.  If  extinction  is  desirable  we 
must  suppose  a  good  God,  for  no  other  would  permit  it.  But  will  He  not  rather 
deliver  from  the  misery  and  preserve  the  life  ?  4.  It  is  not  amiss  that  the  question 
has  come  up,  for  it  has  turned  the  thought  of  the  age  to  the  good  as  well  as  to  the 
evil  of  life.  That  there  are  gains  and  losses  there  is  no  question — which,  then,  are 
in  excess?  I.  Let  us  make  a  compahativb  estimatb  of  the  lobs  and  gain  of 
UFE  AS  WB  pass  oub  ALLOTTED  TEABS.  We  must  Start  with  the  fact  that  but  one 
kind  of  excellence  seems  possible  at  a  time.  We  never  see  a  person  simultaneously 
at  the  height  of  personal  beauty,,  energy  and  wisdom.  One  excellence  follows 
another.  But  we  must  not  infer  that  as  one  phase  passes  away  that  there  is  actual 
loss;  there  may  be  a  succession  characterized  by  an  ascending  grade,  that  life 
represents  an  unquenchable  force,  can  never  be  less  than  it  is,  and  thus  be  its  own 
excuse  for  being.  1.  We  lose  the  perfection  of  physical  life,  its  grace  and  exuber- 
ance— yet  only  to  gain  firmer  hold  of  it.  The  child  is  guileless  by  nature,  the  man 
because  he  has  learned  to  hate  a  lie.  The  child  is  joyous,  it  knows  not  why ;  the 
man's  joy  is  the  outcome  of  his  nature  reduced  to  harmony.  2.  We  lose  the 
forceful,  executive  qualities.  We  no  longer  undertake  arduous  enterprises  or  heavy 
responsibilities ;  the  needed  energy  is  gone,  but  it  may  have  been  transmuted  as 
motion  is  into  light  and  heat.  3.  In  the  mental  qualities  there  is  smaller  loss. 
Fancy  decays,  but  with  the  example  of  Milton  and  others  before  us  we  can  hardly 
say  imagination,  but  the  judgment  grows  broader  and  the  sense  of  truth  keener 
and  the  taste  more  correct  later  on.  4.  In  moral  qualities  there  is  no  loss  at  aU. 
The  order  is  significant,  the  physical  changes  utterly,  the  mental  partially,  the 
moral  not  at  aU  if  the  life  is  normal.  II.  What  do  we  gain  as  lifb  gobs  on  ?  1. 
This  evident  progress  from  th»  lower  to  the  higher  must  be  accounted  a  gain.  It 
does  not  matter  how  this  progress  is  made,  whether  by  actual  loss  of  inferior 
qualities  supplanted  by  higher,  or  by  a  transformation  of  forces,  though  the  latter  is 
more  in  accordance  with  science  which  asserts  that  force  is  indestructible.  Kone  of 
ns  would  choose  to  go  back  to  any  previous  phase  to  stay.  We  may  long  for  the 
innocence  of  youth,  but  who  would  take  it  with  its  ignorance  ;  for  its  zest,  but  not 
at  the  expense  of  its  immaturity;  for  the  enerev  "  life,  hut  not  at  the  cost 


€HAP.  X.]  ST.  JOHN.  VBi 

of  the  repose  and  wisdom  of  age.  2.  Though  we  lose  energy,  courage,  and  present 
hope  we  gain  in  patience,  and  on  the  whole  suffer  less.  This  is  a  gain  over  the 
untested  strength  and  false  measurements  of  earlier  years.  3.  We  make  another 
gain  as  thought  grows  calm  and  judgment  roundei  to  its  full  strength.  Knowledge 
becomes  wisdom,  passion  and  prejudice  pass,  and  we  gain  in  comprehensiveness, 
and  BO  lose  the  spirit  of  partizanship.  4.  There  is  great  gain  in  later  life  in  certain 
forms  of  love  and  sympathy.  The  passion  and  semi-selfishness  of  early  love,  and 
the  restriction  and  prejudice  of  early  sympathy  pass  away,  but  both  become 
stronger,  purer,  calmer  and  more  universal.  The  old  are  more  merciful  than  the 
young ;  they  judge  more  kindly  and  forgive  more  readily.  Hence  they  are  poor 
disciplinarians,  but  they  are  not  called  to  that  duty.  5.  There  is  also  in  advanced 
life  a  mingling  of  the  faculties.  Thought  has  more  faith  in  it  and  faith  more 
thought ;  reason  more  feeling  and  feeling  more  reason ;  courage  more  prudence, 
and  prudence  more  courage.  An  old  man  does  not  feel  so  much  rapture  before  a 
landscape  as  one  younger,  but  he  sees  it  with  more  eyes.  This  co-operation  of  all 
the  faculties  is  like  the  Divine  mind  in  which  every  faculty  interpenetrates  every 
other,  making  God  one  and  perfect,  and  is  an  intimation  that  he  is  getting  ready 
for  the  company  of  God.  Conclusion :  1.  If  life  can  start  at  the  point  of  mere 
existence  and  thence  grow  up  into  likeness  of  God,  it  is  worth  living.  And  if  life 
reaches  so  far,  we  may  be  sure  it  will  go  on.  2.  This  line  of  thought  has  only 
force  in  the  degree  in  which  life  is  normal.  That  it  is  not  such  is  true,  but  there  is 
provision  in  humanity  against  its  own  failures,  for  One  is  in  it  who  can  fill  its  cup 
to  overflow.  (T.  T.  Munger.)  More  life: — I.  Life  in  its elt.  1.  This  language 
implies  that  we  are  by  nature  destitute  of  life.  The  Scriptures  draw  a  wide 
distinction  between  life  in  Christ  and  the  morality  and  the  immorality  of  the  world. 
There  are  immense  differences  between  those  who  "give  themselves  to  work  all 
uncleannesses,"  &c.,  and  those  who  are  respected  for  excellence  of  character,  but  no 
fundamental  difference  is  recognized  by  God.  True  life  is  wanting  in  both,  because 
both  are  "  alienated  from  the  hfe  of  God."  It  is  not  what  virtue  I  may  see  in  the 
face  of  man,  but  has  he  that  "  holiness  without  which  no  man  can  see  the  Lord." 
2.  We  must  not  soften  the  truth  that  there  is  no  life  apart  from  Christ.  One 
statue  may  be  marked  by  rough  outlines  and  coarse  features,  and  another  may  be 
an  Apollo  Belvidere,  but  though  one  may  bear  more  resemblance  to  a  man,  both  are 
dead.  8.  Between  the  feeblest  Christian  and  the  best  specimen  of  the  unrenewed 
man,  if  pot  to  human  eyes,  to  the  eyes  of  God,  there  is  all  the  difference  between 
life  and  death.  4.  Because  there  is  no  self-restorative  power  in  man.  Christ  has 
come  that  we  "might  have  life."  II.  This  life  in  its  fulness.  1.  Progress  is 
one  essential  quality  in  life.  Where  will  you  look  to  find  life  springing  at  once  into 
full  development  ?  Not  to  the  corn  ;  not  to  the  forest.  The  outer  man  is  first  a 
babe,  weak  and  helpless.  The  inner  man  follows  the  same  analogy.  There  are 
babes  in  Christ,  &o.  In  some  cases  the  new  man  may  rise  into  sudden  perfection ; 
for  who  shall  confine  the  power  of  God.  But  the  law  of  God's  general  working  is 
that  the  path  of  the  just  shall  shine  more  and  more,  and  go  from  strength  to 
strength.  2.  Christ  lays  emphasis  on  this  point  because  we  are  prone  to  be  content 
with  a  little  life.  How  common  for  a  man  to  rest  satisfied  with  mere  pardon :  a 
blessing  indeed  beyond  all  price,  but  only  the  porch  of  the  great  temple  of  salvation. 
Many  sit  down  here  and  sing  a  new  song ;  but  Christ  comes  and  says  I  will  show 
you  greater  things  than  these.  I  have  come  to  give  life  more  abundantly.  Don't 
think  less  of  your  pardon  but  more  of  your  sanctification.  You  were  once  like  sick 
men  in  a  hospital  on  fire — you  needed  rescue  first,  but  healing  also.  Do  not  forget 
that  you  were  pardoned  in  order  to  be  purified.  III.  The  keason  for  which  we 
SHOULD  SEEK  THE  MORE  ABUNDANT  LIFE.  Feeble  life  is — 1.  A  miserable  thing — (1) 
To  look  at.  There  is  but  little  to  attract  in  a  river  which,  through  drought,  flows  but 
a  thin  and  sluggish  current ;  it  pleases  best  when  it  fills  the  channel  and  sweeps  in 
majestic  volume  through  the  valley.  There  is  nothing  to  delight  in  a  tree  almost 
barren ;  we  love  to  see  it  thick  and  bossy.  It  distresses  us  to  see  a  man  bent  and 
worn  with  disease  ;  but  delightful  to  see  one  healthy  and  strong.  And  free,  robust 
life  is  not  less  but  more  beautiful  in  the  spiritual  world.  (2)  To  endure.  You  have 
known  the  pain  of  physical  weakness,  its  agony  which  has  seemed  to  turn  every 
nerve  into  a  string  of  fire ;  its  weakness,  when  you  have  started  at  every  noise  ;  its 
sleeplessness.  A  little  Ufe  is  more  painful  than  none  at  all.  And  a  Christian  whose 
spiritnal  life  is  languid  is  more  miserable  than  a  man  dead  in  sin.  His  eyes  are 
opened,  but  while  a  blind  man  feels  no  pain  his  eyes  are  so  weak  that  the  light 
distresses  them.     And  what  a  disastrous  effect  has  religion  without  cheerfulness— 


186  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

particularly  on  children.  2.  A  dangerous  thing.  Epidemics  find  their  way  to  those 
who  are  in  a  low  condition  of  health.  When  a  storm  rushes  on  the  deep  it  tries  the 
stoutest  vessel,  but  woe  to  the  vessel  that  is  slim  and  leaky.  So  when  the  spiritusil 
life  is  weak  it  becomes  an  easy  prey  to  all  perils.  If  we  are  to  be  safe  we  must  be 
well  fortified  within.  3.  A  useless  thing.  We  are  fit  for  nothing  when  our  bodily 
strength  is  reduced.  We  have  enough  to  do  to  stipport  our  own  debility.  But 
the  more  life  we  have  the  more  strength  we  have  to  expand  our  work.  And  Christian 
life  may  be  so  feeble  as  to  be  of  no  service  in  the  way  of  influence  on  the  world. 
It  is  for  the  world's  sake  as  well  as  our  own  that  Christ  desires  us  to  have  abundance 
of  life.  IV.  In  what  manneb  this  abundant  life  is  to  bb  secured.  Like  all 
life  it  is  mysterious,  but  it  is  not  magical  in  its  growth.  It  requires  exertion 
and  will  not  take  care  of  itself.  We  are  to  "grow  in  grace."  1.  We  must 
compare  ourselves,  individually,  with  the  standard  of  holiness  as  given  in  the  gospel 
rather  than  with  that  actually  reached  by  the  Church.  The  question  with  many  is 
not  what  is  possible,  but  what  is  a  fair,  average  piety.  2.  To  have  more  life  we 
must  have  more  prayer.  According  to  prayer,  and  therefore  the  prayer  of  faith,  it 
will  be  done  unto  us.  3.  We  must  dwell  more  beneath  the  Cross,  the  fountain  of 
life,  when  we  begin  to  live,  that  we  may  have  our  life  increased.  {E.  Mellor,  D.D.) 
Life  and  viore  life : — This  was  spoken  in  the  character  of  the  shepherd — the  anti- 
thesis to  thief.  I.  The  aim  of  Chkist — the  calling  forth,  strengthening,  and 
development  of  the  highest  life  of  man.  1.  This  is  necessary  work.  Mother, 
teacher,  &c.,  are  required  for  the  previous  stages  of  life's  realization — animal, 
social,  intellectual  attainment.  But  it  is  still  more  essential  that  spiritual  life 
should  be  created  and  sustained.  Here  we  are  conscious  of  helplessness,  and  just 
here  success  or  failure  affects  our  entire  being  and  future.  All  the  rest  exist  for 
this ;  and  none  as  fit  as  Christ,  and  no  method  better  than  His  for  this  task.  2. 
What  hinders  that  spiritual  life  should  not  be  spontaneous.  A  moral  taint.  Absence 
of  perfect  type.  Christ  came,  therefore,  not  so  much  to  deliver  men  from  a  future 
catastrophe  as  from  existing  moral  death,  and  to  render  possible  a  grander  humanity. 
3.  As  Christ  came  for  this,  so  His  coming  was  itself  the  condition,  the  way  of  its 
realization.  He  lived  fiee  from  sin  and  at  home  in  this  higher  element  of  life.  His 
example  taught  and  inspired  and  His  sacrifice  supplied  a  basis  for  this  Ufe.  Just 
to  live  as  He  did  was  much.  The  inventor  who  lays  bare  new  uses  of  things,  the 
explorer  who  opens  up  unknown  lands,  the  artist  who  interprets  the  deep  har- 
monies of  nature,  the  philosopher  who  discovers  new  truth — each  comes  that  we 
"might  have  life,"  intensifies  its  interest,  extends  its  scope,  and  strengthens  its 
hold  on  the  world,  but  does  not  enrich  the  highest  portion  of  our  nature,  which  is 
conscious  of  righteousness,  and  translates  it  into  action.  The  latter  work  is  Christ's 
only,  and  is  accomplished  only  by  full  union  with  Him  who  is  "  the  Life."  II.  Its 
VALUE  AS  AN  EVIDENCE  OP  CHRISTIANITY.  1.  Generally  a  valid  claim  to  trust  and 
welcome.  Yet  not  likely  to  be  allowed :  presenting  no  immediate  earthly  advan- 
tage ;  not  utilitarian.  2.  But  appealing  to  the  deeper  consciousness  of  men.  (1) 
As  bringing  forth  the  sense  of  this  life  in  men.  (2)  As  calling  for  faith,  admira- 
tion, and  sympathy.  (3)  As  revealing  the  solemn  meaning  of  existence,  and  the 
need  of  reconciliation  with  God.  Conclusion :  What  do  we  gain  ?  The  mastery  of 
our  entire  nature.  "  My  mind  to  me  a  kingdom  is  " ;  nay,  "  I  myself."  The  rest 
(body,  &c.)  not  a  mere  scaffolding  to  be  kicked  away,  but  an  organic  system  through 
which  higher  functions  operate,  and  within  which,  ever  fuller  and  fuller,  life  flows. 
(A.  L.  Astor.)  Life  more  abundant: — I.  Cheist  has  come  that  men  mat  havb 
LIFE.  1.  Prolonged  natural  life  is  due  to  Him.  The  barren  tree  would  not  stand 
BO  long  but  for  His  intercession.  2.  Life  in  the  sense  of  pardon,  deliverance  from 
the  death  penalty.  3.  Life  from  the  death  of  trespasses  and  sins,  the  life  of  the 
Spirit.  4.  This  spiritual  life  is  the  same  which  will  be  continued  and  perfected  in 
heaven.  5.  Of  this  Christ  is  the  only  source.  It  is  not  the  result  of  working. 
How  can  the  dead  work  for  life?  It  is  exclusively  a  gift  of  God.  If  we  could 
have  had  it  without  Christ  coming,  why  need  He  come?     II.  Christ  has  comb 

THAT  THOSE    TO   WHOM    He    HAS   GIVEN   LIFE    MAY   HAVE    IT   MORE  ABUNDANTLY.       1.   Life 

is  a  matter  of  degrees.  Some  have  life,  but  it  flickers  like  a  dying  candle ;  others 
are  full,  like  the  fire  upon  the  blacksmith's  forge  when  the  bellows  are  in  full  blast. 
Christ  has  come  that  we  might  have  Ufe  in  all  its  fulness.  2.  Increase  of  Ufe  may 
be  seen  in  several  ways.  (1)  In  healing.  When  a  sick  man  recovers  he  has  life 
more  abundantly  than  in  his  illness  ;  so  when  Christ  restores  sick  Christians, 
strengthens  their  faith,  brightens  their  hope,  &c.  (2)  But  a  person  may  be  in 
health,  and  yet  you  may  desire  for  him  more  Ufe.   A  child,  e.g.,  is  in  perfect  health. 


CHAP.  X.]  ST.  JOHN.  187 

yet  cannot  ran  alone.  As  he  grows,  however,  he  has  life  more  abundantly.  So  we 
grow  in  grace,  from  babes  to  young  men,  and  then  fathers.  (3)  Health  and  growth 
may  coincide  with  a  stinted  measure  of  life,  as  in  the  case  of  a  prisoner  who 
tenants  a  living  tomb.  When  he  is  set  at  liberty  he  knows,  as  we  when  the  Sou 
makes  us  free  what  it  is  to  have  more  abundant  hfe.  (4)  But  a  man  may  have 
liberty,  &c.,  and  yet  be  so  poor  as  to  be  scarcely  able  to  keep  body  and  soul 
together.  So  there  are  some  believers  who  exist  rather  than  live,  and  have  small 
conception  of  the  rich  thing  Christ  has  stored  up  for  them.  (5)  A  man  may  enjoy 
all  this,  and  yet  need  more  life,  because  a  despised  castaway.  The  love  and  esteem 
of  our  fellows  is  essential  to  life.  When  under  conviction  a  man  finds  himself  to 
be  less  than  nothing,  he  finds  it  a  mighty  addition  to  life  when  Jesus  makes  him, 
a  slave,  a  son  of  God  and  heir  of  heaven.  3.  The  particulars  in  which  more 
abundant  life  consists  and  should  be  sought.  (1)  More  stamina.  An  embankment 
is  to  be  cut.  A  number  of  men  offer  themselves  for  the  work — these  with  sunken 
cheeks  and  hollow  coughs.  They  will  not  do.  Yonder  is  a  band  of  stalwart 
fellows,  with  ruddy  faces,  broad  shoulders,  mighty  limbs.  They  will  do.  The 
difference  between  the  two  is  the  presence  or  absence  of  stamina.  And  Christ  has 
come  that  we  may  have  spiritual  stamina  for  arduous  service.  Alas  !  some 
Christians  want  medicine  and  nursing.  Give  them  work,  and  they  will  grow  weary. 
(2)  Enlargement  of  the  sphere  of  hfe.  To  some  forms  of  human  life  the  range  la 
very  narrow.  Our  streets  swarm  with  men  to  whom  "  the  music  of  the  spheres  " 
means  the  chink  of  sovereigns.  The  souls  of  such  are  like  squirrels  in  cages  ;  each 
day  their  wheel  revolves ;  it  is  all  the  world  they  know.  Christ  has  come  to  give  • 
broader  life.  True,  there  are  many  men  whose  life  traverses  wide  areas,  who  map 
out  the  stars,  fathom  the  sea,  &c. ;  but  that,  wide  as  it  is,  is  bounded  by  time  and 
epace.  But  when  Christ  comes  He  makes  the  greatest  intellect  feel  that  it  was 
"  cabined,  cribbed,  confined,"  till  Christ  made  it  free.  (3)  The  exercise  of  all  our 
powers.  All  the  powers  of  a  man  are  in  the  child,  but  many  of  them  are  dormant, 
and  will  only  be  exercised  as  life  is  more  abundant.  Christ  has  come  to  give  us  a 
fuller  hfe.  Look  at  the  apostles  before  and  after  Pentecost.  Many  professors  seem 
to  be  more  dead  than  alive.  Life  is  in  their  hearts,  but  only  partially  in  their 
heads,  and  has  not  touched  their  silent  tongues,  idle  hands,  frost-bitten  pockets. 
(4)  Increased  energy.  A  man  is  most  alive  when  in  determined  pursuit  of  a 
favourite  purpose.  Christ  has  supplied  us  with  the  most  stimulating  purpose — His 
constraining  love.  Abundance  of  life  is  painfully  manifest  in  insane  persons :  the 
demoniac,  e.g.  Now,  if  possession  by  an  evil  spirit  arouses  men  to  an  unusual 
degree  of  life,  how  much  more  shall  possession  by  the  Divine  Spirit  I  (5)  Overflow 
of  enjoyment.  When  on  a  spring  morning  you  see  the  lambs  frisking  and  children 
playing,  yor,  say,  "  What  life  I  "  Just  so  when  churches  and  individuals  are 
revived,  what  joy  there  is  !  (6)  Delicacy  of  feeUng.  There  is  a  great  deal  of 
difference  as  to  the  amount  of  pain  which  persons  suffer.  People  with  a  fine 
mental  organization,  having  more  life,  suffer  more  than  coarser  people.  When 
Christ  brings  His  abundant  life,  those  who  enjoy  it  will  be  pained  by  a  given  sin  a 
hundred  times  more  than  he  was  before.  And  so  there  will,  on  the  other  hand,  be 
more  pleasure.  The  name  of  Jesus  is  inexpressibly  sweet  to  those  who  have 
abundant  life.  I  mean  by  delicacy  this — (a)  There  is  a  delicacy  of  hand  which  a 
man  may  acquire,  and  which  renders  him  a  worker  of  feats.  So  the  educated  hand 
of  faith  can  not  only  grasp,  but  handle  the  Word  of  Life,  (b)  It  shows  itself 
in  keenness  of  perception.  An  Indian  will  put  his  ear  to  the  ground  and  say, 
"  There  is  an  enemy  in  the  way,"  when  you  cannot  hear  a  sound.  Recall  the 
incident  at  the  siege  of  Lucknow.  Jesus  would  have  us  quick  of  understanding,  so 
that  we  may  hear  Him  coming.  (7)  Supremacy.  Some  races  have  physical  life, 
but  not  abundantly,  and  after  awhile  perish.  Christians  should  have  such  abundant 
life  that  their  circumstances  should  not  be  able  to  overcome  them.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  more  abundant  life : — The  emphasis  rests  on  the  last  word,  i.e.,  "  more  " — a 
word  spoken  by  our  Lord  only  once,  without  explaining  it ;  He  left  it  for  the  inter* 
pretation  of  a  future  day,  and  to  be  pondered  by  His  people  for  ever.  In  order  not 
to  be  lost  in  its  immensity  we  must  view  it  in  reference  to  the  death  from  which  the 
Good  Shepherd  saves  His  flock — the  wasting  and  havoc  brought  on  by  sin.  L 
Chbist  encounters  oub  death  as  Himself  the  soobck  of  oob  immobtalttt,  and 

MAKES  that  IMMOBTALTTY  MOBE  THAN  MEBE  CONTINUANCE  IN  BBINO.     1.  The  "  Priuce  " 

or  Original  "  of  life  "  rescued  mankind  from  extinction  at  the  beginning.  To  what- 
ever principle  we  ascribe  the  deathlessness  of  the  human  spirit,  it  cannot  be  sepa* 
rated  from  Him  and  His  gift.     If  it  rested  on  the  Divine  image,  He  preserved  that 


TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  yvoAT.  z. 


image  ;  if  upon  the  food  of  the  tree,  -when  that  was  interdicted  He  became  the  Ufa 
and  light  of  man,  "  The  thief "  would  have  been  the  means  of  blotting  our  name 
from  the  book  of  life,  but  in  whatever  sense  the  race  died  in  Adam,  in  Christ  it  was 
kept  alive.  2,  We  may  interpret  Christ's  meaning  to  be  that  He  came  to  bring  that 
without  which  immortality  is  not  in  itself  a  blessing.  Life  Christians  share  with 
all  men.  Christ  came  to  crown  our  undying  nature  with  the  true  immortality  of 
life  in  God  for  ever.  That  prerogative  which  has  the  possibility  in  it  of  everlasting 
blessedness  has  also  in  it  the  possibility  of  everlasting  woe.    H.  Christ's  peoplb 

ABE  SAVED  FEOM  THE  CONDEMNATION  OF  DEATH,  AND  THAT  IN  A  MOST  ABUNDANT   SENSE. 

All  who  come  to  Him  come  under  the  benefit  of  a  reprieve,  which  may  be  called  a 
preliminary  life  ;  but  this  reprieve  is  in  the  believer  perfected  into  a  full  discharge. 
God  "  abundantly  pardons,"  and  he  enjoys  "  plenteous  redemption."  As  he  is  one 
with  Christ,  he  is  not  only  released  from  punishment,  but  invested  with  the  Saviour's 
righteousness.  HI.  Life  in  and  from  Christ  is  the  opposite  of  spiritual  death  ob 
THE  separation  OF  THE  SOUL  FROM  GoD.  As  it  is  the  virtue  of  His  blood  that  saves  from 
the  death  of  the  law,  so  it  is  the  virtue  of  His  Spirit  that  restores  the  soul  to  God  and 
God  to  the  soul  in  a  fellowship  that  is  life  indeed,  1.  We  must  not  oe  content  with 
the  beginnings  and  tendencies  towards  the  Ufe  spiritual.  We  have  not  only  a  regene- 
rated life ;  the  Spirit  abides  in  us  as  the  indwelling  source  of  renewing  influence. 
This  life  is  Christ's  superadded  to  ours.  It  is  richer  and  fuller  than  that  forfeited 
by  sin  ;  more  than  we  lost  in  Adam.  We  become  partakers  of  a  Divine  nature. 
The  incarnate  Son  is  in  us  by  a  vital  union,  for  which  analogy  must  be  sought  in 
heaven  alone.  "  As  Thou,  Father,  art  in  Me,"  &c.  2.  That  Christ  was  the  secret 
life  of  the  sanctified  in  old  time  is  as  certain  as  that  they  were  justified  through 
His  propitiation.  But  they  "  knew  it  not "  :  we  know  the  precious  secret.  More- 
over, they  had  not,  in  the  fulness  of  our  evangelical  privilege,  the  indwelling 
Christ.  That  was  the  mystery  hid  from  them,  but  now  revealed — "  Christ  in  us  the 
hope  of  glory."  They  had  manna  from  God ;  but  Moses  gave  them  not  that  bread 
from  heaven.  High  as  were  these  prerogatives,  the  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
is  greater  than  the  greatest  of  them.  Much  is  still  mysterious,  but  it  is  simple  fact 
that  the  Christian  has  a  fourth  element  added  to  his  triple  nature,  and  the  form 
of  that  fonith  is  the  Son  of  God.  Seek  that  you  may  know  what  is  the  riches  of 
the  glory  of  His  inheritance.  IV.  The  privilege  involves  an  abundant  victobt 
OF  spmiTDAL  LIFE  OVER  ALL  THAT  IS  ITS  OPPOSITE.  The  coutest  is  uot  yet  ended. 
There  is  a  remainder  of  death  still  in  the  nature  which  must  be  expelled  by  the 
energy  of  this  heavenly  principle.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  given,  not  indeed  without 
measure,  but  without  other  restriction  than  our  finite  capacity.  The  word  of  Christ 
dwells  richly  within  the  source  of  unfailing  enlightenment,  encouragement,  sancti- 
fication,  and  strength  ;  and  the  sacramental  supper  is  the  pledge  and  the  means  of 
our  invigoration.  All  things  minister  to  nourishment.  Within  the  house  of  God 
the  table  is  spread,  when  they  eat  and  drink  abundantly ;  and  it  is  spread  also  in 
the  wilderness  without,  in  the  presence  of  enemies.  This  mysterious  sentence  is 
to  be  interpreted  by  every  man  according  to  his  faith.  If  our  faith  is  limited,  the 
abundance  will  be  scanty ;  if  large,  the  "  more  "  will  stretch  with  it,  even  to 
infinity.  1.  It  promises  a  measure  of  life  that  sbaU  expel  all  death.  The  law  of 
the  Spirit  of  life  tends  ever  to  perfect  soundness.  The  more  abundant  life  is 
vigorous  health  in  God,  such  as  drives  all  disease  before  it.  This  life,  as  it 
strengthens,  mortifies  the  body  of  sin  with  its  members.  It  is  the  act  of  the 
Lord  and  Giver  of  Life  alone  to  give  the  final  death-blow ;  but  before  that  moment 
comes,  how  blessed  to  know  that  sin  grows  weaker  and  the  hard  work  of  reUgion 
easier  1  Yet  it  is  only  when  the  contest  is  over  that  the  true  blessedness  of  life  can 
be  known.  But  not  necessarily  by  leaving  the  body ;  for  th'-re  is  a  perfect  death 
to  self  and  sin  even  here.  2,  Here  is  the  test  of  our  religion.  Our  privilege 
marks  our  responsibility.  (1)  It  most  surely  condemns  us  all.  Who  does  not  feel 
that  this  boundless  word  of  promise  finds  out  the  poverty  of  his  religion  ?  How 
grievously  have  we  "  limited  the  Holy  One  "  I  (2)  But  here  is  precious  encourage- 
ment.      V.  But  THE  full  perfection  of  life   is  not,  in  its  FULLEST  SENSE,  THB 

PORTION  of  man  in  THIS  WORLD.  The  "  more  "  points  to  an  eternal  fruition.  1. 
The  body  is  not  yet  made  partaker.  Life  in  the  Spirit  and  death  in  the  body  go 
on  simultaneously.  But  the  pledge  has  been  given  that  eternal  life  shall  be  the 
enjoyment  of  the  believer  in  his  whole  humanity.  "  I  am  the  resurrection,"  &c., 
follows  hard  on  this  saying.  Then  shall  we  know  for  the  first  time  what  life 
really  means.  No  wonder  the  last  cry  of  the  Spirit  and  the  Bride  is,  "  Come,  Lord 
Jesoe  1 "     In  the  hope  of  that  superabounding  consummation,  let  us  encounter  the 


CHAP,  x.]  ST.  JOHN.  189 

residuary  penalty  of  death  in  the  body  with  confidence  and  joy.  2.  The  "  more  " 
of  eternal  life  shall  have  its  literal  meaning  for  ever.  The  gift  will  go  on  increasing 
with  the  increase  of  God.  (W.  B.  Pope,  D.D.)  Abundant  life: — 1.  There  are 
many  organisms  which  manifest  only  a  low  degree  of  vitality.  This  discovers 
itself  by  defective  sensation,  limited  powers  of  motion,  less  sensibility  to  pain,  the 
comparative  absence  of  intelligence.  A  sponge,  a  jellyfish,  have  life,  but  very  far 
from  abundance.  2.  These  words  imply  a  similar  variety  in  human  life.  Men 
differ  in  the  amount  of  life  they  enjoy.  Constitutional  delicacy  is  the  result  of  low 
physical  vitality.  We  need  to  distinguish,  no  doubt,  between  feeble  and  undeveloped 
life.  The  Hmited  intelligence  of  a  savage  or  child  may  be  due  to  want  of  culture. 
Among  persons,  however,  who  have  enjoyed  equal  advantages  the  differences  are 
very  great.  We  speak  of  the  slow  understanding,  cold  heart,  feeble  will,  and  we 
mean  that  life  is  scanty.  On  the  other  hand  are  men  of  quick  perception,  keen 
feelings,  ardour,  &c.,  the  symptoms  of  abundant  life.  3.  So  there  are  lukewarm 
Christians  and  Christians  all  aflame;  molluscous,  torpid,  and  feeble  Christians,  as 
weU  as  those  who  are  full  of  faitb,  power,  and  good  works.  4.  Assuming  these 
inequalities,  we  gather  from  these  words  that  God  is  not  satisfied  with  a  lower 
degree  of  vitality  when  a  higher  can  be  attained,  and  that  Christ  has  come  to 
intensify  human  life.  I.  This  has  come  tkue  in  the  okdinart  experiences  op  men. 
The  effect  of  Christianity  has  not  been  to  deaden  men  to  the  interests  of  this  life, 
but  to  render  Ufe  larger.  True,  its  injudicious  friends  and  shrewd  opponents  deny 
this.  Of  course  the  gospel  delivers  us  from  exorbitant  and  unreasonable  concern 
about  our  present  and  petty  affairs,  of  unreasonable  longing  for  temporal  good  for 
its  own  sake.  But  this  is  far  from  saying  that  whatever  goes  to  fill  np  this  daily 
round  has  lost  its  meaning,  and  that  Christian  people  have  less  power  to  stir  them 
than  others.  Quite  the  contrary.  The  world  is  a  graver,  vaster  thing  since  Christ 
died  on  it.  In  such  a  world  there  can  be  nothing  insignificant.  Homes  have 
become  more  sacred,  so  near  they  seem  to  the  gate  of  heaven.  Business  rises  in 
importance  when  regarded  as  the  means  to  glorify  God  and  serve  men.  Social  and 
pohtical  problems  claim  more,  not  less,  attention  because  affecting  the  humanity 
for  which  Christ  suffered,  and  which  He  calls  us  to  seek  and  save.  Christianity 
lets  in  upon  life  the  light  of  a  vaster  day,  brings  out  all  its  possibilities  and  responsi- 
bilities, makes  every  smaU  thing  grand  and  every  dull  person  noble  by  linking  them  to 
the  destinies  of  the  race  and  to  God.  The  Christian  lives  near  to  the  sensorium  of 
the  oniverse  in  which  every  sensation  is  felt  from  the  remotest  ends — the  brain  and 
heart  of  Christ.  Hence  life  must  be  a  larger  thing  as  it  is  lived  in  Christ.  H. 
Chbist  makes  lite  mobe  abundant  by  confebbino  a  new  bobt  of  life,  one  which 
has  fuller  pulses  and  a  deeper  and  stronger  vitality  than  um-egenerate  men  can 
possess.  They  touch  time  and  the  world :  we  that  are  Christ's  touch  God  and  Hia 
eternity.  The  gospel  sets  men  at  once  in  direct  contact  with  infinite  forces,  lays 
us  along  side  supernatural  operations,  opens  up  God's  mighty  heart,  creates  the 
passion  for  holiness.  Conversion  adds  a  new  department  to  man's  being,  gives 
him  new  thoughts,  quickens  new  emotions,  creates  new  ambitions.  {J.  0.  Dykes, 
P.D.)  Abounding  life: — Christ  came — I.  To  impabt  the  blessedness  of  spibituaii 
life.  Kote — 1.  That  a  state  of  sin  is  moral  death — a  want  of  spiritual  discern- 
ment,  feeling,  activity.  When  life  from  Christ  comes  the  eyes  are  opened,  the  ears 
hear,  &o.  2.  The  enjoyment  of  religion  is  comparative  life.  Death  is  stamped  on 
all  else.  Honours  die ;  wealth  perishes ;  so  do  pleasures.  Gourds  wither ;  "nature 
decays,  but  grace  must  live."  "I  have,"  said  a  sickly  Christian  man,  while 
beholding  his  natural  face  in  a  glass,  '•  I  have  the  image  of  death  on  the  outer 
man,  but  I  have  the  image  of  life  on  the  inward  one."  3.  Life  from  Christ  is  the 
only  true  life.  It  is  a  state  of  favour  with  God — "  In  His  favour  is  life."  And  it 
comprehends  an  existence  for  highest  and  noblest  objects — a  life  for  God  and  souls. 
XL  To  COMMUNICATE  SPIRITUAL  LIFE  IN  sDPEEABUNDANCE.  This  great  truth  applies 
— 1.  To  each  individual  believer.  In  nature  there  are  degrees  of  life.  So  in 
grace — one  lives  at  a  ••  dying  rate,"  another  lives  happily,  energetically,  zealously : 
faith  is  lively,  prayer  fervent,  labour  great,  hope  strong.  Let  no  one  be  content 
with  bare  spiritual  existence ;  in  Jesus  there  is  a  blessed  fulness  and  freeness,  and 
you  may  receive  grace  upon  grace.  2.  To  the  flock  of  Christ  collectively.  8.  To 
the  blessedness  of  life  eternal.  It  will  exceed  all  present  enjoyment.  {Congrega- 
tional Pulpit.)  Abounding  life: — If  ever  sunlit,  sail-crowded  sea,  under  blue 
heaven  flecked  with  wind-chased  white,  filled  your  soul  as  with  a  new  gift  of  life, 
think  what  sense  of  existence  must  be  yours,  if  He  whose  thought  has  but  fringed 
Its  garment  with  the  outburst  of  such  a  show,  take  His  abode  with  yoa,  and  while 


190  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i^ 

thinMng  the  gladness  of  a  God  inside  your  being,  let  yoa  know  and  feel  that  He  ic 
carrying  yoo  as  a  Father  in  His  bosom.  {G.  Macdonald,  LL.D.)  Immortal  life 
through  Christ: — Edwin,  the  Prince  of  Northumbria,  gathered  together  his  barona 
into  a  banqueting-hall  to  deliberate  together  as  to  the  desirability  of  relinquishing 
the  old  idolatry  and  accepting  the  new  religion  urged  on  their  acceptance  by  the 
missionaries  of  the  Cross.  One  and  another  spoke;  presently  a  hoary-headedi 
warrior  stood  up  and  said,  "Perhaps  you  recollect,  Oking,  a  thing  which  sometimes 
happens  in  winter  days,  when  you  are  seated  at  table  with  your  captains  and  your 
men-at-arms,  while  a  good  fire  is  burning,  and  your  hall  is  comfortably  warm,  but 
it  rains,  snows,  and  blows  outside.  A  little  bird  comes  in  and  crosses  the  hall 
with  a  dash,  entering  by  one  door  and  going  out  by  the  other.  The  instant  of  this 
crossing  is  for  it  full  of  delight.  It  feels  neither  the  rain  nor  the  storm.  But  that 
instant  is  brief.  The  bird  flies  out  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  and  from  winter  it 
passes  into  winter.  Such  appears  to  me  the  life  of  man  upon  the  earth,  and  ita 
duration  for  a  moment,  compared  with  the  length  of  the  time  which  precedes  and 
that  which  follows  it.  This  time  is  dark  and  uncomfortable  for  ns.  It  tortures  as 
by  the  impossibility  of  our  knowing  it.  If,  then,  the  new  doctrine  can  teach  as 
anything  in  any  degree  certain,  it  deserves  that  we  should  follow  it."  Well  said, 
hoary-headed  warrior!  And  the  old  chronicles  add  that  the  new  religion  was 
voted  amid  the  acclamation  of  the  assembly.  {J.  C.  Jones,  D.D.)  Abundant 
grace  in  Christ: — He  came  that  grace  might  be  abundant;  and  so  it  is.  As  the 
dews  in  the  morning,  in  the  warm  summer,  so  are  the  actual  graces  of  God  that 
penetrate  day  by  day  the  longing,  thirsting  soul.  They  are  hidden ;  we  cannot  see 
them ;  but  we  know  that  they  are,  and  if  they  are  hidden  they  are  only  hke  Nature. 
There  are  spots  in  the  world  that  are  most  beautiful — morning  by  morning,  night 
by  night — though  you  and  I,  in  the  toil  of  our  life,  may  never  gaze  upon  them.  There 
are  quiet  valleys,  long  stretches  of  sea,  open  expanses  of  heaven,  myriads  of  twink- 
ling stars,  dazzling  splendours  of  worlds  of  ice — glories  which,  as  they  stretch  away 
unseen,  unpeopled,  in  God's  vast  creation,  seem  to  be  wasted ;  but  the  angels  are 
gazing  at  them,  and  they  are  but  a  parable  of  grace.  Grace  is  hidden,  but  grace  is 
reaL  {Knox  Little.)  God  is  an  abundant  giver: — God  is  a  Being  who  gives 
everything  but  punishment  in  over  measure.  The  whole  Divine  character  and 
administration,  the  whole  conception  of  God  as  set  forth  in  the  Bible  and  in  nature, 
is  of  a  Being  of  munificence,  of  abundance,  and  superabundance.  Enough  is  a 
measuring  word — a  sufficiency,  and  no  more  ;  economy,  not  profusion.  God  never 
deals  in  this  way.  With  Him  there  is  always  a  magnificent  overplus.  The 
remotest  comer  of  the  globe  is  full  of  wonder  and  beauty.  The  laziest  bank  in  the 
world,  away  from  towns,  where  no  artists  do  congregate,  upon  which  no  farm  laps, 
where  no  vines  hang  their  cooling  clusters,  nor  flowers  spring,  nor  grass  invites 
the  browsing  herd,  is  yet  spotted  and  patched  with  moss  of  such  exquisite  beauty, 
that  the  painter  who  in  all  his  life  should  produce  one  such  thing  would  be  a 
master  in  art  and  immortal  in  fame,  and  it  has  the  hair  of  ten  thousand  reeds 
combed  over  its  brow,  and  its  shining  sand  and  insect  tribes  might  win  the  student's 
lifemne.  God's  least  thought  is  more  prolific  than  man's  greatest  abundance.  (H. 
W.  Beecher.)  A  minister's  work  : — There  is  a  sense  in  which  these  words  ought 
to  be  spoken  by  every  true  teacher.  Taken  in  their  lowest  meaning,  and  yet  in  a 
very  high  and  noble  meaning,  they  express  what  should  be  the  aim  of  every  one 
who  claims  to  have  any  truth  to  teU  his  fellow-men.  His  motive  for  telling  it 
ought  to  be  this,  and  this  only,  that  they  may  have  life,  and  that  they  may  have 
it  more  abundantly.  {Dr.  Magee.)  How  Christ  gives  life : — How  His  life  is  made 
to  be,  at  the  same  time,  our  own,  is  a  mystery  of  grace,  of  which  you  have  seen 
many  types  in  the  garden.  You  once  grafted  something  on  to  a  fruit-tree.  The 
process,  though  delicate,  was  most  simple.  You  only  had  to  be  careful  that  there 
should  be  clean,  clear,  close  contact  between  the  graft  and  the  tree.  The  smallest 
shred  or  filament  of  wrapping  round  the  graft  would  have  prevented  the  life  of  the 
tree  from  flowing  into  it.  The  weak,  bleeding  graft  was  fastened  on  to  the  strong 
stem  just  as  it  was  ;  then  in  due  time  it  struck  ;  then  gradually  the  tiny  slip  grew 
into  the  flourishing  bough,  and  lately,  as  yoa  stood  looking  at  that  miracle  of 
tender  formation  and  soft  bright  flush,  you  almost  thought  it  was  conscious.  It 
seemed  to  say,  *'  I  live ;  nevertheless  not  I,  bat  the  tree  liveth  in  me,  and  the  life  I 
now  live  in  the  foliage,  I  live  by  faith  in  the  shaft  of  the  tree.  I  trust  to  the  tree 
only :  every  moment  I  am  clinging  to  it,  and  without  it  I  can  do  nothing."  (C 
Stanford,  D.D.) 


CHAP.  X.]  ST.  JOHN.  191 

Vers.  11-15.  I  am  the  Good  Shepherd. — Christ  the  Good  Shepherd  .-—Christ  is 
"  the  Good  Shepherd."  He  is  this  because — I.  He  owns  the  sheep.  He  is  the 
Proprietor  of  the  flock.  They  are  His — 1.  By  the  gift  of  the  Father.  *'  Thine 
they  were,  and  Thou  gavf  st  them  Me."  2.  By  creative  ties.  "  His  own  " — sheep 
which  are  His  even  before  they  are  called.  3.  By  purchase.  "The  Good  Shepherd 
giveth  "  as  a  deposit,  layeth  down  as  a  pledge,  "  His  life  for  the  sheep  "  (Heb.  xiii. 
20).  The  blood  He  shed  was  not  in  His  own  defence,  but  for  the  sake  of  those 
whom  He  came  to  rescue.  II.  He  knows  His  sheep.  1.  By  their  faces.  An 
ancient  and  convenient  custom  among  shepherds  is  to  put  a  mark  upon  their 
Bheep,  an  ear-mark,  as  they  call  it ;  and  by  the  mark  they  know  them  in  years 
to  come.  Jesus  Christ,  too,  puts  a  mark  on  His  sheep,  not  on  the  ear,  but  on 
the  forehead  (Rev.  xiv.  1).  2.  By  their  names.  He  knows  His  followers,  not  as 
men  and  women  only,  but  as  Peter  and  Andrew,  Mary  and  Martha.  The  saints 
have  queer  names  in  the  Epistles.  I  cannot  remember  them,  but  Jesus  does.  He 
calls  the  stars  by  name  too,  but  then  the  stars  are  very  big  things.  The  wonder 
is  that  He  calls  the  tiny  sheep  by  name,  scattered  as  they  are.  "  What's  in  a 
name?"  A  great  deal,  especially  in  a  Christian  name,  given  at  the  font,  and 
accepted  by  Christ.  3.  Their  circumstances  (Rev.  ii.  13).  The  Good  Shepherd 
knows  where  you  live — the  town,  the  street,  the  house  (Acts  ix.  11 ;  x.  5,  6).  4. 
By  a  thorough  apprehension  of  their  character.  In  the  fourth  and  fifth  verses 
"  know  "  signifies  outside  acquaintance — that  Christ  and  man  have  come  within 
the  same  circle.  But  in  the  fourteenth  verse  it  means  a  clear  discerning  insight 
into  the  springs  of  life  and  the  motives  of  action.  III.  He  feeds  His  sheep  (ver.  9). 
1.  "  They  go  in  "  first  to  the  fold.  Rest  after  wandering.  "  He  leadeth  me  beside 
the  still  waters  "  (services  of  God's  House :  perusal  of  the  Bible).  2.  They  **  go  out" 
to  graze.  "  He  maketh  me  to  lie  down  in  green  pastures  "  (marg. :  "  in  pastures  of 
tender  grass  ").  The  Bible  pasture  is  green  pasture.  Every  truth  as  fresh  as  if  it 
were  spoken  but  yesterday.  Not  only  is  the  grass  green,  but  there  is  plenty  of  it  (ver. 
10).  IV.  He  LEADS  the  sheep  (ver.  3).  1.  He  leads  the  sheep.  Exceedingly  simple  and 
helpless  is  a  sheep  gone  astray.  And  when  the  Bible  speaks  of  sinners  it  compares 
them  to  erring  sheep  (Isa.  liii.  6).  2.  He  leads  them  gently  (ver.  4).  He  is  not 
behind  them,  scaring  them  with  the  lashes  of  the  law,  but  in  front  of  them,  draw- 
ing them  with  the  cords  of  His  love,  and  adapting  His  steps  to  theirs.  3.  He 
leads  them  safely  along  "the  paths  of  righteousness  for  His  name's  sake."  This 
is,  to  me,  one  of  the  most  cogent  reasons  for  believing  in  His  Divinity,  that  He 
was  able  to  stamp  His  feet  so  deeply  on  the  rock  of  history,  that  their  prints  have 
not  yet  been  erased.  The  weight  of  Godhead  was  in  His  steps,  the  emphasis  of 
the  Infinite  in  His  tread.  4.  Not  only  does  He  lead  us  through  L'fe,  but  He  goes 
before  us  through  death  (Psa.  xxiii.  4).  Not  a  single  sheep  will  be  wanting,  they 
shall  all  be  safely  folded  by  Divine  love  (ver.  16).  {J.  C.  Jones,  D.D.)  Christ 
the  Good  Shepherd : — This  is  one  of  those  Divine  sayings  in  which  there  is  so  much 
of  truth  and  love,  that  we  seem  able  to  do  little  more  than  to  record  it  and  ponder 
on  it,  to  express  it  by  symbols,  and  to  draw  from  it  a  multitude  of  peaceful  and 
heavenly  thoughts.  It  was  the  symbol  under  which,  in  times  of  persecution,  His 
presence  was  shadowed  forth.  It  was  sculptured  on  the  walls  of  sepulchres  and 
catacombs ;  it  was  painted  in  upper  chambers  and  in  oratories  ;  it  was  traced  upon 
their  sacred  books  ;  it  was  graven  on  the  vessels  of  the  altar.  The  image  of  the 
Good  Shepherd  has  expressed,  as  in  a  parable,  all  their  deepest  affections,  fondest 
musings,  most  docile  obedience,  most  devoted  trust.  It  is  a  title  in  which  all  other 
titles  meet,  in  the  light  of  which  they  blend  and  lose  themselves.  Priest,  Prophet, 
King,  Saviour,  and  Guide,  are  all  summed  up  in  this  more  than  royal,  paternal, 
saving  name.  It  recalls  in  one  word  all  the  mercies  and  lovingkindness  of  God 
to  His  people  of  old,  when  "  the  Shepherd  of  Israel  "  made  His  own  people  "  to 
go  forth  like  sheep,  and  guided  them  in  the  wilderness  like  a  flock."  It  recites,  as 
it  were,  all  the  prophecies  and  types  of  the  Divine  care  which  were  then  yet  to  be 
revealed  to  His  elect :  it  revives  the  visions  of  Isaiah  and  Ezekiel  (Isa.  xl.  11 ; 
Ezek.  xxxiv.  12-27 ;  xxxvii.  24 ;  Isa.  xlix.  9,  10).  And,  moreover,  by  this  title  He 
appropriates  to  Himself  the  fulfilment  of  His  own  most  deep  and  touching  parable 
of  the  lost  sheep.  There  is  no  thought  or  emotion  of  pity,  compassion,  gentleness, 
patience,  and  love  which  is  not  here  expressed.  It  is  the  peculiar  consolation  of 
the  weak,  or  of  them  that  are  out  of  the  way ;  of  the  lost  and  wandering ;  of  the 
whole  flock  of  God  here  scattered  abroad  "  in  the  midst  of  this  naughty  world." 
And  though  it  be  an  office  taken  on  earth,  and  in  the  time  of  our  infirmity,  it  is  a 
name  which  He  will  never  lay  aside.    Even  in  the  heavenly  glory  it  still  is  among 


192  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  X. 

His  titles.     He  is  even  there  "  the  chief  Shepherd,"  "  that  great  Shepherd  of  th« 
sheep  "  ;  and  in  the  state  of  bliss  shall  still  guide  His  flock :  though  more  fully  to 
express  the  unity  of  His  nature  with  theirs,  and  His  own  spotless  sacrifice  in  their 
behalf,  He  is  called  "  the  Lamb  "  (Eev.  vii.  17).    Let  us  then  consider  awhile  the 
surpassing  and  peculiar  goodness  of  the  One  True  Shepherd.    And  this  He  has 
revealed  to  the  world  in  His  voluntary  death.    There  was  never  any  other  but  He 
who  came  down  from  heaven  that  He  might  lay  down  "His  life  for  the  sheep." 
This  is  the  one  perpetual  token  of  His  great  love  to  all  mankind — a  token  ever 
fresh,  quickened  with  life,  full  of  power  to  persuade  the  hearts  of  His  people  to 
Himself,     "  Greater  love  hath  no  man  than  this,  that  a  man  lay  down  his  life  for 
his  friends  "  ;  and  therefore  the  death  of  the  good  Shepherd  is  the  subject  of  all 
the  Church's  testimony.    Again,  His  surpassing  goodness  is  shown  in  the  provision 
He  has  made  of  all  things  necessary  for  the  salvation  of  His  flock  in  this  state  of 
mortality  and  sin.     For  this  He  has  provided,  first,  in  the  external  foundation  and 
visible  perpetuity  of  His  Church.     He  has  secured  it  by  the  commission  to  baptise 
all  nations,  by  the  universal  preaching  of  His  apostles,  by  shedding  abroad  the 
Holy  Ghost,  by  the  revelation  of  all  truth,  by  the  universal  tradition  of  ♦he  faith 
in  all  the  world.    And,  secondly,  His  love  and  care  are  shown,  not  only  in  the 
external  and  visible  provision  which  He  thus  made  beforehand  for  the  perpetual 
wants  of  His  flock,  but  in  the  continual  and  internal  providence  wherewith  He  still 
watches  over  it.    The  whole  history  of  His  Church  from  the  beginning — the  agea 
of  persecution,   and  "  times  of   refreshing " ;    the  great  conflicts  of   faith  with 
falsehood,  and  of  the  saints  with  the  seed  of  the  serpent ;  the  whole  career  of  Hia 
Church  amid  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  and  changes  of  the  world,  are  a  perpetual 
revelation  of  His  love  and  power.    {Archdeacon  Manning.)        Christ  the  Good 
Shepherd : — He  is  the  Good  Shepherd  in  the  sense  of  real  or  genuine.    He  is  the 
Shepherd  from  the  very  centre  of  His  being.    Every  instinct  of  His  nature,  every 
feehng  of  His  heart,  every  thought  of  His  brain,  every  touch  of  His  hand  are  those 
of  the  true  Shepherd,  whose  constant  purpose  is  to  guide  and  feed  and  save  the 
flock,  and  for  that  purpose  He  counts  no  toil  too  severe,  no  suffering  too  intense, 
no  sacrifice  too  costly.    He  has  thoroughly  identified  Himself  with  the  sheep,  and 
whatever  adds  to  their  well-being  He  gladly  does  and  bears.    He  is  the  Good  Shep- 
herd in  contrast  with  the  hireUng,  whose  care  is  selfish  and  whose  aim  is  wages. 
Jesus  here  gives  us  a  distinction  that  applies  in  the  most  direct  way  to  every  phase 
of  life.    Interests  of  all  kinds  are  intrusted  with  paid  workers.     Some  of  these  are 
good  shepherds,  putting  the  very  best  of  their  Uves  into  their  toil;   some  are 
hirelings,  faithful  only  so  long  as  fidelity  is  easy,  safe,  and  profitable.    The  rail- 
road  engineer  who  sees  imminent  danger  and  remains  at  his  post,  hoping  to  save 
precious  lives  entrusted  to  his  care,  is  the  good  shepherd.    The  need  to-day  in  the 
State,  the  bank,  the  factory,  the  store,  the  kitchen,  is  for  good  shepherds.    The 
presence  of  hirelings  brings  disaster  to  every  cause.  The  Good  Shepherd  guides  His 
sheep  by  going  before  them.    Those  who  follow  where  Jesus  led  are  safe.     He  was 
at  times  in  a  very  whirlwind  of  human  beings  who  were  wrought  to  the  highest 
pitch  by  diverse  passions,  but  His  feet  never  made  a  mis-step,  His  face  never 
turned  in  the  wrong  direction.     His  lips  spoke  the  right  word.  His  hands  wrought 
the  most  helpful  work  always.     Jesus  said,  "  I  know  My  sheep,  and  am  known  of 
Mine."    "  I  lay  down  My  life  for  the  sheep."    These  were  the  proofs  that  He  was 
the  true  Shepherd.    He  certainly  knew  what  was  in  man.    He  saw  the  treachery 
working  in  the  heart  of  Judas.    He  saw  in  Peter's  self-trusting,  impulsive  nature 
the  flame  that  soon  burnt  itself  out  to  leave  only  the  ashes  of  his  boasted  faith  and 
devotion.    But  further  than  this,  He  saw  the  repentant  Peter  converted  into  the 
brave  hero.    He  looked  into  the  very  soul  of  Zaccheus  in  the  sycamore-tree  and 
saw  in  him  a  stedfast  purpose  of  righteousness.    He  knew  that  back  of  the  cleanly 
appearance  of  the  Pharisees  there  was  moral  leprosy.    On  the  briefest  acquaint- 
ance with  Nathanael  He  spoke  of  him  as  one  "  in  whom  there  was  no  guile."    The 
young  man  who  came  to  Him  with  eager  inquiries  for  eternal  life  was  before  Him 
as  an  open  book — a  man  with  a  kindly  heart,  but  too  weak  to  brave  danger  and 
privation  and  sacrifice.    There  was  no  martyr  stuff  in  him.     Sin  blunts  the 
faculties.    The  most  exalted  natures  have  the  keenest  insight.    Jesns,  the  Perfect 
One,  knew  instantly  the  false  and  the  true.    (Boston  Homilies.)        The  Good 
Shepherd: — These  words  are  equivalent  to — I.  I  am  A  Shepherd.    I  stand  in  a 
peculiar  relation  to  a  peculiar  people,  who  are  My  sheep.    H.  I  am  a  good  Shep- 
herd.   I  possess  the  appropriate  qualifications  and  perform  the  appropriate  duties 
of  the  character  I  sustain.    lU.  I  am  tbb  Shepherd — the  one  Shepherd— not  like 


CHI*.  X.]  ST.  JOHN.  19S 

him  of  ver.  2,  one  of  the  shepherds,  but  the  great,  chief,  proprietor  Shepherd, 
whose  own  the  sheep  are — the  Shepherd  of  shepherds  as  well  as  of  sheep.    IV.  I 
am  TEm  oood  Shepherd.    I  possess  in  the  most  perfect  degree  all  the  qnaUfications 
that  are  requisite  for  the  discharge  of  the  numerous,  varied,  and  difficult  duties  of 
this  most  exalted  office.    Y.  I  am  that  good  Shepherd,  i.e.,  the  Divine  Guardian 
foreshadowed  in  prophecy  (Ezek.  xxxiv.  11-24),  and  answering  in  every  respect  to 
the  type.    Christ  is  all  this — 1.  As  He  secures  for  His  peculiar  people  all  the 
blessings  they  require.    2.  As  He  secures  these  advantages  to  them  at  the  greatest 
conceivable  expense  to  Himself.     3.  As  there  subsists  the  most  endearing  mutual 
acquaintance  and  intercourse  between  Him  and  His  people.    4.  As  He  cares  for 
the  happiness,  so  He  secures  the  salvation  of  all.     (J.  Brown,  D.D.)    The  Good 
Shepherd  : — The  truth  here  is  Christ's  exceeding  love  and  care  for  the  Church.   He 
would  show  that  He  sustained  towards  it  a  relationship  beyond  paralleL     Not  a  king, 
however  wise  his  rule ;  not  a  parent,  however  fond  his  care  ;  not  a  friend,  however 
grea+  his  service,  for  all  these  are  kindnesses  of  beings  of  the  same  nature  only.  They 
suggest  nothing  of  that  condescension  by  which  a  Being  of  the  highest  order  could 
embrace  one  reduced  to  the  condition  of  fallen  man.    Hence  Christ  selected  as 
the  type  of  our  lost  race  the  most  helpless  of  animals,  and  compares  Himself 
to  one  of  the  'kindest  of  guardians.    Let  us  consider  some  of  His  pastoral  offices 
in  wbich  His  love  is  set  forth.    I.  He  pbovides  for  theie  Spibituaij  wants.    This 
would   be  the  first  thing  looked  for  according  to  the  predictions   (Psa.  xxiii.). 
1    Pasture  for  the  flock — enough  for  all ;  variety  for  each.    2.  Wisdom  to  guide. 
8.   Watchfulness  to  tend.     4.  Constraint  to  rule.     5.  Diligence  to  seek  out.    6. 
Power  to  restore.    II.  Hk  pbeserves  them  feom  foes  and  dangers  (ver.  12).    It 
is  our  lot  to  be  sent  forth  as  sheep  in  the  midst  of  wolves.    If  our  soul  escapes 
at  all  it  is  because  the  snare  is  broken  by  our  DeUverer.    That  which  enables  the 
Good   Shepherd  to    effect  our  deliverance  is  His  profound  and  comprehensive 
knowledge  (ver.  14).     These  perils  are  foreseen  and  provided  for.    How  many 
tempted  ones  have  derived  comfort  from  the  thought  that  when  Satan  has  desired 
to  have  them,  he  bas  prayed,  &c.  Hence  the  encouragement,  "Fear  not  little  flock." 
"  He  that  keepeth  Israel  neither  slumbers  nor  sleeps."    III.  He  is  diligent  m 
eecovebing  those  who  strat  (Ezek.  xxxiv.;  Isa.  liiL).    In  relation  to  the  whole 
human  family  Christ  came  to  seek  and  save  the  lost.    The  whole  history  of  the 
Church  has  been  the  gathering  in  of  outcasts.     He  is  found  of  them  that  sought 
Him  not ;  and  under  backslidings  after  conversion,  will  He  go  after  us  again.     He 
may  leave  us  to  eat  the  bitter  fruits  of  our  ways  for  a  time,  and  make  us  contrast 
the  misery  of  the  wilderness  with  the  blessedness  of  the  fold.     He,  who  of  all  the 
saints  of  God  lived  nearest  to  Him,  and  yet  wandered  furthest,  said,  "  He  restoreth 
my  soul."    IV.  He  has  sPECUii  care  of  the  young,  whether  young  in  years  or  in 
grace  (Isa.  xL).   An  untended  lamb  is  the  very  type  of  helplessness  and  folly.    The 
temptations  are  many  which  beset  the  flock  in  early  life  from  the  example  of 
companions,  worldly  pleasures, "buoyant   spirits,  &c.  ;   but  for  these  and  every 
spiritual  danger   the  Good  Shepherd  provides.     Still,  there  are  special  dangers 
which  account  for  this  pastoral  care.     The  very  warmth  and  freshness  of  their 
religious  feelings  render  them  more  liable  to  fall.    Hence  the  first  duty  enjoined  on 
restored  Peter  was  "  Feed  My  lambs."    V.  Ha  n  with  the  flock  to  the  end. 
"  Yea,  though  I  walk  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,"  Ac.    (D.  Moore, 
M.A.)        The  Good  Shepherd: — I.  The  pastoral  character  claimed  by  Christ. 
1.  We  shall  learn  nothing  from  the  text  unless  we  enter  humbly  and  affectionately 
into  its  spirit.     We  must  dismiss  all  Western  ideas.     Here  the  connection  between 
shepherd  and  sheep  is  simply  one  of  pecuniary  interest ;  but  beneath  the  burning 
skies  and  clear  starry  nights  of  Palestine  there  grows  np  between  the  man  and  the 
dumb  creetures  he  protects,  often  at  the  peril  of  his  life,  a  kind  of  friendship. 
For  this  is  after  all  the  true  school  in  which  love  is  taught ;  dangers  and  hard> 
ships  mutually  shared,  alone  in  those  vast  soUtudes  the  shepherd  and  the  sheep 
feel  a  life  in  common.    The  vast  interval  between  the  man  and  the  brute  disap- 
pears, and  the  single  point  of  union  is  felt  strongly — the  love  of  the  protector,  and 
the  love  of  the  grateful  life.    Those  to  whom  Christ  spoke  felt  all  this  and  more. 
He  appealed  to  associations  which  had  been  familiar  from  childhood,  and  unless 
we  try,  by  realizing  such  scenes,  to  feel  what  they  felt  by  association,  these  words 
will  only  be  dry  and  lifeless.    2.  To  the  name  shepherd  Christ  adds  the  significant 
word  "  Good  " — not  in  the  sense  of  benevolent,  but  true  born,  genuine,  just  as  wine 
of  a  noble  quality  is  good  compared  with  the  cheaper  sort ;  and  a  soldier  who  is 
one  in  heart  and  not  by  mere  profession,  or  for  pay.    This  expression  distinguishes 
VOL.  u.  13 


194  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  l. 

the  Good  Shepherd  from — (1)  The  robbers  who  may  guard  the  sheep  simply  £oi 
their  flesh  and  fleece :  they  have  not  a  true  shepherd's  heart  any  more  than  a 
pirate  has  the  true  sailor's  heart.  There  were  many  such  marauders  in  Palestine. 
David  protected  Nabal's  flock  from  them.  Many  such  nominal  shepherds  had 
Israel  in  by-gone  years  :  rulers  whose  rule  had  been  but  kingcraft :  teachers  whose 
instruction  had  been  but  priestcraft.  Government,  teachership  are  subhme  pas- 
toral caUings ;  but  when  the  work  is  even  well  done  ifor  the  sake  of  party,  or  place, 
or  honour,  or  consistency,  it  is  the  spirit  of  the  robber.  (2)  The  hirelings,  who 
are  tested  by  danger.  A  man  is  a  hireling  who  does  his  duty  for  pay.  He  may  do 
it  in  his  way  faithfully.  The  paid  shepherd  will  not  desert  the  sheep  for  a  shower 
or  a  cold  night.  But  he  is  not  paid  to  risk  his  life  against  the  lion  or  bear,  and 
so  the  sheep  are  left  to  their  fate.  So  a  man  may  be  a  hired  priest,  or  a  paid 
demagogue,  a  great  champion  of  rights  paid  by  applause ;  and  while  popularity 
lasts  he  will  be  a  reformer — deserting  the  people  when  danger  comes.  The  cause 
of  the  sheep  is  not  his.  3.  Exactly  the  reverse  is  the  Good  Shepherd.  The  cause 
of  man  was  His,  and  His  only  pay  the  cross.  He  might  have  escaped  it  all,  and 
been  an  honoured  leader  by  prudent  time-service.  Bat  this  would  have  been  the 
desertion  of  God's  cause  and  man's.  II.  The  pboofs  which  substantiate  the  claim. 
1.  I  know  My  sheep  as  the  Father  knoweth  Me,  and  not  simply  by  omniscience. 
There  is  a  certain  mysterious  tact  of  sympathy  and  antipathy  by  which  we  discover 
the  like  and  unlike  of  ourselves  in  others'  character.  A  man  may  hide  his  opin- 
ions, but  not  his  character.  There  is  a  something  in  an  impure  heart  which  purity 
detects  afar  off.  The  truer  we  become,  the  more  unerringly  we  know  the  ring  of  truth. 
Therefore  Christ  knows  His  sheep  by  the  mystic  power,  always  finest  in  the  best 
natures,  by  which  like  detects  what  is  hke  and  unlike  itself ;  and  how  unerringly 
did  He  read  men — the  enthusiastic  populace,  Nathanael,  the  rich  ruler,  Zacchaeus, 
Judas,  the  Pharisees !  It  was  as  if  His  bosom  was  some  mysterious  mirror,  on 
which  all  that  came  near  Him  left  a  sullied  or  unsullied  surface,  detecting  them- 
selves by  every  breath.  This  Divine  power  must  be  distinguished  from  that  cunning 
sagacity  which  men  call  knowingness.  The  worldly-wise  have  maxims  and  rules ; 
but  the  finer  shades  of  character  escape.  Eternal  judgment  is  nothing  more 
thfin  the  carrying  out  of  these  words,  "  I  know  My  sheep  " ;  for  their  obverse  la 
"I  never  knew  you."  2.  Christ's  sheep  know  Him,  not  by  some  lengthened  in- 
vestigation, whether  the  shepherds  dress  be  the  identical  dress,  the  crozier  genuine 
— but  instinctively.  Truth  is  like  light;  visible  in  itself,  not  distinguished  by 
the  shadow  it  casts.  3.  Pastoral  fidelity,  "I  lay  down  My  life."  Here  is  the 
doctrine  of  vicarious  sacrifice.  Unitarians  say  He  died  as  a  martyr  in  attestation  of 
His  truths ;  but  we  cannot  explain  away  the  "  for."  This  sacrificing  love  is  paral- 
leled by  the  love  of  the  Father  to  the  Son.  Therefore  that  sacrifice  is  but  a  mirror 
of  the  heart  of  God.  (F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.)  The  Good  Shepherd: — We  have 
here — I.  The  complete  chabacteb.  There  is  more  in  Jesus  than  yon  can  pack 
away  in  shepherd  or  any  other  emblem.  But  note — 1.  He  sets  Himself  forth  as  a 
shepherd :  not  such  as  is  employed  in  England  to  look  after  sheep  a  few  montha 
till  they  are  slaughtered.  The  Eastern  shepherd  is — (1)  The  owner  or  his  son. 
His  wealth  consists  in  sheep.  He  has  seldom  much  of  a  house,  or  much  land. 
Ask  him  "  How  much  are  you  worth?  "  He  answers,  "  So  many  sheep."  We  are 
Christ's  wealth,  "  the  riches  of  the  glory  of  His  inheritance "  is  in  the  saints. 
The  Lord's  portion  is  His  people.  For  their  sakes  He  gave  not  only  Ethiopia  and 
Seba,  but  Himself.  (2)  The  Caretaker.  Christ  is  never  off  duty.  He  has  con- 
stant care  for  His  people  day  and  night.  He  knows  and  prescribes  for  their  every 
complaint.  (3)  The  Provider.  There  is  not  one  in  the  flock  who  knows  about 
the  selecting  of  pasturage.  For  time  and  eternity,  body  and  soul,  Christ  supplies 
all  our  need.  (4)  The  Leader.  (5)  The  Defender.  2.  Christ  completely  fills  this 
character.  (1)  He  is  the  Good  Shepherd — neither  thief  nor  hireling.  What  He 
does  is  con  amore.  (2)  He  is  the  Good  Shepherd.  Of  others  we  can  only  say  a 
shepherd.  All  the  rest  are  shadows:  He  is  the  substance.  3.  Christ  rejoices 
in  this  character.  He  repeats  it  so  many  times  here  that  it  almost  reads  like  the 
refrain  of  a  song.  And  if  He  is  so  pleased  to  be  our  Shepherd,  we  should  be 
pleased  to  be  His  sheep,  and  avail  ourselves  of  all  the  privUeges  wrapped  up  in 
the  name.  II.  The  complete  knowledge.  1.  Christ's  knowledge  of  His  own, 
"  As  the  Father,"  Ac.  Do  you  know  how  much  the  Father  knows  the  Son  who  is 
His  glory,  other  self,  yea,  one  with  Him  ?  Just  so  intimately  does  the  Good 
Shepherd  know  His  sheep.  (1)  Their  number.  (2)  Their  persons— age,  cha- 
racter, hairs,  constitution ;  and  never  mistakes  one  for  another.     (3)  Trials.    (4) 


VHis.  X-]  8T.  JOHN.  195 

Sing.  (5)  This  ought  to  be  a  great  comfort,  inasmuch  as  it  is  not  cold,  intellectual 
knowledge,  but  that  of  love.  He  knows  you — (a)  By  acquaintance,  (b)  By  com- 
munion, (c)  Sympathy.  "  Though  He  were  a  Son  yet  learned  He,"  &c.  2.  Our 
knowledge  of  the  Lord,  "  as  I  know  the  Father."  This  is — (1)  By  delight.  (2)  By 
union.  (3)  By  love.  III.  The  Complete  Sacrifice.  These  words  are  repeated  in 
different  forms  four  times  (vers.  11,  15,  17,  18),  and  mean  that — 1.  He  was  always 
doing  so.  All  the  life  He  had  He  was  constantly  laying  out  for  the  sheep.  2.  It 
was  actively  performed.  He  did  not  die  merely.  3.  It  was  voluntary.  4.  It  was 
for  the  sheep.  (C.  H.  Spuryeon.)  The  Good  Shepherd: — I.  His  qualifications 
TO  MEET  THE  NEED  OF  THE  SHEEP.  1.  His  knowledge  of  all  the  wants  of  the 
sheep  is  perfect.  2.  His  wisdom  to  provide  is  iufinite.  3.  His  power  enables  Him 
to  carry  out  all  His  will.  4.  His  kindness  endures  through  aU  tbeir  waywardness. 
5.  His  faithfulness  wiD  never  forsake  them.  6.  His  undying  interest  forgets  and 
omits  nothing  for  their  good.  II.  His  active  wohk  foe  the  sheep.  1.  He  rescues 
them  from  the  great  robber.  2.  Brings  them  into  His  own  fold.  3.  Provides  them 
with  all  the  nourishment  needed.  4.  Gives  them  refreshing  repose  amid  the  cares 
and  toils  of  life.  5.  Guards  them  from  all  danger,  6.  Guides  them  in  all  per- 
plexity. 7.  Heals  all  their  diseases.  8.  Eeclaims  them  from  all  their  wanderings. 
9.  Folds  them  at  last  in  heaven.      {W.  H.  Van  Doren,  D.D.)  The  slain  Shep- 

herd : — I.  Foresaw  that  He  should  die  fob  the  sheep.  The  termination  of  the 
Saviour's  life  was  not  accidental  nor  unforeseen.  Many  were  the  intimations  He 
gave  of  it,  which  disproves  the  notion  that  His  death  was  the  disappointment  of 
His  hopes.  U.  Spontaneously  undertook  to  die  for  the  sheep.  He  might 
have  saved  Himself ;  He  made  no  attempt  at  escape  ;  He  prayed  for  no  legion  of 
angels  to  rescue  Him ;  He  told  Pilate  that  there  was  a  limitation  of  his  power  in 
regard  to  his  apparently  helpless  captive  ;  He  committed  His  spirit  into  His  Father's 
hands,  ni.  Died  in  the  stead  of  the  sheep.  A  shepherd  while  defending  his 
sheep  sometimes  falls  a  victim  to  his  faithfulness.  So  Christ  died  a  vicarious 
death,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  which  exempted  the  sinner  from  the  doom  deserved. 
Not  that  there  was  a  commercial  equivalent,  as  when  a  debt  is  paid  ;  but  a  moral 
equivalent  accepted  by  a  righteous  and  gracious  God.  IV.  Died  on  behalf  of  the 
sheep  It  was  not  for  His  own  but  our  advantage.  By  His  sacrifice  we  are  re- 
deemed from  the  curse  of  the  law  and  the  power  of  sin,  and  have  secured  for  us 
eternal  life.  Application :  1.  Adore  and  bless  the  love  which  animated  the  Good 
Shepherd.  2.  Live  as  those  who  have  been  bought  with  a  price,  and  have  returned 
to  the  Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  souls.  {Family  Churchman.)  The  Good  Shepherd 
giveth  His  life  for  the  sheep : — In  this  statement  we  notice  the  following  character- 
istics of  this  sacrifice  which  the  Good  Shepherd  makes  for  His  sheep.  1.  It  was 
deliberate.  "  For  this  purpose  He  came  into  the  world."  2.  It  was  voluntary. 
*'  No  man  taketh  My  life.  I  have  power  to  lay  it  down,  and  I  have  power  to  take 
it  again."  3.  It  is  vicarious.  Not  for  them  in  defence,  but  for  them  vicariously. 
He  died  for  them  as  a  substitute,  "  bearing  their  own  sins  in  His  own  body."  4. 
It  was  an  accepted  sacrifice.  "  Therefore  doth  the  Father  love  Me,  because  I  lay 
down  My  life,  that  I  may  take  it  again  "  (chap.  x.  17).  (G.  F.  Pentecost,  D.D.) 
The  Shepherd  and  the  sheep : — I.  The  flock.  Were  we  to  take  a  walk  some  spring 
morning  among  the  Yorkshire  hills  or  on  the  downs  of  Sussex  or  Bedfordshire,  we 
should  see  thousands  of  sheep  belonging  to  different  flocks  and  masters.  Christ 
has  members  of  His  flock  not  only  in  Sussex,  &c.,  but  in  Africa,  India,  &c. ;  yes, 
all  the  world  over.  This  flock — 1.  Is  an  exceedingly  large  one.  If  you  were  to  go 
on  counting  for  a  whole  year  you  could  not  count  them  all.  The  patriarchs  had 
large  flocks,  so  have  many  English  farmers,  but  not  altogether  one  so  large.  Some 
say  all  who  are  baptized,  or  take  the  Lord's  Supper,  or  belong  to  this  or  that  Church, 
are  the  Lord's  sheep.  But  many  of  these  are  wicked,  and  so  cannot  be  Christ's, 
while  some  where  there  are  no  churches  and  sacrament  are  Christ's  because  they 
love  and  obey  Him.  Ever  since  Abel  died  men  have  been  gathered  in,  and  thou- 
sands are  joining  the  upper  fold  every  day,  and  still  millions  are  left  behind.  2. 
While  it  is  so  large  it  is  increasing  very  rapidly.  Other  flocks  are  to  decrease. 
Every  new  convert  is  an  addition,  and  what  numbers  are  sometimes  converted  in  a 
day  (Acts  ii.)  I    Missionaries  tell  us  of  whole  tribes  casting  away  their  idols,  &c. 

It  ought  to  increase  more  than  it  does  when  we  concider  the  agencies  at  work 

Bibles,  tracts,  churches,  schools,  ministers,  teachers,  Christian  fathers  and  mothers. 
3.  Christ's  sheep  are  very  much  alike.  (1)  In  their  actions.  Just  as  we  can  tell 
wolves  from  sheep,  so  we  can  tell  who  are  Christ's  and  wlio  are  not.  When  we  see 
*  man  roar  like  a  lion ,  or  greedy  Uke  &  wolf,  we  know  he  is  not  of  Christ's  fold. 


196  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  s. 

(2)  In  their  colour.  "  If  I  wash  thee  not  thou  hast  no  part  with  Me."  (3)  In  their 
disposition.  •'  If  any  man  have  not  the  spirit  of  Christ,"  &o.  (4)  In  the  treatment 
they  require.  None  can  do  without  the  Shepherd's  care.  4.  They  bear  His  mark. 
"What  strange  marks  fanners  sometimes  put  upon  their  sheep — circles,  crosses 
initials.  Some  of  Christ's  sheep  have  got  His  mark  in  greater  boldness,  bat  the 
porter  can  detect  it  however  faint.  If  a  king  were  to  attempt  to  enter  without  it  he 
would  be  turned  away,  while  a  prodigal  with  it  would  be  welcomed.  (1)  This  mark 
is  not  being  an  Episcopalian,  Independent,  &q.  We  may  have  the  Church's  mark 
and  not  Christ's.  (2)  It  is  likeness  to  Christ,  and  we  cannot  be  like  Him  without 
being  born  again.  Some  try  to  imitate  this  mark  and  affix  Morality,  Liberality, 
Good  resolution.  Fasting,  &c.  5.  This  is  a  loving  flock.  Members  of  the  same 
family,  school,  place  of  worship,  ought  to  be  kind  and  gentle,  but  Christ's  flock  is 
the  most  loving  in  the  world.  By  this  the  world  knows  Christ's  disciples.  II.  Thb 
Shephebd.  1.  He  is  awake  and  watchful.  A  good  many  people  are  awake  bat  not 
watchful.  Sometimes  lambs  are  worried  by  strange  dogs  when  the  shepherd  wfti', 
asleep,  and  sometimes  stray  into  danger  when  he  is  awake  but  inattentive.  But 
nothing  escapes  Christ's  sleepless  vigilance.  "He  that  keepeth  Israel,"  Ac.  2.  He 
is  patient.  A  shepherd  cannot  have  too  much  patience :  much  as  he  may  have  it 
will  be  sorely  tried.  In  all  trials  Christ's  patience  never  left  Him ;  and  were  it  to 
leave  Him  now  how  many  would  be  expelled  the  fold  1  3.  He  is  strong.  Look  at 
what  He  has  done  in  Nature.  "All  power  is  given  unto  Me."  All  ministers, 
teachers,  and  angels  combined  would  be  unable  to  provide  for  or  protect  His  flock. 
Then  His  stock  of  provisions  never  diminishes,  and  every  sheep  is  fed  according 
to  its  need.  4.  He  goes  after  every  sheep  or  lamb  that  goes  astray.  How  strange 
that  any  should  desert  such  a  fold ;  stranger  still  that  those  who  stray  should 
refuse  to  return.  (J.  Goodacre. )  Christ  the  Good  Shepherd  : — The  shepherd  who 
can  always  go  to  bed  regularly  at  night,  and  who  is  able  to  say,  "  I  do  not  have 
much  trouble  with  my  flock,"  is  not  the  man  to  be  envied.  He  coolly  says,  "  a  few 
lambs  died  last  winter ;  we  must  expect  that  kind  of  thing.  It  is  true  that  some 
sheep  died  of  starvation ;  bat  if  the  meadows  failed,  I  could  not  help  that."  That 
is  the  kind  of  shepherd  who  deserves  to  be  eaten  by  the  next  wolf ;  but  the  man  who 
is  able  to  say  with  Jacob,  "By  night  the  frost  devoured  me,  and  by  day  the  heat," 
is  the  true  shepherd.  He  is  most  irregular  as  to  his  rest ;  the  only  thing  regulai 
about  him  is  his  labour  and  his  disappointment,  and  yet  faith  makes  him  a  happy 
man.  When  you  grow  very  weak  as  a  pastor,  and  your  charge  utterly  overcomea 
you,  do  not  repine  at  such  weakness,  for  then  yon  will  be  at  your  full  strength ; 
but  when  yoa  are  strong  as  a  pastor,  and  say,  *'I  think  that  to  be  a  minister 
is  an  easy  matter,"  yoa  may  depend  upon  it  that  you  are  weak.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  The  Good  Shepherd  and  His  sheep: — I.  What  thb  Good  Shsp- 
HERD  DOES  FOB  HiB  Sheep  ?  1.  He  protects  them.  Sheep  are  exposed  to  many 
dangers,  from  which  they  are  not  able  to  protect  themselves.  When  David 
was  a  shepherd,  he  tells  us  of  a  lion  and  a  bear,  that  each  came  and  stole  away  a 
lamb  from  his  flock  ;  and  how  he  went  after  the  wild  beasts,  and  slew  them,  and 
saved  his  lambs.  And  this  is  just  what  Jesus,  the  Good  Shepherd,  does  for  His 
sheep.  He  protects  them  from  Satau,  their  great  enemy.  And  in  the  same  way 
He  protects  them  from  all  their  enemies,  and  from  every  danger.  A  Christian 
mother  who  lived  in  the  city  of  New  York,  in  very  humble  circumstances,  had  only 
one  child,  a  little  boy  about  seven  years  old,  whom  she  had  taught  to  know  and 
love  the  Saviour.  One  day,  when  this  good  mother  was  going  quietly  on  with  her 
work  at  home,  she  was  startled  by  a  loud  knock  at  the  door  of  her  humble  dwelling. 
On  opening  the  door  she  received  this  alarming  message :  "  Hurry  away  to  the 
police-station ;  your  little  boy  has  been  run  over."  She  was  terribly  frightened, 
and,  hastening  as  fast  as  she  could  to  the  station-house,  on  arriving  there  she  found 
her  little  boy  surrounded  by  strangers.  The  doctor  had  been  sent  for,  but  had  not 
yet  arrived.  She  was  told  that  the  wheels  of  a  large  carriage  had  gone  over  his 
foot,  but,  on  examining  it  carefully,  she  was  surprised  to  find  no  real  injury  about 
the  foot.  "  Why,  Willie  darUng,  how  was  it  possible  for  the  wheel  of  the  carriage 
to  have  gone  over  your  foot,  and  not  have  crushed  it  ?  "  The  child  looked  tenderly 
np  into  his  mother's  face,  and  said — "  Mamma,  dear,  I  guess  God  must  have  put  it 
in  a  hollow  place."  This  shows  what  faith  that  little  boy  had  in  the  protection 
which  Jesus,  the  Good  Shepherd,  has  promised  to  exercise  over  His  sheep.  He 
always  has  "  a  hollow  place "  to  put  them  in  when  danger  is  near.  2.  He 
provides  for  them.  This  is  something  which  the  sheep  cannot  do  for  them- 
Belves,  and  unless  the  shepherd  does  it  for  them  they  must  perish,    n.  Wait 


CHA»   «.]  ST.  JOHN,  197 

VH3  Good  Shephebd  expects  His  sheep  to  do  fob  Him?  1.  To  hear  Hia 
voice.  "  My  sheep  hear  my  voice,"  He  says.  2.  To  follow  Him.  The  sheep 
set  as  an  example  here,  not  only  in  hearing  the  shepherd,  but  in  obeying  him. 
(R.  Newton,  D.D.)  The  Shepherd  and  His  sheep : — (Children's  sermon).  I.  The 
siauBE  OF  SHEEP  SUITS  US.  We  call  them  silly  sheep.  1.  They  cannot  guide  their 
own  way.  As  wild  beasts  can.  2.  They  cannot  keep  or  defend  themselves. 
Frightened  at  danger.  3.  They  quickly  follow  bad  examples.  Eunning  after  wilful 
one.  4.  They  are  Burronnded  by  unknown  dangers.  How  much  mother  knows, 
and  teacher  knows,  that  we  do  not.  II.  The  fioube  of  Shephebd  suits  Chbist. 
A  most  blessed  thing  that  we  have  some  one  to  care  for  as.  1.  Shepherd  must  be 
strong.  To  defend,  carry,  &c.  2.  Shepherd  must  be  wise.  To  guide  to  food  and 
water.  3.  Shepherd  mast  be  watchfuL  To  see  foes.  4.  Shepherd  must  be  loving 
and  gentle.  To  tend  in  weakness.  III.  When  we  speak  of  Jbscs,  wb  want  to  cau. 
Em  THE  Good  Shephebd.  Especially  because  He  was  willing  to  die  in  defending  us, 
Jesus.  The  old  and  familiar  tale  of  Eric,  who  threw  Himself  to  the  wolves  to  save 
his  master.  Or,  case  of  shepherd  who  died  fighting  three  robbers.  IV.  When 
Chbist  speaks  of  us,  He  would  like  to  call  us  good  sheep.  What  is  it  to  be 
good,  BO  that  Christ  can  think  us  good  ?  A  great  difference  in  sheep.  The  good 
Bheep  know  the  Shepherd's  voice.  They  follow,  they  keep  close,  they  obey.  ( Weekly 
Pulpit.)  He  that  Is  an  hireling. — Tlie  hireling  is — I.  Mebcenaby.  He  tends  the 
flock  simply  for  wages  as  Jacob  did  (Gen.  xxix.  15,  18),  though  not  with  the  love 
that  Jacob  showed  (Gen.  xxxi.  38).  An  emblem  of  the  Pharisees  and  Jewish  rulers 
generally  who  served  God  in  a  purely  legal  spirit,  and  shepherded  the  flock  with  an 
eye  to  the  merit  they  might  acquire,  or  the  recompense  they  should  receive ;  of 
those  who  in  Christ's  day  thrust  themselves  into  the  priest's  office  for  a  morsel  of 
bread  (1  Sam.  ii.  36) ;  of  all  who  enter  the  ministry  for  filthy  lucre's  sake  (Tit.  i.  11). 
II.  Selfish.  He  pursues  his  calling  with  an  eye  to  his  own  interest  and  comfort — a 
type  of  Ezekiel's  shepherds  (Ezek.  xxxiv.  2-3),  and  of  so-called  Christian  pastors  who 
ase  their  official  position  solely  to  secure  worldly  emolument,  social  preferment,  or 
temporal  renown  (1  Tim.  iii.  3,  8).  HI.  Negligbnt.  Chiefly  occupied  with 
thoughts  of  his  own  happiness,  he  not  only  leaves  the  sheep  to  cater  for  themselves 
(Ezek.  xxxiv.  4  ;  Zeck.  xi.  16, 17),  but  fleeing  at  the  first  approach  of  danger,  per- 
mits the  helpless  creatures  to  be  ravaged  and  scattered.  Once  more  a  representa- 
tive of  the  corrupt  hierarchy  that  presided  over  Israel,  and  of  such  nominally 
Christian  teachers  who,  neglecting  the  highest  interests  of  their  people,  leave  them 
to  fall  a  prey  to  the  principalities  and  powers  of  evil.  {T.  Whitelaw,  D.D.)  Self- 
sacrificing  teachers : — Paton  records  that  at  a  time  of  great  danger  on  Tanna  he  tried 
to  prevail  on  one  of  the  native  teachers  from  Aneityum  to  remain  at  the  mission 
house.  The  man  insisted  on  returning  to  his  post,  and  with  this  unanswerable 
defence  of  his  conduct :  "  Missi,  when  I  see  them  thirsting  for  my  blood,  I  just  see 
myself  when  the  missionary  first  came  to  my  island.  I  desired  to  murder  him  as  they 
now  desire  to  kill  me.  Had  he  stayed  away  for  such  danger,  I  would  have  remained 
a  heathen ;  but  he  came,  and  continued  coming  to  teach  us,  till  by  the  grace  of  God 
I  was  changed  to  what  I  am.  Now  the  same  God  that  changed  me  can  change 
these  poor  Tannese  to  love  and  serve  Him.  I  can  not  stay  away  from  them."  On 
mission  ground  the  term  *•  pastor  "  is  restored  to  its  original  meaning,  •'  shepherd," 
with  good  reason.  Hannington's  message  to  the  ruler  who  compassed  his  death 
was :  "  Tell  the  king  that  I  die  for  Buganda.  I  have  bought  this  road  with  my  life." 
(Monday  Club  Sermons.)  The  hireling  : — It  is  not  the  bare  receiving  hire  which 
denominates  a  man  a  hireling,  but  the  loving  hire;  his  loving  the  hire  more 
than  the  work ;  the  working  for  the  sake  of  the  hire.  He  is  an  hireling  who  would 
not  work  were  it  not  for  the  hire ;  to  whom  this  is  the  great  (if  not  only)  motive  of 
working.  0  God  1  if  a  man  who  works  only  for  hire  is  such  a  wretch,  a  mere  thief 
and  a  robber,  what  is  he  who  continually  takes  the  hire,  and  yet  does  not  work  at 
all  ?  (J.  Wesley.)  The  Woll — Satan  a  wolf: — 1.  His  attacks  are  deadly.  2.  His 
enrprises  are  crafty.  3.  His  hatred  of  Christ  is  implacable.  4.  His  hanger  to  devour 
IB  insatiable.  6.  He  attacks  under  darkness.  6.  He  scatters  the  flock  by  tempting 
them  to  luxury,  avarice,  and  sensuality.  Filling  their  minds  with  pride,  envy,  anger, 
deceit.  (W.  H.  Van  Doren,  D.D.)  I . . .  know  My  sheep  and  am  known  of  Mine. — 
The  mutual  knowledge  of  Christ  and  His  people : — I.  Chbist's  knowledgb  of  His 
feoplb.  1.  The  faithful  and  experienced  Eastern  shepherd  knows  every  one  of  his 
Bheep.  So  does  Christ.  He  knows — 1.  Their  persons ;  not  only  the  numbeia  of 
His  flock.  We  are  as  well  known  to  Him  as  the  stars  (Isa.  xl.),  and  as  our  children 
are  to  as.    2.  Their  condition  and  circumstances — but  general  and  peculiar — oar 


198  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

Bins  that  He  may  pardon  them ;  our  diseases  that  He  may  heal  them ;  oar  wants 
that  He  may  supply  them  ;  our  fears  that  He  may  quiet  them  ;  our  burdens  that 
He  may  give  us  strength  to  bear  them ;  our  prayers  that  He  may  grant  them,  oar 
graces  that  we  may  delight  in  them ;  our  services  that  He  may  reward  them.  2. 
We  trace  this  knowledge  to — (1)  His  great  love.  It  is  clear  that  the  shepherd  who 
loves  his  sheep  best  will  know  them  best.  (2)  His  intimacy.  He  dwells  with  them. 
(3)  His  omniscience.  II,  Christ's  people's  knowledge  op  Him  is — 1.  Peculiar. 
Their  fellow-men  do  not  possess  it  or  understand  it.  2.  Acquired,  It  is  no* 
natural  to  us.  Nature  does  not  teach  it.  The  young  sheep  knows  its  mother  by 
instinct,  but  not  its  shepherd.  All  real  knowledge  of  Christ  is  the  effect  of  a  special 
manifestation  of  Him  to  the  soul.  3.  Experimental  chiefly.  Some  knowledge  we 
get  of  Him  from  faith  in  God's  testimony  concerning  Him,  but  our  chief  spring  ia 
this :  when  we  have  hungered,  He  has  fed  us ;  when  we  have  not  known  our  way. 
He  has  guided  us ;  where  we  have  fallen  iuto  danger.  He  has  extricated  us.  4. 
Practical.  The  soul  that  possesses  it  becomes  willing  and  obedient.  {C.  Bradley, 
M.A.)  The  true  sheep: — What  is  the  knowledge  by  which  Christ's  true  sheep 
are  known  ?  There  are  many  kinds  of  knowledge,  of  which  only  one  can  be  the 
true.  There  is  a  knowledge  which  even  fallen  angels  have  of  Him  (Luke  iv.  33, 34, 
41 ;  Matt,  viii.  29).  This  is  a  knowledge  of  the  spiritual  intelligence,  which  may  be 
possessed  in  energetic  wickedness,  and  with  direct  resistance  of  the  will  against  the 
will  of  Christ,  Again,  there  is  also  a  knowledge  which  all  the  regenerate  possess. 
The  preaching  of  the  Church,  the  reading  of  Holy  Scriptures,  the  commemoration  of 
fasts  and  festivals,  the  tradition  of  popular  Christianity,  and  all  the  knowledge 
which  from  childhood  we  unconsciously  imbibe,  give  us  a  general  knowledge  of  the 
evangelical  facts  and  of  the  history  of  our  Lord.  This  cannot  be  the  knowledge 
of  which  He  here  speaks.  It  must  be  something  of  a  deeper  kind,  something  more 
living  and  personal.  It  is  plainly,  therefore,  such  a  knowledge  as  He  has  of  us. 
It  is  that  mutual  consciousness  of  which  we  speak  when  we  say  that  we  know  any 
person  as  our  friend.  We  do  not  mean  that  we  know  him  by  name ;  for  many 
strangers  we  know  by  name  ;  many  whom  we  have  never  seen,  or  further  care  to 
know :  neither  do  we  mean  only  that  we  know  all  about  him,  that  is  to  say,  who  he 
is,  and  whence,  of  what  hneage,  or  from  what  land,  or  what  has  been  his  history, 
his  acts  and  words,  and  the  like ;  for  in  this  way  we  may  be  said  to  know  many 
who  do  not  know  us,  and  with  whom  we  have  nothing  to  do.  When  we  say  we 
know  any  one  as  our  friend,  we  mean  that  we  know  not  only  who  he  is,  but  what, 
or  as  we  say,  his  character, — that  he  is  true,  affectionate,  gentle,  forgiving,  liberal, 
patient,  self-denying  ;  and  still  more,  that  he  has  been,  and  is,  all  this  to  ourselves  ; 
that  we  have  made  trial  of  him,  and  have  cause  to  know  this  character  as  a  reality, 
of  which  we  have,  as  it  were,  tasted,  by  often  meeting  with  him,  seeing  him  at  all 
times,  under  all  circumstances  and  in  all  changes,  familiarly  conversing  with  him, 
doing  service  to  him,  ourselves  receiving  from  him  in  turn  tokens  of  love  and  good- 
ness. This  is  the  knowledge  of  friendship  and  of  love.  It  is  something  hving  and 
personal,  arising  out  of  the  whole  of  our  inward  nature,  and  filling  all  our  powers 
and  affections.  And  such  is  the  knowledge  the  true  sheep  have  of  the  Good 
Shepherd.  Let  us,  then,  consider  in  what  way  we  may  attain  this  knowledge.  1. 
It  mast  be  by  following  Him.  "  My  sheep  hear  My  voice,  and  they  follow 
Me."  By  living  such  a  life  as  He  lived.  Likeness  to  Him  is  the  power  of  knowing 
Him.  Nay,  rather  it  is  knowledge  itself :  there  is  no  other.  It  is  by  likeness  that 
we  know,  and  by  sympathy  that  we  learn.  2.  There  are  peculiar  faculties  of  the 
heart  which  must  be  awakened,  if  we  would  know  Him  as  He  knows  us.  There  can 
be  no  true  obedience  without  the  discipline  of  habitual  devotion — in  prayer,  medi- 
tation, sacramental  communion.  3.  This  true  knowledge  of  Him  is  not  a  transi- 
tory state  of  feeling.  Out  of  obedience  and  devotion  arises  an  habitual  faith,  which 
maJses  Him,  though  unseen,  yet  perceptibly  a  part  of  all  our  life.  (Archdeacon 
Manning.)  The  understanding  between  shepherd  and  sheep  : — You  will  notice  the 
difference  between  the  Old  and  the  New  translation  here.  The  new  translation  makes 
the  meaning  of  our  Saviour's  words  much  clearer.  He  says,  "I  am  the  Good 
Shepherd  ;  and  there  is  an  understanding  between  Me  and  My  sheep,  as  there  is  an 
understanding  b  etween  My  Father  and  Me."  For  people  to  understand  one  another, 
there  must  be  something  in  common.  The  Pharisees  could  not  understand  our 
Lord.  They  had  nothing  in  common  with  Him.  As  He  said  to  them,  "  Ye  are 
from  beneath  ;  I  am  from  above  ;  ye  are  of  this  world ;  I  am  not  of  this  world," 
No,  they  could  not  understand  Him;  any  more  than  a  man  without  an  ear  for  musio 
ean  understand  masio,  or  a  dull  prosy  mind  can  understand  poetry,  or  a  persoa 


8HAP.  r]  ST.  JOHN.  19» 

who  always  acts  from  sell  interested  motives  can  understand  another  who  has 
more  thought  for  others  than  for  himself.  But  Christ's  disciples  could  understand 
Him :  not  perfectly,  often  very  imperfectly ;  still  they  had  that  which  made  them 
capable  of  understanding  Him  to  some  extent,  and  of  being  trained  to  understand 
Him  more  fully  in  time ;  as  one  who  loves  music  can  enjoy  and  to  some  extent 
nnderstand  a  great  musician,  one  who  is  not  altogether  selfish  can  appreciate  the 
nobility  of  self-sacrifice  for  the  good  of  others.  Some  of  Christ's  disciples  had 
made  sacrifices  for  Him,  though  small  compared  with  what  He  had  made  for  them. 
There  were  those  among  His  little  flock  who  had  left  all  they  had  on  earth  to  follow 
Him,  and  this,  and  the  faith  which  led  them  to  it,  had  made  them  able  to  know 
and  understand  Him  who  had  left  all  He  had  in  heaven  for  their  sake,  {J.  E. 
Vernmi,  M.A.)  The  shepherd's  mark: — Edmund  Andrews  was  a  thoughtless, 
cruel  boy.  One  day  he  was  passing  by  Burlton's  farm,  and  saw  Wilkinson,  the  old 
shepherd,  busy  with  his  pitch-kettle  and  iron,  marking  the  sheep  with  the  letters 
"  J.  B.,"  for  John  Burlton.  "  So  you  are  putting  your  master's  mark  upon  the 
sheep,  are  you  ?  "  said  he.  "  Yes,  Master  Edmund  ;  but  God,  the  Almighty  Maker, 
has  put  His  mark  upon  them  before."  "  What  do  you  mean  ?  "  asked  Edmund. 
*'  I  mean  that  our  Heavenly  Father,  in  His  wisdom  and  goodness,  has  put  marks 
upon  the  creatures  He  has  made,  and  such  marks  as  none  but  He  could  put  upon 
them.  He  gave  wings  to  the  cockchafer,  spots  to  the  butterfly,  feathers  to  the  bird, 
a  sparkling  eye  to  the  frog  and  toad,  a  swift  foot  to  the  dog,  and  a  soft  furry  skin 
to  the  cat.  These  marks  are  His  marks,  and  show  that  the  creatures  belong  to 
Him  ;  and  woe  be  to  those  that  abuse  them  1 "  "  That's  an  odd  thought,"  said 
Edmund,  as  he  turned  away.  "  It  may  be  an  odd  thought,"  said  the  shepherd, 
♦*  but  odd  things  lead  us  to  glorify  God,  and  to  act  kindly  to  His  creatures.  The 
more  we  have,  Master  Edmund,  the  better."  How  Christ  knows  His  sheep: — 
Suppose  one  of  the  sheep  in  a  fold  were  to  go  to  the  shepherd,  and  say,  "  I  think 
I'm  your  sheep,  because  you  get  six  pounds  of  wool  off  me ;  "  and  another  should 
say,  •'  And  I  think  I'm  your  sheep,  because  you  get  four  pounds  of  wool  from  me;  " 
and  a  third,  *•  I  hope  I  am  your  sheep,  but  I  dou't  know,  for  you  only  get  three 
pounds  of  wool  from  me  ;  and  sometimes  it  is  but  two. "  Finally,  suppose  one  poor 
scraggy  fellow  comes  who  don't  know  whether  he  is  a  sheep  or  a  goat,  and  makes 
his  complaint ;  the  shepherd  would  say,  "  I  know  who  are  the  best  sheep,  and  who 
are  the  worst.  I  wish  you  could  all  give  me  ten  pounds  of  wool ;  but  whether  you 
give  me  ten  pounds  or  one,  you  are  all  mine.  I  bought  you,  and  paid  for  you,  and 
you  are  all  in  my  fold,  and  you  every  one  belong  to  me."  It  is  not  how  much  a 
sheep  brings  his  owner  which  proves  him  his.  The  proof  that  the  sheep  belongs  to 
the  shephard  is,  that  the  shepherd  bought  him  and  takes  care  of  him.  {H.  W. 
Beecher.)  Christ's  knowledge  of  His  sheep : — The  most  fearful  attributes  of  the 
Gk>dhead  turn  to  the  sweetest  comfort  of  a  believer.  His  justice,  to  the  natural 
man  so  awful,  requires  Him  to  forgive  those  whom  He  has  punished  in  our  Substi- 
tute. His  power  so  tremendous  when  turned  against  us  is  assuring  in  the  same 
proportion,  when  it  is  for  us.  So  with  omniscience,  a  terror  to  the  wrongdoer, 
but  a  comfort  to  the  penitent  believer.  I.  Christ  knows  who  abe  His  sheep. 
Leave  it  then  to  Him  to  pronounce  who  are  so.  We  seldom  make  a  greater  mistake 
then  when  we  attempt  to  trespass  on  this  province  of  Deity.  "  I  know,"  almost 
as  much  as  to  say,  •'  You  do  not."  And  there  are  times  when  it  will  be  best  not  to 
form  the  judgment  respecting  ourselves.  Leave  it  thus.  "  He  knows  whether  I  am 
His ;  and  if  not,  that  I  wish  to  be,  and  therefore  will  make  me.  If  I  am.  He  will 
keep  me."  II.  He  knows  them  as  a  whole.  As  all  one,  gathered  out  of  the  same 
desert,  washed  in  the  same  fountain,  &c.  In  this  collectiveness  He  expects  concert 
of  action,  sympathy,  unity  among  His  people.  We  are  accustomed  to  regard  our- 
selves as  separate  individuals,  families,  churches.  Hence  our  narrowness,  selfish- 
ness. III.  He  knows  them  as  individuals.  Each  stands  out  known  and  loved  aa 
if  He  cared  for  none  else.  He  knows — 1.  You,  and  not  merely  about  you.  2.  How 
long  you  have  been  in  the  fold,  and  expects  accordingly.  3.  Your  natural  tempt  ra- 
ment,  what  you  can  and  cannot  bear,  how  much  exposure,  liberty,  &c.  What  kind 
of  pasture  you  require.  4.  Your  future,  and  is  always  working  up  to  it.  IV.  He 
KNOWS  Himself  in  them  and  therefore  His  Father's  mind  asodt  them.  {J. 
Vaughan,  M.A.)  I  lay  down  My  life  for  the  sheep. — Christ  died  to  save  men : — At 
the  time  of  the  gold  fever  in  California,  a  man  went  from  England  to  the  diggings. 
By  and  by  he  sent  money  for  his  wife  and  child  to  follow  him.  They  arrived 
safely  in  New  York,  and  there  took  a  passage  in  one  of  the  beautiful  Pacifio 
ateamers.    A  few  days  after  sailing,  the  terrible  cry  of  "  Fire  1  fire  I "  rang  through 


200  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chip.  X. 

the  ship.  Everything  that  the  captain  and  sailors  conlcl  do  was  done,  but  it  was  of 
no  use ;  the  fire  rapidly  gained  ground.  As  there  was  a  powder  magazine  on 
board,  the  captain  knew  that  the  moment  the  flames  reached  it  the  vessel  would  be 
blown  up ;  so  he  gave  the  word  to  lower  the  life  boats.  These  were  get  out,  but 
there  was  not  room  for  all ;  so  the  strong  pushed  in  and  left  the  weak  to  their  fate. 
As  the  last  boat  was  moving  off,  a  mother  and  her  boy  were  on  the  deck  and  she 
pleaded  to  be  taken.  The  sailors  agreed  to  take  one  but  not  both.  What  did  the 
mother  do  ?  Did  she  jump  in  herself  ?  No  I  Kissing  her  boy  and  handing  him 
over  the  side  of  the  ship,  she  said  "  If  you  live  to  see  your  father,  tell  him  I  died  to 
eave  you."  That  was  great  love,  yet  it  is  but  a  faint  type  of  what  Christ  has 
done  for  us.  (<7.  L.  Nye.)  Damon  and  Pythias : — Damon,  being  condemned  to 
death  by  Dionysius,  tyrant  of  Syracuse,  obtained  liberty  to  visit  his  wife  and  chil- 
dren, leaving  his  friend,  Pythias,  as  a  pledge  for  his  return.  At  the  appointed  time 
Damon  failed  in  appearing,  and  the  tyrant  had  the  curiosity  to  visit  Pythias  in 
prison.  "  What  a  fool  you  were,"  said  he,  "  to  rely  on  Damon's  promise !  How 
could  you  imagine  that  he  would  sacrifice  his  life  for  you  or  for  any  man?  "  *'  My 
lord,"  said  Pythias,  with  a  firm  voice  and  noble  aspect,  "  I  would  suffer  a  thousand 
deaths  rather  than  my  friend  should  fail  in  any  article  of  honour.  He  cannot  fail. 
I  am  as  confident  of  his  virtue  as  I  am  of  my  own  existence.  Bat  I  beseech  the 
gods  to  preserve  his  life.  Oppose  him  ye  winds !  Disappoint  his  eagerness,  and 
suffer  him  not  to  arrive  till  my  death  has  saved  a  life  of  much  greater  consequence 
than  mine,  necessary  to  his  lovely  wife,  to  his  little  innocents,  to  his  friends,  to  bit 
country  1  Oh  !  let  me  not  die  the  cruelest  of  deaths  in  that  of  Damon  1 "  Dionysiua 
was  confounded  and  awed  with  the  magnanimity  of  these  sentiments.  He  wished 
to  speak :  he  hesitated,  he  looked  down,  and  retired  in  silence.  Pythias  waa 
brought  forth,  and  with  an  air  of  satisfaction  walked  to  the  place  of  execution.  He 
ascended  the  scaffold  and  addressed  the  people.  **  My  prayers  are  heard  ;  the  gods 
are  propitious ;  the  winds  have  been  contrary.  Damon  could  not  conquer  impossi- 
bilities :  he  will  be  here  to-morrow,  and  my  blood  shaU  ransom  that  of  my  friend." 
As  he  pronounced  these  words,  a  buzz  arose ;  a  distant  voice  was  heard ;  the  crowd 
caught  the  words,  and  "  Stop,  stop,  executioner  1 "  was  repeated  by  every  person. 
A  man  came  at  fuU  speed.  In  the  same  instant  he  was  off  his  horse,  on  the 
scaffold,  and  in  the  arms  of  Pythias.  "  You  are  safe  1 "  he  cried,  "  you  are  safe,  my 
friend  1  The  gods  be  praised,  you  are  safe  I "  Pale  and  half  speechless  in  the 
arms  of  Damon,  Pythias  replied  in  broken  accents,  "  Fatal  haste !  cruel  impatience  I 
What  envious  powers  have  wrought  impossibilities  against  your  friend  ?  But  I  will 
not  be  wholly  disappointed.  Since  I  cannot  die  to  save  yon,  I  will  die  to  accompany 
you  1 "  Dionysius  heard  and  beheld  with  astonishment.  His  eyes  were  opened, 
his  heart  was  touched,  and  he  could  no  longer  resist  the  power  of  pity.  He 
descended  from  his  throne  and  ascended  the  scaffold.  "  Live,  live,  ye  incomparable 
pair  I  Ye  have  demonstrated  the  existence  of  virtue,  and  consequently  of  a  God 
who  rewards  it.  Live  happy,  live  revered ;  and  as  you  have  invited  me  by  your 
example,  form  me  by  your  precepts  to  participate  worthily  in  a  friendship  so 
divine."  Other  sheep  I  have  which  are  not  of  this  fold. — Outsiders : — The  grace 
of  God  is  no  man's  httle  property,  fenced  off  all  for  ourselves.  It  is  not  a  king's 
park,  at  which  we  look  through  a  barred  gateway.  It  is  a  Father's  orchard  with 
bars  to  let  down  and  gates  to  swing  open.  There  are  Christians  who  keep  a  severe 
guard  over  the  Church,  when  God  would  have  all  come  and  take  the  richest  and 
ripest  of  the  fruit.  Then,  again,  we  have  those  who  get  up  statistics  and  say  so 
many  Methodists,  Presbyterians,  &c.,  there,  that  is  the  number  of  Christians. 
Christ  comes  and  says  "  No  I  you  have  not  counted  rightly,  other  sheep  have  I 
which  are  not  of  these  folds."  I.  The  heavenly  Shepherd  will  find  many  of  His 
Bheep,  among  those  who  are  nom-chitbch  ooebs.  I  do  not  think  that  the  Church 
gains  when  you  take  sheep  from  one  fold  and  puts  them  into  another.  It  is  the 
lost  sheep  on  the  mountains  we  want  to  bring  back.  II.  The  heavenly  Shepherd 
will  find  many  of  His  sheep  £imong  those  who  are  now  bejectobs  of  Christianitt. 
I  do  not  know  how  yon  came  to  reject  Christianity  :  but  I  want  you,  before  you 
finally  discard  it,  to  give  it  a  fair  trial.  You  want  what  it  alone  can  give — if  it  does 
not  give  that  to  you  then  you  may  reject  it.  But  it  will.  Take  not  the  word  of  a 
clergyman,  who  may  be  speaking  professionally,  but  that  of  laymen  who  have  nerer 
preached — Milton,  Wilberforce,  Newton,  Boyle,  Locke,  Morse.  IH.  The  heavenly 
Shepherd  will  get  many  of  His  sheep  among  those  who  have  been  fluno  or  evil 
HABIT.  The  way  Christian  people  give  np  the  prodigal  is  outrageous.  They  talk  aa 
though  the  grace  of  God  were  a  chain  of  forty  or  fifty  links,  and,  when  they  had  been 


CHAP.  t.  ST.  JOHN.  201 

mn  out,  there  was  nothing  to  touch  a  man's  iniquity.  Bat  there  is  only  one 
class  about  whom  we  may  be  despondent :  those  who  have  been  hearing  the  gospel 
for  twenty,  thirty,  forty  years,  and  who  are  gospel  hardened.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.) 
Other  sheep  and  one  fiocU  : — I.  Our  Lord  had  a  people  under  the  worst  circdm- 
STANCES.  "  This  fold  "  was  not  the  Jews,  but  His  handful  of  disciples.  1.  Doubt- 
less these  times  are  exceedingly  dangerous,  and  some  brethren  never  allow  me  to 
forget  it,  for  they  play  well  on  the  minor  key.  But  I  heard  it  thirty  years  ago,  and 
the  times  have  been  bad  ever  since,  and  always  will  be.  This  is  better,  perhaps, 
than  living  in  a  fool's  paradise ;  but  certainly  the  days  of  Christ  were  terrible  days 
in  the  point  of — (1)  Utter  ungodliness.  A  few  godly  ones  watched  for  the  coming  of 
Christ,  but  the  great  mass  were  altogether  gone  out  of  the  way.  (2)  WUl  worship  ; 
the  commandments  of  men  were  taught  for  the  doctrines  of  God.  (3)  Fierce 
opposition,  as  seen  in  the  treatment  Christ  received.  Yet  He  had  a  chosen  com- 
pany, and  however  guilty  our  age  may  be  in  these  points,  tbere  is  an  election  of 
grace  still.  2.  This  company  was  a  fold.  Afterwards  they  were  to  be  called  a  flock; 
but  as  yet  one  glance  was  sufiBoient  to  embrace  them  all.  (1)  They  were  distinct 
from  the  world  '•  Ye  are  not  of  the  world,"  &o.  (2)  In  that  fold  they  were  protected 
from  ill-weathers,  and  from  the  wolf  and  the  thief.  (3)  Even  there  were  goats — "  One 
of  you  is  a  devil."  (4)  They  were  being  strengthened  for  future  following  of  the 
Great  Shepherd.  3 .  When  Jesus  had  thus  shut  them  in  He  would  not  allow  them 
to  be  exclusive,  but  opens  wide  the  door  of  the  sheepfold  and  cries,  "  Other  sheep  I 
have."  Thus  He  checks  a  common  tendency  to  be  forgetful  of  outsiders.  Seeing 
that  He  has  those  who  would  be  found  by  Him  through  His  faithful  people,  let  us 
rouse  ourselves  to  the  holy  enterprise.  4.  Never  despair.  The  Lord  is  with  us. 
We  maybe  poor,  but  we  are  Christ's,  and  that  makes  us  precious.  There  were  three 
men  who  had  to  carry  on  a  college  when  funds  were  running  short.  One  com- 
plained that  they  had  no  helpers  and  could  not  hope  to  succeed.  "  Why,"  said 
another,  '•  we  are  a  thousand. "  "  How  is  that  ?  "  "I  am  a  cipher,  and  you  and 
our  brother ;  so  we  have  three  noughts  to  begin  with.  But  Christ  is  One.  Put 
Him  down  before  the  ciphers,  and  we  have  a  thousand  directly."  U.  Our  Lord 
HAS  OTHER  SHEEP  NOT  TET  KNOWN  TO  D8.  "  I  havo,"  not  "  shall  have."  The  apostles 
never  dreamed  of  His  having  sheep  in  Britain  or  Eome.  Their  most  liberal  notion 
was  that  the  scattered  seed  of  Abraham  might  be  gathered.  1.  Who  are  these 
sheep?  (1)  Christ's  chosen — "  Ye  have  not  chosen  Me,"  &c.  (2]  Those  whom  the 
Father  had  given  Him.  (3)  Those  for  whom  He  laid  down  His  bfe  that  they  might 
be  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord,  "  Ye  are  not  your  own,"  &c.  (4)  Those  on  whose  behalf  He 
had  entered  into  suretyship  engagements  even  as  Jacob  undertook  the  flock  of  Laban 
that  he  should  lose  none.  2.  What  was  their  state  ?  People  without  a  shepherd — 
lost,  wandering,  ready  to  be  devoured  by  the  wolf.  Bad  as  the  world  is  to-day  it 
must  have  been  far  worse  in  the  vile  Soman  world.  3.  This  thought  gave  Christ 
great  encouragement  when  confronting  their  adversaries,  and  should  be  a  great 
comfort  to  God's  people  now.  "  I  have  much  people  in  this  city."  This  is  our 
authority  for  seeking  the  lost  sheep  in  whoever's  preserves  they  may  be.  IIL  Oub 
Lord  must  lead  those  other  sheep,  not  "  bring  " ;  Christ  must  be  at  their  head, 
and  they  must  follow.  1.  It  is  Christ  who  has  to  do  this,  even  as  He  has  done  it 
hitherto,  ••  also."  Ab  Jesus  has  done  it  for  us  He  must  do  it  for  others.  2.  He 
"  must "  do  it.  Subjects  are  usually  bound  by  a  '•  must " ;  this  "  must "  binds  the 
sovereign.  Who  can  resist  it  f  Clear  out  all  enemies  I  3.  How  He  must  do  it  ? 
"  They  shall  hear  my  voice."  Christ  is  going  to  save  people  still  by  the  gospel, 
and  we  must  not  look  for  other  means.  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world."  IV.  Our 
Lord  guarantees  the  unity  op  His  Church.  "  One  floclj."  1.  We  hear  a  great 
deal  about  the  unity  of  the  Church.  We  are  to  have  the  Boman,  Greek,  and 
Anglican  all  one.  God  has  chosen  people  in  each,  but  their  union  would  be  a  dire 
mischief.  2.  This  has  been  carried  out  as  a  matter  of  fact.  There  never  was  but 
one  Shepherd  and  never  will  be  but  one  flock.  All  the  visible  Churches  contain 
parts  of  it.  3.  As  a  matter  of  experience  this  is  carried  out  in  believers.  A  spiri- 
tually minded  man  is  at  one  with  all  spiritually  minded  men.  Set  a  Calvinist  and 
on  Arminian  at  prayer :  let  the  Spirit  work  on  Baptist  and  Paedo-Baptist.  What 
Protestant  but  loves  Bernard  ?  4.  The  external  Church  is  needful,  but  it  is  not  the 
one  and  indivisible  Church  of  Christ.  5.  This  Church  is  known  by  its  obedience 
to  Christ.  (C,  H.  Spurgeon.)  Thit  fold  and  the  other  sheep : — L  This  fold  :  th« 
seed  of  Israel.  By  His  personal  ministry  our  Lord  founded  the  kingdom  in  Israel 
and  some  of  the  seed  of  Abraham  were  gathered  in.  II.  Other  sheep  not  of  this 
roLD.    Here  the  expansive  love  of  Jesus  breaks  forth.    He  began  at  Jerasalem,  but 


i03  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  I. 

the  longings  of  His  heart  go  forth  to  the  end  of  the  earth.    III.  I  hate.    Mark  the 
all  encompassing  sovereignty  of  His  love.     They  were  His  in  the  covenant  from 
the  beginning.     At  a  time  when  they  were  neither  bom  nor  bom  again  He  counts 
them  His.    IV.  Them  also.    There  is  no  respect  of  persons.    No  poor  slave  will  be 
left  out  because  he  is  black ;  no  servant  pushed  aside  to  make  way  for  his  master ; 
no  rich  or  powerful  man  is  kept  out  at  the  cry  of  the  envious  mob.    If  any  were 
kept  back  the  Lord  would  say,  "  them  also  ;  gather  up  the  fragments,"  <fec.    What 
a  cheering  word  !    It  embraces  the  prodigal,  the  dying  thief,  Saul  of  Tarsus.    "V. 
I  BRiNO.    He  sends  none  forward  to  make  or  find  their  own  way.     "  In  all  their 
afflictions  He  is  afflicted."    They  shall  not  traverse  the  valley  of  the  shadow  alone. 
None  shall  stand  at  the  Judgment  to  make  the  best  of  his  own  case.      "  I  am  the 
Way."    He  brings  them  through  the  regeneration  into  the  fold  on  earth.    It  often 
takes  much  bringing ;  but  all  power  is  given  to  the  Captain  of  our  salvation.    The 
drunkard,  miser,  Ac,  are  made  willing  in  the  day  of  His  power.    And  that  same 
bringing  power  shall  rend  the  gates  of  death.     VI.  I  must.    He  commands  the 
winds  and  the  sea  and  they  obey;  who  then  can  command  Him?    His  own 
yearning  love.     (W.  Arnot,  D.D.)        The  missionary's  warrant : — We  have  a  right 
to  go  anywhere  to  seek  after  our  Master's  sheep.      If  they  are  my  Master's 
sheep  who  shall  stop  me  over  hill  and  dale   inquiring,  "  Have  you  seen  my 
Master's  sheep."    If  any  say,  "  You  do  intrude  in  this  land,"  let  the  answer 
be,  "  We  are  after  our  Master's  sbeep  which  have  strayed  here."    Yon  have  a 
search  warrant  from  the  King  of  king's,   and,   therefore,  you  have  a  right  to 
enter  and  search  after  your  Lord's  stolen  property.    If  men  belonged  to  the  devil 
we  would  not  rob  the  enemy  himself;  but  they  do  not  belong  to  him.     (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)       Them  also  I  must  bring. — They  must  be  brought — 1.  To  realize  the 
visions  of  ancient  prophecy.     2.  To  accomplish  the  promise  of  the  Father  (Psa.  ii. 
8).     3.  To  secure  the  object,  and  to  recompense  the  suffering  and  the  toil  of  the 
Redeemer's  mediatorial  undertaking.    4.  To  answer  the  prayers,  fulfil  the  expecta- 
tions, and  crown  the  prayers  which  He  has  animated  and  inspired.     (T.  Raffles, 
LL.D.)        One  fold  and  one  shepherd. — I.  Christ's  propektt  in  His  sheep.    1. 
How  acquired.      (1)  By  donation.     "  Thine  they  were  and  Thou  gavest  them  Me." 
••  Ask  of  Me,"  <fec.    (2)  By  purchase,  "  Ye  are  bought  with  a  price."     (3)  By  the 
sanctification  of  the  Spirit ;  after  which  He  gives  them  back  to  the  Father  to  be 
glorified.     2.  There  are  but  three  possessions  to  which  the  word  property  really 
belongs.    (1)  The  sinner's  possession  of  his  own  sins.     (2)  The  believer's  posses- 
sion of  his  own  Saviour.     (3)  Christ's  possession  of  His  own  people.    3.  Possession 
is  an  endearing  thing.     If  you  possess  a  thing  you  love  it ;  and  that  feeling  is  a 
faint  copy  of  the  mind  of  Christ.     4.  Concerning  this  possession,  Christ  declares 
that  He  holds  it  not  only  over  those  He  was  then  addressing,  but  over  others 
separated  from  them — perhaps  other  worlds,  certainly  Gentiles,  of  whose  admission 
Jews  were  jealous.     5.  Note,  then,  that  Christ  said  this  of  those  who  were  then  un- 
converted.    Paul  (Acts  xviii.)  was  almost  driven  from  Corinth  by  opposition,  but 
was  stopped  by  "  I  have  much  people  in  this  city ;  "  and  yet,  with  the  exception  of 
two  or  three  persons,  all  were  locked  in  unbelief.     But  it  was  not  so  eighteen 
months  after.  What  a  joy  to  the  Christian  worker  to  be  able  to  think  that  any  man 
may  be  among  Christ's  "  other  sheep  1  "    II.  Christ's  engagement  for  His  sheep. 
"Them  also  I  must  bring."    1.  The  imperative  obligation.    God  permits  Him- 
self to  be  ruled  by  His  own  covenant.  2.  This  certified  engagement  is  this  :  "  They 
shall  hear  My  voice."     (1)  When  a  soul  just  awakened  hears  "  Thou  art  the  man." 
(2)  When  the  stricken  conscience  hears  "  Go  in  peace,"  &c.     (C)  When  the  soul, 
better  knowing  now  Christ's  accents,  hears  "  It  is  I ;  be  not  afraid."     (4)  When  the 
heart,  better  ordered,  always  hears  and  says,  "  Speak  Lord,"  &-c.     (5)  When  the  ear 
shall  drink  in  "  Come  ye  blessed,"  &c.    3.  Your  corresponding  duty  to  this  pledge 
is  to  hear — obey.  This  is  happiness  here  and  glory  by  and  by.  III.  Christ's  intention 
WITH  His  sheep.   "  Onefold,"  &o.   1.  This  will  be  literally  fulfilled  in  heaven.  2.  It  is 
spirituallyfulfilledherein—(l)  Unity  of  condition.  (2)  Unity  of  Spirit.  (3)  Unity  of  ac- 
tion. (4)  Unity  of  headship — ••  One  Shepherd."  (J.  Vmighiin,M.A.)  Christ's  collected 

flocks: I.  What  things  abe  to  be  done  for  the  completion  of  this  end?    I 

observe — 1.  The  views  of  mankind  concerning  religious  subjects  are  to  be  extensively 
changed.  2.  A  mighty  change,  also,  must  be  wrought  in  the  disposition  of  man. 
3.  The  change  will  not  be  less  in  the  conduct  of  men.  II.  In  what  manner  abb 
THESE  THINGS  TO  BE  DONE  ?  I  suswer,  they  are  to  be  accomplished  not  by  miracles, 
but  by  means.  III.  Bt  whom  are  these  things  to  be  done?  Sohtary  efforts 
will  here  be  fruitless;  divided  efforts  wiU  be  eciuallv  fm    Irss;  clashing  efforts  will 


«BAP.  X.]  ST.  JOHN.  SOS 

destroy  each  other.  Learn — 1.  The  work  to  which  yoa  are  summoned  is  the  work 
of  God.  2.  The  present  is  the  proper  time  for  this  glorious  undertaking.  3.  The 
necessity  of  this  work  irresistibly  demands  every  practicable  effort.  •*  The  whole 
world,"  says  St.  John,  speaking  of  his  own  time,  *'  lieth  in  wickedness"  (1  John  v. 
19).  Lieth — for  such  is  the  indication  of  the  original — as  a  man  slain  lies  welter- 
ing in  his  blood.  4.  The  day  in  which  these  blessings  are  to  be  ushered  in  has 
arrived.  The  day  in  which  the  mighty  work  will  be  seen  in  its  full  completion  is 
at  hand.  We  must  labour,  that  those  who  come  after  us  may  enter  into  our  labours. 
{T.  Dwight,  D.D.)  Unity  the  final  purpose  of  God  : — An  old  Scottish  Methodist, 
who  had  clung  vehemently  to  one  of  two  small  sects  on  opposite  sides  of  the  street, 
said,  when  dying :  *•  The  street  I  am  now  travelling  in  has  nae  sides,  and  if  power 
were  now  given  me  I  would  preach  purity  of  life  mair  and  purity  of  doctrine  less. 
Since  I  was  laid  by  here  I  have  had  whisperings  of  the  still  small  voice  telling  me 
that  the  wrangUngs  of  faith  will  ne'er  be  heard  in  the  kingdom  I  am  nearing ;  and, 
as  love  cements  all  differences,  I'll  perhaps  find  the  place  roomier  than  I  thought 
in  times  past."  {Dean  Stanley.)  United  in  anticipation  of  death: — When  seven 
men  imprisoned  in  a  Pennsylvania  coal-mine  were  rescued  after  five  days'  imprison- 
ment they  were  asked  if  they  hoped  to  escape.  "  We  prayed  for  it,"  was  the 
reply ;  "  we  prayed  together.  Some  were  Protestants  and  some  Catholics,  but  when 
death  is  as  close  as  that  you  only  think  of  God."  Unity  defined : — I  distinguish 
the  unity  of  comprehensiveness  from  the  unity  of  mere  singularity.  The  word  one, 
as  oneness,  is  an  ambiguous  word.  There  is  a  oneness  belonging  to  the  army  as 
well  as  to  every  soldier  in  the  army.  The  army  is  one,  and  that  is  the  oneness  of 
onity ;  the  soldier  is  one,  and  that  is  the  oneness  of  the  unit.  There  is  difference 
between  the  oneness  of  a  body  and  the  oneness  of  a  member  of  that  body.  The 
body  is  many,  and  a  anity  of  manifold  comprehensiveness.  An  arm  or  a  member 
of  a  body  is  one,  but  that  is  the  unity  of  singularity.  (F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.) 
Therefore  doth  My  Father  love  Me. — Tlie  Father's  love  of  Jesus: — Observe  what 
Christ  says — L  Of  latino  down  His  litb.  1.  No  mere  man  could  have  said  this. 
Power  over  life  is  God's  prerogative.  To  none  but  the  Son  has  He  "  given  to  have 
life  in  Himself  "  ;  and  power  "  to  take  it  again  "  is  manifestly  not  ours.  But  we 
must  not  separate  this  claim  from  His  obedience.  Christ  knows  no  power  but  to 
do  the  Father's  will.  2.  Much  of  our  metaphysics  is  here  silenced.  Is  obedience 
free  if  we  are  not  also  free  to  disobey  ?  The  truest  liberty  is  voluntary  restraint. 
The  freedom  of  obedience  is  learned  as  we  love  to  obey.  The  fullest  consciousness 
of  power  is  that  of  power  to  do  God's  will.  3.  Christ's  assertion  of  power  is  in- 
tended to  illustrate  His  obedience.  "  I  lay  down  My  life  of  Myself. "  He  could  have 
withdrawn  Himself  from  the  people,  or  by  yielding  to  their  prejudices  have  won 
them.  He  could  have  awed  them,  as  He  did  the  soldiers,  by  His  majestic  presence. 
He  had  power  over  men's  consciences,  as  was  seen  in  the  case  of  the  Pharisees  who 
brought  the  woman  taken  in  adultery,  and  in  the  case  of  Pilate.  The  concealed  aid 
of  _  heaven  was  at  His  bidding.  But  more  than  all  this  was  the  strength  of  His  sub- 
mission. He  speaks  of  His  power  to  show  how  full  was  His  obedience.  4.  We 
have  here  an  awful  revelation  of  the  powerlessness  of  sin.  The  Jews  were  simply 
tolerated,  ignorant  of  the  power  that  restrained  itself.  So  with  all  sinners.  But 
Christ  was  thus  patient  that  when  they  had  done  their  worst  He  might  be  their 
Saviour.  6.  The  chief  truth  here  is  the  fulness  of  Christ's  obedience.  The  con- 
sciousness that  we  might  escape  would  be  to  us  a  motive  for  disobedience.  We  are 
kept  submissive  by  weakness.  He  speaks  not  of  power  to  avoid  the  sacrifice  but  to 
make  it.  IL  Of  the  Father's  love.  1.  We  see  the  reason  of  this  partly  in 
Christ's  obedience.  Here  is  the  oneness  of  the  Father  and  the  Son;  the  Son 
rejoices  to  obey ;  the  Father  commits  His  whole  counsel  to  the  Son  that  He  may 
accomplish  it.  2.  The  commandment  was  that  Christ  should  lay  down  His  hfe  for 
the  sheep.  The  Father's  love  for  the  Son  is  not  one  in  which  all  others  are  shut 
out.  We  read  that  God  did  not  •*  rest"  in  Creation  till  He  had  made  man  in  His 
own  image.  His  love  is  so  bountiful  that  it  forms  objects  on  which  to  lavish  itself. 
Here  we  have  something  more  surprising — the  pity  for  lost  man  which  is  in  the 
Father,  and  that  pity  finding  response  in  the  Son.  Well  was  it  said  that  "  God  is 
love."  3.  Christ  tells  us  why  the  Father  loves  Him.  (1)  That  we  may  know  the  men 
■who  are  dearest  to  God — not  as  with  us  the  learned,  wealthy,  powerful,  but  the 
obedient  and  loving.  (2)  That  we  may  understand  Christ's  life  and  death.  Neither 
Jews  nor  disciples  could  understand  the  Man  of  Sorrows.  Hence  the  doable  procla- 
mation, "This  is  My  beloved  Son."  How  many  a  reason  has  been  given  why 
Christ  most  die !    But  how  poor  all  reasons  beside  the  simple  one  that  He  loved 


204  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chj*.  s. 

as.  (3)  In  order  that  we  may  know  God.  The  object  of  our  affection  reveals  onr- 
Belvea.  If  the  man  of  force  be  our  hero,  we  show  ourselves  worshippers  of  power ; 
if  a  good  man,  we  prize  goodness.  Christ  is  dear  to  the  Father  because  He  loves 
as.  What  a  witness  to  the  love  of  God.  III.  Of  the  issue  or  latino  down  Bte 
LIFE.  Christ  is  to  reap  the  reward  of  His  sacrifice,  and  we  of  the  travail  of  His 
soul.  1.  This  alone  renders  His  sacrifice  lawful  or  possible,  and  distinguishes 
between  sublimity  of  sacrifice,  and  scornful  waste  of  self.  The  Father's  com- 
mandment is  not  that  the  Son  should  perish.  The  life  which  is  yielded  up  for  the 
ends  of  love  is  restored  in  the  triumph  of  love.  2.  This  illustrates  the  true 
character  of  trust  in  God — the  assurance  that  He  is  righteous  to  vindicate  fidelity 
and  loving  to  reward  it.  3.  It  is  not  love  for  men  which  is  indifferent  about  sharing 
with  them  the  joy  of  their  restoration — this  makes  any  sacrifice  an  affront.  Christ 
anticipates  the  joy  of  leading  many  sons  to  glory.  4.  Heaven  would  lose  its  value 
if  Christ  perished  to  secure  it  for  as.  We  should  feel  that  our  salvation  had  been 
too  dearly  purchased,  and  the  bitter  sorrow  that  He  was  absent  whose  joy  it  would 
have  been  to  meet  His  redeemed.  5.  To  labour  in  hope  of  reward  is  not  always 
selfish.  We  need  the  triumph  to  vindicate  the  suffering.  6.  We  learn  how  to 
sustain  ourselves  in  Christian  struggle  and  endurance.  "  If  we  suffer  with  Him," 
&c.  The  sacrifice  and  resurrection  of  Christ  is  a  rebuke  to  all  despondency.  (A. 
Mackennal,  D.D.)  God  loving  His  Son: — The  assertions  of  Christ  as  to  His 
relation  to  God  are  very  different  from  those  of  Old  Testament  saints.  Not  once 
did  they  call  God  Father — this  Jesus  always  does;  and  the  Father  acquiesces. 
"  This  is  My  beloved  Son."  Here  Christ  seems  to  found  His  Father's  love  on 
something  He  is  about  to  accomplish  on  earth.  But  a  stranger  having  rescued  a 
child  from  drowning  and  restored  it  to  its  parent  might  say,  ♦•  Therefore  doth  the 
Father  love  me."  And  so  some  infer  that  Christ  was  related  to  God  only  in  virtue 
of  His  obedience  to  death.  Not  so.  God  is  love ;  bat  love  cannot  exist  without  an 
object,  and  this  object  must  be  co-existent  with  the  eternal  affection.  So  Christ  is 
the  eternal  object  of  an  eternal  love,  and  the  text  only  states  an  additional  reason 
for  that  love.  A  king  has  a  beloved  son  and  a  revolted  province.  The  latter  he 
could  crush,  but  prefers  to  accept  a  voluntary  mission  of  the  former  to  win  the 
rebels  by  privation,  forbearance,  and  kindness.  This  succeeds.  The  king  expresses 
his  satisfaction,  and  the  son  says,  "  Therefore  doth  my  father  love  me."  The  idea 
of  the  text  is  similar.  What  were  the  elements  in  Christ's  death  which  drew  forth 
the  love  of  Christ?  I.  Perfect  spontaneity  in  the  obediencb  He  bendered. 
Not  that  His  sufferings  or  death  were  in  themselves  well  pleasing  to  the  merciful 
Father.  All  men  die,  and  by  Divine  appointment ;  but  God  does  not  love  them 
for  this,  else  the  wicked  would  be  loved  as  well  as  the  righteous.  It  was  the  Divine 
principle  that  prompted  it — obedience.  It  was  not  snatched  from  Him,  nor  did  He 
yield  it  in  idle  passivity ;  He  laid  it  down  of  His  active  free  will,  and  so  revealed  the 
Father's  will,  developed  the  plan  of  redemption,  and  is  therefore  the  object  of  God's 
intensest  love.  II.  Faith.  There  would  have  been  no  merit  in  His  death  had  He 
sacrificed  Himself  without  assurance  of  resurrection.  It  might  have  been  from 
despair.  Nor  could  it  have  taken  place  without  this  assurance.  The  extinction  of 
such  a  one  could  not  be  permitted  in  the  govenmaent  of  a  righteous  God.  Knowing 
that  He  was  sinless,  He  must  have  known  that  death,  the  wages  of  sin,  had  no 
power  over  Him.  Hence  He  never  spoke  of  His  death  apart  from  His  resurrection. 
The  taking  up  was  as  much  in  the  Divine  plan  as  the  laying  down.  He  was  con- 
fident of  the  successful  issue,  and  God  loved  Him  because  of  this.  Conclusion  :  1. 
If  God  finds  a  new  reason  for  loving  His  Son  in  the  moral  qualities  He  displayed. 
He  will  love  us  if  we  strive  to  live  as  Christ  lived.  Wherever  He  sees  men  obedient 
and  self-sacrificing  He  will  love  them.  2.  We  should  do  our  duty  in  spite  of  con- 
sequences, or  rather  with  regard  to  the  remoter  consequences.  Lay  down  our 
lives  that  we  may  take  them  again.  "  Whosoever  loseth  his  life  for  My  sake  shall 
find  it."  (T.  James,  M.A.)  The  stimulating  power  of  the  consciousness  of  being 
loved: — Wliat  heat  is  in  nature  that  love  is  in  the  human  realm.  It  tends  to 
quicken  and  expand  and  beautify  those  on  whom  it  lights ;  it  assists  men  to  be 
better  and  stronger  and  more  gracious  than  they  would  otherwise  be.  Under  its 
influence,  souls  are  enabled  to  bud  and  blossom  more  freely ;  and  let  none  of  us  be 
ashamed  of  needing  it,  and  leaning  on  it  for  succour.  (S.  A.  Tipple.)  The  Son's 
work  approved  of  tJie  Father : — I.  The  obeat  wobk  in  which  the  Son  is  engaged 
— the  salvation  of  His  sheep— 1.  From  danger,  the  curse  of  the  law,  eternal  death. 
2.  To  obedience,  holiness,  blessedness,  heaven.  H.  The  appointment  of  the  Son 
TO  this  obbat  wobk  bt  the  Father.      "  This  commandment."     This  principle 


«HAP.  X.]  ST.  JOHN.  205 

holds  a  high  place  in  the  Bible.  Christ  was  predicted  as  the  "  servant "  and  "  sent " 
of  God ;  gladly  accepts  this  subordioation ;  and  His  apostlbs  teach  the  same 
doctrine.  III.  The  quaijIFIoations  of  the  Son  fob  His  great  work.  1.  To  atone 
for  guilt  He  must  be  and  was  free  from  guilt.  2.  To  save  man  He  must  be  and  was 
man,  and  yet  more  than  man.  As  man  He  had  a  life  to  lay  down  ;  but  He  had  no 
power  as  man  to  lay  it  down  of  Himself;  this  W3.3  Divine.  3.  This  Divine-human 
lite  had  suiScient  merit  to  expiate  the  sin  of  the  world.  4.  But  redemption  could 
not  have  been  consummated  without  its  resumption  ;  and  so  He  had  "  power  to 
take  it  again."  IV.  The  Son's  accomplishment  of  His  great  work.  His 
offering  has  been  effectual  for  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  presented.  "  There 
remaineth  no  more  sacritice  for  sin.''  Millions  are  now  through  His  expiation 
"the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect,"  and  millions  are  preparing  for  that 
blessed  state.     V.    The  complacency   manifested   bi  the  Father  to  the  Son 

IN     AND     FOB     THB     ACCOMPLISHMENT    OF     HiS     GREAT     WORK      (Phil,      ii,      9-11).  (J. 

Brown,  D.D.)  Christ  comforting  Hirmi-lf: — The  people  were  listening  with  sneera 
and  anger  to  Christ's  asservations  of  the  union  between  Himself  and  God,  and 
contemplating  a  step  which  would  expose  their  emptiness.  When  put  out  of  the 
way.  His  presumptuous  claims  would  be  shattered.  He  read  this  thought,  and 
answered  it  calmly,  with  the  inward  consciousness  that  that  event  would  only 
culminate  His  voluntary  self-sacrifice,  and  render  Him  the  special  object  of  the 
Father's  love.  Such  is  frequently  the  blindness  and  defeat  of  bad  men.  It  is  poor 
business  trying  to  hurt  a  saint.  You  can  never  be  certain  that  your  hardest  blows 
will  not  ensure  him  more  abundant  consolation.    I.  Christ  comforting  Himself — 

I.  With  the  reflection  that  some  one  loves  Him.  We  find  Him  constantly  doing 
this.  "  I  am  not  alone,"  &c. ;  pausing  in  the  midst  of  hostility,  dkc,  to  get  sooth- 
ing and  inspiration.  He  could  not  get  on  without  it  any  more  than  we  can.  Let 
none  of  us  weakly  and  selfishly  long  for  this,  nor  stoically  determine  to  be  above  it; 
but  value  it  as  an  impulse  for  work.  2.  Witn  His  felt  possession  of  power.  His 
adversaries  regarded  Him  as  their  victim.  He  muses,  "they  are  mistaken ;  instead 
of  being  dragged  helplessly,  I  shall  march  in  might  to  die."  We  need  not  shrink 
from  the  thought  that  Jesus  found  solace  in  the  consciousness  of  His  superiority  to 
what  He  looked :  that  while  He  seemed  weak,  He  was  subhmely  strong.  It  is 
both  natural  and  legitimate,  when  we  are  being  estimated  falsely,  to  feel  the 
excellence  or  the  gift  that  is  not  perceived.  We  may  need  this  in  encountering 
disparagement,  to  preserve  our  self-possession  and  keep  ourselves  from  fainting. 
There  are  otiiers,  however,  who  can  never  have  this  consolation.  Their  reputation 
is  the  best  thing  they  have ;  they  are  meaner  than  the  social  estimate  of  them. 

II.  The  grounds  of  this  comfort.  1.  The  father  loved  Christ  because  He  lay 
down  His  life  in  order  to  take  it  again.  The  beauty  of  self-sacrifice  lies  not  in  the 
act,  but  in  its  animating  purpose.  There  is  no  necessary  virtue  in  denying  your- 
self. Sacrifices  are  often  made  out  of  mere  weakness,  regard  for  the  usages  of 
society,  self-indulgence,  even  to  spite  others,  and  in  disregard  of  the  right  and 
the  claims  of  other  people.  Christ  laid  down  His  life  in  order  to  take  it  again. 
This  explanation  is  at  first  sight  disappointing.  What  was  there  to  charm  the 
heart  of  God  in  surrender  for  the  purpose  of  recovery  ?  But  this  recovery  was 
meant  to  be  a  great  source  and  fountain  of  good,  that  He  might  be  the  first-bom 
among  many  brethren.  It  is  noble  to  sacrifice  self  with  a  view  to  acquiring  more 
capacity  for  service.  2.  The  secret  of  Christ's  power  was  not  that  He  had  a  right 
to  elect  to  die,  which  we  have  not,  but  that  He  felt  Himself  able  to  make  the  sacrifice 
required  of  Him.  He  did  not  need  to  be  dragged  or  urged  into  it,  but  was  able  to 
make  it  freely.  What  happens  there  then  is  in  the  sense  of  the  power  to  respond  at 
once  to  the  call  of  a  difficult,  trying  duty.  But  He  was  certain  hot  only  that 
He  could  bear  the  Cross,  but  that  He  should  reap  to  the  full  the  anticipated  fruit 
of  it.  What  more  blessed  than  this— the  assurance  of  power  to  do  what  is  wholly 
true,  and  an  assurance  of  gaining  the  object  ?  3.  What  was  the  secret  of  it  all  ? 
"  This  commandment,"  &c.  What  God  calls  one  to,  one  will  have  strength  to 
accomplish,  and  it  will  assuredly  yield  its  due  fiuit.  In  other  things  you  may 
break  down  or  be  disappointed — never  in  this.  (S.  A.  Tipple.)  I  lay  down  My 
life. — Victim  and  priest : — Types,  like  shadows,  are  one-sided  things.  Hence  in 
the  shadowy  worship  of  Judaism  Christ  was  brokenly  seen  in  a  variety  of  discon- 
nected images.  The  sacrificial  lamb  was  a  picture  of  Him  who  is  the  first  of 
sufferers  and  the  only  sin-hearer;  but  the  dumb  brute,  led  in  unresisting  ignorance 
to  the  altar,  not  otherwise  than  it  might  have  been  to  the  shambles,  was  no  picture 
of  the  perfect  villingness  with  which  He  devoted  His  life  to  God.     For  the  type  of 


206  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  x, 

that  we  mast  go  to  the  white-robed  priest.  There  was  need  for  a  doable  shadow. 
But  in  the  one  real  sacrifice  the  two  are  one.  Jesus  is  priest  and  victim.  There 
are  certain  steps  we  must  take  in  comprehending  Christ's  self-sacrificing  will  as 
expressed  in  the  text.  I.  It  was  constant.  The  strength  of  one's  will  to  suffer  is 
tested  by  its  deUberate  formation  and  persistent  endurance.  1.  Our  Saviour's  reso- 
lution was  no  impulse  born  of  excited  feeling,  liable  to  fail  before  calmer  thought ; 
nor  a  necessity  for  which  He  was  gradually  prepared,  and  at  last  shut  up  to  through 
circumstances ;  but  a  habitual  purpose,  steadily  kept  in  view  from  the  first,  till  it 
grew  almost  to  a  passion.  "How  am  I  straitened,"  <fec.  2.  Many  men  are 
heroic  only  by  impulse ;  give  time,  and  the  bravery  yields  to  "  prudence."  Men  have 
ignorantly  taken  the  first  step  towards  martyrdom  ;  but,  having  taken  it,  have  felt 
bound  to  go  forward.  But  when  the  mind  can  form  so  terrible  a  purpose,  and 
calmly  hold  it  on  for  years,  in  the  face  of  unromantic  neglect  and  mockery,  the 
purpose  must  have  its  roots  deep.  Such  will  was  never  in  any  except  Christ. 
Precious  life,  which  carried  its  own  death  in  its  bosom,  like  a  bunch  of  sweet 
flowers,  filling  all  its  days  with  fragrance.  II.  It  was  actively  peek.  1.  While 
resignation  was  the  habitual  attitude  of  His  soul,  there  was  more  than  resignation. 
We  under-estimate  His  priestly  act,  by  thinking  more  of  His  willingness  than  of 
His  will  to  suffer.  "  I  lay  down  My  life  "  means  that,  with  ardent  desire  and  fixed 
resolution.  He  is,  at  His  own  choice,  giving  away  His  own  Spiritual  Person,  includ- 
ing that  which  is  the  most  personal  thing  of  all — His  will.  And  this  active 
exposure  to  penalty  accompanied  Him  through  every  stage.  His  was  both  the 
right  and  strength  at  every  stage  to  free  His  soul ;  but  He  chose  to  go  on  deeper 
into  the  darkness  till  all  was  over.  This  came  out  very  plainly  when  Peter  put 
before  Him  the  alternative  ;  when.  His  time  being  come.  He  set  Himself  to  go  to 
Jerusalem,  when  He  said  to  Judas,  "  What  thou  doest,"  &o. ;  when,  on  His  arrest. 
He  spoke  about  the  legion  of  angels ;  yes,  and  when  the  torment  reached  Him, 
"  Let  Him  now  come  dovra  from  the  cross."  2.  Now,  it  is  harder  to  will  a  dis- 
agreeable lot  than  to  consent  to  bear  it  when  it  is  laid  upon  us.  Many  a  man  has 
piety  to  submit  to  unavoidable  evil,  or  even  to  rest  in  it  as  wise,  who  would  yet  be 
unequal  to  make  it  a  choice.  Most  men,  therefore,  aim  at  nothing  higher  than 
passive  acquiescence  in  suffering ;  but  it  is  nobler  to  seal  God's  afflictive  will  with 
our  own,  and  will  not  to  have  it  otherwise.  It  is  a  further  advance  still  to  enter 
voluntarily  into  affliction  for  righteousness  sake.  Yet  even  the  martyr's  choice  of 
death  before  sin  is  less  absolute  and  free  than  that  of  Christ.    III.  It  was  cbossed 

BY   HINDRANCES   FROM     THE     WEAKNESS   OF   THE    FLESH,   AND    IT   OVERCAME   THEM.        As 

you  walk  by  the  side  of  a  deep,  swift-running  river,  you  know  not  how  strong  the 
current  is  till  you  reach  the  rapids,  where  its  flow  is  broken.  So  on  reading  the 
smooth,  constant  story  of  Jesus'  life,  there  is  little  to  teU  us  with  what  power  He 
was  advancicg  to  His  agony.  Near  the  end  came  one  or  two  places  where  this  was 
seen  (chap.  xii.  27-29).  That  was  a  short  struggle.  His  will  to  die  soon  overcame 
the  momentary  perplexity,  and  the  voice  from  heaven  was  needed  not  by  Him,  but 
for  the  bystanders.  This,  however,  was  only  a  foretaste  of  the  greater  strife  in  the 
garden — the  weak  flesh  against  the  willing  spirit ;  yet  in  the  end  it  is  divinely 
upborne  to  bear  the  unimaginable  Fuffering  for  the  world's  guilt.  In  that  hour  He 
sacrificed  Himself — laid  down  His  Ufe.  With  what  relief  do  we  read,  "It  is 
enough,  the  hour  has  come,"  &c.  {J.  0.  Dykes,  D.D.)  I  have  power  to  take  it 
again. — Our  Lord's  resumption  of  life: — I.  Was  His  own  act.  Nowhere  is  the 
majesty  of  our  Lord's  Divine  Person  more  manifest  than  here.  1.  He  had  power 
to  lay  His  hfe  down.  Could  we  use  His  words  ?  There  is  much  in  life  we  can 
control,  but  not  our  way  of  leaving  it.  (1)  So  far  from  laying  it  down,  we  yield  it 
up.  It  is  wrung  from  us  by  disease,  violence,  or  accident.  No  men  of  this  century 
have  wielded  more  power  than  the  two  Napoleons  ;  they  little  meant  to  die — the 
first  at  St.  Helena,  the  third  at  Chislehurst.  Bishop  Wilberforce  never  entered  a 
railway  carriage  without  reflecting  that  he  might  never  leave  it  alive.  He  was  a 
fearless  horseman,  but  he  met  his  death  when  riding  at  a  walking  pace.  (2)  But 
cannot  a  man  lay  down  his  life  at  pleasure  ?  And  did  not  the  Stoics  commend  it  ? 
As  a  matter  of  physical  possibility,  we  can ;  but  what  about  its  morality  ?  It  is  at 
once  cowardice  and  murder.  (3)  A  good  man  may  find  it  his  duty  to  accept  death 
at  the  hands  of  others.  Patriots  and  martyrs  have  had  moral  power  to  lay  down 
their  lives  ;  but  they  could  not  control  the  circumstances  which  made  death  a  duty. 
(4)  Our  Lord's  act  differs  from  that  of  the  suicide  in  its  moral  elevation  (ver.  11 )» 
and  from  that  of  the  martyr  in  His  command  of  the  situation.  As  the  Lord  of 
liife,  He  speaks  of  His  human  life  as  His  creature.    3.  He  had  power  to  take  it 


CHAP,  x.]  ST.  JOHN.  207 

again.  (1)  Here  His  majesty  is  more  apparent,  for  He  speaks  of  a  control  over  His 
life  which  no  mere  man  can  possibly  have.  When  soul  and  body  are  sundered, 
there  is  no  force  in  the  soul  such  as  can  reconstitute  the  body.  In  the  Biblical 
cases  of  resurrection,  the  power  came  from  without.  (2)  Here  barbarism  and 
civilization  are  on  a  level.  Science  has  done  wonders  in  bringing  the  various 
forces  of  nature  under  control ;  but  no  scientist  cherishes  the  hope  of  undoing  the 
work  of  death,  or  of  keeping  it  indefinitely  at  bay.  (3)  When  Christ  claims  to  take 
His  life  again.  He  stands  in  relation  to  His  life,  which  is  only  intelligible  if  we 
believe  Him  to  be  the  Son  of  God.  IL  Was  His  act  and  the  Father's  con- 
jointly 7  1.  He  is  repeatedly  said  to  have  been  raised  by  the  Father.  This  was 
Peter's  language  (Acts  ii.  24  ;  iii,  15  ;  iv.  10 ;  v.  30  ;  x.  40),  and  Paul's  (Acts  xiii. 
30-37 ;  1  Thess.  i.  10  ;  2  Tim.  ii.  8 ;  Kom.  iv.  24-25 ;  vi.  4 ;  viii.  11,  &c.,  &c.).  2.  On 
the  other  hand,  our  Lord  speaks  of  it  as  an  act  distinctly  His  own  (Mark  x.  34  ; 
Luke  xviii.  33 ;  John  ii.  19,  and  text).  3.  There  is  no  contradiction  here.  The 
resurrection  does  not  cease  to  be  Christ's  act  because  it  is  the  Father's.  When 
God  acts  through  mere  men.  He  makes  them  His  instruments ;  but  the  power 
which  effected  the  resurrection  is  as  old  as  the  eternal  generation  of  the  Son 
(chap.  V.  26).  4.  There  is  a  moment  when  imagination,  under  the  conduct  of 
faith,  endeavours,  but  in  vain,  to  realize  when  the  human  soul  of  our  Lord,  sur- 
rounded by  myriads  of  angels,  on  His  return  from  the  ancient  dead,  came  to  the 
grave  of  Joseph  and  claimed  the  body  that  had  hung  upon  the  cross.  IIL  Sug- 
gests THE  FOLLOWING  CONSIDERATIONS.  1.  What  Christianity  truly  means.  Not 
mere  loyalty  to  the  precepts  of  a  dead  teacher,  or  admiration  of  a  striking  character 
who  lived  eighteen  hundred  years  ago.  It  is  something  more  than  literary  taste  or 
a  department  of  moral  archasology.  It  is  devotion  to  a  living  Christ.  If  it  were  a 
false  religion,  literary  men  might  endeavour  to  reconstruct  the  history  of  its  earliest 
age.  This  is  what  Las  been  done  with  the  great  teachers  of  antiquity,  and  with 
Christ.  But  there  is  this  difference.  What  Socrates,  &c.,  were  is  all  that  we  can 
know  of  them  now.  They  cannot  help  us  or  speak  to  us.  But  in  the  fulness  of 
that  power  which  He  asserted  at  His  resurrection,  Christ  still  rules  and  holds  com- 
munion with  every  believer.  A  living  Cbristianity  means  a  living  Christ.  2.  What 
is  the  foundation  of  our  confidence  in  the  future  of  Christianity  ?  Based  as  it  is 
on  a  Christ  who  raised  Himself  from  the  dead,  it  cannot  pass  away.  (1)  Mankind 
has  lavished  admiration  on  great  teachers ;  but  they  have  died  and  been  forgutten. 
Their  age  proclaimed  the  dust  of  their  writings  gold ;  a  succeeding  age  scarcely 
opens  their  fohos.  Why  are  we  certain  that  tuis  fate  does  not  await  Christ? 
Because  men's  loyalty  rests  not  on  His  words  mainly,  but  iu  His  Person.  Christ 
is  Christianity.  And  why  is  it  that,  in  thus  cliuging  to  His  Person,  Christian  faith 
is  so  sure  of  the  future  ?  Because  she  has  before  her  not  a  Christ  who  was  con- 
quered by  death.  (2)  Had  it  been  otherwise,  Christianity  might  have  perished 
more  than  once ;  by  the  wickedness  of  the  Roman  Court  in  the  tenth  century ;  by 
the  hordes  of  Islam  in  the  first  flush  of  th^ir  conquests,  or  by  the  great  Turkish 
sultans  of  the  fifteenth  and  sixteenth  centuries;  by  the  accumulated  weight  of 
corruption  which  invited  the  Reformation  ;  by  the  Babel  which  the  Reformation 
produced ;  by  the  relation  of  the  Church  to  corrupt  governments :  by  the  dishonest 
enterprises  of  unbelieving  theologians.  Men  said  the  Church  was  killed  under 
Decius  and  Diocletian,  after  the  French  Revolution.  But  each  collapse  is  followed 
by  a  revival,  because  Christ  willed  to  rise.  3.  What  is  our  hope  for  the  departed  ? 
Because  Christ  lives,  they  live  also;  because  He  rose,  they  shall  rise.  (Canon 
Liddon.)  The  mastery  of  life : — These  are  the  strongest  words  that  human  hpa 

have  uttered,  I  think ;  the  strongest,  because  they  give  us  a  glimpse  of  what  else- 
where we  cannot  find  in  man  or  his  history — the  complete  mastery  and  control  of 
life.  Where  is  the  man  who  comes  to  life  as  the  workman  comes  to  his  clay  or 
marble,  and  shapes  out  his  idea  precisely  as  he  first  has  thought  and  designed  it, 
and  leaves  it  fulfilled  without  that  obedient  material  having  demanded  any  change 
in  the  work  ?  How  little  of  such  mastery  you  and  I  have.  Your  very  purpose  in 
life,  of  which  you  speak  so  proudly,  have  you  not  got  it  by  living  ?  And  when  you 
had  conceived  it,  when  you  had  said  "  I  will,"  "  That  is  my  purpose,"  did  life  flow 
liquidly  and  obediently  into  your  mould,  and  stay  there,  and  harden  in  it  lastingly? 
Who  has  just  the  life  he  planned?  And  when  you  begin  to  see  your  purpose,  or 
something  like  it,  coming  out  of  life,  what  control  have  you  over  it  and  its  con- 
tinuance ?  You  have  time  to  say,  "Yes,  that  is  the  shape  of  my  wish,  of  my  plan," 
and  yon  or  it  are  hurried  away.  But  even  suppose  that  a  man  cares  not  whether 
his  purpose  be  lasting,  if  for  a  moment  he  reaches  the  place  at  which  he  had  aimed ; 


208  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.* 

if  he  stands  there  where  he  had  struggled  through  life  to  be ;  if  he  has  made  life 
carry  him  there — is  he  not  master  and  victor  ?  May  he  not  say,  as  the  soldier  who 
dies  in  victory,  "  I  die  happy  "  ?  The  hands  that  stiffen  at  that  moment,  are  they 
not,  after  all,  a  conqueror's?  Oh  1  but  think  if  the  mastery  of  life  does  not  include 
something  else.  It  is  not  only  to  carry  one's  own  purpose  for  a  moment ;  it  is  to 
do  it  in  such  a  way  as  to  show  that  you  are  not  indebted  to  life's  favour  for  it ; 
that  it  is  not  a  gift  to  you ;  that  yon  will  take  it  at  your  own  time,  as  one  who  is 
completely,  unanxiously  master;  that  you  will  not  be  hurried  by  the  thought,  "Now 
life  is  offering  me  my  prize ;  if  not  now,  never  " ;  but  can  quietly  choose  the  time 
of  acquisition  when  it  is  best,  and  then  reach  out  the  hand  to  take  it.  But  stop 
again.  Mastery  of  human  life — is  it  not  something  vastly  more  than  all  of  this  ? 
Is  it  not  to  be  above  counting  it  indispensable,  to  use  it  only  as  one  help  in  the 
working  out  of  the  great  purpose ;  to  lay  it  down,  and  yet  win  the  aim  by  other 
help ;  to  lay  it  down  as  a  workman  puts  down  a  tool  and  takes  it  again  ?  But  who 
of  us  is  so  boldly  independent  as  that  ?  Who  can  work  out  his  human  purpose 
without  the  help  of  human  life  f  But  I  must  go  yet  one  great  step  farther  in  this 
description  of  what  it  is  to  be  a  master  of  human  life.  It  is  this  :  Suppose  you 
were  independent  of  this  human  life,  yet  you  are  not  master  of  it  if  it  can  with- 
draw itself  and  you  have  no  power  to  keep  or  resume  it.  If,  after  showing  your 
ability  to  do  without  it,  it  were  able  to  keep  away  from  you,  if  you  bad  no  power  to 
take  it  again,  you  would  not  be  its  master.  That  is  the  complete  mastery  of 
human  life,  not  only  to  work  out  your  purpose  independently  of  it,  but  to  really 
resume  it,  to  take  it  again  when  it  has  been  laid  down.  ...  I  find,  in  the  midst  of 
all  this  history  of  man  and  his  life — beheving  himself  master,  and  yet  never  so  in 
reality — one  life  which  has  no  such  feature,  which  could  never  have  been  troubled 
by  the  thought  of  fate.  There  is  One  among  all  human  existences  which  bears  all 
the  marks  of  the  mastership  of  life,  which  claims  from  all  the  title  of  Lord  and 
Master.  First  of  aU,  Christ  comes  to  human  life  with  His  own  purpose  fully 
formed  and  self-originated.  He  brought  a  Divine  purpose  to  earth.  Then  see  how 
absolutely,  without  change,  that  purpose  of  Christ's  is  carried  out.  Not  a  feature 
is  altered ;  not  a  circumstance  is  varied,  nor  any  addition  made.  It  is  accom« 
plished  j  ust  according  to  the  heavenly  purpose.  Life  has  no  power  to  change  it  in 
the  smallest  particular.  But  this  royal  purpose,  will  not  human  life  over-ride  it, 
and  outgrow  it,  and  destroy  it,  or  gather  it  into  itself  and  its  own  purpose,  like  the 
little  rift  that  your  hand  makes  in  the  water  of  the  strong  river  ?  Will  it  remain 
as  it  was  planned?  How  those  words,  "the  everlasting  gospel,"  answer  our  question  I 
What  is  there  but  the  word  of  God,  which  endures  for  ever  ?  Oh  1  what  is  there 
to-day  in  the  world  which  remains  unchanged  but  the  salvation  of  Christ  J  But 
did  life  give  to  Him  the  fulfilment  of  His  purpose,  as  it  does  to  its  favourites, 
granting  the  prize  to  Him  in  its  own  time  as  its  favour  ?  I  do  not  know  anything 
more  quietly  grand  about  Jesus'  hfe  than  the  way  in  which  He  chooses  the  very 
time  when  it  all  shall  be  done.  "  My  time  is  not  yet  come ;  "  "I  lay  down  My  life  of 
Myself  " ;  "I  must  work  to-day  and  to-morrow,  and  the  third  day  I  shall  be  per- 
fected," He  says,  conscious  of  controlling  the  time  completely.  But  how  His 
Mastership  grows  upon  us !  Still  let  me  go  on  to  show  you  how  His  great  purpose 
is  independent  of  human  life.  Life  is  not  indispensable  to  it  as  to  our  purpose.  He 
can  fulfil  His  purpose  in  loss  of  life,  and  by  loss  of  hfe.  *'  I  lay  down  My  life  of 
Myself.  This  commandment  have  I  received  of  My  Father."  The  Divine  purpose 
is  not  lost,  but  won,  by  passing  into  death.  "  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up,  shall  draw  all 
men  unto  Me."  How  little  is  human  life  necessary  to  His  purpose,  who  died  that 
we  might  Hve  I  How  little  dependent  on  this  human  existence  is  that  love  of  God 
which  came  from  heaven,  which  has  heaven's  life,  which  is  greater  than  death, 
which  survives  the  loss  of  earthly  life  I  There  is  but  one  more  addition.  "  I  have 
power  to  lay  it  down,  and  I  have  power  to  take  it  again."  Here  is  the  highest  and 
last  sign  of  the  Master.  Can  you  not  see  how  the  river  of  life  flows  from  the 
throne  of  God  and  the  Lamb,  where  Christ,  the  ascended  God-man,  sits,  who  has 
taken  human  life  again  ?  Christ  would  take  us  all  into  His  great  purpose.  Follow 
your  own  human  purposes  alone,  and  then,  indeed,  life  is  your  master.  But  become 
our  Lord's  follower,  have  a  share  in  His  purpose,  have  a  real  part  and  place  in  the 
salvation  of  Christ,  and  then  you,  too,  have  a  superiority  to  life,  a  mastery  of  life. 
Then  you,  too,  are  living  for  an  aim  which  Hfe  did  not  give  you  ;  an  aim  which  hfe 
cannot  modify  or  destroy ;  an  aim  which  will  be  fulfilled  in  its  own  chosen  time  of 
heavenly  happiness  ;  an  aim  that  can  survive  death  and  the  loss  of  human  life ;  an 
aim  which,  in  a  resurrection,  will  be  able  by  its  power  to  resume  life  as  its  obedient 
iervant.     (Fred.  Brook*  ', 


esAT.  x.]  8T.  JOHN.  SOb 

Vers.  19-21.  There  was  a  division  .  .  .  for  tliese  sayings. — Here  was — I.  A  bad 
BFiBrr.  1.  Schismatic.  "  There  was  a  division."  Sad  that  Christ  and  His  doc- 
trines should  divide  men  into  sects.  One  might  have  thought  that  as  His  life 
was  BO  pure,  loving,  morally  commanding,  and  His  doctrine  so  congruous  with 
reason  and  spiritual  wants,  that  all  men  would  have  centred  in  Him.  Schism 
in  relation  to  Christ  is  bad — a  calumny  on  the  gospel  and  a  curse  to  the  race. 
2.  Blasphemous  (ver.  20).  There  are  two  evils  men  commit  on  the  question 
oif  moral  causation.  (1)  Some  ascribe  bad  deeds  to  God.  The  warrior  after  hia 
bloody  achievements  returns  thanks  to  God  who  commanded  us  not  to  kill,  and 
declared  that  woes  arise  from  the  lusts  of  the  wicked  heart.  The  priest  who 
presumes  to  stand  between  God  and  the  people  ascribes  his  crafty  deeds  to  God. 
Islam  and  Mormon  leaders  impose  on  credulity  a  pretended  heavenly  authority. 
How  much  despotism,  plunder,  and  oppression  are  enacted  in  God's  name  I  (2) 
Some  ascribe  good  deeds  to  Satan,  as  these  jealous,  cavilling,  and  malicious  Jews. 
To  trace  this  Divine  act  to  God's  arch  foe  was  heinous  sin ;  yet  the  principle  of 
this  is  too  common  in  every  age.  What  is  the  conduct  of  those  who  assign  the 
effects  of  Christianity  to  the  ingenuity  of  imposters  who  designate  the  Bible  a 
*•  cunningly-devised  fable,"  and  brand  as  hypocrites  the  most  holy  and  useful 
men  ?  3.  Intolerant.  "  Why  hear  ye  Him  ? "  This  is  the  spirit  of  aJl  bigots  and 
persecutors.  The  same  language  is  often  used  by  one  sect  about  a  preacher  of 
another  sect.  II.  A  sound  abgument  (ver.  21).  A  devil  could  not,  and  would  not 
if  he  could,  give  eyes  to  the  blind.  This  is  the  same  principle  as  Christ's — "  By 
their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them."  This  is  an  inf alhble  test.  Judge,  then,  Christi- 
anity by  its  works.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Christ's  words  and  deeds : — "  There  arose 
A  division  again  among  the  Jews  "  because  of  the  words  which  Jesus  had  uttered. 
It  is  the  old  story.  Jesus  Christ  has  always  divided  human  communities.  He 
cannot  be  ignored.  How  can  He  be  accounted  for  ?  He  is  the  great  enigma  which 
calls  forth  many  answers.  In  the  preceding  verses  we  have  one  of  those  hurried 
estimates  of  Christ  given  in  the  white  heat  of  anger — "  He  hath  a  devil,  and  is  mad." 
There  are  a  class  of  men  who  never  fail  to  come  to  very  speedy  and  decided  con- 
clusions. They  arrive  at  them  by  a  short  cut,  and  very  often  by  astounding  leaps. 
They  have  a  keen  sensitiveness  to  the  presence  of  a  devil  a  long  time  before  he 
appears,  and  as  a  rule  point  in  the  direction  from  which  he  is  least  likely  to  come. 
The  explanation  that  Jesus  had  a  devil  had  became  a  commonplace,  but  had  carried 
with  it  no  conviction  in  being  frequently  repeated.  There  were  keen-sighted  men 
in  the  crowd  who  saw  through  it  all — "  Others  said.  These  are  not  the  words  of  Him 
that  hath  a  devil.  Can  a  devil  open  the  eyes  of  the  blind?"  There  is  true 
philosophy  in  these  words  uttered  hurriedly  by  unknown  speakers  in  that  surging 
throng.  Some  of  the  world's  best  utterances  are  anonymously  recorded.  The  truth 
BUggested  by  our  text  is — That  words  and  deeds  are  tests  of  character  which  men 
should  not  ignore.  I.  Our  Lord's  speech  as  a  test  of  His  character — "  These  are 
not  the  sayings  of  one  possessed  with  a  devil."  Some  one  possibly  smiles  in- 
credulously and  asks — '•  Who  can  judge  a  man  by  his  speech  ?  "  Napoleon  the 
Great  held  that  speech  was  made  to  conceal  thoughts  and  purposes.  But  did  he 
Bucceed  in  confining  speech  within  these  ignoble  limits?  For  a  time  and  in  certain 
cases  he  doubtless  did.  But  what  of  those  peevish  and  angry  utterances  of  his  at 
St.  Helena  ?  As  we  read  the  story  we  are  forced  to  exclaim,  "  Oh,  man,  thy  speech 
bewrayeth  thee  1 "  That  great  actor  was  no  longer  able  to  conceal  himself,  when 
he  fretted  and  fumed  and  swore  in  helpless  pevishness.  Watch  a  man's  utterances 
through  and  through,  and  he  cannot  hide  himself  from  you.  He  may  at  times  flatter 
himself  that  he  has  succeeded  in  the  attempt,  but  his  speech  so  wronged  and  mis- 
used at  length  plays  traitor  with  him  in  return,  and  reveals  what  manner  of  man  he 
is.  Speech,  graciously  given  by  God  to  man  alone  on  earth,  as  a  means  by  which  he 
Bhall  be  able  to  express  truth,  will  not  suffer  itself  evermore  to  be  made  the  degraded 
instrument  of  diplomacy  and  deceit.  It  will  at  times  involuntarily  start  and  assert 
itself.  In  the  records  of  the  best  lives  we  find  words  uttered  in  haste,  unpremeditated, 
or  under  great  provocation,  which  needed  an  apology,  since  they  revealed  the  weaker 
and  less  noble  side  of  character.  When  did  Christ  utter  such  words  ?  In  speech 
He  was  never  "  overtaken  in  a  fault."  His  disciples  often  were,  but  He  never.  Again, 
see  if  there  were  immature  words  uttered  at  the  outsetof  His  ministry,  which  revealed 
the  crudities  of  youth,  or  an  imperfect  estimate  of  that  ministry  to  which  He  had 
committed  BUs  life.  Was  there  ever  anything  said  by  Him  which  betrayed  a  wrong 
motive,  or  defective  moral  teaching  ?  Have  succeedint?  ages  been  able  to  find  a  flaw 
in  His  doctrine,  or  have  they  been  able  to  add  a  single  virtue  to  those  which  Ha 
Tou  n.  14 


210  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cni».  r. 

taught  men  ?  Have  any  words  lived  like  His,  or  living,  exerted  snch  a  sanctifying^ 
healing  and  ennobling  influence  over  human  lives?  Let  us  refer  to  one  or  two 
features  of  His  incomparable  utterances.  What  does  he  say  about  God  ?  No  teacher 
of  men  can  be  silent  on  this  great  theme.  He  tells  men  many  tender,  loving  things 
concerning  God — that  He  clothes  the  Uly,  feeds  the  sparrow,  numbers  the  hairs  of 
our  head,  and,  finally,  "  that  He  so  loved  the  world  as  to  give  His  only  begotten  Son, 
that  whosoever  believeth  in  Him  should  not  perish  but  have  everlasting  Ufe."  Has 
any  teaching  concerning  God  given  such  light  and  joy  to  human  heart  as  this  ? 
Verily,  "  These  are  not  the  sayings  of  one  possessed  with  a  devil !  "  Again,  what 
has  He  to  say  about  man  ?  By  the  graveside  of  our  dearest  and  best  ones  can  any 
assurance  compare  with  His — "  I  am  the  Kesurrection  and  the  Life,  he  that  beheveth 
in  Me  shall  never  die  "  ?  '♦  Because  I  live  ye  shall  live  also  "  ?  ♦'  Whence  hath  this 
man  these  things  ?  "  "  These  are  not  the  words  of  one  possessed  with  a  devil."  We 
consider — II.  Our  Lord's  deeds  as  tests  of  His  character.  "  Can  a  devil  open  the 
eyes  of  the  blind  ?  "  It  is  the  prerogative  of  the  devil  to  close  men's  eyes,  not  to 
open  them.  It  is  not  so  much  the  miracle  of  giving  sight  as  the  beneficent  nature 
of  it  that  stamps  it  as  undiabolic.  What  was  the  tendency  of  our  Lord's  deeds  ? 
Precisely  the  same  as  His  teaching.  Did  He  not  always  go  about  doing  good  ? 
There  is  a  harmony  of  goodness  and  of  benevolence  in  His  works  from  the  beginning 
to  the  close.  Above  all,  is  there  anything  for  power  and  tenderness  to  compare  with 
His  Gross  ?  And  here  we  come  to  the  root  of  the  whole  matter.  Theology,  history, 
and  moral  philosophy  can  all  apply  their  tests ;  but  no  test  can  compare  with  that 
of  our  own  experience.  Our  experience  may  fail  to  appeal  powerfully  to  others,  but 
nothing  is  so  convincing  to  ourselves.  Among  our  Lord's  disciples  are  the  noblest 
men  and  women  whom  the  world  has  ever  known,  and  they  attribute  all  their  bless- 
ings to  Him.     (David  Davies.) 

Vers.  22,  23.  And  It  was  at  Jerusalem  the  feast  of  Dedication. — The  origin  and 
character  of  the  feast  of  Dedication : — Antiochus  Epiphanes,  on  his  return  from  the 
conquest  of  Egypt,  having  entered  Jerusalem  with  very  great  slaughter,  and 
having  pillaged  the  city,  proceeded  to  pollute  the  sanctuary,  placing  on  the 
altar  of  God  the  abomination  of  desolation ;  offering  swine's  flesh ;  burning  the 
books  of  the  law ;  and  putting  to  death  those  who  ventured  to  keep  that  sacred 
volume  in  their  possession.  This  was,  no  doubt,  a  time  of  great  mourning  to  the 
godly  in  Judah ;  and  with  many  prayers  and  tears  would  they  sigh  for  deliverance. 
And  as  under  the  oppression  of  Pharaoh,  so  under  that  of  Antiochus,  the  Lord 
looked  upon  the  affliction  of  His  people  and  sent  them  a  deliverer.  Judas  was 
raised  up,  a  warrior  who  is  said  to  have  taken  for  the  motto  of  his  standard, 
•«  Who  is  like  unto  Thee  among  the  gods,  0  Jehovah  1 "  the  first  letters  of  which 
words  in  Hebrew  when  put  together  made  up  the  word  Maccabi,  whence  it  ia 
supposed  his  surname  of  Maccabaeus  was  derived.  (J.  Fawcett,  M.A.)  Three 
decisive  victories  in  the  first  two  years  (b.c.  166,  167)  of  the  campaign  at  Samaria, 
Bethoron  and  Emmaus,  secured  Judas'  fame  and  success ;  and,  finally,  an  encounter 
at  Bethzur  made  him  master  of  Jerusalem.  They  entered  and  found  a  scene 
of  havoc.  The  corridors  of  the  priest's  chambers  which  encircled  the  Temple  were 
torn  down ;  the  gates  were  in  ashes,  the  altar  disfigured,  and  the  whole  platform 
was  overgrown  as  if  with  a  mountain  jungle  or  forest  glade  (1  Mace.  iv.  38). 
It  was  a  heart-rending  spectacle.  Their  first  impulse  was  to  cast  themselves 
headlong  on  the  pavement,  and  blow  the  loud  horns  which  accompanied  all 
mournful,  as  well  as  all  joyous,  occasions.  Then,  whilst  the  Greek  garrison  still 
remained  in  the  fortress,  the  warriors  first  began  the  elaborate  process  of  cleansing 
the  polluted  place.  The  first  object  was  to  clear  away  every  particle  which 
had  been  touched  by  the  unclean  animals.  On  the  22nd  of  Marchesvan  they 
removed  the  portable  altar  which  had  been  erected.  On  the  3rd  of  Chisleu 
they  removed  the  smaller  altars  from  the  court  in  front  of  the  Temple  and  the 
various  Pagan  statues  (2  Maco.  x.  2,  3).  With  the  utmost  care  they  pulled  down 
the  great  platform  of  the  altar  itself,  from  the  dread  lest  its  stones  should  have 
been  polluted.  But  with  the  scrupulosity  which  marked  the  period,  they  considered 
that  stones  once  consecrated  could  never  be  entirely  desecrated,  and  accordingly 
hid  them  away  in  a  corner  of  the  Temple,  there  to  remain  till  the  Prophet  (Mace. 
iv.  46) — the  solver  of  riddles — should  come  and  tell  what  was  to  be  done  with  them. 
How  many  stones  of  spiritual  or  intellectual  edifices  excite  a  like  perplexed  fear, 
lest  they  have  been  so  misused  that  they  cannot  be  employed  again — at  least,  till 
some  prophet  comes  to  tell  ua  how  and  when !  For  the  interior  of  the  Templa 


CHAP.  X.]  8T.  JOHN.  911 

everything  had  to  be  refurnished  afresh — vessels,  candlesticks,  incense,  altar,  tables, 
curtain  I.  At  last  aU  was  completed,  and  on  the  25th  of  Chislen,  the  same  day 
that  three  years  before  the  profanation  had  occurred,  the  Temple  was  rededicated. 
It  was  the  very  time  predicted  in  the  book  of  Daniel  (vii.  25  ;  ix.  24-27 ;  xii.  6,  7). 
The  three  years  and  a  half  from  the  time  of  the  first  beginning  of  the  sacrilege 
was  over,  and  the  rebound  of  the  national  sentiment  was  in  proportion.  The 
depth  of  winter  (December)  could  not  restrain  the  burst  of  joy.  From  the  first 
dawn  of  that  day  for  the  whole  following  week  songs  of  joy  were  sung  with  cymbals 
and  harps.  In  the  Psalms  of  Solomon  (zi.  2,  3,  7)  there  are  exalting  strains 
which  echo  the  words  of  the  Evangelical  prophet,  and  welcome  the  return  unto 
Jerusalem.  The  smoke  once  more  went  up  from  the  altar ;  the  gates,  and  even  the 
priestly  chambers,  were  fumigated.  The  building  itself  was  studded  with  golden 
crowns  and  shields,  in  imitation  of  the  golden  shields  which  in  the  first  Temple  had 
adorned  the  porch.  What  most  lived  in  the  recollection  of  the  time  was  that  the 
perpetual  light  blazed  again.  The  golden  candlestick  was  no  longer  to  be  had,  its 
place  was  taken  by  an  iron  chandelier  cased  in  wood ;  but  this  sufficed.  It  was  a 
solemn  moment  when  the  sacred  fire  was  again  kindled  on  the  new  altar ;  and  from 
it  the  flame  communicated  to  the  rest  of  the  building.  As  in  the  modem  ceremony 
of  the  "  Sacred  Fire  "  in  the  church  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  so  this  incident  was 
wrapped  in  mystery  and  legend.  The  simple  historical  account  is  that  they 
procured  the  light  by  striking  the  fresh  unpoUuted  stones  against  each  other.  But 
Uiter  representations,  going  back  to  the  like  events  in  Nehemiah's  life,  imagined 
some  preternatural  origin  of  the  fire  itself.  It  was  further  supposed  that  one 
anpolluted  crevice  was  found  which  furnished  the  oil  for  the  lighting  of  the  Temple 
during  the  whole  week ;  in  remembrance  of  which  every  private  house  was  illumi. 
nated,  beginning,  according  to  one  usage,  with  eight  candles,  and  decreasing  as  the 
week  went  on  ;  according  to  the  other,  beginning  with  one  and  advancing  to  eight. 
Partly,  no  doubt,  from  these  traditions,  or  (as  Josephus  thinks)  from  the  returning 
joy  of  the  nation,  the  festival  in  after  days  bore  the  name  of  the  "Feast  of  Lights." 
This  would  receive  a  yet  fuller  significance  in  connection  with  another  aspect  of 
this  great  day.  Though  the  latest  it  took  rank  at  once  with  the  earlier  holy  days.  It 
won  for  itseli  a  sanctity  which  neither  the  dedication  of  Solomon  nor  Zerubbabel 
had  acquired.  Both  of  these  consecrations  had  been  arranged  to  coincide  with  the 
Feast  of  Tabernacles.  That  season  had  already  passed  whilst  the  patriots  were 
hiding  in  the  mountains.  Now,  however,  it  was  determined  to  make  this  new 
solemnity  a  repetition  of  that  feast.  It  was  called  afterwards  "  The  Tabernacle 
Feast  of  Winter  " ;  and  on  this,  its  first  occasion,  there  were  blended  with  it  the 
usual  processions  of  that  gay  autumnal  holiday,  brandishing  their  woven  branches 
of  palm  and  other  trees,  whose  evergreen  foliage  cheered  the  dull  aspect  of  a 
Syrian  December.  And  we  can  hardly  doubt  that  they  would,  in  accordance  with 
the  name  "  Feast  of  Lights,"  add  to  it  that  further  characteristic  of  Tabernacles — 
the  illumination  of  the  precincts  of  the  Temple  by  two  great  chandeliers  placed  in 
the  court,  by  the  light  of  which  festive  dances  were  kept  up  all  through  the  night. 
There  was  an  additional  propriety  in  the  transference  of  the  national  festival  of  the 
vintage  to  this  new  feast,  because  it  coincided  with  the  natural  solemnity  of  wel- 
coming the  first  light  kindled  in  the  new  year.  December  25th  was  at  Tyre,  as  at 
Rome  in  after  times,  celebrated  as  the  birthday  of  the  Sun — the  revival,  the 
renewal,  the  Encsenia  of  man  and  nature.  (Dean  Stanley.)  The  lawfulness  of 
national  and  ecclesiastical  festivals  : — There  was  nothing  in  this  institution  against 
which  the  most  correctly  informed  conscience  could  object,  and  it  was  enjoined  by 
the  lawful  authorities ;  Jesus  therefore  would  submit  to  an  ordinance  of  man  for  the 
Lord's  sake ;  and  not  only  so,  but  He  would  willingly  encourage  this  feast  of  dedi- 
cation as  a  solemn  acknowledgment  of  Divine  mercies.  On  exactly  the  same 
footing  stand  several  of  the  observances  of  our  Church.  The  fifth  of  November, 
for  instance,  is  observed  as  a  memorial  of  a  like  deliverance  from  the  machinations 
of  those,  who,  after  the  example  of  Antioohus,  would  burn  the  Scriptures,  and  those 
who  were  found  to  possess  them ;  and  even  our  Christmas,  and  Lent,  and  Oood 
Friday,  and  Easter,  and  Whitsuntide,  rest  on  the  same  foundation.  They  were 
appointed  by  man,  and  are  supported  by  the  authority  of  the  Church ;  a  higher 
authority  they  do  not  claim :  bat  who  that  feels  as  a  Protestant  and  as  a  Christian, 
and  regards  the  example  of  Christ,  would  refuse  to  comply  with  them  ?  {J.  Fawcett, 
M.A.)  It  was  winter. — Winter: — Consider  it  in  relation — I.  To  God.  1.  As  a  display 
of  Divine  power  (Job  zxxviii.  22-30).  God  humbles  the  wildest  elements  of  nature 
t>7  His  northern  blast.    It  not  only  arrests  the  mountain  stream,  but  congeals  into 


S13  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [CKA».  X. 

monntains  of  ice  the  polar  seas ;  not  only  withers  the  flowers,  bat  strips  the  forest ; 
not  only  binds  up  the  vegetable  powers,  but  chains  the  solar  heat.  Who  can  stand 
before  His  cold  ?  No  one,  but  for  the  safeguards  provided  by  the  God  of  winter. 
And  if  such  securities  be  so  valuable,  how  invaluable  the  robe  of  righteousness  for 
the  naked  and  destitute  soul  1  2  As  a  display  of  Divine  wisdom  and  goodness. 
Frosts  purify  the  air,  destroy  noxious  vermin,  &o.  ;  and  if  it  occasion  some  dis- 
orders it  prevents  many  others ;  and  even  these  disorders  by  confining  as  at  home, 
induce  rejection.  3.  As  a  display  of  Divine  faithfulness.  The  fulfilment  of  the 
promise  to  Noah  requires  the  annual  preparation  of  the  soil  for  fertility,  and  th« 
preservation  of  seed  from  destruction.  The  first  is  secured  by  the  action  of  frost, 
the  latter  by  snow,  which  affords  a  warm  garment,  and  cherishes  infant  growth. 
Then,  touched  by  the  sun,  the  vesture  melts  and  saturates  the  pores  of  the  toil 
with  the  dissolving  nitre,  thus  replenishing  the  earth  with  the  principles  of 
vegetable  Ufe.  Were  there  only  snow  the  soil  would  be  too  damp ;  were  there  only 
frost  the  seed  would  perish.  So  God  blends  both  together.  II.  To  mankind  at 
liABQE.  It  reminds  as — 1.  Of  the  condition  of  the  poor.  We  must  not  excuse 
ourselves  from  benevolence  because  we  have  paid  the  Poor  Bate.  We  are  compelled 
by  law  to  do  that ;  but  how  dwelleth  the  love  of  God  in  him  who,  having  thif 
world's  goods,  does  nothing  but  pay  his  legal  dues.  2.  Of  the  reverses  of  lot  to 
which  we  are  all  liable.  Often  affairs  that  were  once  as  promising  as  spring,  bright 
as  summer,  and  rich  as  autumn,  are  now  desolate  as  winter.  It  is  not 
necessary  to  forget  prosperity  in  adversity.  To  so  remember  it  as  to  beget  im- 
patience is  foolish  and  sinful,  but  not  if  it  deepens  our  convictions  of  the  uncertainty 
of  human  affairs,  and  warns  others  against  trusting  in  uncertain  riches.  And 
then,  again,  how  often  is  adversity  the  season  when  we  first  began  to  think  seriously. 
3.  Of  the  evening  and  end  of  life.  As  winter  comes  freezing  the  streams,  and 
weakening  the  powers  of  vegetable  life,  so  old  age  congeals  the  warm  blood  and 
impairs  the  mental  faculties.  And  yet  this  is  the  season  to  which  the  soul's 
weightiest  concerns  are  often  left.  Old  age  is  not  the  time  for  business  effort,  much 
less,  then,  for  spiritual.  III.  To  the  Spiritual  world.  Winter  should  remind 
us — 1.  Of  the  entrance  of  sin  into  the  world.  For  as  winter  deforms  the  face  of 
nature,  so  sin  brought  a  curse  upon  the  earth.  Sin  quenched  light,  froze  love, 
destroyed  holiness.  2.  Of  the  natural  state  of  the  heart  in  the  sight  of  God.  The 
heart  and  life  of  every  man  ought  to  be  as  spring :  rich  in  buds  of  holiness ;  as 
summer,  rich  in  the  bloom  of  holiness ;  as  autumn,  rich  in  the  ripe  fruit  of  holi- 
ness. But,  alas  1  it  is  not  so.  It  is  winter  in  every  heart  withheld  from  the  Son 
of  Eighteousness.  And  every  year  of  neglect  hardens  the  heart  further  against 
God.  3.  Of  the  unhappy  state  of  the  backslider ;  its  desolation  and  despair  con- 
trasted with  its  former  f ruitf ulness  and  hope.  4.  Of  the  great  salvation.  God  has 
made  the  whiteness  of  winter's  snow  an  emblem — (1)  Of  the  purity  of  salvation, 
"  Wash  me,  and  I  shall  be  whiter  than  snow. "  (2)  Of  pardon  and  sanctification, 
••Come,  now,  let  us  reason  together,  <fec."  (R,  Philip,  D.D.)  Winter  at  an 
emblem : — I.  Of  the  state  of  the  unconverted.  1.  In  winter  the  light  of  heaven 
is  obscured.  Even  in  our  temperate  zone,  our  day  is  brief ;  but  in  the  far  north 
for  months  the  orb  of  day  never  appears  above  the  horizon.  So  the  unconverted 
Bee  not  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness,  nor  the  light  He  sheds  on  things  important  and 
interesting.  They  "  sit  in  darkness  and  the  shadow  of  death."  2.  The  deadnesa 
and  barrenness  of  winter  is  figured  in  the  unregenerate  state.  There  is  no  foliage, 
corn,  fruit,  but  what  may  be  forced  by  artificial  heat,  and  wanting  in  natural 
flavour.  So  in  spiritual  husbandry :  the  unconverted  bear  no  fruit  of  approved 
quality  ••  of  the  Spirit,"  3.  The  cold  of  winter  typifies  the  state  of  those  who  are 
strangers  to  the  genial  glow  of  pure  and  spiritual  affection.  Their  tenderest  feel« 
ings  in  religion  are  but  a  partial  thaw  produced  by  a  transient  sunshine  which 
leaves  no  memorial  behind  except  the  pendant  icicle  and  slippery  surface,  hardening 
the  more  for  the  momentary  softening.  4.  The  winds  and  storms  of  winter  are  apt 
emblems  of  those  ill-regulated  and  malignant  passions  which  agitate  with  ceaseless 
tempest  the  souls  that  have  no  rest  in  God.  IL  Of  the  state  of  BPntrcuAii 
DECLENSION.  When  summer  and  autiunn  have  gone  a  change  is  soon  per- 
ceptible. Where  the  golden  light,  luxurious  warmth,  precious  produce  ?  Nothing 
remains  bat  cold  barrenness.  Emblematic  of  those  who  started  well  but  have 
fallen  out.  Sometimes  this  change  is  gradual,  as  the  days  gradually  shorten; 
sometimes  more  rapid  through  the  influence  of  temptation,  as  when  winter  is 
hastened  on  by  a  premature  and  unexpected  storm.  But  to  remain  in  that  stats 
is  to  die.    III.  Of  a  state  of  desertion  aks  tfuptation.    In  winter  natuis 


.  X.]  8T.  JOHN.  aiS 

seems  barren  of  oharm,  and  so  the  soul  when  Christ  has  withdrawn.  Such  an)  act 
is  usually tiie  result  of  man's  negligence;  but  sometimes  it  is  for  the  trial  of  faith 
and  patience.  Thus  it  was  with  Job,  our  Lord,  Paul,  and  all  great  saints.  IV.  Ob* 
A  STATE  or  AiTLiCTioN.  In  the  case  of  the  poor,  winter  is  much  more  than  an 
emblem,  and  that  is  the  time  to  show  our  true  religion,  which  is  "  to  visit  the 
widow  and  fatherless  in  their  affliction."  How  many  are  exposed  on  the  stormy 
sea  or  amid  the  drifted  snow !  Let  as  then  be  thankful  for  onr  security.  But  there 
are  sorrows  that  create  winter  in  the  soul.  Conclusion :  Winter  precedes  spring 
in  nature,  and  may  do  also  for  the  unconverted,  the  backslider,  the  troubled,  &o. 
(H.  Grey,  D.D.)  The  moral  uses  of  winter : — We  have  one  whole  season  that 
bears  a  look  of  unbenignity;  but  while  many  of  God's  doings  do  not  represent  His 
disposition,  they  exhibit  His  modes  and  ends  of  discipline.  Turning  our  thoughts 
in  this  direction  we  shall  find  enough  in  winter  to  satisfy  as  of  God's  benignity. 
Some  have  thought  that  God  would  have  shown  His  goodness  more  perfectly  i£ 
He  had  omitted  winter  altogether.  But  would  the  advantages  of  a  cylindrical 
world  be  greater  than  a  spherical  one  in  spite  of  its  winter?  In  winter — I.  We  seb 
THAT  God's  beneficence  is  not  always  concerned  in  the  promotion  of  physi- 
cal ENDS.  He  here  takes  us  oS  into  a  field  to  show  on  how  large  a  scale  He  builds 
and  governs,  and  works  for  ends  that  are  superior.  Our  God  is  not  a  summer  God, 
but  a  winter  God,  caring  visibly  less  for  all  mere  comfort  than  for  the  grand 
prerogatives  and  rigours  of  principles.  11.  Wk  note  a  marked  chanok  in  oub 
BODILY  AND  MENTAL  HABIT  AND  TEMPERAMENT.  1.  Discascs  are  of  a  different  type, 
and  health  itself  a  different  experience.  In  summer  the  senses  are  more  awake, 
and  the  body  has  free  communication  with  nature  through  every  pore.  In  winter 
these  gates  are  closed ;  the  vital  force  retreats  to  sustain  the  internal  heat  by  extra 
exertion  then.  We  fold  our  cloak  instinctively  about  us,  and  ask  to  be  separated 
from  nature  by  impervious  walls.  2.  This  change  naturally  effects  the  tone  and 
temperament  of  the  mind  which  is  less  given  up  to  sensation  and  passion.  In  the 
perpetual  summer  of  the  tropics  the  soul's  capacities  are  all  but  macerated  ;  bat 
where  there  is  a  good  interspersing  of  winter  habit,  a  more  rugged  and  distinctly 
moral  temperament  is  induced.  (1)  The  contrast  between  summer  and  winter 
life  in  respect  to  refection  is  remarkable.  After  the  mind  has  received  the  summer 
into  its  storehouse  then  it  wants  winter  to  review  its  stores.  Now  the  senses  lose 
their  objects,  we  listen  to  conscience  and  think  of  other  worlds.  Every  prospect 
without  is  forbidding,  the  indoor  fire  more  attractive,  and  if  we  ever  think  cogently 
we  do  now.  (2^  It  is  well  understood  that  the  mind  never  attains  to  strength 
without  the  habit  of  reflection.  The  same  is  necessary  to  a  vigorous  pronounce- 
tnent  of  the  moral  man.  Hence  the  intellectual  and  moral  deaiih  of  the  tropics, 
Their  moral  nature  wants  the  f  rigorifio  tension  of  a  well-nurtured  life  and  experience. 
Who  would  undertake  to  form  a  Scotch  people  as  to  a  sense  of  principles  in 
Jamaica?  IH.  We  are  made  more  conscious  of  otm  moral  wants.  The  prodigal  came 
to  himself  in  a  time  of  short  allowance;  and  when,  as  in  winter,  shall  our  want  of 
God  be  awakened?  Everything  around  is  an  image  of  the  coldness  of  a  cold 
heart.  Cut  off  from  the  diversions  of  summer  pleasures,  then,  if  ever,  a  man  will 
feel  those  wants  which  set  all  moral  natures  reaching  after  God,  IV.  We  arcMOBB 
CAPABLE  OF  REALIZING  INVISIBLE  SCENERIES  AND  WORLDS.  God  is  moio  vividly  ima- 
gined in  summer,  and  the  tropical  attractions  of  paradise,  with  its  twelve  manner 
of  fruits,  are  intimated.  But  the  time  for  realizing  these  invisible  things  is  when 
a  pall  is  thrown  over  their  visible  resemblances.  When  creation  is  bare  we  call 
npon  our  imaginations  to  paint  and  picture,  and  make  it  blessed  above  all  seen  facta. 
V.  The  will  becomes  more  erect  and  determinate.  Men  in  the  tropics  seem  to 
have  no  will,  and  are  commonly  inefficient  for  decisive  action.  How  many  of  them 
have  become  martyrs  ?  And  who  is  not  languid  and  averse  to  resolution  even  in 
our  northern  summer  f  We  speak  of  the  bracing  of  winter,  by  which  we  mean 
that  we  have  a  nerve  to  do,  determine,  endure,  i.e.,  have  a  new  instalment  of  will, 
and  so  of  practical  energy.  VI.  The  economic  and  social  conditions  of  life  arb 
AFFECTED  BENEFICIALLY.  Winter  is  uot  commouly  productive,  but  is  rather  a  time 
of  expenditure;  and  in  this  way  it  impels  by  the  most  stringent  motive  to  habits  of 
industry  and  providence.  And  these  habits  help  to  set  one  on  forecasting  the 
wants  and  necessities  of  the  life  beyond.  And  then,  having  this  also  provided,  he 
will  have  it  in  his  heart  to  borrow  the  larger  lesson,  and  be  no  more  churlish  or 
barren  of  gratitude ;  but,  seeing  that  God  gives  for  expenditure,  he  will  set  hi« 
comforts  in  contrast  with  the  desolations  around,  and  thank  God  for  the  supplies 
of  the  year.     ViL  We  see  the  oonibibutions  it  makes  to  hosib  utx.    Home  i« 


2U  ■  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap.  r. 

an  exclusively  northern  word.  Tropical  families  living  oat  of  doors  for  the  whole 
year  are  less  regularly  gathered  into  domestic  proximity.  It  is  only  at  the  hearth 
when  the  winter  fire  is  kindled  that  fatherhood,  motherhood,  and  other  tender  re- 
lationships become  bonds  of  unity.  A  whole  half-year  spent  at  the  hearth — 
mornings  there  begun  with  prayer,  long  evenings  enlivened  by  mutual  society,  books 
opening  their  treasures,  and  games  their  diversions — this  condenses  a  home.  Who 
can  imagine  a  ••  Cottar's  Saturday  Night "  in  the  tropics  ?    VIII.  Wb  havb  been 

THACINQ  PABTICULAB  BESULTS  0»  CEARACTEB  OPERATED  BY  WINTEB  CLIMATES.  LeT 
US  LOOK   AT  A   FEW  WINTEB   SCENES   AND   OCCASIONS     THAT  ARE   WOBEINQ   BESULTS   NOT 

LESS  IMPORTANT.      Note — 1.    The  almost  religious  impression  of  winter  storms. 
Tropical  storms  are  so  terrible  as  to  leave  no  moral  impression  at  all.     But  oar 
winter  storm  gathers  up  its  force  more  thoughtfully,  as  if  moving  only  great  insti- 
gations, and  under  this  performance,  by  God's  aerial  orchestra,  our  soul  is  in 
vibration  as  never  under  any  combination  of  act.  instrument,  or  voice.     2.  The 
moral  value  of  winter  as  a  time  for  charity.     In  the  summer  God  pours  out  His 
bounty  so  freely  that  none  scarcely  miss  their  needed  supply.     In  the  winter  He 
withholds  that  we  may  take  His  place.     The  conditions  of  hunger  and  cold  authen- 
ticate themselves.     If  there  is  no  fire  the  lack  can  be  seen.     The  poor  ragged  child, 
saying  by  his  piteous  look,  "  Who  can  stand  before  His  cold?"  wants  no  certificate. 
S.  Winter  funerals.    These  are  a  trial  that  awakens  strange  inward  commotions. 
Our  heart  shudders,  but  while  our  feehng  is  protesting,  the  thought  arises  "  Our 
departed  is  not  in  that  hole.    Let  the  snows  fall  heavy — we  thank  Thee  Father  Lord 
of  the  warmer  clime  that  our  dead  one  lives  with  Thee."    Practically,  almost 
nothing  will  compel  a  faith  in  immortaUty  more  than  to  bury  a  friend  in  the 
winter.     4.  Winter  religious  movements.     It  is  remarkable,  and  a  fair  subject  for 
congratulation,  that  the  great  Church  days  are  in  winter  or  early  spring — Christ- 
mas and  Easter,  e.g.  Whether  Lent  is  fixed  because  at  that  time  the  mind  is  more 
congenially  tempered  for  the  higher  meditation  and  severer  exercises  of  religion 
some  may  question,  but  Lent  in  July  would  have  much  less  chance  of  the  intended 
benefit ;  and  in  churches  not  observing  Lent,  the  time  is  distinguished  by  what  are 
called  revivals  of  religion.    But  in  both  cases  winter  becomes  the  harvest  of  reli- 
gion.    The  tonic  force  of  vnnter  gives  a  possibility  of  thought  and  tension  specially 
needed    for   earnest    religious    exercises.      It    is   also    an    advantage    that   we 
love  proximity  in    winter,   and    covet    more    easily  the  warmth  of    assemblies 
and    high   social    impulse.     5.    Winter  seems  the    time    to   meditate   all    our 
most  serious  concerns  of  life  anew.    Doing  this  it  will  not  much  concern  us  if 
our  flight  should  be  in  winter.     (H.  Bushne.ll,  D.D.)        The  beauties  of  winter : — 
When  the  sky  is  blue  above,  and  the  morning  air  fresh  and  bracing,  and  the  frost 
has  gemmed  every  twig  and  spray  of  bush  and  tree,  and  every  weed  and  blade  of 
grass  by  the  roadside — aye,  and  every  stone  and  dead  leaf,  and  straw  even,  and 
nature's  myriad  brilliants  glitter  hke  diamonds  in  the  sun  ;  and  the  hard  ground 
rings  under  your  quick  tread ;  and  the  boys  shout  on  the  slippery  pond  ;  and  the 
skater  hurries  to  the  lake  in  the  park ;  and  the  woodman's  axe  is  heard  in  the 
copse ;  and  in  the  barn  the  flail  comes  down  with  a  will ;  and  the  carter's  boy 
whistles  beside  the  smoking  team  ;  and  the  brown  leaves  of  the  oak  rustle ;  and 
the  lark  sings  overhead — then  winter  is  a  brave  old  boy,  and  shall  have  a  crown 
of  shining  holly  with  scarlet  berries  on  the  dark  leaves  of  glossy  green ;  and  the 
log  shall  burn  on  the  hearth,  and  the  mistletoe  hang  in  the  hall,  and  the  young 
shall  be  merry,  and  the  old  cheerful,  and  the  thoughtful  remember  gladly  who  it 
is  that  hath  made  the  winter.      {H.  H.  Dobney. )         Temple  views  of  winter : — 
National  humiliation  and  rejoicing  may  at  times  be  proper,  but  if  annually  per- 
petuated they  may  become  unmeaning.      In   addition   to  fasts   and  festivals  of 
Divine  appointment,  the  Jews  had  this  and  others.      With  how  much  more  rever- 
ence men  treat  Church  institutions  than  those  sanctioned  by  God.     Christianity 
is  contrasted  with  Judaism  in  as  much  as  it  is  not  an  outward  religion,  has  no 
feasts,  attaches  no  sanctity  to  days  and  years,  but  is  inward.      2.  At  this  feast 
Jesus  walked  in  Soloman's  porch,  and  men  sought  to  stone  Him  for  asserting  His 
Oneness  with  the  Father.      Men  may  attach  greater  importance  to  the  sanctuary 
than  to  the  gospel      What  was   passing  through  His   mind?      The   contrast 
between  the  outward  beauty  of  the  Temple  and  the  real  condition  of  the  Church  ? 
Or  the  little  moral  influence  it  had  in  the  world  ?     For  the  world's  winter  was 
only  the  symbol  of  its  spiritual  state.    3.  What  does  the  season  suggest  to  us  in 
the  sanctuary?     The  ritualism  of  nature  is  most  expressive,  and  furnishes  ua 
with  types  of  spiritual  ideas.      Christ  uses  nature's  illustrations  exclusively.    I. 


CHIP.  X.]  ST.  JOHN.  21* 

Death  peecedes  life.  Our  year  beginfl  with  winter,  which  prepares  the  way  for 
aU  that  follows.  Winter  is  the  type  of  death.  It  paralyzes  old  age,  takes  the 
colouring  from  childhood,  and  fills  many  a  grave.  1.  If  mental  life  is  to  be 
developed  how  maoh  have  we  to  die  to — early  prejndices,  mistaken  opinions, 
confused  conjectares.  2.  If  the  spiritual  life  is  to  be  developed,  death  must 
precede  it.  Old  principles  must  be  renounced,  old  habits  abandoned.  (1)  There 
must  be  death  to  sin  that  there  may  be  life  to  God.  Crucifixion  with  Christ 
precedes  Christ  living  in  as.  (2)  There  must  be  death  to  things  seen  if  we  would 
live  to  the  things  unseen.  The  world  must  be  dead  to  us  if  we  would  seek  the 
things  above.  (3)  The  body  must  die  that  it  may  live  a  new  life.  II.  Life  has 
1X8  successive  developments.  1.  Winter  is  necessary  that  one  form  of  life  may 
pass  away  to  be  succeeded  by  another.  (1)  It  is  not  all  spring.  Earth's  beautiful 
garments  become  worn  and  soUed,  and  must  be  laid  aside,  and  in  darkness  and 
silence  nature  makes  preparation  for  her  new  vesture.  (2)  It  is  not  all  activity 
and  growth.  There  must  be  a  time  for  the  gathering  up  of  energies.  (3)  It  is 
Dot  all  f ruitf ulness ;  the  fruits  must  be  gathered  in  to  answer  the  purposes  of 
their  growth,  and  the  developments  must  begin  anew.  2.  The  length  of  the  year 
is  adapted  to  the  constitution  of  the  world.  If  any  change  were  to  take  place  the 
wonderful  mechanism  would  be  disarranged  and  come  to  a  stand,  and  so  in  the 
constitution  of  man.  We  get  robustness  not  in  summer  but  in  winter,  and 
grow  more  spiritually  then.  3.  These  successive  developments,  though  almost 
numberless  in  their  forms,  may  be  repetitions.  Every  year  sees  leaves,  flowers, 
&o.,  like  the  last.  But  some  forms  may  be  succeeded  by  new  manifestations  of 
life,  increase  of  beauty  and  fruitfulness.  There  is  not  a  leaf  that  falls  but  has 
accomplished  its  purpose  and  makes  way  for  its  successor.  And  so  some  successive 
manifestations  of  spiritual  life  seem  copies  of  each  other.  These  are  necessary  to 
Christian  character,  but  they  would  not  go  on  did  not  winter  intervene,  and 
gome  are  replaced  by  manifestations  far  surpassing  those  that  have  preceded 
them.  III.  Life  contains  the  oebm  of  all  FtrruBE  developments.  Winter 
does  not  destroy  life.  The  first  act  of  faith  contains  in  it  the  germ  of  all  the 
future  sinless  and  sorrowless  life.  {H.  J.  Bevis.)  Jesus  walked  in  the  Temple  In 
Solomon's  porch. — Solomon's  porch : — The  word  "  porch  "  rather  means  what  we 
should  call  a  verandah  or  colonnade.  It  was  one  of  those  long  covered  walks 
nnder  a  roof  supported  by  columns,  on  one  side  at  least,  which  the  inhabitants  of 
hot  countries  appear  to  find  absolutely  needful.  Singularly  enough,  one  sect  of 
heathen  philosophers  at  Athens  was  called  "  Stoics,"  from  its  meeting  in  a  place 
called  "  Stoa,"  here  rendered  a  porch;  while  another  was  called  ••Peripatetics," 
from  its  habit  of  "  walking  about "  during  its  discussions,  just  as  our  Lord  did  in 
this  verse.  The  cloisters  of  a  cathedral  or  abbey,  perhaps,  are  most  like  the 
building  called  a  "porch"  here.  Josephus  says  this  porch  was  one  of  the 
buildings  which  remained  partly  undestroyed  from  Solomon's  Temple.  Tacitus 
expressly  mentions  it  as  one  of  the  defences  of  the  Temple  at  the  siege  of 
Jerusalem.  (Bp.  Ryle.)  This  discourse  of  our  Lord  concerning  His  own  Divine 
power  as  proved  by  His  works  was  delivered  in  winter  in  Solomon's  porch.  And 
then  the  Jews  rejected  Him  (ver.  39).  But  afterwards  this  porch  was  the  place  in 
which  His  apostles,  having  wrought  mighty  works  in  His  name,  boldly  proclaimed 
His  Messiahship  and  Divine  power  to  the  people,  who  gladly  accepted  the  gospel 
(Acts  iii.  11 ;  v.  12).  Both  in  nature  and  in  grace  it  was  then  spring.  Christ  had 
ascended  and  the  Comforter  had  come.  {Bp.  Wordsworth.)  The  Lord  in,  our 
assemblies : — 1.  The  presence  of  Jesus  brings  into  prominence — (1)  The  place :  "  at 
Jerusalem,  in  the  Temple."  (2)  The  exact  part  of  it :  "  Solomon's  porch."  (3) 
The  time:  "winter."  (4)  The  proceedings :  ••  feast  of  Dedication."  2.  The  main 
feature  in  all  history,  and  in  the  event  of  every  life,  is  the  presence  or  absence  of 
Jesus.  I.  Will  He  be  heee  ?  The  place  may  be  a  very  Jerusalem,  our  meeting- 
place  may  be  a  temple,  it  may  be  a  high-day,  but  will  He  be  with  us  ?  It  may  be 
cold  and  wintry ;  but  what  of  that  if  He  be  here  t  Our  own  eager  inquiry  is 
about  His  presence,  and  we  feel  sure  that  He  will  come,  for — 1.  We  have  invited 
Him,  and  He  will  not  refuse  His  friends.  2.  We  are  prepared  for  Him,  and  are 
waiting  to  welcome  Him.  3.  We  have  great  need  of  Him,  and  He  is  full  of  com- 
passion. 4.  We  have  some  of  His  brethren,  and  these  bring  Him  in  them ;  indeed. 
He  is  in  them.  5.  We  have  those  here  whom  He  is  seeking — lost  sheep.  6.  H« 
has  promised  to  come  (Matt,  xviii.  20).  7.  Some  declare  that  they  have  already 
seen  Him.  Why  should  not  others  of  us  enjoy  the  same  privilege  ?  II.  Will  Ha 
STAT  ?    He  will — 1.  If  we  prize  His  company,  and  feel  that  we  cannot  live  without 


218  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chip.  « 

it.  We  must  by  earnest  prayer  constrain  Him  to  abide  with  ns  (Luke  xxiv.  29). 
2.  If  we  love  His  truth,  and  delight  to  make  it  known.  3.  If  we  obey  His  will,  and 
walk  in  sincerity  and  holiness.  4.  If  we  are  diligent  in  His  service  and  worship. 
b.  If  we  are  united  in  love  to  Him,  to  one  another,  and  to  poor  sinners.  6.  U  wa 
are  humbly  reverent  and  sit  at  His  feet  in  lowly  confession.  The  proud  He  will 
never  favour.  7.  If  we  are  jealously  watchful.  III.  What  will  Hb  do  if  He 
GOMES  ?  1.  He  will  walk  among  us  and  observe  what  we  are  doing,  even  as  He 
noticed  those  who  went  to  the  Temple  at  Jerusalem.  2.  He  will  grieve  over  the 
spiritual  condition  of  many,  even  as  He  mourned  over  the  ruin  of  Jerusalem.  3. 
He  will  wait  to  give  audience  to  any  who  desire  to  speak  with  Him.  4.  He  will 
teach  by  His  servant ;  and  His  Word,  whether  received  or  rejected,  will  be  with 
great  authority  and  power.  6.  He  will  this  day  explain  to  us  the  Temple  itself, 
by  being  Himself  the  Key  to  it.  Think  of  Jesus,  who  is  the  Temple  of  God  (Eev. 
xxi.  22),  in  the  Temple,  and  then  understand  by  the  light  of  His  presence — (1)  The 
Temple  (Heb.  ix.  11 ;  Bev.  xv.  6).  (2)  The  altar  (Heb.  xiii.  10 ;  Eev.  viii.  3).  (3) 
The  Sacrifice  (Heb.  ix.  28 ;  1  Cor.  v.  7).  (4)  The  shewbread  (Heb.  ix.  2).  (5)  The 
veil  (Heb.  x.  20).  (6)  The  ark  and  mercy-seat  (Heb.  ix.  4,  5  ;  Eev.  x.  19).  (7)  The 
priest  (Heb.  x.  12).  6.  He  will  to  His  own  people  reveal  His  love,  as  once  the 
Lord's  light  shone  above  the  mercy-seat.  7.  He  will  take  us  where  He  always 
walks,  but  where  there  is  no  winter :  to  the  New  Jerusalem,  to  the  temple,  to  a 
more  beautiful  building  than  Solomon's  porch  (Eev.  xxi.  10,  11).    (C.H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  24-39.  Then  came  the  Jews  round  about  Him. — The  scene  and  circutn 
Mtances  : — Here  in  this  bright  colonnade,  decked  for  the  feast  with  glittering 
trophies,  Jesus  was  walking  up  and  down,  quietly,  and  apparently  without 
companions,  sometimes,  perhaps,  gazing  across  the  valley  of  Kidron  at  the 
whited  sepulchres  of  the  prophets  whom  generations  of  Jews  had  slain,  and 
enjoying  the  mild  winter  sunlight,  when,  as  though  by  a  preconcerted  move- 
ment, the  Pharisaic  party  and  their  leaders  suddenly  surrounded  and  began  to 
question  Him.  Perhaps  the  very  spot  where  He  was  walking,  recalling  as  it  did 
the  memories  of  their  ancient  glory — perhaps  the  memories  of  the  glad  feast 
which  they  were  celebrating,  as  the  anniversary  of  a  splendid  deliverance 
wrought  by  a  handful  of  brave  men,  who  had  overthrown  a  colossal  tyranny — 
inspired  their  ardent  appeal  "  How  long,"  they  impatiently  inquired,  "  dost 
Thou  hold  our  souls  in  painful  suspense  ?  If  Thou  really  art  the  Messiah,  tell 
us  with  confidence.  Tell  us  here,  in  Solomon's  porch,  now,  while  the  sight  of 
these  shields  and  golden  crowns,  and  the  melody  of  these  citherns  and  cymbals, 
recall  the  glory  of  Judas  the  Asmonaean — wilt  thou  be  a  mightier  Maccabseus,  a 
more  glorious  Solomon  ?  Shall  these  citrons  and  fair  boughs  and  palms,  which 
we  carry  in  honour  of  this  day's  victory,  be  carried  some  day  for  Thee?"  It 
was  a  strange,  impetuous,  impatient  appeal,  and  is  full  of  significance.  It 
forms  their  own  strong  condemnation,  for  it  shows  distinctly  that  He  had 
spoken  words  and  done  deeds  which  would  have  justified  and  substantiated 
such  a  claim  had  He  chosen  definitely  to  assert  it.  And  if  He  had  in  so  many 
words  asserted  it — in  the  sense  which  they  required — it  is  probable  that  they 
would  have  instantly  welcomed  Him  with  tumultuous  acclaim.  The  place  where 
they  were  speaking  recalled  the  most  glorious  scenes  of  their  ancient  monarchy ; 
the  occasion  was  rife  with  the  heroic  memories  of  one  of  their  bravest  and  most 
successful  warriors ;  the  political  conditions  which  surrounded  them  were  exactly 
such  as  those  from  which  the  noble  Asmonaan  had  delivered  them.  One  spark 
of  that  ancient  flame  would  have  kindled  their  inflammable  spirits  into  such  a 
blaze  of  irresistible  fanaticism  as  might  for  a  time  have  swept  away  both  the 
Bomans  and  Herods.  But  the  day  for  political  deliverances  was  past ;  the  day  for 
a  higher,  deeper,  wider  deliverance  had  come.  For  the  former  they  yearned ;  the 
latter  they  rejected.  Passionate  to  claim  in  Jesus  an  exclusive  temporal  Messiah 
they  repelled  Him  with  hatred  as  the  Son  of  God,  the  Saviour  of  the  world. 
That  He  was  the  Messiah  in  a  sense  far  loftier  and  more  spiritual  than  they  had 
ever  dreamed  His  language  had  again  and  again  implied :  but  a  Messiah  in  the 
sense  they  required  He  was  not,  and  would  not  be.  And  therefore  He  does  not 
mislead  them  by  saying,  "  I  am  your  Messiah,"  but  He  refers  them  to  His  repeated 
teaching,  which  showed  how  clearly  such  had  been  His  claim,  and  to  the  works 
which  bore  witness  to  that  claim.  Had  they  been  sheep  of  His  flock,  they 
would  have  heard  His  voice,  and  then  He  would  have  given  them  eternal  lifs. 
{Archdeacon  Farrar.)  Chritf*  account  of  Himself: — I.  Thb  natobb  or  Hu 


CTAP.  X.]  ST.  JOHN.  217 

CKED-ETsriAis.    I.  His  sayings.    He  had  often  told  them  who  He  was  (ver.  25). 

2.  His  miracles.  These  had  been  signs  that  they  should  have  nnderstood 
(vers.  25,  38).  8.  His  acceptance  by  the  pioas.  Jehovah's  flock  and  Hia 
own  sheep  had  recognized  Him ;  an  indirect  testimony  that  He  was  no 
imposter  (ver.  27).  4.  His  ability  to  save.  He  could  and  did  bestow  eternal  life  on 
those  who  believed  and  followed  Him  (ver.  28).  U.  The  dignity  of  His  pebson. 
1.  The  Father's  Commissioner  (ver.  26).  2.  The  Father's  Shepherd  (ver.  29).  3. 
The  Father's  Son  (ver.  36).  4.  The  Father's  equal  (vers,  30, 38).  The  Jews  under- 
stood this  (ver.  33).  HI.  The  vindication  of  His  pketensions.  1.  The  charge 
preferred  against  Him.  Blasphemy,  in  making  out  Himself,  a  man,  to  be  God  (ver. 
83).  2.  The  punishment  proposed  for  Him.  Stoning,  the  penalty  prescribed  by 
the  law  for  such  offenders.  3.  The  answer  returned  by  Him.  (1)  Scriptural — 
drawn  from  their  own  holy  writings.  (2)  Logical.  If  God's  Word  called  civic  rulers 
"  gods,"  it  could  not  be  blasphemy  for  God's  Son  to  call  Himself  "  Son  of  God." 
(3)  Final.  They  could  not  reply  to  it  except  by  violence ;  and  He  withdrew  Himself 
beyond  the  reach  of  such  machinations.  Learn — 1.  The  sufficiency  of  the  existing 
evidences  for  Christ  and  Christianity.  2.  The  irreconcilable  antagonism  between 
the  unrenewed  heart  and  Christ.  3.  The  ease  with  which  objections  and  objectors 
to  Christ  can  be  answered.  4.  The  certainty  that  evil  men  can  never  achieve  a 
final  triumph  over  Christ.  (T.  Whitelaw,  D.D.)  Religious  scepticism: — I.  It 
DOES  NOT  LACK  EVIDENCE  (vcrs.  24, 25).  1.  Christ's  works  were  such  as  no  mere  man 
had  ever  performed  or  could  ever  accomplish — productions  of  Divine  power,  ex- 
pressions of  Divine  benevolence.  2.  If  these  in  His  day  were  sufficient  evidence, 
how  much  more  His  moral  works  in  Christendom  since.  For  eighteen  centuries 
they  have  been  multiplying.  To  sceptics  who  say.  How  long  are  we  to  be  held  in 
doubt  ?  we  answer.  If  you  are  sincere  in  your  inquiries,  you  need  not  be  held  in  sus- 
pense a  moment  longer.  II.  It  lacks  stmpatht  with  truth  (vers.  26,  27).  This, 
and  not  lack  of  evidence,  is  the  cause  of  scepticism.  The  Jew's  sympathy  was 
with  the  formulffl  and  conventionalities  of  religion  and  not  with  the  truth.  The 
wish  is  evermore  father  of  the  thought.  Men  are  atheists  because  they  do  not 
"like  to  retain  "  God  in  their  thoughts— anti-Christians  because  they  do  not  like 
Christ.  He  is  too  pure,  too  honest.  Are  men  responsible  for  this  lack  of  sympathy  ? 
As  well  ask.  Are  men  responsible  for  being  truthful,  just,  virtuous  ?  Conscience  is 
bound  to  answer  in  the  affirmative.  III.  It  exposes  to  enobuous  loss  (ver.  28). 
This  implies — 1.  That  they,  the  sceptics,  would  not  have  eternal  life — goodness, 
freedom,  perfection,  joy — that  the  absence  of  which  meant  to  "perish."  2.  That  they 
would  not  have  eternal  security.  His  sheep  would  be  safe  in  His  and  the  Father's 
hands  from  ruin  and  misery.  But  those  who  were  not  His  sheep  would  be  in  a 
perilous  condition.  Conclusion:  See  here — 1.  How  hypocritical  is  scepticism.  They 
professed  to  be  in  search  of  truth,  whereas  they  only  wanted  a  pretext  to  destroy 
truth.  2.  How  irrational  is  scepticism.  It  refuses  to  accept  the  most  overwhelm- 
ing evidence  in  favour  of  truth — the  mighty  and  ever  multiplying  works  of  Christ. 

3.  How  immoral  is  scepticism.  It  springs  from  the  state  of  the  heart — destitution 
of  sympathy  with  Christ.  4.  How  egregiously  foolish  is  scepticism.  It  risks 
eternal  hfe  and  security.  {D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  works  of  the  Christ : — We  are 
dealing  with  the  truth  of  the  Divinity  of  the  Christ,  as  it  has  been  proclaimed  by 
Christendom  ever  since  the  day  when  He  lived  and  died  on  this  earth.  We  are 
endeavouring  to  test  the  weight  of  evidence  in  favour  of  such  a  tremendous  claim. 
And  in  order  to  do  this  effectually  we  are  summoning  certain  witnesses  before  us 
that  they  may  bear  their  testimony  for  or  against  it.  The  works  of  a  man,  like  his 
character  and  words,  are  very  eloquent.  They  speak  for  or  against  him.  The 
works  of  the  Christ.  This,  then,  is  our  witness  to-day.  They  are  the  works  of 
One  the  beauty  of  whose  character  and  words  is  acknowledged  by  all  men  whose 
judgment  is  worth  having.  "  They  bear  witness  of  Me,"  says  the  Christ.  \Vhat  do 
they  say?  Do  they  justify  or  condemn,  do  they  speak  for  or  against  Him  ?  I.  And, 
first  of  all,  we  want  to  know  what  this  witness  is.  The  works  of  the  Christ  are 
many  and  manifold.  There  are  works  of  love,  of  sympathy,  of  mercy ;  there  are 
works  of  wisdom,  of  power,  of  greatness ;  there  are  works  of  warning,  of  judg- 
ment, of  condemnation.  Which  of  these  shall  we  summon  as  our  witness  to-day  ? 
No ;  onr  Lord  Himself  narrows  the  issue  for  us.  He  points  to  certain  of  His  works 
and  by  them  will  be  judged,  "  The  works  that  I  do  in  My  Father's  name."  It  is 
quite  clear  that  He  is  speaking  of  His  miracles.  The  miracles  of  the  Christ ! 
"Oh,"  some  will  say,  "no  one  believes  in  miracles  nowadays.  If  yon  have  no 
other  witness  but  this  your  case  must  surely  fall  to  the  ground.    Miracles  do  not 


218  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

happen ! "  Why  is  a  miracle  impossible  ?  Hume  denies  the  possibility  of  a  miracle 
because  "it  is  contrary  to  all  experience."  Mr.  Mill,  the  greatest  of  modem 
logicians,  shows  that  after  all  this  statement  is  really  worth  nothing.  He  tells  as 
that  it  only  means  that  you  cannot  prove  a  miracle  to  a  person  who  does  not  believe 
iu  a  Being  with  supernatural  powers.  If  by  aU  experience  he  literally  means  "  all " 
he  is  simply  begging  the  question.  No  one  ever  supposed  for  a  moment  that 
miracles  have  been  experienced  by  all.  The  philosopher  Eousseau  tells  us  that 
objections  to  miracles  from  their  improbability  cannot  reasonably  be  urged  by  any 
man  who  seriously  believes  in  a  living  God.  But  others  urge,  a  miracle  is  impos- 
sible because  it  is  a  violation  of  the  laws  of  nature.  But  is  it  7  Let  us  ask  what 
is  meant  by  violating  nature's  laws.  What  is  a  miracle  ?  It  is  a  lower  law  sus- 
pended by  a  higher.  And  who  shall  say  this  caimot  be  ?  To  say  so  were  to  con- 
tradict daily  experience.  For  instance,  we  can,  we  do  continually  counteract  the 
great  law  of  gravitation  by  a  higher  law.  A  miracle  is  impossible.  No,  not  to  any 
man  who  believes  in  a  God  at  alL  And  we  are  taking  this  for  granted.  Very  few 
deny  it.  Yea  more,  we  live  in  a  world  of  miracles.  •*  We  cajinot  see,"  writes 
James  Hinton,  who  was  at  once  a  man  of  science  and  a  philosopher,  and  they  do 
not  always  go  together,  "  that  we  walk  in  the  midst  of  miracles,  and  draw  in 
mysteries  with  every  breath."  A  miracle  is  impossible.  Nay,  the  miracles  of  the 
Christ  are  not  a  discredited  witness :  they  are  not  impossible  or  improbable.  On 
the  contrary,  miracles  are  natural  and  reasonable,  and  under  certain  circumstances 
they  are  to  be  expected.  But,  you  say,  were  not  His  character  and  His  words 
enough  ?  Nay,  they  might  be  for  us,  but  not  for  them.  In  those  early  days  many 
among  men  knew  but  little  of  His  character,  and  heard  only  a  few  of  His  words. 
There  was  need  of  other  credentials  in  those  days,  plainer  and  more  striking,  to 
support  the  claim  which  Jesus  made.  We  need  them  not.  The  miracles  of  the 
Christ  were  like  the  bells  of  the  Church,  that  ring  before  the  service  begins,  and 
call  men  by  their  music  to  come  and  worship.  But  the  bells  cease  when  the  con- 
gregation has  assembled  and  the  act  of  worship  commenced.  And  so  we  say  that 
it  was  to  be  expected  that  a  supernatural  revelation,  brought  by  a  supernatural 
Teacher,  should,  in  the  absence  of  all  earthly  power  and  greatness,  be  accompanied 
by  supernatural  signs,  to  attest  the  truth  of  the  Messenger  and  of  the  message  He 
delivered  unto  men.  If,  then,  these  miracles  are  neither  impossible  nor  improbable, 
what  can  we  learn  about  the  nature  of  the  witness  they  give  ?  First,  then,  I  would 
have  you  bear  in  mind  that  they,  too,  like  the  other  witnesses  we  have  called,  are 
well-authenticated  facts.  They  are  facts  which  His  disciples  beUeved  in,  and  who 
were  so  likely  to  know  as  they  7  They  are  facts,  for  even  His  enemies  admitted 
their  reality.  The  Jews  did  not  deny  them.  Secondly,  the  miracles  of  Christ  are 
to  be  expected.  They  were  the  natural  accompaniments  of  His  mission  of  love, 
the  embodiments  of  His  character  and  words,  in  harmony  with  all  else  that  we  are 
told  of  Him.  "  They  were  perfectly  natural  and  ordinary  in  Him,  they  were  His 
Svvaftetg,  His  powers  or  faculties.  His  capacities,  just  as  sight  and  speech  are  ours." 
Thirdly,  the  miracles  of  the  Christ  are  unique.  No  other  rehgion  was  ever  founded 
upon  miracles,  as  is  Christianity.  "  Whence,  then,  hath  this  Man  this  wisdom  and 
these  mighty  works  ?  "  Christendom  answers,  "  He  is  the  Son  of  the  Living  God." 
Yea,  Jesus  Himself  tells  us,  ♦'  The  works  which  the  Father  hath  given  Me  to  accom- 
plish, the  very  works  that  I  do,  bear  witness  of  Me  that  the  Father  hath  sent  Me." 
But  as  in  the  first  days  of  Christianity,  so  still  men  refuse  to  believe  this.  Thej 
offer  ns  other  solutions  instead.  Benan,  for  instance,  says  He  deluded  His  disciples. 
Others  tell  us  that  the  Christ  was  enabled  to  do  His  miracles  by  His  greater  know, 
ledge  of  the  laws  of  science.  But  can  we  accept  this  solution  ?  Or,  again,  we  are 
told  that  these  miracles  are  the  outcome  of  the  imagination  of  the  disciples — that 
miracles  were  in  the  air,  so  to  speak.  Moreover,  are  we  really  entitled  to  take  for 
granted,  as  do  so  many,  that  at  the  time  the  Gospels  were  written  there  was  a  pre- 
disposition in  the  minds  of  men  to  accept  what  was  extraordinary  ?  In  his  book 
on  miracles  Mr.  Litton  writes  with  considerable  force,  "  No  mistake  is  greater  than 
to  suppose  that  the  period  at  which  the  Gospels  appeared  was  favourable  to  im- 
posture of  this  kind.  It  was  an  age  of  literature  and  philosophy,  the  diffusion  of 
which  was  promoted  by  the  anion  of  the  civilized  world  under  one  sceptre.  In 
Palestine  learning  had  especially  taken  the  form  of  critical  inquiries  into  the 
integrity  and  genuineness  of  ancient  books."  Bat  there  are  others  who  accept  the 
force  of  this  reasoning,  and  say  the  miracles  of  the  Christ  are  the  creation  of  a 
later  age.  But,  as  has  been  well  pointed  out  by  the  same  writer,  such  a  man  mast 
have  been  a  forger  surpassing  all  the  world  has  ever  known  in  cleverness.    Once 


CHAP.  X.1  ST.  JOHN.  «19 

more,  it  is  said  that  the  results  attributed  to  miraculous  power  were  in  reality 
brought  about  by  the  forces  of  His  personal  qualities.  His  strength  of  will,  His 
beauty  of  character,  His  personal  attraction,  influenced  men,  and  worked  upon 
them  wonderful  cures.  But  even  if  it  were  so  with  the  miracles  of  which  men  and 
women  were  the  subjects,  how  will  this  account  for  the  stilling  of  the  storm  or  the 
withering  of  the  fig-tree.  There  is  only  one  alternative.  Jesus  Himself  tells  us 
what  it  is,  "  If  I  do  not  the  works  of  My  Father,  believe  Me  not."  Shall  we  believe 
Him  or  shall  we  reject  Him  ?  (C  J.  Ridgeway,  M.A.)  My  sheep  hear  My  voice. 
—  r^'g  order  of  thought: — The  reference  to  those  who  believe  not  (ver.  26)  because 
they  were"'not  of  His  sheep,  introduces  the  contrast  between  them  and  those  who 
were,  and  the  position  of  the  true  members  of  the  flock  is  expanded  in  this  pair  of 
parallel  clauses.  One  member  of  each  pair  refers  to  the  act  or  state  of  the  sheep  ; 
the  other  to  the  act  or  gift  of  the  good  Shepherd.  The  pairs  proceed  in  a  climax 
from  the  first  response  of  the  conscience  which  recognizes  the  Divine  voice,  to  the 
eternal  home  which  is  in  the  Father's  presence.  1.  *'  My  sheep  hear  My  voice," 
(  '  •  •  ^*  and  I  know  them."  2.  "And  they  follow  Me,"  .  .  .  *' and  I  give  unto  them 
I  eternal  life."  3.  "And  they  shall  never  perish."  .  .  .  "Neither  shall  any  man 
^  pluck  them  out  of  My  hand."  By  reading  successively  the  clauses  printed  in  the 
ordinary  type,  we  trace  the  progress  of  the  human  act  and  state ;  by  reading  in  the 
same  way  those  printed  in  italics,  we  trace  the  progress  of  the  Divine  gift ;  by 
reading  each  pair  in  the  order  of  the  text,  we  see  how  at  each  stage  the  gift  is  pro- 
portioned to  the  faculty  which  can  receive  it.  {Archdeacon  Watkins.)  The  sheep 
and  the  shepherd  : — While  far  from  flattering  this  emblem  is  very  consolatory,  for  of 
all  creatures  none  are  so  weak  and  helpless  as  sheep,  and  none  are  the  subjects  of 
such  care.  I.  The  pbopbietob  of  the  sheep.  "  My."  They  are  Christ's — 1.  By 
choice.  2.  By  the  Father's  gift.  We  often  value  a  gift  for  the  donor's  sake 
irrespective  of  its  intrinsic  worth.  3.  He  bought  them.  We  value  that  for  which 
we  have  to  pay.  4.  By  capture.  A  man  esteems  that  which  he  procures  with  risk 
of  life  and  limb.  When  we  were  astray  He  sought,  found,  rescued  us.  5.  By  the 
cheerful  surrender  of  ourselves  to  Him.  We  would  not  belong  to  another  if  we 
might ;  not  even  to  ourselves.  All  this  is — (1)  A  great  honour.  To  belong  to  a 
king  carries  distinction.  (2)  A  guarantee  of  safety.  (3)  The  stamp  of  sanctity. 
We  are  the  Lord's  separated  flock.  (4)  The  key  to  duty.  II.  The  masks  of  xhk 
SHEEP.  1.  Their  ear  mark :  "  Hear  My  voice."  (1)  They  hear  spiritually.  (2) 
They  hear  Christ  in  the  ministry,  Bible,  providences,  &c.,  and  they  distinguish 
His  voice  from  that  of  strangers.  (3)  They  hear  obediently.  2.  Their  foot  mark  : 
"  "  They  follow  Me  " — not  are  driven.  They  follow  Christ — (1)  As  the  Captain  of 
their  salvation.  (2)  As  their  Teacher.  (3)  As  their  Example.  (4)  As  their  Com- 
mander and  Prince.  "  Whatsoever  He  saith  unto  you  do  it."  HI.  The  pbivilegb 
oir  THE  SHEEP.  It  does  not  look  very  large,  but  it  is  amazingly  blessed.  "  I 
know  them,"  the  reverse  of  which  is  "  I  never  knew  you."  He  knows  us — 1.  Per- 
sonally. 2.  Thoroughly.  3.  Helpfully.  (1)  Our  sins  that  He  may  forgive  them. 
(2)  Our  diseases  that  He  may  heal  them,  &c.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Answering 
the  call : — In  a  beautiful  EngUsh  churchyard  is  a  small  grave  remarkable  for  its 
simplicity.  It  is  evidently  the  resting-place  of  a  little  lad  who  loved  his  Saviour. 
The  inscription  is  as  follows  :  "  Freddy  !"..."  Yes,  Father  1 "  {Ibid.)  Christ 
knows  us  thoroughly : — You  have  a  watch,  and  it  will  not  go,  or  it  goes  very 
irregularly,  and  you  give  it  into  the  hands  of  one  who  knows  nothing  about  watches, 
and  he  says,  "  I  will  clean  it  for  you."  He  vrill  do  it  more  harm  than  good.  But 
here  is  the  person  who  made  the  watch.  He  says,  "I  put  every  wheel  into  its  place ; 
I  made  the  whole  of  it  from  beginning  to  end."  You  feel  the  utmost  confldence  in 
entrusting  that  man  with  your  watch.  It  often  cheers  my  heart  to  think  that 
since  the  Lord  made  me  He  can  put  me  right.  (Ibid.)  Christ's  sheep: — 
I.  The  habes.  1.  They  know  His  voice.  This  is  universal  in  the  East.  They 
hear  it — (1)  In  conversion.  (2)  At  the  time  of  duty.  (3)  In  affliction.  (4)  In 
the  hour  of  death.  2.  They  follow  Him — (1)  That  they  may  get  pardon.  (2)  To 
obtain  the  living  water.  (3)  To  share  His  unspeakable  love.  (4)  To  commune 
with  Him  in  prayer.  (5)  To  learn  from  His  example.  II.  Thb  blessingb.  1. 
Christ  knows  tbem.  The  world  does  not ;  the  Church  may  not ;  but  Christ  does, 
whatsoever  their  state  or  condition.  2.  Christ  gives  them  eternal  life.  This 
implies — (1)  Daily  pardon.  (2)  Spiritual  life.  3.  Christ  keeps  them  safely.  (1) 
They  are  in  His  land.  (2)  In  His  Father's  land.  (3)  To  all  eternity.  {Pulpit 
Analyst.)  The  sheep  of  Christ : — These  are  known — I.  Bt  heaeinq.  The  most 
important  of  aU  the  senses,  and  of  scriptural  emblems,  is  the  ear.      (Isa.  Iv.) 


220  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  x 


"  Faith  oometh  by  hearing."    The  sheep  hear — 1.  Christ's  personal  voice.    He 
Btill  speaks  in  the  Scriptures.     Many  do  not  recognize  that  voice,  as  a  stranger 
would  not  recognize  your  child's  voice  in  a  letter;  but  every  syllable  becomes 
audible  to  you.     The  word  of  battle  is  to  the  soldier  not  the  voice  of  the  trumpeter, 
but  the  call  of  his  general.     2.  The  voice  of  truth.    No  voice  but  Christ's  is,  be- 
cause nothing  else  is  permanent.     S.  The  voice  of  grace  and  of  love.    4.  The  voice 
of  power  over  the  world,  the  flesh  and  the  devil.     Hence  it  imparts  courage  to  the 
Christian  soldier  to  go  on  conquering  and  to  conquer.     II.  By  perbonal  appearanck, 
as  we  are  able  to  distinguish  our  friends  and  children.     Christ  knows  His  sheep. 
1.  In  whatever  condition  of  life,  rich  or  poor,  healthy  or  unhealthy,  in  sorrow  or  in 
joy.    2.  Whatever  company  they  may  keep.     3.  Whithersoever  they  go.    4.  What- 
soever they  do.    The  knowledge  in  this  aspect  of  it  is  admonitory  and  encouraging. 
III.  By  following.     They  follow  Christ's  example — 1.  In  obedience  to  His  eaarthly 
parents.      2.  In  conformity  to  all  the  righteousness  of  religion.     3.  In  noncon- 
formity to  the  world,     (if.  Coolte,  D.D.)        They  follow  Me. — Christ's  flock  often 
addressed  by  the  seductive  voice  of  strangers.    They  are  promised  the  treasures, 
honours,  and  pleasures  of  the  world.    They  are  told  that  there  are  other  and 
smoother  ways  of  reaching  heaven.    But  there  is  none  but  this  :  following  Christ. 
I.  In  HOLINESS.    *'  Be  ye  holy  for  I  am  holy."    II.  In  love.     "  By  this  shall  all 
men  know,"  &c.    III.  In  self-denial.    •♦  If  any  man  will  come  after  Me,"  Ac.    IV. 
In  meekness.     "  Let  this  mind  be  in  you,"  <fec.     (W,  H.  Van  Doren,  D.D.)        Be- 
lievers must  not  go  before  Christ : — With  my  brother  I  was  once  climbing  the  Cima 
di  Jazi,  one  of  the  mountains  in  the  chain  of  Monta  Rosa.     When  nearly  at  the 
top,  we  entered  a  dense  fog.     Presently  our  guides  faced  right  about  and  grounded 
their  axes  on  the  frozen  snowed  slope.     My  brotber,  seeing  the  slope  still  beyond, 
and  not  knowing  it  was  merely  the  cornice  overhanging  a  precipice  of  several 
thousand  feet,  rushed  onward.    I  shall  never  forget  their  cry  of  agonized  warning. 
He  stood  for  a  moment  on  the  summit,  and  then,  the  snow  yielding,  he  began  to 
fall  through;  one  of  the  guides,  at  great  risk,  had  rushed  after  him,  and  seizing 
him  by  the  coat,  drew  him  down  to  a  place  of  safety.    So  Christ  is  our  guide  amid 
the  mists  and  the  difficult  place  of  light.    It  is  not  ours  to  go  before  Him.     Where 
He  leads  we  may  go,  when  He  stops,  we  should  stop.    It  is  at  our  peril  if  we  go  » 
etep   beyond.     {Newman   Hall.)         The  test  of  piety : — A  little  girl  was  once 
asked  what  it  was  to  be  a  Christian,  and  she  wisely  answered,   "It  is  to  do 
just  what  Jesus  would  do  if  He  was  a  little  girl  and  lived  at  our  house."        I 
give  unto  them  eternal  life. — Final  perseverance : — This  doctrine  has  been  found  m 
this  passage.    But  we  must  carefully  distinguish  between  the  certainty  of  God'tf 
promises  and  His  infinite  power  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  weakness  and  variable- 
ness of  man's  will  on  the  other.    If  man  falls  at  any  stage  in  his  spiritual  life,  it 
is  not  from  want  of  Divine  grace,  nor  from  the  overwhelming  power  of  adversaries, 
but  from  his  neglect  to  use  that  which  he  may  or  may  not  use.     We  cannot  be 
protected  against  ourselves  in  spite  of  ourselves.     He  who  ceases  to  hear  and  to 
follow  is  thereby  shown  to  be  no  true  believer  (1  John  ii.  19).    The  difficulty  in 
this  case  is  only  one  form  of  the  difficulty  involved  in  the  relation  of  an  infinite  to 
a  finite  being.     The  sense  of  the  Divine  protection  is  at  any  moment  sufficient  to 
inspire  confidence,  but  not  to  render  effort  unnecessary  (comp.  chap.  vi.  37, 39, 40, 44. 
St.  Paul  combines  the  two  thoughts,  Phil.  ii.  12,  &o.).     {Bp.   Westcott.)         The 
security  of  believers : — I.  In  what  sense  they  abb  becuee.     1.  From  the  condem-" 
nation  of  the  law.    2.  From  the  power  of  temptation.    3.  From  the  dominion  of 
Satan.    4.  From  everlasting  death.    IL  The  groonds  op  this  secobity.    1.  Nega- 
tively.    Not  their  own— (1)   RighteousneBS.     (2)   Prudence.     (3)   Strength.      (4) 
Fidelity,     Nor — (5)  The  efficacy  of  the  means  of  grace.     (6)  Iho  security  of  the 
asylum,  i.e.,  the  Church,  to  which  they  have  betaken  themselves.    2.  Positively.    (1) 
The  covenant  of  redemption.    (2)  The  work  of  Christ.     (3)  The  indwelling  of  the 
Spirit.    (4)  The  fidelity  of  God.    III.  Inferences.     1.  Not  that  we  may  live  in  sin 
and  yet  be  saved,  because  the  security  of  believers  is  a  security  from  sin.     This  ia 
the  great  distinction  between  the  doctrine  of  perseverance  and  Antinomianism.    Aa 
it  is  a  contradiction  to  say  that  God  saves  the  lost,  so  it  is  to  say  that  He  preserves 
those  who  indulge  in  sin.    2.  Not  that  we  may  neglect  the  means  of  grace.   For  the 
security  promised  is  as  much  security  from  negligence  as  from  every  other  evil. 
3.  This  truth  is  adapted — (1)  To  fill  the  heart  with  abounding  gratitude  and  love 
to  God.     (2)  To  produce  peace  and  a  filial  spirit.     (3)  To  engender  alacrity  in  the 
service  of  God  and  in  working   out  our  salvation.     (<7.  Hodge,  D.D.)         Life 
eternal : — I.  The  past  history  of  the  people  op  god.    1.  They  had  lost  eternal 


«HAP.  X.]  ST.  JOHN.  221 

life.  Every  one  fell  in  Adam.  2.  They  could  not  have  obtained  life  except  by  its 
being  given.  God  never  works  an  unnecessary  miracle.  If  the  soul  could  save 
itself  God  would  let  it  do  what  it  could.  3.  Eternal  life  is  not  secured  by  merit. 
That  which  is  given  is  unmerited.  Man  merits  nothing  but  death ;  life  is  God's 
free  gift.  4.  Those  who  now  have  it  would  have  perished  but  for  Christ.  Sin  made 
all  men  heirs  of  wrath.  6.  God's  people  have  many  enemies  who  would  pluck  them 
out  of  His  hand.  They  were  once  in  the  hand  of  the  enemy.  II.  Theib  present 
STATE.  Notice  here — 1.  A  gift  received — "life."  Distinguish  between  existence 
and  life.  Existence  may  be  a  curse.  This  life  is — (1)  Spiritual ;  as  distinguished 
from  the  existence  of  a  stone,  and  from  vegetable,  animal,  and  intellectual  life. 
(2)  Mysterious.  Ton  who  have  mental  life  cannot  explain  to  a  horse  what  it  is, 
neither  can  one  explain  spiritual  life  to  those  who  have  it  not.  (3)  Divine.  We 
are  made  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature.  (4)  Heavenly  in  its  nature,  origin  and 
end.  (5)  Energetic.  It  is  the  spring  of  all  activity.  (6)  Eternal.  (7)  Free.  2. 
Preservation  secured.  (1)  '*  They  "  shall  never  perish.  Some  of  their  notions, 
comforts,  and  experiences  may,  but  they  never  shall.  (2)  They  shall  never 
••perish."  The  hfe  in  them  shall  not  be  starved,  beaten,  or  driven  out.  (3) 
••  Never."  8.  A  position  guaranteed — in  Christ's  land.  A  place  of — (1)  Honour. 
We  are  the  jewel  He  wears  on  His  finger.  (2)  Love.  '•  I  have  graven  thee  on  the 
palms  of  my  hands."  (3)  Power.  Christ's  hand  encloses  all  His  people.  (4) 
Property.  "  The  saints  are  in  my  hand."  (5)  Protection.  (6)  Use.  III.  Theib 
OUTLOOK  INTO  THE  FUTURE.  Eternal  life  comprehends  aU  the  future.  Your  spiritual 
existence  will  flourish  when  empires  decay,  when  the  heart  of  this  world  shall  grow 
cold,  when  the  pulse  of  the  sea  shall  cease  to  beat,  and  the  sun's  bright  eye  grow 
dim  with  age.  When,  like  a  moment's  foam  which  melts  into  the  wave  that  bears 
it  the  whole  universe  shall  have  gone,  it  shall  be  well  with  yon.  (G.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  etemallife  of  Cbrist'i  flock : — 1.  The  shepherd  owns  the  flock.  2.  The  shep- 
herd tends  his  flock.  8.  As  the  effect  of  the  shepherd's  training  and  watchful  care 
the  sheep  learn  to  know  him.  4.  The  flock  follow  the  shepherd  wherever  he  may 
lead  them.  L  The  sheep  in  theib  relation  to  the  Shepherd  image  the  members 
or  THE  spiBirnAii  fold  in  theib  relation  to  Jesus  Christ,  the  Shepherd  and 
Bishop  or  theib  souls.  1.  The  Good  Shepherd  is  the  proprietor  of  His  spiritual 
flock.  The  earthly  image  cannot  be  pressed  beyond  proper  limits.  The  sheep  on  the 
Jodffian  hills  were  beasts,  and  their  shepherd  was  a  man.  Between  Christ  and  His 
sheep  there  is  no  such  gulf.  Though  He  is  the  Creator  and  they  are  creatures  yet  He 
that  sanctifieth  and  they  that  are  sanctified  are  of  one  nature.  In  that  nature  He  has 
vanquished  their  enemies  and  has  become  their  Proprietor  as  well  as  their  Brother. 
2.  The  ownership  of  the  Good  Shepherd  in  the  sheep  is  ever  the  same.  Time, 
circumstances,  death  cannot  break  it.  II.  The  Good  Shepherd  oives  his  sheep 
ETERNAL  LIFE.  He  has  given  His  life  for  them ;  He  also  gives  it  to  them.  Errors 
to  be  guarded  against — 1.  That  eternal  hfe  means  everlasting  existence  in  heaven. 
It  is  this  but  it  is  more,  even  the  union  and  communion  of  love  between  God  and 
man  originated  and  perfected  by  Jesus  Christ.  2.  That  it  is  something  future. 
On  the  contrary  Christ  says  explicitly  that  the  believer  hath  it.  It  is  a  present 
possession  and  a  continuous  power,  in.  Therefore  the  sheep  op  the  Good 
Shepherd  shall  never  perish.  1.  There  are  at  least  two  enemies  of  the  flock.  (1) 
The  flesh,  the  wolf  within  the  fold,  the  traitor  within  the  citadel.  (2)  The  spirit 
of  this  world.  2.  The  combined  attacks  of  these  foes  are  vain.  For  Christ — (1) 
protects,  (2)  guides,  (3)  feeds  His  sheep.  Hence  •'  Goodness  and  mercy  follow  them 
all  the  days  of  their  life."  {E.  V.  Gerhart  D.D.)  Eternal  life :— By  vrh&t  a.ida 
can  we  conceive  of  it.  Some  men  say,  describe  a  circle ;  let  the  sun  be  the  centre, 
and  let  the  line  of  circumference  pass  through  the  most  distant  planet.  Let  this 
be  as  one  cycle  of  existence,  and  let  such  cycles  be  innumerable  :  this  is  everlasting 
life.  Traverse  the  woods  and  forests  of  our  planet  during  the  season  of  leaf-fall, 
eoont  the  fallen  leaves,  and  repeat  this  through  endless  years  :  this  is  everlasting 
life.  Visit  the  deserts  and  sea-shores  of  oar  globe,  number  the  sands,  and  let  each 
grain  represent  a  century :  this  is  everlasting  hfe.  Separate  the  waters  of  this  globe 
into  drops,  the  waters  of  all  pools  and  lakes,  of  all  brooks  and  rivers,  of  all  oceans 
and  seas  ;  let  each  drop  represent  a  century :  this  is  everlasting  life.  But  these 
illustrations  represent  duration  only,  continued  existence  might  be  a  curse.  The 
life  which  Jesus  promises  is  pure  life  and  holy.'peaceful  life  and  happy,  tme  life 
and  godly ;  life  in  a  garden  more  paradisaical  than  that  of  Eden  ;  life  in  a  country 
better  far  than  Canaan ;  life  in  a  city  more  sacred  than  Jerusalem,  more  magnificent 
than  Nineveh,  Athens,  or  Borne ;  life  in  a  kingdom  to  which  the  kingdoms  of  this 


222  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cmr.  l. 

world  yield  no  comparison  ;  and  life  in  a  home  as  peaceful  and  as  pure  as  the  heari 
of  God.  (S.  Martin.)  The  Almighty  hand: — I  have  read  of  a  father  and  soa 
who  worked  in  a  deep  mine,  and  one  day  when  they  were  together  in  a  basket  in 
which  the  miners  were  drawn  up  from  the  pit  to  the  surface,  the  son  overbalanced 
himself  and  fell  out  of  the  basket ;  his  father  seized  hold  of  part  of  his  clothing 
and  thus  prevented  his  sudden  fall.  But,  alas  1  this  was  only  for  a  short  time. 
Crying  loudly  for  help,  the  father  held  on  to  his  son's  clothing  as  long  as  he  wa» 
able,  and  then  his  hand  failing  in  its  power  to  bear  up  so  heavy  a  burden,  relaxed 
its  hold,  and  his  son  fell  and  perished.  Only  the  hand  of  Jesus  is  all-sufficieni 
and  almighty,  and  it  never  fails.  (R.  Brewin.)  The  safety  of  the  saints : — 
A  swallow  having  built  its  nest  upon  the  tent  oJ  Charles  Y.,  the  emperor 
generously  commanded  that  the  tent  should  not  be  taken  down  when  the 
cajnp  removed,  but  should  remain  until  the  yoong  birds  were  ready  to  fly.  Was 
there  such  gentleness  in  the  heart  of  a  soldier  towards  a  poor  bird  which  was 
not  of  his  making,  and  shall  the  Lord  deal  hardly  with  his  creatures  when  they 
venture  to  put  their  trust  in  Him !  Be  assured  He  hath  a  great  love  to  those 
trembling  souls  that  fly  for  shelter  to  His  royal  courts.  He  that  buildeth  his  nest 
npon  a  Divine  promise  shall  find  it  abide  and  remain  until  he  shall  fly  away  to  the 
land  where  promises  are  lost  in  fulfilments.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  'SM~,*S^^ 
of  the  saints : — Plutarch,  in  relating  Alexander's  wars,  says,  that  when  he  came 
to  besiege  a  certain  people  who  dwelt  upon  a  rock,  they  jeered  him,  and  asked 
him  "  whether  his  soldiers  had  wings  or  not ;  unless  your  soldiers  can  fly  in  the 
air  we  fear  you  not. "  Such  is  the  safety  of  God's  people ;  he  can  set  them  upon  a 
rock,  so  high  that  no  ladder  can  be  found  long  enough  to  scale  their  habitations, 
nor  any  artillery  or  engine  strong  enough  to  batter  them  down,  so  that  unless  their 
adversaries  have  more  than  eagle's  wiugs  to  soar  higher  than  God  Himself,  they 
cannot  do  them  the  least  annoyance ;  their  place  of  defence  is  the  munition  of 
rocks,  safe  enough  from  all  dangers.  The  least  saints  shall  not  perish : — They  that 
work  in  gold  or  silver  let  fall  many  a  bit  to  the  ground,  yet  they  do  not  intend  to 
lose  it  so,  but  sweep  the  shop,  and  keep  the  very  sweepings  safe,  so  that  which  they 
cannot  at  present  discover  the  refiner  brings  to  light.  Thus,  the  world  is  God's 
workshop,  many  a  dear  child  of  God  suffers  and  falls  to  the  ground  by  banishment, 
imprisonment,  sorrow,  sickness,  &c.,  but  they  must  not  be  lost  thus,  God  will 
search  the  very  sweepings,  and  gather  them  out  of  the  very  trash,  and  preserve 
them.  What  though  they  be  slightly  set  by  here  in  this  world,  and  lie  amongst  the 
pots,  no  better  accounted  of  than  the  rubbish  and  refuse  of  the  earth  ?  God  will 
find  a  time  to  make  them  up  amongst  the  rest  of  His  jewels.  Believers  need 
not  fear  that  they,  shall  perish  : — A  man  crossed  the  Mississippi  on  the  Ice, 
and  feliring  it  was  too  thin,  began  to  crawl  on  his  hands  and  knees  m  great 
terror ;  but  when  he  gained  the  opposite  shore,  all  worn  out,  another  man  drove 
past  him  gaily,  sitting  upon  a  sledge  loaded  with  pig-iron.  That  is  just  the  way 
most  Christians  go  up  to  the  heavenly  Canaan,  trembling  at  every  step  lest  the 
promises  shall  break  under  their  feet,  when  really  they  are  secure  enough  for  us  to 
hold  our  heads  and  sing  with  confidence  as  we  march  to  the  better  land.  Tlu_ 
safety  of  the  saints : — Not  long  before  he  died  James  Janeway  blessed  God^or 
flie'assurance  of  ffis  love,  and  said  he  could  now  as  easily  die  as  shut  his  eyes,  adding 
"  Here  I  am  longing  to  be  silent  in  the  dust  and  to  enjoy  Christ  in  glory.  It  is  not 
worth  while  to  weep  for  me.  Then,  remembering  how  busy  the  devil  had  been 
about  him,  he  thanked  God  for  rebuking  him.  (Memoir  of  J,  Janeway. )  jrhe_ 
safety  of  the  saints : — "  I  want  to  talk  to  you  about  heaven,"  said  a  dying  parenfto 
a  member  of  his  family,  '*  we  may  not  be  spared  to  each  other  long."  His  beloved 
daughter  exclaimed,  "  Surely  you  do  not  think  there  is  any  danger."  He  replied, 
calmly,  '•  Danger,  my  darling  1  Oh,  do  not  use  that  word.  There  can  be  no  danger 
to  the  Christian  whatever  may  happen.  All  is  right  I  All  is  well  I  God  is  love  t 
All  is  well  1  Everlastingly  well  I  Everlastingly  well  1  (John  Stevenson.)  My  Father 
which  gave  them  Me. — If  He  was  given  them,  then — I.  Hb  is  theib  absolutb 
Pbopbietob.  This  is  undeniable.  All  souls  are  His.  IL  It  must  bb  xs  habhomt 
WITH  THEIB  OWN  FBEB  CONSENT.  Souls  Cannot  be  given  away  as  material  objects 
can.  They  are  essentially  free,  and  the  great  Father  would  not  outrage  the  nature 
of  His  offspring.  III.  It  is  not  in  scch  a  way  as  to  involve  the  bencnciatiom 
or  His  claim  upoh  thbm.  When  we  give  a  thing  away,  we  cease  to  have  any  right 
to  it.  God  will  never  relinquish  His  right  to  the  existence,  love,  reverence  and 
service  of  seals.  Indeed  in  this  passage  Christ  tells  us  that  they  are  still  in  His 
Father's  hand.    (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)        Ood  an  impregnable  Refuge : — The  Frenob 


CHAP.  X.]  ST.  JOHN.  228 

were  very  proud  of  the  stronghold  of  Metz,  and  over  one  of  the  principal 
entrances  to  it  was  this  inscription,  deeply  cut  in  the  stone,  "  This  fortress 
has  been  nine  times  besieged,  but  has  never  been  taken."  But  when  the  Prussian 
army  swept  over  the  borders  of  France  and  laid  seige  to  this  far-famed  place  of 
defence,  it  was  not  long  before  those  who  had  taken  shelter  within  its 
walls  found  that  their  hiding-place  was  not  a  safe  one,  and  soon  the  flag 
of  the  victorious  Germans  floated  above  its  walls,  and  the  French  soldiers 
within  it  fell  into  the  hands  of  their  enemies.  God  is  a  strong  refuge,  and 
will  never  give  up  those  who  trust  in  Him,  (R.  Brewin.)  The  safety  of 
believers: — Backed  by  the  Almighty  I  As  the  little  coastable  in  the  Bay  State 
said  to  the  fellow  who  threatened  him,  "If  you  shake  me  you  shake  the  whole 
State  of  Massachussetts."  It  is  a  great  thing  to  be  not  a  forlorn  little  wheel 
that  must  be  turned  by  hand,  but  one  geared  into  the  machinery  of  God's  eternal 
laws  of  moral  order.  I  and  My  Father  are  One. — The  Divinity  of  Christ: — 
That  Christ  in  such  assertions  claimed  absolute  Divinity  is  evident  from  the 
conduct  of  the  Jews.  In  scarcely  any  other  case  did  they  seek  to  lay  violent  hands 
upon  Him.  When  He  exposed  their  sius  they  restrained  their  rage  and  waited  for 
their  revenge.  But  at  such  assertions  as  these  their  pent-up  wrath  burst  forth  in 
indignation  at  His  presumption,  or  in  violent  action.  Now,  if  they  had  been 
misunderstood  Jesus  would  have  explained  them  away ;  but  instead  of  that  He 
accepts  the  interpretation  of  His  words  and  proceeds  to  argue  from  it,  and,  further, 
it  was  for  standing  by  this  interpretation  that  He  died.  We  have  here  a  claim  to — 
I.  Unity  of  nature.  The  mysterious  thing  is  that  He  who  made  this  claim  was  a 
man  with  whom  the  Jews  had  been  long  familiar.  He  had  been  in  being  before 
His  human  nature  was  formed  (chap.  viii.  58 ;  zvii.  5).  He  had  come  forth  from  the 
Father  to  assume  that  human  nature,  and  now  clad  in  it  He  was  conscious  of  no 
change  in  His  Divine  nature.  This  unity —  1.  Implies  absolute  equality  with  the 
Father  (PhiL  ii.  6).  There  is  not  one  perfection  to  be  found  in  the  First  person  of 
the  Godhead  that  does  not  exist  undimmed  in  splendour  in  the  Second.  We  are  to 
conceive  of  Christ  as  possessing  all  the  Father's  self-sufficiency,  eternity,  onmi- 
potence,  holiness,  &c.,  "  All  that  the  Father  hath  is  Mine."  2.  Is  claimed  by  Christ 
through  His  Sonship.  It  is  as  the  Son  He  always  regards  Himself,  even  when 
speaking  most  strongly  of  His  equality.  It  is  not  a  separate  independent  equality, 
but  equality  through  union;  therefore  One  with  the  Father  because  Son  of  the 
Father — possessing  the  Father's  nature  by  virtue  of  Sonship.  This  relation  is 
never  lost  sight  of,  and  all  His  claims  to  Divinity  are  founded  upon  it.  This  shows 
that  He  is  Son  not  merely  through  His  incarnation,  but  eternally.  If  Son  in 
human  nature  only,  He  cannot  be  in  any  special  sense  Son  of  the  Father,  still  less 
"  only  begotten."  3.  Preserves  the  distinction  between  the  Father  and  the  Son. 
Unity  is  not  identity.  One  in  all  that  is  essential  to  the  Godhead,  but  two  distinct 
persons.  When  the  words  were  uttered  the  distinction  was  evident :  the  Father  waa 
in  heaven  on  the  throne  of  Majesty ;  the  Son  was  on  earth  in  the  form  of  a  Servant. 
4.  Does  not  contradict  the  assertion,  "  My  Father  is  greater  than  I "  (chap.  xiv.  28), 
because  just  before  He  had  claimed  unity  with  the  Father  (chap.  xiv.  10,  11),  It  is 
simply  a  recognition  of  the  filial  relation.  The  Father's  glory  isundenied  ;  the  Son's 
is  from  the  Father  (chap.  v.  26).  In  this  sense  only  can  the  Father  be  greater,  and  this 
is  consistent  with  perfect  union  and  equality.  5.  Is  confessedly  mysterious.  Let  us 
not  then  seek  to  break  irreverently  through  and  gaze ;  but  reverently  and  joyfully 
accept  the  truth  that  we  have  a  Saviour  so  qualified  to  save.  IL  Unity  o»  pdbpose. 
Between  such  a  Father  and  such  a  Son  there  can  be  no  collision — unity  of  nature 
must  embrace  unity  of  will.  We  should  not  need  to  dwell  upon  this,  but  for  the 
perversion  of  the  doctrine  of  the  atonement,  which  has  been  represented  as  implying 
an  unwillingness  of  God  to  pardon,  which  had  to  be  propitiated  by  the  sacrifice  of 
Christ.  The  New  Testament  nowhere  teaches  this  God-dishonouring  tenet  (chap. 
Ui.  16).  The  purpose  to  save  is  represented  as  originating  with  the  Father,  and 
voluntarily  accepted  by  the  Son.  lu  the  execution  of  that  purpose  Jesus  repeatedly 
testifies  that  He  came  to  do  His  Father's  will.  The  Son  died,  not  because  the 
Father  was  unwilling,  but  unable  to  save  them  otherwise.  III.  Unity  of  Action. 
(ver.  87,  &c.).  This  so  follows  from  the  former  part  of  the  subject,  that  there  is  no 
need  to  enlarge  upon  it.  The  Bible  abounds  with  illustrations  of  it — in  Creation, 
Providence,  and  redemption.  Conclusion  :  Jesus  makes  this  unity  the  type  of  that 
which  should  exist  between  His  people  and  Himself,  and  amongst  ourselves  (chap, 
xvii.  20-23).  ( W.  S.  Dewstoe).  The  Divinity  of  Chrint : — The  oneness  of  our  Lord 
with  the  Father  is  demonstrated  by  the  following  hne  of  argument.    L    Divnw 


224  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  X 

KAME8  ABB  GivBN  TO  HiM.  1.  God.  This  term  is  used  sometimes  in  a  secondary 
sense  of  Moses  (Exod.  vii.  1),  and  magistrates,  &o.  (Exod.  xxii.  28  ;  Psa.  Ixxxii.  1, 6), 
because  of  some  imperfect  resemblance  tliej  bear  to  God  in  some  one  particular. 
But  it  is  in  no  secondary  or  figurative  sense  that  Christ  bears  this  name  (Matt.  L 
23 ;  John  i.  1 ;  xx.  28;  Acts  xx.  28 ;  1  Tim.  iii.  16 ;  Heb.  i.  8 ;  2  Pet.  i.  1) ;  and  as 
if  to  shut  out  this  sense  He  is  called  "  the  Mighty  God,"  "  God  over  all,"  "  The 
true  God,  "  The  great  God,"  2.  Jehovah,  the  incommunicable  name,  significant  of 
eternal,  independent,  and  immutable  existence  (Isa.  vi.  6  ef.  John  xii,  41 ;  Jer. 
xxiii.  5,  6  ;  Joel  ii.  32  cf.  Kom.  x.  13 ;  Isa.  xi.  3  cf.  Matt.  iii.  3 ;  Isa.  viii.  13,  14  cf. 
1  Pet.  ii.  7,  8 ;  Zech.  xii.  1,  10  cf.  John  xix.  37).  II.  Divinb  perfections  abb 
ASCBiBED  TO  HiM.  1.  Eternal  existence  (Isa.  ix.  6 ;  Micah  v.  2  ;  John  i.  2 ;  Isa. 
xliv.  6  cf.  Eev.  i.  11 ;  ii.  8  ;  xxii.  13).  2.  Omnipresence  (Matt,  xviii.  20;  xxviii.  20 ; 
John  iii.  13).  3.  Omniscience  (Jolm  ii.  24,  25  ;  xxi.  17;  Col.  iii.  3 ;  Rev.  ii.  23  cf, 
1  Kings  viii.  39).  4.  Omnipotence  (Isa.  ix.  6 ;  Eev.  i.  8 ;  Phil.  iii.  21).  5.  Immu- 
tability (Heb.  1.  10-12 ;  xiii.  8).  6.  Every  attribute  of  the  Father  (John  xvi.  15 ; 
Col.  ii.  9).  III.  Divine  wobks  abe  peefobmed  by  Him.  1.  Creation  (John  L 
3-10 ;  Eph.  iii.  9 ;  Col.  i.  16 ;  Heb.  i.  2-10).  2.  Providential  government  (Matt, 
xxviii.  18  ;  Luke  x.  22  ;  John  iii.  35  ;  xvii.  2  ;  Acts  x.  36  ;  Rom.  xiv.  9  ;  Eph.  i.  22 ; 
Col.  i.  17 ;  Heb.  i.  3  ;  Eev.  xvii.  14).  3.  The  forgiveness  of  sins  (Matt.  ix.  2-7 ; 
Mark  ii.  7-10 ;  Col.  iii.  13).  4.  The  final  dissolution  and  renewal  of  all  things 
(Heb.  i.  12 ;  Phil.  iii.  21 ;  Rev.  xxi.  5).  6.  The  resurrection  and  universal  judgment 
(John  V.  22,  27-29  ;  Phil.  iii.  20,  21 ;  Matt.  xxv.  31,  32 ;  Acts  i.  42 ;  xvii.  31 ;  Rom. 
xvi.  10 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  1).  IV.  Divine  worship  is  paid  to  Him.  1.  This  worship  is 
recognized  as  the  distinguishing  peculiarity  of  New  Testament  saints  (Acts  ix.  14, 
21 ;  1  Cor.  i.  2 ;  Rom.  x.  12,  13).  2.  This  worship  has  been  actually  paid  by 
inspired  men  (Luke  xxiv.  51,  52 ;  Acts  i.  24 ;  vii.  59,  60 ;  2  Cor.  xii.  8,  9 ;  1  Thess. 
ML  11, 12 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  16, 17 ;  1  Tim.  i.  2 ;  Rev.  i.  5).  3.  Angels  have  joined  in 
this  worship  (Heb.  i.  6 ;  Eev.  v.  11,  12).  4.  Every  creature  in  the  universe  will 
offer  it  (Phil.  iL  9-11 ;  Rev.  v.  13,  14).  V.  Divinb  equality  is  claimed  by  Him. 
(John  xiv.  9 ;  xvi.  15 ;  x.  30)  This  claim  we  must  acknowlege,  or  accept  the 
terrible  alternative  that  He  was  destitute  of  the  human  excellencies  of  humility 
and  truthfulness.  VL  His  name  is  conjoined  with  that  of  the  Fatheb.  1.  In 
the  promises  He  made  (John  xiv.  21-23).  2.  In  the  embassy  of  the  apostles 
(Titus  1 ;  Gal.  i.  1).  8.  In  the  designation  of  the  Churches  addressed  (1  Cor,  L  2 ; 
Eph.  i.  1. ;  Phil.  i.  1 ;  1  and  2  Thess.  i.  1).  4.  In  benedictions  besought  (1  Tim. 
i.  2 ;  1  Thess.  iii.  11 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  16,  17  ;  1  Cor.  xiii.  14).  5.  In  the  worship  of 
heaven  (Rev.  v.  13  ;  vii.  10).  To  associate  the  Creator  with  a  creature  in  such  away 
would  for  ever  destroy  the  infinite  distinction  between  God  and  man.  {B.  Field). 
The  oneness  of  Christ  with  the  Father : — What  kind  of  unity  is  that  which  the 
context  obliges  us  to  see  in  this  solemn  statement  ?  Is  it  such  a  unity  as  that 
which  our  Lord  desired  for  His  followers  in  His  intercessory  prayer  ;  a  unity  of 
spiritual  communion,  of  reciprocal  love,  of  common  participation  in  an  imparted 
heaven-sent  nature  (chap.  xvii.  11,  22,  23)  ?  Is  it  a  unity  of  design  and  co-operation, 
such  as  that  which,  in  varying  degrees,  is  shared  by  all  true  workers  with  God  (1  Cor. 
iii.  8)  ?  How  would  either  of  these  lower  unities  sustain  the  full  sense  of  the 
context,  which  represents  the  hand  of  the  Son  as  one  with  the  hand,  i.e.,  with  the 
love  and  power  of  the  Father,  securing  to  the  souls  of  men  an  effectual  preservation 
from  eternal  ruin  ?  A  unity  like  this  must  be  a  dynamic  unity,  as  distinct  from 
any  mere  moral  or  intellectual  union,  such  as  might  exist  between  a  creature  and 
its  God.  Deny  this  dynamic  imity,  and  you  destroy  the  internal  connection  of  the 
passage ;  admit  it,  and  you  admit,  by  necessary  implication,  a  unity  of  Essence. 
The  power  of  the  Son,  which  shields  the  redeemed  from  the  foes  of  their  salvation, 
is  the  very  power  of  the  Father ;  and  this  identity  of  power  is  itself  the  outflow 
and  manifestation  of  a  oneness  of  nature.  Not  that  at  this  height  of  contem- 
plation the  person  of  the  Son,  so  distinctly  manifested  just  now  in  the  work  of 
guarding  His  redeemed,  melts  away  into  any  mere  aspect  or  relation  of  the  Divine 
Being  in  His  dealing  with  His  creatures.  As  St.  Augustine  observes,  the  "  unum  " 
saves  ns  from  the  oharabdis  of  Arianism ;  the  "  sumus  "  is  our  safeguard  from  the 
Scylla  of  Sabellius.  The  Son  within  the  incommunicable  unity  of  God  is  still 
Himself ;  He  is  not  the  Father  but  the  Son.  Yet  this  personal  subsistence  is  in  the 
mystery  of  the  Divine  life  strictly  compatible  with  unity  of  essence ;  the  Father 
and  the  Son  are  one  Thing.  {Canon  Liddon).  ChrisVs  two  natures : — The 
picture  produced  in  the  stereopticon  is  fuller,  rounder,  and  more  natural  than  the 
game  picture  seen  without  the  use  of  that  instrument.    But  to  produce  the  8tere»> 


CHAP.  X.]  ST.  JOHN.  tti 

Bcopic  picture  there  must  be  two  pictures  blended  into  one  by  the  use  of  the  stere- 
opticon,  and  both  the  eyes  of  the  observer  are  brought  into  requisition  at  the  same 
time,  looking  each  through  a  separate  lens.  Thus  Christ  is  only  seen  in  His  true 
and  proper  light  when  the  record  of  His  human  nature  and  the  statement  of  His 
divine  are  blended.  It  is  a  flat  unfinished  Christ  with  either  left  out.  But  it  is  as 
seen  in  the  Word,  with  the  moral  and  mental  powers  of  our  being  both  engaged  in 
the  consideration,  and  thus  only,  that  we  get  the  full  and  true  result.  (Pulpit 
Treasury.)  Christ  entitled  to  Divine  honours: — The  Emperor  Theodosius  being 
seduced  from  the  truth  by  Arian  teachers,  Bishop  Amphilocus,  at  Bome,  took  the 
following  eccentric  means  of  convincing  him  of  his  error.  Theodosius  had  raised 
his  son,  Arcadius,  to  the  dignity  of  Caesar.  Together  in  royal  state  they  received 
the  homage  of  their  subjects.  Amphilochus,  on  one  of  these  occasions  presented 
himself  and  bowed  his  knee  before  the  emperor,  but  took  no  notice  of  his  son. 
Theodosius,  offended,  exclaimed  :  "  Know  you  not  that  I  have  made  my  son  the 
partner  of  my  throne  ?  "  The  bishop  thereupon  turned  on  Arcadius,  put  his  hands 
upon  his  head,  and  invoked  a  blessing  upon  him,  and  then  turned  to  go  away. 
Naturally  dissatisfied  with  patronage  in  place  of  homage,  Theodosius  asked  in 
angry  tones  if  that  was  all  the  respect  the  bishop  paid  to  an  occupant  of  the 
throne,  but  the  latter  replied  :  "  Sire,  you  are  angry  with  me  for  not  paying  your 
son  equal  honour  with  yourself ;  what  mu«t  God  think  of  you  for  encouraging  those 
who  insult  His  equal  Son  in  every  part  of  your  empire  ?  "  The  unity  of  God  to 
be  believed  : — Out  of  the  harbour  of  Goodwin  Sands  the  pilot  cannot  make  forth, 
they  say,  unless  he  so  steer  his  ship  that  he  bring  two  steeples  so  even  in  his  sight 
that  they  appear  one.  So  it  is  here.  {J.  Trapp.)  The  unity  of  God: — 
"  Sitting  lately,"  says  one,  "  in  a  public  room  at  Brighton,  where  an  infidel  was 
haranguing  the  company  upon  the  absurdities  of  the  Christian  religion,  I  could  not 
but  be  pleased  to  see  how  easily  his  reasoning  pride  was  put  to  shame.  He  quoted 
those  passages  '  I  and  My  Father  are  one  ' ;  •  I  in  them  and  thou  in  Me ' ;  and 
that  there  are  three  persons  in  one  God.  Finding  his  auditors  not  disposed  to 
applaud  his  blasphemy,  he  turned  to  one  gentleman,  and  said  with  an  oath,  »Do 
you  believe  such  nonsense  ?  '  The  gentleman  replied,  "  Tell  me  how  that  candle 
bums  ?  '  *  Why,'  answered  he,  *  the  tallow,  the  cotton,  and  the  atmospheric  air 
produce  the  light.'  '  Then  they  make  one  light,  do  they  not  ?  '  •  Yes. '  ♦  Will  you 
tell  me  how  they  are  one  in  the  other,  and  yet  but  one  light?'  •  No,  I  cannot.* 
•  But  you  believe  it  ? '  He  could  not  say  he  did  not.  The  company  instantly  made 
the  application,  by  smiling  at  his  folly  ;  upon  which  the  conversation  was  changed." 
{Anecdotes  on  New  Testament  Texts.) 

Vers.  3.\-38.  Then  the  Jews  took  up  stones  a^aln. — Religious  intolerance 
persecutes  a  man  on  account  of — I.  His  relioiods  opinions.  The  Jews  took  up 
stones  merely  because  Christ  had  proclaimed  a  doctrine  which  was  in  conflict  with 
their  opinions,  prejudices,  interests  and  pride.  This  intolerance  has  been  rampant 
in  every  age.  It  cannot  now  inflict  physical  suffering,  but  it  employs  means  more 
subtle  and  powerful  to  wound  the  supposed  herrtic.  Such  conduct  is — 1.  Most 
absurd.  Such  are  the  constitutional  differences  in  minds  and  educational  processes 
that  it  is  almost  impossible  for  two  persons  to  have  exactly  the  same  view  of  the 
same  subject.  The  inevitable  diversity  is  interesting  and  useful ;  it  stimulates  dis- 
cussion and  promotes  thought.  Were  aU  to  think  alike  how  monotonous  would  be 
the  social  life  of  the  world !  2.  Most  arrogant.  There  is  no  greater  audacity  than 
for  an  individual  or  a  Church  to  attempt  to  bring  all  men's  opinions  to  one 
theological  standard.  Who  were  Luther,  Calvin,  Knox,  Wesley  that  men  should 
be  bound  to  accept  their  opinions  ?  "  Jesus  I  know,  and  Paul,  &c."  Let  every  man 
be  fully  persuaded  in  his  own  mind."  II.  Howeveb  excellent  His  life  jut  bb 
(ver.  32.)  Numerous  were  the  works  of  Christ,  and  all  to  bless  men  both  in  body 
and  soul.  "  He  went  about  doing  good."  This  was  not  denied,  but  tacitly 
admitted,  and  yet  though  they  knew  that  He  was  their  greatest  Benefactor,  and 
that  His  character  was  one  of  exemplary  excellence,  because  His  doctrine  clashed 
with  their  opinions  they  stoned  Him.  Good  men  here  in  England  are  stoned  for 
their  opinions,  not  with  flint  or  granite,  but  with  slander  and  social  influences. 
Bigots  of  all  sects  throw  stones  at  men,  not  because  they  are  not  good,  but  because 
they  are  not  of  their  sect  (ver.  33).  We  stone  thee  because  Thou  art  not  one  of  us. 
III.  However  strong  the  arguments  in  their  favour  (vers.  34-36).  Christ  seema 
to  say  that  even  in  the  assumption  that  He  was  no  more  than  man  there  was  no 
blasphemy.  Their  law  called  magistrates  "  goda  "  (Psa.  Ixxxii.  6).  And  if  they 
vol..  IL  15 


226  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  ^ 

allowed  that,  what  hlasphemy  was  there  in  Him  who  "  was  sanctified  by  the  Father," 
••  One  with  the  Father,"  and  who,  as  they  were  bound  to  acknowledge,  performecl 
works  which  those  whom  their  law  called  "  gods  "  never  had  accomplished  and 
never  could  ?  If  your  Scriptures  call  men  gods  "  unto  whom  the  Word  of  God  came," 
surely  there  can  be  no  blasphemy  in  Me  representing  Myself  as  God,  who  am  the 
"  Word  of  God  "  itself.  The  argument  is  a  minori  ad  magus.  In  what  respect  ? 
1.  From  those  blameworthy  judges  and  their  lofty  title  to  Christ.  2,  From  those 
who  derived  their  dignity  from  the  Mosaic  institution  to  Him  whom  God  hath 
sanctified.  3.  From  those  to  whom  the  Word  of  God  did  but  come,  to  Him  who 
was  the  Word  of  God.  But  His  argument  went  for  nothing,  although  it  was  so  clear 
and  conclusive.  Conclusion  :  What  an  accursed  thing  this  religious  intolerance  is  I 
Absurd,  arrogant,  cruel,  regardless  of  moral  excellence,  dead  to  argument,  alive 
only  to  what  it  deems  heresy.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  courage  of  Christ : — 

Holy  boldness  honours  the  gospel.  In  the  olden  times,  when  Oriental  despots  had 
things  pretty  much  their  own  way,  they  expected  all  ambassadors  from  the  West 
to  lay  their  mouths  in  the  dust  if  permitted  to  appear  before  his  Celestial  Bright- 
ness, the  Brother  of  the  Sun  and  the  Cousin  of  the  Moon.  Certain  money-loving 
traders  agreed  to  all  this,  and  ate  dust  as  readily  as  reptiles  ;  but,  when  England 
Bent  her  ambassadors  abroad,  the  daring  islanders  stood  bolt-upright.  They  were 
told  that  they  could  not  be  indulged  with  a  vision  of  the  Brother  of  the  Sun  and 
Cousin  of  the  Moon,  without  going  down  on  their  hands  and  knees.  "  Very  well," 
said  the  Englishmen,  "  we  will  dispense  with  the  luxury ;  but  tell  his  Celestial 
Splendour,  that  it  is  very  likely  that  his  Serenity  will  hear  our  cannon  at  his  palace 
gates  before  long,  and  that  their  booming  is  not  quite  so  harmless  as  the  cooing  o£ 
his  Sublimity's  doves."  When  it  was  seen  that  ambassadors  of  the  British  Crown 
were  no  cringing  petitioners,  our  empire  rose  in  the  respect  of  Oriental  nations.  It 
must  be  just  so  with  the  cross  of  Christ.  Our  cowardice  has  subjected  the  gospel 
to  contempt.  Jesus  was  humble,  and  His  servants  must  not  be  proud ;  but  Jesu3 
was  never  mean  or  cowardly,  nor  must  His  servants  be.  There  was  no  braver  man 
than  Christ  upon  earth.  The  Scripture  cannot  be  broken. — The  integrity 
of  Scripture : — I.  The  gband  pbinciple  asserted.  It  is  impossible  to  shut  our 
eyes  to  the  fact  that  a  teaching  is  gaining  ground  whose  fundamental  principle 
is  opposed  to  this,  and  which  affirms  that  the  Scripture  can  be  broken.  It 
is  of  the  first  importance  that  we  should  distinctly  understand  the  amount 
of  authority  which  is  due  to  the  Bible.  The  Bomanists  say  that  tradition 
is  of  co-ordinate  authority  with  the  Bible ;  the  Rationalists  that  only  part 
of  the  Bible  is  authoritative,  and  what  portions  are  to  be  received  as  such 
is  determined  by  the  "  verifying  faculty."  When  Christ  endorses,  as  He  does 
in  the  text,  the  Old  Testament,  these  philosophers  affirm  that  He  was  liable 
to  mistake,  and  so  overthrew  His  prophetic  office  and  nullify  His  mission, 
which  was  to  "  bear  witness  to  the  Truth."  But  turn  from  theory  to  fact,  and  we 
find  that  Christ's  affirmation  is  proved.  1.  From  the  history  of  the  Jews,  who  from 
their  first  settlement  as  a  nation  down  to  the  present  moment  show  in  all  their 
vicissitudes  that  the  Scripture  cannot  be  broken.  2.  From  the  fate  of  heathen 
nations.  Nineveh,  Babylon,  Tyre,  and  Sidon,  <fec.,  verify  the  predictions  to  the  very 
letter.  8.  The  life  of  our  Lord,  every  detail  of  which  from  Bethlehem  and  Calvary 
was  detailed  beforehand,  and  occurred  "  that  it  might  be  fulfilled."  H.  The  basis 
ON  WHICH  THE  PBINCIPLE  BESTS.  1.  That  mau's  word  may  be  broken.  Why  is  it 
that  friends  and  relatives  in  the  slightest  business  transaction  have  a  legal  and 
written  form?  (I)  Because  man  is  changeable.  That  which  he  honestly  and 
determinately  promises  to-day  he  may  see  reasons  to  change  to-morrow,  or  he  may 
change  from  simple  fickleness.  (2)  Man  is  sometimes  unfaithful,  and  deliberately 
false  to  his  engagements.  (3)  Man  is  often  unable  to  fulfil  his  promises  and 
obligations,  however  willing  he  may  be.  2.  That  for  contrary  reasons  God's  word 
cannot  be  broken.  (1)  God  is  unchangeable.  "  His  counsel  shall  stand."  (2)  God 
is  faithfuL  "  God  is  not  a  man  that  He  should  lie."  (3)  God  is  able.  These 
points  are  well  illustrated  in  the  promise  to  Abraham.  III.  Application.  1.  For 
comfort.  (1)  To  the  Church.  In  every  age  God's  people  have  been  depressed  by 
the  taunt,  "  Where  is  the  promise  of  His  coming?  "  But  God  takes  time  to  fulfil 
His  word.  Be  patient,  it  cannot  be  broken.  (2)  To  the  individual  believer.  He 
has  delivered  in  six  troubles  and  He  will  deliver  in  seven.  Past  promises  fulfilled 
are  assurances  that  His  word  cannot  be  broken,  2.  For  warning.  Though  God't 
threatenings  be  long  delayed  for  merciful  reasons  they  will  assuredly  be  fulfilled, 
{Canon  Miller.)        Christ's  reverence  for  Scripture : — I.  What  is  meant  by  Scbip< 


OTAF.  X.]  ST.  JOHN.  J2T 

TUBE  ?  The  Old  Testament  as  accepted  by  the  Jews  of  our  Lord's  Day.  1.  This 
fixes  the  canon  of  Scripture  for  Christians  and  excludes  the  apocrypha.  2.  This 
stamps  the  Old  Testament  with  a  Divine  authority,  against  which  it  is  infidelity  and 
blasphemy  to  protest.  11.  How  did  Chbist  deal  with  Scbiptobe?  1.  He  was 
aealous  in  fulfilling  it.  In  looking  at  Christ  as  our  example  this  is  to  be  observed. 
Scripture  declares  what  Christ  would  be  and  do  and  suffer,  and  all  this  He  was  and  did 
a.nd  suffered  "  that  the  Scriptures  might  be  fulfilled."  It  tells  us  too  what  we  must 
be  and  do  and  suffer,  and  in  order  to  these  we  must  follow  Christ,  and  in  the  earnest 
eager  spirit  in  which  He  saw  that  no  jot  or  title  of  the  word  concerning  Him  was 
broken.  2.  He  submitted  to  it.  The  only  man  capable  of  judging  for  Himself 
always  submitted  His  judgment  to  the  written  Word.  (1)  As  the  servant  of  God 
He  came  to  do  God's  will ;  but  that  will  was  not  God's  secret  will,  but  His  will  aa 
declared  in  the  Bible.  (2)  He  submitted  to  that  will  without  question,  and  with 
the  utmost  joyfulnesa.  III.  The  use  Chbist  made  of  Scbiptuee.  1.  As  a  weapon 
against  His  enemies.  To  the  devil  in  the  wilderness  He  said,  "  It  is  written,"  and 
to  the  Sadducees  about  the  Eesurrection  (Matt.  xxii).  2,  As  His  authority.  When  He 
drove  the  money  changers  from  the  Temple,  His  only  warrant  for  doing  so  was  "  Itia 
written."  On  the  same  grounds  He  defended  His  disciples  for  plucking  com  on  the 
Sabbath.  3,  As  the  court  of  final  appeal  in  different  questions  (Matt.  xix).  4.  As  Hia 
inspiration  for  suffering  (Luke  xviii.).  5.  As  a  consolation  in  trials.  {J.  W.  Reeve,  M.A .) 
If  I  do  not  the  works  of  My  Father,  believe  Me  not. — The  works  of  Jesm  the 
works  of  God : — The  works  of  God  must  necessarily  have  relation  to  the  attributea 
of  God,  and  in  their  nature  must  partake  of  His.  Will  the  works  of  Jesus  sustain 
this  test?  If  so,  then  His  claim  to  be  one  with  the  Father  is  made  out.  Note, 
then,  that  the  works  of  Jesus  were — I.  Wobks  op  meeoy  and  love,  and  this  with- 
out exception ;  the  seeming  exceptions  when  fuUy  examined  are  seen  not  to  be  really 
BO.  Consistently  and  continuously  He  went  about  doing  good.  All  succeeding 
time  has  acknowledged  the  influence  of  heavenly  love  which  eighteen  hundred 
years  ago  was  manifested.  Charity  has  ever  taken  her  lessons  from  it.  He  was 
merciful  as  His  Father  was  merciful ;  and  His  mercy  on  the  diseased  bore  witness 
then,  as  His  mercy  on  the  sinful  bears  witness  now,  that  He  and  the  Father  are  one. 
n.  Wobks  op  wisdom.  Hia  contemporaries  confessed  as  much — "Whence  hath 
this  Man  this  wisdom,  &o."  His  works  were  performed  at  the  right  time,  in  the 
right  way,  on  the  right  persona.  He  made  no  mistake  in  His  diagnosis,  in  Hia 
prescription,  in  His  application  of  His  remedies,  nor  in  the  result.  The  cleverest 
men  fail  in  one  or  other  of  these  circumstances.  It  is  the  same  now  with  His 
administration  of  His  providence,  and  the  pardoned  sinner  and  the  comforted  saint 
ahke  are  constrained  to  say,  "  Thou  hast  done  all  things  well."  Of  whom  can  this 
be  said  but  of  Him  who,  being  "  the  wisdom  of  God,"  could  say,  "  I  and  the  Father 
are  one."  III.  Wobks  op  poweb.  Divine  love,  as  exhibited  on  earth,  can,  in  a 
measure,  be  imitated,  and  Divine  wisdom  as  taught  on  earth,  can,  in  a  measure,  be 
communicated  and  received.  But  "  power  belongeth  unto  God."  This  power  was 
demonstrated  by  Christ.  He  was  no  Divine  instrum'ent  as  were  the  miracle- 
working  prophets.  There  is  a  Divine  independence  and  originality  about  all  Hia 
operations.  "  I  say  unto  thee  arise."  And  the  power  that  made  men  walk  in 
apostohc  days  was  the  power  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  and  the  power  which  now  heala 
the  decrepitude  of  sinful  man  is  His.  Conclusion :  This  testimony  to  the  mutual 
onebeing  of  Father  and  Son  (ver.  38)  is — 1.  Sufficient.  2.  Hence  our  responsibility. 
Without  this  evidence  men  are  guiltless,  for  they  are  not  unbelieving,  but  ignorant. 
But  with  this  evidence  before  Him,  for  a  man  to  refuse  to  believe  in  Christ's  Deity, 
and  to  decline  to  submit  to  His  claims,  is  morally  fatal.  {J.  W.  Bum.)  Indisputable 
evidence  shows — I.  What  men  might  look  fob  in  the  wobks  of  God.  1.  Wisdom.  2. 
Mercy.  3.  Love.  4.  Power.  II.  That  the  works  op  Jesus  webe  marked  by  these 
characteristics.  1.  Water  made  into  wine.  2.  The  miracles  of  healing.  3.  The 
resurrection  of  Lazarus.  4.  His  own  resurrection.  III.  That  not  to  see  these 
featcbes  in  the  works  op  Jesus  is  to  be  blinded  by  pbejudice.  As  in  the 
case  of  the  Jews.  IV.  That  to  bbject  the  Divinity  op  Him  which  did  such  works 
IS  THE  height  op  FOLLY.  We  judge  of  the  nature  of  a  creature  by  its  works. 
When  we  see  a  bird's  nest  we  know  that  it  was  not  made  by  a  horse ;  when  we  see 
ftn  ant-hill  we  know  that  no  Hon  threw  it  up ;  aa  we  contemplate  a  building  or 
read  a  book  we  have  evidence  of  the  work  of  man.  But  what  creature  can  give 
sight  to  the  blind,  life  to  the  dead?  &c.  The  works  of  Christ: — The  term  "works," 
as  applied  to  the  miracles  of  our  Lord,  is  eminently  significant;  as  though  the 
wonderful  were  only  the  natural  form  of  working  for  Him  who  ia  dwelt  in  by  all 


228  THS  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  s. 

the  falness  of  God ;  He  must,  out  of  the  necessity  of  His  higher  being,  bring  fortb 
these  works  greater  than  man's.  They  are  the  periphery  of  the  circle  whereof  He 
is  the  centre.  The  great  miracle  is  the  Incarnation ;  aU  else,  so  to  speak,  follows 
naturally  and  of  course.  It  is  no  wonder  that  He  whose  name  is  "  Wonderful " 
does  works  of  wonder ;  the  only  wonder  would  be  if  He  did  them  not.  The  sun  in 
the  heavens  is  itself  a  wonder :  but  it  is  not  a  wonder  that,  being  what  it  is,  it  rays 
forth  its  influences  of  light  and  heat.  These  miracles  are  the  fruit  after  its  kind 
which  this  tree  brings  forth;  and  may  be  called  the  "works"  of  Christ,  with  no 
further  addition  or  explanation.  {Archbishop  Trench).  The  evidential  value  of 
Christ's  works: — Consider  the  general  expression  respecting  our  Lord's  Person 
which  arises  upon  a  survey  of  our  Lord's  miracles.  To  a  thoughtful  humanitarian 
they  present,  taken  as  a  whole,  an  embarrassing  difficulty.  In  the  case  of  "  the 
miracles  of  power,"  Schenkel  observes:  "These  are  not  cures  which  could  have 
been  effected  by  the  influence  of  a  striking  sanctity  acting  on  a  simple  faith. 
They  are  prodigies  such  as  Omnipotence  alone  could  achieve.  The  laws  of  nature 
are  simply  susp^^nded.  Jesus  does  not  here  merely  exhibit  the  power  of  moral  and 
mental  superiority  over  common  men ;  He  upsets  and  goes  beyond  the  rules  and 
bounds  of  the  order  of  the  universe."  The  writer  proceeds  to  argue  that  such 
miracles  must  be  expelled  from  any  life  of  Christ  which  "  criticism  "  will  condescend 
to  accept.  But  the  question  arises  how  much  is  to  be  expelled  ?  Is  the  Besurrec- 
tion,  e.g.  ?  If  so,  then  there  is  nothing  left  to  argue  about,  for  Christianity  itself 
is  gone  (1  Cor.  xv.  14,  18).  And  if  this  conclusion  be  objected  to,  we  must  reply 
that  our  Lord's  credit  and  honour  were  entirely  staked  upon  this  issue  (Matt.  xii. 
89,  40.)  But  the  Kesurrection  was  attested  by  evidence  which  must  out-weigh 
everything  except  an  a  priori  conviction  of  the  impossibility  of  miracles,  since  it 
was  attested  by  two  hundred  and  fifty  persons  (1  Cor.  xv.  6).  As  to  a  priori 
objections,  St.  Paul  would  have  argued,  as  most  Theists,  and  even  Rousseau  have 
argued,  that  they  cannot  be  urged  by  any  man  who  believed  seriously  in  a  living 
God  at  all.  But  on  the  other  hand,  if  the  Resurrection  be  admitted,  it  is  puerile  to 
object  to  the  other  miracles.  As  compared  with  them,  that  occurrence  has  all  the 
force  of  an  a  fortiori  argument,  and  are  fitly  complemental  incidents  of  a  history 
in  which  the  Resurrection  has  made  it  plain  that  we  are  dealing  with  One  in  whose 
case  an  ordinary  experience  of  the  hmits  and  conditions  of  human  power  are 
altogether  at  fault.  But  if  the  miracles  of  Jesus  be  admitted  in  the  block,  as  they 
must  be  by  a  "rational"  believer  in  the  Resurrection,  then  they  point  to  the 
Catholic  belief,  as  distinct  from  any  lower  conceptions  respecting  the  Person  of 
Christ.  They  differ  from  those  of  prophets  and  apostles,  in  that,  instead  of  being 
BESwers  to  prayer  granted  by  a  Higher  Power,  they  manifestly  flow  forth  from  the 
majestic  life  resident  in  the  Worker.  And  instead  of  presenting  so  many  "diffi- 
culties "  which  have  to  be  surmounted  or  set  aside,  they  are  in  entire  harmony  with 
that  representation  of  our  Saviour's  personal  glory  which  is  embodied  in  tbe  Creeds. 
St.  John  accordingly  calls  them  Christ's  "works,"  meaning  that  they  were  just 
such  acts  as  might  be  expected  from  Him,  being  such  as  He  was.  They  are  like 
the  kind  deeds  of  the  wealthy,  or  the  good  advice  of  the  wise ;  they  are  like  that 
debt  of  charity  which  is  due  from  the  possessors  of  great  endowments  to  suffering 
humanity — Christ  as  Man  owed  this  tribute  of  mercy  which  His  Godhead  had 
made  it  possible  for  Him  to  pay  to  those  whom  (such  was  His  love)  He  was  not 
ashamed  to  call  His  brethren.     {Canon  Liddon), 

Vers.  39-42.  Therefore  they  sought  again  to  take  Him. — I.  Mobai  ikcobbioi- 
BiLiTY.  What  was  the  result  of  Christ's  appeal  to  His  works  and  to  their  law  ?  Of 
His  noble  life  and  strong  logic?  Were  their  prejudices  broken  down  and  their 
opposition  overcome  ?  No  1  here  it  is  (ver.  39).  Their  opposition  was  intensified, 
and  their  determination  to  stone  Him  strengthened.  There  are,  undoubtedly,  men 
who  have  reached  the  stage  of  moral  incorrigibiUty.  Their  opinions  are  fossilized, 
their  habits  confirmed,  and  their  characters  stereotyped.  Christ  taught  this  when 
He  said,  "  Give  not  that  which  is  holy  to  dogs,"  &c.,  and  when  He  wept  over  Jeru- 
Balem.  Examples  lie  thickly  around  ub.  There  are  men  so  canine  in  temper,  so 
swinish  in  materialism,  that  to  argue  with  them  would  be  waste  of  labour,  and 
expose  to  insult  and  persecution.  With  these  the  day  of  grace  is  over,  retri- 
bution has  already  got  them  into  its  iron  grasp.  Two  evils  befel  these  men  to 
which  all  such  characters  are  liable.  1.  Disappointment.  They  made  all  arrange- 
ments to  stone  Him,  and  when  their  plans  were  complete  they  looked  for  Him  ;  but 
He  had  gone.     And  sooner  or  later  the  incorrigible  sinner  wiU  discoTer  that  All  hia 


OBJLt.  X.]  ST.  JOHN.  221 

oalcuIatioDS  are  false.  He  will  have  all  his  plans  thwarted  and  his  hopes  blasted. 
2.  The  loss  of  Christ.  Christ  had  withdrawn.  He  was  not  afraid  of  them,  but 
His  time  was  not  yet  come.  When  the  hour  struck  He  would  voluntarily  fall  into 
thair  hands  ;  but  meanwhile  they  had  lost  Him.  The  greatest  calamity  for  a  man 
or  a  community  is  the  withdrawad  of  Christ,  which  must  happen  sooner  or  later  to 
the  incorrigible,  "  My  Spirit  shall  not  always  strive  with  man."  When  He  with- 
draws from  the  soul,  it  is  as  if  the  sun  withdrew  from  its  orbit,  and  all  the  planeta 
rush  into  black,  fathomless  chaos.  H.  Posthumous  usefulness  (vers.  40-42).  The 
ministry  of  a  man  who  had  been  for  some  time  in  his  grave  prepared  the  people  to 
receive  Christ.  1.  It  was  remembered.  The  ministry  of  Jesus  recalled  that  of 
John.  The  ministry  of  faithful  preachers  will  never  be  forgotten  by  their  hearers. 
2.  It  was  useful.  (1)  It  served  to  set  off  the  superiority  of  Christ's  ministry. 
"  John  did  no  miracle."  His  work  was  purely  moral.  (2)  It  served  to  confirm  the 
Messiahship  of  Christ,  •'  All  things  that  John  spake  of  this  Man  were  true."  Con- 
sequently, "  many  believed,"  and  "  there  He  abode."  How  long  we  are  not  told. 
How  delightful  must  have  been  that  unconstrained,  free  and  secure  intercourse! 
Conclusion :  Faithful  ministers -may  take  courage  that  their  ministry  will  operate 
for  good  when  they  are  in  their  graves.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  And  went  away  be- 
yond Jordan. — A  model  ministry : — I.  The  ministry  of  John  was  local,  1.  There 
are  special  trials  and  temptations  about  a  fixed  and  restricted  sphere  of  service. 
The  local  minister  is  apt  to  feel  that  his  work  is  monotonous  and  disappointing — 
there  is  httle  variety  in  it,  little  stimulation.  He  often  frets  like  an  eagle  in  a  sack, 
and  sighs  to  spread  his  wings.  2.  Yet  there  need  be  no  disappointment  or  disgust 
with  a  ministry  in  narrow  bounds.  A  large,  varied  field  of  action  appeals  to  the 
imagination,  but  faithful  service  in  an  obscure  comer  tells  far  and  wide,  deep  and 
long.  How  often  have  we  heard  writers  regret  with  our  poet  that  so  many  brilUant 
flowers  are  born  to  blush  unseen,  ••  and  waste  their  sweetness  on  the  desert  air  ?  " 
But  this  is  exactly  what  they  do  not  do.  The  Kientist  corrects  the  poet,  for  he  tella 
us  how  the  date-trees  of  the  Nile,  the  magnolias  of  the  Susquehanna,  the  rhodo- 
dendrons of  the  Himalayas,  the  myrtles  of  Cashmere,  the  aromatic  forests  of  the 
Spice  Islands,  the  blooms  of  untraversed  prairies  and  woods,  all  contribute  to 
vitalize  the  common  air  of  our  daily  life.  So  men  whose  life  is  pure  and  useful 
in  one  place  are  sweetening  the  air  of  the  whole  world.  "  The  Word  of  God 
is  not  bound."  Local  brother,  be  comforted.  The  tree  is  fixed,  it  cannot  move 
however  it  may  tug  at  its  roots,  but  the  fragrance  is  borne  away  on  every  breeze  ; 
the  lamp  is  fixed,  swaying  to  and  fro  as  if  vexed  by  the  narrow  bondage  of  its 
chains,  but  its  beams  shine  afar  into  the  darkness ;  the  fountain  flows  in  a  narrow, 
obscure  basin,  and  the  living,  sparkUng  waters  seem  to  fret  against  the  stones,  bnt 
the  stream  at  last  fills  distant  valleys  with  fruit  and  beauty.  Be  faithful,  and  it 
will  be  found  some  day  that  the  fixed  star  has  been  as  useful  as  the  wandering  star. 
II.  The  ministry  of  John  was  modest.  1.  "  Did  no  miracle."  He  came  in  the 
power  of  Elijah,  without  the  mantle  of  Elijah.  People  were  disappointed.  So 
now,  we  are  disappointed  in  men  if  they  do  not  work  miracles— if  they  are  not 
brilliant,  surprising,  extraordinary  in  one  way  or  another.  2.  "  All  things  that 
John  spake  of  this  Man  were  true."  He  was  a  faithful  witness  to  Christ.  The 
glory  of  John  was  here;  he  witnessed  to  his  Master,  his  miracle  was  in  his 
message.  So  with  us  now.  When  Winstanley  built  the  first  Eddystone  lighthouse, 
he  built  it  firmly  as  he  thought ;  and  then  proceeded  to  add  as  many  ornamenta- 
tions as  if  the  building  had  been  designed  for  a  summer-house  ;  it  is  said  to  have 
been  quite  a  picturesque  object,  like  a  Chinese  pagoda,  with  open  galleries  and  fan- 
tastic projections.  Now,  many  people  would  have  greatly  admired  such  a  lighthouse, 
they  dearly  love  a  pagoda ;  they  would  have  pronounced  it  lovely,  surprising,  a 
thing  to  visit  on  summer  seas  for  a  pic-nio.  But,  after  all,  the  value  of  a  light- 
house is  in  the  light  that  it  sends  forth  in  the  night  of  storm  and  darkness ;  and 
when  Winstanley's  lighthouse  perished,  it  was  felt  that  a  pagoda  was  not  the  best 
form  for  a  light-beacon  on  the  deep.  Many  people  to-day  are  running  after  miracles 
in  the  religious  world,  miracles  of  preachers,  miracles  of  ceremonies,  miracles 
of  architecture,  music,  and  method ;  they  are  anxious  to  turn  the  Church  of  Christ 
into  a  pagoda ;  but  our  grand  duty  is  not  to  amuse,  or  astonish,  or  delight,  we  are  to 
hold  forth  the  Word  of  Life  that  souls  may  be  saved  from  shipwreck,  and  severe  sim- 
pUcity  best  befits  the  Church  of  Christ  as  it  does  the  beacon  of  the  seas.  III.  The 
ministry  of  John  was  effective.  Not  immediately  successful,  but  indirectly  and 
ultimately  so.  No  true  work  for  Christ  fails.  It  may  be  done  silently,  softly,  and 
geem  of  little  effect,  but  in  the  wide  view  and  the  long  view  it  will  be  seen  to  avail 


290  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  X. 

much.  In  Southp>rt  the  other  day,  I  noticed  a  monament  which  has  been  erected 
there,  in  one  of  the  public  streets,  to  the  founder  of  the  town.  The  inscription 
sets  forth  that  this  gentleman  came  to  the  place  when  it  was  only  a  sandy  waste  ;  he 
saw  the  possibilities  of  the  situation,  and  built  the  first  house,  which  was  known  as 
his  "Folly."  But,  despite  the  ridicule,  the  place  grew  into  the  elegant  town  that 
it  is  to-day,  with  its  many  mansions,  museums,  galleries,  gardens,  temples. 
Such  is  the  history  of  many  a  flourishing  cause  in  our  Church  to-day  The 
genesis  of  it  was  feeble  indeed  ;  it  grew  up  an  obscure  mission  station  nursed  by  a 
local  ministry,  but  it  has  grown  into  power,  a  centre  of  life  and  blessing.  ( W.  L. 
Watkitison.)  A  season  of  retirement :  —  I.  Old  scenes  revisited  (ver.  40). 
Bethany,  beyond  Jordan,  the  scene — 1.  Of  His  baptism  by  the  Forerunner.  2.  Of 
His  consecration  by  the  Father  through  the  voice  of  the  Dove.  3.  Of  His  showing 
unto  Israel  as  the  Lamb  of  God.  4.  Of  his  first  acquisition  of  adherents  in 
Andrew,  John,  Peter,  James,  Philip  and  Nathanael.  II.  Accustomed  labouks  pub- 
BUED  (ver.  41).  1.  With  disinterested  zeal.  Though  Christ  needed  rest.  He 
could  not  resist  the  silent  invitation  of  the  people  who  flocked  towards  Him.  2. 
With  unwearied  diligence.  He  neglected  no  opportunities  of  doing  His  Father's 
work.  3.  With  practical  beneficence.  He  performed  miracles.  III.  Fbesh  testi- 
monies GAINED  (ver.  41).  1.  That  He  was  greater  than  John  the  Baptist.  He  did 
signs  which  John  did  not.  2.  That  John's  witness  concerning  Him  had  been  trae 
(chap.  V.  33-35).  IV.  New  disciples  secubed  (ver.  42).  1.  Numerous — "  many." 
2.  Intelligent — actuated  by  conviction.  3.  True.  They  believed  on  Him  as  the 
Messiah.  Lessons — 1.  Grateful  remembrance  of  past  experiences.  2.  Diligent 
employment  of  present  opportunities.  8.  Hopeful  expectation  of  future  vindication. 
{T.  Whitelaw,  D.D.)  A  cheering  incident  at  Bethabara  : — 1.  Because  our  Saviour's 
reasoning  was  unanswerable,  •'  therefore  the  Jews  sought  again  to  take  Him." 
When  men  cannot  answer  holy  arguments  with  fair  reasonings  they  can  give  hard 
answers  with  stones.  He  who  hates  the  truth  soon  hates  its  advocate.  2.  When 
our  Lord  found  that  there  was  nothing  to  be  done  He  went  away.  He  knew  when 
to  speak  and  when  to  refrain.  Opposition  in  one  quarter  is  sometimes  an  intima- 
tion to  labour  elsewhere.  But  though  our  Lord  left  the  obstinate  He  never  ceased 
to  do  good.  Many  despair  under  similar  circumstances.  But  the  flight  of  Christ 
from  men  in  one  place  may  cause  the  flight  of  souls  to  Him  in  another.  Though 
Jesus  withdrew  from  the  stones  which  filled  the  hands  of  the  angry  Jews,  He 
went  to  the  place  where  John  had  said,  "  God  is  able  with  these  stones  to  raise  up 
children  unto  Abraham."  I.  It  is  very  pleasant  to  know  the  place  where  mek 
BELIEVED.  Not  that  this  is  essential.  A  man  may  live  and  yet  not  know  where  he 
was  born,  although  we  may  be  glad  to  know  our  birthplace.  And  so  the  main  ques- 
tion is.  Are  you  bom  again  ?  Still  it  is  a  help  to  know  the  place,  and  some  of  na 
know  it  to  a  yard.  What  was  there  particular  about  this  place?  It  was  the 
place — 1.  Where  Divine  ordinances  had  been  observed.  Where  the  Lord  is  obeyed 
we  may  hope  to  see  Him  revealed.  In  keeping  His  commandments  there  is  great 
reward,  although  the  outward  ordinance  of  itself  cannot  secure  a  blessing.  2. 
Where  faithful  preaching  concerning  Jesus  had  been  heard.  (1)  John  preached 
the  gospel  of  repentance,  and  where  that  is  the  case  men  will  come  to  believe  in 
Jesus.  The  plough  must  lead  the  way,  and  then  it  is  good  sowing.  (2)  He  testified 
that  Jesus  was  "  the  Lamb  of  God,"  &o.  No  wonder  that  men  believed  when  the 
savour  of  such  a  ministry  lingered  in  men's  minds  1  What  an  encouragement  to 
the  faithful  preacher  ;  though  dead,  he  will  yet  speak.  3.  Where  God  had  borne 
witness  to  His  Son.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  wont  to  go  where  He  has  gone  before  ;  and 
where  the  Father  has  borne  witness  to  Christ  once  we  may  expect  Him  to  do  so 
again.  4.  Where  the  first  disciple  had  been  won.  To  visit  the  place  of  their  own 
spiritual  birth  would  cause  a  renewal  of  their  vows,  and  act  as  an  encouragement 
to  persevere  in  winning  others.  Where  solid  stones  have  been  quarried,  there  re- 
mains more  material  which  may  yet  be  brought  forth.  5.  In  what  place  cannot 
Jesus  triumph  ?  He  needs  no  temple :  nay,  in  its  porch  He  finds  cavillers,  but 
yonder  by  the  willows  of  the  Jordan  He  finds  a  people  that  believe  on  Him.  So  in 
all  times  and  now.  II.  It  is  instructive  to  note  the  time  when  men  are  led  to 
FAITH.  Some  cannot,  and  it  is  not  essential,  yet  it  is  blessed  to  those  who  can.  1. 
It  was  after  a  time  of  obstinate  opposition.  The  Saviour  could  make  nothing  of  the 
cavilling  Jews  ;  but  no  sooner  does  He  cross  the  river  than  many  believe  on  Him. 
Opposition  is  no  sign  of  defeat.  When  the  devil  roars  it  is  because  his  kingdom  ia 
being  shaken.  2.  It  was  a  time  of  calm,  unbroken  quietude.  Those  who  came 
were  prepared  to  hear  thoughtfully.     Some  persons  may  be  converted  by  those  who 


(jjHAP,  n.]  ST.  JOHN.  aSl 

strive  and  cry  to  make  their  voice  heard  in  the  streets,  but  solemn  consideration  ia 
the  healthiest  for  gospel  preaching.  3.  It  was  a  time  of  great  desire  for  hearing 
"many."  You  cannot  catch  fish  where  there  are  none;  but  when  they  come 
Bwarming  up  to  the  net  we  may  hope  to  take  some  of  them.  When  men  are  aa 
eager  to  enter  the  house  of  prayer  as  to  go  to  a  theatre,  we  may  hope  that  God 
means  to  bless  them.  4.  It  was  a  time  of  which  nothing  else  need  be  said,  but 
that  many  believed.  The  happiest  days  are  when  many  believe  ;  this  is  the  most 
honourable  record  for  a  Church.    IIL  It  is  cheering  to  observe  the  fact  itself. 

1.  It  was  a  great  refresbment  to  the  Saviour's  heart.  "  There  He  abode."  He 
seemed  at  home  there.  When  the  polished  citizens  rejected  Him,  when  the  wise 
Jews  would  not  hear  Him,  the  plain  rustics  of  Persea  stood  listening  with  delight. 
This  was  to  be  an  oasis  of  comfort  before  the  burning  desert  of  the  passion.  2.  It 
was  the  fruit  of  John's  word.  Good  work  never  dies.  3.  It  was  more  directly  the 
result  of  our  Lord's  own  presence.  They  first  saw  what  He  did,  and  compared  it 
with  what  John  had  testified,  and  then  drew  the  conclusion  that  all  that  John  said 
was  true.  4.  The  faith  produced  was — (1)  Decided.  They  did  not  promise  to  try 
to  believe,  to  think  about  it,  &c. ;  they  believed  on  Him  there.  (2)  Prompt.  Christ 
had  preached  without  result  for  years  to  some  others  ;  but  to  these  He  spoke  only 
for  a  short  time,  and  they  believed  on  Him.  (3)  Solid.  They  could  give  a  reason 
for  it.  (4)  Widespread  "  many."  We  should  look  for  numerous  conversions  since 
Christ  gave  His  life  a  ransom  for  many.  (5)  What  Christ  lived  and  died  for,  what 
we  preach  for,  what  the  Bible  was  written  for,  what  churches  are  built  for.    IV.  It 

IB  MOST  IMPORTANT  THAT  WE  BHODLD  HAVE  A  SECOND  EDITION  OF  IT.      1.  Many  are  here. 

2.  Christ  is  here.  3.  The  witness  borne  here  ia  more  abundant  than  that  borne  at 
Bethabara.    ((7.  H.  Spurgeon.) 


CHAPTER  XL 

Introduction : — The  narrative  of  the  raising  of  Lazarus  is  nnique  In  its  complete* 
ness.  The  essential  circumstances  of  the  fact  in  regard  to  persons,  manner,  results, 
are  given  with  perfect  distinctness.  Four  scenes  are  to  be  distinguished.  1.  The 
prelude  to  the  miracle  (vers.  1-16).  2.  The  scene  at  Bethany  (vers.  17-32).  3.  The 
miracle  (vers.  33-44).  4.  The  immediate  issues  of  the  miracle  (vers.  45-57).  In 
studying  the  history  several  points  must  be  kept  in  view.  I.  The  sign  itself  is  the 
last  of  a  series,  which  has  evidently  been  formed  (chap.  xx.  80,  &o. )  with  a  view  to 
the  complete  and  harmonious  exhibition  of  the  Lord's  work.  The  seven  miraclea 
(chaps,  ii.  1 ;  iv.  46 ;  v.  1 ;  vi.  5, 15  ;  ix.  1 ;  xii.)  form  a  significant  whole.  And  in  this 
respect  it  is  of  interest  to  notice  that  the  first  and  last  are  wrought  in  the  circle  of 
family  life,  and  among  believers  to  the  strengthening  of  faith  (chaps,  ii.  11  ;  xi.  15) ; 
and  both  are  declared  to  be  manifestations  of  "  glory  "  (chaps,  ii.  11 ;  xi.  4,  40).  So 
the  natural  relations  of  men  become  the  occasions  of  the  revelation  of  higher  truth. 
II.  The  circumstances  of  the  miracle  ought  to  be  minutely  compared  with  those  of 
the  corresponding  miracles  recorded  by  the  Synoptists  (Mark  v.  22,  &c.,  and 
parallels;  Luke  vii.  11,  (fee).  The  omission  of  the  raising  of  Lazarus  by  the 
Synoptists  is  no  more  remarkable  in  principle  than  the  omission  of  these  raisings  by 
St.  John.  In  each  case  the  selection  of  facts  was  determined  by  the  purpose  of  tbe 
record.  The  miracles  at  Jerusalem  were  not  included  in  the  cycle  of  apostolio 
preaching  which  formed  the  basis  of  the  Synoptic  Gospels.  III.  Numerous  minute 
touches  mark  the  fulness  of  personal  knowledge,  or  the  impression  of  an  eye-wit- 
ness :  e.g.,  the  relation  of  the  family  to  Jesus  (ver.  5) ;  the  delay  of  two  days  (ver. 
6) ;  the  exact  position  of  Bethany  (ver.  18) ;  the  presence  of  Jews  (ver.  19) ;  the 
secret  message  (ver.  28) ;  the  title  of  "  the  Master  "  (ver.  28) ;  the  pause  of  Jesus  (ver. 
30) ;  the  following  of  the  Jews  (ver.  31),  and  their  weeping  (ver.  38) ;  the  prostration 
of  Mary  (ver.  32) ;  the  successive  phases  of  our  Lord's  emotion  (vers.  33,  35,  38) ; 
the  appearance  of  Lazarus  (ver.  44).  IV.  Not  less  remarkable  than  this  definite- 
ness  of  detail  are  tbe  silence,  the  omissions  in  the  narrative  ;  e.g.,  as  to  the  return 
of  the  messenger  (ver.  4) ;  the  message  to  Mary  (ver.  27,  &a.) ;  the  welcome  of  the 
restored  brother  (ver.  44).  Note,  too,  the  unexpected  turns  of  expression ;  e.g., 
"unto  Judaea"  (ver.  7),  vers.  11,  &c.,  37.  V.  That,  however,  which  is  most  im- 
pressive in  the  narrative,  as  a  history,  is  its  dramatic  vividness ;  and  this  in  different 


232  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

resrects.  There  is  a  clear  individuality  in  the  persons.  Thomas  stands  oat  chft- 
racteristically  from  the  apostles.  Martha  and  Mary,  alike  in  their  convictions,  ars 
distiuguisbed  in  the  manner  of  showing  them.  Then,  again,  there  is  a  living  reve- 
lation of  character  in  the  course  of  the  narrative.  Martha  reflects  the  influence  ol 
the  Lord's  words.  The  Jews  are  tried  and  separated.  And  above  all  the  Lord  is 
seen  throughout,  absolutely  one  in  His  supreme  freedom,  perfectly  human  and  per- 
fectly Divine,  so  that  it  is  felt  that  there  is  no  want  of  harmony  between  His  tears 
and  His  life-giving  command.  VL  Apart  from  the  antecedent  assumption  that  a 
miracle  is  impossible,  and  that  the  record  of  a  miracle  must,  therefore,  be  explained 
away,  it  is  not  easy  to  see  any  ground  for  questioning  the  literal  exactness  of  the 
history.  No  explanation  of  the  origin  of  the  narrative,  on  the  supposition  that  it  is 
unhistorical,  has  even  a  show  of  plausibility.  Those  who  deny  the  fact  are  sooner 
or  later  brought  to  maintain  either  that  the  scene  was  an  imposture,  or  that  the 
record  is  a  fiction.  Both  of  these  hypotheses  involve  a  moral  miracle.  VII.  No 
overwhelming  influence  is  assigned  to  the  miracle  by  the  Evangelist.  It  is  a  "  sign," 
a  revelation  of  Divine  glory,  to  those  who  believe,  or  who  have  sympathy  with  the 
truth.  But  others,  apparently,  without  questioning  the  reality  of  the  fact,  simply 
find  in  it  a  call  to  more  energetic  opposition.  The  work  arrests  attention ;  and  then 
it  becomes  a  touchstone  of  character.  In  this  respect  it  completely  answers  to  the 
functions  assigned  to  miracles  in  the  New  Testament.  (Bp.  Westcott.)  The  con- 
nection between  the  two  incidents  : — I  can  conceive  of  no  diviner  introduction  to  the 
story  of  the  raising  of  Lazarus  than  chap.  x.  40-42.  It  prepares  us  to  understand 
that  what  we  are  about  to  hear  of  is  not  one  of  those  signs  which  Jesus  rebuked 
His  countrymen  as  sinful  and  adulterous  for  desiring ;  not  one  of  those  wonders 
which  draw  men  away  from  the  invisible  to  the  visible — from  an  object  of  faith  to 
an  object  of  sight ;  but  just  the  reverse  of  this — a  witness  that  what  John  spake  of 
Jesus  was  true — a  witness  that  in  Him  was  life,  and  that  this  life  always  had  been, 
was  there  and  always  would  be,  the  Life  as  well  as  the  Light  of  men.  With  what  care 
the  story  is  related  so  that  it  shall  have  this  impression — how  all  those  incidents 
contribute  to  it  which  would  have  been  passed  over  by  a  reporter  of  miracles,  nay, 
which  would  have  been  rejected  by  Him  as  commonplace,  and  therefore  as  inter- 
fering with  His  object.  {F.  D.  Maurice,  M.A.)  The  importance  of  the  miracle : — 
I  have  been  assured  that  Spinoza  wonld  say  to  his  friends  :  If  he  could  have  con- 
vinced himself  of  the  resurrection  of  Lazarus  he  would  have  dashed  to  pieces  his 
entire  (Pantheistic)  system,  and  embraced  without  repugnance  the  common  faith  of 
Christians.  {Boyle.)  The  miracle  and  the  parable: — There  is  a  remarkable 
analogy  between  this  great  miracle  and  one  of  our  Lord's  parables — that  of  Dives 
and  Lazarus  (Luke  xvi.  20-25) — the  only  one  that  deals  with  the  mysterious  subject 
of  the  "  intermediate  state"  from  which  the  spirit  of  Lazarus  was  called  to  revivify 
his  body  at  his  resurrection.  That  is  the  only  parable  in  which  any  of  the  persons 
introduced  is  mentioned  by  name.  And  in  the  parable  and  the  miracle  the 
name  is  the  same.  And  when  our  Lord  delivered  that  parable.  He  put  into  the 
mouth  of  Abraham  the  words — *'  If  they  hear  not  .  .  .  though  one  rose  from  the 
dead."  He  thus  delivered  a  prophecy.  Though  one  rose  from  the  dead — 
though  a  Lazarus  be  sent  unto  them,  they  will  not  be  persuaded.  No.  And  the 
fact  was,  that  when  Lazarus  was  raised,  they,  who  would  not  hear  Moses, 
sought  "  to  kill  Lazarus  "  (chap.  xii.  10),  and  did  kiU  Him  who  had  recalled  him 
to  life.  {Bp.  Wordsworth.)  Lazarus  and  the  other  raisings  from  the  dead  : — The 
Bible  mentions  eight  persons  raised  from  death  and  two  translated  to  heaven  with- 
out dying.  1.  Son  of  widow.  2.  Son  of  Shunamite.  8.  Dead  man  cast  into  Elisha's 
grave.  4.  Young  man  of  Nain.  6.  Dangther  of  Jairus.  6.  Lazarus.  7.  Tabitha. 
8.  Eutychus.  {W.  H.  Van  Doren,  D.D.)  The  omission  of  the  narrative  by  the  other 
evangelists: — The  raising  of  Lazarus  is  not  mentioned  by  Matthew,  Mark,  and  Luke. 
This  has  stumbled  many  persons.  Yet  the  omission  of  the  story  is  not  hard  to  ex- 
plain. Some  have  said  that  Matthew,  Mark,  and  Luke  purposely  confine  themselves 
to  miracles  done  in  Galilee.  Some  have  said  that  when  they  wrote  their  Gospels 
Lazarus  was  yet  alive,  and  the  mention  of  his  name  would  have  endangered  his 
safety.  Some  have  said  that  it  was  thought  better  for  the  soul  of  Lazarus  not  to 
draw  attention  to  him  and  surround  him  with  an  unhealthy  celebrity  till  after  he 
had  left  the  world.  In  each  and  all  of  these  reasons  there  is  some  weight.  But  the 
best  and  simplest  explanation  probably  is,  that  each  evangelist  was  inspired  to  re- 
cord what  God  saw  to  be  best  and  most  suitable.  No  one,  I  suppose,  imagines  that 
the  evangelists  record  a  tenth  part  of  our  Lord's  miracles,  or  that  there  were  not 
other  dead  persons  raised  to  life,  of  whom  we  know  nothing  at  all.    "  The  dead  art 


OBAP.  XI.]  ST.  JOHN.  2Sf 

raised  ap"  was  our  Lord's  own  message,  at  an  early  period  of  His  ministry,  to  John 
the  Baptist  (Matt.  xi.  5).  "  H  the  works  that  Jesus  did  should  be  written  every 
one,"  says  John,  "  the  world  itself  could  not  contain  the  books  that  should  be 
written  "  (Jchn  xxi.  25).  Let  it  suflSce  us  to  beheve  that  each  Evangelist  was  in- 
spired to  record  exactly  those  events  which  were  most  likely  to  be  profitable  for  the 
Church  in  studying  his  Gospel.  Oar  Lord's  ministry  and  sayings  at  Jerusalem 
were  specially  assigned  to  John.  What  wonder  then  that  he  was  appointed  to  re- 
cord the  mighty  miracle  which  took  place  within  two  miles  of  Jerusalem,  and  proved 
incontrovertibly  the  guilt  of  tiie  Jerusalem  Jews  in  not  receiving  Jesas  as  the 
Messiah.     {Bp.  Eyle.) 

Vers.  1-6.  Now  a  certain  man  was  sick  named  Lazarus  of  Bethany. — Lazarus : — 
The  English  reader  would  at  first  sight  hardly  recognize  the  New  Testament 
*•  Lazarus  "  as  identical  with  the  Old  Testament  "  Eleazar."  The  two  words  are, 
however,  the  same.  In  the  dialect  of  the  Jerusalem  Talmud,  words  that  begin  with 
an  aleph  (in  English,  say,  an  unaspirated  initial  vowel,  hke  a  or  e)  often  drop  that 
initial.  Eleazar  (AL'AZR)  thus  becomes  L'azar  (L'AZR) ;  and  so  the  name  occurs, 
in  point  of  fact,  more  than  once  in  the  Talmud.  When  the  word  "  Lazar,"  again, 
was  taken  into  the  mouth  of  any  person  speaking  Greek,  he  naturally  added  to  it 
the  Greek  termination  o«  (Latin,  us),  and  so  by  gradual  stages  the  Old  Testament 
"  Eleazar  "  became  the  New  Testament  "  Lazarus."  (-S,  S.  Times,)  Bethany  : — 
From  the  plain  of  Esdraelon  southward  to  Hebron,  and  nearly  parallel  to  the 
Mediterranean  coast-line,  there  extends  a  range  of  mountainous  table-land,  in 
some  points  reaching  an  elevation  of  three  thousand  feet,  and  varying  in  breadth 
from  twenty  to  twenty-five  miles.  Toward  the  south  of  the  range,  like  a  diadem  on 
the  head  of  the  mountains,  is  the  city  of  Jerusalem.  East  of  the  city,  just  across 
the  deep  vzd  narrow  valley  of  Jehosaphat,  which  forms  the  bed  of  the  storm-brook 
Eedron^  rises  the  Mount  of  Olives.  It  is  the  most  pleasant  of  all  the  mountains  that 
are  round  about  Jerusalem;  in  pilgrim  language  "the  Mount  of  Blessing;"  and 
travellers  are  frequently  surprised  by  the  beauty  which  still  haunts  it.  It  consists 
of  a  ridge  a  full  mile  long,  curving  gently  eastward  in  its  northern  part,  and  rising 
into  three  rounded  summits,  of  which  the  central  and  highest  is  more  than  twenty- 
six  hundred  feet  above  the  level  of  the  Mediterranean,  and  more  than  a  hundred 
above  the  highest  part  of  the  neighbouring  city.  In  a  well-wooded  and  terraced 
ravine,  high  up  on  the  eastern  slope  of  the  mount,  screened  from  the  summit  by  an 
intervening  ridge,  nestled  the  sweet  village  of  Bethany.  It  is  reached  from  Jerusa- 
lem (from  which  it  is  distant  two  short  miles)  by  a  rough  bridle-path,  winding  over 
bare  rock  and  loose  stones.  Its  name,  "  the  place  of  dates,"  seems  to  hint  that  it 
stood  originally  in  the  midst  of  palm-trees.  These  trees,  emblems  of  strength  and 
victory,  once  so  numerous  that,  in  the  coins  of  the  Eoman  conquerors,  "  Judea 
Capta"  appears  as  a  woman  weeping  under  a  palm,  have  now  disappeared  from  this 
neighbourhood  as  from  Palestine  generally.  The  modem  hamlet  {El-'Azariyeh,  or 
the  village  of  Lazarus,  the  old  name  not  being  locally  known)  is  inhabited  by  twenty 
or  thirty  thriftless  Arab  families.  Into  the  walls  of  many  of  the  houses  large  hewn 
stones  are  built,  some  of  them  bevelled,  which  have  evidently  belonged  to  more 
ancient  edifices.  Though  itself  squalid  and  poverty-stricken,  the  village  is  very 
beautifully  situated,  looking  out  from  a  cloud  of  fruit-trees,  chiefly  fig,  almond, 
olive,  and  pomegranate,  and  with  abundant  pasturage  around.  It  is  sheltered  from 
the  cold  north  aud  west,  and  produces  the  earliest  ripe  fruit  in  the  district.  On  the 
whole,  it  may  claim  to  be  regarded  as  one  of  the  sweetest  spots  in  Palestine,  though 
greatly  changed  in  the  course  of  long  ages  of  misrule  from  what  it  must  have  been 
when  the  land  nourished  a  free  and  noble  people;  and  to  one  who  loves  quiet  beauty 
and  peacefulness  combined  with  a  certain  mystery,  it  commands  one  of  the  most 
striking  landscapes  in  the  southern  part  of  the  country.  The  house  of  Martha,  that 
of  Simon  the  leper,  and  the  tomb  of  Lazarus,  are  still  pointed  out  to  visitors.  The 
last  is  a  deep  vault,  hewn  out  of  the  solid  rock,  in  the  very  edge  of  the  village.  Dr. 
Robinson  (followed  by  many)  rejects  the  tradition  which  names  this  as  the  tomb  ; 
while  others,  relying  on  the  notices  in  the  Jerusalem  Itinerary  (a.d.  333),  and  by 
Eusebius  and  Jerome,  are  disposed  to  accept  it,  affirming  that  the  vault  has  every 
characteristic  of  an  ancient  Jewish  tomb  both  in  form  and  construction,  and  ac- 
counting for  its  being  so  close  upon  the  present  village  by  the  tendency  of  Jewish 
towns  to  advance,  in  the  course  of  ages,  toward  spots  reputed  sacred.  Most  beaati 
f ul  is  the  way  in  which  Bethany  is  here  named.  In  celestial  geography,  which  counts 
places  according  to  the  saints  who  inhabit  and  beautify  them,  it  was  known  to  Jesus, 


234  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  h. 

it  is  known  for  ever  as  the  town  of  Martha  and  Mary  and  Lazarus.  "  This  man  was 
born  there."  {J.  Culross,  D.D.)  The  family  at  Bethany  ;  or,  natural  varieties  in 
religion : — 1.  The  facts  of  this  chapter  are  a  sufficient  answer  to  the  objection  that 
there  is  no  recommendation  of  friendship  in  the  Bible.  The  Incarnate  One  Master 
and  Model  of  man  was  a  friend.  Needing  all  the  succours  of  our  nature  He  sought 
and  found  those  which  friendship  yields.  Hence  among  His  apostles  there  was  an 
inner  circle  of  three,  and  one  of  these  especially  * '  loved  "  ;  and  among  His  general 
followers  there  was  the  family  of  Bethany.  2.  It  is  delightful  to  think  of  Jesus  there. 
It  often  happens  that  great  men  have  some  home  where  they  may  unbend,  and  where 
they  need  not  be  other  than  men,  with  the  certainty  of  being  loved.  To  Betha,ny 
Jesus  betook  Himself  after  the  labours  of  the  day,  and  there  He  felt  at  home.  3. 
Who  would  not  like  to  have  seen  Him  there  ?  Home  is  the  best  sanctuary  of  the 
heart.  It  is  an  evil  sign  when  it  ceases  to  attract.  We  could  have  missed  many 
scenes  in  Christ's  life  rather  than  this.  4.  There  were  three  dwellers  in  that  house. 
I  do  not  know  that  He  would  or  could  have  found,  apart  from  female  society,  what 
He  wanted  and  craved.  Tte  greatest  men  have  always  a  feminine  element,  and 
have  always  pleasure  in  female  fellowship.  The  household  which  Jesus  loved  pre- 
sents religious  varieties — I.  In  actual  existence.  We  meet  with  them  also  in 
Luke  X.  38-42  and  John  xii.  1-13.  1.  These  passages  bring  before  as  three  typea 
of  character.  Martha  and  Mary  answering  to  Peter  and  John.  On  each  occasion 
Martha  is  in  action  ;  while  Mary  is  hearkening,  sitting  still,  or  pouring  out  hei 
affection  in  unselfish  homage.  Of  Lazarus's  works  and  acts  we  know  nothing ; 
but  as  Jesus  loved  him,  we  cannot  imagine  that  there  was  nothing  in  him,  or  thai 
what  was  in  him  was  not  good ;  and  therefore  conclude  that  it  was  of  a  kind  which 
does  not  seek  publicity.  So  we  have  here  specimens  of  the  three  great  depart- 
ments of  our  nature — thought,  feeling  and  action.  They  all  loved  Jesus  after  a 
natural  manner,  and  Jesus  loved  them  all  and  gave  their  characteristics  immortal 
honour.  2.  Men  are  naturally  different  in  soul  as  in  flesh.  Had  not  man  sinned 
we  have  no  reason  to  suppose  it  would  have  been  otherwise.  There  is  endless 
variety  in  nature.  There  is  difference  in  the  Church.  As  man  is  not  made  alike, 
so  he  is  not  remade  alike.  This  is  true  also  of  our  minor  parts  and  separate  powers ; 
not  only  of  thoughts,  but  kinds  of  thinking,  so  of  emotions  and  actions.  Why 
not  then  in  reUgion?  In  the  case  before  us,  in  their  quiet  common  life  the  presence 
of  Jesus  brings  out  their  characteristic  qualities,  and  so  it  does  in  their  great  woe 
and  social  feast.  II.  As  manitested  in  connection  with  Christ.  1.  The  practical 
in  Martha  honours  Jesus.  It  has  been  a  question  whether  the  world  is  more 
indebted  to  men  of  action  or  of  thought.  Both  are  best,  and  both  are  necessary. 
Strong  coupling  chains  are  as  needful  as  good  engines,  and  "the  eye  cannot  saj 
to  the  hand,  I  have  no  need  of  thee."  Martha  was  the  hand.  Christ  needed 
refresh  ment  and  she  prepared  it.  I  fancy  her  the  bustling  housewife,  of  robust 
health  and  good  spirits,  clear,  but  not  deep  in  mind ;  warm-hearted,  but  not  pro- 
found in  feeling  ;  ready  to  help,  but  judging  help  by  coarser  tests  ;  honestly  wish- 
ful for  Mary's  help,  but  not  displeased  to  have  it  known  that  she  was  doing  alone ; 
a  woman  who  had  no  idea  of  letting  the  "grass  grow  uuder  her  feet,"  and  could 
express  a  bit  of  her  mind.  There  are  people  of  this  sort  in  the  Church :  men  of 
practical  genius  and  active  habits.  I  have  known  some  never  cool  but  when  in  hot 
water,  and  who  never  slept  but  as  a  top — on  the  spin.  Like  Martha,  they  "  serve  " 
and  feed  the  body.  They  are  the  sappers  and  miners  of  the  army,  the  Levites  of 
the  congregation.  Let  none  usurp  their  office,  and  let  them  not  themselves  neglect 
it.  But  Martha  warns  them  against  two  dangers — (1)  Of  putting  external  activity 
in  the  place  of  the  heart  and  essence  of  religion.  (2)  Of  depreciating  and  inter- 
fering with  the  fitting  and,  it  may  be,  better  sphere  of  others.  "  One  thing  is  need- 
ful," which  in  the  fuss  and  flurry  of  such  spirits  is  liable  to  be  forgotten,  and 
which  alone  can  make  their  labour  of  any  value.  2.  Mary  represents  the  quiet, 
tender,  sentimental  disciples.  Gentle,  retiring,  with  a  deep  power  of  emotion,  she 
preferred  listening  to  labouring,  privacy  to  publicity,  worship  to  work,  while  yet  her 
heart  could  well  up  on  occasions  in  acts  of  unwonted  love  that  would  never  have 
entered  into  Mary's  brains.  There  are  Marys  still,  and  they  are  not  always 
feminine  ;  as  the  Marthas  are  also  often  masculine;  persons  in  whom  the  heart  is 
the  head.  They  are  not  good  at.  general  action,  and  are  more  remarkable  for  the 
fervour  than  ihe  efficiency  of  their  labours.  As  a  rule  their  conception  of  ends  is  too 
high,  and  their  conception  of  means  too  low.  They  work  by  impulse,  and  then 
they  do  more  than  others  or  nothing.  They  contribute  to  the  gracefulness  of 
rehgion,  which  requires  "  whatsoever  things  are  lovely."     They  add  taste  to  iti 


CHAJ.  XI.)  ST.  JOHN.  W5 

talents.  Marthas  supply  the  business-like  prose,  Marys  the  poetry  of  religion. 
Marthas  rear  the  needful  things  in  the  garden  of  the  Lord.  Marys  cultivate  its 
flowers.  Marthas  "  serve  "  the  meals  of  the  household  of  faith,  Marys  bring  the 
costly  spikenard.  But  this  temperament  is  pre-eminently  the  temperament  of 
devotion.  The  prayers  of  some  speed  the  toil  of  others,  returning  like  the  rain, 
and  blessing  other  scenes  than  those  from  which  they  rose.  The  Marthas  little 
think,  when  in  the  full  swing  of  their  engagements,  how  much  of  their  security  and 
success  is  due  to  the  prayers  of  the  Marys.  3.  Lazarus  is  a  type  of  the  more 
reflective,  recipient,  passive  class.  Had  he  been  a  man  of  much  speech  or  action 
something  of  his  as  well  as  something  about  him  would  have  been  preserved.  He 
had  a  heart  open  to  Christ's  influence,  pondered  His  discourse  and  deeds,  and 
enjoyed  a  feast  of  wisdom  and  love  while  many  were  only  being  fed.  There  are 
such  men  still ;  they  know  more  than  they  say,  and  feel  more  than  they  know. 
They  are  too  sensitive  for  the  rude  friction  of  common  life,  and  their  retiring  ways 
prevent  their  being  appreciated  or  understood.  They  on  whom  Christ  works  may 
honour  Him  as  well  as  those  by  whom  He  works.  III.  How  Christ  tbeated  these 
VABiETiES.  1.  He  recognized  and  honoured  them.  He  sat  at  Martha's  table;  He 
proclaimed  His  pleasure  in  Mary's  offering  ;  and  on  Lazarus  He  wrought  His  most 
wondrous  work.  Special  qualities,  even  when  in  excess.  He  did  not  reject.  He 
looked  at  the  motive.  Wiiatever  may  be  our  native  characteristics,  love  to  Jesus 
will  make  them  acceptable,  and  without  that  they  will  be  an  offence.  2.  He  guards 
them.  When  Martha  would  intrude  on  Mary's  sphere,  He  forbad  her.  And  when 
the  apostles  censured  Mary's  offering  He  reproved  them.  And  still  He  looks  with 
no  kindly  eye  on  those  who  are  impatient  of  their  brethren's  different  excellences. 
There  is  a  bigotry  of  character  as  well  as  of  creed.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  a 
tendency  in  some  to  despond  when  conscious  of  the  want  of  qualities  which  others 
exhibit.  But  you  are  called  to  be  yourselves  and  to  cultivate  your  own  gifts.  If 
you  try  to  imitate  others,  you  will  spoil  yourselves  and  caricature  them.  3.  He 
controls  them.  He  gently  chastened  Martha's  anxious  mind  though  He  approved 
of  Mary's  apparently  wasteful  offering ;  as  much  as  to  say — "  If  there  be  any 
extravagance  let  it  be  in  honouring  Me."  Martha's  activity  was  in  danger  of 
becoming  worldliness  ;  but  Mary  might  go  a  great  length  in  her  affection  without 
equal  peril  of  losing  her  soul.  The  world  reserves  its  praise  for  the  devotees  of 
Mammon,  and  the  world  is  wrong.  (A.  J.  Morris.)  Family  disharmonies: — 
What  can  be  more  irksome  than  to  hear  two  sisters  continually  setting  each  other 
right  upon  trifling  points,  and  differing  from  each  other  in  opinion  for  no  apparent 
reason  but  from  a  habit  of  contradiction  7  This  family  fauU  should  be  watched 
against ;  for  it  is  an  annoyance,  though  but  a  petty  one,  never  to  be  able  to  open 
your  hps  without  being  harrassed  by  such  contradictions  as,  "  Oh  no !  that  hap- 
pened on  Tuesday,  not  Wednesday ; "  or  if  you  remark  that  the  clouds  look 
threatening,  to  be  asked  in  a  tone  of  surprise,  "  Po  you  think  it  looks  like  rain  ?  I 
am  sure  there  is  no  appearance  of  such  a  thing."  Narrate  an  incident,  every  small 
item  is  corrected ;  hazard  an  opinion,  it  is  wondered  at  or  contradicted ;  assert  a 
fact,  it  is  doubted  or  questioned  ;  till  at  length  you  keep  silence  in  despair.  (Q.  S. 
Bowes,  B.A.)  He  whom  Thou  lovest  Is  sick. — Christ's  love  the  comfort  in  sick- 
ness : — A  faithful,  pious  preacher  was  once  lying  dangerously  ill,  and  the  members 
of  his  church  were  praying  earnestly  at  his  bedside  that  the  Lord  would  raise  him 
np  and  preserve  him  to  them ;  in  doing  so,  among  other  things,  they  made  mention 
of  his  tender  watchfulness  in  feeding  the  lambs  of  the  flock,  making  use  of  the 
expression,  "Lord,  Thou  knowest  how  he  loves  Thee."  At  this  the  sick  man 
turned  to  them  and  said,  "  Ah,  children,  do  not  pray  thus  I  when  Mary  and  Martha 
Bent  to  Jesus,  their  message  was  not— Lord,  he  who  loveth  Thee,  but — Lord,  behold 
he  whom  Thou  lovest  is  sick  !  It  is  not  my  imperfect  love  to  Him  which  comforts 
me,  but  His  perfect  love  to  me."  (iJ.  Besser,  D.D.)  The  sisters'  message  and  the 
Lord's  response  : — The  message  contained  no  request.  To  a  loving  friend  it  was 
quite  enough  to  announce  the  fact.  Friends  are  not  verbose  in  their  descrip- 
tions. True  prayer  does  not  c  nsist  in  much  speaking,  or  fine  long  sentences. 
When  a  man's  child  falls  into  a  pit  it  is  enough  to  tell  the  father  the  simple 
fact  in  the  shortest  manner  possible.  How  useful  it  is  to  have  praying  sis- 
ters !  As  for  our  Lord's  reply,  there  was  something  very  mysterious  about  it. 
He  might  of  course  have  said  plainly,  "  Lazarus  will  die,  and  then  I  will  raise  him 
again."  Yet  there  is  a  wonderful  likeness  between  the  style  of  His  message  and 
many  an  unfulfilled  prophecy.  He  said  enough  to  excite  hope,  and  encourage  faith 
and  patience  and  prayer,  but  not  enough  to  make  Mary  and  Martha  leave  off  praj- 


386  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  si. 

ing  and  seeking  Ood.  And  is  not  this  exactly  what  we  sboald  feel  aboat  many  an 
unfoMlled  prediction  of  things  to  come  7  Men  complain  that  prophecies  are  not 
80  literally  fulfilled  as  to  exclude  doubt  and  uncertainty.  But  they  forget  that  God 
wisely  permits  a  degree  of  uncertainty  in  order  to  keep  on  watching  and  praying. 
It  is  just  what  He  did  with  Martha  and  Mary  here.  {Bp.  Ryle.)  The  appeal 
and  the  answer : — I.  The  cocrsb  the  bistebs  took.  1.  We  need  not  doubt  that 
they  used  all  the  means  in  their  power  for  their  brother's  restoration.  But  they 
looked  to  the  Great  Physician.  This  is  one  of  the  marks  of  a  believer,  that  while 
he  nses  means  he  does  not  depend  upon  them.  2.  They  sent  to  Jesus.  Their 
message  was — (1)  Short.  This  should  encourage  our  applications  in  sudden  emer- 
gencies when  long  prayer  cannot  be  offered.  This  ia  frequently  the  case  with  the 
sick  and  their  attendants.  It  is  not  the  length,  but  the  faith  and  sincerity  of  the 
prayer  that  makes  it  effectual.  The  most  powerful  prayers  have  been  the  shortest. 
"  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  "  Lord,  remember  me  when  Thou  comest  into 
Thy  kingdom."  "  What  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  (2)  Confident.  They  did 
not  ask  Him  to  come,  or  to  heal  their  brother.  "  All  we  ask  is  '  Behold ' — bis 
languid  eye,  faltering  breath,  sufferings ;  we  have  confidence  in  Thy  love  and 
wisdom,  and  leave  the  matter  in  Thy  hands.  (3)  Humble.  They  send  no  pane- 
gyric, nor  mention  any  quality  that  might  interest  Christ.  All  they  remind  Him  of 
is  His  love.  This  is  the  only  ground  on  which  we  can  build  our  faith  and  shape 
our  prayers.  U.  The  obaciods  answeb.  This  was  sent  for  present  support  until 
a  complete  answer  could  be  given ;  and  is  so  worded  as  to  put  their  faith  and 
patience  to  a  severe  test.  The  way  by  which  Christ  leads  His  people  is  that  of 
simple  confidence  in  Him.  He  directs  them  not  to  judge  Him  by  the  outward 
appearances  of  His  providence  at  a  dark  and  unfavourable  moment ;  but  by  His 
sure  word  of  promise  (Isa.  1.  10).  This  answer  may  be  viewed  as  the  Lord's 
general  answer  to  His  people — •*  for  the  glory  of  God."  The  sorrow  of  the  world 
has  a  different  tendency  (Rev.  xvi.  10,  11).  How  mysterious  must  it  have  seemed 
after  this  message  that  their  brother  should  die ;  but  the  mystery  was  afterwards 
unravelled,  and  the  affliction,  instead  of  terminating  in  death,  was  the  occasion  of 
giving  physical  and  spiritual  life.  {J.  Haldane  Stewart,  M.J.)  The  test  of  du- 
cipleship : — To  whom  do  we  go  first  in  the  time  of  our  extremity  f  What  is  our 
resource  in  the  day  of  trouble  ?  Can  we  say  with  David,  "  From  the  end  of  the 
earth  will  I  cry  unto  Thee  when  my  heart  is  overwhelmed  ?  "  or  do  we  betake  our- 
selves to  some  other  helper?  The  answer  to  these  questions  will  determine 
whether  we  are  the  friends  of  Jesus  or  not.  Travelling  once  upon  a  railroad  car,  I 
had  among  my  fellow-passengers  a  little  laughing  child  who  romped  about  and  was 
at  home  with  everybody,  and  while  she  was  froMcking  around  it  might  have  been 
difficult  to  tell  to  whom  she  belonged,  she  seemed  so  much  the  property  of  every 
one ;  but  when  the  engine  gave  a  loud,  long  shriek,  and  we  went  rattling  into  a 
dark  tunnel,  the  little  one  made  one  bound  and  ran  to  nestle  in  a  lady's  lap.  I 
knew  then  who  was  her  mother  1  So  in  the  day  of  prosperity  it  may  be  occasion- 
ally difficult  to  say  whether  a  man  is  a  Christian  or  not ;  but  when,  in  time  of 
trouble,  he  makes  straight  for  Christ,  we  know  then  most  surely  whose  he  is  and 
whom  he  serves.  {W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The  appeal  to  Christ's  affection : — The 
man  who  was  healed  at  the  pool  of  Bethesda,  the  blind  man  who  was  sent  to  wash 
in  the  pool  of  Siloam,  were  merely  suffering  Jews ;  the  bread  at  Capernaum  was 
given  to  5,000  men  gathered  indiscriminately ;  the  nobleman  at  Capernaum  seems 
to  have  heard  for  the  first  time  of  Jesus ;  the  guests  at  the  marriage  feast  may  have 
been  His  neighbours,  or  even  His  kinsmen,  but  we  are  not  told  that  they  were. 
This  message  is  the  first  which  directly  appeals  to  the  private  affection  of  the  Son 
of  Man,  which  calls  Him  to  help  as  a  fnend  because  He  is  a  Friend.  (F.  D.  Maurice, 
M.A.)  The  friendship  of  Jesus : — I.  The  eealiti  of  Christ's  fbiendship.  That 
Jesus  should  have  passed  His  life  in  sohtude  was  impossible  ;  how  could  it  be  that 
His  Spirit,  wrapped  up  within  itself,  should  be  alien  to  all  human  impulses.  This 
friendship  grew  as  do  others.  There  may  have  been  some  restraint  at  the  first 
interview,  but  this  soon  melted  into  respectful  familiarity,  and  then  into  reciprocal 
union.  Christ  must  have  endeared  Himself  to  many,  but  it  did  not  always  mature 
into  friendship.  To  love  another  as  a  sinner,  as  a  Jew,  a  townsman,  a  relative, 
was  altogether  different  from  His  affection  for  this  family.  They  were  His  friends. 
We  may  not  be  able  to  tell  all  the  reasons  of  this  friendship,  but  we  doubt  not  it 
was  founded  on  mutual  esteem  and  likemindediieas.  II.  The  tbiendship  op  Jesus 
IB  NOT  affected  BY  VARIETIES  OP  EsDiviDUAii  TEMPSBAMENT.  SQoh  Varieties  as  existed 
in  these  people  have  existed  in  all  ages.    Divine  grace  does  not  produce  uniformity 


CBAT.  XI.]  8T.  JOHN.  237 

on  human  nature.  It  left  in  their  own  prominence  the  valour  of  David,  the  genius 
of  Isaiah,  the  pathoa  of  Jeremiah,  the  fervour  of  John,  the  reasoning  powers  of 
Paul.  So  there  are  some  believers  in  whom  intellect  predominates,  in  others 
emotion ;  others  ruminate  on  what  God  has  done  for  their  soul,  and  others  look 
forward  with  the  fuU  assurance  of  hope.  I  feed  on  doctrine  says  one ;  I  live  in 
practice  responds  another.  The  nature  of  one  excites  him  to  battle  as  a  mis- 
sionary, that  of  another  tits  him  to  endure  as  a  martyr.  Every  gift  is  useful  in  its 
place.  III.  The  friendship  of  Jesus  does  not  exempt  its  possessors  from  afflic- 
tion. Jesus  might  easily  have  ordered  it  otherwise,  and  even  the  appeal  to  His 
friendship  did  not  move  Him.  His  religion  does  not  free  us  from,  but  often  leads 
us  to,  suffering.  Its  object  is  to  train  the  mind,  and  it  takes  advantage  of  suffering 
to  aid  it  in  the  process  of  tuition.  The  stars  appear  as  the  gloom  falls ;  so  the 
promises  assume  new  lustre  and  power  to  the  spirit  lying  under  the  shadow  of 
Buffering.  I  may  rejoice  in  the  attachment  of  my  friend,  though  I  have  never  put 
it  to  a  severe  trial ;  but  if  I  am  suddenly  brought  to  ruin,  and  he  as  promptly 
rescues  me  at  great  sacrifice,  I  may  safely  say  that  I  never  knew  the  value  of  his 
friendship.  It  is  therefore  in  the  period  of  suffering  that  the  soul  is  brought  into 
nearer  contact  with  God,  and  finds  His  grace  sufficient.  In  this  case  the  event 
proved  that  God's  ways  are  higher  than  man's,  and  are  not  to  be  judged  of  in 
human  weakness.  They  might  have  questioned  His  friendship  during  those  four 
mysterious  days,  but  afterwards  they  saw,  as  they  could  not  have  seen  otherwise, 
how  He  loved  them.  IV.  While  the  friendship  of  Jesus  does  not  exempt  from 
affliction  it  deepens  into  sympathy  with  those  who  endure  it.  Even  during  His 
absence  Christ's  soul  was  in  Bethany.  Once  and  again  did  He  refer  to  it,  and  at 
last  said  Lazarus  is  dead.  His  mind  thus  brooded  over  the  scene,  and  now,  though 
His  hfe  was  in  peril,  He  did  not  hesitate  to  go.  As  He  met  Martha  He  could  speak 
in  a  firm  tone  of  assurance,  bat  when  He  saw  Mary  weeping  bitterly  He  was  deeply 
moved.  And  as  He  took  the  first  step  to  the  tomb  His  emotion  could  no  longer  be 
restrained.  There  was  no  stoicism  in  His  constitution.  Try  not  to  be  above  the 
Saviour.  V.  The  friendship  of  Jesds  is  not  interrupted  by  death.  What  breaks 
up  all  other  ties  has  no  such  effect  on  it.  Friends  walk  arm  in  arm  till  they  come 
to  the  tomb,  and  then  one  of  them  resumes  his  solitary  path.  Our  Lord  said  of 
him  who  died,  "He  sleepeth,"  recognizing  the  friendship  as  still  existing.  The 
objects  of  Christ's  affection,  when  taken  out  of  the  world,  are  brought  into  closer 
anion  with  Himself.  So  it  was  with  Enoch :  to-day  he  "  walked  with  God  "  on 
earth,  to-morrow  he  walked  with  Him  in  heaven.  (tT".  Eadie,  D.D.)  Beloved 
and  yet  afflicted : — The  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved  is  not  backward  to  record  that 
Jesus  loved  Lazarus  too ;  there  are  no  jealousies  among  those  who  are  chosen  by 
the  well  beloved.  It  is  a  happy  thing  when  a  whole  family  hves  in  the  love  of 
Jesus.  They  were  a  favoured  trio,  and  yet  as  the  serpent  came  into  paradise,  so 
did  sorrow  enter  their  quiet  household.  I.  A  fact.  "  He  whom  Thou  lovest  is 
sick."  The  sisters  were  somewhat  astonished;  "behold,"  we  love  him  and  would 
make  him  well  directly.  Thou  canst  heal  him  with  a  word,  why  then  is  our  loved 
one  sick  ?  We  need  not  be  astonished,  for  the  sick  one — 1.  Is  only  a  man.  The 
love  of  Jesos  does  not  separate  us  from  the  common  necessities  and  infirmities  of 
life.  The  covenant  of  grace  is  not  a  charter  of  exemption  from  consumption  or 
rheumatism.  2.  Is  under  a  peculiar  discipline.  "  Whom  the  Lord  loveth  He 
chasteneth."  If  Job,  David,  Hezekiah  must  each  one  smart,  who  are  we  that  we 
should  be  amazed  if  iU  ?  3.  Is  thereby  benefited.  How  far  this  was  so  with 
Lazarus  we  1  n  >w  not,  but  many  a  disciple  would  have  been  of  small  use  but  for 
affliction.  Stiong  men  are  apt  to  be  harsh,  imperious,  and  unsympathetic,  and 
hence  need  to  be  put  into  the  furnace  and  melted  down.  There  are  fruits  in  God's 
garden  as  well  as  in  man's  which  never  ripen  till  bruised.  4.  Is  a  means  of  good 
to  others.  Throughout  these  nineteen  centuries  all  believers  have  been  getting 
good  out  of  Lazarus's  sickness.  The  Church  and  the  world  may  derive  immense 
advantege  through  the  sorrows  of  good  men  ;  the  careless  may  be  awakened,  the 
doubting  convinced,  the  ungodly  converted,  the  mourner  comforted  through  their 
testimony.  II.  A  report  of  that  fact.  The  sisters  sent  and  told  Jesus.  Let  us 
keep  up  a  constant  correspondence  with  Him  about  everything.  1,  It  is  a  great 
relief.  He  is  a  confidant  who  can  never  betray,  a  friend  who  will  never  refuse.  2. 
He  is  sure  to  support  us.  If  you  ask  Him,  "  Why  am  I  sick ?  "  He  maybe  pleased 
to  show  you  why,  or  He  will  make  you  willing  to  be  patient  without  knowing  why. 
3.  He  may  give  healing.  It  would  not  be  wise  to  live  by  a  supposed  faith  and  cast 
off  the  physician,  any  more  than  to  discharge  the  butcher  and  the  tailor  and  expect 


238  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cuhr.V. 


to  be  fed  and  clothed  by  faith ;  but  this  would  be  far  better  than  forgetting  the  Lor^ 
altogether,  and  trusting  to  man  only.  Some  are  afraid  to  go  to  God  about  their 
health ;  and  yet  surely  if  the  hairs  outside  our  head  are  all  numbered  it  is  not  more  or 
a  condescension  for  Him  to  relieve  throbs  inside.  III.  An  unexpected  result.  Na 
doubt  the  sisters  looked  to  see  Lazarus  recover  ;  but  they  were  not  gratified.  Thia 
teaches  us  that  Jesus  may  be  informed  of  our  trouble,  and  yet  act  as  if  indifferent. 
We  must  not  expect  recovery  in  every  case,  for  if  so  nobody  would  die  who  had 
anybody  to  pray  for  him.  Let  us  not  forget  that  another  prayer  may  be  crossing 
0UI8.  "  Father,  I  will  that  they  also,"  &c.  But  Jesus  raised  him,  and  will  raise 
us.  Some  want  to  live  till  the  Lord  comes,  and  so  escape  death  ;  but  so  far  from 
having  any  preference  such  would  miss  one  point  of  fellowship  in  not  dying  and 
rising  like  their  Lord.  All  things  are  yours,  death  included.  IV.  A  question. 
Does  Jesus  in  a  special  sense  love  you  ?  Many  sick  ones  have  no  evidence  of  ii 
because  they  do  not  love  Him.  If  Jesus  loves  you  and  you  are  sick,  let  your 
friends,  nurses,  &c.,  see  how  you  glorify  God  in  your  sickness.  If  you  do  not  know 
this  love,  you  lack  the  brightest  star  that  can  cheer  the  night  of  darkness.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  The  sickness  of  Lazarus : — I.  A  pbivilege  of  incomparable  value — to 
be  loved  by  Christ.  To  be  loved  by  some  is  no  advantage ;  their  love  is  carnal, 
selfish,  fickle.  But  Christ's  love  is — 1.  Tender — so  tender  that  in  all  our  afflic- 
tions He  is  afflicted.  We  are  as  dear  to  Him  as  Himself.  2.  Constant.  It  is  not 
founded  on  any  mistakes  as  to  our  characters ;  as  to  what  we  have  been,  are, 
shall  be.  Men  sometimes  withdraw  their  love  because  they  discover  imper- 
fections never  anticipated.  3.  All-sufflcient.  It  has  at  command  ample 
resources  to  supply  all  our  wants,  ample  power  to  sustain,  guard,  and  bless 
us,  and  that  always.  II.  A  trial  strikinglt  suggestive.  Why  did  Christ  per- 
mit His  beloved  friend  to  be  sick  ?  1.  Not  because  it  was  agreeable  to  Him.  Th» 
sufferings  of  those  whom  we  love  are  always  painful  to  us.  "  He  doth  not  afflict 
willingly."  2.  Not  because  He  could  not  have  prevented  it.  He  who  hushed  the 
storm  and  raised  the  dead  had  power  to  keep  off  disease.  3.  It  was  for  some  usef  ;il 
end.  The  afflictions  of  Lazarus  were  a  blessing  to  himself  and  his  sisters.  It 
strengthened  this  faith  and  intensified  their  joy.  III.  A  faith  of  remaekablb 
POWER.  So  assured  were  they  of  the  genuineness  and  strength  of  His  love  that 
they  felt  that  the  mere  statement  of  Lazarus's  sickness  was  enough.  True  love 
requires  no  persuasion.  The  appeals  to  benevolence  that  stream  from  the  press  and 
pulpit  imply  a  sad  lack  of  faith  in  the  philanthropy  of  the  land.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
The  uses  of  affliction : — God  often  lays  the  sum  of  His  amazing  providences  in 
very  dismal  afflictions,  as  the  limner  first  puts  on  the  dusky  colours  on  which  he 
intends  to  draw  the  portraiture  of  some  illustrious  beauty.  (S.  Charnock.)  Afflic- 
tion, not  destruction  : — I  feel  that  repeated  afflictions  come,  not  as  lightning  on  the 
scathed  tree,  blasting  it  yet  more  and  more,  but  as  the  strokes  of  the  sculptor  on 
the  marble  block,  forming  it  into  the  image  of  beauty  and  loveliness.  Let  but  the 
Divine  presence  be  felt,  and  no  lot  is  hard.  Let  me  but  see  His  hand,  and  no  event 
is  unwelcome.  [Power  of  Illustration.)  Affliction  makes  fruitful : — Every  vessel 
of  mercy  must  be  scoured  in  order  to  brightness.  And  however  trees  in  the  wilder- 
ness may  grow  without  cultivation,  trees  in  the  garden  must  be  pruned  to  be  made 
fruitful ;  and  cornfields  must  be  broken  up,  when  barren  heaths  are  left  untouched. 
(J.  Arrowsmith.)  The  benefit  of  severe  affliction : — When  Mr.  Cecil  was  walking 
in  the  Botanical  Gardens  of  Oxford,  his  attention  was  arrested  by  a  fine  pome- 
granate tree,  cut  almost  through  the  stem  near  the  root.  On  asking  the  gardener 
the  reason  of  this,  "  Sir,"  said  he,  "this  tree  used  to  shoot  so  strong  that  it  bore 
nothing  but  leaves ;  I  was  therefore  obliged  to  cut  it  in  this  manner ;  and  when  it 
was  almost  cut  through,  then  it  began  to  bear  plenty  of  fruit."  The  reply  afforded 
this  inquisitive  student  a  general  practical  lesson,  which  was  of  considerable  use  to 
him  in  after  life,  when  severely  exercised  by  personal  and  domestic  afflictions. 
Alas  I  in  many  oases,  it  is  not  enough  that  the  useless  branches  of  the  tree  be  lopped 
off,  but  the  stock  itself  must  be  cut — and  cut  nearly  through — before  it  can  become 
extensively  fruitful.  And  sometimes  the  finer  the  tree,  and  the  more  luxmiant  ita 
growth,  the  deeper  must  be  the  incision.  ((J.  A.  James.)  God's  love  to  His  own 
people  in  afflicting  them : — An  invalid  of  twenty  years,  whose  sufferings  were 
extreme,  was  one  night  thinking  of  the  reason  of  this  long-continued  affliction. 
Suddenly  the  room  filled  with  light,  and  a  beautiful  form  bent  over  her,  sa.ying, 
"Daughter  of  sorrow,  art  thou  impatient?"  "No;  but  I  am  full  of  pain  and 
disease,  and  I  see  no  end ;  nor  can  I  see  why  I  must  suffer  thus.  I  know  that  I  am 
a  sinner ;  but  I  hoped  that  Christ's  sufferings,  and  not  mine,  would  save  me.     Oh  t 


CHAP.  XI.]  ST.  JOHN.  239 

why  does  God  deal  thus  with  me  ?  "  "  Come  with  me,  daughter,  and  I  will  show 
thee."  "But  I  cannot  walk."  "True,  truel  There,  gently,  gently!"  He  ten- 
derly took  her  up  in  his  arms,  and  carried  her  over  land  and  water,  till  he  set  her 
down  in  a  far-oS  city,  and  in  the  midst  of  a  large  workshop.  The  room  was  full 
of  windows,  and  the  workmen  seemed  to  be  near  the  light,  and  each  with  his  own 
tools  ;  and  all  seemed  to  be  so  intent  upon  their  work,  that  they  neither  noticed  the 
new-comers,  nor  spoke  to  one  another.  They  seemed  to  have  small,  brown  pebble,s, 
which  they  were  grinding  and  shaping  and  polishing.  Her  guide  pointed  her  to  one 
who  seemed  to  be  most  earnestly  at  work.  He  had  a  half-polished  pebble,  which 
was  now  seen  to  be  a  diamond,  in  a  pair  of  strong  iron  pincers.  He  seemed  to 
grasp  the  little  thing  as  if  he  would  crush  it,  and  to  hold  it  on  to  the  rough  stone 
without  mercy.  The  stone  whirled,  and  the  dust  flew,  and  the  jewel  grew  smaller 
and  lighter.  Ever  and  anon  he  would  stop,  hold  it  up  to  the  light,  and  examine  it 
carefully.  "  "Workmen,"  said  the  sufferer,  "  will  you  please  to  tell  me  why  you 
bear  on,  and  grind  the  jewel  so  hard  ?  "  "I  want  to  grind  off  every  flaw  and  crack 
in  it."  "  But  don't  you  waste  it  ?  "  "  Yes ;  but  what  is  left  is  worth  so  much  the 
more.  The  fact  is,  this  diamond,  if  it  will  bear  the  wheel  long  enough,  is  to  occupy 
a  very  important  place  in  the  crown  we  are  making  up  for  our  king.  We  take  much 
more  pains  with  such.  We  have  to  grind  and  polish  them  a  great  while ;  but, 
when  they  are  done,  they  are  very  beautiful.  The  king  was  here  yesterday,  and 
was  much  pleased  with  our  work,  but  wanted  this  jewel,  in  particular,  should  be 
ground  and  polished  a  great  deal.  So  you  see  how  hard  I  hold  it  down  on  this  stone. 
And,  see  1  there  is  not  a  crack  nor  a  flaw  in  it  1  What  a  beauty  it  wiU  be  1  "  Gently 
the  guide  lifted  up  the  poor  sufferer,  and  again  laid  her  down  on  her  own  bed  of 
pain.  '♦  Daughter  of  sorrow,  dost  thou  understand  the  vision  ?  "  "  Oh,  yes  1  but 
may  I  ask  you  one  question  ?  "  "  Certainly."  "  Were  you  sent  to  me  to  show  me 
all  this  ?  "  "Assuredly."  •'  Oh  1  may  I  take  to  myself  the  consolation  that  I  am 
a  diamond,  and  am  now  in  the  hands  of  the  strong  man,  who  is  poUshing  it  for  the 
crown  of  the  Great  King  ?  "  "  Daughter  of  sorrow,  thou  mayest  have  that  conso- 
lation ;  and  every  pang  of  suffering  shall  be  like  a  flash  of  lightning  in  a  dark 
night,  revealing  eternity  to  thee ;  and  hereafter  thou  shalt  '  run  without  weariness, 
and  walk  without  fasntness,'  and  sing  with  those  who  have  '  come  out  of  great 
tribulatict.  "  {Dr.  Todd.)  Trouble  in  the  family  : — Note — I.  A  happy  family. 
It  consisted  of  a  brother  and  his  two  sisters.  Tbey  were  happy  because  Jesus  loved 
them.  The  essence  of  real  happiness  is  not  riches  or  any  temporal  distinction,  but 
an  interest  in  Christ's  favour.  His  love  is  no  empty  sentiment.  Whom  Jesus  loves 
He  blesses.  How  rare  are  families  whom  Jesus  loves  1  Individual  believers  are 
numerous,  but  "  households "  of  faith  are  rare.  Why  ?  Is  it  because  there  is  so 
little  of  family  worship  ?  II.  A  grievous  teial  which  befel  them.  This  is  no 
new  thing.  The  children  of  God  have  never  been  promised  a  smooth  life  of  it 
(Acts  xiv.  22 ;  Kev.  iii.  19  ;  Heb.  xii.  7,  8).  The  afflictions  of  believers  are  quite 
another  thing  from  God's  ordinary  visitations.  God  visits  them  in  mercy  not  in 
judgment,  for  the  best  purposes  (Bom.  v.  3-5).  Better  is  it  to  suffer  affliction  with 
the  people  of  God  than  to  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  sin  for  a  season  (Heb.  xi.  25,  26  ; 
Job.  V.  17, 18).  in.  The  remarkable  conddct  of  odb  Lord  when  He  was  told  of 
IT.  There  was  nothing  strange  in  a  friend  of  Christ's  falUng  sick  (1  Pet.  iv.  12), 
but  Christ's  conduct  was  very  strange.  Doubtless  they  expected  Him  as  soon  as 
the  distance  would  admit  of  it.  How  we  hasten  at  such  a  summons,  and  the  con- 
sciousness of  being  able  to  do  something  quickens  our  steps.  Yet  Jesus,  who  had 
all  power  as  well  as  all  love,  tarried.  How  trying  this  delay  to  the  afflicted  sisters 
— how  heart-breaking  when  all  was  over  that  Jesus  was  not  there.  But  stranger 
still  Christ  delayed  out  of  love.  No  love  is  so  high  as  that  which  prefers  the  real 
interests  of  its  object  before  his  present  comfort,  which  aims  at  permanent  good 
rather  than  momentary  satisfaction.  We  often  seek  to  gratify  another's  feelinga 
rather  than  to  promote  his  good.  But  Christ  is  not  a  parent  who  gives  His  children 
everything  they  cry  for,  but  everything  that  is  best  for  them.  He  withholds  a  lesser 
mercy  that  He  may  impart  a  greater.  Instead  of  raising  Lazarus  from  a  bed  of 
sickness  He  raised  him  from  the  grave.  Conclusion :  The  great  lesson  here  is  the  duty 
of  waiting  patiently  for  the  Lord  in  regard  to  answers  to  prayer — blessings — succesH» 
(A.  Roberts,  M.A.)  Affliction : — I.  The  source  of  afflictions.  Not  epontaneoua 
(Job.  v.  6,  7).  God  appoints  (Psa.  Ixvi.  10,  11 ;  Amos  iii.  6).  God  regulates  their 
degree  (Isa.  ix.  1 ;  Jer.  xlvi.  28).  God  determines  their  duration  (Gen.  xv.  13,  14; 
Isa.  x.  25).  Not  willingly  sent  (Lam.  iii.  S3 ;  Ezek.  xxxiii.  11).  Consequent  on 
Bin  (Gen.  iii  16-19).     II .  Afflictions  of  the  saints.    Saints  must  expect  them 


240  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap  xx 

(John  xvi.  33 ;  Acts  xiv.  22).  Tempered  with  mercy  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  38,  39 ;  cvi.  43- 
46).  Comparatively  light  (Bom.  viii.  18  ;  2  Cor.  iv.  17).  Are  but  temporary  (Psa. 
■XXX.  5;  1  Pet.  1.  6;  v.  10).  Are  joyfully  endured  (Bom.  v.  3-5;  Jas.  v.  11).  Are 
shared  with  Christ  (Bom.  viii.  17  ;  1  Pet.  iv.  13,  14).  Express  God's  care  (Heb.  xii. 
6,  7 ;  Bev.  iii.  19).  God  with  afflicted  saints  (Psa.  xlvi.  1,  5  ;  Isa.  xliii.  2).  God 
preserves  them  (Psa.  xxxiv.  19,  20 ;  Bom.  viii.  37).  Christ  with  them  (Matt,  xxviii. 
20 ;  John  xiv.  18).  Christ  delivers  them  (2  Tim.  iv.  17 ;  Heb.  it.  18).  They  secure 
a  crown  (Jas.  i.  12 ;  Bev.  ii.  10).  III.  Afflictions  of  the  wicked.  Sent  as  judg- 
ments (Job.  xxi.  17  ;  Jer.  xxx.  16).  Sent  for  impenitence  (Prov.  i.  30,  31 ;  Amos  iv. 
6-12).  Are  multiplied  (Deut.  xxxi.  17  ;  Psa.  xxxii.  10).  Come  suddenly  (Psa.  IxxiiL 
19 ;  Prov.  vi.  15 ;  xxix.  1).  Sometimes  humble  them  (1  Kings  xxi.  27).  Some- 
times harden  them  (Exod.  ix.  34,  35 ;  Neh.  ix.  28,  29).  Consummated  in  the  judg- 
ment (Matt.  XXV.  41;  Luke  xiii.  27,  28).  (S.  S.  Times.)  The  use$  of  sickness  : — 
1.  The  message  was  not  needed,  nor  was  it  immediately  regarded.  With  the  sisters 
nothing  was  more  serious  than  their  brother's  sickness,  and  the  little  chamber  was 
the  centre  of  the  world.  The  Saviour  took  other  views  of  the  matter.  The  sick- 
ness and  death  of  Lazarus  were  not  ends  in  themselves,  but  means  to  a  far  higher 
end.  It  was  more  important  that  tbey  should  learn  patience  than  that  Lazarus 
should  not  be  sick ;  that  they  should  be  taught  a  quiet  and  strong  faith  than  that 
He  should  not  die ;  that  God  and  Christ  should  be  glorified.  2.  The  uses  of  an 
illness  is  not  a  common  topic  Men  may  live  and  die  without  considering  it.  This 
lack  of  consideration  is  due  to  the  fact  that  sickness  is  unwelcome ;  and  to  ask 
what  is  the  use  of  it  is  like  asking  what  is  the  use  of  a  hindrance,  indeed,  of  ase- 
lessness.  This,  however,  is  a  disheartening  conclusion ;  for  think  of  the  vast 
amount  of  sickness  there  is.  There  is  not  a  house  to  which  the  struggle  does  not 
come  sooner  or  later.  It  ought  to,  and  must  be  incredible  to  any  man  who  believes 
in  a  heavenly  Father  that  so  much  of  human  emotion  should  flow  away  without 
benefit.  It  does  not  require  inspiration  to  teach  us  that  there  must  be  some  light 
in  these  dark  facts.  Shakespeare  says,  "  Sweet  are  the  uses  of  adversity,  which, 
like  the  toad,  ugly  and  venomous,  wears  yet  a  precious  jewel  in  its  head"; 
and  "  There  is  a  soul  of  good  in  things  evU,  if  men  would  but  observingly  distil 
it  out."  The  uses  of  sickness  are — I.  To  inquieb  as  to  itb  soubcb.  This  is  the 
first  duty  with  respect  to  any  derangement  of  machinery  whether  mechanical  or 
vital.  1.  It  would  be  a  serious  mistake  to  trace  it  all  to  the  Divine  hand.  This 
may  save  thought,  but  at  the  cost  of  reason  and  reverence.  Many  afliictions  bear 
no  Divine  mark.  (1)  Some  arise  through  indolence.  The  forces  of  life  have  not 
been  kept  in  active  flow — they  have  rested  and  rusted.  There  has  been  leisure  for 
getting  into  moods  and  moodiness,  and  so  the  nerves  become  shaken  and  shattered. 
(2)  Some  arise  through  overwork  whether  bodily  or  mental.  Here  there  are  diffi- 
culties which  each  must  settle  for  himself — how  long  he  can  put  forth  power  with 
safety ;  how  he  can  pull  in  when  he  loves  his  work ;  but  still  retribution  stands 
darkly  behind  the  overworker,  and  will  strike  some  day.  (3)  The  same  result  may 
be  produced  by  the  care  which  gnaws  the  fine  strings  of  the  soul  first,  and  then  tho 
nerves  of  the  body.  II.  To  leakn  that  we  aee  no  exception  to  the  frailty  o» 
THE  BACE.  "  Men  think  all  men  mortal  but  themselves."  Long  continued  health 
has  its  snares.  It  engenders  a  spirit  of  boasting  which  forgets  God  and  sympathy 
with  others.  Humanity  is  like  a  mighty  tree,  always  flourishing  and  always  in 
decay.  Never  for  two  moments  together  has  it  the  same  leaves  upon  it ;  always 
there  are  some  bursting  their  sheath,  or  in  their  tender  green,  or  in  their  full  glory, 
or  slipping  from  their  hold.  All  come  down  at  length  leaving  behind  as  rich  a 
foliage.  Thus  each  leaf  learns  its  frailty  in  turn.  Aid  so  it  is  with  man  who  "  at 
his  best  estate  is  altogether  vanity."  He  begins  to  receive  strange  hints  of  differ- 
ence between  what  he  is  and  what  he  was.  The  eyes  will  give  intimation  that  they 
are  not  as  clear  as  they  were,  and  would  be  all  the  better  for  artificial  help.  As  wa 
walk  hills  seem  more  formidable  than  they  were,  limbs  loose  their  nimbleness,  and 
lungs  and  heart  the  freedom  of  their  play.  And  the  chariot  of  sickness  seems  to 
wheel  a  man  nearer  to  the  presence  of  death  ;  and  to  familiarize  him  with  the  fact 
that  for  him  as  for  others,  there  is  no  discharge  in  this  warfare.  Not  to  learn  this 
is  to  leave  the  sick  chamber  with  one  of  its  most  serious  instructions  unheeded, 

III.    To   TEACH    us  that  WB    ARE    NOT    INDISPENSABLE    TO    THE    LIFE  AND  WORK   OF   THB 

WORLD.  This,  like  our  best  lessons,  is  humiliating  because  true.  It  seems  impos- 
sible at  times  to  conceive  of  the  world  without  some  men  being  in  it ;  they  have 
been  here  so  long,  hold  such  office,  and  render  such  service.  So  many  seem  abso- 
lutely needful — the  father,  pastor,  statesman,  monarch.    When  sickness  comes  and 


GKAP.zi.]  ST.  JOHN.  141 

one  is  withdrawn,  it  is  a  salutary  admonition  to  him  and  to  the  world  that  the  world 
goes  on,  and  will  go  on,  when  he  is  no  more.  IV.  To  help  us  to  revise  oob  views  op 
UFE.  No  one  can  live  wisely  without  times  of  pause  and  quiet  thought ;  and  yet  men 
are  often  too  busy  to  think.  They  live  either  without  plan,  or  their  plan  is  narrow  and 
poor,  and  it  will  never  be  altered  to  the  grand  dimensions  it  ought  to  assume,  unless 
they  are  laid  aside  and  compelled  to  thiuk.  1.  There  is  the  sensualist  with  whom 
life  has  been  a  race  after  pleasure.  Is  there  no  room  for  him  to  revise  his 
plan  of  life  when  appetite  paUs,  and  the  sweetest  drinks  have  lost  their  flavour  ? 
2.  May  not  the  worldling  ask,  "  What  shall  it  profit  a  man,"  &o.  (E.  Mellor,  D.D) 
The  benefits  of  sickness : — By  it  God  designs — I.  To  discoveb  to  us  oub  tbub 
CHARACTER — whether  Christians  or  worldlings.  Christ  is  like  the  crucible  which 
tries  the  gold.  II.  To  make  ds  know  God.  1.  His  authority  and  our  dependence 
on  Him.  Christ  tells  us  how  easily  He  could  crush  us,  and  how  all  our  safety 
depends  on  His  power.  2.  His  faithfulness  supporting  His  children  and  proving 
that  His  grace  is  sufficient  for  them.  3.  His  goodness  in  standing  by  us,  giving  us 
the  consolations  of  His  gospel,  and  letting  down  into  our  souls  an  anticipated 
heaven.  III.  To  give  us  to  feel  the  pbeoiousness  op  Jesus.  Even  in  health  the 
Saviour  is  the  chief  among  ten  thousand,  &c.,  but  His  value  is  especially  felt  when 
sickness  has  brought  us  to  look  into  the  eternal  world.  lY.  To  enable  us  to  esti- 
MATE  THE  INFINITE  IMPORTANCE  OF  RELIGION.  Then  the  most  obdurate  is  constrained 
to  feel  the  difference  between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked.  The  believer  then  feels 
more  than  he  ever  did,  his  unspeakable  obligations  to  God  for  having  forgiven  his 
Bins  and  sealed  by  His  Spirit.  V.  To  snow  us  the  vanities  of  the  world.  On  the 
bed  of  sickness,  honours,  pleasures,  riches,  the  pursuit  of  which  occupies  the  Uvea 
of  so  many  men,  to  the  forgetfuhiess  of  their  soul,  heaven,  God,  lose  their  lustre 
and  appear  but  phantoms.  VI.  To  benefit  our  neighbour  and  glorify  God. 
Thousands  of  examples  might  be  adduced  of  persons  who  received  their  first 
impressions  from  the  conduct  of  Christians  in  dangerous  illnesses.  {U.  Kollock, 
D.D.)  Sickness  a  little  death : — Every  sickness  is  a  little  death.  I  will  be  con- 
tent to  die  oft,  that  I  may  die  once  well.  (Bislvop  Hall.)  The  benefit  of  sorrow  : 
— It  is  said  that  gardeners  sometimes,  when  they  would  bring  a  rose  to  richer 
flowering,  deprive  it  for  a  season  of  light  and  moisture.  Silent  and  dark  it  stands, 
dropping  one  fading  leaf  after  another,  and  seeming  to  go  down  patiently  to  death. 
But  when  every  leaf  is  dropped,  and  the  plant  stands  stripped  to  the  uttermost,  a 
new  life  is  even  then  working  in  the  buds,  from  which  shall  spring  a  tender  foUage 
and  a  brighter  wealth  of  flowers.  So,  often,  in  celestial  gardening,  every  leaf  of 
earthly  joy  must  drop  before  a  new  and  divine  bloom  visits  the  soul.  (Beecher 
Stowe.)  Trial  a  small  matter  in  comparison  with  the  benefit  it  confers  : — In  the 
ancient  times  a  box  on  the  ear  given  by  a  master  to  a  slave  meant  liberty;  little 
would  the  f reedman  care  how  hard  was  the  blow.  By  a  stroke  from  the  sword  the 
warrior  was  knighted  by  his  monarch  ;  small  matter  was  it  to  the  new  made  knight 
if  the  royal  hand  was  heavy.  When  the  Lord  intends  to  lift  His  servants  into  a 
higher  stage  of  spiritual  life.  He  frequently  sends  them  a  severe  trial.  Be  it  so,  who 
among  as  would  wish  to  be  deprived  of  the  trials  if  they  are  the  necessary  attend- 
ants of  spiritual  advancement  ?  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Trial  and  progress  : — One  of 
the  swiftest  Transatlantic  voyages  made  last  summer  by  the  Etruria  was 
because  she  had  a  stormy  wind  abaft,  chasing  her  from  New  York  to  Liverpool. 
But  to  those  going  in  opposite  direction  the  storm  was  a  buffeting  and  a  hindrance. 
It  is  a  bad  thing  to  have  a  storm  ahead  pushing  us  back;  but  if  we  are  God's  chil- 
dren and  aiming  toward  heaven,  the  storms  of  life  will  only  chase  us  the  sooner 
into  the  harbour.  I  am  so  glad  to  believe  that  the  monsoons,  and  typhoons,  and 
mistrals,  and  sirroccos  of  land  and  sea  are  not  unchained  maniacs  let  loose  upon 
the  earth,  but  under  Divine  supervision.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  Afiiictions 
prevent  worse  dangers : — Two  painters  were  employed  to  fresco  the  walls  of  a  magni- 
ficent catheJral.  Both  stood  on  a  rude  scaffolding  constructed  for  the  purpose, 
some  distance  from  the  floor.  One,  so  intent  upon  his  work,  forgetting  where  he 
was,  stepped  back  slowly,  surveying  critically  the  work  of  his  pencil,  until  he  had 
neared  the  edge  of  the  plank  on  which  he  stood.  At  this  moment  his  companion, 
just  perceiving  his  danger,  seized  a  wet  brush,  flung  it  against  the  wall,  spattering 
the  picture  with  unsightly  blotches  of  colouring.  The  painter  flew  forward,  and 
tamed  upon  his  friend  with  fierce  upbraidings,  tUl  made  aware  of  the  danger  he  had 
escaped;  then,  with  tears  of  gratitute,  he  blessed  the  hand  that  saved  him.  Just 
BO,  sometimes  we  get  so  absorbed  with  the  pictures  of  the  world,  unconscious  of  our 
peril,  when  God  in  mercy  dashes  oat  the  beautiful  images,  and  draws  us,  at  tiaH' 
MOL.  n.  16 


943  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ix 

time  ^e  are  complaining  of  Eis  dealings,  into  His  oatstretched  anas  of  love. 
Affiictions  purifying  : — I  remember,  some  years  ago,  when  I  was  at  Shields,  I  went 
into  a  glass-house ;  and,  standing  very  attentive,  I  saw  several  masses  of  burning 
glass  of  various  forms.  The  workman  took  a  piece  of  glass  and  put  it  into  one  fur- 
nace, then  he  put  it  into  a  second,  and  then  into  a  third.  I  said  to  him,  "  Why  do  yoa 
put  it  through  so  many  fires  ?  "  He  answered,  "  Oh,  sir,  the  first  was  not  hot  enough, 
nor  the  second ;  therefore  we  put  it  into  a  third,  and  that  will  make  it  transparent. " 
(G.  Whitefield.)  Afflictions  make  us  long  for  home: — We  had  traversed  the  great  Aletsch 
Glacier,  and  were  very  hungry  when  we  reached  the  mountain  tarn  half-way  between 
the  Bel  Alp  and  the  hotel  at  the  foot  of  the  ^ggischorn ;  there  a  peasant  undertook  to 
descend  the  mountain  and  bring  us  bread  and  milk.  It  was  a  very  Marah  to  us 
when  he  brought  us  back  milk  too  sour  for  us  to  drink,  and  bread  black  as  a  coal, 
too  hard  to  bite,  and  sour  as  the  curds.  What  then  ?  Why,  we  longed  the  more 
eagerly  to  reach  the  hotel  towards  which  we  were  travelling.  Thus  our  disappoint- 
ments on  the  road  to  heaven  whet  our  appetites  for  the  better  country,  and  quicken 
the  pace  of  our  pilgrimage  to  the  celestial  city.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Now  Jesus 
loved  Martha,  and  her  sister,  and  Lazarus.  When  He  had  heard  therefore  that  he 
was  sick,  He  abode  two  days  still  In  the  same  place. — Christ's  special  friends : — 
The  saints  are  all  round  about  His  throne,  because  He  is  alike  near  unto  them 
for  solace  and  tuition.  Howbeit,  as  man,  living  among  men.  He  was  affected  to 
some  more  than  some,  as  to  these  three,  and  the  beloved  disciple.  Plato  com- 
mendeth  his  country  at  Athens,  chiefly  for  this,  that  they  were  beloved  of  the  gods. 
{J.  Trapp.)  The  everlasting  Friend  : — "  Doctor,  what  shall  I  do  ?  "  asked  a 
patient  of  ner  medical  adviser :  "  my  friends  are  all  out  of  town."  "  You  may  have 
one  Friend,"  was  the  answer,  "  who  is  never  out  of  the  way,  but  ever  near,  and  ever 
true.  Jesus  is  the  best  friend  for  earth  or  heaven."  Pres.  Edwards,  when  he  came 
to  die, — his  last  words,  after  bidding  his  relations  good-bye,  were,  "Now,  where  is 
Jesus,  my  never-failing  Friend  ?  "  Love  of  friendship  : — The  English  word 
•'  loved  "  is  ambiguous ;  it  may  apply  to  all  kinds  of  love — the  love  of  friendship^ 
for  instance,  or  the  love  of  man  and  woman.  There  is  not  the  same  ambiguity  in 
Greek.  The  word  used  here  is  one  (agapad)  which  conveys  delicately  the  meaning 
that  the  love  of  Jesus  for  Martha  and  her  sister  was  not  the  love  of  man  for  woman, 
but  the  love  of  friend  for  friend.  The  ambiguity  of  the  English  word  makes  this 
explanation  necessary.     (S.  S.  Times.)  The  delays  of  Jesus: — We  know  the 

value  of  time  to  a  sick  man  (we  say)  when  the  disease  is  growing  and  the  vital 
energies  are  failing.  "  Too  late,"  the  physician  tells  you  :  "  if  you  had  called  me 
just  two  days  ago,  I  might  have  done  something ;  but  now  the  case  is  past  my 
ekill."  But  Jesus  (and  His  heart  was  love  itself)  "  abode  two  days  still  in  the  same 
place  where  He  was."  The  abiding  on  this  occasion  reminds  us  of  that  which  took 
place  when  He  was  on  the  way  to  the  house  of  Jaims,  whose  little  daughter  lay 
•-dying.  Human  love,  impatient  of  delay,  would  have  urged  Him  to  make  haste ; 
yet  He  tarries,  during  the  last  precious  moments,  over  the  case  of  the  woman  who 
had  touched  the  hem  of  His  garment  and  been  healed  of  her  issue  of  blood. 
It  is  a  most  noticeable  feature  of  all  His  works  that  they  were  done  without  hurry; 
with  the  calmness  of  one  who  stays  on  God ;  with  the  calmness  of  conscious 
omnipotence  that  can  afford  to  wait ;  with  the  calmness  of  strong-hearted  love  that 
will  not  forego  its  mighty  purpose  of  blessing  by  taking  premature  action.  In  this 
case  the  delay  was  in  His  plan  of  lovingkindness,  and  essential,  as  we  shall  see  by 
and  by,  to  its  full  development.  It  was  not  merely  that  He  knew  what  He  would 
do,  how  He  would  "  take  off  their  sackcloth,  and  gird  them  with  gladness ;  "  but 
the  delay,  strange  and  painful  as  it  was,  and  inexplicable  to  the  sisters,  formed 
part  of  the  preparation  He  was  making  to  give  them  a  blessing  according  to  His 
own  heart,  who  cares  more  for  our  being  rooted  in  God  than  for  our  present  happi- 
ness. He  was  letting  them  cry  out  of  the  depths,  that  they  might  afterward  cry, 
*•  Let  Israel  hope  in  the  Lord :  for  with  the  Lord  there  is  mercy,  and  with  Him  is 
plenteous  redemption."      {J.  Culross,  D.D.)  The   delays  of  love : — John  is 

always  particular  about  his  use  of  "  therefore,"  and  points  out  many  a  subtle  and 
beautiful  connection  of  cause  and  effect  by  it.  But  none  of  them  is  more  signifi- 
cant as  to  the  ways  of  Providence  than  this.  How  these  sisters  must  have  looked 
down  the  rocky  road  during  those  four  weary  days  1  How  strange  to  the  disciples 
that  He  made  no  sign  of  movement  t  Perhaps  John's  care  in  pointing  out  that  His 
love  was  the  reason  for  His  quiescence  may  reflect  a  remembrance  of  his 
4oubt8  during  this  period.  I.  Christ's  delays  are  the  delays  op  love.  We 
have  all  had  experience  of  desires  for  the  removal  of  sorrowSji  or  for  (he  fulfilment 


«HAP.  XI.3  8T.  JOHN.  24S 

of  wishes  which  we  believed  to  be  in  accordance  with  His  will,  and  v  0  answer  has 
«ome.  It  is  part  of  the  method  of  Providence  that  hope  in  these  respects  shoold  be 
deferred.  And  instead  of  stumbling  at  the  mystery,  would  it  not  be  wiser  to  lay  hold 
of  this  •'  therefore,"  and  by  it  get  a  glimpse  into  the  very  heart  of  the  Divine 
motives?  1.  If  we  could  get  that  conviction  into  our  hearts,  how  quietly  we  should 
go  about  our  work  I  How  encouraging  that  the  only  reason  which  actuates  God  in 
the  choice  of  times  is  oar  good.  2.  Sorrow  is  prolonged  for  the  same  reason  that  it  is 
sent.  Time  is  often  an  element  in  its  working  its  right  effect.  If  the  weight  is 
lifted  the  elastic  substance  beneath  springs  up  again.  As  soon  as  the  wind  passes 
over  the  cornfield  the  bowing  ears  raise  themselves.  You  have  to  steep  foul  things 
in  water  for  a  good  while  before  the  stains  are  cleansed.  Therefore,  the  same  love 
which  sends  must  protract  the  discipline.  3.  The  grand  object  and  highest  blessing 
is  that  our  wills  should  be  bent  until  they  coincide  with  God's,  and  that  takes  time. 
The  shipwright  knows  that  to  mould  a  bit  of  timber  into  the  right  form  is  but  the 
work  of  a  day.  A  will  may  be  broken  at  a  blow,  but  it  will  take  a  while  to  bend  it. 
God's  love  in  Jesus  can  give  us  nothing  better  than  the  opportunity  of  saying,  *•  Not 
my  will,  but  Thine  be  done."  II.  This  delated  help  comes  at  the  bight  time. 
Heaven's  clock  is  different  from  ours.  In  one  day  there  are  twelve  hours  ;  in  God's 
a  thousand  years.  What  seems  long  to  us  is  to  Him  "  a  little  while."  The  longest 
protraction  of  the  f  ulfilmeut  of  a  desire  will  seem  but  as  a  winking  of  an  eye  when 
we  estimate  duration  as  He  estimates  it.  The  ephemeral  insect  has  a  still  minuter 
scale  than  ours,  but  we  should  not  think  of  regulating  our  measure  of  long  and 
short  by  it.  God  works  leisurely  because  He  has  eternity  to  work  in.  But  His 
answer  is  always  punctual  though  delayed.  Peter  is  in  prison.  The  Church  keeps 
praying  for  him  day  after  day.  No  answer.  The  last  night  comes,  and  as  the  veil 
of  darkness  is  thinning,  the  angel  came.  Mark  the  leisureliness  of  the  whole 
subsequent  procedure.  God  never  comes  too  soon  or  too  late.  Take  again  the  case  of 
Sennacherib's  army.  III.  The  best  help  is  not  delated.  The  preceding  principle 
apphes  only  to  the  less  important  half  of  our  prayers,  and  Christ's  answers.  In 
regard  to  spiritual  blessings  the  law  is  not  "  He  abode  still  two  days,"  but  "  Before 
they  call  I  will  answer."  The  only  reason  why  people  do  not  get  the  blessings  of 
the  Christian  life  lies  in  themselves.  "  Ye  have  not  because  ye  ask  not,  or  ask 
amiss,  or  having  asked  you  go  away  not  looking  to  see  whether  the  blessing  is 
coming  or  not."  (X  Maclaren, D.D.)  The  apparent  neglect  of  telf -denying  love. 
John  is  the  only  evangelist  who  speaks  of  the  friendship  between  Christ  and  this 
family,  who  gives  us  in  fact  the  picture  of  Christ  in  social  life,  Christ  unbending, 
Christ  in  the  intimacy,  the  freedom  of  tender,  personal  affection,  Christ  as  a  friend ; 
just  as  He  only  gives  the  social  miracle  at  Cana.  The  apostle  of  love,  "  the 
disciple  whom  Jesus  loved,"  he  only  gives  us  this  aspect  of  Christ's  nature  and 
history.  How  natural  and  beautiful !  Note — I.  The  mtstert  of  buffebing.  Evil 
in  connection  with  love  in  one  who  could  remove  it.  Whatever  may  be 
said  to  lessen  this  mystery  the  facts  are  so.  There  was  no  doubt  about  the 
malady  of  the  man,  none  about  the  mercifulness  of  the  Master.  And  so  we  say 
still.  Christianity  is  not  responsible  for  the  difficulty,  for  as  Sir  W.  Hamilton 
observes,  "  No  difficulty  emerges  in  theology  which  had  not  previously  emerged  in 
philosophy."  Looked  at  alone  the  facts  are  not  consistent  but  opposed.  A  God  of 
love  and  a  world  of  woe  regarded  as  bare  facts  are  a  moral  contradiction ;  and  no 
wonder  if  through  the  veil  of  tears  we  cannot  always  see  His  goodness.  Pain  is 
evil  in  itself,  and  suggests  evil.  The  consciousness  of  sin  interprets  it  as  the  token 
of  the  Father's  frown  ;  and  the  Bible  teaches  that  suffering  came  by  sin ;  but  it 
also  says,  "  Whom  the  Lord  loveth  He  chasteneth,"  and  makes  suffering  the  neces- 
sary evidence  of  love  and  the  choicest  instrument  of  profit.  II.  The  besource  of 
8OBBOW.  1.  They  sent  to  tell  Jesus.  It  was  natural  even  if  they  thought  only  o£ 
telling  Him.  True  love  will  always  tell  what  befalls  it  from  natural  dictate,  because 
it  likes  to  tell  it,  and  because  reciprocal  affection  has  a  right  to  know  it.  When 
John  was  killed  "  the  disciples  went  and  told  Jesus,"  and  so  should  we,  whenever  our 
hearts  are  full,  even  if  nothing  come  of  it.  Our  words  are  modes  of  receiving  as 
well  as  communicating.  God  hears  best  our  prayers  when  we  can  hear  them  too ; 
'we  pray  best  for  ourselves  aloud.  2.  They  merely  informed  Jesus.  They  must 
iiave  meant  and  expected  more.  Both  sisters  exclaimed,  ••  Lord,  if  Thou  hadst,"  &c. 
Was  it  not  then  to  prevent  his  dying  that  Christ  was  told.  But  they  did  not  know 
He  knew.  We  do.  Our  prayers  are  not  to  inform  God ;  He  wants  to  J/iow  our 
prayers — the  expression  of  our  feelings,  not  the  instructions  of  our  wisdom.  3.  They 
did  not  ask  the  boon  they  expected.    Was  it  modesty  or  faith  ?    We  cannci  tell  ^ 


244  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xl 

but  the  more  we  approach  to  this  mode  of  prayer  the  better,  ftt  least,  as  to  things  ol 
a  temporal  kind.  The  more  we  leave  them  to  God,  and  remember  that  we  are  to 
' '  ask  according  to  His  will,"  and  that  only  spiritaal  blessings,  are  blessings  always, 
the  better.  Many  a  parent  has  prayed  the  life  of  a  child,  whom  afterwards  he  had 
wished  had  found  an  infant's  tomb.  Many  a  merchant  has  craved  the  success  of  a 
venture,  whose  success  has  been  the  beginning  of  soul-destroying  prosperity.  But 
there  is  no  danger  or  excess  when  we  ask  for  salvation  and  holiness.  4.  Note  the 
way  in  which  they  said  what  they  did  say.  They  do  not  mention  themselves,  nor 
Lazarus's  love  for  Jesus,  but  Jesus'  love  to  him.  They  might  have  put  it  as  the 
afdicted  mother  did — " Have  mercy  upon  me, "  or,  "Him  we  love  is  sick,"  or, "  He  who 
loveth  Thee."  They  thought  Christ's  love  was  the  best  argument,  and  as  there  was 
no  need  to  mention  his  name,  verily  it  was.  We  always  prevail  with  God  when  we 
make  Him  our  plea,  "for  Thy  name's  sake."  HI.  The  triumph  of  lovb.  Why 
did  He  not  hasten  to  Bethany.  Even  if  He  did  not  chose  to  prevent  Lazarus  dying. 
He  might  have  soothed  him  and  his  sisters.  He  did  not  go  because  He  wished  him 
to  die,  and  intimates  (ver.  15)  that  if  He  were  at  Bethany  He  could  not  let  him  die. 
He  delayed  because  He  meant  to  raise  him.  Herein  is  a  picture  of  Providence.  1. 
The  transformation  of  evil  into  good.  2.  The  material  made  instrument  of  the 
spiritual.  3.  Fellowship.  One  sickening  and  dying  for  the  health,  joy,  and  higher 
hfe  of  many.  Conclusion :  We  have  talked  of  Christ's  love  and  man's  sorrow. 
Here  only  can  the  two  be  found  together.  There  are  two  states  before  us,  one,  in 
which  there  will  be  sorrow  without  love,  and  another  in  which  there  will  be  love 
without  sorrow.  Suffering  without  Christ — this  is  hell.  Love  with  no  trouble  or 
death — the  love  of  Christ  ever  present,  filing  the  heart  with  joy  unspeakable — that 
is  heaven.    {A.  J.  Morris.) 

Vers.  9, 10.  Are  there  not  twelve  hours  In  the  day  f — What  does  this  sentence 
mean  here,  following  vers.  7,8?  Why  was  it  introduced  ?  I  do  not  know  that  wo 
who  are  living  easy  and  comfortable  lives  can  quite  solve  that  question.  But  many 
a  patriot  and  confessor  who  has  been  concealing  himself  from  the  anger  of  those 
whom  he  wished  to  bless  has  learned  its  meaning  and  felt  its  support.  If  he  had 
tried  to  rush  forth  into  danger,  merely  in  obedience  to  some  instinct  or  passion  of 
his  own,  he  was  walking  in  the  night  and  was  sure  to  stumble.  If  he  heard  a 
voice  in  his  conscience  bidding  him  go  and  do  some  work  for  God — go  and  aid 
some  suffering  friend — he  would  be  walking  in  a  track  of  light;  it  signified  not  what 
enemies  might  be  awaiting  him,  what  stones  might  be  cast  at  him,  he  could  move 
on  fearlessly  and  safely.  The  sun  was  in  the  heavens — the  stones  would  miss 
till  his  hour  was  come.  If  it  was  come,  the  sooner  they  struck  the  better.  (F.  D. 
Maurice,  M.A.)  Twelve  hours  in  the  day  : — I,  The  predestination  op  lifb. 
God  has  marked  out  beforehand  the  length  of  the  life.  This  was  true  of  the  life  of 
Christ.  He  was  in  daylight  till  the  twelfth  hour.  He  could  not  die.  His  time  was 
not  yet  come.  It  is  true  of  us.  God  knows  exactly  the  length  of  our  "  day,"  and 
therefore  of  our  "  hour."  The  day  shall  run  its  course,  whether  the  season  be  vnnter 
or  summer,  whether  the  hour  be  thirty  minutes  or  sixty.  This  is  a  call  to  confidence. 
Be  not  afraid  to  go  at  the  summons  of  duty,  in  spite  of  snare,  terror,  accident  or 
infection.  The  day  will  have  its  twelve  hours.  H.  The  completeness  op  lipe. 
We  speak  of  a  child  or  young  man's  life  as  prematurely  closed.  Isaiah  speaka 
of  the  longevity  of  the  time  when  a  child  shall  die  hundred  years  old.  Certainly 
there  have  been  children  whose  little  life  has  been  well  completed — their 
innocence  and  death  testifying  powerfully  for  Christ.  Their  day  has  had  its  twelve 
hours,  though  the  constituent  hour  was  less  than  a  year.  We  must  cast  away  the 
common  measurement  of  time.  Christ's  life  was  a  short  one,  and  how  large  a  part 
was  spent  in  preparation  ?  No  time  is  less  wasted  than  that  given  to  preparation. 
Christ's  three  years  of  speech  had  in  them  the  whole  virtue,  for  the  world,  of  two 
eternities.  Christ's  thirty  years  of  hstening  were  not  the  prelude  only,  but  the 
condition  of  the  three.  Each  life,  the  shortest  not  least,  is  complete.  Man's  work 
depends  not  on  his  longevity.  Many  a  young  man  sleeping  in  the  churchyard  sends 
forth  the  fragrance  of  a  perpetual  sanctity.  Use  well  your  time,  longer  or  shorter, 
and  the  hours  shall  be  twelve,  and  the  component  hour  shall  have  its  constituent 
moments  sure.  III.  The  unity  op  lipe.  We  would  fain  divorce  hour  from  hour, 
and  never  recognize  their  bearing  upon  each  other  and  the  day.  And  it  is  true 
that  repentance  severs  one  part  of  the  day  from  another,  and  make  old  age — and 
therefore  eternity — diverse  from  the  boyhood.  It  is  also  true  that  a  Christian  does 
well  to  take  his  years,  months,  days,  one  by  one  and  to  live  eoda  as  if  it  were  the 


CHAP.  XL]  ST.  JOHN.  244 

only  one.  Nevertheless,  we  cannot  disguise  the  unity  of  this  being.  We  may  wish 
we  had  not  done  that  wicked  thing,  fallen  into  that  evil  habit,  but  it  is  there :  wa 
cannot  cut  off  the  entail.  God  sees  the  day  as  one :  and  when  He  writes  an  epitaph 
Be  does  so  in  one  of  two  lines.  "  He  did  that  which  was  good."  "  He  did  that 
which  was  evU " — the  identification  is  complete,  the  character  one.  IV.  Thb 
DI8TBIB0TI0N  OF  LiFB.  God  sces  it  in  its  unity.  He  bids  us  see  it  in  its  manifold- 
ness ;  in  its  variety  of  opportunity  and  capability  of  good.  Where  is  the  moment 
which  might  not  contribute  something?  Economize.  Give  up  some  fragment 
to  God.  (Dean  Vaughan.)  The  twelve  hours  of  tlie  day  ;  or,  lifetime  and  life's  duty 
in  their  indissoluble  unity : — ^I.  The  certainty  op  life  within  the  bounds  of  duty. 
II.  The  saoredness  of  ddty  within  the  bounds  of  life.  {J.  P.  Lange,  D.D.) 
Life  the  golden  opportunity : — I.  The  wisdom  of  knowing  oub  opportunity.  This 
chiefly  depends  on — 1.  Our  walking.  2.  Our  working  while  it  is  light.  II.  The 
DANOEB  OF  NEGLECTiNO  Tt — 1.  For  vaiu  amusemeuts.  2.  In  the  eager  pursuit  of 
trifles.  (R.  Cecil,  M.A.)  God  takes  care  of  His  workers  .-—The  Kev.  T.  Charles 
had  a  remarkable  escape  in  one  of  his  journeys  to  Liverpool.  His  saddle-bag  was 
by  mistake  put  into  a  different  boat  from  that  in  which  he  intended  to  go.  This 
made  it  necessary  for  him  to  change  his  boat,  even  after  he  had  taken  his  seat  in  it. 
The  boat  in  which  he  meant  to  go  went  to  the  bottom,  and  all  in  it  were  drowned. 
Thus  did  God  in  a  wonderful  way  preserve  His  servant — "  immortal  till  his  work 
was  done."  God  had  a  great  work  for  this  His  sovant,  and  He  supported  and  pre- 
served  him  till  it  was  completed.  Tlie  providential  care  of  life  : — When  I  was 
stationed  in  Swansea,  in  the  year  1836, 1  was  appointed  delegate  to  the  district 
meeting  held  at  St.  Ives,  Cornwall.  One  Captain  Gribble  offered  me  a  passage  in 
his  vessel.  I  accepted  the  offer,  and  said,  •*  When  are  you  going  out  ?  "  He  replied, 
••  We  have  got  our  cargo,  and  shall  go  to-morrow  if  the  wind  is  fair."  I  went  to  the 
dock  on  Monday,  Tuesday,  and  Wednesday  ;  the  wind  was  still  against  him.  He 
then  advised  me  to  take  the  packet  to  Bristol,  as  he  said  it  was  quite  uncertain 
when  he  should  be  able  to  go  to  sea.  I  took  the  packet  on  the  Thursday  morning. 
We  had  a  very  rough  passage ;  through  mercy  we  arrived  safe  in  Bristol  next  morn- 
ing. I  arrived  at  Hayle  between  one  and  two  o'clock  on  Sunday  morning.  I  then 
walked  to  St.  Ives,  a  distance  of  five  miles.  I  went  to  Mr.  Driffield's.  When  he 
saw  me  he  said,  "  Is  Joseph  yet  alive  ?  "  I  answered,  "  Yea."  He  further  said, 
"  We  were  informed  you  were  coming  with  a  sailing  vessel,  and  it  appears  she  ia 
lost,  for  some  of  the  wreck  is  come  on  shore.  We  have  gone  through  the  stationing 
and  left  you  without  a  station."  I  was  given  to  understand  that  on  the  morning  I 
left  for  Bristol  the  vessel  went  out.  The  wind  was  fair,  but  after  being  a  few  hours 
at  sea  all  went  to  the  bottom,  captain  and  crew.  What  a  providence  it  appears  that 
the  vessel  coold  not  go  out  until  I  was  gone  1  (J.  Hibbs. )  The  contemplated  journey  : 
— I.  Opposed  by  the  disciples  as — 1.  Dangerous  (ver.  8).  2.  Unnecessary  (vera. 
12, 13).  Hence— 3.  Imprudent,  if  not  also— 4.  Wrong.  II.  Justified  by  Jesus. 
As — 1.  Imperative,  being  undertaken  at  the  call  of  His  Father.  2.  Safe,  since  He 
could  not  stumble  in  the  path  of  duty.  3.  Merciful,  inasmuch  as  He  went  to 
comfort  the  sisters  and  raise  Lazarus.  4.  Profitable,  even  for  those  who  were  so 
strongly  against  it.  {T.  Whitelaw,  D.D.)  Light  and  loyality  .-—The  disciples 
were  amazed  when  Jesus  proposed  to  go  to  Bethany,  and  remonstrated  with  Him. 
Christ  takes  this  opportunity  of  explaining  the  great  principle  on  which  He  worked. 
»» I  walk  in  God's  hght  which  shines  upon  My  path  during  the  time  He  has  fixed 
for  My  ministry.  Wherever  that  light  shines,  I  go,  regardless  of  everything  but  it. 
Do  you  the  same.  My  disciples.  Your  path  of  duty  will  be  clear.  Without  that 
light  you  will  be  as  men  walking  in  the  dark  and  meeting  disaster."  We  are  thus 
led  up  to  the  question  of  the  simplicity  of  duty.  Somehow  duty  has  come  to  be  to 
many  a  compUcated  matter.  That  it  presents  problems  every  one  of  us  knows,  but 
does  the  problem  lie  in  the  duty  or  in  us  ?  Do  we  not  compUcate  the  problem  by 
adding  factors  of  our  own.  The  oculist  says  that  there  is  a  blind  spot  in  every  eye : 
possibly  when  we  think  duty  obscure  we  have  brought  the  duty  into  line  with  the 
blind  spot.  As  a  matter  of  precept,  duty  being  a  thing  of  universal  obligation  must 
be  simple.  To  make  it  a  matter  of  subtle  casuistry  or  painful  research  would  limit 
it.  And  men  stumble  none  the  less  because  of  this  simplicity.  Christ  does  not  put 
the  blame  of  stumbUng  on  the  law  or  on  the  complication  of  duty.  It  is  not  the 
geological  structure  of  the  stone  that  makes  men  stumble,  but  darkness  or  blind- 
ness. And  so  morally.  Our  Lord  asserts  elsewhere  that  "  the  lamp  of  the  body  is 
the  eye  :  When  thine  eye  is  single  thy  whole  body  is  full  of  light,"  &o.  When 
a  man  sees  two  trees  when  there  is  only  one,  or  prismatic  colours  in  a  house  that  is 


846  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  xu 

white,  we  do  not  blame  the  tree  &c.,  but  the  man's  viRion.    A  sound  moral  vision 
recognizes  duty  nnder  every  shape.    Hence  the  truth  of  our  text  is  that  the  recogni- 
tion  of  duty,  and  the  practical  solution  of  its  problems,  lie  in  the  principle  of  loyalty 
to  Christ.    A  Divinely  enlightened  conscience  and  an  obedient  will,  not  only  push, 
but  lead.     See  this  illustrated  here.     Going  to  Betbany  involved  a  question  of  duty 
for  Christ.     To  one  who  had  no  thought  but  to  do  the  Father's  will,  the  case  was 
simple.    But  the  disciples,  in  their  natural  timidity,  put  another  element  into  the 
question,  which  complicated  it — personal  safety.     If  Jesus  entertained  the  sugges- 
tion, He  would  have  been  diverted  from  the  plain  duty.    A  new  question  would  have 
been  raised  which  God  had  not  raised.    God's  commission  said  nothing  about 
danger — only  "  Go."    If  He  meant  to  do  right  the  decision  presented  no  difficulty ; 
if  He  meant  to  save  Himself,  He  would  have  walked  in  darkness.    Is  not  singleness 
of  purpose  an  element  of  all  heroism?    Was  there  ever  a  great  general  whose 
thought  was  divided  between  victory  and  personal  safety  ?  The  men  who  have  moved 
society  have  seen  nothing  but  the  end  to  be  won.     When  a  physician  enters  on  his 
profession,  he  does  so  with  the  knowledge  that  he  must  ignore  contagion.    That 
makes  his  duty  very  simple — to  relieve  disease  wherever  he  finds  it.    The  moment 
he  begins  to  think  about  exposure  to  fever,  &c.,  his  usefulness  is  over.    Luther  at 
Worms  had  a  terrible  danger  to  face,  but  a  very  easy  question  to  solve ;  but  his 
inabihty  to  do  anything  but  the  one  right  thing  ( "  I  can  do  no  otherwise  ")  carried 
the  Eeformation,  and  this  singleness  is  the  very  essence  of  Christianity.     Its  first 
law  is,  treat  self,  as  though  it  were  not  "Follow  Me."    It  is  not  always  easy  to 
follow  Christ ;  but  the  way  at  least  is  plain.    A  greater  difficulty  arises  when  the 
question  becomes  one  of  compromising  between  Christ  and  self.     The  only  way  in 
which  self  can  be  adjusted  to  the  Cross  is  by  being  nailed  to  it.    Duty  is  a  fixed 
fact.    It  does  not  adjust  itself  to  us.    There  is  a  nebulous  mass  in  the  depths  of 
space.     The  problem  before  the  astronomer  may  be  difficult  to  work  out,  but  its 
nature  is  simple.     He  is  to  resolve  that  mist  into  its  component  stars.     If  he  is  bent 
on  bringing  the  facts  discovered  by  his  telescope  into  harmony  with  some  theory  of 
his  own,  he  comphcates  his  task  at  once :  or  let  the  glass  be  cracked  or  the  mirror 
dirty,  and  his  observation  only  results  in  guess  work.    But,  with  an  unprejudiced 
mind  and  a  good  telescope,  his  eye  penetrates  the  veil  and  brings  back  tidings  which 
enrich  the  records  of  science.     So  when  men  look  at  duty  witii  loyal  and  obedient 
hearts,  its  lines  come  out  sharply.     Let  self  put  a  film  over  the  spirit,  duty  remains 
unchanged,  but  the  man  sees  only  a  mist.     When  the  engineer  decided  that  his  rail- 
road had  to  go  through  Mont  Cenis,  he  had  a  difficult  task  but  a  simple  one ;  and 
in  addressing  himself  wholly  to  that  solution  of  his  problem,  he  at  once  got  rid  of  a 
thousand  questions  as  to  other  routes.  &o.    No  one  ever  had  so  clear  a  perception 
of  the  hardness  of  His  mission  as  Christ.    And  yet  the  closest  study  reveals  not  a 
shadow  of  hesitation.    He  goes  to  the  Cross  saying,   "The  Scripture  must  be 
fulfilled."    He  comes  back  from  the  dead  with,  "  Thus  it  behoved  Christ  to  suffer." 
His  motto  was,  "  My  meat  is  to  do  the  will  of  Him  that  sent  Me,  &c."    He  admitted 
no  question  of  stoning  or  crucifying,  and  hence  it  is  that  His  life  while  it  is  the 
most  tremendous  tragedy  in  history  is  the  most  purely  simple.     Suppose  duty  costs 
popularity,  &c.,  Christ  does  not  promise  that  the  man  who  walks  in  the  light  shall 
have  an  easy  walk.     He  promises  that  he  shall  not  stumble :  but  Christ  did  not 
stumble  because  He  was  crucified,  nor  Stephen  because  stoned,  nor  Paul  because 
beheaded.    The  stvunbling  would  have  been  in  Christ  accepting  Satan's  offer,  in 
Stephen's  keeping  silence,  in  Paul  making  terms  with  Nero  or  the  Jewish  leader. 
Popularity,  &c.,  won  by  evasion  of  duty  are  not  gains.    Better  that  Christ  should 
have  gone  than  that  the  world  should  have  lost  the  lesson  of  the  Resurrection. 
Better  all  that  agony  than  that  the  world  should  have  missed  a  Saviour.    But  this 
steadfast  light  giving  principle  is  not  a  mere  matter  of  human  resolve.    Christ  is  in 
the  soul  as  an  inspiration  and  not  merely  before  the  eye  as  an  example.    And 
remember  that  though  Christ  in  setting  you  on  that  weU-lighted  track  of  duty 
does  not  allow  you  to  take  account  of  the  hardness.  He  takes  account  of  it.     You 
cannot  live  a  life  so  hard  that  Christ  has  not  lived  a  harder.    His  word  is  "  Follow 
Me."    Do  that  and  you  cannot  go  wrong,    {M.  R.  Vincent,  D.D.)        If  a  man 
■walk  in  the  day,  lie  stnmbleth  not. — Oriental  streets  are  not  as  safe  as  Occidental 
streets,  nor  are  Oriental  roads  as  safe  as  Occidental  roads.     Setting  aside  all  other 
differences,  both  streets  and  roads  are  in  a  chronic  state  of  disrepair.    The  streets 
are  narrow,  and  not  too  clean ;  the  roads  are  often  composed  of  nothing  more  than 
loose  stones  lying  upon  each  other  as  chance  sets  them.    The  consequence  is  that 
it  is  a  work  of  strategy  to  thread  one's  way  through  Oriental  streets,  avoiding  at  the 


(OBAX.  XI.]  8T.  JOHN.  247 

aune  time  the  filth  of  the  street  and  the  crowding  of  burdened  donkeys  or  camels, 
«Dd  a  work  of  art  to  ride  or  walk  over  an  Oriental  road  without  coming  occasionally 
to  the  ground,  or  having  one's  flesh  torn  by  the  thorns  on  either  side.  This  is 
during  the  day ;  but  at  night  the  difficulty  is  increased  a  hundred-fold ;  thus  it  is 
that  "  if  a  man  walk  in  the  night,  he  stumbleth."  Jesus  felt  that  He  was  walking 
in  the  day,  because  He  saw  the  danger,  and  knew  how  to  avoid  it.  (S.  8.  Times.) 
The  walk  of  duty : — It  is  a  walk — I.  of  Light.  "  Walk  in  the  day."  The  man 
who,  from  proper  motives  and  with  a  single  eye,  pursues  his  mission  in  life, 
moves  in  open  day.  No  dark  cloud  shadows  his  path,  no  haze  hangs  over  him,  he 
knows  what  he  is  about.  His  course  lies  clearly  before  him,  and  he  sees  the  goal — 
II.  Of  SAFETY.  "Stumbleth  not."  He  who  moves  within  the  bounds  of  duty 
makes  no  false  steps,  for  the  will  of  God  enlightens  him.  But  he  who  walks  out- 
side the  limits  of  his  vocation  wiU  err  in  what  he  does,  since,  not  the  will  of  God, 
but  his  own  pleasure  is  his  guide.  III.  That  must  be  pursued.  Though  Christ  was 
warned  of  the  probable  consequences  He  felt  that  He  had  to  go.   (D.  Thomas,  D.D. ) 

Vers.  11-13.  Our  friend  Lazanu  sleepeth. — Sweet  sleep  : — I.  We  have  a  sweet 
RELATIONSHIP  DECLABBD.  1.  "  Our  friend."  Behold  here  wondrous  condescension. 
Oar  Lord  does  not  turn  to  His  disciples  and  say  "Your  friend  sleepeth,"  but 
places  Himself  side  by  side  with  them  in  their  affection  and  says  '*  Oar 
friend."  It  seems  to  me  to  teach  so  sweetly  the  blessed  fact  that  Jesus  is 
one  with  His  people.  It  is  equal  to  saying,  "Do  you  love  Him  ?  so  do  I."  Let 
as  meditate  upon  the  friendship  Christ  has  to  His  children,  and  in  doing 
so  I  would  notice — 1.  It  is  a  real  one.  There  is  too  much  of  superficial 
friendship  abroad  ;  plenty  of  the  lip,  but  little  of  the  heart.  This  is  an  age  of 
shams  ;  and  among  them,  most  hideous  of  the  lot,  is  that  of  miscalled  friendship. 
In  the  love  of  a  saint  to  his  Saviour  there  is  a  blessed  reality.  Whoever  else  he 
may  not  love  with  all  his  heart,  his  Saviour  he  must.  2.  In  this  friendship  there 
are  no  secrets  kept  on  either  side.  The  old  saying  runs  "  whisperers  separate  chief 
friends,"  but  in  close  friendships  nothing  is  hidden,  so  whispers  have  nothing  to 
reveal.  When  Jesus  says  to  any  one,  •'  My  friend,"  He  declares  a  friendship  that 
ignores  all  secret  keeping,  for  "  the  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  Him." 
IE  there  be  a  secret  sin  in  the  heart,  if  a  fall  in  the  life,  0  bear  me  witness,  saints 
of  God,  that  there  is  no  peace  for  as  until,  like  the  woman  of  old,  we  have  "  told 
EQm  all."  Heavy  burdens  roll  off  the  soul,  and  sweet  ease  flows  into  it  by  telling 
Jesus  everything.  3.  Jesus  shows  His  friendship  by  helping  in  time  of  need.  4. 
Moreover,  if  a  person  says  to  me,  "  my  friend,"  I  naturally  expect  he  wiU  show  his 
friendship  by  calling  in  to  see  me ;  and  sweet  are  the  love  visits  that  Jesus  pays 
His  friends.  That  disciple  knows  but  little  of  the  sweets  of  the  religion  of  Jesus 
who  knows  but  seldom  what  it  is  to  hear  his  Lord's  knock,  and  who  but  seldom  sups 
with  hia  beloved  in  closest  fellowship.  5.  Jesus  is  never  ashamed  of  His  friends. 
When  once  He  has  said  "  My  friend,"  He  never  retracts  the  sentence.  There  are 
many  butterfly  friends  fluttering  round  us  all,  to  be  seen  in  the  summer  of  pros- 
perity, but  conspicuous  by  their  absence  in  the  winter  of  adversity.  6.  That  the 
friendship  of  Jesus  lasts  for  ever.  The  sweeter  the  friendship  the  more  terrible 
the  blow  that  severs  it.  But  severed  it  must  be  at  last.  II.  A  solemn  fact 
SUGGESTED.  Christ's  friends  die.  1.  The  friendship  of  Christ  does  not  exempt 
from  death.  This  dread  reaper  spares  none.  Death  asks  not  whether  the  shock 
of  com  is  ripe  for  glory,  or  is  as  yet  green,  and  unprepared  for  the  sickle.  He 
asks  not  whether  his  victim  is  a  child  of  God  or  one  of  the  world's  devotees.  2. 
Christ  permits  His  friends  to  die  in  order  to  make  manifest  how  completely  He  has 
conquered  death.  Suppose  that,  instead  of  tasting  death,  all  Christ's  friends  were, 
like  Enoch,  translated  into  glory ;  might  not  death  boast  and  say,  "  Aha  !  they  dare 
not  meet  me  in  the  field  I  Their  Lord  is  afraid  to  put  His  conquest  to  the  test."  3. 
Another  reason  why  the  friends  of  Jesus  die  is  that  they  may  be  brought  into 
conformity  with  their  Lord.  It  may  seem  strange  to  some  of  your  ears ;  but 
I  believe  there  are  many  here  who  would  rather  prefer  to  die  than  otherwise,  in 
order  that  in  everything  they  might  be  conformed  to  their  Master.  HI. 
We  havb  in  THIS  text  a  tebt  cheering  DESCRIPTION.  "Our  friend  sleepeth." 
Not  oar  friend  is  dead.  1.  In  sleep  there  is  a  rest  from  pain.  There  is 
rest  from  pain  in  death.  2.  In  sleep  there  is  a  rest  from  care.  8. 
Sleeping  implies  waking.  {A.  G.  Brown.)  The  friendship  of  Christ : — I. 
Jesus  is  the  fbibnd  or  His  people.  Human  friendship  is  the  choicest  of  earthly 
privileges.    How  mach  more  the  friendship  of  Christ  I  (chap.  zvi.  14, 15).    Note  the 


348  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohat.  n. 

qnalities  of  a  true  friend.  1.  Amiableness,  or  having  those  properties  which  are 
calculated  to  attract  the  heart.  We  may  be  grateful  to  those  we  cannot  esteem, 
and  admire  those  we  cannot  love  ;  but  to  make  a  friend  there  must  be  something 
lovely.  This  exists  in  Christ  in  the  highest  degree.  2.  Power  of  wisdom  to  guide, 
of  strength  to  support  and  defend;  of  riches  to  help.  These  all  exist  in  their 
fulness  in  Christ.  3.  Faithfulness  to  keep  our  secrets  and  to  fulfil  His  promises. 
4.  Tenderness.  Friendship  is  like  a  foreign  plant  which  requires  delicate  treat- 
ment. It  shrinks  from  whatever  is  rough  and  unfeeling,  and  cannot  confide  in 
rudeness.  5.  Uuchangeableness.  Christ  is  not  a  summer  friend,  who,  like  the 
butterfly,  flutters  round  us  while  the  sun  is  shining,  but  retires  when  the  sun  has 
gone.  He  is  "  a  friend  born  for  adversity."  He  is  ♦'  the  same  to-day,"  <fec,  IL 
The  bekvices  which  Chkist  discharges  fob  His  friends.  1.  He  sympathizes 
with  them,  as  one  of  them  sharing  their  sorrows.  2.  He  is  their  abiding  com< 
panion.  3.  He  has  paid  their  debts,  ransomed  their  persons,  reconciled  them  to 
God  at  the  expense  of  His  own  life.  4.  He  has  purchased  for  them  an  inheritance 
incorruptible,  &c.  5.  He  has  fitted  up  mansions  as  the  eternal  residences  of  the 
bodies  and  souls  of  His  people.  III.  To  the  friends  op  Christ  death  has 
CHANGED  ITS  NATURE.  They  Cannot  die,  they  only  sleep.  The  emblem  expresses — 
1.  "  The  composure  of  soul  which  the  Lord  gives  to  His  people  in  the  hour  of  death." 
*'  Mark  the  perfect  man,"  &c.  2.  The  temporary  cessation  of  the  powers  of  the  body 
to  recruit  it  for  fresh  service  on  the  resurrection  morn  (Isa.  xxvi.  19).  (J.  H 
Stewart,  M.A.)  The  awakening  ChriH  : — Jesus  awakes  men  out  of  the  sleep  of — 
I.  Ignorance,  to  give  them  intellectual  life.  His  teaching — 1.  Awakes  the  power  to 
think.  2.  Strengthens  the  thinking  powers.  3.  Affords  food  for  thought.  11. 
Moral  insensibility,  to  give  them  spiritual  life.  1.  Men  are  dead  in  sin,  2. 
Christ's  call  awakes  the  soul,  and  Christ's  power  gives  it  life.  3.  Christ  supports, 
develops,  and  perfects  this  new  life.  III.  Indiffebence,  to  give  them  a  hfe  of 
usefulness.     (Weekly  Pulpit.)        The  Christian  in  life  and  in  death: — I.  In  litx. 

1.  The  friend  of  Jesus.     Expressing  ideas  of — (1)  Acquaintance.    (2)  Endearment. 

2.  The  friend  of  Jesus'  friends.  Adding  thoughts  of — (1)  Social  intercourse.  (2) 
Loving  brotherhood.  II.  In  death.  Asleep.  1.  Withdrawn  from  the  ordinary 
activities  of  life,  as  the  mind  is  during  the  hours  of  slumber.  2,  Possessed  of  a 
real,  though  different  existence,  as  the  mind  never  ceases  to  be  active  during 
the  hours  of  repose.  3.  Certain  to  awake  refreshed  after  the  period  of  rest  has 
terminated,  as  mind  and  body  do  when  night  is  passed.  (T.  Whitelaw,  D.D.) 
Death  as  sleep : — Estius  well  remarks,  "  Sleeping,  in  the  sense  of  dying,  is  only 
applied  to  men,  because  of  the  hope  of  the  resurrection.  We  read  no  such  thing 
of  brutes."  The  use  of  the  figure  is  so  common  in  Scripture,  that  it  is  almost 
needless  to  give  references  (see  Deut.  xxxi.  16 ;  Daniel  xii.  2 ;  Matt,  xxvii.  52 ; 
Acts  vii.  60  ;  xiii.  S6  ;  1  Cor.  vii.  39  ;  xi.  30 ;  xv.  6-18  ;  1  These,  iv.  13,  14).  But  it 
is  a  striking  fact  that  the  figure  is  frequently  used  by  great  heathen  writers,  showing 
clearly  that  the  traditions  of  a  life  after  death  existed  even  among  the  heathen. 
Homer,  Sophocles,  Virgil,  Catullus,  supply  instances.  However,  the  Christian 
believer  is  the  only  one  who  can  truly  regard  death  as  sleep — that  is,  as  a  healthy, 
refreshing  thing,  which  can  do  him  no  harm.  Many  among  ourselves,  perhaps, 
are  not  aware  that  the  figure  of  speech  exists  among  us  in  full  force  in  the  word 
"cemetery,"  applied  to  burial  ground.  That  word  is  drawn  from  the  very  Greek 
verb  which  our  Lord  uses  here.  It  is  literally  a  "  sleeping-place."  (Bishop  Ryle.) 
Death  has  thf  advantage  of  sleep: — For  sleep  is  only  the  parenthesis,  while  death 
is  the  period  of  our  cares  and  trials.  (M.  Henry.)  A  beautiful  death: — All 
Wales,  when  I  was  there,  was  filled  with  the  story  of  the  dying  experiences  of 
Frances  Eidley  Havevgal.  She  got  her  feet  wet  standing  on  the  ground  preaching 
temperance  and  the  gospel  to  a  group  of  boys  and  men,  went  home  with  a  chill, 
and  congestion  set  in,  and  they  told  her  she  was  very  dangerously  ill.  "  I  thought 
80,"  she  said,  "  but  it  is  really  too  good  to  be  true  that  I  am  going.  Doctor,  do 
you  reallv  think  I  am  going?"  "Yes."  "To-day?"  ♦'Probably."  She  said: 
"Beautiful,  splendid  to  be  so  near  the  gate  of  heaven!"  Then,  after  a  spasm 
of  pain,  she  nestled  down  in  the  pillows  and  said,  "  There,  now ;  it  is  all  over 
— blessed  rest."  Then  she  tried  to  sing,  and  she  struck  one  glad  note,  high  note 
of  praise  to  Christ,  but  could  sing  only  one  word,  "  He,"  and  then  all  was  still. 
Shefiiiished  itinheaven.  (T.de  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  Sleep  and  death : — The  angel 
of  sleep  and  the  angel  of  death  reclined  at  eventide  on  a  hill  overlooking  the  abodes 
of  men.  As  night  came  on,  one  rose  from  nis  mossy  couch  and  scattered  soma 
seeds  of  slumber.    The  zephyrs  bore  them  away  to  human  dwellings,  and  pre- 


«HAP.  XL]  ST.  JOHN,  U9 

eentlj  the  sick  man  forgot  his  pain,  the  monmer  his  sorrow,  the  poor  his  cares. 
••  Oh,  what  joy,''  exclaimed  the  angel  of  sleep,  "  thus  to  do  good  onseen  I  " 
The  other  looked  at  him  in  sadness,  and  a  tear  gathered  in  his  dark  eye  as  he 
Bald :  "  Alas,  that  I  can  have  no  thanks  I  Earth  calls  me  its  enemy  and 
destroyer."  "  Nay,  my  brother,"  answered  sleep,  "  in  the  morning  men  praise  me 
as  their  friend,  and  will  not  the  good  in  the  resurrection  mom  praise  and  bless 
thee  also  as  a  benefactor  7    Are  we  not  brothers  and  messengers  of  one  Father  ?  " 

Vers.  14,  15.  Lazarus  Is  dead,  and  I  am  glad  for  yonr  sakes  that  I  was  not 
there. — I.  The  Savioub  is  always  alxvh  to  the  welfabb  of  His  people — "for 
your  sakes."  Here  is  love  beyond  compare.  Is  He  abased  t  *'  For  our  sakes  He 
became  poor."  Does  He  suffer?  "He  bears  our  sorrows,  and  for  us  He  dies." 
Does  He  go  away  ?  "  It  is  expedient  for  us."  Does  He  appear  in  heaven ?  Still 
it  is  for  us.  Other  people  are  the  subjects  of  His  providence ;  but  His  people  are 
the  end  of  it.  II.  There  is  nothing  He  is  so  concerned  to  promote  as  their 
FAITH — "  that  ye  may  believe."  From  this  learn — 1.  That  faith  is  no  easy 
matter.  Wbere  is  the  Christian  that  has  not  often  cried,  •'  Help  Thou  mine 
unbelief."  The  difficulty  of  believing  may  be  seen  by  the  means  here  employed 
to  promote  it,  and  from  the  persona  for  whom  He  wishes  it — those  who  had 
been  with  Him  and  seen  His  miracles.  2.  That  faith  admits  of  increase. 
The  disciples  believed,  or  they  would  not  have  followed  Him,  but  they 
did  not  believe  enough.  Faith  at  one  time  is  like  a  mustard-seed,  at 
another  like  a  mustard-tree.  The  blade  may  do  very  well  in  March, 
but  we  expect  the  full  corn  in  August.  3.  The  importance  of  faith. 
Some  persons  are  afraid  to  say  much  about  faith,  as  if  it  were  prejudicial  to 
morality,  whereas  it  is  the  tree  which  bears  all  the  fruits  of  holiness.  Every- 
thing in  the  Christian  life  has  to  do  with  faith.  God  is  glorified  by  faith,  we  are 
filled  with  joy  and  peace,  sanctified,  purified,  by  faith  ;  we  stand,  walk,  live,  and 
have  access  to  God  by  faith,  and  that  this  may  not  fail  Christ  prays.  Hence 
its  importance  here.  III.  He  can  accomplish  the  purposes  of  His  love  by  ways 
PECDLiAB  TO  HiMSELF.  They  would  have  said  He  ought  to  have  been  there.  The  sisters 
expected  this.  But  His  absence  was  to  show  that  His  ways  were  superior  to  theirs. 
The  case  of  Joseph,  Job,  and  the  Three  Children  seemed  very  hard,  but  what  ad- 
vantage the  world  has  derived  from  them  1  When,  therefore,  yonr  views  and  His 
do  not  seem  to  harmonize,  remember  that  He  acts  sovereignly,  not  arbitrarily ;  but 
••  He  gives  no  account  of  His  matters."  Suspend  your  opinions.  Never  set  His  sun 
by  your  dial,  but  the  reverse.  You  can  see  His  heart  if  you  cannot  see  His  hand. 
Where  ?  At  Calvary.  "  He  that  spared  not  His  own  Son,"  &o.  Alphonsus,  of 
Castile,  thought  that  if  the  Maker  of  the  world  had  applied  to  him  he  could  have 
given  Him  good  advice.  But  do  you  not  think  the  same  about  the  God  of  Provi- 
dence ?  "  Blind  unbelief  is  sure  to  err."  If  you  see  not  now  you  will  see  hereafter. 
Ought  you  to  judge  of  a  building  while  all  the  materials  are  scattered  about, 
especially  if  you  had  never  seen  the  plan  ?  Judge  nothing  before  the  time.  The 
saints  above  shout,  ♦'  He  bath  done  all  things  well."  IV.  The  sufferings  of  bomb 
ABE  DESI0NED  FOB  THE  GOOD  OF  OTHERS.  Sometimes  persons  are  afflicted  by  way 
of — 1.  Correction.  "  If  His  children  forsake  My  law,"  &c.  2.  Prevention.  Paul 
was  buffeted  not  because  he  was  proud,  but  "lest  he  should  be  exalted."  3.  Pro- 
bation. Hence  afflictions  are  called  trials.  4.  Usefulness  to  themselves  and 
others.  Ezekiel  was  forbidden  to  weep  when  the  desire  of  his  eyes  was  taken 
from  him  ;  not  on  his  own  account,  but  that  he  might  be  a  "  sign."  So  Lazarus 
dies  and  the  sisters  weep  for  the  disciples'  sake.  V.  The  Savioub  is  never  too 
LATE  IN  His  MOVEMENTS  OB  TOO  CONFIDENT  IN  His  EEsouRCES.  We  ofteu  begin 
what  we  are  not  able  to  finish.  Then  there  are  different  degrees  of  weakness  and 
strength  amongst  us,  but  God  has  all  power,  "  Nevertheless,  let  as  go  to  Him,"  not 
them.  Why  ?  It  is  too  late,  he  is  dead.  "  It  may  be  too  late  for  you,  but  not  for  Me." 
Your  extremity  is  My  opportunity.  I  love  not  only  to  do  what  is  needful  for  My 
people,  but  to  surprise  them ;  to  do  above  all  they  can  ask  or  think.  It  were 
much  to  have  comforted  the  sisters,  how  much  more  to  raise  the  brother  I 
Let  us  learn  to  confide  in  Him — 1.  With  regard  to  ourselves.  Sinner,  your 
case  is  desperate  as  to  all  relief  from  men  or  angels,  yet  that  is  no  reason  why 
you  should  despair.  He  is  nigh.  2.  With  regard  to  others.  Our  work  is  hard, 
but  we  can  do  all  things  if  the  Raiser  of  Lazarus  strengthens  us.  {W.  Jay.) 
The  dark  enigma  of  death : — The  man  Jesus  loved  lay  there  on  his  bed  dying. 
Now,  I  emphasize  that,  because  there  used  to  be  a  great  deal  of  thinking  about 


260  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [0HA».  xi. 

God's  relation  to  those  that  love  Him  and  whom  He  loves — a  great  deal  of  teaching 
in  the  Christian  Church  that  counted  itself  most  orthodox,  and  which  was,  indeed, 
deadly  heresy,  coarse,  materialistic,  despicable,  misunderstanding  the  ideal  gran- 
deur  of  the  Bible  promises.  Some  of  you  know  tbe  sort  of  thing  that  used  to 
prevail — the  idea  that  God's  saints  should  be  exceptionally  favoured,  the  sun  would 
shine  on  their  plot  of  com,  and  it  would  not  shine  on  the  plot  of  corn  of  the  bad 
man  ;  their  ships  would  not  sink  at  sea,  their  children  would  not  catch  infectious 
diseases,  God  would  pamper  them,  exempt  them  from  bearing  their  part  in  the 
world's  great  battle,  with  hardness  and  toil  of  labour,  with  struggle  and  attainment 
and  achievement.  It  came  of  a  very  despicable  conception  of  what  a  father  can 
do  for  a  chUd,  as  if  the  best  thing  for  a  father  to  do  for  his  son  was  to  pet  and 
indulge  him,  and  save  him  all  bodily  struggle  and  all  difficulties,  instead  of  giving 
him  a  life  of  discipline.  As  if  a  general  in  the  army  would,  because  of  his  faltering 
heart,  refuse  to  let  his  son  take  the  post  of  danger,  as  if  he  would  not  rather  wish  for 
that  son — ay,  with  a  great  pang  in  his  own  soul — that  he  should  be  the  bravest,  the 
most  daring,  the  one  most  exposed  to  the  deadliest  hazard.  Ah,  we  have  got  to 
recognize  that  we  whom  God  loves  may  be  sick  and  dying,  and  yet  God  does  love  ua. 
Lazarus  was  loved  by  Jesus,  yet  he  whom  Jesus  loved  was  sick  and  dying.  Ah, 
and  there  is  a  still  more  poisonous  difficulty  in  that  materialistic,  that  worldly  way 
of  looking  at  God's  love ;  that  horrible,  revolting  misjudgment  that  Christ  con- 
demned, crushed  with  indignation  when  it  confronted  Him.  "  The  men  on  whom 
the  tower  of  Siloam  fell  must  have  been  sinners  worse  than  us  on  whom  it  did  not  fall." 
Never,  never  1  The  great  government  of  the  world  is  not  made  up  of  patches  and 
strokes  of  anger  and  outbursts  of  weak  indulgence.  The  world  is  God's  great 
workshop,  God's  great  battlefield.  These  have  their  places.  Here  a  storm  of 
bullets  fall,  and  brave  and  good  men  as  well  as  cowards  fall  before  it.  Yon  mis- 
take if  you  try  to  forestall  God's  judgments,  God's  verdict  on  the  last  great  day  of 
reckoning.  Still  we  have  got  the  fact  that  Christ  does  not  interpose  to  prevent  death, 
that  Christ  does  not  hinder  those  dearest  to  Him  from  bearing  their  share  of  life's 
sicktiesses  and  sufferings,  that  God  Himself  suffers  death  to  go  on,  apparently 
wielding  an  undisputed  sway  over  human  existence.  Is  not  that  true  of  our  world 
to-day  ?  The  best  of  you  Christians,  when  death  comes  to  your  own  homes,  do  you 
manage  to  sing  the  songs  of  triumph  right  away  ?  Well,  you  are  very  wonderful 
saints  if  you  do.  If  you  do  not,  perhaps  you  say,  "  If  God  is  in  this  world,  how 
comes  that  dark  enigma  of  death  ?  "  And  others  of  you  grip  hold  of  your  faith, 
but  yet  your  heart  cries  out  against  it.  You  believe  that  God  is  good,  but  has  He 
been  quite  good  to  you  ?  Like  Martha,  you  feel  as  if  you  had  some  doubt ;  you  feel 
bound  in  your  prayers ;  you  say,  •*  0  God,  I  do  not  mean  to  reproach  Thee  ; " 
weak,  sinful,  if  you  will,  yet  the  sign  of  a  true  follower  of  the  Christ.  And  then 
the  enemies  of  Christ,  the  worldlings  all  about  in  this  earth  of  ours,  as  they  look 
upon  death's  ravages,  they  are  saying:  "If  there  were  a  God,  if  there  were  a 
Father,  if  there  were  a  great  heart  that  could  love,  why  does  not  He  show  it  ?  " 
Now,  I  said  to  you  that  at  first  it  looks  as  if  nothing  but  evil  came  of  God's  delay 
to  interpose  against  death  ;  but  when  you  look  a  little  deeper,  I  think  you  begin 
to  discover  an  infinitely  greater  good  and  benefit  come  oat  of  that  evil.  I  must 
very  briefly,  very  rapidly,  trace  to  you  in  the  story,  and  you  can  parallel  it  in  the 
life  of  yourselves,  that  discipline  of  goodness  there  is  in  God's  refraining  from 
checking  sickness  and  death.  Christ  said  the  end  of  it  is  first  of  all  death,  but  that 
is  not  the  termination.  Through  death  this  sickness,  this  struggle  of  doubt  and 
faith,  should  end  in  the  glory  of  God.  That  tremendous  miracle  compelled  the 
rulers  of  Jerusalem  to  resolve  on  and  carry  out  His  death.  That  miracle  of 
Lazarus's  resurrection  gave  to  the  faith  of  the  disciples  and  of  Christ's  followers  a 
strength  of  clinging  attachment  that  carried  them  through  the  eclipse  of  their 
belief  when  they  saw  Him  die  on  Calvary.  Now,  what  would  you  say  ?  Was  it 
cruel  of  Christ  to  allow  His  friend  Lazarus,  His  dear  friends  Mary  and  Martha,  to 
go  through  that  period  of  suspense,  of  anxiety,  of  sickness,  of  death,  and  of  the 
grave,  that  they  might  do  one  of  the  great  deeds  in  bringing  in  the  world's  Bedeemer  f 
"  Ah,"  you  say,  "you  have  still  got  to  show  Ood's  goodness  and  kindness  to  me 
individually.  My  death  may  be  for  God's  glory,  it  may  be  for  the  good  of  others ; 
bat  how  about  me  and  those  who  mourn  ?  "  Well,  now,  look  at  it.  You  must  get 
to  the  end  of  the  story  before  you  ventcre  to  judge  the  measure,  the  worth  of  God's 
goodness.  After  all,  was  that  period  of  sickness  and  death  unmitigated  gloom, 
and  horror,  and  agony  ?  Oh,  I  put  it  to  you,  men  and  women,  who  have  passed 
through  it,  watching  by  the  death  of  dear  father  or  mother  that  loved  the  Lord 


CHAP,  n.]  ST.  JOHN.  251 

and  loved  yon,  and  whcm  yea  loved — dark,  and  sore,  and  painful  enough  at  the 
time ;  but  oh,  if  I  called  jou  to  speak  out,  would  you  not  say  it  was  one  of  the 
most  sacred  periods  of  your  life — the  unspeakable  tenderness,  the  sweet,  clinging 
love,  the  untiring  service,  the  grateful  responses,  the  sacredness  that  came  into  life  ? 
A.y,  and  when  the  tie  was  snapped,  the  new  tenderness  that  you  gave  to  the  friends 
that  are  left,  the  new  pledge  binding  you  to  heaven,  and  to  hope  for  it,  and  long  for  it 
—death  is  not  all  an  evil  to  our  eyes.  Death  cannot  ultimately  be  an  evil,  since  it 
is  universal — the  consummation,  climax,  crown,  of  every  human  life.  It  is  going 
home  to  one's  Father.  Yes,  but  you  want  the  guarantee  that  death  is  not  the 
end,  and  that  day  it  was  right  and  lawful  for  Christ  to  give  it  to  anticipate  the  last 
great  day,  when  in  one  unbroken  army,  radiant  and  resplendent,  shining  like 
jewels  in  a  crown.  He  shall  bring  from  the  dark  grave  all  that  loved  Him,  fought 
for  Him,  and  were  loyal  to  Him  on  the  road,  and  went  down  into  the  dark  waters 
singly  one  by  one,  in  circumstances  of  ignomony  often,  and  yet  dying  with  Christ 
within  them,  the  Eesurrection  and  the  Life.  Ah,  that  great  grand  vindication  of 
God  and  interpretation  of  this  world's  enigma  was  made  clear  that  day  when 
Christ  called  Lazarus  back  and  gave  him  alive  to  his  sisters  in  the  sight  of  His 
doubting  disciples,  in  the  sight  of  those  sneering  enemies.  (W.  G.  Elmslie,  D.D.) 
Lazarus  dead  and  Jesus  glad : — What  strange  paradox  is  here.  There  was  room 
in  Christ's  heart  for  both  emotions.  The  grief  belonged  to  the  Brother  bom  for 
our  adversity ;  the  gladness  to  the  omniscient  God  who  sees  the  end  from  the  be- 
ginning. Note — I.  The  stmpatht  of  Chbist  with  His  people.  Somewhat 
analogous  to  the  sympathy  of  the  several  organs  of  a  living  frame.  Such  is  the  vital 
union  that  every  wound  inflicted  on  the  members  pierces  with  pain  the  Head.  He 
"  knew  the  sorrows  "  of  Israel  in  Egypt,  and  now  He  felt  the  grief  which  was 
rending  the  household  at  Bethany.  By  a  message,  Jesus  and  His  disciples  had 
learned  that  Lazarus  was  sick ;  but  the  Head,  being  in  closer  oommnnion  with  the 
member,  had  secret  and  better  intelligence.  The  dying  throb  of  Lazarus  beat  also 
in  the  heart  of  Jesus.  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,"  in  the  dark  days  of  pain  as  in 
the  bright  days  of  joy.  II.  Chkist  heaes  the  cey  of  His  people  and  sends 
THEM  help.  They  were  right  in  saying,  "If  Thou  hadst  been  here."  He  cannot 
endure  to  hear  the  prayer  of  His  people  and  permanently  to  deny  their  request. 
Hence  He  could  not  remain  in  visible  presence  with  His  followers.  It  became  ex- 
pedient for  Him  to  go  away,  permitting  multitudes  of  His  friends  to  sicken  and 
die  preparatory  to  a  glorious  resurrection.  III.  Alike  Chbist's  actions  and 
emotions  contemplate  the  profit  of  His  people.  If  He  remained  distant  while 
Lazarus  was  battling  with  death  it  was  for  your  sakes.  If  He  rejoiced  in  the  im- 
mediate issue  of  that  unequal  conflict,  it  was  for  your  sakes.  All  things  are  for 
your  sakes.  In  this  case  it  was  that  they  might  beheve.  The  death  of  Lazarus 
afforded  opportunity  for  the  display  of  omnipotence,  thereby  to  confirm  the  disciples' 
faith.  But  other  benefits  followed.  The  discipline  the  bereaved  family  endured 
was  a  means  of  purging  away  their  dross.  Application  :  The  lesson  bears  on — 1. 
The  ordinary  affairs  of  lite.  You  try  to  obtain  a  lawful  object  in  a  lawful  way, 
but  your  plans  miscarry.  This,  however,  does  not  prove  that  Christ  lacks  the  will 
or  power  to  help.  Had  He  been  in  visible  presence  He  would  have  put  forth  flia 
power,  but  He  is  glad  for  your  sake  He  was  not.  From  the  height  of  His  throne 
He  sees  that  the  world  on  your  side  at  this  point  would  not  be  profitable  for  yon. 
2.  Bereavements.  If  Christ  were  standing  weeping  by  the  bed  your  child  would 
not  die,  but  for  your  sake  He  is  not  there.  A  mother  who  had  lost  all  her  children 
but  the  youngest  said,  "  Every  bereavement  has  knit  me  closer  to  Christ,  and  every 
child  I  have  in  heaven  is  another  cord  to  hold  me  up"; — {W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  A. 
mystery !  Saints  sorrowing  and  Jesus  glad.  Jesus  was  glad  that  the  trial 
had  come.  I.  Fob  the  btbenoi^ienino  of  the  faith  or  the  apostles.  1. 
The  trial  itself  would  do  this.  Faith  untried  may  be  true  faith,  but  it 
is  sure  to  be  little  faith.  It  never  prospers  so  much  as  when  all  things 
are  against  it.  No  flowers  wear  so  lovely  a  blue  as  those  which  grow  at  the  feet  of 
the  frozen  glacier ;  no  water  so  sweet  as  that  which  springs  amid  the  desert  sand. 

(1)  Tried  faith  brings  experience,  and  experience  makes  religion  more  real.  Yoo 
never  know  your  weakness  nor  God's  strength  till  you  have  been  in  the  deep  waters. 

(2)  Trial  removes  many  of  the  impediments  of  faith.  Carnal  security  is  the  worst 
foe  to  confidence  in  God,  and  blessed  is  the  axe  that  removes  it.  The  balloon  never 
rises  until  the  cords  are  cut.  (3)  Affliction  helps  faith  when  it  exposes  the  weak- 
ness of  the  creature.  This  trial  would  show  the  apostles  not  to  depend  on  the 
bounty  of  any  one  man,  for  though  Lazarus  entertained  them,  Lazarus  had  died. 


852  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  xu 

We  are  in  danger  of  making  idols  of  our  mercies.  (4)  Trial  drives  faith  to  God. 
When  the  world's  wells  are  full  of  sweet  but  poisonous  water  we  pitch  our  tents  at 
the  well's  mouth ;  but  when  earth's  water  becomes  bitter  we  turn  away  sick  and 
faint  and  cry  for  the  water  of  life.  (5)  Trial  has  a  hardening  effect  on  faith.  As 
the  Spartan  boys  were  prepared  for  fighting  by  the  sharp  discipline  of  their  boyish 
days,  so  are  God's  servants  trained  for  war  by  the  affliction  which  He  sends  upon 
them.  We  must  be  thrown  into  the  water  to  learn  to  swim.  If  you  want  to  ruin 
your  child,  let  him  never  know  a  hardship.  2.  The  deliverance  of  Lazarus  would 
do  this.  (1)  At  the  worst  Chjjst  can  work  ;  in  the  very  worst  He  is  not  brought  to 
a  nonplus.  The  physician,  Herod,  Caesar,  and  all  their  power  can  do  nothing 
here ;  and  Death  sits  smiling  as  he  says,  "  I  have  Lazarus."  Yet  Christ  wins  the 
day.  (2)  Divine  sympathy  became  most  manifest — "  Jesus  wept."  (3)  Divine  power 
was  put  forth — "Lazarus,  come  forth."  All  this  was  the  best  education  the  dis- 
ciples could  have  for  their  future  ministry.  When  in  prison  they  would  remember 
how  Lazarus  was  brought  out.  When  preaching  to  dead  sinners  they  would  remember 
the  power  of  the  word  which  brought  Lazarus  to  life.  II.  Fob  thk  good  of  thb 
FAJULT.  The  sisters  had  faith,  but  it  was  not  very  strong,  for  they  doubted  both 
Christ's  love  and  His  power.  Because  He  specially  loved  these  people :  1.  He 
sent  them  a  special  trial.  The  lapidary  will  not  spend  much  time  on  an  ordinary 
stone,  but  a  diamond  of  the  first  water  he  will  cut  and  cut  again.  So  the  gardener 
will  a  choice  tree.  2.  Special  trial  was  attended  with  a  special  visit.  Perhaps 
Christ  would  not  have  come  to  Bethany  had  not  Lazarus  died.  If  you  are  ir 
trouble  Christ  will  go  out  of  His  way  to  see  you.  3.  The  special  visit  was  attended 
with  special  fellowship.  Jesus  wept  with  those  who  wept.  You  may  be  well  and 
strong,  and  have  but  little  fellowship  with  Christ,  but  He  shall  make  all  your  bed 
in  your  sickness.  4.  And  soon  you  shall  have  special  deliverance.  III.  Fob  aivnia 
FAITH  TO  OTHERS.  Afflictious  oftcu  lead  men  to  faith  in  Christ  because — 1.  They 
give  space  for  thought.  2.  They  prevent  sin.  A  lad  had  resolved  against  advice  to 
climb  a  mountain.  A  mist  soon  surrounded  him,  and  compelled  him  to  return. 
His  father  was  glad  because,  had  he  gone  a  little  further,  he  would  have  perished. 
8.  They  compel  them  to  stand  face  to  face  with  stern  realities.  How  often  has 
God's  Spirit  wrought  in  illnesses  that  have  seemed  hopeless.  4.  They  are  some- 
times followed  by  great  deliverances.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Five  paradoxes : — I. 
In  the  life  of  an  intelligent  belibvee  gladness  sometimes  grows  out  of  grief. 
Jesus  wept  at  the  death  of  Lazarus,  for  it  was  a  personal  bereavement,  but  He  was 
glad  because  it  was  a  fine  opportuuity  for  glorifying  God.  This  is  the  lowest  form 
of  Christian  experience.  Our  light  affliction  works  out  an  eternal  weight  of  glory. 
This,  understood  as  a  means  of  exalting  God,  will  enable  the  believer  to  glory  in 
tribulations.  II.  One's  advantage  is  sometimes  hid  underneath  another's  trials. 
It  was  a  suprising  thing  to  announce  that  He  had  not  intended  to  prevent  Lazarus's 
death ;  but  it  was  stiU  more  surprising  that  it  was  for  their  sakes.  What  had  they 
to  do  with  it?  Now,  while  all  believers  are  independent  of  each  other,  and  each 
stands  or  falls  to  his  own  master,  yet  the  trials  of  one  are  often  intended  to  benefit 
another.  The  law  of  vicarious  suffering  holds  the  race.  A  parent  suffers  for  a 
child,  a  child  for  a  parent.  Joseph  was  sold  into  Egypt  that  Israel  might  go  into 
Palestine.  Peter's  imprisonment  may  have  been  needed  to  discipline  Khoda's  faith, 
and  Paul's  confinement  may  have  been  ordered  for  the  jailor's  conversion.  Let  us 
be  resigned,  then,  when  we  suffer  for  others,  and  attentive  when  others  suffer  for 
us.  III.  Increase  of  a  Christian's  borrow  sometimes  alleviates  it.  In  the 
opinion  of  the  disciples  the  sickness  of  Lazarus  was  a  disaster,  but  the  most 
unfortunate  circumstance  was  the  absence  of  Jesus.  But  a  strange  comfort  now 
entered  their  hearts.  They  were  worse  off  than  they  supposed,  but  they  were 
better  off,  too.  Up  to  this  disclosure  the  event  was  a  hard  calamity  of  domestic 
life,  and  Jesus'  absence  a  melancholy  accident.  But  now  they  perceived  that  Divine 
knowledge  embraced  this  also.  Divine  wisdom  was  deaUng  with  it,  and  Divine  mercy 
was  going  to  turn  it  to  fine  advantage.  A  great  sorrow  with  a  purpose  in  it  is  easier 
to  bear  than  a  smaller  one  which  seems  to  have  no  aim  now  and  no  benefit  hereafter. 
IV.  In  the  true  believer's  experience  doubt  is  sometimes  employed  to  deepen 
trust.  The  one  simple  intention  of  this  bereavement  was  to  increase  the  faith  of 
those  who  felt  it.  This  was  accomplished  by  permitting  them  to  imagine  for  a  while 
that  they  were  forgotten  of  God.  Just  as  a  mother  hides  herself  from  a  child  who 
has  grown  careless  of  her  presence  that  the  child  may  run  impulsively  into  her 
embrace  and  love  her  all  the  more,  so  God  says,  "  In  a  little  wrath  I  hid  My  face," 
iui*    The  way  to  render  faith  confident  is  to  make  large  demands  upon  it  by  onsets 


OEAP.  M.]  ST.  JORiJ.  158 

of  trying  doubt.  V.  Absolute  hopelessness  and  helplessness  abe  the  coNsmoNa 
OF  hope  and  help.  The  turning  point  of  the  story  is  in  the  "  nevertheless  let  us 
go,"  and  He  goes  to  work  Hia  most  stupendous  miracle  to  remedy  what  His  delay 
had  permitted.  By  this  time  the  sisters  had  given  up  all  hope ;  but  Hope  was  on 
the  way.  So  one  after  another  of  our  props  must  drop  away,  till  at  last  we  are 
shut  up  to  God.  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Death  knocking  away  our  props : — 
•'  See,  father  I "  said  a  lad  who  was  walking  with  his  father,  "  they  are  knocking 
away  the  props  from  under  the  bridge.  What  are  they  doing  that  for  ?  Won't  the 
bridge  fall  ?  "  "  They  are  knocking  them  away,"  said  the  father,  "  that  the  timbers 
may  rest  more  firmly  upon  the  stone  piers,  which  are  now  finished."  God  only 
takes  away  our  earthly  props  that  we  may  rest  more  firmly  upon  Eim.  The  uses 
of  bereavement : — When  engineers  would  bridge  a  stream,  they  often  carry  over  at 
first  but  a  single  cord  ;  with  that,  next  they  stretch  a  wire  across ;  then  strand  is 
added  to  strand,  until  a  foundation  is  laid  for  planks ;  and  now  the  bold  engineer 
finds  safe  footway,  and  walks  from  side  to  side.  So  God  takes  from  us  some 
golden-threaded  pleasure,  and  stretches  it  hence  into  heaven ;  then  He  takes  a 
child,  and  then  a  friend :  thus  He  bridges  death,  and  teaches  the  thoughts  of  the 
most  timid  to  find  their  way  hither  and  thither  between  the  shores.  (H.  W. 
Beecher.)  Build  beyond  the  reach  of  death: — Build  your  nest  upon  no  tree  here, 
for  ye  see  God  hath  sold  the  forest  to  Death;  and  every  tree  whereupon  we  would 
rest  is  ready  to  be  cut  down,  to  the  end  that  we  might  flee  and  mount  up,  and  buUd 
upon  the  Eock,  and  dwell  in  the  holes  of  the  Bock.  (S.  Rutherford,)  Relief 
under  bereavement : — 1.  There  are  reliefs  arising  from  our  constitution.  There  is  a 
self-healing  principle  in  nature.  Break  a  branch  from  a  tree,  <fec.,  wound  the  body, 
cut  the  flesh,  or  break  a  hmb,  and  you  see  the  self-healing  power  exude  and  work. 
It  is  so  in  the  souL  Thought  succeeds  thought  like  the  waves  of  the  ocean,  and 
each  tends  to  wear  out  the  impression  its  predecessor  had  made.  2.  There  are  inci- 
dental  reliefs.  New  events,  new  engagements,  new  relationships,  tend  to  heal  the 
wound.  3.  There  are  Christian  reliefs,  the  assurance  of  after  life,  the  hope  of  a 
future  reunion,  <&c.  Such  are  the  reliefs.  These,  like  the  flowers  and  shrubs  of  a 
lovely  garden,  spring  up  around  our  hearts  and  cover  the  grave  of  our  sorrows  and 
trials  with  the  shadow  of  their  foliage.  Yes ;  though  we  have  oox  trials,  we  have 
still  our  blessings. 

Ver.  16.  Then  said  Thomas  which  Is  called  Didymus. — Thoma$: — A  very  few 
verses  contain  the  sum  of  all  we  know  about  Thomas.  They  tell  us  nothing  of  his 
history.  His  travels,  sufferings,  missionary  toils,  death ;  tradition  speaks  of  these. 
One  account  says  he  preached  the  gospel  in  Persia,  and  was  buried  in  Odessa. 
Another  that  he  went  to  India  and  suffered  martyrdom  there.  We  need  not  imitate 
Thomas  himself  too  closely  by  receiving  all  such  accounts  with  incredulity.  It 
would  seem  all  but  certain  that  he  went  eastwards,  and  that  he  laboured,  and 
suffered,  and  died  for  Christ,  thus  meeting  the  fate  he  was  prepared  for  when  he 
said  to  his  fellow-disciples,  •'  Let  us  also  go  that  we  may  die  with  Him."  Probably 
he  was  by  birth  a  Galilean,  although  this  is  by  no  means  certain,  as  some  accounts 
give  him  a  foreign  birthplace.  The  name  Thomas  is  connected,  especially  by  St. 
John,  with  the  other  name  he  bore,  either  synonym  or  surname  of  it, "  Didymus."  Ha 
had  a  brother  or  sister  (sister  says  one  account,  called  Lysia),  the  same  age  as 
himself.  Therefore  he  was  called  "the  twin."  This  is  the  origin  of  the  name. 
{A.  Raleigh,  I).D.)  The  spiritual  signijicanee  of  Thomas*  name: — la  there  any 
mystery  here  ?  Did  St.  John  intend  us  to  see  any  coming  out  in  the  name-bearer 
of  the  qualities  which  the  name  expressed  ?  Many  have  thought  he  did,  and  the 
analogy  of  similar  notices  in  this  gospel  (chap.  i.  42;  ix.  7)  would  lead  to  this  conclu- 
sion. It  is  very  possible  that  Thomas  may  have  received  this  as  a  new  name  from  his 
Lord,  even  as  Simon  and  the  sons  of  Zebedee,  certainly,  and  Levi  very  probably, 
received  in  like  manner  names  from  Him.  It  was  a  name  which  told  him  all  he 
had  to  fear,  and  all  he  had  to  hope.  In  him  the  twins,  unbelief  and  faith,  were 
contending  for  the  mastery,  as  Esau  and  Jacob,  the  old  man  and  the  new,  wrestled 
once  in  Eebecca's  womb.  He  was,  as  indeed  all  are  by  nature,  the  double,  or  twin> 
minded  man.  It  was  for  him  to  see  that  in  and  through  the  regeneration  he 
obtained  strength  to  keep  the  better  and  cast  away  the  worse  half  of  his  being.  He 
here  utters  words  which  belong  to  one  of  the  great  conflicts  of  his  life — words 
in  which  the  old  and  the  new,  unbelief  and  faith,  are  both  speaking,  partly  one  and 
partly  the  other ;  and  St.  John  fitly  bids  us  note  that  in  this  there  was  the  oat- 
coming  of  all  which  his  name  embodied  so  well.    There  was  faith,  since  he  coanted 


254  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATGS.  [chip.  i» 

it  better  to  die  with  his  Lord  than  to  live  forsaking  Him — unbelief,  since  he  con- 
ceived it  possible  that  so  long  as  his  Lord  had  a  work  to  accomplish.  He,  or  any 
under  His  shield,  could  be  overtaken  by  death.  Thomas  was  evidently  of  » 
melancholy,  desponding  character :  most  true  to  his  Master,  yet  ever  inclined  to 
look  at  things  on  their  darkest  side,  finding  it  most  hard  to  raise  himself  to  the 
loftier  elevations  of  faith — to  believe  other  and  more  than  he  saw,  or  to  anticipata 
more  favourable  issues  than  those  which  the  merely  human  probabilities  of  an 
event  portended.  Men  of  all  temperaments  and  characters  were  to  be  found  in 
that  circle  of  disciples,  that  so  there  might  be  the  representatives  and  helpers  of 
all  who  hereafter,  through  struggles  of  one  kind  or  another,  should  at  last  attain 
to  the  full  assurance  of  faith.  Very  beautifully  Chrysostom  says  of  this  disciple, 
that  he  who  would  hardly  venture  to  go  with  Jesus  as  far  as  the  neighbouring 
Bethany,  afterwards  without  Him  travelled  to  the  furthest  India,  daring  all  the 
perils  of  remote  and  hostile  nations.  (Archbishop  Trench.)  Thomas^  doubt  and 
faith : — I.  His  doubt — 1.  As  to  the  victory  of  life.  2.  As  to  the  way  to  heaven 
(lehap.  xiv.).  3.  As  to  the  certainty  of  the  Resurrection  (chap.  xx.).  H.  His  faith. 
1.  Prepared  by  his  ardent  love  to  Jesus  and  the  brethren  (chap.  xi.).  2.  Introduced 
by  his  longing  desire  for  a  higher  disclosure  (chap.  xiv.).  3.  Decided  by  his  joy  at 
the  manifestation  of  the  Eisen  One  (chap.  xx.).  {W.  H.  Van  Doren,  D.D,)  Let 
us  also  go  that  we  may  die  with  Him. — 1.  Let  us  with  Jesus  go.  2.  Let  us  with 
Jesus  suffer.  3.  Let  us  with  Jesus  die.  4.  Let  us  with  Jesus  live.  (J.  P.  Lange, 
D.D.)  Thomas  desponding : — I.  He  is  an  earnest  man.  We  might  almost 
conclude  this  from  the  fact  that  he  is  one  of  the  twelve.  Some  of  them  are 
ignorant,  some  quiet  and  simple,  some  strong  and  passionate,  but  all  are  earnest. 
Take  all  the  verses  that  relate  to  Thomas,  they  bring  before  us  very  different 
mental  states — deep  depression,  rejoicing,  confidence ;  but  they  all  pre-suppose  a 
spiritual  concernedness  about  himself,  his  duty,  and  his  Lord.  He  is  sometimes 
called  "unbelieving  Thomas,"  but  he  is  better  than  worldly  Demas,  or  a  vacillating 
Peter.  What  hope  can  there  be  for  a  creature  like  man,  intellectual,  spiritual, 
responsible  if  he  will  not  think.  You  can  do  nothing  with  a  man  who  is  not 
earnest — but  you  may  do  much  with  an  earnest  man,  though  a  doubter.     II.  This 

EARNESTNESS    HAS    A    TINGE    OF    MELANCHOLY    AND    IS    CONNECTED    WITH    A    DESPONDINO 

DISPOSITION.  As  a  certain  vein  runs  through  a  geological  formation,  so  a  certain 
disposition  runs  through  a  human  mind.  You  cannot  expel  it.  It  must  be 
recognized  and  dealt  with.  Here  Thomas  threw  himself  on  to  the  dark  conclusion 
that  all  was  over,  and  that  nothing  now  was  left  to  them  but  to  die.  This  shows 
how  truly  he  and  all  had  lived  for  the  kingdom  and  the  Master.  They  all  desponded 
in  a  while  when  the  death  came.  It  is  characteristic  of  Thomas  that  he  took  the 
alarm  sooner  than  the  rest.  One  in  a  company  will  first  say,  "  It  is  getting  colder." 
One  in  a  family  will  be  the  first  to  see  the  death  shadow,  although  it  may  turn  out 
not  to  be  that.  So  some  among  God's  children  are  nearer  despondency  than  the 
rest,  more  quick  to  see  the  world  going  wrong,  more  keen  to  private  troubles. 
III.  With  what  determination  and  nobleness  Thomas  resolves  to  die  with 
Christ,  since  in  his  opinion  no  better  may  be.  Here  is  a  melancholy  man  who 
yet  can  make  the  grand  resolve  that  when  his  dearest  visions  and  hopes  are 
quenched  in  darkness,  though  what  he  cannot  but  regard  as  a  mistaken  judgment 
of  the  Master,  yet  resolves  to  follow  that  Master  wherever  He  may  choose  to  go. 
That  purpose  was  the  salvation  of  Thomas,  and  not  less  than  that  in  principle 
will  be  the  salvation  of  us.  Thomas  did  not  die  with  the  Master.  They  all 
forsook  Him  for  a  little  while.  We  shall  not  live  up  to  the  height  of  our  best 
resolutions.  But  if  our  purpose  be  wisely  and  resolutely  formed,  and  in  dependence 
on  Divine  help,  then  we  shall  not  renounce  it ;  and  it  will  be — IV.  The  consolation 
and  the  cure  of  our  despondency.  You  cannot  conceive  of  one  abiding  in  it 
long  whose  life  is  ribbed  by  a  great  purpose  reaching  unto  death—  whose  heart  ia 
moved  and  lifted  by  a  great  affection,  as  sun  and  moon  lift  the  tide.  With  Him, 
come  storm  or  calm  1  With  Him,  come  life  or  death  I  Then  the  world  will  be 
brighter,  and  we  shall  go  through  it  more  bravely  to  our  home  in  the  world 
beyond.  (A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)  Let  us  go  with  Jesus: — We  cannot  tell  whether 
this  sentiment  sprang  from  love,  from  dejection,  or  from  conviction  that  such  a 
resolve  would  lead  Christ  out  of  love  for  them  to  abandon  His  purpose.  Leaving 
this  discussion,  let  us  go  with  Jesus.  I.  That  in  Him  we  may  die  unto  sin. 
In  what  frame  of  mind  did  Jesus  enter  on  that  course  which  led  Him  to  Golgotha  f 
If  He  knew  so  well,  why  did  He  go  ?  Had  He  not  perfect  freedom  to  follow  Hia 
disciples'  advice,  and  power  to  lay  His  foes  at  His  feet  ?    Why  not  then  use  it  1 


CHAP.  XI.]  ST.  JOHN.  265 

Because  He  only  desires  to  do  the  will  of  His  Father.  Now  the  honr  arrivea  for 
Him  to  be  obedient  unto  death.  What  urges  Him  thereto  ?  The  desire  for  reward 
or  glory?  No:  love  to  His  Father  and  sinful  men.  Thank  God  He  went;  and 
thank  Goi  we  may  still  in  spirit  go  up  to  Jerusalem.  What  for?  To  admire  His 
heroism  ?  Others  have  been  as  brave.  To  pity  His  agonies?  Others  have  suffered 
more.  "  Weep  not  for  Me,  but  for  yourselves,"  dc,  and  for  the  sin  which  cost  Me 
80  much.  The  resolution  to  go  with  Jesus  implies  more  than  reading  the  story  of 
His  passion,  singing  hymns  or  praying  to  Him,  or  repenting.  It  means  union  with 
Christ  in  the  purpose  of  His  death — the  destruction  of  sin.  II.  That  fob  Him  wa 
MAY  WIN  SOULS.  Ought  we  not  to  feel  the  sacred  duty  of  gratitude  to  return  His 
love,  and  resolve  to  go  with  Him,  feeling  unconcerned  about  our  own  death  ?  He 
went  for  the  purpose  of  raising  Lazarus ;  let  us  go  that  the  dead  may  become  alive. 
Have  we  no  loved  friend  who  sleeps?  May  the  love  of  Christ  constrain  us  to 
awaken  him.  III.  That  teboogh  Him  we  may  inherit  life.  If  we  die  in  Him 
unto  sin,  and  for  Him  win  souls,  then  our  whole  life  shall  be  a  walking  in  His  foot- 
steps to  the  Jerusalem  above.  {M.  Coward.)  Devotion  to  the  leader: — General 
Grant  had  the  faculty,  in  a  large  degree,  of  attaching  very  closely  to  himself  all 
about  him.  His  personal  staff  without  exception,  passionately  reverenced  him. 
Any  one  of  them  would  have  gladly  risked  his  life  for  his  chief.  In  the  last  year 
of  the  civil  war  they  organized  a  system  at  City  Point  by  which  one  sat  up  on 
guard  of  him  every  night  to  watch  against  the  plots  of  the  enemy ;  for  there  had 
been  devices  of  dynamitic  character,  and  attempts  not  only  to  capture,  but  to 
assassinate,  prominent  national  oihcers.    (if.  0.  Mackey.) 

Vers.  17-27.  When  Jesua  came. — Christ'$  help  is  sure,  if  delayed : — He  usually 
reserves  His  hand  for  a  dead  lift.    When  our  faith  begins  to  flag,  and  hang  the 
wing  when  our  strength  is  gone,  and  we  have  given  up  all  for  lost,  '•  Now  will  I 
arise,"  saith  the  Lord,  "  now  will  I  be  exalted,  now  wiU  I  lift  up  Myself  "  (Isa. 
xxxiii.  10).     (J.  Trapp.)        The  journey : — Leaving  His  retreat  beyond  Jordan, 
Je*«£i  calmly  makes  His  way  to  the  village  of  Bethany.     We  shall  find  it  shown  in 
the  issus  that,  as  regards  the  manifestation  of  the  glory  of  God,  the  leading  of  the 
disciples  into  higher  faith,  and  the  discipUne  and  blessing  of  the  sisters,  the  Lord's 
arrival  is  neither  too  early  nor  too  late ;  but  that  it  is  as  when  separate  trains  move 
along  separate  lines  of  railway,  "  timed  "  to  meet  by  a  certain  hour,  at  a  certain 
junction,  there  to  be  combined.    The  distance  to  Bethany  was  a  long  day's  journey. 
Whether  He  made  the  journey  in  a  single  day  we  have  no  means  of  knowing. 
The  earliest  part  of  it  would  he  along  some  fertile  glen  of  Gilead,  and  would  be 
pursued  amid  "  morning  songs "  from   every  side.    Crossing   the   Jordan   at  a 
neighbouring  ford,  the  next  part  of  the  journey  would  lie  in  the  rich  plain  of 
Jericho,  beautiful  as  a  great  pleasure  ground,  with  bosks  and  groves  of  aromatic 
shrubs.    Then  He  would  pursue  the  wild  dreary  road  that  goes  up  from  Jericho  to 
Jerusalem,  lying  through  a  desolate  rocky  district,  often  winding  along  the  edge  of 
cliffs  and  frightful  precipices,  one  of  the  wildest  and  gloomiest  roads  in  the  land. 
As  He  approaches  Bethany,  the  dust  of   travel  whitening  His  sandals,  and  as 
weary,  it  may  be,  as  when  He  came  to  Jacob's  well  at  noon,  He  is  told  that 
Lazarus  has  already  been  four  days  in  the  grave.    (J.  Culross.)        Many  of  th© 
Jews  had  come   ...  to  console  them. — Oriental  consolers : — According  to  the 
ancient  Jewish  ritual,  those  who  came  to  condole  with   the  mourners  had  to 
return  with  them  from  the  grave  to  the  house,  there  to  station  themselves  in  a  circle 
around  the  mourners,  repeating  prayers,  and  offering  consolation.    The  rule  was  that 
this  circle  of  consolers  should  consist  of  not  less  than  ten  persons;  but  it  usually 
consisted  of  many  more.     In  token  of  grief,  the  couches  upon  which  the  mourners 
and  the  consolers  sat  were  lowered  so  as  to  come  nearer  to  the  ground,  or  else  all 
sat  upon  the  ground.    The  consolers  remained  with  the  mourners  during  the  days 
of  mourning  ;  but  there  was  a  certain  defence  from  this  publicity  in  the  fact  that 
the  consoler  had  no  right  to  speak  until  the  mourner  spoke  ;  and  the  mourner  had 
the  privilege  further  of  indicating,  by  nodding,  that  he  was  now  comforted  and 
that  the  consolers  need  not  continue  to  sit  around  him  any  longer.     (S.  S.  Times.) 
The  interview  with  Martha : — I.    Martha's    begbetful    lamentation  ;    or  faith 
struggling  with  imperfect  knowledge  (ver.  21).     The  language  neither  of  reproach 
nor  complaint,  but — 1.  Of  deep  sorrow  that  Christ  had  not  been  present,  at  least, 
befora  the  end  came.     2.  Of  sincere  faith,  since  she  believed  that  had  He  been 
present,  He  would  have  healed  him,  or  entreated  God  on  his  behalf.     3.  Of  im- 
peifect  imowledge — (1)  Allied  to  superstition  in  thinking  Christ's  presence  needful 


256  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  si. 

(cf.  chap.  iv.  47).  (2)  Akin  to  over  confidence  in  asserting  that  Lazarus  would  have 
lived  had  Christ  not  been  absent.  II.  Mabtha's  confident  febsuasion  ;  or  faith 
rising  into  ardent  hope  (ver.  22).  1.  Faith's  firm  assurance.  That  Christ's  access 
to  the  Father  on  behalf  of  men  is — (1)  Immediate,  at  any  moment.  (2)  Direct,  by 
simply  asking.  (3)  Unlimited,  "all  things."  (4)  Ef&cacious,  certain  to  prevail. 
2.  Faith's  joyous  expectation.  That  nothing  will  prove  too  great — (1)  For  Christ's 
love  to  devise,  or — (2)  Christ's  power  to  execute  on  behalf  of  His  people  (Eph.  iii. 
20-21) — hence  that  a  resurrection  is  neither  impossible  nor  absurd.  III.  Martha's 
DESPONDING  ADMISSION  ;  or  faith  relapsing  into  doubt  (ver.  24).  1.  Her  disappoint- 
ment. She  had  expected  Christ  to  speak  about  an  immediate  restoration  of  her 
dead  brother,  whereas  He  only  seemed  to  hint  at  a  far  sway  resurrection  (ver.  23). 
2.  Her  concession.  She  acknowledges,  notwithstanding,  such  a  resurrection,  and 
consequently  Lazarus's  continued  existence,  IV.  Martha's  sublime  confession  ;  or 
faith  soaring  into  lofty  adoration  (ver.  27).  That  which  Ufted  her  beyond  the 
atmosphere  of  doubt  was  Christ's  exposition  of  the  doctrine  (vers.  25,  26),  in 
which  were  set  forth — 1.  That  the  resurrection  was  not  an  event  to  be  thought  of 
as  distinct  from  the  life,  but  as  a  manifestation  of  the  life.  2.  That  the  resurrec- 
tion  and  the  life,  as  thus  explained,  have  their  primal  source  in  Himself,  in  whom 
is  life  (chap.  i.  4),  and  from  whom  all  true  life  in  the  soul  proceeds.  8.  That  the 
resurrection,  and  the  Ufe  from  which  it  springs,  are  secured  to  men  by  their  union 
to  Him  through  faith.  4.  That  in  the  experience  of  the  beUever  there  is — (1)  A 
resurrection  of  the  soul  from  sin.  (2)  A  Uving  in  the  Spirit.  (3)  A  transformation  of 
death  so  that  the  beUever  may  be  said  to  "  never  die."  (4)  A  complete  abolition  of 
death  by  the  resurrection  of  the  body.  Lessons — 1.  Christ's  presence  with  the 
soul  is  the  certain  destruction  of  death.  2.  Christ's  intercession  for  His  people  is 
better  imderstood  now  than  it  was  then  (Heb.  vii.  25).  3.  The  resurrection,  as 
explained  by  Christ,  a  perennial  source  of  comfort  for  the  bereaved  and  dying.  4. 
The  only  just  verdict  that  can  be  pronounced  on  Jesus  is  that  of  "  Son  of  God." 
(T.  Whitelaw,  D.D.)  Jesus  and  Martha: — I.  The  social  sadness  of  death. 
The  death  of  Lazarus  had  spread  a  dark  shadow  over  the  hearts  of  not  a  few. 
Besides  the  sisters  the  neighbours  were  affected  (ver.  19).  The  God  of  Love  has 
implanted  in  human  hearts  a  mighty  tie  of  sympathy,  and  the  groan  of  one  will 
vibrate  on  the  heart  chords  of  many.  The  more  love  a  man  has  in  him  the  larger 
the  amount  of  vicarious  suffering  that  he  will  endure  in  this  world  of  grief.  Hence 
He  who  had  more  love  in  Him  than  all  the  race  besides  became  a  "  man  of 
sorrows  "  to  carry  ours.  To  suffer  for  others  by  sympathy  is  not  only  natural,  but 
Christly.  We  are  commanded  to  "  bear  one  another's  burdens."  H.  The  extra- 
OBDiNABY  CLAIM  OF  Chbist  (vers.  25,  26).  These  words,  which  flow  so  naturally 
from  Christ,  would  have  been  blasphemy  from  any  other.  They  imply — 1.  That 
death  is  a  great  evil — not  as  a  mere  dissolution  of  soul  and  body,  which  is  natural, 
but  as  the  consequence  of  sin,  and  so  having  a  dreadful  moral  significance  and 
terror — a  "  sting,"  giving  it  virus  and  agony.  There  are — (1)  Its  physical  sufferings. 
Had  there  been  no  sin  there  would  have  been  no  pain.  (2)  Its  grievous  disappoint- 
ments.  But  for  sin  man  would  have  had  no  broken  purposes.  (3)  Its  social 
disruptions.  (4)  Its  moral  forebodings.  Without  these  death  might  be  hailed  as 
a  blessing — these  make  it  a  curse.  2.  That  from  this  evil  Christ  is  the  great 
Deliverer.  (1)  Christ  is  hfe — original,  absolute,  "  I  am  He  that  liveth,"  &o.  (2) 
He  is  resuscitating  Hfe — not  only  creating  the  new,  but  raising  the  old.  Under- 
standing death  as  the  curse  of  sin,  Christ  is  the  Besurrection  in  that — (a)  He 
delivers  men  from  sin.  (&)  He  has  abolished  death.  3.  That  from  this  evU  He 
deUvers  on  the  condition  of  trust  in  Him,  not  in  doctrines  about  Him,  &o.  lU. 
The  noblb  confession  of  faith  (ver.  27).  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Martha  and 
Jesus : — I.  Martha  is  a  tspb  of  anxious  believers.  They  beheve  truly,  but  not 
with  such  confidence  as  to  lay  aside  their  care.  1.  She  set  a  practical  bound  to 
the  Saviour's  words :  "  Of  course  there  will  be  a  resurrection,  and  Lazarus  will  rise 
with  the  rest."  We  limit  the  words  of  the  Holy  One.  Of  course  they  mean  so 
much,  but  we  cannot  allow  that  they  mean  more.  2.  She  laid  the  words  of  Jesus 
on  the  shelf,  as  things  so  trite  and  sure  that  they  were  of  small  practical  im- 
portance. When  you  believe  a  truth,  but  neglect  it,  it  is  the  same  as  not  believing. 
Some  never  question  a  doctrine,  that  is  not  their  temptation ;  they  accept  the 
gospel  as  true,  but  never  expect  to  see  its  promises  carried  out.  3.  She  set  the 
promise  in  the  remote  distance.  This  is  a  common  folly.  Telescopes  are  meant 
to  bring  objects  near  to  the  eye,  but  some  look  through  the  mental  telescope  at  the 
-wrong  end.    Do  not  refuse  the  present  blessing  and  say,  "  My  Lord  delayeth  Hia 


CHAP.  XI.J  ST.  JOHN.  Kl 

coming."  4.  She  made  the  promise  unreal  and  impersonal,  mixing  Lazarus  with 
the  rest  of  the  dead.  We  take  the  promises  and  say,  "  That  is  true  to  all  God'a 
people."  If  so,  it  is  true  to  us ;  but  we  miss  that  point.  There  is  such  a  thing  as 
speaking  of  the  promises  in  a  magnificent  style,  and  yet  being  in  deep  spiritual 
poverty :  as  if  a  man  should  boast  of  the  wealth  of  England  while  he  has  not  a 
penny.  If  you  are  a  child  of  God,  all  things  are  yours  and  you  may  help  yourself. 
n.  How  Jesus  dkalt  with  Mabtha.  1.  He  did  not  grow  angry  with  her  and  say, 
"  I  am  ashamed  of  you  that  you  should  have  such  low  thoughts  of  Me. "  She 
thought  that  she  was  honouring  Jesus  by  her  acknowledgment  of  His  special 
power  with  God.  And  in  similar  cases  it  iU  becomes  a  servant  to  lose  patience 
where  the  Master  shows  so  much.  2.  With  gentle  spirit  Jesus  proceeds  to  teach 
her  more  of  the  things  concerning  Himself.  This  is  the  true  way  to  cure  de- 
spondency. "I  am,"  not  "I  can  get  the  Eesurrection."  God's  people  want  to 
know  more  of  Jesus.  Some  of  them  know  more  than  enough  of  themselves,  and 
they  will  break  their  hearts  if  they  go  on  reading  much  longer  in  that  black  letter 
book.  Poor  Martha  was  looking  up  into  the  sky  for  life,  or  down  into  the  deeps 
for  resurrection,  when  the  Eesurrection  and  the  Life  was  by.  Learn — 1.  To  construe 
the  promises  in  their  largest  sense.  2.  To  look  to  the  Promiser,  and  not  to  the 
difficulties  which  surround  the  accomplishment  of  the  promise.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Martha  went.  .  .  .  but  Mary  sat  still. — Martha  meeting  Christ : — Martha's  "  met  '• 
is  a  perfect  tense ;  Mary's  "  sat  "  is  an  imperfect  It  is  impossible  not  to  see  the 
characteristic  temperament  of  each  sister  coming  out  here,  and  doubtless  it  is 
written  for  our  learning.  Martha — active,  stirring,  busy,  demonstrative — cannot 
wait,  but  runs  impulsively  to  meet  Jesus.  Mary — quiet,  gentle,  pensive,  meditative, 
contemplative,  meek — sits  passively  at  home.  Tet  I  venture  to  think  that  of  the 
two  sisters,  Martha  here  appears  to  most  advantage.  There  is  such  a  thing  as 
being  so  crushed  and  stunned  by  our  affliction  that  we  do  not  adorn  our  profession 
under  it.  Is  there  not  something  of  this  in  Mary's  conduct  throughout  this 
chapter  ?  Thore  is  a  time  to  stir,  as  well  as  to  sit  still ;  and  here,  by  not  stirring, 
Mary  certainly  missed  hearing  our  Lord's  glorious  declaration  about  Himself.  I  would 
not  be  mistaken  in  saying  this.  Both  these  holy  women  were  true  disciples ;  yet  if 
Mary  showed  more  grace  on  a  former  occasion  than  Martha,  I  think  Martha  here 
showed  more  than  Mary.  Let  us  never  forget  that  there  are  differences  of  tempera- 
ment among  believers,  and  let  us  make  due  allowance  for  others  if  they  are  not 
quite  like  ourselves.  There  are  behevers  who  are  quiet,  passive,  silent,  and  medi. 
tative ;  and  believers  who  are  active,  stirring,  and  demonstrative.  The  well- 
ordered  Church  must  find  room,  place,  and  work  for  all.  We  need  Marys  as  well 
as  Marthas,  and  Marthas  as  well  as  Marys.  {Bp.  liyle.)  Lord,  if  Thou  hadst 
been  here,  my  brother  had  not  died. — If.  "  Lord,  if  Thou  hadst  been  here,  my 
brother  had  not  died."  How  natural  it  all  is  I  "  If  Thou  hadst  been  here.'|  Prone 
is  the  human  heart  to  utter  just  such  words  as  these.  "  Much  virtue  in  an  if,"  says 
the  poet.  But  there  is  also  much  torture  in  it.  Had  this  been  done  or  that,  had 
Buch  and  such  precautions  been  taken,  had  the  doctor  been  sent  for  a  little  sooner, 
had  certain  remedies  been  tried  which  were  learned  of  too  late,  had  we  not  moved 
into  that  house,  the  result  might  have  been  different.  So  we  go  over  the  whole 
miserable  catalogue  of  peradventures  and  possibilities  with  much  bitterness  of 
spirit.  That  is  the  tendency  and  the  temptation.  But  it  should  never  be  done. 
That  "  if  "  has  no  business  in  our  bosom.  It  is  a  stinging  serpent  that  should 
be  ruthlessly  cast  out.  There  is  no  if.  Nothing  ever  simply  happens  so.  Chance 
is  the  god  of  atheism,  and  will  minister  no  comfort  in  the  time  of  trouble.  Banish 
him.  The  Lord  God  omnipotent  reigneth,  and  all  things  come  of  Him.  Our 
ignorance  is  aa  much  a  part  of  the  Divine  plan  as  our  knowledge.  He  does 
not  mean  us  to  know  all  things.  (Boston  Homilies.)  The  imperfection  of 
spiritual  qualities: — God  made  the  tirst  marriage — of  the  body  and  soul 
in  creation,  and  man  the  first  divorce — of  the  body  and  soul  through  sin. 
God  allows  no  such  second  marriages  as  are  implied  in  the  transmigration 
of  souls  into  other  bodies.  And  because  God  has  made  this  band  of  marriage 
indissoluble  but  by  death,  as  far  as  man  is  immortal,  his  divorce  i»  only 
separation.  Body  and  soul  shall  come  together  again  at  the  Eesurrection.  To 
establish  the  assurance  of  this  God  raised  Lazarus  and  others  here.  Note  frorn  the 
text — I.  That  theee  is  nothing  in  this  world  perfect.  1.  In  the  best  things. 
(1)  Knowledge.  What  thing  do  we  know  perfectly?  One  philosopher  thinks  he 
has  dived  at  the  bottom  when  he  says  he  knows  nothing  but  this,  that  he  knows 
nothmg :  and  yet  another  thinks  he  has  expressed  more  knowledge  by  saying  thai 
foxi.  u.  17 


258  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

he  knows  not  bo  much  as  that.  (2)  Faith.  This  imperfection  is  seen  in  the 
apostle's  prayer  for  an  increase  of  faith  (Luke  xvii.  6) ;  in  Christ's  upbraidinga 
/Matt.  vi.  30  ;  viii.  26) ;  in  Paul's  congratulations  and  prayer  for  the  Thessaloniana 
(1  Thess.  i.  2 ;  iii.  10 ;  2  Thess.  i.  3) ;  in  the  expressions  "  rich  in  faith,"  "  abound 
in  faith,"  "  measure  of  faith."  Deceive  not  yourselves,  then,  that  if  you  have  faith 
you  need  no  more.  (3)  That  our  hope  is  not  perfect  we  see  from  James  iv.  3.  We 
cannot  hope  constantly  because  we  do  not  pray  aright ;  and  to  make  a  prayer  a 
right  prayer  there  must  go  so  many  circumstances  as  that  the  best  man  may 
suspect  his  best  prayer.  Whereas,  ordinarily,  a  fly,  the  opening  of  &  door,  a 
memory  of  yesterday,  a  fear  of  to-morrow,  a  noise  in  the  ear,  a  fancy  in  the  brain, 
destroy  prayer.  (4)  There  is  nothing  perfect  in  our  charity.  There  is  no  work  so 
good  as  that  we  can  look  to  God  for  thanks  for  it ;  none  but  has  so  much  ill 
mingled  with  it  that  we  need  not  bespeak  God's  mercy.  2.  How  this  weakness 
appears  in  the  action  in  the  text.  Lest  we  should  attribute  it  only  to  weak  persons, 
note  that  Martha  as  well  as  Mary  comes  also  in  the  same  voice  of  infirmity  (ver.  32). 
Look  upon — (1)  Their  faith.  We  cannot  say  as  much  as  they  did  to  any  college  of 
physicians  ;  but  the  weakness  of  their  faith  hes  in  this,  that  they  said  so  much  and 
no  more  to  Christ ;  and  regard  even  that  power  to  be  derived  from  God  and  not 
inherent  (ver.  22),  Again,  they  relied  so  much  upon  His  corporal  presence.  It  was 
this  that  Christ  diverted  Mary  from  after  His  resurrection  (chap.  xx.  16).  '*  Touch 
Me  not — send  thy  thoughts  whither  I  am  going."  Peter  had  another  holy  distemper 
upon  this  personal  presence,  "Depart  from  Me"  (Luke  v.  8).  The  sisters  longed 
for  Him,  and  Peter  to  be  delivered  from  Him,  both  out  of  weakness  and  error,  as  do 
they  who  attribute  too  much  or  too  httle  to  Christ's  presence  in  ordinances.  To 
imprison  Christ  in  opere  operato,  to  conclude  that  where  that  action  is  done  Christ 
must  necessarily  be  is  to  err  weakly  with  these  sisters ;  but  to  banish  Christ  from 
those  holy  actions  is  to  err  with  Peter.  (2)  So  in  their  hope  and  their  manner  of 
expressing  it.  For  they  did  not  go  ;  they  sent — unlike  Nicodemus,  who  came  in 
person  for  his  sick  soul,  and  the  centurion  for  his  sick  servant,  and  Jairus  and  the 
woman  with  the  issue.  That  is  not  enough  ;  we  must  bring  Christ  and  our  neces- 
Bities  nearer  together.  Then  they  made  no  request,  but  left  an  intimation  to  work 
on  Christ ;  but  I  must  not  wrap  up  my  necessities  in  general  terms,  but  descend  to 
particulars.  As  God  is  an  accessible  God  He  is  open  to  receive  thy  smallest  peti- 
tions, and  as  He  is  an  inexhaustible  God  He  cannot  be  pressed  too  much.  Pray 
personally,  rely  not  upon  dead  or  living  saints,  and  pray  frequently  and  earnestly. 
(3)  Li  their  charity  even  towards  their  dead  brother.  To  lament  a  dead  friend  is 
natural ;  but  inordinate  lamentation  implies  a  worse  state  in  him  that  is  gone  ;  and 
if  we  believe  him  in  heaven  to  wish  him  here  is  uncharitable.  3.  Yet  for  all  these 
imperfections  Christ  doth  not  refuse  or  chide,  but  cherishes  their  piety.  There  is 
no  form  of  building  stronger  than  an  arch,  and  yet  an  arch  has  declinations  which 
even  a  flat  roof  has  not.  So  our  devotions  do  not  the  less  bear  up  upright  in  the 
sight  of  God,  because  they  have  some  declinations  towards  natural  affections.  All 
these  infirmities  of  theirs  multiply  this  consolation,  that  though  God  look  upon 
the  inscription.  He  looks  upon  the  metal  too ;  though  He  look  that  His  image 
ehould  be  preserved  in  us,  He  looks  in  wnat  earthen  vessels  this  image  is  put  by 
His  own  hand.  II.  As  in  spiritual  things  there  is  nothing  perfect,  so  in  tempoeai. 
THEEE  IS  NOTHING  PEEMANENT.  1.  The  earth  itself  is  in  motion.  2.  Consider  the 
greatest  bodies  upon  it — monarchies  which  one  would  think  destiny  might  stare  at 
and  not  shake ;  and  the  smallest  bodies,  the  hairs  of  our  head,  which  one  would 
think  destiny  would  hardly  observe ;  and  yet  destiny  or,  to  epeak  as  a  Christian, 
God,  is  no  more  troubled  to  make  a  monarchy  ruinous  than  a  hair  grey ;  nay, 
nothing  needs  be  done,  the  one  will  ruin  and  the  other  turn  grey  of  itself.  3.  In 
the  elements  there  is  no  acquiescence,  but  a  transmutation  into  one  another ;  air 
condensed  becomes  water,  and  air  rarefied  becomes  fire.  4.  It  is  so  in  the  condi- 
tions of  men  :  a  merchant  condensed,  packed  up  in  a  great  estate,  becomes  a  lord ; 
and  a  merchant  rarefied  by  a  riotous  son  evaporates  into  nothing.  And  if  there 
were  anything  permanent  in  the  world,  yet  we  gain  nothing,  because  we  cannot 
stay  with  it.  5.  The  world  is  a  great  volume,  and  man  its  index.  Even  man's 
body  is  an  illustration  of  all  nature.  Even  in  its  highest  estates,  as  the  temple  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  it  must  perish.  Conclusion :  But  as  in  spiritual  things  there  is 
no  peifectness,  and  yet  God  accepts  our  religious  services,  so,  notwithstanding 
that  all  temporal  things,  God's  noblest  piece  included,  decays,  yet  God  affords  thia 
body  a  resurrection.  The  Gentiles  describe  the  sad  state  of  death  as  one  everlast- 
ing night :  but  to  a  Christian  it  is  the  day  of  death  and  the  day  of  rasurrectioa. 


CHAP.  XI.]  -ST.  JOHN.  269 

And  looking  at  this  ^o  may  invert  the  text  and  say,  "  Because  Thou  wast  here  our 
brother  is  nut  dead."  For  Christ  is  with  the  Christian  in  life,  death,  and  Ihe  resurrec- 
tion. (J.  Donne,  D.D.)  Salvation,  noi  from,  suffering,  but  by  it : — I.  The  lowest 
VIEW  OF  LIFE  looks  out  upon  it  only  as  a  hostelry,  where  every  guest  is  to  seize  on  so 
many  of  the  good  things  exposed  as  the  laws  allow.  This  selfish  hunt  will  take 
different  directions  according  to  the  ruling  appetite.  But  the  characteristic  mark 
on  it  all  is  that  it  disowns  God.  This  system  not  only  fails  to  provide  for  the  chief 
internal  necessity — viz.,  a  religion ;  it  fails  to  meet  the  external  fact  of  suffering. 
That  is  a  test  of  all  philosophies  and  theories  of  life.  It  is  useless  to  leave  it  out 
of  the  calculation  ;  it  forces  its  way  back  into  every  lot.  Life  does  not  become  a 
problem  till  we  taste  of  its  bitterness.  Whenever  pain,  bereavement,  &c.,  come, 
that  comfort-seeking,  epicurean  plan  of  living  collapses,  and  the  least  that  the  man 
can  then  do  is  to  fly  to  Zeno's  porch  and  borrow  some  crumbs  of  frigid  dignity  that 
fall  from  the  stoics  table.  II.  Ascend  a  step  higher.  Here  we  find  God  to  be 
acknowledged,  but  more  through  fear  than  devout  submission.  Providence  had 
returned  to  the  world  from  which  unbelief  had  rejected  Him  ;  but  the  confession, 
*•  Thy  will  be  done,"  is  not  so  full  as  to  include  the  giving  up  of  the  dearest  idols, 
and  there  is  the  suspicion  that  here  and  there  some  sparrow  or  more  precious  thing 
may  fall  without  the  Father's  notice.  This  state  is  met  by  suffering,  the  touch- 
stone ;  how  does  it  behave  itself  ?  Well,  but  not  best.  Soberly  but  not  serenely. 
Some  selfish  preferences  linger  to  mar  the  beauty  of  resignation — to  keep  back  part 
of  the  Bouls  trust,  and  so  disturb  the  perfect  peace  of  beUeving.  There  is  the 
beginning  of  faith — too  much  to  be  thrown  away,  not  enough  to  live  by.  This  is 
precisely  where  Martha  stands.  There  is  a  mixture  of  the  strength  and  weakness 
of  faith,  perhaps  of  faith  and  superstition.  She  believed  in  the  power  and  love  of 
Jesus — that  was  her  true  faith — but  she  believed  that  it  must  operate  in  prolonging 
her  brother's  life,  and  was  limited  to  His  physical  presence.  That  was  the  falsity 
and  weakness  of  her  faith,  Jesus  corrects  it  with,  *'  Whosoever  [anywhere] 
believeth  on  Me  shall  never  die."  III.  Out  of  that  state  into  a  higher  one  still 
Christ  wishes  to  lift  her  and  us.  Where  a  holy  soul  will  be  felt  to  be  of  more  value 
than  any  freedom  from  pain ;  when  sympathy  with  Christ  is  valued  more  than 
having  a  human  friend  at  our  side.  Saved  by  suffering,  not  from  it,  is  the  law  of 
life  revealed  in  Christ.  Character  depends  on  inward  strength,  but  this  strength 
has  two  conditions :  it  is  increased  only  by  being  put  forth,  and  tested  only  by 
resistance.  So  the  spiritual  character  must  enter  into  conflict,  and  stand  in  com- 
parison with  something  formidable  enough  to  be  a  standard  of  its  power.  1.  The 
ordinary  conditions  of  a  prosperous  fortune  furnishes  no  such  standard.  The 
favoured  moral  constitutions  which  ripen  into  sainthood  under  perpetual  comfort 
are  rare  exceptions.  Suffering  in  some  form  must  put  faith  to  the  proof  and 
purify  it ;  what  form  God,  who  knows  best,  must  determine.  The  sisters  must 
fiee  Lazarus  die,  Matthew  must  forsake  all  to  follow  the  Master.  How  many 
of  ns  take  up  Martha's  plaint  instead  of,  "  Lord  in  these  chastenings  of 
friendly  love  Thou  hast  been  here — Thy  will  be  done."  And  Christ  shows  three 
times  over  that  the  design  here  was  that  the  disciples,  the  sisters,  and  the  people, 
might  believe.  2.  In  another  class  of  moral  experiences  the  principle  has  a  direct 
application — in  those  who  long  more  earnestly  for  rest  than  faithful  submission. 
They  have  heard  that  there  is  joy  in  believing,  and  so  believe  for  the  sake  of  the 
joy,  and  this,  though  a  nobler  thirst  than  that  of  the  senses,  is  tainted  with  selfish- 
ness and  wanting  in  faith.  Then,  again,  the  mercenary  tendency  to  offer  to  God 
your  good  works  as  a  price  for  purchasing  self-complacency  needs  to  be  watched. 
It  defeats  its  own  end.  Faith  never  comes  that  way  :  it  comes  swiftest  when  you 
seek  it  as  an  end  least.  Seek  purity,  harmony  with  God,  and  peace  in  God's  good 
time  will  come.  Stillness  is  our  needed  sacrifice.  BafSed  and  broken  the  soul 
must  often  be  ere  its  immortal  strength  comes.  Not  from  but  by  this  suffering  we 
shall  be  saved.  3.  We  may  embrace  all  those  instances  in  which  we  doubt  whether 
some  care  was  not  omitted  whereby  the  fatal  blow  might  have  been  warded  off 
When  shall  we  learn  that  God  takes  the  past  into  His  secure  keeping,  and  that  even 
out  of  sorrows  that  we  might  have  prevented,  a  spiritual  benefit  may  be  now 
drawn  greater  than  their  prevention.  Vain  cry,  "  Lord,  if  Thou  hadst,"  &e.  But  to 
receive  and  bless  Him  in  whatever  robes  of  darkness,  when  He  comes.  Conclusion  : 
1.  Suffering  is  disciplinary.  2.  If  our  desires  reach  only  after  exemption  from  it, 
4hey  are  but  half  faithless.  3.  The  true  conquest  and  peace  of  faith,  as  weU  as  the 
solution  of  the  mystery  of  sorrow,  lie  in  our  willingness  to  suffer,  so  far  as  it  may 
4)ring  OS  to  the  society  of  our  Lord.     (Bp.  Huntington^      The  power  of  God  to  prevent 


260  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

death : — I.  Gk>i>  is  able  to  prevent  ant  person  dtimo  bo  boon  as  hb  does  on.  H« 
preserved  the  lives  of  men  much  longer  in  former  ages  :  but  He  ootild  have  prevented 
Methuselah  dying  at  969  had  He  pleased.  He  is  able  to  preserve  men  from  sickness, 
the  common  cause  of  death — and  He  does  so  often  for  seventy,  eighty,  or  ninety 
years.  And  if  men  become  sick  He  can  raise  them  as  He  did  Hezekic^.  So  with 
accidents,  another  cause  of  death.  II.  God  never  does  prevent  men  dying  as  soon 
AS  THEY  DO  DIE.  He  might  have  prevented  Lazarus  dying,  yet  He  did  not.  And 
this  holds  in  all  cases ;  and  no  power  can  move  Him  when  He  chooses  that  any 
shall  die.  This  we  see  in  David's  prayer  for  his  little  infant,  in  those  of  pious 
parents  for  theirs,  and  in  those  of  the  Church  for  good  and  useful  men.  III.  Why 
God  does  not  prevent  persons  dyino  as  soon  as  they  do  die.  Because — 1.  He 
knows  that  their  appointed  time  to  die  is  come.  "  Is  there  not  an  appointed 
time,"  (&c.  2.  He  sees  it  best  for  them  to  die  then.  He  knows  what  will  be  the 
consequence  of  living,  and  takes  them  away  from  the  evil  to  come.  3.  He  knows 
that  it  will  be  the  best  for  the  survivors.  Many  have  done  more  good  by  dying 
than  they  would  by  living.  How  often  has  the  death  of  a  child  resulted  in  the 
conversion  of  the  parents  !  This  was  the  reason  of  the  death  of  Lazarus.  4.  He 
has  a  supreme  regard  for  His  own  glory.  He  displays  a  wisdom,  goodness  and 
sovereignty  which  surpasses  that  of  all  His  intelligent  creatures.  Improvement. 
If  God  can  preserve  human  life  or  cut  it  short  as  He  pleases,  then — 1.  It  is  proper 
to  pray  for  the  sick  as  long  as  the  least  spark  of  life  remains.  Neither  young  nor 
old  ought  to  give  up  the  hope  of  living ;  and  God  has  wrought  wonders  in  answer  to 
prayer.  2.  We  ought  never  to  pray  for  the  preservation  of  life  unconditionally. 
We  ought  to  rejoice  that  we  are  in  God's  hands,  who  knows  best.  So  Christ  prayed 
conditionally  in  view  of  His  tremendous  sufferings — "  Not  My  will."  3.  All  ought 
to  carry  about  with  them  a  sense  that  they  are  dying  creatures.  They  know  not 
what  a  day  or  an  hour  may  bring  forth.  "Lord  make  me  to  know  mine  end." 
4.  Death  commonly  comes  unexpected.  We  are  ready  to  remember  that  God  can 
preserve  our  lives  as  long  as  He  pleases,  but  forget  that  He  has  an  appointed  time, 
and  that  time  always  comes  suddenly.  6.  None  can  enjoy  life  without  becoming 
truly  religious.  Then  whatever  comes  we  shall  be  ready  lor  the  joy  of  our  Lord. 
6.  Mourners  have  always  reason  to  exercise  unreserved  submission  to  his  bereaving 
hand.     (N.  EmmoTis,  D.D.)  Restoration  better  than  prevention : — I.  Martha 

SAW  not  the  connection  between  the  death  and  blessedness  of  Christ's  servants. 
She  had  largely  in  her  thought  the  Jevrish  idea  of  death  as  the  disturber  of  fellow- 
ship. Truer  to  have  said,  "  Thou  hast  been  here  and  my  brother  has  Uved."  Christ's 
influence  goes  to  make  men  feel  that  they  are  citizens  of  heaven.  The  whole 
meaning  of  onr  life  is  in  the  future ;  death  is  the  portal  to  that  perfection.  1.  We 
feel  in  our  hearts  that  there  is  an  inseparable  connection  between  faith  and 
knowledge.  The  relation  is  not  complete  here.  We  must  die  to  know  the  right 
co-ordination  of  the  two.  2.  Aspiration  and  perfection  are  not  equal  here.  In 
eternity  demand  and  satisfaction  are  one.  3.  How  sundered  are  love  and  happiness 
here,  wllgre  love  and  sorrow  are  fellows.  In  heaven  measureless  love  will  yield 
limitless  gladness.  4.  Power  and  opportunity  are  frequently  divided.  In  heaven 
power  and  environment  will  be  matched.  We  must  die  to  realize  the  true  correla- 
tion of  our  being  with  the  spiritual  universe.  III.  She  did  not  see  the  connection 
between  Christ's  delay  and  the  good  or  all  concerned.  Jesus  was  absent  not 
that  Lazarus  might  die,  but  that  he  might  die  in  faith  without  sight.  Christ  might 
have  checked  the  disease  in  Peraea,  but  His  delay  furthered  the  purposes  of  His  love. 
1.  To  educate  their  trust.  2.  To  prepare  them  for  the  actual  work  about  to  be 
wrought.  3.  To  reveal  His  glory  more  fully.  4.  To  make  the  deepest  impression 
on  the  unbelieving.  III.  She  did  not  see  as  we  do  now  the  connection  between 
their  buffering  and  the  mystery  of  aHE  Cross.  John  shows  us  how  the  miracle 
was  a  distinct  Unk  in  the  chain  of  events  that  led  to  the  death  of  Jesus.  1.  They 
suffered  because  Christ  was  to  suffer.  As  some  on-rushing  star  sets  up  purturbationa 
in  other  worlds  that  come  within  the  range  of  its  influence,  so  this  great  process  of 
God  in  sacrifice  draws  into  its  vortex  the  lives  of  men.  2.  They  suffered  because 
Christ  must  suffer,  "  Ought  not  Christ  to  suffer  these  things  ?  "  Ought  not  His 
disciples  to  share  in  the  community  of  His  sorrows  ?  This  is  the  explanation  of 
pain  and  conflict.  To  see  the  relation  between  our  pain  and  Christ's  Cross  is  to  be 
qualified  to  meet  and  conquer  it.  The  fellowship  of  such  suffering  carries  in  its 
heart  even  now  the  sharing  of  His  glory.  (J.  Matthews.)  Contingent  events  and 
providence  : — I.  There  is  a  close  analogy  between  the  feeling  here  expressed 
AND  that  experienced  bt  uost  bereaved  persons.    How  few  afflictions  which  are 


CHAP,  sxj  ST.  JOHN.  261 

not  made  doubly  afflictive  by  an  if.  If  our  friend  had  done  this  instead  of  that — if 
we  had  only  foreseen.  These  thoughts  make  perfect  resignation  impossible.  They 
come  in  between  us  and  God,  and  bewilder  in  a  maze  of  second  causes  which  no 
man  can  thread  or  find  repose  in.  II.  If  there  is  koom  fob  these  reflections  is 
ANT,  there  is  boom  FOB  THEM  IN  BTEBT  CASE.  Take  any  instance  of  death,  except  by 
constitutional  decay,  and  you  can  always  fix  upon  some  circumstance  which  seemed 
the  turning  point.  Only  let  danger  be  foreseen,  and,  humanly  speaking,  in  nine 
'  oa»ss  out  of  ten  deaths  would  be  prevented.  If  a  man  knew  he  was  going  to  catch 
s  fever  or  meet  with  an  accident,  how  he  would  avoid  the  dangerous  localities. 
Calamities  flow  immediately  from  the  shortness  of  human  foresight.  Could  ocean 
storms  be  calculated  or  shifting  currents  mapped,  there  would  be  no  shipwrecks. 
Here  Divine  Providence  over-rules  and  moves  in  ways  higher  than  ours.  To  say, 
therefore,  "  Had  it  been  thus  my  brother  or  child  had  not  died  is,  to  complain  of 
the  ordinance  of  Divine  Wisdom  by  which  man  is  kept  ignorant  of  the  future. 
IH.  This  pbinciplb  applies  equally  to  the  happy  portions  of  our  life.  Eecovery, 
preservation,  prosperity,  depend  equally  on  contingencies,  which,  when  we  look 
book,  we  see  might  have  been  otherwise.  A  choice  which  has  led  to  the  most 
fortunate  issues  was  determined,  not  by  foresight  of  the  end,  but  by  the  most 
casual  circumstances.  Thus  there  is  room  for  the  if  in  our  joys  which  we  cannot 
number.  IV,  The  necessary  limits  of  human  fobesight  indicate  the  point  on 
which  wb  chiefly  need  to  practice  Christian  submission.  Our  ignorance  is  part  of 
the  Divine  plan,  and  is  essential  to  happiness.  You  murmur  that  you  could  not 
see  a  particular  calamity  so  as  to  have  prevented  it :  but  then  you  would  have  to  see 
all.  This  would  make  you  a  secondary  providence  in  your  own  circle,  and  impose 
a  weight  of  care  which  Omnipotence  alone  could  sustain  for  a  single  day.    V.  The 

CONDITION   OF    MORTAL    LIFE    IS    SUMMED    UP    IN   TWO    WORDS — MAN'S    DUTY    AND    God'S 

PROVIDENCE.  In  the  hour  of  bereavement  the  question  as  to  our  faithfulness  in  the 
relation  suspended  will  and  ought  to  come  up.  When  you  can  answer  it  to  your 
satisfaction  you  have  no  ground  for  uneasiness.  You  did  what  you  could.  You 
had  not  Divine  foresight :  do  not  then  torment  yourself,  because  you  were  not  in 
God's  stead.  Do  your  duty,  and  in  the  majority  of  instances  it  vnll  lead  to  the  out- 
ward results  you  desire.  Obey  nature's  laws,  and  health  will  be  the  rule,  disease 
the  exception.  But  with  all  your  care  there  is  another  system :  that  of  Divine 
Providence,  which  has  no  law  but  eternal  love.  The  decree  has  gone  forth — *'  Ye 
shall  have  tribulation,"  and  we  need  the  discipline  as  pilgrims  to  detach  us  from 
the  attractions  by  the  way-side,  and  to  fix  our  affections  on  things  above.  When 
God  sees  that  we  need  this,  vain  are  our  anxieties  and  precautions.  All  that  remains 
is  to  say,  "  It  is  the  Lord  ;  let  Him  do  what  seemest  to  Him  good."  {A.  P.  Peabody, 
D.D.)  The  consolations  of  Christ  adapted  to  the  state  and  character  of  His  people 
(text  and  ver.  32) : — I.  How  much  sameness  there  is  in  grief.  It  is  remarkable 
that  two  persons  so  different  in  turn  of  mind  and  feeling  should  both  utter  the  same 
words.  It  shows  how  the  heart  when  deeply  moved  is  the  same  in  all.  The 
sisters  were  united  in  their  affection  to  Lazarus  and  in  their  reliance  on  Jesus. 
Together  they  watched,  sent  for  Christ,  waited  anxiously  for  His  coming,  fell  into 
the  dreary  sadness  which  follows  the  first  violence  of  grief,  then  greet  Jesus  as  He 
oomes  too  late  in  the  same  way.  It  is  the  voice  of  nature  mingling  its  vain  regrets 
with  the  resignation  of  simple  faith.  1.  There  is  the  feeling  that  it  might  have 
been  otherwise.  We  know  not  what  detained  Thee,  perhaps  we  did  not  send,  or  the 
messenger  did  not  reach  Thee  in  time.  Oh  that  the  sickness  had  happened 
when  Thou  was  in  Jerusalem  I  Is  it  not  thus  that  the  heart  speaks  under  every 
trying  dispensation  ?  If  some  measure  had  been  adopted,  or  such  an  accident  not 
happened,  my  brother  had  not  died.  However  natural,  is  this  not  the  very  folly  of 
unbelief  conceiving  Christ  as  limited  by  events  which  He  EQmself  ordains  ?  Nay, 
He  might  have  answered,  I  might  have  been  there ;  and  though  not  I  might  have 
kept  him  alive,  or  being  there  might  have  let  him  die.  Whatever  comes  is  not 
accident,  but  His  wilL  Be  still  and  know  that  He  is  God.  2.  That  it  should  have 
been  otherwise.  We  sent  a  special  message,  why  linger  and  not  make  baste  to  help 
us — an  instinctive  complaint  in  a  season  of  bereavement.  It  is  hard  to  believe 
that  God  ordains  it  and  does  no  wrong.  You  can  give  many  reasons.  How 
serviceable  that  valuable  life  might  have  been  to  God  and  man.  But  remember 
God  has  many  purposes  with  which  you  are  unacquainted.  Wait  patiently  and  you 
will  see  that  it  was  for  His  glory.  It  may  be  that  He  had  need  of  His  services 
elsewhere.  3.  That  it  was  sincere,  if  melancholy,  satisfaction  in  meeting  with 
Jesus  at  last     He  had  not  come  at  the  time,  in  the  way,  for  the  purpose  they 


sea  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xt, 

expected,  and  too  late  for  their  purpose,  but  still  He  had  come  for  good,  and 
they  gratefully  receive  Him.  Happy  if  you  so  meet  the  Saviour's  advances.  Like 
Bachel,  you  may  refuse  to  be  comforted,  and  like  Jonah,  when  your  gourd  withers, 
you  may  be  angry,  and  turn  away  when  Christ  comes.  Beware  of  such  moods. 
It  is  enough  if  He  is  with  you  to  till  the  aching  void  in  your  affections,  and  be  to 
you  instead  of  what  you  have  lost — better  than  a  thousand  brothers.  II.  How 
MUCH  VAiUETY  THEBE  IS  IN  OBiEF.  The  sistcrs  differed  in  their  sorrow  as  they  did 
generally.  Both  regarded  Christ  with  confidence  and  affection,  but  Martha  showed 
it  by  active  and  Mary  by  quiet  devotion.  So  now,  when  Martha  received  intimation 
of  Christ's  approach,  she  rose  in  haste  impatient  to  meet  Him  ;  but  Mary  remained 
in  the  house  absorbed  in  her  grief  ;  and  when  she  went  forth  they  said,  •♦  she  goeth 
to  the  grave,"  &c.,  as  though  she,  unlike  Martha,  could  do  nothing  else.  1.  Thus 
in  different  circumstances  the  same  temper  may  be  an  advantage  or  a  snare.  Mary 
was  never  so  occupied  with  an  emotion  of  one  subject  as  not  to  be  ready  for  the  call 
to  another.  This  was  a  disadvantage  when  she  was  so  hurried  with  this  and  that 
household  care  as  to  have  no  time  to  wait  on  the  word  of  life :  but  it  was  an 
advantage  now  that  she  could  shake  off  her  depression  and  hasten  to  meet  Christ. 
The  same  profound  feeling,  however,  which  made  Mary  an  attentive  listener  made 
her  the  most  helpless  sufferer  until  Jesus  sent  specially  to  rouse  her  (ver.  28).  2. 
In  the  meeting*  the  difference  is  equally  characteristic.  Martha  is  calm  and 
collected  enough  to  enter  into  argument,  and  at  length  is  sufficiently  self-possessed 
to  make  a  formal  declaration  of  her  faith.  Not  so  Mary — her  heart  is  too  full  for 
many  words,  she  cannot  command  the  passion  of  her  soul.  She  can  but  cast 
herself  down  weeping,  and  say  (ver.  32).    III.  How  much  compass  there  is  in  thb 

CONSOLATION  OP   ChBIST,  ADAPTED  TO   GRIEF  OF   EVERY  MOULD  AND    MOOD.       1.    Martha's 

distress  admitted  of  discussion  and  discourse.  Jesus  spoke  to  her  and  led  her  to 
epeak  to  Him,  and  though  she  understands  Him  not  fully  she  is  relieved  by  having 
laid  on  her  Divine  Friend  the  burden  of  her  soul,  and  with  her  lightened  heart  she 
declares  her  entire  acquiescence  in  Him  (ver.  27).  2.  Mary  is  differently  affected 
and  His  sympathy  is  shown  in  a  different  way.  He  is  much  more  profoundly 
moved.  He  does  not  reply  in  words,  for  her  own  were  so  few.  Grief  has  choked 
her,  and  His  own  responsive  sigh  is  more  comforting  than  any  promise.  Jesus  wept. 
Blessed  mourner  with  whose  tears  thy  Saviour  mingles  His  own.  With  Martha 
Jesus  reasoned  :  with  Mary  Jesus  wept.  3.  How  confidently  every  Christian 
mourner  can  come  to  Him.  He  wUl  give  you  the  very  cordial  you  need.  He  is  a 
patient  hearer  if  you  have  anything  to  say,  and  He  will  speak  as  you  are  able  to  hear 
it,  and  if  you  cannot  collect  your  thoughts,  and  your  heart  is  hot  within  you — 
remember  that  with  these  groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered  the  Spirit  maketh 
intercession  for  you.  {R.  S.  Candlish,  D.D.)  Whatsoever  thou  wilt  ask  of  God. — 
The  Master  advoate : — This  is  our  comfort,  that  Christ  is  all  in  all  with  the  Father, 
and  may  have  what  He  will  of  Him.  What  need  we  of  any  other  "  master  of  re- 
quests "  than  Christ.  If  David  will  hear  Joab  for  Absalom,  and  Herod  Blastus  for  the 
Tyrians,  what  may  not  we  hope?  {J.  Trapp.)  Death  defeated  by  prayer : — At  a 
certain  4ime  Luther  received  an  express,  stating  that  his  bosom  friend  and 
co-worker  in  the  reformation,  Philip  Melancthon,  was  lying  at  the  point  of  death ; 
upon  which  information  he  immediately  set  out  upon  the  journey  of  some  hundred 
and  fifty  miles,  to  visit  him,  and  upon  bis  arrival,  he  actually  found  all  the 
distinctive  features  of  death ;  such  as  the  glazed  eye,  the  cold  clammy  sweat,  and 
insensible  lethargy,  upon  him.  Upon  witnessing  these  sure  indications  of  a  speedy 
dissolution,  as  he  mournfully  bent  over  him,  he  exclaimed  with  great  emotion, 
"  Oh,  how  awful  is  the  change  wrought  upon  the  visage  of  my  dear  brother  I  "  On 
hearing  this  voice,  to  the  astonishment  of  all  present,  Melancthou  opened  his  eyes, 
and  looking  up  into  Luther's  face,  remarked,  "  Oh,  Luther,  is  this  you  ?  Why  don't 
you  let  me  depart  in  peace?"  Upon  which  Luther  replied,  "Oh  no,  PhiUp,  we 
cannot  spare  you  yet."  Luther  then  turned  away  from  the  bed,  and  fell  upon  his 
knees,  with  his  face  towards  the  window,  and  began  to  wrestle  with  God  in  prayer, 
and  to  plead  with  great  fervency,  for  more  than  an  hour,  tlie  many  proofs  recorded 
in  Scripture  of  His  being  a  prayer-hearing  and  prayer-answering  God;  and  also 
how  much  he  stood  in  need  of  the  service!  of  Melancthon,  in  furttieriug  that  cause, 
in  which  the  honour  and  glory  of  God's  great  name,  and  the  eternal  welfare  of 
unnumbered  millions  of  immortal  souls,  were  so  deeply  interested  ;  and  that  God 
should  not  deny  him  this  one  request,  to  restore  him  the  aid  of  his  well-tried 
brother  Melancthon.  He  then  rose  up  from  prayer,  and  went  to  the  bedside  again, 
and  tock  Melancthon  by  the  hand.   Upon  which  Melancthon  again  remarked,  "  Oh, 


CHAP,  n.]  ST.  JOHN.  263 

dear  Luther,  why  don't  you  let  me  depart  in  peace  ?  "  To  which  Luther  again 
answered,  "  No,  no,  Philip,  we  cannot  possibly  spare  you  from  the  field  of  labour 
yet."  Luther  then  requested  the  nurse  to  go  and  make  him  a  dish  of  soup,  according 
to  his  instructions.  Which  being  prepared,  was  brought  to  Luther,  who  requested 
his  friend  Melancthon  to  eat  of  it.  Melancthon  again  asked  him,  "  Oh,  Luther, 
why  will  you  not  let  me  go  home,  and  be  at  rest  7  "  To  which  Luther  replied  aa 
before,  "  Philip,  we  cannot  spare  you  yet."  Melancthon  then  exhibited  a  disincli- 
nation to  partake  of  the  nourishment  prepared  for  him.  Upon  which  Luther 
re  narked,  "Philip,  eat,  or  I  will  excommunicate  you."  Melancthon  then  partook 
of  the  food  prepared,  and  immediately  grew  better,  and  was  speedily  restored  to  his 
wonted  health  and  strength  again,  and  laboured  for  years  afterwards  with  his 
coadjutors  in  the  blessed  cause  of  the  reformation.  Upon  Luther's  arrival  at 
home,  he  narrated  to  his  beloved  wife  Catherine  the  above  circumstances,  and 
added,  "  God  gave  me  my  brother  Melancthon  back  in  direct  answer  to  prayer ;  " 
and  added  further,  with  patriarchal  simplicity,  "  God  on  a  former  occasion 
gave  me,  also,  you  back,  Kata,  in  answer   to  my  prayer."  Thy   brother 

shall  rise  again. — Earthly  relationship  not  destroyed  by  death : — There  was 
that  in  the  tie  of  blood  which  death  was  powerless  to  alter.  Many  an  aching 
heart  would  find  comfort,  if  it  were  assured  of  this.  Have  we  lost  them  for  ever  as 
ours,  those  loved  ones — lost  all  the  claim  upon  their  special  answering  love,  which 
those  old  earthly  names,"  brother,"  "sister,"  and  the  like,  gave  us?  Is  the 
Communion  of  Saints  one  monotonous  dead  level  of  spiritual  relationship  ?  Or 
are  the  ties  of  earth — whether  ties  of  blood,  or  ties  of  friendship,  or  ties  of  love — 
not  abolished,  but  transfigured,  in  that  mysterious  world  beyond  death  ?  On  the 
warrant  of  these  words  of  Jesus  I  dare  to  believe  that  they  will  be  glorified,  not 
destroyed ;  that  that,  which  more  than  anything  else  makes  earth  bright  and  worth 
having,  will  be  at  least  one  of  the  lesser  luminaries  of  heaven.  Nay,  even  if  we 
had  no  such  words  of  Jesus  as  these,  I  could  never  bring  myself  to  believe  that 
God  would  so  mock  us,  as  to  give  us  these  relationships  and  bid  us  be  faithful  to 
them,  only  to  tear  our  hearts  in  pieces  with  grief — grief  which  must  necessarily  be 
intense  in  proportion  to  our  fidelity  to  them — when  the  cruel  hour  of  death  arrives 
to  dissolve  them.  It  is  sad  enough  that  they  should  be  even  suspended,  through 
" ignorance  of  a  common  tongue" — their  destruction  would  be  intolerable  to  us. 
As  the  seed  is  transformed  into  the  plant — as  the  natural  body  is  transfigured  into 
the  spiritual  body — so  will  the  earthly  relationship  be  glorified  into  its  heavenly 
counterpart.  (D.  J.  Vaughan,  M.A .)  Funeral  sermon  : — Let  us  survey — I.  The 
LIFE  OF  THE  DEPARTED.  Note — 1.  His  affcction  as  a  relative.  2.  His  attachment 
as  a  friend.  3.  His  grace  as  a  Christian.  4.  His  fidelity  as  a  minister.  II.  Thb 
DEATH  OP  THE  DEPARTED.  It  was— 1.  Unexpected.  2.  Tranquil.  3.  Gainful  to 
Him.  He  has— (1)  Full  vision  of  Christ — of  those  around  the  throne.  (2)  Full 
image.  (3)  Full  enjoyment.  4.  Loss  to  you — as  relative,  friend,  Christian, 
minister.  HL  His  besdrkection.  1.  To  an  immortal  life.  2.  In  a  8ui)erior 
state.  3.  For  the  noblest  purposes.  This  resurrection  is — (1)  Possible.  (2)  Reason- 
able. (3)  Certain.  (4)  Desirable — (a)  To  see  his  bereaved  kindred.  (6)  To  meet 
his  sorrowing  friends,  (c)  To  present  his  beloved  people,  (d)  To  enjoy  nis  incarnate 
God.  (J.  Judson.)  The  identity  of  the  earthly  and  the  heavenly  life : — "  Thy 
brother" — the  very  being  that  had  died — the  same  in  feehng,  mind,  sentiment. 
This  is  the  Christian  idea  of  immortality.  The  next  life  is  an  unbroken  continua- 
tion of  this  as  regards — I.  Our  pdrsuit  of  knowledqe.  Why  should  this  be 
closed  by  the  opening  of  the  soul's  prison  gates  ?  So  far  from  this  it  hardly  admits 
of  doubt  that  the  direction  which  the  mind  has  assumed  in  the  obscurity  and 
distractions  of  the  world  will  determine  its  favourite  course  when  for  darkness  there 
shall  be  light,  and  for  hindrances  helps,  in  the  case  of,  e.g.,  the  philosopher,  the 
scientist,  the  historian.  II.  Our  esthetic  nature.  No  attribute  of  the  Creator 
is  more  richly  manifested  than  His  luve  of  beauty.  For  all  refined  tastes  He  has 
famished  nutriment  with  the  same  bounty  as  that  with  which  He  has  provided  for 
our  lower  needs.  We  trace  God  none  the  less  in  the  beauty  that  flows  from  human 
hands.  Man,  in  the  pride  of  his  art,  and  at  the  zenith  of  his  power  is  the  copyist 
of  the  Creator  ;  and  if  I  can  be  glad  and  worshipful  in  the  presence  of  the  copies, 
how  much  more  in  the  better  life  shall  I  be  sensible  of  their  archetypes.  And  when 
St.  John  lays  all  nature  under  contribution,  and  piles  splendour  upon  splendour  to 
shadow  forth  the  glories  of  the  new  Jerusalem,  I  know  the  very  power  of  painting 
those  gorgeous  forms  is  an  authentic  prophecy  of  more  of  beauty  in  heaven  Ihan 
heart  has  conceived.    lU.    Odb    capacity  fob    friendship.     This  capacitj   iU 


264  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  (chap.  n. 

transcends  its  earthly  uses,  and  our  power  of  enjoying  it  here.  The  most  tender 
home  love  only  intensifies  and  enlarges  the  power  of  loving.  "With  this  proclivity 
to  form  attachments  we  are  saddened,  net  only  by  the  death-thinned  ranks  of  our 
friends,  but  by  the  multitude  of  the  living  who  win  our  dear  regard  and  then 
seldom  come  within  our  reach — friends  of  our  travels,  e.g.,  and  friends  in  distant 
cities.  Why  are  we  made  capable  of  loves  so  strong,  and  yet  so  evanescent  ?  To 
lay  up  treasures  for  the  heavenly  life,  providing  friends  that  shall  be  ours  for  ever. 
There  will  be  in  heaven  time  enough  and  room  enough  for  all.  {A.  P.  Peabody,  D.D.) 
1  know  he  shall  rise  again  in  the  resurrection. — Grace  imagined  less  : — The  grace 
was  so  great  that  Martha  does  what  we  all  often  do — imagines  it  less :  as  when  you 
slip  a  sovereign  into  a  boy's  hand  on  his  birthday,  and  he  imagines  it  a  shilling, 
having  no  thought  of  a  gift  so  great.  {J.  Culross,  D.D.)  A  near  benefit  not 
understood : — This  passage  of  the  history  may  remind  us  of  somewhat  similar  in 
the  conversation  with  the  woman  of  Samaria  at  Jacob's  well.  Neither  does  Martha 
iiere,  nor  that  woman,  understand  the  nearness  of  the  benefit.  In  each  case,  half- 
despondingly,  they  put  it  off.  Yet  to  the  one,  speaking  only  of  a  distant  future,  and 
saying,  "  I  know  tiiat  Messias  cometh :  when  He  is  come  He  will  teU  us  all  things ;" 
the  Lord  suddenly  rejoins,  "  I  that  speak  unto  thee  am  He."  And  so  here  to  the 
other,  who  can  think  of  nothing  nearer,  nothing  better,  than  the  remote  general 
resurrection,  the  Lord  likewise  rejoins,  "I  am  the  Resurrection  and  the  Life." 
Each  has  but  the  vague,  inoperative  idea  of  the  final  good :  He  speaks  to  each  of 
an  even  present  blessing.  (G. «/.  Browne,  M.A.)  Our  treatment  of  the  promises : — 
"We  do  with  the  promises  often  as  a  poor  old  couple  did  with  a  precious  document, 
which  might  have  cheered  their  old  age  had  they  used  it  according  to  its  real  value. 
A  gentleman  stepping  into  a  poor  woman's  house  saw  framed  and  glazed  upon  the 
wall  a  French  note  for  a  thousand  francs.  He  said  to  the  old  folks,  "  How  came 
you  by  this  ?  "  They  informed  him  that  a  poor  French  soldier  had  been  taken  in 
by  them  and  nursed  until  he  died,  and  he  had  given  them  that  little  picture  when 
he  was  dying  as  a  memorial  of  him.  They  thought  it  such  a  pretty  souvenir  that 
they  had  framed  it,  and  there  it  was  adorning  the  cottage  wall.  They  were  greatly 
surprised  when  they  were  told  that  it  was  worth  a  sum  which  would  be  quite  a  little 
fortune  for  them  if  they  would  but  turn  it  into  money.  Are  we  not  equally 
unpractical  with  far  more  precious  things  ?  Have  you  not  certain  of  the  words  of 
your  great  Lord  framed  and  glazed  in  your  hearts,  and  do  you  not  say  to  yourselves, 
•'They  are  so  sweet  and  precious"?  and  yet  you  have  never  turned  them  into 
actual  blessing — never  used  them  in  the  hour  of  need.  You  have  done  as  Martha 
did  when  she  took  the  words,  •'  Thy  brother  shall  rise  again,"  and  put  round  about 
them  this  handsome  frame,  "  in  the  resurrection  at  the  last  day."  Oh  that  we  had 
grace  to  turn  God's  bullion  of  gospel  into  current  coin,  and  use  them  as  our  present 
spending  money.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  I  am  the  Resurrection  and  the  Life. — Tlie 
Resurrection : — All  the  titles  of  our  Lord  are  names  of  power.  They  express  His 
nature,  perfection,  or  prerogatives  ;  what  they  declare  He  is.  They  are  shadows  of 
a  Divine  substance.  He  who  is  Very  Life  raised  Himself  from  the  dead  :  "  I  am 
the  Resurrection."  On  the  first  day  of  the  week  His  glorious  soul  returned  to  His 
pure  flesh,  and  His  manhood,  whole  and  perfect,  through  the  power  of  His  Godhead, 
arose  of  His  own  will.  He  came  back  the  very  same,  and  yet  the  same  no  more. 
The  dishonour  of  His  holy  passion  had  passed  away,  but  its  tokens  still  were  there 
And  as  in  body,  so  in  soul.  Death  had  no  more  dominion  over  Him,  yet  He  was 
full  of  sympathy,  learned  by  dying.  Ail  the  depths  of  His  human  experience  were 
in  Him  still.  "  He  learned  obedience  by  the  things  which  he  suffered ; "  and  the 
ineffable  mystery  of  His  three  and  thirty  years  of  sorrow  rose  with  Him  from  the 
grave.  Wherefore  this  Divine  name,  as  it  reveals  the  power  of  His  own  resurrec- 
tion, so  it  is  the  pledge  of  ours.  It  is  a  pledge  to  us  of  many  joys ;  but  chiefly  of 
three  Divine  gifts.  1.  The  first  is  a  perfect  newness  of  body  and  soul.  This  very 
body  shall  be  deathless  and  glorious  as  the  body  of  His  glory  when  He  arose  from 
the  dead.  And  so,  too,  of  the  soul.  It  shall  be  still  more  glorious,  even  as  the 
spirit  is  above  the  flesh.  The  more  we  know  of  ourselves,  the  more  incredible,  if 
I°may  so  speak  of  a  very  blessedness,  this  promise  seems.  To  be  without  sin,  what 
else  is  heaven  ?  And  can  it  ever  be  that  we  who  brought  sin  with  our  life-blood 
into  the  world — who  have  fallen  and  soiled  ourselves  through  and  through  vrith 
wilful  evil — that  we  shall  be  one  day  clean  as  the  light,  and  white  as  the  driven 
snow?  Yet  this  is  His  pledge  to  us.  2.  Another  gift  pledged  to  us  is  the  perfect 
restoration  of  all  His  brethren  in  His  kingdom  (chap.  xvii.  24  •  xiv.  2,  3).  We  shall 
be  ♦'  with  Him."    We  shall  behold  Him  as  He  is ;  He  will  behold  us  as  we  are :  He 


OBtf.  n.]  ST.  JOHN.  2G5 

in  the  perfect  sameness  of  His  person;  we  in  ours.  What,  then,  means  this 
unbelieving  Christian  world,  when  it  asks.  Shall  we  then  recognize  each  other? 
Will  not  they  all  know  Him  as  He  them,  and  all  know  each  other  as  He  knows 
each  ?  The  law  of  perfect  recognition  is  inseparable  from  the  law  of  perfect 
identity.  Our  individual  consciousness  must  be  eternal.  We  should  not  be  what 
we  are  to  ourselves,  if  we  were  not  so  to  others.  The  kingdom  of  God  in  glory  is 
the  perfection  of  His  kingdom  in  grace,  in  which  every  several  soul  here  tried, 
chastened,  and  purified,  shall  be  there  blessed,  crowned  and  sainted — the  same  in 
person,  changed  only  to  perfection.  And  more  than  this.  The  perfect  restitution 
which  shall  be  in  the  kingdom  of  the  resurrection  will  bring  back,  not  only  perfect 
mutual  recognition,  but  the  restoration  of  all  pure  and  consecrated  bonds,  3.  This 
title  pledges  to  us  an  immortal  kingdom.  The  Resurrection  has  given  back  to  us  an 
inheritance  in  the  paradise  of  God,  where  there  shall  be  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth, 
of  which  the  first  creation,  even  in  its  perfection,  was  only  an  imperfect  shadow.  In 
that  true  paradise  there  shall  be  no  seasons  nor  vicissitudes,  no  sweat  of  the  face  nor 
hard  toil  for  bread.  An  everlasting  noontide  shall  be  there  ;  an  endless  spring  in 
the  newness  of  unfading  joy,  a  perpetual  autumn  in  the  ripeness  of  its  gifts. 
There  shall  be  "  the  tree  of  life  bearing  twelve  manner  of  fruits  " ;  all  joy  and  all 
dehght  for  every  capacity  of  man ;  reward  for  every  toil,  and  health  for  every 
wound,  after  the  manifold  trial  of  every  soul,  in  the  Israel  of  God.  {Archdeacon 
Manning.)  Life  everlasting : — After  the  resurrection  comes  life  everlasting.  "  I 
am  the  Life."  1.  This  life  and  the  life  to  come  are  not  two,  but  one  and  the  same. 
Death  is  not  the  ending  of  one,  and  resurrection  the  begiiming  of  another,  but 
through  all  there  runs  one  imperishable  life.  A  river  which  plunges  into  the  earth, 
is  buried  for  awhile,  and  then  bursts  forth  more  mightily  and  in  a  fuller  tide,  is  not 
two,  but  one  continuous  stream.  The  light  of  to-day  and  the  light  of  to-morrow 
are  not  two,  but  one  living  splendour.  Night  is  but  a  veil  between  the  light  and  us. 
So  with  life  and  death.  The  Life  of  the  soul  is  immortal,  an  image  of  God's  own 
eternity.  It  lives  on  in  sleep ;  it  lives  on  through  death ;  it  lives  even  more 
abundantly,  and  with  fuller  and  mightier  energy.  2.  Another  great  law  here 
revealed  is,  that  as  we  die,  so  we  shall  rise ;  as  there  is  no  new  beginning  of  our 
life,  so  there  is  no  new  begiiming  of  our  character.  We  shall  all  carry  with  us  into 
the  eternal  world  the  very  self  which  we  have  here  stamped  and  moulded,  or 
distorted  and  branded — the  renewed  image  of  God,  or  the  image  of  the  evil  one. 
Our  life  from  first  to  last  teaches  us  this  lesson ;  it  is  one  continuous  whole, 
gathering  up  itself  through  all  its  course,  and  perpetuating  its  earliest  features  in 
its  latest  self :  the  child  is  in  the  boy,  the  boy  is  in  the  man ;  the  man  is  himself 
for  ever.  3.  The  resurrection  will  make  each  one  perfect  in  his  own  several 
characters.  Nay,  even  at  death  it  shall  be  unfolded  into  a  new  measure  of  fulness. 
Our  character  is  our  will ;  for  what  we  will,  we  are.  Our  will  contains  our  whole 
intention  ;  it  sums  up  our  spiritual  nature  ;  it  contains  what  we  call  the  tendency  of 
our  character  :  for  the  will  gives  the  bias  to  the  right  or  to  the  left ;  as  we  will,  so  we 
incline.  Now  this  tendency,  both  for  good  and  evil,  is  here  imperfect ;  but  it  will 
be  there  fulfilled.  Here  it  is  hindered ;  the  wicked  are  restrained  by  truth  and 
grace,  by  laws  and  punishments,  by  fear  and  shame,  by  interest  and  the  world ;  the 
good  arc  hindered  by  sin  and  temptation,  by  their  own  infirmities  and  faults.  But 
there  all  restraints  shall  be  taken  away,  and  all  aids  shall  be  supplied.  It  is  both 
an  awful  and  consoling  thought.  What  sinners  are  now  in  measure,  they  shall 
then  be  in  its  fulness.  So  likewise  with  the  faithful :  what  they  have  striven  to  be, 
they  shall  be  made.  God's  grace  shall  perfect  what  they  had  here  desired. 
Lessons — 1.  How  dangerous  is  the  least  sin  we  do  i  Every  act  confirms  some  old 
tendency,  or  develops  a  new  one,  2.  How  precious  is  every  means  of  grace.  (Ibid.) 
The  Resurrection  and  the  Life : — I.  The  chabacteb.  "  I  am  the  Resurrection,"  &c. 
Christ  is  this.  1.  As  it  is  by  Him  that  the  doctrines  of  the  resurrection  and  eternal 
life  are  revealed.  None  had  a  knowledge  of  the  Resurrection,  and  there  were  only  con- 
fused notions  of  immortality  before  Christ  came.  He  taught  these  truths  with  the 
greatest  clearness,  and  illustrated  and  proved  them  by  raising  others,  and  mostly 
by  His  own  resurrection.  This  act  of  His  was  to  extend  His  infiuence  over  the 
world  and  to  the  end  of  time.  2.  As  He  has  the  power  by  which  they  are  bestowed, 
Martha  admitted  the  general  fact ;  but  Christ  goes  on  to  affirm  that  by  His  own 
power  He  could  raise  her  dead  brother  when  and  how  He  pleased,  when  Martha 
came  to  the  conclusion  that  He  was  the  Messiah.  In  this  assertion  we  see  tbe 
supreme  dignity  of  Christ.  "As  the  Father  raiseth  up,"  &c.  The  miracles  at  Nain 
of  Jarius'  daughter,  and  here  at  the  last  day,  prove  Christ  to  be  the  Master  of 


266  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA».  xi. 

Eternity,  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords.  II.  The  pi^omise.  1.  The  characters 
lo  whom  it  is  comprehensively  directed.  "Hethat  believetb,"&c.  (1)  The  necessity 
of  faith.  It  is  the  turning-point  in  your  immortality.  Those  who  do  not  believe 
have  no  title  to  this  and  the  other  promises  which  make  eternal  life  to  depend  upon 
faith.  (2)  What  have  we  to  beheve  ?  Christ,  in  all  the  essential  points  of  His 
character — Divinity,  atonement,  &c.  2.  The  particular  application  of  the  promise 
to  the  circumstances  of  those  to  whom  it  is  addressed.  (1)  ••  Though  he 
were  dead."  He  who  has  believed,  but  is  now  in  the  grave,  shall  be  restored  to 
hfe.  "  I,  who  am  the  Eesuirection,"  &c.,  will  not  allow  him  to  remain  in  that 
narrow  house  for  ever.  Death  itself  shall  die.  We  mourn  not  as  those  who  are 
without  hope.  (2)  "  WTiosoever  liveth."  He  first  goes  and  gives  hope  to  the 
dead,  and  then  He  says  of  the  living  believer,  "he  shall  never  die."  What  is 
death  ?  The  consequence  of  sin  ?  The  sins  of  the  believer  are  pardoned.  The 
effect  of  a  curse  ?  The  curse  from  the  believer  is  removed.  The  stroke  is  not  in 
vengeance,  but  in  love.  IIL  The  appeal.  "  Believest  thou  this  ?  "  Christ  is 
desirous  of  bringing  the  whole  to  bear  on  personal  experience.  What  is  your 
answer  ?  If  we  do  believe  this — 1.  We  shall  not  mourn  improperly  for  those  who 
have  gone,  but  have  comfort  concerning  our  departed  friends.  2.  It  will  be  our 
principal  security  in  the  event  of  our  own  departure.  3.  It  will  give  the  hope  of  a 
happy  reunion  on  the  day  of  final  restoration.  4.  The  rejection  of  this  testimony 
will  be  a  cause  of  condemnation  and  eternal  despair.     (J.  Parsons.)  Christ  the 

Resurrection  and  the  Life : — 1.  Christ's  greatest  utterance  on  death  was  spoken  on 
the  first  occasion  on  which  its  dark  question  had  come  closely  to  His  own  soul. 
Elsewhere  He  had  gone  to  meet  it ;  here  it  had  come  to  meet  Him  in  that  inner 
circle  of  friendship,  and  had  gained  complete  possession.  2.  The  two  mighty 
questions — What  is  death  ?  Can  it  rend  the  friendships  of  life  ? — confronted  the 
Redeemer  ;  and  the  miracle  was  His  answer.  It  showed  that  there  was  in  Him  a 
life  which  death  had  no  power  to  destroy,  and  that  death  had  not  sundered 
Lazarus  from  Jesus  or  his  sisters.  It  had  made  the  ties  of  affection  stronger  than 
betore,  and  had  not  quenched  one  faculty  of  his  being.    I.  Oue  life  in  Christ  is 

A   BATTLE  ;     THROUGH    DEATH    IT   RISES     INTO   A   VICTORY.         We    Carry    withiu    US    OUr 

perpetual  foe,  and  a  thousand  outward  forces  tend  to  quench  the  love  of  Christ 
within.  This  struggle  is  with  death,  for  sin  is  death.  The  act  of  dying  is  but  the 
outward  and  visible  sign  of  this  constant  struggle.  But  in  this  last  scene  the 
apparent  victim  is  conqueror  ;  the  hfe-long  fight  is  finished,  and  the  victory  won. 
The  life  Christ  gives  demands  a  resurrection  for  its  completion,  and  a  resurrection 
in  Christ  makes  death  the  fulness  of  life  in  victory.  II.  Odb  lite  in  Christ  is  a 
hope  ;  DY  DEATH  IT  RISES  INTO  ITS  CONSUMMATION.  The  Christian's  hope  is  to  see 
Christ,  and  be  with  Hiui,  and  like  Him.  From  the  earliest  dawn  of  the  new  life 
that  desire  is  kindled  ;  and  it  deepens  until  it  colours  every  aspiration,  and  finds 
its  whole  heaven  in  "  absent  from  the  body,"  &c.  To  the  first  disciples  the  storms 
that  swept  over  the  lake  had  often  been  things  of  terror ;  but  after  Christ  has 
calmed  them  every  storm  would  seem  holy  with  the  memory  of  His  presence.  The 
det^eri  hath  oft  seemed  a  strange,  unfriendly  region ;  but  after  Christ  had  fed  the 
multitudes  there,  it  would  be  sacred  with  the  memory  of  the  Saviour's  pity.  Mount 
Tabor  had  long  looked  stern,  but  the  memory  of  Christ's  unveiled  glory  there 
transformed  it  into  a  temple.  And  so  it  has  ever  been.  The  felt  presence  of  Jesus 
has  transfigured  earth's  gloomiest  places,  poured  a  light  into  prisons,  diffused 
peace  through  the  cruel  tortures  of  the  rack,  filled  the  martyr's  soul  with  the  dawn 
of  paradise.  Where  Christ  is  is  heaven.  But  this  hope  demands  a  resurrection. 
Here  our  visions  are  transient  and  partial ;  and  until  the  veil  of  the  body  be  rent, 
we  shall  not  see  Jesus  as  He  is.  III.  Odb  life  ik  Christ  is  a  spiritdal  fellow- 
ship :  BY  death  it  becomes  perfect  and  ETERNAL.  No  man  can  be  constrained 
by  the  love  of  Christ  without  feehng  that  henceforth  he  is  bound  by  new  and  holy 
ties  to  "  the  whole  family  in  heaven  and  earth."  It  was  just  the  depth  and  power 
of  that  fellowship  which,  in  the  first  disciples,  startled  the  world  as  a  new  thing. 
The  world  might  crush  the  men,  but  it  could  not  touch  the  fellowship ;  it  might 
try  to  break  np  their  union  with  fire  and  sword,  bnt,  as  apostle  and  martyr  passed 
away,  the  brethren  who  remained  said  only  that  they  had  gone  to  the  earlier  home, 
and  were  now  waiting  in  the  Father's  house  the  reunion.  And  in  these  days  the 
fellowship  of  spiritual  life  is  as  real  and  powerful,  and  demands  a  resurrection.  Death 
seems  the  great  divider.  No  friendship  here  is  perfect,  no  sympathy  complete,  no 
love  ever  reaches  the  fulness  of  which  it  dreams.  The  constant  longing  for  com- 
plete oommunion  is  the  soul's  great  outcry  for  the  resurrection  day.    And  here 


OKAP.  II.1  ST.  JOHN.  267 

again  Christ,  who  is  the  life  of  our  fellowship,  gives  us  the  pledge  of  its  rising. 
In  restoring  Laaarus  to  his  home,  He  showed  that  the  ties  that  bind  a  brother  to  a 
sister  are,  when  spiritual,  among  the  things  which  shall  rise  again.  In  His  words 
of  farewell,  He  promises  a  Father's  house  where  we  shall  meet  apain  ;  and  in  the 
forty  days  He  showed  that  our  communion  shall  rise  from  death,  having  lost 
nothing  but  its  infirmity,  and  clothed  in  a  beauty  and  a  blessedness  which  we  must 
die  to  know.  The  hands  for  whose  "  vanished  touch  "  we  wept  in  agony  shall  be 
clasped  again ;  the  voices  that  grew  still  shall  be  heard  again,  only  purified  from 
the  notes  of  sorrow  and  resonant  with  the  praises  of  the  Lamb.  {E.  L.  Hull,  B.A.) 
Christ  the  Resurrection  and  the  Life: — The  "Resurrection"  of  the  body;  the 
"  Life "  of  the  soul.  I.  Christ  as  Prophet,  bt  His  teaching  and  miracles,  has 
REVEALED  RESURRECTION  AND  LIFE.  Many  have  stood  beside  an  open  grave  and 
felt  obliged  to  ask  the  question.  Shall  we  ever  see  our  friend  again?  Nature  can 
give  no  satisfying  answer,  and  reason  can  only  form  conjectures  and  suggest  pro- 
babilities. But  amid  the  silence  of  nature  and  the  helplessness  of  reason,  a  voice 
has  spoken  and  a  light  was  shone  from  heaven,  for  Christ  has  "  brought  life  and 
immortality  to  light."  The  great  fact  He  clearly  revealed  in  words — "  The  hour  is 
coming,"  &c. — and  in  His  works  of  raising.  No  one  ever  died  in  the  presence  of 
the  Prince  of  Life,  and  no  dead  body  ever  remained  dead  when  He  approached  it. 
n.  Christ  as  Priest  has  redeemed  His  people  prom  sin  and  purchased  fob 
THEM  eternal  LIFE.  The  Only  cause  of  death  is  sin.  That  has  exposed  us  to 
Divine  wraih,  and  brought  upon  us  the  sentence  of  death.  "The  wages  of  sin  is 
death ;  "  and  those  wages  must  be  paid.  But  Christ  has  paid  them  by  the  shedding 
of  His  precious  blood.  The  strength  of  sin  is  the  law.  and  the  law  has  been  com- 
pletely  satisfied  by  the  sacrifice  of  Calvary.  In  proof  that  His  satisfaction  was 
perfect,  Christ  rose.  God  sent  His  angel  to  roll  away  the  stone,  and  set  our  Surety 
free.  Beheving  in  Christ,  our  sins  are  taken  from  us  and  reckoned  to  His  account. 
And  if  sin  be  taken  away,  all  is  taken  away  that  can  make  death  terrible.  Death 
now  comes  to  a  believer,  not  as  an  executioner  of  the  broken  law,  but  as  the  mes- 
senger of  heavenly  peace.  "Whosoever  liveth  and  believeth  in  Me,"  &c.  III. 
Christ  as  King  gives  His  people  the  victory  over  death,  and  brings  them  at 
LAST  INTO  THE  ACTUAL  POSSESSION  OF  ETERNAL  LITE.  His  own  victory  over  the  grave 
is  a  proof  and  pledge  of  ours.  As  our  representative,  He  encountered  the  king  of 
terrors  in  his  own  dark  domain ;  and  though  He  continued  under  the  power  of 
death  for  a  time,  yet  He  saw  no  corruption,  and  came  forth  a  Conqueror.  In  this 
victory  we  are  destined  to  share  by  living  union  to  Him ;  and  therefore,  in  our 
coming  conflict,  we  can  say,  "Thanks  be  to  God  who  giveth  us  the  victory,"  &c. 
And  the  reason  of  it  is,  not  only  because  He  died  and  rose,  but  also  because  He  ia 
alive  for  evermore ;  and  not  only  alive,  but  invested  with  aU  power  in  heaven  and 
earth.  "  He  must  reign,"  &c.  ;  and  therefore  "  death,  the  last  enemy,  shall  be 
destroyed,"  like  the  rest.    (John  Thomson,  D.D.)  Christ  the  Resurrection  and 

the  Life : — I.  The  Pi.esubbection.  Note — 1.  The  authority  with  which  these 
words  are  spoken.  "  I  am,"  not  "  I  will  be,"  the  instrument  at  some  future  time, 
but  the  thing  itself.  Surely  no  creature  could  speak  thus.  He  speaks  just  as  a 
king  would  speak  to  whom  it  never  occurred  that  any  one  should  doubt  of  his 
royalty,  or  that  he  needed  to  vaunt  of  his  power.  The  words  assume  a  supreme 
and  essential  power  over  life  and  death.  His  was  the  original  gift  of  life  ;  His  the 
right  to  dissolve  its  organisation,  and  to  confer  it  again ;  and,  therefore.  He  only 
could  be  the  opener  of  the  world  of  graves.  This  is  the  exclusive  prerogative  of 
Godhead.  Man's  power  is  mighty,  but  it  stops  short  of  this.  He  can  from  a 
fossil  bone  construct  a  massive  elephant,  and,  with  Promethian  ambition,  he  can 
shape  its  features  faultlessly,  and  by  clock-work  or  galvanism  simulate  life ;  but 
he  cannot  breathe  the  living  fire.  *'  Am  I  God,"  said  the  frightened  king,  "  to  kill 
and  to  make  alive  ? "  The  resurrection  is  a  marvel  and  a  mystery  till  we  bring  in 
the  thought  of  God.  "  Why  should  it  be  thought  a  thing  incredible  that  God," 
&e.  2.  But  not  only  do  the  words  affirm  Christ's  divinity,  but  that  through  Him 
only  resurrection  came  to  man.  (1)  Besurrection  implies  death,  and  death  was 
not  among  the  original  arrangements  of  the  universe.  It  came  in  after  the  "  very 
good  "  had  been  pronounced.  There  must  needs  be,  therefore,  some  provision  to 
counteract  its  effects,  and  to  restore  the  forfeited  heritage  of  immortality  to  man. 
This  has  been  secured  by  the  vicarious  atonement  of  Jesus.  He  bore  the  penalty 
on  the  cross,  and,  through  death,  destroyed  Him  who  had  the  power  of  death. 
Christ  is  the  Resurrection,  therefore  its  Source  and  Spring,  Author  and  Finisher. 
When  He  emerged  from  the  tomb,  He  brought  life  and  immortality  with  Him. 


268  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  n. 

The  pearls  of  the  deep  sea,  awaiting  the  plunge  of  the  diver,  the  treasures  before 
lying  in  the  dark  naine,  were  by  Him  seized  and  brought  up  to  the  light  of  day. 
(2)  But  we  must  not  limit  the  import  of  our  term,  and  exclude  the  idea  of  a 
spiritual  resurrection — not  only  a  raised  body,  but  a  soul  bursting  from  the  tomb  of 
its  corruption,  and  blooming  into  newness  of  life.     It  is  remarkable  that,  although 
all  men  inherit  immortality,  the  future  of  the  wicked  is  never  dignified  with  the 
name  of  life.     Everlasting  contempt  and  destruction  are  the  terms  which  Scripture 
uses.     "  They  shall  not  see  life."    A  sinner  breathes  in  physical,  thinks  in  intel- 
lectual, feels  in  emotional,  but  is  destitute  of  spiritual  life.     But  the  Christian 
becomes,    by    faith     in    Christ,    «'  dead    unto    sin,    but    alive    unto    God  " — 
"passes  from   death   into    life."      II.   The    Lipk.      Christ    is    "the   true    God 
and  Eternal  Life,"  and  His  culminating  promise  is  "even  eternal  life."     What 
is  this?      1.    Conscious  life.     In  all  ages  men  have  bewildered  themselves  by 
speculations  as  to  the  mode  of  their  future  existence.     Some  have  taken  refuge  in 
dark  materialism ;  others  have  held  to  transmigration  of  souls.    Their  inability  to 
conceive  of  the  spirit  existing  apart  from  the  body  was  at  the  root  of  it  all ;  and 
modern  theorizers,  perplexed  by  the  same,  have  endeavoured  to  get  out  of  it  by 
teaching  that  the  soul  shall  sleep  tiU  the  body  shall  rise.    But  I  am  not  disposed 
to  give  grim  death  an  advantage  over  the  Diviner  part  of  man.     If  for  ages  He  can 
paralyse  the  soul,  then  Christ  has  gained  only  a  partial  triumph.     When  Paul  had 
"  a  desire  to  depart,"  <fec.,  was  it  "  for  better  "  that  his  mighty  mind  should  cease 
its  thinking,  his  heart  be  stiU,  and  his  energies  be  powerless  for  a  long  cycle  of 
years  ?    Far  better  a  protracted  existence  on  earth.    He  knew  full  well  that  the 
moment  he  was  released  he  would  be  in  conscious  enjoyment  of  Christ.     The 
paradise  of  believers  is  like  the  heaven  it  adjoins,  undeluged  with  a  wave  of  woe. 
The  dungeon  of  the  impenitent  is  like  the  hell  which  it  approximates,  anvisited 
with  one  ray  of  hope.     There  is  no  human  soul  from  the  days  of  Adam  that  is  not 
alive  to-day.     2.  Social  life.    Heaven  is  not  a  solitude ;  it  is  a  peopled  city,  in 
which  there  are  no  strangers,  no  homeless,  no  poor.     "  It  is  not  good  for  man  to 
be  alone  "  means  something  deeper  than  the  family  tie :  it  is  an  essential  want 
which  the  Creator  in  His  highest  wisdom  has  impressed  on  the  noblest  of  His  works. 
The  idea  of  sociality  is  comprehensive  of  the  idea  of  the  fulness  of  life.     That  is 
not  life  where  the  hermit  drags  out  a  solitary  existence.     All  kinds  of  life  tend  to 
companionship,  from  the  buzzing  insect  cloud  up  to  man.     Not  only,  therefore,  did 
Christ  pray  that  those  who  had  been  given  Him  should  be  with  Him,  but  they  are 
to  come  to  •*  the  general  assembly  of  the  firstborn,"  <&o.    Take  comfort,  then,  your 
dear  ones  are  only  lost  to  present  sight.     (W.  M.  Punshon,  LL.D.)        Christ  the 
Resurrection  and  the  Life  : — 1.  The  terms  are  not  synonymous.    When  Christ  saya 
"  I  am  the  Life,"  He  claims  an  attribute  of  God.    None  but  God  is  "  the  Life,"  and 
can  impart  it.    "  I  am  the  Eesurrection  "  implies  that  He  can  keep  life  when  given, 
and  restore  it  after  it  is  lost.    These  powers  measure  the  difference  between  the 
finite  and  the  infinite.    Of  the  myriad  of  insects  that  flutter  in  the  sunshine,  or 
that  the  microscope  reveals  in  a  drop  of  water,  where  is  the  man  that  with  all  his 
art  can  create  so  much  as  one  ?    Much  more  hopeless  to  work  in  the  atmosphere 
of  the  grave.    2.  Note  that  Christ  does  not  say  "  I  produce,"  or  "  I  confer."    The 
text  is  a  member  of  a  magnificent  series  of  *'  I  am's,"  and  the  quality  claimed  is 
not  anything  that  can  be  separated  from  Christ ;  it  is  not  what  He  has,  but  what 
He  is.    The  sun  does  not  need  to  go  anywhere  for  light,  nor  the  ocean  for  water. 
"  As  the  Father  hath  life  in  Himself,"  &c.    I.  Christ  as  the  Eesubbection,  or  the 
restorer  of  lost  life  of  every  kind,  not  merely  of  the  body.     1.  Of  the  life  forfeited 
by  transgression.     "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death."     (1)  It  is  a  dismal  thing  to  know 
this.     It  is  as  if  a  person,  feeling  breathless  at  times,  were  on  describing  his  symp- 
toms to  be  told  by  a  physician  that  he  was  suSering  from  heart  disease.     (2)  It  is 
more  terrible  to  know  that  it  ought  to  be  so,  that  he  deserves  it.     Can  anything  be 
more  bitter  than  when  through  meanness  a  man  deserves  the  social  reproach  he  gets  ? 
Yes ;  the  consciousness  of  loathsomeness  in  the  sight  of  God.     (3)  But  the  "  gift  of 
God  is  eternal  life,"  &c.    United  to  Christ  by  faith  we  get  the  blessing  as  He  bore 
the  curse.    You  may  say  that  such  dehverance  is  only  partial,  that  it  ia  a  worse 
thing  to  deserve  death  than  to  suffer  it.    A  substitute  may  deliver  ns  from  death, 
but  not  from  the  disgrace  of  having  deserved  it.    Granted ;  but  God  will  never 
remind  the  pardoned  sinner  of  his  sin,  and  it  will  not  diminish  the  cordiality  of  his 
reception  in  heaven.    He  will  be  covered  with  Christ's  righteousness.     2.  Of  a  life 
of  purity,  order,  and  holy  beauty.    Can  it  be  necessary  to  prove  that  such  a  resur- 
rection is  needed?    May  we  not  find  in  a  little  child  something  to  condemn  ua^ 


tmr.  n.]  ST.  JOHN.  269 

And  the  first  effect  of  our  receiving  Christ  is  to  become  as  little  children,  having  their 
purity  without  their  weakness,  their  simplicity  without  their  ignorance,  their  trust 
without  their  forgetfulness.  Or  have  you  not  been  shamed  in  reading  the  life  of 
some  saintly  man  or  woman.  We  cannot  of  ourselves  soar  to  these  heights ;  but 
Jesus,  the  fountain  of  goodness,  has  come  to  restore  this  life  too.  But  why  confine 
ourselves  to  human  excellence  ?  To  know  what  it  is  to  live  study  the  life  of  Jesus. 
"  Fairer  than  the  children  of  men,"  This  life  may  be  ours.  "  I  live,  yet  not  I," 
<fec.  "  When  Christ  who  is  our  life,"  &c.  3.  Of  holy  fellowship  with  God.  We 
have  left  our  Father's  house  and  lost  all  liking  for  it.  But  there  can  be  no  happi- 
ness for  us  in  the  "  far  off  "  country.  This  life  is  not  to  be  regained  by  thinking 
reverently  of  God,  or  poring  over  other  men's  love  to  Him  in  hope  of  getting  into 
the  same  current.  In  welcoming  Christ,  and  in  that  only,  can  I  say,  "0  Lord,  Thoa 
art  my  God."  II.  Christ  as  the  Life.  It  is  His  office  to  continue  what  He 
restores,  ••  Whosoever  liveth,"  &a.  1.  If  Jesus  simply  gave  you  life,  and  then  left 
you  to  sink  or  swim,  there  can  be  no  doubt  what  the  issue  would  be.  "  The  life 
that  we  now  live  in  the  flesh  "  must  be  "  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God."  2.  He 
■will  watch  and  guard  your  faith,  as  He  did  Simon's,  that  it  fail  not.  3.  Beyond 
the  grave  the  gift  assumes  a  new  character  of  glory,  worthy  of  Him  from  whom  it 
eomes.  The  soul  is  made  perfect  in  holiness,  and  the  body  will  be  fashioned  like 
onto  Christ's  glorious  body.  It  is  no  longer  a  struggling  but  a  steady  life,  like  that 
of  a  plant  which  has  at  last  found  its  proper  soil  and  congenial  atmosphere.  When 
you  think  of  eternal  life  think  of — (1)  The  home  of  the  soul  and  body.  (2)  The 
intellect  ever  advancing  in  clearness  and  mastery.  (3)  The  emotions  now  in  per- 
fect order,  growing  perpetually  in  strength  and  sensibility.  (4)  A  love  for  ever 
deepening  its  roots  and  enlarging  its  compass.  (5)  The  best  fellowships  yielding 
for  ever  new  harvests  of  enjoyment.  Think  of  all  this.  And  you  have  but  the 
dimmest  shadow  of  what  •'  eye  hath  not  seen,"  &c.     III.  If  all  this  bk  tbue,  is  it 

NOT  STRANGE  THAT  ChkIST   IS  NOT   MORE  WIDELY  WELCOMED  ?      What  do  men  prize   80 

much  as  life  ?  "  All  that  a  man  hath,"  <feo.  But  for  what  life  ?  For  his  animal 
Uf e — the  mere  link  between  body  and  soul  f  What  a  strange  thing  that  the  higher 
you  go  in  the  scale  of  hfe  the  less  do  men  care  for  it  I  And  when  you  reach  the 
highest  life  the  indifference  becomes  aversion.  "  Te  will  not  come  unto  Me,"  &c. 
{W,  6,  Blaikie,  D.D.)  Christ,  both  Resurrection  and  Life  .-—There  is  a  glorious 
harmony  in  the  words  "  Eesurrection  and  Life."  Either  of  them  alone  would  be 
insufficient,  combined  they  are  divinely  satisfying.  If  Christ  had  said  only,  ••  I  am 
the  Eesurrection,"  without  promising  to  bestow  a  new  spiritual  hfe.  He  would  have 
told  us  merely  of  misery.  To  rise  again  into  the  life  we  have  now,  with  its  struggle, 
and  care,  and  failure — to  repeat  it  age  after  age — what  were  this  but  perpetual  con- 
flict and  everlasting  unrest?  Or  if  He  had  said  merely,  "I  am  the  Life,"  without 
saying  "  I  am  the  Resurrection,"  we  should  still  be  of  all  men  most  miserable. 
For  if  He  had  given  us  new  spiritual  life  in  the  love  of  God,  without  raising  us  after 
death,  we  should  have  been  haunted  with  grand  hopes  and  infinite  aspirations  that 
were  destined  never  to  be  fulfilled.  Christ  combines  the  two,  and  therefore  He  tella 
us.  There  is  in  me  a  life  which,  by  dying,  rises  to  its  perfection ;  and  therefore 
death  is  no  more  death,  but  resurrection  to  the  fulness  of  life.  (E.  L.  Hull,  B.A.\ 
The  mystery  of  the  resurrection : — How  shall  the  dead  arise  is  no  question  of  my 
faith  ;  to  beheve  only  possibilities  is  not  faith  but  mere  philosophy.  Many  things 
are  true  in  divinity  which  are  neither  inducible  by  reason  or  confirmable  by  sense, 
and  many  things  in  philosophy  confirmable  by  sense  yet  not  inducible  by  reason. 
{Sir  T.  Browne.)  Natural  analogies  of  the  resurrection : — In  New  Sharon,  in  the 
state  of  Michigan,  a  child  of  great  promise  sickened  and  died.  The  little  one,  all 
beautiful,  robed  for  the  grave,  was  laid  in  its  coffin,  and  in  its  little  hand  was 
placed  a  bouquet  of  flowers — the  central  flower  of  which  was  an  unopened  bud  of 
the  '•  Eose  of  Sharon."  On  the  morning  for  burial  the  coffin  lid  was  removed  for 
the  sorrowing  weepers  to  take  their  farewell  look  at  the  peaceful  dead  ;  when,  lo  I 
that  bud  had  become  a  full-blown  rose,  while  grasped  in  the  dead  child's  hand. 
That  beautiful  flower  seemed  to  say,  W^eep  not  for  the  spirit  that  is  gone,  in  heaven 

it  now  appears,  and  is  "for  ever  with  the  Lord.     {J.  Wihm..)        Christ  lives: 

One  of  the  women  encountered  the  vanquished  army  returning  to  Medina. 
"  "Where  is  my  father?  "  asked  she  of  the  soldiers.  "  He  is  slain,"  was  the  reply. 
"And  my  husband?"  "Slain  also."  "And  my  son?"  "Slain,  with  them," 
said  they.  "But  Mahomet?"  "He  is  here  alive,"  replied  the  warriors.  "Very 
well,"  said  she,  apostrophising  the  prophet;  "since  thoa  livest  still,  all  onr  mia- 
fortunes  are  as  nothing."    (Lamartine.)        The  philosophy  of  Chiistian  hope: — ^I, 


J70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  za. 

The  basis  of  this  hope.  How  shall  man  be  quite  sure  of  a  life  beyond  this  f  L 
By  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  Christian  hope  differs  from  all  other  in  that  it  rests 
neither  npon  any  instinct  of  the  heart,  any  inference  from  reason,  or  any  promise 
sent  from  heaven,  but  upon  a  person.  One  is  set  before  as  who,  bom  into  the 
world,  and  living  our  chequered  human  life,  has  achieved  victory  over  death.  It  i» 
conceivable  that  this  is  not  suflucient  to  assure  os  of  our  resurrection.  We  might 
argue  that  it  is  an  exceptional  distinction  merited  by  a  perfect  character.  And  if 
Christ  were  only  man  the  argument  would  have  force.  But  His  incarnation  gives 
its  proper  significance  to  His  resurrection.  He  is  not  a  unit  of  the  race  singled  out 
for  favour,  but  one  who,  as  equal  with  the  Father,  has  power  and  right  to  take  up 
the  manhood  into  God.  He  took  our  nature,  and  therefore  in  all  He  does  and  is 
our  nature  has  a  share,  that  He  might  redeem,  purify,  exalt  it.  He  did  not  merely 
reverse  the  sentence  of  death  by  an  arbitrary  annulling  of  it,  but  by  the  actual 
victory  of  life  over  death  in  the  same  nature  which  had  become  subject  unto  death. 
He  thus  became  "a  quickening  Spirit."  2.  By  the  communication  of  the  life  of 
Christ  to  all  who  believe  in  Him.  (1)  Jesus  is  the  Besurrection  because  He  is  the 
Life,  and  He  imparts  that  life  to  us.  "  Because  I  live,"  &c.  There  is  a  sense  in 
which  the  resurrection  is  begun  here,  because  the  germ  of  it  is  found  in  every 
renewed  nature.  A  power  has  been  put  forth  on  man  which  must  issue  in  Hii 
glorification.  The  resurrection,  though  sometimes  described  as  a  gift,  is  also  to  be 
regarded  as  the  necessary  development  of  the  work  of  grace  (chap.  v.  26  ;  vi.  57). 
Of  the  twofold  life  of  the  Spirit  here  and  the  body  hereafter,  Christ  is  the  source 
(chap.  X.  17),  and  by  communion  with  Him  only  is  it  sustained  (chap.  vi.  51-54). 
That  which  is  spiritual  is  in  its  very  nature  eternal.  Death  is  but  as  the  episode  of 
a  sleep.  So  essential  is  the  connection  between  the  life  eternal  and  the  resurrection 
that  there  are  only  two  places  in  the  New  Testament  in  which  the  resurrection  of 
the  wicked  is  mentioned  (chap.  v.  29 ;  Acts  xxiv.  15).  (2)  Sometimes  the  same  truth 
is  associated  with  the  indwelling  in  our  hearts  of  a  Divine  Person  (Col.  i.  27  ;  Bom. 
viii.  11).  The  resurrection  follows  from  such  inhabitation  ;  those  bodies,  in  which 
He  has  vouchsafed  to  make  His  tabernacle,  are  not  destined  to  be  left  in  corruption. 
If  Christ  sent  the  Holy  Ghost  to  make  our  bodies  His  temple,  then  that  Divine  Visi- 
tant  sheds  His  sanctifying  influences  upon  the  whole  man.  Every  member  of  the 
body,  eye,  ear,  hand,  foot,  all  have  been  consecrated  to  God's  service.  One 
part  of  our  nature  is  not  left  to  curse  and  barrenness  whilst  the  dew  of  heaven 
falls  richly  on  the  other.    U.   Soch  a  hope,  consistent  in  itself  and  satisftin» 

THE    deepest   needs   OF  OUR   NATURE,  ESSENTTATiLY  DIFFERS  FROM  AND  TRANSCENDS  AUj 

pbe-Chkistian  hope.  1.  What  was  the  hope  of  the  wisest  pagan  philosophers  ? 
At  most  a  bare  hope  of  continuance  after  death.  But  Christ  gives  us  now  the  life 
that  cannot  die  in  the  body  that  the  body  may  be  consecrated  to  God.  Our  souls 
and  bodies  are  His,  filled  and  pervaded  with  His  life,  and  can  never,  therefore, 
perish.  2.  What  was  the  hope  of  the  Jew  ?  Kindling  with  ecstasy  it  rose  above 
time  and  death,  and  laid  its  hand  upon  God  with  the  conviction  that  He  who  was 
the  Life  of  His  children  would  be  their  portion  for  ever.  But  the  Jew  had  still  the 
horror  of  death  unvanquished,  of  the  grave  from  which  none  had  ever  returned. 
The  Christain  is  partaker  of  the  Life  of  God  which  in  human  flesh  overcame  death, 
and  therefore  has  the  sure  pledge  that  he  wiU  overcome.    HI.  The  Christian 

DOCTRINE   OF  THE   EeSURRECTION   COMMENDS   ITSELF  AS   IN   HARMONY  WITH   THE   FACTS 

OF  OUR  NATURE.  All  experience  shows  how  close  is  the  union  between  soul  and 
body.  So  far  as  observation  extends,  the  material  organism  is  destroyed  by  death, 
and  yet  as  by  an  imperious  necessity  it  enters  into  all  our  conceptions  of  another 
life  :  we  would  not  be  "  unclothed  but  clothed  upon."  Does  not  £dl  thought  become 
action  only  through  the  instrumentality  of  the  body  ?  and  does  not  the  body  express 
the  beauty  or  ugliness  of  the  unseen  dweller  within  ?  How  often,  even  after  the  soul 
has  fled,  there  remains  on  the  cold  features  of  the  corpse  the  living  impress  of  that 
soul,  as  if  it  disputed  the  empire  of  death  ?  It  is  almost  as  if  the  body  were  waiting 
for  the  return  of  its  tenant  ?  IV.  The  speculative  difficulties  which  beset  the 
DOCTRINE.  "  How  are  the  dead  raised  up,"  &o.  The  particles  of  which  the  body  is 
composed  may  be  scattered,  and  enter  into  the  formation  of  plants,  animals,  mea 
How  can  each  particle  be  disentangled  and  brought  together  again  ?  We  put  no 
limits  on  the  power  of  God.  But  such  a  process  is  as  unneccessary  as  improbable. 
The  same  body  may  be  raised  though  no  single  particle  of  the  present  body  be 
found  in  it.  What  is  necessary  to  the  identity  of  the  body  7  Not  the  identity  of  its 
material  particles.  These  are  in  a  state  of  perpetual  flux.  The  body  of  our  child> 
hood  is  not  the  body  of  oor  youth,  &c.,  and  yet  it  is  the  same  body  in  patriarch 


o«AP.  n.J  fir.  JOHN.  «71 

and  infant.  The  only  thing  that  we  need  to  be  assured  is  that  the  principle  of 
identity,  which  governs  the  formation  of  the  body  in  this  life,  shall  govern  it  at  the 
Eesurrection.  What,  then,  is  this  thing  that  remains  ever  the  same,  which  never 
perishes  in  all  the  changes  of  the  material  organism  ?  It  escapes  all  our  investiga- 
tions ;  we  only  see  its  manifestations  ;  but  that  it  is  a  reality  all  observation  goea 
to  show  :  and  if,  through  all  the  changes  of  the  body  during  this  life,  this  principle 
continues  in  force,  why  may  it  not  survive  the  shock  of  death  ?  Why  may  not  the 
same  body,  which  was  sown  a  natural  body,  be  raised  a  spiritual  body  ?  There  ia 
everything  in  the  analogies  of  nature  to  confirm  it.  (Bean  Perrowne.)  Though 
He  were  dead. — View  the  text — I.  As  a  steeam  of  coMroRT  to  Martha  and  otheb 
BEREAVED  PERSONS.  1.  The  prescuce  of  Jesus  means  life  and  resurrection.  But 
what  comfort  is  Christ's  spiritual  presence  to  us?  He  will  not  raise  our  loved  ones  ? 
I  answer  that  Jesus  is  able  at  this  moment  to  do  so.  But  do  you  wish  it  ?  Yes. 
Now,  consider.  Surely  you  are  not  so  cruel  as  to  wish  the  glorified  back  to  care  and 
pain.  Lazarus  could  return  and  fill  his  place  again,  but  not  one  in  ten  thousand 
could  do  so.  I  had  rather  that  Christ  should  keep  the  keys  of  death  than  I.  It 
would  be  too  dreadful  a  privilege  to  be  empowered  to  rob  heaven  of  the  perfect 
merely  to  give  pleasure  to  the  imperfect.  Jesus  would  raise  them  now  if  He  knew  it 
to  be  right.  2.  When  Jesus  comes  the  dead  shall  live,  and  living  believers  shall 
not  die,  we  shall  aU  be  changed.  3.  Even  now  Christ's  dead  are  alive.  They 
appear  to  die,  but  they  are  not  in  the  grave,  but  with  the  Lord.  "  God  is  not  the 
God  of  the  dead,"  &c.  4.  Even  now  His  living  do  not  die.  There  is  a  difference 
between  the  death  of  the  godly  and  the  ungodly.  To  the  latter  it  comes  as  a  penal 
infliction,  to  the  former  a  summons  to  his  Father's  palace.  Death  is  ours,  and 
follows  hfe  in  the  list  of  our  possessions  as  an  equal  favour.  II.  As  a  great  deep 
OF  comfort  for  all  believers.  1.  Christ  is  the  Life  of  His  people.  We  are  dead 
by  nature,  but  regeneration  is  the  result  of  contact  with  Christ ;  "  We  are  begotten 
again  unto  living  hope  by  His  resurrection."  He  is  not  only  the  Resurrection  to 
begin  with,  but  the  Life  to  go  on  with.  Anything  beyond  the  circle  of  Christ  ia 
death.  2.  Faith  is  the  only  channel  by  which  we  can  draw  from  Jesus  our  hfe. 
"  He  that  beheveth  in  Me,"  not  he  that  loves,  serves  or  imitates  Me.  You  want  to 
conduct  the  electric  fluid,  and  so  you  have  to  find  a  metal  which  will  not  create  any 
action  of  its  own :  if  it  did  so  it  would  disturb  the  current.  Now,  faith  is  an  empty 
handed  receiver  and  communicator  ;  it  is  nothing  apart  from  that  on  which  it  relies, 
and  therefore  it  is  suitable  to  be  a  conductor  for  grace.  3.  To  the  reception  of 
Christ  by  faith  there  is  no  hmit — "  Whosoever,"  however  wrong,  weak,  unfeeling, 
hopeless.  4.  The  behever  shall  never  die.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Christ's  treatment 
of  death : — 1.  It  is  only  from  great  inspired  natures  that  we  get  such  contradictory 
words  as  these.  In  one  breath  Christ  says  that  if  a  man  dies  and  believes  in  Him, 
he  shall  live ;  and  in  the  next  breath  He  si;ys  that  whosoever  Uvea  and  believes  in 
Him  shall  not  die.  Yet  every  docile  reader  feels  that  it  contains  a  truth  too  subtle 
to  be  grasped  with  words.  When  the  strata  of  rocks  are  twisted  and  upturned,  the 
miner  looks  for  gold,  deeming  that  in  the  convulsions  that  so  disposed  them,  a  vein 
of  precious  metal  may  have  been  thrown  up  from  the  lower  deep.  2.  In  order  to 
get  at  their  meaning,  we  must  keep  in  mmd  that  Christ  waa  drawing  comfort  for 
these  afflicted  friends,  not  from  the  old  sources,  but  Himself.  Martha  has  expressed 
her  faith  in  the  common  doctiine,  but  Christ  passes  over  it  as  though  it  had  httle 
power  to  console.  It  is  a  far  off  event  and  hardly  touches  the  present  fact  of  death. 
So  little  power  had  it  that  Martha  did  not  thiuk  of  it  till  led  to  it  by  Christ's 
question.  God's  love  may  wait  patient  through  ages,  because  ages  are  nothing  to 
Him,  but  human  love  is  impatient,  because  it  is  under  finite  conditions.  Our 
children,  that  we  could  hardly  bear  out  of  our  sight,  die,  and  it  is  small  comfort 
that  ages  hence  they  and  we  shall  live  again;  and  so,  instead  of  dwelling  on  that,  we 
cling  to  the  form  and  mementos  spared  by  death,  and  keep  aUve  the  past  instead  of 
making  ahve  the  present.  Christ  strove  to  give  more  substantial  comfort.  I.  Hia 
first  purpose  was  to  get  their  minds  awat  from  death.  There  ia  but  one 
natural  fact  to  which  Christ  showed  antipathy.  He  set  the  whole  weight  of  Hia 
thought  and  speech  against  what  was  known  as  death.  There  is  a  fine  significance 
in  Hia  indisposition  to  use  the  word.  He  said  that  the  daughter  of  Jairus  waa 
asleep,  and  said  the  same  about  Lazarus  till  the  dulness  of  the  disciples  forced  Him 
to  use  the  ordinary  word.  The  early  believers,  fully  taught  by  the  resurrection  of 
Christ,  caught  at  once  the  remembered  hints,  and  said  that  Stephen  "  fell  asleep." 
So  St.  Paul  many  times  over,  and  St.  Peter,  and  the  Christians  in  the  Catacombs. 
If  Christ  had  done  nothing  more  than  give  this  word,  He  would  have  been  tia» 


273  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

greatest  of  benefactors.  To  that  which  seema  the  worst  thing  He  has  given  the 
best  name,  and  the  name  is  true.  Amongst  the  profoundest  words  of  Shakespeare 
are  those  in  which  he  speaks  of  sleep  as  "  great  Nature's  second  course."  In  a 
profounder  sense  the  sleep  of  death  ushers  in  the  *'  second  course"  of  nature,  even 
the  life  that  shall  never  know  death  nor  sleep.  II.  His  next  purpose  is  to  get  them 
TO  IDENTIFT  HiMSELP  WITH  THE  Eesueeection.  Martha  has  spoken  of  a  general 
resurrection — not  necessarily  a  spiritual  fact — a  mere  matter  of  destiny.  Christ 
draws  it  near,  vitalizes  it,  puts  it  into  the  category  of  faith,  and  connects  it  with 
Himself.  Faith  in  Him  works  away  from  death  towards  life.  To  believe  in  a 
person  is  to  be  like  him.  Christ  is  Life,  and  could  not  be  holden  of  death ;  faith  in 
TFTim  works  towards  the  same  freedom.  The  assimilating  power  of  faith  is  a 
recognized  principle.  We  meet  men  in  whose  faces  we  see  imprinted  avai-ice, 
lust,  or  conceit.  They  have  so  long  thought  and  felt  under  the  power  of  those 
qualities  that  they  are  made  over  into  their  image.  The  Hindu  who  worships 
Brahma,  sleeping  in  the  stars  in  immovable  calm,  gets  to  wear  a  fixed 
impression.  So  Christ  brings  men  to  believe  in  Him  in  order  to  become  like 
Him,  and  if  like  Him,  then  one  with  Him,  sharers  of  His  nature  and  destiny,  and  if 
one  with  Him  then  His  life  is  theirs.  And  yet  the  fact  and  process  of  death  remain. 
Yes,  man  needs  for  his  supreme  development  to  undergo  the  supreme  experience, 
which  is  death.  But  in  Christ  this  is  to  die  to  some  purpose,  to  lay  down  Kfe 
to  take  it  again.  It  is  of  unspeakable  moment  that  the  whole  matter  of  Christian 
believing  and  living  is  summed  up  as  life — existence  in  the  perfect  fulfilment  and 
enjoyment  of  all  relations.  We  transport  the  matter  into  some  future  world; 
Christ  puts  it  into  the  hour  that  now  is.  And  so  life  is  the  single  theme  of 
Christ.  We  can  so  conceive  one  as  so  one  with  Christ  as  to  have  little  sense  of 
yesterday  and  to-morrow,  to  care  little  for  one  world  above  another,  to  Leed  death 
as  little  as  sleep,  because  filled  with  the  life  of  God.  It  is  towards  this  high  stata 
that  Christ  conducts  us,  sowing  in  our  hearts  day  by  day  the  seed  of  eternal  life — 
truth,  and  love,  and  purity.  III.  The  sdbject  leaves  vb  with  two  leadino 
IMPRESSIONS.  1.  Comfort  in  view  of  the  change  called  death.  Christ  does  not 
strive  to  annihilate  Martha's  grief,  but  to  infuse  it  with  another  spirit.  As  Jesus 
wept,  so  we  would  not  have  love  shed  one  tear  less ;  but  there  are  tears  too  bitter 
for  human  eyes — tears  of  despair ;  and  there  are  tears  which  reflect  heaven's  light 
and  promise  as  they  fall — tears  of  hope.  Christ  takes  away  from  death  its  sting 
by  taking  away  the  sin  of  which  it  is  the  shadow.  Aside  from  this  we  may  approach 
death  as  sleep,  a  grateful  ordinance  of  nature,  not  dreading  it,  not  longing  for  it, 
but  accepting  it  as  God's  good  way — a  step  in  life.  2.  A  new  sense  of  the  value  ol 
faith  in  Christ.  It  is  no  small  thing  to  be  deUvered  from  false  views  of  death. 
Consider  the  hopeless  views  of  the  heathen,  and  the  vague  hope  of  the  Jews. 
There  is  no  certainty  till  we  come  to  Christ,  and  no  deliverance  from  fear 
except  through  faith  in  Him.  (T.  T.  Hunger.)  The  consolation  of  the  text : — 
It  makes  the  "lych-gate"  through  which  the  dead  enter  the  churchyard  as  the 
Beautiful  Gate  of  the  Temple,  •'  a  glorious  arch  of  hope  and  triumph."  (J. 
Culross,  D.D. )  A  soldier  who  was  wounded  at  Inkerman  managed  to  crawl  away 
from  the  place  where  he  fell,  and  ultimately  reached  his  tent.  When  he  was  found 
he  was  on  his  face.  Beneath  him  was  the  sacred  volume,  and  on  its  open  page  hia 
hand  rested.  When  his  hand  was  lifted  it  was  found  to  be  glued  by  his  life's 
blood  to  the  book.  The  letters  of  the  page  were  printed  on  his  hand  and  read,  "  I 
am  the  Eesurrection  and  the  Life,"  &c.  It  was  with  this  verse  still  inscribed  on 
his  hand  that  he  was  laid  in  a  soldier's  grave.  (New  Handbook  of  Illustrations.) 
Whosoever  liveth  and  believeth  in  Me  shall  never  die. — This  saying  points  to 
mysteries  which  have  occupied  the  thoughts  of  Eastern  and  also  of  Western 
philosophers,  as  the  famous  verses  of  Euripides  show  :  "  Who  knoweth  if  to  live 
be  truly  death,  and  death  be  reckoned  life  by  those  below?"  and  indicates  a 
higher  form  of  ' '  corporate  "  life,  such  as  St.  Paul  expresses  by  the  phrase,  "  in 
Christ "  (Gal.  ii.  20  ;  CoL  iii.  4).  Part  of  the  thought  is  expressed  in  a  saying  in 
the  Talmud,  "What  has  man  to  do  that  he  may  live?  Let  him  die.  What 
has  man  to  do  that  he  may  die?  Let  him  live."  The  last  words  of  Edward 
the  Confessor  offer  a  closer  parallel.  "  Weep  not,  I  shall  not  die  but  live  ;  and  as  I 
leave  the  land  of  the  dying  I  trust  to  see  the  blessings  of  the  Lord  in  the  land  of 
the  living."  {Bp.  Westcott.)  Death  avoided  : — If  we  truly  believe  in  Christ — I. 
The  healtht  aotivitt  of  our  spibituai.  powers  will  never  cease.  liife  ia 
worthless  without  activity,  and  activity  without  health  is  misery.  By  faith  in 
Christ  the  perceptive,  reflective,  imaginative,  recoUective,  anticipative  faculties  will 


CHA».  n.]  ST.  JOHN.  171 

work  harmoniously  for  ever.  II.  Nothing  valuable  in  oub  spibitoal  AOQUismoN» 
WILL  EVEB  BE  LOST.  Life  without  ideas,  emotions,  memories,  habits,  is  a  blank, 
and  with  these,  if  they  are  not  of  a  virtuous  character,  it  is  despicable  and  wretched. 
But  when  they  are  holy  Ufe  is  blessed.  Faith  in  Christ  secures  their  permanence  and 
perfection.  "  Our  works  foUow  us."  We  cannot  labour  in  vain  in  the  Lord.  IIL 
All  the  soueces  of  teue  pleasuee  will  continue  fob  eveb:  intellectual— 
study,  &o. ;  social — friendship,  usefulness,  &c. ;  reUgious — communion  with  God, 
worship.  Faith  in  Christ,  then,  not  in  propositions  concerning  Him,  but  in  Him  aa 
the  loving  Son  of  God  and  Saviour,  is  a  condition  of  happy  immortaUty.  (X>. 
Thomas,  D.D.)  Believeth  thou  this  ? — Believing  : — The  earnest  and  compas- 
sionate  look  cast  upon  Martha  is  the  look  cast  upon  us  as  we  are  asked  this 
question.  Who  in  his  reflective  moods  does  not  acknowledge  the  importance 
whether  the  answer  is  yes  or  no  ?  Who  does  not  want  to  be  established  in  soUd 
convictions.  But  there  is  a  difficulty  at  the  very  entrance  of  the  subject.  What 
is  it  to  believe  ?  and  how  ?  But  this  is  no  real  difficulty  to  practical  men.  To 
believe  in  a  proposition  is  to  be  persuaded  of  its  truth.  It  admits  of  degrees.  It 
may  shine  like  the  sun  in  clear  assurance,  or  be  overcast  with  the  wet  atmosphere 
of  thought ;  but  still  it  is  the  light  we  are  appointed  to  walk  by.  We  are  every 
day  believing  what  we  cannot  prove.  Our  text  lays  no  injunction,  but  simply 
asks  a  question  :  "  Believest  thou  f "  We  ought  to  know  whether  we  do  or  not. 
I.  We  have  faith  in  some  of  its  lowee  degeees  at  least,  and  every  degree  is 
precious.  We  believe  in  something  of  the  truth  revealed  in  the  Bible,  too 
inadequately  perhaps,  and  with  reason  to  cry  out,  "  Help  Thou  my  unbelief " ;  or 
else  we  are  utter  sceptics.  Which  ia  it  ?  II.  Eveby  deobeb  towabds  thb 
eiohest  and  fullest  assubance  is  pbecious.  This  is  certainly  true  so  far  as  the 
comfort  and  peace  of  the  mind  are  concerned,  and  what  can  be  more  important  ? 
1.  That  it  should  be  nourished  with  Divine  truths.  2.  Confirmed  with  spiritual 
assurances.  3.  Near  healing  words  of  heavenly  compassion.  4.  Be  protected 
against  the  agitations  of  doubt  and  dread.      III.  It  is   subfbisino,  thebefobe, 

THAT  it   should   BE   SAID   THAT   IT   IS   OF   LITTLE   CONSEQUENCE   WHAT  A   MAN  BELIBVE8 

PROVIDED  HE  CONDUCTS  HIMSELF  WELL.  A  principal  point  ia  overlooked,  the  need 
of  the  soul  to  be  cheered  and  kept  in  the  harmony  of  its  own  thoughts.  One  ma^ 
be  a  very  dutiful  man,  and  yet  a  very  restless  and  despairing  one.  IV.  Onb'^ 
BELIEF  MUST  HAVE  SOME  INFLUENCE  ON  CONDUCT.  His  convictiouB  must  be  a  part 
of  the  basis  of  his  character,  if  not  of  the  very  character  itself.  Human  behefa 
are  of  grave  moment,  and  determine  the  behaviour,  and  faith  in  Christ  from  the 
first  has  been  the  means  of  changing  sinful  hearts.  But  I  must  look  at  the  need 
of  the  troubled  mind  and  heart  to  find  satisfaction  and  rest.  Who  can  allow 
himself  to  be  indifferent  or  unassured  when  the  highest  realities  are  to  be 
treasured  up  in  reverent  acknowledgment  or  else  shghted  and  mistrusted. 
V.  Take  the  dibect  question  of  oub  Lord.  "Believest  thou  tfaat  whosoever 
hath  a  living  faith  in  Me  shall  never  die  ?  "  and  Martha's  eesponse,  "  I  believe 
that  Thou  art  He  who  should  come  into  the  world."  She  stopped  there.  With 
a  like  consciousness  of  ignorance  and  weakness  we  may  place  ourselves  at  the 
feet  of  the  great  Teacher.  1.  There  is  a  Father,  wiser  than  you  can  comprehend, 
better  than  you  deserve,  just,  merciful,  forgiving — believest  thou  this  t  2.  There 
is  a  heavenly  providence — the  Father's  care — believest  thou  this  ?  3.  There  ia  » 
better  abode  for  the  soul — the  Father's  house.  4.  There  is  sure  retribution. 
Finally :  If  we  should  be  urged  with  questions  too  difficult  let  us  prepare 
ourselves  in  Martha's  spirit.  I  believe  in  every  doctrine  and  promise,  so  far  as  it 
is  made  plain  to  me,  of  the  Saviour  that  was  sent  into  the  world.  (N.  L. 
Frotheringham.)  The  believer  catechized: — When  believers  are  sorrowful  they 
may  be  sure  that  a  consolation  is  provided  exactly  adapted  to  their  cases.  For 
every  lock  God  has  made  He  has  provided  a  key.  I  doubt  not  that  for  every 
disease  there  is  a  remedy  in  God's  laboratory  if  we  could  but  find  it,  and  if  we 
Christians  are  borne  down  by  excessive  sorrow  it  arises  from  a  defect  in  our  faith. 
This  defect  sometimes  arises  from — 1.  Slender  knowledge.  There  is  a  promise 
that  meets  your  case,  and  you  know  nothing  of  its  efficacy  because  you  have  never 
read  or  understood  it.  2.  Want  of  appreciation  of  the  person  of  Christ.  Thig 
was  the  case  with  Martha.  If  Jesus  were  better  known  our  burdens  would  be 
lightened.  Submit  then  to  a  heart-searching  inquiry.  Believest  thou — L  This 
FABTicuLAB  DOCTRINE?  Tou  have  faith  in  the  Scriptures  in  general.  Now  the 
point  is  to  take  each  separate  doctrine,  and  look  over  it  in  detail,  and  then  say 
with  heart  and  conscience,  "  I  beheve  this."  Martha  had  already  expressed  hat 
VOL.  a.  18 


274  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  o, 

faith  in  certain  great  truths — ^in  the  Saviour's  power  to  heal  the  sick,  in  the  efficacy 
of  His  prayer,  and  in  the  certainty  of  the  resurrection — but  all  these  were  very 
general,  and  Christ  set  before  her  a  specific  fact,  and  said,  "  Believest  thou  this  ?  " 
Let  us  do  the  same  with  the  election  of  grace,  justification  by  faith,  union  with 
Christ,  &c.  This  inquiry  well  managed  and  pressed  home  will  enlarge  the  range 
and  strengthen  the  grasp  of  faith  and  enrich  the  soul.  II.  This  distinct 
DOCTEiNE?  There  is  great  cloudiness  about  the  faith  of  many,  arising  largely 
from  its  second-hand  character.  We  believe  not  because  we  have  personally 
grasped  a  truth,  but  because  somebody  else  believes  it.  Instead  of  the  hazy 
notion  of  the  resurrection  which  Martha  held  in  common  with  others,  Christ 
challenged  her  faith  on  a  crisp,  definite  teaching  about  Himself.  Christian 
doctrines,  the  atonement,  e.g.,  are  robbed  of  half  their  delight  if  indistinctly 
stated.  Bead  Isa.  liii.,  and  then  say  to  yourself,  "Believest  thou  this?"  III. 
This  difficult  tbtjth.  Certain  truths  are  hard  to  grasp.  There  are  points 
about  them  which  stagger  faith  till  faith  rises  to  her  true  character.  What 
Christ  preached  to  Martha  seemed  contrary  to  experience.  But  when  we  become 
Christians  and  once  accept  an  incarnate  God,  ho  difficulty  need  trouble  us. 
Everything  is  simple  in  the  presence  of  that  profound  mystery.  Believing  then  in 
the  Incarnation,  what  difficulty  should  there  be  in  believing  "  when  thou  passes* 
through  the  fire,"  &c.  ?  IV.  This  tbtjth  as  it  stands  connected  with  Christ. 
Martha  believed  there  would  be  a  resurrection,  but  Jesus  says,  "  I  am,"  &c.  It  is 
one  thing  to  believe  a  doctrine,  and  another  to  believe  it  as  embodied  in  the  person 
of  Christ.  There  the  comfort  lies.  Martha  was  called  upon  to  beUeve  in  Christ's 
personal  power.  His  present  power,  and  the  union  of  His  people  with  Him.  V. 
This  tbuth  which  is  applicable  to  thtself  now.  This  was  where  Martha  fell 
short.  We  sometimes  receive  great  truths,  but  are  staggered  by  lesser  truths, 
because  the  great  truth  has  no  present  practical  bearing,  whereas  the  lesser  one 
has.  You  beheve  that  Christ's  blood  can  wash  away  all  sin,  do  you  believe  that 
it  cleanses  yours?  You  believe  that  aU  things  work  together  for  good,  do  you 
beheve  that  your  present  affliction  does?  VI.  This  peactical  tktjth.  Martha 
said  she  believed  it,  but  ver.  39  did  not  prove  it.  Coleridge  says :  "  Truths,  of  all 
others,  the  most  awful  and  mysterious,  and  at  the  same  time  of  universal  interest, 
are  too  often  considered  as  so  true  that  they  lose  all  the  power  of  truth,  and  he 
bedridden  in  the  dormitory  of  the  soul,  side  by  side  with  the  most  despised  and 
exploded  errors."  Why  are  people  "better  than  their  creed"?  For  the  same 
reason  that  others  are  worse  than  their  creed,  because  their  creed  is  asleep. 
There  is  a  house  on  fire — ^you  believe  it,  but  you  don't  stir  until  you  know  it  is 
your  own.  We  beheve  that  God  hears  prayer,  but  nothing  surprises  us  more  than 
when  He  answers  it.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Faith,  not  understanding,  brings  us  the 
blessing  : — He  saith  not,  "  Understandest  thou  this  ?  "  '  *  For  the  mysteries  of 
rehgion,"  saith  Eupertus,  "  are  much  better  understood  by  believing  than  believed 
by  understanding."  {J.  Trapp.)  I  believe  that  Thou  art  the  Christ,  tbe  Son 
of  God. — Martha's  creed : — L  The  guide  of  her  faith,  the  word  of  Christ.  II.  The 
GROUND  of  her  faith,  the  authoeitt  of  Christ.  III.  The  matter  of  her  faith,  that 
Jesus  was — 1.  The  Christ.  2.  The  Son  of  God.  3.  The  One  who  should  come. 
{M.  Henry.)  All  that  can  be  believed  and  known  of  Jesus  is  included  in  this 
threefold  statement,  which  looks  towards  three  possible  sides :  to  the  history  of 
salvation,  to  the  fellowship  of  salvation,  and  to  the  need  and  hope  of  salvation. 
We  might  say  that  the  first  names  the  theme  of  St.  Matthew's  Gospel,  the  third  the 
theme  of  St.  Luke's,  and  the  second  the  theme  of  St.  John's.  And  that  which  in 
the  higher  combination  of  the  scattered  points  is  the  theme  of  the  fourth  Gospel, 
is  in  direct  generality  and  onity  the  theme  also  of  the  second.  (<7.  E.  Luihardt, 
D.D.) 

Vers.  28-30.  The  Master  Is  come  and  calleth  for  thee. — The  Master : — I.  Thh 
PROPEiETY  OF  THIS  TITLE  AS  APPLIED  TO  OUE  LoBD.  1.  He  has  a  peculiar  fitness 
for  the  office.  He  is  the  Master,  i.e.,  the  Teacher.  Put  the  two  together.  A 
master-teacher  mast  have — (1)  A  masterly  mind.  All  minds  are  not  cast  in  the 
same  mould.  Some  are  princely  by  their  very  formation  though  they  may  belong 
to  ploughboys.  Such  men  as  Napoleon,  Cromwell,  Washington,  must  rise  to  be 
masters  among  men.  You  cannot  have  a  master-teacher  with  a  little  soul.  He 
may  insinuate  himself  into  the  chair,  but  every  one  wiU  see  that  he  is  out  ot 
place.  Many  painters  there  are,  but  there  have  been  few  Baphaels  or  Michael 
Angeloe ;  many  philosophers,  but  a  Socrates  and  an  Aristotle  will  not  be  found 


OHAP.  XL]  ST.  JOHN.  275 

«very  day,  for  great  minds  are  rare.  The  Master  of  all  the  teachers  must  needs 
be  a  colossal  spirit,  and  such  Mary  saw  Christ  to  be.  In  Him  we  have  Divinity 
with  its  omniscience  and  infallibility,  and  at  the  same  time  a  full  orbed  manhood 
intensely  manly  and  sweetly  womanly.  There  is  a  grandeur  about  His  whole 
human  nature,  so  that  He  stands  out  above  all  other  men,  like  some  mighty 
Alpine  peak  which  overtops  the  minor  hiUs  and  casts  its  shadows  all  adown  the 
vales.  (2)  A  master  knowledge ;  and  it  is  best  if  that  be  acquired  by  experience 
rather  than  by  instruction.  Such  was  the  case  with  Jesus.  He  came  to  teach  us 
the  science  of  life,  and  He  experienced  life  in  all  its  phases.  (3)  A  masterly  way 
of  teaching.  It  is  not  every  man  of  vast  mind  and  knowledge  who  can  teach. 
Some  talk  a  jargon  no  one  can  understand.  Jesus  taught  plainly  and  also  lovingly. 
The  way  in  which  He  taught  was  as  sweet  as  His  truth  itself.  Every  one  in  His 
school  felt  at  home.  Moreover,  He  gave  a  measure  of  the  Holy  Spirit  so  that 
truths  were  taught  to  the  heart  as  well  as  the  ear.  And  that  same  Spirit  now 
takes  the  things  of  Christ,  and  writes  them  on  the  fleshy  tablets  of  the  heart. 
And  then  Christ  embodied  His  instruction  in  Himself — was  at  once  Teacher  and 
Lesson.  (4)  A  ma,ster  infiueuce.  His  pupils  not  only  saw,  but  felt ;  not  only 
knew,  but  loved ;  not  only  prized  the  lesson,  but  worshipped  the  Teacher.  What 
a  Teacher  this,  whose  very  presence  checked  and  ultimately  cast  out  sin,  gave  new 
life  and  brought  it  to  perfection  I  2.  He  is  by  office  the  sole  Master  of  the  Church. 
(1)  He,  and  not  Luther,  Calvin,  Wesley,  has  the  right  to  determine  what  doctrines 
shall  be  believed.  (2)  He,  and  not  councils,  synods,  the  State,  &o.,  has  the  right 
to  determine  what  ordinances  shall  be  observed.  II.  The  peouliab  becognition 
WHICH  Mabt  gave  to  Chkist  as  masteb.  1.  She  became  His  pupil.  She  sat 
reverently  at  His  feet.  Let  us  take  every  word  of  Jesus,  and  read,  mark,  learn, 
tnd  inwardly  digest  it.  2.  She  was  a  disciple  of  nobody  else,  and  ours  must  not 
Im  a  divided  allegiance.  3.  She  was  a  wilhng  scholar.  She  chose  the  good  part. 
No  one  sent  her  to  Jesus.  He  drew  her  and  she  loved  to  be  there.  Children  at 
school  always  learn  well  if  they  want  to — not  if  driven.  4.  She  perseveringly 
stuck  to  Him.  Her  choice  was  not  taken  from  her,  and  she  did  not  give  it  up. 
6.  She  went  humbly  to  Him,  feeling  it  the  highest  honour  to  be  sitting  in  the 
lowest  place.  They  learn  most  of  Christ  who  think  least  of  themselves.  III.  Taa 
SPECIAL  SWEETNESS  OF  THE  NAMB  TO  US.  1.  To  tcacbers.  (1)  Their  messalge  is 
not  their  own,  but  His,  which  relieves  them  of  responsibility,  and  makes  them 
indifferent  to  criticism.  (2)  When  the  work  does  not  seem  to  prosper,  what  a 
comfort  to  be  able  to  go  to  Jesus  1  This  applies  to  all — business  men,  housewives, 
church  officers,  <fec.  2.  To  sufferers.  A  gardener  preserved  with  great  care  a 
choice  rose.  One  morning  it  was  gone.  He,  scolding  his  fellow-servauts,  and  felt 
very  grieved  tiU  one  said,  "  I  saw  the  master  take  it."  "  Oh,  then,"  said  he,  "  I 
am  content."  Have  you  lost  a  dear  one?  It  was  He  who  took  it.  Would  you 
wish  to  keep  what  the  Master  wants  ?    {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)        The  Master  calling : — 

1.  The  title  given  to  Chkist.      "  The  Master,"  suggesting — 1.  His  authority. 

2.  His  prophetic  office.  II.  His  appeabance — "is  come."  1.  In  the  Incarnation. 
2.  In  the  means  of  grace.  3.  In  special  providences.  4.  At  His  saints'  death- 
beds. 5.  At  the  Judgment.  III.  The  appeal — "  and  calleth  for  thee."  1.  In  the 
Word  read  or  preached.  2.  In  the  example  of  others.  3.  By  the  power  of  His 
Spirit.  This  is — (1)  A  personal  call.  (2)  An  important  call.  (3)  A  gracious 
call  (Prov.  i.  24).  (Preacher^s  Portfolio.)  The  call  of  the  Master: — I.  Thb 
ADTHOBiTy  OF  Christ,  "  The  Master."  Martha  recognized  Christ  as  her  Teacher 
and  Lord.  This  relation  He  bears  still.  All  authority  is  given  Him  in 
heaven  and  earth.  1.  He  is  the  true  Euler  of  the  world.  There  are  many 
forms  of  government,  but  all  are  knowiugly  or  ignorantly,  willingly  or  un- 
willingly the  subjects  of  Christ.  He  rules  them  at  His  pleasure.  2.  He  is 
the  Ruler  of  His  Church.  His  people  are  not  their  own,  but  His  purchased 
possession,  and  He  will  not  delegate  His  authority  to  another.  (1)  Secular  govern- 
ments have  usurped  this  authority,  and  have  endeavoured  to  rule  Christ's  people 
according  to  their  ideas.  Such  have  rightful  authority  in  the  world,  but  not  in  the 
Church.  No  Christian  should  resist  it  in  the  right  sphere,  but  render  onto  Csesar, 
&o.  But  as  soon  as  it  intrudes  into  the  spiritual  sphere  it  is  to  be  opposed,  and 
God  is  to  be  obeyed  rather  than  man.  (2)  Priests  have  usurped  this  authority. 
The  Man  of  Eome  has  declared  himself  to  be  Christ's  vicegerent,  and  Protestant 
popes  have  made  similar  claims.  It  is  true  that  Christ's  ministers  have  authority 
in  the  Church  (Heb.  xiii.  17),  but  it  is  in  perfect  subordination  to  Christ.  IL  Tna 
7fiES£NC£  OF  Chbist.    He  came  to  Bethany  palpably ;  He  comes  here  spixituaUj, 


276  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xk 

•*  Wherever  two  or  three,"  &o.  You  would  feel  excited  il  told  that  Queen  Victoria 
were  here,  but  a  greater  than  Victoria  has  come — 1.  To  inspect.  Christ  sees 
everything — our  conduct  in  the  world  and  in  Church.  8.  To  listen  to  the  sincere, 
the  half-hearted,  the  hypocritical.  3.  To  bless.  He  has  pardon  for  the  sinful, 
teaching  for  the  ignorant,  strength  for  the  weak,  <Xro.  III.  The  call  of  Chbist. 
1.  To  the  careless  sinner.  2.  To  the  anxious  inquirer.  3.  The  Christian,  halting, 
idhng,  sad,  &c.  Let  all  respond.  (J.  Morgan.)  Christ's  call  to  the  personal 
heart : — The  line  of  thought  will  unfold  itself  through  three  principal  steps,  each 
including  a  doctrine,  an  encouragement,  and  a  duty.  The  call  is — I.  Compbehensive. 

I.  In  the  two  sisters  we  see  two  sharply  contrasted  types  of  natural  character. 
(1)  One  is  made  for  practical  action.  The  anxious  housekeeper  whose  concern  is 
that  the  rooms  shaU  be  hospitably  ready,  and  the  table  furnished  for  the  Divine 
guest — fit  representative  of  the  efi&cient  workers,  without  whom  the  regularities  of 
life  and  the  decencies  of  Christian  worship  would  go  to  destruction.  (2)  The  other 
dwells  in  a  world  of  silent  communion.  Beligion  always  has  its  spring  in  the 
heart ;  and  her  heart  life  is  chief.  Christ  blesses  her  in  that  character  as  He  does 
Martha  in  hers.  2.  Out  of  this  marked  difference  we  infer  the  comprehensiveness 
of  the  gospel,  which,  like  the  charity  it  puts  first  among  the  graces,  suits  itself 
••  without  partiality  "  to  every  sort  and  grade  of  human  constitution.  3.  Forget- 
fulness  of  this  grand  truth  exposes  us  to  the  danger  of  an  arrogant  and  conceited 
judgment  of  those  who  manifest  their  faith  in  a  way  different  from  our  own. 

II.  Sympathetic.  The  call  is  in  sympathy  with  our  individual  constitutions.  A 
common  hindrance,  to  the  young  especially,  is  the  feeling  that  religion  is  something 
restricted  to  one  particular  line  and  shape.  But  the  Master  calls  not  that  He  may 
make  you  a  follower  just  like  some  other  and  all  unlike  yourself,  but  just  such  a 
self -forgetful  Christian  as  He  intended  you  to  be  when  He  made  you  what  you  are. 
You  read  the  biography  of  some  eminent  Christian  and  say,  "  I  can  never  be  a 
Christian  like  that,  and  it  is  useless  for  me  to  try."  Turn  from  the  disheartening 
comparison  to  Christ.  Though  you  find  Him  higher  than  all,  there  is  never  any- 
thing discouraging.  His  siulessness  is  so  blended  with  gentleness,  His  majesty 
with  His  understanding  of  your  wants  and  sympathy  with  your  struggles,  that  you 
feel  safe  under  His  hand.  Notice  especially  His  tenderness  towards  the  two 
women's  imperfect  faith.  He  never  breaks  the  bruised  reed,  &c.  III.  Personal. 
He  knows  our  whole  personal  history  from  the  cradle.  Most  of  us  can  understand 
the  conviction  of  the  woman  of  Samaria.  At  first  sight  where  there  is  no  trust 
this  awful  insight  might  affright  us :  but  the  longer  we  ponder  it,  the  more  we  shall 
see  its  blessedness.  There  is  one  Friend  who  understands  us,  and  it  is  safe  to 
trust  ourselves  to  Him,  sins  and  all.  The  reason  why  our  religion  has  bo  little 
power  over  us  is  that  we  keep  Chiist  so  far  away,  and  regard  His  work  as  for  the 
world  in  general,  and  not  for  us  in  particular.  But  the  text  is  the  appeal  of  the 
personal  Christ  to  a  person  now  as  then.  {Bp.  Huntington.)  The  visit  and  the 
invitation : — I.  The  message.  1.  The  appellation  given  to  our  Lord.  The  rulers 
despised  Jesus,  but  these  women  were  not  ashamed  nor  afraid  to  acknowledge  Him 
as  Master.  Happy  the  families  that  acknowledge  Him  as  such.  2.  The  message 
relating  to  Him  :  "  is  come."  He  came  to  the  grave  of  Lazarus ;  He  comes  to  the 
graves  of  those  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  II.  The  persons  to  whom  it  is 
ADDRESSED.  1.  Thoso  who  have  hitherto  kept  at  a  distance  from  Christ  without 
ever  seeking  Him.  (1)  Some  have  not  only  neglected  Him,  but  provoked  Him 
by  open  sin.  (2)  Others  please  themselves  with  the  idea  of  their  comparative 
innocence,  and  satisfy  themselves  with  a  cold,  negative,  heartless  religion.  2.  Those 
who  have  sought  Christ,  but  never  found  Him.  3.  Those  who,  after  having  been 
admitted  to  union  with  Him,  are  deprived  of  His  sensible  presence.  III.  Thk 
SEASONS  WHEN  IT  MORE  PARTICULARLY  COMES.  1.  The  time  of  afflictiou.  2.  When 
the  means  of  grace  are  fully  enjoyed.  3.  When  the  Spirit  of  God  strives.  4.  When 
opportunities  for  religious  usefulness  occur.  Conclusion :  1.  How  much  to  be 
admired  is  Christ's  condescension  in  His  love.  2.  How  great  are  your  obligations 
to  hearken  to  His  call.  3.  How  obligatory  to  communicate  the  message  to  others. 
{H.  Grey,  D.D.)  Christ's  message  : — I.  The  character  of  Christ's  biessage  to 
His  friends.  1.  Its  benignity.  2.  Authority.  3.  Personalty.  4.  Suitability. 
IL  The  best  wat  to  convey  Christ's  messages.  1.  Unostentatiously.  2.  Prudently. 
B.  Plainly.  4.  Promptly.  III.  The  treatment  of  Christ's  messages  by  Ha 
FBisNDs.  1.  Mary  listened  to  it.  2.  Was  infiuenced  by  it.  3.  Obeyed  it  at  once. 
{Stems  and  Twigs.)  The  gospel  message  to  every  man : — We  have  it — I.  CLKABLt 
RAXSD.     1.  The  Master  is  come.     Come  from  heaven,  to  this  earth,  for  every  man. 


OHAJ.  n.]  ST.  JOHN.  271 

Of  all  the  facts  of  history  none  is  better  attested,  more  important,  or  more  gloriona 
than  this.  2.  The  Master  calls  individuals — (1)  In  the  operations  of  nature,  in 
the  events  of  history,  in  the  working  of  conscience,  in  the  ministry  of  His  servants. 

(2)  To  heal  thy  diseases,  to  break  thy  chains,  to  enlighten  thy  judgment,  to  cleanse 
thy  conscience,  to  purify  thy  heart,  and  to  save  thy  souL  II.  Bightlt  DEurvERED. 
Martha  delivered  her  message.  1.  Undoubtingly  (ver.  27).  "  And  when  she  had 
BO  said "  she  proceeds,  filled  with  the  spirit  of  her  mission,  to  Mary.  He  who 
delivers  the  message  without  being  assured  of  its  truth,  is  no  genuine  preacher. 
That  Christ  has  come  and  calls  for  men,  must  be  among  his  most  settled  con* 
victions.  2.  Judiciously.  He  "  secretly  "  suggests  prudence  in  regard  to  — (1) 
Times ;  (2)  Circumstances ;  (3)  Moods.  III.  Pbopeklt  eeceived.  Mary  received 
it  as  every  hearer  of  the  gospel  should.  1.  Promptly  (ver.  29).  She  did  not  wait 
to  consult  her  companion.  The  delay  of  a  moment  after  the  voice  has  come  is 
wrong  and  perilous.  2.  Resolutely  (ver.  30).  On  an  occasion  so  full  of  excitement, 
it  required  no  little  nerve  to  proceed  to  where  Jesus  was  in  sublime  solitude.  The 
Gospel  call  requires  determination  of  soul :  there  are  so  many  opposing  forces 
and  unfavourable  considerations.  3.  Fearlessly  (ver.  31).  Well  she  knew  that  her 
going  forth  would  be  contrary  to  the  wish  of  the  Jews  ;  but,  defiant  of  their  pre- 
judices, she  obeys  the  command.  Thus  it  must  be  with  those  who  would  comply 
with  the  invitations  of  the  gospel.  4.  Devoutly  (ver.  32).  "  At  His  feet,"  where 
every  hearer  should  be.  Conclusion  :  Here  is — 1.  A  fact  in  which  humanity  should 
rejoice.  "  The  Master  is  come."  What  fools  those  are  who  go  not  to  meet  Him ! 
2.  An  example  that  preachers  should  imitate — Martha's.  3.  The  conduct  gospel 
hearers  should  follow.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  It  is  said  of  Sister  Dora  that,  no 
matter  at  what  hour  the  hospital  door  bell  rang,  she  used  to  rise  instantly  to  admit 
the  patient  saying,  "  The  Master  is  come  and  calleth  for  thee."  As  Boon  as  she 
heard  that  she  arose  quickly,  and  came  unto  Him. — The  believer  goes  to  the 
Master: — ^I.  In  pbospebity  hastens  to  Him  for  grace  to  bear  it.  II.  In  adversity 
for  grace  to  improve  it.  III.  In  tbiuftation  for  grace  to  overcome  it.  lY.  la 
A  TBiBNDLESS  woRU)  fot  Sympathy.     {M.  Henry.) 

Ver.  32.  When  Mary  was  come  she  fell  down  at  His  feet,  easing  unto  Him, 
Lord,  If  Thou  hadst  been  here,  my  brother  had  not  died  (see  ver.  21). — Christ's 
delay  to  interpose  against  death : — 1.  Mary  fell  at  His  feet ;  formerly  she  was  willing 
to  sit  at  them.  The  soul  is  never,  as  amid  such  desolation,  constrained  to  cling  to 
"  a  friend  that  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother."  2.  There  is  continued  confidence 
— it  is  still  •*  Lord,"  notwithstanding  what  had  happened — seen  in  the  conviction 
that  an  earlier  arrival  would  have  brought  deliverance,  and  leading  to  a  hope  of  help 
even  in  this  extremity.  3.  Mary  uses  the  same  words  as  Martha  (ver.  21).  Perhaps 
they  had  often  said  so.  But  Mary  did  not  finish  her  appeal  as  Martha  did  (ver. 
22) ;  not  that  her  faith  was  less  strong :  it  was  finished  in  her  ovm  heart.  Tears 
break  in  and  check  utterance  (ver.  33).  4.  Yet  with  this  faith  there  is  wonder  at 
Christ's  absence,  which  almost  verges  on  reproach.  Why  so  late  ?  We  shall  look  at 
the  question  in  the  light  the  narrative  gives.  I.  The  strangeness  of  Christ's 
DELAY  TO  INTERPOSE  AGAINST  DEATH.  1.  Tum  to  the  circumstanccs  around  us,  as 
Martha  and  Mary  may  have  done.  Consider — (1)  What  death  is  to  the  sufferer. 
No  happy  translation.  The  end  of  all  earthly  sufferings  but  more  dreaded  than  all. 
Man's  heart  recoils  from  its  accompaniments.  When  we  see  a  friend  moving 
forward  to  his  doom,  what  means  do  we  not  exhaust  to  save  him  ?  Yet  Christ 
suffered  Lazarus  to  die.  And  how  many  have  been  struck  down  since  of  the  most 
lovely  and  loving  ;  and  yet  death  has  no  power  without  Christ's  permission.  (2) 
What  a  bereavement  death  is  to  the  survivors  1  In  a  Christian  it  is  not  the  dead 
who  are  to  be  mourned,  but  those  whom  they  leave.  What  ages  of  agony  are  lived 
while  the  wavering  balance  is  watched  !  And  then  the  anguish  of  the  parting,  and 
the  slow  groping  which  follows  to  realize  it  1  The  childless  mother,  Ac,  have 
wrestled  over  the  dying  and  moaned  over  the  dead  and  none  seeuied  to  listen, 

(3)  What  a  ground  of  reproach  death  has  furnished  to  the  enemies  of  Christ. 
There  was  no  lack  of  unbelieving  Jews  in  Bethany  to  take  advantage  of  Christ'i 
absence.  Something  like  the  feeling  of  the  Psalmist  must  have  been  theirs,  "  My 
tears  have  been  my  meat.  .  .  .  wnile  they  said  unto  me,  where  is  thy  God,"  and  so 
now  over  closed  graves  we  hear  the  reproach,  "Where  is  the  promise  of  His  coming?  " 
&o.,  and  the  Christian  heart  wearies  for  some  interposition  to  vindicate  its  claim. 
"  Arise,  0  God,"  &0.  2.  Tum  from  our  circumstances  to  Christ  as  these  sisters 
did.    We  believe — (1)  That  Christ  is  fully  aware  of  our  need.    When  a  friend 


278  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.h, 

faila  tiB  tbroagh  ignorance,  we  do  not  blame  him.      Aa  goon  as   the    Bisterg 
apprehended  danger  they  Bent  to  Jesus.    Without  this  we  know  that  Christ  under- 
stands all  our  need.    He  can  draw  nearer  than  the  nearest,  and  His  foot  does  not 
step  forward  to  the  rescue.    Is  it  not  strange — (2)  That  Christ  has  full  power  to 
interpose  (vers.  22,  42).    He  has  not  only  omnipotence,  but  the  moral  right  and 
power,  having  paid  the  ransom  price.    The  keys  of  death  hang  at  His  girdle,  and 
that  He  should  not  use  them  occasions  strange  thoughts.   (3)  That  it  is  the  desire 
of  Christ  to  interpose  (vers.  5, 33).    But  if  He  felt  so  deeply  why  did  He  not  coma 
sooner?   And  if  He  meant  not  to  interpose  why  should  He  weep?  (Jer.  xiv.  8). 
Onr  very  confidence  in  Christ  becomes  the  occasion  of  bewildering  doubts.    "  Lord 
....  help  Thou  our  unbelief."     II.  The  reason  fob  Christ's  delay  which  may 
BB  FOUND  IN  THIS  HISTORY.    Other  rcasons  there  are  to  be  found  in  the  Bible,  and 
probably  outside.    But  here  we  see  that  Christ  delays — 1.  That  His  friends  when 
dying  may  have  confidence  in  Him,  and  have  an  opportunity  for  showing  it.    We 
have  no  account  of  Lazarus's  death,  but  the  period  has  its  peculiar  use  in  every 
spiritual  history.     (1)  The  great  end  of  Christ's  dealing  with  any  soul  is  to  con- 
vince it  that  in  Him  it  has  an  all-sufficient  life,  and  that  with  Him  it  can  pass 
safely  through  every  emergency.    But  this  course  of  teaching  would  want  its  crovoi 
if  it  did  not  end  in  death.    He  invites  the  soul,  and  constrains  it  to  put  all  its  con- 
fidence into  that  last  act  of  surrender  knowing  Him  whom  it  beheves,  and  feeling 
that  underneath  are  the  everlasting  arms.     (2)  Death  is  the  last  touch  of  that 
purifying  fire  which  Christ  employs  to  melt  the  fallen  nature,  free  it  from  its  dross, 
and  fuse  it  into  His  likeness.     2.  That  the  sorrowing  friends  may  learn  entire 
reliance  on  Him.     It  is  a  subject  for  study  how  Christ  leads  on  these  sisters  from  a 
dead  brother  to  the  Kesurrection  and  the  Life,  and  teaches  them  through  their  loss 
to  gain  what  they  could  never  lose  any  more.  Christ  separates  our  friends  from  us  for 
a  while  that  we  may  learn  to  find  our  all  in  Himself.     3.  That  in  the  midst  of 
death  the  union  of  sympathy  between  Christ  and  His  friends  is  perfected.     Jesus 
had  given  them  many  tokens  of  His  love  while  Lazarus  lived,  but  none  with  that 
touching  tenderness  which  came  forth  at  his  grave.     The  fellowship  of  suffering 
brings  hearts  and  lives  together  more  than  all  the  fellowship  of  joy.    When  Jesus 
wept  the  mourners  knew  He  was  one  witii  them.     Gethsemane  shows  us  the  agony 
of  Christ's  soul  for  man's  sin — the  grave  at  Bethany  His  agony  of  heart  at  man's 
suffering.    4.  That  God  makes  this  a  world  of  spiritual  probation.     By  His  delay 
Christ  tried  the  character  of  all  who  knew  the  case,  and  Christ's  delays  now  are 
the  touchstone  of  spiritual  life.    You  who  would  have  Him  never  suffer  the  tears 
of  His  people  to  fall  would  lead  men  to  seek  Him,  not  for  the  love  they  bore  Him, 
but  for  outward  benefits.    But  God  defers  the  time  for  interposition  in  order  that 
He  may  sift  their  characters  and  prepare  them  for  the  day  of  judgment.     5.  That 
He  brings  in  thereby  a  grander  and  final  issue.     {J.  Ker,  D.D.)        Trials  should  be 
borne  cheerfully  : — In  the  days  of  King  Solomon  there  lived  among  the  Jews  a  wise 
man  named  Lokman.    His  master  once  gave  him  a  very  bitter  kind  of  melon, 
called  the  coloquintida ;   he  ate  without  making  wry  faces  or  speaking  a  word. 
"  How  was  it  possible  for  you  to  swallow  so  nauseous  a  fruit?  "  asked  the  master. 
Lokman  answered :    "  I  have  received  so  many  sweets  from  you  that  it  is  not 
wonderful  I  should  have  swallowed  the  only  bitter  fruit  you  ever  gave  me."    The 
master  was  so  much  charmed  with  this  reply  that  he  gave  Lokman  his  liberty. 
The  beautiful  answer  teaches  us  a  lesson.     We  must  take  the  gifts  from  our 
heavenly  Father  with  a  smiling  face ;   but  when  He  sees  best  for  our  good  to  send 
us  something  we  do  not  like,  our  countenance  falls,  and  even  if  we  do  not  speak, 
our  sullen  discontent  is  apparent  to  all.        Fretful  impatience  under  bereavement : — 
The  Duchess  of  Beaufort,  on  the  death  of  the  Duke,  shut  herself  up  in  a  room  hung 
with  black,  and  refused  all  comfort.    A  Quaker,  who  found  her  thus  disconsolate, 
in  the  deepest  mourning,  ejaculated,  "  What  1  hast  thou  not  forgiven  God  Almighty 
yet  ?  "    The  rebuke  had  such  an  effect  that  she  immediately  rose  and  went  about 
her  usual  and  necessary  business.     (Madame  D'Arblay.)        Resignation  taught  by 
the  sorrows  of  others  : — "  Peace,  Mary,  peace,"  said  a  godly  woman,  who  had  lost  all 
her  family,  to  a  godless  neighbour  who  was  rebelling  against  the  Providence  that 
had  taken  one  child  of  many ;  "  Peace,  Mary  ;  while  I  have  six  pairs  of  empty  shoes 
to  look  on,  you  have  but  one."    (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.) 

Ver.  33.  When  Jesus  therefore  saw  her  weeping. — Christ  concealing  His  glory: — 
In  this  history  our  Saviour  appears  under  two  very  different  aspects.  As  the  sun, 
on  some  days,  sometimes  shines  out  in  full  strength,  and  sometimes  is  clouded  over. 


«HAP.  XI.]  ST.  JOHN.  279 

and  yet  is  still  the  same  fonntain  of  light,  bo  it  is  with  oar  Sun  of  Eighteousness,  on 
the  day  of  the  resurrection  of  Lazarus.    He  shines  in  full  splendour  when  Ha 
exerts  His  power  over  the  grave,  and  breaks  asunder  the  bonds  of  death  :  but  He 
hides  all  that  majesty  when  He  appears  under  a  great  commotion  of  mind,  which 
vents  itself  in  sighs  and  tears.     {J.  Jortin,  D.D.)        The  effects  of  bereavement  ;— 
After  sore  bereavement,  Sir  Walter  Scott  says,"  I  was  broken-hearted  for  two  years: 
and  though  handsomely  pieced  again,  the  crack  will  remain  to  my  dying  day." 
Tears  : — Tears  are  the  inheritance  of  our  eyes ;  either  our  sufferings  call  for  them 
or  our  sins;   and  nothing  can  wholly  dry  them  up  but  the  dust  of  the  grave. 
{Bp.  Hopkins.)        He  groaned  In  spirit. — Groaned: — The  word  occurs  also  in 
ver.  38;  Matt.  ix.  30;  Mark  i.  43;  xiv.  5.     The  original  meaning  is  "to  snort, 
as  of  horses."     Passing  to  the  moral  sense,  it  expresses  disturbance  of  mind — 
vehement   agitation.     This  may  express  itself  in  sharp  admonition,  in  worda 
of  anger  against  a  person,  or  in  a  physical  shudder,  answering  to  the  inten- 
sity of  the  emotion.     In  each  of  the  earlier  Gospels  the  word  is  accompanied 
by  an  object  upon  which  the  feeling  is    directed.    In  the  present  context  it 
does  not  go  beyond  the  subject  of  the  feeling.    Here  it  is  "in  the  spirit"  (c/. 
chap.  xii.  21),  and  in  ver.  38  it  is  "in  Himself."    Both  mean  the  same  thing; 
and  point  to  the  inner  moral  depth  of  His  righteous  indignation.    Taken  in  con- 
nection with  what  foUows  some  such  rendering  is  required  as  "  He  was  indignant 
in  the  spirit  and  caused  Himself  to  shudder."      {Archdeacon  Watkins.)        Natural 
emotions : — At  what  and  with  whom  was  Jesus  indignant  ?    The  notion  of  some 
Greek  expositors  that  it  was  with  Himself — that  we  have  here  the  indications  of  an 
inward  struggle  to  repress,  as  something  weak  and  unworthy,  that  human  pity, 
which  found  prfontly  its  utterance  in  tears — cannot  be  accepted  for  an  instant. 
Christianity  demands  the  regulation  of  the  natural  affections,  but  it  does  not,  like 
stoicism,  demand  their  suppression ;  so  far  from  this  it  bids  us  "  weep  with  them 
that  weep  "  and  '*  seek  not  altogether  to  dry  the  stream  of  sorrow,  but  to  bound  it 
and  keep  it  within  its  banks."    Some  suppose  Him  indignant  in  spirit  at  the  hostile 
dispositions  of  the  Jews  and  the  unbelief  with  which  this  signal  work  of  His  would 
be  received.     Others,  that  His  indignation  was  excited  by  the  unbelief  of  Martha 
and  Mary  and  the  others,  which  they  manifested  in  their  weeping,  testifying  that 
they  did  not  believe  that  He  would  raise  their  dead.     But  He   Himself  wept 
presently,  and  there  was  nothing  in  these  natural  tears  of  theirs  to  rouse  a  feeling 
of  displeasure.    Bather  was  it  the  indignation  which  the  Lord  of  Life  felt  at  all 
that  sin  had  vnrought.    He  beheld  death  in  all  its  dread  significance,  as  the  wages 
of  sin  ;  the  woes  of  a  whole  world,  of  which  this  was  a  httle  sample,  rose  up  before 
His  eyes :  all  its  mourners  and  all  its  graves  were  present  to  Him.     For  that  He 
was  about  to  wipe  away  the  tears  of  those  present  and  turn  for  a  httle  while  their 
sorrow  into  joy,  did  not  truly  alter  the  case.     Lazarus  rose  again,  but  only  to  taste 
a  second  time  the  bitterness  of  death  ;  these  mourners  He  might  comfort,  but  only 
for  a  season ;  these  tears  he  might  staunch,  only  again  hereafter  to  Sow ;  and  hoyr 
many  had  flowed  and  must  flow  with  no  such  Coinforter  to  wipe  them  even  for  a 
season  away.    As  He  contemplated  all  this,  a  mighty  indignation  at  the  author  of 
all  this  anguish  possessed  His  heart.     And  now  he  will  no  longer  delay,  but  will  do 
at  once  battle  with  death  and  with  Him  that  hath  the  power  of  death;  and  spoiling 
though  but  in  part  the  goods  of  the  strong  man  armed,  will  give  proof  that  a 
stronger  is  here.     {Abp.  Trench.)        He  was  troubled,  rather  "troubled  Himself," 
for  a  certain  Divine  decorum  tempers  all  we  read  of  Him,  and  He  is  not  represented 
to  us  as  possessing  a  nature  to  be  played  upon  by  passive  emotions.    Why?    We 
cannot  fuUy  tell.      Perhaps,  we  may  conceive  the  case  of  a  physician  coming  into 
a  room,  where  friends  and  children  are  sobbing  over  one  whom  they  supposed  to  bo 
doomed,  himself  weeping  in  sympathy  though  sure  that  he  can  heal.     But  at  least 
this  shows  us  that  we  have  a  real  Christ.     It  was  never  invented.     The  imaginary 
Christ  would  have  walked  majestically  up  the  slope  of  the  Mount  of  OUves,  and, 
standing  with  a  halo  of  the  sunset  around  his  brow,  have  bidden  the  dead  to  rise. 
•The  real  Christ  was  a  dusty  and  wayworn  man,  who  wept  over  the  grave,  and  lifted 
Dp  His  eyes.   The  reaUty  teaches  us  that  the  dead  are  not  raised  by  a  stoic  philoso- 
pher, with  an  eye  of  ice  and  a  heart  of  marble,  but  by  One  who  is  very  Man  with 
the  tender  weakness  that  is  more  beautiful  than  aU  our  strength.    His  is  more 
majestic  aa  well  as  more  moving.    But  could  St.  John  have  invented  it  ?    (Bp. 
Alexander.) 

Yer.  35.    Jesus  wept — The  yrovi  is  different  from  that  nsed  to  express  weeping 


280  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA».  Xh 

in  ver.  83 ;  bat  this  latter  is  used  of  onr  Lord  in  Luke  xiz.  41.  The  present  word 
means  not  the  cry  of  lamentation,  nor  the  wail  of  excessive  grief,  but  the  oahn 
shedding  of  tears.  Men  have  wondered  to  find  in  the  gospel,  which  opens  with  the 
express  declaration  of  the  Divinity  of  our  Lord,  and  at  a  moment  when  that 
Divinity  was  about  to  receive  its  fullest  manifestation,  these  words,  which  point 
them  still  to  human  weakness.  But  the  central  thought  of  St.  John's  Gospel  ia 
"  The  Word  made  flesh,"  and  He  is  for  us  the  Besurrection  and  the  Life,  because 
He  has  been  manifested  to  us,  not  as  an  abstraction  which  the  intellect  could 
receive,  but  as  a  Person,  living  a  human  life  and  knowing  its  sorrows,  whom  the 
heart  can  grasp  and  love.  A  "  God  in  tears  "  has  provoked  the  smile  of  the  stoio 
and  the  scorn  of  the  unbeliever ;  but  Christianity  is  not  a  gospel  of  self-sufficiency, 
and  its  message  is  not  merely  to  the  human  intellect.  It  is  salvation  for  the  whole 
man  and  for  every  man ;  and  the  sorrowing  heart  of  humanity  has  never  seen 
more  clearly  the  Divinity  of  the  Son  of  Man  than  when  it  has  seen  His  glory 
shining  through  human  tears.  (Archdeacon  Watkins.)  Christ's  tears  (Text, 
and  Luke  xix.  41 ;  Heb.  v.  7) : — It  is  a  commonplace  to  speak  of  tears ;  would  that 
it  were  a  common  practice  to  shed  them.  Whoever  divided  the  New  Testament 
into  verses  seems  to  have  stopped  in  amazement  at  the  text,  making  an  entire 
verse  of  two  words.  There  is  not  a  shorter  verse  in  the  Bible  nor  a  larger  text. 
Christ  wept  thrice.  The  tears  of  the  text  are  as  a  spring  belonging  to  one  house- 
hold ;  the  tears  over  Jerusalem  are  as  a  river,  belonging  to  a  whole  country ;  the 
tears  on  the  cross  (Heb.  v.  7)  are  as  a  sea  belonging  to  all  the  world ;  and  though, 
literally,  these  fall  no  more  into  our  text  than  the  spring,  yet  because  the  spring 
flows  into  the  river  and  the  river  into  the  sea,  and  that  wheresoever  we  find  that 
Jesus  wept  we  find  our  text,  we  shall  look  upon  those  heavenly  eyes  through  this 
glass  of  His  own  tears  in  all  these  three  Unes.  Christ's  tears  were — I.  Humane,  as 
here.  This  being  His  greatest  miracle,  and  declaring  His  Divinity,  He  would 
declare  that  He  was  man  too.  1.  They  were  not  distrustful  inordinate  tears. 
Christ  might  go  further  than  any  other  man,  both  because  He  had  no  original  sin 
within  to  drive  Him,  and  no  inordinate  love  without  to  draw  Him  when  His  affec- 
tions were  moved.  Christ  goes  as  far  as  a  passionate  deprecation  in  the  passion, 
but  all  these  passions  were  sanctified  in  the  root  by  full  submission  to  God'a 
pleasure.  And  here  Christ's  affections  were  vehemently  stirred  (ver.  33) ;  but  as  in 
a  clean  glass  if  water  be  troubled  it  may  conceive  a  little  light  froth,  yet  it  con- 
tracts no  foulness,  the  affections  of  Christ  were  moved  but  so  as  to  contract  no 
inordinateness.  But  then  every  Christian  is  not  a  Christ,  and  He  who  would  fast 
forty  days  as  Christ  did  might  starve.  2.  But  Christ  came  nearer  to  excess  than 
to  senselessness.  Inordinateness  may  make  men  like  beasts,  but  absence  of  affec- 
tion makes  them  Uke  stones.  St.  Peter  tells  us  that  men  will  become  lovers  of 
themselves,  which  is  bad  enough,  but  he  casts  another  sin  lower — to  be  without 
natural  affections.  The  Jews  argued  that  saw  Christ  weep,  "  Behold  how  He  loved 
him."  Without  outward  declarations  who  can  conclude  inward  love  ?  Who  then 
needs  to  be  ashamed  of  weeping?  As  they  proceeded  from  natural  affection, 
Christ's  were  tears  of  imitation.  And  when  God  shall  come  to  that  last  act  in  the 
glorifying  of  man — wiping  all  tears  from  his  eyes — what  shall  He  have  to  do  with 
that  eye  that  never  wept  ?  3.  Christ  wept  out  of  a  natural  tenderness  in  general ; 
now  out  of  a  particular  occasion — Lazarus  was  dead.  A  good  man  is  not  the  worse 
for  dying,  because  he  is  established  in  a  better  world  :  but  yet  when  he  is  gone  out 
of  this  he  is  none  of  us,  is  no  longer  a  man.  It  is  not  the  soul,  but  the  union  of 
the  soul  that  makes  the  man.  A  man  has  a  natural  loathness  to  lose  his  friend 
though  God  take  him.  Lazarus's  sisters  believed  his  soul  to  be  in  a  good  estate, 
and  that  his  body  would  be  raised,  yet  they  wept.  Here  in  this  world  we  lack 
those  who  are  gone  :  we  know  they  shall  never  come  to  us,  and  we  shall  not  know 
them  again  tUl  we  join  them.  4.  Christ  wept  though  He  knew  Lazarus  was  to  be 
restored.  He  would  do  a  great  miracle  for  him  as  He  was  a  mighty  God  ;  but  He 
would  weep  for  him  as  He  was  a  good-natured  man.  It  is  no  very  charitable 
disposition  if  I  give  all  at  my  death  to  others,  and  keep  all  my  life  to  myself.  I 
may  mean  to  feaat  a  man  at  Christmas,  and  that  man  may  starve  before  in  Lent. 
Jesus  would  not  give  this  family  whom  He  loved  occasion  of  suspicion  that  He 
neglected  them ;  and  therefore  though  He  came  not  presently  to  His  great  work, 
He  left  them  not  comfortless  by  the  way.  II.  Pbophetical — over  Jerusalem.  Hia 
former  tears  had  the  spirit  of  prophecy  in  them,  for  He  foresaw  how  little  the 
Jews  would  make  of  the  miracle.  His  prophetical  tears  were  humane  too,  they 
rise  from  good  affections  to  that  people.    L  He  wept  in  the  midst  of  the  acclaraa- 


CHAP.  XL]  ST,  JOHN.  281 

ticns  of  the  people.  In  the  best  times  there  is  ever  just  occasion  of  fear  of  worse, 
and  BO  of  tears.  Every  man  is  but  a  sponge.  Whether  God  lay  His  left  hand  of 
adversity  or  His  right  hand  of  prosperity  the  sponge  shall  weep.  Jesus  wept  when 
all  went  well  with  Him  to  show  the  slipperiness  of  worldly  happiness.  2.  He  wept 
in  denouncing  judgments  to  show  with  how  ill  a  will  He  inflicted  them,  and  that 
the  Jews  had  drawn  them  on  themselves  (Isa.  xvi.  9).  If  they  were  only  from  His 
absolute  decree,  without  any  respect  to  their  sins,  could  He  be  displeased  with  His 
own  act  ?  Would  God  ask  that  question,  •♦  Why  will  ye  die  ?  "  Ac,  if  He  lay  open 
to  the  answer,  "  Because  Thou  hast  killed  us  "  ?  3.  He  wept  when  He  came  near 
the  city  :  not  till  then.  If  we  will  not  come  near  the  miseries  of  our  brethren  we 
will  never  weep  over  them.  It  was  when  Christ  Himself,  not  when  His  disciples, 
who  could  do  Jerusalem  no  good,  took  knowledge  of  it.  It  was  not  when  those 
judgments  drew  near ;  yet  Christ  did  not  ease  Himself  on  account  of  their  remote- 
ness,  but  lamented  future  calamities.  III.  Pontifical — accompanying  His  sacrifice. 
These  were  expressed  by  that  inestimable  weight,  the  sins  of  all  the  world.  And 
if  Christ  looking  on  Peter  made  him  weep,  shall  not  His  looking  on  us  here  with 
such  tears  make  us  weep,  1.  I  am  far  from  concluding  all  to  be  impenitent  who 
do  not  actually  shed  tears.  There  are  constitutions  that  do  not  afford  them.  And 
yet  the  worst  epithet  that  the  best  poet  could  fix  on  Pluto  himself  was  "a  person 
that  could  not  weep."  But  to  weep  for  other  things  and  not  for  sin,  this  is  a 
sponge  dried  into  a  pumice  stone.  Though  there  be  good  tears  and  bad  tears,  yet 
all  have  this  degree  of  good  in  them  that  they  argue  a  tender  heart ;  and  the  Holy 
Ghost  loves  to  work  in  wax  not  in  marble.  God  made  a  firmament  which  He  called 
heaven  after  it  had  divided  the  waters:  after  we  have  distinguished  our  tears 
worldly  from  heavenly  then  is  there  a  firmament  estabhshed  in  us,  and  a  heaven 
opened  to  us.  2.  I  might  stand  long  upon  the  manifold  benefits  of  godly  tears,  but 
I  contract  all  into  this,  which  is  all — godly  sorrow  is  joy.  (J.  Donne,  D.D.) 
Christ's  tears : — In  our  recoil  from  Socinianism  we  are  apt  to  go  too  far  to  the 
other  extreme.  This  accounts  for  our  surprise  at  reading  that  Jesus  wept.  We 
are  not  surprised  that  Jeremiah  wept,  or  that  Paul  or  Peter  wept.  Why  be  sur- 
prised to  hear  that  Jesus  wept,  except  that  we  do  not  acknowledge  His  manhood? 
On  three  occasions  Jesus  wept.  To  each  of  these  I  wish  to  call  your  attention.  I. 
Tears  of  sympathy.  Three  thoughts  are  suggested.  1.  It  is  not  sinful  to  weep 
under  afflictions.  2.  The  mourner  may  always  count  on  the  sympathy  of  Jesus. 
Jesus  thought  not  of  these  sisters  alone.  There  sounded  in  His  ears  the  dirge  of 
the  ocean  of  human  misery.  The  weeping  of  Mary  and  Martha  was  but  the  hold- 
ing of  the  shell  to  His  ears.  That  tear  of  love  is  a  legacy  to  every  Christian.  3. 
When  our  friends  are  mourning  we  should  weep  with  them.  The  truest  tenderness 
is  that  which  distils  in  tears.  When  the  heart  feels  most  keenly,  the  tongue  refuses 
to  do  its  bidding,  but  the  tear  expresses  all.  The  tear  is  never  misunderstood.  II. 
Tears  of  compassion  (Luke  xix.  41).  He  was  about  to  enter  Jerusalem  over  Mount 
of  Ohves.  Before  His  vision,  instead  of  the  fair  scene.  He  saw  the  legions  of 
Bome,  <fec.  ••  Oh,  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem,"  &c.  It  was  baffled  affection.  1.  Observe 
the  privileges  which  were  granted  the  Jews  and  neglected.  Who  sball  say  what 
glory  had  been  Jerusalem's  had  she  heard  the  prophets  and  Jesus  ?  All  hearers  of 
the  Word  have  privileges  and  visitations.  2.  Observe  the  sorrow  of  Jesus  for  the 
lost.  He  saw  that  the  chance  to  save  was  past  for  ever.  He  abandoned  the  effort 
in  tears.  III.  Tears  op  personal  suffering  (Heb.  v.  7).  The  tears  Paul  speaks  of 
very  probably  referred  to  Gethsemane.  1.  Think  not  because  you  suffer  that  you 
are  not  chosen.  As  Christ  was  made  perfect  in  His  work,  through  His  suffering,  so 
are  we  thus  to  be  led.  2.  Nor  are  we  to  think  that  we  are  not  Christians  because 
we  feel  weak.  Tears  are  liquid  emotion  pressed  from  the  heart.  It  is  not  mur- 
muring in  you  to  feel  the  sting  of  suffering.  Yet  the  undercurrent  must  always  be, 
**  Thy  will  be  done."  Patience  is  not  apathy.  Best  sure  of  this,  the  prayer  cable 
is  not  broken.  The  Gethsemane  angel  has  gone  on  many  a  strengthening  mission 
since  that  day  in  Gethsemane.  {W,  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The  tears  of  Christ: — 
I.  He  wept  from  very  sympathy  with  the  grief  of  others.  It  is  of  the  nature  of 
compassion  to  "  rejoice  with  those,"  &c.  It  is  so  with  men,  and  God  tells  us  that 
He  is  compassionate.  We  do  not  well  know  what  this  means,  for  how  can  God 
rejoice  or  grieve  ?  He  is  hid  from  us ;  but  it  is  the  very  sight  of  sympathy  that 
comforts  the  sufferer.  When  Christ  took  flesh,  then.  He  showed  ub  the  Godhead 
in  a  new  manifestation.  Let  us  not  say  that  His  tears  here  are  man's  love  overcome 
by  natural  feeling.  It  is  the  love  of  God,  condescending  to  appear  aa  we  are 
capable  of  receiving  it,  in  the  form  of  human  nature.    II.  He  wspx  ax  ihs  tictoby 


282  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  n. 

OF  DEATH.  Here  was  the  Creator  seeing  the  issue  of  His  own  handiwork.  Would 
He  not  revert  to  the  hour  of  Creation  when  He  saw  that  all  was  very  good,  and  con- 
trast man  as  He  was  made,  innocent  and  immortal,  and  man  as  the  devil  bad  made 
him,  full  of  the  poison  of  sin  and  the  breath  of  the  grave  ?  Why  was  it  allowed  f 
He  would  not  say.  What  He  has  done  for  all  believers,  revealing  His  atoning 
death,  but  not  explaining  it,  this  He  did  for  the  sisters  also,  proceeding  to  the  grave 
in  silence,  to  raise  their  brother  while  they  complained  that  he  had  been  allowed  to 
die.  ni.  He  wept  at  His  own  impending  doom.  Joseph  could  bring  joy  to  his 
brethren  at  no  sacrifice  of  his  own.  The  disciples  would  have  dissuaded  Christ 
from  going  into  JudsBa  lest  the  Jews  should  kill  Him.  The  apprehension  was 
fulfilled.  The  fame  of  the  miracle  was  the  immediate  course  of  His  seizure. 
He  saw  the  whole  prospect — Lazarus  raised,  the  supper,  joy  on  all  sides,  many 
honouring  Him,  the  triumphal  entry,  the  Greeks  earnest  to  see  Him,  the  Pharisees 
plotting,  Judas  betraying.  His  friends  deserting,  the  cross  receiving.  He  felt  thai 
He  was  descending  into  the  grave  which  Lazarus  had  left.  (Cardinal  Newman.} 
The  tean  of  Jesus : — 1.  Causes  or  Christ's  sorrow.  1.  The  possession  of  a  soul. 
When  we  speak  of  the  Deity  joined  to  humanity  we  do  not  mean  to  a  body,  but  to 
manhood,  body  and  soul.  With  a  body  only  Jesus  might  have  wept  for  hunger, 
but  not  for  sorrow.  That  is  the  property  not  of  Deity  or  body,  but  of  soul.  The 
humanity  of  Christ  was  perfect.  2,  The  spectacle  of  human  sorrow.  (1)  Death  of 
a  friend  (ver  36).  Mysterious  1  Jesus  knew  that  He  could  raise  him.  This  is 
partly  intelligible.  Conceptions  strongly  presented  produce  effects  like  reality,  e.g., 
we  wake  dreaming,  our  eyes  suffused  with  tears — know  it  is  a  dream,  yet  tears  flow 
on.  Conception  of  a  parent's  death.  Solemn  impression  produced  by  the  mock 
funeral  of  Charles  V.  The  sadness  of  Jesus  for  His  friend  is  repeated  in  as  all. 
Somehow  we  twine  our  hearts  round  those  we  love  as  if  for  ever.  Death  and  they 
are  not  thought  of  in  connection.  He  die  I  (2)  Sorrow  of  His  two  friends.  Their 
characters  were  diverse:  two  hnks  bound  them  together:  love  to  Lazarcis,  attach- 
ment to  the  Redeemer.  Now  one  link  was  gone.  His  loss  was  not  an  isolated  fact. 
The  family  was  broken  up ;  the  sun  of  the  system  gone ;  the  keystone  of  the  arch 
removed,  and  the  stones  lose  their  cohesion.  For  the  two  minds  held  together  only 
at  points  of  contact.  They  could  not  understand  one  another's  different  modes  of 
feeling :  Martha  complains  of  Mary.  Lazarus  gave  them  a  common  tie.  That 
removed  the  points  of  repulsion  would  daily  become  more  sharp.  Over  the  break- 
ing up  of  a  family  Jesus  wept.  And  this  is  what  makes  death  sad.  II.  Characteb 
OF  Christ's  sorrow  :  Spirit  in  which  Jesus  saw  this  death.  1.  Calmly.  "  Lazarus 
eleepeth  "  in  the  world  of  repose  where  all  is  placid.  Struggling  men  have  tried  to 
forget  this  restless  world,  and  slumber  like  a  babe,  tired  at  heart.  Lazarus  to  his 
Divine  friend's  imagination  lies  calm.  The  long  day's  work  is  done,  the  hands  are 
folded.  Friends  are  gathered  to  praise,  enemies  to  slander,  but  make  no  impression 
on  his  ear.  Conscious  he  is,  but  not  of  earthly  noise.  But  "  he  sleeps  well."  2. 
Sadly.  Hence,  observe — (1)  Permitted  sorrow.  Great  nature  is  wiser  than  we. 
We  recommend  weeping,  or  prate  about  submission,  or  say  all  must  die :  Nature 
God,  says,  "  Let  nature  rule  to  weep  or  not."  (2)  That  grief  is  no  distrust  of  God- 
no  selfishness.  Sorrow  is  but  love  without  its  object.  3.  Hopefully — "  I  go,"  «S;c. 
(ver.  11).  "  Thy  brother  "  (ver.  23).  4.  In  reserve.  On  the  first  announcement 
Jesus  speaks  not  a  word.  When  He  met  the  mourners  He  offered  no  commonplace 
consolation.  He  is  less  anxious  to  exhibit  feeling  than  to  soothe.  But  nature  had 
her  way  at  last.  Yet  even  then  by  act  more  than  word  the  Jews  inferred  His  love. 
There  is  the  reserve  of  nature  and  the  reserve  of  grace.  We  have  our  own  English 
reserve.  We  respect  grief  when  it  does  not  make  an  exhibition.  An  Englishman 
is  ashamed  of  his  good  feelings  as  much  as  of  his  bad.  All  this  is  neither  good  nor 
bad :  it  is  nature.  But  let  it  be  sanctified  and  pass  into  Christian  delicacy.  Appli- 
cation. In  this  there  is  consolation :  but  consolation  is  not  the  privilege  of  all 
sorrow.  Christ  is  at  Lazarus's  grave,  because  Christ  had  been  at  the  sisters'  home, 
Banctifying  their  joys,  and  their  very  meals.  They  had  anchored  on  the  rock  in 
sunshine,  and  in  the  storm  the  ship  held  to  her  moorings.  He  who  has  lived  with 
Christ  win  find  Christ  near  in  death,  and  will  find  himself  that  it  is  not  so  difficult 
to  die.  (F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.)  The  import  of  Jesus'  tears  : — The  weeping  was 
preceded  by  groans.  After  the  groans  come  tears — a  gentle  rain  after  the  violent 
etorm.  Jesus  in  this,  as  in  all  things,  stands  alone.  1.  Different  from  Himself  at 
other  times.  2.  Very  nnhke  the  Jews  who  came  to  comfort  the  two  sisters,  and — 3. 
unlike  the  sisters  themselves.  Jesus'  tears  imply — I.  The  relation  between  thb 
BODY  AND  THE  MIND  (Lam.  iii.  51).     Tears  are  natural.     The  relation  existing 


«HAP.  XI.]  ST.  JOHN.  283 

between  matter  and  mind  is  inexplicable.  Yet  it  exists.  From  this  fact  we  can 
reason  to  the  relation  existing  between  God  and  the  material  universe.  II.  Tjcb 
RELATION  BETWEEN  THE  HUMAN  AND  THE  DiviNE.  Here  WB  have  a  proof  of  His 
humanity.  What  more  human  than  weeping?  Following  this  manifestation  of 
humanity  is  the  maniijstation  of  divinity.  We  should  guard  against  the  old  errors 
concerning  the  constitution  of  Christ's  person ;  for  they  appear  from  age  to  age 
under  new  forms :  1.  Arianism — denying  His  proper  Divinity.  2.  Appolinarianism 
— denying  His  proper  humanity.  3.  Nestorianism — dual  personality.  4.  Eutychi- 
anism — confounding  the  two  natures  in  His  person.  III.  The  belation  between 
Christ  as  Mediatob  and  humanity,  in  general,  in  its  misebt,  and  His  people,  n» 
PAETicuLAB,  IN  THEiB  AFFLICTIONS.  1.  The  questiou,  why  He  wept?  is  here  an- 
swered. (1)  He  was  sorrowful  because  of  the  misery  caused  by  sin.  As  Jerusalem 
was  before  His  eyes  when  He  wept  over  it,  so  here  humanity  in  its  sin  and  all  its 
misery  passed  in  review  before  His  face.  (2)  His  weeping  was  a  manifestation  of 
His  sympathy.  No  comparison  between  His  consoling,  comforting  tears  and  those 
of  the  Jews.  2.  The  intercessory  work  of  Christ  as  our  High  Priest  in  heaven  ia 
here  implied.  He  is  the  same  there  as  when  here  upon  earth  (Heb.  xiii.  8).  Has 
the  same  heart  beating  with  ours.  He  is  our  sympathizing  Friend  and  Brother 
there.  Application:  1.  Hsve  you  wept  on  account  of  your  sinsf  They  have 
caused,  and  are  still  causing,  Jesu3  to  weep.  2.  Do  you  realise  Christ's  friendship 
for  yon  ?  3.  Let  us  learn  from  His  example  to  sympathise  with  the  sorrows  of  our 
fellow-men.  (T.  E.  Hughes.)  A  unique  verse : — I  have  often  felt  vexed  with  the 
man  whoever  he  was,  who  chopped  np  the  New  Testament  into  verses.  He  seems 
to  have  let  the  hatchet  drop  indiscriminately  here  and  there ;  but  I  forgive  him  a 
great  deal  of  blundering  for  his  wisdom  in  letting  these  two  words  make  a  verse  by 
themselves,  "  Jesus  wept."  This  is  a  diamond  of  the  first  water,  and  it  cannot 
have  another  gem  set  with  it,  for  it  is  unique.  Shortest  of  verses  in  words,  but 
where  is  there  a  longer  one  in  sense  ?  Let  it  stand  in  sohtary,  sublimity  and  sim- 
plicity. {C.  H.  Spur g eon.)  Embodied  sympathy  powerful: — "Ideas  are  often 
poor  ghosts ;  our  sunfilled  eyes  cannot  discern  them.  They  pass  athwart  us  in  this 
vapour  and  cannot  make  themselves  felt.  But  sometimes  they  are  made  flesh,  they 
breathe  upon  us  with  warm  breath,  they  touch  us  with  soft,  responsive  hands,  they 
look  at  us  with  sad,  sincere  eyes,  and  speak  to  us  in  appealing  tones.  They  are 
clothed  in  a  living  human  soul,  with  all  its  conflicts,  its  faith,  and  its  love.  Then 
their  presence  is  a  power,  and  we  are  drawn  after  them  with  a  gentle  compulsion, 
as  flame  is  drawn  to  flame."  {George  Eliot.)  Jesus  sympathizes  with  all  who 
suffer : — If  a  man  be  found  weltering  by  the  road-side,  wounded,  and  a  stranger 
comes  along,  he  will  pity  him,  for  the  heart  of  man  speaks  one  language  the  world 
over.  But  if  it  were  a  near  neighbour  or  strong  personal  friend  how  much  more 
tender  the  pity.  That  of  the  man's  own  father  far  transcends  those.  But  the 
noblest  heart  on  earth  is  but  a  trickling  stream  from  a  shallow  fountain  compared 
with  the  pity  of  God,  which  is  wide  as  the  scope  of  heaven  and  abundant  as  all  the 
air.  (If.  W.  Beecher.)  Christ  satisfying  the  instinct  of  sympathy  : — There  is  a 
word  in  our  language — the  iron  Boman  had  to  arrange  many  circuitous  approaches 
to  it — we  borrow  it  straight  from  the  plastic,  responsive  Greek — the  word  sympathy 
I.  The  instinct.  The  word  has  gone  through  one  process  since  it  left  its  root  "  to 
suffer,"  which  root  does  not  mean  suflering  in  our  common  sense,  but  "  being 
affected."  So  sympathy  does  not  mean  fellow  suffering,  but  community  of  affec- 
tion. It  may  be — (1)  A  community  of  congruity.  There  is  sympathy  between  two 
persons  where  there  is  such  a  likeness  of  disposition  that  they  are  mutually  drawn 
to  each  other.  (2)  A  community  of  contagion.  You  sympathize  with  a  person  when 
in  some  pai'ticular  sorrow  or  joy  you  share  the  feeling  arising  out  of  circumstances 
not  your  own.  1.  As  a  community  of  disposition,  sympathy  is — (1)  The  spring  of  all 
love.  We  see  in  the  soul  which  looks  through  those  eyes,  its  windows,  the  very 
counterpart  and  complement  of  our  own.  Even  beauty  acts  through  sympathy.  It 
is  not  the  flesh,  grace,  colour,  <&c.,  but  the  idea  or  promise  of  beautiful  qualities  which 
wins  the  heart.  Another  may  be  more  comely,  but  we  are  not  attracted  because  we 
read  not  the  disposition  which  ours  craves.  We  blame  ourselves  for  not  loving. 
Why  do  we  not  love  ?  For  the  lack  of  that  sympathy  of  congruity  represented  by 
the  word  "  liking."  (2)  The  inspiration  of  eloquence.  What  is  there  in  that  insig- 
nificant figure,  uncomely  countenance,  unmusical  voice  which  nevertheless  sways 
multitudes  as  the  orator  lists.  An  empire  has  hung  in  suspense  while  one  man 
has  talked  to  10,000.  Why  ?  Because  of  the  charm  of  sympathy.  (3)  The  secret 
of  Dower  in  poetry  and  fiction.     What  is  it  which  draws  tears  from  eyes  whiob 


284  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cBit.  XL, 

know  they  are  witnessing  imaginary  sorrows?  It  is  the  skill  with  which  genina 
draws  upon  the  resources  of  human  feeling.  The  moment  the  tragical  passes  into 
the  artificial,  the  tear  dries  of  itself.  (4)  The  explanation  of  all  magnificent  suc- 
cesses. A  want  of  sympathy  accounts  for  the  failure  of  men  possessed  of  every  gift 
but  one.  You  see  it  in  oratory  :  there  is  learning,  industry,  &o. ,  but  the  audience 
ia  unimpressed  because  there  was  no  heart.  You  see  it  in  action :  there  is  education, 
character,  opportunity,  &c.,  but  coldness  of  temperament  chilled  the  touch  of 
friendship.  (5)  This  sympathy  has  its  excesses.  It  is  so  charming  and  remunera- 
tive that  some  men  are  guilty  of  practising  on  good  impulses,  and  become  insincere, 
and  destroy  others  by  means  of  the  soul's  best  and  tenderest  affections.  2,  Sym- 
pathy of  contagion,  too,  is  an  instinct.  To  feel  is  human  ;  we  call  a  man  unnatural, 
unhuman  who  cannot  pity.  But  some  men  feel  without  acting,  and  consequently 
feeling  is  deadened.  Others  keep  away  from  them  what  will  make  them  feel,  and 
waste  the  instinct.  To  this  kind  of  sympathy  belong  all  those  efforts  by  which  we 
throw  ourselves  into  another's  life  for  benevolent  influence.  This  alone  renders 
possible  an  education  which  is  worthy  of  the  name,  the  teacher  sharing  personally 
the  difficulties,  games,  weaknesses,  &c.,  of  the  taught.  II.  Christ  satisfying  this 
INSTINCT.  1.  He  presented  Himself  to  us  in  one  thrust,  as  possessing  all  that 
beauty  which  has  a  natural  affinity  to  everything  that  is  noble  and  true.  (1)  He 
appeals  to  the  instinct  in  its  form  of  likeness.  We  must  be  cautious  here,  and  not 
confuse  the  ruined  will,  the  original  temple.  StiU  there  is  no  one  who  has  no 
response  in  him  to  that  which  is  lovely  and  of  good  report.  The  instinct  finds  not 
its  rest  here  below.  Some  profess  to  be  satisfied :  they  have  what  they  want. 
They  are  happy — might  it  but  last ;  were  there  no  storms  and  eventual  death.  But 
for  the  rest  care,  toil,  ill-health,  bereavement  have  forbidden  it,  or  they  have  not  yet 
found  the  haven  of  sympathy.  The  first  movement  of  such  in  hearing  of  Christ 
satisfying  the  wants  of  the  soul  is  one  of  impatience  :  they  want  something  sub- 
stantial. What  they  really  want  is  community  of  affection.  There  is  offered  to 
them  a  perfect  love.  (2)  Christ  guides  and  demands  sympathy.  He  makes  it 
religion,  which  is  sympathy  with  God ;  "  liking  "  the  drawing  of  spirit  to  spirit  by 
the  magnet  of  a  felt  loveliness.  ••  I  drew  them  with  cords,"  &c.  Without  this 
religion  is  a  burden  and  bondage.  2.  Christ  satisfies  the  sympathy  of  contact.  We 
might  have  thought  that  the  Creator  would  shrink  from  the  ugly  thing  into  which 
Bin  has  corrupted  His  handiwork.  But  He  never  heard  the  lepers  cry  without 
making  it  a  reason  for  drawing  nigh.  Again  and  again  He  went  to  the  bereaved, 
and  it  was  to  wake  the  dead  ;  and  this  not  officially,  as  though  to  say,  "  This  proves 
Me  the  Christ."  Jesus  wept.  There  was  no  real  peril  or  want  with  which  He  did 
not  express  sympathy.  He  loved  the  rich  young  man  ;  He  wept  over  Jerusalem 
with  its  unbelief  and  hypocrisy  ;  He  was  in  all  points  tempted,  and  so  is  able  to  sym- 
pathize with  our  infirmities.  What  He  sympathized  with  was  poor  uin-spoiU 
humanity,  and  for  that  He  died.  Conclusion:  What  Christ  did  He  bids  us  do-- 
not  in  the  way  of  condescension,  but  as  men  touching  to  heal,  not  loving  the  sin, 
yet  loving  the  sinner.  Lonely  people  cease  to  be  alone.  "Rejoice  with  them  that 
rejoice,"  &o.  (Dean  Vaughan.)  The  tears  of  the  Lord  Jesus : — I.  Jesos  wepx  ; 
FOB  THERE  WAS  CAUSE  WORTHY  OP  His  TEARS.  Tlie  finest,  noblest  race  of  God 'a 
creatures  dismantled,  sunk  in  death  before  Him,  all  across  earth  and  time  from  the 
■world's  beginning.  Tears,  we  know,  show  strongest  in  the  strongest.  When  you 
see  the  strong  man  broken  down  beside  his  sick  babe  you  cannot  but  feel  there  is  a 
cause.  Whatever  else  there  may  be  in  the  man,  you  see  that  he  has  a  heart,  and 
that  his  heart  is  the  deepest,  is  the  Divine  part  of  him.  As  the  father's  tears  over 
his  child  testify  the  father's  heart,  so  the  tears  of  Jesus  testify  that  He  has  a  heart 
which  beats  with  infinite  love  and  tenderness  toward  us  men.  For  we  are  His,  and 
in  a  far  more  profound  and  intimate  sense  belong  to  Him,  than  children  can  to  an 
earthly  parent.  And  the  relation  into  which  the  Lord  Jesus  has  come  with  our 
humanity  is  closer  and  tenderer  than  that  of  earthly  parent.  We  speak  of  Him  aa 
our  Brother,  our  Elder  Brother ;  but  the  truth  is,  Christ's  relation  to  us  is  Father, 
Mother,  Brother,  Sister,  Husband,  Friend,  all  in  One.  But  He  knew — further — 
that  a  sadder  thing  than  death  and  its  miseries  lay  behind,  even  sin.  This  touched 
and  affected  Him  mo^t,  that  we  were  a  fallen  and  dishonoured  race,  and  therefore 
death  had  come  upon  us  and  overshadowed  us.  Why  else  should  we  die  ?  The 
stars  do  not  wax  old  and  die,  the  heavens  and  the  earth  remain  unto  this  day, 
though  there  is  no  soul  or  spirit  in  them.  Why  should  the  brightness  of  an  im- 
measurably nobler  and  more  exalted  creature  like  man  wax  dim  ?  Stars  falling 
irom  heaven  are  nothing  to  souls  falling  from  God.     The  one  are  but  lights  going 


OHAP.  XI.]  ST.  JOHN.  «5 

out  in  God's  house,  the  other  the  very  children  of  the  house  perishing.  Jesus  wept 
then  for  the  innermost  death  of  all  death,  the  fountain  misery  of  all  miseries. 
But  while  in  His  Divine  thought  and  sorrow  He  penetrated  to  the  root  and  source 
of  that  evil  and  of  all  evil,  the  mighty  attendant  suffering  awoke  in  Him  the  truest 
and  deepest  compassion  and  sympathy.  He  wept,  then,  with  each  one  of  us  ;  for 
who  has  not  heen  called  to  part  with  some  beloved  relative,  parent,  partner,  com- 
panion, guide,  or  friend  ?  With  all  sorrowing,  desolate  hearts  and  homes  of  the 
children  of  men  He  then  took  part.  Again,  the  Lord  Jesus  felt  how  much  the 
darkness  and  sorrows  of  death  were  intensified  aud  aggravated  by  the  state  of 
ignorance  and  unbelief  in  which  the  world  lay.  How  mournful  to  His  spirit  at  that 
hour  the  realization  of  the  way  in  which  the  vast  bulk  and  majority  of  the  human 
race  enter  the  world,  go  through  it,  leave  it  1  for  He  knew,  better  than  any  other 
that  has  been  on  earth,  man's  capability  of  higher  things  and  of  an  endless  life  and 
blessedness.  "  Like  sheep  they  are  laid  in  the  grave,"  says  the  writer  of  the  49th 
Psalm.  What  a  picture  1  Like  that  abjpct,  unthinking,  and  helpless  aninial, 
driven  in  flocks  by  awful  forms,  cruel  powers,  they  can  neither  escape  nor  resist, 
to  a  narrow  point  and  bound,  where  all  is  impenetrable  darkness.  II.  Let  us  con- 
sider   "  THE   TEARS  OF   JeSOS  "  AS   REVEALING  TEE  DlVD^E   HEART.      Are  We   tO  bcHeve 

tbat  He  out  of  whose  heart  have  come  the  hearts  of  all  true  fathers  and  mothers, 
all  the  simple,  pure  affections  of  our  common  nature  and  kinship,  of  the  family 
and  the  home;  are  we  to  believe,  I  say,  that  God  has  no  heart?  Some  one  may 
say,  There  is  no  doubt  God  can  love  and  does  love — infinitely;  but  can  He  sorrow? 
Now,  my  friend,  I  pray  you,  think  what  is  sorrow  but  love  wanting  or  losing  its 
objects,  its  desire  and  satisfaction  in  its  objects,  and  going  forth  earnestly  in  ita 
grief  to  seek  and  regain  them  ?  Sorrow,  suffering,  is  one  of  the  grandest,  noblest, 
most  self-denying,  and  disinterested  forms  and  capabilities  of  love,  apart  from 
which  love  could  not  exist,  whether  in  nature  or  in  name.  IIL  The  tears  oif 
Jesus  are  those  of  a  mighty  One  hastening  to  avenge  and  delfveb.  They  are 
not  the  tears  of  one  whose  pity  and  sympathy  can  only  be  thus  expressed,  but  who 
has  no  power — whatever  may  be  his  willingness  and  desire — to  help.  The  tears  of 
Jesus  are  those  of  a  hero  over  his  native  country  and  kingdom  laid  waste  by  an 
enemy  whom  he  hastens  to  meet  and  avenge  himself  upon.  There  is  hope,  there 
is  help  for  our  world  ;  Jesus  Christ  weeps  over  it,  and  He  "  will  restore  all  things  " 
of  which  we  have  been  robbed  and  spoiled.  IV.  Hence  we  learn  our  true  bodrch 
OP  COMFORT,  help,  AND  RESTORATION.  He  who  wcpt  and  bled  and  died  for  man  hag 
proved  Himself  to  be  our  great  Deliverer.  Do  we  ever  feel  we  can  go  anywhere 
else  but  to  Him  when  sickness  and  death  threaten  and  invade  us  and  ours? 
{Watson  Smith.) 

Ver.  36.  Behold  how  He  loved  him. — Christ's  love  to  man: — This  is  seen— 
I.  In  His  original  engagement  in  his  favour.  By  covenanting  to  live  with  us, 
die  for  us,  and  take  our  happiness  into  His  hands.  II.  In  His  assumption  of 
human  nature,  1.  He  passed  by  the  higher  nature  of  angels.  2.  He  took  our 
nature  with  all  its  poverty  and  trial.  III.  In  the  tenob  op  His  lipb  and  conversa- 
tion. 1.  His  inspiration  was  that  of  mercy.  When  His  disciples  would  have 
called  down  fire  from  heaven  He  told  them  that  that  was  not  His  spirit.  2.  This 
mercy  was  not  a  sentiment  which  dwelt  in  imagination  on  miseries  it  was  not  pre- 
pared to  relieve,  but  was  a  vigorous  active  principle.  "  He  went  about  doing  good." 
IV.  In  the  SOURCES  op  His  joy  and  grief.  Nothing  reveals  the  character  so  much 
as  the  action  of  the  passions.  1.  We  have  joy  when  our  health,  friends,  temporal 
eircumstances  are  good.  Christ's  joys  turned  not  on  Himself,  but  were  connected 
with  the  happiness  of  men.  2.  His  griefs,  too,  were  not  connected  with  His  own 
poverty  and  trouble,  but  with  our  misery.  "  Te  will  not  come  unto  Me."  V.  Is 
THE  CHARACTER  OP  His  MINISTRY.  1.  Its  subject — salvatiou.  2.  Its  invitations,  80 
tender  and  winning — "  Come  unto  Me."  3.  Its  very  threatenings  are  only  hedges 
thrown  up  against  the  way  to  danger.  VI.  In  His  death.  1.  He  died  for  us, 
which  is  a  proof  of  love  in  any  case.  2.  He  died  when  He  had  no  need  to  die.  3. 
He  died  as  no  other  could  die.  VII.  In  His  leaving  the  world.  1.  This  was 
expedient  for  us,  not  for  Him.  2.  He  establishes  the  ministry  of  reconciliation  as 
He  leaves.  3.  He  now  governs  all  things  for  our  good.  (A.  Reed,  D.D.)  Demon- 
stration of  Christ's  love  : — If  the  Jews  exclaimed,  Behold  how  He  loved  Lazarus  I 
merely  because  they  saw  Him  weeping  at  the  tomb,  with  how  much  reason  may  we 
exclaim.  Behold  how  He  loved  us  when  we  see  Him  at  Bethlehem,  in  Gethsemane, 
and  on  Calvary  1    Christ's  love  is  demonstrated — I.  By  the  sacrifices  i» 


286  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  a. 

The  greater  the  inconvenience  to  which  our  friends  submit  for  ns,  the  greater  do 
we  take  their  love  to  be.  To  what  has  not  love  impelled  afifectionate  parents  and 
devoted  servants.  But  Jesus,  "  Though  He  was  rich,"  &c.,  He  laid  aside  His  glory 
and  lived  a  life  of  labour,  poverty,  and  contempt  for  os.  Persons  who  had  seen 
heaven  only  would  be  able  to  estimate  this  sacrifice — II.  Bt  the  sufferings  it 
ENDURED.  Self-love  makes  us  unwilliug  to  suffer.  Here  again  we  labour  under  a 
difficulty  arising  from  ignorance.  We  can  know  little  even  of  His  physical  suffer- 
ings, which  were  the  smallest  of  His  agonies.  Hia  mental  pain  wrung  from  Him 
great  drops  of  blood,  the  occasion  of  which  was  the  curse  of  the  law  He  bore  for  us. 
Of  this  He  said,  "  If  it  be  possible  "  ;  this  extorted  the  "  My  God,"  &o.  "  Greater 
love  hath  no  man  than  this."  Should  we  die  for  a  friend  we  should  but  anticipate 
what  would  come  sooner  or  later ;  but  Christ  was  immortal :  and  although  as  averse 
to  suffering  as  we  consented  to  die  in  a  most  painful  manner.  III.  By  the  gifts 
IT  BESTOWS.  Tried  by  this  Christ's  love  is  great  beyond  all  comparison.  He  gives 
Himself,  and  all  that  He  possesses — pardon,  illumination,  grace,  comfort,  heaven. 
Nor  does  He  give  what  costs  Him  nothing.  If  we  measure  His  gifts  by  what  He 
gave  for  them  they  are  inestimable.  IV.  By  the  pro  vocations  it  overlooks.  To 
love  the  kind  and  grateful  is  easy ;  but  to  persevere  in  doing  good  to  the  ungrateful 
and  perverse,  to  forgive  again  and  again  is  the  triumph  of  love.  The  love  of  Christ 
transcends  a  father's  or  mother's  love  for  their  ungrateful  offspring.  He  came  to  a 
race  which  for  four  thousand  years  had  been  disobeying  Him,  and  when  He  came 
He  was  persecuted,  and  so  He  has  been  ever  since.  Even  His  professed  disciples 
treat  Him  with  distrust,  &c. ;  but  He  endure3  still  the  contradiction  of  sinners. 
Conclusion :  Is  the  love  of  Christ  so  immeasurably  great  ?  1.  Then  surely  we 
ought  to  return  it  with  a  love  which  bears  some  proportion  to  His.  2.  Those  who 
have  not  loved  Christ  begin  to  love  Him  now.      (E.  Payson,  D.D.)  Christ  at  a 

Friend : — I.  Knows  all  our  circumstances  and  feelings.  Want  of  knowledge  is 
a  great  impediment  to  friendship,  and  so  is  want  of  suitable  expression.  But 
Christ  knows  all,  and  needs  no  laboured  utterances  of  ours.  II.  Has  manifested 
supreme  affection.  No  mother,  sister,  or  lover  can  compare  with  Him.  His  love 
is  neither  impulsive,  influenced  by  fancy,  variable,  selfish,  or  fastidious.  III.  Has 
BAD  GREAT  EXPERIENCE.  He  has  always  been  in  the  world  making  friends.  Abra- 
ham rejoiced  to  see  His  day ;  Jacob  enjoyed  His  friendship ;  and  He  will  continue 
to  form  new  friendships  as  long  as  the  world  stands.  Hence  He  knows  how  to  treat 
different  types  of  friends.  IV.  Has  passed  through  great  afflictions.  In  such 
a  world  as  this  an  angel  would  be  an  unsuitable  friend ;  there  would  be  no  minor 
key  in  his  feelings,  for  what  has  he  ever  known  of  sorrow.  We  want  a  friend 
"  stricken  of  God  and  afflicted."  Then  we  can  tell  each  rising  grief,  knowing  that 
He  has  felt  it.  In  all  points  tempted  as  we  are,  and  as  Captain  of  our  salvation 
made  perfect  through  suffering.  He  has  been  wherever  it  must  be  our  lot  to  go.  V. 
Is  constant.  "  Having  loved  His  owu,"  <fec.,  He  never  gave  up  one  friend  for 
another.  Those  whom  He  loves  once  He  loves  for  ever.  Aiaid  the  changes  of  life, 
and  when  we  cease  to  move  the  affections  once  felt  for  us,  the  Saviour  will  love  us 
as  He  did  when  we  were  young.  VI.  Is  kind.  1.  He  never  reproaches  or  upbraids. 
Who  has  not  been  subdued  by  the  delicate  methods  of  a  true  friend  ?  "  His  gentle- 
ness hath  made  me  great."  2.  We  should  have  broken  the  heart  of  any  other 
friend  ;  but  He  is  long  suffering.  VII.  Is  always  with  us.  Some  of  our  greatest 
trials  are  by  separations.  We  land  among  strangers,  but  Christ  is  at  our  side. 
VIII.  Can  do  for  us  what  no  other  friend  can.  1.  When  the  wisdom  of  frieads 
fail  He  is  the  Wonderful,  Counsellor.  2.  When  our  friends  are  dead  He  abides.  3. 
When  friends  are  impotent,  as  at  the  hour  of  death  and  in  the  day  of  judgment,  He 
is  the  hope  of  glory.  IX.  Is  ever  accessible.  If  we  called  on  our  best  earthly 
friend  as  often  as  we  call  on  Christ,  he  could  not  endure  it.  When  we  have  stated 
our  case  to  our  friend  we  have  to  leave  it ;  Christ  permits  ns  to  state  it  over  and 
over  again.  Conclusion :  1.  Whoever  may  love  us  we  cannot  be  truly  happy  with- 
out the  friendship  of  Christ.  2.  We  should  be  such  frieuds  to  others  as  Christ  is 
to  us.  3.  The  greatest  sin,  which  is  not  unpardonable,  is  ingratitude  to  Christ.  (N. 
Adams.)  The  tender  love  of  Christ : — He  never  flattered  the  friends  who  enjoyed 
His  closest  intimacy ;  but  He  made  them  feel  His  penetratmg  affection  ;  "  See  how 
He  loved  him  "  was  a  testimony  to  the  deep  reality  of  a  oalm,  unostentatious 
sorrow.  {Knox  Little.)  The  love  of  Christ: — "Behold  how  He  loved  him." 
What  ?  for  shedding  some  few  tears  for  him  ?  Oh,  how  then  did  He  love  as  tot 
whom  He  shed  the  dearest  and  warmest  blood  in  all  His  heart  1    {J.  Trapp.) 


CHA».  XI.]  ST.  JOHN.  287 

Yer.  38.  Jesus  therefore  again  groaning  In  Himself  cometh  to  tlie  grave. — TJie 
hurial  of  Lazarus ; — "  It  was  a  cave,"  such  as  that  rocky  neighbourhood  abounds 
with,  "  and  a  stone  lay  upon  it."  Among  some  nations  the  bodies  of  the  dead  were 
burned,  and  the  ashes  consigned  to  urns.  This  was  never  a  Jewish  custom,  though 
there  were  exceptional  cases  in  which  it  was  practised  (Saul  and  his  sons,  and  Amos 
vi.  10)),  which  seems  to  have  been  owing  to  pestilence.  The  Jews  buried.  When 
a  person  died,  after  the  affecting  solemnity  of  the  last  kiss  and  closing  the  eyes,  the 
body  was  washed  in  lukewarm  water,  and  perfumed,  and  then  swathed  in  numerous 
folds  of  linen,  with  spices  in  the  folds.  Thus,  e.g.,  Joseph  and  Nicodemus  and  the 
•women  showed  their  affection  for  the  Lord.  The  limbs  were  bound  in  linen  bands, 
not  together,  but  separately ;  and  in  many  cases  the  very  fingers ;  while  the  1  ead 
was  wrapped  in  a  linen  cloth  (the  sudarium  or  napkin),  which  also  veiled  the  face, 
thrown  loosely  over  it.  The  necessary  preparations  I  i  g  completed,  burial 
took  place  within  twenty-four  hours  after  death.  By  a  wise  arrangement,  absolutely 
necessary  in  the  East,  the  burial-places  were  always  situated  without  the  cities, 
though  seldom  if  ever  at  any  great  distance.  In  case  poverty  permitted  nothing 
more,  the  dead  was  laid  in  a  grave  as  with  us,  and  a  little  plain  mason  work  was 
placed  above  ;  at  the  least  a  simple  slab  of  the  white  rock  of  the  country.  For  the 
most  part,  however,  the  burial-places  were  caves,  either  natural  or  hewn  out  of  the 
solid  rock.  In  such  a  cave  a  number  of  persons  could  stand  upright :  and  all  around 
its  sides  there  were  cells  (no  coffins  being  used)  for  the  dead,  of  such  a  size  as  to  con- 
tain each  a  single  body.  In  such  a  cave,  in  the  rocky  side  of  Olivet,  amid  the 
luxuriant  vegetation  of  the  district,  where  birds  sang,  and  flowers  blossomed,  and 
feathery  palm  branches  waved,  and  the  soft  golden  sunshine  fell  from  the  skies  of 
morn  on  the  spangled  turf,  and  evening  threw  its  grateful  shadows,  there  the  body 
of  dead  Lazarus  was  laid ;  and,  for  protection  against  the  ravages  of  beasts  of  prey, 
the  cave's  mouth  was  closed  by  a  large  closely-fitting  stone,  which  it  required  the 
strength  of  many  men  to  move.  {J.  Culross,  D.  D. )  The  story  of  the  grave  :— 
I.  The  gbave  victorious.  1.  In  the  first  family  (Gen.  iv.  8 ;  v.  6).  2.  Among  the 
patriarchs  (Genxxiii.  2-4,  19,  20  ;  xxxv.  19,  20).  3.  Over  kings  (1  Sam.  xxxi.  4-6; 
1  Kings  ii.  10 ;  Dan,  v.  30).  4.  Over  conquerors  (Josh.  xxiv.  29,  30 ;  2  Sam.  iii.  27). 
5.  Over  prophets  (Deut.  xxxiv.  6,  6  ;  2  Kings  xiii.  20,  21).  6.  Over  all  men  (Psa. 
Ixzxix.  48  ;  xc.  3 ;  Heb.  ix.  27).  7.  Over  Jesus  (Isa.  liii.  9  ;  Matt,  xxvii.  60  ;  Mark 
XV.  45,  46).  8.  Ends  all  service  (Psa.  vi.  5 ;  Ixxxviii.  11 ;  Eccl.  ix.  10).  9.  Destroys 
the  body  (Psa.  xlix.  14  ;  Matt,  xxiii.  27).  10.  Opens  suddenly  to  some  (Jobxxi.  13  ; 
Acts  V.  6,  10).  II.  The  Gkave  vanquished.  1.  Eedemption  therefrom  assured 
(Psa.  xlix.  15).  2.  Eansom  therefrom  provided  (Hos.  xiii.  14).  3.  Deliverance 
typified  (Jonan  ii.  1,  2;  Matt.  xii.  40).  4.  Lazarus  brought  from  the  grave  (John 
zi.  43,  44).  5.  Other  saints  came  forth  (Matt,  xxvii.  52,  53).  6.  Christ  came  forth 
(Matt,  xxviii.  2-6  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  3, 4).  7.  AU  shall  come  forth  (Dan.  xii.  2  ;  John  v. 
28,  29).  8.  The  song  of  victory  (1  Cor.  xv.  55).  (S.  S.  Times.)  Christ  at  a 
grave: — I.  The  groans  of  Jesus.  1.  Over  mortal  man.  He  felt  as  with  an  electric 
shock  that  He  was  in  a  world  of  pain  and  infirmity.  2.  Over  sorrowing  man.  Jesus 
sympathized  with  sorrow  as  sorrow.  He  was  moved  by  the  mere  contagiousness  of 
grief.  3.  Over  unbelieving  man.  The  sisters  and  the  Jews  alike  lacked  faith,  and 
lack  of  faith  always  troubled  Him.  There  might  be  more  than  one  feeling  here.  (1) 
an  oppressive  sense  of  loneliness.  (2)  A  deep  conviction  of  the  guilt  of  unbelief. 
(3)  A  distressing  feeling  of  the  miseries  of  unbelief.  II.  The  words  of  Jesus.  1. 
He  spoke  to  God  (ver,  41) — a  thanksgiving  for  an  answer  not  yet  vouehshafed  to  an 
unrecorded  prayer.  2.  He  spoke  to  men — "  Take  ye  away  the  stone."  This  was 
the  work  of  man,  and  therefore  not  included  in  the  scope  of  the  miracle.  And  in 
religion  we  have  a  part  to  play  as  well  as  God.  He  gives  the  grace,  we  must  use  it. 
"  Work  out  your  own  salvation."  III.  The  work  of  Jesus.  1.  Direct  resurrection : 
here  physical ;  in  us  moral.  2.  Indirect.  (1)  Faith;  as  an  effect  of  the  miracle 
(ver.  45).  (2)  Unbelief  and  animosity  (ver.  46).  (Caleb  Morris.)  The  raising  of 
Lazams : — I.  The  literary  record  op  the  miracle.  1.  The  preparatory  order 
(ver.  39).  Christ  never  sought  to  accomplish  by  supernatural  means  what  could  b« 
done  by  natural  (chap.  ii.  7,  8  ;  vi.  10-11).  2.  The  encouraging  remonstrance  (ver. 
40).  3.  The  solemn  thanksgiving  (ver.  41) ;  expressive  of — (1)  Gratitude  for  the 
assurance  of  power  to  accompUsh  the  miracle.  (2)  Confidence  that  as  the  Son  He 
always  stood  within  the  Father's  favour.  (3)  Care  for  the  multitude  that  they  might 
be  prepared  to  believe  when  they  beheld  the  stupendous  sign.  4.  The  awakening 
summons  (ver.  43).  (1)  Affectionate.  (2)  Authoritative.  (3)  Efficacious.  5.  The 
concluding  charge  (ver.  44).    Issued — (1)  For  the  sake  of  Lazarus,  to  complete  hi& 


288  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  si. 

restoration  to  the  world.  (2)  For  the  sake  of  the  sisters  that  they  might  withdraw 
with  and  rejoice  over  their  brother.  (3)  For  the  sake  of  the  spectators,  to  convince 
them  of  the  reahty  of  the  miracle.  II.  Its  historio  obedibilitt.  1.  Objections. 
(1)  The  silence  of  the  synoptists.  Answer — (a)  This  is  not  more  strange  than 
their  other  omissions  (chap.  ii.  1-11 ;  13-22  ;  ix.  1-41).  (6)  This  less  strange  than 
the  omission  of  the  raising  at  Nain  by  Matthew  and  Mark,  or  that  of  the  five  hundred 
witnesses  mentioned  only  by  Paul  (1  Cor.  xv.  6).  (c)  This  not  at  all  strange  if  we 
consider  that  the  narrative  would  compromise  the  safety  of  the  family,  that  it  and 
the  earlier  miracles  at  Jersusalem  did  not  enter  into  the  scope  of  the  Synoptists  who 
dealt  with  the  GaUlean  ministry,  (d)  This  is  required  to  account  for  the  popular 
outburst  of  enthusiasm  which  all  record  (Matt.  xxi.  8-11 ;  Mark  xi.  1-10 ;  Luke 
xix.  29-40).  (2)  The  so-called  improbabilities  of  the  narrative,  (a)  Christ's  repre- 
Bentation  (ver.  4).  (6)  Christ's  delay  (ver.  6).  (c)  Tha  disciple's  misunderstanding 
of  the  figure  already  employed  in  the  house  of  Jarius  (ver.  12, 13).  (d)  Christ's 
grief  in  prospect  of  resurrection  (ver.  35).  (e)  Christ's  prayer  for  sake  of  by- 
standers. (8)  The  non-mention  of  the  miracle  at  the  trial  of  Jesus.  But — (a)  Christ 
offered  no  defence  at  aU,  nor  did  He  call  any  witnesses  on  His  behalf,  (b)  The 
Sanhedrim  were  naturally  silent  (ver.  47).  It  would  have  destroyed  their  plot.  2. 
Considerations  in  support  of  authenticity.  (1)  It  is  evidently  the  report  of  an  eye- 
witness, (a)  In  what  it  includes  (vers.  28,  32,  33,  38,  44,  &c.).  (6)  In  what  it  omita 
— the  return  of  messengers,  call  to  Mary,  &c.  (2)  It  was  performed  publicly,  and 
in  the  presence  of  enemies.  (3)  The  Sanhedrim  believed  it  (vers.  46, 53).  (4)  The 
insufficiency  of  other  offered  explanations  that  the  mirable  was  a  myth,  that  Lazarua 
was  not  really  dead.  III.  Its  docteinal  significancb.  Its  bearing  on — 1.  The 
question  of  the  Divinity  of  Jesus.  He  proclaimed  Himself  the  Son  of  God,  and 
appealed  in  vindication  of  that  to  the  miracle  He  was  about  to  perform.  2.  Tha 
doctrines  of  the  spirituality  and  separate  existence  of  the  soul ;  which  are  abun- 
dantly demonstrated.  3.  The  truth  of  a  future  resurrection.  (1)  It  shows  ita 
possibility.  (2)  It  is  a  type  of  it.  There  will  be  the  same  loving  call,  authoritative 
summons,  efficacious  word.  (3)  It  presents  contrasts.  Lazarus  was  raised  to  this 
world  of  sorrows  to  die  again.    (T,  Whitelaw,  D.D.) 

Ver.  39.  Jesns  said.  Take  ye  away  the  stone. — Taking  the  stone  away : — I.  Goo 
HEVEB  PEBFORMS  AN  uMNECEssABY  ACT.  We  kuow  most  of  God  In  Christ,  and  Christ 
never  spoke  an  unnecessary  word  or  did  an  unnecessary  deed,  although  He  had 
omnipotence  at  His  command.  Had  this  merely  been  delegated  to  Christ  as  a  man 
it  is  inconceivable  that  He  should  not  at  some  time  have  put  forth  His  power  to 
gratify  the  curiosity  of  friends,  or  to  bind  the  hands  of  foes.  But  He  never  did ; 
then  God  never  does.  It  is  the  merest  fanaticism  to  pray  that  God  would  give  ua 
a  sign  and  set  the  universe  agape.  II.  God  neveb  does  dibectly  what  Hb  oak 
DO  THEOUGH  OTHEBS.  He  has  begottcu  children  capable  of  knowing,  feeling,  and 
acting.  He  has  made  them  free.  He  gives  them  the  field.  He  allows  them  time ; 
they  must  do  the  rest.  1.  He  will  never  do  for  the  race  what  the  race  can  do  for 
itself.  He  could  have  stocked  the  world  at  the  first  with  all  the  implements  of 
agriculture,  travel,  and  research.  But  He  did  not.  He  put  man  down  among  the 
quiet  facts  and  laws  of  His  universe,  with  physical,  intellectual,  and  moral  powers, 
and  man  was  to  produce  the  result.  God  made  the  garden  because  man  could  not, 
and  then  set  man  to  dress  it  because  God  would  not.  2.  The  same  rule  holds  good 
spiritually.  Man's  agency  precedes  God's  working.  In  regeneration  there  is  first 
the  agency  of  man  in  Churches,  preaching,  books,  &o.,  and  then  the  power  of  God 
doing  what  man  cannot  do.  lU.  The  help  we  can  bendeb  God  in  the  accom- 
plishment OF  His  gbeat  designs.  We  can  remove  the  stones  which  hinder 
ficiritual  resurrections.  What  are  they  ?  1.  Indifference.  This  is  produced  by— 
(1)  The  engrossing  work  of  hfe.  Tour  friend  is  like  the  racer  who  does  not  notice 
"whether  the  sun  is  shining  or  clouds  gathering,  all  he  thinks  of  is  the  goal.  All  he 
needs  is  to  be  arrested  and  made  to  feel  that  he  is  wasting  his  energies  for  a  prize 
he  may  not  gain,  or  if  gained,  nothing  in  comparison  with  what  is  lost.  (2)  Ignor- 
ance. He  does  not  know  that  there  is  gold  in  California,  and  so  keeps  at  his  potato 
patch.  Not  knowing  the  treasures  of  religion  he  satisfies  himself  with  the  best  he 
knows — worldly  pursuits  and  joys.  (3)  The  frigidity  of  the  religious  atmosphere 
he  breathes.  When  people  are  at  freezing  point  they  would  rather  die  than  stir. 
It  is  no  mercy  in  a  fellow-traveller  to  indi:Qge  a  freezing  man  with  a  short  nap.  Ik 
may  be  the  sleep  of  death.  2.  Scepticism.  There  are  two  courses  open  to  doubters. 
They  may  open  their  minds  to  their  friends.    Their  friends  may  sympathetically 


CE&P.  xz.]  BT.  JOHN.  169 

enter  into  their  questions  and  answer  them,  and  thus  remove  the  stone.  Or  their 
friends  may  do,  as  too  many  do,  treat  them  as  lepers,  in  which  case  they  bury  their 
doubts  in  their  own  hearts,  and  a  stone  is  placed  oyer  them.  Don't  do  that.  Do 
as  Christ  did  with  Thomas.  3.  The  inconsistency  of  Christians.  How  many 
neighbours,  employes,  are  kept  away  from  Christ  by  the  practical  unbelief  of  the 
professors  with  whom  they  are  in  daily  contact.  4.  Vicious  indulgence  which  can 
only  be  removed  by  personal  influence  and  example.  (C.  F.  Deems,  D.D.)  The 
sphere  of  instrumentality  (text  and  ver.  44) : — Although  God  alone  is  the  Quickener 
there  are  many  things  which  we  can  do  for  others.  I.  Befobe  conversion.  1.  We 
can  call  in  the  Master,  as  the  sisters  did.  We  must  earnestly  pray  for  souls  and 
get  them  in  contact  with  the  Saviour  2.  We  can  believe  as  they  did,  that  whatso- 
ever Christ  asks  of  God  wUl  be  granted ;  that  He  is  able  and  willing  to  raise  the 
spiritually  dead.  S.  We  can  roll  away  the  stone  of — (1)  Ignorance.  Let  not  the 
people  die  for  lack  of  knowledge.  (2)  Error — that  they  will  be  saved  by  their  good 
works,  &G.  (3)  Prejudice,  (a)  That  religion  is  gloomy,  by  being  happy.  (6)  That 
religion  is  effeminate,  by  being  men.  (c)  That  religion  is  mere  sentiment,  by 
experimentally  demonstrating  its  reality,  (d)  That  religion  is  not  for  "  such  as 
us,"  i.e.,  the  working  classes,  by  showing  that  Jesus  is  the  people's  Man.  (4)  SoU- 
tariness.  Let  men  feel  that  Christianity  is  social  and  fraternal.  (5)  Degradation. 
Help  men  out  of  the  mire  of  sin.  (6)  Despair.  Infuse  hope  into  the  most  hopeless. 
U.  After  conversion.  Lazarus  is  alive,  but  he  is  encumbered  with  grave  clothes ; 
it  is  the  business  of  his  friends  to  loose  him  and  let  him  go.  New  converts  want 
loosing  for  the  sake  of  their  own : — 1.  Comfort.    Remove  their  doubts  and  fears. 

2.  Freedom.     Gently  lead  them  out  of  those  habits  which  still  bind  the  new  man. 

3.  Fellowship.  Just  as  Lazarus  could  not  enjoy  his  sisters'  society  till  his  swathing 
bands  were  off,  so  real  Christians  are  kept  back  from  fellowship  by  a  sense  of  unfit- 
ness, &c.  Encourage  them :  compel  them  to  come  in.  4.  Testimony.  Lazarua 
was  unable  to  bear  witness  while  the  napkin  was  about  his  head,  so  young  converts 
are  deterred  by  nervousness,  &c.  5.  Service.  Take  them  by  the  hand  and  teach 
them  how  to  use  their  hands  and  feet  for  God.  6.  Communion  with  Christ.  After 
Lazarus  was  unbound  he  sat  at  the  table  with  Jesus.  Don't  leave  the  new  convert 
nntil  he  enjoys  full  fellowship  with  Christ.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Man  as  a  helper 
in  Divine  work  (text  and  ver.  44) : — God's  power  is  all-sufficient.  He  does  not 
need  human  help.  The  utmost  that  man  can  do  is  little.  What  little  man  ia 
required  or  permitted  to  do  is  for  his  own  welfare  and  improvement.  I.  In  thh 
REALM  OP  nature.  1,  Physical.  God  has  given  bodily  life,  and  then  continues  to 
uphold  its  powers,  so  that  man  is  capable  of  work  within  the  appointed  limits.  2. 
Natural.  God  has  adapted  the  seed  to  the  soil,  and  sunshine,  rain,  and  seasons  to 
harvests  ;  but  to  man  He  has  given  the  important  work  of  combining  the  conditions. 
God  will  not  plough  and  scatter  the  seed ;  neither  will  He  cut  and  grind  the  grain. 
God  stops  His  work  where  man's  may  begin,  and  begins  His  where  man's  must 
stop-  II.  In  the  realm  of  the  supernatural.  1.  The  miraculous.  It  was  just 
as  easy  for  Christ  to  do  all,  in  the  raising  up  of  Lazarus,  as  only  a  part.  But  at 
the  grave  He  said,  "  Take  ye  away  the  stone ; "  and  after  the  working  of  the 
miracle,  Jesus  said  unto  them,  "Loose  him,  and  let  him  go."  This  the  friends  of 
Lazarus  might  do,  and  in  doing  might  either  receive  unmistakable  proof  of  the 
life-giving  power,  or  show  their  tender  sympathy  for  the  sisters  and  the  risen  man 
by  ministering  to  them  and  him.  2.  The  spiritual.  It  is  the  Holy  Spirit  that  givea 
life  or  renews  the  soul,  and  then  the  means  of  grace  are  to  be  faithfuUy  used  in 
building  up  a  Christlike  character.  3.  The  providential.  Here  the  renewed  are 
directed  to  offer  prayer  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  promises  as  relate  to  nations  and 
individuals,  for  the  evangelization  of  the  world,  for  the  coming  of  God's  kingdom, 
and  then  faithfully  to  employ  all  necessary  instrumentalities  by  which  to  secure 
these  ends.  _  III.  Inferences.  1.  "  Take  ye  away  the  stone."  This  is  preliminary. 
If  the  word  is  to  enter  a  soul  "  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,"  the  stone  of  prejudice, 
ignorance  and  unbelief  must  be  taken  away,  and  then  the  life-giving  word  will  enter 
and  do  its  work.  2.  "  Loose  him."  Let  us  help  others  to  a  greater  freedom  and 
larger  usefulness.  3.  "And  let  him  go."  Let  us  not  chide  others  if  they  do  not 
work  in  exactly  our  chosen  methods,  or  in  the  same  branches  of  moral  and  spiritual 
work.  There  is  «'  one  Spirit,"  and  •'  to  every  man  his  work."  (L.  0.  Thompton.) 
1  he  stone  taken  away  : — When  Luther  received  the  Divine  call:  "Take  away  the 
stone  I "  the  body  of  the  Church  had  already  lain  more  than  four  hundred  years  in 
the  Romish  grave,  and  more  than  one  faint-hearted  Martha  shrank  from  the  smell 
of  corruption  which  was  bemg  wafted  by  the  stone-removing  Reformation;  bat 

VOL    II.  19 


290  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  a. 

Lnther'B  faith  prospered  nnto  the  seeing  of  the  glory  of  God.  And  we,  if  we  wonld 
believe,  should  then  know  by  real  experience  that  the  fragrance  of  incorraptible 
life,  which  goes  forth  from  the  Head  of  the  Church,  is  powerful  enough  to 
overcome  the  corruption  which  Death  is  working  in  her  members.  Before 
every  Lazarus-grave  of  Jesus'  beloved  Church  the  glory  of  the  Lord  stands 
ready  to  reveal  itself,  (JJ.  Besser,  D.D.)  Pity  must  be  followed  by  active 
help: — Suppose  we  bad  read,  Jesus  wept,  and  went  about  His  daily  business, 
I  should  have  felt  small  comfort  in  the  passage.  If  nothing  had  come  of  it  but 
tears,  it  would  have  been  a  great  falling  off  from  the  usual  ways  of  our  blessed 
Lord.  Tears !  what  are  they  alone  t  Salt  water  I  A  cup  of  them  would  be  of  little 
worth  to  anybody.  But,  beloved,  Jesus  wept,  and  then  He  cried,  "Lazarus,  come 
forth."  ((7.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  reticence  of  power : — The  Divine  modesty,  if 
we  may  so  say,  of  the  miracle  which  tells  us  that  this  setting  aside  for  once  of  the 
Btern  law  of  death  is  the  work  of  Him  who  is  the  Lord  of  law,  and  respects  it  in  all 
His  worlds — the  Author  not  of  confusion,  but  of  peace.  To  have  done  these  other 
things  without  means  would  not  have  rendered  the  true  marvel  greater,  it  would 
only  have  added  something  of  prodigy  to  miracle,  which  Jesus  never  did.  What  is 
etill  more  to  the  purpose,  it  would  have  been  out  of  keeping  with  His  working,  who 
never  wastes  His  power,  who  never  confuses  the  natural  and  the  supernatural,  the 
human  and  the  Divine.  In  His  all-wise  hand  the  two  systems  are  one  plan.  The 
supernatural  is  never  made  to  do  the  work  of  the  natural,  but  the  natural  is  the 
basis  and  preparation  for  the  supernatural.  The  principle  is  a  most  important  one, 
and  most  pointedly  applicable  to  the  kingdom  of  grace.  You  say,  if  God  means  to 
Bave  my  friend,  or  my  child,  his  salvation  will  be  of  grace ;  and  grace  is  wholly 
supernatural.  The  new  heart  is  a  Divine  gift ;  nothing  but  an  immediate  act  of 
Divine  power  will  make  him  a  new  creature ;  just  as  nothing  but  the  voice  of  Jesus 
could  call  Lazarus  from  the  tomb.  True  1  yet  He  bids  you  "  take  away  the  stone." 
Bemove  ignorance,  root  up  bad  habits,  implant  good  ones,  rescue  your  neglected 
brother  from  degradation  and  misery.  Give  your  children  Christian  education, 
prepare  their  minds  to  receive  the  truth  in  Jesus.  Do  these  things,  then  may  you 
pray  and  look  for  the  raising  of  the  morally  lifeless.  But  if  you  do  nothing ;  if 
you  neglect  to  teach,  to  train,  to  strive  and  pray  for  them,  wonder  not  if  they  sink 
into  utter  ungodliness  and  spiritual  death.     (J.  Laidlaw,  D.D.) 

Yer.  40.  If  thon  wouldest  believe,  thou  shonldest  see  the  glory  of  God. — The 
ioul's  organ  of  sight : — I.  The  duty  enjoined.  Faith  is — 1.  A  transaction  between 
God  and  the  soul.  2.  A  voluntary  process.  3.  Is  to  be  exercised  regardless  of 
apparent  diflSculties.  4.  Is  to  be  employed  in  connection  with  corresponding  works. 
II.  The  blessed  result.  We  shall  see  the  glory  of  God  in — 1.  Nature.  2.  Provi- 
dence. 3.  His  Word.  4.  The  Eesurrection.  (TT.  W.  Wythe.)  Persuasives  to 
faith. — Mark : — I.  Man's  slowness  to  believe.  The  words  of  our  text  may  refer  to 
some  checking,  on  the  part  of  the  elder  sister,  of  the  expectation  of  a  wondrous  work 
to  be  done  by  Christ.  She  had  said,  "  I  know  that  even  now  whatsoever  Thou  wilt 
ask  of  God,  God  will  give  it  Thee."  She  was  doubtless  no  stranger  to  His  wondrous 
power;  and  yet,  now,  when  He  is  there,  and  her  part  should  have  been  silent 
obedience,  she  must  needs  interpose,  perhaps  to  prevent  that  very  thing  which,  if 
effected,  would  be  the  consummation  of  their  highest  desires.  And  in  this  was  she 
not  a  type  of  humanity  ?  Will  not  men  acknowledge  that  God  can  do  all  things, 
and  yet  interpose  difficulties  in  the  way  of  His  doing  that  which  would  be  most  for 
their  advantage?  The  fact  is,  man  measures  God  by  himself.  He  will  not 
believe  a  thing  can  be  done  because  he  himself  cannot  do  it,  or  because  he 
cannot  see  how  it  can  be  done.  Think  rather  of  what  He  has  done,  and  await 
what  He  may,  and  what  indeed  He  promises  to  do.  U.  Man  shall  not  lose  by 
believing.  We  are  far  from  denying  the  possession  of  faith  by  the  trembling, 
mourning  sister  of  Lazarus.  She  knew  that  He  had  done  great  things.  And  now 
her  faith  and  theirs  was  rewarded ;  for  from  that  dark  sepulchre  he  came  forth 
whom  they  had  so  mournfully  laid  there;  and  had  not  the  sister  indulged  the 
feeling  that  led  her  to  interpose  a  check  upon  Christ's  act,  the  event  might  have 
rewarded  her  even  more.  Think  of  the  rewards  which  Abraham,  the  father  of  the 
faithful,  received  upon  his  faith.  Must  not  the  result  of  trusting  the  infinite  God 
be  a  good  one  ?  If  you  honour  Him,  will  He  not  be  likely  to  honour  you  ?  A  right 
course  is  sure  to  be  attended  with  profit :  to  trust  in  God  is  a  right  course ;  there- 
fore it  shall  be  attended  with  profit.  And,  as  it  could  be  shown  that  to  believe  on 
the  Son  of  God,  even  on  Jesus  Christ,  is  the  most  righteous  course  for  man  to  take, 


0EAP.XI.]  fir.  JOHN.  »1 

or  it  is  that  one  which  is  attended  by  the  most  profit.  It  is  the  means  of  obtaining 
righteousness  in  the  sight  of  God — justification — present  peace  and  future  glory — 
the  greatest  possible  blessings.  III.  For  God  has  connected  the  sight  op  His  glort 
WITH  THE  exebcise  OF  OUR  FAITH.  "  Said  I  not  unto  thee,"  &o.  Wilt  thou,  therefore, 
not  desire  to  behold  the  light  of  God's  glory — a  light  that  eclipses  the  sun,  and  pours 
fresh  life  and  joy  into  the  souls  of  them  upon  whom  it  falls — a  glory  that  shall 
know  no  gloom,  no  cloud,  no  night,  and  yet  be  always  pleasant,  always  sweet — yea, 
a  thousand  times  more  so  than  that  of  our  brightest  morning  of  joy  after  a  night 
of  sorrow  ?  Dost  thou  rejoice  to  see  the  light  and  feel  the  heat  of  the  sun  ?  and 
wilt  thou  not  desire  to  look  upon  and  be  beneath  the  blessing  of  Him  whose  smile 
fills  a  thousand  suns  with  light  ?  The  very  love  of  this  world  thus  becomes  an 
argument  for  the  love  of  that  which  is  to  come.  But  men  seem  willing  to  lose  the 
last  in  their  too  eager  efforts  to  gain  the  first.  That  was  wondrous  glory  which  Ut 
op  the  dark  tomb  of  Bethany,  and  which  poured  the  light  of  life  into  those  sightless 
eyeballs ;  but  a  greater  glory  shall  shine  into  and  revive  the  frame  of  him  whom 
the  Saviour  shall  call  forth  into  everlasting  life.  How  appropriate  will  the  words 
of  our  text  be  in  his  case!  IV.  There  is  something  in  man  which  makes  him 
ifOOK  fob  greater  than  present  blessings,  and  this  makes  the  exercise  of  faith 
8ui table  to  him.  Our  life,  to  a  great  extent,  is  one  of  expectancy.  Let  our  cup  be 
Jull  in  the  present  life,  yet  are  we  not  completely  satisfied.  If  the  Scripture  asks 
for  faith  it  is  in  harmony  with  the  constitution  of  man's  mind.  The  great  future 
throws  its  shadow  forward,  and  man  is  conscious  of  its  coming.  Rich  in  all  good, 
it  draws  him,  as  the  heavenly  bodies  act  upon  our  earth ;  only  too,  too  often,  he 
supposes  that  future  is  bounded  by  the  time  of  his  physical  death.  Let  him  indulge 
the  expectancy  natural  to  his  mind  only  in  a  larger  degree,  aud  let  it  have  holier 
and  better  objects.  Let  him  place  his  expectations  in  God  and  in  heaven  rather 
than  in  himself,  his  fellow-creatures,  or  the  world.  Let  him  only  transfer  his 
faculty  of  trust  to  higher,  or  rather  to  the  right  objects,  even  to  God  and  His  pro- 
mises in  Christ  Jesus.  Consider,  in  conclusion,  with  what  force  and  beauty  the 
words  of  our  text  may  be  addressed  to  the  faithful  when  they  are  surrounded  by 
the  scenes  of  heaven — when  the  promises  of  Scripture  are  more  than  fulfilled.  The 
sceptic  may  look  doubtfully  on  now,  but  he  wiU  look  ruefully  on  then.  Let  us 
look  forward  with  faith  in  Christ  to  that  glory,  (4.  Hudson.)  Believing  to 
tee  : — Man  always  desires  to  see  in  order  to  believing.  Martha  is  called  upon 
to  give  an  example  of  the  contrary  process :  of  believing  in  order  to  see,  (F. 
Godet,  D.D.)  The  seeing  of  God's  glory  suspended  on  faith: — Though  the  sun 
shines,  yet  if  my  eye  is  closed  I  am  in  darkness.  If  you  meet  a  man  in  the  spirit 
of  unbelief,  or  scorn,  or  pride,  he  will  not  unbosom  himself  to  you ;  and  if 
you  so  meet  God,  neither  are  you  fitted  to  see,  nor  will  He  disclose  to  you. 
His  glory.  The  order  is,  If  thou  wilt  believe,  thou  shalt  see.  We  recognize 
this  order  throughout  our  Lord's  procedure.  "He  could  not  do  many  of  Hia 
mighty  works  there  because  of  their  unbelief. "  "  AU  things  are  possible  to 
him  that  believeth."  What  is  needed  is  not  so  much  a  keen,  strong  intellect,  that 
can  fight  its  way  through  perplexities  and  falsehoods,  that  can  cross-question  wit- 
nesses, that  can  balance  evidence — not  this  half  so  much  as  the  spirit  of  a  little 
«hild.  This  is  heaven's  law  throughout  the  economy  of  grace.  He  that  believeth 
shall  see.  {J.  Culross,  D.D.)  The  importance  of  faith: — I.  Faith  reproved 
BECAUSE  OF  ITS  WEAKNESS.  Martha's  was  genuine,  but  weak,  and  Christ's  delay  waa 
to  strengthen  it.  God's  dealings  are  mysterious,  but  gracious  in  design.  Do  not 
question  Christ's  power  or  doubt  His  word.  II.  Faith  enjoined  because  of  its 
WORTH.  1.  It  enriches  the  soul.  ••  Eich  in  faith."  "  Precious  faith."  2.  It  is 
the  channel  of  Divine  communications — pardon,  purjty,  peace,  joy,  &o.  3.  It  is 
the  eye  of  the  soul,  and  sees  things  unseen  and  eternal,  4.  It  is  necessary  to  the 
saint  passing  securely  through  the  world  and  out  of  the  world.  "  All  things  are 
possible  to  him  that  believeth."  III.  Faith  encouraged  because  of  its  reward. 
"  Thou  shalt  see."  Death  vanquished  by  Christ.  (J.  Dobie,  D.D.)  The  lionour 
given  to  faith : — 1.  That  which  alone  is  worth  seeing,  which  gladdens  the  soul, 
which  Moses  prayed  to  see,  which  holy  men  of  old  saw  only  in  glimpses,  which 
heaven  and  earth  were  intended  to  reveal,  for  the  beholding  of  which  our  eyes  were 
formed,  for  the  appreciation  of  which  our  minds  were  made,  for  the  revelation  of 
which  Christ  lived  and  died,  is  "  the  glory  of  God."  2.  Christ  does  not  speak  of 
Ood  Himself,  but  of  some  visible  display  of  His  invisible  excellencies.  The  glory 
of  God  is  that  which  shows  Him  to  be  the  glorious  Being  He  is,  and  through  it  we 
ireach  the  knowledge  of  Himself ;  but  the  special  glory  here  is  that  of  the  bringer  ol 


892  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chaj.  a. 

life  out  of  death.  That  Lazarus's  resurrection  was  a  signal  display  of  Divine  glory 
is  evident  from  tbe  greatness  of  the  thing  itself.  To  remove  the  penalty  of  death, 
to  undo  its  work,  to  swallow  it  up  in  victory,  are  things  in  which  man  can  have  no 
share,  and  the  glory  God  is  to  get  from  it  la  the  greatest  next  to  Christ's  resur- 
rection. One  man  raised  was  to  show  His  glory;  what  will  not  myriads  do? 
I.  God's  pubfosb  to  beveaij  His  olobt.  Man  may  hide  himself  because  he  has 
nothing  of  his  own  ;  God  cannot,  because  all  His  fulness  is  His  own.  For  Hia 
own  sake  and  the  creature's  He  must  show  Himself.  For  the  sun  to  withdraw  it* 
shining  would  not  be  half  so  terrible  as  God's  refusal  to  reveal  Himself.  II.  Cheist'b 
DESIRE  IS  THAT  WE  SHOULD  SEE  THE  GLOBTt  OF  GoD.  Sin  had  hidden  the  Father, 
Christ  came  to  roll  off  the  clouds.  Love  for  the  Father  makes  Him  desirous  of  this, 
for  He  desires  the  Father's  glory ;  and  love  to  us,  for  He  desires  our  blessedness ; 
and  all  our  life,  consolation,  holiness,  heaven,  lie  in  this.  IIL  Unbelief  hindebs 
OUB  SEEING  His  6L0BY.  1.  It  hinders  Christ  from  working  those  works  which  show 
the  glory  (Matt.  xiii.  58 ;  vi.  5,  6 ;  Mark  ix.  23,  24).  2.  It  hinders  us  from  per- 
ceiving the  glory  that  is  in  the  works  even  when  they  are  wrought  (John  vi.  26). 
To  unbelief  the  miracles  appeared  only  striking  things  in  which  there  was  little 
meaning ;  it  was  faith  that  drew  aside  the  veil.  3.  It  hinders  us  from  enjoying  the 
glory  even  after  we  have  in  some  measure  seen  it.  We  only  get  rays  at  intervals 
when  we  should  see  the  whole  sun  continuously.  IV.  Chbist's  bepboof  of  dnbeliej> 
AND  CALL  TO  FAITH.  Let  Christ's  words  shame  us  out  of  our  unbelief.  Trust  Him 
in  your  sorrows  as  well  as  your  joys,  and  you  will  see  the  glory  of  God  in  both. 
{H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  Faith  is  of  supreme  importance  : — An  Evangelical  clergyman, 
visiting  the  late  Princess  Charlotte  at  Claremont,  Her  Royal  Highness  said  to  bim, 
••  Sir,  you  are  a  clergyman ;  will  you  have  the  goodness  to  give  me  an  answer  to  a 
question  which  I  wish  to  propose  to  you  ?  "  The  clergyman  replied,  "  Most  readily 
shall  I  answer  any  question  your  Eoyal  Highness  shall  please  to  put  to  me." 
"  Then,  sir,"  said  the  Princess,  ♦'  which  is  the  way  a  sinner  can  be  saved  ?  "  The 
dergyman  modestly  replied  that  Her  Eoyal  Highness  must  be  informed  upon  that 
subject,  and  had  frequent  opportunities  of  knowing  the  opinions  of  eminent  persona 
respecting  it.  Her  Eoyal  Highness  said  she  put  the  same  question  to  every  clergy- 
man, and  their  opinions  being  at  variance,  she  requested  to  have  his.  He  then 
replied,  "  Through  faith  in  the  sacrifice  and  work  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Her 
Eoval  Highness  then  observed,  "  That  is  what  my  grandfather  told  me ;  he  said, 
•  Faith  in  Christ  is  everything  in  religion.' "    (Religious  Tract  Society  Anecdotts.) 

Vers.  41-44.  JestiB  lifted  up  His  eyes  and  said. — The  words  of  Christ  at  the  gravB 
of  Lazarus : — I.  Those  He  ai>dkessed  to  heaven  (vers.  41,  42).  In  these  we  have — 
1.  His  recognition  of  God  as  His  Father.  He  was  the  Son  of  God  in  a  higher  sense 
than  any  other  has  been  or  will  be.  (1)  In  mutual  resemblance.  "  The  express 
image  of  His  Person."  (2)  In  mutual  love.  "This  is  my  beloved  Son."  2.  His 
consciousness  of  the  Father's  regard.  Ever  in  close  communion  with  the  Father, 
to  every  aspiration  He  felt  the  Father's  response  "always."  No  true  word  of 
prayer  is  ever  lost.  8.  His  consideration  of  the  people  in  His  devotions.  "Because 
of  the  people."  Audible  words,  though  not  essential,  and  having  no  influence  on 
God,  are  often  useful  to  our  fellow  men.  U.  Those  He  addbessed  to  thb  dead 
(ver.  43).  These  were— 1.  Personal.  "Lazarus."  2.  Earnest.  He  could  have 
done  it  by  a  whisper  or  volition,  but  He  raised  His  voice  to  the  highest  pitch  to 
startle  bystanders  into  solemn  thought.  3.  Mighty.  They  struck  life  into  the 
dead.  III.  Those  He  addbessed  to  the  living  (ver.  44).  Here  again  is  the  human 
co-operating  with  the  Divine.  Conclusion :  This  resurrection  is  an  illustration  of 
that  of  a  dead  aoul  which  can  be  effected  only  by  Christ,  may  stiU  be  entangled 
with  old  associations,  habits,  &c.,  and  requires  in  order  to  its  freedom  the  help  of 
the  living.  The  work  of  a  living  church  and  ministry  is  to  loose  encumbered  souls. 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Christ's  prayer  and  thanksgiving  : — I.  Thb  pbayeb  which 
Jesus  had  evidently  offebed.  It  is  unrecorded,  doubtless  because  silent.  1.  Pro. 
bably  His  first  feeling  on  hearing  of  the  sickness  of  Lazarus  was  one  of  sadness 
(ver.  5).  2.  This  sikdness  it  would  seem  soon  relieved  itself  through  prayer.  By 
a  natural  filial  instinct  His  heart  rose  out  of  its  depression  into  confident  com- 
munion with  His  Father.  3.  The  practical  lesson  for  us  is  not  to  measure  the  force 
of  prayer  by  its  elaborateness  or  audibleness.  The  most  effective  are  frequently 
nnuttered.  This  should  not  discourage  public,  but  encourage  private  devotion. 
II.  Chbist's  assueance  that  His  pbayeb  was  answebed.  1.  To  "  hear  "  prayer  in 
Bcripture  means  to  answer.     The  miracle  was  not  wrought,  but  the  Saviour  wat 


CHAP.  xt.J  ST.  JOHN.  J83 

coDScioas  of  His  own  adeqaacj  and  its  accomplishment.  2.  This  hearing  was  no 
rare  favour.  "  Always  "  (Heb.  v.  7).  3.  The  secret  of  this  was  the  perfect  oneness 
of  Christ's  will  with  the  Father's.  Many  of  our  prayers  are  unanswered  for  the 
opposite  reason  (1  John  v.  14).  III.  Christ's  thanksgitino  fob  God's  besponsb. 
Nothing  is  more  noticeable  in  Christ's  prayers  than  His  sense  of  filial  obUgation. 
Although  not  inferior  to  the  Father  He  will  not  stand  on  His  prerogatives,  but  as 
man's  representative  shows  His  sense  of  need  and  His  trustful  dependence.  1.  Let 
OS  rejoice  in  this  proof  of  Christ's  complete  assumption  of  our  humanity.  2.  Let 
US  learn  to  gratefully  acknowledge  God's  goodness  in  answering  our  prayers  (Psa. 
cxvi.  1,  2).  rV.  Chbist's  pdbposb  in  this  thanksgiving.  Had  Christ  wished 
simply  to  thank  God  audible  words  would  have  been  unnecessary.  That  were  as 
pleasing  to  God  as  the  unspoken  prayer.  But  Christ  wanted  to  show  others  that 
His  claim  to  be  the  Son  of  God  was  no  arrogant  assumption,  and  that  His  works 
were  wrought  by  no  diabolical  aid.  In  this  also  Jesus  is  our  exemplar.  We  must 
not  only  have  the  thankful  feeling,  but  express  it  (Psa.  Ixvi.  16,  17).  We  should 
be  careful  as  to — 1.  The  sincerity  of  our  praises.  2.  Their  propriety.  3.  Their 
earnestness.  {B,  Wilkinson.)  The  force  of  the  prayer  and  thanksgiving: — By 
addressing  His  Father  Christ  put  God  into  the  position  of  either  gianting  or  with- 
holding His  co-operation.  If  Lazarus  remained  in  the  tomb  let  Jesus  be  acknow- 
ledged an  impostor,  and  all  His  other  miracles  be  attributed  to  Beelzebub  1  If  God, 
who  was  thus  solemnly  invoked,  should  manifest  His  arm,  let  Jesus  be  acknow- 
ledged as  sent  by  Himl  Thus  this  act  before  the  still  occupied  sepulchre  made 
this  moment  one  of  solemn  ordeal,  like  that  of  Elijah  on  Carmel,  and  imparted  to 
this  miracle  a  supreme  and  unique  character  in  the  life  of  Jesus.  {F.  Godet,  D.D.) 
Because  of  the  people  which  stand  by. — The  folly  of  merely  "  standing  by  "  '.• — It 
would  seem  to  all  who  knew  you  a  very  odd  thing  if  you  were  seen  loafing  about  a 
certain  shop  for  an  hour  and  a  half  one  day  in  the  week  for  twenty  years,  and  yet 
you  never  bought  a  pennyworth  of  goods.  Why  do  you  hang  about  the  gospel  shop 
and  yet  purchase  nothing  ?  On  your  own  showing  you  are  a  fool.  I  do  not  like 
using  a  hard  word,  still  it  is  used  in  Scripture  for  such  as  you  are.  He  who 
believes  a  thing  to  be  so  important  that  he  spends  one  day  in  the  week  in  hearing 
about  it,  and  yet  does  not  think  it  important  enough  to  accept  it  as  a  gift,  stultifies 
nimself  by  his  own  actions.  How  will  you  answer  for  it  at  the  last  great  day  when 
the  Judge  shall  say,  "  You  believed  enough  to  go  and  hear  about  salvation ;  why 
did  you  not  believe  enough  to  accept  it  ?  "    (C  H.  Sjpurgeon.) 

Vers.  43,  44.  Lazams  come  forth. — A  royal  command  befitting  the  majesty  of 
God.  {St.  Cyril.)  The  scene: — Look  at  our  Lord  by  this  grave.  How  truly 
man,  partaker  of  our  common  nature  1  The  sight  of  the  tomb  awakens  all  His 
grief ;  the  sufferings  of  these  two  sisters,  clinging  to  each  other,  touch  His  loving 
heart ;  and  there  He  stands,  for  ever  sanctioning  sorrow,  and  even  exalting  it  into 
a  manly,  most  noble  thing.  His  eyes  swim  in  tears,  groans  rend  His  bosom ;  He 
is  so  deeply,  so  visibly  affected,  that  the  spectators  say,  "  See  how  He  loved  him  I " 
Jesus  wept.  So  it  was  some  moments  ago.  But  now  what  a  change  1  The  crowd 
retreat,  surprise,  wonder,  terror  seated  on  every  face ;  the  boldest  recoiling  from  that 
awful  form  which  comes  shuffling  out  of  the  grave.  This  Man  of  tears,  so  gentle, 
tender,  easily  moved,  endued  with  a  sensibility  so  delicate  that  the  strings 
of  His  heart  vibrated  to  the  slightest  touch,  has  by  a  word  rent  the  tomb.  Struck 
with  terror,  the  Witch  of  Endor  shrieked  when  she  saw  the  fonn  of  SamueL 
What  a  contrast  this  scene  to  that  I  Not  in  the  least  surprised  at  the  event,  as  if, 
in  raising  the  buried  dead.  He  had  done  nothing  more  remarkable  than  light  a 
lamp  or  rekindle  the  embers  of  an  extinguished  fire,  calm  and  tranquil,  Jeaoa 
points  to  Lazarus,  saying,  "Loose  him  and  let  him  go."  (T.  Outhrie,  D.D.) 
The  raising  of  Lazarus: — I.  A  memobablb  mibaclk.  There  is  no  measuring 
miracles,  for  they  are  all  displays  of  the  infinite,  but  in  some  respects  it  standi 
as  the  head  of  a  wonderful  series,  and  is  a  type  of  what  Jesus  is  doing  now  in  the 
world  of  spirit.  Its  memorableness  is  seen — 1.  In  the  subject  of  it.  (1)  Lazams 
had  been  dead  four  days.  When  a  man  has  newly  died  he  might  seem  to  resemble 
an  engine  just  now  in  full  action,  and  now  though  motionless,  the  valves,  wheels, 
and  bands  are  still  there :  only  rekindle  the  fire  and  re-apply  the  motive  force  and 
the  machinery  will  work.  But  when  corruption  comes,  valves  displaced,  wheels 
broken,  metal  eaten  away,  what  can  be  done  now  7  It  were  an  easier  task  to  make 
a  new  man  than  to  reanimate  a  corrupted  one.  (2)  There  are  some  who  are 
symbolized  by  this  case,  who  are  altogether  abominable.      The  pure  mind  desirea 


294  THE  BIBLICiL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [CHA».  n. 

to  have  them  put  ont  of  sight.  It  does  not  seem  possible  to  restore  them  to 
purity,  honesty,  or  hope.  But  when  the  Lord  makes  them  live,  the  most  sceptical 
are  obliged  to  confess  "  this  is  the  finger  of  God."  However  far  a  man  may  be 
gone  he  is  not  beyond  the  Lord's  arm  of  mighty  mercy.  2.  The  manifest  human 
weakness  of  its  Worker.  In  no  passage  is  the  manhood  of  Christ  more  manifested. 
(1)  He  showed  the  sorrows  and  sympathies  of  a  man.  (2)  As  a  man  He  seeks 
mformation.  (3)  He  walks  to  the  tomb — quite  unnecessary  action.  (4)  He  seeks 
human  assistance.  (5)  He  prays.  This  is  a  parable  of  our  own  case  as  workers. 
Sometimes  we  see  the  human  side  of  the  gospel  and  wonder  whether  it  can  do 
many  mighty  works,  yet  out  of  the  foolishness  of  preaching  the  wisdom  of  God 
shines  forth.  Despise  not  the  day  of  small  things,  but  glory  in  your  infirmity. 
8.  The  instrumental  cause — a  repetition  of  the  man's  name  and  two  commanding 
words.  A  miracle  seems  all  the  greater  when  the  means  are  apparently  feeble.  So 
in  the  salvation  of  men.  It  is  marvellous  that  poor  preaching,  a  short  sentence, 
should  convert  great  sinners.  But  the  quickening  power  is  not  in  the  words  but 
in  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God.  4.  The  result.  The  thunder  of  Christ's  voice  was 
attended  by  the  lightening  of  His  Divine  power,  and  forthwith  life  flashed  into 
Lazarus  and  he  came  forth,  and  that  at  once.  It  is  one  of  the  glories  of  the  gospel 
that  it  does  not  require  weeks  to  quicken  men.  5.  The  eSect  on  the  bystanders. 
Some  believed ;  others  reported  to  the  Pharisees.  Never  mind  what  enemies  do  so 
long  as  sinners  are  saved.  II.  A  sinoulab  spectacle.  1.  A  living  man  in  the 
garments  of  death.  Some  quickened  by  Divine  grace  have  still  their  grave 
clothes  about  them,  and  the  superficial  question  their  vitality.  2.  A  moving  man 
bound.  So  some  souls  can  move  away  from  sin,  but  seem  bound  hand  and  foot  as 
to  faith.  3.  A  repulsive  object,  but  yet  attractive — how  charming  to  the  sisters  I 
So  some  sinners  are  enough  to  frighten  people  with  their  groans,  but  what  Christian 
does  not  love  to  see  them  ?  4.  A  man  strong  and  yet  helpless.  Lazarus  was  able 
to  quit  his  grave  but  not  his  grave-clothes.  So  men  have  been  mightily  moved  by 
the  Spirit,  but  unable  to  enter  into  the  liberty  of  Christ.  III.  A  timely 
ASSISTANCE.  1.  What  a,re  the  bands  which  often  bind  newly-awakened  sinners  ? 
(1)  Ignorance,  which  v^  must  enlighten.  (2)  Sorrow,  that  we  must  comfort.  (3) 
Doubts,  that  we  must  resolve.  (4)  Fears,  that  we  must  assuage.  (5)  Prejudices, 
that  we  must  remove.  (6)  Evil  habits,  that  we  must  help  tear  off.  2.  Why  are 
these  bandages  left  ?  (1)  Because  Christ  will  not  work  an  unnecessary  miracle. 
Christ  is  as  sparing  wi^h  the  genuine  as  Rome  is  prodieal  with  the  counterfeit 
coin.  Men  could  do  y",is,  therefore  Christ  did  not.  (2)  That  those  who  came  to 
unwind  Lazarus  mighi  be  sure  that  he  was  the  same  man  who  died.  For  some 
such  cause  Christ  pesmits  a  quickened  sinner  to  remain  in  a  measure  of  bondage 
that  he  may  know  he  was  the  same  who  was  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  (3) 
That  those  disciples  might  enter  into  rare  fellowship  with  Christ.  It  is  sweet  to 
do  something  with  Christ  for  a  saved  person.  It  gives  us  such  an  interest  in  Him. 
8.  Why  should  we  remove  these  grave-clothes?  (1)  The  Lord  has  bidden  us  do 
BO.  (2)  But  perhaps  before  conversion  we  helped  to  bind  them  on  him,  and  after 
by  our  coldness  or  unbelief  helped  to  keep  them  on.  (3)  Somebody  has  helped 
ours  off,  and  if  we  cannot  repay  that  individual  by  a  similar  service  let  us  do  so  for 
some  one  else.  IV.  A  practical  hikt.  If  Christ  employed  these  disciples  in  this 
He  would  employ  us  in  similar  work.  Saul  is  struck  down  by  Christ,  but  Ananias 
must  visit  him  that  he  may  receive  his  sight.  The  Lord  is  gracious  to  Cornelius, 
but  he  must  hear  Peter.  Lydia  has  an  opened  heart,  but  only  Paul  can  lead  her  to 
Jesus.  When  the  prodigal  came  home  the  father  personally  forgave  and  restored 
him ;  but  the  servants  were  told  to  bring  forth  the  best  robe,  &c.  The  father 
might  have  done  this,  but  he  desired  that  the  whole  house  should  be  in  accord  in 
the  joyful  reception.  Christ  could  do  all  for  a  sinner,  but  He  does  not  do  so 
because  He  wishes  all  of  us  to  have  fellowship  with  Him.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  A 
picture,  a  parable,  or  a  prophecy : — I.  Take  it  as  a  picture  of  Christ.  Here  we 
note  the  following  aspects  of  the  Saviour — 1.  The  interceding  One  (vers.  21,  22). 
2.  The  prophetic  One  (vers.  23,  24) :  promising  to  us  the  same  resurrection  that 
He  promised  to  the  friends  of  Lazarus.  3.  The  living  One  (vers.  25,  26) :  who  has 
life  in  Himself,  not  as  an  endowment,  but  as  an  element  of  Hia  Being.  4.  The 
anointed  One  (ver.  27) :  the  word  *•  Christ"  meaning  "  anointed,"  and  pointing  to 
the  mission  of  Jesus  to  the  world.  6.  The  sympathizing  One  (vers.  28-38) :  who  is 
afiQicted  in  all  our  affliction.  6.  The  commanding  One  (vers.  39-41) ;  whose 
commands  are  to  be  obeyed,  even  when  they  seem  strange  and  contrary  to  nature. 
7.  The  quickening  One  (vers.  42-44) :  who  gives  life  to  the  dead.     II.  Ta^e  it  as 


«HAr.  XL]  8T.  JOHN.  295 

A  riBABLB  OF  SALVATION.  1.  LazaxoB  (s  the  type  of  a  world  dead  in  sin.  2.  There 
is  but  One  who  can  impart  epiritual  life,  the  One  who  is  "  the  Life."  3.  When 
Christ  comes  to  give  life  He  enters  into  fellowship  with  our  sufferings.  4.  Though 
we  cannot  give  life  we  can  help  to  give  it  by  rolling  away  the  stone  and  bringing 
those  spiritually  dead  into  relation  with  Christ.  5.  When  Christ  calls  the  soul 
must  obey,  and  come  forth  from  the  death  of  sin  to  the  life  of  righteousness.  III. 
Take  it  as  a  prophecy  of  the  besurbection.  1.  Death  is  universal.  2.  Death  is 
corrupting.  3.  No  human  power  can  call  the  dead  from  their  graves.  4.  Christ 
can  summon  the  dead,  and  His  voice  will  reach  them  in  their  abode.  6.  There 
will  come  a  day  when  the  picture  of  Lazarus  rising  from  his  tomb  will  be 
repeated  in  a  general  resurrection.  Lazarus  of  Bethany  : — The  significance  of 
this  mighty  deed  we  cannot  over  estimate,  for  it  is,  on  the  one  hand,  a  profoundly 
significant  symbol  of  Christ's  redemption,  and,  on  the  other,  a  signal  testimony  to 
His  right  and  power  to  redeem.  Whether  we  regard  it  as  a  symbol  or  a  witness,  it  is 
equally  noteworthy.  This  great  transaction  was  —  I.  An  eminent  emblem  op 
Chbist's  BEGENEBATiNO  AND  socL-QnicEENiNO  woBE  ;  and  that  both  in  the  details  and 
in  the  substance.  The  details  if  followed  out  make  an  almost  complete  allegory 
of  spiritual  resurrection.  The  sinner,  like  Lazarus,  is  dead,  buried,  we  may  say 
already  corrupt  and  loathsome.  Christ  comes  Himself  to  the  sinner's  tomb.  He 
bids,  "  Take  away  the  stone."  He  calls  His  servants  to  ply  all  preliminary  means. 
He  sends  His  agents  to  warn  and  teach.  But  when  all  this  is  done  there  is 
no  life  till  He  calls.  He  cries  with  a  loud  voice.  It  is  the  "  effectual  call " 
of  His  Word  and  Spirit.  The  man  hears,  the  dead  lives,  the  soul  is  con- 
verted. Then  comes  in  the  use  of  means.  Let  the  living  help  their  new-raised 
brother — "  Loose  ye  him  and  let  him  go."  1.  The  Divine  element  in  the  trans- 
action. The  mighty  shout  which  raised  Lazarus  of  Bethany  was  not  the  prayer 
of  a  mortal.  It  was  the  command  of  God.  The  Divine  will  is  first  cause,  without 
the  intervention,  in  the  act  itself,  of  any  second  cause  whatever.  2.  This  power 
which  raises  the  dead  is  the  power  of  God  in  the  voice  of  Jesus.  The  Father  hath 
given  all  things  into  His  hands.  The  spiritual  resurrection  is  going  on.  One 
rises  and  leaves  his  lusts  and  base  passions,  and  becomes  u  sober,  true.  God-fearing 
man.  Another  leaves  his  poor  legal  strivings  and  becomes  a  humble  debtor  to  the 
grace  of  God  for  righteousness.  Another  rises  from  the  tomb  of  doubt— that 
"  creeping  palsy  of  the  mind,  despair  of  truth  " — and  sits  clothed  at  the  Kedeemer's 

feet.        II.     A    8UPBEMB    TESTIMONY    TO    THE    DiVINITY    ANL    GLORY    OF    JeSDS.        {J. 

LaidlatP,  D.D.)  Newly -quickened  souls  may  yet  be  sj.  'itually  bound: — Some 
of  them  are  blindfolded  by  the  napkin  about  their  head  ;  they  are  very  ignorant, 
Badly  devoid  of  spiritual  perception,  and  withal  the  eye  of  faith  is  darkened.  Yet 
the  eye  is  there,  and  Christ  has  opened  it ;  and  it  is  the  business  of  the  servant  of 
God  to  remove  the  napkin  which  bandages  it  by  teaching  the  truth,  explaining  it, 
and  clearing  up  difficulties.  This  is  a  simple  thing  to  do,  but  exceedingly  neces- 
sary. Now  that  they  have  life  we  shall)  each  them  to  purpose.  Besides  that, 
they  are  bound  hand  and  foot,  so  that  ttey  are  compelled  to  inaction ;  we  can 
show  them  how  to  work  for  Jesus.  Sometimes  these  bands  are  those  of  sorrow, 
they  are  in  an  awful  terror  about  the  past ;  we  have  to  unbind  them  by  showing  that 
the  past  is  blotted  out.  They  are  wrapped  about  by  many  a  yard  of  doubt,  mis- 
trust, anguish,  and  remorse.  "Loose  them  and  let  them  go."  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Christ's  resurrection  different  from  the  restoration  of  Lazarus  : — There  was  no  revela- 
tion of  the  future  made  by  the  restoration  of  Lazarus,  and  his  silence  was  in  perfect 
keeping  with  that  fact.  He  was  brought  back  to  the  old  life,  with  its  old  relationships 
to  his  sisters,  his  neighbours,  and  his  friends,  and  he  had  to  die  again.  When 
Christ  rose  from  the  grave,  however.  He  did  not  come  back,  but  went  forward, 
His  resurrection  was  not  a  return  but  a  going  on.  He  saw  His  followers,  indeed. 
bat  it  was  not  after  the  former  fashion.  There  was  a  complete  difference  between 
the  nature  of  His  intercourse  with  them  after  His  resurrection  and  that  of  His 
fellowship  with  them  before  His  death.  He  did  not  come  back  to  His  former  life  ; 
but  He  went  forward  to  a  new  and  higher  human  life,  and  so  His  resurrection  was 
also  a  revelation  of  the  nature  of  the  life  beyond.  He  brought  life  and  immortality 
to  light  by  it,  and  He  did  so  because  He  rose  not  to  die  again  but  to  pass  in  spiri- 
tual and  glorified  humanity  up  to  the  throne  of  glory.  This  is  what  gives  its 
distinctive  feature  to  His  resurrection,  as  contrasted  with  all  mere  restorations  to 
iife — such  as  those  effected  by  prophets  and  apostles,  and  even  by  Christ  Himself. 
( W.  M,  Taylor,  D.D.)  The  raising  of  Lazarus : — I.We  have  here  a  revelation  ok 
Cbbist  as  oub  Bbotheb  BY  emotion  and  sorrow.    This  miracle  stands  alone  iu 


296  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  XL 

the  whole  majestic  series  of  His  mighty  works  by  the  fact  that  it  is  preceded  by  a 
storm  of  emotion,  which  shakes  the  frame  of  the  Master,  which  He  is  represented 
by  the  Evangelist  not  so  much  as  suppressing  as  fostering,  and  which  diverges  and 
parts  itself  into  the  two  feelings  expressed  by  the  groans  and  by  the  tears.  Here, 
for  one  thing,  is  the  blessed  sign  and  proof  of  His  true  brotherhood  with  us. 
Here  we  are  also  taught  the  sanction  and  the  limits  of  sorrow.  Christianity  has 
nothing  to  do  with  the  false  stoicism  and  the  false  religion  which  is  partly  pride 
and  partly  insincerity,  that  proclaims  it  wrong  to  weep  when  God  smites.  But 
just  as  clearly  and  distinctly  as  the  story  before  ns  says  to  us  "  Weep  for  yourselves 
and  for  the  loved  ones  that  are  gone,"  so  distinctly  does  it  draw  the  limits  within 
which  sorrow  is  sacred  and  hallowing,  and  beyond  which  it  is  harmful  and  weaken- 
ing. Set  side  by  side  the  grief  of  these  two  poor  weeping  sisters  and  the  grief  of 
the  weeping  Christ,  and  we  get  a  large  lesson.  They  could  only  repine  that  some- 
thing else  had  not  happened  di£Eerently  which  would  have  made  all  different. 
Thus  oblivious  of  duty,  murmuring  with  regard  to  the  accidents  which  might  have 
been  different,  and  unfitted  to  grasp  the  hopes  that  fill  the  future,  these  two  have 
been  hurt  by  their  grief,  and  have  let  it  overflow  the  banks  and  lay  waste  the  land. 
But  this  Christ  in  His  sorrow  checks  His  sorrow  that  He  may  do  His  work ;  in  Hia 
sorrow  is  confident  that  the  Father  hears  ;  in  His  sorrow  thinks  of  the  bystanders, 
and  would  bring  comfort  and  cheer  to  them.  A  sorrow  which  makes  us  more 
conscious  of  communion  with  the  Father  who  is  always  listening,  which  makes  as 
more  conscious  of  power  to  do  that  which  He  has  put  it  into  our  hand  to  do,  which 
makes  us  more  tender  in  our  sympathies  with  all  that  mourn,  and  swifter  and 
readier  for  our  work — such  a  sorrow  is  doing  what  God  meant  for  us ;  and  is  a 
blessing  in  so  thin  a  disguise  that  you  can  scarcely  call  it  veiled  at  all.  IL  And 
now  turn  to  what  lies  side  by  side  with  this  in  the  story,  and  at  first  sight  may 
seem  strangely  contradictory  of  it,  but  in  fact  only  completes  the  idea,  viz.,  the 

MAJESTIC   CALM   CONSCIOUSNESS   OF   DiVINE   POWEE   BY   WHICH    Hjl   IS   REVEALED  AB  OUB 

LoBD.  A  consciousness  of  continual  co-operation  with  the  Almighty  Father,  a 
consciousness  that  His  will  continually  coincides  with  the  Father's  will,  that  unto 
Him  there  comes  the  power  ever  to  do  all  that  Omnipotence  can  do,  and  that 
though  we  may  speak  of  a  gift  given  and  a  power  derived,  the  relation  between  the 
giving  Father  and  the  recipient  Son  is  altogether  different  from  and  other  than  the 
relation  between  the  man  that  asks  and  the  God  that  receives.  HI.  The  bevb- 
LATioN  OF  Christ  as  oue  Life  in  His  mighty,  life-givino  Word.  The  miracle, 
as  I  have  said,  stands  high,  not  only  in  the  greatness  of  the  fact,  but  also  is 
the  manner  of  the  working.  With  tenderest  reticence,  no  word  is  spoken  as 
to  what  followed.  No  hint  escapes  of  the  experiences  which  the  traveller 
brought  back  with  him  from  that  bourne  whence  he  had  come.  Surely  some 
draught  of  Lethe  must  have  been  given  him,  that  his  spirit  might  be  lulled 
into  a  wholesome  forgetfulness,  else  life  must  have  been  a  torment  to  him.  But 
be  that  as  it  may,  what  we  have  to  notice  is  the  fact  here,  and  what  it  teaches  us 
as  a  fact.  Is  it  not  a  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ  as  the  absolute  Lord  of  hfe  and 
death,  giving  the  one,  putting  back  the  other?  And  there  is  another  lesson, 
namely,  the  continuous  persistency  of  the  bond  between  Christ  and  His  friend, 
unbroken  and  untouched  by  the  superficial  accident  of  life  or  death.  Where- 
soever Lazarus  was  he  heard  the  voice,  he  knew  it,  and  obeyed.  And  so  we 
are  taught  that  the  relationship  between  Christ-life  and  all  them  that  love  and 
trust  TTim  is  one  on  which  the  tooth  of  death  that  gnaws  all  other  bonds 
in  twain  hath  no  power  at  aU.  Christ  is  the  Life,  and,  therefore  Christ  is  the 
Besurrection.  And  the  thing  that  we  call  death  is  but  a  film  which  spreads  above, 
but  has  no  power  to  penetrate  into  the  depths  of  the  relationship  between  us  and 
Him.     (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Christ  the  Life  of  the  spirit: — This  raising  is  a 

parable  as  well  as  a  prophecy ;  for  even  as  Christ  was  the  Life  of  this  Lazarus 
BO,  in  a  deeper  and  more  real  sense,  and  not  in  any  shadowy,  metaphorical, 
mystical  sense,  is  Jesus  Christ  the  Life  of  every  spirit  that  truly  lives  at  all.  We 
are  "  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins."  For  separation  from  God  is  death  in  all 
regions,  death  for  the  body  in  its  kind,  death  for  the  mind,  for  the  soul,  for  the 
spirit  in  their  kinds ;  and  only  they  who  receive  Christ  into  their  hearts  do  live. 
Every  Christian  man  is  a  miracle.  There  has  been  a  true  coming  into  the  human 
of  the  Divine,  a  true  supernatural  work,  the  infusion  into  a  dead  soul  of  the  God- 
lite  which  is  the  Christ-life.  And  you  and  I  may  have  that  life.  What  is  the 
condition  ?  *•  They  that  hear  shall  live."  Do  you  hear  ?  Do  you  welcome  ?  Do 
yon  take  that  Christ  into  your  hearts  ?    Is  He  your  Life,  my  brother  ?    (Ibid.) 


mtt.  n.]  ST.  JOHN.  K7 

Vers.  45,  46.  Then  many  of  the  Jews  ....  believed  on  Him.  But  some  went 
their  ways  to  the  Pharisees. — Different  efeetx  of  the  same  revelation  on  different  men : 
— 1.  Many  believed.  In  their  case — (1)  The  moral  end  of  the  miracle  was  then 
answered.  They  saw  the  "  glory  of  God."  (2)  The  end  of  Christ's  mission  was 
answered.  He  became  their  Saviour.  2.  Some  did  not  believe.  "  If  they  hear 
not  Moses  and  the  prophets."  The  different  effect  of  the  same  revelation  on 
different  minds  is — I.  A  common  occubbenoe  (Acts  zvii.  32-34).  The  gospel  is  to 
some  the  '•  savour  of  life  unto  life,"  &o.  In  every  congregation  there  are  believers 
and  unbelievers.  Like  the  sun,  which  wakes  the  vital  germ  in  a  grain  of  com,  and 
calls  into  being  a  beautiful  and  manifold  life  yet  draws  poisonous  vapours  out  of  the 
morass,  so  the  gospel  brings  life  to  some  objects  and  death  to  others.  II.  A 
siONrFiCANT  occDEBENCB,  indicating — 1.  Diversity  in  men's  minds.  If  all  men 
were  alike,  the  same  cause  acting  upon  them  would  produce  the  same  results. 
But  they  are  not  alike.  (1)  Naturally.  No  two  have  the  same  kind  and  measure 
of  faculty.  (2)  Morally.  No  two  have  the  same  quality  and  force  of  disposition.  (3) 
Educationally.  No  two  have  had  exactly  the  same  training.  At  St.  Paul's  conversion 
some  saw  the  light,  but  heard  not  the  voice.  Here  is  an  extraordinary  circumstance 
which  is  common  in  life.  Everywhere  there  are  men  hearing  the  same  voice  but 
receiving  different  impressions;  seeing  the  same  lights,  but  observing  different 
objects.  A  voice  fraught  with  deep  meaning  to  some  is  mere  empty  sound  to  others : 
ft  light  revealing  the  grandest  realities  to  some  discloses  nothing  to  others.  2.  The 
moral  force  of  depravity.  Men,  through  prejudices,  sinful  habits  and  carnal 
tendencies,  become  strong  enough  to  resist  the  mightiest  evidences  and  appeals. 
*'  Ye  do  always  resist  the  Spirit  of  God."  3.  The  uncoerciveness  of  the  gospeL  The 
gospel  is  the  power  of  God,  but  not  a  resistless  force.  It  reasons  and  persuades, 
but  does  not  outrage  the  freedom  of  the  souL  4.  The  need  of  perseverance  in  the 
Christian  preacher.  Do  not  be  discouraged  because  some  do  not  believe ;  other's 
will.  "  Sow  beside  all  waters."  (D.  Thomus,  D.D.)  The  power  of  unbelief: — 
Death  more  readily  yielded  to  Christ  than  man's  infidelity.  (J.  A.  Bengel.)  The 
consequences  of  unbelief: — A  vessel  named  The  Thetis  was  cruising  in  the 
Mediterranean  in  search  of  a  shoal  or  bank,  or  something  of  that  kind,  said  to 
exist  beneath  the  treacherous  waters.  The  captain,  after  he  had  adopted  all  the 
means  he  thought  necessary,  having  failed,  abandoned  the  enterprise,  declaring 
that  the  reported  danger  was  all  a  dream.  An  officer  on  board  formed  a  different 
judgment,  went  out  by  himself  on  an  expedition  afterwards  into  the  very  same 
latitude  and  longitude,  and  there  discovered  a  reef  of  rocks,  which  he  reported  at 
the  Admiralty ;  and  it  was  inserted  in  the  charts,  the  discoverer  being  rewarded 
with  a  high  appointment.  The  intelligence  came  to  the  captain's  ears ;  he  would 
not  believe  in  the  discovery.  He  was  a  shrewd,  clever,  practical  man,  but  un- 
scientific, incredulous,  and  obstinate.  "  The  whole  thing  is  a  falsehood,"  he 
exclaimed,  adding,  "  If  ever  I  have  the  keel  of  The  Thetis  under  me  in  those  waters 
again,  if  I  don't  carry  her  clean  over  where  the  chart  marks  a  rock,  call  me  a  liar, 
and  no  seaman."  Two  years  after  he  was  conveying,  in  the  same  vessel,  the  British 
ambassador  to  Naples.  One  windy  night,  he  and  the  master  were  examining  the 
chart  on  deck  by  the  light  of  the  lantern,  when  the  latter  pointed  out  the  sunken 
rock  on  the  map.  "  What !  "  exclaimed  the  old  seaman,  "  is  this  invention  to  meet 
me  in  the  teeth  again  J  No  ;  I  swore  I  would  sail  over  the  spot  the  first  chance  I 
had  ;  and  I'll  do  it."  He  went  down  into  the  cabin,  merrily  related  the  story  to  the 
company,  and  said,  "  Within  five  minutes  we  shall  have  passed  the  spot."  There 
was  a  pause.  Then,  taking  out  his  watch,  he  said,  "  oh  1  the  time  is  past.  We 
have  gone  over  the  wonderful  reef."  But  presently  a  grating  touch  was  felt  on  the 
ship's  keel,  then  a  sudden  shock,  a  tremendous  crash :  the  ship  had  foundered. 
Through  great  exertions,  most  of  the  crew  were  saved  :  but  the  captain  woidd  not 
survive  his  ovra  mad  temerity,  and  the  last  seen  of  him  was  his  white  figure,  bare- 
headed, and  in  his  shirt,  from  the  dark  huU  of  The  Thetis,  as  the  foam  burst  round 
her  bows  and  stem.  He  perished,  a  victim  of  unbelief.  So  perish  multitudes. 
(J.  L.  Nye.) 

Vers.  47-53.  Then  gathered  the  chief  priests  and  the  Pharisees  a  cotmclL — Th4 
Sanhedrim : — I.  The  name  avvklpiov.  Sanhedrin  is  more  accurate  than  Sanhedrim, 
though  this  is  more  frequently  used,  and  means  a  sitting  together,  an  assembly.  IL 
SioNiFiOATiOM :  the  supreme,  theocratico-hierarchical  court  of  the  Jews,  resident  at 
Jerusalem.  HI.  Composition  and  oboanization.  It  consisted  of  seventy-one 
members  forming  three  classes — chief  priests,  elders,  scribes.    At  that  time  it  was 


298  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap. 


composed  of  Pharisaic  and  Sadducean  elements.  Its  president  was  ordinarily  the 
High  Priest  who  was  assisted  by  a  vice-president.  IV.  Sessions.  1.  Extraordinary  l 
in  urgent  cases  at  the  house  of  the  High  Priest.  2.  Ordinary :  held  daily,  with  the 
exception  of  the  Sabbath  and  feast  days,  of  old  in  a  session-room  adjoining  the 
Temple,  called  Gazich,  but  from  a  period  of  forty  years  before  the  destruction  of 
the  Temple  in  places  near  the  Temple  mount.  V.  Mattees  coming  undee  thb 
COGNIZANCE  OF  THE  COURT  AS  A  FOBiJM.  Matters  Concerning  a  whole  tribe,  a  false 
prophet,  the  high  priest,  an  arbitrary  war,  or  blasphemy.  VI.  Pdnitabt  power. 
Formerly  infliction  of  capital  punishment ;  stoning,  burning,  beheading,  hanging ; 
later,  excommunication  and  recommendation  for  capital  punishment.  VII. 
Adkinistbation.  Connection  with  the  minor  courts ;  highest  court  of  appeal  from 
these  ;  intercourse  with  them  through  surrogates  and  apparitors.  VIII.  Extent  of 
AUTHOEiTT :  legislation,  administration,  justice.  IX.  History.  According  to  the 
Talmudists,  this  court  originated  in  the  institution  of  Moses  (Numb.  xi.  24).  That 
probably  was  prelusive.  So,  too,  the  supreme  court  of  Jehoshaphat  (2  Chron.  xix. 
8).  Increased  importance  of  this  institution  after  the  Exile.  The  yBvovaia  in  the 
time  of  the  Selucidse  (2  Mace.  i.  10.) ;  the  first  decided  mention  at  the  time  of  Anti- 
pater  and  Herod  ('•  Jos.  Antiq."  xiv.  9,  4).  (J.  P.  Lange,  D.D.)  What  do  we.— 
Men  active  for  destruction : — Alas  1  if  only  this  question  had  been :  "  What  mast 
we  do  to  be  saved  ?  "  But,  like  all  ungodly  men,  they  are,  as  Augustine  says,  more 
active  in  devising  ways  to  cause  destruction  than  to  escape  destruction.     "  What  do 

we  ? this  man  doeth  many  miracles  1  "    What  a  fearful  antithesis  is  here  I     (JR. 

Besser,  D.D.)  It  is  ever  in  the  way  of  those  who  rule  the  earth  to  leave  out  of 
their  reckoning  Him  who  rules  the  universe.  {Cowper.)  The  perplexity  Jesys 
occasions  Hit  enemies : — Man  cannot  come  into  the  presence  of  truth  and  purity 
without  shame  and  confusion.  The  Chief  Priests  and  Pharisees  felt  this  in  the 
presence  of  Jesus.  The  subject  suggested  is — The  perplexity  Jesus  occasions  His 
enemies.  I.  One  souecb  of  their  perplexitt  was  found  in  His  possession  and 
EXERCISE  OF  MIRACULOUS  POWER.  "  This  man  doeth  many  miracles."  What  should 
have  been  to  them  the  strongest  proof  of  the  dignity  of  His  character,  and  validity 
of  His  mission,  only  excited  their  jealousy  and  increased  their  fears.  UnbeUevers 
fear  the  power  of  Christianity,  while  they  despise  its  teaching,  and  reject  its  author. 
II.  Their  PERPLEXirt  was  increased  by  the  fame  and  success  of  His  mission. 
"  H  we  let  Him  thus  alone  all  men  will  believe  on  Him."  The  resurrection  of 
Lazarus,  added  to  the  fame  of  Jesus,  which  had  been  increasing  as  He  swept  along 
in  His  career.  His  success  recorded  in  verse  45.  Nothing  troubles  infidels  more 
than  the  tenacious  life  of  Christianity,  and  its  irrepressible  extension.     III.  Theib 

PERPLEXITY  REACHED  ITS  CLIMAX  WHEN  THEY  DECIDED  TO   PUT  HiM  TO  DEATH  (ver.  63). 

Murder  has  ever  been  the  miserable  subterfuge  of  the  tyrant— the  ghastly  policy  of 
the  weak  and  despotic.  But  what  a  condition  of  heart  does  this  reveal — bewilder- 
ment, cowardice,  cruelty.  The  man  least  disturbed  was  their  victim.  Calm  and 
unmoved,   Jesus  pressed  forward  to  finish  His  work.     IV.   The  deed  by  which 

THEY  BOUGHT  TO  END  THEIR  PERPLEXITY  ONLY  INCREASED  IT.      To  die  WaS  the  objeCt  Of 

Christ's  coming  into  the  world.  By  His  death  atonement  was  made  for  sin.  The 
cruelty  of  the  wicked  defeats  its  purpose.  V.  How  vastly  was  their  perplexity 
iNOBBASED  WHEN  Jesus  ROSE  FBOM  THE  DEAD  1  Lcam — 1.  How  vain  and  fatal  a  thing 
it  is  to  fight  against  God.  2.  That  believing  in  Jesus  is  the  readiest  and  only  way  of 
ending  all  perplexity  concerning  Him.  (G.  Barlow.)  The  prime  agents  in  the 
Crucifixion : — In  the  events  of  the  Passion  three  chief  actors  offer  in  individual  types 
the  springs  of  hostility  to  Christ.  Blindness — the  blindness  that  will  not  see — is 
consummated  in  the  High  Priest :  weakness  in  the  irresolute  governor :  selfishness 
in  the  traitor  apostle.  The  Jew,  the  heathen,  the  apostate  disciple  form  a  repre- 
sentative group  of  enemies  of  the  Lord.  These  men  form  a  fertile  study.  _  I.  All 
that  St.  John  records  of  Caiaphas  is  contained  in  a  single  sentence;  and  yet  in  that 
one  ^ort  speech  the  whole  soul  of  the  man  is  laid  open.  The  Council  in  timid 
irresolution  expressed  their  fear  lest  *'  the  Romans  might  come,"  &o.  (ver.  48). 
They  both  petrified  their  dispensation  into  a  place  and  a  nation,  and  they  were 
alarmed  when  they  saw  their  idol  endangered.  But  Caiaphas  saw  his  occasion  in 
their  terror.  For  him  Jesus  was  a  victim  by  whom  they  could  appease  the 
suspicion  of  their  conquerors  (ver  49,  &c.).  The  victim  was  innocent,  but  the  life 
of  one  could  not  be  weighed  against  the  safety  of  a  society.  Nay,  rather,  it  was  as 
His  words  imply,  a  happy  chance  that  they  could  seem  to  vindicate  their  loyalty 
while  they  gratified  their  hatred.  To  this  the  Divine  hiemrchy  had  come  at  last. 
Abraham  offered  his  son  to  God  in  obedience  to  the  F  .:her  in  whom  he  trusted: 


«HAP.  n.]  ST.  JOHN.  S99 

Csiaphas  gave  the  Christ  to  Cessar  in  obedience  to  the  policy  which  had  snbstitnted 
the  Been  for  the  unseen.  U.  Caiaphas  had  lost  the  power  of  seeing  the  truth : 
PnATB  had  lost  the  power  of  holding  it.  There  is  a  sharp  contrast  between  the 
clear  resolute  purpose  of  the  priest,  and  the  doubtful  wavering  answers  of  the 
governor.  The  judge  shows  his  contempt  for  the  accusers,  but  the  accusers  are 
stronger  than  he.  It  is  in  vain  that  he  tries  one  expedient  after  another  to  satisfy 
the  unjust  passion  of  his  suitors.  He  examines  the  charge  of  evil  doing  and  pro- 
nounoss  it  groundless ;  but  he  lacks  courage  to  pronounce  an  unpopular  acquittal. 
He  seeks  to  move  compassion  by  exhibiting  Jesus  scourged  and  mocked,  and  yet 
guiltless ;  and  the  chief  priests  defeat  Him  by  the  cry  "  Crucify  "  (chap.  xix.  6).  He 
hears  His  claim  to  be  a  •'  King  not  of  this  world  "  and  "  the  Son  of  God,"  and  is 
"  the  more  afraid  " ;  but  his  hesitation  is  removed  by  an  argument  of  which  he  feels 
the  present  power  (chap.  xix.  12).  The  fear  of  disgrace  prevailed  over  the  convic- 
tion of  justice,  over  the  impression  of  awe,  over  the  pride  of  the  Boman.  The  Jews 
completed  their  apostasy  when  they  cried,  "  We  have  no  king  but  Caesar " ;  and 
Pilate  unconvinced,  baffled,  overborne,  delivered  to  them  their  true  King  to  be 
crucified,  firm  only  in  this,  that  he  would  not  change  the  title  which  he  had  written 
in  scorn,  and  yet  as  an  unconscious  prophet.  III.  Caiaphas  misinterpreted  the 
Divine  covenant  which  he  represented :  Pilate  was  faithless  to  the  spirit  of  the 
authority  with  which  he  was  lawfully  invested ;  Judas  perverted  the  very  teaching 
of  Christ  Himself.  If  once  we  regard  Judas  as  one  who  looked  to  Christ  for  selfish 
ends,  even  his  thoughts  become  intelligible.  He  was  bound  to  his  Master,  not  for 
what  He  was,  but  for  what  He  thought  that  he  would  obtain  through  Him.  Others, 
like  the  sons  of  Zebedee,  spoke  out  of  the  fulness  of  their  hearts,  and  their  mistaken 
ambition  was  purified :  Judas  would  not  expose  his  fancies  to  reproof.  St.  Peter  was 
called  Satan,  an  adversary ;  but  Judas  was  a  devil,  a  perverter  of  that  which 
is  holy  and  true.  He  set  up  self  as  His  standard,  and  by  an  easy  delusion  he 
came  to  forget  that  there  could  be  any  other.  Even  at  the  last  he  seems  to 
have  fancied  that  he  could  force  the  manifestation  of  Christ's  power  by  placing 
Him  in  the  hands  of  His  enemies  (chap.  vi.  70 ;  xviii.  6).  He  obeys  the  command 
to  ••  do  quickly  what  he  did,"  as  if  he  were  ministering  to  his  Master's  service.  He 
stands  by  in  the  garden  when  the  soldiers  went  back,  and  fell  to  the  ground,  waiting, 
as  it  were,  for  the  revelation  of  the  Messiah  in  His  Majesty.  Then  came  the  end. 
He  knew  the  sovereignty  of  Christ,  and  he  saw  Him  go  to  death.  St.  John  says 
nothing  of  what  followed ;  but  there  can  be  no  situation  more  overwhelmingly  tragic 
than  that  in  which  he  shows  the  traitor  for  the  last  time,  "  standing  "  with  those  who 
came  to  take  Jesus.  {Bp.  Westcott.)  One  of  them  named  Caiaphas  being  the  high 
priest  that  same  year  .  .  .  prophesied. — A  memorable  year: — If  this  circumstance 
had  taken  place  in  the  palmy  days  of  the  theocracy,  the  expression  would  be  incom- 
prehensible ;  for,  according  to  the  Mosaic  law,  the  high  priesthood  was  held  for  life. 
But  since  the  Eoman  supremacy,  the  rulers  of  the  land,  dreading  the  power  derived 
from  a  permanent  office,  had  adopted  the  custom  of  frequently  changing  one  high 
priest  for  another.  According  to  Josephus  the  Eoman  governor,  Valerius  Gratus, 
"  deprived  Ananus  of  the  high  priesthood  and  conferred  it  on  Ishmael,  and  after- 
wards deposing  him  madeEleazar,  son  of  Ishmael,  high  priest.  A  year  after  he  also 
was  deposed,  and  Simon  nominated  in  his  stead,  who,  retaining  the  dignity  for  a  year 
only,  was  succeeded  by  Joseph,  surnamed  Caiaphas."  The  latter  continued  in  office 
from  A.D.  24  to  36,  and  consequently  throughout  the  ministry  of  Jesus.  These 
frequent  changes  justify  the  expression  of  the  Evangelist,  and  deprive  criticism  of 
any  excuse  for  saying  that  the  author  of  this  Gospel  did  not  know  that  the  pontificate 
lasted  for  life.  But  since  Caiaphas  was  high  priest  for  eleven  consecutive  years,  why 
did  St.  John  three  times  over  (vers.  49,  61 ;  xviii.  13)  use  the  expression,  "  that 
year  "  ?  Because  he  desired  to  recall  the  importance  of  that  unique  and  decisive 
year  in  which  the  perfect  sacrifice  terminated  the  typical  sacrifices  and  the 
Levitical  priesthood  as  exercised  by  Caiaphas.  It  devolved  upon  the  high  priest  to 
offer  every  year  the  great  atoning  sacrifice  for  the  sins  of  the  people,  and  this  was 
the  office  now  performed  by  Caiaphas,  as  the  last  representative  of  the  ancient 
priesthood.  By  his  vote  he,  in  s  me  degree,  appointed  and  sacrificed  the  victim  who 
in  that  ever  memorable  year  was  to  bring  in  an  everlasting  righteousness,"  &c.  (Dan. 
ix.  24-27).  {F.  Godet,  D.D.)  Unconscious  prophecies  : — If  some  historian  were  to 
write  that  Abraham  Lincoln  was  president  of  the  United  States  that  same  year  in 
which  the  great  civil  war  broke  out,  would  any  be  justified  in  imputing  to  him  the 
mistake  that  the  presidency  was  an  annual  office,  or  in  concluding  that  the  writer  could 
not  have  been  an  American  living  at  the  time,  and  to  whom  the  ordinary  ■oorces  of 


BOO  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHAF.  n. 

information  were  open  ?  And  who  has  a  right  to  ascribe  to  the  words  of  St.  John  any 
farther  meaning  than  that  Caiapbas  was  high  priest  then  t  Whether  he  had  been 
BO  before,  or  should  be  after,  was  nothing  to  his  present  pnrpose.  The  oracular, 
even  prophetic,  character  which  hia  utterance  obtained  requires  some  explanation. 
That  a  bad  man  should  utter  words  which  were  so  over-ruled  by  God  as  to  become 
prophetic,  would  of  itself  be  no  difficulty.  He  who  used  Balaam  could  use 
Gaiaphas.  Nor  is  there  any  difficulty  in  such  unconscious  prophecies  as  this 
evidently  is.  It  exactly  answers  as  such  to  the  omina  of  Boman  superstition,  in 
which  words  spoken  by  one  in  a  lesser  meaning  are  taken  up  by  another  in  a  higher, 
and  by  him  claimed  to  be  prophetic  of  that.  Cicero  ("  De  Divin,"  i.  46)  gives 
examples  :  these,  too,  resting  on  the  faith  that  men's  words  are  ruled  by  a  higher 
power  than  their  own.  How  many  prophecies  of  a  like  kind  meet  us  in  the  history 
of  the  Crucifixion !  What  was  the  title  over  our  Lord  but  another  such  scornful, 
yet  most  veritable  prophecy  ?  Or  what,  again,  the  purple  robe  and  the  homage  ;  the 
sceptre  and  the  crown  ?  The  Boman  soldiers  did  not  mean  to  fulfil  Psa.  xxii  when 
they  parted  Christ's  garments,  &a.,  nor  the  Jewish  mockers  when  they  spoke  those 
taunting  words  ;  but  they  did  so  none  the  less.  And  in  the  typical  rehearsals  of 
the  crowning  catastrophe  in  the  drama  of  God's  providence,  how  many  a  Nimrod, 
Pharaoh,  Antiochus  and  Nero — ^Antichrists  that  do  not  quite  come  to  the  birth — 
have  prophetic  parts  allotted  to  them  which  they  play  out,  unknowing  what  they  do. 
We  have  an  example  of  this  in  the  very  name  Caiaphas,  which  is  only  another  form 
of  Cephas.  But  the  perplexing  circumstance  is  the  attribution  to  him  because  He 
was  the  high  priest  of  these  prophetic  words.  But  there  is  no  need  to  suppose  that 
St.  John  meant  to  affirm  this  to  have  been  a  power  inherent  in  the  high  priesthood ; 
but  only  that  God,  the  extorter  of  the  unwilling,  or  even  unconscious,  prophecies  of 
wicked  men,  ordained  this  further :  that  he  in  whom  the  whole  theocracy  culminated, 
who  was  "  the  Prince  of  the  People  "  (Acts  xxiii.  5),  for  such,  till  another  high  priest 
had  sanctified  Himself — and  his  moral  character  was  nothing  to  the  point— 
Caiaphas  truly  was,  should,  because  he  bore  this  office,  be  the  organ  of  this 
memorable  prophecy  concerning  Christ,  and  the  meaning  and  end  of  His  death. 
{Archbishop  Trench.)  Te  know  nothing  at  all,  nor  consider  that  It  Is  expedient 
for  us  that  one  man  should  die  for  the  people. — What  is  morally  wrong  can  never 
be  politically  right.  {C.  J.  Fox.)  Caiaphas: — 1.  The  resurrection  of  Lazarus 
had  raised  a  wave  of  popular  excitement.  Any  stir  was  dangerous,  especially  at 
Passover  time,  when  Jerusalem  would  be  filled  with  men  ready  to  take  fire  from  any 
spark.  So  a  hasty  meeting  of  the  council  was  summoned  to  disonss  the  situation  and 
to  concert  measures  for  repressing  the  nascent  enthusiasm.  Like  all  weak  men, 
they  feel  that  "  something  must  be  done."  Their  fear  is  not  patriotism  or  religion, 
but  self-interest.  They  are  at  a  loss  what  to  do.  2.  But  there  is  one  man  who 
knows  his  own  mind,  and  no  restraint  of  conscience  or  delicacy  keeps  him  from 
speaking  it  out.  Impatient  at  their  vacillation,  he  brushes  it  all  aside  with,  "  Te 
know  nothing  at  all."  The  one  point  for  us  is  our  own  interests.  This  Man  must 
die.  Never  mind  His  miracles,  teaching,  character.  He  is  a  perpetual  danger  to 
our  prerogatives.  And  so  he  clashes  his  advice  down  into  the  middle  of  their  waver- 
ings, like  a  piece  of  iron  into  yielding  water,  and  the  strong  man  is  master  of  the 
situation,  and  the  resolve  is  taken  (ver.  53).  3.  But  John  regards  this  advice  as 
prophecy.  Caiaphas  spoke  wiser  things  than  he  knew.  The  Divine  Spirit  breathed 
in  strange  fashion  and  moulded  his  savage  utterance  into  an  expression  of  the  deepest 
thought  about  Christ's  death.  Consider — I.  The  unscrtipoijOCs  pbiest  and  his 
SAVAGE  ADVICE.  1.  He  was  set  by  his  office  to  tend  the  sacred  flame  of  Messianic  hope, 
with  pure  hands  and  heart  to  offer  sacrifice  for  sin,  and  to  witness  for  the  truth. 
And  see  what  he  is  1  A  crafty  schemer,  blind  to  Christ's  character  and  teaching, 
unspiritual,  rude,  cruel.  What  a  lesson  this  speech  and  the  character  disclosed  by 
it  read  to  all  who  have  a  professional  connection  with  religion.  Priests  of  all  churches 
have  always  been  tempted  to  look  upon  religion  as  existing  somehow  for  their 
personal  advantage.  And  so  "the  Church  is  in  danger  "  means  "my  position  is 
threatened ; "  and  heretics  must  be  got  rid  of  because  their  teaching  is  inconvenient, 
and  new  truth  is  fought  against  because  officials  do  not  see  how  it  harmonizes  with 
their  pre-eminence.  2.  All  who  professionally  handle  sacred  things  are  tempted  to 
look  upon  truth  as  their  stock-in-trade,  and  to  fight  against  innovations  that  appear 
to  threaten  the  teacher's  position.  3.  But  the  lessons  are  for  all.  This  selfish  con- 
sideration of  our  own  interests — (1)  Will  blind  us  to  the  most  radiant  beauty  ol 
truth  ;  aye,  to  Christ  Himself.  Fishes  which  live  in  the  water  of  caverns  lose  their 
sight,  and  men  who  live  in  the  dark  holes  of  their  own  selfish  natures  lose  theif 


CHAP,  xi-l  ST.  JOHN.  301 

spiritiial  sight.  When  you  put  on  regard  for  yourselves  as  they  do  blinkers  on 
horses  you  lose  the  power  of  comprehensive  vision,  and  only  see  straight  forward 
upon  the  line  marked  out  by  self  interests.  Lord  Nelson  at  Copenhagen  put  his 
telescope  up  to  his  blind  eye  at  the  signal  of  recall,  and  this  is  what  selfishness  does 
with  hundreds  who  do  not  know  it.  There  are  none  so  blind  as  those  who  won't  see ; 
and  there  are  none  who  won't  see  so  certainly  as  those  who  have  a  suspicion  that  if 
they  do  they  will  have  to  change  their  tack.  (2)  May  bring  a  man  down  to  any 
bind  and  degree  of  wrong-doing.  CaiapVias  was  brought  down  by  it  from  supreme 
judge  to  assassin.  If  you  begin  with  "  it  is  expedient  "  as  the  canon  of  your  conduct 
you  get  on  an  inclined  plane  that  tilts  at  a  very  sharp  angle,  and  is  sufficiently 
greased,  and  ends  away  in  darkness  and  death,  and  it  is  only  a  question  of  time  how 
far,  fast,  deep  and  irrevocable  will  be  your  descent.  (3)  Has  in  it  an  awful  power  of 
60  twisting  and  searing  a  man's  conscience  as  tbat  he  comes  to  view  the  evil  and 
never  knows  there  is  any  wrong  in  it.  Caiaphas  had  no  conception  that  he  was 
doing  anything  but  obeying  the  dictate  of  self-preservation.  The  crime  of  the 
actual  crucifixion  was  diminished  because  done  unconsciously;  but  the  crime  of  the 
process  by  which  they  came  to  be  unconscious — how  tbat  was  increased  and 
deepened  I  4.  The  only  antagonist  to  this  selfishness  is  to  yield  ourselves  to  the  love 
of  God  in  Christ,  and  to  say,  "I  live,  yet  not  I,"  &c.  II.  The  unconscious  prophet 
AND  HIS  GBEAT  PBEDicTiON.  1.  The  Evangelist  conceives  that  the  high  priest,  being  the 
bead  of  the  theocratic  community,  was  naturally  the  medium  of  a  Divine  oracle.  In 
that  fateful  year  the  great  "High  Priest  for  ever"  stood  for  a  moment  by  the 
side  of  the  earthly  high  priest — the  Substance  by  the  shadow — and  by  this  offering 
of  Himself  deprived  priesthood  and  sacrifice  of  all  their  validity.  Caiaphas  was  in 
reality  the  last  of  the  high  priests,  and  those  that  succeeded  him  for  less  than  half 
a  century  were  but  like  ghosts.  Solemn  and  strange  that  Aaron's  long  line  ended 
in  such  a  man  I  2.  Being  high  priest  he  prophesied.  And  there  was  nothing 
strange  in  a  bad  man's  prophesying.  Balaam  did ;  so  did  Pilate  when  he  wrote 
the  inscription,  and  the  Pharisees  when  they  said,  ** He  saved  others."  3.  The 
prophecy  suggests — (1)  The  twofold  aspect  of  Christ's  death.  From  the  human 
standpoint  it  was  murder  by  forms  of  law  for  political  ends.  From  the  Divine 
point  of  view  it  is  God's  great  sacrifice  for  the  sin  of  the  world.  The  greatest 
crime  is  the  greatest  blessing.  Man's  sin  works  out  the  Divine  purpose,  even  as  the 
coral  insects  blindly  building  up  the  reef  that  keeps  back  the  waters,  or,  as  the  sea 
in  its  wild  impotent  rage,  seeking  to  overwhelm  the  land,  only  throws  upon  the 
beach  a  barrier  that  confines  its  waves  and  curbs  their  fury.  (2)  The  twofold  con- 
sequences of  that  death  upon  the  nation  itself,  (a)  The  thing  which  Caiaphas 
had  tried  to  prevent  was  brought  about  by  the  deed  itself.  Christ's  death  was  the 
destruction,  and  not  the  salvation,  of  the  nation.  (6)  And  yet  it  was  true  that  He 
died  for  that  people,  for  Caiaphas  as  truly  as  for  John.  You  must  either  build  upon 
Christ,  the  Foundation  Stone,  or  be  crushed  into  powder  under  Him.  4.  The  two- 
fold sphere  in  which  that  death  works  its  effect.  When  John  wrote  the  narrower 
national  system  had  been  shivered,  and  from  out  of  the  dust  and  ruin  had  emerged 
the  firmer  reality  of  a  Church  as  wide  as  the  world.  (1)  The  scattered  children  of 
God  were  to  be  united  round  the  Cross.  The  only  bond  that  unites  men  is  their 
common  relation  to  Christ.  That  is  deeper  than  all  the  bonds  of  nation,  blood, 
race,  society,  «fec.  (2)  Christ's  death  brings  men  into  the  family  of  God.  ••  To 
as  many  as  received  Him,"  &c.     (A.  Maelaren,  D.D.)  Truth  borne  by  strange 

witnesses : — A  flaming  torch  may  be  found  in  a  blind  man's  hand.  (J.  Trapp.) 
Caiaphas  ;  or,  a  glance  at  government,  human  and  Divine  : — I.  An  iniquitous 
POLICY  IN  THE  GOVERNMENT  OF  MAN.  At  the  meeting  of  the  Sanhedrim  two 
things  were  admitted — Christ's  mighty  deeds  ;  His  power  over  the  people.  These 
admissions  by  enemies  are  important  as  evidence  and  significant  as  lessons.  In 
relation  to  Caiaphas's  policy,  note — 1.  That  it  was  apparently  adapted  to  the  end. 
Christ  was  alienating  the  people  from  the  institutions  of  the  country,  and  shaking 
their  faith  in  its  authorities ;  and  the  most  effective  plan  for  terminating  the 
mischief  seemed  to  be  to  put  Him  to  death.  2.  Though  seemingly  adapted  to  the 
end  it  was  radically  wrong  in  principle.  The  Victim  was  innocent.  The  apparent 
fitness  of  a  measure  to  an  end  does  not  make  it  right.  3.  Being  radically  wrong  it 
was  ultimately  ruinous.  It  brought  upon  them  the  judgments  which  broke  up  the 
Commonwealth.  Let  Governments  study  the  policy  of  Caiaphas.  II.  A  stupendous 
riCT  IN  THE  government  OP  GoD.  Caiaphas  unconsciously  predicts  a  feature  of 
the  Divine  administration — that  the  death  of  Christ  was  necessary  to  the  salvation 
of  otiierB.    1.  Negatively.    The  death  of  Christ — (1)  Does  not  change  the  mind  of 


302  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA>.  a 

God  in  relation  to  man.  It  is  the  expression,  proof,  and  medium  of  God's  loT*. 
(2)  Does  not  relax  the  claims  of  laws.  Nothing  can  do  this  bat  annihilation.  (3) 
Does  not  mitigate  the  enormity  of  sin,  bat  rather  increases  it.  (4)  Does  not  change 
the  necessary  conditions  of  spiritual  improvement — the  intellectual  study,  heart 
application,  and  devotional  practice  of  Divine  truth.  2.  Positively.  (1)  It  give» 
a  new  revelation  of  God.  (2)  It  gives  new  motives  to  obedience.  "  Ye  are  not 
your  own,"  <&c.  (3)  It  supplies  new  helps  to  spiritual  culture,  (a)  The  highest 
ideal— the  character  of  Christ.  (6)  The  highest  incentives — gratitude,  esteem, 
benevolence,  (c)  The  highest  Minister — God's  Spirit.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The 
modern  Caiaphas  : — Gaiaphas  appears  in  three  characters.  I.  As  a  witness — 1. 
To  the  truth  of  Christ's  miracles.  He  had  every  reason  to  deny  it,  and  that  he  did 
not  is  certain  evidence  that  he  could  not.  In  this  he  was  wiser  than  his  modem 
disciples,  who  admire  Christ's  doctrines  but  deny  His  works.  Eliminate  the  latter 
and  yoa  throw  discredit  on  the  authenticity  of  the  former.  If  Christ  be  not  risen 
(the  greatest  miracle),  says  Paul,  preaching  is  false  and  faith  vain.  And  if  you  get 
rid  of  Christ's  miracles,  what  about  those  of  nature  and  man?  2.  To  the  power  of 
formality — the  deep-seated  hatred  of  innovation  which  is  in  man.  Christ  was  a 
mighty  Phenomenon.  He  struck  oat  a  new  line  of  thought  and  life,  and  those 
who  do  that  must  expect  opposition.  When  WUberforce  began  his  career  a  noble- 
man pointed  to  a  picture  of  Uie  Crucifixion  and  said,  "That  is  the  end  of  reformers." 
If  you  have  not  found  it  true  it  is  because  you  have  not  tried  to  reform  anything. 
Men  hate  to  be  disturbed  in  their  sins.  8.  To  Christ  as  a  disturbing  force  in 
history.  He  may  be  hated  and  crucified,  but  He  cannot  be  ignored.  He  brings 
Divine  tumult  with  Him,  and  divides  the  world  into  hostile  camps.  All  kingdoms 
are  shaken  that  His  kingdom  may  be  set  up.  From  the  days  of  Caiaphas  to  now 
the  supreme  question  is,  "  What  think  ye  of  Christ  ?  "  •*  What  are  we  to  do  ?  " 
said  the  priest.  *'  How  long  halt  ye  f  "  &o.  If  Christ  be  false  then  "  away  with 
Him."  But  if  He  be  true  be  honest  enough  to  act  on  your  conviction.  H.  As  a 
PBOPHST.  The  gift  of  prophecy  was  supposed  never  to  have  died  out  of  the  Jewish 
priesthood.  So  when  Caiaphas  arose  all  voices  were  hushed  as  he  said,  "  It  is 
expedient,"  &o.  Mark  how  God  raises  the  speech  of  a  frantic  bigot  so  that  it 
becomes  a  prophecy  of  the  atonement.  Even  as  storm,  wind,  hail,  &o.,  do  God's 
bidding  no  less  than  the  sunshine,  so  God  uses  even  evil  men  to  do  the  very  thing 
they  oppose.  What  does  sceptical  criticism  do  for  Christ  but  reveal  that  there  is 
that  which  is  above  all  criticism.  The  mountain  is  never  so  grand  as  when  the 
storm  gathers  round  it.  And  so  Christ  stands  unshaken,  triumphant  amid  the 
loud  tempest  and  tumult  of  history.  The  wrath  of  men  praises  Him,  &o.  III.  As 
a  PHiLosoPHEB.  He  recognizes  the  sacrificial  element  which  has  always  been 
at  work  in  society.  Do  you  turn  to  Leviticus  and  regard  it  as  an  obsolete  record  of 
curious  ancient  custom  ?  If  so  you  will  never  grasp  its  significance,  which  goes 
down  to  the  root  of  human  life.  The  word  written  across  the  Book  is  **  sacrifice." 
Life  is  built  up  of  sacrifice.  It  is  the  law  of  motherhood  and  of  love,  the  soul  ot 
heroism,  the  essence  of  nobleness.  Ages  sacrifice  themselves  for  the  race  that 
follows.  There  is  nothing  Diviner  than  for  a  man  to  die  for  sins  not  his  own. 
The  world  will  never  be  redeemed  until  men  are  ready  to  die  for  it.  Caiaphas 
defines  the  meaning  of  Christ  in  history.  He  is  "  the  Lamb  of  God."  {W.  J. 
Dawson.)  The  counsel  of  Caiaphas: — I.  The  death  of  Christ  as  a.  poliiicai» 
CBiMB.  1.  The  real  reason :  because  Christ  would  not  be  another  Maccabsus  to 
achieve  political  emancipation.  2.  The  ostensible  pretext :  that  He  threatened  to 
bring  them  into  conflict  with  the  Soman  power,  and  thus  imperilled  their  interests 
8.  The  fatal  blunder.  All  political  crimes  are  blunders.  The  murder  of  Jesus 
brought  about  the  destruction  of  the  Jewish  State.  U.  The  death  of  Christ  as  a 
Divine  sacrifice.  1.  Its  substitutionary  character.  It  was,  and  that  according  to 
the  Divine  intention,  the  death  of  one  Man  for  the  people.  The  Son  of  Man  gave 
His  life  a  ransom  for  many,  and  died  the  just  for  the  unjust.  2.  Its  world-wide 
significance.  Christ  died  not  for  Jews  only  but  for  Gentiles  (1  John  ii.  2).  3.  Its 
ultimate  design :  "  that  He  shall  gather,"  <fec.  (chap.  x.  16).  The  enlargement 

of  the  Spirit  on  Caiaphas's  prophecy : — I.  Fob  whom  Christ  died.  1.  The  Jews. 
2.  The  children  of  God  scattered  abroad.  (1)  Then  living.  (2)  Throughout  all 
time.  II.  The  purpose  of  His  death  concerning  these:  to  gather  them  into 
one.  Christ's  dying  is — 1.  The  great  attraction  to  our  hearts.  2.  The  great  centre 
of  our  unity.  (1)  By  the  merit  of  His  death  recommending  all  in  one  to  the  favour 
of  God.  (2)  By  the  motive  of  His  death  drawing  each  to  the  love  of  every  other. 
(if.  Henry.)        Substitution: — A  certain  town  called  Ekrikok  was  devoted  to 


OHAJ.  B.]  ST.  JOHN.  803 

destruction  for  high  treason.  But  it  was  allowed  to  redeem  itself,  partly  by  a 
fine  and  partly  by  one  life  being  offered  in  expiatory  sacrifice  for  the  whole,  which 
was  accomplished  in  the  person  of  a  new  slave,  bought  for  the  purpose.  Mr. 
Waddell,  the  missionary,  remonstrating  on  the  subject  with  "  Old  Egho  Jack,  th® 
head  of  a  great  family,"  that  personage  asserted  that  "  it  was  impossible  the  affair 
could  be  settled  without  a  death,  for  Egho  law  was  the  same  as  God's  law  to 
Calabar,"  and  he  pointedly  asked  me  if  it  were  better  for  all  Ekrikok  to  die,  or  for 
one  slave  to  die  for  all  the  town  ?  I  thought  of  the  words  of  Caiaphas,  and  of  the 
value  of  life  as  a  substitution  and  atonement  for  sin.  A  poor  slave,  bought  in  the 
market  for  a  few  hundred  coppers,  by  his  death  redeemed  a  town,  for  which  many 
thousands  of  money  would  have  availed  nothing.  {Missionary  Record  of  the 
U.   P.  Church.)  Substitution: — In  the  time  of  Napoleon  I.  a  certain  man 

agreed  to  join  tne  ranks  ii)  the  place  of  a  comrade  who  had  been  drafted.  The 
offer  was  accepted,  the  battle  was  fought,  and  the  man  was  killed.  Some  time 
after  another  draft  was  made,  and  they  wanted  a  second  time  to  take  the  man 
whose  substitute  had  been  shot.  "  No,"  said  he,  "  you  can't  take  me  ;  I'm  dead. 
I  was  shot  at  such  a  battle."  "  Why,  man,  you  are  crazy.  Look  here,  you  got  a 
substitute ;  another  man  went  in  your  place,  but  you  have  not  been  shot."  "  No, 
but  he  died  in  my  place ;  he  went  as  my  substitute."  They  would  not  recognize  it, 
and  it  was  carried  up  to  the  Emperor  ;  but  the  Emperor  said  the  man  was  right. 
Napoleon  I.  recognized  the  doctrine  of  substitution,  (D.  L.  Moody.)  Vicarious 
atonement : — Some  350  years  B.C.  a  great  chasm  opened  in  the  Forum  of  Rome, 
which  the  soothsayers  declared  could  only  be  filled  up  by  throwing  into  it 
Home's  greatest  treasure.  Thereupon  Mettus  Curtius,  a  young  and  noble  Eoman 
knight,  arrayed  himself  in  full  armour,  and  mounted  his  charger,  and,  declaring 
that  Eome  possessed  no  greater  treasure  than  a  brave  citizen,  leaped  into  tbe 
chasm,  upon  which  the  earth  closed  over  him.  (W.  Baxendale.)  The  sacrifice 
of  one  the  salvation  of  many  : — At  Kagenbach  in  Germany  one  afternoon  a  great 
number  of  people  were  assembled  in  the  large  room  of  the  inn.  The  room  door 
stood  open  and  the  village  blacksmith,  a  pious,  brave-hearted  man,  sat  near  the 
door.  All  at  once  a  mad  dog  rushed  in,  but  was  seized  by  the  smith  with  an  iron 
grasp  and  dashed  on  the  floor.  "  Stand  back,  my  friends,"  cried  he.  "Now  hurry 
out  while  I  hold  him.  Better  for  one  to  perish  than  for  all."  The  dog  bit  furiously 
on  every  side.  His  teeth  tore  the  arms  and  thighs  of  the  heroic  smith,  but  he  would 
not  let  go  his  hold.  When  all  the  people  had  escaped  he  flung  the  half-strangled 
beast  from  him  against  the  wall,  left  the  room  and  locked  the  door.  The  dog  was 
shot ;  but  what  was  to  become  of  the  man  ?  The  friends  whose  lives  he  had  saved 
stood  round  bim  weeping.  "  Be  quiet,  my  friends,"  he  said,  "  don't  weep  for  me  : 
I've  only  done  my  duty.  When  I  am  dead  think  of  me  with  love ;  and  now  pray 
for  me  that  God  will  not  let  me  suffer  long  or  too  much.  I  know  I  shall  become 
mad,  but  I  will  take  care  that  no  harm  comes  to  you  through  me."  Then  he  went 
to  his  shop.  He  took  a  strong  chain.  One  end  of  it  he  rivetted  with  hia  own 
hands  round  his  body,  the  other  end  he  fastened  round  the  anvil  so  strongly  that 
no  earthly  power  could  loose  it.  Then  he  turned  to  his  friends  and  said,  "  Now 
it's  done  !  You  are  all  safe.  I  can't  hurt  you.  Bring  me  food  while  I  am  well, 
and  keep  out  of  my  reach  when  I  am  mad.  The  rest  I  leave  with  God."  Soon 
madness  seized  him,  and  in  nine  days  he  died — died  gloriously  for  his  friends ; 
but  Christ  died  for  His  enemies.  (R.  Newton,  D.D.)  Self-sacrifice: — The 
plagiie  was  making  a  desert  of  the  city  of  Marseilles ;  death  was  everywhere.  The 
physicians  could  do  nothing.  In  one  of  their  councils  it  was  decided  that  a  corpse 
must  be  dissected  ;  but  it  would  be  death  to  the  operator.  A  celebrated  physician 
of  the  number  arose,  and  said,  "  I  devote  myself  for  the  safety  of  my  country. 
Before  this  numerous  assembly,  I  swear  in  the  name  of  humanity  and  rehgion, 
that  to-morrow  at  the  break  of  day  I  will  dissect  a  corpse  and  write  down  as  I 
proceed  what  I  observe."  He  iromediately  left  the  room,  made  his  will,  and  spent 
the  night  in  religious  exercises.  During  the  day  a  man  had  died  in  the  house  of 
the  plague  and  at  daybreak  on  the  following  morning  the  physician,  whose  name 
was  Guyon,  entered  the  room  and  critically  made  the  necessary  examinations, 
writing  down  all  his  surgical  observations.  He  then  left  the  room,  threw  the 
papers  into  a  vase  of  vinegar  that  they  might  not  convey  the  disease  to  another, 
and  retired  to  a  convenient  place  where  he  died  in  twelve  hoars.  (HomHetie 
Monthly.) 

Vers.  63-57.    From  that  day  forth  they  took  conosel  together  for  to  put  wim  t« 


804  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

deatb. — I.  The  cbowning  cbimb  of  jauMANiTY. — 1,  It  was  sanctioned  by  religion. 
A  religions  institution  is  often  the  corruptest,  and  a  religious  man  the  worst.  2.  It 
was  pursued  with  deliberation.  When  murder  is  perpetrated  by  the  impulse  of 
passion  it  is  an  awful  crime  :  when  by  cold  deliberation  it  is  worse ;  when  by  the 
deliberation  of  one  man  it  is  hideous ;  but  when  by  the  deliberation  of  a  whole 
assembly  its  enormity  is  enhanced.  3.  It  was  delayed  by  Christ  (ver.  54).  XL 
The  manifold  aspects  of  wickedness.  1.  Wretched  superstition  (ver.  55).  They 
could  not  partake  of  the  passover  if  they  were  defiled.  But  here  are  men  with 
murder  in  their  hearts  careful  to  attend  a  mere  ceremony.  Wickedness  often  runs 
into  superstition.  2.  Profane  curiosity  (ver.  56).  It  was  a  sort  of  betting  whether 
He  would  come  or  not.  3.  Organized  malice  (ver.  57).  (D.  Thomas,  D,D.) 
Watching  the  good  to  take  them  : — When  John  Huss  retired  from  the  consistory  of 
the  Pope  and  cardinals,  his  lodging  was  encircled  from  that  time  by  watchful 
sentinels ;  and  a  monk  was  let  loose  upon  him,  to  ensnare  him  with  dangerous 
questions — for  Huss  had  protested  that  he  had  rather  die  than  be  justly  condemned 
as  a  heretic;  and  that  if  convinced  of  error  he  would  make  full  recantation.  He  had 
the  shrewdness  to  "  detect  in  the  monk,  who  affected  the  utmost  simplicity,  one  of 
the  subtlest  theologians  of  the  day."  Jesus  therefore  walked  no  more  openly. 
I.  The  concealment  of  Christ's  person. — 1.  The  reason  of  His  retirement.  The 
fresh  outburst  of  hostility  provoked  by  the  raising  of  Lazarus.  Christ  never  ceased 
to  exercise  a  holy  watchfulness  over  His  personal  safety.  Not  until  His  hour  was 
come,  and  the  Father  gave  the  signal,  would  He  expose  Himself.  Nor  was  it  worth 
while  to  continue  testifying  to  a  generation  that  would  not  see  or  hear.  Jerusalem's 
day  of  grace  had  closed,  and  He  had  withdrawn  for  ever.  When  next  He  appeared 
in  her  streets  it  would  be  to  fall  a  victim  to  her  murderous  hate,  and  thereby  save 
a  world.  2.  The  place  of  His  seclusion.  Ephraim  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Bethel, 
about  twenty  miles  to  the  north-east  of  Jerusalem,  on  the  confines  of  the  Judseaa 
wilderness.  It  was  a  region  full  of  great  memories  of  Abraham,  and  Jacob  (Gen, 
xii.  8  ;  xxviii.  10-19  ;  xxxv.  14).  3.  The  occupation  of  Christ  while  at  Ephraim. 
The  time  spent  was  about  six  weeks ;  and  was  spent  we  doubt  not  in  instructing  His 
disciples  and  preparing  Himself  for  the  end.  U.  The  commotion  at  Jerusalem  cm 
ACCOUNT  of  Christ's  prolonged  absence  (ver.  56).  1.  The  disappointed  search. 
The  country  people  hoped  to  find  Christ  in  the  Temple.  There  they  had  seen  Him 
on  earlier  visits.  This  was  the  most  natural  place  to  look  for  Him,  and  is  still. 
Nor  will  any  who  seek  with  their  whole  hearts  look  in  vain,  2.  The  animated  con- 
versation. Not  finding  Christ  they  formed  themselves  into  eager  groups  to  talk 
about  Him — the  best  object  of  talk,  given  a  praiseworthy  spirit,  as  seen  in  the 
Emmaus  travellers,  but  not  in  Caiaphus  or  these  idle  and  curious  gossips.  3.  The 
reduplicated  question.  They  hardly  anticipated  His  presence,  because  of  the 
action  of  the  Sanhedrim.  But  they  were  in  error,  showing  how  little  reason  is 
capable  of  understanding  the  movements  of  the  God  of  grace.  Christ  had  every 
reason  for  being  present  at  the  feast.  (T.  Whitelaw,  D.D.)  Many  went  ...  to 
purify  themselves. — Ceremonial  purity  not  enough : — The  most  of  them,  it  may  be 
feared,  neither  knew  nor  cared  anything  about  inward  purity.  They  made  much 
ado  about  the  washings,  &c.,  which  formed  the  essence  of  popular  Judaism,  and  yet 
they  were  willing  in  a  few  days  to  shed  innocent  blood.  Strange  as  it  may  appear, 
these  very  sticklers  for  outward  sanctification  were  found  ready  to  do  the  will  of  the 
Pharisees  and  put  Christ  to  death.  Extremes  like  these  meeting  in  the  same 
person,  are  unhappily  far  from  uncommon.  Experience  shows  that  a  bad  con- 
science will  often  try  to  satisfy  itself  by  a  show  of  zeal  for  the  cause  of  religion, 
while  the  "  weightier  matters  "  of  the  faith  are  entirely  neglected.  The  very  same 
man  who  is  ready  to  compass  sea  and  land  to  attain  ceremonial  purity,  is  often  the 
very  man,  who,  if  he  had  fit  opportunity,  would  not  shrink  from  helping  to  crucify 
Christ.  Startling  as  these  assertions  may  seem,  they  are  abundantly  borne  out  by 
plain  facts.  The  cities  where  Lent  is  kept  at  this  day  vsdth  the  most  extravagant 
strictness,  are  the  very  cities  where  the  carnival  after  Lent  is  a  season  of  glaring 
excess  and  immorality.  The  people  in  some  parts  of  Christendom,  who  make 
much  ado  one  week  about  fasting  and  priestly  absolution,  are  the  very  people  who 
another  week  will  think  nothing  of  murder!  These  things  are  simple  realities. 
The  hideous  inconsistency  of  the  Jewish  formalists  in  our  Lord's  time  has  never 
been  without  a  long  succession  of  followers.  A  religion  which  expends  itself  in 
zeal  for  outward  formalities,  is  utterly  worthless  in  God's  sight.  The  puritv  that 
God  desires  to  see  is  not  that  of  bodily  washing  and  fasting,  of  holy  water  and  self- 
imposed  asceticism,  but  purity  of  heart.    Will-worship  and  ceiv-monialism  may 


«HAP.n.]  ST.  JOHN.  805 

"  satisfy  the  flesh,"  but  they  do  not  tend  to  promote  real  godliness.  The  standard 
of  Christ's  kingdom  must  be  sought  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  (Matt.  t.  8; 
Col.  ii.  23).  (Bp.  Ryle.)  What  think  ye  that  He  will  not  come  to  the  feast. — 
Will  He  come  to  the  feast  ? — The  question  was  doubtless  asked  from  a  variety  of 
motives.  Curiosity  prompted  it  in  many ;  the  fame  of  Jesus  had  reached  the  town 
or  village  where  they  lived  ;  they  had  heard  of  His  power  to  heal  the  sick  and  raise 
to  life  the  dead,  and  the  miracle  performed  on  Lazarus  had  been  the  talk  of  the 
place  for  weeks ;  they  wished  to  see  what  He  was  like  who  did  such  wondrous 
things.  This  they  thought  was  their  only  opportunity,  so  anxiously  they  asked 
whether  He  had  yet  come ;  and  when  answered  in  the  negative,  asked  whether  they 
thought  He  would.  There  were  also  some  sullen,  evil-eyed  Pharisees,  who  gfl,thered 
together  in  groups,  argued  the  likelihood  of  His  presence.  But  in  all  probability  the 
vast  majority  of  those  who  asked  the  question  did  so  because  they  felt  a  true  desire 
to  see  Him,  and  hear  the  words  of  His  mouth.  To  be  in  His  company  was  their 
chief  inducement  in  journeying  to  Jerusalem.  "  Will  He  come  to  the  feast  ?"  is 
ever  the  language  of  God's  people  in  all  their  gatherings ;  and  the  motive  that 
prompts  the  question  is  that  of  intense  desire  for  His  presence  and  company.  Let 
us  then  dwell  upon  the  text  not  as  the  language  of  the  Jew  at  the  passover  feast, 
but  as  the  question  of  the  saint  in  relation  to  every  service.    We  wiU  dwell  first  on 

THE  QUESTION  AND  DIFFERENT  REASONS  FOR  ASKING  IT  ;  SeCOndly,  We  will  GIVE  OUB 
ANSWER  AND  THE  REASONS  FOR  IT  BEING  SUCH  AS  IT  IS  ;  thirdly,  MENTION  SOME  SIGNS 
INDICATIVE   OP   His   being  AT   THE   FEAST  ;   and  lastly,  TBT  and  POINT  OUT   SOME   WAYS 

TO  ENSURE  His  company.  I.  First  then — The  question.  It  was,  "  Will  He  come?  " 
They  saw  many  others  going  up  to  the  feast,  but  that  sight  satisfied  them  not.  It 
is  a  happy  thing  to  come  to  the  feasts  of  the  Lord,  surrounded  by  family  and  friends, 
and  if  He  be  present,  their  company  lends  an  extra  charm.  But  how,  if  He  ba 
absent?  Can  they  supply  His  place?  Ah,  "  No."  The  goodness  of  a  meeting  can 
never  be  reckoned  by  its  numbers.  A  crowded  house  may  be  full  without  Christ, 
and  the  room  with  only  the  "  two  or  three  "  may  be  full  with  Him.  Nor  will  the 
respectability  of  those  present.  The  best  families  in  the  land  were  doubtless 
represented  in  Jerusalem  as  well  as  the  poorest.  Yet  their  presence  in  no  way 
lessened  the  desire  for  Christ's,  the  prosperity  of  the  Church,  or  the  value  of  its 
services.  The  child  of  God  would  sooner  worship  with  the  poorest  and  their  Lord, 
than  with  the  wealthiest  without  Him.  Many  of  these  Jews  had  come  on  purpose 
to  see  Him.  The  journey  had  been  undertaken  with  this  expectation.  Let  them 
Bee  never  such  glorious  sights,  yet  if  they  see  not  Him  they  must  return  to  their 
homes  disappointed  men  and  women,  the  one  design  of  their  coming  being 
unfulfilled.  Say,  child  of  God,  has  not  the  expectation  of  meeting  your  Lord  been 
the  sole  motive  power  that  has  brought  you  here?  There  are  many  reasons 
prompting  the  question  ;  dwell  on  one,  and  that  is  that  we  feel  it  will  not  be  a 
feast  at  all  if  He  does  not  come.  No  true  child  of  God  can  feast  on  externals. 
Without  Christ  the  feast  is  no  better  than  a  fast.  Here  is  the  touch-stone  whereby 
the  true  saint  is  discovered,  and  the  formalist  detected.  The  latter  is  satisfied  with 
the  temple — the  people  and  the  service.  He  never  takes  the  trouble  to  seek  Jesus 
or  ask  whether  He  be  at  the  feast  or  no.  He  will  desire  his  Lord's  presence,  more* 
over,  because  it  is  His  being  at  the  feast  that  gives  him  a  spiritual  appetite.  Not 
only  must  Christ  give  us  the  food  but  He  must  also  give  us  the  appetite  to  desire 
the  food ;  and  this  is  most  necessary,  for  the  very  choicest  of  food  is  insipid  to  the 
taste  if  appetite  be  wanting.  This  question  was  also  asked,  because  they  knew 
there  were  many  reasons  why  He  should  stay  away  from  the  feast.  The  high 
priests  were  up  in  arms  against  Him.  The  Sanhedrim  had  determined  His  death. 
And  do  not  we  know  of  many  things  sufficient  to  make  us  doubt  whether  He  can 
come  into  our  company?  Has  He  lived  in  our  warmest  heart's  affections  ?  Have 
we  not  to  confess  to  a  terrible  amount  of  worldliness,  coldness  and  indifference? 
Have  we  not  often  been  ashamed  of  Him  ?  Blushed  to  speak  His  name  ?  Have  we 
not  also  been  often  absent  from  the  feast  when  He  has  been  present  ?  There  is  yet 
another  cause  sufficient  to  make  us  wonder  whether  He  can  come  to  the  feast,  and 
it  is  the  many  vows  we  have  made  at  former  feasts  and  broken.     II.  Secondly,  I 

will    TRY    AND    GIVE    THE    ANSWER,    AND    SOME    REASONS    FOB    IT    BEING   WHAT  IT   IS. 

••  Will  He  come  to  the  feast  ?  "  I  reply,  "  Yes,  I  thmk  He  will."  Nay,  «  I  beheve 
He  will."  Yea,  more,  •«  I  know  He  will,"  My  reasons  for  giving  such  an  answer 
are  fourfold.  1.  I  think  He  will  come  to  the  feast  because  He  loves  it  Himself 
Is  it  a  joy  to  you  to  commune  with  Him  ?  It  is  an  equal  joy  to  Him  so  to  do.  Do 
you  love  His  company  ?  He  also  loves  yours.  It  is  no  irksome  work  to  Him  to  b« 
VOL.  u.  20 


806  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap,  xtu 

in  company  with  His  people.  Therefore,  because  it  is  His  delight  I  think  He  wil^ 
come  to  the  feast.  2.  I  think  moreover  He  will  come  because  He  has  instituted  the 
feast  and  invited  as  to  it.  3.  Very  likely  also  these  Jews  entertained  the  hope  He 
would  come  from  the  fact  that  He  had  often  come  before.  May  not  we  do  the 
same  ?  Cannot  we  call  to  mind  many  times  when  He  has  favoured  us  with  His 
company  at  the  feast,  when  we  have  been  no  more  deserving  of  it  than  we  are 
now.  III.  What  aee  the  signs  ov  His  being  at  the  feast  ?  1.  A  melting 
heart  on  account  of  sin.  Our  own  unworthiness  will  appear  great  in  proportion  as 
we  have  communion  with  Christ.  Self  and  Christ  can  never  stand  together,  where 
He  is,  self  lies  in  the  dust.  Pride  will  be  trampled  under  foot,  and  every  soul  be 
filled  with  what  John  Newton  termed  "  pleasing  grief."  2.  A  second  sign  of  His 
presence  will  be  a  joyful  heart  on  account  of  pardon.  When  Christ  visits  His 
people,  He  not  only  makes  them  see  the  number  of  their  sins,  but  also  their  com- 
plete pardon,  and  it  is  this  double  sight  that  prepares  the  soul  for  sweetest  fellow- 
ship. 3.  The  third  sign  of  Jesus  being  at  the  feast  is  an  indifierence  and 
forgetfulness  about  all  externals.  IV.  And  now  fourthly  and  lastly. — I  will  tby 
AND  POINT  OUT  SOME  WAYS  TO  ENSUES  His  COMPANY.  1.  The  first  and  most 
apparent  way  is  by  asking  for  it.  Christ  will  never  say  "  nay  "  to  the  united 
request  of  His  people,  and  we  may  rest  most  assured,  that  when  that  united 
request  is  simply  for  His  presence  it  will  be  granted.  2.  Another  way  is  by  forgive- 
ness. Nothing  so  surely  hinders  Christ's  communing  with  us  as  an  unforgiving 
spirit ;  where  that  is,  the  joy  of  fellowship  cannot  be.  And  now,  poor  sinner,  ere 
we  close,  a  word  to  you.  Jesus  is  here,  closer  to  each  one  of  as  than  we  are  to  the 
other.  He  is  by  your  side.  He  has  come  up  now  to  the  feast.  What  will  you  do  ? 
What  will  you  say  to  Him  ?  Oh,  invite  Him  to  your  feast ;  tell  Him  "you  have 
nothing  to  offer  Him  but  a  broken  heart  and  contrite  spirit,"  and  He  will  not 
despise  that.  {A.  O.  Brown.)  Festivities: — I.  Christ  will  cbbtainlt  be  at 
ODE  FEASTS  AB  A  JUDICIAL  SPECTATOR.  As  God,  He  is  everywhere.  No  walls  or 
doors  will  keep  Him  out.  He  will  know  the  moral  character  and  bearing  of  every 
feast,  and  bring  "  every  work  to  judgment,"  &c.  U.  He  may  comb  as  a  lovino 
FBiEND.  1.  He  is  pre-eminently  social  in  His  nature.  "  The  Son  of  Man  came 
eating  and  drinking."  2.  He  personally  attended  feasts  when  on  earth.  3.  He  has 
promised  to  be  present  in  the  social  gatherings  of  His  people  through  all  time. 
"  If  any  man  will  love  me,"  "  Where  two  or  three  are  gathered,"  &c.  If 
He  is  not  with  you  it  is  your  fault.  Have  you  invited  Him?  "Behold  I  stand," &o. 
UL  Iv  He  does  not  come  as  a  lovino  fbiend  we  had  betteb  not  have  the  feast  at 
ALL.  If  He  is  absent — 1.  It  would  be  an  affair  unworthy  of  oui  natures.  2.  It 
will  be  an  affair  pemioious  to  us.    (X>.  TJionuu,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  XIL 


Th4  place  of  the  eJiapter  in  the  Evangelical  history : — Every  intelligent  reader  of 
the  gospel  will  see  that  John  purposely  omits  at  this  point  certain  events  which  are 
recorded  by  Matthew,  Mark,  and  Luke.  He  passes  at  once  from  our  Lord's  retire- 
ment to  the  city  called  Ephraim  to  His  return  to  Bethany  for  the  last  time.  In  this 
interval  will  be  found  the  things  related  in  Matthew  xx.  17-34 ;  Mark  x.  32-52  ;  Luke 
xviii.  31,  to  xix.  1-28.  In  whatever  part  of  Palestine  this  city  Ephraim  was,  it  is 
almost  certain  that  between  it  and  Bethany  Jesus  passed  through  Jericho,  healed  two 
blind  men  there,  converted  the  publican  Zaochseus,  and  spoke  the  parable  of  the 
nobleman  who  went  into  a  far  country,  after  giving  to  his  ten  servants  ten  pounds. 
Why  St.  John  did  not  record  these  facts  we  do  not  know,  and  it  is  mere  waste  of 
time  to  inquire.  A  reverent  mind  will  be  content  to  remember  that  John  wrote  by 
inspiration  of  God,  and  was  guided  by  infallible  direction,  both  as  to  what  he  re- 
corded and  what  he  did  not  record.  Beason  and  common  sense,  moreover,  tell  as 
that  if  the  four  Evangelists  had  all  narrated  exactly  the  same  things,  their  value  as 
independent  witnesses  would  have  been  greatly  damaged.  Their  variations  and 
diversities  are  a  strong  indirect  proof  of  their  credibility.  Too  close  an  agreement 
vould  raise  a  suspicion  of  collusion,  and  look  like  an  attempt  to  deceive.   {Bp.  Byle.) 


CBir.  xn.]  ST.  JOHN.  307 

Verb,  1-16.  Then  Jesus  six  days  before  the  passover.— The  following 
calendar  of  the  Passover-week  is  taken  from  Lightfoot  (ii.  586) : — Nisan  IX. ;  The 
Sabbath.  Six  days  before  the  Passover,  Jesus  sups  with  Lazarus  at  the  going  out  of 
the  Sabbath,  when  according  to  the  custom  of  that  country  their  suppers  were  more 
liberal.— Nisan  X. ;  Sunday.  Five  days  before  the  Passover,  Jesus  goes  to  Jerusa- 
lem on  an  ass,  and  in  the  evening  returns  to  Bethany  (Mark  xi.  11).  On  this  day 
the  lamb  was  taken,  and  kept  till  the  Passover  (Exod.  xii.),  on  which  day  this  Lamb 
of  God  presented  Himself,  who  was  the  Antitype  of  that  ride.— Nisan  XI. ;  Monday. 
Four  days  before  the  Passover,  He  goes  to  Jerusalem  again ;  curseth  the  unfruitful 
fig-tree  (Matt.  xxi.  18 ;  Mark  xi.  12) ;  in  the  evening  He  returns  again  to  Bethany 
(Mark  vi.  19).— Nisan  XII. ;  Tuesday.  Three  days  before  the  Passover,  He  goes  again 
to  Jerusalem  ;  His  disciples  observe  how  the  fig-tree  was  withered  (Mark.  xi.  20). 
In  the  evening  going  back  to  Bethany,  and  sitting  on  the  Mount  of  Olives,  He  fore- 
telleth  the  destruction  of  the  Temple  and  city  (Matt,  xxiv.),  and  discourses  those 
things  which  are  contained  in  Matt,  xxv.— Nisan  XIII. ;  Wednesday.  This  day  He 
passeth  away  in  Bethany.  At  the  coming  in  of  this  night,  the  whole  nation  apply 
themselves  to  put  away  all  leaven.— Nisan  XIV. ;  Thursday.  He  sends  two  of  His 
disciples  to  get  ready  the  Passover.  He  Himself  enters  Jerusalem  in  the  afternoon. 
In  the  evening  eats  the  Passover,  institutes  the  Eucharist :  is  taken,  and  almost  all 
the  night  had  before  the  Courts  of  Judicature. — Nisan  XV. ;  Friday.  Afternoon,  He 
is  crucified.— Nisan  XVI. ;  Saturday.  He  keeps  the  Sabbath  in  the  grave.— Nisan 
XVII. ;  The  Lard's  Day.  He  riseth  again.  Came  to  Bethany. — The  arrival  of  the 
Passover  caravan : — Coming  into  Bethany,  the  nearest  point  of  the  great  road  to 
GaJilffians' Hill,  the  caravan  broke  up;  the  company  dispersed  to  the  south  and 
north,  some  seeking  for  houses  in  which  they  could  lodge,  others  fixing  on  the 
ground  where  they  meant  to  encamp.  Those  marched  round  Olivet  to  the  south, 
following  the  great  road,  crossing  the  Cedron  by  a  bridge,  and  entering  the  Holy 
City  by  the  Sheep  Gate,  near  Antonio ;  these  mounted  by  the  short  path  to  the  top 
of  Olivet,  glancing  at  the  flowers  and  herbage,  and  plucking  twigs  and  branches  as 
they  climbed.  Some  families,  having  brought  their  tents  with  them  from  Galilee, 
could  at  once  proceed  to  stake  the  ground ;  but  the  multitude  were  content  with  the 
booths  called  Succoth,  built  in  the  same  rude  style  as  those  in  which  their  father 
Israel  had  dwelt.  Four  stakes  being  cut  and  driven  in  the  soil,  long  reeds  were 
drawn,  one  by  one,  round  and  through  them.  These  reeds,  being  in  turn  crossed  and 
closed  with  leaves,  made  a  small  green  bower,  open  on  one  side  only,  yielding  the 
women  a  rude  sort  of  privacy,  and  covering  the  young  ones  with  a  f raU  defence  from 
both  noontide  beat  and  midnight  dew.  The  people  had  much  to  do,  and  very  little 
time  in  which  it  could  be  done.  At  sundown,  when  the  shofa  sounded.  Sabbath 
would  begin ;  then  every  hand  must  cease  its  labour,  even  though  the  tent  were  un- 
pitched,  the  booth  unbuilt,  the  children  exposed,  the  skies  darkening  into  storm. 
Consequently  the  poles  must  be  cut,  the  leaves  and  branches  gathered,  the  tents 
fixed,  the  water  fetched  from  the  wells,  the  bread  baked,  the  cattle  penned,  the  beds 
unpacked  and  spread,  the  supper  of  herbs  and  olives  cooked  before  the  shofa 
sounded  from  the  Temple  wall.  But  every  one  helped.  While  the  men  drove  stakes 
into  the  ground  and  propped  them  with  stones,  the  women  wove  them  together  with 
twigs  and  leaves,  the  girls  ran  off  to  the  springs  for  water,  the  lads  put  up  the 
camels  and  led  out  the  sheep  to  graze.  In  two  or  three  hours  a  new  city  had  sprung 
up  on  the  Galilaeans*  Hill — a  city  of  booths  and  tents — more  noisy,  perhaps  more 
populous,  than  even  the  turbulent  city  within  the  walls.  This  Galilaeans'  Hill 
made  only  one  field  in  a  great  landscape  of  booths  and  tents.  All  Jewry  had  sent 
up  her  children  to  the  feast,  and  each  province  arrayed  its  members  on  a  particular 
site.  The  men  of  Sharon  swarmed  over  Mount  Gideon,  the  men  of  Hebron  occu- 
pied the  Plain  of  Eephaim.  From  Pilate's  roof  on  Mount  Zion  the  lines  and 
groups  of  this  vast  encampment  could  be  followed  by  an  observer's  eye  down  the  valley 
of  Gihon,  peeping  from  among  the  fruit-trees  about  Siloam,  dotting  the  long  plain 
of  Eephaim,  trespassing  even  on  the  Mount  of  Offence,  and  darkening  the  grand 
masses  of  hUl  from  Olivet  towards  Mizpeh.  All  Jewry  appeared  to  bi  encamped 
about  the  Temple  Mount.  From  sundown  all  was  quiet  on  the  hill-sides  and  on 
the  vaUey,  only  the  priests  and  doctors,  the  Temple  guards,  the  money-changers, 
the  pigeon-dealers,  the  bakers  of  shew-bread,  the  altar-servants  being  astir  and  at 
their  work.  There  was  no  Sabbath  in  sacred  things.  But  everywhere,  save  in  the 
Temple  Courts,  traffic  was  stayed,  movement  arrested,  life  itself  aU  but  extinct. 
{Hepw&rth  Dixon.)  There  they  made  Him  a  supper. — Jesus  honoured: — I.  Bt 
zupBOMPXu  acts.    One  of  the  plainest  proofs  of  the  inspiration  of  the  Bible  is  its 


808  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip,  zn 

Belection  of  facts  for  the  world's  instruction.  Its  standard  of  ntility  is  not  oars. 
Acts  to  us  unimportant  are  given  a  prominence  that  arouses  our  curiosity  and  lead 
to  profitable  study.  Thus  the  single  act  in  Jacob's  life,  which  is  used  as  a  proof  of 
his  faith  in  Heb.  zi.,  is  his  blessing  the  sons  of  Joseph  on  his  dying  bed.  We  should 
have  selected  the  scene  at  Bethel.  Nothing  gives  such  a  solemnity  to  the  last 
judgment  as  the  picture  of  the  separation  of  good  and  bad.  On  what  ground? 
Not  on  that  of  an  intelligent  and  determined  rejection  of  Christ's  claims  or  of  pro- 
nounced and  heroic  service,  but  upon  what  we  should  call  the  waste  and  forgotten 
materials  of  Ufe — things  done  so  naturally  and  thoughtlessly  that  both  cry  out, 
"  When  saw  we  Thee,"  &c.  And  so,  according  to  the  common  standard,  these  two 
acts  here  of  unpremeditated  honour  are  given  undue  importance.  The  anointing 
was  done  in  a  few  moments,  yet  Jesus  selected  that  one  act  as  a  service  never  to  be 
forgotten.  The  scene  on  the  day  following  had  no  great  ntility.  A  modern  reporter 
would  have  called  it  a  simple  outburst  of  popular  enthusiasm.  But  Jesus  needed 
these  songs  of  welcome  and  prized  them.  U.  Bt  uncalcuijAted  love.  Paul 
declares  that  without  love  we  and  our  works  are  unprofitable,  and  John  makes  it 
the  sum  of  all  virtues.  We  live  in  times  of  great  religious  activity.  The  poor  in 
body  are  with  us — the  poor  souls  of  heathens  are  yonder.  We  do  a  good  deal  for 
both,  and  we  do  well.  Yet  because  Christian  work  is  so  highly  organized  and 
reportable  we  need  the  lesson  of  Mary's  incalculating  love.  We  may  be  inside  th© 
great  circle  of  Christian  beneficence,  and  yet  lack  Mary's  "  good  part,"  The  insti- 
tutions of  Christianity  open  avenues  to  pride  and  ostentation  never  known  before. 
The  machinery  of  benevolence  may  exhaust  the  soul  until  all  its  sweetness  and 
grace  are  wasted.  We  may  shine  in  use  and  yet  lack  the  ineffable  charm  and  grace 
of  a  life  hid  with  Christ  in  God.  (Monday  Club  Sermons.)  Bethany  and  it$ 
feast : — The  house  in  which  we  find  ourselves  is  that  of  Simon  the  leper  (Matt, 
xxvi. ;  Mark  xiv.).  The  feast  is  a  great  one ;  but  Christ  is  the  centre,  and  gives  to 
it  and  the  guests  all  their  significance.  Let  us  consider  the  latter  in  their  relation 
to  Christ.  I.  Simon  bnteetaining.  He  had  known  Christ  before,  probably  first 
through  his  leprosy.  Our  first  interview  with  Christ  is  respecting  our  moral  leprosy. 
But  Simon  finds  that  he  has  much  more  to  do  with  Jesus  than  merely  for  His  cure : 
therefore  he  must  have  Him  under  his  roof.  So  our  acquaintanceship  must  be  a 
companionship,  and  Christ  must  sit  at  our  table.  This  is  the  sinner's  side  of  the 
gospel.  Here  it  is,  not  Christ  receiving  the  sinner,  but  the  sinner  Christ.  We 
must  not  overlook  either  side.  II.  Lazarus  feasting.  What  a  feast,  what  a  com- 
pany 1  Simon  healed,  Lazarus  raised,  dipping  into  the  same  dish,  drinking  of  the 
same  cup  with  Christ  the  Healer  and  Kaiser.  How  Lazarus  first  became  acquainted 
with  Christ  we  know  not ;  but  it  was  his  death  that  had  brought  about  the  special 
closeness  of  contact — type  now  of  risen  saints  who  are  to  take  their  places  at  the 
marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb.  What  has  Lazarus  now  but  to  gaze  and  listen  ? 
This  is  our  true  posture  who  have  died  and  risen  with  Christ — listening,  not  bust- 
ling and  talking.  There  is  a  time  for  both.  III.  Martha  sekvinq.  Her  usual 
employment,  lowly  but  not  least  blessed;  like  His  who  came  to  serve.  Angels 
might  covet  service  to  Christ  in  any  form,  were  it  for  nothing  else  than  near  contact 
with  Him.  "  Inasmuch  as  ye  have  done  it,"  <fec.  IV.  Mart  anointing— not  enter- 
taining, feasting,  serving,  but  doing  what  some  would  consider  a  useless  thing.  Yet 
her  act  gets  most  notice.  Christ  says  nothing  to  Simon,  &c.  It  is  no  labour. 
Buffering,  &c.,  that  gets  the  fullest  commendation  but  love.  (H,  Bonar,  D.D.) 
The  supper  at  Bethany  : — Note — I.  The  abounding  proofs  of  oub  Lord's  greatest 
MIRACLES.  Here  was  Lazarus.  No  one  could  pretend  that  his  resurrection  was  an 
optical  illusion.  The  same  proofs  attend  the  mightier  miracle  of  Christ's  resurrec- 
tion (Luke  xxiv.  42).  We  do  well  to  remember  this  in  this  sceptical  age.  II.  Thb 
cnkindness  and  discouragements  Christ's  friends  receive.  Mary  thought  nothing 
too  great  and  good  to  expend  on  such  a  Saviour.  Greatly  loved,  she  thought  she 
could  not  show  to  much  love  in  return.  But  she  was  blamed  by  those  who  had 
lesser  views  than  hers  of  the  dignity  of  Christ's  person  and  of  their  own  obligations 
to  Him.  There  are  only  too  many  of  the  same  spirit,  who  begrudge  nothing  to  push 
trade  or  advance  science,  but  count  it  waste  to  spend  money  on  Christ's  cause.  We 
must  not  allow  ourselves  to  be  moved  from  well  doing  by  such.  It  is  vain  to  expect 
men  to  do  much  for  Christ  who  have  no  sense  of  debt  to  Him.  We  must  pity  them, 
but  work  on.  He  who  pleaded  the  cause  of  Mary  will  not  forget  the  "  cup  of  cold 
water.''  III.  The  desperate  hardness  and  unbelief  of  the  human  heart.  1. 
Unbelief  in  the  chief  priests  (vers.  10, 11),  who  would  rather  commit  a  murder  than 
confess  themselvss  in  tb>3  wrong.    2.  Hardness  in  Judas,  who  after  this oonld  betray 


BHAP.  xn.]  ST.  JOHN.  809 

Christ  (1  Cor.  x.  12).  {Bp.  Ryle.)  The  true  Church: — I.  Its  internal  aspect. 
1.  Christ  as  the  central  figure,  "  They  made  Him  a  supper."  Lazarus  was  conspica* 
ous,  but  Christ  was  the  centre  of  attraction.  In  the  true  Church  Christ  is  in  the 
"  midst,"  and  in  all  things  has  the  pre-eminence.  2.  A  variety  of  guests.  Lazama 
silent,  Martha  busy,  Mary  tender,  Simon  healed  and  grateful.  The  true  Church 
embraces  all  shades  of  character.  3.  The  presence  of  an  incongruous  character. 
Judas  partaking  of  the  feast,  but  unsympathetic.  He  shows  three  base  things — (1) 
A  false  estimate  of  property.  Money  is  not  wasted  on  Christ,  but  on  houses, 
apparel,  fare,  &o.  (2)  A  hypocritical  philanthropy — Judas  cared  little  for  the 
poor,  as  his  history  shows.  (3)  A  heartless  intrusion.  No  man  has  a  right  to 
*'  trouble  "  another  on  account  of  his  religious  services.  Iscariotism  is  very  pre- 
valent. 4.  The  display  of  genuine  devotion.  Mary's  act  was — (1)  Generous — the 
ointment  was  costly.  (2)  Spontaneous.  It  was  unsought.  (8)  Open.  It  was 
done  in  the  presence  of  all.  (4)  Right  —(a)  In  principle.  She  wrought  a  good  work 
— (6)  In  extent.  She  did  what  she  could,  (c)  In  reason — against  the  day  of  Christ's 
burying.  II,  Its  externaii  infldence.  1.  Some  were  attracted  by  curiosity 
(ver.  9).  The  wonderful  fact  on  which  the  Church's  theology  is  founded,  as  well  as 
the  moral  revolutions  it  is  constantly  effecting,  have  a  natural  tendency  to  rouse 
inquisitiveness.  Hence  the  questions,  criticisms,  and  discussions  in  society,  publio 
halls  and  hterature.  2.  Some  men  attracted  by  malice  (ver.  10).  The  determina- 
tion of  the  priests  was— (1)  Wicked.  (2)  Foolish.  Truth  cannot  be  struck  down  by 
physical  force.  The  true  Church  has  always  been  the  object  of  malice.  (D.  Thomas, 
D.D.)  Prodigality  praiseworthy :  —In  the  practical  working  of  good  agencies, 
there  must  almost  always  be  a  certain  prodigality.  The  light  which  illuminates 
this  speck  of  a  world  is  but  a  single  beam  in  comparison  with  that  immense  body 
of  light  which  passes  off,  to  be  lost,  apparently,  in  endless  space.  Nature  producea 
a  hundred  seeds  for  every  one  which  comes  to  maturity ;  and  at  every  sculptor's 
feet  there  is  an  unheeded  pile  of  marble  chips  which  have  been  sacrificed  to  the 
fulfilment  of  the  artist's  design.  If  this  is  waste,  then  what  the  world  wants  is 
waste — waste  of  precious  seed  in  sowing  it,  late  and  early,  by  the  wayside,  in  thorny 
places,  beside  all  waters.  And  what  many  a  Sunday  School  wants  is  more  waste 
like  this — waste  of  money  and  time  and  effort  over  an  apparently  hopeless  enter- 
prise, waste  of  thought  and  speech  and  prayer  in  behalf  of  those  for  whom  these 
seem  to  be  spent  in  vain.  (JT.  C.  Trumbull,  D.D.)  The  fragrance  of  true  piety  ; 
— When  I  was  in  Paris,  I  used  to  rise  early  and  sit  at  my  open  window.  I  always 
knew  when  the  stores  beneath  me  were  open ;  for  one  was  a  flower  store,  and  from 
its  numberless  roses,  and  heaps  of  mignonette,  arose  such  sweet,  sweet  fragrance, 
that  it  proclaimed  what  was  done.  It  seems  to  me  that  Christians  should  be  as  a 
flower  store,  and  that  the  odour  of  sanctity  should  betray  them  wherever  they  are 
Not  that  they  should  go  about  obtruding  themselves  and  their  actions  on  otherr , 
with  the  cant  of  usefulness,  but  that  they  should  live  the  purity  and  joy  of  reHgioc, 
so  that  men  might  see  the  desirableness  of  it,  both  for  the  sake  of  nobleness,  and 
for  the  enjoyment  both  of  this  world  and  that  which  is  to  come.  (H.  W.  Beecher.) 
Power  of  perfumes  .-—Lieutenant  Conder,  in  his  "  Tent  Work  in  Palestine,"  mentions 
that  the  perfume  of  the  orange  groves  is  detected  many  miles  from  Jaffa.  (H.  O. 
Hockey.)  The  lasting  perfume  of  pious  deeds: — It  has  been  shown  that  the 
odoriferous  molecule  of  musk  is  infinitesimally  small.  No  power  has  yet  been  con- 
ceived to  enable  the  human  eye  to  see  one  of  the  atoms  of  musk,  yet  the  organs  of 
smeU  have  the  sensitiveness  to  detect  them.  Their  smallness  cannot  even  be 
imagined,  and  the  same  grain  of  musk  undergoes  absolutely  no  diminution  in 
weight.  A  single  drop  of  the  oil  of  thyme,  ground  down  with  a  piece  of  sugar  and 
a  little  alcohol,  will  communicate  its  odour  to  twenty-five  gallons  of  water.  Haller 
kept  for  forty  years  papers  perfumed  with  one  grain  of  ambergris.  After  this  time 
the  odour  was  as  strong  as  ever.  And  so  the  perfume  of  this  generous  gift  to  Christ 
will  last  throughout  all  time,  and  be  carried  over  the  whole  world.  The  philo' 
sophy  of  benificence  .-—He  who  selfishly  hoards  his  joys,  thinking  thus  to  increase 
them,  is  like  a  man  who  looks  at  his  granary,  and  says,  '*  Not  only  will  I  protect 
my  grain  from  mice  smd  birds,  bnt  neither  the  ground  nor  the  mill  shall  have  it." 
And  so,  in  the  spring,  he  walks  around  his  little  pit  of  com,  and  exclaims,  •'  How 
wasteful  are  my  neighbours,  throwing  away  whole  handf  uls  of  grain  1 "  Bnt  autumn 
comes ;  and,  while  he  has  only  his  few  poor  bushels,  their  fields  are  yellow  with  an 
abundant  harvest.  *•  There  is  that  scattereth  and  yet  increaseth."  Motive  for 
great  gifts  : — A  poor  Protestant  congregation  in  Lyons  was  trying  to  build  a  small 
noose  for  their  public  worship.  An  old  soldier  brought  all  his  three  months'  eaminga 


310  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

"Can  you  spare  so  much ? "  asked  the  minister.    "  My  Savioar  spared  not  Him- 
self," he  answered,  "  but  freely  gave  His  life  for  me ;  surely  I  can  spare  one  quarter 
of  a  year's  earnings  to  extend  His  kingdom  on  earth."    Then  saith  one  of  His 
dlBClpleB,  Judas  Iscarlot. — Here  is — I.  A  foul  iniquity  gilded  over  with  a  specious 
pretence.     11.  Wobldlt  wisdom  passing  censure  on  pious  zeal.    HI.  Charity  to 
the  poor  made  a  colour  for  opposing  an  act  of  piety  to  Christ.  (M.  Henry.)    Mary'$ 
offering :  criticised  and  vindicated  : — I.  The  BETBiYEB's  cbiticism  op  Mabt's  offer- 
iNO.    An  eminent  statesman  once  said  that  critics  were  men  who  had  failed. 
What  a  lurid  light  this  definition  casts  over  the  conduct  of  Judas  at  this  hour  I 
Moreover,  criticism  is  too  often  the  outcome  of  an  utter  incapacity  to  appreciate, 
arising  from  inferiority  on  the  part  of  the  critic.    Judas,  too,  was  not  only  too 
prosaic,  but  was  also  too  official  to  be  touched  by  the  beauty  of  this  deed.    It  is  a 
hard  thing  for  any  man  to  be  the  treasurer  of  one  society  and  maintain  the  breadth 
of  his  humanity.     Judas  felt  that  his  '« bag  "  had  greater  claims  than  his  Saviour. 
Then,  again,  as  a  thief  he  could  not  understand  that  there  are  some  offerings  which 
cannot  be  sold,  but  which  lose  all  their  sacredness  the  moment  you  put  them  under 
the  auctioneer's  hammer;  that  in  this  instance  the  alabaster  box  must  be  broken 
in  the  giving,  and  that  there  are  offerings  the  value  of  which  the  giver  never  counts. 
II.  OuB  Lord's  vindication  of  Maby  and  heb  offebinq.    1.  He  bade  Judas  and 
the  other  disciples  whom  he  had  induced  to  repeat  his  cry  (Matt.  xxvi.  8 ;  Mark 
xiv.  4)  to  "  let  her  alone."    2.  He  not  only  vindicated  the  deed,  but  also  explained 
its  meaning.    What  a  gracious  construction  He  puts  upon  our  poor  services  when 
they  are  prompted  by  love !    That  httle  child  of  yours  wants  to  give  you  a  present 
on  your  birthday.    She  buys  it  a  week  or  so  before  the  day.    Yon  notice  some 
mysterious  movements  and  looks,  and  there  are  little  whispers  heard  all  over  the 
house.    She  confides  in  her  little  brother ;  and  he,  too,  looks  very  wise  and  then 
very  excited.    At  last  the  pressure  is  too  great,  the  safety  valve  of  speech  gives  way, 
and  out  comes  the  secret ;  then  there  is  a  rush  out  of  the  room  and  back  again,  and 
then  the  disclosure  of  a  present  which  all  the  cupboards  in  the  house  could  not  con- 
ceal a  moment  longer.    The  present  is  thrust  on  your  lap,  and  young  eyes  shoot 
light  and  love  into  yours.    It  has  come  before  the  proper  date,  but  it  is  all  the 
better  for  that.    Mary,  on  this  occasion,  was  like  that  little  child,  she  could  keep 
her  alabaster  box  of  ointment  no  longer;  and  what  had  been  intended  for  the  dead 
body  was  now  poured,  in  the  prodigahty  and  impatience  of  an  overflowing  love,  over 
His  living  form.      Jesus  knew  all,  and  rejoiced  over  a  love  which  had  ante-dated 
its  purpose,  and  given  to  the  hving  Lord  what  had  been  kept  for  His  burial.    3. 
Having  done  this.  He  emphasized  the  urgency  for  such  an  act  as  compared  with 
the  duty  to  the  poor,  who  would  remain  when  He  had  vanished  from  their  sight 
and  this  act  would  be  no  longer  possible.    What  they  desired  to  do  to  Him,  whether 
it  were  Mary  to  anoint,  or  Judas  to  betray,  must  be  done  quickly.     (D.  Davies.) 
The  self  sacrificing  woman  and  the  covetous  apostle : — The  self-seeking  heart  in  the 
Church  makes  balsam  into  poison.    It  turns — I.  A  joyous  feast  into  an  houb  of 

TEMPTATION.  II.  ThB  PUBEST  LOVE-OFFEBING  INTO  AN  OFFENCE.  III.  ThK  SACEED 
justification  of  FIDELITY  INTO  A  MOTIVE  FOB  EXASPEEATION.  IV.  ThB  MOST  OBACIOUS 
WABNINOS  AGAINST  DEBTBUCTION  INTO  A  DOOM  OF  DEATH.    {J.  P.  LangC,  D.D.)        Mary 

and  Judas : — The  parts  of  Mary  and  Judas  in  respect  to  the  death  of  Christ  are 
brought  into  sharp  contrast.  Mary  in  her  devotion  unconsciously  provides  for  the 
honoor  of  the  dead.  Judas  in  his  selfishness  unconsciously  brings  about  the  death 
itself.  {Bp.  Westcott.)  Alabaster  box  and  money  box: — Mark  the  striking  con- 
trast between  the  money  box  of  Judas  and  the  alabaster  box  of  Mary,  his  thirty 
pieces  of  silver  and  her  three  hundred  denaries,  his  love  of  money  and  her  liberality, 
his  hypocritical  profession  of  concern  for  the  poor,  and  her  noble  deed  for  the  Lord, 
his  wretched  end  and  her  noble  deed  for  the  Lord.  (P.  Schaff,  D.D.)  Judas  and 
the  disciples: — In  the  synoptists  it  is  "His  disciples"  (Matthew).  "Some" 
(Mark),  who  remonstrate.  It  seems  that  on  this  as  on  many  other  occasions, 
Judas  played  among  his  fellow  disciples  the  part  of  the  leaven  which  raises  the 
flour.     {F.  Godet,  D.D.)        Because  he  was  a  thief  and  had  the  bag. — Judas  and 

the  bag : ^Why  Jesus  should  have  allowed  Judas  to  carry  the  bag,  when  He  knew 

that  he  could  not  resist  the  temptation  to  which  it  exposed  him,  is  one  of  those 
mysteries  which  we  shall  only  be  able  to  answer  when  we  understand  why  God 
allows  any  man  to  be  exposed  to  temptation  which  He  knows  he  will  not  be  able  to 
resist.  It  may  be  that  Judas  was  first  selected  for  this  purpose,  because  he  showed 
AD  aptitude  for  making  such  arrangements  as  were  required  for  supplying  the  daily 
wants  of  the  disciples,  and  for  reUeving  the  poor,  and  that  the  opportooity — the 


«HAP.  in.]  ST.  JOHN.  311 

possession  of  the  bag — ^had  developed  in  him  the  hitherto  latent  feeling  of  avarice. 
His  sin  consisted  in  appropriating  to  his  own  individual  use  some  of  the  money 
which  was  given  to  him  for  the  general  good  of  Jesus  and  the  disciples  and  the 
poor.  That  Judas  was  not  an  unblushing  peculator,  that  he  did  not  practise  his 
thefts  openly,  but  with  the  utmost  secrecy,  and  with  every  outward  appearance  of 
npright  dealing,  is  plain  from  the  fact  tliat  the  disciples  do  not  seem  to  have  sus* 
pected  his  motives  on  this  occasion.  They  join  with  Judas  in  representing,  that 
the  value  of  the  ointment  might  have  been  better  spent  in  distributing  to  the  poor, 
because  they  had  not  the  slightest  suspicion  of  his  honesty.  The  fearful  lesson, 
which  the  conduct  of  Judas  teaches  us,  is  the  intimate  relation  which,  in  the  nature 
of  things,  exists  between  appropriating  to  oneself  the  goods  given  to  us  in  charge 
for  Christ  and  His  poor,  and  the  betrayal  of  Christ  Himself,  between  avarice  and 
treason  to  Christ.  The  latter  of  these  is  the  necessary  consequence  of  the  former, 
not  the  accidental  but  the  moral  consequence,  not  in  Judas  only,  but  in  every  man. 
Betrayal  of  Christ,  in  some  form  or  other,  follows  the  love  of  money  as  regularly 
and  as  certainly  as  night  follows  day.  (F.  H.  Dunwell,  B.A.)  Christ  and  utilitarian- 
ism : — It  is  easy  enough  to  give  an  ill  name  to  that  which  lies  beyond  the  range  of 
oar  sense  or  our  sympathies.  Thus  the  refinement  and  culture  which  give  a  tone 
of  ease  and  elegance  to  higher  social  circles  are  regarded  by  many  with  contempt. 
The  rare  and  costly  products  of  skilled  labour,  which  our  modem  civilization 
demands,  are  despised  as  trivial  luxuries.  Education  in  whatever  cannot  be  turned 
to  account  in  a  merchant's  office,  or  in  passing  an  examination,  is  deemed  super- 
fluous, however  much  it  may  enlarge  and  ennoble  the  scholar's  mind.  Even  the 
moral  delicacy  of  pure  and  sensitive  natures  is  scorned  as  squeamishness.  Men 
steeped  in  one  class  of  religious  ideas  seem  incapable  of  doing  justice  to  those  who 
hold  other  opinions.  Mystical  devotion  sees  profanity  in  thoughtful  inquiry.  The 
aBsthetic  ceremonial  of  a  stately  service  is  but  mummery  to  those  whose  worship  is 
of  a  simpler  form.  Of  the  purest,  noblest,  and  most  generous  actions,  which  are 
veiled  by  their  own  grace,  there  is  little  comprehension  by  the  world  that  toils  and 
struggles  all  around  for  its  daily  bread.  Its  value  in  the  market  gave  to  the  spike- 
nard its  only  worth  in  the  eyes  of  Judas.  The  manufacturer  and  retailer  of  it  could 
be  justified,  for  they  made  it  only  a  means  of  gain ;  but  not  Mary,  who  poured  it  out 
like  water  in  the  mere  gratification  of  sentiment.  Yet  surely  if  the  dignity  of 
haman  existence  is  recognized  we  may  plead  for  a  generous  while  just  expenditure 
upon  all  that  can  sweeten  and  lend  grace  to  life.  Painting,  sculpture,  literature, 
architecture,  have  a  rightful  claim  to  be  fostered.  Foreign  travel,  social  hospitality, 
instead  of  being  forms  of  selfish  indulgence,  should  enter  into  the  education  of  what- 
ever is  best  within  us.  Still  more  may  we  contend  that  the  gifts  of  friendship,  and 
the  consecrated  offerings  of  devotion,  but  fittingly  express  the  reaching  forth  of  the 
spirit  after  fuller  and  higher  being.  To  value  only  what  can  be  "  sold  "  is  to  ap- 
preciate least  what  in  nature  and  man  is  most  glorious,  and  most  capable  of  afford- 
ing exquisite  and  perfect  satisfaction.  The  gold  and  purple  of  the  sunset,  the 
flushing  tenderness  of  the  dawn,  the  rippling  songs  of  birds,  the  full-voiced  ohoms 
of  breaking  billows,  the  pure  air  fresh  with  the  fragrant  breath  of  wild  flowers,  the 
rain  pouring  its  living  draught  into  every  arid  blade  and  leaf,  are  God's  free  gifts  to 
men.  The  innocent  joy  of  childhood,  the  generous  enthusiasm  of  youth,  the 
strength  of  wisdom,  the  serenity  of  a  holy  trust  in  God — in  what  earthly  market 
can  these  blessed  things  of  the  Spirit  be  bought  or  sold  ?  With  what  coin  can  you 
purchase  the  tenderness  of  sympathy,  the  confidence  of  friendship,  the  devotion 
of  love.  The  things  that  cannot  be  bartered,  the  price  of  which  no  merchant 
quotes,  the  value  of  which  no  figures  can  express,  which  no  thief  can  steal, 
and  no  moth  and  rust  corrupt,  alone  form  the  wealth  of  the  soul.  (/.  iJ.  S.  Har- 
rington.) Utility  not  the  highest  test : — The  question  ciii  bono,  to  what  practical 
end  and  advantage  do  your  researches  tend  ?  is  one  which  the  speculative  philo- 
sopher, who  loves  knowledge  for  its  own  sake,  can  seldom  hear  without  a  sense  of 
humiliation.  He  feels  that  there  is  a  lofty  and  disinterested  pleasure  in  his  specula- 
tions which  ought  to  exempt  them  from  such  questionings.  The  great  minds  of 
the  past  who  thought  and  laboured  for  pure  truth  did  not  trammel  themselves 
with  the  question  of  utility ;  yet  many  of  the  truths  they  discovered  have,  in  after 
ages,  found  a  use,  and  contributed  even  to  man's  material  progress.  {Sir  J, 
Herschell.)  Then  said  Jesus,  let  her  alone.  Mary's  passionate  love  accepted : — 
1.  Christ  often  put  aside  enthusiasm.  When  men  and  women  brought  Him  what 
looked  like  lovely  flowers,  He  asked  for  sterner  things.  When  the  woman  said, 
"  Blessed  is  the  womb  that  bare  Thee " ;  when  men  brought  Him  a  onmn,  and 


819  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OUP.  XXL 

when  the  rich  young  man  fell  down  and  worshipped  Him,  He  put  their  enthusiasm 
aside,  chilled  and  damped.  He  would  accept  no  sudden  emotions  and  thoughtless 
impulses — flowers  without  roots  soon  to  wither.  2.  How  different  here.  Who  ia 
to  supply  ice  now  ?  Judas  the  proper  person.  Jesus  gathered  this  passion  flower 
and  put  it  for  ever  into  the  garland  of  God — because— I.  Maby  hai>  been  oeowino 
IN  love.  At  first  what  joy  it  was  to  her  to  sit  at  the  Master's  feet;  then  when  her 
brother  came  back,  her  joy  and  gratitude  were  overwhelming.  She  had  good 
grounds  for  her  love ;  and  at  last,  with  a  fine  impulse,  she  pours  out  her  choicest 
gift  at  His  feet  How  many  years  had  it  been  kept,  too  precious  to  be  used  1 
II.  Maet's  love  was  holt.  She  had  grown  at  His  feet,  and  learned  by  His 
teaching.  Now  she  could  sit  there  no  longer,  she  must  render  her  tribute.  To 
know  what  and  how  to  give  is  one  of  the  last  achievements  of  good  manners,  one 
of  the  most  delicate  of  tasks,  and  when  successfully  done,  one  of  the  most  gracious 
of  acts.  It  is  also  one  of  the  greatest  victories  of  the  soul  to  properly  receive  a 
gift.  Christ  does  not  put  by  her  gift.  It  is  Judas  who  interferes  now ;  and  with 
his  beggarly  economics  brings  in  the  dirty  scales  of  this  world.  "  Let  her  alone," 
said  Christ,  "  she  has  done  well."  Why  ?  Because  her  whole  soul  was  in  it,  and 
when  the  whole  soul  is  in  anything  arithmetic  has  nought  to  do  with  it.  When  a 
little  child  offers  its  caresses  to  some  cold-blooded  woman,  "  There,  there,  there," 
she  says,  "  you  have  kissed  me  once,  that'll  do."  So  the  little  mouth  is  put  back, 
and  the  little  heart  chilled.  Yes :  it  will  do  for  her,  for  a  second  kiss  wasted  on 
that  icicle  would  freeze  the  heart  from  which  it  came.  III.  Mast's  gift  camb 
LAST.  She  had  been  contemplative,  had  heard  His  word,  sat  at  His  feet,  and  last, 
not  first,  came  the  spikenard.  Because  this  passion  flower  was  rooted  in  the  heart 
and  conscience  and  intellect  of  the  woman,  Christ  rebuked  Judas.  Of  all  things 
in  the  house,  these  are  the  saddest — greetings  where  no  friendship  is,  honeyed 
words  which  everybody  gets,  the  same  welcome  for  every  fool,  everybody's  hand 
shaken  alike.  These  things  are  hateful.  But  when  the  fair  water-lily,  rising  from 
the  very  bottom  of  the  pool,  deep  rooted,  slow  climbing,  at  last  reaches  the  light, 
and  bursts  forth  into  glory,  Christ  loves  the  flowers.  Conclusion:  What  about 
the  three  hundred  pence  ?  The  chances  are  that  those  who  give  to  beggars  do  it 
without  much  heart  interest ;  but  to  kiss  those  sacred  feet,  what  were  three  hundred 
pounds !  What  has  money  to  do  here  ?  Listen  to  the  justification,  •'  I  am  going  to 
die :  there  will  be  no  more  chance  for  her.  These  are  flowers  thrown  on  My  grave." 
(0.  Dawson,  M.A.)  The  recognition  of  a  noble  act: — I.  Christ's  mind  begabdino 
His  death. — 1.  He  looked  forward  to  it.  It  was  never  absent  from  His  mind. 
Here  it  emerges  in  a  scene,  the  last  apparently  that  could  have  suggested  it. 
2.  He  looked  forward  to  a  Ufe  above  it,  and  Mary's  act  was  grateful  as  reveaUng  a 
love  over  which  death  had  no  power.  3.  He  had  a  pleasant  view  provided  Him  in 
regard  to  it.  How  cheered  He  must  have  been  by  this  act  with  the  cross  imminent, 
and  amid  the  murmuring  and  unbelief  of  His  friends.  II.  Christ's  mind  eegardinq 
OUE  service.  1.  The  timeliness  of  service.  A  word  spoken,  an  act  done  in  season, 
how  good  it  is !  There  is  a  time  to  speak  and  to  be  silent,  to  work  and  to  be  still. 
We  need  to  pray  for  wisdom.  2.  Christ's  recognition  of  our  service.  He  knows 
what  we  do,  and  accepts  the  service,  however  trifling,  because  of  the  motive. 
8.  Christ's  defence  of  freedom  in  our  service.  4.  Christ's  loving  construction  to 
quicken  our  service.  {J.  Duthie.)  The  poor  always  ye  have  with  you. — The 
claims  of  poverty : — This  word  extorted  by  the  rapacity  of  Judas  teaches  us  that 
poverty  has  its  claims  upon  us  which  we  must  not  neglect.  From  our  definition  of 
"  the  poor  "  we  exclude  the  systematic  idler  and  professional  beggar.  The  claims 
of  the  real  poor  are  based  on — I.  The  possession  of  a  common  nature.  "The 
rich  and  the  poor  ....  the  Lord  is  the  Maker,"  &c.  A  community  of  nature 
should — 1.  Awaken  interest.  2.  Stimulate  sympathy.  II.  The  relations  of 
htthan  soctETT.  St.  Paul's  imagery  of  the  body  and  the  members  (1  Cor.  xii.  14-22) 
will  illustrate  this.  The  poor  have  their  place  in  the  social  economy,  and  cannot 
be  safely  neglected.  III.  The  relations  of  Christ's  Church. — 1.  The  Church  is  a 
body  of  which  Christ  is  the  Head.  2.  The  Church  is  indebted  to  the  poor  for  some 
of  the  brightest  testimonies  to  the  power  of  Divine  grace.  It  owes  a  debt  in  return. 
IT.  The  sanctions  of  Holt  Writ.  (Deut.  xv.  11 ;  Lev.  xxiii.  22 ;  1  Sam.  ii.  7 ;  Job 
xxix.  11-13;  Psa.  xli.  1;  xlviii.  10;  Prov.  xiv.  31;  xvii.  5;  xx.  2;  xxi.  31;  Isa.  xxv.  4; 
Iviil  7;  Dan.  iv.  27 ;  Matt.  xix.  21 ;  xxv.  86 ;  James  ii.  14-16).  The  Bible  is  thus  the 
poor  man's  book.  (Clerical  World.)  The  Church  and  the  poor : — When  the  deacon 
6t.  Lawrence  was  asked,  in  the  Decian  persecution,  to  show  the  Prefect  the  mosl 
precioas  treasures  of  the  Church  at  Bome,  he  showed  him  the  sick,  the  lame,  the 


CHAP,  xn.]  ST.  JOHN.  tl3 

blind.  "  It  is  incredible,"  eaid  Lncian,  the  pagan  jeerer  and  sceptic,  "  to  see  the 
ardour  with  which  those  Christians  help  each  other  in  their  wants.  They  spare 
nothing.  Their  first  Legislator  has  pat  it  into  their  heads  that  they  are  all  brothers." 
«♦  These  Galileans,"  said  Julian  the  Apostate,  "  nourish  not  only  their  own  poor, 
bat  ours  as  well."  ....  In  the  year  252  a  plague  raged  in  Carthage.  The  heathen 
threw  out  their  dead  and  sick  upon  the  streets,  and  ran  away  from  them  for  fear  of 
the  contagion,  and  cursed  the  Christians.  St.  Cyprian,  on  the  contrary,  assembled 
his  congregation,  told  them  to  love  those  who  cursed  them  ;  and  the  rich  working 
with  their  money,  the  poor  with  their  hands,  never  rested  till  the  dead  were  buried, 
the  sick  cared  for,  and  the  city  saved  from  destruction.  (Archdeacon  Farrar.)  The 
poor  represent  Chiist : — A  rich  youth  in  Borne  had  suffered  from  a  dangerous  illness. 
On  recovering  bis  health  his  heart  was  Med  with  gratitude,  and  he  exclaimed, 
•'O  Thou  all-sufficient  Creator  I  could  man  recompense  Thee,  how  willingly  would 
I  give  Thee  all  my  possessions !  "  Hermas  the  herdsman  heard  this,  and  said  to 
the  rich  youth,  "  All  good  gifts  come  from  above  ;  thither  thou  canst  send  nothing. 
Come,  follow  me."  He  took  him  to  a  hut  where  was  nothing  but  misery  and 
wretchedness.  The  father  lay  on  a  bed  of  sickness ;  the  mother  wept ;  the  children 
were  destitute  of  clothing  and  crying  for  bread.  Hermas  said,  "  See  here  an  altar 
for  the  sacrifice ;  see  here  the  Lord's  brethren  and  representatives."  The  youth 
assisted  them  bountifully;  and  the  poor  people  called  him  an  angel  of  God. 
Hermas  smiled,  and  said,  "Thus  turn  always  thy  grateful  countenance,  first  to 
heaven,  and  then  to  earth."  (J.  Krummacher.)  A  motive  for  care  of  the  poor  and 
depraved: — A  few  miles  above  Montreal,  the  two  great  convergent  rivers  of  British 
America,  the  St.  Lawrence  and  the  Ottawa,  meet.  The  St.  Lawrence  is  a  pure 
stream,  of  a  peculiar,  light-blue  colour:  the  Ottawa  is  dark,  as  if  it  were  tinged  by 
moss  in  its  way.  After  their  meeting  the  two  rivers  run  side  by  side  a  few  miles, 
each  occupying  its  own  half  of  one  broad  bed ;  but  gradually  the  boundary  line 
disappears,  and  all  the  waters  are  mingled  in  one  vast  homogeneous  flood. 
Although  the  life  of  the  inhabitants  below  depended  on  preserving  the  pure  cerulean 
hue  of  the  St.  Lawrence,  it  could  not  possibly  be  preserved.  All  the  might  of  man 
cannot  prevent  the  Ottawa  from  tinging  the  united  waters  with  its  own  dark 
shade.  Unless  the  darkness  can  be  discharged  from  its  springs,  that  great  affluent 
will  effectually  dye  the  main  river  in  all  its  lower  reaches.  Behold  the  picture  of 
the  process  by  which  the  neglected  children  of  our  unsaved  brother,  meeting  our 
own  at  a  lower  point  in  time's  rolling  current,  will  blot  out  the  distinction  which  is 
now  maintained.  Behold  the  rod  lifted  up  in  our  sight  to  prevent  the  neglect 
now,  or  punish  it  hereafter  I  The  dark  cellars  in  which  ignorant,  vicious,  godlesa 
parents,  now  pen  their  hapless  brood,  are  the  springs  which  feed  a  mighty  river. 
Our  little  ones  rise  in  cleaner  spots,  and  in  the  meantime  a  solid  bank  separates 
the  streams.  But  that  turbid  river  lies  within  the  same  basin,  and  by  the  laws  of 
nature  must  converge  towards  the  central  channel  of  society.  It  is  an  affluent. 
We  must  accept  the  fact,  for  we  cannot  change  it.  We  dread  that  dark  stream 
which,  at  a  little  distance,  is  flowing  parallel  with  our  own.  Over  the  embankments, 
now  not  very  lolty,  we  hear  sometimes  the  ominous  gurgle  of  its  rapid  flow.  There 
is  only  one  way  of  subduing  that,  terrible  enemy.  If  we  cower  timidly  in  our  own 
hiding-place,  the  destruction  which  we  thereby  invite  will  quickly  overtake  us.  In 
this  warfare  there  is  no  armour  for  the  back  of  the  fugitive.  Safety  lies  in  facing 
the  danger.  The  evil  which  in  its  issue  is  a  deluge,  may  in  its  origin  be  success- 
fully neutralized.  Below  you  cannot  keep  the  gathered  volume  out:  above  you 
may  do  much  to  purify  the  rising  spring.  {W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  Me  ye  have  not 
always. — Christ  absent  and  present  (For  a  Communion :  text  and  Matt,  xxviii.  20.) : — 
Like  many  passages  these  seem  in  contradiction;  but  if  we  grasp  their  deeper 
meaning  they  harmonize.  Christ  has  given  us  a  memorial  of  Himself  in  the 
Lord's  Supper — a  gem  with  two  facets;  on  the  one  is  written  "Me  ye  have  not 
always;"  on  the  other,  "Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway."  They  remind  us  that  we  have 
in  Christ — I.  One  who  is  human  and  Divine.  1.  "  Me,"  <fec.  There  is  something 
very  human  and  touching  in  this  farewell,  which  comes  at  first  like  a  hint,  and 
afterwards  became  more  plain.  And  the  absence  of  the  personal  Saviour  from  our 
Communion  reminds  us  always  of  His  death,  and  therefore  of  His  true  humanity. 
"Forasmuch  as  the  children,"  &c.  Let  not  the  thought  of  His  Divinity  take  away 
from  our  view  of  Him  a  single  fibre  of  His  true  humanity.  In  this  memorial  of 
His  death,  "Behold  the  sign."  2.  But  "Lo,"  &c.,  reminds  as  that  we  have  a 
Saviour  who  is  Divine.  So  in  the  memory  of  His  death  we  must  realize  Hia 
Divinity.   The  promise  is  not  completed  in  the  continuance  of  His  words,  example, 


314  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xb. 

influence,  death,  memorials  going  down  from  age  to  age.  It  is  the  promise  of  a 
presence  which  implies  an  omnipresence:  so  that  at  every  Communion  He  is 
Divinely  repeating  the  words,  '•  This  is  My  body,"  And  if  here,  then  everywhere — 
to  protect,  guide,  comfort  to  the  end.  II.  One  whose  death  as  ouk  Saviour  is  all- 
IM70BTANT,  AND  NOT  LESS  His  LIFE.  1.  His  death  is  the  first  truth  which  meets  us 
in  the  Supper,  "  Me,"  &c.  He  instituted  it  that  His  death  might  be  kept  in  memory, 
and  the  manner  of  it — broken  body  and  shed  blood — the  memorials  twice  put  into 
our  hands  that  by  two  witnesses  every  word  might  be  established.  It  is  impossible 
to  account  for  this  without  believing  that  His  death  was  of  supreme  importance. 
Nor  can  we  read  the  Bible  without  seeing  this.  The  Old  Testament  points  forward, 
and  the  Apostles  point  back  to  this.  The  Incarnation  may  serve  other  ends,  bat 
the  first  end  to  us  is  that  Christ  was  "  made  lower  than  the  angels  for  the  suffering 
of  death,"  &c.  2.  But  the  other  word  must  be  spoken  by  one  who  is  to  be  » 
complete  Saviour.  The  Eesurrection  is  connected  with  the  death  as  the  seal  and 
assurance  of  its  success.  We  have  a  monument  of  each — the  Lord's  table  and  the 
Lord's  day,  "Who  was  delivered  for  our  offences,"  Ac.    HI.  One  who  presides 

OVEB    THE    WORLD   WHERE   WE    ABE    OOINO,   AND    OVER    THE    WORLD    IN    WHICH    WE    NOW 

ARE.  "  It  is  expedient  for  you,"  &c.  Christ  goes  up  before,  that  He  may  lead  the 
way  and  say.  Come ;  but  He  comes  to  guide  and  guard  on  the  journey  to  the  place 
He  has  gone  to  prepare.  If  we  had  a  Saviour  only  in  heaven,  we  might  doubt  if 
ever  we  should  reach  heaven.  So  we  have  Him  there  in  the  noonday,  here  in  the 
twilight;  there  amid  the  palms  of  victory,  here  in  the  heat  of  battle.  "For  to 
this  end  Christ  both  died  and  rose,"  <&c.    \j.  Ker,  D.D.) 

Vers.  9-11.  Much  people  of  the  Jews  therefore  knew  that  Ee  was  thers. 
Learn — 1.  Where  Christ  pleaseth  to  make  Himself  known,  He  wiJl  get  respect 
and  followers,  were  there  never  so  much  hazard  and  opposition  in  the  way ;  for 
albeit  the  Bulers  had  concluded  to  put  Him  to  death,  and  He  had  withdrawn 
upon  that,  and  they  had  given  charge  to  spy  Him  out  (chap.  xi.  53,  54,  67),  yet 
much  people  of  the  Jews,  so  soon  as  they  heard  of  Him,  they  flocked  to  Him. 
2.  Christ  gives  so  glorious  proofs  of  His  power  and  love,  as  may  invite  men  to  flock 
onto  Him  ;  for  He  bath  vntix  Him  Lazarus,  whom  He  raised  from  the  dead, 
to  make  them  flock  unto  Him.  3.  It  is  an  argument  to  persuade  Christ  to  help 
His  people  in  their  difficulties,  that  by  so  doing.  He  not  only  doth  them  good, 
but  doth  also  bring  about  the  manifestation  of  His  glory,  and  an  increase  of 
followers ;  for,  by  raising  Lazarus,  He  draws  them  out  to  wait  upon  Him  (Psa. 
vii.  6,  7).  4.  Albeit  Christ  wiU  get  glory,  even  by  the  unsound  actings  and 
appearings  of  men  for  Him  (Philip,  i.  16,  18 ;  Psa.  Ixvi.  3),  yet  it  is  the  sin 
of  many,  that  they  flock  to  Htm  rather  out  of  curiosity,  than  in  sincerity,  and 
that  they  choose  rather  to  gaze  upon  His  works,  than  fall  in  love  with  the  worker ; 
for  such  was  their  fault  here.  They  were  curious  to  see  such  a  rare  sight,  and 
possibly  also,  to  inquire  somewhat  of  Him  concerning  the  state  of  the  dead. 
(G.  Hutcheson.)  Not  for  Jesus'  sake  only. — Imperfect  attachments  to  Christ : — I. 
Specify  some  op  these  attachments.  Those  whose  attachment  is  influenced. 
1.  By  custom.  It  was  the  fashion  of  the  hour  to  be  interested  in  Christ  (vers. 
12,  19).  May  we  not  truly  say  that  the  power  of  fashion  has  something  still 
to  do  with  assembling  men  about  Christ.  (1)  For  His  sake  only  ought  we  to 
worship  in  the  sanctuary;  but  we  go  also  because  the  respectable  multitude  is 
there.  (2)  For  His  sake  only  ought  we  to  give  ;  but  are  not  our  givings  prompted 
and  regulated  by  social  considerations  ?  (3)  For  His  sake  only  ought  we  to  work  ; 
bat  do  we  not  cast  side  glances  at  the  public  and  reckon  somewhat  on  their 
approbation  ?  2.  By  intellectual  considerations.  "  For  my  sake,"  i.e.,  personal 
love  to  Christ  ought  to  bind  us  to  Him,  and  prompt  all  our  obedience  and  service. 
"  But  that  they  might  see  Lazarus  " — intellectual  interest — learn  something  per- 
chance  about  the  unseen  world.  Not  for  His  own  sake,  bat  because  of  the 
light  He  may  shed  on  great  questions.  How  many  in  our  day  congregate  about 
Christ  as  a  prophet,  and  only  faintly  realize  in  Him  a  Saviour  1  3.  By  secular 
considerations.  Interest  sways  men  in  the  matter.  Virtues  are  valued  as  they 
pay;  and  Christ  is  chosen  not  for  His  own  sake  only,  but  also  because  of  tbd 
immediate  bearing  that  Christianity  has  on  our  worldly  interest  (chap.  vi.  26^. 
4.  By  a  regard  to  moral  aesthetics.  Not  loving  Christ  only,  enamoured  with  His 
grtMse  and  righteousness,  but  "  cultivating  holiness  as  so  much  personal  adorn- 
ment."  Not  loving  Christ  because  He  is  the  Son  of  God,  and  the  Savi>ar  of 
the  world,  but  admiring  Christianity  because  it  fashions  noble  nations.    Thus 


CHAP.  xn.l  ST.  JOHN.  tlS 

there  may  be  mnoh  that  is  false  and  mixed  in  the  feelings  which  lead  mtn  to 
throng  Christ.  Fashion  is  there,  because  Christ  has  acquired  social  credit : 
intellect  is  there,  because  Christ  can  satisfy  some  of  the  hunger  of  its  cariosity  : 
taste  is  there,  because  in  the  shadow  of  Jesus  it  can  realize  some  of  its  ideals : 
and  prudence  and  policy  are  there,  not  because  Christ  is  truth  and  love,  but 
because  He  creates  loaves  and  fishes  of  which  they  eat  and  are  filled.  II.  The 
PLACE  AND  VALUE  OF  SUCH  ATTACHMENTS.  1.  They  may  be  allowed  as  the  starting- 
point  of  Christian  discipleship.  Many  are  drawn  to  Christ  not  by  the  highest, 
and  yet  by  legitimate,  motives.  Their  first  ideas,  motives,  and  hopes,  mixed  and 
inferior,  and  yet  leading  on  to  what  is  purer  and  more  perfect.  As  Matthew  Henry 
says,  "  God  makes  the  best  of  the  green  ears  of  wheat " ;  and  because  He  does 
so,  the  green  ears  become  golden,  fit  for  the  garner  of  God.  2.  But  the  prize 
to  which  we  must  all  press  is  that  of  a  personal  love  to  Christ.  For  His  sake 
only.  Not  only  when  He  will  answer  our  mental  questionings,  but  also  when 
He  is  silent ;  not  only  when  He  is  fashionable,  but  when  He  is  forsaken ; 
not  only  when  discipleship  insures  honour  and  wealth,  but  when  it  involves 
poverty  and  disgrace;  not  only  because  He  makes  as  perfect,  but  because  He 
is  perfection.  Conclusion — Jesus  only.  1.  Here  we  are  safe.  2.  Here  we 
are  supremely  joyful.  3.  Here  we,  forgetting  everything  else,  shall  find  far 
more  than  we  have  forgot.  (W.  L.  Watkiruon.)  But  the  chief  priests  con- 
sulted that  they  might  put  Lazarus  also  to  death :  Learn :  1.  Such  as  betake 
themselves  to  bear  down  Christ  do  engage  themselves  in  an  endless  vexing  life 
and  an  harder  task  than  they  are  able  to  midergo;  for  they  who  would  kill 
Jesus  would  put  Lazarus  also  to  death.  Tea,  they  would  kill  many  who  would 
kill  all  whom  Christ  made  objects  of  His  mercy,  for  inviting  others  to  come 
to  Him  (Exod.  i.  12).  2.  Men  once  engaged  in  opposition  to  Christ  will  not 
readily  be  reclaimed  by  insuperable  difficulties,  nor  the  convincing  beams  of  His 
glory  shining  in  their  eyes;  for,  albeit  this  was  a  glorious  work  prevailing 
on  others,  and  albeit  they  see  more  and  more  impediments  in  their  way,  yet 
they  will  go  on.  3.  None  are  so  malicious  and  bitter  enemies  to  Christ  as 
corrupt  churchmen,  when  they  once  decline;  for  it  is  the  chief  priests  who 
are  so  cruel  as  to  kill  a  man  for  being  the  harmless  occasion  for  drawing  men 
to  Christ  and  whom  God  had  newly  delivered  from  death,  and  testified  He  would 
have  Him  live.  4.  It  is  the  great  preferment,  and  most  special  mercy  that  can 
be  conferred  on  any  when  they  are  made  means  and  instruments  of  advancing 
Christ's  honour  and  kingdom ;  for  this  was  Lazarus'  dignity,  that  because  many 
of  the  Jews  went  away  and  believed  on  Jesus.  It  is  not  needful  to  assert  that  the 
faith  of  the  most  of  them  was  sound,  but  the  least  degree  of  it  in  the  worst  of 
them  was  enough  to  irritate  the  rulers.  6.  Such  as  have  received  special  mercies 
from  Christ,  or  are  made  instruments  of  His  glory,  may  expect  that  they  shall 
meet  with  a  rub,  and  be  made  the  butt  of  the  malice  of  enemies  ;  for  there  is  a 
resolution  against  Lazarus'  life,  who  was  thus  highly  honoured.  6.  How  mad 
soever  enemies  be,  or  their  projects  cruel ;  yet  they  would  be  far  enough  from  their 
point,  if  Christ  pleased,  though  they  got  their  will ;  for,  suppose  they  had  put 
Lazarus  to  death,  could  not  Christ  raise  him  up  again  as  He  had  done  even  lately 
to  their  knowledge,  and  so  make  His  glory  shine  yet  more  brightly  ?  ((?.  Hutcheson.) 
Putting  the  witness  away : — 1.  The  conduct  of  these  men  presents  the  chief  difficulty 
in  the  way  of  the  hope  of  some  final  universal  salvation.  For  hardening  themselves 
against  Christ,  they  reveal  the  power  of  the  human  heart  to  become  utterly 
blinded  to  the  truth,  even  while  the  Life  of  Love  is  an  increasing  light  round  about 
it.  The  difficulty  lies  not  in  the  nature  of  God  or  in  the  Cross  of  Christ,  or  in  any 
temporal  bounds  put  on  the  omnipresence  of  the  Spirit  of  God  ;  but  the  obstacle 
at  which  our  knowledge  must  stop  lies  deep  in  the  will  of  man  and  its  fearful 
possibilities  of  evil.  2.  The  simple  reason  why  they  sought  to  put  Lazarus  to 
death  was  that  "many  of  the  Jews  went  away  (from  them)  and  believed  on  Jesus." 
But  that  thought  was  only  an  exaggeration  of  a  common  tendency  of  our  human 
nature.  For  consider  how  natural  it  was.  They  had  no  special  spite  against 
Lazarus,  but  they  did  not  wish  to  lose  their  power.  As  consistent  Sadducees  they 
could  not  allow  his  resurrection,  but  his  existence  was  an  unwelcome  suggestion  of 
its  possibility,  and  an  evidence  of  it  which  was  misleading  the  people.  Dogmatists 
must  always  close  their  minds  against  evidences  of  new  truth.  1500  years  later 
the  same  men  would  have  put  Lazarus  to  the  rack  until  he  recanted.  1800  years 
later  they  would  have  broken  down  his  infiaence  by  misrepresentation  and  appeals 
to  popular  prejudice  in  the  organs  of  their  sect,    if  we  do  not  want  to  xeceiva 


B16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  zn. 

Christ  or  His  truth,  the  next  thing  for  ns  is  to  pnt  away  anything  that  may 
remind  us  of  it.  This  is  illustrated — L  In  the  attitude  of  communities  towabd's 
NATiONAi.  DUTY.  In  the  troubled  days  before  the  American  civil  war  there  were 
mercb ants  who  did  not  wish  to  have  their  profits  stopped.  Selfish  politicians  who 
for  the  sake  of  office  and  ease  were  willing  to  reject  the  truth  of  freedom,  and 
ready  to  pat  down  every  Lazarus  whose  presence  was  leading  the  people  away 
after  the  new  faith.  II.  In  the  attitude  of  peesecutoks  towabd  the  gospel. 
1.  In  the  book  of  the  lives  of  martyrs  and  witnesses  we  find  abundant  illustra- 
tions— in  the  conduct  of  the  Eoman  emperors,  in  that  of  the  papacy,  and  in 
that  of  the  opponents  of  popular  movements  who  refase  to  inquire  what  unheeded 
truths  are  beneath  them,  or  what  more  human  gospel  may  be  waiting  to  enter 
our  cities.  2.  An  obvious  exemplification  is  the  counsel  of  irreligious  men  to  pnt 
the  Church  or  the  Bible  out  of  the  way.  Social  Sadducees  cannot  secure  their  reign 
in  an  anarchic  humanity,  so  long  as  the  people  have  the  Bible  in  their  homes, 
and  so  long  as  the  churches  stand  to  bear  witness  to  the  gospel.  III.  In  oub 
OWN  attitude  towards  the  Truth.  1.  Christ  draws  nigh  the  cities  of  our  souls 
in  a  duty,  privilege,  opportunity,  clearer  perception  of  truth.  How  do  we  receive 
His  approach  ?  We  saw  that  it  would  interfere  with  our  plan  of  life,  disturb  our 
ease,  spoil  our  pleasure,  leave  us  poorer,  and  we  become  afraid  lest  we  should  yield. 
And  there  was  something  near  which  reminded  us  of  it.  At  least  we  could  get  rid 
of  that.  It  may  have  been  the  sight  of  a  friend ;  we  avoided  him  :  some  sp'-ctacle 
of  want  or  suffering ;  we  passed  by  on  the  other  side :  some  inward  feeUng  or 
thought ;  we  repressed  it.  So  we  remembered  to  forget  that  duty.  We  put  its 
Lazarus  where  he  would  not  trouble  us.  2.  Christ  draws  near  sometimes  in  a 
new  sense  of  faith,  or  hope,  or  possibility  of  life  richer,  truer,  happier ;  and  then 
we  turn  and  other  desires  of  life  gather  quickly  round  us,  and  the  vision  fades : 
we  belong  to  the  world  again.  We  put  that  Lazarus  also  to  death.  (Nevmum 
Smyth.) 

Vers.  12-16.  On  the  next  day  much  people  .  .  .  "when  they  heard  that  Jesus  was 
coming  to  Jerusalem,  took  branches  of  the  palm-trees. — The  triumphal  entry  of 
Christ  into  Jerusalem : — In  the  morning  Jesus  set  forth  on  His  journey.  Three 
pathways  lead,  and  probably  always  led,  from  Bethany  to  Jerusalem  ;  one  a  long 
circuit  over  the  northern  shoulder  of  Mount  Olivet ;  another  a  steep  foot-path  over 
the  summit ;  the  third,  the  natural  continuation  of  the  road,  by  which  the  mounted 
travellers  always  approach  the  city  from  Jericho  over  the  southern  shoulder. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  last  was  Christ's  road.  Two  vast  streams  of  people 
met  on  that  day.  The  one  poured  out  from  the  city ;  and  as  tliey  came  through 
the  gardens,  whose  clusters  of  palm-trees  rose  on  the  southern  corner  of  Olivet, 
they  cut  down  the  long  branches,  as  was  their  wont  at  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  and 
moved  upwards  towards  Bethany,  with  loud  shouts  of  welcome.  From  Bethany 
streamed  forth  the  crowds  who  had  assembled  there  on  th§  previous  evening,  and 
who  came  testifying  to  the  great  event  at  the  sepulchre  of  Lazarus.  The  road  soon 
loses  sight  of  Bethany.  It  is  now  a  rough,  but  still  broad  and  well-defined 
mountain-track,  winding  over  rock  and  loose  stones ;  a  steep  declivity  below  on  the 
left ;  the  sloping  shoulder  of  Olivet  above  on  the  right ;  fig-trees  below  and  above, 
here  and  there  growing  out  of  the  rocky  soil.  Along  the  road  the  multitudes  threw 
down  the  boughs  severed  from  the  olive-trees,  through  which  they  were  forcing 
their  way,  or  spread  out  a  rude  matting  formed  of  the  palm.branches  which  they 
had  already  cut  as  they  came  out.  The  larger  portion — those,  perhaps,  who  had 
escorted  Him  from  Bethany — unwrapped  their  loose  cloaks  from  their  shoulders. 
and  stretched  them  along  the  rough  paths  to  form  a  momentary  carpet  as  He 
approached.  The  two  streams  met  mid -way.  Half  of  the  vast  mass,  turning 
round,  preceded  ;  the  other  half  followed  (Mark  xi.  9).  Bethany  is  hardly  left  in 
the  rear,  before  the  long  procession  must  have  swept  up  and  over  the  ridge,  where 
first  begin?  "  the  descent  of  the  mount  towards  Jerusalem."  At  this  point  the  first 
view  is  caught  of  the  south  eastern  corner  of  the  city.  It  was  here  (Luke  xix.  37) 
— may  it  not  have  been  from  the  sight  thus  opening  upon  them  ? — that  the  hymn 
of  triumph,  the  first  hymn  of  Christian  devotion,  burst  from  the  multitude — 
"  Hosannah,"  &c.  There  was  a  pause  as  the  shout  rang  through  the  long  defile  ; 
and  as  the  Pharisees  who  stood  by  in  the  crowd  (Luke  xix.  39)  complained.  He 
pointed  to  the  stones  which,  strewn  beneath  their  feet,  would  immediately  cry  out 
if  these  were  to  hold  their  peace.  Again  the  procession  advanced.  The  road 
descends  a  slight  declivity,  and  the  glimpse  of  the  city  is  again  withdrawn  behind 


CHAP,  xn.]  ST.  JOHN.  gl7 

the  interyening  ridge  of  Olivet.  A  few  moments,  and  the  path  monnts  again ;  it 
climbs  a  rugged  ascent,  it  reaches  a  ledge  of  smooth  rock,  and  in  an  instant  the 
whole  city  bursts  into  view.  It  is  hardly  possible  to  doubt  that  this  rise  and  turn 
of  the  road  was  the  exact  point  where  the  multitude  paused  again,  and  "He,  when 
He  beheld  the  city,  wept  over  it."     [Dean  Stanley.)  The  entrance  into  Jeru- 

salem : — Four  heads  of  thought. — I.  The  multitude.  This  a  vast  concourse  of 
people  who  are  accompanying  Jesus  from  Bethany  to  Jerusalem,  and  of  people 
coming  out  of  Jerusalem  to  meet  Him.  It  was  composed  of  Galileans,  of  Jews  from 
foreign  countries,  and  even  of  Jerusalem  (John  xii.  11),  these  latter  being  led  by 
the  miracle  of  the  raising  of  Lazarus  to  reconsider  the  claims  of  Jesus,  and  to 
believe  on  Him,  at  least  temporarily.  The  enthusiasm  offers  a  sad  contrast  to  the 
furious  cry,  "  Crucify  Him,"  so  soon  to  be  heard ;  but  it  seems  sincere  enough. 
With  palm-branches,  symbols  of  triumph  (Lev.  xxiii.  40),  and  with  loud  acclama- 
tions, they  welcome  the  King  to  the  royal  city.  In  verse  13  we  have  the  Divine 
mission  and  the  national  work  both  recognized.  II.  Jesus  Himself.  Hitherto 
He  had  resisted  the  enthusiasm  of  the  people  (John  vi.  15) ;  now  the  time  to  yield 
to  it  has  come.  He  sees  the  yielding  to  be  in  accordance  with  the  Father's  will. 
It  is  not  a  move  calculated  upon,  but  unfolding  itself  out  of,  the  course  of  events. 
He  does  not  say,  "Now  I  will  fulfil  the  prophecies  which  concern  Me";  but 
simply  accepts  the  situation,  recognizing  (as  He  always  did)  Divine  guidance.  Two 
things  have  to  be  done :  1.  He  has  to  assert  Himself ;  He  has  openly  to  announce 
His  true  relation  to  the  theocracy,  and  to  take  the  consequences  of  doing  so, 
which  He  clearly  foresees.  2.  He  has  to  assert  Himself  in  such  a  way  as  to  give 
no  countenance  to  mistaken  Messianic  ideas ;  but  rather  to  symbolize  the  spiritual 
character  of  His  royalty.  This  is  accomplished  by  riding  on  an  ass,  and  tiius,  in 
the  most  simple  and  natural  way,  the  ancient  prophecy  is  fulfilled  (Zech.  ix.  9). 
m.  The  disciples.  They  had  joined  with  the  people  in  their  homage  to  Jesus ; 
but  even  they  did  not  understand  the  significance  of  their  actions.  They  had  sub- 
mitted to  the  infiuences  of  the  moment ;  and  afterwards,  looking  back,  discovered 
that  they  had  been  unconscious  instruments  of  fulfilling  the  purpose  of  God  con- 
cerning His  Son  (c/.  Acts  xiii.  27).  IV.  The  opponents  of  Cheist.  For  the 
moment  they  seem  paralyzed.  "  They  had  lost  what  they  looked  upon  as  their 
own."  But  it  was  their  own  after  all;  and  it  came  back  to  them.  The  world  at 
large  does  not  and  will  not  accept  Christ.  It  swings  back  to  its  centre.  Conclusion: 
We  may  learn  how  to  distinguish  between  emotion  and  principle:  between  a 
momentary  enthusiasm  and  the  complete  surrender  of  heart  and  will  to  the 
Saviour.      {O.   Calthrop,  M.A.)  Jesus  coming  : — I.    To  confound  Hig  foes. 

II.   To  console  His  friends.      III.   To  complete  His  woek.  The  coming  of 

Jesus  : — I.  As  a  Man  among  men.  IL  As  a  Power  amono  saints.  III.  As  a  Kin(J 
AMONG  nations.  (S.  S.  Times.)  The  King  comes  to  His  capital : — L  The  King's 
Person.  Jesus — 1.  Eecently  condemned  by  the  Sanhedrim.  2.  Who  had  tacitly 
claimed  to  be  Zion's  King.  3.  Who  had  repeatedly  proved  His  right  to  this 
dignity,  and  lately  established  it  by  the  miracle  at  Bethany.  4.  Who  now  asserted 
it  in  the  most  open  and  unambiguous  manner  by  riding  in  royal  state  into  Hia 
capital,  n.  The  King's  credentials — 1.  Consisted  in  the  fact  that  He  was  coming 
to  His  metropolis  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.  He  was  no  usurper,  but  One  to 
whom  the  throne  belonged  by  Divine  appointment.  The  crown  pertained  to  Him 
in  a  more  real  sense  than  to  any  of  Israel's  kings.  2.  Were  displayed  in  the 
manner  of  His  coming.  He  came  exactly  as  predicted.  Had  He  come  as  kings  of 
the  earth  are  wont  to  approach  their  capitals — as  Solomon  and  His  successors — on 
fiery  chargers,  there  would  have  been  required  no  further  demonstration  that  He 
was  not  God's  Messiah.  He  came  in  humility  and  righteousness — indisputable 
tokens  of  His  claim.  III.  The  King's  welcome.  1.  The  multitudes — accompany- 
ing, meeting.  2.  Their  homage — waving  palms  and  strewing  garments  in  the  way, 
3.  Their  acclaim — "Hosannah."  IV.  The  King's  attendants.  The  disciples. 
1.  Ignorant  at  the  time  of  its  significsmce ;  perhaps  imagining  the  present  realiza- 
tion of  their  earthly  hopes.  2.  Afterwards  alive  to  its  spiritual  and  eternal 
meaning.  IV.  The  King's  enehieb.  The  Pharisees.  The  spectacle  seemed  for 
a  moment  to  confound  their  plots.  It  filled  them  with  indignation,  urged  them  to 
recrimination,  made  them  more  determined.  Caiaphas'  prophecy  appeared  on  the 
eve  of  coming  true.  The  nation  was  slipping  from  their  hands.  Lessons:  1.  The 
religious  instincts  of  the  multitudes.  2.  The  credibility  of  ancient  Scriptnre.  3. 
The  illumination  Christ's  glorification  has  oast  on  history.  4.  The  certainty  that 
the  world  will  ultimately  be  won  by  Christ.    {T.  Whitelaw,  D.D.)         Wtleomin^ 


318  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

the  Monarch's  approach : — Going  out  to  meet  an  approaching  gnest,  and  escorting 
him  to  one's  house  with  a  show  of  honour,  is  a  ootumon  custom  throughout  the 
East.  A  ruler  of  any  sort,  or  a  conquering  hero,  is  welcomed  in  that  way  as  m 
matter  of  course.  Thus  it  was  that  Abraham  was  welcomed  by  the  kings  of  Canaan 
when  he  returned  from  his  pursuit  of  Ghedorlaomer ;  that  Jephthah  was  welcomed 
by  his  daughter  and  her  companions ;  that  David  was  welcomed  by  singing  and 
dancing  women,  out  of  all  the  cities  of  Israel,  as  he  came  back  from  the  slaughter 
of  the  Philistines.  Herodotus  records  that  when  Xerxes  was  passing  over  the 
bridge  of  the  Hellespont,  the  way  before  him  was  strewed  with  branches  of  myrtle, 
while  burning  perfumes  filled  the  air.  Quintius  Curtius  tells  of  the  scattering  of 
flowers  in  the  way  before  Alexander  the  Great  when  he  entered  Babylon.  Monier, 
in  our  own  day,  saw  the  way  of  a  Persian  ruler  strewn  with  roses  for  three  miles ; 
while  glass  vessels  filled  with  sugar  were  broken  under  his  horse's  feet — the  sugar 
being  symbolical  of  prosperity.     (S.  S.  Times.)  Two  royal  progresses : — The 

immense  host  which  accompanied  Xerxes  in  his  attempted  conquest  of  Greece — a 
concoarse  gathered  together  from  the  Indies  to  the  Lybian  desert ;  a  sea  of  nations 
rolling  on  in  serried  waves,  with  turbans  and  helmets  of  brass  and  steel,  of  silver 
and  gold — were  seven  days  and  seven  nights  without  intermission,  and  under  the 
Btimulua  of  the  lash,  in  crossing  the  boat-bridges  of  the  Hellespont ;  and  as  they 
took  up  their  line  of  march,  they  all  moved  on  with  exultation,  and  strewed 
branches  in  the  pathway  of  their  king.  But  what  a  contrast  in  spirit,  in  purpose, 
and  in  result,  between  that  occasion  and  this  1  There,  a  vast  army,  held  together 
by  the  bands  of  military  force,  and  moving  in  abject  submission ;  here,  a  spon- 
taneous multitude,  kindling  with  the  impulses  of  wonder  and  of  love.  That, 
marching  to  the  work  of  terror  and  of  desolation ;  this,  celebrating  the  achieve- 
ments of  a  healing  and  restoring  goodness.  Here,  among  a  rejoicing  people,  with 
eyes  that  had  been  blind,  turned  toward  Him  in  beaming  gratitude ;  with  tongues 
that  had  been  dumb,  crying  hosannas  to  His  name  ;  with  hands  that  once  were 
impotent,  strewing  branches  and  garments  in  His  path,  comes  the  King  of  Israel, 
the  Saviour  of  mankind,  in  humble  raiment  and  wayworn  sandals,  riding  upon  an 
ass.     {E.  H.  Chapin,  D.D.)  Three  classes  in  relation  to  Christ: — Two  things 

strike  UB  at  the  outset.  1.  The  highest  majesty  under  the  garb  of  meanness.  Christ 
as  a  mere  man  was  great.  But  how  does  this  "  Prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth  " 
enter  Jerusalem  ?  In  a  triumphal  chariot  ?  On  a  prancing  steed,  accompanied  by 
a  magnificent  cavalcade  ?  No  1  On  an  ass.  The  more  truly  kingly  a  man  is,  the 
less  he  cares  for  conventional  pageantry.  Hearts  of  oak  requires  neither  veneer 
nor  varnish.  A  great  age  has  never  been  an  age  of  millinery  and  gold  rings. 
"Howe'er  it  be,  it  seems  to  me,"  &c.  2.  An  eternal  idea  developed  in  an  apparently 
incidental  appea  ance.  It  seemed  perfectly  casual  that  Christ  should  have  required 
a  creature  to  ride  upon,  and  that  there  should  be  such  a  creature  at  hand ;  but  all 
this  was  but  the  carrying  out  of  an  eternal  plan,  indicated  six  hundred  years  before. 
Caprice  and  impulse  had  no  part  in  the  control  of  Christ's  life.  The  life  of  virtue 
is  never  that  of  accident ;  it  is  always  the  unfoldment  of  an  eternal  idea.  We  have 
here L  The  Populace,  a  type  of  the  unsophisticated  masses  unbiassed  by  doc- 
trinal and  ecclesiastical  prejudices.  These  men — 1.  Saw  Divine  royalty  under  the 
garb  of  secular  meanness.  Men  in  our  age  and  land  are  so  blinded  by  pride  and 
prejudice  that  they  can  discover  no  moral  greatness  under  the  garb  of  poverty.  2. 
Because  enraptured  with  the  morally  great  for  its  own  sake.  Conscience  is  bound 
by  the  law  of  its  own  constitution  to  exult  in  the  right  and  morally  great.  "I 
delight  in  the  law  of  God  after  the  inner  man."  3.  Felt  the  reality  of  Christ's 
miracle.  The  sophisticated  and  prejudiced  tried  to  argue  it  away,  and  refused  to 
believe  it.  But  the  common  people  saw  it,  and  had  no  interest  in  denying  it. 
Thus  the  •*  people "  went  with  Christ  and  honoured  Him ;  and  this  they  will 
always  do  if  Christ  is  presented  to  them  as  He  really  is,  not  as  metamorphosed  by 
churches  and  creeds.  II.  The  disciples.  1.  They  were  partially  informed  (ver.  16). 
They  knew  nothing  of  what  Zechariah  (ix.  9)  uttered  in  relation  to  Christ. 
Though  they  had  been  with  Christ  so  long,  and  heard  Him  expound  the  Scriptures, 
they  were  yet  very  ignorant.  2.  They  were  enlightened  by  history.  After  Christ 
had  ascended  and  the  Spirit  come  down,  a  new  light  dawned  upon  them.  The 
facts  of  His  life  were  brought  vividly  to  their  minds,  and  were  compared  with  their 
olJer  Scriptures,  when  they  saw  the  fulfilment  of  ancient  predictions.  History  ia 
the  best  interpreter  of  prophecy.  III.  The  Phakisees  (ver  19).  These  men  were 
— 1.  Bound  to  acknowledge  the  failure  of  their  efforts.  "  Ye  prevail  nothing." 
All  the  antagonists  of  Christianity  will  have  to  acknowledge  this  sooner  or  later. 


CHAP,  ni.]  8T.  JOHN.  819 

t.  Bound  to  acknowledge  a  most  disagreeable  fact.     "The  world  is  gone  after 
Him."    (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Vers.  16-18.  These  things  tmderstood  not  His  disciples  at  first.-;-!.  Men  may  be 
in  the  midst  of  great  mercies  and  actings,  and  may  not  only  be  witnesses  of  the 
Lord's  working  and  the  works  of  others,  but  even  actors  themselves  in  that  which  for 
the  time  they  do  little  or  nothing  understand ;  for  these  things  understood  not  the 
disciples  at  the  first.  Men  have  much  brutish  ignorance  fed  with  inadvertency  and  may 
be  little  expecting  the  things  that  God  is  doing  in  such  a  time  or  case  (Gen.  xvi.  13 ; 
zxviii.  16),  and  therefore  do  not  discern  them.  2.  When  the  Lord's  people  are 
ignorant  and  under  a  cloud.  He  useth  not  to  take  advantage  of  them,  but  can  guide 
them  as  right  as  may  be,  so  that  a  back-look  thereunto  when  they  get  light  will  be 
Bweet  unto  them  ;  for  in  all  this  they  act  as  rightly  as  if  they  had  understood,  and 
afterward  they  find  that  what  was  written  of  Him  they  had  done  unto  Him  (Psa. 
Ixxiii.  22,  23,  24).  3.  However,  the  Lord  for  a  time  suffer  His  people  to  lie  under 
clouds,  and  ignorant  of  what  He  or  they  are  doing,  yet  in  due  time  He  will  clear 
them  in  so  far  as  is  needful ;  for  afterward  they  remembered  (John  xiii.  7).  4. 
The  treasures  of  knowledge  hid  up  in  Christ  were  not  fully  opened  up  till  Christ 
was  glorified  ;  for  when  Jesus  was  glorified,  then  remembered  they,  &c.  Hereby  ia 
kept  a  due  proportion  betwixt  the  head  and  his  members,  that  he  shall  be  first 
exalted  before  they  get  their  full  allowance.  And  hereby  also  Christ  being  exalted 
giveth  evidence  that  He  remembers  His  people  (John  vii.  39 ;  Acts  ii.  33  ;  Eph.  iv.  8). 
6.  Confession  of  infijrmity  and  ignorance  is  a  sweet  fruit  of  the  Spirit  poured  out ;  and 
the  more  one  have  received  they  will  be  the  more  sensible  of,  and  ready  to  acknow- 
ledge their  frailties ;  for  John,  the  beloved  disciple,  being  now  enlightened,  is  most 
forward  to  record  that  they  understood  not  these  things  at  the  first.  6.  When  the 
Spirit  of  God  is  most  amply  poured  out,  He  will  still  lead  men  to  the  Scriptures  to 
discern  of  Christ  and  compare  their  own  actings  by  it ;  for  so  was  it  in  the  disciples' 
best  days,  they  remembered  that  these  things  were  written  of  Him  and  that  they 
had  done  these  things  to  Him.  It  is  an  evidence  of  Christ's  being  exalted  at  the 
right  hand  of  the  Father  for  the  good  of  His  people  when  He  brings  Scaiptures  to 
their  minds,  makes  them  clear  to  them,  and  clears  their  practice  there,  for,  when 
Jesus  was  glorified,  this  was  a  comfortable  evidence  of  it,  they  remembered  these 
things.  (G.  Hutcheson.)  Prophecy : — I.  God  does  foretell  in  His  Wobd  mant 
EVENTS  before  THEY  COME  TO  PASS.  This  appears  from  the  text  and  from  the  whole 
history  of  His  conduct  from  the  first  prediction  of  Genesis  to  the  last  in  Revelation. 
Witness  the  fulfilled  promises  concerning  the  Jews,  heathen  nations,  Christ,  Hia 
Church,  &o.  II.  God  always  brings  to  pass  the  events  which  He  foretells.  This 
will  appear  if  we  consider — 1.  That  we  have  no  evidence  that  He  has  ever  failed 
to  bring  to  pass  any  event  that  He  has  foretold.  Though  the  disciples  did  not  know 
at  first  that  Zechariah's  prophecy  had  been  fulfilled,  they  knew  it  afterwards.  2. 
God  never  foretold  any  events  but  such  as — (1)  He  was  willing  to  bring  to  pass. 
He  never  could  be  under  any  compulsion  to  foretelL  (2)  His  own  glory  requires 
to  be  brought  to  pass.  (3)  He  is  able  to  bring  to  pass.  God  can  do 
anything  that  power  can  do  and  that  does  not  involve  a  contradiction.  Hia  op. 
ponents  He  can  break  in  pieces.  III.  God  has  good  seasons  fob  foketellino 
EVENTS  BEFORE  THEY  COME  TO  PASS.  1.  To  conviuce  men  that  He  is  concerned  in 
bringing  them  about.  2.  To  demonstrate  the  truth  of  His  bringing  to  pass  other 
events  not  predicted.  Predicted  events  stand  inseparably  related  to  unpredioted. 
The  Messianic  prophecies  are  connected  with  other  events  which  took  place  in  every 
part  of  the  world.  Improvement  :  It  appears  from  the  design  of  prophecy,  that 
the  Bible  predictions — (1)  Are  the  last  He  will  ever  give  (Eev.  xxii.  18,  19).  2. 
Will  answer  their  end  though  not  understood  till  fulfilled.  3.  Being  disbelieved 
does  not  destroy  their  evidence  or  importance.  4.  Are  an  infaUible  evidence  of  the 
truth  of  the  Bible.     (N.  Emmons,  D.D.)  The  continuous  fulfilment  of  Scrip- 

ture : — There  was  much  written  as  in  sympathetic  ink,  invisible  for  a  season,  yet 
ready  to  flash  out  in  lines  and  characters  of  light  whenever  the  appointed  hour  had 
arrived.  Or  to  use  another  figure.  Holy  Scripture  progressively  unfolding  what  it 
contains  may  be  likened  to  some  magnificent  landscape  on  which  the  sun  is  gradu- 
ally rising,  and  even  as  it  rises  is  bringing  out  one  headland  into  light  and  promi- 
nence, and  then  another ;  anon  kindling  the  glory  smitten  summit  of  some  far 
mountain,  and  presently  lighting  up  the  recesses  of  some  near  valley  which  had 
hitherto  abided  in  gloom,  and  so  travelling  on  till  nothing  remains  in  shadow,  but 
the  whole  prospect  stands  out  in  the  clearness  and  splendour  of  the  brightest  noon. 


820  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xn. 

The  Church  informed  and  quickened  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  more  and  more  discovers 
what  in  Scripture  is  given  her.  She  has  always  possessed  what  she  now  possesses, 
only  not  always  with  the  same  distinctness  of  consciousness.  He  has  not  added  to 
her  wealth,  but  she  has  become  more  and  more  aware  of  that  wealth ;  her  dowry 
has  remained  always  the  same,  but  that  dowry  was  so  rich  and  rare  that  only  little 
by  little  she  has  counted  over  and  taken  stock  and  inventory  of  her  jewels.  She 
has  consolidated  her  doctrine  compelled  thereto  by  the  provocation  of  her  enemies, 
or  induced  to  it  by  a  growing  sense  of  her  own  needs.  She  has  brought  together 
utterances  of  Holy  Writ,  and  those  which  apart  were  comparatively  barren,  when 
thus  married,  have  been  fruitful  to  her.  And  yet  all  this  she  possessed  implicitly 
though  not  explicitly — even  as  the  shut  hand  is  as  perfect  a  hand  as  the  open,  or  as 
our  dominion  in  that  huge  island  of  the  Pacific  is  as  truly  ours,  and  that  region  as 
vast  in  extent  now  as  it  will  be  when  every  mountain  and  valley,  rivulet  and  bay, 
have  been  explored,  and  the  flag  of  England  has  waved  over  all.  {Archbishop 
Trench.)  The  people  therefore  .  .  .  bare  record. — The  popular  testimony  to  the 
resurrection  of  Lazarus : — 1.  It  is  the  part  of  all  such  as  have  been  witnesses  to 
Christ's  working  on  themselves  or  others  to  publish  the  same  to  His  praise ;  for  the 
people  that  was  with  Him  when  He  called  Lazarus,  &c.,  bare  record.  2.  As  it  is 
at  ail  times  a  sin  to  smother  the  praises  of  Christ.  So,  in  particular,  in  days  of 
solemnity,  it  is  our  sin  not  to  join  and  bring  in  what  we  know  to  make  up  the  song, 
for  they  bring  in  that  particular  to  make  up  the  triumph.  3.  In  a  day  of  Christ's 
power,  and  when  He  is  to  get  glory  to  Himself,  He  can  furnish  means  and  make 
them  effectual  to  bring  it  to  pass,  for  He  makes  that  miracle  an  occasion  to  bring 
about  this  triumph.  4.  It  may  encourage  men  to  publish  the  praise  of  Christ's 
working  as  they  know  of  it,  that  Ood  may  make  their  weak  endeavours  effectual  to 
work  upon  very  many,  for  the  testimony  of  some  drew  out  this  great  confluence  to 
Christ.  6.  It  is  the  duty  of  them  who  hear  anything  of  Christ's  commendation  to 
go  and  seek  Him,  and  do  homage  to  Him,  for,  for  this  cause,  the  people  also  met 
Him,  for  that  they  had  heard  that  He  had  done  this  miracle.    (G.  Hutcheson.) 

Ver.  19.  Perceive  ye  how  ye  prevail  nothing  ?  Behold  the  world  Is  gone  after 
pim, — The  failure  of  infidelity : — ^Like  the  prediction  of  Caiaphas  and  the  inscrip- 
tion of  Pilate,  an  unconscious  prophecy  is  hidden  in  these  words.  What  the 
Pharisee  affirmed  hyperboHcaUy  Christ's  friends  may  now  affirm  almost  literally. 
Note — I.  Thb  peogress  of  the  Gospel.  Four  important  facts  concerning  this  pro- 
gress are  admitted  by  friends  and  foes.  1.  That  during  the  first  four  centuries  it 
was  rapid  and  extensive.  2.  That  its  human  instruments  were  few  and  feeble.  3. 
That  it  was  in  spite  of  bitter  and  persistent  opposition.  4.  That  it  was  not  achieved 
in  the  dark,  but  in  the  most  enlightened  age  of  antiquity,  and  in  the  most  populous 
and  poHshed  of  ancient  cities.  The  company  of  one  hundred  and  twenty  soon 
became  three  thousand,  then  five  thousand  men  alone,  then  multitudes  in  Jerusa- 
lem only.  In  less  than  half  a  century  Christian  Churches  were  planted  in  all  the 
chief  cities  of  the  Boman  empire ;  in  less  than  three  centuries  more,  it  was  the 
religion  of  that  empire.  And  from  that  day  it  has  continued  to  spread  until  the 
most  civilized  nations  are  Christian  and  become  Christian.  II.  The  efforts  of 
INFIDELITY  TO  STOP  THAT  PROGRESS.  Such  was  the  nature  of  the  opposition  to 
Christianity  that  if  our  standpoint  had  been  the  first  instead  of  the  nineteenth 
eentury  we  should  be  forced  to  the  conclusion  that  it  would  fail.  1,  The  Jewish 
world  opposed  it.  The  rulers  crucified  its  Author  but  that  effort  was  unavailing, 
for  Christ  rose  again.  They  killed  Stephen  and  James,  but  the  disciples,  driven  in 
every  direction,  spread  the  gospel.  Wherever  the  apostles  went  the  Jews  stirred 
ap  the  people  against  them ;  but  being  persecuted  in  one  city  they  fied  to  another 
preaching  until  thousands  of  Jews,  including  many  priests,  became  obedient  to  the 
faith.  2.  The  Gentile  world  opposed  it.  Polytheism  was  so  firmly  enthroned  in 
the  hearts  of  the  people,  and  so  completely  interwoven  with  the  government,  the 
arts  and  trade,  that  Christianity  was  regarded  as  treason  against  religion,  the  state, 
common  sense  and  good  taste.  First,  the  Christians  were  slandered  and  ridiculed,  then 
alaughtered  in  thousands.  But  all  the  efforts  of  the  empire  and  paganism  com- 
bined prevailed  nothing.  3.  The  modem  world  has  opposed  it.  Changing  its 
tactics,  infidelity,  instead  of  assaulting  men  bodily,  has  assailed  their  minds  and 
hearts,  and  marshalled  its  hosts  under  the  banners  of  science  and  literature.  But 
still  it  prevails  nothing.  III.  Why  iNFrDEUTY  has  failed.  The  Christian  answer 
is  because  the  hand  of  God  is  in  the  progress  of  Christianity.  The  answer  of 
infidelity — in  haman  instrumentality — refutes  itself.  Infidelity  has  failed  because— 


CHAP,  au]  ST.  JOHN.  a»l 

1.  It  has  dashed  itself  against  the  Rock  of  Ages.  There  is  no  saccessful  arguing 
•gainst  such  a  character  as  Christ.  2.  The  evidences  of  Christianity  are  too  con- 
vincing. Intelligent  people  would  not  continue  for  nineteen  centuries  to  use  s 
remedy  that  never  cures.  3.  Infidelity  has  no  substitute  for  Christianity.  (IF.  B. 
Stewart,  D.D.)  The  world  it  gone  after  Him : — It  is  a  confession  of  defeat, 
"  There  has  been  a  long  struggle  and  it  has  gone  against  us."  The  triumphal  entry 
had  shown  the  hold  which  Christ  had  on  the  people.  I.  What  was  it  in  Chbibt 
WHICH  so  DEEPLY  sTiKRED  THE  ENMITY  OF  THE  Phabiseeb  ?  1.  We  are  in  some  re- 
spects hard  on  the  Pharisees.  When  Christ  called  them  hypocrites,  He  meant  that 
sort  of  doubleness  which  may  be  but  half-conscious,  or  which  may  be  quite  un- 
conscious to  the  man  himself.  They  were  moral  men,  and  it  is  not  hard  to  recon- 
cile this  with  their  conduct  towards  Christ.  Who  are  they  now,  who  are  most 
sensitive  to  the  appearance  of  what  they  regard  as  irregular  teachers  of  religion  ? 
And  who  can  wonder  if  the  last  to  give  their  sympathy  to  the  new  doctrine  are  the 
estabUshed  exponents  of  the  old  ?  2.  Doubtless  it  was  the  sin  of  the  Pharisees  to 
be  prejudiced  against  Christ,  but  we  lose  the  lesson  if  we  regard  them  as  monsters 
of  the  past,  which  is  the  danger  of  prejudice  in  things  of  the  soul.  We  ought  not 
to  be  so  wedded  to  one  form  or  formula  as  to  be  incapable  of  profiting  by  any  new 
light.  II.  What  was  it  that  made  the  world  go  after  Him.  1.  Reality.  We 
may  trifle  with  Christ ;  but  He  never  trifles  with  us.  The  Pharisees  were  triflers, 
as  are  their  modern  representatives,  whether  of  wealth,  literature,  or  the  Church. 
Mm  then,  as  now,  were  weary  with  childish  discussions,  and  were  then,  as  now, 
ready  to  follow  a  real  man  who  meant  and  lived  what  he  said.  2.  Unworldiness. 
it  is  a  mistake  for  a  religious  teacher  to  court  popularity  by  compromise  with  the 
world,  "  All  things  to  all  men."  The  people  see  through  it  all  and  despise  the  maai 
who  flatters  himself  that  he  has  won  them.  The  secret  of  John  the  Baptist's 
power  was  his  unworldliness,  and  it  was  the  incomparable  unworldliness  of  Christ 
that  attracted  the  world  after  Him.  3.  Wonderful  love.  It  was  new  to  publicans 
and  sinners  to  be  treated  with  love,  and  still  more  strange  that  with  the  love  of  Christ 
there  should  be  blended  such  an  inflexible  righteousness.  But  the  people  followed 
Him  because  of  the  love  which  won  them  from  the  sin  which  purity  condemned. 
{Dean   Vaughan.)  Why  Christianity  triumphed: — Our  curiosity  is  naturally 

prompted  to  inquire  by  what  means  the  Christian  faith  obtained  so  remarkable  a 
victory  over  the  established  religions  of  the  earth.  To  this  inquiry  an  obvious  but 
satisfactory  answer  maybe  given,  that  it  was  owing  to  the  convincing  evidence  of  the 
doctrine  itself,  and  to  the  ruling  providence  of  the  great  Author.  (Gibbon.)  Tlie 
triumph  of  Christianity  : — During  the  decay  of  the  Roman  Empire,  a  pure  and 
humble  religion  gently  insinuated  itself  into  the  minds  of  men,  grew  up  in  silence 
and  obscurity,  derived  new  vigour  from  opposition,  and  finally  erected  the  triumph- 
ant banner  of  the  Cross  on  the  ruins  of  the  capitol.  Nor  was  the  influence  ol 
Christianity  confined  to  the  period  or  to  the  limits  of  the  Roman  Empire.  After 
a  revolution  of  thirteen  or  fourteen  centuries  that  religion  is  professed  by  the 
nations  of  Europe,  the  most  distinguished  portion  of  the  human  kind  in  arts  and 
learning  as  well  as  in  arms.  By  the  industry  and  zeal  of  the  Europeans,  it  has 
been  widely  diflused  to  the  most  distant  shores  of  Asia  and  Africa,  and  by  the 
means  of  their  colonies  has  been  firmly  estabUshed  from  Canada  to  Chill,  in  a  world 
unknown  to  the  ancients.     {Ibid.) 

Vers.  20-33.  And  there  came  certain  Greeks;  ...  the  same  came  therefore  to 
Fhlllp  .  .  .  Baying,  Sir,  we  would  see  Jesus. — The  incident  and  its  significance : — 
These  Greeks  belonged  to  those  numerous  Gentiles  who,  like  the  Ethiopian  eunuch 
(Act  viii.),  had  embraced  Judaism  and  came  to  Jerusalem  to  keep  its  festivals.  They 
must  be  carefully  distinguished  from  the  Jews  (Hellenists)  speaking  the  Greek 
language,  who  dwelt  in  heathen  lands.  The  spacious  court  of  the  Gentiles  was 
devoted  to  these  proselytes  according  to  the  words  of  Solomon  (1  Kings  viii.  41-43). 
If  these  strangers  witnessed  the  entry  of  Jesus,  and  were  present  at  the  expulsion 
of  the  sellers — an  act  by  which  Jesus  restored  to  its  proper  use  the  only  part  of  the 
ganctuary  open  to  them — we  can  all  the  better  appreciate  their  desire  for  nearer 
acquaintance  with  such  a  person.  Assuredly  they  did  not,  like  Zacchaaus,  wsuit  merely 
to  see  Jesus  with  their  bodily  eyes  ;  for  such  a  purpose  there  was  no  need  of  Philip's 
intervention,  since  they  might  have  seen  Him  as  He  passed  through  the  court. 
Besides,  the  solemnity  of  our  Lord's  reply  obliges  us  to  attribute  a  more  serious 
intention  to  this  step.  What  they  desired  was  to  have  a  private  conversation  on 
rehgious  subjects.  How  do  we  know  even  whether,  having  witnessed  the  opposition 
VOL.   II.  21 


82i  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  rtt 

He  encountered  from  the  rulers  of  His  own  nation,  they  did  not  desire  to  invit« 
Him  to  turn  to  the  Gentiles  who  would  better  appreciate  such  a  sage  than  these 
bigoted  Jews  ?  Eusebius  has  preserved  the  memory  of  an  embassy  sent  to  Jesua 
by  Abgarus,  king  of  Edessa,  in  Syria,  to  invite  Him  to  take  up  His  abode  with  Him, 
and  to  promise  Him  such  a  royal  welcome  as  should  compensate  Him  for  the 
obstinacy  with  which  the  Jews  rejected  Him.  This  fact  is  not  without  resemblance 
to  the  one  in  the  text,  and  in  which  we  behold,  in  one  of  the  first  demonstrations  of 
the  heathen  world  in  favour  of  the  Gospel,  the  first  indication  of  that  attraction 
which  its  moral  beauty  was  soon  to  exercise  over  the  whole  human  race.  Jesua 
was  undoubtedly,  at  the  time,  in  the  court  of  the  women,  which  was  entered  after 
crossing  that  of  the  GentUes,  and  in  which  He  frequently  taught.  The  term 
'•  approached  "  has  a  certain  tone  of  gravity  and  solemnity.  The  address,  "  Sir," 
shows  the  respect  they  felt  for  the  disciple  of  such  a  Master.  "  They  desired," 
expresses  an  action  begun  and  awaiting  its  completion,  the  answer  of  Philip. 
&k\ofiev — "  We  have  decided  to  .  .  ."  ;  procure  us  therefore  the  means — "  to  see." 
These  strangers  used  the  most  modest  expression  :  to  see  Him  more  closely.  The 
fact  that  Phihp  was  of  Bethsaida  may  serve  to  explain  why  they  applied  to  him. 
They  came  perhaps  from  Decapolis  on  the  other  side  of  the  Sea  of  GaUlee,  where 
were  several  entirely  Greek  cities.  It  is  remarkable  that  Philip  and  Andrew  are 
alone  those  whose  names  were  of  Greek  origin.  The  Greek  name  went  hand  in 
hand  with  the  Greek  culture,  Mark  the  cautious  character  of  Philip.  He  feels  the 
gravity  of  the  step  he  is  asked  to  take,  and  before  asking  Jesus  to  deviate  from  Hia 
habitual  conduct  (Matt.  xv.  24)  brings  the  matter  before  Andrew,  who  in  all  the 
catalogues  of  the  apostles  is  placed  next  to  Philip,  and  are  mentioned  together  in 
chapters  i.  and  vi.  It  is  probable  that  the  latter,  the  more  vigorous  and  decided 
character,  was  the  spokesman,  and  that  this  is  the  reason  why  his  name  is  placed 
first.  Why  did  this  circumstance  make  so  profound  an  impression  on  Jesus? 
First  it  aroused  within  Him  the  feeling  of  His  sovereignty  over  the  Gentile  world. 
Keligious  wants  expressed  by  Gentiles  and  to  Him!  It  is,  as  it  were,  the  first 
bursting  forth  of  a  new  world.  But  this  sovereignty  could  only  be  realized  so  far  aa 
He  should  Himself  be  freed  from  His  Jewish  covering  and  raised  to  a  new 
form  of  existence.  Hence  His  thoughts  turned  to  Calvary.  Hence,  instead 
of  answering  yes  or  no  to  the  question.  He  was  absorbed  in  the  reflectiona 
it  called  forth.  The  Gentiles  were  knocking  at  the  door  of  the  kingdom  of 
God:  it  was  the  signal  that  a  decisive  hour  had  come — (1)  For  Himself 
(vers.  23-30) ;  (2)  For  the  human  race  (vers.  31-83) ;  (3)  Especially  for  Israel  (vers. 
34-36).  (F.  Godet,  D.D.)  Seeing  Christ : — It  is  one  of  the  many  curious  things 
that  assure  us  that  the  Gospels  themselves  are  substantially  fragments  out  of  the 
real  life  and  times  of  Jesus  Christ,  that  these  men  should  be  Greeks,  at  that  time 
probably  the  most  inquisitive  and  newsy  race  on  earth.  They  had  come,  I  presume, 
from  Corinth  or  Ephesus  ;  and,  when  they  went  back  home,  the  first  question  would 
be,  "What's  the  news  ?  "  Now,  the  news  was  Jesus.  He  was  just  then  the  common 
subject  of  discussion  ;  and  it  would  be  a  great  thing  for  them,  when  they  got  home, 
to  say,  "  We  have  seen  Jesus,  and  talked  with  Him."  And  the  answer  of  Christ, 
though  it  seems  at  the  first  glance  to  be  no  answer  at  all,  touches  the  very  heart  of 
all  such  question  and  answer,  and  is,  beside  that,  a  beautiful  instance  of  the  rich, 
transcendental  nature  of  this  Son  of  God  :  "  Except  a  com  of  wheat,"  &c.  As  if  He 
would  say,  "  These  men  want  to  see  Me.  What  can  they  gain  by  that  ?  What 
they  will  see  is  not  Me.  The  root  is  not  the  flower.  This  common,  footsore  man, 
with  this  poor  brown  face,  so  thin  and  worn  that  men  think  I  may  be  nearly  fifty, 
while  I  am  but  thirty — what  can  I  be  to  men  whose  ideal  is  Apollo  ?  My  simple 
words  about  God  and  man,  and  duty  and  destiny,  would  be  foohshness  to  them. 
Let  them  wait  until  the  world  bums  with  the  lustre  of  what  is  sprung  out  of  Me. 
When  I  have  whispered  my  comfort  and  confidence  to  millions  of  desolate  souls ; 
when  I  have  created  new  homes  for  purity  and  peace  to  dwell  in,  and  brought  men 
and  women  and  children  back  to  the  Divine  will ;  when  the  love  and  truth  and 
self-sacrifice  of  which  God  has  made  me,  though  I  seem  but  a  poor  peasant,  shall 
have  done  what  all  the  genius  of  all  the  ages  has  failed  to  do ;  when  I  have  hushed 
the  fevered  heart  of  the  world  to  rest,  and  quickened  it  into  a  new  life — then  they 
can  see  Me.  But  I  must  die  to  live."  {E.  Collyer,  D.D.)  The  two  Epiphanies : — 
There  were  two  manifestations  of  onr  Lord  to  the  Gentiles.  One  took  place  at  the 
beginning  and  the  other  at  the  close  of  His  life.  The  Magi,  the  wise  men  of  the 
East,  came  to  the  cradle  of  Jesus  ;  the  Greeks,  the  wise  men  of  the  West,  came  to 
Hia  cross.     The  old  world  of  the  East,  with  its  exhausted  history  and  completed 


OTAP.  m.]  ST.  JOHN.  823 

revelation,  came  to  the  cradle  of  the  Child  of  Promise  to  receive  a  fresh  impulse,  to 
share  in  the  new  creation  of  God  and  rejuvenescence  of  the  world.  The  new  world 
of  the  West  with  its  mobile  life,  its  ever  expanding  history,  its  glowing  hopes  and 
aspirations,  came  to  the  cross  of  the  Eedeemer  that  it  might  receive  a  deeper 
earnestness  and  a  higher  consecration.  In  these  two  Epiphanies  we  see  har- 
moniously united  the  two  great  systems  of  pagan  religion  which  separately  were 
but  a  mere  fragment  of  the  truth,  and  contained  no  hope  or  promise  of  blessing  for 
man.  The  Orientals  had  the  humiliation  of  the  Godhead  as  dimly  shadowed  forth  in 
the  Avatars  of  Vishnu  and  Buddha ;  the  Greeks  had  the  exaltation  of  manhood  as 
shown  in  the  apotheosis  of  the  heroes  of  the  Pantheon.  Thus  appropriately  the 
representatives  of  the  wisdom  of  the  East  and  the  West  came  respectively  to  the 
birth  and  death  of  Him  who,  though  He  was  the  equal  of  God,  yet  took  on  Him  the 
form  of  a  servant,  and  whom  God  had  highly  exalted,  giving  Him  a  name  which  ia 
above  every  name.  Equally  significant  were  the  symbols  of  the  two  manifestations. 
In  both  cases  they  were  borrowed  from  the  field  of  nature.  The  one  was  a  star,  the 
other  a  corn  of  wheat.  The  star  of  the  wise  men  of  the  East — the  watchers  of  the 
midnight  heavens — was  changeless  as  the  life  and  religion  of  the  East.  It  rose  and 
set,  and  moved  in  its  orbit  for  ever  the  same.  The  corn  of  wheat  of  the  Greeks 
— those  restless  searchers  into  the  meaning  of  everything  on  earth — grew  to  more  and 
more,  and  exhibited  all  the  changes  and  variations  of  life.  The  one  was  a  symbol  of 
the  night  with  its  dreams  and  mysteries  and  spiritual  thoughts ;  the  other  of  the 
day  with  its  stem  facts  and  active  duties  and  daily  bread.  *'  Sir,  we  would  see 
Jesus  "  was  but  another  form  of  the  old  question  which  the  wise  men  asked,"  Where 
is  He  that  is  born  King  of  the  Jews  ?  "  The  wise  men  of  the  East  were  guided  to 
Christ  by  a  star,  a  dead  silent  object  of  nature.  But  the  Greeks  were  guided  to  Him 
fcy  the  living  voice  and  hand  of  man.  And  how  characteristic  was  this  circimistanoe 
of  the  difference  between  the  Orientals  and  the  Greeks  1  The  Orientals  shaped 
their  philosophy  and  religion  in  the  changeless  desert,  under  the  passionless  starry 
heavens,  from  the  calm  contemplation  of  the  objects  of  nature  which  entered  so 
largely  into  their  worship.  The  Greeks  shaped  their  philosophy  and  religion  amid 
the  ever-changing  haunts  of  man,  and  in  contact  with  the  busy  work  of  everyday 
life.  Not  through  the  sympathy  of  nature,  but  through  the  fellowship  of  man,  did 
they  rise  to  their  conception  of  man's  origin  and  destiny,  and  their  solution  of  the 
profound  mysteries  which  surround  his  present  and  future.  It  was  fitting  therefore 
that  they  should  be  guided  to  Christ,  in  whom  all  their  hopes  should  be  fulfilled, 
and  all  their  mysteries  solved,  not  by  a  star  but  by  their  fellow-men.  (H.  Macmillan, 
D.D.)  East  and  West  coming  to  Christ : — This  is  a  companion  picture  to  the 
visit  of  the  Magi — science  and  thought  seeking  Christ.  The  Magi,  on  the  one  side,  are 
the  representatives  of  the  world's  godly  scientists,  the  forerunners  of  the  Galileos, 
the  Keplers,  the  Newtons,  and  the  Faradays,  who  never  stop  at  laws  but  reach  to 
their  giver,  '*  from  nature  rise  to  nature's  God  ;  "  who  refuse  to  see  the  world  as  a 
stage  only  on  which  man  may  stand  or  strut,  may  display  his  energy  or  magnify  his 
pride,  but  who  see  it  as  an  "  altar-stair  that  slopes  through  darkness  up  to  God," 
and  on  which  it  becomes  man  to  kneel  and  pray.  The  Greeks,  on  the  other  side, 
are  the  representatives  of  the  world's  godly  philosophers,  the  theistic  thinkers; 
they  are  the  forerunners  of  the  Augustines,  the  Aquinases,  the  Anselms,  and  the 
Pascals — the  men  who  rescue  philosophy  from  being  the  painted  priestess  of  pride 
and  purify  her  to  be  the  sweet  handmaid  of  Christ.  •'  Where  is  He  that  is  born 
King  of  the  Jews  ?  "  ••  Sir,  we  would  see  Jesus."  (G.  M.  Grant,  B.D.)  Certain 
Greeks : — I.  The  Greeks.  Three  peoples  prepared  for  Christ's  coming  and  three 
languages  waved  above  His  cross.  Jewish  religion,  Eoman  arms  and  government, 
Greek  thought.  The  philosopher  connects  preacher  and  politician.  1.  In  an  age 
far  back,  when  thought  had  become  enslaved  in  the  falsified  civilizations  of  the  Nile 
and  Euphrates,  an  asylum  was  found  in  Greece.  For  five  centuries  the  Greeks 
marched  at  the  head  of  humanity.  All  gathered  round  the  torch  of  Greek  genius. 
Meanwhile  Greek  language  had  been  fashioned  into  the  most  perfect  vehicle  of 
thought  ever  developed.  Neither  Hebrew  nor  Latin  had  the  copiousness  or 
flexibility  necessary  to  deal  with  a  new  world  of  ppiritual  realities.  And  this  so 
rich  and  copious  became  all  but  universal.  And  what  a  marvellous  intellect  wielded 
this  weapon.  To  them  was  entrusted  the  brilliant  but  sad  task  of  demonstrating 
for  all  time  the  necessary  failure  of  culture  to  regenerate  man.  The  grandeur  of 
the  effort  is  the  measure  of  the  greatness  of  the  failure.  Their  intellectual  labours 
were  those  of  Titans.  Of  this  mission  and  failure  the  apostle  reminds  the 
Corinthians  (i.  21,  &c.).   2.  At  the  hour  when  the  failure  was  most  evident.    When 


824  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oHi*.  XXk 

instead  of  being  brought  nearer  to  heaven  and  God  man  was  halting  between  m 
Buperstition  which  believed  everything  and  a  scepticism  which  believed  nothing, these 
Greeks  said,  "  We  would  see  Jesus."  3.  They  were  proselytes,  Greek  correspondents 
of  the  Boman  centurion,  brothers  of  thousands  in  India  to-day  who  are  Christian 
theists  halting  at  the  "  gate  "  of  baptism.  We  can  picture  the  processes  by 
which  they  reached  tbeir  position.  Born  where  decorous  belief  in  mythology  waa 
professed ;  then  emancipated  into  a  vague  scepticism  by  the  speculations  and 
critioisms  of  the  schools  (what  Western  science  and  literature  are  doing  in  India) ; 
then  plunged  into  dead,  unproductive  negation,  the  spirit  protesting,  and  the  longing 
after  positive  truth  eventually  triumphant.  The  Jewish  scriptures  reach  them,  and 
there  they  find  at  least  something  of  that  for  which  they  yearned  ;  a  warrant  for  the 
vague  belief  throughout  the  East  of  the  advent  of  some  great  one  in  Judea.  The 
project  would  be  started  and  carried  out  to  visit  Jerusalem.  How  disillusioned  they 
become  at  the  sight  of  its  secularities.  They  are  permitted  to  enter  the  Temple  no 
further  than  the  Outer  Court ;  and  how  little  to  solemnize  they  see  there — tables  of 
money-changers,  cattle,  &o.  Then  comes  Palm  Sunday,  and  the  benign  form 
"riding  on  an  ass's  colt."  Who  is  this?  Jesus.  Then  follows  the  cleansing  of 
the  Temple.  They  talk  it  over.  Something  more  than  curiosity  awakes  within 
them — a  revival  of  those  hopes  which  the  vitiated  moral  atmosphere  had  killed. 
They  make  up  their  minds  to  seek  a  personal  interview,  which  brings  us  to — II. 
The  bequest.  On  two  other  occasions  we  hear  of  a  similar  desire.  Herod,  "  that 
fox  "  (Luke  xxiii.  8),  had  his  wish  gratified  to  his  condemnation — for  Jesus  answered 
him  nothing ;  to  such  as  he  our  Lord's  lips  are  closed.  Zacchaaus  (Luke  xix.  3) 
was  also  gratified  and  salvation  brought  to  his  house.  1.  The  request  is  marked  by 
directness  and  simplicity,  yet  there  is  more  in  it  than  Ues  on  the  surface.  In  their 
minds  a  train  of  possibilities  hung  upon  that  "seeing."  Jesus  might  turn  out  to  be 
a  Messiah,  or  only  a  kindly  enthusiast  or  a  popular  idol.  2.  But  there  was  much 
more  in  it  than  they  knew.  They  occupied  a  representative  position  and  spoke  for 
a  vast  constituency — the  devout  souls  of  all  time  who  cry  for  a  Saviour.  III.  Ixa 
EFFECT.  "  The  hour  is  come "  must  have  seemed  a  strange  outburst  in  such  a 
connection ;  but  we  can  trace  the  connection  easily.  1.  Christ  saw  in  them  the  first 
fruits  of  the  full  harvest  of  heathen  lands — the  advance  guard  of  the  multitude 
which  no  man  can  number.  All  that  was  needful  for  Him  to  do  as  a  teacher  was 
now  done ;  what  remained  of  His  regenerative  mission  could  be  done  only  by 
dying.  So  He  goes  on  to  discourse  concerning  the  life  efficacy  of  His  death. 
2.  Christ  does  not  appeal  to  the  Prophets  concerning  His  death  as  He  does 
when  addressing  His  disciples,  but  appeals  to  the  secretly  prophesying  mystery  ol 
nature — the  prophecy  of  a  Redeeming  Death  which  they  could  discern  everywhere 
around  them,  and  on  which  philosophy  had  long  speculated,  the  mystery  of  life 
through  death.  Only  by  dying  could  His  Divine  energy  be  set  free  and  exerted  for 
the  life  of  all.  3.  This  analogy  was  appropriate  to  the  Greeks.  They  had  sought 
their  ideal  of  life,  not  in  self-renunciation,  but  in  beauty,  strength,  self-satisfaction. 
Their  ideal  was  embodied  in  Apollo,  the  very  opposite  of  Jesus,  who  was  *♦  without 
comeliness  "  and  whose  emblem  was  a  cross.  The  lesson  of  dying  to  self  was  what 
their  race  most  lacked  and  therefore  most  needed.  4.  The  influence  of  that  inter, 
view  would  never  pass  away.  That  grandest  prayer,  the  voice  from  heaven  under- 
stood according  to  spiritual  capacity — all  that  would  abide  as  an  instruction  and 
power  of  life  for  ever.     (G.  M.  Grant,  B.D.)        The  inquiring  Greeks : — I.  Thb 

liONOINO  TO  SEE  JesUS  IS  A  MATTEB  OF  CONSTITUTION  NOT   EDUCATION  (vcr.  20).      ThcSO 

were  not  Jews,  and  their  visit  grew  up  out  of  heart-want.  Man's  need  and  God's 
supply  must  be  contemplated  together.  Beligious  experience  begins  in  the  natural 
seekings  of  our  constitution,  and  ends  in  the  gratification  of  some  higher  ones  which 
are  supernatural.  The  natural  desires  demand  direct  communion  with  God ;  but 
the  supernatural  are  created  by  the  disclosure  of  a  possible  purity,  and  these 
demand  to  be  led  to  Christ  as  a  sacrifice.    U.  Sfibituaij  inqdiby  afteb  Chbist  ib 

80METIHE8  LITTLE  MOEE  THAN  EESTLE88   CUBIOSITT  (vor.  21).       These   men   OOUld  not 

haye  known  just  what  they  wanted.  The  soul  has  vague  but  sincere  wishes  for 
something  it  does  not  possess — "  an  aching  void."  Partly  from  need  and  ourioaity 
the  Greeks  came  to  ask.  Fire  ascending  seeks  the  sun ;  we  can  imagine  some 
flames  so  buffeted  by  winds  as  to  render  it  consistent  for  them  to  say,  "  We  would 
see  the  Day-God  " ;  or  some  compass  needles  disturbed  praying,  "  We  would  se^ 
the  North  Pole  I "  For  these  constitutional  desires  will  not  long  tamely  bear  to  be 
denied  of  their  proper  rest.  lU.  Many  iien  take  the  boundabodt  way  in  comimo  to 
Jkbus  (ver.  22).    They  prefer  some  intervening  Philip,  some  mediating  priesthood4 


CHAP,  xn.]  8T.  JOHN.  §28 

But  it  is  not  the  Greek  name  of  Philip,  nor  the  experience  of  Andrew,  which  is  to  be 
relied  on  for  soul  rest.  Eedemption  as  an  individual  acquisition  is  the  only  reply  to 
the  cravings  within.  IV.  The  moment  one  sees  Jesus  he  finds  that  He  has  a  wobd 
TO  SAT  debectlt  FOB  HiMSELF  (vcr.  23).  Hitherto  one  may  have  supposed  his  own  soul 
to  be  the  object  of  the  atonement.  Suddenly  he  perceives  that  the  glory  of  God  is 
lying  behind  the  Cross,  and  it  puts  a  new  thought  in  his  mind  to  learn  that  the 
work  of  the  Son  of  Man  was  done  that  the  Son  of  God  might  have  supreme  glory. 
But  did  not  Christ  suffer  to  save  souls  ?  Yes  ;  but  what  was  the  special  need  that 
souls  should  be  saved  ?  V.  The  tekms  op  the  gospel  are  impeeative  as  to  an 
BNTiBE  8UBEENDEB  OF  SELF  IN  OBDEB  TO  SEE  Jesus  (vcrs.  24-25).  If  One  wants  the 
grand  hope  of  the  gospel  in  conversion ;  to  attain  the  full  measure  of  consecration, 
to  know  the  secret  of  unfailing  success — it  is  life  for  life.  Jesus  means  that  we  are 
to  put  our  heart  into  our  work,  to  deny  our  ease,  give  our  time,  money,  &c.,  and 
sink  our  selfishness  in  devotion  to  Him.    VI.  When  a  soul  has  found  Jesus  it  is 

TO  MAKE  ITSELF   PEBFECTLY  SATISFIED    WITH  JeSUS  (VCI.  25).       (C.  S.  RobtnSOTl,  D.D.) 

What  the  world  owes  to  the  Greeks  f — It  was  the  Greeks  who  first  welcomed  Chris> 
tianity,  and  there  cannot  be  a  more  striking  contrast  than  between  the  eagerness 
with  which  they  received  the  truth  of  God  manifest  in  the  flesh,  and  the  difficulty 
which  even  the  Jewish  Christians  had  in  realizing  its  full  significance.  It  was  in 
the  Greek  tongue  that  it  first  addressed  its  Divine  message  to  the  world.  It  was  in 
the  cities  and  homes  of  the  Greeks  that  it  first  displayed  its  wonderful  power  of 
assimilating  and  transforming  all  the  elements  of  life,  and  manifested  what  it  should 
afterwards  become  in  human  society.  The  gods  of  Hellas  were  the  first  to  fall 
down  before  the  ark  of  the  Son  of  God ;  and  when  He  died,  it  is  touchingly  said  a 
wailing  voice  was  heard  through  all  the  hills  and  forests  of  Greece  crying,  "  Great 
Pan  is  dead."  It  is  indeed  difficult  to  conceive  what  form  Christianity  might  have 
assumed  had  not  Greek  faith  first  illustrated  its  saving  truths ;  or  how  it  would 
have  prospered  had  not  the  Greeks  of  earlier  days  spread  tbeir  language  and  philo- 
sophy through  all  lands.  What  the  world  owes  to  the  Greeks  no  tongue  can  suffi- 
ciently tell.  From  them  we  have  received  the  sublime  poems  and  splendid  treatises 
on  science  i  vnd  philosophy  which  have  educated  all  the  higher  minds  of  the  human 
race.  Frot  i  them  we  have  received  the  matchless  sculptures,  paintings,  and  archi- 
tectural glories  which  have  filled  men's  souls  with  visions  of  ideal  beauty.  From 
them  we  have  received  the  inestimable  legacy  of  our  Greek  New  Testament,  which 
is  the  light  of  our  feet  and  the  lamp  of  our  path  to  immortality.  It  is  to  them  we 
owe  the  boon  for  which  we  should  never  cease  to  be  thankful,  that  the  sacred 
Scriptures  passed  from  the  calm  lonely  lethargic  scenes  of  nature  in  the  East, 
associated  with  the  infancy  and  early  youth  of  our  race,  to  the  busy  stimulating 
scenes  of  the  West,  associated  with  its  manhood ;  that  the  lofty,  vague  Hebrew 
language,  the  very  language  of  the  loneliness  and  grandeur  of  nature,  has  been 
translated  into  the  quick,  precise,  many-mooded  Greek,  the  very  language  of  busi- 
ness and  active  human  life  ;  that  the  stately  oracles  of  prophets  living  in  deserts, 
addressing  men  afar  off  and  from  pedestals  high  above  them,  have  become  the 
famihar  epistles  of  apostles  coming  constantly  into  personal  contact  with  the  sins, 
sorrows,  and  wants  of  humanity.  From  them  we  have  received  the  noble  works  of 
the  early  Greek  fathers  of  the  Church,  Justin,  Origen,  Gregory,  Chrysostom,  Athe- 
nagoras,  Basil,  Cyril  of  Jerusalem,  and  John  of  Damascus,  which  have  proved  such 
invaluable  helps  in  expounding  the  sacred  Scriptures.  From  them  we  have  received 
the  grand  Uturgies,  the  inspiring  hymns,  the  glorious  triumph  of  martyrs,  and  the 
devoted  Mves  of  saints,  which  have  stimulated  the  piety  and  fired  the  enthusiasm  of 
all  Christian  churches  ever  since.  The  Greeks  gathered  together,  as  it  were,  aU 
that  was  grandest  and  most  enduring  in  the  world,  and,  holding  it  up  in  their  arms 
for  the  baptism  of  Christianity,  handed  it  on  thus  purified  for  the  blessing  of  all 
after  ages.  {H.  Macmillan,  D.D.)  The  movement  of  Greek  thought  toward  Christ: — 
In  the  courteous  but  eager  desire  of  these  Greeks  we  hear  the  longing  of  their  whole 
heathen  world  for  a  Redeemer.  The  old  rites  and  superstitions  had  lost  their  hold 
on  men's  minds.  Jupiter,  Mars,  Apollo,  and  Venus,  had  all  faded  from  the  imagi- 
nation of  the  upper  classes ;  and  the  worship  of  these  deities  was  left  to  the  vulgar 
and  ignorant,  or  was  retained  only  as  a  matter  of  policy.  The  oracles  were  dumb ; 
the  altars  cold  and  deserted ;  and  some  tried  in  vain  to  satisfy  their  wants  by 
changing  religion  into  poetry  or  philosophy,  or  sought  as  a  last  resource  to  fill  with 
sensual  pleasure  the  intolerable  vacuity  of  their  hearts.  Regretful  of  the  past, 
hopeless  of  the  future,  suicide  was  recommended  as  the  only  cure  for  human  misery; 
the  darkness  of  despair  giving  place  to  the  deeper  darkness  of  death.    But  even  in 


526  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  zn. 

the  ntter  blankness  of  such  a  night,  there  were  men  of  nobler  instincts  who  eonld 
not  do  without  religion — "  Memnons  waiting  for  the  day."  They  felt  about  for  the 
unknown  God  to  whom  they  might  cry  for  help  amid  the  wreck  of  every  religioaa 
system,  and  the  failures  and  uncertamties  of  the  world  around.  Some  of  these 
"seekers  after  God,"  men  of  the  stamp  of  Epictetus  and  Marcus  Aureliua,  had 
wandered  into  Jewish  synagogues,  which  by  a  providential  coincidence  at  that  time 
were  placed  in  all  the  chief  cities  of  the  world  ;  and  there  they  found  to  their  sur- 
prise, in  what  they  had  been  taught  to  regard  as  an  "  execrable  superstition,"  ledees 
of  faith  and  hope  by  which  they  climbed  out  of  the  profound  darkness  into  the 
happy  sunshine.  They  were  irresistibly  drawn  to  the  new  religion  by  its  unity  of 
the  Godhead,  its  high  ideal  of  domestic  and  social  purity,  and  above  all  by  the  hope 
which  it  held  out  of  a  coming  Messiah  who  should  redress  all  the  evils  of  the  world, 
dispel  its  ignorance,  and  bring  in  not  a  cold  morality,  but  a  righteousness  which 
should  be  the  offspring  of  a  burning  love.  Not  a  few  of  these  went  up  as  pilgrims 
to  the  annual  festival  at  Jerusalem  ;  and  among  them  were  the  Greeks  who  wished 
to  see  Jesus.  They  expressed  the  longing  of  the  whole  heathen  world  for  Him  who 
was  the  light  to  lighten  the  Gentiles.  (Ibid.)  The  desire  to  see  Jesus : — I.  What 
IS  THERE  TO  SEE  IN  Jesds?  1.  God  manifest  in  the  flesh.  In  any  other  aspect  the 
Deity  is  an  object  of  fear  not  of  comfort.  2.  God  anxious  to  save  the  lost.  3.  God 
rejoicing  when  the  lost  is  found.  4.  God  receiving  before  He  expects  amendment. 
6.  The  way  of  salvation  through  Christ's  Cross  and  Christ's  life.  6.  God  always 
accessible.  II.  How  abe  we  to  beceive  Jesds  ?  1.  With  deep  penitence.  2.  With 
hungry  expectancy.  3.  With  a  longing  to  do  His  will.  (W.  Birch.)  Wishing 
to  see  Jesus : — These  Greeks  are — I.  Illusteations  of  a  UNrvEKSAL  truth — 
that  those  who  live  up  to  the  light  they  have  will  be  graudally  led  on  to 
more.  1.  They  were  proselytes,  or  at  least  companions  of  those  who  feared 
God,  or  they  would  not  have  been  here.  They  had  given  up  heathenism,  and 
this  step  was,  according  to  God's  moral  government,  rewarded  by  another.  A 
desire  came  into  their  hearts,  awakened,  no  doubt,  by  the  resurrection  of  Lazarus, 
to  become  acquainted  with  Christ.  2.  There  are  differences  of  opinion  how  people 
become  Christians.  Some  say  there  is  first  a  giving  up  of  what  is  wron;  and  false, 
then  an  intermediate  stage  in  which  one  feels  nothing  and  is  nothin  »,  and  then 
truth  taking  occasion  by  the  vacuum  enters  the  mind.  Others  say  there  is  no 
middle  state.  But  the  true  theory  is,  "  the  wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth."  In  the 
majority  of  oases,  however,  truth  comes  in  and  expels  falsehood,  just  as  there  is  no 
parenthesis  between  light  and  darkness,  but  the  moment  that  it  ceases  to  be  dark  it 
is  light,  and  the  moment  that  light  has  begun  darkness  is  over,  II.  Examples  or 
A  TJNivERSAii  CRAVING.  Thcirs  was  the  language — 1.  Of  the  whole  Old  Testament 
dispensation.  The  cherubim  bending  over  the  mercy  seat,  as  if  to  look  into  the 
mysteries  of  the  ark,  were  emblems  of  all  the  Mosaic  ages.  The  expected  Messiah, 
the  desire  of  all  nations,  was  the  point  to  which  all  faces  turned.  "  Many  prophets 
and  righteous  men,"  Ac.  As  the  appointed  time  drew  on  the  desire  was  intensified. 
Simeon  and  Anna,  the  Magi  and  the  Greeks,  were  representatives  of  the  whole 
Jewish  and  Gentile  world.  And  during  Christ's  life,  the  crowds  that  thronged  His 
steps  bore  testimony  to  the  feeling,  and  Zacchseus  was  probably  not  the  only  man 
whose  pious  curiosity  was  rewarded.  2.  Of  the  Christian  Church  in  regard  to 
Christ's  Second  Advent.  3.  Of  penitents  under  a  sense  of  sin  groping  their  way 
toward  the  light.  4.  Of  Christians  who  have  lost  the  glimpses  they  once  enjoyed, 
and  are  now  passing  under  clouds.  5.  Of  the  dying  Christian  passing  home.  (J. 
Vaughan,  M.A.)  A  sight  of  Jesus: — I.  A  personal  oe  bodilt  view.  No  reliable 
portrait  or  representation  of  our  Lord  has  been  handed  down  to  us,  and  we  have 
reason  to  believe  no  such  portrait  was  ever  taken.  It  was,  no  doubt,  in  the  order 
of  God's  providence  that  it  should  be  so,  or  the  portrait,  and  not  the  Saviour  Him- 
self, would  probably  have  been  the  object  of  worship.  II.  Histobical  view.  We 
all  know  about  the  incarnation,  Ac,  of  Christ,  and  the  other  points  of  His  human 
history,  as  recorded.  III.  Theological  view.  "I  and  My  Father  are  one" — 
human,  as  well  as  Divine — hard  to  some  to  believe.  IV.  Believing  view.  "  As 
Moses  lifted  up  the  serpent  in  the  wilderness,"  &c.  "  Look  unto  Him,  and  be  ye 
saved."  V.  Imitative  view.  After  believing,  let  us  go  on  unto  perfection,  imita- 
ting Christ,  "  doing  good."  VI.  Judicial  view.  Christ  will  sit  on  His  great  white 
throne,  <fec.  VII.  Heavenly  view.  "  There  we  shall  see  His  face,  and  never, 
never  sin,"  &c.  (L.  H.  Wiseman, M. A.)  A  sight  of  Jesus: — Inspiration  has 
given  us  no  description  of  the  personal  appearance  of  Jesus.  God  did  not  intend 
for  as  to  worship  Him  through  an  image.    We  cannot  tell  His  appearance,  bat  we 


CHAP,  xn.]  ST.  JOHN.  827 

know  His  spirit  which  shone  through  His  earthly  hody.  We  can  see  Him — I.  In  thr 
ELEMENTS  OF  Hi9  CHAKACTEB  AND  LITE.  Infidcls  deny  His  divinity,  but  they  admire 
His  character,  and  present  His  graces  for  the  emulation  of  men.  His  is  a  unique 
position  in  history,  the  only  one  in  the  flesh  without  defect.  II.  In  His  ststem  of 
MOKAL  TEACHmoa.  How  superior  to  all  human  writings  not  borrowing  from  Him  I 
Plato  and  Mohammed  taught  much  that  is  good  with  much  that  is  evil.  His 
teachings  are  without  defect.  III.  In  the  globious  scheme  op  redemption.  By 
the  Cross  He  graciously  solves  the  problem  which  baffled  the  ages,  how  God  can  bo 
just  and  justify  the  sinner.  Man  was  doomed,  but  Jesus  came  to  the  rescue.  The 
sublime  philosophy  lies  in  its  supreme  adaptedness  to  the  necessities  of  the  case. 

IV.  In  the  kingdom  He  established  in  the  eakth.  The  Jews  expected  a  temporal 
kingdom,  but  He  came  not  to  subdue  Caesar  but  Satan.  He  despised  all  carnal 
means,  and  used  nobler  methods.     "  The  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it." 

V.  In  the  effects  of  His  religion  on  individuals  and  the  world.  Christianity  is 
a  character-builder.  It  alone  transforms  men.  It  has  blessed  whatever  it  has 
touched.  I  lift  up  before  you  Jesus  Christ  and  beg  you  to  behold  Him.  He  is 
God  ;  worship  with  all  adoration.  (C.  A.  Stakeley.)  We  would  see  Jesus : — 1. 
We  would  see  Jesus,  for  we  have  heard  of  Him  from  others.  One  friend  has  told 
of  His  love,  another  of  His  wisdom,  a  third  of  His  power,  a  fourth  of  His  faithful- 
ness. Does  this  second-hand  knowledge  satisfy  you?  Has  it  appeased  your 
spiritual  hunger,  allayed  your  discontent,  removed  the  burden  of  your  sins  ?  Oh, 
let  the  testimony  of  others  lead  you  to  His  feet  1  2.  We  would  see  Jesus,  for  we 
have  need  of  Him.  (1)  To  release  us  from  the  burden  of  our  sins.  (2)  To  enable 
OS  to  overcome  temptation.  (3)  To  take  away  the  fear  of  death.  3.  We  would  see 
Jesus,  for  He  is  so  accessible.  No  barriers  stand  in  the  sinner's  path  when  he 
seeks  the  Saviour.  His  court  is  an  open  audience-chamber  to  all.  (G.  A.  Sowter, 
M.A.)  Opportunity  to  be  used  : — These  Greeks  seem  to  have  seized  the  only 
opportunity  ever  presented  to  them  of  coming  to  Jesus.  Shall  we,  with  many 
opportunities,  lose  them  all?  This  one  maybe  our  last.  I  have  sometimes  in 
passing  through  a  forest  seen  a  tree  here  and  a  tree  there  marked  with  a  line  of 
white  paint.  What  did  it  mean?  Was  it  a  clue  to  the  inexperienced  traveller  to 
show  him  his  road  ?  Was  it  a  boundary  line  between  different  properties  ?  No ; 
these  paint-marked  trees  were  dotted  over  the  whole  woods.  Then  I  heard  the 
woodman's  axe  ringing  out  in  the  distance,  and  I  knew  that  the  trees  were  marked 
for  destruction.  The  owner  had  decided  which  should  fall  and  which  should  stand 
a  while  longer.  And  the  woodman,  guided  by  the  marks,  was  thinning  the  forest 
with  his  deadly  axe  in  obedience  to  his  master's  word.  Brethren,  God's  mark  may 
be  set  upon  some  of  us,  we  know  not  upon  whom.  Oh,  trifle  not  then  with  your 
opportunities!  Lay  hold  on  them  ere  they  pass  away.  Take  up  the  language  of 
these  Greek  visitors  to  Jerusalem,  and  cry  out  of  the  yearning  depths  of  your  in- 
most hearts,  "  We  would  see  Jesus."  The  request  will  be  granted.  The  heavenly 
life-giving  sight  of  Him  wiU  gladden  your  eyes,  and  with  that  vision  the  old  cry  of 
yearning  will  change  to  a  new  glad  shout  of  hope.  No  longer  "we  would  see 
Jesus,"  but  "we  shall  see  Jesus," — "  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is."  {Ibid.)  The 
consequences  of  seeing  Jesus  : — I.  Rest.  There  are  some  objects  so  calm  and  rest- 
ful that  the  very  sight  of  them  is  rest.  This  is  the  chief  of  them.  II.  Peace.  He 
is  our  peace ;  and  to  see  Him  is  to  have  peace  with  God  and  conscience.  III. 
Quickening.  He  is  our  life ;  and  the  sight  of  Him  as  such  puts  life  into  us.  IV. 
Healing.  He  is  "the  Sun  of  Righteousness  with  healing  in  His  wings,"  and  in 
looking  to  Him  we  have  health.  V.  Enlightenment.  He  is  the  Light  of  the 
world  ;  and  to  see  Him  as  such  is  to  have  day  within  us.  VI.  Freedom.  He  and 
His  truth  make  free.  VII.  Strength.  All  power  is  in  Him ;  and  the  sight  of 
Him  draws  it  out  to  us.  VIH.  Fulness.  In  Him  is  all  fulness ;  and  in  looking 
we  ar»  filled.  Every  void  disappears.  IX.  Gladness.  We  are  made  partakers  of 
His  joy.  (H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  The  great  exhibition: — Perhaps  the  sight-seeing 
instinct  was  never  more  fully  developed  than  at  preuent.  We  live  in  a  sight-seeing 
age.  This  instinct  has  managed  to  engage  the  whole  world  as  purveyor  to  its 
enJOTments  in  its  periodical  exhibitions  in  this  and  that  great  city.  But  we  may 
profitably  turn  to  another  exhibition,  not  at  present  more  attractive  externally,  but 
intrinsically  far  more  interesting.  Not  works  of  human  art  and  industry,  but  of 
Divine  wisdom,  justice,  and  love,  are  exhibited.  Turn  aside  and  see  this  great 
sight.  Apply  it  to — I.  Intellectual  exercises.  1.  In  geoo;raphical  study  we  may 
see  the  vastness  of  the  theatre  on  which  Jesus's  faithfulness  performs  its 
promises.    His  wisdom  exerts  its  guidance.  His  love  pours  out  its  treasures,  Hla 


328  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSI BATOR.  [cha>.  xAk 

grace  fulfils  its  plans.  2.  In  botanical  investigation  we  may  see  His  wisdom  and 
goodness,  for  He  painted  the  colours  of  every  flower,  shaded  its  tints,  and  infused 
its  perfume.  3.  In  historical  research  we  find  that  personages  are  His  agents,  and 
events  are  controlled  for  His  purposes.  4.  Morals  take  their  image  from  His  ex- 
ample and  their  vigour  from  His  Spirit.  II.  Social  dtjtibs.  1.  Conversation ; 
and  not  only  in  that  part  which  is  interspersed  with  His  name.  To  see  Him  is  to 
check  trifling,  levity,  garrulity.  To  see  Him  is  to  transform  the  daily  salutation 
into  a  benediction;  for  who  can  make  "good-day"  but  Jesus?  2.  In  visiting, 
business,  recreation,  <&c..  He  is  to  have  the  pre-eminence.  This  will  make  the 
soul's  health  secure,  guard  against  temptation,  encourage  righteousness.  III. 
Eeligious  obligations.  1.  Searching  the  Scriptures.  Of  these  Jesus  is  the  Alpha 
and  Omega,  and  they  will  be  unintelligible  unless  we  see  Him.  The  doctrines 
centre  in  Him.  In  the  practical  parts  His  example  is  the  rule.  His  love  the  motive, 
His  blood  the  purifier.  The  promises  are  "  Yea,  and  amen  in  Him."  His 
testimony  is  the  spirit  of  prophecy.  The  ceremonies  and  characters  are 
types  of  Him.  Take  Jesus  out  of  the  Bible,  and  you  have  taken  the 
sun  from  the  system,  the  eoul  from  the  body,  gravitation  from  the  universe. 
2.  Baptism.  Take  Christ  away  and  it  is  an  unmeaning  ordinance.  To  see  Him  in 
it  is  to  make  it  a  sacrament  of  life,  prornise,  and  power.  "  Go  ye  therefore.  .  .  , 
Lo,  I  am  with  yon,"  present,  pledging  to  save.  3.  The  Lord's  Supper.  "  This  is 
My  body,"  &c.  IV.  Famiuab  places.  1.  The  devotional  closet.  How  cold  that 
is  without  Christ ;  how  radiant  with  glory  when  we  see  Jesus,  having  expelled  all 
intercepting  objects,  thoughts,  cares,  &c.  2.  The  domestic  tabernacle.  If  in  the 
human  family  Christ  is  a  brother,  how  much  more  in  the  believing  family.  To  see 
Him  is  to  hush  all  domestic  dissensions ;  to  sanctify  all  family  relations,  duties, 
&c.  3.  In  the  public  temple.  "What  is  Christ's  Church  without  Him  ?  '*  Where 
two  or  three,"  &c.  V.  Respective  characteks.  1.  Two  characters  would  gladly 
see  Jesus.  (1)  The  penitent.  Are  you  sorry  for  sin  ?  then  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of 
God,"  &c.  (2)  The  believer  who  now  apprehends  Christ  by  faith  waits  for  His  full 
manifestation  in  glory,  and  has  "  a  desire  to  be  with  Christ,"  &c.  2  Two  classes 
must  be  exhorted  to  see  Jesus.  (1)  The  impenitent.  Your  need  is  absolute,  and 
your  obligation  unlimited.  (2)  The  apostate.  The  Greeks  reprove  you.  They 
knew  not  Jesus  but  would  see  Him ;  you  know  Him  but  forsake  Him.  VI.  To  im- 
portant STAGES.  1.  In  discouragement.  2.  In  temptation.  3.  In  youth,  manhood, 
and  old  age.  4.  In  the  hour  of  death  and  the  day  of  judgment.  (D.  Griffiths.) 
Manifestations  of  humanity  : — I.  Its  moral  craving  (ver.  21).  These  Greeks  wanted 
Jesus  for  their  soul  as — 1.  One  who  could  solve  their  moral  problems.  2.  One  on 
whom  to  centre  their  supreme  love.  8.  One  to  guide  them  rightly  on  the  way  of 
life.  n.  Its  grandest  work  (ver.  22).  1.  To  bring  men  to  Christ  is  something  more 
than  to  bring  them — (1)  To  science  and  art.  Such  a  ministry  we  disparage  not,  but 
highly  prize.  (2)  To  a  church  or  sect.  Numbers  are  thus  engaged.  Their  inspira- 
tion is  sectarianism ;  and  their  efforts  often  immoral  and  pernicious.  2.  To  bring 
them  to  Christ  is  to  bring  them — (1)  To  the  only  infallible  Physician.  (2)  To  th« 
only  efficient  Educator.  (3)  To  the  only  qualified  Redeemer.  3.  To  bring  to  Christ 
you  must  be  Christlike.  You  may  bring  crowds  to  your  church  by  clap-trap  ;  you 
can  only  bring  them  to  Christ  by  a  hfe  of  Christly  stateliness,  inspiration,  and  in- 
fluence. III.  Its  sdblimest  type  (ver.  23).  1.  Christ  speaks  with  magnanimity  in 
prospect  of  His  death.  2.  With  triumph  at  the  prospect  of  His  glory — in  His  resur- 
rection, exaltation,  moral  victories  over  all  the  errors,  curses,  miseries  of  the  world. 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Andrew  :  Leading  others  to  Christ : — The  notices  of  this 
apostle  are  extremely  rare,  but  nearly  all  of  them  exhibit  Him  introducing  others  to 
Christ — his  brother  Peter,  the  lad  with  the  barley  loaves,  the  Greeks.  And  this  is 
the  prime  duty  of  all  Christians ;  let  each  ask  how  he  has  discharged  it.  Note  the 
qualifications — I.  We  must  ourselves  enow  Christ.  This  is  something  more  than 
a  knowledge  of  gospel  history,  of  Christian  doctrine.  We  may  teach  these  and 
bring  none  nearer  to  Christ  Himself.  Nor  is  it  these  in  union  with  a  moral  life. 
To  know  Christ  is  to  reverence  Him  as  our  Master  and  to  cling  to  Him  as  oar 
Saviour.  This  knowledge  alone  will  help  us  to  make  disciples  and  Christians.  11. 
Ws  uusT  BE  QUICK  TO  KNOW  OUR  FELLOW  MEN.  The  physiciau  can  tell  much  of  the 
history  and  condition  of  his  patients  from  their  very  looks.  Like  readiness  is  there 
with  the  Physician  of  souls.  This  quickness  depends  on — 1.  Sympathy.  2.  Self- 
knowledge.  HI.  We  must  speak  fob  Christ.  We  remember  this  requirement  in 
preaching.  But  the  effort  of  Andrew  was  a  type  of  those  private  ways  of  doing 
good  which  are  open  to  ordinary  men  and  women.  There  are  difficulties  in  the  way 


tHAP.  XI1.J  ST.  JOHN.  S2f 

of  private  personal  testimony  for  Christ — the  reticence  of  etiquette  and  culture,  the 
sense  of  the  shame  of  the  cross,  constitutional  sensitiveness,  &o.  But  it  is  astonish- 
ing  how  difficulties  may  be  smoothed  before  a  willing  mind.  IV.  Wb  must  lfvb 
FOB  Chbist.     Words  with  which  the  life  is  inconsistent  will  lose  all  attractive 

Sower.  A  life  that  is  wanting  somewhat  in  words  may  yet  bring  blessing.  The 
isciple's  life  should  be  attractive.  {T.  Gdsquoine,  B.A.)  Every  Christian  may  be 
useful: — See  that  well  on  the  moimtain  side — a  small,  rnde,  rocky  cup  full  of 
crystal  water,  and  that  tiny  rill  flowing  through  a  breach  in  its  brim.  The  vessel  ia 
BO  diminutive  that  it  could  not  contain  a  supply  of  water  for  a  single  family  a  single 
day.  But,  ever  getting  through  secret  channels,  and  ever  giving  by  an  open  over- 
flow, day  and  night,  summer  and  winter,  from  year  to  year,  it  discharges  in  the 
i»ggregate  a  volume  to  which  its  own  capacity  bears  no  appreciable  proportion. 
The  flow  from  that  diminutive  cup  might,  in  a  drought  or  war,  become  life 
to  all  the  inhabitants  of  a  city.  It  is  thus  that  a  Christian,  if  he  is  full  of  mercy 
and  good  fruits,  ia  a  greater  blessing  to  the  world  than  either  himself  or  his 
neighbours  deem.  Let  no  disciple  of  Christ  either  think  himself  excused,  or 
permit  himself  to  be  discouraged  from  doing  good,  because  his  talents  and  oppor- 
tunities are  few.  Your  capacity  is  small,  it  is  true,  but  if  you  are  in  Christ  it  is  the 
capacity  of  a  welL  Although  it  does  not  contain  much  at  any  moment,  so  as  to 
attract  attention  to  yon  for  your  gifts,  it  will  give  forth  a  great  deal  in  a  lifetime, 
and  many  will  be  refreshed.  (W.  Arnot.)  A  lesson  to  pastors  and  teachers  : — An 
orthodox  clergyman  found  one  Sunday  on  his  Bible  a  slip  of  paper,  placed  there  by 
some  members  of  his  congregation,  on  which  was  written,  "  Sir,  we  would  see 
Jesus."  The  pastor  felt  distressed,  but  was  not  offended.  He  set  to  examine  him- 
self humbly  and  sincerely.  The  result  was  that  he  made  the  sad  but  happy  dis- 
covery that  the  people  were  justified  in  making  the  above  request.  He  thereupon 
"  went  into  a  desert  place,"  and  within  a  short  time  he  found  in  his  pulpit  another 
slip  of  paper  with  the  following  words,  "  Then  were  the  disciples  glad,  when  they 
saw  the  Lord."  {Pastor  Funcke.)  One  afternoon  in  the  Sabbath  school  where  a  lad 
was  asked  to  repeat  what  he  had  learned  during  the  week,  he  said  simply  "  Sir,  we 
would  see  Jesus. "  The  teacher  was  strangely  conscience  smitten.  He  remembered 
that  he  had  given  excellent  lessons  on  the  Creation,  the  Fall,  Israel  in  Egypt,  and 
similar  subjects,  but  had  said  little  about  Christ.  He  looked  at  the  youth  who  had 
spoken  these  words,  and  then  round  on  the  faces  of  the  others.  And  then  instead 
of  using  the  lesson  he  had  prepared,  he  talked  to  the  lads  earnestly  upon  the  re- 
quest made  so  simply  and  opportunely.  He  spoke  with  such  yearning  for  their 
eonls,  that  the  lads  listened  as  never  before ;  and  as  he  spoke  he  felt  that  the 
Master's  presence  was  in  their  midst.  The  want  which  had  unconsciously  been 
felt  was  met  that  afternoon,  and  souls  were  gathered  into  the  eternal  harvest.  {W. 
Baxendale.)  Congregations  want  to  see  Christ : — On  a  lovely  Sunday  morning  in 
August  we  arrived  at  Osborne.  We  were  desirous  of  seeing  her  Majesty,  but  did  not 
succeed.  We  only  saw  her  house,  her  gardens,  and  her  retainers.  Then  we  went 
to  Whippingham  Church,  having  been  told  that  the  queen  would  attend  divine 
service.  But  again  we  were  disappointed.  We  only  saw  the  seat  the  august  lady 
was  wont  to  occupy.  The  ladies  and  gentlemen  of  the  court  came  to  church,  and 
those  we  saw;  we  even  heard  the  court  chaplain  preach,  but  of  the  sovereign  we  saw 
nothing.  Well  this  was  a  disappointment  we  could  easily  get  over.  But  with  me 
it  led  to  a  serious  frame  of  thought.  I  said  to  myself :  What  if  the  flock  committed 
to  your  care  should  come  to  church  to  see  the  King  of  kings,  and  yet  through  some 
fault  of  yours  not  get  to  see  Him  I  What  if  you,  the  great  King's  dependent,  detain 
men  with  yourself,  by  your  words  and  affairs  and  all  sorts  of  important  matters 
which  yet  are  trifles  in  comparison  with  Jesus !  May  it  not  be  that  we  ministers 
often  thus  disappoint  our  congregations.     (Pastor  Fujicke.) 

Vers.  23-26.  The  hour  la  come  that  the  Son  of  Man  should  be  glorified. — The 
tignijicance  of  this  declaration  in  connection  with  the  incident : — Why  should  this  be 
such  an  hour  of  trouble  and  glory  ?  How  should  the  appearance  of  a  few  strangers 
have  led  to  a  discussion  respecting  the  falling  of  wheat  into  the  ground,  and  its 
death — the  saving  of  life  tmd  the  losing  it?  Yon  will  remember  that  when  our 
Lord  spoke  of  those  "  other  sheep  "  He  connected  the  formation  of  the  one  flock 
with  the  death  of  the  one  shepherd.  The  assertion  is  in  strict  harmony  with  the 
prophecy  of  Caiaphas.  If  you  torn  from  St.  John  to  St.  Paul  you  will  And  that  the 
breaking  down  of  the  wall  of  partition  between  Jews  and  Gentiles  is  effected  "  in 
the  body  of  Christ's  flesh  through  death."    If  yon  reflect  on  these  passages,  that 


830  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xu, 

which  we  treat  as  though  it  were  only  an  accident — the  calling  in  of  the  Qentilea — 
the  unfolding  of  a  universal  society,  will  be  seen  to  be  that  wonderful  event  to  which 
all  God's  purposes,  from  the  beginning  of  the  world,  had  been  tending — the  unveil- 
ing of  the  deepest  mystery  of  all,  in  the  relations  of  God  to  man,  in  the  Being  of 
God  Himself.  Without  sacrifice  Jews  and  heathen  had  been  taught  there  could 
be  no  unity  among  the  members  of  a  race.  Sacrifice  must  bind  them  to  God  and  ta 
each  other.  Only  he  who  can  give  up  himself — so  the  heart  of  mankind  testified — ia 
a  patriot ;  only  he  obeys  the  laws ;  only  he  can  save  his  country  when  it  is  falling. 
There  had  been,  then,  a  sure  conviction  that  any  larger  union  must  involve  a  mightier 
sacrifice.  As  the  conscience  was  awakened  by  God's  teaching  more  and  more  clearly 
to  perceive  that  all  resistance  to  God  lies  in  the  setting  up  of  self,  it  began  to  be 
understood  that  the  atonement  of  man  with  man  must  have  its  basis  in  an  atone- 
ment of  God  with  man,  and  that  the  same  sacrifice  was  needed  for  both.  One 
thing  yet  remained  to  be  learned — the  most  wonderful  lesson  of  all,  and  yet  one 
of  which  God  had  been  giving  the  elements,  line  upon  line,  from  the  beginning : 
Could  sacrifice  originate  in  God  and  be  made,  first,  not  to  Him  but  by  Him  ?  All 
our  Lord's  discourses  concerning  Himself  and  His  Father — coneeruing  Hia  own 
acts  as  the  fulfilment  of  the  Father's  will — concerning  the  love  which  the  Father 
had  to  Him  because  He  laid  down  His  life  for  the  sheep — had  been  bringing 
these  mysteries  to  light;  had  been  preparing  the  meek  to  confess  with  wonder 
and  contrition  that  in  every  selfish  act  they  had  been  fighting  against  an  unselfish 
God — that  in  every  self-sacrificing  act  they  had  been  merely  yielding  to  Him. 
And  so  far  as  they  had  any  ghmpses  of  the  accomplishment  of  God's  promises — that 
He  would  bring  all  into  one — that  the  Gentiles  should  wait  for  His  law — that  He 
would  be  a  Father  of  all  the  families  of  the  earth — so  far  they  had  the  vision  of  a 
transcendent  and  Divine  sacrifice.  {F.  D.  Maurice,  M. A.)  The  hour  of  redemp- 
tion : — It  was  given  to  St.  John  long  after  the  other  evangelists  had  described  the 
Passion  to  add  some  details  of  the  deepest  interest.  The  Transfiguration  and  Geth- 
semane  St.  John  omits,  but  here  records  the  significance  of  both.  The  Lord  passed 
through  a  season  of  profound  agitation — the  earnest  of  the  Garden ;  but  out  of  the 
darkness  light  unspeakable  arose — the  reflection  of  the  Mount.  I.  Thb  Lord  enxebs 

INTO  THE  DABKNESS  OF  HiS  HOOB  AND  PEOCLAIMS   ITS   GLOKT.      1.    "  The  hour  "  is  the 

sacred  term  that  marks  the  Passion  as  the  consummation  of  the  Eedeemer's  work. 
He  entered  the  world  in  the  "  fulness  of  time  "  ;  He  wrought  His  preparatory  work 
in  the  "  days  of  the  Son  of  Man  "  ;  and  now,  after  ages  of  waiting  had  passed  into 
days  of  fulfilment,  the  days  are  compressed  into  an  "  hour."  From  this  moment 
the  shadow  of  the  cross  throws  its  sacred  gloom  upon  every  incident  and  word.  The 
Passion  has  begun,  and  from  that  moment  went  on  in  its  ever-deepening  variety  of 
grief,  through  the  indignities  of  His  enemies,  the  abandonment  of  His  friends,  the 
sense  of  the  world's  guilt,  to  that  infinite  woe  which  took  from  man  his  curse.  It 
was  the  first  more  direct  onset  since  the  temptation.  It  was  the  beginning  of  the 
awful  strain  on  the  resources  of  His  lower  nature  under  which  He  would  fain  cry 
"  Save  me,"  but  that  He  knows  "  for  this  purpose,"  &c. ;  the  same  pressure  which 
caused  Him  to  ask  that  the  cup  might  pass,  a  prayer  the  next  moment  recalled  in 
the  submission  of  perfect  victory.  2.  The  darkness  is  not  past,  but  the  true  light 
already  shines.  His  first  word  on  entering  the  dark  valley  is — "  The  hour  .  .  .  glori- 
fied." His  lowest  humiliation  was  His  highest  dignity.  The  cross  in  which  Hia 
servants  gloried  He  here  glories  in.  In  it  He  beholds  the  glorification  of  the  Father'a 
attributes  (ver.  28),  an  exhibition  of  the  glory  of  Divine  justice  visiting  upon  sin  ita 
penalty,  and  the  glory  of  the  Divine  mercy  providing  salvation  for  the  sinner.  To 
this  the  Redeemer's  final  "  Lo  1  I  come,"  there  is  a  sublime  response  from  heaven. 
For  the  third  time  the  Father  proclaims  aloud  the  secret  of  His  constant  com- 
placency in  the  sacrifice  of  His  Son.  3.  The  record  teaches  us  two  errors  we  must 
avoid.  (1)  We  must  not  by  our  feeble  theories  mitigate  the  sorrow  that  wrought 
out  our  redemption  and  exchange  it  into  a  mere  demonstration  of  such  charity  and 
self-sacrifice  as  man  might  rival  and  which  could  never  redeem  man's  soul.  (2)  It 
tells  us,  too,  that  the  Redeemer  was  filled  with  a  sense  of  His  own  glory  and  His 
Father's  complacency  even  while  He  suffered  for  our  sins.  He  presented  Himself 
as  an  oblation  for  man's  sin  to  manifest  the  love  that  provided  the  propitiation,  and 
to  declare  the  glory  of  the  Divine  name  in  the  harmony  of  its  perfections.   II.  Fbom 

THE  HOUB  OF  THE  PASSION  TO  THE  LIFTING  DP  ON  THE  CEOSS  THE  TBANSITION  IS  OBVIOUS. 

Here  also  we  perceive  the  blending  of  opposite  emotions.  1.  St.  John  has  already 
made  us  familiar  with  this  expression,  which  serves  the  double  purpose  of  signify- 
ing the  crucifixion  and  the  exaltation.     But  in  the  gospels  it  is  used  to  express  tha 


OHAf.  xn.]  ST.  JOHN.  SSI 

act  of  man  that  lifted  Jesns  to  His  croBS.  In  the  beginning  of  His  ministry,  oar 
Lord  spoke  to  Nicodemns  of  this  lifting  ap ;  in  the  middle  He  told  the  Jews  that 
they  would  do  it ;  and  now  He  refers  to  it  at  the  close.  But  the  cross  is  the 
symbol  here  of  His  own  reproach,  "  Cursed  is  every  one  that  hangeth  on  a  tree." 
2.  But  while  His  soul  is  troubled — and  only  in  His  deepest  anguish  does  He  men- 
tion His  soul — Jesus  still  rejoiced  in  spirit.  On  either  side  is  a  word  of  triumph. 
(1)  "  The  prince  of  this  world  is  cast  out."  He  had  at  an  earlier  time,  and  in  a 
higher  sphere,  "  beheld  Satan  as  lightning,"  &c.  Now  He  beholds,  as  the  result  of 
His  redeeming  death,  Satan  fall  from  his  power  on  earth — not,  indeed,  with  the 
swiftness  of  lightning,  but  absolutely  and  surely,  (2)  "  I  will  draw  all  men  unto 
Me  "  expresses  the  tranquil  assurance  that  the  virtue  of  His  death  would  draw  in 
due  time — when  preached  in  His  word  and  testified  by  His  spirit — all  the  children 
of  men  to  Himself.  3.  Here  also  are  two  lessons  that  guard  our  thoughts.  (1)  The 
reality  of  Satan's  relation  to  our  sin  and  the  world's  redemption.  A  doctrine  of 
atonement  finds  acceptance,  which  rejects .  the  personality  of  the  being  to  whom 
our  Lord  alludes.  But  in  so  doing  they  must  reconstruct  the  entire  doctrine  of  the 
New  Testament,  wrest  the  Saviour's  words  to  their  own  peril,  and  undermine  the 
whole  economy  of  redemption,  which  assumes  that  Satan  is  the  representative  and 
ruler  of  the  world's  wickedness,  whose  power  and  law  is  broken.  (2)  That  through 
cor  redemption  we  are  delivered  from  the  reign  of  sin ;  that  the  drawing  of  Christ 
is  as  universal  in  its  influence  as  the  virtue  of  His  atonement ;  that  we  may  enter 
into  our  Master's  joy  and  exalt  over  a  vanquished  enemy.    III.  We  pass  fbou 

THE   HOCB,  THBOUQH   IBB   LIFimO   UP,  TO  THE   SELF-8ACBIFICINO   DEATH   WHICH   GIVES 

Lira  TO  uuiiTiTUDEB.  Here  again  we  have  two  contending  emotions.  1.  All  His 
allusionB  to  the  coming  end  connect  His  own  loss  with  our  gain.  His  death  with 
our  life.  So  it  is  here,  only  the  emblem  is  the  most  affecting  He  ever  employed, 
expressive  of  the  entireness  of  His  surrender,  and  the  absolute  connection  between 
His  death  and  the  abundant  life  of  His  people.  What  in  the  similitude  of  the  com 
of  wheat  expresses  the  deep  anguish  of  this  prelude  to  Gethsemane  the  Lord  does 
not  say.  There  was  a  mystery  in  the  anguish  of  His  soul  that  nothing  in  the 
secret  of  human  dying  will  account  for.  2.  But  the  rejoicing  of  His  spirit  keeps 
not  silence.  He  passes  immediately  to  the  much  fruit  that  would  grow  from  £Qs 
death,  the  example  He  would  set  to  His  saints,  and  the  supreme  honour  which  He 
and  His  imitators  in  the  self -renouncing  charity  of  holiness  would  partake  together 
throughoat  eternity.  Nor  is  His  rejoicing  marred  by  the  prospect  that  His  death 
will  not  give  life  to  all  mankind.  And  should  we  be  discontented  when  our  Master 
Bees  of  the  travail  of  EUs  soul  and  is  satisfied  ?  Conclusion :  1.  The  only  word  of 
exhortation  that  we  hear  in  this  solemn  hour  is,  "  If  any  man  serve  Me,  let  him 
follow  Me."  This  is  the  voice  of  Him  who  passes  through  the  garden  to  the  cross. 
There  is  no  loyalty  to  the  Redeemer  which  does  not  share  His  passion.  For  Him 
we  must  sacrifice  our  sins,  and,  in  imitation  of  His  last  example,  must  live,  and,  if 
need  be,  die  for  others.  2.  "  Where  I  am,"  &c. ;  for  a  short  season  in  the  gloom 
of  sorrow  and  conflict,  but  for  ever  in  His  glory.  3.  "  If  any  man  serve  Me,"  &c. ; 
heirs  of  God  and  joint-heirs  with  Christ.     {W.  B.  Pope,  D.D.)  The  hour  of 

Christ's  suffering  and  triumph  (text  and  vers.  27-28) : — I,  The  hotte.  It  stands 
out  from  all  other  hours  amid  the  reminiscences  of  the  past  and  anticipation  of 
ages  to  come.  Time's  stream  set  in  to  bear  upon  it.  All  prophecy  met  here.  One 
dispensation  after  another  was  introduced  and  completed  in  relation  to  it,  and 
derived  all  their  importance  from  that  relation.  It  was  an  hour — 1.  Of  intense 
suffering.  Who  can  tell  the  physical  agony?  His  soul  was  troubled  within  a  body 
of  sensibility  as  keen  as  ours ;  and  what  anguish  racked  His  spirit  when  He  was 
executed  as  a  malefactor  and  forsaken  of  His  Father !  2.  Of  triumph.  An  hour 
in  which  He  glorified  God  and  God  Him ;  in  which  all  the  Divine  attributes  har- 
monized as  they  never  had  before,  and  never  could  again.  They  received  glory 
which  covered  all  obscurations  that  had  appeared,  and  which  can  never  be  tarnished 
to  eternity.  U.  The  seemino  beluctance  of  Christ  to  meet  this  hour  (ver.  27). 
His  spirit  is  perplexed,  for  He  was  as  truly  man  as  God.  But  wherefore  these 
cries  and  tears?  Because  of  -1.  The  death  of  ignominy  which  He,  innocence 
itself,  was  about  to  die.  2.  The  unbelief  and  ingratitude  of  the  Jews.  "  He  came 
to  His  own,"  &o.  3.  The  d  sertion  of  His  disciples,  the  denial  of  Peter,  the 
betrayal  of  Judas.  4.  The  buffetings  of  Satan  during  "  the  hour  and  power  of 
darkness."  5.  The  hiding  of  the  Father's  face  (Zech.  xiii.  7  ;  Matt,  zzvii.  45,  46). 
Well  might  His  soul  be  troubl  d  and  say.  Father,  save  Me  from  this  hour — if  there 
is  any  other  way  of  saving  sinners.    But  God  spared  not  His  own  Son,  and  the 


88S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oHAr.  xn. 

Son  acquiesced.  III.  The  obounbs  on  which  Hb  otebcJue  His  apparent  beluo- 
TANCE.  They  respect — 1.  Himself.  He  knew  that  on  this  hour  depended  all  that 
He  came  to  do,  and  this  consideration  dispelled  the  cloud  human  nature  raised. 
He  had  done  too  much  to  allow  of  His  retracting.  Why  the  Bate  of  Bethlehem  if 
He  refused  to  be  the  Man  of  Sorrows  ?  He  came  to  finish  the  work  God  gave  Him 
to  do.  2.  His  people.  If  I  would  save  others  I  dare  not  save  Myself.  If  they 
are  to  have  life  I  must  endure  death.  3.  His  Father.  To  glorify  Him  was  the 
design  of  His  coming  into  the  world.  "  Lo  1  I  come,"  Ac.  IV.  By  what  means 
Goo  was  glorified  in  the  wobs  of  Christ.  1.  In  the  fulfilment  of  Messianio 
prophecy.  God  had  in  all  the  introductory  announcements  of  the  Bedeemer  for 
four  thousand  years,  connected  His  glory  with  the  completion  of  redemption  by 
Christ's  death  as  a  sacrifice  for  sin  (Heb.  i.  1-3  ;  Luke  ii.  7-14).  2.  The  incainaa- 
tion.  "  We  beheld  His  glory,"  &c.  3.  The  discourses,  miracles,  and  character  of 
Christ.  4.  His  death,  resurrection,  and  ascension.  5.  The  spread  of  the  gospel. 
6.  The  resurrection  and  judgment.     (T.  Raffles,  LL.D.)  The  glorification  of  th« 

Son  of  Man : — 1.  Christ  here  displays  His  broad  humanity.  Not  "  Son  of  David." 
The  Jewish  side  of  His  mission  is  no  longer  prominent.  As  "  the  Son  of  Man  " 
Jesus  is  near  akin  to  every  man  that  lives.  2.  He  speaks  of  His  glory  as  approach- 
ing suggested  by  the  sight  of  these  first-fruits  among  the  Gentiles.  Christ  is 
glorified  in  the  souls  He  saves,  as  a  physician  wins  honour  by  those  he  heals.  3. 
The  same  visitors  led  the  Saviour  to  use  the  metaphor  of  the  buried  com.  Wheat 
was  mixed  up  with  Greek  mysteries.  Christ  was  undergoing  the  process  which 
would  burst  the  Jewish  husk  in  which  Eis  human  Ufe  had  been  enveloped.  Afore- 
time He  said  He  was  not  sent  save  to  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel.  Note 
— I.  Profound  docteinal  teaching  conveyed  in  several  paradoxes.  1.  Glorious  as 
He  was,  He  was  yet  to  be  glorified.  (1)  Jesus  was  always  glorious — as  one  with 
God,  in  the  perfection  of  His  moral  character,  in  His  great  love,  in  His  complete 
consecration,  and  alec  in  the  wonders  of  His  birth,  baptism,  and  transfiguration. 
(2)  But  something  was  to  be  added  to  His  honour — death,  resurrection,  ascension, 
&c.  2.  His  glory  was  to  come  to  Him  through  shame.  It  is  His  highest  reputa- 
tion  to  be  of  no  repatation.  His  crown  derives  new  lustre  from  His  cross.  If  we 
merge  the  crucified  Saviour  in  the  coming  King  we  rob  our  Lord  of  His  highe&'t 
honour.  3.  He  must  be  alone,  or  abide  alone.  Unless  He  had  trodden  the  wine« 
press  alone,  and  had  cried,  "  My  God !  My  God  1 "  &c.,  He  could  not  have  saved  us.  If 
He  had  not  died  He  would,  as  man,  have  been  alone  for  ever :  not  without  the  Father, 
the  Spirit,  and  the  angels ;  but  there  had  not  been  another  man  to  keep  Him  com- 
pany. Our  Lord  cannot  bear  to  be  alone.  Without  His  people  He  would  have 
been  a  shepherd  without  His  sheep,  a  husband  without  His  spouse.  His  delights 
were  with  the  sons  of  men.  In  order  that  He  might  draw  all  men  unto  Him,  He 
was  lifted  up  upon  the  cross  alone.  4.  He  must  die  to  give  life,  not  teach,  &o.  If 
the  ethical  part  of  Christianity  is  the  fiiost  important,  why  did  Jesus  die  ?  But 
since  He  did  fall  into  the  ground  and  die,  we  may  expect  much  as  the  result  of  it. 
The  travail  of  the  Son  of  God  shall  not  bring  forth  a  scanty  good.  II.  Pbaciicai* 
instruction.  What  is  true  of  Christ  is  in  a  measure  true  of  Christians.  1.  We 
must  die  if  we  would  live.  2.  We  must  surrender  everything  to  keep  it.  We  can 
never  have  spiritual  life  except  by  giving  everything  up  to  God.  3.  We  must  lose 
self  in  order  to  find  self.  The  man  who  lives  for  himself  does  not  live — he  loses 
the  essence  and  crown  of  existence :  but  if  you  live  for  others  and  God,  you  will 
find  the  life  of  Ufe.  "  Seek  ye  first,"  <fec.  4.  If  you  wish  to  be  the  means  of  life 
to  others,  you  must,  in  your  measure,  die  yourself.  The  self-sacrificing  life  and 
death  of  saints  has  always  been  the  life  and  increase  of  the  Church.  (G.  H, 
Spurgeon.)  ChrisVs  cross,  Christ's  glory: — As  regards — I.  The  great  enemt. 

In  the  wilderness  Christ  did  not  achieve  a  complete  victory.  The  devil  departed 
from  Him  for  a  season  only,  and  was  actually  and  finally  vanquished  on  the  cross. 
He  who  hoped  to  crush  Adam  was  himself  crushed  in  Christ.  Satan  had  brought 
ruin  and  misery  into  a  happy  world.  Christ  brought  out  the  world  into  happiness 
tenfold  as  bright  and  holy  as  that  which  Satan  ruined.  II.  Man.  On  the  cross 
was  transacted  the  central  event  of  man's  world.  All  before  had  reference  to  this ; 
all  after  flow  from  it.  The  whole  system  of  types  found  its  end  on  the  cross ;  the 
whole  state  of  acceptance  in  which  believers  stand  before  God,  the  whole  dispensa- 
tion of  the  Spirit,  had  its  origin  here.  Wherever  there  breathes  a  man,  there  the 
cross  has  a  deep  and  never-failing  interest.  Here  also  was  the  triumph  of  human 
nature.  You  hear  of  the  power  and  dignity  of  human  nature,  its  wonderful 
capacities  for  knowledge,  its  high  endowments  for  enterpriie ;  bat  in  nons  of  tb^MM 


CHAP,  xn.]  ST.  JOHN.  833 

did  it  reach  its  noblest  height,  nor  bear  its  fairest  fruit.  Not  in  Athens  or  Borne, 
in  poesy  or  art,  has  man  been  most  glorifed ;  but  on  the  cross  of  Jesus.  There 
manhood  bore  its  fruit  of  love  untouched  by  a  blight,  and  was  honoured  with  the 
union  of  the  Godhead,  stooping  to  share  its  sentence  of  death  and  to  bring  it  to 
glory.  IIL  Himself  (Bom.  xiv.  9).  Christ  was  born  tliat  He  might  be  a  King ; 
and  here  we  have  His  Lordship  established  and  His  kingdom  inaugurated. 
Eemember  what  He  said  to  the  dying  thief.  The  cross  is  Christ's  throne ;  Hia 
atonement  His  basis  of  empire  (Bev.  v.  6)  ;  from  it  proceeds  the  work  of  the 
Spirit,  whose  office  it  is  to  glorify  Christ.  IV.  Thk  Father.  By  the  counsel  of 
the  Father's  will  was  the  plan  of  redemption  directed,  and  His  perfections  find 
their  highest  example  on  the  cross.  1.  Love.  •'  Herein  is  love,"  &c.  2.  Truth. 
"For  this  end  He  came  into  the  world,  to  bear  witness  unto  the  truth  " ;  and  He 
bore  it  here.  3.  Bighteousness.  •*  He  made  Him  to  be  sin  for  us,"  &c.  (Dean 
Alfvrd.)  The  work  and  glory  of  the  Saviour  : — In  eternity  there  are  no  hours ; 
yet  there  have  been  two  hours  in  time  which  are  drawn  out  over  the  length  of 
eternal  ages.  One,  pregnant  of  evil,  when  Eve  plucked  the  forbidden  fruit.  When 
time  shall  be  no  more  that  unhappy  hour  will  live  in  the  memory  and  be  felt  in 
the  misery  of  the  lost.  The  other  hour,  pregnant  with  greatest  good,  was  when 
the  Son  of  Man  said,  "  It  is  finished,"  and  the  head  He  bowed  in  death  was  crowned 
with  its  brightest  glory.  I.  The  visible  qloby  of  tbis  cross.  There  never  was 
a  death  like  this.  1.  Bays  of  Godhead  streamed  through  the  darkest  stages  of 
Christ's  humiliation.  Angels  attended  His  humble  birth,  and  a  new  star  rested 
above  the  stable.  His  hands  were  rough  with  labour,  but  at  their  touch  eyes 
received  their  sight.  His  voice  cried  in  infancy  and  death,  but  it  quelled  the 
fitorm  and  burst  the  fetters  of  the  tomb.  His  eye  was  quenched  in  darkness,  but 
it  had  read  man's  heart  and  penetrated  futurity.  He  wore  no  costly  robes,  but  the 
hem  of  His  garment  cured  inveterate  disease.  He  trod  on  no  luxurious  carpets, 
but  His  step  was  on  the  sea.  His  simple  drink  was  water,  bat  water  changed  into 
wine  at  His  bidding.  No  sumptuous  banquets  entertained  His  guests,  but  the  few 
fishes  and  barley  loaves  in  His  hands  satisfied  multitudes.  2.  But  this  glory  was 
still  more  apparent  in  His  dying  hours.  Men  had  left  undone  nothing  to  heap 
shame  upon  Him.  To  pour  contempt  on  His  kingly  claims  they  crowned  Him 
with  thorns ;  in  mockery  of  His  omniscience  they  asked  Him  to  tell  who  struck 
Him  ;  in  ridicule  of  His  omnipotence  they  challenged  Him  to  leave  the  cross.  Yet 
even  in  this  dark  hour  He  was  glorified.  "If  these  should  hold  their  peace  the 
stones  would  cry  out,"  was  now  verified.  Men  were  silent,  dumb  nature  spoke. 
The  rocks,  whose  bosoms,  less  hard  than  man's,  were  rent,  cried  out  on  earth;  the 
sun,  veiling  his  face  from  a  scene  on  which  man  looked  without  emotion,  cried  out 
in  heaven  ;  the  dead,  disturbed  in  their  graves  by  so  great  a  crime,  cried  out  from 
their  open  tombs ;  and  the  temple's  veil  added  its  solemn  testimony  to  theirs. 
II.  The  moral  glory  of  the  cross.  1.  Christ's  death  afEorded  the  fullest  display 
of  His  love.  Not  that  it  had  not  been  displayed  before.  It  was  when  Moses 
smote  the  rock  that  its  hidden  treasures  were  unsealed.  It  was  when  the  alabaster 
box  was  broken  that  its  value  became  known.  It  is  when  the  clusters  of  the 
grape  are  crushed  that  they  yield  the  wine.  And  so  Christ's  gracious  attributes 
were  not  fully  disclosed  till  Hia  dying  hour.  But  for  that  it  had  never  been 
known  how  He  loved.  He  had  been  despised  and  rejected  of  men,  but  He  died  to 
prove  His  willingness  and  power  to  save  the  chief  of  sinners.  2.  By  His  death 
He  conquered  hell,  death,  and  the  grave.  {T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  The  law  of  self- 
sacrifice  exemplified  in  the  death  of  Christ : — We  shrink  too  much  from  investi- 
gating the  mental  struggles  of  Jesus  as  though  it  were  a  profanation.  But  in  this 
we  commit  two  errors.  1.  We  lose  sight  of  Christ's  proper  humanity,  of  the  fact 
that  He  had  a  mind  governed  like  our  own,  a  heart  and  sympathies  which 
throbbed  as  ours.  2.  A  false  conception  of  true  reverence.  It  is  reverential  to 
be  cautious  of  approaching  too  closely  an  earthly  sovereign,  because  near  approach 
would  only  produce  familiarity,  and  make  us  feel  that  he  too  is  but  a  frail  and 
sinful  man.  But  the  Majesty  of  Jesus  requires  no  such  precautions,  because  the 
nearer  we  get  to  Him  the  more  we  realize  His  Divine  Majesty.  Note — I.  The  law 
OF  THE  atonemekt.  1.  The  gloriousness  of  suffering.  There  are  two  ways  of 
looking  at  every  act — at  the  appearance,  and  at  the  reality.  Hence  what  seems 
mean  is  often  inwardly  glorious,  and  vice  versa.  Thus  there  is  nothing  in  the 
oatward  circumstances  of  a  soldier's  death  to  distinguish  them  from  an  ignoble 
brawl ;  but  over  the  soldier's  death  is  shed  the  glory  of  that  cause  for  which  hia 
life  was  offered.    So  in  external  circurastances  Christ's  death  was  mean,  bat  in 


834  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  jru 

inward  principles  it  was  glorified  hj  God.  We  say  that  a  throne  is  glorious  and  a. 
coronet  noble ;  but  nothing  can  ennoble  cowardice  or  selfishness.  We  say  that 
a  dungeon,  scaffold,  and  the  lower  arts  of  life  are  base ;  but  Christ's  death  haa 
sanctified  the  cross,  and  His  life  shed  a  glory  over  carpentry.  2.  The  death  of 
one  for  the  life  of  many.  This  is  the  great  law  upon  which  God  has  constructed 
the  universe.  If  there  is  to  be  a  crop,  there  must  first  be  the  destruction  of  the 
seed.  The  lives  of  vegetables  and  animals  are  given  for  us.  So  the  doctrine  of 
the  atonement  is  no  strange,  arbitrary  principle.  The  Father  who  made  the  law 
by  which  the  fiesh  of  living  things  sustains  the  life  of  others  is  the  same  Being 
who  made  and  obeyed  the  law  by  which  the  fiesh  of  Christ  is  to  the  world  "  meat 
indeed."  3.  Self-devotion  (ver.  25).  The  previous  parallel  fails  in  one  thing. 
We  do  not  thank  the  grain  of  wheat  for  dying,  because  its  death  is  involuntary ; 
and  therefore  to  constitute  a  true  sacrifice  a  living  will  is  needed.  Christ's  sacri- 
fice was  a  voluntary  act,  else  it  had  been  no  sacrifice  at  all.    II.  The  mentaii 

STBUaOLE    BY   WHICH   THAT   LAW   WAS    EMBRACED    AS    THE    LAW    OP    THE     BeDEEMEB'S 

LtFB.  It  is  one  thing  to  understand  a  law  and  another  to  obey  it.  To  admire  that 
which  is  right  is  one  thing,  but  to  do  what  is  right  is  another.  The  Divine  life  of 
Christ  subordinated  innocent  human  ideas  to  itself  by  degrees.  Here  He  was- 
literally  distracted  between  the  natural  craving  for  Ufa  and  the  higher  desire  to 
embrace  the  wiU  of  God.  But  the  victory  was  won  by  prayer,  that  communion 
of  the  mind  with  God  through  which  our  will  becomes  at  last  merged  into  His. 
And  so  there  was  one  perfect  will,  the  will  of  the  Father  being  that  of  the  Son. 
"  Father,  glorify  Thy  name."    (F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.) 

Vers.  24-26.  Except  a  com  of  wheat  fall  Into  the  ground  and  die. — A  com  of 
■wheat : — The  original  word  is  not  gperma,  a  seed,  but  kokkos,  a  berry,  a  fruit.  It 
shows  the  extreme,  even  scientific,  accuracy  of  our  Saviour's  language ;  for  the- 
corn  of  wheat,  and  other  cereal  grains,  consist  of  seeds  incorporated  with  seed- 
vessels,  and  are  in  reality  fruits,  though  they  appear  hke  seeds.  It  is  not  the  bare 
seed  that  falls  into  the  ground,  and,  by  dying,  yields  much  fruit,  but  the  corn  of 
wheat — the  whole  fruit  with  its  husk-like  coverings.  A  corn  of  wheat  is  beautiful 
and  complete  in  itself.  It  is  full  of  latent  life  ;  it  contains  the  germ  of  boundless 
harvests.  But  it  is  hard  and  narrow  and  isolated.  How  then  are  its  dormant 
capabilities  to  be  quickened  ?  Clearly  not  by  keeping  it  as  it  is.  In  its  present 
state  it  abideth  alone.  It  can  never  be  anything  else  but  bare  corn  if  kept  out  of 
the  ground.  But  if  sown  in  the  field,  and  covered  by  the  earth,  and  quickened  by 
the  sunshine  and  showers  of  heaven,  it  softens  and  expands.  It  seems  to  die.  It 
surrenders  itself  to  the  forces  of  nature  which  take  possession  of  it,  and  seem  to 
put  it  altogether  aside.  But  this  apparent  death  is  in  reality  more  abundant  hfe. 
Its  burial-place  becomes  the  scene  of  a  wonderful  resurrection.  The  spark  of 
vitality  has  been  kindled  by  the  very  elements  that  seemed  to  work  its  destruction. 
The  embryo  grows  at  the  expense  of  the  decomposing  perisperm.  Lengthening 
downwards  by  the  radicle  and  upwards  by  the  plumule,  the  seed  becomes  a  bright, 
green,  beautiful  plant  which  lays  all  nature  under  contribution  for  its  sustenance, 
borrows  the  materials  of  growth  from  earth  and  sky,  and  at  length  becomes  a^ 
luxuriant  stalk  of  com  laden  with  its  fruitful  ear.  Seed-time  in  this  country  is  in 
spring.  The  sower  goes  forth  to  sow  when  the  day  is  lengthening  and  brightening, 
and  a  warmer  feeling  is  in  the  air.  The  dark  days  and  wild  storms  of  winter  are 
over ;  and  before  the  seed  sown  there  is  an  almost  uninterrupted  continuance  of 
genial  weather  till  the  harvest.  But  in  nature  seed-time  is  at  the  close  of  autumn, 
when  "  the  melancholy  days  have  come,  the  saddest  of  the  year."  The  important 
process  of  scattering  the  seed  over  the  waste  places  of  the  earth  is  accomplished 
amid  the  fading  and  falling  of  leaves,  and  the  destruction  of  nature's  strength  and 
beauty.  The  chill  air  and  feeble  sunlight  put  a  stop  to  all  further  growth ;  and  the 
dreary  rain  and  boisterous  storms  which  prevail  at  this  season  are  needed  to  shake 
down  the  ripe  fruits  from  stem  or  bough,  to  scatter  them  over  the  face  of  the  earth, 
and  to  rot  them  in  the  groimd,  so  that  the  imprisoned  seeds  may  escape  and  find  a 
suitable  soil  in  which  to  grow.  Thus,  the  dark  ungenial  weather  which  so  often 
proves  disastrous  to  our  cereal  crops  when  they  are  about  to  be  gathered  into  the 
bam,  is  a  wise  provision  of  natm-e  to  facilitate  the  dispersion  of  the  ripened  fruits 
and  seeds  of  the  earth.  We  step  between  nature  and  her  purpose,  snatch  the  cora 
from  its  appointed  destiny  as  the  seed  of  a  future  crop,  and  convert  it  into  human 
food ;  and  thus  diverting  a  law  of  nature  into  a  new  channel,  we  cannot  always 
•xpect  that  the  weather  which  would  be  favourable  to  the  natural  process  should  be 


OHAP.  ni.]  ST.  JOHN,  835 

equally  favoarable  to  the  artificial.  Nature  fulfils  her  designs  perfectly;  she  ia 
faithful  to  the  law  of  her  God.  But  when  she  comes  into  contact  with  man  she 
does  not  harmonize  with  his  designs.  The  primeval  carse  rests  upon  the  toil  of 
man's  hands,  and  the  earning  of  man's  bread ;  and  nature  therefore  will  not  give 
UB  her  blessings  without  a  stern  struggle  with  hostile  elements.  How  true  is  all 
this  of  the  stormy  end  of  our  Saviour's  life;  that  dreary  autumn  seed-time  of 
which  He  said,  "  Now  is  my  soul  troubled,  and  what  shall  I  say.  Father,  save  me 
from  this  hour  ;  but  for  this  cause  came  I  unto  this  hour."  And  further,  how  true 
of  His  entombment  is  the  natural  fact  that  the  seed  thus  sown  in  the  decaying 
autumn,  amid  the  wreck  of  life  and  beauty,  and  to  the  wailing  dirge  of  the  devas- 
tating storm,  lies  passive  and  inert  in  the  soil  all  the  winter,  chilled  with  the  frosts, 
drenched  with  the  rains,  and  buried  in  its  grave  of  darkness  beneath  a  shroud  of 
snow,  waiting  for  its  resurrection  under  the  bright  skies  of  spring.  (H.  Macmillan, 
LL.D.)  The  corn  of  wheat;  or  growth  through  death: — We  see  the  piinciple  of 
propagation  by  self-surrender  operating  in  the  region  of — I.  Individual  life.  1. 
If  a  man  will  be  an  individual  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  term  he  will  be  his  own 
destroyer.  If  the  seedling  of  a  babe  would  grow  physically  he  must — (1)  give,  by 
stretching  forth  the  tendrils  of  its  undeveloped  faculties;  and  (2)  take,  by  the 
aliment  which  such  exercise  supplies.  Thus  the  first  condition  of  physical  life  is 
faith.  The  same  law  operates  in — 2.  The  acquisition  of  knowledge.  A  man  must 
believe  before  he  knows,  and  faith  is  the  depositing  of  self  in  the  ground  of  humaia 
testimony.  A  boy  must  work  with  self  deposited  in  the  ground  of  study  under  discip- 
Unary  influences,  and  convert  his  time,  (&c.,  into  materials  for  developing  the  seeds 
of  knowledge.  3.  The  formation  of  character.  When  we  say  that  a  man  has 
character  we  mean  he  has  acquired  self-control.  Self-control  is  the  fruit  of  sub- 
mission. Submission  during  the  period  of  youth  grows  into  those  principles  of 
conduct  which  are  the  polestar  of  manhood,  through  mortifying  acts  of  obedience. 
IL  Social  life.  A  man  ie  obliged  to  work  for  others  if  he  would  enlarge  and 
propagate  his  life  and  influence.  We  see  this  illustrated  in — 1.  Family  relation- 
ships. The  law  of  marriage  enjoins  the  giving  up  of  self  to  another,  so  as  to 
become  a  larger,  happier  self.  Parents  who  fulfil  God's  idea,  think,  work,  pray, 
live  for  and  iu  their  children.  If  the  father  does  not  thus  lose  himself  and  die  he 
"  abides  alone,"  and  when  he  departs  this  life  he  has  no  one  to  propagate  his  like- 
ness, and  becomes  extinct  except  in  name.  2.  Legislation.  Law,  to  a  certain 
extent,  consists  of  those  things  which  individuals  have  agreed  to  surrender  for  the 
maintenance  of  society  and  is  the  fruitage  of  seeds  of  individual  knowledge  put 
into  the  soil  of  public  experience.  3,  The  extension  of  knowledge.  Ideas  and 
schemes  in  the  mind  are  so  many  seeds  having  life  in  them  which  have  to  be  cast 
into  the  ground  of  public  opinion  in  order  to  bear  fruit.  They  must  get  out  of  the 
mind  if  they  are  not  to  "  abide  alone."  The  thinker  communicates  his  scheme  to 
another,  or  publishes  it  in  the  newspaper,  and  by  and  by,  under  the  influence  of  the 
opinions  and  suggestions  of  others,  the  thought,  once  his,  bears  fruit.  This  holds 
true  of  apparently  trivial  thoughts.  A  casual  remark  made  in  the  hearing  of  a 
thoughtful  friend  may  yield  a  rich  harvest  of  knowledge.  4.  Historic  influence. 
The  good  that  men  do  lives  after  them.  Men  in  advance  of  their  age  are  never 
known  till  they  die.  This  is  true  of  poets,  statesmen,  &c.,  but  of  none  so  much  as 
Christ.  No  one  was  ever  so  misunderstood — so  little  known  ;  but  every  succeeding 
century  carries  a  truer  picture  of  His  unique  life.  III.  Christian  life.  1.  Christ 
who  was  "  the  Life  "  had  to  surrender  that  life  in  order  that  He  might  be  for  and 
in  the  world.  Had  he  •'  spared  Himself  "  He  would  have  abode  alone,  had  He 
never  been  "bruised"  He  would  not  have  been  the  "Bread  of  life."  2.  So  in 
regard  to  the  principle  of  Christian  life.  Self  is  given  away  in  holy  efforts  for 
others,  in  order  to  produce  in  them,  and  so  be  found  again  in,  the  fruits  of  righteous- 
ness. 3.  The  mainspring  which  sets  all  going  is  love.  Love  is  self-sacrifice,  and 
by  that  principle  we  live  unto  God  and  are  filled.  IV.  The  resuebection.  Like 
the  seed  corn  the  body  must  be  put  into  the  ground  if  it  would  rise  again  and  bear 
fruit.  Conclusion  :  The  subject  teaches — 1.  The  difficulties  of  selfishness  and  the 
terrible  daring  and  force  of  sin.  (1)  God  has  placed  us  under  a  system  of  laws 
which  make  it  natural  and  imperative  to  serve  others.  To  break  through  this 
system  involves  effort  and  secures  self-destruction.  (2)  Yet  sin  has  the  audacity  to 
recommend  this  course,  and  is  thus  the  grand  antagonist  of  nature  as  well  as  grace. 
2.  The  nature  and  functions  of  Christianity — that  it  is  no  afterthought  suggested 
by  the  fall,  but  what  agrees  with  principles  already  in  operation.  3.  The  feelings 
of  awe  and  hope  with  which  we  should  regard  death.     (S.  C.  Gordon,  B.D.)        Ths 


83d  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat,  m 

com  of  wheat  dying : — 1.  A.  corn  of  wheat — how  insignificant.  A  little  child  may 
bold  it  in  its  tiny  hand ;  and  yet  not  all  the  science  of  the  world  ooald  produce  it. 
That  depends  on  the  strict  preservation  of  all  the  laws  and  influences  of  the  universe ; 
were  one  interfered  with  all  life  would  perish.  2.  Our  Lord's  disciples  were  pro* 
bably  excited  over  the  triumphal  entry,  and  expectant  that  their  Master  would 
assume  that  throne  they  had  imagined  for  Him.  Hence  He  reminds  them  of  Hia 
approaching  death  and  its  significance.  3.  The  great  truth  here  declared  ia  that 
life  comes  through  death  and  exaltation  through  humiliation.  Again  and  again 
had  our  Lord  taught  this,  but  the  disciples  failed  to  apprehend  it  Nor  can  we 
wonder  at  that,  for  it  is  the  great  stumbling-block  of  our  day.  4.  But  of  what  oae 
is  a  corn  of  wheat  except  it  die  ?  It  would  hardly  supply  a  meal  for  the  smallest 
bird.  It  is  a  thing  of  beauty  perfectly  shaped  and  you  may  put  it  in  a  casket 
worthy  of  it,  but  it  is  worthless  while  kept  "alone.*  But  place  it  in  the  earth 
where  showers  and  sunshine  may  reach  it,  and  who  can  tell  what  may  become  of 
it  ?  So  it  was  with  Him  who  compared  Himself  to  one.  The  disciples  would  have 
kept  that  inestimably  precious  life  all  to  themselves.  Had  they  done  so  it  would 
have  stood  •*  alone,"  and  been  but  an  angel's  visit.  It  woiid  have  supplied 
man  with  a  pattern,  but  one  which  would  have  filled  the  race  with  despair,  and 
made  it  at  Isest  local  and  temporary.  What  man  wanted  was  an  adequate 
motive  power  which  death  only  could  supply.  6.  Not  only  so,  but  •'  except  it 
died  "  how  could  it  multiply  itself  ?  Place  a  com  of  wheat  among  the  regalia 
of  the  realm,  and  it  will  remain  "  alone,"  but  place  it  in  suitable  soil  and  it  will 
spring  :'up  thirty,  sixty,  &o.  "  The  Son  of  Man  came  to  give  His  life  a  ransom 
for  many"  The  preaching  of  a  crucified  Christ  won  three  thousand  on  the 
Day  of  Pentecost ;  and  it  is  this  same  truth  which  has  ever  since  been  the  Ule- 
blood  of  the  Church.  6.  Moreover,  it  is  by  the  death  of  the  corn  of  wheat  that  we 
have  hope  and  promise  of  a  more  glorious  body  by  and  by.  Turn  up  the  earth  in 
a  month  or  so  after  the  seed  has  been  sown,  and  what  do  you  find  but  a  black, 
mouldy  mass  with  death  written  on  every  particle  of  it  ?  But  go  to  the  same  spot  on 
the  reaping  day,  and  can  any  contrast  be  greater?  "Sown  in  corruption,"  <fec. 
(D.  Howell.)  The  seed  com : — I.  The  facts.  1.  The  symbolical  com  of  wheat 
has  a  real  existence — Christ.  (1)  Wheat  I  The  Word  of  God  is  called  by  this  name. 
It  is  not  like  chaff ;  it  has  nourishment  in  it,  and  is  pre-eminent  among  all  words,  aa 
wheat  is  among  grain.  Believers  are  called  wheat.  The  wicked  are  chaff,  tares, 
which  have  no  value  in  them.  Christ  is  the  Word  of  God  in  a  higher  sense  than 
scripture,  and  between  Christ  and  believers  there  is  union.  The  rank  which  wheat 
holds  among  cereals  may  remind  as  that  Christ  is  chief  among  ten  thousand  ;  the 
dehcate  purity  of  it,  that  He  is  the  Holy  One  of  God ;  and  the  great  purpose  that  it 
serves,  that  He  is  the  bread  of  life.  (2)  A  corn  of  wheat.  There  is  hfe  in  that,  so 
there  is  in  a  blade  or  leaf  ;  but  these  cannot  propagate  their  life,  whereas  that  has 
life  to  give  away.  Their  life,  too,  is  dependent  and  continually  derived  from  the 
stem  and  root  from  which  they  must  not  be  divided ;  but  that  has  hfe  that  it 
carries  with  it  wherever  it  goes.  So  the  life  that  is  in  Christ  comes  not  by  trans- 
mission. He  is  "  the  Life."  (3)  A  com  of  wheat  keeps  its  life  a  long  time.  It  has 
been  found  in  the  hand  of  a  mummy  after  thousands  of  years.  The  Son  of  God 
became  a  com  of  wheat,  for  the  purpose  expressed  in  our  text,  before  the  foundation 
of  the  world.  2.  The  com  of  wheat,  has  fallen  into  the  ground.  This  is  a  figurative 
expression  of  the  fact  of  the  incarnation.  When  the  vital  powers  of  wheat  are  to 
be  called  into  action  it  is  necessary  to  take  it  from  the  gamer  and  sow  it.  One 
com  of  wheat  was  taken  from  the  Father's  bosom  and  put  into  this  sinful  world. 
How  great  an  abasement !  The  Creator  became  a  creature,  and  was  subjected  to  a 
creature's  duties  and  obUgations.  3.  When  a  com  of  wheat  falls  into  the  ground  it 
dies.  One  corn  of  wheat  has  died  because  it  was  sown.  If  the  Eternal  Son  had  not 
been  sent  down  His  death  would  not  have  taken  place.  He  was  made  under  the  broken, 
offended  law  which  slew  Him  with  its  curse.  4.  When  a  corn  of  wheat  dies  its  life- 
giving  power  is  developed.  One  com  of  wheat  has  not  remained  alone.  Christ's 
death  has  great  results.  It  was  to  Him  what  the  deep  sleep  was  to  Adam — it  gave 
Him  a  spouse.  His  death  is  the  root,  the  collective  Church  is  the  stem,  and  indi- 
vidual believers  its  fruit  with  which  the  stem  is  laden.  "  When  thou  shalt  make 
His  soul,"  &c.  He  saw  this  seed  at  Pentecost  and  at  many  a  Pentecost  since,  and 
will  continue  to  see  it  till  the  Church  is  complete.  And  when  He  sees  His  seed  He 
recognizes  them,  and  that  because  of  their  likeness  to  Himself.  When  a  com  of 
wheat  produces  seed,  it  is  seed  of  its  own  nature.  So  the  seed  of  Christ  are  Uke 
Him.     II.  TuK  DEATH  OF  Chbisx.     1.  Its  character.    (1)  Glorious.     The  sham* 


CHIP,  xn.)  ST.  JOHN.  83T 

was  outward  and  transcient,  the  glory  essential  and  imperishable.  (2)  Fruitful. 
In  this  its  glory  largely  consists.  The  consequences  are  destined  to  cover  the  earth 
and  outlive  time.  (3)  Not  a  natural  death  but  a  d<-ath  of  violence.  There  are 
various  kinds  of  violent  deaths,  (a)  Martyrdom.  This  is  glorious,  and  has  fruits. 
Christ  was  a  martyr.  (6)  That  of  a  soldier.  A  peculiar  lustre  attaches  to  Wolfe, 
Nelson,  and  the  heroes  at  Thermopylje,  who  conquered  while  they  died,  as  did 
Christ,  (c)  The  felon's  death,  which  answers  useiui  ends.  And  Christ  suffered  the 
punishment  sin  deserved.  The  holy  law  was  trampled  underfoot ;  His  death 
lifted  it  up  and  took  away  its  reproach,  (d)  The  death  of  a  substitute,  such  as  David 
wished  for  when  Absalom  was  slain,  and  Paul,  in  Eom,  ix.  The  ram  substituted 
for  Isaac  and  the  sacrifices  of  Judaism  were  examples  of  the  same  thing.  Christ's 
death  was  vicarious.  "The  Lord  laid  on  Him,"  &c.  2.  Its  necessity.  (1)  The 
Bimple  fact  proves  this.  Christ,  was  not  capable  of  throwing  away  His  life,  and 
God  would  never  have  given  it  had  it  not  been  necess£«ry.  (2)  Its  character  proves 
this — as  that  of  a  warrior,  martyr,  &c.  (3)  But  there  was  a  special  necessity  for  it. 
"Except  a  corn  of  wheat,"  &o.  Had  He  not  died  He  had  been  a  head  without  a 
body,  a  shepherd  witiiout  a  flock,  a  king  without  a  kingdom,  &c.  {A.  Gray.) 
Tlie  seed  corn: — Two  travellers,  journeying  together,  tarried  to  rest  by  the  way  at 
an  inn,  when  suddenly  a  cry  reached  their  ears  that  there  was  a  fire  in  the  village. 
One  of  the  travellers  forthwith  sprang  up,  and  leaving  his  staff  and  his  bundle 
behind  him,  hastened  to  afford  assistance.  But  his  companion  strove  to  detain 
him,  saying,  "  Why  should  we  waste  our  time  here?  Are  there  not  hands  enough 
to  assist  ?  Wherefore  should  we  concern  ourselves  about  strangers  ?  "  The  other, 
however,  hearkened  not  to  his  words,  but  ran  forth  to  the  fire ;  when  the  other 
leisurely  followed,  and  stood  and  looked  on  at  a  distance.  Before  the  burning 
hcjse  there  was  a  mother  transfixed  with  horror,  and  screaming,  "  My  children  I 
my  children !  "  When  the  stranger  heard  this,  he  rushed  into  the  house  among 
the  falling  timbers,  and  the  flames  raged  around  him.  "He  must  perish  I" 
exclaimed  the  spectators.  But  after  they  had  waited  a  short  time,  behold,  he  came 
forth  with  scorched  hair,  bringing  two  young  children  in  his  arms,  and  carried  them 
to  their  mother.  She  embraced  the  infants,  and  fell  at  the  feet  of  the  stranger ; 
but  he  lifted  her  up,  and  spoke  words  of  comfort  to  her.  The  house  meanwhile 
fell  with  a  dreadful  crash.  As  they  two,  the  stranger  and  his  companion,  were 
returning  to  the  inn,  the  latter  said,  "  But  who  bade  thee  risk  thy  life  in  such  a 
rash  attempt  ?  "  "  He,"  answered  the-  former,  "  who  bids  me  put  the  seed  corn 
into  the  ground,  that  it  may  decay  and  bring  forth  new  fruit."  "  But  how,"  said 
the  other,  "  if  thou  hadst  been  buried  beneath  the  ruins  ? "  His  companion 
smiled,  and  said,  "Then  should  I  have  been  the  seed  corn  myself."  (J.  Krurnmocher,) 
The  corn  of  wheat  falling  into  the  ground  and  dying : — I.  The  corn  of  wheat 
ABiDTNG  ALONE.  It  is  Christ's  humiliation  which  we  are  mainly  called  in  these 
words  to  ponder.  But  in  order,  by  contrast,  to  bring  out  the  wonders  of  that 
humiliation,  let  us,  as  here  sug-.  ested,  gi  >  back  to  a  past  Eternity,  and  contemplate 
that  corn  of  wheat  abiding  alone.  Immensity  a  void.  The  mysterious  Trinity 
in  unity,  pervading  and  filling  all  space  :  No  need  of  worlds  or  angela  to  glorify 
them.  There  was  the  com  of  wheat  abiding  alone :  the  Eternal  Son  with  the 
Eternal  Father,  in  the  glory  which  He  had  with  Him  before  the  world  was.  II. 
We  are  next  called  to  consider  the  corn  of  wheat  falling  into  the  ground,  and 
D'HNQ.  Impelled  by  nothing  but  His  own  free,  sovereign,  unmerited  grace,  Christ 
resolves  not  to  abide  alone.  He  is  to  come  down  to  a  ruined  world  in  order  to 
effect  its  ransom  and  salvation.  But,  how  replace  it  ?  How,  in  other  words,  is 
this  redemption  from  sin  and  death  to  be  effected  ?  There  are  two  words  in  our 
text,  on  which  we  may  for  a  moment  instructively  pause.  The  one  suggesting  the 
necessity,  the  other  the  voluntariuess  of  the  death  of  Jesus.  1.  "Except  a  com  of 
wheat  fall  into  the  ground."  "Unless."  There  was  no  other  possible  way  by 
which  the  world  could  be  redeenn-d.  Without  the  dying  of  corn  seed — no  life. 
2,  We  have  the  voluntariness  of  Christ's  death  here  set  forth.  "  If  it  die  I  " — "  If." 
This  same  monosyllable  He  Himself  repeats  with  similar  emphasis  a  few  versea 
further  on :  "  And  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up,  will  draw  all  men  unto  Me."  This  leads  va 
— III.  To  the  corn  of  wheat  bringing  fobth  much  fruit.  It  was  prophesied 
regarding  the  Redeemer,  that  He  should  '•  see  His  seed  "  (Isaiah  liii.  10).  "  This," 
eR\  s  He,  "  is  the  Father's  will  who  hath  sent  Me,  that  of  all  which  He  hath  given 
Me  I  should  lose  nothing,  but  should  raise  it  up  again  at  the  last  day  "  (John  vi. 
39).  He — the  Tree  of  Life — was  to  be  felled  to  the  ground  ;  the  axe  was  already  laid 
to  the  root.  But  as  many  a  noble  denizen  of  the  forest,  coming  mth  a  crash  oa 
vol..  n.  22 


838  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

the  eward,  scatters  its  seed  all  around,  and  in  a  few  years  there  starts  up  a  vast 
plantation,  so  Christ,  by  dying,  scattered  far  and  wide  the  grain  of  spiritual  and 
immortal  life.  The  seed  and  the  leaves  of  this  Tree  are  for  the  healing  of  the 
nations.  The  Divine  corn  seed  drops  into  the  ground ;  a  golden  harvest  waves, 
and  heaven  is  garnered  with  ransomed  souls.  Oh  wondrous  multitude  which  no 
man  can  number !  A  multitude  growing  ever  since  Abel  bent,  a  solitary  worshipper, 
in  the  heavenly  Sanctuary,  with  his  solitary  song — the  first  solitary  sheaf  in 
these  heavenly  granaries.  Yes  1  the  song  is  deepening ;  the  sheaves  are  multiply- 
ing. {J.  R.  Macduff,  D.D.\  The  dying  seed  fruitful : — The  blood  of  the  martyrs 
has  evermore  "  been  the  seed  of  the  Church."  Thus  have  the  "corns  of  wheat" 
been  again  and  again  planted,  to  die  and  live  again  in  great  harvests.  We  are 
reminded  of  the  saying  of  Cranmer  to  Ridley,  as  they  were  fastened  to  the  stake 
and  the  fire  was  lighted  under  them  :  "  Be  of  good  courage.  Master  Eidley.  We 
will  kindle  a  fire  this  day  that  wiU  be  a  light  to  all  England."  The  life  of  Christ 
without  and  within : — I.  In  one  point  of  view  Christ's  life  was  an  entire  failubb. 
He  did  not  get  the  things  which  men  think  to  be  most  valuable ;  nor  did  He  derive 
much  gratification  in  those  faculties  which  men  live  to  gratify  ;  nor,  though  endowed 
with  a  wondrous  versatility  of  powers,  did  He  employ  those  powers  as  to  make  it 
appear  that  He  gained  the  object  of  Ufe.  Eegarding  our  Saviour  in  His  general 
relations — 1.  He  could  scarcely  have  entered  life  at  a  worse  door  than  at  the  portal 
of  Jewish  nationality.  For  in  that  age  it  was  a  misfortune  to  be  bom  a  Jew  in  the 
estimation  of  everybody  except  a  Jew.  So  far  as  worldly  oppoi-tunities  were 
concerned  He  might  better  have  been  bom  a  heathen.  2.  He  had  but  few  oppor- 
tunities in  youth.  Men  are  dependent  for  their  standing  on  the  fact  that  they 
began  with  the  capital  of  their  predecessors.  Christ  had  nothing  of  the  kind,  and 
He  never  strove  to  repair  these  conditions  of  fortune.  3.  He  secured  no  wealth, 
not  even  enough  to  redeem  Himself  from  dependence.  4.  Though  He  had  great 
power  of  exciting  enthusiasm.  He  never  gained  or  kept  a  steady  influence  over  the 
people.  Even  His  disciples  failed  to  enter  into  His  ideas  or  career.  5.  He  failed 
even  more,  if  it  were  possible,  to  secure  any  personal  or  professional  influence  on  the 
minds  that  ruled  that  age.  There  were  pohtical  rulers  of  great  sagacity  whom  He 
never  seems  to  have  fallen  in  with,  and  He  never  had  a  place  among  men  of  letters, 
nor  was  He  a  power  in  any  philosophical  circle.  6.  Even  more  remarkable  is  it 
that  He  did  not  produce  any  immediate  impression  on  the  religion  and  feeUngs  of  His 
age.  7.  Nor  did  He  found  a  family,  the  object  of  most  great  men's  ambition.  All 
this  being  the  case,  what  could  His  hfe  produce  that  should  remain  ?  Nothing, 
apparently.  It  seemed  to  be  like  an  arrow  shot  into  the  air.  His  trial  and  con- 
demnation were  more  than  ordinarily  ignominious  and  fruitless,  whereas  there  are 
many  whose  trial,  &c.,  is  the  most  glorious  event  in  their  history.  He  died  leaving 
no  trace  behind.  In  His  resurrection  there  was  not  much  alleviation,  for  He  never 
appeared  in  public ;  and  His  ascension  closed  His  career.  Was  there  ever  a  life 
that  seemed  to  be  thrown  away  more  than  Christ's  ?  II.  What  are  the  facts  on 
THE  OTHER  SEDE  ?  Did  He  not  save  His  life  by  losing  it.  1.  Bom  a  Jew,  no  man 
now  ever  thinks  of  Him  as  a  Jew.  There  is  victory  in  that  what  hung  about  Him 
as  a  cloud  is  utterly  dissipated.  2.  Born  without  opportunity  in  His  social  relations, 
there  is  not  a  household  or  community  in  Christendom  that  is  not  proud  to  call 
itself  Christian.  The  very  kings  of  the  earth  bring  their  glory  and  baptize  it  with 
His  name.  3.  Having  no  learning,  when  has  there  been  a  school  or  university  or 
philosophical  system  for  a  thousand  years  that  has  not  been  conscious  of  receiving 
its  germ  from  Christ  ?  4.  He  was  indifferent  to  the  ordinary  sources  of  wealth, 
yet  from  out  His  Hfe  there  has  issued  an  influence  that  is  to  control  money-making. 
6.  He  never  gained  much  influence  with  the  masses,  yet  what  name  evokes  so  much 
enthusiasm  among  the  common  people  as  Christ's  1  6.  He  made  Uttle  impression  on 
political  and  intellectual  rulers,  but  He  has  now  filled  the  channels  of  thought  and 
poetic  sentiment,  and  more  and  more  do  you  find  in  treaties  of  law  the  principles  of 
Christian  justice.  His  life  was  thrown  away,  just  as  grain  is  thrown  away,  into  the 
soil :  it  died  to  give  growth  to  life.  III.  What  was  the  secret  of  it  all  ?  If 
yoo  had  asked  at  that  time,  *'  What  are  the  secrets  of  power  in  the  world  ?  "  any  Jew 
would  have  pointed  to  the  temple.  If,  as  he  did  so,  you  bad  seen  some  Greek 
Bmiling  and  asked  him  the  same  question,  he  would  have  said,  "  Have  you  been  in 
Athens  ? "  And  if,  while  he  yet  spoke,  a  disdaining  Soman  had  passed  by,  and 
you  had  asked  him,  "Wherefore  that  smile?"  he  would  have  said,  "Jews  and 
Greeks  are  full  of  superstitions  and  are  blinded  as  to  the  true  source  of  the 
world's    power.      That  power   is   centred  in  Eome."      And   how   would    Jew 


COAX,  xn.]  8T.  JOHN.  83S 

and  Greek  and  Boman  joined  in  the  derision  if  yon  had  pointed  to  Jesus  crucified 
as  the  secret  of  the  world's  power.  And  yet  Jews,  Greeks,  and  Bomans  have 
gone  down  while  this  shadow  fills  the  world.  It  was  His  death,  and  the  sacrifice 
involved  by  that  death  that  was  and  is  the  secret  of  His  unique  power.  But  His 
life  was  a  daily  death — a  constant  self-purrender,  and  only  in  so  far  as  we  copy 
Him  shall  we  share  His  power.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  death  of  Jesus : — I. 
Death  the  most  dbeadful  of  events  has  often  been  made  a  blessing.  1. 
The  death  of  the  believer  has  been  the  hfe  of  the  sinner.  After  turning  their 
backs  on  a  sermon  men  have  been  convinced  by  a  dying  bed.  2.  The  death  of  a 
parent  has  proved  the  life  of  the  child.  The  expiring  change  has  never  been 
iorgotten.  3.  The  death  of  a  minister  has  been  the  life  of  the  hearer.  Little 
regarded  when  living,  his  word  has  come  with  power  when  gone.  4.  The  death  of 
a  martyr  has  been  the  life  of  the  beholder.  "  The  blood  of  the  martyrs  is  the  seed 
of  the  Church."  5.  But  where  are  we  now  ?  The  death  of  Jesus  is  the  life  of  the 
world.  II.  The  death  of  Jesxjs  confers  the  lakgest  blessing.  By  His  death 
Christ  fills  heaven  with  praise,  the  Church  with  blessings,  the  world  with  followers. 
1.  A  grain  of  com  multiplies  by  yielding  other  grains  like  itself.  If  barley  is  sown, 
■barley  comes  up;  if  wheat,  wheat;  if  Christ,  Christians.  He  was  not  of  the 
world — they  are  not  of  the  world ;  He  went  about  doing  good — they  serve  their 
generation  by  the  will  of  God ;  He  was  meek  and  lowly  of  heart — they  are  learning 
of  Him.  2.  A  grain  of  com  is  capable  of  yielding  a  large  crop— one  may  stock 
tk  coantry.  Christ  was  asked,  "  Are  there  few  that  be  saved  ? "  He  told  the 
questioner  to  strive  himself  to  enter  into  the  straight  gate ;  a  wiser  course  for  us 
tiian  speculation.  But  were  the  question  asked  properly  we  might  reply,  No,  He 
is  leading  "  many  sons  to  glory  " — a  multitude  which  no  man  can  number.    III. 

EVBBTTHING  THAT   ENLIVENS   VB  AND   CONFOEMS    US     TO   HiM   OWES     ITS     EFFICACY     TO 

Bjs  DEATH.  1.  The  convincing  and  renewing  infiuences  of  the  Spirit.  2.  Deliver- 
ance from  spiritual  enemies.  3.  The  lively  hope  by  which  we  draw  nigh  to  God. 
4.  Holiness.  (W.Jay.)  The  law  of  fruitfulness : — The  people  were  full  of  expecta- 
tion of  the  temporal  kingdom  of  the  Messiah.  Therefore  our  Lord  lays  down  the 
principles  on  which  His  kingdom  shall  come.  It  is  spiritual,  but  conforms  to  the 
law  which  says.  No  power  comes  into  this  world,  or  attains  its  end,  but  on  the 
condition  of  suffering :  only  in  death  can  life  be  achieved.  I.  Illdstbations  of 
THIS  LAW.  When  we  distinguish  between  the  laws  of  Christian  and  the  laws  of 
ordinary  life,  we  make  a  false  distinction.  The  former  are  but  the  highest  spiritual 
expression  of  the  conditions  which  underlie  and  rule  all  nature.  1.  Our 
Lord  takes  us  to  the  lower  side  of  life — that  of  physical  nature.  2.  So  it  is  with 
every  beautiful  and  joyous  thing  that  exists.  Not  a  little  child's  laughter  makes 
home  ring  with  gladuess  but  it  has  found  its  hfe  in  the  trembling  agony  that  has 
gone  before.  3.  Take  life  on  its  commercial  side.  The  spirit  of  enterprise  does 
not  mean  the  hugging  of  your  savings,  but  reinvesting  them.  A  man  wins  wealth 
by  his  readiness  and  wisdom  in  fulfilling  the  law  of  sacrifice.  4.  It  is  true  also  in 
the  world  of  intellect.  The  power  of  genius  and  talent  largely  consists  in  the  power 
of  self-denial  and  industry.  It  is  only  when  a  man  puts  his  whole  will  into  the 
subject  he  is  studying,  denying  himself  pleasure,  enduring  physical  pain  and 
hardship,  patiently  proving  the  certainties  of  his  discoveries,  that  he  stands  at  last 
amongst  his  fellows  as  one  who  has  something  to  teach.  5.  So  in  all  noble  and 
high  enterprise.  Columbus  has  his  dream,  but  he  must  first  incur  the  ridicule  and 
indiflference  of  those  who  plume  themselves  on  being  the  wise  men  of  the  day.  6. 
It  is  true  in  regard  to  social  life.  The  same  law  has  its  illustration  in  the  case, 
t.g.,  of  Israel.  Their  position  at  first  was  that  of  a  mere  assemblage  of  tribes  with 
individual  preferences,  needs,  &c.,  surrounded  by  the  determined  hostiUty  of  the 
nations  of  Canaan.  The  duty  of  tribal  suffering  was  the  condition  of  the  nation's 
nnity.  The  Song  of  Deborah  teaches  this.  That  was  in  its  youth  ;  but  Solomon 
taught  that  the  same  principle  was  at  work.  "  There  is  that  scattereth  and  yet 
increaseth,"  <fec.  The  real  wealth  of  the  nation  depends  on  the  people's  willing- 
ness to  sacrifice  themselves.  When  the  spirit  of  selfishness  came  into  the  land  it 
was  easy  for  the  prophets  to  predict  its  doom.  II.  What  do  we  owe  to  Christ 
nr  connection  with  this  pbinciplb  ?  Christ  did  for  it  that  which  makes  it  capable 
of  operating  throughout  the  whole  length  and  breadth  of  human  life.  1.  Christ 
unfolded  to  the  intellect  and  brought  into  the  consciousness  of  life  this  law.  This 
is  His  claim  to  originaUty.  No  man  can  claim  originality  in  inventing  new  laws. 
Sir  Isaac  Newton  only  brought  into  human  thought  the  law  of  gravity,  which  had 
•ziited  erer  since  the  stars  were  made.    The  truest  benefactor  is  not  he  that  bringE 


340  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xa 


novelties,  but  who  makes  us  acquaii-ted  with  the  laws  which  underlie  our  national 
existence.  2.  But  intellectual  perception  is  not  enough.  Example  is  the  potent 
agent  of  action,  and  therefore  Christ  brought  the  law  home  to  the  will.  You  teach' 
a  law  by  an  example  because  you  thus  stir  up  the  principles  of  admiration  and 
emulation.  Christ  is  no  mere  demonstrator  ;  He  stood  to  the  yoke  of  the  very 
laws  He  had  made.  He  passes  by  all  temptations  to  selfishness  leading  a  life  of 
self-consecration  from  Bethlehem  to  Calvary.  And  what  is  the  harvest?  His 
power  is  the  kingdom  which  is  the  measure  of  the  world's  empire  to-day.  Where 
is  the  power  of  Egypt  and  Assyria,  the  wisdom  and  genius  of  Greece?  These» 
founded  on  mere  selfishness,  have  passed  away.  But  every  land  has  worshippers 
of  Him  who  died  on  the  cross.  3.  The  work  must  be  carried  yet  further.  A  man 
may  clearly  perceive  a  thing  and  most  earnestly  resolve  it.  You  may  gain  his 
intellect  and  will,  but  you  have  not  won  the  man  until  you  have  got  hold  of  the 
affections.  It  is  love  which  illuminates  the  actions  and  understanding,  and  lifts 
men's  lives  into  courses  which  make  the  whole  life  obedient  to  them.  Christ  was 
not  only  the  educator  and  the  embodiment  of  the  law ;  behind  both  there  was  the 
inspiration  of  His  love.  And  so  "  we  love  Him  because  He  first  loved  us."  (Bp. 
Boyd  Carpenter.)  Alone: — There  are  two  conditions  of  being  possible,  either  of 
which  must  constitute  our  chHracter — love  and  self.  Love  seeks  its  life  outside 
itself :  self  seeks  its  life  in  itself.  Love,  in  order  to  possess,  sacrifices  selfishness ; 
while  self,  in  order  to  possess,  keeps  itself  and  sacrifices  love.  An  unloving  soul  is 
— L  Without  God  in  the  wokld.  God's  love  toward  us  is  certain ;  but  of  what 
avail  is  that  if  our  hearts  are  closed  against  Him,  •*  He  that  loveth  not  knoweth 
not  God."  He  may  be,  as  He  is,  everywhere  present ;  but  unless  the  heart  receives 
His  love  and  returns  it,  it  is  the  same  to  us  as  if  God  did  not  exist.  The  world  is 
without  the  sun  at  noon-day  to  the  blind  man.  II.  Without  Chbist.  Jesaa  is 
one  with  the  Father  in  Being  and  in  love  to  man.  He  came  not  merely  to  atone 
for  sin,  but  to  impart  His  life  of  love.  He  represents  Himself  accordingly,  as 
knocking,  &c.,  the  symbol  of  fellowship  of  brotherly  love.  But  how  can  such 
fellowship  be  realized  if  self  bars  the  door  7  Jesus  may  be  as  near  to  na  as  He  waa 
to  Satan  in  the  wilderness,  and  yet  between  us  the  same  moral  gulf.  Judas  was  as 
far  from  Him  when  be  sat  by  His  side  as  when  he  went  forth  to  his  own  place. 
So  we  may  be  near  Christ  when  He  saves  others,  but  abide  "alone."  He  cannot 
dwell  in  the  selfish  heart.  IH.  Without  the  Spirit.  The  Spirit  sheds  abroad  the 
love  of  God.  "  If  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,"  &o.  "  The  fruit  of  the 
Spirit  is  love."  But  if  we  quench  Him,  whatever  His  love  may  be,  it  may  be  said 
of  us  "  not  having  the  Spirit."  IV.  Without  communion  with  saints.  There  is 
but  one  family  in  heaven  and  earth,  and  one  Spirit  pervades  the  whole — love. 
Prisons,  loss,  and  bereavement  cannot  shut  Christians  out  from  this.  The  unloving 
soul  is  not  rejected  :  he  is  invited,  "  Come  thou  with  us  and  we  wiU  do  thee  good  "; 
but  he  responds,  "  I  desire  only  myself."  V.  What  is  to  become  of  such  a  man  ? 
He  has  rejected  God,  &c.  As  years  advance  the  conviction  steals  over  him 
that  his  companions  are  falling  away.  Old  age  comes,  and  the  world  becomes 
like  a  cell  where  he  must  suffer  solitary  confinement.  The  deathbed  at 
last  is  reached,  and  he  must  go  forth  •'  alone  "  into  the  unknown.  How  sad  and 
dreary.  He  has  lived  alone  and  now  finds  himself  without  heaven.  (J,  T,  Pitcher.) 
He  that  loveth  his  life  shall  lose  it. — Suppose  that  Jesus,  seeking  only  His  per- 
sonal safety,  had  now  gone  to  the  Greeks  to  play  among  them  the  part  of  a  sage,  or 
to  organize  the  state  like  another  Solon,  He  might  indeed  thus  have  saved  His  life, 
but  would  in  reality  have  lost  it.  In  having  given  it  up  to  God,  He  could  not  have 
received  it  from  Him  glorified  (ver.  23).  Thus  kept  by  Him,  it  would  have  remained 
doomed  to  sterility  and  earthly  frailty.  It  was  by  renouncing  the  life  of  a  sage  that 
He  became  a  Christ,  and  by  renouncing  the  throne  of  a  Solon  he  obtained 
that  of  God.  This  saying  included  the  judgment  of  Hellenism ;  for  what  was 
Greek  civilization  but  human  life  cultivated  from  the  view-point  of  enjoyment,  and 
withdrawn  from  the  law  of  sacrifice.  {F.  Godet,  D.D.)  The  bearing  of  the  pre- 
tent  on  the  ftiture  life  : — The  text — I.  Applies  to  the  position  Chbist  occupied  ai 
THE  TiwE.  The  gratification  of  a  selfish  desire  in  Christ  at  this  time  meant  the 
world's  ruin — ruin  intensified  by  the  fact  that  the  work  of  deliverance  was  so  nearly 
completed.  Christ  was  the  exemplification  of  the  text  (chap.  x.  17, 18 ;  xv.  13 ; 
Gal.  ii.  20).  U.  The  general  application  to  us.  It  points  to  two  subjects  ou 
which  we  propose  to  dwell.  1  Selfishness  indulged — the  cause  of  irreparable  loss. 
"He  that  loveth  His  life  shall  lose  it."  See  how  selfishness  operates  on  and  affecti 
the  life.    (1)  It  isolates.    Man  is  intended  to  be  a  social  being.    Selfishness  shutd 


CHAP.  xn.J  ST.  JOHN.  841 

oat  society  and  turns  a  man  in  upon  himself.  (2)  It  debases.  Man  is  intended  to 
benefit  his  race.  While  getting  good  he  is  to  do  good.  Selfishness  obstructs  the 
work  of  charity  and  usefulness.  The  life  that  should  find  loving  room  for  all  is 
reduced  to  its  own  enjoyment  and  gratification.  (3)  It  destroys.  "Shall  lose  it." 
An  irreparable  loss,  which  cannot  be  fully  understood,  but  of  which  some  conception 
may  be  formed  when  you  consider — (o)  The  excellence  of  its  nature — God -bestowed. 
(fc)  The  duration  of  its  existence — eternal,  (c)  The  price  of  its  redemption — the 
sacrificial  death  of  Jesus.  This  leads  us  to  ask,  What  is  meant  by  loving  life  ? 
Not  the  pure  enjoyment  of  life  by  a  healthy  vigorous  person,  but  the  love  bestowed 
without  restraint  on  the  purely  animal  life,  indulging  appetite,  fulfilling  sensual 
lusts  and  delights,  following  fashion,  craving  for  fame,  a  passion  for  riches  and 
pleasures — loving  these  more  than  Christ.  The  worldling  who  gives  his  soul  for 
the  world.  2.  Self-denial  practised— the  security  of  eternal  life.  "  He  that  hateth," 
&o.  Self-denial  is  not  a  gift,  but  a  cultivation  developed  by  exercise  and  practice. 
It  is  the  resurrection  of  our  personality  buried  in  the  grave  of  deception.  In  self- 
denial  we  find  our  true  selves.  Man's  choice  lies  between  temporary  gain  and 
eternal  loss.  The  false  says  the  present ;  the  true  part  of  our  nature  says  the 
future.  "Hatred"  of  life  is  not  misanthropy.  It  is  this  life  loved  less  than  the 
life  to  come ;  everything  here  treated  as  being  incompetent  to  give  true  joy,  pre- 
ferring God's  favour  to  all  below.  Crucifying  the  flesh,  keeping  the  body  under, 
enduring  persecution  for  Christ's  sake — the  seed  of  *'  much  fruit."  "  Shall  keep 
it,"  &o.  Selfishness  enervates,  loosens  the  grasp,  and  allows  the  treasure  to  slip 
away.  Self-denial  tightens  the  hold  and  retains  possession.  "  Life  eternal " — 
deliverance  from  trial,  the  enjoyment  of  rest  and  reward.  (J.  E.  Hargreaves.) 
Life  loved  and  lost : — Bichard  Denton,  a  blacksmith,  residing  in  Cambridgeshire, 
was  a  professor  of  religion,  and  the  means  of  converting  the  martyr,  William 
Woolsey.  When  told  by  that  holy  man  that  he  wondered  he  had  not  followed  him 
to  prison,  Denton  replied  that  he  could  not  burn  in  the  cause  of  Christ.  Not  long 
after,  his  house  being  on  fire,  he  ran  in  to  save  some  of  his  goods,  and  was  burnt  to 
death.  If  any  man  serve  Me,  let  Mm  follow  Me. — Following  Christ : — I.  Let 
WHOM?  n.  Follow  whom?  III.  Follow  whence?  IV.  Follow  whithee?  V. 
Follow  how.  (S.  S.  Times.)  I.  The  leader.  H.  The  follower.  IIL  The  joubnbt. 
IV.  The  DESTINATION.  (lUd.)  Following  Christ : — When  Amurah  II.  died, 
which  was  very  suddenly,  his  son  and  destined  successor,  Mohammed,  was  about  a 
day's  journey  distant  in  Asia  Minor.  Every  day  of  interregnum  in  that  fierce  and 
turbulent  monarchy  is  attended  with  peril.  The  death  of  the  deceased  Sultan  was 
therefore  concealed,  and  a  secret  message  despatched  to  the  prince  to  hasten  at 
once  to  the  capital.  On  receiving  the  message  he  leaped  on  a  powerful  Arab 
charger,  and,  turning  to  his  attendants,  said,  "Let  him  who  loves  me  follow  I" 
This  prince  afterwards  became  one  of  the  most  powerful  sovereigns  of  the  Ottoman 
line.  Those  who  approved  their  courage  and  loyalty  by  following  him  in  thia 
critical  moment  of  his  fortunes  were  magnificently  rewarded.  There  is  another 
Prince — the  Prince  of  Peace — who  says  to  those  around  him,  "  Let  him  who  loves 
Me  follow."  Chrisfs  servant :  his  duties  and  rewards : — The  motto  of  the  Prince  of 
Wales  is  '•  Ich  dien  " — I  serve ;  it  should  be  the  motto  of  every  prince  of  the  blood 
royal  of  heaven.  I.  Plain  directions  for  a  very  honourable  office.  1.  We 
should  all  like  to  minister  to  Christ.  If  He  were  here  now  there  would  be  nothing 
which  we  would  not  do  for  Him,  so  we  say.  But  much  of  this  is  mere  sentiment. 
If  Christ  were  to  come  now  as  He  came  at  first,  probably  we  should  treat  Him  as 
He  was  treated.  This  sentimentalism  has  at  the  bottom  of  it  the  idea  that  we 
should  be  honouring  ourselves  by  it.  But  if  you  really  would  serve  Christ,  you  can, 
by  following,  i.e.,  imitating  Him.  (1)  One  says,  "  I  should  like  to  do  something 
to  prove  that  I  really  would  obey  my  Lord.  I  would  show  that  I  am  not  a  servant 
in  name  only."  Imitate  Christ,  and  you  then  show  your  obedience.  (2)  Anothar 
says,  "I  would  joyfully  assist  Him  in  His  wants."  Imitate  Him,  then,  and  gc 
about  doing  good.  Behold  His  wants  in  the  poor  saints.  (3)  "  I  would  do  some- 
thing  to  cheer  Him."  The  solace  of  His  sorrow  is  the  obedience  of  His  people. 
When  He  sees  that  He  sees  of  the  travail  of  His  soul,  &o.  (4)  '•  I  would  honoor 
Him."  Christ  is  most  honoured  when  His  saints  are  most  sanctified.  Follow  Him 
thus,  and  you  will  honour  Him  more  than  by  strewing  palm  branches  in  His  way 
and  shouting  "  Hosannah !  "  2.  Let  me  mark  out  Christ's  way,  and  then,  if  you 
would  serve  Him,  follow  Him.  The  proud  flesh  wants  to  follow  Christ  by  striking 
oat  new  paths,  to  be  an  original  thinker.  It  is  not  for  us  to  be  originals,  but 
humble  copies  of  Christ.    (1)  He  went  to  Jordan  to  be  baptized.    If  you  would 


841  TBE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.xh. 

Berve  Him  don't  say  this  is  not  essential ;  it  is  not  a  servant's  business  to  determine 
that.  (2)  The  Spirit  led  Him  to  be  tempted  of  the  devil ;  don't  think  that  tempta- 
tion is  a  mark  of  being  out  of  Christ.  (3)  Now  He  comes  forth  to  work.  So  yon 
must  follow  Him  in  labour.  If  you  cannot  preach  to  thousands  yon  can  to  tens,  or 
to  one,  as  He  did  by  Jacob's  well.  (4)  He  bears  bold  witness  before  His  adversaries. 
Let  there  not  be  a  foe  before  whose  face  you  would  fear  to  plead  His  cause.  (5)  He 
comes  into  the  black  cloud  of  reproach ;  they  say  He  has  a  devil  and  is  mad. 
Follow  Him  there.  (6)  Ha  comes  to  die.  Be  ready  to  yield  thy  life  if  called  upon, 
and  if  not,  devote  every  moment  of  it  to  Him.  II.  Generous  stipuIiAtionb  from  a 
NOBLB  Master.  "Where  I  am,"  &c.  Whoever  heard  of  such  oonditions.  The 
master  is  in  the  drawing-room,  the  servant  in  the  kitchen ;  the  master  presides  at 
the  table,  the  servant  waits  at  the  table.  Not  so  here.  1.  This  was  Christ's  rule 
all  His  life  long.  (1)  He  went  to  a  wedding,  to  the  house  of  Lazarus,  to  the 
Pharisee's  house,  and  had  He  been  an  ordinary  man  He  would  have  said,  "  I  can- 
not take  these  poor  fishermen  with  Me ; "  bnt  they  were  always  with  Him :  with 
Him  too  in  His  triumphal  entry  and  His  last  great  feast.  "  With  desire,"  &o.  (2)  But 
if  He  thus  shared  His  comforts  among  His  disciples.  He  expected  them  to  share 
His  discomforts.  He  was  in  a  ship  in  a  great  storm,  and  they  must  be  with  Him 
though  they  were  sore  afraid.  He  goes  to  Gethsemane,  and  they  must  be  with  Him 
there ;  and  though  He  had  to  tread  the  winepress  alone,  yet  they  were  with  Him  in 
death,  for  they  suffered  martyrdom.  2.  This  stands  true  to  us.  Where  Christ  was 
we  must  be.  He  is  gone  to  heaven  now,  and  where  He  is  we  shall  be  also.  Fare  ill 
or  well  we  are  to  have  joint  stock  with  Christ.  III.  A  glorious  reward  for  imper- 
fect SERVICES.  "  Him  will  my  Father  honour."  1.  In  his  own  soul.  He  shall 
have  such  peace  and  fellowship  that  this  honour  shall  be  apparent.  How  greatly 
God  honoured  Knox,  who  never  feared  the  face  of  man,  with  unruffled  serenity  of 
heart  t  2.  By  success  in  whatever  he  may  attempt.  Why  is  it  that  little  success 
rests  on  some  who  labour  for  God?  Because  they  do  not  serve  Christ  by  imitating 
Him.  Ecclesiastical  courts  and  rubrics  confine  too  many.  3.  At  the  last,  before  the 
angels.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Service  and  its  reward : — I.  The  course  of  Christian 
SERVICE.  What  are  men's  ideas  of  Ufe?  The  gratification  of  animal  appetites, 
the  desire  for  social  pleasures,  the  love  of  distinction.  Is  it  any  wonder  that  these 
ideas  should  prompt  the  question,  "Is  life  worth  living?  "  These  are  ends  which 
life  itself  will  ultimately  disdain.  Turn,  then,  to  Christ's  idea — service  true  and 
lasting.  1.  Christ's  Ufe  was  one  of  full  consecration  to  God.  This  consecration  was 
—(1)  Active—"  I  come  to  do  Thy  will."  (2)  Entire — "  My  meat  is  to  do  the  will," 
Ac.  (3)  Eealized  in  the  largest  degree — "  Into  Thy  hands  I  commit  My  Spirit."  (4) 
Triumphant,  "  It  is  finished."  (5)  Was  maintained  by  prayer.  2.  Christ's  life  was  in- 
spired with  one  aim — the  elevation  of  mankind.  Achimedes  said  that  if  he  could  find 
a  fulcrum  he  would  make  a  lever  that  would  lift  the  world.  The  fulcrum  in  our 
redemption  was  God's  eternal  purpose,  and  the  lever  Christ's  own  life — His  teaching 
and  example.  This  is  the  Church's  mission  to-day.  3.  Jesus  never  made  present 
success  the  ground  of  His  life.  After  1800  years  there  is  more  power  in  it  than 
when  He  saved  the  dying  thief.  U.  This  service  leads  where  Jesus  is.  There 
is  elevation  in  the  very  nature  of  Christian  service.  Men  wearing  titles  and 
honours  which  they  have  never  deserved  are  looked  upon  with  contempt.  To  bear 
Christ's  name  and  to  wear  His  livery  without  serving  Him  is  despicable.  But  that 
service  is  calculated  to  destroy  one  of  our  most  debasing  passions — selfishness ;  and 
the  moment  that  that  is  dead  at  the  feet  of  Jesus  we  begin  to  rise.  We  are  not 
blind  to  other  elevating  influences — knowledge,  taste,  industry,  uprightness,  but  a 
heart  consecrated  to  Christ  is  higher  than  all.  It  has  higher  conceptions  of  life, 
sweeter  sentiments  of  duty,  aims  at  higher  ends.  III.  This  life  of  service  will 
BE  CROWNED  WITH  DtviNE  HONOURS.  1.  A  placc  in  heaveu.  2.  Distinguished  signs 
of  approbation.    3.  Association  with  Jesus.      (Weekly  Pulpit.)         Self-denial: — 

1.  The  self-denial  in  which  we  should  follow  Jesds.  1.  It  was  free.  Voluntari- 
ness is  the  essence  of  this  virtue.  For  others  to  deny  us  a  benefit  or  to  constrain 
us  to  hardship  we  would  avoid  is  not  self-denial.    Christ  "emptied  Himself,"  <feo. 

2.  It  was  wise.  It  was  not  placed  in  trifles.  If  He  restrained  innocent  desires  or 
endured  what  wa?  painful  it  was  for  noble  and  generous  ends.  3.  It  was  extensive, 
reaching  from  the  humble  stable  to  the  malefactor's  cross,  and  all  was  foreseen.  4. 
It  was  disinterested.  Many  deny  to  serve  themselves ;  but  "  ye  know  the  grace  of 
onr  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  &c.  Would  we  be  Christ's  followers?  Our  self-denial 
must  be  Uke  His — free,  wise,  Ac.  II.  This  self-denial  is  the  path  to  trob 
BONOUB  AND  OBEATNEB8,  bccausc — 1.  It  is  great  and  honourable  in  itself.     These 


CHAP,  xn.]  ST.  JOHN.  34S 

qaalities  arise  from  character  and  conduct,  and  are  independent  of  the  judgments 
of  men.  They  are  not  derived  from  noble  descent,  magnificence,  dominion,  &o. 
To  rise  above  self-love  requires  a  vigour  in  which  there  will  always  be  found  true 
greatness  of  mind.  2.  It  conducts  to  true  greatness.  Voluptuousness  rusts  the 
best  talents,  blunts  the  most  undaunted  courage,  perverts  the  soundest  judgment, 
and  corrupts  the  purest  heart.  All  these  qualities  a  habit  of  self-denial  improves. 
That  which  the  world  counts  greatness  can  only  be  achieved  by  self-denial — 
learning,  statesmanship,  war.  But  Christian  self-denial  makes  man  truly  great. 
3.  It  is  honoured  by  God.  This  is  seen  in  the  case  of  Christ.  For  His  self-denial 
God  gave  Him  a  name  above  every  name.  (J.  Erskine,  D.D.)  Where  I  am 
there  shall  also  My  servant  be.  I  have  heard  that  a  noted  Methodist  preacher, 
who  commenced  his  ministry  very  early  in  life,  suffered  not  a  little  at  first  because 
of  his  humble  origin  and  unpromising  exterior.  Being  sent  on  the  circuit  plan  to 
a  certain  house  on  a  Saturday  night,  to  be  in  readiness  for  preaching  on  the  Sun- 
day, the  good  woman,  who  did  not  like  the  look  of  him,  sent  him  round  to  the 
kitchen.  The  serving  man  was  surprised  to  see  the  minister  in  the  kitchen  when 
he  came  from  labour.  John,  rough  as  he  was,  welcomed  the  despised  preacher, 
and  tried  to  cheer  him.  The  minister  shared  John's  meal  of  porridge,  John's  bed  in 
the  cockloft,  and  John's  humble  breakfast,  and  walked  to  the  House  of  God  with 
John  in  the  morning.  Now,  the  preacher  had  not  long  opened  his  mouth  before 
the  congregation  perceived  that  there  was  somewhat  in  him,  and  the  good  hostess, 
who  had  so  badly  entertained  him,  began  to  feel  a  little  uneasy.  When  the  sermon 
was  over  there  were  many  invitations  for  the  minister  to  come  home,  and  the 
hostess,  fearful  of  losing  her  now  honoured  guest,  begged  he  would  walk  home  with 
her,  when,  to  her  surprise,  he  said,  •'  I  supped  with  John,  I  slept  with  John,  I 
breakfasted  with  John,  I  walked  here  with  John,  and  I'll  walk  home  with  John." 
So  when  dinner  came  he  was,  of  course,  entreated  to  come  into  the  chief  room,  for 
many  friends  wished  to  dine  with  this  young  minister,  but  no,  he  would  dine  in  the 
kitchen  ;  he  had  supped  with  John,  he  had  breakfasted  with  John,  and  he  would  dine 
with  John.  They  begged  him  to  come  into  the  parlour,  and  at  last  he  consented 
on  the  condition  that  John  should  sit  at  the  same  table.  "  For,"  he  said,  very 
properly,  "  John  was  with  me  in  my  humiliation,  and  I  will  not  sit  down  to  dine 
unless  he  be  with  me  in  my  exaltation."  So  on  they  went  till  the  Monday  morning, 
for  "  John  was  with  me  at  the  beginning,  and  he  shall  be  with  me  to  the  end." 
This  story  may  be  turned  to  account  thus  :  our  Master  came  into  this  world  once, 
and  they  sent  Him  into  the  servants'  place,  where  the  poor  and  despised  ones 
were.  Now  the  name  of  Christ  is  honoured,  and  kings  and  cardinals,  popes  and 
bishops,  say,  "  Master,  come  and  dine  with  us."  Yes,  the  proud  emperor  and 
philosophej.-  would  have  Him  sup  with  them,  but  still  He  says,  *'  No,  I  was  with 
the  poor  and  afflicted  when  I  was  on  earth,  and  I  will  be  with  them  to  the  end,  and 
when  the  great  feast  is  made  in  heaven  the  humble  shall  sit  with  Me,  and  the  poor 
and  despised  who  were  not  ashamed  of  Me,  of  them  will  I  not  be  ashamed  when  I 
come  into  the  glory  of  My  Father,  and  all  My  holy  angels  with  Me."  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon. )  If  any  man  serve  Me,  him  will  My  Father  honour. — Christian  service 
and  its  honours : — I.  The  service  of  Christ.  1.  It  is  not  a  condition  of  serfdom. 
It  is  perfect  freedom.  2.  It  is  not  a  condition  of  menialism.  In  a  modified  sense 
it  gives  equality  with  Christ  (chap.  xv.  15).  The  relation  between  the  Saviour  and 
His  servants  is  tender,  intimate,  mysterious.  "  Christ  in  you  the  hope  of  glory." 
3.  It  involves  a  complete  renunciation  of  every  other  service  and  our  entire  dedica- 
tion to  Christ.  Hand  and  head  and  heart,  time  and  influence  and  wealth  must  be 
laid  on  His  altar.  4.  It  is  a  voluntary  service.  The  Bible,  the  history  of  each 
saint  of  God,  and  our  own  inward  consciousness  unite  in  attesting  that  we  possess 
the  power  to  discern  moral  distinctions,  to  recognize  the  character,  and  to  appre- 
ciate the  claims  of  God ;  the  power  to  render  implicit  obedience  or  proudly  to  defy 
our  Maker.  II.  Its  accompanvinq  honours.  1.  The  service  of  Christ  is  the  only 
path  of  real  honour ;  but  it  is  the  sure  way  to  certain  and  glorious  distinction.  2. 
This  service  elevates  the  physical,  gives  majesty  to  the  intellectual,  and  arrays  in 
robes  of  richest  glory  the  moral  and  spiritual.  It  inspires  an  unwavering  purpose. 
It  raises  to  all  the  privileges  of  an  adopted  sonship.  8.  It  is  emphatically  royal. 
Those  engaged  in  it  are  "a  royal  priesthood."  Already  they  have  in  possession 
the  highest  good,  and  in  prospect  an  "inheritance  incorruptible,  undefiled,  and 
that  fadeth  not  away."  They  are  kings,  albeit  as  yet  uncrowned,  but  awaiting 
patiently  their  coronation.  (J.  W.  Jones. )  The  Christian  service  and  honour ;— . 
Few  men  love  service.    Man  prefers  to  be  his  own  master,  to  do  as  he  pleases.   Bat 


344  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOR.  [chap,  zn 

he  who  epums  the  counsel  of  God  commits  an  act  of  suicide  on  his  liberty.  He  ia 
the  free  man  who  serves  God.  But  he  who  refuses  is  a  slave  to  Satan  or  self.  I. 
What  la  it  to  serve  Jesus?  We  may  serve  Him — 1.  In  the  faith  we  hold. 
Studying  it,  mastering  it,  loving  it,  practising  it.  2.  In  suffering  for  His  sake. 
Bearing  meekly  persecution,  calumny,  Divine  discipline,  and  poverty.  3.  In  the 
outward  acts  we  perform.  Some  may  serve  God  in  ecclesiastical  duties,  others  in 
the  private  duties  of  religion,  and  those  of  daily  life.  If  you  cannot  serve  Christ  in 
one  way  you  can  in  another — the  servant  in  the  household,  the  nurse  in  the 
hospital,  the  merchant  in  the  rectitude  of  his  dealings.  It  is  not  necessary  to  be  a 
clergyman ;  you  may  serve  Christ  behind  the  counter  or  at  the  plough.  II.  Thb 
HONOUR  God  confers  on  Christ's  servants.  1.  In  this  world.  (1)  In  the  midst 
of  the  Church.  Whatever  a  man's  rank  may  be,  the  most  useful  are  after  all  the 
most  honoured.  Let  a  man  deserve  position,  and  his  fellow  Christians  will  not  be 
backward  in  giving  it.  (2)  In  the  world.  You  may  not  know  it,  but  the  conscience 
of  the  wicked  respects  the  righteous,  however  scornful  the  tongue.  And  for  whom 
does  the  sinner  send  on  his  death-bed  ?  His  boon  companions  ?  No  ;  the  man  of 
prayer.  (3)  After  he  is  dead.  The  servant  of  Christ  has  honour  at  the  hands  of 
his  family,  his  business  connections,  his  neighbourhood,  after  he  is  gone.  2.  In 
the  world  to  come.  (1)  At  the  judgment — from  persecutors,  the  wicked,  the  devil 
himself.  (2)  Throughout  eternity.  "  Well  done,"  &o.  Christian  service  and  it» 
reward: — I.  The  service.  1.  The  Master  who  is  served.  Jesus — Divine  and 
human — One  in  whom  are  associated  the  might  of  omnipotence  and  the  tenderness 
of  love,  who  strengthens  the  weakness  of  His  servants  and  uniformly  leads  them  to 
victory  and  reward.  And  what  else  can  it  be  but  a  service  of  honour  to  follow  one 
80  pre-eminently  glorious?  The  subject  may  be  proud  of  the  sovereign,  the  scholar 
of  the  teacher,  &o.,  but  what  sovereign,  &c.,  can  be  compared  with  Christ.  The 
conclusion  is  irresistible.  There  is  no  one  who  ought  to  be  so  trusted,  loved,  and 
obeyed.  2.  The  men  who  serve.  Not  men  of  any  description,  but  fit  men,  chosen, 
justified,  sanctified.  How  animating  to  be  associated  with  such — men  at  the  head 
of  their  species,  whatever  the  world  may  say.  The  soldier  congratulates  himself 
on  belonging  to  a  profession  which  includes  a  Wellington ;  the  student  that  he 
traverses  a  path  trodden  by  Plato  and  Newton ;  the  artist  that  he  follows  in  the 
wake  of  Raphael  and  Reynolds  ;  but  we  follow  in  the  footsteps  of  Paul,  Augustine, 
Luther,  &c.  "  Wherefore  seeing  we  are  encompassed,"  &c.  3.  The  object  con- 
templated— the  loftiest  at  which  man  can  aim — the  evangelization  of  the  world. 
The  politician  may  alleviate  the  burdens  of  many,  the  merchant  increase  the 
comfort  of  thousands,  the  phvsician  and  inventor  minister  to  multitudes,  but  the 
Christian  carries  light  to  the  benighted  and  Hfe  to  the  dead,  deposes  Satan  and 
enthrones  God.  4.  Its  motive.  The  love  of  Christ.  Think  of  that  in  the  con- 
stancy of  its  exercise,  the  depth  of  its  intensity,  the  fulness  of  its  abundance,  the 
felicity  of  its  influence,  and  the  munificence  of  its  bestowment,  and  you  will  feel 
with  Paul,  "  the  love  of  Christ  constraineth,"  &c.  II.  The  reward.  God  honours 
those  who  serve  His  Son — 1.  By  crowning  their  labours  with  success.  Admiration 
and  advantages  are  nothing  with  success,  but  that  compensates  all  sacrifices  and 
exertions ;  and  Christians  always  have  it,  although  in  a  different  way  and  of  a 
different  sort  to  what  they  expect.  2.  By  bestowing  upon  them  His  friendship  and 
presence.  This  atones  for  worldly  neglect  and  contempt.  3.  By  making  them  the 
almoners  of  His  grace.  All  right-minded  men  esteem  it  an  honour  to  dispense 
blessings,  but  Christians  are  channels  of  the  living  waters  of  salvation.  4.  By 
raising  them  to  the  blessedness  and  glory  of  heaven.  [J.  Fleming. )  The  Christian 
a  follower  of  Christ : — I.  Evert  true  Christian  is  a  servant  of  Christ.  This  is  a 
very  frequent  description  of  His  people,  "  My  servants."  In  one  sense  all  men  and 
all  creatures  are  the  servants  of  Christ :  they  are  subject  to  the  control  of  Hia 
power,  the  direction  of  His  wisdom,  the  accomplishment  of  His  purposes,  and  the 
manifestation  of  His  glory.  But  it  may  be  more  properly  said  He  serves  Himself 
by  them,  than  that  they  serve  Him.  We  are  not  to  confine  this  relationship  to 
those  who  serve  Christ  in  the  ministry  of  the  word,  either  at  home  or  amidst  the 
moral  wilds  of  pagan  superstition.  1  hey,  indeed,  are  His  servants  in  an  eminent, 
but  not  in  an  exclusive  sense.  To  be  a  servant  might  seem  to  imply  no  very  lofty 
eminence  of  distinction,  no  very  rich  honour.  This,  however,  depends  upon  the 
dignity  of  the  person  we  serve.  When  the  queen  of  Sheba  saw  the  glory,  and  heard 
the  wisdom  of  Solomon,  she  poured  forth  her  raptures  in  congratulations  to  hia 
servants,  who  stood  continually  in  his  presence,  and  ministered  before  his  throne. 
IL  It  la  bsbentiai.  to  the   characteb  and  conduct  of  a  servant  of  Chbisi 


0IUP.  zn,}  ST.  JOHN.  848 

TO  FOLLOW  Hiu.  This,  in  fact,  is  the  service ;  the  follower  is  the  serrant,  and  no 
other.  The  servant  keeps  his  eye  upon  his  master,  and  avoiding  all  other  persons, 
and  all  other  streets,  treads  in  his  footsteps,  and  presses  as  closely  as  possible  to 
him.  Just  observe  for  a  moment  whom  a  Christian  does  not  follow.  He  does  not 
follow  the  teachers  of  false  opinions  in  religion,  in  philosophy,  or  in  morals,  with 
whatever  specious  sophisms,  or  seductive  eloquence,  their  notions  may  be  advanced 
and  supported.  He  does  not  follow  the  votaries  of  pleasure  or  of  fashion,  in  their 
epicurean  revels,  with  whatever  elegance  or  refinement  they  may  endeavour  to 
recommend  their  habits.  1.  In  what  views  of  Christ  do  His  servants  follow  him  ? 
As  their  Teacher.  2.  We  are  to  follow  Him  as  onr  Saviour.  He  came  not  only 
to  instruct  us,  but  to  redeem  us.  3.  We  are  to  follow  Christ  as  a  Master.  "  Ye  call 
me  Master  and  Lord,"  said  Jesus  to  His  disciples,  "  and  ye  say  well,  for  so  I  am  " 
(chap.  xiii.  13).  Here  it  may  be  proper  to  consider  the  rule  of  our  service  to  Christ. 
This  is  the  word  of  God.  If  I  were  asked  to  describe  the  character  of  a  servant  of 
Christ,  not  sach  as  His  professing  people  are  too  generally  found,  but  such  as  they 
ought  to  be,  I  should  say,  they  are  His  willing  servants ;  they  choose  His  service 
with  their  whole  heart,  and  would  not  quit  it  for  any  consideration  of  wealth,  rank, 
station,  or  fame.  They  are  His  servants  without  terms  or  conditions  as  to  the  kind, 
quantity,  time  or  place  of  service.  If  it  be  not  degrading  the  subject  to  apply  to  it 
a  common  phrase  in  domestic  use,  I  would  say  they  are  servants  of  all  work : 
willing  to  do  the  work  of  God  in  any  place,  in  any  condition,  in  any  circumstances ; 
so  that  if  they  can  serve  Him  better  by  sneering  than  by  active  duties,  in  adversity 
than  in  prosperity,  they  are  willing  to  do  it.  They  are  His  inquisitive  servants, 
searching  the  Scriptures  as  the  rule  of  conduct,  to  know  His  will.  They  are 
His  loving  servants;  loving  their  Master  and  His  work  too.  They  are  His 
diligent  servants,  satisfied  with  no  measure  of  duty,  wrestling  against  a  slothful 
and  indolent  disposition,  and  forgetting  the  things  that  are  behind,  in  going  on  unto 
perfection.  They  are  His  faithful  servants,  taking  account  of  all  the  gifts,  graces, 
opportunities  of  usefulness,  and  means  of  doing  the  will  of  God  and  serving  their 
generation.  They  are  His  waiting  servants,  looking  for  the  coming  of  their  Master. 
4.  We  are  to  follow  Him  as  an  example.  We  are  to  imitate  His  holy  hie.  Christ 
must  be  followed  in  humble  dependence  on  Divine  grace ;  and  with  a  fixed  resolu- 
tion and  dauntless  courage  in  the  face  of  danger,  and  at  the  risk  of  suffering.  III. 
All  who  follow  Christ  on  earth  will  dwell  with  Him  in  heaven.  He  saith, 
«'  Where  I  am  there  shall  My  servant  be."  (J.  A.  Jaims.)  Christian  service : — 
Labour  is  not  necessarily  service.  A  good  worker  may  be  a  poor  server.  A  cook 
who  lets  the  dinner  spoil  because  she  persists  in  scrubbing  the  floor  when  she 
should  be  watching  the  pot,  is  laborious,  but  not  faithful.  Service  rather  than 
labour  is  the  measure  of  usefulness  everywhere.  God's  service  is  not  merely  in  the 
church-meeting,  nor  in  the  home-closet,  but  in  every  legitimate  undertaking  of  life. 
Whatever  distracts  us  in  our  proper  business  distracts  from  our  proper  service. 
The  bookkeeper  who  makes  a  wrong  entry  because  he  is  dreaming  of  the  pleasures 
of  last  night's  prayer-meeting,  is  practically  forgetting  God,  because  he  forgets 
present  duty.  The  pay-master  who  makes  an  overpayment  because  he  is  framing 
nis  next  Sunday-school  lesson,  may  think  more  about  God  than  he  thinks  of  Him. 
Ho  is  a  religious  worker  more  than  a  godly  sever.  And  one  may  serve  the  Church 
to  the  neglect  of  the  Master.  He  may  forget  God  in  thinking  about  God.  (H.  C. 
Trumbull,  D.D.)  The  honour  God  confers  upon  those  who  serve  Christ: — We  will  sup- 
pose that  the  Prince  of  Wales  is  wrecked  on  a  certain  voyage,  and  is  cast  on  shore 
with  only  one  companion.  The  Prince  falls  into  the  hands  of  barbarians,  and  there 
is  an  opportunity  for  his  companion  to  escape ;  but  he  says,  "  No,  my  Prince,  I 
will  stay  with  you  to  the  last,  and  if  we  die,  we  will  die  together."  The  Prince  is 
thrown  into  a  dungeon  ;  his  companion  is  in  the  prison  with  him,  and  serves  him 
and  waits  upon  him.  He  is  sick — it  is  a  contagious  fever — his  companion  nurses 
him — puts  the  cooling  liquid  to  his  mouth — and  waits  on  him  with  a  mother's 
care.  He  recovers  a  little  :  the  fond  attendant  carries  the  young  Prince,  as  he  is 
getting  better,  into  the  open  air,  and  tends  him  as  a  mother  would  her  child.  They 
are  subject  to  deep  poverty — tbey  share  their  last  crust  together;  they  are  hoote'i 
at  as  they  go  through  the  streets,  and  they  are  hooted  at  together.  At  last,  by 
some  turn  in  Providence,  it  is  discovered  where  the  Prince  is,  and  he  is  brought 
home.  Who  is  the  man  that  the  Queen  will  delight  to  honour  ?  I  fancy  she  would 
look  with  greater  affection  upon  the  poor  servant  than  upon  the  greatest  statesman ; 
and  I  think  that  as  long  as  she  lived  she  would  remember  him  above  all  the  rest, 
"  I  will  honour  him  above  aU  the  mighty  ones  in  the  land."    And  now,  if  w«  shall 


346  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xn, 

be  with  Christ,  the  King's  Sou,  if  we  shall  safier  with  Him,  and  be  reproached 
with  Him,  if  we  shall  follow  Him  anywhere  and  everywhere,  making  no  choice 
about  the  way,  whether  it  shall  be  rough  or  smooth — if  we  can  go  with  Him  to 
prison  and  to  death,  then  we  shall  be  the  men  whom  heaven's  King  delighteth  to 
honour.  "  Make  room  for  Him,  ye  angels  1  Stand  back  ye  peers  of  heaven's  realm  I 
Here  comes  the  man ;  he  was  poor,  mean,  and  afflicted ;  but  he  was  with  My  Son» 
and  was  like  My  Son.  Come  hither,  man  !  There,  take  thy  crown,  and  sit  with 
My  Son  in  His  glory,  for  thou  wast  with  My  Son  in  His  shame."  (C.  H,  Spurgeon.} 

Vers.  27-29.  Now  Is  My  soul  troubled. — This  struggle  is  like  one  of  those 
fissures  in  its  crust  which  enables  science  to  fathom  the  bowels  of  the  earth.  It 
lets  us  read  the  very  inmost  depths  of  our  Lord's  being.  And  what  do  we  dis> 
cover?  Just  the  reverse  of  that  impassive  Jesus  attributed  by  criticism  to  St. 
John.  (F.  Godet,  D.D.)  Lent,  a  preparation  for  Good  Friday  :  or  the  valley  of 
the  shadow  of  death : — It  has  been  well  said  that  all  Lent  should  be  regarded  as  a 
preparation  for  Good  Friday  and  its  observance.  Just  as  when  we  visit  some  deep 
and  gloomy  gorge  amongst  the  mountains,  long  before  we  reach  the  spot  where  the 
cliffs  rise  highest  and  the  day-light  is  farthest  oS,  the  hills  begin  to  encircle  as, 
the  bright  sunshine  is  lost  and  the  black  shadows  of  the  stern  and  solemn  precipices 
encompass  our  path  I  Thus,  for  a  considerable  time  before  His  crucifixion,  our 
Lord  by  His  prophetic  foresight  entered  into  "  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death." 
And  we,  in  sympathy,  should  follow  His  footsteps.  When  the  great  pre-historio 
temple  of  Stouehenge  was  perfect,  a  number  of  huge  stone  gateways  gave  access  to 
the  central  altar,  around  which  they  were  ranged.  So  our  Blessed  Lord  may  be 
pictured  as  approaching  the  great  Sacrifice  on  the  Altar  of  the  Cross  by  passing 
through  diverse  portals.  We  may  look  on  Him  in  different  aspects  of  the  prepara- 
ation  for  the  first  Oood  Friday.  I.  For  instance,  we  see  Him  passing  through  the 
archway  of  painful  anticipation.  He  knew  what  awaited  Him — He  told  His 
disciples — "  the  Son  of  Man  "  was  about  to  be  betrayed — given  into  the  hands  ol 
strangers — "  scourged,"  "  mocked,"  •'  spitefully  entreated — insulted — crucified  I  " 
All,  Uke  a  harrowing  picture,  was  clear  before  His  eyes,  every  detail  stood  out 
distinctly,  and  each  day  the  crisis  of  His  obedience  drew  closer.  "  For  though  He 
was  a  Son,  yet  learned  He  obedience  by  those  things  which  He  suffered  "  (Heb.  v. 
8).  A  middle-aged  man  said  that  the  most  agonizing  day  he  ever  spent  was  the 
one  day  before  an  operation  was  performed  on  him ;  he  did  not  know  whether  it 
would  be  very  painfid  or  not,  and  he  was  afraid  to  ask,  and  every  time  his  thoughts 
wandered  to  pleasant  matters  they  came  back  with  a  start  to  the  grim  recollection 
that  every  moment  brought  nearer  and  nearer  the  horrible  instant  that  he  could 
not  escape  I  II.  Again,  we  may  regard  our  Lord  pressing  on  to  the  Cross  through  the 
portal  of  a  brave  and  resolute  detebmination.  "  He  set  His  face  to  go  up  to  Jeru- 
salem." When  His  disciples  objected,  "  Master,  the  Jews  of  late  sought  to  stone 
Thee,  and  goest  Thou  thither  again  ?  "  the  warning  cannot  stay  His  footsteps.  When 
"  the  power  of  darkness  "  is  at  hand.  He  says,  with  a  noble  resignation,  "  The  cup 
that  My  Father  giveth  Me  to  drink,  shall  I  not  drink  it  ?  "  III.  Another  aspect  in 
which  we  may  observe  our  Saviour  is,  that  He  was  called  on  to  take  His  pathway 
under  the  gloomy  arch  of  mobtification  and  failure.  The  disciples  who  walked  by 
His  side  He  knew  were  about  to  forsake  Hmi.  Peter,  their  chief  spokesman,  was 
going  to  deny  Him,  and  Judas  to  betray  Him,  and  the  multitude  were  soon  to 
exchange  their  welcome  of  "  Hosannah  "  into  grim  yells  of  "  Crucify  Him  1  "  But 
none  of  these  things  daunted  the  resolution  of  our  Lord.  In  one  golden  sentence 
He  summed  up  His  task.  (J.  W.  Hardman,  LL.D.)  The  Saviour's  prayer : — I. 
The  expeeiencb  out  of  which  it  abose.  "  Troubled "  means  tortured,  racked, 
torn,  as  it  were,  with  intense  and  various  emotions.  1.  This  trouble  arose  out  of 
the  foresight  of  the  Cross.  Between  Him  and  His  glory  lay  Calvary.  But  the 
anguish  was  not  on  account  of  the  physical  torture  or  personal  ignominy  He  would 
endure,  although  extreme  ;  He  had  tasted  the  bitterness  of  sin  in  the  intensity  and 
perfection  of  His  redeeming  sympathy,  and  to  pass  under  the  shadow  of  its  retribu- 
tion. 2.  This  trouble  superinduced  a  great  confiict  in  His  mind,  "  What  shall  I 
say  ?  Father,"  &c.  Some  regard  this  as  a  petition ;  others  with  more  propriety  an 
interrogation  implying  a  natural  shrinking  which  it  would  have  been  more  human 
not  to  feel.  Gladly  would  He  have  said  it  but  for  the  stability  of  His  redeeming 
purpose.  Purpose  and  feeling  thus  came  into  distressing  collision.  3.  The  confiict, 
however,  was  but  momentary.  It  gave  place  at  once  to  a  calm  and  heroic  resigna- 
tion.   II.  The  PUBPOBi  OF  the  PBAYEB.  "  Father,  glorify  Thy  name. "   How  concise, 


OTAP.  xn.]  8T.  JOHN.  847 

yet  comprehensive :  expressive  of — 1.  Kesignation.  "  Do  what  Thou  wilt  so  long 
as  Thou  be  glorified."  2.  Fortitude.  •'  The  task  before  Me  is  a  heavy  one,  but  for 
Thy  sake,  I  will  go  forward  to  it."  3.  Benevolence.  Self  is  lost  sight  of,  and  the 
Father's  purpose  and  the  redounding  glory  is  all  in  all.  4.  Faith.  "  What  Thou 
hast  promised  Thou  wilt  perform."  III.  The  answer.  1.  How  it  was  given.  By 
a  voice  from  heaven,  mistaken  as  thunder,  as  the  voice  of  an  angel,  but  truly 
interpreted  by  Christ.  2.  What  it  was.  A  declaration — (1)  That  it  had  been 
already  fulfilled — in  the  whole  of  Christ's  life.  How  this  assurance  would  animate 
Christ,  and  endear  to  Him  afresh  the  Father's  will.  (2)  That  the  end  for  which 
Jesus  prayed  would  be  still  further  attained.  Conclusion  :  Learn  to  cherish  at  all 
times  a  true  and  steady  regard  for  the  glory  of  God.  (B.  Wilkinson.)  A  foretaste 
of  Gethsemane  : — I  see  in  the  whole  event  here  described  a  short  summary  of  what 
took  place  afterwards  more  fully  at  Gethsemane.  There  is  a  remarkable  parallel- 
ism at  every  step.  Does  our  Lord  say  here — 1.  "  My  soul  is  troubled  "  ?  Just  so 
He  said  in  Gethsemane :  ••  My  soul  is  exceeding  sorrowful,  even  unto  death  " 
(Matt.  xxvi.  38).  2.  "Father,  save  Me  from  this  hour"?  Just  so  He  says  in 
Gethsemane  :  "  0  My  Father,  if  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  Me  "  (Matt, 
xxvi.  39).  3.  Does  our  Lord  say  here,  "  For  this  cause  came  I  unto  this  hour  "  ? 
Just  so  He  says  in  Gethsemane  :  "  If  this  cup  may  not  pass  away  from  Me  except 
I  drink  it,  Thy  will  be  done."  4.  Does  our  Lord  say,  finally,  "  Father,  glorify  Thy 
name  "  ?  Just  so  our  Lord  says,  lastly,  "  The  cup  which  My  Father  hast  given  Me, 
shall  I  not  drink  it"  (chap.xviii.  11).  The  brief  prayer  which  our  Lord  here  offers, 
we  should  remember,  is  the  highest,  greatest  thing  that  we  can  ask  God  to  do.  The 
utmost  reach  of  the  renewed  will  of  a  believer,  is  to  be  able  to  say  always,  "  Father 
glorify  Thy  name  in  Me.  Do  with  Me  what  Thou  wilt,  only  glorify  Thy  name." 
The  glory  of  God  after  all  is  the  end  for  which  all  things  were  created.  Paul's 
joyful  hope,  he  told  the  Philippians,  when  a  prisoner  at  Eome,  was  "  that  in  all 
things,  by  life  or  by  death,  Christ  might  be  magnified  in  his  body  "  (Phil.  i.  20). 
{Bp.  Ryle.)  Gethsemane  introspect: — This  world  is  a  world  of  grief.  The  infant 
begins  its  career  with  a  cry  of  distress  premonitory  of  all  it  must  suffer  from  the 
cradle  to  the  grave.  Some  suffer  more  than  others — martyrs,  e.g.  (Heb.  xi.  36-38). 
But  one  stands  out  pre-eminent  for  suffering  (Isa.  liii ;  Psa.  Ixix.  1,  2,  20).  It  was  in 
the  foresight  of  His  amazing  sufferings  that  Christ  felt  this  perturbation  of  spirit, 
which  arose  out  of — I.  An  ovebwhelmino  sense  of  besponsibility  undeb  the 
TRUST  He  had  assumed.  Those  most  worthy  of  responsibility  feel  its  pressure  most. 
Some  rush  into  office  without  sensibility  or  conscience,  prepared  to  take  all  responsi- 
bility merely  to  pervert  it  to  private  ends.  But  men  who  deserve  the  trusts  of  life 
shrink  even  from  their  honours — e.g.,  the  conscientious  physician,  advocate,  judge, 
parent.  What  was  Christ's  trust  ?  It  was — 1.  To  represent  the  sinner  (Gal.  v.  4, 
6 ;  2  Cor.  v.  21).  2.  To  represent  God.  His  holiness,  justice,  truth,  in  all  the 
bitter  experiences  of  His  Spirit,  and  that  not  in  His  omnipotent  Divine,  but  in  His 
frail  human  nature.  II.  The  view  op  death  as  the  penalty  op  the  law.  The 
dread  of  death  is  natural  because  it  formed  no  part  of  our  original  constitution. 
Whatever  belongs  to  our  nature  God  makes  pleasant — e.g.,  sleep  and  food.  But 
death  is  horrible  because  it  has  supervened  on  our  constitution  (Bom.  v.  12).  Bat 
Christ  had  to  die  under  the  Father's  judicial  displeasure  as  the  substitute  for  sin- 
ners whom  the  law  condemns.  He  was  made  sin  for  us  who  know  no  sin,  which 
sinlessness  added  to  the  agony.  Who  that  is  in  any  degree  sanctified  can  help  but 
feel  the  pain  of  the  sins  with  which  He  is  brought  in  contact  ?  How  then  must  it 
have  been  with  the  Perfect  Man  who  hore  all  sin,  and  all  sorrows  that  are  born  of 
sin,  even  to  the  privation  of  the  Divine  presence.  III.  The  anticipation  op  con- 
flict WITH  the  powebs  OP  DABKNES8.  It  WBS  an  old  quarrel  begun  when  Satan 
lifted  the  standard  of  rebellion  in  heaven,  continued  when  Adam  fell,  and  after. 
We  know  something  of  the  terribleness  of  striving  with  the  devil,  and  as  we 
advance  in  the  Divine  life  it  becomes  more  terrible.  What  then  must  it  have  been 
for  the  spotless  Jesus  to  feel  the  full  brunt  of  all  the  forces  that  hell  could  muster. 
Conclusion  :  1.  All  these  sufferings  are  the  evidences  of  Christ's  love  to  us.  2. 
They  show  us  the  awful  demerit  of  sin.  {B.  M.  Palmer,  D.D.)  The  internal 
tufferings  of  Christ : — "  It  became  "  Christ  to  suffer  (Heb.  ii.  10).  His  sufferings 
were  many  varied  and  severe,  and  His  external  sufferings,  though  of  no  common 
kind,  were  the  least  part  of  them,  as  may  be  judged  by  the  fact  that  they  never 
extorted  a  complaint,  whereas  His  inward  anguish  wrung  from  Him  "strong 
trying  and  tears."  I.  The  Saviour's  intebnal  suffebings.  When  the  mind  is 
free  from  uneasiness  it  is  said  to  be  calm  like  the  bosom  of  the  lake  when  no  breath 


848  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cbap.  zn. 

of  wind  ruffles  it3  glassy  surface.  When  sorrow  and  terror  takes  possession  of  it,  it 
is  said  to  be  agitated,  like  the  ocean  in  a  storm.  The  latter  was  the  case  with 
Christ  here,  and  chap  ziii.  21,  and  Matt.  xxvi.  36^6.  1.  Its  cause  (1)  not  external 
circumstances.  There  was  no  scourge  or  cross  here,  or  at  Gethsemane.  On  the 
contrary,  there  was  much  to  please.  The  people  had  just  shouted  their  Hosannahs 
to  His  Messiahship  ;  the  Greeks  had  fulfilled  the  promise  of  Isa.  xlix.  6.  (2)  Not 
remorse.  In  no  case  could  He  wish  that  He  had  thought,  or  felt,  or  acted  differ- 
ently from  what  He  had  done.  (3)  Not  fear  of  impending  bodily  sufferings  (though 
no  doubt  they  did  give  rise  to  uneasy  feelings),  for  He  knew  that  these  would  be 
momentary  and  would  be  abundantly  compensated.  (4)  There  is  but  one  way  of 
accounting  for  it.  The  invisible  arm  of  Omnipotence  smites  Him.  On  the  head  of 
the  spotless,  perfect  man,  Jehovah  made  to  meet,  as  the  victim  for  human  transgres- 
sion, the  iniquities  of  us  all,  in  all  their  odiousness  and  malignity.  The  more  He 
loved  those  in  whose  room  He  stood,  the  more  would  His  trouble  be  increased,  just 
as  we  are  affected  more  by  the  crimes  of  a  friend  than  by  those  of  a  stranger.  And 
in  addition  He  was  exposed  to  the  attack  of  malignant  spiritual  beings  whose  was 
that  hour  and  power  of  darkness.  2.  Its  purpose.  (1)  To  '*  make  Him  perfect," 
i.e.,  fully  to  accomplish  Him  as  Saviour.  It  formed  one  important  part  of  His 
expiation.  Mere  bodily  sufferings  could  not  expiate  "  spiritual  wickedness."  (2) 
To  complete  His  example.  This  had  been  incomplete  had  He  not  showed  His 
people  how  to  conduct  themselves  under  inward  troubles  which  often  form  the 
severest  part  of  their  trials.  (3)  To  render  Him  sympathetic  with  His  people  under 
those  trials  which  most  need  Hia  sympathy.  II.  Thb  exebcise  of  oub  Lobd's 
MIND  DNDEB  THESE  SDFFEBiNGS.  1.  "  What  shall  I  sav  ?  "  has  been  regarded  as  a 
further  expression  of  suffering — "  My  sorrows  are  too  great  to  be  uttered  in  words. 
Father,  save  me  from  my  impending  sufferings."  Christ's  sorrows  were  indeed 
unspeakable,  but  He  could  hardly  have  asked  to  be  saved  from  death  when  He 
rebuked  His  disciples  for  attempting  to  dissuade  Him,  and  when  He  was  straitened 
till  the  baptism  of  blood  was  accomplished.  2.  The  words  express  the  deliberating 
of  our  Lord's  mind  as  to  what  course  He  should  follow — "  to  what  quarter  shall  I 
turn  for  relief.  Men  are  not  disposed  to  pity  Me,  and  cannot  relieve  Me.  I  turn  to 
God  :  what  shall  I  say  to  Him  ?  He  can  sustain  and  dehver  Me.  Shall  I  ask  Him 
to  release  Me  from  My  covenant  engagements  ?  No  :  for  this  cause  I  came  to  this 
hour.  I  will  not  ask  it.  I  will  say.  Glorify  Thy  name ;  finish  Thy  work  in 
righteousness.  Let  the  end  be  gained :  I  quarrel  not  with  the  means."  8.  What 
a  display  of — (1)  Love  to  God  in  entire  devotedness  to  His  glory  I  (2)  Love  to  man 
in  becoming  obedient  to  death.  4.  What  a  call  for  gratitude,  love  and  devotion 
from  us  1  III.  The  Father's  appeobation  of  the  Savioub's  exercise  of  mind  undeb 
THESE  SUFFEBINGS.  "  I  havc  both  glorified  it,"  &c.  The  whole  universe  glorifies 
God's  name,  the  whole  history  of  the  past  and  future.  But  this  refers  to  the 
glorification  of  God's  name — 1.  In  Christ  Jesus.  His  faithfulness  in  fulfilling  His 
great  promise  to  His  Church ;  His  power  in  bringing  into  personal  union,  the 
Divine  and  human  natures ;  His  mercy  in  not  withholding  His  only  Son.  God's 
glory  was  seen  in  Christ's  Ufe,  teaching,  miracles.  2.  In  the  awful  events  of  that 
"hour."  3.  In  the  glorious  results  of  Christ's  death  (Psa.  xvi.  10,  11;  ex.  1; 
ii.  8 ;  Isa.  liii.  12 ;  xlix.  6 ;  xl.  5).  The  Resurrection  and  Ascension  of  Christ ; 
the  effusion  of  the  Spirit ;  the  salvation  of  an  innumerable  company.  The 
subject — 1.  Tells  the  impenitent  sinner  what  he  must  endure  if  he  refuses  to  avail 
himself  of  the  "  redemption  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  2.  Bids  the  Christian  rejoice 
that  the  cup  of  wrath  he  deserved  has  been  drunk  by  Christ.  3.  Urges  us  often  to 
show  forth  the  Lord's  death  in  His  own  ordinance.  {J.  Brown,  D.D.)  The  soul 
trouble  of  Christ : — I.  The  mystery  of  the  Saviour's  sobeow.  It  is  usual  to 
explain  that  the  human  nature  of  Jesus  shrank  from  death.  But  this  view  lowers 
Him  below  the  level  of  the  martyrs,  and  is  inconsistent  with  the  haste  with  which 
He  journeyed  to  Jerusalem  to  meet  His  death  ;  and  we  cannot  think  of  Him  as 
losing  courage.  II.  Some  light  on  the  mtsteey.  We  are  apt  to  take  too  corporeal 
a  view  of  Christ's  sacrifice.  The  bodily  pain  was  an  essential  part  of  the  suffering, 
but  only  a  part.  It  was  something  all  His  own  in  dying,  from  which  He  shrank, 
and  the  shrinking  from  which  He  had  to  conquer.  He  saw  the  sin-wrought  woes 
and  horrors  of  all  the  generations  before  and  after,  to  the  day  of  judgment,  and 
there  was  a  sense  of  their  being  upon  Him,  and  enveloping  Him.  And  so  we  may 
hear  Him  cry,  "  Spare  Me  not  the  scourging,  the  death  agony,"  &c.,  but  the  being 
made  one  with  the  world  in  its  sin.  IH.  The  meaning  of  the  prateb.  This 
experience  had  not  been  altogether  measured  beforehand,  and  now  the  agony  of 


CHAP,  xn.]  ST.  JOHN.  849 

the  incorporation  of  the  sinless  with  sin  is  before  Him,  He  prays  for  deliveranoe 
from  conscious  sin-beanng.  IV.  Thb  answeb  to  ths  pbayeb.  "  There  came  a 
voice."  Modern  onbelief  scoffs  at  voices  from  heaven.  Heverence  will  not  pass 
hasty  judgments.  One  said,  "  It  thundered ; "  another,  "  an  angel  spoke  to  Him." 
Christ  alone  hears  the  audible  words,  and  interprets  them  when  He  is  alone  with 
His  people.  "  I  have  glorified  it  and  will  glorify  it."  V.  Practicaii  IiEssons.  1. 
"  My  soul  is  troubled."  Christ  is  not  alone  in  that  experience ;  but  His  troubles  were 
not  His  own ;  ours  are  our  own.  2.  "  Save  Me  from  this  hour."  Not  that  He 
would  not  suffer  for  others ;  but  that  this  going  fearfully  into  the  very  heart  of  sin 
seemed  terrible.  We  may  pray  this  prayer ;  but  let  us  take  care  to  remember  how 
different  is  our  trouble ;  and  to  add,  "  Glorify  Thy  name,"  whatever  it  may  cost  us. 
3.  Can  we  pray,  •*  Glorify  Thy  name  ?  "  Whatever  I  suffer  for  my  own  sin  or  for 
my  brother's,  only  may  God  be  glorified  ;  only  may  God  be  seen  as  He  is  in  His 
power  to  save.  May  this  thought  take  root  and  grow  in  us  1  {Dean  Vaughan.) 
The  sorrow  aiid  resignation  of  Christ : — I.  The  houb  which  the  Savioub  met.  He 
names  it  twice  in  a  very  emphatic  manner :  and  there  is  repeated  notice  of  the  fact 
that  "  it  had  not  yet  come."  There  have  been  many  important  hours,  but  none 
like  this.  It  was  the  hour — 1.  For  which  time  was  made.  2.  To  which  all  the  dis- 
pensations referred — Adamic,  Abrahamic,  Mosaic.  3.  Which  all  the  prophets  fore- 
told (1  Pet.  i.  11).  4.  In  which  the  grandest  work  was  accomplished,  and  the 
grandest  victory  achieved.  5.  In  which  all  intelligent  creation  was  concerned.  (1) 
Angels  were  not  indifferent  spectators,  for  they  were  confirmed  in  their  bliss.  (2) 
Devils,  for  they  were  deprived  of  their  last  expiring  hope.  (3)  Man,  for  a  full  atone- 
ment for  his  sin  was  made.  II.  The  affliction  He  felt.  He  hardly  knew  how  to 
express  Himself  in  the  prospect ;  what  then  must  have  been  the  agony  itself  ?  No 
one  had  ever  such  reason  to  meet  death  with  calmness.  He  had  no  guilt,  was  assured 
of  immortality,  and  saw  the  blessed  issue.  Martyrs — mere  men — have  suffered  with 
magnanimity  and  joy.  Yet  He  was  troubled.  Wliy  t  Because  He  was  the  surety  for 
sinners  and  suffered  for  sin.  Learn,  then — 1.  The  extreme  evil  of  sin.  2.  The 
greatness  of  the  love  of  Christ.  3.  The  indispensable  necessity  of  faith  in  Hia 
atonement.  IIL  Thb  besionation  He  exemplified.  "  Father,  save  Me,"  <&o.,  is 
not  a  petition,  but  an  interrogation.  Note  that — 1.  Christ's  undertaking  for  sinners 
was  voluntary.  He  "  came  to  this  hour,"  which  teaches  His  inviolable  faithfulness, 
and  should  encourage  our  trust.  2.  He  saw  this  hour  in  every  period  of  His  exis- 
tence. It  was  not  unexpected — "  For  this  cause."  8.  The  motives  which  had 
influenced  Him  to  suffer  were  still  the  same ;  and  as  the  hour  approached  ^ney 
gathered  weight.  4.  It  was  but  an  hour.  The  conflict  was  severe  but  transient. 
Such  considerations  contributed  to  work  this  resignation.  lY.  The  pbayeb  Hb 
OFFERED.  *'  Father,  glorify  Thy  name  "  is  more  than  resignation ;  it  is  a  conseora- 
•tion  of  His  sufferings  to  God's  glory.  How  is  the  Father  glorified  thus  ?  1.  la 
His  perfections.  Already  His  wisdom,  power,  and  mercy  were  displayed  in  the 
Saviour's  mission  and  miracles :  but  now  He  was  to  display  His  holiuess  and  justice. 
2.  As  regards  His  dispensations.  (T.  Kidd.)  The  Redeemer  contemplating  nit 
hour  as  come: — I.  The  unique  significance  of  the  LANonAOs.  1.  The  nature  of 
ihe  hour — the  time  appointed  for  the  vindication  of  the  Divine  government  outraged 
i>y  man,  and  for  the  manifestation  of  Divine  love.  The  world  had  been  spared  for 
this  hour.  2.  The  mysterious  agitation  with  which  it  was  approached.  This  was 
natural.  Who  has  not  spent  anxious  days  and  sleepless  nights  over  an  unfinished 
work,  and  who  does  not  know  the  tension  as  the  hour  for  its  completion  arrives.  3. 
The  grand  consideration  which  induced  Christ  to  meet  this  hour — the  fact  that  all 
the  past  was  summed  up  in  it  to  the  glory  of  God,  and  that  the  glory  of  God  would 
stream  from  it.  II.  Its  application  to  us.  1.  There  is  an  hour  in  the  life  of  every 
man,  Christian,  Church,  for  which  every  previous  hour  is  a  designed  preparation. 
2.  Seasons  of  special  service  and  sacrifice  have  actually  occurred  in  the  history  of 
the  Church — Israel  on  the  confines  of  the  promised  land ;  the  Eeformation ;  the 
mission  of  Wesley ;  the  great  missionary  movement.  3.  Such  times  of  effort  should 
be  expected,  prayed  for,  ascertained.  4.  The  due  apprehension  of  our  hour  would 
invest  us  with  a  consecrating  sense  of  opportunity.  5.  On  our  discharge  of  impend- 
ing  responsibihties  may  be  suspended  consequences  of  unknown  magnitude.  6.  Is 
not  the  urgency  of  the  hour  now  greater  than  ever?  (J.  Harris,  D.D.)  The  hour 
of  atonement : — The  Redeemer — I.  Contemplated  an  important  period.  1.  As  in- 
volving intense  and  infinite  agony — betrayal,  desertion,  ignominy,  corporeal  torture, 
agony  in  the  endurance  of  imputed  sin.  2.  As  connected  with  and  founding  His 
exaltation  (ver.  23).    (1)  The  glory  of  His  personal  dignity  in  Hia  resurrection. 


850  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  nu 

ascension,  enthronement,  and  dominion.  (2)  The  glory  of  the  universal  efficacy  of 
His  atonement  (vers.  24,  32 ;  Isa.  liii.  10-12).  II.  Was  aitected  by  a  powebfto 
EMOTioK.  1.  He  was  perturbed  with  anxiety  arising  from  the  prospect  of  His  suffer- 
ings, which  incidentally  proves  that  His  death  was  an  atonement.  How  else  shall 
we  explain  this  intense  agitation  7  2.  He  was  resolute  in  determination.  *•  For 
this  cause  come  I  to  this  hour."  3.  He  was  fervent  in  prayer.  "  Father,  glori{7 
Thy  name."  IH.  Beceived  a  bemabkablk  testimony.  1.  Its  mode — a  voice  from 
heaven.  2.  Its  announcement — an  approval  of  the  invocation.  Conclusion :  1. 
Honour  the  hour  of  atonement  by  admitting  its  unparalleled  importance.  2.  Seek 
with  supreme  earnestness  a  personal  interest  in  the  redemption  this  period  has  pro- 
vided. 3.  Promote  the  glory  of  the  Father  and  the  Son  by  the  zealous  diffusion  of 
that  gospel  which  conveys  it.    {J.  Parsons.) 

Vers.  28-30.  Father,  glorify  Thy  name. — The  glorified  name : — 1.  One  important 
aspect  of  Christian  life  is  the  imitation  of  Christ.  But  this  is  not  necessarily  doing 
the  same  things  that  Christ  did,  but  involves  the  discovery  of  the  principles  by 
which  His  life  was  ruled,  and  the  imitation  of  ways  of  expressing  character  after  we 
have  gained  Christ's  principles.  2.  A  man's  ruling  principle  can  best  be  discovered 
in  his  prayers,  particularly  in  those  which  are  forced  on  by  sudden  calamity  or 
pressure.  Then  all  the  guards  and  formaUties  around  a  man  are  broken  down,  and 
the  man  reveals  himself  in  his  heart  cry  to  God.  The  circumstances  of  the  text 
present  such  an  occasion,  and  that  we  may  know  what  was  our  Lord's  ruling  prin- 
ciple, let  us  study  this  revealing  prayer.  I.  The  pkayeb  that  embodies  the  pbinciplb 
OF  THE  noble  Chbistly  LIFE.  Observe — 1.  The  apprehension  of  God  that  is  in  it. 
The  character  of  our  prayer  depends  on  the  name  we  are  able  to  use  for  God.  Our 
Lord  could  only  employ  the  richest  and  dearest — Father.  This  apprehension  in- 
cludes some  apprehension  of  the  mystery  of  life  and  suffering,  and  a  comforting 
recognition  of  the  Divine  purpose.  His  is  a  fatherhood  of  many  sons  whom  He  is 
training  for  glory.  2.  The  attitude  of  soul  it  indicates.  (1)  Perfect  trust  in  the 
goodness  of  all  the  Father's  arrangements  and  doings.  (2)  Simple  and  unquestion- 
ing obedience.  (3)  Intense  love  making  complete  self-sacrifice  possible.  3.  What 
is  involved  in  the  petition — living  out  to  the  end  such  a  perfect  sonship  that  men, 
throughout  the  ages,  thinking  of  the  life  of  Jesus,  should  fill  the  name  of  Father 
with  highest,  tenderest,  and  holiest  meanings.  To  live  for  self  is  ignoble ;  to  live 
for  God  in  His  character  of  Father,  the  noble  life  indeed.  II.  The  Divine  besponbb 
TO  SUCH  A  peayee.  1.  A  side  of  tender  comforting — "  I  have  glorified  it ;  that  has 
been  the  meaning  of  all  your  life's  toil  and  pain."  This  voice  may  be  heard  to 
cheer  all  true-hearted  sons  of  God.  Their  life  has  not  been  lived  in  vain.  2.  A 
sign  of  assurance  for  the  future — "  I  will,"  <fec.  Therefore  our  Lord  may  calmly  go 
on  to  new  scenes  of  toil  and  suffering.  {R.  Tuck,  B.A.)  The  glory  of  God  interpreted 
in  Christ : — The  true  glory  of  God  must  be  interpreted  in  Christ  Jesus  ;  and  when 
you  understand  what  it  is  that  God  makes  to  be  His  glory ;  when  you  understand 
that  the  glory  of  God  is  not  self-laudation,  nor  enriching  His  own  power,  nor  multi- 
plying His  own  treasures,  but  that  it  is  supremely  to  make  others  happy ;  when  yoo 
understand  that  the  glory  of  God  means  loving  other  people  and  not  oneself,  mercy 
and  not  selfishness,  the  distribution  of  His  bounty  and  not  the  hoarding  it  up ; 
when  you  understand  that  God  sits  with  all  the  infinite  stores  of  redemptive  love 
only  to  shed  them  abroad  upon  men  for  ever  and  for  ever,  then  you  form  a  different 
conception  of  what  it  is  for  God  to  reign  for  His  own  glory.  If  love  is  His  glory ; 
if  generosity  is  His  glory ;  if  giving  is  His  glory ;  if  thinking  of  the  poor  is  His 
glory ;  if  strengthening  the  weak  is  His  glory ;  if  standing  as  the  defender  of  the 
wronged  is  His  glory ;  if  loving  and  watching  over  every  being  that  He  has  created 
for  ever  and  for  ever  is  His  glory,  then,  blessed  be  that  teaching  which  represents 
that  God  does  reign  for  His  own  glory.  That  is  a  glory  which  is  worthy  of  the 
Divine  regality.  It  will  bring  out  blossoms  of  joy  and  gladness  in  heaven  and  on 
earth.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  glory  of  God  in  Christ  crucified : — Here  shine  spot- 
less justice,  incomprehensible  wisdom,  and  infinite  love,  all  at  once ;  none  of  them 
darkens  or  eclipses  the  other ;  every  one  of  them  gives  a  lustre  to  the  rest ;  they 
mingle  their  beams,  and  shine  with  united,  eternal,  splendour.  The  just  Judge, 
the  merciful  Father,  the  wise  Governor — no  other  object  gives  such  a  display  of  all 
these  perfections  ;  yea,  all  the  objects  we  know  give  not  such  a  display  as  any  one 
of  them.  Nowhere  does  justice  appear  so  terribly  awful,  mercy  so  sweetly  amiable, 
or  wisdom  so  unfathomably  profound.  The  glories  that  are  found  separately  in  the 
other  works  of  God,  are  found  united  here.    The  joys  of  heaven  glorify  God's  good- 


CHAP,  ra.]  ST.  JOHN.  861 

ness ;  the  pains  of  hell  glorify  His  justice ;  the  cross  of  Christ  glorifies  both  of 
them  in  a  more  remarkable  way  than  heaven  or  hell  glorifies  any  of  them.  The 
jastice  of  God  is  more  awfully  displayed  in  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  as  the  substi- 
tute of  sinners,  than  in  the  torments  of  devils ;  and  His  mercy  is  far  more  brightly 
manifested  in  these  sufferings,  than  in  the  joys  of  angels.  {J.  McLaurin.)  The 
glory  of  God  the  object  of  grace : — Whenever  God  has  blessed  the  Church,  He  has 
secured  Himself  the  glory  of  the  blessing,  though  we  have  had  the  profit  of  it. 
Sometimes  He  has  been  pleased  to  redeem  His  people  by  might ;  but  then  He  had 
BO  used  the  power  that  all  the  glory  hath  come  to  Him,  and  His  head  alone  hath 
worn  the  crown.  Did  He  smite  Egypt,  and  lead  forth  His  people  with  a  strong 
hand  and  an  outstretched  arm  ?  the  glorj'  was  not  to  the  rod  of  Moses,  but  to  the  Al- 
mighty power  which  made  the  rod  so  potent.  Did  He  lead  His  people  through  the 
wilderness  and  defend  them  from  their  enemies  ?  Still,  did  He,  by  teaching  the 
people  their  dependence  upon  Him,  preserve  to  Himself  all  the  glory.  So  that  not 
Moses  or  Aaron  amongst  the  priests  or  prophets  could  share  the  honour  with  Him. 
And  tell  me,  if  ye  wUl,  of  slaughtered  Anak,  and  the  destruction  of  the  tribes  of 
Canaan ;  tell  me  of  Israel's  possessing  the  promised  land ;  tell  me  of  Philistines 
routed,  and  laid  heaps  on  heaps  ;  of  Midiauites  made  to  fall  on  each  other ;  tell  me 
of  kings  and  princes  who  fied  apace  and  fell,  until  the  ground  was  white,  like  the 
snow  in  Salmon.  I  will  say  of  every  one  of  these  triumphs,  "  Sing  ye  to  the  Lord, 
for  He  hath  triumphed  gloriously ; "  and  I  vrill  say  at  the  end  of  every  victory, 
"  Grown  Him,  crown  Him,  for  He  hath  done  it ;  and  let  His  name  be  exalted  and 
extolled,  world  vrithout  end."  (C7.  U.  Spurgeon.)  Human  glory,  what  it  comes 
to : — A  moment  before  he  uttered  his  last  sigh  he  called  the  Jierald  who  had  carried 
his  banner  before  him  in  all  his  battles,  and  commanded  him  to  fasten  to  the  top 
of  a  lance  the  shroud  in  which  the  dying  prince  was  soon  to  be  buried.  "  Go," 
said  he,  "  carry  the  lance,  unfurl  this  banner ;  and  while  you  lift  up  this 
standard,  proclaim,  '  This,  this  is  all  that  remains  to  Saladin  the  Great  (the 
conqueror  and  the  king  of  the  empire)  of  all  his  glory.'"  Christians,  I  perform 
to-day  the  office  of  this  herald.  I  fasten  to  the  staff  of  a  spear  sensual  and 
intellectual  pleasures,  worldly  riches,  and  human  honours.  All  these  1  reduce 
to  the  piece  of  crape  in  which  you  w.ll  shortly  be  buried.  This  standard  of 
death  I  hft  up  in  your  sight,  and  I  cry,  "  This,  this  is  all  that  will  remain  to  yoa 
of  the  possessions  for  which  you  exchanged  your  souls."  {J.  Saurin.) 
Voices  from  the  excellent  glory  (Text  and  Matt.  iii.  16,  17 ;  xvii,  5) : — L  The  thbeb 
TESTIMONIES.  1.  When  the  voices  were  heard — (1)  In  relation  to  Christ's  perso^ial 
ministry,  (a)  The  first  at  the  commencement  of  His  public  ministry.  (6)  The 
second  some  little  time  after  its  central  point,  (c)  The  last  just  before  its  close. 
How  cheering  at  the  beginning  of  a  great  enterprise  to  have  God's  testimony 
that  He  has  sent  you;  how  encouraging  when  the  labour  is  heavy  and  the 
spirit  faint  to  receive  another  affirming  word ;  but  best  of  all  to  have  it  when  we 
are  about  to  depart.  (2)  In  relation  to  His  life  and  enterprise,  (a)  The  first  celes- 
tial witness  was  given  after  He  had  hved  for  thirty  years  in  obscurity.  It  was 
meet  when  He  first  appeared  that  there  should  be  some  token  that  He  was  what 
He  professed  to  be.  It  came  also  before  the  temptation,  for  which  there  could  not 
be  a  better  forearming.  So  with  us:  before  temptation,  spiritual  sustenance.  (6) 
The  second  was  when  our  Lord  (according  to  Luke)  was  about  to  send  out  other 
seventy  disciples.  Before  extending  His  agencies  of  mercy  He  received  a  token 
for  good.  When  the  Lord  calls  us  to  wider  service,  let  us  go  up  into  the  mountain 
to  pray,  and  there  too  we  may  expect  to  enjoy  the  comforting  and  strengthening 
witness  of  the  Spirit,  (c)  The  third  came  just  before  His  sufferings  and  death.  It 
was  meet  that  the  Sufferer  who  must  tread  the  winepress  alone  should  receive  a 
word  meeting  the  point  about  which  His  soul  was  most  concerned,  viz.,  God's 
glory.  (3)  In  relation  to  His  habits,  (a)  The  first  came  when  He  was  in  the  atti- 
tude of  obedience — "fulfilling  all  righteousness."  When  you  are  in  the  path  of 
fihal  obedience  you  may  expect  the  Spirit  to  bear  vdtness  with  yours  that  you  are 
bom  of  God.  (b)  The  second  came  when  He  was  in  devout  retirement.  He  had 
gone  up  into  the  mountain  alone,  and  when  you  are  there  you  may  expect  to 
receive  Divine  testimonies,  (c)  The  third  came  when  about  His  work,  preaching  in 
the  Temple.  If  you  are  called  to  any  form  of  service,  under  no  pretext  neglect  it, 
or  you  may  lose  the  inward  witness.  2.  To  whom  the  attestations  were  given.  (1) 
To  an  increasing  number  of  persons.  The  first  to  John  alone ;  the  second  to  five ; 
the  last  to  many.  God's  testimony  to  Christ  is  an  ever  growing  one.  (2)  It  was 
^ven  in  this  wise,     (a)  The  first  to  the  greatest  of  men,  yet  the  voice  revealed  a 


B5S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [asa.  xn. 

greater  than  he.  (b)  The  second  to  the  best  of  men,  but  the  voioa  bear  witness  to 
a  better,  (c)  The  third  in  the  holiest  place,  and  there  it  testified  to  a  holier.  Jesus 
is  everywhere  magnified  beyond  all  others.  3.  To  what  God  bore  testimony.  (1 ) 
The  first  was  to  Christ's  miraculous  origin :  ••  This  is  My  beloved  Son."  (2)  Th« 
second  sealed  His  appointment  as  the  Great  Prophet—"  Hear  Him."  (3)  The  third 
bore  witness  to  the  success  of  His  work — "  I  have  glorified  it,"  &o.  Some  have 
thought  that  the  three  voices  attested  our  Lord  in  His  threefold  office,  (a)  John 
came  proclaiming  the  kingdom,  and  Jesus  was  in  His  baptism  proclaimed  the  chief 
of  the  new  kingdom,  (b)  On  the  second  occasion,  "Hear  Him,"  ordained  Him  the 
Prophet  of  the  people,  (c)  In  the  third  He  was  owned  as  Priest.  Is  this  threefold 
witness  received  in  your  hearts  the  testimony  of  God,  who  cannot  lie.  Behold 
Christ  well  pleasing  to  the  Father ;  let  Him  be  well  pleasing  to  you.  Hear  Him 
proclaimed  as  God's  beloved ;  let  Him  be  the  beloved  of  your  hearts.  Hear  tba 
testimony  that  He  has  glorified  God,  and  remember  that  His  further  glorifying 
God  depends  in  some  measure  on  you.  4.  How  were  these  testimonies  given?  (1) 
On  the  first  occasion  the  heavens  were  opened  and  the  Spirit  descended.  What  if 
this  proclaims  to  us  that  by  His  obedience  our  Lord  procured  the  opening  of  heaven 
for  OS  that  our  prayers  might  go  ap  and  our  blessings  come  down !  (2)  Hea\en 
was  not  beheld  as  opened  the  second  time — the  overshadowing  cloud  represented 
the  Mediatorship  of  Christ  veiling  the  excessive  brightness  of  the  Godhead.  (8) 
In  the  third  our  mind  rests  neither  upon  the  opening  of  heaven  nor  on  the  cloud,  but 
on  the  voice.  The  opening  of  heaven  and  the  interposition  of  a  Mediator  are  but 
means  to  the  great  end  of  glorifying  God.  Let  this  one  great  object  absorb  all  our 
Bonis.  5.  WhAt  was  it  that  was  spoken  f  (1)  The  first  time  tibie  heavenly  voice 
preached  the  gospel,  "  This  is  My  beloved  Son,"  &o.  The  gospel  is  tidings  con- 
cerning a  blessed  person,  and  His  acceptableness  as  the  chosen  of  God,  and  of  the 
Divine  pleasure  with  those  who  are  "  in  "  Him.  (2)  The  second  time  the  voice 
uttered  the  great  command,  "  Hear  Him."  Salvation  does  not  come  by  seeing,  as 
Romanists  have  it.  Faith  cometh  by  hearing,  and  not  the  doctrines  of  men,  even 
each  as  Moses  and  Elias,  but  Him.  (3)  On  the  third  occasion  testimony  was  given 
to  the  gospel's  result.  It  is  through  the  gospel  that  God  is  glorified.  II.  Instbuctivb 
cntccMSTANCES  coMNEOiED  wiTB  THESE  TESTIMONIES.  1.  On  each  occasion  Jesus  was 
in  prayer.  Learn  that  if  any  would  have  God  speak  comfortably  to  him,  he  must 
speak  to  God  in  prayer.  2.  Each  time  His  sufferings  were  prominently  before  Him. 
John,  at  the  waters  of  Jordan,  said,  "  Behold  the  Lamb,"  &o.  On  Tabor  Moses  and 
Elias  spoke  of  His  decease.  In  the  Temple  His  soul  was  troubled  at  the  prospect 
of  His  death.  Learn,  then,  if  you  desire  to  see  the  glory  of  Christ,  as  attested  of 
the  Father,  yon  must  dwell  much  on  His  death.  3.  Each  time  He  was  honouring 
the  Father.  In  His  baptism  by  obedience,  on  the  mountain  by  devotion,  in  the 
Temple  His  very  words  were,  •'  Glorify  Thy  name."  If  you  would  see  God's  glory 
and  hear  His  voice  you  must  honour  Him.  Conclusion :  Eeceive  these  testimonies. 
1.  With  assured  conviction.  2.  With  profound  reverence.  3.  With  unconditional 
obedience.  4.  With  joyful  confidence.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  best  prayer  ever 
offered : — I.  Its  object.  1.  It  is  unselfish.  Personal  apprehension  is  swallowed 
op  in  the  craving  for  Divine  glory.  Compare  this  with  Matt.  vi.  9.  Prayer  ia 
often  too  selfish.  2.  It  seeks  the  reveahng  of  God's  glory.  God  is  changeless  and 
cannot  grow  more  glorious  in  Himself.  But  His  name  is  glorified  when  the  beauty 
of  His  character  is  revealed.  The  mountains  are  not  changed  when  the  mists  lift ; 
but  they  are  glorified  in  being  unveiled.  3.  The  particular  form  is  the  glory  of  the 
Fatherhood  of  God.  His  creative  glory  of  wisdom  and  might  had  been  revealed  in 
nature ;  His  regal  glory  of  justice  and  government  in  providence ;  His  highest  glory 
of  goodness  awaited  its  full  manifestation  when  His  Fatherhood  would  be  seen  in 
personal  self-sacrificing  love  to  His  children.  II.  Its  motives.  1.  The  name  of 
God  as  our  Father  deserves  to  be  glorified.  2.  Christ  found  His  own  greatest  en. 
couragement  in  the  vision  of  the  glory  of  God.  So  did  Moses  (Exod.  xxxiii.  18, 19). 
We  are  most  strengthened  when  we  forget  self  in  God.  3.  Christ's  work  is  accom> 
plished  when  the  name  of  God  as  our  Father  is  glorified.  This  name  had  been 
dishonoured  till  Christ  raised  it  to  honour  among  His  disciples.  The  Christian  ia 
glorified  only  as  he  reflects  the  glory  of  God,  and  this  can  only  be  as  God  is  first 
revealed  to  him  (2  Cor.  iii.  18).  IH.  Its  answer.  1.  God's  Fatherhood  had  been 
revealed — (1)  In  creation,  providence,  and  Old  Testament  revelation,  but  dimly 
and  partially.  (2)  In  the  incarnation,  life,  character,  words,  and  works  of  Christ, 
but  still  not  perfectly.  2.  It  was  destined  to  be  revealed  more  fully.  (1)  In  the 
fassion  of  Christ,  by  the  love  of  God  shown  in  sustaining  His  Son,  by  His  holinea* 


cmr.  xn.]  ST.  JOHN.  iCB 

and  goodness  in  the  suffering  Saviour,  and  by  the  great  act  of  redemption  then 
accomplished.  (2)  In  the  resurrection,  and  the  proof  this  gave  of  God's  redeeming 
goodness.  (3)  In  the  fruits  of  the  redemption  seen  in  the  history  of  the  Church. 
(4)  Through  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  helping  the  Church  to  read  aright 
the  mystery  of  the  Cross,  which,  after  Pentecost,  became  the  central  theme  of  the 
Church's  praises.  (W.  F.  Adeney,  M.A.)  The  changed  prayer : — A  man  once 
complained  to  his  minister  that  he  had  prayed  for  a  whole  year  that  he  might 
enjoy  the  comforts  of  religion,  but  found  no  answer  to  his  prayers.  The 
minister  replied,  "  Go  home  now,  and  pray,  '  Father,  glorify  Thy  name.'  "  The 
truest  and  deepest  view  of  life : — I.  A  man  taking  the  truest  and  deepest  view  of 
tiFE.  A  sentence  is  often  a  revelation.  This  is  unique,  suggestive.  If  we  were 
to  put  our  deepest  desires  into  words  would  they  be  this?  The  worldly  man's  life 
is  limited  to  the  self  sphere ;  the  very  point  of  this  is  that  Christ  had  no  self  sphere. 
The  former  is  the  shallow,  the  latter  the  ennobling  view.  Observe  our  Lord's — 1. 
Cherished  life  thought.  This  inspiring  thonght  for  Christ  and  us  starts  the  ques- 
tion, Will  not  a  cherished  sense  of  our  independence  do  more  for  us  than  the  sense 
of  dependence,  and  so  of  responsibility?  Let  Christ's  life  be  the  answer.  The 
independent  view — I  am  my  own — maybe  fascinating;  but  it  is  untrue  and  de- 
teriorating, and  sooner  or  later  is  found  to  be  such.  What  is  the  condition  of  the 
parasite  when  the  tree  on  which  it  feeds  is  dead  ?  or  that  of  the  ivy  cut  below  and 
made  independent  of  its  secret  roofings?  What  good  is  an  independent  vine 
branch?  2.  Ruling  life-force — obedience  inspired  by  affection  for  His  Father. 
Here  we  see  how  all  the  seeming  hardness  of  dependence  is  lost  in  the  atmosphere 
of  love.  The  wife  never  finds  it  hard  to  obey  when  she  loves.  Mere  obedience  is, 
for  man,  very  hard;  but  obedience  out  of  love  is  the  highest  joy;  and  this  deep  joy 
■we  find  in  Christ.  3.  Prevailing  Ufe-attitude — the  activitv  of  submission ;  for  true 
submission  is  not  mere  bearing,  but  bearing  in  doing.  This  is  fully  illustrated  in 
the  life  of  Christ.  II.  God's  response  to  the  man  who  takes  this  view  of  life. 
1.  That  the  deepest  wish  of  His  heart  has  been  already  realized  and  He  may  read 
His  past  in  the  light  of  it.  All  depends  on  the  light  in  which  we  read  our  past. 
Bead  Christ's  in  the  light  thrown  by  this  response  and  see  how  it  had  been  a 
glorifying  of  the  Father-name  of  God  in — (1)  His  own  Sonship.  (2)  His  teachings 
about  the  Father.  (3)  His  brotherhood  with  men.  2,  That  the  deepest  wish  of 
his  heart  shall  yet  be  realized,  and  he  may  go  calmly  on  into  darkness  with  the 
assurance  that  even  his  Cross  shall  glorify  the  Father.  Death  shall  do  even  more 
than  life.  The  "  forsaking  "  was  a  final  triumph  of  obeiUenco.  The  will  of  God 
was  so  beautiful  that  He  could  even  suffer  and  die  for  it.  Conclusion :  We  say, 
"God  is  our  Father."  Do  we  say,  "Father,  glorify  Thy  name."  Is  this  cur  in- 
spiring life  secret?  In  life-labour,  relationships,  sufferings,  bereavements,  death, 
do  I  honour  myself  or  my  Father?  (R.  Tuck,  B.A.)  The  people  .  .  .  said  that 
It  thundered. — The  whole  multitude  heard  a  noise ;  but  the  meaning  of  the  voice 
was  only  perceived  by  each  in  proportion  to  his  spiritual  intelligence.  Thus  the 
wild  beast  perceives  only  a  sound  in  the  human  voice ;  the  trained  animal  discovers 
a  meaning,  a  command,  e.g.,  which  it  immediately  obeys ;  man  alone  discerns  a 
thought.  {F.  Godet,  D.D.)  The  voice  from  heaven: — I.  Thb  voice.  1.  Grossly 
misunderstood  by  the  bystanders — (1)  As  a  natural  phenomenon,  as  thunder.  (2) 
As  a  supernatural  utterance,  the  speech  of  an  angel — a  significant  proof  of  man's 
incapacity  to  understand  the  words  of  God  (1  Cor.  ii.  14).  2.  Lovingly  by  Jesus; 
as  an  old  and  familiar  voice,  the  voice  of  His  Father,  which  twice  previously  had 
addressed  Him  out  of  heaven.  It  needs  a  child's  heart  to  recognize  a  father's 
voice.  8.  Eightly  interpreted  again  by  Jesus — perhaps  also  by  John  and  his  co- 
apostles — to  whom  it  spoke  in  the  language  of — (1)  Approbation,  "I  have  glorified 
it."  (2)  Consolation,  "Will  glorify  it  again."  II.  The  pup.pose  of  the  voiob.  1. 
Not  for  His  sake ;  since  He  knew  His  Father  always  heard  Him  (chap.  xi.  42).  2. 
But  for  theirs — to  assure  them  that  He  was  the  Father's  Son,  the  heaven-sent 
Messiah.  Learn — 1.  The  superiority  of  faith  to  unbelief  in  the  nnderstanding  of 
Divine  revelations.  2.  The  condescension  of  Christ  in  considering  man's  weakness 
and  infirmity.     (T.  Whitelaw,  D.D.) 

Vers.  81-33.  Now  Is  the  Judgment  of  this  •world.— r7;«  world's  hour  of  deepest 

revolution : — It  was  the  signal — I.  Of  its  jddgment.  To  judge  is  to  verify  the 
moral  condition.  The  judgment  of  the  world  is  based  upon  the  Cross,  inasmuch 
as  this  discloses  the  moral  condition  of  man  in  his  natural  state.  Man,  by  raising 
this  throne  for  Jesus,  judged  himself,  and  manifested  the  enmity  to  God  which  is 
VOL.  n.  23 


854  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xa 

in  his  heart.  Having  erected  it,  he  judges  himself  still  more  decidedly  "by  hia 
relation  thereto  ;  for  either  by  faith  he  finds  therein  his  salvation,  or  by  unbelief 
his  condemnation.  Of  this  choice  the  final  judgment  will  be  only  the  ratification. 
Thus  the  judgment  of  the  world  dates  from  Good  Friday.  Its  first  external  mani> 
testation  was  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  ;  its  second  will  be  the  judgment  of  the 
Church ;  its  third  the  last  judgment  predicted  (Matt.  xxiv. ;  xxv.)  on  the  very 
day  on  which  these  words  were  uttered.  II.  Of  the  expulsion  of  its  ancient 
Masteb.  The  Cross  filled  up  the  measure  of  tolerance  granted  to  the  perversity  of 
the  Prince  of  this  world.  The  Crucifixion  was  the  most  odious  and  unpardonable 
transgression  of  Satan ;  this  crime  put  an  end  to  the  long-suffering  of  God  con- 
cerning him,  and,  consequently,  to  his  dominion  over  mankind.  The  Babbia 
habitually  designate  Satan  "  the  prince  of  this  world,"  but  place  the  Jews  outside 
his  kingdom,  while  Jesus  includes  them  as  well  as  the  heathen  therein  (chap,  viii.) 
"  Out "  signifies  not  only  out  of  his  ofi&ce  and  power,  but  chiefly  out  of  the  world — 
his  ancient  realm — as  is  shown  by  the  connection  of  these  words  with  the  preceding, 
and  the  opposition  between  vers.  31  and  32.  III.  The  accession  of  its  new 
SovBKEiGN.  The  overthrow  coincides  with  the  accession.  Jesus  declares  Himself 
appointed  to  fill  this  part.  But,  strange  to  say,  it  is  not  upon  this  earth,  whence 
Satan  is  cast  out,  that  He  will  establish  His  kingdom.  He  will  not  become,  as  the 
Jews  expected,  the  successor  of  His  adversary,  and,  consequently,  another  prince 
of  this  world ;  He,  as  well  as  His  rival,  vrill  leave  the  earth ;  He  will  be  raised 
from  it  and  above  it,  and  in  a  higher  sphere  He  will  draw  to  Himself  His  subjects 
and  realize  His  kingdom.  "  Lifted  up  "  must  be  understood  here  in  the  same 
amphibiological  sense  as  at  chaps,  iii.  14  and  viii.  28.  His  lifting  up  on  the  cross,  that 
throne  of  love,  appears  to  Him  as  the  gloriously  ironical  emblem  of  His  elevation 
to  the  throne  of  glory.  And  this  comparison  is  based  on  a  deep  truth.  For  was 
it  not  the  Cross  which  created  the  abyss  between  Christ  and  the  world  (Gal.  vi.  14), 
and  rendered  the  purely  heavenly  form  of  the  kingdom  of  God  for  the  present 
necessary  ?  ••  From  "  or  "  out  of  the  earth  "  designates  an  ignominious  expulsion 
from  earthly  existence  by  any  capital  punishment,  and  cannot  refer  to  the  small 
distance  between  the  ground  and  the  feet  of  the  crucified.  It  is  *•  lifted  up,"  which 
refers  to  the  Cross.  The  Cross  and  the  Ascension  united  freed  Jesus  from  all 
earthly  ties  and  national  obligations,  and  placed  Him  in  a  position  to  extend  His 
agency  to  the  whole  world  (Bom.  x.  12).  Once  raised  to  heaven,  Jesus  will  draw 
around  Him  a  new  people,  strangers  to  earth,  and,  like  Himself,  of  a  heavenly 
nature.  He  vdll  be  both  the  Author  and  End  of  this  Divine  attraction.  (F. 
Godet,  D.D.)  The  Cross  ; — In  the  Cross  Christ  saw  a  provision  for  three  great 

objects.  By  it — I.  The  world  should  be  judged.  God  judged  our  sins  in  the 
person  of  Jcbus,  visited  our  guilt  upon  Him  condemned  in  our  place.  That  is  the 
true  measure,  as  it  is  the  most  awful  punishment  of  our  guilt.  If  men  sin  on  they 
may  see,  as  clearly  as  if  it  were  come  already,  their  eternal  doom.  How  can  a 
sinner  be  so  deluded  as  to  think  he  will  escape  when  he  sees  the  Son  of  God  hang- 
ing there.  Let  him  look  and  realize  who  He  was,  and  then  feel,  "I  am  condemned." 
Thus  Christ  knew  that  the  Cross  would  convince  men  of  sin.  What  the  law  could 
not  do,  what  no  mercies  or  judgments  of  God  could  do,  this  would  effect,  and  His 
heart  exulted  in  the  thought  that  men  at  last  would  see  that  there  was  no  hope 
for  them  save  in  turning  to  God  through  Him.  II.  The  prince  of  this  world 
BEJECTED.  That  being  whose  empire  none  else  could  shake,  whose  dominion  over 
men's  minds  and  habits  none  else  could  destroy,  Jesus  saw  dethroned.  God  had 
predicted  this.  "  The  seed  of  the  woman,"  &c.  To  accomplish  this  was  the  end 
of  His  coming.  •'  For  this  purpose  is  the  Son  of  God  manifested,"  &c.  This  end 
is  gained  when  Satan  is  banished  from  the  human  heart.  The  Cross  avails  for 
this — 1.  By  having  procured  the  gift  of  the  Spirit  who  turns  men  "  from  the 
power  of  Satan  unto  God."  2.  By  furnishing  the  most  powerful  motives  to  turn 
from  sin,  inasmuch  as  it  reveals  the  guilt  and  danger  of  sin,  and  endears  behevera 
to  the  Saviour  who  died  to  reconcile  them  to  God,  and  therefore  weans  them  from 
sin.  3.  By  securing  powerful  help  in  such  a  view  of  the  love  of  God  as  inspires 
faith  and  hope.  III.  Human  souls  drawn  to  Christ.  1.  The  means — wondrous, 
the  last,  apparently,  calculated  to  serve  this  purpose.  2.  The  method — •'  draw," 
not  compel,  by  the  attraction  of  love.  3.  The  object — *•  all  men."  Gentiles  as 
well  as  Jews.  4.  The  result— "to  Me."  (B.  W.  Noel,  M.A.)  The  d^ath  of 
Christ  and  its  results  : — I.  The  death  of  Christ.  1.  The  fact  of  His  death  pre- 
dicted. It  was  a  wonderful  thing  that  He  should  die,  for  death  is  the  penalty  of 
Bin,  and  He  was  sinless,  and  can  only  take  effect  on  humanity,  whereas  He  was 


OBAi.  xn.J  ST.  JOHN.  356 

Divine.  2.  The  manner  of  His  death  described — crucifixion.  The  mystery 
thickens.  If  He  must  die,  surely  it  should  be  naturally  and  peacefully,  or  if  not, 
gloriously,  as  a  hero,  and  amidst  the  blessings  of  His  race.  No,  He  must  die  as 
«  felon,  a  death — (1)  profoundly  humiliatmg ;  (2)  excruciatingly  painful.  3.  The 
oatare  of  His  death  unfolded.  Its  manner  partly  indicates  its  nature.  (1)  It  was 
penaL  He  suffered  under  Koman  and  Divine  law,  but  how  differently.  (2)  It  was 
vicarious,  since  He  was  innocent.  (3)  It  was  expiatory  (Isa.  liii.  5,  6).  II.  Its 
EE8ULTS.  1.  The  judgment  of  the  world.  (1)  What  this  means.  In  the  Scriptures 
■to  judge  means  to  govern.  Hence  the  "  Judges."  As  King  and  Ruler  the  Messiah 
is  frequently  predicted  as  Judge.  This  interpretation  agrees  with  the  context. 
The  Son  of  Man  is  glorified  by  being  made  King  of  the  world;  how,  therefore,  ia 
the  world  to  be  judged  by  being  ruled  by  Him?  A  new  order  of  Divine  adminis- 
tration has  been  commenced,  having  for  its  object  the  subjection  of  the  world 
to  God.  (2)  How  is  this  judgment  the  result  of  Christ's  death  ?  (a)  It  was  the 
promised  and  richly-merited  reward  of  His  death  (Isa  liii.  10-12  ;  Phil.  ii.  5-11). 
\b)  It  ia  the  necessary  means  of  His  carrying  into  accomplishment  the  great 
design  of  His  death,  the  salvation  of  His  chosen  people  (John  xvii.  2).  2.  The 
expulsion  of  the  prince  of  this  world  (John  xiv.  30 ;  xvi.  8-11 ;  Eph.  ii.  2).  (1) 
Who  is  he?  (a)  A  real  personal  existence,  (b)  A  potentate,  (c)  Exercising 
dominion  over  this  world,  (d)  But  not  independently  and  uncontrolled,  but  largely 
as  the  executioner  of  Divine  justice,  and  limited  in  power  by  the  duration  of  "  this 
world."  (2)  What  is  his  expulsion  ?  His  being  cast  out — (a)  From  the  human 
heart.  (6)  From  the  religious  and  civil  institutions  he  had  controlled.  (3)  How 
18  he  cast  out  ?  (a)  Christ  bore  the  penalty  of  that  for  which  he  held  men  in 
bondage,  and  men  paid  their  debt  and  suffered  their  punishment  in  Christ  their 
substitute,  (b)  By  tbe  power  of  the  Spirit,  by  which  men  can  resist  the  devil  and 
make  him  flee.  3.  This  drawing  of  all  men  to  Christ.  (1)  What  this  drawing  is. 
{a)  All  men,  without  exception,  become  the  subjects  of  His  mediatorial  government. 
(6)  All  men,  without  distinction,  become  the  objects  of  the  invitations  of  His 
gospel,  (c)  All  whom  the  Father  has  given  Him,  an  innumerable  company  out  of 
every  kindred,  &c.,  are  put  in  possession  of  the  blessings  of  His  salvation.  (2) 
How  it  is  connected  with  His  lifting  up.  Had  not  atonement  been  made  there 
<iould  have  been  no  salvation  to  offer,  or  give  or  receive.  Christ's  death  removed 
sll  obstacles  to  this,  and  secured  the  effectual  agency  of  the  Spirit.  (J.  Brown, 
D.D.)  I,  If  I  be  lifted  up,  will  draw  all  men  unto  Me. — The  uplifted  Saviour  : — 
Nothing  is  more  wonderful  about  Christ  than  His  unfaltering  confidence  in  the 
boundlessness  and  perpetuity  of  His  power,  especially  when  we  consider  the  circum- 
stances in  which  it  was  expressed  and  the  grounds  on  which  it  was  based.  The 
assertion  before  us  is  that  of  a  fanatic  or  of  a  God.  I.  The  extent  op  thb 
Saviodr's  drawing.  "  All  men."  1.  The  meaning  of  universal  terms  in  Scripture 
must  be  determined — (1)  By  its  great  acknowledged  principles.  One  of  these  is 
the  freedom  of  the  will.  So  the  text  signifies  merely  that  there  is  suflQcient  power 
in  Christ  to  draw  all  men  ;  but  the  melancholy  fact  is  that  many  "  will  not  come 
unto  Him  that  they  may  have  life."  (2)  By  the  context.  Spoken  as  it  was  in 
connection  with  the  visit  of  the  Greeks,  the  text  means  that  the  benefits  of  Christ's 
redemption  were  not  restricted  to  the  Jews,  but  were  thrown  open  to  the  world.  2. 
While,  however,  some  shall  reach  destruction  because  they  will  choose  the  broad 
way,  there  is  a  vastly  preponderating  aggregate  who  shall  be  brought  to  Christ. 
The  drawing  commenced  with  the  dying  thief.  Seven  weeks  afterwards  three 
thousand  were  drawn.  Then  the  whole  of  the  Acts  furnishes  illustrations.  Then 
eighteen  centuries  of  Church  history,  particularly  great  movements  like  Methodism 
and  missions.    Finally,  the  Apocalyptic  visions   shall  be  realized.     II.  What  is 

THERE    IN    THE    tJPLIFTED    SaVIOUR   80   CAIiCTJLATED    TO   ATTRACT.       In  Him  Is  discloSCd 

— 1.  The  ground  of  full  and  free  pardon  for  the  very  chief  of  sinners.  This  gives 
hope  to  the  most  despairing,  who  can  get  rest  nowhere  else.  2.  Ample  provision 
f'^r  tbe  purification  of  sinful  hearts.  3.  All  those  qualities  calculated  to  draw  the 
sympathies  and  aspirations  of  the  renewed  heart.  (1)  The  love  of  truth  is  satisfied 
in  Him,  who  is  the  Truth.  (2)  The  yearning  for  fellowship  is  satisfied  in  His 
Brotherhood.  (3)  The  sense  of  right  binds  us  to  Him  as  our  Eedeemer  Sovereign. 
(4)  The  desire  for  spiritual  beauty  is  gratified  in  Him,  who  is  the  altogether  lovely. 
{5)  Impulses  to  serve  our  brethren  are  sanctified  and  empowered  by  the  constraint 
of  His  self-sacrificing  love.  III.  The  agency  emploied.  1.  The  power  of 
Providence  or  government  of  the  world  is  committed  to  the  Eedeemer  for  the  in- 
^atnering  and  completion  oi  the  Church.    2.  The  Holy  Spirit  draws  hearts  to  the 


356  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap. 


Saviour.  He  is  Christ's  Witness  and  Glorifier.  "  No  man  can  say  that  Jesna  i» 
the  Christ  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  For  this  purpose  He  abides  with  the  Church 
for  ever.  Hence — 3.  The  Church  is  Christ's  visible  agency  for  this  great  work, 
which  is  discharged — (1)  By  private  testimony.  (2)  Public  proclamation.  (J. 
Graham.)  Christ  lifted  up: — Christ  crucified. — I.  Chkist's  glort.  Because— 1.  The 
manifestation  of  glorious  love.  2.  The  demonstration  of  glorious  fortitude.  S. 
The  completion  of  glorious  work.  4.  The  achievement  of  glorious  triumph.  IL 
The  ministeb's  theme.  Christ  lifted  up,  and  not — 1.  Hell  and  damnation.  2. 
Mere  doctrine.  3.  Inoperative  morality.  4.  Sacred  or  secular  learning.  HI.  Tna 
heakt's  attbaction.  Christ  draws — 1.  Like  a  trumpet  attracting  men  to  hear  the 
proclamation.  2.  Like  a  net  drawing  men  out  of  the  sea  of  sin.  3.  With  the 
bands  of  love.  4.  As  a  standard  in  the  centre  of  gathering.  5.  As  a  chariot  ia 
which  souls  are  drawn  to  heaven.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)        Why  Christ  was  lifted 

up : Expression  of  text  used  three  times  to  teach  that  the  Son  of  Man  must  be 

lifted  up  in  order — I.  To  give  a  demonstbation  of  His  Divinb  manhood  (chap, 
vii.  28).  1.  Christ  proved  Himself  to  be  true  man  by  dying  as  every  man  dies.  2. 
He  proved  Himself  to  be  Divine  by  dying  as  no  other  man  ever  died.  (1)  His  death 
unique  in  its  supernatural  accompaniment.     (2)  In   its  voluntariness.     II.  To 

BEING    TO    BEAB   THE    MOST   POWEEFTJL   DiVINE   ATTBACTION   UPON   MAN     (chap.    xii.    32). 

1.  The  strongest  bonds  of  attraction  between  man  and  man  are  love  and  sympathy. 
These  two  are  braided  together  in  a  twofold  cord  in  Christ  crucified.     2.  He  waa 
lifted  up  to  draw  men  out  of  and  keep  them  away  from  the  sins  that  had  kept 
them  from  Sim.    III.  To  accomplish  a  Divine  bedemption  fob  man  (chap.  iii.  14). 
Salvation   is  absolutely  fastened  to   Christ   crucified.      1.  Without  the  shedding 
of  blood  is  no  remission.    2.  The  Divine  imperative  "  must."     {A,  J.  Gordon.) 
The  great  attraction: — 1.  Christ's  death  must  have  seemed  to  His  apostles  an 
unmitigated  misfortune  ;  but  He  showed  them  that  it  was  really  the  most  hopeful 
of  all  points  in  His  history.     2.  The  text  must  be  illustrated  by  doctrines  that  are 
concealed  in  it,  and  facts  with  which  it  is  connected.    The  prince  of  darknes* 
enticed  poor  foolish  man  to  his  destruction  as  fish  are  taken  by  the  bait,  birds 
lured  by  decoys,  barques  wrecked  by  false  lights  or  sucked  into  the  whirlpool. 
Christ  came  to  produce  a  counter  attraction.     But  men  stood  at  a  distance  from 
their  best  Friend ;  but  since  man  does  not  come  of  himself,  even  when  he  per- 
ceives the  gracious  errand  of  Jesus,  He  condescends  to  attract  him,  and  that  by 
means  of  the  Cross.     I.  What  is  the  attbaction  of  Jesus  ceucified  ?    It  lies  in 
that  which  some  count  its  weakness  and  reproach.     Certain  preachers  have  missed 
all  in  forgetting  this.     Socinians  have  fondly  dreamed  that  His  holy  hfe  will  pro- 
vide the  attraction.     Such  has  not  proved  to  be  the  case.    Nor  has  the  millenial 
glory  of  Christ  proved  attractive ;  but  men  have  been  drawn  to  the  Cross — 1.  By 
the  disinterested  love  there  manifested.     "  Scarcely  for  a  righteous  man,"  &c.    2. 
By  the  satisfaction  there  rendered  to  justice,  through  which  pardon  is  provided, 
and  may  be  accepted  honourably.    3.  By  its  exact  suitability  to  man's  necessities- 
thirsty,  here  is  living  water;  naked,  here  is  a  robe  of  righteousness  ;  vUe,  here  is 
a  fountain ;  lost,  here  is  salvation.    4.  By  its  agonies,  the  culmination  of  all  pre- 
vious sorrows.    II.  In  what  dibection  does  the  Cboss  attbact.    1.  From  despair 
to  hope.      2.    From  fear  to  faith.       3.   From  dread  to  love.      4.    From  sin  to 
obedience.    5.  From  self  to  Jesus.     6.  From  earth  to  heaven.    HI.  What  abb  thh 
chaeactebistics  and  qualities  of  this   poweb.     1.    Gentle.     2.   Gracious.     3. 
Wide.    4.  Effectual.    5.  Present.    (C.H.  Spurgeon.)        Woridrous  attraction : — In 
the  Paris  Salon  some  few  years  ago  there  was  a  bust  of  the  painter  Baudry,  by  Paul 
Dubois.     Mr.  E.  Gosse  was  sitting  contemplating  the  bust,  when  an  American 
gentleman  passed,  caught  sight  of  it,  and,  hovering  round  it  for  sometime,  came  and 
sat  down  by  his  side  and  watched  it.    Presently  he  turned  to  Mr.  Gosse,  inquiring  if 
he  could  tell  him  whose  it  was,  and  whether  it  was  thought  much  of,  adding,  with 
&  charming  modesty,  *'  I  don't  know  anything  about  art ;  but  I  found  I  could  not 
get  past  that  head."    Would  we  could  so  set  forth  Christ  that  His  word  might  be 
fulfilled  1     •'  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up,"  &c.    (H.  0.  Mackey.)         Invisible  attraction : — A 
little  boy  was  flying  a  kite,  which  had  soared  so  high  as  to  be  almost  out  of  sight. 
Seeing  him  looking  so  intensely  upward,  a  gentleman  asked  him  what  he  had 
there.    "  A  kite,  sir,"  was  the  boy's  reply.    "  A  kite  1 "  said  the  gentleman  ;  "  how 
can  that  be,  I  don't  see  it?  "    "  Ah  1  I  feel  it  pulling,  sir,"  was  the  boy's  anan- 
Bwerable  reply.    This  should  be  our  evidence  that  our  Saviour  is  above — we  should 
feel  Him  pulling.    (T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  The  attractiveness  of  Christ  :— 

Thi£  subject  ought  to  be  attractive.    There  is  the  attraction  of  one  dewdrop  for 


CHAT,  xn.]  8T.  JOHN.  857 

another,  as  they  hang  together  on  the  same  blade,  and,  running  together,  fall 
from  their  momentary  glory  into  a  common  grave.  There  is  the  attraction  of  the 
flame  for  the  moth,  as  it  flutters  and  dai  ts  around  the  fatal  glow,  until  at  last  it 
falls,  wingless  and  scorched,  upon  the  floor.  There  is  the  attraction  of  the  magnet 
lor  the  particles  of  matter  through  which  it  is  passed,  in  virtue  of  which  it  draws 
some  of  them  to  itself,  and  has  no  influence  upon  others.  There  is  the  attraction 
of  the  moon  for  the  sea,  its  pale  light  shining  in  tremulous  bars  on  the  bosom  of 
the  melancholy  deep,  as  it  rises  and  falls,  like  a  dark  and  guilty  conscience  heaving 
and  sobbing  under  the  ghostly  memories  of  its  past  misdeeds.  And  there  is  the 
attraction  of  the  sun  for  all  created  things  within  the  circle  of  the  worlds  that 
sweep  around  him  as  their  centre,  finding  life  and  gladness  in  his  beams.  The 
latter  is  the  highest  and  most  glorious  form  in  which  the  principle  of  attraction 
displays  itself,  and  it  is  that  which  is  exerted  by  the  Sun  of  Kighteousness.  Christ 
is  tiie  luminous  centre  and  the  effulgent  source  of  all  vitality  and  blessing  in  the 
universe  of  souls.  (F.  Ferguson,  D.D.)  The  attractiveness  of  the  cross : — There  is  a 
moral  power  in  beauty  ;  it  elevates  the  heart  of  the  man  who  sees  it.  It  is  not 
enough  that  a  man  should  display  the  law  of  holiness ;  he  must  display  the  beauty 
of  holiness.  There  are  some  whose  religion  has  every  quality  but  one — attractive, 
ness.  They  are  animated  by  the  sincerest  motives  ;  they  are  ruled  by  the  tenderest 
conscience ;  they  are  influenced  by  the  purest  desires  ;  yet  their  religion  is  withal  a 
weapon  in  the  hand,  not  a  magnet  in  the  heart;  it  drives,  but  it  does  not  draw. 
Thoy  are  impressed  above  all  things  with  the  power  of  the  Lord,  and  they  would 
like  to  display  His  power ;  but  they  do  not  see  that  the  uppermost  garment  of  the 
religious  life  must  be  the  beauty  of  the  Lord.  They  have  not  measured  the  force  of 
the  words  of  the  text.  The  highest  power  of  the  Cross  is  ability  to  allure — its 
beauty.  The  glory  of  religion  lies  in  the  number  of  things  it  can  attract. 
{G.  Matheson,  B.D.)  The  attractive  power  of  Christ: — L  The  impobtant  event 
THE  TEXT  ANTICIPATES.  1.  Primarily  the  Crucifixion  (chap.  iii.  14-15).  2.  Christ's 
exaltation  to  the  mediatorial  throne.  3.  The  preaching  of  the  gospel,  which  dis- 
plays both  the  Cross  and  the  throne.  This  comprehends — (1)  The  recital  of  the 
manner  of  the  Redeemer's  death.  (2)  The  declaration  of  the  great  design  of  His 
death.  (3)  The  proclamation  of  His  power  to  save,  with  the  terms  on  which  He 
saves.  II.  The  oband  pubposb  the  text  reveals.  1.  The  point  to  which  He 
attracts.  "  Me."  The  centre  of  humanity,  toward  which  all  should  gravitate.  2. 
The  manner  in  which  He  attracts.  By  Himself,  the  Father,  and  the  Holy  Spirit. 
But  the  uplifting  is  adapted  to  the  end.  (1)  What  is  more  calculated  to  arrest 
attention  than  the  spectacle  of  such  a  Sufferer  dying  for  the  sake  of  a  sinful  world. 
(2)  The  view  of  the  Divine  character  presented  is  eminently  attractive.  (3)  The 
felt  wants  of  our  nature  are  here  supplied.  3.  The  scale  on  which  He  attracts. 
"  All  men."  Some  resist.  Objects  are  interposed  between  the  magnet  and  the 
Bubstance.     But  Christ  attracts  men  from  every  race.    (J.  Rawlinson.)  The 

attractive  power  of  Christ: — I.  Observe  how  univebsallt  operative  is  that 
mysterious  liAW  BY  WHICH  MEN  ABE  DRAWN  TO  Chbist.  Explain  it  how  we  may, 
Christ  is  to-day  the  central  figure  in  the  thoughts  of  the  civilized  world,  and  is 
becoming  more  and  more  so.  For  the  past  1800  years  interest  in  Him  has  been 
steadily  growing.  How  many  volumes  it  would  take,  e.g.,  to  present  a  faithful 
account  of  "  Christ  in  Song  "  since  Luke  penned  the  "  Overture  of  the  Angels  " 
down  to  the  time  when  Keble  wrote  "  Sun  of  my  Soul "  1  Is  the  world  tired  of 
singing  about  Christ  because  He  has  occupied  the  central  field  so  long  ?  It  is  a 
fact  of  no  little  interest  that  Christ  is  the  only  Person  all  nations  of  the  world  have 
ever  united  to  praise  in  the  same  forms  of  speech.  Again,  it  might  be  shown  that 
Christ  occupies  the  same  position  through  the  ages  in  art  and  general  literature. 
No  one  has  ever  received  such  tributes  from  men  of  genius  as  Christ,  and  about  no 
one  is  the  printing-press  so  busy.  II.  What  is  it  in  man  that  is  thus  dbawn 
OUT  to  Christ.  With  some  it  is  admiration  for  His  character  and  teachings ;  with 
others  it  is  the  interest  that  a  reformer  awakens ;  with  others  a  sense  of  His 
Divinity.  But  if  we  stop  here  we  shall  lose  sight  of  the  true  reason,  so  well  stated 
by  Napoleon.  ••  Jesus  alone  founded  His  empire  on  love,  and  to  this  very  day 
millions  would  die  for  Him."  It  is  the  human  heart  that  is  drawn  out  towards 
Christ.  As  we  test  the  power  of  the  magnet  by  the  weight  we  attach  to  it,  so  Satan 
experiments  with  the  heart  of  man.  Take  a  typical  case — that  of  Paul.  He 
weighted  Paul's  heart  with  worldly  allurements ;  but  Paul  cried,  "  What  things 
were  gain  to  me,"  &c.  (Phil.  iii.  7) :  then  with  persecutions;  but  Paul  said,  "I  taka 
pleasure  in  infirmities,"  Ac.  (2  Cor.  xii.  10) :  finally  with  death  ;  but  Paul  exulted, 


858  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xo. 


"  Who  shall  separate  me  "  (Rom.  viii.  35-39).  When  a  bar  of  soft  iron  is  bronf^ht 
into  contact  with  a  powerful  magnet  it  becomes  magnetic,  and  continues  so  while 
in  contact ;  but  remove  it,  and  its  virtue  is  gone.  So  the  believer,  to  be  attractive, 
must  live  near  to  Christ  (chap.  xiii.  35).     III.  What  is  it  in  Christ  that  has  such 

POWEB   to    kindle  NEW   AFFECTIONS   AND   SET   UP   NEW    RELATIONS    AMONG    MEN  ?       Not 

merely  the  influence  of  His  life  or  doctrines,  or  of  the  mysterious  union  of  the 
Divine  with  the  human,  but  supremely  His  Cross.  And  why  His  Cross  we  cannot 
exactly  analyze.  We  cannot  explain  the  mysterious  principle  that  we  see  operating 
in  the  galvanic  battery ;  but  there  is  clearly  something,  and  we  call  it  Magnetism. 
And  the  mysterious  something  in  the  Cross  we  call  Love  (2  Cor.  v.  15 ;  Jer.  xxxi.  3). 
Here  is  a  love  that  has  at  its  command  the  resources  of  the  Godhead.  •'  In  Him 
dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead,"  and  a  perfect  sympathy  with  all  human 
weaknesses  (Heb.  iv.  15).  What  wonder  that  sinners  are  drawn  to  such  a  Saviour. 
IV.  The  manner  in  which  that  power  is  bkodght  to  bear  upon  men.  By  draw- 
ing (Psa.  ex.  3;  Cant.  i.  4;  Psa.  Ixxiii.  28).  (J.  G,  Lowrie,  M.A.)  The  attractive 
power  of  the  crucified  Saviour : — 1.  When  a  man  is  leading  a  great  religious  move- 
ment, the  worst  thing  that  could  usually  happen  is  that  he  should  die.  The  death 
of  a  pastor  is  often  a  hindrance  to  a  good  work.  But  here  is  one  great  religioua 
Leader  who,  through  death,  draws  all  men  to  Himself.  2.  But  if  the  death  of  a 
religious  leader  is  a  disgraceful  one,  what  damage  his  influence  suffers — e.g.,  Dr. 
Dodd,  who  was  hung  for  forgery.  But  behold  a  wonder  1  The  death  of  Jesus  on  a 
malefactor's  cross  is  the  secret  of  His  highest  influence.  I.  The  attractive  power 
OP  the  crucified  Saviour.  Himself.  1.  Some  suppose  that  Christ  was  lifted  up 
to  draw  men  unto  the  priests.  2.  To  draw  men  to  a  church  might  satisfy  a 
religious  bigotry.  3.  But  Christ  alone  can  satisfy  their  souls.  II.  How  that 
POWER  IS  exercised  TO-DAY.  There  are  degrees  of  drawing.  Those  who  have  never 
heard  of  Christ  are  drawn  in  a  sense,  for  the  world  is  pervaded  with  His  influence. 

1.  Some  say  that  the  force  that  draws  man  is  light ;  but  men  are  sometimes  driven 
away  by  light.     They  rebel  against  it,  and  use  the  truth  to  their  own  detriment. 

2.  Men  are  won  to  Christ  by  the  force  of  love.  Even  earthly  love  is  powerful. 
Swayed  by  love,  what  have  not  mothers  done.  Jesus'  power  lay  in  His  iiresistable 
love.  3.  By  His  sufferings.  In  the  old  martyr  days,  what  made  England  Protestant 
was  the  death  of  martyrs.  4.  By  the  instrumentality  of  other  men.  Not  by 
ministers  only,  but  by  holy  life  and  loving  words.  III.  What  it  evidently  implies. 
1.  That  men  were  far  off  from  Christ.  The  older  philosophers  taught  that  men 
started  like  a  sheet  of  white  paper,  and  decried  original  sin.  But  the  newer  philo- 
Bophefs  tell  us  that  we  have  inherited  all  the  desires  and  vices  of  our  animal 
ancestors.  2.  That  men  would  not  come  to  Christ  unless  He  drew  them.  3.  That 
if  we  feel  ourselves  drawn,  the  wisest  thing  for  us  to  do  is  to  yield.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  attractive  power  of  Christ  crucified : — 1.  Standing  alone,  these  words  might  be 
understood  to  refer  to  the  Ascension.  St.  Peter  twice  applies  the  expression  to  that 
event.  But  St.  John  explains  the  text  according  to  our  Lord's  own  meaning  in 
chaps,  iii.  14,  and  xiii.  28.  2.  The  Apostle  has  preserved  the  text  for  the  pur- 
pose of  enforcing  his  main  theme — the  Divinity  of  Christ — whereas  the  stress  in 
the  other  Gospels  is  on  the  manhood,  although  neither  side  of  our  Lord's  Person 
is  overlooked  by  either.  This  general  difference  culminates  in  the  picture 
of  the  Crucifixion.  To  the  Three  that  is  the  lowest  depth  of  Christ's  humiliation, 
and  their  task  is  to  train  our  sympathies  with  the  perfect  Man.  But  to  St.  John 
the  cross  is  not  a  scaffold  but  a  throne ;  not  defeat  but  victory ;  not  a  repulsion 
but  a  world-wide  attraction.  3.  If  Christianity  had  come  from  man  its  chief 
attraction  would  not  have  been  placed  here,  but  to  Christ  on  the  Mount  or  beyond 
the  stars.  The  wisdom  of  the  Teacher,  the  prowess  of  the  Conqueror,  the  majesty 
of  the  King  would  have  been  put  forward,  and  a  veil  drawn  over  these  dark  hours. 
Instead  of  this,  Christianity  boasts  of  that  which  to  human  eyes  must  have  appeared 
a  failure.  Twenty  years  after  this  prediction  St.  Paul  echoes  it,  "  We  preach  Christ 
crucified,"  and  implies  that  that  is  the  compendium  of  all  Christian  doctrine  and 
morality,  •'  I  determined,"  &c.  Wherein  consists  this  attraction  ?  In — I.  The 
moral  beauty  and  strength  of  self-sacrifice.  This  fascinates  because — 1.  It 
requires  a  moral  effort  of  the  highest  kind,  and  commands  admiration  exactly  pro- 
portioned to  its  intensity.  2.  It  is  rare.  The  mass  of  men  follow  self.  The 
majestic  power  of  keeping  well  in  hand  the  forces  that  belong  to  the  life  of  natur© 
is  as  rare  as  it  is  beautiful.  As  we  admire  gems  and  flowers  for  their  rarity  as  well 
as  for  their  beauty,  so  we  are  drawn  to  great  examples  of  self-sacrifice.  3.  It  is 
fertilizing.     It  is  not  unproductive  moral  beauty  or  energy  run  to  waste.    All  the 


.  xn.]  ST.  JOHN.  989 

good  done  among  men  is  proportioned  to  the  amount  of  sacrifice  employed.  To 
witness  sacrifice  is  to  breathe  a  bracing  atmosphere,  and  to  be  capable  of  it  is  already 
to  be  strong.  All  intense  labour,  and  particularly  that  which  is  at  the  same  time 
nnrecognized  or  discouraged,  is  sacrifice  of  a  high  order.  Such  has  been  that  of 
discoverers  whose  discoveries  have  been  made  public  after  death.  Faraday's  life  was 
one  example  of  disinterestedness  and  vast  results  of  sacrificial  labour.  There  are  also 
lives  in  which  sacrifice  is  pure  suffering,  undergone  for  a  great  cause  or  truth.  The 
old  pagans  knew  how  to  appreciate,  e.g.,  the  deaths  of  the  three  hundred  at  Thermo- 
pyles.  And  who  that  has  ever  witnessed  the  welcome  a  man  receives  who  saves  a 
fellow-creature  from  a  watery  grave,  or  a  burning  house,  can  doubt  the  empire  of 
sacrifice  over  every  class  in  society.  Our  Lord  said,  "  It  is  more  blessed  to  give 
than  to  receive."  That  each  gift  of  what  is  dear  to  self  adds  immeasurably  to 
moral  capital  is  a  matter  of  experience.  Wealth  consists  not  in  the  abundance  of 
things  external  to  ourself  but  in  internal  possession,  in  the  force  and  freedom  of 
the  will  to  do  good.  That  is  God-like  and  Christ-like.  Christ  surrendered  long  before 
all  that  man  cares  for  most,  but  on  the  cross  He  gave  His  life.  Had  He  come 
amongst  us  without  this  mark,  not  doctrine,  prowess  or  majesty  would  have  drawn 
as  to  Him.  II.  The  sufferings  endueed.  1.  Life  is  made  up  largely  of  pain  of  body 
or  mind.  Some  have  not  begun  to  feel  it,  but  all  do  before  life  closes.  What 
account  can  be  given  of  this  empire  of  pain.  (1)  It  is  a  punishment — the  advertise- 
ment that  a  deeper  evil  lies  beneath.  (2)  A  purification.  (3)  A  preventitive.  2. 
Still,  an  abstract  doctrine  in  justification  of  pain  is  not  sufficient  to  support  ns. 
We  need  the  sympathy  of  a  fellow-sufferer.  Now,  if  Christ  had  come  fenced  in 
among  all  the  comforts  of  life  by  a  superhuman  power,  and,  after  teaching  the  true 
theory  of  pain,  had  died  on  a  soft  bed,  He  might  have  been  honoured  as  a  great 
teacher,  but  would  not  have  drawn  all  men  unto  Him.  As  it  is.  He  is  the  Universal 
Sympathizer.  "  It  behoved  Him  in  all  things  to  be  made  like  unto  His  brethren." 
Therefore,  after  a  life  of  varied  suffering,  He  enforces  His  teaching  by  a  supreme 
example  of  an  excruciating  death.  III.  The  atonement  He  offered.  1.  The  pre- 
valence of  sacrifice  expresses  a  truth  recognized  universally  by  the  conscience,  viz., 
that  man  carries  about  him  that  which  is  offensive  to  the  purity  of  heaven.  The 
depth  of  the  sense  of  sin  is  proportioned  to  the  soul's  vision  of  moral  truth,  which 
becomes  clearer  as  the  law  of  God  is  more  clearly  revealed.  The  law  affords  a 
standard  of  duty,  but  gives  no  means  of  realizing  it.  Would,  then,  Christ  have  drawn 
all  men  unto  Him  had  He  only  left  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  ?  Nay,  they  who  have 
felt  the  reproaches  of  the  Decalogue  would  have  felt  more  keenly  the  reproaches  of 
the  Beatitudes.  2.  Christ  draws  all  men  because  He  alone  offers  relief  to  this  our 
deepest  need.  The  Bible  describes  three  forms  which  a  sense  of  sin  takes,  and  how 
Christ  crucified  relieves  us  from  each.  (1)  It  tells  man  that  sin  is  like  a  tyrant  who 
keeps  him  fettered,  and  then  points  to  Christ  as  paying  down  a  ransom  by  His  death. 
(2)  It  tells  us  that  since  God  is  holy,  sin  makes  God  and  man  at  enmity ;  and  that 
Jesus  removes  this  by  an  atonement.  (3)  It  insists  that  sin  once  committed  is 
not  like  a  vapour  which  melts  away  into  the  sky,  but  that  it  leaves  a  positive  load  of 
guilt  behind  it,  and  then  it  points  to  Jesus  as  taking  this  load  and  offering  for  it  as 
a  propitiation  His  supreme  act  of  obedience.  3.  Faith  unites  us  with  the  all-sacri- 
ficing Christ.  Conclusion  :  1.  The  Cross  is  the  one  real  principle  of  unity  to  the 
human  family.  2.  To  this  common  centre  we  are  drawn  one  by  one.  {Canon 
Liddon.)  The  attraction  of  the  Cross : — This  is  one  of  God's  paradoxes.  Christen- 
dom gathers  once  a  year  to  commemorate  and  contemplate  a  brutal  public  execution. 
How  is  this?  The  Cross  is — 1.  An  attraction  of  admiration.  1.  Who  has  not 
felt  his  heart  burn  within  him  as  he  reads  or  sees  a  life  given  for  another  ?  If  a  man 
saves  his  wife  or  child  from  a  burning  house  and  perishes  we  have  a  natural  admira- 
tion for  the  sacrifice.  If  the  sacrifice  be  one  all  of  duty;  if  the  captain  remains 
with  the  wreck  and  dies  at  his  post,  or  still  more,  if  a  man  die  as  a  martyr  the  self- 
devotion  demands  higher  praise.  Yet  once  more,  if  the  life  be  thus  given  not  in 
heat  and  emotion,  bnt  with  calm  reflection  when  it  might  have  been  avoided,  the 
consideration  is  heightened.  2.  Christ  attracts  in  part  with  the  help  of  admiration. 
This  is  the  first  feeling  a  man  has  who  contemplates  the  Cross.  We  see  there, 
even  before  reaching  the  higher  ground  of  the  Divinity  and  Incarnation,  an  innocent 
person,  the  victim  of  an  old-world  formalism,  the  best  of  men  enduring  voluntarily 
the  worst  of  deaths  as  a  condition  of  giving  life  to  the  world.  The  observer  of  the 
Crucifixion  desires  to  penetrate  the  heart  of  the  Sufferer,  and  as  he  passes  in  review 
the  prayer  for  the  murderers,  the  gentle  answer  to  the  penitent,  the  tender  consign- 
ment of  His  mother  to  John,  what  heart  can  find  no  affinity  of  admiration t 


360  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

For  here  in  its  highest  form  is  what  men  most  admire — strength,  conrage, 
presence  of  mind,  tenacity  of  purpose,  might  of  will,  and  aU  combined  with  perfect 
tenderness,  love  and  sympathy.  IL  An  attraction  of  faith,  growing,  in  due 
course,  out  of  admiration.  The  object  of  the  lifting  up  was  no  mere  exhibition  of  a 
superhuman  excellence,  but  the  bearing  away  of  sin.  The  moment  yoa  rob  the 
Cross  of  this,  you  take  out  of  it  the  magnetic  virtue.  As  a  mere  display  of  heroio 
courage  other  deaths  have  rivalled  it ;  other  martyrs  have  yielded  their  life :  we  ad- 
mire the  sacrifice,  but  it  would  be  a  misnomer  to  say  that  it  draws  us  to  them. 
Though  admiration  may  draw  us  towards  Him,  faith  alone  can  draw  us  to  Him. 
Put  thy  trust  in  that  death  :  it  has  in  it  the  balm  of  all  sorrow,  the  satisfaction  of 
all  want,  the  heaUng  of  all  disease,  and  the  quickening  of  all  death.  (Dean 
Vaughan.)  The  power  of  the  Cross  : — The  gospel,  with  the  Cross  as  its  centre, 
is  destined  to  exert  an  influence  over  the  whole  race.   I.  Whebeveb  it  is  peoclaimej> 

IT   CREATES   A  GENERAL  INTEREST  AND  EXEBTB  A  UNIVERSAL  INFLUENCE.      The  fact  is  aS 

startling  as  the  assertion.  Millions  of  sympathetic  hearts  cluster  round  the  Cross, 
of  all  orders  of  intellect,  all  nationalities,  &o.  Even  infidels,  in  spite  of  their 
antipathies,  are  drawn  to  the  Cross  to  write  lives  of  Christ.  How  can  we 
account  for  this  great  influence  ?  1.  The  life  and  sufferings  of  Jesus  are  in  the 
highest  degree  expressions  of  the  Divine  mind  and  heart.  Nature  is  full  of  attrac- 
tions. It  is  uphill  work  to  scale  the  mountain,  but  the  tourist  ia  drawn  up  by  an 
irresistible  influence.  We  are  always  ready  for  another  country  walk.  Man  sooa 
gets  tired  of  human  productions,  but  never  of  the  works  of  God.  The  Divine  alone 
can  capture  the  spirit  of  man,  and  the  Cross  is  the  sublimest  exhibition  of  the 
Divine.  2.  Christ's  Ufe  and  sufferings  supply  a  particular  craviug  in  the  human 
breast.  What  an  attraction  a  fountain  has  for  a  crowd  of  thirsty  people,  and  the 
Cross  attracts  because  there  is  that  in  it  which  alone  can  quench  the  thirst  of  the 
spirit.  The  great  questions,  •*  How  shall  a  man  be  just  with  God  ?  "  "  How  shall 
conscience  be  satisfied?  "  are  only  answered  there.  3.  The  same  life  and  sufferings 
have  conferred  inestimable  blessings  on  mankind.  The  influence  radiating  from  the 
Cross  has  banished  superstitions,  liberated  slaves,  promoted  peace,  good  govern- 
ment, <&c.,  and  therefore  forces  the  most  reluctant  to  give  it  a  silent  tribute  of 
respect.  H.  The  special  influence  of  the  Cross  is  the  salvation  of  our  souls. 
Some  lives  are  more  effective  at  a  distance ;  but  the  nearer  we  come  to  Christ  the 
■y  better.  Thousands  are  near  enough  to  the  Cross  to  be  touched  by  its  influence,  but 
not  its  transforming  power.  There  is  here — 1.  A  sacrifice  for  sin.  The  Cross  is 
the  power  which  draws  us  to  God  for  reconcihation.  2.  Sanctification  from  sin — 
"  Whereby  the  world  is  crucified  unto  Me."  3.  Elevation  above  sin  "  Unto  Me." 
(T.  Davies,  Ph.D.)  The  attraction  of  the  Cross  (Missionary  Sermon) : — The 
text  presents  us  with — I.  The  great  object  of  missionary  zeal.  Such  an  object 
associates  our  cause  with — 1.  The  design  of  the  Son  of  God  in  redemption,  the 
salvation  of  the  human  soul.  2.  The  ultimate  end  of  all  Providential  arrangements. 
Providence  is  the  direction  of  all  human  events  with  reference  to  the  kingdom  of 
Christ.  3.  The  best  interests  of  the  human  race.  If  we  succeed  in  drawing  men 
to  Christ  we  save  their  souls  from  death,  and  provide  them  with  a  blissful  eternity ; 
besides  which  reUgion  is  a  civilizing  process,  and  has  the  promise  of  the  life  that 
now  is.  n.  The  grand  instrument  of  missionary  exertions — the  doctrine  of 
the  Cross.  We  see  something  resembling  the  splendid  fable  of  Constantino's  con- 
version— "  By  this  conquer."  We  preach  a  true  crusade  whose  object  is  not  the 
recovery  of  the  holy  sepulchre,  but  the  setting  forth  of  Him  who  is  the  Kesurrection 
and  the  Life,  and  whose  weapons  are  not  carnal  but  spiritual.  1.  What  is  included 
in  the  doctrine  of  the  Cross.  (1)  The  manner  of  Christ's  death — agonizing,  igno- 
minious. (2)  The  design  of  Christ's  death,  "  Whom  God  hath  set  forth  to  be  a 
propitiation."  (3)  The  Divinity  of  Christ's  Person  as  constituting  the  value  of  His 
satisfaction.  While  the  hope  of  a  guilty  world  can  rest  nowhere  but  on  an  atone- 
ment, that  in  its  turn  can  be  supported  by  nothing  short  of  the  Bock  of  Ages.  (4) 
The  gratuitous  manner  in  which  its  blessings  are  bestowed  :  "  by  faith  that  it  might 
be  by  grace."  (5)  Its  moral  tendency  and  design  as  respects  the  heart  and  conduct 
of  those  by  whom  it  is  received.  "  I  am  crucified  with  Christ. "  2.  The  various 
powers  of  attraction  which  the  doctrine  of  the  Cross  exerts.  (1)  The  stupendous 
fact  arrests  and  fixes  the  attention.  The  whole  fabric  of  Christianity,  both  as 
to  doctrines  and  duties,  is  founded  on  a  fact ;  and  that  fact,  drawn  out  into  details 
more  touching  and  tender  than  can  be  found  in  any  history  or  romance.  Conceive 
the  effect  upon  pagans,  conversant  with  nothing  but  the  puerilities  of  a  barbarous 
state,  who  heard  for  the  first  time  of  the  death  of  the  Son  of  God.    (2)  As  an 


CHAP,  xn.]  ST.  JOHN.  861 

exhibition  of  unparalleled  love,  it  melts  and  captivates  the  heart.  John  calls  it  the 
manifestation  of  love,  as  if  nothing  more  now  remained  to  be  known  of  love  in  any 
•ge  or  world ;  St.  Paul  speaks  of  it  as  the  commendation  of  love,  as  if  nothing 
more  could  now  ever  be  said  upon  the  subject ;  and  Christ  uses  the  remarkable 
emphasis,  "  God  so  loved,"  «&o.  There  is  a  mighty  power  in  love,  and  the  heart 
which  wraps  itself  up  in  the  covering  of  a  stubborn  and  reckless  despair  against  the 
attacks  of  severity,  like  the  flower  which  closes  at  the  approach  of  the  angry  blast, 
will  put  forth  all  the  better  parts  of  its  nature  to  the  smiles  of  love,  like  the  tendrils 
of  the  sea  anemone  when  it  feels  the  first  wave  of  the  returning  tide  upon  its  native 
rock.  (3)  As  a  system  of  mediation,  it  allays  the  fears  of  a  guilty  conscience,  and 
draws  the  soul  into  confidence  in  God.  The  idea  of  retributive  justice  seems  far  more 
easily  deducible  by  the  siimer  from  the  light  of  nature,  than  that  of  mercy.  What 
is  the  meaning  of  all  those  bloody  sacrifices  ?  But  the  Cross  puts  an  authorized 
and  perfect  satisfaction  to  justice  in  the  sinner's  hand.  (4)  By  admitting  an 
individual  appropriation  of  its  benefits,  it  appeals  to  all  the  feelings  of  self-regard 
and  personal  interest.  It  is  the  glory  of  the  gospel  that,  while  it  makes  ample  pro- 
vision for  the  world,  it  lays  its  blessings  at  the  feet  of  every  individual.  (5)  By  the 
suitableness  and  certainty  of  its  blessings,  it  awakens  hope  and  establisnes  faith. 
Are  we  guilty,  here  is  pardon ;  rebels,  here  is  reconciliation ;  unholy,  here  is 
sanctification ;  agitated,  here  is  peace  for  a  wounded  spirit ;  without  knowledge  of 
or  hope  for  the  future,  here  is  life  and  immortality.  3.  The  effects  which  the 
doctrine  of  the  Cross  has  produced.  (1)  In  Judaism,  at  the  metropohs,  and  in 
heathen  lands.  (2)  In  heathenism  at  Antioch,  Corinth,  Athens,  and  more  recently 
in  India,  &c.  III.  The  fibst  consummation  of  missionabt  success.  1.  Beview 
the  present  results  of  missionary  zeaL  2.  Forecast  its  future  triumph.  {J.  Angell 
James.)  The  attraction  of  the  Cros$  : — The  Crucifixion  furnished  a  significant 
type  of  the  influence  which  the  Cross  would  exert.  Witnessing  that  spectacle  were 
all  classes  of  men.  In  the  Boman  centurion  behold  a  representative  of  the  intel- 
lectual and  sceptical  convinced,  saying,  ••  This  is  the  Son  of  God."  In  the  multi- 
tude remark  the  careless  and  thoughtless  roused  and  agitated,  "  smiting  heavily  on 
their  breasts. "  In  the  thief  see  the  power  of  the  Cross  to  stir  and  still  the  guilty 
clamour  within.  Whatever  the  intellect  of  man  there  is  an  argument  in  the  Cross 
to  convince  him  ;  whatever  his  heedlessness  there  is  an  energy  in  the  Cross  to  rouse 
him  ;  whatever  his  guilt  there  is  a  magnetism  to  draw,  a  magic  to  change,  and  a 
mystery  to  save  him.  {E.  Fuller,  D.D.)  Christ  the  Great  Magnet: — When  I 
was  a  student  at  Princeton,  Professor  Henry  had  so  constructed  a  huge  bar  of  iron, 
bent  into  the  form  of  a  horseshoe,  that  it  used  to  hang  suspended  from  another 
iron  bar  above  it.  Not  only  did  it  hang  there,  but  it  upheld  four  thousand  pounds 
weight  attached  to  it  I  That  horseshoe  magnet  was  not  welded  or  glued  to  the 
metal  above  it ;  but  through  the  iron  wire  coiled  round  it  there  ran  a  subtle  current 
of  electricity  from  a  galvanic  battery.  Stop  the  flow  of  the  current  one  instant, 
and  the  huge  horseshoe  dropped.  So  does  all  the  lifting  power  of  a  Christian  come 
from  the  currents  of  spiritual  influence  which  flow  into  his  heart  from  the  living"' 
Jesus.  The  strength  of  the  Almighty  One  enters  into  the  believer.  If  his  connec- 
tion with  Christ  is  cut  off,  in  an  instant  he  becomes  as  weak  as  any  other  man. 
(T.  L.  Cuyler.)  The  great  attraction: — Our  world  has  two  forces:  it  has  one 
tendency  to  run  off  at  a  tangent  from  its  orbit ;  but  the  sun  draws  it  by  a  centri- 
petal power,  and  attracts  it  to  itself,  and  so  between  the  two  forces  it  is  kept  in  a 
perpetual  circle.  Oh,  Christian  I  thou  wilt  never  walk  aright,  and  keep  in  the  orbit 
of  truth,  if  it  be  not  for  the  influence  of  Christ  perpetually  attracting  thee  to  the 
centre.  Thou  feelest  (and  if  thou  dost  not  feel  always,  it  is  still  there) — thou  feelest 
an  attraction  between  thine  heart  and  Christ ;  and  Christ  is  perpetually  drawing 
thee  to  Himself,  to  His  likeness,  to  His  character,  to  His  love,  to  His  bosom,  and 
in  that  way  thou  art  kept  from  thy  natural  tendency  to  fly  off,  and  to  be  lost  in  the 
wide  fields  of  sin.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  vioral  attraction  and  separation  of  the 
Cross  : — He  was  lifted  up,  that  He  might  draw  all  men  unto  Him  by  drawing  them  out 
of,  and  away  from,  the  sins  that  had  put  them  so  far  off  from  Him.  The  sun,  lifted 
into  the  meridian  heavens,  draws  through  its  far-reaching  beams  from  ten  thousand 
lakes,  and  rivers,  and  oceans.  But  there  is  separation  as  well  as  attraction.  Here 
a  crystal  drop  is  lifted  from  a  muddy  pool,  but  with  no  trace  of  impurity  remaining 
in  it ;  and  there  another  drop  is  drawn  from  the  Dead  Sea  waters,  but  with  no  taint 
of  the  acrid  salts  left  in  it.  There  is  attraction  and  separation  in  one  process.  So, 
the  beams  of  love  from  Christ's  Cross  fall  upon  this  sinful  world,  and  draw  men  to 
Him.    Not  alone  to  win  you  to  Himself  did  Jesus  die ;  but  also  to  wia  joa  away 


set  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  zn, 

for  ever  from  the  sins  that  have  held  70a  in  the  bondage  of  corraption.     "  Thoa 
ehalt  call  His  name  Jesus  ;  for  He  shall  save  His  people  from  their  sins."     {A.  T. 
Oordon.)        The  universality  of  Christ's  attractionand  resistance  to  it : — The  image, 
which  most  naturally  suggests  itself  to  the  mind  on  reading  the  declaration,  is  thai 
of  the  loadstone  attracting  on  all  sides  the  iron  to  itself.    Bat  this  is  a  defective 
image ;  the  loadstone  draws  only  one  kind  of  substance ;  Christ  declares  that  He 
will  draw  all  men,  however  diverse  their  character.     Some  of  the  ancient  philoso- 
phers, observing  the  attractive  power  of  the  earth,  by  which  various  bodies  are 
made  to  fall  towards  its  surface,  inclined  to  the  opinion  that  the  earth  itself  was 
one  huge  loadstone.     Sir  Isaac  Newton  fairly  argued  that  the  earth  attracts  a 
feather  as  much  as  a  piece  of  iron ;  whereas  the  loadstone  attracts  only  iron,  and 
he  therefore  contended  there  could  be  nothing  analogous  between  the  loadstone  and 
the  earth.     Now  it  will  follow  from  this,  that  Christ  must  be  thought  of  as  having 
the  properties  of  the  earth  rather  than  of  the  loadstone.     Some  bodies  indeed  are 
so  light  that  they  float  in  the  air,  but  this  is  not  because  the  earth  attracts  them 
not,  but  simply  because  the  air  resists  their  descent.     If  there  were  no  air,  the 
tiniest  leaf  would  fall  as  rapidly  as  a  mass  of  lead.    And  here  we  cannot  but  observe 
a  beautiful  analogy.     Only  a  few  are  actually  drawn  to  Christ,  the  great  mass  of 
men  continue  at  a  distance.    But  Christ,  like  the  earth,  attracts  all — though,  as 
with  the  earth,  all  come  not  to  Him.     Why,  then,  are  not  all  literally  drawn  unto 
Him  ?    Oh  I  just  because  there  is  a  carnal  atmosphere  round  them,  which  neu- 
tralizes, as  it  were,  the  attractive  power  ;  and  thousands  float  in  it,  who,  if  it  were 
destroyed,  would  rush  eagerly  to  Jesus  as  their  centre.     So  that  in  these  respects 
the  earth,  though  not  the  loadstone,  is  the  exact  emblem  of  Christ ;  there  is  attrac- 
tive virtue  enough  in  each  case  to  draw  all ;  but  in  each  case  there  is  also  a  resisting 
medium  which  prevents  the  lighter  bodies  from  descending.    And  it  is  possible,  that 
this  is  something  more  than  imagery,  and  ought  to  be  received  as  interpretation. 
It  is  clear  that  the  fact  of  one  substance  drawing  another  does  not  depeud  on  the 
two  being  actually  brought  into  contact.     The  earth  draws  the  feather  as  much  as 
h  draws  the  lead ;  yet  the  feather  falls  not,  and  the  lead  rushes.    Thus  with  Christ: 
it  is  not  that  He  did  not  die  for  all ;  it  is  not  that  He  does  not  love  all ;  it  is  not 
that  He  does  not  invite  all ;  and  therefore  we  cannot  be  warranted  in  saying  that 
He  does  not  draw  all — just  as  the  earth  draws  all.    But  the  feather  of  the  unstable 
and  worldly  mind  descends  not,  whilst  the  lead  of  the  weary  and  heavy-laden  spirit 
approaches  Him  rapidly.     All  are  drawn ;  but  one  is  inflated  with  vanity,  and 
therefore  floats  ;  another  is  burdened  with  sin,  and  therefore  falls.     So  that  by 
illustration,  at  least,  if  not  by  argument,  we  make  out  that  Christ  might  say  of 
Himself  that  He  would  draw  all,  and  yet  know  that  all  would  not  come  to  Him 
for  Ufe.     {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)        The  mighty  magnet : — The  attraction  of  gravitation 
is  an  invisible  force,  whose  centre  is  the  sun.     This  natural  force  illustrates  the 
attractive  power   of  the  Cross.      The   Cross  attracts — I.  By   Its  exhibition   of 
JUSTICE  (Rom.  iii.  25).     1.  Violated  law  demands  the  punishment  of  the  guilty. 
This  principle  is  inherent  in  man's  conscience.    There  is  a  distinction  between 
chastisement  and  punishment.     The  one  originates  in  love,  and  its  end  is  the  good 
of  the  offender  ;  the  other  originates  in  justice,  and  its  end  is  the  maintenance  of 
the  majesty  of  law.    2.  The  Cross  of  Christ  satisfies  the  demand  of  conscience  for 
justice.    Christ  is  "  the  propitiation  for  our  sins  "  (2  John  ii.  2).    (1)  The  sufferings 
of  Christ  were  penal.    He  bore  our  sins  (Isa.  liii.  4-6).     He  was  "  made  a  curse  for 
us"  (Gal.  iiL  13).     •*  God  made  Him  to  be  sin  for  us,  who  knew  no  sin  "  (2  Cor.  v. 
21).     (2)  The  sufferings  of  Christ  were  vicarious  (1  Cor.  xv.  3).     (3)  All  the  diffi- 
culties of  this  truth  find  their  practical  solution  in  the  union  of  the  believer  with 
Christ  (Heb.  x.  22).    II.  By  its  exhibition  of  love.     1.  It  has  its  origin  in  love 
(1  John  iii.  16).    2.  It  reconciles  the  attributes  of  God.    The  substitution  of  Christ 
for  sinners  is  not  a  mere  arbitrary  interference  (Psa.  Ixxxv.  10).     3.  The  sacrifice 
of  the  Cross  was  voluntary,  and  in  accordance  with  a  covenant  arrangement  between 
the  Father  and  the  Son  (chap.  x.  17, 18).      III.  This  exhibition  of  love  and  justice 
in  the  Cross  of  Chbist  is  the  mighty  magnet  of  the  spiritcai.  world.    1.  The  power 
which  draws  near  to  the  Cross  is  the  woikof  the  Holy  Spirit  (chapxvi.  8-11).  2.  There 
is  no  passion,  affection,  or  desire  of  the  human  heart  which  the  Holy  Spirit  cannot 
subdue  by  the  Cross.    3.  The  attractive  power  of  the  Cross,  through  the  influences  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.    (Homiletic  Review.) 
Christ  drawing  all : — Note :  I.  Christ's  sublime  confidence.     He  knew  that  the 
triumphal  procession  to  Jerusalem  was  but  a  funeral  march.      The  Church  has 
had  many  moments  of  despair  since  then,  but  never  one  like  that.     There  is  mucb 


CHAP,  zn.]  ST.  JOHN.  MS 

to  weary  and  depress  in  the  slow  progress  of  the  Church,  yet  how  much  brighter 
in  our  outlook  than  His.  Yet  He  never  faltered.  And  He  is  standing  in  the  midst 
of  His  waiting  Church  to-day,  sure  of  Himself,  and  of  His  truth  and  His  destiny. 

II.  The  condition  op  victoet  *•  hfted  up."  Eighteen  hundred  years  were  needed 
to  explain  this — lifted  up  out  of  the  passions  of  men,  their  prejudices,  errors, 
misconceptions,  sins — He  was  so  far  above  His  age  that  it  has  taken  eighteen 
centuries  of  moral  growth  to  enable  men  to  partially  understand  Him.  By  and  by 
the  world  will  see  the  King  in  His  beauty,  and  then  this  promise  wUl  be  fulfilled. 

III.  The  tbde  character  of  Christ's  power — "  draw."  It  is  the  magic  attraction 
of  Divine  beauty,  and  not  the  compulsion  of  Divine  terrors.  He  would  have  no 
slaves,  but  free  men.  He  disdained  to  entice  men  by  the  bribes  of  this  world  or 
the  next.  He  had  faith  in  human  nature,  and  laid  hold  of  its  aspirations  with  His 
love.  IV.  The  vast  kingdom  over  which  Christ  will  reign — "all  men."  The 
text  lies  parallel  to  Christ's  prophecy  of  one  fold  and  one  shepherd,  and  the  apostles' 
anticipation  of  the  complete  victory  Christ  will  win  when  He  shall  put  all  things 
under  His  feet.  (/.  O.  Greenhough,  M.A.)  Christ  drawing,  not  dragging: — The 
words  avpu)  and  kXievut  differ.  In  avpeiv,  as  in  our  "  drag,"  there  lies  always  the  notion 
of  force,  e.g.,  the  headlong  course  of  a  river ;  and  it  will  foUow,  that  where  persons, 
and  not  merely  things,  are  in  question,  avpiiv  will  involve  the  notion  of  violence 
(Acts  viii.  3;  xiv.  19  ;  xvii.  6).  But  in  iKkvhv  this  notion  does  not  of  necessity  He. 
It  may  be  there  (Acts  xvi.  19;  xxi.  30;  James  ii.  6),  but  not  of  necessity,  any 
more  than  in  oar  "  draw,"  which  we  use  of  a  mental  and  moral  attraction,  or  in 
the  Latin  traho.  Only  by  ke  }ping  in  mind  this  difference  can  we  vindicate  from 
erroneous  interpretation  this  doctrinally  important  passage.  The  word  here  is 
iXiaiffut.  But  how  does  a  crucified,  and  thus  an  exalted.  Saviour  draw  all  men  unto 
Him  ?  Not  by  force,  for  the  will  is  incapable  of  force,  l3Ut  by  the  Divine  attraction 
of  His  love.  Again  (chap.  vi.  44)  •*  Father  which  hath  sent  Me  draw  him  "  {iXicitrtt 
dvToi').  Now,  as  many  as  feel  bound  to  deny  any  gratia  irresistibilis,  which  turns 
man  into  a  mere  machine,  and  by  which,  willing  or  unwilling,  he  is  dragged  to 
God,  must  at  once  assert  that  this  iXicvari  can  mean  no  more  than  the  potent 
allurements,  the  allective  force  of  love,  the  attracting  of  men  by  the  Father  to  the 
Son;  compare  Jer.  xxxi.  3  (?iXkv<to  «),  and  Cant  i.  3,4.  Did  we  find  <riijO£t»' on 
either  of  these  occasions  (not  that  I  can  conceive  this  possible),  the  assertors  of  a 
gratia  irresistibilis,  might  then  urge  the  declarations  of  our  Lord  as  leaving  no 
room  for  any  other  meaning  but  theirs ;  but  not  as  they  now  stand.  In  agreement 
with  all  this,  in  iXicveiv  is  predominantly  the  sense  of  a  drawing  to  a  certain  point, 
in  aiptiv  merely  of  dragging  after  one.  Thus  Lucian  likens  a  man  to  a  fish  already 
hooked  and  dragged  through  the  water.  Not  seldom  there  will  lie  in  avpuv  the 
notion  of  this  dragging  being  on  the  ground,  inasmuch  as  that  will  trail  upon  the 
ground  (Isa.  iii.  16),  which  is  forcibly  dragged  along  with  no  will  of  its  own :  as 
for  example,  a  dead  body.  We  may  compare  John  xxi.  6,  11,  with  ver.  8  of  the 
same  chapter,  in  proof  of  what  has  just  been  asserted.  At  ver.  6  and  11  kXicueiv  is 
used  :  for  there  a  drawing  of  the  net  to  a  certain  point  is  intended  :  by  the  disciples 
to  themselves  in  the  ship,  by  Peter  to  himself  upon  the  shore.  But  at  ver.  8, 
iXKveiv  gives  place  to  avpuv,  for  nothing  is  there  intended  but  the  dragging  of  the 
net,  which  had  been  fastened  to  the  ship,  after  it  through  the  water.  (Abp. 
Trench.)  The  power  of  Christ's  death: — I.  The  manifestation  op  the  power 
OF  Christ's  death.  1.  Evidences  of  this  power  are  to  be  found  in  the  national 
and  social  life  of  countries  wherever  His  death  has  been  proclaimed.  Is  it  not 
marvellous  that  an  obscure  teacher,  who  spent  but  a  few  years  in  making  known 
His  doctrines  to  a  despised  people,  and  was  so  despised  by  them  that  they  put  Him 
to  death,  should  draw  to  Him  the  steadfast  gaze  of  all  who  have  heard  His  name  ? 
2.  Within  the  broad  circle  of  popular  homage  to  Christ,  there  is  the  narrower  one 
containing  those  who  are  personally  attached  to  Him.  He  who  was  despised  and 
crucified  is  loved  by  millions  with  an  ardour  that  death  cannot  quench,  3.  What- 
ever may  now  be  the  power  of  Christ's  death,  it  will  be  greater  still.  "  Every  knee 
shall  bow  "  to  Him.  The  fulness  of  the  promise  is  not  yet  realized ;  but  because 
the  stream  of  homage  has  daily  risen  higher,  the  hope  is  kindled  that  the  whole 
family  of  man  wiU  be  gathered  into  the  household  of  God.  4.  But  if  this  hope  be 
cot  realized,  in  yet  another  sense  all  men  will  be  drawn  to  Christ.  "  When  He 
Cometh  with  clouds  every  eye  shall  see  Him."  II.  Whence  comes  this  attractive 
FOWER?  1.  Christ's  death  is  significant,  because  in  it  He  triumphed  over  the 
prince  of  this  world  (ver.  31).  He  shook  the  kingdom  of  evil  to  its  foundation, 
and  gave  to  all  the  power  to  become  the  sons  of  God.    So  men  are  drawn  to  Him 


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chaf.  xn. 

M  their  DeliTerer.  2.  Christ's  death  exemplifies  the  highest  form  of  self-sacrifioe, 
and  declares  with  greatest  emphasis  the  love  of  God.  The  world  knows  of  no 
sreater  forces  than  love  and  self-sacrifice.  3.  Christ's  death  is  the  ground  of  the 
unpartation  of  spiritual  Ufe  (ver.  24).  (F.  Carter.)  The  centripetal  power  of 
Christ  overcoming  the  centrifugal  attraction  of  sin : — I.  Man  tbb  wandebeb.  The 
centrifugal  influence  of  sin  has  been  felt  not  only  by  devils,  but  by  men.  It  has  so 
separated  man  from  God  that  he  has  neither  the  disposition  nor  the  ability  to 
retnm.  1.  Cain-like  he  has  gone  out  from  the  presence  of  God.  2.  Prodigal-like 
he  has  gone  into  a  far  country.  3.  Pharoah-like  he  has  asked,  "  Who  is  the  Lord 
that  I  should  serve  Him  ?  "  4.  Eve-like  he  has  been  seduced  from  his  allegiance. 
II.  Chbist  the  bestobeb.  a  Divine  Person,  one  representative  and  a  substitute. 
1.  He  has  provided  for  our  restoration  by  the  Cross.  He  was  lifted  up  in  the  very 
heart  of  Satan's  kingdom.  In  the  midst  of  fiery-fiying  serpents  He  heals  our 
diseases  and  restores  us  to  our  place  of  duty  in  His  kingdom.  2.  From  earth  to 
heaven.  "  Led  captivity  captive."  ♦•  A  highway  shall  be  there."  ••  I  am  the  Way." 
Thus  only  is  the  wandering  star  brought  back  to  its  orbit  by  the  attraction  of  the 
Sun  of  Bighteousness.  lU.  The  BLESsmas  thus  secubed.  1.  Man  is  freed  from 
sin;  its  guilt,  pollution,  love,  power,  alienation,  and  curse.  2.  Mammon  is  no 
longer  His  Master.  As  the  greater  fire  extinguishes  the  less,  so  the  love  of  Christ 
puts  out  the  love  of  Mammon.  3.  He  is  drawn  to  Christ.  This  first ;  to  Church 
and  ordinances  after.  Union  is  followed  by  communion.  Being  like  Him,  we 
shall  spend  eternity  with  TTim,  IV.  Application.  Men  by  nature  are  drawn  by 
Bin  to  hell ;  they  must  by  grace  be  drawn  from  sin  to  heaven.  Which  power 
controls  you,  the  centrifugal  or  the  centripetal?  The  one  will  land  yon  in  the 
zenith  of  glory;  the  other  sink  yon  in  the  nadir  of  despair.  (Homiletic  Review.) 
Christ's  kingdom: — I.  The  object  of  Chbist  was  to  dbaw  all  men  unto  Him. 
The  opposition  in  which  He  sets  Himself  to  the  prince  of  this  world  (ver.  31)  shows 
as  that  by  drawing  He  means  attracting  as  a  king  attracts  to  his  name,  claims, 
standard,  person.  Note  some  of  the  characteristics  of  this  kingdom.  1.  It  is  a 
kingdom  ;  a  community  of  men  under  one  Head.  Those  who  are  attracted  to  Christ 
are  formed  into  one  soUd  body  or  community.  Being  drawn  to  Christ,  we  enter  into 
fellowship  with  all  the  good  who  are  labouring  in  the  cause  of  humanity.  Every  ' 
man  out  of  Christ  is  an  isolated  individual.  2.  It  is  a  universal  kingdom — "  all 
men."  The  idea  of  universal  monarchy  has  visited  the  great  minds  of  our  race. 
But  an  effectual  instrument  has  ever  been  wanting.  Christ  tarns  this  grandest 
dream  into  a  rational  hope.  He  appeals  to  what  is  universally  present  in  human 
nature,  and  there  is  that  in  Him  which  every  man  needs.  He  does  not  say  that 
His  kingdom  will  be  quickly  formed.  If  it  has  taken  a  million  ages  for  the  rocks 
to  knit  and  form  for  us  a  standing  ground  and  a  dwelling  place,  we  must  not  expect 
that  this  kingdom,  which  is  to  be  the  one  enduring  result  of  this  world's  history, 
and  which  can  be  built  up  only  of  thoroughly  convinced  men,  and  of  generations 
slowly  weeded  of  traditional  prejudices  and  customs,  can  be  completed  in  a  few 
years.  3.  Being  universal  it  is  necessarily  inward.  What  is  common  to  all  men 
lies  deepest  in  each.  Christ  knew  what  was  in  man,  and  knew  also  that  He  could 
sway  all  that  was  in  man.  This  He  would  do  by  the  simple  moral  process  of 
drawing.  It  is  by  inward  conviction,  not  outward  compulsion,  men  are  to  become 
His  subjects.  And  because  Christ's  rule  is  inward,  it  is  therefore  of  universal 
application.  The  inmost  choice  being  governed  by  Christ,  all  conduct  is  governed 
by  Christ.  The  kingdom  of  Christ  claims  all  human  life  as  its  own.  If  the 
statesman  is  a  Christian,  it  will  be  seen  in  his  policy ;  if  the  poet,  his  song  will 
betray  it,  &o.  Christianity  does  not  mean  churches,  creeds.  Bibles,  but  the  Spirit 
of  Christ.  It  is  the  most  portable  and  flexible  of  all  religions,  and  therefore  the 
most  persuasive  and  dominant  in  the  life  of  its  adherent.  II.  The  condition  of 
His  attaining  it.  Not  His  remarkable  life,  but  His  shameful  death.  Wherein 
then  consists  the  superiority  of  the  latter  as  a  constraining  force  ?  1.  Because  it 
presents  in  a  dramatic  and  compact  manner  the  devotedness  which  is  diffused 
through  every  part  of  the  life,  and  was  the  culmination  and  seal  of  the  life. 
2.  Because  Christ  was  the  representative  of  God,  and  His  death  the  last  syllable  of 
the  utterance  of  God's  great  love  for  man.  It  draws  us  because  the  very  heart  of 
God  is  laid  bare  to  us.  It  is  this  which  is  special  to  the  death  of  Christ,  and 
separates  it  from  all  other  deaths.  Nothing  could  be  more  noble  or  pathetic  than 
the  way  in  which  Boman  after  Boman  met  His  death.  But  beyond  respectful 
admiration  they  win  from  us  no  further  sentiment ;  they  have  no  connection  with 
ns.    But  Christ's  death  concerns  all  men,  and  the  result  of  our  contemplation  of  it 


•BAT.  xn.]  8T.  JOHN.  S65 

is  not  that  we  admire,  but  are  drawn  into  new  relations  with  Him  whom  that  death 
reveals.  (Marcus  Dods,  D.D.)  A  lesson  for  preachers  and  churches ; — "  You 
have,"  Baid  the  Hon.  and  Rev.  W.  B.  Cadogan,  to  a  young  clergyman,  "  but  one 
thing  to  do  ;  exalt  Jesas,  and  the  promise  is,  '  I  will  draw  all  men  unto  Me.* "  The 
Moravians  laboured  in  Greenland  for  a  number  of  years  with  no  apparent  fruit. 
When  they  spoke  to  the  savages  of  the  being  and  attributes  of  God^ — of  the  sin  of 
man — of  the  necessity  of  an  atonement — of  the  evil  of  sin — of  the  excellence  of 
holiness — of  the  glories  of  heaven,  or  of  the  horrors  of  hell — their  hearers  talked 
of  seal-catching,  and  said  they  did  not  understand  these  things.  But,  on  one  of 
the  missionaries  one  day  describing  to  them,  with  unusual  minuteness,  the  sufferings 
and  death  of  Christ,  one  of  the  savages  suddenly  stepped  forward,  and  said,  "  How 
was  that  ?  Tell  me  it  once  more.  I  also  would  fain  be  saved."  This  amazed  and 
delighted  the  missionaries,  and  led  them  to  adopt  a  new  method  with  their  pagan 
disciples.  They  preached  the  Gross.  They  held  up  Jesus,  lifted  np  from  the 
earth,  and  virtue  came  forth  from  Him.  The  poor  brutalized  Greenlanders  were 
interested;  their  dark  understandings  were  enlightened;  their  stubborn  hearts 
melted ;  in  a  word,  they  were  drawn  to  Christ ;  the  Spirit  wielded  resistlessly  His 
favourite  instrument — the  Cross.  {J.  Brown,  D.D.)  Nothing  but  the  Cross 
"  draws  "  for  any  length  of  time : — Take  Unitarianism,  for  instance,  Christianity 
with  the  Cross  left  out,  the  Gospel  with  the  Atonement  struck  off.  What  is  the 
result  ?  It  does  not  "  draw."  One  of  the  leaders  of  English  Unitarianism  de- 
clared publicly  in  Birmingham  the  other  day  that  Unitarianism  failed  to  "  draw. " 
The  English  public  will  not  attend  their  chapels.  That  is  just  what  Christ  fore- 
saw. He  knew  that  nought  save  His  Cross  would  serve  to  draw  men.  "  And  I,  if 
I  be  lifted  up,  will  draw."  It  is  not  His  character,  though  spotlessly  white,  not  Hia 
teaching,  though  sublimely  pure,  not  His  person,  though  mysteriously  Divine,  but 
His  Cross  that  is  the  centre  of  the  world's  attraction.  The  popularity  as  well  as 
the  efficacy  of  Christianity  is  mainly  dependent  on  the  Cross.    (/..  C.  Jones,  D.D.) 

Vers.  84-36.  We  have  heard  out  of  the  law  that  Christ  abldeth  for  ever. — 
Misunderstandings  and  explanations: — I.  Misunderstandings  (ver.  34).  They 
considered  perhaps  that  Fsa.  ex.  4 ;  Isa.  ix.  7 ;  Dan.  vii.  13  referred  to  Christ. 
Their  question  would  be,  therefore,  "  If  Thou  art  to  die,  how  canst  Thou  be  the 
Messiah  ?  We  know  who  the  Son  of  Man  in  the  Old  Testament  is ;  but  who  is 
this  Son  of  Man  ?  "  Men  have  always  misunderstood  the  Cross.  It  is  foolishness 
to  the  Greek,  &o.  1.  Some  now  speak  of  the  Cross  as  a  means  of  appeasing  the 
wrath  of  the  Almighty.  2.  Some  as  a  transaction  that  will  purchase  souls.  8. 
Some  as  the  procuring  cause  of  God's  love.  4.  Whereas  it  is  the  effect,  demon- 
stration, channel  of  God's  love  for  man.  II.  Explanations.  Christ  does  not 
explain  the  difficulty  by  logical  disquisition,  but  by  exhorting  them  to  practice 
holiness  (ver.  85).  It  is  the  pure  heart,  not  the  logical  understanding,  that  solves 
the  problems  of  Christianity.  Christ  urges  the  spirit  of  holiness  on  three  consider- 
ations. 1.  Their  possession  a  special  advantage.  They  had  the  light  with  them. 
From  Christ's  presence,  words,  deeds,  holiness  beamed  brightly  on  them.  They 
were  moving  in  the  rays  of  the  highest  moral  excellence.  2.  Their  special  advantage 
was  only  temporary — "  Yet  a  little  while."  A  few  days  more  and  their  moral  sua 
would  be  set.  Man's  opportunities  for  spiritual  improvement  are  very  transcient. 
3.  The  departure  of  their  special  advantage  would  expose  them  to  danger — "  He 
that  walketh  in  darkness,"  &c.  To  walk  on  in  moral  darkness  to  the  great  eternity, 
how  dismal  and  dangerous  1  4.  The  right  use  of  their  advantage  would  fill  them 
with  light  (ver.  36).  Trust  in  Christ  will  fill  the  soul  with  Divine  illumination. 
"  The  entrance  of  Thy  Word  giveth  light."  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Who  Is  this  Son 
of  Man? — The  Son  of  Htm: — This  question  of  utter  bewilderment  negatives  the 
supposition  that  it  was  equivalent  to  the  Messiah.  The  two  names  do  not  cover 
the  same  ground  ;  for  our  Lord  avoided  the  one  and  habitually  used  the  other.  The 
name  is  found  on  no  other  lips,  and  no  man  applied  it  to  Christ  but  Stephen.  The 
4wo  apparent  instances  in  which  it  occurs — in  Revelation — probably  read  a,  not  the 
Son  of  Man.  It  has  been  supposed  to  be  taken  from  Daniel.  No  doubt  there  is  a 
connection,  but  the  Prophet  speaks  of  "  one  like  a  Son  oj  Man,"  i.n  contradistinction 
to  the  bestial  forms.  What,  then,  is  the  force  of  the  name  ?  I.  Christ  thebebv 
ZDENTiEiES  HiMSELF  WITH  US.  1.  The  name  declares  the  fact  of  the  Incarnation 
and  the  reality  and  fulness  of  His  humanity.  It  is  employed  where  special  emphasis 
is  to  be  placed  on  our  Lord's  manhood.  (1)  As,  e.g.,  when  He  would  bring  into  view 
the  depth  of  His  humiliation — "Foxes  have  holes,"  <&o.    "Not  merely  am  I 


886  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xit 

individually  homeless,  but  I  am  so  because  I  am  truly  a  Man,  the  only  creature  who 
builds  houses,  and  the  only  creature  that  has  not  a  home.    Foxes  can  rest  any. 
where  ;  any  bough  will  do  for  birds  ;  I,  as  the  representative  of  humanity,  wander  a. 
pilgrim."    We  are  all  restless  and  homeless :  the  creatures  correspond  to  their 
environment.    We  have  desires  and  needs  that  wander  through  eternity ;   our 
Eepresentative  •'  hath  not  where  to  lay  His  head."    (2)  When  He  would  emphasize 
the  completeness  of  His  participation  in  our  conditions.     "  The  Son  of  Man  came 
eating  and  drinking" — having  ordinary  dependence  on  external  things:  nor  un- 
willing to  taste  whatever  gladnesses  may  be  found  in  man's  path  through  the  supply 
of  natural  appetites.     (3)  When  He  would  emphasize  this  manhood  as  having  truly 
taken  upon  itself  the  whole  weight  and  weariness  of  man's  sin.    "  The  Son  of  Man 
came  not  to  be  ministered  tmto,"  &c.    2.  All  these  instajaces  suggest  to  us — (1) 
How  truly  and  blessedly  He  is  "  bone  of  our  bone  "  &c.    All  our  joys,  sorrows, 
wants  were  His.    The  Son  of  Man  is  our  Brother  and  Example.    (2)  Is  it  not 
beautiful  that  this  name,  which  emphasizes  humiliation,  and  weakness,  and  likenes^^ 
to  ourselves,  should  be  always  on  His  lips.    Just  as  if  some  teacher  who  went  away 
into  savage  life  might  adopt  some  barbarous  designation  and  say,  "  That  is  my  name 
now."    II.  Christ  thebebt  distingdishes  Himself  fbom  us,  and  plainly  claims 
an  unique  relationship  to  the  whole  world.    How  absurd  it  would  be  for  one  of  us 
to  perpetually  insist  on  the  fact  that  He  was  a  man,  and  the  very  frequency  and. 
emphasis  with  which  the  name  comes  from  our  Lord's  lips  lead  one  to  suspect  that 
there  is  something  behind  it.    The  impression  is  confirmed  by  the  article  the.     1, 
Appropriately,  then,  the  name  is  used  with  suggestions  of  authority  and  dignity, 
contrasting  with  those  of  humiliation.     "  The  Son  of  Man  is  Lord  of  the  Sabbath," 
**  hath  power  OQ  earth  to  forgive  sins,"  &o.    And  it  is  significant  that  the  design 
nation  occurs  more  frequently  in  the  first  three  Gospels  than  in  the  fourth,  which  is> 
alleged  to  present  higher  notions  of  Jesus.     In  substance  Christ  claims,  what  Faal 
claimed  for  Him,  to  be  the  Second  Adam.     "  Aristotle  is  but  the  rubbish  of  an. 
Adam,"  and  Adam  is  but  the  dim  outline  sketch  of  a  Jesus.    The  one  man  as  God 
meant  him,  the  perfect  humanity,  is  He  who  claimed  that  for  Himself,  and  as  He 
did  so  said,  "  I  am  meek  and  lowly  of  heart."    "  Who  is  this  Son  of  Man  ?  "    A 
perfect  Son  of  Man  must  be  more  than  a  Son  of  man — "  the  Christ  the  Son  of  the 
living  God."    2.  The  name  is  employed  in  connections  in  which  He  desires  to  set 
Himself  forth  as  the  solitary  medium  of  all  blessing  to  mankind — "  The  Son  of  Man 
came  to  give  His  life  a  ransom  for  many,"  *'  the  angels  of  God  ascending  and 
descending,"  <fec., — the  Medium  of  all  communication  between  earth  and  heaven. 
He  who  is  perfect  manhood  touches  all  men,  and  all  men  touch  Him,  and  the  Son 
of  Man  whom  God  hath  sealed  will  give  to  every  one  of  us  bread  from  heaven.    III» 
Thb  pbedictive  characteb  of  this  designation.    If  not  a  quotation  from  it  is  an 
allusion  to  the  prophecy  of  Daniel.    Hence  we  find  the  name  occurring  in  passages 
which  refer  to  Christ's  second  coming — "Hereafter  ye  shall  see,"  &c.    "  He  hath 
given  Him  authority,"  &c.    "  Standing  at  the  right  hand  of  God.'*    1.  The  name 
carries  with  it  a  blessed  message  of  the  present  activity  and  perpetual  manhood  of 
the  risen  Lord.    Stephen  does  not  see  Him  sitting,  but  standing,  as  if  He  had  sprung 
to  His  feet  on  response  to  the  cry  of  faith  from  the  first  of  a  long  train  of  sufferers. 
He  is  the  ever-present  Helper.    2.  That  perfect  manhood  will  be  our  Judge.    It 
could  not  end  its  relationship  on  the  cross  or  at  the  Ascension.    That  He  should 
•ome  again  is  the  only  possible  completion  of  His  work.    That  Judge  is  our  Brother. 
So  in  the  deepest  sense  we  are  tried  by  our  Peer.    With  the  omniscience  of 
Divinity  will  be  blended  the  sympathy  of  humanity.     Conclusion  :  Let  us  lay  hold 
by  true  faith  on  the  mighty  work  which  He  has  done  on  the  cross,  then  we  shall 
rejoice  to  see  our  Brother  on  the  throne.    (A.  Maclaren,D.D.)       Yet  a  little  whll» 
is  the  light  with  you. — Light  and  its  little  while  : — I.  The  light.    Light  is  that 
which  reveals,  as  darkness  hides.    Christ  is  the  Light :  He  reveals  the  Father,  the 
Father's  love  and  righteousness,  and  all  the  riches  of  His  grace  ;  and  we,  opening 
our  eyes  to  take  in  this  light,  are  thereby  enlightened.    II.  The  light  with  ds. 
The  first  gleam  came  in  the  first  promise.    After  that  the  rays  multiplied.     Then 
the  Light  came  and  remained  here  for  thirty-three  years.     It  is   still,  though 
impersonally,  with  us ;  and  it  will  be  yet  more  gloriously  so  when  Christ  comes 
again.    We  may  withdraw  from  it,  but  it  never  withdraws  from  us.    We  may  shut 
our  eyes  and  our  windows,  but  the  light  still  shineth — not  starlight  or  moonlight^ 
but  sunlight.     "  The  darkness  comprehendeth  it  not."    Oh  dark  world,  child  of 
darkness,  when  wilt  thou  let  in  the  light.    III.  The  littlb  whilb  of  the  light. 
Our  Lord's  personal  presence.    There  ate  other  little  whiles.    Israel  had  herg ;  th» 


CHAP.  XII.]  ST.  JOHN.  867 

Cbnrohes  have  had  or  are  having  theirs ;  so  with  nations,  congregations,  souls.  A 
little  while  of  Sabbaths,  sermons,  sacraments,  providences,  and  all  is  done.  Then 
the  light  departs,  and  its  little  while  for  thee  may  be  near.  Improve  it.  Jesus  is 
coming,  but  with  darkness  to  the  despisers  of  the  light.  lY.  The  usino  of  ths 
LIGHT.  "  Walking  "  is  equivalent  to  the  whole  of  a  man's  life.  Our  Lord's  meaning 
is  •*  Use  this  light  for  whatever  yon  do."  1.  Believe  in  the  light,  and  in  no  other. 
The  light  of  reason,  literature,  science  will  do  nothing  for  the  soul.  At  best  they 
are  but  starlight,  clear  but  cold,  distinct  but  distant.  God  proclaims  His  testimony 
concerning  this  Ught,  and  it  wants  admission.  2.  Become  children  of  the  light. 
He  into  whom  it  enters  becomes  a  child  of  light,  and  a  light  to  others.  V.  Thb 
BBFUSAii  TO  DSE  THE  LIGHT — by  neglect,  delay,  hatred,  rejection.  {H.  Bonar,  D.D.) 
Too  late : — A  man  who  would  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  this  world  said  it  was  too  soon 
for  him  to  think  of  another  world.  He  journeyed,  and  was  taken  ill  very  suddenly, 
and  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  at  an  inn.  The  people  there  sent  for  a  clergyman. 
He  came  ;  and  the  dying  man,  looking  him  in  the  face,  before  he  could  speak,  said 
to  him,  "  Sir,  it  is  too  late  1 "  The  minister  said,  "  Christ  is  able  to  save  to  the 
Qttermost,"  and  explained  the  gospel  to  him.  He  replied,  "  Sir,  it  is  too  late  1 " 
The  clergyman  asked,  "  Will  you  allow  me  to  pray  with  you  ?  "  His  only  reply  was, 
"  Sir,  it  is  too  late  I "  He  died,  saying,  "  It  is  too  late  I  "  {Arvine. )  The 
similitude  of  the  light. — I.  A  gracious  pkivilege.  *•  While,"  or  "  as  ye  have,"  &c. 
1.  Great.  A  day  without  light,  a  world  without  the  sun,  expressive  but  faint 
emblems  of  a  soul  without  spiritual  illumination,  of  humanity  without  Christ.  2. 
Present.  The  world  was  never  without  it,  but  only  since  the  Incarnation  has  it 
attained  to  meridian  splendour.  3.  Temporary.  It  is  not  permanent  to  us  any 
more  than  it  was  to  the  Jews,  or  than  the  natural  light  is  to  any.  IL  A  solemn 
DUTY.  "Believe  in  the  light."  1.  Plain.  Christ's  language  neither  vague  nor 
ambiguous.  2.  Easy.  It  is  not  work  or  suffer  for,  but  only  believe,  trust,  walk  in 
the  light.  S.  Continuous.  It  is  not  one  act  of  faith  and  then  all  is  done.  "  Walk  " 
implies  continuance  and  progress.  III.  A  gloeious  result — "  That  ye  may  become," 
&o.  1.  Magnificent.  The  light,  for  man,  can  illuminate  his  understanding,  purify 
his  heart,  quicken  his  conscience,  vitalize  his  spirit,  direct  his  conduct,  beautify  and 
dignify  His  whole  life.  It  can  put  Him  in  direct  contact  with  and  assimilate  him 
to  Him  who  is  the  Light.  2.  Designed.  This  it  does  not  unexpectedly  or  acci- 
dentally, but  purposely  and  necessarily.  3.  Certain.  He  who  walks  in  the  hght 
will  as  certainly  be  transfigured  by  it  as  the  flower  is  transformed  into  a  spectacle  of 
beauty  by  the  beams  of  the  sun.  Lessons — 1.  Thankfulness  to  Him  who  hath 
furnished  the  light.  2.  Watchfulness  lest  the  light  should  pass  away  unimproved. 
3.  Hopefulness  with  respect  to  the  future  of  those  who  believe  on  the  Saviour.  4. 
PitiJuluess  for  the  fate  of  those  who  still  walk  in  darkness.  (T.  Whitelaio,  D.D.) 
The  gospel  of  light: — The  gospel  is  "light."  This  marks  its  origin  from  heaven. 
It  is  no  human  device,  but  comes  from  God  Himself.  It  is  "  light."  This  denotes 
its  truth.  It  is  fitting  that  what  is  truth,  without  mixture  of  error,  should  be 
compared  to  the  most  simple  substance  in  nature.  It  is  called  "light  "  because  of 
its  penetrating  and  subtle  nature.  Kindle  it  up,  and  no  shade  is  so  gross  that  it 
cannot  penetrate  it ;  there  is  no  imposture  so  weU  devised  which  it  will  not  expose  ; 
thare  are  no  works  of  darkness  which  it  will  not  drag  to  light  and  shame  ;  there  is 
no  conscience  so  callous  but  this  hght  will  search  it.  It  is  called  "  light,"  because 
of  the  discoveries  which  it  makes.  It  is  a  "great  light."  It  makes  manifest  the 
invisible  God,  in  His  awful  and  mild  glories.  It  shows  Him  in  His  works,  His 
providence,  and  His  grace ;  it  opens  to  view  the  path  of  peace  which  has  been  so 
long  lost ;  it  presents  the  model  and  the  promises  of  holiness ;  displays  the  connec- 
tion between  the  present  state  of  probation  and  eternity ;  it  plays  round  the  darkness 
of  the  tomb,  and  illuminates  the  mansion  of  the  grave  with  hope  of  a  resurrection  ; 
it  makes  the  future  start  to  sight,  and  is  both  "  the  substance  of  things  hoped  for, 
and  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen."  But  it  is  called  "  light  "  for  another  reason. 
It  is  life  and  health  to  the  world;  it  shows  us  ♦'  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,"  rising 
with  "  healing  in  His  wings. "  The  comparison  is  made  to  the  parent  bird,, 
warming  her  young  to  hfe,  and  giving  health  and  strength  by  brooding  over  them. 
Such  is  the  sun  to  nature.  It  warms  to  life,  purges  the  atmosphere  of  its  vapours, 
and  renews  the  health  of  the  world.  Such  is  the  light  of  the  gospel.  Where  it 
prevails,  spiritual  life  is  inspired,  and  the  moral  disorders  of  the  soul  give  place  to 
health  and  vigour.  (JJ.  Watson.)  Children  of  light : — I.  Light  is  the  symbol  of 
— I.  God  the  Father  (1  John  i.  5].  He  is  the  Medium  through  which  all  spiritual 
things  are  discerned.     It  is  only  m  God,  as  light,  that  we  can  see  God  or  have  any 


808  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xa, 

notion  of  Him.  The  old  pervasiveness  of  light,  too,  is  an  apt  emblem  of  omni- 
presence. 2.  Christ  Himself  (chap.  i.  4).  He  is  the  Light  of  God  to  man  in  a 
state  of  darkness.  Without  Him  we  cannot  know  God,  ourselves,  or  the  relations 
between  the  two.  3.  The  written  Word  (Psa.  cxix.  105).  The  fact  of  our  receiving 
the  light  in  any  of  these  senses  throws  upon  us  a  vast  amount  of  responsibility. 
II.  Believe  in  the  lioht.  Not  beUeve  it,  or  about  it,  or  reason  about  it,  but  believe 
so  as  to  participate  in  it.  Of  what  use  is  it  for  man  to  believe  in  the  fact  of  the  sun, 
or  in  some  theory  about  it,  or  to  reason  about  its  effects,  especially  if  he  is  charged 
with  some  mission  which  requires  its  light,  if  he  persists  in  keeping  his  shutters 
closed.  Yet  how  many  there  are  who,  requiring  the  Light  of  the  World  to  illuminate 
their  path  to  heaven,  content  themselves  with  mere  orthodox  views  about  Him, 
Numbers  are  more  ready  to  argue  about  the  Divinity  of  Christ  than  to  say  with 
adoring  trust,  •*  My  Lord  and  my  God."  Numbers  more  are  content  with  acknow- 
ledging God's  claims  and  the  reasonableness  of  Bible  precepts  who  never  think  of 
fulfilling  the  one  or  walking  by  the  other.  III.  Childben  op  the  light  means 
more  than  being  enlightened.  *•  Children  "  implies  parentage,  propagating  power. 
Light  produces  light,  and  by  believing  in  Him  who  is  the  Light  we  become  light  in 
the  Lord.  And  if  light  as  applied  to  God  sets  forth  His  perfections,  the  enjoyment 
of  that  light  means  the  perpetration  in  us  of  holiness,  truthfulness,  &o.  (G.  Fisk, 
LL.B. )  Gospel  light : — I.  There  abe  several  kinds  of  light  which  yet  pall  short 
OP  the  gospel,  and  leave  a  man  in  fatal  obscurity.  As — 1.  The  light  of  nature.  2. 
There  is  the  light  of  infidel  philosophy.  This  is  full  of  self-importance  and  swelling 
pride.  3.  There  is  the  light  of  enthusiasm.  This  is  a  sort  of  wild-fire,  it  blazes  as 
straw,  bewilders  the  mind,  and  produces  an  obstinacy  not  easily  eradicated.  4.  But 
Christ  is  the  "Light  of  Life."  That  which  is  pure,  unadulterated,  and  unchangeable. 
This  blessed  light  centres  in  Christ,  and  emanates  from  Him.  Jesus  Christ  neglected 
— disregarded — undervalued,  must  give  the  death-wound  to  a  man's  brightest  hopes, 
and  his  best  feUcity  (see  1  Cor.  zvi.  22).  II.  The  darkness  of  the  heart  is  uadb 
EVIDENT  BY  SOUS  CERTAIN  SYfiiFTOMS.  1.  Gross  ignorauce ;  a  mind  perfectly  unin- 
formed. The  Sadducees  did  not  know  the  Scriptures  nor  the  power  of  God.  2.  A 
heart  inflated  with  vanity,  and  puffed  up  with  its  own  consequence.  Some  of  the 
Corinthians  were  thus  puffed  up.  If  they  had  a  Httle  light,  they  had  much 
darkness.  3.  Self-righteousness  and  self-sufficiency  are  evidences  of  positive 
darkness  dwelling  within  (see  Bom.  x.  3,  4 ;  Matt,  xxiii.).  Affected  royalty  in  a 
lunatic  provokes  a  smile,  but  self-righteousness  in  a  sinner  ought  to  produce 
astonishment  and  grief.  III.  The  way  to  be  secure  is  to  take  heed.  To  look 
well  within  and  wisely  around.  We  must  guard  against  pride,  the  operations  of 
which  preclude  the  entrance  of  truth,  as  the  gay  colouring  of  cathedral  windows 
excludes  the  common  light  of  day.  We  must  guard  against  prepossessions  and 
prejudice.  These  often  operate  upon  the  mind  greatly  to  a  man's  disadvantage. 
Prejudice  will  turn  that  which  is  beautiful  into  deformity,  and  then  reject  it. 
Beware  of  two  great  evils,  neghgence  and  unbelief.  Negligence  (see  Heb.  vi.  12 ; 
Prov.  xix.  15).  Unbehef  (see  Heb.  iii.  12-19).  Do  not  resist  conviction,  do  not 
Bhut  out  the  light.  1.  Let  the  infidel  take  heed  lest  his  boasted  light  terminate  in 
a  worse  than  Egyptian  darkness.  2.  Let  the  proud,  self-righteous  Pharisee  come 
down  from  the  pinnacle  of  his  elevation,  and  seek  both  light  and  life  in  Jesus 
Christ.  3.  Let  the  profane  sinner,  venturesome  as  he  now  is,  look  out  in  time ;  go 
to  Jesus  Christ  the  Sun  of  righteousness,  in  time.  IV.  Mental  darkness,  that  op 
the  understanding,  is  the  worst  kind  op  darkness.  It  produces  enmity  to  the 
truth  of  God,  and  neglect  of  His  ways.  Permit  me  to  give  you  a  word  of  friendly 
counsel  in  reference  to  this  light.  1.  Set  a  just  value  on  it.  Buy  it  at  any  expense, 
sell  it  not  on  any  account.  2.  Labour  to  gain  more  of  it.  3.  Communicate  it  to 
others,  and  that  to  the  extent  of  your  abilities.  4.  Eemove  obstacles  to  its  shining 
whenever  you  can.  6.  Triumph  in  the  happy  victories  which  the  light  and  truth 
of  God  may  at  any  time  gain,  in  any  one  family,  at  any  one  place.  6.  Look 
forward  to  its  final  and  complete  triumphs,  its  unfading  and  eternal  splend&ur! 
{The  Evangelist.)  Believing  in  the  light  and  its  effects: — In  certain  parts  of 
Asia  there  is  a  curious  plant  which  grows  in  the  forests.  These  forests  are  very 
dense  and  gloomy,  for  the  trees  grow  thick  together,  and  twine  their  branches  into 
one  another  at  the  top,  till  the  forest  almost  seems  to  have  a  great  roof  over  it 
keeping  out  the  sunlight.  This  plant  at  first  is  a  very  slim  and  feeble-looking  plant 
— just  a  straight  stalk,  with  only  a  thin  leaf  here  and  there  upon  it.  But  it  shoots 
«p  and  up,  and  gathers  strength  as  it  grows,  till  it  becomes  like  a  tall  bamboo  rod. 
Axid  now  ii  reaches  up  to  the  first  branches  of  the  trees,  then  up  to  the  middle  ones. 


CHAP,  rn.]  ST.  JOHN.  SW 

then  np  to  the  topmost  bonghs,  and  pierces  its  way  through  the  thick  roof  of  leaves 
at  the  top ;  then,  for  the  first  time,  it  lifts  its  head  unto  the  sunshine.  And  now,  ii 
does  what  it  never  did  and  never  could  have  done  before.  It  puts  out  beautiful 
blossoms  and  flowers ;  and,  by  and  by,  out  of  these  it  brings  fruits  and  seeds. 
Once  it  has  become  a  child  of  the  light  it  begins  to  blossom  and  be  fruitful.  This 
explains  the  text  in  this  way  :  at  fii'st  the  plant  had  a  little  light,  and  that  Uttla 
made  it  glad.  It  loved  the  light,  and  believed  it  was  good  for  it.  It  believed  in  the 
hght,  and  it  found  that  the  more  it  loved  the  light  the  more  light  it  got,  because  it 
was  growing  more  up  to  it,  and  from  being  a  sickly,  pale  plant  it  became  strong  and 
beautiful.  Now  Jesus  is  the  Light  of  the  soul.  We  know  a  little  about  Him,  that 
He  loved  as  and  died  to  save  us,  and  wants  to  make  us  good.  We  have  a  little  light, 
and  what  we  have  now  to  do  is  to  love  that  light  and  believe  that  light,  that  our 
souls  may  be  changed  by  the  light  from  day  to  day,  till  we  also  become  children  of 
light.  Suppose  that  plant,  when  it  had  only  a  little  light,  had  said  to  itself,  "  Ah,  I 
don't  want  the  light,  I  don't  want  the  light ;  I  am  tired  of  always  trying  to  grow 
higher  into  the  hght,  I  think  it  would  be  much  nicer  if  I  could  become  a  creeper 
and  grow  on  the  dark  ground  1  "  Well,  if  the  plant  said  that  and  did  that,  it  would 
bend  down  and  down  and  away  from  the  light,  and  it  would  receive  less  light  and 
less  light,  and  it  would  never  have  any  flowers  or  any  kind  of  fruit,  just  because 
when  it  had  the  light  it  would  not  believe  in  the  light,  or  try  to  get  more  of  it,  or  love 
it.  It  is  the  same  with  you.  If  you  do  not  want  that  light,  if  you  do  not  believe 
in  it,  if  you  prefer  to  do  this  thing  and  that  which  is  sinful,  then  you  will  be  growing 
away  from  the  light,  and  receive  less  and  less  light  still,  and  you  will  forget  the 
light  you  once  had,  and  your  life  wiU  be  lost.  (/.  R.  Howat.)  Light  limited  in 
duration : —Alex&ndeT  the  Great,  when  he  besieged  a  certain  city,  kindled  a  torch^ 
and  offered  pardon  and  peace  to  the  besieged  citizens  if  they  would  surrender  them> 
Belv3!  so  long  as  the  torch  continued  to  burn,  but  threatened  them  with  destructioD 
and  death  if  they  did  not  surrender  during  the  blazing  light  of  the  torch.  So  will 
it  be  with  God  and  ourselves.  Let  us  therefore  work  while  we  can  enjoy  the  light 
that  shines  from  heaven  and  leads  us  to  heaven,  for  when  this  light  is  quenched,  if 
we  have  not  before  surrendered  ourselves  to  God,  we  must  certainly,  as  He  has 
warned  us,  meet  with  eternal  death  and  destruction  at  His  hands.  (T.  H.  Leary, 
D.C.L.)  Delay  leads  to  the  winter  of  the  soul : — How  dangerous  to  defer  those 
momentous  reformations  which  conscience  is  solemnly  preaching  to  the  heart  1  II 
they  are  neglected,  the  difficulty  and  indisposition  are  increasing  every  month.  The 
mind  is  receding,  degree  after  degree,  from  the  warm  and  hopeful  zone ;  till  at  last 
it  will  enter  the  arctic  circle,  and  become  fixed  in  relentless  and  eternal  ice.  {J, 
Foster.) 

Ters.  37-50.  But  though  He  had  done  so  many  miracles  ....  yet  they  believed 

not  on  Him. — Owr  Lord's  ministry : — I.  Its  details.  1.  The  doctrines  He  taught 
(vers.  44-50).  These  words  are  an  abridged  statement  of  our  Lord's  words  uttered 
at  different  times.  In  verse  36  we  have  the  formal  close  of  our  Lord's  mission,  and 
this  summary  appropriately  follows.  It  teaches — (1)  The  Divinity  of  His  missioa 
(ver.  49).  There  is  nothing  that  our  Lord  stated  more  frequently  or  plainly  thaa 
this.  His  name  for  God  is  often  "  He  who  sent  Me."  This  claim  leaves  no 
alternative  between  receiving  Him  as  a  Divine  Messenger  or  rejecting  Him  as  fanatio 
or  impostor.  (2)  The  Divinity  of  His  doctrine  (vers.  44,  49,  60).  He  did  not  bring 
it  forward  as  an  opinion  of  the  man  Jesus,  but  as  the  truth  He  bad  heard  of  the 
Father.  (3)  The  Divinity  of  His  Person.  His  authority  here  is  clearly  co-ordinate 
with  til  at  of  the  Father.  (4)  The  design  of  His  mission.  To  be  a  light  to  the 
world  ;  not  to  judge  the  world  bnt  to  save  it.  The  two  declarations  are  synonymous. 
Men  are  in  a  state  of  darkness,  i.e.,  of  ignorance,  error,  guilt  and  depravity;  at  a 
distance  from  God  who  is  "  light."  Jesus  is  the  "  light  "  as  He  is  the  author  and 
bestower  of  th"t  salvation  which  dispels  our  moral  darkness.  (5)  The  manner  of 
being  interested  in  His  salvation.  "  He  that  believeth  on  Me."  (6)  The  doom  of 
those  who  refuse  to  believe  (ver.  48).  2.  The  manner  of  His  teaching  (ver.  44). 
(1)  PubUo.  He  did  not  confine  His  teaching  to  a  few,  and  like  Mohammed  and 
other  impostors  conceal  His  doctrines,  till  by  private  exertions  He  had  secured  « 
considerable  body  of  followers.  (2)  Earnest.  Sometimes  He  quietly  "  talked  with 
the  people,"  but  at  other  times  He  cried  aloud  and  spared  not.  The  conviction  H« 
had  of  tne  truth  and  importance  of  His  message  produced  a  holy  excitement.  (3)  Fear- 
less. He  well  knew  how  unpalatable  His  doctrines  were  and  how  great  the  dangers 
to  which  He  exposed  Himself.  Bat  He  "  set  His  face  as  a  flint,  and  refused  to  ba> 
VOL.  n.  24 


170  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xit, 

BBhamed."  In  all  this  Christ  is  a  Model  to  His  own  ministers.  8.  The  evidenca 
He  produced.  (1)  He  did  miracles,  i.e.,  "  signs,"  tokens  or  signals  of  the  truth  of 
His  doctrines.  These  miracles  were — (2)  ••  Great,"  as  the  words  "  so  many  "  may  b« 
rendered— far  and  obviously  exceeding  human  power.  (3)  Many,  (a)  More  than 
those  of  Old  Testament  prophets,  (b)  Many  in  kind,  remarkable  for  variety.  (4) 
••  Before  "  His  countrymen ;  not  like  pretended  miracles  of  later  ages  for  the  most 
part  in  the  presence  of  those  interested  in  supporting  His  system.  (5)  These 
miracles  were  also — (a)  Beneficient.  (b)  Unostentatious,  (c)  At  a  time  and  in 
circumstances  where  imposture  could  be  detected,  (d)  In  conformity  with  Messianio 
predictions.  II.  Its  eesults.  1.  The  body  of  the  Jewish  nation  did  not  believe. 
(1)  This  disbelief  fulfilled  prophecy  (vers.  38-41).  (2)  In  this  prophecy  we  have 
the  true  cause  of  their  rejecting  Him.  They  had  blinded  eyes  and  hardened  hearts, 
and  therefore  they  could  not  perceive  and  understand.  (3)  This  blindness  was  first 
voluntary  and  self-imposed,  then  judicial,  a  punishment  of  God.  2.  A  minority 
who  did  believe  from  worldly  motives  suppressed  their  convictions  (vers.  42-43). 

SJ.  Brown,  D.D.)  The  rejected  messenger : — I.  The  closed  ministby  (ver.  36). 
:t  had  been  a  ministry  of — 1.  Manifested  glory.  Glory  one  of  the  key-notes  of  the 
Gospel.  The  Divine  Being  looked  upon  by  Israel  in  the  first  temple  had  been 
rejected  by  Israel  in  the  second.  This  glory — (1)  Was  of  a  higher  order  than  that 
Been  by  the  prophet.  That  was  symbohcal,  this  real.  (2)  Of  more  frequent 
exhibition.  He  had  only  one  glimpse,  they  repeated  manifestations.  2.  Offered 
grace.  The  ministry  was  one  persistent  effort  to  secure  their  personal  and  social 
redemption.  3.  Attesting  power  (ver.  37).  II.  The  forsaken  people.  "Did  hide 
Himself"  (ver.  36).  1.  The  unbelieving  majority  (ver.  37).  The  completest 
evidence  had  been  laid  before  them.  Yet  they  voluntarily  closed  their  eyes  to  the 
light.  One  would  have  expected  the  opposite  from  ver.  13.  But  Christ  was  not 
deceived  by  popular  applause.  2.  The  beUeving  minority.  (1)  Considerable, 
embracing  many  of  the  rulers.  (2)  Sincere,  though  defective.  (3)  Timid,  afraid  of 
excommunication.  (4)  Beprehensible,  preferring  human  approbation  to  Divine. 
III.  The  fultilled  pbediction  (ver.  38).  1.  The  prediction.  (1)  That  the  report 
of  Jehovah's  suffering  Servant  would  not  be  believed.  (2)  That  the  "  signs  "  would 
not  be  understood.  2.  The  fulfilment.  This  came  to  pass  when  the  nati  on  mis- 
interpreted the  signs,  disbelieved  the  message,  and  rejected  the  person  of  Christ. 
3.  The  connection  :  the  fulfilment  necessary  because  of  the  prediction.  (1)  Not 
that  compulsion  was  laid  upon  the  Jews  to  reject  Christ  to  save  the  credit  of  a 
prophet.  But — (2)  that  the  foreordained  programme  of  human  history  should  come 
to  pass.  That,  however,  did  not  exempt  the  Jews  from  gnilt.  IV.  The  accomplished 
DBSioM  (ver.  39).  1.  The  law  of  moral  hardening.  The  truth  rejected  always  results 
in  a  diminution  of  the  soul's  susceptibility  for  receiving  it.  2.  The  Author  of  this 
law,  God.  It  being  part  of  the  moral  order  of  the  universe  (Epb.  iv.  19), 
God  does  not  shrink  from  the  responsibility.  3.  The  working  out  of  this  law. 
They  could  do  no  other  than  reject  the  Saviour,  because  they  hated  the 
light.  Lessons — 1.  The  day  of  grace  may  terminate  before  the  day  of  hfe.  2. 
Unbehef  eeldom  springs  from  lack  of  evidence.  3.  No  prediction  of  God  will  ever 
fail.  4.  The  Divine  foreknowledge  exempts  no  man  from  responsibility.  6.  It  is 
perilous  to  shut  one's  eyes  against  the  light  of  truth.  6.  Unbelief  is  a  disease  for 
which  Christ  is  the  only  Physician.  7.  Christ  the  healer  of  souls  is  the  Jehovah 
of  the  Old  Testament.  8.  It  is  not  enough  to  believe  on  Christ ;  we  must  also  confess 
Him.  9.  They  who  foUow  Christ  must  expect  persecution.  10.  Who  love  the 
praise  of  men  more  than  the  glory  of  God  cannot  be  saved.  (T.  Whitelaw,  D.D.) 
Jesus  and  tlie  Jews : — I.  A  quiltt  unbelief  (ver.  37).    Why  did  they  not  believe  ? 

1.  Not  for  want  of  evidence.    For  many  miracles  had  been  wrought  amongst  them. 

2.  Not  for  want  of  warning  (ver.  38).  The  ministry  that  was  fitted  by  God  to  bring 
them  to  spiritual  knowledge  and  repentance  they  turned  to  opposite  results  (ver.  40), 
When  a  man  has  not  three  things — (1)  Evidence  ;  (2)  The  capacity  for  examining 
evidence,  and  (3)  The  opportunity  fordoing  so — his  unbelief  is  not  guilty ;  but  this 
is  not  the  unbelief  of  England  to-day.  II.  A  cowabdlv  faith  (vers.  42-43)  arising 
from — 1.  Fear  of  men.  2.  Love  of  popularity.  "  Glory  "  would  be  a  better  word 
than  praise.  It  is  imphed — (1)  That  between  the  glory  of  men  and  the  glory  of  God 
there  is  an  essential  difference.  Glory  in  the  estimation  of  men  is  wealth,  fame, 
titles,  &o.  In  the  eyes  of  God  these  are  worthless.  The  glory  of  God  is  holinesd. 
(2)  That  a  higher  appreciation  of  the  glory  of  man  than  of  God  is  inimical  to 
a  courageous  faith.  The  faith  of  Peter  before  the  Sanhedrim ;  •'  we  cannot  but  speak," 
Aol,  is  the  true  type.    HI.  Bedempxxvb  tbusifulness  (ver.  44).    1.  It  is  faith  ia 


«HiP.  rn.]  ST.  JOHN.  871 

dhrist's  identity  with  the  Father.  Christ  claimed  no  position  independent  of  the 
Father.  2.  It  is  faith,  the  absence  of  which  tends  to  a  terrible  doom— *' Dark- 
ness," i.e.,  ignorance,  remorse,  despair.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  No  welcome  for  Christ: 
— Perhaps  there  is  no  episode  recorded  in  history  more  interesting  than  that  of 
■Charles  V.  when  he  landed  at  Tunis.  Ten  thousand  men  and  women  who  were 
slaves  within  the  city,  when  they  heard  of  the  approach  of  their  dehverer,  rose  and 
broke  their  chains,  and  rushed  toward  the  gate  as  the  emperor  was  entering  the 
town  ;  and  this  mighty  procession  knelt  down,  hailed  him  as  their  dehverer,  and 
prayed  God  to  bless  him.  But  when  Christ  the  world's  dehverer  comes  to  His  own 
His  own,  alas,  receive  Him  not.  That  the  sasdng  of  Esaias  the  prophet  might  be 
fulfilled. — The  Gospel  report : — I.  The  gospel  eeport  is  true  and  DrviNELY  mighty. 
1.  It  is  true  because  it  is  imphed  that  it  ought  to  be  believed.  What  is  genuinely 
believable  must  be  true.  2.  It  is  mighty  because  called  "  The  arm  of  the  Lord." 
Eedemptive  truth  is  "  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation."  II.  Though  tbue,  its 
TBtJXH  18  OFTEN  CNBELiEVED  AND  UNFELT.  It  was  SO  in  the  days  of  the  prophets,  of 
iJhrist,  of  the  apostles,  and  of  all  subsequent  times.  "  Therefore  they  could  not 
beheve  " — not  because  of  the  prediction,  or  of  any  Divine  decree,  but  because  of  the 
state  of  their  minds.  As  long  as  men  are  in  the  depths  of  moral  corruption  they 
can  neither  see  nor  feel  Divine  things.  A  malignant  nature  cannot  see  love,  nor  an 
avaricious  generosity  and  disinterestedness.      HI.  These  mobal  states  op  mind 

dlMICAL  TO  FAITH  ABE  OFTEN  INTENSIFIED   BY  LISTENING    TO    THE    BEPOBT.       "  He  hath 

blinded,"  <fec.  (Matt.  xiii.  14  ;  Acts  xxviii.  26).  It  is  a  fact  proved  by  the  nature  of 
things,  and  patent  to  the  observation  of  all,  that  the  hearer  of  the  gospel  who  believes 
not  it  made  more  blind  and  hard  by  listening.  Then  as  free  agents  have  the  power 
of  counteracting  the  moral  tendencies  of  things,  turning  blessings  into  curses  and 
vice  versa.  The  unbeliever  is  erer  doing  the  former  and  the  believer  the  latter.  IV. 
The  awful  besultb  of  the  gospel  upon  men  possessing  these  states  of  mind 
ABB  ALL  FOBEKNOWN  OP  GoD.  The  prophct  was  told  what  would  be  the  fate  of  his 
*' report."  But  God's  foreknowledge  did  not  render  the  result  necessary,  nor 
interfere  with  freedom  of  action,  nor  lessen  guilt.     V.  Although  God  foreknowb 

THE    TEBBIBLB    CONSEQUENCES    OP    THE     GOSPEL    ON    THE    UNBELIEVING   HEAEEB,   HB 

STILL  COMMANDS  IT  TO  BE  PBEACHED.  The  proclamation  of  Gospel  truth  is  a  good 
in  itself,  and  a  good  to  the  universe,  though  it  may  enhance  the  misery  of  millions. 
Though  God  knows  that  storms  will  spread  fearful  devastation,  jet  He  sends  them 
forth.     Man  is  not  the  only  creature  to  be  served.     (Ibid.)  The  Gospel  not 

believed: — I.  The  gospel  is  a  message  ob  eeport  ro  man  upon  mattees  of 
auPEEMB  impobtance.  a  system  introduced  by  such  agency  as  that  of  the  Son  of 
God  could  not  be  insignificant.  The  gospel  is  a  message — 1.  As  to  the  character 
and  claims  of  God — the  Majesty  of  His  nature,  the  harmony  of  His  attributes,  the 
import  of  all  His  relations  to  the  universe  as  Creator,  Governor,  Benefactor  and 
Judge.  2.  As  to  the  character  and  condition  of  mankind ;  our  depravity  consequent 
on  the  fall,  our  alienation  from  God,  our  exposure  to  the  curse.  Beyond  the  gospel 
announcements  on  these  subjects  we  want  nothing.  Here  are  the  principles  of  true 
philosophy  and  untiring  observation.  Outside  them  all  is  delusion.  3.  As  to  the 
method  of  salvation  by  the  intervention  of  a  Mediator — the  counsels  of  eternity 
respecting  it,  the  Author  of  it,  the  nature  of  His  oflQce,  the  value  of  His  sacrifice, 
and  the  effects  on  earth  and  in  heaven  are  all  clearly  and  fully  set  forth.    II.  The 

GOSPEL   IS    communicated   TO     MAN   FOB   THE    EXPBESS     PURPOSE     OP    BBINO     BELIEVED. 

1.  The  report  of  the  gospel  is  worthy  of  faith  on  account  of  the  evidence  by  which 
it  is  confirmed.  We  are  not  called  upon  to  believe  it  without  evidence.  The 
historic  testimony  to  its  authenticity,  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy,  the  performing  of 
miracles,  its  wonderful  adaptation  to  the  circumstances  of  all  men  and  its  wonderful 
achievements  constitute  a  conclusive  claim  to  the  embrace  of  every  enlightened  mind. 

2.  Faith  in  the  report  of  the  gospel  is  the  only  medium  by  which  it  can  be  rendered 
available  to  our  safety  and  final  happiness.  Observe  the  statement  of  Scripture 
respecting  the  connection  between — (1)  Faith  and  justification.  (2)  Faith  and 
sanctification.  (3)  Faith  and  the  salvation  which  is  the  glorious  consummation  of 
justification  and  sanctification.  3.  Faith  in  the  gospel  results  from  the  operation 
of  Divine  power  on  the  soul.  "  The  arm  of  the  Lord  "  signifies  His  power,  and 
the  manifestation  of  that  arm  consists  in  the  implantation  of  the  principle  of  faith. 
It  is  an  affecting  thought  that  nothing  can  overcome  the  depraved  increduhty  of 
the  human  heart  but  an  agency  omnipotent  and  Divine.  This  agency  is  the  Holy 
Spirit    secured    by  the  death,  resurrection,  &c.,  of   Christ.      III.    It  becomes  4 

•LATTEB    or    SOLBMN    INQUIBY   AS    TO    THE    NUMBEB   B7    WHOM    THE    GOSPEL    HAS    BSEX 


B7«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ciu».  xn 

EUBRAOED.  **Who  hath  believed?"  1.  The  implication  which  this  inquiry 
involves,  viz. :  that  the  number  is  comparatively  small.  It  was  bo  in  the  days  ot 
the  prophet,  in  those  of  our  Lord  and  the  apostles,  and  in  subsequent  Christian 
history.  And  now,  while  we  must  not  overlook  the  revived  interest  in  religion  and 
the  success  of  missions,  how  few  are  the  saved  in  comparison  with  the  unsaved.  2. 
The  results  which  from  that  implication  must  be  produced.  (1)  Compassion  for 
sinners.  (2)  Exertion  for  their  salvation.  (3)  Prayer  that  our  efforts  may  be  blessed. 
(J.  Parsons.)  Therefore  they  could  not  believe. — The  loss  of  faith: — I.  Thb 
TEMPEBAMENT  WHICH  BENDERS  FAITH  IMPOSSIBLE.  The  Statement  is  a  strong  one  and  is 
derived  from  Isaiah  vi.  9,  10.  This  refers  to  no  arbitrary  act  of  Divine  sovereignty. 
The  Hebrews  never  conceived  of  a  mere  mechanical  law,  but  regarded  all  sequence 
as  a  mode  of  God's  power.  And  as  overlooking  intermediate  cause  they  spoke  o£ 
Him  as  making  day  and  night,  so  they  spoke  of  Him  as  making  spiritual  day 
and  night.  In  the  stolidity  inevitable  when  the  soul  refuses  the  report  of  God's 
messengers,  and  closes  itself  against  the  light,  they  beheld  law,  and  beholding  law 
they  discerned  God.  St.  John  dwells  much  upon  cans  and  cannots  (chap  v.  19, 
30  ;  vi.  44 ;  iii.  3),  which  refer  to  impossibilities  which  have  their  root  in  the  pre- 
sence or  absence  of  certain  dispositions ;  and  the  "  could  not "  here  implies  the 
operation  of  a  spirit  inconpalible  with  trust  in  Christ.  The  difficulty  of  ver.  34 
arose  out  of  a  state  of  mind  impervious  to  Christ's  manifest  Divine  life.  Intellectual 
cavillings  were  allowed  to  intercept  spiritual  light,  and  so  they  could  not  believe. 
For  the  same  reason  many  do  not  believe  now.  There  is  a  type  of  mind  which  ia 
often  praised  as  a  sign  of  intellectual  smartness — disputatious,  so  constantly  posing 
as  debater  or  critic  that  the  light  which  would  illumine  doubts  cannot  get  into  the 
heart.  Such  should  deeply  ponder  the  text.  U.  The  SpiBirtJAi,  inaction  which 
INVOLVES  THE  LOSS  OF  FAITH  (vers.  42,  43).  Compare  this  with  chap.  viii.  45-52. 
Only  one  then  protested,  now  we  learn  that  there  was  a  considerable  party  in  favour 
of  Jesus  although  prudential  considerations  prevented  them  from  confessing  Him. 
What  was  the  consequence  of  their  timidity  ?  A  few  days  after  the  hiding  of  Jesus, 
they  were  all  with  two  exceptions  implicated  in  the  plottings  which  issued  in  the 
crucifixion.  It  is  dangerous  to  delay  the  expression  of  conviction  in  appropriate 
action.  Christ  requires  confession,  and  no  peculiarity  of  disposition  should  hinder 
it.  So-called  reserved  people  run  the  risk  of  weakening  their  own  faith  and  love  &9 
well  as  hiding  God's  righteousness  (Psa.  xl.  10).  "  He  who  is  not  for  Me  is  against 
Me  "  (Rom  x.  8-10).  III.  The  action  in  which  faith  is  pbesebved  and  peefected 
(vers.  35,  36,  46,  cf.  Eph.  iv.  15 ;  v.  13).  1.  Believe  and  walk.  The  error  of  the 
people  is  that  they  stand  still,  putting  their  scruples  between  them  and  Christ. 
His  command  is.  Use  what  light  you  have ;  set  yourselves  in  the  path  which  faith 
in  the  light  shall  indicate  (Hosea  vi.  3).  2.  Believe  that  yon  may  be  the  children 
of  light.  Not  to  believe  is  to  pass  into  darkness.  (J.  M.  Lang,  D.D.)  Never- 
theless, among  the  chief  rulers  also  many  believed  on  Him. — The  conduct  of  the 
rulers: — There  were  rulers,  chief  rulers,  and  many  of  them  believed.  What  a 
pleasing  circumstance.  God  grant  that  it  may  be  the  same  with  our  rulers  up  to 
the  sovereign ;  but  may  their  faith  go  further  ;  for  the  Jewish  potentates  did  not 
confess  Christ  because  they  feared  men  and  were  anxious  to  secure  their  praise.  I. 
There  abe  diffeeent  wats  of  believing  in  Christ.  Faith  is  made  a  great  matter 
of  in  Scripture.  Salvation  hangs  altogether  on  it,  "  He  that  believeth  in  the  Son 
hath  everlasting  life."  Are  we  then  to  infer  that  every  one  who  is  convinced  that 
Christ  is  the  Saviour  shall  be  saved  7  No,  for  the  rulers  were  thus  convinced,  and 
there  are  many  who  believe  all  the  truths  of  the  Bible  and  yet  are  not  believers. 
We  read  that  the  devils  believe  and  tremble,  but  never  that  the  devils  believe  and  live. 
The  text  helps  us  to  discriminate  between  a  true  and  a  false  faith.  The  faith  of  the 
rulers  was  one  which  could  lie  in  their  bosoms  and  could  be  smothered  by  fear  of 
man  and  love  of  his  praise.  But  a  true  faith  cannot  be  stifled.  It  must  speak  out 
(Bom.  X.  9).  And  not  only  will  the  lips  speak  out,  but  the  life  in  all  the  graces  of 
the  Christian  character.  We  live  in  days  when  it  is  no  disgrace  to  say  that  we  are 
Christians,  but  to  show  it.  II.  There  are  two  great  obstacles  to  faith.  1.  The 
fear  of  man  as  withering  now  as  then.  "  What  will  the  world  say  ?  "  often  casts  a 
damp  on  godly  resolutions.  Men  cannot  bear  the  thought  of  ridicule,  and  so  lower 
the  standard  of  religious  conduct  and  conform  to  the  world.  But  grace  enables  the 
true  believer  to  say,  "  I  will  not  be  afraid,"  and  he  *•  rejoices  that  he  is  counted 
worthy  to  suffer  shame."  2.  The  love  of  man's  praise  in  preference  to  that  of  God. 
How  many  a  man's  faith  is  nipped  by  no  other  cause  ?  To  live  agreeably  to  the 
gospel  is  not  the  way  tu  gain  man's  praise.     Man  does  not  praise  the  poor  io 


OBir.  zn.]  ST.  JOHN.  ITS 

spirit,  the  meek,  &o.,  bnt  the  proad,  &o.  He  therefore  who  seeks  to  please  the 
world  pats  on  snoh  qnalities  as  these.  Bat  the  trae  believer  acts  differently.  He 
is  not  indeed  indifferent  to  the  good  opinion  of  his  fellow-creatares,  yet  he  valaes 
God's  esteem  above  this,  and  to  secure  that  is  the  great  aim  of  his  life.  {A.  Roberts, 
M.A .)  The  meamiess  of  not  confessing  Christ : — I  believe  there  are  many  in  this  con- 
gregation who  wake  every  morning  to  pray,  and  who  never  let  the  evening  shadows  go 
without  perfuming  them  with  their  grateful  thanks  for  the  mercies  of  the  day ;  who 
study  their  Bibles  more  than  many  professing  Christians ;  and  who  believe  that  the 
life  they  now  live  is  by  faith  in  the  Son  of  God,  but  who  yet  do  not  wish  to  have  it 
known,  and  shrink  from  joining  the  Church,  and  making  a  public  acknowledgment 
of  the  debt  they  owe  to  Christ.  They  mean  to  be  Christians,  but  not  to  avow  them- 
selves such.  Thus  they  will  leave  the  world  to  suppose  that  their  manifest  virtues 
are  self-cultured,  and  that  Christian  lives  may  be  led  without  Christ.  If  I  were  a 
pupil  of  Titian,  and  he  should  design  my  picture,  and  sketch  it  for  me,  and  look 
over  my  work  every  day  and  make  suggestions,  and  then,  when  I  had  exhausted 
my  skill,  he  shoald  take  the  brush  and  give  the  finishing  touches,  bringing 
out  a  part  here  and  there,  and  making  the  whole  glow  with  beauty,  and  then 
I  should  hang  it  upon  the  wall  and  call  it  mine,  what  a  meanness  it  would 
be  1  [H.  W.  Beeeher.)  For  they  loved  the  praise  of  man  more  tlian  the 
praise  of  God. — The  uses  of  praise : — I.  Praise  is  one  of  thb  most  active  and 

IMPOBXANT    of    ALL    THB    INFLUENCES    THAT    AFFECT    HUMAN    LIFE.      A   man    without 

a  sense  of  pleasure  in  other  men's  approbation  is  not  well  fitted  to  live  among 
men.  Its  operation  tends  continually  to  restrain  men  from  offence.  It  incites  to 
doing  of  a  thousand  things  which  are  agreeable  and  which  we  should  not 
have  thought  of  doing  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  desire  to  produce  pleasure 
in  others,  and  so  refiexly  to  win  their  favour.  In  these  directions  it 
eo-operateB  easily  with  benevolence.  When  it  works  upward,  and  is  in  alliance 
vdth  reason,  duty,  and  religion,  then  it  becomes  a  glorious  incitement,  a  stimu- 
lus to  industry  and  to  chivalry.  If  those  from  whom  we  desire  praise  are  praise- 
worthy, then  to  desire  their  praise  is  to  set  in  operation  within  ourselves  the 
machinery  by  which  we  lift  ourselves  toward  their  level.  Where  it  includes  the 
approval  of  great  spirits  generically,  and  of  God,  then  the  highest  form  of  motive 
power  is  reached.  II.  The  value  of  this  function  in  life  depends  on  its  associa- 
tions AND  education.  Of  all  the  faculties  it  is  the  most  illusive.  When  not  rightly 
trained  it  is  deceiving,  and  when  improperly  exercised  it  is  weakening.  Associated 
with  conscience  it  should  reject  all  undeserved  praise.  Men  ought  to  be  ashamed 
to  be  praised  for  what  they  know  is  not  true,  and  when  they  lay  traps  for  it  how 
beggarly  is  the  degradation  to  which  they  have  come.  How  many  array  themselves  on 
the  side  of  right  to  be  praised  1  Who  accepts  truth  which  is  unpopular,  and  love 
that  which  their  conscience  tells  them  is  just  when  it  will  bring  down  upon  them 
the  discredit  of  the  whole  community  ?  How  easy  is  it  to  bring  men  on  the  side 
that  is  popular.  As  long  as  slavery  was  an  accredited  fact  and  not  to  be  disturbed,  it 
was  a  very  ungracious  thing  to  stand  up  for  human  liberty ;  but  no  sooner  was  the 
public  sentiment  changed  than  men  sprang  up  thicker  than  asparagus  and  cried, 
"  Oh,  the  preciousness  of  emancipation."  Somen  think  they  are  following  the 
truth  when  they  are  simply  lasting  for  praise.  As  an  auxiliary  there  can  be  no 
objection  to  it.  If  a  man  in  the  performance  of  duty  afterwards  finds  himself  the 
subject  of  praise,  all  well  and  good ;  but  it  is  necessary  that  it  should  be  the  second 
or  the  third,  and  not  the  primary  or  dominant  motive.  Those  surrounded  by  a  low- 
toned  public  sentiment  are  apt  to  have  an  indiscriminate  hankering  after  praise  and 
to  be  so  demoralized  that  they  even  become  vain  of  sinful  courses.  There  are  men 
whose  foul  tongue  is  their  strength  and  they  glory  in  it.  There  are  men  proud  of 
their  rudeness.  They  think  it  praiseworthy  to  be  singular  in  this  respect.  Men 
enter  into  competition  with  each  other  as  to  which  can  eat  or  drink  the  most.  Yea, 
crimes  become  virtues  in  the  sight  of  many.  III.  Illustrations.  1.  As  an  incite- 
ment to  artistic  work,  the  love  of  praise  should  always  wait  on  and  follow  achieve- 
ment, and  never  precede  it.  No  man  who  works  for  praise  can  ever  become  a 
leading  artist.  2.  This  is  true  also  of  literary  work.  No  author  will  live  whose  paper 
is  a  looking-glass.  No  man  will  write  thoughts  but  he  who  is  utterly  unconscious 
and  lost  in  his  subject.  8.  In  politics  everything  is  made  to  turn  on  the  popular 
vote,  and  our  public  men  grow  ap  questioning  not,  "  What  will  be  the  infiaenoe  of 
this  or  that  as  to  the  right  or  wrong  ?  "  but,  "  How  will  it  strike  my  oonstitaents 
and  affect  my  chances  ?  "  And  the  inspirations  of  God  in  the  lines  of  trath  are 
eacrifioed  to  this  miserable  and  mercenary  regard  for  praise  which  men  want  and  do 


874  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  zu. 

not  deserve.    4.  Of  all  places  there  is  none  where  self -consciousness  and  the  love  of 
praise  are  so  fatal  as  in  the  pulpit.  There  is  a  wide  range  for  the  selection  of  themes 
by  the  preacher,  but  how  many  are  chosen  that  jar  on  the  nerves  of  the  lovers  of 
pleasure,  wealth,  &q.  ?    In  the  treatment  especially  of  great  public  questions,  what 
conservatism  and  fear  of  men's  opinions  there  is  ?  No  man  can  effectually  preach  the 
truths  of  the  Christian  life  who  is  not  willing  to  throw  himself  instantly  into  anything 
that  is  needful  and  be  lost  to  popularity  so  that  it  is  with  truth  and  God  that  he  stands. 
IV.  In  this  subject  wb  have  matter  fob  very  profound   self-examination.     1. 
It  is  a  question  for  many  how  much  of  your  religion  is  other  than  conformity 
to  public  custom,  and  how  much  is  simple  conformity  to  what  is  respectable.    2.  Is 
the  praise  you  receive  beneficial  in  its  effect  upon  you?    Is   it  preparing    you 
for  higher  association  in  the  kingdom  above  ?     The  day  hastens.     Soon  we  shall 
stand  before  Him  who  has  declared  that  if  in  this  evil  generation  we  are  ashamed 
of  Him,  He  will  be  ashamed  of  us.     {H.  W.  Beeclier.)        The  praise  of  men : — L 
The  folly  of  an  over-valuation  op  the  opinion  op  men.    The  condemnation  was 
not  that  the  rulers  loved  the  praise  of  men,  but  they  loved  it  more  than  the  praise 
of  God.     This  overweening  regard  to  human  opinion  is — 1.  Very  common.     Not 
that  the  esteem  of  others  is  sinful,  because  deference  to  the  opinion  of  the  wise  and 
good  is  wisely  implanted  in  our  nature.     The  perversion  of  an  instinctive  ten- 
dency does  not  convert  a  good  principle  into  a  bad  one.     The  love  of  praise  is  not 
to  be  condemned  if  limited  to  the  praise  of  good  men  for  right  sentiments  and 
good  actions.     It  must,  however,  be  an  insufficient  principle  of  conduct,  because  it 
may  be  extended  to  the  praise  of  bad  men  for  bad  actions.    We  must  not  then  say 
that  the  love  of  praise  or  fear  of  blame  is  necessarily  sinful.     Opinion  is  the  prop 
and  stay  of  all  social  intercourse.     Eeputation  for  honour,  &c.,  is  essential,  while 
man  is  man.    "No  man  liveth  to  himself."    Jacob  said  of  Judah,  "Thou  art  he 
whom  thy  brethren  shall  praise  "  ;  and  to  stand  well  in  the  opinion  of  good  men 
is  a  means  of  blessing  to  the  Church  and  the  world.     St.  Paul  says,  "  If  there  be 
any  praise,  think  on  these  things."    Only  remember  that  this  love  of  praise  should 
be  followed  by  a  love  of  praiseworthiness,  and  a  fear  of  blame  of  blameworthiness ; 
otherwise  it  will  be  only  vanity  in  disguise.    The  man  who  is  above  or  below  the 
good  opinion  of  others,  must  be  more  or  less  than  man.     He  who  sets  no  value 
upon  the  just  estimation  of  society  is  often  careless  of  the  actions  which  tend  to 
produce  it.     2.  It  may  be  abused,  and  become  implicit  idolatry  like  that  of  the 
heathen  who  served  the  creature  more  than  the  Creator.    It  was  the  same  with  the 
young  ruler,  Pilate  and  Felix.  *'  This  is  the  victory  that  overcometh  our  faith — even 
the  world.'"    3.  This  sinful  preference  of  man  to  God  is  dangerous  in  its  issue. 
It  hazards  the  loss  of  the  soul,  and  draws  down  the  displeasure  of   God  (see 
following  verses).     II.  Considerations  which   may   correct   this   eviii.     1.  The 
worthlessnesa  of  the  men  for  whose  commendation  we  are  ready  to  renounce 
Christ.    Let  us  know  why  and  for  whom  we  are  prepared  to  make  shipwreck  of 
faith  and  good  conscience.    For  what  did  Judas  betray  Christ  ?    The  favour  of 
worthless  Pharisees  and  thirty  pieces  of  silver.    For  what  did  Esau  renounce  his 
birthright  ?    And  for  what  do  we  give  up  the  hope  of  acceptance  with  Christ  ?    For 
the  wretched  smile  of  triflers,  for  the  ribaldry  of  Paine  and  the  "  don't  know  "  of 
Spencer — a  mess  of  pottage  indeed.     "  An  atheist's  laugh  is  a  poor  exchange  for  a 
Deity  offended."    2.  The  study  of  the  best  models.     The  men  of  whom  this  world 
was  not  worthy,  were  not  the  men  who  bowed  to  ruling  opinions.    Paul  conferred 
not  with  flesh  and  blood  ;  Columbus  turned  a  deaf  ear  to  worldly  wisdom,  or  he 
would  never  have  discovered  a  new  world.     Had  Milton  been  swayed  by  popular 
opinion  he  would  never  have  left  a  name  immortal.     Defoe  was  offered  wealth  and 
preferment  to  support  government  measures  by  "  venal  pen,  but  he  sternly  refused, 
and  borrowed  a  guinea  to  supply  his  wants  for  the  day.     Study  the  answer  of  the 
Three  Hebrew  Children  and  the  example  of  Christ.    We  talk  of  the  public  opinion 
of  earth,  but  forget  that  there  is  a  public  opinion   in  heaven  (Heb.  xii.  10).     3r 
Estimate  of  the  value  of  the  Divine  opinion.     God  is  the  standard  of  all  excellence. 
His  approbation  is  the  seal  of  honour.   4.  Anticipate  the  decisions  of  the  great  day. 
(T.  H.  Day.)        The  supreme  valtu  of  tliat   honour  which  cometh  from  God  : — 
I.  There  is  nothing  is  the  nature  of  praise  that  is  absolutely  sinful.     It  is 
nowhere  condemned  except  in  the  form  of  flattery,  which  is  not  praise  but  simply 
lying.     It  is  needful  to  bear   this  in  mind,  because,  through  erroneous  notions, 
many  receive  what  is  done  for  them  or  for  God's  cause  with  chilling  indifference, 
which  has  a  detrimental  effect  particularly  on  the  young.     To  see  that  praise  is  not 
imful,  we  have  but  to  study  the  generous  commendations  of  our  Lord  and  of  St. 


'.  xn.]  ST.  JOHN.  87i 

Paul.  Then  how  freqnentlj  has  it  animated  the  faint  and  discouraged,  as  in  the 
ease  of  St.  Paul  at  Appii  Fomm.  II.  Thb  praise  of  men  and  the  pbaisb  of  God 
ABB  FBEQUENTLT  OPPOSED.  For  man  often  condemns  what  God  approves,  and  vice 
versa.  God  cannot  look  upon  any  form  of  sin  with  allowance,  but  man  con- 
donea  and  sometimes  applauds  the  grossest  vices.    III.  Both  ik  BESTowiNa  and 

AOCEPTINO    PBAISB   WB    SHOULD    BE    GUIDED    ENTHtELT    BT  THE    ICCND    OF    GoD.        He 

knows  what  is  praiseworthy,  and  has  revealed  His  mind  on  the  subject.  Never 
receive  or  give  flattery  for  what  the  Bible  condemns.     IV.  To  this  unhappy  pbe- 

FEBENCE  FOB   THE   PRAISE   OF  UAN   BEFOBE  THAT  OF   GOD   HAT  BE   TRACED  THE  MISERT 

AND  BuiN  OF  MANKIND.  {Congregational  Remembrancer.)  The  desire  for  admira- 
tion : — The  human  eye  of  admiration  I  seek  is  like  the  scorching  ray  that  destroys 
all  the  delicate  colours  in  the  most  costly  material.  Every  action  that  is  done  only 
to  be  seen  of  others,  loses  its  freshness  in  the  sight  of  God,  like  the  flower  that, 
passing  through  many  hands,  is  at  last  hardly  presentable  to  any  one,  much  less  to 
a  dear  friend.  (T.  H.  Leary,  D.C.L.)  The  peril  of  the  love  of  praise: — A 
clergyman  once  had  a  dream,  in  which  another  popular  clergyman  appeared  to 
him  in  his  garden  and  asked  the  time  of  the  day.  ••  Twenty-five  minutes  past 
four,"  said  the  other.  "  It  is  then  exactly  an  hour  since  I  died,  and  I  am 
damned ;  "  "  Damned  for  what  ?  "  said  the  other.  "  Not  for  not  preaching  the 
gospel,  for  I  have  many  seals  to  my  ministry ;  but  I  have  sought  the  praise  of  men 
more  than  the  praise  of  God."  The  first  clergyman  on  going  to  the  service  in  the 
evening  (Sunday)  was  asked  "  if  he  had  heard  of  the  loss  of  such  a  church  whose 
minister  had  died."  "When?  "said  the  clergyman.  "Twenty-five  minutes  past 
three  this  afternoon!"  Love  of  fame  rebuked : — There  was  one  Michael  Fenwick 
that  travelled  with  Wesley  as  a  sort  of  groom,  nurse,  and  occasional  exhorter.  The 
good  man  was  vain  enough  to  complain,  one  day,  that  his  name  was  never  inserted 
in  Wesley's  published  "  Journals."  In  the  next  number  of  the  "  Journals "  he 
found  his  name  in  a  connection  that  probably  did  not  serve  to  increase  his  vanity. 
"  I  left  Epworth,"  wrote  Wesley,  "  with  great  satisfaction,  and  about  one,  preached 
at  Clayworth.  I  think  none  were  unmoved  but  Michael  Fenwick,  who  fell  fast 
asleep  under  an  adjoining  hayrick."  (Dr.  Haven.)  Jesus  cried  and  said.  The 
rejected  message  : — A  message  of — I.  Love  from  the  Father  (ver.  49).  1.  The  sub- 
stance of  the  message — a  revelation  of  the  Father  (ver.  45).  (1)  Of  His  name, 
Father.  (2)  Of  His  character,  love.  (3)  Of  His  gift,  the  Son.  (4)  Of  His  purpose, 
salvation  (ver.  47).  2.  The  medium  of  its  transmission — through  Christ,  God's 
(1)  Son  (ver.  50) ;  (2)  Representative  (ver.  44) ;  (3)  Commissioner  (vers.  44,  49). 
3.  The  heinousness  of  its  rejection — to  reject  Christ  and  His  message  the  same 
thing  as  to  reject  the  Father  and  His  message  (ver.  44).  II.  Salvation  fob  thb 
WORLD  (vers.  46,  47).  1.  Of  Salvation  from  the  darkness  of  (1)  Intellectual 
error.  (2)  Moral  unholiness.  (3)  Legal  condemnation.  (4)  Eternal  death.  2. 
Of  salvation  through  faith — through  hearing,  believing,  keeping  Christ's  words. 
3.  Of  salvation  for  ever — through  escaping  the  final  judgment  and  entering  at  the 
last  day  upon  eternal  life.  III.  Judgment  for  the  unbelieving  (ver.  48).  1.  Its 
time — the  last  day.  2.  Its  author — the  Word  of  Christ.  3.  Its  ground— unbelief 
and  disobedience.  IV.  Etebnal  life  for  the  faithful  (ver.  60).  1.  The  object 
of  the  Father's  commission.  2.  The  burden  of  the  Son's  commission.  3.  The 
issue  of  the  individual's  faith.  Lessons— 1.  Thankfulness  for  the  gospel  message. 
2.  Watchfulness  against  the  sin  of  unbelief.  3.  Prayerfulneas  that  the  news  of 
salvation  may  be  propagated  through  the  earth.  4.  Trustfulness  that  we  may  escape 
the  judgment  of  the  last  day.  5.  Earnestness  to  lay  hold  of  eternal  life.  (T.  White- 
law,  D.D.)  I  am  come  a  Light  Into  the  world.  Light  for  the  world's  darkness, 
I.  Our  world  is  dark.  God  did  not  make  it  so,  but  man  has  darkened  it,  and  Satan 
and  sin  have  darkened  it.  It  is  a  darkness  of — 1.  Sleep.  The  sleeper  sees  not  the 
light.  He  may  dream  that  he  does  so,  but  that  is  aU.  2.  Death.  With  life,  light 
flees.  3.  The  tomb.  Buried,  the  darkness  is  double.  4.  Satan.  He  is  the  ruler  of 
the  darkness  of  this  world.  5.  Hell.  Our  world  is  an  earnest  of  the  blackness  of  dark- 
ness for  ever.  The  shadow  of  hell  is  over  it.  II.  There  is  light  fob  it.  Deep 
as  is  the  darkness,  it  is  not  hopeless.  There  is  enough  of  light  in  God  and  heaven 
yet.  Light  has  not  been  quenched  throughout  the  universe,  though  driven  firom 
our  world.  III.  This  light  has  comb.  It  is  not  in  heaven  merely ;  it  has  coma 
down  to  earth.  The  gospel  is  an  announcement  of  the  arrival  of  the  light.  -  IV. 
Christ  is  the  Light.  The  brightness  of  Jehovah's  glory ;  the  true  Light ;  the  San 
of  Righteousness ;  the  Day  Star ;  the  bright  and  morning  Star.  All  the  light  of  the 
Godhead,  of  heaven,  of  the  universe,  is  centred  in  Him.  He  is  the  Light  of  the  World 


»76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  m. 

because — I.  Of  what  He  shows  us  of  the  Father.  He  that  hath  seen  Him  hath  seen 
the  Father.  2.  Of  what  He  does  to  us — pardons,  heals,  comforts,  blesses,  saves. 
8.  Of  what  He  is  yet  to  do  for  our  world.  His  reign  shall  be  the  reign  of  light,  and 
the  earth  shall  rejoice  in  His  hght.  V.  The  way  in  which  the  liqht  enteks. 
Not  in  working  or  waiting,  but  believing.  Faith  ends  the  darkness,  and  lets  in  the 
glorious  light.  VI.  The  frebness  and  univeesalxty  of  the  light.  •*  Whosoever." 
{H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  Believers  thall  not  abide  in  darkness  : — Perhaps  the  worst 
feature  of  darkness  is,  that  it  is  so  bewildering.  Ton  have  to  walk,  and  yet  your 
way  is  hidden  from  your  eyes.  This  is  hard  work.  God  will  help  His  children, 
will  He  not?  Ay,  that  He  will,  but  we  cannot  see  how  1  We  look  upward,  and  see 
no  twinkling  star;  dovmward  and  do  not  even  find  a  glow-worm.  Surely  we  shall 
see  a  candle  in  some  window !  But  no  1  we  are  lost  in  a  dark  wood.  Have  we  not 
somewhere  about  us  a  match  that  we  could  strike  ?  We  fumble  for  it ;  we  find  it, 
it  is  damp,  we  have  no  light.  The  question  that  now  chills  the  heart  is — How  can 
God  deliver  me  ?  We  do  not  see  how  He  can  make  a  way  of  escape.  What  simple- 
tons we  are  to  fancy  that  if  we  do  not  see  a  way  of  deliverance  God  does  not  see  one 
either  I  If  you  have  ever  steamed  up  the  Bhine,  you  have  looked  before  you,  and  it 
has  looked  as  if  you  could  go  no  further ;  the  river  seemed  to  be  a  lake ;  great 
mountains  and  vast  rocks  blocked  up  aJl  further  advance.  Suddenly  there  has  been 
a  turn  in  the  stream,  and  at  once  a  broad  highway  has  been  before  you,  inviting 
you  to  enter  the  heart  of  the  country.  Perhaps  in  Providence  you  are  in  one  of 
those  parts  of  the  river  of  life  where  no  progress  appears  possible.  You  are  quite 
blocked  up,  and  this  causes  you  darkness  of  mind.  Cease  from  this  unbelieving 
bewilderment.  "Best  in  the  Lord,  and  wait  patiently  for  Him,  and  He  shall  giVe 
thee  thy  heart's  desire."    {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  47-48.  If  any  man  hear  My  words. — I.  The  obeatest  spibitual  PBrviiiEoa 
that  HAN  CAN  ENJOY.  It  is  a  priceless  privilege  to  hear  the  words  of  any  great  sage, 
poet,  moralist.  But  what  are  the  best  human  words  compared  with  those  of  Christ  t 
They  are  spirit  and  life ;  more  pure  than  crystal,  more  refreshing  than  the  morning 
breeze,  more  quickening  than  the  sunbeam,  they  are  recreative  forces.  What  have 
they  accomplished  ere  now  ?  II.  The  greatest  oriminaij  neglect  of  which  a  man 
CAN  BE  ODiLTY — "  and  believe  not,"  i.e.  keep  them  not.  Such  is  guilty  of — 1.  The 
most  egregious  folly.  2.  The  most  heinous  ingratitude.  3.  The  most  hardened 
impiety.  HI.  The  most  terrible  doom  which  a  man  can  apprehend.  "  I  judge 
him  not."  I  as  a  Saviour  have  nothing  more  to  do  with  him ;  I  leave  him  to  the 
retributive  treatment  of  My  Father.  Mercy  leaves  him,  and  justice  apprehends 
him.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D. )  The  words  of  Christ : — L  As  laws  to  be  obeyed. 
Christ's  words  are  not  like  poetry  for  entertainment,  or  ab-tract  science  for 
Bpecolative  thought ;  they  are  laws  to  be  kept ;  not  so  much  a  creed  as  a  code.  It 
is  only  as  they  are  embodied  in  actual  life  that  their  mission  is  answered,  that  they 
are  of  any  real  or  lasting  service  to  man.  II.  As  a  means  of  salvation.  Had 
Christ  come  to  judge  the  world,  His  words  would  have  breathed  the  indignation 
of  insulted  justice.  But  He  came  to  save,  and  hence  His  words  are  full  of  all  that 
can  restore  man  to  holiness  and  God.  The  salvation  which  Christ  came  to  effect 
la  restoration  from  spiritual  ignorance  to  intelligence,  from  selfishness  to  bene- 
volence, from  bondage  to  freedom,  from  inward  conflict  to  inner  harmony,  from 
social  pemiciousness  to  social  utility.  To  this  His  signs  and  words  are  adapted. 
"  Save  the  world,"  not  a  class.  III.  As  CRiTERii  op  judgment  (ver.  48).  The  man 
to  whom  Christ  has  spoken,  and  who  rejects  or  nullifies  His  words,  needs  no  other 
judge  but  His  words.  These  words  will  judge  him  in  his  conscience  and  will  con- 
demn him  for  ingratitude,  folly  and  rebellion.  (Ibid.)  Christ  is  both  able  and 
willing  to  save  the  world : — When  the  Duke  of  Argyle  was  taken  in  lebeUion  in 
Scotland,  and  brought  before  James  II.,  the  king  said  to  him,  "  You  know  that  it 
is  in  my  power  to  pardon  you."  It  is  reported  that  the  prisoner  answered,  "  It 
may  be  in  your  power,  but  it  is  not  in  your  nature  " — a  speech  which,  whether  true 
or  not,  cost  him  his  hfe.  He  died  like  a  stoio,  executed  at  Temple  Gate.  But 
Christ  has  both  the  power  and  the  disposition  to  pardon  sinners.  He  that  rejecteth 
me* ....  hath  one  that  Judgeth  Him.  The  redemptive  becoming  retributive  : — L 
Christianity  may  be  bejected  now.  It  is  possible  to  accept  Christ's  creed  and  to 
reject  His  authority.  II.  Those  who  reject  Christianity  now,  most  bow  to  its 
JUDICIAL  force  hereafter.  "  The  last  day  "  is  the  retributive  period  that  awaits 
ns  all.  Then  the  "  Word  "  which  has  been  trodden  under  foot  will  rise  from  the 
iust  and  take  the  throne.    1.  There  is  nothing  arbitrary  in  the  decision  or  pro> 


<aui.  xm.]  ST.  JOHN.  Vtl 

eednre  of  the  last  judgment.  The  glorions  words  of  mercy  which  are  rejected  will 
spring  from  their  graves,  and  conscience  will  invest  them  with  judicial  authority. 
2.  Man  should  be  profoundly  cautious  as  to  how  to  treat  the  words  of  Christ  now. 
His  words  are  not  sounds  but  things — terrible  things.  They  must  live  for  ever  in 
every  soul  into  which  they  have  fallen.  Old  sermons  will  be  preached  again  by 
memory  many  ages  on.  "  How  shall  we  escape."  (D.  Thomas,  D  .D. )  The  word  that 
I  have  spoken,  the  same  shall  judge  Him.  I.  Teebe  is  a  last  day.  The  world 
shall  not  always  roll  on.  God  shall  interpose  at  length.  In  one  sense  there  is  no  last 
day  either  to  righteous  or  wicked.  But  in  reference  to  the  existing  order  there  is  a 
winding  up,  a  reckoning.  "  To-morrow  "  shall  then  cease,  and  that  word  of  mystery 
and  procrastination  and  suspense  be  known  no  more.  II.  That  day  shall  be  onb 
OP  JUDGMENT.  The  long  unsettled  cases  of  earth  shall  be  settled  then.  Time's 
riddles  shall  be  solved  and  its  wrongs  righted.  The  oppressed  shall  be  vindicated 
and  the  evil-doer  be  put  to  shame.  The  judgment  shall  be  just,  undoing  the  evil 
and  establishing  the  good.  III.  Chkist's  word  shall  judge  us.  Not  that  the 
word  is  to  supersede  the  Judge,  but  it  will  form  the  ground  of  judgment.  We  can 
imagine  in  connection  with  that  word  such  questions  as  these  :  1.  Did  it  reach 
you  ?  2.  Did  you  listen  to  it,  or  spend  your  lives  in  listening  to  some  one  or  thing 
else  ?  3.  Did  you  treat  it  as  a  true  word  ?  Professing  to  receive  it  as  true,  did  you 
treat  it  as  untrue  ?  4.  Did  you  treat  it  as  Divine  ?  by  reverence  and  submission. 
6.  Did  you  accept  it  as  suitable,  as  meeting  your  case ?  or  did  you  reject  it?  By 
this  word,  then,  let  us  judge  ourselves  now,  that  so  we  may  not  be  condemned 
by  it  at  the  great  day.     {H.  Bonar.) 

Vers.  49-50.  For  I  have  not  spoken  of  Myself.  Christ  as  a  teacher : — I.  Hm 
PBOFOUND  HUMILITY.  "  I  havc  Hot  spokcn  of  Myself."  As  if  He  had  said,  I  take 
no  credit  for  the  thoughts  that  I  have  addressed  to  men :  they  are  not  the  flashes 
of  my  own  genius,  or  the  conclusions  of  my  own  reason.  I  am  not  their  fountain 
but  their  channel.  A  teacher  is  great  and  divine  just  in  proportion  to  his  humility. 
Alas  1  the  vanity  of  preachers  has  become  proverbial.  II.  His  conscious  Divinitt. 
•'  But  the  Father  which  sent  Me,"  &c.  No  man  is  a  true  spiritual  teacher  who  ia 
Dot  consoioos  that  the  thoughts  he  utters  are  not  his  own  but  God's.  ID.  Thoma$, 
DJ).) 


CHAPTER  xm. 


Vebs.  1-19.  Now  before  the  feast  of  the  Passover. — A  threefold  marvel: — ^L  A 
MABVELZiOus  LOVE  :  that  of  Christ  for  His  own.  Marvellous  in  respect  of — 1.  Its 
time.  (1)  Before  the  feast  of  the  Passover,  .when  His  thoughts  might  have  been 
occupied  with  its  memories.  (2)  Before  His  departure,  when  He  might  have  been 
absorbed  in  the  contemplation  of  death  or  the  heaven  beyond.  (3)  Before  His 
exaltation,  when  the  vision  of  the  coming  glory  might  have  fixed  His  Spirit's  eye. 
2.  Its  intensity — "  unto  the  end."  (1)  To  the  uttermost,  or  in  the  highest  degree, 
with  a  love  passing  knowledge  (Eph.  iii.  19),  which  many  waters  (of  aflfliction) 
could  not  quench,  nor  floods  (of  sorrow)  drown  (S.  Song  viii.  9).  (2)  To  the 
latest  moment  of  His  life,  with  a  love  which,  as  it  had  been  without  beginning,  so 
also  would  it  be  without  end  (Jer.  xxxi.  3).  (3)  At  the  last,  surpassing  every 
previous  demonstration  and  stooping  even  unto  death  for  its  objects  (John  xv.  13  ; 
1  John  iii.  16  ;  Rom.  v.  8).  3.  Its  reason.  While  He  was  departing  from,  they 
were  remaining  in  the  world,  exposed  to  the  enmity  and  evil  He  was  escaping.  The 
thought  of  their  feebleness  and  defencelessness,  and  their  sufferings  and  imperfec- 
tions, added  fuel  to  the  fire  of  His  affection  (Heb.  iv.  15).  II.  A  marvellous 
deed  (ver.  6).  An  act  of — 1.  Amazing  condescension,  considering — (1)  Its  nature 
— the  work  of  a  slave  (1  Sam.  xxv.  41).  (2)  His  dignity — the  Incarnate  Son, 
•onscious  of  His  heavenly  origin  and  destiny  (ver.  3),  on  the  eve  of  grasping  the 
sceptre  of  the  universe  (Matt,  xxviii.  18).  (3)  The  objects — frail  and  erring  men 
and  one  of  them  a  traitor.  Had  Christ  been  only  man  He  would  have  spurned 
Judas :  being  God,  He  loved  him  and  even  washed  his  feet.  2.  Sublime  signifi- 
cance. Symbolic— (1)  Of  Christ's  self-abasement  who,  in  order  to  effect  the 
spiritual  cleansing  of  His  people,  laid  aside  the  form  of  God,  assumed  the  garment 
of  humanity,  and  poured  His  purifying  blood  from  the  cross  (Phil.  ii.  7,  8 ;  1  John 


87§  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  xxxl 

1.  7).  (2)  Of  the  working  of  regeneration  through  which  Bin's  defilement  is 
removed  (Eph.  v.  26  ;  Titus  iii.  5).  (3)  Of  the  daily  cleansing  which  the  renewed 
ijeed  (Psa.  li.  7 ;  1  John  i.  9).  III.  A  mabvellods  obligation  (vers.  14,  15). 
Christ's  examole  caUs  His  disciples  to — 1.  Personal  humility.  If  the  Lord  and 
Master  could  stoop  and  wash  the  feet  of  a  Judas,  it  ill  became  them  to  be  puffed 
up  with  thoughts  of  their  own  greatness  (Rom.  xii.  3  ;  Luke  xxii.  27 ;  Matt. 
ix.  29  ;  1  Pet.  v.  5).  2.  Loving  service.  Not  that  Christ  instituted  a  new  religious 
service.  The  Pope  is  Christ's  ape  rather  than  His  imitator.  Christ's  example  is 
to  be  followed  spiritually  in  ministering  to  necessity  and  practising  Christian 
kindness  (John  xv.  17  ;  Matt.  xxv.  34-40 ;  Rom.  xii.  9,  10,  xiii.  8  ;  Gal.  v.  13,  14, 
22,  vi.  2 ;  Eph.  v.  2  ;  1  Tim.  v.  10).  3.  Brotherly  forgiveness.  Christ  had  washed 
and  therefore  forgiven  them ;  they  were  to  practise  the  charity  which  covers  a 
multitude  of  sins  (Matt.  vi.  12 ;  Mark  xi.  28 ;  Luke  xvii.  3,  4 ;  Eph.  iv.  32 ;  Col. 
iii.  13).  Learn — 1.  The  supreme  Divinity  of  Christ.  2.  The  diabolical  depravity 
of  the  fallen  heart.  3.  The  imperfections  of  even  Christ's  followers.  4.  The 
absolute  necessity  of  Christ  as  a  Saviour.  5.  Christ's  perfect  knowledge  of  men. 
6.  The  duty  of  taking  Christ  as  our  example.  7.  Obedience  the  royal  road  to 
happiness.  (T.  Whitelaw,  D.D.)  Jesus  knew  that  His  hour  was  come. — Christ'* 
knowledge: — I.  Its  fulness.  II.  Its  sources.  III.  Its  uses.  (Ibid.)  Christ' $ 
hour : — I.  So  long  contemplated.  II.  So  full  of  sofpebings.  IH.  So  full  of 
BESPONSiBiLiTY.     (Ibid.)  Christ's  death  : — I.    He  had  a  Divine  pbesentimbmt 

of  the  exact  time  op  His  death.  "  When  Jesus  knew,"  &c.  All  men  know 
that  they  must  die  sooner  or  later.  This  throws  a  shadow  on  the  whole  path  of 
life,  but  the  exact  time  is  in  mercy  hidden  from  us.  But  Christ  knew  His  hoar 
from  the  first,  and  instead  of  endeavouring  to  avoid  it  comes  forth  to  meet  it. 
What  mere  man  would  have  done  this  ?  And  with  such  heroic  calmness !  H.  H» 
BAD  A  GLOBions  VIEW  OP  THE  NATURE  OF  His  DEATH.  1.  It  was  a  departure  from 
this  world.  With  the  exception  of  the  beauties  and  blessings  of  the  earth,  every- 
thing in  the  world  mast  have  been  repugnant  to  Him.  It  was  a  world  of  rebels 
against  the  government  of  His  Father,  of  enemies  against  Himself.  To  Him  it 
must  have  been  what  the  cell  is  to  the  prisoner  or  the  lazaretto  to  the  healthy. 
To  leave  such  a  scene  could  not  have  been  a  matter  for  regret,  but  rather  of  desire. 
May  not  every  good  man  look  on  death  thus  ?  What  is  there  in  the  human  world 
to  interest  him  ?  2.  It  was  a  going  to  the  Father,  where — (1)  He  would  get  the 
highest  approbation  of  His  work.  (2)  He  would  enjoy  the  sublimest  fellowship. 
So  with  the  Christian.  HI.  He  had  a  sublime  Motivb  fob  meeting  with  His 
DEATH.  Love  for  His  own,  ».«.,  all  who  in  every  land  and  age  consecrate  them- 
selves to  God,  whose  they  are.  This  love  continues — 1.  To  the  end  of  every  man's 
existence.  2.  To  the  end  of  the  mediatorial  system.  Nay,  will  it  ever  have 
an  end?  Never  in  essence,  but  in  achievement.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  A  great 
and  solemn  hour  : — 1.  It  was  the  hour  of  His  departure.  "  Jesus  knew  that  His 
hour  was  come  that  He  should  depart  out  of  this  world  unto  His  Father. "  Such 
was  His  death,  even  though  it  was  the  death  of  the  Cross,  "a  departure."  2.  It 
was  the  hour  of  His  love.  If  He  rejoiced  in  the  thought  of  departing  to  be  with 
the  Father,  there  was  also  a  strain  npon  His  heart  at  the  thought  of  leaving  His 
disciples,  whom,  "  having  loved  as  His  own  in  the  world.  He  loved  to  the  end," 
that  is,  "  to  the  uttermost."  8.  It  was  the  hour  of  His  betrayal.  What  a  frightful 
contrast  is  here !  In  this  hour,  when  His  Divine  heart  was  swelling  nigh  unto 
bursting  with  the  intensity  and  vehemence  of  His  love,  there  was  one  of  their 
number  whose  heart  was  filled  with  a  devilish  purpose  of  betrayal.  4.  It  was  the 
hour  of  His  supreme  and  sublime  self -consciousness — "  Knowing  that  the  Father 
had  given  all  things  into  His  hands,  and  that  He  came  forth  from  God,  and  was 
going  back  to  God."  5.  The  hour  of  His  lowly  service  to  His  disciples.  (O.  F. 
Pentecost.)  That  He  should  depart  out  of  this  world  imto  the  Father. — He  came 
from  God,  and  yet  not  leaving  Him,  and  He  goeth  to  God  not  leaving  as.  {St. 
Bernard.)  Having  loved  His  own  which  were  in  the  world.  —The  Divine  love : — 
1.  It  is  not  strange  that  the  hour  of  departure  should  be  the  hour  of  quickened 
affection.  When  the  child  leaves  home,  father  and  mother  seem  more  dear  than 
before.  And  had  this  been  the  Saviour's  home,  and  those  around  Him  His  rela- 
tions, it  would  not  have  been  strange  that  He  should  have  felt  more  strongly  for 
them  than  at  any  previous  time.  2.  On  the  other  hand,  when  for  purposes  of 
health,  business,  or  pleasure  one  has  long  been  an  exile,  and  the  day  comes  for 
return,  although  he  has  made  pleasant  acquaintances,  yet  the  thoaght  of  home 
swallows  up  every  other.     Applying  this,  who  ean  imagine  the  vision  thr  t  arose 


CTAP.  xm.]  8T.  JOHN.  879 

before  Jesns  at  this  hoar  ?  The  infinitnde  of  His  power  was  to  be  restored,  and 
the  companionships  He  had  known  from  eternity.  Tet  at  this  hoar  it  is  said  that 
••  having  loved,"  &c.  3.  This  is  wonderful.  For  consider  what  the  disciples  were. 
If  Christ  had  dwelt  in  the  accomplishments  of  the  heavenly  land,  what  mast  they 
have  seemed  to  Him  ?  Not  one  had  any  extraordinary  endowment  except  John, 
and  none  save  he  and  Peter  and  James  have  left  any  record  except  their  names. 
Had  Christ  selected  heroes  like  Lather,  Melanchthon,  Hampden,  Sidney,  Washing- 
ton, or  geniuses  like  Dante,  Shakespeare,  or  Goethe,  we  can  imagine  how, 
surrounded  by  the  greatest  natures.  He  should  have  suffered  at  parting  from  them. 
But  these  were  men  with  not  only  no  royalty  of  endowment,  but  selfish,  prejudiced, 
ambitious,  and  mean.  A^d  yet  taking  them  with  all  their  imperfections  which 
the  glory  to  which  He  was  departing  threw  into  bolder  relief,  having  loved  them 
He  loved  them  ante  the  end.  4.  It  is  plain  that  Divine  love  includes  other 
elements  than  those  asaally  imagined.  It  is  not  strange  that  God  loves  loveliness. 
We  do  that.  But  who  of  us  loves  that  which  is  unlovely  ?  This  is  what  God 
does.  But  it  does  not  follow  that  this  love  is  not  more  qualified  with  growing 
excellency  than  without  it.  It  is  that  kind  of  love  which  a  parent  feels  toward 
children  who  are  not  in  themselves  attractive.  Parental  love,  however  it  may  grow, 
is  what  we  feel  by  reason  of  what  is  in  as,  not  of  what  is  in  our  children.  The 
new-bom  babe  has  neither  thought,  love,  nor  power  of  expression ;  and  yet  there 
is  in  the  mother  that  which  loves  it  with  an  intensity  which  is  like  life  itself.  So 
there  is  in  the  Divine  nature  a  power  of  sympathizing  with  things  at  the  lowest 
and  poorest.  5.  In  this  simple  thought  we  find  the  world's  hope  and  comfort.  You 
may  dismiss  from  your  minds,  if  you  can,  all  who  are  not  your  near  relations ;  but 
I  cannot.  It  is  a  burden  on  my  soul  what  becomes  of  the  vast  multitudes  of  Africa, 
Asia,  and  of  our  great  cities  who  crawl  like  vermin  in  and  out  of  dens  of  vice  and 
poverty.  The  only  light  on  this  problem  comes  from  the  fact  that  there  is  a  God 
who  loves  things  that  Eire  not  lovable.  6.  This  universality  of  the  Divine 
sympathy  interprets  the  declaration,  '*  God  so  loved  the  world,"  Ac.  His  affection 
for  a  world  lying  in  brutality  and  wickedness  was  such  that  He  gave  what  was  most 
precious  to  Him  to  redeem  it.  Men  think  that  this  obliterates  the  motives  to  right. 
Not  so.  Is  there  any  feeling  in  the  parent's  mind  stronger  than  this :  that  the 
beloved  child  shall  grow  out  of  nothingness  into  largeness  and  beauty  ?  And  God 
aims  to  purify  and  exalt  and  enrich  human  nature.  He  loves  men  without  reason 
in  them,  but  with  infinite  reason  in  Himself.  His  love  is  not  simply  good  nature. 
It  is  intensely  earnest  and  just,  and  suffering  flows  from  it.  There  is  nothing 
lovable  in  us  at  first,  but  under  the  fructifying  influence  of  the  Divine  soul  working 
on  ours,  germ  after  germ  begins  to  develop  into  something  lovable ;  and  the 
Divine  complacency  takes  hold  of  us  as  we  rise  to  higher  love  and  perfection,  7. 
What  a  consolation  this  representation  presents  to  those  who  are  battling  with 
their  imperfections.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Christ's  love  to  His  own : — I.  The  lovb 
OF  Chkist  is  a  personal  love.  1.  This  personal  love  is  not  to  be  contrasted  with, 
although  it  is  to  be  distinguished  from,  His  love  of  the  whole  world.  Without 
supposing  the  universal  love  that  pities  misery  everywhere,  we  cannot  make  our 
way  to  a  personal  love.  You  cannot  be  sure  of  a  love  that  passes  by  great  multi- 
tudes. 2.  This  personal  love  ie  just  the  application  of  the  general  love  to  the 
person.  It  is  not  merely  that  the  individu^  believes  in  that  general  love  and 
appropriates  just  so  much  to  himself  as  he  needs,  but  that  in  that  very  appropria- 
tion he  practically  increases  the  love  of  Christ  to  himself.  His  love  to  Christ 
makes  Christ's  love  to  him  a  love  of  complacency  and  friendship.  3.  The  belief 
of  this  is  the  turning-point  of  life.  When  a  man  can  say,  "  He  loved  me  and  gave 
Himself  for  me,"  he  has  passed  or  is  passing  from  darkness  into  light.  His  destiny 
is  solved.  Not  to  believe  that  assurance  so  solemnly  and  affectingly  given,  is  to  be 
without  the  comfort  of  the  blessed  gospel,  to  abide  under  vsrrath.  4.  It  is  either 
wrath  or  love.  There  is  no  explaining  it  away  or  shading  it  off.  Come  to  Christ, 
believe  the  gospel,  you  are  in  love.  Stay  away  from  Him,  distrust  His  goapel, 
leave  it  lying  there  unopened,  untouched,  as  you  would  some  printed  circular  you 
don't  care  to  be  troubled  with,  and  the  whole  world  is  full  of  wrath.  It  darkens 
and  embitters  your  whole  life.  Just  say  this  and  believe  it,  for  it  is  true,  "  He 
loved  me,"  <fec. ;  and  then  you  are  out  of  wrath  into  love,  you  leave  the  ranks  of 
His  enemies,  you  enter  among  "  His  own."  II.  Christ  loves  His  own  onto  thb 
END,  i.e.,  to  the  end  of  His  own  life.  In  proof  of  which,  here  at  the  very  end  is  a 
most  thoughtful,  touching  instance  of  His  intense  desire  to  do  them  a  good  that 
would  last  long  after  He  was  away.     1.  He  was  going  into  great  suffering.     No 


380  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA».  un. 

agitation,  no  depression,  no  entering  into  the  sorrow  before  the  time;  but  thia 
calm,  beautiful  action  of  feet-washing  which  they  might  recall  for  ever  as  an  over- 
whelming  proof  of  the  endurance  of  His  love  to  His  own.  2.  He  was  going  into 
great  glory.  Work  all  done.  Suffering  nearly  finished.  Home  now  to  God ! 
What  then  ?  A  great  elation  of  spirit  and  a  corresponding  f orgetf ulness  of  these 
common  persons  and  these  inferior  things  ?  No  ;  but  the  washing  of  the  disciples' 
feet  I  A  yearning,  enfolding  love  of  "  His  own  "  unto  the  end.  No  trial  of  love 
could  be  more  searching,  more  complete,  than  is  furnished  by  those  two  great 
things,  both  so  near — the  suffering  and  the  glory.  Application — 1.  Tou  who  are 
"  His  own,"  it  concerns  you  much  to  believe  that  He  will  "  love  you  unto  the 
end."  Why  should  He  not?  (1)  Even  His  own  great  suffering  could  not  cast  a 
shade  between  the  loving  Master  and  the  trembling  disciple  when  He  was  here. 
And  now  there  is  no  suffering  to  come  between  you  and  Him.  (2)  And  as  to  tke 
glory  of  His  heavenly  life,  even  now  when  throned  and  crowned  and  worshipped  by 
ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand,  the  joy  that  is  dearer  to  Him  than  all  this  is  that 
which  He  wins  yet  down  here  when  He  seeks  and  finds  the  sheep  that  was  lost. 
We  think  poorly  of  Him  if  we  suffer  ourselves  to  think  of  Him  as  enjoying  heaven 
yonder  while  we  suffer  and  die.  (3)  And  as  for  your  unworthiness,  you  were 
unworthy  when  He  began  to  deal  with  you,  and  you  have  been  unworthy  every  day 
since,  and  you  are  now,  and  He  knows  all  this.  Having  loved  His  own  with  an 
unbougbt,  uncaused  love  from  the  beginning,  and  thus  far  along  their  individual 
histories.  He  will  love  them  so,  and  no  otherwise,  unto  the  end.  {A.  Raleigh,  D.D.) 
ChrisVs  love  for  His  oivn : — I.  The  kelation — "  His  own."  This  relation  is  formed 
by  Himself.  *'  To  them  gave  He  power  to  become  the  sons  of  God."  It  is  not, 
therefore,  from  a  mere  profession  of  religion.  "  Ye  are  clean ;  but  not  all."  There 
were  persons  endued  with  miraculous  powers  who  nevertheless  were  not  "His 
own,"  and  to  whom  Christ  will  say,  "  I  never  knew  you."  II.  The  position  "  in 
the  world."  It  is  one  of — 1.  Trial.  You  are  exposed  to  a  position  of  sorrow,  and 
struggling,  and  conflict.  Here  is  something  that  will  try  you.  What  influence  has 
the  world  had  on  your  spirit  and  conduct  ?  It  you  are  called  on  to  suffer,  is  there 
the  language  of  Eli :  "  It  is  the  Lord  ;  let  Him  do  what  seemeth  good  unto  Him  "? 
or  obstinacy  and  rebellion  ?  2.  Danger.  You  are  exposed — [1)  To  innumerable 
adversaries.  "  Your  adversary,  the  devil,  as  a  roaring  lion,  goetn  about,"  &c.  (2) 
To  great  temptations.  How  many  run  well  for  a  time  and  afterwards  fall  short ! 
III.  The  affection — "  having  loved."  If  your  position  is  to  be  a  test  of  your 
affection  for  Christ,  what  a  proof  it  will  be  of  His  affection  for  you  1  What 
evidence  of  love  will  you  ask  at  His  hands?  What  can  He  do  more  than  He  has 
done?  "Greater  love  hath  no  man  than  this,"  <fec.  IV.  Ths  adhesion — "unto 
the  end."  Can  you  say  this  of  any  human  affection  ?  Can  the  child  calculate  on  the 
affection  of  the  parent,  the  most  durable  of  all,  to  the  end  1  "  Can  a  woman  forget 
her  sucking  child?  .  .  .  Yea,  she  may  forget;  yet  will  I  not  forget."  There  is 
no  unchangeable  love  but  His  because  there  is  no  unchangeable  being  but  God.  "  I 
have  loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love,"  &c.  {W.  Bengo  Colly er,  D.D.) 
ChrisVi  love  of  His  own.  The  Saviour  has  a  treasure  of  immortal  spirits  who  are 
not  in  the  world.  Angels  and  spirits  of  the  just  made  perfect  are  all  His  own — a 
multitude  which  no  man  can  number.  This  verse,  however,  shows  the  relationship 
of  Jesus  t'^  His  faithful  followers  who  "  are  in  the  world."  The  disciples  were  no 
monopolists  of  Christ's  love.  The  lapse  of  time  may  change  the  tense,  but  it  does 
not  change  the  sense  of  this  gracious  text.  I.  The  disciples  of  Jesus  ake  called 
BY  A  peculiably  endeabino  NAME — **  His  owu."  All  thiugs  are  His  own.  "  All  souls 
are  Mine,"  even  the  rebellious  and  unthankful.  Here,  however,  the  words  imply  » 
relationship  of  the  dearest  and  closest  kind.  A  true  mother  has  a  sympathy  for 
all  children  ;  but  there  is  a  singular  depth  in  her  words,  as  she  looks  into  the  eyes 
of  the  darling  of  her  heart,  and  says,  "  My  own  1 "  The  gift  in  the  hand  of  a  child 
is  enhanced  when  it  is  understood  to  be  his  "very  own."  With  such  intense  affection 
and  delight  does  Christ  regard  His  people.  He  constantly  challenges  them  as  "  My 
brethren,"  "  My  sheep,"  "  My  friends,"  and  emphatically,  "  Mine."  They  are  His 
own — 1.  As  the  purchase  of  His  blood.  They  had  sold  themselves  for  nought,  were 
sold  under  sin.  Christ  was  their  Redeemer.  He  gave  His  life  a  ransom  for  them,  and 
they  are  become  His  purchased  possession.  "  He  justly  claims  us  for '  His  own,' "  Ac. 
2.  By  willing  personal  surrender.  This  is  an  all-essential  endorsement  of  His  claim. 
The  price  of  his  freedom  may  be  proffered  to  the  slave,  but  il  he  will  not  accept  it 
he  is  still  in  bonds.  Christ  hath  purchased  all  souls.  Yet  it  needs  the  assent  ol 
their  understanding,  and  the  consent  of  their  will,  in  order  to  bind  them  to  Him  by 


OHAP.  xra.]  -ST.  JOHN.  88t 

the  special  tie  and  to  make  them  peculiarly  His  own.     3.  They  bear  the  name,  seal, 
and  image  of  the  Saviour.     4.  As  the  gift  of  the  Father,  the  reward  of  His  media- 
torial work.    In  chap.  xvii.  we  see  how  the  Saviour  gathered  strength  and  comfort 
from  the  thought  of  their  prospective  possession.     "  Thine  they  were,  and  Thou 
gavest  them  Me."    II.  The  tempobaey  position  op  Christ's  own  !    "In  the  world." 
Wben  a  sinner  is  converted  and  all  is  safe  for  heaven,  how  desirable  it  seems  that 
he  should  be  removed  out  of  ttie  world.     Let  him  be  taken  away  from  the  evil  to 
come  that  he  may  never  run  the  hazard  of  losing  so  rich  a  prize.   Amid  the  troubles 
o£  life  the  Christian  pilgrim  is  often  tempted  to  say,  *'  Oh  that  I  had  the  wings  of  a 
dove,"  &c.     But  the  Lord  keeps  "  His  own  "  in  the  world— 1.  For  their  own  sake. 
Eternal  hfe  is  the  gift  of  God  unmerited  and  free;  yet  the  Ch  istian's  future  will 
be  largely  influenced  by  the  tone  and  character  of  his  Ife  )n  e  ith.    According  to 
his  spiritual  growth,  his  moral  victories,  his  love  and  sao^iliuo  and  service,  will  be 
the  fulness  of  the  glory  which  sball  be  revealed.     2.  For  the  Saviour's  sake.    The 
world  holds  Him  in  dishonour,  and  gives  His  glory  to  another.     Christians  are  in 
the  world  to  represent  the  Saviour  1    "  The  glory  which  Thou  hast  given  Me  I  have 
given  them,  that  the  world  may  know  that  Thou  hast  sent  Me."    3.  For  the  world's 
sake.     The  world  cannot  spare  them.     Its  only  hope  lies  in  the  element  of  godli- 
ness which  is  slowly  leavening  it  more  and  more.     "  Ye  are  the  salt  of  the  earth." 
III.  The  Saviour's  unchanging  love  for  His  own.     "  He  loved  them  to  the  end." 
These  disciples  of  His,  from  the  day  He  called  them,  had  been  the  objects  of 
tenderest  regard.    They  were  full  of  faults  and  failings,  were  sadly  slow  of  heart 
to  receive  the  truth  ;  yet  in  and  through  all  He  loved  them.     Now  that  the  time  ia 
at  hand  when  the  bitter  cup  shall  be  lifted  to  His  lips,  His  anxiety  for  their  weh- 
being  is  the  foremost  feeling  of  His  heart     He  pours  into  their  ears  the  richest 
strains  of  comfort  and  consolation.    "  Let  not  your  hearts  be  troubled,"  &c.    He 
promises  them  a  Comforter,  and  bids  them  "  be  of  good  cheer."    In  the  garden, 
His  gentle  forbearance  to  the  unwatchful  three  reveals  the  fixity  and  depth  of  His 
love.    When  the  officers  came.  He  wards  His  trembUng  disciples  from  the  threat- 
ening crowd.   Their  desertion  was  a  sharper  pang  than  any  made  by  jailer's  scourge 
or  soldier's  spear.     And  yet  it  was  quenchless  love  that "  looked  "  on  Peter.    When 
He  left  the  tomb,  He  gave  the  angel  watchers  a  kindly  message  for  His  flock,  and 
mentioned  the  penitent  denier  by  name.     And  when  at  last  they  gathered  round 
Him  on  the  hill  of  Bethany,  His  latest  movement  was  to  lift  His  hands  and  bless 
them ;  His  latest  word  a  promise  to  be  with  them  even  to  the  end  of  the  world ; 
when  a  sloud  received  Him  out  of  their  sight,  two  angels  stood  before  them  to  tell 
them  that  as  they  had  seen  Him  ascend,  so  should  He  again  descend,  that  He  might 
receive  them  unto  Himself  1    Afterwards,  when  seated  at  the  right  hand  of  God, 
Stephen's  cry  for  help  brought  Him  to  His  feet  1  Do  you  wonder  that  when  the  aged 
apostle  called  up  each  look,  tone,  deed,  and  word  that  marked  his  Saviour's  later 
days,  that  with  a  gush  of  unrestrained  devotion  he  should  write,  "Having  loved  His 
own,"  &c.  ?    Conclusion :  1.  Believer,  you  are  in  the  holy  and  the  privileged 
succession.  (1)  Christ  loves  you  with  an  abiding  love.    Your  memory  bears  grateful 
witness.     Many  an  Ebenezer  stands  out  and  tells  how  His  love  came  in  the  hour  of 
your  sorest  need.    Your  backslidings  have  been  many ;  your  imperfections  more, 
but  His  love  hath  endured  through  all.    Be  of  good  cheer.     He  will  love  you  to  the 
end,  and  draw  closer  and  nearer  as  the  end  draws  nigh.     (2)  Seek  a  closer,  more 
perfect  union  with  your  Saviour.     Be  "His  own"  entirely.    2.  Sinner  1  you  are 
not  in  this  saving  sense  "  His  own."    Then  whose  are  you  ?    You  are  a  servant  of 
tbe  devil,  whose  wages  is  death  1   Yet  the  Saviour  loves  you  I    Give  Him  your  heart, 
then  you  shall  be  "  His  own."     {J.  Jackson  Wray.)        Jesus  loving  His  own  that 
were  in  the  world : — For  the  inspired  Evangelist  not  only  specifies  the  precise  date 
— '•  Before  the  feast  of  the  Passover  " — but  he  also  mentions  a  particular  fact  of  a 
moral  nature,  of  the  utmost  importance,  as  giving  us  an  insight  into  the  Saviour's 
mind :  '•  When  Jesus  knew  " — or  Jesus  knowing — "  that  His  hour  was  come  that 
He  should  depart  out  of  this  world  unto  the  Father,"  &g.    The  idea  plainly  is, 
that  just  because  He  knew — not  merely  although,  but  just  because  He  knew — that 
His  hour  was  come,  that  He  should  leave  this  world,  and  that,  consequently,  Hia 
disciples  would  be  left  alone  in  it — as  He  had  always  previously  loved  them,  so  He 
now  manifested  His  love  in  a  very  peculiar  manner,  corresponding  to  their  neces- 
sities ;  and  this,  too,  under  the  most  affecting  circumstances,  and  to  the  utmost 
extent.    I.    The  objects  of  this  love  are  described,  in  the  first  instance,  more 
generally  as  being  "  His  own."    It  is  true,  indeed,  that,  in  one  sense,  all  things  are 
His  own,  as  being  their  Creator  and  Preserver — all  things,  from  the  highesa 


88S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 


archangel  to  the  meanest  insect  that  crawls  upon  the  ground.  But  His  people  ar» 
His  own  in  a  sense  peculiar  to  themselves.  But  the  objects  of  this  love  ar» 
described  not  only  as  Hid  own,  but  more  particularly  as  His  own  that  were  in  the 
world.  Jesus  had  many  of  "  His  own  "  that  were  now  in  glory ;  and  doubtless  these 
were  objects  of  peculiar  complacency  and  delight.  Oh  !  see  them  in  their  white 
robes,  as  they  shine  so  bright  1  But  still  the  precious  truth  for  us  is,  that  it  was 
His  own  that  were  in  the  world  that  He  is  here  said  to  have  loved.  And  why  were 
they  singled  out  from  the  rest  ?  Why,  but  because  of  the  peculiar  difficulties  and 
dangers  to  which  they  were  exposed.  Ask  that  tender-hearted  mother,  which  of 
her  many  children  recurs  oftenest  to  her  memory — those  of  them  who  are  safe  ai 
home  under  the  parental  roof,  or  the  one  that  is  far  away  at  sea  ?  Jesus  was  now 
to  depart  out  of  the  world,  but  they  were  to  be  left  in  it ;  and  therefore  His  hearf 
turned  in  love  towards  them.  But  without  dwelling  further  on  this  idea  here,  is  it 
not  a  most  delightful  and  encouraging  truth,  that,  though  Jesus  is  now  in  glory,  yet 
He  still  regards  His  own  that  are  in  the  world  with  peculiar  care  suited  to  their 
circumstances  and  necessities  ?  But  methinks  I  hear  some  one  say, ' '  Alas  1 1  feel  that 
I  am  in  the  world,  not  only  because  of  the  sins  of  others,  but  because  I  sin  myself ; 
because  I  have  •  a  body  of  death '  within  me,  and  often  it  breaks  out  in  word  and 
action."  Yes,  indeed,  but  Jesus  loves  His  own  that  are  in  the  world  still ;  He  seea 
and  knows  all  the  sin  and  imperfection,  that  you  have  to  contend  against,  and  yet 
He  loves  His  own  notwithstanding.  "  But,  oh  1  "  says  some  one,  "  my  case  is  of  a 
different  kind  still :  I  have  come  hither  to-day,  burdened  with  a  heavy  heart."  It 
may  be  that  it  is  some  dear  relative  that  is  sick,  and  apparently  near  to  death.  All 
this  proves  that  you  are  still  in  a  world  of  sorrow.  But  then  Jesus  loves  His  own 
still,  and  looks  down  upon  them  with  ever  watchful  eje.  II.  But  I  come  now,  in  the 
second  place,  to  mention  some  of  those  wats  in  which  Jesus  had  always  pbeviodslt 
MANIFESTED  His  LOVE  TO  THEM.  1.  See,  for  example,  how  having  oncc  choscu  them 
in  His  love,  He  ever  afterwards  proved  His  love  by  continual  companionship  with 
them.  2.  See,  too,  how  tenderly,  how  graciously  He  instructed  them.  Hie 
instructions  were  always  very  simple,  because  He  loved  them  so  welL  His  love  was 
stronger  than  their  unbelief  and  ignorance.  3.  See,  moreover,  how  ready  He  was 
to  sympathize  with  them,  and  to  render  them  every  kind  of  assistance.  Whenever 
they  were  in  trouble.  He  was  their  willing  and  able  Friend.  4.  And,  oh,  with  what 
patience  did  He  bear  with  them  in  all  their  weakness  and  infirmities  I  III.  But  what 
I  wish  you  specially  to  notice  now  is  the  steadfastness  of  this  love — its  unfailino 

AND  UNFLINCHING  FAITHFULNESS,  A3  IN  LIFE  SO  ALSO  IN  DEATH.      "  He  lOVed  them  UUtO 

the  end  " — not  only  to  the  end  of  life,  but  to  the  utmost  extent,  and  under  the  most 
affecting  circumstances.  And  if  He  thus  loved  them,  in  the  view  of  the  agonies  of 
Gethsemane  and  the  death  of  Calvary,  think  you  does  He  now  forget  them — now 
that  He  has  passed  withiu  the  veil  ?  Ah  1  no,  it  is  impossible.  But  I  must  also  add, 
if  Jesus  Christ  loved  His  own  unto  the  end,  then  surely  they  ought  to  persevere  in 
their  love  to  Him.  But  I  have  this  also  to  say  in  closing,  what  misery  must  it  be  to 
be  without  such  a  Saviour  1  (C  Ross.)  Christ's  love  unto  the  end : — I.  There  was 
NOT  MUCH  IN  THEM  TO  LOVE — YET  He  LOVED  THEM.  I  havo  DO  wish  to  disparage 
these  early  disciples.  Everything  betokens  that  most  of  them  were  what  the 
narrative  tells  us — unlebrned  Galilean  fishermen,  who  had  been  nurtured  in  the  free, 
clear  air  of  Nature,  and  so  they  had  to  the  end  a  sort  of  frankness  about  them  which 
was  very  enjoyable.  I  think  that  was  something  in  them  which  Jesus  Christ 
appreciated.  It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  there  was  also  in  them  an  unselfish 
readiness  to  endure  sacrifice  in  the  cause  of  Him  who  had  charmed  their  hearts  and 
excited  the  questioning  wonder  of  their  minds.  Yet  in  spite  of  all  this,  what  was 
there  particularly  in  these  men  that  one  like  Christ  should  find  to  love  ?  I  think  of 
the  sensitiveness  of  His  nature,  the  gentleness  of  His  disposition,  the  purity  of  His 
thought,  the  utter  unselfishness  of  His  purposes,  the  grandeur  and  sweep  of  His 
ideas.  His  conceptions  of  nature,  of  man,  of  God.  What  was  there  that  Christ 
could  perceive  in  these  rude,  uncultured,  somewhat  coarse  men,  men  most  limited 
in  their  thoughts,  who  had  little  of  wliat  we  call  spirituality  in  them  to  attract  Him 
towards  them  ?  Yet  He  gave  them  His  very  heart ;  He  loved  them  with  a  love  that 
is  simply  matchless  and  astounding.  Ah  1  doubtless  He  saw  more  in  them  to  love 
than  common  eyes  could  possibly  see.  For  the  greatest  natures  always  do  discover 
beauties  of  c^amcter  in  the  humblest  which  escape  the  observation  of  ordinary 
people.  But  \o  k  at  the  Divine  side.  See  Him  as  the  Incarnate  Son  of  God,  the 
Holy  One,  the  Perfect,  the  Divine  One,  and  how  the  wonder  grows  that  He  ehoold 
have  hambled  Himself  to  associate  on  terms  of  generous  love  with  the  disciples  I 


CBiif,  XII1.1  ST.  JOHN.  383 

Why  has  Christ  loved  you — yonr  heart,  mind,  soul  ?  It  is  a  fact ;  that  you  know. 
Why  is  it  ?  Ah  I  that  you  cannot  answer,  I  cannot  answer,  except  we  say,  It  is  the 
nature  of  God  to  love,  and  the  more  weak,  feeble,  helpless,  unworthy  we  are,  the 
more  compassionately  does  He  bend  to  pour  the  fulness  of  His  heart  into  our  sinning 
lives.  II.  There  was  much  in  them  that  tested  His  love — yet  He  loved  them. 
It  is  not  necessary  to  speak  much  of  the  trial  that  Christ's  first  disciples  were  to 
Him  over  and  over  again.  Quarrelling,  petulance,  scepticism,  blindness  of  thought, 
cowardliness,  treachery  have  no  power  to  destroy  that  supreme  love.  How  often 
we  have  stumbled  at  the  revelations  He  has  made,  and,  through  a  doubting  spirit 
which  we  have  encouraged,  have  asked  foolish  sceptical  questions  simply  for  the 
sake  of  asking  them  1  How  we  have  prayed  for  more  light  and  clearer  visions  of 
God,  when  close  at  our  side,  all  around  us,  have  been  manifestations  of  the  Father  I 
flew,  when  asked  to  watch  with  and  for  Christ,  we  have  pleaded  weariness  and  slept  1 

III.  There  was  a  continuous  need  op  His  love,  and  He  loved  them  unto  the 
END.  Thus  His  life  was  a  discipline  of  love  to  them.  His  death  a  sacrifice  of  love 
for  them.  {W.  Braden.)  The  great  love  of  Christ  for  His  own,  as  shown — I. 
In  the  diversions  it  held  at  bay.  1.  The  consciousness  that  His  hour  was  come 
that  He  should  depart  out  of  this  world.  And  knowing  the  fact,  He  also  knew  all 
the  particulars  of  the  tragic  exode.  The  actual  endurance  could  not  be  much  worse 
than  such  a  distinct  anticipation  of  it  as  He  had.  And  yet  the  tremendous 
pressure  of  this  foresight  did  not  divert  Him  from  the  most  tender  and  considerate 
attention  to  those  whom  He  was  about  to  leave.  2.  The  consciousness  that  He  was 
about  to  return  to  God.  There  was  a  joy  set  before  Him  for  which  He  endured  the 
cross,  despising  the  shame.  Yet  such  was  His  affection  for  His  disciples,  that  not 
all  the  glories  of  heaven  in  the  act  of  opening  to  receive  Him,  could  tor  a  moment 
disturb  His  warm  and  compassionate  attentions  to  them.  II.  In  the  repulsions  it  y' 
submounted.  There  was  much  uuworthiness  and  carnal  crudeness  in  these  men  to 
repel  the  Saviour's  affection.  They  did  not  so  love  Him.  A  few  hours  and  they  all 
had  deserted  Him.  That  same  night,  one  of  the  most  devoted  of  them  denied  Him. 
Another  of  them  was  harbouring  at  the  time  the  Satanic  instigation  to  betray  Him. 
And  in  the  hearts  of  all  of  them  worked  a  most  unseemly  jealousy  and  contention 
(Luke  xxii.  24).  The  Saviour  had  given  them  lesson  after  lesson  on  this  point,  and 
yet  their  miserable  pride  and  selfishness  had  not  been  cured.  How  painful  the  con- 
templation 1  How  disheartening  and  repellant  to  Him  who  had  so  loved  them.  And 
yet,  the  more  unworthy  they  were  of  His  love,  the  more  intensely  did  it  flame  forth.  ^ 
IIL  In  the  condescension  it  induced.  He  into  whose  hands  the  Father  had 
given  all  things,  stooped  to  employ  those  hands  in  washing  a  traitor's  feet  1  Nor 
did  He  only  take  the  menial's  attire  and  work,  but,  when  Peter  objected,  Jesus  set 
Himself  to  new  efforts  to  meet  new  manifestations  of  disease.  And  even  Judas, 
with  all  His  known  treachery,  was  not  relinquished  without  the  most  faithful  and 
tender  endeavours  to  bring  him  to  himself.  And  when  the  washing  was  finished, 
the  Lord  preached  still  another  sermon  on  humility  and  the  true  Christian  spirit. 

IV.  In  the  sacrament  it  ordained.  Though  not  given  in  the  text,  the  other  Evan- 
gelists have  stated  it  in  full  (Matt.  xxvi.  26-28).  Herein  is  the  great  love  of  Christ 
manifest  toward  His  own,  that,  on  the  very  eve  of  His  great  passion,  He  appointed 
and  left  to  them  and  us  this  perpetual  legacy  and  memorial  of  His  affection,  in 
which  He  continually  administers  to  all  believing  celebrants  of  this  holy  sacrament 
the  very  manna  and  bread  of  heaven,  and  incorporates  His  living  Self  with  us  as 
our  salvation  and  our  eternal  life.  {J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.)  The  method  by  which  we 
become  ChrisVs  own : — His  redemption  is  not  a  mere  breaking  of  bonds  in  which 
we  were  enthralled.  It  is  not  as  when  one  comes  upon  a  wild  animal  caught  in  a 
snare,  and  undoes  the  snare,  and  lets  the  panting,  struggling  thing  return  to  its 
wild  liberty  again ;  it  is  rather  as  if  one  not  only  delivered  it  from  the  snare,  but 
likewise  attached  it  to  himself,  and  tamed  it  to  His  will,  so  that  it  becomes  his  own. 
{J.  Culross,  D.D.)  Christ's  transcendent  love : — The  experiences  of  love  are  such 
sometimes,  even  in  this  life,  as  to  be  an  earnest,  a  blessed  interpretation,  of  some- 
thing more  glorious  yet  to  come.  There  is  one  thing  which  the  New  Testament  is 
always  in  labour  with,  and  which  is  never  born,  and  that  is,  the  conception  of  the 
greatness  of  the  love  of  Christ  to  our  souls.  When  all  language  is  exhausted,  when 
every  one  of  its  variations  of  figures  and  illustrations  has  been  employed  to  set  it 
forth,  still  it  is  never  finished.  Like  music  that  transcends  the  scale  of  the  instru- 
ment, it  leaves  the  strain  always  unexpressed.  The  apostle,  first  in  one  key  and 
then  in  another,  tries  all  the  melodies  and  harmonies  of  this  Divine  theme  ; 
but.  after  all,  the  love  of  Christ  has  never  been  told.     The  apostle  decl&res 


384  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVaTRATOH.  [chap,  xm, 

that  it  is  past  nnderstanding,  and  so  it  is ;  but  there  are  elements  of  experience 
that  teach  ua  something  of  it  ;  and  there  are  moments  in  which  we  pnt 
these  elements  together,  and  get  some  sense  of  it.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  The 
love  of  the  departing  Christ: — The  text  should  perhaps  read  "to  the  uttermost" 
— expressing  the  depth  and  degree  rather  than  the  permanence  of  our  Lord's 
love.  It  is  much  to  know  that  the  emotions  of  these  last  moments  did  not  interrupt 
Christ's  love.  It  is  even  more  to  know  that  in  some  sense  they  perfected  it.  So 
understood,  the  words  explain  for  us  the  foot-washing,  the  marvellous  discourses, 
and  the  climax  of  all  that  High-Priestly  prayer.    I.  Look  at  that  love  as  alovb  which 

WAS  not   INTEEEUPTED,    BDT   PEEFECTED   by   the    PBOSPECT   of  SEPAEAIION.       1.    '*  He 

knew  that  His  hour  was  come."  All  His  hfe  was  passed  under  the  consciousnesa 
of  a  Divine  necessity  laid  upon  Him,  to  which  He  cheerfully  yielded  Himself.  On 
His  lips  there  are  no  words  more  significant,  and  few  more  frequent,  than  "I 
'must  1  "  And  all  through  His  life  He  declares  Himself  conscious  of  the  hours 
which  mark  the  several  cris-es  of  His  mission.  No  external  power  can  coerce  Him 
to  any  act  till  the  hour  come,  or  hinder  Him  from  the  act  when  it  comes.  And  thus, 
at  the  last  and  supreme  moment,  to  Him  it  dawned  unquestionable  and  irrevocable. 
How  did  He  meet  it  ?  "  Father  I  save  Me  from  this  hour.  .  .  .  Yet  for  this  cause 
came  I  unto  this  hour."  There  is  a  strange,  triumphant  joy  that  blends  with  the 
shrinking  that  the  decisive  hour  is  at  last  come.  2.  Mark,  too,  the  form  which  the 
consciousness  took.  The  agony,  the  shame,  the  mysterious  burden  of  a  world's 
sins  that  were  to  be  laid  upon  Him  ;  all  these  elements  are  submerged  in  the  one 
thought  of  leaving  behind  all  the  limitations,  humihations,  and  compelled  associa- 
tion with  evil  which,  like  a  burning  brand  laid  upon  a  tender  skin,  was  an  hourly 
agony  to  Him,  and  soaring  above  them  all,  unto  His  own  calm  home,  His  habitation 
from  eternity  with  the  Father.  3.  This  marvellous  consciousnes^5  '*■  set  forth  here 
as  the  basis  and  the  reason  for  a  special  tenderness,  as  He  thought  of  the  impending 
separation.  (1)  Does  this  not  help  aa  to  realize  how  truly  flesh  of  our  flesh,  and 
bearing  a  heart  thrilling  with  all  innocent  human  emotions  that  Divine  Saviour 
was  ?  We,  too,  have  known  what  it  is  to  feel,  because  of  approaching  separation  from 
dear  ones,  the  need  for  a  tenderer  tenderness.  At  such  moments  the  masks  of  use 
and  wont  drop  away,  and  we  are  eager  to  find  some  word,  to  put  our  whole  souls 
into  some  look,  our  whole  strength  into  one  clinging  embrace  that  may  express  all 
our  love,  and  may  be  a  joy  to  two  hearts  for  ever  after  to  remember.  The  Master 
knew  that  longing,  and  felt  the  pain  of  separation ;  and  He,  too,  yielded  to  the  human 
impulse  which  makes  the  thought  of  parting  the  key  to  unlock  the  hidden  chambers 
of  the  most  jealously-guarded  heart,  and  let  the  shyest  of  its  emotions  come  out 
for  once  into  the  dayhght.  So,  "  knowing  that  His  hour  was  come,  He  loved  them 
then  unto  the  uttermost."  (2)  But  amidst  all  the  parting  scenes  that  the  world's 
literature  has  enshrined,  there  are  none  that  can  be  set  by  the  side  of  this  supreme 
and  unique  instance  of  self-oblivion.  This  Man  who  was  susceptible  of  all  human 
affections,  and  loved  us  with  a  love  like  our  own  human  alTection,  had  also  more 
than  a  man's  heart  to  give,  and  gave  us  more,  when,  that  He  might  comfort  and 
sustain,  He  crushed  down  Himself  and  went  to  the  Cross  with  words  of  tenderness 
and  consolation  and  encouragement  for  others  upon  His  lips.  (3)  And  if  the 
prospect  only  sharpened  and  perfected  His  Jove,  the  reality  has  no  power  to  do  aught 
else.  In  the  glory,  when  He  reached  it,  He  poured  out  the  same  loving  heart ;  and 
to-day  He  looks  down  upon  us  with  the  same  face  that  bent  over  that  table,  and 
the  same  love  flows  to  us.  •'  Knowing  that  He  goes  to  the  Father,  He  loves  to  the 
uttermost,"  and  being  with  the  Father,  He  still  so  loves.  II.  A  love  which  is 
FAITHFUL  TO  THE  OBLIGATIONS  OF  ITS  OWN  PAST.  Having  loved.  He  loves.  That  is  an 
argument  that  implies  Divinity.  About  nothing  human  can  we  say  because  it  has 
been  therefore  it  shall  be.  Alas  !  we  have  to  say  the  converse,  because  it  has  been, 
therefore  it  will  cease  to  be.  They  tell  us  that  the  great  sun  itself,  pouring  out  its  rays 
exhausts  its  warmth,  and  were  it  not  continually  replenished  must  gradually,  and  even 
though  continually  replenished,  will  one  day  be  a  dead,  cold  mass  of  ashes.  But  thia 
heart  of  Christ,  which  is  the  Sun  of  the  World,  shall  endure  after  the  sun  is  cold.  He 
pours  it  out  and  there  is  none  the  less  to  give.  "  Thy  mercy  endureth  for  ever."  III. 
A  LOVE  WHICH  HAS  SPECIAL  TENDEENES8  TOWARDS  ITS  OWN.  These  poor  men,  who, 
with  all  their  errors,  did  cleave  to  Him  ;  who,  in  some  dim  way,  understood  some- 
what of  His  greatness  and  His  sweetness — and  do  you  and  I  do  more? — were  they 
to  have  no  special  place  in  His  heart  because  in  that  heart  the  whole  world  lay  ? 
Surely,  because  the  sun  shines  down  upon  dunghills  and  all  impurities,  that  is  no 
reason  why  it  should  not  lie  with  special  brightness  on  the  polished  mirror  that 


CHA».  xm.]  ST.  JOHN.  188 

reflects  its  lustre.  Surely,  because  Christ  loves  the  outcasts  and  the  sinners,  that 
is  no  reason  why  He  should  not  bend  with  special  tenderness  over  those  who, 
loving  Him,  try  to  serve  Him,  and  have  set  their  whole  hopes  upon  Him,  The 
rainbow  strides  across  the  sky,  but  there  is  a  rainbow  in  every  little  dewdrop  that 
hangs  glistening  on  the  blades  of  grass.  And  there  is  nothing  sectional,  narrow  in 
the  proclamation  of  a  special  tenderness  of  Christ  towards  His  own,  when  you 
accompany  with  that  truth  this  other,  that  all  men  are  besought  by  Him  to  come 
into  that  circle  of  '•  His  own,"  and  that  only  they  themselves  shut  any  men  out 
therefrom.  The  whole  world  dwells  in  His  love.  But  there  is  an  inner  chamber  in 
which  He  discovers  all  His  heart  to  those  who  find  in  that  heart  their  heaven  and 
their  all.  "  He  came  to  His  own,"  in  the  wider  sense  of  the  word,  and  "  His  own 
received  Him  not ;  "  but  also,  "  having  loved  His  own  He  loved  them  unto  the  end." 
There  are  textures  and  lines  which  can  only  absorb  some  of  the  rays  of  light  ia  the 
spectrum ;  some  that  are  only  capable  of  taking,  so  to  speak,  the  violet  rays  of 
judgment  and  of  wrath,  and  some  who  open  their  hearts  for  the  ruddy  brightness 
at  the  other  end  of  the  line.  IV.  A  love  made  specially  tendeb  by  the  necessities 
AND  the  dangebs  OF  ITS  EEiENDS.  "  Which  Were  in  the  world."  We  have,  running 
through  the  discourses  which  follow,  many  allusions  to  His  leaving  His  followers  in 
circumstances  of  peculiar  peril.  "  I  come  unto  Thee,  and  am  no  more  in  the  world, 
bat  these  are  in  the  world.  Keep  them  through  Thine  own  name."  The  same 
contrast  between  the  certain  security  of  the  Shepherd  and  the  troubles  of  the  flock 
seems  to  be  in  the  text,  and  suggests  a  reason  for  the  special  tenderness  with  which 
He  looked  upon  them.  As  a  dying  father  on  his  deathbed  may  yearn  over  orphans 
that  he  is  leaving  defenceless,  so  Christ  here  is  represented  as  conscious  of  an 
accession  even  to  the  tender  longings  of  His  heart  when  He  thought  of  the  loneliness 
and  the  dangers  to  which  His  followers  were  to  be  exposed.  It  seems  a  strange 
contrast  between  the  emperor,  sitting  throned  there  between  the  purple  curtains, 
and  the  poor  athletes  wrestling  in  the  arena  below.  It  seems  strange  to  think  that 
a  loving  Master  has  gone  up  into  the  mountain,  and  has  left  His  disciples  to  toil  in 
rowing  on  the  stormy  sea  of  life  ;  but  the  contrast  is  only  apparent.  For  you  and 
I,  if  we  love  and  trust  Him,  are  with  Him  in  the  heavenly  places  even  whilst  we 
toil  here,  and  He  is  with  us,  working  with  us  even  whilst  He  sitteth  at  the 
right  hand  of  God.  We  may  be  sure  of  this,  that  that  love  ever  increases 
its  manifestations  according  to  our  deepening  necessities.  The  darker  the  night  tho 
more  lustrous  the  stars.  The  deeper,  the  narrower,  the  savager,  the  Alpine  gorge, 
usually  the  fuller  and  the  swifter  the  stream  that  runs  through  it.  And  the  mor« 
enemies  and  fears  gather  round  about  us  the  sweeter  will  be  the  accents  of  our 
Comforter's  voice,  and  the  fuller  wiU  be  the  gifts  of  tenderness  and  grace  with  whifh 
He  draws  near  to  us.  Our  sorrows,  dangers,  necessities,  are  doors  through  which 
His  love  can  come  nigh.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  constancy  of  Christ's  love  : — A 
ghorttime  previous  to  the  death  of  the  Marchioness  of  Tavistock,  and  when  she  was 
preparing  to  go  to  Lisbon  for  the  recovery  of  her  health,  a  consultation  of  physicians 
was  held  at  Bedford  House  ;  and  one  of  the  gentlemen  present  requested,  while  he 
felt  her  pulse,  that  she  would  open  her  hand.  Her  frequent  refusals  occasioned  him 
to  take  the  liberty  of  gently  forcing  the  fingers  asunder  ;  when  he  perceived  that  she 
had  kept  her  hand  closed  to  conceal  the  miniature-picture  of  the  marquis.  "  Oh 
madam  1 "  observed  the  physician,  "  my  prescriptions  must  be  useless,  if  your  lady- 
ship  is  determined  to  keep  before  your  eyes  an  object  which,  although  deservedly 
dear  to  you,  serves  only  to  confirm  the  violence  of  your  illness."  The  marchioness 
replied,  "  I  have  kept  the  picture,  either  in  my  bosom  or  my  hand,  ever  since  the 
death  of  my  lamented  lord  ;  and  thus  I  am  determined  to  preserve  it  till  I  fortunately 
drop  after  him  into  the  grave."  (Percy.)  The  perfection  of  Christ's  love : — The 
mother,  wan  and  pale  with  incessant  vigils  by  the  bedside  of  a  sick  child  ;  the  fire- 
man, maimed  for  life  in  bravely  rescuing  the  inmates  of  a  blazing  house  ;  the  three 
hundred  Spartans  at  Thermopylae  ;  Howard,  dying  of  fever  caught  in  dungeons 
where  he  was  fulfilling  his  noble  purpose  of  succouring  the  oppressed  and  remember- 
ing the  forgotten  ;  the  Moravian  missionaries,  who  voluntarily  incarcerated  them- 
selves in  an  African  leper-house  (from  which  regress  into  the  healthy  world  was 
impossible,  and  escape  only  to  be  effected  through  the  gates  of  death)  in  order  that 
they  might  preach  the  glad  tidings  to  the  lepers, — all  these,  and  many  other 
glorious  instances  of  self-devotion,  do  but  faintly  shadow  forth  the  love  of  Him  who 
laid  aside  divine  glory,  and  humbled  himself  to  the  death  of  the  cross.  (W, 
Baxendale.)  Christ's  an  unchanging    love: — A    noble   rolling   river  has  been 

flowing  on  for  six  thousand  years  watering  the  fields  and  slaking  the  thirst  of  • 
VOL.  II.  26 


886  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rm. 

hundred  generations,  yet  shows  no  signs  of  waste.  The  sun  has  melted  the  snowa 
of  BO  many  winters,  renewed  the  verdure  of  so  many  springs,  painted  the  flowers  of 
BO  many  summers,  and  ripened  the  golden  harvests  of  so  many  autumns,  yet  shines 
as  brilliant  as  ever,  his  floods  of  light  none  the  less  full  for  centuries  of  boundless 
profusion.  Yet  these  are  but  faint  images  of  Christ's  love.  For  when  the  judgment 
flames  have  licked  up  that  flowing  stream  and  the  light  of  that  glorious  sun  shall 
be  quenched  in  darkness,  His  love  shall  flow  on  throughout  eternity.  (T.  Guthrie, 
D.D.)  Love  in  the  face  of  discouragement : — I  know  a  mother  who  has  an  idiot  child. 
For  it  she  gave  up  all  society,  almost  everything,  and  devoted  her  whole  life  to  it. 
"  And  now,"  said  she,  •'  for  fourteen  years  I  have  tended  it  and  loved  it  and  it  does 
not  even  know  me."  Amid  all  discouragements  Christ's  love  is  patient  and 
unwearying.  (D.  L.  Moody.)  The  changeless  love  of  Christ : — Eartnly  love  is  a 
brief  and  penurious  stream,  which  only  flows  in  spring,  with  a  long  summer 
drought.  The  change  from  a  burning  desert,  treeless,  springless,  drear,  to  green 
fields  and  blooming  orchards  in  June,  is  slight  in  comparison  with  that  from  the 
desert  of  this  world's  affection  to  the  garden  of  God,  where  there  is  perpetual, 
tropical  luxuriance  of  blessed  love.  (H.  W.  Beecher. )  Uncertain  friendship  :— 
Henry  the  Eighth  used  to  come  up  the  Thames  to  Chelsea  to  Sir  Thomas  More's 
house,  drop  in  to  dinner,  and  walk  afterwards  in  the  garden,  his  arms  about 
More's  neck.  More's  son-in-law,  Eoper,  records  it  with  delight.  But  More  knew 
just  what  all  this  was  worth,  and  that  his  head  would  count  with  the  king  for 
nothing  against  a  French  city  or  citadel,  say.  It  is  not  so  with  Christ.  "  Having 
loved  His  own  which  were  in  the  world,  He  loved  them  to  the  end."  The  Divine 
love  does  not  fail  when  man  fails : — Mr.  Sloan  said  :  "  A  father  teaching  his  child 
about  the  unchanging  piety  and  love  of  God,  said:  'I  knew  a  little  boy  who 
received  a  canary  from  a  friend  as  a  present.  The  bird  seemed  to  fill  that  boy'a 
heart.  He  was  intensely  fond  of  it,  and  every  morning  he  was  delighted  to  listen 
to  its  singing.  One  morning  no  note  proceeded  from  the  cage.  The  bird  was 
standing  panting  upon  its  perch,  its  feathers  all  rufiBed.  The  little  boy  sat  upon  his 
chair  and  sobbed  as  if  his  heart  would  break.'  The  lesson  taught  the  little  child 
was  this — Do  you  think  he  loved  the  bird  any  less  that  morning  when  he  could  not 
sing  ?  No,  he  loved  it  when  it  was  joyfully  singing  on  its  perch,  but  he  loved 
it  that  morning  when  it  could  not  sing.  When  it  sang  it  filled  him  with  jay 
and  delight,  but  when  it  was  ill  he  loved  it  all  the  more  though  its  condition  caused 
him  pain."  So,  too,  God  loved  us  at  all  times.  The  changeless  Friend: — So 
long  as  there  is  blossom  on  the  trees,  and  honey  in  the  blossom,  the  bees  will 
frequent  them  in  crowds,  and  fill  the  place  with  music ;  but  when  the  blossom  is 
over,  and  the  honey  is  gone,  the  bees  too  will  disappear.  The  same  happens  in  the 
world  with  men.  In  the  abode  of  fortune  and  pleasure  friends  will  be  found  in 
plenty ;  but  when  fortune  flies,  they  fly  along  with  it.  For  this  reason,  let  good 
men  be  advised  to  fly  to  Christ  crucified,  who  never  forsakes,  in  their  distress,  those 
who  truly  seek  Him.  (Gotthold.)  The  faithfulness  of  Jesus : — Consider  these 
words — I.  In  theib  relation  to  the  apostles.  The  words  "  having  loved  His  own," 
are  a  brief  but  complete  summary  of  the  Saviour's  conduct.  He  loved  them  with  a 
love  of  pity  when  He  saw  their  lost  estate,  and  He  called  them  out  of  it  to  be  His 
disciples ;  touched  with  a  feeling  of  their  infirmities  He  loved  them  with  a  tender 
and  prudent  affection,  and  sought  to  train  and  educate  them,  that  they  might 
be  good  soldiers  of  His  cross ;  He  loved  them  with  a  love  of  complacency  as  He 
walked  and  talked  with  them  and  found  solace  in  their  company.  Even  when  He 
rebuked  them  He  loved.  On  Tabor  or  in  Gethsemane  He  loved  His  own ;  alone 
or  in  the  crowd,  in  life  and  in  death.  Our  Saviour's  faithfulness  was — 1.  Most 
remarkable.  He  had  selected  persons  who  must  have  been  but  poor  companions 
for  one  of  so  gigantic  a  mind  and  so  large  a  heart.  (1)  He  must  have  been  greatly 
shocked  at  their  worldliness.  He  was  thinking  of  the  baptism  wherewith  He  was  to 
be  baptized,  but  they  were  disputing  which  should  be  the  greatest.  When  He 
warned  them  of  an  evil  leaven,  they  thought  of  the  loaves.  Earth-worms  are 
miserable  company  for  angels,  moles  but  unhappy  company  for  eagles,  yet  love 
made  our  great  Master  endure  the  society  of  His  ignorant  and  carnal  followers. 
(2)  Worse  was  the  apparent  impossibility  of  lifting  them  out  of  that  low  condition ; 
for  though  never  man  spake  as  He  spake,  how  little  did  they  understand  1  "  Have  I 
been  so  long  time  with  you,"  &&  No  teacher  here  could  have  had  patience  with  such 
heavy  intellects,  but  our  Lord's  love  remained,  notwithstanding.  (3)  When  we  love  a 
person,  we  expect  bim  to  have  some  little  sympathy  in  the  great  design  and  aim  of 
our  life  ;  yet  our  Lord  loved  disciples  who  could  not  be  brought  to  enter  at  all  into 


<8HAP.  xm.l  ST.  JOHN.  887 

4he  spirit  which  governed  Him.  Had  they  dared,  they  would  rather  have  thwarted 
than  assisted  Him  in  His  self-sacrificing  mission.  Still,  this  could  not  prevent  Him 
from  loving  them  unto  the  end.  (4)  On  one  or  two  occasions  certain  of  them  were 
even  guilty  of  impertinence.  Peter  took  Him  and  began  to  rebuke  Him.  But  after 
rebuking  a  temptation  which  was  evidently  Satanic,  His  affection  to  Peter  remained 
unabated.  (3)  That  was  a  stern  trial,  too,  when  at  a  later  period  "  all  the  disciples 
forsook  Him  and  fled."  Carrying  the  text  beyond  its  original  position,  Christ,  who 
had  loved  His  own,  loved  them  to  the  end.  2.  Christ  proved  His  love— (1)  By  His 
continual  companionship.  You  would  not  expect  a  master  to  find  rest  in  the 
society  of  his  scholars  ;  and  yet  herein  was  love,  that  Jesus,  passing  by  angels,  and 
kings,  and  sages,  chose  for  His  companions  unlettered  men  and  women.  (2)  By 
being  always  ready  to  instruct  them,  and  His  love  is  shown  as  clearly  in  what  He 
kept  back  from  them  as  in  what  He  revealed.  How  loving  to  dwell  so  often  upon 
the  simpler  truths,  and  the  more  practical  precepts ;  it  was  as  though  a  senior 
wrangler  should  sit  down  in  the  family  and  teach  boys  and  girls  their  alphabet  day 
after  day.  (3)  By  rendering  every  kind  of  assistance.  Whensoever  they  were  in 
trouble,  He  was  their  willing  and  able  friend— when  the  sea  roared ;  when  Peter's 
wife's  mother  was  sick ;  when  one  of  His  dearest  friends  was  dead  and  buried. 
(4)  By  comforting  them  when  He  foresaw  that  they  would  be  cast  down  ;  especially 
was  this  true  at  the  period  before  His  passion — when  one  would  have  thought  He 
might  have  sought  for  comfort,  He  was  busy  distributing  it.  (5)  By  constantly 
pleading  for  them.  Ere  the  poison  was  injected  by  the  old  serpent,  the  antidote 
was  at  hand.  "  Satan  hath  desired,"  &o.  (6)  By  washing  their  feet.  II.  In  theib 
BBLATiON  TO  ALL  His  SAINTS.  We  read  that  our  Lord  '•  Came  unto  His  own,"  &c. — 
the  word  is  neuter — his  own  things  ;  but  in  this  instance  it  is  masculine — his  own 
persons.  A  man  may  part  with  his  own  things;  sell  his  own  house,  cattle, 
merchandise  ;  but  a  man  cannot  part  with  his  own  when  it  relates  to  persons,  his 
own  child,  wife,  father.  Our  own  relatives  are  real  property,  perpetual  possession. 
Jesus  has  just  such  a  property  in  His  own  people — they  are  for  ever  near  of  kin  to 
Him.  These  He  "  loved  to  the  end."  The  text  opens  three  windows.  1.  As  to  the 
past.  He  has  loved  His  own  people  from  of  old ;  eternally.  This  everlasting  love 
Jias  a  speciality  about  it.  Our  Lord  has  a  general  love  of  benevolence  towards  all 
His  creatures ;  but  He  has  a  special  place  in  His  heart  for  His  own  peculiar  ones. 
{!)  Jesus  loved  His  people  with  a  foresight  of  what  they  would  be.  He  knew  that 
«*  His  own  "  would  fall  in  Adam  ;  tbat  they  would  be  hard  to  reclaim  and  difficult 
to  retain ;  and  yet  He  loved  His  own  over  the  head  of  all  their  sins.  On  their 
highest  Tabors  He  loves  them,  but  equally  as  well  in  their  Gethsemanes ;  when 
they  wander,  and  when  they  come  back.  (2)  This  love  is  more  than  a  passion,  it  is 
a  settled  principle,  not  subject  to  changes  like  terrestrial  things.  (3)  This  love  has 
been  attested  by  many  deeds.  By  the  fact  that  He  stood  surety  for  us  when  the 
covenant  was  made,  and  entered  into  stipulations  on  our  behalf  that  He  would 
fulfil  the  broken  law,  and  offer  satisfaction  to  the  justice  of  God.  In  the  fulness  of 
time  he  took  upon  Himself  our  nature,  lived  a  life  of  blameless  service,  died  a  death 
into  which  all  the  weight  of  Divine  vengeance  for  sin  was  compressed.  Now  that 
He  lives  exalted  in  the  highest  heaven.  He  is  still  His  people's  servant,  interceding 
for  them,  representing  them,  preparing  a  place  for  them,  and  by  His  Spirit  fetching 
them  out  from  mankind,  and  preparing  them  for  the  place  which  He  has  prepared. 
2.  The  second  window  looks  out  upon  the  present.  "  Which  were  in  the  world." 
It  does  not  seem  an  extraordinary  thing  that  Jesus  should  love  His  own  who  are  in 
heaven.  Well  may  Jesus  love  them,  for  there  is  much  beauty  in  them.  But  Jesus 
loves  you  working  men  that  have  to  work  with  so  many  bad  fellows,  you  tradesmen 
who  have  to  go  in  among  many  who  shock  you,  you  good  work  girls,  who  meet  with 
so  many  tempters.  He  sees  your  imperfection,  He  knows  what  you  have  to  struggle 
with,  and  He  loves  you  notwithstanding  all.  Again,  as  the  sparks  tiy  upwards,  so 
were  we  born  to  trouble.  But  Jesus  loves  His  own  which  are  in  this  dolorous  world : 
this  is  the  balm  of  our  griefs.  3.  The  third  window  looks  out  to  the  future.  "  Unto 
the  end."  (1)  To  the  utmost  end  of  their  unloveliness.  Their  sinfulness  cannot 
travel  so  far  but  His  love  will  travel  beyond  it  ;  their  unbelief  even  shall  not  be 
extended  to  so  great  a  length  but  His  faithfulness  shall  still  be  wider  and  broader 
than  their  unfaithfulness.  (2)  To  the  end  of  all  their  needs.  They  may  need  more 
ihan  this  world  can  hold,  and  all  that  heaven  can  give,  but  Jesus  will  go  to  the  end 
of  all  their  necessities,  and  even  beyond  them,  for  He  is  "  able  to  save  to  the  utter- 
most." (3)  To  the  end  of  their  lives.  (4)  To  the  end  of  His  own  life.  Until  the 
•eternal  God  shall  die.  His  love  shall  never  depart  from  any  one  of  His  beloved. 


388  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (oHAfc  xm. 

Conclusion  :  If  Jesus  Christ  thus  loves  to  the  end — 1.  How  ought  we  to  persevere  itt 
our  love  to  Him.    2.  Let  us  not  indulge  the  wicked  thought  that  He  will  foisake 
us.    3.  What  a  misery  it  must  be  to  be  without  such  a  Saviour  1     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
And  supper  being  ended. — The  translation  should  probably  be,  "  And  it  now 
becoming  supper  time."     As  a  matter  of  fact  the  supper  was  not  ended  (vers.  12, 
26) ;  but  they  had  already  reclined,  and  were,  as  we  say,  ready  for  supper.     {Arch- 
deacon Watkins.)        Jesus  knowing  that  the  Father  had  given  all  things  Into 
His  hands. — The  great  gift : — A  gift — I.  Fkom  the   Sovereign  of  all.    II.  In- 
cluding Aiiii  THINGS.     III.  To  THE  Saviodb  OF  ALL.     (S.  S.   Times.)        1.  Thb 
Giver.    II.  The  gift.     III.  The  recipient.     {Ibid.)         And  that  He  was  come 
firom  God  and  went  to  God. — Extremes  in  Christ's  life  : — This  sublime  declaration 
is  but  the  preface  to  what  follows,  and  nothing  more  startling  at  first  sight  can  be 
found  in  all  literature.     I.  Christ  possessed  all  things,  and  yet  He  washed  His 
disciples'  feet.    What  has  the  possession  of  boundless  wealth  to  do  with   such 
menial  service?    We  could  imagine  a  Bothschild  sweeping  His  own  room,  but 
would  it  occur  to  us  to  conneci  with  that  act,  as  a  reason,  the  fact  of  his  immense 
riches  ?     The  explanation  lies  in  what  this  feet-washing  meant — the  pardon  and 
sanctification  of  Christ's  disciples  through  His  atonement.    To  this  "  aU  things  " 
were  necessary,  and  the  absence  of  one  Divine  prerogative  would  have  marred  the 
work.    Christ  required  all  wisdom,  all  justice,  all  power,  all  love,  and  all  influence 
over  the  widest  reach  of  human  souls.    II.  Christ  came  from  God,  and  yet  He 
washed  His  disciples'  feet — as  wonderful  a  conjunction  as  the  previous  one.    We 
could  imagine  an  ambassador  of  the  highest  rank  relieving  his  lacquey  of  some 
humble  duty  and  discharging  it  himself — but  we  should  hardly  refer  to  his  office 
for  a  reason.     But  Christ's  mission  was  expressly  to  do  what  the  feet-washing 
meant.     His  one  motive  for  visiting  this  world  was  to  cleanse  and  sanctify  His 
disciples'  souls.     HI.  Christ  was  going  to  God,  and  yet  He  washed  His  disciples' 
feet — an  equally  strange  conjunction.     We  can  imagine  a  sovereign,  just  before 
his  return  from  some  distant  province,  rendering  some  humble  but  kindly  service 
to  a  peasant,  but  we  should  never  dream  of  saying  that  he  did  this  because  he  was 
going  to  his  capital.     But  Christ  went  to  heaven  because  He  had  done  that  which 
was  symbolized  by  the  feet-washing.     He  came  for  tiiat  purpose ;  that  purpose 
being  accomplished,  there  was  no  further  reason  for  Him  to  stay.    And  in  going 
He  went  to  His  rest  and  His  reward.     Lessons  :  1.  Christ's  work  is  an  individual 
work,  and  shows  the  value  of  individual  souls.    Christ  had  all  things.  He  came, 
He  went  for  every  man's  cleansing — for  mine,    2.  What  is  true  of  Christ  is  in  a 
sense  true  of  every  discip'e.     God  has  given  us  all  we  have,  time,  talents,  money, 
influence,  &c. ;  we  have  come  from  God;  we  shall  go  to  God — what  for?     The 
salvation  of  men.     God  has  endowed  us  with  ability  for  it,  has  sent  us  to  do  it, 
will  hold  us  accountable  for  it  at  the  great  day.    3.  The  "  knowledge  "  of  all  this 
should  beget  a  due  sense  of  the  blessedness,  dignity,  and  responsibility  of  Christian 
discipleship.      (/.  W.  Burn.)        Christ's  mission ; — I.  Its   origin — "  from  God." 
II.  Its  qualifications — "  all  things."    III.  Its  destiny — "to  God."    {Ibid.)        He 
riseth  fiom  supper. — The  minuteness  with  which  every  action  of  our  Lord  is 
related  here  is  very  striking.     No  less  than  seven  distinct  things  are  named — 
rising,  laying  aside  garments,  taking  a  towel,  girdiug  Himself,  pouring  water  into 
a  bason,  washing  and  wiping.   This  very  particularity  stamps  the  whole  transaction, 
with  reality,  and  is  the  natural  language  of  an  astonished  and  admiring  eye-witness. 
St.  John  saw  the  whole  transaction.      {Bp.  Ryle.)        He  poureth  water  into  a 
bason,  and  began  to  wash  the  disciples'  feet. — Jesus  teaching  humility: — Christ 
taught  humility  by  precept — "  He  that  humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted ; "  by 
metaphor,  as  in  the  parable  of  the  Pharisee  and  Publican  ;  by  illustration,  as  when 
he  set  a  little  child  in  the  midst ;  and,  as  here,  by  his  own  most  blessed  example. 
Note — I.  Humility  in  its  characteristic  unselfishness.      Pride  is  essentially 
selfish ;  humility  "  seeketh  not  its  own,  but  another's  good."    Where  shall  we  find 
a  mona  beautiful  or  touching  example  than  that  introduced  by  ver.  1?    II.  The 
deepest  humility  is  consistent  with  the  highest  stage  of  Christian  assurance. 
Many  Christians  regard  full  assurance  of  salvation  as  having  a  tendency  to  spiritual 
pride.     They  are  afraid  to  say  "  Jesus  is  mine,  and  I  am  His,"  lest  it  should 
savour  of   presumptiDn.     There  is  a  false  assurance  which  founds  itself   upon 
feeling,  or  imagined  revelations,  rather  than  upon  the  testimony  of  the  word  «l 
God,  and  which  by  its  blatant  self-assertion  has  tended  to  bring  assurance  into 
contempt.    But  where  assurance  is  the  result  of  a  simple  faith  in  the  promises, 
it  produces  in  the  soul  the  fruits  of  genuine  humility.    Just  when  Jesus  was  at  tb« 


xin.]  ST.  JOHN.  369 

■enitli  of  spiritual  exaltation  (ver.  3),  He  bowed  Himself  to  His  lowly  task. 
III.  Tboe  hdmility  expresses  itself  not  in  words,  but  in  deeds.  Our  Lord 
uses  no  words  of  self-abasement.  In  majestic  silence  He  proceeds  with  His  lowly 
but  loving  task.  There  is  a  form  of  so-called  humility  which  expends  itself  in 
words  of  idle  self-depreciation.  This  never  becomes  so  clamorous  as  when  any 
humble  service  is  to  be  rendered  or  any  modest  testimony  borne.  They  are  not 
presumptuous  enough  to  make  a  public  confession  of  Christ,  to  teach  a  Sabbath- 
school  class,  to  visit  a  family  in  poverty,  &c.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  this  is  a  thin 
veil  for  self-indulgence  and  pride.  True  humility  expresses  itself  not  in  un- 
favourable comparisons  of  ourselves  with  others,  but  in  whole-hearted  devotion  to 
the  interests  of  others.  This  was  the  humility  of  Him  who,  "  though  Ho  wa?  in 
the  form  of  God,"  &c.  IV.  The  service  which  true  humility  renders  is  not 
spectacuIiAB  and  scenic,  but  unobtrusive  and  HELPi'UL.  The  simple  rite  of 
hospitality  observed  by  our  Lord  became  the  occasion  of  many  a  splendid  pageant 
in  later  days.  But  let  him  who  would  follow  our  Lord's  example  not  imagine  that 
he  can  do  so  by  a  literal  observance  of  a  rite  that,  through  change  of  customs,  has 
lost  its  utility  and  therefore  its  significance.  He  now  truly  "  washes  the  disciples' 
feet  "  whose  own  feet  are  swift  to  bear  to  them  messages  of  kindness,  and  whose 
hands  are  ready  for  any  humble  service.  V.  The  particular  service  rendered 
BY  ouB  Lord,  though  not  spectacular,  was  symbolic  of  inward  purification,  and 
distinguishes  between  the  first  and  radical  purification  which  takes  place  once  for 
all  in  regeneration,  and  that  daily  purging  from  the  infirmities  that  cling  to  us  as 
we  pass  through  the  world  (ver.  iO).  As  one  coming  up  fresh  from  the  bath  needs 
only  to  wash  o£E  the  dust  that  clings  to  his  feet  and  does  not  affect  the  purity  of 
his  person,  so  the  believer  by  the  bath  of  his  first  regeneration  is  kept  pure  till  he 
enters  his  Father's  house  on  high,  whilst  a  daily  appUcation  of  the  Spirit  in 
sanctification  is  needed  to  remove  the  impurities  that  come  from  daily  contact  with 
earth  and  earthly  things.  (T,  D.  Witherspoon,  D.D.)  Jesus  teaching  humility : — 
I.  The  DIRECT  TEACHING  Contained  in  our  Saviour's  washing  of  the  disciples'  feet. 
That  our  relation  to  Christ  is — 1.  Personal,  as  is  also  His  relation  to  us.  There 
is  no  such  fact  as  a  general  relationship  to  Christ.  We  are  either  His  personal 
followers,  or  personally  estranged.  There  is  no  religion  but  personal  religion. 
Christ  knelt  before  each  of  the  twelve  in  turn.  2.  Cleansing.  Christ  came  to 
save  the  world  from  sin.  But  only  those  cleansed  by  the  blood  receive  eternal  life. 
3.  Needs  to  be  continually  renewed.  It  is  a  daily  relation.  He  pointed  to  his 
daily  cleansing,  the  washing  of  the  basin,  in  distinction  from  the  bathing  in  the 
fountain.  4.  Practical.  Our  service  is  to  be— (1)  Personal.  We  have  no  general 
ministry,  either  of  clergy  or  laity.  It  is  the  personal  work  we  do  which  builds  up 
the  kingdom  of  God.  The  lost  are  found  one  by  one.  All  organization  that 
amounts  to  anything  is  association  in  some  form  for  hand-to-hand  work.  (2) 
Lowly.  Jesus  took  the  form  of  a  servant.  Look  upon  Him  as  He  kneels  at  thy 
feet.  So  humble  thyself  to  serve.  (3)  With  the  basin  and  towel.  We  are  to  aid 
each  other  to  be  clean  Christians.  II.  The  indirect  teaching.  1.  That  the  first 
act  of  discipleship  is  self- surrender  (vers.  8,  9).  We  must  do  just  as  the  Saviour 
says,  or  we  can  have  no  part  with  Him.  We  must  waive  all  objections.  The 
objection  of  Peter  arose  from  tenderness  of  conscience.  We  may  feel  unworthy  of 
the  grace  of  God.  But  some  say,  "  We  need  no  cleansing  ;  we  are  satisfied  with 
our  way  of  life."  There  is  nothing  for  these  but  self-surrender.  How  can  you 
help  it,  looking  upon  Jesus,  kneeling  and  waiting  before  you  ?  2.  The  value  of 
one  soul  in  God's  sight.  Jesus  felt  a  personal  love  for  each,  even  for  Judas! 
What  a  tender  touch  He  put  upon  those  feet,  which  no  mere  washing  could 
cleanse  1  3.  That  bathing  precedes  washing  (ver.  10) ;  the  atonement,  the  baptism 
of  the  Spirit ;  pardon,  sanctification.  As  Peter,  having  been  bathed,  needed  not 
save  to  wash  his  feet,  so  Judas,  not  having  been  bathed,  needed  the  cleansing  of 
the  fountain.  {The  Monday  Club.)  Christ,  the  perfect  pattern:— "Knowing 
that  He  was  come  from  God  and  went  back  to  God" — He  did  that  act.  Do  not 
you  see  that  He  was  quite  conscious  of  His  dignity  when  He  did  it  ?  He  did  not 
.iorget  Himself ;  and  that  is  put  down  there  that  you  may  know  that  the  deepest 
act  of  hTimility  is  not  inconsistent  with  dignity.  He,  knowing  that  He  came  from 
(Jod,  and  that  He  was  just  ubout  to  go  back  to  God,  would  do  this,  the  humblest  of 
all  acts.  He  would  show  us  before  He  went  up  to  the  throne  of  the  universe  what 
He  is  who  is  sitting  on  the  throne ;  because  if  He  had  not  done  this  who  was  with 
God  from  all  eternity,  dweUing  with  Him  in  unapproachable  light,  we  should  not 
have  been  able  to  think  that  there  was  such  humility  on  the  throne.    But  now  wa 


890  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [cHA».  xnu 

shall  know  for  ever  and  ever  what  He  is  that  is  sitting  upon  the  throne.  Let  as 
learn  another  thiog — what  it  is  that  goes  to  God.  It  is  humility  that  goes  to  God 
as  well  as  comes  from  God.  We  must  be  humble,  then  ;  we  must  go  on  humbling 
ourselves  more  and  more  to  the  very  last,  so  that  at  the  last,  when  we  at  last  go, 
we  shall  go,  with  nothing  but  humility — prepared  to  be  just  nothing  before  the 
throne.  When  we  are  nothing  God  gives  us  all,  and  God  will  not  give  us  His  all 
till  we  are  nothing  in  our  own  estimation.  There  are  two  or  three  reflections,  which 
shall  close  our  subject.  1.  The  first  is — let  us  write  it  upon  our  hearts — that  our 
Christ  in  glory  is  as  humble  now,  and  will  be  as  humble  to  all  eternity,  as  He  was 
in  that  supper-room  before  His  disciples.  He  changeth  not.  2.  Another  reflection 
is,  that  as  the  devil  and  his  angels  lost  their  heaven  through  their  self-importance, 
through  pride,  we  may  lose  our  heaven  as  they  did  through  pride.  3.  The  next 
reflection  is,  that  there  is  a  spurious  grandeur  of  humility  which  we  must  avoid. 
We  are  reminded  of  this  by  Peter.  When  Peter's  turn  came  to  be  washed,  he 
said,  O  no,  never,  never!  My  Lord  wash  my  feet?  Never  1  How  humble  that 
seems ;  and  yet  it  was  not  humility,  but  a  spurious,  affected  grandeur  of  humihty, 
in  which  there  is  no  humility  at  all.  No ;  I  wiU  tell  you  what  humility  is. 
Humility  before  God  is  exactly  that  simple  willingness  to  be  served  which  the  babe 
has  to  be  waited  on  by  its  mother.  The  baby  does  not  object  to  it.  The  baby 
does  not  say,  "  I  am  nothing  but  a  poor  httle  baby."  No ;  but  it  takes  it  for  granted. 
Now,  we  must  allow  God  to  do  with  us  whatever  He  will  in  the  same  artless, 
simple  spirit.  4.  Another  thought— that  Satan  put  something  into  Judas's  heart 
that  put  him  off  from  Christ  and  heaven.  That  is  in  the  connection  too.  Judas 
was  among  the  twelve,  but  Satan  was  putting  something  into  his  heart.  What 
was  it  ?  The  love  of  this  present  evil  world,  and  the  love  of  the  means  by  which 
this  present  evil  world  can  be  enjoyed — the  love  of  what  he  had  in  the  bag,  and 
the  love  of  putting  something  more  into  the  bag  and  increasing  it  by  any  means. 
The  devil  was  putting  that  into  his  heart.   (J.  Pulsford.)       Humility  illustrated  ;— 

1.  In  the  career  op  the  Lord,     1.  Taking  our  nature  (John  i.  14 ;  Bom.  i.  3). 

2.  Assuming  our  infirmities  (Matt.  viii.  17;  Heb.  iv.  15).  3.  Born  in  lowhnesa 
(Luke  ii.  7,  12,  16).  4.  Becoming  a  servant  (Luke  xxii.  27;  Phil.  ii.  6,  7).  5. 
Associating  with  the  lowly  (Matt.  ix.  10;  Luke  xv.  1,  2).  6.  Submitting  to  toil 
(Mark  vi.  3;  John  iv.  6).  7.  Enduring  poverty  (Matt.  xvii.  27;  Luke  ix.  58). 
8.  Obeying  the  law  (Matt.  iii.  13-15 ;  Gal.  iv.  4).  9.  Eefusing  honours  (John  v. 
41 ;  vi.  15).  10.  Dying  on  the  cross  (Phil.  ii.  8  ;  Heb.  xii.  2).  II.  In  the  cabeeb 
OP  believebs.  1.  Abraham  before  the  Lord  (Gen  xviii.  27,  30,  32).  2.  Jacob 
before  God  (Gen.  xxxii.  9,  10).  3.  Moses  in  Midian  (Exod.  iiL  11 ;  iv.  1,  10). 
4.  Joshua  before  Ai  (Josh.  vii.  6-9).  5.  Gideon  when  appointed  to  save  Israel  ( Judg. 
vi.  16).  6.  David  at  the  great  offering  (1  Chron.  xxix.  14).  7.  John  the  Baptist  (Matt. 
iii.  14  ;  John  iii.  29,  30).  8.  The  Boman  centurion  (Matt.  viii.  8).  9.  Peter  (Luke 
v.  8;  John  xiii.  6-8).  10.  Paul  (Acts  xviii,  1-3;  xx.  33,  34).  Conclusion: 
Pauline  commendation  of  humihty  (PhU.  ii.  5-11).  (S.  S.  Times.)  The  importance 
of  humility : — St.  Augustine  makes  humility  bear  to  religion  the  same  essential 
relation  which,  according  to  Demosthenes,  action  bears  to  eloquence.  **  As  the 
Athenian  orator,"  says  he,  "  being  asked.  What  is  the  first  precept  in  oratory  ? 
answered.  Action ;  and  What  the  second?  answered.  Action  ;  and  What  the  third  ? 
answered,  Action;  so,  if  you  ask  me  in  regard  to  the  precepts  of  the  Christian 
religion,  I  answer,  first,  second,  third.  Humility."  (T.  D.  Witherspoon,  D.D.) 
Christ  washing  the  feet  of  His  disciples : — Christ  appears  here  as  a  dramatical 
teacher.  Every  act  is  significant.  The  old  prophets  taught  in  this  way.  Jeremiah's 
potters  vessel ;  Ezekiel's  scales,  knife,  and  razor,  are  amongst  the  numerous 
examples.  Christ  taught  here — L  Teat  true  greatness  consists  in  ministerino 
TO  the  oood  op  inferiors.  We  learn  from  Luke  xxii.  24,  that  there  was  a  dispute 
as  to  who  should  be  greatest,  and  that  Evangelist  records  what  our  Lord  said. 
John  records  what  Christ  did.  This  idea  of  greatness— 1.  Condemns  the  general 
conduct  of  mankind.  The  world  regards  men  great  who  receive  most  service,  and 
mix  least  with  inferiors.  2.  Agrees  with  the  moral  reason  of  mankind.  The 
greatness  of  Christ,  who  made  Himself  of  no  reputation,  and  the  greatness  o£ 
Paul,  ia  that  which  commends  itself  to  the  unsophisticated  reason  of  the  world. 
He  who  humbles  himself  to  do  good  gets  exalted  in  the  estimation  of  universal 
conscience.  Disinterestedness  is  the  soul  of  true  greatness.  II.  That  e? irituaIj 
oiiEANSiNO  IB  THE  GREAT  WANT  OP  THE  RACE  (vcr.  S).  1.  That  this  is  80  appeatg 
fzom  two  facts.  (1)  Divine  fellowship  is  essential  to  human  happiness.  In  God'a 
presence  is  fulness  of  joy,  and  nowhere  else.    (2)  Spiritual  purity  is  esuential  to 


«HAP.  rrn.]  8T.  JOHN.  891 

Divine  fellowship.  '•  Without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord."  Hence  God's 
command,  '•  Wash  you  and  make  you  clean  ;  "  and  man's  prayer,  "  Purge  me  with 
hyssop,"  &o.  2.  This  cleansing  is  pre-eminently  the  work  of  Christ.  "  If  I  wash 
thee  not,"  &c.  His  blood  cieanseth  from  all  sin.  "  Unto  Him  that  loved  us,"  Ac. 
3.  It  extends  to  the  whole  life  of  man  (ver.  10).  Though  regenerated,  a  man  is 
not  perfect.  Every  day  brings  its  defilements  and  requires  its  purifications. 
Conclusion :  At  the  table  were  three  types  of  character.  1.  The  perfectly  clean — 
Christ.  2.  The  partially  clean — the  disciples.  3.  The  entirely  unclean— Judas. 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Washing  the  disciples^  feet: — I.  It  is  the  qualitt  of  an 
ONFETTEKED  SPIRIT.  The  possessiou  of  an  unfettered  spirit  is  the  gift  of  humility, 
a  possession  which  can  be  yours  and  mine  only  as  we  rid  ourselves  of  those  fetters 
^th  which  society  and  business  and  fashions  of  the  day  would  bind  us,  and  go  out 
in  the  strength  of  a  loyal  affection  to  Jesus  Christ  to  walk  in  the  footsteps  of  the 
Master,  bind  up  the  broken-hearted,  to  visit  those  who  are  in  prison,  to  wash  the 
disciples'  feet,  and  thus  by  our  very  humility  illustrate  a  strength  and  power  for 
the  manifestation  of  which  the  world  is  longing  to-day,  as  never  before,  with  a 
great  longing.  II.  In  strcH  a  Christian  humility  there  is  always  majestic 
POWER.  There  is  a  vast  difference  between  muscular  strength  and  moral  strength. 
Atlas  could  carry  the  world  upon  his  shoulders,  but  it  required  Christ  to  carry  the 
world  upon  his  heart.  Go  back  into  that  valley  of  Elah  in  Old  Testament  times 
and  see  the  difference  between  the  strength  of  muscle  and  the  strength  of  morals. 
Here  comes  the  Philistine  giant  out  from  his  camp.  Behind  him  all  are  boasting 
of  his  power  and  of  his  prowess ;  in  just  a  little  Israel  will  be  overthrown  and  the 
Philistine's  god  will  be  triumphant.  And  out  from  the  camp  of  Israel  comes  that 
boy  armed  only  with  his  sling  and  his  five  smooth  stones.  If  you  will  follow  the 
life  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  you  will  find  that  ever  and  always  the  strength  of 
His  life  was  a  strength  of  moral  purpose  put  over  against  the  other  strength  that 
the  world  had  to  offer.  III.  The  waste  op  a  life  which  is  unpossessed  of  this 
SPIRIT  OF  humility.  This  is  a  coroUary  from  those  last  words  of  the  text :  "  If  ye 
know  these  things,  happy  are  ye  if  ye  do  them ; "  because  there  is  always  great 
disaster  which  comes  to  an  immortal  soul  when  knowledge  is  not  the  spur  which 
drives  it.  There  is  always  something  lost  in  a  human  life  when  that  life  knows 
more  about  Christ  than  it  does  for  the  sake  of  Christ.  It  is  not  that  there  may 
not  be  the  manifestation  of  this  lovely  virtue  or  of  that  attractive  trait  apart  from 
the  spirit  of  humility;  but  there  is  a  great  waste  in  the  life  still,  because  it  retains 
a  possession  which  has  not  been  transmuted  into  action,  because  it  has  not  been 
entirely  permeated  by  the  spirit  of  love.  You  find  a  person,  for  example,  who  has 
been  Uving  far  away  among  the  hills,  perhaps  in  a  beautiful  home,  with  everything 
that  pertains  to  comfort  and  to  luxury  about  him,  but  never  having  gone  beyond 
the  borders  of  the  little  town  in  which  he  has  been  dwelling.  You  have  had  the 
advantage  of  a  larger  acquaintance  and  of  a  larger  fellowship,  and  as  you  speak 
with  that  circumscribed  life  you  cannot  help  confessing  to  yourself  that,  although 
there  is  very  much  that  is  beautiful  about  it  and  within  it,  still  there  is  a  great 
lack  there  somewhere ;  there  is  a  waste  because  that  life  has  not  gone  out  to  see 
what  there  is  to  be  seen  in  this  world  of  ours.  But  just  so  soon  as  the 
Lord  opened  the  eyes  of  Peter's  impulsive  soul,  just  so  soon  as  He  permitted 
him  to  look  out  upon  vistas  which  he  had  never  seen  before,  and  upon  a 
Divine  landscape  which  had  never  before  fallen  beneath  his  ken,  at  that  moment 
Peter  called  out  in  a  great  yearning  and  in  a  great  soul-desire,  "Lord,  not 
my  feet  only,  but  also  my  hands  and  my  head."  (Nehemiah  Boynton.)  Jesus 
washing  His  disciples'  fret : — Here  is — I.  Matter  fob  inquiry.  Is  there  any- 
thing in  the  conduct  of  Christ  now  analogous  to  His  washing  Peter's  feet  when  on 
earth  ?  Yes.  1.  When  He  watches  over  the  temporal  affairs  of  His  people.  When 
Jesus  looks  to  your  family  troubles,  and  bears  your  household  cares,  saying  unto 
you,  "  Cast  all  your  care  on  Me  for  I  care  for  you,"  is  He  not  in  effect  doing  for  yoo 
what  He  did  for  Peter,  caring  for  your  lowest  part,  and  minding  the  poor  dust- 
stained  body  ?  2.  When  He  puts  away  from  us  our  daily  infirmities  and  sins.  It 
is  a  great  act  of  love  when  Christ  once  for  all  absolves  the  sinner,  and  puts  him 
into  the  family  of  God ;  but  what  long  suffering  there  is  when  the  Saviour  bears 
the  follies  of  the  recipient  of  so  much  mercy  hour  by  hour,  putting  away  the  con- 
stant  sin  of  the  erring  but  yet  beloved  child.  To  blot  out  the  whole  of  sin  like  a 
thick  cloud,  this  is  a  great  and  matchless  power,  as  well  as  grace  ;  but  to  remove 
the  mist  of  every  morning  and  the  damps  of  every  night — this  is  condescension  well 
imaged  in  the  washing  of  Peter's  feet.     3.  When  He  cleanses  our  prayers.    Ihey 


89S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  jm^ 

are  the  feet  of  our  soul,  since  with  them  we  climb  to  heaven  and  ran  after  God.  It 
is  oftentimes  easier  to  do  a  thing  over  at  once  anew  than  it  is  to  patch  up  a  work 
which  has  been  badly  done  by  others.  There  are  His  own  prayers  for  me — I  thank 
Him  for  them,  but  I  cannot  help  also  blessing  Him  that  He  should  take  my  prayers, 
and  put  them  into  the  censer,  and  offer  them  before  His  Father's  face ;  for  I  am 
certain  that  before  they  can  have  been  fit  to  offer  they  must  have  experienced  a 
deal  of  washing.  4.  When  He  makes  our  works  acceptable.  These  may  be  com- 
pared to  the  soul's  feet.  It  is  by  the  feet  that  a  man  expresses  hia  activity.  We 
have  heard  of  some  one  who  made  sugar  out  of  old  rags ;  but  the  manufacture  cost 
more  than  the  goods  were  worth ;  and  this  is  something  like  our  works.  Jesus 
Christ  makes  sweetness  out  of  the  poor  rags  of  our  good  works ;  they  cost  Him 
more  in  the  manufacturing  than  ever  the  raw  material  could  have  been  worth,  or  the 
finished  works  themselves  are  worth,  except  in  His  esteem.  5.  When  He  is  content 
to  suffer  in  His  people's  sufferings.  Not  a  pang  shoots  through  you  but  Jesus 
knows  and  feels  it.  II.  Matter  fob  admikation.  When  we  consider — 1.  The  free- 
ness  of  the  deed.  "  Lord,  dost  Thou  wash  my  feet  ?  "  It  is  perfectly  wonderful 
that  He  should,  for  we  have  scarcely  desired  the  mercy.  You  do  not  find  that 
Peter  asked  Christ  to  do  it.  No,  it  was  unsoUcited,  unexpected.  It  is  great  good* 
ness  on  Christ's  part  to  hear  our  prayers  when  we  really  feel  our  need  ;  but  if  Christ 
did  no  more  for  us  than  we  ask  Him  to  do,  we  should  perish ;  for  nine  out  of  ten 
o4  the  things  which  He  gives  us  we  never  asked  for,  and  three  out  of  four  of  them 
we  scarcely  know  that  we  want.  Have  there  not  been  many  nights  on  which  you 
have  gone  to  bed  without  any  particular  sense  of  guilt,  and  without  any  special 
intercession  for  cleansing  ?  You  have  forgotten  to  ask,  but  He  has  never  forgotten 
to  give.  You  have  risen  in  the  morning ;  you  were  not  aware  that  any  special 
danger  would  come  to  you,  and  you  did  not  pray  for  special  protection,  but  yet  He 
knew  it ;  and  unasked  and  unsought  for  He  has  kept  you  from  danger.  2.  The 
glory  of  the  Person.  Lord  !  Master  I  God  1  Dost  thou  wash  my  feet  ?  He  whom 
the  angels  worship  takes  a  towel  and  girds  Himself.  What  a  stoop  is  here  1  3. 
The  lowliness  of  the  office.  "  My  feet."  To  wash  my  head,  to  purge  my  mind,  to 
cleanse  my  hands  and  my  heart,  is  very  condescending ;  but  He  does  a  slave's 
work,  takes  the  meanest  part  of  me  and  washes  that.  4.  The  unworthiness  of  the 
object  of  this  washing.  "My  feet?"  5.  The  completeness  of  the  washing.  When 
things  are  washed  by  careless  servants,  they  want  washing  again  ;  but  when  they 
are  washed  by  the  loving  hands  of  Jesus,  they  cannot  be  badly  done.  III.  Matteb 
roB  GRATITUDE,  that  having  once  washed  head  and  hands  and  feet  with  blood.  He 
still  doth  daily  wash  my  feet  with  water.  IV.  Matteb  fob  imitation.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  The  teaching  of  the  foot-washing : — 1.  The  type  of  our  Lord's  con- 
tinuous LOVE  to  us.  1.  Christ  stUl  acts  as  the  host  of  His  people.  How  much  the 
life  of  Christ  with  His  people  lay  in  intense  familiarity  with  them  I  He  began  His 
ministry  at  a  feast,  and  again  and  again  we  find  Him  eating  with  His  disciples ; 
and  the  last  thing  He  did  was  to  sit  at  supper  with  them.  He  still  saith  to  His 
Church,  "  If  any  man  open  to  Me,"  «fcc. ;  and  His  own  figure  for  the  opening  of  the 
new  dispensation  is  "  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb."  Now  Jesus  is  the  host 
of  His  Church,  providing  the  gospel  supper  and  entertaining  us  right  royally.  He 
prepares  a  table  before  us  in  the  presence  of  our  enemies.  "  He  satisfies  our  mouth 
with  good  things,"  &c.  And  the  Lord  is  a  host  who  leaves  nothing  incomplete,  and 
entertains  us,  not  as  paupers  but  as  guests,  as  friends,  as  distinguished  persons  who 
shall  not  sit  among  mean  men,  but  shall  have  their  portion  among  princes.  2. 
Christ  cares  for  our  minor  matters  with  a  personal  interest.  That  He  should  ease 
their  weary  hearts,  enlighten  their  clouded  brains,  I  can  understand  ;  but  that  He 
should  wash  their  feet  is  wonderful.  A  little  soil  on  their  ankles ;  He  will  attend  to 
that,  and  personally,  too.  He  might  have  left  them  to  wash  one  another's  feet. 
Sarely  He  had  but  to  suggest  it  and  they  would  have  cheerfully  waited  on  each 
other.  Take  your  little  things  to  Christ,  those  trials  of  which  your  heart  says, 
*•  They  are  too  trifling  for  prayer."  Not  so ;  the  Lord  loves  us  to  trust  EUu 
thoroughly.  8.  Christ  provides  refreshment  for  His  people.  What  an  intense 
pleasure  it  is  in  extremely  hot  countries  to  have  the  feet  washed  upon  coming  in 
after  a  weary  walk.  Our  Lord  washed  EUs  disciples'  feet,  not  only  because  cleansing 
was  desirable,  but  also  for  their  pleasure  and  solace.  He  takes  great  pleasure  in 
giving  joy  to  His  followers.  When  doth  the  Lord  give  us  these  refreshments?  (1) 
Often  after  a  journey — after  a  severe  trial.  (2)  Sometimes  before  the  trial,  for  these 
disciples  were  now  abont  to  enter  upon  a  very  rough  road.  (3)  When  we  are  in  the 
booae  of  God,  when  the  Word  has  been  preached,  some  joyful  hymn  borne  na  to 


OHi».  nn.]  ST.  JOHN.  WS 

heaven ;  or,  best  of  all,  at  the  communion  table.  (4)  In  car  own  quiet  chambers, 
and  in  the  night  watches.  4.  Christ  continues  to  guard  the  purity  of  His  Church. 
From  the  occasion  it  is  clear  that  He  would  have  us  seek  the  special  purifying 
power  of  His  presence  during  religious  ordinances.  We  need  our  feet  washed  before 
we  come  to  His  table — "  Let  a  man  examine  himself,  and  so  let  him  eat  of  this 
bread,"  while  we  are  at  His  table,  for  there  is  sin  in  our  holiest  things.  When 
we  come  away  from  worship  we  have  need  to  get  alone,  and  cry,  '•  Cleanse  Thoa 
me  from  secret  faults."  This  frequent  washing  is— (1)  Absolutely  necessary.  Ye 
that  follow  in  His  footsteps,  walk  with  clean  feet.  His  ministers  especially  need 
this  or  the  people  will  never  cry,  "  How  beautiful  upon  the  mountains  are  the  feet 
of  him  that  bringeth  good  tidings."  (2)  Spiritual :  no  external  form  will  suffice. 
Christ  washed  the  feet  of  Judas  with  water.  (3)  Very  readily  given.  II.  The 
BiODEL  OF  His  OWN  LOVE  IN  His  PBOPLB.  We  leam — 1.  That  there  will  always  be 
need  of  service  in  the  Church,  and  always  need  of  service  in  the  particular 
direction  of  promoting  purity.  The  apostles  were  twelve  strong  men,  yet  they 
could  not  do  without  a  servant;  and  therefore  their  Lord  supplied  the  vacant 
place.  And  now  that  the  Lord  is  gone  His  Church  still  needs  servants,  and 
will  never  be  bo  clean  that  it  will  have  no  need  of  foot-washing.  2.  That  we 
are  not  to  advocate  the  abrogation  of  such  service.  The  Stoic  would  say,  "  What 
need  of  washing  a  man's  feet  ?  If  he  needs  it,  let  him  wash  them  himself.  The 
first  law  of  nature  is  self-love.  Let  him  mind  his  own  business."  That  is  anti- 
Christianity  :  but  Christianity  says,  "  I  am  willing  that  others  should  help  me  to  be 
holy,  and  I  am  also  willing  to  help  others  to  the  same  end."  Sometimes  it  is  more 
humbling  to  have  your  own  feet  washed  than  to  wash  other  people's,  and  hence 
sometimes  our  naughty  pride  says,  "  Thou  shalt  never  wash  my  feet."  Yet  it  mast 
be  so,  and  pride  must  sit  still  like  a  child  and  be  both  washed  and  wiped.  3.  That 
such  service  should  be  done  very  cheerfully.  Nobody  asked  the  Master  to  bring  the 
basin  :  no  one  would  have  thought  of  such  a  thing :  it  was  His  own  heart  of  love 
that  made  Him  do  it.  Let  us  be  also  ready  to  perform  any  office  for  our  brethren, 
however  lowly.  Covet  humble  work,  and  when  you  get  it  be  content  to  continue  in 
it.  4.  That  such  service  should  be  done  thoroughly.  How  well  our  Lord  took  up 
the  servant's  place.  Give  your  Lord  zealous  and  earnest  service;  strip  to  your 
shirt  sleeves,  if  need  be.  Do  not  attempt  to  play  the  fine  gentleman ;  is  it  not  far 
nobler  to  be  a  real  Christian?  (Ibid.)  Reminiscences  of  the  foot-washing: — 
In  the  Epistles  of  Peter,  written  many  years  after  this,  we  find  subtle  traces  of  the 
impression  it  left  upon  his  mind.  There  still  seemed  to  rise  before  him  the  form 
of  the  King  taking  off  His  upper  garment,  tying  a  towel  round  His  waist,  and  then, 
with  marvellous  self-abasement,  washing  the  disciples'  feet.  Hence  the  intensely 
picturesque  expression  of  His  charge — "Yea,  all  of  yon  gird  yourselves  with 
humility,  to  serve  one  another,  for  God  resisteth  the  proud,  but  giveth  grace  to  the 
humble."  Literally,  ••  Tie  on  humihty  like  a  dress  fastened  with  strings."  It  is 
plain  that  he  understood  the  required  imitation  of  what  Christ  did  when  washing 
the  feet  of  His  company,  to  consist  not  in  copying  the  outward  act,  at  the  same 
time  wearing  an  outward  garment  like  that  which  He  wore  at  the  time,  but  in 
copying  the  spirit  of  the  act  and  wearing  humility  itself.  (C.  Stanford,  D.D.) 
Parody  of  the  foot-washing : — A  great  authority  declares  that  "  Peter  lives  to-day  in 
the  person  of  the  Pope."  Then  he  has  changed  his  conviction  on  the  present 
subject,  if  we  can  accept  the  Rev.  Newman  Hall's  account  of  the  ceremonies  of 
"Maundy  Thursday."  "Thirteen  persons  personated  the  apostles.  They  were 
diessed  in  white  flannel,  and  were  seated  on  an  elevated  platform  in  the  south 
transept,  which  had  been  arranged  for  the  ceremony,  with  galleries  of  ascending 
seats  for  lady  spectators,  who  came  in  the  prescribed  costume.  Descending  from 
his  throne  after  the  benediction,  the  Pope  was  divested  of  his  gorgeous  outer  vest- 
ments,  and  appeared  as  if  in  a  very  large  flannel  dressing-gown,  fastened  with  a 
cord  round  the  waist ;  a  towel  of  fine  cloth,  trimmed  with  lace,  having  been  tied  on 
him,  he  walked  slowly  to  the  nearest  apostle,  whose  right  foot,  evidently  well  washed 
beforehand  was  already  bare.  The  stocking  had  been  previously  cut  so  as,  without 
any  trouble  or  delay,  to  be  removed  sufficiently  for  the  purpose  at  the  precise 
moment.  Everything  was  done  to  facilitate  his  Holiness  in  the  arduous  duty 
which  now  awaited  him.  The  apostles  were  seated  at  such  a  convenient  elevation 
that  He  was  under  no  necessity  of  stooping.  A  sub-deacon  on  his  right  raised  the 
apostle's  foot,  over  the  instep  of  which  a  second  attendant  poured  a  little  water, 
whicli  fell  into  a  silver-gilt  basin,  held  by  a  third ;  while  a  fourth,  carrying  thirteen 
towels  in  a  silvar  basin,  handed  one  of  them  to  his  Holiness,  who  passed  it 


894  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

over  the  foot,  which  he  then  kissed.  Another  officer  in  waiting  was  a  bearer  iA 
nosegays,  one  of  which  he  then  handed  to  the  Pope,  who  presented  it  to  the  apostle, 
together  with  two  medals  from  a  purse  of  crimson  velvet  fringed  with  gold,  borne 
by  the  Papal  treasurer.  The  rest  were  then  similarly  served ;  and  the  whole  waa 
done  so  expeditiously,~that  in  a  very  few  minutes  the  immense  crowd  were  rushing 
off  to  be  present  at  the  next  ceremony."  So  does  the  Pope  fulfil  what  has  been 
called  the  proudest  of  titles,  "  Servus  servorum  Dei."  Not  only  at  Rome,  however, 
has  this  act  of  our  Lord  been  regarded  as  the  institution  of  a  religious  rite  rather 
than  the  disnlay  of  an  example  to  be  followed  spiritually.  Many  humble  Christian 
societies  bav^  adopted  this  view,  and  still  we  find  that  some  devout  people  are 
earnest  for  it.  Such  worthies,  in  making  the  mere  sign  a  resting-place  of  thought, 
remind  us  of  the  case  feigned  by  an  old  British  sage,  of  a  belated  and  weary 
traveller,  who,  on  coming  up  to  an  hostelry,  ready  to  die  for  want  of  a  night's 
lodging,  took  no  notice  of  the  inn,  but  •♦  embraced  the  signpost."  (Ibid.) 
The  strangenesB  of  our  Lord's  procedure : — To  provide  a  guest  with  water  to  wash 
his  feet  is  a  common  act  of  hospitality  among  the  Hindoos.  It  is  also  considered 
a  privilege  and  duty  for  disciples  to  wash  the  feet  of  any  celebrated  gooroo,  or 
religious  guide.  But  for  a  gooroo  to  wash  the  feet  of  his  disciples  would  be  dia- 
metrically opposed  to  a  Hindoo's  ideas  of  propriety.  "  Suppose,"  I  said  to  my 
pundit,  the  other  day,  **  a  celebrated  gooroo  were  to  attempt  to  wash  the  feet  of  hia 
disciples,  would  they  allow  it?  "  "  Never,"  he  replied ;  "  if  he  were  to  make  the 
attempt,  they  would  refuse  to  allow  him;  would  rush  out  of  his  presence;  and 
would  think  be  was  gone  mad.  Such  an  idea  is  entirely  opposed  to  the  reverence 
which  a  disciple  has  for  his  teacher,  and  would  not  be  tolerated  for  a  moment.  To 
permit  it  would  bring  reproach  upon  both  teacher  and  disciple."  With  these  ideas 
in  his  mind  it  is  easy  to  understand  how  Peter  should  be  startled  and  astonished 
when  Jesus  drew  near  to  wash  his  feet.  "  Lord,  dost  Thou  wash  my  feet  ?  "  Such 
an  act  had  never  been  heard  of ;  was  contrary  to  the  customs  of  the  country  ;  con* 
trary  to  every  idea  of  propriety  ;  and  calculated  to  bring  reproach  upon  his  teacher. 
(J.  L.  Nye.)  What  I  do  thou  knowest  not  now. — The  inscrutable  character  of 
the  Divine  dispensations  : — I.  The  conduct  of  God  is  in  genekal  concealed  fbom 
THE  knowledge  OF  His  PEOPLE.  1.  It  may  be  the  result  of  necessity.  The  con- 
duct of  God  will  appear,  on  the  least  consideration,  too  vast  and  complicated  ever 
to  be  comprehended  by  man.  Not  only  is  our  knowledge  limited  in  reference  to 
nature,  but  in  reference  to  many  sublime  truths  of  revelation.  We  know  not  what 
attainments  the  mind  will  make  in  its  disembodied  and  exalted  state,  but  we  seem 
fully  confident  that  in  the  present  condition  there  is  a  limit  to  its  discoveries.  2. 
It  may  be  the  result  of  design.  That  He  could  have  stated  the  reason  of  chastise- 
ment when  the  rod  was  inflicted,  that  He  could  have  made  known  His  design  when 
the  suffering  was  felt,  there  can  be  no  doubt.  But  it  is  intentionally  concealed, 
that  the  discovery  may  add  to  our  felicity  in  a  world  of  greater  purity  and  light  and 
love.  II.  There  is  a  pebiod  when  the  conduct  and  purposes  of  God  will  be'fullt 
AND  BATiSFACTORiLT  EXPLAINED.  1.  The  conduct  of  God  may  be  partially  disclosed 
in  time.  Time  is  necessary  for  the  development  of  many  things.  The  seed  lies  in 
the  ground  and  seems  to  rot,  but  if  we  have  patience  to  wait  we  shall  see  the  germ, 
and  at  a  subsequent  period  a  tall  and  stately  tree.  Hence,  that  which  once  seemed 
useless  and  rotten  becomes  in  process  of  time  useful  both  in  blossom  and  fruit — the 
one  enchanting  to  the  eye,  and  the  other  grateful  to  the  palate.  Now  if  it  be 
requisite  to  wait  that  we  may  trace  the  openiug  beauties  of  nature,  equally  neces- 
sary is  it  to  wait  that  we  may  trace  the  conduct  of  Providence.  The  singular  and 
diversified  history  of  Joseph  may  be  cited  as  a  proof  of  these  observations.  Per- 
mit me  to  observe,  before  I  pass  on,  that  we  are  not  always  required  to  wait  so  long 
for  the  developments  of  Divine  Providence  as  in  a  moment  of  unbelief  we  are  apt 
to  imagine.  Disclosures  are  sometimes  speedily  made  and  unexpectedly  enjoved. 
Peter  had  merely  to  wait  the  utterance  of  another  sentence  before  he  perceived  the 
symbolical  character  of  our  Lord's  conduct.  But  though,  as  an  antidote  to  de- 
spondency and  a  stimulus  to  hope,  the  disclosure  may  be  made,  we  are  not  war- 
ranted to  look  for  it  with  unwavering  certainty.  2.  That  it  will  be  fully  revealed 
in  eternity.     UI.  This  concealment  of  the  conduct  of  God  ought  not  to  lead  to 

ANT  DISCOURAGEMENT   OB  UNBELIEF  IN   THE    MINDS  OF    HiS    PEOPLE.      Notlce — 1.   The 

equity  of  the  Divine  government.  In  the  administrations  of  His  laws,  and  in  the 
distribution  of  His  favours,  God  appears  in  a  twofold  character—  as  a  benefactor 
and  a  judge.  In  the  former  character,  favours  unmerited  and  unsought  are 
graciously  bestowed,  and  it  is  this  that  endears  Him  to  the  Christian,  and  entitle! 


CBAP.  xm.]  ST.  JOHN.  895 

Him  to  honour,  homage,  and  praise.  As  a  judge  He  never  faUs  to  do  that  which  ia 
right.      2.  The  parental  character  of  the  Divine  discipline.      {The  Evangelist.) 

I.  Thb  pboposition.  ♦*  What  I  do  thou  knowest  not  now."  1.  As  to  the  intent. 
God's  people  know  the  general  end  of  His  dealings  with  them— His  own  glory  and 
their  good ;  but  the  particulars  they  are  not  able  to  guess — as  Joseph  when  his 
brethren  sold  him  into  Egypt  (Gen.  1.  20).  2.  As  to  the  extent  and  effect.  We  see 
things  sometimes  in  their  beginnings  but  not  in  their  close ;  because  of — (1)  Their 
intricacy  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  19 ;  Eom.  xi.  13 ;  Isa.  Iv.  8-9 ;  Job  v.  9).  (2)  Our  under- 
standings, which  at  best  are  short-sighted,  on  account  both  of  the  dimness  of 
natural  reason  and  the  imperfection  of  supernatural  illumination.  (3)  A  special 
Divine  dispensation.  God  makes  His  ways  dark  to  His  servants — (o)  Because 
they  are  not  capable  of  or  fit  to  receive  a  revelation  of  them  (John  xvi.  12  ;  Heb.  v. 
12).  (b)  That  their  faith  may  be  thereby  strengthened,  and  their  dependence  on 
God  encouraged  (chap.  xx.  19).  (c)  That  God's  sovereignty  and  liberty  may  be 
preserved  (Deut.  xxix.  29).  (d)  For  their  discipline — to  correct  or  prevent  some 
miscarriage  in  them,  whether  pride,  security,  or  carnal  confidence  (2  Cor.  xii.  7). 

II.  Thk  qualification.  "  Thou  shalt  know,"  &c.  1.  The  discovery.  He  will  make 
known — (1)  The  justice  of  His  ways,  and  show  that  He  has  done  no  more  than 
equal  (Jer.  xii.  1 ;  Habb.  ii.  13 ;  Ezek.  xviii.  29).  (2)  Their  truth,  and  manifest 
His  faithfulness  (Psa.  Ixxvii.  8 ;  Josh,  xxiii.  14).  (3)  Their  efficacy,  and  so  manifest 
His  power  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  19).  (4)  Their  unchangeableness,  and  so  show  His  con- 
stancy (Job  xxiiL  13 ;  James  i.  17).  (5)  Their  wisdom,  and  so  justify  them  to  all 
(Job  xii.  6 ;  2  Cor.  i.  25).  (6)  Their  goodness,  and  so  make  known  His  kindness 
(Bom.  viii.).  2.  The  manner  of  this  discovery.  (1)  By  illumination,  so  that  we 
may  see.  (2)  By  experience,  so  that  we  may  feel.  3.  The  time.  (1)  Perhaps  in 
this  life.  Many  Christians  have  left  the  world  justifying  God's  proceedings.  (2) 
Certainly  in  the  life  to  come.  "  In  Thy  light  we  shall  see  light."  {T.  Horton,  D.D.) 
"  What  I  do."  That  act  of  Christ's  did  seem  strange,  and  Peter's  bewilderment  is  not 
to  be  wondered  at.  Let  us  see  how  the  Master  dealt  with  it.  L  *'  What  I  no." 
What  a  wealth  of  meaning  is  stored  in  these  three  words.  No  angel  mind  can  grasp 
them.  He  is  the  great  Doer ;  always  doing.  •*  My  Father  worketh,"  &o.  There  is 
nothing  anywhere,  or  at  any  time,  that  He  does  not  perform,  permit,  or  control,  in 
mind  or  matter,  heaven  or  earth.  H.  "  Thoo  knowest  not."  Put  the  two  pronouns 
side  by  side.  "  I "  stands  for  the  Deity,  "  thou  "  for  the  mortal.  Oh,  the  folly 
and  pride  that  criticises  and  objects  to  His  providential  rule!  I  could  not 
worship  a  God  whose  work  I  could  comprehend.  How  wicked  to  rebel  because 
our  poor  capacity  cannot  gauge  the  Divine  intention.  If  an  architect  were 
to  ask  you  to  explain  the  lines  on  which  Chichester  Cathedral  is  built  as  you 
were  flashing  by  it  in  the  express  to  Portsmouth,  you  would  smile  at  his  unreason, 
but  you  are  moving  across  the  field  of  God's  matters  more  rapidly  than  that.  You 
cannot  pour  the  ocean  into  a  pond,  crowd  the  light  of  the  sun  into  a  lantern,  com- 
press the  mind  of  an  archangel  into  the  brain  of  a  schoolboy.  Then,  again,  your 
affairs  are  mixed  up  with  the  rest  of  His  matters,  and  what  He  does  you  know 
not,  because  you  are  only  the  smallest  cog,  and  the  scope  of  the  machine  is  beyond 
your  ken ;  because  you  are  only  one  thread  in  the  vast  loom  at  which  He  is  weaving, 
and  the  pattern  and  purpose  cannot  be  scanned  by  mortal  eyes.  What,  then,  is 
the  attitude  we  ought  to  take  ?  One  of  implicit  obedience  and  xmflinching  trust. 
Though  we  know  not  what  He  does  we  need  never  be  at  a  loss  to  know  what  He 
would  have  us  do.  But  if  you  set  up  a  will  of  your  own  you  must  suffer.  Loyally 
enter  the  train  of  His  providence,  make  its  movements  yours,  and  you  shall  be 
carried  safely  to  the  terminus ;  but  oppose  it,  and  collision  will  come  and  eternal 
wreck — witness  the  cases  of  Pharaoh,  Israel  in  the  wilderness,  Saul,  Jerusalem.  IH. 
"  Thou  shait  know  heeeafter."  In  Peter's  case  the  revelation  followed  close  upon 
the  mystery.  It  often  does.  It  did  to  Joseph  in  Egypt,  Esther  in  Persia,  Luther 
in  Wartburg.  But  whether  here  or  not  heaven  will  be  the  land  of  revelations. 
Amongst  the  many  mansions  there  will  be  the  Interpreter's  house,  where  we  shall 
look  upon  the  picture  of  life  as  it  was,  and  read  the  translations  too.  "  There 
■hall  be  no  night  there."  {J.  Jackson  Wray.)  Ignorance  and  knowledge : — What 
we  do  not  know  does  not  lessen  or  impair  the  value  of  what  we  do  know.  (H.  H. 
Dobney.)  Existing  ignorance  and  approaching  knowledge : — I.  Thk  niBTnia 
IGNOBANCB  OF  THE  oooD.  There  is  much  that  the  best  man  does  not  know.  1.  In 
nature.  How  Uttle  does  the  most  scientific  man  know  of  the  substances,  lives,  laws, 
operations,  extent  of  the  universe.  How  deeply  did  Newton  feel  his  ignorance.  2. 
In  moral  government.     The  reasons  for  the  introduction  of  gin,  the  suffering  of 


896  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iin. 

innocence,  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked,  the  tardy  march  of  Christianity,  are  wrapt  in 
obsoarity.  3.  The  Divine  revelation.  What  Peter  said  of  Paul's  epistles  we  feel  to 
be  true  of  the  whole  book — difficnlties  we  cannot  remove,  doctrines  that  transcend 
oar  intelligence.  4.  In  his  own  experience.  Why  should  he  be  dealt  with  as  he 
is  ?  Why  such  alternations  of  joy  and  sorrow,  friendship  and  bereavement,  health 
•nd  sickness  ?  Why  such  conflicting  elements  in  his  nature  f  U.  Ths  appboaohino 
KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  QooD.  Christ's  words  imply  that  there  is  a  hereafter,  and  that 
this  hereafter  will  be  a  sphere  of  knowledge.  1.  There  will  be  sufficient  time  for 
knowing.  What  ages  of  study  await  as  1  2.  Sufficient  facilities  for  knowing.  All 
existing  obstructions  removed,  and  the  immeasurable  field  of  truth  wide  open  under 
a  never  clouded  or  setting  sun.  (Eomilist.)  Present  ignorance  and  future  illu- 
mination : — We  view  the  text  as  containing— L  A  statement  of  pbesent  ignorance. 
We  propose — 1.  To  illustrate  the  fact  of  this  present  ignorance.  God  has  been 
pleased  to  assist  the  human  mind,  by  the  gift  of  His  own  inspired  word,  and  has 
imparted  the  influences  of  His  Holy  Spirit,  by  whose  agency  its  meaning — which, 
to  the  carnal  mind,  is  frequently  obscure — is  more  fully  unfolded.  Yet,  at  the 
same  time,  there  is  a  vast  sphere  over  which,  as  yet,  ignorance  casts  her  shadow. 
"  We  know  but  in  part,"  &c.  For  example :  (1)  The  construction  of  your  bodies ; 
the  constitution  of  your  minds ;  the  mode  of  their  primeval  union ;  of  their  present 
co-operation,  and  of  their  final  separation — how  much  of  mystery  is  here  1  (2) 
Angels.  Their  residence,  occupations,  enjoyments.  (3)  God,  the  trinity  of  per- 
sons in  unity  of  essence,  the  perfections  of  His  nature  and  the  process  by  which  He 
operates  in  the  creation.  (4)  Providential  dispensations.  (5)  The  scheme  of  re- 
demption. (6)  Eternity.  2.  To  assign  its  reasons.  (1)  The  limitation  of  our 
intellectual  faoalties,  arising  partly  from  their  inherent  constitution,  and  partly 
from  their  being  now  identified  with  material  bodies.  (2)  The  pollution  of  our 
moral  nature.  (3)  The  positive  design  of  God,  in  order  to  continue  our  fitness  for 
the  ordinary  associations  and  duties  of  life ;  to  mature  and  to  perfect  the  graces  of 
the  Christian  character ;  to  create  and  continue  within  us  a  vivid  anticipation  of 
the  eventual  possession  of  another  and  a  better  world.  II.  A  promise  of  future 
ILLUMINATION.  Observe  that  the  future  state — 1.  Is  one  of  vast  and  expanded 
knowledge.  (1)  All  obstructions  will  be  removed.  (2)  Men  are  there  to  be  brought 
into  direct  and  inmiediate  contact  with  objects,  the  very  existence  of  which  they 
now  know  only  upon  testimony  and  through  faith.  2.  The  vast  and  expanded 
knowledge  of  the  future  state  is  identified  with  the  highest  interests  of  our  being. 
(1)  There  is  much  of  difficulty  in  studying,  and  oftentimes  much  of  pain  in  acqui- 
sition, and  its  results.  There  is  also  much  which  directly  tends  to  pollute. 
Ask  the  philosopher  over  his  midnight  lamp ;  the  statesman  amid  the  intricacies  of 
his  cabinet ;  the  man  of  observation  amid  the  buffeting  and  temptations  of  the 
world— one  result  will  invariably  be  pronounced,  *•  All  is  vanity  and  vexation  of 
spirit."  (2)  Now  against  all  this  the  knowledge  of  the  celestial  state  is  associated-^ 
(a)  With  our  holiness.  Not  that  the  knowledge  of  heaven  is  an  efficient  cause  of 
purity ;  but  it  will  be  an  instrument  for  preserving  it.  Possessing  such  a  knowledge, 
with  such  objects  from  such  a  source,  and  from  such  causes,  it  is  impossible  for  the  in- 
habitants of  heaven  to  fall.  (6)  With  our  happiness;  for  holiness  is  inseparable  from 
happiness.  And  what  must  be  the  result  of  those  contemplations  which  the  heavenly 
world  fully  and  absolutely  reveals  to  our  view  of  providence  and  of  redemption  ?  Con- 
clusion :  Cherish — 1.  Faith.  2.  Desire.  8.  Evangelical  preparation.  (J.  Parsons.) 
Rectified  knowledge  in  the  future  state : — It  is  very  interesting  to  consider  ourselves 
here  as  only  in  the  childhood  of  our  bein?,  our  full  manhood  being  reserved  for 
another  and  higher  state  of  existence.  When  a  man  reviews  the  ideas,  imagina- 
tions, and  pursuits  of  his  youth,  he  discovers  a  number  of  wild  notions  which  he 
now  would  be  ashamed  to  entertain,  of  false  theories  which  a  riper  judgment  has 
long  ago  exposed,  and  of  worthless  objects  which  have  long  ceased  to  attract  hia 
regards.  He  finds,  moreover,  that  much  which  seemed  inexplicable  has  become 
very  plain,  and  that  things  at  which  he  used  to  wonder  present  no  longer  any  cause 
for  surprise.  Thus  shalt  it  be  with  us  hereafter.  We  shall  look  back  upon  riches, 
and  honour,  and  property — things  which  now  seem  to  us  of  great  worth  and  im- 
portance— we  shall  look  back  upon  them  as  so  many  toys  with  which  it  is  wonder- 
ful we  could  ever  have  been  pleased.  Many  of  our  present  notions  and  opinions, 
though  framed  with  care  and  maintained  with  pertinacity,  will  appear  to  us  like  the 
dreams  and  fancies  of  boyhood,  which  fade  before  the  light  of  riper  years  ;  and  the 
dispensations  of  Providence  at  which  we  now  wonder,  and  beneath  which  we  are 
too  often  impatient,  will  become  as  simple  to  as  and  as  worthy  of  oar  gratitude  as 


CHAP,  xm.]  ST.  JOHN.  897 

4he  discipline  and  correction  we  have  received  from  earthly  parents,  which,  whilst 
we  were  young,  may  have  appeared  to  us  harsh  and  unaccountable,  but  of  which  in 
later  days  we  see  all  the  reasons  and  feel  all  the  worth.     {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)        At 
best  our  knowledge  of  God's  designs  is  fragmentary  : — If  we  could  know  as  much  as 
we  desire  it  would  probably  make  us  insane.     We  have  seen  gardeners  pull  down 
the  awnings  in  their  greenhouses.     Plants  may  sometimes  have  too  much  sun,  and 
so  may  we.     (T.Adams.)        A  clear  view  of  life's  mysteries: — A  traveller,  as  he 
passed  through  a  large  and  thick  wood,  saw  a  part  of  a  huge  oak  which  appeared 
misshapen,  and  seemed  to  spoil  the  scenery.    "If,"  said  he,  " I  was  the  owner  I 
would  cut  down  that  tree."     But  when  he  had  ascended  the  bill  and  taken  a  full 
view  of  the  forest  this  same  tree  appeared  the  most  beautiful  part  of  the  landscape. 
One  day  we  are  to  have  clearer  vision  of  life's  mysteries.        The  present  obscure 
because  unjinuhed : — You  go  into  the  workshop  of  the  artist  who  is  framing  a  great 
structure.      You  see  here  a  stone  of  a  peculiar  colour ;  there  a  stone  of  another 
colour;  here  one  of  this,  and   there  one  of   that  angle.      You  would  not  say  to 
the  artist,   "  You  had  better   take  this   stone  or  that  stone  next ; "  you  would 
submit  to  his  superior  wisdom.    He  sees  the  whole  of  the  structure  as  it  stands 
complete  before  his  mind.     What  do  you  know  of  the  whole  plan?    These  few 
atones  that  you  see  can   give   you   but   the   most  imperfect   conception  of  the 
cathedral  in  which  they  are  to  be  placed.     In  God's  providence  I  submit  to  the 
superior  wisdom  of  the  Great  Architect.     He  takes  from  the  earth  one  man  and 
leaves  another.     We  are  amazed;  we  cannot  understand  it;  we  know  not  the 
plan  that  lies  in  God's  mind.    {W.  Hamma,  D.D.)        Hereafter,  not  now  : — Christ's 
"  hereafter  "  has  a  large  scope.    In  this  case  it  might  mean — 1.  Presently — as  soon 
as  He  had  taken  His  garments  and  was  set  down  again  (vers.  12-15).     2.  The  later 
life  of  the  apostle — when  the  Holy  Spirit  had  led  him  into  all  truth,  and  be  began 
to  see  in  this  act  an  epitome  of  all  Christ's  Ufe,  work,  and  teaching.     3.  That  haven 
of  everlasting  repose,  where  every  mystery  shall  be  read  aright  in  the  sunshine  of 
the  Saviour's  presence.     Let  us  now  apply  the  text  to — I.  Christian  ordinances. 
1.  Which  of  ns  has  not  asked   himself,  in  taking   part   in  the  services  of  the 
Church,  What  is  the  meaning,  hope,  use  of  this  entering  a  particular  building, 
kneeling  at  certain  rails,  hearing  and  uttering  of  sounds,  eating  bread,  drinking 
wine,  sprinkling  of  a  little  child  with  water?     2.  We  can  answer  tbese  qnestions 
most  satisfactorily  in  these  words  of  Christ.    The  operation  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is 
observed  not  in  the  agency,  but  in  the  effect.     It  is  mere  impatience  to  say,  Because 
I  cannoS  see  which  way  the  Spirit  came  or  went,  I  will  not  believe.     Or,  because  I 
cannot  see  the  connection  between  this  word  of  God  and  my  soul — because  I  cannot 
understand  how  my  poor  voice  can  make  its  way  into  the  Eternal  Presence,  &c. — 
therefore  I  will  forsake  the  assembling  of  Christians  together,  and  trust  that  grace, 
the  only  real  thing,  will  come  to  me  all  the  same  in  solitude.    3.  We  hope  that  the 
hereafter  thus  promised  is  the  nearest  of  the  three.     If  a  man  will  earnestly  set 
himself  to  use  the  ordinances  of  the  gospel,  we  trust  that  he  will  be  enabled  very 
soon  to  know  what  Christ  does  in  them.     And  certainly,  if  we  never  find  any  good 
from  any  of  them,  we  have  cause  for  anxiety  and  self-suspicion.    Every  service 
ought  to  send  us  home  saying,  Lord,  it  was  good  for  us  to  be  there ;  it  has  enabled 
me  to  hold  converse  with  Thee,  and  to  go  on  my  way  rejoicing.    II.  That  which  is 
true  of  ordinances  is  no  less  true  of  doctrines.     1.  There  are  many  things  which 
Christ  teaches,  and  which  the  teaching  of  Christ  presupposes  as  already  com- 
municated that  we  know  not.    We  receive  them ;  they  lie  on  the  surface  of  the 
intellect — unharmonized  particulars — but  they  do  not  enter  into  our  thoughts  and 
feelings  as  truths  grasped  and  realized.     When  we  re-examine  them  they  are  each 
time  as  difficult  as  before,  and  we  despair  of  ever  fitting  them  into  our  plan  of  truth. 
There  are  some  which  we  could  wish  away  ;  the  doctrines,  e.g.,  of  grace  and  free- 
will, of  the  existence  of  evil,  of  the  atonement,  of  the  Spirit.    2.  In  regard  to  all 
this  "  hereafter  "  is  nearer  and  a  more  distant.     (1)  The  first  sound  of  these  diffi- 
culties is  daunting,  yet,  when  we  look  into  them  we  see  a  ray  of  light  soon.     Few, 
if  any,  are  created  by  the  gospel.     Most  certainly  the  existence  of  evil  had  place 
before,  and  would  have  place  without,  the  gospel.    Each,  when  tried  not  by  the 
intellect  but  by  the  heart,  diminishes  almost  into  nothing,  and  is  qualified  by  such 
accompaniments,  that  practically  its  force  is  almost  nothing,  as  regards  piety  and 
life.     It  may  be  a  hard  saying,  "  Whom  He  will  He  hardeneth  ;  "  but  if  along  with 
that  there  stands  the  promise,  "  Ask,  and  ye  shall  have — If  any  man  thirst,  let 
Him  come  unto  Me  and  drink,"  we  see  at  once  that  the  object  of  the  doctrine  is 
rather  attraction  than  repulsion.    (2)  And  what  I  know  not  now  I  shall  know  here- 


898  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHAP.  xnfc 

after.  Life  is  troubled  and  confused ;  its  opportunities  of  Divine  study  are  rar« 
and  brief,  its  distractions  many,  the  illusions  of  its  sight  and  thought  powerful,  the 
gaze  of  the  intellect  into  God's  heaven  dim  and  unsteady.  But  eternity  will  be  fre& 
from  all  these  interruptions :  and  when  God  Himself,  revealed  in  open  vision, 
becomes  the  instructor,  we  shall  advance  apace  in  that  science  of  sciences,  which 
is  "  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ."  III.  The  text 
is  no  less  true  of  providences.  There  are  many  things  in  the  conduct  of  tiiis  world, 
whether  in  the  affairs  of  empires  or  individuals,  which  are  difficult  to  make  oon- 
sistent  with  the  truth  of  a  Divine  Euler.  We  make,  some  of  us,  too  free  a  use  of 
the  word  mysterious  in  our  judgments  upon  Providence.  There  is  nothing  mysterious 
in  the  removal  of  a  good  man  to  his  paradise,  even  though  it  leave  a  neighbourhood 
Bad  and  a  family  fatherless,  nor  in  any  event  which  instructs  the  Uving  or  makea 
heaven  more  real  to  us,  reflection  easier,  or  repentance  more  resolved.  The 
mysterious  thing  is,  when  evil  is  allowed  to  spread  unchecked  ;  when  souls  are  lost 
in  sin  for  which  Christ  died ;  when  unprepared  men  are  hurried  to  judgment  without 
a  moment  for  thought ;  when  the  Gospel  of  Christ  seems  to  make  so  httle  progress. 
It  is  concerning  these  things  that  we  have  to  say,  "  What  I  do,"  &c.  And  though 
we  must  not  call  affliction  in  its  commoner  forms  a  mystery,  yet  there  is  a  sense 
in  which  even  to  it  may  be  applied  these  words,  and  the  Christian  mourner,  or 
watcher,  or  wrestler,  with  indwelling  corruption,  may  be  bidden  to  look  up,  and 
say.  The  time  is  at  hand,  for  my  Master  tells  me  so,  when  I  shall  know  why  I  was 
so  buffeted  and  tempted.  Even  in  the  near  hereafter  I  may  be  able  to  say,  "  It  is 
good  for  me  that  I  have  been  afflicted ;  in  the  great  boundless  hereafter  I  shalli 
certainly  read  all  clearly,  and  be  eatisfled  when  I  awake  in  His  likeness."  (Dean 
Vaughan.)  Present  mysteries,  future  solutions : — "God's  providences,"  says  the 
godly  Flavel,  "  like  the  Hebrew  letters,  are  often  to  be  read  backward."  1.  Sense 
doubts,  while  faith  trusts.  2.  The  one  questions  while  the  other  obeys.  3.  The 
one  must  reason  out  aU  mysteries,  all  God's  ways,  while  the  other  can  take  them- 
on  trust.  "  Though  no  affliction  for  the  present  seemeth  joyous,  but  grievous,  never- 
theless, afterwards,"  &o.  {Homiletic  Monthly.)  The  patient  waiting  and  obedience  of 
faith : — The  subject  suggests — I.  A  caution  against  the  spibit  of  hasty  dogmatism.  1. 
Eespecting  the  Divine  procedure.  Peter  was  over  hasty  in  judging  Christ's  action, 
for  he  was  ignorant.  Had  he  waited  Christ  would  have  made  it  clear.  We,  too,  are 
incompetent  to  comprehend  the  Divine  procedure.  (1)  When  we  consider  the  Doer 
it  is  not  surprising  that  there  should  be  much  that  is  mysterious  in  His  varied 
action  in  the  universe.  A  man  may  do  and  say  many  things  confoimding  to  the 
intellect  of  his  child  ;  much  more  the  infinite  God.  (2)  No  wonder  that  in  a  system 
so  vast  and  complex  there  should  be  many  things  that  appear  to  our  limited  view  to 
conflict  with  Divine  goodness,  wisdom,  and  power;  but  the  wise  man  will  not  con- 
clude that  the  conflict  is  real ;  He  wiU  rather  wait.  Ignorance  should  be  modest  in 
its  judgments.  2.  Eespecting  the  difficulties  of  Divine  revelation.  Because  you 
fancy  you  see  some  contradictions  in  the  Bible,  or  something  opposed  to  science,  do 
not  rush  to  the  conclusion  that  therefore  the  Bible  is  false.  Wait  I  There  maybe 
a  mistake  somewhere  outside  the  Bible.  That  which  contradicts  it  may  be  mere 
hypothesis,  or  that  in  it  which  contradicts  may  be  your  own  mistaken  interpretation. 
A  little  more  light  may  remove  the  difficulty.     II.  That  whatever  DiFFictJLTiES 

THERE  MAY  BE  SURROUNDING  OTHER  THINGS,  AND  HOWEVER  IGNORANT  WE  MAY  BB 
BESPECTINO   THEM,  THERE  IS  AT  LEAST  ONE  THING  PLAIN — THE  PATH  OF  DUTY.      Peter*8 

duty  was  plain,  it  was  to  obey  Christ.  No  matter  whether  he  saw  the  reason  or 
not.  The  Scriptures,  if  they  do  not  resolve  your  difficulties,  vet  do  light  up  the 
path  in  which  you  should  walk.  If  they  do  not  supply  all  dec  Irable  light  for  the 
head,  they  do  supply  all  needful  light  for  the  feet.  III.  That  obedience  is  thh 
CONDITION  of  knowledge.  Christ  did  not  impart  knowledge,  and  then  tell  Peter 
to  submit.  Do  what  Christ  enjoins  and  you  will  the  better  learn  of  Him.  "  If  any 
man  will  do  His  will,"  &c.  Patient  acquiescence  and  trustful  submission  are  the 
best  guarantee  of  our  knowledge  of  Divine  things.  The  light  becomes  clearer  and 
fuller  as  we  follow  it.  Turn  your  back  on  it,  and  you  shall  go  deeper  and  deeper 
into  gloom.  (A.  Bell,  B.A.)  The  next  life  an  interpreter  of  this  : — This  hfe  is 
like  a  bale  of  silk  on  a  loom,  that  winds  itself  up  as  fast  as  it  is  woven.  You  do 
cot  know  what  the  figure  is  until  it  has  been  taken  off  and  unrolled ;  then  you 
begin  to  see  what  it  is.  This  life  weaves  ;  the  other  life  reveals.  No  man  that  is 
doing  these  great  things  can  tell  that  he  is  the  cause  of  the  effect.  Nobody  can 
tell  what  he  has  done.  A  man's  real  life  is  not  in  his  body ;  it  is  that  celestial  life 
tpithin  himself  that  has  no  external  exponent.     (H.  W.  Beecher.)         The  unknou)7& 


CHAP,  nn.)  8T.  JOHN.  899 

wayg  of  love : — I.  In  otjb  Lord's  doings  thebb  is  much  which  we  cannot  dndbr- 
8TAND.  We  may  know  the  external  part  of  what  He  does,  but  there  is  more  in  His 
actions  than  any  of  us  can  conceive.  The  work  of  Jesus  is  lower  than  thy  fall, 
higher  than  thy  desire.  Even  His  acts  of  loving  condescension  we  do  not  folly 
understand ;  how  can  we  (vers.  3,  4)  ?  1.  Was  anything  that  Jesus  did  understood 
while  He  was  doing  it  I  He  is  bom  a  babe  in  Bethlehem,  but  to  the  mass  of  man- 
kind He  was  unknown.  He  lived  the  life  of  a  mechanic's  son ;  a  life  the  most 
august  in  all  human  history,  but  "  the  world  knew  Him  not."  He  came  forward 
to  preach ;  did  they  know  who  it  was  that  spake  as  never  man  spake  ?  or  compre- 
hend what  He  spake  ?  At  last  He  laid  aside  the  life  He  had  so  strangely  taken ; 
who  knew  the  reasons  of  His  death  upon  the  cross  ?  He  could  say  even  to  His> 
own  disciples,  of  all  that  He  had  done,  "  What  I  do  thou  knowest  not  now."  2, 
This  is  true  too  of  every  separate  gift  which  our  Lord's  love  has  given  to  His  people. 
You  have  been  justified,  but  do  you  fully  know  the  wondrous  righteousness  with 
which  justification  has  endowed  you  ?  You  are  accepted  in  the  beloved,  but  did 
any  one  of  you  ever  realize  the  full  sweetness  of  its  meaning  ?  You  are  one  with 
Christ,  and  joint  heirs  with  Him.  He  is  betrothed  onto  you  in  an  everlasting 
marriage,  know  you  what  aU  that  means  ?  3.  Our  Lord  is  doing  great  things  by 
way  of  preparing  us  for  a  higher  state  of  existence.  We  know  that  they  are  being 
done,  but  we  cannot  as  yet  see  their  course  and  ultimate  issues.  The  instrument 
does  not  comprehend  the  tuner ;  the  tuner  fetches  harsh  sounds  from  those  dis^ 
ordered  strings,  but  all  those  jarring  notes  are  necessary  to  the  harmonious  condi- 
tion which  he  is  aiming  to  produce.  If  the  discords  were  not  discovered  now,  the 
music  of  the  future  would  be  marred.  II.  OoB  want  of  dnderstandinq  does  not 
PREVENT  THE  EFFICACY  OF  OUR  Lord's  WORK.  The  Master  washes  just  as  clean 
whether  Peter  understands  it  or  not.  A  mother  is  washing  her  little  child's  face  : 
the  child  does  not  like  the  water,  and  it  cries,  but  it  is  washed  all  the  same  ;  the 
mother  waits  not  for  the  child  to  know  what  she  is  doing,  but  completes  her  work 
of  love.  So  is  the  Lord  often  exercising  Divine  arts  upon  us,  and  we  do  not  appre- 
ciate them  ;  perhaps  we  even  strive  against  them,  but  for  all  that  He  perseveres. 
Does  the  tree  understand  pruning,  the  land  comprehend  ploughing  ?  yet  pruning 
and  ploughing  produce  their  good  results.  The  physician  gives  medicine  which  is 
unpalatable,  and  which  causes  the  patient  to  feel  worse;  this  the  sufferer  cannot 
understand,  and  therefore  he  draws  unhappy  conclusions  ;  but  the  power  of  the 
medicine  does  not  depend  upon  the  patient's  understanding.  If  a  fool  eats  kia 
dinner,  it  will  satisfy  his  hunger  as  much  as  if  he  were  a  philosopher,  and  under- 
stood the  processes  of  digestion.  It  is  not  necessary  for  a  man  to  be  learned  in  the 
nature  of  caloric  in  order  to  be  warmed.  A  man  may  be  ignorant  of  the  laws  of 
light,  and  yet  be  able  to  see ;  he  may  know  nothing  of  accoustics,  and  yet  be  quick 
of  hearing.  A  passenger  who  does  not  know  a  valve  from  a  wheel,  enters  a  carriage 
at  the  station,  and  he  will  be  drawn  to  bis  journey's  end  by  the  engine  as  well  as  if 
he  were  learned  in  mechanics.  It  is  the  same  in  the  spiritual  world.  We  think  it 
80  essential  that  we  should  form  a  judgment  of  what  the  Lord  is  doing.  It  is 
better  to  trust,  to  submit,  to  obey,  to  love,  than  to  know.  Let  the  Lord  alone ;  He 
is  doing  rightly  enough,  be  sure  of  that.    III.  Our  not  being  able  to  know  what 

THE   LOBD   DOETH     SHOULD     NEVER    SHAKE     CUB  CONFIDENCE   IN   HiM.       Some    things 

which  the  Lord  has  done  bear  upon  their  very  forefront  the  impress  of  His  love, 
but  I  hope  you  know  enough  of  Him  to  be  able  to  believe  that  where  there  are  no 
traces  of  love  apparent  His  love  is  as  surely  there.  This  washing  of  the  feet  was 
the  act  of  the  Lord  Himself.  Now,  when  the  Master  and  Lord  is  the  actor,  who 
wants  to  raise  a  question  or  to  suggest  inquiry  ?  Do  you  know  Christ  ?  Then  you 
are  sure  that  He  will  never  act  unkindly,  unbecomingly,  or  unwisely.    IV.  Oub 

WANT  OF  UNDERSTANDING  AS  TO  WHAT  OUR  LoRD  DOES  GENERALLY  SHOWS  ITSELF 
MOST    IN     BEFjERENCE    TO     HiS     PERSONAL    DEALINGS    WITH     OURSELVES.      We    are   tOO 

close  home  to  see  clearly.  The  looker-on  sees  more  than  the  player.  We  generally 
form  a  better  opinion  of  another  than  we  do  concerning  ourselves.  So  we  must  not 
expect  when  Christ  is  personally  dealing  with  us  that  we  should  be  able  to  under- 
stand. Besides,  if  He  be  afflicting  us  we  are  generally  in  an  unfavourable  state  of 
mind  for  forming  a  judgment.  When  a  patient  is  under  the  knife  he  is  a  poor 
judge  of  the  necessity  of  the  operation  or  the  skill  of  the  surgeon.  In  after  days, 
when  the  wound  has  healed,  he  will  judge  better.  Judge  nothing  before  the  time. 
1. 1  do  not  wonder  that  Peter  could  not  understand,  for  it  is  always  a  hard  thing  for 
an  active  and  energetic  mind  to  see  the  wisdom  of  being  compelled  to  do  nothing. 
It  is  hard  to  be  put  on  the  shelf  among  the  cracked  crockery,  while  yet  you  feel  yoa 


MO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

eoald  be  asefnl  if  yoa  had  but  strength  to  leave  your  chamber.  2.  Then,  what  is 
worse,  Peter  not  only  cannot  do  anything,  but  must  be  waited  on  by  his  Master, 
whom  he  loved  to  serve.  He  would  say,  "  Cannot  I  do  it  myself  ?  I  am  not  used 
to  be  waited  on."  It  is  very  unpleasant  to  an  active  man  to  be  dependent  upon 
others.  To  stand  in  need  of  anxious  prayers,  and  to  arouse  pitying  thoughts, 
eeems  strange  to  those  who  have  been  accustomed  to  do  rather  than  to  suffer.  We 
become  inquisitive,  but  the  Saviour  says,  "What  I  do  thou  knowest  not  now."  8. 
All  the  while  there  is  in  our  mind  a  sense  of  insignificance  and  unworthiness, 
which  makes  our  receipt  of  favours  the  more  perplexing.  "  What,"  says  Peter, 
"  Shall  I  be  washed  by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ?  "  So  it  seems  to  us  unworthy 
sinners.  4.  Tet,  if  our  eyes  are  opened,  the  Lord's  afflicting  dealings  are  not  so 
wonderfully  mysterious  after  all,  for  we  need  purging  and  cleansing  even  as  Peter 
needed  foot-washing.  5.  There  was  a  needs  be  of  fellowship.  "  If  I  wash  thee  not 
thou  hast  no  part  with  Me."  You  cannot  have  fellowship  with  Christ  except  He 
does  this  or  that  for  you,  nay,  especially  except  He  tries  you ;  for  how  shall  you  know 
the  suffering  Saviour  except  you  suffer  yourself  ?  6.  There  was  a  needs  be  yet 
again  to  learn  the  lesson  of  washing  their  brethren's  feet  by  seeing  the  Lord  wash 
theirs.  Ko  man  can  rightly  wash  another's  feet  till  his  own  feet  have  been  washed 
by  his  Saviour.  V.  Upon  this  point  and  many  othees  wb  shall  one  day  bs  ra- 
FORMED.  1.  That  "  hereafter  "  may  be  very  soon.  Peter  knew  within  a  few  minutea 
what  Jesus  meant.  A  child  is  in  an  ill  temper  because  there  has  been  a  rule  made 
by  the  father  and  not  explained,  and  so  it  thinks  of  some  unkind  motive  on  the 
father's  part.  In  a  minute  or  two  after  it  understands  it  all,  and  has  to  eat  its  own 
words.  2.  Peter  imderstood  his  Master's  washing  His  feet  better  after  his  sad  fall 
and  threefold  denial.  When  he  percived  how  sadly  he  needed  washing,  he  would 
prize  the  token  which  his  Lord  had  given  him.  At  a  certain  point  of  your  experi- 
ence you  will  possibly  discover  the  explanation  of  your  present  adversity.  3.  After 
the  Lord  had  said  to  him,  "  Feed  My  sheep,"  and  "  Feed  My  lambs,"  another 
method  of  explanation  was  open  to  him.  Often  does  oar  work  for  Jesus  unfold  the 
work  of  Jesus.  4.  Yonder  in  heaven,  best  of  all,  Peter  understands,  for  he  sings, 
•'  Unto  Him  that  loved  us,"  &o.  All  things  will  be  clear  when  we  once  pass  into 
the  region  of  light.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  God's  work  in  our  behalf: — I.  God  n 
DOING  something  FOR  US.  Every  life  is  a  little  Bible — a  revelation  of  God.  Every- 
thing is  from  God.  Life's  meaning  is  God.  II.  We  know  not  what  it  is.  We 
misinterpret  the  events  of  life — like  Job's  friends.  It  were  better  not  to  know. 
Yet  we  do  "  know  in  part " — have  blind  hints  of  the  Divine  meaning  in  oar 
lives.  III.  We  shall  know  hereafter.  The  end  explains  all.  ••  Face  to  face," 
•'  eye  to  eye."  God,  at  last,  will  make  plain  all  His  providences.  (George  Elliot.) 
Reasons  for  tubmission : — I.  The  Saviour's  wisdom.  As  St.  Peter  emphasises 
"  Thou,"  our  Lord  lays  stress  upon  "  I."  All  My  past  intercourse  should  teach 
you  to  submit  to  what  I  think  best  for  you  in  My  wisdom  (Isa.  xxviii.  29).  II.  Thb 
DISCIPLES  IGNORANCE.  Equally  does  our  Lord  emphasize  •»  Thou. "  The  ways  of 
God  baffle  us,  and  that  idle  boast,  "  We  shall  soon  lay  bare  the  throne  itself  of  the 
Eternal,"  is  but  the  mere  froth  of  human  vanity.  The  ignorance  of  Joseph  and 
Job  of  the  reasons  of  their  trials  is  illustrative  of  ours.  III.  The  promised  ex- 
planation. 1.  It  came  soon  in  part  (vers.  8-10, 13-17).  2.  More  fully  at  Pente- 
cost. 3.  Clearer  still  in  heaven.  4.  Completely  at  the  Second  Advent.  (Family 
Churchman.)  The  night-flowering  cereus  ;  or,  the  beauty  of  unfolding  providence$: 
— "  I  was  walking  with  Wilberforce  in  his  verandah,"  says  a  friend,  "  watching  for 
the  opening  of  a  night-flowering  cereus.  As  we  stood  by  in  expectation,  it  suddenly 
burst  wide  open  before  us.  "  It  reminds  me,"  said  he,  as  we  admired  its  beauty, 
"  of  the  dispensations  of  Divine  Providence  first  breaking  on  the  glorified  eye,  when 
they  shall  fully  unfold  to  the  view,  and  appear  as  beautiful  as  they  are  complete." 
Thou  Shalt  never  wash  My  feet. — Washing  the  disciples'  feet : — Learn — 1.  That  they 
who,  like  Peter,  refuse  to  believe  in  or  conform  to  requirements  of  the  Master  which 
they  do  not  fully  understand  or  sympathize  with  are  in  danger  of  getting  where  they 
have  no  part  with  Him.  2.  That  if  we  submit  to  His  will  we  shall  in  due  time 
understand  the  significance  of  His  treatment.  3.  It  is  good  to  be  zealously  desirous 
of  abundant  blessing,  a  generous  supply  of  grace.  But  it  is  sometimes  necessary 
also  to  "  wait  patiently  for  the  Lord,"  to  learn  of  Him,  perchance  slowly,  and  "  one 
thing  at  a  time."  4.  That  in  the  kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ  the  crown-bearer  is  the  feet- 
washer.  5  That  our  knowledge  of  Christian  duty  becomes  a  blessing  in  proportion 
as  it  is  transmuted  into  practice.  Sentimental  admuation  of  humility  and  lowly 
helpfulness  la  one  thing,  being  humble  and  helpful  is  another.    6.  The  passage 


<5BA».  iiH.]  8T.  JOHN.  401 

affords  as,  as  Bruce  has  well  shown,  an  excellent  intimation  of  what  constitutes  the 
perfection  of  obedience.  "  It  lies  in  letting  the  Lord  change  places  with  us,  and,  if 
it  seem  good  to  Him,  humble  Himself  to  be  our  servant.  Our  true  humility  is  not  to 
object  to  Christ's  humiliation,  but,  on  the  contrary,  to  recognize  its  necessity  in 
order  to  our  deliverance  from  sin.  They  honour  not  God  who  deny  the  Incarnation 
and  the  redeeming  death  of  the  eternal  Son  as  unworthy  of  Him.  Katber  do  they 
doubly  dishonour  the  Divine  Being ;  first,  by  misconceiving  wherein  His  glory  lies, 
and,  next,  by  ignoring  their  own  need  of  redemption.  The  only  genuine  piety  ia 
that  which  owns  man's  moral  defilement  and  leaves  God  to  remove  it  in  His  own 
way."  {Boston Homilies.)  The  washing  of  Peter^s  feet: — I.  Tee  mixture  of  evil 
IN  THE  EXPERIENCE  OP  THE  GOOD.  Peter  ou  the  whole  was  a  good  man,  and  his 
language  here  expresses  something  that  was  really  good,  just  that  sense  of  Christ's 
greatness  and  his  own  unworthiness  as  appears  in  Luke  v.  8.  "  Thy  condescension 
overwhelms  me."  But  associated  with  tuis  is  Peter's  want  of  reflection,  of  ready 
acquiescence  and  his  characteristic  impulsiveness.  He  should  have  felt  «(uch  un- 
bounded confidence  in  Christ  as  to  submit  without  resistance  or  reluctance.  This 
shows  the  necessity — 1.  For  self-scrutiny.  "  Who  can  understand  his  errors."  2. 
For  Divine  cleansing,  "  Cleanse  thou  me  from  secret  faults."  3.  The  advantages 
of  death.  With  the  good  all  imperfections  are  left  this  side  of  Jordan.  Yonder  is 
nnmised  good.  II.  The  danger  of  a  bight  feeling  leading  to  evil.  Peter's 
LumiUty  was  right,  but  it  led  him  to  oppose  Christ.  A  sense  of  our  own  unworthi- 
ness and  of  God's  greatness,  right  in  itself,  may  lead  to  wrong  results.  1.  To  the 
rejection  of  Christ's  mediation.  How  can  the  Maker  of  the  universe  have  sent  Hia 
Son  to  die  for  this  httie  world  of  rebellious  worms.  2.  To  the  rejection  of  God's 
personal  providence.  God  is  too  great  and  man  too  little  for  such  a  thing,  3.  To 
the  rejection  of  Christian  consolation.  III.  The  rapidity  with  which  the  soul  can 
PASS  INTO  opposite  SPIRITUAL  MOODS  (vcrs.  7,  8).  This  power  indicates — 1.  The 
greatness  of  human  nature.  We  know  of  no  other  creature  that  can  pass  through 
such  changes.  All  irrational  creatures  move  in  a  rut,  which  they  cannot  leave.  Man 
has  power  to  defy  time  and  space,  to  Uve  in  the  future,  and  to  revel  in  the  distant. 
2.  The  necessity  for  reflection.  Without  this  men  will  ever  be  at  the  mercy  of  ex- 
ternal influences.  Thoughtless  men  of  impulse  are  like  feathers  on  the  wind — the 
sport  of  circumstances.  IV.  The  dependence  of  perfection  in  character  upon  as 
INCREASE  OF  DiviNE  KNOWLEDGE  (vcrs.  7,  12-14).  {HovdUst.)  Christian  purity : — 
I.  Its  nature.  1.  The  evil  from  which  we  are  to  be  cleansed.  Christ  evidently  had 
Judas's  sin  in  view  (vers.  2,  11).  And  in  ver.  8  He  manifestly  implies  that  the  sin 
of  the  betrayer  was  the  sin  into  which  they  would  fall  unless  purified  by  Him.  This 
is  the  root  and  ground  of  every  other  sin.  Every  man  has  the  Judas  nature  in  him. 
Consider  \7hat  that  sin  was.  Avarice  was  only  the  last  form  which  it  assumed.  Go 
deeper  and  we  shall  discover  its  spirit  and  essence  in  intensely  carnal  selfishness. 
Look  at  any  form  of  this  and  you  will  see  that  its  natural  development  is  the  Judas- 
sin — all  things  sold  for  its  own  gratification.  Its  laws  of  growth  are  all  there.  It 
shuts  out  Divine  influences,  creates  unbelief,  hardens  the  heart,  and  reaches  its 
consummation  in  the  sale  of  Christian  principle.  The  world  for  eighteen  centuries 
has  cast  stones  at  Judas,  but  the  thoughtful  Christian  will  be  constrained  almost  to 
stand  by  his  side  and  say,  "  Had  it  not  been  for  God's  grace,  this  tendency  to  sin 
in  me  would  have  led  to  that  consummation,  and  I  had  sold  the  Christ  too."  This, 
then,  is  the  evil  from  which  we  need  cleansing.  2.  Whence  comes  the  purifying 
power  t  The  answer  to  this  we  find  expressed  in  the  symbol.  The  highest  stooping 
to  the  lowest,  that  He  might  purify  them  from  sin.  .  .  .  Connect  with  that  the 
words,  '•  Having  loved  His  own.  He  loved  them  unto  the  end,"  and  you  will  reach 
the  power  in  Christ  which  purifies  the  soul.  This  is  the  power  which  shatters  the 
idols  of  the  heart ;  which  makes  the  life  a  sacrifice.  In  the  hours  of  fiercest  trial, 
only  let  us  feel,  '♦  He  became  a  servant  for  me,"  and  this  will  bind  the  heart  as  with 
golden  chains  to  Christ  as  its  Master  and  Lord.  II.  Its  perfection.  How  are  we 
to  be  wholly  cleansed  from  this  dark  temptation  ?  Now,  mark,  they  needed  not  a 
special  purifying ;  but  to  let  that  power  pervade  their  whole  natures  they  needed  to 
wash  their  feet.  Two  thoughts  are  involved  here.  1.  The  purifying  mast  pervade 
the  lowest  powers  of  life.  The  feet,  as  representing  the  least,  lowest  actions  and 
energies  of  life,  those  which  come  into  actual  contact  with  the  world.  The  most 
trifling  outward  act  has  a  power  to  corrupt  the  spiritual  hfe.  One  evil  deed  leaves 
its  scar  ;  one  such  impedes  prayer,  because  the  dark  nature  within  you  will  find  an 
outlet  there.  You  are  encircled  by  foes ;  leave  no  portal  unguarded.  Ton  are  sur- 
rounded by  a  torrent ;  leave  no  break  in  the  dyke.  2.  The  purifying  must  advanoa 
VOL.  n.  26 


40t  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHiFHEfc 

with  advancing  life.    The  feet  again,  as  representing  the  progress  of  life.    Past 
porification  will  leave  the  advanced  life  untouched.  ...  If  a  man  tries  to  live 
always  on  the  power  of  the  first  grace  given,  he  will  fall.     We  must  go  to  the  Cross 
daily.    {E.  L.  Hull,  B.A.)        If  I  wash  thee  not  thou  hast  no  part  with  Ue. — 
Spiritual  washing  : — I.  By  the  Lobd  peesonally.    II.  Of  the  sinneb  iKDiviDUAiiLT. 
III.  Fob  the  submissive  exclusivelt.     IV.  Fob  His  salvation  eteenallt.    {S.  3. 
Timet.)        Spiritual  washing  : — I.  Bv  whom  ?    II.  In  what  ?    III.  On  what  con- 
prnoNs?  rV.  With  WHAT  KES0LTS  ?    (Ibid.)        Spiritual  bathing : — Humboldt  tella 
OS  that,  after  bathing  among  the  noctilucse  in  the  phosphorescent  water  of  the 
Pacific,  his  skin  was  luminous  for  hours  after.    In  a  spiritual  sense  is  it  not  true 
that  when  we  bathe,  so  to  speak,  mind  and  heart  in  the  truths  and  influences  of 
Christianity,  allowing,  seeking  their  appropriate  effect  upon  us,  the  whole  character 
shines  with  heaven-given  light  and  beauty,  that  we  can  bear  about  with  us  into  the 
common  scenes  and  daily  duties  of  life  ?   But  the  meai:s  need  to  be  repeatedly  used 
if  we  would  have  the  effect  continued.    Let  then  our  devoutness  be  habitual.    Let 
thought  and  love  find  their  home  in  the  ••  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,"  and  our  profiting 
wiU  appear  unto  all.    (Homiletic  Monthly.)        The  sine  qua  non  : — I.  The  qbeat 
OBJECT  OF  ouB  DESiEE.     1.  To  have  a  part  in  Christ.     (1)  In  the  merit  of  His 
righteousness.     (2)  In  His  death.     (3)  In  His  resurrection.     (4)  In  His  ascension. 
(5)  In  His  intercession.    (6)  In  His  kingdom.    (7)  In  His  second  advent.    2. 1  hope 
most  of  us  know  what  it  is  to  have  a  part  in  Christ.    But  if  we  do,  the  blessed  fact 
is  altogether  due  to  grace,  and  it  could  never  have  been  so  if  we  had  not  first  been 
washed.    If  we  do  not  then  this  is  a  blessing  worthy  of  the  utmost  intensity  of  de- 
sire, and  one  which  we  must  obtain  or  sink  down  to  destruction,  since  to  be  without 
Christ  is  to  be  without  hope.     II.  The  essential  qualification  fob  osTArNmo  and 
ENJOTTNG  A  PABT  WITH  Cheist — being  Washed  by  Him.    Then,  the  qualification  is 
not  one  of  merit  on  our  part,  but  one  of  mercy  on  His.     If  He  had  said,  "  Except 
ye  obtain  a  superior  degree  of  holiness,  ye  have  no  part  in  Me,"  we  might  have 
despaired  ;  but  the  very  chief  of  sinners  may  find  comfort  in  such  a  word  as  this. 
But  what  is  meant  by  this  washing  ?  1.  No  man  has  any  part  in  Christ  who  does  not 
receive  the  first  all-essential  washing  in  the  precious  blood,  by  which  all  sin  is  once 
and  for  ever  put  away.    The  moment  a  sinner  believes  in  Jesus  Christ,  his  iniquities 
are  seen  as  laid  on  Christ  the  Substitute,  and  the  believer  himself  is  free  from  sin.  But 
without  faith  in  the  atonement  thou  canst  have  no  part  in  Christ.    2.  There  follows 
a  second  cleansing,  viz.,  daily  pardon  for  sin  through  faith  in  Jesus.  As  day  by  day 
we  fall  into  sin,  we  are  taught  to  pray  each  day,  "  Forgive  us  our  trespasses,  as 
we  forgive  them  that  trespass  against  us;"  and  there  is  provision  made  in  Christ 
Jesus  for  this  daily  pardon,  since  besides  being  the  Paschal  Lamb,  our  Lord  is  the 
morning  and  evening  Lamb  for  daily  guilt.    The  priest  of  God,  when  consecrated 
first,  was  washed  from  head  to  foot,  and  so  baptized  into  the  service  of  the  sanc- 
tuary ;  but  each  time  he  went  to  offer  sacrifice  he  washed  his  feet  and  his  hands  in 
the  brazen  laver.    No  need  to  give  the  complete  immersion  on  each  occasion  ;  but 
accidental  defilement,  incident  to  every-day  lite,  had  to  be  cleansed  away,  not  to 
make  the  man  a  priest,  but  to  keep  him  in  proper  condition  for  the  discharge  of  his 
office.  The  leper,  once  purged  under  the  law,  was  clean,  and  might  go  into  the  con- 
gregation of  the  Lord's  house ;  yet  as  a  clean  man,  he  had  the  ordinary  need  to 
wash  which  was  incidental  to  every  Israelite.  3.  Another  thing  included  is  the  con- 
tinual sanctification  which  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  carries  on  within  by  the  Holy 
Spirit.    If  a  man  profess  to  be  a  Christian,  and  is  not  in  his  walk  and  conversation 
holier  than  other  men,  that  man's  profession  is  vain.    If  Jesus  wash  not  yoor 
tongue,  and  cleanse  away  those  angry,  or  idle,  or  filthy  words ;  that  hand,  and 
render  it  impossible  for  it  to  perform  a  dishonest  or  unchaste  act ;  that  foot,  and 
render  it  impossible  it  should  carry  you  to  the  haunts  of  vice  and  criminal  amuse- 
ment, you  have  no  part  in  Him.    4.  The  daily  communion  which  the  true  Christian 
has  with  Christ.     III.  Wht  this  washing  is  so  essential.    Because  of — 1.  The 
claims  of  Christ.  Suppose  a  man  shall  say, "  I  have  no  need  of  washing,"  brethren, 
it  is  clear  that  he  has  no  part  in  Christ,  because  Christ  came  on  purpose  to  cleanse 
His  people  from  their  sins.     He  came  not  to  call  the  righteous,  but  sinners  to  re- 
pentance. You  have  no  part  in  Christ,  then,  however  much  you  applaud  Him,  unless 
yoQ  are  washed  by  Him,  for  you  have  rejected  that  for  which  He  lived  and  died.  2. 
Christ  is  Himself  so  infinitely  pure  that  we  must  first  be  cleansed  by  Him  before  He 
can  enter  into  fellowship  with  us.     There  is  a  fellowship  with  us  as  sinners  which 
He  gracioasly  adopts,  for  He  receiveth  sinners  and  eateth  with  them ;  but  into 
fellowship  with  His  deep  thoughts,  His  blessed  purposes,  and  His  Divine  nature,. 


«HAP.  xni.]  ST.  JOHN.  403 

He  brings  no  man  till  first  He  has  washed  him  in  His  blood.  3.  The  blesBings 
which  are  in  Christ  are  so  spiritual  that  till  we  are  cleansed  we  cannot  enjoy  them. 
Who  can  see  God  but  those  who  are  first  made  pure  in  heart  ?  Who  can  have  peace 
with  God  but  those  who  are  justified  by  faith  ?  4.  Man's  nature  is  such  that  it  ia 
impossible  for  him  to  have  part  with  Christ  without  washing.    IV.  Some  thdjos 

WHICH  HAVE  BEEN  PUT  FOKWABD  AS  SUBSTITUTES   FOR   BEING   WASHED  BY  JesUS  ChBIST. 

1.  Peter  had  such  love  and  admiration  for  his  Master  that  he  very  humbly  said, 
"  Dost  Thou  wash  my  feet  ?  "  Humility  will  not  save  you.  2.  Peter  had  performed 
distinguished  service  for  his  Master.  Though  any  of  us  should  possess  tongues  of 
men  and  of  angels,  and  give  our  bodies  to  be  burned,  jet  if  Christ  wash  ns  not,  we 
have  no  part  in  Him.  3.  Peter  had  enjoyed  very  remarkable  views  of  Christ's  glory. 
I  hear  men  boasting  of  the  "  coming  glory  " ;  but  it  is  not  as  glorified  that  Jesus  puts 
-away  sin.  Though  a  man  bathe  day  after  day  in  the  very  light  of  the  Millenium, 
yet  if  Jesus  wash  him  not  it  profiteth  him  nothing.  4.  Peter  had  walked  the  water 
once  and  found  it  marble  beneath  his  feet.  If  thou  hadst  faith  to  remove  mountains, 
yet  if  thou  hadst  not  this  washing,  thou  wouldst  have  no  part  in  Christ.  5.  Peter 
had  received  deep  instruction  1  Ay,  but  though  you  possessed  all  knowledge,  and 
could  interpret  all  mysteries,  yet  if  Jesus  wash  you  not,  you  have  no  part  in  Him. 
6.  Peter  was  full  of  zealous  enthusiasm,  but  the  greatest  imaginable  zeal 
does  not  prove  a  man  to  have  a  part  in  Christ  if  he  be  not  truly  washed.  V. 
liZSSONS  OF  WISDOM.  1.  Let  no  supposed  humility  keep  any  of  you  from  believing 
in  Jesus  Christ.  2.  As  you  must  not  let  a  supposed  humility,  so  let  no  other 
kind  of  feeling  keep  you  from  Christ.  3.  Eemember  what  you  are  11  you 
remain  unwashed,  and  what  you  will  be  U  you  are  washed.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  connection  between  a  sinner  having  a  part  icith  Christ  and  being  washed  by 
Him: — I.  A  binneb  having  pabt  with  Christ.  This  includes — 1.  His  being  of 
Christ's  mystical  body  through  union  with  Him  (1  Cor.  xii.  12,  13  in  contrast  with 
1  John  V.  19 ;  see  2  Cor.  vi.  17).  2.  His  having  communion  with  Christ  in  His 
saving  benefits  (1  John  i.  3).  U.  A  sinneb  being  washed  bt  Christ.  1.  There  is 
A  filthiness  in  sin  whereby  the  soul  is  polluted  and  defiled  before  the  Lord  (Ezek. 
xxxvi.  25  ;  Jer.  zliv.  4  ;  Isa.  iv.  4).  This  consists  in  its  contrariety  to  tbe  holiness 
of  God  (Exod.  XV.  11).  Hence — (1)  It  makes  the  sinner  loathsome  before  God 
(Zech.  xi.  8 ;  Hab.  i.  13 ;  Psa.  v.  4).  (2)  It  fiUs  the  soul  with  shame  before  God 
<Ezek.  xvi.  60,  61 ;  Gen.  iii.  10).  2.  Christ  has  them  all  to  wash  who  get  part  in 
Him  (Eev.  i.  5 ;  1  John  i.  7).  (1)  There  are  two  things  in  Christ's  blood  which 
make  it  cleansing,  (a)  An  infinite  value  and  dignity  (Acts  xx.  28).  (6)  An  infinite 
energy  and  efficacy  (Heb.  x.  20).  (2)  In  all  washing  there  are  two  things  to  be 
distinguished,  (a)  The  loosing  of  the  filth  of  sin  sticking  to  the  soul — as  pitch 
sticks  to  men's  fingers  (1  Cor.  xv.  56).  This  is  done  in  our  justification,  (b)  Its 
removal  from  the  soul — as  water  takes  filth  right  away.  This  is  done  in  sanctifi- 
cation  (Heb.  ix.  14 ;  Eev.  vii.  14).  (3)  This  cleansing  lies  in  three  things,  (o)  The 
putting  away  of  former  loathsomeness,  so  that  God  can  look  on  the  soul  with 
complacency  (Eev.  i.  6,  6).  (b)  The  making  of  the  soul  fair  and  clean  before  God 
(Song  of  Solomon  iv.  7).  (c)  The  removal  of  legal  shame.  (4)  Faith  is  the  instrumental 
course  of  this  cleansing  (Acts  xv.  9  ;  Eom.  iii.  25).  HI.  The  inseparableness  of 
the  two.  1.  In  respect  of  their  subject.  He  that  has  the  one  has  the  other.  2. 
In  respect  of  time.  They  are  simultaneous.  (T.Boston,  D.D.)  Communion  with 
the  Saviour  inseparable  from  holiness : — Let  us  consider  that  purification,  without 
which  all  our  hope  of  an  interest  in  Christ  is  vain.  I.  The  condition — "  If  I  wash 
thee  not."  Tliis  reminds  us  that  sin  is  of  a  defiling  quahty.  Man  may  palliate  the 
«vil,  but  in  the  view  of  the  Supreme  Judge  it  is  unspeakably  vile  and  hateful.  And 
when  the  sinner  himself  is  convinced  of  sin  he  sees  it  in  the  same  light.  He 
"loathes  himself  for  all  his  abominations."  This  enables  us  to  determine  what 
our  Saviour  means  by  washing  us.  As  water  removes  defilement  and  restores 
to  purity,  so  the  influences  of  Divine  grace  deliver  us  from  sin  and  make 
OB  truly  holy.  We  do  not  indeed  mean  to  intimate  that  real  Christians  are 
•ntirely  freed  from  all  sin  here.  Unmixed  purity  is  the  privilege  of  heaven. 
But  let  OS  remember,  that  though  this  work  is  completed  in  eternity,  it  ia 
begun  in  time.  II.  The  dreadfulness  of  the  exclusion — "  Thou  hast  no  part 
with  Me."  Hear  how  the  apostle  Paul  speaks  of  a  privilege  from  which  you  are 
excluded.  "  But  what  things  were  gain  to  me,"  &o.  But  you  say,  yoo  do  not  thua 
value  Him ;  you  prefer  a  thousand  objects  to  an  interest  in  Him — and  therefore  to 
yon  there  seems  nothing  so  very  dreadful  in  this  threatening.  But  the  question  ia 
— whether  your  judgment  be  a  righteous  one.    A  pearl  is  not  the  less  precious 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xm 

because  the  swine  tramples  it  nnder  foot.  A  toy  is  not  more  valuable  than  a  title 
to  an  estate  because  an  infant  or  an  idiot  njay  give  it  the  preference.  And  the 
question  also  is,  whether  you  will  always  remain  in  the  same  opinion.  Will  the  day 
of  judgment  operate  no  change  in  your  sentiments  ?  Will  not  the  approach  of  death 
alter  your  convictions  ?  If  our  Saviour  was  an  unimportant  character,  your 
exclusion  from  Him  would  not  be  so  fatal — but  the  fact  is,  that  everything  you  need 
is  found  in  Him,  and  to  be  derived  only  from  Him.  No  lieing  in  the  universe  can 
fill  His  place,  and  do  for  us  what  He  is  able  to  do.  And  therefore,  if  He  will  have 
nothing  to  do  with  us,  our  case  is  indeed  miserable  and  hopeless.  We  are  wanderers 
without  a  guide :  dying  patients  without  a  remedy  :  exposed  to  the  deluge,  and  have 
no  ark.  It  matters  not  to  whom  else  we  belong.  "  Neither  is  there  salvation  in  any 
other,"  &o.  To  have  no  communion  with  Him  in  whose  favour  is  life  ;  to  hear  TTim 
say,  I  have  a  family,  but  you  are  no  part  of  it — you  are  not  a  child,  nor  even  a 
servant ;  to  hear  Him  say,  I  have  a  plantation,  but  you  are  not  in  it,  I  have  in 
reserve  for  my  followers,  thrones  of  glory,  rivers  of  pleasure,  fulness  of  joy — but  as 
for  you — you — have  "  neither  part  nor  lot  in  the  matter," — if  this  be  not  dreadful, 
nothing  can  be  dreadful.  Especially  when  we  add  that  there  is  but  one  alternative 
— If  you  have  no  part  with  Christ  and  His  people,  you  must  have  your  portion  with 
hypocrites  and  unbelievers,  with  the  devil  and  his  angels  1  You  have  already  fixed 
your  destiny.  III.  The  ceetaintt  of  this  exclusion.  There  are  two  ways  of  proving 
this.  1.  By  testimony.  "  If  you  receive  the  witness  of  man,  the  witness  of  God  is 
greater."  And,  says  not  our  Lord,  "  If  I  wash  thee  not,  thou  hast  no  part  with 
Me  "  ?  "  If  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  His."  2. 
Eeasoning  from  principles.  (1)  Christ  is  pure  and  holy ;  His  person,  kingdom,  joy, 
service  are  pure.  If  therefore  we  are  not  made  pure,  we  have  no  likeness  in  Him. 
(2)  If  Christ  is  the  head,  and  Christians  are  the  body,  let  us  remember  that  the 
head  and  the  body  partake  of  the  same  nature :  and  that  if  Christ  be  the  vine,  and 
Christians  the  branches,  the  vine  and  the  branches  partake  of  the  very  same 
qualities.  (3)  What  intercourse  can  there  be  where  nothing  prevails  but  a  con- 
trariety of  inclination  and  an  opposition  of  interest?  "How  can  two  walk  together 
except  they  be  agreed  ?  "  "  What  fellowship  hath  righteousness  with  unrighteous- 
ness ?  "  (4)  Without  this  renovation  we  should  be  whoUy  incapable  of  deriving 
happiness  from  our  connection  with  Him.  Our  being  for  ever  in  His  presence  would 
only  render  us  miserable.  Wherever  he  may  be  placed,  while  he  has  sin  in  him, 
man  has  hell  with  him.  Conclusion  :  1.  How  exceedingly  those  misunderstand  the 
gospel,  and  delude  their  own  souls,  who  expect  to  be  "  made  partakers  of  Christ," 
while  they  seek  not  to  be  sanctified  by  Him.  "  He  was  manifested  to  take  away  our 
Bin."  2.  We  may  congratulate  those  who  are  made  free  from  sin.  You  have  '•  an 
inheritance  among  them  that  are  sanctified."  lou  have  part  with  Christ  1  you 
partake  of  His  safety  and  His  dignity.  (1)  Can  you  be  poor?  Having  nothing, 
you  possess  all  things.  "  For  all  things  are  yours,"  <fec.  (2)  Can  you  be  miserable? 
"  Eejoice  in  the  Lord  always ;  and  again  I  say,  rejoice."  And  if  you  have  part 
with  EUm  in  His  glory,  can  you  be  unwilling  to  share  with  Him  in  His  reproach  ? 
If  you  are  to  "  live  with  Him,''  cannot  you  "  die  with  him  "  ?  (W.  Jay.)  But  Is 
clean  every  wMt ;  and  ye  are  clean  but  not  all ;  for  He  knew  who  should  betray 
Him. — The  expressions  used  by  the  Evangelist  with  reference  to  the  traitor  show 
the  development  and  progress  of  the  treasonable  thought.  1.  He  that  was  about 
to  betray  (chap.  vi.  71).  2.  He  that  should  betray  (chap.  vi.  64).  3.  He  that  is 
betraying  (text).  4.  He  that  betrayed  (chap,  xviii.  2  ;  cf.  Matt.  xxvi.  48).  {T. 
Whitelaw,  D.D.)  Clean  every  whit: — These  words  teach  two  different  and  yet 
most  closely  connected  truths.  I.  The  completeness  and  abidingness  of  the 
"Divine  forgiveness.  He  who  is  washed  is  clean  every  whit.  II.  The  second  is, 
that  after  we  have  got  this  complete,  abiding  forgiveness,  we  still  require,  while  we 
remain  on  earth,  daily,  hourly  forgiveness  ;  we  still  need  to  wash  our  feet.  This 
accords  wim  our  daily  experience  ;  the  emblem,  as  is  always  the  case  with  Christ's 
figures,  exactly  accords  with  fact.  But  there  is  a  more  striking  illustration  in  the 
book  of  Exodus.  The  Lord  there  tells  Moses  to  consecrate  Aaron  and  his  sons  as 
priests.  In  doing  this  their  bodies  were  wholly  washed  with  water.  This  was  the 
consecration  washing,  and  this  was  never  to  be  repeated.  But  in  the  next  chapter, 
Moses  is  commanded  to  make  a  laver,  or  large  basin  of  brass,  and  put  it  between  the 
brazen  altar  and  the  tabernacle,  and  fill  it  with  pure  water.  In  this  the  priests,  who 
had  been  fully  washed,  once  for  all,  were  yet  required  to  wash  their  feet  and  hands 
every  time  they  entered  the  tabernacle.  I  believe  the  Lord  referred  to  this  when  He 
littered  the  words  of  this  verse.  It  is  as  if  He  had  said, "  When  you  come  as  sinners. 


CHAP,  xm.]  ST.  JOHN.  401 

and  believe  on  Me,  I  wash  you,  bathe  yon,  once  for  all,  in  My  blood.  I  make  you 
priests  unto  God ;  I  perfect  you  for  ever,  in  as  far  as  concerns  acceptance  and 
approach  to  the  Lord.  But,  Uke  the  typical  priests,  you  will  still  require,  so  long 
as  you  sojourn  and  minister  on  earth,  to  wash  your  feet,  to  seek,  and  get,  forgiveness 
for  your  daily,  hourly  errors  and  shortcomings."  Such  seems  to  be  the  import  of 
the  Lord's  words.  We  cannot  but  feel  that  there  is  more  intended  here  than  the 
washing  with  water.  We  are  lifted  into  a  loftier  region ;  we  stand  on  high  and  holy 
ground,  and  are  dealing  with  that  blood  of  the  Lamb  of  God  wherewith  He  washed 
and  sanctified  His  Church  unto  Himself,  "Clean  every  whit."  I  fear  that  many 
never  get  full  hold  of  this  blessed  truth ;  they  never  realize  the  difference  between 
law  and  gospeL  The  law  made  nothing  perfect ;  the  blood  of  bulls  and  goats  could 
not  take  away  sin  for  ever ;  it  only  procured  a  respite,  a  reprieve,  "  a  renewal  of  the 
bill,"  as  men  of  business  would  say.  The  blood  which  the  Jewish  high  priest  took 
into  the  holiest  of  all,  and  sprinkled  there  on  the  mercy-seat,  only  covered  Israel's  sin 
for  a  year ;  it  had  to  be  annually  renewed.  But  the  blood  which  Christ,  our  High 
Priest,  has  taken  into  the  heavenly  tabernacle,  and  sprinkled  on  the  mercy-seat 
there,  covers  the  sins  of  His  believing  people  for  ever  and  ever.  There  needs  no 
more  sacrifice  for  sin,  for  by  one  offering  He  has  perfected  for  ever  them  that  are 
sanctified ;  that  is,  those  who  are  washed  and  set  apart  for  God.  Oh,  it  is  blessed 
when  this  truth  gets  full  possession  of  the  heart  and  conscience !  It  brings  in 
peace,  assurance,  hope,  joy,  holiness,  humility.  It  makes  our  service  one  of  free- 
dom, gladness,  light.  But  now  comes  the  subordinate  truth  ;  the  forgiven  man 
Btill  needs  to  wash  his  feet.  We  can  easily  understand  this.  God's  forgiven  people 
are  still  on  earth  ;  still  in  the  flesh  ;  and  so  liable  to  many  sins  and  shortcomings. 
What  are  we  to  do?  We  have  an  advocate;  we  have  a  propitiation.  "If  we 
confess  our  sins.  He  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive,"  &c.  This  will  keep  up  a  close, 
intimate,  happy  fellowship  with  God  (1  John  i.  7).  I  suppose  this  is  very  much 
what  is  meant  when  it  is  said  (Eev.  vii.  14,  16).  They  had  once  been  washed, 
and  washed  for  ever;  but  then  they  continued  all  their  days  resorting  to  the 
fountain,  to  wash  away  the  sin  and  infirmity  of  life  and  lip  and  heart.  (John  Milne.) 
Enow  ye  what  I  have  done  unto  you  7 — What : — I.  In  its  eteknal  fobms.  II.  In  its 
INTRINSIC  WORTH.  III.  lu  its  EXBMPLAEY  FORCE.  (S.  S.  Times.)  What  Christ 
requires  of  His  disciples : — I.  Intelligence — "  Know  ye."  Sometimes  the  actions  of 
men  have  no  meaning :  they  are  impulsive  and  purposeless.  Sometimes  they  have 
a  bad  meaning :  they  have  selfish  and  sensual  aims.  Sometimes  they  have  a  good 
meaning :  they  are  benevolent  and  pure  in  their  motives.  Christ's  actions  always 
had  a  meaning,  holy  and  beneficent,  and  it  is  the  duty  of  His  disciples  to  find  it 
out.  Two  classes  of  professed  Christians  act  wrongly  in  this  respect.  1.  Those  who 
attach  no  meaning  to  Christ's  works.  2.  Those  who  attach  a  wrong  meaning  to 
them.  What  absurd  and  even  blasphemous  ideas  are  current  about  many  of  them  I 
Let  the  real  Christian,  then,  "  prove  all  things."  II.  Consistency  (ver.  14).  There 
should  be  perfect  harmony  between  what  they  profess  to  be  and  what  they 
are.  Creed  and  conduct  should  agree.  The  discrepancy  between  the  two  is  the 
greatest  crime  and  curse  of  Christendom.  Christ  denounces  war,  worldliness, 
selfishness,  and  subjection  to  the  flesh,  yet  His  followers  practise  them.  III. 
Christliness  (ver.  15).  To  do  in  spirit  as  Christ  did  is  to  follow  His  example,  and 
not  the  mere  copying  of  the  form.  Were  we  to  do  all  that  Christ  did  we  might  still 
be  out  of  harmony — aye,  and  in  antagonism  with  His  spirit.  The  way  for  a  student 
artist  to  become  like  a  great  painter,  is  not  to  copy  most  accurately  all  the  strokes 
and  shadings  of  his  model,  but  to  catch  the  genius  that  inspired  the  master.  Christ's 
Spirit  is  the  genius  of  all  works  of  moral  beauty  and  excellence,  and  if  we  catch 
that,  we  shall  be  "  fruitful  unto  all  good  works."  IV.  Happiness  (vers.  16,  17).  1. 
Christ  desires  the  happiness  of  His  disciples.  Those  who  profess  His  name  and  are 
gloomy  and  discontented  are  not  His.  2.  The  doing  in  love  the  things  of  His 
loving  heart  ensures  true  happiness.  The  labour  of  love  is  the  music  of  life.  (D. 
Thomas,  D.D.)  Ye  call  Me  Master  and  Lord.— Christ  a  Master : — I.  We  all  tjbgentlt 
need  a  good  master  for  the  regulation  and  control  op  our  lives.  1.  Even  in 
matters  secular  there  is  no  such  thing  as  absolute  independence.  We  are  tha 
subjects  of  the  sovereign,  who  in  turn  is  subject  to  national  law,  private  advisers, 
or  public  opinion.  2.  But,  especially,  in  matters  spiritual.  It  is  the  misery  of  the 
ungodly,  that  they  are  subject  to  no  law  but  that  of  their  ownf oily  and  passions.  What 
a  mercy  that  we  have  been  placed  under  the  management  of  Him  whose  regulations 
form  "  the  perfect  law  of  liberty !  "  That  man  is  the  slave  whose  master  is  himself; 
and  he  alone  is  the  freeman  whose  master  is  Christ.    II.  Christ  is  odb  Master  in 


406  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xm, 

THS  TBtns  AHD  8TBICT  SENSB  ov  THB  TBBM — not  One  who  is  to  be  Sainted  -mth  the 
name,  merely  in  a  spirit  of  courtesy.  His  mastership  is  that  of  a  sovereign,  whom 
his  subjects  must  obey,  for  whom  they  must  fight,  and  to  whom  they  must  pay 
tribute  (1  Cor.  ix.  21).  III.  Chbist  has  been  constituted  oub  Masteb  by  thb 
DEOBEB  OF  His  Fathbb  (Fsa.  ii.  6 ;  Acts  v.  31).  So  that  the  devout  man's  satis- 
faction is,  that,  when  he  does  homage  to  Christ  as  His  Lord,  he  does  homage  to  the 
Father,  as  honouring  His  appointment  (Phil.  ii.  9-11).  So  far,  then,  is  the  worship 
of  Christ  from  robbing  of  the  Father  of  His  honour,  that  it  is  an  act  which  we 
honour  both  at  once  (chap.  v.  19-23).  IV.  The  Fatheb's  obdination  of  Christ  to 
BB  oub  Master  proceeds  on  a  pbinciplb  of  equity,  and  is  not  an  act  of  mere 
arbitrary  sovereignty.  The  Father  (Heb.  i.  2 ;  John  i.  3)  commissioned  the  Son,  in 
His  state  of  unincarnated  glory,  to  create  us,  and  in  His  state  of  incarnated  mercy  to 
redeem  us  (Rev.  v.  12 ;  2  Cor.  v.  14).  Since  Christ  died  to  save  our  Uves,  these 
lives  are  most  lawfully  His,  to  be  consecrated  to  His  service ;  should  we  deny  Him 
which  service  we  shall  be  condemnable,  not  only  for  a  want  of  gratitude,  but  a 
violation  of  the  law  of  equity.  V.  Chbist,  as  oub  Master,  is  entitled  to,  and 
DEMANDS  OF  Ds,  ABSOLUTE,  UNIVERSAL  OBEDIENCE  ;  Buch  as  is  commensurate  with  our 
entire  being,  and  the  whole  economy  of  our  lives,  in  our  works,  words,  meditations ; 
not  only  on  the  Sabbath,  but  on  all  days ;  not  only  at  the  stated  hours  of  devotion, 
but  in  the  management  of  business,  &o. ;  as  a  citizen  in  your  political  conduct,  and 
in  your  domestic  relations,  Ac.  (Col.  iii.  17).  Does  this  seem  oppressive  ?  Do  you 
feel  as  if  He  should  be  satisfied  with  only  a  partial  control,  and  act  accordingly  ? 
Then — 1.  How  foohsh  you  are ;  as  if  there  were  any  part  of  the  economy  of  your 
being  which  could  be  safely  entrusted  to  the  management  of  yourself.  2.  How 
corrupt  you  are ;  since  it  appears  there  is  some  part  of  your  life  which  will  not  bear 
Etis  inspection.  3.  How  ungrateful  yon  are  ;  grudging  the  subjection  of  any  part 
of  your  life  to  Him  who  gave  Himself  from  the  manger  to  the  cross  for  you  I  4. 
How  unjust  you  are ;  robbing  the  Redeemer  of  part  of  His  pain-bought  inheritance  I 
If  with  purpose  of  heart  you  can  coolly  reason  that  there  is  one  hour  of  life  for 
the  manner  of  spending  which  you  are  under  no  obligation  to  consult  with  Him — 
then  all  is  wrong,  you  are  still  "in  your  sins."    VI.  Christ  is  open  and  free  to 

THE   APPLICATION  OF  ALL  HiS   SERVANTS  FOB   AID  IN   PERFORMINO   THE   WORE  WHICH  Hs 

pbbscbibes  THEM.  How  many  masters  act  unreasonably  and  unjustly  by  their 
servants  in  this  respect  I  They  starve  them  so  as  to  enfeeble  them,  and  refuse  to 
furnish  them  with  proper  implements  for  their  work.  How  different  the  Christian's 
Master  I  All  His  commandments  are  reasonable  ;  and  to  an  unperverted  disposition 
would  be  easy.  And  He  looks  at  the  subjective  weakness  and  incapacity  of  our 
hearts,  and  sympathises  with  our  infirmity,  and  communicates  strength  (2  Cor.  xii. 
9).  VII.  Perfect  though  Christ's  rights  be,  and  free  and  ample  the  help  which  He 
vouchsafes,  so  that  all  disobedience  is  without  excuse,  yet  is  Christ  a  Master  most 

FOBBEABINQ  WITH  THB  FAULTS  AND  FAILUBE8   OF  HiS  SERVANTS.      Had  WC   treated   any 

other  master  as  we  have  treated  Him,  long  ere  this  we  would  have  been  dismissed 
from  his  service.  A  principal  explanation  of  this  forbearance  is  found  in  the 
circumstance  that  He  was  once  a  servant  Himself  (Heb.  v.  8) ;  and  in  our  own 
nature,  amid  the  same  scenes  of  trial  through  which  we  pass.  And  although  He 
stood  the  trial,  yet  He  does  not  make  this  a  reason  for  condemning  His  weak 
brethren.  Bat  rather,  remembering  the  force  of  temptation,  and  how  much 
fortitude  it  required  of  Himself  to  withstand  it,  He  apologizes  to  Himself  for  their 
failures,  and  easily  forgives  them.  VHI.  As  a  Master  Christ  rewards  His  servants 
WITH  EXUBERANT  LIBERALITY.  As  if  He  had  douc  nothing  for  us  as  yet,  at  all.  He 
encourages  us  to  diligence  and  activity  by  the  assurance  of  a  "  great  recompense  of 
reward."  {W.  Anderson,  LL.D.)  The  helpfulnesa  of  Christ  as  Master: — Who 
teaches  like  Christ  ?  By  His  Spirit  He  pours  light  into  the  soul,  applies  His  word 
to  the  conscience,  and  draws  the  heart  gently,  >et  powerfully,  to  faith,  love,  and 
holy  obedience.  Five  minutes'  instruction  in  Christ's  school  is  worth  more  than 
ten  thousand  sermons.  We  have  seen  a  child  make  a  drawing  from  a  picture  set 
before  him ;  and  as  the  work  grows  under  his  pencil,  he  is  delighted  with  his  own 
performance,  and  does  not  perceive  its  many  defects.  The  master  looks  at  the  work, 
and  surprises  the  pupil  by  pointing  out  deficiencies  hitherto  unsuspected;  he  then 
takes  the  pencil  into  his  hand,  and  by  a  bold  touch  here,  and  a  stroke  there,  he 
produces  a  new  effect ;  so  that  the  pupil  is  at  once  astonished  and  humbled.  Thus 
a  touch  or  so  from  the  Spirit  of  Jesus  in  the  heart  is  more  effectual  than  all  the 
wisdom  of  the  schools,  and  all  the  learning  of  the  ancients.  Let  us  inquire.  Have  we 
BO  learned  Christ  t  Devout  Mr.  Herbert,  when  He  mentioned  the  name  of  Christ,  i  ised 


SBAJP.  mi.]  ST.  JOHN.  407 

to  add, "  my  Master  " ;  and  thns  expresses  himself  concerning  it  in  one  of  his  poems : 
"  How  sweetly  doth  '  my  Master '  sound,  '  my  Master  1 '  As  ambergris  leaves  a  rich  scent 
unto  the  taster,  so  do  these  words  a  sweet  content,  an  oriental  f  ragrancy ; '  my  Master.' " 
(J.  M.  Randall.)  Christour  Master  and  Lord: — "Who  went  about  doing  good."  Thia 
ia  the  shortest  and  noblest  eulogium  ever  pronounced.  I  will  not  '*  give  flattering  titles 
onto  man."  Yet  the  practice  is  too  common.  But  now,  as  to  the  Lord  Jesns,  what- 
ever we  say  of  Him  that  is  noble  and  glorious,  we  say  well,  for  bo  He  is.  Some  of 
this  good  was  mediatorial ;  some  of  it  miraculous  ;  some  of  it  corporeal ;  some  of  it 
spiritual;  and  some  of  it  exemplary — as  here.  I.  The  title.  As  the  Master  and  the 
Lord  of  His  people.  They  learn  in  His  school  and  serve  in  His  house.  Li  both 
these  titles  the  main  idea  is  authority.  He  is  Lord — 1.  By  the  claims  of  creation. 
As  He  is  our  Maker,  He  has  an  infinitely  greater  property  in  us  than  a  creature  can 
have.  In  Him  we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being.  If,  therefore,  He  were  to 
call  into  His  presence  a  monarch  or  a  philosopher,  and  say,  "  Take  that  thine  own 
is,"  what  could  either  of  them  take  1  Not  even  his  existence.  2.  By  the  clahna 
of  redemption.  "  Ye  are  not  your  own."  This  gives  Him  a  greater  claim  than 
even  creation,  for  redemption  -ielivers  us  from  greater  evils,  advances  us  to  greater 
blessings,  and  is  accomplished  by  a  much  more  expensive  process  than  creation. 
8.  By  their  own  choice  and  submission.  Once  He  bare  not  rule  over  them ;  they 
were  not  called  by  His  name.  But  He  made  them  willing  in  the  day  of  His  power. 
And  the  glory  of  His  dominion  is  here — that  He  does  not  govern  only  by  external 
rule,  but  by  internal  influence.  He  illuminates  our  understanding,  and  displays  to 
their  view  His  loveliness.  And  thus  we  run  after  Him ;  for  He  draws  with  the 
cords  of  a  man  and  with  the  bands  of  love.  H.  The  obligation.  '•  If  I  am  your 
Master  and  Lord  " — 1.  You  ought  to  renounce  coimection  with  every  other;  for  "no 
man  can  serve  two  masters."  But  His  dominion  does  not  interfere  with  the  rela- 
tions subsisting  between  man  and  man.  Your  rendering  unto  God  the  things  that 
are  Qod's  does  not  prevent  your  rendering  unto  CsBsar  the  things  that  are  Ctesar's. 
But  even  this  service  is  regulated  by  His  authority  too.  "  Children,  obey  your 
parents  in  the  Lord,  for  this  is  right  in  the  Lord."  He  said,  "Call  no  man  master." 
Thus  He  releases  His  subjects  from  all  authority  as  to  conscience  but  His  own. 
But  said  He  also,  "Be  not  ye  called  masters."  There  are  those,  who  refuse 
dominion,  who  are  ready  enough  to  require  it.  2.  You  ought  to  obey  My  com- 
mandments. There  cannot  be  a  better  evidence  of  sincerity  than  this.  "If  ye 
love  Me,"  &c.  For  a  knowledge  of  His  orders,  you  must  repair  to  the  Scriptures, 
and  to  these  only.  You  must  shun  all  that  He  forbids,  and  pursue  all  that  He 
enjoins.  3.  You  ought  to  submit  to  My  appointments.  As  He  gives  us  our  work, 
BO  He  must  determine  when,  and  where,  and  how  we  shall  labour  and  serve  Him. 
"Here  I  am;  let  Him  do  what  seemeth  Him  good."  You  must  not,  therefore,  com- 
plain if  He  restrains  you,  tries  you,  bereaves  you.  He  has  a  right  to  determine 
your  connections,  the  bounds  of  your  habitations,  the  way  in  which  you  are  to 
glorify  Him;  and  He  never  exercises  this  right  but  for  your  own  welfare.  Some  at 
His  bidding  cross  over  land  and  sea  ;  they  also  serve  Him  that  wait,  and  they  also 
serve  that  suffer.  4.  You  ought  to  imitate  Me.  "  If  any  man  serve  Me,  let  him 
follow  Me."  You  see  this  specified  here.  6.  You  should  esteem  all  you  have  as 
Mine,  and  use  it  accordingly.  '♦  Occupy  till  I  come."  If  you  have  no  title  to 
yourselves,  how  is  it  possible  that  you  can  have  a  title  to  anything  that  you  now 
call  your  own?  (1)  Do  you  think  that  your  time  is  your  own,  that  you  may  lie  as 
long  in  bed  as  you  please,  or  that  you  may  lounge  as  much  in  the  day  as  you 
choose?  You  will  soon  appear  before  Him  who  has  said,  "Eedeem  the  time." 
(2)  Can  you  suppose  that  your  tongues  are  your  own  ?  You  will  soon  be  in  His 
presence  who  said,  '*For  every  idle  word  that  men  shall  speak,"  <fec.  (3)  Do  you 
think  that  your  substance  is  your  own,  that  you  may  either  hoard  it  or  spend  it  as 
you  like  ?  You  will  soon  be  in  His  presence  who  has  told  you,  "  To  do  good  and 
to  communicate,  forget  not,"  <feo.  6.  You  should  be  willing  to  partake  with  Me  in 
all  My  estates.  If  you  are  to  reign  vrith  Him  hereafter  you  must  suffer  with  Him 
now.  7.  You  may  depend  upon  Me  for  all  the  advantages  of  the  relation.  "  Ye 
shall  receive  the  reward  of  your  inheritance,  for  ye  serve  the  Lord  Christ."  It  ia 
impossible  for  you  to  serve  Him  for  nought.  Conclusion  :  1.  Entertain  proper 
apprehensions  of  Christ.  He  is  not  only  a  Saviour,  but  He  is  a  Lord  and  Master. 
Is  Christ  divided  ?  2.  Beware  of  hypocrisy  and  inconsistency.  Why  call  ye  Me, 
Lord,  Lord,  and  do  not  the  things  that  I  say  ?  3.  Some  have  other  lords ;  some 
love  idols,  and  after  them  they  will  go.  (W.  Jay.)  The  universality  of  Christ's 
Mastership  : — In  the  high-toned  sanctities  of  our  Christian  worship,  ov  the  lower 


408  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  an. 

plane  of  domestic  life,  with  its  secret  cares,  and  silent  griefs,  and  angry  frets, 
Christ  is  our  Lord.  On  the  crested  wave  of  business,  with  its  glittering  spiay  and 
argosies  of  wealth,  and  along  its  turbid  and  choking  shallows,  Christ  is  our  Lord. 
In  all  the  undress  and  innocent  relaxations  of  life — on  the  heathery  hills,  or  placid 
ocean,  or  in  the  crowded  city — still  Christ  is  our  Lord.  In  the  retreat  of  the 
counting-house  or  the  perilous  whirlpool  of  the  public  exchange,  in  the  obscurest 
nook  and  coruer  of  your  life,  Christ  is  your  Master  and  Lord.  You  have  chosea 
Him  as  such.  Your  faith,  your  profession,  aflSrm  Him  as  such,  and  He  responds 
to  that  profession.  He  is  Lord  of  your  spirit,  in  what  it  thinks,  and  feels,  and  is  ; 
of  your  wealth,  and  time,  and  influence ;  of  your  pursuits,  and  pleasures,  and 
possessions  ;  of  the  most  hidden,  germinal,  and  nnbetiayed  proclivities  of  the  soul ; 
of  the  totalized  aggregate  man — Christ  is  "Lord  of  all."  And  you  are  His  ser- 
vants, put  in  trust  with  His  goods,  stewards  of  His  wealth,  factors  in  His  house- 
hold ;  and  He,  the  Lord  and  Master,  is  even  now  on  His  return  journey,  to  call 
each  to  his  account,  and  to  assign  his  position  and  award.  But  what  a  weight  of 
responsibiUty  does  this  assumption  of  the  regal  sovereignty  of  Christ  entail  upon  its 
subjects  1  What  a  solemnity  does  it  lend  to  the  ongoings  of  human  life,  and 
what  a  tragic  interest  does  it  give  to  the  dismission  of  each  occupant  from  his 
trust  I  "  What  manner  of  persons,"  in  view  of  all  this,  "  ought  ye  to  be  ?  "  (John 
Burton.)  The  Christian  a  servant : — Dr.  Mublenburg  gave  a  beautiful  illustra- 
tion of  obedience  to  his  Master  when  he  once  took  up  a  tray  of  dishes  in  St.  Luke's 
Hospital  and  carried  them  down  to  the  kitchen.  Some  one  mi  eting  him,  and  pro- 
testing against  his  doing  such  menial  work,  he  quickly  said,  "  What  am  I,  but  a 
waiter  in  the  Lord's  hotel?  "  If  I,  then,  your  Lord  and  Master,  have  washed 

yoTir  feet,  ye  ought  also  to  wash  one  another's  feet. — The  sign  of  the  feet-washing : 
— Let  OS  look  at  this  act — I.    As  requiring  the  Cross  for  its  interpretation. 
Short  as  this  evening  was,  it  was  the  most  memorable  on  which  the  sun  ever  went 
down,  and  the  eve  of  the  most  memorable  day  that  ever  dawned.     First  came  the 
feet-washing,  then  the  holy  supper,  then  the  discourse,  then  the  prayer.     But  all 
that  passed  within  that  ante-chamber  of  the  passion  had  reference  to  the  morrow. 
1.  *'  Thou  slialt  know  hereafter  "  intimated  that  the  mystery  of  the  whole  strange 
scene  would  be  explained  when  the  Servant  of  God,  and  the  Minister  of  man's 
redemption,  would  reach  the  lowest  point  of  His  submission,  and  offer  EUs  final 
oblation  of  humility.     "  He  riseth  and  laid  aside  His  garments,"  &c. ;  even  so  He 
left  the  Father's  bosom,  and  emptied  Himself.     "  He  poured  water  into  a  basin  " 
—but  this  water  is  once  again  changed,  not  now  into  wine,  but  into  blood — and 
washed  His  disciples'  feet.     2.  Notice  some  of  the  specific  points  of  this  exhibition. 
(1)  It  was  voluntary  service  rendered  in  the  consciousness  of  Divine  power  (ver.  3). 
To  the  ransom  of  His  life  He  Himself  freely  gave.     "  I  have  power  to  lay  down  My 
life,"  &c.    Had  it  not  been  so.  His  death  could  not  have  been  redemption.    (2)  It  was 
as  our  Lord  that  He  bought  us  with  His  blood.     "  Ye  call  me,"  &c.    The  submis- 
sion to  death  was  a  Divine  victory  over  the  cause  of  death.     (3)  The  redeeming  act 
is  fully  available  only  for  "  His  own."     The  symbol  did,  indeed,  teach  that  Christ 
washed  away  the  sins  of  the  race ;  that  He  made  atonement  for  John  and  Judas 
alike.     So  effectual  has  been  that  washing  that  no  one  is  condemned  eternally  for 
his  original  stain  or  contracted  defilement,  and  baptism  is  the  pledge  of  that.    But 
as  we  look  at  our  Great  Servant  going  round  with  the  basin,  and  washing  each  one, 
and  saying,  "  Ye  are  clean,  but  not  all  "  ;  when  we  hear  Him  telling  Simon,  "  If  I 
wash  thee  not,"  <fec.,  we  cannot  help  seeing  that  Christ  may  wash  in  vain,  or  man  may 
refuse  the  benefit  of  His  washing.    We  may  hope  that  these  are  as  few  in  comparison 
of  the  innumerable  multitude  as  Judas  in  comparison  of  the  eleven.     But  the  saved 
are  personally  saved,  and  none  have  fellowship  with  Christ  whose  souls  have  not 
been  cleansed  in  His  blood.    II.  As  illdstr4Tive  or  the  believers'  fellowship 
WITH  Christ,  the  bond  of  union  between  Christ  and  His  cleansed  people.     1.  Our 
Minister  in  heaven  makes  provision  for  the  forgiveness  of  our  sins  and  the  renewal 
of  our  nature.     He  came  to  give  His  life  a  ransom  for  many  ;  He  is  gone  to  give 
ffis  spirit  for  His  people's  redemption.     Thus  we  are  washed  by  pardon  and  the 
bestowal  of  the  renewing  Spirit.    The  two  washings,  distinguished  as  acts,  are 
united  in  their  effect;  and  He  who  "  came  by  water  and  blood  "  makes  both  symbols 
one  in  those  who  have  "  part  in  Him."    2.  Christ  makes  provision  for  the  cleansing 
of  that  defilement  which  may  be  daily  contracted  by  a  renewed  believer,  "  save  to 
wash  His  feet."    Two  opposite  perversions  of  this  gracious  act  must  be  guarded 
against.    (1)  It  gives  as  the  perfect  ideal  of  the  Christian  Ufe ;  bat  it  may  be 
exhibited  so  as  to  throw  many  into  despondency.    Christ  does  not  say  more  than 


OHAP.  zm.]  8T.  JOHN.  409 

that  He  who  is  once  washed  needeth  not  that  washing  again.  He  doeB  not  go  on 
to  say,  "  Nor  shall  he  who  has  lost  his  first  washing  ever  be  washed  anew."  Oar 
heavenly  Minister  fainteth  not,  neither  is  weary.  (2)  But  this  saying  must  not  be 
perverted  in  the  interests  of  a  nature  only  too  tolerant  of  evil.  It  does  not  say 
that  those  whom  Christ  has  once  washed  He  will  and  must  wash  unto  the  end. 
Those  who  make  it  say  so  forget  the  terrible  denunciation  uttered  on  those  who 
"sin  that  grace  may  abound."  HI.  As  oxjb  example.  "  If  I,  your  Lord,"  &o.  1. 
The  mind  of  Christ  in  His  self-renunciation  is  the  standard  of  the  true  Christian 
spirit.  Between  the  Pattern  and  the  imitators  there  is  infinite  disparity ;  but  of 
the  Spirit  we  are  all  commanded  to  partake.  This  was  the  solitary  principle  in 
Himself,  that  He  or  His  apostles  proposed  for  our  imitation.  To  know  no  self 
apart  from  the  will  of  God  and  the  service  of  man  is  Christ's  example  and  the  per- 
fection of  the  Christian  spirit.  2.  In  some  sense,  also,  He  gives  us  here  the  pattern 
of  our  act  as  well  as  of  our  spirit.  His  service  left  no  ministry  incomplete,  whether 
to  our  bodies  or  our  souls.  He  chose  here  an  emblem  that  was  well  adapted  to 
illustrate  those  deeds  which  minister  to  our  brethren's  needs  of  every  kind.  Con- 
elusion :  Our  Lord  closes  the  scene  by  a  warning  and  a  benediction  (ver.  17). 
(W.  B.  Pope,  D.D.)  Great  principles  and  small  duties: — A  soul  occupied  with 
great  ideas  best  performs  small  duties  ;  the  Divinest  views  of  life  penetrate  most 
clearly  into  the  merest  emergencies.  Let  us  apply  this  principle  to — I.  Intellectuaij 
CULTUBE.  The  ripest  knowledge  is  best  qualified  to  instruct  the  most  complete 
ignorance.  It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  master,  who  is  but  a  stage  before 
the  pupil,  can,  as  well  as  another,  show  him  the  way.  However  accurately  the 
recently  initiated  may  give  out  his  new  stores,  he  wiU  rigidly  follow  the  method  by 
which  he  made  them  his  own,  and  will  want  that  command  of  several  paths  of 
access  to  a  truth  which  are  given  by  a  thorough  survey  of  the  whole  field  on  which 
he  stands.  The  instructor  also  needs  to  have  a  full  perception  of  the  internal 
contents  of  the  truths  he  unfolds.  The  sense  of  proportion  between  the  different 
parts  and  stages  of  a  subject,  the  appreciation  of  every  step  at  its  true  value,  the 
foresight  of  the  section  that  remains  in  its  real  magnitude  and  direction,  are 
qualities  so  essential,  that  without  them  all  instruction  is  but  an  insult  to  the 
learner's  understanding.  And  in  virtue  of  these  it  is  that  the  most  cultivated  minds 
are  tbe  most  patient,  clear,  progressive.  Neglect  and  depreciation  of  intellectual 
'minutiae  are  characteristic  of  the  ill-informed.  And,  above  all,  there  is  the  inde- 
finable power  which  a  superior  mind  always  puts  forth  on  an  inferior.  In  the  task 
of  instruction  no  amount  of  wisdom  is  superfluous,  and  even  a  child's  elementary 
teaching  would  be  best  conducted  by  omniscience  itself.  U.  Social  life.  It  is  an 
error  to  suppose  that  homely  minds  are  the  best  administrators  of  small  duties. 
How  often  the  daily  troubles  prove  too  much  for  the  generalship  of  feeble  mindo^ 
and  a  petty  and  scrupulous  anxiety  in  defending  some  almost  invisible  point  of 
frugality,  surrenders  the  greater  unobserved  1  How  often,  too,  a  rough  and  unmel- 
lowed  sagacity  rules,  indeed,  but  creates  a  constant  friction.  But  where,  in  the 
presiding  genius  of  a  home,  taste  and  sympathy  unite,  with  what  ease,  mastery, 
and  graceful  disposition  do  the  seeming  trivialities  of  existence  fall  into  order  and 
drop  a  blessing  as  they  take  their  place.  This  is  realized,  not  by  microscopic 
solicitude  of  spirit,  but  by  comprehension  of  mind  and  enlargement  of  heart ;  by 
that  breadth  and  nicety  of  moral  view  which  discerns  everything  in  due  proportion, 
and,  in  avoiding  an  intense  elaboration  of  trifies,  has  energy  to  spare  for  what 
is  great;  in  short,  by  a  perception  akin  to  that  of  God,  whose  providing 
frugality  is  on  an  infinite  scale,  whose  art  colours  a  universe  with  beauty, 
and  toucLes  with  its  pencil  the  petals  of  a  flower.  A  soul  thus  pure  and 
large  disowns  the  paltry  rules  of  dignity,  and  will  discharge  many  an  ofiBce 
from  which  lesser  beings  would  shrink  as  ignoble.  Offices  the  most  menial 
cease  to  be  menial  the  moment  they  are  wrought  in  love.  III.  Hioh  religious 
FAITH.  In  the  management  of  daily  disappointments  and  small  vexations 
only  a  devout  mind  attains  any  real  success.  How  wonderfully  the  mere  insect 
cares  that  are  ever  on  the  wing  in  the  noonday  heat  of  life  have  power  to  sting 
even  the  giant  minds  around  which  they  sport  1  It  may  be  absurd  and  immoral  to 
be  teased  by  trifles ;  but  while  you  remain  in  the  dust  it  will  annoy  you,  and  there 
is  no  help  for  it  but  to  retire  into  a  higher  and  grassier  region,  where  the  sultry 
road  is  visible  from  afar.  We  must  go  in  contemplation  out  of  life,  ere  we  can  see 
how  its  troubles  are  lost,  like  evanescent  waves,  in  the  deeps  of  eternity  and  the 
immensity  of  God.  How  welcome  to  many  a  child  of  anxiety  and  toil  to  be  trans- 
ferred from  the  heat  and  din  of  the  city  to  the  midnight  garden  or  mountain  top. 


410  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiO, 

And  like  refreshment  does  a  high  faith,  with  its  infinite  prospects,  open  to  the  worn 
and  weary :  no  laborious  travels  are  needed  for  the  devout  mind,  for  it  carries 
within  it  Alpine  heights  and  starlit  skies,  which  it  may  reach  at  a  moment's 
notice.  IV.  The  sekvices  of  benevolence.  The  humblest  form  of  this  receives 
its  most  powerful  motive  from  the  sublimest  truth — immortality.  It  might  have 
been  thought  that  no  love  would  be  so  faithful  as  that  which  believed  at  the  death- 
bed of  a  friend  that  the  absolute  farewell  was  drawing  ni^^h.  The  vivid  expectation 
of  futurity,  which  has  so  often  led  the  believer  to  ascetic  contempt,  would  appear 
only  consistent  if  it  passed  by  in  equal  scorn  the  bodily  miseries  of  others.  But  it 
is  not  so.  In  this,  as  in  all  other  instances,  truths  the  most  divine  are  the 
greatest  servitors  of  wants  the  most  humiliating.  The  immortal  element  imparts 
a  species  of  sanctity  to  the  mortal :  just  as  the  worshipper  feels  that  the  very  stones 
of  the  temple  are  sacred.  Conclusion :  Let  us  revere  the  great  sentiments  of 
religion  not  as  an  occasional  solace  to  a  weakly  dignity,  but  as  truths  which  pene- 
trate the  very  heart  of  life's  activity.  Nothing  less  than  the  majesty  of  God  and 
the  powers  of  the  world  to  come  can  maintain  the  peace  and  sanctity  of  our  homes 
and  hearts.  {J.  Martineau,  LL.D.)  Christian  service  should  be  rendered 
lovingly  : — Preaching  on  this  text,  Mr.  Finlayson,  of  Helmsdale,  observed,  ••  One 
way  in  which  disciples  wash  one  another's  feet  is  by  reproving  one  another.  But 
the  reproof  must  not  be  couched  in  angry  words,  so  as  to  destroy  the  effect ;  nor 
in  tame,  so  as  to  fail  of  effect.  Just  as  in  washing  a  brother's  feet,  you  must  not 
use  boiling  water  to  scald,  nor  frozen  water  to  freeze  them."  Christian  service 
should  be  rendered  constantly  : — Christian  charity  is  too  often  like  a  large  banknote 
which  may  be  flourished  on  occasion  to  excite  the  wonder  of  bystanders,  bnt  which 
is  never  broken  up  into  small  change  to  meet  every-day  occasions.  Little  labours 
are  the  small  change  into  which  true  charity  is  willing  to  be  turned  for  life's 
common  needs.  Do  not  be  content  with  merely  discharging  your  charity  by  large 
professions  of  liberality,  but  prove  it  by  those  little  deeds  of  pity  and  grace  for 
which  you  may  get  no  popular  applause.  {H.  C.  Trumbull,  D.D.)  I  have  giyen 
you  an  example. — The  example  of  Christ : — Among  those  rules  for  his  daily  conduct 
which  the  pious,  though  visionary  Lavater,  suspended  in  his  study,  and  seriously 
read  every  night  and  morning,  the  following  is  far  from  being  the  least  important : — 
"  I  will  not  do  nor  design  anything  which  I  would  omit  if  Jesus  Christ  were  standing 
visibly  before  me,  or  which  I  suppose  He  would  not  perform  if  He  were  in  my 
situation.  I  will,  with  the  assistance  of  God,  accustom  myself  to  do  everything  in 
the  name  of  Jesus  Christ ;  and,  as  His  disciple,  to  sigh  every  hour  to  God  for  the 
blessing  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  be  always  disposed  to  prayer."  Happy  the  believer 
who  acts  in  this  manner  I  I.  That  it  is  oub  duty  to  imitate  thb  example  of  thb 
Redeemer  is  easily  proved.  1.  For  what  reason  was  the  history  of  His  life 
written  ?  Not  that  it  might  gratify  an  idle  curiosity  ;  not  that  it  might  amuse  ns 
by  its  wonderful  events,  and  produce  a  barren  admiration ;  not  that  it  might  afford 
scenes  on  which  we  might  carelessly  gaze,  and  subjects  on  which  we  might  coldly 
converse.  They  recorded  the  actions  and  the  words  of  Jesus,  that  a  living,  lustrous, 
obligatory  rule  of  conduct ;  that  a  visible  commentary  on  God's  law  might  be  pre- 
sented for  our  imitation ;  that  a  light,  unerring  as  the  pillar  of  fire  and  cloud  that 
led  the  Israelites,  might  be  given  to  us  to  conduct  us  through  this  wilderness  to  the 
promised  land  that  is  on  high.  2.  In  your  Scriptures  you  are  constantly  and 
unequivocally  commanded  to  imitate  the  Bedeemer.  "Learn  of  Me";  "If  any 
man  serve  Me,  let  him  follow  Me."  "  Let  the  same  mind  be  in  you  which  was  in 
Christ"  is  the  admonition  of  Paul  (Phil.  ii.  5).  Do  they  exhort  us  to  holiness? 
"  As  He  who  hath  called  you  is  holy,  so  be  ye  holy  in  all  manner  of  conversation  " 
(1  Pet.  i.  15).  Do  they  incite  us  to  charity  ?  "  Walk  in  love,  as  Christ  also  hath 
loved  us  "  (Eph.  v.  2) ;  "This  is  My  commandment,  that  ye  love  one  another,  as  I 
have  loved  you  "  (chap.  xv.  12).  Would  they  arm  us  with  patience  ?  "  We  must 
consider  Him  who  endured  such  contradiction  of  sinners  against  Himself,  lest  we 
be  weary  and  faint  in  our  minds  "  (Heb.  xii.  S).  Would  they  teach  ns  to  condescend 
to  onr  neighbour  for  his  benefit  f  "  Let  every  one  please  his  neighbour  for  his  good 
to  edification,  for  even  Christ  pleased  not  Himself "  (Bom.  xv.  2).  Do  they  urge  as 
to  forgiveness?  "Forbearing  one  another,  and  forgiving  one  another;  eren  as 
Christ  forgave  you,  so  also  do  ye  "  (Col.  iii.  13).  3.  The  sacred  vows  that  are  upon 
ns,  the  tender  and  solemn  relations  that  we  sustain  to  Jesus,  enforce  this  duty.  4. 
A  regard  to  the  best  interests  of  our  fellow-men  should  induce  us  to  follow  the 
example  of  the  holy  Jesus.  Oh !  let  us  be  careful  not  to  alienate  them :  let  u» 
imitate  Jesus,  and  then  perhaps  we  will  draw  them  to  the  Saviour,  or  if  not,  w* 


caiAP.  xra.]  ST.  JOHN.  411 

■hall  be  "  pure  from  their  blood."    5.  A  regard  to  our  own  spiritual  improvement 
and  salvation  should  induce  us  to  study  and  imitate  the  example  of  Jesus.    There 
is  no  othfr  example  so  comprehensive :  from  that  wonderful  union  of  greatness  and 
humihation.     Other  lives  afford  instruction  to  men  in  particular  circumstances  and 
relations ;  though  they  are  burning  and  shining  lights,  they  dissipate  the  gloom  but 
for  comparatively  a  short  distance  around  them  :  but  He,  like  the  sun,  is  set  in  a 
higher  orb,  and  with  an  everlasting  and  uncircumscribed  light  illumines  the  universe. 
Other  lives  may  be  excellent  examples  of  some  particular  virtues :  as  Job,  of  patience ; 
Moses,  of  meekness ;  Paul,  of  zeal.    But  in  Jesus  there  is  a  beautiful  and  attractive 
harmony  of  all  the  virtues.     Other  examples  present  us  with  only  a  short  period  of 
time,  reaching  merely  from  the  birth  to  the  death  of  those  who  exhibit  them.     We 
are  taught  by  Him  not  only  when  He  tabernacled  in  flesh,  but  also  when  He  first 
raised  the  hopes  of  fallen  man  :  when  He  appeared  to  the  patriarchs  and  prophets ; 
when  He  comforted  His  martyrs,  and  cheered  His  children  in  every  age ;  when  He 
now  sheds  down  into  the  souls  of  His  followers  joys  unspeakable.    Other  examples 
communicate  no  quickening  influence.     Other  examples  are  of  persons  who  are  not 
united  to  us  by  such  endearing  bonds  as  is  Immanuel.     Other  examples  bear  the 
stamp  of  imperfection.    Let  us  remember  that  a  conformity  in  our  internal  prin- 
ciples of  conduct  forms  the  first  step  of  this  imitation.     Hence  we  are  exhorted  by 
Paul  to  "  have  the  same  mind  which  Christ  had  "  (Phil.  ii.  5).    We  must,  then,  in 
order  to  imitate  Jesus,  be  animated  by  the  same  Holy  Spirit  tnat  He  possessed.  We 
must  also  receive  the  same  systems  of  Divine  truths,  otherwise  our  obedience  will 
spring  from  different  motives.   But  in  what  particular  instances  must  we  take  Jesus 
as  our  model,  and  conform  ourselves  to  His  example  ?     1.  Imitate  Him  in  His  piety 
towards  God.    It  was  constant  and  unwearied.    In  no  single  instant  did  His  heart 
cease  to  glow  with  affection  to  His  Father.     Ye  who  "  did  run  well  for  a  season," 
blush  when  you  contemplate  the  steady  path  of  Jesus,  and  return  from  your 
wanderings.    His  piety  was  zealous.    He  does  not  coldly  and  heartlessly  engage 
in  the  duties  of  religion.     His  piety  was  attended  with  frequent  prayer.     2.  He  is 
an  example  to  us  in  His  benevolence.    This  is  exhibited  in  all  His  conduct,  as  it 
breathed  in  all  its  discourses.    On  the  wings  of  charity  He  descended  from  heaven, 
and  His  whole  life  proved  that  He  had  lain  from  eternity  in  the  bosom  of  everlasting 
love.    3.  He  is  an  example  to  us  in  His  humility.    Never  were  such  endowments 
as  He  possessed ;  yet,  with  celestial  wisdom.  He  never  was  assuming.    4.  He  is  an 
example  to  us  of  superiority  to  the  world.     He  might  have  enjoyed  all  that 
the  world  idolizes ;  His  renunciation  of  it  was  voluntary.    5.  He  is  an  example 
to  us  in  His  patience  and  forgiveness.     6.  He  is  an  example  to  us  in  tolerance 
and  forbearance.     Though  zealous,  His  zeal  was  never  cruel   and  malignant  ; 
though  perfectly  innocent,  He  tenderly  compassionated  the  errors  and  the  follies 
of  men.    Though  His  censures  were  faithful,  they  were  ever  meek  and  gentle. 
(H.  Kollock,  D.D.)       Christ  our  example : — God  is  set  before  us  as  our  example 
in  the  Scriptures;  but  Christ,  being  man,  subject  to  our  infirmities  and  temp- 
tations, brings  before  us  not  merely  Divine  but  human  perfection  as  a  model 
for  our  imitation.     We  should  imitate  Christ  —  I.   In  His  devotion  to   God. 
His  constant — 1.  Beference  to  God's  glory.     2.  Confidence  in  His  promise.     3. 
Obedience  to  His  commands.     4.  Submission  to  His  will.     5.  Fulfilment  of  all 
righteousnebs.     II.  In  His  disintebbsted  service  to  man.     He  sought  not  His 
own.     He  went  about  doing  good.     Neither  His  own  honour  nor  advantage  was  the 
end  He  pursued.     Let  your  governing  principle  be  what  His  was.     III.  In  His 
UANNEB  OF  BESisTiNO  TEMPTATION.     1.  Hc  uevcr  placed  Himself  in  danger.     He 
refused  to  tempt  God.    2.  He  resisted  the  first  suggestions  of  evil.     8.  He  appealed 
to  the  authority  of  the  Scriptures,  and  used  them  as  the  sword  of  the  Spirit.    IV. 
I»  His  enddbance  of  injubies.     Never  was  such  ingratitude  and  scorn  heaped 
on  any  other  head.    Yet — 1.  There  was  no  resentfulness.     He  did  good  for  evil, 
and  prayed  for  those  who  shed  His  blood.    2.  He  did  not  threaten.     In  this  there 
is  a  strong  contrast  between  Him  and  many  of  the  martyrs.     V.  In  His  RBBnKiNO 
OF  siNNEBS.    1.  His  ccusures  were  expressive  of  His  hatred  of  sin.    2.  It  was  im- 
partiaL      3.    With  authority.     4.   Loving  and  tender,  except  where  there  was 
manifest  hypocrisy.     VL  In  His  publio  woek.     As  a  teacher  He — 1.  Adapted  His 
instruction  to  the  state  of  His  hearers.     2.  He  seized  every  occasion,  and  gave  His 
lesson  a  special  application.    3.  He  spoke  as  a  witness.     YII.  In  His  sdffebinob. 
1.  He  did  not  manifest  stoical  indifference.     2.  He  was  meek  and  resigned.    3.  He 
looked  to  the  glory  which  should  follow.      (C.  Hodge,  D.D.)        Christ  our  example 
not  fur  model: — The  two  are  different.    Yon  oopy  ^e  outline  of  a  model;  jos 


412  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

imitate  the  spirit  of  an  example.  Yoa  might  copy  the  life  of  Christ,  and  make  Him 
a  model  in  every  act,  and  yet  you  might  be  not  one  whit  more  of  a  Christian  than 
before.  You  might  wash  the  feet  of  poor  fishermen  as  He  did,  live  a  wandering 
life  with  nowhere  to  lay  your  head.  You  might  go  about  teaching,  and  never  use 
any  words  but  His,  never  express  a  truth  except  in  Bible  language,  have  no 
home,  and  mix  with  publican's  and  harlots.  Then  Christ  would  be  your  model ; 
and  you  would  have  copied  His  life  like  a  picture,  line  for  line,  and  shadow  for 
shadow ;  and  yet  you  might  not  be  Christ-like.  On  the  other  hand,  you  might 
imitate  Christ,  get  His  spirit,  breathe  the  atmosphere  of  thought  He  breathed,  do 
not  one  single  act  which  He  did,  but  every  act  in  His  spirit.  You  might  be  rich, 
whereas  He  was  poor ;  never  teach,  whereas  He  was  teaching  always ;  lead  a  life 
in  all  outward  particulars  the  very  opposite  of  His,  and  yet  the  spirit  of  His  self- 
devotion  might  have  saturated  your  whole  being,  and  penetrated  into  the  life  of 
every  act  and  the  essence  of  every  thought.  Then  Christ  would  have  become  your 
example,  for  we  can  only  imitate  that  of  which  we  have  caught  the  spirit.  {F.  W. 
Robertson,  M.A.)  The  perfection  of  Christ's  example :— The  reference  of  all  the 
world  tells  us  that  Christ's  example  was  perfect.  The  admissions  of  enemies  tell 
as  ;  our  own  hearts  and  consciences  tell  us  ;  but  did  you  ever  think  how  strange  it 
is  that  these  four  little  tracts,  telling  us  such  fragmentary  stories,  and  of  so  brief  a 
period  of  a  life,  in  which  there  was  a  conspicuous  absence  of  very  many  of  the 
important  circumstances  of  that  life,  should  have  been  accepted  by  all  the 
centuries,  and  by  all  sorts  and  conditions  of  men,  women,  and  children,  wise 
and  fooMsh,  learned  and  ignorant,  bond  and  free,  happy  and  sad,  as  an  all- 
sufficient  guide  for  them,  and  that  these  little  stories  should  be  felt  by  as 
all  to  contain  an  adequate  guide  and  rule  for  our  conduct  ?  It  is  not  enough 
to  say,  "  Men's  circumstances  change,  but  the  essentials  of  their  duty  are 
very  few,  and  you  can  put  them  into  two  or  three  words  and  they  will  be 
enough."  That  is  quite  true,  and  we  thank  God  for  it.  It  is  a  great  thing  instead 
of  a  whole  host  of  precepts  to  have  got  two  or  three  fruitful  principles.  We  have 
got  the  Divine  example  in  human  form,  and  the  stimulus  of  His  deeds,  when 
pondered,  opens  out  into  majesty  and  greatness ;  and  what  a  blessed  thing  it  is 
instead  of  being  handed  over  to  a  mere  law — Do  that  and  thou  shalt  live  ; 
Be  this,  and  so  forth  —  to  be  told,  "  Do  as  I  do  "  ;  and  still  more  blessed, 
"  Do  as  I  do,  because  I  love  you,  and  you  love  Me."  (^1.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
Christ  the  supreme  example  : — We  were  examining  Guide's  *'  Aurora  "  in  the 
Bummerhouse  of  the  Rospigliosi  Palace,  and  as  we  sat  behind  the  row  of  artists 
busily  copying  the  celebrated  painting,  we  could  not  help  noticing  how  they 
differed  from  each  other  as  well  as  from  the  immortal  fresco.  After  a  time  we 
called  the  attention  of  our  guide  to  the  fact  that  each  of  the  painters  had  a 
different  colour  for  the  horses,  and  that  no  two  copies  were  at  all  alike.  With  an 
expressive  gesture  he  replied,  "  Don't  look  at  them  1  Look  only  at  the  original  1 " 
{W.  Baxendale.)  Christ  an  all-round  example : — The  character  of  our  Lord  was 
such  that  no  one  virtue  had  undue  predominance.  Take  Peter,  and  there  is  a 
prominent  feature  peculiar  to  himself ;  one  quality  attracts  you.  Take  John,  and 
there  is  a  lovely  trait  in  his  character  which  at  once  chains  you,  and  his  other 
graces  are  unobserved.  But  take  the  life  of  Jesus,  and  it  shall  perplex  yoa  to 
discover  what  virtue  shines  with  purest  radiance.  His  character  is  like  the 
lovely  countenance  of  a  classic  beauty,  in  which  every  single  feature  is  so  in 
exact  harmony  with  all  the  rest,  that  when  you  have  gazed  upon  it,  yoa 
are  struck  with  a  sense  of  general  beauty,  bat  you  do  not  remark  upon  the  flashing 
eye,  or  chiselled  nose,  or  coral  lips ;  an  undivided  impression  of  harmony  remains 
upon  your  mind.  Such  a  character  should  each  of  us  strive  after — a  mingling  of 
perfections  to  make  up  one  perfection  ;  a  combining  of  all  the  sweet  spices  to  make 
up  a  rare  perfume,  such  as  only  God's  Holy  Spirit  Himself  can  make,  but  such  as 
God  accepts  wherever  He  discovers  it.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  union  in  Christ 
of  precept  and  example : — If  He  recommended  active  benevolence  He  went  about 
doing  good;  if  He  preached  forgiveness  of  injuries  He  prayed  for  His  murderers; 
if  He  inculcated  self-denial,  He  voluntarily  subjected  Himself  to  penury,  persecution, 
and  death ;  if  He  prescribed  piety  towards  God,  He  passed  days  and  nights  in 
prayer ;  if  He  enjoined  resignation  to  the  Divine  will.  He  freely  drank  the  cup 
which  His  Father  gave  to  His  lips.  In  these  respects  our  Lord  presented  a  marked 
contrast  to  the  example,  often  pernicious,  always  imperfect  of  other  teachers,  and 
by  exemplifying  His  own  laws  He  has  rendered  no  small  service  to  virtae,  since,  in 
Addition  to  His  instructious.  He  has  embodied  a  living  pattern  of  that  new  oast  and 


«HAP.  xm.]  -ST.  JOHN.  413 

description  of  character,  of  those  original  and  distinctive  excelleuoiss,  which  He  has 
prescribed  to  His  followers.  (G.  Chandler,  LL.D.)  Sceptical  testimony  to  Christ's 
example: — When  Christ's  pre-eminent  genius  is  combined  with  the  qualities  of 
probably  the  greatest  moral  reformer  and  martyr  to  that  mission  who  ever  lived, 
religion  cannot  be  said  to  have  made  a  bad  choice  in  pitching  upon  this  mam  as 
the  ideal  representative  and  guide  of  humanity ;  nor  even  now  would  it  be  easy 
even  for  an  unbliever  to  find  a  better  translation  of  the  rule  of  virtue  from  the 
abstract  into  the  concrete  than  the  endeavour  so  to  live  that  Christ  would  approve 
our  life.  {J.  S.  Mill.)  Christ's  example  gradually  imitated : — The  Christian,  in 
his  striving  after  perfection,  is  like  the  sculptor  Fiamingo  with  his  image,  of  which 
the  elder  D'Israeli  tells  us.  He  kept  polishing  and  polishmg,  till  his  friend 
exclaimed  impatiently,  "  What  perfection  would  you  have  ?  "  '•  Alas  1 "  was  the 
answer,  "  the  original  I  am  labouring  to  come  up  to  is  in  my  head,  but  not  yet  in 
my  hand."  (W.  Baxeiidale.)  Self-propagating  power  of  example  : — Example  is 
like  the  press :  a  thing  done  is  the  thought  printed  ;  it  may  be  repeated  if  it  cannot 
be  recalled ;  it  has  gone  forth  with  a  self -propagating  power,  and  may  run  to  the 
ends  of  the  earth,  and  descend  from  generation  to  generation.  (H.  Melvill.) 
Influence  of  example : — When  in  the  Mexican  war  the  troops  were  wavering,  ft 
general  rose  in  his  stirrups  and  dashed  into  the  eiieuiy's  lines,  shouting,  "  Men, 
follow  I "  They,  seeing  his  courage  and  disposition,  dashed  on  after  him  and 
gained  the  victory.  What  men  want  to  rally  them  for  God  is  an  example  to  lead 
them.  (2'.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  The  imitation  of  Christ : — Man  is  observed  to 
be  a  creature  naturally  given  to  imitation ;  examples  have  a  great  deal  more  influ- 
ence on  him  than  laws  and  precepts.  This  being  the  case,  he  is  concerned  to  set 
before  him  the  best  examples.  And  because  this  is  a  thing  wherein  men  generally 
fail,  here  the  loving  Jesus  directs  them  to  the  worthiest  object  of  their  imitation  I 
I.  Wherein  are  we  to  imitate  Christ.  As  there  are  some  duties  that  the  gospel 
commands  us,  which  yet  Christ  was  not  capable  of,  as  repentance,  &o.,  so,  like- 
wise, there  are  some  actions  of  Christ  which  it  would  be  folly  in  us  to  endeavour 
to  imitate.  1.  Negatively.  We  are  not  to  imitate  Christ  in — (1)  Those  actions 
which  He  did  by  His  extraordinary  and  Divine  power.  The  poets  relate  that  Sal- 
moneus  strove  to  imitate  Jove's  thunder,  and  was  slain  with  a  real  thunder-bolt. 
Sach  may  be  expected  to  be  the  recompense  of  our  presumptious  emulating  the 
miraculous  undertakings  of  Christ.  And  to  these  1  may  add  those  actions  of  His, 
which  were  arbitrary  and  absolute,  as  He  was  Lord  of  the  world.  (2)  In  His 
actions  as  Bedeemer  He  both  did  and  sufiered  many  things  thus,  which  were 
peculiar  to  Him,  and  above  our  imitation  ;  and  yet  in  some  sense  we  are  to  make 
Him  our  pattern,  even  as  to  those.  His  nativity  must  be  copied  out  in  our  spiritual 
birth;  His  cross  bearing,  crucifixion  (Gal.  ii.  20;  vi.  14),  death  (Eom.  vi.  8;  Col. 
ii.  20;  2  Tim.  ii.  11),  sacrifice  (Rom.  xii.  1)  by  ours.  He  was  buried,  and  we  must 
(Rom.  vi.  4)  find  a  grave  for  our  sins.  He  was  raised  and  we  must  rise  (Col.  iii, 
1 ;  Rom.  vi.  4).  And,  as  Christ  was  exalted,  so  God  exalts  us  in  Him  (Eph.  ii.  6). 
(3)  In  some  actions  which  He  did  in  His  pecuUar  state  and  condition,  e.g.,  we  are 
not  authorized  by  His  example  to  choose  a  life  of  poverty ;  for  we  are  not  in  the 
same  circumstances  with  Him.  (4)  In  those  acts  He  did  o  ily  to  signify  and  teach 
some  greater  thing,  as  the  feet-washing — e.g.,  the  apostles,  it  is  true,  washed  one 
another's  feet,  in  imitation  of  their  Lord's  example,  yet  this  only  the  custom  of  that 
country.  In  this  country  it  would  only  be  apish  imitation,  and  like  those  who 
wore  sandals,  preached  on  the  house-tops,  and  saluted  no  man  by  the  way,  &o.  2. 
Positively.  Imitate  Christ  in — (1)  His  humihty  and  condescension.  How  this 
appears  in  His  birth,  subjection  to  His  parents,  trade,  choice  of  companions,  and 
object  of  ministry  I  And,  as  He  was  humble  Himself,  so  he  reproved  pride  and 
haughtiness  of  spirit  in  others  (Matt,  xviii.  2-4 ;  Luke  xxii.  24,  &o. ;  Matt.  xx.  27). 
And  under  Christ's  humility  I  may  reckon  His  obedience  to  the  government  He 
Uved  under  (Matt.  xviL  27).  "  Render  unto  Cssar,"  &o.  And  as  Christ's  whole 
life  so  His  death  was  an  amazing  act  of  condescension  (Phil,  ii,  6-8).  (2)  In  His 
self-denial  and  mortification.  These  He  eminently  showed  in  divers  emergencies 
of  His  life ;  in  despising  the  world's — (o)  Honour  and  applause.  He  obscured  even 
His  Divinity  itself  for  many  years,  and  sometimes  when  He  wrought  miracles  He 
would  not  let  them  take  air  (John  viii.  50).  (b)  Riches  (Matt.  viii.  20).  (c)  Pleasures. 
{d)  In  His  entire  resigning  Himself  to  God's  will  (John  v.  30 ;  vi.  38).  (e)  In  that 
He  was  pleased  to  bear  with  the  infirmities  and  frailties  of  men  (Rom.  xv.  1-3). 
<3)  In  His  extensive  love  and  exact  justice  towards  men.  I  join  these  because  ha 
tfa^t  acts  charitably  gives  men  their  doe,  and  he  that  acts  justly  proves  kind.    None 


414  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

was  a  greater  observer  of  honest  dealing  than  our  Lord  (Matt.  vii.  12  ;  Luke  vi.  21k 
And  that  He  was  also  charitable,  everything  that  He  did  was  a  proof  (Acts  x.  38). 
As  He  hved  so  He  died  a  most  compassionate  lover  of  souls.  Still  He  propounds 
Himself  as  a  pattern  to  us.  Being  a  loving  Saviour,  He  calls  on  us  to  love  one 
another  (John  xiii.  35).  (4)  In  His  religious  and  devout  converse  with  God.  In 
His  love  for  and  attendance  at  God's  house.  In  His  private  converse  with  God 
(Luke  vi.  12 ;  xxii.  44 ;  Heb.  v.  7).  His  meditation,  &c.  In  these  things  let  our  Lord  be 
our  pattern,  leaving  behind  us  the  noise  and  business  of  the  world.  (5)  In  Hia 
patient  and  undaunted  deportment  under  His  extraordinary  sufferings  (Heb.  xii. 
1-3).  (6)  In  His  constant  beating  down  of  sin  and  vice,  and  His  encouraging  and 
promoting  of  holiness,  by  all  that  He  said  or  did.  Was  there  ever  a  more  eminent 
reprover  of  sin  than  our  Lord  ?  II.  The  eeasons  why  we  abe  to  imitate  Chkist. 
1.  Because  His  example  is  the  exactest  that  we  can  follow.  (1)  Some  examples  of 
virtue  are  counterfeit.  The  Papists  impiously  take  St.  Francis  to  be  the  exact 
image  of  Christ.  And  you  may  read  in  their  legends  of  other  persons  who  were 
canonized  for  the  prodigious  holiness  of  their  lives.  But  Christ's  example  is  no 
fiction.  (2)  The  examples  of  those  saints  that  are  true  and  real  are  very  imperfect, 
and  often  mixed  with  smf  ul  miscarriages,  and  therefore  not  the  fittest  to  be  followed 
by  as.  Christ  alone  is  an  unblemished  pattern  (2  Pet.  ii.  22).  (3)  The  examples 
of  the  best  of  men  are  only  so  far  imitable  by  us,  as  they  are  conformable  to  the 
example  of  Christ  (1  Cor.  xi.  1).  2.  It  was  the  design  of  God  in  sending  His  Son 
into  the  world,  that  He  should  be  an  example  to  us.  3.  This  is  the  great  character 
of  Christianity,  and  the  main  thing  whereby  we  are  able  to  demonstrate  ourselves 
to  be  true  Christians  (1  John  ii.  6).  4.  Christ's  own  command.  6.  This  is  it 
which  brings  repute  to  Christianity,  and  renders  it  honourable  and  praiseworthy. 
6.  This  is  that  which  yields  us  solid  comfort,  and  gives  us  certain  hopes  of  eternal 
happiness.  III.  The  application.  1.  Ask  your-jelves  seriously  whether  you  have 
set  Christ's  example  before  you,  and  have  endeavoured  to  imitate  it.  2.  Lament 
both  in  ourselves  and  others  our  neglect  of  taking  Christ  for  our  example  3.  Let 
this  grief  and  shame  lead  us  to  our  duty.  (1)  Make  use  of  Christ's  example 
to  repel  the  temptation  that  you  are  under.  As  when  you  are  tempted  to  pride, 
think  how  humble  a  Saviour  you  had.  When  you  are  tempted  to  deal  unjustly, 
consider  how  upright  He  was.  When  you  find  yourselves  allured  by  pleasure 
allay  your  extravagant  desires  by  calling  to  mind  what  a  severe  observer  of 
temperance  the  Holy  Jesus  was.  (2)  Set  this  before  you  when  you  are  to  enter- 
prise aijy  virtuous  action.  4.  Often  peruse  the  holy  life  and  death  of  Jesus.  6. 
Be  convinced  of  the  matchless  excellency  and  beauty  of  Christ.  {John  Edwardt, 
D.D.)  Christ  our  example  : — There  were  in  Greece  certain  fields  called  Palaes- 
trae, where  young  men  exercised  themselves  in  wrestling.  In  these  were  set  up 
statues  of  some  valiant  chanapions,  that  the  young  wrestlers  might  fix  their  eyes 
upon  them  and  so  be  encouraged.  Can  we  choose  a  better  chajnpion  than  Christ 
to  eye  and  imitate.  (J.  Trapp.)  Imitation  of  Christ  in  sacrifice  : — Are  you  not 
trying  to  build  your  nests  high,  and  to  feather  them  with  down  ?  Are  you  not  try- 
ing to  provide  for  the  future,  so  that  you  shall  escape  trouble  and  care?  Has  the 
idea  entered  into  your  mind  that  suffering  is  the  baptism  of  holiness  ?  that  it  brings 
you  into  the  likeness  of  Christ,  and  that  it  is  to  be,  not  suffering  for  your  ovra  sake, 
but  suffering  that  other  men  may  be  wiser  and  purer,  and  truer  and  juster?  la 
this  the  founaation  upon  which  you  are  I'uilding  your  activity  ?  Can  we  be  saviours 
of  the  world,  and  none  of  us  be  willing  to  suffer,  and  all  of  us  be  fierce  for  vengeance  ? 
Can  we  be  saviours  of  the  world,  and  all  of  us  carry  the  whip  of  justice,  and  none 
of  us  carry  the  sweet  incense  and  perfume  of  love  ?  Shall  all  pulpits,  all  papers, 
all  Churches,  all  Christians  of  every  name,  clamour  for  justice,  justice,  justice,  and 
not  one  speak  of  that  crowned  Sufferer  who  stood  silent  and  meek,  though  the 
world  thundered  about  Him  and  rolled  in  upon  Him,  and  overwhelmed  Him  even 
unto  death?  Go!  go!  ye  sous  of  Zebedee,  that  want  to  stand  high,  but  do  not 
want  to  take  the  cup  or  the  baptism  1  But  if  any  man  would  follow  Christ,  let  him 
be  silent  in  the  p>3sence  of  that  most  august  spectacle  of  time — the  Saviour  crowned 
with  thorns  1  (fl.  W.  Beecher.)  The  family  likeness: — A  httle  boy  had  lost  hia 
sister.  There  was  no  portiait  of  her.  It  was  before  the  days  of  photographs.  He 
begged  his  parents  to  get  a  painter  to  make  a  picture  of  his  sister.  Bemonstrance 
did  not  silence  him,  and  finally  he  was  sent  to  visit  friends  in  Boston,  and  was  told 
that  hs  might  see  if  he  could  find  a  painter  who  would  undertake  to  make  a  picture 
of  his  sister.  The  friends  humoured  him,  and  took  him  to  the  studios  of  several 
Artists;  bat  they  all  shook  their  heads.    At  last  one  young  artist  said:  "Come 


CBir.  zm.]  ST.  JOHN.  415 

with  me,  and  see  if  you  can  find  any  faces  that  look  like  your  sister's,"  He  took 
the  little  boy  to  a  large  gallery  of  portraits.  Soon  one  picture  attracted  the  child's 
attention.  "  That's  like  her  eyes,"  he  said.  Then  another — "  that's  like  her 
moath."  Another  had  "her  hair,"  another  "her  forehead,"  and  so  on.  The  artist 
put  all  these  features  together,  and  succeeded  in  making  a  good  portrait  of  the  boy's 
sister.  In  the  same  way  we  can  supply  the  likeness  of  Christ.  We  do  not  find  all  Hia 
portrait  in  any  one  person.  But  pick  it  out,  feature  by  feature,  among  the  different 
members  of  His  family,  and  we  can  make  it  into  one  harmonious  whole.  {New 
Testament  Anecdotes.)  If  ye  know  these  things  happy  are  ye  if  ye  do  them. — 
Knowing  and  doing : — I.  Knowledge.  1.  In  order  to  do  anything,  anywhere,  we 
must  know.  This  is  so  in  the  natural  world.  The  laws  of  nature  are  determinate 
over  her  whole  empire,  and  the  triumphs  of  science  are  but  the  discoveries  of 
occult  law.  It  is  so  also  in  the  moral  universe.  There  law  is  supreme  and  intelli- 
gent, whether  revealed  in  Scripture  or  written  on  the  heart.  This  we  must  know  to 
obey,  for  where  there  is  no  knowledge  of  it  there  is  no  transgression.  There  are 
some  who  think  that  religion  is  a  thing  of  emotion,  and  has  notiiing  to  do  with  the 
intellect,  and  herein  those  old  systems,  which  so  long  swayed  the  spirits  of  men,  were 
essentially  defective.  Christianity  appeals  to  the  whole  man.  Ignorance  is  not  the 
mother  of  devotion,  but  of  squalor  and  crime.  Christ  came  that  whosoever  believed  in 
Him  should  not  "walk  in  darkness,"  &c.  2.  This  knowledge  must  be  clear  and 
certain.  A  confused  or  contradictory  or  partial  revelation  would  either  bewilder  us, 
drive  us  to  despair,  or  paralyse  our  efforts.  There  must  be  a  revelation — (1)  Of  God. 
(a)  In  His  nature,  that  we  may  avoid  impiety  in  our  worship,  (b)  In  His  character, 
that  we  may  grow  up  into  His  likeness,  (c)  In  His  will,  that  we  may  neither  cumber 
ourselves  with  needless  restrictions,  nor  indulge  in  unworthy  compromises.  (2) 
Of  man.  (a)  In  His  capacity,  that  we  may  know  that  we  are  not  oveitasked. 
lb)  In  His  fall,  that  we  may  taste  the  bitterness  of  the  wormwood,  (c)  In  Hia 
helplessness  that  we  may  be  humbled  from  our  pride,  and  driven  to  rely  on  the 
succours  of  another.  (3)  Of  Christ,  whose  atonement  is  life  from  the  dead.  (4)  Of 
immortality  that  we  may  feel  the  importance  of  our  stewardship.  3.  God  has 
provided  for  this  knowledge  in — (1)  The  Bible.  (2)  The  interpreting  Spirit.  (3)  A 
living  ministry.  Ignorance,  therefore,  is  not  misfortune  but  guilt.  II.  Obedience, 
without  which  knowledge  is  an  aggravation  of  transgression,  and  for  the  sake  of 
which  knowledge  is  given.  This  obedience— 1.  Is  the  essence  of  religion — "  Blessed 
are  they  that  hear  the  word  of  God  and  keep  it."  2.  Is  a  teat  ol  affection  towards 
Christ.  "If  ye  love  Me  keep  My  commandments."  3.  Is  not  meritorious,  but 
simply  dutiful.  4.  Must  have  respect  to  the  fixed  rule  of  Divine  law  and  the  whole 
of  it.  We  must  not  lower  the  standard  of  right  either  for  fashion,  affection,  or  - 
persecution.  5.  Must  be  whole-hearted.  We  must  not  pick  and  choose.  6.  Must 
regard  the  spirit  as  well  as  the  letter  of  the  command.  7.  Must  have  as  its  motive 
power  not  fear  but  love.  8.  Must  be  constant ;  not  strict  on  Sunday  and  lax 
during  the  week ;  not  dependent  on  feelings  or  associations,  but  on  principle.  9. 
Must  endure  to  the  end.  III.  Happiness.  The  result  in  which  this  knowledge  and 
obedience  will  issue.  The  satisfaction — 1.  Of  understood  and  discharged  duty. 
2.  Of  God's  consequent  and  manifested  favour.  3.  Of  the  hope  of  reward  in  heaven. 
{W.  M.  Punshon,  LL.D.)  Knowing  and  doing: — I.  We  should  stkive  to  know 
ouB  DOTT.  1.  What  kind  of  knowledge  ?  (1)  Clear  and  distinct  (1  Pet.  iii.  15). 
(2)  Scriptural  (John  v.  39  ;  Isa.  i.  12).  (3)  Effectual.  (4)  Universal  (Psa.  cxix.  6). 
?5)  Growing  (2  Pet.  iii.  18),  2.  What  duties?  (1)  Toward  God.  (a)  Repentance 
(Matt.  iv.  17).  {b)  Faith  (John  xiv.  1).  (c)  Love  (Matt.  xxii.  37).  (2)  To  man. 
(a)  Love  (Matt.  v.  44).  (6)  Justice  (Matt.  vii.  12  ;  xxii.  21).  (c)  Mercy  (Luke  vi. 
36).  (d)  Humihty  (John  xiii.  4-8).  3.  Why  should  we  know  our  duty.  (1) 
Because  the  law  and  gospel  were  both  written  for  this  end  (John  xx.  31).  (2)  To 
know  a  duty  is  itself  a  duty  commanded  (1  Pet.  iii.  18).  (3)  We  can  perform  no  duty 
without  we  first  know  it  (Rom.  x.  i).  4.  Labour  then  to  know  your  duty. 
Consider — (1)  Ignorance  is  the  cause  of  all  error  (Matt.  xxii.  29).  (2)  You  have  tJl 
means  requisite  for  this  knowledge  in  the  Scriptures.  (3)  It  is  then  your  own  fault 
if  you  know  not  how  to  serve  God  (Hos.  xiii.  9).  (4)  Hence  you  will  be  inexcusable 
at  the  day  of  judgment,  and  have  greater  condemnation  (John  iii.  19).  II.  Wb 
SHOULD  DO  WHAT  WB  KNOW.  1.  How  should  we  perform  all  the  commands  of 
Christ?  (1)  From  such  principles  as  Christ  commands,  (a)  Love  (Gal.  v.  6). 
(6)  A  desire  to  please  God  (1  Thess.  iv.  1).  (2)  In  a  right  manner,  (a)  Under- 
standingly  (1  Cor.  xiv.  15).  (6)  Willingly  (Psa.  ex.  3).  (c)  Cheerfully  (Bom.  xii 
8:  Psa.  xl.  8).    (d)  Believingly  (Rom.  xiv.  23;  Heb.  xiii.  6).    (e)  With  all  oat 


416  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  snx. 

might  (Eccles.  ix,  10).  (/)  Humbly  (James  iv.  6),  so  as  never  to  think  we  oan  do 
enough  (Lake  xvii.  10),  nor  merit  anything  (Gal.  ii.  16),  but  that  our  best  duties 
are  full  oi  infirmities  (Isa.  Ixiv.  6).  (3)  To  a  right  end — (a)  Not  for  vain  glory  (Matt. 
vi.  1)  or  temporal  interest ;  but — (6)  for  God's  glory(Matt,  v.  16 ;  1  Cor.  x.  31),  and 
in  order  to  our  own  salvation  (1  Cor.  ix.  27).  2.  Why  should  we  perform  all  the 
commands  of  Christ  ?  (1)  This  was  His  end  in  commanding  them.  (2)  The  only 
way  whereby  to  manifest  ourselves  to  be  His  disciples  (chap.  xiv.  15).  (3)  He 
deserves  this  after  aU  He  has  done  for  us.  (4)  Our  baptism  and  subsequent  vows 
pledge  us  to  this.  III.  They  that  do  God's  commands  ake  happy — 1.  In  this  life. 
(1)  We  shall  not  fear  the  curses  of  the  law  (Mai.  ii.  2),  nor  the  wrath  of  God  (Psa. 
vii.  11.  (2)  Our  consciences  will  be  clear  (2  Cor.  i.  12),  (3)  Our  souls  will  be  kept 
in  right  order  (Isa.  Ivii.  20,  21).  (4)  We  shall  have  the  assistance  and  communion 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  (John  xvi.  7).  (5)  God  will  be  present  with  us  (Isa.  xli.  10 ;  xliii. 
2).  (6)  He  will  direct  us  (Prov.  iii.  6 ;  Psa.  xxv.  12).  (7)  Make  aU  things  work 
together  for  our  good  (Rom.  viii.  28).  (8)  Discover  His  special  love  to  us  and  ours 
to  Him  (1  John  v.  3),  and  that  we  are  His  children  (chap.  i.  12).  (9)  Have  a  title 
to  everlasting  life  (Matt.  xix.  16,  17).  2.  In  the  world  to  come.  (1)  In  our  freedom 
from  pain  (Rev.  xxi  4),  and  sin  (Eph.  v.  27).  (2)  In  our  company — saints,  angels, 
God.  (3)  In  our  employments — perfect  service,  perfect  praise.  (4)  In  our 
privileges — admission  to  God's  presence,  sight  of  His  glory,  fruition  of  desire. 
(5)  In  our  enjoyments,  (a)  Perfection  of  soul  and  body  (Philip  iii.  21 ;  Heb.  xii. 
23).  (b)  The  infinite  love  and  favour  of  God.  (c)  All  the  pleasures  that  our 
natures  are  capable  of  (Psa.  xvi.  11 ;  xvii.  15),  for  ever  (Matt.  xxv.  46).  (Bp.  Bever- 
idge.)  Knowing  and  doing : — I.  "Thb  eesponsibilities  of  those  who  know.  II. 
The  blessedness  of  those  who  know  and  do.  UI.  The  cdiiPability  of  those  who 
know  and  do  not.  IV.  The  destitution  of  those  who  know  not,  (S.  S.  Times.) 
The  reciprocal  relations  and  blessednegs  of  knowing  and  doing : — We  must  not  think 
that  we  have  then  obtained  to  the  right  knowledge  of  the  truth  when  we  have 
broken  through  the  outward  shell  of  Tords  and  phrases  that  house  it  up ;  or  when, 
by  logical  analysis,  we  have  found  out  the  dependencies  and  coherences  of  them  one 
with  another,  or  when,  like  stout  champions  of  it,  having  well  guarded  it  with  the 
invincible  strength  of  our  demonstration,  we  dare  stand  out  in  the  face  of  the  world 
and  challenge  the  field  of  all  those  who  pretend  to  be  our  rivals.  We  have  many 
grave  and  reverend  idolaters  that  worship  truth  only  in  the  image  of  their  own 
wits  ;  that  could  never  adore  it  so  much  as  they  may  seem  to  do,  were  it  anything 
else  but  such  a  form  of  belief  as  their  wandering  speculations  had  at  last  met 
together  in  ;  were  it  not  that  they  find  their  own  image  and  superscription  on  it. 
There  is  a  knowing  of  "  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus  " — as  it  is  in  a  Christ-like  nature, 
as  it  is  in  that  sweet,  mild,  humble,  and  loving  spirit  of  Jesus,  which  spreads  itself, 
like  a  morning  sun,  upon  the  souls  of  good  men,  full  of  light  and  life.  There  is  an 
inward  beauty,  Ufe  and  loveliness  in  Divine  truth,  which  cannot  be  known  but  when 
it  is  digested  into  life  and  practice.  {John  Smith,  M.A.)  Knowledge  and  practice 
necessary  in  religion: — Two  things  make  up  religion,  the  knowledge  and  the 
practice  of  it ;  and  the  first  is  wholly  in  order  to  the  second.  God  hath  not  revealed 
to  UB  the  knowledge  of  Himself  and  His  will,  merely  for  the  improvement  of  our 
nnderstanding,  but  for  the  bettering  of  our  hearts  and  lives.  Our  Saviour,  in  the 
text,  from  a  particular  instance,  settles  this  general  conclusion.  I,  The  knowledge 
OF  God's  will  and  oub  duty  is  necessaby,  in  obdeb  to  the  pbactice  of  it.  Borne 
teaches  that  "  ignorance  is  the  mother  of  devotion,"  and  looks  up  from  the  people 
the  great  storehouse  of  Divine  knowledge.  In  justification  of  this,  it  is  pretended 
that  knowledge  is  apt  to  puff  men  up,  to  make  them  disobedient,  and  heretical.  For 
answer  to  this  pretence,  consider — 1.  That,  unless  this  be  the  necessary  effect  of 
knowledge  in  rehgion,  and  of  the  free  use  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  there  is  no  force  in 
this  reason,  for  that  which  is  useful  ought  not  to  be  taken  away,  because  it  is  liable 
to  be  abased.  Ii  it  ought,  then  all  knowledge  ought  to  be  suppressed;  light,  and 
liberty,  and  reason,  yea,  life  itself  ought  to  be  taken  away.  But  if  the  knowledge 
of  religion  is  of  its  own  nature  pernicious,  then  the  blame  of  all  this  would  fall 
apon  our  Saviour  for  revealing,  and  upon  His  apr>stles  for  pubhshing,  it  in  a  known 
tongue  to  all  mankind.  2.  But  this  is  only  accidental  and  through  men's  abuse  of 
it,  for  which  the  thing  itself  ought  not  to  be  taken  away.  If  any  man  abuse  the 
Holy  Scriptures  he  does  it  at  his  peril.  We  must  not  hinder  men  from  being 
Christians,  to  preserve  them  from  being  heretics,  and  put  out  men's  eyes,  for  fear 
they  should  dispute  their  way  with  their  guides.  St.  Paul  (1  Cor.  viii.  1)  takes 
notice  of  this  accidental  inconvenience,  but  the  remedy  which  he  prescribes  (1  Cor. 


OHA».  xni.]  ST.  JOHN.  417 

ziv.)  is  that  the  service  of  God  be  so  performed  as  may  be  for  the  edification  of  the 
people ;  and  that  charity  shall  govern  knowledge  and  help  to  make  right  use  of  it 
(1  Cor.  xiv.  20).  There  is  nothing  in  the  Christian  religion,  but  what  is  fit  for  every 
man  to  know,  for  it  is  all  designed  to  promote  holiness.  Men,  therefore,  ought  not  to 
be  debarred  of  it.  3.  The  proper  effects  of  ignorance  are  equally  pernicious,  and  much 
more  certain  than  those  which  are  accidentally  occasioned  by  knowledge  ;  for  so 
far  as  a  man  is  ignorant  of  his  duty,  it  is  impossible  be  should  do  it.  He  that  hath 
the  knowledge  of  religion  may  be  a  bad  Christian ;  but  he  that  is  destitute  of  it 
can  be  none  at  all  (Prov.  xix.  2).  Because  nothing  is  religious  that  is  not  a 
reasonable  service,  and  no  service  can  be  reasonable  that  is  not  directed  by  our 
understanding.  The  end  of  prayers,  e.g. ,  is  to  testify  of  our  own  wants,  and  of  our 
dependence  upon  God  for  supply ;  it  is  impossible,  therefore,  that  any  man  should 
be  said  to  pray  who  does  not  understand  what  he  asks ;  and  the  saying  over  so 
many  jjafer  nosters  by  one  that  does  not  understand  them  is  no  more  a  prayer  than 
the  repeating  over  so  many  verses  in  Virgil.  Aud  if  men  n:B3t  not  be  permitted  to 
know  so  much  as  they  can  in  religion,  for  fear  they  should  grow  troublesome,  then 
the  best  way  to  maintain  peace  would  be  to  let  the  people  know  nothing  in  religion, 
and  to  keep  tbe  priests  as  ignorant  as  the  people,  but  then  the  mischief  would  be, 
that,  out  of  a  fondness  to  maintain  peace  in  the  Church,  there  would  be  no  Church, 
cor  no  Christianity  ;  which  would  be  the  same  wise  contrivance,  as  if  a  prince 
snould  destroy  his  subjects  to  keep  his  kingdom  quiet.  4.  If  this  reason  be  good, 
it  is  much  stronger  for  withholding  the  Scriptures  from  the  priests  and  the  learned 
than  from  the  people,  for  most  of  the  famous  heresies  have  their  names  from  some 
learned  man.  The  ancient  fathers  frequently  prescribe  to  the  people  the  constant 
and  careful  reading  of  the  Scriptures  as  the  surest  antidote  against  the  poison  of 
dangerous  errors.  And  if  the  word  of  God  be  so  improper  a  means  to  this  end,  one 
would  think  that  the  teachings  of  men  should  be  much  less  effectual ;  so  that  men 
must  either  be  left  in  their  ignorance,  or  they  must  be  permitted  to  learn  from  the 
word  of  truth.  5.  This  danger  was  as  great  in  tbe  age  of  the  apostles  as  now ;  and 
yet  they  took  a  quite  contrary  course.  II.  The  knowledge  of  oue  dutt,  and  the 
PBACTicE  OF  IT,  MAT  AND  OFTEN  ABE  SEPARATED.  Our  Saviour,  elsewhere,  supposes 
that  many  know  their  Master's  will,  who  do  not  do  it ;  and  He  compares  those  that 
hear  His  sayings,  and  do  them  not,  to  a  foolish  man  that  built  his  house  upon  the 
sand.  And  St.  James  speaks  of  some  who  are  "  hearers  of  the  word  only,  but  not 
doers  of  it ;  "  and  for  that  reason  fall  short  of  happiness.  There  are  three  sorts  of 
persons  in  whom  the  knowledge  of  religion  is  more  remarkably  separated  from  the 
practice  of  it.  1.  The  speculative  Christian,  who  mal-es  religion  only  a  science,  and 
studies  it  as  a  piece  of  learning.  He  hath  no  design  to  practise  it,  but  he  is  loth  to 
be  ignorant  of  it,  because  tbe  knowledge  of  it  is  a  good  ornament  of  conversation, 
and  will  serve  for  discourse  and  entertainment.  And  because  he  does  not  intend  to 
practise  it,  he  passeth  over  those  things  v.'hich  are  easy  to  be  understood,  and 
applies  himself  chiefly  to  the  consideration  of  those  which  will  afford  matter  of 
controversy.  Of  the  same  rank  usually  are  the  leaders  of  factions  in  religion,  who, 
by  endless  disputes  about  things,  commonly  of  no  great  moment,  hinder  themselves 
and  others  from  minding  the  practice  of  the  great  and  substantial  duties  of  a  good 
life.  2.  The  formal  Christian,  who  takes  up  religion  for  a  fashion.  Such  think  they 
are  very  good  Christians  if  they  can  give  an  account  of  the  articles  of  their  faith, 
profess  their  belief  in  God  and  Christ,  and  declare  that  they  hope  to  be  saved  by 
Him,  though  they  take  no  care  to  keep  His  commandments.  These  are  they  of 
whom  our  Saviour  speaks  in  Luke  vi.  46.  3.  Hypocritical  Christians,  who  make 
an  interest  of  religion,  and  serve  some  worldly  design  by  it  (2  Tim.  iii.  2).  IIL  Thb 

PEACTICB   0»   BELIGION   IS   THE   ONLY   WAT   TO   HAPPINESS.        1.    The  gOSpcl  makeS   th© 

practice  of  religion  a  necessary  condition  of  our  happiness.  Our  Saviour,  in  His 
first  sermon,  where  He  repeats  the  promise  of  blessedness  so  often,  makes  no 
promise  of  it  to  the  mere  knowledge  of  religion,  but  to  the  habit  and  practice  of 
Christian  graces  (Matt.  vii.  22-24;  Bom.  ii.  13;  James  u  22-26;  Heb.  xii.  14). 
2.  As  God  hath  made  the  practice  of  religion  a  necessary  condition  of  our  happi- 
ness, so  the  very  nature  and  reason  of  the  thing  make  it  a  necessary  qi;alification 
for  it.  It  is  necessary  that  we  become  like  to  God,  in  order  to  the  enjoyment  of 
Him  ;  and  nothing  makes  us  like  to  God  but  the  practice  of  holiness  and  goodness 
(1  John  iii.  3).  Conclusion :  1.  The  great  end  of  all  our  knowledge  in  religion  is 
to  practice  what  we  know  (1  John  ii.  3,  4).  2,  Practice  is  the  best  way  to  increase 
and  perfect  our  knowledge  (John  vii.  17).  3.  Without  the  practice  of  religion  our 
knowledge  is  vain.     {Abp.  TilloUon.)        All  light  good: — It  is  very  sad  to  fail  in 

▼Oil.  n.  27 


418  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [onix.  xm 

duty  from  ignorance.  And  when  that  ignorance  is  very  gross,  the  failure  is 
generally  so  complete  and  so  visible,  that  it  is  sure  to  meet  with  its  appropriate 
punishment.  The  utter  worthlessness  into  which  men  can  sink  who  have  never 
been  taught  any  portion  of  the  truth  is  a  visible  proof  to  us  how  much  we  owe  to 
the  light  which  has  been  shed  over  our  own  lives.  Their  condition  clearly  tells  U9 
what  education  does  for  us  :  what  we  gain  from  mere  unassisted  light.  Mere  light 
of  intellect,  without  any  direct  consciousness  of  God  or  of  Heaven,  or  of  Christ,  or 
of  conscience,  does  a  great  and  visible  work.  It  sets  a  man  free  from  many 
temptations,  so  that  without  making  him,  as  far  as  we  can  see,  at  all  a  better  man, 
it  puts  him  in  a  better  position.  There  are  many  gross  sins  which  lose  aU  their 
power  over  him,  simply  because  other  attractions  are  presented  which  are  still  more 
powerful.  But  this  is  not  all,  though  this  is  much.  Light  of  any  kind  invariably 
throws  light  upon  duty,  and  if  we  know  anything  we  are  sure  to  have  thereby  a 
clearer  knowledge  of  right  from  wrong.  The  mere  awakening  of  the  understanding 
must  awaken  the  conscience  in  some  degree.  You  cannot  gain  more  intellectual 
power  without  also  gaining  moral  light.  Just  as  the  coming  of  the  daylight 
shows  yon  the  beauty  of  nature  at  the  same  moment  that  it  shows  you 
the  position  of  surrounding  objects,  so,  too,  even  the  merest  science  must 
reveal  in  some  slight  degree  the  beauty  of  the  Will  of  God.  {Bishop  Temple.) 
Knowledge  and  obedience : — I.  Knowledge  is  good — 1.  In  its  nature.  2.  In  its 
contents.  3.  It  is  an  evil  thing  to  be  without  it.  II.  Obedience  is  beiieb.  1. 
More  rare.  2.  More  difficult.  3.  Implies  a  better  disposition  of  heart.  4.  Pro* 
daces  far  better  effects.  III.  Happiness  eesults  feom  their  united  influence. 
The  real  Christian  is  happy  in — 1.  The  real  safety  of  his  state.  2.  In  the  appro- 
bation of  conscience.  3.  In  the  special  favour  of  God.  4.  In  the  earnest  and  hope 
of  heaven.  Learn — 1.  The  character  of  a  true  Christian.  2.  The  wise  ordination 
of  the  gospel.  3.  The  necessity  of  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  '  (T.  Kidd.) 
The  comfort  of  duty : — Bain  falls  on  the  Highland  hills.  Slipping  down  the  bare 
sides,  trickling  along  the  roots  of  the  heather,  soaking  through  the  bogs,  past  all 
obstacles,  the  waters  make  their  way  into  the  glen.  They  are  not  stopped  there  by 
the  fallen  trees,  or  the  big  boulders  which  impede  their  progress.  On  and  on  they 
traverse  every  barrier  till  they  fall  into  the  sea,  out  of  which  they  came,  and  to 
which  they  ever  tend.  Thus,  too,  does  comfort  from  doing  that  which  duty 
demands  meet  with  many  an  opposition,  but  it  will  surely  sweep  past  them  all, 
and  shed  into  waiting  hearts  the  consciousness  that  obligation  fulfilled  is  associated 
with  blessedness  according  to  eternal  law.  (D.  G.  Watt,  M.A.)  The  blessedness  of 
duty : — Have  you  heard  of  that  pious  monk  in  the  middle  ages  ?  He  intensely 
desired  to  have  one  look  at  the  Saviour's  bodily  form,  one  gaze  on  His  blessed  and 
holy  countenance.  And  one  day  as  he  was  praying  and  meditating  in  his  cell, 
*' suddenly  there  shined  round  about  him  a  light  from  heaven,"  and  raising  his 
eyes  he  beheld  in  the  cloud  of  light  one  like  unto  the  Son  of  God.  But  just  as  he 
was  goingb  o  fix  his  eyes  on  the  celestial  vision,  the  monastery  bell  rang  calling 
him  to  his  duty.  What  did  he  do?  Did  he  postpone  his  duties  and  stop  to 
feast  his  soul  on  the  sacred  sight  ?  No ;  the  Uttle  monk  immediately  started  to  his 
feet,  went  out  of  his  cell,  took  his  turn  at  the  outer  gate,  distributed  charity  to  the 
necessitous  that  flocked  to  the  monastery  for  much-needed  help.  Having  com> 
pleted  his  task,  be  returned  to  his  apartment,  sorry  to  think  he  had  missed  the 
vision  for  which  he  had  been  praying  all  his  monastic  life  through.  But,  to  his 
astonishment,  there  shone  the  Shekinah  brighter  than  ever,  and  in  the  glowing 
radiance  he  beheld  One,  no  longer  hke  unto  the  Son  of  God,  but  "  hke  unto  the 
Son  of  Man,  clothed  with  a  garment  down  to  the  foot,  and  girt  about  the  paps 
with  a  golden  girdle,"  and  out  of  the  ineffable  Brightness  came  a  voice,  saying, 
"  Hadst  thou  remained  here  to  the  neglect  of  duty  I  should  have  departed ;  but 
seeing  thou  preferrest  duty  to  ease,  come  and  see ; "  and  thereupon  He  showed  to 
the  poor  monk  His  hands  and  His  feet.  The  conscientious  Christian  was  filled 
with  unspeakable  dehght,  not  unmixed  with  holy  awe.  You  see  the  lesson  :  to  taste 
the  joy  of  religion  you  must  perform  its  duties  ;  to  enter  the  inner  court  of  sweet 
communion  with  God  you  must  penetrate  through  the  outer  court  of  outward 
service.  Through  Judaism  the  world  attained  Christianity;  and  through  duty 
shall  we  arrive  at  solid  pleasure.  (J.  C.  Jones,  D.D.)  The  secret  of  a  happy 
life : — I.  Happiness  is  not  only  ▲  privilege  but  a  duty,  because — 1.  It  adorns 
religion.  Christians  are  a  book  which  every  one  reads,  and  a  happy  face  is  a 
beautiful  illustration  in  that  book  which  is  sure  to  attract  the  reader.  2.  A  happy 
mind  is  the  cradle  of  all  usefulness.     Everyone  does  everything  best  when  he  is 


oup.  xm.]  ST.  JOHN.  419 

happy.  3.  We  are  to  be  like  God,  and  our  God  is  a  happy  God.  4.  We  are  rehearsing 
our  eternity,  and  that  is  a  happy  heaven.  5.  An  unhappy  man  wrongs  the  Father, 
— for  what  father  is  not  grieved  if  his  child  is  not  happy  ?  He  wrongs  the  Son — 
lor  what  has  not  the  Son  done  to  make  us  happy  ?  He  wrongs  the  Holy  Ghost,  the 
••  Spirit  of  joy  ?  "  So  unhappiness  is  not  so  much  a  weakness  to  be  pitied  as  a  sin 
to  be  condemned  and  overcome?  II.  What,  then,  is  the  secbbt  op  a  happy 
iiiFB  7  To  turn  knowledge  into  practice,  first  to  "  know  "  and  then  to  "  do."  But 
then  is  not  happiness  the  cause  of  a  good  life  ?  Yes,  the  two  act  and  re-act  for 
ever.  I  believe  that  Christ  died  for  me,  that  my  debt  is  paid,  and  I  free.  In 
that  behef  all  happiness  begins  before  I  do  a  single  work,  and  makes  me  do  it  ? 
But  then  how  is  this  consistent  with  our  Lord's  words,  "  Know  "  what  ?  "  Do  " 
what  ?  I  know  that  Christ  has  borne  my  punishment,  and  that  I  am  saved.  What 
I  am  to  do  with  that  knowledge  is  to  turn  it  into  faith.  I  have  the  knowledge  of 
salvation  through  faith,  and  my  believing  it  is  the  doing.  1.  I  come,  then,  to  the 
first  principle  of  a  happy  life,  that  sense  of  freedom  which  springs  from  a  sense  of 
pardon.  A  man  may  be  called  a  happy  man ;  he  may  be  a  merry  man ;  but  how 
can  he  be  really  happy  with  unforgiven  sins,  with  dark  retrospects,  and  awful 
visions  of  the  future  scaring  him.  2.  What  Christ  appears  to  have  had  specially 
in  His  mind  here — love  and  humility.  It  is  pride  which  stands  in  the  way  of  most 
persons'  happiness.  Personal  pride — of  beauty,  or  intellect,  never  getting  what 
they  expect  from  it,  and  therefore  always  mortified ;  pride  of  wealth  and  grandeur; 
spiritual  pride.  The  man  who  has  now  chosen  the  lower  ground  wUl — (1)  Always 
have  Jesus  at  his  side.  He  carries  with  him  "  the  Light  of  Life."  Therefore  he 
walks  in  the  sunshine.  (2)  Have  a  secret  communion  going  on  with  God.  (3)  And 
walking  with  frequent  converse  with  Him,  we  gradually  take  something  of  the  mind 
of  God,  our  judgment  unites  itself  to  God's  judgment — our  will  to  God's  will — 
without  which  there  never  can  be  a  happy  life.  Until  that,  all  life  is  a  conflict 
between  man  and  God-  (4)  And  so  we  arrive  at  a  strange  independence  of  this 
present  world.  We  may  have  and  enjoy  human  friendships  ;  we  are  independent 
of  them.  And  the  trials  and  sorrows  prove  only  evidences  that  we  are  the  children 
of  God ;  that  our  education  is  for  home.  (5)  And  every  true  child  of  God  has 
some  work  which  he  is  doing  for  Him.  And  work  for  God  is  happiness.  (J. 
Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  good  practitioner : — I.  Knowledge  alone  in  the  mystebies 
OP  BELiQioN  WILL  NOT  MAKE  A  MAN  HAPPY  (Matt.  vii.  21;  Luke  vi.  46).  His 
knowledge  might  make  a  man  admired,  but  not  blessed.  I  would  not  disparage 
knowledge :  knowledge  is  the  pilot  to  guide  us  in  our  obedience ;  if  zeal  be  not 
according  to  knowledge,  it  is  will-worship,  the  setting  up  an  altar  to  an  unknown 
God.  Knowledge  is  the  elder  sister,  but  here  the  elder  must  serve  the  younger : 
knowledge  may  put  us  into  the  way  of  happiness,  but  it  is  only  practice  brings  as 
thither.  1.  Knowledge  alone  doth  not  make  a  man  better,  therefore  it  cannot  make 
him  happy ;  it  informs,  not  transforms  :  a  man  may  receive  the  truth  in  the  light 
of  it,  not  in  the  love  of  it  (2  Thess.  ii.  10  ;  Rom.  ii.  20).  Knowledge  alone  makes 
men  monsters  in  religion ;  they  are  all  head  but  no  feet  (Col.  ii.  6).  A  man  may 
have  knowledge  and  be  neglective  of  his  duty ;  and  have  a  clear  head,  and  a  foul 
heart,  as  the  sun  may  shine  on  a  dirty  way.  2.  Knowledge  alone  will  not  save, 
therefore  it  will  not  make  a  man  happy.  Hell  is  full  of  learned  heads.  3.  Know- 
ledge alone  makes  a  man's  case  worse,  therefore  it  cannot  make  him  happy.  (1)  It 
takes  away  all  excuse  and  apology  (chap.  xv.  22).  (2)  It  adds  to  a  man's  torment 
(Luke  xii.  47).  If  a  king  cause  his  proclamation  to  be  published,  the  subject 
knows  it,  but  obeys  not,  this  doth  the  more  incense  the  king  against  him.  Better 
be  ignorant  than  knowingly  disobedient.  4.  Use.  Get  knowledge,  but  do  not  rest 
in  it  (Eccles.  i.  18).  To  know  only  to  know  is  like  one  that  knows  certain  countries 
by  the  map,  and  can  discourse  of  them,  but  never  travelled  into  them,  nor  tasted 
the  sweet  spices  of  those  countries.  So  the  gnostic  in  religion  hath  heard  and  read 
much  of  the  beauty  of  holiness,  but  never  travelled  into  religion,  nor  tasted  how  good 
the  Lord  is ;  what  is  it  the  better  to  have  the  Bible  in  our  heads  if  not  in  our  hearts? 
You  do  not  call  him  an  handicraftsman  who  doth  not  work  in  his  trade :  so  it  is 
improper  to  call  him  a  Christian  who  hath  knowledge,  but  no  practice.  II.  Ix  is  the 
practical  part  of  religion  MAKES  A  MAN  HAPPY.  1.  There  must  be  practice,  because 
it  is  only  that  which  answers  God's  end  in  giving  us  His  Word  both  written  and 
preached  (Levit.  xviii.  4  ;  Deut,  xxvi.  16).  If  you  speak  to  your  children,  it  is  not 
only  that  they  may  know  your  mind,  but  doit.  God  gives  us  His  Word  not  only 
as  a  picture  to  look  upon,  but  as  a  copy  to  write  after.  The  master  gives  his 
servant  a  candle,  not  to  gaze  on,  but  to  work  by ;  and  so  David  oalls  the  Word  of 


420  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  zia 

God,  not  a  lamp  to  his  eyes,  bat  a  lantern  to  his  feet.  2.  It  is  only  the  practice 
of  raligion  that  makes  a  man  happy.  It  appears  by  Scripture  (James  i.  25; 
Acts  vii.  22,  Matt.  zxv.  34,  35,  Bev.  xxii.  12).  By  reason,  happiness  is  not  attain- 
able  but  in  the  use  of  means ;  and  the  use  of  means  implies  practice  (Phil.  u.  12). 
There  can  be  no  crown  without  running,  no  recompense  without  diligence.  (1)  If 
it  be  only  the  doing  part  of  religion  makes  men  happy,  then  it  sharply  reproves 
them  who  know  much,  yet  do  nothing.  It  is  better  to  practice  one  truth  than  to 
know  all.  But  why  do  so  few  come  up  to  the  practical  part  of  religion  ?  Surely 
it  is— (a)  For  want  of  humility,  (b)  Want  of  faith  (Isa.  liii.  1).  (c)  The  difficulty  of  it. 
It  is  easy  to  hear  a  truth,  to  make  a  profession  of  it ;  but  to  digest  it  into  practice, 
men  are  loth  to  put  themselves  to  too  much  trouble  (Prov.  xix.  15).  But  it  costs- 
many  a  sinner  more  labour  in  toiling  about  his  lusts  than  it  costs  a  saiut  in  serving 
his  God.  (d)  The  world  comes  between  and  hinders.  (2)  It  exhorts  all  to  become 
practitioners  in  religion.  Note  the  following  :  (a)  Obedience  is  an  evidence  of  sin- 
cerity (chap.  X.  25).  (b)  Practice  will  both  honour  religion  and  propagate  it.  (c) 
Thus  we  show  our  love  to  Christ  (chap.  xiv.  21).  (d)  Without  practice  you  will 
come  short  of  them  who  have  come  short  of  heaven  (Mark  vi.  20).  (e)  What 
unspeakable  comfort  will  obedience  yield  both  in  hfe  and  death.  (/)  What  is  th© 
end  of  all  God's  administrations,  promises,  threatenings,  but  obedience  (Deut.  xi.28). 
(g)  Consider  what  a  sin  disobedience  is,  against  reason  (1  Cor.  x.22),  against  equity, 
against  conscience  (Mal.i.  6) ;  against  kindness,  against  nature,  since  every  creature 
in  its  kind  obeys  God  ;  against  self-preservation  (2  Thess.  i.  7,  8).  (h)  The  beneht  of 
obedience  (Psa.  xix.  11).  So  saith  the  text.  If  this  argument  will  not  prevail,  what 
will  ?  (3)  Some  rules  to  help  Christians  in  their  obedience.  Obedience  must  be — 
(o)  Cordial  (Deut.  xxvi.  16 ;  Kom.  vi.  17).  The  heart  is  the  seat  of  love,  and  it  is 
love  perfumes  every  duty.  The  heart  makes  service  a  freewill  offering,  else  it  is  but  a 
tax.  (b)  Extensive — it  must  reach  to  all  God's  commandments  (1  Kings  ix.  4 ;  Luke 
i.  6).  (c)  Believing  (Heb.  xi.  6 ;  Eom.  xvi.  26).  (d)  Constant  (Kev.  ii.  26).  Faith 
must  lead  the  van,  and  perseverance  must  bring  up  the  rear.  (T.  Watson.) 
Religion  essentially  practical : — The  object  of  religion  is  conduct ;  and  conduct  is 
really,  however  men  may  overlay  it  with  philosophical  disquisitions,  the  simplest 
thing  in  the  world  as  far  as  understanding  is  concerned :  as  regards  doing,  the 
hardest.  Here  is  the  difficulty — to  do  what  we  very  weU  know  ought  to  be  done. 
This  difficulty  is  great  enough  to  satisfy  the  most  voracious  appetite  for  difficulties. 
It  extends  to  rigbtuess  in  the  whole  range  of  what  we  call  conduct ;  in  three-fourths, 
therefore,  at  the  lowest  computation,  of  human  hfe.  The  only  doubt  is  whether 
we  ought  not  to  make  the  range  of  conduct  wider  stiU,  and  say  it  ia  four-fifths  of 
human  life,  or  five- sixths.  Now,  certainly  we  need  not  go  far  about  to  prove  that 
conduct  is  in  a  special  manner  the  object  of  Bible  religion  (Isa.  i.  16  ;  17,  Ivi.  1 ; 
Psa.  iv.  5;  xcvii.  10;  1.23;  2  Tim.  ii.  19).  But  instantly  there  will  be  raised 
the  objection  that  this  is  morality  and  not  religion  which,  some  people  suppose  is 
identical  with  speculative  theology.  Rehgion,  however,  means  simply  either  a 
binding  to  righteousness,  or  else  a  serious  attention  to  righteousness  and  dwelling 
upon  it ;  the  antithesis  between  ethical  and  religious  is  thus  quite  a  false  one. 
Ethical  means  practical,  it  relates  to  conduct  passing  into  habit  or  disposition. 
Eehgious  also  means  practical,  only  in  a  still  higher  degree :  if  we  follow  the 
intention  of  human  thought  and  language  in  the  use  of  the  word,  it  is  ethics 
heightened,  enkindled,  lit  up  by  feeling.  The  passage  from  rehgion  to  morahty  is 
when  to  morality  is  applied  emotion.  And  the  true  meaning  of  rehgion  is  thus, 
not  simply  morahty,  but  morality  touched  by  emotion.  And  this  new  elevation 
and  inspiration  of  morality  is  well  marked  by  the  word  "  righteousness."  Conduct 
is  the  word  of  common  life,  morahty  of  philosophical  disquisition,  righteousnesa 
of  rehgion.     {Matthew  Arnold.) 

Vers.  18-30.  I  speak  not  of  yon  alL — A  last  appeal: — I.  A  solemn  AiraomfCBiiEin:. 
1.  The  reason  of  it.  (1)  To  indicate  Christ's  knowledge  of  the  human  heart,  and 
to  show  that  He  had  not  been  mistaken  in  Judas  (ver.  18).  Had  it  not  been  made 
it  would  have  appeared  as  though  Christ  were  not  omniscient.  (2)  To  direct  the 
disciples'  minds  to  an  impressive  fulfilment  of  Scripture  (ver.  18).  (3)  To  confirm 
the  faith  of  the  disciples  in  Himself  (ver.  19).  (4)  To  arrest,  and  if  yet  possible 
rescue,  the  soul  of  Judas.  2.  The  certainty  of  it  (ver.  21).  "  Amen,  amen."  Had 
any  other  made  the  announcement  it  would  have  been  rejected  with  scorn.  3.  The 
effect  of  it.  (1)  It  filled  the  Saviour  with  horror  (ver.  21),  just  as  He  had  been 
perturbed  at  Lazarus's  grave  (chap.  xi.  33).     (2)  It  plunged  the  disciples  into  con- 


CHAP,  mi.]  ST.  JOHN.  421 

sternation  and  dismay  (ver.  22).  11.  An  anxious  question  (ver.  25).  1.  Moved  by 
Peter,  with  characteristic  impetuosity,  who  thought  perhaps  that  John  was  in  the 
secret,  but  he  was  equally  ignorant.  2.  Proposed  by  John — (1)  Witii  affection— lean- 
ing back  till  his  head  rested  on  Jesns's  breast.  (2)  "With  reverence—*'  Lord."  (3) 
With  pity  for  Christ,  who  should  suffer,  and  the  disciple  who  should  inflict  so  sad  a 
fate.  (4)  With  humility  and  self-examination — as  if  he  dreaded  it  should  be  him- 
self ;  and  yet  surely — (5)  With  conscious  innocence — though  Judas  had  the  effrontery 
to  ask,  "Is  it  I?"  III.  An  explicit  answeb  (ver.  26).  1.  Clearly  given.  2. 
Defiantly  accepted.  3.  Strangely  misunderstood  (ver.  23).  Lessons— 1.  Christ  in 
His  Church  a  searcher  of  hearts.  2.  The  possibility  of  sitting  at  Christ's  table 
without  being  a  true  disciple,  of  enjoying  religious  ordinances  without  possessing 
grace,  of  falling  from  Christ  so  far  as  to  lift  the  heel  against  Him.  3.  Apostasies, 
though  they  do  not  affect  Christ's  position  in  the  Church,  are  occasions  of  pain.  4. 
John-like  spirits  are  most  likely  to  obtain  from  Christ  revelations  of  His  grace  and 
truth.  5.  Christ  loves  those  who  hate  Him ;  but  he  who  will  not  be  won  by  that 
love  must  eventually  fall  into  the  devil's  grasp,  (r.  Whitelaw,  D.D.)  A  fourfold 
theme  for  thought : — I.  A  solemn  truth  (ver,  18) — "  I  know  whom  I  have  chosen." 
Christ  knows  His  disciples — the  true  and  false — their  works  and  their  hearts — all 
they  have  been,  are,  and  shall  be.  "  He  knew  what  was  in  man."  Then — 1.  He 
does  not  require  of  us  what  will  outmeasure  our  faculties.  He  loves  us  too  much, 
and  is  too  just  for  this.  2.  The  services  that  are  not  rendered  Him  from  the  heari 
are  of  no  value  in  His  sight.  Formality  and  insincerity  are  worse  than  worthless. 
3.  Every  one  that  names  His  name  should  depart  from  evil.  II.  A  lamentablb 
FACT.  "  He  that  eateth  bread,"  &o.  Judas  was  guilty  of — 1.  The  basest  ingrati- 
tude. 2.  The  grossest  avarice.  3.  The  most  daring  impiety.  Such  a  fact  as  this 
shows- (1)  Possibility  that  should  lead  us  all  to  the  most  rigorous  heart  scrutiny. 
Here  we  see  that  a  man  may  be  in  close  contact  with  Christ  and  yet  have  no  spiri- 
tual  connection  with  Him.  (2)  That  Christ  coerces  no  man  into  His  service.  He 
leaves  each  to  act  for  himself.  III.  A  beneficent  warning  (ver.  19).  1.  Against 
a  probable  danger  to  the  other  disciples.  Had  the  conduct  of  Judas  broken  suddenly 
on  them,  they  might  have  received  a  moral  shook  which  would  have  imperilled  their 
faith.  2.  For  the  purpose  of  fortifying  their  faith  in  the  Messiah  by  the  very 
means  of  the  betrayal  as  foreannounced.  IV.  A  glorious  assurance  (ver.  20), 
This  shows  that  His  faithful  disciples  were— 1.  Identified  with  Him.  The  treat- 
ment  they  receive  is  regarded  as  being  rendered  to  Him.  2.  As  He  was  identified 
with  the  Father— (1)  By  official  work.  (2)  By  vital  sympathy.  (D.  Thomas,  p.D.) 
The  history  of  Judas  in  relation  to  the  Divine  dealings : — The  history  of  Judas  is  but 
the  record  of  a  human  life.  He  was  a  man  like  ourselves,  subject  therefore  to 
temptation  and  struggle,  and  one  with  the  freedom  and  responsibility  which 
belong  to  us  all.  This  will  save  us  from  fatalism,  and  in  the  face  of  many  dark 
problems  here  is  our  safe  starting-point.  Learn  that — I.  Men  may  fbustbatb 
Christ's  purposes  concerning  them.  Christ  gave  Judas  responsible  work  and  a 
noble  calling,  and  educated  him  for  it  all.  But  the  training  was  worse  than  useless, 
the  privileges  were  abused,  and  the  sacred  trust  betrayed.  Yet  Christ  would  have  had 
delight  in  Judas's  wellbeing  and  success.  But  all  was  frustrated,  and  the  bitter 
lament  over  Jerusalem  had  its  reference  to  Judas.  We  all  share  this  terrible 
power,  and  could  we  see  how  we  have  used  it  we  should  live  much  nearer  to  Him 
for  the  rest  of  our  lives.  II.  The  mercy  of  God  which  would  save  us  may  ruin  us. 
Judas  had  gifts  :  Christ  employed  them.  His  very  position  brought  its  dangers : 
Christ  trusted  him.  Not  indeed  without  warning  him  (chap.  vi.  70,  71).  And  as 
the  besetting  sin  was  yielded  to,  and  the  downward  course  became  more  and  more 
marked,  where  was  Judas  so  likely  to  be  kept  from  evil  as  in  Christ's  company? 
Accordingly  he  was  retained  at  his  post  and  was  still  trusted.  Yet  the  mercy  which 
would  have  saved  ruined  him.  For,  turning  from  the  source  of  Goodness,  he  said, 
"  Evil,  be  thou  my  good."  Each  o!  us  may  apply  this  principle.  III.  Man's  sin  is 
OVER- ruled  to  display  THE  DiviNB  GOODNESS.  Thomas  doubted :  We  obtain  an 
additional  proof  of  Christ's  resurrection.  Judas  betrayed  :  Jesus  died.  It  did  not 
require  a  Judas  to  save  the  world,  or  the  hatred  of  the  Sanhedrim  to  fulfil  God's 
promises.  Yet  the  sin  of  the  world  runs  up  into  typical  acts,  and  in  a  profoundly 
representative  sense  the  sin  of  Judas  was  ours.  This  sin  was  over-ruled  for  God's 
glory  and  man's  good.  And  through  it  all  Judas  was  free,  as  is  every  sinner,  as 
proved  from  common  consent,  conscience,  and  such  words  as  *•  can,"  "  ought,"  Ac. 
Christ  too  is  free  and  maketh  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  Him.  lY.  The  bearing  of 
ALL  THIS  ON  THE  PBESENCB  OF  JuDAs's  IN  THE  Church.    Men  may  kuow  Hot  that  they 


422  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xm, 

are  there :  bat  CJhrist  knows  tbem.    Each  service  in  the  upper  room  repeated. 
John  is  there,  and  it  may  be  Judas,  so  is  Christ.    If  so  the  love  that  spares  is  the 
love  that  would  save.    How  must  Christ  have  looked  on  Judas,  yet  he  went  out 
madly  from  that  saving  Presence.     "  And  I  saw  there  was  a  way  to  hell  from  the 
gate  of  heaven."    Two  apostles  sinned  grossly.    Judas  went  out  from  the  presence 
of  Christ  to  meet  the  night ;  Peter,  broken-hearted,  to  meet  the  dawn.    Which  will 
you  follow?    (G.  T.  Keeble.^        The  sin  and  folhi  of  the  crime  of  Judas  : — Once,  I 
think,  there  was  great  joy  in  a  certain  house  in  Kerioth,  because  there  a  child  had 
just  been  bom.     I  think  this  joy  broke  out  in  the  name  given  to  the  child.    Call 
him  "  Praise,"  that  is,  Judah.    But  the  parents  were  not  prophets;  and  years  afcer 
this,  Jesus  said  of  him,  "  It  had  been  good  for  that  man  if  he  had  not  been  bom  1  " 
This  saying  darkly  intimates  that  the  sin  of  Judas  was  unparalleled.     "  Esau  for 
one  morsel  of  meat  sold  his  birthright."    But  Judas  sold  Christ !    For  a  man  to 
Bell  his  soul  for  some  passing  paltry  profit  is  enough  to  make  him  infamous. 
But  Judas  sold  Christ  1    John  Bunyan  tells  us  that  long  after  he  loved  Christ  he 
was  tempted  for  the  space  of  a  year  to  sell  and  part  with  the  blessed  Christ  for  the 
things  of  this  life.     The  tempter,  he  says,  •'  would  intermix  in  such  sort  with  all  I 
did,  that  I  could  not  eat  my  food,  nor  stoop  to  pick  up  a  pin,  nor  chop  a  stick, 
without  hearing  this  whisper — Sell  Christ — sell  Him  for  this — seU  Him  for  that. 
Sell  Him  1  sell  Him  1 "    But  Judas  actually  sold  Christ.    You  may  have  had  some 
moment  of  spiritual  delirium,  when  some  one  sinful  gratification  seemed  to  be  so 
irresistible  that  your  heart  swore  that  you  would  have  it,  come  what  might ;  but 
God's  hand  snatched  you  back  just  in  time,  and  His  Spirit  showed  the  truth  in  its 
light,  and  made  you  resolve  not  to  buy  bliss  that  was  only  for  a  moment,  at  the 
eost  of  bliss  everlasting.    The  temptation  was  fearful ;  for  it  was  to  part  with  your 
portion  in  Christ.     But  the  sin  of  Judas  was  that  he  sold  Christ  Himself.     Some- 
times men  treat  Christ  with  profanity,  partly  because  they  are  steeped  in  ignorance; 
and  all  the  while  they  are  sinning  the  Intercessor's  plea  f,or  them  is  "  Father,  for- 
give them,  for  they  know  not  what  they  do."    Judas  knew  what  he  did.    He  had 
heard  Christ  say,  " Before  Abraham  was,  I  am ; "  "I  and  My  Father  are  one." 
He  had  witnessed  His  grand  manifestations  as  King  of  the  air,  of  the  water,  of  the 
dead,  of  spirits  ;  and  yet  Judas  sold  Christ !     What  did  he  sell  Him  for  ?    The  old 
German  story  reports  that  the  astrologer  Faustus  sold  his  soul  to  the  evil  one  for 
twenty-four  years  of  earthly  happiness.    What  was  the  bargain  in  this  case  ?    The 
auctioneer  had  tempting  lists  to  show ;  what  was  it  that  tempted  Judas  ?    He  sold 
his  Lord  for  thirty  somethings.     What  things  ?     Thirty  years  of  right  over  all  the 
earth,  with  all  the  trees  of  the  forests,  all  the  fowls  of  the  mountains,  and  the 
cattle  upon  a  thousand  hills  ?      For  thirty  armies,  or  thirty  fleets  ?     Thirty  stars  ? 
Thirty  centuries  of  power  to  reign  majestically  on  hell's  burning  throne  ?     No,  for 
thirty  shillings,  i.e.,  £3  lOs.     {C.  Stanford,  D.D.)        I  know  whom  I  have  chosen ; 
but  that  the  Scripture  may  be  fulfilled. — Why  did  Christ  choose  Judas  : — Christ 
chose  him  for  what  he  was,  and  what  he  might  have  been,  not  for  what  he  became. 
Christ  chooses  men  not  for  their  attainments,  but  for  their  possibilities.    Do  you 
suppose  Christ  chooses  men  for  their  ability  or  their  character  ?     He  chooses  them 
that  He  may  give  them  character  and  inspire  new  capacities  within  them.     He 
chooses  twelve  men,  and  one  was  a  traitor  ;  the  average  of  treachery  in  human  life 
is  usually  higher  than  that.     Moreover,  the  election  of  Christ  does  not  fetter  the 
free-will  of  a  man.    In  a  certain  high  and  almost  inscrutable  sense  it  is  true  that  it 
all  happens  "  that  it  may  be  fulfilled ;  "  for  though  the  bad  man  may  seem  an 
accident  he  is  not,  but  in  some  way  fits  into  a  Divine  order.     The  wild  wind  roars 
through  the  troubled  heaven,  but  somewhere  there  is  a  sail  to  catch  it,  so  that  all 
its  fierceness  is  yoked  to  fairest  uses,  and  transformed  into  a  mysterious  helpfulness. 
There  are  no  accidents  in  the  Divine  order ;  the  harvest  of  to-day  is  the  fruitful 
child  of  the  storm-weather  of  a  century  ago ;  it  was  all  that  it  might  be  fulfilled. 
But  whatever  may  be  the  ultimate  issue  of  events,  the  will  of  man  works  freely 
within  their  circumference.     Christ  has  chosen  every  living  soul,  and  called  hia ; 
yet  few  there  are  that  shall  be  saved.    You  are  as  free  to  work  evil  in  an  apostle- 
ship  as  in  a  fisherman's  boat.     Nay  more,  if  this  man  was  so  cursed  and  burdened 
with  evil  aptitudes,  was  it  not  an  act  of  Divinest  mercy  to  call  to  him  an  apostlo' 
ship  ?    There  are  some  men  who  never  would  be  Christians  at  all  unless  they  were 
Christian  ministers.    They  need  the  constraint  of  solemn  responsibilities  ;  the  only 
chance  of  saving  them  is  to  set  them  to  save  others.     And,  looked  at  in  this  light 
of  human  experience,  how  Divine  was  that  discernment  which  chose  Judas,  and 
gave  him  this  unique  opportunity  of  making  his  calling  and  election  sure  beneath 


CBxr.  xra.J  ST.  JOHN.  4231 

the  very  ejes  of  JesoB  I  For  the  evils  which  destroyed  Jadas  had  not  ripened  in 
him  when  Jesus  called  him.  He  came  in  the  untainted  freshness  of  faith,  perhaps 
in  the  unbroken  energy  of  youth.  He  had  more  than  ordinary  capacity,  for  at  once 
he  became  the  organiser  of  the  little  society,  its  steward,  its  financier,  the  custodian 
of  its  means.  To  paint  him  therefore  in  the  light  of  the  after  event,  as  most  painters 
have  done,  disfigured  with  the  leer  of  low  cunning,  scowling  with  the  meanness  of 
baffled  craft  and  delayed  cupidity,  is  altogether  false.  He  who  paints  Judas  must 
put  into  his  face  the  dying  fight  of  what  was  once  noble  enthusiasm — the  shadowed 
eagemesH  of  what  was  once  heroic  faith.  He  must  paint  a  face  full  of  the  anguish 
of  remembrance,  the  traces  of  perished  nobility,  the  tragedy  of  overthrown  ideals. 
In  a  word,  we  must  remember  Christ  called  him,  and  not  in  vain  ;  Christ  loved  him, 
and  not  without  cause ;  and  howsoever  dreadful  the  end  may  be,  there  was  once  a 
bright,  a  brilliant,  and  a  beautiful  beginning.  (TT.  J.  Dawson.)  He  that  eateth 
bread  yrith  Me,  is  equivalent  to  "  a  professed  friend,"  "  an  intimate  acquaintance  " 
— '*  a  familiar  friend,"  as  the  psalmist  has  it  in  the  place  referred  to.  To  "  lift  up 
the  heel,"  according  to  some  is  a  figure  borrowed  from  the  practice  of  wrestlers  in 
lifting  up  the  foot,  for  the  purpose  of  overthrowing  an  antagonist.  The  more  pro- 
bable account  is,  that  the  figure  is  that  of  a  vicious  horse  or  ox,  receiving  food  from 
the  hand  of  its  owner,  and  yet  lifting  up  the  heel  to  give  him  a  stroke  which  may 
be  fatal  to  him.  The  meaning  of  the  whole  expression  seems  to  be,  '•  a  highly 
favoured  associate  is  prepared  secretly  to  inflict  on  me  a  very  severe  injury."  (J. 
Brown,  DJ).)  Ingratitude  : — In  considering  this  prophecy  show — I.  In  whom 
rr  MAT  BE  SAID  TO  BE  PXJLFiLLED.  1.  The  Atheist.  2.  The  infidel.  3.  The  hypo- 
crite. 4.  The  apostate.  II.  What  we  mat  learn  from  its  accomplishment.  "  1. 
That  Christianity  must  be  true.  2.  That  the  falls  of  its  professors  afford  no  just 
argument  against  it.  3.  That  no  man  can  teU  what  evil  he  may  perpetrate,  if 
Satan  be  permitted  to  assault  him.  4.  That  God's  conduct  towards  us  is  the  very 
reverse  of  ours  towards  Him.  (C.  Simeon,  M.A.)  The  successive  steps  by  which 
the  traitor  reached  the  climax  of  his  guilt : — The  devil  had  already  put  it  into  hia 
heart  to  betray  the  Lord  (ver.  2).  Wounded  pride  (Matt.  xxvi.  14),  Satanic  influ- 
ence (Luke  xxii.  3),  and  the  love  of  money — these  were  the  great  evils  that  lay  at 
the  root  of  his  conduct.  And  yet,  who  can  tell  what  struggles  he  must  have  gone 
through  ere  he  brought  himself  to  carry  his  resolution  into  effect  ?  (C  Ross.) 
Warnings  as  to  the  conduct  of  the  traitor : — 1.  And,  first  of  all,  do  we  not  see  here 
what  a  hateful,  detestable  thing  hypocrisy,  treachery  is  in  the  sight  of  God.  Oh 
see,  only  see,  the  Lord  of  Glory  troubled  in  spirit  as  He  approaches  the  painful 
subject.  And  let  us  remember,  that  hypocrisy  is  equally  offensive  to  Him  still.  3. 
Farther,  do  we  not  see  here  that  sin — that  hardness  of  heart  is  a  gradual,  a  pro- 
gressive thing?  Judas  did  not  reach  the  climax  of  his  guilt  by  a  single  leap,  but 
step  by  step.  3.  But  still  further,  may  we  not  learn  from  this  narrative,  that  though 
the  hypocrite  and  the  hardened  sinner  may  for  a  long  time  escape  detection,  yet  at 
last  he  shall  be  disclosed.  The  Lord  may  indeed,  in  His  long-suffering,  allow  him 
to  pass  unknown,  just  to  give  him  space  and  opportunity  for  repentance.  4. 
Finally,  let  the  Lord's  true-hearted  ones  seek  John's  place  —  leaning 
on  the  Master's  bosom.  What  a  contrast  between  John  and  Judas — John 
leaning  on  Jesus'  breast,  Judas  proposing  in  his  heart  to  betray  Him  I  (Ibid.) 
Jesus  .  .  .  was  troubled  In  spirit  and  testified. — I.  Christ  in  sadness  (ver.  21). 
This  was  the  distress — 1.  Of  intense  holiness  in  the  presence  of  sin.  The  more 
holiness,  the  more  sensitiveness  to  sin.  Sometimes  the  optic  nerve  becomes  so 
sensitive  that  a  sunbeam  will  produce  the  greatest  pain  ;  and  the  auricular  nerve 
BO  iender  that  the  softest  sound  yields  agony.  And  in  some  diseases  a  breath  of 
air  will  throw  the  whole  writhing  frame  into  anguish.  And  so  Judas  sent  a  quiver 
through  all  the  nerves  of  Christ's  pure  soul.  2.  Of  the  highest  benevolence  in  the 
presence  of  a  lost  souL  The  more  love  a  being  has,  the  more  he  feels  the  suffer- 
ings of  others.  Christ's  love  was  immeasurable,  and  He  knew  what  a  lost  soul 
meant.  We  wonder  not  then  that  He  was  troubled  as  a  lost  soul  stood  before  Him. 
n.  The  disciples  in  anxiett  (ver.  22).  Matthew  and  Mark  tell  us  that  they  were 
exceeding  sorrowful,  and  asked  each,  "  Is  it  I  ?  "  The  question  implies  two  things. 
1.  Self-suspicion.  Had  they  been  certain  of  their  incapability  they  would  not 
have  made  such  an  appeal.  None  of  them  was  confident  of  Hia  impeccability. 
This  self-suspicion  is  well  founded  in  all  souls,  and  is  a  help  to  our  spiritual 
progress  and  safety.  "Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth."  2.  A  desire  to 
know  the  worst.  Cowards  close  their  eyes  on  the  worst,  and  delude  themselves 
with  the  idea  that  all  is  right.    It  is  to  the  spiritual  interest  of  every  man  to  know 


424  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHU.  xm. 

the  worst  here  and  now,  for  here  and  now  it  can  be  rectified.  "Search  me,  O  God! 
and  know  my  heart,"  &c.  III.  The  tbaitor  unmasked.  1.  The  means  of  his  de 
taction  (ver.  26).  2  His  domination  by  Satan  (ver.  27).  Before  we  read  that 
Satan  had  pat  the  wicked  deed  into  his  heart ;  now  he  took  possession  of  his 
soul.  3.  His  defiance  by  Christ,  "What  thou  doest,"  &c.  "  I  defy  thee  to  do  thy 
worst.  Do  it  and  have  done  with  it."  4.  His  lamentable  doom  (ver.  20).  (D. 
Thimas,  D.D.)  The  Saviour's  trouble: — These  verses  describe  the  last  scene 
between  our  Lord  and  Judas  before  the  betrayal.  They  never  met  again,  except- 
ing in  the  garden.  Within  a  short  time  both  the  Holy  Master  and  the  treacherous 
servant  were  dead.  They  will  never  meet  again  till  the  trumpet  sounds.  What  an 
awful  meeting  will  that  be !  Let  us  mark — I,  What  tbodblb  cub  Lobd  went 
THBODGH  FOR  THE  SAKE  OP  DUE  SOULS.  1.  Our  Master's  troubles  are  far  beyond 
the  conception  of  most  people.  The  cross  was  only  the  completion  of  His  sorrows 
(Isa.  liii.  3).  2.  But  this  trouble  was  an  exceptional  one — that  of  seeing  an 
apostle  becoming  an  apostate.  Nothing  is  so  hard  to  bear  as  ingratitude. 
"  Sharper  than  a  serpent's  tooth  is  a  thankless  child."  Absalom's  rebellion  was 
David's  heaviest  trouble,  and  Judas's  Christ's.  3.  Passages  like  these  should 
make  us  see — (1)  The  amazing  love  of  Christ  to  sinners.  How  many  cups  o< 
sorrow  He  drained  to  the  dregs  in  working  out  our  salvation,  beside  the  mighty 
cup  of  bearing  our  sins  1  (2)  How  httle  reason  we  have  for  complaining  when 
friends  fail  us  and  men  disappoint  us.  (3)  The  perfect  suitableness  of  Christ  to 
be  our  Saviour.  He  can  sympathize  with  us.  He  has  suffered  Himself,  and  can 
feel  for  those  who  are  ill-used  and  forsaken.  II.  The  poweb  and  malignity  of  oub 
GBEAT  ENEMY,  THE  DEVIL.  First  he  suggests :  then  he  commands.  First  he  knocks 
at  the  door  and  asks  permission  to  come  in  :  then,  once  admitted,  he  takes  com- 
plete possession,  and  rules  the  whole  inward  man  like  a  tyrant.  Let  us  take  heed 
that  we  are  not "  ignorant  of  his  devices  "  (2  Cor.  ii.  11).  He  is  still  going  to  and 
fro  in  the  earth,  seeking  whom  he  may  devour.  Our  oiily  safety  lies  in  resisting 
him  at  the  first.  Strong  as  he  is,  he  has  no  power  to  do  us  harm,  if  we  ory  to  the 
stronger  One  and  use  the  means  which  He  has  appointed  (James  iv.  7).  Once  let 
a  man  begin  tampering  with  the  devil,  and  he  never  knows  how  far  he  may  falU 
in.  The  extreme  habdnfss  which  comes  over  the  heabt  of  a  backsliding  pbofessob 
OF  RELIGION.  One  might  have  thought  that  the  sight  of  our  Lord's  trouble,  and  the 
solemn  warning,  "  One  of  you  shall  betray  Me,"  would  have  stirred  the  conscience  of 
this  unhappy  man,  or  the  words,  "  That  thou  doest,  do  quickly."  But  like  one 
whose  conscience  was  dead  and  buried,  goes  out  to  do  his  wicked  work,  and  parts 
with  his  Lord  for  ever.  The  extent  to  which  we  may  harden  ourselves  by  resisting 
light  and  knowledge  is  one  of  the  most  fearful  facts  in  our  nature.  We  may  become 
past  feeling,  like  those  whose  limbs  are  mortified  before  they  die.  We  may  lose 
entirely  all  sense  of  fear,  or  shame,  or  remorse.  {Bp.  Eyle.)  The  suffering$ 
of  the  $oul  of  Jesus  : — What  a  spectacle  !  He  who  is  inseparably  united  to 
the  source  of  life  and  felicity,  in  sorrow ;  He  who  is  the  unfailing  fountain  of 
consolation  to  His  children  on  earth,  and  of  joy  to  the  redeemed  in  heaven,  in 
trouble  and  distress  !  We  in  vain  look  for  external  causes  of  this  woe.  Entering 
upon  His  last  conflicts,  He  cries,  "  Now  is  My  soul  troubled."  These  inward  suffer 
ings  of  our  Eedeemer  were  no  less  necessary  than  His  external  woes  ;  the  anguish  of 
His  soul  was  as  requisite  as  the  tortures  of  His  cross.  1.  Sin  had  defiled  our  souls 
as  well  as  our  bodies :  nay,  the  soul  had  been  the  first  source  of  disobedience ;  in 
it  the  throne  of  sin  and  Satan  was  erected,  while  the  body  was  used  only  as  its 
instrument.  When  Jesus,  therefore,  appeared  as  surety  to  expiate  for  our  offences, 
it  was  needful  that  the  agonies  of  His  soul  should  unite  with  the  pains  of  His  body, 
in  order  to  pay  down  a  full  ransom  for  us.  2.  Besides,  one  great  end  of  His  incar- 
nation and  death  was,  that  He  might  set  before  us  a  perfect  pattern  of  holy  conduct, 
a  complete  example  of  every  virtue ;  so  that  in  every  circumstance  we  might  cast 
our  eyes  upon  Him,  and  learn  our  duty.  But  this  great  end  could  never  have  been 
accomplished,  had  our  Eedeemer  experienced  no  sorrows  of  the  soul,  had  He  been  a 
stranger  to  inward  troubles.  3.  And,  finally,  had  only  the  body  of  Jesus  suffered, 
we  should  have  been  deprived  of  a  large  portion  of  that  consolation  and  support 
which  is  now  afforded  us  by  remembering  the  events  of  His  life.  Every  afflicted 
Christian  has  been  comforted  by  recollecting,  that  "we  have  not  a  High  Priest 
who  cannot  be  touched  with  a  feeling  of  our  infirmities,"  but  one  who  "  was  in  all 
points  tempted  as  we  are,"  and  who  will  therefore  sympathize  with  us  in  all  our 
sorrows.  The  inward  sorrows  of  men  are,  it  is, true,  often  criminal.  Christ's 
sorrows  were  ever  holy :  for  in  their  source  they  were  pure ;  in  their  degree,  they 


«HAP.  xin.l  8T.  JOHN.  425 

did  not  transcend  the  measure  which  reason  and  religion  required  ;  and  their  effect 
never  was  to  suspend  His  communion  with  His  Father,  to  make  Him  pause  in  His 
laborious  beneficence,  or  recoil  from  those  sufferings  which  He  was  to  undergo  for 
our  salvation.  Under  this  trouble  of  spirit,  Jesus  has  recourse  to  prayer.  And 
hovi  exalted  is  this  testimony  to  the  sublimity  of  the  Bedeemer's  character,  and  the 
benefits  of  His  mediatorial  work :  '•  I  have  glorified  My  name."  In  the  incarnation 
of  Immanuel,  the  wisdom  and  the  faithfulness,  and  the  love  of  God,  had  already 
been  illustriously  displayed.  Yes,  in  these  and  in  other  modes  the  honour  of  the 
Divine  name  had  been  promoted  by  the  Bedeemer.  But  the  voice  from  heaven 
•dded,  "  I  will  glorify  it  again,"  more  remarkably  by  Thy  death  and  the  great  effects 
of  Thy  sacrifice.  And  has  not  this  been  fully  verified  ?  Had  we  time  to  display  the 
Divine  glory,  as  manifested  in  the  Cross,  the  Besurrection,  the  Ascension  of  Jesus ; 
in  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  in  the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles ;  you  would  instantly 
acknowledge  that  this  declaration  has  been  accomplished.  Look  upwards,  and  see 
how  there  especially  in  the  Cross  the  name  of  God  is  glorified.  1.  The  Divine  per- 
fections are  there  displayed  in  a  degree  infinitely  greater  than  they  are  elsewhere 
manifested.  You  admire  the  goodness  which  shines  in  nature  and  providence ; 
but  what  is  this  to  that  love  which  induced  the  Father  to  give  the  Son  of  His 
bosom  to  undergo  such  agonies  for  your  salvation  ?  You  shudder  at  that  justice 
and  holiness  which  are  announced  in  the  Scriptures,  which  are  heard  in  the  thunders 
and  glitter  in  the  lightnings  on  Sinai ;  but  they  are  more  manifested  in  the 
tremendous  sacrifice  of  Immanuel.  2.  It  is  there  that  those  perfections,  which 
appeared  irreconcilable,  beautifully  and  completely  harmonize.  Holiness  is  exalted, 
while  grace  triumphs.  The  rights  of  the  Divine  government  are  unimpaired,  while 
the  sinner  is  saved.  1.  Careless  and  impenitent  man,  this  sabject  should  alarm 
thee  I  The  woes  which  Jesus  endured  were  suffered  for  the  guilty.  Befnse  the 
gospel  method  of  salvation,  and  thou  sacrilegiously  attemptest  to  rob  God  of  His 
glory  manifested  in  it.  But  wilt  thou  succeed  ?  2.  Behever,  in  the  anguish  of 
Jesus,  see  the  foundation  of  thy  joy  i  He  suffered  that  thou  mightest  triumph. 
8.  Communicants,  approach  the  holy  table.  Contemplate  the  glories  of  God 
in  the  crucified  Saviour.  Betrace  the  mercy  of  your  Bedeemer.  {H.  Kollock, 
D.D,)  The  practical  tuet  of  Christ's  troubles: — Away  with  the  argument  of 
philosophers  who  say  that  a  vrise  man  is  not  liable  to  be  troubled.  Let  the  soul 
of  the  Christian  be  troubled  with  fear  lest  others  perish,  with  sorrow  when  others 
perish,  with  desire  that  others  may  not  perish,  with  joy  when  others  are  saved 
from  perishing,  with  fear  lest  we  ourselves  perish,  with  sorrow  because  we  are 
absent  from  Christ.  And  let  us  not  despair  when  we  are  troubled  by  the  prospect 
of  death,  for  Christ  was  troubled  by  it.  Thus  He  cheers  infirm  members  in  His 
Body — the  Church — by  the  voluntary  example  of  His  own  infirmity;  thus  He 
encourages  Christians,  if  they  find  themselves  troubled  by  the  defection  of  friends 
or  the  prospect  of  death.  (Bp.  Wordsworth.)  Judas,  John,  and  Peter : — I.  Thb 
TEEACHERT  OF  JuDAs :  OB  SEPAEATioN  FBOM  Cheist.  We  speak  of  close  corporations 
and  sacred  fellowships,  but  there  are  none  so  close,  so  sacred,  as  to  shut  out 
intruders.  Curiously  assorted  guests  sit  down  side  by  side  at  the  same  feast.  The 
Son  of  Man  did  not  exclude  a  traitor.  1.  This  treachery  occasioned  our  Lord 
poignant  sorrow.  2.  Our  Lord  in  love  and  mercy  interposed  between  the  traitor 
and  his  doom.  8.  The  interposition  being  ineffectual  the  traitor  leaves  Christ, 
Satan  captures  him,  and  he  disappears  in  darkness.  II.  The  blessedness  of  John  ; 
OE,  KEPT  Df  the  LOVE  OP  Chkist.  It  cauuot  be  an  accident  that  these  accounts  of 
John  and  Judas  are  left  here  side  by  side.  We  are  to  "  look  here  upon  this  picture, 
and  on  that."  The  treachery  of  Judas  going  out  into  the  night  to  serve  his 
master  is  best  understood  when  set  over  against  the  blessedness  of  John  leaning  on 
the  breast  and  hearing  the  wisdom  of  his  Master.  Extremes  meet.  But  John  has  no 
monopoly  of  his  Master's  love.  It  was  offered  to  Judas  and  rejected.  If  the  presence 
of  a  traitor  into  the  glorious  company  of  the  apostles  troubled  the  spirit  of  Christ, 
why  should  not  his  going  forth  be  a  relief  ?  It  was  like  the  vanishing  of  a  oload. 
It  was  also  prophetic,  for  at  last  the  spirit  of  selfishness  and  evil  and  darkness 
shall  be  utterly  and  for  ever  cast  forth  from  the  Church  of  God.  When  Judas  is 
gone  John  may  enter  fully  into  the  Divine  joy  and  life.  III.  The  denial  of  Fetbb  ■ 
OB,  TBDSTiNO  TO  ouB  LOVE  FOB  Chbist.  The  fall  of  such  a  man  is  inevitable.  Ha 
has  miscalculated  his  strength,  and  mistaken  the  true  and  only  source  from  whiok 
comes  the  abiding  love  that  makes  one  willing  to  leave  all  things.  He  thinks  love 
a  possession  of  his  own,  something  that  originates  with  and  in  himself.  This 
delusion  is  so  fatal,  so  sure  to  bring  failure  and  disappointment,  that,  at  aU  costs, 


426  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chip,  zm 

It  must  be  dispelled.  Peter  was  really  believing  in  himself,  in  his  own  constancy 
and  determination.  The  worthlessness  of  such  a  faith  was  very  soon  to  be  demon* 
strated.  For  that  faith  in  himself  he  was  to  substitute  a  faith  in  One  who  was  able 
to  keep  him.  {Monday  Club.)  The  apostacy  of  Judas: — This  was  the  last  of  a 
series  of  fatal  victories  which  Judas  Iscariot  won  over  the  different  means  and 
checks  which  God  had  mercifully  provided.  From  that  time  it  seemed  as  if  God 
would  no  more  strive  with  him,  either  by  His  Providence  of  love  or  by  the  sugges* 
tions  of  His  Spirit  within.  "  Let  him  ^one."  There  was  no  more  check  to  his 
iniquity,  and  he  proceeded  rapidly  in  that  downward  course  which  was  to  issue  in 
his  irremediable  destruction.  Consider  that  series  of  the  means  of  grace  which 
Judas  had  resisted  before  he  triumphed  over  this.    I.  Judas  had  been  acquainted 

WITH  all  the  BEMABKABLE  MIRACLES  THAT  JeSUS  ChRIST  HAD  WROUGHT  TO  MANIFEST 
THE   TRUTH   OF  HiS   MISSION.        II.     WhAT    INSTBUOTION    HAD     JuDAS    RECEIVED   FBOM 

HIS  Master?  III.  This  instruction  was  sustained  by  an  example  of  unparal- 
leled   LOVELINESS.        IV.     Hb    WAS   FAVOURED    WITH    CONSTANT    TOKENS   OF   KINDNESS. 

V.  Being  brought  in  connection  with  Jesus  Christ  must  necessarily  have  induced 

him  to  EMPLOY  HIMSELF  FREQUENTLY  IN  THE  VARIOUS  RELIGIOUS  EXERCISES  THAT 
WOULD  PROMOTE  HIS  CHRISTIAN  TEMPER  AND  CHARACTER.  VI.  He  WAS  CONTINUALLY 
ASSOCIATING  WITH  THE  BEST  PEOPLE  UPON  EARTH.  VII.  He  SAW  THE  BEMARKABLB 
CHANGE   PERFECTED  BY   THE    MEANS     OF  GRACE     AND   RENDERED     EFFECTUAL     BY  GRACE 

ITSELF — the  joy  and  gratitude  of  the  Syro-Phoenician  woman  whose  strength  of 
faith  brought  her  great  blessings,  the  change  in  the  heart  of  the  publican,  the 
penitence  of  Mary  Magdalene.  VIII.  He  was  the  subject  of  the  feet-washino, 
IX.  As  the  context  tells  us  (cf.  Luke  xxii.),  hb  was  called  to  the  table  of  thb 
Lord  at  the  first  institution  of  the  Suppeb.  Thus  all  the  most  powerful 
means  that  imagination  could  devise  failed  in  repressing  the  sin  of  Judas  when 
once  it  had  obtained  the  mastery.  Conclusion :  Perhaps  when  we  are  noticing  the 
strength  of  sin  in  him,  which  overcame  all  the  most  powerful  means  of  grace, 
there  may  be  some  who  are  ready  to  suppose  that  Judas  was  one  selected  above  all 
others  to  manifest  the  power  of  depravity.  Who  is  it  that  is  thus  prompt  to 
condemn  Judas  ?  Who  is  the  person  that  is  not  as  singular  an  instance  of  depravity? 
Are  not  you  now  under  the  power  of  a  reigning  sin,  you  that  thus  condemn  thii 
wretched  man  ?  "  Therefore  thou  art  inexcusable,"  &c.  Who  are  you  that  can 
say  truly  that  you  have  never  manifested  such  obduracy  ?  I  ask  you  to  determine 
the  question  as  before  God  whether  you  have  not  resisted  and  triumphed  over 
means  of  grace  as  mighty  as  he  overcame.  Consider,  then — 1.  That  you  are  an 
inexcusable  sinner.  2.  That  you  need  a  Saviour  and  One  has  been  provided.  3. 
Do  not  neglect  to  avail  yourself  of  this  provision  by  repentance  and  faith.  {Baptist 
Noel.)  Jesus  and  the  traitor: — Consider  these  words — I.  As  predicting  thb 

bin  of  Judas,  which  shows — 1.  That  Christ  suffered  as  no  other  human  being  ever 
suffered.  Great  as  are  the  sorrows  of  men,  they  are  generally  unforeseen  ;  more 
than  half  their  weight  therefore  is  removed.  We  are  supported  by  hope  even  on 
the  brink  of  misery :  Jesus  foresaw  all  His  woes,  and  He  knew  them  to  be  unavoid- 
able. 2.  That  all  hearts  are  open  to  the  Sun  of  God.  It  was  not  long  since  Judas 
had  agreed  with  the  chief  priests.  He  was  sure  not  to  have  betrayed  himself ; 
and  the  same  secrecy  was  equally  needful  to  his  accomplices.  Yet  how  vain  all 
their  precautions  I  The  traitor  hears  his  own  purpose  first  exposed  by  the  very 
Being  whom  he  would  betray  1  How  then  can  you  hope  to  impose  on  Christ  and 
shun  the  eye  of  God  ?  "  Can  any  hide  himself  in  secret  places  that  I  shall  not  see 
him  ?  "  3.  That  the  most  wicked  actions  of  men  unintentionally  promote  God'a 
secret  purposes  of  grace.  He  who  foretold  this  crime  could  have  prevented  it. 
But  the  act  foreseen  was  permitted  and  over-ruled  for  good.  Shall  we  murmur, 
then,  even  at  the  most  mysterious  dispensation  (Rom.  viii.  28)  ?  II.  As  describing 
THE  aggravations  OF  THAT  SIN.  1.  It  was  the  sin  of  treachery — a  sin  of  that  kind 
which  is  held  in  abhorrence  even  by  fallen  man.  Nor  is  the  case  at  all  mended  by 
urging  that  Judas  was  moved  by  self-interest  and  not  by  malice.  The  plea  only 
adds  detestable  meanness  to  his  character,  where  passion  and  revenge  might  have 
furnished  (what  men  would  call)  a  prouder  excuse.  And  who  is  the  traitor  ?  Has 
he  no  name  but  Judas?  Alas  1  his  "  name  is  Legion,  for  he  is  many."  2.  It  was 
treachery  against  the  best  of  friends — "  Me  I  "  Is  not  the  same  Christ  our  Friend? 
Yet  multitudes  still  prefer  the  silver  to  Christ.  3.  It  was  the  treachery  of  a  highly 
privileged  and  confidential  servant.  "  One  of  you !  "  For  three  years  had  the 
Pharisees  been  seeking  for  such  an  accomplice :  but  the  multitude  would  not,  the 
ofQcerg  could  not.     These  persecutors  never  dreamed  of  asking  one  of  the  apostlei 


«HAP.  xra.]  ST.  JOHN.  427 

— ^who  would  ?  when,  to  their  great  astonishment,  he  offers  of  his  own  accord  1 
**  Take  heed  lest  there  be  in  any  of  you  such  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief."    III.  As 

EXEMPLIFYING     THE    FEELINGS     OF    A     HOLT     MiND    IN     THE     CONTEMPLATION    OP    SIN. 

Jesus  **  was  troubled  in  spirit."  Not  because  mortified  by  an  unexpected  discovery. 
He  had  known  that  these  things  would  take  place  at  least  as  long  ago  as  when 
David  penned  the  fifty-fifth  Psalm  (vers.  12-14) .  Nor  because  this  treachery  made 
His  own  fate  certain;  it  oould  not  be  more  so  than  His  eternal  purpose  had 
already  made  it.  No ;  He  was  troubled — 1.  At  the  present  dishonour  done  to  God 
and  the  gospel.  It  was  a  triumph  to  Satan,  who  thus  "  bruised  His  heel "  ;  to  all 
the  ungodly — "Ah,  bo  would  we  have  it!"  It  is  not  passion  or  jealousy  which 
calls  forth  from  true  Christians  the  reproof  of  sin.  It  is  trouble  of  heart  because 
God  is  dishonoured.  Encourage  this  feeling.  2.  At  the  approaching  ruin  of  a 
sinner.  He  saw  before  him  a  soul  which  (before  even  His  own  death  should  be 
accomplished)  would  be  "  gone  to  its  place."  He  still  feels  the  same  trouble  for 
thee,  0  sinner!  whosoever  thou  art.  His  holy  children  also  feel  the  same 
cause  for  mournings — none  but  devils  and  sinners  rejoice.  {J.  Jowett,  M.A.) 
Horror  of  treachery  natural: — Even  in  Pagan  story  the  name  of  Ephialtes  enjoyed 
a  bad  pre-eminence,  and  could  not  be  mentioned  without  horror,  whom  no  love  of 
his  country,  no  admiration  of  heroic  valour,  not  the  dear  pledges  of  his  friends,  nor 
the  threatened  tyranny  of  a  degrading  foe,  could  withhold  from  such  a  deed  of 
shame ;  but  Persian  gold,  more  sacred  to  that  base  mind  than  all  of  these,  bribed 
him  to  guide  the  enemy  over  the  mountain  path,  and  surprise  that  devoted  Spartan 
band.  Sad  indeed  that  in  Christian  annals  it  should  have  its  more  than  parallel. 
(C.  J.  Brown,  M.A.)        One  of  you  shall  betray  Me. — I.  "  You  "  whom  I  have  loved 

so  TBNDEELY.      II.  "  You  "   whom  I  have   TAUOHX   60  PATIENTLY.      III.  "  YoU  "  WHOM 

I  HAVE  SEBTED  80  FAITHFULLY.  {S.  S.  Times.)  The  conspicziousness  of  apostates: — 
In  the  long  Une  of  the  portraits  of  the  Doges  in  the  palace  at  Venice,  one  space  ia 
empty,  and  the  semblance  of  a  black  curtain  remains  as  a  melancholy  record  of 
glory  forfeited.  Found  guilty  of  treason,  Marino  Falieri  was  beheaded,  and  his 
image,  as  far  as  possible,  blotted  from  remembrance.  As  we  regarded  the  singular 
memorial  we  thought  of  Judas  and  Demas,  and  then,  as  we  heard  in  spirit  the 
Master's  warning,  "  One  of  you  shall  betray  Me,"  we  asked  within  our  soul  the 
solemn  question,  "  Lord,  is  it  I  ?  "  Every  one's  eye  rests  longer  on  the  one  dark 
vacancy  than  upon  any  one  of  the  fine  portraits  of  the  merchant  monarchs ;  and 
BO  the  apostates  of  the  Church  are  far  more  frequently  the  theme  of  the  world's 
talk  than  the  thousands  of  good  men  and  true  who  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  our 
Saviour  in  all  things.  Hence  the  more  need  of  care  on  the  part  of  those  of  us 
whose  portraits  are  publicly  exhibited  as  saints,  lest  we  should  one  day  be  painted 
out  of  the  Church's  gallery,  and  our  persons  only  remembered  as  having  been  de- 
testable hypocrites.  ( C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Now  there  was  leaning  on  Jesus'  bosom. — 
Christ's  special  affection  for  St.  John : — You  naturally  ask,  was  there  anything 
noticeable  or  distinguishing  in  the  character  of  this  much-favoured  disciple  ?  We 
answer,  Christ's  love  is  free.  It  must  be  so,  for  it  is  everlasting — it  precedes  the 
existence  of  its  objects ;  and  further,  it  must  be  so,  for  its  objects  are  guilty  and 
evil — they  have  nothing  in  them  to  attract,  they  have  everything  to  repel.  Christ's 
love  has  its  cause,  or  reason,  in  Himself.  Even  our  love  is  in  some  respects  free. 
It  cannot  be  bought ;  it  cannot  be  forced ;  we  cannot  reason  ourselves  into  it.  But 
while  love  is  thus  in  its  nature  free,  yet,  in  examining  the  objects  of  it,  we  find  that 
they  possess  some  real  or  supposed  qualities,  which  are  the  ground  of  this  peculiar 
esteem.  In  our  blindness  we  often  fancy  qualities  which  do  not  really  exist ;  and 
BO,  on  more  intimate  acquaintance,  we  are  often  disappointed.  But  the  Lord  can- 
not be  thus  mistaken ;  and  so,  when  we  find  one  distinguished  from  his  companions 
as  "the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved,"  we  infer  that,  through  grace.  He  must  have 
possessed  some  quaUties  which  the  others  had  not,  or  not  in  the  same  degree. 
"What  was  it,  then,  in  John,  on  whom  the  Lord's  complacency  rested  ?  It  was  not 
any  peculiarly  high  talent,  for  in  this  Paul  was  superior.  It  was  not  any  peculiar 
aptitude  for  business  and  the  conduct  of  affairs,  for  in  this  Peter  seems  to  have  ex- 
celled. It  was  for  the  qualities  of  the  heart,  rather  than  the  head,  that  John  was 
distinguished ;  and  the  secret  of  the  Lord's  pecuhar  delight  in  him  is  perhaps  foimd 
in  this:  "  I  love  them  that  love  Me,  and  they  who  seek  Me  early  shall  find  Me." 
John  was  %  man  of  warmer,  fervid  temperament,  as  appears  from  the  Lord  calling 
him  and  his  brother  Boanages  (sons  of  thunder) ;  and  this  ardent  heart  was  given 
wholly  and  abidingly  to  Christ.  He  came  young  to  Christ,  as  appears  from  the 
long  period  that  he  outlived  his  Master.     He  came  also  early ;  for  he  was  one  of 


428  IBE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [CBis.  nn. 


the  two  who,  in  oonseqaence  of  John  Baptist's  words,  followed  JesuB  to  His  dwell- 
ing, and  became  His  disciples.  His  deep,  fervent  love,  anconsoionsly  breaks  forth 
in  many  ways.  His  love  to  Christ,  as  well  as  Christ's  to  him,  appears  in  his  place 
at  the  table — the  nearest  to  Jesus.  His  love  made  him  follow  his  Master  to  the 
judgment  hall ;  made  him  linger  at  the  cross  when  the  others  were  gone ;  made  him 
foremost  in  the  race  to  the  tomb,  and  first  to  believe  the  story  told  by  the  forsaken 
bat  orderly  grave  clothes.  It  was  his  love,  quick  sighted,  that  made  him  the  first 
to  recognize  his  Beloved  on  the  shores  of  Tiberias,  in  the  grey  twilight  of  the 
dawning  day.  It  was  admiring  love  that  made  him  close  his  gospel  with  the 
glovring  words  (John  zxi.  25).  It  was  panting,  longing  love  that  made  him 
close  his  Apocalypse  with  the  fervid  prayer  (Rev.  xxii.  20).  John's  very  faults 
show  his  love  to  Christ.  .  .  .  But  further,  John  had  a  deeper,  truer  insight 
than  the  others  into  the  Divine  glory  of  Christ's  person,  and  the  spiritual 
nature  of  His  work.  The  others  begin  with  His  earthly  lineage  and  birth, 
and  occupy  themselves  chiefly  with  His  manhood.  John  begins  with  the  eternal 
Godhead.  The  others  dwell  on  the  works  of  benevolence  and  power  which  crowded 
Christ's  laborious  days.  John  takes  little  note  of  these,  but  dwells  rather  on  the 
glory  of  the  grace  and  truth,  and  gathers  up  the  words  of  hfe  and  power.  John 
seems  to  have  been  among  men  what  Mary  was  among  women — he  sat  at  Christ's 
feet,  and  heard  His  words.  Hence  his  gospel  is  different  from  the  others.  While 
the  other  evangelists  speak  chiefly  of  Christ's  dealings  with  the  bodies  of  men, 
John  dwells  more  on  His  dealings  with  men's  souls.  The  Lord  must  have  felt  that 
John  knew  Him  better,  and  appreciated  Him  more  fully,  than  the  others.  We  can 
conceive  that,  when  Christ  performed  any  act  of  higher  import,  or  uttered  any 
word  of  deeper  meaning.  His  eye  would  unconsciously  turn  to  John,  and  would  be 
ever  sure  to  meet  John's  loving,  gleaming  eye  I  (John  Milne.)  Titled  believers ; 
the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved : — This  was  John's  most  notable  title.  As  a  servant 
of  the  Queen,  having  distinguished  himself  in  the  service  of  Her  Majesty,  becomes 
the  lord  of  such  and  such  a  town,  and  he  takes  tbe  name  of  the  place  as  a  name  of 
honour,  so  John  drops  his  own  birth-given  name,  as  it  were,  and  takes  this  title 
instead  of  it — "  that  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved."  He  wears  it  as  a  Knight  of  the 
Garter,  or  of  the  Golden  Fleece,  wears  the  mark  of  his  sovereign's  esteem.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  A  title  that  was  better  than  a  name : — Lord  Brooks  was  so  proud  of 
his  friendship  with  Sir  Philip  Sidney,  that  he  chose  for  his  epitaph,  "  Here  Ues  Sir 
Philip  Sidney's  friend."  Nearness  to  Jesus: — I.  Let  us  first,  then,  inquire  how 
ARE  WE  TO  ATTAIN  THIS  NEARNESS  TO  Jesus  ?  1.  In  the  first  placo,  by  coming  to 
Him.  We  are,  naturally,  at  a  distance  from  Him.  2.  This  nearness  implies  real 
sympathy  of  mind.  What  a  sacred  bond  is  sympathy  1  what  a  fountain  of  delight, 
of  comfort,  and  of  strength !  In  order  that  there  may  be  sympathy,  there  must  be 
three  things — mutual  ^owledge  one  of  another — harmony  of  moral  taste — and 
aiming  at  the  same  end.  The  refined  cannot  sympathize  with  tbe  polluted,  the 
gentle  cannot  sympathize  with  the  cruel  hearted.  He  that  delights  in  sin,  on  the 
other  hand,  cannot  sympathize  with  him  who  seeks  to  advance  in  holiness,  and  to 
bring  all  around  him  to  enjoy  communion  with  God  and  Jesus.  3.  Nearness  to 
Jesus  implies  that  we  persevere  in  following  Him.  Nearness  to  Him  does  not 
depend  upon  one  act.  4.  The  next  idea  is,  that  nearness  to  Jesus  implies  felt 
f  eUow^p — real  communion.  Oh  I  it  is  not  a  dream.  We  have,  I  trust,  very  many 
of  as,  experienced  it  as  a  distinct  and  separate  thing  from  the  work  of  imagination. 
Felt  fellowship — he  who  has  experienced  that  is  near  to  Jesus.  5.  Pass  on  to  notice 
the  next  thing  implied  in  nearness  to  Jesus — love  to  Him.  Love  is  the  power  that 
annihilates  the  distance  between  as.  6.  Then  it  implies,  also,  that  we  have  intercourse 
with  His  people — communion  with  His  disciples.  II.  The  blessedness  of  this  con- 
dition. 1.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  an  honour — the  highest  honour — to  come  near 
to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  to  be  acquainted  with  Him,  to  walk  with  Him,  to  have 
fellowship  with  Him.  That  is  the  highest  distinction  that  can  be  conferred  upon 
man,  for  it  implies  that  a  man  is  raised  to  a  kind  of  equality  with  the  Supreme 
Being,  that  has  condescended  to  become  brother  and  saviour.  The  honour  of 
being  introduced  to  Jesus  will  last,  and  fill  the  mind  with  rest  and  tranquihty. 
2.  We  say,  in  the  second  place,  it  is  a  blessed  privilege  to  be  near  to  Jesus,  because 
it  assures  as  of  His  eternal  love  to  as.  The  text  says,  *'  there  was  leaning  on  Jesus' 
bosom  one  of  the  disciples  whom  Jesus  loved."  It  was  John  himself  that  wrote  it, 
and  he  knew  the  fact  that  Jesus  loved  him.  The  way  then  to  be  assured  of  the 
love  of  Jesus  is  to  live  near  to  Him.  3.  Nearness  to  Jesus,  in  the  third  place, 
secures  glorious  shelter  and  protection  from  the  evils  which  are  in  the  world. 


«HAP.  zm.]  ST.  JOHN.  42f 

Keep  near  to  thy  Saviour,  nestle,  as  it  were,  in  the  bosom  of  His  promises ;  let  Hia 
feathers  cover  thee,  and  His  wings  be  over  thee ;  go  to  Him  in  times  of  danger  and 
trial.  4.  Then  there  is  another  glorious  privilege — the  power  that  is  transferred 
from  Jesus  to  those  who  are  near  to  Him.  Wiien  we  are  near  to  Jesus,  there  is  a 
current  of  sanctified  influence  passing,  until  those  hearts  of  yours,  once  the  abode 
of  pollution,  become  as  spotless  temples.  The  soul  that  was  in  the  thraldom  of  sin 
is  released,  and  becomes  cleansed  and  sanctified,  and  shall  stand  clean  in  the  pre- 
sence of  the  eternal  God.  This  is  not  done  at  once,  but  by  a  continued  influence 
which  assimilates  the  soul  to  Jesus  in  purity,  holiness,  love,  and  heavenly  minded- 
ness,  and  makes  it  a  type  of  Jesus.  5.  Then  there  is  another  privilege — that  there 
is  a  constant  manifestation  of  fresh  glory  made  to  the  mind  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  What  an  unworthy  idea  some  people  have  of  Jesus.  It  is  only  that  of  a 
beautiful  image,  as  it  were,  drawn  on  canvas.  But,  to  the  believer,  Jesus  always 
manifests  some  new  beauty  in  His  face — some  new  glory  in  His  nature.  6.  You 
have  another  striking  advantage  of  being  near  to  Jesus — that  of  growing  and  in- 
creasing in  your  usefulness  in  the  service  of  Jesus.  There  is  a  moral  element  of 
fitness  required  for  the  service  of  Jesus.  7.  Then  there  is  another  great  privilege 
and  blessing — the  mind  and  heart  are  weaned  from  earth  in  proportion  as  we  live 
near  to  Jesus.  We  become  conscious  of  being  only  strangers  on  the  earth,  of  be- 
longing to  another  world,  as  citizens  of  a  more  enduring  city.  (T.  Thomas.) 
The  sacred  breast : — Attention  should  be  called  to  the  different  words  (different  in 
ihe  original  as  well  as  in  the  English)  used  in  the  text  to  denote  that  part  of  our 
Lord's  most  Sacred  Person :  "  bosom  "  in  ver.  23,  "  breast "  in  ver.  25.  Strictly 
speaking,  the  latter  word  alone  denotes  part  of  the  person;  the  ••  bosom"  is  that 
part  of  the  dress  which  covers  the  breast.  Ancient  dresses  consisted  of  two  pieces, 
a  tight-fitting  inner  gai-ment,  and  a  shawl  or  outer  wrapper  thrown  over  it.  And 
this  shawl  was  so  arranged  as  to  fall  in  a  large  full  fold  over  the  breast,  this  full 
fold  constituting  the  bosom  or  lap  of  the  dress.  This  bosom  or  lap  was  sometimes 
nsed  as  a  purse,  to  contain  money  or  valuables ;  which  explains  that  expression  of 
our  Lord,  "  Good  measure,  pressed  down,  and  shaken  together,  and  running  over, 
shall  men  give  into  your  bosom  "  (Luke  vi.  38).  And  when  a  parent  or  nurse 
carried  a  young  child,  the  child  would  more  or  less  repose  in  this  fold  of  the  dress, 
which  would  be  drawn  over  its  head.  The  subject  having  been  thus  opened,  we  will 
speak  to  you  first  of  the  Bosom  in  which  our  Lord  Himself  lay  from  all  eternity ; 
secondly,  of  the  moral  attitude  of  His  faithful  and  beloved  ones,  who  "  lean  on  His 
Bosom,"  or  "  lie  on  His  Breast ;  "  and  lastly,  of  the  glorified  Breast  of  the  risen  and 
ascended  Saviour.  I.  And,  first,  of  the  bosom  in  which  He  Himself  lay  rsou 
ALL  ETEKNiTV,  "before  the  mountains  were  brought  forth,  or  ever  the  earth  and  the 
world  were  made."  "  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time  ;  the  only  begotten  Son, 
which  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  He  hath  declared  Him  "  (chap.  i.  18).  The 
earthly  image  chosen  to  convey  the  heavenly  truth  is  drawn  from  the  parental 
relationship  upon  earth,  and  from  the  loving  services  which  human  parents  do  for 
their  children  in  the  earliest  and  most  dependent  stage  of  existence.  They  fold 
them  in  their  bosom ;  they  carry  them  in  their  arms ;  according  to  that  word  of 
Moses  (Num.  xi.  12).  This  doctrine  lights  up  Chiistian  theology  with  bright  and 
consolatory  lights.  First,  the  God  of  Christian  men,  as  distinct  from  the  God  of 
the  Deist  and  Unitarian,  is  not  to  be  thought  of  as  ever  having  dwelt  apart  or  in 
solitude.  And  then,  secondly,  this  doctrine  of  our  Lord's  eternal  generation  gives 
ns  such  an  assurance  as  we  could  not  otherwise  have  of  the  tenderness  and  strength 
of  God's  love  to  ourselves.  He  who  gave  up  for  us,  and  who  giveth  to  us,  the  Son 
of  His  love,  to  b« "  unto  us  wisdom,  aud  righteousness,  and  sanctification,  and 
redemption  "  (1  Cor,  i.  30),  what  may  we  not  expect  Him  to  do  for  us,  to  give  to 
ns ;  how  can  we  suppose  that  He  will  withhold  from  us  any  good  thing  ?  0  Lord 
and  Heavenly  Father,  may  we  open  our  hearts  to  this  fatherly  love  of  Thine,  in 
faitl.,  in  confidence,  in  filial  love  reciprocating  itl     II.  The  mokal  attitude  op 

THOSE    FAITHFUL  AND   BELOVED  ONES  WHO  LEAN  ON  HiS    BOSOM   OB   LIE    ON    HiS  BREAST. 

It  is  said  especially  of  St.  John  the  Evangelist,  "the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved  " 
(chap.  XX.  2  ;  xxi.  7,  20).  The  expression  has  relerence,  as  is  well  known,  to  the 
arrangement  of  the  guests  at  an  ancient  supper.  They  did  not  sit  round  the  table 
in  our  modern  fashion,  but  reclined  on  broad  couches,  leaning  on  the  left  elbow, 
and  helping  themselves  with  the  right  hand.  Each  couch  usually  accommodated 
three  guests,  and  the  central  place  on  it  was  the  most  distinguished.  It  was  a 
privileged  position,  you  will  say,  not  granted  even  to  all  the  Apostles ;  and  there- 
fore, in  applying  the  passage,  nothing  can  be  founded  upon  it  as  to  the  spiritual 


430  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip,  xiou 

privileges  of  ordinary  Christians.  But  I  find  a  Messianic  prophecy  of  Isaiah,  which 
surely  enlarges  the  purview  of  this  privilege,  showing  it  to  be  a  privilege  designed 
!or  all,  and  more  especially  for  the  weaker  members  of  Christ's  flock.  ••  He  shall 
^ther  the  lambs  with  His  arm,  and  carry  them  in  His  bosom,  and  shall  gently  lead 
those  that  are  with  young  "  (Isa.  xl.  11).  Yes ;  •'  He  shall  carry  them  in  Hia. 
bosom."  He  Himself,  we  have  seen,  was  carried  from  all  eternity  in  the  bosom  of 
the  Father.  And  our  attitude  and  relation  towards  Him  is  to  be  that  which  He 
Himself  bears  to  the  Father.  But  now  let  us  develop  in  particulars  the  moral 
attitude  which  it  behoves  us  to  have  towards  the  Saviour,  as  pictorially  represented 
in  those  words,  "leaning  on  Jesus*  bosom,"  "lying  on  Jesus' breast."  (1)  And 
first,  he  who  leans  on  Jesus'  bosom  in  a  spiritual  sense  has  a  trustful  repose  iff 
Him.  Activity  indeed  must  characterize  the  Christian  life  ;  and  there  is  a  blessed 
ness  and  a  healthfulness  in  work  for  God  ;  but  it  must  be  a  calm  activity,  without 
solicitude,  without  wearing  anxiety,  an  activity  which,  while  it  works,  knows  also 
how  to  lean,  and  lie  still,  and  to  say,  "  the  Lord  will  provide."  "  Be  careful  for 
nothing ;  but  in  everything  by  prayer  and  supplication  with  thanksgiving  let  your 
requests  be  made  known  unto  God,"  &c.  (Phil.  iv.  6,  7).  To  taste  this  peace,  at 
least  in  a  measure,  is  to  lean  on  Jesus'  bosom,  to  lie  on  His  breast.  (2)  Secondly; 
he  who  leans  on  Jesus'  bosom  in  a  spiritual  sense  has  an  assurance  of  the  Saviour's 
nearness  to  him  and  love  for  him — a  love  which  will  cling  to  him  to  the  end.  Oh 
for  an  assurance,  independent  of  the  senses — the  assurance  of  faith — that  Christ  is 
near  to  us  at  all  times,  more  especially  in  public  prayer,  where  two  or  three  are 
gathered  together  in  His  name,  and  in  the  Sacred  Supper,  in  which  He  makes  every 
faithful  recipient  a  partaker  of  His  body  and  blood !  (3)  Thirdly ;  he  who  leans  on 
Jesus'  bosom  in  a  spiritual  sense  cultivates  St.  John's  type  of  character,  a  quiet  con 
templativeness,  in  which  he  may  hear  the  whispers  made  by  the  Divine  Master  to 
the  soul.  The  present  is  an  age  of  activity,  of  material  progress,  of  rapid  move* 
ment.  Under  these  circumstances  it  becomes  more  than  ever  necessary,  as  an 
antidote  to  the  spirit  of  the  times,  that  devotional  retirement  should  be  insisted 
upon  as  a  condition  of  all  healtby  spiritual  life.  Let  things  drop  ever  and  anon, 
even  when  the  strain  of  work  and  worry  is  most  severe,  and  lean  back  as  it  were  on 
the  bosom  of  thy  Lord,  and  look  up  into  His  face,  and  seek  from  Him  the  guidance 
or  the  help  or  the  comfort  which  thou  needest,  and,  if  thou  doest  this  faithfully, 
thou  shalt  not  fail  to  hear  the  whispers  of  His  voice  within.  But  how  can  those 
whispers  be  heard  in  the  rapid  whirl  of  business,  in  the  tumult  of  affairs,  without 
an  inward  silence  and  a  hush  in  the  soul  ?  III.  We  are  to  speak,  lastly,  of  th» 
GLOKiFiED  BREAST  OF  THE  RISEN  AND  EXALTED  Saviour.  In  that  magnificent  vision 
of  the  glorified  Son  of  Man  at  the  opening  of  the  Revelation.  "  Being  turned,  I 
saw  seven  golden  candlesticks ;  and  in  the  midst  of  the  seven  candlesticks  one  like 
nnto  the  Son  of  Man,  clothed  with  a  garment  down  to  the  foot,  and  girt  about  at 
the  breasts  "  (so  it  is  in  the  Eevised  Version)  "  with  a  golden  girdle."  Three  points 
are  observable  in  this  part  of  the  grand  vision,  which  throughout  is  full  of  deep  and 
edifying  significance.  (1)  He  appears  "  girded;  "  and  to  the  angel  of  the  Church 
of  Ephesus  He  describes  Himself  as  "  walking  in  the  midst  of  the  seven  golden 
candlesticks  "  (Rev.  ii.  1).  The  girding  and  the  walking  are  both  expressive  of  the 
ceaseless  activity  of  the  exalted  Saviour,  an  activity  which  shows  itself  not  only  in 
His  intercession,  but  in  His  close  inspections  of  the  Churches  as  to  their  spiritual 
condition  and  progress.  (2)  He  appears  girded  at  the  breasts,  not  at  the  loins ; 
the  golden  cincture  is  swathed  around  Him  high  up  the  person,  below  the  armpits. 
This  is  explained  by  what  Josephus  tells  us  about  the  girdle  of  the  high  priest,  and 
the  part  of  the  person  on  which  it  was  fastened.  This  girding  at  the  breast,  then, 
being  the  sacerdotal  way  of  wearing  the  girdle,  and  obviously  a  more  dignified, 
reposeful,  and  majestic  way  than  merely  tying  it  tight  round  the  loins,  as  was  done 
when  men  addressed  themselves  to  secular  and  common  work,  indicates  that  He 
who  wears  the  girdle  thus  is  the  "  great  high  priest,  that  is  passed  into  the 
heavens,"  there  "  to  appear  in  the  presence  of  God  for  us,"  and  to  give  effect  to  Hia 
sacrifice  by  pleading  it  on  our  behalf  in  the  heavenly  sanctuary.  But  if  by  the 
position  of  ttie  girdle  the  high  priestly  character  of  the  wearer  is  indicated,  why  is 
it  not  also  indicated  by  the  materials,  which  here  are  all  gold,  whereas  the  curious 
or  (embroidered)  girdle  of  the  ephod,  though  it  had  gold  in  it,  yet  was  made  also  of 
••  blue,  ana  purple,  and  scarlet,  and  fine  twined  linen  ?  "  This  is  to  indicate  the 
kingly  character  of  Christ  united  with  the  priestly.  He  being  not  only  a  priest,  but 
*■  J\  priest  upon  His  throne,"  a  priest  exalted  to  universal  government.  (3)  Bn< 
"%at  shall  we  say  of  this  remarkable  feature  of  the  vision,  that  the  Saviour  appeatf 


OTA».  xm.)  ST.  JOHN.  431 

in  it  with  the  breast  of  a  woman,  not  of  a  man  ?  That  there  is  a  profound  and 
beautiful  Bignificance  in  this  trait,  whatever  be  its  significance,  I  make  no  manner 
of  question.  He  was  the  Seed  of  the  woman,  not  of  the  man,  and,  as  being  descended 
only  from  a  mother,  might  be  expected  to  show  all  that  tender  side  of  human 
character  which  woman  more  especially  exemplifies.  He  has  the  breast  of  a 
woman,  that  is,  the  heart  of  a  woman,  in  susceptibility  to  the  sufferings  of  His 
people,  and  in  sympathy  with  them,  when  they  are  called  upon  to  suffer.  (E.  M. 
Golburn,  D.D.)  Leaning  on  Jesus'  bosom: — I.  The  significanox  of  this  act* 
Eien  with  John  the  outward  posture  was  only  the  symbol  of  the  spiritual.  It 
implies — 1.  Reconciliation  to  Christ.  We  are  by  nature  estranged  from  God  and 
Christ.  Hence  we  stand  guilty  and  condemned.  But,  impelled  by  wondrous  love, 
Jesus  has  taken  our  place  and  borne  our  penalty.  Now  God  can  be  just  and 
the  justifier  of  all  who  believe  in  Him.  Those  who  have  been  thus  recon- 
ciled lean  on  Jesus'  bosom,  and  those  only.  Suppose  a  child  to  have  disobeyed  ita 
mother's  commands  and  cherished  a  rebellious  spirit.  Will  that  child  with  con- 
scious guilt  and  angry  feelings  nestle  on  the  mother's  breast?  But  let  temper  sub- 
side and  penitence  arise,  then  it  will  hasten  to  the  mother's  knee,  let  the  mother's 
forgiveness  kiss  away  tears,  and  throw  its  arms  round  the  mother's  neck  and  lean 
on  her  bosom.  2.  Confidence  in  Him.  He  is  worthy  of  this,  for  He  is  infinitely 
wise,  strong,  good,  and  ought  to  be  thoroughly  trusted.  But  He  is  not.  But  those 
who  lean  on  His  bosom  have  no  fear,  and  find  everything  they  need.  3.  Love  for 
Him.  He  is  worthy  of  our  best  affection.  Do  we  not  naturally  admire  beauty  ? 
"He  is  altogether  lovely."  Are  we  not  always  affected  by  loviugkindness ?  He 
has  loved  as  with  a  love  surpassing  every  other.    Hatred  separates,  love  unites. 

Those  who  love  Christ  are  ever  near  His  side.     4.   Communion  with  Hun not 

merely  saying  prayers— but  heart  intercourse  with  Him  everywhere.  Silence  leads 
to  estrangement,  exchange  of  confidences  to  love.  So  when  there  is  little  com- 
munion with  Christ  there  is  little  love ;  but  the  soul  whose  fellowship  with  Him  is 
constant  will  lay  his  head  where  John  lay  his.  II.  The  blessedness  of  this  posi- 
tion. Here  is— 1.  Perfect  safety.  We  are  all  exposed  to  danger  as  regards  both 
body  and  soul.     Most  men  are  concerned  about  the  safety  of  their  bodies  and 

money — then  surely  they  should  be  about  that  of  their  souls.    But  where  shall (1) 

The  unpardoned  sinner,  or  (2)  the  backsliding  saint  find  safety  save  here  ?  "  There 
is  therefore  now  no  condemnation,"  &o.  "  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against 
us."  2.  Spiritual  instruction.  We  are  enfeebled  by  ignorance.  Some  of  us  think 
we  know  much  about  business,  science,  art,  &c. ;  but  we  know  little  aboat  God  and 
Divine  things.  Where  shall  we  look?  The  learned  of  our  day  only  bewilder  us, 
but  we  shall  get  all  we  want  from  the  best  Teacher,  who  is  Himself  the  embodiment 
of  truth ;  and  those  who  trust  Him  most  will  be  the  best  instructed,  even  as  John 
learnt  most  of  the  betrayal.  3.  Moral  improvement.  We  are  greatly  influenced  by 
our  associates.  Those  who  dwell  in  courts  acquire  a  peculiar  dignity,  and  those 
who  live  near  Christ  become  Christ-like.  4.  Rest  and  peace.  There  is  a  fearful 
amount  of  unrest  in  the  world  arising  from  a  guilty  conscience,  loss  of  friends, 
wealth,  <fec. ;  but  "  in  Christ  Jesus  the  peace  of  God  will  keep  our  hearts  and  minds." 
(J.Morgan.)        Lying  on  Jesus*  breast:—!.  The  state  of  mind  and  heabt,  ok 

EITHER  SIDE,  OF  WHICH  THIS  ATTITUDE  WAS   THE   EXPBESSION.      1.  On    the   side  Of  the 

disciple,  it  told — (1)  Of  a  holy,  unsuspecting,  childlike  trust,  reliance  on  the  Lord. 
Doubtless  John  was  tried  with  many  a  painful  foreboding  for  the  future.  Had  any 
one  asked,  "  Knowest  thou  that  the  Lord  will  take  away  thy  Master  from  thy 
head?  "  methinks  he  had  been  ready  to  answer,  "  Yea,  I  know  it;  hold  thou  thy 
peace."  Too  well  he  knows  it.  But  just  the  more  he  will  lean  his  head  to-night 
on  that  Master's  bosom  and  cast  his  care  on  this  mighty,  gracious  One.  (2)  Of 
intense  affection.  It  is  heart  drawing  to  heart  in  the  hour  of  deep  grief  I  (3)  The 
two  feelings,  the  reliance  and  the  love  were  inseparably  connected.  It  was  a  loving 
reliance;  and  it  was  a  confiding  affection.  The  "faith  wrought  by  love;"  and 
tha  love,  "  casting  out  fear,"  emboldened  the  faith.  2.  It  told  of  corresponding 
feelings  on  the  side  of  the  Master.  (1)  Confidence,  trust,  reposed  by  Christ  in  the 
disciple  ?  Jesus  suffers  him  to  lean  his  head  upon  His  bosom.  Ah  I  this  is  not  to 
be  the  traitor.  ^  "  The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  Him,  and  He  will 
show  them  His  covenant."  (2)  Intense  affection.  Not  that  Christ  loved  John 
with  any  higher  love  of  benevolence  than  He  did  the  other  disciples.  Plainly  it  ia 
satisfaction,  delight,  complacency,  in  John  that  is  spoken  of  in  the  appellation,  and 
which  came  out  divinely  in  the  permission  to  lean  his  head  upon  His  bosom.*  IL 
Odk  text  admits  or  bfinq  turned  to  extensive  use,  far  beyond  the  case  of  John. 


433  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xau 

One  disciple  only  could  lean  as  did  John,  bat  we  may  now  find  that  this  is  a  privi> 
lege,  accessible  in  the  essence  of  it,  even  to  as  many  as  shall  truly  aspire  after 
it.  1.  The  BOol  of  this  attitude,  as  on  the  disciple's  side  lay  in  trust  in 
Jesus.  Then  have  we  the  attitude  still.  "The  life  which  I  now  live  in  the 
flesh  I  Uve  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God."  Many  years  ago  I  was  visiting  a  dying 
boy.  He  lay  weary  on  his  pillow,  near  his  end.  I  scarce  hoped  to  make  him 
understand  me — he  was  not  sis  years  of  age.  But  thinking  I  might  make  an 
attempt,  after  short  prayer,  I  said  to  him,  "  Charlie,  you  are  resting  your  head  on 
the  pillow ;  try  and  rest  on  Jesus,  as  you  are  resting  on  the  pillow."  Next  day  hia 
father  told  me  that,  on  going  up  to  the  Httle  crib  several  hours  after  my  visit,  and 
without  making  any  reference  to  it,  he  said  to  him,  "  Are  you  resting  on  Jesus, 
dear?"  He  immediately  answered,  "  Soft  pillow."  It  was  his  only  reply.  Ah, 
that  is  it,  unsuspecting  reliance,  "  soft  pillow  " — He  lying  on  Jesus'  breast  1  (2) 
And  have  we  not  the  love  also,  still.  "  My  beloved  is  mine,  and  I  am  his  " — faith 
and  love  hand  in  hand.  "  I  will  seek  Him  whom  my  soul  loveth."  2.  The  leaning 
of  disciples  still  is  by  His  welcoming  also,  just  as  of  old — reciprocating  their  feel- 
ings towards  Him  in  a  blessed  corresponding  confidence,  and  complacency  in  them. 
"He  that  hath  My  commandments,  and  keepeth  them,"  &o.  Perhaps,  in  a  more 
special  manner  at  the  Lord's  Supper,  may  the  lying  on  the  breast  be  known  and 
realized.  Yet  this  is  not  a  privilege  confined  to  any  one  ordinance  or  season. 
Assuredly  the  bosom,  the  heart,  of  Jesus  is  large  enough  to  receive  every  weary  head 
that  is  but  truly  offered  to  lean  on  it.  "  I  heard  the  voice  of  Jesus  say,"  &c.  (C.  J. 
Brown,  D.D.)    [Can  we  now  lean  on  Jesus'  bosom : — What  is  it,  at  this  day,  to  do  this  ? 

I.   To  BBINO  OUB  HEAET8  INTO  LIVING   FEELING,  CONTACT  WITH    THE   HEAKT  OP  ChRIST. 

We  speak  of  the  breast  of  man,  as  being  filled  with  noble  or  revengeful  feelings;  of  a 
generous  or  an  unfeeling  bosom,  because  the  heart  has  its  seat  in  the  breast ;  and 
as  that,  in  the  physical  system,  is  the  centre  of  animal  life,  the  ever- welling  up  and 
distributing  fountain  of  the  vital  cmTents,  so  when  we  would  speak  of  the  moral 
centre,  the  well-spring  of  moral  emotions,  we  use  the  term  heart,  and  say,  his  heart 
is  right  or  wrong,  generous  or  closed,  renewed  or  unsanctified ;  hence,  to  lean  upon 
the  breast,  the  outer  casement  of  the  heart,  is  equivalent  to  saying,  that  the  person 
leans  upon  the  love  and  sympathy  of  that  individual.  Christ's  love  emanates  from 
His  heart,  and  hence  he  who  rests  upon  His  love  rests  upon  His  breast.  The 
feeling  of  confidence  in  human  affection  is  one  of  the  most  deUcious  emotions  of 
which  we  are  capable.  In  leaning  upon  the  heart  of  Jesus,  the  Christian  can  have 
this  confidence,  to  a  degree  impossible  among  men.  His  heart  is  an  organ  of 
infinite  love.  II.  To  lean  upon  the  place  whence  His  sympathies  flow.  There 
are  daily  trials,  in  which  we  seek  not  only  succour  but  sympathy.  None  ever  felt 
80  deeply  for  the  sorrows  and  sufferings  of  the  world  as  Jesus,  and  now  that  He  has 
ascended  into  heaven,  He  is  still  "  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities." 
And  if  we  lean  on  Jesus'  bosom,  we  shall  always  have  His  sympathies.  III.  To  get 
AN  intelligent  UNDERSTANDING  OP  THE  DOCTEiNE  OP  Cheist.  "  Out  of  the  abun- 
dance of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaketh."  A  man  may  be  a  learned  theologian 
without  leaning  upon  Jesus'  bosom ;  but  no  one  can  savingly  understand  Divine 
truth  who  does  not  bring  his  head  in  contact  with  Jesus'  heart.  There  is  a  great 
difference  between  an  intellectual,  and  an  experimental,  knowledge  of  Bible  doc- 
trines. The  poor  widow,  the  bed-ridden  patient,  often  has  a  richer  knowledge  of 
the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus ;  than  the  learned  minister  or  the  boasting  professor.  All 
real  knowledge  of  Jesus  must  come  from  Christ's  heart,  and  through  our  heart. 

IV.  To  LEAN  UPON  the   PLACE   WHENCE  PLOWED   HiS    PRECIOUS    BLOOD.      It   WaS   from 

the  spear-riven  heart  of  Christ,  that  there  gushed  out  blood  and  water;  and 
in  leaning  upon  Jesus'  breast,  therefore,  we  get  close  to  the  fountain  opened 
for  sin  and  all  oncleanness.  If  we  would  feel  the  preciousness  of  that  blood, 
we  must  lean  upon  the  heart  whence  it  flowed,  and  there  learn  the  vastness 
of  the  love  which  gave  it,  the  greatness  of  the  sacrifice  it  involved,  and  the 
unspeakable  richness  of  the  grace  it  purchased.  Conclusion:  The  bosom  of 
Christ  is  a  privileged  place  in  times  of — 1.  Adversity.  The  world  may  treat 
us  coldly,  friends  may  withdraw  from  us,  riches  may  depart,  but,  if  we  can  lean 
on  Jesus'  bosom,  we  care  not.  2.  Sickness.  3.  Sorrow.  4.  Death.  {Bp.  Stevens.) 
One  of  His  disciples  whom  Jesus  loved. — The  beloved  disciple : — I.  John's  characteb. 
1.  Early  piety.  2.  The  most  remarkable  trait,  love,  which  was  constantly  evinced 
in  his  attendance  on  our  Lord.  He  leaned  on  his  Master's  bosom  in  their  hours  of 
social  enjoyment — "  And  in  death  they  were  not  divided."  He  remained  with  Him 
(ill  he  saw  Him  expire.    We  must  follow  him  to  the  cross.     II.  How  did  hk  ARBiva 


CHAP,  xm.]  BT.  JOHN.  483 

AT  THIS  ?  He  explains  this,  "  We  love  Him."  Yes ;  there  he  learned  the  lessons 
of  love  on  Jesus'  bosom.  HI.  How  did  he  exemplift  after  his  Mastee's 
DECEASB  ?  Bead  his  Epistles.  He  led  others  to  it  (chap  i.).  Zeal  for  God  and 
love  for  man ;  a  burning  fervour  for  God's  cause  and  man's  happiness — "What  we 
have  seen  and  heard  we  testify  unto  you."  Love.  IV.  The  pabticdlab  distinctions 
AND  FAVOURS  CONFERRED  ON  HIM  BY  Christ,  Leans  on  His  breast;  Mount  of 
Transfiguration;  garden;  and  He  consigns  His  holy  virgin  mother  to  his  care; 
lived  long ;  closed  the  canon  of  Scripture ;  was  raised  to  glory.  {T.  Sumvierfield, 
M.A.)  A  specially  loved  disciple  is — I.  Near  to  Jesus.  H.  Intimate  with 
Jesus.  III.  Honoured  by  men.  IV.  Helpful  to  men.  (S.  S.  Times.)  Why 
Jesus  loved  John : — We  learn  from  the  test  the  rightness  of  personal  preferences — 
certain  minds  being  more  akin  to  other  minds  than  others — but  also  that  in  the 
highest  hearts  this  affinity  will  be  determined  by  spiritual  resemblauces,  not  mere 
accidental  agreeabilities,  accomplishments,  politenesses,  or  pleasant  manners. 
Again,  I  imagine  that  the  union  had  nothing  to  do  with  mental  superiority;  that 
might  have  been  more  admirable.  John  was  lovable.  Not  talent,  as  in  Paul's 
case,  nor  eloquence,  nor  amiability,  drew  Christ's  spirit  to  him,  but  that  large 
heart,  which  enabled  him  to  beHeve  because  he  felt,  and  hence  to  reveal  that  "  God 
is  love."  It  is  Very  remarkable,  however,  that  his  love  was  a  trained  love.  Once 
John  was  more  zealous  than  affectionate.  But  he  began  by  loving  the  human 
friend  by  tending  the  mother  as  a  son,  by  attachment  to  his  brother  James  ;  and 
80  through  particular  personal  atachments  he  was  trained  to  take  in  and  compre- 
hend the  larger  Divine  love.  I  should  say,  then,  that  he  was  most  lovable,  because, 
having  loved  in  their  varied  relationships  "  men  whom  be  had  seen,"  he  was  able 
to  love  •*  God  whom  he  had  not  seen."  He  is  most  dear  to  the  heart  of  Christ, 
who  loves  most,  because  he  has  most  of  God  in  him ;  and  that  love  comes  through 
missing  none  of  the  preparatory  steps  of  affection  given  us  as  primer  lessons.  (J''. 
W.  Robertson,  MA.)  Who  Is  it? — Familiarity  with  Christ : — Personal  Christianity 
is  an  intimate  connection  with  Christ.  To  be  a  true  Christian  is  to  be  more 
familiar  with  Christ  tban  with  father,  mother,  &c.  This  familiarity  involves — I. 
The  most  amazing  condescension.  Little  magnates  of  earth  deem  it  a  great 
condescension  to  allow  the  humble  and  lowly  to  speak  to  them  even  at  a  distance. 
But  here  is  the  Author  and  Proprietor  of  the  universe,  the  infinitely  holy  as  well 
as  the  transcendently  great,  permitting  this  poor,  frail,  sinful  man  to  lean  on  His 
bosom.  Let  this  condescension — 1.  Inspire  us  with  adoring  gratitude.  2.  Con- 
sume that  pride  which  prompts  man  to  keep  the  poor  at  a  distance.  II.  Thb 
SUBLIMES!  PBTViLEGE.  To  be  SO  closcly  allied  to  Christ  as  this  is  to  be  in  the 
safest  and  most  honourable  position.  What  an  honour  to  recline  on  the  bosom  of 
the  King  of  kings.  III.  The  propoundest  reverence.  John  addresses  Christ  as 
Lord.  Familiarity  with  men,  the  proverb  says,  breeds  contempt.  We  know  it 
often  breeds  discontent.  So  imperfect  are  the  best  of  men,  that,  as  a  rule,  the 
more  we  know  of  them  the  less  reverence  we  have.  Not  so  with  Christ.  (D. 
Thomas,  D.D.)  He  it  is  to  whom  I  shall  give  a  sop.— Literally,  "  the  morsel." 
No  Incident  of  Oriental  meals  is  more  celebrated  in  Western  narrative  than  the 
giving  of  the  morsel,  or  sop,  to  a  table-neighbour,  as  a  mark  of  favour.  It  is  said 
that  the  Shah  of  Persia,  when  in  London  some  years  ago,  could  not  break  himself 
entirely  of  the  habit,  but  insisted  on  passing  some  morsels  to  the  fine  ladies  near 
him,  to  the  danger  of  their  fine  dresses ;  giving  rise  to  the  witticism  which 
described  the  saving  for  the  cat  of  the  morsels  left  after  the  meal,  by  the  French 
sentence,  Notu  aliens  les  garder  pour  le  chat — "  We  are  going  to  save  them  foi 
the  Shah  "  (cat).  But  scarcely  a  traveller,  and  certainly  no  resident,  in  the  East 
can  escape  this  Oriental  courtesy  at  meals.  Since  the  dishes  are  generally  either 
stews  or  cooked  almost  to  pieces,  the  fingers  can  easily  tear  off  a  morsel.  This  is 
dipped  in  the  sauce,  thus  becoming  the  sop,  and  is  thrust  directly  into  the 
favoured  one's  mouth.  If  the  mouthful  is  large,  the  sauce  or  gravy  is  apt  to  run 
down  the  receiver's  beard.  The  present  writer  has  often  received  the  sop  at  an 
Oriental  meal,  and  cannot  say  that,  considering  the  other  customs,  there  is  any- 
thing uncleanly  or  repulsive  in  it.  A  common  mode,  however,  both  of  helping  one's 
self  and  giving  the  sop  to  one's  neighbour,  is  to  take  two  pieces  of  bread,  and  take 
np  the  morsel  between  them,  the  pieces  of  bread  serving  as  spoon,  or  knife  and 
fork.  The  sop  must,  according  to  all  Oriental  rules,  be  considered  as  a  mark  of 
favour ;  and  in  Jesus'  giving  it  to  Judas,  we  must,  unless  we  look  farther  below  the 
fiurfaoe  than  we  have  any  light,  see  only  love  and  goodwill.  The  giving  of  the  sop, 
or  morsel,  seems  to  be  an  old  Greek  custom,  as  well  as  an  Oriental  one;  but  tha 
VOL.  n.  28 


484  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR,  [chap,  thu 

citations  to  sustain  that  position  may  be  seen  collected  in  Webster's  Greek  Testa* 
ment.  They  are  too  numerous  and  voluminous  to  repeat  here.  The  custom  goei 
back  to  the  time  of  Socrates,  if  not  to  that  of  Homer.  {S.  S.  Times.)  He  gave 
it  to  Judas. — Christ  was  now  standing  at  the  door  of  the  heart  of  His  apostle.  He 
was  holding  out  to  him  the  opportunity  of  repentance.  Judas,  however,  was 
unwilling  to  open  that  door  at  the  call  of  Christ,  though  he  opened  it  to  Satan,  and 
80  Satan  entered  into  him.  The  devil  had  stood  knocking  at  his  heart  by  the 
temptation  of  money;  and  his  yielding  to  the  temptation  unbarred  the  door  of 
the  sinner's  heart,  and  made  him  an  easy  prey  to  the  great  tempter.  {W,  Denton, 
M.A.)  The  dramatic  interest  of  the  act : — There  is  perhaps  a  reason  why  this 
giving  of  a  sop  has  an  effect  on  our  minds  not  unlike  the  knocking  on  the  gate  in 
"  Macbeth,"  which  succeeds  the  murder  of  Duncan.  No  words  are  spoken  in  either 
case.  In  this  instance  the  effect  is  more  startling,  because  the  sign  precedes  rather 
than  follows  the  crime.  It  produces  a  feeling  of  peculiar  awfulness  and  solemnity. 
It  is  the  casting  of  a  die.  We  are  made  to  feel,  as  De  Quincey  says  of  the  device 
of  the  great  poet,  "  that  the  human  and  Divine  nature  of  love  and  mercy,  spread 
through  the  hearts  of  all  creatures,  and  seldom  utterly  withdrawn  from  man,  is 
entirely  gone,  and  that  this  fiendish  nature  has  taken  its  place."  By  this  sign  and 
token  we  know  that  Satan  has  entered.  It  was  not  the  Lord  rejecting  Judas,  but 
Judas  rejecting  the  Lord.  (Monday  Club.^  The  final  step : — Remorse  may  dis- 
turb the  slumbers  of  a  man  who  is  dabbhng  with  his  first  experiences  of  wrong ; 
and  when  the  pleasure  has  been  tasted  and  is  gone,  and  nothing  is  left  of  the  crime 
but  the  ruin  which  it  has  wrought,  then,  too,  the  furies  take  their  seats  upon  the 
midnight  pillow.  But  the  meridian  of  evil  is,  for  the  most  part,  left  uuvexed ; 
and  when  a  man  has  chosen  his  road,  he  is  left  alone  to  follow  it  to  the  end.  {J, 
A.  Froude.)  Christianity  not  responsible  for  the  words  or  deeds  of  its  professors : — 
We  must  distinguish  Christian  thoughts  from  the  thoughts  of  Christians,  and 
Christian  deeds  from  the  deeds  of  Christians ;  in  short,  we  must  discriminate 
between  Christianity  and  Christians,  because  Christians  are  human  and  Christianity 
is  Divine.  It  is,  in  fact,  because  of  this  very  distinction  that  Christianity  often 
suffers  in  the  minds  of  those  who  note  the  unworthiness  of  Christians.  Every  fall 
of  a  Christian  is  an  indication  of  the  elevation  of  Christianity  ;  and  every  indica- 
tion of  that  elevation  is  a  reason  for  our  endeavour  to  reach  it.  To  say  that  a  man 
-does  not  practice  what  he  preaches  is  no  necessary  condemnation  of  his  preaching, 
however  much  it  condemns  his  practice.  A  drunkard  has  the  right  to  preach 
temperance  from  the  standpoint  of  intemperance.  A  slave  to  tobacco  is  nci 
necessarily  insincere  because  he  advises  abstinence  from  his  masterful  habit.  "  I 
•can  easier  teach  twenty  what  were  good  to  be  done,  than  be  one  of  the  twenty  to 
follow  mine  own  teaching,"  says  Portia  ;  but  while  that  may  reflect  on  the  twenty, 
it  is  no  reflection  on  the  teaching.  And  so,  when  a  Christian  is  derelict,  that 
dereliction  is  not  a  fruit  of  his  Christianity,  but  of  his  want  of  it.  The  defection 
of  Christians  cannot  legitimately  condemn  the  Church  and  Christianity ;  because 
Christianity  and  the  Church  first  condemned  the  defection.  Yet  when  a  Church 
member  or  a  minister  turns  out  to  be  a  defaulter,  a  blasphemer,  an  adulterer,  the 
world  often  points  its  finger  of  scorn  at  the  Christian  profession,  as  if  the  culprit 
had  learned  the  principles  of  deception  from  the  pulpit,  or  had  been  instructed  in 
defilement  from  the  Sunday-school  chair  or  desk.  A  shallower  argument  against 
the  Christian  profession  than  this  it  would  be  difficult  to  conceive.  It  is  really  the 
blaming  of  Christianity  for  another  instance  of  the  neglect  of  Christianity ;  it  is 
charging  a  high  ideal  with  the  consequences  of  a  low  practice ;  it  is  criminating 
virtue  because  of  the  existence  of  vice ;  it  is  reproaching  truth  with  the  fact  of 
falsehood.  It  is  as  if  we  were  to  reflect  upon  Jesus  by  pointing  at  Judas.  The 
simple  question  at  issue  is.  Is  the  Christian  standard  high  or  low,  good  or  evil  ?  If 
it  be  high,  live  for  it — no  matter  who  falls ;  if  it  be  good,  practice  it — no  matter 
who  fails.  If  it  be  in  itself  low  and  evil,  say  so  squarely.  {H.  C.  Trumhull,  D.D.) 
The  timid  encouraged  to  communion: — Look  in  upon  that  humble  chamber  in 
-Jerusalem.  Whom  do  you  see  eating  of  the  bread  of  life,  and  drinking  of  the  cup 
of  salvation  ?  Are  they  not  all  men  of  hke  passions  with  ourselves  ?  There  are 
James  and  John,  who,  in  their  hasty  zeal,  would  fain  have  called  down  fire  from 
heaven  to  destroy  the  Samaritans.  And  there  is  Thomas — doubting  Thomas. 
There,  too,  is  Peter,  who  only  a  few  hours  afterward  would  curse  and  swear  and 
cowardly  deny  his  Lord.  There,  again,  the  Master  is  seen  passing  the  bread  and 
the  cop  to  Andrew,  and  Philip,  and  Matthew,  and  Bartholomew,  and  the  other 
James,  who  reverently  drank,  but  who,  when  dangers  and  death  encompassed  Him 


,  xra.]  BT.  JOHN.  435 

about,  forsook  Him  and  fled.  And  look  once  more.  There,  too,  is  Judas  1  The 
Saviour  does  not  even  pass  him  by.  Now,  I  ask,  what  right  has  any  one  to  declare 
that  the  Lord's  Supper  is  something  so  sacred  and  awful,  that  none  but  perfectly 
good  people  must  venture  to  receive  it,  when  our  Saviour  Himself  admitted  such 
characters  as  these  to  the  table  which  His  goodness  had  spread  ?  What  reason  is 
there  in  the  plea  which  is  so  often  urged  by  people  that  they  are  afraid  to  commune, 
because  they  have  done  so  many  wrong  things  in  times  past,  or  because  they  are 
apprehensive  lest  they  may  be  led  into  evil  in  the  future  ?  Are  they  more  un- 
charitable and  vindicative  by  nature  than  James  and  John?  Have  they  more 
serious  and  perplexing  doubts  than  Thomas?  Do  they  run  a  greater  risk  of 
apostacy  than  Peter?  or  of  treason  than  Judas  ?  Others  acknowledge,  if  you  press 
tnem  very  closely  upon  the  subject,  that  they  stay  away  from  the  Lord's  table 
because  of  insincere  communicants.  But  how  clearly  does  the  traitor's  presence 
prove  that  no  personal  unworthiness  on  the  part  of  others  can  excuse  us  from  the 

?erformance  of  our  duty.  {J.  N.  Norton,  D.D.)  For  some  of  them  thought — I. 
'he  statement  that  he  *'  had  the  bag  "  shows  thb  position  Jddas  occupied  among 
THE  APOSTLES.  He  was  no  mean  and  inferior  person.  He  was  so  far  from  being 
suspected,  that  he  had  the  charge  of  the  common  store  of  money.  BuUinger  even 
thinks  that  he  must  have  been  a  man  remarkable  for  wisdom,  prudence,  economy, 
and  faithfulness.  II.  The  supposition  of  some  that  Jesus  told  Judas  to  "  buy  the 
things  needed  agaiust  the  feast"  shows  clearly  that  oub  Lobd  did  not  work 
MIRACLES  IN  ORDEB  TO  PRocDRB  THE  NECESSARIES  required  by  Himsclf  and  His 
disciples.  Christians  must  buy  and  sell  like  other  people,  and  must  manage  their 
money  affairs  with  prudence  and  economy.  It  also  shows  how  little  the  disciples 
realized  that  their  Master's  death  was  close  at  hand.  III.  The  supposition  of 
othera  that  Jesus  told  Judas  to  "  give  something  to  the  poor  "  shows  plainly  what 
was  OCR  Lord's  custom  in  the  matter  of  aimsgivino.  He  sanctified  and  adorned 
the  practice  of  caring  for  the  poor  by  His  own  example.  This  passage  and  Gal.  ii. 
10  deserve  careful  consideration.  It  may  be  doubted  whether  the  English  Poor 
Law  has  not  tended  to  shut  up  English  almsgiving  far  more  than  is  right  before 
God.  Conclusion :  1.  Let  us  mark  the  snares  which  attend  the  possession  and 
fingering  of  money.  The  man  who  has  care  of  the  money  in  our  Lord's  little  com- 
pany of  followers  is  the  very  man  who  makes  shipwreck  of  his  soul  for  ever  through 
the  love  of  money.  "  Give  me  neither  poverty  nor  riches  "  should  be  a  Christian's 
frequent  prayer.  2.  The  possession  of  money  is  evidently  not  in  itself  sinful  and 
wicked.  The  Bomish  mendicant  friars,  and  others  who  make  a  self-imposed 
poverty,  are  under  a  complete  aelusion.  It  is  not  the  having,  but  the  misusing, 
money  which  is  sinfuL     {bp.  Ryle.) 

Yer.  30.  He  then  having  received  the  sop  went  Immediately  oat :  and  It  was 

Bight. — Judas  and  the  sop  : — The  subject  suggests — I.  The  two-fold  and  even 
CONTRASTED  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  THE  SAME  THING.  1.  The  giving  of  the  sop  meant  one 
thing  to  John,  viz.,  who  was  the  betrayer?  It  does  not  seem  to  have  been  fully  under- 
stood (ver.  28),  but  that  was  its  meaning.  To  Judas  it  was  meant  as  a  mark  of 
kindness.  There  was  no  inconsistency  in  this.  It  was  done  for  a  good  reason.  It 
consisted  with  Christ's  affection  for  John,  not  to  allow  the  suspicion  of  betrayal  to 
rest  upon  him,  and  with  His  love  for  Judas  to  show  him  kindness.  But  why  should 
Christ  so  act  when  He  knew  the  result  ?  Because  He  invariably  acted  as  though 
results  were  unknown.  He  knew  that  He  would  raise  Lazarus,  yet  He  gave  way  to 
grief.  He  knew  who  believed  not  and  who  should  betray  Him,  but  that  did  not 
lead  Him  to  slacken  efforts  on  their  behalf.  2.  And  so  ihe  same  providence  now 
may  convey  a  varied  meaning  according  to  our  feeling  or  position.  We  are  more 
susceptible  at  one  time  than  another.  A  song  may  make  glad  feelings  in  one  and 
sad  in  another,  according  to  the  mood.    Let  each  learn  what  God  says  aside  to  him. 

IL    How   MUCH   MEANING   MAY   BE   CONVEIED   BT  A  LITTLE   THING.        In    the  YBTJ  UU- 

obtrusiveness  of  the  sop  there  was  an  element  of  power.  It  was  better  than  if  many 
words  had  been  employed.  The  little  friendly  act  was  sufficient  to  flash  the  whole 
before  His  mind,  and  to  discover  the  whole  attitude  of  the  Saviour.  It  was  an 
intimation  that  it  was  not  too  late  for  repentance.  Shortly  before  Christ  put  into  a 
little  service  the  great  lesson  of  humility  and  serviceableness  ;  shortly  after  He  put 
great  meaning  into  a  look ;  and  while  sitting  there  He  put  meaning  to  all  time  into 
simple  bread  and  wine.  It  needs  only  to  have  susceptible  warm  hearts  to  learn 
great  lessons  through  httle  things.  III.  The  disastrous  effect  that  mat  follow 
VBOM  THi<:  rejection  or  AN  APPEAL.     1.  Duriug  all  his  declension  Judas  had  the 


436  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  xm. 

close  attendance  of  Jesus,  and  therefore  must  have  had  every  help  toward  a  sncoess- 
Eul  issue  in  his  trial.  And  now  a  last  appeal  was  about  to  be  made.  Would  he  suf 
}  es  or  no  to  the  love  of  Christ.  That  was  the  turning-point  in  his,  as  in  eveiy 
man's,  destiny.  And  he  was  so  infatuated  with  evil  as  to  say  No.  And  so  Satan, 
who  had  only  previously  pat  the  thought  in  his  heart,  now  entered  him,  and  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  departed  from  him.  But  as  soon  as  the  act  was  performed,  th« 
enchantment  was  gone,  and  he  hurried  himself  into  eternity.  2.  And  so  Christ  is 
continually  making  appeals  to  us,  in  some  sermon,  book,  mercy,  worldly  loss.  Ik 
we  do  not  yield  there  will  come  a  last  and  decisive  appeal,  and  if  we  reject  that, 
despair.  IV.  How  extebnal  nature  reflects  and  meets  states  of  the  hujian  soul. 
"  It  was  night" — a  congenial  time  for  the  deed  of  darkness.  The  children  of  dark- 
ness are  dark  within,  and  when  Judas  went  out  the  dark  thought  of  his  mind  was 
reflected  there.  Perhaps  it  was  a  relief  to  be  away  from  the  light,  perhaps  a  sug- 
gestion of  destiny.  There  is  only  outer  darkness  for  those  who  "go  out  "from 
Christ.  Let  us  accept  Him  now,  from  whose  presence  by  and  by  we  shall  go  no 
more  out.      (R.  Finlayson,  B.A.)         The  sop  and  a  dark  deed: — Notice — I.  Tmt 

GROWTH   AND   STBENGTHENINO   OF   EVIL  AMID   THE   HOLIEST   INFLUENCES.      JudaS   llved 

within  the  circle  of  the  Saviour's  influence  for  three  years.  Eli  was  rebuked  by 
Samuel  for  permitting  his  sons  to  commit  sin  on  the  threshold  of  the  Temple,  ana 
— strange  irony — Samuel's  sons  while  doing  priestly  work  walked  in  the  same  evil 
way.  We  may  attend  the  sanctuary  and  listen  to  a  mother's  prayers  for  fifty  years, 
and  afterwards  be  lost.  II.  The  Saviour's  goodness  becomes  the  occasion  of  obeat 
EVIL.  Judas  was  a  worse  man  at  the  end  of  three  years ;  while  Christ's  appreoia- 
tion  of  Mary's  offering,  and  His  appeal  to  Judas,  seemed  to  strengthen  him  hi  hia 
purpose.  So  the  presence  of  goodness,  if  not  a  blessing  to  us,  is  a  withering  cnrse. 
III.  Christ's  generous  tbeatment  of  the  binneb.  He  saw  the  growth  of  evil  in 
Judas,  but  it  made  no  difference  in  His  trust  and  love.  At  the  last  moment,  there 
was  one  more  attempt  to  touch  the  traitor's  heart.  "  Friend,"  &c.  The  gift  of  the 
sop  was  a  sign  of  love.  What  a  wealth  of  persevering  love  is  poured  out  on  tbe  most 
depraved !  IV.  The  dare  termination  of  an  evil  life.  Judas  went  out  into  the 
cahn  of  that  beautiful  Syrian  night,  but  is  was  a  scene  of  blankness  and  tempest  to 
him.  Then  came  that  deeper  night  of  unavailing  penitence  and  suicide.  The  path 
of  sin  always  ends  in  night.  It  may  be  strewn  with  flowers  or  steeped  in  blood, 
but  there  is  the  same  termination — the  night  of  separation  from  God  and  com- 
munion with  our  own  sins.  (Noel  R.  Hamer,  M.A.)  It  was  night : — I.  Ik 
Jerusalem.  Only  the  pale  shining  of  the  passover  moon  lit  the  streets.  The  sieve 
was  shaken,  and  the  small  soul  of  the  money-lover  dropped  through  oat  of  honoar 
into  shame  and  gloom.  H.  In  his  heart.  For  Satan,  the  prince  of  darkness,  in 
person  was  ruling  there.  Over  him  swept  a  wave  of  the  *•  outer  darkness  "  like  a 
cloud  from  tbe  bottomless  pit.  Suicide  was  just  at  hand.  III.  In  all  thb  vast 
FUTURE.  He  was  going  "  to  his  own  place."  (Job  x.  22).  We  see  at  this  vanishing 
moment  that  the  man  is  lost  while  he  is  living,  virtually  in  hell  because  the  prince 
of  hell  is  in  his  heart.  And  so  we  know  that  a  soul  can  be  damned  even  before  it  is 
dead.  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Walking  in  the  night: — I.  The  darkness  of 
JuDAs's  CRIME.  1.  The  night  has  become  intolerable  to  him  now.  2.  He  was  not 
always  a  traitor.  3.  He  may  even  have  been  brought  into  Christ's  company  that 
he  might  be  saved.  4.  But  over  all  good  his  evil  heart  obtains  supremacy.  11. 
The  DARKNESS  OF  his  REPENTANCE.  1.  His  conscieuce  works  up  with  the  terror  of 
night  upon  it,  but  without  the  accents  of  hope.  2.  His  repentance  leads  only  to 
suicide— a  further  crime.  III.  The  darkness  of  his  doom.  •'  It  had  been  better 
for  that  man,  if  he  had  never  been  born."  (J.  H.  Hargreaves.)  The  harmony  of 
nature  with  our  mental  moods ; — We  always  like  to  have  nature  in  sympathy  with 
our  sorrows  and  our  joys ;  to  have  our  moods  of  mind  quite  in  accordance  with  our 
moods  of  seasons.  Thus,  if  you  and  I  are  in  distress,  there  is  a  sort  of  melancholy 
pleasure  to  find  the  sky  gloomy  with  clouds  ;  and  when  the  shutter  which  tells  oar 
loss,  and  hides  our  mourning  from  the  world  and  casts  a  shadow  upon  our  home, 
lets  in  through  the  crevice  the  sunbeam,  and  we  hear  the  happy  crowd  enjoying  it 
outside,  that  intrusion  seems  quite  an  injury  to  our  feeUngs.  We  take  oar  moods 
of  mind  from  those  of  nature,  and  this  is  a  mystery,  of  course,  which  we  cannot 
explain ;  bat  we  have  pleasure  in  finding  that  her  moods  are  in  accordance  with 
ours,  that  she  is  bright  when  we  are  bright,  that  she  is  in  sackcloth  when  we  are 
sad.  And  so  it  is  quite  a  relief  to  our  feelings,  just  as  it  mast  have  been  to  the 
Evangelists,  to  find  "  it  was  night."  Such  a  deed  could  not  have  been  done  before 
the  face  of  God's  smiling  sun.    (C.  J.  P.  Eyre,  M.A.)        Moral  leatom : — There  is 


CEAV.xm.]  ST.  JOHN.  481 

a  moral  nigbt  upon  the  soal  of  every  sinfal  creature,  jnst  as  there  has  been  «  day 
spring  in  the  soul  of  every  true  believer.  (Ibid.)  Now  Is  the  Son  of  man  glorified. 
The  triple  glorification : — I.  The  globification  of  the  Son  of  man  in  and  bt  His 
BUFFERING.  This  language  is  strange  here.  It  would  not  have  been  wonderful  at 
Jordan  or  on  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration.  Observe  that  it  is  as  "  the  Son  of 
Man  "  He  is  glorified,  i.e.,  His  glory — 1.  As  the  perfect  man  was  displayed  in  and 
by  His  sufferings.  Man's  excellence  consists  in  entire  conformity  to  God's  will.  Of 
this  Christ  was  all  through  possessed,  but  more  particularly  when  at  tbe  supreme 
moment  to  do  God's  will  He  died  for  man.  2.  As  the  representative  man,  as 
typified  by  the  vicarious  sacrifice  on  the  Day  of  Atonement,  and  by  the  '♦  Kinsman 
Bedeemer."  How  glorious  this  was.  3.  As  the  God-man,  as  illustrated  by  the 
supernatural  portents  before  and  at  the  Crucifixion,  which  made  the  Centurion 
exclaim,  "  Surely  this  is  the  Son  of  God."  4.  As  the  predicted  man.  At  no  period 
of  His  history  were  so  many  prophecies  fulfilled.  It  is  probable  that  the  words 
suggest  that  there  sbould  be  spectators  :  that  there  should  not  only  be  glory,  but 
glorification.  If  so,  Christ  was  glorified  in  His  sufferings  by  the  dying  thief,  God 
the  Father,  and  the  holy  angels.  Some  expositors  refer  the  words  to  the  Lord's 
Bupper — 8  glorious  display  of  His  authority  as  the  Legislator,  and  His  love  as  the 
Saviour  of  the  Church,  II.  The  glokification  of  God  in  the  Son  of  Man  sofferutq. 
This  is  a  strange  declaration.  We  can  understand  how  God  is  glorified  in  heaven, 
in  the  universe,  in  His  government,  and  in  multitudes  of  saved  beings,  but  how  in 
the  Bufferings  of  His  Son?  Now  was  "the  hour  and  power  of  darkness."  The 
words  "  in  Him  "  explain  the  mystery.  By  men  and  devils  God  was  dishonoured, 
but  by  Christ  honoured.  God  was  glorified  in  Christ's  sufferings — 1.  Viewed  in  them- 
selves, they  glorify — (1)  The  Divine  power  which  inflicted  them  and  sustained 
the  Sufferer.  Never  was  sorrow  like  Christ's  sorrow,  but  never  was  God's  grace  so 
abundant.  Christ  crucified  is  •*  the  power  of  God."  (2)  The  Divine  wisdom. 
Christ's  sufferings — (a)  Effectually  answer  an  important  end — the  eternal  salvation  of 
man.  (6)  By  means  different  from  any  that  created  wisdom  could  have  suggested. 
(3)  The  Divine  justice  (Rom.  iii.  25,  26).  (4)  The  Divine  faithfulness  in  exactly 
fulfilling  so  many  predictions.  (5)  The  Divme  benignity  (chap.  iii.  16).  2.  Viewed 
in  their  results.  (1)  In  the  events  themselves.  The  enemy  of  God  is  baffled,  evil 
in  the  form  of  sin  and  suffering  prevented,  and  good  in  the  form  of  holiness  and 
happiness  produced.  (2)  In  those  events  as  the  results  of  Christ's  suffering — to 
bring  such  results  out  of  such  means.  Satan's  ruin  rises  out  of  his  apparent 
triumph ;  life  is  the  fruit  of  death ;  favour  arises  out  of  wrath,  <&c.  III.  The 
glorification  by  God  of  the  Son  of  Man,  on  account  of  His  sufferings,  in  conse- 
quence OF  God  being  glorified  by  Him  in  them.  1.  God  glorified  the  Son  of  Man 
— (1)  Under  His  sufferings,  which  tested  His  power  to  beaj  and  His  disposition  to 
obey,  by  sustaining  Him  amid  them.  (2)  After  His  sufferings — "  straightway,"  "  It 
is  finished,"  paradise,  the  resurrection,  ascension,  session,  and  the  judgment 
to  come.  2.  God  glorified  the  Son  of  Man  in  Himself.  If  God  is  glorified  in  Him 
He  shall  be  glorified  in  God.  3.  God's  glorification  of  the  Son  of  Man  was  the  result 
and  reward  of  God  being  glorified  in  and  by  the  Son  of  Man's  sufferings.  Con- 
clusion: The  subject  bids  us — 1.  Best  with  entire  confidence  on  the  finished  work 
of  Christ  as  the  ground  of  our  hope.  2.  Imitate  the  Son  of  Man  in  glorifying  God 
and  in  seeking  thus  to  be  glorified  by  God.  3.  Co-operate,  though  at  an  infinite 
distance,  with  God  in  glorifying  the  Son  of  Man.  (J.  Brown,  D.D.)  God  glorified 
in  His  Son — showed  what  glory  accrued  from  the  sufferings  of  Christ.  I.  To  the 
Son  Himself.  1.  In  completing  His  engagements  with  the  Father.  2.  In 
redeeming  from  death  a  ruined  world.  II.  To  the  Father  through  the  Son. 
1.  In  the  display  of  all  His  perfections.  2.  In  the  accomplish  ment  of  all  His 
purposes.  HI.  To  the  Son  by  and  with  the  Father.  1.  In  the  testimonies  borne 
to  Him  under  His  sufferings.  2.  In  the  triumphant  issue  of  them.  3.  In  the 
benefits  conferred  in  consideration  of  them.  (C.  Simeon,  M.A.)  God  glorified  in 
His  Son : — By — I.  His  obedience  to  God's  law.  II.  His  teaching  of  God's  will. 
IIL  His  submission  to  God's  appointments.  IV.  His  death  for  God's  childben. 
(S.  S.  Times.)  The  cross  the  glory  of  Christ  and  God  : — There  is  something  very 
weird  and  awful  in  the  brief  note  of  time — "  it  was  night."  In  immediate  connection 
comes  this  singular  burst  of  triumph — "  Therefore."  Now  that  that  "spot  in  theii 
feast  of  charity  "  bad  disappeared,  the  Master  felt  at  ease ;  and,  like  some  stream, 
out  of  the  bed  of  which  a  black  rock  has  been  taken.  His  words  flow  more  freely. 
How  intensely  real  and  human  the  narrative  becomes  when  we  see  that  Christ,  too, 
felt  title  oppression  of  an  ancongenial  presence,  and  was  relieved  and  glad  at  iti 


438  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHAP.xnir 

removal  1  The  departure  of  the  traitor  evoked  these  words  of  triumph  in  another 
way.  The  match  was  lit  that  was  to  be  applied  to  the  train.  He  had  gone  out  on 
his  dark  errand,  and  that  brought  the  Cross  within  measurable  distance  of  our  Lord. 
What  Judas  went  to  do  was  the  beginning  of  Christ's  glorifying.  I.  The  Son  o» 
Man  oiiORiFrED  in  His  Cboss.  1.  There  is  a  double  aspect  under  which  our  Lord 
regarded  His  sufferings.  On  the  one  hand  we  mark  the  innocent  shrinking  of  His 
manhood.  And  yet,  side  by  side  with  that,  there  is  the  reaching  out  almost  with 
eagerness  to  bring  the  Cross  nearer.  Like  the  pellucid  Bhine  and  the  turbid 
Moselle,  that  flow  side  by  side,  so  the  shrinking  and  the  desire  were  contem- 
poraneous in  Christ's  mind.  Here  we  have  the  triumphant  anticipation  rising  to 
the  surface,  and  conquering  for  a  time  the  shrinking.  2.  Why  did  Christ  think  of 
His  Cross  as  a  glorifying  ?  The  New  Testament  generally  represents  it  as  the  lowest 
point  of  His  degradation ;  John's  Gospel  always  represents  it  as  the  highest  point 
of  His  glory.  And  both  are  true ;  just  as  the  zenith  of  our  sky  is  the  nadir  for 
those  on  the  other  side  of  the  world.  The  same  fact  which  in  one  aspect  sounds 
humilating,  in  another  is  glorious.  The  Cross  glorified  Christ  because — (1)  It  was 
the  revelation  of  His  heart.  All  His  life  long  He  had  been  trying  to  tell  the  world 
how  much  He  loved  it ;  but  in  His  death  it  comes  in  a  flood,  and  pours  itself  upon 
Ihe  world.  For  Him  to  be  known  was  to  be  glorified.  So  pure  and  perfect  was  He, 
that  revelation  of  His  character  and  glorification  of  Himself  were  one  and  the  same 
thing.  We  can  fancy  a  mother  in  the  anticipation  of  shame,  and  suffering,  and 
death  for  the  sake  of  some  prodigal  child,  forgetting  all,  because  all  are  absorbed  in 
the  one  thought :  "  If  I  bear  them,  my  poor,  rebellious  child  will  know  at  last  how 
much  I  loved  him."  So  Christ  yearns  to  impart  the  knowledge  of  Himself  to  as 
because  by  that  knowledge  we  may  be  won  to  His  love  and  service.  (2)  It  is  His  throne 
of  saving  power.  Christ  could  not  have  spoken  such  words  as  these  if  He  had 
simply  thought  of  His  death  as  a  Plato  or  a  John  Howard  might  have  thought  of 
his,  as  being  the  close  of  his  activity  for  the  welfare  of  his  fellows.  If  His  death  is 
His  glorifying,  it  must  be  because  in  that  death  something  is  done  which  was  not 
completed  by  the  life,  however  fair ;  by  the  words,  however  wise  and  tender  ;  by 
the  works  of  power,  however  restorative  and  heahng.  Here  is  something  more,  viz. , 
that  His  Cross  is  the  propitiation  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world.  He  is  glorified 
therein,  not  as  a  Socrates  might  be  glorified  by  his  calm  and  noble  death ;  but 
because  in  that  death  He  wrestled  with  and  overcame  our  foes,  and  because,  like 
the  Jewish  hero,  dying.  He  pulled  down  the  house  which  our  tyrants  had  built,  and 
overwhelmed  them  in  its  ruins.  3.  And  so  there  blend,  in  that  last  act,  the  two 
contradictory  ideas  of  glory  and  shame ;  like  some  sky,  all  full  of  dark  thunder- 
clouds, and  yet  between  them  the  brightest  blue  and  the  blazing  suushine.  In  the 
Cross  Death  crowns  EUm  the  Prince  of  Life,  and  His  Cross  is  His  throne.  "  He 
endured  the  Cross,  despising  the  shame ; "  and  lo  !  the  shame  flashed  up  into  the 
very  brightness  of  glory,  and  the  ignominy  and  the  suffering  became  the  jewels  of 
His  crown.  II.  God  gloeifikd  in  the  Son  or  Man.  The  mystery  deepens  as  we 
advance.  That  God  shall  be  glorified  in  a  man  is  not  strange,  but  it  is  strange 
that  the  act  in  which  He  was  glorified  was  the  death  of  an  innocent  Man,  and  must 
imply — 1.  That  God  was  in  Christ,  in  some  singular  and  eminent  manner.  If  His 
whole  human  life  and  nature  were  the  brightest  manifestation  of  God,  we  can 
understand  that  the  Cross  was  the  highest  point  of  the  revelation  of  the  Divine 
nature,  and  so  was  the  glorifying  of  God  in  Him.  But  if  we  take  any  lower  view 
of  the  relation  between  God  and  Christ,  these  words  are  a  world  too  wide  for  the 
facts  of  the  case.  2.  That  these  sufferings  bore  no  relation  to  the  deserts  of  the 
person  who  endured  them.  If  Christ,  with  His  pure  and  perfect  character,  suffered 
so,  then,  if  they  have  any  bearing  at  all  on  the  character  of  God,  they  cast  a 
shadow  rather  than  a  light  upon  the  Divine  government.  But  if  we  can  say,  "  God 
was  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world  to  Himself ; "  that  His  death  was  the  death  of 
Him  whom  God  had  appointed  to  live  and  die  for  us,  and  to  bear  our  sins  then, 
though  deep  mysteries  come  with  the  thought,  still  we  can  see  that,  in  s  very 
unique  manner,  God  is  glorified  and  exalted  in  His  death.  For,  if  the  dying  Christ 
be  the  son  of  God  dying  for  us,  then  the  Cross  glorifies  God,  because  it  teaches  as 
that  the  glory  of  the  Divine  character  is  the  Divine  love.  If  there  be  nothing 
Diviner  in  God  than  His  giving  of  Himself  to  His  creatures,  then  the  Cross  towers 
above  aU  other  revelations.  And  is  it  not  so  ?  Has  it  not  scattered  doubts  that  lay 
like  mountains  of  ice  upon  man's  heart  ?  Has  it  not  delivered  men  from  the  dreams 
of  gods  angry,  capricious,  vengeful,  &o.  ?  Has  it  not  taught  us  that  love  is  God,  and 
God  is  love  1    lU.  The  Son  of  Man  olobified  in  the  Father.    The  mysteries 


SKIP.  Kn.]  ST.  JOHN.  43$ 

deepen  as  we  advance.  "  If  God  be  glorified  in  Him,"  &c.  Do  these  words  sound 
to  you  as  if  they  expressed  no  more  than  the  confidence  of  a  good  man,  who,  when 
he  was  djmig,  believed  that  he  would  be  accepted  of  a  loving  Father,  and  would  be 
at  rest  from  his  sufferings  ?  1.  "  In  Himself."  That  is  the  obvious  antithesis  to  the 
previous  clause,  a  glorifying  which  consisted  in  a  manifestation  to  the  external 
aniverse,  whereas  this  is  a  glorifying  within  the  depths  of  the  Divine  nature.  And 
the  best  commentary  is :  '•  Father  1  glorify  Thou  Me  with  the  glory  which  I  had 
with  Thee  before  the  world  was."  We  get  a  glimpse  into  the  very  centre  of  the 
brightness  of  God ;  and  there,  walking  in  that  beneficent  furnace,  we  see  "  One  like 
nnto  the  Son  of  Man."  2.  This  reception  into  the  bosom  of  the  Father  is  given  to 
the  Son  of  Man.  The  brother  of  os  all,  in  His  manhood,  enters  into  that  same 
glory,  which,  from  tie  beginning,  the  Eternal  Word  had  with  God.  3.  That 
glorifying  is  set  forth  as  commencing  immediately — "  straightway."  At  the  instant, 
then,  that  He  said,  "  It  is  finished,"  and  all  that  the  Cross  could  do  to  glorify  God 
was  done,  at  that  instant  there  began,  with  God's  glorifying  of  the  Son  in  Himself. 
It  began  in  that  Paradise  into  which  we  know  that  upon  that  day  He  entered.  It 
was  manifested  to  the  world  when  He  raised  Him  from  the  dead  and  gave  Him 
glory.  It  reached  a  still  higher  point  when,  ascending  up  on  high,  a  dominion  and 
a  throne  and  a  glory  were  given  to  Him.  It  shall  rise  to  its  highest  manifestation 
before  an  assembled  world,  when  He  shall  come  in  His  glory,  and  before  Him  shall 
be  gathered  all  nations.  Conclusion  :  From  that  elevation  He  looks  down  ready 
to  bless  each  poor  creature  here.  And  if  we  will  but  take  Him  as  our  Saviour,  His 
aU-prevalent  prayer,  presented  within  the  veil  for  us,  will  certainly  be  fulfilled  at 
last — "  Father,  I  will  that  they  also  whom  Thou  has  given  Me,"  &c.  {A.  Maclaren, 
D,D.)  Three  important  facts  in  relation  to  Christ : — I.  A  painbtjIi  impression 
REMOVED  FROM  His  HEART.  "  Therefore  when  he  was  goue  out " — 1.  An  object  of 
moral  offence  had  been  removed  from  His  vision.  It  is  never  felt  to  be  a  pleasant 
thing  to  have  in  your  social  circle  a  corrupt  man,  especially  if  you  know  he  has 
plotted  against  you.  The  exit  of  such  a  man  is  felt  to  be  a  relief.  2.  An  obstruc- 
tion to  the  free  utterance  of  His  love  had  been  removed  from  amongst  His  hearers. 
Parents  and  pastors  have  often  things  to  say  which  they  will  not  utter  in  the 
presence  of  a  stranger  or  enemy.  When  the  traitor  was  gone  Christ's  tongue  waa 
free.  II.  A  glorious  consummation  of  the  great  purpose  op  His  life.  The 
sxpression  "  Son  of  Man  "  occurs  sixty-six  times.  Not  son  of  a  tribe,  nation,  sect,  or 
He  would  have  had  tribal,  &c.,  peculiarities.  He  realized  the  Divine  ideal  of  what 
man  ought  to  be.  1.  The  true  glory  of  a  man  is  the  realization  of  the  Divine  pur- 
pose in  his  life.  The  universe  is  glorious  because  it  realizes  the  Divine  purpose. 
The  gospel  is  glorified  when  it  transforms  men  into  the  image  of  God.  2.  The 
man  who  thus  realizes  the  Divine  purpose  glorifies  God  also.  We  see  most  of  God's 
glory  in  his  life  who  works  out  the  Divine  will  in  a  God-like  life.  This  is  what 
Christ  felt  now.  III.  A  tender  consideration  fob  the  coming  trial  of  Hia 
disciples  (ver.  33),  1.  He  informs  them  of  that  trial.  A  trial  that  would  crush  if 
it  came  unexpectedly  may  fall  lightly  when  anticipated.  2.  He  informs  them  in 
the  language  of  endearment.    (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver.  33.  (See  Dr.  Blaclaren's  sermon  on  chap.  vii.  83,  34).  Little  Children. — 
Needing — I.  Care.  II.  Instruction.  III.  Guidance.  IV.  Protection.  (S.  S. 
Times.)  Whither  I  go,  ye  caimot  come  .  .  .  now. — I.  A  picture  of  thb 
Christian's  present  condition.    H.  A  promise  of  the  Christian's  future  de- 

▼ELOPMENT.       (Ibid.)  The  conditions  of  being   with  Christ Just  as  these 

friends  of  Christ,  though  they  loved  Him  very  truly,  and  understood  Him  a  little, 
were  a  long  way  from  being  ready  to  follow  Him,  and  needed  the  schooling  of  the 
Cross,  and  Olivet,  and  Pentecost,  as  well  as  the  discipline  of  life  and  toil,  before 
they  were  fully  ripe  for  the  harvest,  so  we,  for  the  most  part,  have  to  pass  through 
analogous  training  before  we  are  prepared  for  the  place  which  Christ  has  prepared 
for  us.  Certainly,  so  soon  as  a  heart  has  trusted  Christ,  it  is  capable  of  entering 
where  He  is,  and  the  real  reason  why  the  disciples  could  not  come  where  He  went 
was  that  they  did  not  yet  clearly  know  Him  as  the  Divine  Sacrifice  for  theirs  and 
the  world's  sins,  and,  however  much  they  believed  in  Him  as  Messiah,  had  not  yet, 
nor  could  have,  the  knowledge  on  which  they  could  found  their  trust  in  Him  as  their 
Bavioor.  But,  while  that  is  true,  it  is  also  true  that  each  advance  in  the  grace  and 
knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  will  bring  vrith  it  capacity  to  advance  furthes 
into  the  heart  of  the  far-off  land,  and  to  see  more  of  the  King  in  His  beauty.  S<v 
M  long  as  His  friends  were  wrapped  in  such  dark  clouds  cl  misconception  uA 


UO  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHAF.  xm. 

error,  as  long  88  their  Christian  characters  were  so  imperfect  and  incomplete  aa 
they  were  at  the  time  of  my  text  being  spoken,  they  could  not  go  thither  and 
follow  Him.  But  it  was  a  diminishing  impossibility,  and  day  by  day  they  approxi- 
mated more  and  more  to  His  likeness,  because  they  understood  Him  more,  and 
trusted  Him  more,  and  loved  Him  more,  and  grew  towards  Him,  and,  there- 
fore, day  by  day  became  more  and  more  able  to  enter  into  that  kingdom.  {A. 
Maclareji,  I).D.) 

Ver.  34.  A  new  commandment  I  give  unto  you. — The  new  commandment : — 

1.  Why  18  THIS  CALLED  NEW  ?  1.  NegativcIy.  Not  as  if  it  was  not  enjoined 
before  (1  John  ii.  7  ;  2  John  v ;  Levit.  xix.  18).  2.  Positively.  (1)  Newly  freed 
from  the  false  glosses  of  the  Jews  (Matt.  t.  43-44).  (2)  Newly  infused  into  the 
heart  as  well  as  commanded.  (3)  Christ  adds  a  new  authority  to  it,  and  a  new 
obligation  on  us.  (4)  Because  it  is  so  excellent  (Psa.  xxxii.  3).  (5)  It  is  to  be 
performed  according  to  a  new  pattern,  viz.,  Christ's  love  to  us.  H.  By  what 
powEB  DOES  Chkist  lat  His  COMMANDS  UPON  US?      1.  As  God  (chap.  XX.  28). 

2.  As  King  and  head  of  the  Church  (Matt,  xxviii.  18).  HI.  What  love  is  it  w» 
SHOULD  HAVE  TO  ONE  ANOTHEB  ?  1.  Pray  for  One  another  (1  Tim.  ii.  1).  2.  Forgive 
one  another  (Matt.  vi.  14).     3.  Help  one  another.    (1)  In  temporals  (Matt.  vii.  11). 

(2)  In  spirituals  (Levit.  xix.  17).  4.  Sympathize  with  one  another.  (1)  In  prosperity 
(Rom.  xii.  15).  (2)  In  adversity.  5.  Relieve  one  another's  necessities.  (1)  In 
obedience  to  God  (1  John  iii.  17).    (2)  Proportionably  to  our  estates  (1  Cor.  xvi.  2). 

(3)  Humbly,  not  thinking  to  merit  thereby  (Luke  xvii.  10).  IV.-  How  is  Christ's 
LOVE  TO  DS  TO  BE  A  PATTEBN  FOB  oDB  LOVE?  1.  Negatively.  (1)  Not  that  we 
can  suffer  so  much  for  others  as  He  has  done  for  us.  (2)  Nor  do  so  much ;  for  He 
has  obtained  the  pardon  of  our  sins  (1  John  ii.  2) ;  peace  with  God  (Bom.  v.  1) ; 
heaven  (chap.  xiv.  2).  2.  Positively.  (1)  Our  love  must  proceed  from  the  same 
principles,  (o)  Obedience.  (&)  Compassion.  (2)  In  the  same  manner,  (a)  Readily 
(Tit.  iii.  1;  Psa.  xl.  7,  8).  (b)  Sincerely. — (c)  Effectually,  in  deeds  as  well  as 
words  (1  John  iv.  18).  (d)  Humbly,  thinking  nothing  too  low  for  us  to  do  for 
others  (Philip,  ii.  6-8).  (e)  Constantly  (ver.  1).  (3)  To  the  same  objects,  His 
enemies  (Rom.  v.  8-10).  (4)  To  the  same  ends,  (a)  God's  glory  (chap.  xvii.  4; 
1  Cor.  X.  31).  (b)  Others'  good  (Acts  x.  38).  V.  Use.  Consider— 1.  Unless  yon 
love  others  you  have  no  love  for  God  (1  John  iii.  17).  2.  It  is  the  fulfilling  of  all 
the  law  (Rom.  xiii.  9).  3.  No  duty  is  accepted  without  it  (1  Cor.  xiii.  1-3).  4.  It 
is  the  badge  of  a  Christian  (ver.  35).  5.  It  is  an  everlasting  grace  (1  Cor.  xiii. 
8,  13).  6.  Christ  will  judge  us  according  to  this  command  (Matt.  xxv.  45).  {Bp. 
Beveridge.)  The  new  comviandment : — It  is  new,  because — I.  Founded  on  a  nbW 
DELATION.  1.  Our  relation  to  Christ.  We  are  united  to  Him  by  faith,  and  receive 
from  Him,  as  the  branches  from  the  vine,  the  life  by  which  we  live.  2.  This  new 
relation  to  Christ  involves  a  new  relation  with  each  other.  We  are  brethren, 
members  of  one  family — "  As  many  as  received  Him,"  &o.  3.  On  this  new 
relation  the  new  commandment  is  based.  As  the  relationship  of  nature  gives  rise 
to  natural  affection,  so  this  spiritual  one  begets  love  in  accordance  with  itself.  It 
is  more  than  philanthropy,  patriotism,  party  attachment,  friendship,  &c.  It  is 
love  to  those  who  love  Christ  and  are  beloved  by  Him  :  love  to  the  Elder  Brother 
in  His  brethren  and  ours.  II.  Peesented  in  a  new  foem — "  As  I  have  loved  you." 
It  must  be  the  same  in  kind,  although  in  a  lesser  degree;  just  as  a  drop  from  the 
ocean,  or  a  ray  from  the  sun,  is  the  same  as  the  fulness  from  which  it  comes.  These 
conversations  exhibit  several  characteristics  which  we  ought  to  imitate.  1.  Tender 
consideration  for  each  others'  needs.  He  thought  of  them  more  than  He  thought 
of  Himself.  2.  Humble  ministration  to  the  welfare  of  the  brethren  (vers.  4,  5). 
Christ's  was  not  a  sentimental,  but  a  practical  love.  8.  Self-sacrifice  for  our  sakes. 
"  He  gave  Himself,"  not  merely  certain  blessings,  and  not  merely  to  teach  and 
minister,  but  to  die.  "  Greater  love  hath  no  man  than  this."  "We  ought  to  lay 
down  our  lives  for  the  brethren."  IH.  Enfobced  by  a  new  powee.  It  is  in  thi« 
respect  that  the  new  covenant  differs  so  widely  from  the  old.  The  law  enjoined 
the  duty  of  loving  our  neighbour ;  but  it  had  not  sufficient  motive  power  to  carry 
the  commandment  into  effect.  Hence  it  remained  a  dead  letter,  and  spoke  only  to 
condemn.  But  the  new  commandment  is  •'  The  Spirit  of  Ufe  in  Christ  Jesus," 
and  its  word  is  with  power.  It  is  attended  by  the  constraining  influence  of  the 
Saviour's  love.  "  We  have  not  received  the  Spirit  of  fear,"  <fec.  As  we  contem- 
plate this  "  great  love,"  we  become  the  subjects  of  a  new  emotion  of  admiration 
and  gratitude.     Above  all,  His  Spirit  writes  the  new  commandment  on  the  fleshy 


•HAF.  xm.]  8T.  JOHN.  441 

tables  of  our  hearts.  IV.  Designed  fob  a  new  fubpose  (ver.  35).  It  is  not  only 
a  law  to  be  fulfilled ;  but  its  fulfilment  is  a  distinction  and  evidence  of  our  rela- 
tion to  Christ.  1.  A  peculiar  distinction.  Of  old  time,  discipleship  was  known 
by  dress,  language,  meat,  and  drinks,  creeds,  &o. ;  but  our  Lord  declares  that 
the  distinct  mark  of  His  disciples  shall  be,  beyond  everything  else,  love  like  His 
own.  2.  A  certain  distinction.  For  what  is  there  more  directly  opposed  to  the 
sinfulness  of  the  human  heart?  And  what  is  the  saving  change,  but  one  from 
selfishness  to  love  ?  **  We  know  that  we  have  passed  from  death  unto  life, 
because,"  &c.  3.  An  influential  distinction.  For  wherever  it  exists,  men  cannot 
bat  recognize  us,  and  Christ  in  us,  and  be  attracted  to  His  love  and  service. 
{B.  Dale,  M.A.)  The  new  commandment : — We  all  know  the  Ten  Commandments, 
is  there  another  besides  ?  Yes,  says — I.  The  world.  "  Thou  shalt  not  be  found 
out  in  breaking  any  of  the  ten."  It  acknowledges  their  excellence,  breaks  them, 
and  strives  to  conceal  that  it  has  done  so,  wishing  above  all  things  to  escape 
detection.  This  is  the  object  which  the  bad  part  of  the  world  pursues  with  all  its 
cleverness  and  energy.  II.  The  Church.  It  is  remarkable  that  in  the  version  of 
the  Ten  Commandments  by  the  oldest  of  existing  sects,  the  Samaritans,  this  is 
added,  "  Thou  shalt  build  an  altar  on  Mount  Gerizim,  and  there  thou  shalt 
worship."  And  for  commandments  such  as  this,  half  the  energies  of  Christendom 
have  been  spent,  and  spent  in  vain.  Ill,  Christ.  "  Love  one  another."  We  can 
imagine  the  surprise  of  the  apostles,  "  What  I  are  not  the  ten  enough,  or  the  two  ; 
may  we  not  rest  and  be  thankful  in  these  ?  "  True  in  these  are  the  substance  of 
all  duty ;  but  there  is  a  craving  in  the  human  heart  for  something  beyond  mere 
doty,  for  a  commandment  which  should  be  at  once  old  and  new — new  with  all  the 
varying  circumstances  of  time  and  thought  and  feeling,  and  which  should  give  a 
new,  fresh,  undying  impulse  to  its  ten  elder  sisters.  The  ten  older  commandments 
were  written  on  blocks  of  stone,  as  if  to  teach  us  that  all  great  and  good  works 
were  like  that  primaval  granite  of  Sinai,  more  solid  and  enduring  than  all  the 
other  strata,  cutting  across  all  the  secondary  and  artificial  distinctions  of  mankind. 
A  a  that  granite  block  itself  had  been  fused  and  wrought  together  by  the  central 
fire,  so  the  Christian  law  of  duty,  in  order  to  fully  perform  its  work  in  the  world, 
must  have  been  warmed  and  fed  at  the  source  of  a  central  fire  of  its  own — love  of 
God  and  love  of  man.  And  that  central  fire  itself  is  kept  alive  by  the  conscious- 
ness that  there  has  been  in  the  world  a  love  above  all  other  love — the  love  of 
Christ.  Learn  the  importance — 1.  Of  personal  kindness.  2.  Systematic  benefi- 
cence. 8.  Making  the  most  and  the  best  of  everyone.  {Dean  Stanley.)  The 
new  commandment : — It  is  new  because  love — I.  Renews  ds.  II.  Makes  U8  new 
obeatdbes.  III.  Makes  us  heirs  of  a  new  covenant.  IV.  Enables  us  to  sino 
A  NEW  song.  {Bp.  Christ.  Wordsworth.)  The  new  commandment: — What  are 
Christ's  parting  instructions  to  His  Church  ?  How  are  His  followers  to  vanquish 
all  the  banded  opposition  of  the  world  ?  Does  He  counsel  them  to  amass  wealth  f 
to  secure  high  offices  ?  to  acquire  learning  ?  to  equip  fleets  and  armies  ?  to  employ 
craft  and  intrigue  ?  No,  the  first  disciples  were  poor,  destitute  of  learning,  humble 
and  despised,  nor  did  they  ever  kill  or  wound  a  single  human  being.  The  power 
with  which  the  Eedeemer  arms  His  Church  is  love.  I,  The  commandment.  1. 
Love  is  the  only  badge  by  which  tbe  Church  of  Christ  is  known  (ver.  35).  Armies 
have  their  banners,  and  families  their  heraldry.  In  the  days  of  Christ,  Jews  and 
Gentiles  had  their  emblems — different  sects  and  schools  being  distinguished  by 
symbols  and  mottoes.  At  this  day,  churches  called  Christian  glory  in  names, 
titles,  orders,  and  parade.  But  there  is  only  one  badge  of  the  true  Church  which 
will  be  recognized  and  honoured  by  "  all  men."  "  The  banner  over  as  is  love." 
2.  Love  is  the  only  law  by  which  a  Church  of  Christ  is  to  be  governed.  Church 
government  1 — how  much  pride,  prejudice,  ambition,  selfishness,  cruelty,  have  been 
sanctified  by  this  phrase.  A  king  dabbling  with  astronomy  once  said.  Had  I  been 
present  when  God  arranged  the  solar  system,  I  could  have  made  some  important 
suggestions.  So  vain  men  have  thought  as  to  the  Saviour's  regulation  of  His 
Church,  and  they  have  sought  to  improve  His  system.  As  in  the  natural  world 
the  Creator  secures  order  without  monotony,  by  forming  each  particle  of  matter 
with  its  own  peculiar  properties,  and  throwing  around  all  substances  the  law  of 
gravitation  ;  so  in  the  Church,  there  are  many  members  and  diversities  of  gifts, 
&c. ,  but  the  law  of  love  binds  all  into  one  harmonious  whole.  If  love  reign  in  a 
church,  it  will  almost  supersede  discipline.  3.  When  from  the  internal  administra- 
tion of  the  Church  we  turn  to  its  outward  enterprise,  we  find  a  mission  entirely  of 
loY«.    It  is  this  which  makes  the  gospel  the  reUgion  suited  to  all  climes  and  ages. 


448  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xni. 

4.  It  is  love  which  is  to  secare  the  perpetuity,  and  final  and  universal  triumph  of 
the  Church.  Force,  stratagem,  heredity,  prescriptive  authority,  are  the  foundations 
of  earthly  kingdoms.  Christ  founded  His  empire  on  love.  6.  Love  is  the  glory, 
the  happiness,  the  perfection  of  the  Church  of  Christ.  It  is  greater  than  faith 
and  hope,  because  it  comprehends  them  both  ;  for  it "  hopeth  all  things,  believeth 
all  things."  We  every  day  see  loving  hearts  hoping  against  hope,  and  trusting  in 
spite  of  the  basest  perfidiousness.  Love,  indeed,  is  the  crowning  flower  in  which 
all  the  Christian  graces  will  expand  and  bloom  in  eternity.  The  highest  heaven 
knows  nothing  more  exalted  and  blessed  than  love.  II.  In  what  sense  is  it  new. 
1.  In  the  new  principle  to  which  it  appeals.  It  is  not  attachment  to  a  human 
being  for  his  natural  excellencies,  but  complacency  in  the  image  of  God  reflected 
by  him.  "  Every  one  that  loveth  him  that  begat,  loveth  him  also  that  is  begotten 
of  him."  2.  In  its  extent — embracing  all  who  are  the  children  of  God.  All  other 
ties  and  relations  are  subordinated  to  this  religion — this  new  spiritual  afi&nity 
which  rebinds  as  to  Christ  and  to  each  other.  Separated  from  God,  men  are 
walled  off  from  each  other  by  selflsh  and  hostile  distinctions.  To  repair  these 
unnatural  breaches,  the  "  Son  of  God"  became  the  "Son  of  man,"  that  He  might 
attract  us  all  to  God,  and  nnite  us  all  to  one  another  by  new  and  heavenly  ties. 
3.  Its  spirituality.  It  is  love  not  only  for  the  bodies,  but  for  the  souls  of  onr 
brethren.  How  few  really  and  practically  recognize  the  soul.  In  Christ's  teachings 
the  soul  is  everything.  He  heeded  neither  the  trappings  of  the  prince  nor  the  rags 
of  the  beggar.  Beneath  all,  through  all,  He  saw  a  soul  whose  dignity  and  worth 
transcend  finite  thought.  The  only  charge  which  His  enemies  could  ever  prove 
against  Him  was,  "  This  man  receiveth  sinners."  And,  catching  His  spirit,  what 
a  new  passion  inflamed  the  souls  of  His  disciples.  4.  Its  comprehensiveness ;  for  it 
embraces  and  renders  superfluous  all  other  commands.  lU.  The  example  bt  which 
IT  IS  ENFORCED — •*  As  I  have  loved  you."  A  love — 1.  How  attentive  1  as  considerate 
and  assiduous  as  the  love  of  a  woman.  2.  How  confiding !  "  Having  loved  His 
own,  which  were  in  the  world,  He  loved  them  unto  the  end."  Often  had  they  been 
faithless.  Yet  He  trusts  them,  opens  His  whole  heart  to  them,  and  commits  Hia 
cause  to  their  keeping.  3.  How  condescending!  Stooping  to  the  most  menial  office 
of  kindness  and  hospitality  (vers.  4,  5).  4.  How  compassionate !  He  not  only  pro- 
nounces every  sin,  however  aggravated,  pardonable,  if  only  against  Himself,  but 
He  is  ingenious  in  finding  apologies  for  all  the  weaknesses,  even  for  the  baseness 
and  treachery,  of  those  whom  He  had  trusted.  5.  How  disinterested  I  He  entirely 
forgets  Himself  when  His  friends  are  in  sorrow  or  danger.  (R.  Fuller,  D.D.) 
The  new  commandment: — These  words  fall  strangely  on  our  ears.  A  commandment 
to  love  !  We  have  placed  law  and  love  in  contrast,  and  have  imagined  affection  to 
be  below  our  reach.  Yet  Jesus  enforces  love.  We  are,  therefore,  reminded  that 
love  is  within  our  own  reach.  Christ  lays  it  upon  us  not  as  an  ideal  which  we  may 
admire,  and  which  may  exert  some  kind  of  influence  on  us,  nor  as  a  standard 
which  we  may  attain  to  in  heaven ;  but  as  a  commandment.  In  what  sense  can 
it  be  called  a  new  commandment  ?  Surely  in  the  old  dispensation  God  commanded 
love.  The  newness  of  the  law  may  be  found  in  the  prominent  position  which  ia 
given  to  it,  and  the  standard  set  before  us.  The  first  fruit  of  the  Spirit  named  in 
the  list  of  graces  is  love.  Christ  especially  singles  out  this  affection  as  being 
illustrative  of  His  own  character,  and  giving  most  effectual  testimony  to  Him. 
I.  In  what  form  mat  this  new  commandment  be  fulfilled  ? — "  As  I  have  loved 
you."  Study  the  love  of  Christ.  His  love  showed  itself — 1.  In  a  generous 
appreciation  of  the  characters  of  those  around  Him.  In  that  little  group  there 
existed  the  utmost  differences.  You  find  a  publican  like  Matthew,  a  man  with 
very  dim  perceptions  like  Philip;  a  determined  and  resolute  doubter  like  Thomas  ; 
a  boastful  man  like  Peter,  <&o.  These  are  men  from  whom  we  should  be  inclined 
to  shrink,  but  Christ  could  appreciate  them  all.  Be  quick,  like  Christ,  to  see 
virtues,  and  slow  to  see  faults.  Generous  appreciation  will  encourage  public  men 
to  hold  their  position.  It  will  encourage  men  of  worth,  who  are  retiring  in  dis- 
position, to  come  to  the  front  and  bear  their  share  of  public  duty.  Unkind 
criticism  will  keep  in  the  background  men  who  can  best  serve  the  Church  and 
commonwealth.  This  generous  appreciation  is  a  wonderful  force  to  elevate  society. 
Suspicion  has  a  tendency  to  create  what  it  suspects.  If  you  suspect  a  lad  of  un- 
truthfulness, you  are  tempting  him  to  falsehood.  If  high  estimates  are  formed  of 
us  by  others,  we  are  encouraged  to  rise  to  the  estimate.  2.  In  patient  endurance  ! 
"  When  reviled  He  reviled  not  again."  We  are  to  forbear  one  another  and  to 
forgive  one  another,  even  as  God,  for  Christ's  sake,  has  forgiven  us.    If  we  are 


CEAP.  xra.1  ST.  JOHN.  443 

ioing  good  work  we  cannot  afford  to  be  turned  aside  by  any  nnkindness.  God  baa 
overcome  our  evil  with  His  good,  and  turned  the  hostile  forces  of  our  nature  into 
helpful  influences  for  His  purposes.  Thus  seek  to  conquer  the  evil  which  you  have 
to  endure  by  good.    It  is  the  noblest  of  all  triumphs.    3.  In  unselfish  service. 

(1)  In  httle  deeds  of  kindness,  of  which  sometimes  the  recipients  shall  know 
nothing,  but  which  shall  bring  some  fresh  gladness  and  hope  into  their  lives. 

(2)  In  words.  What  did  God  give  yoo  the  power  of  speech  for  ?  Is  it  to  hide 
your  feelings  ?    Love  will  die  like  a  smothered  fire  if  you  give  it  no  expression. 

(3)  In  looks.  If  your  face  is  dull,  sad,  cross,  to  the  extent  of  your  influence  you 
are  saddening  all  that  come  within  your  circle.  II.  What  will  bb  thb  besult  or 
SUCH  Chbist-mkb  lovb  ?  1.  That  you  can  sympathise  with  God.  On  many  sides 
of  the  Divine  nature  you  cannot  sympathise  with  Him.  (1)  With  His  mighty 
power,  for  yoo  have  not  an  arm  hke  His.  (2)  With  Divine  wisdom.  (3)  With 
burning  purity.  (4)  But  you  can  sympathise  with  His  love.  You  can  feel  for  men 
as  God  feels  for  them.  8.  That  you  will  show  your  union  with  Christ  (ver.  35). 
No  Christian  grace  exercises  so  much  influence  on  the  thoughts  of  men.  They 
are  not  able  to  appreciate  Christian  holiness,  prayerfulness,  zeal ;  but  Christ- 
like  love  they  can.  8.  Such  love  will  gladden  your  own  life  as  well  as  the 
lives  of  others.  There  is  perhaps  no  joy  greater  than  that  of  loving.  The 
bliss  of  the  blessed  God  lies  chiefly  in  His  loving  heart.  (C  B.  Symes,  B.A.) 
The  new  commandment : — It  was  new  because  He  had  only  then  come  to  explain  it ; 
it  was  new  because  it  could  not  have  been  conceived  before  His  life  exhibited  its 
meaning ;  it  was  new  because  the  love  which  He  showed  was  something  altogether 
beyond  the  power  of  man  to  have  imagined  for  himself;  and  as  in  science  we 
reckon  him  to  be  the  discoverer  of  a  new  law,  who  rises  above  the  guesses  and 
glimpses  of  His  predecessors,  and  establishes  upon  new  ground,  and  in  a  manner 
whiobi  can  never  afterwards  be  questioned,  some  great  principle  which  had  been 
perhaps  partly  conceived  before,  so  I  think  we  may  say,  that  the  law  of  brotherly 
love,  as  illustrated  by  the  example  of  the  Lord,  which  stamps  the  great  principle  of 
selfishness  as  a  vile  and  execrable  principle,  might  be  truly  described  as  a  new  com- 
mandment which  Christ  gave  to  His  disciples.  (Bp.  H,  Goodwin.)  The  new 
cmnmandment  and  the  old : — Christ  is  our  Lawgiver  as  well  as  our  Saviour.  And 
He  made  obedience  to  His  laws  the  test  and  the  manifestation  of  love  to  Him  [chap, 
xiv.  15).  The  Church  of  Christ  is  in  fact  the  spiritual  Israel.  Israel  according  to 
the  flesh  had  their  laws  fitted  for  their  place  in  God's  purposes ;  we  have  ours 
adapted  to  our  position  also.  And  we  may  well  be  thankful  when  we  compare  the 
two  codes  together.  Theirs,  as  necessary  in  a  state  of  imperfection  and  bondage, 
was  cumbrous  and  intricate.  Of  all  the  commands  of  the  old  law,  none  remain  for 
as,  but  those  which  are  based  on  the  nature  of  God,  and  His  attributes.  And  our 
new  commandment  comes  to  us,  not  sanctioned  by  lightnings  and  thuuderings,  Ac. 
— but  from  the  dying  lips  of  our  dearest  Friend ;  it  is  prefaced  by  His  deed  of  deep 
humiliation,  is  embosomed  in  His  words  of  consolation  and  peace — is  enforced  by 
His  own  constraining  example.  A  new  commandment.  And  what  is  it  which  we 
are  to  hear  from  the  lips  of  Divine  wisdom,  after  such  an  announcement  ?  Long 
had  the  world  disobeyed  His  law  written  in  the  conscience ;  and  then  He  defined 
that  law,  and  wrote  it  on  tables  of  stone,  and  set  apart  a  people  for  Himself,  among 
whom  it  might  be  observed.  But  that  people  had  rejected  Him,  and  disobeyed  His 
laws.  And  now,  what  new  commandment  will  He  promulgate  to  His  rebellious 
world  ?  What,  to  the  Gentile,  sunk  in  moral  degradation — what  to  the  Jew,  mock- 
ing Him  with  empty  hypocrisy  ?  Shall  it  not  surpass  in  strictness  and  in  terror  all 
that  have  gone  before  ?  Shall  it  not  be  such  as  to  awe  the  passions  into  submission 
to  awaken  the  conscience  into  energy,  to  drive  the  sinner  to  repentance  or  to  his 
doom  ?  Nay  1  Can  He,  who  invited  to  Him  the  weary  and  heavy  laden,  speak 
aught  but  words  of  gentleness  and  comfort  ?  Had  God's  new  revelation  of  His  will 
been  an  increase  in  severity,  would  this  Messenger  have  been  sent  to  make  it  ?  A  new 
commandment  I  give  unto  you,  that  ye  love  one  another.  {Dean  Alford.)  ChrisVs 
law  of  love : — Look  for  a  moment,  by  way  of  recall,  at  three  or  four  characteristics 
of  that  love  which  Christ  showed  to  His  disciples.  In  the  first  place,  love  was  the 
principle  of  His  hfe.  Some  men  are  like  Western  farmers  who  have  their  one  hun- 
dred and  sixty  acres,  and  put  on  hundred  and  fifty-nine  and  a  half  acres  in  hay 
and  grain  and  grass  for  the  cattle,  and  half  an  acre  around  the  door  is  a  garden 
and  grass-plot,  and  a  fraction  of  that  the  wife  cultivates  in  flowers.  _  So  men  give 
the  larger  part  of  their  life  to  self  or  justice  or  righteousness  or  fair-dealing,  and 
tliey  cultivate  a  little  plot  with  flowers  which  they  call  love  (and  generally  fchey  are 


444  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xnfc 

very  like  the  Western  farmers  in  that  they  leave  the  wife  to  raise  all  the  flowers). 
Now,  love  was  not  thus  a  mere  incident  of  Christ's  life.  It  was  the  essence  of  His 
life.  He  lived  for  love.  Love  was  the  inspiration  of  His  life.  It  was  a  wise  love, 
not  a  mere  sentiment,  not  a  mere  blind  enthusiasm.  It  was  well  considered.  He 
measured  men  and  adapted  His  gifts  to  their  capacities.  Christ's  love  was  not 
either  a  mere  sentimental  love.  It  was  not  a  love  that  cannot  bear  to  look  upon 
Buffering,  or  that  intervenes  to  stop  ail  suffering.  It  was  not  a  love  that  could  not 
rebuke  and  reprove.  There  was  flash  in  the  eyes  of  His  love,  and  there  was  thun- 
der,  sometimes,  in  the  tones  of  His  love.  He  loved,  too,  with  infinite  patience  and 
long-suffering.  He  loved  not  only  with  benevolence — that  is,  well-wishing  to  all 
men,  and  with  pity — that  is,  with  love  to  those  that  are  in  suffering,  but  with  mercy 
— that  is,  love  to  those  who  do  not  deserve  love.  He  loved  when  love  and  con- 
science seemed  to  antagonize  each  other.  Impossible !  do  you  say  ?  Well,  then, 
let  us  say  frankly  it  is  impossible  to  be  a  Christian.  Impossible  ?  Then  impos- 
sible to  follow  Christ.  Not  human  nature  ?  No,  it  is  not  human  nature.  It  iB 
Divine  nature :  and  that  is  the  very  object  of  Christianity — to  confer  upon  all  who 
will  be  the  disciples  of  Christ  a  Divine  nature,  not  a  mere  human  nature ;  that  they 
may  be  lifted  up  out  of  the  plane  of  the  human,  and  walk  in  the  plane  and  atmo- 
sphere of  the  Divine  ever  more.  (Lyman  Abbott,  D.D.)  The  new  commandment  of 
love  to  one  another : — The  commandment  of  love  issued  appropriately  at  the  Feast 
of  Love,  and  not  long  before  the  great  Act  of  Love.  For  the  love  of  Christ  was  no 
fine  saying ;  it  cost  Him  His  life  to  say  these  words.  It  is  difficult  to  grasp  the 
meaning  of  this  command,  arising  from  the  fact  that  words  change  their  meaning. 
Love  is,  by  conventional  usage,  appropriated  to  one  species  of  human  affection, 
which,  in  the  commoner  men,  is  most  selfish.  Nor  is  charity  a  perfect  symbol  of 
His  meaning  ;  for  that  is  now  identified  with  almsgiving.  Benevolence  or  philan- 
thropy, in  derivation,  come  nearer  to  the  idea  ;  but  yet  you  feel  at  once  that  these 
words  are  too  tame  and  cold.  We  have  no  sufiScient  word.  "  As  I  have  loved  you :  " 
that  alone  expounds  it.  Take — I.  The  novelty  of  the  law — 1.  As  a  historical  fact. 
Men  before  that  had  travelled,  but  the  spectacle  of  a  Paul  crossing  oceans  not  to 
conquer  kingdoms,  to  hive  up  knowledge,  to  accumulate  stores  for  self,  but  to  give 
and  to  spend  himself — was  new  in  the  history  of  the  world.  The  celestial  fire  had 
touched  the  hearts  of  men  and  their  hearts  flamed  ;  and  it  caught,  and  spread,  and 
would  not  stop.  Bead  the  account  given  by  Tertullian  of  the  marvellous  rapidity 
with  which  the  Christians  increased,  and  you  are  reminded  of  one  of  those  vast 
armies  of  ants  which  move  across  a  country  in  irresistible  myriads,  drowned  by 
thousands  in  rivers,  cut  off  by  fire,  consumed  by  men  and  beabt,  and  yet  fresh 
hordes  succeeding  interminably  to  supply  their  place.  A  new  voice  was  heard  ;  man 
longing  to  burst  the  false  distinctions  which  had  kept  the  best  hearts  from  each 
other  so  long.  And  all  this  from  Judaea — the  narrowest,  most  intolerant  nation  on 
the  face  of  the  earth.  2.  In  extent.  It  was  in  literal  words,  an  old  Command- 
ment, "  Thou  shah  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  But  the  difference  lay  in  ex- 
tent in  which  the  words  were  understood.  By  "  neighbour,"  the  Jew  meant  his 
countrymen  ;  so  that  the  rabbinical  gloss  was,  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  and 
hate  thine  enemy."  And  what  the  Gentile  understood  by  the  extent  of  the  law  of 
love,  we  may  learn  from  their  best  and  wisest,  who  thanked  heaven  that  he  was 
bom  a  man,  and  not  a  brute — a  Greek,  and  not  a  barbarian.  But  Christ  said, 
*'  Love  your  enemies."  And  as  a  specimen  of  a  neighbour  he  specially  selected  one 
of  that  nation  whom  every  Jew  had  been  taught  to  hate.  And  just  as  the  applica- 
tion of  electricity  to  the  innumerable  wants  of  human  life  and  to  new  ends  is 
reckoned  a  new  discovery  (though  the  fact  has  been  familiar  to  the  Indian  child  and 
applied  for  ages  to  his  childish  sports),  so  the  extension  of  this  grand  principle  of 
Love  to  all  the  possible  cases  and  persons — even  though  the  piinciple  was  applied 
lt)»g  before  in  love  to  friends,  country,  and  relations — is  truly  and  properly  "  a  new 
commandment."  3.  In  being  made  the  central  principle  of  a  system.  Never  had 
obedience  before  been  trusted  to  a  principle,  it  had  always  been  hedged  round  by  a 
law.  Now  it  was  reserved  for  One  to  pierce  down  into  the  springs  of  human  action, 
and  to  proclaim  the  simplicity  of  its  machinery.  "Love,"  said  the  apostle  after 
Him — •'  Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law."  I  may  abstain  from  murder  and  theft, 
deterred  by  law  and  its  penalties.  But  I  may  also  rise  into  the  Spirit  of  Charity  ; 
then  I  am  free  from  the  law  ;  the  law  no  more  binds  me,  now  that  I  love  my  neigh- 
bour, than  the  d.yke  built  to  keep  in  the  sea  at  high  tide  restrains  it  when  that  sea 
has  sunk  to  low  watermark.  II.  The  spniiT  on  measdre  of  the  law — "  As  I  have 
k)ved  you."  Broadly,  the  love  of  Christ  was  the  spirit  of  giving  all  He  had  to  give — 


CHAP,  xm.]  ST.  JOHN.  445 

*'  Greater  love  bath  no  man  than  this,"  &c.  *'  He  saved  others ;  Himself  He  can- 
not  save."  These  words,  meant  as  taunt,  were  really  the  noblest  panegyrio.  How 
could  He.  having  saved  others  J  How  can  any  keep  what  he  gives  ?  Love  gives 
itself.  The  mother  spends  herself  in  giving  life  to  her  child ;  the  soldier  dies  for 
his  country  ;  nay,  even  the  artist  produces  nothing  that  will  Uve,  except  Bo  far  as 
he  ha-  merged  his  very  being  in  his  work.  That  spirit  of  self-giving  manifests 
itself  in — 1.  Considerate  kindness.  Take  three  cases.  (1)  When  He  fed  the  people  with 
bread,  there  was  a  tenderness  which,  not  absorbed  in  His  own  great  designs,  provided 
for  the  satisfaction  of  the  lowest  wants.  (2)  *•  Come  ye  yourselves  apart  into  a  desert 
place,  and  rest  awhile."  He  did  not  grudge  from  duty  the  interval  of  relaxation. 
(3)  "  Woman,  behold  thy  son  1  "  In  that  hour  of  death-torture,  He  could  think  of 
her  desolate  state  when  He  was  gone,  and  with  delicate,  thoughtful  attention  provide 
for  her  weU-being.  There  are  people  who  would  do  great  acts  ;  but  because  they 
wait  for  great  opportunities,  hfe  passes  and  the  acts  of  love  are  not  done  at  all. 
Observe,  this  considerateness  of  Christ  was  shown  in  little  things.  And  life  is  made 
up  of  infinitesimals.  And  these  trifles  prepared  for  larger  deeds.  The  one  who  will 
be  found  in  trial  capable  of  great  acts  of  love  is  ever  the  one  who  is  always  doing 
considerate  small  ones.  2.  It  was  never  foiled  by  the  unworthiness  of  those  on  whom 
it  had  once  been  bestowed.  There  was  everything  to  shake  His  trust  in  humanity.  As 
we  mix  in  life  there  comes  disappointment,  and  the  danger  is  a  reaction  of  desolating 
and  universal  mistrust.  The  only  preservation  from  this  withering  of  the  heart  ia 
love.  The  strength  of  affection  is  a  proof,  not  of  the  worthiness  of  the  object,  but 
of  the  largeness  of  the  soul  which  loves.  The  might  of  a  river  depends  not  on  the 
quality  of  the  soil  through  which  it  passes,  but  on  the  inexhaustibleness  and  depth 
of  the  spring  from  which  it  proceeds.  The  greater  minds  cleave  to  the  smaller 
with  more  force  than  the  other  to  it.  Love  trusts  on — expects  better  things.  And 
more,  it  is  this  trusting  love  that  makes  men  what  they  are  trusted  to  be,  so  reali- 
zing itself.  When  the  crews  of  the  fleet  of  Britain  knew  that  they  were  expected 
to  do  their  duty,  they  did  their  duty.  And  it  is  on  this  principle  that  Christ  wins 
the  hearts  of  His  rv»deemed.  He  trusted  the  doubting  Thomas ;  and  Thomas  arose 
with  a  faith  worthy  "  of  his  Lord  and  his  God."  He  would  not  suffer  even  the  lie 
of  Peter  to  shake  His  conviction  that  Peter  might  love  him  yet ;  and  Peter  answered 
nobly  to  that  sublime  forgiveness.  Therefore,  come  what  may,  hold  fast  to  love. 
Learn  not  to  love  merely,  but  to  love  as  He  loved.  {F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.)  Love 
one  another : — A  little  girl,  three  or  four  years  old,  learned  the  Bible  text,  "  Love  one 
another."  "  What  doss  love  one  another  mean?  "  asked  her  next  eldest  sister,  in 
honest  doubt  as  to  th«  meaning.  "Why,  I  must  love  you  and  you  must  love 
me ;  and  I'm  one  and  you're  another "  was  the  answer.  Who  can  improve 
on  that  ?  (J.  L.  Nye.)  The  winning  power  of  love  : — Alexander  the  Great, 
being  asked  how  he  had  been  able  at  so  early  an  age  and  in  so  short  a 
period  to  conquer  such  vast  regions,  and  establish  so  great  a  name,  replied, 
"  I  used  my  enemies  so  well  that  I  compelled  them  to  be  my  friends  ;  and  I 
treated  my  friends  with  such  constant  regard  that  they  became  unalterably 
attached  to  me."  The  victorious  power  of  love: — A  lady  brought  a  little  ragged 
orphan  girl  to  her  house  for  a  playmate  for  her  three  daughters.  But  the  little 
thing  would  venture  no  further  than  the  lobby,  where  she  sat  crying  as  if  her  heart 
would  break.  The  lady  said  to  her  daughters  there  was  one  secret  of  four 
letters  she  thought  would  win  the  little  one.  The  eldest  girl  tried  her  doll,  the 
second  her  new  muff,  but  still  the  little  stranger  kept  on  weeping.  At  length  the 
youngest  sister  ran  into  the  lobby,  sat  down  beside  her,  began  to  weep  with  her,  and 
then  put  her  arms  about  her  neck  and  kissed  her,  till  at  last  she  easily  got  her  into 
the  room ;  and  then  it  was  found  that  the  secret  was  love.  (Clerical  Library.) 
Love  the  ciirt  for  coldness: — One  of  the  common  complaints  in  our  day,  in 
Christian  societies,  is  this,  "  There  is  no  love  among  us."  Sometimes  the  com- 
plaint is  uttered  in  holy  sorrow.  But  sometimes  it  only  means,  "I  am  not 
getting  my  just  share  of  love  from  others  ;  the  place  feels  cold  around  me."  If 
this  is  what  the  complaint  means,  the  remedy  is  that  the  complainer  should  love  till 
he  warms  up  the  whole  neighbourhood.  I  am  to  love  when  I  am  not  loved.  I  am 
to  love  when  I  am  suspected.  I  am  to  love  when  men  are  trying  to  discover  what 
selfish  feeUng  moves  me,  or  what  my  price  is.  I  am  to  love  those  who  do  not  care 
for  my  love.  I  am  to  love  even  when  I  have  indignation.  I  am  to  love  as  the  sun 
shines — its  beams  going  forth  on  all  sides  without  asking  for  an  object,  and  ••  there 
is  nothing  hid  from  the  heat  thereof  ;  "  the  love  I  show  being  the  love  of  God  in  me. 
The  eleventh  commandment : — I.  Its  principle.     We  are  to  have  love  like  that  of 


446  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  xm. 

Christ.  1.  In  one  sense  this  is  impossible.  "  Measure  the  waters  in  the  hollow 
of  thine  hand ;  mete  out  heaven  with  a  span,"  &c. — these  are  measurable  things, 
but  the  love  of  Christ  is  measureless.  To  love  like  Paul — like  John — would  be  a 
lofty  aim,  but  who  can  love  like  Christ  ?  2.  He  asks  not  that  our  love  should 
equal,  but  resemble  His ;  not  that  it  should  be  of  the  same  strength,  but  of  the 
same  kind.  A  pearl  of  dew  will  not  hold  the  sun,  but  it  may  hold  a  sparkle  of  ita 
light.  A  child,  by  the  sea,  trying  to  catch  the  waves,  cannot  hold  the  ocean  in  a 
tiny  shell,  but  he  may  hold  a  drop  of  the  ocean  water.  "  There  is  an  ovean  of  love 
in  My  heart,"  says  Christ,  "  let  a  drop  of  that  ocean  be  received  into  yours."  3. 
Divine  love,  therefore,  is  but  another  name  for  that  Divine  life  which  animates  all 
the  disciples.  None  need  despair  of  his  ability  to  obey  his  Lord's  will,  for  Christ 
gives  the  love  which  He  commands,  and  you  need  only  ask  in  order  to  have  (Eph. 
iii.  14-19).  n.  The  mode  of  action  it  prescribes.  If  we  love  as  Christ  loves — 1,  We 
shall  be  ready  to  love  others  before  they  love  us.  If  He  bad  waited  until  we 
loved  Him,  where  should  we  now  have  been?  "Herein  is  love,  not  that  we 
loved  Him,  but  that  He  loved  us."  His  love  explains  His  death,  but  what  can 
explain  His  love  ?  Sublime  as  it  is,  our  love  must  acknowledge  uo  lower  law.  2. 
Our  love  will  be  a  practical  thing.  Some  are  in  danger  of  becoming  mere  religiooB 
sentimentalists.  They  feel  much,  but  do  little.  They  are  ready  for  sympathy,  bat 
not  for  sacrifice.  They  are  the  sensitive  plants  of  the  Church,  and  not  fruit-bearing 
trees  of  righteousness.  This  fine  sensibility,  cherished  for  its  own  sake,  and 
having  no  outforce  in  deeds  for  the  good  of  others,  both  weakens  the  soul  and 
itself.  "Abiding  alone,"  it  is  but  soft  effeminacy  or  weak  indulgence  ;  luxury  not 
love.  Christ  has  not  said,  "  By  love  feel  for  one  another,"  merely ;  but "  By  love 
serve  one  another."  Let  us  interpret  His  law  by  His  life.  His  love  speaks  to  ua 
through  a  glorious  deed  ;  then  our  love,  like  His,  must  speak  through  action.  Hie 
love  found  expression  through  a  sacrifice ;  then  ours  must  express  itself  throagh 
sacrifice.  His  love  was  displayed  when  "  He  bore  our  griefs,  and  carried  our 
sorrows;  "  then,  "  bear  ye  one  another's  burdens,  and  so  fulfil  the  law  of  Christ." 
Bedemption  was  His  own  personal  act.  Then  our  love  is  not  to  have  a  mere  repre- 
sentative utterance.  3.  Our  love  will  be  humble.  All  love  is  lowly.  You  often 
see  a  loving  purpose  kept  in  check  by  a  haughty  will,  and  the  ice  of  pride  seal  the 
river  of  love.  You  have  seen  the  father  and  son  proudly  stand  apart  Each 
yearns  to  fling  himself  into  the  other's  embrace,  but  pride  forbids  the  younger  to 
confess  his  fault,  and  the  elder  his  sorrowful  tenderness.  But  where  love  lives  in 
its  strength  it  will  be  stronger  than  death.  It  will  come  down,  cast  aside  state  and 
ceremony,  submit  to  a  thousand  indignities,  stoop  to  save,  and  "  stand  at  the  door 
and  knock. "  If  you  would  know  what  humility  can  do,  study  redeeming  love,  and 
though  Christ  sits  enthroned  on  the  riches  of  the  universe  His  heart  is  still 
anchanged.  Like  the  sunshine  that  falls  with  magical  flicker  on  pearl  and  ruby, 
lance  and  armour,  in  the  royal  hall — ^yet  overflows  the  shepherd's  home,  and 
quivers  through  the  grating  of  the  prisoner's  cell — floods  the  noblest  scenes  with 
day,  yet  makes  a  joy  for  the  insect — so  does  the  Saviour's  love,  not  deterred  by  our 
unworthiness,  come  down  to  teach  and  bless  the  meanest  and  the  lowliest  life  in 
the  new  creation.  4.  Our  love  must  be  bountiful.  Love  can  never  do  enough  for 
its  object.  When  you  were  lost,  "  unsearchable  riches  "  were  poured  forth  as  the 
price  of  your  redemption.  When  you  were  found,  what  was  the  language  of  the 
Heart  of  Hearts  ?  "  Bring  forth  the  best  robe,  and  put  it  on  him,"  &c.  When, 
therefore,  your  heart  is  disposed  to  give  a  brother  disciple  but  a  scanty  and 
penurious  affection  remember  "  Freely  ye  have  received,  freely  give."  5.  We  shall 
breathe  a  spirit  of  gentleness  and  patience  towards  the  erring  or  offending  members 
of  the  Christian  brotherhood.  The  effects  flowing  from  the  violation  of  this  prin- 
ciple might  fill  a  library  with  sad  histories.  6.  We  shall  love  all  the  disciples. 
Christ  is  not  now  speaking  of  His  universal  love,  but  of  His  peculiar  and  dis- 
criminating love  to  those  who  have  accepted  Him,  and  who  are  already  partakers 
of  His  life.  He  loves  them,  as  you  love  your  child  none  the  less  because  it  is  now 
only  learning  to  read,  or  just  beginning,  with  many  a  fall,  to  totter  along  alone. 
He  loves  all  His  disciples,  and  all  are  His  disciples,  who,  however  they  differ  in 
other  respects,  unite  in  the  sentiment,  "  for  us  to  live  is  Christ."  7.  Our  love  will 
last  for  ever.  Whom  He  loves  He  always  loves.  This  is  an  inference  from  His 
nature.  III.  Its  novelty.  It  is  a  new  commandment — 1.  As  it  enjoins  love  after 
a  new  model.  Love  had  always  been  commanded,  but  never  before  had  it  been  so 
exempUfied.  2.  As  it  is  addressed  to  a  peculiar  class  of  Qod's  subjects,  and  is  a 
law  for  the  new  creation  alone.    The  old  commandments  were  given  to  the  world* 


<WAP.  xra.]  ST.  JOHN.  447 

this  new  commandment  to  the  Church.  8.  As  it  arose  oat  of  a  new  necessity,  and 
was  intended  to  be  the  distinguishing  sign  of  Christ's  disciples.  To  prevent  con- 
fusion, and  secure  a  defined  place  in  society,  each  office  and  every  class  has  its 
peculiar  sign.  "  As  every  lord  giveth  a  certain  livery  to  his  servants,  charity  is  the 
very  livery  of  Christ.  Our  Saviour,  which  is  the  Lord  above  all  lords,  would  have 
His  servants  known  by  their  badge,  which  is  love  "  (Latimer).  4.  As  it  has  a  new 
impressiveness — an  affecting  power  all  its  own.  The  old  commandments  had  a 
power  to  alarm ;  this,  when  truly  understood,  has  a  power  tQ  subdue ;  they  smote 
the  conscience,  this  captivates  the  heart.  (C.  Stanfwd,  D.D.)  The  eleventh  com- 
mandment : — The  httle  town  of  Anworth  was  the  home  and  the  pride  of  that  sweet 
soul,  Rutherford,  the  Covenanter.  One  Saturday  evening,  so  the  story  runs,  his 
household  were  gathered  together  for  their  usual  cotter's  Saturday  night's  devo- 
tions,  when  an  alarm  was  heard  at  the  outer  door.  A  stranger  sought  admission. 
He  was  welcomed  with  true  hospitality,  and  took  his  place  in  the  circle  of  thoso 
who  were  then  answering  the  varied  questions  in  the  Catechism.  It  so  chauced 
that  the  question,  "How  many  commandments  are  there?"  came  to  this  new- 
comer, as  the  one  to  which  he  was  to  make  reply,  and  instantly  he  answered, 
"Eleven."  "What I"  said  Rutherford;  "a  man  so  experienced  in  life  as  you 
seem  to  be,  and  so  educated  in  the  law  and  the  Scripture  of  God,  not  to  know  that 
there  are  but  ten  commandments  1  "  The  stranger  answered,  "  *  A  new  command- 
ment I  give  unto  you,  that  ye  love  one  another.'"  Startled  by  the  answer,  Ruther- 
ford proceeded  with  his  service.  The  next  morning  before  the  hour  of  service,  he 
walked  from  his  humble  manse  along  that  pathway  which  is  still  spoken  of  as 
"  Rutherford's  Walk,"  towards  the  little  church.  It  was  early  in  the  day,  and  he 
scarcely  expected  to  meet  any  one  in  the  path  ;  but  over  in  the  wood  he  heard  the 
voice  of  some  one  in  supplication.  The  moment  he  listened  he  recognized  the 
stranger's  tone.  He  sought  him  out,  and  demanded  to  know  who  he  was.  The 
stranger  answered,  "  My  name  is  Usher."  He  was  the  Archbishop  and  Primate 
of  all  Ireland.  Having  heard  much  of  the  piety  of  the  Presbyterian  Rutherford, 
he  had,  in  this  secret  way,  sought  his  society  that  he  might  judge  for  himself. 
Their  hearts  flowed  together  in  the  common  devotion  which  they  both  felt  toward 
the  Lord  Jesus,  their  Master ;  and  when  the  hour  of  service  came,  together  the 
Covenanter  and  the  prelate  walked  to  the  little  Anworth  church,  and  Usher  of 
Ireland  preached  to  the  Covenanters  of  Scotland  on  the  new  commandment,  that 
"  ye  love  one  another."  His  presence  there,  his  welcome  there,  his  spirit  and  his 
words,  were  expositions  of  the  truth  of  that  which  the  Lord  gave  as  the  summing 
up  of  His  own  life.  (S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.)  Brotherly  love  (Sermon  to  Children): — 
Brotherly  love  should  show  itself —I.  In  kindness  to  each  other.  Love  will  have 
to  get  outlet.  If  I  do  not  see  brotherly-kindness,  I  conclude  that  there  is  not 
brotherly-love.  1.  There  will  be  kind  words.  In  most  families  there  are  many 
unkind,  scolding,  fault-finding,  angry,  irritating,  coarse,  uncourteous  words.  Not 
to  speak  of  kindness,  there  is  sometimes  scarcely  common  civility.  There  is  a  rode* 
ness — demanding  things  of  each  other — driving  each  other  out  of  the  way,  <feo., 
when,  if  a  request  were  made  politely,  it  would  be  so  much  better.  I  like  to  see 
children  in  a  kindly  way  bid<Ung  each  other  "  Good  night,"  and  again,  greeting 
each  other  when  they  meet  in  the  morning.  All  this  would  change  the  whole  face 
of  many  a  family  circle.  Though  you  may  say  it  is  but  words,  it  would  soon  tell 
on  everything  else.  And  do  not  tell  tales.  A  "  tell-tale  "  is  an  ugly  character 
(Lev.  xix.  16 ;  Prov.  xxvi.  20,  22).  Did  yon  ever  notice  an  echo  ?  If  you  tire  a 
gun,  or  sing,  or  whistle,  or  shout,  or  whisper,  you  get  exactly  what  you  give.  And 
so  it  has  passed  into  a  proverb,  "  Kind  words  awaken  kind  echoes."  2.  There  will 
be  kind  looks.  You  kiiow  how  much  there  is  in  a  look — a  displeased,  angry, 
sulky,  scornful,  off-taking  look.  How  they  can  vex  and  do  a  world  of  mischief  I 
But  if  looks  can  do  evil,  they  can  also  do  good.  There  are  kind,  encouraging,  com- 
forting, winning  looks.  And  just  as  "  kind  words  produce  kind  echoes,"  so  kind 
looks  call  forth  a  return  in  kind.  You  must  have  noticed  what  an  effect  the  look 
you  gave  has  sometimes  had  on  a  dog.  In  the  case  of  an  infant,  how  you  can,^ 
without  difficulty,  make  him  either  laugh  or  cry  merely  by  a  look.  That  tells  what 
a  look  can  do  for  good  or  evil.  Others  will  look  at  you  just  as  you  look  at  them. 
Yon  have  looked  into  a  mirror,  and  seen  reflected  there  your  own  face.  As  yoia 
looked  pleased  or  cross,  so  did  it.  Just  so  is  it  in  a  family.  3.  There  will  be  kind 
deeds.  I  have  heard  of  a  mother  who  was  in  the  habit  of  asking  her  children,  each 
night  before  they  went  to  bed,  what  they  had  done  that  day  to  make  others  happy. 
It  would  be  well  for  the  members  of  each  family  to  ask  themselves  that.    How 


448  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xrn, 

many  little  services  of  love  you  might  render  without  being  asked.  Now,  if  yon 
love  each  other  you  will  pray  for  each  other.  This  is  one  of  the  greatest  of  all 
kindnesses,  as  it  is  one  of  the  most  tender  of  all  bonds,  and  will  be  likely  to  lead 
to  aU  the  rest.  II.  In  stmpathi  for  each  other.  To  "  sympathise  "  is  to  feel  for, 
or  rather  with  one.  I  have  heard  of  a  girl  who,  after  having  lost  a  little  brother,  went 
back  to  school ;  and  I  have  this  account  of  her  from  one  of  her  companions :  "  All 
the  time  she  studied  her  lesson,  she  hid  her  face  in  her  book  and  cried.  I  felt  so 
sorry  that  I  laid  my  face  on  the  same  book  and  cried  with  her.  Then  she  looked 
up,  and  put  her  arms  around  my  neck ;  but  I  do  not  know  why  she  said  I  had  done 
her  so  much  good."  It  was  the  power  of  sympathy.  When  there  »  any  trial,  be 
it  light  or  heavy,  pressing  on  another's  mind  there  is  nothing  you  can  give  to  be 
compared  to  sympathy.  It  is  wonderful  the  effect  of  even  inquiring  for  the  sick 
one.  I  am  sometimes  amazed,  in  asking  children  about  a  little  brother  or  sister 
who  has  been  ill,  when  they  say  they  "  don't  know  !  "  Why  do  they  not  know  ? 
Had  they  lost  their  tongue,  or  had  they  not  rather  lost  their  heart  ?  When  your 
brother  has  got  up  in  his  class ;  when  he  has  carried  off  a  prize ;  when  he  has  got 
some  present ;  when  his  birthday  has  come  round ;  when  he  la  raised  up  from  a 
eick  bed — give  him  your  hearty  sympathy.  III.  In  self-deniai..  Selfishness  is  the 
great  cause  of  unhappiness  in  many  homes.  Where  children  are  unselfish  they 
must  agree — they  cannot  fail  to  be  happy.  But  the  reverse  meets  us  on  every 
hand  in  most  painful  and  humbling  ways.  I  once  offered  a  friend  a  copy  of 
a  little  book  for  his  three  children.  But,  no.  He  said,  "  I  must  have  three  or 
none,  otherwise  there  will  be  no  satisfying  them."  I  am  not  sure  but  they  had 
even  to  be  all  of  the  same  colour.  Two  of  these  books  were  thus  very  much  thrown 
away.  Now,  it  should  not  be  so.  IV.  In  foebeahance  and  patience.  "  Love 
Buffereth  long,"  Ac.  In  every  family  there  is  much  to  annoy.  But  love  enables 
one  to  bear  a  great  deal,  and  keeps  the  wheels  running  smoothly.  Especially  is  it 
the  part  of  the  elder  members  of  the  family  to  bear  with  the  younger,  as  it  is  the 
duty  of  the  younger  to  pay  deference  to  the  elder.  You  have  got  some  unkind, 
rude,  impudent  thing  said  or  done  to  you.  Tour  first  impulse  is  to  pay  the  evil- 
doer back  in  his  own  coin.  Do  you  ask,  "  What  should  I  do  ?  "  I  say,  Bear  it. 
Try  to  be  like  God — "slow  to  wrath."  Some  one  gives  the  advice  to  •'  count  ten 
before  you  speak,"  when  you  are  angry.  Even  in  the  worst  case,  "  a  soft  answer 
tumeth  away  wrath."  There  is  a  saying,  "  He  begins  the  fight  who  strikes  the 
second  blow."  That  is  true  of  the  tongue  as  well  as  of  the  hand.  V.  In  roEorvE- 
NEss.  A  mother  can  forgive  when  none  else  can  because  she  lovea.  Ood  can 
forgive  when  none  else  can,  because  He  loves.  And  if  we  love  like  Him 
■we  shall  forgive  like  Him.  To  be  unforgiving,  whether  young  or  old,  is 
one  of  the  worst  characters  that  could  be  given  to  one.  {J.  H.  Wilson,  M.A.) 
The  social  principles  of  Christianity  (1) : — In  what  sense  is  this  a  new  command- 
ment? This  epithet  distinguishes  it  from — 1.  The  Mosaic  code.  The  law  of 
Moses  was  mainly  an  embodiment  of  justice.  It  admitted  the  cultivation  of  mutual 
love,  and  even  enjoined  it.  But  this  was  not  its  salient  characteristic.  Wheieaa 
the  gospel  is  pre-eminently  and  characteristically  a  law  of  love.  Again,  the  love 
vhich  Judaism  recognized  was  inferior  in  quality.  A  Jew  behoved  to  love  his 
neighbour  as  himself.  A  Christian  must  love  his  brother  so  as  to  sacrifice  himself 
if  need  be.  2.  From  all  common  worldly  affection.  There  are — (1)  Instinctive 
affections,  such  as  the  parental,  filial,  &c.  (2)  Elective  affections,  such  as  those 
of  friendship,  patriotism,  &c.  (3)  But  none  of  these  afford  the  highest  exhibition, 
development,  and  gratification  of  man's  social  nature.  In  a  manner  far  to  surpass 
them  Christian  love  is  to  be  cherished.  Christ  has  introduced  among  men  an 
altogether  new  principle  of  social  existence.  This  social  aspect  of  the  gospel 
will  be  fully  displayed  in  heaven.  Meanwhile  it  is  intended  to  show  itself  in 
churches.  The  singidarity  of  this  affection  will  better  appear  if  we  consider  a  few 
of  its  distinctive  features.  Consider — I.  Its  spiritual  basis.  It  is  not  founded 
upon  any  natural  relationship  or  sentiment,  but  upon  a  common  participation  in 
the  benefits  of  Christ's  redemption.  Observe — 1.  How  this  circumstance  connects 
as  with  the  same  loving  Lord.  2.  How  it  supposes  in  each  of  us  the  same  spiritual 
experience.  S.  How  it  guarantees  in  each  and  all  the  same  elements  of  a  pure  and 
estimable  character.  4.  How  it  furnishes  the  prospect  of  our  being  united  together 
in  perfect  blessedness  for  ever  and  ever.  Is  there  any  other  love  which  has  such 
a  profound  and  solemn  basis  as  this?  II.  Its  disimtebested  ptjbitt.  III.  Its 
ravoTBO  FEBvoTTB.  It  should  lead  ns,  if  need  be,  to  die  for  our  brethren,  after  the 
example  of  Christ.    lY.  Its  pbaotioaii  ptjbposes.    1.  It  supposes  times  of  perseco* 


OKAV.  xnL]  ST,  JOHN.  44f 

tion  and  trial,  and  then  it  ii  serviceable  to  enooarage  and  comfort  ui.  2.  It  relates 
to  the  exigenoiea  of  our  spiritual  cultivation,  and  is  intended  to  supply  the  means 
of  instruction  and  guidance.  3.  It  glances  at  the  work  which  we  are  to  do  for 
Christ  in  the  world,  and  it  ensures  strength,  co-operation,  and  success.  Apply 
specially  to  Church  members.  The  Church  ought  to  be  the  happiest  circle  of  our 
acquaintance.  Do  we  observe  the  new  commandment  ?  The  way  to  promote  it  is 
to  love  Christ  more.  Thus  to  act  is  most  important  for  the  sake  of  our  piety,  oar 
peace,  and  our  usefulness.     {T.  O.  Horton.) 

Yet.  35.  By  this  shall  all  men  know  that  ye  are  My  disciples. — The  social  priu' 
eiplea  of  Christianity  (2) : — How  seldom  is  this  test  of  true  discipleship  to  Christ 
appealed  to.  We  look  for  orthodoxy  of  sentiment,  moral  character,  denominational 
zeal,  attention  to  ordinances,  but  we  are  apt  to  overlook  the  one  great  criterion 
laid  down  in  the  text.  Quite  in  harmony  with  this  verse  is  1  John  iii.  14.  Con- 
sider— I.  Thk  nature  of  this  love.  It  consists  mainly  of  two  elements,  an 
admiration  of  the  peculiar  spiritual  character  of  God's  saints,  and  a  deep  personal 
sympathy  with  them  in  their  struggles  and  temptations.  To  these  elements  may 
sometimes  be  added  a  high  sense  of  gratitude  to  them  if  they  have  been  made 
instrumental  in  conveying  light,  grace,  and  comfort  to  our  minds,  and  a  hearty 
desire  of  pure  benevolence  to  do  them  good  and  be  helpers  of  their  joy.  It  will  be 
borne  in  mind  that  the  objects  of  this  love  are  Christian  believers,  simply  as  such. 

Now — II.    How   DOES   SUCH  AN   AFFECTION   EVINCE   OUR  DISCIPLESHIP  TO   ChRIST  ?      1. 

Because  He  commands  it ;  therefore  not  to  cherish  it  is  to  disobey  Him,  and  prove 
that  we  do  not  love  Him.  2.  Because  the  character  of  the  saints  is  the  very  one 
which  we  are  striving  to  acquire  if  we  are  followers  of  Christ ;  and  therefore  we 
cannot  help  but  admire  it.  3.  As  Christians  we  are  called  to  pass  through  the  same 
tribulations  and  trials  as  they  have ;  therefore  we  are  constrained  to  sympathy 
with  them  according  to  that  fundamental  law  of  human  nature — "  A  fellow-feeling 
makes  the  whole  world  kin."  4.  Gratitude  for  spiritual  mercies  is  only  possible  to 
those  who  have  ceased  to  be  carnally -minded :  while,  again,  to  receive  spiritual 
mercies  through  the  medium  of  a  fellow-believer  must  attach  ns  specially  to  him, 
on  the  common  principle  of  human  gratitude.  5.  To  love  God's  people  so  as  to  be 
willing  to  go  through  great  sacrifices  for  them,  must  surely  be  impossible  to  the 
worldly  mind,  because  it  is  at  enmity  with  God  and  cannot  honestly  seek  the  good 
of  those  who  are  born  of  Him.  If,  therefore,  any  man  loves  us  as  Christian  dis- 
ciples, the  inference  must  be  that  he  is  a  disciple  and  has  ceased  to  stand  connected 
with  our  enemies,  lU.  Consider  this  affection  as  a  standing  proof  of  our  dis- 
cipleship. 1.  Nothing  else,  without  this,  can  prove  a  man  to  be  a  child  of  God. 
He  that  is  destitute  of  this  love,  whatever  else  he  possesses,  abideth  in  death. 
2.  Where  this  exists,  nothing  else  need  be  looked  for.  Conclusions :  1.  As  a  pro- 
fessed believer  test  your  sincerity  by  this  principle :  Do  you  love  the  followers  of 
Jesus?  2.  Judge  of  your  growth  or  declension  in  grace  by  your  waxing  or  waning 
love  to  the  brethren,  3.  Prepare  for  greater  usefulness  by  seeking  more  of  this  love 
to  the  people  of  God.  4.  Appeal  to  the  unconverted  and  inquiring.  We  want  you 
amongst  us  only  if  you  can  love  us ;  and  we  want  you  to  love  us  only  because  you 
and  we  together  have  learned  to  love  the  Saviour.  (Ibid.)  The  badge  of  true 
Christians : — I.  Christ  would  have  every  Christian  known  to  be  a  disciple.  And 
this  cannot  be  otherwise.  The  fire  of  grace  will  ever  show  itself  both  by  smoke  and 
light.    But  wherein  must  we  show  ourselves  disciples  of  Christ?    In  five  things. 

1.  The  disciples  were  called  by  Christ's  voice,  and  depended  on  His  mouth  for 
instruction  and  direction.  So  must  we  be  made  disciples  by  the  word  of  Christ. 
But  if  thou  carest  not  for  the  preaching  of  the  Word,  or  canst  content  thyself  in 
thy  ignorance,  or  with  some  confused  knowledge,  thou  showest  thou  art  no  disciple. 

2.  The  disciples  being  called,  denied  themselves,  left  all  for  Christ,  and  acknow- 
ledged no  master  but  Him  alone  (Matt.  iv.  22  ;  xxiii.  8,  10).  If  thou  likewise  be  a 
disciple  thou  must  renounce  all  other  masters  and  all  employments  which  will  not 
Btacd  with  Christianity.  3.  The  disciples  were  called  to  be  near  attendants  of 
Christ  and  perform  all  His  commandments  (chap.  viii.  31 ;  xv.  14,  15).  4,  The 
disciples  were  glad  of  Christ's  presence,  and  when  He  was  absent  their  hearts  wer« 
full  of  sorrow.  If  thou  art  a  disciple  thy  soul  rejoiceth  in  the  presence  of  Christ, 
in  His  ordinances,  in  the  directions  and  consolations  of  His  Spirit.  5.  The  disciples 
had  commission  and  commandment  to  make  other  disciples,  accordingly  were  dili- 
gent in  their  callings,  spending  themselves  in  doing  good  to  others.  Dost  thou  gain 
others  to  Christ  and  form  thine  own  course  to  His?   U.  Christ  would  have  all  know 

vol..  n.  29 


450  THE  BIBLICAJj  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tzo. 

His  disciples  by  this  badge  of  love  ^1  John  ii.  10).  1.  What  is  this  true  Christian 
love  7  (1)  The  act — love  ;  it  is  a  fruit  of  the  Spirit  (Gal.  y.  22).  No  natural  man 
is  capable  of  it,  nor  any  but  such  as  are  entered  into  God's  school  (1  Thess.  iv.  9). 
(2)  The  object  of  it  is  good  men,  and  all  good  men  (Eph.  i.  15),  even  the  poorest 
and  meanest,  without  accepting  of  persons ;  it  must  not  offend  one  of  the  httle 
ones.  (3)  The  bond  of  this  love  is  goodness.  Christian  love  loves  not  only  in  the 
truth,  but  for  the  truth  (2  John  i.  2).  (4)  The  rule  of  this  love  is  according  to 
Christ  (ver.  34).  Thus — (a)  He  loved  us  first,  before  we  loved  Him.  (6)  When  we 
were  enemies,  (c)  Not  for  His  benefit,  but  ours,  (d)  To  make  ub  better.  1.  Con- 
stantly, even  to  the  end.  2.  This  is  a  badge  of  a  true  Christian  man.  And  that 
for  these  reasons — (1)  It  is  a  note  of  God's  child,  or  one  that  is  born  of  God  (1  John 
iv.  7,  8  ;  iii.  14).  (2)  It  is  a  note  of  the  Spirit's  presence,  who  dwells  nowhere  but 
in  the  heart  of  a  sound  Christian.  (3)  A  hvely  and  inseparable  fruit  of  living  faith 
is  a  badge  of  a  true  Christian,  but  true  love  of  the  brethren  is  such  a  fruit  of  living 
faith  (Gal.  v.  6).  (4)  A  note  of  a  true  member  of  the  Church  is  a  badge  of  a  true 
Christian,  but  it  is  a  note  of  a  true  member  of  the  Church  when  the  lion  and  lamb 
feed  together,  &o.  (Isa.  xi.  7,  8),  that  is,  when  a  man  brought  into  the  kingdom  of 
Christ  putteth  off  his  fierce,  lionish,  and  poisonful  affection,  and  is  now  become 
tame  and  tractable  as  a  lamb  of  Christ's  fold,  or  as  a  child  resembles  his  heavenly 
Father,  who  is  loving  and  merciful.  (T.  Taylor.)  The  badge  of  discipleship : — 
Love  was  to  be  the  grand  distinctive  sign  which  hence  on  through  all  the  ages  was 
to  denote,  distinguish,  and  define  the  followers  of  Jesus  from  all  other  guilds, 
schools,  creeds,  and  combinations  under  heaven.  The  Pharisee  was  known  by  his 
broad  phylactery,  the  Sadducee  was  known  by  his  contempt  for  ritual  and  his 
ostentatious  contrast  to  the  rival  sect.  The  priests  and  scribes  were  marked  out 
by  their  peculiar  robes;  the  Boman,  by  his  toga,  or  the  eagle  on  his  helmet 
according  as  he  was  citizen  or  soldier.  To-day  the  Brahmin  is  known  by  the 
mystic  character  cut  upon  his  breast  and  brow,  and  the  Mahometan  by  his  head- 
gear. The  soldier's  red,  the  sailor's  blue,  the  cleric's  black — by  this,  that,  and  the 
other  sign,  classes,  creeds,  professions,  preferences,  races,  are  distinguished  the 
wide  world  over.  Some  time  ago  there  was  quite  a  warm  burst  of  indignation  from 
onr  Scottish  fellow-countrymen  because  the  distinctive  plaids  and  colours  of  the 
tartan,  which  denote  the  difference  between  the  Campbell,  the  Mackintosh,  and 
Macgregor,  were  in  peril.  Well,  to  those  who  are  Israelites  indeed,  those  who  are 
enlisted  under  the  banner  of  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  those  who  are  faithful 
followers  of  Jesus,  and  bend  a  loyal  knee  to  Him  of  the  Crown  of  Thorns — to  these 
Jesus  fays,  "  I  institute  a  new  order.  In  it  neither  star,  ribbon,  medal,  stripe,  nor 
outward  garb,  mark,  or  colour  shall  find  place ;  but  you  shall  wear  a  token  by 
which  all  men  shall  take  knowledge  of  you  that  you  belong  to  Me,  '  By  this  shall 
all  men  know  that  ye  are  My  disciples,  if  ye  have  love  one  to  another.' "  {J. 
Jackson  Wray.)  The  criterion  of  discipleship : — Love  is — I.  A  simple  test.  Had 
it  been  the  adoption  of  a  certain  set  of  beliefs,  or  conformity  to  certain  rites,  it 
would  have  been  too  complicated  to  be  of  easy  application  or  practical  use ;  bat 
here  how  simple — "  He  that  loveth  not  his  brother  whom  he  hath  seen,"  &o.  H.  Ah 
INFALLIBLE  TEST.  Other  tests,  even  the  best,  are  of  doubtful  accuracy;  the  applica> 
tion  may  lead  to  wrong  conclusions.  But  this  is  infallible,  and  will  determine  the 
destiny  of  all  men  at  the  last  day  (Matt.  zxv. ).  III.  A  boleun  test.  If  we  apply 
it  to  the  Christians  of  this  age  and  country,  where  men  hate,  cheat,  and  fight  each 
other,  how  few  will  prove  genuine  disciples  1  Could  all  men  stand  it  the  world 
would  be  a  paradise.  {D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  proof  of  discipleship  : — The  marks 
of  a  true  disciple  of  any  master  are — I.  Bbubp  in  his  master's  words.  II.  Attach- 
ment  to  his  master's  person.  HI.  Obedience  to  his  master's  precepts.  IV.  Imita- 
tion of  his  master's  example.  Obedience  and  imitation  may  be  summed  up  in  one 
word — love.  If  we  love  Christ  we  shall  believe,  obey,  and  imitate  Him ;  and  we 
must  show  that  love  by  loving  one  another.     {J.  R,  Bailey. ) 

Vers.  36-38.  Lord,  whither  goest  Thou  7 — Unlawful  curiosity  : — It  is  a  common 
fault  among  us  to  be  more  inquisitive  concerning  things  secret,  which  belong  to 
God  only,  t'han  concerning  things  revealed,  which  belong  to  us  and  to  our  children — 
more  desirous  to  have  our  curiosity  gratified,  than  our  conscience  directed — to  know 
what  is  done  in  heaven,  than  what  we  ought  to  do  to  get  thither.  It  is  easy  to 
observe  it  in  the  conversation  of  Christians,  how  soon  a  discourse  of  what  is  plain 
and  edifying  is  dropped,  and  no  more  is  said  of  it ;  the  subject  is  exhausted  ;  while 
Ik  matter  of  doubtful  disputation  runs  into  an  endless  strife  of  words.    iM.  Henry.} 


«HAP.  xra.]  ST.  JOHN.  451 

Peter'g  curiosity  and  presumption : — I.  His  cobiositt.  The  question  was  occasioned 
4>y  ver.  33 ;  and  as  soon  as  our  Saviour  paused,  Peter  suddenly  makes  the  inquiry. 
1.  Here  is  something  which  we  know  not  how  entirely  to  censure.  The  imperfec- 
tions of  good  men  betray  their  excellences.  We  see  Peter's  love  to  his  Lord,  and 
concern  for  His  presence.  When  Elijah  was  going  to  be  taken  up,  Elisha  followed 
him.  When  Jonathan  and  David  were  about  to  separate,  they  fell  upon  each  other's 
neck  and  wept.  When,  at  Miletus,  "  Paul  kneeled  down  and  prayed  with  the 
brethren,  they  all  wept  sore. "  But  think  of  Christ !  What  a  Benefactor,  what  a 
Master  was  He  I  Could  Peter  then  view  His  removal  with  indifference  ?  2.  But  if 
our  Saviour  blames  Peter,  Peter  was  blameworthy.  He  was  a  little  too  curious — a 
fault  by  no  means  uncommon.  For  how  many  are  more  anxious  to  know  secret 
things  than  to  improve  the  things  revealed.  We  are  all  fonder  of  speculation  than 
practice.  Whereas,  we  ought  to  remember,  that,  in  a  state  where  we  have  so  much 
to  do,  and  so  little  time  to  do  it  in,  we  should  secure  ourselves  from  all  superfluous 
engagements.  3.  Our  Saviour,  therefore,  never  encouraged  this  principle.  When 
a  man  asked  Him,  "  Lord,  are  there  few  that  shall  be  saved  ?  "  He  did  not  even 
notice  the  trifler  :  He  said  onto  them,  "  Strive  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate."  So 
here  He  shows  His  judgment  of  the  inquiry  by  eluding  it.  But  though  He  does 
not  gratify.  He  instructs.  In  two  senses,  Peter  was  to  follow  Him,  in  due  time— 
(1)  To  glory.  It  was  what  our  Lord  prayed  for,  and  what  He  promised  (chap.  xvii. 
24).  So  we  are  to  be  for  ever  with  the  Lord.  He  has  gone  to  prepare  a  place  for 
us.  But  for  every  thing  there  is  a  season.  He  could  not  follow  Him  now. 
Though  our  Saviour's  hour  was  come,  Peter's  was  not ;  though  the  Master  had 
finished  the  work  given  Him  to  do,  the  servant  had  scarcely  begun  his — and  '*  we 
are  all  immortal  till  our  work  is  done."  Christians  are  sometimes  impatient,  bat 
this  is  wrong.  "  The  best  frame  we  can  be  in  is  to  be  ready  to  go,  and  willing  to  stay." 
The  eagerness  is  not  only  wrong,  but  useless.  What  would  it  avail  the  husbandman 
to  fret  ?  Would  this  bring  harvest  the  sooner  ?  He  cannot  reap  in  May,  the  order  of 
nature  forbids  it.  There  is  also  an  order  in  grace.  Why  cannot  you  follow  Him 
now  ?  You  have  an  aged  mother  to  support,  or  an  infant  charge  to  rear,  or  an 
institution  of  charity  to  found,  or  to  exemplify  religion  in  your  practice,  or  to 
recommend  it  by  your  sufferings.  (2)  To  the  cross.  But  he  could  not  follow  Him 
now,  because  he  had  not  sufficient  faith  and  resolution  to  suffer.  This  shows  us 
that  our  Lord's  dealings  with  His  people  are  founded  not  only  in  kindness,  but  in 
wisdom  and  prudence.  He  adapts  the  burden  to  the  shoulder,  or  fits  the  shoulder 
to  the  burden.  "  As  thy  day,  so  shall  thy  strength  be."  SufiQcient  for  the  day  is 
the  evU  thereof — and  what  is  better,  sufficient  for  it  too  will  be  the  grace.  II.  His 
PEESDMPTiON  (vers.  37,  38).  Ah,  Peter,  this  is  sooner  said  than  done.  Life  is  not 
BO  easily  parted  with.  You  trembled  upon  the  water ;  be  not  so  confident  now. 
Note — 1.  The  crime  was  heinous.  To  deny  his  Master  was  unfaithfulness :  hia 
Friend,  perfidy :  his  Benefactor,  ingratitude :  his  Bedeemer,  impiety.  This,  too, 
was  the  conduct  of  one  who  had  been  called  from  a  low  condition  in  life  to  the  high 
honour  of  apostleship — of  one  who  had  seen  His  miracles,  &c.  Three  aggravations 
are  here  mentioned.  (1)  He  was  warned — he  could  not  plead  ignorance.  (2)  The 
sin  was  immediately  committed.  Things  soon  wear  off  from  the  mind  ;  but  here 
was  no  time  for  forgetful ness.  (3)  It  was  repeated,  •'thrice."  A  man  may  be 
surprised  and  overtaken  in  a  fault ;  but,  the  moment  after,  reflection  may  return  ; 
and  he  may  flee.  But  Peter,  after  his  first  offence,  renews  it  again — and  again — 
and  each  time  waxes  worse  and  worse.  (2)  The  lessons  :  1.  The  foreknowledge  of 
our  Saviour.  2.  What  reason  have  we  to  exclaim,  with  David,  "  Lord,  what  is 
man  1  "  Survey  him  under  the  greatest  advantages  and  obligations.  There  is 
nothing  too  vile  for  us  to  fall  into,  if  we  are  left  of  Him  who  alone  can  keep  us 
from  falling.  3.  How  little  we  are  acquainted  with  ourselves.  Peter  spoke  according 
to  his  feelings.  But  sincerity  is  not  constancy.  There  is  a  goodness,  compared  to 
the  morning  cloud  and  early  dew,  that  soon  passeth  awaj'.  Peter  did  not  consider 
the  difference  between  an  impulse  and  a  principle ;  between  an  hour  of  ease  and  a 
moment  of  trial.  Hazael's  case  is  a  strong  one ;  but  it  will  apply,  in  various 
degrees,  to  ourselves.  God  only  knows  how  much  of  ourinnocencyhas  been  owing 
to  principle,  or  the  absence  of  temptation  ;  or  what  we  should  have  been  in  con- 
ditions the  reverse  of  those  which  have  sheltered  our  weakness.  4.  The  most 
confident  are  the  most  exposed  ;  and  the  most  humble  the  most  safe.  "When  I 
am  weak,  then  I  am  most  strong."  "  Hold  Thou  me  up,  and  I  shell  be  safe." 
Conclusion  :  We  do  not  wonder  at  this  sad  revolution  in  Peter.  He  is  proud  and 
self-sulficient.     "  Pride  goes  before  destruction,"  &c.     I  never  saw  a  professor  of 


452  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rm. 

religion  full  of  confidence  in  himself,  and  speaking  censoriously  of  othen,  but  who 
fell  into  some  gross  crime,  or  into  some  great  calamity.  [W.  Jay.)  Not  now, 
but  afterwards  : — 1.  Children  will  have  everything  now  :  "  afterwards  "  is  a  word 
that  plagues  them.  As  life  advances  we  become  more  intimately  acquainted  with 
the  word,  and  come  to  like  it.  We  know  that  yesterday  has  gone  beyond  recall, 
and  that  to-morrow  is  coming  and  always  available.  2.  This  is  the  second  time 
the  same  thing  has  been  said,  on  this  same  occasion,  to  the  same  man,  and  both 
times  in  a  Master's  tone,  delivered  with  a  brother's  heart  and  voice  (ver.  7).  So 
this  child-man  was  constantly  put  back  and  told  to  wait  till  the  clock  struck,  and 
the  hour  had  come  when  he  should  have  the  keener  vision,  the  more  sensitive  heart, 
the  more  receptive  spirit  and  understanding  mind.  This  was  the  training  that 
Peter  needed.  He  was  a  man  who  wanted  everything  done  instantaneously.  Th© 
Lord  knowing  this  said  the  most  vexing  words,  "  Not  now."  We  want  it  too,  and 
when  we  are  mad  with  impatience  He  says  it  quietly  and  sovereignly ;  but  adds 
"  afterwards  "  in  the  same  tone,  for  Christ  hved  in  to-morrow.  I.  Look  at  this  nt 
THE  MKECTiON  OP — 1.  Eevclation.  We  cannot  follow  any  great  doctrine  in  all  the 
range  of  its  thoughts  and  in  all  the  possibilities  of  its  issues.  Who  can  explaia 
the  atonement  ?  We  begin  in  the  right  spirit  when  we  begin  in  the  spirit  of  wait- 
ing. I  need  the  cross  ;  I  accept  it,  but  cannot  tell  the  measure  of  the  oblation  or 
its  efficacy.  But  afterwards  there  will  be  a  higher  school,  additional  facilities,  then 
I  shall  know.  2.  The  mysteries  of  daily  providence.  "Thou  canst  not  follow 
Me " — not  from  one  locality  to  another,  but  in  thought,  purpose,  and  sovereign 
decree.  Who  can  keep  pace  with  the  Great  Walker?  I  halt,  stagger,  fall,  hall 
rise  again,  and  am  down  before  I  can  straighten  myself ;  I  cannot  f oUow  except  in 
the  dim  far  distance  now,  but  afterward.  Our  strange  constitution,  individuality, 
sufferings,  are  heavy  burdens.  Explanation  would  help  us  to  bear  them.  Why 
should  I  wear  this  chain?  be  encompassed  by  this  cloud?  The  answer  is  "not 
now,  but  afterward."     "No  chastening,  for  the  present  seemeth  joyous,"  &o.    II. 

ThEKB  CANNOT  BE  AN  AFTEKWABD  OF  REVELATION  UNLESS  THERE  IS  A  NOW  OF  OBEDI- 
ENCE. 1.  The  "  now  "  is  not  evacuated  of  all  meaning.  To  obey  in  the  darkness  is 
the  great  thing.  Were  I  to  say,  "I  will  trust  God  in  the  seventh  trouble  because 
He  has  delivered  me  in  six,"  it  would  be  historically  true  and  full  of  solace,  but  no 
indication  of  growth  in  grace.  But  he  has  grovm  in  grace  who  says,  "  Though  He 
slay  me  yet  will  I  trust  in  Him."  2.  Obedience  now  is  revelation  afterward.  He 
that  doeth  the  will  f-hall  know  of  the  doctrine.  We  do  not  know  the  joy  which  is 
laidnp  for  us  in  complete  obedience  to  the  words,  "  Stand  still  and  see  the  salvation 
of  God."  The  next  piece  of  knowledge  comes  easily.  Were  the  child  to  be  compelled 
to  overleap  seven  years  of  the  process  of  education,  he  would  be  overcome.  What 
he  has  to  do  is  to  read  the  next  line,  and  then  to  turn  over  the  next  page.  What 
we  as  Christian  students  have  to  do  is  to  keep  to  the  present  truth,  do  the  next 
duty,  and  then  the  revelation  will  steal  upon  us  without  the  violence  of  haste  and 
the  unrest  of  surprise.  We  cannot  tell  how  the  light  grows,  so  in  mental  illumina- 
tion and  spiritual  culture.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  "  now  "  and  "  then  "  of  following 
Christ : — The  first  words  spoken  to  Peter  were  *'  Follow  Me  "  ;  almost  the  last  were 
••  Thou  canst  not  follow  Me  now."  After  a  long  attachment  to  the  Saviour  it  was  a 
hard  word.  There  is,  however,  always  a  "staying  hand  "  in  life  as  well  as  a  "  beckon- 
ing." The  pillar  of  cloud  moves  and  halts.  I.  The  negative  present.  When 
had  it  been  that  Simon  could  not  go  with  his  Master  ?  He  had  accompanied  Him 
to  Bethany  when  seeking  rest  aft(;r  tumult  and  turmoil ;  to  the  Mount  of  Trans- 
figuration when  Jesus  was  pre-glorified.  Now  he  may  not  follow  Him.  Nor  was 
t^s  strange.  The  high  priest  only  could  enter  the  Holy  of  Holies  on  the  Day  of 
Atonement,  and  Peter  might  not  understand,  but  we  do,  that  the  great  Day  of 
Atonement  had  dawned.  On  to  the  cross,  into  the  tomb,  within  the  veil,  only  Jesus 
must  go.  Yet  by  this  access  to  God  was  given.  And  now  into  the  crucified  life,  as 
dead  with  Christ  to  the  world  ;  into  the  risen  life,  as  new  creatures  in  Hira,  we  may 
follow  Jesus  ;  but  further  than  this  we  may  not  go  now ;  into  the  ascension  life  we 
are  forbidden  to  enter  at  present,  but  we  shall  be  permitted  afterwards.  II.  Thb 
positive  future.  It  was  in  the  human  life  Jesus  commanded  Peter  to  follow  Him, 
saying  He  would  make  them  "  fishers  of  men."  They  were  to  observe  His  modes 
of  action  and  drink  of  His  Spirit.  And  so  with  us.  But  is  it  not  rather  into  the 
higher  risen  life  that  He  bids  ns  follow  Him — the  life  of  pardon,  peace,  sanctity, 
and  spiritual  power  ?  And  to  this  He  is  "  the  Way  ";  and  by  following  that  Way 
we  shall  reach  the  ••  afterwards  "  of  His  presence  and  glory  (1  John  iii.  2).  (I. 
Watt$.)         Why  cannot  I  follow  Thee  now? — 1.  Why,  indeed?    There  could  be 


OHAi',  xin.]  ST.  JOHN.  453 

no  doobt  of  his  sincerity  and  attachment  to  his  Master.  I  cannot  believe  that 
our  Lord  merely  referred  to  the  time  for  Peter's  departure.  Further,  Peter  did 
follow  Christ  so  far  as  he  could  without  dying ;  for  there  was  still  a  considerable 
portion  of  ground  to  be  traversed  by  those  sacred  feet.  There  lay  before  Him 
the  way  of  sorrows,  crowned  with  the  cross  on  Calvary.  Up  to  that  point  Simon 
Peter  might  have  followed  Christ,  although  he  did  not.  Our  Lord  was  referring  to 
this  first,  though  His  words  may  have  reached  on  to  the  glory  that  was  at  last  to  be 
revealed.  The  time  was  already  come  when  His  disciples  were  to  be  scattered  and 
to  leave  Him  alone.  And  knowing  this,  He  says,  "Whither  I  go,"  &o.  And  it  is 
equally  true  that  this  same  Simon  Peter  did  follow  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  afterwards 
in  the  same  sense  in  which  he  was  now  precluded  from  following  Him.  2.  As  we 
ask  Peter's  question,  we  are  led  to  consider  our  own  experience.  Is  it  not  true  that 
there  sometimes  seems  to  rise  up  in  the  very  path  of  our  inclinations  and  spiritual 
aspirations  a  strange,  indescribable  barrier — an  inexorable  "  cannot " — that  seems  to 
bar  the  way  to  further  progress  ?  It  is  wise  to  ask  this  question,  for  if  it  be  honestly 
put,  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  will  sooner  or  later  show  us  what  gives  strength  to  this 
cruel  and  pitiless  "  cannot."  Why  could  not  Simon  follow  Jesus  then  ?  Because — 
I.  He  thought  he  codld.  "  I  will  lay  down  my  life  for  Thy  sake."  There  is 
nothing  more  common  amongst  Christians  than  the  admission  of  our  frailty  and 
weakness.  But  what  a  great  difference  there  is  between  making  orthodox  admis- 
sions and  having  a  real  consciousness  of  our  own  helplessness  and  dependence  on  a 
higher  power.  Sometimes,  feeling  ourselves  to  be  a  little  weaker  than  we  should  be, 
we  are  ashamed  of  our  infirmity.  And  sometimes,  taught  by  many  disasters,  we 
entertain  serious  apprehensions  about  ourselves  ;  but  it  is  wonderful  how  self-con- 
fidence rebounds  from  the  most  distressing  humiliations.  We  are  quite  determined 
to  be  more  careful  in  the  future.  But  how  slow  we  are  to  abandon  all  confidence 
in  the  flesh  1  And  it  is  not  until  we  have  learnt  our  helpless  dependence  that  we 
can  hope  to  follow  Jesus.  For  flesh  and  blood  can  no  more  participate  in  the 
fellowship  of  Jesus'  sufferings  than  they  can  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God.  But 
Simon  Peter  was  a  man  of  strong  determination ;  and  such  characters  find  it  very 
hard  to  renounce  all  confidence  in  their  moral  vigour.  It  seemed  incredible  that 
he  should  turn  his  back  upon  his  Master,  and  we  can  scarcely  bring  ourselves  to 
believe  that  we  could  condescend  to  the  sin,  which  subsequently  we  commit ;  and 
then  by  and  by  we  learn  our  weakness  amidst  bitter  tears,  as  Simon  Peter  did.  II. 
He  was  at  this  time  walking  by  sight  eatheb  than  by  faith.  We  do  not  reach 
the  life  of  real  faith  till  we  are  fully  conscious  of  our  own  helplessness.  How 
can  we  really  trust  Christ  unless  we  have  thoroughly  learnt  to  distrust  ourselves  ? 
Peter,  walking  by  sight,  his  firmness  was  greatly  dependent  upon  outward  circum- 
stances. As  long  as  he  saw  Christ  performing  prodigies,  or  greeted  by  hosannas, 
it  appeared  easy  to  follow  Him ;  but  when  all  His  glory  seemed  departed,  his 
courage  forsook  him.  Ah  1  how  many  of  us  are  fair-weather  sailors  1  and  how  few 
in  their  daily  life  by  faith  possess  themselves  of  God.  III.  He  was  walkinq  in 
THE  FLESH  BATHEB  THAN  IN  THE  Spieit.  This  Same  Peter,  only  a  few  weeks 
afterwards,  when  baptized  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  stood  before  the  rulers  of  his 
country  with  unblanched  countenance,  for  that  Master  whom  He  denied.  And  for 
as  also  that  Spirit  is  given.  This  qualification  for  following  Jesus  is  closely  con- 
nected with  the  other.  They  represent  the  two  sides  of  a  healthy  spiritual  experience. 
Faith  on  our  side  brings  us  into  contact  with  the  Divine,  and  puts  the  soul  in  the 
attitude  of  reception ;  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  on  God's  side  brings  the  Divine 
into  contact  with  us,  and  fills  us  according  to  our  capacity.  "  Eeceived  ye  the 
Spirit  by  the  works  of  the  law,  or  by  the  hearing  of  faith  t  But,  if  we  live  in  the 
Spirit,  let  us  also  walk  in  the  Spirit ;  "  and  Paul's  charge  against  the  Galatians  is 
that,  having  begun  in  the  Spirit,  they  had  gone  on  to  be  made  perfect  in  the  flesh. 
Is  not  this  where  many  of  us  lose  our  capacity  to  follow  Christ  ?  The  energies  of 
the  flesh  may  be  never  so  strong  and  well-intentioned,  but  they  cannot  take  the 
place  of  the  powers  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  there  is  a  point  beyond  which  they 
cannot  go  in  disposing  us  to  follow  Christ.  IV.  Because  he  was  out  of  sympathy 
WITH  Christ's  mind.  "  Can  two  walk  together  except  they  be  agreed  ?  "  Christ 
was  meditating  on  the  Father's  will,  while  Simon  Peter  "  savoured  of  the  things  that 
be  of  men."  And  if  we  are  to  follow  Jesus  we  must  rise  into  the  inner  circle  of 
His  fellowship,  and  see  things  from  His  point  of  view.  It  is  not  by  saying,  "  I 
will  follow  Thee  "  that  we  succeed  in  following  Him.  It  is  by  bringing  our  hearts 
into  full  harmony  with  His  Divine  will.  And  the  first  step  towards  accepting  the 
Divine  will  is  taken  when  we  repose  our  full  confidence  in  it.  Jesas  Christ  was  at  this 


4ft4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xm 

moment  fulfilling  in  His  own  experience  the  language  of  the  Psalm,  "  Lo  I  I  come 
to  do  Thy  will."  Peter,  on  the  other  hand,  preferred  to  trust  to  his  own  will.  He 
had  day-dreams  of  material  aggrandisement,  and  political  power,  so  that  he  had  no 
room  for  the  fellowship  of  the  mind  of  Jesus  Christ.  And  when  Jesus  began  to 
open  up  His  own  purposes  to  him,  he  shrank  from  them  with  aversion.  Now,  here 
is  our  lesson.  You,  who  seek  after  popularity,  who  are  wishing  to  be  on  good  termg 
with  the  world,  how  can  you  follow  Jesus  until  you  are  in  sympathy  with  Him  and 
with  His  aims  ?  "If  any  man  will  come  after  Me,  let  him  deny  himself,  take  up  hia 
cross,  and  follow  Me."  V.  Ha  was  inwabdly  clinging  all  the  while  to  a  be- 
BBTTDia  SIN — self-assertion,  or  self-confidence,  mingled  with  not  a  little  worldly 
pride.  We  see  this  evil  habit  of  soul  exhibitmg  itself  in  his  attempt  to  dissuade 
his  Master  from  facing  the  Cross ;  and  in  his  conduct  at  the  supper-table.  How  many 
of  you  are  kept  back  from  foUowiug  Jesus  now  by  some  cherished  sin  ?  Conclusion : 
Perhaps  some  of  you  are  asking,  "  Can  we  not  go  to  heaven  without  all  this  ?  "  We 
are  not  discussing  the  minimum  qualification  for  heaven.  What  it  is  God  only  knows. 
We  are  talking  of  following  Jesus,  and  that  is  far  more  to  the  purpose.  I  have  no  desire 
to  solve  the  problem.  Here  is  a  consideration  which  is  very  profitable :  How  much 
spiritual  benefit  is  it  possiblefor  a  man  to  get  out  of  his  religion?  ( W.  Hay  Aitken,M.A.) 
The  withheld  completiora  of  life : — St.  Peter  felt  dimly  that  the  life  of  Jesus  was 
opening  into  something  so  large  that  all  which  had  gone  before  would  be  seen  to 
have  been  only  the  vestibule  and  preparation  for  what  was  yet  to  come.  And  just 
then,  when  his  expectation  was  keenest,  and  his  love  most  eager,  an  iron  curtain 
fell  across  his  view.  The  completion  was  withheld.  And  that  is  what  is  always 
happening.  It  would  be  intolerable  to  us  if  we  could  not  trace  tendencies  in  our 
life.  If  everything  stood  still,  or  only  moved  round  in  a  circle,  it  would  be  a  dreary 
and  a  dreadful  thing  to  live.  But  we  rejoice  in  life  because  it  seems  to  be  carrying 
as  somewhere.  We  bear  with  incompleteness,  because  of  the  completion  which  is 
prophesied  and  hoped  for.  But  it  is  the  delay  or  barrier  that  distresses  us.  The 
tendency  that  is  not  allowed  to  reach  the  fulfilment,  which  alone  gave  it  value, 
seems  a  mockery.  You  watch  your  plant  growing,  and  see  its  wonderful  building 
of  the  woody  fibre,  its  twining  of  the  strong  roots,  its  busy  life-blood  hurrying 
along  its  veins.  Some  morning  the  deep-red  flower  is  blazing  full-blown  on  the 
stem,  and  all  is  plain.  The  completion  has  justified  the  process.  But  suppose  the 
plant  to  have  been  all  the  time  conscious  of  the  coming  flower,  and  yet  to  have  felt 
itself  held  back  from  blossoming,  would  it  not  be  a  very  puzzled  and  impatient  and 
unhappy  little  plant  ?  Now,  there  are  certain  conditions  which  are  to  all  good  life 
just  what  the  flower  is  to  the  plant.  There  are  certain  fine  results  of  feeling  which 
are  the  true  and  recognized  results  of  the  best  ways  of  living.  But  when  the  life, 
conscious  of  the  character  in  itself  out  of  which  these  conditions  ought  to  come,  finds 
that  it  pauses  on  the  brink  of  its  completion  and  cannot  blossom,  then  come  impa* 
tient  questionings  and  doubts.  I.  Let  ds  take  some  instances  dkawn  from  daily  life. 
Suppose  we  have  some  one  devoted  to  the  good  of  others.  A  poor  obscure  woman  in  a 
Bick  room  giving  her  days  aud  nights,  health  and  strength,  to  some  poor  invahd;  or 
a  great  brilliant  man  out  in  the  world  neglecting  his  personal  interests  in  the  desire 
that  some  of  the  lagging  causes  of  God  may  be  helped  forward.  Now  such  a  life 
has  its  legitimate  completion.  The  natural  flower  which  should  crown  that  life  is 
men's  gratitude.  Perhaps  in  ringing  cheers,  perhaps  only  in  the  silent  pressure  of 
the  hand.  The  man  who  does  no  good  expects  no  thanks.  The  selfish  life  feels 
and  shows  the  unnaturalness  if  men  make  a  mistake  and  lavish  their  gratitude  upon 
it.  It  is  as  if  men  tied  the  glorious  flower  on  to  the  top  of  a  wooden  post.  And 
now  suppose  that  the  gratitude  does  not  come.  Is  there  no  disappointment ;  no 
sense  of  a  withheld  completion?  "  What  does  it  mean?  "  you  ask  with  wonder, 
even  with  impatience.  And  in  answer  to  yoiu-  question  there  are  two  things  to  be 
said.  1.  That  such  a  suspension  of  the  legitimate  result,  shows  a  condition  of 
disorder.  The  natural  result  of  your  self-devotion  has  not  come  because  the  state 
of  things  in  which  you  live  is  unnatural.  That  must  be  recognized.  If  you  let 
your  surprise  appear,  men  will  misunderstand  you,  and  cry,  "  Oh,  after  all,  then, 
you  were  not  unselfish."  But  they  are  wrong;  you  did  not  work  for  thanks. 
When  the  thanks  do  not  come  it  is  not  your  loss ;  it  is  the  derauged  state  of  things 
that  troubles  you.  When  Jesus  wept  over  Jerusalem,  did  He  not  feel  its  ingratitude? 
But  was  it  not  the  disturbed  world,  where  such  ingratitude  was  possible,  which  lay 
at  the  bottom  of  His  grief?  When  your  child  is  ungrateful  to  you,  is  it  the 
neglect  of  yourself,  or  the  demoralized  home,  that  saddens  you  ?  It  is  the  violation 
of  a  deep,  true  instinct.    2.  But  because  any  state  of  things  is  unnatural,  it  does 


OHAP.xm.]  ST.  JOHN.  455 

not  provB  that  there  can  oome  oat  of  it  no  blessing.  So  it  is  here.  The  service 
that  a  man  does  to  his  fellow-men  does  not  bring  down  their  gratitude.  What 
then  ?  The  withholding  of  the  legitimate  completion  of  his  service  may  throw 
him  back  upon  the  nature  of  the  act  itself,  and  compel  him  to  find  his  satisfaction 
there.  That  has  been  the  support  of  many  a  despised  reformer  and  misunderstood 
friend.  The  essence  of  any  act  is  more  and  finer  than  its  consequences  are. 
Because  Christ  was  **  despised  and  rejected  of  men,"  we  are  able  to  see  more  clearly 
how  truly  He  was  His  Father's  "  weU-beloved  Son."    II.  As  we  come  into  thb 

BEOIONS   OF   BPntlXUAti   EXPEBIENOB    THIS  TBCTH    BECOMES   MOBE    STBIEINa,    and   oftcn 

much  more  puzzling.     1.  Look,  e.g.,  at  the  connection  of  duty  and  happiness. 
Happiness  is  the  natural  flower  of  duty.    The  good  man  ought  to  be  a  thoroughly 
bright  and  joyous  man.     To  disbelieve  this  would  be  to  bow  down  at  the  footstool 
of  a  devil  or  a  chance,  and  which  of  these  would  be  the  most  terrible  master  who 
can  say?  With  this  conviction  strong  in  us  we  come  to  some  good  man's  Ufe,  and  that 
life  is  all  gloomy.    Duty  is  done  day  after  day,  but  done  in  utter  dreariness  ;  good 
without  gladness,  shocking  and  perplexing  our  deep  certainty  that  to  be  good  and  to 
be  glad  belong  together.    To  such  we  want  to  bring  the  two  before-mentioned 
considerations.     To  recognize  that  it  is  unnatural,  and  so  to  struggle  against  it, 
and  yet,  while  it  must  last,  to  get  what  blessing  we  can  out  of  it,  by  letting  it  drive 
us  down  deeper,  for  our  joy  and  comfort,  into  the  very  act  and  fact  of  doing 
righteousness.    The  plant  ought  to  come  to  flower,  but  if  it  fails  it  is  still  a  plant. 
The  duty  should  open  into  joy,  but  it  may  still  be  duty  ;   stiU  hold  the  duty.     Do 
righteousness  and  forget  happiness,  and  so  it  is  most  likely  that  happiness  will 
oome.     This  will  help  a  man  to  be  hopeful  without  impatience,  and  patient  without 
despair.    2.  But  take  another  case.    There  are  promises  in  the  Bible  which  declare 
that  dedication  to  God  shall  bring  communion  with  God.    "  Draw  near  to  Me,  and 
I  will  draw  near  to  you."    And  yet  sometimes  the  man  does  give  himself  to  God, 
and  the  promise  seems  to  fail ;  and  the  man  given  to  God  trembles  when  he  hears 
other  men  talk  of  the  joy  of  Divine  communion,  because  no  such  ever  comes  to 
him.   Once  more,  to  such  a  soul  there  are  the  same  two  messages  to  bring.     Never, 
no  matter  how  long  such  exclusion  from  the  presence  of  God  may  seem  to  last, 
make  up  your  mind  to  it  that  it  is  right ;  never  cease  to  expect  that  you  will  be 
admitted  to  all  the  joy  of  your  Father's  felt  love.     And  seek  even  more  deeply  the 
satisfaction  which  is  in  your  consecration  itself;  and  that  you  may  find  it,  conse- 
crate yourself  more  and  more  completely.     There  are  two  great  anxieties  which  I 
do  feel  for  such  souls.     One  is,  lest  you  should  give  up  expecting  that  privilege  of 
communion  which  is  certainly  yours  in  possibility,  and  must  certainly  be  yours 
some  day  in  possession.    The  other  is,  lest,  since  the  consecration  has  not  brought 
you  the  communion,  yon  should  think  that  the  consecration  is  unreal,  and  so  lose 
the  power  to  be  blessed  by  it,  and  the  impulse  to  increase  it.     Multitudes  of  saints 
would  tell  you  how  in  their  hindered  lives  God  kept  them  true  to  such  experience 
as  they  had  attained  ;  and  so  it  was  that,  by  and  by,  either  before  or  after  the  great 
enlightenment  of  death,  the  hindrance  melted  away,  and  they  now  "follow  the  Lamb 
withersoever  He  goeth."     3.  Among  Christ's  promises  there  is  none  that  is  dearer 
to  one  class  of  minds  than  this.     "  If  any  man  wills  to  do  My  will,  he  shall  know 
of  the  doctrine,"  &o.     Such  souls  have  not  found  that  the  thousand  curious  questions 
of  theolop7  were  answered,  and  all  the  mystery  rolled  away  out  of  the  sky  of  truth. 
Christ  did  not  promise  that.     But  they  have  found  what  He  did  promise :  that, 
coming  near  to  Him  in  obedience,  they  have  been  made  sure  of  the  true  divinity 
that  was  in  Him  and  in  the  teachings  that  He  gave.    Everywhere  the  flower  of 
obedience  is  intelligence.     Obey  a  man  with  cordial  loyalty  and  you  will  under- 
stand him.     And  now,  are  there  any  of  us  from  whom  that  completion  seems  to 
have  been  withheld  ?    They  must  be  sure,  first,  that  they  are  right :  that  they  have 
not  really  come  to  an  essential  faith  that  the  doctrine  of  Jesus  is  divine.    They  must 
be  sure,  again,  that  their  will  to  serve  Christ  has  been  indeed  true.    And  what  then  ? 
Sure  of  all  this,  still  the  darkness  and  the  doubts  remain.  Then  they  must  come  to  the 
two  principles  ;  they  must  say, "  This  is  unnatural.    I  will  not  rest  until  my  service  of 
Christ  completes  itself  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ ;  and  yet  all  the  time  while  I  am 
waiting  I  will  find  joy  in  the  service  of  Him,  however  dimly  I  may  apprehend  Him." 
{Phillips  Brooks,  D.D.)         Readiness  for  death: — The  most  natural  explanation 
of  Christ's  words  to  one  who  knew  Him  as  intimately  as  Peter  did  was  that,  while 
shrinking  from  no  danger  Himself,  He  would  not  involve  His  followers  in  that 
danger.    But  Christ's  meaning  was  that  the  time  had  not  come  for  Peter  to  die. 
Had  Peter  known  this  he  would  still  have  desired  thus  to  follow  Christ ;  bat  in 


456  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHAP.xm 

reality  he  was  not  ready.  Desiring  to  die  and  readiness  for  death  are  two 
different  things.  I.  Thebe  was  a  work  yet  to  be  done  in  Peteb.  1.  His  knowledge 
of  Christ  and  of  Divine  things  needed  to  be  increased.  He  knew  a  great  deal,  being 
Divinely  taught,  but  he  had  yet  to  learn  that  Christ  must  suffer  and  enter  into 
His  glory.  Our  Lord  had  indeed  spoken  of  this,  but  nothing  shori  of  the  event 
itself  could  teach  the  full  truth.  There  was  the  teaching,  too,  supplied  by  the  Besur- 
rection,  Ascension,  and  Pentecost.  Compare  what  Peter  knew  in  later  years  with 
what  he  knew  now,  and  you  see  the  reason  for  our  Lord's  words.  Here,  then,  is  ona 
of  the  reasons  why  God  keeps  us  here.  We  are  to  learn  Christ  as  He  can  be 
learnt  nowhere  else,  by  experiencing  His  wonderful  love  and  almighty  grace.  What 
will  not  men  endure  to  become  acquainted  with  man  or  nature  ?  Shall  we  complain 
then  because  we  are  called  for  a  season  to  endure  hardships  that  we  may  know 
Christ.  2.  His  character  needed  chastening  and  strengthening.  He  was  weaker 
morally  than  he  thought  himself.  •'  I  will  lay  down,"  &o.  "  Wilt  thou  ?  "  Ac. 
Life  was  a  furnace  by  means  of  which  the  baser  parts  of  his  character  were  re- 
moved,  and  the  truer  and  nobler  made  manifest.  Peter  went  to  heaven  a  better 
man  than  he  would  have  done  had  he  followed  Christ  now.  There  is  no  expla- 
nation of  human  life  satisfactory  but  this.  Once  accepted  the  axe  is  laid  at  the 
root  of  all  impatience  and  disgust.  II.  There  was  a  work  yet  to  be  done  bi 
Peter.  1,  Indeed  the  work  done  in  Peter  was  with  a  view  to  that  to  be  done  by 
him.  To  regard  our  knowledge  and  experience  only  as  a  fitting  as  for  heaven  ia 
only  selfishness.  Christ  taught  that  both  were  for  the  sake  of  others.  They  could 
only  follow  Him  as  they  gave  themselves  for  their  fellow-men,  as  He  did.  Doubt- 
less Peter  soon  understood  this,  and  acquiesced  in  the  ♦'  afterwards."  2.  Our  work 
here  is  a  preparation  for  the  life  hereafter.  That  will  be  no  state  of  inactivity, 
and  by  serving  Christ  here  in  our  inward  and  outward  life  we  are  to  learn  how  to 
work  for  Him  in  heaven.  {H.  S.  Toms.)  Speech  and  action: — 1.  Peter  meant 
what  he  said,  but  he  did  not  measure  the  meaning  of  his  words.  Sometimes  oar 
words  are  bigger  than  we  are,  and  all  exaggeration  is  weakness.  Peter  spoke  out  of 
his  passion,  not  out  of  his  reason,  and  the  only  passion  that  endures  is  reason-on- 
fire.  If  he  had  said  less,  he  would  have  done  more.  The  strongest  man  has  only 
so  much  energy,  and  if  that  be  spent  in  wild  speech,  it  vrill  not  be  spent  in  well- 
directed  actions.  Hear  a  man  talk  much  about  the  poor,  and  the  probability  is  ha 
is  not  going  to  do  much  for  the  poor.  How  to  spend  oar  limited  amount  of  energy 
to  the  greatest  effect  ought  to  be  the  inquiry  of  every  earnest  man.  We  want  more 
Bible  reading,  deeper  devotion — the  strengthening  of  our  inner  life — and  then  the 
expenditure  will  be  with  ease,  and  be  a  great  beneficence.  2.  Thunder  frightens 
people ;  the  light  is  welcome  to  all,  and  how  quietly  it  comes.  "  Let  your  light  so 
shine,"  &c.  I  quote  this  passage  because  there  is  a  danger  lest  this  doctrine  of 
action,  as  opposed  to  speech,  should  be  perverted.  Persons  excuse  themselves  from 
saying  anything  about  their  religion,  and  say  that  they  seek  the  shade.  Don't 
believe  them.  The  shade  is  never  difficult  to  find.  To  talk  about  humility  is  not 
to  practice  it.  Action  and  speech  must  go  together.  Love  the  shade,  certainly ;  but 
remember  that  God  made  the  light,  and  that  everything  does  not  grow  in  the 
shade,  and  don't  undervalue  the  light.  Are  you  sure  that  you  are  honest  in  pro- 
fessing to  love  the  shade?  Is  it  not  when  some  one  asks  you  to  do  something  that 
you  don't  like  that  you  become  so  modest?  Christ  wants  spefch  and  action,  open 
conduct,  that  everybody,  if  needful,  can  see  and  estimate.  There  are  times  when 
the  shadow  will  be  right  welcome ;  but  let  the  light  make  the  shade.  3.  Peter'i 
boast  is  one  of  the  expressions  which  outdo  themselves  by  their  own  bigness. 
Beware  of  outdoing  yourself  by  your  own  words.  There  are  men  whose  geese  are 
all  swans,  and  their  swans  eagles.  Christ  demands  that  our  words  be  weighed  and 
directed  to  His  Cross  and  service.  He  asks  no  man  to  lay  down  his  life,  in  thia 
tragical  sense,  on  a  manufactured  occasion — that  will  come  by  and  by  as  a  practical 
necessity.  There  are  many  who  are  ready  to  do  some  tremendous  thing  for  as 
when  we  don't  want  anything  tremendous  done.  A  dying  master  told  his  old  slave 
that  he  had  arranged  in  his  will  that  he  (the  slave)  was  to  be  buried  in  the  family 
grave :  to  which  he  made  reply,  "  Ten  dollars  would  suit  Cato  better."  We  cannot 
live  on  tragedies — give  us  bread  and  water.  "  My  mother,  sir  I  "  says  the  wild  youth, 
"  I  would  walk  fifty  miles  on  burning  metal  for  her  1 "  But  his  mother  wants  no 
filial  piety  so  tragical  as  that ;  but  she  would  like  him  home  a  little  earlier  at  night. 
Don't  say  that  you  would  lay  down  your  life  for  her — lay  down  your  glass,  your  pipe, 
your  cards  ;  lay  down  aomething  as  an  instalment.  "  My  pastor !  sir,  I  would  die  for 
him  I"    No,  no;  he  wants  nothing  so  tragic,  all  he  wants  is  for  you  to  take  a 


CBit.  xrv.]  ST.  JOHN,  457 

Bitting,  come  in  time,  aad  pay  yonr  subscription  occasionally.  4.  Peter's  boast  was  a 
broken  sentence.  Christ  only  could  complete  it,  and  did.  "  I  have  power  to  take  it 
again."  To  serve  friends  after  death,  as  well  as  in  it,  was  reserved  for  Him  alone. 
Therefore  economize  life.  You  can  serve  others  better  by  living  than  by  dying — 
even  Christ.  "I  beseech  you  therefore  ....  present  your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice." 
And  if  we  live  for  Christ  we  shall  certainly  die  for  Him.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  We 
must  ioatch  our  tceah  points : — A  great  commander  was  engaged  in  besieging  a 
strongly  fortified  city.  After  a  while  he  concentrated  his  forces  at  a  point  where 
the  fortifications  were  stronger  than  at  any  other,  and  at  two  p.m.,  under  a  bright 
Bun  and  a  clear  sky,  ordered  an  assault-  When  expostulated  with  by  an  under 
officer,  the  commander  replied:  "At  this  point  such  a  general  is  in  command. 
At  this  hour  of  the  day  he  is  invariably  accustomed  to  retire  for  a  long  sleep. 
When  informed  of  our  approach  he  will  deny  the  fact,  and  send  a  messenger  for 
information.  Before  the  messenger  returns  we  shall  gain  possession  of  the  for- 
tress."   The  facts  turned  out  exactly  as  predicted.    "Yonder  weak  point,"  said 

the  commander,  "  is  held  by  General .     There  is  no  use  in  attempting  to 

Borprise  him ;  he  is  never  for  a  moment  oft  his  guard."    {A.  Mahan,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  XIV, 


▼bbs.  1-4.  Let  not  yonr  beart  be  tronbled. — This  clanse  is  the  true  heading  to 
the  whole  consolatory  discourse,  for  it  flows  on  in  one  channel  of  love  and  ends  at 
last  with  the  words,  "Be  of  good  cheer."  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled: — We 
may  well  feel  glad  that  God's  people  of  old  were  men  of  like  passions  with  our* 
selves.  It  is  not  the  will  of  God  that  His  people  should  "  be  troubled  "  in  heart ; 
hence  these  blessed  words.  I.  Let  vb  taste  of  the  bitteb  watebs.  1.  Jesus  was 
to  die.  It  had  finally  dawned  on  them  that  they  were  to  be  left  hke  sheep  without 
a  shepherd,  and  they  were  inconsolable.  2.  He  was  to  be  betrayed  by  one  of  their 
own  number.  This  pierced  the  hearts  of  the  faithful.  Of  this  bitter  water  the 
faithful  at  this  hour  are  also  made  to  drink.  Beputed  ministers  under  the  banner 
of  "  advanced  thought "  make  war  upon  those  eternal  truths  for  which  confessors 
contended  and  martyrs  bled,  and  the  saints  in  past  ages  have  been  sustained  in 
their  dying  hours.  S.  Peter's  denial  was  to  cause  another  pang  to  the  faithful. 
II.  Let  us  dbink  of  the  sweet  watebs,  to  befbesh  us.  Our  Master  indicates 
the  true  means  of  comfort  under  every  sort  of  disquietude.  1.  "Believe"  not 
only  My  doctrine  but  in  Me — a  personal,  living,  ever-present,  omnipotent  Saviour. 
2.  Though  He  was  going  from  them.  He  was  only  going  to  His  Father's  house. 
8.  A  great  many  would  follow  Him  to  the  Father's  house.  4.  "  I  go  to  prepare  a 
place  for  you,"  not  only  "  many  mansions  "  for  our  spirits,  but  an  ultimate  place 
of  our  risen  bodies.  We  are  apt  to  entertain  cloudy  ideas  of  the  ultimate  inheri* 
tance  of  the  saints.  Christ  went  away  in  body — not  as  a  disembodied  spirit,  but  as 
One  who  had  eaten  with  His  disciples,  and  whose  body  had  been  handled  by 
them.  His  body  needed  a  place.  5.  The  promise  of  His  sure  return — "  If  I  go," 
&o.  6.  And  then  He  will  "  receive  "  us.  It  will  be — (1)  A  courtly  reception.  (2) 
A  marriage  reception.  7.  He  will  place  ns  eternally  where  He  is  that  we  may  be 
with  Him.  Can  we  not  now,  once  for  all,  dismiss  every  fear  in  prospect  of  the 
endless  bliss  reserved  for  us?  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Let  not  your  hearts  be 
troubled: — The  disciples  had  been  like  lambs  carried  in  the  bosom  of  a  loving 
shepherd.  They  were  now  about  to  be  left  by  Him,  and  would  be  among  the 
wolves  and  the  terrors  of  the  snowstorm.  Frequently  after  conversion  God,  who 
tempers  the  wind  to  the  shorn  lamb,  gives  a  period  of  repose ;  but  for  all  of  ns 
there  will  come  a  time  of  trouble.  Albeit  that  bark  so  lately  launched  upon  a 
glassy  sea  has  all  her  streamers  flying,  and  rejoices  in  a  favourable  wind,  let  her 
captain  remember  that  the  sea  is  treacherous  and  that  the  stoutest  vessel  may  flnd 
it  more  than  difficult  to  outride  a  hurricane.  But  without  due  trial  where  wonld 
be  our  experience,  and  without  the  experience  where  increase  of  faith  and  triumph 
of  love?  We  have  each — 1.  A  share  of  home  trials.  2.  Trials  arising  from  the 
Church  of  God.  In  the  best-ordered  Church  it  must  needs  be  that  offences  come. 
S.  Worst  of  all  are  soul  troubles.      Note  that  the  advice  of  the  text  is — I.  Toielx 


ASS  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xnr. 

AND  WISE.  There  is  no  need  to  say,  "  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled,"  when  yoo 
are  not  in  affliction.  When  all  things  go  well  with  you,  you  will  need,  ♦'  Let  not 
your  heart  be  esialted."  Now,  it  is  the  easiest  thing  in  times  of  difficulty  to  let  the 
heart  be  troubled,  to  give  up  and  drift  with  the  stream.  Our  Lord  bids  us  pluck 
up  heart,  and  here  is  the  \visdom  of  His  advice,  namely — 1.  That  a  troubled  heart 
will  not  help  us  in  our  difficulties  or  out  of  them.  In  time  of  drought  lamentations 
have  never  brought  showers.  A  man  whose  business  was  declining  never  multi- 
plied his  customers  by  unbelief.  It  is  a  dark  night,  but  the  darkness  of  your  heart 
will  not  light  a  candle  for  you.  2.  A  doubting,  fretful  spirit  takes  from  us  the 
joys  we  have.  You  have  not  all  you  could  wish,  but  you  have  still  more  than  yoo 
deserve,  and  far  more  than  some  others  ;  health  perhaps,  God  certainly.  There 
are  flowers  that  bloom  in  winter  if  we  have  but  grace  to  see  them.  3.  A  troubled 
heart  makes  that  which  is  bad  worse.  It  magnifies,  aggravates,  caricatures. 
Unbelief  makes  out  our  difficulties  to  be  most  gigantic,  and  then  it  leads  us  to 
suppose  that  never  soul  had  such  difficulties  before.  But  think  of  Baxter,  Calvin, 
the  martyrs,  St.  Paul,  Christ.  4.  A  troubled  heart  is  most  dishonourable  to  God. 
It  makes  the  Christian  suspect  eternal  faithfulness  and  to  doubt  unchangeable 
love.  Is  this  a  little  thing  ?  The  mischief  of  the  Christian  Church  at  large  is  a 
want  of  holy  confidence  in  God.  When  once  an  army  is  demoralized  by  a  want 
of  spirit  and  the  soldier  assured  that  he  cannot  win  the  day,  then  the  conclusion 
is  that  every  man  had  better  take  care  of  himself  and  fly.  But  as  long  as  we  do 
not  lose  heart  we  have  not  lost  the  day.  II.  Practicable.  "Let  not  your  heart 
be  troubled."  "  Oh,"  says  somebody,  "  that's  easy  to  say  but  hard  to  do."  Here's 
a  man  who  has  fallen  into  a  deep  ditch,  and  you  say  to  him,  "  Don't  be  troubled 
about  it."  "  Ah,"  says  he,  "  that's  very  pretty  for  you  that  are  standing  up  there, 
but  how  am  I  to  be  at  ease  while  up  to  my  neck  in  mire?  "  But  if  Jesus  says  it 
our  heart  need  not  be  troubled.  1.  He  indicates  that  our  resort  must  be  to  faith. 
If  in  thy  worst  times  thou  wouldst  keep  thy  head  above  water,  the  swimming  belt 
must  be  faith.  In  the  olden  times  how  were  men  kept  from  perishing  but  by  faith 
(Heb.  xi.)  ?  There  is  nothing  which  it  cannot  do,  but  what  can  you  do  if  you  do 
not  trust  yonr  God  ?  and  surely  it  ought  not  to  be  difficult  for  a  child  to  believe  his 
father.  2.  The  Saviour  goes  on  to  say,  "  You  believe  in  God  " ;  exercise  that  same 
faith  with  regard  to  the  case  in  hand.  The  case  in  hand  was  this — could  they  rest 
upon  One  who  was  about  to  be  crucified  ?  "  You  have  believed  God  about  other 
things,  exercise  that  same  faith  about  this."  You  have  believed  God  concerning 
pardon,  believe  God  about  the  child,  the  wife,  the  money.  3.  It  ought  to  be  a 
great  deal  easier  for  us  to  live  above  heart  trouble  than  it  was  to  the  apostles. 
(1)  You  have  experience.  (2)  You  have  received  the  Holy  Spirit.  (3)  You  have 
the  whole  of  Scripture,  which  they  had  not.  III.  Pbecious.  Bemember  that  the 
loving  advice — 1.  Came  from  Jesus.  The  mother  says  to  the  child,  "  Do  not  cry, 
child  ;  be  patient."  That  sounds  very  differently  from  what  it  would  have  done  if 
the  schoolmaster  or  a  stranger  had  spoken.  His  own  face  was  towards  the  Cross, 
He  was  about  to  be  troubled  as  never  man  was  troubled.  It  is  as  if  He  wanted  to 
monopolize  all  tears.  2.  It  points  to  Jesus.  If  you  want  comfort  you  must  hear 
Jesus  say,  ••  Believe  also  in  Me."  No  place  for  a  child's  aching  head  like  its 
mother's  bosom.  No  shadow  of  a  great  rock  in  this  weary  land  like  our  Saviour's 
love  consciously  overshadowing  us.  3.  It  speaks  of  Jesus.  "In  My  Father's 
house,"  Ac.  Jesus  is  here  seen  in  action.  Think  of  all  He  said  and  did,  and  what 
He  is  doing  for  us  now.  4.  It  hints  that  we  are  to  be  with  Jesus  for  ever.  "  An 
hour  with  my  God,"  says  the  hymn,  "will  make  up  for  it  alL"  So  it  will ;  but 
what  will  an  eternity  with  our  God  be  ?     (Ibid.)  Trouble  not : — The  words  are 

— I.  Not  sentimental.  They  are  not  spoken  by  one  who  wishes  to  silence  sorrow 
by  superficial  kindliness.  Christ  does  not  say  we  are  to  disarm  ourselves  of 
prudence  and  energy ;  but  He  does  say  where  all  these  work  torture  and  misery 
you  are  faithless.  There  is  a  Providence  that  goes  before  you.  Your  Heavenly 
Father  knoweth  what  things  you  have  need  of.  There  is  more  than  sorrow  in  this 
world.  Sin  is  here,  but  even  over  it  we  triumph  by  a  salvation  which  makes  a 
redeemed  Ufe  the  most  glorious  life  of  alL  From  the  lips  of  Christ  this  is  a  reason- 
able comfort,  because  He  is  able  to  make  all  grace  abound  towards  us,  and 
because  sorrow  goes  forth  as  His  angel  to  make  us  meet  for  the  inheritance  of 
the  saints  in  light.  II.  Not  exhaustible.  This  comfort  is  not  exhaustible  in 
time  ;  nor  can  you  exhaust  its  adaptation  to  the  variety  and  speciality  of  personal 
sorrow.  Does  not  Christ  know  your  sorrow?  We  could  gain  no  true  comfort  if 
Christ  were  merely  a  figure  in  history.    If  Christ  had  not  risen  the  words  are 


CHAP.  XIV.]  ST.  JOHN.  469 

•zhanstible.  But  Christ  Himself  has  said,  "  I  am  He  that  liveth,"  &o.  The 
value  even  of  an  earthlj  friend  is  in  the  inexhaustibility  of  sympathy.  But  at  the 
best  human  friendship  is  shallow,  but  it  is  different  with  Christ's.  His  passeth 
knowledge.  He  who  changes  not  and  abideth  always  says,  "Let  not  your  heart 
be  troubled."  III.  Not  limitable.  These  are  words  of  consolation  for  all  the 
brothers  and  sisters  of  Jesus.  1.  No  little  community  has  any  special  privilege 
of  excommunicating,  nor  has  any  large  one.  2.  All  through  the  ranges  of  experi- 
ence, as  well  as  through  all  the  ages  of  time,  Christ  bids  us  take  these  words  of 
comfort.  First  of  all  they  should  be  applied  to  the  heaviest  sorrows.  Here  at 
Christ's  Cross  the  most  burdened  may  find  release.  IV.  Not  alonb  temporal. 
They  do  not  simply  relate  to  this  time-world  or  to  our  human  and  spiritual  expe- 
riences here.  Christ  was  comforting  men  concerning  the  rest  that  remaineth.  And 
the  spirit  of  man  had  never  been  so  comforted  before.  He  knew  that  hearts  like 
ours  would  grasp  every  promise  concerning  the  blessed  dead.  So  these  words 
should  be  taken  up  into  the  highest  sphere  to  comfort  us  concerning  those  who 
Bleep  in  Jesas  that  we  sorrow  not  as  those  without  hope,  remembering  that  the 
risen  Christ  went  back  whence  He  came,  to  prepare  a  place  for  us.  V.  Not 
HONE  RETBOSPECTIVE.  Christ  does  not  say,  "  Do  not  trouble  about  past  sine,  they 
are  forgiven  you."  No.  He  looks  forward  and  comfoits  them  in  relation  to  their 
earthly  future  here  and  their  home  hereafter.  And  yet  what  did  He  see  in  the 
near  perspective  for  many  of  them  ?  On  the  edge  of  the  horizon  stand  their 
crosses  in  the  grey  light  of  to-morrow.  "  The  time  cometh  that  whosoever  killeth 
you  will  think  that  he  doeth  God  service."  Still  He  says,  "Do  not  trouble." 
Let  us  take  Christ  at  His  word  as  they  did.  (W.  M.  Statham.)  Christ's  cufe 
Jor  trouble : — I.  The  sobe  of  the  world  is  trouble  and  its  cube  is  faith.  The 
Beat  of  trouble  is  not  in  anything  outside  of  us.  It  is  the  passions.  Work,  wake- 
fulness, losses,  bereavements,  life's  burdens  and  battles  are  not  troubles.  They 
are  discipline.  While  the  passions  are  in  right  and  healthful  play  all  these 
things  may  befall  a  man,  and  yet  he  may  be  wholly  untroubled.  On  the  other 
hand,  a  man  may  be  surrounded  by  all  that  can  minister  to  bis  comfort  and 
dignity,  and  yet  be  troubled.  In  the  latter  case  the  man's  passions  are  tossed 
abont  as  the  sea  is  when  a  tempest  is  on  it ;  in  the  other  case,  they  are  serene  aa 
the  lake  in  the  fastnesses  of  a  mountain.  1.  The  cause  of  all  our  trouble  is  the 
want  of  harmony  between  our  wills  and  God's  will.  Let  them  accord,  and  then 
nothing  in  heaven  or  earth  or  hell  can  trouble  us.  But  when  we  beat  ourselves 
against  the  barriers  erected  by  Omnipotence  for  our  safety  and  good,  then  there  is 
trouble.  2.  Our  trouble  arises  from  our  want  of  faith  in  the  rightfulness  and 
paramount  authority  of  God's  law.  Men  would  not  fight  against  God's  law  of 
morals  if  they  could  perceive  that  the  law  is  perfectly  good  and  right.  Men  have 
an  impression  that  the  law  of  God  is  a  kind  of  Procrustes'  bed,  cutting  long  men 
short  and  stretching  short  men  long  for  arbitrary  reasons,  and  not  that  every 
regulation  is  for  man's  sake  and  that  of  other  creatures.  And  because  men  do 
not  believe  that  the  law  of  God  is  good  they  do  not  believe  it  is  paramount.  The 
origin  of  the  trouble  of  every  heart  from  the  beginning  is  to  be  found  in  this  failoxe 
of  faith  in  God.  It  was  so  with  Adam  and  Eve.  There  was  no  trouble  while  they 
trusted  their  Heavenly  Father.  You  cannot  seduce  a  man  into  wrong-doing  tmtil 
you  shake  his  faith  in  God.  It  is  this  fundamental  principle  of  which  Jesus 
seems  to  have  thought.  This  seems  to  me  to  mean  two  things — (1)  Tbat  belief  in 
God  is  necessary  to  belief  in  Jesus.  Jesus,  then,  is  something  more  than  a  mere 
extraordinary  specimen  of  humanity.  (2)  Simple  belief  in  God  has  never  cured 
trouble.  It  might  have  kept  all  trouble  from  the  human  heart  if  originally 
persevered  in.  But  after  sin  had  come  into  the  world  something  else  was  neces- 
sary. And  for  this  we  can  appeal  to  every  man's  experience.  Do  you  not  often 
feel  that  yon  would  be  freer  and  happier  if  God  would  throw  His  laws  away,  or 
still  better,  cease  to  exist  ?  The  fact  is,  that  until  we  came  to  distinguish  between 
creatures  and  children,  our  belief  in  God  can  produce  no  agreeable  feeUngs  toward 
Him.  (a)  We  must  have  some  distinct  evidence  o  ;His  loving  us.  Of  such  love 
Jesus  is  the  Demonstration.  Belief  in  Jesus  is  belief  in  God  incarnating  Himself; 
putting  Himself  thus  into  most  complete  sympathy  with  us,  making  us  feel  that  if 
any  disasters  should  happen  to  us  He  would  be  the  Person  who  most  should  feel 
it.  This  breaks  down  the  opposition  of  our  hearts  to  God.  (6)  Jesus  declares 
Himself  the  Governor  of  the  world.  Providence  is  in  the  hands  of  my  Brother. 
He  manages  the  universe  for  the  purposes  of  the  atonement.  Why  should  my  heart 
be  troubled  7     Is  not  the  King  of  eternity  my  Friend  ?    (3)  Christ  is  my  Leadet 


i60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xif, 

through  all  places,  narrow  and  dark  and  frightf  nl,  or  large  and  wealthy  and  sednc- 
tive.  If  I  believe  this  and  yield  my  heart  to  it,  how  my  troubles  disappear! 
Wii^out  Jesus,  my  heart  is  like  the  Galilean  lake,  night-bound  and  storm-lashed  ; 
when  He  says  "Peace,"  there  is  a  great  calm.     II.  Then  feom  Himself  as  tbom 

A  CENTBE  Hb  SWEEPS  THE  DNIVERSE  OF  8PACB  AND  DURATION,  AND  FOLDS  IT  ALL 
DOWN   UPON   BVEBY  TBUSTING   HEABT  AS  ▲    MEAflUBELESS    BENEDICTION.        1.     "  In   My 

Father's  house  are  many  mansions."  How  this  takes  the  vagueness  out  of  out 
ideas  of  God  1  How  our  recently  constructed  scientific  instruments  enlarge  and 
deepen  this  saying  of  Jesus  1  It  is  to  be  noticed  that  our  intellects  gravitate 
toward  a  common  centre.  There,  in  that  centre,  we  seem  to  feel  must  be  the  chief 
place  of  God.  There  is  an  unhealthy  fear  of  God  which  is  not  humble  reverence. 
Men  dread  to  think  of  Him.  In  our  catechisms  we  put  Him  just  as  far  away 
from  our  children  as  we  can.  Jesus  does  no  such  thing.  God  is  a  Person.  Ho 
has  a  house  and  a  household.  He  makes  homes  for  His  children.  Why,  then, 
should  I  be  troubled  that  I  am  to  die  ?  My  removal  will  be  hke  the  progress  of  a 
prince  from  castle  to  castle  of  his  father's  dominions.  In  each  I  shall  find  new 
work  and  new  delights.  2.  One  of  the  phases  of  man's  unbehef  is  that  he  does 
not  seem  to  have  space  and  time  enough  to  carry  forward  to  completion  the  grand 
projects  of  his  intellect.  But  if  you  will  believe  in  Jesus,  this  trouble  shaU  dis- 
appear. In  the  boundless  field  of  the  universe,  in  the  perpetual  cycles  of  eternity, 
you  shall  find  space  and  time  enough  to  do  all  that  you  desire  now  or  may  desire 
hereafter.  3.  Another  thing  Jesus  utters  to  be  a  heart-cure :  "  If  it  were  not  so, 
I  would  have  told  you."  He  will  not  only  correct  our  thoughts  of  God,  He  will 
not  let  us  have  a  false  hope.  Those  men  loved  Him,  and  in  some  blind  way  had 
believed  in  Him.  He  knew  that  they  had  aspirations  higher  than  the  Temple  and 
wider  than  the  spangled  tent  that  spread  all  night  above  the  Holy  Land.  He  would 
not  go  away  and  leave  them  cherishing  a  fond  delusion.  He  would  tell  them  if 
the  things  they  hoped  were  an  idle  dream.  In  this  there  ought  to  be  a  happy 
lesson  for  every  earnest  heart.  There  is  a  gloomy  infideUty  in  us  which  says  of 
happiest  things  that  they  are  "  too  good  to  be  true."  If  you  have  any  hope  for 
tternity,  and  Jesus  Christ  has  not  contradicted  it,  you  may  reasonably  indulge  it. 
See  what  a  field  that  flings  open  to  us.  This  is  comforting,  but  grandly  vague. 
4.  He  goes  further  and  tells  us  that  He  departs  in  order  to  "  prepare  a  place  for 
us."  This  meets  another  phase  of  trouble.  Our  wills  conflict  with  the  will  of 
God  because  we  never  feel  at  home  totally  suited  in  our  surroundings  on  earth. 
Think  how  much  is  necessary  for  perfect  comfort.  There  must  be  a  suitable 
physique,  agreeable  in  all  the  particulars  of  size,  beauty,  and  health.  There  mast 
be  perfectly-fittiag  clothes;  a  collar  too  tight,  a  boot  too  small  breaks  one's 
comfort.  Then  our  house  must  be  in  everything  complete ;  nay,  it  must  be  an 
elastic  house,  expanding  or  shrinking  to  our  wants  at  different  times.  When  the 
residence  is  complete,  there  is  the  absence  of  the  beloved  or  the  presence  of  an 
unpleasant  neighbourhood.  It  is  not  an  unamiable  discontentedness  in  human 
nature  which  makes  us  dissatisfied  or  unsatisfied :  it  is  the  inability  of  this  present 
world,  with  all  its  resources,  to  fill  the  soul ;  and  this  argues  the  soul's  greatness. 
Jesus  says,  "  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you."  He  knows  what  is  in  us  and  what 
we  need  abont  us.  He  is  putting  all  His  resources  to  the  work  of  fitting  up  for 
ns  mansions  in  the  spiritual  world.  Our  place  will  be  complete.  How  that  abates 
our  troubles !  There  shall  be  nothing  wanting  in  the  place  when  Jesus  pronounces 
it  ready.  6.  "  Eeady  ?  "  Then  when  it  is  ready  we  must  go  to  it.  There  is  to  be 
a  removaL  But  still  there  is  something  to  try  one  in  any  change  of  residence, 
bat  Christ  says,  "  I  will  come  for  you  and  take  you,"  and  that  '•  unto  Myself." 
(C  F.  Deems,  LL.D.)         Trouble  and  its  cordial: — I.   God's  most  faithfuii 

SEEVANTB  ABB   SUBJECT  TO  TROUBLES  OF    HEABT.       1.    What    troubles  ?      (1)   luward, 

arising  from — (o)  Sin  (Psa.  li.  4-8).  (b)  Corruption  (Bom.  vii.  24).  (2)  Outward, 
which  are — (o)  Spiritual :  Christ's  absence,  (b)  Temporal :  outward  afflictions 
(Lam.  i.  4).  2.  The  reason.  (1)  Weakness  of  faith.  (2)  Imperfection  of  other 
graces.  IL  Faith  in  God  and  Cheist  is  the  best  cobdial  to  a  tboubled  heart. 
1.  It  is  the  surest  and  most  infaUible  (Matt.  xi.  28).  2.  The  strongest  (Isa.  lix. 
1).  3.  The  pleasantest  (1  Pet.  i.  8).  4.  The  readiest  (Psa.  xlvi.  1).  6.  The  most 
suitable  (Isa.  xliii.  2,  3).  6.  The  most  constant  (Heb.  xiii.  6).  7.  The  most  uni- 
versal. HL  Apply  this  to — 1.  Temporal  troubles.  Art  thou  troubled  with — (1) 
Poverty  ?  (a)  Faith  is  the  best  riches  (James  ii  6).  (6)  It  will  turn  thy  very 
poverty  into  a  blessing  (Rom.  viii.  28).  (2)  Disgrace  ?  (a)  By  faith  thou  mayest 
gee  the  emptiness  of  honour  (Psa.  xliL  11).     (b)  Faith  will  procure  thee  honour 


«HAP.  nr.]  ST.  JOHN.  461 

fHeb.  i.  14 ;  1  Sam  ii.  30).  (3)  Sickness  and  pains  ?  By  faith — (a)  Thon  mayest 
see  God's  love  in  them  (Heb.  xii.  6).  (b)  Thou  mayest  get  good  by  them  (Psa. 
cxix.  71).  (c)  Thou  mayest  receive  more  comfort  in  them  than  in  health.  (4) 
Losses  and  crosses  ?  (a)  Faith  will  show  thee  from  whence  they  came  (Job  i.  21). 
(5)  Why  (Heb.  xii.  10).  (c)  And  so  turn  them  to  thy  gain  (2  Cor.  iv.  17).  (5) 
Fears  of  death  ?  Faith  will  show  thee — (a)  That  the  sting  is  out  (1  Cor.  xv.  55). 
(b)  That  death  is  but  the  entrance  of  life,  (c)  And  so  turn  thy  fears  into  hopes 
(Phil.  i.  23).  2.  In  spiritual  troubles.  Art  thou  troubled — (1)  For  thy  sins  ?  (a) 
Ood  is  merciful  (Psa.  ciii.  8 ;  Isa.  xliii.  25).  (6)  Christ  is  all-suBicient  (1  John  ii. 
1).  (2)  With  thy  lusts  ?  (o)  God  is  almighty,  (fc)  Christ  will  send  His  Spirit 
(chap.  xvi.  7).  (c)  Faith  conquers  them  (1  John  v.  4).  (3)  With  desertions  f  If 
thou  believest — (a)  God  will  never  forsake  thee  wholly  (John  xiii.  1 ;  Heb.  xiii.  5). 
(b)  Christ  will  pray  that  thy  faith  fail  not  (Luke  xxii.  31,  32).  (Bp.  Beveridge.) 
Christ' i  word  to  the  troubled : — This  is  a  discourse  showing  the  disciple  his  refuge 
from  trouble.  The  refuge — I.  Of  faith.  "  Believe  in  Gad  :  believe  also  in  Me," 
&c.  Three  grand  truths  are  at  the  basis  of  Christianity :  God,  Christ,  Immortality. 
They  are  the  antidotes  to  atheism,  the  helplessness  of  guilt,  and  the  hopelessness 
of  death.  II.  Of  love.  A  personal  relation  to  Chiist,  He  is  the  way  of  God  to 
man  and  of  man  to  God ;  the  truth,  about  all  the  soul  needs  to  know  and  which 
natural  theology  fails  to  answer ;  and  the  life,  eternal  and  blissful.  HI.  Of  hope. 
Here  was  a  personal  bereavement.  He  was  about  to  withdraw,  and  the  loss  was 
the  more  inconsolable  because  He  was  the  object  of  faith  and  love.  But  He  com- 
pensates this  loss  by  the  promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  through  whom  they  should  do 
greater  works,  by  whom  God  is  manifest  in  the  believer,  &c.,  and  who  should  abide 
with  them  for  ever.  And  He  promises  that  He  will  personally  intercede  for  believers 
above,  while  the  Spirit  intercedes  in  them  below.  And  so  He  who  goes  away  actu- 
ally does  not  leave  them  orphans,  but  comes  to  them,  dwells  in  them,  manifests 
Himself  to  them,  and  is  seen  by  them.  And  so  this  part  of  the  discourse  ends  as 
it  began,  with  peace.  Peace — 1.  For  the  mind  harrassed  with  doubt,  by  establish- 
ing the  certainties  of  faith.  2.  For  the  heart  harassed  with  unsatisfied  cravings,  by 
establishing  it  upon  God.  (A.  T.  Pierson,  D.D.)  Christ's  remedy  for  a  troubled 
heart : — I.  The  tbodbled  heabt.  Trouble  in  estate  is  bad,  but  heart  trouble  is  worst. 
The  mariner  cares  not  for  the  howling  tempest,  but  matters  are  serious  when  the 
sea  gains  entrance.  Causes.  1.  Unpardoned  sin.  (1)  We  cannot  ignore  it.  (2) 
Dare  not  excuse  it.  (3)  Are  unable  to  expiate  it.  2.  Separation  from  beloved  friends. 
(1)  By  absence ;  (2)  by  death.  3.  Persecution.  4.  Disappointed  hopes.  So  the 
disciples  have  trials.  Sometimes  from  a  clear  sky  the  thunder  peals  ;  from  richest 
verdure  the  venomous  serpent  hisses.  II.  The  qoiet  heabt,  1.  We  acknowledge 
the  authority  of  the  decalogue  ;  but  our  Lord's  command  is  equally  binding.  2. 
This  is  tne  purpose  of  God.  Every  apparent  discord  leads  up  to  the  final  harmony. 
3.  The  quiet  heart  is  the  best  learner,  worker,  warrior.  4.  The  quiet  heart  is  a 
mirror  of  heaven.  III.  How  can  the  tbodbled  heabt  be  made  into  the  quiet 
HEABT.  1.  The  >/ld  belief  in  God.  The  Jews  had  fallen  into  polytheism,  but  the 
captivity  cured  them.  Christ  points  to  the  old  well  of  comfort — a  firm  belief  in  one 
ever-living  God.  (1)  God  will  smite  all  vnrong.  (2)  He  will  bring  forth  the  right- 
eous as  the  sun.  2.  The  new  belief  in  Christ.  Inferentially  a  proof  of  Christ's 
Divinity.  (1)  As  the  great  atoning  Substitute.  There  is  nothing  in  the  new  philo- 
sophy to  calm  the  troubled  heart.  (2)  As  our  sympathizing  Brother  and  High 
Priost.  (3)  As  alive  for  ever  more.  (4)  As  our  Representative  and  Forerunner — "I  go 
to  jjrepare  a  place,"  &c.  We  need  not  shrink  from  "  Worlds  unknown."  He  has 
made  them  well  known  ;  *' brought  life  and  immortality  to  light,"  and  will  come 
Bgain  and  receive  us  unto  Himself.  (W.  Anderson,  LL.D.)  Christ  comforting : 
— There  was  some  good  in  the  disciples'  trouble.  1.  There  was  natural  trouble  at 
the  departure  of  such  a  friend.  For  we  are  flesh,  not  steel ;  and  in  that  sense, 
Christ  was  troubled  Himself  to  show  the  truth  of  His  manhood.  Nay,  trouble  is 
the  seasoning  of  all  heavenly  comforts  ;  there  were  no  comforts  if  there  were  no 
trouble;  and  therefore  this  natural  trouble  was  not  disallowed  by  Christ.  2.  There 
was  hkewise  something  spiritually  good  in  this  trouble.  They  loved  their  Master, 
who  they  saw  was  going  away.  They  were  riglit  in  this  principle,  that  all  comf or* 
depends  on  the  presence  of  Christ.  For  as  all  heavenly  light,  and  heat,  and  influ- 
ence come  from  the  sun,  so  all  heave-ily  comforts  must  come  to  us  from  Christ's 
presence.  Their  error  was  in  tying  all  comfort  to  a  bodily  presence ;  as  if  it  were 
necessary  for  the  sun  to  come  down  and  abide  upon  the  earth,  to  bestow  its  heat 
and  influence.     I.  The  best  Chbistians  abb  subject  to  be  tbodbled  more  xhah 


462  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  xit. 

SHOXTLD  BE.     Chtist  was  troubled,  but  His  trouble  was  like  the  shaking  of  clea» 
water  in  a  crystal  glass.     There  was  no  mud  in  the  bottom.    But  our  trouble  is  of 
another  kind,  and  apt  to  be  inordinate  (1  Sam.  i.  13  ;  Isa.  xxxviii.  14 ;  Psa.  Ixxvii. 
3 ;  Jonah  ii.  2).      1.  God  permits  us  to  be  troubled — (1)  For  conformity  to  our 
Head.     (2)  That  we  may  be  known  to  ourselves ;  that  we  may  discern  where  our 
weakness  lieth,  and  so  be  better  instructed  to  seek  Him  in  whom  our  strength  lieth. 
(3)  For  the  preventing  of  spiritual  sins.     (4)  In  regard  of  others,  that  we  may  b« 
pitiful.    2.  But  how  shall  we  know  that  our  hearts  are  more  troubled  than  they 
should  be?     We  may  sin  in  being  overmuch  troubled  at  things  for  which  it  is  a  sin 
not  to  be  troubled.     If  they  had  not  been  at  all  affected  with  the  absence  of  Christ, 
it  had  been  a  sin,  and  no  less  tban  stupidity;  yet  it  was  their  sin  to  be  overmuch 
troubled.     A  trouble  is  sinful  when  it  hinders  us  in  duties ;  or  from  duty,  when 
the  soul  is  like  an  instrument  out  of  tune,  or  a  limb  out  of  joint.    Naturally,  affec- 
tions should  be  helps  to  duty,  they  being  the  winds  that  carry  the  soul  on,  and  the 
spiritual  wings  of  tbe  soul.     But  then  they  must  be  regulated  and  ordered  at  the 
command  of  a  spiritual  understanding.    Now,  besides  the  hurt  that  is  in  such  affec- 
tions themselves,  Satan  loves  to  fish  in  these  troubled  waters  (Eph.  iv.  26).    That 
was  Saul's  case  (1  Sam.  ivi.  23).    3.  We  should  not  yield  to  excess  of  trouble.  And 
the  reasons  are :  (1)  We  wrong  our  ownselves.    We  make  actions  difficult  unto  us. 
The  wheels  of  the  soul  are  thereby  taken  off  (Neh.  viii.  10).     (2)    We  do  dishonour 
to  God,  mistaking  His  goodness,  murmuring  at  His  providence,  wronging   Hia 
graciousness  and  nursing  a  rebellious  pride.     (3)  We  dishonour  Christ,  and  the 
love  of  God  in  Christ ;  for  it  is  as  if  we  had  not  in  Him  a  sufficient  remedy  for  that 
great  malady.     (4)  Christ  hath  forbidden  it,  "  Let  not,"  &o.    II.  The  ways  wherb- 
BT  we  most  laboub  TO  COMFORT  oDB  HEARTS.    1.  There  must  be  a  due  search  inte 
the  heart  of  the  grounds  of  our  trouble ;  for  often  Christians  are  troubled,  they 
cannot  tell  wherefore;  as  children  that  will  complain  they  know  not  why.  See  if  there 
be  not  some  Achan  in  the  camp.     2.  And  when  you  have  found  out  your  sin  give  it 
vent  by  confession  of  it  to  God,  and  in  some  cases  to  others.     8.  And  when  we 
have  done  so,  consider  what  promises,  and  comforts,  in  that  Word  of  God  are  fitted 
to  that  condition.     And  therefore  we  ought  to  be  skilful  in  the  Word  of  God,  that 
we  may  store  up  comforts  beforehand.    4.  When  we  have  these  promises,  let  ua 
labour  to  understand  them  thoroughly,  and  then  to  digest  them  in  our  affections, 
and  so  make  them  our  own,  and  then  to  walk  in  the  strength  and  comfort  of  them. 
5.  Labour  likewise  to  have  them  fresh  in  memory.     It  is  a  great  defect  of  Chris- 
tians that  they  forget  their  consolation  (Heb.  xii.  6).    6.  Labour  to  keep  unspotted 
consciences.     7.  And  because  there  can  be  no  more  cot»:fort  than  there  is  care  of 
duty,  therefore,  together  with  innocency,  let  us  be  careful  A  all  duties  in  all  our 
several  relations.    8.  But  above  all  let  us  labour  for  a  spirit  of  faith.     "  You  believe 
in  God,"  &o.    How  doth  faith  in  Christ  ease  the  soul  in  trouble  ?    (1)  It  banishes 
troubles,  and  brings  in  comfort,  because  it  is  an  emptying  grace.    It  empties  us  of 
ourselves,  and  so  makes  us  cleave  to  another,  and  thereby  becomes  a  grace  of  union. 
It  makes  us  one  with  the  fountain  of  comfort,  and  by  its  repeated  acts  derives  fresh 
comfort.    (2)  It  establishes  the  heart.     (3)  It  stirs  up  such  graces  as  comfort  the 
soul,  as  hope  in  all  good  things  promised.     "  In  My  Father's  house  are  many 
mansions."    {R.  Sibbes,  D.D.)        Christ  comforting  the  disciples : — I.  The  hbboio 
ATTITUDE  Christ  assumes.    He  had  just  dismissed  Judas,  knew  what  was  transpir- 
ing outside,  and  what  would  follow.    And  yet  He  sat  amongst  His  disciples  perfectly 
composed,  and  was  able  to  counsel  deliberate  composure  in  the  prospect  of  afflic- 
tion.   This  was  not  from  any  insensibility  to  pain,  nor  superiority  to  it  (chaps,  xi. 
83 ;  xii.  27  ;  xiii.  21).    It  was  a  wonderful  manifestation  of  spiritual  strength,  and 
as  an  example  was  more  forcible  than  even  His  counsel  for  the  production  of  a  like 
spirit.    II.  The  heroic  spirit  Christ  commands  His  disciples  to  cultivate.    They 
were  in  a  grievous  plight.    They  had  been  drawn  into  fellowship  with  Christ.    He 
had  led  them  step  by  step,  and  they  had  learned  to  lean  upon  Him  utterly.    And 
now  He  was  about  to  be  taken  from  them  by  a  cruel  death,  and  leave  them  exposed 
to  persecution  for  His  sake.    An  hour  ago  there  had  been  a  strife  among  them 
which  of  them  should  be  greatest.    How  vain  all  these  ambitions  seemed  now  t 
And  yet  our  Lord  counsels  calmness.    Then — 1.  It  is  possible  to  overmaster  trouble, 
however  hard  the  lot  in  life  may  be.     2.  It  is  important  to  overmaster  it ;  a  troubled 
heart  is  our  agitated  medium  and  cannot  see  things  clearly,  and  our  enfeebled 
•gent  Impotent  to  do  them  adequately.    III.  Tmt  secret  of  a  heboio  spirit  which 
Christ  communicated  TO  them.     1.  Faith  in  God.    The  Old  Testament  saints  found 
in  this  a  panacea  for  all  their  cares.     "  Thou  wilt  keep  Him  in  perfect  peace,"  <ScO' 


CHAP.  xiT.]  ST.  JOHN.  468 

There  were  resources  in  Omnipotence  wliich  they  felt  to  be  equal  to  all  haman  exi- 
gency (Isa.  zxvi.  3,  4).  Something  of  this  the  disciples  knew.  2.  Our  Lord  argnes 
from  the  Father  to  Himself,  and  particularly  recommends  them  to  have  such  faith 
in  Him  as  they  have  in  God.  3.  The  advantage  of  this  twofold  trust.  Although 
the  disciples  had  a  certain  faith  in  God,  it  left  them  far  from  satisfied  with  it. 
Hence  Phihp's  request.  God  was  more  or  less  remote  from  and  incomprehensible 
to  them ;  but  Christ  brought  them  near.  "  He  that  hath  seen  Me,"  &o.  This 
sufficed.  (W.  Roberts.)  Grounds  of  comfort: — I.  Heaven  is  sdbe  (vers.  2,3). 
II.  There  is  a  certain  wat  to  heaven  (vers.  4-11).  III.  Ghbist's  wobe  does  not 
CEASE  WITH  Cheist's  depabture  (vers.  12-14).  rV.  The  help  of  the  Spirit  la 
vouchsafed  in  the  absence  of  Christ  (vers.  15-17).  V.  Christ's  absence  is  only 
temporary  (vers.  18-24).  VL  The  Spirit  will  teach  the  disciples,  and  supply 
their  want  of  understanding  when  left  alone  (vers.  25,  26).  VII.  The  legacy  o» 
PEACE  to  cheer  in  the  Master's  absence  (ver.  27).  (Prof.  Hcngstenburg.)  Sourcea 
of  Christian  comfort : — There  is  a  class  of  words  the  meaning  of  which  is  known  to 
all,  and  without  consulting  a  dictionary  most  people  know  what  the  word  "  trouble  " 
means.  The  man  who  should  attempt  to  construct  a  theory  of  life  and  leave  trouble 
out  of  the  account  would  be  no  philosopher.  How  to  deal  with  it,  and  not  how  to 
ignore  it,  becomes  the  great  problem.  From  both  ancients  and  moderns  proposals 
of  alleviation  and  help  are  forthcoming.  But  He  who  boldly  cries,  "  Let  not  your 
heart  be  troubled  "  must  possess  infallible  antidotes.  What  are  they  ?  Faith 
and  Hope  directed  to  their  proper  objects.  We  propose,  then,  to  examine — I.  Thb 
grounds  on  which  Christ  solicits  our  faith.  Belief  comes  by  belief.  To  be  able 
in  some  overpowering  grief  to  throw  the  weight  of  one's  care  upon  another  and  to 
trust  whoUy  in  that  other's  help  is  an  eminently  satisfying  process  ;  while  the 
trustless  soul  is  without  the  least  gleam  of  comfort.  In  these  times  of  daring  denial 
and  of  timid  doubt  it  is  well  to  be  reminded  that  in  the  great  crises  of  life — poverty, 
bereavement,  affliction — denial  is  mockery  and  doubt  is  impotence,  and  that  only  an 
honest  and  hearty  belief  will  secure  sufficient  solace.  Christ  solicits  our  faith  on  the 
ground  of — 1.  A  prior  acknowledgment  of  the  Divine.  "  Ye  believe  in  God." 
Christ  desires  nothing  contrary  to  already  existing  and  inborn  Godward  conceptions 
of  the  soul,  but  merely  that  we  enlarge  those  conceptions  so  as  to  include  Him.  2. 
The  defectiveness  of  our  belief  apart  from  Him.  "  Ye  believe  in  God ; "  yes,  but 
tbftt  is  inadequate,  it  needs  supplementing.  The  most  anxious  moments  of 
humanity  have  been  spent  in  searchings  after  such  a  view  of  God  as  would  enable 
man  to  approach  Him  without  dread.  Humanity's  great  longing  has  waited  until 
Christ  for  its  complete  satisfaction.  He  has  extracted  from  the  thought  of  God  all 
that  is  calculated  to  give  pain  and  introduced  everything  calculated  to  give  comfort. 
"  God  was  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world  unto  Himself."  3.  His  personality. 
Trust  must  repose  on  a  person  to  be  trust  at  all.  Christian  apologists  often  begin 
with  the  proofs  of  superhuman  skill  and  power,  and  so  lead  up  to  the  central  object 
of  Christian  faith.  But  Christ  asked  for  immediate  trust  in  Himself,  for  with  that 
would  oome  a  hearty  belief  in  all  He  said  and  did.  II.  The  motives  by  which  He 
encourages  our  hope.  By  "  two  immutable  things,"  Christ  intends  us  to  have 
"  strong  consolation."  Hope  is  as  important  a  contribution  to  comfort  as  faith  ; 
the  two  together,  exercised  rightly,  never  fail.  Without  a  future  what  is  the  present 
worth  ?  An  English  nobleman  once  asked  himself  why  there  should  be  a  future 
existence,  and  answered,  "  Because,  on  any  other  hypothesis,  the  world  would  be  a 
piece  of  magnificent  nonsense."  1.  Christ,  implying  human  immortality,  reveals 
heaven.  He  bids  the  troubled  be  comforted  by  directing  their  hope  to  the  positive 
existence  of  an  absolutely  untroubled  state.  Heaven  is  rendered  attractive  to  us  as 
much  by  its  exemptions  as  by  its  possessions  (Bev.  xxi.  4).  Christ  does  present  also 
a  positive  view.  Heaven  is  a  home.  "  In  My  Father's  house  I  "  A  house  is  not 
necessarily  a  home,  but  a  father's  house  always  is,  or  ought  to  be.  A  happy  earthly 
home  is  the  nearest  approach  to  an  adequate  conception  of  the  life  of  heaven.  "  My 
Father's  house"  is  a  happier  home  than  the  happiest  of  earthly  ones.  8.  Hope  ia 
encouraged  by  the  variety  of  heavenly  enjoyments.  "  Many  mansions,"  many 
methods  of  enjoyment,  various  fields  of  occupation,  unexhausted  resources  of  interest 
and  pleasure.  An  endless  uniformity  of  type  would  be  fatal  to  perfect  happiness. 
3.  Hope  is  further  encouraged  by  Christ's  guarantee  of  its  realization.  "  If  it  were 
not  BO  I  would  have  told  you,"  &c.  What  security  this !  He  could  not  countenance 
a  delusion.  Conclusion :  We  read  of  a  Boman  army,  when  eagerly  engaged  in 
battle  with  their  country's  enemies,  being  unconscious  of  an  earthquake  which 
XD*d«  the  groond  beneath  their  feet  to  tremble ;  and  so  will  a  high  faith  in  Qod  and 


464  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xit, 

Christ,  and  a  holy  hope  of  immortality  and  heaven,  cause  the  true  Christian  to  be 
insensible  to  the  tossings  to  and  fro  of  the  life  that  now  is.  (IF.  Brooks.) 
The  Christian  not  afraid  of  unseen  dangers  : — General  Sherman  is  reported  to  have 
said :  "  One  difference  between  General  Grant  and  myself  is  this :  I  am  not  afraid 
of  dangers  that  I  can  see,  but  he  is  not  afraid  of  dangers  that  he  cannot  see."  Any 
good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ  has  a  right  to  absolute  confidence  as  he  goes  forward, 
even  in  the  dark.  For  the  Saviour  says  to  him.  Whatever  comes,  •'  Let  not  your 
heart  be  troubled."  Men  seem  unwilling  to  be  without  trouble : — Men  do  not  avail 
themselves  of  the  riches  of  God's  grace.  They  love  to  nurse  their  cares,  and  seem 
as  uneasy  without  some  fret  as  an  old  friar  would  be  without  his  hair  girdle.  They 
are  commanded  to  cast  their  cares  upon  the  Lord ;  but,  even  when  they  attempt  it, 
they  do  not  fail  to  catch  them  up  again,  and  think  it  meritorious  to  walk  burdened. 
They  take  God's  ticket  to  heaven,  and  then  put  their  baggage  on  their  shoulders,  and 
tramp,  tramp,  the  whole  way  there  afoot.  Christ  will  relieve  our  troubles : — I 
heard  of  a  man  who  was  walking  along  the  high  road,  with  a  pack  on  his  back :  he 
was  growing  weary,  and  was,  therefore,  glad  when  a  gentleman  came  along  in  a 
chaise,  and  asked  hii^  to  take  a  seat  with  him.  The  gentleman  noticed  that  he 
kept  his  pack  strapped  to  his  shoulders,  and  so  he  said,  "  Why  do  you  not  put  your 
pack  down  ?  "  *'  Why,  sir,"  said  the  traveller,  "  I  did  not  venture  to  intrude.  It 
was  very  kind  of  you  to  take  me  up,  and  I  could  not  expect  you  to  carry  my  pack  as 
well."  *•  Why,"  said  his  friend,  ♦'  do  you  not  see  that  whether  your  pack  is  on  your 
back,  or  off  your  back,  I  have  to  carry  it  ?  "  My  hearer,  it  is  so  with  your  trouble : 
whether  you  care,  or  do  not  care,  it  is  the  Lord  who  must  care  for  you.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  The  consolation  of  the  gospel  unique : — In  this  I  say  the  gospel  differs 
sharply  from  the  most  cultivated  pagan  thought  of  the  age  in  which  it  appeared  in 
the  world.  When  Seneca  is  trying  to  console  a  lady  who  is  suffering  agonies  of 
mind  under  a  severe  bereavement,  he  can  only  suggest  to  her  that  she  had  better 
try  as  soon  as  possible  to  forget  her  trouble.  She  has,  he  says,  good  examples 
around  her  in  the  birds  and  in  the  beasts.  They  too  love  their  relations,  but  after 
a  momentary  spasm  when  they  lose  them  they  take  life  easily  again ;  and  in  doing 
this  they  show  man  an  example  which  he  would  do  well  to  imitate.  As  if  the 
mental  pain  which  means  to  man  so  much  more  than  to  the  beast,  precisely  because 
he  is  man  and  not  beast,  could  be  conjured  out  of  him  by  a  philosophy  which  talks 
incessantly  of  his  dignity  and  can  only  make  him  comfortable,  if  at  all,  at  the  cost 
of  forgetting  it  1  (Canon  Liddon.)  Religion  has  many  comforts : — Why  should 
you  carry  troubles  and  sorrows  unhealed  ?  There  is  no  bodily  wound  for  which 
some  herb  doth  not  grow,  and  heavenly  plants  are  more  medicinal.  Bind  up  your 
hearts  in  them,  and  they  shall  give  you  not  only  healing,  but  leave  with  you  the 
perfume  of  the  blessed  gardens  where  they  grew.  Thus  it  may  be  that  sorrow! 
shall  turn  to  riches ;  for  heart  troubles,  in  God's  husbandry,  are  not  wounds,  but 
the  putting  in  of  the  spade  before  the  planting  of  seeds.  (H.  W.  Beecher.) 
Glivipses  of  our  heavenly  home : — I.  The  tboublb  in  the  heabt  op  the  disciples. 
The  trouble — 1.  Of  agonized  ignorance  and  blank  bewilderment.  Long  before, 
.Tesus  had  dropped  hints  of  a  mysterious  journey  that  He  had  to  take.  As  the  time 
went  on.  He  spoke  of  it  more  frequently,  and  in  terms  more  and  more  darkly 
suggestive  of  horror.  This  had  not  seemed  to  trouble  their  heart  at  first ;  they 
regarded  His  language  as  metaphoricaL  Probably  they  had  the  impression  that 
first  some  great  battle  had  to  be  fought,  or  some  unknown  trial  to  be  gone  through ; 
that  would  last  three  days.  So  just  before,  Peter  asks,  "  Whither  goest  thou  ?  "  2. 
Of  bereaved  love.  *•  Do  I  love  the  Lord,  or  no  ?  "  was  not  a  question  in  any  heart 
there.  Jesus  had  poured  upon  them  all  the  very  essence  of  kindness,  and  had 
received  them  into  the  very  sanctuary  of  His  heart.  Naturally,  it  was  this  mighty 
love  that  made  bereavement  of  its  object  so  intolerable.  Christ  had  not  yet  left 
them ;  but  love  may  feel  a  bereavement  before  it  is  bereaved.  3.  From  the  thought 
of  having  no  share  in  the  last  passion  of  their  Lord.  "  Why  cannot  I  follow  Thee 
now  ?  "  Love  said  then,  as  love  says  now,  "  Give  me  some  work  to  do ;  some  cross 
to  carry  ;  some  block  to  lay  my  head  upon."  It  is  impossible  to  stand  idly  by  while 
Christ  gives  and  suffers  all.  II.  The  akiidote.  1.  A  peculiar,  most  tranquilUzing 
revelation  of  the  heaven  to  which  He  is  going — "a  place."  Along  with  other 
elements  of  comfort,  our  nature  needs  this.  We  have  been  told  that  this  is  a 
doctrine  of  Materialism,  and  that  heaven  is  in  character  rather  than  in  condition. 
This  is  only  a  half-truth,  and  we  want  the  whole.  "  Heaven  is  principle,"  said 
Confucius ;  but  a  house  to  live  in  must  be  built  of  something  besides  principle. 
Heavau  ia  for  the  complete  man,  body  and. soul;  and  a  body  asks  for  a  place. 


«KAP.  xiT.]  ST.  JOHN.  *6& 

TTnderstanding  that  heaven  is  at  least  a  place,  we  are  ready  to  ask  a  thonsand 
questions  about  it  as  such ;  and  one  of  the  first  will  be,  "  Where  is  it  in  the  map  of 
the  aniverse  ?  "  In  times  not  a  few  has  this  been  made  a  question  of  astronomy, 
and  to  suggest  the  possibihty  of  some  central  heaven  amongst  the  stars.  Well, 
the  iuquiry  must  start  from  our  own  solar  system.  This,  with  its  circle  of  at  least 
5,000,000,000  miles  in  diameter,  is  but  a  speck  in  the  creation.  Its  stars  burn  and 
roll  round  the  sun,  their  centre.  The  sun,  cariying  all  these  his  satellites  with  him, 
is  moving  round  another  centre,  with  its  system ;  that,  about  another ;  that,  about 
another ;  and  where  is  the  fixed  ultimate  centre  round  which  all  the  other  centres 
are  wheeling  and  moving?  The  only  One  who  could  have  settled  this  question  was 
silent  about  it.  He  says  nothing  of  its  whereabouts,  of  its  beauty,  of  its  music, 
except  in  signs  that  are  manifestly  but  hieroglyphic.  He  knew  that  the  most  exact 
precision  of  statement  and  the  most  dazzling  magic  of  description  would  leave  the 
greatest  as  well  as  the  least  of  mortals  as  much  in  the  dark  as  ever.  Therefore 
Christ,  aiming  at  our  spiritual  profit  rather  than  at  our  scientific  enlightenment, 
leaves  for  future  solution  all  problems  that  have  only  to  do  with  place.  2.  That 
the  heavenly  place  is  His  home  and  theirs.  He  has  just  addressed  them  in  the 
language  of  family  affection  as  His  "  VV^e  children."  With  this  word  of  love  still 
in  the  air,  He  proceeds  to  speak  of  he;  ve  as  "  My  Father's  house."  A  little  child 
looks  upon  his  father's  house  as  his  o\.  n,  and  so  would  Christ  have  ns  look  upon 
heaven-  Even  on  earth,  a  father's  house  is  bis  child's  home ;  and  the  dearest  place 
to  tht  bast  man,  woman,  child,  is  home.  "  Home,  sweet  home."  Earth  is  one  of 
My  Father's  battle-fields,  farms,  foundries,  factories,  roads  that  He  travels  on  ;  but 
heaven  is  our  "  Father's  house,"  and  therefore  the  home  of  all  His  family.  3.  That 
in  that  home  are  many  mansions,  i.e.,  settled  abodes ;  the  same  word  as  in  ver.  23. 
Emphasis  resting  on  the  idea  of  permanence.  Jesus  was  speaking  to  the  sad 
thoughts  then  stirring  in  the  hearts  of  His  mourners  on  account  of  the  shortness 
of  the  time  they  had  spent  with  Him,  and  which  seemed,  in  the  review,  only  like  a 
dream.  "  What  does  this  lack  to  make  it  perfect  ?  "  asked  an  old  Roman  of  his 
companion,  as  they  were  together  looking  on  some  imperial  show  ;  and  the  answer 
was,  "Permanence."  "  Permanence  adds  bliss  to  bliss."  In  the  word  "many," 
He  spoke  to  the  thoughts  of  the  company.  When  one  of  the  disciples,  on  the 
notice  of  His  near  departure,  asked  if  he  might  go  with  Him,  the  virtual  answer  was 
"No."  This  refusal  to  the  "one"  was  a  blow  to  "the  many."  If  the  happiness 
of  going  with  the  Lord  is  not  to  be  given  even  to  Peter,  what  is  to  become  of  the 
many?  We  had  all  expected  that  we  should  go  with  Him  into  His  kingdom.  If 
these  happy  dreams  of  ours  are  all  to  melt  into  misery,  why  were  we  not  informed 
of  this  before  ?  Before  now,  on  some  festive  day,  when  a  man  has  asked  his 
friends  to  his  house,  he  has  been  forced  to  ask  only  a  few,  because,  though  his  heart 
was  large  enough  for  many,  his  house  was  not.  Before  now,  in  the  straits  of  some 
war,  some  iron  captain  has  spared  the  hves  of  only  a  few  prisoners,  simply  on  the 
ground  of  lacking  room  to  accommodate  the  many.  God  has  room  in  His  purpose, 
in  His  heart,  in  His  house,  for  all  His  captives.  By  the  miracle  of  His  grace  He 
first  changes  all  His  captives  into  children,  then  welcomes  them  all  home.  No 
limitation  is  suggested  by  the  indefinite  plural,  "  many."  "  Many  "  simply  stands 
for  aU  the  children,  "  a  great  multitude  which  no  man  can  number,"  "  and  yet  there 
is  room  1  "  4.  That  He  is  going  "  to  prepare  a  place  "  for  them.  While  man  is 
asleep  in  the  night,  the  sun  goes  before  him,  that  he  may  prepare  the  day  for  him 
to  wake  in.  Thus  he  prepares  light  for  him  to  see  by,  power  for  him  to  work 
with,  and  the  spirit  of  gladness.  So  does  Christ  prepare  heaven  for  the  heirs 
of  heaven.  There  can  be  no  heaven  without  the  revelation  of  God,  and  there  can 
be  no  revelation  of  God  without  Christ.  He  prepares  heaven  for  them,  not  only 
by  preparing  their  right  to  the  place,  but  by  preparing  their  fitness  for  it.  "  Why 
cannot  I  go  with  Thee  now?"  asked  Peter;  and  the  saying,  "I  go  to  prepare  a 
place  for  you,"  is  an  answer  to  this  "  Why?  "  Christ  was  going  to  prepare  a  place 
for  them  ;  first,  by  His  Cross ;  next,  by  the  Spirit,  who  would  change  their  hearts 
and  train  their  natures  for  the  rank  they  would  inherit,  as  well  as  for  the  work  they 
had  to  do.  5.  That  He  would  come  again,  and  receive  them  unto  Himself.  Dying 
may  be  regarded  as  a  mode  in  which  Christ  comes  for  His  people,  one  by  one. 
Death  is  not  coming;  death  is  not  a  person,  only  a  door,  to  which  Christ,  the 
sovereign  Lord  who  has  at  His  girdle  the  keys  of  death  and  the  unseen  state,  comes. 

JC.  Stanford,  D.D.)        Ye  believe  in  God,  believe  also  in  Me. — Belief  in  Chritt: — 
.  What  IB  IT  TO  BELIEVE  ?    Faith  includes  two  things.     1.  The  submission  of  th« 
reason  to  all  Christ  has  revealed.    2.  The  trust  of  the  heart  in  all  He  has  promised. 
TOL.  n.  80 


4M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  zxr. 


Both  of  these  are  difficult  duties.    To  receive  as  true  what  we  cannot  understand, 
on  God's  testimony  is  declared  to  be  irrationaL   But  remember  that  faith  is  rational, 
and  that  the  testimony  of  God  is  informing.     To  trust  that  we  shall  be  pardoned, 
Baved,  preserved,  is  equally  difficult  for  unbelieving  hearts.   II.  The  object  op  faith 
IB  Christ — i.e.,  the  things  to  which  we  are  to  assent  are  truths  concerning  Christ, 
and  these  things  in  which  we  are  to  trust  are  His  promises.     This  is  the  only  form 
in  which  we  can  exercise  faith  in  God.     If  we  believe  not  God,  as  seen,  how  can  we 
believe  in  Him  as  not  seen.    HI.  What  abb  we  to  believe  concebnino  Chbist,  and 
WHAT  ABE  the  pbomises  WHICH  WE  ABE  TO  TRUST  f    1.  We  must  bclieve  that  He  is  the 
Way,  i.e.,  that  He  brings  us  to  God.   We  are  separated  from  God — (1^  By  our  ignor- 
ance.    Christ  brings  us  near  to  God  as  an  object  of  knowledge.     He  is  the  Logos  or 
Eevealer.    He  is  God  in  our  nature.     (2)  By  our  guilt.    Christ  brings  us  near  to 
God  by  reconciliation  through  His  blood.     He  atones  for  our  sins.     Through  Him 
we  are  able  to  draw  near  to  God  with  hope  of  acceptance.    (3)  By  our  enmity. 
Christ,  by  revealing  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  reconciling  us  to  Him,  removes  oui 
enmity.    2.  That  He  is  the  Truth,  i.e. — (1)  That  He  is  real ;  the  true  God ;  true 
Prophet,  Priest,  King.     (2)  That  in  Him  is  all  truth  and  excellence.    3.  That  He 
is  the  Life — the  source  of  universal,  intellectual,  spiritual  and  eternal  life.     It  is 
not  we  that  hve,  but  Christ  that  lives  in  us.    IV.  What  pbomises  abe  we  to  tbust 
TO  ?    The  promises  of  the  Spirit.  1.  That  His  presence  is  permanent  and  internal. 
2.  That  He  will  reveal  Christ.     3.  That  He  will  be  our  Paraclete.    (C.  Hodge,  D.D.) 
Believe  also  in  Me: — 1.  It  might  have  been  urged  that  the  disciples  are  addressed 
by  our  Lord  as  already  believing,  not  in  God  ouly,  but  in  Himself.    But  the  Bible, 
and  He  who  speaks  therein,  is  truer  to  nature  and  experience  than  many  who 
profess  to  interpret  it.    Are  there  not  many  in  Christian  Churches  needing  still  the 
voice  which  shall  say,  Believer,  believe ;  Christian,  come  to  Christ ;  disciple  of  three 
or  of  thirty  years,  stiU,  as  for  the  first  time,  behold  Him !    2.^  There  are  those, 
oven  among  Christian  people  who  confide  to  us,  in  the  tone  of  sincere  and  humble 
regret — "  I  cannot  see  why  a  Saviour  was  needed.     If  I,  being  evil,  know  how  to 
forgive,  how  much  more  shall  a  Father  in  heaven  accept  the  first  sigh  and  bestow 
the  unpurchased  grace?    Is  it  not  enough  if  I  believe  in  God  my  Father?    Why 
must  I  be  encumbered  with  a  revelation  of  sacrifice  which  rather  repels  me  than 
reassures?     I  believe  in  God— why  must  I  believe  also  in  Christ?"     Let  us 
endeavour  to  answer  this  question.   I.  Now,  some  one  might  say,  Look  at  the  saints 
of  the  Old  Testament.     What  grace,  of  reverence,  of  affiance,  of  holy  aspiration, 
•was  lacking  in  the  patriarch  Abraham,  or  to  the  poet-king  of  the  Psalms  ?    Christ 
was  not  manifested  when  those  thoughts  of  eternal  fulness  glowed  and  throbbed  in 
the  big  heart  of  David.     We  venture  to  dispute  the  very  fact  taken  for  granted. 
Abraham,  •'  saw  Christ's  day,"  and  walked  in  the  light  of  it.    David  was  reared 
amidst  promises  which   made  Christ  a  household  word  in  Israel,  and   sacrifices 
which  brought  to  the  very  senses  the  need  and  hope  of  propitiation.    11.  Or  you 
might  speak  of  men  who,  in  this  century,  have  not  only  led  good  lives,  but  have 
had  pious  feelings,  and  done  beneficent  works,  without  realizing  what  we  should 
eall  the  fulness  of  the  Christian  faith— avowed  Unitarians,  e.g.     But   it  is  only 
truth  to  remember  that  men  thus  dispensing  with  Christ  are  yet  unspeakably 
indebted  to  Him.    The  very  idea  of  God  as  our  Father  comes  from  His  revelation. 
III.  Still,  you  might  say,  having  made  this  great  revelation,  may  not  Christ  Himself 
disappear  ?    Having  taught  that  God  is  our  Father,  must  He  remain  in  sight  to 
confuse  or  divide  our  allegiance  ?    Believing  in  God  by  Christ's  help,  why  go  on 
further  to  believe  in  Christ  ?    Now,  it  is  an  obvious  answer,  and  surely  a  just  one. 
We  cannot  take  Christ  by  halves.     If  Christ  said  one  thing  from  God,  He  said  all 
things :  we  must  look  to  see  what  He  said,  and  not,  after  catching  one  isolated 
word,  presume  to  declare  that  one  word  all.    IV.  Observe,  too,  how  the  particular 
truth  received,  no  less  than  the  accompanying  doctrines  objected  to,  runs  up  into 
matters  which  we  can  neither  dispute  as  facts,  nor  yet,  apart  from  God,  settle.    Sin 
—you  see  it,  you  feel  it ;  all  religions  pre-suppose  it.     Evidently  sin  has  made  a 
great  rent  and  breach  in  God's  work.    Listen  to  this  new  Teacher,  crying  in  the 
hearing  of   the  dislocated  and  disorganized  creation,  "  When  ye  pray,  say,  Our 
Father."    Yes,  we  say,  something  within  teUs  me  that  I  had  a  Father  onoe — but 
long,  long  have  I  lost  Him.   TeU  me  the  processes  by  which  it  has  been  recovered — 
the  marvellous  mystery  of  restored  sonship  and  reawakened  love.     Shall  we  accept 
the  bare  fact,  and  ask  nothing  as  to  the  proofs  and  the  instrumentalities  ?     Shall  we 
let  Christ  say,  "God  is  your  Father,"  and  never  question  Him  once  as  to  anything 
further  ?    They  who  believ*  th«  mighty  intelligence  must  hearken  what  the  sama 


<OHA».  xiT.]  ST.  JOHN.  467 

Lord  bas  to  Bay  concerning  it.  May  it  be,  perhaps,  that  there  was  that  in  the 
Divine  holiness  which  made  sin  a  fatal  bar  to  man's  acceptance,  except  on  some 
condition  which  God  only  can  perform  ?  Shall  we  dare,  we  the  guilty  and  helplefes 
ones,  to  say  that,  with  nothing  but  poor  human  tears  and  cries  and  paltry  efforts,  the 
stain  of  sin  can  be  wiped  out?  Shall  we  dare  to  repose  upon  a  feeble  human 
analogy,  and  rest  the  whole  weight  of  eternity  upon  the  impulses  and  instincts  (not 
always,  even  here,  prevailing)  of  family  love  and  parental  tenderness?  What  if 
thwe  lurked  in  the  background  of  Deity  an  obstacle  which  Calvary  alone  could  take 
away  ?  It  was,  no  doubt,  with  special  reference  to  His  sacrifice  and  its  consequences 
that  Christ  spoke  of  His  disciples,  in  the  text,  as  having  (in  some  sense)  still  to 
believe.  They  knew  Him  for  the  Messiah ;  what  they  had  still  to  learn,  still  to 
believe  in,  was  the  death  as  itself  the  hfe.  It  is,  indeed,  the  crucial  test  of  faith. 
He  who  believes  in  Christ's  atonement  believes  Christ ;  believes  that  He  came  from 
God,  and  came  with  a  message.  V.  But,  although  we  thus  stand  upon  the  dignity 
of  the  Cross  as  a  mystery,  we  do  find,  as  a  matter  of  experience,  that  no  man 
dispenses  with  it  without  being  a  definite  loser  in  some  feature  of  the  Christian 
character.  1.  There  is  often  a  feeble  sense  of  the  sinfulness  of  sin.  A  man  cannot 
really  see  Himself  a  sinner,  and  not  cry  out  for  a  Saviour.  2.  There  is  often  a  want 
of  true  tenderness  towards  sinners.  Benevolence  there  may  be ;  but  the  discovery 
of  unworthiness  in  the  object  of  the  philanthropy  is  often  the  death-blow  of  charity. 
Or,  again,  there  may  be  an  easiness  of  good  nature  ready  enough  to  see  excuses  : 
there  will  not  be  that  unique  combination,  which  was  in  the  cross  itself,  and  which 
is  in  the  true  family  of  the  Crucified — tenderness  towards  the  sinner,  with  displeasure 
against  the  sin.  VI.  God,  in  arranging  that  we  should  receive  this  greatest  of  EQa 
gifts — reconciliation  through  His  Son — has  given  a  charm  and  pathos  to  the  gospel 
which  it  could  not  otherwise  have  possessed.  What  possession  do  you  not  value 
tenfold  if  it  is  yours  through  love  f  That  book,  that  trinket,  why  is  it  dear  to  you  ? 
It  was  the  keepsake  of  a  loving  friend.  And  do  yon  not  think  that  God  was 
appealing,  perhaps,  to  some  such  instinct  of  your  nature,  when  He  would  not  only 
send  word  to  you  that  you  were  pardoned,  but  bid  you  to  receive  the  blessing  through 
the  willing  self-gift  of  One  who,  sharing  every  emotion  of  God's  love  for  the  self- 
rained  one,  came  Himself  to  plead,  and  at  last  to  die,  because  thus  He  could  effectually 
"roll  away  the  great  stone"  sin,  move  the  obdurate,  and  win  back  the  lost? 
Conclusion :  Try  the  charge,  "  Beheve  also  in  me."  Lean  your  whole  weight  of 
guilt,  of  sin,  of  weakness,  of  sorrow,  upon  Jesus  Christ  and  Him  crucified.  See 
whether,  in  proportion  as  you  trust  Christ  more,  you  become  not,  in  yourself, 
happier,  holier,  stronger,  gentler.  Thus,  in  time,  you  shall  have  a  witness  within. 
You  life  shall  be  one  echo  to  the  sweet  persuasive  expostulation, "  Let  not  your  heart 
be  troubled :  ye  believe  in  God ;  believe  also  in  Me."  (Dean  Vaughan.)  Faith  in 
God  one  with  faith  in  Christ : — We  get  a  more  true  and  appropriate  meaning  if  we 
keep  both  clauses  in  the  imperative,    "  Believe  in  God,  believe  also  in  me."    I. 

€hBIST  HEBE   POINTS   TO  HiMSELF  AS   THE   OBJECT  OF  PBECISELT   THE   SAME  BELIOIOUS 

TBC8T  WHICH  18  TO  BE  GIVEN  TO  GoD.  1.  It  is  Only  our  familiarity  with  these  words 
that  blinds  us  to  their  wonderfulness.  Try  to  hear  them  for  the  first  time,  and  to 
remember  the  circumstances.  Here  is  a  man  amongst  a  handful  of  friends,  within 
fonr-and-twenty  hours  of  a  shameful  death,  that  to  all  appearance  was  the  anni- 
hilation of  all  His  claims  and  hopes.  And  He  says,  "  Trust  in  God,  and  trust  in 
Me  1  "  2.  What  is  it  that  Christ  offers  us  ?  A  very  low  and  inadequate  interpre- 
tation is,  "Believe  that  God  is,  that  lam."  But  it  is  scarcely  less  so  to  suppose  that 
the  mere  assent  of  the  understanding  to  His  teaching  is  all  that  Christ  is  asking  for. 
Faith  grasps  not  a  doctrine,  but  a  heart.  The  trust  which  Christ  requires  is  entire 
committal  to  Him  in  all  my  relations  and  for  all  my  needs.  3.  Further,  note  that 
this  believing  in  Him  is  precisely  the  same  thing  which  He  bid*  as  render  to  God. 
The  two  clauses  in  the  original  bring  out  that  idea  even  more  vividly — "  Believe  in 
God,  in  Me  also  believe."  And  so  He  here  proposes  BUmself  as  the  worthy  and 
adequate  recipient  of  all  that  makes  up  religion  in  its  deepest  sense.  That  tone  is 
the  uniform  characteristic  of  our  Lord's  teaching.  What  did  He  think  of  Himself 
Who  stood  up  before  the  world,  and  with  arms  outstretched,  like  that  great  white 
Christ  in  Thorwaldsen's  lovely  statue,  said  to  all  the  troop  of  languid  and  burdened 
ones  crowding  at  His  feet : — "  Come  unto  Me  all  ye  that  are  weary,"  &o.  That 
surely  is  a  Divine  prerogative.  What  did  He  think  of  Himself  Who  said,  "  All  men 
should  honour  the  Son  even  as  they  honour  the  Father  "  ?  You  cannot  eliminate 
the  fact  that  Christ  claimed  as  His  own  the  emotions  of  the  heart,  to  which  only  God 
has  a  right  and  which  only  God  can  satisfy.    4.  We  have  to  take  that  into  account 


468  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap  nr, 

if  we  would  estimate  the  character  of  Jesus  Christ  as  a  teacher  and  as  a  man.  What 
Beparates  Him  from  all  other  teachers  is  not  the  clearness  or  the  tenderness  with 
which  He  reiterated  the  truths  about  the  Father's  love,  and  moraUty  and  goodness ; 
but  the  peculiarity  of  His  call  to  the  world  is,  "  Believe  in  Me."  And  if  He  said 
that,  why,  then,  one  of  two  things.  Either  He  was  wrong,  and  then  He  was  a  crazy 
enthusiast,  only  acquitted  of  blasphemy  because  convicted  of  insanity  ;  or  else  He 
was  "  God,  manifest  in  the  flesh."  II.  Faith  in  Chkist  and  faith  in  God  aee  not 
TWO,  BUT  ONE.  These  two  clauses  on  the  surface  present  juxtaposition.  Looked  at 
more  closely  they  present  interpretation  and  identity.  1.  What  is  the  underlying 
truth  that  is  here?  How  comes  it  that  these  two  objects  blend  into  one,  like  two 
figures  in  a  stereoscope?  (1)  This,  that  Jesus  Christ  Himself  Divine,  is  the  Divine 
Bevealer  of  God.  There  is  no  real  knowledge  of  the  real  God  outside  of  Jesus.  He 
showing  us  a  Father,  has  brought  a  God  to  our  hearts  that  we  can  love,  and  of 
whom  we  can  be  sure.  Very  significant  is  it  that  Christianity  alone  puts  the 
very  heart  of  religion  in  the  act  of  trust.  Other  religions  put  it  in  dread  worship, 
service,  and  the  like.  (2)  On  the  other  hand,  the  truth  that  underlies  this  is  that 
Jesus  is  Divine.  The  light  shines  through  a  window,  but  the  light  and  the  glass 
that  make  it  visible  have  nothing  in  common  with  one  another.  The  Godhead 
shines  through  Christ,  but  He  is  not  a  mere  transparent  medium.  It  is  Himself 
that  He  is  showing  us  when  He  is  showing  us  God.  **  He  that  hath  seen  Me  hath 
seen  the  Father."  And  because  He  is  Himself  Divine  and  the  Divine  Eevealer, 
therefore  the  faith  that  grasps  Him  is  inseparably  one  with  the  faith  that  grasps 
God.  Men  could  look  upon  a  Moses,  an  Isaiah,  or  a  Paul,  and  in  them  recognize 
the  irradiation  of  the  Divinity  that  imparted  itself  through  them,  but  the  medium 
was  forgotten  in  proportion  as  that  which  it  revealed  was  behind.  You  cannot  for- 
get Christ  in  order  to  see  God  more  clearly,  but  to  behold  Him  is  to  behold  God, 
2.  And  if  that  be  true,  these  two  things  follow.  (1)  One  is  that  all  imperfect  reve- 
lation of  God  is  prophetic  of  and  leads  up  towards  the  perfect  revelation  in  Jesus 
Christ  (Heb.  i.  1-3).  And  in  like  manner  all  the  imperfect  faith  that,  laying  hold 
of  other  fragmentary  means  of  knowing  God,  has  tremulously  tried  to  trust  Him, 
finds  its  climax  and  consummate  flower  in  the  full-blossomed  faith  that  lays  hold 
upon  Jesus  Christ.  (2)  That  without  faith  in  Christ  such  faith  in  God  as  is  possible 
is  feeble,  incomplete,  and  will  not  long  last.  Historically  a  pure  theism  is  all  but 
impotent.  There  is  only  one  example  of  it  on  a  large  scale  in  the  world,  and  that 
is  a  kind  of  bastard  Christianity — Mohammedanism ;  and  we  all  know  what  good 
that  is  as  a  rehgion.  The  God  that  men  know  outside  of  Jesus  Christ  is  a  poor, 
nebulous  thing ;  an  idea,  not  a  reahty.  It  has  little  power  to  restrain.  It  has  less 
power  to  inspire  and  impel.  It  has  still  less  to  comfort;  it  has  least  of  all  to  satisfy 
the  heart.  III.  This  trust  in  Cheist  is  the  secret  of  a  qoiet  heart.  1.  It  is  no 
ose  saying  to  men,  "  Let  not  your  hearts  be  troubled,"  unless  you  finish  the  verse. 
The  state  of  man  is  like  that  of  some  of  those  sunny  islands  in  southern  seas,  around 
which  there  often  rave  the  wildest  cyclones,  and  which  carry  in  their  bosoms,  be- 
neath all  their  riotous  luxuriance  of  verdant  beauty,  hidden  fires,  which  ever  and 
anon  shake  the  solid  earth  and  spread  destruction.  And  where  is  the  "  rest "  to 
come  from  ?  All  other  defences  are  weak  and  poor.  We  have  heard  about  "  pills 
against  earthquakes. "  That  is  what  the  comforts  which  the  world  supplies  may 
fairly  be  likened  to.  Unless  we  trust  we  are,  and  shall  be,  *•  troubled."  2.  If  we 
trust  we  may  be  quiet.  To  cast  a  burden  oil  myself  on  other's  shoulders  is  always 
a  rest.  But  trust  in  Jesus  Christ  brings  infinitude  on  my  side.  Submission  is  re- 
pose. When  we  cease  to  kick  against  the  pricks  they  cease  to  stick  and  wound  us. 
Trust  opens  the  heart,  like  the  windows  of  the  Ark,  tossing  upon  the  black  and 
fatal  flood,  for  the  entrance  of  the  peaceful  dove  with  the  olive  branch  in  its  mouth. 
But  "  the  wicked  is  like  the  troubled  sea  which  cannot  rest."  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
Faith  in  God : — 1.  Why  should  it  have  been  needful  to  give  such  a  command  as  this 
to  any  intelligent  person  ?  In  one  sense  all  men  believe  in  God.  We  acknowledge 
and  recognize  a  power  which  passes  all  control,  measurement,  or  thought.  We  re- 
cognize an  authority  to  which  we  are  responsible.  As  the  moral  nature  is  culti- 
vated, we  recognize  a  moral  order  in  the  universe,  a  law  of  righteousness,  and 
therefore  a  Law-giver  and  a  Judge.  In  the  time  of  calamity  or  death  all  men  call 
upon  God.  Why,  then,  teach  men  to  believe  in  God,  and  command  it?  and 
especially  the  disciples  who  had  been  trained  under  the  ancient  system.  2.  Of 
course  the  answer  is  that  belief  may  be  real  and  yet  wholly  ineffective.  You  see  the 
Tapoor  issaing  from  the  kettle  and  disappearing  through  the  air.  It  is  steam-power, 
bat  not  enoogh  to  drive  the  train.    Yoa  step  upon  the  beach  and  find  the  littl* 


CHAP.  HT.]  fir.  JOHN.  469 

puddles  of  water,  but  there  ia  not  enough  to  float  the  boat  and  keep  alive  the  fish. 
So  belief  may  be  real  in  the  mind  and  yet  be  entirely  insufficient  for  any  useful 
and  inspiring  purpose.  The  master  would  have  us  carry  our  belief  in  God  to  a  point 
where  it  shall  involve  every  spiritual  force  within  ua.  Believe  to  the  roots  of  your 
nature ;  with  all  your  strength  and  life :  and  your  heart  shall  not  be  troubled. 
What  is  it  thus  to  believe  in  God  ?  It  is  to  affirm — I.  His  absolute  oeiginal  peb- 
soNAiiiTY  of  existence.  And  yet  this  it  is  not  easy  for  us  to  do.  If  we  search  into 
our  thoughts  we  shall  find  very  often  that  He  is  to  us  rather  a  force  without  affec- 
tion, intelligence,  and  life.  So  multitudes  of  men  conceive  of  God,  and  scientifio 
investigation  often  comes  in  to  encourage  this  tendency  of  thought.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  Scripture  everywhere  manifests  to  us  God  as  a  person.  Our  own  personal 
constitution  reflects  and  demonstrates  that  personality.  As  impossible  as  that  the 
clod  of  the  valley  should  generate  a  human  soul,  as  that  the  blossoming  branch  of 
the  tree  should  bring  forth  living  intelligence  ;  so  impossible  is  it  that  personality 
in  you  and  me  should  come  from  impersonal  forces  and  mechanical  laws.  We  see 
the  indications  of  it  in  His  works,  where  intelligent  contiivances  present  themselves 
to  us  in  the  adjustment  of  force  to  force,  in  the  relations  of  one  object  to  another ; 
and  in  Christ,  who  said,  ••  I  and  My  Father  are  one."  And  this  is  to  be  affirmed, 
with  all  energy  of  conviction,  and  intensity  of  feeling,  as  the  absolute  and  everlast- 
ing truth,  n.  His  pbesencb  with  us  in  every  hour  and  every  place.  Amazing ! 
Yes,  God  is  amazing  in  every  attribute.  The  soul  is  amazing  because  it  has  some- 
thing of  God  within  it.  Even  natural  theology  affirms  this ;  for  it  would  imply 
Divine  imperfection  if  God  were  not  everywhere.  The  recognition  of  a  moral  order 
in  the  universe  implies  that ;  for  otherwise  the  administration  of  that  order  would 
be  necessarily  imperfect.  The  constitution  of  the  universe  implies  that,  since  other- 
wise there  would  be  parts  of  the  universe  self-supporting  and  independent  of  God. 
His  omnipresence  shines  throughout  the  whole  Scriptures.  There  are  times  in 
spiritual  experience  when  we  feel  it.  But  you  say,  We  do  not  see  Him  !  Do  we 
see  the  air,  magnetism,  the  productive  force  in  nature,  music,  fragrance,  the  voice 
of  a  friend  ?  We  see  the  result.  III.  His  character  of  perfect  holiness  and  pkb- 
FECT  TENDERNESS.  Undoubtedly  there  is  much  to  perplex  us  in  the  prevalence  of  sin, 
and  the  long  delay  of  punishment.  These  facts  disturb  our  impression  of  the  Divine 
holiness.  And  yet  we  do  not  doubt  the  sun  when  for  a  time  obscured  by  cloud.  The 
holiness  of  God  must  be  recognized  by  any  one  who  would  for  a  moment  feel  safe 
in  the  universe.  If  God  were  otherwise  than  holy,  what  could  restrain  any  arbitrary 
exercise  of  His  power  f  He  could  not  properly  be  worshipped  except  He  were  holy. 
Worship  mere  power,  and  it  demoralizes  and  demonizes.  Worship  intellect,  and 
it  degrades  the  moral  nature.  Worship  can  only  be  offered  to  absolute  and  sovereign 
purity  of  character ;  and  that  must  be  God's  character,  or  else  let  every  harp  on 
high  be  silent  and  every  heart  on  earth  be  dumb.  God's  holiness  shines  upon  as 
through  His  law  in  our  own  reason  and  conscience  and  in  the  person  of  Christ. 
But  then,  with  this  holiness  is  united  tenderness ;  and  it  is  that  which  it  seems 
harder  stiU  to  recognize,  for  we  associate  with  absolute  justice  absolute  sovereignty 
rather  than  absolute  tenderness :  and  yet  there  is  in  His  Word  the  declaration  of 
His  tenderness.  There  is  a  reflection  of  that  tenderness  in  our  own  hearts.  Whence 
did  these  tender  loves  within  ns  spring  ?  It  is  idle  to  say  they  are  transmitted. 
From  whence  did  they  come  to  our  parents  ?  We  see  them  illustrated  most  perfectly 
in  Christ,  whose  missson  it  was  to  so  reveal  the  Father  that  we  might  not  be  afraid 
of  His  holiness.  IV.  Affectionate  solicitude  for  every  one  who  seeks  Him.  And 
this  is  the  most  difficult.  He  is  so  infinite  and  we  are  so  weak.  Yet  even  here  we 
find  instruction  from  those  who  are  nearest  to  Him  in  spirit  and  character.  We 
get  our  clearest  view  of  it  from  Christ,  again,  always  so  welcoming  to  all  who  sought 
Him,  so  tender  towards  those  who  trusted  and  loved  Him.  Conclusion :  If  thus  we 
believe  in  God,  then — 1.  There  is  peace  for  us  and  in  us.  We  shall  no  more  be 
afraid  of  any  real  harm  while  we  are  affiliated  with  God  in  spirit.  2.  There  is 
power,  the  power  which  sent  forth  the  disciples  on  their  errands  of  love,  3.  Creation 
reveals  its  mystery  of  majesty  and  loveliness  to  us,  and  redemption  its  higher  glories 
both  of  majesty  and  beauty,  4.  We  anticipate  the  promises  and  the  provisions  of 
grace,  5.  We  are  assured  of  the  victory  of  righteousness  in  the  world.  (E. 
S.  Storrs,  D.D.)  Belief  in  God  emotional  as  well  as  intellectual: — Truth  that 
touches  a  man  not  merely  through  a  cold  perception,  but  through  some  warm 
feeling,  is  the  kind  of  truth  the  Scripture  teaches  to  constitute  belief.  It  may 
be  intellectually  conceived,  but  no  moral  nor  social  truth  is  ever  presented  so 
as  to  be  beheved,  unless  it  be  presented  in  such  a  way  as  to  carry  sympathy 


470  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xtf, 

and  feeling  with  It ;  and  that  is  not  the  case  with  all  kinds  of  truth.  Physical, 
Bcientifio  tmths,  do  not  touch  the  feelings,  and  do  not  need  to.  Arithmetie 
deals  with  truths  that  have  no  relation  directly  except  with  the  understanding. 
They  never  oome  with  desire,  sorrow,  pity,  or  emotion  of  any  sort.  But  all  truths 
that  relate  to  dispositions  in  men,  to  moral  duties — they  never  stop  with  the  under- 
standing, but  touch  the  feeling  as  well.  A  man  cannot  be  said  to  believe  a  moral 
truth  unless  he  believes  it  so  that  it  carries  some  emotion  with  it.  And,  in  this 
respect,  it  makes  a  great  difference  what  a  man  believes,  (fl.  W.  Beecher.)  Be- 
lief in  God  based  on  the  knowledge  of  His  character : — A  banknote  is  tendered  to  me 
— it  is  a  promise  to  pay,  but  by  whom  ?  The  Oriental  Bank  Corporation.  I  should 
not  have  it ;  that  institution  has  lost  its  character.  I  could  not  trust  it.  Another 
note  is  handed  to  me ;  this  bears  the  name  of  the  Bank  of  England.  Ah  1  that  is 
a  different  matter.  I  know  that  bank  has  a  name  for  solvency  and  stability.  So, 
without  any  hesitation,  I  take  the  note  just  for  what  it  stands.  I  do  not  ask  for 
any  discount  off  its  amount,  as  I  might  if  there  was  a  shade  of  suspicion  attaching 
to  its  name.  I  just  take  it  for  what  it  appears  on  its  face  to  be  worth,  so  confident 
am  I  that  it  will  be  paid  to  the  full  in  the  sterling  coin  of  tb^  realm.  So  a  knowledge 
of  the  character  of  God  will  lead  us  to  be  fuUy  persuaded  "  that  what  He  hath  pro- 
mised He  will  be  able  also  to  perform."  {John  K.  Shaw.)  Belief  in  God  inex- 
tinguishable : — Whatever  men  may  scientifically  agree  to  believe  in,  there  is  in  men 
of  noble  nature  something  which  science  can  neither  illumine  nor  darken.  When 
Tyndall  was  walking  among  the  clouds  during  a  sunset  upon  the  Alps  his  com- 
panion said  to  him, "  can  you  behold  such  a  sublime  scene  as  this  and  not  feel  that 
there  is  a  God?"  "  Oh,"  said  he,  "I  feel  it.  I  feel  it  as  much  as  any  man  can 
feel  it ;  and  I  rejoice  in  it,  if  you  do  not  tell  me  I  can  prove  it."  The  moment  you 
undertake  to  bring  the  evidence  with  which  he  dealt  with  matter  to  the  ineffable 
and  the  hereafter,  then,  he  says,  "  I  am  agnostic.  I  don't  know.  It  isn't  true ; " 
but  the  moment  you  leave  the  mind  under  the  gracious  influence  of  such  a  scene  it 
rises  above  the  sphere  of  doubt  or  proof,  and  he  says,  •*  I  accept  it."  (H.  W. 
Beecher.)  Belief  in  God  encouraging  : — When  menaced  by  Indian  war  and 
domestic  rebellion,  when  distrustful  of  those  around  him,  and  apprehensive  of  dis- 
grace at  court,  Columbus  sank  for  a  time  into  complete  despondency.  In  this  houi 
of  gloom,  when  abandoned  to  despair,  he  heard  in  the  night  a  voice  addressing  him 
in  words  of  comfort, "  O  man  of  little  faith !  why  art  thou  cast  down  ?  Fear  nothing, 
I  will  provide  for  thee.  The  seven  years  of  the  term  of  gold  are  not  expired ;  in 
that,  and  in  all  other  things,  I  will  take  care  of  thee."  (Washington  Irving.) 
Belief  in  God  should  inspire  confidence : — In  a  small  town  there  lived  the  widow  of  a 
preacher,  a  God-fearing  woman,  who  in  days  of  trouble  used  to  say  to  her  children 
and  friends,  "  Fear  not,  God  lives."  Her  trials  were  sometimes  great,  but  she  strove 
to  bear  all  with  cheerfulness  and  patience.  One  day  her  diflaculty  was  greater  than 
she  could  bear,  and  she  sat  down  with  a  feeling  of  hopelessness,  and  allowed  her 
tears  to  flow  unchecked.  Her  little  son  saw  her  weeping ;  he  put  his  little  hand  in 
hers,  and  said,  while  he  looked  into  her  face  sorrowfully,  ••  Mother,  is  God  dead  ?  " 
"  No,  my  son,"  she  said,  taking  him  on  her  lap.  "  I  thank  thee  for  thy  question. 
He  ever  liveth ;  He  is  near  to  help  in  aU  trouble ;  He  wiU  help  us."  She  wiped 
away  her  tears  and  continued  her  work.  She  sought  and  found  help  in  Jesus.  (Der 
Glaubensbote.)  Belief  in  God  stimulating  : — The  late  Professor  Agassiz  once  said 
to  a  friend,  "  I  will  frankly  tell  you  that  my  experience  in  prolonged  scientific  in- 
vestigations convinces  me  that  a  belief  in  God — a  God  who  is  behind  and  within  the 
chaos  of  vanishing  points  of  human  knowledge — adds  a  wonderful  stimulus  to  the 
man  who  attempts  to  penetrate  into  the  regions  of  the  unknown.  Of  myself,  I  may 
say  that  I  never  make  the  preparations  for  penetrating  into  some  small  province 
of  nature  hitherto  undiscovered  without  breathing  a  prayer  to  the  Being  who  hides 
His  secrets  from  me  only  to  allure  me  graciously  on  to  the  unfolding  of  them." 
The  revealing  power  of  faith : — Christian  faith  is  like  a  grand  cathedral  with  divinely 
pictured  windows.  Standing  without  you  see  no  glory,  nor  can  possibly  imagine 
any;  standing  within,  every  ray  of  light  reveals  a  harmony  of  unspeakable 
splendour.  (Bp.  Porteous,)  Believing  in  Jesus  is  laying  hold  of  Him  : — A  vessel 
is  wrecked :  one  after  another  of  her  crew  is  swept  away,  and  disappears.  As  she 
heaves  to  and  fro,  it  seems  as  if  every  moment  she  would  break  up,  and  send  her 
shivering  passengers  down  into  the  deep.  There  is  the  cabin-boy,  thinking  of  his 
mother  and  his  home,  and  praying,  though  scarcely  hoping  to  be  saved,  when  a 
plank  floats  past.  Eagerly  he  lays  hold  of  it,  rests  his  whole  weight  upon  it ;  and, 
while  others  perish,  he  is  safe.     That  describes  you.    As  yon  are  just  about  to  go 


CHAT.xrr.J  ST.  JOHN.  471 

down,  the  plank  floats  along,  comes  near  you — within  reach,  within  arm's-length. 
That  plank  is  Christ.   Lay  hold  cf  Him,  rest  yourself  upon  Him.  He  can  bear  your 
whole  weight — the  whole  weight  of  your  sins,  which  would  have  sunk  you  to  per- 
dition — the  whole  weight  of  your  soul.  Try  Him ;  and,  like  a  sailor  who  tried  Him, 
you'll  be  able  joyfully  to  say  even  in  dying,  "  The  plank  bears,  the  plank  bears  I  " 
{J.  H.  Wilson.)        Believing  is  looking  to  Jesus  : — Believing  on  Jesus  is  looking  to 
Him  for  salvation.    You  see  that  poor  widow  with  a  young  family,  weeping  as  if 
her  heart  would  break.    When  I  ask  her  what  ails  her,  she  tells  me  she  is  behind 
with  her  rent,  and  her  landlord  threatens  to  turn  her  to  the  door,  unless  she  can 
pay  her  debt,  and  find  security  for  the  next  six  months.    So  I  tell  her  to  dry  her 
tears,  and  do  her  best  to  work  for  her  children,  and  just  look  to  me  for  her  rent. 
How  fuU  of  joy  she  is  all  at  once  1  How  cheerfully  she  works !  and,  though  she  has 
not  a  penny  laid  past  for  the  term,  she  has  no  fear ;  and  when  asked.  Why  ?  she 
says,  '*  I  am  looking  to  him,  for  he  bade  me ;  and  I  know  he  will  not  fail  me.  What 
he  promised  is  just  as  sure  as  if  I  had  it  in  my  hand."    Now,  believing  on  Jesus  is 
something  like  this.    If  I  might  so  speak,  it  is  the  heart's  look  to  Jesus — a  single 
glance,  indeed,  at  first,  and  yet  a  constant  looking  to  Him  ever  after    (Ibid.)       Be- 
lieving i$  trusting  in  Jesus : — There  is  a  boy  whose  father  was  buried  yesterday. 
To-day  he  is  wearing  his  father's  gold  watch.     Some  wicked  lads  are  trying  to  take 
it  from  him.    He  is  struggling  to  keep  it ;  but  they  are  too  strong  for  him.    He  is 
JQst  about  to  lose  it,  when  I  come  up,  and  say,  "  Give  it  to  me,  my  boy,  and  I'll 
keep  it  safe  for  you."    For  a  moment  he  looks  at  me  with  doubtful  eye  ;  but  as  I 
say  to  him,  "  Trust  me  I  "  and  he  sees  that  I  am  earnest  and  sincere,  he  hands  it 
over  to  me,  and  I  prevent  him  from  being  robbed.    That  is  just  what  the  apostle 
Paul  says  of  himself.     He  had,  as  you  have,  something  far  more  precious  than  a 
gold  watch — an  immortal  soul ;  and  he  was  afraid  of  losing  it :  he  could  not  keep 
it  himself.  Jesus  said,  "  Give  it  to  Me,"  and  he  gave  it  to  Him  ;  and  then  you  hear 
him  saying  rejoicingly,  "  I  know  whom  I  have  believed  "  (which  is  the  same  thing 
as  whom  I  have  trusted),  ♦•  and  am  persuaded  that  He  will  keep  that  which  I  have 
committed  to  Him  against  that  day."  {Ibid.)        The  comfort  of  believing  in  Christ  .•• 
— "  What  do  you  do  without  a  mother  to  tell  all  your  troubles  to  ?  "  asked  a  child 
who  had  a  mother,  of  one  who  had  none.    "  Mother  told  me  whom  to  go  to  before 
she  died,"  answered  the  little  orphan.    '*  I  go  to  the  Lord  Jesus :  He  was  mother's 
friend,  and  He's  mine."    "  Jesus  Christ  is  in  the  sky.    He  is  away  off,  and  He  has 
a  great  many  things  to  attend  to  in  heaven.    It  is  not  likely  He  can  stop  to  mind 
you."    "  I  do  not  know  anything  about  that,"  said  the  orphan.    ••  All  I  know,  He 
says  He  will ;  and  that's  enough  for  me."         Untroubled  faith : — What  the  Caliph 
Omar  is  reported  to  have  written  to  Amru,  his  general  commanding  in  Egypt,  has  a 
grand  moral.  If  those  books  contradicted  the  Koran,  they  were  false,  and  ought  to  be 
destroyed.     If  they  agreed  with  the  Koran,  they  were  of  no  use,  and  might  well  be 
spared.     One  book  was  enough  for  Mohammedans.    So,  when  Sir  Walter  Scott  lay 
dying,  he  said  to  his  son-in-law  one  day,  "Lockhart,  read  to  me."    "What  book 
shall  it  be  ?  "  said  Lockhart.  '•  Why  do  you  ask  ?  there  is  but  one,"  said  Scott.  Now, 
if  this  Book  itself  were  in  danger  of  being  destroyed,  and  I  might  have  only  one  chap- 
ter out  of  it,  I  rather  think  it  would  be  this  which  Scott  asked  to  be  read  to  him. 
Probably  no  single  chapter  is  read  so  much  to  the  dying,  over  the  dead.    It  was  the 
Speaker  who  was  about  to  die.    His  hearers  were  about  to  be  launched  into  a  life- 
long service,  and  their  last  necessity  was  absolute,  child-like  faith.     I.  Let  not 
TODB  HEABT  BE  TEOCBLED.    Certainly  they  were  troubled.    And  they  had  reason  to 
be.     Many  times  over  Judas  betrays  his  Lord,  and  hangs  himself.     Many  times 
over  Peter  denies  his  Lord  and  repents.    Many  times  over  the  Lord  Himself  is 
trucified,  and  buried,  rises  and  goes  away  and  comes  again  unseen.    It  is  the  same 
old   etory  always  ;   and  always  with  the  old  refrain  :    "  Let  not  your  heart  be 
troubled."      1.    To-day,  as  related  to  heathen  peoples  and  religions,  the   Judas 
Iscariot  of  Christianity  is  Christendom  itself.     At  first,  Christianity  had  behind  it 
only  the  incomparable  personality  and  teachings  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  If  Christen- 
dom were  only  Christian  really,  how  much  longer  would  China  probably  be  Con- 
fucian ?  or  India  Brahmanic  ?   These  are  painful  questions.  But  let  not  your  heart 
be  troubled.     Inside  of  Christendom  I  see  another  betrayal  of  Christianity,  which 
also   is  very  painful.      We  behold  a  Christian  civilization,  incontestably  and 
immensely  superior  to  any  heathen  pattern.     By  and  by  this  Christian  civilization 
forgets  its  Christian  parentage ;  or  denies  it,  and  claims  for  itself  another  pedigree. 
Scholaily  men  analyze  and  compare  the  great  historic  religions,  allowing  Uttle  pre- 
uniuenoe  to  Christianity,    Then  after  a  while  the  conclusion  is  reached  that  we 


472  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHU.  rtr. 

really  need  no  religion  at  all,  only  science.   Take  your  Bop,  Jadas,  and  be  gone.  As 
for  the  eleven,  let  not  their  hearts  be  troubled.    2.  Peter's  denial  of  the  Lord  also 
repeats  itself.     Scandals  and  offences  are  sure  to  come.    Good  men  are  tempted, 
stumble  and  fall.    Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled.    Peter  denied  his  Master  with 
an  oath.     Whole  communions  apostatize.     Yerily,  powers  of  darkness  are  busy ; 
and  the  night  is  long.    But  let  not  your  heart  be  troubled.    The  morning  cometh. 
Peter  repented.    S.  As  for  what  Christ  said  about  going  away  and  coming  again, 
changing  the  economy  from  flesh  to  spirit,  from  sight  to  faith,  it  seems  strange  to 
ns  that  His  apostles  should  have  been  so  staggered  by  it.    Those  apostles,  for  three 
years  had  been  under  marvellous  tuition ;  and  we  wonder  they  got  so  little  out 
of  it.    The  day  of  Pentecost  had  not  yet  come.    By  and  by  men  will  be  looking 
back  and  wondering  that  we  so  poorly  understood  the  gospel,  overlaying  it,  some 
of  us  with  ritual,  others  with  dogma.    We  have  much  to  be  ashamed  of.    But  let 
not  your  heart  be  troubled.    More  Pentecosts  than  one  have  come  already.    And 
more  are  yet  to  come.  II.  Believe  in  God.  1.  Commanded  belief  implies  always  the 
possibility  of  honest  unbelief .  Such  unbelief  has  increased  greatly  of  late.  Partly,  it 
seems  like  a  reaction  against  outward  authority,  and  traditional  opinions,  or  against 
a  superstitious  theism.    Partly  it  is  sheer  science,  clear-eyed  and  dispassionate, 
unable  to  help  multiplying  second  causes.    2.  I  have  no  fear  of  any  very  long  reign 
of  Atheism.    In  the  poor,  apathetic  Orient,  there  may  be  morality  enough  to  con- 
serve society,  with  little  or  no  religion,  as  in  China.    But  not  in  Europe  and 
America,  full  of  vitality,  greedy,  rich  and  restless.  With  us,  irreligion  to-day  is  im- 
morality to-morrow,  and  after  that  the  deluge.     3.  Much  of  what  passes  for  belief 
in  God  is  mere  scholastic  assent  to  the  proposition  that  God  exists.     Or  the 
attributes  most  emphasized  are  those  pertaining  rather  to  the  Divine  essence. 
What  we  need  is  a  vivid  sense  of  the  personality  of  God.  He  must  come  very  close, 
and  be  very  real,  to  us,  in  our  whole  experience  of  life.    Mankind  must  be  His  off- 
spring ;  and  human  history,  from  first  to  last,  the  working  out  of  His  own  eternal 
and  righteous  purposes.     "  We  are  but  two,"  said  Abu  Bakr  to  Mohammed  as  they 
were  flying,  hunted,  from  Mecca  to  Medina.    "  Nay,"  answered  Mohammed,  '•  wo 
are  three ;  God  is  with  us."    And  so  belief  in  God  is  not  mere  assent,  nor  mere 
conviction,  but  absolute  personal  trust,  submission,  and  service.      4.  You  and  I 
know  vei7  well  what  troubles  us  in  thinking  of  God — sin.    But  if  He  had  no  hatred 
of  sin,  how  much  worse  it  would  be  for  us.    We  might  be  in  the  power  of  evil 
spirits  stronger  than  we  are,  from  whose  hideous  tyranny  we  should  feel  it  a  mercy 
to  be  delivered  over  to  the  righteous  judgment  of  a  pure  and  holy  God.    You  say 
you  are  afraid  of  God.    But  what  human  imagination  can  picture  the  horrors  of  a 
universe  given  over  to  the  rioting  of  evil  unrestrained?  Thank  God  for  His  holiness. 
Though  He  slay  us,  we  had  better  trust  in  Him.     III.  Believe  also  in  Me.     1. 
In  me,  not  as  a  second  rival  object  of  trust,  but  as  God  manifest  in  the  flesh, 
rounded  out  and  historic.     This  takes  us  back  into  bewildering  depths.    Sin  is  a 
tremendous  mystery.    But  for  sin,  however,  we  might  never  have  known,  in  this 
world,  the  sublime  Triunity  of  God.    Triunity,  as  we  have  to  study  it,  is  the  whole 
Godbead,  dealing  with  the  problem  of  moral  evil.    2.  "Believe  also  in  Me."    The 
work  of  atonement  is  done,  was  done  centuries  ago  in  time,  ages  ago  in  eternity. 
God  in  Christ  now  stands  pledged  to  the  forgiveness  of  sin  on  the  condition  of  re- 
pentance.     3.  "Believe  also  in  Me."     Human  history  is  God's  judgment  day. 
Nations  are  rising  and  falling.  Human  history  is  also  God's  day  of  grace.  The  king- 
dom began  in  an  upper  chamber.   From  then  till  now  the  kingdom  has  steadily  ad- 
vanced.   The  steady  progress  of  Christianity  has  no  parallel  in  the  history  of  any 
other  religion.    The  problem  demands    solution.     And    only  one   is    possible. 
But  for  tiie  magnetism  of  the  felt  divinity   of  Christ,  Christianity  could  not 
have  started  at  all  as  it  did,  or  continued  as  it  has.    It  stands  to-day  the  old  solid 
bulwark  of  liberty  and  order  against  license  and  chaos.    (R.  D.  Hitchcock,  D.D.) 
In  My  Father's  house  are  many  mansions. — The  Father's  house : — I.  Christ  sits  and 
DiscovBKS  HEAVEN  TO  us.   1,  Its  nature.    His  home,    "  This  is  not  your  rest."    2.  Its 
extent.    "  Many  mansions."    "  Yet  there  is  room."    3.  Its  reality.    •' If  it  wore  not 
so  I  would  have  told  you."   Christ  knew  it — came  from  it — went  to  it.    Stephen  saw 
its  open  door  and  its  glory  when  his  breath  was  being  beaten  out  of  his  body.    H. 
Chbist  ascends  and  pbepaees  heaven  yoB  us.    **  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you." 
He  prepares  heaven  for  us — 1.    By  making  it  accessible.      The  angel  with  the 
flaming  sword  no  longer  guards  the  tree  of  life,  and  the  veil  of  the  Temple  no 
longer  hinders  man's  approach  to  God.     2.   By  gathering   its  people.     Heaven 
becomes  richer  to  us  as  Christians  die.    It  is  dailv  more  horee-likfi.    3.  Bv  supply- 


CHAP,  iiv.]  ST.  JOHN.  473 

ing  its  blessings.  Who  knows  so  well  as  He  the  kind  of  heaven  that  will  meet  our 
needs  ?  Yes,  and  He  prepares  it  all.  IH.  Chbist  eetdbns  and  enxeb8  heaven  with 
08.  "  If  I  go,"  Ac.  This  applies  to — 1.  All  the  journey  of  life.  "  My  presence 
ehaU  go  with  thee  and  I  will  give  thee  rest."  2.  All  the  labours  of  life.  "  Go  ye 
into  all  the  world  and  preach,  &c.  .  .  .  and  lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto 
the  end  of  the  world."  3,  All  the  trials  of  life.  "  When  thou  passeth  through  the 
waters  I  will  be  with  thee,"  <&o.  4.  The  close  of  life.  He  is  there  with  the  dying 
saint.  lY.  Chbist  abides  and  becoues  heaven  to  us.  "  That  where  I  am  there  ye 
may  be  also."  This  was  Paul's  idea  of  heaven — having  a  desire  to  depart  and  to 
be  with  Christ.  {W.  H.  Burton.)  My  Father's  house  : — The  very  term  changed 
the  whole  character  and  aspect  of  Hades.  The  invisible  became  visible  in  the  form 
of  the  most  benign  and  beautiful  of  all  the  institutions  that  lend  charm  and  joy  to 
life.  My  Father's  house  I  then  for  the  first  time  men  dared  to  think  of  death  as  a 
going  home.  It  seems  a  vast,  awful  world,  this  invisible  which  stretches  out  to  the 
infinite  all  round  us ;  the  trembling  soul  may  well  shudder  as  it  goes  forth  to  meet 
its  destiny.  But  the  thought  "  My  Father's  house,"  dissipates  all  dread.  Be  it 
what  it  may,  and  where  it  may,  this  vast  unknown,  it  is  filled  with  that  nameless 
benediction,  a  Father's  presence  and  lit  with  the  light  of  a  Father's  smile.  It  is 
this  sense  of  a  loving  Presence,  meeting  us  at  life's  outer  gate,  and  bringing  as  into 
a  bright  home  full  of  hght  and  beauty  and  living  joy,  which,  for  the  Christian,  has 
so  utterly  dissipated  the  terror;  and  this  made  death  seem  to  St.  Francis  a  sister  to 
take  him  by  the  hand  and  conduct  him  home.  It  is  the  activity,  the  animation, 
the  joyful  tasks,  the  abounding  interest,  of  the  life  of  the  invisible  world  unveiled 
by  Christ,  which  is  the  characteristic  revelation  of  the  gospel.  It  is  not  a  world  of 
shades,  but  a  world  of  sons  in  strong  immortal  forms,  instinct  with  energy,  rich  in 
faculty,  busy  with  the  tasks  that  occupy  the  angels  ;  a  world  glad  with  work  and 
bright  with  song.  {J.  B.  Brown,  B.A.)  My  Father's  house  magnificent : — A  New 
Zealand  chief  who  visited  England  was  remarkable  for  the  deep  spirituality  of  hia 
mind  and  his  constant  delight  in  the  word  of  Qod.  One  day  he  was  taken  to  see  a 
beautiful  mansion  near  London.  The  gentleman  who  took  him  expected  to  see 
him  greatly  astonished  and  charmed  with  its  magnificence,  but  it  seemed  to  excite 
little  or  no  admiration  in  his  mind.  Wondering  how  this  could  be,  he  began  to 
point  out  to  him  its  grandeur.  Tamahana  heard  all  silently,  then,  looking  round, 
said,  "My  Father's  house  is  finer  than  this."  "  Your  father's  house  I  "  thought 
the  gentleman,  who  knew  that  his  father's  home  was  but  a  poor  mud  cottage.  But 
Tamahana  went  on  to  speak  in  his  own  touching  strain  of  the  "  many  mansions  " 
of  the  redeemed.  (IF.  Baxendale.)  Entering  the  Father's  house  : — It  was  the 
quaint  saying  of  a  dying  man,  who  exclaimed :  "  I  have  no  fear  of  going  home. 
God's  finger  is  on  the  latch,  and  I  am  ready  for  Him  to  open  the  door.  It  is  bat 
the  entrance  to  my  Father's  house."  The  house  of  many  mansions  : — From  these 
words  we  learn — I.  The  magnitude  of  heaven,  Christ's  going  away  would 
naturally  seem  to  them  pure  loss.  Death,  as  a  natural  event,  always  seems  so. 
Bat  Christ  says  death  is  not  a  closing  so  much  as  an  opening—  not  a  going  away 
so  much  as  a  coming  home.  It  is  the  passing  of  a  pilgrim  from  one  mansion  to 
another,  from  the  winter  to  the  summer  residence,  from  one  of  the  outlying  pro- 
vinces up  nearer  the  central  home.  This  is  not  a  chance  expression,  far  less  a 
mere  figure  of  speech.  There  are  many  others.  "  The  third  heavens  " ;  Christ 
has  •*  passed  through  all  heavens  " ;  "  heaven,  even  the  heaven  of  heavens,"  a 
place  evidently  of  inconceivable  grandeur,  for  even  that  cannot  contain  the  infinite 
presence  of  God.  This  idea  of  immense  capacity  is  a  real  relief  from  some  of  the 
more  popular  conceptions  of  the  future  life,  as  that  of  a  temple,  &c.  The  popu- 
lation of  this  world  is  something  tremendous.  It  has  been  yielding  immense  num- 
bers to  heaven  in  every  age.  Thus  "  a  great  multitude  which  no  man  can  aumber," 
has  been  passing,  and  will  pass,  in  ceaseless  procession.  And  we  cannot  help 
wondering  how  they  are  all  to  be  provided  for !  II.  Out  of  the  idea  of  vastness 
arises  that  of  an  endless  variety.  The  variety  existing  in  God's  woi  ks  here  is  one 
of  the  principal  charms  of  the  natural  world.  So  as  there  are  "  many  mansions," 
the  adorning  of  them  will  be  very  various.  One  will  not  be  as  another.  We  do  not 
go  to  heaven  to  lose  our  natural  tastes,  our  sinless  preferences,  but  rather  to  have 
all  these  gratified  in  a  far  higher  degree.  Otherwise  heaven  would  be  plainer, 
poorer,  and  less  interesting  than  earth.  And  unless  our  own  nature  were  pressed 
down  into  some  kind  of  mechanical  exactness  and  shape,  weariness  would  ensue. 
There  would  be  a  sighing  for  the  lost  seasons  of  the  earth,  its  withered  flowers,  its 
light  and  shade,  its  many  countries,  and  its  encircling  seas.    But  no  1  Th«re  will 


474  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  mr, 

be  places,  pursuits,  and  enjoyments  for  all.  III.  Then,  lest  this  vastness  and 
variety  should  seem  too  large  to  our  thought,  we  have  also  in  these  words  a  sweet 
assurance  as  to  the  Homeliness  of  heaven.  lY.  Bealitt.  "If  it  were  not  so,  I 
would  have  told  you."  This  life  in  itself  is  shadowy  enough.  We  speak  of  "  long 
days,"  and  of  '•  long  years."  But  when  the  awakened  immortal  soul  looks  at  those 
spaces  of  time  in  the  light  of  its  own  eternity,  how  short  and  shadowy  they  seem  I 
In  those  times  we  feel  that  everything  depends  on  the  reality  and  permanence  of 
the  future  life  I  No  man  who  has  not  long  been  untrue  to  himself  and  to  his  God 
can  be  pleased  with  the  thought  of  annihilation.  But  who  can  tell  him  firmly 
where  lies  the  realm  of  life,  or  whether  anywhere  ?  He  asks  philosophy,  and  she 
answers,  "I  see  something  Uke  it,  but  I  cannot  surely  tell.  It  may  be  land  or  it 
may  be  cloud."  He  asks  his  own  reason,  and  the  instincts  of  his  heart,  and  they 
answer  "  yes "  to-day  and  •'  no "  to-morrow,  according  to  the  mood,  and  the 
aspects  of  outward  life.  Then,  turning  to  Jesus  Christ,  he  asks  by  his  sorrow,  by 
his  hopes,  by  all  the  stmggling  instincts  that  will  not  die,  by  that  upward  look  in 
which  the  soul  is  '*  seeking  a  city  with  foundations,"  whether  such  a  city  is  builded 
— whether  such  a  life  is  secure.  And  the  answer  is  here.  Conclusion  :  The  love 
of  heaven  has  been  derided  by  some  as  a  selfish  passion.  No  doubt  heaven  may  be 
represented  and  desired  by  the  mind  as  a  place  of  escape  from  conflict,  of  mere 
ignoble  rest.  But  if  we  take  it  just  as  it  is  projected  to  our  view  in  the  Scriptures 
— in  its  relations  to  earthly  labour,  and  suffering,  and  desire ;  and  as  the  place 
where  our  higher  toils  and  nobler  enjoyments  shall  begin — then  the  desire  of 
heaven  is  the  noblest  and  purest  passion  we  cherish.  (A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)  Many 
mansions : —  Sorrow  needs  simple  words  for  its  consolation ;  and  simple  words  are 
the  best  clothing  for  the  largest  truths.  Note  in  these  words — I.  The  "  Fatheb's 
HOUSE,"  AND  ITS  AMPLE  BOOM.  There  is  only  one  other  occasion  in  which  our  Lord 
ased  this  expression :  "  Make  not  My  Father's  house  a  house  of  merchandise." 
Its  courts,  its  many  chambers,  its  ample  porches,  with  room  for  thronging  wor- 
shippers, represented  in  some  poor  way  the  wide  sweep  and  space  of  that  higher 
house.  1.  How  sweet  and  familiar  this  conception  of  heaven  1  (1)  There  is  some- 
thing awful,  even  to  the  best  souls,  in  the  thought  even  of  the  glories  beyond.  But 
how  it  is  all  softened  when  we  say,  "  My  Father's  house."  Most  of  us  have  left 
behind  us  the  sweet  security  which  used  to  be  ours  when  we  lived  as  children  in  a 
father's  house  here.  But  we  may  all  look  forward  to  the  renewal,  in  far  nobler 
form,  of  these  early  days,  where  the  shyest  and  timidest  child  shall  feel  at  ease  and 
secure.  (2)  And  consider  how  this  conception  suggests  answers  to  so  many  of  oor 
questions  about  the  relationship  of  the  inmates  to  one  another.  Are  they  to  dwell 
isolated  in  their  several  mansions  ?  Surely  if  He  be  the  Father,  and  Heaven  be 
His  house,  the  relation  of  the  redeemed  to  one  another  must  have  in  it  more  than 
all  the  sweet  familiarity  and  unrestrained  frankness  which  subsists  in  the  famihea 
of  earth.  (3)  But,  further,  this  great  and  tender  name  has  its  deepest  meaning  in 
a  spiritual  state  of  which  the  essential  elements  are  the  loving  manifestation  of  God 
as  Father,  the  perfect  consciousness  of  sonship,  the  happy  union  of  all  the  children 
in  one  great  family,  and  the  derivation  of  all  their  blessedness  from  their  elder 
Brother.  2.  The  ample  room  in  this  great  house.  (1)  There  was  room  where 
Christ  went  for  eleven  poor  men.  But  Christ's  prescient  eye  looked  down  the  ages, 
and  some  glow  of  satisfaction  flitted  across  His  sorrow  as  He  saw  from  afar  the  re- 
sult of  the  impending  travail  of  His  soul  in  the  multitudes  by  whom  God's 
heavenly  house  should  yet  be  filled.  Perhaps  that  upper  room,  like  the  most  of 
the  roof-chambers  in  Jewish  houses,  was  open  to  the  skies,  and  whilst  He  spoke  the 
innumerable  lights  that  blaze  in  that  clear  heaven  shone  down  upon  them,  and  He 
may  have  pointed  to  these  as  He  spoke.  Ah  1  brethren,  if  we  could  only  widen  our 
measurement  of  the  walls  of  the  New  Jerusalem  to  that  of  the  "  golden  rod  which 
the  man,  that  is,  the  angel "  applied  to  it,  we  should  understand  how  much  bigger  it 
is  than  any  of  these  poor  communities  on  earth.  If  we  would  lay  to  heart,  as  we 
ought  to  do,  the  deep  meaning  of  that  indefinite  "  many "  in  my  text  it  would 
rebuke  oar  narrowness.  (2)  That  one  word  may  also  be  used  to  heighten  our  own 
confidence  as  to  our  own  poor  selves.  A  chamber  in  the  great  temple  waits  for 
each  of  us,  and  the  question  is.  Shall  we  occupy  it  or  shall  we  not  ?  The  old  rabDit 
said  that,  however  many  the  throngs  of  worshippers  who  came  up  to  Jerusalem  at 
the  Passover,  the  streets  and  the  courts  were  never  crowded.  And  so  it  is  with  thai 
great  city.  There  are  throngs,  but  no  crowds.  Each  finds  a  place  in  the  ample  sweep 
of  the  Father's  house,  like  some  of  the  great  ptJaces  that  barbaric  Eastern  kings 
used  to  build,  in  whose  courts  armies  might  encamp,  and  the  chambers  of  which 


«HAP.  xiT.]  ST.  JOHN.  475 

were  ooanted  by  the  thousand.  (3)  There  is  only  another  occasion  in  this  Gospel 
in  which  the  word  here  translated  "  mansions  "  is  employed — "  We  will  come  and 
make  our  abode  with  Him."  Our  mansion  is  in  God ;  God's  dwelling-place  is  in 
us.  When  prodigal  children  go  away  from  the  father's  house  sometimes  a  heart- 
broken parent  will  keep  the  boy's  room  just  as  it  used  to  be  when  he  was  young  and 
pure,  and  will  hope  and  weary  through  long  days  for  him  to  come  back  and  occupy 
it  again.  God  is  keeping  a  room  for  you  in  His  house ;  do  you  see  that  you  fill  it. 
II.  The  sdfficibnct  of  Christ's  revelation  for  our  needs,  ••  If  it  were  not  so,  I 
would  have  told  you."  1.  He  sets  Himself  forward  in  very  august  fashion  as  being 
the  Bevealer  and  the  Opener  of  that  house  for  us.  There  is  a  singular  tone  about 
all  our  Lord's  few  references  to  the  f utare— a  tone  of  decisiveness.  He  stands  like 
one  on  a  mountain-top,  looking  down  into  the  valleys  beyond,  and  telling  His  com- 
rades in  the  plain  behind  Him  what  He  Rees.  He  speaks  of  that  unseen  world 
always  as  one  who  had  been  in  it,  and  who  was  reporting  experiences,  and  not 
giving  forth  opinions.  Very  remarkable,  therefore,  is  it  that  with  this  tone  there 
should  be  such  reticence  iu  Christ's  references  to  the  future.  But  my  text  suggests 
to  us  that  we  have  got  as  much  as  we  need,  and,  for  the  rest,  if  we  needed  to  have 
heard  it.  He  would  have  told  us.  Let  the  gaps  remain.  The  gaps  are  part  of  the 
revelation,  and  we  kno«v  enough  for  faith  and  hope.  2.  May  we  not  widen  the 
application  of  that  th/ught  to  other  matters  ?  In  times  like  the  present,  of  doubt 
and  unrest,  it  is  a  grc/it  piece  of  Christian  wisdom  to  recognize  the  limitations  of 
our  knowledge  and  the  sufficiency  of  the  fragments  that  we  have.  What  do 
we  get  a  revelation  for  ?  To  solve  theological  puzzles  and  dogmatic  difficulties ; 
to  inflate  us  with  the  pride  of  guasi-omniscience :  or  to  present  to  us  God 
in  Christ  for  faith,  for  love,  for  obedience,  for  imitation?  Surely  the  latter, 
and    for    such    purposes   we   have    enough.      (A.    Maclaren,   D.D.)  Many 

mansions: — I.  Heaven  is  God's  house.  1.  God  is  infinite  (Psa.  cxlvii.  5).  2. 
Therefore,  not  comprehended,  or  included  anywhere  (Isa.  Ixvi.  1).  3.  But  is 
present  everywhere  (Psa.  cxxzix.  7).  4.  But  yet  in  some  places  unveils  Himself, 
and  discovers  Hib  glory  more  than  in  others.  5.  Where  God  is  pleased  to  reveal 
Himself  most,  is  called  His  house.  He  has  a  twofold  house.  (1)  A  house  of  grace, 
(a)  The  Church  in  general  (Mark  iii.  35).  (6)  A  believer's  heart  in  particular  (Isa. 
Ivii.  15  ;  Eev.  iii.  20).  (2)  A  house  of  glory,  where  He  manifests  most  clearly  the 
glory  (1  Cor.  xiii.  12)  of  His  power,  goodness,  mercy,  wisdom.  6.  Hence,  observe 
that  they  who  come  to  heaven — (1)  Dwell  with  God,  and  so  with  the  fountain  of 
Isght  (Psa.  civ.  2),  life  (Psa.  xxxvi.  9),  love,  joy  (Psa.  xvi.  11).  (2)  And  so  are 
secure  from  enemies.  (3)  And  enjoy  true  happiness  (Psa.  xvi.  11;  xvii.  15).  II. 
It  is  Christ's  Father's  house.  And  this  adds  great  comfort ;  for — 1.  We  may  be 
sure  of  entertainment,  though  not  for  our  own,  yet  for  Christ's  sake.  2.  We  shall 
dwell  with  Christ  (ver.  3).  3.  In  Christ :  it  is  our  Father's  house  too  (chap.  xx.  17). 
ni.  These  mansions  are  convenient  and  suitable — 1.  For  our  natures  and 
capacities  (2  Pet.  i.  4).  2.  For  our  wants  and  necessities :  being — (1)  Void  of  all 
troubles — (a)  Spiritual :  as  of  the  sense  of  God's  displeasure  (Ezek.  xvi.  42) ;  doubts 
about  our  estate  ;  Satan's  temptations  (1  Pet.  v.  8) ;  the  delusions  of  this  world ; 
our  own  corruptions  (Eph.  v.  27 ;  Heb.  iv.  10).  (b)  Temporal  (Rev.  vii.  17) ;  for 
here  is  no  want  in  our  estates  (Psa.  xxxiv.  9;  Ixxxiv.  11),  no  crosses  in  oar 
enjoyments,  no  disgrace  upon  our  names  (Psa.  cxix.  39),  no  sickness  in  our  bodies 
(Mark  xii.  25),  no  cares  in  our  minds  (Matt.  xiii.  22 ;  Phil.  iv.  6),  no  death  (Bev. 
xxi.  4).  2.  Furnished  with  all  delightsome  furniture.  (1)  For  our  souls,  (a)  Our 
understandings.  (&)  Our  wills  and  affections  (Psa.  xvi.  11).  (2)  For  our  bodies 
(Phil.  iii.  21),  robes  (Eev.  vi.  11),  crowns  (James  i.  12;  2  Tim.  iv.  8),  thrones 
(Luke  xxii.  30),  banquets  (Isa.  xxv.  6 ;  Bom.  xiv.  17 ;  Eev.  vii.  17),  the  most 
pleasing  objects  (1  Cor.  xiii.  12),  the  most  celestial  melodies  (Bev.  iv.  8-11).  3. 
They  are  everlasting  (Matt.  xxv.  46  ;  Bom.  vi.  23 ;  2  Cor.  v.  1).  IV.  In  heaven 
there  are  many  mansions.  1.  What  is  the  purport  of  this  expression?  Not 
distinct  cells,  but — (1)  That  there  is  room  enough  for  many.  (2)  That  many  shall 
be  saved  (Rev.  vii.  9 ;  James  ii.  5) ;  but  not  irrespectively  (1  Cor.  i.  26-28).  2. 
Whether  in  these  mansions  will  there  be  degrees  of  glory  ?  (1)  Negatively.  All 
shall  be  alike  in  respect  of — (a)  Their  freedom  from  evil  (Eev  xxi.  4).  (b)  God's 
love,  (c)  Duration,  (d)  Their  capacities,  i.e.,  every  one  shall  enjoy  as  mucn  as  he 
is  capable  of  (Psa.  xvi.  11).  (2)  Positively.  One  will  be  more  capable,  and  so  enjoy 
more  than  another.  This  appears — (a)  From  Scripture  (1  Cor.  xv.  41,  42 ; 
Matt.  xix.  28).  (6)  There  are  degrees  of  torments  in  hell  (Luke  xii.  47,  48  ;  Matt. 
xi.  21,  22 ;  Rom.  ii.  9).     (c)  There  are  degrees  of  angelical  glory  (1  Thess.  iy.  16  ,* 


476  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XIT, 


Jade  9).    (d)  There  are  degrees  of  grace  and  good  works  here  (Bom.  it  6 ;  2  Cor. 
V.  10 ;  Luke  xix.  16-18).    3.  There  are  many  mansions.     Then — (1)  Despair  not  of 
room  for  you  there.   (2)  Labour  to  have  one  of  them.    There  are  degrees  in  glory — 
then  strive  to  be  eminent  in  grace  that  you  may  be  eminent  in  glory  (Matt.  xv.  28). 
(Bp.  Beveridge.)       The  heavenly  home : — The  text  is  suggested  of — I.  Permanencb. 
1.  "All  things  change,  and  we  with  them."    The  earth  and  sun  and  stars  are 
moving  from  their  old  forms  into  new,  but  their  slow,  stem  cycles  seem  to  as 
changeless  when  we  think  of  ourselves.   Let  any  one  who  has  advanced  but  a  short 
way  in  life  look  round.    Old  times  are  away,  old  interests,  old  aims :  the  haunts, 
the  friends,  the  faces  of  our  youth,  where  are  they  ?    Gone,  or  so  changed  that  we 
dare  not  think  to  recall  them.     And  we  are  changing  within.    If  we  could  keep  up 
the  life  and  freshness  there  it  would  be  less  sad.      There  is  compensation  for  this, 
if  we  will  seek  it.    If  we  have  a  home  in  God  through  Christ,  it  brings  in  some- 
thing better  than  youthful  brightness.    But  here,  too,  there  is  frequently  change. 
The  anchor  of  our  hope  seems  to  lose  its  hold,  our  sense  of  pardon  and  peace  may 
be  broken,  and  the  face  of  God,  if  seen  at  all,  may  look  dim  and  distant.    2.  It  la 
from  such  changes  that  the  promise  of  Christ  carries  us  to  a  fixed  place  of  abode. 
The  permanence  of  the  dwelling  shall  ensure  permanence  in  all  that  belongs  to  the 
dwellers  in  it.  There  must  be,  indeed,  the  change  of  progress  :  it  is  the  permanence 
not  of  death  but  of  life ;  and  so  the  changes  of  decay,  of  loss,  of  bereavement,  of  the 
unretiring  past,  these  are  gone  with  the  last  great  change,  which  ends  the  perishing 
and  opens  the  eternal.    There  shall  be  no  wavering  of  faith,  no  waning  of  hope,  no 
chill  of  love.     Here,  change  at  every  step  leaves  some  lost  good  behind  it ;  there 
change  shall  take  all  its  good  things  forward  into  fuller  possession,  and  thus  become 
a  growing  perfoimance.    The  way  to  be  sure  of  a  permanent  home  is  to  keep  fast 
hold  of  Him  who  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.    II.  Extent.    Our 
present  life  is  related  to  it  as  that  of  childhood  to  manhood.    Let  us  think  of  the 
dwelling  of  the  child,  where  it  looks  from  its  little  window  on  the  few  houses  or 
fields  which  make  up  its  world,  and  then  let  us  compare  it  with  what  the  man 
knows  of  his  present  world-residence,  when  he  has  surveyed  with  his  eye  or  hia 
mind  the  breadth  of  the  earth  with  its  oceans  and  lands  that  stretch  over  continenta 
by  Alps  and  Andes.  There  enter  at  the  wicket-gate  Christiana  and  also  the  children, 
many  Keady-to-halts  and  Feeble-minds,  and  far-off  pilgrims,  for  whom  we  can  find 
no  names,  but  who  are  written  in  the  Lamb's  Book  of  Life.     Infants  are  carried 
through  the  door  sleeping ;  and  it  is  not  for  us  to  say  by  what  far-off  rays  in  dark 
nights,   by  what  doubtful  paths  amid   many  imperfections,   hearts  have  been 
yearning  to  this  home.     The  notices  of  Eahab  and  Ruth,  of  Ittai  and  Naaman,  of 
the  wise  men  of  the  East,  and  the  Greeks  who  came  up  to  the  Passover,  of  the 
Ethiopian  eunuch  and  the  devout  Cornelius,  are  hiuts  for  the  enlargement  of  our 
hopes  about  many  who  had  the  same  yearning  in  their  hearts,  though  they  did  not 
see  the  walls  of  any  earthly  Jerusalem.    And,  if  we  believe  the  Bihle,  there  are 
long  eras  to  run,  when  the  flow  shall  be  toward  God  more  than  it  ever  has  been 
away  from  Him.     And  then  there  is  to  be  a  gathering  togetlier  of  all  things  in 
Christ,  and  the  holy  angels  have  relations  to  Him  which  will  give  them  their  share 
in  His  home.    When  we  think  of  this,  how  the  extent  of  the  heavenly  world  grows  I 
and  the  discoveries  of  science  may  help  us  to  extend  our  hopes.    III.  Vakiett.    In 
all  God's  works  the  many  means  the  manifold.     IV.  Unity.     These  abodes  of  the 
futm-e,  manifold  as  they  are,  have  walls  around,  and  an  over-arching  roof,  which 
make  them  one  house,  and  that  house  a  home.    The  chambers  of  a  house  have 
their  communication  with  one  another,  and  the  heavenly  world,  wide  as  it  is,  shall 
have  a  unity  of  fellowship.     In  the  present  world  the  children  of  God  are  far  apart, 
separated  by  the  emergencies  of  life,  by  death,  by  misunderstandings  and  prejudices, 
by  chills  of  heart  and  jealousies ;  and  they  rear  their  many  little  mansions,  forgetful 
of  the  one  house.    The  word  of  the  Saviour  promises  a  reversal  of  this  long,  sad 
history.     Conclusion :  1.  Something  is  needed  to  secure  all  this,  and  our  Lord 
teaches  us  to  carry  to  the  thought  of  heaven  a  filial  heart.     It  is  "the  Father's  " 
house.     This  is  needed  to  make  it  a  home  in  any  sense  ;  needed  to  give  the  heart 
rest  either  on  earth  or  in  heaven.     Men  who  inquire  into  the  facts  and  laws  of  the 
world,  and  find  no  God  in  it,  have  made  themselves  homeless.     Men  who  have 
found  human  affection,  but  no  God  beneath  it,  have  found  only  the  shadow  of  a 
home.    It   is   to  tewch  us  this  that  God  has  made  a  father's  love  the   bond 
of  •  true  human  household.     If  it  were  possible  to    enter    heaven    and    find 
no    Father    there,    heaven    vould    be    the    grave    of    hope.     2.  Our  Lord   has 
taught   us  to  connect  heaven  with  the  thought   of   Himself — "  My "   Father's 


OHAP,  XIV.]  ST.  JOHH,  i,n 

hoase.  Heaven  is  the  house  of  Christ's  Father.  (1)  It  is  as  when  a  palace 
has  been  raised  with  all  its  rooms  and  their  fumitnre  complete,  bat  it  ia 
dark  or  dimly  seen  by  lights  carried  from  place  to  place.  The  sun  arises, 
and  by  the  central  dome  the  light  is  poured  into  all  the  corridors  and  chambers,  and 
by  the  windows  there  are  prospects  over  hill  and  valley  and  river.  Christ  is  the  son 
of  this  house.  (2)  If  we  think  of  its  mansions,  and  wonder  where  the  final  resting- 
place  shall  be,  it  is  where  Christ  takes  up  His  dwelling,  ••  that  they  may  be  with  Me 
where  I  am."  (3)  If  we  think  of  its  extent  and  variety,  our  imagination  might  be 
bewildered,  and  our  sotil  chilled  by  boundless  fields  of  kn&wledge,  which  stir  the 
intellect  and  famish  the  heart ;  but  where  He  is,  knowledge  becomes  the  wisdom  of 
love — the  daylight  softened  ;  and  a  heart  beats  in  the  universe  which  throbs  to  its 
remotest  and  minutest  fibre  ;  for  '*  in  Him  is  life,  and  the  life  is  the  light  of  men." 
(4)  If  we  think  of  heaven  in  its  unity  of  fellowship,  it  is  in  Him  that  it  is  maintained 
and  felt.  "  That  they  all  may  be  one,  as  Thou,  Father,  art  in  Me,"  &o.  (5)  And  if 
we  think  of  a  Father  in  heaven,  it  is  Christ  who  has  revealed  Him.  "  No  man  hath 
seen  God  at  any  time,"  &o.  (6)  But  beyond  all  this,  it  is  Christ's  Father's  house 
because  He  alone  is  the  way  and  the  door  to  it.  (J.  Ker,  D.D.)  Home  in 
heaven : — I.  A  desceiption  of  heaven.  1.  A  house,  not  a  tent,  put  up  to-day,  and 
taken  down  to  morrow  ;  but  the  home  we  come  to  at  the  end  of  all  our  travels ; 
fitted  up  for  rest,  security  and  enjoyment.  2.  God's  own  house.  Not  merely  the 
place  where  His  people  are  to  dwell,  but  the  place  where  He  Himself  dwells,  and 
enjoys  His  unutterable  happiness  and  rest.  It  is  not  simply,  "  the  kingdom  " — it 
is  "  the  palace  of  the  great  King."  What,  therefore,  we  may  ask,  may  we  not  expect 
in  heaven  ?  We  do  not  go  there  as  strangers  or  foreigners  ;  we  go  to  the  richest 
house  in  the  universe  as  the  children  of  the  owner  of  it.  The  very  best  things  it  can 
afford  will  be  ours.  The  astonished  prodigal  had  the  best  provisions,  and  the  best 
robe,  brought  forth  for  him,  when  he  got  home.  3.  A  house  with  "  many 
mansions  "  in  it,  large,  spacious,  having  many  rooms,  fitted  up  for  the  reception  of 
many  guests.  II.  An  assubance  of  its  tbuih.  1.  Here  is  greatness.  He  speaks  of 
heaven  as  none  other :  like  One  who  had  been  familiar  with  it.  2.  Here,  too,  is  His 
love  ;  ••  If  it  were  not  so,  He  would  have  told  them."  They  had  left  all  to  follow 
Him,  with  some  earthly  expectations,  perhaps,  but  yet  chiefly  in  the  expectation  of 
a  future  recompense.  III.  The  end  of  oue  Lobd's  depabtube  to  the  heaven  Hh 
HAS  BEEN  DEScBiBiKO.  And  here  is  love  again.  Had  we  been  asked  what  He  was 
going  to  heaven  for,  we  should  have  said — To  get  away  from  this  evil  world ;  to 
enter  into  His  joy,  &c.  But  He  says,  No  ;  "I  go  there  to  prepare  a  place  for  you." 
He  left  His  Father's  house  for  us ;  He  now  returns  to  it  for  us.  By  this  we  must 
understand,  not  His  creating  heaven  for  us,  or  enlarging  or  adorning  it,  but 
removing  out  of  the  way  all  things  which  would  prevent  our  entering  into  it.  He 
goes  there  to  prove  our  title  to  it ;  to  show,  in  His  wounded  hands  and  pierced 
side,  that  He  has  paid  for  us  its  stipulated  price.  He  goes  to  claim  it  on  oi>- 
behalf ;  to  take  possession  of  it  in  our  name  and  stead.  Hence  He  is  said  to  have 
entered  it  as  our  Forerunner.     IV.  The  way  in  which  Chbist  will  put  vb  ik 

POSSESSION  OF   THE  HEAVEN   He  HAS  PREPAEED  FOB  US.       "  He  wiU  SCUd  death  tO  OS," 

you  may  say,  " to  s^nmmon  us  to  His  kingdom."  No  :  "I  will  come  again,  and 
receive  you  unto  Myself,  that  where  I  am,  there  ye  may  be  also."  It  does  not 
satisfy  Him  to  snatch  us  from  destruction,  to  open  heaven  for  ns,  to  bring  us  into 
the  way  to  it,  to  make  us  meet  for  it ;  He  will  come  Himself,  and  take  ns  to  it. 
And  when  we  are  there,  He  will  not  say — •'  There  is  the  door  of  My  Father's  house 
open  for  you  ;  you  may  now  enter  in  ;  "  He  will  not  leave  angels  to  welcome  us,  or 
our  holy  ministers  and  friends,  who  have  gone  before,  to  receive  us ;  He  Himself 
will  come  like  a  parent  to  his  door  to  receive  there  his  long  expected  and  beloved 
child.  He  seems  to  regard  this  as  the  very  summit  of  the  heavenly  happiness. 
And  so  every  real  believer  feels  that  nothing  higher  can  be  promised  him,  than 
that  he  should  "be  ever  with  his  Lord."  (C.  Bradley,  M.A.)  Heaven  th$ 
Christian's  home : — It  is  impossible  wholly  to  estimate  the  value  of  the  gospel.  It  is 
not  only  that  it  brings  the  knowledge  of  salvation  to  us;  but  it  makes  revelations 
that  no  other  book  on  earth  ever  made  with  reference  to  a  future  state  of  existence. 
I.  You  find  in  the  text,  then,  first,  the  idea  of  comfobt.  Yon  will  remark  that  it 
was  Christ's  intention,  by  this  description  of  heaven,  to  administer  comfort  to  the 
disciples.  Then  mark  the  consolations  of  religion,  and  the  consolatory  hope  of 
heaven,  belong  to  a  certain  class — to  those  that  believe  in  God  and  believe  also  in 
Christ.  But  now,  what  is  the  comfort  that  the  idea  of  a  father's  house,  or  home, 
«oDveys  to  the  mind  ?    First  of  all,  Christ  speaks  of  His  Father's  house,  and  there> 


478  .  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap.  xiv. 

(ore  we  call  it  oar  Father's  house — just  because  he  says,  "  My  Father  and  you* 
Father,  my  God  and  your  God."  Of  all  the  ideas  of  comfort  that  we  can  form, 
♦•  home  "  conveys  the  sweetest.  1.  Now  the  first  thing  that  strikes  us  here  is  a 
wonder  certainly — but  it  is  the  truth — that  we  shall  feel  perfectly  at  home  in  out 
Father's  house.  When  we  think  of  our  own  weakness  and  sinfulness  here,  and 
then  think  of  the  glory  of  God,  the  glory  of  Christ,  the  glory  of  angels,  and  the  glory 
of  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect,  it  requires  no  slight  effort  of  mind  to  fancy 
that  we  shall  be  at  home  there  :  but  we  shall.  2.  To  constitute  a  home  there  must 
be  familiarity  and  confidence.  We  can  talk  with  the  folks  at  home  with  a  con- 
fidence that  we  cannot  use  towards  strangers.  Now  imagine  yourself  in  familiar 
conversation,  in  love,  with  patriarchs,  and  with  prophets,  and  with  Christ  Himself — 
for  He  will  be  there.  It  requires  an  elevation  of  faith  and  confidence,  and  spiritu- 
ality of  mind.  3.  But,  of  course,  this  supposes  another  thing  with  regard  to  home 
— that  it  is  all  love  there.  Here  we  are  strangers — it  may  be,  perhaps,  surrounded 
by  enemies  ;  there  all  is  love.  Evil  tempers,  crabbed  dispositions,  restless  fretful- 
ness,  that  even  some  good  men  manifest,  will  not  be  there.  There  will  be  perfect 
love  ;  and  every  one  will  wear  a  cheerful  countenance  ;  and  it  will  be  a  glorious 
home.  Well,  that  is  what  you  are  to  think  about ;  that  is  what  it  will  be.  Don't 
let  your  hearts  be  troubled.  If  troubles  come,  think  of  your  home,  as  a  stranger  does 
who  has  long  journeyed,  and  not  had  a  very  comfortable  berth  to  rest  in  at  night. 
II.  In  the  second  place,  we  have  the  idea  of  permanence.  There  is  a  permanence 
about  heaven  that  we  can  well  understand,  if  we  canuot  fully  comprehend.  1.  The 
first  thing  is  this,  that  when  we  get  there  nobody  can  turn  us  out  again.  2.  Then 
you  will  further  observe,  that  as  to  this  permanence,  there  will  be  ample  sources  of 
joy  for  us  throughout  eternity.  III.  The  third  idea  in  our  text  is  pbeparation. 
Observe  it  is  prepared  for  us,  and  the  preparation  is  made  by  Christ  Himself.  And 
you  will  notice  that  preparation  made  for  us  testifies  to  the  kindness  and  love  of 
Him  who  prepares  it.  1.  Now  whilst  this  shows  the  love  of  Christ  to  His  people, 
the  Bimple  fact  of  His  going  to  prepare  a  place  for  us  you  see  involves  too  His 
knowledge  of  our  love  to  Him.  It  is  really  as  though  He  had  said,  "  Heaven  won't 
be  a  complete  home  to  Me  till  you  are  there,  and  I  am  sure  it  will  not  be  to  you  till  I 
am  there ;  we  must  be  together."  2.  But,  moreover,  this  preparation  shows  the 
adaptation  of  our  present  state  to  that  home  that  He  is  gone  to  prepare  for  us. 
"He  that  hath  wrought  us  for  the  self-same  thing  is  God,  who  hath  also  given  us 
the  earnest  of  the  Spirit."  IV.  But  in  the  next  place  we  have  the  idea  of  beception. 
"  I  will  come  again  and  receive  you  unto  Myself,  that  where  I  am  there  ye  may  be 
alpo."  You  immediately  catch  the  idea  of  home  here.  The  reception  one  will  meet 
with  from  wife  and  children  is  one  of  the  delightful  anticipations  of  returning  home. 
The  moment  the  spirit  is  out  of  the  body  the  first  object  on  which  it  will  fix  its  sight 
is  Christ,  with  smiles  on  His  face  and  glory  on  His  br^  w.  For,  mark  you,  Christ 
would  not  trust  the  safety  of  one  of  His  redeemed  spirits  in  the  hands  of  all  the 
angels  of  heaven.  He  will  be  there  Himself  to  take  care  of  it.  We  do  not  know  what 
death  is :  He  does.  Observe,  there  is  a  twofold  reception  which  Christ  will  give  us — 
first,  that  which  we  may  call  our  personal  reception  in  heaven  ;  and  next  that 
public,  glorious  reception  that  He  will  give  us  at  the  last  great  day,  when  He  shall 
come  a  second  time  withuut  sin  unto  salvation.  V.  Now,  in  the  last  place,  here  is 
ceetaintt.  "  If  it  were  not  so,  I  would  have  told  you."  1.  Christ  is  already  there  in 
possession.  2.  Next,  Christ  says  He  would  have  told  us  if  there  had  been  no 
heaven.  Further,  our  bopes  of  heaven  should  guard  us  against  two  evils  that 
we  are  subject  to.  The  first  is  that  which  Christ  has  set  before  you.  Don't 
be  unduly  troubled  about  earthly  things.  Then,  on  the  other  hand,  do  not 
be  too  delighted  with  earthly  things.  (J,  Carter.)  Heaven — home  : — Some 
one  asked  a  Scotchman  if  he  was  on  his  way  to  heaven.  "  Why,  man," 
he  said,  *♦  I  hve  there."  He  was  only  a  pilgrim  here.  Heaven  was 
his  home.  {D.  L.  Moody.)  Heaven — home  : — Death  came  unexpectedly  to  a 
man  of  wealth,  as  it  almost  always  does  -,  and  he  sent  out  for  his  lawyer  to  draw 
his  will.  He  went  on  willing  away  his  property ;  and  when  he  came  to  his  wife 
and  child,  he  said  he  wanted  his  wife  and  child  to  have  the  home.  The  little 
child  didn't  understand  what  death  was.  She  was  standing  near,  and  she  said, 
" Papa,  have  you  got  a  home  in  that  land  you  are  going  to?  "  The  arrow  reached 
that  heart ;  but  it  was  too  late.  He  saw  his  mistake.  He  had  got  no  home  beyond 
the  grave.  Heaven — home  : — "  H.  me  " — oh,  how  sweet  is  that  word  I  What 
beautiful  and  tender  associations  cluster  thick  around  it  I  Compared  with  it,  house, 
mansion,  palace,  are  cold,  heartless  terms.    But  "  home  I "  that  word  quickens  the 


CHAP,  xiy.)  fir.  JOHN.  47f 

pulse,  warms  the  heart,  stirs  the  soul  to  its  depths,  makes  age  feel  young  again, 
rouses  apathy  into  energy,  sustains  the  sailor  in  his  midnight  watch,  inspires  the 
soldier  with  courage  on  the  field  of  battle,  and  imparts  patient  endurance  to  the 
worn-down  sons  of  toil.  The  thought  of  it  has  proved  a  sevenfold  shield  to  virtue : 
the  very  name  of  it  has  been  a  spell  to  call  back  the  wanderer  from  the  paths  of 
Tice.  And  far  away,  where  myrtles  bloom  and  palm-trees  wave,  and  the  ocean 
sleeps  upon  coral  strands,  to  the  exile's  fond  fancy  it  clothes  the  naked  rock,  or 
stormy  shore,  or  barren  moor,  or  wild  highland  mountain,  with  charms  he  weeps 
to  think  of,  and  longs  once  more  to  see.  Grace  sanctifies  these  lovely  affections, 
and  imparts  a  sacredness  to  the  homes  of  earth  by  making  them  types  of  heaven. 
As  a  home  the  believer  delights  to  think  of  it.  Thus,  when  lately  bending  over  a 
dying  saint,  and  expressing  our  sorrow  to  see  him  lay  so  low,  with  the  radiant 
countenance  rather  of  one  who  had  just  left  heaven  than  of  one  about  to  enter  it, 
he  raised  and  clasped  his  hands,  and  exclaimed  in  ecstasy,  "  I  am  going  home." 
(T.  Guthrie.)  Heaven,  our  home  : — In  our  last  dreadful  war  the  Federals  and 
the  Confederates  were  encamped  on  opposite  sides  of  the  Rappahannock,  and  one 
morning  the  brass  band  of  the  Northern  troops  played  the  national  air,  and  all  the 
Northern  troops  cheered  and  cheered.  Then,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  Rappa- 
hannock, the  brass  band  of  the  Confederates  played  "My  Maryland"  and  "  Dixie," 
and  then  all  the  Southern  troops  cheered  and  cheered.  But  after  a  while  one  of 
the  bands  struck  up  "  Home,  Sweet  Home,"  and  the  band  on  the  opposite  side  of 
the  river  took  up  the  strain,  and  when  the  tune  was  done  the  Confederates  and  the 
Federals  all  together  united,  as  the  tears  rolled  down  their  cheeks,  in  one  great 
"  Huzza  I  huzza  1  "  Well,  my  friends,  heaven  comes  very  near  to-day.  It  is  only 
a  stream  that  divides  us — the  narrow  stream  of  death  ;  and  the  voices  there  and 
the  voices  here  seem  to  commingle,  and  we  join  trumpets  and  hosannahs  and 
hallelujahs,  and  the  chorus  of  the  united  song  of  earth  and  heaven  is,  "  Home, 
Sweet  Home."  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  A  good  home  to  go  to  : — Mr,  Mead, 
an  aged  Christian,  when  asked  how  he  did,  answered,  "  I  am  going  home  as  fast  as 
I  can,  as  eVery  honest  man  ought  to  do  when  his  day's  work  is  over,  and  I  bless 
God  I  have  a  good  home  to  go  to."  Nearing  home : — It  was  stormy  from  shore  to 
shore,  without  a  single  fair  day.  But  the  place  to  which  we  were  going  was  my 
home ;  there  was  my  family ;  there  was  my  church  ;  there  were  my  friends,  who 
were  as  dear  to  me  as  my  own  life.  And  I  lay  perfectly  happy  in  the  midst  of 
sickness  and  nausea.  All  that  the  boat  could  do  to  me  could  not  keep  down  the 
exultation  and  joy  which  rose  up  in  me.  For  every  single  hour  was  carrying  me 
nearer  and  nearer  to  the  spot  where  was  all  that  I  loved  in  the  world.  It  was 
deep,  dark  midnight  when  we  ran  into  Halifax.  I  could  see  nothing.  Yet  the 
moment  we  came  into  stiU  water  I  rose  from  my  berth  and  got  up  on  deck.  And 
as  I  sat  near  the  smoke-stack  while  they  were  unloading  the  cargo,  upon  the  wharf 
I  saw  the  shadow  of  a  person,  apparently,  going  backward  and  forward  near  me. 
At  last  the  thought  occurred  to  me,  "Am  I  watched?"  Just  then  the  person 
addressed  me,  saying,  "  Is  this  Mr.  Beecher  ?  "  "  It  is,"  I  replied.  "  I  have  a 
telegram  for  you  from  your  wife."  I  had  not  realized  that  I  had  struck  the 
continent  where  my  family  were.  There,  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  and  in  dark- 
ness, the  intelligence  that  I  had  a  telegram  from  home — I  cannot  tell  you  what  a 
thrill  it  sent  through  me  I  We'  are  all  sailing  home ;  and  by  and  by,  when  we  are 
not  thinking  of  it,  some  shadd^y  thing  (men  call  it  death),  at  midnight,  will  pass 
by,  and  will  call  us  by  name,  and  will  say,  "  I  have  a  message  for  you  from  home; 
God  waits  for  you."  Are  they  worthy  of  anything  but  pity  who  are  not  able  to 
bear  the  hardships  of  the  voyage  ?  It  will  not  be  long  before  you,  and  I,  and  every 
one  of  us  will  hear  the  messenger  sent  to  bring  us  back  to  heaven.  It  is  pleasant 
to  me  to  think  that  we  are  wanted  there,  I  am  thankful  to  think  that  God  loves 
in  such  a  way  that  He  yearns  for  me — yes,  a  great  deal  more  than  I  do  for  Him. 
(H.  W.  Beecher.)  Diverted  from  thoughts  of  home: — Why  do  we  not  go  home? 
Why  are  we  like  a  silly  child,  that  when  his  father  sends  him  forth,  and  bids  him 
hie  him  home  again,  every  flower  that  he  meets  with  in  the  field,  every  sign  he 
sees  in  the  street,  every  companion  that  meets  him  in  the  way,  stops  him,  and 
hinders  him  from  repairing  to  his  father  1  So  it  is  with  ns  for  the  most  part : 
every  trifle,  every  profit,  every  bauble,  every  matter  of  pleasure,  every  delight,  is 
enough  to  divert  and  turn  aside  our  thoughts  from  death,  from  home,  from  heaven, 
from  our  God ;  and  we  are  taken  up  and  lose  ourselves,  I  know  not  where.  (R, 
Sibhen,  D.D.)  Heaven: — I,  The  cniveksal  heaven  of  the  good — "Father's 
house."    It  is  a  scene  of — 1.  Family  life.    It  is  the  "  Father's  house."    (1)  It  is 


480  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  »?. 

a  large  family.  "An  innumerable  company  of  angels,"  "thrones,  principalities," 
&c.  (2)  A  holy  family.  All  are  pure,  free  from  selfishness,  from  error  and  Bin. 
(3)  A  harmonious  family.  Though  mixed  and  of  vast  gradations  the.v  are  aU 
imited  in  thought,  sympathy,  and  aim.  (4)  An  undying  family.  (5)  An  ever- 
increasing  family.  2.  Undoubted  reality.  "  If  it  were  not  so,  1  would  have  told 
you."  li  is  no  poet's  dream,  no  fictitious  realm.  (1)  He  is  too  intelligent  to  be 
mistaten.  He  knows  every  part  of  the  universe.  (2)  He  is  too  truthful  to  mis- 
represent. In  Him  there  is  no  motive  to  deceive.  (3)  He  is  too  kind  to  delude^ 
II.  The  special  heaven  of  Chbist's  disciples.  "  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  tor 
you."    ( D.  Thomas,  D.D.)        The  holy  habitation  of  heaven : — I.  Heaven  is  thb 

HOUSE   OF   OTJB   FaTHBB,  AND   UNITES  ALL  THE   ASSOCIATIONS  OF  FILIAL   HAPPINESS  AND 

BEVEBENT  DEVOTION.  The  relationship  of  family  is  supposed  by  the  scheme  of  our 
redemption.  Sin  is  alienating  ;  but  we  are  made  nigh  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  and 
our  consequent  fellowship  is  with  the  Father  and  His  Son  Jesus  Christ.  A  chil/d- 
like  title  and  a  child -like  temper  are  the  results:  "  Now  are  we  the  sons  of  God," 
and  home  is  the  abode  of  children.  Touching  are  the  thoughts  of  home :  what  is 
the  home  of  heaven  ?  1.  Quiet  and  repose.  We  are  wanderers  on  earth.  "  With- 
out are  fightings,  within  are  fears."  But  soon  shall  we  toil  no  more.  The  days  of 
our  mourning  shall  be  ended.  We  shall  come  to  our  Father's  house  in  peace. 
2.  Confidence.  Look  at  the  home-born  child.  When  danger  threatens,  home  is 
the  bulwark:  when  affliction  weeps,  this  is  the  asylum.  It  is  this  assuredness 
which  is  the  secret  of  all  earthly  satisfaction  and  peace.  Yet  is  it  not  always  to 
be  cherished,  it  may  not  be  invariably  justified.  Suspicion  coils  like  a  serpent 
about  each  flower  of  existence ;  or,  like  a  lurking  poison,  taints  all  its  springs. 
But  with  what  strictest  security  does  all  the  happiness  of  heaven  rise  on  our  view  1 
Nothing  maketh  a  lie.  .  Thieves  do  not  break  through  and  steal.  There  is  no 
more  death.  3.  Concord.  Nevertheless  a  house  may  be  divided  against  itself. 
But  the  inhabitants  of  tiiat  house  are  "  made  perfect  in  one."  They  have  one 
heart.  They  see  eye  to  eye.  If  we  too  much  forget  to  ask  each  other  while  here 
below,  "  Have  we  not  all  one  Father  ? " — the  remembrance  of  that  truth  will  ever 
be  vivid  and  efficacious  in  our  "  Father's  house."  4.  Sympathy.  5.  Improvement. 
This  is  the  true  sphere  of  education.  But  during  our  moral  state,  however  matured 
our  powers  and  enlarged  our  attainments,  we  "  speak  as  a  child,"  <fec.  In  heaven 
we  "  shall  put  away  childish  things."  In  that  hght  we  shall  see  light.  6.  Content 
and  happiness.  7.  But  it  is  not  only  our  Father's  house  in  the  associations  of  a 
home,  it  is  the  consecrated  receptacle  of  His  worship.  And  these  ideas  are  not 
incompatible.  For,  to  the  Christian's  perception  and  taste,  what  can  make  heaven 
more  delightful,  in  addition  to  its  illustration  as  a  home,  than  that  this  home  shall 
be  devoted,  witii  the  family  which  fills  it,  to  the  high  praises  of  our  Father  in 
heaven?  The  votary  is  the  child!  The  child  is  the  votary!  Pilgrim  never 
touched  more  reverently  the  dreadful  shrine :  son  never  more  joyously  bounded 
upon  the  paternal  threshold.  With  this  double  intention,  of  resting  in  a  home 
and  of  ministering  in  a  sanctuary,  he  exclaims :  '*  I  will  dweU  in  the  house  of  the 
Lord  for  ever."  II.  In  this  house  of  home  and  temple  thbbb  abb  many  mansions. 
And  thus  are  we  taught  that  the  greatest  amplitude  consists  with  the  strictest 
urity,  that  though  the  mansions  are  numerous  the  house  is  one.  And  thus,  also, 
'we  learn  that  there  is  no  monotony  in  that  blessed  state.  There  is  order  in  the 
harmony  of  difference,  and  the  distribution  of  the  mansions  completes  the  identity 
of  the  house.  Meditating,  then,  on  this  multiform  glory,  what  do  we  ascertain 
of  the  blessed  immortals?  1.  The  immensity  of  their  number.  Heaven  once 
suffered  a  vast  depopulation.  The  influence  of  the  catastrophe  we  cannot  deter- 
mine. There  was  a  strange  vacancy  amidst  those  groves :  untrodden  paths  and 
nngathered  fruits.  But  that  heaven  might  not  always  remain  thus  diminished,  it 
'was  arranged  that  beings  who  had  themselves  lapsed,  and  whom  a  most  stupendous 
salvation  should  rescue  from  all  their  guilt  and  rebelliousness  and  ruin,  should 
constitute  an  incomputable  augmentation  over  the  deficiency  and  loss.  There  was 
a  wonder  in  heaven.  Meek  and  humble,  there  bent  before  the  Divine  Majesty  a 
■oUtary  human  spirit.  It  sung,  but  it  was  a  lonely  song.  It  gazed,  but  its  eye 
rested  upon  nothing  like  itself.  Up  from  this  world  another  and  another  sprung. 
He  the  solitary  was  set  in  a  family.  The  question  of  preponderance,  in  the 
number  of  the  saved  over  that  of  the  lost,  might  now  be  properly  argued.  (1)  The 
proportion  of  infant  death,  the  certainty  of  infant  salvation,  furnish  us  with  most 
pleasant  grounds  on  which  to  rest  the  argument.  (2)  The  design  of  punishment 
'flomprehendB  warning,  and  we  may  presume  without  irreverence,  this  purpose 


OHAF.  xrr.]  8T.  JOHN.  481 

being  revealed,  that  the  good  of  the  majority  is  sought,  and  that  they  who  perish 
form  a  very  inferior  proportion  to  those  who  are  saved.  (3)  There  are  certain 
implications  concerning  these  ratios  which  we  cannot  overlook.  Sometimes  they 
are  eqaaL  "  Five  of  them  were  wise  and  five  were  foolish."  In  other  instances 
there  ia  an  encouraging  difference.  Two  of  the  servants,  among  three,  are  "  good 
and  faithful :  "  the  third  alone  is  "wicked  and  unprofitable."  Still  higher  is  placed 
that  relative  state :  "  the  wedding  is  furnished  with  guests,"  all  duly  apparelled 
and  royally  approved,  and  only  one  is  without  the  qualifying  badge.  (4)  Chris- 
tianity, as  the  reign  of  grace,  asserts  its  purpose  and  pledges  its  supremacy. 
"  Where  sin  abounded,  grace  did  much  more  abound."  Shall  sin  predominate  and 
proclaim  more  victims  than  this  grace  can  enumerate  subjects?  (5)  Models  of 
prayer  are  instituted  for  us.  "Let  all  the  people  praise  Thee."  "Thy  will  be 
done  on  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven."  These  anticipations  are,  then,  assured  possi- 
bilities: we  are  taught  to  seek  them  with  believing  expectation.  (6)  A  glorioua 
sequel  to  our  earth's  dark  history  is  foretold.  "  The  kingdoms  of  this  world  are 
become  the  kingdoms  of  our  God  and  of  His  Christ."  2.  The  inequality  of  their 
glory.  Where  there  are  rewards,  there  must  be  differences.  They  suppose  adapta- 
tion and  adjustment  to  every  form  and  habit  of  excellence.  "  He  which  soweth 
sparingly  shall  reap  also  sparingly,"  &o.  This  man  has  been  like  a  continued 
sigh  and  aspiration  and  panting  after  holiness.  That  man,  truly  sincere,  has 
pursued  a  far  less  devoted  course.  These  could  not  enjoy  the  same  portion.  Nor 
ia  there  a  supposeable  alternative,  save  that  all  were  forcibly,  mechanically,  con- 
formed to  one  standard.  There  would  be,  then,  a  necessity  to  lower  as  well  as  to 
raise,  to  repress  as  well  as  to  expand.  The  first  process  would  be  unjust,  however 
the  second  might  be  gracious.  The  speed  of  a  zealous  hfe  would  give  no  advantage 
in  the  immortal  race.  Yet  if  these  inequalities  exist,  some  think  they  must 
engender  envy.  Is  it  necessarily  thus  even  in  this  imperfect  state  of  ours? 
Charity  envieth  not,  &a.  In  heaven  nothing  is  loved  but  holiness,  and  the  highest 
holiness  is  loved  the  most.  3.  The  diversity  of  their  character.  The  modifications 
of  the  regenerated  soul  are  not  fewer  and  less  notable  than  those  of  the  soul  un- 
renewed. And  who  does  not  rejoice  in  this  difference  of  mental  powers  and  habits, 
this  diversity  of  gifts  and  graces,  during  the  earthly  exhibition?  In  heaven  our 
nature  has  not  perished :  our  being  is  only  fulfilled.  All  of  it  is  brought  out  and 
glorified.  What  pleasure  to  search  through  these  "  many  mansions  "  and  to  find 
every  form  of  worth  and  might,  every  species  of  intellectual  activity  and  spiritual 
perfection,  all  endlessly,  as  actually,  vaiiegated,  multiplied,  and  combined  I  4. 
The  transition  of  their  employment.  One  investigation,  uncheckered  and  unre- 
lieved, strains  the  mind.  One  enjoyment,  unvaried,  and  undiverted,  cloys.  The 
glorified  spirit  may,  therefore,  not  only  find  its  mansion,  but  be  free  of  the  many 
mansions.  Thus  may  it  renew  its  youth  and  recreate  its  Immortality.  Now  shall 
it  offer  praise.  It  bends  in  adoring  contemplation.  It  sees  the  King  in  His  beauty. 
It  exercises  itself  in  the  research  of  wonder  and  mystery.  It  cultivates  communion 
with  aU  other  heavenly  spirits.  What  may  not  angels,  who  have  ministered  to  the 
heirs  of  salvation,  tell  of  their  knowledge  and  their  experience  ?  What  saints  are 
there,  smd  we  shall  recognize  them.  And  are  we  not  then  to  be  still  more  filled 
with  the  love  of  God,  more  delineated  with  the  image  of  Christ,  more  imbued  with 
love  for  all  saints?  and  then  each  effort  brings  its  repose.  "  They  rest  not,"  and 
in  that  ceaselessness  of  activity  is  their  rest.  5.  The  regularity  of  their  arrange- 
ment. In  this  "great  house,"  every  "  vessel,"  all  "sanctified  and  meet  for  the 
Master's  use,"  has  its  valuation  and  its  function.  There  is  the  mansion — (1)  Of 
the  patriarchs,  their  thoughts  still  full  of  sacrifice.  (2)  Of  the  prophets,  singing 
■till  as  in  their  choir  1  (3)  Of  the  apostles,  pointing  still  to  the  atoning  Lamb  1 
(4)  Of  the  martyrs,  as  new  baptised  from  the  flames  1  (5)  Of  faithful  ministers, 
discriminating  among  the  throng  those  who  are  their  glory  and  their  crown  I 
(6)  Of  pious  parents,  their  solicitudes  fulfilled  and  their  prayers  answered  in  the 
conversion  of  their  offspring  1  (7)  Of  self-sacrificing  missionaries,  as  on  set 
thrones,  surrounded  by  their  converts.  "Yet  there  is  room."  But  there  is  in 
these  orders  nothing  repulsive,  arrogant,  or  humihating ;  all  is  one ;  one  happy 
family  I  6.  The  series  of  their  progression.  The  tendencies  and  yearnings  of  th» 
human  mind  are  towards  an  indefinite  life  and  advancement.  These  keep  us  rest- 
less and  dissatisfied  while  we  are  in  our  sins  :  these  excite  us  to  follow  on  to  know 
the  Lord,  when  we  receive  the  grace  of  God.  If  there  was  a  point  in  our  existence 
beyond  which  we  could  learn  nothing  further  and  enjoy  nothing  more,  that  would 
be  the  limit  of  well-being.     Our  misery,  instead  of   bemg  lessened  by  what 

TOL.    U.  81 


482  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xit. 

we  had  acquired,  would  be  unspeakably  aggravated.  It  would  be  like  an 
ascent  to  some  everlasting  hill  to  gaze  for  first  and  for  last  our  full  of  the 
glorious  land,  not  then  to  die  amidst  the  rapture,  but  to  be  doomed  to  life 
beneath  the  sudden  fall  of  an  endless  night.  The  stretch  for  these  progres- 
sions  is  the  duration  of  eternity  1  {R.  W.  Hamilton,  D.D.)  Variety  in 
heaven : — A  mother  was  standing  by  the  dying  bed  of  her  little  child.  She 
tried  to  lead  the  child's  thoughts  to  heaven,  and  told  her  of  how  the  city  waa 
of  pure  gold,  of  dazzling  brightness.  But  the  little  one  shuddered,  and  cried  that 
the  light  would  hurt  her  eyes.  Then  the  mother  told  her  of  the  choirs  of  angels, 
and  the  songs  before  the  throne,  and  the  child  answered  that  the  noise  would  make 
her  head  ache.  At  last  the  mother  took  the  moaning  child  to  her  breast,  and  as 
she  nestled  there,  she  said,  '•!!  heaven  is  like  this,  I  am  ready  to  go  there."  For 
some  there  will  be  an  existence  of  dazzling  brightness,  an  existence  full  of 
grandeur  and  glory,  like  the  sound  of  a  mighty  anthem ;  others,  those  who  loved 
much,  shall  find,  hke  St.  John,  their  greatest  joy  in  resting  on  the  bosom  of  their 
Lord.  (H.  J.  W.  Buxton,  M.A.)  Recognition  in  heaven : — Not  long  ago  I  stood 
by  the  death-bed  of  a  little  girL  Every  fibre  of  her  body  and  soul  recoUed  from  the 
thought  of  death.  '•  Don't  let  me  die,"  she  said ;  "  don't  let  me  die.  Hold  me 
fast.  Oh,  I  can't  go."  "Jenny,"  I  said,  "you  have  two  brothers  in  the  other 
world,  and  there  are  thousands  of  tender-hearted  people  over  there  who  will  love 
you  and  take  care  of  you."  But  she  cried  out  again  despairingly,  "Don't  let  me 
go ;  they  are  strangers  over  there."  But  even  as  she  was  pleading  her  little  hands 
relaxed  their  clinging  hold  from  my  waist  and  lifted  themselves  eagerly  aloft.  Her 
face  was  turned  upwards ;  but  it  was  her  eyes  that  told  the  story.  Thay  were  filled 
with  the  light  of  Divine  recognition.  They  saw  something  plainly  that  we  could 
not  see;  and  they  grew  brighter  and  brighter.  "Mamma,"  she  said,  "mamma, 
they  are  not  strangers ;  I'm  not  afraid."  Her  form  relapsed  upon  the  pillowg, 
and  she  was  gone.  {Helen  Williams.)  Not  dead,  but  gone  home : — We  lament 
for  the  dead,  because  we  ourselves  dread  death.  The  physical  instinct,  wisely  given 
for  the  preservation  of  life,  is  controlled  but  not  destroyed  by  faith.  Afidicted 
believers,  your  sorrows  are  only  the  discomforts  of  a  journey,  each  stage  of  which, 
however  rough  the  road  and  wild  the  weather,  brings  you  nearer  home.  The  dark- 
ness is  only  that  of  the  tunnel  through  which  you  are  hurrying,  and  the  speck  of 
light  at  the  end  is  nearing  and  brightening  as  you  speed  onward  to  the  eternal 
sunshine.  Our  Lord  speaks  of  heaven  as  home — "  My  Father's  house ."  What  a 
contrast  to  the  gorgeous  imagery  employed  by  servants  is  this  sublimely  simple 
familiarity  of  the  Son  1  Inspired  men  are  overawed  by  the  distant  vision  of  the 
celestial  city,  with  its  pearly  gates  and  streets  of  gold ;  as  if  a  poor  cottager,  after 
visiting  a  royal  palace,  tried  to  describe  the  unimagined  splendours  of  a  place 
which  members  of  the  royal  family  simply  knew  as  home.  This  was  in  harmony 
with  His  high  claims  of  Deity  !  The  (hsciplea  were  not  to  be  troubled  on  His 
account.  Although  betrayed,  condemned,  crucified.  He  was  going  home.  They 
were  not  to  be  troubled  for  Him ;  and  because  of  their  intimate  union  with  Him, 
they  were  not  to  be  troubled  for  themselves.  If  heaven  is  Christ's  home,  it  is  ours 
also.  We  are  "joint  heirs  with  Jesus  Christ."  What  hallowed  associations  are 
suggested  by  the  word  1  Love  makes  home.  1.  Home  promises  rest.  There  the 
wearied  limbs  or  wearied  brain  repose  after  the  day's  toil.  "  Blessed  are  the  dead 
that  die  in  the  Lord ;  they  rest  from  their  labours."  2.  Home  suggests  fidelity. 
We  may  suspect  deceit  and  treachery  outside,  but  we  can  cast  off  all  reserve,  all 
distrust  at  home.  3.  Home  suggests  sympathy.  There  may  be  enmity  outside, 
avowed  or  concealed,  and  even  friends  may  sometimes  prove  forgetful,  selfish,  and 
unkind ;  but  true  home  is  the  palace  of  love,  "  where  hearts  are  of  each  other 
sure."  But  the  purest  of  earthly  homes  are  but  faint  types  of  that  above.  There 
every  heart  is  wholly  true  to  every  other,  being  wholly  true  to  God.  4.  It  is  a  per- 
manent home ;  mansions,  not  movable  tents,  but  an  enduring  habitation.  "  We 
know  that  when  this  earthly  tabernacle  is  dissolved  we  have  a  building  of  Ood." 
How  unlike  the  uncertainty  of  earthly  things  1  The  lake,  reflecting  from  its  un- 
ruified  surface  the  sky  and  stars,  may,  in  one  short  bour,  be  wild  with  storms.  The 
stream,  which  oft  refreshed  us,  suddenly  becomes  dry.  The  fairest  flowers  droop 
even  as  we  gaze  on  them.  The  loveliest  homes  are  quickly  broken  up.  No  locks 
and  bolts  can  shut  out  sickness  and  death.  6.  And  there  is  abundance  of  supply. 
There  are  "  many  mansions."  The  Father's  house  is  large  enough  for  all  Hia 
hildren  — vast  as  His  own  heart.  6.  Number  implies  variety.  The  mansions  are 
Dot  oniform,  though  all  are  perfect.     They  are  prepared  for  dwellers  of  varied 


CHIP.  XIV.]  8T.  JOHN.  483 

capacity — for  children  and  yoang  men,  for  babes  in  Christ  and  for  those  of  full 
age.  7.  These  hopes  are  not  visionary.  "  If  it  were  not  so,  I  would  have  told 
you."  The  disciples  had  forsaken  all  to  follow  Him.  They  loved  their  Lord,  and 
knew  He  loved  them.  Could  such  love  perish  ?  They  expected  a  kingdom ;  and 
as  it  was  not  to  be  earthly,  it  must  be  heavenly.  Would  Christ  allow  them  to  serve 
Him  as  they  did,  on  false  expectations  ?  He  did  contradict  their  expectation  of  a 
temporal  kingdom — would  He  not  have  contradicted  this  heavenly  hope  had  it 
also  been  unfounded  ?  0  believer,  your  hope  is  no  idle  dream  1  That  city  does  glow 
with  splendour.  "  If  it  were  not  so,  I  would  have  told  you."  St.  Paul  says,  "  We 
are  of  good  courage,  and  are  willing  rather  to  be  absent  from  the  body,  and  to  be 
at  home  with  the  Lord  "  (R.V.).  Death  is  only  the  migration  of  the  soul  from  the 
fleshly  tabernacle  to  the  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens.  We 
\nll  not  weep  for  them  as  dead.  Is  it  death  to  reach  home  after  the  toilsome 
journey,  to  wear  the  crown  after  the  fierce  fight,  to  serve  in  the  presence  of  the 
King,  where  there  is  fulness  of  joy  ?  The  funeral  was  only  that  of  frailty,  sorrow, 
and  sin.  A  Christian  in  that  coffin,  in  that  grave  ?  No  I  he  is  at  home  in  the 
Father's  house.  {N.  Hall.)  Room  for  all  saved  sinners  in  heaven : — There 
was  a  poor  man  who  had  been  a  long  while  burdened  in  spirit.  One  night 
he  dreamed  that  he  stood  at  the  gates  of  heaven,  longing  to  enter;  but  he 
dare  not,  and  could  not,  for  sin  had  shut  him  out.  At  length  he  saw  ap- 
proaching  the  pearly  gates  a  company  of  men  who  came  on  singing,  dressed 
in  white  robes.  So  he  stepped  up  to  one  of  them,  and  said,  «•  Who  are  you  ? " 
And  they  replied,  "  We  are  the  goodly  fellowship  of  the  prophets."  He  eaid, 
"Alas!  I  cannot  enter  with  you."  And  he  watched  them  until  they  had  passed 
the  gates,  and  he  heard  outside  the  voice  of  song  as  they  were  received  with 
welcome.  Cast  down  and  troubled,  he  watched  until  he  saw  another  company 
approach,  and  they  came  with  music  and  rejoicing.  He  said  to  them,  "  Who  are 
you  ?  "  and  they  replied,  "  We  are  the  noble  army  of  martyrs."  He  said,  "  I 
cannot  go  with  you  ;  and  when  he  heard  the  shouts  a  second  time  ascending  from 
within  the  gates,  his  heart  was  heavy  within  him  at  the  thought  that  it  was  not 
possible  for  him  to  enter  there.  Then  came  a  third  company,  and  he  detected  in 
the  van  the  apostles,  and  after  them  there  came  mighty  preachers  and  confessors  of 
the  Word.  He  said  in  his  heart,  "  Alas  I  I  cannot  go  with  you,  for  I  am  no 
preacher,  and  I  have  done  nothing  for  my  Master. "  His  heart  was  ready  to  break, 
for  they  entered  and  were  lost  to  his  sight ;  and  he  heard  the  triumphant  acclama- 
tions  as  the  Master  said,  "  Well  done,  enter  into  the  joy  of  your  Lord."  But  aa 
he  waited,  he  saw  a  greater  company  approaching.  He  marked  in  the  fore-front 
Saul  of  Tarsus,  Mary  Magdalene,  the  thief  that  died  upon  the  cross ;  and  they 
came  streaming  on.  So  he  said  to  one  of  them,  "  Who  are  ye  ?  "  And  they  replied, 
"  We  are  a  company  of  sinners  whom  no  man  can  number,  saved  by  blood,  through 
the  rich,  free,  sovereign  grace  of  God."  Indeed,  all  the  companies  might  have  said 
the  same,  and  the  dream  would  have  been  more  complete.  But  as  this  poor  man, 
with  the  tears  in  his  e.yes,  heard  this  word,  he  said,  "  Thank  God,  I  can  go  with 
you,  for  I  am  a  sinner  like  you,  and  Uke  you  I  will  trust  in  the  merit  of  Him  that 
died  on  Calvary."  So  he  joined  their  ranks,  and  was  about  to  enter,  but  he  said  in 
his  heart,  "  When  we  come  there  shall  be  no  songs ;  they  will  admit  us,  but  it  will 
be  in  silence,  for  we  bring  no  honour  to  God;  we  have  done  nothing  for  Him." 
But  to  his  surprise  the  acclaim  was  louder,  the  music  was  more  melodious,  and  the 
shouts  of  acclamation  were  louder  far,  while  they  said,  **  Here  are  they  who  come 
to  complete  the  number  of  the  host  whom  Jesus  bought  with  blood."  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  The  parting  consolation : — Let  us  consider — I.  Thb  truth  declabed. 
Consider  the  Father's  house — 1.  In  its  majesty  and  greatness.  It  is  the  abode 
of  the  great  King;  where  He  holds  His  court,  surrounded  by  all  the  angels 
and  sons  of  light.  2.  In  the  right  which  our  Lord  here  supposes  we  have  to  it. 
But  how  shah  guilty  and  polluted  man  hope  for  admission  there  ?  His  right  is,  it 
is  Christ's  Father's  house.  We  go  there  by  the  invitation  of  the  Lord  of  glory ;  we 
go  there  by  the  bidding  of  Him  who  is  the  Heir.  "Te  are  Christ's."  "Heirs  of 
God  and  joint-heirs  with  Him."  3.  In  the  vastness  of  its  dimensions.  Christ, 
who  will  "  bring  many  sons  into  glory,"  hath  for  these  sons  many  prepared  and 
furnished  mansions.  Christ's  mansions,  like  Christ's  heart,  will  be  found  to  be  fuU 
and  large,  and  ready  to  embrace  every  humble,  penitent  and  believing  soul.  4.  In 
its  everlastingness.  ".  Hitherto  ye  have  dwelt  in  tabernacles ;  then  ye  shall  enter 
into  the  everlasting  mansions,"  into  "a  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the 
heavens."    5.  In  its  urifaiiing  certainty.    "  If  it  were  not  so,  I  would  have  told 


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xtf, 

you."  II.  The  PUEPOSE  avowed.  To  "prepare  a  place."  Were  not  those  bright 
walls  built  before  the  birth  of  time?  Did  not  the  turrets  of  those  everlasting 
mansions  glitter  before  the  first  sun  rose  upon  the  hills  ?  Yes,  but  these  mansions 
were  prepared  for  men  who  knew  no  sin.  Our  Lord  says,  '•  I  am  going,  so  that  when 
these  seats  are  sprinkled  with  My  sacrificial  blood,  and  when  your  hearts  are 
sprinkled  with  that  blood  too,  He  that  sanctifieth  and  they  that  are  sanctified,  being 
all  one,  may  sit  down  together,  and  I  go  to  keep  possession,  to  preserve  the  place  in 
continual  readiness  for  your  arrival."  III.  The  assurance  given.  •'  I  will  come 
again,"  <feo.  See  how  large  and  full  is  the  love  of  Christ.  After  having  shown  ua 
the  house,  and  opened  the  house,  and  prepared  the  house,  will  He  then  leave  us  to 
ourselves  to  come  afterwards  ?  No ;  He  says — "  I  will  come  and  fetch  you.  Will 
forsake  the  companionship  of  these  immortals  that  now  surround  Me,  •  and  I  will 
come  and  receive  you  unto  Myself.'"  IV.  The  consummation  to  be  attained. 
"  That  where  I  am,  there  ye  may  be  also."  (D.  Moore,  M.A.)  If  it  were  not  so, 
I  would  have  told  you. — Cltrist's  appeal  to  His  disciples'  confidence : — We  are  eager 
for  certainty,  for  reality.  In  the  hour  of  a  bitter  loss  the  heart  refuses  fictitious 
comfort,  for  sorrow  makes  men  wonderfully  real.  I.  Christ  announces  His  know- 
LEDGE  or  the  FACTS.  Thesc  are  remarkable  words  in  many  aspects,  but  particularly 
so  in  that  they  imply  a  full  knowledge  of  the  secrets  of  another  world.  It  was  just 
the  truth  we  should  suppose  a  good,  loving,  tender  God  would  be  anxious  to  make 
known  to  the  myriads  of  His  children  who  were  treading  every  hour  the  sad  path- 
way of  death.  II.  Christ  appeals  to  His  known  character.  He  knew  that 
the  disciples  to  whom  He  spoke  could  not  point  to  any  incident  in  His  intercourse 
with  them  which  would  justify  a  doubt  of  His  perfect  truthfulness.  Further,  Christ 
was  not  only  truthful,  but  He  was  too  good  to  deceive  them.  It  is  possible  for  a  man 
to  be  sternly,  rigidly  true,  and  yet  not  be  good  in  the  large  sense  of  that  word.  We 
have  known  men  who  would  scorn  to  utter  a  lie  or  to  draw  a  false  picture,  but  they 
were  not  kind,  gentle,  compassionate,  sympathizing  men.  III.  Christ  seeks  thb 
CONFIDENCE  OF  His  DISCIPLES.  If  I  spcak  to  any  doubter  who  has  long  struggled  in 
the  midst  of  perplexities,  these  words  are  for  you.  Could  He  deceive  any  80ul» 
however  humble,  on  a  matter  of  such  supreme  importance  ?  {W.  Braden.)  The 
silence  of  Scripture  : — 1.  A  familiar  proverb  says  "  Speech  is  silvern,  but  silence  ia 
golden."  Thoughts  are  often  best  expressed  by  silent  acts  than  words.  A  grasp  of 
the  hand,  a  glance  of  the  eye  may  stir  us  more  than  a  trumpet  peal.  Christ  looked 
at  Peter.  2.  Written  revelation  has  its  necessary  limitations.  Only  essential 
truths  are  given.  Much  is  left  to  inference.  But  silence  is  a  source  of  pain  and  in 
no  subject  more  than  the  future  life.  I.  Let  ds  see  this  reticence  of  Scriptdbb 
A3  carried  into  OTHER  TRUT^s.  1.  God's  Sovereignty  and  man's  responsibility. 
We  can  deny  neither ;  history  proves  both.  For  their  reconciliation  we  must  wait. 
2.  The  Resurrection.  Reason  is  staggered  and  asks,  "  How  are  the  dead  raised  ?  " 
We  cannot  explain  the  process.  But  God's  power  is  adequate.  The  darkness  is  not 
with  God  but  with  us.  3.  The  proofs  of  the  existence  of  a  personal  God.  The 
Bible  simply  assumes  His  existence.  But  we  know  that  our  watch  must  have  had 
a  maker.  This  we  believe  without  referring  to  our  ignorance  of  him.  There  musl 
have  been  a  Maker  of  the  eye,  whether  we  know  Him  or  not.    II.  From  this  themb 

WB  LEARN    HOW    TO    INTERPRET    God'S    SILENCE.      1.   It   is   God'S  glory   tO  COHCCal   & 

matter.  2.  Secret  things  belong  to  Him;  things  revealed  to  us  and  to  oar 
children.  8.  We  are  to  walk  by  faith  not  by  sight.  4.  We  are  indeed  to  dig 
and  toil  for  truth,  yet  ever  remember  that  there  are  depths  we  cannot  now 
fathom.  6.  All  true  science  is  humble,  and  the  language  of  our  faith  should 
be,  "  Even  so,  Father,  for  so  seemeth  it  good  in  Thy  sight."  (D.  Murdoch,  D.D.) 
Inferences  from  the  silence  of  Christ: — This  is  an  appeal  of  Christ  to  His  own 
truthfulness  and  love.  He  could  not  allow  His  disciples  to  remain  victims  of 
delusion.  He  had  often  wounded  them  by  telling  painful  truths,  and  had  their 
expectation  of  an  immortal  life  been  a  mistaken  one.  He  would  most  certainly  have 
oontradicted  it.  Our  text,  then,  enunciates  a  grand  principle.  Christ  made  it  » 
nvin  part  of  His  work  to  expose  Jewish  error.  Whenever,  therefore.  He  refrained 
from  contradicting  any  deeply  rooted  belief,  we  have  an  argument  for  its  truth. 
Apply  this  to— L  The  doctrine  of  oub  Lord's  deitt.  Christ  was  worshipped  over 
and  over  again  during  His  earthly  ministry.  We  know  that  Peter  (Acts  x.  26)  and 
the  angel  (Bev.  xxii.  9)  shrunk  from  such  homage ;  but  Jesus  never  did.  When 
His  enemies  accused  Hjm  of  making  Himself  equal  with  God  He  did  not  repel  the 
charge.  Meek  and  lowly  as  He  was,  He  accepted  all  the  worship  men  offered. 
Had  He  not  been  Divine  would  He  not  have  told  us  7  IL  The  authenticity  or  tbm 


our.  xxT.]  ST.  JOHN.  48* 

Old  Testament.  This  the  destructive  criticism  of  our  time  denies.  Now  remem- 
ber that  to  the  Jews  were  "  committed  the  oracles  of  God,"  and  they  were  con- 
Bpicuoasly  faithful  to  their  trust.  But  Christ  never  questioned  the  purity  and 
integrity  of  the  ancient  scriptures.  He  held  them  in  the  deepest  reverence,  referred 
to  all  classes  of  facts  recorded  in  them,  set  His  seal  to  minor  incidents,  encouraged  the 
people  to  search  them,  declared  that  they  could  not  be  broken,  and  that  not  one  jot 
or  tittle  should  fail.  What  a  gulf  between  Christ's  criticism  and  that  of  the  modern 
school  I  Had  the  latter  been  correct,  how  is  it  that  He,  *'  the  Truth,"  did  not  tell 
the  world  so  ?  We  need  not  fear,  therefore,  any  of  the  lower  or  higher  criticism  of 
our  day.  III.  The  perpetuity  op  the  Sabbath  law.  That  the  weekly  Day  of  Best 
was  not  a  mere  Jewish  institution  is  proved  from  its  position  in  the  Decalogue,  and 
from  the  design  of  God  in  appointing  it.  And  had  it  been  abrogated,  or  if  it  was  to 
have  no  place  in  the  Christian  code  of  ethics,  would  not  Jesus  have  told  us  ?  He 
often  had  to  deal  with  the  question  of  Sabbath  observance,  and  to  correct  the  rab- 
binical interpretations  of  the  Fourth  Commandment ;  but  never  did  He  drop  a 
Bingle  word  to  countenance  the  idea  that  the  Sabbath  law  was  not  to  remain  in 
force.  On  the  contrary,  He  claimed  to  be  Lord  of  the  Sabbath.  He  found  the 
Sabbath  a  standing  Divine  ordinance,  and  left  it  such  only  freshened  with  the  dew 
of  His  blessing.  IV.  Man's  hope  op  immortality.  Thoughtful  men  in  every  age 
have  cherished  this.  Socrates  held  the  doctrine,  but  admitted  that  a  good  deal 
could  be  said  against  it.  In  the  oldest  scriptures  we  find  deep  yearnings,  and  over 
against  them  hopes  very  distinct  and  definite  (Job  xiv.  14,  15 ;  xix.  25-27).  We 
learn  from  what  our  Lord  said  to  the  Sadducees,  that  the  doctrine  was  from  the  be- 
ginning part  of  the  faith  of  God's  ancient  people ;  and  one  of  the  purposes  for 
t  which  He  came  was  tb  tell  men  that  this  was  a  reasonable  hope.  In  the  text  He 
assumed  that  the  disciples  cherished  it,  and  in  words  of  deepest  tenderness  tells 
them  that  they  are  right.  (C  Jerden,  LL.B.)  Man^s  hope  of  immortality  un- 
contradicted by  God ; — I.  OoB  position  to  God  is  similar  to  that  in  which  the  dis- 
ciples STOOD  TO  Christ — we  are  looking  to  Him  for  the  fulfilment  of  hopes  which 
reach  beyond  our  present  life.  1.  It  cannot  be  questioned  that  there  is  a  deep  and 
wide  testimony  in  man's  nature  to  the  existence  of  a  God  and  of  a  future  life.  (1) 
There  is  a  dim  token  of  a  nature  which  seeks  more  than  earth,  in  the  manner  in 
which  earthly  things  are  often  pursued.  The  world  cannot  fill  man's  soul,  because 
it  is  greater  than  the  world.  The  magnet  in  his  heart  can  never  rest  till  it  points 
to  its  pole-star.  (2)  In  his  thirst  for  truth,  in  his  faith  in  it,  in  his  search  after  it 
as  single  and  sovereign,  there  is  a  token  of  man  a  origin  and  destiny.  (3)  We  all 
know  men  who  have  aims,  more  or  less  exalted,  for  which  they  are  ready  to  glTe 
time  and  labour  and  endless  anxiety  without  even  any  hope  that  they  themselves 
shall  see  the  result.  In  this  stretch  of  man's  soul  beyond  self  there  is  a  look  of 
his  nature  beyond  earthly  limits.  (4)  We  can  perceive  the  same  in  the  conception 
men  have  of  an  ideal  of  perfection,  in  their  struggle  to  realize  it,  and  in  their  deep 
lamentation  over  the  imperfect  and  impure  around  them.  The  only  sphere  in 
which  this  yearning  can  be  realized  is  immortality.  (5)  It  is  discerned  in  all  the 
religions  which  man  has  made  for  himself.  We  can  see  also,  that,  as  religions 
rise  in  their  perception  of  moral  excellence,  they  become  clear  on  this  question. 
We  have  a  right  to  say,  further,  that  this  hope  is  one  of  its  greatest  living  forces. 
No  one  can  read  these  parting  words  of  Christ  or  the  utterances  of  such  men  as 
Paul  and  John,  without  seeing  that,  wherever  their  rehgion  goes,  the  conviction  of 
an  immortality  goes  with  it  as  an  all-pervading  thought.  Its  martyrdoms  and  its 
missionary  efforts  are  everywhere  based  upon  it.  It  remains  yet  to  be  shown  that 
any  view  of  man,  as  possessed  of  a  mere  earthly  life,  will  lead  to  the  suHering  and 
labour  which  the  gospel  has  called  forth  in  the  cause  of  humanity.  I  know  that 
it  is  the  fashion  of  some  to  speak  of  the  hope  of  immortality  as  selfish.  But  it  is 
surely  worthy  of  consideration,  that  the  religion  which  of  all  others  is  most  dis- 
interested in  its  morality,  which  founds  its  motives  on  love,  is  that  one  also  which 
looks  most  clearly  and  steadily  into  an  eternal  life,  and  that  its  central  act  is  a 
sacrifice  unto  death,  which  becomes  the  spring  and  birth  of  numberless  immor* 
talities.  2.  If  in  these  hopes  and  aspirations  men  were  deceived,  and  were  appeal- 
ing to  the  Author  of  their  being,  so  widely  and  so  constantly,  for  the  fulfilment  of 
what  He  never  intends  to  bestow,  then — in  some  distinct  way  or  other — by  some  voice 
from  heaven,  or  some  prevailing  voice  of  reason  in  their  own  hearts — we  might  justly 
conclude  that  He  would  act  on  this  principle — "  If  it  were  not  so,  I  would  have  told 
you."  II.  The  same  considerations  which  would  have  led  Christ  to  undeceivi 
His  disciples,  had  they  been  in  sbrob,  apply  xo  God  is  His  position  xo  us.     1. 


486  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHAf .  Xt7, 

Those  which  lie  in  God's  own  character.  (1)  His  truthfulness.  A  genuine  nature  will 
shun  not  merely  active  falsehood,  but  silent  connivance  with  it.  (2)  His  justice.  It 
would  have  impelled  Christ  lo  undeceive  His  disciples,  had  He  known  their  hopes  to 
be  vain.  For  these  hopes  they  were  exposing  themselves  to  hardship  and  scorn,  and 
were  ready  to  suffer  a  cruel  and  untimely  death.  It  was  right  that  the  terms  should 
be  before  them,  and  that  Christ  should  not  accept  their  services  and  sufferings  on 
a  false  presumption.  If  Divine  equity  can  have  the  law  of  the  universe  move  on 
amid  a  perpetual  delusion,  and  be  subserved  by  it,  then  God's  justice  is  something 
else  than  the  image  of  it  which  He  has  formed  within  us.  (3)  His  goodness.  If 
this  life  were  indeed  all,  would  not  that  gooduess  bring  man's  wishes  within  the 
circle  of  his  brief  existence,  and  not  suffer  him  to  tantalize  himself  with  the  lights 
and  shadows,  the  hopes  and  fears,  of  an  eternity  which  shall  never  dawn  I  2. 
Those  which  lie  in  the  relation  which  exists  between  God  and  His  human  crea- 
tures. (1)  That  of  Teacher.  Christ  had  led  His  disciples  to  look  to  Him  for 
instruction  in  all  the  great  interests  of  life.  He  would  have  convinced  them  that 
the  desire  was  unreasonable,  or  He  would  have  carefully  guarded  against  exciting 
it.  (2)  A  higher  relation  is  the  drawing  out  of  the  heart's  affections.  Christ's 
words  and  conduct  bound  the  disciples  to  Him  irrevocably.  Now,  let  us  suppose 
for  an  instant,  that,  by  some  strange  arrangement,  immortality  was  for  Him  but 
not  for  them.  Then  the  love  had  failed,  not  on  the  part  of  earth  but  heaven — not 
the  mortal  friend  but  the  immortal  Master  would  have  been  guilty  of  cold  forget- 
fulness.  And,  if  He  meant  never  to  meet  its  desire,  would  He  not  be  allowing  a 
love  to  spring  up  in  the  human  heart,  stronger  and  truer  than  His  own,  for  man's 
would  he  perpetually  struggling  to  overpass  death,  while  God's  would  coldly  yield  to 
it?  (3)  This  relation  of  affection  rises  into  the  higher  one  of  fellowship.  The 
bond  between  Christ  and  His  disciples,  of  mutual  converse  and  appeal,  finds  its 
counterpart  in  the  bond  between  God  and  many  souls  of  men  in  this  world.  It  is 
as  strong  a  necessity — it  is  a  stronger — for  some  men  to  speak  to  God,  than  it  is  for 
others  to  speak  to  their  fellow-creatures.  Whence  has  come  this  spontaneous  re- 
course to  prayer,  which  withstands  all  arguments  ?  If  it  is  not  God's  heart  meet- 
ing man,  it  is  man's  heart  meeting  God,  and  seeking  a  fellowship  with  his  Maker, 
which  cannot  but  be  of  His  Maker's  prompting.  And  when,  in  the  trust  and  joy  of 
this  fellowship,  the  soul  looks  forward  to  its  continuance,  can  we  believe  that  God 
would  permit  it,  in  this,  to  be  for  ever  deceived  ?  Conclusion  :  Note — 1,  That  God 
has  contradicted  this  hope  in  the  lower  creatures,  that  is,  He  has  not  suffered  it  to 
spring  up.  2.  He  has  contradicted  prevalent  falsities  in  human  nature  in  various 
ways.  Apart  from  supernatural  utterance,  there  is  the  progress  of  reason,  the 
growth  of  conscience,  the  rise  of  the  soul's  highest  life,  which  make  superstitions 
and  immoralities  that  have  covered  whole  ages  and  nations  to  pine  and  die.  In 
these  ways  He  tells  man  what  is  false ;  but  here  it  is  in  proportion  as  the  soul 
grows  and  sin  dies,  that  this  hope  increases,  and  it  is  strongest  when  we  find  our 
highest  intuitions  answered  in  the  light  and  life  of  God.  {J.  Ker,  D.D.)  I  go 
to  prepare  a  place  for  you. — The  Forerunner: — 1.  What  Divine  simplicity  and 
depth  are  in  these  words  1  The  emblem  is  homely,  the  thing  meant  is  transcendent. 
2.  Not  less  wonderful  is  the  blending  of  majesty  and  lowliness.  The  office  which 
He  takes  upon  Himself  is  that  of  an  inferior  and  a  servant.  And  yet  the  discharge 
"of  it,  in  the  present  case,  implies  His  authority  over  every  corner  of  the  universe. 
8.  Nor  can  we  fail  to  notice  the  blending  of  another  pair  of  opposites,  His  certainty 
of  His  impending  death,  and  His  certainty,  notwithstanding  and  thereby,  of  His 
continual  work  and  His  final  return.  I.  The  departure.  Our  Lord's  Roing  away 
from  that  little  group  was  a  journey  in  two  stages.  Calvary  was  the  first ;  Olivet 
was  the  second.  He  means  by  the  phrase  the  whole  continuous  process.  1.  He 
prepares  a  place  for  ns  by  His  death.  The  High  Priest  of  old  once  a  year  was 
privileged  to  pass  into  the  holiest,  because  he  bore  in  his  hand  the  blood  of  the 
sacrifice.  But  in  our  New  Testament  system  the  path  into  the  holiest  is  made  pos- 
Bible  for  every  foot,  because  Jesus  has  died.  And  as  the  communion  upon  earth, 
BO  the  perfecting  of  the  communion  in  the  heavens.  Old  legends  tell  us  of  magio 
gates  that  resisted  all  attempts  to  force  them,  but  upon  which,  if  one  drop  of  a  cer- 
tain blood  fell,  they  flew  open.  And  so,  by  His  death,  Christ  has  opened  the  gates 
and  made  the  heaven  of  perfect  purity  a  dwelling-place  for  sinful  men.  2.  He 
prepares  a  place  for  as  by  His  entrance  into  and  His  dwelling  in  the  heavenly 
places.  (1)  If  Christ  had  not  ascended,  would  there  have  been  "  a  place  "  at  all  ? 
He  baa  gone  with  a  human  body,  which  must  be  somewhere.  And  we  may  even 
lay  that  His  ascending  np  on  high  has  made  a  place  where  His  servants  are.    (2) 


«HiP.  HT.]  ST.  JOHN.  487 

Bat  apart  from  that  we  may  see  that  Christ's  presence  in  the  heavens  is  needfal  to 
make  heaven  a  heaven  for  poor  human  souls.  It  is  from  Him  and  through  Him 
that  there  come  to  men,  whether  on  earth  or  in  the  heavens,  all  that  they  know,  all 
that  they  hope,  all  that  they  enjoy  of  the  wisdom,  love,  beauty,  peace,  power,  which 
flow  from  God.  The  very  glories  of  all  that  lies  beyond  the  veil  would  have  an 
aspect  apaUing  and  bewildering  to  us,  unless  our  Brother  were  there.  Like  some 
poor  savages  brought  into  a  great  city,  or  rustics  into  the  presence  of  a  king  and 
his  court,  what  should  we  do  unless  we  saw  standing  there  our  Kinsman,  to  whom 
we  can  turn,  and  who  makes  it  possible  for  us  to  feel  that  that  is  home  ?  3.  Not 
only  did  He  go  to  prepare  a  place,  but  He  is  continuously  preparing  it  for  us  all 
through  the  ages.  We  have  to  think  of  a  double  form  of  the  work  of  Christ.  (1) 
Past  in  His  earthly  life,  and  present  in  His  exaltation.  (2)  Present  with  and  in  ua 
here,  and  for  us  there.  (3)  Tn  the  heavens — His  priestly  intercession  and  His  pre- 
paring a  place  for  us.  II.  The  betdbn.  The  purpose  of  our  Lord's  departure,  as 
6et  forth  by  Himself  here,  guarantees  for  us  His  coming  back  again.  He  who  went 
away  as  the  Forerunner  has  not  done  His  work  until  He  comes  back,  and,  as  Guide, 
leads  those  for  whom  He  had  prepared  the  place  to  the  place  which  He  had  pre- 
pared for  them.  That  return,  like  the  departure,  may  be  considered  as  in  two 
stages — 1.  The  main  meaning  is  that  final  and  personal  coming  which  stands  at 
the  end  of  history.  And  He  will  come  as  He  went,  a  visible  Manhood,  only  throned 
amongst  the  clouds  of  heaven  with  power  and  great  glory.  This  return  ought  to 
be  the  prominent  subject  of  Christian  aspiration  and  desire.  We  have  a  double 
witness  to  bear.  One  half  stretches  backwards  to  the  Cross  and  proclaims  "  Christ 
has  come '' ;  the  other  reaches  onwards  to  the  Throne  and  proclaims  "  Christ  will 
come."  2.  But  Scripture  knows  of  many  comings  of  the  Lord  preliminary  to,  and 
in  principle  one  with.  His  second  coming.  For  nations,  all  great  crises  of  their 
history  are  "  comings  of  the  Lord,"  the  Judge.  And  in  reference  to  individuals,  we 
Bee  in  each  single  death  a  true  coming  of  the  Lord.  Beyond  all  secondary  causes, 
deeper  than  disease  or  accident,  lies  the  loving  will  of  Him  who  is  the  Lord  of  life 
and  of  death.  Death  stands  amidst  the  ranks  of  the  "  ministering  spirits  sent  forth 
to  minister  to  them  that  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation."  Whensoever  a  Christian  man 
lies  down  to  die,  Christ  says,  "  Come  I "  and  he  comes.  How  that  thought  should 
hallow  the  death  chamber  as  with  the  print  of  the  Master's  feet  I  How  it  should 
quiet  our  hearts  and  dry  our  tears !  With  Him  for  our  companion  the  lonely  road 
will  not  be  dreary.  The  dying  martyr  beneath  the  city  wall  lifted  np  his  face  to  the 
fc»rens  and  said,  "  Lord  Jesus,  receive  my  spirit  1 "  It  was  the  echo  of  the  Master's 
promise:  "I  will  come  again  and  receive  you  to  Myself."  III.  The  pebfected  union. 
The  departure  and  the  return  are  stages  in  the  process,  which  is  perfected  by  com- 
plete union — "  that  where  I  am  there  ye  may  be  also."  Christ  is  Heaven.  To  be  with 
Him  is  to  behold  His  glory.  And  to  behold  His  glory,  as  John  tells  us  in  his  epistle, 
is  to  be  like  Him.  So  Christ's  presence  means  the  communication  to  as  of  all  the 
lustre  of  His  radiance,  of  all  the  whiteness  of  His  purity,  of  all  the  depth  of  His 
blessedness,  and  of  a  share  in  His  wondrous  dominion.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
The  prepared  place : — There  are  two  remarkable  things  about  Christ's  statement. 
1.  That  the  Master  should  prepare  for  the  servant.  But  this  is  in  keeping  with 
Christ's  whole  method.  2.  That  the  Divine  Christ  should  ever  have  occasion  to 
prepare  anything.  Can  He  who  fills  eternity  have  anything  to  arrange  for  Hia 
servants?  The  answer  is,  that  Christ  accommodates  Himself  to  our  way  of  thinking. 
There  are  some  things  which  the  Master  only  can  do.  We  can  do  one  hundred  and 
fifty  little  things,  and  double  that,  and  get  the  notion  that  we  can  do  anything. 
But  go  and  prepare  summer!  You  have  seen  half  a  hundred:  try  and  make  the 
fifty-first  1  If  the  servant  cannot  prepare  the  summer,  how  can  he  prepare  heaven  ? 
The  text  gives  three  comforting  and  inspiring  views  of  the  Christian's  position  and 
destiny — I.  He  is  the  object  of  Chbist's  zeaiiOus  and  tender  cabb  ''For  you;" 
and  Paul  catching  his  Master's  tone  said,  ••  All  things  are  yours."  Yet  we  hang 
our  heads  and  cry  as  though  we  had  nothing  unless  we  could  lace  our  fingers  round 
it,  not  knowing  that  a  man's  life  consisteth  not  in  the  abundance  of  the  things 
which  he  possesseth.  Wherever  you  find  Christ  you  find  Him  working  for  His  people. 
There  is  a  beautiful  necessity  of  love  about  this  arrangement.  For  if  He  were  to 
fail  here — in  training  and  sanctifying  the  Church — He  would  fail  altogether.  What 
if  He  has  made  countless  millions  of  stars  ?  Can  they  talk  to  Him  ?  If  He  does 
not  get  us — poor,  broken  things — right  into  His  heaven  He  has  failed.  This  is 
the  one  work  He  set  Himself  to  do.  IL  Christians  abb  to  be  etebnallt  His 
JOT.    As  for  these  heavens,  He  will  one  day  dismiss  them.    He  makes  some  things 


489  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chat.  xit. 


for  the  time  being ;  but  when  we  read  of  the  place  prepared  for  believers  we  h»T« 
the  idea  of  never-ending  fellowship.  All  true  life  is  in  the  heart.  Love  alone  is 
immortal,  God  is  love.  Love  it  is  which  binds  Christ  and  Christians.  If  we 
love  Him  we  shall  be  with  Him  for  ever.  III.  Seeing  that  all  this  is  so,  thb 
Christian  is  entitled  to  look  at  the  present  through  the  future.  The 
Christian  is  not  to  be  troubled,  because  in  His  Father's  house  are  many  mansions. 
When  you  are  weary  of  the  present,  look  forward  into  the  future.  Conclusion :  If 
Christ  is  gone  to  prepare  a  place  for  us,  then. — 1.  The  place  will  be  worthy  of  Him- 
self. Send  a  poor  creature,  and  the  place  will  be  prepared  according  to  the  capacity 
and  resources  of  the  messenger  ?  What  kind  of  place  will  He  prepare,  who  has 
all  things  at  command?  2.  Christ  is  waiting  for  His  guests.  Bad  manl  God 
has  prepared  nothing  for  you.  There  is  a  place — but  it  was  prepared,  not  for 
you,  but  for  the  devil  and  his  angels.  That  is  the  only  place  He  has  to  put  yon  in. 
(J.  Parker,  D.D.)        Christ  preparing  a  place  for  us: — I.  We  have  no  bight  to 

HEAVEN   BY   NATURE    (Eph.  ii.  3).      II.   NEITHER   CAN   WB   HAVE   BIGHT  BUT   BY   ChBIST 

(Acts  iv.  12).  HI.  This  title  Christ  purchased  tor  us  bt  His  death  (Matt  xx, 
28  ;  Euth  iii.  9,  12,  iv.  1).  IV.  Having  purchased  it.  He  goes  to  take  possession 
op  it,  and  have  it  surrendered  to  Him  fob  cub  use.  (Heb.  vi.  20).  V.  Having 
taken  possession  of  it  in  our  names,  He  prepares  it.  1.  By  getting  us  actually 
admitted  or  entitled  to  it ;  pleading  (1  John  ii.  1) — (1)  That  our  sins  are  pardoned 
(Isa.  liii.  5,  6).  (2)  Our  persons  justified  (2  Cor.  t.  21).  (3)  Our  lusts  subdued 
(Bom.  vi.  14).  2.  By  preparing  us  for  it,  by — (1)  Enlightening  our  minds  (chap, 
iii.  3).  (2)  Rectifying  our  wills.  3.  Eegulating  our  affections.  (Bp.  Beveridge.) 
Christ  gone  to  prepare  a  place  for  us : — In  the  days  before  the  railway  showered  its 
sparks  upon  the  darkness  of  the  wilderness,  people  put  out  on  foot,  or  in  slow 
cumbrous  waggons,  from  our  Eastern  homes,  and  in  the  wild  thickets  of  the  far  West 
sought  to  clear  for  their  families  a  home.  Ofttimes  leaving  their  tender  little  ones 
in  the  New  England  village,  with  blanket,  and  gun,  and  axe,  they  dared  the  forest, 
terrible  with  bear's  bark,  and  panther's  scream,  and  the  war-whoop  cry  of  scalping 
savages.  After  awhile  the  trees  were  felled,  and  the  underbush  was  burned,  and 
the  farm  was  cleared,  and  the  house  was  built.  Then  word  came  back  here,  saying 
that  everything  was  ready.  The  family  would  get  into  the  waggon  and  start  on  at 
a  slow  pace  for  a  very  long  journey.  After  awhile,  some  evening  tide,  the  shout  of 
recognition  was  heard,  and  by  the  fire  of  the  great  black  log  the  newly-arrived  would 
recount  the  exciting  experiences  of  the  way.  Well,  my  friends,  we  are  all  about 
to  become  emigrants  to  a  far  country.  This  is  no  place  for  us  to  stay.  Our  Older 
Brother,  Jesus,  Him  of  the  scarred  brow  and  the  blistered  feet,  has  gone  ahead  to 
build  our  mansion  and  to  clear  the  way  for  us,  and  He  sends  a  letter  back,  saying 
He  has  it  all  ready ;  and  I  break  the  seal  of  that  letter  and  read  to  you  these 
words:  •* I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you."  I  might  put  it  in  another  shape.  A 
young  man  resolves  to  build  a  home  for  himself.  He  has  pledged  himself  in  one  of 
the  purest  of  earthly  attachments.  He  toils  no  more  for  himself  than  for  the  one 
who  will  share  with  him  the  results  of  his  industrious  accumulation.  After  awhile 
the  fortune  is  made,  the  house  is  built,  the  right  hands  are  joined,  the  blessing  is 
invoked,  the  joy  is  consummated.  So  Jesus,  the  lover  of  our  souls,  has  been 
toiling  to  make  a  place  for  us.  He  is  fitting  up  our  mansion.  He  is  gathering  around 
it  everything  that  can  possibly  enchant  the  soul,  and  after  awhile  he  will  say  :  •'  It 
is  all  ready  now,"  and  He  will  reach  down  His  hand  and  take  up  to  His  fair 
residence  "  the  Church,  which  is  the  Lamb's  wife."  "  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for 
you."  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  Christ  gone  to  prepare  a  place  for  us: — ^I 
was  visiting  a  friend  some  years  ago,  who  had  just  built  a  new  hoase.  It  was 
beautiful,  useful.  He  took  me  upstairs.  It  had  wardrobes,  toilet-glasses,  books, 
and  paintings.  It  was  furnished  grandly.  And  the  father  turned  to  me,  and  said, 
"  This  room  is  for  our  daughter.  She  is  in  Europe,  she  does  not  know  we  are 
arranging  it.  Her  mother  and  I  have  fixed  up  everything  we  could  think  of  for 
her.  As  soon  as  the  house  is  fully  finished,  we  are  going  to  Europe  to  bring  her 
back ;  and  we  are  going  to  bring  her  upstairs,  and  open  the  door,  and  say,  *  Daugh- 
ter, this  is  yours.'  '•  And  I  thought  of  the  joy  it  would  give  her,  and  I  thought,  how 
kind  these  parents  are  I  Just  then  I  turned  away  and  thought,  That  is  what  Jesus 
is  doing  for  me.  He  says  He  is  going  away  to  prepare  a  place  for  me :  he  will  come 
again,  and  receive  me  unto  Himself.  Then  I  thought.  This  father  and  mother  are 
rich :  but  they  have  not  all  treasures,  there  are  a  great  many  things  they  do  not 
know  how  to  get.  But  Jesus,  who  is  furnishing  my  mansion  in  glory,  has  every- 
thing.   He  has  undertaken  to  furnish  a  place  for  me,  and  I  shall  be  with  Him  foi 


OHAp.  xiT.]  ST.  JOHN.  489 

ever.  {G.  8.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Heaven  adapted  to  us  by  Christ: — In  the  works 
of  God  I  know  nothing  more  beautiful  than  the  perfect  skill  with  which  He  suits 
Bis  creatures  to  their  condition.  He  gives  wings  to  birds,  fins  to  the  fish,  sails 
to  the  thistle-seed,  a  lamp  to  light  the  glowworm,  great  roots  to  moor  the 
majestic  cedar,  and  to  the  aspiring  ivy  a  thousand  hands  to  climb  the  wall.  Nor  is 
the  wisdom  thus  oonspicuous  in  nature  less  remarkable  and  adorable  as  exhibited 
in  the  arrangements  of  the  Kingdom  of  Grace.  He  forms  a  holy  people  for  a  holy 
state.  He  fits  heaven  for  the  redeemed,  and  the  redeemed  for  heaven.  (J.  Quthrip, 
D,D,)  Christ  preparing  heaven  for  the  believer  : — It  was  customary  for  travellers 
in  those  old  days  to  send  some  of  their  party  on  in  advance  to  find  lodging  and 
make  arrangements  for  them  in  some  great  city.  Many  a  time  one  or  other  of  the 
disciples  had  been  sent  before  His  face  into  every  place  whither  He  Himself  should 
oome.  Christ  here  takes  that  office  on  Himself.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  If  I  go 
...  I  will  come  again  and  receive  you  unto  Myself. — Christ's  coming  and  our 
future  fellowship  with  Him: — I.  The  death  of  a  belteveb  is  Chbist's  coming. 
At  deaih  their  Saviour  comes  to  fetch  them  away  from  this  strange  land;  and 
thus — 1.  To  rescue  them  from  its  numerous  snares.  2.  To  deliver  them  from  its 
multiplied  sorrows.  These  are  often  owing — (1)  To  the  conduct  of  its  inhabitants. 
By  far  the  g  .ater  part  live  in  open  rebellion  against  God.  (2)  To  the  influence  of 
worldly  things  on  the  mind.  ( 3)  To  the  strength  of  sin  that  dwelleth  in  as.  (4) 
The  temptations  of  Satan.  8.  And  He  will  thus  show — (1)  The  strength  of  His 
affection.  (2)  The  tenderness  of  His  sympathy.  II.  How  to  beoabd  the  futtjbb 
BLESSEDNESS  OF  THOSE  WHO  BELIEVE  IN  Jescs.  It  is  foi  them  to  be  with  Christ, 
(chap.  xvii.  24).  In  that  blessed  land  will  the  Saviour  have  aU  His  followers 
dwell,  because — 1.  They  are  united  to  Him  (Heb.  ii.  14,  15).  2.  They  bear  His 
image.  They  now  seek  and  pray  to  resemble  Him.  (1)  In  humility  and 
meekness.  (2)  In  purity  of  heart  and  life.  (3)  In  uprightness  and  sincerity. 
8.  They  delight  in  fellowship  with  Him.  And  as  they  are  formed  to  this  heavenly 
temper,  now  so  in  glory  they  will  be  received  to  this  unspeakable  feUcity.  They 
wUl  there  enjoy  it— (1)  Without  suspicion.  How  often,  through  the  strength  of 
nnbelief,  does  this  find  an  entrance  into  the  pious  mind  I  (2)  Without  interruption. 
Here  it  is  indf.ed  enjoyed,  but  how  transient  the  season  of  enjoyment.  (3)  Without 
end.  There  bliss  will  be  no  longer  measured,  as  here,  by  days,  or  months,  or  years. 
4.  They  may  then  be  made  perfect — (1)  As  a  body.  The  Church  is  the  body  of 
Christ.  It  is  a  whole  body,  and  not  one  of  its  members  will  be  lost  or  overlooked 
in  the  great  assembly  of  the  whole.  (2)  As  a  family.  (J.  Dorrington.)  _  Jesus 
comes : — '*  He  drew  very  near,"  solemnly  uttered  a  youthful  believer  within  a  few 
hours  of  death.  "  Who  drew  near  ?  "  anxiously  inquired  a  friend  who  was  present, 
fearful  to  hear  her  pronounce  the  word  "death."  "Jesus,"  she  replied,  with  an 
unutterable  earnestness  of  expression.  "  I  felt  just  now  as  if  He  stood  close  beside 
me."  Soon  after  she  was  asked  by  her  sister  if  she  would  like  her  to  pray  with 
her.  She  gladly  assented.  But  while  she  prayed  the  countenance  of  the  dying  one 
changed,  the  expression  of  supplication  was  succeeded  by  one  of  adoring  contem- 
plation— it  would  have  been  rapture  but  for  its  perfect  calm.  A  kind  of  glow  suffused 
her  features,  then  faded  gradually  away,  and  before  that  prayer  was  ended  she  was 
gone.  Her  "  amen  "  to  it  was  her  first  hallelujah  in  heaven.  Jesus  had  • '  come  again  " 
and  received  her  unto  Himself.  {New  Testament  Anecdotes.)  Christ  will 
eome  again : — A  minister  once  entered  an  almshouse  of  which  an  aged  couple  were 
'  the  inmates.  Beside  a  httle  round  table  sat  the  husband,  and  as  he  was  very  deaf 
his  visitor  shouted  in  his  ear,  "  Well,  Wisby,  what  are  you  domg  ? "  "  Waiting, 
sir."  "For what?"  "For the  appearing  of  my  Lord."  "And  what  makes  you 
wish  for  His  appearing  t  "  "  Because  I  expect  great  things  then."  The  sainVs 
best  days  to  come :— A  young  girl  of  fifteen,  a  bright,  laughter  loving  girl,  was 
suddenly  oast  upon  a  bed  of  suffering.  Completely  paralysed  on  one  side  and 
nearly  blind,  she  heard  the  family  doctor  say  to  her  friends,  who  surrounded  her, 
" She  has  seen  her  best  days,  poor  child  1 "  "  Oh  no,  doctor,"  she  exclaimed,  "my 
best  days  are  yet  to  come,  when  I  see  the  King  in  His  beauty."  Death  brings 
Christ  and  the  soul  together : — A  very  affecting  account  is  given  of  the  death  of 
Williams  of  Wern.  He  had  lost  his  wife  some  time  before,  and  he  and  his  daughter 
were  dying  together  in  different  rooms  of  the  same  house.  As  he  said  to  her  one 
day,  "  We  appear  to  be  running,  with  contending  footsteps,  to  be  first  at  the  goaL" 
They  spent  much  time  in  talking  together  of  death  and  heaven,  and  being  "  absent 
from  the  body,  and  present  with  the  Lord."  Every  morning  as  soon  as  he  was  up 
found  him  by  the  bedside  of  his  daughter.    "  Well,  Eliza,  how  are  70a  this  mom- 


490  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xzt, 

ing  ?  "  "  Very  weak,  father."  «•  Ah  I "  said  he,  •'  we  are  both  on  the  race-coarse. 
Which  of  us,  do  you  think,  will  get  to  the  end  first?"  "Oh,  I  shall,  father.** 
"  Perhaps,"  he  said,  "  it  is  best  that  it  should  be  so,  for  I  am  more  able  to  bear  the 
blow.  But  do  you  long  to  see  the  end  of  the  journey?  "  *' Oh,  from  my  heart  1  '* 
she  replied.  "  But  why  ?  "  •'  Because  I  shall  see  many  of  my  old  friends,  and  my 
mother :  and  above  all,  I  shall  see  Jesus."  "  Ah  well,  then,"  he  said,  "  tell  them 
I  am  coming  1  Tell  them  I  am  coming ! "  She  died  first.  He  followed  shortly 
after,   in  the  fifty-ninth  year   of  his   age.  With  Christ — heaven  : — A  little 

negro-boy,  when  on  his  death-bed,  was  visited  by  a  missionary,  to  whom  he 
spoke  of  the  happiness  he  felt,  and  the  longing  desire  he  had  to  be  with  Jesus. 
"  I  am  going  to  heaven  soon ;  and  then  I  shall  see  Jesus,  and  be  with  Him  for 
ever,"  said  the  little  fellow.  **  But,"  rejoined  the  missionary,  "  if  Jesus  were  to 
leave  heaven,  what  would  you  do?  "  ••  I  would  follow  him,"  replied  the  boy.  "  But 
suppose,"  said  the  missionary,  "  Jesus  went  to  hell :  what  would  you  do  then  ?  " 
In  an  instant,  with  an  intelligent  look  and  a  smile  on  his  countenance,  he  replied, 
*'  Ah,  massa  I  there  is  no  hell  where  Jesus  is."  (S.  M.  Haughton.)  Christ  the 
s^ipreme  attraction  of  heaven : — Have  you  heard  of  the  poor  Chinaman  in  London  ? 
Walking  along  the  streets  of  the  metropolis  in  the  fog  and  the  drizzling  rain,  he 
was  well-nigh  breaking  his  heart  with  longing  for  his  native  land.  One  day, 
however,  the  sun  rose  brighter  than  usual,  drove  the  clouds  before  him,  and  lifted 
the  fog.  Thereupon  the  little  Chinaman  cheered  up  amazingly.  "  Why,  what  is 
the  matter  with  yoa  to-day?  what  is  the  cause  of  your  rejoicing?"  asked  an 
acquaintance.  "  What  is  the  cause  indeed,"  replied  the  poor  foreigner  in  broken 
English,  pointing  with  his  finger  to  the  sky.  "Don't  you  see  there  ?  that  is  China's 
sun  ?  "  and  with  the  word  he  was  dancing  on  the  pavement  like  a  delighted  school* 
boy.  Everything  else  was  strange  to  him — the  streets,  the  inhabitants,  the 
sceneries,  and  even  the  stars.  The  only  thing  he  beheld  in  England  that  he  had 
seen  at  home  was  the  sun;  and  he  felt  comforted  under  the  face  of  the  same 
Bun.  Thus,  when  we  go  to  eternity,  things  will  appear  very  strange — the  city  with 
its  golden  streets,  the  inhabitants  with  palms  in  their  hands,  the  sceneries  "  ever 
decked  in  living  green."  But  the  same  Sun  shines  there  as  here,  and  under  its  shining 
we  shall  feel  all  fear  and  tremor  depart.  The  Sun  of  earth  is  the  Sun  of  heaven, 
the  Sun  of  Cardiff  is  the  Sun  of  the  New  Jerusalem.  (J.  CynddyUm  Jones,  D.D.) 
Acquaintances  in  heaven : — "  When  I  was  a  boy,"  said  a  minister,  "  I  thought  of 
heaven  as  a  great  shining  city,  with  vast  walls  and  domes  and  spires,  and  with 
nobody  in  it  except  white  tenuous  angels,  who  were  strangers  to  me.  By  and  by 
my  little  brother  died,  and  I  thought  of  a  great  city  with  walls,  and  domes,  and 
spires,  and  a  flock  of  cold,  unknown  angels,  and  one  little  fellow  that  I  was  ao< 
quainted  with.  He  was  the  only  one  I  knew  at  that  time.  Then  another  brother 
died,  and  there  were  two  that  I  knew.  Then  my  acquaintances  began  to  die,  and 
the  flock  continually  grew ;  bat  it  was  not  until  I  had  sent  one  of  my  little  children 
to  his  grandparent — God — that  I  began  to  think  I  had  a  little  in  myself.  A  second 
went,  a  third  went,  a  fourth  went ;  and  by  that  time  I  had  so  many  acquaintances 
in  heaven  that  I  did  not  see  any  more  walls  and  domes  and  spires.  I  began  to 
tbink  of  the  residents  of  the  Celestial  city ;  and  now  there  are  so  many  of  my 
acquaintances  gone  there  that  it  sometimes  seems  to  me  that  I  know  more  in 
heaven  than  I  do  on  earth." 

Vers.  4-6.  WMther  I  go  ye  know. — The  interpellation  of  Thomas : — Observe — I. 
That  a  man  may,  in  spiBiTUAii  things,  know  more  than  he  is  coNSCions  of  knowing. 
"  Ye  know,"  "  We  know  not."  It  may  be  said  that  our  Lord  is  only  attributing  a 
certain  knowledge  with  a  view  to  stirring  up  His  disciples  to  think  so  that  they  may 
come  to  know  distinctly,  just  as  we  say  to  a  child,  "  You  know  if  you  would  only 
think."  But  here  the  fact  stands  that  Thomas  did  not  know,  and  yet  Christ  said 
he  did.  So  a  man  may  know,  and  yet  not  know  that  he  knows.  M^Tiat  was  it  that 
the  apostles  actually  knew  ?  They  knew  Christ — very  imperfectly,  but  they  did 
know  Him.  Thomas's  "  Lord,"  the  same  word  that  He  used  subsequently,  in  an 
ass'  >ci  <tion  that  leaves  no  room  to  doubt  its  signification,  shows  us  this.  Now  Christ 
was  the  Way ;  and  therefore  in  knowing  Christ,  he  knew  the  Way,  although  he  did 
not  know  Him  as  the  Way.  And  more  than  this.  Thomas  and  the  rest  were 
pra<*tically  walkivg  in  the  right  way  in  believing  in  Christ.  But  not  understanding 
that  Christ  was  the  Way,  they  did  not  understand  that  they  were  in  the  right  way. 
Whence  it  follows  that  a  man  may  be  actually  in  the  right  way  before  he  is  quite 
eonscious  of  it.     This  must  be  so ;  for  being  conscious  of  a  thing  means  coming  to 


CHAP,  xw.]  8T.  JOHN.  491 

a  distinct  eonscioasness  of  it  as  an  existing  fact.  Then  it  mast  exist  as  a  fact 
prior  to  consciousness.  The  time  that  may  elapse  between  a  man  being  in  a  certain 
condition  and  becoming  conscious  of  it  may  vary  according  to  circumstances.  II. 
That  to  know  Christ  is  to  be  in  the  eight  way.  "  I  am  the  Way."  Christ  had 
just  told  them  of  the  Father's  house,  and  they  were  naturally  anxious  to  know  the 
way.  But  notice  how  He  modifies  the  aspect  of  future  blessedness.  He  now  speaks 
of  the  Father  HimseU.  For  it  is  the  Father's  presence  that  makes  home — not  a 
house  built  by  the  Father,  however  much  the  Father's  love  may  have  been  lavished 
on  it  for  His  children's  sake.  To  this  Father  Christ  is  the  Way,  and  how  His 
subsequent  conversation  shows.  "  He  that  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen  the  Father  " 
(Eph.  ii.  18 ;  Heb.  x.  19,  20).  There  is  no  direct  access  for  man  to  God.  Christ 
is  the  way  to  God,  and  the  way  to  God  is  the  way  to  Heaven.  And  he  who  knows 
Christ,  however  imperfectly,  is  in  the  right  way.  IH.  Those  who  beallt  know 
Chbist  as  the  Way  will  soon  lbabn  that  He  is  mdch  more  to  them  than  the  Way 
ONLY.  Christ  adds  the  ample  appendix,  "  and  the  Truth  and  the  Life."  These 
three  lead  on,  the  one  to  the  other.  Eeligion  begins  in  practical  conformity  to  a 
Divine  "  way,"  and  so  comes  down  to  the  level  of  the  simplest  and  the  feeblest. 
But  when  a  man  has  walked  some  time  in  the  Divine  way,  he  begins  to  desire  a 
fuller  understanding  of  the  reasons  of  the  way.  Then  Christ  comes  as  the  Truth, 
disclosing  the  grounds  on  which  religious  duty  rests,  satisfying  thus  the  speculative, 
as  He  formerly  did  the  practical,  faculty.  Finally  Christ  reveals  Himself  as  the 
Life.  Then  it  is  seen  that  rehgion  is  more  than  practice  and  knowledge,  it  is  the 
commonication  of  vital  powers,  of  the  powers  of  the  life  of  God,  of  power  to 
become  the  child  of  God;  and  that  this  new  vitality  in  tarn  prompts  to  pious 
practice,  and  capacitates  for  spiritual  perception.  {W.  Boberts.)  Christ^ »  fare- 
well : — It  serves — I.  To  exercise  faith  in  Christ.  1.  In  His  omniscience.  For 
He  knows — (1)  Whither  He  goes  (ver.  5).  (2)  When  He  goes  (ver.  5).  (3)  For  what 
purpose  (vers.  7-15) :  to  send  the  Comforter,  Ao.  2.  In  His  truthfulness  (ver.  7). 
For — (1)  Jesus  went  to  His  Father.  (2)  He  sent  the  Comforter.  (3)  The  Comforter 
has  fulfilled  His  mission.  II.  Fob  consolation  when  we  feel  the  pans  or 
separation.  For. — 1.  Christ  is  omniscient.  He  alone  knows — (1)  Whither  we  go. 
(2)  When  we  are  to  go.  (3)  Why  we  go.  2.  Christ  is  truthful.  Therefore  we  are 
certain  that  we  go — (1)  To  the  Father.  (2)  At  the  hour  appointed  by  Him.  (3) 
Because  it  is  expedient  and  necessary  for  oar  own  faith  in  God's  omnipotent  love 
and  our  sense  of  dependence  on  Him.  {Pastor  Fricke.)  The  way,  unknown  and 
yet  well  known : — When  you  say  to  a  man, "  You  know  the  way,"  you  mean  "  Come." 
And  in  these  words  there  lie  a  veiled  invitation,  and  the  assurance  that  they,  though 
separated,  might  still  find  the  road  to  the  Father's  house,  and  so  be  with  Him  still. 
Observe — I.  The  disciples' UNCONSCions  knowledge.  1.  Christ  says:  "Ye  know 
the  way  and  the  goal."  Thomas  ventures  flatly  to  contradict  Him.  Was  Jesns 
right  ?  or  Thomas  ?  or  both  ?  The  fact  is,  they  had  heard  plenty  in  the  past 
as  to  where  Christ  was  going.  It  had  made  some  kind  of  lodgement  in  their  heads, 
and,  in  that  sense,  they  did  know.  It  is  this  unused  and  unconscious  knowledge 
of  theirs  to  which  Christ  appeals.  2.  The  dialogue  is  an  instance  of  what  is  true 
about  as  all,  that  we  have  in  our  possession  truths  given  to  us  by  Jesus  Christ,  the 
whole  sweep  and  bearing  of  which  we  do  not  dream  of  yet.  Time  and  oircam. 
stances  and  some  sore  agony  of  spirit  are  needed  in  order  to  make  us  realize  the 
riches  that  we  possess;  and  the  practice  of  far  more  patient,  honest,  profound 
meditation  is  needed,  in  order  that  we  may  understand  the  things  that  are  given  to 
as  of  God.  The  life-belts  he  unnoticed  on  the  cabin  shelf  as  long  as  the  weather 
keeps  fine,  but  when  the  ship  strikes  people  take  to  them.  3.  All  our  knowledge  is 
ignorance.  And  ignorance  that  confesses  itself  to  Him  is  in  the  way  of  becoming 
knowledge.  And  we  are  meant  to  carry  all  our  inadequate  and  superficial  realiza* 
tions  of  His  truths  into  His  presence,  that,  from  Him,  we  may  gain  deeper  knowledge, 
and  a  more  joyous  certitude  in  His  inexhaustible  truths.    H.  Oob  Lord's  great 

SELF-REVELATION  WHICH  MEETS  THIS  UNCONSCIOUS  KNOWLEDGE.      Of  thcSC   three  great 

words,  the  Way,  the  Truth,  the  Life,  we  are  to  regard  the  second  and  the  third  as 
explanatory  of  the  first.  1.  Note,  then,  as  belonging  to  all  three  of  these  clauses  that 
remarkable  "I  am."  We  show  the  Way,  Christ  is  it.  We  speak  truth,  Christ  ia 
it.  Parents  impart  life,  which  they  have  received,  Christ  is  life.  He  separates 
Himself  from  ah  men  by  that  representation  which  He  made  when  Calvary  was 
within  arm's  length.  What  did  He  think  about  Himself,  and  what  should  we  think 
of  Him  ?  2.  And  note  that  He  here  sets  forth  His  unique  relation  to  the  truth  as 
being  one  ground  on  which  He  is  the  Way  to  God.  (1)  He  is  the  Truth  in  reference 


in  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  nT. 

to  the  Divine  natQTe.  It  is  not  only  His  speech  that  teaches  as,  but  Himself  that 
shows  as  God.  There  is  all  the  difference  between  talking  aboat  God  and  showing 
Him.  Men  reveal  God  by  their  words ;  Christ  reveals  Him  by  Himself  and  the 
facts  of  His  life.  2.  He  is  the  Trath,  inasmuch  as,  in  His  life,  men  find  the  foun- 
dation truths  of  a  moral  and  spiritual  sort.  "  Whatsoever  things  are  true,"  &c.. 
He  is  these.  3.  He  is  the  Way  because  He  is  the  Life.  Dead  men  cannot  walk  a 
road.  It  is  no  use  making  a  path  if  it  starts  from  a  cemetery.  And  Christ  taught 
that  men  apart  from  Him  are  dead,  and  that  the  only  life  that  they  can  have  by 
which  they  can  be  knit  to  God  is  the  Divine  life  which  was  in  Himself.  He  is  the 
Life — and,  paradox  of  mystery  and  yet  fact  which  is  the  very  heart  and  centre  of 
His  gospel,  His  only  way  of  giving  His  hf e  to  us  is  by  giving  up  His  physical  life  for 
as.  4.  And  what  about  people  that  never  heard  of  Him.  Aii  I  Christ  has  other 
ways  of  working  than  through  His  historical  manifestation,  He  is  "  that  Light 
which  lighteth  every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world."  But  for  us  to  whom  this 
Book  has  come,  the  law  of  my  text  rigidly  applies.  •*  No  man  cometh  unto  the 
Father  but  by  Me."  It  is  either — take  Christ  for  the  Way,  or  wander  in  the 
wilderness  and  forget  your  Father ;  take  Christ  for  the  Truth,  or  be  given  over  to 
the  insufficiencies  of  mere  natural,  political,  and  intellectual  truths,  and  the  shows 
and  illusions  of  time  and  sense  ;  take  Christ  for  your  life,  or  remain  in  your  deadnesa 
separate  from  God.  HI.  The  disciples'  ignorance  and  the  new  vision  which  dispels 
IT.  "  If  ye  had  known  Me  ye  should  have  known  My  Father  also,"  &o.  Our  Lord 
accepts  for  the  moment  Thomas'  standpoint.  He  supplements  His  former  allega- 
tion of  their  knowledge  with  the  admission  of  the  ignorance  which  went  with  it  as 
its  shadow,  and  tells  them  that  they  did  not  know  what  they  thought  they  knew  so 
well,  after  so  many  years  of  companionship — even  Himself.  The  proof  that  they 
did  not  is  that  they  did  not  know  the  Father  as  revealed  in  Him,  nor  Him  as 
revealing  the  Father.  If  they  missed  that,  they  missed  everything.  1.  The  lesson 
for  OS  is  that  the  true  test  of  the  completeness  and  worth  of  our  knowledge  of 
Christ  lies  in  its  being  knowledge  of  God  the  Father,  brought  near  to  us  by  Him. 
This  saying  puts  a  finger  on  the  radical  deficiency  of  all  merely  humanitarian  views 
of  Christ's  person.  If  you  know  anything  about  Jesus  Christ  rightly,  this  is  what 
you  know  about  Him,  that  in  Him  you  see  God.  The  knowledge  of  Christ  which 
stops  with  the  martyr,  and  the  teacher  and  the  brother,  is  knowledge  so  partial  that 
even  He  cannot  venture  to  call  it  other  than  ignorance.  2.  And  then  our  Lord 
passes  on  to  smother  thought,  the  new  vision  whic'h  at  the  moment  being  granted  to 
this  unconscious  ignorance  that  was  passing  into  conscious  knowledge.  •'  From 
henceforth  ye  know  Him  and  have  seen  Him."  We  must  give  that  "  from  hence- 
forth," a  somewhat  literal  interpretation,  and  apply  it  to  the  whole  series  of 
utterances  and  deeds  of  which  the  words  of  our  text  are  but  a  portion.  It  is  the  dying 
Christ  thftt  reveals  the  living  God.  Conclusion :  So  He  is  your  way  to  God.  See  that 
you  seek  the  Father  by  Him  alone.  He  is  your  truth ;  enrich  yourselves  by  all  the 
communicated  treasures  that  you  have  already  received  in  Him.  He  is  your  Life ; 
cleave  to  Him,  ^at  the  quick  spirit  that  was  in  Him  may  pass  into  you  and  make 
you  victors  over  all  deaths,  temporal  and  eternal.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  _  Know- 
ledge unconsciously  possessed : — A  man  may  have  grace  and  yet  not  know  it ;  yea, 
he  may  think  He  hath  it  not,  as  we  seek  for  the  keys  that  are  in  our  pocket :  or 
think  that  we  have  lost  a  jewel  that  we  have  locked  ap  in  a  chest;  yea,  as  the 
butcher  looketh  for  the  candle  that  sticketh  in  his  hat.     (J.  Trapp.) 

Ver.  6.  Jesas  said  unto  blm,  I  am  the  Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life. — Brief 
expositions : — The  way  of  a  holy  conversation ;  the  truth  of  a  heavenly  doctrine ; 
the  life  of  a  bliss  everlasting  (Leo).  The  way  to  beginners,  the  truth  to  the 
progressing  (chap.  viii.  32),  the  life  to  the  perfect  (Ferus).  I  am  the  Way,  leading  to 
the  truth ;  I  am  the  Truth,  promising  life ;  I  am  the  Life,  which  I  give  (St. 
Augustine).  I  am  the  Way  and  the  Life ;  the  way  on  earth,  the  life  in  heaven  :  I 
am  He,  to  whom  you  go;  I  am  He,  by  whom  you  go  (ibid).  The  way,  in 
which  we  walk  by  charity ;  the  truth,  to  which  we  cling  by  faith ;  the  life,  to  which 
we  aspire  by  hope.  The  life  in  His  example,  the  truth  in  His  promise,  the  hfe  in 
His  reward  (St.  Bernard).  Truth  lies  between  way  and  life,  as  if  the  way  to  life 
were  through  truth  (Leigh).  The  true  way  to  eternal  life  (Dr.  Whichcote).  With- 
out the  Way  there  is  no  going ;  without  the  Truth  there  is  no  knowing ;  without 
the  Life  there  is  no  living.  I  am  the  Way  which  thou  aughtest  to  follow ;  the 
Truth  which  thou  aughtest  to  trust  ;  the  Life  which  thou  aughtest  to  hope  for.  I 
am  the  inviolable  Way,  the  infaUable  Truth,  the  Godless  Life.    If  thou  remain  in 


SWAP.  xiT.]  ST.  JOHN.  493 

My  way  thou  shalt  know  the  tnitb,  and  the  truth  shall  make  thee  free  and  tliou 
flhalt  lay  hold  on  eternal  life.  (Thomas  a  Kempis.)  The  Way,  the  Truth,  and 
the  Life : — Mistakes  have  been  made  the  occasion  of  profoundest  utterances.  It 
was  so  here. — I.  "  I  am  the  Wat."  Man's  primal  communion  with  God  in  Eden 
was  broken  by  his  falL  Henceforth  humanity  became  as  an  islet  in  mid-ocean, 
without  material  for  bridge  or  boat.  And  the  Eternal  Word  became  flesh  in  order 
that  He  himself  might  become  the  causeway  which  should  reconnect  the  island-man 
and  the  continent-God.  He  not  only  shows  the  way,  as  our  Teacher,  He  is  the  way 
itself,  the  true  ladder  connecting  earth  and  heaven.  He  is  alike  the  portal,  the  hue 
of  direction,  the  true  Scala  Santa,  "  Tiie  gi'eat  world's  altar-stairs  that  slope  through 
darkness  up  to  God."  His  Via  Dolorosa  is  our  Via  Gloriosa.  His  valley  of  Achor 
is  our  door  of  hope.  IL  '*  I  am  the  Tbuth."  1.  In  distinction  from  what  is  sjm- 
bohc.  He  is  the  fulfiller  and  realizer  of  all  prophetic  hints.  Thus  He  is  said  to  be 
the  True  Light,  the  True  Bread,  the  True  Tabernacle,  &o.  2.  In  distinction  from  what 
is  phenomenal.  For  truths  are  ever  greater  than  facts.  There  is  no  necessary 
morality  in  mere  facts  as  such,  e.g.,  in  the  fact  that  every  particle  of  matter  attracts 
every  other  particle  in  the  direct  ratio  of  its  mass,  and  in  the  inverse  ratio  of  the 
square  of  its  distance.  Truth  is  moral,  and  can  exist  only  in  connection  with  a 
person,  i.e.,  a  person  who  shall  somehow  stand  as  its  end  or  representation.  Such 
a  person  is  Christ.  He  not  only  has  truth.  He  is  the  Truth — Himself  its  eternal 
embodiment ;  its  source,  means,  and  end.  He  is  the  meaning  of  facts.  All  things  have 
been  created  through  Him  and  for  Him.  He  is  creation's  detinition  or  flnal  cause. 
ni.  "I  AM  THE  LiFB."  1.  Of  all  animate  existence;  all  things  are  also  subsisting 
in  Him.  2.  Particularly  is  this  true  of  man.  (1)  Jesus  Christ  is  the  life  of  oar 
bodily  nature.  Poor  Marthas  and  Marys  may  weep  by  the  tombs  of  dead  brothers ; 
but  Jesus  Christ  shall  say,  •'  I  am  the  Resurrection  and  the  Life."  (2)  Of  our 
Bpiritual  nature,  "  God  hath  given  unto  us  eternal  life  and  this  hfe,  is  in  His  Son." 
Conclusion :  Christ  is  the  only  way,  "  No  man  cometh,"  &o.  Other  voices  indeed 
proclaim  the  contrary  ;  but  they  are  the  voices  of  false  prophets.  Liberalism  says : 
*'  There  are  many  ways  to  the  Father ;  for  instance,  nature,  aesthetics,  charity," 
ite.  Materiahsm  says :  *•  It  is  through  the  uplifting  of  environment. "  Ecclesi- 
asticism  says  :  ••  It  is  through  the  Church,  the  sacraments."  But  all  who  under- 
take to  climb  over  into  the  fold  by  any  other  way  are  thieves  and  robbers.  [G.  D. 
Boardman,  DJ).)  The  Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life : — Science  tells  us  that  there 
are  three  elements  in  light — the  illuminating,  the  chemical,  and  the  heat  power. 
So  in  Him  who  is  "the  Light  of  the  World  "  there  is  a  threefold  perfection.  L 
The  tbuths  separately.  1.  Christ  the  Way.  One  of  the  deepest  feelings  in  man's 
nature  is  that  of  a  want  of  something  which  this  world  is  found  not  to  supply. 
The  eye  is  not  satisfied  with  seeing,  nor  the  ear  with  hearing,  nor  the  ambition 
with  success,  nor  the  lust  with  gratification.  It  arises  from  the  terrible  disruptions 
with  the  intervening  chasms  which  sin  has  produced.  Despite  our  downward 
tendencies,  man  is  led  by  what  he  feels  within,  and  sees  around,  to  look  up  to  a 
Divine  Power.  That  Being  we  would  fondly  claim  as  a  Father.  But  where  is  that 
Father  ?  There  is  a  way,  but  somehow  we  have  lost  it,  and  the  difficulty  is  to  find 
it.  Conceive  a  planet  wandering  from  its  sphere.  Now  it  is  hindered  by  bodies 
attracting  it  or  attracted  by  it,  and  forthwith  it  dashes  through  space,  threatening 
to  strike  and  break  in  fragments,  or  to  kindle  into  a  conflagration,  all  the  other 
planets  and  suns  it  meets  with.  It  is  a  picture  of  a  wandering  man  loosened  from 
the  Central  Power  that  stays  him,  and  from  the  Central  Light  that  should  illumi- 
nate  him.  Neither  wanderer  will  right  itself  till  made  to  move  in  its  old  path. 
But  how  can  we  know  the  way  ?  The  flaming  sword,  turned  every  way  to  keep  the 
sinner  from  the  tree  of  life,  has  entered  into  him  who  is  God's  fellow,  and  hath 
now  power  against  us,  and  there  is  a  way  opened  by  which  the  sinner  can  come  into 
the  very  presence  of  God.  "  I  am  the  Way."  2.  Christ  the  Truth.  By  truth,  in 
this  passage,  we  are  not  to  onderstaud  abstract  or  general  doctrine.  Systematized 
truth  may  serve  most  important  purposes  ;  but  it  is  not  to  such  that  our  Lord 
refei  s.  Truth  is  defined  by  philosophers  as  the  agreement  of  our  ideas  with  things. 
If  we  know  God  as  He  really  is,  then  have  we  truth  in  religion.  But  how  can  we 
know  God  as  He  really  is  ?  Do  we  not  feel  as  if  He  were  at  an  infinite  distance,  as 
if  we  could  no  more  rise  to  Him  with  our  spirits  than  our  frail  bodies  could  mount  from 
earth  to  heaven  ?  Who  will  give  us  wings  that  we  may  ascend  to  Him  ?  Alas  1 
the  attraction  of  earth  is  too  powerful  to  admit  of  our  rising  to  Him.  The  approach 
must  be  on  His  part.  Plato  was  obliged  to  say  :  "  The  Father  of  the  world  is  hard 
to  discover,  and  when  discovered  cannot  be  communicated."    But  when  we  go  on 


494  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xit. 


by  Christ  as  the  Way,  He  introduces  us  to  the  Father,  and  we  have  the  truth.  God 
is  no  loDger  at  a  distance ;  "  Emmanuel,  God  with  as."  Aristotle  has  said  that  the 
mind  as  it  came  from  its  Maker  is  organized  for  truth,  as  the  eye  is  to  perceive 
light  and  the  ear  to  hear  sounds.  He  who  has  found  Christ  knows  that  he  has 
found  the  truth.  With  the  truth  there  is  assurance ;  the  eye  has  found  the  light, 
the  ear  is  listening  to  the  sound.  This,  this  is  the  reality  of  things.  3.  Chrisi 
the  Life.  It  is  of  vast  moment  that  we  know  the  way,  all  good  that  we  reach  the 
truth ;  but  we  must  have  more.  The  weU-formed  statue  is  an  interesting  object, 
but  none  of  us  would  exchange  our  living  condition  for  that  of  the  chiselled  marble. 
Along  with  the  truth  we  must  have  life.  There  are  few  or  no  sinners  so  dead  that 
they  do  not  wish  at  times  to  have  life.  And  yet  when  they  would  excite  and 
stimulate  it,  they  find  that  they  have  only  the  cold  and  the  clamminess  of  death. 
FeeUng  never  wUl  be  excited  by  a  mere  determination  to  raise  it.  There  must  be  a 
something  to  call  it  forth.  Nor  will  it  be  evoked  by  an  abstract  statement  or 
general  doctrine.  It  is  called  forth  by  a  living  person.  Christ  so  lovely  and  so 
loving.  Apprehended  as  the  truth  He  becomes  the  life.  II.  Thb  truths  in  theib 
CONNECTION.  The  full  truth  is  to  be  found  in  the  union  of  these  various  truths.  If 
we  would  have  a  true  religion,  and  a  proper  theology  founded  upon  it,  we  must  give 
Christ  the  supreme  place.  Displace  Christ  the  head  from  this  His  proper  position 
and  the  whole  form  becomes  disproportioned.  1.  There  are  some  who  would  have 
men  first  to  find  the  way,  and  then  in  the  way  to  find  Christ.  Who  would  have, 
e.g.,  inquirers  first  to  find  the  true  Church,  and  then  through  it  to  find  Christ.  But 
this  is  to  reverse  the  Scriptural  order.  2.  Some  would  have  us  first  seek  the  truth, 
and  then  seek  Christ.  Seekers  of  truth  deserve  all  the  honour  that  has  been  paid 
to  them,  but  they  will  never  find  truth  in  religion  till  they  find  Christ.  So  Justin 
Martyr  acknowledged,  and  Augustine,  and  Luther.  Let  us  not  go  out  with  the 
tapers  of  earth  to  seek  the  sun.  Any  other  hght  can  at  best  be  merely  like  the  star 
to  guide  the  wise  men,  serving  a  good  end  only  so  far  as  it  guides  us  to  where 
Christ  as  the  truth  is  to  be  found.  3.  Again,  some  would  find  Ufe  without  Christ. 
Their  appeal  is  to  inward  feelings,  sentiments,  and  intuitions.  But  what,  I  ask,  is 
to  evoke  such  sentiments  from  our  dead  and  sinful  hearts  ?  They  tell  us  by  such 
grand  and  generous  ideas  as  the  infinite  and  the  eternal.  But  these  ideas  call  forth 
love  only  when  they  are  associated  with  a  living  being  whose  love  is  infinite  and 
eternal.  And  such  is  Christ.  4.  There  are  some  who  would  seek  for  Christ  under 
one  of  these  aspects  or  in  one  of  these  characters,  but  who  do  not  care  for  the 
others.  (1)  Thus,  there  are  some  who  are  anxious  to  have  Christ  as  the  way,  but 
who  stop  at  the  entrance,  instead  of  going  on  in  the  path.  They  are  most  anxious 
to  have  Christ  for  salvation ;  but  they  do  not  go  on  to  establish  themselves  in  the 
truth.  (2)  Some  are  contented  with  the  truth  without  the  life,  with  their  orthodox 
creed,  their  reverence  for  the  Bible,  their  attendance  at  religious  meetings.  Such  a 
formal  religion  is  offensive  to  man,  even  as  it  is  displeasing  to  God.  (3)  Another 
class  seek  the  life  without  the  truth,  led  into  this  by  a  reaction  against  a  stiff 
formaUsm  or  a  frigid  orthodoxy,  or  by  an  unwillingness  to  submit  to  any  restraints. 
Persons  are  calling  for  a  life  which  is  to  be  independent  of  all  the  old  forms  of 
orthodoxy  and  of  the  letter  of  the  Word  of  God.  Of  this  I  am  sure,  that  the  life 
which  is  not  supported  by  Scriptural  truth  will  be  of  a  very  uncertain  and  wavering 
and  transient  character.  {J.  Mc  Cosh,  D.D.)  The  Way,  the  Truth,  and  the 
Life : — 1.  Christ  is  the  Way,  for  He  recovers  man  from  his  godless  wandering. 
The  metaphor  views  man  in  the  light  of  his  practical  obliquities.  He  is  estranged 
by  wicked  works  from  the  fiUal  fellowship  in  which  the  life  of  Jesus  Christ  was 
unchangeably  centred.  A  way  is  that  which  connects  the  distant  and  inaccessible. 
Traversed  as  is  our  land  in  every  possible  direction  by  the  highways  of  commerce 
and  civilization,  we  perhaps  scarcely  feel  the  force  of  this  figure.  Poor  Living- 
stone, who  waded  waist-deep  through  pestilential  marshes  for  weeks,  to  die  at  last 
in  a  miserable  hut  by  the  lake  shore  ;  the  traveller,  who  has  to  cut  his  way  for 
hundreds  of  miles  through  tangled  forest  and  jungle  at  the  rate  of  half  a  mile  a 
day;  the  emigrant,  who  has  to  cross  the  trackless  alkali  plain,  and  who  ■may  perish 
midway  ;  the  military  commander,  who  had  to  carry  his  forces  over  mountains, 
some  sections  of  which  are  almost  perpendicular, — know  how  a  well  engineered 
path  is  the  first  condition  of  successful  movement.  A  way  is  that  which  makes 
movement  in  some  specific  direction  possible.  Movement  towards  God  is  impos- 
sible without  the  work  of  Jesus  Christ  the  Mediator.  Jesus  Christ  brings  together 
in  His  own  person  the  two  most  distant  objects  the  whole  circle  of  the  universe  can 
couLam.  God  dweUine;  in  unapproachable  light,  and  man  wallowing  in  guilt,  world- 


CHAP,  xiv.l  ST.  JOHN.  495 

liness,  transgression.     Christ  subverts  and  destroys  the  work  of  sin  in  hnman 

nature,  and  makes  progress  towards  God  possible  to  as  once  more.    In  Him  the 

alienated  are  brought    back   into    relations     of    gentleness,    endearment,    and 

obedience.    2.  Christ  is  the  truth,  for  He  recovers  man  from  his  godless  error. 

The  metaphor  looks  upon  man  from  his  intellectual  side.     Men  are  estranged  from 

God  in  their  thinkings,  "  alienated  from  the  life  of  God  by  reason  of  the  ignorance 

that  is  in  them."    Christ  answers  our  intellectual  need.     "  He  that  hath  seen  Me 

hath  seen  the  Father."    Scientific  truth  puts  us  into  intelligent  relation  with  the 

world  of  established  scientific  fact.    Historic  truth  puts  us  into  intelligent  relation 

with  the  facts  that  have  determined  the  growth  of  particular  types  of  government 

and  civilization.    Sociological  truths  puts  us  into  intelligent  relation  with  the  facts 

that  have  moulded  the  social  life  of  mankind.     Jesus  Christ  puts  us  into  intelligent 

relation  with  all  the  vital  facts  of  God's  being  and  nature  and  government.    He  ia 

the  only  possible  word  by  which  God  can  address  Himself  to  a  world  of  sinners. 

Ko  intellectual  activity,  no  induction  of  reason,  no  range  of  research  can  fill  up  this 

chasm  in  the  mind  of  man.    We  can  only  know  God  as  we  give  ourselves  up  to 

Jesus  Christ,  and  suiter  the  energy  of  His  spirit  and  presence  to  rule  us.    He  is 

made  unto  us  the  wisdom  by  which  we  come  to  the  saving  knowledge  of  God.    All 

knowledge  that  lies  outside  this  sphere  of  contract  with  Christ  is  at  the  very  best 

but  adroit  guess-work.    3.  Christ  is  the  Life,  inasmuch  as  He  raises  men  from  their 

godless  insensibility  and  death.    The  ideas  deepen  as  they  succeed  each  other. 

Knowledge  passes  into  life.     "  This  is  life  eternal,  to  know  Thee,  the  only  true  God, 

and  Jesus  Christ,  whom  Thou  hast  sent."    He  stands  forth  in  the  midst  of  the 

universe  to  counterwork  the  disintegration  and  decay  that  set  in  when  the  tie 

binding  all  life  to  its  first  Centre  was  ruptured  by  transgression.    Union  with 

Christ,  our  everlasting  Life,  will  guard  against  the  shock  and  sting  and  disability  of 

death.     The  man  who  is  sailing  under  trustworthy  captainship,  and  in  company 

with  genial  friends,  out  of  one  zone  into  another,  is  scarcely  conscious  of  the 

lines  of  demarcation  over  which  the  ship  glides.     So  with  the  man  who  hves  and 

dies  in  fellowship  with  Christ.    Throughout  the  months  of  summer,  darkness  is 

unknown  in  the  latitudes  of  the  far  north.     The  rising  and  the  setting  suns  blend 

their  light  without  the  hairbreadth  of  a  shadow  between.    Tourists  are  all  eager  to 

visit  the  "Land  of  the  Midnight  Sun."     It  seems  to  me  that  for  the  man  who  is 

vitally  united  to  Christ,  the  event  of  death  is  very  much  like  that.      He  sails 

through  the  quiet,  solemn  seas  of  the  midnight  sun,  and  before  the  light  of  the 

earthly  life  has  quite  gone  the  light  of  a  nobler  sunrise  has  come  to  blend  with  it. 

In  the  solemn  crisis  of  transition,  for  the  man  who  has  become  one  with  Christ  his 

Life  no  darkness  deepens,  and  the  shadow  of  the  grave  marks  the  dayspring.    4. 

Christ's  words  present  a  corrective  to  all  distracted  faith.     He  asks  from   His 

followers  concentrated  thought  and  attachment  and  expectation.     They  had  sought 

a  way  outside  Christ,  though  a  way  through  whose  mazes  He  was  to  guide  them  ;  a 

truth  outside  Christ,  though  a  truth  the  exposition  of  which  was  to  come  from  Hig 

lips ;  a  hf e  outside  Christ,  though  a  life  of  which  His  immortal  reign  was  to  be  the 

seal  and  the  defence.    The  purport  of  these  words  is,  that  they  must  seek  their  all 

in  Christ.    They  must  let  their  eye  rest  upon  His  person  as  the  one  centre  from 

which  all  saving  power,  all  teaching  light,  all  quickening  inspiration  must  come. 

Mark  how  in  these  words  the  Master  leads  on  His  disciples  to  faith  in  a  Saviour 

unseen.    The  love  of  the  disciples  had  been  very  apt  to  glide  into  an  idolatry  of 

Christ's  human  form.    But  all  this  is  to  be  corrected  by  the  fresh  events  that  are 

tt  hand.    The  text  suggests  a  warning  against  all  low  and  dishonouring  views  of 

the  Saviour's  work  and  person.     (T.  G.  Selby.)        The  Way,  the  Truth,  and  tlie 

Life : — I.  I  am  the  Way.     To  what  ?    To  our  eternal  destiny.     There  are  ends 

closer  at  hand  than  this  which  man,  if  left  to  himself,  seeks  before  aU  other  things — 

pleasure,  fortune,  glory,  science.    That  is  what  the  heathens  ardently  demanded  of 

their  gods ;  but  never  by  a  single  word  did  Jesus  Christ  offer  to  lavish  them  upon 

men.     1.  I  know  that  when  we  speak  of  the  higher  aim  of  hfe,  worldlings  shrug 

their  shoulders  and  smile  ;  and  a  certain  school,  now  ui  high  favour,  gravely  affirms 

that  we  can  neither  attain  it  nor  even  so  much  as  understand  it.    But  I  needs 

must  know  whither  I  go,  and  if  I  deem  foolish  the  man  who  would  fling  himself  in 

»  railway  train  or  embark  upon  a  vessel  without  asking  where  the  steam  power  or 

the  breath  of  the  wind  is  taking  him,  by  what  appellation  shall  I  characterize  those 

who  allow  themselves  to  be  borne  away  in  the  voyage  of  life  without  knowing 

whether  their  destination  is  death  or  life  ?    3.  *'  But,"  says  the  sceptic,  •♦  supposing 

A  higher  life  is  indeed  reserved  for  man,  how  shall  he  know  it  ?    So  many  ways  are 


496  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xit. 

open  before  ns  1  How  find  ont  the  right  path  ?  "  Not  much  science  is  requiiad  to 
discover  which  is  the  path  to  be  preferred,  of  pleasure  or  duty,  iniquity  or  justice, 
selfishness  or  sacrifice,  pride  or  devotion,  purity  or  corruption.  And  heathens 
themselves  have  understood  this  well.  But  how  much  more  simple,  and 
solemn  has  the  question  become  since  Christ  said,  "  I  am  the  Way  I "  To 
know  if  He  speaks  true,  I  have  only  to  consider  whither  He  means  to  lead 
me.  What  then  is  the  end  which  He  sets  before  me?  It  is  the  one,  holy, 
just  and  good  Being  reigning  over  all  beings :  it  is  harmony  governing  the  world, 
man  loving  man.  Well,  if  that  is  the  end  towards  which  Christ  would  lead  me, 
what  need  have  I  to  argue  further  ?  Were  I  the  most  ignorant  of  men,  I  would 
instinctively  understand  tiiat  I  must  indeed  tend  towards  this  aim.  Were  I  the 
most  learned,  what  could  I  add  to  this  ideal  ?  II.  I  am  the  Tbuth.  1.  That  is 
what  greatly  astonishes  many  of  those  who  hear  Him.  They  are  willing  to  accept 
Christ  as  the  instructor  of  souls.  But  if  Jesus  Christ  had  been  nothing  more  than 
this,  we  instinctively  feel  that,  after  having  guided  men  to  the  true  God,  He  should 
have  retired  in  the  background  and  re-echoed  the  words  of  the  Forerunner :  "  God 
must  increase,  and  I  must  decrease."  Others,  and  among  these  many  of  the  noblest 
benefactors  of  mankind,  have  been  compelled  to  speak  thus.  Aristotle,  Copernicus, 
Newton,  Bacon,  Descartes  might  be  unknown  to  us  without  this  fact  depriving  their 
works  of  aught  of  their  value.  And  in  the  religious  order,  knew  we  nothing  what- 
ever of  Moses,  David,  or  St.  Paul,  we  would  none  the  less  be  in  possession  of  the 
genesis  of  the  world,  of  the  most  heart-thrilling  hymns  and  of  the  grand  doctrine  of 
grace.  These  men  were  the  witnesses  of  the  truth.  This  Jesus  Christ  has  also  been ; 
but  more  than  all  this,  and  that  is  why  He  utters  these  words,  which  in  the  lips  of 
Moses,  David,  or  St.  Paul,  had  been  blasphemy  :  "  I  am  the  Truth."  2.  What  is 
truth  ?  It  is  the  exact  relation  between  two  things.  Thus  a  word  is  true  when  it 
corresponds  perfectly  with  the  fact  or  the  idea  it  expresses ;  and  arithmetical  calcu* 
lation  is  true  when  it  gives  accurately  the  results  of  a  relation  between  two  difEerent 
quantities.  Every  truth,  therefore,  supposes  a  relation.  Well,  truth  in  religion 
will  be  the  harmonious,  and  perfect  relation  between  man  and  God.  Now  Jesus 
Christ  has  not  only  taught  us  what  this  relation  is,  but  that  He  has  realized  it  in 
His  person.  You  ask  what  is  the  true  religion.  We  point  to  Jesus  Christ  and 
answer :  "  Behold  it."  III.  I  am  the  Life.  1.  Life,  which  is  the  most  habitual 
and  common  of  phenomena,  is  the  most  unfathomable  of  mysteries.  Materialism, 
which  triumphs  to-day  in  so  many  schools,  is  stopped  by  this  problem  as  before  a 
brazen  door  for  ever  sealed.  The  Eternal  God  alone  calls  foiih  life ;  I  know  the 
terrible  objection,  if  God  alone  is  the  Author  of  all  life,  wherefore  evil  ?  To  this 
the  gospel  answers  that  the  world  is  not  in  a  state  of  order,  that  evil  has,  from  the 
origin,  been  the  consequence  of  the  improper  use  of  liberty.  But  have  you  observed 
how  closely  the  notion  of  sin  and  that  of  death  are  bound  up  together ;  have  you 
remarked  that  the  sublime  promise  of  life  is  essentially  reserved  for  that  alone 
which  is  in  harmony  with  the  will  of  God  t  Consequently,  strong  is  our  faith,  we 
are  able  to  say  to  all  the  powers  of  evil:  "You  shall  not  live  for  ever."  The 
Rospel  is  the  doctrine  of  life;  earth  has  been  visited  by  the  perfect  Being,  and 
•ecording  to  His  own  words :  *'  As  the  Father  hath  life  in  Himself,  so  hath  Ha 
given  to  the  Son  to  have  life  in  Himself."  Alone  the  Son  of  God  hath  life  in  Him. 
self.  Therefore  can  He  say :  "  I  am  the  Life."  2.  As  Christ  possesses  life  in 
Himself,  He  also  brings  life.  Life  alone  can  bring  forth  life.  Christ  came  into  a 
world  which  was  literally  dried  up.  What  He  did  in  Judaea  He  has  done  in  Rome,  in 
the  uncivilized  world ;  what  He  did  in  olden  time  He  is  doing  to-day ;  and  whilst  it 
remains  a  fatal  law  for  these  nations  that  civilization  alone  leads  them  to  destruo- 
tion,  it  also  remains  a  certain  and  striking  fact  that  civilization  with  Jesus 
Christ  is  able  to  transform  and  save  them.  But  if  Christ  brings  life 
to  nations,  it  is  by  imparting  it  to  souls  individually.  (E.  Bersier.) 
The  movement  of  the  ages : — May  it  not  be  said  that  the  movement  of  our  age  is 
towards  life  ?  I  sometimes  fancy  that  I  can  discern  three  epochs  in  the  Reformed 
Churches  corresponding  in  the  main  to  those  three  mighty  words,  via,  Veritas,  vita. 
The  Reformers  themselves  no  doubt  laid  the  stress  chiefly  upon  this  first.  It  was 
on  this  Popery  had  gone  most  astray,  obscuring  the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith 
alone.  The  epoch  following  was  essentially  dogmatic  when  the  doctors  drew  up 
systems  of  the  truth.  It  was  now  indeed  Christ  as  Veritas  1  but  the  dogma  taken 
alone  led  to  coldness,  dogmatism,  sectarianism  and  formality.  Happy  will  it  be 
for  the  Church  if,  not  forgetting  the  other  two,  she  shall  now  be  found  moving  on 
to  the  tiiiid  development  of  Christ  as  th^  I^We,  which  well  regulate  the  two  formef 


CHAP,  xrr.]  ST.  JOHN.  497 

aspects,  while  it  oonsummates  and  informs  them.  The  life  must  develop  the  indivi- 
dual, and  on  individuals  the  Church  depends  ;  for  in  God's  sight  it  is  no  abstraction. 
(J.  Mackintosh.)  lam  the  Way. — The  Way  : — The  most  precious  things  lie  in  the 
smallest  compass.  Diamonds  have  much  value  in  little  space.  Those  Scriptural 
Bayings  which  are  fullest  of  meaning  are  many  of  them  couched  in  the  fewest  words. 

1.  How  Jesus  Chbist  is  the  Wat,  and  how  He  comes  to  be  so.  A  way  supposes  tw9 
points — from  which  and  to  which.  1.  Christ  is  the  Way — (1)  From  the  guilt  of  sin. 
The  great  difficulty  was — How  is  sin  to  be  put  away  ?  Some  have  hoped  for  pardon 
from  future  good  conduct,  but  the  payment  of  a  future  debt  can  by  no  means  dis- 
charge a  past  debt.  Some  hope  much  from  the  mercy  of  God,  but  the  law  knows 
nothing  of  clearing  the  sinner  of  guilt  by  a  sovereign  act  of  mercy.  Here  is  the 
way  for  the  sinner  to  approach  the  Father.  His  sin  is  laid  upon  Christ,  who 
became  his  substitute.  (2)  The  text  is  true  concerning  the  wrath  of  God  on 
account  of  sin.  The  way  to  escape  from  wrath  is  to  escape  from  the  sin  which 
causes  the  wrath.  Now,  when  the  sin  of  God's  people  was  moved  from  them  to 
Christ,  the  wrath  of  God  went  where  the  sin  went.  (3)  There  comes  upon  us,  in 
consequence  of  sin,  a  deep  and  terrible  depression  of  spirit.  Christ  is  the  way  out 
of  the  sense  of  the  wrath  of  God.  (4)  But  more,  Christ  is  the  way  to  escape  from 
the  power  of  sin.  A  man  may  break  off  some  of  nis  sins  by  his  own  unaided  efforts. 
Still,  sin  dwells  in  fallen  creatures.  Who  can  bring  a  clean  thing  out  of  an  unclean  ? 
But  there  is  power  which  can  deliver  from  the  power  of  sin  and  make  holy  ;  it  is 
found  in  Christ  Jesus.  The  saints  in  glory  overcame  through  the  blood  of  the  Lamb, 
and  there  is  no  other  way  of  overcoming.  The  precious  blood  of  atonement 
wherever  sprinkled  kills  sin.  2.  Christ  is  the  Way — (1)  To  the  Father.  We  hear 
talk  of  getting  to  God  the  Father  by  nature,  but  it  is  a  ladder  too  short  to  reach  the 
Infinite.  It  is  only  by  Christ  that  we  realize  the  Fatherhood  of  God.  We  are  God's 
children  when  we  are  created  anew  in  Christ  Jesus.  (2)  To  conscious  acceptance 
with  the  Father.  "  Made  nigh  by  the  blood  of  Christ."  (3)  To  communion  with 
the  Father.  You  do  talk  with  God  when  you  draw  near  in  Jesus  Christ.  "  Truly, 
our  fellowship  is  with  the  Father,  and  with  His  Son  Jesus  Christ."  (4)  To  resemble 
the  Father.  You  imitate  Christ,  and  so  become  like  the  Father.  II.  What  sobt  of 
WAT  IS  Chbist,  and  fob  what  soet  of  people  ?  1.  What  sort  of  way.  He  is — (1) 
The  King's  highway,  the  Divinely-appointed  way  from  sin  to  the  Father.  (2)  An 
open  way.  If  I  am  treading  the  king's  highway  I  cannot  be  a  trespasser  there.  (8) 
A  perfect  way.  It  would  not  be  complete  unless  it  came  down  where  you  are. 
Where  are  you  ?  Defiled  by  evil  living  ?  There  is  a  road  from  where  you  are  right 
np  to  the  immaculate  perfection  of  the  blessed  at  God's  right  hand,  and  that  road 
is  Christ.  You  think  you  have  some  preparations  to  make,  some  feelings  to  pass 
through,  something  or  other  to  perform ;  but  all  you  can  do  to  make  yourself  fit  for 
Christ  is  to  make  yourself  unfit ;  all  your  preparations  are  but  foul  lumber — put 
them  all  away.  Thou  must  come  as  thou  art.  (4)  A  free  way.  There  is  not  a 
toll-bar  all  along  the  road.  Whosoever  wills  to  have  Christ  may  have  Him  for  the 
taking.  He  that  will  pay  for  Christ  cannot  have  Him  at  all.  If  faith  be  in  one 
respect  a  condition,  it  is  in  another  respect  a  gift  of  God,  and  though  we  are  com- 
manded to  repent,  yet  Jesus  is  exalted  on  high  to  give  repentance.  (5)  A  per- 
manent  way.  Not  a  way  for  Abraham,  Isaac  and  Jacob,  only,  but  for  you ;  not  for 
the  apostles,  and  martyrs,  and  early  saints,  only,  but  for  you.  It  is  a  way  that 
never  has  been  broken  up,  and  never  will  be.     (6)  A  joyful  way.     (7)  The  only  way. 

2.  For  what  sort  of  people.  For  all  sorts — (1)  For  wanderers.  (2)  For  back-sliders. 
(3)  For  captives.  (4)  For  the  poorest  of  the  poor.  III.  How  we  make  Chbist  oub 
WA.T.  1.  How  do  we  make  Christ  our  way?  As  we  make  any  other  way  our  way : 
by  getting  into  it.  2.  In  order  to  keep  the  way  your  own,  all  you  do  is  to  continue 
in  it.  "  The  just  shall  live  by  faith,"  not  by  any  other  means.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Jesus  the  Way  : — This  word  "way"  may  mean  either  one  of  two  things — the  road 
along  which  you  must  go  to  reach  a  certain  place ;  or  the  thing  that  must  be  done 
in  order  to  secure  any  particular  end.  When  we  think  of  heaven,  Jesus  is  the  way 
in  both  these  senses.  He  is  the  road  along  which  we  must  walk.  He  has  done  all 
that  is  necessary,  in  order  that  we  may  get  there.  The  way  of  salvation  through 
Jesus  is — I.  A  plain  wat.  A  paved  street  or  a  turnpike  road,  is  a  plain  way.  But 
if  we  are  travelUng  over  a  sandy  desert,  or  through  a  rocky  country  where  there  is 
nothing  to  mark  the  path,  then  we  are  in  a  way  that  is  not  plain.  It  is  hard  to  find 
the  way,  and  at  every  step,  we  are  liable  to  get  off  the  right  track.  The  way  of 
salvation  in  Jesus  is  easy  to  find  and  easy  to  keep,  if  we  only  ask  God  to  help  us  in 
finding  and  keeping  it.    (Isa.  xxxv.  8 ;  Hab.  ii.  2).    The  father  of  a  little  girl  wa* 

YOU  n.  82 


<98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  jot. 

once  in  great  trouble  on  accoant  of  his  sins.  He  lay  awake,  after  going  to  bed  one 
night,  in  fear  and  dread.  His  little  daughter  was  sleeping  in  her  crib  beside  hif 
bed.  Presently  she  began  to  move  about  uneasily.  "  Papa,  papa  I  "  she  called. 
"  What  is  it,  my  darling  ?  "  he  asked.  "  Oh,  papa,  it's  so  dark  1  Take  NeUie'a 
hand."  He  reached  out  and  took  her  tiny  little  hand,  clasping  it  firmly  in  his  own. 
A  sigh  of  relief  came  from  her  little  heart.  At  once  she  was  quieted  and  comforted. 
That  father  felt  that  his  little  child  had  taught  him  a  valuable  lesson.  "  Oh,  my 
Father,  my  Saviour,"  he  cried,  "  it  is  dark,  very  dark  in  my  soul.  Take  my  hand." 
So  he  turned  to  Jesus  and  trusted  in  Him.  A  minister  had  a  son  in  the  army. 
Tidings  came  that  his  son  had  been  wounded  and  was  not  expected  to  live.  On 
arriving  there,  the  doctor  said,  "  He  may  die  any  moment."  With  a  sad  heart,  the 
father  went  in.  "  Oh,  father,"  said  the  wounded  man,  "  the  doctor  says  I  must 
die,  and  I  am  not  prepared  for  it.  Tell  me  how  I  can  be  ready.  Make  it  so  plain 
that  I  can  get  hold  of  it."  "  My  son,"  said  the  father, "  do  you  remember  one  day, 
years  ago,  I  had  occasion  to  rebuke  you  for  something  you  had  done  ?  You  became 
very  angry  and  abused  me."  "  Yes,  father."  Do  you  remember,  after  your  anger 
had  passed  off,  how  you  came  in  and  threw  your  arms  round  my  neck  and  said : 
•  My  dear  father,  I  am  so  sorry,  won't  you  forgive  me  ?  '  "  "Yes,  I  remember  it 
very  distinctly."  "  Do  you  remember  wbat  I  said  ?  "  "  Oh,  yes.  You  said  :  •  I 
forgive  you  with  all  my  heart,'  and  you  kissed  me."  "  Did  you  believe  me?" 
"Certainly."  "And  then  did  you  feel  happy  again?"  "Yes,  perfectly  happy, 
and  since  that  time  I  have  loved  you  better  than  ever  before."  "Well,  now,  my 
son,  this  is  the  way  to  come  to  Jesus.  Tell  Him,  •  I  am  so  sorry,'  just  as  you  told 
me :  and  He  will  forgive  you  a  thousand  times  quicker  than  I  did."  "  Father,  is 
this  the  way.  Why,  I  can  get  hold  of  this."  And  he  did  get  hold  of  it  and  was 
soon  happy.  After  awhile,  the  doctor  came  in .  He  felt  the  pulse  of  the  wounded 
man,  and  said  with  surprise :  "  Why,  Colonel,  you  look  better."  "  I  am  better, 
doctor.  I'm  going  to  get  well."  He  got  well ;  and  he  is  living  now,  the  joy  and 
comfort  of  that  father  who  made  the  way  of  salvation  so  plain  that  he  could  get 
hold  of  it.  II.  A  BBOAD  WAT  (Matt.  ix.  28 ;  Bev.  xxii.  17).  There  was  a  poor 
sailor  who  had  lived  a  very  wicked  hfe.  Once,  while  far  off  at  sea,  it  pleased  God 
to  awaken  his  conscience.  Then  he  was  in  great  distress.  There  was  no  one  on 
board  to  tell  him  what  to  do.  One  night  he  lay  in  his  berth,  and  in  the  dim  light 
of  the  feeble  lamp,  he  was  reading  the  Bible.  He  came  to  John  iii.  16.  He  put 
his  finger  on  the  word  "whosoever,"  *•  Whosoever,"  said  he,  "  that  means  any- 
body ;  that  means  everybody  1  Why,  that  means  me !  "  Then  he  turned  in  faith 
to  Jesus,  and  He  received  him.  He  got  into  the  broad  way  of  salvation  through 
this  sweet  word.  One  day  a  minister  was  visiting  with  a  friend  among  some  of 
the  poorest  of  the  population.  He  entered  a  wretched  looking  house.  A  rickety 
bedstead,  a  couple  of  broken  chairs,  the  remains  of  a  table,  and  a  few  pieces  of 
earthenware  on  the  shelf,  made  up  all  the  furniture.  In  the  middle  of  the  room  a 
miserable  looking  woman  lay  on  the  floor  drunk.  The  minister  said  to  his  friend: 
*•  Let  us  pray  for  her."  They  kneeled  down  and  prayed  that  God  would  have  mercy 
on  this  poor  woman.  She  lay  there  still  and  stupid,  and  seemed  to  take  no  notice. 
They  went  away.  Some  months  after  the  minister  was  going  again  through  that 
part  of  the  city.  A  weU-dressed,  respectable-looking  woman  came  up  and  spoke  to 
£dm.  ••  Do  yoa  not  remember  some  months  since  praying  over  a  woman  who  lay 
dmnk  on  the  floor  ?  "  "I  do."  "  Well,  sir,  I  am  that  woman.  I  was  respectably 
broQght  up  by  Christian  parents.  I  married ;  but  after  awhile  my  husband  died, 
and  left  me  with  three  children  in  utter  poverty.  I  saw  no  way  of  support  but 
by  my  own  shajne.  Then  I  took  to  drinking  to  drown  my  sorrow.  I  was  at  the 
lowest  point  of  sin  and  misery  when  yon  stopped  and  offered  that  prayer.  It  saved 
me.  It  made  me  think  of  my  dear  mother,  now  in  heaven.  And,  by  God's  help, 
I  hope  yet  to  join  her  there."  Oh,  it  is  a  broad  way  of  salvation  that  can  take 
in  such  poor  wretched  creatures  as  this!  A  gentleman  was  sent  for  once 
to  visit  one  of  his  class,  a  newsboy,  named  Billy,  who  was  very  ill.  As  he 
entered  the  room,  Billy  said:  "Oh,  captain,  I'm  mighty  glad  to  see  yer." 
"  What  can  I  do  for  you,  my  dear  fellow?"  "I  wanted  to  ax  yer  two  questions. 
Did  you  tell  us  the  other  night  as  how  Jesus  Christ  died  for  every  feller  ?  "  "  Yes, 
♦  Jesus  Christ  tasted  death  for  every  man.' "  "  Good  I "  said  Billy :  "  I  thoaght  so. 
Now  did  yoa  tell  us  as  how  Jesus  Christ  saves  every  feller  that  axes  Him  ?  "  "  Yes," 
laid  his  mend;  " Every  one  that  asketh  receiveth."  "Then  I  know,"  said  Billy, 
with  a  feeble  but  happy  voice,  "  That  He  saves  me  because  I  axes  Him."  The 
teacher  paused  to  wipe  away  a  tear  from  his  eye.    Then  he  stooped  down  to  speak 


(SHIP.  ziT.]  8T.  JOHN.  499 

to  the  boy.  Bat  Billy's  head  had  dropped  back  on  his  pillow  of  rags,  and  his  happy 
spirit  bad  gone  to  Jesus.  IIL  A  nabbow  way.  It  is  a  broad  way,  because  the 
greatest  sinners  may  come  into  it,  and  any  number.  It  is  a  narrow  way,  because 
when  sinners  come  into  it  they  must  leave  all  their  sins  behind  (Matt.  vii.  13). 
1.  There  is  a  vessel  lying  at  anchor.  It  can  make  no  progress  while  the  anchor  holds 
it.  It  may  rise  and  fall,  as  the  tide  rises  or  falls ;  but  it  cannot  move  away.  And 
just  what  the  anchor  does  to  the  vessel,  one  sin,  one  wrong  thought  or  feeling  in- 
dulged  or  allowed,  will  do  for  the  soul.  It  will  keep  it  from  going  on  in  the  way  of 
salvation.  2.  A  lady  once  was  led  to  see  that  she  was  a  sinner.  The  thought  of 
her  sins  made  her  feel  very  unhappy.  The  difficulty  was  just  here.  She  had  been 
a  very  charitable  woman,  and  wanted  to  trust  in  part  to  good  works.  One  night, 
after  weeping  and  praying  in  great  distress,  she  went  to  bed.  In  her  sleep  she 
dreamed  that  she  fell  over  a  dreadful  precipice.  In  falling,  she  caught  hold  of  the 
branch  of  a  tree.  In  her  terror  she  cried  out :  "  Oh,  save  me,  save  me  1 "  She 
heard  the  voice  of  Jesus  saying:  "Let  go  that  branch,  and  I  will  save  you."  But 
she  was  unwilling  to  loose  her  hold.  Again  she  cried :  "  Oh,  save  me  1 "  The 
same  voice  said:  "  I  cannot  help  you  while  you  cling  there."  At  last  she  let  go, 
expecting  to  be  dashed  to  pieces.  But,  instead  of  this,  she  found  herself  caught  in 
the  strong  arms  of  her  Saviour.  In  the  joy  of  feeling  herself  safe,  she  awoke.  And 
BO  in  her  dream  she  had  learned  the  lesson  which  she  had  failed  to  learn  in  her 
waking  hours.  She  saw  that  the  way  of  salvation  was  too  narrow  for  her  to  carry 
any  of  her  good  works  into  it.  IV.  Thb  only  way.  Some  people  think  that  there 
are  a  great  many  ways  to  heaven,  and  that  one  of  these  is  as  good  as  any  of  the 
others.  What  does  God  say  about  it  ?  (Isa.  xliii.  11 ;  Acts  iv.  12).  No  one  can  ever 
get  to  heaven  who  does  not  go  there  through  Jesus  Christ.  Many  will  go  to 
heaven  without  knowing  how  they  get  there.  But  they  will  find  it  was  Jesus  alone 
who  brought  them  there.  A  little  girl  was  very  ill.  She  asked  :  "  Papa,  does  the 
doctor  think  I  shall  die  ?  "  With  a  very  sad  heart,  her  father  said :  "  My  darling, 
the  doctor  is  afraid  you  cannot  Uve."  Then  her  pale  face  grew  very  sad.  She 
thought  about  the  dark  graves,  and  her  eyes  filled  with  tears  as  she  said :  "  Papa, 
the  grave  is  very  dark.  Won't  you  go  down  with  me  into  it  ?  "  With  a  bursting 
heart,  her  father  told  her  he  coiid  not  go  with  her,  till  the  Lord  called  him.  "  Papa, 
won't  you  let  mamma  go  with  me  ?  "  It  almost  broke  that  father's  heart  to  teU 
her  that,  much  as  her  mother  loved  her,  she  could  not  go  with  her  either.  The 
poor  dear  child  turned  her  face  to  the  wall  and  wept.  But  she  had  been  taught 
about  Jesus,  as  the  Friend  and  Saviour  of  sinners.  She  poured  out  her  little  heart 
to  Him  with  a  child's  full  faith,  and  found  comfort  in  Him.  Soon  she  turned  again 
to  her  father,  with  her  face  all  lighted  up  with  joy,  and  said :  "  Papa,  the  grave  is 
not  dark  now.  Jesus  will  go  with  me."  But  Jesus  is  the  only  one  who  can  do  this 
(Psa.  xxiii.  4).  Some  years  ago  there  was  a  distinguished  lawyer,  who  had  an  only 
daughter,  the  light  and  joy  of  her  father's  life.  The  mother  of  this  young  girl  was 
an  earnest  Christian  woman.  She  had  tried  to  teach  her  child  that  Jesus  was  the 
only  way  of  salvation.  But  her  husband  was  an  infidel.  He  had  told  his  daughter 
that  we  could  get  to  heaven  without  the  help  of  Jesus.  This  daughter  loved  and 
honoured  both  her  parents ;  but  as  her  father  told  her  of  one  way  and  her  mother 
of  another  way,  she  could  not  make  up  her  mind  which  of  these  two  ways  was  the 
right  one.  At  the  age  of  sixteen  she  was  taken  very  ill.  One  day,  she  said  to  her 
father  with  great  earnestness :  "Father,  I  am  going  to  die.  What  must  I  do  to  be 
saved  ?  My  mother  has  taught  me  that  the  only  way  of  salvation  is  in  Jesua 
Christ.  You  have  taught  me  that  we  can  be  saved  without  Jesus.  Shall  I  take  my 
mother's  advice  or  yours  ?  "  The  strong  man  was  deeply  moved.  After  a  while, 
he  came  to  the  bedside  of  his  daughter.  He  took  her  pale,  thin  hand  in  his,  and 
said  slowly  but  solemnly :  "  My  darling  daughter,  take  your  mother's  way."  Hera 
is  a  ship  at  sea.  She  has  been  overtaken  by  a  dreadful  storm.  Her  masts  are 
broken,  her  sails  are  rent.  She  has  sprung  a  leak,  and  now  the  pumps  are  choked, 
and  can  no  longer  be  worked.  The  water  is  rising.  It  is  very  evident  that  she 
cannot  be  kept  afioat  much  longer.  There  is  only  one  way  left  to  the  poor  sailors 
for  saving  their  lives?  What  is  that?  It  is  to  take  to  the  life-boat.  And  we,  as 
sinners,  are  just  in  the  position  of  such  a  storm-tossed  wreck  at  sea.  Jesus  is  the 
lifeboat.  (B.  Newton,  D.D.)  Christ  the  Way  : — We  could  never  rejoice  in 
this  His  way,  if  He  merely  stood  in  the  way  as  a  sign-post,  or  went  befora 
ns  as  a  Guide.  God  be  praised,  our  Jesus  is  not  only  Counsellor,  but 
mighty  as  well;  and  not  mighty  only,  but  Mighty  God  I  (Isa.  ix.  6).  If  He 
it  ai  a  sign-post,  He  is  one  with  Uving  arms ;  for  He  receives  us  to  Himself,  from 


600  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xif. 

Eia  Cross  He  draws  tis  np  to  Himself,  He  lifts  as  npon  His  shonlders;   ia 
short,  He  is  Himself  the  way,  the  new  living  way,  which,  like  a  full  flowing  river, 
bears  along  our  little  bark,  and  brings  it  to  the  ocean  of  a  blissful  eternity.  Conrad 
Bieger  sets  before  us  Jesus  as  the  way,  thus  :  *'  Where  is  the  man  who  will  give 
himself  to  another  to  be  his  way  ?    If  the  king  could  not  cross  over  a  dyke,  and 
were  to  say  to  one  of  you, '  Lay  thyself  in  this  dyke  to  make  a  bridge  that  I  may 
cross  over  upon  thee,'  where  is  the  meanest  subject  in  the  land  who  would  consent 
to  do  it  1  But  what  no  man  would  like  to  do  for  another,  that  Jesus  does  for  us  aU." 
(JR.  Besser,  D.D.)        Christ  the  way   to  God: — L  In  what  bespects  is  Chbibt 
"  THB  Way  ?  "    1.  As  a  Teacher.    He  came  into  a  world  that  was  filled  with  error 
and  falsehood.      Everywhere  men  were   groping  in  the  dark,  following  "bUnd 
leaders."    And  the  Saviour  affirmed,  "  I  am  the  Light  of  the  World."    "  I  am  the 
Truth."    All  spiritual  truth  is  associated  with  Christ,  because  it  proceeds  from  Him 
and  terminates  in  Him.    2.  As  a  Mediator.    Many  can  see  that  Christ  is  "  th« 
Way"  as  a  Teacher,  but  not  as  a  Mediator.    But  if  Christ  be  a  Teacher,  and 
nothing  more,  then  He  rather  shows  "  the  Way,"  than  is  "  the  Way."  Between  man 
and  God  there  stretches  a  wide  gulf  which  sin  has  opened.     Amidst  the  many  ex> 
pedients  which  man  vainly  devises,  the  Saviour  interposes  and  becomes  the  "  one 
Mediator  between  God  and  man."    3.  As  such — (1)  He  intercedes  with  us,  and 
beseeches  us  to  be  reconciled  to  God.     (2)  He  intercedes  with  God.    For  this  the 
Saviour  is  fitted  because  of  His  atoning  work.    He  entered  into  the  holy  place, 
*•  neither  by  the  blood  of  goats  and  calves,  but  by  His  own  blood."    "  Having, 
therefore,  brethren,  boldness  to  enter,"  &g.     (3)  He  receives  and  bestows  upon  as 
the  Holy  Spirit.     If  man  is  to  come  to  God  it  must  be  as  a  "new  creature"  that 
he  comes.     II.  Some  of  thb  chabacteristics  of  this  "  Wat."    1.  Truth.    Im- 
mediately our  Lord  adds, "  I  am  the  Truth."    From  the  Fall  until  now  the  human 
mind  has  been  in  matters  of  religion  avaricious  of  error.     Now,  amidst  the  many 
ways  which  men  have  invented,  Christ  presents  Himself  as  the  true  Way — the  Way 
which  God  provides,  and  which  Scripture  reveals.    What  other  way  so  commends 
itself  to  an  enlightened  reason  as  this.      2.  Purity.    False  systems  of  religion 
must  accommodate  themselves  to  man's  frailties,  and  enable  him  to  compound  for 
his  sins ;  it  is  only  the  gospel  that  presents  a  pure  and  perfect  standard.  3.  Happi- 
ness  and  security.    Emphatically  may  it  be  said  that  it  is  a  way  of  peace.    But  can 
you  affirm  this  of  those  methods  of  salvation  which  man  has  invented?    "Blessed 
is  the  man  whose  sins  are  forgiven."   Safe  as  well  as  happy  1 — for  as  this  is  a  living 
way,  all  who  walk  in  it  participate  in  that  eternal  hfe  which  it  bestows  (Isa.  zzzv. 
8-10).    I  think  of  every  image  that  can  suggest  this  security,  but  they  all  fail  ade- 
quately to  shadow  it  forth.    I  think  of  Noah  sheltered  in  the  ark ;  of  Lot,  plucked 
as  a  "  brand  from  the  burning ; "  of  the  criminal  pursued  by  the  officers  of  justice 
reaching  the  Temple  ;  of  the  man-slayer  in  the  city  of  refuge.     "  There  is  no  con- 
demnation,"  &c.    4.  Simplicity.   What  can  be  plainer  than  this  promise,  •'  He  that 
believeth,  shall  be  saved  ; "  or  than  this  invitation,  "  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that 
labour,"  &o. ;  or  than  this  assarance,  "  Him  tbat  cometh  unto  Me,  I  will  in  no  wise 
cast  out ;  "  or  than  this  command,  "  Look  unto  Me,  all  ye  ends  of  the  earth,  and 
be  ye  saved  "  ?  6.  Exclusiveness.   •'  There  is  no  other  name,"  &c.  (if.  J.  Gamble.) 
Make  sure  thut  you   are   in  the  right  way : — When  I  was  at  Fall  Eiver,   I   waa 
obliged  to  rise  at  four  o'clock  in  the  morning  to  take  the  train.  I  took  my  carpet-bag  ia 
my  hand,  acd  ran,  but  was  in  trouble  lest  I  might  be  running  directly  from  the  cars, 
instead  of  towards  them.    There  was  not  a  person  in  sight ;  but  I  saw  a  light  in 
one  upper  window.    A  watcher  was  there.     I  rang  the  bell,  and  asked  information 
as  to  my  way.    It  was  gives.     I  was  about  right — only  needed  a  little  help,  and 
now,  knowing  that  I  was  in  the  right  way,  I  did  run.    A  bird  might  have  counted  it 
doing  well  to  keep  up  with  me ;  for  I  expected  every  moment  to  hear  the  bell,  and  the 
rushing  off  of  the  train,  and  then  I  should  be  there,  and  my  people  without  a 
sermon  on  Sunday.     Only  let  me  be  sure  that  I  was  in  the  right  way,  and  I  was 
willing  to  run.     So  says  the  Christian,  "  Only  let  me  be  sure  that  I  am  on  my  way 
to  heaven,  and  there  is  nothing  that  I  am  not  willing  to  do  or  to  bear."    Well,  il 
you  are  so  earnest,  know  that  Christ  is  the  Way ;  and  if  you  are  desirous  to  cast 
away  all  that  shall  hinder  your  race,  I  think  that  you  need  not  doubt  that  you  are 
already  in  it.   {H.  W.  Beecher.)      Christ  the  only  way  : — Mrs.  Bennet,  wife  of  John 
Bennet,  minister  of  an  Independent  Church  in  Cheshire,  the  day  before  she  died, 
raised  herself  into  a  very  solemn  attitude,  and  with  most  striking  emphasis,  delivered, 
in  the  following  language  her  dying  testimony  to  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus :  ♦'  I 
hete  declare  it  before  you  that  I  have  looked  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left — ^I 


CHAP.  xiT.]  8T.  JOHN.  601 

have  cast  my  eyes  before  and  behind — to  see  if  there  was  any  possible  way  of  salva* 
tion  but  by  the  Son  of  God  ;  and  I  am  fully  satisfied  there  is  not.  No  1  none  on 
earth,  nor  all  the  angels  in  heaven,  could  have  wrought  out  salvation  for  such  a 
sinner.  None  but  God  Himself,  taking  our  nature  upon  Him,  and  doing  all  that 
the  holy  law  required,  could  have  procured  pardon  for  me,  a  sinner.  He  haa 
wrought  out  salvation  for  me,  and  I  know  that  I  shall  enjoy  it  for  ever."  The 
way  to  our  wishes  : — Thomas  was  the  spokesman  of  the  disciples  for  the  moment. 
The  Saviour  speaks  to  them  and  to  us  as  if  we  were  anxious  to  get  a  glimpse  of  a 
particular  person,  and  to  go  to  a  particular  place.  Are  not  these  longings  strong 
and  deep  in  the  heart  of  humanity  ?  Is  not  science  itself  in  search  of  the  Father  ? 
Is  it  not  trying  by  every  means  in  its  power  to  get  up  to  the  Great  First  Cause  ? 
And  does  not  superstition  unite  its  sighs  with  those  of  science  ?  When  it  makes 
its  idol  and  falls  down  before  it,  is  it  not  trying  to  bring  God  within  the  bounds  of 
visibility  ?  And  is  not  Pantheism  in  pursuit  of  the  same  object  f  God  everything, 
and  everything  God.  Deeper  still  is  the  desire  in  the  heart  of  the  Church. 
Now  Christ  says,  "I  am  the  Way."  Would  it  not  be  wonderful  if  it  were 
otherwise,  if  there  were  no  way?  We  see  on  all  sides  provision  made  for 
the  wants  of  our  nature,  for  the  gratification  of  the  wishes  of  our  hearts. 
Are  we  to  believe  that  the  desires  which  we  have  for  the  highest  and  noblest  and 
holiest  of  all  things  are  to  be  made  exceptions  to  the  rule  ?  I.  Christ  is  thh 
Wat  by  which  the  Gbbat  First  Cause,  the  Father  op  all,  has  been  brought 

WITHIN   THE   RANGE   OF  HUMAN   VISION   IN   A   REAL  PERSONAL  FORM.      His  attributes  are 

evident  from  His  works.  Holy  men  of  old  were  permitted  to  hear  His  voice  some- 
times, and  to  behold  symbols  of  His  presence.  But  the  Lord  Jesus  made  the  eternal 
God  visible  to  the  eye  of  man  in  human  form — '*  In  Him  dwelt  all  the  fulness  of 
the  Godhead  bodily."  And  that  was  the  only  way  in  which  He  could  be  manifested 
personally  to  the  eye  of  flesh.  Mortal  man  could  not  go  up  to  God  where  He  is. 
The  only  alternative  was,  that  God  should  come  down  in  the  faf^hion  of  a  man.  In 
no  other  nature  could  He  convey  a  complete  conception  of  His  character  to  the 
mind.  II.  Christ  is  the  Way  by  which  man  gets  up  to  God,  and  dwells  with 
Him  at  last  in  His  House.  When  we  were  bearing  our  own  sins,  we  dreaded  Him  ; 
when  He  is  placed  before  us  bearing  our  sins,  we  are  attracted  to  Him,  and  take 
hold  of  Him  with  our  whole  heart,  as  His  heart  took  hold  of  us  when  we  were 
perishing.  When  we  are  drawn  to  Him  we  partake  of  His  nature  as  really  as  He 
partook  of  ours.  His  Spirit  flows  into  us,  and  all  that  is  good  is  quickened  and 
strengthened  in  us,  so  that  an  affinity  is  established  between  us  and  Him,  just  as  an 
affinity  had  been  previously  established  between  Him  and  us.  •*  If  I  be  hfted  up,  I 
will  draw  all  men  unto  Me."  His  people  "  seek  the  things  which  are  above,"  &o. 
"  Our  citizenship  is  in  heaven."  When  the  souls  of  His  people  are  loosed  from 
their  bodies  at  death  they  go  up  to  Him.  And  the  bodies  of  believers,  as  well  aa 
their  spirits,  will  be  drawn  up  to  Him  at  last.  "  And  so  we  shall  be  ever  with  the 
Lord."  {W.  Simpson.)  The  way  to  the  Father:— We  hear  much  of  the  Father- 
hood of  God,  and  cannot  hear  too  much  if  the  doctrine  be  truly  stated.  It  is  not  a 
new  doctrine.  The  heathen  knew  something  of  it ;  it  is  in  the  Old  Testament, 
while  it  is  the  very  substance  of  the  New.  Only  in  the  latter,  what  heathenism 
never  knew,  and  what  the  Law  and  the  Prophets  only  taught  imperfectly,  God  ia 
our  Father  in  the  Eternal  Son.  This  distinctly  Christian  doctrine  is  declared  in 
our  text — I.  Polemically.  It  protests  against  certain  religious  teachings  which 
contravene  it.  Throughout  His  ministry  Christ  was  in  conflict  with  men  who  held 
a  false  doctrine  of  the  Fatherhood  of  God.  1.  There  were  those  who  represented 
God  as  though  He  looked  on  His  human  offspring  with  a  complacency  which  winked 
at  all  moral  distinctions.  The  Supreme  Father  looked  upon  all  with  equal  indiffer- 
ence. In  opposition  to  this  Christ  taught  that  man  was  estranged  from  God  through 
Bin.  He  had  lost  the  knowledge  of  God  and  was  spiritually  dark ;  the  favour  of 
God  and  was  guilty ;  the  image  of  God  and  was  corrupt ;  the  life  of  God  and  was 
dead  in  trespasses  and  sins ;  and  that  men  could  only  secure  the  prerogatives  of 
sonship  by  intervention  from  without.  There  are  those  to-day  who  teach  the  old 
doctrines  of  a  philosophical  Sadduceeism.  Christianity  challenges  them.  Appealing 
to  Christ's  credentials  as  a  Teacher  sent  from  God,  it  proclaims  to  the  world  that 
God  hath  given  unto  us  eternal  Ufe,  and  that  this  life  is  by  a  Mediator  whom  He 
hath  ordained.  There  is  no  absurdity  in  the  doctrine.  Who  but  God  can  deter- 
mine how  we  may  most  fitly  come  to  Him  J  And  as  the  Mediatorship  ia  actually 
oonstitated,  what  lessons  touching  Divine  love  and  holiness,  and  human  helpless- 
and  lUgnity,  does  it  not  poor  into  cor  ears.    2.  Bat  Christ's  ministry  did 


602  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLV8TRAT0R.  [chat.  xit. 

battle  eTen  more  keenly  with  those  who  held  that  God  was  their  Father  through 
mediatorship.  Angels,  Abraham,  Moses,  saintly  pedigree,  holy  observances,  &c., 
were  their  monthpieces  with  God,  and  stepping-stones  to  immortality.  Christ  told 
them  they  carried  a  lie  in  their  right  hand ;  that  there  was  but  one  Mediator — Him- 
self. Alas  1  we  have  the  doctrine  of  the  Pharisees  too.  Men  are  heard  proclaiming 
that  the  prayer  of  a  disembodied  saint,  the  magic  of  a  Christian  rite,  &o.,  have  the 
stupendous  power  to  join  heaven  and  earth  together.  The  New  Testament  pro- 
nounces all  this  to  be  falsehood.  Our  alms,  deeds,  fastings,  communions,  baptisms, 
Ac. — these  bridge  the  gulf  between  us  and  God  1  What  does  a  man  think  of  him- 
self, what  does  he  thic^  of  God,  who  takes  up  with  such  a  hypothesis  f  II.  Doc- 
TEiNALLT.  Taken  with  its  context,  the  text  is  the  summary  and  index  of  a  most 
large  and  precious  Scripture  teaching.  How  do  men  come  to  the  Father  through 
Christ  ?  Necessarily  the  Person,  character,  and  history  of  the  Mediator  will  have 
much  to  do  with  the  nature  and  method  of  His  mediation.  Who  the  Mediator  was 
let  John  tell  us  (chap,  i.),  and  His  character  and  history  let  him  and  his  brethren 
tell.  With  these  facts  in  view  men  have  held  that  the  value  of  Christ's  mediation 
consists  in  the  energy  of  the  truth  He  taught,  and  the  force  of  His  example. 
Others  explain  that  by  His  perfect  fulfilment  of  the  will  of  God  as  our  representa- 
tive, He  became  so  acceptable  to  God,  that  by  reason  of  what  He  did  God  is  now 
the  loving  Father  of  us  all,  and  in  Him  all  men  are  already  virtually,  and  wiU  be 
by  and  by  actually  justified  and  glorified.  Now  both  these  theories  mistake  the 
entire  basis,  method  and  scope  of  Christ's  Mediatorship,  which  is  essentially 
an  economy  of  holy  law,  in  which  God  and  man  sustain  not  simply  the 
relations  of  Father  and  Son,  but  those  of  moral  Governor  and  rational  and 
responsible  creature.  According  to  Scripture — 1.  Christ's  blood  has  made 
satisfaction  in  law  to  Divine  justice  for  the  sins  of  all  mankind,  by  virtue 
of  which  sin  is  expiated,  and  all  men  through  personal  faith  may  find 
mercy  and  acceptance.  2.  As  the  recompense  of  the  Eedeemer's  passion.  God 
gives  to  the  world  by  Christ's  hands  His  Holy  Spirit,  by  whom  assurance  of  pardon 
is  given,  and  new  birth  to  righteousness.  3.  Under  the  reign  of  Christ  behevers 
are  protected  from  the  evil  that  is  in  the  world ;  subjected  to  providential  discipline, 
and  furnished  with  strength  to  do  the  will  of  God  and  make  their  way  to  everlasting 
life.  III.  EvangelicaijjT  aot)  pbomissobt.  Men  can  only  come  to  God  by  Christ ; 
but  by  Him  there  is  free  access  for  every  soul.  To  come  to  the  Father  is — 1.  To 
know  God.  2.  To  be  the  object  of  the  love  of  God.  3.  To  be  with  God  for  ever. 
Conclusion :  1.  The  words  illuminate  the  widest  possible  area  of  religious  truth. 
God  is  and  always  has  been,  whether  as  Creator,  Preserver,  Bedeemer,  the  Father 
of  men  through  a  Mediator.  2.  Within  a  narrower  circle,  Christ's  doctrine  lays 
down  broad  lines  of  duty  and  privilege  for  the  Church  of  God.  Let  no  false  charity 
presume  to  enlarge  what  God  has  straitened.  It  is  at  the  Church's  peril  that  it 
dares  to  cripple  man's  evangelical  Uberty.  3.  The  text  speaks  with  a  gracious  but 
authoritative  voice  to  every  hearer  of  the  gospel.  (1)  Do  not  hope  to  find  God 
without  Christ.  (2)  Do  not  treat  Christ  as  though  His  Mediatorship  was  inadequate. 
(3)  Let  no  man  despise  or  neglect  the  Mediator,  **  How  shall  we  escape,"  &c.  {J. 
D.  Geden,  D.D.)  Christ  the  only  way  to  the  Father: — Not  long  ago,  two  little 
children  rambling  from  home  over  a  wild  and  dangerous  part  of  Dartmoor,  lost 
their  way.  Utterly  unable  to  find  the  right  path,  they  sat  down,  and  cried  bitterly. 
"  And  what  did  you  do  next?  "  was  the  question  put  to  them  afterwards.  *'l  said, 
•  Our  Father,' "  answered  the  boy,  •'  and  sister  said,  '  Gentle  Jesus.' "  Then  they 
made  another  attempt,  and  discovered  a  moorland  road  which  led  them  safely  home. 
Surely  the  conduct  of  those  Uttle  ones,  lost  on  the  moor,  has  a  lesson  for  us.  If 
any  of  us  have  wandered  from  the  right  way,  and  lost  sight  of  our  Father's  House, 
and  fallen  among  the  dangers  of  a  sinful  world,  what  can  we  do  better  than  shed 
tears  of  sorrowful  repentance ;  what  can  we  do  better  than  cry  to  Our  Father  and 
Gentle  Jesus?  (H.  J.  W.  Buxton,  M. A.)  Christ  the  only  way  of  approach  to 
the  Father : — I.  To  come  unto  the  Father  must  be  begabded  as  the  chiff 
CONCERN  OF  MAN.  1.  The  nature  of  this  coming  to  the  Father.  It  is— (1)  To 
obtain  an  accurate  acquaintance  of  His  character  and  His  will.  We  are  said  to  be 
distant  from  an  object  when  we  are  ignorant  of  it.  In  the  Sacred  Writings,  on  the 
one  hand,  ignorance  of  God  is  mentioned  as  being  a  crime ;  and,  on  the  other, 
to  attain  an  accurate  acquaintance  with  Jehovah  is  the  highest  human  blessing. 
It  is,  therefore,  desired  for  men  that  they  may  have  the  spirit  of  wisdom  and  of 
revelation  in  the  knowledge  of  God  and  His  Son.  (2)  The  enjoyment  of  reconcilia- 
tion with  Him.    Beconciliation  was  the  grand  theme  which  Christ  preached,  aa 


OBAP.  xiT.]  ST.  JOHN.  503 

well  as  the  grand  work  which  He  came  to  accomplish.  2.  The  importance  of  thus 
coming  to  the  Father.  Adopting  the  most  general  assumption  that  God  is  the 
Governor,  and  that  man  ia  a  subject,  and  that  the  sanction  by  which  the  govern- 
ment of  God  is  vindicated,  over  the  retribution  of  eternity,  then  it  must  follow  that 
nothing  can  be  of  importance  at  all  compared  to  the  attainment  of  a  state  by  which 
the  infliction  of  the  Divine  anger  may  be  avoided,  and  by  which  the  enjoyment  of 
the  Divine  favour  may  be  secured.  II,  The  wore  op  the  Lord  Jesus  aptoeds  a 
JiETHOD  BY  WHICH  MEN  MAY  COME  UNTO  THE  Fatheb.  In  the  wholo  of  the  ssries 
of  verses,  with  which  the  text  is  connected,  our  Saviour  speaks  of  Himself  as  being 
one  who  had  been  introduced  for  the  purpose  of  accomplishing  a  work,  through  the 
agency  of  which  man  might  be  made  possessor  of  aU  that  is  desirable  in  the  state 
we  have  endeavoured  to  describe.  Let  us  notice — 1.  The  nature  of  the  work  which 
our  Lord  Jesus  has  accomplished.  (1)  Christ  is  invested  with  the  oflSce  of  a 
teacher.  One  object  of  His  incarnation  was  to  remove  those  awful  shades  of  ignor- 
ance which  had  overshadowed  the  nations  of  the  earth  ;  and  to  inculcate  all  those 
principles  of  spiritual  truth  which  were  necessary  for  man  to  know  and  believe. 
(2)  But  we  must  contemplate  the  work  of  our  Lord  as  that  which  also  furnishes  a 
positive  atonement  for  sin.  2.  The  extent  to  which  this  work  is  intended  to  be 
applied.  The  merit  of  the  work  of  the  Saviour  is  intrinsically  sufiQcient  for  the 
world.  The  means  of  access  and  acceptance  with  God,  under  the  Levitical  dispen- 
sation, were  restricted  to  a  small  nation ;  but  under  that  dispensation  of  grace  and 
truth,  which  came  by  Jesus  Christ,  it  announced  that  the  party  walls  were  to  be 
broken  down,  and  the  distinction  of  Jew  and  Gentile  known  no  more;  and  that 
whomsoever,  of  any  age,  nation,  rank,  or  character,  would  come  unto  the  Father 
through  the  work  of  the  Son,  should  find  in  the  work  of  the  Son  a  ready  plenitude 
of  Almighty  energy  and  grace.  There  is  no  limit  to  that  promise — "  He  that  cometh 
onto  Me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."    III.  To  come  unto  the  Father,  except 

THROUGH  THE  WORK   OP    JeSUS,   IS    PERFECTLY    AND    ETERNALLY    IMPOSSIBLE.       1.    No 

other  being  possesses  the  characteristics  which  are  possessed  by  our  Lord  Jesua, 
and  which  are  necessary  to  constitute  a  sufficient  mode  of  access  to  the  Father. 
For,  what  is  Christ  ?  He  is  God,  and  He  is  Man.  The  way  to  God  would  be  shut 
if  it  were  not  for  the  humanity  of  Christ ;  the  way  to  God  would  be  imperfect  if  it 
were  not  for  the  Divinity  of  Christ.  Humanity  is  what  gives  to  the  work  of  the 
Saviour  adaptation ;  Divinity  is  what  gives  to  the  work  of  Christ  efficacy,  plenitude, 
and  power.  2.  The  Sacred  Writings  distinctly  and  solemnly  declare  that  the  work 
of  Christ,  as  the  Medium  of  access  to  the  Father,  stands  exclusive  and  alone. 
"  Neither  is  there  salvation  in  any  other,"  &c.  *•  Other  foundation  can  no  man  lay," 
&c.  Conclusion :  1.  Have  you  come  to  the  Father?  2.  Will  you  come  unto  the  Father? 
{J,  Pancns.)  Christ  the  only  means  of  access  to  the  Father: — The  passage  implies— 
I.  That  it  is  a  primary  duty  of  all  intelligent  beings  to  comb  to  God.  God 
is  the  Father  of  all  spirits,  of  all  beings,  to  whom  He  has  given  an  intelligent 
nature,  ou  whom  He  has  conferred  moral  capacities.  From  that  very  circumstance 
it  is  their  first  and  positive  obligation,  and  will  constitute  their  happiness  to  come 
to  Him,  i.e. ,  to  have  constant  intercourse  with  Him.  There  is  something  solemn 
and  impressive  about  it.  To  come  into  contact  with  the  eternal  and  infinite  mind  1 
We  feel  strongly  when  we  have  a  prospect  of  coming  into  contact  with  some  eminent 
person.  But  everything  falls  short  of  the  idea  of  coming  into  the  presence  of  God. 
And  then  to  have  a  proper  idea  of  our  responsibiUty,  and  our  being  constantly  under 
His  eye — and  yet  it  is  our  primary  duty  to  delight  in  this,  and  to  do  it.    H.  Thai 

THERE   IB  A  VERY  REMARKABLE   SINQUIiARITY  ABOUT     THE     WAY    IN    WHICH     MAN   IS   TO 

COMB  TO  God.  "No  man  oometh  unto  the  Father  but  by  Me."  Anything  like 
that  was  never  uttered  in  heaven.  It  never  was  uttered,  and  never  will  be,  in  any 
world  in  which  the  beings  continue  to  be  just  as  they  proceeded  from  the  hands  of 
God.  They  delight  in  constant  intercourse  with  God.  Why  is  this?  Worlds  that 
have  never  fallen  are  in  a  state  of  natural  religion.  With  respect  to  us  who  have 
fallen,  if  we  come  to  God  we  must  come  in  a  particular  manner.  And  the  singu- 
larity of  this  arises  from  our  guilt.  God  is  to  be  vie^fred  by  us  not  merely  as  God, 
but  as  a  God  whom  we  have  offended.  And,  therefore,  there  is  some  process 
required  to  mark  our  circumstances,  both  upon  God's  part  and  apon  ours.  And 
the  peculiarity  of  the  thing  as  revealed  in  Scripture  is,  that  we  are  to  come  to  Ood, 
through  a  Mediator,  and  to  plead  the  work  and  sacrifice  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and 
to  ask  the  forgiveness  of  sin,  in  the  consideration  of  that  reason.  Now  all  just  views 
•f  rehgion  rest  upon  this  foundation.  The  Deist  rejects  revelation  and  a  mediator 
altogether,  because  he  looks  abroad  on  the  face  of  the  world,  and  he  thinks  that  nothing 


604  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHAP.  n». 

more  is  necessary  to  come  to  God  but  some  prayer  and  eome  expression  of  penitence. 
Then,  again,  some  men  reject  the  idea  of  the  Divinity  and  sacrifice  of  Christ,  and 
think  it  is  enough  to  come  to  God,  as  professing  to  receive  the  truth  of  Christ. 
These  views  result  from  very  inadequate  impressions  of  the  holiness  and  majesty 
of  God  and  of  the  nature  of  sin,  and  of  that  kind  of  medium  which  is  represented 
in  the  New  Testament  as  the  way  into  the  presence  of  the  holiest  of  all.  III.  That 
IN  COMING  TO  God  it  becomes  us  to  have  bespect  to  the  Mediatoe,  and  to 
COME  on  the  specific  BUSINESS  FOR  WHICH  Hb  IS  APPOINTED.  Only  imagine  that 
one  of  your  children,  or  several  of  them,  had  deeply  and  grievously  offended  yoa. 
Or  imagine  the  case  of  a  monarch,  against  whom  a  certain  portion  of  his  subjects 
had  rebelled.  Imagine,  in  either  of  these  cases,  that  some  kind  and  gracious  and 
affectionate  declaration  of  readiness  to  forgive  on  certain  conditions  and  in  a  certain 
way.  And  just  imagine  that  either  the  child,  or  the  subject  should  dare  to  come 
into  the  presence  of  the  parent  or  of  the  sovereign,  unconcerned  about  the  matter 
wherein  they  had  offended.  Imagine  that  your  child,  without  adverting  to  the 
circumstances  of  his  actual  offence,  and  of  your  displeasure,  and  to  the  plan  which 
you  had  designed  by  which  reconciliation  might  be  effected  between  you — that  your 
child  came  and  praised  the  properties  of  your  character,  and  rejoiced  in  the  genuine 
affections  of  your  nature,  and  the  principles  of  your  behaviour,  and  praising  your 
heart,  or  your  hands,  or  your  head.  Or  conceive  of  the  subjects  entering  the 
presence  chamber  of  their  monarch,  and  that  without  adverting  to  the  proclamation 
that  bad  been  made,  they  should  come  and  unite  together  in  some  manifestation  of 
their  feelings  with  regard  to  his  government  and  his  reign,  and  the  happiness  of 
his  subjects  ;  never  once  referring  to  the  business  on  which  they  were  supposed  to 
come.  Would  there  not  be  something  monstrous  in  all  this  ?  And  do  you  not 
perceive  that  the  chUd  would  increase  his  offence,  and  that  the  subjects  would  add 
something  like  ingratitude  and  contempt  to  their  rebellion  ?  There  are  many  who 
just  treat  God  in  this  way.     IV.  That  in  comino  in  the  way  that  has  been 

POINTED   out   we  .HAVE   EVERY   ENCOURAGEMENT  ;     AND  WE   SHALL  FIND  IT  TO  BE   SUIT- 

FiciENT.  We  shall  have  a  welcome,  and  shall  surely  receive  whatever  is  requisite 
to  ensure  for  us  happiness  and  satisfaction.  "No  man  cometh  unto  the  Father 
but  by  Me."  But  "  whoever  cometh  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  And  the  reason 
why  you  do  not  enjoy  all  this  is,  because  you  wiU  not.  V.  That  those  who  comb 
TO  God  by  the  Mediator,  and  they  only,  are  prepared  for  dwelling  with  God 
HEREAFTER.  It  is  Hot  euough  to  die,  and  be  happy,  as  some  people  seem  to  imagine; 
you  may  die  and  be  damned — the  Bible  says  so.  VI.  That  this  subject  is  ex- 
ceedingly FORGOTTEN  AND  NEGLECTED  BY  MEN.  1.  There  are  many  men  who  never 
come  to  God  at  all.  They  never  come  in  any  way ;  they  never  think  of  it.  2. 
There  are  others  who  come  to  God,  professedly,  but  in  the  wrong  way.  They  do 
not  come  to  the  Father  by  the  Son.  3.  There  are  others  who  neglect  the  spirit  of 
this  declaration.  They  profess  to  come  in  the  right  way;  but  the  particular 
exercises,  and  the  positive  enjoyments  of  religion,  are  to  them  an  end  of  itself.  {T. 
Binney.)  Truth. — The  Truth : — Christ  is  the  Truth — I.  In  the  highest  sense  of 
that  word.  Some  by  the  word  mean  literal  accuracy  of  speech,  some  a  restricted 
class  of  theological  truths ;  others  some  philosophical  theories.  We  use  the  word 
to  denote  the  whole  sum  of  Christianity  as  revealed  in  the  person,  teaching,  and 
life,  of  Jesus  ;  the  final  test  and  appeal  to  which  all  religious  and  moral  truth  must 
be  referred ;  eclipsing  all  by  its  glory,  overtopping  all  by  its  majesty,  swaying  all 
by  its  authority,  and  determining  all  by  its  decision.  II.  The  saving  truth.  A  few 
simple  facts  and  doctrines  constitute  the  main  features  of  our  religion.  They 
exhibit  the  Divine  law  broken  by  man's  transgression.  They  proclaim  the  eternal 
justice  condemning  man.  Man  is  guilty,  and  therefore  condemned;  depraved, 
therefore  impotent ;  hopeless,  therefore  wretched.  This,  then,  is  the  mystery  of 
godliness :  the  Christ,  who  is  the  sinless  one,  became  the  representative  and  the 
surety  of  the  sinful,  obeyed  the  law  we  had  broken,  endured  the  penalty  we  had 
deserved,  is  gone  to  heaven  to  shed  down  on  our  hearts  the  influence  which  alone 
can  renew  and  sanctify.  By  faith  we  are  united  to  Him.  Thus  we  are  cleansed  from 
our  transgression,  justified  from  all  condemnation,  made  partakers  of  the  Saviour's 
Spirit,  destined  to  the  Saviour's  glory.  III.  Incomparably  the  most  important  of 
ALL  truth.  No  error  can  be  harmless;  every  truth  must  have  its  use;  yet  it  is 
equally  evident  that  all  truth  is  not  of  the  same  importance ;  but  this  is  the  central, 
ftll-pervading  truth.  If  we  divei  e  here,  we  can  only  go  further  and  further  astray 
It  is  in  spiritual  science  what  the  law  ot  gravitation  is  in  physical  science.  Other 
truth  will  affect  your  intelligence,  your  conscience,  your  luxuries,  your  civilization. 


OHAf.nv.]  8T.  JOHN.  605 

your  personal  freedom ;  bat  this  affects  yoar  soul,  your  conscience,  your  cjiaracter, 
your  eternity.  IV.  To  contradict  and  refdtb  the  world's  falsehood.  The  first 
temptation  was  a  lie ;  and  ever  after  that  time  men  were  deceived.  Thus  it  came 
to  pass  that  history,  with  a  slight  substratum  of  fact,  became  little  else  than  a 
tissue  of  fables  ;  philosophy,  notwithstanding  its  high  pretentions,  became  for  the 
most  part  a  mere  logomachy  or  imposing  sophism  ;  poetry  was  employed  to  dazzle 
the  imagination,  to  blind  the  understanding,  to  decorate  the  vices  ;  while  religion, 
which,  above  all  things,  ought  to  be  the  unadulterated  truth,  became  the  most 
complicated  and  abandoned  he ;  till  Christ  stood  in  the  deluded  world,  and  con- 
fronted all  its  delusions,  and  said,  "  I  am  the  Truth."  But  since  then  even  the 
gospel  has  been  perverted.  We  have  need  incessantly,  therefore,  to  refer  to  the 
first  principle ;  to  correct  everything  by  this,  "  I  am  the  Truth."  V.  Notwith- 
standing THE  INDIFFEBENCB  THAT  MEN  GENERALLY  MANIFEST  IN  RELATION  TO  IT.      I 

know  of  nothing  wbich  men  are  so  reluctant  to  honour.  If,  indeed,  you  will  lower 
its  tone  and  destroy  its  vitality  ;  if  you  will  represent  it  as  a  philosophy  amenable 
at  the  bar  of  man,  and  class  it  as  a  speculation  with  all  other  speculations  it  will 
be  tolerated.  VI.  Notwithstanding  the  world's  hostility.  Thus  hostility  has 
put  the  seal  to  the  declaration.  Had  it  not  been  mighty,  it  would  never  have 
awakened  that  hostility;  had  it  not  been  right-hearted,  it  would  never  have  dared 
it ;  had  it  not  been  immortal,  it  would  never  have  survived  it ;  but  having  awakened, 
dared,  and  survived  it,  in  the  person  of  Christ,  and  in  His  truth  we  see  it,  as  if  it 
came  direct  from  heaven,  bearing  this  testimony  before  all  unequivocally  and  un- 
shakingly,  "  I  am  the  Truth.  VII.  As  the  power  ultimately  to  subdue  the 
WORLD.  "  Great  is  the  truth,  and  shall  prevail."  The  thoughtful  of  all  parties 
assent  to  that ;  the  mistake  is  that  men  should  so  hastily  conclude  that  the  truth 
is  with  them.  Even  they  who  are  engaged  in  the  worst  of  enterprises  wish  to  have 
the  truth  on  their  side,  and  labour  to  have  it  appear  that  it  is  so.  And  why  ? 
Because  truth  is  of  God  ;  the  man  who  knowingly  goes  against  it  feels  he  is  struggling 
with  Omnipotence.  When  men  see  error  with  their  eyes  open  the  spirit  shrinks 
away  from  it.  And  if  Christ's  doctrine  be  not  true  it  must  perish ;  all  the  learning, 
and  power,  and  skill,  and  genius,  of  the  universe  cannot  save  it  from  the  perdition 
it  deserves ;  but  Christ  cannot  be  defeated  so  long  as  this  text  is  true.  Christ's 
people  cannot  be  defeated  so  long  as  they  can  say,  '*  We  are  in  Him  that  is 
true."  Living  in  Him;  the  Church  is  founded  upon  a  rock,  and  the  gates  of 
hell  cannot  prevail  against  it.  Eemember  —  1.  That  though  this  truth  is  set 
before  you,  it  will  never  be  yours  but  in  the  exercise  of  deep  humility.  2.  That 
folly  to  enter  into  this  truth  you  must  possess  the  spirit  of  Him  from  whom  it 
comes.  3,  That  this  truth  is  Divine  in  its  origin,  and  intends  to  be  saving  in  its 
result.  4.  Take  it  vrith  you  as  at  once  your  defence  and  your  law.  (J.  Aldis.) 
Jesus,  the  Truth : — It  is  a  truth  in  arithmetic  that  two  and  two  make  four.  It  is  a 
truth  in  geometry  that  "  the  shortest  distance  between  any  two  points  is  a  straight 
line."  Certain  facts  are  truths  of  history.  And  what  we  are  taught  about  God  or 
heaven  are  truths  in  religion.  But  Jesus  hag  so  much  to  do  with  our  religion, 
that  we  sometimes  put  His  name  in  place  of  the  word  religion,  and  say  of  a  certain 
doctrine  that  it  is  a  truth  in  Jesus.  And  this  is  what  Jesus  means  when  He  says : 
"I  am  the  Truth."  The  truth  in  Jesus  is  the  best  of  all  truth,  because  it — 
I.  Sanctifies  or  makes  us  good.  The  model  of  goodness  is  the  example  of 
Jesus.  There  is  none  like  Him  in  heaven,  in  the  earth,  in  any  other  world.  He 
is  "  the  chief  among  ten  thousand,  and  altogether  lovely."  And  that  which  helps 
to  make  us  like  Jesus  is  the  very  best  thing  in  the  world  for  us.  It  is  the  truth 
the  Bible  teaches  us  about  Jesus,  which  makes  us  Christians  in  the  beginning'. 
And  then  it  is  only  by  knowing  more  of  this  truth  that  we  "grow  in  grace,"  or 
become  better  Christians.  II.  Satisfies  and  makes  us  happy.  When  you  are 
hungry  you  have  a  very  disagreeable  feeling,  and  nothing  will  take  it  away  and 
make  us  feel  comfortable,  but  substantial  food.  But  the  hunger  of  the  soul  is 
harder  to  bear  than  the  hunger  of  the  body.  Suppose  you  go  to  a  person,  whose 
soul  is  in  trouble  on  account  of  some  great  sorrow  or  sin,  and  try  to  comfort  him 
by  telling  him  one  of  the  truths  in  arithmetic  or  geography.  You  say  to  him  :  "  Don't 
be  troubled;  two  and  two  make  four;  or  the  sun  rises  in  the  east  and  sets  in  the  west." 
Do  you  think  that  would  satisfy  him,  or  do  him  any  good  ?  None  whatever.  But 
suppose  that,  instead  of  this,  you  teU  him,  and  he  believes,  about  "  the  truth  as  it 
is  in  Jesus."  This  is  the  food  that  this  hungry  soul  craves.  The  Princess  Eliaabeth, 
daughter  of  Charles  I.,  lies  buried  in  Newport  Church,  in  the  Isle  of  Wight.  A 
marble  monument  erected  by  Queen  Victoria  shows,  in  a  very  touching  way,  what 


M6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap.  a?. 

her  feelings  were  about  the  matter  of  which  we  are  now  speaking,  at  the  time  of 
death.  During  the  time  of  her  father's  troubles,  she  was  a  prisoner  in  Carisbrook 
Castle.  She  was  alone,  separated  from  all  the  friends  and  companions  of  her 
youth,  and  lingered  on  in  her  sorrows,  till  death  came  and  set  her  free.  She  was 
found  one  day  dead  in  her  bed,  with  her  Bible  open  before  her,  and  her  finger 
resting  on  these  words :  *'  Gome  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour,  and  are  heavy  laden, 
and  I  will  give  you  rest."  And  this  is  what  the  monument  in  Newport  is  intended 
to  show.  "What  a  sermon  in  stone  that  monument  preaches  1  To  every  one  who 
looks  at  it,  it  seems  to  say :  *'  Biches  and  rank  cannot  make  you  happy.  Jesus 
only  can  satisfy  the  souL"  ILL  Saves  cs.  But  this  is  what  no  other  kind  of 
knowledge  will  or  can  do.  You  may  know  all  about  arithmetic,  geography,  history, 
&G. ,  and  this  knowledge  may  be  very  useful  to  you  in  the  business  of  this  life,  but 
it  will  not  be  of  the  least  use  to  you  in  trying  to  get  to  heaven.  If  some  poor  soul, 
distressed  about  his  sins,  should  come  to  you  and  ask  the  question  :  "  What  must 
I  do  to  be  saved  ?  "  you  would  find  nothing  in  all  those  studies  that  would  be  the 
least  help  to  you  in  answering  that  question.  But,  if  you  only  know  what  the 
Bible  teaches  about  Jesus,  you  will  be  able  to  answer  this  question  in  a  moment. 
It  is  the  truth  in  Jesus  alone  which  shows  us  the  way  to  heaven.  Some  years 
since,  a  respectable-looking  person  said  to  t«ro  collectors  for  the  Bible  Society, 
"  I  belonged  to  a  company  of  pickpockets.  About  a  year  since,  two  of  my  com- 
panions  and  myself  were  passing  by  a  church.  It  was  the  anniversary  of  the 
Bible  Society.  Seeing  so  many  there,  we  thought  it  would  be  a  good  chance  for  us 
to  carry  on  our  wicked  business.  The  Ten  Commandments,  in  large  gilt  letters, 
were  on  the  wall  behind  the  pulpit.  The  first  words  that  caught  my  eye  were : 
*  Tbou  shalt  not  steal.'  In  a  moment,  my  attention  was  arrested.  I  felt  as  if  God 
were  speaking  to  me.  My  conscience  troubled  me,  and  my  tears  began  to  flow. 
As  soon  as  the  meeting  was  over,  I  hurried  away  to  a  distant  part  of  the  city, 
where  no  one  knew  me.  I  got  a  Bible,  and  began  to  read  it.  It  showed  me  what 
a  great  sinner  I  was ;  but  it  showed  me  also  what  a  great  Saviour  Jesus  is.  I 
prayed  to  Jesus  with  all  my  heart.  He  heard  my  prayer.  Please  accept  five 
guineas,  and  may  God  bless  you  in  the  good  work  you  are  doing."  The  late  Dr. 
Corrie,  bishop  of  Madras,  in  India,  was  a  chaplain  there  for  some  time  before  he 
was  made  bishop.  At  that  time,  no  translation  of  the  Bible  had  been  made  into 
the  language  of  that  country.  To  help  in  scattering  a  little  Ught,  he  was  in  the 
habit  of  translating  striking  passages  of  Scripture  on  little  scraps  of  paper,  and 
having  his  servant  distribute  them  at  his  door  every  morning.  Twenty  years 
afterwards  a  missionary  at  Allahabad  wrote  to  him :  ••  I  have  lately  visited  a 
Hindoo,  who  came  to  this  place  in  ill  health.  I  was  surprised  to  find  that  he 
was  not  only  a  Christian,  but  a  Christian  with  a  very  clear  knowledge  of  Jesus, 
and  of  the  way  in  which  he  saves  the  souls  of  His  people.  •  How  is  it,  my  friend,' 
I  said  to  him,  '  that  you  understand  so  much  about  the  Scriptures  ?  You  told  me 
you  never  saw  a  missionary  in  your  life,  and  never  had  any  one  to  speak  to  yoa 
about  the  way  of  salvation  ? '  He  answered  this  question  by  putting  his  hand 
under  his  pillow,  and  drawing  out  a  parcel  of  well-worn  ragged  bits  of  paper,  and 
saying :  '  From  these  bits  of  paper,  which  Sahib  Corrie  used  to  distribute  by  a 
servant  at  his  door  every  day,  I  have  learned  all  I  know  about  the  religion  of 
Jf^sud.  I  have  read  them  till,  as  you  see,  they  are  almost  worn  out.  All  I  know 
about  Jesus  they  have  taught  me ;  but  what  I  do  know  of  Him  is  worth  more  than 
all  the  world  to  me.  It  has  saved  my  soul.'  "  (R.  Newton,  D.D.)  Christ,  "  the 
Truth": — We  do  not  wonder  to  find  "  Truth  "  made  the  centre-bit  of  the  arch.  For 
"truth,"  wherever  it  is,  holds  everything  together.  It  is  the  integrity  of  a  man 
which  gathers  up  the  man,  and  gives  a  unity  to  his  character.  Take  away  truth- 
fulness, and  all  his  virtues,  if  he  have  any,  fall  to  the  ground.  In  like  manner, 
"  the  Truth "  of  Christ  is  the  cardinal  point  of  all  the  strength  of  Scripture. 
Therefore,  Christ  placed  it  in  the  middle.  For  the  same  reason,  in  the  figurative 
dress,  both  of  Christ  (Isa.  xi,),  and  of  the  Christian  (Eph.  vi.),  •*  Truth  "  is  the 
girdle — that  which  binds  up  and  knits  the  power  of  the  man.    Consider — I.  Truth 

WAS   AN   ATTRIBUTE  ABOVE    ALI.    OTHEB8,   ESSENTIAL    TO    THE    OFFICES    WHICH    ChBIST 

TJNDEETOOK  TO  FULFIL.  1.  As  Witucss.  In  this  character.  He  came  from  heaven 
to  reveal  and  testify  to  men  the  invisible  things  of  another  world.  But  what  is  a 
witness  without  truth  ?  2.  As  the  Substance  of  that  of  which  the  whole  of  the 
Old  Testament  was  the  shadow.  But  the  substance  of  anything  is  "  the  truth  "  of 
anytbing.  Therefore  Christ  is  "Truth."  3.  As  the  Founder  of  a  faith  very 
diiterent  from  all  others  which  ever  appeared  apon  this  earth.    Its  precepts  are 


caur.  xiT.]  ST.  JOHN.  807 

the  strictest — its  doctrines  are  the  loftiest — its  consolations  are  the  strongest. 
Now  what  intense  veracity  did  all  that  require  in  Him  who  propounded  such  a 
thing  I  If  one  iota  or  any  word  of  His  should  ever  fail,  what  would  become  of  the 
whole  gospel,  of  which  He  was  the  Author?  4.  As  His  people's  Righteousness. 
Truth  had  died  out  of  the  earth,  when  Christ  came  to  re-make  "  truth,"  to  be 
"  Truth."  But  what  must  be  the  "  truth  "  of  Him  who  was  to  be  "  the  Truth  "  of 
all  the  whole  world?     6,  As  Judge.    II.  How  does  Chkist  become  "Tbuth?" 

1.  He  is  nature's  "  truth."  The  earliest  record  that  we  have  of  Him  is,  that  He 
was  that  *•  Wisdom  "  which  dwelt  with  God  when  He  made  the  worlds — that  Word 
by  which  all  things  were  made.  Therefore,  all  things  which  are  now  in  the  world 
were  first  ideas  in  the  mind  of  Christ.  And  there  they  lay,  until  His  willing  it 
gave  those  ideas  their  form,  and  they  took  the  material  substances  with  which  we 
are  conversant.  That  is  the  only  idea  we  can  form  of  creation.  2.  He  is  "  the 
Truth  "  of  God.  God  is  a  Being  of  perfect  love.  And  yet,  God  has  announced, 
that  "  every  soul  that  sins  shall  perish."  Can  you  reconcile  it  ?  And  yet,  if  two 
attributes  of  God  cannot  be  reconciled,  where  is  God's  "  truth  ?  "  In  Christ  the 
justice  is  satisfied  that  the  love  may  be  free.  3.  He  is  man's  "  Truth."  There  are 
three  empires  of  "  truth."  (1)  The  intellectual.  I  doubt  whether  any  mind  ever 
attains  the  highest  order  of  mteUect  without  an  acquaintance  with  Jesus  Christ. 
For  if  everything  took  its  rise,  as  we  have  seen,  in  the  mind  of  Christ,  then  the 
true  science  of  every  subject  must  revert  to  Christ.  (2)  Moral.  It  is  very  certain 
that  in  proportion  as  nations  have  departed  from  Christ,  they  have  wandered  out 
of  the  orbit  of  •'  truth."  And  every  man — as  he  dwells  more  with  Christ — grows 
in  rectitude  of  conduct  and  integrity  of  practice.  (3)  Spiritual.  Every  under- 
taking of  God  to  His  people  owes  its  strength  to  Christ,  when  it  says  that  "  all  the 
promises  of  God  in  Him  are  yea,  and  in  Him  amen."  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.) 
Christ,  "the  Truth": — Christ  is  the  Truth,  because  He  came  to — I.  Eeveal  tbuth, 
and,  but  for  Christ's  revelation  of  it,  we  should  be  utterly  ignorant  of  it.  He  is 
Himself  the  substance  of  all  revealed  truth.  1.  Christ  came  to  teach  ns  about 
God.  And  how  ?  "He  that  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen  the  Father."  What  could 
we  have  known  of  God,  of  His  mercy.  His  faithfulness,  His  truth.  His  justice,  but 
for  the  revelation  of  them  that  is  made  in  Christ  ?  2.  Christ  is  Truth  substantially 
in  relation  to  the  types  and  shadows  of  the  Old  Testament.  These  all  pointed  to 
Him.  Under  the  New  Testament  we  are  referred  for  all  truth  to  Jesus  Christ, 
let  who  will  be  the  teacher.  ♦'  Every  man  that  hath  learned  of  the  Father  cometh 
unto  Me."  The  office  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  to  take  of  the  things  of  Christ,  and 
show  them  unto  us.  And  why  is  this?  Because  "it  hath  pleased  the  Father 
that  in  Him  should  be  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge."  IL  Con- 
FiBM  THE  TRUTH.  Christ  came — 1.  "  To  confirm  the  promises  made  unto  the 
fathers,  that  the  Gentiles  might  glorify  God  for  His  mercies."  God  graciously 
sustained  the  faith  of  the  Old  Testament  saints  by  a  succession  of  prophecies,  and 
the  truth  of  them  was  confirmed  by  the  life,  and  death,  and  resurrection  of  Christ. 

2.  To  confirm  the  threatenings.  He  had  said  in  Eden  that  He  would  punish  the 
breach  of  His  law,  at  the  same  time  that  He  promised  to  spare  the  offender. 
Christ  confirmed  this  truth,  for  in  Him  we  see  how  the  threatenings  of  the  law 
and  the  promises  of  the  gospel  harmonize.  3.  In  confirming  the  Word  of  God, 
Christ  shows  how  impossible  it  is  for  God  to  lie.  However  great  the  difficulty  may 
be  in  fulfilling  a  promise  in  our  estimation,  it  is  impossible  for  God  to  lie ;  and 
while  the  infallibility  of  God's  promises  should  afford  strong  consolation  to  all 
that  trust  them,  it  should  be  a  terror  to  them  that  will  not  obey ;  for  the  threatenings 
will  as  infallibly  be  fulfilled  as  the  promises.  lU.  Establish  the  tbuth,  and  to 
set  up  a  kingdom  in  which  truth  reigns,  and  the  subjects  of  which  have  truth  in 
their  inward  parts.  Now,  in  establishing  truth  in  a  man's  heart,  Christ  not  only 
sets  up  the  principle  of  obedience  to  the  Word  of  God,  but  He  establishes  that 
principle  by  the  power  of  His  own  life.  It  is  not  so  much  that  they  live,  as 
Christ  that  liveth  in  them.  Whatever  knowledge  men  may  have  of  the  truth, 
if  it  do  not  lead  to  the  establishing  of  Christ's  kingdom  in  their  hearts,  it  ia 
lifeless,  unprofitable,  condemning  knowledge.  IV.  Usb  the  tbuth?  1.  He 
converts  men  by  the  convincing  evidence  of  truth.  Christ  does  not  deal  with 
OS  as  machines,  but  as  reasonable  beings.  He  brings  truth  to  bear  on  our 
understanding,  reason,  and  judgment ;  and  He  makes  men  exercise  them  upon 
the  truth.  Thus  the  full  responsibility  of  man  is  maintained,  while  the  power  of 
God  comes  in  all  its  sovereign  force  upon  their  hearts  and  consciences.  For  this 
purpose  He  sends  forth  the  Spirit ;  who  makes  men  feel  that  they  are  sinners,  and 


608  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cMi*.  XIT. 

then  He  leada  them  to  desire  the  salvation  of  Him  who  is  the  Truth.  And  the 
same  Holy  Spirit  who  reproves  of  sin  also  goes  on  to  display  the  perfect  righteous- 
ness of  Christ,  in  which  the  sinner  is  accepted.  2.  He  rules  in  a  converted  heart 
by  the  commanding  power  of  the  truth.  This  power  extends  to  all  parts  of  God's 
holy  Word.  His  right  to  command  is  as  extensive  in  one  thing  as  another  ;  His 
least  command  is  as  important  as  His  greatest.  (J.  W,  Reeve,  M.A.)  The  life. — 
Jesus,  the  Life : — He  is — I.  The  giveb  of  life.  We  cannot  go  anywhere  without 
finding  living  things.  Heaven  is  full  of  life ;  for  the  angels  live  there.  This 
world  is  full  of  life ;  for,  wherever  we  go,  we  find  people  living.  And,  when  we  go 
outside  of  the  homes,  in  the  fields,  on  the  hills,  in  the  ponds,  and  rivers,  and  seas, 
far  down  to  its  lowest  depths,  something  or  other  is  found  living.  And  the  air 
is  full  of  life.  And  it  is  Jesus  who  gives  hfe  to  all  these  things  (Acts  iii.  15).  But 
it  is  particularly  because  He  gives  life  to  souls  dead  in  sins,  and  makes  it  possible 
for  them  to  live  for  ever,  that  Jesus  is  called  "tbe  Life."  "  I  say,  Charlie,"  said 
Willie  to  his  brother,  "  isn't  it  nice  to  be  alive  !  Why,  only  see  how  I  can  toss  my 
arms  about,  and  use  my  legs,  and  feet,  and  hands.  And,  then,  I  can  see,  and  bear, 
and  feel.  It's  real  nice  to  be  alive,  especially  when  you  are  all  alive  and  have  no 
part  of  you  dead."  "  No  part  of  you  dead  I  "  said  Willie.  "  Who  ever  heard  of 
such  a  thing  as  being  part  alive  and  part  dead ?  "  "I  have,  Willie.  It  was 
myself.  The  best  part  of  me  was  quite  dead ;  and  what  made  it  still  worse  was 
that  I  didn't  know  it."  "  But  what  part  of  you  was  dead,  Charlie  ?  "  *'  My  soul 
was  dead  towards  God.  When  God  spoke  to  me,  I  didn't  hear  His  voice  ;  when 
He  called  me  to  look  to  Him,  I  couldn't  see  Him ;  and  when  He  told  me  to  love 
Him,  I  didn't  do  it."  "  Well,  how  did  it  ever  come  alive?"  "  Well,  Willie,  it 
was  Jesus  who  did  it  all  for  me.  He  sent  His  blessed  Spirit  into  my  heart,  to 
show  me  that  my  soul  was  dead ;  and  that  I  never  could  be  happy,  and  never  go 
to  heaven  unless  my  soul  was  made  alive.  Then  I  prayed  to  Him,  and  He  heard 
me,  and  ever  bince  He  has  made  me  feel  so  happy !  "  II.  The  supporter  of  life. 
We  Lave  no  power  to  make  ourselves  alive,  and  when  life  is  given  we  have  no 
power  to  keep  or  preserve  it,  and  therefore  we  need  such  a  one  as  Jesus.  Nothing 
could  continue  to  live,  if  it  were  left  entirely  to  itself.  Some  things,  when  they 
begin  to  live,  need  a  great  deal  more  care  and  support  than  others.  Look,  for 
instance,  at  a  babe  that  is  just  born,  and  a  chicken  that  is  just  hatched.  How  very 
different  they  are  in  the  care  they  require  I  But  there  is  nothing  that  requires 
more  care  than  our  souls,  after  Jesus  has  made  them  alive.  We  are  in  a  position 
of  great  dauger.  If  left  to  ourselves,  we  must  perish.  If  we  have  a  servant 
working  for  us,  we  can  show  him  the  work  we  want  him  to  do ;  but  we  cannot  give 
him  the  strength  to  do  it.  Jesus  can  do  both.  He  is  like  a  great  mountain  that 
can  support  everything  that  rests  upon  it,  whether  an  army  or  a  fly.  And  He  is 
like  the  ocean,  too.  When  men  launch  their  huge  iron  steamers,  by  scores  and  by 
hundreds,  the  ocean  supports  them  as  easily  as  though  they  were  light  as  a  piece 
of  cork.  And  so  Jesus  can  support  all  His  people.  III.  The  example  of  ufk 
(1  Pet.  ii.  21).  When  Jesus  makes  our  souls  alive,  then  the  one  thing  we  have  to 
do  is  to  try  to  be  like  Jesus.  A  little  girl  went  to  a  writing-school.  When  she  saw 
the  copy  set  before  her,  she  said  ;  "  I  can  never  write  like  that."  But  she  took  up 
her  pen,  and  put  it  timidly  on  the  paper.  "  I  can  but  try,"  she  said.  "  I'll  do  the 
best  I  can."  She  wrote  half  a  page.  The  letters  were  crooked.  She  feared  to 
have  the  teacher  look  at  her  book.  But  when  the  teacher  came,  he  looked  and 
smiled.  "  I  see  you  are  trying,  my  little  girl,"  he  said  kindly,  "  and  that  is  all  I 
expect."  She  took  courage.  Again  and  again  she  studied  the  beautiful  copy. 
She  wrote  very  carefully,  but  the  letters  straggled  here,  were  crowded  there,  and 
some  of  them  seemed  to  look  every  way.  She  trembled  when  she  heard  tbe  step 
of  the  teacher.  "  I'm  afraid  you'll  find  fault  with  me,"  she  said.  ••  I  do  not  find 
fault  with  you,"  said  the  teacher,  "  because  you  are  only  a  beginner.  Keep  on 
trying.  In  this  way,  you  will  do  better  every  day,  and  soon  get  to  be  a  very  good 
writer."  And  this  is  the  way  we  are  to  try  to  be  like  Jesus.  But  when  we  read 
about  Jesus,  and  learn  how  holy,  and  good,  and  perfect  He  was,  we  must  not  be 
discouraged  if  we  do  not  become  like  Him  at  once.  But,  if  we  keep  on  trying,  and 
ask  God  to  help  us,  we  shall  "  learn  of  Him  to  be  meek  and  lowly  in  heart ;  "  and 
we  shall  become  daily  more  and  more  Uke  Him.  IV.  The  Eewabder  of  life. 
Those  who  love  Jesus  are  the  happiest  in  this  world,  and  will  be  the  only  happy 
people  in  the  world  to  come,  (iJ.  Newton,  D.D.)  Christ,  our  Life : — Life  in- 
olades — L  Appropriate  activity.  2.  Happiness.  The  life  here  intended  is  not 
natnral  and  intellectual,  but  spiritual  and  eternal.    Christ  is  the  Life,  as  He  i»— • 


«BO.  xiT.]  8T.  JOHN.  609 

I.  Its  authob.  1.  He  saves  as  from  death — (1)  By  His  atonement,  which  satisfies 
-the  law.  (2)  By  delivering  us  from  the  power  of  Satan.  2.  He  gives  inward 
spiritual  life,  because — (1)  He  procures  for  us  the  gift  of  the  life-giving  Spirit. 
^2)  He  not  only  merits,  but  sends  that  Spirit.  II.  Its  object.  1.  The  exercises 
in  which  the  Spiritual  life  consists  terminate  in  Him.  2.  The  happiness  involved 
consists  in  fellowship  with  Him.  He  is  our  hfe,  as  He  is  our  joy,  our  portion,  our 
«verla6ting  inheritance.  III.  Its  end.  It  is  Christ  for  us  to  live.  While  others 
live  for  themselves,  their  country,  mankind,  the  believer  lives  for  Christ.  It  is 
the  great  design  of  His  life  to  promote  Christ's  glory,  and  to  advance  His  kingdom. 
Inferences — 1.  Test  of  character.  The  difference  between  the  true  and  the  nominal 
Christian  lies  here.  The  one  seeks  and  regards  Christ  as  his  life  only,  as  He 
delivers  from  death ;  the  other  as  the  object  of  his  life.  2.  The  true  way  to  grow 
in  grace,  and  in  vigorous  spiritual  life,  is  to  get  more  of  Christ.  3.  The  happiness 
and  duty  of  thus  making  Christ  our  life.  (C  Hodge,  D.D.)  Christ,  the  Life : — 
A  well-known  modern  scientist  has  hazarded  the  speculation  that  the  origin  of  life 
on  this  planet  has  been  the  falling  upon  it  of  the  fragment  of  a  meteor  or  an 
•erolite,  from  some  other  system,  with  a  speck  of  organic  life  upon  it,  from  which 
all  has  developed.  Whatever  may  be  the  case  in  regard  to  the  physical  life,  that 
is  absolutely  true  in  the  case  of  spiritual  life.  It  all  comes  because  this  heaven- 
descended  Christ  has  come  down  the  long  staircase  of  Incarnation,  and  has  brought 
with  Him  into  the  clouds  and  oppressions  of  our  terrestial  atmosphere  a  germ  of 
life  which  He  has  planted  in  the  heart  of  the  race,  there  to  spread  for  ever. 
{Homiletic  Monthly.)  Christ,  the  Christianas  life : — I.  Life  in  Christ.  As  the 
ufe  of  the  mother  is  imparted  to  the  child,  so  Christ's  hfe  is  imparted  to  the 
Christian.  Baptism  symbolizes  our  being  born  in  Christ,  and  the  Lord's  Supper 
eymbolizes  our  being  fed  by  Him.  Both  exhibit  a  common  life  between  the 
believer  and  Christ.  In  this  lies  the  security  of  the  Christian.  If  you  saw  a  rill 
running  down  a  mountain  side,  you  might  wonder  if  that  stream  would  not  soon 
cease  to  run  ;  but  if  you  found  out.that  a  fountain  fed  it,  then  you  could  readily 
believe  that  it  would  keep  on  running,  and  that,  whatever  obstacles  might  cross  its 
course,  it  would  go  on  and  on  toward  the  ocean.  Christ  is  the  eternal  fountain — 
the  life  of  the  soul  (Bom.  viii.  38,  39).  U.  Lifb  on  Chbist.  Some  plants  grow 
on  that  on  which  they  lean.  So  the  life  of  Christ  is  to  the  Christian  a  support 
and  a  supply.  This  life  is  given  to  us  through — 1.  The  Word.  The  words  of  the 
Bible  are  life.  Christ  is  in  them.  There  is  not  a  word  here  in  which,  if  you  go 
down  deep  enough,  you  will  not  find  Christ,  as  there  is  not  a  spot  of  ground  where, 
if  you  go  down  deep  enough,  you  cannot  find  water.  2.  The  Sacraments.  We  do 
not  value  these  as  highly  as  we  ought.  In  the  sixth  chapter  we  read  that  if  we 
partake  of  Christ  we  ehaH  live.  This,  of  coarse,  is  but  the  outward  expression 
of  the  infinite  truth.  There  is  an  inward  oneness  with  Christ  revealed  in  the 
sacraments.  We  can  never  understand  this  union  unless  we  have  experienced  it. 
III.  Lm  FOB  Cbbist.  No  one  can  reahze  Christ's  worth  to  his  soul  until  h« 
works  for  Him,  until  he  consecrates  his  life  to  Him.  In  consecration  Christ  is 
revealed.  lY.  Lifb  with  Chbist.  The  entire  life  of  the  Saviour,  from  Bethlehem 
to  Calvary,  is,  I  may  say,  an  allegory,  a  mould  in  which  the  Christian's  life  is 
cast.  Christ  was  bom :  the  Christian  is  bom  in  Him,  «&o.  We  have  no  trial  that 
Christ  did  not  experience.  We  can  roll  all  oor  burdens  on  Christ,  who  is  by  out 
«ide.     {J,  A.  M.  Chapman.) 

Vera.  8-11.  Philip  salth  onto  Him,  Lord,  show  ns  the  Father  and  It  BafQceth  ns.— 
Man's  cry  and  Christ's  response : — I.  The  spibitual  cbt  of  mankind.  Philip  repre> 
sents  all  men  in  their  deepest  spiritual  experiences.  What  is  this  but  the  cry  of 
spiritual  orphans  for  a  lost  Father.  "  Oh,  that  I  knew  where  I  might  find  Him." 
The  cry  implies  an  underlying  belief — 1.  In  the  existence  of  a  great  Father.  In 
the  human  heart — (1)  there  is  no  atheism ;  that  is  a  phantom  of  the  brain.  The  idea 
of  God  is  at  the  root  of  all  ideas.  (2)  There  is  no  pantheism.  The  heart  craves  a 
person.  (3)  There  is  no  moloohism.  The  heart  craves  a  Father,  not  the  represen. 
tation  of  God  in  certain  theologies.  This  belief  is  instinctive ;  you  cannot  reason 
it  away.  It  is  the  hope  of  the  sinner  on  his  death-bed.  The  heart  turns  to  it  as 
the  fiower  to  the  sun.  2.  In  the  sufficiency  of  the  Father's  manifestation.  Until 
the  Father  comes  the  soul  will  have  a  gnawing  hunger  and  an  aching  void.  It  will 
satisfy — (1)  The  intellect.  Solving  the  problems  insoluble  to  reason,  and  whose 
crushing  weight  philosophy  but  augments.  (2)  The  affections.  It  will  unfold, 
purify,  harmonize,  and  centralize  them.     The  prodigal  was  flooded  with  joy  in  tiia 


610  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cHAJ.  nr. 

•warm  caresses  of  his  father's  love.  As  the  genial  son  of  May  sets  the  choristers  of 
the  grove  into  music,  the  presence  of  the  Father  will  not  only  hush  all  the  cries  ot 
the  child,  but  fill  the  heart  with  filial  rapture.  II.  The  satisfactory  bbsponse  or 
Cheist.  In  Christ  the  Father  of  man  appears  to  man  in  man's  nature.  1.  Thia 
•was  now  amply  attested  (vers.  10,  11).  Who  but  the  Father  could  have  wrought 
those  works  which  He  accomplished,  inspired  the  doctrines  He  proclaimed,  pro- 
duced such  a  character  as  He  manifested  ?  2,  This  was  now  practically  ignored 
(ver.  9).  Note  here — (1)  A  criminal  neglect  of  means.  *'  Have  I,"  the  medium  ot 
His  power,  the  organ  of  His  thoughts,  the  image  of  His  character — '•  been  so  long 
with  you,"  &c.  (2)  The  finality  of  the  revelation.  •*  How  sayest  thou  then,"  Ac. 
Thdre  is  no  other  revelation  of  the  Father  to  come.  "  No  man  hath  seen  God,"<feo. 
If  you  cannot  find  the  Father  in  Me,  you  will  never  find  Him,  neither  in  the  universe 
nor  in  the  speculations  of  philosophy.  Conclusion :  Without  this,  whatever  else 
thou  bast,  thy  destitution  is  terrible.  No  amount  of  worldly  wealth,  social  influ- 
ence, intellectual  culture  will  be  of  real  and  lasting  service  without  this  revelation 
of  the  Father.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Man's  deep  cry  for  the  paternalin  religion: — 
I.  That  the  deep  cet  of  man  is  fob  the  unfolding  of  the  pateenal  in  religion. 
Men  cry  for  the  paternal  rather  than — 1.  The  historical  in  religion.  Beligion  has 
a  history  both  interesting  and  significant.  It  comes  down  to  as  from  the  earliest 
times.  (1)  It  unfolds  the  inner  life  of  humanity.  (2)  It  introduces  to  our  atten- 
tion the  most  remarkable  and  beautiful  characters  that  the  world  has  ever  known. 
(3)  It  is  connected  with  worship  and  religious  thought.  And  this  is  made  known 
to  us  by  a  Divine  inspiration.  Such  a  history  must  be  interesting  to  man,  yet, 
after  he  has  perused  it,  his  cry  is  rather,  ♦•  Show  us  the  Father,"  And  men  read 
history  in  search  of  the  Divine  Fatherhood.  2.  The  philosophical  in  religion. 
Religion  has  not  merely  a  history,  but  also  a  philosophy.  It  is  at  the  basis  of  all 
philosophical  questions.  It  has  given  rise  and  importance  to  them  all.  The 
philosophy  of  evil,  of  mediation,  of  salvation,  of  futurity,  is  inseparably  connected 
with  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ.  These  problems  are  perplexing.  They  have 
taxed  the  best  minds.  They  are  still  unsolved.  Heaven  can  only  give  the  solution 
of  them.  Man  studies  the  philosophy  of  religion  in  order  to  get  at  the  Great 
Father  of  the  universe,  and  of  His  being.  3.  The  theological  in  religion.  Eeligion 
has  not  merely  a  history,  a  philosophy,  but  also  a  theology.  This  theology  has 
been  systematized  by  councils,  and  crystalized  in  creeds.  The  development  of 
Christian  doctrine  is  interesting.  But  in  the  study  of  the  Bible,  man  seeks  more  to 
catch  the  smile  of  his  Father,  than  to  see  the  sceptre  of  his  legislator,  or  to  hear 
the  voice  of  his  teacher.  This  is  the  present  direction  of  human  sentiment.  Men 
are  every  where  seeking  the  paternal ;  they  are  doing  so  to  an  unwarrantable  extent; 
to  the  overbalance  of  theology ;  to  the  destruction  of  the  moral  government  of  God, 
in  utter  f  orgetf  ulness,  or  neglect  of  other  attributes  equally  involved  in  His  existence. 
Let  men  see  the  Father,  but  let  them  also  see  the  King,  and  the  Judge.     II.  That 

THE  deep  cry  of  MAN'S  HEART  IS  FOR  A  SENSUOUS  UNFOLDING  OP  THE  PATERNAL  HJ 

BELIGION.  1.  Some  men's  ideas  of  religion  are  thoroughly  sensuous.  Such  was 
the  case  'with  Thomas  and  Philip.  It  would  seem  that  the  religion  of  these  two 
men  was  confined  to  what  they  knew  and  saw.  Some  men  cannot  interpret  the 
spiritual  meaning  of  imagery,  nor  understand  symbolism.  They  remain  in  its 
outercourt,  and  appear  unable  to  enter  its  holy  of  holies.  We  want  the  power  to 
see  heavenly  meanings  in  earthly  words.  There  is  another  vision  than  that  of 
sight,  even  that  of  faith.  2.  We  should  strive  to  correct  the  sensuous  ideas 
associated  •with  the  religious  lite  of  men.  ♦'  Have  I  been  so  long  time  with  you," 
<&c.  Christ  was  the  manifestation  of  the  Divine  Father.  PhiHp,  in  seeing  Him, 
ought  to  have  risen  to  a  vision  of  the  Father.  3.  We  should  strive  to  lead  men  into 
the  bright  vision  of  faith.  "  He  that  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen  the  Father."  Some 
only  see  half  of  the  things  they  look  at.  They  look  at  mountains,  and  see  nothing 
but  crags ;  at  trees,  and  see  nothing  but  sticks  and  leaves ;  at  stars,  and  see  nothing 
but  candles ;  at  Christ,  and  see  nothing  but  manhood.  Whereas,  to  other  men  all 
nature  is  a  revelation  of  God.  They  penetrate  into  the  inner  meaning  of  things ; 
they  behold  the  invisible.  When  such  men  look  at  Christ,  they  also  see  the  Father. 
IIL  That  mak  hopes  to  obtain,  from  a  vision  of  the  paternal,  deep  satisfaction 
or  bxabt.  1.  A  sensuous  vision  of  the  paternal  in  religion  will  never  satisfy  the 
haman  heart.  Man  cannot  with  bodily  eye  behold  the  Father.  If  he  were  to  see 
Him,  he  woald  doubt  the  accuracy  of  his  sense  immediately  the  glad  vision  were 
gone.  This  would  be  but  a  glimpse  of  Fatherhood.  It  would  not  give  satisfaction. 
iL  A  Tiaw  at  fha  paternal,  obtained  by  faith,  will   give  constant  satisfaction  to 


•HAP.  XI?.]  BT.  JOHN.  61t 

the  soul  of  man.  From  this  vision  the  Divine  Father  wUl  never  withdraw.  Tha 
vision  shall  be  co-eztensive  with  the  faith.  It  will  produce  the  satisfaction  of  peace^ 
of  hope,  and  of  joy.  The  soul  wUl  want  no  other  vision.  Lessons :  1.  To 
cultivate  the  inner  sense  of  the  soul.  2.  To  make  Christ  the  interpretation  of 
all  our  heavenly  relationships.  3.  To  obtain  heart  rest  from  a  consciousness  of  the 
Divine  Fatherhood.  (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Show  us  the  Father: — The  mystery  of 
"  going  away  "  was  deepened  when  the  Master  declared  that  through  Him  they  were 
to  know  the  Father.  The  surprise  of  Thomas,  whose  faith  was  dull,  but  whose  love 
was,  nevertheless,  genuine — was  natural ;  while  the  sentiment  of  Philip  was  a  sort 
of  desperate  clutching  at  something  very  glorious,  but  very  diflScult  of  obtaining. 
For  an  absent  Son  he  asked,  as  the  only  compeusation,  a  manifested  Father.  His 
words  show  us — L  The  great  want  op  mankind.  God  has  not  left  Himself  with- 
out witness,  and  not  the  least  of  His  evidences  is  that  our  nature  is  ever  seeking 
Him.  The  question  of  Philip — 1.  Asserts  the  knowledge  of  the  Father  as  that 
■which  suflSces.  It  is  an  assertion  of  our  grandeur.  Ours  are  not  glowworm  faculties; 
ours  no  owl-like  souls.  No  dim  vision,  no  starlight  manifestations  can  content  us. 
Our  capacity  takes  in  the  universe,  and  then  cries,  "  Show  us  the  Father,"  &c. 
Less  than  such  a  desire  is  a  degradation  of  man.  Less  is  to  make  his  nature  » 
dwarfed  and  sickly  thing.  2.  Echoes  the  cry  of  the  races.  Our  nature  is  not 
always  conscious  that  it  is  after  Him ;  but  it  reaches  and  calls  after  what  is  in  Him 
alone.  The  savage  approaches  the  conception  of  power  by  his  adoration  of  strength ; 
the  sage  the  worship  of  infinite  understanding  through  study  of  the  truth ;  the 
artist  through  his  vision  of  the  beautiful ;  the  poet  through  his  dream  of  the  right 
and  good.  The  world  swings  round,  and  men  catch  single  gleams  of  Godhead,  and 
know  not  what  it  is — only  something  great  and  noble.  3.  Is  the  instructed  soul 
asking  for  the  Father.  It  is  not  scepticism  searching  for  a  deity — an  insensate 
principle.  It  is  not  half  convinced  doubt  feeling  along  the  links  of  creation  after  » 
first  cause.  It  is  not  amiable  optimism  out  in  immeasurable  extension  of  bene- 
ficent actuality  asking  for  a  Creator.  It  is  awakened  faith  seeking  its  author ;  • 
hungry  soul  searching  a  satisfying  love.  H.  Want,  unconscious  op  neab  supplt. 
1.  Men  go  afar  for  the  knowledge  at  their  doors ;  nay,  at  their  very  feet.  They 
search  after  the  mystery  of  God.  They  sound  for  Him  in  depths ;  they  climb  for 
Him  in  the  heights  1  Yet  His  footprints  are  on  every  green,  His  hand  touches  on 
each  flower  and  shrub  and  spire.  Gentle  and  Titanic  forces  alike  declare  Him. 
Could  I  give  the  atom  a  tongue,  it  would  cry,  "  Have  I  been  so  long  time  with  you» 
and  have  I  not  spoken  to  you  of  God  ?  "  The  river  sings  as  it  hastens  oceanward, 
"  Have  I  been  so  long  time  with  you,  and  have  you  not  seen  God  reflected  in  my 
silver  beauty  ?  "  Oh,  blindness,  which  can  fail  to  discern  Him  I  Has  that  word 
lain  by  you  so  long  with  promise,  covenant,  and  command,  and  yet  have  you  not 
known  the  God  it  discloses?  2.  Philip's  error  was,  that  he  had  looked  elsewhere 
than  to  Christ  for  the  vision  of  the  Father.  God  had  been  described.  He  had 
been  promised.  For  the  first  time  he  was  manifested.  His  love  came  out  in 
Christ's  Divine  human  voice,  and  was  in  the  touch  of  those  human  fingers.  It  was 
the  Father's  authority  in  the  "  Go  in  peace  and  sin  no  more."  It  was  the  Father's 
majesty  in  the  awakening  voice  at  the  grave  of  Lazarus.  Yet  it  was  God  incarnates, 
and  Philip  knew  it  not.  Conclusion  :  There  is  profound  significance  to  us  in  th& 
lesson  of  Jesus  to  Philip.  1.  We  are  to  find  the  Father  in  the  Only-begotten,  who 
dwelt  in  His  bosom,  and  hath  declared  Him.  You  can  neither  understand  Him  in 
His  works  or  word  until  you  study  both  through  the  Incarnation.  Around  that,  as 
■we  look  steadily,  both  a  theology  and  a  theodicy  must  crystalize.  Our  knowledge 
of  Jesus  is  through  faith,  and  through  that  our  knowledge  of  the  Father  becomes 
experimental.  2.  It  is  hence  that  we  know  the  infinite.  Christ's  mediation 
stretches  a  cord  between  heart-love  and  God-love,  soul-life  and  God-life,  human 
nature  and  Divine  nature.  It  answers  nothing  as  to  mysteries  it  oversweeps.  It  is^ 
silent  as  to  riddles  of  theology  and  questions  of  schoolmen.  But  it  touches  us 
here,  God  there  ;  we  touch  it  with  our  guilt.  He  with  His  compassion.  We  appre- 
hend the  Infinite  we  can  never  comprehend.  Jesus  came  to  reveal  the  Father  who 
hears  prayer,  who  governs  in  providences,  who  smiles  upon  His  child ;  who  sees 
the  prodigal,  foot-sore  and  tattered,  yet  trying  to  come  home,  and  runs  to  meefc 
him.  (T.  M.  Eddy,  D.D.)  The  true  vision  of  the  Fatfter  .-—Philip  knew  that 
Moses  had  once  led  the  elders  up  to  the  mount  where  "  they  saw  the  God  of  Israel," 
&nd  that  to  many  others  had  been  granted  sensible  manifestations  of  the  Divine 
preaenoe.  As  a  ^oiple  he  longed  for  some  similar  sign  to  confirm  his  faith.  As  & 
auui  he  was  conscious  of  the  deep  need  which  all  of  us  have  for  something  mora 


612  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi». 

than  an  unseeable  and  unknowable  God.  The  peculiarities  of  Philip's  temperament 
strengthened  the  desire.  To  all  Nathanael's  objections  he  had  only  the  reply, 
"  Come  and  see."  And  here  he  says,  '*  Oh  I  if  we  could  see  the  Father  it 
would  be  enough."  His  petition  is  child-like  in  its  simplicity,  beautiful  in  its 
trust,  noble  and  true  in  its  estimate  of  what  men  need.  He  meant  a  palpable 
manifestation,  and  so  far  he  was  wrong.  Give  the  word  its  highest  and  its  truest 
meaning,  and  Philip's  error  becomes  grand  truth.  I.  The  sight  of  God  m 
Christ  as  enough  to  answeb  men's  longings.  There  is  a  world  of  sadness  and 
tenderness  in  the  first  words  of  our  Lord's  reply.  He  seldom  names  His  disciples. 
When  He  does  there  is  a  deep  cadence  of  affection  in  the  designation.  This  man 
was  one  of  the  first  disciples,  and  thus  had  been  with  Him  all  the  time  of  His 
ministry,  and  the  Master  wonders  that,  before  eyes  that  loved  Him  as  much  as 
Philip's  did.  His  continual  self-revelation  had  passed  to  so  little  purpose.  Learn — 
1.  That  we  all  need  to  have  God  made  visible  to  us.  The  history  of  heathendom 
shows  us  that.  And  the  highest  cultivation  of  this  nineteenth  century  has  not 
removed  men  from  the  same  necessity.  A  God  who  is  only  the  product  of  inferences, 
the  creature  of  logic  or  of  reflection,  is  very  powerless  to  sway  and  influence  men. 
The  limitations  of  our  faculties  and  the  boundlessness  of  our  hearts  both  cry  out 
for  a  God  that  is  nearer  to  us  than  that,  and  whom  we  can  see  and  love  and  be  sure 
of.  2.  Christ  meets  this  need.  How  can  you  make  wisdom  visible  ?  How  can  a 
man  see  love  or  purity  ?  By  deeds.  And  the  only  way  by  which  God  can  ever 
come  near  enough  to  men  to  be  a  constant  power  and  smile  in  their  lives  is  by  their 
seeing  Him  at  work  in  a  man.  Christ's  whole  life  is  the  making  the  invisible  God 
visible.  3.  That  vision  is  enough.  The  mind  settles  down  upon  the  thought  of 
God  as  the  basis  of  all  being,  and  of  all  change ;  and  the  heart  can  twine  itself 
round  Him,  and  the  seeking  soul  folds  its  wings  and  is  at  rest ;  and  the  troubled 
spirit  is  quiet,  and  the  accusing  conscience  is  silent,  and  the  rebellious  will  is  sub- 
dued, and  the  stormy  passions  are  quieted ;  and  in  the  inner  kingdom  is  a  great 
peace.  We  are  troubled  because  we  see  not  God,  our  Father,  in  the  face  of  Jesus. 
4.  Our  present  knowledge  and  vision  are  far  higher  than  the  mere  external  symbol 
of  a  presence  which  this  man  wanted.  The  elders  of  Israel  saw  but  some  symbolical 
manifestation  of  that  which  in  itself  is  unseen  and  unattainable.  But  we  who  see. 
God  in  Christ  see  no  symbol  but  the  reality.  U.  The  Divine  and  mutual  indwell- 
ing BY  WHICH  THIS  BIGHT  IS  MADE  POSSIBLE  (ver.  10).  There  are  here — 1.  Christ's 
claim  to  the  oneness  of  unbroken  communion.  "  I  am  in  the  Father  "  indicates 
the  suppression  of  all  independent  will,  consciousness,  thought,  action :  "  And  the 
Father  in  Me,"  indicates  the  influx  into  that  perfectly  filial  manhood  of  the  whole 
fulness  of  God.  2.  The  claim,  that  because  of  this  there  is  perfect  co-operation. 
Jesus  Christ  in  all  His  words  and  works  is  the  perfect  instrument  of  the  Divine 
will,  BO  that  His  words  are  God's  words,  and  His  works  are  God's  works.  3.  And 
from  all  this  follow — (1)  The  absolute  absence  of  any  consciousness  on  Christ's 
part  of  the  smallest  deflection  or  disharmony  between  Himself  and  the  Father. 
Two  triangles  laid  on  each  other  are  in  every  line,  point,  and  angle  absolutely  co- 
incident. That  humanity  is  capable  of  receiving  the  whole  inflow  of  God,  and  that 
indwelling  God  is  perfectly  expressed  in  the  humanity.  (2)  If  this  was  what  Christ 
said,  what  did  He  think  of  Himself?  If  Jesus  had  this  consciousness,  either  He 
was  ludicrously,  tragically,  blasphemously,  utterly  mistaken  and  untrustworthy,  or 
He  is  what  the  Church  in  all  ages  has  confessed  Him  to  be,  "  the  Everlasting  Son 
of  the  Father."  IH.  The  faith  to  which  Chbist  invites  us  on  the  obound  op  Hia 
onion  with,  and  bbvelation  of,  God  (ver.  11).  Observe  that  the  verb  at  the  begin- 
ning of  this  verse  passes  into  a  plural  form.  Our  Lord  has  done  with  Philip  espe- 
cially. He  bids  us  believe  Him.  1.  The  true  bond  of  nnion  between  men  and 
Jesus  Christ  is  faith.  We  have  to  trust,  and  that  is  better  than  sight.  We  have 
to  trust  Him.  He  is  the  personal  Object  of  our  faith.  Faith  is  the  outgoing  of 
the  whole  man — heart,  will,  intellect  and  all — to  a  person  whom  it  grasps.  But  the 
Christ  that  we  have  to  trust  is  the  Christ  as  He  has  Himself  declared  to  us.  If  He 
be  not  God  manifest  in  the  flesh,  I  ought  not  to  trust  Him.  I  may  admire  Him, 
reverence  Him,  have  a  kind  of  a  love  to  Him.  But  what  in  the  name  of  common 
sense  shall  I  trust  Him  for  ?  And  why  should  He  call  upon  me  to  exercise  faith  in 
Him  unless  He  stand  before  me  the  adequate  object  of  a  man's  trust — namely,  the 
manifest  God?  2.  Believing  in  the  sense  of  trusting  is  seeing  and  knowing. 
Philip  said,  "  Show,"  &c.  Christ  answers,  "  Believe  1  and  thou  dost  se<»  "  If  you 
look  back  upon  the  previous  verses  of  this  chapter  you  will  find  that  in  the  earlier 
portion  of  them  the  keyword  is  "  know  "  ;  that  in  the  second  portion  of  them  the 


our.  xiT.]  8T.  JOHN.  Sit 

keyword  ii  **  see  " ;  that  in  this  portion  of  them  the  keyword  is  "  believe."  The 
world  says,  "  Ah  I  seeing  is  believing."  The  gospel  says,  "  Believing  is  seeing." 
The  trae  way  to  knowledge,  and  to  a  better  vision  than  the  nncertain  vision  of  tiie 
eye,  is  faith.  3.  Faith,  even  if  based  upon  lower  than  the  highest  grounds,  is  still 
faith  and  acceptable  to  Him,  "  Or  else  believe  Me  for  the  very  works'  sake."  (1) 
And  so  we  are  taught  that  if  a  man  has  not  come  to  that  point  of  spiritual  suscep- 
tibility in  which  the  image  of  Jesus  Christ  lays  hold  upon  his  heart  and  obliges  him 
to  trust  Him  and  to  love  ELim,  there  are  yet  the  miracles  to  look  at ;  and  the  faith 
that  by  help  of  that  ladder  climbs  to  Him,  though  it  be  second  best,  is  yet  real. 
Imperfect  faith  may  be  the  highway  to  perfection.  Let  us  follow  the  light  if  it  be 
but  a  far-off  glimmer,  sure  that  it  will  bring  ns  into  perfect  day.  (2)  On  the  other 
hand,  no  faith  avails  itself  of  all  the  treasures  laid  up  for  it  which  does  not 
lay  hold  upon  Christ  in  the  character  which  he  presents  Himself.  (A.Maclaren,  D.D.) 
The  vision  of  Ood : — This  request  of  Philip  touches  the  heart  of  all  reUgion.  It  is 
a  question  as  old  as  humanity.  Sometimes,  indeed,  the  soul  becomes  so  debased, 
that  the  desire  ceases  to  be  eager,  or  even  conscious ;  a  perversion  of  natural  law 
as  disastrous  as  if  the  flame  were  not  to  seek  the  sun,  the  magnet  not  to  turn  to  the 
pole,  the  solid  not  to  fall  to  the  earth.  But  in  a  normal  state  of  human  feeling, 
it  has  no  yearaing  so  spontaneous  and  strong.  This  last  discourse  of  our  Lord — 
the  greatest  and  profoundest  of  His  teachings — is  simply  His  answer  to  this  inquiry. 
It  would  indeed  be  a  fatal  invalidation  of  the  rehgion  of  Christ,  if  it  had  no  answer 
to  this  fundamental  quest  of  men.  Indeed,  the  exhaustive  definition  of  Christ's 
salvation  is  the  Christian  way  of  seeing  God.  I,  Thb  cbavino  fob  God  which  is 
CHARACTEEiSTio  OF  ALL  MORAL  NATURES.  1.  To  thoso  who  deny  God,  I  am  justified 
in  putting  the  question — Why  do  I  concern  myself  about  religious  things  ?  Why 
do  I  crave  some  vision  of  God  ?  As  well  ask  why  my  physical  body  craves  food,  or 
my  intellectual  soul  seeks  knowledge.  By  persistent  sin,  a  man  may  practically 
disable  his  soul ;  just  as  by  drunkenness  or  licentiousness  he  may  disable  his  body, 
or  reduce  to  idiotcy  his  mind.  So  also  he  may  reason  down  his  religious  instincts 
by  material  philosophies ;  just  as  by  fanciful  notions  concerning  his  body  he  may 
make  himself  a  hypochondriac.  But  it  is  part  of  him  still.  He  may  damage,  but 
he  cannot  kill  it.  And  sometimes — it  may  be  after  years  of  sin,  or  scepticism — 
there  shall  be  a  sudden  roUing  away  of  the  stone,  and  a  coming  forth  of  the 
entombed  soul,  and  it  shall  cry  out  for  God,  and  refuse  to  be  comforted  if  it  cannot 
find  Him.  2.  But  this,  we  are  told,  is  only  traditional  superstition,  educational 
influence,  social  environment.  But  how  account  for  the  superstition,  the  social 
sentiment?  Its  universality  and  uniformity  point  to  something  inherent  and 
ineradicable.  The  soul  may  be  befooled.  Men  take  advantage  of  it  when  ignorant 
or  morbid,  and  urge  upon  it  religious  sacrifices,  services,  and  ceremonies,  sacra- 
ments, penances,  and  prayers.  But  even  those  do  not  suffice.  No  religious  things 
can  satisfy,  the  living  soul  cries  out  for  the  living  God.  True,  in  Philip  the  desire 
shaped  itself  in  ignorant  forms ;  but  in  which  of  us  does  it  not  ?  Sometimes  it  is 
only  a  feeling  of  bUnd  unrest,  a  craving  for  we  know  not  what.  We  moan  and  toss 
like  men  in  a  fever.  3.  Who,  conscious  of  a  living  soul,  can  be  contented  with 
mere  laws  of  nature  instead  of  the  living  God  ?  If  there  be  no  God,  our  nature,  as 
it  is,  is  the  greatest  solecism  in  the  universe.  All  things  else  have  their 
purpose  and  harmony.  But  for  man,  this  spiritual  nature  is  a  waste, 
and  a  mockery.  Eobespierre  was  right.  "  If  there  be  no  God,  then  it  behoves 
man  to  make  one."  4.  The  strength  of  this  craving  is  attested  by  the  credulities  of 
scepticism  as  much  as  by  the  confidences  of  faith.  Let  men  reject  the  Christian 
revelation  of  God,  and  as  surely  as  they  succeed,  wild  and  incredidous  imaginations 
will  break  forth  and  in  pitiful  forms  give  the  lie  to  all  their  philosophy.  The  fantasies 
of  modern  spiritualism  are  as  conclusive  attestations  as  the  convictions  of  Paul.  Blind 
to  spiritual  truth,  men  are  by  the  very  strength  of  their  spiritual  nature  "  given  over 
to  strong  delusions,  and  believ  a  lie."  IL  The  MiscoNcapTioNS  into  which,  in  thxib 
QUEST  AFTER  GoD,  EVEN  oooD  MEN  FALL.  1.  The  dlsciplcs  generally  had  bat  a 
very  confused  and  imperfect  conception  of  Christ  and  His  work.  Their  persistent 
dream  of  a  restoration  of  David's  throne  and  dominion  hung  like  a  veil  between 
them  and  Christ.  We  find  few  things  more  difficult  than  to  believe  in  purely 
spiritual  forces  and  processes.  It  is  a  poor  spiritual  teaching  that  can  be  folly 
comprehended.  Our  Lord  has  to  speak  of  the  highest  spiritual  things  to  men  of 
low  spiritual  type ;  and  after  vain  attempts  to  make  them  understand.  He  has  to 
content  Himself  with  a  promise  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  should  "  teach  them  all 
Ihings."  2.  Probably  Phihp  thought  of  some  visible  manifestation,  such  as  th« 
VOL  n.  S3 


£14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ht. 

Qhekinah  symbol  or  of  Isaiah's  Tision.  How  rarely  men  recognise  manifestatioM 
of  God  in  purely  spiritual  forms,  in  true  religious  ideas,  in  holy  actions,  in  Godlik* 
eharacter.  For  three  years  Christ  had  been  with  these  men,  and  they  were  utterly 
anconscious  that,  in  all  His  moral  glory,  they  were  looking  upon  the  truest  and 
highest  manifestation  of  God.  When  we  think  of  Divine  manifestation  we  think  ol 
supernatural  miracle,  of  inspired  fervours,  of  signal  conversions,  of  ecstatio 
services.  How  difficult  we  find  it  to  realize  that  in  the  sublime  faith,  the  unselfish 
love  of  a  quiet  saintly  life,  there  is  a  far  higher  manifestation  of  God  than  in  all 
miracles !  The  great  aim  of  our  Lord's  teaching  was  to  turn  men's  quest  after  God 
from  signs  and  wonders  to  His  spiritual  workings  in  religious  hearts.  Philip  asked 
some  theophany — "  the  Lord  coming  suddenly  to  His  temple,"  as  Malachi  had 
predicted — which  he  thought  would  give  certainty  to  his  faith  and  precision  to  his 
idea.  Christ  replies  by  directing  him  to  a  living  spiritual  Person,  "  full  of  grace 
and  truth."  3.  If,  then,  this  manifestation  of  purely  moral  and  spiritual  glories  be 
the  true  vision  of  God — the  glory  of  His  goodness  which  God  caused  to  pass  before 
Moses — ^may  we  not,  in  the  light  of  it,  test  the  various  ways  of  seeking  God  which 
men  pursue  ?  (1)  Men  come  with  their  intellectual  methods  of  analysis  and  reasoning. 
The  astronomer  brings  his  computations ;  the  geologist  his  hammer ;  the  chemist  his 
crucible ;  and  the  philosopher  his  laws  of  sequence,  order,  and  causation.  They 
resolve  substances  into  atoms,  or  ether ;  they  trace  back  all  developments  to  a 
common  protoplasm ;  they  follow  up  sequence  to  its  last  term,  and  then  they 
gravely  tell  you  that  they  cannot  find  God.  How  should  they,  when  they  have 
brought  only  physical  tests  to  the  mere  material  universe  of  God  ?  His  spiritual 
character  they  have  never  attempted  to  essay.  Even  on  their  own  physical  ground 
they  confess  that  their  atoms  are  pure  imaginations,  that  when  they  have  traced  all 
organisms  to  their  conmaon  protoplasm,  the  mystery  of  life  is  utterly  inscrutable ; 
that  they  can  throw  no  Ught  upon  the  genesis  of  mind,  or  of  moral  feeling,  or  of 
religious  idea,  or  even  suggest  how  vegetable  Uf  e  develops  into  animal  intelligence, 
or  animal  intelligence  into  reason  or  conscience.  Before  these  primal  mysteries, 
the  profoundest  philosopher  stands  as  utterly  ignorant  as  the  dweller  in  an  African 
kraal.  How  should  men  find  God  by  such  processes?  As  well  may  the  antiquary 
who  unwraps  an  Egyptian  mummy,  or  the  surgeon  who  conducts  a  post-mortem 
examination,  demur  because  he  cannot  find  the  heroism  of  the  patriot,  the  genius  of 
the  poet,  the  affections  of  the  lover,  the  piety  of  the  saint.  All  that  these  processes 
can  lead  to  is  a  rational  presumption  that  a  universe  so  wonderful  must  be  the 
creation  of  an  Infinite  Intelligence.  The  supreme  manifestation  of  God  is  in  the 
moral  sphere  of  things.  Let  men  ask  their  moral  consciousness  whether  the 
Bcriptural  ideas  of  God  are  not  true  and  transcendent  ?  whether  they  do  not  satisfy 
the  highest  thoughts  and  yearnings  and  wants  of  their  own  spiritual  nature? 
whether  they  can  think  anything  greater  or  holier,  more  congruous  and  satisfying  ? 
While  God  is  supremely  and  characteristically  a  moral  Being,  it  must  in  the 
necessity  of  things  be  that  the  world  by  its  mere  intellectual  wisdom  cannot  know 
God.  (2)  The  other  way  in  which  men  seek  God  is  through  creeds  and  churches, 
priesthoods,  sacraments,  and  rituals.  III.  The  manifestation  of  God  that  men 
CSAVB  IB  that  of  A  Fathbb.  In  our  Lord's  day,  as  in  our  own,  men  had  been 
told  much  about  God  as  the  Creator,  the  Buler,  the  Judge  of  men.  But  it  did  not 
satisfy  the  soul.  They  yearned  for  something  else  in  God  —  for  pity, 
patience,  help,  love.  Let  the  thought  come  that  this  great  and  holy  God  is 
also  the  Father.  How  car  hearts  leap  towards  Him  1  As  a  Father,  He  is 
precisely  the  God  we  need:  our  sins  crave  the  forgiveness,  our  weakness 
and  imperfections  the  patience,  our  sorrows  the  sympathy  of  a  Father; 
our  yearnings  His  fatherly  love  and  bosom.  We  kneel  down  to  pray  to  Him : 
how  gladly  we  catch  up  the  great  word  put  into  our  lips,  and  say,  "  Our  Father 
who  art  in  heaven."  Some  glimpses  of  this  the  old  Jew  had.  But,  as  with  all 
reUgious  truths,  the  realization  of  God  as  a  Father  depends  not  upon  intellectual 
ideas  merely,  but  upon  religious  experiences.  It  is  the  experience  of  what,  as  a 
Father,  God  does  for  us,  that  enables  us  to  understand  what  He  is.  lY.  God  as  k 
Fatheb  IB  BETEALED  TO  US  ONLY  IN  Chbist.  1.  Chiist  claims  this  as  His  distinc- 
tive  revelation  of  God.  Like  a  refrain  it  rings  through  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount 
at  the  beginning  of  His  ministry ;  like  an  atmosphere  it  suffuses  this  last  great 
discourse  "  on  the  night  that  He  was  betrayed."  It  is  the  one  unvarying  represen- 
tation of  all  His  intervening  teaching.  But,  in  this  great  word  to  Philip  much 
more  than  a  teaching  is  meant.  It  would  be  a  cold  and  meagre  paraphrase  of  it  to 
•aj,  "  He  that  hath  received  My  teaching  hath  received  a  true  doctrine  of  tlM 


<HiP.  XIV.]  ST.  JOHN.  615 

Father."  It  is  a  vision  of  God,  not  a  theory  of  God,  which  He  gives.  2.  I  do  not 
4hink  that  the  explanation  is  to  be  found  in  the  Incarnation.  Men  saw  Him,  the 
veritable  incarnate  Son,  and  yet  they  did  not  see  the  Father.  Nor  does  He  refer  to 
His  miracles,  the  displays  of  His  supernatural  power  :  these  He  always  put  in  dis- 
paraging contrast  with  His  spiritual  glories.  Clearly  His  idea  is  of  a  purely 
spiritual  conception  of  God,  a  vision  of  God's  spiritual  character  such  as  God  pro- 
claimed to  Moses  when  He  made  "  all  His  goodness  pass  before  him."  There  is  no 
sense  in  which,  as  distinguished  from  His  almighty  works,  the  spiritual  God  can  be 
seen  but  in  manifestations  of  His  holiness,  goodness,  and  love.  And  these  can  be 
adequately  embodied  and  expressed  only  in  a  personal  moral  life — the  life  of  the 
only  begotten  Son.  This  is  the  true  incarnation — the  embodiment  in  a  human  life 
of  these  Divine  moral  qualities.  As  we  conceive  of  the  spiritual  God,  there  ia 
nothing  else  in  Him  that  could  be  incarnated.  3.  May  we  venture  a  speculation 
apon  God's  peculiar  Fatherhood  in  its  relation  to  the  Incarnation  ?  Is  there  not 
an  essential  oneness  between  the  spiritual  nature  of  God  and  the  spiritual  nature  of 
man,  as  between  fire  and  the  sun,  the  father  and  the  child  ?  Is  there  not  some- 
thing in  the  Divine  nature  of  which  the  Incarnation  is  the  supreme  expression  ?— 
something  in  human  nature  which  makes  the  Incarnation  possible  in  virtue  of 
affinity  ?  Does  He  not  love  us  because  a  father  must  love  his  children  ?  And  does 
He  not  in  the  Incarnation  of  Christ  show  us  how  closely  our  nature  is  allied  to  His  ? 
4.  I  need  not  dwell  here  upon  the  inevitable  inference  from  all  this,  as  to  who  or 
what  this  transcendent  Personage  really  is.  No  creature  may  claim  Divine  glories, 
least  of  all  God's  spiritual  perfections.  Deliberately  and  emphatically  this  calmest 
and  most  ingenuous  of  men  claims  to  have  perfectly  embodied  them.  No  other 
interpretation  of  the  claim  is  rationally  possible  than  the  accepted  interpretation  of 
the  Christian  Church.  *'  I  and  my  Father  are  one."  This  conception  of  the  Christ 
is  much  more  than  a  theological  dogma.  It  is  a  great  religious  inspiration  full  of 
practical  uses.  Nothing  so  assures  our  hearts,  nothing  gives  us  such  a  feeling  of 
Christ's  practical  sufficiency  as  a  Eedeemer.  We  can  trust  such  a  Christ,  pray  to 
Him,  worship  Him,  realize  His  presence  and  help.  V.  The  manitestation  of  thh 
Father  in  Christ  is  a  perfect  satisfaction  to  the  spiritual  bodl.  Philip  was 
right.  He  who  really  can  show  us  the  Father  does  "  suffice  us."  Let  the  claims  of 
Jesus  be  submitted  to  this  test.  He  who  really  shows  us  God  must  be  of  God. 
No  one  has  revealed  God  to  men  as  Christ  has  done.  And  is  not  this  the  true  and 
sufficient  test  of  every  religious  teacher :  How  truly  and  in  what  degree  can  He 
show  us  the  Father  ?  Is  it  not  the  sufficient  authentication  of  every  teaching — 
does  it  bring  us  face  to  face  with  the  spiritual  God  ?  Is  it  not  in  this  that  so  much 
religious  teaching  is  defective  ?  Men  tell  us  about  God,  but  it  is  doctrine  only, 
they  fail  to  make  us  see  God.  About  means  of  grace,  again,  they  have  much  to 
say  :  upon  these  they  insist  as  the  appointed,  the  indispensable  means  of  seeing 
God.  But  we  see  only  the  means,  not  God  Himself.  Whatever  its  theological 
truth,  no  teaching  is  really  and  spiritually  such  if  it  do  not  reveal  God  to  us.  This 
-was  the  supreme  characteristic  of  the  teaching  of  Christ.  The  sum  of  aU  religion 
IS  to  see  the  Father ;  and  by  whomsoever  and  by  whatsoever  the  Father  is  moat 
fully  revealed  to  us,  and  we  are  but  made  to  stand  in  the  pure  white  light  of  His 
spiritual  glory,  there  is  the  truest  teacher  and  the  highest  worship.  "  It  sufficeth 
ns."  VI.  How  THEN  MAT  WB  PERSONALLY  REALIZE  ALL  THIS?  1.  The  Father  caH 
be  seen  only  by  men  of  spiritual  vision.  "  The  pure  in  heart  see  God." 
Christ  does  not  demonstrate  God,  He  simply  manifests  Him.  The  process 
is  not  a  theological,  it  is  a  religious  one.  We  can  know  God  as  a  Father 
only  by  religious  experience  of  Him.  All  life,  all  great  passions  of  life,  are  under- 
stood only  by  experience.  It  demands  the  poet's  eye  to  see  poetic  beauty ;  the 
artist's  eye  to  see  art  beauty.  We  do  not  see  light  through  the  demonstrations  of 
the  astronomer ;  we  know  love  only  by  loving  ;  and  life  only  by  living.  In  the 
essential  nature  of  things  God  cannot  manifest  Himself  to  an  impure  unspiritual 
Boul,  any  more  than  the  sun  can  shine  into  a  blind  man's  eye.  We  know  God  only 
by  the  indwelling  oi  God.  2.  The  Father  is  revealed  to  us  in  processes  and  experi- 
ences of  common  religious  life.  "  If  any  man  love  Me  he  will  keep  My  words,  and 
My  Father  will  love  him,"  &c.  The  obedient  in  life  see  God,  obedience  is  practical 
experience  of  God.  3.  The  process  is  somewhat  prosaic :  men  of  great  fervours 
and  of  ecclesiastical  enthusiasm  get  somewhat  impatient  with  it.  But  here,  aa 
everywhere,  the  divinest  wisdom  lies  in  common-place  methods.  And  how  trans- 
43endent  the  visions  of  God  which  the  man  attains  who  thus,  by  patient  processes  of 
parity  and  obedience,  develops  all  the  faculties  of  his  religious  life  1    (H.  Allon, 


616  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOR.  [CHA».  n?. 

D.D.)  The  revelation  of  the  Fatherhood  of  God  in  Chritt: — Modem  theology 
reeognizes  two  Fatherhoods  in  God — the  extrinsic  and  intrinsic;  first  arising  from 
His  relation  to  the  external  world,  the  second,  from  the  depths  of  His  eternal 
nature.  Now,  the  first  did  not  require  the  Incarnation  to  disclose  it.  It  depended 
on  the  doctrine  of  creation.  "Let  us  make  man,"  &o.,  and  as  the  eztrinsia 
Fatherhood  was  involved  in  the  creation  of  man  in  God's  image,  it  was  reasonably 
to  be  expected  that  a  close  and  exhaustive  analysis  of  our  nature  would  ultimately^ 
discern  the  likeness,  and  that  an  inference  should  be  made  therefrom  of  our  sonship 
and  His  Fatherhood.  As  indeed,  one  of  the  Greek  poets  said,  "We  also  are  His 
offspring."  But  not  till  men  saw  the  Son  coming  out  from  the  Father  did  they 
understand  that  He  was  always  with  the  Father.  In  the  *•  coming  out  "  they  per- 
ceived what  was  always  in,  and  a  new  truth  thus  dawned  upon  the  world,  to  eclipse 
aU  others  with  its  grandeur  and  brightness.  A  Son  has  come  out  from  the  Father  I 
Then  it  was  understood  that  Sonship  and  Fatherhood  must  have  existed  from 
eternity  within  the  inner  circle  of  the  incomprehensible  Godhead.  God  is  Father 
in  the  prof oundest  abysses  of  His  essential  nature.  There  is  no  room  for  this  in- 
trinsic  Fatherhood  in  Unitarian  theology,  because  there  is  no  place  in  it  for  the  In- 
carnation. The  God  of  Unitarianism,  therefore,  is  not  a  Father  in  the  profoundest 
sense  ;  He  is  not  a  Father  in  the  deepest  essence  of  His  being ;  He  is  simply  • 
Father  in  relation  to  the  world.  We  are  not  begotten  by  Him,  of  the  same  sub- 
stance  with  Him ;  He  is  therefore  a  Father  to  us  by  creation,  not  by  generation. 
But  a  Father  by  creation  is  only  a  figurative  Father ;  the  Father  by  generation  only 
is  genuine,  real  Father.  According  to  Unitarianism,  before  creation  God  was  not  a 
Father ;  destroy  creation  and  He  will  again  cease  to  be  a  Father.  His  Fatherhood, 
therefore,  is  a  variable,  accidental,  extrinsic  quality.  He  can  take  it  up  and  lay  it 
down  when  He  pleases.  With  it  He  is  God ;  without  it  He  is  God  just  the  same. 
But  believe  in  the  Incarnation  of  the  Son,  and  you  believe  in  the  truest,  deepest 
Fatherhood  of  God.  Here  you  have  clear,  positive,  I  may  say,  infinite  gain.  II 
thej  highest,  noblest  aspect  in  which  we  can  contemplate  God  is  that  of  a  Father,  a^ 
real,  true  Father,  then  the  God  of  Trinitarianism  is  immeasurably  superior  to  that  of 
Unitarianism.  One  is  a  Father  really,  truly,  intrinsically,  for  ever  and  ever  ;  He  can- 
not help  being  a  Father :  the  other  is  a  Father  simply  in  relation  to  His  creatures  ;  let 
the  universe  collapse,  and  His  Fatherhood  vanishes  the  same  moment.  {J.  C.  Jown^ 
D.D.)  The  sufficiency  of  Christ's  revelation  of  the  Father : — When  the  pitiless  power 
and  fixity  of  nature  seems  to  oppress  our  little  individual  life,  and  we  faint  under 
the  sense  of  our  vanity  and  selfishness  ;  or  when  we  groan  under  the  pressure  of  the 
burden,  and  cry  madly.  Why  hast  Thou  made  me  thus,  and  with  this  passion, 
this  propension  to  the  dust,  this  enmity  to  God,  this  deadness  to  the  true,  the 
beautiful,  the  Divine?  Christ  shows  to  us  the  Father,  and  strengthens  us  to 
endure.  When  the  heartstrings  are  tensely  strained,  and  every  touch  of  things 
external  is  anguish,  when  all  that  makes  life  beautiful  and  dear  is  vanishing  in  the 
darkness,  and  we  look  round  on  what  seems  a  cold  drear  prison-house  of  a  world. 
He  shows  us  the  Father  and  it  comforts  us.  And  when  at  last  the  shadows  fall 
round  us  thicker,  deeper,  when  heart  faints  and  flesh  fails,  when  the  dews  of  death 
gather  on  the  brow,  and  the  chill  steals  into  the  inmost  pulses  of  the  life,  He  will 
show  to  us  the  Father,  and  make  us  more  than  conquerors  over  Death  and  Hell. 
And  when  we  stand  up  at  last  in  the  great  assembly  and  Church  of  the  first-bom,^ 
when  we  gaze  on  the  splendours  of  the  New  Creation,  when  we  see  the  shining 
hosts  in  their  radiant  circles,  sphere  beyond  sphere,  and  catch  the  music  of  their 
mighty  hymn  as  it  fioats  on  a  bright  sea  of  harmony  around  the  eternal  throne  ; 
when  the  soul  faints  before  the  beatific  Vision,  trembles  at  its  beauty,  and  shrinks 
from  its  splendour,  then  Saviour,  show  to  us  the  Father,  and  it  shall  suflBce  us  for 
ever  more.  {J.  Baldwin  Brown,  B.A.)  The  heart  longs  to  know  God : — The  greatest 
hunger  of  the  human  soul  is  for  a  knowledge  of  its  God.  The  unknowable  never 
takes  hold,  and  never  can  take  hold,  of  human  experience.  The  orphaned  heart 
yearns  for  its  Divine  Father,  and  will  not  be  content  in  its  orphanage.  It  looks  on 
the  sunset  or  the  flower,  and  sees  the  Artist.  It  looks  on  the  ocean  or  the  forest, 
and  sees  the  Divine  Mechanician.  It  looks  on  the  manifestations  of  force  and  law, 
and  sees  the  Divine  Governor.  But  it  looks  in  vain  in  nature  for  a  disclosure  of 
the  personal  God ;  of  a  heart  that  loves  and  that  can  be  loved.  It  is  true  that  the 
finite  soul  can  never  comprehend  its  God ;  as  the  babe  can  never  comprehend  its 
mother.  But  it  longs  for  a  personal  presence — for  a  real  interpreter — for  a  face 
that  shows  where  the  uninterpretable  heart  is,  and  a  word  that  speak?  the 
love  that    transcends  speech.     {Christian  Union.)        A  sight  of  God  in  Jenu 


CHAP.  XIV.]  ST.  JOHN.  617 

Christ : — A  forlorn  woman,  discovered  by  one  of  our  missionaries  in  the  depths 
of  Central  Africa,  is  reported  by  him  to  have  broken  out  in  the  most  affecting 
demonstrations  of  joy,  when  Christ  was  pre>ented  to  her  mind,  saying,  ♦'  Oh, 
that  is  He  who  has  come  to  me  so  often  in  my  prayers.  I  could  not  find  who 
He  was."  Have  I  been  so  long  with  yon,  and  yet  hast  thou  not  known  Me.— 
The  patient  Master  and  the  slow  scholars  : — The  question  carries  a  lesson — I.  As  to 
WHAT  lONORANCB  OF  Chbist  IS.  Our  Lord  charges  Philip  with  not  knowing  Him 
because  Philip  had  said,  "  Lord  I  show  us  the  Father."  And  that  question  betrayed 
Philip's  ignorance  of  Christ,  because  it  showed  that  he  had  not  understood  that 
'•  He  that  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen  the  Father."  Not  knowing  that,  all  his  know- 
ledge of  Christ — howsoever  full  of  love,  and  reverence,  and  blind  admiration — is  but 
twilight  knowledge,  which  may  well  be  called  ignorance.  1.  Not  to  know  Christ  as 
the  manifest  God  is  practically  to  be  ignorant  of  Him  altogether.  This  man  asked 
for  some  visible  manifestation,  such  as  their  old  books  told  them  of.  But  if  such 
a  revelation  ha"^  been  given — and  Christ  could  have  given  it  if  He  would — what  a 
poor  thing  it  would  have  been  when  put  side  by  side  with  that  mild  and  lambent 
light  that  was  ever  streaming  from  Him,  making  God  visible  to  every  sensitive  and 
responsive  nature  1  The  revelation  of  righteousness  and  love  could  be  entrusted  to 
no  flashing  brightnesses,  and  to  no  thunders  and  lightnings.  Not  the  power,  not 
the  omniscience,  are  the  Divinest  glories  in  God.  These  are  but  the  outermost 
parts  of  the  circumference ;  the  living  Centre  is  a  Righteous  Love,  which  cannot  be 
revealed  by  any  means  but  by  action ;  nor  shown  in  action  by  any  means  so  clearly 
as  by  a  human  life.  Therefore,  above  all  other  forms  of  manifestations  of  God 
stands  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ,  God  manifest  in  the  flesh.  2.  This  is  His  own 
claim,  not  once  or  twice,  not  in  this  Gospel  alone,  but  in  a  hundred  other  places. 
And  we  have  to  reckon  and  make  our  account  with  that,  and  shape  our  theology 
accordingly.  So  we  have  to  look  upon  all  Christ's  life  as  showing  men  the  Father. 
His  gentle  compassion,  His  meek  wisdom,  His  patience.  His  long-suffering  yearning 
over  men,  His  continual  efforts  to  draw  them  to  Himself,  all  these  are  the  full  reve- 
lation of  God  to  the  world.  They  all  reach  their  climax  on  the  cross.  "  Lo,  this 
is  our  God,  we  have  waited  for  Him,  and  He  will  save  us."  There  are  some  of  yon 
who  admire  and  reverence  this  great  Teacher,  but  who  stand  outside  that  inner- 
most circle  wherein  He  manifests  Himself  as  the  God  Incarnate,  the  Sacrifice,  and 
the  Saviour  of  the  world.  But  not  to  know  Him  in  this  His  very  deepest  and 
most  essential  character  is  little  different  from  being  ignorant  of  Him  altogether. 
3.  Here  is  a  great  thinker  or  teacher,  whose  fame  has  filled  the  world,  whose 
books  are  upon  every  student's  shelf ;  he  lives  in  a  Uttle  remote  country  hamlet ; 
the  cottagers  beside  him  know  him  as  a  kind  neighbour,  and  a  sympathetic 
friend.  They  never  heard  of  his  books,  his  thoughts,  his  world-wide  reputation  : 
do  you  call  that  knovnng  him  ?  Yoa  do  not  know  a  man  if  you  only  know  the 
Bnrface,  and  not  the  secrets  of  his  being.  You  may  be  disciples,  in  the  imperfect 
sense  in  which  these  apostles  were  disciples  before  the  Ascension,  but  without  their 
exonse  for  it.  But  you  will  never  know  Him  until  you  know  Him  as  the  Eternal 
Word,  and  until  you  can  say,  •'  We  beheld  His  glory,"  &c.  All  the  rest  is  most 
precious ;  but  without  that  central  truth,  you  have  but  a  fragmentary  Christ,  and 
nothing  less  than  the  whole  Christ  is  enough  for  you.  II.  As  GrviNO  us  a  glimpse 
INTO  THE  PAINED  AND  LoviNO  HEART  ov  ouB  LoED.  We  Very  scldom  hear  Him 
speak  about  His  own  feelings  or  experience,  and  when  He  does  it  is  always  in  some 
such  incidental  way  as  this.  So  that  these  glimpses,  Uke  little  windows  opening 
out  upon  some  great  prospect,  are  the  more  precious  to  us.  1.  In  another  place  we 
xead :  "  He  marvelled  at  their  unbelief."  And  here  there  is  almost  a  surprise  that 
He  should  have  been  shining  so  long  and  so  near,  and  yet  the  purblind  eyes  should 
have  seen  so  little.  But  there  is  more  than  that,  there  is  the  pain  of  vainly 
endeavouring  to  teach,  to  help,  to  love.  And  there  are  few  pains  like  that.  The 
slowness  of  the  pupil  is  the  sorrow  of  the  honest  teacher.  If  ever  you  have  had  a 
child,  or  a  friend,  that  you  have  tried  to  get  by  all  means  to  take  your  love,  and 
who  has  thrown  it  all  back  in  your  face,  you  may  know  in  some  faint  measure  what 
was  at  least  one  of  the  elements  which  made  Christ  the  "  Man  of  Sorrows."  2.  But  this 
question  reveals  also  the  depth  and  patience  of  a  clinging  love  that  was  not  turned 
•way  by  the  pain.  How  tenderly  the  name  "  Philip  "  comes  in  at  the  end !  It  bids 
OS  think  of  that  patient  love  of  His  which  will  not  be  soured  by  any  slowness  or 
scantiness  of  response.  Dammed  back  by  our  sullen  rejection,  it  still  flows  on, 
seeking  to  conquer  by  long-suffering.  Refused,  it  still  lingers  round  the  closed  door 
of  the  heart,  and  knocks  for  entrance.    Misunderstood,  it  still  meeklj  nmnifesta 


fil8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  iOHAP.  xit. 

itself.  Surely  in  that  we  see  the  manifested  God.  3.  Eemember  that  the  same 
pained  and  patient  love  is  in  the  heart  of  the  throned  Christ  to-day.  We  cannot 
anderstand  how  anything  like  pain  should,  however  slightly,  darken  Etis  glory ;  bat 
if  it  be  true  that  He  in  the  heavens  has  yet  "  a  fellow-feeling  of  our  pains,"  it  is 
not  less  true  that  His  love  is  still  wounded  by  our  lovelessness,  and  His  manifesta- 
tion of  Himself  made  sad  by  the  slowness  of  our  reception  of  Him.  IIL  Aa  beino 
A  piEBOiNO  QUESTION  ADDBESSED  TO  EACH  07  US.  1.  It  is  the  great  wonder  of 
human  history  that,  aft^r  eighteen  hundred  years,  the  world  knows  so  little  of 
Jesus  Christ.  (1)  The  leaders  of  opinion,  of  literature,  the  men  that  profess  to 
guide  the  thoughts  of  this  generation,  how  little  they  know,  really,  about  this 
Master  I  Some  people  take  a  great  deal  more  trouble  to  understand  Buddha  than 
they  do  to  understand  Christ.  (2)  How  little,  too,  the  mass  of  men  know  about 
Him  1  Ii  IS  enough  to  break  one's  heart  to  look  round  one,  and  think  that  He  has 
been  so  long  time  with  the  world,  and  that  this  is  all  which  has  come  of  it.  The 
great  proof  that  the  world  is  bad  is  that  Christ  has  stood  before  it  for  nearly  nine- 
teen centuries  now,  and  so  few  have  been  led  to  turn  to  Him  with  the  adoring  cry, 
*'  My  Lord  and  my  God."  2.  But  let  us  narrow  our  thoughts  to  ourselves.  (1) 
Many  of  you  have  known  about  Jesus  Christ  all  your  lives,  and  yet,  in  a  real,  deep 
sense  you  do  not  know  Him  at  this  moment.  Do  you  know  Christ  as  a  man 
knows  his  friend,  or  as  you  know  about  Julias  Casar?  Do  you  know  Christ 
because  you  live  with  Him  and  He  with  you,  or  do  you  know  about  Him  in  that 
fashion  in  which  a  man  in  a  great  city  knows  about  his  neighbour  across  the  street, 
that  has  lived  beside  him  for  five  and  twenty  years,  and  never  spoken  to  him  once 
all  the  time  ?  Is  that  your  knowledge  of  Christ  ?  If  so,  it  is  no  knowledge  at  all. 
People  that  live  close  by  something,  which  men  come  from  the  ends  of  the  earth  to 
see,  have  often  never  seen  it.  (2)  And,  to  yoa  who  know  Him  a  little,  this  question 
comes  with  a  very  pathetic  appeal.  If  we  know  Him  at  all  as  we  ought  to  do,  our 
knowledge  of  Him  will  be  growing  day  by  day.  But  how  many  of  us  stand  at  the 
same  spot  that  we  did  when  we  first  said  that  we  were  Christians  I  We  are  like 
the  Indians  who  live  in  rich  gold  countries,  and  could  only  gather  the  ore  that 
happened  to  lie  upon  the  surface  or  could  be  washed  out  of  the  sands  of  the  river. 
In  this  great  Christ  there  are  depths  of  gold,  great  reefs  and  veins  of  it,  that  will 
enrich  us  all  if  we  dig,  and  we  shall  not  get  it  unless  we  do.  He  is  the  boundless 
ocean.  We  have  contented  ourselves  with  coasting  along  the  shore,  and  making 
timid  excursions  from  one  headland  to  another.  Let  us  strike  out  into  the  middle 
deep,  and  see  all  the  wonders  that  are  there.  This  great  Christ  is  like  the  infinite 
sky  with  its  unresolved  nebulae.  We  have  but  looked  with  our  poor,  dim  eyes.  Let 
as  take  the  telescope  that  will  reveal  to  us  suns  blazing  where  now  we  only  see 
darkness.  (3)  This  knowledge  ought  to  be  growing  every  day ;  and  why  does  ife 
not  ?  Yoa  know  a  man  because  you  are  much  with  him.  And  if  you  want  to 
know  Jesus  Christ,  there  must  be  a  great  deal  more  meditative  thougbtfulness,  smd 
honest  study  of  His  life  and  work  than  most  of  us  have  put  forth.  We  know 
people,  too,  by  sympathy,  and  by  love,  and  by  keeping  near  them.  Oh,  it  is  a 
wonder,  and  a  shame,  and  a  sin  for  us  professing  Christians,  that,  having  tasted 
the  sweetness  of  His  love,  we  should  come  down  so  low  as  to  long  for  the  garbage 
of  earth.  Who  is  fool  enough  to  prefer  vinegar  to  wine,  bitter  herbs  to  grapes, 
dross  to  gold  ?  Who  is  there  that,  having  consorted  with  the  king,  would  gladly 
herd  with  ragged  rebels?  And  yet  that  is  what  we  do.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
He  that  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen  the  Father. — The  Father  manifested  in  the  Son: — 
Our  Lord  meant  that  in  His  person,  as  well  as  by  His  doctrine,  miracles,  benevo- 
lence, life,  death,  resurrection,  ascension,  God  is  manifested,  as  far  as  could  be, 
even  to  our  senses,  as  well  as  to  our  understanding,  and  that  this  is  the  clearest 
manifestation  God  has  been  pleased  to  make  of  Himself  to  man  on  earth.  Hence, 
to  such  as  wish  to  know  God,  we  must  say,  Behold,  and  consider,  not  only  His 
works  of  creation ;  look  not  only  at  the  dispensations  of  Providence,  which  manifest 
such  attributes  as  the  works  of  creation  were  not  calculated  to  discover ;  nor  read 
and  consider  only  His  Word,  which  shows  Him  still  more  ;  but  behold  the  person 
of  His  Son,  who  is  "the  image  of  the  invisible  God,  the  first  bom  of  every  creature  " 
(Col.  i.  15 ;  Heb.  i.  3  ;  John  i.  18).  Would  we  discover  tbe  Father's  wisdom?  let 
us  hearken  to  Him  who  was  the  wisdom  and  word  of  God  incarnate.  Would  we 
know  the  Father's  power  ?  let  us  observe  it  in  the  miracles  of  Christ.  Would  we 
know  how  holy  God  is,  and  the  nature  of  His  holiness  f  let  us  observe  the  spirit 
which  Jesus  breathed  and  the  conduct  He  maintained.  Would  we  know  whether 
God  be  a  kind  and  compassionate  Being,  and  irhat  is  the  nature  of  His  benevolenoa 


«HAP.  xiT.]  ST.  JOHN.  61» 

and  love  ?  we  must  look  how  these  qaalities  were  displayed  in  the  character  of 
Jeans  Christ.  Would  we  see  His  meekness,  patience,  forbearance,  and  long-suffer- 
ing ?  let  US  observe  how  these  dispositions  shone  forth  in  Christ.  Would  we  hava 
ft  display  of  His  justice?  let  us  see  sin  condemned  and  punished  in  Him  who  "gave 
Himself  for  us,  an  offering  and  a  sacrifice  to  God."  Do  we  wish  to  see  the  love  of 
God  exemplified?  observe  Christ  dying  for  us,  "  dying  for  the  ungodly  ;"  when  we 
were  enemies,  reconciling  us  to  God  by  His  death."  Would  we  know  God  as  our 
Creator  ?  observe  Christ  secretly  and  insensibly  multiplying  the  loaves  and  fishes  ; 
observe  Him  giving  sight  to  the  blind,  and  life  to  the  dead.  Would  we  know  God 
as  our  Preserver  ?  let  us  contemplate  Jesus  upholding  Peter  while  walking  on  the 
water.  As  our  Governor  ?  let  us  observe  Him  controUing  the  powers  of  nature, 
*•  rebuking  the  winds  and  the  sea,  and  producing  a  great  calm."  As  our  Redeemer? 
«ee  Him  "giving  His  life  a  ransom  for  us."  As  our  Saviour?  consider  Him  coming 
*'to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost."  Would  we  know  God  as  a  Friend? 
mark  the  famiharity  and  tenderness  with  which  Jesus  conversed  with  His  disciples. 
As  a  Father?  observe  Jesus  "begetting  us  again  by  His  Gospel,"  and  see  Hia 
parental  care  for  His  disciples.  In  a  word,  if  we  wish  to  know  the  mind,  dis- 
positions, and  intentions  of  God  towards  man,  we  must  see  them  delineated  and 
exhibited  in  the  doctrine,  example,  and  works  of  Christ.  In  order  to  this,  how- 
ever, it  is  necessary  we  should  be  enlightened  by  the  Divine  Spirit  (1  Cor.  ii.  11) ; 
that  we  be  "  taught  "  and  "learn  of  the  Father"  (John  vi.  45  ;  Matt.  xi.  27,  xvi.  17). 
{J.  Benson.)  The  effect  of  GhrisVs  manifestation  of  the  Father  on  individuals  : — 
A  sick  woman  said  to  Mr.  Cecil,  "  Sir,  I  have  no  notion  of  God ;  I  can  form  no 
notion  of  Him.'  You  talk  to  me  about  Him,  but  I  cannot  get  a  single  idea  that 
seems  to  contain  anything."  "  But  you  know  how  to  conceive  of  Jesus  Christ  as  a 
man,"  replied  Mr.  Cecil;  ''God  comes  down  to  you  in  Him,  full  of  kindness  and 
condescension."  •'  Ah !  sir,  that  gives  me  something  to  lay  hold  on.  There  I  can 
rest.  I  understand  God  in  His  Son.  God  was  in  Christ."  The  effect  of  Christ'$ 
manifestation  of  the  Father  on  history : — The  great  mass  of  mankind  must  have 
images.  The  strong  tendency  of  the  multitude  in  all  ages  and  nations  to  idolatry 
can  be  explained  on  no  other  principle.  The  first  inhabitants  of  Greece,  there  is 
every  reason  to  believe,  worshipped  one  invisible  Deity.  But  the  necessity  of 
having  something  more  definite  to  adore  produced,  in  a  few  centuries,  the  innumer- 
able crowd  of  gods  and  goddesses.  In  like  manner  the  ancient  Persians  thought  it 
impious  to  exhibit  the  Creator  under  a  human  form.  Yet  even  these  transferred  to 
the  sun  the  worship,  which  speculatively  they  considered  to  be  due  only  to  the 
supreme  mind.  The  history  of  the  Jews  is  the  record  of  a  continual  struggle 
between  pure  theism,  supported  by  the  most  terrible  sanctions,  and  the  strangely 
fascinating  desire  of  having  some  visible  and  tangible  object  of  adoration.  Perhaps 
none  of  the  secondary  causes  which  Gibbon  has  assigned  for  the  rapidity  with 
which  Christianity  spread  over  the  world,  while  Judaism  scarcely  ever  acquired  a 
proselyte,  operated  more  powerfully  than  this  feeling.  God  the  uncreated,  the 
incomprehensible,  the  invisible,  attracted  few  worshippers.  A  philosopher  might 
adore  so  noble  a  conception ;  but  the  crowd  turned  away  in  disgust  from  words 
which  created  no  image  in  their  minds.  It  was  before  the  Deity,  embodied  in  a 
human  form,  walking  among  men,  partaking  of  their  infirmities,  leaning  on  their 
bosoms,  weeping  over  their  graves,  slumbering  in  the  manger,  bleeding  on  the 
cross,  that  the  prejudices  of  the  synagogue,  and  the  doubts  of  the  academy,  and 
fche  pride  of  the  portico,  and  the  forces  of  the  lictors,  and  the  swords  of  thirty 
legions  were  humbled  in  the  dust.  {Lord  Macaulay.)  Believest  thou  not  tliat  I 
am  in  the  Father  and  the  Father  In  Me  ? — I.  Christ  in  the  Father.  Iu  the 
Father's — 1.  Affections.  He  loves  Christ  more  than  He  loves  the  universe.  "  This  is 
My  beloved  Son."  As  a  loving  child  lives  in  the  affections  of  his  parents,  so  Christ, 
only  in  an  infinitely  higher  degree,  lives  in  the  heart  of  God.  2.  Thoughts.  What 
an  intelligent  being  loves  most  he  will  think  most  about.  (1)  Christ  is  the  Logos, 
the  Revealer  of  the  Divine  thought.  As  the  word  is  to  the  mind  before  it  is  sounded, 
Christ  is  in  God.  (2)  He  is  the  Executor  of  the  Divine  thought  By  Him  His 
creative,  redemptive,  governing,  statutory  thoughts  are  carried  out.  II.  The  Fatheb 
IS  IN  Christ  as  in  His  special — 1.  Temple,  He  whom  the  heaven  of  heavens  cannot 
contain  has  a  special  dwelling  in  Christ.  In  Him  He  manifests  Himself  in  a  fulness 
and  glory  seen  nowhere  else.  2.  Organ.  As  the  soul  dwells  in  the  body,  God 
dwells  in  Christ  and  works  by  Him.  3,  Eevealer.  "  The  brightness  of  His  glory,** 
Ac. — the  Revealer  of  His  power,  wisdom,  character,  as  aU  that  is  pure,  just,  tender, 
and  compassionate.    4,  Devotee-    Ood  is  the  object  of  Christ's  supreme  lov»    All 


620  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHAI.  nf. 

His  thoughts,  powers,  and  aims,  were  subordinate  to  Him.  (D.  Thomai,  D.D.) 
God  in  Christ : — But  is  not  the  Father  in  all  ?  In  every  tree,  stream,  and  star  ? 
Yes.  There  is  no  life  where  He  is  not.  But  He  is  in  Christ  in  a  higher  sense. 
He  is  in  nature  as  an  animating  principle,  in  holy  souls  as  an  inspiring  influence, 
in  Christ  as  a  Divine  Personality.  In  Him  He  is  God  manifest  in  the  flesh.  The 
Father  is  in  Him  as — I.  An  apfbeciablb  personality.  It  is  difficult,  if  not  impos- 
sible, to  realize  the  Divine  Personality  in  nature.  He  seems  so  vast  and  boundless. 
But  in  Christ  He  comes  within  the  range  of  our — 1.  Senses.  2.  Sympathies.  3. 
Experiences.  II.  An  ATTBAcxrvB  personaUty.  1.  Does  wonder  attract?  He  is 
"the  Wonderful."  2.  Does  love  attract f  His  is  the  tenderest,  strongest,  most 
self-sacriflcing,  and  unconquerable  love.  3.  Does  beauty  attract  ?  He  is  "  the 
altogether  lovely."  In  Christ  there  is  power  to  draw  all  men  to  Him.  III.  An 
IMITABLB  personality.  Our  obligation  and  well  being  require  us  to  become  like  God, 
partakers  of  the  Divine  nature—"  holy,  even  as  He  is  holy."  In  Christ  He  appears 
pre-eminently  imitable.  1.  His  love  wins  our  hearts.  2.  His  principles  command 
our  consciences.  3.  His  moral  glories  inspire  our  admiration.  Thus  we  can  imitate 
Him.    (Ibid.) 

Yer.  11.  Belleye  Ue  .  .  .  for  the  very  works'  sake. — The  miracles : — I.  Should 
WE  BELIEVE  THE  uiBACLES  ?  1.  Are  miracles  possible  ?  Hume,  Spinosa,  and  others 
say,  "No:  reason  pronounces  them  impossible."  But  whose  reason 7  Theirs? 
Then  that  contradicts  the  all  but  universal  reason,  which  affirms  that  with  God  all 
things  are  possible.  2.  Are  miracles  improbable  and  incredible?  Yes,  say  the 
same  authorities.  But  did  they  live  when  they  are  alleged  to  have  been  performed  ? 
One  ground  of  disbelief  is,  that  it  is  impossible  to  believe  what  contradicts  ex- 
perience. But  what  remains  to  be  proved  is,  Did  miracles  contradict  the  experience  of 
the  professed  witnesses?  The  denizens  of  the  equator  never  saw  ice.  Their 
experience  cootradicts  that  of  the  Greenlanders.  But  which  shall  we  accept  f 
Another  ground  is  that  it  is  unlikely  that  the  Creator  would  disturb  the  beneficent 
order  of  events.  Granted,  except  for  the  best  and  wisest  purposes,  and  in  such  a 
way  as  not  to  derange  the  order  of  the  universe.  This  is  what  is  claimed  for 
Christ;  and,  indeed,  on  behalf  of  the  freedom  and  beneficence  of  the  Creator. 
The  anti-miraculous  position  is  the  dethronement  of  God  in  favour  of  natural  law. 
8.  Have  we  satisfactory  ground  to  believe  that  Christ  performed  miracles  f  There 
is  the  same  evidence  for  them  as  that  Csesar  entered  Gaul  and  Britain.  Upon  thia 
evidence  the  Christian  Church  is  built ;  the  witnesses  died  to  support  their  testi* 
mony.  The  fabrication  of  this  testimony  would  be  more  miraculous  than  what 
it  records.  II.  SnouLn  we  be  induced  bt  theu  to  admit  Christ's  Divine  claims^ 
Yes,  for — 1.  They  are  the  acts  of  a  Creator.  We  recognize  the  same  Voice  saying, 
"Let  there  be  light  I "  that  said,  "  Lazarus,  come  forth  I "  We  believe  Him  "for 
^e  works'  sake."  2.  Christ  is  the  efficient  Agent  in  all  miracles.  He  promised, 
and  gave  to,  the  apostles  their  supernatural  power ;  and  they  referred  the  effects  of 
it  back  to  Him,  and  exerted  it  to  produce  faith  in  Him.  3.  Christ  performed 
miracles  by  His  own  power  and  in  His  own  name,  which  the  apostles  never  did. 
Conclusion:  1.  The  blessedness  of  belief  in  Christ.  2.  The  peril  of  disbelief. 
{E.  N.  Kirk,  D.D.)  The  reasonableness  of  the  evidence  of  miracles,  and  its  im- 
potence alone  : — It  is  quite  consistent  with  God's  wisdom  to  reveal  Himself  to  the 
senses,  as  well  as  to  the  soul ;  and  if  the  gospel  were  utterly  deficient  in  this  latter 
kind  of  proof,  one  great  evidence  that  it  is  from  God  would  be  wanted — an  evidence 
that  we  are  fortified  in  expecting  from  the  analogies  of  nature.  God  has  writteo 
His  glory — e.g.,  in  the  heart — at  the  same  time,  He  has  so  constructed  the  visible 
universe,  that  "  the  heavens  declare  the  glory  of  God."  And  when  the  eternal 
Word  is  manifested  into  the  world,  we  naturally  expect  that  Divine  power  shall  be 
shown,  as  well  as  Divine  beneficence.  Miracles,  therefore,  are  exactly  what  we 
should  expect ;  and  I  acknowledge  a  great  corroboration  and  verification  of  His 
claims  to  Sonship.  Besides,  they  startled  and  aroused  many  to  His  claims  who 
otherwise  would  never  have  attended  to  them.  Still  the  great  truth  remains  un- 
touched, that  they,  appealing  only  to  the  natural  man,  cannot  convey  the  spiritual 
certainty  of  truth  which  the  spiritual  man  alone  apprehends.  However,  as  the 
natural  and  spiritual  in  us  are  both  from  God,  why  should  God  not  have  spoken  to 
both,  and  why  should  not  Christ  appeal  to  natural  works,  subordinate  aJways  te 
the  spiritual  self-evidence  of  Truth  itself  ?    (F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.) 

Ters.  12-14.  He  that  helleveth  on  Ue  the  works  that  I  do  shall  he  do  alio. — Ths 


OHAP.  xrr.]  BT.  JOHN.  £21 

activity  of  the  glorified  Christ : — ^I.  Its  bealitt  ak©  certainty.  Vers.  13,  14  show 
that  Christ  regarded  Himself  as  the  worker  and  His  followers  only  as  His  agents. 
II.  Its  obgan  ani>  instrument.  Our  Saviour's  language — 1.  Does  not  mean  that 
He  will  work  through  no  other  way  than  the  collective  Church,  which  is  His  body, 
and  the  believer  who  is  a  member  of  it ;  because  in  point  of  fact  He  does,  as  the 
Governor  of  the  universe  which  He  summoned  into  being.  2.  Nor  that  everything 
done  by  the  Church  or  the  beUever  is  a  manifestation  of  His  activity.  To  maintain 
this  would  be  to  open  a  wide  door  to  fanaticism.  3.  It  does  signify,  however,  that 
Christ  uses  His  Church  collectively  and  individually  to  operate  on  the  earth ;  and 
that  not  merely  as  His  representative,  but  as  His  body,  pervaded  by  His  power  and 
ewayed  by  His  wilL  His  own  works  indicate  His  unity  with  the  Father  (ver.  11) : 
the  works  of  believers  their  unity  with  Himself  (vers.  12,  20).  III.  Its  nature  and 
extent.  1.  Its  nature — •'  The  same  works,"  &c.  This  was  fulfilled  in  the  miracles 
of  the  disciples  after  Pentecost.  But  that  they  performed  no  works,  except  as  they 
were  employed  by  Christ  is  shown  by  the  fact  they  wrought  no  miracle  to  cure  their 
friends  (Phil.  ii.  26,  27 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  20).  They  had  no  power  to  work  indiscriminately. 
2.  Its  extent.  "  Greater  works  " — ^not  greater  miracles,  but  such  works  as  Peter's 
At  Pentecost,  and  Paul's  in  his  missionary  journeys.  IV.  Its  mode  and  condition. 
If  Christ  is  the  prime  worker  and  the  believer  the  instrument,  connection  must  be 
established  between  them.  1.  Christ  must  be  able  to  reach  the  believer.  This  He 
does  by  the  impartation  of  the  Spirit  (vers.  16,  17).  2.  The  believer  must  be  able 
to  communicate  with  Christ.  This  he  does  by  prayer  (vers.  13,  14).  Nothing 
could  be — (1)  Simpler — it  would  be  only  needful  that  they  should  ask  (Matt.xxi.  21, 
22 ;  Mark  xi.  23,  24).  (2)  Ampler — all  things  should  be  done  (Matt.  vii.  7  ;  xviii. 
19).  (3)  Surer — Christ  would  Himself  do  what  they  asked.  (4)  Freer — the  only 
stipulation  was  that  they  should  ask  in  Christ's  name.  Lessons — 1.  The  supreme 
divinity  of  Christ  involved  in  all  He  here  says  about  Himself.  2.  The  essential 
dignity  of  the  Christian — a  fellow-worker  with  Christ.  3.  The  true  doctrine  of 
prayer — asking  in  the  name  of  Christ.  4.  The  reason  why  miracles  have  ceased — 
the  Holy  Ghost  does  not  consider  them  necessary.  (T.  Whitelaw,  D.D.)  The 
works  of  the  ascended  Christ : — The  key-word  of  this  context  is  "  Beliere  ! "  In 
three  successive  verses  we  find  it,  each  time  widening  in  its  application — to  the 
single  disciple :  "  Philip  I "  to  the  whole  group  :  and  now,  here,  to  whosoever 
believeth  in  Him.  Our  Lord  has  pointed  to  believing  as  the  great  antidote  to  a 
troubled  heart,  as  the  sure  way  of  knowing  the  Father,  as  the  better  substitute  for 
sight ;  and  now  here  He  opens  before  us  still  more  wonderful  prerogatives  and 
effects.  We  have  here — I.  The  continuous  work  of  the  exalted  Lord  roB  and 
THBouoH  His  servants.  These  disciples,  of  course,  thought  that  the  departure  of 
Jesus  would  be  the  end  of  His  activity.  Henceforward  whatever  distress  or  need 
might  come,  that  voice  would  be  silent,  and  that  hand  motionless.  Some  oi 
OS  know  how  dreary  that  makes  life,  and  we  can  understand  how  these 
men  shrank  from  the  prospect.  Christ's  words  tell  them  that  in  them  He 
will  work  as  well  as  for  them,  after  He  has  departed.  1.  Christ's  removal 
from  the  world  is  not  the  end  of  His  activity  in  the  world.  We  are  not  to 
water  down  such  words  as  these  into  the  continuous  influence  of  His  memory.  That 
is  true,  but  over  and  above  that,  there  is  the  present  influence  of  His  present  work. 
One  form  of  His  work  was  "  finished  "  on  Calvary,  but  there  is  another  work,  which 
will  not  be  ended  until  the  angel  voices  shall  chant  "  It  is  done,  the  kingdoms  of 
the  world  are  the  kingdoms  of  our  God  and  of  His  Christ."  And  therefore  these 
disciples  were  not  to  be  cast  down  as  if  His  work  for  them  were  ended.  It  is  clear, 
of  coarse,  that  such  words  as  these  demand  something  perfectly  unique  in  the 
nature  of  Christ.  All  other  men's  work  is  cut  in  twain  by  death.  "  This  man, 
having  served  his  generation  by  the  will  of  God,  was  gathered  to  his  fathers.  And 
he  (and  his  work)  saw  corruption."  That  is  the  epitaph  over  the  greatest,  the 
tenderest,  and  most  helpful.  But  Christ  is  living  to-day,  and  working  all  around 
Qs.  Now,  it  is  of  the  last  importance,  that  we  should  give  a  very  prominent  place 
in  our  creeds,  and  hearts,  to  this  great  truth.  What  a  joyful  sense  of  companion- 
ship it  brings  to  the  solitary,  what  calmness  of  vision,  in  contemplating  the  com- 
plications and  calamites  of  the  world's  history.  2.  But  not  only  for  us,  but  on  and 
in  and  therefore  through  us  Christ  is  working.  "I  live,  yet  not  I,  but  Christ 
liveth  in  me,"  and  through  me,  if  I  keep  close  to  Him,  will  work  mightily  in  forms 
that  my  poor  manhood  could  never  have  reached.  And  now,  mark  that  a  still  more 
solemn  and  mysterious  aspect  of  this  union  of  Jesus  Christ  and  the  believer.  It  is 
no  accident  that  in  one  clause  He  says,  "  I  am  in  the  Father,  and  the  Father  in  Me. 


622  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (cha».  xsf. 

The  words  that  I  speak  unto  you,"  Ac. ;  and  that  in  the  next  He  says,  "  The  work* 
that  I  do  shall  He  do  also  ;  "  and  so  bids  us  see  in  that  union  between  the  Father 
and  the  Son,  a  pattern  after  which  our  union  with  Him  is  to  be  moulded,  both  as 
regards  the  closeness  of  its  intimacy  and  as  regards  the  resulting  manifestations  in 
life.  All  the  doings  of  a  Christian  man  holding  by  Christ,  are  Christ's  doings,  in- 
asmuch as  He  is  the  Life  and  the  Power  which  does  them  all.  So  let  us  curb  all 
self-dependence  and  self-will  that  that  mighty  tide  may  flow  into  us ;  and  let  ua 
oast  from  us  all  timidity,  and  be  strong  in  the  assurance  that  we  have  a  Christ 
living  in  the  heavens  to  work  for  us,  and  living  within  us  to  work  through 
us.  II.  The  greateb  wobk  op  the  servants  on  and  fob  whom  the  Lord 
WORKS.  Is,  then,  the  servant  greater  than  his  Lord  ?  Not  so,  for  whatsoever 
the  servant  does  is  done  because  the  Lord  is  with  and  in  him.  The  contrast 
it]  between  Christ's  manifestations  in  the  time  of  His  earthly  humiliation 
and  His  manifestations  in  the  time  of  His  glory.  We  need  not  be  afraid  that 
such  words  trench  on  the  unapproachable  character  of  the  earthly  work  of  Christ. 
This  is  finished.  But  the  work  of  Eevelation  and  Eedemption  required  to  be 
applied  through  the  ages.  The  comparison  is  drawn,  between  the  limited  sphere 
and  the  small  results  of  Christ's  work  upon  earth,  and  the  world-wide  sweep  and 
majestic  magnitude  of  the  results  of  the  application  of  that  work  by  His  servants* 
witnessing  work.  And  the  poorest  Christian  who  can  go  to  a  brother  soul,  and 
draw  that  soul  to  Christ,  does  a  mightier  thing  than  it  was  possible  for  the  Master 
to  do  whilst  He  was  here.  For  the  Redemption  had  to  be  completed  in  act  before 
it  could  be  proclaimed  in  word,  and  Christ  had  no  such  weapon  as  we  have  when 
we  can  say,  "  We  testify  unto  you  that  the  Son  of  God  hath  died  for  our  sins,  and  is 
raised  again  according  to  the  Scriptures."  "  He  laid  His  hands  on  a  few  sick  folk 
and  healed  them,"  and  at  the  end  of  His  life  there  were  120  disciples  in  Jerusalem 
and  500  in  Galilee.  That  was  all  that  Jesus  Christ  had  done,  while  to-day,  the 
world  is  being  leavened,  and  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  are  beginning  to  recognize 
His  name.  III.  The  conditions  on  which  the  exalted  Lord  works  fob  and  on 
His  servants.  1.  Faith,  the  simple  act  of  loving  trust  in  Jesus  Christ,  opens  the 
door  for  the  entrance  of  all  His  solemn  Omnipotence,  and  makes  us  possessors  of 
it.  So  if  Christian  individuals  and  communities  are  impotent,  there  is  no  difl&culty 
in  understanding  why.    They  have  cut  the  connection,  they  have  shut  the  tap. 

2.  Prayer.  (1)  Our  power  depends  upon  our  prayer.  Not  God's  and  Christ's  fulness 
and  willingness  to  communicate,  but  our  capacity  to  receive  of  that  fulness,  and  so 
the  possibility  of  its  communication  to  us,  depend  upon  our  prayer.  ••  We  have  not 
because  we  ask  not."  (2)  The  power  of  our  prayer  depends  upon  our  conscious 
oneness  with  the  revealed  Christ.  Christ's  name  is  the  revelation  of  Christ's 
character ;  and  to  do  a  thing  in  the  name  of  another  person  is  to  do  it  as  His 
representative,  and  as  realizing  that  in  some  deep  and  real  sense — for  the  present 
purpose,  at  all  events — we  are  one  with  Him.  Prayer  in  the  name  of  Christ  is  hard 
to  offer.  It  needs  much  discipline  and  watchfulness ;  it  excludes  all  self-will  and 
selfishness.  And  if,  as  my  text  tells  us,  the  end  of  the  Son's  working  is  the  glory 
of  the  Father,  that  same  end,  and  not  our  own  ease  or  comfort,  must  be  the  end  and 
object  of  all  prayer  which  is  offered  in  His  name.  When  we  so  pray  we  get  an 
answer.  And  the  reason  why  such  multitudes  of  prayers  never  travel  higher  than 
the  roof,  and  bring  no  blessings  to  him  that  prays,  is  because  they  are  not  prayers 
in  Christ's  name.  (3)  Prayer  in  His  name  will  pass  into  prayer  to  Him.  As  He 
not  obscurely  teaches  us  here,  if  we  adopt  the  reading,  "  If  ye  shall  ask  Me,"  He  has 
an  ear  to  hear  such  requests,  and  He  wields  Divine  power  to  answer.  (A.  Maclaren, 
D.D.)  Christian  work  with  an  absent  Redeemer  : — I.  The  blessings  which  this 
PROMISE  CONTAINS  OR  CONVEYS?  1.  Ability  to  work.  Professing  Christians  of  a 
certain  school  speak  scornfully  of  this  "  to  do,"  but  this  is  to  despise  the  words  and 
things  of  God.  He  who  redeems  us  works  in  us  to  will  and  "  to  do."  2.  Power  to 
do  good  and  to  serve  others.  This  was  and  is  the  great  feature  of  Christ's  character. 

3.  Power  to  work  as  Jesus  Christ  wrought.  There  is  an  evident  limitation  here. 
Miracles  cannot  be  perpetual ;  but  if  the  working  of  miracles  were  at  all  desirable 
now,  the  power  would  be  again  given.  Atonement  for  sin  is  another  work 
which  we  cannot  imitate.  Still  there  is  a  path  of  work  in  which  we  may  follow  our 
Saviour.  The  blessing  promised  is — 4.  The  power  to  work  superior  work.  "  The 
greater  "  here  may,  perhaps,  point  to  more  extensive  service,  but  we  think  the  word 
rather  points  to  nobler  and  to  higher  service.  Now,  it  is  greater,  to  enlighten  the 
mind  than  to  open  blind  eyes  ;  to  create  faith  than  to  unstop  deaf  ears  ;  to  awaken 
praise  than  to  loosen  dumb  tongues ;  to  purify  from  Bin  than  to  cleanse  from 


flHAT.  xiv.l  ST.  JOHN.  623 

leprosy ;  to  quicken  the  dead  soul  than  it  is  to  raise  the  corporeally  dead.  5.  Not 
an  extraordinary  blessing,  but  one  that  is  the  commou  heritage  of  all  who 
believe.  Great  injury  has  been  done  to  the  Church,  and  to  many  not  in  the 
Church,  by  the  fuss  which  is  made  about  any  man  or  woman  who  happens  to 
try  to  be  useful  So  much  is  made  of  the  mere  human  worker,  as  that  He 
who  works  in,  and  by  us  all,  becomes  completely  concealed.  Now  there  are 
many  persons  who  seem  to  think  that  admiring  those  who  do  Christian  work 
a  very  blessed  substitute  for  doing  that  work.  We  require  in  our  churches 
less  said  about  what  is  done,  in  order  to  begin  to  do  more.  It  is  thus  too 
about  giving.  Men  who  give  a  little  expect  so  much  notice  taken  of  that  little,  that 
their  hands  are  closed  by  the  mischievous  power  of  that  very  expectation.   II.  The 

CIRCUMSTANCES    IN    CONNECTION    WITH    WHICH    THE    FULFILMENT    OF    THIS    PROMISE    IS 

SECURED.  "  Because  I  go  unto  My  Father."  The  Father  is  everywhere  ;  but  He  is 
not  in  all  places  equally  manifest.  Where  the  manifestation  of  the  Father  is 
perfect,  Jesus  Christ  now  is.  There  He  is  seated  on  the  throne  of  His  Father. 
1.  With  the  Father,  Jesus  is  absent  from  this  earth,  and — (1)  His  disciples  are  here 
as  E[is  representatives.  Now,  what  would  Christ  have  been  doing  on  this  earth 
were  He  here  ?  He  went  about  doing  good.  Perhaps  some  of  you  would  be 
extremely  surprised  to  find  the  eyes  from  which  you  have  wiped  away  tears  ;  or  the 
mind  to  which  you  have  given  one  religious  idea  ;  or  the  feet  that  you  have  turned 
from  the  path  of  inquity  into  the  path  of  redemption.  (2)  He  has  received  gifts  for 
men,  and  is  able  from  His  throne  to  endow  His  disciples  with  all  power.  (3)  The 
providence  of  Jesus  Christ  is  over  the  working  of  His  disciples.  I  do  not  say  that 
His  providence  prevents  some  wretched  hand  laying  hold  of  portions  of  your  work, 
and  disturbing  it,  bat  I  say  that  it  secures  a  good  general  result.  And  you  will 
work  with  much  more  courage  if  you  feel  this.  2.  There  is  a  close  connection 
between  believing  on  Christ  and  Christ-like  work.  Believing  qualifies  for  it  and 
impels  to  it.  3.  This  Christ-like  work  is  a  privilege  and  a  blessing  to  the  man  who 
performs  it.  4.  Moreover,  the  Christian  disciple  has  the  highest  power,  and  the 
largest  resources,  and  the  noblest  motives  in  the  direction  of  doing  good.  If  a 
Christian  cannot  render  service  in  this  world  of  sin  and  sorrow,  who  can  ?  Some 
of  you  will  say,  that  Christians  are  not  generally  wealthy,  and  not  generally  in  high 
social  positions.  Put  your  finger  upon  a  passage  in  the  New  Testament  that  teaches 
you  that  these  two  things  are  essential  to  doing  good,  or  that  good  is  often  done 
where  these  two  things  exist.  One  reason  why  many  of  our  evangelistic  operations 
are  so  blasted  is  to  be  found  in  this  fact,  that  those  who  conduct  our  societies  go 
hunting  for  what  they  call  patronage.  Patronage  for  the  redemption  of  the  world 
by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  1  One's  very  heart  is  sick  sometimes  over  this  human 
patronage  of  Divine  things.  6.  Those  who  look  for  Christ's  coming  again  speedily, 
seem  to  think  that  that  will  bring  an  increase  of  the  working  power.  We  believe 
that  all  the  power  that  Christians  want  now  may  be  obtained  now.  Our  tendency  is 
continually  to  say  that  "  the  time  has  not  come,"  and  we  must  wait  for  a  larger 
outpouring  of  the  Spirit  ?  Is  not  the  Spirit  here  ?  Will  the  Spirit  ever  be  here 
more  than  He  is  now  ?  6.  Do  your  work.  I  say  it  because  some  among  you  are 
spending  your  time  in  idleness.  {S.  Martin.)  The  believer  doing  greater  works 
than  Christ : — I  The  works  in  which  Christ  and  the  believer  have  bomethino  m 
COMMON.  1.  In  His  greatest  work  of  course  Christ  stands  alone.  He  came  to  work 
out  and  bring  in  an  everlasting  righteousness  ;  to  be  the  embodiment  of  a  perfect 
obedience.  Further,  He  came  to  die  as  an  atonement  for  sin,  and  to  rise  and  ascend 
and  plead  its  merits  in  heaven.  In  neither  of  these  can  the  believer  have  any 
part.  •'  I  have  trodden  the  wine-press  alone."  "  Mine  own  arm  hath  wrought 
salvation."  And  yet  in  the  ministrations  of  truth,  in  the  exemplifications  of  good- 
ness, and  in  the  triumphs  of  mercy  in  which  that  sacrifice  shall  demonstrate  its 
power,  and  that  righteousness  find  its  embodiment,  all  believing  souls  are  invited  to 
take  their  share.  2.  The  apostles  were  endowed  with  the  power  of  working 
miracles.  In  this  sense  the  doing  of  the  works  of  Christ  was  confined  to  them. 
But  Christ's  miracles  and  theirs  while  real,  and  not  to  be  spiritualized  away,  were 
physical  types  of  spiritual  As  bodily  misery  pointed  out  the  misery  of  the  soul,  so 
healing  symbolized  salvation.  II.  The  works  in  which  believers,  ik  some  sort, 
SHALL  EXCEL.  To  apprehend  this,  look  at — 1.  The  results  of  our  Lord's  personal 
ministry.  That  cannot  be  regarded  as  unsuccessful.  No  doubt  much  of  His  teaching 
ripened  after  the  rain  of  Pentecost,  and  those  impressed  before  became  converted 
afterwards.  But  during  those  three  years  how  many  benighted  minds  must  hava 
received  light  and  foul  hearts  cleansing  t  Yet — as  far  as  visible  results  go — how  fen 


524  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ht. 

even  amongst  the  diBcipIes,  and  of  what  a  qaality  !  2.  The  resalts  of  the  ministry 
of  the  Chorch.  These  great  works  are  the  burden  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  How 
soon  in  the  place  where  they  murdered  Christ  were  thousands  won  to  His  cause  ? 
Then  the  work  spread  to  Samaria.  Then  the  representative  of  far  off 
Ethiopia  was  converted :  then  Cornelias  the  representative  of  Bome,  and  so 
on  under  the  Apostles  and  their  successors  the  tidal  waves  flowed  on,  until 
in  the  course  of  three  centuries  Christianity  had  overflown  the  world.  Better  still 
the  nature  of  the  results  produced.  The  world  was  then  at  its  very  worst.  At 
Thessalonica  you  have  only  a  representation  of  what  was  universal.  Men  swallowed 
up  in  idolatry,  but  '*  the  Word  came  with  the  demonstration  of  the  Spirit,"  «fce. 
In  Corinth  philosophy  was  rampant  on  the  one  hand  and  vice  on  the  other,  but 
then  people  were  "  washed,  sanctified,"  &c.  And  thus  from  that  time  to  this  the 
gracious  words  have  been  fulfilled.  IIL  The  obound  of  this.  "  Because  I  go," 
Ac  1 .  Christ  went  from  them,  but  for  them.  It  was  not  His  departure  simply, 
but  what  followed  upon  it — the  gift  of  the  Comforter,  the  burden  of  this  discourse. 
Christ's  departure  was  expedient — (1)  In  regard  to  their  character,  that  they  who 
had  been  so  worldly,  ignorant,  and  timid,  might  become  spiritual,  enlightened, 
and  heroic.  (2)  In  relation  to  their  work.  2.  Christ  went  from  them  yet  remained 
with  them.  This  enigmatical  form  of  speech  occurs  often.  "I  go  away."  «'Lo, 
I  am  with  you  alway."  Our  Lord  would  not  leave  them  to  the  miseries  of  defeat 
or  to  the  calamity  of  self-sufficiency.  He  therefore  resolved  to  abide  with  them, 
and  by  His  Spirit  to  be  in  them,  their  energy,  courage,  wisdom,  sanctifying  power. 
3.  All  this  is  guaranteed  to  as.  IV.  Thb  besponsibilitt  this  involves.  "  If  ye 
shall  ask  anything  in  My  name,"  &o.  You  will  prove  your  faith  that  yoa  are 
Mine,  and  that  I  am  with  you,  only  as  you,  by  grace  work  out  these  results.  (J. 
Aldis.)  Greater  than  miracle : — This  is  one  of  the  reasons  why  the  disciples, 
whom  Christ  was  about  to  leave,  were  "  not  to  let  their  hearts  be  troubled."  The 
discipleship  to  which  He  had  called  them  was  a  very  arduous  one,  but  so  long  as 
He  was  with  them,  performing  such  miracles,  they  were  safe.  They  would  there- 
fore think  with  dismay  of  His  going  away,  inasmuch  as  this  marvellous  miracle- 
working  would  cease,  and  they  would  be  left  to  the  merciless  Pharisees.  It  was, 
then,  fitting  to  tell  them  that  they  should  do  the  miraculous  works  and  greater 
things.  The  way  in  which  our  Lord  speaks  about  miracles  is  striking.  Had 
these  narratives  been  a  fiction,  Christ  would  have  spoken  of  miracles  very 
differently.  So  far  from  magnifying  them,  He  speaks  of  them  as  inferior  things. 
Both  Christ  and  His  apostles  appealed  to  men  in  two  ways.  Such  as  were  unspiri- 
tual  were  appealed  to  by  miracle ;  but  He  of^en  told  them  that  it  was  a  higher 
and  more  spiritual  thing  to  beUeve  Him  for  His  truth's  sake  than  for  His  works' 
sake.  So  He  tells  His  disciples  here  they  should  have  power  to  work  miracles, 
BO  far  as  this  was  nesded  to  convince  the  unspiritual  world ;  but  they  should 
have  a  greater  power,  viz.,  to  do  spiritual  works  in  the  conversion  and  sanctifica- 
tion  of  men.  This  is  Christ's  meaning.  (1)  Because  He  connected  it  with  the 
gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  whose  work  is  to  convince  men  of  sin,  and  righteousness, 
and  judgment.  (2)  From  the  very  nature  of  the  case:  no  one  can  doubt  that 
moral  goodness  is  greater  than  miraculous  works.  I.  The  histobt  of  the  apostles 
ABUNDANTLY  TDLFiLS  THIS  PB0MI8B.  Depending  upoH  His  power,  that  is,  •*  believ- 
ing on  Him,"  they  did  the  miraculous  works.  1.  Christ  does  not  mean  that  these 
were  greater  than  His  own ;  no  miracles  may  be  compared  with  His.  (1)  His 
were  always  wrought  in  His  own  name,  and  by  His  own  power;  those  of  the 
apostles  always  in  the  name  and  by  the  power  of  their  Master.  (2)  His  were 
always  full  of  great  spiritual  significance.  Nature  was  moulded  by  Him  into 
evangelical  sermons.  2.  Bat  their  spiritual  achievements  were  to  be  greater  than 
Christ's  miracles.  (1)  The  conversion  of  the  three  thousand  on  the  day  of  Pente- 
cost was  a  greater  miracle  than  the  feeding  of  five  thousand  in  the  wilderness ; 
the  conversion  of  a  single  soul  is  greater  than  the  hushing  of  the  storm.  In  the 
charge  Christ  gave  to  the  seventy  He  makes  the  same  distinction  between  the 
miraculous  and  the  moral.  He  gave  them  power  to  heal  the  sick  and  to  cast 
out  devils.  The  exercise  of  this  power  seems  greatly  to  have  elated  them.  He 
instantly  turns  their  thoughts  to  spiritual  things.  (2)  It  is  a  common,  perhaps  a 
correct  impression,  that  the  personal  ministry  of  our  Lord  did  not  produce  such 
great  spiritual  resalts  as  that  of  the  apostles.  The  Holy  Ghost  was  not  yet 
given.  We  have  no  records  of  two  and  of  five  thousand  converts  at  a  time. 
The  largest  intimation  of  the  spiritual  results  of  His  ministry  is  that  after  Hia 
resurrection  He  was  "  seen  of  above  five  hundred  brethren  at  once, "      And  yet 


CHAP.  xiT.]  ST.  JOHN.  625 

what  preaching  was  ever  like  His  preaching,  in  spiritual  character,  and  depth, 
and  earnestness  ?  "  Never  man  spake  like  this  Man."  And  yet  the  Jews 
listened  to  His  preaching  and  remained  unconverted.  Was  it  that  Peter  had  a 
greater  truth  to  proclaim  than  even  Christ  taught?  Was  it  that  no  preaching 
can  be  powerful  to  save  men's  souls  but  the  preaching  of  the  Cross  ?  Christ 
predicted  His  death,  and  spake  of  its  atoning  character,  but  He  did  not  preach 
it  to  the  people:  the  apostles  "preached  Jesus  and  the  resurrection";  and  even 
in  their  comparatively  rude  and  unskilful  hands  it  proved  more  powerful  in 
subduing  men  than  Christ's  Divine  words.  His  own  great  prediction  was  fulfilled 
— •'  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will  draw  all  men  unto  Me."     II.  OoB 

LOBD   INTIMATES  A    OBEAT    AND     IMfOBTANT    PBINCIPIiE     IN   THE     SEBVICS     OF    HUICAN 

LIFE — that  grace  ia  greater  than  gifts ;  that  the  ministry  of  moral  truths  and 
influences  is  greater  than  the  exercise  of  the  most  brilliant  talents.  It  is  a  great 
work  to  perform  a  miracle ;  but  the  credentials  of  a  messenger  are  not  so  great  aa 
his  message.  It  is  an  honour  to  be  so  employed  and  attested,  but  this  is  in  order 
to  the  accomplishment  of  the  mission.  In  Christ  Himself  miracles  were  the 
lowest  manifestations  of  His  glory.  They  showed  that  God  was  with  Him ;  but 
His  true  glory  was  in  His  own  character,  and  mission,  and  words.  So  it  was 
with  the  apostles.  Paul's  shaking  the  viper  off  his  hand  is  but  a  small  thing 
compared  with  his  sacrifice  of  his  honours  and  emoluments  for  Christ's  sake. 
Peter's  healing  of  the  lame  man  is  but  a  small  thing  compared  with  the  conver- 
sion of  three  thousand  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  The  moral  sense  of  all  men 
confesses  this.  There  is  constant  danger  lest  we  be  led  away  by  brilliancy, 
crowds,  outward  successes,  intellectual  miracles.  Ministers  sometimes  so  mistake, 
and  others  so  mistake  them.  A  man  is  lost  as  a  minister  of  Christ  who  thinks 
about  popularity  or  sets  himself  to  seek  it.  The  humble,  obscure  man  is  often 
greater  than  the  prominent  and  brilliant  one  ;  he  has  greater  aims,  secures  nobler 
things,  bears  a  nobler  character.  1.  Conversion  is  greater  than  miracle — (1)  In  its 
sphere  of  operation.  Miracle  operates  in  the  outer  and  physical  world.  Eegene- 
ration  operates  in  the  inner  and  moral  world,  amongst  the  passions  and  purposes 
of  the  soul.  (2)  In  the  power  that  is  put  forth.  In  miracle  God's  simple  fiat  is 
absolute;  He  commands  the  laws  of  nature — they  instantly  obey;  but  in  regene- 
ration God's  will  encounters  another  will — a  will  that  He  has  made  free  and 
powerful,  and  that  He  will  not  coerce.  Nature  never  resisted  Christ's  Word ;  the 
men  of  Jerusalem  would  not  come  to  Him  that  they  might  have  life.  To  convert 
a  human  soul,  therefore,  is  infinitely  greater  than  to  create  a  planet :  moral  forces 
have  to  be  used ;  it  needs  to  be  made  willing,  and  this  demands  no  less  an  agency 
than  the  Incarnation  and  the  Crois.  (3)  In  its  results.  Miracles  have  fed  the 
hungry,  6co. ;  but  conversion  changes  moral  character,  makes  its  subject  a  saint, 
and  when  he  dies  it  secures  his  life  with  God  in  heaven.  2.  Charity  is  greater  than 
miracle  (1  Cor.  xiii.).  Moral  excellencies  have  in  them  the  quality  of  pcjman- 
ence ;  Christ's  miraculous  acts  have  ceased.  His  love  moved  His  power,  which 
was  miraculous  ;  our  love  moves  our  power,  which  is  not  miraculous  :  the  feeling 
and  motive  are  the  same,  only  the  power  and  the  form  of  the  action  differ.  Christ's 
disciples  perpetuate  His  pitying  love — they  visit  the  sick,  they  relieve  the  poor, 
Ac.  And  this  is  far  grander  than  miracle :  the  aggregate  benevolence  of  the  Church 
of  Christ  is  a  nobler  thing  than  the  creation  of  a  new  world  would  be.  3.  Patient 
submission  to  God's  will  is  greater  than  miracle.  What  can  be  nobler  than  a  hfe 
wholly  consecrated  to  God  and  to  whatever  is  holy  and  benevolent? — a  life  of  self- 
sacrificing  service  in  the  Church,  the  school,  or  the  mission-field— a  life  that 
surrenders  its  dearest  joys  and  interests  for  Christ's  sake  ?  Perhaps  the  only 
nobler  thing  is,  when  devoted  service  is  crowned  by  patient  suffering.  4.  Victory 
over  death  is  greater  than  miracle.  (H.  Allan,  D.D.)  The  disciple's  work  greater 
than  his  Lord's : — It  is  a  common  thought  and  remark  with  us,  tliat  the  child  and 
the  day-labourer  now  use  forces  and  truths,  and  do  works,  without  esteeming  it 
unusual,  which  the  earlier  ages  of  science  and  thought,  the  ages  of  Copernicus  and 
Columbus,  were  dimly  and  laboriously  guessing  and  imagining  and  hoping.  Those 
early  masters  laid  down  theories  and  principles,  and  they  were  ridiculed  if  not 
persecuted,  misrepresented  if  not  denied,  obstructed  if  not  stopped  and  interdicted. 
Their  work  was  immense,  greater  than  the  work  of  their  successors.  It  was  the 
massive  foundation.  But  their  successors  stand  on  a  vantage  ground.  Slowly 
those  beneficent  theories  have  won  acknowledgment.  They  had  enlarged  their 
sphere  and  field  and  power  of  operation.  Their  activity  has  increased  till  nothing 
now  impedes.     The  noble  originators  have  mounted  into  universal  recognition. 


S26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHAJ.  xn» 

And  tbeir  children  daily  deyelop  the  power  which  they  made  possible ;  make  new 
applications  as  new  exigencies  arise  and  new  fields  open.  Their  saocessors  and 
disciples  do  the  same  works  in  one  sense,  for  it  is  the  continuation  of  the  same 
principle  in  activity :  or,  in  one  sense  they  do  a  lesser  work,  for  it  is  less  to 
continue  than  to  originate.  But  in  another  sense  they  do  "  greater  works,"  for 
their  activity  is  daily  widening,  daily  less  impeded,  daily  more  and  more  encour- 
aged by  more  auspicious  surroundings.  And  yet  they  are  not  greater  than  the  early 
originator,  who  cannot  show  the  "  greater  works "  which  come  so  properly  and 
naturally  to  them.  They  follow  him.  Yet  they  go  beyond  him.  Nay,  stranger 
still,  they  go  beyond  him  only  because  they  follow  him,  and  are  the  disciples  of  and 
the  believers  in  his  first  great  underlying  work.  Apply  this  illustration  to  Christ 
and  His  disciples.  True,  His  was  the  great  spiritual,  all-supporting  work.  The 
great  problem  was  finished  and  enunciated  at  the  Cross.  It  received  its  seal  at 
the  Easter.  And  yet  the  field  of  the  Lord's  activity  during  His  own  earthly  lif» 
was  contracted  to  the  smallest  limits.  He  could  not  go  beyond  Judaea.  His- 
spiritual  work  found  no  spiritual  surrounding,  found  no  spiritual  resp(jnse,  left  no- 
spiritual  fruit  (John  i.  5,  11 ;  Mark  vi.  6).  These  were  the  judgments  of  Hi* 
contemporaries  upon  Him  (Matt.  xiii.  55 ;  Mark  iii.  22 ;  John  ix.  29,  vii.  47,  48). 
Stop  the  world  after  Christ's  ascension,  and  ask  it  how  it  had  been  the  better 
for  Christ's  living,  and  it  would  have  nothing  to  show  you.  It  would  know  of 
nothing  done,  but  a  few  that  were  blind,  now  seeing,  a  few  that  were  deaf,  hearing, 
a  few  lepers  cleansed,  a  few  inanimates  restored.  And  a  single  generation  would- 
have  removed  even  these.  Struggling  as  man  in  the  world  of  men.  bearing  sin  in 
the  world  of  sin,  Christ  laid  indeed  the  massive  foundation  of  a  world's  redemp- 
tion ;  but  it  was  a  work  wholly  wrought  out  in  and  by  Himself.  None  other  knew 
of  it.  It  hardly  left  any  outward  impression  upon  men  and  their  lives.  And 
what  it  did  leave  was  vague,  and  easily  lost.  But  at  the  Ascension  a  change 
begins.  He  goes  to  the  Father.  He  is  no  more  a  mere  single  labourer,  working^ 
out  a  great  work  among  men ;  suflScient  to  do  all,  and  doing  all  by  Himself ;  but 
He  has  mounted  to  the  seat  of  His  power.  And  the  Spirit  of  His  power  goes  forth 
to  create  outward  impressions  upon  men,  to  carry  His  work  to  others.  In  the  first 
day  of  Peter's  preaching  three  thousand  are  converted;  vastly  more  than  Chrisi 
ever  influenced  ;  greater  works  than  Christ's,  because  He  has  gone  to  the  Father. 
His  successors  and  followers  stood  on  a  vantage  ground  of  work.  Their  great, 
earlier  Master  had  mounted  into  universal  power.  He  was  no  longer  compelled 
simply  to  suffer  and  submit  as  in  the  garden;  but  was  omnipresent  and  omni- 
potent by  His  Spirit.  And  daily  His  Spirit  makes  new  advances  possible  for 
them,  which  were  not  possible  for  Him  when  dwelling  in  the  flesh.  {Fred. 
Brooks.)  Greater  works  than  Christ's: — What  were  the  works  that  Jesus  did? 
What  was  their  very  essence  ?  We  must  look  a  little  beneath  the  surface.  Some 
minds  are  apt  to  confine  their  attention  to  the  surface  results  of  our  Saviour's 
wonderful  course.  They  think  of  the  leaping  of  the  lame,  the  seeing  of  the  blind, 
the  hearing  of  the  deaf,  the  speaking  of  the  dumb,  the  rising  of  the  dead,  the 
conscious  strength  of  the  paralytic,  and  the  emancipation  of  the  demoniac.  It  is 
befitting  to  think  of  these  things.  Our  Saviour  wished  them  to  be  considered. 
They  were  as  a  voice  from  the  excellent  glory  and  drew  attention  to  the  fact 
that  a  gracioas  Divine  Person  was  at  work  among  men.  And  yet,  comparatively 
speaking,  they  were  but  a  voice  drawing  attention  to  something  else.  They 
pointed  to  something  that  was  really  higher  and  greater  than  themselves.  It  ifr 
good  indeed  that  the  lame  should  leap ;  but  surely  there  is  something  better  even 
for  the  lame.  What  if  after  leaping  they  hasten  away  to  the  haunts  of  dissipa- 
tion I  Of  what  very  great  benefit  will  their  leaping  be  to  them  ?  It  is  true,  too, 
that  it  is  good  for  the  blind  to  see,  and  to  see  clearly.  But  what  if,  after  the 
first  transports  consequent  on  the  restoration  of  vision,  the  eyes  neither  read 
the  glory  of  God  in  the  heavens,  nor  the  glory  of  His  grace  on  the  pages  of 
revelation  ?  What  if  they  lower  with  passion,  or  look  out  for  opportunities  of 
alluring  the  nnwary  to  their  destruction?  There  are  surely  better  things  stiU 
than  mere  seeing,  hearing,  speaking.  Even  life  from  the  dead,  if  merely 
physical,  is  not  the  highest  conceivable  blessing.  A  new  lease  of  life,  if  it  turn, 
AS  may  too  often  be  the  case,  to  be  a  lease  mis-spent,  is  not  the  greatest  possible 
benefit  which  can  be  conferred  upon  aa  immortal  man.  Neither  is  deUverance 
from  demoniac  torture  and  oppression  the  most  glorious  emancipation  of  which  w» 
ean  eonceive.  Surely,  then,  there  was  scope  for  the  apostles  doing  even  greater 
works  than  oar  Sarioor  performed  when  He  scattered  miracles  of  power  all  along 


«HA».  xiT.]  6T.  JOHN.  627 

the  pathway  of  His  terrestrial  career.  There  was  scope  for  those  greater  works, 
because  the  Savioar  was  resolved  to  go  on,  and  yet  further  on,  till  He  went  up  to 
His  Father.  Had  He  faltered  in  this  resolution,  had  He  shrunk  when  the  crisis 
became  imminent,  had  He  refused  to  suffer  and  to  die  as  an  atoning  Sacrifice  for 
the  sins  of  the  whole  world,  then,  not  only  would  there  have  been  no  provision  m 
Divine  moral  government  for  a  repetition,  or  continuance,  of  such  miracles  of 
power,  as  were  also  miraicles  of  mercy,  but  the  door  would  have  been  actually 
closed  upon  hope  in  reference  to  deliverance  from  spiritual  lameness,  blindness, 
deafness,  dumbness,  paralysis,  and  death,  and  from  all  the  spiritual  demons  of  dis- 
cord, and  passion,  and  hate,  and  intemperance,  and  licentiousness,  that  are  making 
demoniacs  of  myriads,  and  that  would  be  in  danger  but  for  Christianity  of  making 
demoniacs  of  us  alL  Our  Lord  did  not,  however,  repent  of  His  high  resolve.  He  did 
not  draw  back  from  the  completion  of  His  enterprise  when  the  difficulty  was  at  its 
climax,  and  the  hosts  of  darkness  had  gathered  around  Him  in  their  serried  and  most 
formidable  array.  Oh,  no !  He  strode  on  to  victory.  And  it  was  in  view  of  that 
victory,  and  of  its  mighty  moral  influence  in  the  Divine  government,  that  He 
promised  that  all  the  blessings  which  He  had  conferred  on  individuals  during  the 
brief  period  of  His  own  personal  and  preliminary  ministry,  should  be  but  the 
precursory  drops  as  compared  with  the  plenteous  rain  that  would  by  and  by 
descend  and  refresh,  not  the  land  of  Palestine  alone,  but  all  the  dry  and  thirsty 
lands  on  the  face  of  the  earth.  The  Saviour  looked  far  and  wide  from  Bis 
elevated  standpoint  and  saw,  as  the  consequent  of  .His  triumphal  ascent  to  Hia 
Father,  the  overthrow  of  Phariseeism  and  Sadduceeism.  That  was  a  very  great 
work.  He  looked  further  and  saw  the  overthrow  of  Roman  and  Grecian  and 
Scythian  idolatry.  What  great  works  were  these  1  He  looked  further  and  saw  the 
destruction  of  slavery  through  the  influence  of  His  gospel  of  love  as  preached  by 
His  disciples.  He  saw  too  the  gradual  emancipation  of  the  masses  from  the 
tyranny  of  tyrants,  and  their  elevation  into  political  and  social  privileges.  He  saw, 
besides,  the  erection  of  hospitals  and  other  institutions  of  benevolence  wherever 
His  Cross  should  be  planted  fast  and  firm.  He  saw  the  establishment  on  the  one 
hand  of  home  missions  descending  to  the  hundreds  of  thousands  who  have  lapsed, 
and  the  establishment,  on  the  other,  of  foreign  missions  sending  the  gospel  of  Hia 
grace  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  in  hundreds  of  tongues.  What  wonder  that  He 
■poke  of  "  greater  works  "  than  He  Himself  had  performed  on  a  few  impotent  folk 
round  about  the  Sea  of  Galilee,  and  in  a  few  other  insignificant  places  within  the 
narrow  radius  of  the  Holy  Land  ?  And  then  He  looked  still  further  forward,  and 
saw  His  Church  everywhere  purified  after  it  had  passed  through  fiery  trials.  He 
saw,  in  that  future,  that  just  because  He  was  about  to  go  up  to  His  Father,  all 
demonism  would  be  vanquished,  all  diseases  would  be  healed ;  men  and  women 
everywhere  would  see  right,  and  hear  right,  and  speak  right,  and  act  right. 
He  saw,  as  the  grand  conclusion  of  His  enterprise,  that  men  everywhere 
would  be  a  brotherhood  of  love,  no  one  acting  selfishly,  but  each  minis- 
tering benevolently  to  all  around.  (James  Morison,  D.D.)  Miracles 
in  nature  and  grace  contrasted  : — I.  The  wobk  of  Christ  in  the  kingdom 
OF  NATUB2,  CARRIED  ON  THROUGH  His  DISCIPLES.  1.  The  use  of  mlracuIous 
powers.  Miracles  were  the  credentials  of  Christ's  Messiahship.  The  words  of  the 
Savioar  ought  to  have  brought  the  world  in  homage  to  His  feet.  But  seeing  that 
men  are  held  in  bondage  to  sense  He  condescended  to  this  weakness,  and  sub- 
stantiated His  preternatural  knowledge  by  the  exercise  of  preternatural  power. 
When  He  added  to  His  words  this  sign  manual  of  Heaven,  then  numbers  like 
Nicodemus  said,  "  No  man  can  do  these  miracles,"  &o.  2.  Their  present  disuse. 
They  were  only  for  the  commencement  of  our  religion.  The  pillar  of  a  cloud  and 
fire  was  God's  miraculous  ratification  of  the  authority  of  the  Hebrew  legislator. 
But  that  pillar  was  not  a  permanent  gift.  The  Jews  were  trained  to  higher  spiritual 
manifestations  of  the  Divine  presence,  and  then  the  cloud  retired  into  the  holy  place 
and  was  seen  no  more.  So  the  miracles  of  Christ  and  His  apostles  were  the  leading 
strings  in  which  the  infant  Church  was  tenderly  led  until  her  inherent  strength  was 
developed,  and  she  was  enabled  to  walk  alone  in  her  spiritual  might.  The  miracles 
in  nature  waned  as  the  miracles  of  grace  waxed,  and  the  transforming  influence  of 
the  gospel  on  the  heart  and  life  of  a  behever  was  left  to  be  the  world's  standing 
sign  and  proof  that  it  was  the  power  and  the  wisdom  of  God.  IL  Thb  obsatbb 
WOBK  OF  Christ  in  thb  unodoh  of  obacb.  The  conversion  of  the  sonl  is  * 
greater  work,  becanse — 1.  It  is  wrought  npon  a  greater  object.  Miracles  were 
mought  upon  material  things ;  bat  conversion  is  wrought  upon  the  sooL    Who 


523  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xn, 

ean  calculate  the  vast  snperiority  of  spirit  oyer  matter  ?  The  soul  allies  ns  with 
Deity,  for  God  is  a  spirit.  It  is  the  breath  of  the  Almighty :  matter  is  the  rough 
clay  in  His  hands.  Hence  the  most  degraded  hnman  being  can  say  to  the  son,  *'  I 
am  greater  than  thoa  1 "  2.  It  demands  more  and  greater  attributes  to  effect  i^^ 
Miracles  were  in  the  main  displays  of  power.  But  in  the  conversion  of  our  soul  all 
the  attributes  of  Jehovah  are  brought  into  play.  Infinite  wisdom  must  solve  the 
problem,  how  the  condemned  can  be  pardoned,  the  lost  saved,  and  the  law  honoured. 
]|fnfinite  power  must  work  out  the  plan  which  wisdom  has  devised,  and  unite  the 
Godhead  and  humanity  in  the  person  of  Immanuel.  Infinite  love  must  be 
manifested  in  the  undertaking  of  such  an  amazing  work.  3.  It  encounters  greateC 
difficulties.  It  was  easier  to  make  a  world  than  remake  a  fallen  soul.  In  miracles 
of  nature  there  was  nothing  to  resist  the  Divine  will.  But  in  the  restoration  of  the 
Boul  difficulties  on  all  sides  were  encountered.  Divine  justice  and  truth  stood  in 
the  way.  All  the  powers  of  darkness  were  marshalled  against  it.  The  soul  opposes 
its  own  conversion.  It  required  four  thousand  years  to  prepare  for  the  coming  of 
Christ,  and  after  His  conaing  His  thirty-three  years  of  humiUation,  privation,  and 
toil.  It  still  requires  the  striving  of  the  Spirit  on  earth,  the  unwearied  intercession 
of  Jesus  above,  and  the  process  of  earthly  discipline  before  one  soul  can  be  brought 
to  glory.  4.  It  secures  a  greater  good.  Even  the  miracles  of  Jesua  secured  only  a 
temporal  good,  though  they  aimed  at  awaking  desires  after  spiritual  benefits.  But 
conversion  is  man's  highest  good,  securing  the  richest  blessings.  5.  It  has  a  greatef 
duration.  A  change  of  heart  has  imperishable  results.  Where  are  the  few  whom 
Jesus  summoned  from  the  grave  ?  To  the  grave  they  were  summoned  again. 
Where  is  the  crowd  from  whom  disease  fled?  The  forces  of  human  affiiction 
returned,  and  brought  death  as  their  leader.  Where  are  those  miraculously  fed  f 
They  hungered  again.  III.  The  essential  qualification  fob  this  work.  '*  He 
that  believeth."  One  of  the  most  prominent  features  in  our  Lord's  teaching  is  the 
importance  attached  to  faith.  With  respect  to  outward  miracles,  none  of  Hia 
disciples  could  perform  them,  none  of  the  multitude  could  enjoy  them  without 
faith.  If  confidence  in  Christ  was  so  essential  in  outward  miracles,  much  more  is 
it  essential — 1.  In  the  reception  of  the  great  miracle  of  grace,  2.  To  its  instru- 
mental accomplishment.  The  conversion  of  the  world  is  entrusted  to  the  Church 
as  the  instrument  by  which  the  Spirit  effects  this  spiritual  change.  "  He  that 
believeth,"  whosoever  he  may  be,  may  aspire  to  this  surpassing  honour.  There  are 
three  truths  which  should  be  deeply  graven  on  our  hearts.  (1)  Faith  in  the  adapta- 
tion of  the  gospel  to  meet  the  wants  of  men  of  every  class  and  in  every  age.  (2) 
Faith  in  the  fact  that  none  are  excluded  from  a  participation  in  its  saving  blessings 
except  through  their  own  unbelief.  (3)  Universal  reliance  or  dependence  on  the 
Spirit  of  Christ  in  every  work  of  faith  and  labour  of  love.  If  we  put  our  faith  in 
the  splendour  of  our  sanctuaries,  the  talent  of  our  ministers,  the  respectability  of 
our  churches,  the  machinery  of  our  religious  societies,  the  purity  of  our  creed,  we  are 
trusting  to  a  broken  reed.  IV.  The  source  of  all  success  in  this  work.  The 
outpouring  of  the  Spirit  resulting  from  the  exaltation  of  Jesus.  "  For  if  I  go  not 
away,  the  Comforter,"  &c.  1.  Our  inward  state  requires  this.  To  suppose  a 
spiritual  change  without  the  Spirit  is  to  suppose  not  only  an  effect  without  a  cause, 
but  an  efifeot  contrary  to  all  causes.  2.  Our  outward  state  requires  it.  How  can  we 
conquer  a  hostile  world,  except  by  that  Spirit  who  makes  His  strength  perfect  in 
our  weakness  ?  3.  Spiritual  agency  of  a  corrupting  and  deadly  character  shows  our 
need  of  it.  "  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  My  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord." 
Conclusion :  Learn — 1.  The  Divinity  of  Christ  Jesus.  Man,  however  gifted,  is 
never  able  to  impart  at  his  will,  his  power  to  another.  Napoleon  could  not  bestow 
as  a  legacy  on  hia  faithful  adherents  his  own  genius.  Christ  says,  "The  works 
that  I  do  shall  ye  do  also."  2.  The  honour  and  dignity  of  all  believers.  A  greater 
miracle  has  been  wrought  on  them  than  on  the  body  of  Lazarus.  3.  The  ennobling 
character  of  Christian  work.  4.  The  lamentable  condition  of  every  unbeliever. 
(R.  Best. )  The  eclipse  of  miracle : — I.  The  text  presents  ns  with  a  parallel. 
Christ  teaches  that  there  shall  be  a  relation  of  likeness  or  identity  between  His  own 
personal  works  and  the  works  carried  on  by  believing  disciples  after  His  departure. 
"  He  that  believeth  on  Me,  the  works  that  I  do,  shall  he  do  also."  The  terms  in 
which  Christ  describes  His  own  supernatural  works  are  remarkable  suid  suggestive. 
He  scarcely  ever  speaks  of  them  as  miracles.  He  nearly  always  uses  the  quiet,  un- 
ostentatious phrase  employed  in  the  text — "  works."  The  mere  triumph  over 
physical  law  seems  to  be  forgotten,  and  there  is  a  godlike  unconsciousness  of  that 
which  is  extraordinary  to  as.     The  term  is  suggestive  of  calm  power.    These  things 


CHAP.  xiT.]  ST.  JOHN.  9e9 

•re  not  miracles  to  Him,  they  were  miracles  only  to  the  beholder.  The  word  too 
is  one  that  links  His  achievements  with  the  achievements  of  the  future  Church.  It 
expressed  only  that  which  should  be  common  between  the  two.  The  miraculona 
element,  in  the  popular  sense  of  that  word,  was  not  the  most  conspicuous  feature  in 
the  works.  Christ's  thought  would  seem  to  have  been  fixed  upon  those  elements  in 
the  works  that  embodied  living  relations.  The  eye  of  the  child  is  caught  by  the 
glare  of  colour  in  the  picture,  and  a  little  Bed  Eiding  Hood  from  an  illustrated  paper 
will  fascinate  it  just  as  much  as  a  Holy  Family  by  Titian.  The  eye  of  the  artist 
is  riveted  by  the  form  and  composition  and  delicate  suggestion  and  sentiment  with 
which  the  canvas  has  been  made  to  speak.  The  first  living  relation  in  Christ's 
works  was  with  the  Father.  They  were  a  continuous  testimony  of  the  Father  to  the 
Son  before  the  world.  "  The  Father  worketh  hitherto,  and  I  work."  "The  "^on 
can  do  nothing  of  Himself,  but  what  He  seeth  the  Father  do."  '•  The  Father  that 
dwelleth  in  Me,  He  doeth  the  works."  The  second  living  relation  embodied  in 
Christ's  works  was  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  Now  these  are  the  essential  elements  in 
Christ's  works,  and  the  power  of  accomplishing  such  works  is  given  just  as  much  to 
UB  as  to  Jesus  Christ.  Through  all  the  life  of  a  man  who  believes  in  Jesus  Christ 
the  Father  directly  testifies  concerning  His  Son.  Whilst  the  man  retains  a  loyal, 
believing  relation  to  his  great  Head,  the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  sovereign  guide  of  all 
his  activity,  and  his  works  are  as  perfectly  adapted  to  the  removal  of  suffering,  the 
destruction  of  unbelief,  and  the  awakening  of  faith  in  those  with  whom  he  is 
associated,  as  were  the  most  imperial  works  of  the  Son  of  God  upon  earth.  "  The 
works  that  I  do  shall  he  do  also."  If  we  cannot  do  works  upon  which  the  miracle- 
glory  rests,  we  can  do  works  upon  which  there  rests  a  glory  that  in  Christ's  view 
outshines  and  eclipses  that  of  miracle,  so  that  even  •'  that  which  was  made  glorious 
had  no  glory,  by  reason  of  the  glory  that  excelleth."  II.  The  text  contains  a 
CONTRAST.  There  is  to  be  a  splendid  advance  in  the  character  of  the  believer's 
achievements,  an  advance  that  will  make  them  transcend  even  the  Lord's  own 

Eersonal  works  amongst  men.  "  Greater  works  than  these  shall  he  do."  Christ 
ad  alwHys  thought  more  of  the  moral  elements  and  relations  in  His  works  and 
those  of  His  disciples,  than  of  the  merely  miraculous.  The  time  Christ  spent  in 
teaching  men  was  enormous,  compared  with  the  time  spent  in  healing  disease.  A 
second  sufficed  to  touch  a  leper  with  His  restoring  hand :  it  sometimes  cost  Him 
days  to  do  the  yet  greater  work  of  touching  a  polluted  soul  with  heavenly  light.  In 
the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  we  find  the  space  occupied  by  narrating  the  work  of  miracle 
small,  and  that  occupied  by  the  work  of  conviction  increasingly  large,  in  com- 
parison with  the  relative  spaces  they  fill  in  the  synoptical  gospels.  The  apostles 
were  beginning  to  enter  into  Christ's  estimate  of  the  relative  value  of  the  two  types 
of  work.  The  physical  conditions  that  constituted  Christ's  works  miraculous  are 
often  realized  in  connection  with  spiritual  work  upon  a  much  more  commanding 
scale.  Did  some  of  Christ's  works,  such  as  turning  the  water  into  wine  and  feed- 
ing the  multitudes,  imply  mastery  over  creative  processes  ?  Whilst  fruitful  seasons 
and  food  and  gladness  are  given  liythe  loving  Father  to  good  and  evil  alike,  I  have 
no  doubt,  the  cry  of  the  scientists  notwithstanding,  they  are  given  in  conspicuou* 
degrees  to  the  piety  and  prayers  of  God's  people.  And  not  to  speak  of  the  super- 
natural influence  of  Christianity,  how  much  of  the  wealth  of  the  world  is  due  to  the 
thrift  and  righteousness  growing  up  out  of  its  conversions  !  Take  away  its  presence' 
from  the  earth,  and  nations  that  now  overflow  with  luxury  would  be  represented  by 
groups  of  scattered  savages  gnawing  roots  and  uncooked  carrion.  It  is  Christianity 
that  is  feeding  the  nations.  By  its  uplifted  hands  of  righteousness  and  prayer  it  is 
multiplying  bread  for  thousands  in  comparison  with  whom  the  crowds  Christ  fed 
were  but  as  units.  And  is  not  this  a  greater  thing  than  the  miracle  on  the  table- 
land of  Bethsaida  or  the  plain  of  Gennesaret  ?  Did  the  largest  group  of  Christ's 
miracles  imply  command  over  disease  and  death?  How  much  has  that  active 
sympathy,  which  is  the  outcome  of  faith  in  Christ,  done  to  limit  the  ravages  of  disease 
and  add  to  the  length  of  human  life  ?  The  evils  turned  back  by  the  conversion  ol 
those  present  in  thousands  of  Christian  congregations  are  as  ghastly  and  as  terrible 
and  manifold  as  the  evils  that  shrank  before  Christ's  word  in  the  days  of  His  flesh. 
For  Christian  faith  and  love  to  put  healing  hands  upon  human  sickness  and  infirmity, 
to  prevent  in  incalculable  degrees  human  pain,  to  add  year  by  year  to  the  length  of 
human  life  in  all  quarters  of  the  globe,  is  it  not  a  greater  work  than  Christ's  com- 
paratively oircnmscribed  work  of  healing  the  sick  and  raising  the  dead  when  upon 
earth?  The  spiritual  works  effected  by  believers  in  Jesas  Christ  bring  about  that 
eonviction  which  is  the  great  end  of  miracle  by  more  eSeotive  methods.  In  ouraol«9> 
Toil.  II.  84 


S30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR  [chap.xit. 

the  work  of  the  Spirit  came  before  the  eye.  Miracle  left  the  man  more  or  less  the 
victim  of  his  own  prejudice,  unbelief,  self-will.  Miracle  was  only  occasional  in  itft 
appeal.  The  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  in  the  heart  of  man  was  a  power  that  out- 
lasted the  believing  prayers  and  labours  to  which  its  first  coming  was  a  response. 
If  our  faith  reach  up  to  the  full  evangelical  altitude,  we  may  do  by  the  instantaneous 
help  of  the  Spirit  what  it  cost  Christ  years  full  of  pains  and  sighs  and  toils  to 
accomplish.  Our  work  transcends  miracle  because  the  spirit,  which  is  the  special 
sphere  touched  by  it,  is  more  delicately  sensitive  than  the  body,  which  is  the  sphere 
in  which  miracle  was  wrought.  The  unseen  part  of  a  man's  nature  has  capabilities 
of  enjoyment  or  suffering  which  are  indefinitely  in  advance  of  the  part  of  his  nature 
represented  by  the  senses ;  the  work  of  saving  and  tranquillizing  it  must  be 
indefinitely  higher  in  both  process  and  result.  In  comparison  with  the  agony  of  a 
wounded  spirit,  physical  sufiering  is  a  mere  pin-prick.  To  impart  health  by  miracle 
to  a  diseased  frame  is  a  work  unspeakably  inferior  to  that  of  ministering  salvation 
to  diseased  souls,  plucking  out  rooted  sins  from  the  memory  in  which  they  rankle, 
and  freeing  the  conscience  from  the  haunting  sense  of  eternal  wrath.  The  spiritual 
works  it  is  the  behever's  high  privilege  to  do  outshine  Christ's  personal  miracles, 
because  spiritual  work  is  the  key  to  the  final  destruction  of  all  physical  evil  and 
disability  at  the  last  day.  In  spiritual  miracle,  the  sentence  is  pronounced  that 
shall  then  be  carried  out,  and  evil  is  virtually  dead  for  the  man  whose  nature  has 
been  touched  by  the  works  we  do  through  our  believing  fellowship  with  Christ. 
The  miracle  was  only  respite.  "  Lo  I  disease  and  deatu  come  back  to  undo  the 
triumph  of  the  vanished  wonder-worker."  By  the  power  I  wield  as  a  believer  in 
Jesus  Christ  I  work  irreversible  miracles.  I  dismiss  disease  and  death  into  a  realm 
from  whence  they  can  never  return.  The  inward  miracle  of  regeneration  is  the 
mainspring  of  that  climatic  miracle  which  sums  up  all  other  acts  of  healing  power, 
when  sickness  and  sorrow  and  sighing  shall  be  swept  for  ever  away.  This  is  the 
true  virtue  radiated  from  the  ascended  Saviour,  imparted  freely  to  all  His  disciples, 
and  perpetually  reflected  from  every  quickened  Church  in  fellowship  with  its  Lord. 
It  pulsates  unseen  in  our  midst  just  now,  but  a  few  transient  breaths  must  come  and 
go  before  it  can  be  seen  that  the  flush  of  immortal  health  has  been  restored  to  the 
universe.  III.  The  text  points  out  the  secret  of  this  contrast  between  Christ's 
works  and  those  of  His  favoured  followers.  The  secret  has  a  Divine  and  a  human 
side.  Christ's  presence  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father  is  the  pledge  and  sign  that 
sin  has  been  dealt  with,  man's  unfitness  to  receive  these  high  and  holy  gifts  has 
been  taken  away,  the  burden  which  crushed  human  nature  into  impotence  removed, 
and  the  Father's  hand  opened  to  Eas  reconciled  people  in  more  than  its  ancient  wealth 
of  blessing.  This  secret  of  transcendent  power  has  an  earthly  as  well  as  a  heavenly 
eide.  "  And  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  My  name,  that  will  I  do."  Some  of  th« 
laatural  forces  of  the  aniverse  can  only  he  manifested  through  the  special  elements 
and  agencies  that  are  adapted  to  transmit  them.  Electricity  must  have  a  pathway 
of  susceptible  matter  over  which  to  travel,  even  if  that  pathway  be  one  of  indefinitely 
minute  particles  of  ether  only.  So  with  the  spiritual  forces  of  the  universe.  If  the 
power  of  the  mediatorial  presence  have  no  conducting  lines  of  faith  along  which  to 
travel,  it  must  sleep  for  ever,  and  the  world  be  left  to  swing  on  in  its  old  grooves 
of  evil  and  death.  The  manifestation  of  all  the  energies  of  that  presence  can  only 
«ome  through  the  believing  request  of  the  disciples.  Prayer,  bound  only  by  the 
holy  instincts  of  the  faith  that  inspires  it,  and  the  rights  of  the  name  in  which  it  is 
presented,  is  a  thing  of  illimitable  power.  Let  us  never  forget  the  dignity  and 
beneficence  of  all  spiritual  work.  This  promise  suggests  the  plenary  character  of 
ihe  Pentecostal  endowment.     (T.  G.  Selby.)        Because  I  go  unto  My  Father. — L 

COMPLETINO   Mt  work  IN  THE   FLESH.      II.   ACCEPTING   My  PLACE     AT     THE    THRONE. 

III.  Beqdeathino  Mt  WOES  TO  XH£  Church.  IV.  Endobinq  My  saints  with  xna 
Spirit.     (S.  S.  Times.) 

Vers.  13,  14.  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  My  name  that  will  I  do. — Praying  in 
the  name  of  Christ : — I.  What  does  this  mean  ?  1.  To  obtain  anything  in  the 
name  of  another  supposes  that  your  own  name  is  an  insufficient  warrant.  In  the 
negotiation  by  which  you  secure  it,  your  own  personality  is  lost  altogether.  Thua 
an  ambassador  personifies  the  country  he  represents ;  he  has  no  personal  recogni- 
tion when  he  sits  in  the  councils  of  foreign  potentates.  So  in  familiar  life  we  invest 
a  subordinate  agent  with  our  own  reputation  and  credit.  2.  But  in  neither  of  these 
senses  do  we  make  mention  of  the  name  of  Christ  in  our  prayers.  We  may  be  said, 
«t  is  true,  to  traffic  with  another's  credit,  and  represent  the  authority  oi  a  soveiei^ 


OTAi.  xiT.]  ST.  JOHN.  631 

ill  some  conditions  of  intercourse  with  God ;  but  praying  in  the  name  of  Jesus 
implies  a  closer  union  than  that  of  service.  "  If  ye  shall  ask  the  Father  "  (see  chap. 
XX.  17).  Prayer  rises  from  outside,  knocking  into  the  tender  confidences  of  family 
intercourse.  We  ask  in  the  name  of  Christ  because  we  have  put  on  that  name  as  a 
■woman  by  marriage  puts  on  the  name  of  her  husband,  and  with  it  his  rank  and 
property.  When  she  asks  anything  in  the  husband's  name  she  brings  with  her 
whatever  that  name  merits  or  can  demand.  To  deny  her  is  to  deny  him.  In  the 
Scriptures  our  union  with  Christ  is  described  by  marriage.  This  is  foreshadowed 
by  the  prophets  (Isa.  liv.  5  ;  Ixii.  6),  and  God's  name  is  used  as  an  argument  of 
deprecation  as  if  somehow  that  name  were  bound  up  with  the  fate  of  His  people 
(Jer.  xiv.  21 ;  Josh,  vii,  9  ;  Ezek.  xxxvi.  22,  23).  In  Matt.  ix.  15  Christ  accepts  all 
this,  and  in  His  marriage  parables.  And  so  St.  Paul  (Eph.  v.  25-32),  and  St.  John 
(Key.  xix.  6-9  ;  xxi.  2-9).  Let  the  light  of  these  statements  shine  on  the  text.  In 
communion  with  the  Father  we  have  lost  our  name.  He  found  us  nameless,  for  we 
had  not  a  name  of  any  honourable  distinction  to  lose  or  merge.  The  Saviour 
describes  our  condition  as  lost — without  name,  home,  repute.  He  allured  us  back 
(Isa.  Ixii.  2),  and  gave  us  His  own  name,  and  our  miserable  name  was  hidden  and 
lost  in  the  brightness  of  Christ.  That  name  is  ours,  its  renown  and  the  vast 
treasures  of  grace  procurable  by  its  warrant  (1  Cor.  iii.  23).    II.  The  power  of 

JPBATEB  MUST  BE  PROPORTIONED  TO  OUR  ABSORPTION  IN    ChRIST.       1.    It  is  the  COUSCioUS 

weight  of  His  name  that  gives  its  energy  to  faith.  When  that  name  is  not  pre- 
dominant, we  naturally  dwell  on  our  own  unworthiness,  &c.,  which  produces  distrust 
— the  fatal  sickness  of  prayer.  Distrust  blocks  the  way  up  to  God,  and  no  prayer 
can  pass  to  Him  (James,  i.  5-7).  Not  that  no  prayer  can  prosper  unless  faith  be 
perfect,  for  then  how  could  we  pray  for  faith  at  all ;  but  the  chief  condition  of  our 
receiving  is  a  belief  that  Christ  will  do  it  (Mark  xi.  24).  It  is  the  name  of  Christ, 
and  that  only,  that  gives  us  such  a  confidence.  With  His  name  in  our  hands,  or 
rather  written  on  the  covenant  register  of  our  love,  we  can  no  more  fail  with  the 
Father  than  He  can.  When  we  pray  in  His  name  it  is  as  if  He  prayed.  2.  This 
nearness  of  fellowship  with  Christ  explains  the  "  anything  "  of  the  text.  It  is  not 
supposed  that  such  a  licence  will  be  abused  by  caprice.  The  prayer  of  a  depending 
love  to  a  conferring  love  will  interpret  it  by  the  extent  of  its  wants,  and  the  right 
it  is  permitted  to  assume.  3.  The  endearments  of  such  a  state  are  not  sustained  by 
great  services.  Whatever  concerns  you  concerns  Him ;  if  in  itself  it  be  a  trifle,  it  is 
not  a  trifle  to  Him  if  it  affects  you.  (£.  E.  Jenkins,  LL.D.)  If  ye  shall  ask 
anything  in  My  name. — Prayer  in  Christ's  name : — I.  The  fact  which  is  the  boot 
OF  this  promise  is  described  in  what  our  Lord  says  about  the  vine.  The  vine  and 
the  branches  are  one,  the  same  name  covers  them.  Whatever  the  branch  asks  for — 
that  its  blossoms  may  be  abundant,  and  that  its  clusters  may  ripen — the  vine  asks 
for.  And  it  was  in  immediate  connection  with  this  that  our  Lord  said,  ••  If  ye  abide 
in  Me,  and  My  words  abide  in  you,  ask  whatsoever  ye  vdll,"  Ac.  We  are  to  pray  in 
Ohrist's  name  because  we  are  so  undeniably  one  with  Him  that  what  we  ask  He 
asks.  The  use  of  His  name,  then,  is  not  an  incantation,  nor  is  it  one  of  a  nruuber  of 
conditions  of  successful  prayer.  It  is  the  one  condition  of  both  prayer  and  work. 
This  promise  is  connected  with  that  which  precedes  it.  *'  He  that  beUeveth  on  Me, 
the  works  that  I  do,"  &c.  Why?  ••Because  I  go  unto  My  Father;  and  those 
who  are  one  with  Me  share  My  glorified  powers."  It  is  the  consciousness  of  this 
nnion  that  enables  us  to  pray  too  and  work  for  God  with  a  large  and  happy  faith 
that  He  will  hear  us  and  help  us.  11.  The  coMPREHENsrvENEss  of  thb  promise.  1. 
It  may  be  objected  that  when  we  pray  in  the  name  of  Christ  the  range  of  orur  prayers 
must  be  narrowed.  We  must  pray  about  Christ's  affairs,  and  not  about  our  own. 
We  may  pray,  for  example,  that  the  gospel  may  jeach  the  hearts  of  men  ;  but  can 
we  ask  in  Christ's  name  that  we  may  be  successful  in  business,  or  that  our  children 
may  be  healthy  and  happy  ?  When  we  pray  for  the  strong  help  of  the  Spirit  of  God 
to  enable  us  to  practise  all  Christian  virtues  we  may  pray  in  Christ's  name ;  but  if 
we  want  to  get  an  appointment  which  will  bring  us  a  larger  income,  to  win  a  con- 
tested election,  to  escape  a  bad  debt,  protection,  or  better  health — these  are  our  own 
affairs.  It  is  as  if  a  minister  of  the  Crown  were  to  use  his  official  authority  for 
his  own  personal  interests ;  or  as  if  the  representative  of  a  commercial  firm,  who  was 
authorised  to  sign  cheques  for  the  firm,  signed  cheques  for  the  payment  of  his  private 
and  personal  accounts.  But  have  we  any  interests  that  are  not  Christ's  7  Should 
we  really  choose  the  better  appointment  and  the  larger  income  at  the  risk  of  becom- 
ing of  less  use  to  Christ  ?  Should  we  care  to  win  the  contested  election  if  success 
did  not  give  as  new  opportunities  for  serving  Him  ?    Are  we  not  carrying  on  our  busi- 


632  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cha».  jrv. 

ness  as  Christ's  servants  ?  And  when  we  pray  for  our  children,  do  we  not  remember 
with  a  leap  of  the  heart  that  they  are  much  more  dear  to  Him  than  they  are  to  us  ? 
Can  we  really  desire  anything  for  ourselves  that  Christ  does  not  desire  us  to  have  ? 
Can  we  desire  anything  for  others  that  Christ  does  not  desire  them  to  have  ?  2. 
But  these  answers,  though  good  as  far  as  they  go,  are  incomplete.  The  real  root  of 
that  vague  discontent  is  in  that  dualism  which  divides  human  life  into 
the  religious  and  the  secular  ;  in  one  of  which  we  know  that  Christ  is  interested, 
while  the  other  seems  to  be  of  interest  only  to  ourselves.  That  we  should 
care  for  righteousness  more  than  for  everything  besides  we  acknowledge 
frankly.  To  serve  Christ  well — that  is  what  we  desire  above  everything. 
If  the  chance  were  offered  to  us  between  a  saintly  character  and  the  most  splendid 
earthly  position,  not  for  a  moment  should  we  hesitate.  But  our  nature  is  complex. 
Eighteousness  is  the  great  good  to  which  every  inferior  good  gives  place  ;  but  there 
are  many  good  things  besides.  The  worst  of  all  evils  is  to  sin  against  God ;  but 
it  is  a  bad  thing  to  be  cold,  hungry,  friendless ;  to  see  the  wealth  which  has 
been  accumulated  by  skill,  industry,  and  thrift,  wasting  away  through  the  dis- 
honesty of  those  we  have  trusted.  It  is  the  worst  of  all  evils  to  be  lashed  day  after 
day  by  a  guilty  conscience ;  but  it  is  also  a  bad  thing  to  suffer  the  physical  tortures 
which  are  the  result  of  some  terrible  forms  of  disease.  From  the  worst  evils  we 
can  ask  in  Christ's  name  to  be  delivered,  that  others  should  be  delivered  from  them  j 
but  how  is  it  with  the  rest  ?  Have  we  forgotten  that  Christ  created  us  body  and 
soul  ?  When  a  limb  is  broken,  Christ's  own  creation  is  injured,  just  as  the  creation 
of  an  artist  is  injured  when  the  marble  which  is  the  triumph  of  his  genius  is 
shattered,  or  when  the  canvas  on  which  he  has  recorded  some  dream  of  beauty  is 
rent.  Christ's  miracles  were  the  signs  of  the  depth  of  His  compassion  for  the 
miseries  of  our  race  ;  and  has  He  not  made  it  apart  of  the  service  which  we  owe  to 
Himself  lo  feed  the  hungry,  to  clothe  the  naked,  (fee.  In  His  name  we  are  to  relieve 
all  forma  of  human  want — in  His  name,  when  the  want  is  our  own,  we  may  ask  that 
the  want  may  be  relieved.  If  we  serve  Christ  in  common  things,  we  shall  be  able 
to  pray  in  His  name  about  common  things ;  and  perhaps  it  is  because  we  alienate  a 
large  part  of  our  life  from  His  service  that  we  are  conscious  of  a  certain  incongruity 
when  we  try  to  pray  about  it.  3.  But  we  may  sometimes  doubt  whether  relief  from 
want,  pain,  trouble,  is  really  good.  It  is  right  to  ask,  and  to  ask  in  Christ's  name,  for 
relief  from  it ;  but  Christ  may  cancel  the  prayer,  and  put  in  its  place  a  petition  for  a 
higher  blessing.  We  pray  that  it  may  be  removed :  He  loves  us  too  well  for  the 
prayer  to  be  answered.  But  when  we  pray  for  the  great  gifts,  whether  for  ourselves 
or  for  others,  then  we  know  that  our  prayers  are  but  the  experience  of  the  central 
thoughts  and  desires  of  the  very  heart  of  Christ ;  we  know  that  we  should  not  offer 
them  were  it  not  for  our  union  with  Christ ;  and  therefore  with  perfect  confidence 
wo  offer  them  in  His  name,  they  are  less  ours  than  His.  (R.  W.  Dale,  D.D.) 
Fraying  in  ChrisVs  name : — In  the  common  acceptation,  the  phrase  "  in  my  name" 
means  the  same  thing  as  "  for  my  sake  "  or  "  on  my  account."  The  common 
notion  seems  to  be  that  if  we  present  ourselves  before  the  Infinite  Majesty  with  any 
request  and  make  use  of  this  formula,  our  requests  will  be  granted,  no  matter  what 
they  may  be.  The  young  soldier  dying  on  the  field  sends  by  his  wounded  comrade 
a  letter  to  his  father  at  home,  saying,  "  This  is  my  friend  ;  give  him  whatever  he 
asks  for,  for  my  sake;"  and  although  the  requests  of  the  wounded  man  are  un- 
reasonable and  injurious,  the  father  grants  the  petition,  simply  because  of  the  love 
that  he  bears  his  son.  Just  so  men  go  to  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  with 
this  text  as  their  warrant.  Another  conception  of  the  promise  is  that  Christ  has 
accumulated  an  infinite  fund  of  merit  by  His  death,  and  has  put  the  Father  under 
infinite  obligations  to  Him.  Those,  therefore,  who  come  to  the  Father  in  the  name  of 
the  Son  have  a  claim  on  Him  which  He  is  bound  to  recognize.  The  transaction,  as 
thai  conceived,  is  partly  legal  and  partly  commercial.  To  ask  in  Christ's  name  is 
therefore  substantially  the  same  thing  as  to  present  an  order  at  a  store  signed  by 
one  of  the  joint  proprietors,  or  a  cheque  upon  a  bank  certified  by  the  cashier.  The 
name,  as  we  say,  is  good  for  the  amount.  It  matters  not  to  us  whether  the  persons 
to  whom  the  cheque  or  the  order  is  presented  are  friendly  or  unfriendly  to  ns ;  nor 
to  them  whether  the  thing  is  good  for  as  or  not ;  there  need  be  no  acquaintance 
beyond  simple  identification.  What  they  impart  to  us  is  not  of  grace  to  as  but  of 
debt  to  the  one  whose  name  we  present  to  them.  This  view  needs  only  to  be 
distinctly  stated  in  order  that  its  credulity  may  be  perceived.  I.  What  is  meant 
BX  A8KIN0  IN  Chbist'b  namb  ?  The  name,  in  the  New  Testament,  generally  stands 
for  the  person.    So  always  when  miracles  are  wrought  by  the  name  of  Christ,  it  ii 


OHAP.  XIV.]  fir.  JOHN.  633 

the  personality  and  the  power  of  Christ  that  are  referred  to.   Believing  in  the  name 
of  Christ  is  believing  not  merely  in  a  word  but  in  Christ,  with  a  glance,  no  doubt,  at 
His  trustworthiness.  To  ask  for  anything  in  the  name  of  Christ,  then,  is  to  put  our- 
selves in   His  place  as  nearly  as  we   can,  and  to  ask   for  the  things  that  He 
would  ask  for,  and  in  the  spirit  with   which  He  would  present  His  requests. 
Just  in  proportion  as  His  mind  is  in  us,  and  our  lives  reproduce  His  life,  will 
our  prayers   be  effectual.    The   same  truth   is    put    in  another    form  in    chap. 
XV.   7,   16.      It  is  only  when  the  life  of  the  Master  quickens  and  invigorates 
the   disciple,  just   as  the  life  of  the  vine  does  that  of  the  branches,  that   he 
can   truly  pray  in  Christ's  name,  and   find  a  certain  answer   to  his   prayers. 
II.  This   intebpretation   limits   the   promise  in  certain  directions.     That   is 
really   no  objection  to  the  interpretation.     1.  Men  have  brought  to  God  many 
strange  requests  for  objects  unworthy  and  injurious  to  themselves,  and  yet  have 
supposed  that  by  the  use  of  this  phrase  they  made  good  their  demand  upon  Him. 
Those  to  whom,  e.g.,  worldly  prosperity  would  be  a  curse,  who  have  no  power  to  use 
wealth  wisely,  and  would  surely  be  corrupted  by  it,  sometimes  ask  for  it,  and  seem 
to  think  that  God  is  not  faithful  to  His  promise  because  He  does  not  give  it  to  them. 
2.  Sometimes  good  people  have  hateful  whims  that  they  wish  to  have  gratified. 
One  good  woman  whom  I  knew  prayed,  so  she  said,  in  Christ's  name  all  night,  that 
her  husband  may  be  kept  from  joining  a  certain  church.     Thus  she  imagined  this 
promise  to  be  a  weapon  with  which  she  could  compel  the  Deity  to  gratify  her  small 
bigotry,  her  antipathy  to  another  Christian  sect.  3.  Neither  does  the  text  encourage 
speculative  or  experimental  praying.     A  proposition  was  made  that  Christians 
should  pray  for  the  patients  in  a  certain  ward  of  a  hospital ;  and  if  these  recovered 
more  rapidly  than  those  in  other  wards  the  result  would  be  a  demonstration  of  the 
power  of  prayer.  But  men  who  pray,  just  to  see  whether  there  is  any  use  in  praying 
or  not,  are  not  praying  with  the  mind  of  Christ,  no  matter  what  phrases  these  may 
use  ;  and  there  is  no  promise  of  answer  to  any  such  prayers.     To  ask  a  good  man 
for  a  good  gift,  just  to  see  what  he  would  say,  would  be  an  insult ;  and  it  is  not  less 
offensive  to  approach  God  in  this  way.     4.  Neither  does  this  interpretation  encou- 
rage the  expectation  that  God  will  work  miracles  to  relieve  us  of  work.     Some 
imagine  that  God  will  support  them  in  idleness  if  they  only  pray  in  faith  for  food 
and  raiment  and  shelter.     We  know,  as  well  as  we  can  know  anything,  that  it  is 
God's  will  that  we  should  earn  our  livelihood  by  labour,  and  husband  our  earnings 
with  prudence.     5.  The  same  principle  applies  to  suffering.    One  who  violates  a 
physical  law  the  existence  of  which  he  knows  or  ought  to  know,  and  then  thinks  to 
escape  through  prayer  from  the  penalty  of  that  law,  really  insults  God  by  his  prayer. 
No  one  can  pray  really  in  the  name  of  Christ  who  is  not  careful  to  obey  every  part 
of  the  law  of  God,  natural  as  well  as  Biblical.     The  very  first  condition  of  asking 
in  Christ's  name  is  an  entire  and  hearty  willingness  to  know  and  to  do  the  will  of 
the  Lord.    To  pray  in  the  name  or  character  of  Christ  is  to  remember  that  we  are 
ignorant  and  that  God  is  infinitely  wise  ;  and  that  what  He  chooses  for  us,  though 
it  may  seem  evil  to  us,  is  by  far  the  best  that  we  can  only  make  known  to  Him  our 
desires,  and  then  leave  ourselves  with  entire  submission  in  His  careful  and  powerful 
hands.     III.  After  wb  have  qualified  this  promise  in  all  these  wavs  it  is 
STILL  large  enough — SO  large  that  we  shall  never  begin  to  realize  aU  the  good  it 
offers  us.     1.  It  does  not  forbid  us  to  ask  for  temporal  mercies,  for  the  least  of  the 
good  things  that  God  provides,  nor  for  the  greatest  of  them.    Too  may  pray  for 
health ;  that  is  a  blessing  that  Christ  gave  to  many  while  He  was  here.    Put  it 
is  a  gift  that  He  does  not  always  give  to  those  He  loves  best ;  and  when  yon  pray 
for  it  you  must  always  say,  "Nevertheless,  not  my  will  but  Thine  be  done." 
2.  You  may  pray  for  success  in  business  and  for  prosperity  if  you  desire  them  for 
spiritual  or  benevolent  rather  than  for  natural  and  selfish  reasons.    But  here,  too, 
tie  dominating  wish  will  be  that  God's  wUl  may  be  done.    Yon  may  honestly 
think  that  you  could  use  wealth  in  such  a  way  as  to  derive  moral  and  spiritual 
benefit  from  it  for  yourself,  and  to  confer  benefits  upon  others  ;  but  the  Omniscient 
One  may  know  that  you  are  mistaken  about  this,  and,  for  your  own  good,  as  well  as 
for  His  glory.  He  may  therefore  withhold  what  yoa  crave.     3.  There  is  one  class 
of  petitions,  however,  in  which  you  do  not  need  to  make  any  of  these  reservations. 
When  yoa  ask  for  spiritual  gifts,  then  if  you  are  sincere  you  know  that  you  are 
asking  in  Christ's  name.    "  This  is  the  will  of  God,  even  your  sanctification." 
( WcLthington  Gladden  D.D.)        The  reason  for  delay  in  the  answers  to  prayer : — ••  Pa 
said  he  liked  us  to  ask  him  for  whatever  we  wanted,  and  I  asked  him  yesterday  to  get 
me  a  kite,  and  he  has  not  got  it  for  me ! "  said  a  curly-headed  grumbler,  on  a  oold 


634  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOR.  [chap.  Xlfi 

foggy  daj  in  November.  '*Te8,  and  I  asked  him  to  give  me  a  gold  watch,  and  he  has 
never  given  me  one  1 "  said  a  brother,  two  or  three  years  older ;  "  and  I  don't 
see  the  good  of  asking  him  for  things."  Six  months  passed  away,  when  behold  1 
one  fine  day  in  May,  the  father  came  in  with  a  beautiful  kite,  which  he  gave  to  his 
little  boy  without  saying  a  word.  But  it  was  eight  or  nine  years  before  he  called  the 
other  boy  to  him  and  said,  "  I  suppose  you  have  forgotten,  when  you  were  a  boy  in 
pinafores,  asking  me  for  a  gold  watch,  haven't  you  ? "  "  Yes,  that  I  have," 
answered  the  now  tall  youth.  "But  I  have  not,"  said  the  father.  "Here's  tiie 
watch,  my  dear  boy ;  you  can  value  it  and  take  care  of  it  now  1  Ah,  Christian,  need 
I  add  a  word  ?  else  I  might  say  that  prayers  do  not  spoil  by  keeping,  but  are  only 
put  out  at  interest.  {H,  H.  Dobney. )  If  ye  love  Me,  keep  My  commandments. 
— Trut  love  for  Christ : — I.  Its  tbub  nature  and  characteb.  1.  The  text  suggests  a 
contrast  with  something  besides  which,  while  purporting  to  be  the  love  of  Christ,  ia 
not  the  very  reality.  There  is  a  love  of  Christ  which  is — (1)  Affected — that  of  Judas. 
His  successors  are  men  who,  for  selfish  purposes,  have  said,  "  Lord,  Lord  1 "  (2) 
Visionary — that  of  Simon  Magus.  His  love  was  not  a  falsehood  like  the  traitor's ; 
but  it  was  an  illusion.  How  much  of  Christianity  consists  in  acknowledgment  of 
Gospel  verity,  respect  for  Christian  institutions,  &c.  (3)  Morbid,  that  perhaps  ol 
Thomas,  which  has  its  eyes  turned  in  upon  himself — a  tjpe  of  Christianity  in- 
duced by  persecution,  the  prevalence  of  wickedness,  a  high  state  of  civilization,  want 
of  moral  earnestness.  (4)  Partial  and  unworthy,  that  of  Peter,  who  made  the 
commonest  of  mistakes,  overestimating  His  love.  It  was  a  genuine  feeling; 
bat  not  equal  to  all  emergencies,  and  so  vanished  as  soon  as  it  confronted  danger. 
2.  The  love  of  Christ — what  is  it?  (1)  Acquaintance  with  Christ.  How  can 
we  love  what  we  do  not  know?  How  can  we  love  Christ  if  we  are  ignorant 
of  His  Person,  work,  character,  claims,  promises,  <fec.?  Of  this  knowledge  our  Lord 
makes  the  highest  account,  and  provides  for  it  by  the  gift  of  His  Spirit.  This 
knowledge  ia  not  the  measure  of  love,  but  is  its  companion,  and  one  of  the 
spheres  of  its  activity.  (2)  Affection  for  Christ.  Knowledge  may  be  divorced  from 
any  alliance  of  the  heart  or  will.  But  the  soul  who  possesses  the  love  of  Christ  will 
be  filled  with  a  sacred  passion  for  Him  shed  abroad  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  (3) 
Obedience  to  Christ,  which  is  Christ's  own  definition  here.  This  is  to  live  in — (a) 
Piety  towards  God.  Christ  will  recognize  no  love  for  Him  which  does  not  show 
forth  the  praises  of  His  Father.  (b)  Self-control  and  purity,  (c)  Truth,  love, 
justice  to  all  men.  II.  Its  blessedness  and  Divine  excellence.  To  love  Christ 
is — 1.  To  be  loved  of  the  Father  and  the  Son  (ver.  21).  The  Divine  Son  is  so  dear 
to  the  Father,  that  love  for  Him  in  a  human  soul  makes  it  dear  to  God.  2.  To 
receive  the  manifestation  of  the  love  of  God  is  the  coming  to  the  soul  of  the  Father 
and  the  Son  (ver.  23).  Human  love  often  remains  unmanifested  through  lack  of 
opportunity,  &o.  So  there  was  a  lack  of  the  manifestation  of  Divine  love  before 
the  Incarnation ;  but  Christ  promises  to  the  disciples  that  He  and  the  Father  will 
♦•  come."  Believers  shall  know  the  love  which  God  has  for  them,  the  Spirit  Him- 
self bearing  witness  of  the  fact.  3  Tc  enjoy  this  manifestation  as  a  permanent 
condition  of  soul :  "  make  our  abo&e."  Conclusion :  1.  What  bewildering  and 
entrancing  views  of  heaven  does  this  scripture  open  before  us  ?  If  God  so  loved  us 
here,  how  will  He  love  us  in  the  mansions  above  1  2.  To  how  great  a  height  does 
the  Christianity  of  the  New  Testament  tower  above  that  of  most  of  its  professors.  3. 
Let  those  who  name  the  name  of  Christ  be  careful  to  keep  His  commandments.  (J.  D, 
Geden,  D.D.)  Love's  law  and  life : — This  is  a  chapter  singularly  full  of  certainties, 
and  remarkably  studded  with  "ifs."  1.  Look  at  ver.  2.  If  there  had  been  noplace  for  us 
in  the  glory  land  Jesus  would  have  told  us.  2.  Notice  ver.  3.  If  the  Lord  Jesus  should 
go  away  (and  this  is  a  supposition  no  longer),  then  He  would  return  again  in  due  time. 
His  home-going  pledges  Him  to  come,  and  compels  us  to  look  for  Him.  3.  The 
next  "  if  "  comes  at  the  beginning  of  ver.  7.  If  we  really  know  Christ,  we  know 
God.  In  fact,  there  is  no  knowing  God  aright  except  through  His  Son.  If  our 
scientific  men  get  away  from  the  Christ,  the  incarnate  God,  before  long  they  drift 
away  from  God  altogether.  4.  The  next  variety  of  "if  "  is  in  ver.  14.  Taking  it 
for  granted  that  we  ask  mercies  in  the  name  of  JesuSi  a  glorious  certainty  is  hnked 
thereto — "  I  will  do  it."  6.  Again,  you  have  "  if  "  in  ver.  23.  Bespect  to  His  wisdom, 
and  obedience  to  His  authority,  will  grow  ont  of  love.  6.  The  chapter  almost  closes 
at  ver.  28  by  saying,  "  If  ye  loved  Me,  ye  would  rejoice,"  &o.  Where  there  is  an 
intelligent  love  to  Christ  we  rejoice  in  His  gains  even  though  we  ourselves  appear 
to  be  losers  thereby.  I.  Thb  "  if  "  in  oub  text  is  a  teby  sebious  one.  It  goes  to 
the  very  root  of  the  matter.    Love  belongs  to  the  heart ;  and  every  surgeon  will  tell 


CHAP,  xiy.3  8T.  JOHN.  535 

you  that  a  disease  of  the  heart  may  not  be  trifled  with.  Solomon  bids  as  keep  the 
heart  v?ith  all  diligence,  "  for  out  of  it  are  the  issues  of  life."  If  the  mainspring 
fails,  all  the  works  of  a  watch  refuse  to  act.  1.  Our  Saviour  puts  this  "  if  "  in  such  a 
way  as  to  teach  as  that  love  must  be  prior  to  obedience.  Obedience  must  have  love 
lor  its  mother,  nurse,  and  food.  The  essence  of  obedience  lies  in  the  hearty  love 
which  prompts  the  deed  rather  than  in  the  deed  itself.  A  heart  at  enmity  with 
God  cannot  be  made  acceptable  by  mere  acts  of  piety.  It  is  not  what  your  hands 
are  doing,  nor  even  what  your  lips  are  saying ;  the  main  thing  is  what  your  heart 
is  meaning  and  intending.  The  great  fly-wheel  which  moves  the  whole  machinery 
of  life  is  flxed  in  the  heart :  hence  this  is  the  most  important  of  all  suggestions — 
"  If  ye  love  Me."  When  the  heathen  killed  their  sacrifices"' in  order  to  prophesy 
future  events  from  the  entrails,  the  worst  augury  they  ever  got  was  when  the  priest 
could  not  find  a  heart ;  or  if  that  heart  was  smaU  and  shrivelled.  It  is  so  in  very 
deed  with  religion  and  with  each  religious  person.  He  that  searches  us  searches 
principally  our  hearts.  2.  Love  to  Jesus  is  put  first  because  it  is  the  best  reason 
for  our  obedience  to  Him,  Notice :  "  If  ye  love  Me,  keep  My  commandments." 
Personal  affection  will  produce  personal  obedience.  There  are  some  men  for  whom 
you  would  do  anything.  The  Saviour  may  much  more  safely  than  any  other  be 
installed  in  such  a  position.  This  is  the  spring  and  source  of  all  holy  living — love 
to  the  Holy  One.  3.  It  was  greatly  needful  for  our  Lord  thus  to  address  Hia 
disciples.  We  should  never  have  doubted  one  of  them.  We  now  know  by  the 
result  that  one  of  them  was  a  traitor,  but  no  one  suspected  him.  Ah !  if  that 
question,  "If  ye  love  Me,"  needed  to  be  raised  in  the  sacred  college  of  the 
twelve,  much  more  must  it  be  allowed  to  sift  our  churches,  and  to  test  ourselves. 
Perhaps  you  have  almost  taken  it  for  granted  that  you  love  Jesus ;  but  it  must  not 
be  taken  for  granted.  It  is  most  kind  of  the  Saviour  to  give  you  an  opportunity  of 
examining  yourself  and  seeing  whether  you  are  right  at  heart  4.  Eemember,  if  any 
man  love  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  he  will  be  anathema  maranatha,  cursed  at  His 
coming.  This  applies  to  every  man,  even  though  he  be  most  eminent.  An  apostle 
turned  out  to  be  a  son  of  perdition — may  not  you  ?  5,  The  question  is  answerable. 
It  was  put  to  the  apostles,  and  they  could  answer  it.  Peter  spoke  as  all  the  eleven 
would  have  done  when  he  said,  "Thou  knowest  that  I  love  Thee."  It  is  not  a 
question  concerning  mysteries.  A  man  may  know  whether  he  loves  the  Lord  or 
not,  and  he  ought  to  know.  Do  not  be  content  with  merely  longing  to  love  Jesus ; 
or  with  longing  to  know  whether  you  love  Him.  Not  love  Jesus  I  It  were  better 
for  me  not  to  Uve  than  not  to  love  Him.  II.  The  test  which  is  peoposed  in  thb 
TEXT  IS  A  VERT  JUDICIOUS  ONK.  "  If  ye  love  Me."  1.  The  test  indicated  does  not 
suggest  a  lawless  liberty.  Let  us  never  enter  into  the  counsel  of  those  who  do  not 
beheve  that  there  are  any  commandments  for  believers  to  keep.  Those  who  do 
away  with  duty  do  away  with  sin,  and  consequently  with  the  Saviour.  Jesus  does 
not  say,  so  long  as  you  love  Me  in  your  hearts,  I  care  nothing  about  your  lives.  He 
that  loves  Christ  is  the  freest  man  out  of  heaven,  but  he  is  also  the  most  under 
bonds.  He  is  free,  for  Christ  has  loosed  his  bonds,  but  he  is  put  under  bonds  to 
Christ  by  grateful  love.  2.  The  text  also  contains  no  fanatical  challenge.  We  do 
not  read,  "  If  ye  love  Me,  perform  some  extraordinary  act."  Hermits,  nuns,  and 
religious  mad  caps  find  no  example  or  precept  here.  Every  now  and  then  we  find 
members  of  our  churches  who  must  needs  leave  their  trades  and  their  callings  to 
show  their  love  for  Jesus :  children  may  starve  and  wives  may  pine,  but  their  mad 
whims  must  be  carried  out  for  love  of  Jesus.  3.  Why  does  the  Saviour  give  ua 
this  as  a  test  ?  Because — (1)  It  tests  whether  you  are  loving  Christ  in  His  true 
position,  or  whether  your  love  is  to  a  Christ  of  your  own  making,  and  your  own  plac- 
ing. Moses  never  used  an  expression  such  as  our  Saviour  here  employs.  He  might 
say,  ♦•Keep  God's  commandments";  but  He  would  never  have  said,  "Keep  My 
commandments."  By  obedience  you  own  Christ's  sovereignty  and  Godhead.  We 
do  not  love  Jesus  if  He  is  not  our  Lord  and  God.  Love  Him,  and  belittle  Him  1 
It  is  absurd.  (2)  It  proves  the  living  presence  of  the  object  of  your  love.  Love 
always  desires  to  have  its  object  near,  and  it  has  a  faculty  of  bringing  its  object 
near.  A  gentleman  has  faithful  servants  ;  he  goes  away,  and  leaves  his  house  in 
their  charge.  Thp''  are  not  eye-servants,  and  so  they  work  none  the  less  because  he 
is  absent.  If  he  d  as  not  see  them,  yet  the  eyes  of  their  love  always  see  him, 
and  therefore  they  work  as  if  he  were  at  home.  So  Christ  has  gone  away,  but  He 
is  made  present  to  us  by  our  realizing  love  ;  and  the  proof  of  our  love  is  that  Jesus  is 
BO  present  that  He  constrains  our  actions,  influences  our  motives,  and  is  the  cause 
of  oar  obedience.     (3)  By  keeping  oar  Lord's  commandments  we  are  doing  that 


536  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha»,  xrr. 

which  is  most  pleasing  to  Him,  and  will  most  glorify  Him.  There  is  the  answer 
to  every  rapturous  inquiry.  (4)  Moreover,  the  Saviour  knew,  when  He  bade  us  try 
this  test,  that  it  would  prepare  us  for  honouring  and  glorifying  Him  in  many  ways. 
When  a  friend  is  dying,  and  he  asks  you  to  prove  your  love  by  such  and  such  a 
deed,  he  may  ask  what  he  wills  ;  you  give  him  carte  blanche.  Baptism  and  the 
Lord's  supper  will  never  be  slighted  by  those  whose  hearts  are  fully  possessed  with 
love  to  Jesus.  They  may  seem  trifles,  but  if  the  Lord  Jesus  commands  them  they 
cannot  be  neglected.  III.  Tbub  love  will  endube  this  test.  "  If  ye  love  Me, 
ye  will  keep  My  commandments."  This  is  the  Revised  Version,  and  I  hope  it 
will  be  written  out  in  capitals  upon  our  revised  lives  I  If  you  love  Christ — 
1.  Set  to  work  to  find  out  what  His  commandments  are.  2.  Be  always  true  to 
your  convictions  about  what  Christ's  commandments  are.  Carry  them  out  at 
all  hazards,  and  carry  them  out  at  once.  3.  Take  note  of  every  commandment 
as  it  concerns  you.  If  there  be  a  commandment  which  you  do  not  relish,  it  ought 
to  be  a  warning  to  you  that  there  is  something  wrong  in  your  heart  that  needs  set- 
tingright.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Love  and  obedience  : — The  keyword  of  the  preceding 
context  is  "  Believe  I  "  and  that  word  passes  now  into  "  Love."  The  believing  gaze 
upon  Christ  kindles  love  and  prompts  to  obedience.  There  is  another  very  beautiful 
and  subtle  link.  Our  Lord  has  just  been  saying,  "  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  My 
name  that  will  I  do."  The  Lord  does  as  the  servant  asks,  and  the  servant  is  to  do 
as  the  Lord  commands.  On  both  sides  there  is  love  delighting  to  be  set  in  motion 
by  a  message  from  the  other  side.  I.  The  all-sufficient  ideal  or  guide  fob 
liiFB.  The  authoritative  tone  which  Christ  assumes  is  noteworthy.  He  speaks  as 
Jehovah  spoke  from  Sinai ;  and  quotes  the  very  words  of  the  old  law.  There  are 
distinctly  involved,  in  this  incidental  utterance,  two  startling  things — one  the 
assumption  of  the  right  to  impose  His  will  upon  every  human  being,  and  the  other 
that  His  will  contains  the  all-sufficient  directory  for  conduct.  1.  What,  then,  are 
His  commandments?  Those  which  He  spoke  are  plain  and  simple;  and  some 
people  crow  loud  if,  scratching  amongst  rabbinical  dust-heaps,  they  find  something 
that  looks  like  anything  that  He  once  said.  What  does  that  matter  7  Christ's 
"  commandments"  are  Christ  Himself.  There  is  the  originality  and  uniqueness  of 
Christ  as  a  moral  teacher,  that  He  says,  "  Copy  Me."  His  law  is  to  be  found  iu 
His  life.  2.  And  then,  if  that  be  so,  what  a  change  passes  on  the  aspect  of  law ! 
Everything  that  was  hard,  repellent,  far-off,  cold,  vanishes.  We  have  no  longer 
tables  of  stone,  but  fleshy  tables  of  a  heart;  and  the  Law  stands  before  us,  a  Being 
to  be  loved,  to  be  clung  to,  to  be  trusted  in,  and  whom  it  is  blessedness  to  know  and 
perfection  to  be  like.  3.  It  is  enough  for  conduct,  for  character,  and  in  all  per- 
plexities of  conflicting  duties  that  we  listen  to  and  obey  the  Voice  that  says,  "  Keep 
My  commandments."  II.  The  all-poweeful  motive.  The  Eevised  Version  reads, 
'•If  ye  love  Me  ye  will  keep,"  &c.,  making  it  an  assurance  and  not  an  injunction. 
1.  The  principle  that  underlies  these  words  is,  that  love  is  the  foundation  of  obedience, 
and  obedience  is  the  sure  outcome  and  result  of  love.  We  all  know  that  love  which  is 
real  delights  most  chiefly  in  knowing  and  conforming  to  the  will  of  the  beloved.  And 
you  have  only  to  lift  that  which  is  the  experience  of  every  true  heart  into  the  higher 
regions,  to  see  that  Christ  has  invoked  an  omnipotent  power.  2.  That  is  exactly  what 
lifts  themoralityof  the  Gospel  above  all  other  systems.  It  is  not  for  want  of  knowledge 
that  men  go  to  the  devil,  but  for  want  of  power  to  live  their  knowledge.  And  what 
morality  fails  to  do  with  its  clearest  utterances  of  human  duty,  Christ  comes  and 
does.  The  one  is  like  the  useless  proclamations  posted  up  in  some  rebellious 
district,  where  there  is  no  army  to  back  them.  The  other  gets  itself  obeyed.  Here 
is  the  road  plain  and  straight.  What  matters  that  if  there  is  no  force  to  draw  the 
cart  along  it.  Here  stand  all  your  looms,  polished  and  in  perfect  order,  but  there 
is  no  steam  in  the  boilers  ;  and  so  there  is  no  motion  and  nothing  manufactured. 
What  we  want  is  not  law,  but  power.  And  what  the  gospel  stands  alone  in  giving 
ns,  is  not  merely  the  clear  revelation  of  what  we  ought  to  be,  but  it  is  the  power  to 
become  it.  3.  Love  does  that,  and  love  alone.  The  true  way  to  cleanse  the  Augean 
stables,  was  to  turn  the  river  into  them.  It  would  have  been  endless  to  wheel  out 
the  filth  in  wheelbarrows  loaded  by  spades.  When  the  ark  comes  into  the  Tempb, 
Dagon  lies,  a  mutilated  stump,  upon  the  threshold.  Christ,  and  He  alone,  entering 
my  heart  by  the  portals  of  my  love,  will  coerce  my  evil  and  stimulate  my  good.  4. 
Here  is  a  plain  test  and  a  double-barelled  one.  (1)  There  is  no  love  worth  calling 
80  which  dues  not  keep  the  cammandtnent.  All  the  emotional  and  the  mystic,  and 
the  Si  -(-a  led  higher  parts  of  Christian  experience  have  to  be  content  to  submit  to 
this  plain  test — do  they  help  us  to  live  as  Christ  would  have  as,  and  that  becauM 


OBAT.  XIV.]  ST.  JOHN.  537 

He  woald  have  as  ?  Not  that  in  regard  of  each  action  there  must  be  the  conscious 
reference  to  the  supreme  love.  The  colouring  matter  put  in  at  the  fountain  will 
dye  every  drop  of  the  stream ;  and  they  whose  inmost  hearts  are  tinged  and  tinctured 
with  the  sweet  love  of  Jesus  Christ,  from  their  hearts  will  go  forth  issues  of  life  all 
coloured  and  moulded  thereby.  (2)  There  is  no  obedience  worth  calling  so  which 
is  not  the  child  of  love ;  and  all  the  multitude  of  right  things  which  Christians  do, 
without  that  motive,  are  made  short  work  of  by  the  principle.  Obedience  which  is 
mechanical  and  matter-of-course,  or  which  is  forced  upon  us  by  dread,  is  nothing. 
This  is  a  sieve  with  very  small  meshes,  and  there  will  be  a  great  deal  of  rubbish  left 
in  it  after  the  shaking.  III.  Thb  all-subduimo  gazb.  This  is  not  included  in  the 
text,  but  it  is  necessary  to  complete  the  view  of  the  forces  to  which  Christ  here 
entrusts  the  hallowing  of  life.  Nothing  will  kindle  a  man's  love  but  the  faithful 
contemplation  and  grasp  of  the  Bedeeming  Christ.  1.  Fere  is  a  man,  dead  for  nine- 
teen centuries,  expecting  you  and  me  to  have  towards  Him  a  vivid  personal  affection 
which  will  influence  our  conduct  and  our  character.  What  right  has  He  to  expect 
that  ?  There  is  only  one  reasonable  ground,  and  that  is,  that  He  died  for  me.  And 
such  a  love  towards  such  a  Christ  is  the  only  thing  which  will  wield  power  sufficient 
to  guide,  to  coerce,  to  restrain,  to  constrain,  and  to  sustain  my  weak,  wayward, 
rebeUious,  and  sluggish  will.  2.  Here  is  a  unique  fact  in  the  history  of  the  world, 
that  not  only  did  He  make  this  astounding  claim,  but  that  it  has  been  responded 
to,  and  that  to-day  there  are  millions  of  men  who  love  Jesus  Christ  with  a  love 
warm,  personal,  deep,  powerful — the  spring  of  all  their  goodness  and  the  Lord  of 
their  lives.  Why  do  they  ?  For  one  reason  only.  Because  they  believe  that  He 
died  for  them,  and  that  He  lives  an  ascended  yet  ever-present  Helper  and  Lover  of 
their  souls.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Love  and  obedience : — I.  What  is  included  in 
EEEPiNo  THE  DiviNE  COMMANDS  ?  1.  That  WO  retain  them  in  our  memory,  so  as  not 
to  forget  them.  This  is  necessary  to  all  other  ways  of  keepiog  them  (Deut.  viii.  7  ; 
xvii.  18).  The  heart  of  every  Christian  should  be  a  sacred  ark,  containing  the  two 
tables  of  the  law,  that  they  may  be  ready  for  use,  and  secured  against  all  hostile 
attempts  to  deprive  us  of  them  (Psa.  cxix.  61,  93  ;  Heb.  ii.  1 ;  2  Pet.  i.  12,  13).  2. 
That  they  have  a  place  in  our  affections  ;  we  must  love  them,  and  delight  in  them. 
A  thing  may  be  lost  to  the  memory,  and  yet  be  kept  in  the  heart ;  the  words  of  a  dis- 
course may  be  forgotten,  and  yet  the  savour  of  it  be  retained.  But  God's  commands 
require  to  be  kept  in  both  these  respects.  The  believer  loves  the  Divine  law,  on 
account  of  its  Author ;  and  the  subject  matter  of  it,  on  account  of  its  own  intrinsic 
excellence.  3.  That  we  preserve  them  unadulterated,  pure  aud  entire.  Nothing  is 
more  displeasing  to  the  Lord,  than  to  blend  human  inventions  with  His  institutions 
(Deut.  iv.  2  :  Rev.  xxii.  18).  4.  A  decided  and  persevering  obedience  to  the  Divine 
will,  regardless  of  the  consequences  (Matt.  vii.  24-29 ;  Rev.  xxii.  14).  6.  That  we 
recommend  them  to  the  attention  of  others,  II.  How  otJR  KEEpma  the  command- 
ments IS  AN  evidence  of  OUR  LOVE  TO  GoD.  1.  It  is  a  very  rational  evidence,  for 
all  love  is  active  and  influential.  Obedience  without  love  is  in  many  instances 
found  to  be  impracticable;  with  it,  it  is  almost  unavoidable.  2.  It  is  a  scriptural 
evidence,  very  frequently  inculcated  (vers.  21,  23  ;  chap.  xiv.  14).  3.  The  evidence 
is  simple  and  easy.  This  is  the  love  of  God,  that  we  keep  His  commandments ; 
and  His  commandments  are  not  grievous.  4.  It  is  an  obvious  and  convincing 
evidence  (Matt.  vii.  20  ;  1  John  ii.  4,  5).  6.  It  is  such  an  evidence  that  without  it 
no  other  kind  of  evidence  would  be  sufficient.  Reflections :  The  subject  teaches  us 
— 1.  That  love  is  the  foundation  of  Christian  obedience.  2.  To  judge  of  our  love 
by  our  obedience,  and  not  of  our  obedience  by  our  love.  3.  Love  and  obedience 
will  bear  a  proportion  to  each  other.  4.  They  will  at  last  be  consummated  together. 
(B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  Love  and  obedience : — Nothing  can  be  love  which  does  not 
shape  itself  into  obedience.  We  remember  the  anecdote  of  a  Roman  commander 
who  forbade  an  engagement  with  the  enemy,  and  the  first  transgressor  against  his 
prohibition  was  his  own  son.  He  accepted  the  challenge  of  the  leader  of  the  other 
host,  met,  slew,  spoiled  him,  and  then,  in  triumphant  feeling,  carried  the  spoils  to 
his  father's  tent.  But  the  Roman  father  refused  to  recognise  the  instinct  which 
prompted  this  as  deserving  the  name  of  love.  Disobedience  contradicted  it,  and 
deserved  death.  {F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.)  Obedience  the  true  test  Oj  love  to 
Christ : — I.  Christ  merited  the  highest  esteem  op  all  His  people.  1.  In 
Himself  He  is  the  most  lovely  of  objects.  2.  From  Him  the  disciples  have  received 
the  most  delightful  instruction.  3.  He  has  died  to  save  them  from  the  direst  of 
evils  and  lives  to  procure  for  them  the  highest  blessings.  4.  His  laws  are  the  con- 
ditions upon  which  our  well-being  is  secured.     II.  There  are  in  Christ's  disciples 


638  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nv. 

SUCH   THINGS   AS    RENDER    THEIR     LOVE     TO     ChRIST   BtJSPICIOTJS.      1.    Sad    neglect    Ol 

public  worship.  2.  Backwardness  in  prayer.  3.  Eeluctance  to  study  the  Scriptures. 
4.  Passion  easily  agitated.  5.  Fear  of  death.  III.  The  method  of  getting  rid 
Of  ALL  THAT  RENDERS  OUR  LOVE  SUSPICIOUS.  Obedience  :  1.  Universal.  2.  Constant. 
3.  Self-denying.  (R.  Robinson.)  Affectionate  obedience: — L  The  important 
PRINCIPLE  OF  LOVE  TO  Jesus  Christ.  Consider  this  principle — 1.  As  to  its  nature. 
Love  to  Christ  implies  several  things.  (1)  A  knowledge  of  Christ.  (2)  Satisfaction 
with  Christ.  (3)  Esteem  for  Christ,  and  delight  in  Him.  2.  In  its  causes.  "  He 
first  loved  us."  3.  Consider  this  love  in  its  characteristics.  What  should  be  the 
features  of  this  love  ?  (1)  It  should  be  ardent.  A  flame  burning  intensely  on  the 
altar  of  the  heart.  (2)  It  should  be  progressive.  Cannot  stand  still.  (3)  It  should 
be  pre-eminent.  4.  In  its  importance  (see  1  Cor.  xvi.  22).  II.  The  evidence  of  rra 
POSSESSION.  Obedience  is  the  essential  fruit  of  a  renewed  heart.  Christ's  command- 
ments— 1.  Are  revealed.  They  are  left  on  the  pages  of  Holy  Writ.  2.  They  are 
sometimes  difiBcult.  Hence  self-denial  and  cross-bearing  are  always  so.  3.  They 
are  always  practicable.  "I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  strengthening 
me."  4.  They  are  indispensable.  Not  to  be  despised  or  neglected.  Essential 
to  Christ's  favour,  and  our  own  comfort.  Application:  1.  Eight  obedience  to 
Christ  is  humble,  universal,  and  hearty.  It  does  not  question,  or  choose,  or 
obey  reluctantly.  2.  Christ's  order  seems  this :  Hear,  repent,  believe,  be  baptized, 
and  then  do  whatsoever  else  I  command  you.  (Jabez  Burns,  D.D.)  Love 
the  inspiration  of  courage  to  obey  : — Several  boys  were  playing  marbles.  In  the 
midst  of  their  sport,  the  rain  began  to  fall.  Freddie  S.  stopped,  and  said,  "  Boys, 
I  must  go  home :  mother  said  I  must  not  go  out  in  the  rain."  "  Your  mother — 
fudge  1  The  rain  won't  hurt  you  any  more  than  it  will  us,"  said  two  or  three  voices 
at  once.  Freddie  turned  upon  them  with  a  look  of  pity,  and  the  courage  of  a  hero, 
and  replied,  "  I'll  not  disobey  my  mother  for  any  of  you  !  "  Love  the  motive  power 
of  obedience  : — When  the  Bible  prescribes  Christian  graces,  it  always  implies  love 
as  the  motive  power ;  as  when  we  speak  of  rearing  harvests  it  is  always  implied  that 
there  is  a  soiL  Without  love  there  is  no  soil  for  any  Christian  grace.  If  there  be 
little  of  it,  the  fruit  of  Christian  feeling  will  be  poor  and  scant.  If  there  be  much, 
there  will  be  great  fruit,  and  easily  grown.  All  things  are  easy  to  love.  It  tames 
all  passions,  inspires  all  affections,  feeds  every  generous  sentiment,  gives  both  soft- 
ness and  potency,  as  its  needs  require,  to  the  will,  makes  the  understanding 
luminous  and  by  making  the  whole  man  like  God,  makes  it  easy  for  him  to  be  god- 
like to  his  fellow-men.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Love  liberates  us  for  obedience: — 
Obedience  is  freedom,  when  we  have  learned  to  love  the  lips  that  command.  We 
are  set  free  that  we  may  serve.  (Ibid.)  Love  makes  obedience  delightful : — Love 
obeys  with  delight.  It  is  not  a  burden  to  pray,  but  a  pleasure.  Hard  duties  become 
easy  to  love  and  the  time  seems  not  long  nor  tedious;  as  Jacob  for  the  love  of  Bachel 
(Gen.  xxix.  20).  Seven  years  to  love  seems  but  as  one  day.  One  day  spent  in  a  holy 
duty  to  one  who  hath  love,  seems  to  pass  away  sooner  and  with  more  delight  than  one 
day  spent  in  flesh  displeasing  duties  where  there  is  no  love  to  take  off  the  tediousness  of 
it  to  the  flesh.  (Percy.)  Love  makes  obedienceeasy : — Love  is  like  wings  to  the  bird, 
like  sails  to  the  ship ;  it  carries  a  Christian  full  sail  to  heaven.  When  love  cools, 
obedience  slacks  and  drives  heavily,  because  it  wants  the  oil  on  it  which  that  love 
osed  to  drop.  (T.  Watson. )  Love  better  than  the  mere  sense  of  duty  : — Men 
will  do  far  more  from  love  than  we  might  dare  to  ask  as  a  matter  of  duty. 
Napoleon's  soldiers  frequently  achieved  exploits  under  the  influence  of  fervid 
attachment  for  him,  which  no  law  could  have  required  them  to  attempt.  Had 
there  been  cold-blooded  orders  issued  by  some  domineering  officer,  who  said, 
**  Too  shall  do  this,  and  you  shall  do  that,"  they  would  have  mutinied  against 
Buch  tyranny,  and  yet  when  the  favourite  little  corporal  seizes  the  standard, 
and  cries,  "  Come  on ! "  they  will  rash  even  to  the  cannon's  mouth,  out  of  love 
to  the  person  of  their  gallant  leader.  This  is  the  difference  between  the  law 
and  the  gospel.  The  law  says,  '•  You  shall,  or  you  shall  be  punished ; "  but  the 
gospel  says,  "I  have  loved  yon  with  an  everlasting  love;  I  have  forgiven  all 
your  trespasses ;  now  my  love  shall  sweetly  constrain  yon,  and  the  influence  of 
inward  principle  shall  guide  yon  in  my  ways,  my  law  shall  be  written,  not  apon 
stone,  but  apon  the  fleshly  tablets  of  your  hearts."  The  old  covenant  in  all 
that  it  did  only  provided  precepts ;  but  the  gospel  provides  the  power  to  keep 
the  precept.  The  law  drove  us,  but  the  gospel  draws  us.  The  law  came  behind 
ns  with  its  dog  and  stick,  as  cor  drovers  do  from  the  cattle  markets ;  bat  the 
gospel  goes  before  as,  as  the  Eastern  shepherd  before  his  sheep,  and  we  cheerfully 


CHA».  xw.]  ST.  JOHN.  139 

follow  where  the  gospel  leads  the  way.  This  is  the  difiFerence,  then,  between 
the  old  law  and  its  inability  to  sanctify  us,  and  the  gospel  and  its  wonderful  power  to 
purify.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Sonship  manifested  in  love : — Outside,  in  the  streets,  a 
man's  companions  will  do  him  a  kindness,  and  the  action  performed  is  friendly ; 
but  for  filial  acts  you  must  look  inside  the  house.  There  the  child  does  not  lend 
money  to  its  father,  or  negotiate  business,  yet  in  his  Uttle  acts  there  is  more  sou- 
ship.  Who  is  it  that  comes  to  meet  father  when  the  day  is  over  ?  and  what  is  the 
action  which  often  indicates  childhood's  love  ?  See  the  little  child  comes  tottering 
forward  with  father's  slippers,  and  runs  oS  with  his  boots  as  he  puts  them  off. 
The  service  is  little,  but  it  is  loving  and  filial,  and  has  more  of  filial  affection  in  it 
than  the  servant's  bringing  in  the  meal,  or  preparing  the  bed,  or  any  more  essential 
service.  It  gives  the  little  one  great  pleasure,  and  expresses  his  love.  No  one  who 
is  not  my  child,  or  who  does  not  love  me  in  something  like  the  same  way,  would 
ever  dream  of  making  such  a  service  his  speciality.  The  littleness  of  the  act  fits 
it  to  the  child's  capacity,  and  there  is  also  something  in  it  which  makes  it  a  suitable 
expression  of  a  child's  affection.  So  also  in  little  acts  for  Jesus.  Oftentimes  men 
of  the  world  will  give  their  money  to  the  cause  of  Christ,  putting  down  large  sums 
for  charity  or  for  missions,  but  they  will  not  weep  in  secret  over  other  men's  sins, 
or  speak  a  word  of  comfort  to  an  afflicted  saint.  To  visit  a  poor  sick  woman,  teach 
a  little  child,  reclaim  a  street  Arab,  breathe  a  prayer  for  enemies,  or  whipper  a 
promise  in  the  ear  of  a  desponding  saint,  may  show  more  of  sonship  than  building 
a  row  of  almshouses  or  endowing  a  church.  (Ibid.)  The  Divinity  of  a  Christ- 
loving  soul: — I.  As  LiviNQ  A  Divine  life.  The  life  is  that  of  keeping  Divine 
commandments.  1.  This  is  the  effect  of  loving  Christ.  Here  is  a  law  of  mind. 
He  who  really  loves  another  is  naturally  desirous  of  acting  in  accord  with  the 
wishes  of  the  object  loved.  We  see  this  in  families  and  among  friends,  and  the 
professing  Christian  who  is  not  obedient  from  love,  is  not  obedient  at  all.  2.  This 
is  the  evidence  of  loving  Christ  (ver.  21).  There  may  be  the  most  glowing  songa 
of  praise,  Ac,  but  love  is  only  proved  by  practical  obedience.  The  true  Christian 
is  an  incarnation  of  the  God  of  love.  Worldly  men  only  embody  and  work  out  the 
current  notions  of  their  age.  "  I  will  run  the  way  of  Tby  commandments  when 
Thou  shalt  enlarge  my  heart."  II.  As  possessing  a  Divine  helpeb  (ver.  16). 
1.  He  is  the  gift  of  the  Father — free,  sovereign,  priceless.  2.  He  is  the  messenger 
of  reality — "  the  Spirit  of  Truth."  The  world  is  under  the  dominion  of  falsehood 
and  shams.  False  ideas  of  God,  life,  duty,  happiness,  and  greatness  prevaiL  The 
Paraclete  comes  to  scatter  delusions,  and  to  bring  souls  into  contact  with  the 
morally  real.  3.  He  is  exclusively  for  the  Christ-loving — "And  I  will  pray  the 
Father  .  .  .  whom  the  world  cannot  receive,"  &c.  Love  is  the  receptive  and 
recognizing  faculty  (1  Cor.  ii.  14).  As  soon  may  a  man,  who  has  not  attained  the 
faculty  of  reading,  see  in  "  Paradise  Lost "  the  genius  of  Milton  as  the  man  who 
has  not  the  love  of  Christ,  see  and  receive  the  Spirit  of  God.  4.  He  is  the  spiritual 
presence  of  Christ  (ver.  18).  5.  He  instructs  in  the  things  of  Christ  (ver.  26). 
III.  As  enjoying  Divine  companionship  (vers.  20,  21).  Love  to  Christ  makes  the 
soul  the  residence  of  God.  Such  a  soul  He  enters,  not  as  a  passing  visitor,  but  a 
permanent  guest  (1  Cor.  iii.  16).  IV.  As  pakticipatino  in  a  Divine  peace  (ver.  27). 
Peace  with  our  own  conscience,  with  society  and  God.  Not  as  the  world  giveth. 
1.  As  to  quality.  The  world  gives  inferior  gifts,  Christ  gives  the  highest.  The 
world  gives  non-essential  gifts.  Men  can  do  without  the  best  of  the  world's  giftg» 
but  Christ's  is  indispensable.  2.  As  to  manner.  (1)  The  world  gives  selfishly, 
looking  for  something  in  return.  Christ  gives  from  infinite  disinterestedness. 
(2)  The  world  gives  limitedly.  It  has  neither  heart  nor  capacity  to  give  much. 
Christ  gives  unhmitedly.  (3)  The  world  gives  occasionally,  and  according  to  its 
moods.  Christ  gives  constantly.  (4)  The  world  gives  to  its  friends.  It  loves  its 
own.    Christ  gives  to  His  enemies.    (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Vers.  16.  I  will  pray  the  Father,  and  He  shall  give  yon  another  Comforter.— 
The  praying  Christ,  the  giving  Father,  and  the  abiding  Spirit: — The  "  and  "  shows 
QB  that  these  words  are  a  consequence  of  some  preceding  steps.  The  ladder  that 
has  its  summit  in  heaven  has  for  its  rungs,  first,  "believe";  second,  "love"; 
third, "  obey."  And  thus  the  context  carries  us  from  the  very  basis  of  the  Christian 
life  up  into  its  highest  reward.  And  there  is  another  very  striking  link.  There 
are,  if  I  may  so  say,  two  telephones  across  the  abyss  that  separates  the  ascended 
Christ  and  us.  One  is,  "  If  ye  ask  anything  in  My  name  I  will  do  it "  ;  the  other, 
**  If  ye  keep  My  commandments  I  will  ask."    Love  on  this  side  of  the  great  oleft 


640  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xit. 

Bets  love  on  the  other  side  of  it  in  motion  in  a  twofold  fashion.  If  we  ask,  He 
does ;  if  we  do,  He  asks.  I.  The  pba  ong  Chbist  and  the  givino  Patheb.  1.  '  I 
will  ask  and  He  wiU  give"  seems  a  strange  drop  from  the  lofty  claims  in  the  earlier 
verses.  The  voice  that  spake  the  perfect  revelation  of  God  lowers  its  tones  into 
petition.  Now  apparently  diverse  views  lying  so  close  together  cannot  have  seemed 
contradictory  to  the  utterer,  and  there  is  no  explanation  which  does  justice  to  these 
two  sides  of  Christ's  consciousness,  except  that  He  is  God  manifest  in  the  flesh, 
who  prays  in  His  Manhood  and  hears  prayer  in  His  Divinity.  The  bare  humanistio 
view  which  emphasizes  such  utterances  as  these  of  my  text  does  not  know  what  to 
do  with  the  other  ones.  2.  His  intercession  is  the  great  hope  of  the  Christian 
heart.  The  High  Priest  passes  within  the  veil,  bearing  in  His  hand  the  offering, 
and  by  reason  of  that  offering,  and  of  His  powerful  presence  before  the  mercy-seat, 
all  the  spiritual  gifts  which  redeem  and  regenerate  and  sanctify  humanity  are  for 
ever  coming  forth.  Note — (1)  Christ's  quiet  assumption  that  all  through  the  ages 
He  knows,  at  the  moment  of  their  being  done,  His  servants'  deeds.  (2)  He  puts 
the  Father's  act  in  pledge  to  us,  and  assures  us  that  His  prayer  brings  ever  its 
answer.  "Father!  I  will  that  they  whom  Thou  hast  given  Me  be  with  Me."  How 
far  beyond  the  warrantable  language  of  manl  And  how  impossible  for  a  fisher- 
man of  Bethsaida  to  imagine  that  strange  blending  of  submission  and  of  authority 
which  speaks  in  such  words.  (3)  That  which  puts  in  motion  Christ's  intercessory 
activity  is  the  obedience  of  a  Christian  man.  If  you  obey  He  will  pray,  and  the 
Father  will  send.  So  the  reward  of  imperfect  obedience  is  the  larger  measure 
given  to  us  of  that  Divine  Spirit  by  whose  indwelling  obedience  becomes  possible, 
and  self-surrender  a  joy  aud  a  power.  H.  The  abiding  gift.  1.  "  Comforter  " 
means  not  only  One  who  administers  sweet  whispers  of  consolation.  We  have  to 
look  not  merely  for  a  vague  influence,  but  a  Divine  Person  who  will  be  by  our  side 
on  condition  of  our  faith,  love,  and  obedience,  to  be  our  Strength  in  all  weakness, 
our  Peace  in  all  trouble,  our  Wisdom,  Guide,  Comforter  "and  Cherisher,  Bighteous- 
ness,  the  Victor  over  our  temptations,  and  the  Companion  and  Sweetener  of  our 
solitude?  The  metaphors  with  which  Scripture  represents  this  great  personal 
.  Influence  are  full  of  instruction  and  beauty.  He  comes  as  "  The  Fire,"  which 
melts,  warms,  cleanses,  quickens ;  as  the  "  rushing,  mighty  Wind,"  which  bears 
health  upon  its  wings,  and  sometimes  breathes  gently  as  an  infant's  breath,  and 
sometimes  sweeps  with  irresistible  power ;  as  the  "  Oil,"  gently  flowing,  lubricating, 
making  every  joint  supple,  nourishing ;  as  the  "  Water  of  Life,"  refreshing, 
vitalizing,  quickening  all  growth.  He  comes  fluttering  down  as  the  Dove  of  God, 
the  bird  of  peace  that  will  brood  upon  our  hearts.  He  is  the  Spirit  of  holiness, 
truth,  wisdom,  power,  love,  a  sound  mind,  sonship,  supplication,  <fec.  2.  And 
this  Strengthener  and  Advocate  is  to  replace  Christ  and  to  carry  on  His  work. 
"Another  Comforter."  All  that  that  handful  of  men  found  of  sweetness  and 
shelter  and  assured  guidance,  and  stay  for  their  weakness,  and  companionship  for 
their  solitude,  and  a  breast  on  which  to  rest  their  heads,  and  love  in  which  to  bathe 
their  hearts,  all  these  this  Divine  Spirit  will  be  to  each  of  us  if  we  wiU.  3.  This 
strong  continuation  of  Christ's  presence  will  be  a  permanent  companion.  He  was 
comforting  the  disciples  who  were  trembling  at  the  thought  of  His  departure. 
Here  is  the  abiding  Guest,  that  nothing  but  y  >ur  own  sin  will  ever  cast  out  from 
your  hearts.  4.  And  Christ  tells  us  how  this  great  Spirit  will  do  His  work.  He  la 
the  "  Spirit  of  Truth,"  not  as  if  He  brought  new  truth.  To  suppose  that  opens  the 
door  to  all  manner  of  fanaticism,  but  the  truth,  the  revelation  of  which  is  all 
summed  and  finished  in  the  person  and  work  of  Jesus  Christ,  is  the  weapon  by 
which  the  Divine  Spirit  works  all  His  conquests,  the  staff  on  which  He  makes  ua 
lean  and  be  strong.  IH.  The  blind  woeld.  There  is  a  tone  of  deep  sadness  in 
Christ's  words.  A  savage  stares  at  the  sunshine  and  sees  nothing.  And  worldly 
men,  who  are  bound  by  this  visible  diurnal  round,  lack  the  organ  that  enables  them 
to  see  that  Divine  Spirit  moving  round  about  them.  Whether  you  have  put  your 
eyes  out  bv  fleshly  lusts,  or  by  intellectual  self-suflSciency  and  conceit,  you  are  stone 
blind  to  all  the  best  realities  of  the  universe ;  aud  if  you  look  out  upon  the  history 
of  the  Church,  or  upon  the  present  condition  of  Christendom,  and  say,  "I  see  no 
Divine  Spirit  working  there  "  ;  well,  then,  the  only  thing  that  is  to  be  said  to  yoa 
is,  "  Go  to  an  oculist,  your  sight  is  bad.  Perhaps  there  is  solid  land,  as  some  of  us 
see  it,  where  you  see  only  mist."  IV.  The  becipient  disciples.  Observe  that  the 
order  of  clauses  is  reversed.  The  world  cannot  receive,  because  it  does  not  know. 
The  disciple  knows,  because  He  receives.  Possession  and  knowledge  reciprocally 
iuterchange  places,  and  may  be  regarded  as  cause  and  effect  of  one  another.    At 


CHAP,  xi?.]  ST.  JOHN.  HI 

4>ottom  they  are  one  and  the  same  thing.    Knowledge  is  possession,  and  possession 
is  the  only  knowledge.     •'  He  dwelleth  with  you  now,  and  He  shall  be  in  yon  " 
hereafter.     There  is  a  better  form  of  possession  opening  before  them,  which  came 
at  Pentecost,  and  has  lasted  ever  since.     {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)        The  gift  of  the 
Spirit  and  the  gift  of  the  Son  compared  (text  and  chap.  iii.  16) : — It  is  a  much 
overlooked,  but  nevertheless  true,  fact  that  the  Divine  love  is  as  much  displayed  in 
the  gift  of  the  Spirit  as  in  tbe  gift  of  the  Son.    I.  The  Spibit  is  as  intbinsicallt 
GKEAT  A8  THE   SoN.      The  Same  attributes,  prerogatives,  words  belong  to  both. 
n.  The  Spirit  is  as  actively  engaged  fob  the  benefit  of  the   wobld  as  the 
Son.     Did  He  not  strive  with  the  old  world  ?     Did  He  not  inspire  the  prophets, 
i&c.  ?    Has  there  ever  been  a  soul  regenerated  without  His  agency  ?    Has  there 
ever  been  a  conscience  that  He  has  not  touched  ?    In  every  solemn  thought  and 
expression  is  He  not  working?    HI.  The  Spirit  has  been  as  wickedly  treated  . 
BY  THE  WOBLD  AS  THE  SoN.   The  people  of  Judasa  alone  personally  ill-treated  Christ ; 
the  population  of  the  whole  world  "  do  always  resist  the  Spirit."    About  thirty- 
three  years  measured  the  period  of  the  Saviour's  personal  ill-treatment,  but  that 
of  the  Spirit  extends  over  well-nigh  twice  that  number  of  centuries.    IV.  The 
Spibit  is  as  necessaey  to  mankind  as  the  Son.      Two  things  are  necessary  to 
man's  salvation  :  deliverance  from  the  guilt,  and  from  the  power  of  sin.     Christ 
■was  necessary  for  the  first,  the  Spirit  for  the  second.    It  is  said  that  man  wants 
nothing  but  suflScient  evidence  and  the  free  use  of  his  faculties  to  believe.     1.  But 
there  are  circumstances  antagonistic  to  faith  which  need  to  be  removed.    There 
is — (1)  Moral  habit.     The  habits  contracted  by  most,  before  the  gospel  comes  fairly 
jmder  attention,  are  such  that  the  whole  tenor  of  its  truths  condemn,  and  when 
assailed  marshal  every  power  of  the  soul  to  their  defence.     (2)  Servile  fear.     The 
man  who  feels  that  he  is  hastening  to  insolvency  is  frequently  reluctant  to  go  into 
his  accounts.    Nothing  but  sheer  urgency  will  induce  him  to  open  his  ledger.    la 
there  not  something  similar  to  this  in  a  man's  soul  in  relation  to  the  Bible.     Often 
has  conscience  whispered  that  a  fearful  debt  has  been  contracted,  and  that  there 
is  nothing  to  pay,  and  the  Bible  which  confirms  that  is  shunned.      (3)  Social 
influence.     (4)  Satanic  agency.    "  The  god  of  this  world  blindeth  the  eyes  of  men." 
2.  All  this  being  true,  the  Spirit  is  necessary,  in  a  sense,  apart  from  truth,  and 
apart  from  His  dwelling  in  the  truth.    He  is  a  personal  power,  using  the  truth 
and  making  it  effective  in  the  minds  and  hearts  of  men.     (D.   Thomas,  D.D.) 
The  parting  promise  : — Among  the  many  sources  of  trouble  which  disquieted  the 
disciples  we  can  distinguish  four.    And  for  each  of  these  our  Lord  provides  an 
adequate  consolation.     1.  The  pang  of  separation  from  a  beloved  Master.     For 
this  His  consolation  is,  that  such  separation  shall  not  be  for  ever  (vers.  2,  3).    2. 
The  fear  lest,  in  proclaiming  their  message,  they  should  not  be  able  to  appeal  to 
those  "  mighty  signs  and  wonders  "  with  which  our  Lord  Himself  had  demonstrated 
the  Divine  origin  of  His  mission.    For  this  He  gives  them  the  assurance  that  they 
should  even  perform  greater  wonders  (ver.  12).     3.  That  they  should  not  have  their 
Divine  Master  to  fly  to  when  they  might  require  protection  and  provision.    The 
answer  to  this  was  that  our  Lord  would  secure  to  them  a  perpetual  access  to  God 
in  prayer  (ver.  13).     4.  The  painful  consciousness  that  they  should  no  longer  have 
the  wisdom  of  their  Master  to  guide  them  in  their  proclamation  of  the  gospel.    For 
this  our  Lord  provided  in  the  text.     Consider  this  blessing — I.  In  its  source  :  as  it 
arises  from  the  mediation  of  Christ  Himself.    "  I  will  pray  the  Father."    This  does 
not  mean  that  the  Father  is  unwilling  to  bestow,  but  that  in  the  order  of  the  eternal 
counsels  Christ  must  "  ascend  up  on  high  "  to  "  receive  gifts  for  men."    Large  and 
blessed  as  were  the  results  of  our  Lord's  personal  ministry,  yet  all  the  blessings 
which  attend  the  promulgation  of  the  gospel  spring  directly  from  the  outpouring  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  the  result  of  Christ's  intercession.    II.  In  its  bfficact  :  as  able  to 
impart  a  consolation  equal  to  that  of  Christ  Himself.    Large  and  dreary  must  have 
been  the  void  created  by  Christ's  departure.     But  He  would  not  go  away  until  He 
had  provided  *•  another  Comforter."     "  I  will  send  One  to  yon,  who  shall  achieve 
for  you  mightier,  more  abundant,  more  lasting  benefits.     I  will  send  that  blessed 
Spirit,  whose  office  shall  be  to  seal  and  to  bind  upon  your  souls  all  those  comforting 
promises  which  you  have  heard  from  Me ;  who  shall  recall  all  My  discourses  to  yon, 
and  enable  yon  to  pour  oat  your  prayers  to  God  by  reason  of  His  '  groanings  which 
cannot  be  ottered.'  "     III.  In  His  pabticulab office  of  spibitual  illumination  we 
are  to  have  "  the  Spirit  of  Truth  " — 1.  To  instruct  as  in  aU  points  of  doctrine. 
It  is  the  office  of  the  Spirit  to  take  of  the  things  of  Christ  and  to  show  them  to  the 
tool ;  to  reveal  the  mysteries  of  redemption.    Thus  we  see  that  thia  office  of  th« 


54i  THE   BIBLICAL  LLVSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

Spirit  must  b«  a  great  comfort  to  those  destitute  of  human  learning.  Having  One 
to  "  guide  into  all  truth,"  the  poor  and  the  wayfaring  have  the  assurance  that  the 
whole  mind  of  God  shall  be  made  plain  to  them,  as  much  as  to  the  greatest  genius 
that  ever  tenanted  the  soul  of  man.  2.  To  direct  us  in  all  the  practical  concerns  of 
life.  "  He  shall  teach  you  all  things."  IV.  In  its  exclusiveness  :  as  applying  to 
all  true  believers.  Christ  does  not  say,  "  Whom  the  Lord  will  not  give  " ;  but, 
"  Whom  the  world  cannot  receive."  Why  cannot  the  world  receive  Him  f 
"  Because  it  seeth  Him  not."  Why  does  not  the  world  see  the  Spirit  7  Is  it 
from  deficiency  of  evidence  ?  No,  but  because  they  will  not  see.  They  close  tha 
shutter,  and  complain  of  darkness.  Every  worldly  man  is  permitted  to  witness  th» 
daily  operations  of  God's  Spirit  in  the  world.  Let  him  look  abroad  and  see 
the  transforming  power  of  religion,  the  revivals  in  many  Christian  Churches,  the 
changed  habits  of  many  families,  and  of  many  souls,  brought  under  the  power  of 
God's  Spirit.  Seeth  it  not  1 — might  he  not  as  well  say  that  he  seeth  not  the  wind  ? 
He  sees  the  ocean  roused  into  tempest,  &c.  ;  will  he  tell  us  he  cannot  see  the  wind  ? 
V.  In  its  permanence.  He  is  not  a  stranger  to  visit  ;  He  is  not  a  traveller,  ta 
sojourn  for  a  season ;  but  He  is  a  friend,  to  abide  and  dwell.  (D.  Moore,  M.A.\ 
The  Paraclete : — The  etymological  meaning  of  the  word  is, "  One  called  to  be  beside 
another."  The  word  is  used  in  classical  Greek,  and  a  word  of  similar  etymology, 
from  which  our  word  "  advocate  "  is  derived,  is  used  in  classical  Latin  to  denote  a 
person  who  patronises  anotber  in  a  judicial  cause,  and  who  appears  in  support  of 
him.  It  was  the  custom,  before  the  ancient  tribunals,  for  the  parties  to  appear  in 
court,  attended  by  one  or  more  of  their  most  powerful  and  influential  friends,  who 
were  called  "  paracletes  " — the  Greek — or  "  advocates  " — the  Latin  term.  They 
were  not  advocates  in  our  sense  of  the  term — feed  counsel ;  they  were  persons  who, 
prompted  by  affection,  were  disposed  to  stand  by  their  friend ;  and  persons  in  whose 
Knowledge,  wisdom,  and  truth  the  individual  having  the  cause  had  confidence. 
These  paracletes,  or  advocates,  gave  their  friends — "  prospelates,"  or  "  clients,"  ao 
they  were  called — the  advantages  of  their  character  and  station  in  society,  and  th» 
aid  of  their  counsel.  They  stood  by  them  in  the  court,  giving  them  advice,  an'l 
speaking  in  their  behalf  when  it  was  necessary.  Jesus  had  been  the  Paraclete  of 
His  disciples  while  He  was  with  them.  He  had  made  their  cause  His  own.  H« 
had  taught  them  how  to  manage  their  cause  with  God.  He  had  taught  them  k: 
pray;  and  He  had  prayed  for  them.  He  had  taught  them  how  to  manage  thef 
cause  with  the  wicked  one ;  bidding  them  watch  and  pray,  lest  they  should  ent« 
into  temptation ;  and  He  had  prayed  for  them,  that  their  faith  should  not  fail 
When  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  attacked  them.  He  was  ever  ready  to  defend  them 
In  the  great  cause  which  was  at  once  His  and  theirs  He  was  their  great  helper.  He 
instructed  them  what  to  say,  and  how  to  act.  He  gave  them  miraculous  powers, 
and  taught  them  how  to  use  them.  Thus  He  had  been  their  patron — their  para- 
clete.  And  He  was  not  to  cease  to  be  so  ;  He  was,  in  His  Father's  house  of  many 
mansions,  "  ever  living  to  interpose  in  their  behalf  "  (1  John  ii.  1 ;  Heb.  vii.  25). 
But  He  was  to  cease  to  be  their  Paraclete  on  earth ;  and  therefore,  knowing  how 
much  they  needed  such  a  patron  and  adviser,  and  monitor  and  helper,  He  says,  "  I 
will  pray  to  the  Father,  and  He  will  send  you  another  Paraclete."  "  Instead  of 
losing,  you  are  to  gain  by  My  removal."  They  had,  in  becoming  His  disciples, 
identified  themselves  with  His  cause.  They  stood  pledged  to  establish  the  right 
which  their  Master's  principles  had  to  be  universally  embraced  and  submitted  to. 
And  all  the  resources  of  Judaism  and  Paganism,  all  the  subtility  of  philosophy,  all 
the  seductions  of  idolatry,  all  the  power  of  kingdoms  and  empires,  all  the  craft,  and 
activity,  and  energy  of  hell,  were  against  them.  And  what  were  they  ?  poor, 
unlearned,  obscure  men?  Truly,  they  needed  a  powerful  patron,  a  wise  adviser. 
And  such  a  paraclete  was  He  whom  the  Saviour  promises.  He  cannot  want  power, 
through  whose  plastic  influence  the  world  was  formed ;  He  cannot  want  wisdom, 
who  "  searches  all  things,  even  the  deep  things  of  God  " ;  and  we  know  how  He 
guided  them,  and  enabled  them  to  bring  to  a  triumphant  issue  their  mighty  litiga- 
tion.  He  filled  their  minds  with  the  pure  light  of  Divine  truth,  and  their  hearts 
with  the  holy  fire  of  Divine  love,  and  He  poured  grace  and  power  into  their  lipa ; 
and  when  brought  before  counsels  and  synagogues,  and  governors,  and  kings.  Ho 
gave  them  a  force  of  reason  and  a  power  of  eloquence  that  could  not  be  withstood. 
"They  spake  with  tongues,  as  He  gave  them  utterance,"  and  proclaimed  the 
mysteries  of  the  kingdom,  "  not  in  words  taught  by  human  wisdom,  but  in  words 
taught  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  (J.  Brown,  D.D.)  The  Paraclete : — It  means  one 
who  oaUs  us  to  his  side,  as  a  father  does  his  ohild  when  he  has  some  speoial  thinf 


CHAP.  xiT.]  ST.  JOHN.  643 

to  say.  {H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  The  Paraclete  : — I.  How  the  Spibit  of  God  is  thb 
Pabacuste.  1.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  to  be  to  us  all  that  Jesus  was  to  His  disciples. 
What  a  valiant  leader  is  to  an  army,  the  shepherd  to  the  sheep,  Jesus  Christ  was  to 
His  people.  As  the  Orientals  say  of  the  palm-tree,  that  every  fragment  of  it  is  of 
use,  and  there  is  scarcely  any  domestic  arrangement  into  which  the  palm-tree  in 
Bome  form  or  other  does  not  enter,  even  so  Jesus  Christ  is  good  for  everything  to 
His  people,  and  there  is  nothing  that  they  have  to  do  or  feel  or  know  but  Jesus 
Christ  enters  into  it.  What  would  that  little  company  have  been  without  their 
Lord  ?  Now,  all  that  Jesus  was,  the  Spirit  of  God  is  now.  If  there  be  any  power 
in  the  Church,  any  light  in  her  instruction,  life  in  her  ministry,  glory  gotten  to 
God,  good  wrought  among  men,  it  is  entirely  because  the  Holy  Spirit  is  still  with 
her.  And  we  shall  do  well  to  treat  the  Holy  Spirit  as  we  would  have  treated  Christ. 
Our  Lord's  disciples  told  Him  their  troubles ;  we  must  trust  the  Comforter  with 
ours.  Whenever  they  felt  baffled  by  the  adversary,  they  fell  back  upon  their 
Leader's  power ;  so  must  we  call  in  the  aid  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  When  they  needed 
guidance,  they  sought  direction  from  Jesus ;  we  also  must  seek  and  abide  by  the 
Spirit's  leadings.  When,  knowing  what  to  do,  they  felt  themselves  weak,  they  waited 
upon  their  Master  for  strength  ;  and  so  must  we  upon  the  Spirit  of  all  grace,  2. 
The  Holy  Spirit  comforts  by  His  presence  and  indwelling  (ver.  17).  3.  He  comforta 
us  by  His  teaching  (ver.  26).  We  can,  so  far  as  the  letter  goes,  learn  from  the 
Scriptures  the  words  of  Jesus  for  ourselves  ;  but  to  understand  them  is  the  gift  of 
the  Spirit  of  God.  What  comfort  is  there  equal  to  the  words  of  Jesus,  "  the  conso- 
lation of  Israel,"  when  they  are  really  understood  ?  4.  Through  the  Holy  Spirit  we 
obtain  peace  (ver.  27).  He  who  is  taught  of  God  naturally  enjoys  peace,  for  if  I  be 
taught  that  my  sins  were  laid  on  Jesus,  and  the  chastisement  of  my  peace  was  upon 
Him,  how  can  I  help  having  peace  ?  5.  The  Holy  Spirit,  according  to  chap.  xvi. 
13,  guides  us  into  all  truth,  which  is  more  than  teaching  us  all  truth.  There  are 
caverns  full  of  sparkling  stalactites.  Now,  it  is  a  good  thing,  when  you  are  travel- 
ling, to  be  taught  where  each  of  these  caverns  is — that  is  teaching  you  truth  ;  but 
it  is  a  better  thing  when  the  guide,  with  his  flaming  torch,  conducts  you  down  into 
the  great  subterranean  chambers,  while  ten  thousand  crystals,  like  stars,  vieing  in 
colour  with  the  rainbow,  flash  their  beams  upon  you.  So  the  Spirit  of  God  will 
convince  you  that  such  and  such  a  teaching  is  truth,  and  that  is  very  much  to 
know  ;  but  when  he  leads  you  into  it,  so  that  you  experimentally  know  it,  taste  it, 
and  feel  it,  oh,  then  you  are  admitted  to  the  innermost  cave  of  jewels,  where  "  the 
diamond  lights  up  the  secret  mine,"  A  great  many  Christians  never  get  into  the 
truth.  They  sit  on  the  outside  of  it,  but  do  not  enter  in.  6.  The  Spirit  (chap.  xvi. 
14)  glorifies  Christ  by  "taking  of  the  things  of  Christ  and  showing  them  to  us." 
Could  infinite  wisdom  select  a  sweeter  topic  for  a  disconsolate  heart  than  "  the 
things  of  Christ "  ?  You  may  bring  me  the  things  of  Moses  and  of  David,  of 
Solomon  and  of  Daniel,  but  wTiat  are  they  to  me  compared  with  the  things 
of  Christ  ?  II.  The  natukk  of  the  Holy  Spikit's  comfoet.  1.  He  never  dia- 
Booiates  His  comfort  from  character  (see  ver.  15).  The  Spirit  of  God  never 
comforts  a  man  in  his  sin.  See  what  sin  it  is  that  makes  you  sorrow — obey,  and  ye 
ehall  be  comforted.  2.  He  does  not  aim  at  working  mere  comfort  by  itself  and 
alone.  He  does  not  comfort  us  as  a  fond  mother  who  does  not  teach  the  child  any- 
thing, nor  cleanse  its  body  or  purify  its  heart  in  order  to  comfort  it,  but  whO' 
neglects  these  to  please  the  little  one;  but  the  Holy  Spirit  never  acts  so  unwisely. 
When  a  man  is  feeling  pain  he  is  very  desirous  that  the  surgeon  should  administer 
Bome  drug  which  will  stop  the  unpleasant  sensation  immediately ;  yet  the  surgeon 
refuses  to  do  anything  of  the  kind,  but  endeavours  to  remove  the  cause  of  the  evil, 
which  lies  far  lower  than  the  pain.  Do  not  expect  to  get  comfort  by  merely  running 
to  sweet  texts  or  listening  to  pleasing  preachers,  but  expect  to  find  comfort  through 
the  holy,  reproving,  humbling,  strengthening,  sanctifying  processes  which  are  the 
operation  of  the  Divine  Paraclete.  3.  His  comfort  is  not  founded  upon  conceal- 
ment. Some  have  obtained  consolation  by  conveniently  forgetting  troublesome 
truth.  Now,  the  Holy  Spirit  lays  the  whole  truth  open  before  us ;  therefore  our  con- 
solation is  not  of  fools,  but  of  wise  men ;  peace,  which  age  and  experience  will  not 
invalidate,  but  which  both  these  will  deepen,  causing  it  to  grow  with  our  growth 
and  strengthen  with  our  strength.  4.  It  is  a  comfort  always  in  connection  with 
Jesus.  5.  It  is  comfort  which  is  always  available.  It  does  not  depend  upon  health, 
strength,  wealth,  position,  or  friendship  ;  the  Holy  Spirit  comforts  us  through  the 
truth,  and  the  truth  does  not  change  ;  through  Jesus,  and  He  is  "  yea  and  amen  " ; 
therefore  our  oomf (\rts  may  be  quite  as  lively  when  we  are  dying  as  when  we  are  in> 


644  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  mt. 

vigorons  health,  when  the  purse  is  empty,  and  the  erase  of  oil  low,  as  when  all 
worldly  store  and  cheer  abound  to  us.  lU.  Some  obsebvatioms  upon  the  wholb 
SUBJECT.  1.  To  the  believer — (1)  Honour  the  Spirit  of  God  as  you  would  honour 
Jesus  Christ  if  He  were  present.  2.  Never  impute  the  vain  imaginings  of  your 
fancy  to  Him.  8.  In  all  your  learning  ask  Him  to  teach  you,  in  all  your  suffering 
ask  Him  to  sustain  you,  in  all  your  teaching  ask  Him  to  give  you  the  right  words, 
in  all  your  witness-bearing  ask  Him  to  give  you  constant  wisdom,  and  in  all  service 
depend  apon  Him  for  His  help.  Believingly  reckon  upon  the  Holy  Spirit.  4.  To 
the  unconverted — il  thou  art  ever  to  be  saved,  the  Holy  Spirit  is  essential  to  thee. 
Except  thou  be  born  again  from  above,  thou  canst  never  see  the  kingdom  of  God, 
much  less  enter  it.  (C,  H.  Spurgeon.)  Another  Comforter : — I.  "  Thebe  is  a 
CoMFOBTEB."  1.  So  our  high  festival  of  the  Holy  Ghost  comes  round,  and  meets 
the  wants  which  the  year  has  been  accumulating.  Just  as  Good  Friday  came  and 
met  another  year's  guilt,  Whit-Sunday  comes  to  meet  another  year's  grief.  Some 
have  wept  alone,  and  have  had  no  earthly  solace.  Some  have  had  comforters ;  but 
their  well-intentioned  comfortings  mocked  you.  Or,  the  human  comforting  was 
very  precious  and  very  true,  and  you  know  what  that  word  "  comforter  "  means  ; 
but  here  is  that  which  exceeds  it  all,  as  the  fountain  exceeds  one  of  its  own  smallest 
drops — "a  Comforter."  2.  Christ  said,  "Another  Comforter."  Who  is  it?  The 
Father  ?  Yes ;  for  He  is  "  the  God  of  all  comfort."  The  Son  ?  Yes ;  "  I  will  not 
leave  you  comfortless."  Then,  a  Trinity  of  Comforters.  Is  that  the  way  we  travel 
to  "  God  is  love  "  ?  Through  a  Comforter  I  ask  a  Comforter  to  send  a  Comforter. 
Or  more  truly,  two  Comforters,  of  themselves,  send  a  Comforter.  You  are  a  deep 
mourner.  But  see  how  you  are  encircled.  And  can  any  sorrow  outreach  that 
comforting  ?  II.  The  mode  of  His  coMiNa.  1.  It  is  the  comforting  of  a  Spirit. 
Therefore  He  mingles  with  our  spirit.  He  does  not  need  that  there  should  pass 
any  actual  words.  Every  one  who  has  ever  passed  through  very  deep  sorrow  will 
appreciate  this.  There  are  times  when  all  language  is  poor  and  rude.  How  often 
have  we  longed  that  our  minds  could  throw  themselves  into  another's  mind  with- 
out speaking.  The  Holy  Ghost  does  that.  2.  And  what  power  there  is  in  that 
thought,  that  He  is  the  Holy  Ghost !  It  wants  holiness  to  deal  with  a  wounded 
mind.  Nothing  but  what  is  very  holy  ought  ever  to  come  near  sorrow.  3.  Still, 
the  Spirit  nses  instruments,  and  almost  always  the  Word.  It  is  not  always  a  pro- 
mise. Sometimes  it  is  a  doctrine,  whose  grandeur  fills,  and  raises,  and  assures  the 
Spirit.  Sometimes  it  is  a  command,  and  the  comfort  is  the  sense  of  duty.  The 
Comforter  never  forgets  that  He  is  the  Sanctifier,  and  the  Sanctifier  never  forgets 
that  He  is  the  Comforter.  Therefore,  if  you  would  be  comforted,  obey  the  impulse 
of  the  Spirit,  and  go  and  be  much  with  your  Bible,  and  be  jealous  that  the  first  thing 
you  seek  is  holiness.  4.  He  does  not  make  you  forget,  but  He  draws  happiness  out 
of  the  unhappiness ;  He  makes  the  subject  of  your  tears  the  element  of  your  smile; 
He  does  not  take  away  the  cloud,  but  He  makes  a  rainbow  of  the  shower ;  the  pain 
does  not  go,  bat  gradually  the  pain  has  so  much  of  Christ  in  it  that  yon  scarcely  wish 
to  part  with  it.  6.  He  always  displays  Christ — makes  you  find  what  you  want,  not 
in  man,  bat  in  Christ.  If  the  thought  which  is  presented  to  your  mind  does  not 
draw  yon  nearer  to  Christ — if  yoa  are  not  led  to  do  something  for  Christ's  sake — it 
is  not  the  true  Comforter  who  has  been  speaking  to  you.  Jesus  is  the  balm  of  life, 
and  the  comfort  of  the  Spirit  is  the  revealing  of  Christ.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.) 
Another  Comforter : — The  Divine  Spirit  is — I.  A  holy  Comfobtee.  There  can  be 
no  comfort  apart  from  goodness.  "  There  is  no  peace,  saith  my  God,  to  the  wicked." 
His  name  indicates  His  work.  By  Him  the  soul  is  regenerated.  Christians  are 
"  elect  through  sanctification  of  the  Spirit,  unto  obedience."  II.  A»  instbuctivb 
Comfoeteb.  By  His  inspiration  all  Holy  Scripture  was  given  for  our  learning. 
Not  by  methods  opposed  to  or  ignoring  our  intellectual  nature ;  not  by  mere  excite- 
ment  of  the  emotions ;  but  by  conveying  truth  to  the  mind,  and  enabling  us  to 
tiuderstand  and  feel  it,  the  Holy  Spirit  acts  as  "  another  Comforter."  By  His  help 
we  believe,  and  then,  "  being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with  God,"  and  enjoy 
that  "peace  which  passeth  all  understanding."  III.  A  pebsuasive  Comfobteb. 
By  revealing  Jesus  to  the  soul  the  Holy  Spirit  produces  that  love  which  is  the 
strongest  motive  to  holiness,  and  which  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law.  "  The  love  of 
God  is  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghost  which  is  given  unto  us."  And 
"  the  love  of  Christ  constraineth  us  to  live  not  to  ourselves,  but  to  Him  who  died 
for  us  and  rose  again."  The  Comforter,  as  a  faithful  guide,  in  places  of  difficulty 
takes  the  traveller  by  the  hand,  and  in  addition  to  words  of  counsel,  restrains  him 
when  he  would  step  into  danger,  and  kindly  compels  him  to  proceed  when  throu^jjh 


CHAP.  xiT.]  ST.  JOHN.  54S 

fear  or  thoughtlessness  he  hesitates  and  may  be  overtaken  by  storm  or  darkness. 
IV.  A  STRENGTHENING  CoMFOETEB.  He  "  hclpcth  our  infirmities."  He  comes  to 
our  succour  when  we  are  too  heavily  burdened,  and  lightens  the  weight  or  gives  ua 
strength  to  bear  it.  We  are  "  strengthened  with  might  by  His  Spirit  in  the  inner 
man."  The  result  of  such  strengthening  is  Christ  "dwelling  in  our  hearts  by 
faith,"  the  being  "  rooted  and  grounded  in  love,"  "  knowing  the  love  of  Christ 
which  passeth  knowledge,"  and  being  "filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God,"  And 
what  consolation  can  surpass  that  which  must  result  frqm  such  strengthening  I 
Especially  are  we  taught  to  expect  this  help  in  prayer  (Kom.  viiL  26).  He 
helps  us  to  obtain  comfort  by  teaching  os  what  to  pray  for,  by  enabling  us 
to  pray  aright,  by  overcoming  the  doubts  which  hinder  us  in  the  exercise,  by 
creating  within  us  earnest  longings  after  God,  by  exciting  in  us  desires  which 
we  may  be  unable  to  express  in  words,  but  which  bring  down  the  refreshing 
showers  upon  the  mown  grass,  and  cause  us  to  say,  "  I  love  the  Lord,  because  He 
hath  heard  my  voice  and  my  supplication. "  V.  An  assuking  Comforter.  What 
consolation  can  be  greater  than  to  know  that  Jesus  is  our  Saviour  and  that  we  are 
His  friends,  and  that  through  Him  we  can  look  upward  and  with  confidence  say, 
"  My  God !  my  Father  1  "  (Rom.  viii.  14-16).  VI.  A  hope-inspiring  Comforter. 
We  "  abound  in  hope  through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost "  (Eom.  viii.  17-19). 
Practical  lessons :  1.  Let  us  regard  the  Holy  Spirit,  not  with  dread,  but  with  loving 
confidence.  2.  Let  our  actions  respond  to  His  methods  of  help.  Does  He  comforfe 
by  teaching  ?  let  us  be  diligent  learners  ;  by  persuasion  ?  let  us  yield  to  His 
influence;  by  guidiug?  let  us  follow;  by  promoting  our  holiness?  let  us  strive 
against  sin  ;  by  helping  us  to  know  our  high  vocation?  let  us  "give  diligence  to  the 
full  assurance  of  hope  unto  the  end."  3.  Let  all  be  encouraged  to  seek  His  help, 
for  "If  ye,  being  evil,"  &c.  {Newman  Hall,  LL.B.)  Another  Comforter: — I. 
The  Being  spoken  of.  1.  Spiritual  (ver.  17).  2.  Personal.  Not  a  mere  influence 
or  energy,  as  according  to  the  Moaarchians,  Patripassians,  Unitarians,  but  a  Person 
as  truly  as  Christ  was.  That  Christ  taught  this  is  appirent  from — (1)  The  use  of 
the  personal  pronoun  (ver.  26  ;  chap.  xv.  26).  (2)  The  names  given  Him.  3.  Divine. 
Christ  could  not  be  represented  by  or  commit  the  interests  of  His  Church  to  a 
creature.  4.  Distinct,  as  against  Sabellians  and  Swedenborgians.  "Another." 
II.  The  relation  in  which  He  stands — 1.  To  the  Father.  (1)  Ontologically  :  one 
with  Him,  equal  in  being,  wisdom,  power,  and  glory,  and  yet  proceeding  from  Him 
(chap.  XV.  26).  (2)  Historically.  He  is  sent  (ver.  26)  and  given  (vei-.  16)  by  the 
Father.  2.  To  the  Son.  (1)  Essentially  the  Son's  as  the  Father's  equal,  He  is 
nevertheless — (2)  Historically  exhibited  as  sent  forth  by  the  Father  at  the  Son's 
intercession  3.  To  the  Truth.  Spirit  of  Truth  may  signify  the  Spirit  whose 
essence  is  the  Truth,  whose  operations  concern  the  Truth,  whose  office  it  is  to 
testify  of  Him  who  is  the  Truth  (chap.  xv.  26),  and  to  guide  into  all  the  Truth 
(chap.  xvi.  13).  4.  To  the  disciples.  A  presence — (1)  Inward ;  not  with  and  by, 
but  in  them  (1  Cor.  iii.  16).  (2)  Permanent ;  not  temporary,  as  Christ's  had  been. 
(3)  Helpful  (Matt.  x.  20).  5.  To  the  world  (ver.  17;  chap.  xvi.  8).  III.  Thb 
conditions  of  receiving  Him.  1.  Loving  obedience  to  Christ  (ver.  15).  2.  Believing 
recognition  of  the  Spirit  (ver.  17).  The  world  had  closed  its  eyes  and  steeled  its 
heart  against  Him.  Learn — 1.  That  all  a  saint  obtains  on  earth  he  owes  to  the 
Saviour's  intercession  (Rom.  viii.  34 ;  Heb.  vii.  25).  2.  That  the  highest  gift  a 
human  spirit  can  receive  is  the  Holy  Ghost  as  a  Divine  Being,  an  ali-suflicient 
Helper,  a  heavenly  Teacher,  an  unchanging  Friend.  3.  That  the  world's  un- 
belief of  the  Spirit  is  no  proof  that  He  does  not  exist.  (T.  Whitelaic,  D.D.) 
Another  Comforter : — I.  The  work  of  Christ  as  implied  in  the  allusion  to  Him- 
self. Christ  is  a  Comforter.  1.  In  the  needs  He  came  to  meet.  To  have  had  no 
mission  for  the  sorrowful  would  have  been  to  neglect  the  most  evident  of  the  world's 
wants.  2.  In  the  predictions  concerning  Him — "He  hath  sent  Me  to  heal  the 
broken-hearted,"  &c.  3.  In  the  nature  of  His  words  and  works.  To  alleviate  pain, 
to  console  bereavement,  to  meet  doubt,  to  lighten  death,  He  set  Himself  with  all 
the  absorbing  interest  of  a  master  passion.  II.  The  Work  of  the  Spirit  resembleb 
THAT  OF  Christ.  The  life  of  Jesus  is  an  index  of  the  work  of  "  the  Comforter." 
1.  What  we  read  of  Jesus  doing  as  a  consoler,  we  read  also  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
doing.  2.  What  men  saw  Jesus  doing  in  Judaea,  we  may  see  and  feel  is  being 
done  by  the  Spirit  now.  As  Christ  led,  inspired,  soothed,  and  elevated  human 
hearts,  so  the  Spirit  will  ever  do.  III.  The  work  of  the  Spqut  transcends  the 
bimilar  work  of  Christ.  1.  In  its  permanence.  Jesus  Christ  "  went  away."  His 
■tay  was  only  for  "a  little  while."  But  the  Spirit  abides  "for  ever."  2.  In  iia 
VOL.  n.  85 


548  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  dt, 

nniversality.  Jesus  was  only  known  to  the  comparative  few  who  were  aroand  Him. 
But  on  every  shore,  and  under  every  sky,  the  Spirit  dwells  with  men.  3.  In  its 
nearness.  Those  who  came  nearest  to  Christ  but  kissed  His  feet  or  lay  in  His 
bosom.  This  is  distant  in  comparison  with  the  Spirit's  indwelling.  {V.  R.Thomas.) 
The  Comforter : — I.  Oub  need  of  a  Comforteb.  We  Hve  in  a  world  of  sorrow  ana 
suffering.  II.  Ib  thebe  a  bemedy?  God  is  love ;  and  it  is  impossible  that  Ha 
should  intend  His  creatures  to  sink  under  such  a  burden.  1.  Shall  we  seek  for  it 
in  the  influences  of  nature  ?  2.  Shall  we  seek  for  it  in  our  fellow-men  t  Many 
seem  to  think  so.  3.  It  may  be  said,  indeed,  that  there  is  no  need,  even  if  we  feel 
that  all  these  earthly  stays  and  solaces  are  insufficient,  to  think  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
as  the  Comforter.  We  have  "  consolation  in  Christ,"  and  we  need  no  other.  Wa 
need  a  present  Comforter  to  make  them  efficacious.  III.  How,  then,  does  thb 
Holt  Ghost  comfoet  us  ?  When  we  first  approach  the  consideration  of  the  work 
of  the  Comforter,  we  meet  with  certain  views  of  that  work  which  seem  to  be  the 
reverse  of  comforting.  How  can  He  who  convinces  us  of  sin,  of  righteousness, 
and  of  judgment,  be  a  Comforter  to  ns  who  are  sinners  ?  The  friend  who  is  found 
to  be  the  truest  and  most  trustworthy  comforter  is  not  he  who  whispers  merely 
pleasant  things  in  our  ears ;  but  he  who  tells  us  the  truth,  who,  by  telling  us  the  truth, 
prepares  us  to  understand  what  is  wrong  with  us  and  to  seek  for  a  remedy.  And 
how  does  He  administer  to  the  necessities  which  He  thus  makes  apparent?  1.  By 
revealing  the  fulness  and  sufficiency  of  Christ  for  all  our  spiritual  wants.  We  say 
the  work  of  comfort  must  begin  here ;  for  it  is  plain  that,  unless  there  be  a  supply 
for  those  deepest  wants  of  our  nature,  we  can  have  no  real  comfort  or  happiness. 
How,  for  instance,  can  a  man  be  happy,  or  what  kind  of  comfort  can  he  enjoy, 
while  he  is  laden  with  the  burden  of  unforgiven  sin?  2.  By  giving  grace  and 
strength  in  temptation.  3.  And  as  it  is  in  our  spiritual  trials,  so  also  He  comforts 
us  in  the  ordinary  troubles  of  life.  {W.R.Clark.)  Another  Comforter: — Christ 
Himself  was  a  Comforter,  a  true  Barnabas,  a  brother  born  for  adversity.  His 
disciples  found  Him  such.  I.  The  Spirit  is  an  imdwellino  Comforter.  "  Dwelleth 
with  .  .  .  shall  be  in  you."  Most  of  our  comforts  are  external,  outside  of  us. 
Our  souls  are  empty,  weak,  unsatisfied ;  and  we  need  to  look  outward  for  strength 
and  consolation.  Even  Christ's  bodily  presence  was  without,  and  sometimes  He 
and  His  disciples  were  separated  from  each  other.  But  the  Holy  Ghost  is  in  you ;  He 
goes  where  you  go ;  He  dwells  with  you  ;  He  makes  your  bodies  temples  of  the  Holy 
Ghost ;  He  makes  your  souls  wells  of  living  water ;  He  is  the  glory  in  the  midst,  in 
the  heart,  of  each  of  you.  II.  The  Spirit  is  an  abiding  Comforter  (ver.  16).  Change 
is  written  upon  all  things  here.  Health  and  strength  fail,  friends  die,  riches  fly 
away.  Even  Christ,  as  to  His  bodily  presence,  was  only  a  sojourner  on  earth.  Bat 
the  Spirit  abides ;  He  will  never  leave  the  soul  of  which  He  has  taken  saving  pos- 
session. HI.  The  Spirit  is  an  unwobldlt  Comforter  (ver.  17).  He  is  spirit,  and 
BO  the  world  cannot  see  Him,  cannot  handle  Him.  Even  if  He  could  become  visible 
and  tangible,  the  world  would  neither  know  Him  nor  receive  Him,  The  world  can 
have  no  sympathy  with  Him,  for  He  does  not  speak  of  earthly  things ;  it  is  not 
with  them  that  He  seeks  to  comfort  sorrowful,  longing  souls.  If  He  spoke  o£ 
earthly  things.  He  could  not  be  a  Comforter  to  God's  poor,  humbled,  broken, 
wearied  ones.  The  true  believer  has  left  aU  for  Christ,  has  sold  all  to  get  the 
treasure,  and  now  nothing  but  Christ  can  satisfy  him.  And  so  the  Holy  Ghost, 
when  He  wishes  to  comfort,  speaks  of  Christ  (chap.  zv.  26  ;  xvi.  14).  IV.  Tha 
Spirit  is  an  effectual  Teacher  (ver.  26).  Christ  was  a  Teacher;  He  was  always 
ftt  work,  in  public  and  private.  {John  Milne.)  The  Comforter : — I.  The  office  o» 
I  the  Sfibit.  This  term  signifies  to  call  to  one's  self.  A  person  is  in  distress  on 
account  of  ignorance,  and  he  calls  to  him  a  learned  person ;  a  person  ignorant  in 
the  law,  who  wants  to  appear  in  a  court  of  justice,  calls  a  person  learned  in  the 
law  ;  a  person  who  is  in  distress  on  account  of  any  disease  calls  a  physician.  So 
the  Holy  Spirit.  In  the  season  of  distress  He  comes  to  us  at  our  call.  The  Holy 
Spirit  performs  this  office — 1.  By  the  attestation  of  pardon.  2.  By  the  production 
of  a  new  and  holy  nature.  3.  By  maturing  the  Christian  character.  4.  By  the 
assistance  He  affords  in  devotional  exercises.  5.  By  fortifying  the  mind  against 
the  fear  of  death.  II.  The  period  of  His  continuance.  His  continued  residence 
— 1.  Constitutes  the  great  distinction  and  difference  between  the  Church  and  the 
world  (ver.  17).  2.  Gives  efficiency  and  success  to  the  means  of  grace.  8.  Is  an 
assurance  of  the  ultimate  triumph  of  the  Church.  III.  The  mode  of  His  attain- 
ma  this  off)CB.  We  are  indebted  to  Jesus  Christ  for  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
because — 1.  It  is  the  reward  of  His  sufferings.    2.  The  reward  of  His  intercession. 


«HA».  xnr.]  ST.  JOHN.  647 

Therefore — 3.  We  have  a  pledge  and  an  assurance  that  Christ  will  pray  the  Father. 
(T.  Lessey.)        Comfort  by  the  support  of  the  indwelling  Spirit: — If  you  thoroughly 
exhaust  a  vessel  of  the  air  it  contains,  the  pressure  of  the  air  outside  will  break 
that  vessel  into  perhaps  millions  of  pieces,  because  there  is  not  a  sufficiency  of  air 
within  to  resist  and  counteract  the  weight  of  the  atmosphere  from  without.     A 
person  who  is  exercised  by  severe  affliction,  and  who  does  not  experience  the  Divine 
comforts  and  supports  in  his  soul,  resembles  the  exhausted  receiver  above  described ; 
and  it  is  no  wonder  if  he  yields,  and  is  broken  to  shivers,  under  the  weight  of  God's 
providential  hand.    But  affliction  to  one  who  is  sustained  by  the  inward  presence 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  resembles  the  aerial  pressure  on  the  outer  surface  of  an 
unexhausted  vessel.     There  is  that  within  which  supports  it  and  preserves  it  from 
being  destroyed  by  the  incumbent  pressure  from  without.     (T.  H.  Leary,  D.C.L.) 
The  two  paracletes  •• — Their  mutual  and  distinctive  relation  to  the  work  of  redemp- 
tion, to  the  life  of  believers,  and  to  the  service  of  the  Church.     I.  What  does  the 
WOBD  "  PAKACLETE  "  MEAN  ?    Nearly  all  the  ancient  interpreters  render  it  comforter  or 
consoler.    This  accords  with  one  use  of  it  and  its  related  words  in  both  the  Old 
Testament  and  the  New.    It  does  not  cover  the  whole  ground,  since  the  Holy  Ghost 
not  only  comforts,  but  does  a  great  deal  more  than  that.    In  some  cases  the  word 
is  equivalent  to  master,  teacher,  interpreter.    In  other  cases  it  means  a  pleader  or 
advocate — one  engaged  to  take  up  a  cause  and  to  carry  it  through.    Hence  the 
word  comes  to  mean — one  by  whose  grace  and  love  the  entire  case  and  cause  of 
men  are  undertaken  :  who  will  soothe,  comfort,  advocate,  plead,  teach,  interpret — 
yea,  who  will  stand  by  us  and  render  any  needed  aid  whatever  1    For  this  reason 
the  word  •*  advocate "  is,  like  the  word  "  comforter,"  too  restricted.    We  want  a 
word  of  wider  significance  than  either.    The  word  helper  is  the  best  that  we  can 
find.     1.  A  helper — a  large  and  beautiful  word,  which,  in  the  fulness  of  its  meaning 
as  here  used,  nought  but  the  experience  of  God's  love  can  unfold  to  us.   2.  A  Divine 
Helper.    And  we  have  two  Divine  Helpers,  both  working  together  to  make  the  help 
complete.     But  who  are  they  who  have  causes  in  hand  that  need  such  help? 
Manifold  and  complex  is  our  need.    We  want  help  in  every  form.    As  sinners,  we 
want  such  help  as  One  can  give  who  has  a  right  to  say,  "  Thy  sins  are  forgiven 
thee."    As  penitents,  we  want  One  who  can  grant  us  access  to  the  Father.     As 
learners,  we  want  One  who  can  take  of  the  things  of  God  and  show  them  to  us.    As 
suppliants,  we  want  One  who  can  receive  and  answer  our  requests.     As  believers, 
we  want  One  who  can  lead,  sustain,  and  inspire.    As  confessors  of  Christ  and 
ambassadors  for  Him,  we  need  One  who  can  convict  men  of  sin,  and  who  can 
speed  our  words  directly  to  their  hearts.    Strong,  constant,  varied  help  do  we  want. 
II.  Then  let  us  look  at  oub  two  Helpers  and  see  how  they  complete  each  other's 
WORK.     1.  One  Helper  is  in  heaven,  is  a  link  joining  on  beaver^  to  earth  ;  the  other 
Helper  is  on  earth,  as  a  link  uniting  earth  to  heaven.     Hence  one  Helper  remains 
for  us  above  ;  the  other  remains  in  us  below.     2.  The  help  of  the  Son  is  by  the 
appointment  of  the  Father ;  the  help  of  the  Spirit  is  through  the  ministration  of 
the  Son.     3.  By  the  help  of  the  one  Helper  we  have  a  great  sacrifice  for  sin ;  by 
the  work  of  the  other  Helper  men  are  convicted  of  sin.    4.  Hence  another  and  not 
less  striking  correspondence  appears.    The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  presents  Himself  to 
us  as  the  object  of  faith  ;  the  Holy  Ghost,  working  within  us,  enters  into  the  region 
of  an  inward  experience,  and  enables  us  by  the  power  of  a  spiritual  intuition  to 
verify  what  we  believe.    6.  Further :  In  every  detail  of  Christian  truth  and  life 
these  two  Divine  Helpers  supplement  and  complete  each  other's  work.     Christ 
reveals  the  Father  to  us  ;  the  Holy  Ghost  creates  the  spirit  of  adoption  in  us,  so 
that  we  cry,  Abba,  Father.    Christ  gives  us,  when  we  beHeve,  the  right  of  being 
sons  of  God ;  the  Spirit  bears  witness  with  our  spirit  that  such  we  are.     Christ  is 
in  Himself  the  truth  ;  the  Holy  Ghost  gives  us  the  spirit  of  wisdom  and  revelation 
in  the  knowledge  of  Him.     Christ  is  the  object  in  whom  we  rejoice,  but  the  joy 
itself  is  imparted  by  the  Holy  Ghost.     6.  One  Helper  intercedes  with  the  Father ; 
the  other  Helper  intercedes  m  the  children.    In  one  case  the  scriptural  expressions 
are,  "  We  have  an  Advocate  with  the  Father  " ;  •'  He  ever  liveth  to  make  interces- 
sion for  us."    In  the  other  case,  "The  Spirit  itself  maketh  intercession  for  us 
with  groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered."     7.  But  we  must  not  omit  to  give  dis- 
tinctness to  the  thought  of  the  advocacy  of  our  two  Helpers.     The  Lord  Jesus 
•Christ  is  the  Advocate,  Pleader,  and  Defender  of  our  cause  above  ;  the  Holy  Ghost 
ia  the  Advocate,  Pleader,  and  Defender  of  our  cause  below.     Christ  above,  that  sin 
may  not  bar  us  from  the  throne  ;  the  Spirit  below,  that  the  world  may  not  put  us 
io  shame.     8.  One  Helper  is  graciously  preparing  a  place  for  us  ;  the  other  Helpur 


648  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  CRi:e.  xir, 

is  engaged  in  preparing  us  for  the  place.  III.  In  view  of  the  combined  work  of 
these  two  Divine  Helpers,  we  can  see  the  completj<:ness  of  redemption's  plan. 
Had  our  Bedeemer  wrought  alone,  His  work  had  been  unappreciated  by  man  ;  but 
let  another  Helper  come,  creating  men  anew,  convicting,  regenerating,  enlightening, 
educating,  and  training,  then  we  see  the  Divine  completeness  of  the  Redeemer's 
mighty  work,  and  learn  how  surely  the  Eedeemer  will  see  of  the  travail  of  His  soul 
and  be  satisfied.  On  recognizing  and  laying  hold  of  both  these  Helpers  will  depend 
our  completeness  as  Christians.  Our  own  piety  and  power  in  Christ  aie  a  prime 
condition  of  power /or  Christ.  The  degree  to  which  the  Spirit  of  God  works  by  us 
Burely  depends  on  the  measure  in  which  He  works  in  us.  So  also  the  eflBciency  of 
Church  life  depends  on  realizing  and  utilizing  this  double  help.  Not  merely  has 
soundness  in  faith  to  be  guarded,  but  vigour  of  life  has  to  be  carefully  watched. 
On  this  double  help  depends  the  efiBcieney  of  private  members.  It  is  also,  and 
only,  in  the  full  use  of  this  double  help  that  the  Christian  ambassador  is  completely 
equipped.  While  we  hold  up  Christ  as  the  Light  of  the  world,  let  us  also  equally 
extol  the  Holy  Ghost  as  the  Power  of  the  Church.  (C  Clemance,  D.D.)  Even, 
the  Spirit  of  Truth. — The  spirit  of  truth: — I.  The  need  op  the  Spjcp.it  or 
Tboth.  It  was  by  a  lie  that  evil  gained  entrance  into  the  world.  Satan  is  both  a  liar 
and  a  murderer.  .  .  .  Evil  first  introduced  by  means  of  a  lie  has  been  continually 

Eromulgated  through  the  same  instrumentality.  Alas  !  the  dominion  of  falsehood 
as  been  almost  universally  established ! — false  notions  of  God,  of  ourselves,  of 
happiness ;  false  estimates  of  good  and  evil ;  false  dealings  in  the  intercourse  of 
life.  Who  is  not  conscious  of  these  and  other  forms  of  it.  It  is  amongst  the  most 
melancholy  proofs  of  our  fallen  estate,  that  often,  with  children,  the  earliest  exer- 
cise  of  the  gift  of  speech  is  an  endeavour  at  deceiving  their  parents.  And  as  we 
grow  up,  it  cannot  be  denied,  that  a  rigid  and  unvarying  adherence  to  truth  is  the 
most  difficult  of  our  duties.  Hence  the  suspicion  and  mistrust  between  man  and 
man.  We  admit,  indeed,  that  a  liar  is  held  in  general  abhorrence.  Men  have 
naturally  an  admiration  of  courage  in  whatever  way  displayed ;  and  therefore  they 
despise  a  liar  as  they  do  the  poltroon.  And  over  and  above  the  cowardice  which  is 
manifested  by  a  lie,  thereistheinjury  whichis  done  to  society.  Therefore,  it  may  be- 
little more  than  a  consciousness  that  its  own  permanence  is  identified  with  adher- 
ence to  truth,  which  induces  society  to  be  so  vehement  in  its  rebuke  of  a  lie.  But 
even  if  the  contempt  in  which  a  liar  is  held  might  be  referred  to  the  very  highest 
principles,  whatever  indignation  at  falsehood  is  excited,  it  exists  in  a  degree  which 
proves  this  indignation  but  httle  efficacious  in  destroying  its  empire.  There  is  not 
the  land  where  false  principles  are  not  wielding  an  influence  which  should  belong 
only  to  true.  There  is  not  a  family  within  whose  circle  there  is  no  admiration  for 
false  theories  in  regard  of  duty  and  intercbt.  There  is  not  a  heart  so  thoroughly 
hallowed  into  a  sanctuary  for  truth  that  it  is  always  closed  against  the  intruston 
of  false  opinions  and  false  expectations.  The  whole  creation  groaneth  for  the 
establishment  of  truth.  H.  How  in  His  besidencb  with  the  Chukch  the  Holt  Ghost 
EA8  verified  THIS  TITLE.  1.  It  is  curious  and  interesting  to  observe  how  truth  of 
every  kind  has  advanced  hand  in  hand  with  religion.  Not,  indeed,  that  it  was  the 
office  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  instruct  the  world  in  natural  philosophy.  He  came  to 
nnfold  redemption,  and  so  to  strengthen  the  human  understanding,  that  it  might  be 
able  to  bear  the  vast  truths  of  the  Mediatorial  work.  But,  nevertheless,  it  did  come 
to  pass — that  the  understanding,  so  strengthened,  found  itself  strengthened  also  to 
investigate  creation.  The  Christian  era  has  been  distinguished  by  a  rapid  advance 
madt  in  every  branch  of  science ;  by  the  emancipation  of  mind  from  a  thousand 
trammels ;  by  the  discovery  of  truths  which  seemed  to  He  beyond  the  scope  of 
human  intelligence.  In  the  dark  ages  when  Christianity  was  almost  buried  beneath 
superstition,  ignorance  of  every  kind  oppressed  the  earth ;  but  when  better  days 
dawned ;  science  revived  and  the  arts  again  flourished.  And  besides  this,  there  is 
the  same  strict  alliance  between  aU  kinds  of  truth  as  between  all  kinds  of  falsehood. 
And  it  ought  not  therefore  to  excite  surprise  that  science  and  Christianity  should 
have  marched  side  by  side.  The  "  rushing  mighty  wind,"  which  swept  supersti- 
tion  before  it,  swept  also  much  of  the  cloud  which  had  rested  on  natural  things.  In 
clearing  the  moral  firmament,  that  the  "  Sun  of  Bighteousness"  might  be  discoveied, 
it  took  the  mist  from  the  material  heavens.  2.  But,  at  the  same  time,  the  great 
business  on  which  the  Holy  Ghost  came  was  the  instructing  the  world  in  the 
mysteries  of  redemption — (1)  The  Holy  Ghost  was  "the  Spirit  of  truth"  to  the 
apostles.  We  do  not  know  that  it  is  more  amazing  to  hear  so  soon  as  the  Spirit 
had  descended,  the  twelve  speaking  fluently  aU  the  languages  of  the  earth,  than  tha 


OHir.  xn}  ST.  JOHN.  549 

preacher  exponnding  to  the  multitude  the  blessed  gospel  of  Christ.  He  made  good 
this  cha'acter  by  enabling  them  to  preach  the  truth  :  and  also  by  enabling  them  to 
write  the  truth.  We  know  too  well  the  treachery  of  the  memoiy,  and  might 
reasonably  say,  that  where  the  writing  had  been  so  long  deferred,  the  narrative 
would  be  imperfect.  But  this  is  our  security — the  fact  that  it  was  "  the 
Spirit  of  Truth "  which  guided  the  evangelists.  (2)  If  the  Spirit  were  thus  "  the 
Spirit  of  Truth"  in  regard  of  apostles,  is  He  not  stiU  such  in  regard  of 
every  real  Christian?  There  is  naturally  gross  darkness  on  the  mind,  and 
tlie  most  gifted  of  our  race  is  unable  to  discern  things  so  long  as  he  is 
left  to  his  unassisted  powers.  Mental  as  well  as  moral  power  has  been  put  out  of 
joint  through  apostacy ;  the  affections  strongly  biassed  towards  evil  exert  a  dis- 
astrous power  over  the  will,  and  the  will  does  the  same  with  the  understanding. 
And  then  the  understanding  will  often  reject  the  clearest  evidence  and  fail  to  com- 
prehend the  simplest  truth.  It  is  the  office  of  this  Divine  person  to  rectify  the 
disorder  of  the  moral  and  mental  constitution,  and  thus  to  communicate  that  sort 
of  inner  light  in  which  alone  can  be  discerned  the  great  truths  of  religion.  And 
when  a  man  has  once  submitted  himself  to  the  teaching  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  "  the 
Spirit  of  Truth,"  guides  him  into  truth,  and  leads  him  from  one  stage  to  another  of 
knowledge,  showing  him,  successively,  the  mysteries  of  redemption,  and  never 
allowing  him  to  open  the  Bible  without  finding  fresh  matter  for  thought  and 
for  thankfulness.  There  remains  much,  very  much,  for  this  Spirit  to  teach.  But 
observe,  our  Lord  says — "  He  shall  abide  with  you  for  ever."  But  we  are  now  only 
in  the  infancy  of  being.  No  marvel  then  if  we  master  only  the  rudiments  of  truth. 
And  if  this  Spirit  is  to  abide  with  us  "  for  ever,"  why  may  we  not  expect  the  com- 
pletion of  what  is  thus  commenced  ?  He  has  all  Eternity  to  teach  in.  (H.  Melvill, 
B.D.)  The  Spirit  of  Truth : — The  Holy  Ghost  is  the  living,  personal.  Divine 
unity  of  complete  revelation,  and,  as  such,  the  Spirit  of  Truth.  He  is  the  Spirit  of 
Truth  inasmuch  as  He  makes  objective  truth  subjective  in  believers,  in  order  to  a 
knowledge  of  the  truth.  (J.  P.  Lange,  D.D.)  The  function  of  the  Spirit  of  Truth 
in  relation  to  revealed  truth : — When  a  telescope  is  directed  to  some  distant  land- 
scape, it  enables  us  to  see  what  we  could  not  otherwise  have  seen  ;  but  it  does  not. 
enable  us  to  see  anything  which  has  not  a  real  existence  in  the  prospect  before  us. 
The  natural  eye  saw  nothing  but  blue  land  stretching  along  the  distant  horizon. 
By  the  aid  of  the  glass,  there  bursts  upon  it  a  channing  variety  of  fields,  and 
woods,  and  spires,  and  villages.  And  so  of  the  Spirit.  He  does  not  add  a  single 
truth  or  character  to  the  book  of  Revelation.  He  enables  the  spiritual  man  to  see 
what  the  natural  man  cannot  see  ;  but  the  spectacle  which  he  lays  open  is  uniform 
and  immutable.  It  is  the  Word  of  God  which  is  ever  the  same ;  and  he  whom  the 
Spirit  of  Truth  has  enabled  to  look  to  the  Bible  with  a  clear  and  affecting  discern- 
ment, sees  no  phantom  passing  before  him  ;  but  amid  all  the  visionary  extravagance 
with  which  he  is  charged,  can  for  every  article  of  his  faith,  and  every  duty  of  his 
practice,  makes  his  triumphal  appeal  to  the  law  and  to  the  testimony.  (T.  Chal- 
mers, D.D.)  Willingness  to  know  the  truth  a  condition  of  the  reception  of  the 
truth : — A  celebrated  French  beauty  was  smitten  with  small-pox,  and  as  she  became 
convalescent,  her  friends,  fearing  the  consequences,  would  not  tell  her  of  her  disfigure- 
ment. But  one  day,  not  getting  an  answer  to  her  questions,  she  called  for  a  mirror, 
and  when  she  saw  the  calamitous  fact  that  her  beauty  was  gone,  in  a  fit  of  passion, 
smashed  the  glass.  It  had  told  her  the  truth  about  herself.  So  the  Spirit  of  Truth 
tells  us  about  ourselves ;  and  some  people,  rather  than  believe  His  witness,  deny 
His  existence.  Whom  the  world  cannot  receive. — The  world — that  is,  worldly  men, 
minds  full  of  worldliness — cannot  receive,  cannot  see  or  know  the  Spirit,  because  He 
is  wholly  heavenly.  As  a  mirror  which  is  unclean  cannot  reflect  clearly  the  image 
which  is  before  it,  so  the  heart  that  is  impure,  and  which  clings  to  the  things 
of  earth,  cannot  see  with  the  eye  of  faith  the  Spirit  of  Truth,  and  so  cannot  receive 
Him.  Worldliness  receives  Him  not — (1)  Because  it  does  not  and  cannot  see  Him 
intellectually,  which  is  the  only  mode  by  which  it  is  accustomed  to  perceive 
anything  that  is  not  corporeal.  (2)  Because  it  does  not  see  Him  corporeally ;  for 
Buch  a  temper  of  mind  receives  only  what  it  sees :  sight  and  the  other  senses  are 
the  instruments  of  reception,  not  faith;  and  hence,  since  He  cannot  be  apprehended 
by  the  senses,  such  men  did  not  receive  Him,  and  cannot  love  Him,  for  the 
knowledge  which  is  here  spoken  of  includes  love.  {W.  Denton,  M.A.)  But  y» 
know  Him. — The  saint  and  the  Spirit : — The  Holy  Spirit,  although  the  most  active, 
potent,  and  real  worker  in  the  world,  is  not  discerned  by  the  mass  of  mankind,  who 
are  affected  only  by  what  they  see,  or  hear,  or  feeL    The  vital  distinction  between 


S50  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cmr.  nr, 

the  man  of  God  and  the  man  of  the  world  is  this :  the  man  of  God  knows  the  Holy 
Spirit,  for  He  is  with  him  and  dwelleth  in  him  ;  but  the  man  of  the  world  knows  not 
the  Holy  Ghost.  I.  The  Holy  Spieit  is  known  to  belibvebs  thbouoh  His  opera- 
tions IN  them  and  upon  them.  1.  We  have  seen  the  operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
in  the  Church  at  large — (1)  It  was  the  Holy  Spirit  who  at  the  very  first  formed  the 
Church  ;  who  called  out  the  chosen  ones,  quickened  them,  made  them  living  stones 
fit  to  be  builded  together  for  a  habitation  of  God  through  the  Spirit ;  who  binds 
these  living  stones  together,  for  all  Christian  unity  comes  from  Him  as  the  Spirit 
of  peace,  the  Holy  Dove  proceeding  from  the  Father.  (2)  The  indwelling  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  in  the  Church  is  as  manifest  to  many  of  us  as  any  other  great  fact  can 
possibly  be.  Even  when  we  have  d  lubted  whether  we  ourselves  possessed  the 
Spirit,  we  have  been  charmed  to  see  his  work  in  others.  We  have  seen  conversions 
which  nothing  but  Omnipotence  could  have  wrought ;  we  have  seen  graces  exempli- 
fied which  unaided  human  nature  could  not  have  produced.  2.  The  wurks  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  within  a  regenerate  man  find  an  illustration  in  the  work  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  upon  the  person  of  our  Lord,  our  Covenant  Head  and  Representative.  (1) 
Christ  was  not  born  at  Bethlehem  without  the  Spirit  of  God,  neither  is  He  born  in 
our  hearts.  (2)  Although  Christ  was  baptized  by  man  with  water.  He  was  also  bajj- 
tized  with  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  it  is  only  in  the  power  of  His  Divine  anointing  that 
we  can  have  power  to  minister  in  the  Lord's  house.  (3)  Then  the  power  by  which 
Christ  wrought  miracles,  and  preached,  is  ascribed  to  the  Holy  Ghost.  •'  The  Spirit 
of  the  Lord  God  is  upon  me,"  &c.  Did  the  Master  work  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit 
of  God,  and  shall  not  the  servants  do  so  ?  (4)  The  resurrection  of  Christ  is  ascribed 
to  the  Holy  Ghost.  You  are  promised  that  the  same  power  which  '•  raised  up  Christ 
from  the  dead  shall  also  quicken  your  mortal  bodies."  3.  If  we  know  the  Spirit  of 
God  at  all,  we  shall  know  Him  as  having  convinced  us  of  sin.  No  one  ever  came  to 
Christ  until  he  felt  his  need  of  Him.  4.  If  you  know  the  Holy  Spirit,  you  will  also 
know  Him  as  the  great  revealer  of  Christ.  5.  Since  that,  have  we  not  often  known 
the  Spirit  as  our  helper  in  prayer  ?  6.  Then,  when  we  rose  from  our  knees,  we 
opened  the  Scriptures,  the  Spirit  of  Truth  acted  as  interpreter.  He  wrote  the  book, 
and  therefore  He  understands  it  meaning.  7.  You  know  not  the  Spirit  unless  you 
have  often  recognized  Him  as  the  great  calmer  and  quieter  of  His  people's  minda 
when  under  distractions.  8.  More  especially  is  the  Spirit  known  to  believers 
as  their  sanctifier.  II.  Thet  know  Him  by  His  pebsonal  indwelling  in  theib 
BOULS.  The  Holy  Spirit  gives  us  His  operations  and  His  influences  for  which  we 
should  be  very  grateful,  but  the  greatest  gift  is  Himself,  which  "  dwelleth  with  you 
and  shall  be  in  you."  This  is — 1.  Wondrously  condescending ;  2.  Singularly 
effective.  There  is  no  way  of  doing  work  well,  except  doing  it  yourself ;  and  when 
the  Master  comes  and  gives  personal  attendance,  it  is  sure  to  be  done.  3.  Delight- 
fully encouraging,  "  If  God  actually  dwells  in  me,  then  what  may  I  not  expect?  " 
4.  Potently  sanctifying.  If  God  dwell  in  us,  let  us  not  defile  these  bodies.  When 
Ignatius  stood  before  the  judges,  they  said,  "  You  are  called  the  God-bearer, 
Theophorus  ;  what  mean  you  by  this  ?  "  He  said,  "  God  dwells  in  me."  When  the 
persecutor  looked  at  him  and  said  he  blasphemed,  he  replied  that  the  Holy  Spirit 
dwelt  in  him.  Ah  1  but  Ignatius  proved  it.  If  you  and  I  dare  to  say  God  dwells  in 
us,  we  must  prove  it  too ;  perhaps  not  by  a  cruel  death,  but  by  what  is  far  more 
difficult — a  holy  life.  HI.  We  shall  know  Him  betteb  soon.  We  shall  be  more 
instructed ;  and  the  instructed  disciple  knows  the  Master  better  than  he  who  is  in 
the  ABC  class.  We  shall  be  more  fully  sanctified,  and  the  more  pure  we 
become,  the  more  clearly  shall  we  see  the  great  Purifier.  I  do  not  know  what  we 
may  be  even  here.  We  become  warped  and  crippled  by  our  small  conceptions  of  the 
possible  in  grace.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  He  dwelleth  with  you,  and  shall  be  in  you. 
— The  office  of  the  Spirit : — I.  The  assdbancb  of  a  neaeer  belation  to  the  Divinb 
Being  conveyed  by  this  pbomisb.  The  indwelling  of  the  Spirit  is  declared  to 
bo  a  mere  metaphor,  as  when  we  say  of  a  philosopher,  there  is  in  him  the  soul  o£ 
science ;  or  of  a  poet,  that  he  has  the  spirit  of  song.  The  disciples  at  this  time 
needed  comfort,  they  were  about  to  lose  the  support  of  their  Master's  personal  pre- 
Beuce.  What  mockery  to  have  been  told  that  they  should  be  so  inspirited  with  truth 
63  to  compensate  them  abundantly  for  all  their  loss.  A  Uteral  indwelling,  then, 
being  contended  for,  notice  some  of  the  included  blessings.  1.  It  is  a  standing  pledge 
of  the  Divine  presence  and  protection.  The  Divine  Spirit  dwelling  in  us  is  God 
Himself  coming  back  to  that  temple.  He  had  dwelt  in  it  once  before ;  but  thig  once 
living  temple  lost  its  purity,  and  in  that  same  hour  lost  the  presence  of  God.  The 
rebuilding  of  this  temple,  the  preparatory  step  for  bringing  back  God  to  Hia  forsaken 


«HAP.  xiT.]  ST.  JOHN.  651 

sanctuary,  was  the  awful  mystery  of  the  Incarnation.  By  this  one  act  the  human 
nature  became  an  honoured  and  noble  thing.  Through  the  power  of  the  Spirit  it 
had  enshrined  Godhead.  The  indwelling  of  the  Spirit  is  an  abiding  pledge  of 
restored  and  continuing  confidence  between  God  and  man.  2.  It  is  the  vital  prin- 
ciple of  union  betwixt  Christ  and  His  people.  Our  being  made  one  in  Christ  is  one 
of  the  great  junction  facts  of  the  Gospel  system.  It  connects  the  sinner  with  his 
hope,  the  elect  with  the  covenant,  and  both'  originates  and  effects  that  vital  relation 
to  God  which  brings  the  faithful  within  the  reach  of  the  mediatorial  designs 
and  purposes.  The  Spirit  initiates  that  union,  for  "  by  one  Spirit  we  are  all  bap- 
tized into  one  body."  He  assures  us  of  the  union  remaining  unbroken,  "  Thereby 
we  know  that  Christ  abide th  in  us  by  the  Spirit  which  He  hath  given  us"  (Bom.  viii. 
11).  "  He  that  is  joined  unto  the  Lord  is  one  spirit."  II.  The  pebmanent  iNFiiUBNCR 

PEOMISED  AS  IT  BEARS   UPON  OUR  HAPPINESS  AND  ADVANCEMENT   IN  THE   CHRISTIAN  LIFE. 

1.  It  assures  to  us  a  constant  supply  of  enlightening  and  directing  influences.  "  He  will 
guide  you  into  all  truth."  He  enlarges  the  range  of  our  spiritual  knowledge,  and  re- 
veals, as  if  by  a  new  spiritual  sense,  the  great  mystery  of  godliness.  2.  It  influences 
the  moral  affections  also.  This  imparted  life  makes  the  heart  to  burn,  while  it  opens 
the  understanding.  3.  It  gives  to  all  our  services  a  fihal  and  loving  character — 
"  For  ye  have  not  received  the  spirit  of  bondage,"  &c.  There  is  a  service  which  is 
not  happy.  It  may  be  sincere,  and  earnest,  and  costly,  and  self-denying;  but 
it  is  the  service  not  of  a  son,  but  of  a  bondsman.  The  Spirit  in  us  changes  constraint 
into  cheerfulness  and  duty  into  happiness,  and  the  restless  activities  of  a  self -devised 
worship  into  a  calm  repose  and  a  commanded  and  accepted  sacrifice.  (D.  Moore,  M.  A.) 
The  Spirit  with  you  and  in  you  i — I.  A  man  may  have  the  Divine  Spirit  with  Him, 
BUT  NOT  IN  HIM.  The  Divine  Spirit  was  with  the  disciples  in  the  person  of  Christ. 
Every  man  has  the  Spirit  with  him.  1.  In  the  operations  of  nature.  2.  In  the 
revelations  of  the  Bible.  3.  In  the  events  of  history.  4.  In  the  lives  of  all  good 
men.  II.  It  is  a  great  privileqe  fob  a  man  to  have  the  Spirit  op  God  with  him. 
We  have  one  who  is  ready  to — 1.  Guide  ;  2.  Protect ;  3.  Strengthen  ;  4.  Perfect  us. 
III.  It  is  a  greater  privilege  for  a  man  to  have  the  Divine  Spirit  in  him.  Christ 
had  unfolded  to  His  disciples  an  infinite  system  of  truth,  but  it  lay  cold  and  dead 
in  their  memories.  He  deposited  precious  seed  in  the  soil ;  but  the  soil  lacked  the 
warmth  and  sunshine  that  the  Spirit  of  God  alone  could  give.  Compare  the 
difference  between  the  disciples  before  and  after  Pentecost.  When  the  Spirit  of 
God  is  in  you  you  have  spiritual — 1.  Life.  2.  Satisfaction.  3.  Power.  (D.  ThamaSf 
D.D.)  The  indwelling  of  the  Spirit : — God  is  said  to  dwell  in  heaven;  among  the 
children  of  men  ;  in  Zion  ;  among  His  people  ;  in  behevers.  The  Spirit  is  said  to 
dwell  in  His  Church  which  is  thus  a  temple  of  God,  and  in  believers  individually, 
who  are  severally  His  temple.  It  follows,  then,  that  where  the  Spirit  dwells  His 
presence  is  indicated  by  certain  specific  effects.  I.  Knowledge.  This  is  one  of  the 
chief  ends  for  which  He  was  promised.  This  knowledge  includes  correct  intellectual 
convictions  and  spiritual  discernment.  To  this  are  due  orthodoxy,  love  of  truth 
and  adherence  to  it  under  all  circumstances.  To  this  source,  also,  we  are  indebted 
for  the  unity  as  well  as  the  preservation  of  the  faith.  This  is  a  ground  of  convic- 
tion beyond  the  reach  of  scepticism,  and  unassailable  by  infidelity.  II.  Holiness  in 
all  its  forms.    1.  Faith,  confidence  in  God,  in  His  word,  promises,  favours,  &o. 

2.  Love— (1)  To  God.    (2)  To  Christ.    (3)  To  the  brotherhood.     (4)  To  all  men. 

3.  Temperance.  4.  Meekness.  5.  Long  suffering.  UI.  Hope,  jot,  akv  peace. 
The  consolations  of  the  Spirit  which  sustain  the  soul  under  all  sorrow ;  whether 
from  conviction  of  sin  or  from  affliction.  IV.  Activity  in  resisting  sin  and  in 
DOING  GOOD.  He  is  the  source  not  only  of  inward  spiritual  life,  but  of  outward  acts 
of  devotion  and  obedience  to  God.  V.  Guidance.  1.  By  the  Word.  2.  By  inward 
operation  on  the  mind,  guiding  its  thoughts,  shaping  its  conclusions  and  exciting 
right  feelings  ;  not  by  impulse  or  any  magic  methods.  Duties  flowing  from  this 
doctrine — 1.  To  cherish  the  conviction  that  we  in  a  special  sense  belong  to  God. 
2.  To  reverence  and  obey  the  admonitions  of  the  indwelling  Spirit.  3.  To  preserve 
car  soul  and  body  pure  as  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  4.  A  grateful  sense  of 
this  unspeakable  blessing  and  dignity.     (C.  Hodge,  D.D.)        God  in  us: — I.  At.t. 

THE  CONDITIONS  OF  THE  DIVINE  LIFE  IN  MAN  BASE  THEMSELVES  ULTIMATELY  ON  THB 
NECES8ABY  AND  BTEBNAL  RELATIONS  OF  THE  EVER-BLESSED  GODBEAD,  OF  THB  TBOnTT  HT 

UNiTT.  The  gradualnesB  of  God's  revelation  of  Himself  enables  as  to  trace  oat 
something  of  this  mystery.  1.  For  many  generations  the  revelation  of  the  ever- 
lasting Father  covered  the  canvas,  and  ^^hat  form  of  awful  majesty  was  shrouded 
everywhere  in  olonds  and  darkness.  The  utterance  was,  "  I  am  the  Almighty  God; 


552  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSIRATOR.  [chap.  nv. 

walk  before  Me,  and  be  thou  perfect."  2.  To  this  succeeded  the  revelation  of  th« 
co-eternal  Son.  At  first,  wrapped  up  in  the  types  and  figures  of  the  old  law  :  then 
atrnggling  like  the  sun  through  the  mists  of  the  morning,  as  by  the  chant  of  Psalma, 
and  the  voice  of  prophecy,  the  ever-brighteniag  form  was  declared  to  the  waiting 
Boul  of  humanity  ;  until  the  fulness  of  the  time  was  come,  and  the  eternal  Son 
stood  incarnate  upon  the  earth.  Humanity  had  now  reached  altogether  a  new 
stage ;  God  was  manifest  in  the  flesh  ;  yet  still  God  was  external  to  man.  The 
brightness  of  the  uncreated  glory  shone  before  his  eyes,  but  his  eyes  were  not 
quickened  to  receive  it.  3.  One  mighty  farther  step  was  yet  to  be  reached,  and  it 
is  with  the  promise  of  this  that  the  Lord  here  upholds  their  hearts.  The  Paraclete 
"  shall  be  in  you."  The  external  revelation  was  to  be  replaced  by  the  internal. 
Accordingly,  when  the  coming  of  the  Holy  Ghost  was  perfectly  accomplished,  all 
additions  to  the  external  revelation  ceased.  Miracles  were  but  visible  attestations 
of  the  outward  kingdom  passing  into  the  inward,  and  one  by  one  they  expired  as 
the  inward  kingdom  was  established.  Even  the  external  revelation  of  the  heavenly 
mysteries  soon  ceased.  The  canon  was  closed.  II.  Fbom  this  follows  thb 
PECULiAB  CHARACTBB  OF  ouE  PEOBATioN.  For  though  the  Spirit  of  God  works  as  a 
most  free  agent,  quickening  whom  He  will ;  yet  does  He  work  on  humanity  accord* 
ing  to  the  law  under  which  God  has  created  it ;  not  destroying  its  free  agency,  but, 
in  the  mystery  of  man's  freedom,  working  with  his  spirit,  and  not  by  external  force, 
overpowering  its  proper  action.  The  energy  of  the  Spirit's  working  is  enlarged  or 
restrained  as  man  yields  himself  to  it,  or  resists  it.  In  the  first  preaching  of  the 
gospel  this  great  cQstinction  of  the  new  dispensation  was  emphatically  declared. 
*'  Eepent,  and  be  converted,  that  your  sins  may  be  blotted  out,  '  that  the  times  of 
refreshing  may  come,  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and  He  shall  send  Jesus.'  " 
This  is — 1.  A  promise  to  the  whole  Church.  The  stirring  of  the  indwelling  power 
was  openly  manifested,  and  through  all  times  since  the  same  law  may  be  traced  as 
pervading  the  Church's  history.  It  does  not  set  before  us  one  equally  prolific  age, 
but  times  of  utter  coldness  and  weariness  alternating  with  blessed  seasons  of 
refreshing.  Ease,  success,  quietness,  has  often  bred  a  deadly  lethargy  in  the 
Church,  and  the  Spirit  seems  to  have  left  her  ;  but  when  dang6r,  or  persecution,  has 
brought  her  back  to  repentance,  at  once  the  Spirit  stirred  within  her,  and  the  times 
of  refreshing  were  restored.  This  has  been,  all  along  its  history,  the  distinctive 
criterion  of  the  Church.  No  dead  empire  has  ever  lived  again ;  no  exhausted 
Bobool  of  philosophy  has  ever  revived  ;  no  sect  has  ever  recovered  again  its  early 
strength  after  falling  into  decrepitude.  The  Church  of  Christ  alone  has  thus 
renewed  her  strength,  and  mounted  up  from  her  decay  with  wings  as  eagles, 
because  in  her  only  is  this  hidden  presence  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  therefore 
for  her  only  these  times  of  refreshing  are  possible.  2.  The  law  of  the  life  of 
separate  souls.  With  what  energy  does  it  awake  when  the  heart  turns  really  to  God. 
Who  has  not  known  hearts,  which  seemed  dead,  the  mere  slaves  of  selfishness, 
burnt  out, — like  exhausted  volcanoes  buried  in  their  ashy  scoriae, — which  have 
suddenly  revived,  under  the  breathing  of  the  Spirit,  and  put  forth  again,  like  the 
earth  in  the  blessed  spring-time,  the  manifested  glories  of  an  irrepressible  life  ? 
III.  Fbom  this  great  mystebt  there  follow  some  practical  consequences.  1.  Aa 
this  is  the  characteristic  of  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit,  how  do  they  lose  the 
glory  and  the  blessedness  of  life  who  do  not  know  it  in  its  fulness?  Wbat  earthly 
joy  can  be  compared  with  these  Divine  refreshings  f  How  different  a  life  is  thia 
from  the  cold,  doubting,  questioning,  colourless  life  which  the  greater  number  of 
those  who  call  themselves  Christians  are  leading.  What  know  they,  alas  !  in  life 
or  in  death,  of  this  word  of  promise,  "  He  shall  be  in  you  ?  "  2.  This  indwelling  of 
God  must,  with  all  its  unspeakable  blessedness,  be  accompanied  by  correlative 
perils.  So  the  word  of  God  distinctly  teaches  us  when  it  speaks  of  sin  against  the 
Holy  Ghost  as  ^larked  with  such  a  peculiar  mahgnity  of  charity,  and  leading  to  so 
terrible  and  hopeless  an  end.  (1)  For  other  sins  are  committed  against  God  aa 
external  to  the  soul,  these  are  committed  against  Him  within  as.  (2)  But  beyond 
this.  He  who  did  not  believe  in  the  Son  of  Man,  great  as  was  his  guilt,  might 
nnder  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  be  won  to  penitence ;  but  he  who  blasphemea 
that  Holy  Spirit,  on  whose  presence  within  us  depends  the  faculty  of  seeing, 
destroys  in  his  soul  the  very  power  of  vision  itself.  He  can  never  see  the  truth ;  he 
can  never  be  won  to  repentance,  and  so  he  hath  never  forgiveness,  neither  in  thia 
life,  nor  in  tbat  which  is  to  come.  (3)  Again,  the  progress  of  this  deadly  sin  is 
from  its  peculiar  character  pre-eminently  insidious.  Every  external  act  of  wicked- 
ness has  of  necessity  about  it  some  note  of  warning.    But  the  separate  aotings  ol 


•HA».  HT.]  8T.  JOHN.  653 

these  sins  against  the  Holy  Spirit  are  so  inward  and  secret,  that  men  may  pass 
through  the  whole  series  without  any  external  sign  awakening  their  alarm.  (4) 
The  end  of  such  a  course,  and  the  secret  history  of  that  spiritual  decay,  may 
sometimes  be  read  in  those  terrible  cases  of  what  seem  to  be  the  sudden  falls  into 
gross  iniquity  of  those  who  have  long  stood  upright.  The  evil  has,  we  may  be  sure, 
been  long  festering  within.  There  may,  perhaps,  be  no  very  marked  outward 
change  in  the  conduct.  It  is  but  that  they  are  colder  than  they  were  in  all  the 
religious  life  :  that  is,  Ood  the  Holy  Ghost  has  left  them.  Then  some  sudden 
gust  of  temptation  falls  suddenly  upon  them,  and  their  utter  failure  under 
it  reveals  to  light  and  day  the  fearful  secret.  Conclusion  :  With  such  capacities  of 
ruin  involved  in  the  very  blessedness  of  our  regenerate  life,  surely  the  lesson  of 
lessons  is  for  us  the  need  of  perpetual  watchfulness :  of  guarding  jealously  that 
secret  indwelling  of  God  within  us  which  is  our  glory,  but  which  we  oan  make  oar 
destruction.     (Bp.  S.  Wilberf&rce.) 

Vers.  18,  19.  I  will  not  leave  you  comfortless,  I  will  come  to  you. — Not  left 
comfortless: — The  word  "comfortless"  means  "bereft."  We  have  adopted  the 
Greek  word,  and  have  gradually  limited  it  to  the  severest  kind  of  bereavement- 
orphanhood.  But  the  promise,  starting  from  one  kind  of  bereavement,  enlarges 
itself,  and  takes  in  all  who  from  any  cause  want  comfort.  God  does  not  say  that 
you  shall  never  be  comfortless,  but  on  the  contrary.  He  implies  that  yoa  shall  be 
60.  Nobody,  however  saintly,  could  say  he  was  never  comfortless,  but  he  can  say, 
"  I  was  not  left  comfortless."  And  the  length  of  the  comfortless  period  depends 
upon  the  faith  we  have  in  Christ's  coming  to  us.  I.  Let  us  confine  our  view  to 
one  kind  of  sorrow — Bereavement.  This  has  in  it — 1.  Change.  One  you  loved, 
and  with  whom  you  were  almost  hourly  in  converse,  has  passed  away.  Everything 
is  changed ;  nothing  looks  to  us  as  it  used  to  look  in  the  sunshine,  which  seems  as 
if  it  never  would  come  back  again.  It  is  wonderful  how  one  face  gone,  one  voice 
BUent,  alters  the  whole  world.  2.  Separation.  Then  a  gulf  opens,  which, 
however  persons  may  talk  about  it,  is  then  very  wide.  The  grave  is  a  wall  of 
adamant  to  you — they  may  be  conscious  of  no  distance,  but  to  you,  oh,  how  very 
far  off!  3.  Loneliness.  No  wonder  that  the  silence  is  oppressive.  No  matter 
how  many  you  may  have  around  you,  or  how  kind,  you  are  thrown  back  into  your 
own  thoughts  which  circle  about  one,  and  that  one  is  gone,  and  it  is  a  perfect 
solitude.  4.  Fear:  a  painful  apprehension  of  what  the  future  is  going  to  be. 
"  How  shall  I  live  on  ?  What  shall  I  do  without  that  love,  that  counsel  ?  "  IL  Fob 

THESE    FOUB    WRETCHEDNESSES,    ChRIBT     IS     THK     ONLT    ANTIDOTE — "I    will    COme    tO 

you."  And  mark,  it  is  His  presence,  not  His  work.  His  Gross,  His  final  Advent, 
but  His  living  presence  now.  1.  With  Him  there  is  no  shadow  of  a  turning.  It 
is  the  same  voice  which  faith  hears,  and  the  same  face  which  faith  sees  now,  which 
you  heard  and  saw  in  years  long  gone  by.  "  I  will  never  leave  you."  AJad  the 
awful  change  which  has  passed  over  everything  else  only  makes  it  stand  oat  more 
comfortingly — His  impossibility  of  change.  2.  And  with  that  felt,  present, 
unchangeable  Christ,  both  worlds  are  one.  The  Church  in  heaven  and  the  Church 
on  earth  are  the  members,  and  all  meet  in  that  one  Head,  and  in  Him  they  are 
here.  Where  then  is  loneliness?  He  is  a  Brother  by  me,  to  whom  I  can  tell 
everything,  and  He  will  answer  me.  I  seem  speaking  to  them  because  they  are 
holding  the  very  same  converse  within  the  veil.  3.  The  solitude  of  the  soul, 
where  He  is,  becomes  peopled  with  the  whole  host  of  heaven.  There  is  no  sense  of 
being  alone  when  we  realize  that  we  are  alone  with  Jesus.  4.  And  so  the  fear  flies 
away.  For  what  Christ  is  now.  He  will  be  always.  And  that  presence  is  the  pledge 
of  a  re-union.  A  little  while,  and  it  will  be  He,  and  they,  and  I,  and  we  shall  be 
together  for  ever.  Conclusion:  1.  Bead  a  particular  emphasis  on  the  "I,"  that 
great  word  which  God  is  so  fond  of.  Whatever  it  be  to  you  now,  this  gay  world 
will  leave  you  utterly  "comfortless."  Those  whom  to-day  yoa  are  most  fondly 
cherishing,  and  the  thought  of  whose  death  you  dare  not  admit  to  your  own 
heart — if  you  have  none  but  them,  and  no  Christ  in  them,  you  will  wake  up  some 
morning  to  such  a  cold  vacancy,  for  that  one  will  have  gone,  and  will  have  left  you 
*'  comfortless."  Friends  will  come  with  their  emptinesses,  and  they  will  go,  and  you 
will  be  as  comfortless  as  when  they  came.  Only  He  who  could  say,  "  I  will  come 
to  you  "  as  none  other  comes,  as  He  came  to  Martha  and  Mary  at  Bethany ;  only 
He  can  say,  "I  will  not  leave  you  comfortless."  2.  Bead  another  emphasis  on 
that  "  you."  "  I,"  Jesus  seems  to  say,  "  I  was  left  comfortless,  but  I  will  not  leave 
you  oomf ortlesg :  I  will  come  to  jou."    8.  Of  all  the  bereaved  in  the  whole  world. 


5S4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nr. 

there  is  none  so  bereft  as  that  man  of  tvhatever  happy  circle  he  may  be,  who 
cannot  look  up  to  heaven,  and  say,  '•  My  Father."  That  man  is  an  orphan  indeed. 
4.  There  is  another.  He  has  known  what  it  is  to  feel  God  His  Father,  but  it  is 
gone  Do  you  say,  "It  is  I?"  Then  I  am  sure  that  at  this  moment  Jesus  is 
saying  it  to  you — "I  will  not  leave  you  an  orphan,"  <fec.  For  if  there  be  a  thing 
on  the  whole  earth  which  Jesus  wiU  not  have  it  is  an  orphaned  heart.  (J. 
Vaughan,  M.A.)  Our  Comforter: — I.  Man  needs  a  comfokteb.  I  do  not  new 
speak  of  men  in  the  bulk,  but  in  units.  Wars,  pestilences,  strikes,  and  social  evils 
trouble  men,  but  besides  these,  each  man  in  himself  has  trouble  which  none  bu' 
God  can  soothe.  Perhaps  friendless  poverty  is  the  sorest  trouble  of  existence 
Betuming  along  the  road  from  Warrington,  I  heard  a  groan  which  made  my  heat^ 
shudder.  Stooping  to  the  hedge,  I  saw  a  woman  and  a  little  child  in  great  distress- 
She  was  from  Liverpool ;  her  husband  had  come  to  Manchester  seeking  for  work 
and  had  written  saying  he  had  been  taken  iU,  and  that  as  he  could  send  no  money, 
she  must  trust  in  God.  Without  a  penny  in  her  pocket,  love  for  her  husband  gave 
her  strength  to  walk  to  Manchester  with  her  child  in  her  arms.  She  inquired  at 
his  lodgings,  but  found  he  had  been  taken  to  the  hospital.  She  then  by  asking  at 
every  corner  arrived  at  the  Manchester  workhouse,  and  found  that  her  husband 
was  dead,  and  his  remains  had  been  placed  in  the  grave  the  day  before.  Footsore, 
hungry,  and  friendless,  she  was  sent  away,  and  pawned  her  shawl  to  keep  from 
dying  in  the  street.  Then  she  dragged  herself  to  the  road  near  Irlam  and  lay 
down  under  a  hedge  to  groan  and  to  die.  But  in  the  cottage  of  a  poor  farm 
labourer  she  found  help  and  sympathy  which  caused  her  to  live.  Did  God  not 
hear,  and  hearing,  did  He  not  provide  comfort?  11.  Men  vebt  often  seek 
ARTIFICIAL  C0MF0RTEB8.  After  the  great  deluge,  men  built  the  tower  of  Babel, 
hoping  by  that  means  to  receive  comfort  in  any  similar  calamity.  And  in  these 
days  men  are  building  towers  which  they  hope  will  save  them  from  the  deluge  of 
trouble.  Many  people  think  that  if  they  build  up  a  tower  of  riches  they  will  be 
happy.  But  the  rich  man  is  no  happier  than  the  poor  one.  I  was  once  asked  to 
visit  a  man  who  was  said  to  be  dying.  Standing  at  his  bedside  and  holding  his 
hand  in  mine,  I  said,  "Have  you  the  joy  of  knowing  that  your  sins  are  forgiven?" 
The  man  looked  and  replied,  "  Joy  1  joy  1  joy !  "  Taking  his  hand  from  mine  he 
pushed  it  under  the  pillow  and  bringing  out  a  bottle  of  brandy  he  held  it  with  hi3 
trembling  hand,  saying,  "  This  is  my  joy."  Poor,  miserable,  drunkard  !  Most 
people  before  they  become  drunkards  have  had  some  sickness  of  mind  or  body 
preying  upon  them ;  but  do  not  fly  from  your  great  trouble  to  drink.  HI.  Oub 
Father  has  provided  a  Comforter  for  every  man.  If  you  seek  in  the  history  of 
the  past,  what  man  would  you  select  to  be  your  comforter?  I  ask  the  philosophers 
if  they  would  ask  for  Socrates  above  all  others  ?  I  ask  the  deists  if  they  would 
ask  for  Thomas  Paine  or  Voltaire?  Or  would  you  ask  for  John  Bunyan,  or  for 
Wesley  or  Whitefield  ?  If  you  knew  none  better  you  migbt.  Take  the  worst  man  in 
the  world,  or  an  unbeliever,  and  ask  him,  "  If  you  were  to  select  out  of  all  men  one 
who  should  be  your  bosom  friend  until  you  die,  upon  wbom  would  you  fix  ?  "  If 
he  told  his  heart's  truth,  he  would  reply, "  Jesus."  1.  Jesus  our  Comforter  is  with 
us.  My  mother  died  in  giving  me  Ufe,  and,  of  course,  I  have  not  the  slightest 
remembrance  of  her.  The  only  relic  I  had  was  a  little  piece  of  her  silk  dress, 
and  this  I  preserved  as  my  dearest  treasure.  Tossed  about,  and  yearning  for  a 
love  which  was  not  to  be  had,  I  used  to  sit  alone  for  hours,  and  long  for,  and  pray 
to  my  mother.  You  may  call  it  an  insane  fancy,  but  to  me  it  was  real  and 
powerful  and  comforting.  And  I  owe  the  success  of  my  boyhood  to  the  conscious- 
ness of  her  beloved  presence.  In  the  same  way,  Jesus  communes  with  us.  Jesus 
in  Spirit  is  with  you.  2.  He  comforts — (1)  By  showing  that  our  Father  loves  us. 
Deep  down  in  every  human  heart  there  is  the  instinct  that  God  loves  men.  In 
great  calamity  men  always  cry  to  God.  (2)  By  pointing  us  to  the  Cross.  Look  to 
the  Cross  of  Jesus,  and  see  the  remedy  which  shall  in  time  save  all  the  world. 

(3)  By  inspiring  us  with  hope.  When  a  man  is  cast  out  of  society,  and  swears  in 
his  despair,  "  I  will  now  do  all  the  evil  I  can  and  spite  them,"  if  a  friend  tap  him 
on  the  shoulder,  saying,  "  Brother,  why  despair  of  yourself?  Come  with  me,  and  I 
will  hold  on  to  you  until  you  are  a  better  man,"  why,  such  language  would  be  an 
inspiration  t     Jesus  is  the  friend  who  does  this  to  the  despairing  souls  of  men. 

(4)  When  we  are  heavily  burdened.  Paul  was  burdened.  He  had  a  "thorn  in  the 
flesh."  But  did  God  take  it  away?  No;  but  He  gave  him  grace  to  bear  it.  So 
Jesus  comforts  us  when  we  are  burdened  b>  giving  us  strength  to  bear  it.  (5)  He 
comforts  us  too  by  showing  us  God's  purpose.    He  teaches  us  that  all  things  work 


OHAP.  xiT.]  ST.  JOHN.  555 

together  for  good.  {W.  Birch.)  Soul  orplianhood — L  Consists  in  morUi 
SEPABATiON  FROM  GoD.  1.  Not  local,  foi  God  is  everywhere,  and  no  spirit  can  flee 
from  His  presence.  2.  Not  physical ;  for  in  God  we  live  and  move,  &c.  3.  But, 
morally,  the  nnregenerate  are  ever  distant  from  Him — alienated  in  sympathy, 
purpose  and  pursuit :  "  without  God. "  The  ungodly  world  is  a  world  of  orphans, 
without  a  father's  fellowship  and  guidance.  II.  Is  an  evil  of  stupendous  maoni- 
TUDB.  1.  Orphanism,  so  far  as  human  parentage  is  concerned,  is  a  calamity,  but 
this  is  a  crime.  The  soul  has  broken  away  from  its  Father,  not  its  Father  from  it. 
2.  Orphanism  in  the  one  case  may  have  its  loss  supplied,  but  not  in  the  other. 
Thank  God,  society  in  this  age  has  loving  hearts,  and  good  homes  for  orphans. 
But  nothing  on  earth  can  take  the  place  of  God  in  relation  to  a  soul :  such  a  soul 
is  benighted,  perishing,  lost.  III.  Is  kemovbd  by  the  presence  of  Christ.  He 
brings  the  soul  into  a  loving,  blessed  fellowship  with  God.  The  deep  cry  of 
humanity  is  the  cry  of  an  orphan  for  the  Father.  The  response  is  the  advent  ol 
Christ.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  absent  present  Christ: — I.  The  absent  Christ 
IS  THE  PRESENT  Christ.  "  Orphans "  is  rather  an  unusual  form  in  which  to 
represent  the  relation  between  our  Lord  and  His  disciples.  And  so,  possibly,  our 
versions  are  accurate  in  giving  the  general  idea  of  desolation.  But,  stjJl,  it  is  to  be 
remembered  that  this  whole  conservation  begins  with  "  Little  children  " ;  and  they 
would  be  like  fatherless  and  motherless  children  in  a  cold  world.  And  what  is  to 
hinder  that?  One  thing  only.  " I  come  to  you."  Now,  what  is  this  " coming " ? 
Our  Lord  says,  not  "  I  will,"  as  a  future,  but  "  I  come,"  or,  "  I  am  coming,"  as  an 
immediately  impending,  or  present,  thing.  There  can  be  no  reference  to  the  final 
coming,  because  it  would  follow,  that,  until  that  period,  all  that  love  Him  here  are 
to  wander  about  as  orphans ;  and  that  can  never  be.  1.  We  have  here  a  coming 
which  is  but  the  reverse  side  of  His  bodily  absence.  This  is  the  heart  of  the 
consolation  that,  howsoever  the  "  foolish  senses  "  may  have  to  speak  of  an  absent 
Christ,  we  may  rejoice  in  the  certainty  that  He  is  with  all  those  that  love  Him, 
and  all  the  more  because  of  the  withdrawal  of  the  earthly  manifestation  which  has 
served  its  purpose.  Note  the  manifest  implicatiBn  of  absolute  Divinity.  "I 
come."  "I  am  present  with  every  single  heart."  That  is  equivalent  to  Omni< 
presence.  I  cannot  but  think  that  the  average  Christian  life  of  this  day  wofully 
fails  in  the  realization  of  this  great  truth,  that  we  are  never  alone,  but  have  Jesua 
Christ  with  each  of  us  more  closely,  and  with  more  Omnipotence  of  influence  than 
they  had  who  were  nearest  Him  upon  earth.  If  we  really  believed  this,  how  all 
burdens  and  cares  would  be  ligbtened,  how  all  perplexities  would  begin  to  smooth 
themselves  out,  and  how  sorrows  and  joys  and  everything  would  be  changed  in 
their  aspect.  A  present  Christ  is  the  Strength,  the  Eighteousness,  the  Peace,  the 
Joy,  the  Life  of  every  Christian  soul.  2.  This  coming  of  our  Lord  is  identified 
with  that  of  His  Divine  Spirit.  He  has  been  speaking  of  sending  that  "other 
Comfortei","  who  is  no  gift  wafted  to  us  as  from  the  other  side  of  a  gulf ;  bat  by 
reason  of  the  unity  of  the  Godhead,  Christ  and  the  Spirit  whom  He  sends  are, 
though  separate,  so  indissolubly  united  that  where  the  Spirit  is,  there  is  Christ, 
and  where  Christ  is,  there  is  the  Spirit.  "If  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of 
Christ,  he  is  none  of  His."  3.  This  present  Christ  is  the  only  Remedy  for  tke 
orphanhood  of  the  world.  We  can  understand  how  forlorn  and  terrified  the 
disciples  were,  when  they  looked  forward  to  the  things  that  must  come  to  them, 
without  His  presence.  Therefore  He  cheers  them  with  this  assurance.  (1)  And 
the  promise  was  fulfilled.  How  did  that  dispirited  group  ever  pluck  up  courage  to 
hold  together  after  the  Crucifixion  at  all  ?  Why  was  it  that  they  did  not  follow  the 
example  of  John's  disciples,  and  dissolve  and  disappear,  and  say,  "  The  game  is 
up."  If  it  had  not  been  that  He  came  to  them,  Christianity  would  have  been  one 
more  of  the  abortive  sects  forgotten  in  Judaism.  But,  as  it  is,  the  whole  of  the 
New  Testament  after  Pentecost  is  aflame  with  the  consciousness  of  a  present 
Christ  working  amongst  His  people.  (2)  The  same  conviction  yon  and  I  mast 
have,  if  the  world  is  not  to  be  a  desert  and  a  dreary  place  for  us.  If  you  take 
away  Christ  the  elder  Brother,  who  alone  reveals  the  Father,  we  are  all  orphans, 
who  look  up  into  an  empty  heaven  and  see  nothing  there.  And  is  not  life  a 
desolation  without  Him?  Hollow  joys,  roses  whose  thorns  last  long  after  the 
petals  have  dropped,  real  sorrow,  shows  and  shams,  bitternesses  and  disappoint- 
ments— are  not  these  our  life,  in  so  far  as  Christ  has  been  driven  oat  of  it? 
II.  The  unseen  Christ  is  a  seen  Christ.  1.  That  "yet  a  little  while"  oovera 
the  whole  space  ap  to  His  ascension :  and  if  there  be  any  reference  to  the  forty 
days,  daring  which,  literally,  the  world  "  ^ftw  Him  no  more,"  but "  the  aposUea 


656  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xit. 

saw  Him,"  that  reference  is  only  secondary.  These  transitory  appearances  are  not 
safficient  to  bear  the  weight  of  so  great  a  promise  as  this.  The  vision,  which  ia 
the  consequence  of  the  coming,  is  as  continuous  and  permanent  as  the  coming.  It 
is  clear,  too,  that  the  word  "see"  is  employed  in  two  different  senses.  In  the 
former  it  refers  only  to  bodily,  in  the  latter  to  spiritual  perception.  For  a  few 
short  hours  still,  the  ungodly  mass  of  men  were  to  have  that  outward  vision  which 
they  had  used  so  badly,  that  "  they  seeing  saw  not."  It  was  to  cease,  and  they  who 
loved  Him  would  not  miss  it  when  it  did.  They,  too,  had  but  dimly  seen  Him 
while  He  stood  by  them ;  they  would  gaze  on  Him  with  truer  insight  when  He  was 
present  though  absent.  So  this  is  what  every  Christian  life  may  and  should  be — 
the  continual  sight  of  a  continually  present  Christ.  2.  Faith  is  the  sight  of  the 
soul,  and  it  is  far  better  than  the  sight  of  the  senses.  (1)  It  is  more  direct.  My 
eye  does  not  touch  what  I  look  at.  Gulfs  of  millions  of  miles  lie  between  me  and 
it.  But  my  faith  is  not  only  eye,  but  hand,  and  not  only  beholds  but  grasps. 
(2)  It  is  far  more  clear.  Senses  may  deceive ;  my  faith,  buUt  upon  His  Word,  caunot 
deceive.  Its  information  is  far  more  certain,  more  valid.  So  that  there  is  no  need 
for  men  to  say,  "  Oh  1  if  we  had  only  seen  Him  with  our  eyes  1 "  You  would  very 
likely  not  have  known  Him  if  you  had.  There  is  no  reason  for  thinking  that  the 
Church  has  retrograded  in  its  privileges  because  it  has  to  love  instead  of  beholding, 
and  to  believe  instead  of  touching.  Sense  disturbs,  faith  alone  beholds.  (3)  "  The 
world  seeth  Me  no  more."  Why  ?  Because  it  is  a  world.  "  Ye  see  Me."  Why  ? 
Because,  and  in  the  measure,  in  which  you  have  "  turned  away  your  eyes  from 
seeing  vanity."  If  you  want  the  eye  of  the  soul  to  be  opened,  you  must  shut  the 
eye  of  sense.  And  the  more  we  turn  away  from  looking  at  the  dazzling  lies  which 
befool  and  bewilder  us,  the  more  shall  we  see  Him  whom  to  see  is  to  live  for  ever. 
III.  Thk  pbesent  and  seen  Christ  is  life  and  life-giving.  Because  He  comes. 
His  life  passes  into  the  hearts  of  the  men  to  whom  He  comes,  and  who  gaze  upon 
Him.  1.  Mark  the  majestic  "  I  live  " — the  timeless  present  tense,  which  expresses 
unbroken,  undying  and  Divine  life.  It  is  all  but  a  quotation  of  the  name  "  Jehovah." 
The  depth  and  sweep  of  its  meaning  are  given  to  us  by  this  Apostle,  •*  the  living 
One,"  who  .ived  whilst  He  died,  and  having  died  "  is  alive  for  evermore."  2.  And 
this  Christ  is  hfe-giver  to  all  that  love  Him  and  trust  Him.  (1)  We  live  because 
He  lives.  In  all  senses  the  life  of  man  is  derived  from  the  Christ  who  is  the  Agent 
of  creation,  and  is  also  the  one  means  by  whom  any  of  us  can  ever  hope  to  live  the 
better  life  that  consists  in  union  to  God.  (2)  We  shall  live  as  long  as  He  lives,  and 
His  being  is  the  guarantee  of  the  immortal  being  of  all  who  love  Him.  Anything 
is  possible,  rather  than  that  a  soul  which  has  drawn  a  spiritual  life  from  Christ 
should  ever  be  rent  apart  from  Him  by  such  a  miserable  and  external  trifle  as  the 
mere  dissolution  of  the  bodily  frame.  As  long  as  Christ  lives  your  life  is  secure. 
If  the  Head  has  life  the  members  cannot  see  corruption.  The  Church  chose  for  one 
of  its  ancient  emblems  of  the  Saviour  the  pelican,  which  fed  its  young,  according 
to  the  fable,  with  the  blood  from  its  own  breast.  So  Christ  vitalizes  us.  He  in  ua 
is  our  life.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Christians  not  forgotten  by  Christ : — A  tragio 
story  comes  from  Senegal.  Four  natives  who  had  been  sent  to  guard  the  French 
flag  on  a  newly  acquired  barren  island  in  that  region  were  left  without  provi- 
sions,  and  died  of  starvation.  They  had  a  supply  of  food  to  last  three  months,  but 
the  governor  had  entirely  forgotten  to  send  relief  to  the  guardians  of  the 
standard  on  the  lonely  rock.  {Christian  World.)  Christ  in  heaven  helps  His  dis- 
ciples ;  '-Suppose  a  king's  son  should  get  out  of  a  besieged  prison  and  leave  his  wife 
and  children  behind,  whom  he  loves  as  his  own  soul ;  would  the  prince,  when 
arrived  at  his  father's  palace,  please  and  delight  himself  with  the  splendour  of  the 
court,  and  forget  his  family  in  distress ;  No  ;  but  having  their  cries  and  groans  always 
in  his  ears,  he  should  come  post  to  his  father,  and  entreat  him,  as  ever  he  loved  him, 
that  he  would  send  all  the  forces  of  his  kingdom  and  raise  the  siege,  and  save  hia 
dear  relations  from  perishing  ;  nor  will  Christ,  though  gone  up  from  the  world  and 
ascended  into  His  glory,  forget  His  children  for  a  moment  that  are  left  behind  Him. 
(J,  Gumall.)  Comfort  for  the  bereaved : — On  every  Mohammedan  tombstone  the 
inscription  begins  with  the  words,  "  He  remains."  This  appUes  to  God,  and  gives 
sweet  comfort  to  the  bereaved.  Friends  may  die,  fortune  fly  away,  but  God 
endures.  He  remains.  Tet  a  little  while,  and  the  world  seeth  Ue  no  more, 
but  ye  see  Me. — Seeing  the  living  Christ: — Came  in  the  flesh — that  is  the  out- 
ward, material  fact.  He  is  here  in  the  Spirit — that  is  the  inward,  spiritual  reality. 
L  Chbist's  littlb  while.  1.  His  visible  appearance  on  earth  was  only  for  a  "  httle 
while."    Yet  how  much  has  been  crowded  into  it.    Example;  teaching;  miracle t 


(CHAP.  XIV.]  ST.  JOHN.  667 

Buffering.  All  this  helps  us  to  understand  His  mission,  and  especially  to  realize  to 
ourselves  His  abiding  spiritual  presence.  He  is  still  with  us,  the  very  Christ  that 
He  was.  2  When  Jesus  spoke  these  words  there  was  but  a  very  "  little  while  "  left. 
Only  the  death-scene,  and  the  forty  days  in  the  Resurrection  body.  But  these  also 
help  us  to  realize  the  spiritual  presence  of  Christ,  as  we  can  Imow  it;  especially  do 
we  get  suggestions  from  the  Kesurrection-time.  II.  The  wobld's  blindness.  What 
report  can  the  "world"  give  of  Christ?  "He  was  a  good  Man,  an  original 
Teacher,  But  He  offended  the  religion  and  society  leaders  of  His  day,  and  they  se- 
cured His  crucifixion."  The  world  testifies  that  He  was  dead  and  buried  ;  but  the 
world  resists  the  bare  ideas  of  His  Resurrection  or  spiritual  life.  How  little  the 
world  know«,  or  can  conceive,  of  the  "  coming,  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost." 
So  Christ  is  lost  as  an  actual  power  in  life.  HI.  The  disciplks'  vision.  "Ye  see 
Me."  TLat  is,  "  Ye  do  constantly  see  Me."  If  they  had  seen  Christ  truly  while  He 
was  here  on  earth,  then  they  would  find  they  never  lost  the  sight  of  Him.  Because, 
during  His  earthly  life.  His  real  presence  with  the  disciples  had  been  presence  to 
heart,  not  to  eye.  1.  Christ  never  goes  out  of  disciples'  thought  or  heart.  2. 
Christ  never  ceases  to  be  the  disciple's  Ruler  and  Referee.  3.  The  honour  of  Christ 
never  ceases  to  be  the  disciple's  sole  aim.  4.  The  strength  of  Christ  never  ceases 
to  be  the  soul's  victory.  The  joy  of  Christian  life  depends  on  the  clearness  of  our 
vision  of  this  ever-present  Christ.  (Weekly  Pulpit.)  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live 
also. — The  Lord  of  Life  : — This  saying  is  only  to  be  fully  understood  in  the  light  of 
the  Resurrection  and  Ascension.  Christ  has  taken  the  measure  of  death ;  death  was 
to  be  no  real  interruption  of  His  ever-continuing  life.  Already  He  sees  the  Resur- 
rection beyond.  He  treats  Death  as  an  already  vanquished  enemy.  Observe:  I.  What 
CUB  Lord's  words  do  not  mean.  They  do  not  mean  that  the  immortality  of  the  soul  of 
man  is  dependent  upon  the  work  or  life  of  Christ.  Man  is  an  immortal  being,  just  as 
he  is  a  thinking  and  feeling  being  by  the  original  terms  of  bis  nature.  Any  of  us  may 
see  who  will  consider  how  generally  unhke  the  spirit  or  soul  of  man  is  to  any  merely 
material  creature.  1.  The  soul  of  man  knows  itself  to  be  capable  of  continuous 
development.  However  vigorous  a  tree  or  an  animal  may  be,  it  soon  reaches  a  point 
at  which  it  can  grow  no  longer.  Its  vital  force  is  exhausted ;  it  can  do  no  more. 
With  the  soul,  whether  as  a  thinking  or  feeling  power,  we  can  never  say  that  it  has 
exhausted  itself.  When  a  man  of  science  has  made  a  great  discovery,  or  a  man  of 
letters  has  written  a  great  book,  or  a  statesman  has  carried  a  series  of  great 
measures  we  cannot  say — "  He  has  done  his  all."  Undonbtedly,  as  the  body  moves 
towards  decay  it  inflicts  something  of  its  weakness  upon  its  spiritual  companion. 
But  the  soul  constantly  resists,  asserting  its  own  separate  and  vigorous  existence. 
The  mind  knows  that  each  new  effort,  instead  of  exhausting  its  powers,  enlarges 
them,  and  that  if  only  the  i^hysical  conditions  necessary  to  continued  exertion  are 
not  withdrawn,  it  will  go  on  continuously  making  larger  and  nobler  acquirements. 
So  too  with  the  heart,  the  conscience,  the  sense  of  duty.  One  noble  act  suggests 
another  :  one  great  sacrifice  for  truth  or  duty  prompts  another.  "  Be  not  weary  iu 
well-doing"  is  the  language  of  the  Eteraal  Wisdom  to  the  human  will.  2.  The 
fipirit  is  conscious  of  and  values  its  own  existence.  This  is  not  the  case  with  any 
material  living  forms,  however  lufty  or  beautiful.  The  most  magnificent  tree  only 
gives  enjoyment  to  other  beings  ;  it  never  understands  that  itself  exists  ;  it  is  not 
conscious  of  losing  anything  when  it  is  cut  down.  An  animal  feels  pleasure  and 
pain,  but  it  feels  each  sensation  as  it  comes ;  it  never  puts  them  together,  or  takes 
the  measure  of  its  own  life,  and  looks  on  it  as  a  whole.  The  animal  lives  wholly  in 
the  present,  practically  it  has  no  past,  nor  does  it  look  forward.  How  difiereut  with 
the  conscious,  self-measuring  spirit  of  man  I  Man's  spirit  lives  more  in  the  past 
and  in  the  future  than  in  the  present,  exactly  in  the  degree  in  which  it  makes  the 
most  of  itself.  And  the  more  the  spirit  makes  of  its  powers  and  resources,  the 
more  earnestly  does  it  desire  prolonged  existence.  Thus,  the  best  of  the  heathens 
longed  to  exist  after  death,  that  they  might  continue  to  make  progress  in  aU  such 
good  as  tbe.v  had  begun  in  this  life,  in  high  thoughts  and  in  excellent  resolves.  And 
with  these  longings  they  believed  that  they  would  then  exist  after  all  when  this  life 
was  over.  The  longing  was  itself  a  sort  of  proof  that  its  object  was  real ;  for  how 
was  its  existence  to  be  explained  if  all  enterprise  was  to  be  abruptly  broken  ofif  by 
the  shock  of  death?  3.  Unless  a  spiritual  being  ia  immortal,  such  a  being  counts 
for  less  in  the  universe  than  mere  inert  matter.  For  matter  has  a  kind  of  immor 
tahty.  Within  the  range  of  our  experience,  no  matter  ceases  to  exist ;  it  only  takes 
new  shapes,  first  in  one  being,  and  then  in  another.  It  is  possible  that  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  world  at  the  Last  Day  will  be  only  a  re-arrangement  of  the  som-total  of 


658  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xir» 

matter  which  now  makes  tip  the  visible  universe.  If  man's  spirit  naturally  perishesr 
the  higher  part  of  his  nature  therefore  is  much  worse  oS  than  the  chemical  ingre« 
dients  of  his  body.  For  man's  spirit  cannot  be  resolved  hke  his  body,  into  form  and 
material ;  the  former  perishing  while  the  latter  survives.  Man's  spirit  either  exists 
in  its  completeness,  or  it  ceases  to  exist.  Each  man  is  himself :  he  can  become  no 
other.  His  memory,  his  affections,  his  way  of  thinking  and  feeling,  are  all  his  own : 
they  are  not  transferable.  If  they  perish,  they  perish  altogether.  And  therefore 
it  is  a  reasonable  and  very  strong  presumption  that  spirit  is  not,  in  fact,  placed  at 
such  disadvantage,  and  that,  if  matter  survives  the  dissolution  of  organic  forms, 
much  more  must  spirit  survive  the  dissolution  of  the  material  forms  with  which  ii 
has  been  associated.  These  are  the  kind  of  considerations  by  which  thoughtful  men, 
living  without  the  light  of  revelation,  might  ue  led  to  see  the  reasonableness,  the 
very  high  probability  of  a  future  life.  This  teaching  of  nature  is  presupposed  by 
Christianity,  and  it  is  no  true  service  to  our  Master  to  make  light  of  it.  At  the  same^ 
time,  it  is  true  that,  outside  the  Jewish  revelation,  immortality  was  not  treated  by 
any  large  number  of  men  as  anything  like  a  certainty.  Jesus  Christ  assumed  it  aa 
certain  in  all  that  He  said  with  reference  to  the  future  life.  And  it  is  the  Eesurreo- 
tion  of  Jesus  Christ — which  has  in  this,  as  in  so  many  other  ways,  opened  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  to  all  believers.  What  has  been  may  be.  And  thus  the  Chris- 
tian faith  has  brought  "  immortality  to  light."  And  what  a  solemn  fact  is  this 
immortality  of  ours  !  A  hundred  years  hence  no  one  of  us  will  be  still  in  the  body  : 
we  shall  have  passed  to  another  sphere  of  being.  But  if  the  imagination  can  take 
in  these  vast  tracts  of  time,  ten  miUions  years  hence  we  shall  still  exist,  each  one 
with  his  memory,  will,  and  conscious  contact,  separate  from  all  other  beings  in  our 
eternal  resting-place.  II.  What  Chbist's  wokds  do  mean.  Clearly  something  is 
meant  by  "  Life  "  which  is  higher  than  mere  existence ;  not  merely  beyond  ani- 
mal existence,  but  beyond  the  mere  existence  of  a  spiritual  being.  We  English  use 
"  hfe  "  in  the  sense  of  an  existence  which  has  a  purpose  and  makes  the  most  of 
itself.  And  the  Greeks  had  an  especial  word  to  describe  the  true  life  of  man,  his 
highest  spiritual  energy.  This  is  the  word  employed  by  our  Lord  and  by  St.  Paul. 
This  enrichment  and  elevation  of  being  is  derived  from  our  Lord.  He  is  the  Authoi 
of  our  new  life,  just  as  our  first  parent  is  the  source  of  our  first  and  natural  exis- 
tence. On  this  account  St.  Paul  calls  Him  the  Second  Adam.  And,  in  point  of  fact, 
He  is  the  parent  of  a  race  of  spiritual  men  who  push  human  life  to  its  highest 
capacities  of  excellence.  When  our  Lord  was  upon  earth  He  communicated  His 
Life  to  men,  by  coming  in  contact  with  them.  Men  felt  the  contagion  of  a 
presence,  the  influence  of  which  they  could  not  measure,  a  presence  from 
which  there  radiated  a  subtle,  mysterious  energy,  which  was  gradually  taking 
possession  of  them  they  knew  not  exactly  how,  and  making  them  begin  to  live  a 
new  and  higher  Ufa.  What  that  result  was  upon  four  men  of  very  different  types 
of  character  we  may  gather  from  the  reports  of  the  Life  of  Christ  which  are  given 
as  by  the  evangelists.  But  at  last  He  died,  and  arose  and  disappeared  from  sight. 
And  it  is  of  this  after-time  that  He  says,  "  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also."  How 
does  He  communicate  His  life  when  the  creative  stimulus  of  His  visible  Presence 
has  been  withdrawn?  1.  By  His  Spirit.  That  Divine  and  Personal  force,  whereby 
the  mind  and  nature  of  the  unseen  Saviour  is  poured  into  the  hearts  and  minds  and 
characters  of  men,  was  to  be  the  Lord  and  Giver  of  this  life  to  the  end  of  time. 
(John  xvi  14 ;  Bom.  viiL  9 ;  2  Cor.  v.  17).  2.  By  the  Christian  sacraments,  the 
guaranteed  points  of  contact  with  our  unseen  Saviour ;  for  in  them  we  may  certainly 
meet  Him  and  be  invigorated  by  Him  as  we  toil  along  the  road  of  onr  pilgrimage. 
Conclusion:  1.  It  is  this  new  life  which  makes  it  a  blessing  to  have  the 
prospect  before  as  that  we  shall  individually  exist  for  ever.  2.  Our  immortality 
is  certain.  But  what  sort  of  immortality  is  it  to  be?  {Canon  Liddon.) 
Life  in  Christ  .* — L  Lite.  We  must  not  confound  this  with  existence.  Before  the 
disciples  believed  in  Jesus  they  existed,  and  altogether  apart  from  Him  as  their 
spiritaal  life  their  existence  would  have  been  continued.  Life,  what  is  it  ?  We 
cannot  tell  in  words.  We  know  it,  however,  to  be  a  mystery  of  different  degrees 
There  is  the  life  of  the  vegetable.  There  is  a  considerable  advance  when  we  come 
to  animal  life.  Sensation,  appetite,  instinct,  are  things  to  which  plants  are  dead. 
Then  there  is  mental  life,  which  introduces  us  into  quite  another  realm.  To  judge, 
to  foresee,  to  imagine,  to  invent,  to  perform  moral  acts,  are  not  these  functions 
which  the  ox  hath  not  f  Now,  far  above  this  there  is  another  form  of  life  of  which 
the  mere  carnal  man  can  form  no  more  idea  than  the  plant  can  of  the  animal,  or  the' 
animal  of  the  poet.    Education  cannot  raise  man  into  it,  neither  can  refinement 


CHAP.  xiT.l  ST.  JOHN.  659 

reach  it ;  for  at  its  best,  "  that  which  is  bom  of  the  flesh  is  flesh,"  and  to  all  must 
the  humbling  truth  be  spoken,  "  Te  must  be  born  again."  It  is  to  be  remarked 
concerning  our  life  in  Christ,  that  it  is — 1.  The  removal  of  the  penalty  which  fell 
upon  our  race  for  Adam's  sin.  2.  Spiritual  life.  Christ  works  in  us  through  His 
Holy  Spirit,  who  dwelleth  in  ns  evermore.  3.  A  life  in  union  with  God  (Bom.  viii. 
6-8) .  Death  as  to  the  body  consists  in  its  separation  from  the  soul ;  the  death  of 
the  soul  lies  mainly  in  the  soul's  being  separated  from  its  God.  4.  This  life  bears 
fruit  on  earth  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness,  and  it  is  made  perfect  in  the 
presence  of  God  in  heaven.  II.  Life  fbeserved.  "  Ye  shall  live  also."  Con- 
cerning this  sentence,  note — 1.  Its  fulness.  Whatever  is  meant  by  living  shall  be 
ours.  All  the  degree  of  life  which  is  secured  in  the  covenant  of  grace,  believers 
shall  have.  All  your  new  nature  shall  thoroughly,  eternally  live.  Not  even,  in 
part,  shall  the  new  man  die.  "  I  am  come,"  saith  Christ, "  that  ye  might  have  life, 
aud  have  it  more  abundantly."  2.  Its  continuance.  During  our  abode  in  this 
body  we  shall  live.  And  when  the  natural  death  comes,  which  indeed  to  us  is  no 
longer  death,  our  inner  life  shall  suffer  no  hurt  whatever ;  it  will  not  even  be 
suspended  for  a  moment.  And  in  the  awful  future,  when  the  judgment  comes,  the 
begotten  of  God  shall  live.  Onward  through  eternity,  whatever  may  be  the  changes 
which  yet  are  to  be  disclosed,  nothing  shall  affect  our  God-given  life.  3.  Its 
universality.  Every  child  of  God  shall  live.  The  Lord  bestows  security  upon  the 
least  of  His  people  as  well  as  upon  the  greatest.  If  it  had  been  said,  "  Because 
your  faith  is  strong,  ye  shall  live,"  then  weak  faith  would  have  perished ;  but  when 
it  is  written,  "  Because  I  live,"  the  argument  is  as  powerful  in  the  one  case  as  in 
the  other.  4.  Its  breadth.  See  how  it  overturns  all  the  hopes  of  the  adversary. 
You  shall  not  be  decoyed  by  fair  temptation,  nor  be  cowed  by  fierce  persecution  ; 
mightier  is  he  that  is  in  you  than  he  which  is  in  the  world.  Satan  will  attack  you, 
and  his  weapons  are  deadly,  but  you  shall  foil  him  at  all  points.  If  God  should 
allow  you  to  be  sorely  tried  your  spirit  shall  still  maintain  its  holy  life,  and  you 
shall  prove  it  so  by  blessing  and  magnifying  God,  notwithstanding  all.  We  little 
dream  what  may  be  reserved  for  ns ;  we  may  have  to  climb  steeps  of  prosperity, 
slippery  and  dangerous,  but  we  shall  live ;  we  may  be  called  to  sink  in  the  dark 
waters  of  adversity,  but  we  shall  live.  If  old  age  shall  be  our  portion,  and  our 
crown  shall  be  delayed  till  we  have  fought  a  long  and  weary  battle,  yet  nevertheless 
we  shall  live ;  or  if  sudden  death  should  cut  short  the  time  of  our  trial  here,  yet 
we  shall  have  Uved  in  the  fulness  of  that  word.  UI.  The  reason  fob  the  secubitt 
OF  THE  BPiRiTnAL  LIFE.  *' Bccause  I  live."  1.  This  is  the  sole  reason.  When  I 
first  come  to  Christ,  I  know  I  must  find  all  in  Him,  for  I  feel  I  have  nothing  of  my 
own;  but  all  my  life  long  I  am  to  acknowledge  the  same  absolute  dependence. 
Does  not  the  Christian's  life  depend  upon  his  prayerfulness  ?  The  Christian's 
spiritual  health  depends  upon  his  prayerfulness,  but  that  prayerfulness  depends  on 
something  else.  The  reason  why  the  hands  of  the  clock  move  may  be  found  first 
in  a  certain  wheel  which  operates  upon  them,  but  if  yon  go  to  the  primary  cause 
of  all,  you  reach  the  main-spring,  or  the  weight,  which  is  the  source  of  all  the 
motion.  "  But  are  not  good  works  essential  to  the  maintenance  of  the  spiritual 
life  ?  "  Certainly,  if  there  be  no  good  works,  we  have  no  evidence  of  spiritual  life. 
To  the  tree  the  fruit  is  not  the  cause  of  life,  but  the  result  of  it,  and  to  the  life  of 
the  Christian,  good  works  bear  the  same  relationship,  they  are  its  outgrowth,  not 
its  root.  2.  It  is  a  sufficient  reason,  for — (1)  Christ's  Hfe  is  a  proof  that  His  work 
has  accomplished  the  redemption  of  His  people.  (2)  He  is  the  representative  of 
those  for  whom  He  is  the  Federal  Head.  Shall  the  representative  live,  and  yet 
those  represented  die?  (3)  He  is  the  surety  for  His  people,  under  bonds  and 
pledges  to  bring  His  redeemed  safely  home.  (4)  We  who  have  spiritual  life  are  one 
with  Christ  Jesus.  Jesus  is  the  head  of  the  mystical  body,  they  are  the  members. 
What  were  the  head  without  the  body  ?  3.  An  abiding  reason — which  has  as  much 
force  at  one  time  as  another.  From  causes  variable  the  effects  are  variable ;  but 
remaining  causes  produce  permanent  effects.  Now  Jesus  always  lives.  4.  A  most 
instructive  reason.  It  instructs  us  to  admire — (1)  The  condescension  of  Christ. 
(2)  To  be  abundantly  grateful.  (3)  To  keep  up  close  communion  with  Christ.  {C. 
H.  Spurgeon.)  Fellowship  in  Christ't  life  : — These  words  strikingly  resemble  the 
declaration  of  our  Lord  to  John  in  Patmos  (Rev.  i.  17, 18).  I.  The  life  of  Christ. 
"  I  live."  1.  Our  Lord,  as  a  Divine  Person,  is  possessed  of  independent,  infinite, 
immutable,  eternal  life :  that  is,  capacity  of  action  and  enjoyment.  In  Him — was, 
is,  and  ever  will  be,  •*  the  fountain  of  life  "  {John  i.  4 ;  1  John  i.  2 ;  Psa.  xzzvi.  9) 
2.  It  it  not,  however,  to  this  life  that  reference  is  made.    That  is  A  life  in  which 


660  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xrv. 

none  can  participate  beyond  the  sacred  circle  of  Deity.  The  life  is  the  life  which 
belongs  to  the  Son,  as  Qod-man,  Mediator ;  and  it  refers  to  this  Ufa  in  its  state  of 
fall  development,  after  His  resurrection.  8.  He  had  lived  the  life  of  a  man  in 
anion  with  God  while  He  was  on  the  earth— of  the  God-man,  commissioned  to  give  life 
— and  many  and  striking  were  the  demonstrations  that  He  gave  of  His  possession 
of  this  life.  But,  till  sin  was  expiated,  this  life  could  not  be  fully  developed  nor 
displayed.  That  death  in  the  ^esh,  which  was  the  bearing  away  of  the  sins  ot 
men,  was  the  procuring  cause  of  that  "  quickening  in  the  Spirit "  which  followed. 
4.  It  is,  however,  to  the  new  development  of  Ufe  which  accompanied  and  followed 
the  resurrection  that  our  Lord  refers.  "  I  am  alive  again,"  "  I  have  the  keys  of 
hell  and  of  death."  His  life  is  royal  life — the  life  of  ••  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord 
of  lords  "  (Psa.  xxi.  1-7 ;  Isa.  liii.  10).  II.  The  lefb  of  Christ's  people.  "  Ye 
Bhall  live  also."  1.  Christ  rose  as  "  the  first-fruits  of  them  that  sleep  in  Him," 
the  first-born  of  the  chosen  family,  their  representative  and  forerunner.  2. 
Christians  are,  by  faith,  so  identified  with  Jesus  Christ  as  to  be  partakers  with  Him 
of  that  life  on  which  He  entered,  when,  being  raised  from  the  dead,  He  sat  down 
for  ever  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high.  They  "  reign  in  Ufe  with  Him  " 
—in  Him  (Kom.  v.  17  ;  vi.  3-11 ;  Eph.  ii.  5,  6 ;  Col.  iii.  1-4  ;  Gal.  ii.  19, 20).  This 
life  is — (1)  One  of  holy  activity  and  enjoyment.  (2)  Immortal.  (3)  Incomplete 
now,  but  destined  to  be  complete  at  the  Resurrection.  ••  We  shall  be  like  Him." 
III.  Thb  connection  between  the  two.  "  Because  " — 1.  His  hfe  proves  that  He 
has  done  all  that  is  necessary  in  order  to  secure  life  for  them.  Had  He  not  suc- 
ceeded in  doing  this  He  Himself  would  not  thus  have  lived.  His  resurrection  and 
celestial  life  are  undoubted  proofs  that  the  sentence  adjudging  us  to  death  was 
repealed,  and  the  influence  that  was  necessary  to  make  us  live  was  sent  forth.  So 
were  we  not  to  live,  the  great  end  for  which  He  died  and  rose  would  be  frustrated. 
2.  His  life  shows  that  He  possesses  all  that  is  necessary  to  bestow  life  on  His 
people.  "  The  Father  hath  given  to  Him  to  have  life  in  Himself ;  so  that  He 
quickeneth  whom  He  wUl."  "  It  has  pleased  the  Father,  that  in  Him  all  fulness 
should  dwell,"  that  out  of  His  fulness  His  people  may  receive,  and  grace  for  grace. 
Conclusion :  1.  This  truth  is  calculated  to  sustain  and  comfort  Christians  amid  all 
the  Bufferings,  and  anxieties,  and  sorrows  of  Ufe  and  death.  He  can  "  give  power 
to  the  faint,  and  to  them  that  have  no  power  He  increaseth  strength."  He  can 
••  strengthen  the  things  that  remain,  and  are  ready  to  die."  2.  When  our  nearest 
and  dearest  are  taken  from  us,  how  consoling  to  think  the  great  God  our  Saviour 
lives  I  He  is  still  their  life,  stiU  our  life.  "  Because  He  died,  we  Uve ;  because  He 
Uves,  we  live ;  because  He  lives  " — because  He  is  the  living  One — "  we  shall  Uvo 
also  I "  Happy,  surely,  are  the  living  disciples  of  the  Uving  Saviour  I  Happy  in 
prosperity — happy  in  adversity — happy  in  Ufe — happy  in  death — happy  for  ever  I 
8.  But  the  Saviour's  unending  Ufe  is  full  of  terror  to  His  enemies  because  He  ever 
Uves.  "  Because  I  live,  you  must  perish  for  ever."  They  would  not  come  to  Him 
that  they  might  have  life.  4.  He  is  still  proclaiming,  '•  As  I  Uve,  I  have  no  pleasure 
in  the  death  of  the  wicked."  "  I  wiU  that  they  would  turn — I  will  that  they  would 
live."  (J.  Brown,  D.B.)  The  Christian's  life  force  : — Christ  is  the  basis  of — I. 
Physical  lifb.  He  is  the  Creator,  and  the  life  of  Adam  and  Eve  after  the  fall 
depended  entirely  on  the  promise  of  the  Redeemer.  His  advent  postulated  the 
continuance  of  the  race.  The  birth  of  the  first  child  was  a  prelude  to  the  gospel. 
It  may  be  that  Eve  saw  in  the  birth  of  Cain  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise,  for  she 
said,  "I  have  borne  the  seed,  a  man,  the  Lord."  II.  The  renewed  life.  The 
plan  of  redemption  depends  upon  His  iucamation  and  atonement.  There  is  no 
spiritual  Ufe  on  earth  apart  from  BUm.  The  fact  that  there  are  millions  of  Christiana 
who  Uve  by  faith  in  Him  under  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit,  proves  the  reality  of 
His  Ufe,  of  its  continuance  and  power.  Because  He  Uves,  we  live,  and  our  life  is 
hid  with  Christ  in  God.  IH.  The  bisen  life  in  glory,  to  aU  eternity.  Becaus* 
He  continues  to  Uve,  His  disciples  shall  continue  to  live  also.  "  When  Christ,  who 
is  our  Life,  shall  appear,  then  shaU  ye  also  appear  with  Him  in  glory."  Reflections : 
(1)  Apart  from  Christ,  the  Christian  can  do  nothing.  (2)  The  fact  that  Jesua 
continues  to  Uve,  is  the  assurance  that  aU  who  beUeve  in  Him  shaU  not  perish,  but 
have  eternal  life.  (3)  How  great  wiU  appear  at  last  the  guUt  of  those  who  reject 
Christ,  when  they  shall  learn  that  even  their  bodily  Ufe  has  depended  upon  Him, 
and  that,  being  destitute  of  His  Spirit,  they  are  none  of  His.  {L.  O.  Thompson.) 
The  leliever's  life : — "  Because  I  Uve,  ye  shaU  live  also."  What  life  is  it  that  Christ 
speaks  of  when  He  here  says,  "  I  live  ?  "  It  is  the  life  which  He  now  has  in  heaven, 
and  which  began  at  the  Resurrection.    It  is  different  from  aU  other  life,  higher  and 


CHAP.  XIV.]  ST.  JOHN.  561 

better  than  any  life  with  which  we  are  acquainted.  It  is  everlasting  life ;  He  has 
done  with  deaih.  It  is  a  life  of  liberty ;  He  has  done  with  servile  work,  and  now 
reigns  on  high.  It  is  a  life  of  glory ;  He  has  done  with  shame,  and  has  a  name 
that  is  above  every  name.  It  is  a  life  of  favour ;  He  is  now  very  near  and  very 
dear  to  God  for  ever.  He  never  slumbers  nor  sleeps ;  He  has  all  power  in  heaven 
and  on  earth  ;  He  is  Head  over  all  things  to  the  Church.  But  what  is  the  believer's 
life  of  which  Christ  speaks,  when  He  says,  "  Ye  shall  live  also."  It  is  the  samo  as  ' 
Christ's  own  life,  of  which  we  have  been  speaking.  It  springs  out  of  His  life,  and 
is  fed  and  maintained  by  it.  True,  the  believer's  natural  life  is  like  that  of  all  oiher 
men  :  one  of  sin,  misery,  without  God,  without  hope  under  wrath,  on  the  way  to 
everlasting  woe.  It  is  not  worthy  of  the  name  of  life ;  it  is  properly  death.  But 
this  natural  life  loses  its  power  and  dominion  when  we  believe  on  Christ.  It  re- 
ceived its  death-blow  on  the  cross.  Hence  the  apostle  says,  "  Ye  are  dead,  and 
your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God ; "  and  the  believer  answers,  "  I  am  crucified 
with  Christ,  nevertheless  I  Uve."  At  present  this  higher  life  is  only  in  its  infancy. 
It  is  hindered  by  its  connection  with  the  old  life,  by  the  circumstances  in  which  it 
is  placed  by  its  absence  from  Christ  its  Fountain.  The  life  of  the  beli«ver  is  the 
same  in  nature  as  Christ's ;  the  same  in  duration.  It  is  the  same  in  the  reason  for 
which  it  is  bestowed.  Christ  got  it,  because  He  wrought  out  the  perfect,  everlasting 
righteousness;  we  get  it,  because  by  faith  we  have  received  that  righteousness.  It 
is  the  same  in  its  origin.  It  began  in  Christ,  when  God  wrought  in  Him  by  Hii 
mighty  power,  to  raise  Him  from  the  dead.  It  begins  in  us  by  the  working  of 
the  c^ame  mighty  power.  But  what  assurance  have  we  that  this  life  of  Christ  wUl 
always  continue  to  be  imparted  to  His  people  ?  This  springs  from  the  relation 
which  He  holds  to  them.  He  is  their  Surety,  Bepresentative,  Covenant  Head. 
(John  Aliinc.)  The  continued  life  of  Christ  the  ground  of  our  hope  : — Christ 

lives — I.  In  all  the  strength  and  tenderness  of  His  afeectkins.  A  heart  which 
bore  the  Hgony,  shime,  desertion  of  His  disciples  must  be  always  warm  towards 
those  whose  salvation  He  seeks.  II.  In  His  ability  to  help  to  the  utmost.  "  All 
power  is  given  unto  Me"  (Eph.  i.  20-22).  "  He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession." 
III.  In  a  special  manner  with  the  believer.  "  I  am  the  Bread  of  Life ;  "  "I  am 
the  Vine,  ye  are  the  branches."  The  Church  is  His  bride.  How  can  we  famish  or 
die  ?  IV.  To  destroy  all  power  that  is  opposed  to  man's  redemption.  (Ray 
Palmer,  D.D.)  The  living  Church: — 1.  The  life  of  the  Church  of  Christ  is  its 
most  distinctive  and  ^loiious  characteristic.  It  has  changed  its  forms,  varied  its 
circumstances,  altered  its  doctrines,  but  has  maintained  in  every  period  of  its  history 
its  inward  life.  If  justitieation  is  the  article  of  a  standing  or  a  falling  Church,  re- 
generation, or  life  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  is  the  article  of  a  hving  or  a  dead  Church.  2. 
This  life  is  communicated,  not  by  anything  that  is  outward,  but  entirely  by  the  Holy 
Spirit  of  God.  The  patronage  of  princes  may  make  a  rich  or  a  renowned  Church. 
Eloquence  and  orthodoxy  may  make  a  convinced  or  an  enlightened,  but  they  cannot 
make  a  hving  Church.  I.  The  evidences  of  this  life.  It  is  easy  to  ascertain  if  a 
man  be  dead  or  living  physically ;  and  it  is  not  difficult  to  ascertain  if  a  man  be 
living  or  dead  spiritually.  1.  Life  is  an  internal  principle  originating  outward  and 
visible  characteristics.  We  know  not  what  life  is.  All  that  we  know  is,  that  there 
is  some  priniiple  within  that  looks  through  the  eye,  that  hears  through  the  ear, 
that  feels  through  the  touch,  that  enables  me  to  walk,  to  speak,  and  to  hold  con- 
verse with  socitity  around  me.  Now  it  is  so  with  spiritual  Ufe.  2.  Life  has  the 
power  of  assimilation.  If  a  man  eats  a  piece  of  bread,  that  bread  is  so  assimilated 
that  it  is  turned  into  the  energy  of  his  physical  system.  And  this  spiritual  life  lays 
hold  upon  all  the  elements  of  nutriment,  as  these  are  laid  up  in  Christ,  found  in  the 
oracles  of  truth,  and  at  the  communion  table.  3.  Life  is  sensible  of  pain.  A 
dead  man  does  not  feel.  What  pain  is  to  the  body,  sin  is  to  the  spiritual  Ufe ;  and  just 
as  our  nervous  system  shrinks  from  the  very  touch  or  contact  of  pain,  so  the  soul  that 
is  in  unison  with  God  shrinks  from  sin  as  its  greatest  evil,  and  the  immediate 
source  of  all  misery.  4.  Wherever  there  is  Ufe,  we  find  it  has  within  itself  the 
power  of  adaptation  to  varied  temperature.  Man  lives  at  the  Pole,  as  he  Uvea  below 
the  Line.  And  if  there  be  life  in  man's  soul,  that  life  wiU  adjust  itself;  wUl  not  be 
conquered  by,  but  wiU  conquer  its  circumstances.  Place  the  Christian  in  the  palace 
with  Pharaoh,  or  in  the  dimgeon  with  Joseph,  and  he  can  breathe  the  atmosphere 
of  the  one  just  as  he  can  the  other.  5.  Life  is  progressive,  and  Spiritual  hfe  grows 
in  likeness  to  Christ.  Its  progress  is  UUmitable,  because  the  principle  itself  is  in- 
finite. 6.  Life  is  communicative.  The  proof  that  a  man  is  no  Christian  is,  that 
he  is  no  missionary.  Monopoly  is  a  word  banished  from  the  reUgion  of  heaven.  Ih* 
▼oL.  u.  86 


562  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xit. 

Christian  cannot  see  pain  he  does  not  wish  to  alleviate  ;  ignorance  he  does  not  wish 
to  enlighten ;  death  in  trespasses  and  sins  to  which  he  would  not  communicate  a  por- 
tion of  his  own  spiritual  life.  II.  There  ake  certain  points  to  which  this  lifb 
SPECIALLY  kefers.  A  Christian  is  alive— 1.  To  the  presence  of  God.  •'  Thou  God 
fieest  me  "  is  the  constant  feeling  of  the  Christian.  2.  To  the  favour  of  God. 
"  Who  will  show  us  any  good?  "  is  the  question  with  the  worldling ;  but  the  Chris- 
tian says,  "  Lift  Thou  upon  us  the  light  of  Thy  countenance."  3.  To  the  glory  of 
God.  We  are  prone  to  think  that  Christianity  is  a  thing  for  the  Bible,  for  the  Sun- 
day, for  the  Church  merely.  But  it  is  meant  to  be  like  the  great  principle  of  gravi- 
tation which  controls  the  planet  and  the  pebble.  When  you  transact  business  you 
are  bound  to  do  it  to  the  glory  of  God.  In  your  homes,  whether  your  tables  be 
covered  with  all  the  luxuries,  or  merely  with  the  necessaries  of  life,  "  ye  are  to  do 
all  to  the  glory  of  God."  III.  This  life  has  certain  special  characteristics.  It  is — 

1.  A  holy  hfe.  If  there  be  God's  life  in  man's  heart,  there  must  be  God's  hohness 
in  man's  conduct.  2.  A  happy  life.  Joy  is  one  of  the  fruits  it  bears.  3.  A  royal 
life.  "  He  has  made  us  kings  and  priests  unto  God."  We  are  "  a  royal  priesthood." 
4.  An  immortal  life.  All  systems,  hierarchies,  and  empires  shall  be  dissolved ;  but 
the  man  that  has  the  life  of  God  in  his  heart  has  the  immortality  of  God  as  his 
prerogative.  Conclusion :  The  history  of  the  Church  that  has  possessed  this  vital 
principle  has  been  throughout  a  very  painful  but  a  very  triumphant  one.  That 
vitality  must  be  a  reality  since  nothing  has  been  ever  able  to  extinguish  or  destroy 
it.  Systems  that  chime  in  with  the  fallen  propensities  of  man  have  sunk  before 
rival  systems ;  but  Christianity,  which  rebukes  man's  pride,  which  bridles  man's 
lusts,  which  rebukes  man's  sins,  has  outlived  aU  persecution,  survived  all  curse, 
and  seems  to  commence  in  the  nineteenth  century,  a  career  that  shall  be  bounded 
only  by  the  limits  of  the  population  of  the  globe  itself.  Is  not  this  evidence  of  a 
Divine  presence — of  a  Divine  power  ?  Let  me  make  one  or  two  inferences.  This 
life  is — 1.  The  true  secret  and  source  of  ministerial  success.  2.  The  source  of 
all  missionary  effort.  3.  The  true  distinction  between  the  Church  and  the  world. 
4.  The  true  safety  of  the  Church.  5.  The  great  want  of  the  Church  to-day.  {J. 
Gumming,  D.D.)  Immx}rtality  as  taught  by  the  Christ : — 1.  Science  may  throw 
no  barrier  in  the  way  of  belief  in  immortahty ;  nature  and  the  heart  of  man  may 
suggest  clear  intimations  of  a  future  life;  human  society  may  demand  another  life 
to  complete  the  suggestions  and  fill  up  the  lacks  of  this ;  but,  for  some  reason,  all 
Buch  proof  fails  to  satisfy  us.  It  holds  the  mind,  but  does  not  minister  to  the  heart. 

2.  It  is  noticeable  also  that  the  faith  of  natural  evidence  awakens  no  joyful  entha- 
eiasm  in  masses  of  mankind.  Plato  and  Cicero  discourse  of  immortality  with  a 
certain  degree  of  warmth,  but  their  countrymen  get  little  comfort  from  it.  The 
reason  is  evident.  The  mere  fact  that  I  shall  live  to-morrow  does  not  sensibly  move 
me.  Something  must  be  joined  with  existence  before  it  gets  power.  3.  We  will 
now  consider  the  way  in  which  Christ  treated  the  subject.  I.  Hb  assumed  thb 
Beceived  doctbink  and  built  upon  it.  When  He  entered  on  His  ministry  He  found 
certain  imperfect  or  germinal  truths  existing  in  Jewish  theology.  He  found  a 
doctrine  of  God,  partial  in  conception ;  He  perfected  it  by  reveahng  the  Divine 
Fatherhood.  He  found  a  doctrine  of  sin  and  righteousness  turning  upon  external 
conduct ;  He  transferred  it  to  the  heart  and  spirit.  He  found  a  doctrine  of  immor- 
tahty,  held  as  mere  future  existence.  His  treatment  of  this  doctrine  was  not  so 
much  corrective  as  accretive.  Hence  He  never  uses  any  word  corresponding  to  im- 
mortality (which  is  a  mere  negation — unmortal),  but  always  speaks  of  life.  He 
never  makes  a  straight  assertion  of  it  except  once,  when  the  Sadducees  pressed  Him 
with  a  quibbhng  argument  against  the  resurrection.  Elsewhere  He  simply  assumes 
it.  But  an  assumption  is  often  the  strongest  kind  of  argument.  It  implies  such 
conviction  in  the  mind  of  the  speaker  that  there  is  no  need  of  proof.  II.  In  His 
mind  the  intense  and  absolute  consciousness  of  God  carries  with  it  immortality, 
as  it  does  the  whole  body  of  His  truth.  Within  this  universe,  at  its  centre,  is  A 
world  around  which  all  others  revolve,  the  sun  of  suns,  the  centre  of  all  systems, 
whose  potency  reaches  to  the  uttermost  verge,  holding  them  steady  to  their  courses. 
It  is  not  otherwise  in  morals.  Given  the  fact  of  God,  and  all  other  truth  takes  its 
place  without  question.  Hence,  when  there  is  an  overpowering,  all-possessing  sense 
of  God  as  there  was  in  Christ,  truth  takes  on  absolute  forms ;  hence  it  was  that  He 
spoke  with  authority.  It  was  Christ's  realization  of  the  living  God  that  rendered 
His  conviction  of  eternal  life  so  absolute.  We  can  but  notice  how  grandly  Christ 
reposed  upon  this  fact  of  immortal  life.  He  feels  no  need  of  examining  the  evi- 
dences ot  balancing  proofs.    He  stands  steadily  upon  life,  life  endless  by  its  owa 


OTAP.  XIV.]  ST.  JOHN.  66» 

Divine  natare.  Death  was  no  leap  in  the  dark  to  Him ;  it  was  simply  a  door  lead- 
ing  into  another  mansion  of  God's  great  Louse.  It  is  proper  to  ask  here,  "  Is  it 
probable  that  Christ  was  mistaken  ?  That  His  faith  in  immortality  was  but  an  in- 
tense  form  of  a  prevailing  superstition  ?  "  If  we  could  find  any  weakness  elsewhere 
in  His  teachings,  there  would  be  ground  for  such  questions.  But  as  a  moral 
ieacher  He  stands  at  the  head,  unimpeachable  in  the  minutest  particular.  Is  it 
probable  that,  true  in  all  else.  He  was  iu  fault  in  this  one  respect?  That  a  body  of 
truth  all  interwoven  and  suffused  with  life  is  based  upon  an  illusion  of  life  ?  If  one 
tells  me  ninety-nine  truths,  I  will  trust  him  in  the  hundredth, especially  if  it  is  involved 
in  those  before.  Build  me  a  column  perfect  in  base  and  body,  and  I  will  know  if  the 
capital  is  true.  When  the  clearest  eyes  that  ever  looked  on  this  world  and  into  the 
heavens,  and  the  keenest  judgment  that  ever  weighed  human  life,  and  the  purest 
heart  that  ever  throbbed  with  human  sympathy,  tells  me  that  man  is  immortal,  I 
repose  on  His  teaching  in  perfect  trust.  It  is  reason  to  see  with  the  wise,  and  to  feel 
with  the  good.  Still  another  distinction  must  be  made  ;  we  do  not  accept  immor- 
tality because  Jesus,  the  wise  young  Jew,  wove  it  into  His  precepts,  but  because  the 
■Christ,  the  Son  of  God  and  of  man—  Humanity  revealing  Deity — makes  it  a  part  of 
that  order  of  human  history  best  named  as  the  reconciliation  of  the  world  to  God. 
III.  He  does  not  think  of  it  as  a  ruTUKE,  but  as  a  pbesekt  fact.  As  time  in  the 
Divine  mind  is  an  eternal  now,  so  it  seems  to  have  been  with  Christ.  If  the  cup  of 
life  is  full,  there  is  Uttle  sense  of  past  or  futui  e ;  the  present  is  enough.  When 
Christ  speaks  of  eternal  life.  He  does  not  mean  future  endless  existence ;  but  full- 
ness or  perfection  of  life.  That  it  will  go  on  for  ever  is  a  matter  of  course,  but  it  is 
not  the  important  feature  of  the  truth.  IV.  And  thus  we  are  brought  to  the  funda- 
mental fact  that  He  connected  life  ob  immortality  with  chabacteb.  Life,  as  mere 
continuance  of  being,  is  not  worth  thinking  about.  Of  what  value  is  the  mere 
adding  of  days  to  days  if  they  are  full  of  sin  ?  Practically  such  life  is  death,  and 
so  He  names  it.  There  can  be  no  real  and  abiding  faith  in  immortality  until  it  be- 
comes wedded  to  the  spiritual  nature.  When  Ufe  begins  to  be  true,  it  announces 
itself  an  an  eteinal  thing  to  the  mind ;  as  a  caged  bird  when  let  loose  into  the  sky 
might  say,  "  Now  I  know  that  my  wings  are  made  to  beat  the  air  in  flight;  "  and 
no  logic  could  ever  persuade  the  bird  that  it  was  not  designed  to  fly ;  but  when 
oaged,  it  might  have  doubted  at  times,  as  it  beat  the  bars  of  its  prison  with  unavail- 
ing stroke,  if  its  wings  were  made  for  flight.  So  it  is  not  until  a  man  begins  to  use 
his  soul  aright  that  he  knows  for  what  it  is  made.  When  he  puts  his  life  into 
harmony  with  God's  laws ;  when  he  begins  to  pray ;  when  he  clothes  himself 
with  the  graces  of  Christian  faith  and  conduct,  when  he  begins  to  live  unto  his 
spuitual  nature,  he  begins  to  realize  what  life  is — a  reality  that  death  and  time 
cannot  touch.  But  when  his  life  is  made  up  of  the  world,  it  is  not  strange  that  it 
should  seem  to  himself  as  liable  to  perish  with  the  world.  Those  who  believe  have 
everlasting  life.  Others  may  exist,  but  existence  is  not  life.  Others  may  continue 
to  exist,  but  continuance  is  not  immortality.  To  lift  men  out  of  existence  into  life 
•was  Christ's  mission.  V.  He  not  only  gave  us  the  true  law,  but  was  Himself  a 
peefect  illustration  of  immoetality,  and  even  named  Himself  by  it — the  Life.  It 
is  a  great  thing  for  us  that  this  truth  has  been  put  into  actual  fact.  Human  nature 
is  crowded  with  hints  and  omens  of  it,  but  prophecy  does  not  convince  till  it  is  ful- 
filled. And  from  the  Divine  side  also  we  get  assurances  of  endless  life ;  but  in  so 
hard  a  matter  we  are  like  Thomas,  who  needed  the  sight  and  touch  to  assure  him. 
And  in  Christ  we  have  both — the  human  omen  and  the  Divine  promise  turned  into 
fact.  In  some  of  the  cathedrals  of  Europe,  on  Christmas-eve,  two  small  lights,  typi- 
fying  the  Divine  and  human  nature,  are  gradually  made  to  approach  one  another  until 
they  meet  and  blend,  forming  a  bright  flame.  Thus,  in  Christ,  we  have  the  light  of 
two  worlds  thrown  upon  human  destiny.  The  whole  bearing  of  Christ  towards 
death,  and  His  treatment  of  it,  was  as  one  superior  to  it,  and  as  having  no  lot  nor 
part  in  it.  He  will  indeed  bow  his  head  in  obedience  to  the  physical  laws  of 
the  hurtanlty  He  shares,  but  already  He  enters  the  gates  of  Paradise,  not  alone  but 
leading  a  penitent  child  of  humanity  by  the  hand.  And  in  order  that  we  may  know 
He  simply  changed  worlds,  He  comes  back  and  shows  Himself  alive  ;  for  He  is  not 
here  in  the  world  simply  to  assert  truth,  but  to  enact  it.  And  still  further  to  show 
us  how  phantasmal  death  is.  He  finally  departs  in  all  the  fullness  of  life,  simply 
drawing  about  Himself  the  thin  drapery  of  a  cloud.  Conclusion  :  A  true  and  satis- 
fying sense  of  immortality  cannot  be  taken  second-hand.  We  cannot  read  it  in  the 
pages  of  a  book,  whether  of  nature  or  inspiration.  We  cannot  even  look  upon  the 
man  Jesus  issuing  from  the  tomb,  and  draw  from  thence  a  faith  that  yields  peace. 


£64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xnr. 

There  must  be  fellowship  with  the  Christ  of  the  Eesnrrection  before  we  can  feel  ita 
power ;  in  other  words,  we  must  get  over  upon  the  Divine  side  of  life  before  we  can 
be  assured  of  eternal  life.  "  Join  thyself,"  says  Augustine,  •'  to  the  eternal  God, 
and  thou  wilt  be  eternal."  (T.  T.  Hunger.)  Living  became  Christ  lives : — When 
Luther  was  in  his  worst  troubles  a  friend  came  in  to  see  him,  and  he  noticed  that  he 
had  written  upon  the  wall  in  big  letters  the  word  "  Vivit  1 "  He  inquired  of  Luther 
what  he  meant  by  "  vivit  ?  "  Luther  answered,  "  Jesus  lives ;  and  if  He  did  not  live 
I  would  not  care  to  live  an  hour."  Yes,  our  life  is  bound  up  with  that  of  Jesus.  We 
are  called  upon  to  live  of  ourselves,  that  would  be  death ;  but  we  have  life  and  all 
things  in  onion  with  Him.    (C.  H.  S;purgeon.) 

Yet.  20.  At  that  day  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  In  Uy  Father,  and  ye  In  Me,  and  I 
In  you. — Christ's  legacy  : — I.  The  legacy  itself  :  Knowledge.  "  Ye  shall  know." 
God  delivered  the  Jews  to  some  extent  from  ignorance  by  the  law,  which  was  their 
schoolmaster.  But  in  the  gospel  we  are  giaduates,  and  know  as  a  matter  of  history 
and  experience  what  was  only  previously  known  in  prophecy  and  type,  in  the 
manifestation  of  Christ,  and  the  presence  of  the  Spirit.  Consider  this  knowledge 
as  opposed  to — 1.  Ignorance.  As  there  is  a  profitable  ignorance  which  is  a  reverent 
abstinence  from  searching  into  God's  secrets,  so  there  is  an  unprofitable  ignorant 
knowledge  which  puffs  us  up.  And  one  strange  effect  of  this  ignorance  is  that 
every  man  murmurs  that  some  one  else  has  more  land  or  money  than  he,  yet  every 
man  thinks  that  he  has  more  knowledge  than  all  the  world  beside.  Wherefore  the 
prophet  (Jer.  z.  14)  calls  this  confident  believer  in  his  own  wisdom  a  fool,  as  the 
greatest  reproach  that  can  be  fastened  upon  him.  Now,  this  foolishness  is  not 
narrowness  of  understanding,  nor  inability  to  acquire  knowledge,  for  many  good 
men  are  unlettered  and  dull.  The  fool  is  he  who  trusteth  in  his  own  heart ;  and 
against  this  Christ  has  left  us  this  legacy  of  knowledge.  2.  Inconsideration.  God 
takes  it  worse  to  be  neglected  than  to  be  injured.  Dares  an  officer  who  receives 
instruction  from  his  prince  on  non-performance  say,  " I  never  thought  of  it?" 
Dares  a  subject,  a  servant,  or  a  son  1  God  sbows  the  inconsiderate  man — (1)  The 
book  of  His  creatures.  Every  ant  asks  him,  "  Where  had  I  this  providence  and 
industry  ?  "  Every  flower,  "  Where  had  I  this  beauty,  fragrance,  medicinal  virtue  ?  " 
(2)  The  Scriptures,  where  every  merciful  promise  cries,  "  Why  am  I  here  to  meet 
thee  and  perform  God's  purpose  towards  thee,  if  thou  never  consider  me  ?  "  So 
wiih  every  judgment.  (3)  'The  example  of  Christ,  who  reconsidered  His  prayer, 
*•  Yet  not  My  will,  but  Thine,  be  done."  Since,  then,  our  best  acts  of  reading  or 
hearing  and  praying  need  consideration,  value  this  legacy.  3.  Concealment.  It 
must  be  pubUshed  for  the  benefit  of  others.  Virtue  that  is  never  produced  into 
action  is  not  worthy  of  the  name  (Philemon  6).  II.  The  time  when  this  legaot 
ACCRUES  TO  vs.  "  At  that  day."  1.  The  word  itself  affords  cheerfulness.  When 
God  inflicted  the  greatest  plague  on  Egypt  it  was  at  midnight ;  and  when  He  would 
intimate  both  deaths  at  once  He  says,  "  Thou  fool,  this  night,"  &c.  Against  all 
supply  of  knowledge  He  calls  him  fool ;  against  all  sense  of  comfort  in  the  day  He 
threatens  night.  2.  It  was  a  certain  day :  "  That  " — and  soon.  For  after  Christ 
had  made  His  will  at  this  supper,  and  given  strength  to  His  will  by  His  death,  and 
proved  His  will  by  His  resurrection,  and  left  the  Church  possessed  of  His  estate  by 
His  ascension,  within  ten  days  after  that  He  poured  out  this  legacy  of  knowledge. 
3.  On  that  day  the  Holy  Ghost  came  as  a  vnnd  to  note  a  powerful  working ;  filled 
them,  to  note  the  abundance ;  and  pave  them  utterance,  to  infer  the  communication 
of  their  knowledge  to  others.  But  He  was  poured  forth  for  the  benefit  of  all.  The 
prophets,  high  as  their  calling  was,  saw  nothing  without  the  Spirit ;  with  the 
Spirit  simple  man  understands  the  prophets.  III.  Oob  poetion  in  this  leoact — 
the  measure  of  the  knowledge  of  those  mysteries  which  we  are  to  receive.  When 
Felix  the  Manichsean  would  prove  to  Augustine  that  Manes  was  the  Holy  Spirit 
who  should  teach  all  truth,  because  Manes  taught  many  things  of  which  men  were 
ignorant  concerning  the  frame  and  nature  of  the  heavens,  Augustine  answered, 
"  The  Holy  Ghost  makes  us  Christians,  not  mathematicians."  This  knowledge  ia 
to  know  the  end  and  the  way — heaven  and  Christ.  Now,  in  all  our  journeys,  a 
moderate  pace  brings  a  man  most  surely  to  his  journey's  end,  and  so  does  a  sober 
knowledge  in  the  mysteries  of  religion.  Therefore,  the  Holy  Ghost  did  not  give  the 
apostles  all  kind  of  knowledge,  but  knowledge  enough  for  their  present  work,  and  so 
with  us.  The  points  of  knowledge  necessary  for  our  salvation  are  three.  1.  The 
mystery  of  the  Trinity.  "  I  am  in  My  Father."  Origin  tells  us  that  the  principal 
sse  of  knowledge  is  to  know  the  Trinity.    For  to  know  that  there  is  one  CK>d« 


CHAP.  XI?.]  8T.  JOHN.  665 

natural  reason  serves  our  turn.  But  to  know  that  the  Son  is  in  the  Father  I  need 
the  Scriptures,  and  the  light  of  the  Holy  Spirit  on  the  Scriptures,  for  Jews  and 
Arians  have  the  Bible  too.  But  consider  that  Christ  says,  "  ye  shall  know,"  not 
*•  ye  shall  know  how."  It  is  enough  for  a  happy  subject  to  enjoy  the  sweetness  of  a 
peaceable  government,  though  he  knows  not  the  ways  by  which  his  prince  governs, 
so  it  is  enough  for  a  Christian  to  enjoy  the  working  of  God's  grace,  though  ha 
inquire  not  into  God's  unrevealed  decrees.  When  the  Church  asked  how  the  body 
of  Christ  was  in  the  sacrament  we  see  what  an  inconvenient  answer  it  fell  upon. 
Make  much  of  that  knowledge  with  which  the  Spirit  hath  trusted  you,  and  beUeva 
the  rest.  No  man  knows  how  his  soul  came  into  him,  yet  no  man  doubts  that  he 
has  a  soul.  2.  The  mystery  of  the  Incarnation — "Ye  in  Me."  For  since  the  devil 
has  taken  manhood  in  one  lump  in  Adam,  Christ  to  deliver  us  as  entirely  took  all 
mankind  upon  Him.  So  that  the  same  pretence  that  the  devil  hath  against  us, 
"  You  are  mine,  for  you  sinned  in  Adam,"  we  have  also  for  our  discharge,  we  are 
delivered,  for  we  paid  our  debt  in  Christ.  3.  The  assurance  of  this  grows  from  the 
third  part  of  our  knowledge  the  mystery  of  our  redemption,  in  our  sanctification. 
"I  in  you."  This  last  is  the  best.  To  know  that  Christ  is  in  the  Father  may 
Berve  me  to  convince  another  who  denies  the  Trinity  ;  to  know  we  are  in  Christ 
may  show  that  we  are  more  honoured  than  angels.  But  what  worth  is  this  if  I 
know  not  that  Christ  is  in  me.  How  then  is  this  ?  Here  the  question  is  lawful, 
for  it  has  been  revealed.  It  is  by  our  obedience  to  His  inspiration,  and  by  our 
reverent  use  of  His  sacrament,  when  the  Spirit  visits  us  with  effectual  grace,  and 
Christ  marries  Himself  to  our  souls.  {J.  Donne,  D.D.)  The  experimental  know- 
ledge of  the  Christian  mysteries : — Our  Lord  had  just  been  exhorting  His  disciples 
to  believe  that  He  was  in  the  Father  and  the  Father  in  Him  ;  and  had  been  gently 
wondering  at  the  slowness  of  their  faith.  Now  He  tells  them  that,  when  He  ia 
gone,  they  shall  know  the  thing  which,  with  Him  by  their  side,  they  found  it  so 
hard  to  believe.  I.  The  principle  that  underlies  these  wonderful  words  is  that 
Christian  expeeience  is  the  best  teachee  of  fundamental  Cbbistian  truth. 
Observe  with  what  decision  our  Lord  carries  that  principle  into  regions  where  we 
might  suppose  at  first  sight  that  it  was  altogether  inapplicable.  1.  "  Ye  shall  know 
that  I  am  in  My  Father."  How  can  such  a  thing  as  the  relation  between  Christ  and 
God  ever  be  a  matter  of  consciousness?  Must  it  not  always  be  a  matter 
that  we  must  take  on  trust?  Not  so;  remember  what  has  gone  before. 
If  I  have  these  things  I  know  that  it  is  Jesus  Christ  that  gives  them, 
and  I  know  that  He  could  not  give  them  if  He  did  not  dwell  in  God  and  were  not 
Divine.  These  new  influences,  this  revolution  in  my  being,  this  healing  touch, 
these  new  hopes,  these  reversed  desires,  all  these  things  bear  upon  their  very  front 
the  signature  that  they  are  wrought  by  a  Divine  hand,  and  as  sure  as  I  am  of  my 
own  Christian  consciousness,  so  sure  am  I  that  all  its  experiences  proclaim  their 
author,  and  that  Christ  who  does  them  is  in  God.  On  the  subject  of  Christ's 
Divinity,  many  profound  and  learned  arguments  have  been  urged  by  theologians, 
and  these  are  all  well  and  needful  in  their  places,  but  the  true  way  to  be  sure  of  it 
is  to  have  Him  dwelling  with  us  and  working  on  us.  2.  In  like  manner,  the  other 
elements  of  this  knowledge  flow  necessarily  from  Christian  experiences.  "  That  ye 
are  in  Me,  and  I  in  you."  If  a  Christian  man  carries  the  consciousness  of  Christ's 
presence,  and  has  Him  as  a  Sun  in  his  darkness,  and  as  a  Life-source  feeding  his 
deadness  with  life,  then  he  knows  with  a  consciousness  which  is  irrefragable  that 
Jesus  Christ  is  in  him.  3.  So,  let  us  learn  what  the  Christian  man's  experience 
ought  to  be,  and  to  do  for  him.  It  should  make  all  the  fundamentals  of  the  gospel 
vitally  and  vividly  true;  and,  certified  by  what  had  passed  within  your  own  spirits, 
you  should  be  able  to  say,  "we  have  the  witness  in  ourselves."  And  though  there 
will  remain  much  in  Christian  doctrine  which  is  not  capable  of  that  plain  and  all- 
sufficing  verification ;  much  about  which  we  must  still  depend  on  the  teaching  of 
others,  the  central  facts  which  make  the  gospel  may  all  become  elements  of  our 
very  consciousness  which  stand  undeniable  to  ns,  whosoever  denies  them.  U. 
Such  a  direct  way  to  knowledge  is  reasonable.  1.  It  is  in  plain  analogy  with 
the  manner  by  which  we  attain  to  the  knowledge  of  everything  except  the  mere 
external  facts.  How  do  you  know  anything  about  love  ?  You  may  read  poems  and 
tragedies  to  the  end  of  time,  and  you  will  not  understand  it  until  yon  come  under 
its  spell  for  yourself ;  and  then  all  the  things  that  men  said  about  it  cease  to  h» 
mere  words,  because  you  yourself  have  experienced  the  emotion.  And  the  only  way 
to  be  sore,  with  a  vital  certitude,  of  Christ,  is  to  take  Christ  for  your  very  own,  and 
then  Be  eomes  into  joox  very  being,  and  dwells  there  unchanged,  the  Sun  and  the 


566  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSI RATOB.  [chap.  nr. 

Life.  2.  Though  Buch  certitude  is  not  available  for  other  people,  the  fact  that  so 
many  millions  of  men  allege  that  they  possess  this  certitude  is  available  for  other 
people.  And  there  is  nothing  to  be  said  by  the  unbeliever  to  this.  "  Whether  this 
man  be  a  sinner  or  no,  I  know  not."  You  may  jangle  as  much  as  you  like  about 
the  controversial  points  that  surround  the  Christian  revelation.  "  One  thing  I 
know,  that  whereas  I  was  blind,  now  I  see."  And  we  may  push  the  war  into  the 
enemy's  quarters,  and  say,  "  Why !  herein  is  a  marvellous  thing,  that  you  that 
know  everything  do  not  know  whence  this  Man  is.  And  yet  He  has  opened  mine 
eyes."  You  want  facts  ;  there  are  some.  You  want  verification  ;  we  have  verified 
by  experiment,  and  we  set  to  our  seals  that  God  is  true.  3.  But,  you  say,  that  is 
not  a  fair  account  of  the  way  in  which  Christian  men  and  women  generally  feel 
about  this  matter.  Well,  so  much  the  worse  for  the  so-called  Christian  men  and 
women.  And  if  they  are  Christians,  and  do  not  know  by  this  inward  experience 
that  Christ  is  Divine  and  their  Saviour,  then  either  their  experience  is  wretchedly 
superficial  and  fragmentary ;  or,  having  the  facts,  they  have  failed  to  make  their 
own  by  reflection  the  certitudes  which  are  their  own.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The 
Father,  Christ,  and  His  people  one : — 1.  The  importance  of  a  definite  knowledge 
and  firm  belief  of  the  more  recondite  doctrines  of  Christianity  is  greatly  underrated. 
By  the  infidel  they  are  considered  as  mystical  dreams,  scholastic  abstractions, 
characterized  by  self-contradiction  and  absurdity.  The  rationalistic  Christian  for 
the  same  reason  explains  away  the  passages  that  teach  them.  But  there  are  also 
men — loud  in  proclaiming  their  belief  of  all  these  doctrines — whose  belief  of  them  is 
little  more  than  a  belief  that  the  propositions  in  which  they  are  stated,  and  who  plainly 
considerthem  as  having  Httle  connection  with  the  formation  of  character  and  guidance 
of  conduct.  But  I  do  not  worship  the  Christian  God  if  I  do  not  worship  God  in  Christ; 
and  as  Christian  worship  is  rational  worship,  I  cannot  worship  God  in  Christ,  without 
knowing  what  is  meant  by  God  being  in  Christ,  and  believing  it.  All  Christian 
motive  and  comfort  flow  from  Christian  doctrine  understood  and  believed.  2.  The 
phrase,  "  that  day,"  does  not  seem  here  to  refer  to  some  short  fixed  period — as  the 
time  when  our  Lord  returned  to  the  disciples  after  His  resurrection — or,  the  time 
of  the  giving  of  the  Holy  Spirit  at  Pentecost, — or,  the  time  of  the  second  coming ; 
bat  to  the  whole  period  from  our  Lord's  coming  after  the  Eesurrection,  to  His  com* 
ing  the  second  time  for  complete  salvation.  The  phrase  is  very  often  so  used  in 
the  Old  Testament  (Ija.  xii.  1 ;  Zech.  xiii.  1 ;  xiv.  9).  I.  The  doctrines.  1.  Christ 
is  in  the  Father.  The  sentiment  is  more  fully  expressed  in  vers.  10,  11.  Note — (1) 
The  relation  between  our  Lord  and  the  Father  as  Divine  persons  ?  They  are,  with 
the  Holy  Spirit,  possessors  of  the  one  Divine  essence,  are  of  the  same  perfections 
and  prerogatives.  It  is  the  most  intimate  relation  in  the  universe.  The  Father 
and  the  Son  are  one.  This  is  a  union  with  the  Father  common  to  the  Son  and  to 
the  Spirit ;  but  there  is  a  union  with  the  Father  peculiar  to  the  Son.  He  is  the 
Son  of  the  Father,  the  Father  is  His  Father.  (2)  The  relation  between  our  Lord  as 
the  man  Christ  Jesus,  and  the  Father  ?  (a)  The  man  Christ  Jesus  is  in  personal 
unity  with  the  Divinity.  He  is  related  to  God  as  no  man  ever  was,  ever  will  be, 
ever  can  be.  He  was  "  God  manifest  in  flesh."  (6)  The  man  Christ  Jesus  was, 
from  the  very  moment  of  His  beginning  to  exist  as  a  man,  brought  entirely  under 
the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  through  whom  the  one  Divinity  does  all  things. 
In  other  relations  the  Son  stands  alone.  Here  He  stands,  at  the  head  of  an 
innxmierable  multitude  of  brethren.  (3)  The  relation  between  our  Lord  as  God- 
man,  Mediator  ajid  the  Father.  It  belonged  to  the  Father,  as  sustaining  the 
majesty  of  Godhead,  to  appoint  the  Mediator.  Our  Lord  took  not  this  honour  on 
Himself.  He  was  in  the  Father,  as  the  ambassador  is  in  his  prince  or  sovereign ; 
and  the  Father  was  in  Him,  as  the  prince  or  sovereign  is  in  his  ambassador.  His 
doctrine  was  the  doctrine  of  God  ;  His  works  were  the  works  of  God.  2.  Christ's 
people  are  in  Him.  (1)  By  the  Divine  constitution,  every  believer  is  brought  into 
such  an  intimacy  of  relation  with  Jesus  Christ,  as  that  he  is  treated  as  if  he  had 
done  what  Christ  has  done.  So  that  in  him  he  is  justified,  sanctified,  and 
redeemed  (1  Cor.  i.  80),  absolutely  secured  of  a  complete  salvation,  from  His  con- 
nection with  Him.  (2)  Besides,  Christ's  people  are  in  Him,  as  the  branch  in  the 
vine,  as  the  members  in  the  head.  As  new  creatures,  in  Him  '*  they  live,  and 
move,  and  have  their  being  "  (chap.  vi.  57).  3.  Christ  is  in  His  people.  They  are 
animated  by  His  Spirit.  But  that  Spirit,  enabling  them  to  understand  and  believe 
His  word,  makes  them  think,  will,  choose  along  with  Him,  walk  as  He  also  walked ; 
BO  that  they  are  His  animated  images.  His  living  epistles.  11.  The  knowledgb  o» 
TBB  C0C7BINE9.    The  apostlos  had  heard  them  again  and  again,  and  they  had  some 


CHAP.  »▼.]  ST.  JOHN.  667 

misty  general  conception  of  them ;  but  they  had  no  clear  apprehension.  But  the 
time  was  approaching  when  their  views  should  be  enlarged,  and  their  faith  con- 
firmed, and  experience  called  in  to  the  aid  of  faith.  1.  The  Eesurrection,  to  some 
extent,  cleared  their  minds.  They  saw  that  their  Master  was  in  the  Father.  Ha 
was  thereby  powerfully  declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  (chap.  xx.  28).  2.  The  out- 
pouring of  the  Holy  Spirit  went  still  farther  in  extending  their  views  and  confirming 
their  faith  (see  Peter's  sermon  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost).  3.  And  all  the  true 
followers  of  our  Lord,  in  every  age  and  country,  are  all  made  to  know  these  doctrinea 
by  the  teaching  of  His  Spirit  through  the  word,  and  the  working  of  the  Spirit  in 
their  hearts.  They  lie  at  the  very  foundation  of  all  their  hopes,  and  all  their 
holiness.  4.  And  at  the  great  day  of  doom,  they  shall  know  more  clearly  still,  and 
as  eternity  rolls  on,  new  depths  of  meaning  are  found  in  these  unfathomable  words. 
(J,  Brown,  D.D.)  The  union  between  Christ  and  His  people : — It  is  a  union  oi 
mutual  in-being,  not  a  union  of  affection  only,  such  as  the  stones  have,  when  they 
lie  together  in  a  heap  ;  but  rather  such  as  is  between  the  wine  and  the  water,  when 
they  are  put  together,  saving  that  they  are  not  mixed  together.  Christ  is  not  mixed 
with  a  Christian,  a  Christian  is  not  mixed  with  Christ ;  Christ  is  not  a  Christian,  a 
Christian  is  not  Christ ;  but  there  is  a  union  of  mutual  in-being.  Now,  you  know, 
when  the  fire  gets  into  the  iron,  is  united  to  it,  is  in  it,  the  properties  of  the  fire  are 
communicated  to  the  iron;  the  iron  forgets  his  own  blackness,  and  shines  with  the 
shining  of  the  fire,  and  burns  with  the  burning  of  the  fire.  Aiid  as  a  coal,  though 
it  be  never  so  dark  and  black  a  body,  when  the  fire  comes,  get  into  it,  the  proper- 
ties  of  the  fire  are  communicated  to  it,  and  it  burns  like  the  fire  itself,  and  melts 
like  the  fire  itself,  and  shines  like  the  fire  itself.  So,  when  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is 
united  to  a  soul,  look  what  excellencies  there  are  in  Christ,  what  graces  in  Christ, 
the  same  are  communicated  to  it ;  the  soul  shines  with  Christ's  shining,  and  wanna 
with  His  warming:  there  is  grace  answerable  for  His  grace.     {W.  Bridge,  M.A.) 

Yer.  21.  He  that  hath  My  commandments,  and  keepetb  them,  he  It  Is  that  loveth 
Me. — Love  to  Christ : — I.  Thk  beasons  which  justify  its  exercise.  If  we  love  an 
object,  it  is  because  of  something  amiable  in  that  object.  1.  And  is  there  not  real 
excellency  in  Jesus  Christ — •*  the  brightness  of  His  Father's  glory,"  &o.  "  He  is 
altogether  lovely  1 "  2.  Is  He  not  nearly  related  to  us  (Heb.  ii.  11 ;  Matt.  xii.  48- 
60)?  3.  Is  He  not  our  Friend,  our  kindest  and  best  Benefactor?  "He  gave  His 
life  a  ransom  for  us."  II.  The  propeeties  by  which  it  is  distinguished.  It  must 
be — 1.  Sincere  (Eom.  xii.  9).  2.  Supreme.  Love  to  any  object  should  rise  accord- 
ing to  its  worth.  3.  Constant.  III.  The  test  by  which  it  is  ascertained.  It  is 
good  to  have  the  commandments  of  Christ,  to  be  born  in  a  land  of  Bibles ;  but  this 
is  not  enough.  He  that  hath  them,  and  keepeth  them,  he  it  is  that  loveth  Him. 
And  what  is  this  keeping  the  commandments  of  Christ?  Do  they  keep  them — 1. 
Who  are  ignorant  of  them,  and  who  discover  httie  concern  to  become  acquainted 
with  them?  2.  Who  have  no  relish  for  them?  8.  Who  do  not  obey  them?  IV. 
The  reward  with  which  it  is  connected.  1.  The  favour  of  the  greatest  Father. 
2.  The  affection  of  the  kindest  Saviour.  3.  The  presence  of  the  best  Friend. 
From  the  whole,  learn — 1.  The  insufficiency  of  external  privileges.  2.  The  honour 
which  attends  real  Christianity.  3.  The  proper  use  of  religious  ordinances,  and  the 
spirit  in  which  we  should  attend  them.  {T.  Kidd.)  Love  to  Christ: — I.  Thb 
obedience  which  18  the  sign  and  test  of  love.  The  words  are  here  substantially 
equivalent  to  ver.  15.  Only  the  former  begins  with  the  root  and  traces  it  upwards  to 
its  fruits,  love  blossoming  into  obedience.  Our  text  reverses  the  process.  Note — 1. 
How  remarkably  our  Lord  here  declares  the  possession  of  His  commandments  to  be 
a  sign  of  love  to  Him.  "  He  that  hath,"  &a.  There  are  two  ways  of  having  :  in 
the  Bible,  and  in  the  heart ;  before  my  eye  as  a  law  that  I  ought  to  obey,  or  within 
my  will,  as  a  power  that  shapes  it.  And  the  latter  is  the  only  kind  of  "  having  " 
that  Christ  regards  as  real  and  valid.  Love  possesses  the  knowledge  of  the  loved 
one's  will.  Do  we  not  all  know  how  strange  is  the  power  of  divining  desires  that 
goes  along  with  true  fiffection,  and  how  the  power,  not  only  of  divining,  but  of 
treasuring,  these  desires  is  the  thermometer  of  our  true  love.  Some  of  as,  perhaps, 
have  laid  away  in  sacred,  secret  places  tattered  yellow  old  bits  of  paper  with  the 
words  of  a  dear  one  on  them  that  we  would  not  part  with.  *'  He  that  hath  My 
commandments  "  laid  up  in  lavender  in  the  recesses  of  his  faithful  heart,  he  it  is 
"  that  loveth  Me."  2.  Obedience :  There  are  two  motives  for  keeping  command- 
ments, one,  because  they  are  commanded,  and  one  because  we  love  Hua  that  com- 
mandB.    The  on*  is  slavery,  the  other  is  liberty.    The  one  is  like  the  Arctic  regions. 


568  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  xrr. 

cold  and  barren,  the  other  is  like  tropical  lands,  full  of  warmth  and  sunshine, 
glorious  and  glad  fertility.  3.  The  form  of  the  sentence  suggests  how  easy  it  is  foi 
people  to  delude  themselves  about  their  love  to  Jesus  Christ.  That  emphatic  "He," 
and  the  putting  first  of  the  character  before  He  states  its  root,  are  directed  against 
false  pretentions  to  love.  The  love  that  Christ  stamps  with  His  hall-mark  is  no 
mere  emotion,  however  passionate  and  sweet ;  no  mere  sentiment  however  pure  and 
deep.  The  tiniest  dribble  that  drives  a  mill  is  better  than  a  Niagara  that  rushes 
and  foams  and  tumbles  idly.  And  there  is  ever  so  much  so-called  love  to  Jesus 
Christ  that  goes  masquerading  up  and  down  the  world ;  from  which  the  paint  is 
stripped  by  the  sharp  application  of  the  words  of  my  text.  H.  The  Divine  love 
AND  MANIFESTATION  WHICH  KEWAKD  ouB  LOVE  AND  OBEDIENCE.  Notc — 1.  The  extra- 
ordinary boldness  of  that  majestic  saying  :  "  If  a  man  loves  Me,  My  Father  will 
love  him."  God  regards  our  love  to  Jesus  Christ  as  containing  in  it  the  germ  of 
all  that  is  pleasing  in  His  sight.  And  so,  upon  our  hearts,  if  we  love  Christ,  there 
falls  the  benediction  of  the  Father's  love.  2.  Of  course,  our  Lord  here  is  not 
beginning  at  the  very  beginning  of  everything.  "  We  love  Him  because  He  first 
loved  us  "  digs  a  story  deeper  down  than  the  words  of  my  text.  That  being  under- 
stood, here  is  a  great  lesson.  It  is  not  all  the  same  to  God  whether  a  man  is  a 
scoundrel  or  a  saint.  God's  love  is  a  moral  love  ;  and  whilst  the  sunbeams  play 
upon  the  ice  and  melt  it  sometimes,  they  flash  back  from,  and  rest  more  graciously 
and  fully  on,  the  rippling  stream  into  which  the  ice  has  turned.  God  loves  them 
that  love  Him  not,  but  the  depths  of  His  heart  and  the  secret  sacred  favours  of 
His  grace  can  only  be  bestowed  upon  those  who  love  Christ  and  obey  Him.  3.  If, 
then,  we  seek  to  know  that  dear  Lord,  the  path  is  plain.  Walk  on  the  way  of 
obedience,  and  Christ  will  meet  us  with  the  unveiling  of  more  and  more  of  His  love. 
To  live  what  we  believe  is  the  sure  way  to  increase  its  amount.  To  be  faithful  to 
the  little  is  the  certain  way  to  inherit  the  much.  He  gives  us  His  whole  self  at 
the  first,  but  we  traverse  the  breadth  of  the  gift  by  degrees.  The  flower  is  but  a 
bud  when  we  get  it,  and  as  we  hold  it,  it  opens  its  petals  to  the  light.  {A.  Maclaren, 
D.D.)  Obedience  the  proof  of  love : — I.  Some  who  think  they  love  Jesus  abe  mis- 
taken AS  TO  THE  genuineness  AND  SINCERITY  OF  THEIR  LOVE  TO  HiM.  There  is  an  emphasis 
on  "  He  it  is,"  singling  Him  out  as  the  only  real  lover.  Men  may  be  misled  as  to 
the  reality  of  their  love.  1.  By  regarding  strong,  keen  and  frequent  feelings  of 
Borrow  and  compassion  for  Christ  as  an  innocent  sufferer,  as  evidence  of  true  love. 
Such  an  emotion  is  an  element  in,  but  is  not  love.  2.  By  substituting  an  intellec- 
tual and  moral  admiration  of  Christ.  But  many  infidels  evince  this.  3.  By 
counting  sufficient  an  outward  and  decorous  attention  to  His  laws  and  institutions. 
This  is  sufficient  to  keep  from  sins  of  a  gross  nature  ;  but  at  the  bottom  it  may  be 
self-love,  a  bid  for  the  world's  good  opinion.  II.  They  only  who  have  and  keep 
Christ's  commandments  truly  love  Him.  1.  Having  Christ's  commandments  im- 
plies— (1)  A  recognition  of  them  as  of  binding  authority  being  enforced  by  His  love. 
(2)  An  intelligent  appreciation  of  their  meaning  and  spirit.  (3)  Treasuring  them 
in  the  head  and  heart.  2.  Keeping  them.  We  may  have  without  keeping  them. 
Practice  and  knowlege  must  keep  step.  3.  Here  is — (1)  A  test  of  Christian  pro- 
fession (1  John  ii.  3-5  ;  v.  1-3).  (2)  A  ground  of  comfort  to  doubting  Christians. 
Their  Lord  does  not  insist  on  warm  feelings  which  are  fluctuating,  but  on  obedi- 
ence. (3)  An  inducement  to  obedience.  (A.  War  rack,  M.  A.)  Obedience  the  sign  of 
love  : — A  king  in  ancient  times  made  some  wise  laws  for  his  people,  and  most  of 
them  loved  and  reverenced  him  as  a  father,  but  not  all.  Some  who  professed  a 
great  affection  for  him  were  very  unwilling  to  obey  him ;  and  a  few  complained 
that  his  laws  were  too  strict,  and,  whenever  they  could  do  so  without  fear  of  punish- 
ment, they  broke  them.  Now  the  king  had  a  country  far  off  where  troubles  and 
tumults  had  arisen,  and  the  governor  wrote  to  ask  the  king  to  go  and  visit  his  dis- 
contented people,  and  try  if  his  own  presence  would  win  them  to  obedience  and 
love.  The  king  promised  to  go ;  but  before  he  left,  he  gave  every  family  a  copy  of 
the  laws.  He  was  away  a  long  time,  and  on  his  return  there  were  loud  rejoicings. 
But  when  he  came  to  bis  council  chamber,  there  were  some  sad  stories  of  rebellion 
and  disobedience,  not  among  the  poor  alone,  but  among  the  nobles,  who  had  been 
loader  than  all  the  rest  in  their  professions  of  love  and  songs  of  welcome.  But 
when  the  king,  having  discovered  the  offenders,  asked  for  a  copy  of  the  laws,  and 
one  by  one  read  them  to  the  rebels,  they  were  confused  and  silent.  Some,  indeed, 
had  lost  the  paper  he  had  given  them ;  some  had  wilfully  burnt  it,  and  declared 
that  thev  would  not  obey ;  many  had  broken  one  or  more  of  the  rules.  He  was  • 
gentle  king,  but  firm  and  jost ;  and  so  he  gathered  his  disobedient  sabjeots  together, 


«HAP.  xiT.]  ST.  JOHN.  66& 

fcnd  looking  sorrowfully  at  them,  he  gravely  asked  each, "  If  he  loved  his  sovereign?  " 
They  all  answered  "  Yes,"  but  on  holding  up  a  copy  of  his  laws,  they  all  hung 
down  their  heads.  "  He  that  hath  my  laws  and  keepeth  them,"  he  said,  "  he,  and  he 
only,  loves  me."  So  with  Christ's  laws.  {Mrs.  Geldart.)  Christ  knovm  only  to 
the  hwing  .•—I.  We  cannot  know  Christ  throdgh  the  intellect.  The  intellect 
has  tried  for  ages  to  find  out  God,  and  after  all  its  investigations  it  has  pronounced 
Him  unknowable,  ♦'  The  world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God."  II.  We  cannot  know 
Christ  through  the  imagination.  Imagination  has  filled  the  world  with  myths, 
superstitions  and  idols,  but  has  never,  unaided  by  the  heart,  found  Christ.  III. 
We  cannot  know  Christ  through  an  excited  conscience.  Conscience  has  formu- 
lated a  god  of  vengeance.  Christ  is  God  and  reveals  Himself  to  the  loving. 
(Hoiruletic   Monthly.)  Character  and  privilege   of   true    Christians  : — I.    Thb 

PECDLiAB  character  OF  TR0B  CHRISTIANS.  1.  They  lovc  Christ.  (1)  They  love 
Himself — (a)  As  a  Divine  person,  glorious  in  moial  perfection  and  loveliness.  (6) 
As  the  incarnate  Divinity,  the  image,  of  Him  whom  we  should  "  love  with  all  the 
heart,  and  soul,  and  strength."  (c)  As  the  God-man  Mediator,  the  Only-begotten 
of  Him  whose  name  and  nature  is  love,  (d)  As  the  man,  Christ  Jesus,  possessed 
of  every  quality  which  can  command  esteem  and  excite  love.  (2)  This  love  ex- 
tends to  every  thing  in  the  Saviour — His  huliness,  as  well  as  His  grace;  His  laws, 
as  well  as  His  promises;  the  yoke  He  lays  on  them,  as  well  as  the  crown  He  is  to 
confer ;  His  house,  His  word,  His  day.  His  people,  His  cause.  (3)  This  love  leads 
them  to  seek  intercourse  with  Him  ;  they  cannot  be  happy  away  from  Him.  (4) 
This  love  is  common  to  all  the  saints.  They  have  not  all  the  same  measure  of  it^ — 
that  depends  on  the  measure  of  their  knowledge  and  faith  and  capacity  of  affection ; 
but  they  have  all  the  same  kind  of  love.  (5)  And  as  this  love  is  common  to  all  the 
saints,  so  it  is  peculiar  to  them.  To  the  uubelieving  world  "  He  has  no  form  nor 
comeliness,"  &o.  2.  They  have  His  commandments,  words,  sayings.  These 
are  not  to  be  confined  to  what  was  preceptive  in  our  Lord's  teaching ;  they  include 
all  His  communications.  (1)  To  "have"  is  something  more  than  to  possess  the 
Bible,  or  even  to  have  a  general  knowledge  of  its  contents.  It  is  to  have  it  in  the 
mind  and  the  heart.  (2)  They  who  receive  our  Lord's  words  cannot  but  love  Him, 
for  they,  in  the  degree  in  which  they  receive  them,  know  and  believe  Him  to  be  the 
proper  object  of  supreme  affection.  3.  They  keep  His  commandments.  Aa  it  is  by 
having  the  words  of  Christ  that  men  come  to  love  Him,  so  it  is  by  keeping  His 
words  that  they  manifest  and  prove  their  love  to  Him.  They  must  be  kept — (1) 
As  He  gives  us  them.  We  must  not  detract  from  them,  nor  add  to  them,  nor 
modify  them  (Deut.  iv.  2).  (2)  In  the  mind.  There  are  men  who  find  it  disquiet- 
ing to  them,  and  seek  to  get  rid  of  it  as  soon  as  possible.  There  are  others  who, 
ceasing  to  give  it  any  attention,  suffer  it  to  "  slip  out  of  their  mind."  And  there 
are  others  who  permit,  who  invite,  "  the  wicked  one  to  come  and  take  away  what 
was  sown  in  their  hearts."  But  the  lover  of  Christ  "  lets  the  word  of  Christ  dwell " 
in  his  heart,  and  often  reviews  it  as  his  most  precious  treasure.  (3)  By  our  having 
no  other  opinions  on  the  subjects  to  which  they  refer  than  those  unfolded  in  them, 
and  by  fashioning  the  whole  system  of  our  sentiments  and  judgments  with  a 
reference  to  them,  (a)  The  promises  are  to  be  kept  by  firmly  believing  them  in  the 
most  trying  circumstances,  {b)  The  warnings  are  to  be  kept  by  keeping  at  a 
distance  from  their  subjects,  and  by  cherishing  a  habitual  holy  fear  of  sin.  (c)  His 
commandments,  with  regard  to  tempers  and  dispositions,  are  to  be  kept  by  "  keep- 
ing our  hearts  with  all  diligence."  (d)  Those  with  regard  to  our  general  conduct 
are  to  be  kept  by  our  not  following  "the  course  of  this  world,"  but  walking  accord- 
ing to  the  will  of  God.  (e)  Those  with  regard  to  institutions  are  to  be  kept  by 
•'observing  all  things  whatsoever  He  has  commanded."  II.  Their  pecdliab  privi- 
leges. 1.  They  are  loved  of  the  Father  and  thfe  Son.  (1)  As  elected  in  sovereign 
love  to  eternal  Hie.  (2)  As  actually  united  to  Christ  by  believing.  (3)  As  trans- 
formed and  sanctified  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  2.  This  love  is  discovered  in  the  Son's 
manifesting  Himself  to  them,  and  in  the  Father  and  the  Son  coming  to  them,  and 
making  their  abode  with  them.  IH.  The  connection  between  the  two.  1.  He 
only  who  possesses  the  character  can  enjoy  the  privilege.  2.  He  who  possesses  the 
character  must  enjoy  the  privilege.  3.  The  measure  in  which  the  character  is 
possessed  is  the  measure  in  which  the  privilege  is  enjoyed.  The  more  a  man  lovea 
Christ,  the  more  must  both  God  and  Christ  love  him.  {J.  Brown,  D.D.)  The 
tecret  of  ielf-consecration : — Here  is  the  secret  of  self -consecration :  in  our  being 
"  poBsessed  "  by  the  love  of  Christ ;  and  feeling — He  loves  me  more  than  I  love 
Hua.    PoBsessed  by  this  love,  I  yield  myself  wholly  and  joyfully  to  Him.    My  hand 


670  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [caht.  xrr. 

is  His,  redeemed  by  Him,  sacred  to  Him,  and  cannot  do  unholy  work ;  my  foot  is 
His,  and  cannot  go  on  unholy  errands  ;  my  ear  is  His,  and  cannot  list^  to  unholy 
•words ;  my  eye  is  His,  and  cannot  look  upon  unholy  deeds ;  my  tongue  is  His,  and 
cannot  utter  unholy  speeches ;  my  mind  is  His,  and  cannot  think  unholy  thoughts ; 
my  heart  is  His,  and  cannot  cherish  unholy  feelings  and  desires ;  my  whole  being 
is  His,  redeemed  by  Him,  sacred  to  Him,  and  is  surrendered  to  His  will.  (J. 
Culross,  D.D.)  Practical  religion  : — Since  a  vestment  ornamented  with  gold  is 
a  beautiful  and  conspicuous  object,  but  seems  much  more  so  to  us  when  it  is  worn 
upon  our  own  persons,  thus  also  the  precepts  of  God  are  beautiful  when  but  praised^ 
but  appear  far  more  lovely  when  they  are  rightly  observed,  and  conspicuous  in  our 
own  life.     (T.  H.  Leary,  D.C.L.) 

Vers.  22-24.  Judas  salth  unto  Him,  not  Iscarlot,  Lord,  how  Is  It  that  Thou  wilt 
manifest  Thyself  unto  us,  and  not  unto  the  world  ? — How  may  the  Lord  disclose  or 
reveal  Himself  to  His  disciples,  and  Twt  to  others  ? — Disclosure,  or  revelation,  is  at 
least  a  double  process.    It  consists  in  the  presentation  of  an  object  of  knowledge, 
and  a  mental  reception  of  what  is  presented ;  a  clear  manifestation,  and  an  object 
of  this  who  is  capable  of  apprehending  it.     Again,  different  objects  of  knowledge 
manifest  or  disclose  themselves  through  diverse  channels  of  apprehension.     There 
is  demonstration  through  the  senses,  as  when  we  rtport,  upon  the  authority  of  the 
sense  of  touch,  that  an  object  is  hard,  soft,  smooth,  or  rough.     There  is  also  the 
declaration  of  the  reason,  as  when  we  candidly  consider  the  professions  of  a 
political  party  and  decide   upon  their  merits.      And  there  is    the  revelation  of 
the  affections,  as  when  we  discern  the  bitterness  of  ingratitude  or  the  sweetness  of 
fidelity.     Each  kind  of  truth  has  its  own  channel  and  method  of  getting  at  the 
mind.   Moreover,  different  truths  or  objects  manifest  themselves  in  various  degrees, 
according  to  the  capacity  of  the  recipient.    Not  long  ago  I  visited  one  of  my  col- 
leagues in  his  mineralogical  cabinet.  Opening  one  of  the  drawers,  I  took  in  my  hands 
two  specimens  with  the  remark,  ••  These  are  duplicates."  "  Oh,  no,"  was  the  reply, 
"  they  are  quite  different  minerals."     "  How  do  you  know  that  ?  "  I  said ;  "  they 
look  just  alike."     "No,"  was  the  response,  "they  look  extremely  unlike."    To 
my  sight  the  specimens  were  identical.     To  Lis  critical  vision,  although  casting  the 
same  rays  of  light  upon  his  eye  as  upon  mine,  and  presenting  the  same  surface, 
they  made  an  incomparably  more  definite  revelation.     There  are  said  to  be  men 
employed  in  the  wine  vaults  connected  with  the  London  docks  who  are  able  by  taste 
not  only  to  distinguish  between  a  sherry,  a  claret,  and  a  port,  but  also  to  tell  the 
district  in  which  a  given  wine  was  produced.    It  is  even  asserted  that  in  many  cases 
they  can  name  the  year  of  the  vintage.    To  each  of  us  is  given  the  share  of  revelation 
which  his  capacities  can  apprehend.     Men  say,  "  Let  us  understand  these  so-called 
spiritual  truths;  let  them  be  explained,  demonstrated.    Let  us  be  convinced." 
The  demand  is  fair;  but  the  explanation,  the  demonstration,  the  conviction,  must 
be  to  a  capacity  appropriate  to  this  special  kind  of  truth.    A  truth  has  not  been 
revealed  to  us  unless  we  have  experienced  the  emotions  which  it  is  fitted  to  arouse. 
Any  of  us  may  read  accounts  of  what  is  seen  by  the  astronomers  who  are  using 
the  Lick  telescope,  but  only  they  who  have  gazed  through  that  splendid  glass,  to 
resolve  nebulsa  into  clusters  of  hitherto  undistinguished  worlds,  have  known  experi- 
mentally, have  personally  received  the  revelation  of  these  hitherto  unknown  worlds. 
To  one  who  does  not  possess  it  already,  words  cannot  convey  experimental  know- 
ledge.   They  simply  name  our  ideas.     Any  new  knowledge  which  they  seem  to  give 
is  simply  a  re-arrangement  of  ideas  previously  in  the  mind.    Looking  into  the 
kaleidoscope,  you  see  gaudy  colours.    Turn  the  kaleidoscope :  something  new  has 
apparently  entered  it.    In  fact  the  same  light  is  there  as  before,  so  are  the  same 
bright  pieces  of  glass ;  but  they  now  have  a  different  arrangement,  and  therefore 
reflect  and  transmit  the  light  in  a  different  way.    Words  are  simply  the  power  to 
turn  the  kaleidoscope  of  our  experiences.    If  we  lack  the  experiences,  words  can- 
not give  them.    All  you  who  are  parents  had  many  times  heard  the  words  describ- 
ing parental  feelings  before  you  yourself  became  parents.    You  thought  you  knew 
their  meaning ;  but  in  fact  it  was  a  totally  new  experience  when  your  first  helpless 
ehUd  was  placed  in  your  arms.  Let  us  seek  to  apply  all  this  to  the  Master's  words. 
The  Lord's  manifestation  becomes  revelation  to  some  and  not  to  others,  not  because 
of  differences  in  God,  or  in  His  manifestations,  but  because  of  differences  in  men. 
To  expect  that  the  resnlt  shall  be  to  all  of  as  a  revelation,  it  is  necessary  to  assure 
onrselves  that  we  have  that  spiritnal  sense  to  which  the  Lord  alluded  in  His  reply 
to  Jadas.    There  most  be  not  only  an  exhibition  of  the  Di-  iae  self,  there  mast 


CHAP,  nr.]  ST.  JOHN.  571 

also  be  the  human  capability  of  apprehending  this.  "  Jesus  answered  and  said 
unto  him,  If  a  man  love  Me,  he  will  keep  My  words ;  and  My  Father  will  love 
him,  and  we  will  come  unto  him,  and  make  our  abode  with  him."  The  heart  is 
not  the  sensitive  plate  upon  which  the  manifestations  of  the  Father  can  become 
the  visible  image,  until  it  is  prepared  by  the  chemistry  of  love.  With  such  pre- 
paration, the  Divine  manifestation  meets  a  human  capacity  to  receive,  and  revela- 
tion is  complete.  You  read  in  the  Bible  a  passage  as  familiar  to  you  as  the  alphabet. 
Hitherto  it  has  seemed  to  contain  very  little  meaning,  and  certainly  has  been  no 
mediator  between  you  and  God.  Now,  however,  it  scintillates  with  new  meaning, 
and  seems  weighty  with  unsuspected  value.  Every  high- school  scholar  is  familiar 
with  the  experiment  by  which  the  agency  of  the  air  in  the  phenomena  of  sound  is 
proved.  A  silver  bell  is  suspended  upon  a  spiral  spring  in  a  glass  globe.  The  bell 
is  kept  in  vibration,  and  its  sound  is  at  first  clearly  heard.  But  now  an  air-pump 
is  set  in  motion  beneath  the  globe.  The  impact  of  the  bell's  tiny  tongue  upon  its 
fildes  goes  on  as  before,  yet  as  the  air  is  exhausted  the  sound  grows  fainter  and 
fainter,  and  at  last  completely  dies  away.  The  ocular  manifestations  are  exactly 
as  before,  but  the  receptive  medium  of  the  air,  without  which  sound  cannot  exist, 
is  gone.  In  the  Master's  explanation,  love  is  that  medium,  that  condition  of  the 
heart,  within  which  alone  the  manifestations  of  the  Divine  presence  and  of  Divine 
truth  can  transmute  themselves  into  revelation.  The  mysticism  of  this  chapter  is 
transcendent  realism.  There  is  a  touch  more  delicate  than  touch,  a  vision  more 
penetrating  than  vision,  a  hearing  more  acute  than  hearing.  Jesus  Christ  was  not 
a  physical  but  a  spiritual  revelation.  The  physical  senses  of  hundreds  of  men 
came  into  relation  with  the  manifestations  of  Christ's  physical  existence,  but,  for 
lack  of  that  "  eighth  sense,"  of  love,  discovered  in  him  no  divinity.  Jesus  Christ 
presents  a  body  of  spiritual  facts  adapted  to  human  apprehension.  He  is  not 
spiritual  fact  made  discernible  by  physical  faculty.  The  whole  Ufe  of  Christ,  as 
written  in  the  Scriptures,  is  the  Holy  Spirit's  canvas.  If  we  go  to  it  sympathetically, 
the  Spirit  of  God  will  glorify  Himself  in  us.  He  will  cause  us  to  see  and  feel  and 
know  the  facts  of  spiritual  life.  It  is  our  right  to  have  just  as  authentic  evidence 
that  the  grace  of  God  changes  the  heart,  as  stands  in  the  records  of  the  apostles. 
It  is  given  us  to  have  a  spiritual  insight  for  ourselves,  and  to  be  able  to  testify,  not 
that  there  is  an  old  chronicle  which  reports  that  a  Pharisee  of  Tarsus  was 
spiritually  blind  and  somehow  gained  spiritual  eyesight,  but  to  testify  that  we 
were  blind,  yet  now  see.  It  is  our  privilege  to  know  that  the  Spirit  of  Christ  is 
the  vital  power  of  our  spiritual  nature,  and  from  immediate  knowledge  to  testify 
of  its  operation.  {History,  Prophecy,  and  Gospel.)  Chnst  manifestivg  Hiin- 
telf  to  His  people : — What  a  blessed  Master  Jesus  Christ  was  I  How  familiar 
did  He  allow  His  disciples  to  make  themselves  with  Him  I  He  was  none  of 
your  dignitaries  who  pride  themselves  on  that  dignity ;  but  He  talks  to  His 
disciples  just  as  a  father  would  to  his  children — even  more  kindly  than  a 
master  might  to  his  pupils.  Here  is — I.  A  great  fact  :  that  Jesus  Christ  does 
reveal  Himself  to  His  people,  but  He  does  not  unto  the  world.  The  fact  is  implied 
in  the  question,  and  there  are  many  who  have  a  Bible  of  experience — which 
teaches  us  that  it  is  true.  1.  The  favoured  people  to  whom  Jesus  Christ  manifests 
Himself.  ••  Us."  It  appears  that  they  do  not  belong  to  the  world.  They  are  men 
who  are  not  worldly  in  principle,  in  action,  in  conversation,  in  desires,  in  object,  or 
in  end.  2.  Special  seasons  of  manifestation.  "  When."  These  highly  favoured 
men  do  not  always  see  Jesus  Christ  alike.  There  are  special  times  when  God  is 
pleased  to  reveal  Himself  to  His  people.  (1)  Times  of  duty.  I  never  found  a  lazy 
or  indifferent  Christian  have  a  manifestation  of  Jesus  Christ ;  I  never  heard  one 
who  gave  himself  wholly  to  business  talk  much  of  spiritual  manifestations.  Those 
who  do  but  little  for  Christ,  Christ  does  but  little  for  them  in  the  way  of  special 
favours.  The  men  who  are  the  most  zealous  for  their  Master  discern  the  most  of 
His  lovingkindness,  and  enjoy  His  richest  blessings.  (2)  In  seasons  of  trial.  Do 
not  complain  then ;  for  it  is  in  the  time  of  trouble  we  see  most  of  Jesus.  Previous 
to  trial  you  may  generally  expect  a  season  of  joy.  But  when  the  trial  comes,  then 
expect  to  have  delight  with  it.  8.  The  wondrous  display.  Jesus  manifests  Him- 
eeU.  There  are  many  manifestations  of  God  to  His  children  ;  but  this  is  the  most 
precious  of  all.  He  does  this  in  different  ways.  Tou  have  seen  Jesus  with  the  eye 
of  faith  banging  on  the  cross.  At  other  times  you  have  had  a  manifestation  of 
Christ  in  His  gifts.  Then,  again,  yon  will  see  Him  in  His  triumph.  4.  The  effects 
of  this  manifestation.  (1)  HumUity.  "  God  has  respect  unto  the  humble,  but  the 
proad  be  knoweth  afar  off."    (2)  Happiness;  for  he  must  be  happy  who  lives  neaz 


672  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cta».  xw. 

to  God.  (3)  Holiness.  Some  men  profess  a  great  deal ;  but  do  not  believe  any 
man  unless  you  see  that  his  deeds  answer  to  what  he  says.  II.  An  intebestino 
INQUIRY.  1.  It  was  suggested  by — (1)  Ignorance.  Judas  thought:  "If  we  see  Him 
the  world  must  see  Him  too.  (2)  Kindness.  He  wanted  it  all  to  be  given  to  every- 
body.  Ah  I  we  never  need  be  more  benevolent  than  God.  ^3)  Love  to  his  Master. 
He  wished  Christ's  dominion  might  be  imiversal.  (4)  Admiration.  '•  Who  are  we  that 
we  should  have  it?  "  2.  The  answer.  The  question  was  not  answered  ;  for  it  was 
unanswernble.  Is  it  not  enough  that  He  should  do  so?  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Who 
bring  and  who  repel  Christ: — The  real  meaning  of  the  question  is,  "  Lord  I  What 
has  come  to  pass  to  induce  you  to  abandon  the  course  on  which  we  entered  when 
you  rode  into  Jerusalem  with  the  shouting  crowd  ?  "  His  question  is  no  better  in 
intelligence,  though  it  is  a  great  deal  better  in  spirit,  than  the  taunt  of  Christ's 
brethren,  "If  Thoa  do  these  things,  show  Thyself  to  the  world."  Judas,  too, 
thought  of  the  simple  flashing  of  His  Messianic  glory,  in  some  visible  vulgar  form, 
before  else  blind  eyes.  How  sad  and  chilling  such  a  question  must  have  been  to 
Jesus  !  Slow  scholars  we  all  are ;  and  with  what  wonderful  patience  He  reiterates 
His  lesson.  I.  What  beings  Christ  and  what  Cheist  brings.  Note  two  signifi- 
cant changes  in  the  form  of  expression.  1.  He  had  formerly  said,  *'  If  ye  love  Me  ;  " 
now,  as  against  Judas's  complacent  assumption,  He  says,  "  Anybody  may  have  the 
vision  if  He  observes  the  conditions."  2.  Christ's  '•  Word"  is  wider  than  "com- 
mandment." It  includes  all  His  sayings  as  in  one  vital  unity  and  organic  whole.  We 
are  not  to  go  picking  and  choosing  among  them  ;  they  are  one.  And  every  word  of 
Christ's,  be  it  revelation  or  be  it  a  promise,  enshrines  within  itself  a  commandment. 
Note — 1.  That  Christ  will  show  Himself  to  the  loving  heart.  (1)  Every  act  of  obedi- 
ence to  any  moral  truth  is  rewarded  by  additional  insight.  Every  act  of  submission 
to  His  will  cleans  the  lenses  of  the  telescope,  and  so  the  stars  are  brighter  and 
larger,  and  nearer.  As  we  climb  the  hill  we  get  a  wider  view.  (2)  But  in  our  rela- 
tion to  Him  we  have  to  do  not  with  truths  only,  but  with  a  Person.  There  is  only 
one  way  to  know  people,  that  is,  by  loving  them.  They  tell  us  that  "  love  is  blind." 
No  !  There  are  not  such  a  clear  pair  of  eyes  anywhere  as  the  eyes  of  love.  Sympathy 
is  the  parent  of  insight  into  persons,  as  obedience  is  the  parent  of  insight  into  duty. 
(3)  Our  loving  obedience  has  not  only  an  operation  inwards  upon  us,  but  has  an 
effect  outwards  upon  Christ.  Too  commonly  is  it  the  case  that  even  good  Christian 
people  have  a  far  more  realizing  faith  in  the  past  work  of  Christ  on  earth  than  in 
the  present  work  of  Christ  on  themselves.  They  think  the  one  a  plain  truth,  and 
the  other  something  like  a  metaphor,  whereas  the  New  Testament  teaches  us  plainly 
that  there  is  an  actual  supernatural  communication  of  Christ,  which  leads  day  by 
day  to  a  fuller  knowledge,  a  larger  possession,  of  a  fuller  Christ.  And  one  piece  of 
honest  loving  obedience  is  worth  all  the  study  and  speculation  of  an  unloving  heart 
when  the  question  is,  "  How  are  we  to  see  Christ  ?  "  2.  Jesus  shows  Himself  to 
the  obedient  heart  in  indissoluble  union  with  the  Father.  Look  at  the  majesty  and, 
except  upon  one  hypothesis,  the  insane  presumption  of  such  words  as  these  :  "  If  a 
man  love  Me  My  father  will  love  him."  As  if  identifying  love  to  Christ  with  love  to 
Himself.  And  look  at  that  wondrous  union,  the  consciousness  of  which  speaks  in 
"  We  will  come."  Think  of  a  man  saying  that.  Just  as  in  heaven  there  is  but  one 
throne  for  God  and  the  Lamb,  so  on  earth  there  is  but  one  coming  of  the  Father  in 
the  Son.  And  this  is  the  only  belief  that  will  keep  this  generation  from  despair  and 
moral  suicide.  The  world  has  learned  half  of  that  great  verse,  *'  No  man  hath  seen 
God  at  any  time,  nor  can  see  Him."  If  the  world  is  not  to  go  mad,  if  everything 
higher  and  nobler  than  the  knowledge  of  material  phenomena  and  their  sequences 
is  not  to  perish  from  the  earth,  the  world  must  learn  the  next  half,  "  The  only  be- 
gotten Son  which  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  He  hath  declared  Him."  Christ 
shows  Himself  in  indissoluble  union  with  the  Father.  3.  Christ  shows  Himself  to 
the  obedient  love  by  a  true  coming.  (1)  That  coming  is  not  to  be  confounded  either 
with  mere  Divine  Omnipresence,  nor  of  increased  perception  on  our  part  of 
Christ's  fulness.  That  great  central  Sun  draws  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  planets 
that  move  about  it,  and,  having  once  been  in  an  almost  infinitely  distant  horizon, 
approaches  until  planet  and  Sun  unite.  (2)  That  coming  is  a  permanent  residence. 
Very  beautiful  is  it  to  notice  that  our  Lord  nere  employs  that  same  sweet  and  signi- 
ficant word,  "  In  My  Father's  house  are  many  mansions."  Yonder  they  dwell  for 
evei'  with  God ;  here  God  in  Christ  for  ever  dwells  with  the  loving  heart.  It  ig 
a  permanent  abode  so  long  as  the  conditions  are  fulfilled,  but  only  so  long.  In  the 
last  hours  of  the  Holy  City  a  great  voice  said,  "  Let  ns  depart  hence ; "  and  to- 
morrow the  shrine  was  empty,  and  the  day  after  it  was  in  flames.    Brethren,  if  v« 


«HAP.  xiT.]  8T.  JOHN.  673 

could  keep  the  Christ  in  whom  is  God,  remember  it  is  by  the  act  of  loving  obedience. 
II.  What  keeps  awat  Chkist  and  all  His  blessings  (ver.  24)  ?  1.  "  He  that 
loveth  Me  not,  keepeth  not  My  sayings. "  No  love,  no  obedience.  That  is  plainly 
true,  because  the  heart  of  all  the  commandments  is  love,  and  where  that  is  not, 
disobedience  to  their  very  spirit  is.  No  power  will  lead  men  to  Christ's  yoke  except 
the  power  of  love.  It  was  only  the  rising  sunbeam  that  could  draw  music  from  tha 
«tony  lipa  of  Memnon,  and  it  is  only  when  Christ's  love  shines  on  our  faces  that  we 
open  our  lips  in  praise,  and  move  our  hands  in  service.  Those  greit  rockiug-stones 
down  in  Cornwall  stand  unmoved  by  any  tempest,  but  a  child's  finger,  put  at  the 
right  place,  will  set  them  vibrating.  And  so  the  heavy,  hard,  stony  bulk  of  our 
hearts  lies  torpid  and  immovable  until  He  lays  His  loving  finger  upon  them,  and 
then  they  rock  at  His  will.  That  makes  short  work,  does  it  not,  of  a  great  deal  that 
•calls  itself  Christianity  ?  Eeluctant,  self-interested,  constrained  obedience  is  no 
obedience  ;  outward  acts  of  service,  if  the  heart  be  wanting,  are  rubbish.  2.  Dis- 
obedience to  Christ  is  disobedience  to  God.  Paul  has  to  say,  "  So  speak  I,  not  tha 
Lord. "  And  you  would  not  think  a  man  a  very  sound  or  safe  religious  teacher  who 
said  to  you  to  begin  with,  •'  Now,  mind,  everything  that  I  say,  God  says."  The 
personality  of  Jesus  Christ  is  never,  through  all  His  utterances,  so  separated  but 
that  God  speaks  in  Him :  and,  hstening  to  His  voice,  we  hear  the  absolute  utter- 
ance of  the  uncreated  and  eternal  wisdom.  3.  Therefore  follows  the  conclusion, 
which  our  Lord  does  not  state,  but  leaves  us  to  supply.  What  brings  Him  is  the 
obedience  of  love ;  what  repels  Him  is  alienation  and  rebellion.  Conclusion  :  1.  It 
is  possible  for  men  not  to  see  Christ,  though  He  stands  there  close  before  them.  2. 
Ohrist's  showing  of  Himself  to  men  is  in  no  sense  arbitrary.  It  is  you  that  deter- 
mines what  you  shall  see.  The  door  of  your  hearts  is  hinged  to  open  from  within, 
and  if  you  do  not  open  it  it  stops  shut,  and  Christ  stops  outside.  3.  You  do  not 
need  to  do  an^^thing  to  blind  yourselves.  Simple  negation  is  fatal.  "  If  a  man 
love  not ;  "  that  is  all.  The  absence  of  love  is  your  ruin.  4.  You  ask  how  can  I 
get  this  love  and  obedience.  There  is  only  one  answer.  We  know  that  we  love 
Him  when  we  know  that  He  loves  us ;  and  we  know  He  loves  us  when  we  see  Him 
dying  on  His  cross.  So  here  is  the  ladder,  that  starts  down  in  the  miry  clay  of  the 
horrible  pit,  and  fastens  its  golden  hooks  on  His  throne.  The  first  round  is,  behold 
the  dying  Christ  and  His  love  to  me.  The  second  is,  let  that  love  melt  my  heart 
into  sweet  responsive  love.  The  third  is,  let  my  love  mould  my  life  into  obedience. 
And  then  Christ,  and  God  in  Him,  will  give  me  a  fuller  knowledge  and  a  deeper 
love,  and  make  His  dwelling  with  me.  And  then  there  is  only  one  step  left, 
and  that  will  land  us  by  the  throne  of  God,  and  in  the  many  mansions  of  the 
Father's  house  where  we  shall  make  our  abodes  with  Him  for  ever  more.  (A. 
Maclaren,  D.D.)  If  a  man  love  Me,  he  will  keep  My  words. — Love  and 
obedience: — I.  Thb  love  or  Cbbisi  will  pboddoe  obediencb  to  His  wobds. 
Because — 1.  It  presupposes  a  sense  of  the  evil  of  sin  and  a  desire  for  righteous- 
ness, 2.  Love  desires  to  please,  and  ever  shrinks  from  grieving  its  object.  3. 
Love  is  essentially  imitative.  To  love  evil  is  to  be  debased ;  to  love  goodness  is 
to  be  ennobled.  4.  The  affections  exert  a  strong  influence  on  the  will.  The  strength 
of  evil  lies  in  the  love  of  it,  and  so  the  strength  of  goodness.  II.  Whosobveb 
LOVES  and  obets  Chbist  will  secubb  to  himself  the  Father's  lovb.  1.  This 
is  natural.  There  is  no  nearer  passage  to  a  parent's  heart  than  to  love  his 
x^ld.  2.  God  loves  Christ  in  a  manner  and  degree  of  which  we  can  form  no  con- 
ception ;  and  if  you  love  Him,  too,  although  your  love  may  dififer  in  manner  it  is 
the  same  in  kind.  So  you  are  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature,  which  is  love,  and  as 
God  loves  and  delights  in  Himself,  He  will  love  and  delight  in  you.  8.  To  love 
Christ  is  to  be  Uke  Him,  and  for  the  same  reason  that  God  loves  Christ  will  He  love 
us.  God  loves  us  in  our  unholiness,  and  if  He  so  loved  us  when  we  were  enemies 
as  to  give  His  Son  to  die  for  us,  how  much  more  will  He  love  us  now  we  are 
ELis  friends?  UI.  Lovb  to  thb  Son  and  the  lovb  of  thb  Fatheb  will  besult 
IN  THE  indwellino  OF  BOTH.  Love  ever  scoks  to  dwell  with  Its  objeot.  The  effect 
of  its  indwelling  is — 1.  Peace  and  satisfaction.  God's  presence  constitutes  the 
joy  of  heaven,  and  where  He  comes  He  brings  heaven.  2.  Hungerings  and  thirst- 
ings  after  righteousness  and  God.  So  sweet  is  God's  love  that  appetite  grows  on 
what  it  feeds  upon.  The  tasted  drop  begets  a  longing  for  the  ocean.  3.  Privilege 
cmd  honour.  {F.  J.  Sharr.)  Love  the  source  of  obedience : — 1.  There  is  nothing 
tiiat  a  sincere  Christian  more  desires  than  to  keep  the  commandments  of  Christ. 
But  human  nature  is  human  nature  still ;  and  lapses  occur  daily.  The  more  anxious 
we  are  to  stand  in  all  the  ordinances  of  the  law  blameless,  the  more  we  are  oonvioted 


874  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxt^ 

of  failure;  and  failure  at  last  makes  us  indifferent  or  despondent.  2.  But  may 
it  not  be  that  our  ill  success  is  due  to  misunderstanding  the  philosophy  of  the  sub- 
ject, and  failure  to  appropriate  the  forces  which  would  have  surely  pushed  ua  on 
toward  success  ?  What,  then,  is  this  Divine  energy,  which,  were  it  constantly  in  our 
hearts,  would,  with  an  authority  that  we  should  gladly  recognize  and  yield  to,  com- 
mand obedience  ?  It  is  love  to  Christ.  I.  Love  is  a  passion.  1.  The  strongest 
and  most  unconquerable  forces  in  human  nature  are  the  passions.  Like  rivers  in 
spring-time,  when  the  snows  are  melting  on  the  mountains,  and  the  clouds,  driven 
by  south  winds,  are  emptying  their  waters  upon  the  earth,  they  rise  and  swell,  and 
overflow,  submerging  the  whole  nature.  2.  God  is  the  Parent  of  our  passions : 
He  begat  love,  and  said,  *'It  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law,"  i.e.,  the  force  out 
of  which  all  obedience  comes,  just  as  we  say,  "  That  man's  fortune  is  in  his 
brains."  Not  that  it  is  in  dollars  and  cents  actually  there;  but  that  within 
his  brain  are  the  forces  that  shall  win  his  fortune.  3.  Now,  Christ,  the 
greatest  and  wisest  of  all  Teachers,  knew  the  use  of  passion;  for  it  was  Hia 
own  child.  He  created  man  with  it.  He  knew,  too,  its  potency ;  for,  when  a  man 
was  begotten.  He  supplied  it  to  him  in  due  measure  and  force.  When  He  began 
to  teach.  He  did  not  go  to  the  conscience,  and  say,  "  Convict ; "  not  to  th© 
reverential  faculty,  and  say,  "  Adore ; "  nor  to  the  reason,  and  Bay,  "  Argue, 
speculate."  No  :  He  went  straight  and  at  once  to  the  great  central  force  in  natur© 
— to  that  engine-like  power  in  man,  which  has  power  not  merely  to  propel  itself, 
but  to  start  all  the  long  train  of  faculties  that  are  dependent  upon  it  into  motion, 
and  to  say,  "  Love."  Christ  used  it  everywhere.  In  the  case  of  the  poor  wicked 
woman,  whose  tears  fell  at  His  feet  when  He  was  at  dinner  with  the  Pharisee,  He 
made  it  the  measure  of  forgiveness.  He  made  it  the  source  of  all  obedience,  as  in 
our  text.  The  Apostle  John  made  it  the  test  of  regeneration.  And,  as  if  he  would 
put  it  so  that  all  eyes  must  see  it,  he  wrote,  "  God  is  love."  II.  Love  requiees  a 
PEKSON  TO  ELICIT  IT.  1.  Ecgardcd  as  a  sentiment,  love  is  possible  in  respect  to 
principles ;  but,  regarded  as  a  passion,  it  is  possible  only  touching  a  person.  A 
patriot  does  not  lay  down  his  life  for  liberty  in  the  front  rank  of  battle  with  the  same 
feeling  which  fills  a  frontiersman  when  he  dies  fighting  at  the  door  of  his  log-cabin 
in  an  heroic  attempt  to  defend  his  wife  and  children  from  the  murderous  savages. 
We  admire  beauty,  we  reverence  virtue,  we  praise  modesty  as  elements  of  character ; 
but  never  until  the  eyes  behold  them  clothed  in  physical  form  do  we  love  them. 
The  qualities  we  admire,  the  woman  we  love.  2.  Ilere,  at  this  point,  you  see  how 
love  educates  one  in  worthy  directions.  The  man  loves  the  woman,  the  woman  the 
man,  and  each  the  qualities  that  the  other  represents.  Each  educates  the  other 
into  a  finer  appreciation.  They  grow  to  be  each  more  like  the  other.  In  this  great 
love  of  assimilation  going  on  between  those  who  truly  love,  based  on  the  apprehen- 
sion of  embodied  virtues,  I  find  the  true  source  of  that  gratitude  in  my  heart,  that 
God  took  flesh  and  dwelt  among  us.  Before  Christ  came,  God  was  an  abstraction, 
a  collection  of  powers  and  principles,  august  and  lovely,  known  to  the  reason,  the 
conscience,  the  reverential  faculties,  but  not  to  the  warm,  passionate  side  of  human 
nature.  And  may  God  forgive  us,  who,  having  this  living,  breathing,  personal 
Saviour  revealed  to  us,  love  Him  so  little  1  "  If  ye  love  Me,"  said  Christ :  not  the 
principles  I  represent,  the  truth  I  teach,  My  virtue,  but  '*  Me."  3.  Is  it  not  just  at 
this  point  that  we  are  able  to  see  why  religion  is  so  cold  and  unexpressive  ?  Our 
philosophy  is  at  fault.  We  have  put  truth  in  front  of  Him  who  revealed  it.  We 
keep  the  principles,  but  lose  the  Person,  of  Christ.  We  have  lost  sight  ol  the  sun 
in  our  eager  chase  to  capture  the  sunbeams.  4.  Whence  comes  the  charm  of  love 
and  loving  life  ?  Is  it  not  grouped  around  some  person,  as  fragrance  around  a 
flower?  Does  it  not  come  from  the  eye,  the  voice,  the  face,  the  form,  of  one  be- 
loved? Let  the  loved  form  be  stricken,  the  voice  silent  and  where  is  the  charm  of 
your  love  gone  ?  It  has  gone  out,  with  the  personal  life  that  expressed  it ;  gone  aa 
the  fragrance  goes  when  yon  shake  the  leaves  of  the  rose  from  their  fastenings ; 
gone  back  to  God  who  gave  it ;  and  "your  house  is  left  unto  you  desolate."  What 
is  domestic  life  now  ?  And  what  is  religious  life  when  the  face  and  form  of  Jesaa 
are  gone  from  the  chamber  of  your  heart,  but  a  cold,  silent,  embarrassed,  con- 
strained, and  mournful  state  ?  6.  You  hear  people  say  that  the  absence  of  reUgioos 
emotion  in  oar  churches  and  among  the  upper  classes  is  due  to  their  culture  and 
refinement.  It  is  not  so.  The  argument  proves  too  much.  Love  is  not  subject  to 
such  modification.  Who  would  say  that  a  cultivated  person  cannot  love  as  intensely 
as  a  rude  one  7  Must  a  young  man  marry  an  ignorant  girl  in  order  to  be  loved  ? 
This  sublime  passion  has  but  one  voice,  one  touch,  the  world  over.  Like  some  birdf 


«HAP.  XIV.]  ST.  JOHN.  675 

true  to  its  species,  that  inhabits  every  clime,  its  food,  its  plumage,  its  mode  of  birth 
and  growth,  its  note,  are  everywhere  the  same.  III.  The  power  op  love.  1. 
Obedience  is  the  hardest  of  all  things  for  those  naturally  inclined  not  to  obey,  to  do. 
It  is  so  with  a  child.  And  it  is  therefore  necessary  to  bring  the  strongest  possible 
motive  to  bear  upon  the  child,  that  he  may  obey.  You  say,  "  My  children  love  me, 
but  they  do  not  mind  me.  That  motive  does  not  make  tliem  obedient."  But  have 
you  ever  shovra  your  child  the  connection  between  your  heart  and  his  wrong  con- 
duct ?  Have  you  made  the  little  fellow  understand  how  his  behaviour  hurts 
you  ?  Have  you  sought  to  restrain  him  as  you  would  a  young  dog,  by  the  stamp  of 
your  foot  and  the  glance  of  your  eye?  or  as  a  parent  should,  by  moral  education? 
Some  people  appeal  more  to  brute  fear  in  their  children  than  they  do  to  human  love. 
2.  Love  is  the  strongest  passion  known  to  mortals.  It  is  stronger  than  hate,  for 
death  checks  its  cry.  Leaving  the  bloody  body  on  the  sand,  it  returns  content  to  its 
kennel.  But  love  is  not  checked,  is  not  weakened  by  death.  There  is  no  power 
like  love.  It  will  carry  heavier  burdens,  endure  more  buffeting,  do  more  service, 
face  more  perils,  live  on  under  the  sense  of  deepest  shame,  beyond  any  other  emotion 
that  the  heart  of  man  is  able  to  feel.  ( W.  H.  H.  Murray.)  On  obeying  Christ : — 
I.  There  are  many  people  who  obey  Christ  because  thet  see  for  themselves 
THAT  His  commandments  ABE  LOFTY  AND  GOOD.  But  this  is  uot  the  same  thing  as 
obeying  Christ.  1.  If  a  man  over  whom  you  have  no  authority  consults  you  about 
a  piece  of  work,  and  does  not  take  your  advice,  you  may  think  him  a  dull  or  a  lazy 
man,  but  not  a  disobedient  one.  There  can  be  no  obedieuce  or  disobedience  where 
there  is  no  authority.  But  if  the  man  is  your  servant  the  case  is  different.  He  may 
think  that  his  own  way  is  better  than  yours,  but  he  has  to  accept  yours.  You  are 
his  master.  So  if  I  recognize  the  authority  of  Christ,  I  shall  obey  Him  before  I 
recognize  that  His  commandments  are  good  and  wise.  His  words  are  laws  to  be 
fulfilled,  not  ethical  treatises  the  soundness  of  whose  principles  I  find  by  study.  2. 
In  the  training  of  children  we  do  not  explain  everything  before  we  expect  obedience. 
A  child  of  six  does  not  easily  understand  why  he  should  take  offensive  medicine, 
or  a  child  of  ten  why  he  should  learn  the  Latin  declensions.  He  has  to  do  it  first, 
and  to  discover  the  reasons  afterwards.  And  so  if  a  c'lild  be  not  disciplined  to 
truthfulness,  industry,  &c. ,  before  he  can  see  for  himself  the  obligation  of  these 
virtues,  he  will  never  see  that  lying  and  indolence  are  vices.  Compel  him  to  be 
industrious  and  he  will  discover  the  obligations  of  industry.  3.  And  so  if  we  obey 
Christ  His  commandments  will  shine  in  their  own  light.  It  is  not  by  meditation 
but  by  practice  that  we  see  the  beauty  of  His  words.  II.  There  are  others  who 
ACCEPT  Christ's  judgments  on  all  moral  questions  against  theib  own  because 
He  knows  so  much  more  about  righteousness  than  they  do.  This  is  a 
great  advance,  but  it  is  not  enough.  It  is  only  faith  in  Christ's  larger 
moral  wisdom,  not  in  His  authority.  It  sometimes  happens  that  a  young 
man  finds  himself  in  a  position  in  which  it  is  hard  for  him  to  recon- 
cile his  personal  interests  with  the  claims  of  others.  There  are  three 
or  four  courses  open  to  him ;  one  of  them  he  dismisses  as  involving  quite  un- 
necessary sacrifice ;  he  is  perplexed  about  the  rest.  He  consults  an  older  man  in 
•whom  he  has  perfect  faith.  His  friend  tells  him  that  he  is  bound  to  take  the 
course  which  he  has  dismissed  from  his  mind.  The  young  man  cannot  see  why, 
but  trusts  his  older  friend's  judgment  rather  than  his  own.  This  is  a  great  proof 
of  confidence,  but  it  is  not  obedience.  Christ  does  not  oome  asking  only  for  our 
confidence.  He  comes  asserting  authority.  HI.  Wb  must  obey  God  because  wb 
OUGHT.  1.  There  is  a  light  which  lighteth  every  man,  and  however  broken  and 
obscured  is  a  light  from  heaven.  It  is  the  revelation  of  the  eternal  law  of  righteoua- 
ness,  and  whatever  obedience  I  owe  that  law  which  is  revealed  to  conscience  I  owe 
to  God.  That  God  is  my  Creator,  is  good,  can  punish,  imposes  on  me  many 
obligations ;  but  if  He  were  not  my  God,  though  I  should  be  bound  to  be  gratefm 
to  Him,  or  should  fear  Him,  yet  my  conscience  would  determine  the  measure  of 
my  duty  towards  Him,  and  I  might  not  find  absolute  obedience  to  be  due  to  Him. 
But  in  that  He  is  God,  He  has  an  authority  over  me  that  is  unique  and  unlimited  ; 
and  you  might  just  as  well  ask.  Why  should  I  obey  conscience  ?  as,  Why  should  I 
obey  God  ?  The  only  answer  in  each  case  is,  I  ought.  There  is  nothing  more  to 
be  said.  2.  And  in  Christ  Ood  comes  and  claims  my  obedience.  He  is  the  eternal 
law  of  righteousness  incarnate.    He  does  not  counsel ;  He  commands.    IV.  This 

POSITION   IS  OHALLENOED  ON  THE  OBOUND  THAT  EVEN  IN  ChBIST'S  PBESENCB  OOMSOIBNOB 

IB  BUPBEMB.  It  is  true  that  conscience  must  determine  whether  or  not  the  claims 
tfi  Christ  are  valid;  but  when  conscience  has  once  discovered  that  He  ii  the 


676  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.xiv. 

personal  revelation  of  the  law  of  righteousness,  it  has  discovered  its  Master.  "  But 
am  I  to  obey  Christ  against  the  dictates  of  my  own  conscience  ?  "  Wait  and  see 
whether  the  conflict  arises.  It  may  happen  that  some  of  Christ's  precepts  impose 
duties  which  conscience  has  not  discovered,  for  conscience  is  not  omniscient,  and 
often  discovers  duties  when  too  late  to  discharge  them.  What  would  we  now  give 
if  we  had  recognized  filial  objections,  which  are  now  so  clear,  thirty  years  ago  ? 
Christ  enables  us  to  anticipate  experience.  He  does  not  command  what  conscience 
condemns ;  bat  in  the  early  years  of  Christian  life  it  is  very  commonly  found  that 
He  commands  many  duties  which  as  yet  conscience  does  not  enforce.  V.  Thb 
CLAIMS  OF  Chbist  fbovoee  uot  Only  speculative  criticism,  but  besentment.  1.  It 
is  one  thing  to  submit  to  an  abstract  law  which  conscience  discovers,  in  this  there 
is  no  humiliation ;  it  is  quite  another  thing  to  submit  to  the  government  of  a 
Person.  Nor  is  the  claim  resisted,  because  made  by  one  who  has  "  been  made 
flesh."  There  are  many  who  suppose  they  believe  in  God,  but  who  refuse  Him  all 
authority  over  conduct.  They  regard  Him  as  nothing  more  than  an  hypothesis  to 
account  for  the  universe.  While  He  is  nothing  more  than  this  the  personal  life  is 
free;  as  soon  as  He  claims  authority  the  freedom  seems  lost.  2.  But  those  to 
whom  the  great  discovery  of  God  in  Christ  has  come,  know  that  in  His  service 
there  is  perfect  freedom.  The  rule  of  law  is  the  real  tyranny.  The  law  can  only 
command ;  but  when  Christ  becomes  Lord  of  conduct,  He  stands  by  us  in  every 
conflict ;  gives  strength  as  well  as  defines  duty.  Christ  becomes  our  Comrade,  but 
yet  He  is  our  Euler,  and  we  are  under  the  government  of  a  higher  Will  than  our 
own.  3.  We  have  to  obey  God  in  Christ.  But  when  the  real  secret  of  the  Christian 
revelation  is  mastered,  the  obedience  assumes  an  unique  character.  The  fountains 
of  our  life  are  in  Him.  He  is  our  higher,  truer  self.  Not  until  we  abide  in  Christ, 
and  He  in  us,  are  we  able  to  keep  His  commandments.  (jR.  W.  Dale,  LL.D.) 
Loved  of  God : — An  oak  tree,  as  it  stands  in  the  open  forest,  presents  one  of  the 
most  perfect  forms  of  sturdy  independence.  So  fitted  is  that  tree  to  stand  alone, 
that  the  architect  of  the  Bell  Rock  lighthouse  copied  the  work  of  a  greater  Architect, 
and  took  as  the  model  of  a  building  that  was  to  resist  the  sweep  of  waves  and 
winds  the  trunk  of  an  oak  tree.  In  striking  contrast  with  this,  there  are  plants  in 
nature,  and  some  of  them  the  most  beautiful  and  fragrant,  that  cannot  stand  alone. 
Yet  these  are  not  doomed  to  be  trodden  under  foot.  No ;  types  of  him  who  is  strong 
in  his  weakness,  exalted  in  his  humility,  these  may  overtop  the  loftiest  oak,  and  laugh 
at  the  storm  that  lays  its  head  in  the  dust.  And  how  ?  They  are  made  to  attach 
themselves  to  other  objects ;  and  when  they  have  had  no  other  objects  to  attach 
themselves  to,  they  entwine  their  arms  within  each  other — embrace  their  own 
body :  like  a  selfish  man,  whose  affections  are  all  fixed  upon  himself.  As  these 
plants  are,  so  are  we ;  what  their  tendrils,  and  arms,  and  instruments  of  attachment 
are  to  them,  our  affections  are  to  us.  Man  is  not  made  to  be  independent.  Con« 
stitnted  as  I  and  you  are,  we  can  no  more  fling  off  our  affections  than  we  can  fling 
off  any  other  part  of  oar  nature.  Be  the  object  good  or  bad,  be  it  the  earth  or  be  it 
heaven,  man  can  no  more  live  without  loving  tban  he  can  live  without  breathing. 
Obedience  to  the  command  "  love  not  the  world  "  had  been  an  impossibility,  unless 
there  had  been  this  other  command — "love  the  Lord  thy  God."  I  must  love 
something ;  and  if  you  would  put  the  love  of  the  world  out  of  my  heart,  you  must 
poor  the  love  of  God  into  it.  Note — I.  The  Fatheb  loves  those  who  lovb  His 
Son.  How  God  should  have  loved  those  who  hated  Him — but  that  God  should 
love  us,  so  soon  as  through  grace  we  oome  to  love  His  Son — I  as  a  father,  you  as 
parents,  can  easily  understand.  I  love  all  that  love  my  children.  Do  my  child  a 
good,  and  it  has  a  double  value  than  if  it  were  done  to  myself ;  do  my  child  an 
injury,  and  I  know  nothing  in  this  world  that  would  so  soon  lash  and  goad  a  father 
into  madness.  I  have  heard  of  good  people  who  have  been  greatly  distressed  to 
know  whether  God  loved  them.  The  way  to  know  that  is  just  to  see  and  know, 
"  Am  I  loving  Christ  ?  "  Can  you  appeal  to  Him  who  searches  all  your  heart,  and 
taking  up  the  language  of  a  man  who,  if  he  belied  his  Master,  afterwards  most 
bravely  died  for  Him.  "  Lord,  Thon  knowest  all  things,  Thou  knowest  that  I  love 
Thee  ?  "  Then,  yon  can  add,  I  know  that  God  loves  me ;  and  if  God  loves  me, 
happy  am  I,  I  can  afford  to  dispense  with  the  love  of  others.  With  my  back  at 
the  uirone  of  God  I  can  defy  the,  world.  And  even  if  they  hate  me  who  should 
love  me,  I  am  not  miserable :  with  the  sun  in  the  sky,  I  can  afford  to  dispense  with 
the  twinkling  stars.  The  love  of  God  is  like  the  hfe  of  God,  the  covenant  o{ 
grace  standeth  sure,  and,  "  whom  He  loveth  He  loveth  to  ths  end."  U.  Lr  wb 
iiOTB  Chbist,  God  and  Chbist  will  coue  to  us.    David  was  so  offended  at  th« 


aup.xiv.]  ST.  JOHN.  §77 

cold-blood  »d  murder  of  Amnon,  that  although  he  permitted  Absalom  to  return  to 
Jerusalem,  for  two  years  he  would  not  see  him.  And  when  the  sin  of  Eden  was 
committed,  God  was  so  offended  that  He  withdrew.  Intercourse  between  God  and 
man  after  the  Fall  was  mainly  continued  through  servants,  until  at  length  His  Son 
came,  and  He  came  to  reconcile  them  that  were  at  enmity,  and  has  done  it.  And 
I  take  that  to  be  expressed  in,  "  We  will  come  unto  Him."  That  implies  that  the 
offence  has  been  removed ;  that  the  friendly  visits  are  renewed.  Having  faith  in 
Christ,  we  have  peace  with  God.  You  may  ask  me  how  God  and  Christ  oome  to 
U8.  I  need  not  tell  you,  that  they  come  in  the  Word,  by  daily  grace,  by  the 
communications  of  the  Spirit :  so  much  so,  that  there  are  no  lovers  meet  so  often 
as  Jesus  and  His  bride ;  and  there  is  no  mother  goes  so  often  to  her  nursery,  to  see 
her  children,  as  I  believe  our  Father  comes  to  visit  His  children  upon  earth.  You 
see  your  neighbour  once  a  day ;  you  see  your  friend  or  brother  once  or  twice  a  year; 
but  if  you  are  God's  people,  there  are  none  you  meet  so  often  as  God.  He 
comes  at  the  time  of  prayer ;  takes  the  mercy-seat  at  the  family  worship ;  and  into 
that  closet  where  the  good  man  goes,  goes  along  with  him.  The  believer  finds 
every  morning  a  letter  from  home  on  his  table,  in  his  Bible — a  letter  from  Hia 
Father.  He  may  be  humble,  poor,  despised ;  but  there  is  not  a  man  on  earth 
moves  in  such  high  society  as  the  humblest  of  God's  poor  ones.  HI.  God  and 
Chbist  will  abide  with  us.  What  else  will  ?  Who  else  will  ?  Not  your  parents, 
pastors,  health,  prosperity,  family.  A  good  man  deprived  of  His  all  is  left  God, 
his  Bible,  grace,  a  throne  of  grace.  Conclusion  :  Cultivate  the  love  of  Christ.  It 
is  a  fire  that  will  go  out  unless  it  is  fed ;  it  is  a  plant  that  will  die  unless  it  is 
cultivated.  There  are  two  sayings  that  should  stir  us  up  to  this,  "  Seeing  is 
believing;"  "Out  of  sight  out  of  mind."  Why  is  it  that  in  heaven  they  ever 
love?  Because  they  ever  see?  Now,  as  you  cannot  see  Christ,  there  is  the  more 
need  that  you  should  make  up  by  faith  for  want  of  sight.  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.) 
The  Father's  love  felt: — The  sun  was  shining  in  the  heavens,  revealing  to  the  world 
the  infinite  beauty  of  form  and  colour,  for  untold  ages  before  its  rays  were  analyzed 
by  the  prism.  It  was  bringing  forth  verdure  by  its  warmth  for  untold  ages  before 
it  was  found  out  that  oceans  of  hydrogen  served  upon  his  surface,  and  that  heat, 
like  light,  is  a  mode  of  motion.  What  you  and  I  want,  and  what  you  and  I  have, 
is  not  the  bare  truth  that  there  is  a  sun,  but  the  sense  of  its  warmth.  What  we 
want,  and  what  we  have  is  not  an  analysis  of  what  the  idea  of  God  menns,  but  the 
sense  that  there  is  a  Father  who  loves  us,  and  has  communion  with  us.  (E. 
Hatch,  D.D.)  Christ  and  His  words  : — I.  The  connection  between  Christ  and 
His  words.  1.  Christ  and  His  words  are  both  very  fully  made  known  to  us.  This 
is  not  always  the  case  with  the  teachers  of  the  race.  (1)  Sometimes  we  may  have 
a  great  personality  who  has  stirred  his  own  and  subsequent  generations,  but  we 
have  few  or  none  of  his  words.  His  secret  has  died  with  him,  as  in  the  case  of 
Pythagoras,  Noah,  Enoch,  Abraham.  (2)  We  may  have  great  and  noble  words 
from  a  man,  but  we  may  know  little  of  his  personality — as  in  the  case  of  Homer, 
Shakespeare,  Plato,  Isaiah,  and  many  of  those  prophets.  (3)  But  in  Christ  both 
the  personality  and  the  words  have  been  brought  out  into  the  clearest  and  fullest 
illumination.  We  should  have  felt  unsatisfied  unless  we  had  heard  the  law  of  love 
from  His  own  lips,  and  our  wish  is  met.  And  with  the  words  God  has  given  ua 
the  life,  as  never  a  life  was  given,  by  those  four,  each  different,  yet  each  the  same, 
a  separate  mirror  to  take  in  the  side  presented  to  it,  but  all  disclosing  in  life-like 
harmony  the  one  grand  person — each  so  absorbed  in  his  theme  that  he  himself  is 
forgotten.  (4)  The  wards  of  Christ,  then,  and  Christ  Himself,  are  both  fully  m  <.de 
known  to  us.  The  gospel  has  its  expression  in  His  words,  but  its  power  and  spirit 
are  in  His  Ufe.  He  is  Himself  "  the  Word  made  flesh  " — the  greatest  utterance  in 
the  greatest  person.  2.  There  is  a  perfect  harmony  between  Christ  and  His  words. 
(1)  He  and  His  words  are  in  agreement,  else  they  could  not  co-exist  and  coalesce  ai 
He  says  they  must  do.  This  is  not  always  the  case  with  a  man  and  His  words, 
(a)  Sometimes  we  can  love  and  esteem  a  man,  and  yet  his  words  carry  neither 
conviction  to  the  understanding  nor  moving  power  to  the  soul.  (6)  Or,  we  may 
admire  the  words,  but  we  cannot  love  the  man.  It  is  with  pain  that  we  turn  from 
the  words  of  Bacon  to  his  life,  and  from  the  scorn  of  worldly  ambition  by  the 
author  of  the  "  Night  Thoughts  "  to  his  eager  pursuit  of  it  in  courtly  circles.  One 
of  the  moat  melancholy  contrasts  is  between  the  words  of  the  wisest  of  men  and 
the  exemplification  which  he  himself  gave  of  wisdom.  How  different  when  we 
come  to  Christ  1  Our  deepest  moral  nature  sets  the  seal  of  approval  on  His  words. 
"  Thou  art  fairer  than  the  children  of  men ;  grace  is  poured  into  Thy  lips."  When 
VOL.  11.  37 


578  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  or. 

He  inculcates  humility,  He  Himself  "  is  among  the  disciples  as  one  that  serveth." 
When  He  speaks  of  purity,  "He  did  no  sin,  neither  was  guile  found  in  His  mouth." 
When  He  urges  the  law  of  kindness,  "  He  goes  about  doing  good."  (2)  While  the 
words  and  life  are  in  harmony,  yet  the  life  is  greater  than  the  words.  A  man 
should  always  be  more  than  his  expression.  We  feel  that  whatever  some  men  may 
say  or  do,  they  are  capable  of  something  above  it.  This  is  pre-eminently  true  o£ 
Jesus.  This  superiority  of  the  person  to  the  words  of  Christ  is  not  destructive  of 
harmony ;  it  is  the  highest  reach  of  it.  In  all  things  that  perfectly  agree  there 
must  be  a  great  and  a  greater,  in  some  such  way  as  God  agrees  with  His  universe, 
which  is  His  expression  of  Himself,  while  yet  He  remains  an  infinity  behind  it. 
It  is  one  of  the  most  important  steps  a  man  can  take  in  his  spiritual  history  when 
he  passes  from  hstening  to  the  sayings  to  looking  up  into  the  face  of  Christ,  and 
learns  that  the  words  are  only  rays  from  the  countenance  of  the  "  Eternal  Life," 
the  natural  breathings  from  Him  who  is  "the  Word  made  flesh."  "Now  we 
believe,  not  because  of  thy  saying,  but  because  we  ourselves  know  that  this  is 
indeed  the  Christ."  II.  The  connection  between  loving  Christ  and  ki-eping  His 
WOKDS.  Note — 1.  The  central  truth  of  Christian  doctrine,  viz.,  that  there  must  be 
a  change  of  heart  before  there  is  a  change  of  life.  Christ  is  the  lawgiver  of  God'g 
world,  and  before  we  can  obey  His  laws  we  must  be  on  terms  of  amity  with 
Himself.  God's  friendship  must  come  before  God's  service.  Now,  it  is  frequently 
taught — that  there  must  be  service  before  there  can  be  friendship,  and  that  peace 
can  only  be  purchased  by  obedience.  But  who  can  do  anything  that  will  bear  the 
look  of  service  in  a  spiritual  sense  until  the  heart  is  in  it?  Love  to  Him,  however, 
can  face  every  duty,  dare  every  danger,  endure  every  sacrifice,  when  it  sees  His 
self-sacrifice  to  save  him  from  the  most  terrible  of  all  evils,  exclusion  from  the 
favour  and  life  of  the  God.  Less  than  this  cannot  explain  either  the  Epistles 
or  Gospels,  neither  can  it,  in  the  last  extremity,  bear  the  weight  of  what  Christ 
requires  of  those  who  own  His  allegiance.  2.  The  Christian  philosophy  of 
morality.  (1)  The  superiority  of  the  morality  of  Christianity,  candid  men  who 
profess  to  stand  outside  generally  admit.  But  what  is  often  overlooked  is  that  this 
superiority  does  not  consist  so  much  in  its  details  as  in  its  central  principle  of 
action.  There  is  no  system  but  Christianity  that  has  gathered  all  the  grand 
motives  to  morality  round  a  person,  and  made  the  strength  and  essence  of  them 
spring  from  love  to  Him.  (2)  There  would  be  a  fatal  objection  to  this  if  Christ 
were  less  than  God.  For  then  His  claim  of  implicit  obedience  would  be  impious, 
and  if  He  had  done  less  for  man  than  save  him  from  the  lowest  depth.  He  could 
not  require  all  his  nature  to  be  given  up  to  Him.  Here,  again,  the  morality  of  the 
gospel  is  seen  to  be  closely  connected  with  its  doctrines.  The  Divinity  of  Christ 
forbids  the  charge  of  assumption  on  His  part,  and  His  atonement  prevents  the 
feeling  that  there  is  over-exaction  from  us.  This  view  makes  Christian  morality 
and  doctrine  cohere  ;  and  those  men  who  speak  of  detaching  the  gospel  morality 
from  the  gospel  doctrine  are  as  rational  as  the  men  who  would  pluck  a  blossom 
from  a  tiee  and  think  to  have  it  come  to  fruit.  Conclusion  :  Therp  are  only 
three  conceivable  ways  in  which  morality  can  be  thought  of  as  springing  ap  in 
man.  1.  By  instinct.  But  how  feeble,  fluctuating,  contradictory,  this  is  when 
left  to  itseli;  and  if  it  were  perfect,  morahty  by  instinct  would  be  morality 
mechanical.  2.  By  reason.  But  reason  can  never  furnish  sufficient  motive  power ; 
it  becomes  weakest  when  passion  is  strongest.  Hence  reason,  in  moraUty,  is  much 
more  a  thing  for  the  philosopher  in  his  closet  than  for  the  mass  of  men  in  the 
struggle  and  strain  of  life.  8.  By  love,  and  love  going  forth  to  a  person.  It  is  this 
way  ^at  Christianity  has  chosen.     (J.  Ker,  D.D,) 

Yers.  25,  26.  These  things  have  I  spoken  unto  yon. — The  misgion  of  the  Holy 
Spirit : — I.  Its  distinction  fbou  that  of  Jesus  Chbist.  Both  Christ  and  the  Spirit 
were  sent  by  the  Father,  and  were  sent  to  teach ;  but  they  differed  in  respect  of — 
1.  Character.  Christ  had  been  sent  in  the  Father's  name  as  the  Father's  repre> 
sentative;  the  Spirit  was  come  in  Christ's  name  as  Christ's  representative.  2. 
Purpose.  Christ  had  been  sent  to  furnish  men  with  an  objective  image  of  God ;  the 
Spirit  to  give  an  inward  apprehension  of  the  same.  3.  Duration.  Christ  came  for 
a  season;  the  Spirit  for  ever.  4.  Results.  Christ's  mission  was  imperfectly  realized 
BO  far  as  it  related  to  the  enlightenment  of  men ;  that  of  the  Spirit  would  attain 
complete  success  both  in  instructing  and  sanctifying.  II.  Its  fulfilment  in  thb 
CASE  OF  Christ's  apostles.  1.  Scripture  illumination.  A  wonderful  light  began 
to  shine  on  the  Old  Testament,  which  enabled  them  to  see  its  references  to  Christ 


OHAP.  MT.J  ST.  JOHN.  57J 

•which  had  previously  been  hidden  (c/.  Psa.  xvi.  8-11  with  Acts  ii.  25-28 ;  xiii.  35 ; 
Psa.  ox.  1  with  Acts  ii,  34 ;  Psa.  ii.  1,  2  with  Acts  iv.  25 ;  Psa.  ii.  7  with  Acts  liii. 
33  ;  Amos  ix.  11  with  Acts  xv.  16 ;  Zech.  ix.  9  with  John  xii.  16).     2.  Quickened 
recollection.     A  lively  recollection  of  forgotten  words  of  Jesus  began  to  show  itself. 
Examples  :  chap.  ii.  22;  Luke  xxiv.  8  ;  Acts  xi.  16;  xx.  35.    In  particular,  Christ's 
utterances  concerning  His  relation  with  the  Father  (chap.  viii.  28).     3.  Further 
revelation.    A  gradual  disclosure  of  truths  which  had  been  concealed  in  Christ's 
teaching  but  not  developed  as,  e.g.,  the  doctrines  of — (1)  His  Divinity  (Acts  i.  36). 
(2)  His  atoning  death  (Acts  iii.  19).     (3)  His  exclusive  Mediatorship  (Acts  iv.  12). 
(4)  Justification  by  faith  (Acts.  xiii.  39  ;  Rom.  i.  16,  17  ;  iii.  21-26  ;  t.  1).     (5)  The 
■Catholicity  of  the  New  Testament  Church  (Acts  xi.  17 ;  Eom.  i.  6-7 ;  ii.  11 ;  GaL 
vi.  15  ;  Eph.  ii.  14-16).    In  short,  out  of  this  flowed  the  New  Testament.    III.  Its 
KKLATioN  TO  THE  GENEBAii  BODY  OF  BELIEVERS.     1.  Negatively.    It  does  not  warrant 
thd  expectation  that  new  revelations  will  be  imparted  to  either  the  Church  or 
individual — a  pretension  advanced  by  Rome,  which  places  tradition  on  a  level  with 
the  writings  of  apostles.     2.  Positively.    Christ's  language  implies  that  the  Church 
and  the  individual  have  to-day,  as  the  apostles  had,  a  Teacher  qualified  to  lead  them 
into  all  rehgious  truth  (1  John  ii.  20).    Learn:  1.  The  high  esteem  in  which  the 
Holy  Spirit  should  be  held  as  the  Father's  Commissioner,  the  Saviour's  Expositor, 
the  apostles'  Remembrancer,  the  Church's  Teacher,  the  saints'  Comforter.    2.  The 
•great  confidence  which  should  be  placed  in  the  Holy  Spirit,  possessing  as  He  does 
the  twofold  stamp  and  seal  of  the  Father  and  the  Son.    3.  The  sincere  gratitude 
with  which  the  Holy  Spirit  should  be  welcomed,  since  without  His  assistance  the 
revealed  Christ  cannot  be  understood.     (T.  Whitelaw,  D.D.)        Tlie  Teacher  Spirit : 
— I.  The  promised  Teacher.     1.  "  The  Comforter  "  means  literally  one  who  is 
called  to  the  side  of  another,  primarily  for  the  purpose  of  being  his  representative 
in  some  legal  process ;  and,  more  widely,  for  any  purpose  of  help,  encouragement, 
and  strength.     2.  This  comforting  and  strengthening  oflSce  of  the  Spirit  is  brought 
into  immediate  connection  with  the  conception  of  Him  as  a  Teacher,    That  is  to 
say,  the  best  strength  that  God  can  give  us  is  by  the  firm  grasp  and  the  growing 
clearness  of  understanding  of  the  truths  which  are  wrapped  up  in  Christ.    3.  This 
Divine  Teacher  is  the  Holy  Ghost.    We  might  have  expected,  as  indeed  we  find  in 
another  context,  the  "  Spirit  of  Truth  "  as  appropriate  in  connection  with  the  oflBce 
of  teaching.    But  there  is  the  profound  lesson  for  us  in  this,  that,  side  by  side  with 
the  thought  of  illumination,  there  lies  the  thought  of  purity  built  upon  consecration. 
\\)  There  is  no  real  knowledge  of  Christ  and  His  truth  without  purity  of  heart. 
The  man  who  has  no  ear  can  never  understand  music.     The  man  who  has  no  eye 
ior  beauty  can  never  be  brought  to  bow  his  spirit  before  some  gem  of  art.     The 
-scholars  in  Christ's  school  have  to  come  there  with  clean  bands  and  clean  hearts. 
(2)  On  the  other  hand,  the  truest  motives  for  purity  are  found  in  that  great  word 
"which  is  meant  much  rather  to  make  us  good  than  to  make  us  wise.     So,  in  this 
designation  of  the  teaching  Spirit  as  holy,  there  lie  lessons  for  two  classes.     All 
fanatical  professions  of  possessing  Divine  illumination  which  are  not  warranted  by 
purity  of   life  are  Ues  or  self-delusion.     And,  on  the  other  hand,  cold-blooded 
inteUectualism  will  never  force  the  locks  of  the  palace  of  Divine  truth,  but  they  that 
oome  there  must  have  clean  hands  and  a  pure  heart.    4.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  "  sent 
by  God  "  in  Christ's  name.     (1)  He  acts  as  Christ's  Representative ;  just  as  Christ 
•comes  in  the  Father's  name  and  acts  as  His  Representative.    (2)  He  has,  for  the 
basis  of  His  mission,  and  the  sphere  in  which  He  acts,  the  recorded  facts  of  Christ'! 
life  and  death,  these  and  none  other.    6.  This  Messenger  is  a  Person.    "He." 
They  tell  us  that  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  is  not  in  the  New  Testament.    The 
word  is  not,  but  the  thing  is.     In  this  verse  we  have  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the 
Spirit  brought  into  such  close  and  indissoluble  union  as  is  only  vindicated  from  the 
charge  of  blasphemy  by  the  belief  in  the  divinity  of  each.     That  Divine  Spirit  is 
more  than  an  influence.     "  He  shall  teach,"  and  He  can  be  grieved  by  evil  and  sin. 
U.  The  lesson.     1.  Christ  is  the  lesson  book.     2.  The  significance  of  this  lesson 
book,  the  history  of  our  Lord,  cannot  be  unfolded  all  at  once.    The  world  and  the 
Church  received  Christ,  as  it  were,  in  the  dark  ;  and,  like  some  man  that  has  got  a 
precious  gift  into  his  hands  as  the  morning  was  dawning,  each  fresh  moment  that 
passed  revealed  as  the  light  grew  new  beauties  and  new  preciousness  in  the  thing 
poBBessed.     Christ's  words  are  inexhaustible,  and  the  Spirit's  teaching  is  to  nnveU 
more  and  more  the  infinite  significance  that  lies  in  the  apparently  least  significant 
of  them.    3.  If  this  be  our  Lord's  meaning  here.  He  plainly  anticipated  that  after 
fiis  departure  there  should  be  a  development  of  Christian  doctrine.     The  earlier 


680  THE  BrBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XTT. 

disciples  had  only  a  very  partial  grasp  of  Christ's  nature.  They  knew  next  to 
nothing  of  the  great  doctrine  of  sacrifice  ;  about  His  resurrection ;  that  He  wa» 
going  back  to  heaven  ;  of  the  spirituality  or  universality  of  His  kingdom.  None  of 
these  things  were  in  their  mind.  They  had  all  been  in  germ  in  His  words.  And 
after  he  was  gone,  there  came  over  them  a  breath  of  the  teaching  Spirit,  and  the 
unintelligible  flashed  up  into  significance.  4.  If  Jesus  Christ  and  the  deep  under- 
standing of  Him  be  the  true  lesson  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  then  real  progress  consists,, 
not  in  getting  beyond  Christ,  but  in  getting  more  fully  into  Him.  I  hope  I  believe 
in  the  continuous  advance  of  Christian  thought  as  joyfully  as  any  man,  but  my 
notion  of  it — and  Christ's  notion  of  it — is  to  get  more  and  more  into  His  heart,  and 
to  find  within  Him,  and  not  away  from  Him,  "  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and 
knowledge."  All  other  teachers'  words  become  feeble  by  age,  as  their  persons 
become  wrapped  in  oblivion  ;  but  the  progress  of  the  Church  consists  in  absorbing 
more  and  mure  of  Christ,  in  understanr^ing  Him  better,  and  becoming  more  and 
more  moulded  by  His  influence.  III.  The  scholars.  1.  The  apostles,  in  all  this- 
conversation,  stand  as  the  representatives  of  the  Church.  For  this  very  Evangelist 
refers  to  this  promise,  when  he  says,  addressing  all  his  Asiatic  brethren,  "  Ye  have 
an  unction  from  the  Holy  One,  and  know  all  things."  And,  again,  "  The  unction 
which  ye  have  of  Him  abideth  with  you,  and  ye  need  not  that  any  man  should 
teach  you."  So,  then,  every  believing  soul  has  this  Divine  Spirit  for  His  Teacher. 
2.  But  let  us  not  forget  that  the  early  teaching  is  the  standard.  As  to  the  first 
disciples  the  ofi&ce  of  the  Divine  Spirit  was  to  bring  before  them  the  deep  signifi- 
cance of  their  Master's  life  and  words,  so  to  us  the  office  of  the  teaching  Spirit  is- 
to  bring  to  our  minds  the  deep  significance  of  the  record  of  what  they  learned  from 
Him.  "If  a  man  think  himself  to  be  spiritual,  let  him  acknowledge  that  the 
things  that  I  write  unto  you  are  the  commandments  of  the  Lord."  Conclusion: 
(1)  Let  this  great  promise  fill  us  with  shame.  What  slow  scholars  we  arel  How 
little  we  have  learnt  1  How  we  have  let  passion,  prejudice,  the  babble  of  men'a 
tongue's,  anybody  and  everybody  take  the  office  of  teaching  us  God's  truth,  instead 
of  waiting  before  Him  and  letting  His  Spirit  teach  us  1  "  When  for  the  time  we 
ought  to  be  teachers,  have  need  that  one  teach  us  which  be  the  first  principles  of 
the  oracles  of  Christ."  (2)  Let  it  fill  us  with  desire,  diligence,  and  calm  hope. 
They  tell  us  that  Christianity  is  effete.  Have  we  got  all  out  of  Jesus  Christ  that  is 
in  Him  ?  Is  the  process  that  has  been  going  on  for  all  these  centuries  going  to  stop 
now?  Ah  1  depend  upon  it  the  new  problems  of  this  generation  will  find  their 
solution  where  the  old  problems  of  past  generations  have  found  theirs,  and  the  old 
commandment  of  the  old  Christ  will  be  the  new  commandment  of  the  new  Christ. 
Foolish  men  both  on  the  Christian  and  on  the  anti-Christian  side  stand  and  point 
to  the  western  sky  and  say,  "The  Sun  is  setting."  But  that  which  sank  in  the 
west  rises  fresh  and  bright  in  the  east  for  a  new  day.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Christ 
for  all  the  ages  and  for  every  soul,  and  the  world  will  only  learn  more  and  more  of 
His  inexhaustible  fulness.  \A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  teaching  of  the  Holy  Ghost: 
— I.  What  the  Holt  Spirit  teaches  us.  He  teaches  God's  people — 1.  All  that 
they  do.  (1)  There  are  some  things  which  you  and  I  can  do  naturally  without  any 
teaching.  Who  ever  taught  a  child  to  cry?  But  you  and  I  could  not  cry  of 
ourselves  till  we  had  received  "  the  spirit  of  adoption,  whereby  we  cry,  Abba,. 
Father."  (2)  Children  have  to  be  taught  to  speak.  We,  too,  are  taught  to  speak. 
We  have  none  of  us  learned,  as  yet,  the  whole  vocabulary  of  Canaan.  ••  No  man  can 
say  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  "  Those  first  words  which  we 
ever  used  as  Christians — "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner,"  were  taught  ns  by  the 
Holy  Spirit ;  and  that  song  which  we  shall  sing  before  the  throne  will  be  His  last 
lesson.  (3)  God's  people  are  taught  to  walk  and  act  by  Him.  '•  It  is  not  in  man 
that  walketh  to  direct  his  steps."  To  stray  is  natural ;  to  keep  the  path  of  right  is 
spiritual.  (4)  So  with  the  higher  efforts.  The  preaching  of  the  gospel,  when  it  be 
done  aright,  is  only  accomplished  through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  So  is  it 
with  sacred  song.  The  wings  with  which  I  mount  towards  the  skies  in  sacred 
harmony  and  joy  are  Thy  wings,  0  Holy  Dove !  The  fire  with  which  my  spirit 
flames  at  times  of  hallowed  consecration  is  the  flame  of  the  Spirit  1  2.  All  thej 
know.  We  may  learn  very  much  from  the  Word  of  God  morally  and  mentally,  but 
spiritual  things  are  only  to  be  spiritually  discerned.  (1)  He  reproves  us  of  sin. 
No  man  knows  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin,  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  (2)  Next 
the  Spirit  teaches  ns  the  total  ruin,  depravity,  and  helplessness  of  self.  (3)  The 
character  of  God.  God's  goodness  and  omnipotence  are  clearly  manifested  in  the- 
works  of  creation ;  but  where  do  I  read  of  His  grace,  mercy,  or  justice  ?    These  an* 


CHAP.  xiT.]  ST.  JOHN.  681 

only  revealed  to  ns  in  this  precious  Book,  and  so  that  we  cannot  know  them  nntil 
the  Spirit  opens  our  eyes  to  perceive  them.  (4)  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  the  Holy  Ghost 
who  manifests  the  Saviour  to  us  in  the  glory  of  His  person  ;  the  love  of  His  heart, 
the  power  of  His  arm,  the  preciousness  of  His  blood,  and  the  prevalence  of  Hia 
plea.  (5)  Our  adoption.  Indeed,  all  the  privileges  of  the  new  covenant,  beginning 
from  regeneration,  unto  the  abundant  entrance  into  the  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ  is  the  teaching  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  especially  that  last 
point,  for  "  eye  hath  not  seen,"  &c.  II.  The  methods  by  which  the  Holy  Spirit 
TEACHES.  1.  He  excites  interest  in  the  mind.  He  shows  them  that  these  things 
have  a  personal  bearing  upon  their  soul's  present  and  eternal  welfare.  2.  He  gives 
to  the  man  a  teachable  spirit.  There  be  men  who  will  not  learn.  Teach  them  by 
little  and  little,  and  they  say — "  Do  you  think  I  am  a  child  ?  "  Tell  them  a  great 
deal  at  once,  and  they  say — "  You  have  not  the  power  to  make  me  comprehend  1 " 
The  Holy  Spirit  makes  a  man  willing  to  learn  in  any  shape.  3.  He  sets  truth 
in  a  clear  light.  How  hard  it  is  sometimes  to  state  a  fact  which  you  perfectly 
understand  yourself,  in  such  a  way  that  another  man  may  see  it.  It  is  like  the 
telescope ;  there  are  many  persons  who,  when  they  walk  into  an  observatory  and 
put  their  eye  to  the  glass,  expecting  to  see  the  rings  of  Saturn,  have  said,  "  I  can 
see  nothing  at  all ;  a  piece  of  glass,  and  a  grain  or  two  of  dust  is  all  I  can  see  I  " 
•'  But,"  says  the  astronomer,  "  I  can  see  Saturn  in  all  his  glory."  Why  cannot 
you  ?  Because  the  focus  does  not  suit  the  stranger's  eye.  By  a  Uttle  skill  the  focus 
can  be  altered  so  that  the  observer  may  be  able  to  see  what  he  could  not  see  before. 
Now  the  Holy  Spirit  always  gives  the  right  focus  to  every  truth.  He  sheds  a  light 
BO  strong  and  forcible  upon  the  Word,  that  the  spirit  says,  "  Now  I  see  it  and 
understand  it."  4.  He  enlightens  the  understanding.  'Tis  marvellous,  too,  how 
the  Holy  Ghost  does  teach  men  who  seem  as  if  they  never  could  learn.  I  know 
some  brethren  whose  opinion  I  would  not  take  in  anything  worldly  on  any  account. 
But  those  men  have  a  deeper,  truer,  and  more  experimental  knowledge  of  the  Word 
of  God  than  many  who  preach  it,  because  the  Holy  Spirit  never  tried  to  teach  them 
grammar,  and  never  meant  to  teach  them  business,  but  He  has  taught  them  the 
Word  of  God,  and  they  understand  it.  But  I  have  perceived,  also,  that  when  the 
Spirit  has  enlarged  the  understanding  to  receive  Bible  truth,  that  understanding 
becomes  more  capable  of  receiving  other  truth.  6.  He  refreshes  the  memory.  "  He 
shall  bring  all  things  to  your  remembrance."  6.  He  makes  us  feel  its  effect.  Yoa 
may  try  to  teach  a  child  the  meaning  of  the  term  "  sweetness  ; "  but  words  will  not 
avail,  give  him  some  honey  and  he  will  never  forget  it.  So  the  Holy  Spirit  does  not 
only  tell  us  of  Christ's  love;  He  sheds  it  abroad  in  the  heart.     III.  The  charactbb- 

ISTIC8  AND  NATURE  OF  THE  HoLY  Spirit's  TEACHING.    The  Holy  Ghost  teachcs 1. 

Sovereignly.  HeteacheswhomHewills,  whenHewills.asHewills.  2.  Effectually.  He 
never  failed  to  make  us  learn  yet.  3.  Infallibly.  We  teach  you  errors  through  want  of 
caution,  over  zeal,  and  the  weakness  of  our  own  mind.  4.  Continually.  Whom 
once  He  teaches.  He  never  leaves  till  He  has  completed  their  education. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  Teacher  of  the  Church: — I.  Oub  need  of  such  a 
Teacher.  It  is  not  enough  to  assume  the  necessity  of  the  teaching  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  All  experience  shows  that  an  outward  revelation  of  truth  is  inadequate. 
Our  knowledge  is  always  in  advance  of  our  inward  conformity  to  it  or  our  practical 
compliance  with  it.  But  even  when  men  seem  to  receive  and  believe  the  truth,  we 
must  not  always  assume  that  they  really  understand  it,  or  that  they  need  no  more 
light  than  it  brings  along  with  it  in  order  to  discern  the  fulness  of  its  meaning. 
By  nature  man  does  not  so  easily  apprehend  spiritual  truth,  II.  The  nature  of 
His  teaching.  1.  As  a  Teacher,  His  work  is  in  reality  a  continuation  of  the  pro- 
pbetical  ofiQce  of  Christ.  Jesus  is  the  great  Teacher ;  but  the  Holy  Ghost  is  His 
representative  on  earth  during  His  personal  absence  from  His  Church  on  earth. 
Thus  we  are  reminded  that  the  substance  of  His  teaching  was  not  a  new  revelation, 
distinct  from  that  which  had  been  already  afforded,  but  an  extension,  completion, 
and  application  of  that  which  had  been  given  by  Jesus  Christ  as  His  own  words 
clearly  show.  He  was  not  to  speak  of  Himself,  because  He  was  not  the  Saviour  in 
the  exact  sense  of  that  word.  The  Holy  Ghost  was  further  to  bring  all  things  to 
the  remembrance  of  the  disciples  of  Christ  which  He  had  spoken  to  them.  The 
words  of  the  Son  of  God  contained  the  germ  of  all  Christian  truth.  But  His  work 
-was  not  to  be  a  mere  helping  of  the  memory.  2.  And  this  work  of  teaching  is 
carried  on  now  in  the  Church  of  Christ  by  the  Holy  Ghost  as  truly  as  it  was  in  the 
days  of  the  apostles.  The  Holy  Ghost  no  longer  teaches  as  in  the  same  manner 
in  which  He  taught  those  who  waited  for  His  advent.    No  "  cloven  tongues  as  of 


583  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  xit. 

fire  "  reflt  upon  us  who  preach,  or  npon  you  who  hear.  (1)  He  teaches  us  now  by 
the  Word  which  He  inspired  the  apostles  to  write.  (2)  So  also,  He  teaches  by  the 
instrumentality  of  the  Christian  ministry  (Eph.  iv.  8,  11,  12).  (3)  But  the  Holy 
Ghost  also  teaches  as  by  inward  illumination.  He  speaks  to  our  hearts  by  His  own 
personal  influence,  and  casts  the  rays  of  His  enlightening  grace  into  the  darkest 
recesses  of  our  spirits.  (4)  And,  ought  we  not  to  add,  He  gives  us  this  teaching, 
whether  with  reference  to  things  human  or  to  things  Divine,  whether  for  our  natural 
or  our  spiritual  life,  in  answer  to  prayer.  He  is  an  infallible  Teacher ;  and  there  ia 
no  other  but  He.     He  is  an  ever-present  Teacher.    III.  Finally,  let  me  notice  two 

EBBOBS  LYING  IN  QUITE  OPPOSITE  DIRECTIONS,  WHICH  ABE  COMMITTED  WITH  REFERENCE  TO 

THE  TEACHING  oy  THE  HoLY  Ghost.  1.  The  first  is  the  error  of  those  who  profess  to 
seek  and  receive  the  teaching  of  the  Holy  Ghost  while  they  reject  the  means.  2.  An 
error  no  less  common,  among  you  to  whom  I  speak  perhaps  even  more  common,  is 
the  fault  of  those  who  forget  the  agency  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  use  of  the  means 
of  grace.  (W.R.  Clark,  M.A.)  And  bring  all  things  to  your  remembrance. — 
The  Holy  Ghost  a  Remembrancer : — I.  The  Holy  Ghost  teaches  us,  in  a  great 

MBABUEE,  NOT  AT  THE  MOMENT,  BUT  IN  AND  BY  THE  MEMOEY.      None   of   the  faculties  of 

the  human  soul  have  been  given  it  in  vain.  Every  endowment  has  its  office ;  and 
in  working  out  salvation,  man  may  find  his  whole  intellectual  and  moral  nature 
brought  into  play.  It  is  so  with  fear,  with  hope,  with  love ;  so  also  with  memory. 
1.  There  is  a  very  remarkable  instance  of  this  in  the  case  of  the  apostles.  Nothing 
is  clearer  than  that  the  twelve  disciples,  at  the  time,  did  not  and  could  not  compre- 
hend the  nature  or  the  teaching  of  their  Lord.  When  the  Holy  Ghost  came  down, 
then,  as  He  revived  in  their  minds  the  memory  of  all  that  Christ  had  done  and 
said,  they  began  to  see,  more  and  more,  who  He  was.  2.  And  thus  also  is  it  with 
ourselves.  We  interpret  God's  dealings  with  us,  not  at  the  moment,  but  as  we  go 
over  them  again  in  memory.  Is  it  not  the  case  that  in  every  man's  life  occur 
critical  periods,  upon  which  the  whole  after  existence  turns,  and  which  yet  at  the 
time  he  understands  not  ?  The  becoming  acquainted  with  a  certain  individual,  the 
going  for  a  few  weeks  to  a  certain  place,  have  often  fixed  a  man's  whole  after 
destiny.  You  knew  not  at  the  time  how  important  the  step  was  ;  but  when  you 
look  hack,  you  are  able  to  discern  in  it  the  hand  of  God.  It  is  in  memory,  that  is, 
that  you  can  trace  God's  dealings  with  your  soul.  3.  In  the  history  of  Churches 
and  nations,  the  same  rule  will  be  noticed.  How  frequently  in  the  progress  of  a 
kingdom  has  the  history  of  centuries  turned  upon  an  infant's  death,  upon  a  bow 
drawn  at  a  venture.  "  If  the  king  had  acted  otherwise,"  says  the  annalist,  "  the 
history  of  the  country  from  that  hour  would  have  had  to  be  written  differently." 
Yet  to  contemporaries  it  seemed  of  no  consequence  which  course  was  taken.  What 
a  difference  again  does  the  moment  of  acting  make.  The  same  political  conduct  at 
one  period  stops,  at  another  hurries  on  a  revolution ;  yet  the  acutest  human  intellect 
at  the  instant  discerns  not  the  crisis.  By  and  by  a  child  can  often  appreciate  the 
error,  and  trace  its  results.  Nor  is  it  hard  to  assign  a  reason  why  God  should  thus 
leave  us  blind  at  the  moment,  and  allow  us  to  be  enlightened  afterwards.  It  is 
evident  that  if,  whilst  an  event  was  happening,  we  could  see  palpably  God's  hand 
in  it,  our  freedom  of  will  would  be  interfered  with.  II.  Let  us  pass  on  to  other 
ILLUSTBATIONB.  1.  It  Is  a  common  observation,  that  argument  does  no  good.  All 
a  man's  good  opinion  of  himself  is  armed  against  you  when  you  try  to  convince 
him  that  he  is  wrong.  And  perhaps  if  the  truth  is  really  on  your  side,  there  is  yet 
another  profounder  cause  why  you  are  not  heard.  But  you  may  also  have  noticed 
how  in  after  years  the  same  reasoning  has  made  itself  felt.  When  the  excitement 
of  the  moment  is  over,  the  words  of  wisdom  which  we  put  from  as  will  often 
return  to  the  mind,  and  force  conviction  of  themselves.  2.  Take  the  case  of  a 
voung  man  who  laughs  to  scorn  the  remonstrances  of  a  father,  and  pursues 
headlong  his  career  of  sin  and  self -pleasing.  He  has  always  an  answer  satisfactory 
to  himself,  if  not  to  others.  Life  ebbs  away,  and  those  remonstrances  seem  to  be 
wasted  breath ;  yet  not  so.  Again  and  again  has  it  happened,  that  in  distant  landa 
and  remote  years,  the  reproof  of  a  father  and  the  sighs  of  a  mother  have  echoed  in 
the  siknt  soul,  and,  like  one  risen  from  the  dead,  spoken  with  power.  And  what  is 
this  bat  the  Holy  Ghost  acting  upon  the  memory,  to  teach  and  convert  the  sinner. 
8.  And  we  may  not  pass  over  here  the  strange  power  which  the  dead  possess  in 
memory.  Why  should  a  person  exercise  an  influence  when  departed  out  of  thia 
world  which  he  did  not  exercise  whilst  ahve  ?  How  many  a  wayward  boy  weeps 
bitter  tears,  as  he  recoUects  by  a  mother's  grave,  her  earnest  longings  for  his  well- 
doing,  her  prayers  and  warnings  against  sin,  and  vows  amendment  which  is  oftea 


«HAP.  xiT.]  8T.  JOHN.  583 

the  beginning  of  a  saintly  life.  The  meaning  of  this  is  the  Holy  Qhost  using  the 
power  of  memory  to  check  man's  sin,  and  stir  him  to  repentance.  4.  And  there  is 
a  darker  hour  yet,  when  the  Holy  Ghost  turns  the  faculty  of  memory  to  a  terrible 
yet  blessed  account,  when  He  causes  the  dying  man  to  see  with  a  fearful  distinctness 
all  the  lapses  of  his  life  past.  Conclusion :  1.  Memory  has  no  power  to  convert. 
It  only  preserves  or  recalls  the  past.  But  God  the  Holy  Ghost  lays  hold  of  man's 
memory  and  turns  souls  unto  righteousness.  2.  It  is  on  this  peculiar  working  of 
God  the  Holy  Ghost  as  a  Remembrancer,  that  may  be  founded  one  main  argument 
lor  early  Christian  education.  "  Train  up  a  child  in  the  way  he  should  go,  and 
when  he  is  old  he  will  not  depart  from  it."  3.  There  remaineth  yet  a  nobler 
aoooraplishment  of  the  promise  than  any  yet  seen  below.  The  work  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  as  a  regenerating  sanctifying  Spirit,  will  be  past  and  over ;  but  His  work  aa 
a  Eemembrancer  shall  never  cease.  For  in  the  courts  of  the  heavenly  city  there 
shall  be  a  perpetual  recurrence  of  the  souls  of  the  redeemed  to  all  that  Christ  said 
unto  them  and  did  for  them  on  earth.  If  the  thunder  of  their  song  shall  ever  roll 
with  a  mightier  volume  at  one  time  than  another,  it  will  be,  methinks,  as  the 
Eternal  Spirit  brings  to  the  remembrance  of  each  saved  soul,  the  wonders 
of    the    way    in    which    the    Lord    God    led    it.      (Bishop   Woodford.)  The 

Divine  Remembrancer : — I.  There  is  a  gift  of  foegetfdlness.  What  would 
this  world  be  if  it  were  not  given  us  to  forget — if  the  finger  of  time  had  no  sub- 
duing, and  mellowing,  and  obliterating  touches.  What  a  mercy  is  oblivion  1  There 
ia  not  a  more  gracious  revelation  of  Deity  than  this — "  I  will  not  remember  thy 
sins."  It  is  among  the  best  offices  of  the  Holy  Ghost  that  He  can  teach  us  to  for- 
get. There  are  many  to  whom  the  greatest  lesson  which  they  have  to  learn  in  the 
school  of  grace  is  to  forget.  You  should  not  remember  what  God  has  forgotten. 
But  here  is  our  comfort — that  if  we  will  let  the  Spirit  work  in  our  hearts,  He  will 
secure  at  once  the  right  memory  and  the  right  forgetfulness.  H.  A  gift  of 
UEMOBY.  1.  Who  has  not  to  lament  over  his  religious  forgetfulness  ?  Sermons, 
conversations,  which  were  so  interesting  and  so  useful ;  hymns  once  learnt ;  pas- 
sages of  Scriptures,  impressions,  thoughts  and  feelings,  which  seemed  engraven 
npon  the  mind  as  with  a  pen  of  iron — how  have  they  effaced  themselves  ?  What 
would  it  be  if  everything  which  once  lived  in  our  souls  were  living  there  now  ?  And 
if  it  be  really  an  attribute  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  bring  all  these  things  back  again, 
and  not  to  allow  anything  to  die  which  was  indeed  the  voice  of  Christ,  what  a  pos- 
session that  Spirit  must  be  !  And  yet,  what  else  can  these  words  mean  ?  2.  There 
is  no  doubt  that  a  strong  memory  is  a  natural  endowment.  And  he  that  has  it  has 
a  wonderful  power.  But  it  is  a  gift — he  could  not  help  it.  But  that  with  which  we 
have  now  to  deal  is  something  different.  It  is  the  prerogative  of  the  Spirit  to  help 
the  memory  on  all  sacred  subjects.  And  if  upon  sacred  subjects  then  on  all.  For 
if  that  faculty  of  the  mind  be  strengthened  and  increased  in  one  department, 
sorely  it  cannot  fail  to  be  improved  in  every  other,  for  all  memory  is  one.  (1)  Did 
you  never  know  a  verse  of  the  Bible,  which  had  been  lying  dorinant  in  your  mind 
for  a  long  time,  awake  and  come  to  you  with  a  power  and  a  vividness  which  quite 
surprised  you  ?  And  it,  strangely  appropriate,  just  fits  the  circumstances  in  which 
jrou  find  yourself,  and  the  state  of  your  own  mind.  If  it  had  been  made  for  you 
it  could  not  have  suited  you  better.  What  is  this  but  the  Holy  Ghost  fulfilling  His 
own  mission.  (2)  Or  there  is  a  passage  in  the  Bible  with  which  you  are  very 
familiar — but  to-day  it  stands  out  in  such  a  new  hght,  and  carries  such  a  power, 
never  felt  before,  that  it  strikes  upon  you  like  a  new  creation.  And  yet  you  have 
read  it  hundreds  of  times — no  verse  more  common.  Then  why  is  it  so  salient  now? 
It  is  memory  illuminated  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  (3)  Or,  it  may  be  no  written  word  at 
all.  Years  and  years  back,  Christ  spoke  to  you  by  an  impression.  The  rough  con- 
tact of  ten  thousand  things  in  this  rude  world  has  long  since  trodden  it  out.  You 
are  now  as  if  that  good  impression  had  never  been.  Why  is  it  there  again  to-day 
so  distinct  and  loud  ?  Did  you  call  it  up  ?  What  has  raised  it  from  those  sleeping 
places  ?  I  know  but  one  answer — He  who  quickens  all  buried  things,  He  who  raises 
dead  Christs  out  of  the  graves  of  our  dull  hearts  is  bringing  back  the  things  of 
Christ  to  yon.  (4)  Or,  it  may  not  be  even  as  much  as  this.  Who  has  not  felt  the 
mysterious  power  of  association  ?  It  may  be  the  smallest  possible  thing  that  evokes 
it — a  breath  of  wind,  a  colour,  the  scent  of  a  flower,  the  accent  of  a  note.  But  it 
will  make  yon  go  through  chapters  of  existence.  And  what  if  all  these  recovered 
links  of  being  are  the  waftings  of  the  Spirit's  wing,  verifying  the  promise  of  JesoB. 
(/.  Vaughant  M.A.) 


681  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  xiv. 

Ver.  27.  Peace  I  leave  with  you. — The  legacy  of  legacies : — The  Earl  of  Dan- 
donald  fought  with  his  solitary  ship  a  line  of  fonnidable  forts  in  South  America, 
whose  fire  proved  so  raking  that  his  men  could  not  be  got  to  stand  to  their  guns. 
Calling  his  wife,  he  asked  her  to  fire  one  of  the  guns,  aud  show  these  men  how  to 
do  their  duty.  She  did  so.  Instantly  they  returned,  burning  with  shame,  to  their 
posts,  and  soon  the  victory  was  theirs.  The  lady,  in  rehearsing  the  circumstance, 
said  that  the  thing  that  was  felt  by  her  to  be  the  most  terrible,  was  not  the  din  of 
battle,  not  the  raking  fire,  but  the  awful  calmness  that  sat  fixed  on  her  husband's 
countenance,  as  it  seemed  to  carry  in  itself  the  sure  presage  of  victory.  This  we 
can  all  understand.  Every  moral  nature  feels  that  settled  calmness  in  the  face  of 
dangers  and  deaths  is  the  loftiest  example  of  the  sublime.  Of  this  we  have  one 
peerless  example  in  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  SJ^o,  on  the  eve  of  His  agony,  utters 
these  words.  We  have  here  a  word  of— O  Fabbwell.  The  Old  Testament 
phrase,  "  Peace  be  with  you ! "  had  now  come"to  be  a  word  of  salutation,  as  it  still 

t'is  in  the  Oriental  "  salaam,"  the  modem  form  of  the  Hebrew  "  shalom,"  or  peace. 

[  Originally,  it  was  a  benedictory  prayer.  But  by  this  time,  in  most  cases,  like  our 
words  "adieu,"  '*  good-bye,"  which  mean  "God  be  with  you!  "the  deeper  and 

!  devouter  meaning  had  very  much  exhaled,  leaving  only  a  breath  of  courtesy  or 

'  compliment  behind.  But  this  is  good,  bo  far  as  it  goes :  for  our  religion  says,  "  be 
courteous,"  and  no  gentleman  can  compare  with  the  Christian  gentleman.  Christ 
here  commends  these  forms  of  courtesy  by  His  august  example.  But  he  does  a 
great  deal  more.  Instead  of  pharisaically  leaving  these  forms,  because  they  are 
not  always  what  they  ought  to  be.  He  tells  us  to  take  them  up  and  make  them 
what  they  ought  to  be.     But,  as  the  context  shows,  He  here  means  a  farewell ;  and 


this  farewell  of  peace  He,  repeats  at  the  end  of  t^Lft,  sixteenth  chapter,  where  He 
brings  these  valedictory  discoursmgs  to  a  close.  {Ili "Bequest.  "Leave."  Even 
in  the  case  of  a  human  relative,  it  is  much  to  inherit  his  peace.  We  prize  more 
than  gold  a  father's,  a  mother's  dying  benediction.    But  what  are  such  legacies  com- 

Eared  with  that  which  Jesus  here  bequeaths  to  the  humblest  of  His  disciples.  If  we 
ave  Christ's  peace,  no  matter  for  any  one's  curse,  no  matter  what  wrath  may  sur- 
round our  head.  Peace  is  here  used  twice,  and  occurs  first  in  its  general  sense. 
Peace  within,  in  the  calm  serenityof  a  pardoned  and  reconciled^qul ;  peace  without, 
in  every_needed  temper arEIessTngT peace  in  storms  and  afflictions,  m  the  precious 
^ft__ofaJ^^eaft  established,  trusting  in  the  Liord  '^j)eace  jinjersecutiqh ;  yea, 
p'p^fect  peace;t^"51e6slng:  them  that  curse  us,  doing  good  to  them  {Eat  hate  us; 
p JBfce Tn~death;  for  "mark  the  perfect  man,  and  behold  the  upright,  for  the  end 
of  thaFman  is  peace  "  ;  peace  in  the  grave,  for  there  the  body  is  stretched  out  in 
repose,  "  where  the  wicked  cease  from  troubling  and  the  weary  are  at  rest "  ;  and 
the  consummation  of  ^,11  peacejn  heaven.  And  as  Christ  is  the  Testator,  so  He  is 
himself  thelSxecutor,  "  Mypeace.^'  Yes ;  what  thg^Saviour  leaves  He  gives :  what  He 
died  to  procure.  He  rose°^na  reigns  to  bestow,  ftlv  Gospel,  This  peace  is  a  peace 
particularly  Christ's  own  ;  that  which  He  Hiroseu  possesses  and  feels,  as  having 
finished  His  work  and  wrought  out  our  salvation.  Would  you  see  something  of  it  ? 
Go  to  Calvary.  The  pallid  lips  give  forth  the  victory-shout,  "  It  is  finished  ;"  and 
the  words,  "Father,  into  Thy  hands  I  commit  My  spirit "  ;  and  then  the  triumphant 
soul  of  the  Bedeemer  rises  in  peace  and  rapture  to  the  bosom  of  His  Father  and 
His  God.  It  is  the  climax  of  peace^  Now  the  peace  which  was  then  our  Saviour's 
own  He  imparts  to  tne  numblest  ofHis  disciples.  Weijelieve  in  Him  and  become 
pardoned,  accepted,  and  sanctified  in  the  Beloved.  (^IV\Good  cheer.  "  Not  as 
the  world  giveth,"  &c.  "  There  is  no  peace  saith  my  Uoa^o  tne  wicked. "  But  let 
the  wicked  only  forsake  his  way,  and  this  peace  straightway  breathes  down  upon  him 
like  a  scented  vivifying  gale  from  the  delectable  land.  "  Not  as  the  world  giveth, 
give  I  unto  you."  How  suggestive  the  contrast  1  1.  It  is  vain  to  seek  peace — 
(1)  In  the  world's  objects  of  attraction,  such  as  pride,  pleasure,  and  ambition,  which 
bring  with  them  no  end  of  thorny  care.  (2)  In  the  world's  friendships,  which  at 
best  are  but  fleeting,  and  which  too  often  promise  only  to  falsify  and  forget.  (3)  In 
the  world's  wisdoms,  which  are  folly,  (4)  In  the  world's  religions,  which  are 
worse,     2.  But  our  Saviour's  words  seem  to  refer  mainly  to  the  manner  of  the 

fiving.  (1)  The  world  gives  conventiooally,  Christ  gives  sincerely,  (2) 
^he  world  gives  superficially,  Christ  gives  substantially,  (3)  The  world 
gives  partially,  Christ  gives  perfectly.  (4)  The  world  gives  capriciously,  Christ 
gives  constantly.  ,  (fj)   Tha  Trnvld  piraa  trmrnrnrilT,  Christ  gives  eternally.      {T. 


Guthrie,  D.D.)      [The  legacy  of  Chrih a— That  the  Son  of   God  might  become 
the  "  merciful  and  faJthiul  High  Priesf^'  of  His  Church,  "  it  behoved  Him  to 


CHAP.  XIV.]  ST.  JOHN.  68-5 

be  made  in  all  things  like  unto  His  brethren."  Hence  we  see  Him  inflaenced  by 
the  same  affections  that  influence  ourselves,  and  manifesting  the  same  dispositions. 
When  His  end  drew  near,  He  made,  as  it  were,  His  will,  and  wonld  not  suffer  the 
last  interview  with  His  disciples  to  close  befgye-He  had  reminded  them  of  the  pre- 
cious gifts  which  He  purposed  to  bestow.  f^L^HE  blessing  which  Ghbist  be- 
QOEATHS.  "  Peace."  If  there  is  any  word  wEich  can  excite  pleasing  sensations  in 
the  human  breast,  it  is  this.  It  is  as  sweet  to  the  children  of  men,  as  the  long- 
wished  for  shore  to  the  mariner  who  is  wearied  with  the  labours  of  the  ocean.  It 
is  as  reviving  as  the  warm  breezes  of  the  spring  to  the  man  who  has  just  risen  from 
a  bed  of  sickness.  How  welcome  are  the  tidings  of  returning  peace  to  a  nation 
which  has  been  long  accustomed  to  the  sound  of  war  !  How  beautiful  the  feet  of 
them  who  publish  it  1  But  it  is  not  amongst  mankind  only  that  peace  is  thus 
highly  esteemed.  It  is  declared  by  the  great  Jehovah  Himself  to  be  among  the 
things  which  He  calls  good.  Tn  ^ring  Hnwn  f.bia  blftsainfr  was  the  great  object  of 
our  Saviour's  appearing.  Hence  the  prophecies  spoke  of  Him  as  "  tEe  i'rince  of 
Peace."    Hence,  ^ti&h  He  was  bprn.  peace  on  earth  was  proclaimed  by  the  rejoicing 

s  beloved  disciples,  peac  ' 


angels.  Hence,  too7~when  He  was  about  to  leave  His  beloved  disciples,  peace  was 
the  precious  legacy  he  left,  and  it  wasT  His  first  bleFsing  after  He  rose;  What,' 
then,  is  this  peace?  Is  it  aTr  exemplioirfrum  the  calamUitJB  of  Mfe,  ffgffli  sorrow 
and  affliction?  No.  "In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation."  Is  it  peace  with 
the  world,  an  exemption  from  its  hatred  and  persecution?  No.  "The  world 
hateth  you."  It  is — 1.  Peace  with  God.  "The  man  who  inherits  this  precious  legacy 
was  once  the  enemy"  of  the  Lord.  But  now  the  enmity  of  his  carnal  mind  has 
been  subdued.  He  has  gone,  as  a  repentant  prodigal,  to  the  throne  of  his  heavenly 
Father,  and  has  received  a  welcome  and  a  pardon  there.  "  Being  Justified  by  faith, 
he  has  peace,"  &c.  2.  Peace  in  the  soul.  This  is  a  blessing  which  none  but 
Christ  can  give,  and  none  but  His  renewed  people  receive.  Others  may  seek  it, 
may  perhaps  find  something  which  they  mistake  for  it ;  but  until  a  man's  heart 
has  been  "  sprinkled  from  an  evil  conscience,"  he  must  remain  as  far  off  from  true 
peace  of  mind  as  he  is  from  God.  3.  Christ's  peace.  It  is  the  same  peace  that  He 
Himself  enjoys  ;  that  kept  His  soul  tranquil  in  the  midst  of  aU  His  sorrows,  and 
into  which  He  is  now  entered  in  His  Father's  kingdom  above.  (l^  The  bunneb  in 
jvHicH  IT  HAS  BEEN  GIVEN.  1.  By  bcquest.  (1)  The  property '^hich  a  "fflStt  cea»- 
veys  by  a  wm  or  tesxament  must  be  his  own  estate  and  property ;  and  he  must  also 
have  a  right  of  transferring  it  to  others.  Thus  this  peace  was  Christ's  own,  and 
which  He  had  the  power  of  disposing  of  by  will.  He  was  the  only  Being  in  the 
universe  rich  enough  to  purchase  reconciliation.  (2)  This  peace  could  never  have 
been  inherited  if  the  great  Giver  of  it  had  not  died.  A  man  may  leave  to  his 
friends  abundant  riches,  but  these  gifts  will  profit  them  nothing  tiU  after  he  is 
dead.  (8)  "Not  as  the  world  giveth."  The  blessings  which  Christ  has  left  are 
widely  different  from  those  things  which  men  leave  to  their  friends.  They  are — 
(a)  More  valuable.  Men  may  leave  behind  them  riches,  mansions,  titles ;  but  they 
cannot  make  a  man  happy,  even  in  the  day  of  prosperity ;  while  the  legacy  of 
Christ,  even  in  the  darkest  night  of  adversity,  can  "  satisfy  the  longing  soul,  and 
fill  the  hungry  soul  with  goodness."  lb)  More  permanent.  They  will  remain 
precious  as  ever,  when  every  earthly  treasure  shall  be  heard  of  no  more.  Con* 
elusion :  1.  The  security  and  stability  of  the  Divine  promises.  Peace  is  not  only 
promised,  but  bequeathed.  The  Testator  is  now  dead ;  the  testament  is  in  force. 
2.  A  man  may  have  a  precious  legacy  bequeathed  to  him,  and  he  may  be  so 
infatuated  as  to  refuse  to  accept  it,  or  so  indolent  as  to  neglect  the  proper  means 
of  possessing  himself  of  it ;  but  still  the  legacy  is  his.  The  very  same  causes,  nnited 
with  ♦'  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief,"  may  keep  you  strangers  to  the  peace  of  God.  3. 
But  before  we  can  have  a  title  to  this  legacy,  we  must  be  united  to  Christ  bjjL. 
Ujtiag-faitk.  —i^ There  is  no  peace  to  the  wicked."  (C.  Bradley,  M. A.)  [The 
legacy  ofChnsti — Our  Lord,  being  about  to  die,  makes  all  the  accustomed  prepara- 
tions;"aud  dhicllarges  all  the  functions  of  a  dying  man.  He  charges  His  friends 
with  His  last  commands,  delivers  to  them  His  last  advices,  prays  for  them  a  last 
and  touching  prayer,  institutes  for  them  an  expressive  and  affecting  ordinance— the 
great  Christian  keepsake  to  be  observed  "  in  remembrance  of  Him  " — and  compen- 
sates them  as  much  as  possible  for  their  deprivement  of  Himself,  by  bequeathing 
them  all  that  He  had  to  dispose  of — this  precious  and  peculiar  blessing  of  peace. 
T  Tmi-^TnTwra  yTflffij  The  legacy  iff  "p*^"""-"  1.  It  fulfils  the  first  great  condition 
01  peace,  by  harmonizing  tne  mwara  feelings  with  the  outward  experience;  in 
other  words,  it  establishes  peaceful  relations  between  the  sooland  its  proper  objects. 


586  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xw. 

(1)  Between  the  soul  and  its  God.  These  had  been  violated.  The  primitive  inter- 
course between  man  and  his  Maker  was  loving  and  intimate.  When  he  sinned, 
such  intercourse  became  impossible.  "  How  can  two  walk  together  unless  they  ba 
agreed  ?  "  The  holy  anger  of  the  offended  God  is  met  by  the  hostile  feeling  of  the 
offending  man.  In  this  condition  of  enmity  Christ  becomes  "our  peace."  By  His 
Cross  He  appeases  the  anger  of  God.  By  His  Spirit  He  subdues  the  enmity  in 
man.  He  makes  pardon  possible  on  God's  part  by  bearing  our  sins ;  He  makes  it 
to  be  desired  on  ours  by  renewing  our  hearts.  (2)  Between  the  soul  and  its  moral 
duty.  Corruption  opposes  our  duty  to  God,  selfishness  our  duty  to  man,  and  their 
antagonism  is  destructive  of  peace.  But  under  the  influence  of  the  gospel  both  are 
destroyed,  (a)  Duties  to  God  are  discharged  with  delight.  The  service  is  love, 
the  principle  is  gratitude.  (6)  Nor  are  duties  to  man  less  cordial.  We  are  taught 
to  "  love  as  brethren,"  and  are  conformed  to  a  noble  example.  This  peace  comes 
into  individual  hearts,  and,  eradicating  selfishness  and  bitterness,  produces  chaiity; 
it  comes  into  our  homes,  and  it  adds  the  brotherhood  of  grace  to  the  brotherhood 
of  nature.  It  comes  among  nations,  and  it  teaches  that  righteousness  is  exaltation, 
affection,  and  felicity.  (3)  Between  the  soul  and  its  providential  experiences. 
When  did  irreligion  acquiesce  in  providential  trials?  But  the  gospel  gives  us 
revelations  of  the  purpose  of  God's  providence,  new  recognitions  of  its  real 
character,  and  thus  harmonizes  our  feelings  with  even  its  deepest  adversities.  (4) 
Between  the  soul  and  its  destiny ;  peace  in  anticipation  of  the  future  life.  The 
behever  has  no  longer  a  "  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment " ;  he  "  knows 
in  whom  he  has  believed";  he  is  "begotten  again  to  a  lively  hope."  This 
is  more  than  reconciliation — it  is  assurance ;  more  than  peace  with  God 
—  it  is  peace  in  God ;  more  than  peace  with  his  lot — it  is  rejoicing  over  it. 
2.  It  is  competent  to  produce  harmony  among  the  inward  feelings  them- 
selves — a  condition  palpably  as  essential  as  the  former — essential  in  order  to  the 
former.  For,  while  there  is  internal  discord,  there  cannot  be  external  harmony. 
Sin  destroyed  the  peace  of  the  inward  heart,  as  effectually  as  it  destroyed  the  peace 
of  its  outward  relations.  There  can  be  no  peace  among  passions  of  equal  intensity 
and  independence,  unless  subject  to  some  common  and  absolute  rule.  To  meet 
this  need,  we  "  receive  the  kingdom  and  patience  of  Jesus  Christ."  Every  affection 
is  taught  to  recognize  Him.  Every  gratificationis  found  in  His  will.  Every  pas- 
sion is  thus  made  to  harmonize.  Every  desir^SVolicited  to  a  common  tendency. 
Every  energy  is  directed  to  a  comnxQa-xegult.\\iHj^Hy  beqpeathment  the  Savioob 
n)EKTaiEP-«MB-HlM8EU.  1.  ^fMy  peac^"  ^R  Baid  secdr^d  it  tO  themi  It  was 
purchased  by  His  atonement,  anS^fdUghr  by  His  Spirit.  ^.  It  is  peace  like  His 
<Xwn ;  tbft  pftp.nlii^r  ^n({  surpassing  peace  which._a8  a  manTlle  naa  en^oyejT  (1)  ' 
Peace  with  God]  (2)  The  peace  of  perfect  and" coB^iouMUbedience.^y  The 
peace  of  perfect  afiBsnce.  No  endurance  made  Him  murmur  ;  no  extremity  pro- 
voked His  impatience ;  no  deprivation  shook  His  confidence.  (4)  The  peace  of 
bUssful  anticipation.  He  knew  that  when  His  work  was  done  He  should  be  "  raised 
to  glory  and  honour. "  In  all  these  elepaeBJjs  the  peace  of  the  Redeemer  and  the 
peace  of  His  followers  are  identical.  (HI.  Yhe  pecuIiarity  of  the  bebtowmest. 
"Not  as  the  world  giveth."  l»_.^e  nafttHM  61  the  world  in  giving  peace  tS  b^  a 
careful  adjustment  of  extemaltElngs,  sweetening  such  as  are  bitter,  smoothing 
such  as  are  rugged.  It  mistakes  a  peaceful  lot  for  peaceful  feelings ;  totally  neg- 
lectful of  feelings  within,  it  attends  solely  to  circumstances  without ;  it  seeks  to 
remove  anxiety,  not  by  trusting  in  Providence,  but  by  heaping  up  wealth  to  make 
us  independent  of  Providence.  It  seeks  to  satisfy  inordinate  craving,  not  by 
moderating  desire,  but  by  scraping  up  gratifications  until  desire  be  satiated.  Ik 
builds  up  around  a  man  its  vain  fortifications  ;  but  let  its  defences  be  carried,  and 
the  untutored  and  effeminate  soul  is  a  helpless  and  hopeless  prey.  Broadly  con- 
trasted with  this  is  the  peace  of  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  not  dependent  on  things  with- 
out ;  it  arises  from  sources  within.  It  requires  not  that  there  should  be  ease  and 
indult-'cnce  ;  it  may  exist  amid  the  utmost  privation  and  self-sacrifice.  It  is  not 
the  peace  of  compromise,  but  of  conquest.  "  In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribula- 
tion, but  in  Me  ye  shall  have  peace."  •^.  Identifying  peace  with  indifference,  the 
world  would  school  the  heart  into  an  insensibility.  Thus  the  men  of  the  world 
seek  peace  ;  they  would  freeze  the  i-ea  of  affection,  that  no  storm  may  agitate  its 
waves  ;  they  would  petrify  the  heart,  that  no  grasp  of  anguish  may  mark  it.  And 
in  lik-  manner  would  tbex  d<  al  with  spiritual  hings;  they  would  qniet  all  religions 
Bolic  itude^  by  utterly  banishing  them ;  peace  with  God  they  would  have  by  for- 
getting Him ;  peace  with  their  consciences  by  stilling  tbi^m  :  peace  with  the  claima 


OHAP.xiT.]  ST.  JOHN.  im 


of  duty  by  refusing  to  listen  to  them ;  peace  with  their  future  destiny  by  never 
^>ii'nV^yi^  ghnnf.  it.^,J!iiJhey  make  a  solitude,  and  call  it  peace."  (H.  Allon,  D.D.) 
jCAmt'i  Zeaaci/ .'-t-I.  JThb  natdbe  of  the  blessing  beqpeatked.  1.  The  enjoy- 
Eient  of  actual  recfJiTciliation  witJi  (iod.  '^.  A  sweet  composure  and  calmness  of 
mind,  arising  fsomthe  sense  of  reconciliation  impressed  by  the  Spirit  of  God  on 
our  hearts.  Al.  ^he  pecpliab  connection  which  He  states  this  blessing  to 
HATE  WITH  BTigSELj\  "  My  peace."  1.  Jtieconciiiation  to  God  exclusively  arises 
from  the  menT  of  His  sacrificial  sufferings  as  being  our  Kedeemer.  "  It  is  in 
consequence  of  the  work  of  the  Saviour  that  the  Spirit  has  been  sent  actually 
to  appR-the  blessing  of  reconciliation  to  the  heart  and  to  the  conscience  of 
man.  ulO  The  points  of  conteast  existing  ^between  this  blessing  and  the 
coMMUNiairioOT  off~THE-W01fia)"'""TToT^  1.  That  which  is 

gl?5H:  to  Qgtiy  ttSE"W5"rTa~1s'  empty ;  that  which  is  given  to  us  by  Christ  is  sub- 
stantial. 2.  What  the  world  gives  is  pernicious,  and  that  which  Christ  gives  is 
beneficial.  3.  That  which  is  given  to  us  by  the  world  is  changeable,  and  must 
perish  ;  and  that  which  is  given  to  us  by  Christ  is  immutable,  and  must  endure  for 
ever.  IV.  The  influence  which  the  possession  of  this  blessing  ought  to 
possess  on  oub  minds.  "Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled."  (J.  Parsons.) 
Christ's  legacy  : — When  Christ  left  the  world,  He  made  His  will.  His  soul  He 
bequeathed  to  His  Father,  and  His  body  to  Joseph.  His  clothes  fell  to  the  soldiers. 
His  mother  He  left  to  the  care  of  John.  But  what  should  He  leave  to  His  poor 
disciples,  who  had  left  all  for  Him  ?  Silver  and  gold  He  had  non^;  but  He  left 
thgm  what  was  far  better — His  peace.  (M.  Henry.)  (  The  legacy  of  pea^: 
-(FL])The  first  requisite,  in  order  to  this  pbace/^3  HA'tfllwa,  sealed  "by 
raSTSpiRiT  OF  God,  a  certificate  of  justification.  One  hassaid,  "  It  you  wi§51 
foF peace  with  Goa,  do  your  duty"  'I'ry  toHbe  as  good  as  you  can."  But  I  have 
not  been  as  good  as  I  could.  God  has  not  had  the  first  place  in  my  love,  and 
the  first  obedience  in  my  life.  Through  Christ's  intervention,  however,  the  writ 
once  against  me  is  now  null,  for  the  sentence  for  treason  is  crossed  through  under 
sanction  of  the  law  itself,  amLIJiave  in  my  very  soul  the  certificate  of  justification, 
sealed  by  the  Comforter.  CXI.Xjhrist's  peace  comes  from  Christ's  life.  Yoc 
mistake  if  you  fancy  that  tms^peace  is  a  dull  composure.  It  means  more  life,  not 
less  !  The  Spirit  of  Christ,  in  giving  this  peace,  numbs  no  nerve,  stifles  no  primi- 
tive impulse,  mesmerises  no  faculty.  On  the  contrary.  His  tendency  is  to  make  us 
spring  up,  broad  awake,  feeling  alive  all  over.  He  makes,  through  this  change  in 
us,  a  change  in  everything  around  r.s.  He  makes  old  Christian  tmths,  that  once 
had  become  almost  insipid  by  familiarity,  break  out  into  meanings  and  charms, 
bright  as  morning  and  fresh  ^s4he  spring.  To  be  spiritually-minded  is  "  life,"  the 
cause ;  "  peace,"  the  effect.  '  HP  Peace  is  incompatible  with  sin.  A  person  may 
be  in  the  root  of  his  life  a  Christian,  and  yet  his  Ohns'tTamty  may  be  little  more 
than  a  root.  He  may  have  "a  name  to  live,"  and  may  pass  as  an  average  pro- 
fessor of  faith  in  Christ,  yet  might  know  but  little  of  this  Divine  peace.  There  is 
no  peace  for  the  shot  limb  while  the  bullet  is  in  it.  A  person  has  been  drinking 
some  deadly  thing,  tempted  by  its  inspiriting  flavour,  but  now  it  maddens  him,  and 
there  is  no  peace  for  the  poisoned  system  while  the  poison  is  in  it.  There  is  no 
peace  to  the  fever-stricken  sufferer  until  the  fever  is  out  of  him.  You  remember 
the  storm  that  Jonah  caused,  and  how  it  had  to  be  quieted.  If  you  would  have 
peace,  first  find  out,  and  then  cast  out  your  Jonah — the  Jonah  of  that  sheltered  sin, 
of  that  crooked  policy,  of  that-seciet,  whatever  it  may  be,  that  stops  a  blessing  from 
coming  on  you  who  carry  it.C  IYJThe  peace  of  Christ  has  its  seat,  not  in  the 
circumstances,  but  in  the  HBAfirr  *'  Let  not  your  iieart  be  trouDiea.''  It  is  a" 
ifuism  to  say  that  disqalst  iJElOtigs  to  this  world,  for  every  one  knows  this,  though 
he  may  know  little  else  ;  and  it  belongs  in  a  particular  degree  to  this  particular  age. 
Disquiet  connected  with  the  disputes  between  labour  and  capital ;  from  questions 
connected  with  the  money  market ;  made  by  the  "  battle  of  books,"  by  the  conflicts 
of  theological  thought ;  seen  from  the  post  of  poUtical  outlook.  But  having  Christ 
as  our  own  life,  we  can  say,  though  our  surroundings  may  be  like  the  disquiet  of 
ta  earthquake,  "Therefore  will  not  we  fear,  though  the  earth  be  removei,"  «fec. 
We  have  peace  in  our  heart,  for  the  Giver  of  peace  is  there.  Without,  there  may 
be  excitement ;  indeed,  our  own  physical  life  may  be  excitable,  for  grace  does  not 
tarn  one  body  into  another ;  yet  there  is  a  Divine  cal^a-<down  under  the  surface, 
gaeh  as  no  man  can  know  who  knows  not  the  true  life,  v  ^)  Chbist'b  fBAOB  la  hebe 
ABBUBED  TO  US  IN  TERMS  o>  PEcuLiAB  BiGNiTicANCB.  "  Peaoe  1  leave."  TMs  li  the 
language  of  legacy,  and  implies— 1.  That  He  would  live  after  He  had  died.    A 


688  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xit. 

legacy  implies  death  (Heb.  ix.  16).  2.  The  principle  of  grace.  He  gives.  "  Grace  " 
is  not  the  name  of  wages  for  work,  nor  of  reward  for  merit ;  nor  of  gain  by  con- 
quest ;  nor  of  what  we  receive  on  the  principle  of  "  so  much  for  so  much."  3. 
The  deity  of  the  Giver.  Reconsider  what  is  meant  by  the  peace  of  Christ,  and  then 
ask  yourself  if  a  man  could  give  it.  4.  "  Not  as  the  world  giveth."  The  world  can 
only  give  what  it  has  to  give.  The  world  gives  fitfully,  and  there  is  no  dependence 
on  the  world ;  the  world  gives  in  order  to  get ;  the  w^idd^veaJo  take  away  again; 
grudgingly  and  delusively.  {C.  Stanford,  D.D.)  ^  fPeoce  ttj^Iy  jThe  nature  of  thb 
PEACE  THAT  Jesus  OIVE8.  1.  It  is  pcace  in  the  mina!"*"niere-re  a  siate  of  the  mind 
answering  to  the  surging  seatw  thelcgttJrtiOTis  of  the  atmosphere;  when  a  man  has 
not  clear  perception  of  important  truth ;  when  the  mind  is  swayed  by  apprehension, 
and  driven  by  scepticism  from  every  resting-place  for  its  convictions.  The  opposite 
of  that  is  certitude,  the  repose  of  enlightened  conviction  upon  ascertained  prin- 
ciple. Jesus  Christ  gives  that  to  His  people.  2.  Peace  of  conscience.  If  a  man 
have  not  that,  all  the  flattery  of  nations  will  not  maEeTimi  Luppy.  The  Psalmist 
says,  "  Make  me  to  hear  joy  and  gladness,  that  the  bones  which  Thou  hast  broken 
[or  dislocated]  may  rejoice."  Man's  moral  nature  is  the  skeleton  of  his  soul. 
David  felt  that  his  conscience  was  dislocated,  and  he  could  not  know  happiness 
until  God  had  reset  and  restored  it.  Well,  Christ  gives  peace  of  conscience  ;  He 
restores  it  to  its  functions,  and  causes  the  man  that  has  this  peace  to  rejoice.     3. 

.£eace  ofheart.  Man  may  know,  see,  say,  and  sing  a  great  deal,  but  if  his  heart  ia 
noFEeyeno  spiritual  harmony,  if  there  are  jarring  affections,  forbidden  passions, 
corrupt  emotions  in  the  soul,  he  cannot  be  happy.  4.  Peace  in  all  the  relationships 
in  which  a  man  stands.  There  is  no  solid  peace  if  there  is  not  peace  with  God, 
but  where  there  is  there  will  be  peace  with  man,  and  he  who  enjoys  it  will  be  a 
peacemaker;  he  will  deUght  in  diffusing  that  happiness  which  he  enjoys.  6.  It  ia 
Christ's  peace — (1)  As  distinguished  from — (a)  The  peace  of  indifference.     There 

"arelSume  ptjfsons  who,  on  the  subject  of  religion,  have  really  no  trouble  at  all. 
This  is  a  peace  like  that  of  the  poor  Indian  sleeping  in  his  canoe  while  rolling  him 
onwards  to  the  cataract.  (6)  The  peace  of  self-deception  :  the  peace  of  the  patient 
that  takes  the  hectic  flush  of  his  cheek  as  a  sign  of  health,  of  the  sailor  who 
swaggers  along  the  deck  while  the  leak  is  in  the  keel.  That  is  not  the  peace  of 
Christ.  (2)  Positively  it  is  the  peace  that  arises  from  a  knowledge  of  man's  state 
and  the  remedy  that  he  needs.  I  have  seen  a  patient  quite  relieved  by  being  told 
the  very  worst  of  his  case.  At  the  same  time  he  was  assured  by  a  physujian  that 
there  was  a  specific  remedy  for  that  disease  which  ha^umred  thousands. ^y^  How.. 
He  gives  this  peace  :  "  Mflt.  as  the  world  giveth."/   lj)The  world  could  not  give 

"sucB^  thing  at  all ;  thS' world  can~nijly  giv«  what  it^ts,  and  it  neither  has  nor 
knows  that  peace.  The  world  may  give  a  man  wealth  ;  the  heart  may  be  writhing 
in  agony  under  the  blaze  of  diamonds.  The  world  may  give  a  man  fame,  but  a 
celebrated  actor  died  of  sorrow  whilst  the  city  was  ringing  his  praiee.  The  world 
may  give  a  man  pleasure,  but  that  can  only  ripple  the  surface.  ^^Jfheworld  gives 
what  it  has— (1)  With  a  hope  of  getting  again.  (2)  As  little  as  it«m.  (Sjjls  soon 
Ijrfid  of  giving  on  any  principle,  even  of  giving  to  its  friends.     (J.  Gramm,  D.D.) 

IThe  blessedness  of  peacel^A.  lady  who  passed  through  the  terrors  of  the  Vicksburg 

Wge  wrote  the  mghLTCfter  the  surrender  :  ••  It  is  evening.    All  is  still.     SUence 

and  night  are  once  more  united.    H is  leaning  back  in  his  rocking-chair.    He 

says, '  G ,  it  seems  to  me  I  can  hear  the  silence  and  feel  it  too.    It  wraps  me 

tlik»  ■>  8offr-gapaei3l;..hfflK^elBe  can  I  express  this  peace?'"  (fl.  0.  Mackey.) 
False  peace  and  true  peace  ;-r^I.  Txnf  vanju.n'a  i>mr»  i.  it  ig  not  sound  and  sincere, 
but  hollow  (Psa.  Iv.  21).  It  i)rofesses  friendship,  and  yet  it  is  ready  to  sell  its  friend 
for  a  mess  of  pottage.  ■^_SelfiBh.  a  Mcrpprin,ry.  When  it  gives,  always  expects 
an  equivalent.  4.  fragile.  How  soon  is  the  trading  man's  peace,  our  domestic 
peace,  our  civil  peace,  our  peace  of  mind,  broken  1  How  long  can  you  calculate 
upon  keeping  your  peace  ?  6.  Unserviceable.  The  world's  peace  never  stands  by 
our  side  in  the  hour  of  sorrow,  tribulation,  or^Jiex^tation.  It  will  do  for  the 
/  summer,  but  no4  for  the  winter.  6.%Temporary.  ^I/The  peaos  or  Christ.  1.  Its 
I  nature.  ItJg  peace— (1)  with  God;  (2LJEitkjSi««l*«a ;  (3)  sim_jQuEr.fellow- 
mSD^  9.  Its  eharacteriatlea.  (1)  it  is  sincere ;  (2)  disintereaadsw/3)  gratuitous  ; 
(4)  indissoluble;  (6)  serviceable.  (J.  Ralph,  M.A.)  |y^a^gg_agg(J:— Once,  as  a 
poet  was  thinking  of  Napoleon's  defeat  when  he  tried  to  win  koscow,  he  had  a 
dreadful  dream  of  peace.  Under  the  spell  of  his  dream,  he  found  himself  in  a  dim, 
Btill,  snowy  wilderness ;  many  horsemen,  covered  with  cloaks,  their  cloaks  covered 
with  snow,  were  sitting  motionless ;  dead  fires  were  seen,  with  grenadiers,  white 


CHAP.  DT.]  ST.  JOHN.  589 

with  snow,  stretched  motionless  around ;  waggons,  crowded  with  snow-shrouded, 
motionless  figures,  seemed  to  stop  the  way,  the  wheels  fixed  by  a  river-side,  in  ruta 
of  water  which  the  frost  had  struck  into  steel ;  cannon  were  there,  heaped  over  with 
Biiow  ;  snow  lay  on  banners  unlifted,  on  trumpets  unblown.  Was  the  seer  of  such 
a  sight  moved  to  cry  "  Peace,  peace !  "  Better  face  the  intense  white  flame  that 
bursts  from  guns,  better  face  the  terrible  iron  rain,  better  face  the  worst  of  war, 
than  face  a  scene  of  peace  like  that !  Yet  much  that  passes  for  peace  in  the  region 
of  ths  soul,  and  in  relation  to  God,  is  not  much  better.  (C.  Stanford,  D.D.) 
^iuine  peac£}: — It  may,  perhaps,  have  befallen  some  of  us  to  stand  by  the  side  of 
one  01  tnose  brawling  mountain  streams  which  descend  from  our  southern  and 
western  coasts  into  the  sea.  It  rushes  with  its  noisy  waters  down  its  stony  channel ; 
every  pebble  rattles  in  the  torrent ;  every  ripple  makes  a  murmur  of  its  own. 
Suddenly  the  sound  ceases  :  a  deep  stillness  fills  the  banks  from  side  to  side. 
Why  ?  It  is  the  broad  sweep  of  the  advancing  tide  of  the  ocean  that  has  checked 
the  stream  and  occupied  the  whole  space  of  its  narrow  channel  with  its  own  strong, 
eilent,  overwhelming  waters.  Even  so  it  is  with  all  the  little  cares,  difficulties,  and 
distractions  which  make  up  the  noise  and  clatter  of  the  stream  of  our  daily  life 
They  go  on  increasing  and  increasing,  and  engross  our  whole  attention,  till  they  are 
suddenly  met  and  absorbed  by  some  thoughts  or  objects  greater  than  themselves 
advancing  from  a  wider  and  deeper  sphere.  So  it  is  in  human  things:  so  it  is 
when  in  private  life  we  are  overtaken  by  some  great  personal  joy  or  sorrow.  The 
•very  image  which  I  have  just  used  of  the  brook  and  the  sea  has  been  beautifully 
employed  by  our  greatest  living  poet  to  express  the  silencing  of  all  lesser  thoughts 
and  aims  by  the  death  of  a  dear  friend.  So  it  is  often  felt  in  public  concerns,  when 
all  petty  cares  and  quarrels  have  been  drowned  in  the  tide  of  public  joy  or  sorrow 
which  has  rolled  in  upoQ  us  from  the  great  world  without.  All  the  streams  of 
common  life  under  such  circumstances,  descending  from  their  several  heights,  deep 
or  shallow,  turbid  or  clear,  have  been  checked  at  one  and  the  same  moment,  have 
been  hushed  at  one  and  the  same  point,  by  the  waters  broad  and  vast  sweeping  in 
from  the  ocean,  which  encompassed  us  all  alike.  Every  lesser  controversy  has  then 
stood  still ;  every  personal  murmur  at  such  moments  has  been  silenced  by  the 
grander  and  deeper  interest  which  belonged  alike  to  us  all.  What  that  figure  of 
the  brook  and  of  the  tide  is  in  the  natural  world,  what  great  joys  and  sorrows  are  in 
personal  hfe,  what  great  public  events  are  in  the  life  of  a  nation,  that  to  every 
human  being  ought  to  be  the  thought  of  eternity,  the  peace  of  God.  From  a 
thousand  heights  the  streams  of  life  are  ever  rushing  down.  All  manner  of 
obstacles  meet  their  course — the  rough  rock,  the  broken  bough,  the  smooth  pebble, 
the  crooked  bank.  Each  and  all  are  enough  to  ruffle  those  shallow  waters,  and  to 
obstruct  those  narrow  torrents.  But  there  is,  or  there  may  be,  for  ever  advancing 
into  each  of  these  channels  a  tide  from  that  wide  and  trackless  ocean  to  which  they 
are  all  tending ;  and  deep  indeed  is  the  peace  which  those  tides  bring  with  them 
into  the  inland  hills  wherever  their  force  extends.  (Dean  f^tnniay  y  s^  Tv»^fr-^ 
Urviitng  peace  to  His  disdpTesH — Though  all  Christ's  conduct  js  godlijkg,  neyerthelesg 
ihe  last  scenes  of  His  life  siime  with  pecuITar  splendour.  In  proportion  as  He 
draws  nearer  to  its  close.  His  charity  appears  to  bum  with  a  warmer  flame.  His 

^.dHnnity  to  shed  forth  brighter  beams  through  the  clouds  which  enshrouded  it. 

1^.  ^Esus  Christ  gives  peace  to  His  followers  ;  or  in  other  words,  He  has  opened 
Tor  Them  BouTCeS"tif^f anquillily  and  joy  amidst  all  the  calamities  and  afflictions  of 
life.  This  will  be  established  if  we  can  prove  these  two  points — 1.  He  has  given 
Qs  the  most  adequate  supports  under  all  the  woes  to  which  we  are  exposed  ;  and, 
2.^e  has  bestowed  on  us  positive  grounds  of  tranquillity.  That  is  to  say,  with  the 
one  Baud  H6  gives  us  an  antidote  against  every  sorrow,  and  with  the  other  reaches 
forth  to  us  the  richest  benedictions.  (1)  Look  at  your  life  and  heart,  and  you  will 
find  two  great  enemies  of  peace  and  tranquillity,  sins  and  afflictions;  and  in  vain 
will  the  heart  sigh  for  rest,  till  in  some  mode  thesting  ot  sin  is  taken  away  and 
the  bitterness  of  affliction  removed.  While  the  conscience  is  burdened  by  the  guilt 
of  sm,  and  the  mind  harassed  by  the  apprehension  of  that  punishment  to  which 
it  exposes  us,  we  in  vain  hope  for  peace.  No,  no  1  there  is  no  other  grief  that  can 
be  compared  with  the  anguish  of  the  soul,  that  is  enlightened  to  behold  the  spotless 
parity  and  inflexible  justice  of  God,  and  the  depth  of  the  abyss  dug  by  its  own 
crimes  and  iniquities.  Where,  then,  shall  we  seek  for  relief  to  these  torments  which 
arise  from  a  sense  of  guilt?  In  the  sacrifice  of  Immanuel  we  behold  all  cause  of 
terror  removed,  and  the  most  satisfying  joys  presented  to  our  hopes  and  expecta- 
tions.    Could  you  find  it  in  the  amusements  and  gaieties  of  the  world  ?    Alas !  in 


590  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  mw 

the  midst  of  jocoseness  and  pleasantry  your  heart  was  bleeding.  Hnman  philo- 
sophy, worldly  wisdom  I  alas,  can  these  wash  out  the  stain  of  the  smallest  sin  fron»/ 
the  conscience  ?  Could  you  find  it  in  the  endearments  of  f rien  iship  and  affection  ? 
Christ  has  been  no  less  careful  in  affording  proper  supports  under  those  trials, 
those  crosses,  and  afflictions,  of  which  human  life  is  full,  and  \Thich  we  mentioned 
as  the  second  great  enemy  to  peace.  All  the  schools  of  antiquity,  discordant  and 
clashing  in  everything  else,  were  united  only  in  presenting  unsubstantial  comforts, 
which  were  too  airy  to  support  those  under  the  pressure  of  real  grief,  or  else  ia 
irritating  instead  of  healing  the  wounds  of  the  soul.  But  when  we  turn  from  these 
ineffectual  consolations  of  the  brightest  ornaments  of  Greece  and  Rome,  to  the- 
Divine  Instructor  who  "  spate  as  never  man  spake,"  what  different  sentiments  are 
excited  1  He  proposes  such  grounds  of  peace  and  tranquillity  as  will  hush  every 
painful  passion,  will  compose  every  rising  grief,  will  drive  back  every  starting  tear, 
or  convert  it  into  a  tear  of  joy,  and  render  us  not  patient  merely,  but  triumphant 
in  affliction.  He  gives  us  such  instructions  concerning  the  author,  the  intent,  and 
the  issue  of  afflictions,  as,  if  they  be  properly  realized,  will  cause  the  sorrows  of  life- 
to  vanish  "  like  the  morning  cloud,"  and  the  pains  of  mortality  to  dissolve  "  like 
the  early  dew."  (2)  That  He  has  conferred  on  them  positive  grounds  of  tranquillity 
80  powerful,  so  cheering,  as  to  be  sufficient  to  keep  their  souls  in  sacred  peace 
amidst  all  the  storms  of  sorrow  with  which  they  may  be  assailed.  Jesus  Christ 
secures  peace  and  tranquillity  for  His  followers,  by  giving  them  an  intimate  com- 
munion with  God.  But  thi.s_js  only  the  first^of^His  benedictions.  He  f^nnftfra  ftlsn, 
the  Holy  Spirit,  that  bond^aiid~ttgament  connecting  God  and  the  soul  of  the 
believe?: — Ari  thtJ  enlightening  Spirit  He  presents  to  our  minds  those  great  truths 
of  religion  which  affect,  which  interest  and  delight  us.  But  this  Spirit  which 
enlightens  is  also  the  renewing  Spirit ;  and  how  much  tranquillity  and  satisfactioa 
does  the  exercise  of  this  part  of  His  office  give  to  the  soul.  To  find  harmony 
restored  to  our  irregular  affections,  to  see  the  passions  formerly  untamed  sub- 
mitting to  the  yoke  of  religion  ;  to  behold  our  native  depravity  losing  its  reigning 
power,  and  the  image  of  God  re-impressed  upon  us :  is  not  this  a  desirable,  a^ 
delightful  contemplation  ?  And  finally,  it  is  part  of  the  office  of  this  same  Spirit, 
by  His  consoling  influences,  to  dissipate  the  cloud  of  sorrow  and  cause  the  sunshine 
oif  heaven  to  break  in  upon  the  soul.  Finally,  Jesus  is  ready  to  confer  on  believers, 
and  will  confer  on  them,  if  thev  be  notjajflnting  to  themselves,  the  earnests  of  future 
glory,  the  pledges  of  eternal  felicity  j^ll^  That  He  gives  itnot  as  the  wobld  doe8. 

1.  When  the  world  exclaims  to  us,  Peroe- be  unto  yuu  1  lllTs  exclamation  is  often 
void  of  sincerity.  How  often  are  proffers  of  service,  and  desires  for  our  happiness, 
uttered  by  the  mouth  that  has  just  been  employed  in  stabbing  our  reputation,  and 
that  in  a  few  minutes  will  load  us  with  slanders,  and  hold  us  up  to  ridicule  I 

2.  "When  the  world  exclaims  to  us,  Peace  be  unto  you,  it  is  not  always  insincere 
and  deceitful ;  but  even  when  it  most  strongly  desires  our  felicity,  it  is  weak,  and 
without  power  to  afford  as  a  complete  felicity.  Man  is  feeble,  indigent,  unhappy. 
Thus,  unable  to  find  full  happiness  from  the  world,  shall  we,  my  brethren,  entirely 
despair  of  attaining  it?  No;  for  Jesus  gives  peace  not  as  the  world  does;  Hia^ 
wishes  can  all  be  accomplished,  for  His  power  is  irresistible.  3.  The  peace  which 
the  world  gives  is  limited  in  its  duration.  Inconstant  and  variaMe7TireTr-fi«e€t««iitly 
change  their  sentiments  and  opinions.  (H,  Kollock,  D.D.)  .Qjoiritual  peace  :f- 
This  blessed  legacy  our  Lord  has  left  might  be  considered  ^^"Tualiig  puace — 
1.  With  all  the  creatures.  God  has  made  a  league  of  peace  between  His  people  and 
the  whole  universe.  "  For  thou  shalt  be  in  league  with  the  stones  of  the  field, "  <fec. 
**  All  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God."  2.  Among  the  people  of 
God  toward  one  another.  3.  With  God,  for  He  "  hath  reconciled  us  to  Himself  by 
Jesus  Christ  "  4.  In  the  conscience,  jjg^ce  with  God  is  the  treatyjpeace  in  the 
conscience  is  the  publication  of  it.  fijflTs  OBPrmgwoRK^  m8~i56rTratltrtipoil 
imagination,  but  on  facts.  I.  i"aith  in^tli^  bluuil  lit  Chx'iyi.  2.  A  sense  of  pardon. 
8.  All  intimacy  with  Christ.  4.  The  possession  of  the  title-deeds  of  heaven.  6. 
An  assurance  of  the  faithftilness  and  covenant  fidelity  of  God  our  Father.  ({T^  It» 
KOBLE  CHABACTEB.  The  peace  of  other  men  is  ignoble  and  base.  Their  ^eace  is 
born  in  the  purUeus  of  sin.  Self-conceit  and  ignorance  are  its  parents.  Our  peace 
is — 1.  God's  own  child,  and  God-like  in  its  character.  2.  Divine  in  its  nourish- 
ment. The  daintiest  morsels  that  ever  carnal  sense  fed  upon  would  be  bitter  t» 
the  mouth  of  this  sweet  peace.  Ye  may  bring  your  much  fine  corn,  your  sweet 
wine,  and  your  flowing  oil ;  your  dainties  tempt  us  not,  for  this  peace  feeds  upoa 
ftngels'  food,  and  it  cannot  relish  any  food  that  grows  on  earth.    If  you  should  give 


CHAi".  xiv.]  ST.  JOHN.  691 

a  Christian  ten  times  as  much  riches  as  he  has,  yoa  wonid  not  canse  him  ten  times 
as  much  peace,  but  probably  ten  times  more  distress ;  you  might  magnify  him  in 
honour,  or  strengthen  him  with  health,  yet  neither  would  his  honour  or  his  health 
contrfbute  to  his  peace,  for  that  peace  flows  from  a  Divine  source,  and  there  are  no 
tributary  streams  from  the  hills  of  earth  to  feed  that  Dijcjne  current.  3.  A  peace 
that  lives  above  circumstances.  4.  Profound  and  reaL.CLlIi.  Its  effects.  1.  Joy. 
The  words  "  joy  "  and  "  peace  "  are  continually  put  togetn^.  'A^JjoveT'  He  tliat  is 
at  peace  with  God  through  the  blood  of  Christ  is  constrained  to  love  Him  that  died 
for  him.  .S.  Hnlinpaa.  He  that  is  at  peace  with  God  does  not  wish  to  go  into  sin ; 
for  he  is  careful  lest  he  should  lose  that  peace.  4.  It  will  help  as  to  bear  affliction. 
•  Your  feet  shod  with  tVpi  prppamfmn  nt  t.Tno  gnspp]  pf  peace."  5.  It  gives  U8 
boldness  at  the  throne.  '  IV.  Interrdptions  of  peacjbl.-  KH  Christians  have  a  right 
to  perfect  peace,  but  the^  liaVB  ilUl  llll  the  possession  of  it.  These  interruptions 
may  be  owing  lo — 1.  The  ferocious  temptations  of  Satan.  2.  Ignorance.  3.  Sin. 
God  hides  His  face  behind  the  clouds  of  dust  which  His  own  flock  make  as  they 
travel  along  the  road  of  this  world.  We  sin,  and  then  we  sorrow  for  it.  4. 
Unbelief.  Conclusion :  If  ye  would  keep  your  peace  continual  and  unbroken — 1, . 
Look  always  to  the  sacrifice  of  Christ.  2.  Walk  humbly  with  joxaji^ — 5i,^alkj 
in  holiness;  avoid  every  appearance  of  evil.  {G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  0hrist^8 peaci  : — 
"  Peace  be  unto  you  "  was,  and  is,  the  common  Eastern  salutation,  DDtirta-m^ting 
and  parting.  It  carries  us  back  to  a  state  of  society  in  which  every  stranger  might 
be^an  enemy.  It  is  a  confession  of  the  deep  unrest  of  the  human  heart.  Note — 
\  I.  ,Xhe  greeting^  which  is  a  gift.  Christ  gives  His  peace  because  He  gives  Him- 
"iBelfT  it  comes  witli  Him,  like  am  atmosphere  ;  it  is  never  where  He  is  not.  1.  The 
first  requisite  for  peace  is  consciousness  of  harmonious  relations  between  me  and 
God.  The  deepest  secret  of  Christ's  peace  was  His  consciousness  of  unbroken 
communion  with  the  Father.  And  the  centre  and  foundation  of  all  the  peace-giving 
power  of  Jesus  Christ  is  that  in  His  death  He  has  swept  away  the  occasion  of 
antagonism,  and  so  made  peace  between  the  Father  and  the  child,  rebellious  and 
prodigal.  2.  We  must  be  at  peace  with  ourselves.  There  is  no  way  of  healing  the 
inner  schism  of  our  anarchic  nature  except  in  bringing  it  all  in  submission  to  His 
merciful  rule.  Look  at  that  troubled  kingdom  that  each  of  us  carries  about  within 
himself,  passion  dragging  this  way,  conscience  that ;  a  hundred  desires  all  arrayed 
against  one  another,  inclination  here,  duty  there,  till  we  are  torn  in  pieces  like  a 
man  drawn  asunder  by  wild  horses.  But  when  He  enters  the  heart  with  His  silken 
leash,  the  old  fable  eomes  true,  and  He  binds  the  hons  and  the  ravenous  beasts 
there  with  its  slender  tie  and  leads  them  along,  tamed,  by  the  cord  of  love,  and  all 
harnessed  to  pull  together  in  the  chariot  that  He  guides.  There  is  one  power,  and 
only  one,  that  can  draw  after  it  all  the  multitudinous  heaped  waters  of  the  weltering 
ocean,  and  that  is  the  quiet  silver  moon  in  the  heavens,  which  pulls  the  tidal  wave, 
into  which  melt  and  merge  all  currents  and  small  breakers,  and  rolls  it  round  the 
whole  earth.  And  so  Christ,  shining  down  lambent  and  gentle,  but  changeless, 
from  the  darkest  of  our  skies,  will  draw,  in  one  great  surge  of  harmonized  motion, 
all  the  else  contradictory  currents  of  our  stormy  souls.  3.  Peace  with  men.  The 
reason  why  men  are  in  antagonism  with  one  another  is  the  central  selfishness  of 
each.  And  there  is  only  one  way  by  which  men's  relations  can  be  thoroughly 
sweetened,  and  that  is  by  the  Divine  love  of  Jesus  Christ  casting  out  the  devil  of 
selfishness,  and  so  blending  them  all  into  one  harmonious  whole.  4.  Peace  with 
the  outer  world.  It  is  not  external  calamities,  but  the  resistance  of  the  will  to 
these,  that  makes  the  disturbances  of  life.  Submission  is  peace,  and  when  a  man 
with  Christ  in  his  heart  can  say  what  Christ  did,  "  Not  My  will,  but  Thine,  be 
done,"  then  some  fainlJbeginnings,  at  least,  of  tranquillity  come  to  the  most 
agitated  and  bufiEeted.  CiU-The  world's  oitt,  which  is  an  illusion.  ••  The  world  " 
may  mean  either  mankind  in  generaFoi!  the  Whole  material Irame  of  things.  1. 
Regarding  it  in  the  former  sense,  the  thought  is  suggested — Christ  givet ;  men  can 
only  wish.  How  little  we  can  do  for  one  another's  tranquilUty !  how  soon  we 
come  to  the  limits  of  human  love  and  human  help  I  2.  And  then,  if  we  take  the 
other  signification,  we  may  say,  "  Outward  things  can  give  a  man  no  reai.Deaoe." 
The  world  is  for  excitement ;  Christ  alone  has  the  secret  of  tranquillity.  UuS^Tm 
;P7TT  fl''  "^"^  BFOTPTPiNTS  OF  that  peace  of  Chbist'b.  "  Let  not  yonr  neixt  W 
tronbled,"  Ac.  1.  Christ's  gift  of  peace  does  not  dispense  with  the  neoessityfor 
our  own  effort  after  tranquillity.  There  is  very  much  in  the  enter  world  and 
within  ourselves  that  will  surge  up  and  seek  to  shake  oar  repose ;  and  we  have  to 
(Doeroe  and  keep  down  the  temptations  to  anxiety,  to  andae  agitation  of  desire,  to 


598  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  xjt. 

tumults  of  sorrow,  to  cowardly  fears  of  the  unknown  future.  All  these  will  continue, 
even  though  we  have  Christ's  peace  in  our  hearts.  And  it  is  for  us  to  see  to  it  that 
we  treasure  the  peace.  2.  It  is  useless  to  tell  a  man,  "  Do  not  be  troubled  and  do 
not  be  afraid,"  unless  he  first  has  Christ's  peace  as  his.  Is  that  peace  yours  because 
Jesus  Christ  is  yours  ?  If  so,  then  there  is  no  reason  for  your  being  troubled  or 
dreading  any  future.  If  it  is  not,  you  are  mad  not  to  be  troubled,  and  you  are 
insane  if  you  are  not  afraid.  3.  Your  imperfect  possession  of  this  peace  is  all  your 
own  fault.  Conclusion :  I  went  once  to  the  side  of  a  little  Highland  loch,  on  a 
calm  autumn  day,  when  all  the  winds  were  still,  and  every  birch  tree  stood  unmoved, 
and  every  twig  reflected  on  the  stedfast  mirror,  into  the  depths  of  which  Heaven's 
own  blue  seemed  to  have  found  its  way.  That  is  what  our  hearts  may  be,  if  we  let 
Christ  put  His  guarding  hand  round  them  to  keep  the  storms  off,  and  have  Him 
within  us  for  our  rest.  But  the  man  that  does  npt-ltust  JesusjaJikaJJia.iroubled 
sea  which  cannot  rest.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Vhrist'owrpeace  in  trouhlA: — In 
India,  where  there  are  many  venomous  serpentsT^thriiu  la  au  auiuitil — Sond  of 
weasel — which  is,  as  it  were,  appointed  by  God  to  destroy  them.  Put  one  of  these 
creatures  and  the  deadliest  snake  together,  and  let  them  begin  the  battle.  Pre- 
sently the  weasel  will  be  bitten  by  the  serpent,  and  it  wUl  dart  off  into  the  next 
bush,  will  find  the  antidote  to  the  poison,  and  will  return  to  the  fight.  And  so, 
again  and  again,  till  at  last  it  seizes  the  snake  and  destroys  it.  That  is  strange  in 
itself ;  but  a  thing  yet  stranger  is  this :  A  very  large  reward  has  been  offered  by  the 
Government  for  the  dif^covery  of  this  antidote.  If  an  animal  can  find  it  out,  much 
more  easily,  one  would  think,  can  a  man  discover  it.  But  it  is  not  so.  This 
creature  has  been  watched  again  and  again,  but  no  one  has  ever  yet  been 
able  to  learn  the  remedy.  God  has  given  to  it  the  knowledge,  which  He 
has  denied  to  us.  And  so  the  true  servant  of  Christ  knows  where  to  go 
for  a  cure  against  all  the  troubles  that  may  befall  him  ;  where  t.Q-.S£fik„Eeace 
injjJUJihajjJ^ms  that  beset  him.  (J.  M.  Neale,  D.D.)  fUhrisVs  peace  m 
The  dying  hour) — A  poor  soldier  was  mortally  wounded  at  ths'UaUle  l>I  Wat^p- 
loo.  nis  companion  conveyed  him  to  some  distance  and  laid  him  down 
under  a  tree.  Before  he  left  him,  the  dying  soldier  entreated  him  to  open  hia 
knapsack  and  take  out  his  pocket  Bible,  and  read  to  him  a  small  portion  of  it  before 
he  died.  When  asked  what  passage  he  should  read,  he  desired  him  to  read  John 
xiv.  27.  "  Now,"  said  he,  "  I  die  happy.  I  desire  to  have  peace  with  God,  and  I 
possess  the  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all  understanding. ''  A  little  while  after 
one  of  his  officers  passed  him,  and  seeing  him  in  such  an  exhausted  state,  asked 
him  how  he  did.  He  said,  "  I  die  happy,  for  I  enjoy  the  peace  of  God  which 
passeth  all  understanding,"  and  then  expired.  The  officer  left  him  and  went  into 
the  battle,  where  he  was  soon  after  mortally  wounded.  When  surrounded  by  his 
brother  officers,  full  of  anguish  and  dismay,  he  cried  out,  "  Oh  !  I  would  give  ten 
thousand  worlds,  if  I  had  them,  that  I  possessed  that  peace  which  gladdened  the 
heart  of  a  dying  soldier,  whom  I  saw  lying  under  a  tree ;  for  he  declared  that  he 
possessed  the  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all  understanding.  I  know  nothing  of  that 
peace  X^die  miserable  I  for  I  die  in  despair  I "  {New  Testament  Anecdotes.)  J  Chris- 
.tianpeace^ — I.  The  peace  of  fobqiveness — the  peace  of  the  evening.  II.  PBaBSTh 
BERvfCB-=the  p^ace.  of  tbe..^grning.  III.  Peace  in  sobbow — peace  of  dark  hours. 
(S.  S.  Times.)  /  Christian  peace)) — "Peace."  It  was  no  new  word.  It  was  and  is  the 
common  form  oTsalUtaliou  aud  larewell ;  and  the  Master  used  it  because  it  was  o''d 
and  familiar.  This  peace  is  threefold.  I.  Peace  with  odeselves.  Every  one  knows 
what  it  is  to  be  at  peace  with  ourselves,  and  not  at  peace.  1.  We  may  be  perfectly 
prosperous,  and  yet  there  is  a  secret  pang,  a  bitter  thought.  2.  On  the  other  hand, 
we  may  be  in  suffering,  and  yet  be  in  perfect  peace  because  doing  our  duty.  Peace 
of  conscience  is  the  peace  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  Christ.  II.  Peace  with  one  anotheb. 
In  Christ  Jew  and  Gentile,  &c.,  are  one.  He  gathered  round  Him  the  most  opposite 
characters.  His  peace  therefore  does  not  mean  that  we  are  all  to  speak,  think,  act, 
in  the  same  way.  The  world  of  nature  derives  its  beauty  and  grace  from  its 
variety.  And  so  in  the  world  of  man.  We  differ  but  no  difference,  but  that  of  sin 
should  become  separation.  The  chief  priests  of  ancient  Eome  were  called  Pontiffs — 
"  bridge-makers."  It  is  the  duty  of  every  Christian  to  throw  bridges  over  the  moral 
rents  or  fissures  which  divide  us.  Sometimes  you  will  find  opinions  shading  off 
one  into  the  other  :  these  are  branches  that  are  entwined  over  the  abyss.  Seize 
hold  of  them  I  Sometimes  there  are  points  of  character  the  very  counterparts  of 
our  own :  these  are  stepping-stones.  Sometimes  there  are  concessions  made  :  to 
ftll  such  give  the  widest  scope.     There  ai'e,  no  doubt,  occasions  when  truth  and 


NJ 


CBAP.  UT.]  8T.  JOHN.  €98 

jnstice  mast  be  preferred  to  peace,  and  differences  which  are  widened  by  saying, 
"  Peace,  peace  when  there  is  no  peace ; "  but  we  must  be  careful  not  to  multiply 
them,  ^ou  receive  an  angry  letter;  do  not  answer  it.  You  observe  a  quarrelsome 
look  ;  take  no  notice  of  it.  You  see  the  beginning  of  a  quarrel ;  throw  cold  water 
on  it.  Churches  need  not  be  united  in  order  to  be  at  peace.  The  peace  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  of  Christ  is  deeper  than  outward  diversities.  III.  Peace  with  God. 
Our  hearts  are  torn  with  scruples  and  cares  even  in  duty;  our  sins  rise  up  against 
us.  Where  shall  we  find  a  haven  of  peace  ?  In  the  thought  of  God.  Think  of 
God  the  Father,  perfectly  just  and  merciful.  Think  on  Christ  who  stilled  the 
tumult  of  the  natural  storm,  and  who  came  to  reconcile  us  to  the  Father.  Thiuk 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  who  hrgndg  f^v«r  All  ana,  anj  cf  it  Can  make  eternal  order  and 
peace.  {Dean  Stanley.)  \  Peace  undisturbed  ."j— All  the  peace  and  favour  of  the 
world  cannot  calm  a  troubled  heart ;  buT  Where  the  peace  is  that  Christ  gives,  aU 
the  trouble  and  disquiet  of  the  world  cannot  disturb  it.  Outward  distress  to  a 
mind  thus  at  peace  is  but  as  the  rattling  of  the  hail  upon  the  tiles  to  him  that  sita 
within  the  house  at  a  sumptuous  feast.  Perfect  peace  in  Christ  : — There  was  a  • 
martyr  once  in  Switzerland  standing  barefooted  on  the  fagots,  and  about  to  be  burnt 
quick  to  the  death — no  pleasant  prospect  for  him.  He  accosted  the  magistrate 
who  was  superintending  his  execution,  and  asked  him  to  come  near  him.  He  said, 
"  Will  you  please  to  lay  your  hand  upon  my  heart.  I  am  about  to  die  by  fire.  Lay 
your  hand  on  my  heart.  If  it  beats  any  faster  than  it  ordinarily  beats,  do  not 
believe  my  religion."  The  magistrate,  with  palpitating  heart  himself,  and  all  in  a 
tremble,  laid  his  hand  upon  the  martyr's  boso<n,  and  found  that  he  was  just  as  calm 
as  if  he  was  going  to  his  bed  rather  than  to  the  fiames.  That  is  a  grand  tiaing  I  To 
wear  in  your  button-hole  that  little  flower  called  "heart's-ease,"  and  to  have  the 
jewel  of  contentment  in  your  bosom — this  is  heaven  begun  below :  godliness  ia 
raflt  gain  to  hiqi  that  hath  it.  (C.  U.  Spurgeon.)  VSot  as  the  world  givetli.^ 
The  world's  peace ^ — They  cry  "  peace  "  when  there  is  no  peace,  an3  make  fair 
WtiUlhur  Wheb  such  a  storm  of  God's  wrath  is  ready  to  be  burst  as  shall  never  be 
blown  over.  They  compliment  and  wish  peace  when  war  is  in  their  hearts,  as 
when  the  Pope  sent  away  Henry  III.,  in  peace,  but  it  was,  saith  the  historian,  not 
Buch  as  Jesus  left  His  people.  (J.  Trapp.)  Unwilling  givers  : — The  great  ocean 
is  in  a  constant  state  of  evaporation.  It  gives  back  what  it  receives,  and  sends  up 
its  waters  in  mists  to  gather  into  clouds ;  and  so  there  is  rain  on  the  fields,  and 
Btorm  on  the  mountains,  and  greenness  and  beauty  everywliere.  But  there  are 
many  men  who  do  not  believe  in  evaporation.  They  get  all  they  can  and  keep  all 
thev  get,  and  so  are  not  ferdlis^rq^  ji^u^  only  stagnant,  miasmatic  pools.  (H.  W, 
Beecher. )  C  Tfte  world  bestows  meagrely^- — Tt  prnmisf^R  mnnh  ».nd  givftfi  bnt  IHf^f i 
When  the  richest  man,  who'h'aS'dled^tir'New  York,  within  my  memory  was  on  his 
dying-bed,  he  asked  his  attendants  to  sing  for  him.  They  sang  the  familiar  old 
revival  hymn,  "  Come,  ye  sinners,  poor  and  needy."  The  dj  ing  millionaire  said  to 
them,  in  a  plaintive  tone,  "  Yes,  please  sing  that  again  for  me.  I  am  poor  and 
needy."  Ah  1  what  could  fifty  millions  of  railway  securities  and  bank  stocks  do 
for  him  on  the  verge  of  eternity  ? 
could  bring  him  more  pe  _ 

WMa  iu'ths  JSatlohal  xreasun^;;  "  "  Poor  and  needy  "  was 

oFtne  most  p^itEetlc^sayinKS  that  ever  fell  from  dying  lips-  f¥,-L~£liLyle3r,  D.D.) 
Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled,  neither  let  it  be  afraid.— #rords  of  peace^ — The 
acceptableness  and  the  force  of  advice  depend  upon  our  feeliBrgs  with' respect  to  the 
adviser.  Now  the  Counsellor  in  this  case  is  the  Lord  Jesus ;  entirely  informed, 
thoroughly  concerned,  full  of  truth  as  well  as  fall  of  p&ce,  and  so  disinterested 
that  He  has  for  us  already  laid  down  His  life.  Look  at-G. JThe  wobds  themselves. 
They  imply — 1.  The  possession  of  a  power  of  control  ovSr  our  own  hearts.  Now 
how  is  the  heart  to  be  controlled?  You  cannot  govern  it  directly;  it  is  to  be 
governed  by  means  of  the  thoughts.  If  you  would  change  the  emotions,  you  must 
change  the  thoughts.  To  think  only  of  our  grievous  and  not  of  our  joyous  circum- 
stances— only  of  the  cloudy  side  of  our  grievous  circumstances  (and  every  cloud 
over  us  Christians  has  a  silver  lining),  is  to  let  our  heart  be  troubled  and  be  afraid. 
But  to  call  off  the  thoughts  from  the  circumstances  which  are  grievous  to  those 
which  are  joyous,  to  think  of  God  "  as  our  refuge,  and  strength,  and  present  helj 
in  the  time  of  trouble,"  is  to  check  the  sorrow  and  to  quench  the  fear.  2.  Bespon- 
sibilit.N  as  to  the  exercise  of  such  control.  This  is  a  power  which  yon  may  not 
leave  dormant.  Ttiat  which,  in  this  case,  we  can  do,  we  ought  to  do,  because  God 
xequires  it,  and  because  the  doing  of  it  is  essential  to  our  well-being  and  right  eon- 
VOL.  u.  88 


X 


694  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xiv. 

dact.  The  difficulty  does  not  lessen  our  obligation.  God  calls  us  all  to  do  difficult 
things.  The  human  being  who  never  attempts  a  difficult  thing  is  but  half  a  man. 
8.  They  do  not  require  that  we  should  harden  our  hearts  against  the  due  influence 
of  grievous  circumstances,  or  shut  our  eyes  to  danger  or  to  threatening  sorrow ;  but 
they  do  forbid  and  condemn — (1)  The  sorrow  which  confuses  and  discomposes  a 
man — which  hinders  the  performance  of  duty  and  prevents  the  use  of  consola- 
tion, and  mars  the  enjoyment  of  present  mercies.  A  man  may  be  sad,  and  yet  do 
his  work.  "  He  that  goeth  forth  and  weepeth  bearing  precious  seed."  Weeping  is 
not  to  hinder  working.  (2)  Fear.  A  girls'  school  in  New  York  took  fire,  and  all 
the  children  were  thrown  into  the  greatest  state  of  excitement.  But  there  sat  upon 
a  form  one  little  girl  who  remained  perfectly  still.  When  the  excitement  was  over 
the  teacher  said  to  her,  "  How  is  that  you  sat  so  still  ?  "  "  Oh,"  said  the  little  one, 
"  my  father  is  one  of  the  firemen,  and  he  told  me  that  if  ever  I  was  in  a  building 
when  an  alarm  of  fire  was  given,  to  sit  still."  Your  Father  is  employed  in  ex- 
tinguishing the  fire  that  would  consume  you.  And  you  have  been  told  to  be  quiet ; 
and  this  because  you  can  afford  to  be  quiet.  4.  Now  the  whole  of  this  advice 
proceeds  on  the  assumption  that  the  disciple  of  Christ  has  sources  of  joy  counter- 
active of  his  sorrows,  and  that  he  has  no  ground  for  fear.  (1)  The  Saviour  has 
charge  of  us  individually.  (2)  The  Father  loves  us.  (3)  A  place  is  prepared  for 
us.  (4LA  Comforter  is  sent  to  abide  with  us  for  ever.  (5)  Jesus  gives  us  His 
peace.  flL)  Cases  to  which  they  particulaklt  apply.  1 .  Some  may  be  expecting 
bereavenrent.  Death  hath  no  sting  to  that  loved  one,  and  the  grave  can  gain  no 
victory.  2.  Others  are  now  bearing  the  anguish  of  the  separation  which  death 
creates.  Special  promises  are  made  to  you  ;  and  He,  who  superintends  the  fulfil- 
ment of  these  promises,  says,  "  let  not  your  heart  be  troubled,"  &o.  3.  Some  are 
anticipating  change — change  of  residence — emigration.  Whither  can  you  go  from 
your  Saviour's  Spirit  —  or  from  your  best  Friend's  presence?  4.  A  few  are 
stretched  and  tortured  on  the  rack  of  suspense.  The  uncertainty  is  only  in  your 
mind.  Above,  all  things  are  arranged,  and  will  work  together  for  your  good.  6. 
Many  are  enduring  the  pains  of  disappointment.  But  still  there  are  hopes  founded 
upon  rock,  of  which  no  man  can  ever  be  ashamed.  The  hope  of  salvation,  of 
eternal  life,  of  paradise.  6.  Diseases,  like  worms  at  the  roots  of  plants,  are  surely 
bringing  many  of  us  to  death  and  the  grave — and  their  destructive  work  vnll  one 
day  be  fully  wrought.  But  death  is  only  the  beginning  of  new  life.  7.  Poverty, 
like  an  armed  man,  is  beating  down  others.  There  is  but  one  shield  against  this 
armed  man — faith  ;  hut  one  weapon — lawful  endeavour ;  and  but  one  cordial  and 
stimulant — prayer.  And  if  you  pray  poverty,  turning  your  face  Christward,  you 
win  hear  Christ  in  His  sweetest  whispers  say,  "  Take  no  thought  for  to-morrow," 
<&c.  8.  Does  persecution  rage  around  some  of  you  as  a  tempest  ?  "  Fear  not  them 
that  kill  the  body."    {S.  Martin.) 

Yers.  28-29.  If  ye  loyed  Me,  ye  would  rejoice,  because  I  said  I  go  unto  the  Father. — 
The  death  of  the  good  a  reeuon  for  joy : — Note  the  view  which  Christ  had  of  His 
death.  *«I  go."  1.  Whence?  From  the  world.  2.  Whither  r  To  the  Father, 
not  to  destruction,  eternal  solitude,  nor  to  fellowship  with  minor  souls.  3.  How  t 
Kot  driven.  Other  men  are  sent  to  the  grave ;  Christ  freely  went.  The  general 
truths  of  the  text  are  these : — ^I.  That  oentiinb  lovb  rejoices  in  the  happiness 
or  its  object.  We  find  illustrations  of  this  in — 1.  Creation.  Love  made  the 
nniverse  in  order  to  diffuse  happiness.  2.  Christ's  mission.  Christ  came  to  make 
happy  the  objects  of  infinite  love.  3.  Christian  labour.  Happiness  is  the  end  of 
all  church  work.  H.  That  ihb  happiness  of  uen  depends  upon  fellowship 
with  the  Fatheb.  1.  Happiness  is  in  love.  2.  The  love,  to  produce  happiness, 
must  be  directed  to  the  Father.  His  perfection  delights  in  it ;  His  goodness  reci- 
procates it.  3.  Love  for  the  Father  yearns  for  fellowship  with  Him.  Love  always 
craves  the  presence  of  its  object.  HI.  That  death  intboduces  thb  good  into  a 
specially  close  fellowship  with  the  Fatheb.  There  were  obstructions  to  the 
fellowship  of  the  Man  Christ  Jesus  with  the  Father.  1.  The  body  vrith  its  in- 
firmities. 2.  The  sinful  world,  3.  The  influence  of  principalities  and  powers  of 
darkness.  These  interfere  vdth  the  fellowship  of  good  men  and  God,  and  in  addi- 
tion they  have  what  Christ  had  not.  (1)  Worldly  cares.  (2)  Inward  depravity. 
(3)  Corrupt  habits.  At  death,  however,  aU  these  are  removed,  and  the  soul  of  the 
good  man  goes  into  the  immediate  presence  of  God.  We  need  not,  then,  sorrow 
for  the  departed  good.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Joy  and  faith  the  fruit  of  Chritft 
departure : — I.  Thb  depabvdbe  of  the  Lobd  is  a  fountain  of  joy  io  ibosb  mm 


<mAP.  ziT.]  ST.  JOHN.  695 

LOTS  Hm.     1.  Christ's  going  is  Christ's  coming.     The  word  "  again  "  is  a  supple- 
ment, and  somewhat  destroys  the  true  flow  of  thought.    But  if  you  strike  it  out 
and  read  the  sentence  as  being  what  it  is,  a  description  of  one  continuous  process, 
you  get  the  true  idea.     "  I  go  away,  and  I  come  to  you. "    There  is  no  moment  of 
absolute  absence.    To  the  eye  of  sense,  the  "  going  away  "  was  the  reality,  and  the 
"  coming  "  a  metaphor.    To  the  eye  enlightened  to  see  things  as  they  are,  the 
dropping  away  of  the  visible  corporeal  was  but  the  inauguration  of  the  higher  and 
the  more  real.    2.  Christ's  going  is  Christ's  exaltation.    Hitherto  we  have  been 
contemplating  Christ's  departure  simply  in  its  bearing  upon  us,  but  here  He  unveils 
another  aspect  of  it,  and  that  in  order  that  He  may  change  His  disciples'  sadness 
into  joy.     (1)  What  a  hint  of  self-sacrifice  lies  in  this  thought,  that  Christ  bids  His 
disciples  rejoice  with  Him  because  the  time  is  getting  nearer  its  end,  and  He  goes 
back  to  the  Father  1    And  what  shall  we  say  of  the  nature  of  Him  to  whom  it  was 
martyrdom  to  live,  and  a  supreme  instance  of  self-sacrificing  humiliation  to  "  be 
found  in  fashion  as  a  man  "  ?    (2)  The  context  requires  that  for  Christ  to  go  to 
the  Father  was  to  share  in  the  Father's  greatness.    Why  else  should  the  disciples 
be  bidden  to  rejoice  in  it  ?  or  why  should  He  say  anything  about  the  greatness  of 
the  Father  ?    The  inferiority,  of  whatever  nature  it  may  be,  to  which  He  here 
alludes,  falls  away  when  He  passes  hence.    Now  these  words  are  often  quoted 
triumphantly,  as  if  they  were  dead  against  the  doctrine  of  the  Divinity  of  Christ. 
But  the  cf^ed  which  confesses  that  is  not  to  be  overthrown  by  pelting  this  verse  at 
it ;  for  this  verse  is  part  of  that  creed,  which  as  fully  declares  the  Father  is  greater 
than  the  Son  as  it  declares  that  the  Son  is  One  with  the  Father.    We  can  dimly 
see  that  the  very  names  "Father"  and  "  Son  "  imply  some  sort  of  subordination, 
but  as  that  subordination  is  in  the  timeless  and  inward  relations  of  Divinity,  it 
must  be  supposed  to  exist  after  the  Ascension,  as  it  existed  before  the  Incarnation  ; 
and,  therefore,  any  such  mysterious  difference  is  not  that  which  is  referred  to  here. 
What  is  referred  to  is  what  dropped  away  from  the  Man  Jesus  Christ  when  He 
ascended  up  on  high.    As  Luther  has  it,  "  Here  He  was  a  poor,  sad,  suffering 
Christ " ;  and  that  garb  of  lowliness  falls  from  Him,  like  the  mantle  that  fell  from 
the  prophet  as  he  went  up  in  the  chariot  of  fire,  when  He  passes  behind  the  bright- 
ness of  the  Shekinah  cloud  that  hides  Him  from  their  sight.     Therefore  we,  as  His 
followers,  have  to  rejoice  in  an  ascended  Christ,  beneath  whose  feet  are  foes,  and 
far  away  from  whose  human  personality  are  all  the  ills  that  flesh  is  heir  to.    3.  On 
both  these  grounds  Christ's  ascension  and  departure  is  a  source  of  joy.    (1)  There 
can  be  no  presence  with  us,  man  by  man,  through  all  the  ages,  and  in  every  land, 
anless  He,  whose  presence  it  is,  participated  in  the  absolute  glory  of  Divinity.    (2) 
And  surely  if  our  dearest  one  was  far  away  from  us,  in  some  lofty  position,  our 
hearts  and  our  thoughts  would  ever  be  flung  thither,  and  we  should  live  more  there 
than  here.    And  if  we  love  Jesus  Christ,  there  will  be  no  thought  more  sweet  to  us 
"than  the  thought  of  Him,  our  Brother  and  Forerunner,  who  has  ascended  up  on 
high  ;  and  in  the  midst  of  the  glory  of  the  throne  bears  us  in  His  heart,  and  uses 
His  glory  for  our  blessing.     II.  His  depabtdre  and  His  annooncement  of  His 
DEPABTUKB  AS  THE  GROUND  AND  FOOD  OF  FAITH  (ver.  29).    He  kuew  what  a  crash 
was  coming,  and  with  exquisite  tenderness  He  gave  Himself  to  prepare  the  disciples 
for  the  storm,  that,  forewarned,  they  might  be  forearmed.     And  when  my  sorrows 
come  to  me,  I  may  say  about  them  what  He  says  about  His  departure.    Aye !  He 
has  told  us  before,  that  when  it  comes  we  may  believe.    But  note — 1.  How  Christ 
avows  that  the  great  aim  of  His  utterances  and  of  His  departure  is  to  evoke  our 
faith.     And  what  does  He  mean  by  faith  7    (1)  A  grasp  of  the  historic  facts,  His 
death,  resurrection,  ascension.     (2)  The  understanding  of  these  as  He  Himself  has 
explained  them.     (3)  And,  therefore,  as  the  essence  of  faith,  a  reliance  upon  Him- 
self as  thus  revealed,  sacrifice  by  His  death,  victor  by  His  resurrection,  King  and 
interceding  Priest  by  His  ascension — a  reliance  upon  Himself  as  absolute  as  the 
facts  are  sure,  as  unfaltering  as  His  eternal  sameness.    2.  These  facts,  as  inter- 
preted by  Himself,  are  the  ground  and  the  nourishment  of  our  faith.    How  dif- 
ferently they  looked  when  seen  from  the  further  side  and  when  seen  from  the 
hither  side.     ''We  trusted,"  said  two  of  them,  with  such  a  sad  use  of  the  past 
tense,  "  that  this  had  been  He  which  should  have  redeemed  Israel."    But  after  the 
facts  were  all  unveiled,  there  came  back  the  memory  of  His  words,  and  they  said 
to  one  another,  "  Did  He  not  tell  us  that  it  was  all  to  be  so  ?    How  blind  we  were 
not  to  understand  Him  1 "    3.  Faith  is  the  condition  of  the  true  presence  of  our 
absent  Lord.     {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)        Love's  importance  : — 1.  Jesus'  love  makes 
Him  use  the  disciples'  love  to  Himself  as  a  comfort  for  themselves  when  they  ars 


S96  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiT. 

distressed  about  His  going  away.  2.  He  appeals  to  the  warmest  feeling  in  theii 
hearts  in  order  to  raise  their  spirits.  8.  It  is  well  when  grace  has  put  within  ua 
principles  which  are  springs  of  consolation.  From  our  text  learn — I.  That  wb 
bhoUld  tbt  to  ser  things  in  Chbist's  light.  1.  He  sees  the  whole  of  things. 
He  says  not  only,  "  I  go  away,"  but  also,  "  I  come  again  unto  you."  2.  He  sees 
through  things.  He  does  not  say,  "  I  die,"  but  He  looks  beyond,  and  says,  "  I  go 
unto  the  Father."  3.  He  sees  the  true  bearing  of  things.  The  events  which  were 
about  to  happen  were  in  themselves  sad,  but  they  would  lead  to  happy  results. 
"  If  ye  loved  Me,  ye  would  rejoice."  To  see  facts  in  His  light  we  must  dwell  with 
Him,  Uve  in  Him,  grow  Uke  Him,  and  especially  love  Him  more  and  more.  II. 
That  our  love  should  go  forth  towards  His  person.  "If  ye  loved  Me."  All 
about  Him  is  amiable ;  but  He  Himself  is  altogether  lovely  (Song  of  Sol.  v.  16).  He 
is  the  source  of  all  the  benefits  He  bestows.  Loviug  Him  : — 1.  We  have  Him,  and 
BO  His  benefits.  2.  We  prize  His  benefits  the  more.  3.  We  sympathize  in  all 
that  He  does.  4.  We  love  His  people  for  His  sake.  5.  Our  love  endures  all  aorta 
of  rebuffs  for  His  sake.  6.  The  Father  loves  us  (chap.  xiv.  23.)  7.  We  are 
married  to  Him.  Love  is  the  sure  and  true  marriage-bond  whereby  the  soul  is 
united  to  Christ.  Love  to  a  person  is  the  most  real  of  emotions.  Love  to  a  person 
is  the  most  influential  of  motives.  Love  to  a  person  is,  in  this  case,  the  most 
natural  and  satisfying  of  affections.  III.  That  our  borrow  ought  not  to  pui 
OUR  love  in  question.  Yet,  in  the  case  of  the  disciples,  our  Lord  justly  said,  ••  If 
ye  loved  Me."  He  might  sorrowfully  say  the  same  to  us — 1.  When  we  lament  in- 
ordinately the  loss  of  creatures.  2.  When  we  repine  at  His  will,  because  of  our 
severe  afflictions.  3.  When  we  mistrust  His  wisdom,  because  we  are  sore  hampered 
and  see  no  way  of  escape.  4.  When  we  fear  to  die,  and  thus  display  an  unwilling- 
ness to  be  with  our  Lord.  Surely,  if  we  loved  Him,  we  should  rejoice  to  be  with 
Him.  5.  When  we  complain  concerning  those  who  have  been  taken  from  us  to  be 
with  Him.  Ought  we  not  to  rejoice  that  Jesus  in  them  sees  of  the  travail  of  His 
soul,  and  has  His  prayer  (chap.  xvii.  24)  answered.  IV.  That  our  love  should 
make  D8  rejoice  at  oub  Lord's  exaltation,  though  it  be  our  personal  loss. 
1.  It  was  apparently  the  disciples'  loss  for  their  Lord  to  go  to  the  Father  ;  and  we 
may  think  certain  dispensations  to  be  our  loss — (1)  When  we  are  tried  by  soul- 
desertion,  while  Christ  is  magnified  in  our  esteem.  (2)  When  we  are  afflicted,  and 
He  is  glorified,  by  our  sorrows.  (3)  When  we  are  eclipsed,  and  in  the  result  the 
gospel  is  spread.  (4)  When  we  are  deprived  of  privileges  for  the  good  of  others. 
(5)  When  we  sink  lower  and  lower  in  our  own  esteem,  but  the  kingdom  of  Gtod 
comes  with  power.  2.  It  was  greatly  to  our  Lord's  gain  to  go  to  His  Father.  Thus 
He — (1)  Left  the  field  of  suffering  for  ever.  (2)  Eeassumed  the  glory  which  He 
had  laid  aside.  (3)  Received  tbe  glory  awarded  by  the  Father.  (4)  Became  en- 
throned for  His  Church  and  cause.  Conclusion  :  1.  It  will  be  well  for  ns  to  look 
more  to  our  love  than  to  our  joy,  and  to  expect  our  joy  through  our  love.  2.  It 
will  be  well  for  us  to  know  that  smallufss  of  love  may  dim  the  understanding,  and 
that  growth  in  it  may  make  us  both  wiser  and  happier.  8.  In  aU  things  our  Lord 
must  be  first.  Yes,  even  in  those  most  spiritual  delights,  about  which  it  may  seem 
allowable  to  have  strong  personal  desires.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  For  My  Father 
iB  greater  than  I. — ChrisVt  equality  with  and  subordination  to  God: — It  is 
contended  that  our  Lord  here  abandoned  any  pretension  to  be  a  person  internal 
to  the  essential  life  of  God.  But  this  saying  can  have  no  such  force  if 
its  application  be  restricted,  as  the  Latin  Fathers  do  restrict  it  to  our  Ijord's 
manhood.  But  even  if  our  Lord  is  here  speaking,  as  the  Greeks  generally 
maintain,  of  His  essential  Deity,  His  words  express  very  exactly  a  truth  recognized 
and  required  by  the  Catholic  doctrine.  The  subordination  of  the  everlasting  Son 
to  the  everlasting  Father  is  strictly  compatible  with  the  Son's  absolute  Divinity  ;  it 
is  abundantly  implied  in  our  Lord's  language :  and  it  is  an  integral  element  of  the 
ancient  doctrine  which  steadily  represents  the  Father  as  alone  unoriginate,  the 
Fount  of  Deity,  in  the  eternal  Ufe  of  the  ever-blessed  Trinity.  But  surely  an 
admission  on  the  part  of  One  in  whom  men  saw  nothing  more  than  a  fellow- 
creature,  that  the  everlasting  God  was  greater  than  Himself,  would  fail  to  satisfy  a 
thoughtful  listener  that  no  claim  to  Divinity  was  advanced  by  the  Speaker.  Such 
an  admission  presupposes  some  assertion  to  which  it  stands  in  the  relation  of  a 
necessary  qualification.  If  any  good  man  of  our  acquaintance  should  announce 
that  God  was  greater  than  himself,  should  we  not  hold  him  to  be  guilty  of  some- 
thing worse  than  a  stupid  truism  ?  And  should  we  not  peremptorily  remind  him 
(hat  the  life  of  man  is  related  to  the  life  of  God,  not  as  the  less  to  the  greater,  but 


OTAP.  nr.]  8T,  JOHN.  iV\ 

as  the  created  to  the  Uncreated,  and  that  it  is  an  impertinent  irreverence  to  admit 
superiority  of  rank,  when  the  real  truth  can  only  be  expressed  by  an  assertion  of 
radical  difference  of  natures  ?  And  assuredly  a  sane  and  honest  man,  who  had 
been  accused  of  associating  Himself  with  the  Supreme  Being,  could  not  content 
himself  with  admitting  that  God  was  greater  than  himself.  Knowing  himself  to 
be  only  human,  would  he  not  insist  again  and  again  with  passionate  fervour  upon 
the  incommunicable  glory  of  the  great  Creator?    (Cavxm  Liddon.) 

Ver.  30.  Henceforth  I  will  not  talk  much  with  you. — Christ  at  a  conversationa- 
list:— I.  Christ's  greatest  wore  was  done  bt  conversation.  1.  In  the  four 
Gospels  there  are  but  five  discourses  properly  so  called — that  in  the  synagogue  at 
Nazareth,  that  upon  the  Mount,  that  on  the  Bread  of  Life  in  the  synagogue  at  Caper- 
naum, that  on  the  seashore,  when  He  practically  traced  the  future  of  His  kingdom, 
and  that  at  Jerusalem  respecting  His  second  coming.  All  the  rest  is  conversation, 
sometimes  drifting  into  monologue.  It  is  significant  that  the  two  greatest  teachers 
— Christ  and  Socrates — taught  chiefly  in  this  way.  2.  Here  is  an  open  door  for  you 
all  1  You  cannot  write  books  or  preach ;  but  there  is  no  better  way  into  a  human 
heart  than  by  conversation.  I  write  my  article  and  send  it  to  the  newspaper.  I  know 
not  who  looks  upon  it.  I  stand  here  and  talk,  and  look  into  your  faces.  Some  of 
them  answer  me  back.  This  is  better  work  than  that  of  the  pen.  But  the  best  of 
all  is  conversation  when  you  open  your  soul  to  me,  and  I  open  mine  to  you.  In 
this  lies  the  largest  part  of  our  influence.  What  might  we  not  do  with  it !  II. 
Notice,  as  a  characteristic  of  every  good  conversationalist,  and  pre-eminently  of 
Christ,  His  quick  akd  catholic  sympathies.  1.  We  open  this  Gospel  and  find  Him 
talking  on  the  same  plane  with  a  Jewish  rabbi.  We  turn  the  page  and  behold  Him 
condescending  to  the  level  of  the  depraved  Samaritan.  Further  on  we  see  Him  in 
conversation  with  His  enemies  ;  and,  lastly,  here  with  His  disciples — in  every  case 
alike  in  sympathy,  in  touch — what  we  call  tact.  What  is  tact  ?  The  touch  of  one 
soul  with  another.  I  can  talk  music  a  little  with  the  musician,  for  I  am  fond  of 
music  ;  less  of  art  with  the  artist,  for  I  know  less  ;  about  theology  with  the  theolo- 
gian if  he  is  not  too  far  removed  from  me  theologically ;  but  if  I  cannot  talk  with 
the  car  conductor,  the  day  labourer,  it  is  because  my  sympathies  are  narrow.  2. 
Christ's  sympathies  were  as  quick  as  they  were  catholic.  His  soul  was  receptive  aa 
well  as  distributive.  The  musician  plays  on  the  keys  of  the  organ.  They  are  inert, 
and  answer  to  his  touch.  But  when  the  speaker  plays  on  a  human  soul,  he  must  be 
keys  as  well  as  fingers — he  must  respond  as  well  as  move.  There  is  no  flash  oi 
thought,  question  of  perplexity,  or  sorrow  anywhere  that  Christ  does  not  instantly 
meet.  III.  Because  He  had  this  quick  and  catholic  sympathy  He  drew  men  out. 
He  made  tham  express  themselves ;  oftentimes  against  their  will— evoked  their 
doubts,  sins,  difficulties.  Witness  His  treatment  of  Philip,  Thomas,  and  Jude  in  this 
conversation.  This  is  rare  power :  worth  more  than  eloquence  or  poetry.  He  knew 
what  was  in  man ;  and  more  than  once  He  saw  them  doubting  among  themselves, 
and  phrased  His  answer  to  their  doubting.  IV.  He  had  the  gift  of  turning 
EVERYTHING  TO  ACCOUNT.  He  asks  for  a  drink  of  water,  and  this  suggests  the  water  of 
life ;  He  fed  a  multitude  with  bread,  and  then  talked  naturally  about  the  bread  of 
life.  A  friend  of  mine,  on  entering  a  train,  asked  the  brakesman,  "  When  shall  we 
get  to  Albany  ?  "  "I  do  not  know,"  surhly  replied  the  man,  "  there  is  nothing 
certain  on  a  train."  "Nothing  but  death,"  said  my  friend.  "Well,  that  js  so." 
"Yes,  and  therefore  we  ought  to  be  ready  for  it."  "  That  is  a  fact,"  said  the  brakes- 
man. If  my  friend  had  gone  out  of  his  way  to  preach  he  would  not  have  got  an 
answer.  V.  Conversation  with  Christ  was  always  the  instrument  of  Divine 
MINISTRY.  Christ  never  decUned  an  invitation  ;  but  wherever  He  went,  He  carried 
His  message  of  love  and  goodness,  and  turned  the  least  incidents  into  moral  lessons, 
He  was  always  master  of  the  conversation.  He  was  not  carried  by  its  drift  wherevet 
it  might  go,  but,  like  a  skilful  pilot  with  his  hand  on  the  helm,  guided  it  in  what 
direction  He  would  have  it  go.  {Lyman  Abbott,  D.D.)  We  must  prize  our  oppor- 
tunities : — Make  we  the  best  of  our  Christian  friends  while  we  have  them  :  as  we 
would  do  of  a  borrowed  book  or  tool  that  we  knew  not  how  soon  may  be  sent  for  by 
the  right  owner.  (J.  Trapp.)  Interruption : — Christ  thus  closed  the  conversation 
to  intimate  to  His  disciples — I.  The  value  of  what  He  had  spoken  in  the  past. 
1.  As  their  rule  of  life.  "  If  ye  love  Me,  keep  My  commandments."  2.  As  teach- 
ing them  to  draw  instruction  from  every  source,  3.  As  being  the  means  of  life.  H. 
The  need  of  concentration  in  an  approaching  conflict.  A  time  of  peace  was 
followed  by  a  time  of  trial.     Chnst  was  ready  for  it,  and  concentrated  every  faiulty 


598  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  nr. 

for  a  final  struggle  with  the  devil,  who  was  worsted  by  Him  in  the  wilderness,  and 
left  Him  then  for  a  season.    U.  That  the  consciousness  or  fbeedom  fbcm  the  con- 

DEHKATION  OF  SIN  GIVES  THE   GKEATEST  POWEB  TO  WITHSTAND  THE  ASSAULTS   07  SaTAN. 

There  was  no  ledge  in  Christ  on  which  the  devil  could  stand,  nothing  at  which  he 
coald  clutch.  Our  weaknesses  Satan  knows  too  well.  He  has  something  in  ns. 
But  we  may  rejoice  in  freedom  from  condemnation.  Doubt  as  to  this  is  what  Satan 
loves  to  take  hold  of ;  and  it  is  frequently  a  sincere  Christian's  weakest  point — IV. 
That  He  has  besolved  to  maintain  pubity.  "  Shall  have."  Christ  had  no  doubt 
about  the  issue :  nor  need  there  be  any  in  those  whom  Christ  upholds.  "  fiesist  the 
devil  and  he  will  flee  from  you."  Against  the  Church  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not 
prevail.  V.  That  the  disciples  might  learn  more  from  seeing  than  hearing. 
It  is  not  what  a  man  says,  but  what  he  does,  that  influences  others.  Christ 
has  said:  "Whosoever  taketh  not  np  his  cross,"  &c.  Did  He  shrink  from 
taking  it  up  Himself  ?  Christ  ceases  to  talk,  and  allows  His  life  to  speak.  VI. 
Chbist'b  sorrow  that  His  intercourse  with  His  disciples  had  to  be  inteb- 
bupted.  All  are  subject  to  all  sorts  of  interruptions  here.  We  must  be  pre- 
pared for  breaks  in  life,  gaps  in  the  family,  vacant  chairs.  Still  we  may, 
with  Christ,  take  up  the  joyful  life.  Death  possesses  nothing  permanent  in  us. 
Homiletic  Magazine.)  The  prince  of  this  world  cometh  and  hath  nothing  In  Me. — 
The  coming  struggle  : — I.  The  enemy — the  prjnce  of  this  world.  1.  Of  large 
iominions  (Matt.  iv.  8).  2.  Of  many  subjects  (Eph.  ii.  2).  3.  Of  great  power 
(Eph.  ii.  2  ;  vi.  12).  4.  Of  subtle  craft  (Gen.  iii.  1 ;  Eev.  xii.  9).  5.  Of  evil  mind 
(1  John  ii.  13 ;  iii.  8 ;  viii.  44 ;  Bev.  xii.  10).  U.  The  onset.  The  prince  of  this 
world  cometh.  1.  Its  proximity.  Judas  was  at  hand,  and  in  him  Satan  was 
drawing  near.  2.  Its  violence.  Quite  an  army  had  the  devil  put  in  force 
against  the  Saviour.  3.  Its  aim.  It  was  directed  against  heaven's  purpose  of  re- 
demption. It  was  meant  by  destroying  Christ  to  confound  the  counsel  of  salvation. 
4.  Its  skill.  The  campaign  had  on  Satan's  side  been  planned  with  ingenuity. 
Judas,  an  apostle,  had  been  persuaded  to  become  a  traitor.  The  ecclesiastical 
authorities  had  been  turned  against  God's  Son.  The  Boman  power  had  been  se- 
cured to  lend  assistance  in  affecting  His  arrest.  All  signs  augured  well  for  the 
success  of  his  infernal  scheme.  UI.  The  defeat.  The  prince  of  this  world 
hath  nothing  in  Me.  1.  The  seeming  victory.  Outwardly,  Satan  was  to  triumph. 
Tet  it  was  not  to  be  because  of  any  power  which  Satan  possessed ;  but  to  be  of 
Christ's  free  will  (chap.  x.  18).  2.  The  actual  overthrow  (Heb.  ii.  14  ;  Col.  ii.  16). 
Learn — 1.  That  Christ  is  wiser  than  Satan.  2.  That  as  He  conquered  so  shall  Hia 
people,     (r.  Whitelaw,  D.D.) 

Ver.  31.  But  that  the  world  may  know  that  I  love  the  Father. — Christ*$ 
departure : — 1.  It  is  well  that  "  we  do  not  know  when  the  last  time  is  the  last : 
unconsciously  and  without  premonition  we  leave  our  door,  we  retire  to  bed,  wo 
grasp  the  hand  of  our  friend  for  the  last  time :  and  by  and  by  it  is  said,  "He  is  not, 
for  God  hath  taken  him."  How  much  of  mercy  there  is  in  this  veiling  of  the 
future,  this  sparing  of  farewells,  we  may  understand  from  the  flutter  and  pain  with 
which  forseen  and  calculated  things  are  done  for  the  last  time.  We  leave  homev 
friends,  church,  and,  even  though  it  be  for  improved  conditions,  there  is  a  lacera- 
tion in  the  parting  proportioned  to  the  length  of  association.  2.  We  are  differently 
constituted.  Some  can  change  their  homes  with  as  little  thought  or  feeling  as  they 
aan  change  their  clothes.  They  have  lived  in  half  a  dozen  houses,  worshipped  in 
half  a  dozen  churches.  They  strike  no  deep  roots,  and  feel  no  parting  sorrow 
deeper  than  good  natural  regret.  Hardly  is  this  the  flnest  type  of  human  feeling. 
To  merely  be  put  down  on  a  surface  and  strike  no  roots  difficult  or  painful  to  pull 
up,  is  a  grave  implication  of  either  the  plant  or  the  soil.  In  this  departure — I. 
Chbist  was  impelled  by  His  bdfbeme  sense  of  duty.  "  As  the  Father  gave  Me 
commandment."  No  self-interest,  no  sentiment,  was  ever  permitted  to  interfere 
with  this  sense  of  duty.  While  yet  a  youth  it  was  the  supreme  law  of  life — "  Wist 
ye  not,"  &o.  As  a  man  it  dominated  all  impulses  of  filial  affection.  "  Woman, 
what  have  I  to  do  with  thee?  "  1.  In  all  great  lives  the  sense  of  duty  is  dominant. 
Sometimes  God  gives  reasons  for  what  He  requires  of  us  ;  bat  if  the  only  reason  ia 
that  God  has  demanded  it  we  may  not-hesitate.  As  with  an  army  or  a  child,  the 
commander  and  father  may  not  be  able  to  give  reasons,  nevertheless  duty  ia 
imperative.  God  has  many  purposes  we  cannot  understand.  2.  In  many  of  ni 
the  sense  of  duty  is  weak.  We  consult  our  convenience,  advantage,  likings.  How 
rarely  we  choose  unpleasant  work  because  of  its  importanoo  I    3.  No  strong  or 


aup.  xiT.]  ST.  JOHN.  899 

Doble  character  can  come  ont  of  this.  A  man  who  will  not  for  the  sake  of  duty  do 
an  arduoas  thing  will  never  build  up  his  moral  strength  or  glorify  God.  II.  Anotheb 

IMPULSE  WAS  to  PBODUOE  THE  IMPEESSION  OF  HiS  FILIAL  AFFECTION.     "  That  the  WOrld 

may  know."  1.  Love  is  the  inspiration  of  all  high  duty.  Duty  is  not  mere 
measured  service.  A  son  who  weighed  the  literal  word  of  command  could  hardly 
be  called  dutiful.  2.  Our  Lord  attached  great  importance  to  the  impression  which 
His  loving  duty  made  upon  men.  He  would  have  the  world  see  it  so  that  it  might 
inspire  love.  What  shall  I  do  to  show  my  love  to  God  ?  Let  selfishness  or  sentiment 
come  in,  and  how  narrowed  becomes  the  sphere  of  duty,  and  how  poor  its  motive  1 
There  can  be  no  blessing  upon  it.  III.  To  maintain  duty  and  love  the  Masteb 
TOOK  no  count  of  EASE  OB  SAFETY.  "  Arise,"  &c.  He  went  forth  to  His  forseen 
passion  and  death.  We  often  hesitate  to  run  a  risk  for  Him.  He  laid  down  His 
life  for  the  sheep.  To  maintain  duty  He  broke  up  the  tenderest  fellowship  with 
His  own.  {H.  Alton,  D.D.)  Be/lections  on  departure  (on  removing  to  another 
place  of  worship) : — Let  ns  apply  these  words.  I.  To  the  Son  of  God  in  thb 
SOLEMN  MOMENT  WHEN  THEY  WERE  UTTERED.  He  was  going  to  the  garden,  to  that 
great  and  awful  conflict  in  which  the  prophecy  was  to  be  fulfilled,  thjat  He  should 
present  His  soul  an  offering  for  sin,  and  bear  the  burden  of  the  world's  atonement. 
This  was  the  last  night  of  the  Eedeemer's  life.  He  had  been  eating  the  passover 
with  His  disciples.  He  could  use  these  words  with  ideas  and  anticipations,  o£ 
which  they  knew  nothing.  The  traitor  had  gone,  and  made  his  arrangements ;  and 
our  Lord  saw  this  :  yet  there  was  nothing,  either  like  fainting  under  the  prospect, 
or  rashness,  or  precipitancy,  or  passion :  but  all  was  calm  and  tranquil.    II.  To 

SEVERAL   CIRCUMSTANCES   OF   PROVIDENCE  AS  THEY   OCCUR   TO   OURSELVES.       1.   To  local 

removals  of  place  and  of  habitation,  when  the  voice  of  Providence  and  of  God  calls 
QS  from  scenes  and  situations  where  we  have  been  surrounded  by  kindred  and  con- 
genial society  ;  from  our  father's  house,  from  a  particular  habitation  which  we  may 
have  long  occupied,  where  we  may  have  felt  and  experienced  much  of  the  blessing 
of  God ;  where  we  may  have  passed  through  many  afflictions  ;  and  we  feel  we  must 
say  to  ourselves,  *'  Let  us  go  hence,"  there  are  many  emotions  which  come  upon 
the  heart ;  and  I  should  never  envy  that  man  his  feelings,  who  had  never  experi- 
enced such  emotions.  2.  To  moral  circumstances,  when  we  may  be  called  to  depart 
from  circumstances  of  enjoyment,  comfort,  and  tranquillity,  and  to  enter  upon 
scenes  of  adversity  and  misfortune,  when  we  are  called  to  experience  what  is  pain- 
ful and  distressing  to  our  mind  and  heart.  3.  To  what  is  spiritual.  I  cannot  help 
thinking  of  the  resolutions  which  have  often  been  made,  when  these  words  have 
been  carried  home  to  the  heart  of  a  man  by  the  Spirit  of  God ;  when  he  haa 
determined  to  arise  and  go  to  his  Father.  4.  To  the  matter  of  death.  That  word 
"departure"  conveys  a  grand  truth  :  it  is  not  extinction,  but  the  going,  the  passing 
from  one  place  to  another  ;  the  continuance  of  consciousness,  of  every  capacity, 
faculty,  and  feeling ;  and  the  passing  of  the  intelligent  spirit  into  another  place, 
and  another  state.  III.  To  our  own  personal  circumstances.  If  we  are  permitted  to 
Bee  another  Sabbath,  we  hope  to  be  worshipping  in  another  sanctuary,  rendered 
necessary  by  the  Providence  of  God.  We  are  going  from  a  place  interesting  to  our 
minds,  hallowed  to  our  remembrances — 1.  By  the  purposes  to  which  it  has  been 
devoted.  2.  By  events  which  have  transpired  within  it.  Here  souls  have  been  born 
to  God.  Over  this  scene  angels  have  rejoiced  over  sinners  that  have  repented. 
3.  By  relative  recollections  of  interest  and  importance.  Here  many  of  you  have 
the  recollection  of  a  pious  ancestry ;  here  you  have  been  led  by  them ;  here  perhaps 
you  were  dedicated  in  baptism  ;  and  here  your  parents  have  borne  you  upon  their 
hearts.  4.  By  personal  recollection.  You  rejoice,  and  give  God  thanks,  that  you 
were  led  here  to  hearken  to  the  voice  of  the  man  of  God,  in  exhibiting  that  truth 
by  which  you  trust  you  were  saved  and  sanctified.  And  many  of  you  have  peculiar 
recollections  of  seasons,  in  which  the  truth  hath  been  peculiarly  appropriate  to  your 
personal  circumstances.  5.  Painful  recollections.  Y>u  have  to  look  back  upon 
services  neglected,  and  Sabbaths  misimproved;  when  you  have  heard  with  in- 
dolence, or  a  critical  and  improper  feeling  ;  when  you  have  conversed  on  what  yoa 
have  heard  with  flippancy,  instead  of  retiring  with  it  to  pray.  (T.  Binney.)  The 
calmness  of  Christ : — Christ's  calmness  here  in  prospect  of  Gethsemane  and  the 
cross  is  in  keeping  with  the  whole  tenor  of  His  life,  and  suggests — I.  His  conscious- 
ness OF  the  rectitude  of  His  character  and  procedure.  Had  He  been  consciona 
of  any  wrong  against  God  or  man.  His  conscience  would  have  disturbed  Him.  Or 
had  He  had  any  misgiving  as  to  the  rectitude  of  His  procedure  He  might  have 
been  disturbed.    His  calmness  was  not  stoicism  or  indifference — for  Christ  was 


600  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  XT. 

exquisitely  sensitive  and  emotional.  II.  A  settled  bensb  or  His  strBLiMB 
BUPEBioBiTY.  Well  He  knew  the  ignorance  and  depravity  of  those  who  opposed 
Him,  and  He  rose  above  it  all.  Their  stormy  insults  awoke  no  ripple  upon  the 
deep  translucent  lake  of  His  great  nature.  III.  An  inwabd  assdbance  of  His 
Tn.TiMATS  SUCCESS.  He  bad  an  end  to  accomplish,  and  had  laid  EUs  plans.  He  had 
calculated  on  all  the  opposition  He  had  to  encounter,  and  knew  that  He  would 
"  see  of  the  travail  of  His  soul,"  &o.  lY.  The  habmony  of  all  His  impulses  and 
powEBS.  Because  in  us  there  are  two  elements  warring — flesh  and  spirit — we  are 
constantly  being  disturbed.  Bight  wars  against  pohcy,  conscience  against  impulse, 
and  we  get  like  the  troubled  sea.  Not  so  with  Christ,  aU  the  elements  of  His  soul 
moved  as  harmoniously  as  do  the  planets.  He  was  at  one  with  Himself,  as  well  as 
with  God  and  the  universe.  V.  His  commanding  claim  to  oub  imitation  in  the 
crisis  of  life  and  in  death.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  A  watchword: — We  cannot  bo 
long  in  one  stay.  A  voice  ever  sounds  in  our  ear,  "  Arise,  let  us  go  hence."  Even 
when  we  have  conversed  on  the  sweetest  themes,  or  have  enjoyed  the  holiest 
ordinances,  we  have  not  yet  come  to  our  eternal  abode  ;  still  are  we  on  the  march, 
and  the  trumpet  soundeth,  "  Arise,  let  us  go  hence."  Our  Lord  was  under 
marching  orders,  and  He  knew  it :  for  Him  there  was  no  stay  upon  this  earth.  Hear 
bow  He  calls  Himself,  and  all  His  own,  to  move  on,  though  bloody  sweat  and 
bloody  death  be  in  the  way.  I.  Oub  Masteb's  watchwoed.  "  Arise,  let  us  go  hence." 
By  this  stirring  word — 1.  He  expressed  His  desire  to  obey  the  Father.  "  As  the 
Father  gave  Me  commandment,  even  so  I  do.  Arise,  let  us  go  hence."  (1)  He  was 
not  hindered  by  expected  suffering.  (2)  He  did  not  start  back,  though  in  that 
suffering  there  would  be  the  special  element  of  His  Father's  forsaking  Him.  (3)  He 
did  not  hesitate  though  death  was  in  near  prospect.  (4)  He  was  eager  to  do  the 
wiU  of  the  Father,  and  make  all  heaven  and  earth  know  how  entirely  He  yielded 
Himself  to  the  Father.  2.  He  indicated  His  readiness  to  meet  the  arch-enemy. 
"  The  prince  of  this  word  cometh.  Arise,  let  us  go  hence."  (1)  He  was  prepared 
for  the  test.  He  "hath  nothing  in  Me."  (2)  He  was  eager  to  overthrow  Elia 
dominion.  8.  He  revealed  His  practical  activity.  All  through  the  chapter  observe 
our  Lord's  energy.  He  is  ever  on  the  move.  "  I  go.  I  will  come  again.  I  vrill 
do  it.  I  will  pray.  Arise,  let  us  go  hence."  (1)  He  prefers  action  to  the  most 
sacred  rites,  and  so  leaves  the  supper  table  with  this  word  on  His  lips.    (2)  He 

{)refers  action  to  the  sweetest  converse.  "  I  will  not  talk  much  with  you.  Arise, 
et  us  go  hence."  4.  He  manifested  His  all-consuming  love  to  us.  (1)  He  was 
straitened  till  He  had  accomplished  our  redemption.  (2)  He  could  not  rest  in  the 
company  of  His  best-beloved  till  their  ransom  was  paid.  (3)  He  would  not  sit  at 
God's  right  hand  till  He  had  felt  the  shame  of  the  Cross,  and  the  bitterness  of  death 
(Heb.  xii.  2).  II.  Oub  own  motto.  "  Arise,  let  us  go  hence. "  Ever  onward,  ever 
forward,  we  must  go  (Exod.  xiv.  16).  1.  Out  of  the  world  when  first  called  by 
grace  ^2  Cor.  vi.  17).  How  clear  the  call  I  How  prompt  should  be  our  obedience ! 
Jesus  is  without  the  camp,  we  go  forth  unto  Him  (Heb.  xiii.  13),  We  must  arouse 
ourselves  to  make  the  separation.  "  Arise,  let  us  go  hence,"  2.  Out  of  forbidden 
associations,  if,  as  believers,  we  find  ourselves  like  Lot  in  Sodom.  "  Escape  for  thr 
life"  (Gen.  xix.  17).  3.  Out  of  present  attainments  when  growing  in  grace  (PhiL 
iii.  13,  14).  4.  Out  of  all  rejoicing  in  self.  There  we  must  never  stop  for  a  single 
instant.  Self-satisfaction  should  startle  us.  6.  To  work,  anywhere  for  Jesus. 
We  should  go  away  from  Christian  company  and  home  comforts  to  win  souls  (Mark 
xvi.  15).  6.  To  defend  the  faith  where  it  is  most  assailed.  We  should  be  prepared 
to  quit  our  quiet  to  contend  with  the  foe  (Jude  3).  7.  To  suffer  when  the  Lord 
lays  affliction  upon  as  (2  Cor.  xii.  9).  8.  To  die  when  the  voice  from  above  calls  oa 
home  (2  Tim.  iv.  6).  Conclusion :  1.  Oh  sinner,  where  would  you  go  if  suddenly 
summoned  ?  2.  Oh  saint,  what  better  could  happen  to  you  than  to  rise  aoid  go  hence  ? 
(<7.  H.  Spurgeotu) 


CHAPTER  XV. 


"Veb.  1.  I  am  the  Tme  Vine. — The  origin  of  the  atttuion  : — Most  of  •ax  Lord's 

figurative  discourses  were  obviously  suggested  by  some  ontward  thing.  What 
was  the  visible  object  here  ?  It  could  hardly  have  originated  in  a  thought  aboat 
**tho  fiuit  of  the  vine,"  represented   by  what  He  had  been   pouring  from  tha 


CHAP.  IT.]  ST.  JOHN.  601 

enp ;  nor  is  it  satisfactory  to  say  that  He  pointed  to  a  vine  in  the  garden ;  for 
the  garden  was  not  a  vineyard.  You  will  notice  that  although  the  words,  "  Arise, 
let  us  go  hence,"  occur  in  chap.  xiv.  31,  the  words  that  fill  up  chapters  xv.,  xvi., 
and  xvii.  were  spoken  before  we  eome  to  the  entrance  into  the  garden.  Now, 
for  these  long  utterances  to  have  been  Bpoken  in  this  walk  is  to  me  inconceiv- 
able. Some  think  however,  that  when  Christ  said,  "  Arise,  let  us  go  hence," 
they  rose,  and  that  the  words  filling  the  next  three  chapters  were  spoken  while 
they  were  still  standing,  just  as  a  leader,  after  he  has  signified  that  the  meeting 
is  over,  may  say  at  the  door,  "  Stop,  a  new  thought  strikes  me,"  and  may  then 
linger  to  utter  unpremeditated  things.  But  it  is  inconceivable  that  Christ  should 
leave  His  longest  and  most  important  parting  instructions  until  the  audience 
had,  at  His  own  request,  all  risen  to  go.  My  own  opinion  is  that  Jesus  on  His 
way  to  the  garden  went  to  take  a  farewell  glance  at  the  Temple,  and  that  for 
the  purpose  of  teaching  the  disciples  lessons  founded  on  its  golden  vine.  Nations 
have  often  taken  certain  plants  or  flowers  for  their  heraldic  devices,  such  as  the 
rose,  the  thistle,  and  the  shamrock.  If  not  as  a  matter  of  heraldry,  as  a  matter 
of  fact,  the  vine  appeared  to  be  the  device  on  the  shield  of  Israel.  Striking 
passages  might  be  quoted  in  proof,  from  the  prophets  (Isa.  xxvii.  6 ;  Jer.  ii.  21 ; 
Ezek.  XV.  2;  xvii.  8;  Psa.  Ixxx.  8-11).  The  Master  then  took  the  scholars  up 
to  the  famous  national  emblem  displayed  over  the  porch  of  the  sanctuary,  and 
with  that  before  them,  prepared  them  to  understand  that  now  the  sacred  nation 
was  about  to  lose  its  ancient  place,  and  to  be  superseded  and  fulfilled  by  the 
nation  of  saved  souls;  teaching  them  to  withdraw  their  trust  in  that  vine,  and 
to  place  their  trust  in  Him  alone,  henceforth  to  be  one  with  Him,  as  are  branches 
with  the  tree  they  spring  from.  (C.  Stanford,  D.D.)  The  True  Vine  : — I.  Thh 
VINE.  .  1.  The  method  of  Christ's  teaching  seems  to  have  depended  largely  on 
chances  and  occasions.  Seeds  of  truth  were  blown  from  Him  who  is  the  Truth 
by  every  breeze  of  circumstance, -like  thistledown  by  the  wind.  This  allegory 
was  suggested,  perhaps,  by  a  portion  of  a  trellised  vine  outside,  peeping  in  through 
the  latticed  window,  rustling  in  the  evening  breeze,  or  showing  through  its  veined, 
transparent  leaves  the  golden  light  of  the  setting  sun ;  or,  more  probably  still, 
the  wine-cup  before  Him  on  the  supper-table.  2.  But  while  the  form  of  Christ's 
teaching  was  determined  by  the  accident  of  the  moment,  it  fell  in  with  the 
general  analogy  of  Scripture  teaching.  The  vine  is  one  of  the  most  familiar 
images  in  the  Old  Testament.  No  less  than  five  of  our  Lord's  parables  refer 
to  it.  3.(  The  Land  of  Promise  was  a  land  of  vineyards  ;  and  Judaea  especially, 
with  its  temperate  climate,  and  elevated  rocky  slopes,  was  admirably  adapted 
for  the  culture  of  the  vine.  A  vineyard  on  a  terrace  or  brow  of  a  hill  is  the 
first  object  that  strikes  the  eye  of  the  traveller  when  he  approaches  Judsea  from 
the  desert.  A  vineyard  on  a  hill,  fenced  and  cleared  of  stones,  was  the  natural 
emblem  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah ;  and  this  heraldic  symbol  was  engraved  on 
the  coins  of  the  Maccabees,  on  the  ornaments  of  the  Temple,  and  on  the  tomb- 
stones  of  the  Jews.  It  is  not  without  significance  that  the  vine  should  be  thus  peculiar 
to  Judsea.  One  of  the  most  perfect  of  plants,  it  belongs  to  one  of  the  most  perfect  of 
eountries  as  regards  its  physical  structure.^  Contrast  the  grapes  of  Eshcol  with  the 
variegated  scenery  of  that  valley,  and  its  geological  conformation,  with  the  hard  dry 
woody  fruits  of  the  parched  plains  of  Australia :  a  low  type  of  fruit  with  a  low  type  ol 
country.  There  is  a  close  typical  relation  between  the  character  of  a  country  and  the 
character  of  its  productions ;  and  this  relation  ascends  even  into  the  world  of  man. 
As  the  monotonous  plains  and  innutritious  fruits  of  Australia  reared  the  lowest 
eavages ;  so  the  picturesque  mountain  scenery,  and  the  rich  nutritious  grapes, 
pomegranates  and  olives  of  Palestine  developed  the  noblest  of  the  human  races. 
II.  The  fitness  of  the  vinb  Fob  oub  Lobd's  poeposb.  1.  He  wished  to  represent 
— (1)  The  permanent  spiritual  union  of  His  disciples  with  Himself ;  and  therefore 
a  perennial  and  not  an  annual  plant  must  be  selected,  a  dicotyledonous  tree  with 
branches,  and  not  a  monocotyledonous  tree  without  branches.  The  image  of  the 
lily  suited  Him  when  His  own  personal  loveliness,  purity,  and  fragrance,  and 
His  own  short-lived  single  life  on  earth  were  intended  to  be  shadowed  forth ; 
and  the  image  of  the  palm-tree,  which  has  no  branches,  suited  the  disciples 
when  their  own  individual  excellence  was  portrayed.  (2)  The  fruitfulness  of 
Christ  and  of  believers  in  Him ;  and  hence  the  plant  that  can  do  this  adequately 
mast  be  a  cultivated  one — not  a  mere  herb  of  the  field,  hke  com,  yielding  fruit 
only  on  the  top  of  a  stalk,  but  a  tree  yielding  fruit  on  every  branch.  (3)  The 
■nbordinate  relation  to  and  dependence  of  Chnst  upon  His  Father  in  the  dayi 


60S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.xt. 

of  His  flesh ;  and  this  idea  manifestly  excludes  all  frait-trees  that  are  capable 
of  standing  alone  and  ansupported,  such  as  the  apple — the  pomegranate,  or  the 
fig-tree.  (4)  Believers  exhibit,  with  general  features  of  resemblance,  considerable 
personal  differences ;  and  the  plant  which  is  to  represent  this  quality  must  admit 
of  considerable  variability  within  certain  distinct  and  well-reoognized  limits.  All 
these  qualifications  meet  in  the  vine,  and  in  the  vine  alone.  2.  The  vine 
belongs  peculiarly  to  the  human  period,  and  was  planted  in  the  earth  shortly 
before  its  occupancy  by  man.  It  came  into  the  world  along  with  the  beautiful 
rose,  and  the  fruitful  apple,  and  the  fragrant  mint,  and  the  honey-laden 
bee,  to  make  an  Eden  of  nature  for  man's  use  and  enjoyment.  The  former 
ages  were  flowerless;  green,  monotonous  tree-ferns  and  tree-mosses,  destined 
to  become  fuel  for  man,  alone  covered  the  land.  Prophesied  by  all  previous 
vegetable  forms,  whose  structure  approached  nearer  and  nearer  to  its  type,  the  vine 
appeared  in  the  fulness  of  the  earth's  time ;  just  as  He  whom  it  shadowed  forth  waa 
announced  in  type  and  prophecy  from  the  foundation  of  the  world,  and  appeared  in 
the  fulness  of  human  history  when  the  world  was  ready  for  His  reception.  And 
thus  the  symbol  and  the  Person  symbolized  belong  peculiarly  to  the  human  world, 
and  were  destined  specially  for  human  nourishment  and  satisfaction.  3.  A  strict 
correlation  exists  between  the  culture  of  the  vine  and  the  intellectual  and  spiritual 
development  of  humanity.  Wherever  the  grape  ripens,  there  flourish  all  the  arta 
that  chiefly  tend  to  make  life  nobler  and  more  enjoyable.  The  spread  of  the  Chris- 
tian religion,  as  a  general  rule,  has  been  co-extensive  and  synchronous  with  that  of 
the  vine,  so  that  wherever  the  allegory  of  our  Saviour  is  read,  there  the  natural 
object  may  be  seen  to  illustrate  it.  4./  In  the  symbol  of  the  vine  our  Lord  recog- 
nizes  the  prefiguration  in  plants  of  animal  furms  and  functions.  In  the  stem^ 
branches,  and  foliage  of  the  vine,  we  discern  the  ideal  plan  on  which  our  own  bodies 
are  constructed:  the  stem  being  the  spinal  column;  the  branches  the  ribs  and 
members  :  the  leaves  the  lungs ;  while  the  sap-vessels,  filled  with  their  nourishing 
fluid,  correspond  with  the  veins  and  their  circulating  blood.  '  The  functions,  too, 
which  all  these  parts  and  organs  in  the  vine  perform  are  precisely  analogous  to 
those  which  similar  parts  and  organs  perform  in  the  economy  of  man.  III.  Chkist 
THE  Trde  Vine.  1.  St.  John's  Gospel  has  several  peculiar  terms — such  as  the  Word, 
the  Light,  the  Life,  the  Truth,  the  World,  Glory,  Grace — which,  perhaps  more  than 
all  others,  bear  upon  them  the  clear  stamp  of  the  Divine  signet.  To  these  may  be 
added  the  word  "  true,"  which  occurs  no  less  than  twenty-two  times  in  this  Gospel, 
as  against  five  times  in  all  the  rest  of  the  New  Testament.  By  us  the  word  ia 
commonly  employed  to  represent,  and  so  confound,  two  distinct  ideas  ;  viz.,  the  true 
as  opposed  to  the  false,  and  as  distinguished  from  the  typical  or  subordinate  reaUza- 
tion.  Our  forefathers  recognized  this  distinction,  and  expressed  the  former  idea  by 
"  true,"  and  the  latter  by  "  very."  The  man  who  fulfilled  the  promise  of  his  lips  waa 
a  true  man ;  but  the  man  who  fulfilled  the  wider  promise  of  his  name  was  a  very 
man,  a  man  indeed.  God  is  the  true  God,  in  the  sense  that  He  cannot  lie  ;  but  He 
is  the  true  God,  inasmuch  as  He  is  all  that  the  name  of  God  implies,  in  contradis- 
tinction to  false  gods.  The  phrase  is  still  retained  in  the  Nicene  creed,  "  very  God 
of  very  God."  In  Greek  the  distinction  is  clearly  indicated  by  the  use  of  two  words, 
alethes  true,  and  alethinos  very,  which  are  never  used  indiscriminately.  The  word 
here  is  alethinos,  and  should  be  rendered  "  very,"  for  it  indicates  the  contrast,  not 
between  the  true  and  the  false,  but  between  the  imperfect  and  the  perfect — between 
the  shadowy  and  the  substantial,  the  type  and  the  archetype,  the  highest  ideal  and 
a  subordinate  realization  or  partial  anticipation.  And  in  this  connection  it  ia 
interesting  to  notice  that  the  Saxon  word"  tree"  is  etymologicaUy  cognate  with  '•  true," 
signifying  that  which  is  firm,  strong,  or  well-established.  5.'  Israel  was  a  vine,  but 
not  the  tme  vine  of  God.  Though  not  altogether  false  and  fraudulent,  it  was  an 
inferior  and  subordinate  realization,  a  partial  and  imperfect  anticipation  of  the 
tmth.  It  did  not  come  up  to  God's  ideal  of  a  vine.  But  Christ  was  the  True  Vine 
of  God ;  He  fulfilled  to  the  utmost  the  purposes  of  His  existence.  The  vineyard  ol 
Israel  waa  to  be  taken  from  the  wicked  husbandmen.  But  out  of  this  Jewish  vine- 
yard was  to  grow  one  Vine,  which  should  endure  when  all  the  peculiar  institutions 
of  Judaism  had  perished,  and  become  the  starting-point  of  a  new  and  highei 
religious  growth.  While  the  Law  was  given  by  Moses,  grace  and  truth  came  by 
Jesua  Christ,  f  8.  Christ  is  also  the  "  True  Yine,"  as  distinguished  from  the  false  ol 
counterfeit  vine.  There  are  many  species  of  vine,  but  there  is  only  one  grape-vine ; 
to  error  is  multiform,  but  truth  is  one.  And  just  as  the  wheat  is  imitated  by  tha 
tares — the  poisonous  darnel — which  closely  resemble  it  in  every  respect ;  so  th« 


OUP.  z?.]  ST.  JOHN.  603 

Trae  Vine  is  imitated  by  the  vine  of  Sodom,  with  its  poisonoas  fruit.  4.  Bat  there 
is  another  aspect  still  in  which  the  phrase  may  be  viewed.  It  is  as  if  Christ  had 
said,  "  I  am  the  unconcealed  Vine."  (1)  Israel  was  a  concealed  vine.  Its  full 
significance  was  not  known  until  Christ,  the  True  Vine,  revealed  it.  And — (2)  The 
natural  vine  is  a  concealed  vine.  Men  could  not  understand  its  symbolical  mean- 
ing ;  they  misinterpreted  its  lessons ;  they  thought  that  it  had  no  higher  uses  than  the 
mere  material,  utilitarian  ones.  It  was  only  when  Christ  appeared  that  the  parable 
was  explained,  and  the  mystery,  hid  from  ages  and  generations,  revealed.  Our 
Lord's  first  miracle  at  Cana  was  effected  by  the  direct  and  immediate  agency  of  the 
True  Vine.  It  revealed  the  power  which  enables  the  natural  vine  in  the  vineyard 
to  change  the  rains  and  dews  of  every  summer  into  wine  in  its  grapes.  And  what 
is  thus  asserted  of  the  vine  is  equally  applicable  to  bread,  to  light,  to  water — to 
every  natural  object.  They  all  had  a  concealed  meaning — a  reference  to  Christ— 
from  the  begiiming.  Our  Lord  does  not  say,  '*  I  am  like  the  vine."  That  would 
have  been  to  use  a  mere  metaphor,  or  figure  of  speech.  But  He  says,  "  I  am  the 
True  Vine ;  "  and  this  declares  that  the  vine  is  the  actual  shadow  of  His  substance. 
IV.  The  qualities  in  Chbist  which  abe  adumbrated  by  the  vine  ?  1.  The  vine  is 
the  most  perfect  of  plants.  (1)  Some  plants  possess  one  part,  or  one  quality,  more 
highly  developed ;  but  for  the  harmonious  development  of  every  part  and  quality — 
for  perfect  balance  of  loveliness  and  usefulness,  there  are  none  to  equal  the  vine. 
It  belongs  to  the  highest  order  of  the  vegetable  kingdom.  Painters  tell  us  that  to 
study  the  perfection  of  form,  colour,  light,  and  shade,  united  in  one  object,  we  must 
place  before  us  a  bunch  of  grapes.  It  is  perfectly  innocent,  being  one  of  the  few 
climbing  plants  that  do  not  injure  the  object  of  their  support.  It  has  no  thorns — 
no  noxious  qualities ;  all  its  parts  are  useful.  Its  foliage  affords  a  refreshing  shade 
from  the  scorching  sunshine.  Its  fruit  was  one  of  the  first  oblations  to  the  Divinity, 
and,  along  with  bread,  is  one  of  the  primary  and  essential  elements  of  human  food. 
In  common  with  other  plants,  it  purifies  the  air — feeding  upon  what  we  reject  as 
poison,  and  returning  it  to  us  as  wine  that  maketh  glad  the  heart,  and  in  the  pro- 
cess maintaining  the  atmosphere  in  a  fit  condition  for  our  breathing.  (2)  In  all 
these  aspects  the  vine  is  the  shadow  of  Him  who  is  altogether  lovely — who  unites 
in  Himself  the  extremes  of  perfection — who  is  continually  doing  good — who 
beautified  our  fallen  world  by  His  presence,  changed  its  wilderness  into  an  Eden* 
and  made  the  polluted  atmosphere  of  our  hfe  purer  by  breathing  it,  and  is  now 
transforming  our  evil  into  good,  and  our  sorrow  into  a  fruitful  and  strengthening 
joy.  2.  The  words  distiguish  between  nature  and  that  which  is  above  it.  To 
Pantheism  nature  is  God.  The  pronoun  "I"  in  it  leads  us  up  to  the  Personal 
Origin  of  all  creation,  shows  to  ns  that  creation  is  not  eternal,  but  springs  from  a 
Person.  Hew,  then,  can  any  one  expect  to  be  able  to  interpret  the  meaning  of  the 
vine,  without  the  personal  knowledge  of  the  Living  Being  who  is  working  and 
speaking  to  us  through  its  instrumentality  ?  Without  the  knowledge  of  His  person 
we  cannot  have  the  knowledge  of  His  work  in  its  fulness.  But  once  united  to  £[im 
by  a  living  and  loving  faith,  we  have  the  proper  view-point  of  the  universe.  {H. 
Macmillan,  D.D.)  The  True  Vine : — Christ  selected  this  metaphor  because  of — ^I. 
The  abundance  of  its  fbuit  ;  for  which  reason  it  is  used  by  David  to  express  great 
fertility  (Psa.  oxxviii.  8).  Hence  this  tree  is  especially  appropriate  as  a  type  of 
Christ,  through  whose  life  and  passion  the  abundant  fruits  of  holiness  are  brought 
forth  by  believers.  II.  The  pleasantness  and  the  qbateful  chabaoteb  of  its  fbdit, 
as  the  fruits  produced  by  the  indwelling  of  Christ  are  those  which  are  accordant 
with  and  pleasing  to  man's  highest  nature.  UI.  The  btbenoth  and  jot  which 
WINE  PBODUOES  withiu  the  heart  of  man  (Judges  ix.  13 ;  Psa.  civ.  15  ;  Prov.  zxxi. 
6,  7).  IV.  The  widb  extent  of  the  bbanches  stretching  on  all  sides,  and  furnish- 
ing a  striking  figure  of  the  growth  and  expansion  of  the  Church,  which  is  the  body 
of  Christ  (Psa.  Ixxx.  11).  V.  Its  typical  chabaoteb,  wine  symbolizing  the  blood 
of  Christ  in  the  Holy  Eucharist.  (W.  Denton,  M.A.)  The  True  Vine:—!.  Thb 
TINE  IN  THE  VITAL  UNITY  OF  ALL  ITS  PABTS.  We  shall  bcst  Understand  this  thought  if 
we  recur  to  some  of  those  great  vines  in  royal  conservatories,  where,  for  hundreds 
of  yards,  the  pliant  branches  stretch  along  the  espaliers,  and  yet  one  life  pervades 
the  whole,  from  the  root,  through  the  crooked  stem,  right  away  to  the  last  leaf  at 
the  top  of  the  furthest  branch,  and  reddens  and  mellows  every  cluster.  This  great 
thought  of  the  unity  of  life  between  Jesus  Christ  and  all  that  believe  upon  FTinn  is 
the  familiar  teaching  of  Scripture,  and  is  set  forth  also  by  the  metaphor  of  the 
body  and  its  members.  Personahty  remains,  bat  across  the  awful  gulf  of  th« 
individual  consciousness,  which  parts  us  from  one  another,  Jesus  Christ  assumes 


604  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

the  Divine  prerogative  of  passing  and  joining  Himself  to  each  of  us.  A  oneness  of 
life,  which  is  the  sole  cause  of  fruitfuluess  aud  growth,  is  taught  us  here.  This  is 
a  oneness  which  results — 1.  In  a  oneness  of  relation  to  God.  In  this  relation  He 
is  the  Son,  and  we  in  Him  receive  the  standing  of  sons.  He  has  access  ever  into 
the  Father's  presence,  and  we  through  Him  and  in  Him  have  access  with  confidence 
and  are  accepted  in  the  Beloved.  2.  In  relation  to  men,  if  He  be  Light,  we,  touched 
with  His  light,  are  also,  in  our  measure  and  degree,  the  lights  of  the  world ;  and  in 
the  proportion  in  which  we  receive  the  power  of  His  Spirit,  we,  too,  become  God's 
anointed — "  As  the  Father  hath  sent  Me,  even  so  send  I  you.  3.  In  regard  of 
character,  this  union  results  in  a  similarity  of  character,  and  with  His  righteous- 
ness we  are  clothed.  4.  In  regard  to  the  future,  we  can  look  forward  and  be  sure 
that  we  are  so  closely  joined  with  Him,  that  it  is  impossible  but  that  where  He  is, 
there  shall  also  His  servants  be.  And  as  He  sits  on  the  Father's  throne,  His 
children  must  needs  sit  with  Him  on  His  throne.  5.  Therefore  the  name  of  the 
collective  whole  is  Christ.  And,  as  in  the  great  Old  Testament  prophecy  of  the 
servant  of  the  Lord,  the  figure  fluctuates  between  that  which  is  the  collective  Israel 
and  the  personal  Messiah ;  so  the  '•  Christ  "  is  not  only  the  individual  Kedeemer, 
but  the  whole  of  that  redeemed  Church,  of  which  it  is  said,  •*  it  is  His  body,  the 
fulness  of  Him  that  fiUeth  all  in  all."  II.  The  husbandman,  aj^d  the  dbessing  of 
THE  VINE.  The  one  tool  that  a  vinedresser  needs  is  a  knife,  and  the  one  kind  of 
husbandry  spoken  of  here  is  pruning — not  manuring,  not  digging,  but  simply  the 
hacking  away  of  all  that  is  rank  and  dead.  1.  Fruitless  branches  mean  all  those 
who  have  a  mere  superficial  adherence  to  the  true  vine.  If  there  be  any  real  union, 
there  will  be  some  life,  and  therefore  some  fruit.  And  so  the  application  is  to 
those  nominal  adherents  to  Christianity,  who,  if  you  ask  tliem  to  put  down  in  the 
census  paper  what  they  are,  will  say  that  they  are  Christians,  Churchmen,  or  Dis- 
senters, as  the  case  may  be,  but  who  have  no  real  hold  upon  Jesus  Christ,  and  no 
real  reception  of  anything  from  Him  ;  and  the  "  taking  away"  is  simply  that  God 
makes  visible,  what  is  a  fact,  that  they  do  not  belong  to  Him  with  whom  they  have 
this  nominal  connection.  The  longer  Christianity  continues  in  any  country,  the 
more  does  the  Church  get  weighted  and  lowered  in  its  temperature  by  the  aggrega- 
tion round  about  it  of  people  of  that  sort.  And  one  sometimes  longs  and  prays  for 
a  storm  to  come,  of  some  sort  or  other,  to  blow  the  dead  wood  out  of  the  tree,  and 
to  get  rid  of  all  this  oppressive  and  stifling  weight  of  sham  Christians  that  has 
come  round  every  one  of  our  churches.  .  2.  The  pruning  of  the  fruitful  branches; 
We  all,  in  our  Christian  life,  carry  with  us  the  two  sources — our  own  poor,  miser- 
able self,  and  the  better  life  of  Jesus  Christ  within  us.  The  one  flourishes  at  the 
expense  of  the  other;  and  it  is  the  Husbandman's  merciful,  though  painful  work, 
to  cut  back  unsparingly  the  rank  shoots  that  come  from  self,  in  order  that  all  the 
force  of  our  lives  may  be  flung  into  the  growing  of  the  cluster  which  is  acceptable 
to  Him.  III.  The  branches  abiding  in  the  vine  and  therefore  fruitful.  1. 
Union  with  Christ  is  the  condition  of  all  fruitfulness.  There  may  be  plenty  of 
activity  and  yet  barrenness.  Works  are  not  fruit.  We  can  bring  forth  a  great 
deal  "  of  ourselves,"  and  because  it  is  of  ourselves  it  is  naught.  2.  There  is  the 
^eat  glory  and  distinctive  blessedness  of  the  gospel..  ■  Other  teachers  come  to  as 
and  tell  us  how  we  ought  to  live,  and  give  us  laws,  examples,  reasons,  motives. 
The  gospel  comes  and  gives  us  life,  and  unfolds  itself  in  us  into  all  the  virtues  that 
we  have  to  possess.  '  What  is  the  use  of  giving  a  man  a  copy  if  he  cannot  copy  it  f 
Morality  comes  and  stands  over  the  cripple,  and  says  to  him,  "  Look  here !  This 
is  how  you  ought  to  walk."  But  Christianity  comes  and  bends  over  Him,  and  lays 
hold  of  his  hand,  and  says,  "In  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Nazaieth,  rise  up  and 
walk."  •  3.  Our  reception  of  that  power  depends  upon  our  own  efforts.  ♦'  Abide  in 
Me  and  I  in  you."  Suppress  yourselves,  and  empty  your  lives  of  self,  that  the  life 
of  Christ  may  come  in.  A  lock  upon  a  canal,  if  it  is  empty,  will  have  its  gates 
pressed  open  by  the  water  in  the  canal  and  will  be  filled.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
Falge  vines: — There  are  "strange  vines  "which  bring  forth  "wild  grapes"  in 
perilous  abundance,  planted  in  the  soil  of  our  human  nature  by  ''  an  enemy." 
Their  nature  is  deadly,  their  grapes,  however  luscious  and  inviting,  are  noxious; 
their  very  shadow  and  foliage,  like  the  fabled  Upas  tree,  are  redolent  of  destruction 
and  death.  There  are  grapes  of  gold,  for  which  the  grower  sells  his  soul,  and 
Mammon  is  the  spirit  that  drives  the  ruinovis  bargain.  There  are  the  grapes  which 
being  pressed  into  the  goblet  do  sparkle  and  coruscate,  and  Pleasure's  fascinating 
beauties  are  reflected  in  the  flowing  cup  ;  but  a  serpent  lies  coiled  below  the  ruby 
draught  and  stingeih  like  an  adder  the  victim  she  allures.     There  are  grapes  ol 


•BAP.  XT.]  ST.  JOHN.  605 

which  the  smooth-tongued  vine-dresser  says  that  "  they  are  much  to  be  desired  to 
make  one  wise."  "  Eat,"  quoth  he,  •'  and  ye  shall  be  as  gods.  Yes.  There  are 
vines,  vineyards,  vine-dressers,  and  wine-vats  in  this  deluded  and  deluding  world. 
Pleasant  is  their  shadow,  graceful  and  winsome  their  festooni)3gs,  attractive  are 
their  supplies  either  from  the  cluster  or  the  flagon,  and,  alasl  those  who  are 
deluded  by  them  '«know  not  that  the  dead  are  there,"  and  that  the  shaded  and 
enticing  paths  that  lead  men  thither  are  "  steps  that  take  hold  on  hell."  "  Their 
vine  is  of  the  vine  of  Sodom  and  of  the  fields  of  Gomorrah :  their  grapes  are  grapes 
of  gall,  &c.  It  was  a  "wild  vine"  which  produced  the  fruit  gathered  in  mistake  by  the 
servant  of  Elisha,  so  that  there  came  to  be  "  death  in  the  pot "  into  which  the  deceptive 
grapes  were  shed ;  and  so  with  all  the  false  trusts  and  hopes  of  humanity.  {J.  Jackson 
Wray.)  Chrintthetrue  Vinein  His  Divine  humanity : — Itis  in  His  manhood  thatChrist 
is  the  true  Vine.  It  was  of  the  essence  of  His  Mediatorial  work,  of  the  Daysman, 
who  should  lay  His  hands  upon  both,  that  as  on  the  one  side  He  could  say,  "  I  and 
My  Father  are  one,"  so  upon  the  other,  "I  and  My  brethren  are  one;"  but 
while  the  "vine  and  the  vine  branches  must  thus  both  be  partakers  of  the  same 
nature  (Heb.  ii.  11),  He  will  presently  challenge  for  Himself  a  share  in  the  work  of 
the  husbandman.  He,  too.  Las  power  to  "  purge  "  or  cleanse  through  ffis  word 
(ver.  3).  His  humanity  was  a  Divine  humanity,  for  so  only  could  it  have  become  a 
life-giving  humanity  to  the  world.  {Archbishop  Trench.)  Union  with  Christ: — 
I.  Its  natube.  1.  An  actual  joining  of  each  branch  to  the  vine.  When  Madame 
Quyon  was  ten  years  old,  she  learned  that  Madame  de  Chantal  had  wiitten  the 
characters  of  the  holy  name  of  Jesus  upon  her  bosom  with  a  red-hot  iron.  She 
sought  to  imitate,  so  she  sewed  on  her  breast  a  piece  of  stiff  paper  containing  the 
name  of  Christ.  Never  has  there  been  good  in  such  folly.  Union  to  the  Saviour 
does  not  consist  in  tacking  on  a  badge  of  mere  profession  of  love  for  Him.  You 
might  as  well  nail  a  branch  to  a  trellis,  and  call  that  grafting.  2.  A  living  joining 
of  each  branch  to  this  Vine.  We  have  often  seen  flowers  bound  to  sticks  with  a 
bit  of  wire,  so  that  they  seemed  growing  on  long  stems ;  but  there  was  no  life  in 
the  merely  mechanical  contact.  3.  The  reciprocal  joining  of  every  branch  to  the 
vine,  and  of  the  vine  to  every  branch.  II.  Its  pubposes.  That  it  may  produce 
after  its  kind  for  the  enrichment  of  the  husbandman  the  fruits  he  loves.  These 
fruits  are — 1.  Good  views.  It  never  profits  any  one  to  sneer  at  creeds,  and  cry  out 
for  deeds  instead  ;  for  no  good  deed  was  ever  done  unless  there  was  a  good  thought 
behind  it.  The  shallowness  of  much  of  our  modern  piety  is  owing  to  want  of  real 
conviction.  Our  religion  has  always  been  "  a  faith,"  and  so  has  had  an  intellectual 
basis.  2.  Good  deeds.  For  all  genuine  ideas  force  themselves  out  into  conduct. 
Mere  admiration  for  the  character,  or  mystic  affection  for  the  person,  of  a 
Saviour  like  ours  would  not  be  enough.  A  pretty  little  honeysuckle  in  the  garden 
might  as  well  twine  itself  up  around  a  trellis,  and  try  for  a  whole  season  to  look  like 
a  vine ;  grape-time  would  show  the  sham.  3.  Good  feelings.  Some  people  doubt 
the  power  of  a  religious  duty  to  start  the  enthusiasm  of  a  large  souL  And  yet  many 
of  the  finest  minds  and  purest  hearts  have  drawn  their  inspirations  from  the 
spiritual  intercourse  they  kept  with  the  life  and  the  words  of  Jesus.  While  Clau- 
dius Buchanan  was  missionary  in  India,  he  translated  and  issued  the  Syriao  Testa- 
ment. Macaulay  says  that  once  in  bis  presence  he  stopped  and  suddenly  burst  into 
tears.  When  he  recovered  himself  the  great  man  said,  "  Do  not  be  alarmed,  I  am 
not  ill ;  but  I  was  completely  overcome  with  the  recollections  of  the  delight  I  have 
enjoyed  in  this  exercise."  It  is  thus  that  good  Christians  have  often  gone  to  the 
stake  for  the  love  they  bore  for  this  Redeemer  of  men.  4.  Good  graces.  Vines  feel 
no  shame  for  being  beautifuL  Excellencies  of  character  are  what  the  Lord  loves 
(Gal.  T.  22.  23).  III.  Chbist's  cabe  fob  it.  The  Husbandman  is  God  the  Father. 
He  cleanses  the  vines.  In  the  East  dressers  wash  the  leaves  and  shoots  and  tendrils 
and  clusters,  each  by  itself  in  turn,  so  as  to  clear  off  the  dust  and  mould.  They  cut 
away,  also,  the  dead  branches,  and  keep  the  whole  vine  under  discipline.  1.  Th« 
branch  may  be  too  feeble  in  its  growth.  Then,  of  course,  it  must  be  made  to  draw 
more  strength  from  the  vine  which  supports  it.  In  the  union  of  Christ  to  each  soul 
these  quickenings  are  efficaciously  wrought  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  proceeds  from 
the  Father  and  the  Son.  The  behever  seeks  them  by  prayer,  and  openly  welcomes 
them  with  thanksgiving  and  trust.  A  female  teacher  in  Persia  was  seated  on  a  mat 
in  the  middle  of  the  earthen  floor  of  the  church  greatly  fatigued,  and  as  she  was  en- 
deavouring to  oatch  a  moment's  rest,  one  of  the  native  women  seated  herself  directly 
behind  on  the  same  mat.  In  a  quiet  whisper  she  begged  her  to  lean  back.  Th« 
missionary  iust  suffered  her  weight  to  fall  against  her  knee ;    but  the  generooo 


606  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xw. 

Christian  drew  her  nearer  and  then  whispered  again,  "  If  you  love  me,  lean  hard.* 
Never  was  a  truer  imitation  of  Christ.  Those  who  are  weak  show  more  love  by 
leaning  harder.  2.  The  branch  may  be  too  perverse  in  its  growth.  Sometimes  it 
appears  as  if  it  had  become  wilfuL  It  thrusts  its  rings  and  tendrils  off  as  if  • 
petulant  rebelliousness  against  the  trellis  had  awakened  its  spite,  and  it  had  deter- 
mined to  grow  oat  of  order.  It  will  lay  hold  of  twigs  below  it  in  the  grass,  and 
trees  above  it  in  the  orchard,  always  endeavouring  to  defeat  the  husbandiuan'a 
purpose.  For  this  there  is  no  remedy  but  one  :  the  knife  comes  suddenly,  and  now 
remains  only  the  fire.  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Union  with  Christ: — I.  This 
UNION.  1.  It  is  compared — (1)  By  Peter  (ii.  5,  6)  to  the  connection  between  the 
foundation-stone  and  the  building,  and  the  relation  thus  suggested  is  one  of  depen- 
dence. (2)  By  the  Lord  Himself  to  the  union  between  the  branches  and  the  vine, 
the  connection  is  seen  to  be  one  of  life.  (3)  By  Paul  (Ephes.  iv.  15,  16)  to  the 
union  between  the  head  and  the  members,  where  the  connection  is  one  of  subjection. 
(4)  By  the  same  Apostle  (Ephes.  v.  22,  23)  to  the  union  between  husband  and  wife; 
and  there  the  idea  of  affection  is  the  predominating  one.  Now,  putting  all  these 
together,  we  get  this  result,  that  believers  are  one  with  Christ,  as  represented  by 
Him,  dependent  upon  Him,  living  in  Him,  subject  to  Him,  and  loving  Him  with 
tenderest  affection.  But  in  the  figure  of  our  text  there  is  further  suggested  the  idea 
that  believers  are  supported  by  Christ.  The  branches  are  sustained  by  the  sap, 
which  the  vine  supplies  ;  and  so  His  people  are  animated  by  the  Spirit  which  Christ 
bestows.  2.  How  this  union  is  entered  into.  The  analogy  of  the  vine  does  not 
help  us  here.  The  branches  are  in  the  vine,  whether  they  will  or  no.  But  men 
have  wills  ;  and  so  this  union  is,  on  their  part,  a  voluntary  thing.  3.  Then,  when 
we  are  thus  united  to  Him,  His  strength  and  grace  flow  into  us.  When  the  oar  is 
coupled  to  the  engine,  the  motion  of  the  engine  is  communicated  to,  and  shared  with, 
the  car  ;  and  when  we  are  one  with  Christ  in  love  and  trust.  His  Spirit  comes  into 
our  hearts  and  makes  us  more  responsive  to  Himself.  II.  Thk  end  for  which  thh 
UNION  EXISTS  (vers.  2,  8).  Fruit,  the  character  of  which  may  be  gathered  from 
Eph.  V.  9  ;  Gal.  v.  22,  23  ;  2  Pet.  i.  6-8.  Then  this  fruit  is— 1.  A  personal  thing. 
It  is  not  the  effect  on  others  of  some  effort  wbich  we  put  forth,  but  the  appearance 
in  ourselves  of  the  graces  of  holiness.  2.  Not  a  single  grace,  but  a  whole  circle. 
The  spiritual  vine,  like  the  natural,  brings  forth  its  fruit  in  a  cluster,  and  only  when 
each  of  the  members  of  that  cluster  is  fairly  and  symmetrically  developed  is  there 
true  fruitfulnesa.  (Christian  Age.)  Union  with  Christ : — The  fruitful  source  of 
aU  the  Christian's  blessings.  Constantly  felt  and  remembered  tends  to  dignify  and 
fructify  his  life.  Leads  to— (1)  Purity.  (2)  Safety.  In  Christ.  (3)  Glory.  L 
Union  in  its  natueb.  1.  Mysterious.  2.  Mutually  agreed.  3.  Spiritual.  4. 
Living.  II.  Permanence  of  the  union.  III.  Fruitfulness  op  the  union.  "  Bear 
much  fruit."  1.  Expected.  It  is  a  vine — a  vineyard  under  care.  "Father  is  the 
husbandman."  2.  Only  possible  in  union.  Human  nature.  "  No  fruit  of  itself," 
•'  for  without  Me  ye  can  do  nothing."  Linked  to  Christ  by  faith.  *'  Much  fruit." 
3.  To  the  highest  end.  Heavenward,  "  Glory  to  God "  (ver.  8).  Earthward. 
*'  So  shall  ye  be  My  disciples"  (ver.  8).  The  great  want  of  earth — true  disciples. 
God  claims  the  glory.  4.  Sign  of  life.  "Bringeth  forth" — out  of — grow — result 
of  the  Divine  life  within.  (E.  Wickliffe  Davies.)  The  true  spiritual  Ij/e  in  man 
is — I.  Derived  from  Christ.  Beligion  is  not  a  mere  creed  or  form ;  it  is  a  life, 
and  the  life  is  a  "  branch  "  of  Chnst's  life.  It  grows  out  of  Him.  There  is  no 
true  spiritual  life  where  Christ's  spirit  is  not  the  inspiration.  II.  Developed  in 
FRUiTFULNEBS.  The  production  of  fruit  is  what  is  required  ;  it  is  not  to  pass  off  in 
foliage  and  blossom.  Unless  we  yield  fruit  we  are  worthless  and  doomed  to  des- 
traction.  What  is  the  fruit?  "  Love,  joy  peace,"  &c.  III.  The  joint  agency  op 
God  and  man.  1.  Man  must  seek  an  abiding  connection  with  Christ.  Cut  the 
branch  from  the  tree,  it  will  wither  and  rot.  2.  God  must  act  the  part  of  the  Great 
Hasbandman.    The  mere  abiding  in  Christ  will  not  do  of  itself.    (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver  2.  Erery  branch  in  Me  that  beareth  not  fruit. — Believers  branches  in  the  true 
vine : — I.  What  is  implied  in  bkino  a  branch  in  Christ,  and  who  are  propeelt 
bbanchbs  in  Him.  1.  In  order  to  be  such,  we  must  be  cut  off  from  the  stock,  which 
is  wild  by  nature  (Bom.  zi.  24).  This  stock  is  our  natural  and  sinful  state  (1  Pet.  i. 
18).  Growing  in  this  stock,  we  bring  forth  evil  fruit.  We  begin  to  be  cut  oflf 
from  it  when  we  are  convinced  of  our  sin,  and  brought  to  repentance.  Hence 
we  begin  to  die  to  all  dependance  on  our  own  wisdom,  righteousness,  and  strength ; 
to  all  love  of  the  world  and  sin  (2  Cor.  vi.  17).     2.  We  must  be  ingrafted  into  Christ 


«eA».  XV.]  8T.  JOHN.  60  f 

(Eom.  xi.  24).  The  usual  way  of  ingrafting  is  not  to  insert  a  wild  scion  into  a  good 
stock,  but  a  good  scion  into  a  wild  stock.  3.  Hence  it  appears  evidently  who  are 
branches  in  Him — (1)  Negatively  ;  not  all  who  have  been  baptized,  and  are 
reckoned  members  of  the  visible  Church  (Bom.  ii.  25-29),  who  profess  to  know 
God,  and  to  have  religion  (2  Tim.  ii.  19;  1  Cor.  xiii.  2,  3).  (2)  Positively.  They 
are  those  who  have  experienced  true  repentance  and  faith,  and  are  in  Christ  new 
creatures  (2  Cor.  v.  17).  IL  What  is  the  fruit  which  such  are  expected  to  bear. 
This  implies  the  cultivation  of  truth,  justice,  mercy,  charity  (Heb.  xiii.  16  ;  Tit.  iii. 
8 ;  Phil.  i.  10,  11).  Such  must  also  cultivate,  and  maintain  towards  themselves, 
temperance  in  all  its  branches,  chastity,  self-denial,  purity,  universal  holiness 
^Heb.  xii.  14).  III.  The  consequences  op  bearing,  or  not  bearing,  this  fruit. 
1.  If  we  do  not  bring  forth  this  fruit,  our  grace,  not  being  exercised,  is  withdrawn 
and  lost.  We  are  actually  cut  off  from  Christ,  as  an  unfruitful  branch  is  lopped 
off  from  a  vine.  We  wither  in  our  fruits,  our  blossoms,  aud  our  very  leaves ;  in  our 
works,  graces,  and  gifts.  2.  If  we  do  produce  fruit,— we  are  purged,  or  purified,  by 
the  Spirit,  through  the  Word  (chap.  xvii.  17),  which  is  believed,  and  obeyed  (Acts  xv. 
9 ;  1  Pet.  L  22) ;  by  affliction  (Heb.  xii.  4-11).  IV.  How  we  mat  be  enabled  to 
bear  this  fruit.  1.  By  abiding  in  Christ,  and  Christ  in  us  (ver.  5).  We  shall  not 
otherwise  be  fruitful  (ver.  4),  for  otherwise  we  shall  want  life,  inclination,  know- 
ledge, and  power.  2.  We  abide  in  Him  by  abiding  in  faith,  in  God,  in  His  revealed 
will,  in  His  Gospel  and  its  truths,  in  Christ,  in  the  promises  (John  vi.  47-58 ;  Gal. 
ii.  20 ;  Heb.  x.  38  ;  and  especially  Eom.  xi.  16,  24).  By  continuing  in  lo^e  (John 
XV.  9 ;  Gal.  v.  6).  Hence  arise  deadness  to  the  world,  and  power  over  sin.  By 
eontinuing  to  obey  (John  xv.  10 ;  xiv.  23,  24.)  In  order  to  these,  the  use  of  all 
prescribed  means  is  necessary,  as  the  Word,  prayer,  watchfulness,  self-denial. 
{J.  Benson.)  Useless  branches  ! — In  the  natural  world  branches  of  the  vine  which 
are  not  good  for  that  to  which  they  were  specially  ordained,  viz.,  for  the  bearing  of 
fruit,  are  good  for  nothing.  There  are  trees  which  may  be  turned  to  secondary 
nses,  if  they  fail  to  fulfil  their  primary.  Not  so  the  vine.  As  timber  it  is  utterly 
valueless  (Ezek.  xv.  3,  4).  It  is  with  it  exactly  as  with  the  saltless  salt,  which, 
having  lost  its  savour,  is  fit  only  to  be  cast  out  of  doors ;  both  of  them  being  meet 
emblems  of  the  spiritual  man  who  is  not  spiritual,  who  is  good  neither  for  the  work 
of  this  world  nor  of  a  higher.  {Abp.  Trench).  Character  and  doom  of  unfruitfuU 
ness : — L  The  position  tou  occupy.  The  Saviour  speaks  of  those  who  are  in  Him. 
This,  in  a  sense,  is  true  of  you ;  not  in  the  highest  sense,  indeed ;  by  the  supposition, 
you  are  not  in  Him  by  that  vital  union  which  faith  produces,  and  which  secures 
fruitfulness,  but  you  are  so  in  a  real,  though  a  subordinate  sense.  Tou  have  some 
relation  to  Christ,  are  not  like  those  to  whom  His  name  is  unknown ;  you  have 
heard  of  Christ,  whence  He  came,  what  He  did,  how  He  suffered,  how  He  is  able 
and  willing  to  "save  to  the  uttermost" — a  fact  by  which,  while  yonr  ears  ai8 
blessed,  you  are  also  involved  in  responsibility.  To  Him  you  were  dedicated  in 
Christian  baptism  ;  by  parental  piety,  in  His  Church,  His  name  was  named  upon 
you,  and  His  blessing  in\oked.  More  than  this.  You  have  been  trained  and 
nurtured  amid  Christian  influences :  IneflQcacious  as  these  may  have  proved,  they 
have  existed ;  you  can  remember  them.  The  possibility  of  such  outward  and 
visible  union,  as  distinct  from  the  inward  and  spiritual,  is  variously  illustrated. 
"  Have  not  I  chosen  you  twelve  ?  and  one  of  you  is  a  devih "  "  Demas  hath  for- 
saken us,  having  loved  the  present  world."  Such,  then,  is  your  position.  II.  You 
ABB  unfruitful.  What  do  we  mean  by  this  ?  Not  that  you  have  no  capacity  for 
fruitfulness.  You  might  have  been  so  different,  as  different  from  your  present  self 
as  light  from  darkness,  hfe  from  death.  Not  that  you  have  been  unfruitful  in  all 
senses.  Your  intellect,  perhaps,  has  been  active,  become  acute  and  strong ;  your 
judgment  has  become  matured;  your  affections  have  budded,  blossomed,  and 
brought  forth  fruit ;  yonr  character,  so  far  as  this  can  be  perfected  without  the 
motives  and  principles  of  Christian  life,  has  become  developed  and  firm.^  It  may 
be,  too,  that  in  the  years  we  are  now  reviewing  and  charging  with  anfruitfulness, 
you  have  done  much,  been  a  philanthropist,  a  patriot,  a  projector  of  useful  schemes. 
In  what,  then,  are  you  chargeable  with  unfruitfulness  ?  By  lacking  such  principle* 
as  these.  Love  to  God.  Faith  in  Christ.  Obedience.  Humility  and  repentance, 
too.  It  might  be  supposed  that  sense  of  deficiency  would  have  produced  at  least 
these.  Have  they  f  Has  your  heart  been  broken  for  sin  ?  Have  you  offered  the 
sacrifice  which  God  will  not  despise,  the  broken  and  contrite  spirit  ?  Thus  you  see, 
there  are  fruits  which  you  have  not  borne,  the  most  important  fruits,  and  those 
without  which  all  others  God  esteems,  if  not  "  abomination,"  yet  certainly  mort 


608  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

subordinate.    III.  Some  of  the  aggravations  of  this  unfbuitfdlness.     You  have 
had  great  advantages.     Consider,  too,  the  time  you  have  wasted.     How  insufficient 
the  causes,  too,  which  have  produced  your  infertility.  It  were  wise  for  you  seriously 
to  inquire  what  these  have  been.     Decree,  fate,  providenoe,  necessity — you  cannot 
charge  these  with  the  future.    Your  conscience  is  too  enlightened  for  that.    No  I  the 
cause  is  not  from  above.    Nor  from  beneath  altogether.     Satan  has  no  compulsory 
power  over  us.    Where,  then,  is  the  cause  to  be  found ?    In  yourself  only;  in  your 
yielding  to  outward  influences.    It  is  a  further  aggravation  of  your  sin,  that  all  the 
time  of  your  unfruitf  ulness  y^ju  have  been  positively  injurious.    Think,  for  example, 
of  the  incomparable  mischief  a  father  does  in  his  family  all  the  time  he  is  living  a 
worldly  and  careless  life.    IV.  The  doom  of  the  dnfrhitful  branch.    It  is  one  proof, 
among  many,  of  God's  willingness  to  save,  that  he  announces  punishment  before 
He  executes  it.     None  are  led  blindfold  to  justice.     "  Every  branch  in  me  that 
beareth  not  fruit,  He  taketh  away."    This  is  fulfilled  variously.    It  is  sometimes  in 
the  loss  of  capacity.    Then  there  is  Death.    This  is  common  to  man  as  the  penalty 
of  sin ;  but  to  diSerent  men,  how  different !     Whatever  heaven  is,  and  its  glory  is 
inexpressible,  such  are  taken  away  from  it ;  whatever  hell  is,  and  its  dolefulness,  M 
described  by  Christ,  no  darkness  can  paint,  they  are  taken  away  to  it.     {J.  Viney.) 
Every  branch  that  beareth  fruit  He  purgeth  It.     A  sharp  knife  for  the  vine- 
branches  : — I.    The    text    suggests    self-examination.      It    mentions — 1.    Two 
characters  who  are  m  some  respects  exceedingly  alike ;  they  are  both  branches, 
and  are  in  the  vine  :  and  yet  for  all  this,  the  end  of  the  one  shall  be  to  be  cast  away, 
while  the  end  of  the  other  shall  be  to  bring  forth  fruit.    2.  The  distinction  between 
them.     The  first  branch  brought  forth  no  fruit ;  the  second  branch  bore  some  fruit. 
We  have  no  right  to  judge  of  our  neighbours'  motives  and  thoughts,  except  so  far 
as  they  may  be  clearly  discoverable  by  their  actions  and  words.  #The  interior  we 
must  leave  with  God,  but  the  exterior  we  may  judge.     "  By  their  fruits  ye  shall 
know  them."     Paul  has  given  us  a  list  of  these  fruits  in  Gal.  v.  23.  Say,  professor, 
hast  thou  brought  forth  the  fruit  "  love  ?  "  &c.   Jt  is  so  easy  for  us  to  wrap  our- 
selves up  in  the  idea  that  attention  to  religious  ceremonies  is  the  test,  but  it  is  not 
so,  for  "  Except  your  righteousness  shall  exceed  the  righteousness  of  the  Scribes 
and  Pharisees,"  &c.  3.  The  solemn  difference  between  them  leads  to  a  solemn  result. 
(1)  Sometimes  God  allows  the  professor  to  apostatise.     (2)  Or  else  he  is  allowed  to 
fall  into  open  sin.     (3)  Some  have  been  taken  away  in  a  more  terrible  sense  by 
death.    II.  Conveys  instruction.    The  fruit-bearing  branches  are  not  perfect.     If 
they  were,  they  would  not  need  pruning.   Whenever  the  sap  within  them  is  strong, 
there  is  a  tendency  for  that  strength  to  turn  into  evil.    The  gardener  desires  to  see 
that  strength  in  clusters,  but  alas  !  instead  it  runs  into  wood.  When  the  sap  comes 
into  a  Christian  to  produce  confidence  in  God,  through  the  evil  that  is  in  him,  it 
often  produces  confidence  in  himself.    When  the  sap  would  produce  zeal,  how  very 
frequently  it  turns  into  rashness.     Suppose  the  sap  flows  to  produce  self-examina- 
tion, very  generally,  instead  of  the  man  doubting  himself,  he  begins  to  doubt  his 
Lord.    How  often  have  I  seen  even  the  joy  of  the  Lord  turned  into  pride.     Tbat 
love  which  we  ought  to  bear  towards  our  neighbours,  how  apt  is  that  to  run  into 
love  of  the  world  !     Gentleness  often  turns  to  a  silly  compliance  with  everybody's 
whim,  and  meekness,  which  is  a  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  how  often  that  becomes  an 
excuse  for  holding  your  tongue,  v/hen  you  ought  boldly  to  speak  !    2  Pruning  is  the 
lot  of  all  the  fruitful  saints.    It  is  generally  thought  that  our  trials  and  troubles 
purge  us  :  I  am  not  sure  of  that,  they  certainly  are  lost  upon  some.    It  is  the  wore. 
(ver.  3)  that  prunes  the  Christian.    Affliction  is  the  handle  of  the  knife ,  the  grind- 
stone that  sharpens  up  the  Word  ;  the  dresser  which  removes  our  soft  garments, 
and  lays  bare  the  diseased  flesh,  so  that  the  surgeon's  lancet  may  get  at  it.    Afflic- 
tion makes  us  ready  to  feel  the  word,  but  the  true  pruner  is  the  word  in  the  hand  of 
the  Great  Husbandman.      Sometimes  when  you  lay  stretched  upon  the  bed  of 
sickness,  you  think  more  upon  the  word  than  you  did  before,  that  is  one  great  thing. 
In  the  next  place,  you  see  more  the  applicability  of  that  word  to  yourself.    In  the 
third  place,  the  Holy  Spirit  makes  you  feel  more,  while  you  are  thus  laid  aside,  the 
force  of  the  word  than  you  did  before.     3.  The  object  in  this  pruning  is  never 
condemnatory.    God  chastises,  but  He  cannot  punish  those  for  whom  Jesus  Christ 
has  been  already  punished.    You  have  no  right  to  say,  when  a  man  is  afflicted, 
that  it  is  because  he  has  done  wrong ;  on  the  contrary,  just  the  branch  that  is 
good  for  something  gets  the  pruning  knife.   It  is  because  the  Lord  loves  His  people 
that  He  chastens  them.    4.  The  real  reason  is  that  more  fruit  may  be  produced. 
(1)  In  quantity.    A  good  man,  who  feels  the  power  of  the  word  pruning  him  of  this 


cjup.  rr.]  ST.  JOHN.  609 

and  that  superfluity,  sets  to  work  to  do  more  for  Jesus.    Before  he  was  afflicted  he 
did  not  know  how  to  be  patient.    Before  he  was  poor  he  did  not  know  how  to  be 
humble,  &c.     (2)  In  variety.     One  tree  can  only  produce  one  kind  of  fruit  usually, 
but  the  Lord's  people,  the  more  they  are  pruned  the  more  they  will  produce.    (3) 
In  quality.    The  man  may  not  pray  more,  but  he  will  pray  more  earnestly.     5. 
What  greater  blessing  can  a  man  have  than  to  produce  much  fruit  for  God  ?  Better 
to  serve  God  much  than  to  become  a  prince.     III.  Invites  meditation.     1.  "  If 
the  righteous  scarcely  be  saved,  where  shall  the  ungodly  and  the  wicked  appear  ?  " 
2,  What  a  mercy  it  is  to  the  believer  that  it  is  pruning  with  him  and  not  cutting 
off  1     3.  Think  how  gently  the  pruning  has  been  done  with  the  most  of  us  up  till 
now,  compared  with  our  barrenness.    4.  How  earnestly  we  ought  to  seek  for  more 
fruit.     5.  How  concerned  should  every  one  of  us  be  to  be  efficaciously  and  truly 
one  with  Christ  I     {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)        Hard  times,  God's  pruning  knife  (Thanks- 
giving Sermon) : — I.  To-dat  we  should  be  thankful  because — 1.  Hard  as  the  times 
are,  they  might  be  worse.    2.  The  times  are  not  so  hard  as  we  deserve.     3.  They 
are  not  so  hard  as  we  represent.    H.  What  we  call  habd  times  are  the  best  fob 
va.     1.  Good  for  man's  physical  nature.    The    frugality  and  self-control  thej 
induce  are  precisely  what  the  athlete  practices.  2.  Good  for  his  intellectual  natura, 
No  great  genius  ever  daudled  into  inspiration.    3.  Good  for  his  moral  nature. 
Thev  remove  the  excrescences  of — (1)  Covetousness.     (2)  Luxury.     (3)  Indolence. 
III.  The  result  will  be  better  fruit.  1.  A  new  style  or  higher  type  of  manhood. 
2.  A  higher  type  of  politics.    Hard  times  teach  befooled  people  to  think,  and  to 
rise   above  party  dictations.      3.    A  higher  type   of    religion.      God    has    ever 
developed  the  higher  Christian  life  in  times  of  trial     IV.  After  all,  the  peunino 
KNIFE  IS   ONLY  ONE  OF  THE    IMPLEMENTS  OF    CULTURE.       Soft   rain  and  genial 
sunshine  are  the  larger  experience  of  the  vine.     And  so  even  in  hard  times  our 
afflictions  are  not  one  to  a  thousand  of  our  blessings.     (C.  D.  Wadswwth,  D.D.) 
Pruning,  a  reason  for  gratitude : — Brambles  certainly  have  a  fine  time  of  it,  and 
grow  after  their  own  pleasure.     We  have  seen  their  long  shoots  reaching  far  and 
wide,  and  no  knife  has  threatened  them  as  they  luxuriated  upon  the  commons  and 
waste  lands.    The  poor  vine  is  cut  down  so  closely  that  little  remains  of  it  but  bare 
stems.    Yet,  when  clearing-time  comes,  and  the  brambles  are  heaped  for  their 
burning,  who  would  not  rather  be  the  vine?     (Ibid.)        Means  of  fruitfulness : — 
The  word  translated  "  purgeth  "  is  kathairo,  which  includes  all  the  means  that  are 
necessary  to  develop  the  fruitfulness  of  the  plant,  and  the  removal  of  all  hindrances. 
It  means  to  purify  the  ground  and  prepare  it  for  sowing,  by  removing  weeds  and 
rubbish — to  winnow  the  corn,  to  separate  the  chaff  from  the  wheat.    Its  root-idea 
is  purity,  freedom  from  all  that  is  foul,  false,  useless,  or  noxious.    It  is  interesting 
to  notice  the  close  resemblance  that  exists  between  the  word  kathairo,  to  purge,  and 
kathaireo,  to  destroy.    The  addition  of  one  letter  makes  the  one  word  to  mean  a 
very  different  thing  from  the  other.     And  so  there  is  a  resemblance  between  the 
purging  of  the  fruitful  branches  and  the  taking  away  of  the  unfruitful  ones.    In 
the  garden  during  spring,  the  process  of  digging  the  ground,  cutting  the  roots  and 
branches,  seems  purely  a  process  of   destruction;   but  in  the  added  beauty  of 
inmmer  and  the  richer  fruitfulness  of  autumn,  it  is  seen  to  be  a  remedial  and  con- 
structive process.     And  so  the  means  which  God  employs  to  promote  the  fertility  of 
His  own  people  seem  so  like  those  which  He  employs  to  punish  the  wicked,  that  the 
righteous  are  not  seldom  perplexed.    In  considering  the  means  of  fruitfulness,  let 
us  look  at — I.  The  nature  of  the  soil  in  which  believers  are  planted.     1.  Some  of 
the  finest  grapes  are  produced  on  volcanic  soil.    From  the  rich  red  monld  into 
which  lava  is  disintegrated  when  long  exposed  to  the  weather,  the  vine  draws  th* 
juices  that  form  the  largest  and  most  generous  clusters.    The  passion  of  the  soil, 
as  it  were,  passes  into  the  produce.    Palestine,  the  native  country  of  the  vine, 
exhibits,  for  its  size,  more  than  any  other  country,  evidences  of  extraordinary 
geological  convulsions.     These  features  were  paralleled  by  the  historical  revolutions 
which  were  intended  to  make  Israel  the  true  vine  of  the  Lord.    And  so  it  is  in  the 
experience  of  every  nation  that  is  intended  to  produce  much  fruit.    Africa,  with  its 
uniform  geology  and  its  monotonous  history,  has  done  Uttle  for  mankind  compared 
with  Europe,  whose  geology  and  history  are  exceedingly  varied  and  complicated. 
It  is  as  true  of  individuals  as  of  nations,  that  because  they  have  no  changes,  they 
do  not  fear  God  or  prosper.     But  God  plants  His  vines  amid  fiery  trials,  where  they 
are  exposed  to  constant  temptations,  lava-floods  of  the  wrath  and  malice  of  the 
Adversary  and  of  wicked  men.     Since  the  ground  beneath  them  is  insecure,  and 
liable  to  constant  convulsive  shocks,  they  are  thereby  induced  to  set  their  affectionfl 
voio  n.  89 


610  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xt. 

more  £rmly  on  things  above,  and  to  walk  as  pilgrims  and  strangers  on  earth.  2. 
The  influence  of  external  circumstances  upon  objects  so  plastic  as  plants  is  con- 
fessedly very  powerful,  leading  often  to  great  modifications  of  form,  structure,  and 
substance.  Hence  the  endless  variety  of  grapes  and  wines  of  different  countries. 
A  similar  modification  in  the  character  of  the  growth  and  fruit  of  the  Christian  is 
caused  by  the  circumstances  in  which  God's  providence  places  him.  One  thing, 
amid  all  the  changes  of  his  circumstances,  the  Christian  can  command  if  he  will — 
and  that  is  the  sunlight  of  God's  countenance.  He  does  not,  however,  always  avail 
himself  of  it.  And  hence,  as  the  spice-trees  in  our  hot-houses  are  destitute  of 
aromatic  taste,  because  we  cannot  supply  them  with  the  brilliant  direct  sunshine  of 
their  native  skies,  so  the  Christian,  amid  all  the  privileges  of  the  Church,  is  often 
destitute  of  the  rich  aromatic  fragrance  of  spiritual  joy,  because  he  seeks  to  make 
up,  by  the  heat  of  forced  spiritual  emotion  originating  in  himself,  for  the  full, 
bright,  joyous  sunshine  that  beams  from  God's  face.  3.  Under  this  head  may  be 
noticed  the  discipline  of  life's  daily  work  as  one  of  the  means  of  developing 
Christian  fruitfulness.  Like  the  vine,  the  Christian  requires  to  be  trained  along 
the  trellis  of  formal  duties  and  orderly  habits.  4.  I  may  also  notice  the  fact,  that 
God's  tenderest  vines  are  often  placed  in  the  most  trying  circumstances.  It  seems 
a  strange  appointment  of  nature,  that  the  growing  points  of  all  trees  should  be 
their  weakest  and  most  delicate  parts.  So  it  is  witb  God's  own  people.  Many  of 
the  most  delicate  and  sensitive  of  them  have  to  bear  the  full  brunt  of  life's  storms. 
Tender  women  have  often  to  withstand  the  severest  shocks  of  circumstances.  The 
sorest  trials  often  meet  the  Christian  at  the  beginning  of  his  course.  He  puts  forth 
the  tenderest  growths  of  his  nature  often  into  the  biting  air  of  doubt,  and  fear,  and 
despondency.  But  it  is  good  thus  to  bear  the  yoke  in  our  youth.  The  elasticity 
and  hopefuhiess  of  the  young  Christian  can  overcome  trials  which  would  crush  the 
more  aged  and  less  buoyant.  And  the  very  patience  and  tenderness  of  those 
sensitive  ones,  who  have  to  bear  greater  hardships  and  evils,  disarm  these  evils  of 
their  bitterness,  and  turn  them  to  profitable  uses.    H.  Pbunino  is  one  of  the  most 

COMMON  MBTHODS  BT  WHICH  INCEEASED  FBUITFULNESS  IS  PBODUCED.      No  plant  requires 

more  pruning  than  the  vine.  So  bountiful  is  its  sap,  so  vigorous  its  vital  force,  that 
we  are  amazed  at  the  abundance  of  superfluous  growth  which  it  annually  produces. 
In  order  to  adapt  it  to  our  conditions  of  cultivation  we  must  systematically  cripple 
and  restrict  it  in  every  part.  1.  The  head,  or  leading  shoots,  are  carefully  broken 
off ;  and  the  long,  luxuriant,  lateral  shoots  are  cut  back  to  a  few  joints.  2.  Bat 
besides  the  pruning  of  the  suckers  on  the  branch  the  branch  itself  is  sometimes 
pruned.  In  almost  every  branch,  owing  to  deficiency  of  light  and  heat,  or  over- 
crowding, many  of  the  buds  that  are  put  forth  every  year  become  dormant.  Some 
of  these  torpid  buds  retain  a  sufficient  amount  of  vitality  to  carry  them  forward 
through  the  annually-deposited  layers  of  wood  and  bark ;  so  that  they  still  continue 
to  maintain  their  position  visibly,  year  after  year,  on  the  outside  of  the  bark.  In 
most  instances,  however,  they  are  too  feeble  to  keep  pace  with  the  onward  growth 
of  the  branch ;  and,  in  that  case,  they  fall  behind,  necessarily  sink  below  the 
surface,  and  become  buried  beneath  succeeding  annual  deposits  of  wood  and  bark. 
The  branch,  instead  of  developing  them,  employs  the  sap  which  ought  to  have  gone 
for  that  purpose,  into  growing  fresh  shoots.  But  the  gardener  comes,  and  with  hia 
sharp  pruning-knife  lops  off  these  useless  suckers;  and  the  consequence  is,  that  in 
a  little  while  the  sap  goes  back  to  the  dormant  buds  and  stimulates  their  slumbering 
vitality.  And  so  God  prunes  every  branch  in  the  True  Vine  for  two  reasons ;  first, 
in  order  to  remove  rank  and  useless  qualities ;  and,  secondly,  to  develop  latent 
graces.  In  no  Christian  is  there  an  harmonious  spiritual  growth,  a  perfect 
expansion  from  a  perfect  germ  in  childhood.  On  the  contrary,  growth  in  grace  in 
us  is  always  misymmetrical.  Solid  and  valuable  qualities  are  united  with  weai, 
worthless  ones ;  graces  that  charm  by  their  beauty  lie  side  by  side  with  defects  that 
repel  by  their  deformity.  Some  graces,  also,  are  dormant  in  the  soul,  repressed  by 
unfavourable  circumstances  of  continued  prosperity,  or  starved  by  the  over- 
development of  other  graces.  Some  besetting  sins,  such  as  irritability,  covetousness, 
worldliness,  pride,  impatience,  are  allowed  to  grow  up  and  exhaust  in  their  noxious 
growth  the  life  of  the  soul.  Now,  to  repress  the  evil  and  stimulate  the  good 
qualities  of  His  people,  God  subjects  them  to  the  pruning  of  His  providence.  But, 
tile  pruning  of  God's  providence  would  be  very  unsatisfactory  did  it  only  lop  off 
noxious  qualities,  mortify  easily-besetting  sins.  Such  injurious  growths  may  be 
repressed  by  afiiiction,  but  unless  the  discipline  develops  the  opposite  good  quaUties, 
tliey  will  spring  up  anew,  and  make  matters  worse  than  before/     Spiritual  graces 


CHAT.  XT.]  ST.  JOHN.  611 

must  be  developed  in  their  room.  In  order  to  get  rid  of  worldly-mindedness, 
gpirituality  of  mind  must  be  cultivated ;  covetousness  will  only  yield  to  a  larger 
experience  of  the  Love  that  for  our  sakes  became  poor :  anger  will  only  be  extirpated 
by  meekness,  and  pride  by  humility.  3.  But  we  must  be  guarded  against  the  idea 
4hat  affliction  of  itself  can  develop  the  fruitfulness  of  the  Christian  life.  We  find 
that  in  the  fruit-tree  the  pruning  is  only  of  use  when  there  are  latent  or  open  buds 
to  develop.  And  so,  unless  we  have  Christian  life  and  Christian  capabilities, 
affliction,  so  far  from  doing  us  good,  will  only  harden  and  injure  ua.  But,  while 
affliction  cannot  impart  spiritual  life,  there  are  instances  in  which  God  uses  it  to 
quicken  the  soul  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  And  here,  too,  we  find  an  analogy  in 
nature.  The  buds  of  plants  almost  always  grow  in  the  axil — the  vacant  angle 
between  the  leaf  and  the  stem,  where  the  hard,  resisting  bark  which  everywhere 
else  invests  the  surface  of  the  plant,  is  more  easily  penetrated,  and  allows  the 
growing  tissues  to  expand  more  easily.  The  axil  is,  bo  to  speak,  the  joint  in  the 
armour  of  the  stem.  Now,  "  a  wound  is  virtually  an  anxil,  for  the  continuity  of 
the  surface  is  there  broken,  and  consequently,  the  resistance  of  the  external 
investiture  diminished."  Now,  we  all  invest  ourselves  with  a  strong,  resisting 
envelope  of  pride,  worldliness  and  carelessness.  Our  property,  our  friends,  our 
reputation,  our  comfort,  all  form  a  kind  of  outer  crust  of  selfishness,  which  prevents 
our  spiritual  growth.  But  God  removes  our  property  or  our  friends,  blights  our 
reputation,  destroys  our  carnal  ease,  and  by  the  wound  thus  made  in  our  selfish 
life  an  axil  is  formed,  from  whence  springs  up  the  bud  of  a  new  and  holier  growth 
4.  There  is  one  process  of  unusual  severity  which  the  gardener  has  recourse  to  in 
eases  of  obstinate  sterility.  The  barren  branch  is  girdled  or  ringed — that  is,  a 
narrow  strip  of  its  bark  is  removed  all  round  the  branch.  The  juices  elaborated  by 
the  leaves  are  arrested  in  their  downward  course,  and  accumulated  in  the  part  above 
the  ring,  which  is  thus  enabled  to  produce  fruit  abundantly  ;  while  the  shoots  that 
appear  below  the  ring,  being  fed  only  by  the  crude  ascending  sap,  do  not  bear 
flowers,  but  push  forth  into  leafy  branches.  The  prophet  Joel  says,  "  He  hath  laid 
my  vine  waste,  and  barked  my  fig-tree."  Many  Christians  are  ringed  to  prevent 
the  earthward  tendencies  of  their  souls,  and  enable  them  to  accumulate  and  con- 
centrate all  the  heavenly  influences  which  they  receive  in  bringing  forth  more  fruit. 
Their  present  life  is  separated  from  their  past  by  some  terrible  crisis  of  suffering, 
which  has  altered  everything  to  their  view,  which  has  been  in  itself  a  transformation, 
and  has  accomplished  in  a  day,  in  an  hour,  in  a  moment,  what  else  is  effected  only 
by  the  gradual  process  of  years.  The  lot  that  is  thus  halved  may  be  more  useful 
than  in  its  full  and  joyful  completeness.  Ceasing  to  draw  its  nourishment  from 
broken  cisterns  of  earthly  love,  the  lonely  branch,  separated  from  its  happy  past, 
depends  more  upon  the  unfaihng  due  and  sunshine  of  heavenly  love.  5.  Sometimes 
even  the  roots  of  the  vine  require  to  be  dug  about  and  cut  short.  There  is  a 
eorrespondence  between  the  horizontal  extension  of  the  branches  in  the  air  and  the 
lateral  spreading  of  the  roots  in  the  earth.  For  this  reason  the  roots  require 
pruning  no  less  than  the  branches.  If  they  are  allowed  to  develop  too  luxuriantly, 
the  branches  will  keep  pace  with  them,  only  they  will  be  barren.  We  are  prone  to 
root  ourselves  too  firmly  in  the  rich  soil  of  our  circamstances,  to  spread  our  roots 
iar  and  wide  in  search  of  what  shall  minister  to  our  love  of  ease  and  pleasure. 
But  God  digs  about  as.  Our  circumstances  crumble  away  about  our  roots;  the 
things  and  the  persons  in  which  we  trusted  prove  as  unstable  as  a  sand-heap  on  a 
slope.  But,  from  roots  bare  and  exposed,  or  cut  off  and  circumscribed  by  uncon- 
genial soil,  we  should  seek  to  develop  a  higher  beauty  and  richness  of  character. 
6.  The  leaves  also  need  sometimes  to  be  taken  away,  as  superabundant  foliage 
would  shade  the  fruit  and  prevent  the  sunshine  from  getting  access  to  it  to  ripen  it. 
So  the  fruit  of  the  Christian  is  sometimes  prevented  from  ripening  or  filling  out 
properly  by  the  superabundance  of  the  leaves  of  profession.  There  may  be  more 
profession  than  practice,  more  of  the  rustling  foliage  than  of  the  silent  fruit.  The 
most  common  fault  of  believers  is  letting  their  profession  of  the  Christian  life  run 
ahead  of  their  experience.  Not  more  necessary  are  the  leaves  of  a  natural  tree  to 
the  production  of  the  fruit,  than  the  profession  of  a  Christian  is  to  the  formation  of 
the  Christian  character.  But  God,  by  some  appropriate  discipline,  regulates  what 
leaves  of  profession  should  be  stripped  off  and  what  leaves  should  remain.  7. 
Many  of  the  tendrils  of  the  vine  require  to  be  nipped  off,  in  order  that  no  sap  may 
he  wasted,  or  diverted  from  the  fruit.  If  left  to  itself,  the  vine  would  pat  forth  a 
tendril  at  every  alternate  joint ;  for  it  would  seek  to  climb  to  the  top  of  the  highest 
tree.     In  like  manner,  it  is  necessary  that  the  excessive  upward  tendency  oi  soma 


618  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xt. 

Christiaos  shoald  be  restricted,  in  order  that  the  common  daties,  and  th«  liomely 
concerns  of  ordinary  life — which  in  their  own  sphere  are  equally  important — may 
not  be  neglected.  8.  The  fruit  itself  must  be  thinned.  The  gardener  pnmes  the 
cluster  of  grapes  when  yotmg  and  tender,  in  order  that  the  berries  which  are  allowed 
to  remain  may  be  larger  and  finer.  In  the  Christian  life  there  must  be  concentra- 
tion of  effort,  conservation  of  force.  Much  moral  energy  is  spent  without  effect  on 
B  multiplicity  of  objects,  which,  if  husbanded  and  focussed  on  a  few  of  the  most 
important,  would  lead  to  far  greater  results.  9.  It  has  been  cbserved  that  the  huQ» 
of  the  sunbeam  which  the  growing  plant  does  not  reflect  at  one  time  are  absorbed, 
like  a  stream  runniDg  underground  for  a  while,  and  re-appear  in  some  after  part. 
So  is  it  with  God's  discipline  of  His  people.  Much  of  it  may  seem  to  be  void  and 
lost — to  make  no  adequate  return ;  but  in  some  part  or  other  of  the  life  the  effect 
of  it  is  seen. ,  If  it  fails  to  manifest  itself  in  the  leaf,  it  comes  out  in  the  blossom 
or  fruit.  10.  It  may  happen,  however,  that  the  purging,  whose  various  forms  and 
relations  I  have  thus  considered,  may  be  here,  and  the  fruition  in  eternity.  Christians 
are  placed  in  an  unfavourable  climate.  Tropical  by  nature,  they  have  been  carried, 
like  a  wind-wafted  seed,  into  a  temperate  zone,  and  have  striven  in  vain  to  grow 
and  flower  among  the  hardy  plants  around  them.  But  it  is  a  comforting  thought, 
that  what  bears  about  it  here  the  marks  of  incompleteness,  and  to  our  eyes  the 
appearance  of  failure,  belongs  essentially  to  some  vaster  whole.    III.  Another 

UETHOD   OF   PURGING   THE   BRANCH   IS   FREEING   IT  FROM    ITS   ENEaOES.        The    natural 

vine,  owing  to  its  rich  productiveness,  is  peculiarly  exposed  to  the  attacks  of 
numerous  foes  which  prey  upon  it.  1.  A  species  of  vegetable  parasite  not  unfre- 
quently  assails  it,  called  the  "  dodder."  This  strange  plant  is  a  mere  mass  of 
elastic,  pale-red,  knotted  threads,  which  shoot  out  in  all  directions  over  the  vine. 
It  springs  originally  from  the  ground,  and  if  it  finds  no  living  plant  near  on  which 
to  graft  itself,  it  withers  and  dies ;  but  if  there  be  a  vine  or  any  other  useful  plant 
within  its  reach,  it  surrounds  the  stem  in  a  very  little  time,  and  henceforth  hves  on 
the  fostering  plant  by  its  suckers  only,  the  original  root  in  the  ground  becoming 
dried  up.  The  dodder  is  exceedingly  injurious  to  the  plants  it  attacks,  depriving^ 
them  of  their  nourishment,  and  strangling  them  in  its  folds.  Can  we  imagine  a 
more  striking  natural  emblem  of  the  law  of  sin  and  death  with  which  the  believer 
has  to  contend,  and  from  which  he  longs  for  deliverance  ?  We  can  only  hope  to 
prevent  the  dodder  growing  and  spreading  by  perpetually  breaking  and  dividing  ita 
stalks  before  they  have  time  to  fruit ;  and  we  can  only  hope  to  keep  down  the 
remains  of  corruption  within  us  by  incessant  effort,  watchfulness,  and  prayer  ;  not 
allowing  them  to  develop  into  fruit  and  seed.  How  blessed  will  be  the  deliverance 
when  this  terrible  despoiler  of  our  peace  and  usefulness  is  finally  and  completely 
removed  from  us,  when  we  are  saved  for  ever  from  the  power  and  presence  of  that 
Bin  from  whose  guilt  the  blood  of  Christ  has  freed  us  I  2.  Every  one  has  heard  of 
the  terrible  grape-mildew  which,  on  its  first  appearance,  utterly  destroyed  the  vine- 
yards in  many  parts  of  the  world,  and  still  annually  re-appears  to  levy  its  tax  upon 
the  vine-grower.  In  consists  of  a  fungus,  whose  growth  spreads  a  white,  downy 
mould  over  the  surface  of  the  grape,  checking  its  development,  and  converting  its 
pulp  into  a  sour  and  watery  mass  of  decay.  But  it  does  no  harm  unless  the 
conditions  of  its  germination  exist — which  are  cold,  wet  seasons,  with  little  sunshine 
— in  which  case  it  starts  into  hfe,  and  grows  with  inconceivable  rapidity,  spreading 
ruin  on  every  side.  To  a  species  of  moral  mildew  the  fruit  of  the  Christian  is  also 
exposed.  In  cold  seasons,  when  clouds  of  unbelief  rise  up  between  the  soul  and 
the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  intercepting  His  light,  this  mildew  is  peculiarly  destruc- 
tive. It  is  a  very  solemn  thought,  that  the  spiritual  atmosphere  is  full  of  the 
devices  of  the  Prince  of  the  power  of  the  air — that  the  existence  of  another  world 
of  evil  beyond  our  own  world,  makes  all  remissness  on  our  part  most  dangerous. 
8.  In  this  country,  the  greatest  pest  of  the  vinery  is  the  little  red  spider,  whose 
movements  over  the  leaves  and  fruit  are  exceedinglw  nimble,  and  which  makes  up 
by  its  vast  numbers  for  its  individual  weakness.  It  punctures  the  fruit,  sips  ita 
juice,  and  thus  injures  its  appearance  and  quality.  In  the  East,  the  land  of  the 
vine,  the  special  foe  of  the  vineyard  is  the  fox.  "Take  us  the  foxes,  the  little 
foxes,  that  spoil  the  vines,  for  our  vines  have  tender  grapes  " — or  small  grapes  just 
out  of  blossom — says  the  beautiful  Song  of  Solomon.  These  are  fitting  symbols  of 
some  weakness  or  infirmity  of  believers — some  sin  of  temper  or  tongue — which, 
although  it  may  not  endanger  their  safety,  will,  nevertheless,  greatly  mar  their 
peace.  Peevishness,  irritability,  &c.,  may  seem  so  small  and  trifling  as  to  be  hardly 
entitled  to  be  called  sins  at  all.     They  may  be  exter  uated  and  explained  away,  but 


<ausf.  XT  J  ST.  JOHN,  61S 

they  are  in  reality  red  spidera — ^little  foxes,  that  spoil  the  tender  grapes  of  the  soul. 
4.  There  is  a  disease  called  *♦  rust,"  which  makes  its  appearance  on  the  berries  of 
the  vine  a  few  days  after  they  are  out.  It  is  supposed  to  be  caused  by  handling  the 
berries  while  thinning  them.  Our  vines  have  indeed  tender  grapes.  The  beauty  of 
holiness  is  easily  blurred :  self -consciousness  rusts  it ;  affectation  brashes  oS  the 
fine  edge — the  delicate  beauty  of  the  various  graces.  5.  Another  disease  known  to 
gardeners  is  "  shanking,"  which  makes  its  appearance  just  as  the  grapes  are 
changing  from  the  acid  to  the  saccharine  state,  and  arrests  the  transformation  at 
once ;  the  berry  remaining  perfectly  acid,  and  at  length  shrivelling  up.  It  begins 
in  the  decay  of  the  little  stem  or  shank  of  the  berry,  and  is  supposed  to  be  caused 
by  the  roots  of  the  vine  descending  into  a  cold,  wet  subsoil.  How  often,  alas,  is  it 
true  of  the  believer,  that  his  fruit  is  shanked,  remaining  sour  when  it  should 
become  sweet  and  palatable  I  (H.  Macmillan,  D.D.)  Spiritual  pruning : — What 
is  pruning?  Whatever  it  be,  two  things  are  observable.  It  is  effected  by  the 
husbandman,  and  applied  to  each.  It  is  a  pleasant  thought  that  all  the  discipline 
by  which  we  are  exercised  is  from  the  hand  of  "  our  Father,"  There  may  indeed 
be  subordinate  instruments,  the  "wicked  "  being  God's  "  sword,"  but  it  is  still  "  the 
Lord's  doing."  A  work  so  important  as  the  spiritual  culture  of  His  people  He 
commits  wholly  to  none.  '^He  pruneth,"  nor  are  any  exempt.  "Every  branch" 
is  the  subject  of  pruning.  As  all  need,  so  all  have,  discipline.  In  the  deepest  trial 
there  has  nothing  happened  to  you  but  what  is  "  common  to  man."  And  why  this  ? 
For  greater  fruitfulness.  Not  "  willingly,"  for  wantonness,  for  pleasure,  for  any 
benefit  the  husbandman  secures,  but  for  fruit.  The  subject,  then,  is.  Fruit  as  the 
result  of  affliction.  Affliction  !  What  a  scene  does  this  word  open  to  view.  It  ia 
well  to  bear  in  mind  that  it  is  confined  to  earth.  There  are  whole  races  of  beings 
who  experimentally  know  not  the  meaning  of  the  word,  who  never  felt  a  pain, 
never  breathed  a  sigh,  never  wept  a  tear ;  others  to  whom  it  is  a  thing  of  the  past. 
How  truthful  in  this,  as  in  all  other  respects,  is  the  Bible.  How  large  a  portion  of 
the  Scriptures  is  occupied  with  scenes  and  truths  bearing  on  affliction  !  The  terma 
by  which  it  designates  it,  how  various — *'  adversity,"  "  correction,"  "  chastisement," 
"  calamity,"  "  distress,"  "  grief,"  "  judgment,"  •'  stripes,"  "  smiting,"  "  trouble," 
"  visitation,"  are  some  of  the  literal  expressions ;  while  the  figures  of  "  fire," 
••  water,"  the  "  rod,"  the  ••  yoke,"  "  gall,"  "  wormwood,"  "  rough  wind,"  •«  sack- 
cloth," ••  ashes,"  and  many  others,  are  significantly  employed  as  its  symbols.  You 
know,  too,  how  deeply  all  the  histories  of  the  Biblo  are  tinged  by  it :  Job  in  the 
ashes,  Jacob  mourning  his  children,  Joseph  in  the  pit,  Moses  in  the  desert,  David 
in  the  wilderness,  the  youths  in  the  furnace,  Daniel  in  the  den — ^what  are  all  these 
familiar  tales  of  life,  but  scenes  of  affliction,  showing  how  it  was  experienced  and 
borne  f  It  is  not  of  affliction,  however,  whether  in  fact  or  description,  we  have 
now  to  think,  but  of  its  fruit,  the  "more  fruit,"  which  it  is  designed  to  produce, 
the  "  peaceable  fruit "  which  "  afterward  "  it  yields.  1.  Affliction  deepens  on  the 
mind  a  sense  of  the  reality  of  eternal  things.  It  is  said  that  after  an  earthquake, 
men  tread  more  warily.  The  foundations  having  been  shaken,  a  sense  of  insecurity 
is  felt,  which  produces  solemn  impression.  2.  Another  valuable  result  of  affliction 
is  increased  sense  of  the  value  of  religion.  When  Israel  passed  through  the  desert 
they  learnt,  as  they  never  otherwise  could  have  done,  the  worth  of  many  things — 
water,  manna,  guidance.  As  the  dove  beaten  by  the  tempest  to  the  sheltering  ark, 
as  the  tossed  disciples  to  the  mighty  One  who  walked  on  the  billows,  we  repair  to 
Christ.  Certain  colours  require  certain  lights  to  show  them.  There  are  views  of 
Christ  as  a  Saviour,  a  Friend,  a  High  Priest,  an  Example,  which  only  the  shadow 
of  affliction  could  enable  us  to  discern,  but  which,  when  once  seen,  remain  for  ever 
upon  the  vision  of  the  soul.  So  with  God's  Word.  To  enjoy  plaintive  music  or  a 
minor  key,  a  certain  state  of  mind  is  requisite ;  and  who  but  one  in  trial  can  fully 
enter  into  the  deep  bass  of  sorrow  and  wailing  in  the  Lamentations  or  the  Psalms. 
Prayer  is  another  exercise  of  which  affliction  teaches  the  value.  "  I  will  go  and 
return  unto  My  place  till  they  seek  My  face,  in  their  affliction  they  will  seek  Me 
early."  3.  Another  valuable  effect  of  affliction  is  the  cultivation  and  growth  of  the 
passive  virtues.  The  importance  and  value  of  these  we  are  apt  to  overlook.  Con- 
stitutionally active,  we  are  all  prone  to  honour  the  more  stirring  graces  rather  than 
the  gentler  ones.  By  far  the  larger  proportion  are  passive  virtues.  What  are 
these  f  Patience,  submission,  acquiescence.  To  take  away  wilfulness,  wayward- 
ness, self-determination,  and  suchlike  natural  excrescences,  and  thus  secore  the 
opposite  growth,  He  prunes  even  the  fruitful  branch.  4.  Another  fmit  of  affliction 
Ib  increasing  fellowship  with  Christ.    There  are  communications  for  which  affliction 


614  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  «t. 

is  indispensable,  and  which  the  Saviour  reserves  for  this  seascn.  To  see  the  stars 
we  require  darkness.  Certain  flowers  open  only  at  night.  Ihe  sweetest  song  is 
heard  in  the  dusk.  The  most  beautiful  effect  of  colour  requires  a  camera  obscura, 
a  darkened  chamber.  It  is  even  thus  with  affliction.  Would  Abraham  have  heard 
the  angel  had  it  not  been  for  the  outstretched  knife  ?  And  it  is  worth  while  to  be 
afiUcted  to  have  such  fruit  as  this.  Is  it  necessary  to  pass  through  spiritual  dark- 
ness and  desertion  in  order  to  know  the  unchanging  love  of  Christ.  S.  Another 
result  of  sanctified  affliction  is  increased  desire  for  heaven.  Such  are  some  of  the 
fruits  of  sanctified  affliction.  Sotm,  not  all.  Each  affliction  comes  with  its  special 
message,  as  well  as  its  general  one.  "  Every  branch  "  has  its  own  particular 
deformities,  and  these  the  pruning-knife  filrst  cuts.  It  may  be,  too,  that  affliction 
sometimes  comes  specially  with  reference  to  others — is  rather  relative  than  personal. 
Trial  may  be  vicarious.  The  child  suffers  for  the  parent,  the  sister  for  the  brother, 
the  minister  for  the  people.  Learn,  then,  to  estimate  affliction  aright.  Seek 
earnestly  to  get  the  benefit  of  affliction.  Look  through  affliction  to  that  whidi  is 
beyond.    (J.  Viney.) 

Ver.  3.  Now  are  ye  clean  through  the  Word  which  I  have  spoken  nnto  yon. — 

Further  cleansing  necessary  : — Now  are  ye  clean  through  the  Word,  and  yet  needing 
to  be  cleansed.  We  have  a  hint  here  of  the  mystery  of  that  double  relation  in 
which  every  beUeving  man  stands  to  God,  of  that  double  relation  which  is  more 
fully  and  dogmatically  stated  in  some  of  the  Epistles  ;  but  which  is  yet  distinctly 
anticipated  here  and  at  chap.  z.  10.  The  faithful  in  Christ  Jesus  are  "  clean," 
being  by  faith  justified  from  all  things,  and  having  thus  a  standing  ground  before 
God;  which  yet  is  in  some  sort  an  ideal  one— their  actual  state,  although  ever 
approximating  to  this,  yet  still  failing  to  correspond  to  it — they  therefore  needing 
by  the  same  faith  to  appropriate  ever  more  and  more  of  that  sanctifying  grace, 
those  purifying  influences,  which  continually  stream  forth  from  Him  on  all  them 
that  are  His ;  and  by  aid  of  which  He  is  bringing  them  to  be  all  that,  which  for 
His  sake  His  Father  has  been  already  willing  to  regard  them,  however  the  absolute 
identity  of  what  tbey  are  and  what  they  are  counted  to  be,  is  reserved  for  another 
state  of  existence.  (Archbishop  Trench.)  The  Christianas  present  condition  as 
compared  with  the  past : — At  Munich  the  custom  is  said  to  prevail  that  every  child 
found  begging  in  the  streets  is  arrested,  and  carried  to  a  charitable  establishment. 
The  moment  he  enters,  and  before  he  is  cleaned,  and  gets  the  new  clothes  intended 
for  him,  his  portrait  is  painted  in  his  ragged  dress,  and  precisely  as  he  was  found 
begging.  When  his  education  is  finished,  this  portrait  is  given  him,  and  he  pro- 
mises by  an  oath  to  keep  it  all  his  hfe,  that  he  may  be  reminded  of  the  abject  con- 
dition from  which  be  has  been  rescued,  and  of  the  gratitude  he  owes  the  establish- 
ment which  raised  him  from  misery,  and  taught  him  how  to  avoid  it  for  the  future. 
Let  the  Christian  often  compare  thus  his  former  condition,  as  a  sinner  unsaved, 
with  his  state  as  a  renewed  believer,  that  his  love  and  gratitude  may  be  excited,  and 
his  affections  drawn  to  Him  who  has  wrought  the  change. 

Ver.  4.  Abide  In  Me,  and  I  In  you. — Abiding  in  Christ : — I.  To  whom  the  com- 
HAMD  IS  orvEN.  To  those  who  are  already  in  Him.  1.  We  are  at  first  in  nature, 
possessed  merely  of  the  powers  of  nature,  as  understanding,  will,  affections ;  but 
we  must  be  in  grace,  which  raises  us  above  nature,  purifies  all  our  faculties,  and 
directs  them  to  a  proper  end.  2.  We  are  naturally  in  the  flesh  influenced  and 
governed  by  the  body,  its  appetites,  and  senses  (Gen.  vi.  5 ;  John  iii.  5,  6).  We 
must  be  in  the  Spirit  under  the  influence  and  government  of  His  motions  and 
graces.  3.  We  are  naturally  in  Belial  (Eph.  ii.  2 ;  1  John  v.  18) ;  inspired, 
deceived,  deluded,  corrupted  by  him  ;  but  we  must  be  in  Christ.  4.  How  ?  (1)  By 
the  knowledge  of  Him  (Phil.  iii.  8) ;  (2)  by  faith  in  Him ;  (3)  love  to  Him ;  (4|  an 
interest  in  Him  (Phil.  iii.  9).  II.  What  this  command  implies.  1.  It  implies  that  we 
are  to  retain  this  knowledge,  faith,  love,  interest,  union  with  Christ;  which  may  be 
lost  (Col.  i.  23;  John  xv.  9,  10  ;  Eom.  xi.  22;  Heb.  x.  38).  Now,  we  retain  these 
— (1)  When  we  abide  in  Him  in  our  thoughts ;  not  only  thinking  highly  of  Him, 
but  having  our  thoughts  stayed  upon  Him.  (2)  When  our  desires,  our  designs, 
our  will,  both  in  its  choice  and  resolution,  and  our  affections,  are  set  upon  these 
things.  (3)  When  we  dwell  upon  them  in  our  conversation,  find  manifest  that  we 
love  Him,  and  cleave  to  Him  in  our  behaviour.  2.  To  illustrate  this  :  we  must 
abide  in  Christ,  as  a  branch  in  a  tree,  which  is  supported  by  it,  adheres  to  it,  grows 
in  it,  and  becomes  verdant  and  fruitful  by  the  virtue  derived  from  it ;  as  a  hand  in 


«HAF.  !▼.]  ST.  JOHN.  61S 

a  body,  from  which  it  receives  its  warmth,  life,  activity,  and  asefulness ;  as  a  man- 
slayer  in  the  city  of  refuge,  for  he  would  be  safe  only  while  abiding  in  the  conse- 
crated city  ;  so  we  are  in  danger  of  being  overtaken  by  the  curse  and  wrath  of  God, 
nnless  we  have  fled  to  Christ  and  continue  in  Him  ;  as  a  besieged  citizen  in  a  garrison, 
for  we  are  surrounded  and  attacked  by  various  enemies  ;  as  passengers  in  a  ship, 
for  we  are  on  the  sea  of  this  world,  tossed  with  the  winds  and  waves,  proceeding  on 
our  voyage  for  the  port  of  eternal  bliss,  and  our  safety  depends  on  being  in  the  ship. 
m.  The  peomise  made  to  those  that  keep  it  ;  and  the  advantages  kesultino 
THEBEFBOM.  1.  Christ  wiU  abide  in  us — (1)  By  His  word,  teaching,  instructing, 
directing,  strengthening,  supporting,  encouraging,  comforting  us  (Bom.  xv.  4).  (2) 
By  His  Spirit,  in  His  witness  as  a  Spirit  of  adoption,  and  in  His  fruits,  which  are 
"  love,  joy,  peace,"  &c.  (Eom.  viii  15 ;  Gal.  v.  22,  23).  (3)  By  the  efficacy  of  His 
body  and  blood  (John  vi.  56,  57).  (4)  By  His  indwelling  presence,  as  our  "  wisdom, 
righteousness,  sanctification,  and  redemqtion"  (1  Cor.  i.  30).  (5)  By  permitting  ua 
to  have  foUowship  with  Him  (Rev.  iii.  20).  2.  Hence  we  shall  have  pardon, 
acceptance,  adoption,  safety,  access.  All  our  prayers  shall  be  heard  (ver.  7  ;  Mark 
xi.  24).  We  shall  abound  in  the  fruits  of  righteousness  (ver.  5,  6 ;  2  Cor.  ix.  8). 
IV.  How  WB  MAT  BE  enabled  TO  KEEP  THE  COMMAND.  1.  By  abiding  in  a  belief  of 
His  word,  and  holding  fast  all  the  doctrines,  precepts,  promises,  and  threatenings 
of  the  Scripture.  By  continuing  to  attend  the  ordinances,  public,  domestic,  social, 
and  private.  2.  By  guarding  against  hypocrisy,  formality,  and  lukewarmness,  in 
the  use  of  all  ordinances,  and  maintaining  sincerity,  spirituality,  and  fervour 
therein.  3.  By  conscientiously  keeping  His  commandments,  carefully  shunning 
sins  of  commission  and  omission,  and  whatever  is  calculated  to  grieve  His  Spirit. 
4.  By  guarding  against  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief  (Heb.  iii.  12),  and  *•  holding  fast 
our  confidence. "  By  guarding  against  the  love  of  this  present  world.  (J.  Benson.) 
Christ  the  True  Vine  ; — "  I  am  the  True  Vine."  I.  Christ  sets  forth  the  genuineness 
of  His  union  with  His  disciples.  II.  In  the  eeality  and  completeness  of  His  life- 
giving  power  Christ  infinitely  excels  all  His  forerunners  and  types.  HI.  This  relation- 
ship is  much  NEAEEE  than  that  of  the  shepherd  with  the  sheep.  IV.  This  union  is 
COMPBEHENsrvE,  embracing  many  besides  those  who  are  usually  recognized  as  believers. 
'  Every  branch  in  Me  that  beareth  not  fruit."  V.  Our  union  with  Christ  should  be 
CONSTANT.  Twelve  times  in  this  allegory  the  word  "  abide  "  is  used.  They  were  in 
danger  of  unfaithfulness  and  apostasy.  Christ  sought  to  fortify  them.  He  assured 
them  that  He  would  keep  them  if  they  would  trust  Him.  VI.  This  communion  is 
one  of  LOVE  (vers.  9-16).  "  As  the  Father  hath  loved  Me,  even  so  have  I  loved  you." 
*•  Abide  in  My  love. "  The  believer  lives  in  the  love  of  Christ.  Christ  loves  all  men ; 
but  He  m&nifests  His  love  in  a  peculiar  manner  to  those  whose  hearts  are  given 
to  Him.  If  we  love  God,  we  will  delight  in  His  character,  we  wiU  be  drawn  by  those 
Divine  attributes  which  Jesus  reveals.  Love  of  a  holy  Being  implies  hatred  of 
sin.  The  Spirit  convicts  the  loving  heart  of  sin.  Is  my  fruit  recognized  as 
Divine  fruit,  such  fruit  as  Christ  bore  ?  1.  One  of  the  fruits  of  union  with  Christ 
according  to  this  lesson  is  patience  under  discipline  (vers.  1-3).  "  My  Father  is  the 
Husbandman."  "He  purgeth  it,"  &c.  "Ye  are  clean  through  the  Word,''  &c. 
The  lot  of  Jesus  was  one  of  severe  trial."  He  was  made  "  perfect  through  suffering." 
Those  who  become  Christ-like  must  expect  Christ-like  trials.  The  believer  can 
maintain  his  union  with  Christ  only  by  uncompromising  opposition  to  every  form 
of  evU.  2.  Another  result  of  this  union  is  the  spirit  of  dependence  on  Christ  (vers. 
4,  5).  "  Apart  from  Me  ye  can  do  nothing."  This  sense  of  dependence  on  Christ, 
instead  of  paralyzing  human  energy,  becomes  the  source  of  its  power.  It  enables 
t!he  soul  to  look  up  and  confidently  exclaim  with  the  apostle,  "  I  can  do  all  things 
in  Him  that  strengtheneth  Me."  3.  This  suggest  another  fruit  of  union  with  Christ, 
namely,  life  (vers.  6-8).  "  If  a  man  abide  not  in  Me,  he  is  cast  forth  as  a  branch, 
and  is  withered."  ■  Christ  came  that  we  might  have  life.  All  the  vital  juices  of  the 
branch  and  its  power  to  bear  fruit  come  from  the  vine.  So,  for  every  good  desire 
we  ever  formed,  or  good  word  we  ever  spoke,  or  good  deed  we  ever  did,  evidencing 
£.  renewed  life  in  us,  we  are  indebted  to  Christ.  He  "  is  our  life."  (G.  H.  Cheney.) 
Abiding  in  Christ:—"  Believe  on  Christ"  is  the  gospel  to  the  world.  "  Abide  in 
Christ  "  is  the  gospel  to  the  Church.  We  cannot  ihiiik  too  much  of  Christ  for  us, 
but  we  may  think  far  too  Uttle  of  Christ  in  us ;  yet  for  perfect  salvation  we  need 
both.  Notice  that  this  is — I.  A  call  to  conscious  vital  union  with  oub  Loed. 
This  implies — 1.  A  realization  that  of  ourselves  we  can  do  nothing,  that  we  arp 
mere  dead  branches  apart  from  Him  !  We  live  too  much  as  though  we  were  trees, 
as  though  by  oar  own  power  we  were  to  do  G^d'e  will,  and  we  have  striven,  and 


616  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ch*p.  xt. 

then  groaned  over  the  inevitable  failure.  Now,  says  Christ,  be  satisfied  to  be  » 
branch.  2.'  An  assurance  that  the  fulness  of  Christ  is  ours.  That  is  involved  in 
the  figure,  and  ia  stated  in  the  chapter.  He  goes  on  to  say  (as  its  consequence) 
that  what  He  has,  they  share.  They  are  to  share — (1)  His  joy — "that  My  joy 
might  abide  in  you  " ;  (2)  His  love — "  that  ye  love  one  another  as  I  have  loved 
you  "  ;  (3)  His  knowledge — "  all  things  that  I  have  heard  of  My  Father  I  have  made 
known  unto  you  " ;  (4)  His  rights — "  that  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  of  the  Father  in 
My  name,  He  may  give  it  you";  (5)  His  persecutions — "if  they  have  persecuted 
Me,  they  wiU  also  persecute  you"  ;  (6)  His  work — "  the  Spirit  shall  bear  witness  of 
Me,  and  ye  also  shall  bear  witness  " ;  (7)  His  glory — "  the  glory  which  Thou  gaveat 
Me,  I  have  given  them."  3.  A  surrender  of  ourselves  to  Christ  for  His  purposes. 
For  the  branch  exists  for  the  tree.  II.  The  figure  op  the  vine  suggests  how  this 
CAiiii  MAT  BE  FULFILLED.  The  words  show  that  the  responsibility  is  with  us.  Christ 
can  only  bless  according  to  our  willingness  ;  and  willingness  is  proved  by  readiness 
to  seek  the  blessing.  "  Abide  in  Me,  and  I  in  you  "  is  a  command ;  it  is  ours,  there- 
fore, to  fulfil  it.  And  we  ask  How  ?  Eemember  there  are  degrees  in  this  union ; 
some  are  more  closely  joined  to  Christ  than  others,  and  receive  more  of  His  life ; 
and  this  is  due  to  their  growth  into  Him,  they  have  struck  the  fibres  of  their 
spiritual  being  deeper  and  yet  deeper  into  His  being,  and  thus  are  close  knit  to 
Him.  1.  We  need  the  cords  of  meditation  and  prayer  to  bind  us  to  Him  more 
firmly.  The  formal  prayer,  the  ill-studied  Bible,  the  almost  deserted  closet,  are  the 
destruction  of  the  hopes  held  out  in  the  text.  The  weather  soon  loosens  the  old 
cords,  and  through  perpetual  communion  they  must  be  perpetually  renewed.  2, 
We  need  the  putting  away  of  whatever  would  come  between  Christ  and  us.  Sin 
hinders  Christ  giving,  for  He  will  not  give  to  sin.  Sin  weakens  our  desire  and 
faith,  that  is,  our  power  of  receiving.  So  everything  in  any  degree  contrary  to 
Christ  must  be  put  away.  3.  Wo  need  the  ceaseless  drawing  by  faith  on  His  ful- 
ness. HI,  Feom  this  would  come  that  spiritual  fruit-beaeino  which  is  God's 
WILL.  There  would  be — 1.  The  natural  growth  of  personal  holiness.  It  is  a 
common  thought  that  before  Christ  can  enter  into  us  we  must  put  out  evil.  That 
is  not  the  order.  Let  Christ  in  and  He  will  put  out  the  evil,  as  light  puts  out  dark- 
ness. 2.  A  heart  at  rest.  The  poverty  of  our  resources  is  our  perpetual  fear ; 
loneliness  and  care  are  with  some  a  perpetual  grief.  But  would  not  that  be  altered 
if  we  consciously  abode  in  Christ  ?  3.  Christ's  power  working  through  us.  Think 
of  being  the  channel  for  the  will  of  Jesus.  {C.  New.)  Mutual  abiding  : — I.  Thb 
duty  enjoined.  1.  Abide  in  Me.  It  has  been  justly  said,  that  the  command  is  not 
abide  with  Me — near  Me — or  under  Me;  but,  in  Me.  The  fruit-bearing  branch 
is  not  only  in  the  same  place  with  the  vine — near  it,  under  its  shadow — it  is  in  it, 
and  it  abides  in  it.  The  ideas  suggested  are,  residence  and  continuance.  It  is  as  if 
he  had  said,  "  Think  as  I  think ;  feel  as  I  feel ;  will  as  I  will ;  choose  as  I  choose  U 
and  let  My  views  of  all  objects  and  all  events  be  yours,  because  they  are  Mine ;  let 
My  feelings,  My  volitions,  My  choices,  all  be  yours,  and  let  them  be  yours  because 
they  are  Mine.  Prosecute  My  ends — use  My  means — rely  on  Me,  entirely  on  Me. 
Let  My  wisdom  be  your  wisdom — My  righteousness  your  righteousness — My  strength 
your  strength.  Come  out  of  yourselves.  Come  out  of  the  creature.  Come  into 
Me."  It  is  faith  that  thus  unites  us  to  the  Saviour,  and  it  is  continued  faith  which 
keeps  us  thus  united  to  the  Saviour.  2.  Let  Me  abide  in  you.  What  is  meant  by 
Christ's  abiding  in  His  people?  The  best  answer  is  at  the  seventh  verse,  and 
1  John  iii.  24.  Christ  abides  in  His  people,  by  continuously  making  them,  through 
the  agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  the  instrumentality  of  His  word,  understood 
and  believed  under  His  influence,  think  along  with  Him — feel,  choose,  enjoy  along 
with  Him.  Christ  is  so  "  formed  in  them  "  that  it  is  not  so  much  they  who  live, 
as  Christ  who  lives  in  them.  2.  What  is  the  import  of  the  injunction,  "  Let  Me 
dwell  in  you  "  ?  Christ  never  does  come  into  any  man,  so  as  to  dwell  in  him, 
against  the  man's  wilL  Were  the  thing  possible,  it  would  be  to  degrade  man  into 
ft  mere  machine,  and  involve  the  incongruity,  than  which  none  can  be  greater,  that 
He  who  of  old  inhabited  His  own  eternity,  and  has  heaven  for  His  throne  and  earth 
for  His  footstool,  should,  as  if  in  want  of  a  house,  force  an  entrance  where  He  wan 
not  desired.  But  His  language  is,  "Behold,  I  stand  at  the  door,"  &o.  3.  The 
two  parts  of  the  injunction  are  closely  connected.  Christians  will  abide  in  Christ 
just  in  the  degree  in  which  they  let  Christ  abide  in  them.  II.  The  motives  Bt 
WHICH  THE  injunction  IS  ENFORCED.  1.  CompUauce  with  the  injunction  is  neces- 
sary to  prevent  unfruitfulness  and  its  fearful  consequences.  A  vine  branch  by  it' 
■el/  can  bring  forth  nothing,  not  even  blossoms  or  leaves.     All  men  are  naturally 


«HAP.  XT.]  BT.  JOHN.  617 

unholy  and  unprofitable.  There  is  no  way  in  vhich  they  can  be  made  fruitful, 
except  by  being  cut  off  from  their  original  stock,  the  first  Adam,  and  being  grafted 
into  Him  who  is  the  True  Vine.  When  men  are  awakened  to  a  sense  of  the  dangers 
of  a  state  of  spiritual  barrenness,  they  often  endeavour  to  become  "  fruitful  of  them- 
Belves."  They  go  about  to  make  themselves  holy  by  the  works  of  the  law :  but  the 
thing  is  impossible.  There  is  no  good  fruit  but  what  is  the  product  of  Divine 
influence  ;  and  no  channel  for  Divine  influence  to  flow  into  the  human  heart,  but 
the  mediation  of  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  not,  "  Without  Me  ye  can  do  little  " ;  it  is, 
"Without  Me  ye  can  do  nothing."  It  is  not,  "  Without  Me  ye  will  do  nothing  " — 
that  is  true  too — but  it  is,  '*  Without  Me  ye  can  do  nothing."  It  is  not,  "  Without 
Me  you  can  accomplish — finish — nothing  "  ;  it  is,  "  Without  Me  ye  can  do  nothing." 
2.  Compliance  with  this  injunction  alone  can,  and  certainly  will,  secure  fruitful. 
ness,  with  all  its  blessed  results.  No  stream  without  a  fountain ;  no  fountain, 
unless  obstructed,  without  a  stream.  Three  effects  are  mentioned  by  our  Lord — 
(1)  The  answer  of  whatever  prayers  we  present  to  God ;  (2)  The  glorification  of 
God  ;  (3)  The  clearly  proving  to  ourselves  and  others  that  we  are  really  the 
disciples  of  Christ.  (J.  Brown,  D.D.)  Branches  not  mechanically  in  the  vine  : — 
It  is,  of  course,  possible  to  attach  a  bough  or  branch  either  to  the  stem  of  a  vine  or 
the  trunk  of  any  other  tree  by  artificial  means,  and  so  to  secure  a  kind  of  external 
union  therewith.  A  length  of  cord  or  iron  wire  may  accomplish  a  poor  and  pitiful 
result  like  that ;  but  the  stem  knows  it  not  and  the  branch  is  withered,  however 
painfully  and  skilfully  art  may  struggle  to  endorse  the  lie.  In  the  same  way  we 
may  be  mechanically  and  externally  united  to  the  visible  Church  of  Christ.  That 
is  entirely  an  affair  of  contrivance,  a  mere  matter  of  ligature  or  glue.  It  is  alto, 
gether  and  at  most  a  concern  of  nomination,  register  or  ceremonial.  But  let  it  be 
remembered  that  this  is  in  itself  stark  naught.  Never  a  rotten  branch  on  the  floor 
of  a  forest,  a  branch  that  breaks  and  crackles  beneath  the  foot  of  a  passer-by,  ia 
more  dead  than  we  are,  if  the  hasp  and  staple  of  Church  membership,  if  the  hook 
and  eye  of  registration,  if  the  glue  of  mere  sectarian  adhesion,  if  the  paint  of  mere 
external  profession  are  all  that  holds  us  on  to  the  Christ  of  God.  (J.  J.  Wray. ) 
Union  with  Christ  the  means  of  salvation : — Of  the  precise  origin  of  the  late  civil  war 
in  Anaerica  I  am  not  quite  sure  ;  but  I  am  told  it  was  a  perverse  misunderstanding 
on  the  subject  of  slavery.  The  North  was  against  the  slave-trade,  the  South  for 
it ;  and  so  both  parties  appealed  to  arms.  But  be  that  as  it  may,  one  thing  is 
clear  :  not  many  months  passed  before  the  question  of  slavery  was  swallowed  up  in 
the  most  important  question  of  the  Union — the  Union  of  the  States.  Who  is  for  or 
against  the  slave  ?  There  the  conflict  began.  Who  is  for  or  against  the  Union  ? 
There  it  fiuished.  Neither  am  I  quite  certain  of  the  first  cause  of  the  prolonged 
controversy  between  earth  and  heaven,  man  and  God.  A  rumour  was  afloat  in  my 
native  neighbourhood  that  it  all  began  in  a  slight  misunderstanding  touching  a 
certain  apple-tree  in  the  garden  of  Eden.  But  be  that  as  it  may,  the  question  of 
the  apple-tree  has  been  long  ago  swallowed  up  in  the  more  important  question  of 
the  union — the  union  with  the  Son.  Salvation  hinges  not  on  such  questions  as 
what  was  the  first  sin,  or  who  is  the  greatest  sinner?  but  upon  the  simple  straight- 
forward question — Who  is  for  or  against  the  union  with  Jesus  Christ?  Do  you 
believe  in  the  only-begotten  Son?  (J.  C.  Jones,  D.D.)  Union  with  Christ  and 
fruitfulness : — The  villages  in  Persia  may  be  devided  into  two  classes :  those  of  the 
plains,  treeless,  sterile  and  poor;  and  those  of  the  mountains,  where  the  springs 
and  torrents  encoura  ge  the  growth  of  plane,  mulberry,  poplar  trees,  and  orchards,  and 
allow  channels  for  the  nourishment  of  plantations.  Elevation  means  fertility  here. 
{H.  0.  Mackey.)  The  reciprocities  of  personal  salvation: — I.  Christ  m  the 
BELIEVER.  1.  How.  2.  When.  3.  Why.  II.  The  believeb  in  Christ.  1. 
How.  2.  When.  3.  Why.  (S.  S.  Times.)  Union  with  Christ : — 1.  A  spiritual 
anion  (1  Cor.  vi.  17  ;  xii.  13  ;  1  John  iii.  24;  iv.  13).  2.  A  vital  union  (John  xiv. 
19  ;  Gal.  ii.  20).  3.  It  embraces  our  entire  persons,  our  bodies  through  our  spirits 
(1  Cor.  vi.  15,  19).  4.  It  is  a  lagal  or  federal  union,  so  that  all  of  our  legal  or 
covenant  responsibilities  rest  upon  Christ,  and  all  of  His  legal  or  covenant  merits 
accrue  to  us.  .  .  .  5.  This  union  is  between  the  believer  and  the  person  of  the 
God-man  in  His  office  as  mediator  (John  xiv.  23;  xvii.  21,  23).  (A.A.Hodge.) 
Abide  in  Christ : — Be  like  Milton's  angel,  who  lived  in  the  sun.  Abide  in  Christ 
and  let  His  words  abide  in  you.  Closer,  closer,  closer,  this  ii  the  way  to  spiritual 
wealth.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  entire  dependence  of  sanctity  on  Christ: — 1. 
*'  Without  Me,"  in  ver.  5.,  should  rather  be  rendered,  "Apart  from  Me,"  "  separate 
from  Me,"  "  in  state  of  independence  on  Me."    "  Without "  the  asslatanoe  of  m 


618  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  IT. 

strong  person,  a  weak  one  cannot  lift  a  heavy  weight ;  but  the  dependence  of  the 
weak  on  the  strong  in  order  to  lift  the  weight,  is  not  the  dependence  which  the 
word  here  employed  indicates.  '•  Apart  from  "  the  soul  the  body  is  motionless,  and 
cannot  stir  a  finger.  This  is  the  sort  of  dependence  indicated  here.  2.  The  subject 
brought  before  us  is,  that  the  sanctification  of  the  Christian,  like  his  justification, 
is  entirely  dependent  upon  our  Lord.  As  regards  our  justification,  this  is  clearly 
seen  (at  least  in  the  Eeformed  Churches)  and  generally  admitted.  But  it  ia 
thought  that,  unlike  justification  (which  is  something  that  passes  on  the  sinner 
externally  to  him,  a  sentence  of  acquittal  in  consideration  of  Our  Lord's  merits), 
sanctification  is  an  achievement  mastered — much  as  a  lesson  is  mastered — by  a 
variety  of  exercises,  prayers,  almsdeeds,  sacraments,  Ac,  and  when  mastered,  a 
sort  of  permanent  acquisition,  which  goes  on  increasing  as  the  stock  of  these 
spiritual  exercises  accumulates.  It  is  not  regarded  in  its  true  light  as  a  momentary 
receiving  out  of  Christ's  fulness  grace  for  grace,  as  the  result  of  His  inworking  in  a 
heart,  which  finds  the  task  of  self-renewal  hopeless,  and  makes  itself  over  to  Him, 
to  be  moulded  by  Him.  3.  Let  us  take  two  illustrations — (1)  His  own.  "  As  the 
branch",  &c.  The  circulating  sap,  which  is  the  life  of  the  tree,  is  indeed  in  the 
vine-branch,  so  long  as  it  holds  of  the  stem ;  but  in  no  sense  whatever  is  it  from 
the  vine-branch.  Cut  off  the  branch  from  the  stem,  and  it  ceases  instantaneously 
to  live,  for  it  has  no  independent  life.  Even  so  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  while  of 
course  our  hearts  are  the  sphere  of  their  manifestation,  are  in  no  sense  from  our 
hearts;  but  a  righteousness  outflowing  continually  from  the  fulness  of  grace  which 
is  in  Christ.  (2)  When  we  walk  abroad  on  a  beautiful  day,  our  eye  catches  a 
variety  of  colours  lying  on  the  sm-face  of  the  landscape, — there  is  the  yellow  of  the 
golden  grain,  the  green  of  the  pasture-land,  the  dark  brown  of  those  thic-k-planted 
copses,  the  silver  gleam  of  the  stream  which  winds  through  them,  the  faint  blue  of 
distant  hills  seen  in  perspective,  the  more  intense  blue  of  the  sky,  the  purple  tinge 
of  yonder  sheet  of  water — but  none  of  these  colours  reside  in  the  landscape.  Now, 
apart  from  the  sunlight  no  object  has  any  colour  ;  as  is  shown  by  the  fact  that,  aa 
soon  as  liglit  is  withdrawn  from  the  landscape,  the  colours  fa'^e  from  the  robe  of 
nature.  The  difference  of  colour  is  produced  by  some  subtle  difference  of  texture 
or  superficies,  which  makes  each  object  absorb  certain  rays,  and  reflect  certain 
others  in  different  proportions.  Now  Christ  is  the  Sun  of  righteousness,  in  whom 
dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily,  the  fair  colour  of  every  grace  and 
Christian  virtue.  When  Christ  is  shining  upon  the  heart,  then  these  virtues  are 
manifested  there,  by  our  Christian  graces  of  one  description,  by  another  of  another, 
according  to  their  different  receptivity  and  natural  temperament.  The  great  secret, 
then,  of  bringing  forth  much  fruit,  or  of  all  advance  in  holiness,  is  a  constant 
keeping  open  the  avenues  of  the  soul  towards  Him.  If  a  vine-branch  is  to  sprout, 
the  tube  by  which  it  conmiunicatea  with  the  stock  of  the  tree  must  adhere  tightly  to 
the  stem,  and  be  well  open  for  the  passage  of  the  sap.  If  you  desire  to  see  the 
colours  of  furniture  in  this  room,  whose  shutters  are  closed,  throw  open  the  shut- 
ters, and  admit  the  full  flood  of  sunUght.  And  if  you  desire  to  see  the  dead  heart, 
put  forth  the  energies  of  spiritual  life,  and  the  dark  heart  illumined  by  the  fair 
colours  of  spiritual  grace,  throw  wide  open  the  passage  of  communication  between 
Christ  and  it,  and  allow  the  Life  which  is  in  Him,  and  the  Light  which  is  in  Him, 
to  circulate  freely  through  it.  I.  Take  heed,  first,  that  tb  abide  in  Me.  This  is 
done  by  fadth.  As  we  first  consciously  entered  into  fellowship  with  Christ  by  faith, 
80  there  is  no  other  way  to  abide  in  Him,  than  by  repeated  exercises  of  the  same 
faith.  The  faith  which  enables  the  soul  to  abide  in  Christ  is  nothing  else  than  an 
assured  trust  and  confidence  that,  as  He  has  already  wrought  out  for  us  our  accept- 
ance with  God,  so  He  will  work  in  us  every  gracious  disposition  which  is  necessary 
to  qualify  us  for  glory.  It  is  not  enough  to  supphcate  these  graces  ;  we  must  lean 
upon  Him  for  them,  and  fix  the  eye  of  expectation  upon  the  promise  of  His  new 
covenant :  "  I  will  put  My  laws  into  their  mind,"  &c.  And  as  without  holiness  no 
man  shall  (or  can)  see  the  Lord,  must  not  Christ  be  much  more  earnestly  anxious 
to  make  as  holy,  than  we  can  be  to  be  made  so  ?  If  we  do  not  believe  in  this 
earnest  anxiety  of  His,  do  we  believe  in  His  love  at  all  ?  Ah  1  what  if  these 
struggles  to  be  holy  should  themselves  be  in  a  certain  sense  a  token  of  unbelief  ? 
What  if  the  poor  bird  imprisoned  in  the  cage  should  be  thinking  that,  if  it  is  ever 
to  gain  its  liberty,  it  must  be  by  its  own  exertions,  and  by  vigorous  and  frequent 
strokes  of  its  wings  against  the  bars  f  If  it  did  so,  it  would  ere  long  fall  back 
breathless  and  exhausted,  faint  and  sore,  and  despairing.  And  the  soul  will  have 
a  ■imiln.r  experience,  which  thinks  that  Chrif  t  has  indeed  won  pardon  and  accept* 


CHAP.  XT.]  8T.  JOHN,  019 

ance  for  her,  bat  that  Banctification  Bhe  mast  win  for  herself,  and  ander  this 
delusion  beats  herself  sore  in  vain  efforts  to  correct  the  propensities  of  a  heart 
which  the  Word  of  God  pronounces  to  be  "  desperately  "  wicked.  That  heart, — 
you  can  make  nothing  of  it  yourself ; — leave  it  to  Christ,  in  quiet  dependence  upon 
His  grace.  Suffer  Him  to  open  the  prison-doors  for  you,  and  then  you  shall  fly  out 
and  hide  yourself  in  your  Lord's  bosom,  and  there  find  rest.  II.  Let  Mb  abidb 
XNf  TO0.  Christ  thus  teaches  us  that  ordinances,  as  well  as  faith,  form  part  of  His 
religion.  In  order  to  fruitfulness  the  sap  must  rise  from  the  vine-stock,  and  pass 
into  the  branch,  this  is  the  abiding  of  the  vine  in  the  brauch.  Similarly  Christ 
must  continually  send  up  into  our  heart  a  current  of  holy  inspirations,  new  loves, 
good  impulses,  devout  hopes — i.e.,  communicate  Himself  to  the  soul  by  the 
continual  influx  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  And  this  is  made  specially  in  the  Supper  of 
the  Lord.  Of  course  the  Divine  allegory  quite  precludes  the  supposition  that  with- 
out faith  in  the  recipient  the  Holy  Supper  will  avail  anything.  The  vine-stock 
may  push  upwards  its  sap  in  strong  current,  at  the  first  outburst  of  the  genial 
spring ;  but  what  will  that  avail  the  branch,  which  does  not  hold  closely  to  the 
tree,  which  is  half  broken  off  from  the  stem,  and  the  fracture  filled  up  with  dust,  oi 
corroded  by  insects  ?  Christ  may  offer  Himself  to  us  in  the  Lord's  Supper ;  but,  ii 
the  soul  cleaves  not  to  Him,  if  the  avenues  of  the  heart  are  not  open  towards  Him, 
how  can  He  enter  t    (Dean  Goulburn. ) 

Ver.  5.  I  am  the  Vine,  ye  are  the  branches. — The  true  branches  of  the  True 
Vine : — No  wise  teacher  is  ever  afraid  of  repeating  himself.  The  average  mind 
requires  the  reiteration  of  truth  before  it  can  make  that  truth  its  own.  One  coat  of 
paint  is  not  enough,  it  soon  rubs  off.  I.  The  fruitfulness  of  union.  1.  "  I  am 
the  Vine  "  was  a  general  truth,  with  no  clear  personal  application.  "  Te  are  the 
branches  "  brought  each  individual  listener  into  connection  with  it.  How  many 
people  there  are  that  hsten  in  a  fitful  sort  of  languid  way,  interestedly,  to  the  most 
glorious  and  solemn  truths  and  never  dream  that  they  have  any  bearing  upon 
themselves  1  The  one  thing  most  needed  is  that  truth  should  be  sharpened  to  a 
point  and  the  conviction  driven  into  you,  that  you  have  got  something  to  do  with 
this  great  message.  ••  Ye  are  the  branches  "  is  the  one  side  of  that  sharpening  and 
making  definite  of  the  truth  in  its  personal  application,  and  the  other  side  is 
"  Thou  art  the  man."  All  religious  teaching  is  toothless  generalities,  utterly  use- 
less, unless  we  can  force  it  through  the  wall  of  indifference  and  vague  assent.  2. 
Note  next  the  great  promise,  "  He  that  abideth  in  Me,  and  I  in  Him,"  &c.  Abiding 
in  Christ,  and  Christ's  abiding  in  us  means  a  temper  and  tone  of  mind  very  far 
remote  from  the  noisy,  busthng  distractions  too  common  in  our  piesent  Christianity . 
We  want  qniet,  patient,  waiting  within  the  veil.  The  best  way  to  secure  Christian 
conduct  is  to  cultivate  communion  with  Christ.  Get  more  of  the  sap  into  the 
branch,  and  there  will  be  more  fruit.  We  may  grow  graces  artificially  and  they 
will  be  of  httle  worth.  First  of  all  be,  and  th«n  do  ;  receive,  and  then  give  forth. 
That  is  the  Christian  way  of  mending  men,  not  tinkering  at  this,  that,  and  the 
other  individual  excellence,  but  grasping  the  secret  of  total  exeeUeuce  in  commu- 
nion with  Him.  Our  Lord  is  here  not  merely  laying  down  a  law,  but  giving  a 
promise,  and  putting  His  veracity  into  pawn  for  the  fulfilment  of  it.  3.  Notice 
that  little  word  which  now  appears  for  the  first  time :  "  much."  We  are  not  to  be 
content  with  a  poor  shrivelled  bunch  of  grapes  that  are  more  like  marbles  than 
grapes,  here  and  there,  upon  the  half -nourished  stem.  God  forbid  that  I  should 
say  that  there  is  no  possibiUty  of  union  with  Christ  and  a  little  fruit.  A  httle 
union  will  have  a  little  fruit ;  but  the  only  two  alternatives  here  are,  "no  fruit," 
and  "  much  fruit."  And  I  would  ask  why  it  is  that  the  average  Christian  man  ol 
this  generation  bears  onl}'  a  berry  or  two  here  and  there,  like  such  as  are  left  upon 
the  vines  after  the  vintage,  when  the  promise  is  that  if  he  will  abide  in  Christ,  he 
will  bear  mucli  I.uic.  4.  This  verse,  setting  forth  the  fruitfulness  of  union  with 
Jesus,  ends  with  the  brief  solemn  statement  of  the  converse — the  barrenness  of 
separation.  There  is  the  condemnation  of  all  the  busy  life  of  men  which  is  not 
lived  in  union  with  Jesus  Christ ;  it  is  a  long  row  of  figures  which,  like  some  other 
long  rows  of  figures  added  up,  amount  just  to  Zero.  "  Without  Me,  nothing."  II. 
The  withering  and  destruction  of  separation  from  Him  (ver.  6).  1.  Separation 
is  withering.  Did  you  ever  see  a  hawthorn  bough  that  children  bring  home  from 
the  woods,  and  stick  in  the  grate ;  how  in  a  day  or  two  the  fresh  green  leaves  all 
shrivel  up  and  the  white  blossoms  become  brown  and  smell  foul,  and  the  only  thing 
to  be  done  with  it  is  to  fiing  it  into  the  fire  and  get  rid  of  it  ?     Separate  from 


620  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHiP.  zr. 

Christ,  the  individaal  shrivels,  and  the  possibilities  of  fair  buds  wither  and  set  into 
no  fruit.  And  no  man  is  the  man  he  might  have  been  unless  he  holds  by  Jesua 
Christ  and  lets  His  life  come  into  Him.  And  as  for  individuals,  so  for  communities. 
The  Church  or  the  body  of  professing  Christians  that  is  separate  from  Jesus  Christ 
dies  to  all  noble  life,  to  all  high  activity,  to  all  Christlike  conduct,  and,  being  dead, 
rots.  2.  Withering  means  destruction.  Look  at  the  mysteriousness  of  the 
language.  "They  gather  them."  "They  cast  them  into  the  fire."  Who  have 
that  tragic  task  ?  The  solemn  fact  that  the  withering  of  manhood  by  separation 
from  Jesus  Christ  requires,  and  ends  in,  the  consuming  of  the  withered,  is  all  that 
we  have  here.  We  have  to  speak  of  it  pityingly,  with  reticence,  with  terror,  with 
tenderness,  with  awe  lest  it  be  our  fate.  Be  on  your  guard  against  that  tendency 
of  this  generation,  to  paste  a  bit  of  blank  paper  over  all  the  threatenings  of  the 
Bible.  One  of  two  things  must  befall  the  branch,  either  it  is  in  the  Vine  or  it  gets 
into  the  fire.  And  if  we  would  avoid  the  fire  let  us  see  to  it  that  we  are  in  the  Vine. 
m.  The  union  with  Ghbist  as  the  condition  of  satisfied  desires  (ver.  7). 
Our  Lord  instead  of  saying,  "  I  in  you,"  says  "  My  words  in  you."  He  is  speaking 
about  prayers,  consequently  the  variation  is  natural.  The  abiding  of  His  words  in 
us  is  largely  the  means  of  His  abiding  in  us.  1.  What  do  we  mean  by  this  ? 
Something  a  great  deal  more  than  the  mere  intellectual  acceptance.  Something 
very  different  from  reading  a  verse  ia  a  morning,  and  forgetting  all  about  it  aU  the 
day  long  ;  something  very  different  from  coming  in  contact  with  Christian  truth  on 
a  Sunday,  when  somebody  else  preaches  what  he  has  found  in  the  Bible .  to  us,  and 
we  take  in  a  little  of  it.  It  means  the  whole  of  the  conscious  nature  of  a  man. 
His  desires,  understanding,  affections,  wUI,  all  being  steeped  in  those  great  truths 
which  the  Master  spoke.  Put  a  little  bit  of  colouring  matter  into  the  fountain  at 
its  head  and  you  wUl  have  the  stream  dyed  dovm  its  course  for  ever  so  far.  See 
that  Christ's  words  be  lodged  in  your  inmost  selves,  and  all  the  life  will  be  glorified 
and  flash  into  richness  of  colouring  and  beauty  by  their  presence.  2.  The  main 
effect  of  such  abiding  of  the  Lord's  words  with  us  is,  that  in  such  a  ca»e,  my  desire 
will  be  granted.  If  Christ's  words  are  the  substratum  of  your  wishes,  then  your 
wishes  will  harmonize  with  His  will,  and  so  "  Ye  shall  ask  what  ye  will  and  it 
shall  be  done  unto  you."  IV.  This  union  and  fbtjitfdlness  lead  to  the  noblb 
ends  of  globifting  God  and  incbeasing  discipleship  (ver.  8).  1.  Christ's  life 
was  all  for  the  glorifying  of  God.  The  lives,  which  are  the  Ufe  of  Christ  in  us,  will 
have  the  same  end  and  the  same  issue.  We  come  there  to  a  very  sharp  test.  How 
many  of  us  are  there  on  whom  men,  looking,  think  more  loftily  of  God.  And  yet 
we  should  eJI  be  mirrors  of  the  Divine  radiance,  on  which  some  eyes,  that  are  too 
dim  and  sore  to  bear  the  light  as  it  streams  from  the  sun,  may  look,  and,  beholding 
the  refection,  may  learn  to  love.  2.  And  if  thus  we  abide  in  Him  and  bear  fruit 
we  shall  "  become  His  disciples."  The  end  of  our  disoipleship  is  never  reached  on 
earth ;  we  never  so  much  are,  as  we  are  in  the  process  of  becoming.  His  true 
followers  and  servants.  If  we  bear  fruit  because  we  are  knit  to  Him, 
the  fruit  itself  will  help  us  to  get  nearer  Him,  and  so  be  more  His 
disciples  and  more  fruitful.  Character  produces  conduct,  but  conduct  reacts  on 
character  and  strengthens  the  impulses  from  which  it  springs.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
Growth  from  within  ;— /This  growing  is  to  be  the  growth  of  a  branch :  not  by  accre- 
tion, by  adding  to  the  surface,  but  by  strength  and  development  from  within.  Too 
may  make  a  molehill  into  a  mountain  by  bringing  a  sufficiency  of  material  to  it,  to 
ewdl  the  rising  pile ;  but  trees  and  branches  expand  from  within :  their  growth  is 
the  putting  forth  of  a  vital  but  unseen  force.  '  The  life-power  in  the  stock,  being 
also  in  the  bough,  compels  an  outward  exhibition  of  results  in  progressive  keeping 
with  the  vigour  and  strength  of  the  supplies.  So  the  beUever  "  grows  up  "  into 
Christ  into  ever-increasing  holiness,  influence  and  grace  through  the  Divine  afflatus 
which  is  at  work  within  his  soul,  for  it  is  thus  that  "  God  worketh  in  you  "  more 
and  more  "  to  will  and  to  do  of  His  good  pleasure."  By  this  inner  power  the 
branches  of  a  tree  have  a  wonderful  power  of  assimilation.  They  take  hold  npon 
all  surrounding  forces  and  turn  them  to  advantage.  The  dew  that  falls,  the  gases 
of  the  atmosphere,  the  descending  rain,  the  chemistry  of  the  sunlight,  all  are 
drawn  into  it ;  all  are  made  a  part  of  itself,  are  made  to  serve  its  purpose  and  to 
nurse  its  healtli.  The  very  storms  that  blow,  the  alternations  of  weather  tliat  test 
and  try  it  and  ofttimes  seem  to  work  it  damage,  are  all  made  to  consolidate  its 
fibres,  to  quicken  the  action  of  its  sap,  and  send  new  energy  through  every  vein,  a 
stronger  life- thrill  into  every  leaf.  So  grows  the  righteous  soul  into  higher, 
stronger,  moxe  mature  religious  life.    "All  things  are  yours,"  says  the  apostle 


mn.  XT.]  8T.  JOHN.  621 

Paul.  That  is  to  say,  all  events,  all  experiences,  all  the  providences  of  God,  all  tha 
oircumstances  of  Hfe,  as  well  as  all  the  riches  of  promised  grace,  are  made  by  the 
goodness  and  wisdom  of  God  to  serve  the  Christian's  interests  and  help  his  soul  to 
grow.  The  dew  of  the  Spirit,  the  sunshine  of  God,  the  aids  of  the  sanctuary,  the 
flociety  of  the  good,  the  exercise  of  Christian  toil,  the  business  of  life,  the  storms 
and  tempests  of  sorrow  and  toil — all  things,  by  reason  of  the  subtle  power  of  the 
inner  life,  are  made  to  help  the  Christian,  to  deepen  his  piety,  to  strengthen  hia 
Bonl,  to  beautify  his  character,  to  mature  and  ripen  his  graces,  and  to  give  him  a 
stronger  grip  upon  his  God.  "  All  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love 
God."  Neither  is  there  any  hmit  to  the  attainments  possible  to  the  godly  soul. 
Under  the  influence  of  the  Divine  life  it  is  placed  amid  an  exhaustless  store  of 
nourishment,  it  is  grafted  into  the  Vine  whose  Boot  is  the  Godhead  and  whose 
resources  are  infinite  and  eternal.  (J.  J.  Wray.)  Religion  in  diverse  places  : — 
I  saw  a  vine  growing  on  the  fertile  plain  of  Damascus  with  "  boughs  hke  the  goodly 
cedars  "  (Psa.  Ixxx.  10).  One  "  bough  "  of  that  vine  had  appropriated  a  large 
forest  tree ;  it  had  climbed  the  giant  trunk,  it  had  wound  itself  round  the  great 
gnarled  arms,  it  had,  in  fact,  covered  every  branch  of  the  tree  with  garlands  of  its 
foliage,  and  bent  down  every  twig  with  the  weight  of  its  fruit.  And  I  saw  another 
branch  of  the  same  vine  spread  out  along  the  ground,  and  cover  bushes  and 
brambles  with  foliage  as  luxuriant  and  fruit  as  plentiful  as  those  on  the  lordly 
forest  tree.  So  is  it  in  the  Church.  Some  branches  of  that  heaven-planted  vine 
climb  to  the  very  pinnacles  of  human  society.  They  appropriate  and  sanctify  the 
sceptre  of  the  monarch,  the  dignity  of  the  peer,  the  power  of  the  statesman,  the 
i;enius  of  the  philosopher,  and  they  shed  a  lustre  upon  each  and  all  greater  and 
more  enduring  than  can  ever  be  conferred  by  gemmed  coronet  or  laurel  crown. 
While  other  branches  of  the  same  vine  find  a  congenial  sphere  in  humbler  walks, 
they  penetrate  city  lanes,  they  creep  up  wild  mountain  glens,  they  climb  the  gloomy 
stair  to  the  garret  where  the  daughter  of  toil  lies  on  her  death-bed,  and  they  diffuse 
wherever  they  go  a  peace  and  a  joy  and  a  halo  of  spiritual  glory,  such  as  rank  and 
riches  cannot  bestow,  and  such  too  as  poverty  aud  suffering  cannot  take  away. 
Peer  and  peasant,  philosopher  and  working  man,  king  and  beggar,  have  equal 
rights  and  rewards  in  the  Church.  They  are  united  to  the  same  Saviour  on  earth, 
and  they  shall  recline  on  the  same  bosom  in  heaven.  {J.  L.  Porter,  LL.D.) 
Variety  of  Christian  growth : — There  may  be  a  hundred  branches  in  a  vine  ;  their 
place  in  reference  to  each  other  may  be  far  apart ;  they  may  seem  to  have  but  a 
very  distant  connection  with  each  other ;  but  having  each  a  living  union  with  the 
central  stem,  they  are  all  members  of  the  same  Vine,  and  every  one  of  them  there- 
fore is  a  member  one  of  the  other.  Some  of  the  branches  are  barely  above  the 
ground  ;  some  peer  higher  than  all  the  rest ;  some  are  weighted  with  fruit,  much 
fruit  rich  and  fine ;  some  bear  but  little  fruit  and  that  only  small  and  inferior ; 
some  occupy  important  and  central  positions ;  some  are  seemingly  insignificant, 
and  look  as  though  they  might  readily  be  dispensed  with;  as  though,  indeed,  the 
tree  would  be  healthier  and  more  graceful  without  them ;  some  are  old  and  well 
grown,  thoroughly  strong  and  established ;  others  are  young,  delicate,  and  need 
development.  But  whatever  variety  there  may  be  among  the  branches  in  size, 
circumstance,  or  state,  they  all  form  a  part  of  one  complete,  harmouinus  and  like- 
natured  whole.  The  vine- stem  is  the  common  centre,  and  in  it  all  partake  of  a 
common  life.  {J.  J.  Wray.)  The  Christian  individuality  : — The  discoveries  of 
vegetable  physiology  have  shown  that  every  branch  is,  in  fact,  a  tree  perfectly 
distinct  and  complete  in  itself :  a  tree  which,  by  means  of  roots  struck  into  the 
parent  tree,  derives  its  life,  and  sends  out  its  leafage.  The  common  idea  is,  that 
every  tree  in  the  ground  has  in  itself  the  same  kind  of  individual  existence  that  a 
man  has,  and  that,  just  as  in  the  body  iimbs  and  various  organs  are  component 
piirts  of  a  man,  so  the  bole,  the  boughs,  and  the  leaves  are  component  parts  of  a 
tree.  But  the  common  idea  is  wrong ;  a  tree  is,  in  truth,  a  colony  of  trees,  one 
gi'owing  on  another — an  aggregate  of  individuals — a  body  corporate,  losing  nothing, 
however,  and  merging  nothing  of  its  own  individuality.  It  is  charming  to  study  a 
scientifically  written  biography  of  a  tree,  giving  an  account  of  its  cells  aud  pores 
and  hairs,  telling  the  tale  of  its  evolution  and  its  education ;  its  infinite  relations 
with  all  the  elements,  and  how  it  is  affected  by  the  chemistries  of  nature ;  tracing 
it  from  its  first  faint  filament  to  its  full  wealth  of  foliage  and  its  final  sweep  of 
extension ;  thereby  revealing  through  this  miracle  of  the  forest  the  glory  of  God 
But,  for  the  reasons  snpgested  by  some  of  the  thoughts  just  confessed,  interesting 
AS  is  the  story  of  a  tree,  a  Chiistian  will  find  the  life-story  of  a  mere  branch 


622  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cbu».  xn 

Boarcely  less  interesting,  for  it  teaches  him  how  to  connect  the  ideas  of  total' 
dependence  and  perfect  individuality.  I  am  a  branch,  yet  I  am  a  true  tree — a  tree 
growing  on  another  tree — even  on  the  Tree  of  Life.  I  see  it  all  now,  and  also  see 
the  harmony  between  this  particular  Scripture  and  other  Scriptures,  better  than 
formerly.  It  is  scientifically  true  that  I  am  a  branch  in  the  Vine,  yet  that  I  am  a 
tree,  answering  to  the  description,  "  Booted  and  built  up  in  Him,  and  established 
in  the  faith,  as  ye  have  been  taught,  abounding  therein  with  thanksgiving."  (G. 
Stanford,  D.D.)  The  buds : — A  Sunday-school  teacher  was  trying  to  make  his 
class  understand  this  lesson.  "  Jesus  is  the  Vine,"  said  he,  '•  we  are  the  branches ; 
we  get  all  our  life  and  happiness  from  Him."  "  Tes,"  said  a  little  fellow  in  the 
class,  •'  Jesus  is  the  Vine,  grown  up  people  are  the  branches,  and  we  young  ones 
are  the  buds."  In  the  natural  vine  the  buds  do  not  bear  any  fruit.  But  in  Jesus, 
the  Spiritual  Vine,  even  the  buds  can  be  fruitful ;  the  youngest  can  make  themselves 
useful.  {J.  L.  Nye.)  The  condition  of  fruitfulness : — I  saw  a  Uttle  twig  scarcely 
an  inch  long,  so  tender  an  infant  hand  could  break  it ;  rough  and  unseemly  without 
comeliness,  and  when  I  saw  it  there  was  no  beauty  that  I  should  desire  it.  It  said: 
"  If  I  were  comely  and  beautiful,  like  those  spring  flowers  I  see,  I  could  attract, 
and  please,  and  fulfil  a  mission."  It  said :  "  If  I  were  like  yonder  oak  or  cedar,  1 
could  afford  shelter  to  God's  weary  sheep  at  noonday,  and  the  fowls  of  heaven 
should  sing  among  my  branches."  It  said  :  "  If  I  were  even  strong,  I  might  bear 
some  burden,  or  serve  a  purpose  as  a  peg,  a  bolt,  or  a  pin,  in  God's  great  building 
that  is  going  up.  But  so  unsightly,  so  weak,  so  small ! "  A  voice  said  to  it : 
"  Abide  in  Me,  and  I  in  yon,  He  tibat  abideth  in  Me,  and  I  in  him,  the  same 
bringelh  forth  much  fruit."  And  so  it  rested.  It  was  not  long  until  a  glory 
of  leaves  crowned  it,  and  in  God's  time  I  saw  the  heavy  fruit  it  bore.  With- 
out Me  ye  can  do  nothing. — Without  Christ — nothing  : — No  saint,  prophet,  apostle 
would  ever  have  said  this  to  a  company  of  faithful  men.  Among  the  virtues 
of  a  perfect  man  we  must  certainly  reckon  modesty.  It  is  impossible  to  con- 
ceive that  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  had  he  not  been  more  than  man,  could  ever  have 
uttered  this  sentence.  We  have  here — I.  An  aspibation  of  hope.  From  such 
a  root  what  a  vintage  must  come  1  Being  branches  in  Him,  what  fruit  we  must 
produce!  That  word  "do"  has  music  in  it.  Jesus  went  about  doing  good, 
and,  being  in  Him,  we  shaU  do  good.  There  is  the  hope  of  doing  something 
in  the  way  of  glorifying  God  by  bringing  forth — 1.  The  fruits  of  holiness,  peace, 
and  love.  2.  Fruit  in  the  conversion  of  others.  8.  Fruit  of  further  blessing 
will  ripen  for  this  poor  world.  Men  shall  be  blessed  in  as  because  we  are  blessed 
in  Christ.  II.  A  shudder  of  feab.  It  is  possible  that  I  may  be  without  Christ, 
and  so  may  be  utterly  incapacitated  for  aU  good.  1.  What  if  you  should  not 
be  so  in  Christ  as  to  bring  forth  fruit  ?  If  you  are  without  Christ,  what  is  the  use 
of  carrying  on  that  Bible-class  ;  for  you  can  do  nothing  ?  2.  What  if  you  should 
be  in  Christ,  and  not  so  in  Him  as  to  abide  in  Him  ?  It  appears  from  our  Lord's 
words  that  some  branches  in  Him  are  cast  forth  and  are  withered.  What  if  you 
are  off  and  on  with  Christ  1  What  if  you  play  fast  and  loose  with  the  Lord ! 
What  if  you  are  an  outside  saint  and  an  inside  devil  I  What  will  come  of  such 
conduct  as  this  ?  III.  A  vision  of  total  failure.  1,  A  ministry  without  Christ 
in  its  doctrine  will  do  nothing.  Preachers  aspire  to  be  leaders  of  thought ;  will 
they  not  command  the  multitude  and  charm  the  intelligent  f  Add  music  and 
architecture,  and  what  is  to  hinder  success,  and  what  has  been  done  ?  "  The  sum 
total  is  expressed  in  the  text — *•  Nothing."  2.  Without  acknowledging  always  the 
absolute  supremacy  of  Christ  we  shall  do  nothing.  Jesus  is  much  complimented, 
but  He  is  not  submitted  to.  Certain  modern  praises  of  Jesus  are  written  upon  the 
theory  that,  on  the  whole,  the  Saviour  has  given  us  a  religion  that  is  tolerably 
suited  to  the  enlightenment  of  the  nineteenth  century,  and  may  be  allowed  to  last 
a  little  longer.  It  is  fortunate  for  Jesus  that  He  commends  Himself  to  the  "  best 
thought "  and  ripest  culture  of  the  period ;  for,  if  He  had  not  done  so,  these  wise 
gentlemen  would  have  exposed  Him  as  being  behind  the  times.  Of  course  they 
have  every  now  and  then  to  rectify  certain  of  His  dogmas ;  He  is  rectified  and 
squared,  and  His  garment  without  seam  is  taken  off,  and  He  is  dressed  out  in 
proper  style,  as  by  a  West-end  clothier;  then  He  is  introduced  to  us  as  a  remarkable 
teacher,  and  we  are  advised  to  accept  Him  as  far  as  He  goes.  Now,  what  wiU 
come  of  this  foolish  wisdom  7  Nothing  but  delusions,  mischief,  infidelity,  anarchy,, 
and  all  manner  of  imaginable  and  unimaginable  ills.  3.  Yon  may  have  sound 
doctrine,  and  yet  do  nothing  unless  you  have  Christ  in  your  spirit.  In  former 
fe&ia  many  orthodox  preachers  thought  it  to  be  their  sole  duty  to  comfort  and^ 


CHAP.  XV.]  ST.  JOHN.  623 

confirm  the  godly  few  who  by  dint  of  great  perBeverance  found  out  the  holes  and 
corners  in  which  they  prophesied.  These  brethren  spoke  of  sinners  as  of  people 
whom  God  might  possibly  gather  in  if  He  thought  fit  to  do  so ;  but  they  did  not 
care  much  whether  He  did  so  or  not.  When  a  Church  falls  into  this  condition  it  is, 
as  to  its  spirit,  "  without  Christ."  What  comes  of  it  ?  The  comfortable  corporation 
exists  and  grows  for  a  little  while,  but  it  comes  to  nothing.  4.  But  above  all  things 
we  must  have  Christ  with  us  in  the  power  of  His  actual  presence.  The  power  lies 
with  the  Master,  not  with  the  servant ;  the  might  is  in  the  hand,  not  in  the  weapon. 
6.  We  have,  then,  before  us  a  vision  of  total  failure  if  we  attempt  in  any  way  to  do 
without  Christ.  He  says,  '•  Without  Me  ye  can  do  nothing  : "  it  is  in  the  doing 
that  the  failure  is  most  conspicuous.  You  may  talk  a  good  deal  without  Him ;  you 
may  hold  conferences  and  conventions ;  but  doing  is  another  matter.  The  most 
eloquent  discourse  without  Him  will  be  all  a  bottle  of  smoke.  You  shall  lay  your 
plans,  and  arrange  your  machinery,  and  start  your  schemes  ;  but  without  the  Lord 
you  will  do  nothing.  IV.  A  voice  of  wisdom,  which  speaks  out  of  the  text, 
and  says  to  us  who  are  in  Christ — 1.  Let  us  acknowledge  this.  2.  Let  us  pray. 
If  without  Christ  we  can  do  nothing,  let  us  cry  to  Him  that  we  may  never  be 
without  Him.  3.  Let  us  personally  cleave  to  Jesus.  4.  Heartily  submit  yourselves 
to  the  Lord's  leadership,  and  ask  to  do  everything  in  His  style  and  way.  He  will 
not  be  with  you  unless  you  accept  Him  as  your  Master.  5.  Joyfully  believe  in 
Him.  Though  without  Him  you  can  do  nothing,  yet  with  Him  all  things  are  possible, 
V.  A  BONG  OF  CONTENT.  "  Without  Me  ye  can  do  nothing."  Be  it  so.  Do  yoa 
wish  to  have  it  altered,  any  of  you  that  love  His  dear  name  ?  I  am  sure  you  do 
not:  for  suppose  we  could  do  something  without  Christ,  then  He  would  not 
have  the  glory  of  it.  Who  wishes  that?  If  the  Church  could  do  something 
without  Christ  she  would  try  to  live  without  Him.  As  I  listened  to  the  song 
1  began  to  laugh.  I  thought  of  those  who  are  going  to  destroy  the  orthodox 
doctrine  from  off  the  face  of  the  earth.  They  say  our  old  theology  is  decaying,  and 
that  nobody  believes  it.  It  is  all  a  lie.  If  His  friends  can  do  nothing  without  Him, 
I  am  sure  His  foes  can  do  nothing  against  Him.  I  laughed,  too,  because  I  re- 
collected a  story  of  a  New  England  service,  when  suddenly  a  lunatic  started  up 
and  declared  that  he  would  at  once  pull  down  the  meeting-house  about  their  ears. 
Taking  hold  of  one  of  the  pillars  of  the  gallery,  this  newly-announced  Samson 
repeated  his  threatening.  Everybody  rose ;  the  women  were  ready  to  faint.  There 
was  about  to  be  a  great  tumult ;  no  one  could  see  the  end  of  it ;  when  suddenly  one 
cool  brother  produced  a  calm  by  a  single  sentence.  '•  Let  him  try  I  "  Even  so 
to-day  the  enemy  is  about  to  disprove  the  gospel  and  crush  out  the  doctrines  of 
grace.  Are  you  distressed,  alarmed,  astounded  ?  So  far  from  that,  my  reply  is 
this  only — Let  him  try !  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Nothing  without  Christ : — I.  As  to 
THE  STUDY  OF  THE  BiBLE.  There  is  much  in  the  Bible  which  all  must  understand 
aud  admire ;  but  as  to  its  moral  spirit  and  purpose  what  can  be  done  without 
Christ  ?  How  slow  of  heart  to  believe  were  the  disciples  till  Christ  opened  their 
understandings  (Luke  xxiv.  48).  Of  the  Old  Testament  Christ  said,  "  They  are 
they  which  testify  of  Me."  The  first  words  of  the  New  are,  "The  Book  of  the 
Generations  of  Jesus  Christ ; "  and  its  last,  "  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ," 
&o.    He  is  the  Alpha  and  Omega,  and  of  the  whole  Bible  John  xz.  31  may  be  said. 

II.  As  TO  EBCONCiLiATioN  WITH  GoD.  That  man  needs  this  is  not  to  be  questioned ; 
but  how  is  it  to  be  effected?  God  cannot  change;  His  laws  cannot  be  set 
aside.  Sin  is  eternal  separation  from  God.  How,  then,  can  man  be  reconciled  ? 
Only  through  Christ  (Rom.  iii.  19-25 ;  Col.  i.  21 ;  2  Cor.  v.  19 :  Eom.  v.  11}. 

III.  As  TO  PBOOBEss  IN  THE  DiviNE  LIFE.  From  first  to  last  the  Christian  is 
dependent  on  Christ.  His  life  is  derived  from,  developed  by,  devoted  to 
Christ.  IV.  As  to  success  in  evangelistic  wobe.  {W.  Forsyth,  M.A.)  None 
but  Christ  indispensable : — In  this  world  no  man  is  necessary.  There  are  many 
men  who,  if  they  were  taken  away,  would  be  missed.  But  there  is  no  man  but 
what  we  may  say  of  him,  that  useful  and  valuable  as  he  may  be,  we  might  come  to 
do  without  him.  It  is  a  truth  this  which  we  do  not  like  to  admit.  We  like  to  fancy 
that  things  would  not  go  on  exactly  the  same  without  us  as  with  us.  But  this 
world  has  never  seen  more  than  one  Being  who  could  say  that  it  was  absolutely  impos- 
sible to  go  on  when  separated  from  Him.  The  little  child  fancied,  when  its  mother 
died,  that  without  her  it  could  "  do  nothing  ;  "  but  the  grown-up,  busy  man,  hardly 
Beems  ever  to  remember  at  all  her  whom  the  heart-broken  child  missed  so  sorely. 
And  the  mother,  when  her  little  one  is  called  to  go,  may  fancy  that  without  that 
little  one  she  "can  do  nothing;"   but  time  brings  its  wonderful  easing,  and* 


624  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

though  not  forgetting,  she  gets  on  much  as  before.  And  it  is  the  same  way  in 
every  earthly  relation.  The  husband  comes  to  do  without  his  dead  wife  ;  and  the 
wife  to  do  without  the  departed  husband.  The  congregation  that  missed  their 
minister  for  a  while,  come  at  length  to  gather  Sunday  after  Sunday  with  little 
thought  of  the  voice  it  once  was  pleasant  for  them  to  hear.  The  state  oooiea  to  do 
without  its  lost  political  chief,  and  the  country  without  its  departed  hero :  and  we 
learn  in  a  hundred  ways,  that  no  human  being  is  absolutely  necessary  to  any  other 
human  being.  We  may  indeed  fancy  so  for  a  while,  but  at  length  we  shall  find 
that  we  were  mistaken ;  we  may  indeed  miss  our  absent  friends  sadly  and  long ; 
but  we  shall  come  at  last  to  do  without  them.  {A.  K.  H.  Boyd,  D.D.)  Ijdan't 
greatest  need  : — No  man  lives  a  true  and  useful  life  who  lives  without  Christ.  The 
good  man  feels  his  need  of  Him,  and  of  all  of  Him  always.  1.  His  eye  to  guide 
him.  2.  His  hand  to  uphold  him.  3.  His  arm  to  shield  him.  4.  His  bosom  to 
lean  upon.  5.  His  blood  to  cleanse  him.  6.  His  Spirit  to  make  him  holy  and 
meet  for  heaven.  Christ  is  the  one  only  Saviour  who  can  make  a  sinner  a  saint, 
and  secure  to  him  eternal  life.  Usefulness  is  suspended  upon  holiness,  and  we  are 
made  holy  by  Christ's  cleansing  blood,  and  in  no  other  way.  {Homiletic  Monthly.) 
The  union  between  Christ  and  His  people  : — Apart  from  Christ — I.  There  is  no  mebit 
FOB  OUB  ACCEPTANCE  WITH  GoD.  *'  There  is  none  righteous,  no,  not  one."  "  By  the 
deeds  of  the  law  there  shall  no  flesh  be  justified  in  His  sight."  But  in  Christ 
there  is  all-suflQcient  merit.  Beheving  in  Him,  we  are  justified  and  accepted. 
Not  through  His  merit  together  with  what  we  ourselves  can  do.  Dr.  Chalmers', 
when  awakened  to  his  condition  as  a  sinner,  for  a  time  "  repaired  to  the  atonement 
to  eke  out  his  deficiencies,  and  as  the  ground  of  assurance  that  God  would  look 
upon  him  with  a  propitious  eye."  But  the  conviction  was  at  length  "wrought  in 
him  that  he  had  been  attempting  an  impossibility  .  .  .  that  it  must  be  either  on 
his  own  merits  wholly,  or  on  Christ's  merits  wholly,  that  he  must  lean  ;  and  that, 
by  introducing  his  own  riehteousness  into  the  ground  of  his  meritorious  acceptance 
with  God,  •  he  had  been  inserting  a  flaw,  he  had  been  importing  a  falsehood  into 
the  very  principle  of  his  ju-titication.' "  H.  We  can  do  nothing  to  ovebcous 
THE  powEB  OF  INDWELLING  SIN.  The  evil  propensities  within  us  are  not  the  same 
in  each  one  ;  it  may  be  the  love  of  money  or  the  lust  of  power  in  one,  vanity  or 
pride,  malice  or  guile,  in  another.  Does  not  the  Christian  have  frequent  experience 
that  the  corruption  of  his  heart  is  too  strong  for  him  ?  He  made  good  resolutions, 
and  broke  them ;  after  repeated  failures  he  is  driven  almost  to  despair,  and  is  ready 
to  ask,  '*  Can  my  corruptions  ever  be  conquered,  or  must  I  become  more  and  more 
their  slave?"  But  if  we  be  brought  by  Divine  grace  to  cleave  in  faith  to  the 
Saviour,  we  shall  have  His  Spirit  to  dwell  in  us,  and  in  His  strength  we  shall 
prevail.  In  ancient  fable  we  read  that  one  of  the  great  labours  imposed  npon 
Hercules  was  to  cleanse  the  foul  Augean  Stable.  This  mighty  task  he  accomplished 
by  turning  the  river  Alpheus  through  it,  thus  performing  with  ease  what  before  had 
appeared  impossible.  That  stable  is  a  true  picture  of  the  heart  defiled  by  countless 
sins.  The  streams  of  that  fountain  opened  in  the  house  of  David,  turned  by  a  living 
faith  to  flow  into  it,  alone  can  cleanse  it.  III.  We  can  do  nothing  to  build  op  a 
Chbistian  chabacteb.  In  a  building  there  is  not  only  a  foundation,  but  also  a 
superstructure.  Apart  from  Christ  we  cannot  build  aright.  Christian  character 
may  be  likened  unto  a  tree  growing.  "  Giving  all  diligence,  add  to  your  faith, 
virtue,"  &o.  Here  is  a  noble,  well-developed  growth ;  But  these  spiritual  graces 
will  not  appear  if  we  do  not  abide  in  constant  communion  with  Christ.  IV.  Wb 
can  do  nothing  to  peomotb  the  tbub  entebests  op  othees.  What  are  all  the 
provisions  for  the  alleviating  and  removing  of  the  wants  and  sufferings  of  men — 
the  hospitals,  orphanages,  almshouses,  and  other  philanthropic  institutions — but 
the  results  of  Christian  effort,  the  products  of  the  Christian  spirit  1  All  noble 
enduring,  legislative  acts  also,  such  as  that  for  the  emancipation  of  the  slaves,  have 
been  brought  about  by  men  under  the  influence  of  the  religion  of  Christ.  Who 
likewise  have  filled  Wales  and  other  countries  with  the  gospel  ?  Is  it  not  men 
with  the  love  of  Christ  as  a  holy  fire  burning  within  them  ?  (J.  R.  Owen.)  The 
necessity  of  supernatural  grace  in  order  to  a  Christian  life: — I.  What  we  mean  bt 
the  supernatural  grace  and  assistance  of  Christ.  Whatever  natural  power  we 
have  to  do  anything  is  from  God,  but  God,  considering  the  lapsed  condition  of 
Dianhind,  sent  His  Son  to  recover  us  out  of  that  condition,  but  we,  being  without 
strength,  our  Saviour  hath  in  His  Gospel  offered  an  extraordinary  assistance  of 
Hi^.  Holy  Spirit,  to  supply  the  defects  of  our  natural  strength.  And  this  super- 
natural grace  of  Christ  is  that  alone  which  can  enable  us  to  perform  what  H« 


CHA*.  XV.)  ST.  JOHN.  (m 

requires  of  as.  And  this,  according  to  the  several  ases  and  occasions  of  it,  is  called 
by  several  names.  As  it  puts  good  motions  into  us,  it  is  called  preverjting  grace  ; 
because  it  prevents  any  motion  or  desire  on  our  parts ;  as  it  assists  and  strengthens 
us  in  the  doing  of  anything  that  is  good,  it  is  called  assisting  grace  ;  as  it  keeps  us 
constant  in  a  good  course,  it  is  called  persevering  grace.  II.  To  this  grace  thb 
Scripture   doth   constantly  attribdtb   our   regeneration,  sanctitication,   and 

PERSEVERANCE  IN  HOLINESS.  III.  ThERE  IS  GREAT  REASON  TO  ASSERT  THB  NECES- 
BITY   OP  THIS   GRACE  AND   ASSISTANCE   TO  THESE   PURPOSES.       If   We    COUsider — 1.   The 

corruption  and  impotency  of  human  nature.  When  the  Scripture  speaks  of  the 
redemption  of  Christ,  it  represents  our  condition  not  only  as  miserable,  but  help- 
less  (Rom.  v.  6).  2,  The  strange  power  of  evil  habits  and  customs.  The  other  is 
a  natural,  and  this  is  a  contracted  impotency.  The  habits  of  sin  being  added  to 
our  natural  impotency,  are  like  so  many  diseases  superinduced  upon  a  constitution 
naturally  weak,  which  do  all  help  to  increase  the  man's  infirmity.  Evil  habits  in 
Scripture  are  compared  to  fetters,  which  do  as  effectually  hinder  a  man  from 
motion,  as  if  he  were  quite  lame,  hand  and  foot.  By  passing  from  one  degree  of 
sin  to  another,  men  became  hardened  in  their  wickedness,  and  insensibly  bring 
themselves  into  that  state,  out  of  which  they  are  utterly  unable  to  recover  them- 
selves. 3,  The  inconstancy  and  fickleness  of  human  resolution.  4.  The  malice 
and  activity  of  the  devil.      IV.    This  supernatural  grace  and  assistance   dobs 

NOT   EXCLUDE,    BUT   SUPPOSES   THE   CONCURRENCE   OF   OUR   ENDEAVOURS.       The  prace   of 

God  strengthens  and  assists  us.  Our  Saviour  implies  that  by  the  assistance  of 
grace  we  may  perf onn  all  the  duties  of  the  Christian  life  ;  we  may  bear  fruit,  and 
bring  forth  much  fruit.  When  the  Apostle  says,  "  I  can  do  all  things  through 
Christ  strengthening  me,"  he  does  not  think  it  a  disparagement  to  the  grace  of 
Christ  to  say,  he  could  do  all  things  by  the  assistance  of  it  (Phil,  ii,  12,  13).  V. 
This  grace  is  derived  to  us  from  our  union  with  Christ.  Inferences :  1.  If  the  grace 
of  God  be  so  necessary  to  all  the  ends  of  holiness,  obedience,  and  perseverance,  then 
there  is  great  reason  why  we  should  continually  depend  upon  God,  and  every  day 
earnestly  pray  to  Him  for  the  aids  of  His  grace.  2.  We  should  thankfully  acknow- 
ledge and  ascribe  all  the  good  that  is  in  us,  and  aU  that  we  do,  to  the  grace  of  God. 
3.  Let  us  take  heed  that  we  resist  not  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  receive  not  the  grace 
of  God  in  vain.  4.  The  consideration  of  our  own  impotency  is  no  excuse  to  our 
eloth  and  negligence,  if  so  be  the  grace  of  God  be  ready  to  assist  us.  5.  The  con- 
sideration of  our  own  impotency  is  no  just  ground  of  discouragement  to  our 
endeavours,  considering  the  promise  of  Divine  grace  and  assistance.  (Archbishop 
Xillotson.) 

Ter.  6.  If  a  man  aMde  not  In  Me  be  Is  cast  fortb. — Jesut  and  the  only  meant 
of  righteousnest : — God  is  the  author  of  righteousness,  and  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God, 
because  He  gives  the  method  and  secret  by  which  alone  righteousness  is  possible. 
And  that  He  does  give  this,  we  can  verify  from  experience.  It  is  so  I  try,  and  you 
will  find  it  to  be  so  I  Try  all  the  ways  to  righteousness  you  can  think  of,  and  yoa 
will  find  no  way  brings  you  to  it  except  the  way  of  Jesus,  but  that  this  way  does 
bring  you  to  it.  This  is  a  thing  that  can  prove  itself,  if  it  is  so ;  and  it  will  prove 
itself,  because  it  is  so.  {Matthew  Arnold.)  Five  steps  to  judgment : — Just  as 
abiding  in  Christ  infers  grace  for  grace,  fruit  for  fruit,  so  not  abiding  in  Christ 
draws  after  it  the  judgment  of  being  rejected,  the  successive  steps  to  which  are  pre« 
sented  to  us  in  the  words :  cast  forth,  wither,  gather,  cast  into  the  fire,  bum. 
These  are  the  five  steps  in  the  judgment ;  the  complete  execution  of  which  is,  by 
God's  long-suffering,  delayed.  {R.  Besser,  D.D.)  Cast  forth  : — One  year  when  I 
was  travelling  towards  my  usual  winter  resting-place  I  halted  at  Marseilles,  and 
there  was  overtaken  by  great  pain.  In  my  room  in  the  hotel  I  found  it  cold,  and 
BO  I  asked  for  a  fire.  The  porter  came  in,  and  he  had  in  his  hand  a  bundle  of 
twigs.  I  called  to  him  to  let  me  look  at  it.  He  was  about  to  push  it  into  the  stoT* 
as  fuel  with  which  to  kindle  the  fire.  As  I  took  the  bundle  into  my  hand,  I  found 
it  was  made  of  vine  branches — branches  that  had  been  cut  off  now  that  the  pruning 
time  was  come.  I  solemnly  thought,  will  this  be  my  portion  ?  Here  I  am,  away 
from  home,  unable  to  bear  fruit,  as  I  love  to  do.  Shall  I  end  with  this  as  my 
portion  ?  Shall  I  be  gathered  for  the  fire  ?  Those  vine  shoots  were  parts  of  a  good 
vine,  no  doubt,  branches  that  once  looked  fair  and  green ;  but  now  they  were  fuel 
for  the  fiame.  They  had  been  cut  off  and  cast  off  as  useless  things,  and  then  men 
gathered  them  and  tied  them  in  bundles,  and  they  were  ignobly  thrust  into  (h« 

VOL  n.  40 


63«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rr. 

fire.  {C.  n.  Spurgeon.)  And  is  withered. — Withered : — The  cast-out  branch 
withers ;  whatever  remains  of  sap  it  might  have  had  so  long  as  it  hung  on  ever  so 
slightly  to  the  vine,  now  quickly  dries  up ;  it  becomes  a  hard  piece  of  wood,  which 
can  no  longer  be  bent,  only  broken.  /  A  man  may  refuse  to  be  bent  by  grace,  but  he 
cannot  hinder  himself  from  being  broken  by  wrath. '  Judas  is  a  fearful  example  of 
this :  he  withered  in  one  day.  We  may  indeed  place  a  cast-off  branch  in  water, 
and  by  that  means  keep  it  for  a  time  from  completely  withering ;  but  it  is  of  no 
lasting  good :  so  it  is  no  use  for  a  man  inwardly  dead  and  forsaken  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  to  force  forward  for  a  while  the  appearance  of  a  pious  life  from  his  own 
strength  ;  it  cannot  last  long,  seldom  untU  his  end,  and  then  his  withered  state  is 
manifest.    (R.  Besser,  D.D.) 

Ver,  7.  If  ye  abide  tu  Me,  and  My  words  abide  In  you. — The  conditions  of  prevail- 
ing prayer : — I.  What  is  keqdieed  ob  supposed.  1.  What  is  meant  by  our 
abiding  in  Him  7  This  is  called  partaking  of  Him  (Heb.  iii.  14),  and  implies  in  it 
our— (1)  Being  in  Him  (Eom.  viii.  1 ;  2  Cor.  ▼.  17).  (a)  By  faith  (Phil.  iii.  8,  9). 
(6)  Obedience  (Gal.  v.  24).  (c)  Being  members  of  His  mystical  body  (Col.  i.  18 ; 
Eph.  V.  30).  (2)  Continuing  in  Him  as  a  branch  in  the  vine  (vers.  1-6).  Con- 
tinuing in  the  profession  of  His  doctrine  (chap.  viii.  31),  and  hearty  endeavours 
after  perfection  (Col.  i.  28).  2.  What  is  meant  by  His  words  abiding  in  us  ?  (1) 
His  words  are  that  doctrine  that  He  came  to  deliver  in  His  Father's  name  (John 
vii.  16  ;  xii.  49  ;  xvii.  8  ;  Mark  i.  22 ;  Luke  iv.  23).  (2)  These  words  abide  in  us  by 
our — (a)  Knowing  them  (chap  x.  4,  5).  (6)  Believing  them  (John  viii.  45  ;  xiiL  19  ; 
xvii.  8 ;  Matt.  xxiv.  35 ;  Eom.  x.  10  ;  Heb.  iv.  2).  (c)  Remembering  them  (ver.  20^. 
(d)  Persevering  in  the  observance  of  them  (Mark  xiii.  13 ;  Luke  viii.  15 ;  Eev.  ii. 
26).  (3)  The  effect  of  their  abiding  in  us.  (a)  They  purify  us  (John  xv.  3  ,  xvii. 
17  ;  2  Cor.  v.  17).  (6)  They  bring  forth  fruit  in  us  (Matt  xiii.  23 ;  John  xv.  5). 
II.  What  ib  fbomised  (Matt.  vii.  7).  Such  as  abide  in  Christ  shall  be  sure  not  to 
meet  with  disappointment,  because — 1.  They  will  only  according  to  God's  will  (1 
Sam.  iii.  18) ;  herein  following  the  example  of  their  blessed  Lord  (Matt.  xxvi.  39, 
42) ;  submitting  with  those  in  Acts  xxi.  14 ;  and  praying  as  our  Lord  directs 
(Matt.  vi.  10).  2.  They  ask  according  to  His  will,  and  so  are  sure  to  be  heard 
upon  this  account  (1  John  v.  14,  15).  Particularly,  they  ask — (1)  Nothing  but 
what  is  lawful  (Matt.  vii.  11) ;  avoiding  the  folly  mentioned  in  Psa.  1.  21,  22.  (2) 
And  only  to  a  good  end  (James  iv.  3).  3.  They  take  a  right  method  in  asking : 
praying — (1)  In  faith  (Matt.  xxi.  22 ;  James  i.  5-7).  (2)  With  fervency  and  devo- 
tion (Eom.  L  9 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  20).  (3)  In  humihty  (Luke  xviii.  9,  <&c. ;  Psa.  cxxxviii. 
■Q).  (4)  From  a  clean  heart  (Isa.  i.  11, 16-18;  1  Tim.  ii.  8).  (5)  With  constancy 
find  perseverance  (Luko  xviii.  1 ;  xi.  8-10 ;  Eph.  vi.  8).  (6)  In  the  name  and 
through  the  merits  of  Christ  (chap.  xiv.  13, 14).  {Bp.  Beveridge.)  The  secret 
of  prevailing  prayer: — I.  The  katubS  of  the  conditions  IiAid  down.  1.  "If  ye 
abide  in  Me,"  as  the  branches  abide  in  the  vine :  union  with  and  reception  of  the 
whole  Christ  by  faith,  as  Saviour,  Teacher,  Example.  If  we  accept  Him  in  one 
aspect  and  not  in  another,  we  fail  to  fulfil  the  condition.  2.  "  If  My  words  abide 
in  you."  (1)  Christ's  words  are  His  whole  teaching,  not  the  part  of  it  which  we 
most  like.  (2)  These  words  are  to  abide  in  us — not  merely  in  our  memories  as 
words,  nor  in  our  understandings  as  facts,  nor  in  our  reasons  as  truths,  nor  in  oar 
feelings  as  sentiments  ;  but  pervading  our  whole  spiritual  being  as  principles  of 
life  and  action,  just  as  we  assimilate  food,  which  does  not  profit  unless  changed 
into  blood,  bone,  sinew,  &o.  If  we  have  Christ's  words  thus  abiding  in  us,  we  shall 
have  Christ  Himself,  and  that  being  so  we  shall  breathe  His  Spirit  and  be  trans- 
formed into  His  likeness.  II.  The  oebtaintt,  in  the  tulfilment  of  such  con- 
ditions, THAT  AIX  OUB  PETITIONS  WILL  BB  OBANTED.      If  WO  ful£l  BUch   COuditionS 

in  the  very  fulfilment  all  our  best  desires  are  already  granted.  What  more  can  we 
have  than  to  be  in  Christ  and  to  have  Christ  in  us  7  The  branch  is  already  most 
fruitful  if  it  is  actually  the  branch  of  the  most  fruitful  vine.  But  note  the  grounds  on 
which  this  certainty  rests.  1.  God  honours  simphcity  of  trust.  For  what  is  this 
irust  ?  It  is  to  feel  that  truth  cannot  lie,  that  faithfulness  cannot  deceive,  that 
wisdom  cannot  err,  that  power  cannot  fail,  that  holiness  cannot  blight  the  hope 
that  perfect  love  has  inspired.  On  the  contrary,  unbeUef  is  absurd.  Think  of 
casting  a  shadow  of  doubt  on  infinite  excellence,  omnipotence,  and  wisdom. 
Let  a  man  doubt  that  there  is  not  enough  light  in  the  sun  to  enable  him  to  see* 
or  enough  water  in  the  sea  to  float  his  vessel.  Besides,  trust  has  naturally  ft 
•drawing  power  on  the  heart  of  love.     2.  Only  such  blessings  will  be  soughl  lor  aa 


OT  *.  XT.]  ST.  JOHN.  627 

ore  fithis  the  range  of  God's  promise.  All  the  Christian's  hopes  and  yearnings 
are  b  oonded  by  this.  What  lies  beyond  ?  Unholy  hononrs,  pleasures,  <&c. ;  but 
ihe  C  hristian  does  not  want  these,  he  has  done  with  these  trifling  or  injuriouB 
toys.  What  lies  within  ?  Whatever  is  calculated  to  make  us  wiser,  holier,  happier, 
«nd  lore  useful.  3.  There  is  purity  of  desire  in  supplicating  spiritual  blessings. 
Prayer  for  other  things  necessarily  arises  from  mixed  motives.  4.  We  have 
furthe  in  this  state  of  soul  complete  submissiveness  to  the  Divine  will.  IJ,  M. 
Charlton,  M.A.)  Ash  great  things  from  God: — Sir  Walter  Kaleigh  one  day  asking 
a  favour  from  Queen  Elizabeth,  the  latter  said  to  him,  "  Raleigh,  when  will  you 
leave  off  begging?"  To  which  he  answered,  "When  your  Majesty  leaves  off 
giving."  Ask  great  things  of  God.  Expect  great  things  from  God.  Let  His 
past  goodness  make  us  "instant  in  prayer."  {W.  Baxendale.)  ChrisVa  work  for 
us  the  secret  of  successful  prayer : — All  the  promises  in  the  Bible  are  so  many  bills 
of  ex(!hange  drawn  by  God  the  Father  in  heaven  upon  His  Son  Jesus  Christ,  and 
payable  to  every  pious  bearer, — to  every  one  that  comes  to  tke  mercy-seat,  and 
offers  the  promise  or  bill  for  acceptance,  and  pleads  in  the  way  of  obedient  faith 
and  prayer.  Jesus,  the  High  Treasurer  of  heaven,  knows  every  letter  of  His  Father's 
handwriting,  and  can  never  be  imposed  upon  by  any  forged  note.  He  will  ever 
honour  His  Father's  bills  :  He  accepts  them  all.  It  is  for  His  Father's  honour 
that  His  bills  never  fail  of  acceptance  and  payment.  [J.  Beaumont,  M.D.)  The 
necessity  of  specific  prayer: — In  order  to  be  prevailing  our  prayers  must  be  pointed 
and  personal.  The  old  womon  who  interrupted  an  "  eloquent "  supplication,  in 
whic  h  the  attributes  of  God  were  being  stated  at  great  length,  by  saying,  "  Ask 
Him  for  something,"  may  teach  us  a  much-needed  lesson.    (S.  Pearson,  M.A.) 

Ver.  8.  Herein  is  My  Father  glorified,  that  ye  bear  much  fruit.— God  glorified 
in  His  people : — The  great  majority  of  Christ's  illustrations  were  drawn  from  the 
world  of  nature,  which  teaches  us  that  there  is  a  profound  connection  between  the 
oat  oral  and  spiritual  worlds.  For  Christ  did  not  introduce  His  teaching  into 
aatore,  but  showed  men  the  lessons  concerning  God  and  the  spiritual  which  it  had 
been  silently  teaching  for  ages,  but  which  they  had  been  too  blind  to  see.  For 
years  had  the  vines  of  Palestine  been  uttering  glorious  things  about  the  union  of 
man  to  God :  prophets  had  seen  something  of  the  mystery ;  but  it  was  reserved  for 
the  greatest  of  the  prophets  to  gather  all  their  finest  teachings  into  one  beautiful 
discourse.  And  because  the  principle  on  which  Christ  taught  is  ever  true,  we  may 
ieam  most  solemn  lessons  from  the  beauty  of  God's  world.  The  great  teaching  of 
fthe  text  is  this :  Man's  greatest  power  for  glorifying  God  is  a  life  of  Christ-like 
Action,  and  in  order  to  illustrate  its  full  force  we  must  trace  it  back  to  its  first 
principles.  I.  The  inward  life  in  union  with  Christ  most  show  itself  oux- 
WABDLY  IN  Chkist-like  ACTION.  1.  All  profound  emotions  must  display  themselves 
in  action.  Whenever  a  deep  love  or  a  strong  conviction  enters  a  man's  heart,  it 
impels  him  to  utter  it.  If  it  be  unspoken  in  word,  it  will  change  his  whole  being, 
and  burning  itself  into  speech  in  his  deeds,  give  its  meaning  a  tongue,  and  mani- 
fest its  secret  fire;  or  if  it  cannot  express  itself  it  will  perish  in  its  own  concealment. 
80  the  ruhng  emotion  of  love  to  Christ  must  utter  itself  to  men  in  the  language  of 
Christ-like  words  and  life,  or  it  will  pine  and  perish  in  its  secrecy.  And  not  only 
so,  but  all  deep  love  must  transform  the  soul  into  the  image  of  the  beloved,  and 
thus  reveal  its  energy.  2.  The  inner  Christian  life  has  a  power  to  overcome  the 
hindrances  to  its  manifestation.  It  has  been  said  that  "  circumstances  make  the 
man  "  ;  but  do  circumstances  hinder  the  man  who  is  resolved  to  be  rich  ?  On  the 
flontrary,  he  turns  them  to  his  own  end.  Did  circumstances  make  Napoleon?  He 
made  them  steps  to  his  throne.  Circumstances  make  weak  men,  but  strong  men 
make  circumstances.  There  we  have  the  answer  to  the  timid  assertion  that  it  is 
impossible  in  such  a  world  as  this  to  manifest  the  power  of  a  living  Christianity. 
As  the  vine,  by  the  inward  force  of  life,  draws  from  the  sun  and  air  and  soil  those 
•lements  that  give  it  beauty  and  vigour,  so  the  Christian  life  causes  all  outward 
states  to  minister  to  its  growing  power.  The  sight  of  sin  is  an  opposing  circum- 
stance— to  the  real  Christian  it  is  transformed  into  a  mighty  lesson.  The  slanders 
of  men  are  an  opposing  circumstance — they  form  the  noblest  school  for  Christian 
patience.  The  sufferings  and  sacrifices  of  life  may  seem  to  be  hindrances — in 
reality  they  make  the  soul  strong  in  faith  and  prayer.  If  the  life  of  love  be  in  a 
man  he  will  live  Christ  everywhere,  and,  like  the  oak,  grow  stronger  in  storms. 
Hence  the  conclusion  arises  unanswerably,  that  the  inner  life  in  union  with 
Ohrist  must  reveal  itself  in   Christ-like  deeds.     II.    The   life   of  Christ-ukb 


828  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chat.  Xf, 

ACTION  IS  man's  obeat£8T  poweb  OF  GLOBiFYiNQ  GoD.    1.  A  Chiist-like  life  is  the 
strongest  manifestation  of  God  to  the  world.      The  men  of  this  world   do  not 
perceive  the  signs  of  a  present  God.     They  may  have  an  indistinct  beUef  in  aa 
awful  Power  existing  somewhere  in  the  universe.     They  read  the  Bible  as  an  old 
hook,  not  as  a  testimony  to  a  living  Lord  :  they  find  a  beauty  in  nature,  but  thai 
beauty  is  not  to  them  the  evidence  of  its  invisible  King.     But  a  Christ-like  mat. 
brings  the  Divine  so  directly  into  the  sphere  of  his  own  daily  life,  that  they  cannot 
help  perceiving  it  there  and  then.     That  man's  life  becomes  a  Bible,  which  in  the 
clearest  tone»   proclaims  the  presence  of  his  Lord.    2.  A  Christ-like  hfe  is  the 
greatest  human   influence  to  bring  men  near  God.      When  Christ   said  to  His 
disciples,  "  Go  and  bear  fruit,  go  and  reproduce  My  life  in  your  life,"  He  laid  hold 
of  the  two  great  forces  that  mould  all  human  society — influence  and  example. 
For  the  power  of  social  influence  is  constant   and  irresistible,  while  all  direot 
efforts  for  God  are  of  necessity  limited,  and  awaken  opposition.     Men  hear  the 
appeals  of  the  preacher,  and  apply  them  only  to  their  neighbours.      But  the 
ceaseless,  silent  influence  of  a  Christ-like  life  enters  with  its  resistless  majesty 
into  hearts  that  are  barred  and  bolted  in  self-complacency  against  the  preacher's 
voice,  and,  like  the  hght,  makes  their  darkness  visible.     (E.  L.  Hull,  B.A.)       God 
requires  that  His  vines  be  fruitful : — A  vine  would  never  be  so  stupid  as  to  examine 
itself  thus,  but  suppose  it  should,  and  should  call  out,  "  Boots,  do  you  enjoy  being 
down  there  in  the  soil  ?  "      "Yes,  we  enjoy  being  here  in  the  soU."      "Stem,  do 
you  like  to  be  out  there  in  summer  ?  "      "  Yes,  I  like  to  be  out  here  in  summer." 
"Leaves,  are  you  fond  of  waving  in  the  sun  and  air?"      "Yes,  we  are  fond  of 
the  sun  and  air  ;  "  and,  satisfied,  it  says,  "  I  am  an  excellent  vine."    The  gardener, 
standing  near,  exclaims,  "  The  useless  thing  1     I  paid  ten  dollars  for  the  cutting, 
and  I  have  pruned  and  cultivated  it,  and  for  years  looked  for  the  black  Hamburg 
grapes  it  was  to  bear,  but  it  has  yielded  only  leaves."     He  does  not  care  that  the 
roots  love  the  soil,  and  the  stem  the  summer.     It  makes  no  difference  to  him 
though  ever.v  leaf  spread  itself  broad  as  Sahara  in  its  barrenness.     It  is  fruit  that 
he  wants.     (H.  W.  Beecher.)        Muchfruit : — They  say  that  at  Mentone  the  citron 
harvest  lasts  from  the  1st  of  January  to  the  3lst  of  December.     Women  may  be 
Been  almost  every  morning  of  the  year  stepping  down  the  rocky  mountain  paths 
with  large  baskets  upon  their  heads  filled  with  the  fruit.      Pastors  may  well  wish 
that  their  Churches  were  always  in  such  bearing  order,  and  Sabbath- school  teachers 
may  sigh  for  such  perpetual  fruit.     To  come  nearer  home,  may  not  each  one  of  as 
long  for  like  perpetuity  of  fertiUty  in  our  own  souls?    It  would  be  a  grand  thing  (o 
be  evermore  working  and  at  the  same  time  planning  new  effort,  and  preparing 
material  for  new  enterprises.     Mentone  owes  its  lemons  to  its  warm  sun,  and  to 
its  sheltered  position  close  under  the  great  rocks.     Here  is  a  secret  for  us  all.    To 
dwell  in  communion  with  Jesus  is  to  abide  in  the  sunshine,  and  to  rest  in  His  great 
love  and  atoning  sacrifice  is  to  nestle  under  the  Eock  of  Ages,  and  to  be  shielded 
from  every  withering  blast.     "  Nearer  to  God  "  is  the  way  to  greater  fruitfulness. 
{C.  H.  Spurgean.)         Christian  fruitfulness : — I.  Its  natdbe.      1.  It  consists  in  a 
visible  exhibition  of  Christian  feeUng  and  principle.     I  say  visible;  for  though 
your  heart  was  as  tender  as  that  of  a  child,  and  warm  as  that  of  a  seraph,  yoa 
bring  forth  no  fruit  unto  God  unless  your  internal  feelings  are  manifested  in 
appropriate  acts  of  obedience.     Those  who  in  ancient  times  retired  from  all  con- 
nection  with  the  world  may  have  been  persons  of  piety,  but  they  were  prevented  by 
the  very  circumstances  of  their  condition  from  bringing  forth  fruit  unto  God.     To 
be  a  fruitful  Christian  it  must  be  seen  that  you  are  a  Uving,  active  Christian.    9. 
It  demands  that  we  discharge  with  fideUty  the  appropriate  duties  of  our  respective 
stations.    If  we  neglect  these  and  attempt  to  perform  others  that  do  not  belong  to 
ns  or  for  which  we  are  not  qualified,  we  dishonour  rather  than  glorify  God — just  as 
the  planets  would  if  they  should  quit  their  proper  orbits  and  rush  into  spheres  in 
which  they  were  not  appointed  to  move.     Christians  are  all  the  servants  of  Jesus 
Christ,  and  each  one  has  his  proper  work  assigned  him  ;  they  are  aU  soldiers  of 
Jesus  Christ,  and  each  one  has  his  post  allotted  him.     Some  are  ordained  to  serve 
as  ministers,  some  as  magistrates,  some  as  heads  of  families,  some  as  masters, 
some  as  servants.     Some  are  rich,  and  are  appointed  to  be  the  Lord's  stewards, 
to  honour  Him  with  their  substance  ;  some  in  an  inferior  station  are  called  to  serve 
Him  like  Dorcas  by  making  coats  and  garments  for  tbe  poor.      3.  Christian  fruit- 
fulness,  in  order  to  glorify  God,  must  be  abundant.     The  ^lory  of  the  husbandman 
does  not  arise  from  his  fields  or  vines  bearing  fruit  but  much  fruit.    A  few  ears  ol 
oom  in  the  one  nearly  choked  with  weeds,  or  here  and  there  a  branch  or  berry  on 


«HA*.  XT.]  ST.  JOHN.  629 

the  other,  much  blighted  and  shrivelled,  rather  dishonours  than  honours  him. 
Thus  a  little  religion  often  dishonours  God  more  than  none.  An  indecisive  halting 
between  God  and  the  world  causes  His  name  to  be  evil  spoken  of  much  more  than 
the  excesses  of  the  openly  wicked.  The  husbandman  is  not  dishonoured  by  the 
nnfruitfulness  of  a  wild  tree  upon  which  he  has  bestowed  no  culture,  but  the  barren- 
ness of  what  is  planted  in  his  garden  or  in  his  enclosed  field  reflects  on  himself, 
and  he  will  therefore  cut  it  down  and  cast  it  out  as  an  incumbrance.  II.  Its 
MKANS.  Very  analogous  are  the  means  of  Christian  fruitfulness  to  those  of  common 
husbandry.  1.  A  good  soil,  i.e.,  a  good  heart.  This  is  ihdispensable.  You  do  not 
expect  a  harvest  from  seed  sown  upon  a  rock  or  in  sand.  And  what  but  such  is 
the  heart  unsanctified  by  grace  ?  Never  tiU  it  is  softened  and  warmed  into  spiri- 
tual life  by  an  influence  from  above  will  it  yield  any  fruit  that  is  pleasing  to  God. 
Hence  vital  union  to  Christ  is  asserted  to  be  indispensable  to  Christian  fruitful- 
ness. "  Abide  in  Me,  and  I  in  you,"  &o.  Union  with  Christ  is  the  animating 
principle  of  all  holy  obedienc?,  infusing  spiritual  life  and  vigour  into  the  soul, 
and  quickening  all  its  powers  into  activity  for  the  glory  of  God.  No  culture  will 
make  us  fruitful  till  we  are  brought  into  vital  union  with  Christ.  2.  Good  seed, 
i.e.,  the  truths  of  God's  Word  lodged  in  the  mind  by  a  just  apprehension  and 
cordial  faith  of  them.  As  well  might  you  expect  a  harvest  of  wheat  from  a  field 
sowed  with  tares,  as  the  fruits  of  righteousness  from  a  mind  vacant  of  religious 
truth  or  filled  with  error.  Doctrinal,  experimental,  and  practical  religion  are  all 
necessarily  connected ;  they  cannot  exist  apart  or  separate  from  each  other.  3. 
Careful  cultivation.  Fruitfulness  unto  God  is  not  a  growth  of  chance.  It  does 
not  spring  from  indolence,  unwatchfulness,  or  carelessness,  much  less  from  sinful 
conformity  to  the  world  or  deadening  absorption  in  its  cares  and  pursuits.  No ;  it 
is  the  result  of  a  tender,  conscientious  keeping  of  the  heart  in  the  love  of  God ;  it 
is  the  growth  of  diligence  and  care  in  the  use  of  such  means  as  God  has  appointed 
for  our  advancement  in  the  Divine  life.  Whatever  be  the  state  of  your  heart  at 
any  given  time,  or  however  excellent  the  seed  sown  in  it,  if  you  allow  the  cares, 
the  riches,  and  pleasures  of  the  world  to  enter  in  and  choke  the  Word,  no  fruit 
will,  be  brought  forth  to  perfection.  4,  Bain  and  sunshine,  i.e.,  the  influences  of 
the  Holy  Spirit.  The  most  careful  labours  of  the  husbandman  cannot  avail  to 
produce  a  single  ear  of  corn  or  blade  of  grass.  So  in  things  spiritual.  Means  of 
themselves  have  no  efficacy  to  produce  spiritual  life  or  Christian  fruitfulness. 
"Paul  may  plant,"  &c.  Here  comes  in  the  necessity  of  prayer;  and  a  beautiful 
arrangement  it  is  which  connects  our  endeavours  to  grow  in  Christian  fruitfulness 
with  dependence  on  help  from  God.  HI.  Its  motives.  By  bearing  much  fruit 
you — 1.  Glorify  your  Heavenly  Father.  As  the  works  of  creation  show  forth  the 
glory  of  the  Lord,  because  they  illustrate  His  perfections  exerted  in  their  forma- 
tion ;  so  His  rational  creatures  glorify  Him  when  some  resemblance  of  His  moral 
excellence  is  discerned  upon  their  hearts  and  manifested  in  their  lives.  In  this 
sense  every  Christian,  however  humble  his  station,  or  circumscribed  his  sphere  of 
action,  may  attain  to  the  high  privilege  and  honour  of  glorifying  God  his  Maker. 
Professed  disciples  of  Jesus,  if  you  take  a  just  view  of  your  character  and  obliga- 
tions, you  will  regard  yourselves  in  a  most  important  sense  as  representatives  of  the 
Divine  Majesty  among  your  fellow-men.  Their  eyes  are  upon  you,  and  they  will 
form  their  opmion  of  the  religion  you  profess  and  of  the  God  you  adore  very  much 
from  the  conduct  you  exhibit  from  day  to  day.  2.  Prove  to  yourselves  and  to 
others  the  reality  of  your  professed  discipleship.  The  question  is  often  asked. 
How  may  I  know  that  I  am  a  Christian  ?  The  answer  is  by  bearing  fruit  to  the 
glory  of  God.  In  the  absence  of  such  fruitfulness  all  other  evidence  is  worthless. 
You  see  a  tree  in  the  season  of  winter  stripped  of  its  leaves  and  fruit,  and  you  find 
it  difficult  to  decide  what  tree  it  is.  But  look  at  it  when  it  is  covered  with  foliage 
and  loaded  with  fruit,  and  you  are  at  no  loss  for  a  moment  on  the  subject.  Just 
80  in  judging  of  your  own  character.      {J.  Hawes,  D.D.)  Union  with  Christ  tlie 

tole  condition  of  fruitfulness  : — Our  only  possibility  of  bearing  any  fruit  worthy  of 
our  natures  and  of  God's  purpose  concerning  us  is  by  vital  union  with  Jesus  Christ. 
If  we  have  not  that,  there  may  be  plenty  of  activity  and  mountains  of  work  in  out 
lives,  but  there  will  be  no  fruit.  Only  that  is  fruit  which  pleases  God  and  is  con- 
formed to  His  purpose  concerning  us,  and  all  the  rest  of  your  busy  doings  is  no 
more  the  fruit  that  a  man  should  bear  than  cankers  are  roses,  or  than  oak-galls  are 
acorns.  They  are  but  the  work  of  a  creeping  grub,  and  diseased  excrescences  that 
suck  into  themselves  the  juices  that  should  swell  the  fruit.  Open  your  hearts  to 
Chribt  and  let  His  life  and  His  Spirit  oome  into  you,  and  then  yon  will  "  have 


680  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xt. 

yonr  fruit  nnto  holiness,  and  the  end  everlasting  life."  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
Christ  the  True  Vine : — I.  Fkuitfulness  is  the  object  of  discipleship.  To  bear 
fruit  is  the  purpose  for  which  the  vine  was  planted  and  the  branches  grown.  No 
basbandman  plants  vines  for  wood  or  shade  or  beauty,  but  for  fruit.  Christ's 
disciples  are  of  value  according  to  their  fruitfulness.    II.  The  FBuiTFtrLNESS  or 

THB    DISCIPLE     CONSISTS    IN    THE     DEVELOPMENT     OF    THE     DISTINCTIVELY    CHRISTIAN 

QUALITIES.  It  is  not  first  or  mainly  in  its  usefulness  or  fruitfulness  of  service, 
though  this  is  the  sense  in  which  probably  the  text  is  most  often  read  and 
expounded.  It  is  not  usefulness,  but  character,  which  is  the  first  and  great  end  of 
the  Husbandman.  We  are  called,  not  to  be  missionaries  first,  but  to  be  saints ;  not 
to  be  apostles,  but  first  to  be  disciples — learners  first,  and  afterwards  men  sent  to 
teach  and  preach.  It  is  not  by  discipling  others  so  much  as  becoming  more  and 
more  disciples  ourselves  that  we  bear  fruit  and  glorify  our  Father.  We  have  com- 
pared fruitfulness  with  usefulness  as  an  aim.  But  we  must  not  forget  that  the  very 
fruitfulness  of  the  branch  is  its  usefulness.  It  had  never  thought  of  anything  but 
growing,  developing  what  was  in  it,  coming  to  its  perfection  and  maturity.  That 
was  all  its  aim  :  to  throw  its  life  into  the  fruitage.  But  so  it  found  its  usefulness. 
So  it  did  its  work  for  God  and  men.  For  the  fruit  contains  both  food  and  seed. 
The  starving  eats  and  is  refreshed.  The  invalid  with  failing  appetite  tastes  and  is 
revived.  It  graces  the  tables  of  the  rich  and  inexpensively  supplies  the  needs  of 
the  poor.  The  owner  stands  by  well  pleased,  and  invites  all  to  feast  themselves. 
It  only  tried  to  grow,  but  growing  found  its  means  and  opportunity  of  service.  It 
is  so  with  the  Christian.  His  best  usefulness  is  that  which  comes  out  of  his  simple 
obedience  to  the  laws  of  the  vineyard,  out  of  his  simple  purpose  to  grow  into  that 
to  which  His  Lord  has  called  him.  He  may  exhort,  but  his  life  speaks  louder  than 
his  lips.  He  may  set  out  with  intent  to  serve,  and  his  best  service  may  have  been 
before  his  setting  out.  He  may  be  reproaching  himself  with  his  unfaithfulness  even 
while  his  faithfulness  is  winning  men  to  Christ.  To  grow  is  more  important  than 
to  go.  Suppose  the  branch,  just  started  from  the  vine,  begins  to  feel  the  burden 
of  its  mission  to  do  good  more  than  the  compulsion  to  bear  fruit.  In  sees  yonder  a 
porch  which  it  might  shade  and  so  be  a  blessing  to  a  household,  and  its  stretches 
away  to  reach  and  cover  it.  It  strains  away  over  the  intervening  space,  and  twines 
itself  over  the  vacant  trelUs.  It  has  succeeded,  but,  alas  !  where  is  the  shade  ?  It 
has  grown  so  fast,  the  stem  has  almost  run  away  from  the  leaves — a  foot  apart  they 
stretch  along  the  spindUng  vine ;  small  and  but  half-grown,  they  have  neither 
shade  nor  beauty,  and  not  a  bunch  of  grapes.  If  it  had  simply  grown  and  sought 
to  fill  the  fruit  which  it  had  set,  a  season  later  and  the  fragrant  clusters  would  have 
hnng  within  reach  of  those  resting  under  its  shade  and  delighting  in  its  beauty. 
Have  you  never  seen  something  like  that  among  the  disciples  ?  "  Grow  in  grace  " 
is  the  first  law  of  the  Christian  life.  All  else  comes  under  that  law  and  out  of  it. 
The  fruit,  too,  has  in  it  the  seed :  that  by  which  it  is  perpetuated ;  the  more  fruit, 
the  more  seed.  The  branch  might  think  that  if  it  could,  by  some  process  of 
layering,  multiply  plants,  it  would  be  doing  good  service.  But  so  it  can  never 
accomplish  as  much  as  by  the  natural  way  :  filling  its  fruit,  so  making  seed. 
Nothing  60  tends  to  the  perpetuation  of  the  Christian  faith  as  the  fidelity  to  the 
Christian  standard  of  those  who  bear  the  name  of  Christ.  The  Divine  order  is — 
first,  fruitfulness ;  and,  second,  usefulness.  It  is  fruitfulness  only  which  ever 
come  to  the  hundredfold  of   useful  service.      UI.    Thb   fbcitfulness  of  thb 

DISCIPLE    DEPENDS    UPON    HIS    BELATION    TO    HIS   DiVIMB    TeACHEB    AND   LORD.      The 

branch  gets  its  life  through  the  vine  from  which  it  grows.  It  has  no  life  in 
itself :  cut  it  off,  it  dies.  Does  this  Scripture  tell  us  plainly  in  what  this  abiding 
in  Christ  consists  t  It  does.  1.  It  is  abiding  in  His  words,  in  His  commandments, 
and  having  them  abide  in  us.  It  is  in  keeping  His  commandments,  not  simply 
obeying  them — that,  but  not  only  that;  it  is  in  guarding  them  as  a  sacred  treasure, 
and  protecting  them  from  violation  not  only,  but  from  the  slightest  disrespect.  2. 
It  is  abiding  in  His  love :  and  that  is  not  living  so  that  He  shall  continue  to  love  us, 
but  abiding  in  the  love  of  Him,  proving  that  love  by  lovingly  keeping  His  com- 
mandments ;  abiding  also  in  a  love  like  His  to  others,  and  proving  that  by  a  spirit 
of  self-sacrifice  whose  measure  is  a  willingness  to  lay  down  our  Uves  if  so  we  can 
serve  or  save  them.  8.  It  is  abiding  in  that  fellowship  with  Him  which  finds 
its  natural  expression  in  prayer ;  that  is,  communion  with  Him.  Thus  the  channels 
of  communication  are  kept  open  between  the  vine  andthe  branches,  and  the  life- 
blood  flows  freely  from  the  one  to  and  through  the  other.  (George  M.  Boynton.) 
Fruitfulness  the  true  proof  of  the  tree's  excellence  and   the  gardener's  skiU : — 1 


OHAP.XT.]  ST.  JOHN.  631 

remember  going  over  the  garden  of  a  friend  who  had  taken  up  with  immense 
enthusiasm  some  new  system  of  growing  dwarf  trees.  He  exhibited  hia  garden  to 
me  with  great  pride  as  a  model  of  what  a  garden  ought  to  be.  "  I  presume,"  said  I, 
*'  that  you  get  a  large  quantity  of  fruit."  •'  Fruit  ?  "  was  the  reply — "  fruit  ?  Why, 
I  scarcely  think  about  that ;  "  and  I  found  that  my  friend  had  so  delighted  himself 
with  his  new  scheme,  and  with  the  beauty  of  the  small  trees  all  standing  in  rows,  and 
the  delightfulness  of  their  leaves,  so  bewildered  himself  in  his  enthusiasm  for  hia 
new  method  of  gardening,  that  he  had  deceived  his  own  self  and  was  satisfied  with 
leaves,  and  forgot  that  which  seemed  to  me,  as  a  looker-on,  to  be  the  only  proof 
of  success.  (Bp.  Harvey  Goodwin.)  Christian  fruitfulness : — The  analogies 
ozisting  between  Nature  and  Grace  are  striking  and  beautif  uL  Nor  is  it  at  aU  sur- 
prising that  80  they  should  be.  He  who  formed  the  one  kingdom  formed  also  the  other. 
Nature  is  designed  as  the  type,  the  symbol  of  Grace.  It  was  ever  thus  the 
Saviour  looked  at  it.  To  Him,  Nature  was  always  illustrative,  typical  of  higher 
tniths,  sublimer  realities  than  appeared  on  its  surface.  He  never  rested  in  anything 
short  of  the  spiritual.  On  few  subjects  is  this  analogy  more  frequently  indicated 
than  on  that  of  "  fruit  " — fruit  in  Nature  betokening  fruit  in  grace,  "  First  fruits ;  " 
"  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit ; "  "  the  fruits  of  righteousness ; "  • « fruit  in  its  season ;  " 
•'  His  fruit ; "  "  fruits  of  the  valley,"  &c.  Note — I.  That  fbdit-beabino  is  the  great 
END  OF  ALL  God's  DISPENSATIONS.  Fruit  is  the  great  object  sought  in  all  agricul- 
tural arrangements.  It  ia  not  otherwise  with  the  Great  Husbandman,  the  "  Lord 
of  the  Vineyard."  His  arrangements  who  can  conceive!  They  span  eternity, 
embrace  worlds,  include  the  gift  of  His  Son,  the  Mission  of  His  Spirit,  the  revolu- 
tions of  Providence,  the  breathing  of  inspiration.  His  purpose  is  our  fruitfulness. 
This  too  was  the  Saviour's  object.  For  this  He  was  born,  lived,  died ;  for  this  He 
endured  sorrow ;  for  this  He  still  lives,  pleads,  gives  His  Spirit,  conducts  His  entire 
moral  government.  The  Holy  Spirit  too  works  for  this,  and  uses  all  the  appliances 
He  has  created  and  sustains.  Means  and  opportunities.  Bibles  and  ordinances, 
sanctuaries  and  Sabbaths,  all  exist  for  this.      II.  The  only  fbuit  wb  can  bear, 

THAT  18  ACCEPTABLE  TO   GoD,  COMES  TROM  A   SOURCE  EXTERNAL  TO  OURSELVES.      Much 

instruction  is  conveyed  in  the  figure  here  employed — "fruit."  What  is  it?  It  is 
result,  sequence,  an  effect,  not  a  cause.  It  must  be  thus  with  ourselves.  What 
we  are  in  spirit,  life,  character,  must  come  from  a  hidden  source,  an  inner  nature; 
from  something  •'  back  of  itself."  And  what  is  the  source  of  this  life  ?  There  are 
beautiful  fruits  borne  by  ansanctified  humanity.  Generosity,  amiability,  benevo- 
lence, honour,  kindness.  Unregenerate  nature  cannot  produce  such  fruit  as  ia 
acceptable  to  a  holy  God.  It  follows,  that  in  order  to  acceptable  fruit,  there  must  be 
renovation  of  nature — a  new  principle  of  life.  Begeneration  is  spiritual  grafting, 
the  introduction  of  a  new  life,  the  modification  of  the  old  tree  to  such  an  extent  that, 
though  it  does  not  alter  its  physical  qualities,  its  natural  capacities,  it  altogether 
renovates  its  moral  nature,  and  makes  it  a  new  creation,  capable  henceforth  of 
bearing  acceptable  fruit.  This  Divine  and  blessed  influence,  this  grace  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  comes  alone  from  Christ.  Had  sin  not  entered  our  world  and  tainted  our 
nature,  it  had  come  direct  from  our  Father.  As  it  was  in  paradise,  so  it  would 
have  been  since,  God's  nature  would  have  flowed  into  man's  with  an  unimpeded 
current.  Sin  checked  this,  and  now  the  sacred  influence,  the  Holy  Spirit's  energy 
and  grace  flows  through  another,  even  Christ.  The  whole  spiritual  being  with  all 
its  new  capacities  and  instincts  unfolding  to  Christ.  "  Abiding  " — not  a  state  ex- 
pressed by  fits  and  starts,  spiritual  and  worldly  by  turns ;  but  continuing  ;  in  all 
conditions  of  sorrow  and  joy,  hke  the  branch  in  the  tree — "  abiding."  Is  this  all  ? 
No.  The  branch  thus  abiding  cannot  be  without  the  reception  of  influence.  It 
does  not  give,  it  receives ;  and  assuredly  the  great  Saviour,  the  Celestial  Vine,  will 
not  allow  'any  of  His  branches  thus  to  abide  in  Him  for  nothing.  Are  you  thus 
abiding  ?  Then  you  know  there  comes  from  Him  sap,  nurishment,  energy,  spiritual 
power,  which,  flowing  into  you,  makes  you  at  once  to  adhere  more  closely,  and  also 
to  "  bear  fruit."  "  He  that  abideth  in  Me,  and  I  in  him."  The  latter  is  more  than 
the  former,  though  the  first  is  indispensable  to  the  second.  It  it  important  to  ob- 
serve here,  too,  the  point  of  contact.  What  is  this  ?  On  our  part  it  is  faith  crystal- 
lizing into  prayer.  On  His  the  Word,  the  medium  of  His  Spirit.  Such  is  the 
philosophy  of  Christian  fruit-bearing.  As  the  pomegranate,  the  peach,  the  grape, 
the  fig,  are  the  results  of  elements,  drawn  from  sources  external  to  themselves,  M 
all  the  fruits  borne  by  the  Christian  are  the  result  of  a  true  life  first  given,  then 
sustained  by  Him  who  said,  "I  am  the  Vine,  ye  are  the  branches."  III.  The  results 
yv  SUCH  FBuiT-BSABiNa  ABE  MOST  VALUABLE.    How  great  the  valuo  even  of  material 


633  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  kw, 

fruits  I     •'  Ab  the  earth  bringeth  forth  fruit  of  herself,"  what  a  mint  of  wealth  doea 
she  annually  yield  to  ungrateful  and  sinful  man.    Fields  of  golden  corn,  orcharda 
of  russet  apples,  mountains  of  purple  grapes,  what  an  immense  money  value  they 
express ;  sufficient  to  teU  upon  the  national  exchequer,  to  regulate  the  markets  of 
the  world.     The  "  fruits  of  righteousness  "  which  are  by  Jesus  Christ,  how  great 
their  vaJue  I     They  glorify  God.    "  Herein  is  My  Father  glorified  that  ye  bear  much 
fruit."     God  is  "  glorified  "  variously.    All  His  works  praise  Him,  His  saints  bless 
Him.    Their  praise  is  voluntary,  conscious,  intelligent,  therefore  higher  in  its 
nature,  more  acceptable,  and  worthy.    They  render  it  according  to  their  fruitful- 
ness.     It  vindicates  and  honours  Christianity.    This  is  often  aspersed,  vilified, 
scorned.    While,  thus,  the  gospel  has  brought  forth  fruits  fully  adequate  to  vindi- 
cate its  claims  as  a  system,  it  is  only  as  its  friends  do  this  personally  that  those 
claims  will  be  adequately  recognized.    Oh,  the  value  of  a  fruitful,  practical  coiuse 
of  Christian  life  in  this  respect.    It  vindicates  the  gospel.     It  may  be  silent,  but  it 
is  not  dumb,     A  tree  laden  with  fruit,  whether  a  sapling  or  giant  stem,  is  an  object 
which  speaks  for  itself.     More  than  this,  it  speaks  for  the  soil  in  which  it  grows, 
the  garden  in  which  it  is,  the  husbandman  by  whom  it  is  trained.    These  clusters 
of  themselves  show  what  needs  to  be  known,  so  that  "  we  need  not  to  speak  any- 
thing."   Fruit-bearing  ministers  to  joy.   Christ  would  have  His  disciples  joyful.   It 
is  most  experienced  when  the  soul  is  most  fruitful.   Consciousness  of  improvement 
in  anything,  most  of  all  in  self-culture  and  moral  excellence,  ministers  to  satisfac- 
tion.    Fruitfulness  is  of  inestimable  value  for  the  joy  it  secures.    It  gives  efficacy 
to  prayer.    The  Saviour  recognizes  this  intercourse  when  He  says,  "  If  ye  abide 
in  Me,  and  My  words  abide  in  you,  ye  shall  ask  what  ye  will,  and  it  shall  be  done 
unto  you."    Abiding  in  Me,  My  Spirit  through  My  Word  flowing  into  you,  the 
branch  and  the  Vine  will  become  one.  My  grace  wiU  be  the  source  of  your  fruitfulness. 
My  Spirit  the  inspirer  of  your  prayers.      The  purport  of  all  that  has  been  said  is 
simple  and  practical.     It  says  to  each  and  all,  be  fruitful,  and  seethe  way  in  which 
you  may  become  so.     If  hitherto  unfruitful,  it  says  to  you.  You  are  defeating  the 
great  end  of  your  being,  of  God's  purpose  in  reference  to  you,  of  Christ's  coming 
into  this  world.    Let  me  entreat  you  to  do  this  at  once,  lest  you  lost  the  capacity  for 
it.     The  unfruitful  tree  becomes  less  and  less  likely  to  improve,  till  at  last  it  withers 
and  dies.     (JViney.)        Defective  fruitfulness: — How  many  of  the  professed  dis- 
ciples of  our  blessed  Lord  and  Master  are  there,  who,  while  they  possess  and  mani- 
fest certain  indubitable  excellencies,  and  clearly  exhibit  certain  Christian  graces, 
do,  nevertheless,  appear  to  much  and  serious  disadvantage  by  reason  of  the  total,  or 
almost  total,  absence  of  other  essential  Christian  virtues.    Their  moral  defects  cause 
so  many  gaps  in  the  cluster,  that,  like  a  ragged,  iU-shapen,  and  sparsely  furnished 
bunch  of  grapes,  they  fail  effectively  to  manifest  the  fruit  aright  which  they  actually 
do  produce ;  and  if  they  do  not  bring  their  reUgious  honesty  and  sincerity  into 
serious  doubt,  do  unquestionably  fall  far  short  of  what  they  ought  to  be,  and  what 
they  might  be,  and  what  they  must  try  to  be,  if  they  are  to  be  really  well-written 
epistles,  setting  forth  the  true  character  of  the  Master,  known  and  read  of  all  men. 
In  these  defective  fruit-bearers  there  is  no  proportion,  no  symmetry,  no  sign  or 
pronuse  of  that  ultimate  holiness  which  wiU  make  them  meet  for  the  inheritance 
of  the  saints  in  light.     Whatever  of  good  there  is  in  them  is  largely  discounted  in 
moral  value  as  the  representations  of  the  Christly  character,  and  as  influences  for 
goi>d  on  those  who  dwell  within  their  circle.     They  are  the  subject  of  sore  anxiety 
and  discomfort  to  their  godly  comrades,  and  unfavourably  impress  "  them  that  are 
without  the  knowledge  of  God,"  and  whom  it  is  their  sacred  duty  to  win  to  Christ. 
One  exhibits  the  fruit  of  benevolence,  but  his  temper  is  fitful,  uncertain,  and  at 
times  is  altogether  unrestrained.    Another  bears  the  fruit  of  fidehty ;  nobody  can 
question  his  integrity  or  the  purity  of  his  motives ;  but  be  is  cold,  harfl,  morose, 
ungentle.    A  third  is  full  of  energy,  courage,  action,  but  these  excellent  fruits  are 
spoiled  by  lack  of  patience,  and  his  longsuffering  is  conspicuous  by  its  absence.    A 
fourth,  again,  is  genial,  gentle,  sunny  and  kindly  almost  to  a  fault,  but  he  is  alto- 
gether deficient  in  firmness,  strength  of  principle,  stabihty  of  character,  and  is 
easily  led  away  :  and  so  on  through  all  the  defective  combinations  possible  to  an 
ill-formed  Christian  character.     It  is  to  be  feared  that,  too  often,  the  absence  of 
certain  fruits  of  the  Spirit  not  only  becomes  chronic,  but  has  a  very  noxious  and 
destructive  influence  on  such  as  do  exist,  and  imperils  the  whole  religious  life.    In 
full  consciousness  of  this  the  apostolic  teachers  ever  urge  the  followers  of  the  Perfect 
Man  to  strive  after  moral  completeness.     They  are  to  "  perfect  that  which  is  lack- 
ing ;  "  they  are  to  grow  into  the  ' '  full  stature  of  a  man  in  Ch  rist  Jesus ;  "  they  are 


CHAP.  XV.]  ST.  JOHN.  6M 

to  seek  to  be  "  eanctified  wholly  ; "  and  to  be  "  perfect  and  entire,  lacking  nothing." 
(J.  J.  Wray.)  Fruit-bearing  the  test  of  discipleship  : — I.  How  is  God  olobifiiid? 
It  cannot  be  that  we  can  add  anything  to  His  intrinsic  excellence.  We  can  glorify 
A  man  by  ofi&ce,  by  honours,  in  various  ways ;  but  nobody  can  add  anything  to  God. 
We  can  glorify  Him  only  by  revealing  in  some  degree  what  His  excellencies  are. 
No  man  can  glorify  the  sun  ;  but  when  the  day  has  hung  drooping,  and  by  and  by 
the  clouds  begin  to  fold  and  spread,  and  here  and  there  sun-bursts  come  in,  and  at 
last  the  every-increasing  light  sweeps  out  of  the  whole  heaven  every  cloud,  we  do 
not  create  the  sun,  and  we  do  not  burnish  it ;  but  the  wind  reveals  it.  And  we 
eannot  in  any  way  increase  the  glory  of  God ;  but  in  our  lives  and  dispositions  we 
ean  make  known  to  men  the  quality  of  Divine  attributes.  One  drop  of  water  ia 
enough  to  teach  us  what  liquid  is,  but  one  drop  of  water  would  not  be  enough  to 
teach  as  what  the  Atlantic  ocean  is  if  we  had  not  seen  it ;  and  so  one  single  develop- 
ment of  love  reveals  the  glory  of  the  God  of  love,  although  the  ocean,  the  tides,  the 
infinities  that  belong  to  the  Divine  Nature  we  shall  not  know  until  we  behold  them 
from  a  higher  point  of  vision,  even  if  we  do  then.  II.  If  wb  beab  much  fedit  wb 
oiiORiFT  God.  What  the  fruit  is  we  know  already.  "  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  ia 
love,  joy,  peace,"  &o.  These  are  very  precious  fruits,  and  the  more  we  bring  forth 
the  more  we  reveal  the  nature  of  God.  A  diamond  is  nothing  in  itself ;  and 
yet,  having  the  power  of  refraction  and  reflection,  it  in  every  facet  gives  bril- 
liance and  colour  from  light.  So  it  is  with  those  who  are  reaUy  God's  gems  and 
jewels.  The  light  that  flashes  from  their  lives  from  day  to  day  reflects  Him,  and 
makes  men  easUy  to  know  Him.  Call  back  the  example  of  Christ.  He  was  per- 
petually endeavouring  to  teach  that  the  development  of  a  beautiful  life  was  the 
power  that  He  sought  to  establish.  It  was  not  an  order  of  the  priesthood  or  philo- 
sophy, new  institutions  or  methods  that  He  was  seeking  to  build  up  ;  it  was  to  taka 
man  by  man,  and  develop  in  him  the  kingdom  of  God.  That  is  the  lever,  and  the 
eight  of  the  highest  form  of  manhood  is  the  instrument  by  which  the  world  is  to  be 
converted — has  been,  is,  will  be.  III.  Infbbbnceb.  If  this  be,  then,  the  substance 
of  Christ's  teacbins; — bear  much  fruit ;  so  shall  ye  glorify  your  Father — then  I  re- 
mark— 1.  That  the  growth  of  the  Church  is  not  by  the  numbers  that  are  in  it,  but 
by  the  graces,  the  beauty,  variety  and  ripeness  of  Christian  character.  Whatever 
tends  to  make  men,  looking  upon  you,  revere  you,  love  you,  whatever  lifts  their 
conception  of  your  spiritual  excellence,  gives  strength  to  the  Church.  2.  The 
courses  which  glorify  God  and  make  the  Church  rich  are  within  the  reach  of  every. 
body.  There  is  an  impression  that  the  men  who  have  great  gifts,  great  knowledge, 
are  the  glory  of  the  Church.  No ;  it  is  the  man  who  has  the  most  fruit  of  the  Spirit 
of  God  ;  and  the  qualities  that  constitute  fruit  are  those  that  are  open — to  the  child, 
to  the  ungifted,  to  the  ignorant.  Everybody  knows,  or  may  know,  how  to  be  gentle. 
Everybody  knows  how  to  use  his  tongue,  not  as  a  sword,  but  as  an  instrument  of 
pleasure,  profit,  and  instruction  to  other  men.  There  be  Christians  that  say,  ••  I 
never  speak  in  meeting ;  I  can't."  Very  well,  that  is  all  right.  To  be  dumb  when 
yon  ought  not  to  speak  is  a  very  good  Christian  grace.  "  But  I  am  of  very  little 
account.  I  only  wish  I  could  pray  as  I  hear  brethren  pray.  I  should  be  glad  to 
rise  in  the  meetings  sometimes ;  but  I  know  nobody  wants  to  hear  me."  You  are 
not  fit  to  exhort ;  and  nobody  wants  to  hear  you  explain  Scripture ;  but  if  God  has 
brought  you  out  of  sorrow,  and  you  have  a  word  of  testimony  as  to  how  in  some 
gracious  hour  the  heavens  cleared,  and  your  soul  was  lifted  on  high,  then  you  will 
be  listened  to  with  interest.  No  eloquence  is  like  that  of  a  fact  of  soul  experience. 
The  power  of  the  Church  lies  not  in  its  ordinances,  not  in  its  creed,  but  in  the  life 
of  its  members.  It  is  not  a  declaration  that  creeds  or  organizations  are  valueless. 
A  fence  is  a  very  good  thing  on  a  farm  for  the  sake  of  the  crops  that  grow  inside 
of  it ;  but  there  are  any  number  of  Christian  farms  that  have  high  fences,  and  that 
have  not  a  thing  growing  in  them  but  weeds.  3.  God  saves  by  few  rather  than  by 
many.  One  single  electric  light  in  a  hall  is  better  than  five  hundred  candles.  So 
one  glowing  and  eminent  Christian  hfe  is  better  than  a  whole  church  full  of  toler- 
able Christians ;  and  usually  I  think  it  will  be  found  that  in  the  activities  of  the 
Church  it  is  the  few  and  not  the  many  that  give  it  quality,  influence,  power.  I  do 
not  think  there  is  anything  on  earth  more  beautiful  than  a  vine.  But  some  Chris- 
tian vines  have  not  a  solitary  grape  on  them.  They  are  empty  vines.  But  there 
are  some  that  have  two  or  three  clusters,  here  and  there.  Tliere  are  one  or  two 
things  which  they  do  that  are  conspicuous  and  excellent ;  how  many  Christiana 
are  there  whose  branches  are  loaded  with  the  choicest  fruit,  that  fills  the  air  with 
ita  aroma,  and  deHghts  the  eye,  and  much  more  the  tongue,  if  one  be  privileged  to 


6M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  Xf. 

pluck  and  eat  ?  *•  Herein  is  My  Father  glorified  that  ye  bear  much  fruit."  4.  Faith 
in  Christ  is  like  faith  in  any  master.  If  one,  conscious  of  ignorance  in  music,  goes 
to  some  celebrated  pianist  to  take  lessons,  he  has  faith  in  him,  showing  it  by  the 
fact  that  he  accepts  him  as  a  teacher,  and  then  puts  forth  all  his  exertions  to  do 
the  thing  he  is  taught  to  do.  If  a  man  goes  to  some  great  master  to  study  art,  he 
has  faith  in  him.  Knowing  what  his  reputation  is  he  betakes  himself  to  his  instruo- 
tion,  and  attempts  to  develop  form,  grouping,  colour,  sentiment.  Now  faith  in 
Christ  consists  in  putting  yourself  into  His  hands,  that  you  may  be  what  He  was — 
you  according  to  the  measure  of  your  nature  what  He  was  according  to  the  measure 
of  His  nature.  *'  Put  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.''  Put  on  the  graces  that  made 
Jesus  Christ  pre-eminently  the  Man  of  all  time — the  God-man  ;  and  whoever  accepts 
Christ,  and  every  one  of  all  the  attributes  then  eventuated  in  His  life,  has  faith  in 
Him.  5.  The  tendency  to  judge  of  revivals  is,  I  am  afraid,  becoming  mora 
materialized.  Men  glorify  God  that  a  great  outpouring  of  His  Spirit  has  filled  the 
Churches.  With  what  ?  Some  rivers,  when  they  come  down  in  freshets  in  spring, 
bring  sand,  and  destroy  the  meadows  over  which  they  spread  themselves ;  while 
some  bring  loam,  and  refresh  all  the  meadows  where  the  detrius  settles  down,  in< 
creasing  the  soil.  And  a  revival  is  beneficial  not  by  the  number  of  persons  sup- 
posed to  be  converted,  but  by  the  quality  of  the  conversion  they  have  gone  through. 
The  boy  preacher,  Harrison,  informed  me  that  there  were  twenty-six  hundred  per- 
sons converted  in  one  city  where  he  was.  Twenty-six  hundred  gardens  of  the  Lord  1 
Well,  I  would  like  to  see  those  gardens.  I  would  Uke  to  see  what  they  bring  forth. 
If  they  simply  say  they  are  in  the  Church,  and  have  a  through  ticket  paid  up  to 
heaven,  and  go  back  and  live  just  as  they  always  have  lived,  I  do  not  very  much 
esteem  that ;  but  if  there  could  be  twenty-six  hundred  persons  that  break  out  with 
the  blossom  and  fruit  of  the  Lord's  garden  in  their  hearts,  and  they  could  all  be 
brought  into  the  Church  in  one  company,  the  millennium  would  be  the  next  step, 
right  outside  the  door.  Communities  could  not  stand  such  a  cloudburst  as  that. 
{H.  W.  Beecher.) 

Vers.  9-11.  As  the  Father  hath  loved  Me,  so  have  1  loved  jon.— Divine  love: — 
The  principle  of  Divine  love  constitutes  the  essence  of  true  religion.  Upon  the 
golden  link  of  love  hangs  not  only  the  gospel,  but  also  the  law  and  the  prophets. 
Meditate — I.  Upon  thb  magnitude  of  Chbist'b  love  towabd  us.  The  love  of 
Christ  to  us  may  be  regarded  as  resembling  the  love  of  God  to  His  Son.  1.  As  to 
its  strength.  The  intensity  of  the  love  of  Christ  may  be  fairly  exhibited  by  human 
affection ;  yet  the  Saviour's  love  is  infinitely  stronger  than  all  human  love  com- 
bined. 2.  In  its  freeness.  3.  In  its  durability.  4.  In  its  harmony  with  all  the 
trials  and  sorrows  of  earth.  II.  The  claims  Christ's  love  has  upon  us.  "Con- 
tinue," &c.  It  should  be  realized  and  manifested.  1.  The  fact  that  Jesus  loves 
us  should  be  reahzed  beUevingly.  2.  It  should  be  realized  joyfully.  3.  Should 
prompt  us  to  manifest  our  love  to  Him  in  return.  (G.  Philips.)  The  Divine 
measure  of  love : — 1.  In  John's  Gospel  we  have  God's  love  to  man,  and  in  his  Epistles 
man's  love  to  God.  2.  Each  of  the  apostles  had  his  mission — Paul  to  expound  the 
Divine  decrees,  James  to  hoist  the  standard  of  Christian  duty,  John  to  proclaim 
Divine  love.  So  the  first  propagators  of  Christianity  represented  the  various 
phases  of  Christ's  character.    3.  In  his  treatment  of  love  John  elevated  it.    The 

Eoet,  historian,  dramatist,  found  it  the  most  inspiring  subject.  But  alas !  the 
'ivine  passion  which  left  the  portals  of  immortality  whiter  than  snow  was  dragged 
through  the  culverts  of  human  debasement ;  but  John  took  it  to  the  foot  of  the 
cross,  where  its  stains  were  cleansed,  and  led  it  back  to  the  gate  of  heaven  whiter 
than  before.  I.  The  declabation.  "  As  the  Father,"  &c.  This  was — 1.  Old  love. 
The  question  of  Pharaoh  is  of  frequent  occurrence,  "  How  old  art  thou  ?  "  The 
historian  asks  it  of  the  archives  of  nations,  the  antiquarian  of  ancient  monuments, 
the  geologist  of  primaeval  formations.  Nature  is  venerable  and  has  a  calender 
which  contains  this  record,  *'  In  the  beginning  God  created  the  heavens,"  &o. ;  but 
the  date  when  He  began  to  love  the  Son  is  not  there.  Of  the  old  things  of  life,  old 
friendship  is  the  sweetest.  You  say  "  These  are  very  old  friends  of  mine."  After 
an  absence  of  years  with  what  a  hearty  shake  of  bands  old  friends  greet  each  other! 
Bat  the  oldest  began  to  love ;  Christ's  is  an  everlasting  love.  2.  Great  love.  H 
God  so  loved  the  world  of  imperfect  beings  how  intcnre  His  love  to  His  Son  must 
have  been ;  and  Christ  is  fuller  of  love  to  us  than  the  aun  is  of  light,  or  the  sea  ol 
water.  3.  Enduring  love  (Zech.  iii.  17  ;  John  xiii.  1).  II.  The  advice.  "  Con- 
tinue," &c.     Christ's  love  is — 1.  The  source  of  Christian  discipleship.    The  fol- 


CBAP.  XT.l  8T.  JOHN.  635 

lowers  of  Christ  were  many,  and  were  actuated  by  a  variety  of  motives;  some 
because  of  the  loaves  and  fishes,  some  out  of  admiration,  some  out  of  sympathy,  some 
because  of  His  irresistible  charm.  But  how  quickly  these  sources  of  attraction 
dried  up  1  There  are  many  religious  influences  at  work,  but  only  one  abides  to-day. 
During  winter  and  spring  the  rills  overflow  their  beds,  and  the  villagers  have  no 
need  to  go  far  for  water ;  but  when  summer  comes  all  these  cease  flowing.  The 
village  well,  however,  is  inexhaustible.  BeUgious  life  has  its  rills,  but  the  fountain 
is  Jesus.  Young  converts  should  take  heed  to  the  word  "abide."  2.  The  only 
Bphere  is  which  the  Christian  should  turn.  "  Love  one  another,  so  shall  ye  be  My 
disciples."  Christians  strive  hard  to  love  one  another  and  fail.  The  only  secret 
of  success  in  this  direction  is  to  love  Christ.  3.  The  only  condition  of  safety.  Be- 
hold the  helpless  babe.  Its  safety  is  not  in  its  own  strength,  but  in  its  mother's 
love.  A  mother  once  said  about  her  youngest  son,  "  I  am  not  afraid  of  his  going 
astray;  he  is  so  fond  of  home."  Do  you  want  to  be  safe?  Abide  in  Christ's  love. 
A  mother  begged  her  daughter  to  stay  at  home  one  day ;  she  refused,  and  embarked 
on  the  ill-fated  Princess  Alice,  and  was  lost.  Young  Christian,  allow  the  pleasure- 
boats  of  sin  to  pass  by,  and  stay  at  home  in  Christ's  love.  (T.  Davies,  Ph.D.) 
Christ's  love  for  His  disciples — I.  Is  likb  the  love  the  Father  has  fob  Hm. 
No  being  in  the  universe  is  so  dear  to  the  Infinite  heart  as  Christ ;  yet — 1.  As 
really  as  the  Father  loved  Him  He  loves  us.  The  reality  of  the  Father's  love  for 
Him  was  a  grand  reality  attested  by  His  own  consciousnesss.  He  could  not  doubt 
it.  It  was  proved  to  Him  in  a  thousand  ways,  in  every  faculty  and  fact  of  His  life. 
But  not  less  really  did  He  love  His  disciples.  His  love  for  them  was  a  mighty, 
ever  operating  force  within  Him.  2.  As  disinterestedly.  The  Father's  love  for 
Christ  was  absolutely  and  spontaneously  unselfish,  so  was  Christ's  love  for  His 
disciples.  There  was  nothing  in  them  to  merit  His  affection,  nothing  in  them  to 
render  Him  more  glorious  or  more  happy.  U.  Is  febpetuaied  by  obedience  to 
His  commands.  *•  If  ye  keep  My  commandments,"  &o.  How  does  Christ  retain 
the  love  of  His  Father  ?  By  working  out  His  wiU.  It  would  seem  as  if  the  Father's 
love,  great  though  it  be,  would  wane  and  die  if  the  Son  ceased  to  obey.  So  with 
Christ's  love  towards  His  disciples.  Its  continuance  depends  upon  a  practical 
fulfilment  of  His  will.  It  seems  almost  a  law  of  mind  that  love  must  work  to  live. 
If  it  remain  in  the  mind  merely  as  a  sentiment  or  emotion,  it  will  perish.  The 
mother's  love  is  kept  alive  by  working  for  her  children.  When  the  work  ceases  the 
maternal  affection  wanes.  If  we  would  keep  the  love  of  Christ  strong  in  the  heart 
we  must  keep  His  commandments.  No  emotion  of  the  soul  wUl  strike  root,  live 
and  grow,  except  as  it  is  translated  into  acts.  Love  only  lives  in  deeds.  III.  Yeabks 
TO  UAKE  ITS  objects  HAPPY  (ver.  11).  It  is  the  essence  of  love  to  glow  with 
desires  for  ^,he  happiness  of  its  object.  See  this  in  the  anwearicd  services  of 
parents,  and  in  the  countless  efforts  of  genuine  philanthropy.  In  Christ's  love  for 
man  this  desire  is  unquenchable  and  ever  operating.  To  make  men  happy  was  the 
grand  object  of  His  advent  to  earth.  '*  I  am  come  that  ye  might  have  life."  *'  He 
came  to  heal  the  broken-hearted,"  &o.  Christ  wishes  His  disciples  not  only  to  be 
happy,  but  to  be  fuU  of  happiness.  "That  your  joy  may  be  full."  All  saddening 
emotions  are  foreign  to  Christliness.  Christliness  is  sunshine,  musio,  rapture. 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Abiding  in  love  t — The  last  of  these  verses  shows  that  they 
are  to  be  taken  as  a  kind  of  conclusion  of  the  parable  of  the  vine.  They  have 
three  words  as  their  keynotes — love,  obedience,  joy.  L  Thb  lotb  dt  which  ii  u 
ouB  SWEET  DUTY  TO  ABIDE.  What  shall  we  say  about  these  mysterious  and  pro- 
found words  ?  They  carry  as  into  the  very  depths  of  Divinity.  1.  Christ  here 
claims  to  be,  in  a  unique  fashion,  the  object  of  the  Father's  love,  and  to  be  able  to 
love  like  God.  As  deeply,  purely,  fully,  eternally,  and  with  all  the  unnameable 
perfectnesses  which  must  belong  to  the  Divine  affection,  does  Christ  declare  that 
He  loves  us.  2.  In  this  affection  He  exhorts  us  to  abide.  The  command  to  abide 
in  Him  suggests  much  that  is  blessed,  but  to  have  all  that  mysterious  abiding  in 
Him  resolved  into  abiding  in  His  love  is  infinitely  tenderer,  and  draws  as  still 
closer  to  Himself.  What  is  meant  is  not  oar  continuance  in  the  attitude  of  love  to 
Him,  but  rather  our  continuance  in  the  atmosphere  of  His  love  to  na.  But  then, 
whosoever  thus  abides  in  Christ's  love  to  Him  will  echo  it  back  again  in  an  equally 
continuous  love  to  Him.  3.  This  continuance  is  a  thing  in  our  power  since  it  it 
commanded.  What  a  quiet,  blessed  home  that  is  for  as !  The  image,  I  sappose, 
that  underlies  dwelling  in  Christ,  in  His  joy,  in  His  words,  in  His  peace,  is  tha 
image  of  some  safe  house  in  which  we  may  be  secure.  II.  The  obediehob  bt 
WHioa  wx  ooMTiMCB  IN  Chbist's  lovb.     The  analogy,  on  which  He  ham  alreadj 


136  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHAP.  TVi 

touched,  is  still  continued.  "  If  ye  keep  My  commandments,"  <fec.  Note — 1.  That 
Christ  here  claims  for  Himself  absolute  and  unbroken  conformity  with  the  Father's 
will,  and  consequent  uninterrupted  and  complete  communion  with  the  Father's 
loye.  It  is  the  utterance  of  a  nature  conscious  of  no  sin,  of  a  humanity  that  never 
knew  one  instant's  film  of  separation  between  Him  and  the  Father.  No  more 
tremendous  words  were  ever  spoken  than  these.  2.  Christ  here,  with  His  conscious- 
ness of  perfect  obedience  and  communion,  intercepts  our  obedience  and  diverts  it 
to  Himself.  He  does  not  say,  "  Obey  God  as  I  have  done  and  He  will  love  you ;  " 
but  He  says,  "  Obey  Me  as  I  obey  God  and  I  will  love  you."  Who  is  this  that  thua 
comes  between  the  child's  heart  and  the  Father's  ?  Does  He  come  between  ?  or 
does  He  rather  lead  us  up  to  the  Father,  and  to  a  share  in  His  own  filial  obedience? 
3.  By  keeping  His  commandments,  we  shall  continue  in  that  sweet  home  and  safe 
stronghold  of  His  love.  (1)  Of  course  the  keeping  of  the  commandment  is  some- 
thing more  than  mere  outward  conformity  by  action.  It  is  the  inward  harmony  of 
will,  and  the  bowing  of  the  whole  nature.  (2)  He  will  love  us  better  the  more  we 
obey  His  conunandments,  for  although  His  tender  heart  is  charged  with  the  love 
of  pity  and  of  desire  to  help  towards  all.  He  cannot  but  feel  a  growing  thrill  of 
satisfied  affection  towards  us,  in  the  measure  in  which  we  become  like  Himself. 
(3)  The  obedience  which  we  render  for  love's  sake  will  make  us  more  capable  of 
re:!eiving,  and  more  blessedly  conscious  of  possessing,  the  love  of  Jesus  Christ. 
The  lightest  cloud  before  the  sun  will  prevent  it  from  focussing  its  rays  to  a  burn- 
ing point  on  the  convex  glass.  And  the  small,  thin,  fleeting,  scarcely  visible  acts 
of  self-will  that  sometimes  pass  across  our  skies  will  prevent  our  feeling  the  warmth 
of  that  love  upon  our  shrouded  hearts.  You  cannot  rejoice  in  Jesus  Christ  unless 
you  do  His  will.  You  will  have  no  real  comfort  and  blessedness  in  your  religion 
unless  it  works  itself  out  in  your  daily  lives.  (4)  We  shall  continue  in  Els  love  by 
obedience,  inasmuch  as  eveiy  emotion  which  finds  expression  in  our  daily  life  is 
strengthened  by  the  fact  that  it  is  expressed.  The  love  which  works  is  love  which 
grows,  and  the  tree  that  bears  fruit  is  tbe  tree  that  is  healthy  and  increases.  4. 
So,  note  how  all  these  deepest  things  of  Christian  teaching  come  at  last  to  a  plain 
piece  of  practical  duty.  We  talk  about  the  mysticism  of  John's  Gospel,  about  the 
depth  of  these  last  sayings  of  Jesus  Christ.  Yes !  They  are  mystical,  they  are 
deep,  but  connected  by  the  shortest  possible  road  with  the  plainest  possible  duties. 
It  is  no  use  talking  about  communion  with  Jesus  Christ,  and  abiding  in  Him,  the 
possession  of  His  love,  and  all  those  other  properly  mystical  sides  of  Christian 
experience,  unless  you  verify  them  for  yourselves  by  the  plain  way  of  practice.  IH. 
The  jot  which  follows  on  this  pbactical  obedeencb  (ver.  11).  1.  A  strange 
time  to  talk  of  His  "  joy."  In  half  an  hour  he  would  be  in  Gethsemane.  Was 
Christ  a  joyful  Man  ?  He  was  a  man  of  sorrows.  But  it  is  said  of  Him,  "Thoa 
hast  loved  righteousness,  .  .  .  therefore  God  hath  anointed  Thee  with  the  oil  of 
gladness  above  Thy  fellows."  Absolute  surrender  and  submission  in  love  to  the 
beloved  commands  of  a  loving  Father  made  Him,  in  spite  of  the  baptism  with 
which  He  was  baptized,  the  most  joyful  of  men.  2.  This  joy  He  offers  to  us. 
There  ia  no  joy  to  compare  with  that  deep,  solid,  continuous  sunshine  which  floods 
the  soul,  that  is  freed  from  all  the  clouds  and  mists  of  self  and  the  darkness  of  sin. 
Self-sacrifice  at  the  bidding  of  Jesus  Christ  is  the  recipe  for  the  most  God-like 
gladnesses.  Our  joy  will  remain  if  His  joy  is  ours.  Then  our  joy  will  be  up  to  the 
measure  of  its  capacity,  ennobled,  and  advancing  ever  towards  fuller  possession. 
(A,  ilaclaren,  D.D.)  Continuing  in  Christ's  love: — I.  The  principle  on  which 
THE  PRECEPT  IS  BASED.  *'  As  the  Father  hath  loved  Me,"  &c.  The  particle  •*  as  " 
of  course  does  not  indicate  equality,  but  similitude  ;  and  even  the  similitude  indi- 
cated is  not  absolute.  From  the  very  nature  of  the  objects — the  one,  the  Son- 
infinite — the  other,  Christians — finite — the  love  borne  by  the  Father  to  the  Son 
must,  both  in  nature  and  degree,  exceed  the  love  which  the  Son  bears  to  His  people ; 
and  there  is  at  least  one  point  in  which  there  is  not  resemblance,  but  strong  con- 
trast. Like  the  love  of  the  Father  to  the  Son,  the  love  of  the  Son  to  His  elect  ones 
is — 1.  Unbeginning.  There  never  was  a  period  when  the  Father  began  to  love  His 
Son.  The  only  begotten  Son  was,  from  eternity,  in  the  Father's  bosom  (Prov.  viii. 
22,  23,  30).  In  this  respect  the  Son  loved  His  chosen  people,  predestinated,  as 
they  were,  in  Him  before  the  foundation  of  the  world.  There  was  a  time  when 
they  did  not  love  Him — for  they  did  not  exist;  at  a  time  when,  though  they  might 
have  loved  Him,  they  did  not — they  would  not ;  but  there  never  was  a  time  wheo 
He  did  not  love  them.  2.  Infinite.  The  excellences  of  the  Son,  which  are  the 
ground  of  the  Father's  love,  are  infinite ;  and  so  is — so  muf»t  be — the  Father's  love. 


«HiJP.  xy.)  8T.  JOHN.  637 

The  love  of  the  Sou  to  His  people  cannot  be,  in  this  sense,  infinite ;  bat  we  can  set 
ao  bounds  to  it.  3.  Active.  How  it  manifested  itself  when  there  was  nothing  but 
Deity  in  the  universe,  we  cannot  telL  The  declaration  in  reference  to  one  of  the 
economies  is  true  of  them  all.  "  The  Father  loveth  the  Son,  and  " — 1.«.,  there- 
fore— '*  He  hath  put  all  things  into  His  hand."  The  love  of  the  Son  to  His 
people  is  also  active.  It  has  proved  itself  stronger  than  death.  Whether  we  fix 
our  minds  on  the  value  of  the  innumerable  blessings  it  bestows,  or  on  the  cost  of 
these  blessings  to  Him,  surely  we  must  say,  this  love  has  "  a  height  and  a  depth,  a 
length  and  a  breadth,  that  passeth  knowledge."  4.  Unchanged  and  unchangeable. 
Immutability  is  equally  the  attribute  of  the  Father  and  the  Son ;  and  therefore  it 
is  impossible  that  there  should  be  any  change  in  the  affection  with  which  the  one 
regards  the  other.  In  like  manner  does  the  Son  love  His  people.  He  "  rests  in 
His  love  " — Jesus  is  "  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever. "  The  invariableness 
of  His  love  to  them  wants  one  of  the  foundations  on  which  the  invariable  love  of 
the  Father  to  Him  rests.  He  never  changes ;  but  they  often  do.  5.  Unending. 
While  the  Father  and  the  Son  continue  to  exist,  they  must  continue  to  regard  each 
other  with  infinite  love ;  and,  as  a  token  of  His  everlasting  love,  the  Father  has 
given  the  Son  an  everlasting  kingdom.  The  love  of  the  Son  to  His  people  is  also 
everlasting,  and  proves  itself  in  the  bestowal  of  eternal  blessings.  But  there  is  one 
point  in  wiiich  the  contrast  is  as  striking,  as  the  resemblance.  The  love  of  the 
Father  to  the  Son  was  richly  merited.  But  as  for  the  objects  of  the  love  of  the 
Son,  as  creatures  standing  at  an  infinite  distance  from  Him  who  is  God  over  all, 
blessed  for  ever,  it  would  have  been  wonderful  if  the  Son  had  loved  man,  in  His 
best  estate,  as  the  Father  loved  Him  (Psa.  viii.  4).  But  how  much  more  does  the 
contrast  come  out  when  we  remember  what  they  are.  The  Father's  love  to  the  Son 
was  love  to'  dignity,  moral  beauty,  innocence,  excellence,  perfection ;  but  the 
Son's  love  to  men,  fallen  men,  is  love  to  the  degraded,  the  deformed,  the  con* 
demned,  the  (but  for  His  love)  hopelessly  lost  (Eom.  viii.  8).  II.  The  duty  en- 
JOINED.  "  Continue  in  My  love,"  or,  as  Jude  has  it,  "  Keep  yourselves  in  the  love 
of  God."  To  continue  in  Christ's  love  is  to  continue  in  cherishing  those  affections, 
and  doing  those  actions,  which  are  well-pleasing  in  His  sight ;  and  to  continue  in 
the  enjoyment  of  an  humble  assurance,  that  He  continues  to  regard  us  with  com- 
placential  satisfaction.  The  subject  teaches  us — 1.  How  we  should  regard  official 
station  or  personal  standing  in  the  Church  of  Christ.  We  should  regard  it  as  the 
being  made  branches  of  the  True  Vine ;  as  a  token  of  the  love  of  Christ.  To  be  a 
minister  or  a  member  of  the  Church  is  a  far  higher  honour  than  to  be  a  member  or 
office-bearer  in  the  most  distinguished  hterary  or  political  societies  in  the  world. 
2.  What  is  the  duty  of  those  who,  through  the  love  of  Christ,  have  been  placed  ia 
such  circumstances.  It  is  to  continue  in  His  love.  The  branch  is  put  forth  by 
the  vine,  or  grafted  into  it,  not  for  its  own  honour,  but  that  it  may  grow,  and 
blossom,  and  bring  forth  fruit,  to  the  glory  of  the  vine,  and  the  vine-dresser.  IIL 
The  manner  in  which  compliance  with  the  pbecept  is  to  be  viblded.  By  keeping 
our  Lord's  commandments,  as  He  kept  His  Father's  commandments.  The  following 
may  be  considered  as  among  the  most  comprehensive  and  important  of  our  Lord's 
commandments :  Matt.  xvi.  24  ;  vi.  19,  20,  33  ;  x.  8 ;  Luke  xii.  15 ;  John  xiii.  34. 
Now,  when  a  disciple,  from  regard  to  His  Lord's  authority,  and  from  love  to  His 
person,  yields  a  cheerful  habitual  obedience  to  these  commandments,  he  cannot  but 
continue  in  His  love.  The  eye  of  the  Saviour  cannot  but  rest  complacently  on  him. 
And  this  is  the  only  way  in  which  a  disciple  can  continue  in  his  Master's  com- 
placential  love.  When  the  Father  manifested  His  love  to  His  Son,  by  constituting 
Him  His  great  agent  in  the  restorative  economy,  He  gave  Him  a  commandment 
(Psa.  xl.  7.  8).  He  fully  conformed  Himself  to  this  law;  and,  in  doing  so,  he  con- 
tinued in  His  Father's  love.  Our  obedience  must  have  the  same  leading  characters 
as  our  Lord's  had.  His  obedience  was  the  obedience  of — 1.  Love,  and  so  must 
ours  be.  2.  In  consequence  of  its  being  the  result  of  love,  it  was  cheerful.  So  wa 
must  run  in  the  way  of  His  commandments  with  enlarged  hearts.  3.  Universal — 
it  extended  to  every  requisition  of  the  law.  And  in  our  obedience  there  must  be  no 
reserves,  no  allowed  omissions  or  violations.  4.  Persevering.  He  was  faithful  to 
death,  and  it  is  He  who  endures  to  the  end,  that  so  continues  in  the  Saviour's  lov« 
as  to  be  saved.  IV.  Motives  to  comply  with  the  injunction.  By  continuing  in 
Christ's  love,  by  keeping  His  commandments — 1.  You  will  be  conformed  to  Him, 
your  Lord  and  Master.  Ought  not  the  '•  disciple  to  be  as  His  teacher,"  &c.  It  is 
the  great  design  of  the  Father  of  the  whole  family,  that  the  younger  members,  the 
many  brethren,  should  all  be  conformed  to  their  elder  brother.    2.  Tou  will  minister 


638  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xfi 

to  the  Lord's  enjoymeut.  His  joy  in  us  will  remain,  if,  keeping  His  command- 
ments, we  continue  in  His  love  (ver.  11).  The  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved  breathed 
the  Spirit  of  Him  on  whose  bosom  he  had  been  accustomed  to  lean,  when  he  said, 
"I  have  no  greater  joy,"  &c.  (3  John  4.)  And  Paul  (Phil.  20).  Our  Lord  had  joy 
in  His  disaiples,  &c.  (Matt.  xi.  25.)  His  joy  in  them  was  proportioned  to  the 
degree  in  which  they  were  made  holy,  useful,  and  happy,  through  the  influence  of 
His  word  and  Spirit.  3.  You  will  promote  your  own  happiness.  While  Christ's 
joy  in  us  remains,  our  joy  in  Him  will  be  full.  (J.  Brown,  D.D.)  Obedient  love 
bringing  fulness  of  joy : — I.  Love  in  its  bikth.  Christ  loved  us  first,  and  this 
was  after  the  model  of  the  Father's  to  Him.  It  was,  therefore — 1.  A  free  love.  2. 
An  eternal  love.  3.  A  deep  and  infinite  love.  To  believe  in,  and  to  receive  Christ's 
love,  awakens  in  our  hearts  reciprocal  love  to  Him.  II.  Love  in  its  continuance. 
The  law  of  continuance  in  love  is  obedience :  obedience  to  Christ  after  the  model 
of  His  obedience  to  the  Father.  1.  What  are  we  to  obey  ?  The  moral  law  which 
is  Christ's,  and  His  special  evangelical  laws.  2.  Why  ?  Out  of  gratitude  to  Him, 
as  the  condition  of  His  continued  love  to  us.  3.  How  ?  As  Christ  obeyed  God : 
cheerfully,  heartily,  unreservedly,  even  unto  death.  Thus  will  our  love  be 
sustained :  not  otherwise.  UL  Love  in  its  fbdition.  1.  This  obedience  leads 
to  fruitfulness  in  doing  good  to  others — which  pleases  God.  2.  It  occasions  joy  to 
the  soul  that  loves  and  obeys.  Conclusions :  1.  How  to  be  happy  ?  By  loving 
Christ.  2.  How  to  foster  love  to  Christ  t  By  diligently  doing  His  commandments. 
(T.  G.  Horton.) 

Ver.  10.  If  ye  keep  My  commandments,  ye  shall  abide  In  My  love. — The  con' 

dition  of  abiding  in  Christ's  love  : — Wiiat  is  implied  in  that  keeping  of  His  com- 
mandments, which  is  essential  to  abiding  in  His  love  ?  The  keeping  of  all  those 
commandments  of  His — I.  Which  refer  to  the  maintaining  of  spiritual  communios 
WITH  Himself.  He  kept  constantly  all  such  commandments  of  His  Father,  and  so 
continued  in  His  Father's  love.  If  we  would  abide  in  Christ's  love,  we  must 
imitate  Him  and  make  an  earnest  use  of  the  means  of  grace.  There  are  those 
who  neglect  these,  and  thus  plainly  do  not  keep  God's  commandments.  There  are 
others  who  do  not  quite  neglect  them,  and  yet  do  not  use  them  as  Christ's  com- 
mandments require,  and  therefore  not  so  as  to  benefit  by  them.  II.  Which  beqoibb 
us  TO  BE  LIKE  HiMSELF  IN  SPIRIT.  We  must  Seek  after  the  wisdom,  truthfulness, 
delicacy  of  feeling,  purity  of  heart,  disinterestedness,  patience,  humility,  chaiity, 
piety,  and  all  those  other  excellencies  which  were  included  in  His  perfection.  What 
a  number  of  people  there  are  so  engrossed  in  business  that  they  can  find  no  time 
for  moral,  or  mental,  or  spiritual  culture  1  Others,  again,  feel  that  Christ  has  claims 
upon  them,  and  that  they  should  be  at  work  in  His  service ;  but  they  are  not 
thoughtful,  and  do  not  realize  how  much  of  Christ's  work  is  inward,  not  outward. 
There  is  a  great  deal  of  so-called  *'  doing  good  "  which  is  very  worthless  and  comes 
to  nothing,  because  it  does  not  flow  naturally  from  real  inward  goodness.  Be  good 
and  you  will  do  good,  without  having  to  go  out  of  your  way  to  seek  to  do  it.  III. 
Which  eefeb  to  the  ordinary  common  duties  of  daily  life — to  the  relationships 
in  which  we  are  placed  by  nature  and  Providence ;  and  if  we  would  continue  in  Christ's 
love,  we  must  be  careful  to  obey  these.  The  Christian  life  is  to  fill  and  beautify 
our  whole  existence.  It  is  not  by  what  a  man  does  on  special  occasions  in  pubhc, 
or  to  those  who  seldom  come  into  contact  with  him,  that  you  can  form  an  accurate 
estimate  of  him,  but  by  his  daily  ordinary  life — by  knowing  what  sort  of  son  or 
brother  he  has  been,  or  what  sort  of  a  husband  he  ia.  Love  to  Christ  will  show 
itself  much  better  there  than  anywhere  else.  It  is  especially  through  these  that 
God  seeks  to  train  into  order  and  obedience,  into  nobleness  and  freedom,  the  souls 
of  the  children  of  men.  IV.  Which  point  us  to  a  life  of  active  beneficence  ; 
and  if  we  would  continue  in  His  love,  we  must  do  good  to  all  men.  Christ's  death 
for  all  men  pledges  us  to  the  love  of  all  men.  To  abide  in  the  love  of  Christ,  we 
must  seek  to  lessen  pain  and  suffering,  ignorance  and  crime,  wrong  and  injustice, 
ftnd  to  make  all  to  whom  our  influence  can  reach  better  and  happier.  Thus  living 
in  love  to  our  brethren,  for  whom  Christ  died,  we  shall  hve  in  the  love  of  Christ, 
who  died  for  them  as  well  as  for  us.     {R.  Flint,  D.D.) 

Ver.  11.  These  things  have  I  spoken  unto  you,  that  My  Joy  might  remain  In 
vou. — Christ's  things  to  make  His  disciples  happy  : — A  revelation  of — I.  Heaves 
(chap.  xiv.  1-6)  as — 1.  A  Father's  house.  2.  Capacious.  3.  Prepared.  4.  Taken 
to  by  Himself.    II.  The  Fatheb.     1.  Christ  teUs  them  that  they  have  a  Father. 


<JHAP.IT,J  -ST.  JOHN.  «S9 

That  was  the  great  want  of  their  bouIs.  2.  He  tells  them  that  those  who  have 
seen  Hun  have  seen  the  Father.  All  the  love,  faithfulness,  tenderness,  wisdom  of 
the  Father  was  in  Him.  Therefore  they  might  trust  Him.  III.  The  Spibit  (chap, 
xiv.  12-31).  He  tells  them  that  He  would  not  leave  them  comfortless.  The  Spirit 
would — 1.  Give  them  power  to  do  wonderful  works.  2.  Qualify  them  to  pray  suc- 
cessfully. 3.  Abide  with  them  for  ever.  IV.  Union  with  Himself  (vers.  1-11). 
He  showed  that  this  union  was — 1.  Vital.  2.  Fruitful.  3.  Necessary.  {R.  V. 
Pryce,  LL.B.)  Christ's  joy : — The  greatest  of  sufferers  was  the  happiest  of  men. 
He  exulted  in  the  prospect  of  Gethsemane  and  the  Cross.  I.  His  own  joy.  It 
waa  the  joy — 1.  Of  uninterrupted  communion  with  the  Father  (chap.  iv.  31,  32). 
2.  Of  accomplishing  His  Father's  wiU  (Heb.  x.  7 ;  Psa.  xl.  6 ;  Luke  xxii.  41).  3. 
Of  anticipating  the  result  of  His  great  work  (Isa.  xiii.  11 ;  Heb.  xii.  2).  II.  The 
believer's  pabticipation  in  the  joy.  1.  It  is  the  Saviour's  joy.  Is  it  possible  to 
have  this?  Yes;  we  may  partake  of  the  joys  of  fellowship,  obedience,  hope. 
Present  service  is  ours,  and  future  victory  will  be.  2.  It  is  a  joy  that  may  be  full, 
or  fulfilled.  A  man  has  joy  as  soon  as  he  becomes  a  believer,  but  it  is  not  filled 
np.  Jesus  wishes  it  to  be,  and  puts  into  his  hand  a  cup  of  joy  which  ovei  flows. 
It  is  a  paradox  ;  but  the  Christian,  though  sorrowful,  is  always  rejoicing  (2  Cor.  i. 
8-6 ;  vi.  9,  10 ;  Phil.  ii.  17  ;  iv.  4).  3.  It  is  a  joy  which  none  can  take  away 
^chap.  xvi.  22).  It  is  not  in  the  power  of  the  world  to  rob  a  Christian  of  his 
joy.  {T.Stephenson.)  The  sources  of  Christ' s  joy  : — I.  The  beauty  and  peefec- 
TioN  07  His  own  chabacteb.     1.  As  an  innocent  child.     2.  As  a  righteous  man. 

n.    H3   EXQUISITE    SENSE   OF   THE    MEANING   AND   BEAUTY  OF   NATURE.        No    artist,    Ot 

poet,  or  psalmist  so  revelled  in  the  glories  of  creation.  He  might  well  do  so  ;  for 
He  knew  it  with  the  knowledge  not  of  a  spectator  or  student,  but  of  a  Maker.     III. 

His   TESTIMONY   OF   Hl3   FATHER,    DECLARING   HiS   NAME    AND   W0NDE0U8     LOVE,         If    a 

Newton  cannot  tell  his  discoveries  without  being  over-joyed  ;  if  a  reformer  cannot 
but  be  enthusiastic  about  his  mission,  what  must  Christ  have  felt,  whose  work  was 
to  reveal  the  Father?  IV.  His  life  of  sebvice  and  self-sacrifice  (Heb.  xii.  3). 
{J.  T,  Stannard.)  Christ's  inner  joy  : — I.  Its  sources.  1.  The  consciousness  of 
the  abiding  presence  of  the  Father.  Harmony  of  Spirit  with  heaven.  2.  The 
obedience  and  attachment  of  the  disciples.  Great  is  the  joy  of  a  tutor  or  parent 
when  the  scholar  or  child  manifests  proficiency  and  perseverence.  3.  The  bene- 
ficent effects  of  His  working.  It  was  His  joy  to  take  this  up,  and  his  meat  to 
finish  it.  4.  The  foresight  of  the  working  of  His  truth  in  the  world,  and  its 
ultimate  results.  "  He  shall  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged."  "  He  shall  see  of  the 
travail  of  His  soul."  H.  Its  chabactebistics.  1.  It  was  not  like  the  joy  of  the 
world,  which  is  often  mere  levity,  never  lasts,  and  is  quenched  by  death.  2.  It 
was — (1)  A  steady  joy.  All  through  His  life,  from  His  infancy  to  His  Cross,  we 
eee  calm  joy  and  obedience.  (2)  A  joy  in  the  prospect  of  death  (Heb.  xii.  3).  (3) 
A  lasting  joy,  not  variable,  like  that  of  many  of  us — grasping  at  the  clouds  one 
day,  and  the  next  in  the  depths  of  despair.  (4)  A  shared  joy.  He  lived  not  for 
Himself,  but  for  others.  Those  who  seek  to  bless  others  are  always  the  most 
happy.  III.  Its  influence.  Strength-inspiring,  health-giving.  Sterne  said  every 
smile  tends  to  lengthen  out  the  fragment  of  our  lives.  No  wonder,  with  this  in- 
spiration, the  apostles  became  what  they  did.  What  manner  of  men  ought  we  to 
be  f  (Homiletic  Magazine.)  The  fellowship  of  Christ's  joy  the  source  of  true 
blessedness : — This  saying  is  strange,  because  our  idea  of  Christ  is  that  of  the  man 
of  sorrows.  Only  on  one  occasion  are  we  told  that  He  rejoiced.  But  the  saying 
seems  stranger  still  when  we  look  at  the  circumstances  under  which  it  was  uttered 
— in  sight  of  the  agony  and  the  Cross.  Then  remember  to  whom  it  was  spoken : 
to  men  for  whom  He  had  predicted  martyrdom.  I.  What  was  the  blessedness 
OF  Chbist?  Note — 1.  That  the  blessedness  of  the  infinite  God  is  essentially  in- 
comprehensible. The  thought  of  Qod  is  necessarily  the  thought  of  One  infinite 
and  eternal,  without  limit  or  change.  But  we  can  only  conceive  of  blessedness  as 
a  change  from  the  less  to  the  more  blessed.  We  know  the  light  by  knowing  the 
darkness,  and  joy  only  by  its  changes.  We  are  obliged,  therefore,  to  think  of  God 
as  rejoicing  in  His  world,  and  as  rising  to  a  higher  gladness  when  He  had  peopled 
His  univeise  with  creatures.  In  these  two  contradictory  thoughts,  both  of  which 
we  must  think  and  yet  cannot  reconcile,  lies  the  mystery  of  the  ever  blessed  God. 
2.  In  God  revealed  in  Christ,  the  mystery  is  yet  deeper.  How,  if  one  with  the 
Infinite,  could  His  joy  ever  fail  ?  Why,  if  foreseeing  the  results  of  His  mission, 
could  He  sorrow  ?  But  observing  Christ  on  His  human  side.  His  blessedness  as 
the  God-Man  must  be  in  some  measure  comprehensible.    He  humanity  was  as  pei^ 


640  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  it. 

feet  as  His  divinity,  and  the  emotions  of  the  human  Christ  we  can  partly  nnder- 
stand ;  and  this  will  lead  us  to  a  comprehension  in  part  of  His  Divine  joy.  3. 
The  elements  of  His  joy  were  twofold.  It  came,  He  tells  us — (1)  By  keeping  the 
Father's  commandments.  It  was  the  feeling  that  He  did  not  live  for  Himself — 
that  He  existed  as  Man  to  reveal  the  full  glory  of  eternal  love,  that  every  toil  and 
Borrow  were  helping  on  the  Divine  plan  for  man's  redemption — that  formed  His 
joy.  (2)  By  abiding  in  the  Father's  love.  Men  might  desert  Him — this  never  did. 
His  human  nature  might  tremble,  but  His  eye  pierced  beyond  the  sorrow  into  the 
sunshine  of  the  Divine  law  behind  it,  and  that  was  a  mighty  joy.  Hence  His  fre- 
quent hours  of  prayer.  (3)  Combining  these  two  elements,  we  may  understand 
how  it  was  that  He  spoke  of  it  so  soon  after  His  Spirit  was  troubled.  For  His 
blessedness  and  suffering  arose  from  one  source :  the  doing  of  the  Father's  will. 
The  consciousness  of  complete  self- surrender  gave  Him  gladness;  yet  the  sur- 
render produced  the  sorrow.  JJ.  Can  that  joy  be  communicated  7  We  find  the 
answer  in  the  preceding  verse.  Like  their  Master,  the  disciples  were  to  surrender 
life  to  be  the  organ  of  God's  will,  and  then  the  consciousness  of  His  love  would 
dawn.  In  a  sense,  joy  and  sorrow  are  incommunicable.  "  The  heart  knoweth  its 
own  bitterness,"  &c.  But  they  are  communicable  just  as  we  are  one  in  sympathy 
and  purpose  with  a  friend.  I  know  nothing  of  the  joy  of  a  stranger ;  but  I  do 
know  the  joy  of  a  man  with  whom  I  am  bound  by  the  deep  sympathies  of  love.  So 
to  enter  into  Christ's  joy  we  must  become  Christ-like.  Amid  anxiety  and  sorrow,  a 
man  first  gives  up  his  all  to  God ;  and  amid  His  suffering  there  flashes  the  convic- 
tion, "  God  loves  me,"  and  there  steals  over  his  heart  a  blessedness  which  is  the 
joy  of  the  Lord.  III.  The  fellowship  of  Chkist's  blessedness  is  the  onlt 
socKCE  OF  PERFECT  JOT.  Perfect  joy  has  two  conditions.  1.  In  its  source  it  must 
be  self-surrender  to  the  highest  love.  All  inward  discord  destroys  joy,  and  that 
discord  only  ceases  when  a  man  loses  the  thought  of  self  in  devotion  to  somethmg 
he  regards  as  greater.  The  man  who  toils  for  wealth  is  never  satisfied,  because  in 
the  pursuit  he  is  trying  to  lose  the  sense  of  self.  The  pleasure-seeker  plunges  into 
every  excitement  that  will  drown  reflection.  The  ambitious  man  loses  the  thought 
of  self  in  the  intense  yearning  for  future  achievement.  In  fine,  man  pants  for  the 
Infinite — for  a  boundless  something  to  which  he  may  yield  his  heart  and  be  con- 
scious of  himself  no  more.  This  explains  the  idea  of  final  absorption  into  the 
Deity,  and  the  belief  in  the  eternal  sleep  of  death.  But  fellowship  with  the  eternal 
joy  of  Christ  furnishes  the  only  anodyne  to  the  unresting  sense  of  self.  2.  Beal 
enjoyment  must  be  independent  of  outward  changes.  The  longing  to  attain  a  state  of 
life  superior  to  the  accidents  of  time  and  change  shows  this.  The  wisest  men  have 
spoken  of  following  the  right,  in  the  face  of  all  consequences,  as  the  source  of  the 
highest  joy.  The  fellowship  of  Christ's  joy  gives  this.  It  gave  it  to  Paul,  who  was 
enabled  thereby  to  glory  in  infirmity.  Even  death,  which  damps  the  joy  of  all  other 
men,  consummates  the  blessedness  of  those  who,  through  fellowship  of  life,  are 
partakers  of  the  joy  of  Christ.    (E.  L.  Hull,  B,A.)  The  abiding  joy : — L  Its 

BOUBCB,  "  These  things  have  I  spoken  unto  you."  He  referred  them  especially  to 
what  He  had  just  said.  Union  with  Christ.  "  I  am  the  Vine,"  &o.  1.  To  be 
one  with  Christ  is  to  enjoy  the  peace  of  God.  2.  To  be  one  with  Christ  is  to  walk 
in  the  right  path — the  path  of  truth,  virtue,  and  honour.  He  is  the  Way.  3.  To 
be  one  with  Christ  has  its  prospects.  The  crown  is  beyond  the  Cross.  '*  Ye  have 
heard  how  I  said  unto  you,  I  go  away,  and  come  again  unto  you."  II.  Its  con- 
TiKCANCB.  "That  My  joy  may  remain  in  you."  The  promise  implies  a  state  of 
heart  which  is  never  without  sources  of  joy.  Christians  are  subject  to  natural  and 
moral  grief ;  but  when  the  clouds  obscure  the  light  and  make  the  atmosphere  cold, 
the  son  is,  nevertheless,  in  the  heavens.  Christian  joy  is  perpetual,  because — 
(1)  Jesus  is  the  same,  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever,  without  change.  The 
streams  never  dry  while  the  fountain  is  full.  (2)  Intercommunion  never  fails.  He 
has  ordained  means  which  are  infallible.  This  is  a  bold  saying ;  but  as  the  sun 
cannot  fail  to  give  life,  the  promise  cannot  fail  to  give  comfort,  prayer  cannot  fail 
to  bring  the  blessing,  and  the  communion  of  saints  cannot  fail  to  generate  love. 
ni.  Its  BXPANsrvENESs — "  That  your  joy  might  be  full."  The  growth  of  the  child, 
or  the  increased  light  of  the  sun  until  the  perfect  day,  or  the  journey  of  the  pilgrims 
Zion-ward,  represents  the  advancing  state  of  grace.  (1)  Full  in  respect  of  its 
object.  We  have  only  touched  the  hem  of  His  garment  as  yet.  As  faith  is  turned 
into  sight,  our  joy  increases.  (2)  Full  in  respect  of  the  subject.  It  is  possible 
only  when  all  fear  of  sin  and  death  is  removed.  "Bejoice  evermore";  that  is, 
rejoice  on  to  rejoicing,  for  sources  of  anxiety  are  left  behind,  and  you  and  Christ 


CHAP.  XV.]  ST,  JOHN.  641 

are  one.  (Weekhj  Pulpit.)  The  Christianas  joy : — 1.  Jesus  spoke  these  words  to 
those  who  were  about  to  be  His  representatives  in  the  world.  It  was  no  easy  mis- 
sion on  which  He  was  sending  them  ;  but  it  was  His  will  that  they  should  go,  not 
as  soldiers  on  a  forlorn  hope,  with  the  courage  of  despair,  but  in  that  holy  joyoug 
tone  of  spirit  which  means  the  courage  of  confident  victory.  And  what  He  means 
for  one  set  of  disciples  He  means  for  all.  2.  Note  three  elements  of  Christ's  joy. 
I.  His  filial  joy.  We  are  brought  into  the  presence  of  it  in  chap.  xvii.  Now  it 
is  His  will  that  we  should  share  the  joy  of  sonship.  We  may  do  this  by  faith  in 
His  name  and  the  possession  of  the  Spirit  of  Adoption  which  He  gives.  What  joy 
can  equal  that  of  even  the  greatest  sufferer  who  trusts  and  delights  in  his  Father 
in  heaven?  H.  The  joy  of  service.  "  I  delight  to  do  Thy  will."  Even  beyond 
results,  beyond  the  luxury  of  doing  good,  there  is  a  joy  in  the  very  serving  itself. 
To  gather  the  wanderers,  to  win  the  young,  to  alleviate  suffering,  drives  away  a 
thousand  black  thoughts,  and  fills  the  individual  heart  and  the  Church  with  joy. 
What  a  joyful  ring  there  is  in  "Neither  count  I  My  life  dear  unto  Myself,  that  I  might 
finii  h  My  course  with  joy."  The  self-same  joy  is  open  to  us.  Instead  of  being 
self-seekers,  let  us  simply  ask,  "  What  is  the  will  of  God  for  me  ?  "  The  narrow, 
dissatisfied,  unhappy,  will  find  their  cure  here.  III.  The  Savioub-joy.  There  are 
many  passages  in  which  this  conies  into  view — e.g.,  when  Jesus  saw  the  poor  and 
lowly  gathering  around  Him,  He  "  rejoiced  in  spirit";  and  then,  when  the  publican 
and  sinner  drew  near.  He  likened  Himself  to  the  shepherd,  who  in  rescuing  the 
lost  sheep,  called  his  friends  together,  saying,  "rejoice  with  me."  This  is  the  joy 
for  which  He  endured  the  Cross  aud  despised  the  shame.  Now  He  will  have  all 
Christians  share  in  that  very  joy,  and  be  glad  in  the  fruits  of  the  travail  of  Hia 
Boul.  {J,  Culross,  D.D.)  The  nature  and  sources  of  Christian  joy  : — This  Divine 
joy  is  planted  in  the  soul  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  It  is  therefore  an  inward  and 
spiritual  joy ;  it  is  deep-rooted  in  the  heart ;  it  is  solid  and  well  founded  ;  it  is 
abiding  and  lasting ;  it  is  a  satisfying  joy,  and  purifying  in  its  effects.  It  is  a  joy 
that  flourishes  most  in  adversity.  It  is  a  communicative  joy.  A  man  has  not 
tasted  what  religion  is  if  he  does  not  seek  to  impart  this  joy  to  others.  It  is  the 
joy  of  communion  with  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Chiist.  It  is  a  humble  joy ; 
but  it  causes  a  man  •'  to  triumph  in  Cbrist."     (R.  Cecil,  31. A.)  Happiness  and 

joy  : — Christ  enters  the  world  bringing  joy :  '*  Good  tidings  of  great  joy."  So  now 
He  leaves  it,  bestowing  His  gospel  as  a  gift  of  joy.  This  testament  of  His  joy  He 
also  renews  in  His  parting  prayer  :  "  These  things  I  speak  in  the  world,  that  they 
might  have  My  joy  fulfilled  in  themselves."  "Man  of  sorrows  "  though  we  call 
Him,  still  He  counts  Himself  the  Man  of  joy.  It  is  an  impression  that  the  Christian 
life  is  one  of  hardship  and  suffering:  Christ,  you  perceive,ha8  no  such  conception  of  it, 
and  no  such  conception  is  true.  I.  To  clear  this  truth,  it  is  necessary,  first  of  all,  te 
exhibit  the  mistake  of  not  distinguishing  between  happiness  and  jot.  1.  There 
is  a  distinction  represented  in  the  words  tLemselves.  (1)  Happiness  is  that  which 
happens  or  comes  by  an  outward  befalling.  It  is  what  money  yields,  or  will  buy — 
settlement  in  life  or  rank,  political  standing,  victory,  power.  All  these  stir  a  delight 
in  the  soul,  which  is  not  of  the  soul,  but  from  without.  Hence  they  are  looked 
npon  as  happening  to  the  soul,  and,  in  that  sense,  create  happiness.  The  Latin 
word  "  fortune  "  very  nearly  corresponds  with  the  Saxon.  For  whatever  came  to 
the  soul,  bringing  it  pleasure,  was  considered  to  be  its  good  chance,  and  was  called 
fortunate.  (2)  But  joy  differs  from  this,  as  being  of  the  soul  itself.  And  this 
appears  in  tne  original  form  of  the  word,  which,  instead  of  suggesting  a  "  hap," 
literally  denotes  a  "  leap  "  or  "  spring."  Here  again,  also,  the  Latin  had  "  exult " 
— a  "leaping  forth."  The  radical  idea,  then,  of  joy  is  that  the  soul  has  such 
springs  of  Hfe  opened  in  its  own  blessed  virtues,  that  it  pours  forth  a  sovereign  joy 
from  within.  It  is  not  the  bliss  of  condition,  but  of  character.  2.  And  we  have 
many  symbols  of  joy  about  us  from  which  we  might  take  the  hint  of  a  feUcity 
higher  than  the  mere  pleasures  of  fortune  or  condition  :  the  sportive  children,  too 
full  of  life  to  be  able  to  restrain  their  activity ;  the  birds  pouring  out  their  music, 
simply  because  it  is  in  them.  Precisely,  too,  history  shows  us  the  saints  of  God 
singing  out  their  joy  together  in  caves  and  dens  of  the  earth,  and  the  souls  of 
martyrs  issuing,  with  a  shout,  from  the  fires  that  crisp  their  bodies.  II.  It  is 
necessary,  in  order  to  a  right  conception  of  Christian  joy,  as  now  defined,  that  we 
discover  how  to  dispose  of  cebtain  facts,  which  commonly  peoduck  a  contbabt 
impression.  1.  Tbus,  when  the  Saviour  bequeaths  His  jov  to  us.  He  lives  a  perse- 
cuted life,  and  passes  through  an  agony  to  His  death.  WTiere,  then,  is.  the  joy  of 
which  He  speaks?  To  this  I  answer  that  He  was  a  Man  of  sorrows  in  the  matter 
VOL.   u.  41 


6«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap.  Xf. 

of  happiness  ;  that  is,  in  the  outward  condition  of  His  earthly  state  ;  still  He  had 
ever  within  a  joy,  a  spring  of  good,  which  was  perfectly  sufficient.  Indeed,  Ha 
reveals  the  victorious  power  of  joy  in  the  Divine  nature  itself  ;  for  God,  in  the  con- 
tradictions of  sinners,  suffers  a  degree  of  abhorence  and  pain  that  may  properly  be 
called  unhappiness;  and  He  would  be  an  unhappy  Being  were  it  not  that  the  love 
He  pours  into  their  bosom  is  to  Him  a  welling  up  eternally  of  conscious  joy.  And 
exactly  so  He  represents  Himself  in  the  incarnate  person  of  Christ.  In  His  parable 
of  the  shepherd  calUng  in  bis  neighbours  to  rejoice  with  him  over  the  sheep  he  haa 
foand,  He  opens  the  joy  He  feels  as  being  that  Shepherd.  And  then,  how  much 
does  it  signify  when,  coming  to  the  close  of  His  career,  He  says,  glancing  backward 
in  thought  over  all  He  has  experienced,  "  My  joy,"  bequeathing  it  to  His  disciples  as 
His  dearest  legacy.  What,  then,  does  it  signify  of  real  privation  or  loss  to  become 
His  follower  1  2.  But  it  requires,  you  will  say,  painful  thought  to  begin  such  a 
life — sorrow,  repentance,  self-renunciation,  and  to  pass  through  life  under  a  cross. 
How  can  the  Christian  life  be  called  a  life  of  joy  ?  It  is  not,  I  answer,  in  these 
things,  taken  simply  by  themselves.  But  consider  what  labours,  cares,  self-denials, 
all  men  have  to  suffer  in  the  way  of  what  is  called  success — in  scholarships,  e.g.^ 
and  in  war.  Are  these  made  unhappy  because  of  the  losses  they  are  obhged  to 
make  ?  Are  they  not  rather  raised  in  feeling  on  this  very  account  ?  But  how  is 
this  ?  The  solution  is  easy,  viz.,  that  the  sacrifice  made  is  a  sacrifice  of  happiness, 
a  sacrifice  of  comfort  of  condition  ;  and  the  gain  made  is  a  gain  of  something  more 
ennobling,  a  gain  that  partakes  of  the  nature  of  joy.  The  man  of  industry  and 
enterprise  says  within  himself.  These  are  not  gifts  of  fortune ;  they  are  my  con- 
quests, tokens  of  my  patience,  economy,  application,  fortitude,  integrity.  In  them 
his  soul  is  elevated  from  within.  And  it  will  be  found  that  even  worldly  men 
despise  mere  happiness.  None  but  the  tamest  will  sit  down  to  be  nursed  by  for- 
tune.  In  such  a  truth  you  may  see  how  it  is  possible  for  the  repentances,  sacrifices, 
self-denials,  and  labours  of  the  Christian  life  to  issue  in  joy.  III.  The  positivb 
REALITY  ITSELF.  Wc  notice — 1.  The  fact  that,  in  a  life  of  selfishness  and  sin, 
there  is  a  well-spring  of  misery  which  is  now  taken  away.  No  matter  how  for- 
tunate the  external  condition  of  an  unbelieving,  evil  mind,  there  is  yet  a  disturb- 
ance, a  sorrow  within,  too  strong  to  be  mastered  by  any  outward  felicity.  The 
whole  internal  nature  is  in  a  state  of  discord.  And  this  discord  is  the  misery,  the 
hell  of  sin.  How  much,  then,  does  it  signify  that  Christ  takes  away  this  ?  For 
Christ  is  the  embodied  harmony  of  God,  and  he  that  receives  Him  settles  into 
harmony  with  Him.  Just  to  exterminate  the  evil  of  the  mind,  and  clear  the 
sovereign  hell  which  sin  creates  in  it,  would  suffice  to  make  a  seeming  paradise. 
2.  Besides,  there  is  a  fact  more  positive :  the  soul  is  no  sooner  set  in  peace  with 
itself  than  it  becomes  an  instrument  in  tune,  discoursing  heavenly  music  ;  and  now 
no  fires  of  calamity,  no  pains  of  outward  torment,  can  for  one  moment  break  the 
sovereign  spell  of  its  joy.  3.  But  we  must  ascend  to  a  plane  that  is  higher.  Little 
conception  have  we  of  the  soul's  joy,  or  capacities  of  joy,  till  we  see  it  established 
in  God.  It  dares  to  call  Him  Father  without  any  sense  of  daring.  It  is  strong 
with  His  strength.  It  turns  adversity  into  peace,  for  it  sees  a  friendly  hand  minis- 
tering only  good  in  what  it  suffers.  In  dark  times  it  is  never  anxious,  for  God  is 
its  trust,  and  God  wiU  suffer  no  harm  to  befaU  it.  To  a  mind  thus  tempered,  for- 
tune can  add  little,  and  as  little  take  away.  4.  The  Christian  type  of  character  is 
a  character  rooted  in  the  Divine  love,  and  in  that  view  has  a  sovereign  bhss  welling 
up  from  within.  No  power  is  strong  enough  to  forbid  love,  none  therefore  strong 
enough  to  conquer  the  joy  of  love ;  for  whoever  is  loved  must  be  enjoyed.  Besides, 
it  is  a  pecuharity  of  love  that  it  takes  possession  of  its  neighbour's  riches  and  suc- 
cesses, and  makes  them  its  own.  Loving  him,  it  loves  all  that  he  has  for  his  sake. 
It  understands  the  declaration  well,  "For  all  things  are  yours."  Having  such 
resources  of  joy  in  its  own  nature,  the  word  that  signifies  love,  in  the  original  of 
the  New  Testament,  is  radically  one  with  that  which  signifies  joy.  According  to 
the  family  registers  of  that  language,  they  are  twins  of  the  same  birth.  Love  is 
joy,  and  all  true  joy  is  love.  And  Christ  is  an  exhibition  to  us  of  this  fact  in  His, 
own  Person,  a  revelation  of  God's  eternal  joy,  as  being  a  revelation  of  God's  eternal 
love,  coming  down  thus  to  utter  in  our  ears  this  glorious  call,  "  Enter  ye  into  the 
joy  of  your  Lord."  He  finds  us  hunting  after  condition.  He  says,  "  Behold  My 
poverty,  watch  with  Me  in  My  agony,  follow  Me  to  My  Cross.  Coming  up  into  love, 
yon  clear  all  dependence  of  condition,  you  ascend  into  the  very  joy  of  God  ;  and 
this  is  My  joy.     This  I  have  taught  you;  this  I  now  bequeath  to  your  race."    IV. 

Sous    OF   THE   INSPIBINO    AND     QUICKENING     THOUGHTS     THAT     CROWD    UPON    US   IN   THB 


OTA*.  XT.]  ST.  JOHN.  Ui 

BUBJECT  EEviEWED.  1.  Joy  is  for  all  men.  It  does  not  depend  on  circmnstance  or 
condition ;  if  it  did,  it  could  only  be  for  the  few.  2.  The  reason  why  men  have  it 
not  is  that  they  do  not  seek  it  where  it  is — in  the  receiving  of  Christ  and  the 
spirit  of  His  life.  They  go  after  it  in  things  without,  not  in  character  within. 
3.  It  is  important  that  we  hold  some  rational  and  worthy  conception  of  the  heavenly 
felicity.  How  easy  it  is  for  the  Christian,  who  has  tasted  the  true  joy  of  Christ,  to 
let  go  the  idea  of  joy  and  slide  into  the  pursuit  only  of  happiness  or  the  good  of 
condition.  No  getting  into  heaven  as  a  place  will  compass  it.  You  must  carry  it 
with  you,  else  it  is  not  there.  Consider  only  whether  heaven  be  in  you  now.  For 
heaven  is  nothing  but  the  joy  of  a  perfectly  harmonized  being  filled  with  God  and 
His  love.      {H.  Bushnell,  D.D.)  The  difference  between  worldly  mirth  and 

Christian  joy : — Mirth  comes  from  external  things  which  tickle  the  senses  and 
please  the  appetite  ;  but  joy  comes  from  the  happy  spirit  within  us.  If  this  be  so, 
a  poor  sickly  man  may  not  be  full  of  mirth,  but  he  may  be  full  of  joy;  while  a 
rich  man  may  be  sinful  and  mirthful,  and  yet  have  no  joy.  Mirth  comes  from  out- 
ward things,  and  it  therefore  lasts  only  for  a  short  time ;  but  joy  springs  from  an 
inward  eternal  forcf  of  blessedness.  The  other  day,  in  London,  a  kind  friend  called 
at  my  hotel  and  left  me  a  bouquet  of  beautiful  flowers.  I  had  them  put  in  water, 
and  I  said,  "  I  will  take  these  flowers  home  with  me  " ;  but  they  faded,  and  the 
sweet  perfume  was  gone ;  they  were  beautiful  and  fragrant  only  for  a  time.  So 
mirth  is  pleasant  while  it  lasts,  but  very  soon  it  is  gone  like  a  dream  ;  but  the  joy 
that  comes  from  trusting  Cod  and  doing  His  will  has  no  end ;  it  is  an  increasing 
eternal  delight.  What  is  more  beautiful  than  t,  baloon  rising  in  the  sky?  but 
trY.at  is  more  unsightly  than  the  beautiful  thing  emptied  and  lying,  an  unshapely 
mass,  upon  the  ground  ?  Mirth  may  well  be  compared  to  fireworks.  How  grand 
they  are  1  why,  they  put  out  the  light  of  the  stars  1  but,  then,  you  know,  when  the 
fireworks  have  finished  their  explosive  din,  the  stars  keep  on  shining  for  ever. 
Equally  enduring  shall  be  the  joy  of  the  believer  and  doer  of  God's  will ;  he  shall 
be  hke  a  light  that  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day.  Let  me  remind 
you  of  the  martyr,  John  Bradford.  When  the  morning  dawned  on  which  he  was 
to  be  put  to  death,  he  had  such  peace  within  him  that  he  swung  upon  the  rail  of 
the  bedstead  in  his  dungeon,  and  while  he  swung  he  cried,  "  Oh,  I  am  so  happy  I 
We  shall  light  a  fire  to-day  tii  at  will  never  be  put  out  1"  Then  he  went  fortii, 
smiling  and  joyful,  to  the  stake  in  Smithfield,  glorifying  God ;  and  so  he  died. 
Can  you  find  anything  in  sinful  pleasure  to  give  a  joy  like  that?  Will  you  find  it 
in  the  intoxicating  cup  ?  In  gambling  ?  In  any  of  the  sinful  indulgencies  of  life  ? 
No,  no ;  they  are  not  solid ;  they  let  you  down  at  the  critical  moment  when  they 
ought  to  sustain  you.  You  find  that  they  give  no  help,  and  you  are  left  alone  like 
a  boy  on  the  ice  when  it  gives  way,  and  he  cries  for  a  friend  and  deliverer,  and 
there  is  none.    (W.  Birch.) 

Yer.  12-17.  This  is  My  commandment,  that  ye  love  one  another. — The  great 
commandment  of  Christ : — I.  The  love  op  Christ.  Eemember — 1.  How  free  it  was. 
We  did  not  merit  it,  ask  for  it,  nor  even  desire  it.  And  here  is  the  wonder  of  it. 
It  is  love  which  found  nothing  to  draw  it  forth.  It  was  entirely  self-moved.  Dis- 
interestedness  then  must  be  one  main  ingredient  in  the  love  we  are  to  bear  our 
fellow-men.  It  is  not  to  stop  and  ask,  "  Why  should  I  love  that  man  ?  What  haa 
he  done  for  me  ?  "  That  is  a  love  like  Christ's,  which  rises  up  spontaneously.  It 
does  not  wait  to  be  bought  or  won.  2.  How  costly.  "  Ye  know  the  grace  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  though  He  was  rich,  yet  for  our  sakes  He  became  poor. "  Moved 
by  His  grace,  He  paid  for  our  redemption  the  price  that  His  law  demanded.  And 
what  a  price  !  Oh  to  find  a  man  who  will  break  through  any  thing  but  the  law  of 
God  for  his  fellow-man  I  That  is  the  man,  who  embodies  this  precept  of  our  Lord  ; 
a  self-denying  man,  one  who  even  in  his  love  is  willing  to  take  up  his  cross  and 
follow  Christ.  3.  How  compassionate  and  tender  I  In  looking  at  its  greatness,  we 
often  lose  sight  of  this.  But  the  softness  of  a  mother's  love  never  equalled  our 
Lord's.  Bead  His  life.  It  is  not  here  and  there  that  His  compassion  comes  out, 
it  is  everywhere.  And  this  is  the  point  in  which  the  love  of  many  real  Christians 
is  most  deficient.  Our  neighbours  want  our  hearts  as  well  as  our  hands.  There  is 
tenfold  more  sorrow  in  men's  minds,  than  pain  in  men's  bodies,  or  sickness  and 
poverty  in  men's  houses.  Would  you  show  it  mercy  ?  Then  carry  a  feeling  heart 
through  it.  This  will  do  more  for  the  world's  comfort  than  the  richest  purse.  4. 
How  bountiful  !  '*  No  good  thing  will  He  withhold  from  us."  "  Freely  ye  have' 
received,  freely  give."     The  measure  of  what  our  love  is  to  do  for  others  and  give 


644  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap.  TV. 

to  others,  is  simply  this,  the  measure  of  our  ability  to  give  and  do.  That  is  ChrisVt 
standard  in  His  love  ;  it  must  be  our  standard  in  ours.  5.  How  extensive  1  It  ia 
discriminating.  It  took  almost  as  many  forms  as  love  could  take.  The  love  of 
country  was  strong  in  Him,  and  the  love  of  kindred  and  the  love  of  friends.  But 
then  look,  at  the  same  time,  at  its  extent.  Who  was  excluded  from  it  ?  His  enemies  T 
No,  with  His  last  breath  He  prayed  for  the  very  men  who  murdered  Him.  Or  the 
world  ?  There  is  not  a  guilty  being  on  the  wide  earth  whom  He  does  not  pity,  and 
load  daily  with  benefits.  His  love  is  like  the  sun  in  the  heavens — they  who  are 
the  nearest  to  it  are  warmed  and  gladdened  by  it  the  most,  but  they  who  are  the 
farthest  oft  from  it  behold  its  light.  And  this  is  the  unfailing  character  of  all  true 
Christian  love.  Worldly  love  is  narrow,  and  generally  becomes  more  so  as  we  grow 
older.  This  is  expansive.  No  one  object  can  absorb  it ;  no  one  house  or  family 
can  hold  it ;  no  sect  or  party  can  confine  it.  II.  The  chaege  odb  Lord  gives  us  to 
unTATE  Him  in  His  love.  1.  There  is  a  commandment  in  the  case.  It  is  remark- 
able that  our  Lord,  who  seldom  uses  this  word  on  other  occasions,  uses  it  again  and 
again  in  reference  to  this  love.  Here,  jou  observe,  is  authority  pressing  down  on 
us.  We  are  to  be  without  this  love  at  our  peril.  We  little  think  what  we  are 
doing  when  we  keep  back  the  helping  hand  or  the  pitying  heart  from  a  suffering 
brother.  We  are  setting  up  once  more  for  our  own  masters.  2.  It  is  Cbrist'a 
commandment.  He  stamps  it  with  His  own  authority.  Viewed  in  this  light,  there 
is  an  appeal  in  this  charge  to  our  gratitude  and  affection.  When  our  Lord  calls  it 
a  commandment,  He  says,  "  Dread  to  dispise  it ;  "  and  when  He  calls  it  His  com- 
mandment, He  urges  us  by  His  mercies  towards  us  to  obey  it.  And  there  may  be  a 
reference  here  to  a  custom  of  the  times.  Each  of  the  different  sects  among  the 
Jews  had  some  particular  tenet  or  practice  to  distinguish  it.  "  Now  I,"  says  our 
Lord,  "  fix  on  this  as  the  mark  and  badge  of  My  followers — mutual  love.  You 
shall  be  as  well  known  by  this  love,  as  the  priests  of  the  Temple  are  by  their 
garments,  or  the  Eoman  soldiers  by  their  standards."  3.  It  is  His  last  and  great 
commandment.  Herein  He  shows  us — (1)  The  amazing  tenderness  of  His  own  love. 
His  love  for  them  triumphs  over  every  other  feeling  and  desire.  (2)  The  importance 
in  itself  of  this  mutual  love.  Our  all-wise  Lord  would  not  have  spoken  thna* 
emphatically  of  a  trifle.  St.  Paul  says  that  this  love  is  '•  the  fulfilling  of  the  law," 
and  "  the  end  of  the  commandment."  Just  so  our  Lord  speaks  of  it  (ver.  17). 
{C.  Bradley,  M.A.)  Brotherly  love: — I.  BLiS  the  highest  model.  "As  I  have 
loved  you."  How  did  Christ  love  ? — 1.  Disinterestedly.  There  was  not  a  taint  of 
selfishness  in  His  love.  He  looked  for  no  compensation,  no  advantage.  2. 
Earnestly.  It  was  an  all-pervading,  all-commanding  passion.  It  was  a  zeal 
consuming  Him.  3.  Practically.  It  was  not  a  love  that  slept  as  an  emotion  in  the 
heart,  that  expended  itself  in  words  and  professions ;  it  was  a  love  that  worked  all 
the  faculties  to  the  utmost,  and  led  Him  to  the  sacrifice  of  Himself.  This  is  the 
kind  of  love  we  should  have  one  toward  another.  This  is  the  brotherly  love  that — 
(1)  Unites  Christ's  disciples  together.  (2)  Honours  Christ.  (8)  Llesses  the  world 
with  the  most  beneficient  influences.  H.  Forms  the  highest  feiendship.  "  Ye 
are  My  friends,"  <feo.  1.  It  not  only  establishes  a  friendship,  but  a  friendship 
between  them  and  Christ.  A  true  friendship  between  man  and  man  is  the  greatest 
blessing  on  earth.  2.  A  friendship  between  man  and  Christ  is  the  consummation 
of  man's  well  being.  If  Christ  is  my  friend  what  want  I  more  ?  HI.  Has  the 
highest  source.  "  Ye  have  not  chosen  Me,"  &o.  We  did  not  choose  to  love  Christ 
first,  but  He  chose  to  love  us.  His  love  to  us  generates  our  love  to  Him.  He  chose 
His  flrst  disciples  from  their  worldly  avocations  and  called  them  into  His  circle ; 
this  inspired  them  with  His  love.  Men  will  never  love  one  another  properly  until 
Christ  sheds  abroad  His  love  in  their  hearts.  He  is  to  all  His  disciples  what  the 
sun  is  to  the  planets ;  around  Him  they  revolve  and  from  Him  derive  their  life  and 
unity.  They  are  united  one  to  another  by  the  bonds  that  unite  them  to  Christ. 
IV.  Eealises  the  highest  good.  1.  Spiritual  fruitfuLness.  "  Ordained  you," 
appointed  you,  •*  that  ye  bring  forth  fruit."  The  fruit  involves  two  things — (1)  The 
highest  excellence  of  character.  (2)  The  highest  usefulness  of  Ufe.  Benderin^ 
others  the  highest  service.  2.  Successful  prayer.  *•  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask,"  &c. 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Christians  bound  to  love  om  another: — I.  The  duty.  1. 
Mutual  love.  There  is  a  love  which  all  men  owe  to  all  men.  "  Thou  shalt  love 
thy  neighbour  as  thyself :  "  but  the  love  which  is  the  subject  of  our  Lord's  precept^ 
is  obviously  much  more  comprehensive  in  its  elements,  and  much  less  extensive  in 
its  range,  than  this.  It  is  the  love  of  which  none  but  a  disciple  can  be  either  the 
object  or  the  subject.     Its  component  elements  are  esteem,  complacency,  benevo- 


CHAP.  XT.]  8T.  JOHN.  645 

lenee,  and  its  appropriate  manifestations, — highly  valuing  each  others'  Christian 
gifts  and  graces,— delighting  in  such  association  with  each  other  as  naturally  calls 
forth  into  exercise  all  that  is  peculiarly  Christian  in  the  character, — defending  each 
other's  Christian  reputation  when  attacked, — sympathising  with  each  other's 
Christian  joys  and  sorrows, — promoting  each  other's  personal  Christian  holiness  and 
comfort. — and  cordially  co-operating  with  each  other  in  enterprises  calculated  to 
promote  the  common  Christian  cause,  the  cause  of  God's  glory,  and  man's  improve 
ment  and  happiness.  2.  Love  like  that  of  our  Lord.  "  As  I  have  loveil  you."  (1)  Dis- 
criminative. (2)  Sincere.  (3)  Spontaneous.  (4)  Fervent  and  copious.  (5)  Disinterested. 
(6)  Active.  (7)  Self-sacrificing.  (8)  Considerate  and  wise.  (9)  Generously  confiding 
and  kindly  forbearing.  (10)  Constant.  (11)  Enduring.  (12)  Holy  and  spiritual. 
(13)  Universal.  IL  The  motives.  1.  The  commandment  of  Christ.  There  is  no 
duty  which  the  apostles,  more  frequently,  or  more  authoritively,  enjoin.  To  enable 
us  to  form  some  estimate  of  the  force  of  this  motive  we  have  only  to  propose  and 
answer  the  question.  Who  is  this  who  speaketh?  This  is  a  commandment  which 
Christ  claims  as  His  own,  in  a  peculiar  sense  ;  and  it  is  addressed  to  a  class  who  stand 
in  a  peculiar  relation  to  Him.  2.  The  example  of  Christ.  How  did  Christ  love — 
(1)  He  was  just  about  to  give  them  the  greatest  proof  of  friendship  which  can  be 
given.  "Greater  love  hath  no  man  than  this,"  &o.  (2)  He  had  made  them  the 
objects  of  His  peculiar  complacent  regard,  as  persons  who  were  really  desirous  of 
doing  whatever  He  commanded  them.  *'  Ye  are  My  friends,  if  ye  do  whatsoever  I 
command  you."  (3)  He  had  treated  them  as  "friends,"  by  unfolding  to  them,  so 
far  as  they  were  capable  of  apprehending  it,  the  whole  truth  respecting  the  wonder- 
ful communication  He  had  come  from  heaven  to  earth  to  make,  and  the  wonderful 
work  He  had  come  from  heaven  to  earth  to  perform — the  economy  of  salvation. 
"  Henceforth  I  call  you  not  servants,"  &c.  (4)  He  had  selected  them,  and  appointed 
them  to  a  great,  important,  salutary  work,  their  success  in  which  was  assured  by 
all  nesessary  assistance  in  it  being  secured  in  answer  to  believing  prayer.  "  Ye 
have  not  chosen  Me,"  &c.  {J.  Brown,  D.D.)  The  Gross  the  means  of  perpetuating 
Christian  love : — The  fire  of  charity  is  never  extinguished,  but  will  always  be  re- 
kindled by  the  wood  of  the  cross.  (St.  Ignatius.)  The  oneness  of  the  branches : — 
The  union  between  Christ  and  His  disciples  has  been  set  forth  in  the  parable  of  the 
vine.  We  now  turn  to  the  union  between  the  disciples,  which  is  the  consequences 
of  their  common  union  to  the  Lord.  There  are  four  things  suggested.  I.  The 
OBLIGATION.  1.  The  two  ideas  of  commandment  and  love  do  not  go  well  together. 
You  cannot  pump  up  love  to  order,  and  if  you  try  you  generally  produce  seutimental 
hypocrisy,  hollow  and  unreal.  Still  we  can  do  a  great  deal  for  the  cultivation  and 
strengthening  of  any  emotion.  We  can  cast  ourselves  into  the  attitude  which  is 
favourable  or  unfavourable  to  it.  We  can  look  at  the  subjects  which  will  create  it 
or  at  those  which  will  check  it.  2.  This  is  an  obligation — (1)  Because  He  commands 
it.  He  puts  Himself  jhere  in  the  position.  (2)  Because  such  an  attitude  is  the  only 
fitting  expression  of  the  mutual  relation  of  Christian  men,  througli  their  common 
relation  to  the  vine.  However  unlike  any  two  Christian  people  are  in  character, 
culture,  circumstances,  the  bond  that  knits  those  who  have  the  same  relations  to 
Jesus  Christ  is  far  deeper,  more  real,  and  ought  to  be  far  closer,  than  the  bond  that 
knits  them  to  the  men  or  women  to  whom  they  are  likest  in  all  these  other  respects, 
and  to  whom  they  are  unlike  in  this  one  central  one.  Let  all  secondary  grounds  of 
union  and  of  separiition  be  relegated  to  their  proper  subordinate  place ;  and  let  us 
recognize  this,  that  the  children  of  one  father  are  brethren.  And  do  not  let  it  be 
said,  that  "  brethren  "  in  the  Church  means  a  great  deal  less  than  brothers  in  the 
world.  II.  The  sufficiknctof  love.  1.  Our  Lord  has  been  speaking  in  a  former 
verse  about  the  keeping  of  His  commandments.  Now  He  gathers  them  all  up  into  one : 
the  all  comprehensive  simplification  of  duty — love.  2.  If  the  heart  be  right  all  else 
will  be  right ;  and  if  there  be  a  deficiency  of  love  nothing  will  be  right.  You  cannot 
help  anybody  except  on  condition  of  having  an  honest  and  benevolent  regard 
towards  him.  You  may  pitch  him  benefits,  and  you  will  neither  get  nor  deserve 
thanks  for  them  ;  you  may  try  to  teach  him,  and  yom:  words  will  be  hopeless  and 
profitless.  As  we  read  Cor.  xiii. — the  lyric  praise  of  charity — all  kinds  of  blessing 
and  sweetness  and  gladness  come  out  of  this.  3.  And  Jesus  Christ,  leaving  the 
little  flock  of  His  followers  in  the  world,  gave  them  no  other  instruction  for  their 
mutual  relationship  ?  He  did  not  talk  to  them  about  institutions  and  organiza- 
tions, about  orders  of  the  ministry  and  sacraments,  or  Church  polity.  His  one 
commandment  was  "  Love  one  another,"  and  that  will  make  you  wise.  Love  one 
Bjaotiier  and  you  will  shape  yourselves  into  the  right  forms.    IIL  Tins  pattekn  o» 


646  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUBTRATOB.  [chap.  XT. 

LOVE.  "  As  I  have  loved  yoa.  Greater  love  hath  no  man  than  this,"  &c.  1. 
Christ  sets  Himself  forward  here,  as  He  does  in  all  aspects  of  bunan  conduct  and 
character,  as  being  the  realized  ideal  of  them  all.  Beiiect  upon  the  strangeness  of 
a  man  thus  calmly  saying  to  the  whole  world,  "  I  am  the  embodiment  of  all  that 
love  ought  to  be."  The  pattern  that  He  proposes  is  more  august  than  appears  at 
first  sight.  A  verse  or  two  before  our  Lord  had  said,  "  As  the  Father  hath  loved 
Me  so  I  have  loved  you."  Now  He  says,  "  Love  one  another  as  I  have  loved  you." 
2.  But  then  our  Lord  here  sets  forth  the  very  central  point  of  His  work,  even  His 
death  upon  the  cross  for  us,  as  being  the  pattern  to  which  our  poor  afiection  ought 
to  aspire,  and  after  which  it  must  tend  to  be  conformed.  That  is  to  say,  the  heart 
of  the  love  that  He  commands  is  self-sacrifice,  reaching  to  death  if  death  be  need- 
ful. And  no  man  loves  as  Christ  would  have  Him  love  who  does  not  bear  in  his 
heart  affection  which  has  so  conquered  selfishness  that,  if  need  be,  he  is  ready  to 
die.  It  is  a  solemn  obligation,  which  many  well  make  us  tremble,  that  is  laid  on 
na  in  these  words,  "  As  I  have  loved  you."  Calvary  was  less  than  twenty-four  hours 
off,  and  He  says  to  us,  "  That  is  your  pattern  I  "  3.  Bemember,  too,  that  the 
restriction  which  here  seems  to  be  cast  around  the  flow  of  His  love  is  not  a  restric- 
tion in  reality,  but  rather  a  deepening  of  it.  The  "  friends  "  for  whom  He  dies  are 
the  same  persons  as  the  Apostle,  in  his  sweet  variation  upon  these  words,  has 
called  by  the  opposite  name  when  he  says  that  He  died  for  His  "  enemies."  There 
is  an  old  wild  ballad  that  tells  of  how  a  knight  found,  coiling  round  a  tree  in  a 
dismal  forest,  a  loathly  dragon  breathing  out  poison ;  and  how,  undeterred  by  its 
hideousness  and  foulness,  he  cast  his  arms  round  it  and  kissed  it  on  the  mouth. 
Three  times  he  did  it  undisgusted,  and  at  the  third  the  shape  changed  into  a  fair 
lady,  and  he  won  his  bride.  Christ  "  kisses  with  the  kisses  of  His  mouth  "  His 
enemies,  and  makes  them  His  friends  because  He  loves  them.  "  If  He  had  never 
died  for  His  enemies,"  says  one  of  the  old  fathers, "  He  would  never  have  possessed 
His  friends."  And  so  He  teaches  us,  that  the  way  by  which  we  are  to  meet  even 
alienation  and  hostiUty  is  by  pouring  upon  it  the  treasures  of  an  unselfish,  self- 
sacrificing  affection  which  will  conquer  at  the  last.  IV.  The  motive.  *'  As  I  have 
loved  you."  The  novelty  of  Christian  morality  hes  here,  that  in  its  law  there  is  a 
self-fulfilling  force.  We  have  not  to  look  to  one  place  for  the  knowledge  of  our 
duty,  and  somewhere  else  for  the  strength  to  do  it,  but  both  aie  given  to  us  in  the 
one  thing,  the  gift  of  the  dying  Christ  and  His  immortal  love.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
Love  the  means  of  unity  : — In  the  early  spring,  when  the  wheat  is  gi'een  and  young, 
and  scarcely  appears  above  the  ground,  it  springs  in  the  lines  in  which  it  was  sown, 
parted  from  one  another  and  distinctly  showing  their  separation,  and  the  furrows. 
But,  when  the  full  com  in  the  ear  waves  on  the  autumn  plain,  all  the  lines  and 
separations  have  disappeared,  and  there  is  one  unbroken  tract  of  sunny  fruitfulness. 
And  so  when  the  life  in  Christ  is  low  and  feeble.  His  servants  may  be  separated  and 
drawn  up  in  rigid  lines  of  denominations,  and  churches,  and  sects  ;  but  as  they 
grow  the  lines  disappear.  If  to  the  churches  of  England  to-day  there  came  a 
sudden  accession  of  knowledge  of  Christ,  and  of  union  with  Him,  the  first  thing 
that  would  go  would  be  the  wretched  barriers  that  separate  us  from  one  another. 
For  if  we  have  the  life  of  Christ  in  any  mature  measure  in  ourselves,  we  shall 
certainly  have  grown  up  above  the  fences  behind  which  we  began  to  grow,  and 
shall  be  able  to  reach  out  to  all  that  love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  feel  with 
thankfulness  that  we  are  one  in  Him.    (Ibid.) 

Vers.  13.  Greater  love  hath  no  man  than  this. — Let  us  consider  the  unparalleled 
greatness  of  Christ's  love.  I.  In  the  objects  of  His  regard.  1.  In  the  vastness 
of  their  number.  He,  indeed,  knows  their  number,  but  it  is  beyond  all  human 
calculation.  We  admire  local  charity  and  extended  philanthropy  ;  but  the  widest 
range  of  human  benevolence  falls  far  short  of  the  love  of  Christ,  which  flows 
through  all  nature,  worlds,  and  generations.  We  are  apt  to  limit  the  range 
of  this  love ;  but  the  love  of  the  Bedeemer  could  not  be  satisfied  with 
tk  less  number  than  that  which  no  man  could  number.  2.  In  the  depth  of 
their  degradation.  If  we  could  fathom  the  bottomless  pit,  we  might  tell  the 
depth  of  human  depravity  and  degradation.  In  such  objects  there  was  nothing 
attractive,  but  everything  repulsive.  Their  moral  pollution  was  contracted  by  acts 
of  aggression  against  this  Bedeemer.  3.  In  their  utter  helplessness.  No  human 
power  could  have  subdued  their  depravity.  No  human  mercy  could  have  removed 
their  guilt.  No  human  arm  could  lave  rescued  them  from  their  degradation.  II. 
Ih  thb  icAGNiTDDS  OT  His  SACRIFICES.     1.  That  which  He  relinquished.     "Being 


tmxr.  XT.]  ST.  JOHN.  647 

in  the  form  of  God  He  made  Himself  of  no  reputation."  He  threw  aside  Hia 
original  glory.  Human  conception  is  inadequate  to  the  greatness  of  this  sacrifice. 
2.  What  He  assumed.  He  condescended  to  be  made  one  of  us.  If  a  man,  having 
the  power,  were  to  assume  the  nature  and  form  of  a  beast  to  deliver  the  brute  crea- 
tion from  the  "  groaning  "  to  which  they  are  subject  by  reason  of  man's  sin,  that 
would  be  an  admirable  sacrifice ;  but  there  would  be  no  parallel  between  it  and  the 
love  of  Christ  in  this  respect.  3.  That  which  He  sustained.  Our  sorrows, 
infirmities,  sins.  HI.  In  the  activity  of  His  solicitudes.  Hewas  not  idle — He 
went  about  doing  good.  Mark — 1.  The  intensity  of  His  designs.  He  sought  the 
salvation  of  strangers,  aliens,  enemies.  2.  In  the  fervour  of  His  zeal.  In  a  thou- 
sand instances  the  spark  of  our  desire  is  never  fanned  into  the  flame  of  zeal.  It 
was  not  80  with  the  Kedeemer.  3.  In  the  constancy  of  His  exertions.  He  shrunk 
not  back  in  the  day  of  battle.  Once,  and  once  only,  for  a  moment.  His  nature 
seemed  to  shrink  from  the  violence  of  the  storm,  when  He  said,  ••  Father,  if  it  be 
possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  Me  !  "  But  w'xien  His  time  was  come,  impelled  by 
love,  "  He  steadfastly  set  Himself  to  go  to  Jerusalem ;  "  nay,  He  was  "  straitened  " 
till  His  work  was  accomplished.  IV.  In  the  depth  of  His  humiliation.  1.  He 
Btooped  to  the  lowest  grade  of  human  society.  2.  To  be  charged  with  the  lowest 
crimes  of  human  delinquency,  thus  bearing  the  reproach  of  His  people.  3.  To 
endure  the  vilest  and  most  painful  death  that  ever  was  inflicted  on  the  lowest 
criminal.  But  though  He  died.  He  lives  again  :  His  love  was  stronger  than  death. 
He  hves  to  execise  it  still ;  and  we  see  its  unparalleled  greatness.  V.  In  thb 
amplitude  of  its  bestowments.  1.  Upon  the  guilty  unlimited  pardon.  2.  Upon 
the  necessitous  unlimited  supplies.  3.  Upon  the  redeemed  unlimited  glory.  YL 
In  the  biches  of  its  anticipations.  We  anticipate — 1.  The  absolute  perfection 
of  our  intellectual  and  moral  nature.  2.  The  uninterrupted  enjoyment  of  the 
Redeemer's  presence.  3.  The  everlasting  beatitudes  of  God  himself.  Improvement  : 
1.  What  a  ground  of  encouragement  to  the  true  penitent  I  2.  What  a  stimulus 
to  the  accepted  believer  1  3.  What  an  aggravation  of  guilt  is  incurred  by  those  who 
obstinately   persist    in    sin  1      (J.  Hunt.)  Love's  crowning   deed : — I.   Love's 

CBOWNiNo  DEED.  There  is  a  climax  to  everything,  and  the  climax  of  love  is  to  die 
for  the  beloved  one.  This  is  the  ultima  thule  of  love ;  its  sails  can  find  no  further 
shore.  1.  This  is  clear  if  we  consider,  that  when  a  man  dies  for  his  friends,  it 
proves — (1)  His  deep  sincerity.  Lip-love  is  a  thing  to  be  questioned  ;  too  often  is  it 
a  counterfeit.  All  are  not  hunters  that  blow  the  horn,  all  are  not  friends  who  cry 
up  friendship;  all  is  not  gold  that  glitters,  so  it  is  not  all  love  that  feign eth  aflec- 
tion.  But  we  are  sure  he  loves  who  dies  for  love.  (2)  The  intensity  of  his  affec- 
tion. A  man  may  make  us  feel  that  he  is  intensely  in  earnest  when  he  speaks  with 
burning  words,  and  he  may  perform  many  actions  which  may  all  appear  to  show 
how  intense  he  is,  and  yet  for  all  that  he  may  but  be  a  skilful  player,  but  when  a 
man  dies  for  the  cause  he  has  espoused,  you  know  that  he  is  no  superficial  passion. 
(3)  The  thorough  self-abnegation  of  the  heart.  If  I  profess  to  love  a  certain  person, 
and  yet  in  no  way  deny  myself  for  his  sake,  such  love  is  contemptible.  After  all,  the 
value  of  a  thing  in  the  market  is  what  a  man  will  give  for  it,  and  yon  must  estimate 
the  value  of  a  man's  love  by  that  which  he  is  willing  to  give  np  for  it.  Greater 
love  for  friends  hath  no  man  than  this,  that  he  lay  down  his  life  for  them. 
••  Hereby  perceive  we  the  love  of  God,  because  He  laid  down  His  life  for  us."  2.  Death 
for  its  object  is  the  crowning  deed  of  love  because — (1)  It  excels  all  other  deeds.  Jesus 
Christ  had  proved  His  love  by  dwelling  among  His  people  as  their  Brother,  by  partici- 
pating in  their  poverty  as  their  friend,  by  telling  them  all  He  knew  of  the  Father,  by 
the  patience  with  which  He  bore  with  their  faults,  by  the  miracles  He  wrought  on 
their  behalf,  and  the  honour  which  He  put  upon  them  by  using  them  in  His  service  ; 
but  none  of  these  can  for  a  momentendure  comparison  withHisdyingforthem.  These 
life-actions  of  His  love  are  brirht  as  stars,  but  yet  they  are  only  stars  compared  with 
this  sun  of  infinite  love.  (2)  It  comprehends  all  other  acts,  for  when  a  man  lays 
down  his  life  for  his  friend  he  has  laid  down  everything  else.  Give  up  life,  and  you 
have  given  np  wealth,  position,  enjoyment.  Hence  the  foree  of  that  reasoning, 
••  He  that  spared  not  His  own  Son,"  &o.  (3)After  a  man  has  died  for  another,  there 
can  be  no  question  raised  about  his  love.  Unbelief  would  be  insane  if  it  should 
venture  to  intrude  itself  at  the  cross  foot,  though,  alas  I  it  has  been  there,  and  has 
there  proved  its  utter  unreasonableness.  Shame  on  any  of  God's  children  that  they 
should  ever  raise  questions  on  a  matter  so  conclusively  proven  I  IL  Thb  bkvbx 
CBOWNS  OF  Jesus'  dtinq  love.  Men's  dying  for  their  friends — this  is  superlative — 
bat  Christ's  dying  for  as  is  as  much  above  man's  superlative  as  that  coald  be  above 


648  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rr. 

mere  commonplace.    1.  Jesus  was  immortal,  hence  the  special  character  of  His 
death.    Damon  is  willing  to  die  for  Pythias  ;  But  suppose  Damon  dies,  he  ia  only 
antedating  what  must  occur,  for  they  must  both  die  eventually.    A  substitutionary 
death  for  love's  sake  in  ordinary  cases  would  be  but  a  slightly  premature  payment 
of  that  debt  of  nature  which  must  be  paid  by  all.    Jesus  needed  not  die  at  all.    Up 
there  in  the  glory  was  the  Christ  of  God  for  ever  with  the  Father  everlasting. 
He  came  to  earth  and  assumed  our  nature  that  He  might  be  capable  of  death,  yet 
His  body  need  not  have  died ;  as  it  was  it  never  saw  corruption,  because  there  was 
not  in  it  the  element  of  sin  which  necessitated  death  and  decay.     "  No  man  taketh 
My  life  from  Me,  but  I  lay  it  down  of  Myself,"  &o.     2.  In  the  cases  of  persons  who 
have  yielded  up  their  lives  for  others  they  may  have  entertained  the  prospect  that 
the  supreme  penalty  would  not  have  been  exacted.    Damon  stood  before  Dionysius, 
willing  to  be  slain  instead  of  Pythias ;  but  the  tyrant  was  so  struck  with  the  devo- 
tion of  the  two  friends  that  he  did  not  put  either  of  them  to  death.    A  pious  miner 
was  in  the  pit  with  an  ungodly  man  at  work.    They  were  about  to  blast  a  piece  ol 
rock,  and  it  was  necessary  that  they  should  both  leave  the  mine  before  the  powder 
exploded  ;  they  both  got  into  the  bucket,  but  the  hand  above  was  not  strong  enough 
to  draw  the  two  together,  and  the  pious  miner,  leaping  from  the  bucket,  said  to  his 
friend,  "  You  are  an  unconverted  man,  and  if  you  die  your  soul  vrill  be  lost.    Get 
up  in  the  bucket  as  quickly  as  you  can;  as  for  me,  if  I  die  I  am  saved."    This 
lover  of  his  neighbour's  soul  was  spared,  for  he  was  found  in  perfect  safety  arched 
over  by  the  fragments  which  had  been  blown  from  the  rock.    But,  such  a  thing 
oould  not  occur  in  the  case  of  our  Eedeemer.     Die  He  or  His  people  must,  there 
was  no  other  alternative.    3.  He  could  have  had  no  motive  in  that  death  but  one  of 
pure,  unmingled  love.    You  remember  when  the  Eussian  nobleman  was  crossing  the 
steppes  in  the  snow,  the  wolves  followed  the  sledge.     The  horses  needed  not  the 
lash,  for  they  fled  for  their  lives  from  their  howUng  pursuers.     Whatever  oould 
stay  the  eager  wolves  for  a  time  was  thrown  to  them  in  vain.    A  horse  was  loosed : 
they  pursued  it,  rent  it  to  pieces,  and  still  followed,  like  grim  death.    At  last  a 
devoted  servant,  who  had  long  Uved  with  his  master's  family,  said,  "  There  remains 
but  one  hope  for  you ;  I  will  throw  myself  to  the  wolves,  and  then  you  will  b.ave  time 
to  escape."     There  was  great  love  in  this,  but  doubtless  it  was  mingled  with  a  habit 
of  obedience,  a  sense  of  reverence,  and  emotions  of  gratitude  for  many  obligations. 
If  I  had  seen  the  nobleman  surrender  himself  to  the  wolves  to  save  his  servant,  and 
if  that  servant  had  in  former  days  sought  his  hfe,  I  could  see  some  parallel,  but  as 
the  case  stands  there  is  a  wide  distinction.     4.  In  our  Saviour's  case  it  was  not 
precisely,  though  it  was,  in  a  sense,  death  for  His  friends.    Though  He  called  as 
"  friends,"  the  friendship  was  all  on  His  side  at  the  first.    Our  hearts  called  Him 
enemy,  for  we  were  opposed  to  Him.     God  commendeth  His  love  to  us  in  that 
while  we  were  yet  sinners  in  due  time  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly.     5.  We  had 
ourselves  been  the  cause  of  the  difiBculty  which  required  a  death.     There  were  two 
brothers  on  board  a  raft  once,  upon  which  they  had  escaped  from  a  foundering 
ship.     There  was  not  enough  of  food,  and  it  was  proposed  to  reduce  the  number, 
that  some  at  least  might  be  able  to  live.     They  cast  lots  for  life  and  death.     One  of 
the  brothers  was  drawn,  and  was  doomed  to  be  thrown  into  the  sea.     His  brother 
interposed  and  said,  "  You  have  a  wife  and  children  at  home ;  I  am  single,  and 
therefore  can  be  better  spared,  I  will  die  instead  of  you."    "  Nay," said  the  brother, 
"  not  so,"  and  they  struggled  in  mutual  arguments  of  love,  till  at  last  the  substitute 
was  thrown  into  the  sea.    Now,  there  was  no  ground  of  difference  between  those 
two  brothers  whatever.    But  in  our  case  there  would  never  have  been  a  need  for 
any  one  to  die  if  we  had  not  been  the  wilful  offenders ;  and  the  offended  one, 
whose  injured  honour  required  the  death,  was  the  Christ  that  died.    6.  There  have 
been  men  who  died  for  others,  but  they  have  never  borne  the  sins  of  others ;  they 
were  willing  to  take  the  punishment,  but  not  the  guilt.    Those  cases  which  I  have 
already  mentioned  did  not  involve  character.    But  here,  ere  Christ  must  die,  it 
must  be  written — "He  made  Him  to  be  sin  for  us  who  knew  no  sin,"  &o.     7.  The 
death  of  Christ  was  a  proof  of  love  superlative,  because  in  His  case  He  was  denied 
all  the  helps  and  alleviations  which  in  other  cases  make  death  to  be  less  than  death. 
I  marvel  not  that  a  saint  can  die  joyously ;  for  he  sees  his  heavenly  Father  gazing 
down  upon  him,  and  glory  waiting  him.    But  ah,  to  die  npon  a  cross  without  a 
pitying  eye,  surrounded  by  a  scoffing  multitude,  and  to  die  with  this  as  your  requiem, 
••  My  God,  My  God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me  1 "    IH.  Many  boyal  thing8 
OUGHT  to  bh  suggested  TO  US  BY  THIS  ROYAL  LOVE.     How  this  thought  of  Christ'i 
proving  His  love  by  His  death — 1.  Ennobles  self-denial.   2.  Prompts  us  to  heroism. 


«HAP.  XT.]  8T.  JOHN.  649 

When  you  get  to  the  crosa  yon  have  left  the  realm  of  little  men :  you  have  reached 
the  nursery  of  tree  chivalry.  Does  Christ  die  ? — then  we  feel  we  could  die  too. 
But  mark  how  the  heroic  in  this  case  is  sweetly  tinctured  and  flavoured  with  gentle- 
ness. The  chivalry  of  the  olden  times  was  cruel.  We  want  that  blessed  chivalrj  of  love 
in  which  a  man  feels,  "  I  would  suffer  any  insult  from  that  man  if  I  could  do  him 
good  for  Christ's  sake."  3.  There  seems  to  come  from  the  cross,  a  gentle  voice 
that  saith,  "  Guilty  sinner,  I  did  all  this  for  thee,  what  hast  thou  done  for  Me  ?  " 
and  yet  another  which  saith,  "  Look  unto  Me  and  be  ye  saved,  all  ye  ends  of  the 
earth."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Self-sacrificing  love: — A  little  child  six  years  old, 
went  out  one  autumn  afternoon  to  play  with  a  companion  younger  than  himself, 
Johnnie  Carr,  the  little  hero  whos*  name  deserves  to  be  written  in  gold,  rambled 
about  with  his  smaller  playmate  till  the  houses  were  left  behind,  and  they  were  in 
the  country.  Presently  they  found  that  they  had  lost  their  way,  and  the  night  was 
coining  on,  cold  and  stormy.  The  younger  child,  chill  and  hungry,  began  to  cry, 
and  his  brave  companion  cheered  him  on,  now  carrying  him  for  a  few  steps,  now 
anxiously  searching  for  the  way  home.  At  last  the  night  fell  dark  and  cold,  the 
children  were  lost,  and  lay  down  for  shelter  in  a  field.  But  the  around  was  wet  and 
chilly,  and  the  younger  cried  for  home  and  his  mother.  Then  Johnnie  Carr,  who 
was  only  six  years  old,  remember,  could  not  bear  to  see  his  playmate  crying  with 
the  cold,  and  he  stripped  off  his  own  jacket  and  made  a  bed  for  his  companion,  and 
placed  the  rest  of  his  clothes  to  cover  the  child.  Then,  with  oiJy  his  shirt  and 
socks,  the  little  hero  lay  down  beside  him.  Their  childish  prayers  were  said,  and 
Johnnie  Carr  knew  not  that  in  his  sublime  act  of  self-sacrifice  he  had  taken  part  in 
the  mightier  sacrifice  of  Jesus.  When  the  morning  came,  the  anxious  friends,  who 
had  been  searching  through  the  night,  found  the  children  lying.  The  younger  was 
soon  restored  to  health  and  strength,  but  no  care  could  save  the  life  of  the  child- 
hero  who  had  given  himself  for  his  friend.  {H.  J.  W.  Buxton).  The  death  of 
Christ  our  only  stay  :— If  the  thought  of  sin,  death,  and  judgment  be  so  terrible,  as 
in  truth  they  are  to  every  soul  of  man,  on  what  shall  we  stay  ourselves  when  our 
time  is  at  hand  ?  I.  Upon  the  love  of  God,  in  giving  His  Son  to  die  fob  tjs  (John 
iii.  16  ;  1  John  iv.  10 ;  Eom.  v.  8).  Whatever  be  doubtful,  this  is  sure.  Light 
does  not  pour  forth  from  the  sun,  with  a  fuller  and  directer  ray  than  does  perfect 
and  eternal  love  overflow  from  the  bosom  of  God  upon  all  the  works  that  He  has 
made.  The  love  of  God  is  the  sphere  in  which  the  world  is  sustained,  every  living 
soul  is  encompassed  by  that  love,  as  stars  by  the  firmament  of  heaven.  And  from 
this  blessed  truth  flows  all  manner  of  consolation.  Not  only  does  God  hate  sin,  but 
He  hates  death  ;  not  only  does  He  abhor  evil,  but  the  peril  and  perdition  of  so 
much  as  one  living  soul — of  one,  even  the  least  of  aU  things  He  has  made.  The 
Lord  hath  sworn  by  Himself,  saying  (Ezek.  xviii.  32).  What  do  we  further  need  to 
assure  us  that  He  desires  oar  salvation  ?  Does  a  child  bind  his  father  by  pro- 
mises to  give  him  bread,  or  a  mother  to  foster  him  in  sickness?  Surely  the 
character  of  God  is  enough.  "  God  is  love."  What  more  do  we  ask  1  What  more  would 
we  receive  ?  "  He  cannot  deny  Himself."  And  therefore  when  He  was  "  willing  inore 
abundantly  to  show  unto  the  heirs  of  promise  the  immutability  of  His  counsel,"  He 
"  confirmed  it  by  an  oath."  But  for  us  God  has  done  still  more  :  He  has,  beside  His 
promise,  found  a  pledge  to  give  us.  He  has  given  us  "  His  only  begotten  Son. "  He 
gave  Him  np  to  suffer  all  humiliation,  agony,  and  death;  all  that  the  Divine  nature 
most  abhors  ;  and  He  gave  Him  to  be  ours  in  so  full  a  right,  that  we  might  offer 
Him  as  our  own  in  sacrifice  for  our  sins.  II.  The  love  of  the  Son  m  giving  Him- 
self fob  ds.  When  we  remember  who  He  is  that  gave  Himself,  and  for  whom, 
and  to  die  what  death,  we  cannot  find  capacity  of  heart  to  receive  it.  If  He 
hfid  saved  us  by  a  new  exertion  of  His  creative  vrill,  it  would  have  been  a  miracle 
of  lovingkindness.  If  He  had  spoken  once  more  the  first  words  of  power,  and 
creating  us  again  in  light,  it  would  have  been  a  mystery  of  sovereign  grace.  If  He 
had  redeemed  us  by  the  lowliness  of  the  Incarnation,  still  revealing  Himself  in 
majesty,  though  as  a  man,  and  lightening  the  earth  with  His  glory,  as  Saviour,  God, 
and  King,  it  would  have  seemed  to  us  a  perfect  exhibition  of  the  Divine  compassion 
to  a  sinful  world.  How  much  more  when  He  came  to  suffer  shame  and  sorrow, 
all  that  flesh  and  blood  can  endure,  to  sink,  as  it  were,  into  the  lowest  depths  of 
creation,  that  He  might  uplift  it  from  its  farthest  fall  ?  If  He  so  loved  us  as  to  die 
for  us,  what  will  He  not  grant  or  do?  If  He  gave  His  whole  self,  will  He  k^p 
back  any  partial  gift  ?  Will  He  not  save  us,  who  Himself  died  for  us  ?  If  He 
loved  us  when  we  loved  Him  not,  will  He  not  love  us  now  that  we  desire  to  love 
Him  again  ?    IIL  Christ's  death  upon  the  cross  is  not  only  a  revelation  of  Divine 


660  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha*.  TT. 

love  to  us ;  it  is  also  a  Divine  atonement  fob  otjr  sin.  How  it  is  so,  we  may  not 
eagerly  search  to  know.  That  by  death  He  has  destroyed  "  Him  that  had  the 
power  of  death,"  and  taJien  away  ••  the  sin  of  the  world,"  is  enough.  In  that  death 
were  united  the  oblation  of  a  Divine  person  and  the  sanctity  of  a  sinless  man;  the 
perfection  of  a  holy  will  and  the  fulfilment  of  a  spotless  life ;  the  wilHng  sacrifice 
of  the  sinless  for  the  sinful,  of  the  shepherd  for  the  sheep  that  was  lost,  of  life  for 
the  dead.  How  this  wrought  atonement  for  the  sin  of  the  world  we  cannot  say 
further  than  is  revealed.  God  "  made  Him  to  be  sin  for  us."  "  He  bore  our  sins 
in  His  own  body  on  the  tree."  •'  By  His  stripes  we  are  healed."  "  He  hath  tasted 
death  for  every  man."  *'  There  is  now  no  condemnation  to  them  that  are  in  Christ 
Jesus."      {Archdeacon    Manmnj.)  Bemonstration    of  friendship.   Divine   and 

human : — I.  Chkist  demonsteates  His  love  to  man  by  dying,  Here  He  states — 1. 
The  utmost  limit  of  human  love.  Nothing  is  felt  by  man  to  be  more  precious  than 
his  life.  Everything  he  has  he  will  sacrifice  for  this.  A  love  that  will  lead  to  the 
sacrifice  of  this  is  love  in  its  highest  human  measure.  2.  Christ's  love  transcended 
this  limit.  He  laid  down  His  life  for  His  enemies.  There  is  nothing  in  history  ap- 
proaching this.  This  transcendent  love  is — (1)  The  love  of  compassion.  There 
could  be  neither  gratitude  nor  esteem  in  it,  for  the  subjects  are  all  wicked.  (2)  The 
love  of  disinterestedness.  He  had  nothing  to  gain  by  it ;  for  His  glory  and  happi- 
ness admitted  of  no  entrancement.  II.  Man  demonstbates  His  love  by  obeyino. 
Surely  all  men  ought  to  love  Christ,  and  when  they  do  they  will  obey.  This  obedi- 
ence will  be  marked  by — 1.  Heartiness.  2.  Cheerfulness.  When  this  love  is 
obedience  to  Christ  is  the  highest  gratification  of  the  soul.  When  the  heart  is  en- 
larged it  rims  in  the  way  of  Christ's  commandments.  3.  Entireness.  Love  does 
not  sort  duties,  or  weigh  or  measure  them.  Whatever  the  object  wishes  shall  be 
done,  even  unto  death.  Conclusion  :  The  subject — (1)  Supplies  the  test  of  Chris- 
tian piety.  Christian  piety  is  not  ritualism,  however  becoming ;  not  a  theology, 
however  Scriptural ;  it  is  obedient  love  to  Christ,  2.  Indicates  the  true  method  of 
preaching — to  so  exhibit  Christ's  love  as  to  awaken  the  love  of  human  souls. 
{Swain.)  A  friend^s  love : — During  the  Civil  war  in  America,  a  farmer  was  drawn 
to  be  a  soldier.  He  was  much  grieved  about  it,  not  because  he  was  a  coward,  but  on 
account  of  his  motherless  family,  who  wonld  have  no  bread-winner  or  caretaker  in 
his  absence.  The  day  before  he  had  to  march  to  the  town  where  the  conscripts' 
names  were  called  over,  and  their  clothing  and  weapons  given  them  for  the  cam- 
paign, young  Mr.  Durham,  a  neighbour,  came,  saying,  "  Farmer  Blake,  I  will  go  in- 
stead of  you."  The  farmer  was  astonished  so  much  so  as  to  be  unable  to  reply  for 
some  time.  He  stood  leaning  one  hand  on  his  spade  and  wiping  the  sweat  from  his 
brow  with  the  other.  It  seemed  too  good  to  be  true  1  At  length  he  took  in  the  de- 
liverance, as  if  it  were  an  angel  of  light  in  a  dark  dungeon,  and  he  grasped  the 
hand  of  young  Durham  and  praised  God.  The  young  fellow  went,  feeling  that  he 
was  doing  a  noble  thing,  and  all  the  village  came  out  and  bid  him  "  God  speed."  It 
may  be  that  he  had  "  glory  "  before  him— the  sash  of  a  general,  the  chair  of  the 
President.  Whatever  his  ideas,  he  nobly  took  the  place  of  his  fellow-man ;  but 
alas  I  in  the  first  battle  he  was  shot  and  killed  I  When  the  farmer  saw  in  the  news- 
paper the  name  of  Charles  Durham  in  the  list  of  "  missing,"  he  at  once  saddled 
his  old  horse  and  went  off  to  the  battle-field,  and  after  searching  for  some  time,  found 
the  body  of  his  friend.  He  brought  it  to  his  village,  to  the  little  churchyard  in 
which  they  had  so  often  walked  together  to  the  house  of  God  ;  and  from  the  quarry 
up  on  the  hill  he  cut  out  a  plain  marble  tablet,  on  which  he  carved  an  inscription 
with  his  own  hand.  It  was  roughly  done,  but  with  every  blow  there  fell  a  tear  from 
his  eyes.  There,  in  the  little  churchyard,  he  placed  the  body  of  his  devoted  friend 
and  substitute,  and  covered  the  grave  with  grass  sods  from  his  garden.  Then, 
while  his  tears  dropped,  he  put  the  marble  tablet  on  the  grave,  and  when  the  vil- 
lagers stooped  to  see  the  little  monument  they  also  wept.  It  did  not  say  much, 
but  it  really  touched  them ;  it  said, "  C.  D.  He  died  for  me."  (New  Testament 
Anecdotes.) 

Ver.  14-17.  Te  are  My  friends  If  ye  do  whatsoever  I  command  you. — Christ's 
friends : — Notice — I.  What  Christ's  feiends  do  fob  Him  (ver.  16).  In  the  former 
verse,  "  friends  "  means  chiefly  those  whom  He  loved.  Here  it  means  mainly  those 
who  love  Him.  1.  He  lingers  on  the  idea,  as  if  He  would  meet  the  doubts  arising  from 
the  sense  of  unworthiness,  and  from  some  dim  perception  of  how  He  towers  above 
them.  How  wonderful  that  stooping  love  of  His  is  1  Every  form  of  human  love  Christ 
lays  His  hand  upon.     "  He  that  doeth  the  will  of  My  Father,  the  same  is  My  brother, 


CHAP.  XT.]  ST.  JOHN.  651 

sai  sister,  and  mother."  That  which  is  even  sacreder,  the  purest  and  most  complete 
anion  that  humanity  is  capable  of,  receives  a  new  sweetness  when  we  think  of  the 
Bride,  the  Lamb's  wife.  Aiid,  passing  from  tliat  Holy  of  Hohes  out  into  this  outer 
court,  He  lays  His  hand  on  that  more  common  and  familiar,  and  yet  precious  and 
sacred,  thing,  the  bond  of  friendship.     The  Prince  makes  a  friend  of  the  beggar. 

2.  This  friendship  lasts  to-day.  The  pecularity  of  Christianity  is  the  strong 
personal  tie  which  binds  men  to  this  Man  that  died  nineteen  hundred  years  ago. 
We  look  back  into  the  wastes  of  antiquity :  the  mighty  names  rise  there  that  we 
reverence ;  there  are  great  teachers  from  whom  we  have  learned,  and  to  whom  we 
are  grateful.  But  what  a  gulf  there  is  between  us  and  the  best  and  noblest  of 
them  I  But  here  is  a  dead  Man,  who  to-day  is  the  object  of  passionate  attachment, 
and  a  love  deeper  than  life  to  millions  of  people,  and  will  be  till  the  end  of  tieae. 

3.  There  are  no  limitations  in  that  friendship,  no  misconstructions  in  that  heart, 
no  alienation  possible,  no  change  to  be  feared.  There  is  absolute  rest  for  us  there. 
Why  should  I  be  solitary  if  Jesus  Christ  is  my  Friend  ?  Why  should  I  fear  if  He 
walks  by  my  side  ?  Why  should  anything  be  burdensome  if  He  lays  it  upon  me, 
and  helps  me  to  bear  it  ?  What  is  there  in  life  that  cannot  be  faced  and  borne — 
aye,  and  conquered — if  we  have  Him,  as  we  all  may  have  Him,  for  the  Friend  and 
the  Home  of  our  hearts?  4.  But  notice  the  condition,  "  If  ye  do  what  I  command 
you."  Note  the  singular  blending  of  friendship  and  command,  involving  on  our 
parts  absolute  submission  and  closest  friendship.  For  this  is  the  relationship  between 
love  and  obedience,  in  regard  to  Jesus  Christ,  that  the  love  is  the  parent  of  the  obedi- 
ence, and  the  obedience  is  the  guard  and  the  guarantee  of  the  love.  II.  What 
Christ  does  foe  His  friends  (ver.  15.)  The  slave  may  see  what  his  lord  does, 
but  he  does  not  know  his  purpose  in  his  acts.  *'  Their's  not  to  reason  why,"  If 
the  servant  is  in  his  master's  confidence  he  is  more  than  a  servant.  But,  says 
Christ,  "I  have  called  you  friends";  and  He  calls  them  so  before  in  act.  and 
and  He  points  to  all  His  past  relationship,  and  especially  to  the  heart  ouipourings 
of  the  upper  room,  as  the  proof.  1.  Jesus  Christ,  then,  recognizes  the  obligation 
of  absolute  frankness,  and  He  will  tell  His  friends  everything  that  He  can.  When 
He  tells  them  what  He  can  the  voice  of  the  Father  speaks  through  the  Son.  2.  Of 
course,  to  Christ's  frankness  there  are  limits.  He  will  not  pour  out  His  treasures 
into  vessels  that  will  spill  them.  And  though  here  he  speaks  as  if  His  communion 
was  perfect,  we  are  to  remember  that  it  was  necessarily  conditioned  by  the  power  of 
reception  on  the  part  of  the  hearers.  3.  That  frank  speech  is  continued  to-day. 
By  tiie  light  which  He  sheds  on  the  Word,  by  many  a  suggestion  through  human 
lips,  by  many  a  blessed  thought  rising  quietly  within  oar  hearts,  and  bearing  the 
token  that  it  comes  from  a  sacreder  source  than  our  poor,  bluntlering  minds,  He 
still  speaks  to  us,  His  friends.  4.  Ought  not  that  thought  of  the  utter  frankness 
of  Jesus  make  us  for  one  thing  very  patient  of  the  gaps  that  are  left  in  His 
communications  and  in  our  knowledge  ?  There  are  so  many  things  that  we  should 
like  to  know.  He  holds  all  in  His  hand.  Why  does  He  thus  open  one  finger 
instead  of  the  whole  palm?  Because  He  loves.  A  friend  exercises  the  right  of 
reticence  as  well  as  the  prerogative  of  speech.  "  Trust  Me  I  I  tell  you  all  that  is 
good  for  you  to  receive."  5.  And  that  frankness  may  well  teach  us  the  obligation 
of  keeping  our  ears  open  and  our  hearts  prepared  to  receive  the  speech  that  comes 
from  Him.  Many  a  message  from  your  Lord  flits  past  you  like  the  idle  wind 
through  an  archway,  because  you  are  not  listening  for  His  voice.  If  we 
silenced  passion,  ambition,  selfishness,  worldliness,  if  we  took  less  of  our  religion 
out  of  books  and  from  other  people,  and  were  more  accustomed  to  *'  dwell  in  the 
secret  place  of  the  Most  High,"  and  to  say,  "  Speak,  Friend,  for  Thy  friend  heareth," 
we  should  more  often  understand  how  real  to-day  is  the  voice  of  Christ  to  them 
that  love  Him.  HI.  How  Christ's  friends  come  to  be  so,  and  why  they  ark 
BO  (ver.  16.)  1.  In  all  the  cases  of  friendship  between  Christ  and  men,  the 
origina  ion  and  initiation  come  from  Him.  "  We  love  Him  because  He  first  loved 
us."  The  apostle  said,  "  I  was  apprehended  of  Christ."  It  is  because  He  lays  Hia 
seeking  and  drawing  hand  upon  us,  that  we  ever  come  to  love  Him.  His  choice  of 
us  precedes  our  choice  of  Him.  The  Shepherd  always  comes  to  seek  the  sheep 
that  is  lost.  We  come  to  be  His  friends:  because,  when  we  were  enemies,  He 
loved  us,  and  gave  Himself  for  us,  and  ever  since  has  been  sending  out  the 
messengers  of  His  love  to  draw  us  to  His  heart.  2.  And  the  purpose  is  twofold — ■ 
(1)  It  respects  service  or  fruit.  "  That  we  may  go,"  There  is  deep  pathos  and 
meaning  in  that  word.  He  had  been  telling  them  that  He  was  going ;  now  He  says 
to  them    "  You  are  to  go  1     We  part  here.     My  road  lies  upward :  ysurs  runa 


652  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xt. 

onward.  Go  into  all  the  world."  "That  ye  may  bring  forth  fruit."  "Keeping 
His  commandments  "  does  not  explain  the  whole  process  by  which  we  do  the  things 
that  are  pleasing  in  His  sight.  We  must  also  take  this  other  metaphor  of  the 
bearing  of  fruit.  There  must  be  the  effort;  for  men  do  not  grow  Christlike  in 
character  as  the  vine  grows  its  grapes,  but  there  must  be,  regulated  and  disciplined 
by  the  effort,  the  inward  life,  for  no  mere  outward  obedience  and  tinkering  at  duties 
and  commandments  will  produce  the  fruit  that  Christ  desires  and  rejoices  to  have. 
"  That  your  fruit  should  remain."  There  is  nothrag  that  corrupts  faster  than  fruit. 
There  is  only  one  kind  of  fruit  that  is  permanent,  incorruptible.  The  only  life's 
activity  that  outlasts  life  and  the  world  is  the  activity  of  the  men  that  obey  Christ. 
(2)  It  respects  the  satisfying  of  our  desires,  that  "whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  the 
Father  in  My  name  He  may  ^ve  it  you."  Make  your  desires  Christ's,  and  Christ's 
yours,  and  you  will  be  satisfied.  IV.  The  mutuaij  fbiendship  of  Chkist's  friends 
(ver.  17.)  This  whole  context  is  enclosed  within  a  golden  circlet  by  that  command- 
ment which  appears  in  ver.  12,  and  re-appears  here  at  the  close,  thus  shutting  off 
this  portion  from  the  rest  of  the  discourse.  Friends  of  a  friend  should  themselves 
be  friends.  We  care  for  the  lifeless  things  that  a  dear  Friend  has  cared  for.  And 
here  are  living  men  and  women,  in  all  diversities  of  character  and  circumstances, 
but  with  this  stamped  upon  them  all—  Christ's  friends,  lovers  of  and  loved  by  Him. 
And  how  can  we  be  indifferent  to  those  to  whom  Christ  is  not  indiffert^nt  ?  We  are 
knit  together  by  that  bond.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  friends  of  Jesus: — There 
is  no  title  surely  that  excels  in  diginty  that  which  was  worn  by  Abraham,  who  was 
called  "  The  friend  of  God."  Lord  Brooke  was  so  delighted  with  the  friendship  of 
Sir  Philip  Sydney  that  he  ordered  to  be  engraved  upon  his  tomb  nothing  but  this, 
"  Here  lies  the  friend  of  Sir  Philip  Sydney."  There  is  beauty  in  such  a  feeling, 
but  yet  it  is  a  small  matter  compared  with  being  able  to  say,  "  Here  lives  a  friend  of 
Christ."  I.  Note — What  obedience  Chbist  bequests  fbom  those  who  cam. 
THEMSELVES  His  FRIEND8.  It  must  be — 1.  Aotivc.  "If  ye  do."  Some  think  it  is 
quite  sufficient  if  they  avoid  what  He  forbids.  Abstinence  from  evil  is  a  great  part 
of  righteousness,  but  it  is  not  enough  for  friendship.  It  would  be  a  poor  friend- 
ship which  only  said,  "  I  am  your  friend,  and  to  prove  it,  I  don't  insult  you,  I  don't 
rob  you,  I  don't  speak  evil  of  you."  Surely  there  must  be  more  positive  evidence 
to  certify  friendship.  In  that  memorable  twenty-fifth  of  Matthew  nothing  is  said 
about  negative  virtues ;  but  positive  actions  are  cited  and  dwelt  upon  in  detail. 
Fine  words,  again,  are  mere  wind,  and  go  for  nothing  if  not  backed  up  with  sub- 
stantial deeds.  Friendship  cannot  Uve  on  windy  talk,  it  needs  the  bread  of  matter 
of  fact.  2.  Continuous.  He  does  not  say,  "  If  you  sometimes  do — if  you  do  it  on 
Sundays,  in  your  place  of  worship  " ;  no,  we  are  to  abide  in  Him,  and  keep  His 
statutes  even  unto  the  end.  3.  Universal.  "Whatsoever."  No  sooner  is  any- 
thing discovered  to  be  the  subject  of  a  command  than  the  man  who  is  a  true  friend 
of  Christ  says,  "  I  will  do  it,"  and  he  does  it.  He  does  not  pick  and  choose  which 
precept  he  will  keep  and  which  he  will  neglect.  The  smallest  command  of  Christ 
may  often  be  the  most  important.  Here  is  the  proof  of  your  love.  Will  you  do 
the  smaller  thing  for  Jesus  as  well  as  the  more  weighty  matter?  The  reality  of 
your  subjection  to  your  Lord  and  Master  may  hinge  upon  seemingly  insignificant 
points.  A  servant  might  place  the  breakfast  on  the  table,  and  feel  that  she  had 
done  her  duty,  but  if  her  mistress  told  her  to  place  the  salt  at  the  corner,  and  she 
did  not,  she  would  be  asked  the  cause  of  her  neglect.  Suppose  she  replied,  "I 
placed  the  breakfast  before  you,  but  a  little  salt  was  too  trifiing  a  matter  for  me  to 
be  troubled  about."  Her  mistress  might  answer,  "But  I  told  yon  to  be  sure  and 
pat  out  the  salt-cellar.  Mind  you  do  so  to-morrow."  4.  To  Christ  Himself.  Put 
the  emphasis  on  the  I.  We  are  told  to  do  these  things  because  Jesus  commands 
them.  Does  not  the  royal  person  of  our  Lord  cast  a  very  strong  light  upon  the 
necessity  of  obedience  ?  6.  Out  of  a  friendly  spirit.  Obedience  to  Christ  as  if  we 
were  forced  to  do  it  under  pains  and  penalties  would  be  of  no  worth  as  a  proof  of 
friendship.  He  speaks  not  of  slaves,  but  of  friends.  II.  Those  who  do  not  obey 
Him  abb  nofbiends  of  His.  A  man  who  does  not  obey  Christ — 1.  Does  not  give 
the  Saviour  His  proper  place,  and  this  is  an  unfriendly  deed.  If  I  have  a  friend  I 
am  very  careful  that,  if  he  has  honour  anywhere,  he  shall  certainly  have  due 
respect  from  me.  2.  Is  not  of  one  mind  with  Christ.  Can  two  walk  together 
•xcept  they  be  agreed  ?  Christ  is  for  holiness,  this  man  is  for  sin.  3.  He  may  be  a 
▼ery  high  and  loud  professor,  and  for  that  reason  be  all  the  more  an  enemy  of  the 
Otoss.  Through  the  inconsistent  conduct  of  our  Lord's  professed  friends,  His 
Mose  is  more  hindered  than  by  anything  else.    4.  A  disobedient  friend  would  be  a 


«HAP.  XV.]  ST,  JOHN.  653 

great  dishonour  to  Christ.     A  man  is  known  by  the  company  he  keeps,    HI.  Thosb 

WHO    BEST    OBEY   ChRIST   ARE    ON    THE     BEST    OF    TERMS    WITH     HiM.        1.    YoU    Cannot 

walk  in  holy  converse  with  Christ  unless  you  keep  His  commandments.  2.  Some 
Christians  will  never  get  into  full  fellowship  with  Christ  because  they  neglect  to 
study  His  word  and  search  out  what  His  will  is.  Half  the  Christian  people  in  the 
world  are  content  to  ask,  "What  is  the  rule  of  our  Church?"  That  is  not  the 
question:  the  point  is,  "What  is  the  rule  of  Christ?"  Some  plead,  "My  father 
and  mother  before  me  did  so."  I  sympathize  in  a  measure  with  that  feeling;  but 
yet  in  spiritual  things  we  are  to  call  no  man  "father,"  but  make  the  Lord  Jesua 
our  JIaster  and  Exemplar,  Take  your  light  directly  from  the  sun.  Let  holy 
Scripture  be  your  unquestioned  rule  of  faith  and  practice.  3.  Under  all  the 
crosses,  and  losses,  and  trials  of  life,  there  is  no  comfort  more  desirable  than  the 
confidence  that  you  have  aimed  at  doing  your  Lord's  will.  Losses  borne  in  the 
defence  of  the  right  and  true  are  gains,  Jesus  is  never  nearer  His  friends  than 
when  they  bravely  bear  shame  for  His  sake,  IV.  The  most  friendly  action  a 
MAN  CAN  DO  FOR  Jesus  IS  TO  OBEY  HiM.  1.  Piich  men  have  thought  to  do  the 
most  friendly  act  towards  Christ  by  building  a  church,  or  founding  almshouses  or 
schools.  If  they  are  believers,  and  have  done  this  thing  as  an  act  of  obedience  to 
Christ's  law  of  stewardship,  they  have  well  done,  and  the  more  of  such  munificence 
the  better,  but  where  splendid  benefactions  are  given  out  of  ostentation,  or  from 
the  idea  that  some  merit  will  be  gained  by  the  consecration  of  a  large  amount  of 
wealth,  the  whole  business  is  unacceptable.  Jesus  asks  not  lavish  expenditure,  but 
ourselves,  "  To  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice,  and  to  hearken  than  the  fat  of  rams." 
2.  Others  have  imagined  that  they  could  show  their  friendliness  to  Christ  by  self- 
mortification.  Jesus  Christ  has  not  demanded  this  as  the  gauge  of  friendship. 
He  says,  "  Ye  are  My  friends,  if  ye  do  whatsoever  I  command  you,"  but  He  does 
not  command  you  to  starve,  or  to  wear  sackcloth,  or  to  shut  yourselves  up  in  a  cell: 
pride  invents  these  things,  but  grace  teaches  obedience.  3.  Certain  persons  have 
thought  it  would  be  the  noblest  form  of  holy  service  to  enter  into  brotherhoods  and 
sisterhoods.  But  assuredly  in  the  New  Testament  you  shall  find  no  foreshadowing 
of  Franciscans  and  Dominicans.  All  godly  women  were  sisters  of  mercy,  and  all 
Christlike  men  were  of  the  society  of  Jesus,  but  of  monastic  and  conventual  vows 
we  read  nothing.  4,  Some  think  it  a  very  friendly  act  towards  Christ  to  attend 
many  religious  services  in  a  consecrated  building.  They  are  at  matins,  and  vespers, 
and  feasts  and  fasts  without  number.  Ye  are  Christ's  friends,  if  ye  do  whatsoever 
He  commands  ye :  that  is  a  better  test  than  early  communion  or  daily  mass.  6.  It 
comes  to  this,  that  we  must  steadily,  carefully,  persistently,  cheerfully,  do  the 
will  of  God  from  the  heart  in  daily  life,  from  the  first  waking  moment  till  our 
eyes  are  closed.  Say  concerning  everything,  "What  would  Jesus  have  me  do 
about  this?  What  is  the  teaching  of  Christ  as  to  this?"  ((7.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
A  Christian — Christ's  friend : — If  we  are  friends  of  Christ — I.  We  shall  bb  frb- 
QUENTLY  THINKING  OF  HiM,  His  Image  will  be  often  in  our  minds.  Almost  all 
remarkable  occurrences,  at  least,  will  suggest  Him,  in  one  way  or  another,  to  our 
hearts.  In  common  hfe  you  could  scarcely  be  regarded  as  being  a  warm-hearted 
friend  of  that  man,  of  whom  there  had  not  been  a  single  thought  in  your  mind 
during  the  course  of  the  day.  And,  yet,  are  there  not  a  few  in  our  churches  who, 
from  one  Sabbath  to  another,  have  their  thoughts  wandering  in  every  direction 
but  toward  Christ.  II.  Wb  shall  seek  His  company,  and  embrace  opportunities 
of  meeting  with  Him.  When,  and  where  do  we  find  Him  ?  1.  In  the  reading  of 
the  Word.  2.  In  prayer.  3.  At  the  prayer-meeting.  4.  At  His  own  house, 
amid  the  ordinances  of  the  Sabbath.  6.  In  His  sacraments.  How  easy,  then,  ia 
the  application  of  thn  test  ?  III.  We  shall  bead  with  interest  the  letters  Ha 
SENns  OS,  AN©  delight  in  corresponding  with  Him  in  return.  On  being  asked. 
When  you  heard  from  an  attached  friend  ?  were  you  to  reply,  "  Some  days  ago, 
but  I  have  not  yet  found  leisure  to  open  and  read  it " — what  would  be  the  infer- 
«nce  ?  Well,  is  not  the  New  Testament  hterally  an  epistle  which  Christ  has  sent 
us?  And  ought  not  a  Sabbath's  sermon  to  be  waited  on  expectantly  as  containing 
some  message  from  Him  ?  And  is  not  the  return  of  correspondence  on  our  part 
exemplified  specially  by  prayer  ?  How,  then,  do  our  professions  of  friendship  for 
Him  stand  this  test  7  IV.  Ws  shall  have  recodbsb  to  Him  fob  sympathy  and 
HELP  in  seasons  OF  AFFLICTION.  Friendship  is  often  manifested  and  proved  better 
by  applying  for  aid  than  by  bestowing  it.  If  you  have  two  friends  of  whom  yoa 
cannot  at  present  tell  who  is  the  more  endeared  to  your  heart — watch,  when  some 
evil  may  befall  you,  and  see  whose  image  presents  itself  first  to  your  nund.    In 


654  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLDSTBATOR.  [chap,  xvw 

applying  these  principles  for  the  determination  of  the  question  of  your  friendship 
for  Christ,  observe,  that  there  are  two  classes  of  evils,  for  deliverance  from  which 
you  need  friendly  help.  1.  Your  sinfulness,  with  its  twofold  evil  of  guilt  and 
servitude.  To  whom,  then,  do  you  apply  for  deliverance?  Now  Jesus  is  the 
Friend  of  Sinners ;  and  that,  too,  in  the  sense  of  His  being  "  the  only  Mediator 
between  God  and  man ; "  and  in  the  sense  of  His  taking  the  penitent  by  the  hand, 
and  leading  him  up  to  the  throne  of  grace.  Can  that,  then,  be  a  friend  of  Christ, 
who,  as  He  stands,  inviting  the  guilty  to  come  unto  Him,  passes  Him  by.  2.  There 
are  your  temporal  wants,  difficulties  and  distresses.  How  many,  who  ween  of 
themselves  that  they  are  good  friends  of  Christ,  have  yet  much  of  the  lesson  to 
learn  of  giving  Him  the  dependence  of  their  hearts,  without  exception  or  reserve! 
Y.  We  shall  be  the  friends  of  His  friends.  1.  We  will  take  a  friendly  interest 
in  them,  for  His  sake.  I  should  feel  there  was  a  want  of  entireness  in  the  friend- 
ship of  that  man  who  treated  with  negligence  even  the  dog  in  which  he  saw  I 
delighted.  2.  For  their  own  sakes.  as  bearing  a  resemblance  to  Him,  and  possessed 
of  properties  which  we  admire  in  Himself.  VI.  We  will  be  fbiends  of  His 
CAUSE — interested  in  the  welfare  of  His  Church :  will  grieve  for  its  losses  ;  rejoice 
for  its  gains  ;  plead  for  it,  spend  for  it,  work  for  it,  and,  if  need  be,  sufier  for  it. 
VII.  We  shall  not  be  ashamed  to  confess  Him  (Rom.  v.  6).  There  is  nothing 
by  which  friendship,  in  common  life,  is  better  manifested,  than  by  avowing  yourself 
a  friend  of  your  friend.  But — 1.  Friendship  for  Christ  does  not  require  tbat  w© 
be  always  obtruding  on  our  company  professions  of  love  for  Him,  and  His  claims 
on  their  embracement  of  His  cause.  2.  When  challenged  and  accused  for  your 
declared  or  suspected  faith  in  Christ,  by  either  the  magistrate  or  the  mob,  though 
it  might  imperil  your  life  to  confess  Him,  it  would  imperil  your  salvation  more  to 
deny  Him.  3.  There  are  manners,  customs,  and  fashions  of  the  world  which  are 
inimical  to  Christ's  honour  and  interests,  compliance  with  which  His  friends  will 
refuse  and  resist.  VIH.  We  shall  be  scrupulous  in  obeying  His  commandments. 
(TF.  Anderson,  LL.D.)  Th£  friendship  between  Christ  and  the  believer: — I.  YouB 
FRIENDSHIP  IS  SOUGHT  BY  Jesos  Christ.  That  He  might  win  it,  He  declares  His 
own  friendship.  No  matter  how  meanly  you  think  of  yourselves,  there  is  One  who 
seeks  your  friendship.  Think  who  this  One  is.  In  His  presence  Socrates  and 
Plato  pale.  The  greatness  of  Alexander,  of  Hannibal,  of  Csesar,  of  Napoleon,  of 
Washington  is  feeble  indeed  in  comparison  with  His.  II.  The  ground  upon  which 
THIS  FRIENDSHIP  CAN  BE  BUILT  UP.  1.  By  mutual  Confidence.  This  is  a  law  of 
friendship.  To  strengthen  their  confidence  He  reveals  the  secrets  of  His  heart  to 
His  disciples.  He  makes  confidants  of  them.  2.  By  gratitude.  Christ  says,  "  All 
is  thine."  We  answer  back,  "All  that  we  have  is  Thine."  III.  The  forms  of 
THIS  friendship.  1.  Intcrcourse.  We  do  not  desire  to  be  separated  from  our 
friends,  but  to  be  near  them.  2.  Remembrance.  The  human  heart  craves  to  be 
remembered.  Is  not  this  the  meaning  of  tokens,  even  of  the  writing  on  grave- 
stones  ?  Friendship  ministers  to  this  want.  It  is  met  in  the  friendship  of  Christ. 
We  are  told  that  we  are  in  His  thoughts,  that  our  very  names  are  written  on  His 
hands.  Is  there  anything  more  touching  than  Christ's  desire  to  be  remembered  by 
His  disciples  after  He  would  be  gone  ?  At  our  communion  seasons  we  comply  with 
this  desire  of  Christ.  3.  Desire  to  please.  Hence,  if  our  friends  are  below  as  we 
sink  to  their  level.  If  Christ  is  our  friend,  we  rise  to  Him,  and  become  more  and 
more  like  Him.  Hence,  not  anything  tends  to  such  purity  of  life  as  love  for  Christ. 
4.  Mutual  care.  Christ  cares  for  us,  for  our  interests,  protects  us,  and  we  care  for 
His  interests.  If,  as  a  scientist,  I  am  set  for  the  defence  of  the  law  of  gravitation, 
I  arrange  my  arguments  and  endeavour  to  convince  the  understanding.  But  when 
our  friend  is  attacked  then  it  is  that  the  lip  quivers  and  the  blood  boils.  When 
Christianity  is  assailed  it  is  more  to  us  than  the  assailing  of  a  system  of  principles; 
the  interests  of  our  dearest  Friend  are  involved,  and  we  are  ready  to  make  any 
sacrifice,  even  to  the  laying  down  of  our  lives,  in  their  defence.  IV.  The  proof  of 
this  friendship.  Friendship  does  not  spring  from  obedience,  but  obedience  from 
friendship.  What  should  we  think  of  an  admiral  who  would  say,  "  I  will  take 
advantage  of  the  fact  that  the  President  of  the  United  States  is  my  friend  and  will 
disregard  his  commands  "  ?  That  would  be  unspeakably  mean.  The  Christian 
does  not  presume  on  the  friendship  of  Christ.  That  friendship  holds  him  but  the 
firmer  to  what  is  right.     Note  some  of  the  characteristics  of  Christian  obedience. 

It  is 1.  Active  and  positive.    The  best  way  to  meet  the  importunities  to  do  wrong 

is  to  be  fully  occupied.     "  I  have  a  great  work  to  do.    Why  should  I  come  down  ?  " 
2.  Cheerful.    The  Christian  has  the  friendship  of  the  most  powerful  and  bert 


flttip.  IT.]  ST.  JOHN.  65S 

Being  in  the  univerBe ;  why  should  he  not  be  cheerful  in  his  obedience  to  that 
One  ?  What  parent  would  wish  to  see  his  child  surly  in  his  obedience  ?  3.  With- 
out reserve:  "whatsoever."  I  know  no  earthly  friend  to  whom  I  would  say,  I 
will  do  whatsoever  you  command  me."  {John  Hall,  D.D.)  Believer*  Christ'i 
friends : — I.  What  this  pbivileoe  is  in  the  general.  1.  The  friends  of  Christ, 
whereas  naturally  they  were  in  a  state  of  enmity  with  God,  are  now  in  a 
state  of  peace  with  Christ,  and  God  through  Christ  (Eph.  ii.  14).  2.  Whereas 
they  had  divided  interests  as  to  heaven,  now  there  is  an  unity  of  interests  betwixt 
Christ  and  them  (1  John  i.  3).  II.  How  this  friendship  is  made  cp.  I.  The 
first  spring  and  source  of  it  is  everlasting  free  love  (Jer.  xxxi.  3).  2.  The  plot  for 
compassing  it  was  laid  from  eternity  between  the  Father  and  the  Son  (Tit.  i.  2). 
3.  The  founcJation  of  it  was  laid  in  the  blood  of  Christ,  in  the  fulness  of  time 
(Gal.  iv.  4,  5).  4.  It  was  moved  to  them  in  the  gospel  (2  Cor.  v.  20).  5.  They 
are  won  to  it  by  His  own  Spirit  (Isa.  xliv.  3,  5).  6.  By  faith  they  go  into  the 
friendship  with  Him  (Eph.  iii.  17).  7.  The  friendship  is  sealed  by  the  sacraments, 
particularly  that  of  His  body  and  blood.  It  was  an  ancient  custom  to  confirm  a 
covenant  of  friendship  with  a  feast  (Geru  xxxi.  54 ;  John  xv.  13).  III.  What  a 
pbivilege  this  is  1  Men  nor  angels  cannot  fully  express  the  value  of  it,  for  it  is  of 
infinite  value  (1  Cor.  ii.  9).  1,  It  is  an  honourable  friendship.  Their  Friend  is 
the  Prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth  ;  and  through  Him  God  is  their  friend.  2.  It 
is  a  beneficial  friendship.  The  friendship  of  many  in  the  world  is  no  more  but  an 
empty  name.  But  Christ's  friendship,  the  benefits  of  it  who  can  tell  ?  3.  It  is  an 
intimate  friendship.  There  is  no  such  close  and  intimate  friendship  betwixt  any 
relations  on  earth  (1  Cor.  vi.  17).  4.  It  is  an  universal  friendship,  of  universal 
influence.  There  is  no  friendship  in  the  world  but  it  is  limited.  But  from  the 
greatest  to  the  least  of  the  concerns  of  His  friends,  Christ  interests  Himself. 
6.  It  is  a  sure  and  lasting  friendship.  The  friendships  in  the  world  are  very  un- 
certain (Job.  xix.  14;  Psa.  xxxviii.  11).  But  Christ's  friendship  never  dies  out 
(John  xiii.  1 ;  Isa.  xlix.  14-16).  IV.  Impeovement.  See — 1.  The  wonderful  con- 
descension of  heaven.  We  are  rebels  against  God  naturally,  but  may  become  friends 
through  Christ.  2.  They  that  are  Christ's  are  most  happy.  3.  Jesus  Christ  is  the 
best  and  most  generous  of  masters.  He  makes  all  His  servants  friends.  4.  Friend- 
less persons,  who  have  none  to  regard  them,  may  best  bestow  themselves  and  get  a 
friend,  that  will  be  better  to  them  than  all  the  world.  5.  Let  sinners  seek  this 
friendship.  6.  Ye  that  profess  to  be  the  friends  of  Christ,  walk  worthy  of  your 
privilege.  (T.  Boston,  D.D.)  ChrisVs  friends,  doers  of  all  His  commands  : — 
I.  Inqdibe  into  this  characteb  of  the  friends  op  Christ.  1.  The  friends  of 
Christ  are  doers  of  His  commands.  They  are  aU  His  servants  (Luke  vi.  46). 
Christ  is  their  Lord  and  Lawgiver,  and  they  do  His  commandments  (Kev.  xxii.  14). 
(1)  Their  lusts  are  not  their  domineering  lords,  to  whom  they  yield  themselves  to 
obey  (Rom.  vi.  13,  14 ;  Gal.  v.  24).  (2)  The  course  of  the  world  is  not  their  rule 
(Eph.  ii.  2).  (3)  But  as  they  look  for  salvation  by  Him,  it  is  the  business  of  their 
life,  to  please,  serve,  and  glorify  Him,  to  walk  worthy  of  the  Lord,  unto  all  pleasing 
(Col.  i.  10).  There  are  two  works  seriously  plied  by  all  Christ's  friends,  (a) 
Salvation-work,  that  they  may  be  saved  from  sin  and  wrath,  and  set  beyond  hazard 
of  eternal  ruin.  This  is  done  by  faith,  (b)  Their  generation  work  (Acts  xiii.  36  ; 
1  Pet.  ii.  9).  This  is  done  by  obedience.  In  the  former  they  look  for  their 
own  safety,  and  in  the  latter  for  the  honour  of  their  Saviour.  2.  The  friends 
of  Christ  are  doers  of  His  commands,  because  they  are  His  commands  (Col.  iii. 
17).  (1)  Out  of  respect  to  His  authority  (Psa.  cxix.  4  ;  Heb.  li.  8),  (2)  Out 
of  love  to  Him  (Heb.  vi.  10).  (3)  As  sons  redeemed  by  His  blood,  not  as  bond- 
servants working  for  their  own  redemption;  to  please  their  Benefactor,  not  to 
render  themselves  accepted  by  their  own  obedience  (Eom.  viii.  15;  Col.  i.  10). 
(4)  With  heart  and  good-will  (Eph.  vi.  7  ;  Isa.  Ixiv.  6).  3.  The  friends  of  Christ 
are  doers  of  His  commands  universally  and  without  exception  (Psa.  cxix.  6). 
They  are  universal — (1)  In  their  desire  to  do  all  His  commands,  saying,  as  (Psa. 
cxix.  6).  (2)  In  respect  of  their  endeavour  (Phil.  13,  14).  (3)  In  respect  of 
their  Willingness  to  know  aU  that  Christ  commands,  that  they  may  do  it  (Psa. 
cxxxix.  23).  The  reasons  why  Christ's  friends  are  universal  in  their  obedience, 
are — (a)  Because  the  grace  of  God  inclines  them  to  do  what  Christ  commands, 
because  He  commands  it  (Psa.  cxix.  4).  The  law  of  Christ  is  a  chain  of  many 
links,  and  he  that  truly  draws  one  to  Him,  draws  all.  (b)  Because  the  whole  law 
is  written  on  their  hearts  in  regeneration,  and  not  scraps  of  it  here  and  there 
(Heb.  viii.  10).    (c)  Because  Christ  hath  the  chief  room  in  their  hearts  beyond  all 


656  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xv, 

competitors  (Lake  xiv,  26).  (d)  Because  He  is  jealous,  and  the  least  command  ol 
His  that  is  slighted  is  displeasing  to  Him  (Matt.  v.  19).  (e)  Because  their  hearts 
are  reconciled  to  the  whole  law,  and  every  part  of  it  (Psa.  cxix.  128).    II.  Whi 

THIS   IS   MADE  THE  TRYING  AND  DISTINGUISHING  CHAKACTEK  OF  THE  FBIENDS  OF  ChEIST. 

1.  Because  this  hits  the  point  in  which  the  sincere  and  hypocrites  differ.  2.  Be- 
cause the  reality  of  friendship  to  Christ  does  without  controversy  appear  here. 
•  Show  your  faith  by  your  works.  Love  not  in  word  only  but  in  deed."  3.  Because 
where  Christ's  friendship  to  a  person  takes  effect,  it  certainly  has  this  effect 
(Eph.  V.  25,  26 ;  Tit.  ii.  14).  4.  Because  though  the  free  grace  of  God  tends  to 
holiness  (Tit.  ii.  11,  12),  yet  there  is  a  disposition  in  the  children  of  men  to  turn  it 
to  licentiousness  (Jude  4).  Therefore  the  apostle  cautions  the  Galations  (Gal.  v.  13) 
III.  Uses.  1.  Of  information.  This  shows  us — (1)  What  the  life  of  a  Christian 
is.  It  is  a  life  of  doing  whatsoever  Christ  commands.  And  so  it  is — (a)  An  active 
not  an  idle  life  (Phil.  ii.  12 ;  Bev.  xiv.  13).  (6)  A  well  doing  Ufe  (1  Tim.  i.  5). 
(c)  A  watchful  Ufe  (1  Cor.  xvi.  13).  (d)  A  resolute  life  (Eph.  vi.  16).  (2)  The 
doctrine  of  free  grace  gives  no  encouragement  to  looseness  of  life :  for  there  is  no 
separating  of  faith  and  holiness.  If  ye  be  Christ's  friends  by  faith,  ye  wUl  be  His 
faithful  and  tender  servants  in  obedience.  2.  Of  exhortation.  Show  yourselves 
Christ's  friends  by  doing  whatsoever  He  commands  you.  And  do  ye  what  Christ 
commands  you,  if  you  would  show  yourselves  His  friends.  (1)  In  a  time  of  general 
apostasy  and  blacksliding  from  the  ways  of  God  (Gen.  vi.  9).  (2)  Even  when  it 
must  be  your  temporal  loss  (Heb.  xi.  35).  (3)  When  His  hand  is  lying  heavy  on 
you  by  crosses  and  afflictions  (Job.  i.  9,  10).  (4)  When  sin  comes  with  a  seen 
advantage  in  its  hand,  as  in  the  case  of  Moses  (Heb.  xi.  24-26).  (5)  When  the 
sin  that  most  easily  besets  you  comes  in  competition  with  your  obedience  to  the 
commands  of  Christ  (Psa.  xviii.  23).  (6)  When  there  is  nothing  to  keep  you  back 
from  sin,  but  pure  regard  to  the  command  of  Christ.  IV.  Motives.  1.  Because 
all  His  commands  are  those  of  an  absolute  Lord,  to  whom  we  owe  obedience  in 
all  things  (Exod.  xx.  2).  2.  All  His  commands  are  just,  righteous,  and  reason- 
able (Psa.  cxix.  128).  3.  We  are  all  of  us  under  covenant-engagements  to  do 
whatsoever  He  commands  us.  We  have  all  avouched  Him  for  our  Lord  (Luke  vi. 
46).  4,  Christ  has  been  the  best  friend  ever  mankind  had  (John  xv.  13;  Rom  v.  8). 
5.  It  is  necessary  to  evidence  your  sincerity  (Psa.  cxix.  6).  6.  The  glorious 
privilege  of  those  who  do  whatsoever  Christ  commands  them.  {Ibid.)  Implicit 
obedience  : — At  Federal  Hill,  Baltimore,  Colonel  Warren  gave  orders  to  his  guards 
that  only  officers  in  nniform  were  to  be  admitted  to  camp.  One  bright  morning 
General  Dix,  who  commanded  the  troops  guarding  the  city,  walked  over  from  Fort 
McHenry  in  undress.  Attempting  to  pass  the  line  of  sentries  in  company  with  an 
aide,  the  old  general  was  amused  at  finding  a  musket  barring  his  passage,  while 
the  aide,  with  his  glittering  shoulder  straps,  was  permitted  to  enter.  *•  Why  do 
you  stop  me,  my  man  ?  "  inquired  the  general,  quietly.  "  My  orders  are  to  admit 
only  officers  in  uniform,"  was  the  reply.  "  But  don't  yon  see  that  this  is  General 
Dix  ?  "  exclaimed  the  aide,  angrily.  "  Well,  between  you  and  me,  major,"  said  the 
sentry,  his  eyes  twinkling  with  amusement,  "  I  see  very  weU  who  it  is ;  but  if 
General  Dix  wants  to  gets  to  get  into  this  camp  he  had  better  go  back  and  put  on 
his  uniform."  «•  You  are  quite  right,  sentry,"  remarked  the  general.  *«  I'll  go 
back  and  get  my  coat."  The  incident  increased  his  admiration  for  the  entire 
command.     [H.  0,  Mackey.) 

Ver.  15.  Henceforth  I  call  you  not  servants. — Slave  or  friend » — The  word  nsed 
was  the  word  for  slave,  though  not  always  used  in  the  most  ignominious  relation. 
The  word  "  friends  "  is  philos,  something  more  than  friendship  in  the  ordinary  use 
of  the  word  "  love-friends."  These  were  the  disciples  that  had  been  ordained  to  go  out 
and  preach.     All  that  time  they  have  been  only  servants.    I.  There  is,  then,  a 

DISCIPLE8HIP    that   IS   SERVITUDE,   HAVING   IN   IT  A   GOOD   MANY  EXCELLENT   QUALITIES 

but  as  soon  as  possible  to  be  left  behind.  All  over  the  world,  we  see  in  progress 
this  primary  state  of  discipleship — that  of  servitude  and  inferiority.  1.  The  lower 
province  begins,  with  conscientious  morality;  that  is,  so  much  of  rectitude  recognized 
and  mildly  sought  as  is  embodied  in  public  law  and  in  public  sentiment.  But  the 
averages  of  society  are  always  and  everywhere  very  low.  2.  Higher  than  this  is  a 
more  active  recognition  of  what  may  technically  be  called  religious  life:  that  is,  the 
recognition  of  an  invisible  God,  of  a  moral  order,  and  of  a  providence  which  unfolds 
the  thought  and  the  will  of  God  among  men.  A  man  has  certainly  risen  very  much 
higher  than  tht;  ordinary  morality  which  is  contained  in  the  Ten  Commandments— 


CHAP.  IT.]  ST.  JOHN.  667 

he  has  risen  a  great  deftl  when  he  begins  to  be  a  worshipper.  3.  Then  we  come,  a 
little  more  interiorly,  to  the  condition  of  those  who  are  seeking  to  conform  their 
lives  to  canons  of  morality,  to  rules  of  Church  life,  to  religion  as  a  personal  ex- 
perience ;  and  we  find  that  fear  is  usually  the  very  first  incitement,  as  it  is '  the 
lowest  motive.  There  is  a  fear  that  runs  with  the  highest  feelings,  that  purity  itself 
has  lest  it  should  be  sullied.  There  is  a  fear  of  love—  filial  fear.  But  there  is  also 
the  fear  that  if  a  duty  be  neglected  it  will  bring  chastisement ;  and  this  fear  takes 
a  very  low  range.  It  indicates  no  great  love  for  moral  quality,  no  worship  of  good 
because  it  is  good,  no  spontaneity,  but  a  dark  shadow  of  dread  for  neglect  or  viola- 
tion. There  are  thousands  whose  religion  rises  in  its  motives  no  higher  than  thia  : 
"We  must  prepare  for  death;  it  may  come  in  an  untold  hour."  There  are 
multitudes  who  are  afraid  to  be  wicked.  I  am  glad  of  that ;  but  it  is  a  very  low 
motive.  Multitudes  of  persons  are  afraid  not  to  say  their  prayers.  That  is  a  very 
low  motive.  Sometimes  it  is  the  misery  of  an  heir  to  know  that  a  decrepit  aunt  is 
going  to  bequeath  her  property  to  him,  provided  his  conduct  is  in  all  respects  suitable 
tu  her  wishes.  So  all  his  life  long  he  is  thinking :  "  What  does  she  want  ?  "  And 
what  politeness  !  what  keeping  out  of  her  prejudices  I  And  so  all  his  life  long  he 
has  a  certain  sort  of  respectable  morality ;  but  the  whole  way  through  it  is  carnal 
and  mean,  and  it  is  to  g€t  the  property ,  not  because  he  loves  politeness,  not  because 
he  loves  her  at  all — he  loves  her  Will.  A  service  of  fear  never  works  the  higher 
moral  qualities.  If  a  man's  religion  is  very  largely  compounded  of  the  element  of 
fear  he  may  save  his  soul ;  but  is  it  worth  saving  ? — poor,  scrawny,  mean  1  4.  Then 
eomes,  next  higher  in  order,  the  sense  of  duty—  conscience.  In  combination  with 
higher  qualities  conscience  gives  strength  and  great  power.  It  is  an  undertone  that 
should  run  through  life.  Duty  is  not  less  noble  because  it  is  inferior  to  love,  but  it 
is  inferior  to  love.  The  things  that  every  mother  does  for  her  child,  are  they  things 
that  are  done  from  a  sense  of  duty  ?  She  ought ;  but  she  never  touches  bottom  on 
ought.  She  does,  because  spontaneous  love  urges  it  upon  her.  If  that  were 
deficient  she  would  fall  down  upon  another,  but  inferior,  faculty  of  conscience — "  It 
is  my  duty."  A  rich  man,  dying,  leaves  large  properties  to  be  distributed  for 
charitable  purposes  ;  and  those  appointed  as  trustees  and  distributors,  men  of 
honour  and  conscientiousness,  s»j  :  "  This  is  a  good  cause  ;  we  think  we  will  devote 
a  hundred  thousand  dollars  for  that."  It  is  the  fulfilment  of  a  duty  that  has  been 
laid  upon  them.  But  if  a  man  with  a  great  heart,  and  blessed  with  large  inheritance, 
looks  out  on  society,  and  pities  the  orphans,  and  buihis  a  home  for  them,  that 
springs  out  of  his  own  heart.  It  is  not  his  duty ;  it  is  his  desire  and  wish.  So, 
then,  a  man  may  be  doing  benevolent  work  as  a  duty  ;  but  it  is  a  very  much  higher 
thing  to  do  benevolent  work  because  you  are  benevolent,  and  not  because  it  is  your 
duty.  5.  In  various  grades,  all  these  things  are  acceptable  to  God  and  useful ;  but 
as  in  the  pictures  of  a  studio  there  are  various  grades  of  excellence,  and  yet  the 
least  may  be  a  good  picture,  so  in  the  development  of  the  dispositions  of  Christians 
there  is  very  low,  and  there  is  a  little  higher,  and  there  is  the  higher  still,  and  there 
is  the  highest  level,  which  men  should  seek,  and  on  which  they  should  stand.  II. 
On  the  eve  of  His  departure,  Christ  said  to  men  who  had  been  living  in  this  lower 
relation,  doing  right  things,  avoiding  evil  things — doing  this  from  various  motives, 
more  or  less  in  bondage,  more  or  less  exhorted  by  duty :  "  Henceforth  I  call  you  not 
servants  ;  I  call  yod  fbiends.  1.  One  can  see  easily  how  this  might  take  place. 
In  the  thrall  of  poverty  and  neglect  some  beneficent  heart,  meeting  with  a  maiden, 
sees  in  her  some  moral  quality  that  indicates  a  higher  place  in  life ;  and  it  turns 
out  at  last  that  she  came  of  good  parents,  that  they  were  swept  away,  that  the  child 
went  through  various  hands  down  to  the  bottom  of  society,  but  that  being  caught 
up  by  this  philanthropic  missionary,  she  had  responded  quickly  to  moral  appeals. 
Every  point  in  her  is  susceptible  of  development ;  and  at  every  step,  coming  up, 
and  ministered  to  little  by  Uttle,  at  last  there  comes  a  day  when  the  benefactor  says : 
"  Hitherto  I  have  called  you  my  ward ;  I  have  been  your  benefactor ;  now  I  loTe 
you,  and  I  take  you  for  my  own."  How  many  have  found  that  higher  and  nobler 
development  of  confidence  between  their  souls  and  their  Saviour  ?  2.  We  attain  to 
this  state  of  experience,  not  as  the  direct  result  of  effort.  It  is  not  by  prayer.  You 
never  can  pray  it  into  yourself,  although  prayer  is  an  excellent  thing.  It  is  not  by 
mortification ;  it  is  by  the  power  of  love,  and  soul-ripening  that  it  is  attained. 
That  process  differs  with  different  people  and  in  different  circumstances.  In  June 
the  orchard  blossoms  ;  but  nobody  wants  to  eat  blossoms.  In  early  July  the  germs 
of  the  apple  and  the  pear  have  set,  and  the  blossoms  are  gone.  The  work  has 
begun.  Now,  the  first  rejoicing  that  the  soul  has  comes  when  it  just  begins  th* 
voii.  n.  4£L 


658  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vr^ 

Christian  life.  Then  it  has  the  flush  of  early  love  and  joy.  The  grc/ring  come* 
afterward.  In  early  July  the  apple  and  the  pear  have  set  their  germs,  they  are 
beginning  to  grow,  and  are  utterly  unfit  to  eat.  In  September  they  have  got  size 
that  they  had  not,  but  are  very  sour.  In  October  they  begin  to  get  colour  on  their 
cheeks,  but  they  are  hard  yet.  In  November  they  begin  to  have  sugar  in  themselves, 
and  they  exhale  fragrance.  Step  by  step,  the  fruit  from  greenness  goes  on  to  size, 
and  from  size  to  quality,  and  from  quality  to  perfect  ripeness  and  harmony.  So, 
largely,  is  it  in  Christian  life.  There  is  a  process  constantly  going  on ;  and  the 
evidence  that  there  is  this  tendency  toward  ripeness  is  one  of  the  things  that 
should  stimulate  the  hope  of  our  soul.  The  ripening  of  men  is  not  a  mechanical 
system,  by  which  we  have  been  awakened,  and  convicted  of  sin,  and  have  changed 
our  will  and  purpose.  This  ripening  does  not  come  because  we  are  joined  to  God's 
people,  and  because  we  are  striving,  according  to  the  measure  of  our  knowledge  in 
ordinary  tbings,  to  live  about  right  and  fulfil  our  duties.  We  have  simply  ripened 
so  that  we  have  begun  to  be  susceptible ;  and  Christ  says :  "  Henceforth  I  call  you 
My  love,"  and  we  respond,  "I  am  my  Lord's;  He  is  mine."  {H.  W.  Beecher.) 
Servants  and  friends ; — I.  Servants  and  friends.  All  Christ's  friends  are  His 
servants,  but  all  His  servants  are  uot  therefore  His  friends.  This  was  perhaps  the 
distinction  between  Moses  and  Aaron  (Exod.  xxxiii.  11).  You  see  the  difference  at 
once  between  their  characters.  In  Aaron  it  was  attention  to  the  ministry  at  the 
altar,  in  Moses  it  was  jealousy  for  the  Divine  law.  In  Aaron  it  was  a  regard  for 
the  defences  and  pictures  of  purity  and  truth,  in  Moses  it  was  regard  for  truth  and 
purity  themselves.  1.  Servants  may  be  quite  unconscious  of  their  servitude.  The 
elements  are  the  servants  of  God.  Winds,  and  vapours,  and  storms  fulfilling  His 
word.  Time  is  His  servant,  and  the  ambition  of  princes  ;  but  it  is  all  unconscious 
servitude.  How  great  the  difference  between  the  two  Shepherds  of  God,  David  and 
Cyrus  1  (Isa.  xliv.  28).  Christ  made  my  relationship  to  Him  a  consciousness.  2. 
Servants  have  but  a  passing  and  transient  relationship.  The  connection  is  slight 
and  fragile,  bom  in  interest.  Servants  have  a  divided  interest  from  their  masters. 
How  suspicious  of  him  and  of  their  fellows  1  Friendship  would  make  common  cause 
with  the  master,  and  identify  both  interests  in  one.  Christ  spoke  in  the  hght  of 
the  perpetuity  of  our  relationship.  3.  Servants  are  unable  to  enter  into  the  mean- 
ing of  the  Master's  will.  '•  His  ways  are  not  their  ways,  neither  are  His  thoughts 
their  thoughts. "  The  soldier  is  not  one  of  the  council  of  war ;  but  the  mind  and 
heart  are  revealed  to  the  friend.  We  know  words  lovelessly  pronounced,  how  cold  I 
words  lovingly  pronounced,  how  dear  I  The  same  number  of  letters,  but  the  accent 
is  aU.  So  God  speaks  to  His  people  with  an  accent.  ••  All  that  My  Father  hath 
given  Me  have  I  made  known  to  you."  In  the  thonght  of  this  deep  intercourse, 
Christ  said,  ••  I  have  called  you  not  servants,"  &o.  4.  Servants  may  be  absolute 
enemies.  How  many  names  are  recorded  in  Scripture  of  men  who  were  His  enemies 
at  last?  He  used  them,  while  they  sought,  as  Balaam  did,  to  circumvent  the 
Divine  purposes.  He  used  them  as  the  builder  uses  a  scaffold  or  a  tool,  then  to  be 
cast  aside  as  useful  no  more.  In  thought  of  a  will  made  one  with  His,  Christ  said, 
"  Henceforth  I  call  you  not  servants,"  &c.  II.  Look  at  the  doctbinb  to  which 
THE  TEXT  points.  1.  Now  it  is  clcar  that  all  along  throughout  Scripture,  its 
language  points  to  a  state  of  hallowed  seclusiveness,  in  which  the  soul  sees  more 
ftnd  feels  more,  knows  more  and  has  more,  in  highest  communion  with  Christ 
(1  John  i.  3  ;  John  xiv.  22,  23  ;  1  Cor.  ii  16  ;  1  John  v.  10).  There  is  no  fact  more 
stupendously  beautiful  than  tliis — God  loves  His  friends,  and  they  know  it.  He 
crowds  all  imaginable  and  all  imageable  mercies  upon  their  souls,  to  assure  them 
of  His  love  (Isa.  Ixiii.  9).  In  the  light  of  God's  love  to  his  friends,  even  nature 
acquires  new  majesty.  What  is  more  sure  and  steadfast  than  the  heavens  in  their 
daily  march,  or  in  their  midnight  pomp  (Jer.  xxxiii.  20  21)  ?  Or,  think  of  the 
seasons  in  their  annual  round  (Jer.  xxxiii.  25,  26).  And  hence  you  see  the  difference 
between  the  two  methods  of  our  Lord's  teaching.  He  had  the  parabolical  and  the 
real  (Luke  x.  28 ;  ix.  10 ;  Matt.  xiii.  16).  For  friendship  has  words  which  mere 
acquaintanceship  cannot  use.  And  love  ever  finds  new  words  and  new  meanings. 
2.  The  doctrine  suffers  no  defect,  and  does  not  recoil  from  the  fact  of  the  infinite 
superiority  on  one  hand,  and  the  infinite  inferiority  on  the  other.  Such  friendships, 
either  in  time  or  eternity,  are  not  impossible.  On  earth,  indeed,  real  friendship 
always  receives ;  it  is  impossible  but  there  must  be  some  benefit  on  either  side. 
The  subject,  the  friend  of  the  prince,  repays  the  prince  in  counsel,  and  in  sympathy, 
more  than  he  receives  in  honour.  And  even  the  heart  of  the  Bedeemer  owns  tb# 
Divine  light  of  sympathy  with  His  believing  friends.    Few  joys,  to  which  we  caa 


«Hi».  XT.]  ST.  JOHN.  659 

look  forward,  can  equal  the  hope  we  have  that  one  day  we  shall  call  our  boy  our 
friend.  I  said  to  a  young  mother  once,  congratulating  her  on  her  new-born  child. 
••  How  proud  you  will  be  to  take  his  arm  twenty  years  hence."  Although,  alas  1 
the  young  mother,  a  few  days  after,  was  among  the  angels.  Very  beautiful  is  the 
friendship  between  a  master  and  a  disciple,  when  the  disciple  looks  reverently  up 
to  the  teacher  for  instruction,  and  the  master  looks  lovingly  down  and  beholds 
himself  growing  anew  in  his  young  friend.  3.  Servants  of  God,  here  is  a  higher 
ambition  for  you.  Strive  for  the  peerage,  for  the  dignity  of  friends !  This  is  the 
relation  that  completes  the  Divine  Ufe ;  this  is  the  highest  object  of  ambition  of  the 
friends  of  God.  4.  What  hallowed  rest  is  here  1  Friendship  rests.  They  are  not 
troubled  as  we  are  who  are  only  servants.  Doubts  vanish  from  the  full  assurance 
of  love.  Talk  with  them,  and  they  will  tell  you  that  all  things  about  them  Jesus 
knows.  (Paxton  Hood.)  Christ  our  friend : — Seneca  once  told  a  courtier  who  had 
lost  his  son,  tbat  he  had  no  cause  to  mourn,  either  for  that  or  ought  else,  because 
Caesar  was  his  friend.  Oh,  then,  what  little  cause  have  the  saints  to  mourn  for 
this  or  that  loss,  considering  that  God  is  their  portion  1  Would  you  not  laugh  to  see 
a  man  lament  bitterly  for  the  loss  of  his  shoe-stiiags  when  his  purse  is  safe  ?  or  for 
the  burning  of  a  pig-sty  when  his  dwelhng-house  is  safe  ?  and  why  then  should  a 
Christian  lament  for  the  loss  of  this  or  that,  so  long  as  his  God  is  with  him? 
{Thomas  Brooks.)  The  friendship  of  Jesus  : — When  we  say  of  two  men  that  they 
are  friends,  we  put  them  down  in  the  same  list ;  but  what  condescension  on  the 
Lord's  part  to  be  on  terms  of  friendship  with  a  man  I  Again  I  say,  no  nobility  is 
comparable  to  this.  Parmenio  was  a  great  general,  but  all  his  fame  in  that  direc- 
tion is  forgotten  in  the  fact  that  he  was  known  as  the  friend  of  Alexander.  He  had 
B  great  love  for  Alexander  as  a  man,  whereas  others  only  cared  for  him  as  a 
conqueror  and  a  monarch  ;  and  Alexander,  perceiving  this,  placed  great  reliance 
upon  Parmenio.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  servant  and  the  friend  compared  and  con- 
trasted : — The  whole  human  race  may  be  divided  into  two  classes,  "  Servants  "  and 
"  Friends."  AU  human  beings  have  to  do  with  Christ,  and  their  service  must  be  either 
that  of  slaves  or  of  friends.  Our  Lord  here  intimates  the  superiority  of  the  one  rela- 
tionship to  the  other,  and  the  superiority  will  be  obvious  by  comparing  the  relation- 
ships together.  I.  The  one  is  legal,  the  other  is  lovinq.  The  master  treats  his  slave, 
and  the  slave  treats  him,  according  to  legal  contract.  The  servant  works  by  rule, 
and  the  master  treats  him  accordingly ;  the  slave  Uves  and  works  in  the  letter  of 
the  contract.  But  the  service  of  the  friend  is  irrespective  of  all  prescriptive  rules, 
of  all  legal  arrangements.  He  does  not  feel  himself  to  be  under  the  law  at  aU,  and 
although  he  does  more  real  hard  work  in  the  service  of  his  friend  than  that  of  the 
slave  in  the  employ  of  his  master,  love  is  his  inspiration,  and  love  is  his  law.  II. 
The  one  is  watched,  the  other  is  tbusted.  The  master  keeps  his  eye  upon  the  slave ; 
he  knows  that  he  is  not  the  character  to  be  trusted,  here  is  a  mere  eye-servant.  If 
the  contracted  work  is  to  be  done  he  is  to  be  kept  up  to  it  by  force.  Not  so  with  the 
friend ;  he  is  thrown  upon  his  love,  honour,  sense  of  gratitude  and  justice.  Thna 
Christ  treats  His  disciples ;  He  does  not  tell  them  how  much  to  do,  or  how  to  do  it. 
He  trusts  to  their  love,  knowing  that  if  they  love  Him  they  will  keep  His  command- 
ments. This  is  the  true  way  to  treat  men — trust  them.  Thus  Dr.  Arnold  treated 
his  boys  at  Bugby,  and  thus  all  whom  Providence  has  put  in  authority  over  men 
should  treat  their  subordinates,  in  order  to  get  from  them  the  highest  service  they 
can  render.  III.  The  one  is  distant,  the  other  is  neab.  The  master  keeps  his 
flervant  at  a  distance,  he  stands  on  his  authority,  gives  out  his  orders,  and  insists 
on  their  discharge.  They  live  not  only  in  different  apartments,  but  in  different 
mental  worlds.  Not  so  with  the  friend — the  friend  is  near  to  the  heart.  An  old 
philosopher  defined  friendship  as  the  existence  of  two  souls  in  one  body.  Thus 
near  are  Christ's  disciples  to  Him.  "  The  servant,"  He  says,  "  knoweth  not  what 
his  Lord  doeth  ...  but  all  things  that  I  do  I  have  made  known  unto  yon."  How 
dose  and  vital  the  connection  I  "  Shall  I  hide  from  Abraham  that  thing  which  I 
do  ?  "  said  God.  IV.  The  one  is  used,  the  other  uses.  The  master  uses  his  slave, 
usee  him  as  he  does  a  piece  of  machinery ;  he  has  no  tender  interest  in  him.  All 
he  cares  for  is  what  benefits  he  can  extract  from  his  service,  the  slave  is  used — used 
as  a  beast  of  burden.  But  the  friend  is  using.  All  his  services,  as  a  true  friend, 
answer  his  own  purpose,  conduce  to  his  own  happiness  of  soul.  He  acts  from  love, 
and  love,  like  the  philosopher's  stone,  turns  the  commonest  things  into  moral  gold, 
to  enrich  his  own  heart.  Thus  it  is  with  Christ's  disciples :  all  their  efforts  to  servA 
Him  serve  themselves.  ••  All  things  are  yours,  life,  death,"  <feo.  Everything  turns 
io  the  real  use  of  those  who  are  the  friends  of  Christ.     V.  The  one  is  oobboso,  the 


660  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaj.  XT, 

other  is  fbee.  The  slave  is  not  free  in  his  work ;  he  would  not  serve  his  master  it 
he  could  help  it.  He  is  placed  under  considerations  that  force  him  to  do  his  work. 
But  the  service  of  the  friend  is  free,  he  would  not  but  do  what  he  does,  and  his 
desires  to  render  service  transcend  his  abilities.  Thus  it  is  with  Christ's  disciples. 
"He  that  is  joined  to  the  Lord  is  one  Spirit."  The  love  of  Christ  constrains  them ; 
they  welcome  the  slighi est  intimation  of  duty  from  their  Lord.  Conclusion  :  What 
is  our  relationsbip  to  Christ — that  of  servitude  or  friendship?  All  must  serve 
Him,  either  against  their  will  or  by  their  will.  The  former  is  the  condition 
of  devils,  the  latter  that  of  holy  saints  and  blessed  angels.  (D.  Tlwmas,  D.D.) 
Friendship  with  Jesus : — When  a  blind  man  was  asked  what  he  thought  the  sun  to 
be  like,  he  replied,  "  Like  friendship. "  And  truly  friendship  is  a  sun,  if  not  the 
sun,  of  life.  All  feel  it  to  be  so.  Most  strange  is  it  that  men  should  wonder  that 
the  gospel  has  not  enjoined  so  good  a  thing.  It  needs  no  injunction.  It  grows 
best  of  itself.  It  is  as  unnecessary  to  command  men  to  cultivate  friendship,  as  to 
command  them  to  eat  and  drink.  Let  us — I.  Look  at  the  expressions  employed, 
AND  THE  GENERAL  SENTIMENT  WHICH  THEY  EMBODY.  1.  Both  slavery  and  friend- 
ship represent  our  relations  to  our  Lord  and  Saviour.  "  For  he  that  is  called  in 
the  Lord,  being  a  slave,  is  the  Lord's  freeman :  likewise  also  he  that  is  called,  being 
free,  is  Christ's  slave."  Freedom  and  bondage  go  together,  and  we  are  not  free  till 
we  are  bound.  Here  servitude  is  the  sign  of  friendship.  As  inferiors,  as  creatures, 
we  can  be  friends  of  Jesus  only  "if  we  keep  His  commandments."  2.  When 
Christ  says,  "  AU  things  that  I  have  heard  of  My  Father  I  have  made  known  unto 
you,"  He  can  mean  only  all  things  intended  for  them,  for  in  the  next  chapter  He 
remarks,  "  I  have  yet  many  things  to  say  unto  you,  but  y^  cannot  hear  them  now." 
Their  intimacy  with  Him  was  progressive.  And  so  now  His  people  pass  from  one 
degree  of  fellowship  to  another ;  become  less  and  less  slaves,  and  more  and  more 
friends,  and  the  honours  and  privileges  of  friendship  increase  with  its  spirit. 
3.  Confidence  is  the  sign  of  Christ's  friendship.  There  are  but  two  essentially 
different  ways  of  treating  men  as  friends,  or  as  slaves.  We  must  be  ruled  either  by 
force  or  by  reason ;  we  must  be  watched  or  trusted.  Selfishness,  ignorance,  pre- 
judice, fear,  tyranny  may  say,  "  Treat  him  as  a  slave  " ;  but  reason,  love,  justice, 
hope,  and  all  in  Christ  Jesus,  say,  "  Treat  Him  as  a  friend."  The  world  is  learning 
this.  Severity,  though  the  way  to  govern  men,  as  Dr.  Johnson  said,  is  not  the  way 
to  mend  them,  and  in  the  school,  the  State,  the  Church,  and  even  the  mad-house,  they 
are  being  treated  more  as  friends,  and  less  as  slaves.  Who  knows  not  that,  even 
among  children,  not  to  believe  is  to  excite  to  falsehood,  to  be  always  watching  to  be 
sure  to  prompt  to  go  astray,  and  want  of  trust  to  beget  unworttuness  ?  And  if  it 
is  so  with  Children,  it  is  still  more  so  with  men.     II.  Illustkatb  the  diffebenob 

BETWEEN     slavery    AND     FRIENDSHIP,    AND     SHOW    THAT     ChRISX     TREATS     DS     NOT     Afl 

SLAVES  BUT  AS  FRiENns.  This  is  secu — 1.  In  the  position  which  Christ  assigns  us, 
and  the  spirit  which  He  excites  within  us.  Being  reconciled,  we  receive  "  not  the 
spirit  of  bondage  again  to  fear,  but  the  spirit  of  adoption."  Thus  the  state  and 
the  temper  of  slavery  are  both  abolished.  We  are  "  joined  unto  the  Lord  "  and  are 
"  one  spirit "  with  Him.  When  John,  king  of  France,  lost  the  battle  of  Poictiers, 
though  he  had  been  beaten  by  a  force  one  eighth  only  of  his  own,  though  he  him- 
self was  taken  prisioner,  he  was  overpowered  by  the  courtesy  and  chivalrous  kind- 
ness of  the  Black  Prince,  his  foe,  "  the  tears  burst  from  his  eyes,  and  mingled  with 
the  marks  of  blood  upon  his  cheeks."  It  is  thus  that  God  moves  the  heart.  In 
seeking  His  high  ends,  He  does  not  beget  a  crouching  spirit,  but  treats  us  gener- 
ously. And  I  do  not  know  how  the  heart  of  man  is  to  be  reached  in  any  other  way, 
how  its  enmity  is  to  be  slain  and  its  love  drawn  out.  2.  In  the  nature  of  Christ's 
communications  to  us.  "  The  servant  knoweth  not  what  his  Lord  doeth,"  &c.  In 
like  manner  God  spake  of  Abraham,  His  '•  friend :  ■"  '•  Shall  I  hide  from  Abraham 
that  thing  which  I  do  f  "  (1)  It  is  true  of  Ds  as  of  them.  Christ  has  given  us 
information  as  to  what  He  intends  to  do,  and  "the  wise  shall  understand"  ;  He 
has  given  us  notices  of  His  general  purposes  respecting  the  world  and  the  Church  : 
not  a  minute  prophetic  history,  but  a  grand  idea  of  the  destiny  of  systems  and  of 
men.  But  we  have  a  more  glorious  revelation  than  this.  In  the  text  Christ  means 
the  whole  counsel  of  God's  wiU.  He  had  opened  to  them  His  mind  and  heart ; 
and,  if  they  saw  but  little,  the  fault  was  in  the  eye,  not  the  object.  He  has  entered 
into  frank  and  friendly  communication  with  us.  opened  His  counsels,  explained  His 
objects  and  His  methods,  told  us  His  desires  and  designs,  and  has  thus  given  us  an 
interest  not  only  in  what  we  do,  but  in  what  He  does.  (2)  And  if  this  conlidenoe 
is  seen  in  what  He  communicates,  it  is  seen  also  in  what  He  irithholds.    A  friend  ia 


CHiP.  XV.]  ST.  JOHN.  661 

not  bound  by  a  clear  and  particular  direction  in  respect  of  everything ;  trust  is 
reposed  in  him,  he  has  to  exercise  his  own  gkiU  and  feel  his  own  responsibility. 
And  so,  on  no  subject  is  the  gospel  a  fall  rule,  except  as  to  principles.  If  the  heart 
be  not  right,  such  a  rule  would  be  useless ;  if  it  be  right,  such  a  rule  is  unnecessary. 
When  the  heart  is  "  ready  to  every  good  work,"  a  hint  will  be  enough  to  set  all  its 
powers  in  active  and  pleasant  motion.  "  I  will  guide  thee  with  Mine  eye,"  saya 
God  to  His  people :  that  look  of  God  will  speak  volumes  to  a  friendly  heart,  and 
supply  its  own  best  motive  to  obedience.  '6.  In  the  manner  in  which  Christ 
employs  us.  For  the  gospel  idea  of  saints  is  that  they  are  not  merely  to  do  Hia 
commandments,  but  to  engage  in  His  work,  and  He  attaches  the  greatest  iuiportance 
to  their  service.  He  works  out  His  gracious  will  on  earth  bv  the  instrumentality  of 
redeemed  men;  He  puts  His  Spirit  into  men,  and  draws  out  their  powers  in 
grateful,  cheerful  labour.  His  object  is  not  only  to  secure  the  effects  of  their 
service ;  but  as  a  Father,  though  needing  not  His  children's  labour,  makes  a  work 
to  please  and  honour  them.  This  is  seen  very  striking  in  the  constitution  of  His 
Church.  Christian  Churches  are  societies  of  friends.  4.  In  the  extent  to  which  Christ 
blesses  us.  No  one  can  look  at  the  gospel  and  not  perceive  that  it  deals  with  all  that 
beUeve  in  the  way  of  the  greatest  bountifulness.  It  is  not  meant  to  meet  a  mere 
necessity,  but  to  gratify  our  utmost  desires  and  hopes.  Are  we  not  treated  as  friends  ? 
III.  A  FEW  OBVIOUS  THOUGHTS  BY  WAY  OF  APPLICATION.  If  this  is  Christ's  friend- 
ship— 1.  Let  us  realize  and  rejoice  in  it.  He  is  more  deeply  interested  in  us  than 
we  are  in  ourselves:  He  wishes  our  welfare  as  we  have  never  wished  it.  Why 
should  we  not  therefore  tell  Him  our  perplexities,  trials,  gladness?  Why  should 
we  not  pass  our  life  in  free  and  familiar  intercourse  with  Him  ?  Friendship  cannot 
live  in  an  atmosphere  of  distrust  and  suspicion.  •'  He  that  bath  friends  must  show 
himself  friendly  "  ;  and  if  Christ  confides  in  us,  we  must  confide  in  Him.  Nothing 
is  more  important  than  our  being  frank  and  faithful  with  Him.  As  among  men,  a 
few  honest  words  may  prevent  a  world  of  mischief,  so  with  Christ,  long  seasons  of 
trouble  and  sin  may  be  prevented  by  the  prompt  and  ingenious  acknowledgment 
of  faults  and  doubts  and  difficulties.  2.  Let  us  be  worthy  of  it.  There  are  men 
not  at  all  remarkable  for  integrity  or  gratitude  who  would  feel  the  force  of  this 
claim.  The  appeal  to  honour  they  would  respond  to,  though  to  all  other  appeals 
they  would  be  deaf.  Christ  makes  His  appeal  to  your  honour.  If  He  treats  you 
in  the  way  we  have  indicated,  shall  it  not  move  you  to  the  utmost  zeal  to  please 
and  glorify  Him?  Will  you  abuse  His  confidence,  and  answer  His  grace  with 
gracelessness  ?  Answer  His  trust  with  fidelity ;  His  love  with  obedience.  Sin  in 
you  is  not  mere  transgression;  it  is  ingratitude,  it  is  sacrilege,  it  is  treachery. 
3.  Let  us  imitate  Him  in  our  treatment  of  others.  This  is  the  right  way,  the  way 
most  in  accordance  with  human  nature.  Some,  perhaps  many,  may  prove  them- 
selves unworthy  of  it — there  was  a  traitor  among  Christ's  friends — but  many  also 
will  respond  to  it ;  or,  if  they  do  not,  they  will  not  respond  to  anything.  Let  it  be  your 
method  in  your  treatment  of  your  friends,  in  the  education  of  children,  in  the  Church. 
{A.  J.  Morris.)  Christ's  friendship : — Friendship  is  the  sweetest  wild  flower  that 
can  be  found  in  the  desert  soil  of  a  fallen  world.  There  can  scarcely  be  conceived  a 
more  forlorn  description  of  a  man,  than  that  he  is  friendless.  But  man  often  calls 
another  a  friend,  and  it  is  but  a  name ;  he  lias  sinster  ends  and  selfish  motives,  which 
he  thus  disguises ;  in  the  hour  of  need  he  proves  himself  false,  and  when  friends 
ought  most  to  stand  forward,  he  keeps  back.  But  note — I.  The  eeality  of  the 
friendship  of  Christ.  1.  It  is  the  clearest  evidence  of  friendship,  that  it  will  make 
the  greatest  sacrifices  for  a  friend.  Who  can  doubt  the  infinite  reality  of  the 
friendship  of  Christ,  that  traces  Him  from  the  throne  of  heaven  to  the  manger  in 
Bethlehem,  from  the  manger  to  the  cross.  "  Hereby  perceive  we  the  love  of  God, 
because  He  laid  down  His  life  for  us."  2.  But  the  reahty  of  friendship  is  also 
tested  by  the  confidence  and  the  communion  which  it  extends  to  the  friend.  Jesus 
puts  His  Spirit  into  us,  and  He  unites  us  to  Himself.  "  The  secret  of  the  Lord  is 
with  them  that  fear  Him,  and  He  will  show  them  His  covenant ; "  He  reveals  Him- 
self to  them,  as  He  said — "  I  will  come  to  you,  and  I  will  manifest  Myself  to  you."  3. 
But  the  reaUty  of  friendship  is  further  evidenced  by  the  sympathy  that  it  is  manifest, 
in  the  hour  of  trial  and  affliction.  That  man  is  not  worthy  to  be  my  friend,  who 
can  be  unaffected  in  my  grief,  a  friend's  heart  should  throb  with  every  throb  of  my 
heart,  and  thrill  at  whatever  thrills  mine.  And  where  is  friendship  so  real  aa 
Christ's?  "In  all  the  afflictions  of  His  people.  He  is  afflicted  ;  "  "He  is  touched 
with  the  feeling  of  their  infirmities ;  "  *♦  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled."  4.  It  is 
a  further  proof  of  friendship,  that  the  faithful  friend  will  rebuke  as  well  as  commend. 


661  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  it. 

It  is  a  rare  qaality,  even  in  Christian  friendship  ;  in  the  friendship  of  the  world,  it 
u  hardly  known.  "  Faithful  are  the  wounds  of  a  friend."  But  what  friendship 
gives  proof  of  faithfulness,  in  comparison  with  that  of  Christ?  Look  at  His 
treatment  of  Simon  Peter.  II.  Its  ExcELLBNai.  1.  "What  friend  can  we  find  so 
disinterested  as  Christ  ?  Without  disinterestedness,  friendship  is  a  mockery.  The 
man  who  loves  me  for  some  selfish  end  is  not  my  friend — he  is  his  own.  A  friend 
is  one  who  loves  my  soul,  loves  me  for  myself,  and  would  love  me  for  ever  I  He 
does  not  love  me  for  what  I  have,  but  for  what  I  am.  So  Jesus  loves  us.  He  came 
to  demonstrate  His  friendship  towards  us  when  we  were  enemies.  2.  When  shall 
we  find  a  friend  so  able  as  Christ?  The  love  of  an  earthly  friend,  however  sincere, 
is  often  impotent ;  but  there  is  a  Friend  sticking  closer  than  a  brother,"  who  knows 
no  perplexity  of  ours  which  He  cannot  resolve — no  conflict  which  He  cannot 
comprehend  and  sustain  under — no  tempestuous  surges  to  which  He  cannot  speak 
the  word — "  Peace  be  still " — no  extremity  of  poverty,  or  desolation,  or  bereave- 
ment, to  which  He  cannot  say,  "  Weep  not,"  and  the  tear  shall  be  staunched. 
With  Christ  as  my  Friend,  if  I  have  the  universe  for  my  foes,  I  smile  at  them  all. 
3.  There  is  no  friend  so  faithful  as  Christ.  Faithfulness  is  the  crown  of  friendship. 
He  whom  no  slight  occasion  of  offence  can  alienate,  whom  no  infirmities  can  revolt, 
whom  no  outward  circumstances  can  wean,  who  loves  me  in  poverty  as  in  wealth,  in 
reproach  as  in  renown,  in  sickness  as  in  health,  in  death  as  in  life ;  He  is  a  friend 
indeed.  There  are  few  such,  however,  to  be  found.  But  where  Jesus  loves.  He  loves 
for  ever.  "  He  hath  said,  I  wUl  never  leave  thee,  nor  forsake  thee."  {Canon  Stowell.) 
Christians  the  friends  of  Christ : — I.  A  fbw  explanatory  eemaeks  concerning  this 
FBiEMDSEiP.  1.  It  is  really  friendship,  consisting,  not  of  kindly  feelings  only,  such 
BS  we  bear  towards  our  ordinary  acquaintance,  but  of  a  cordial  heart- warm  love, 
like  that  which  we  have  felt  towards  a  few  select  individals  only.  2.  It  is  mutual 
between  our  Lord  and  His  people.  It  is  not  all  on  His  side,  nor  all  on  theirs.  To 
constitute  friendship  there  must  be  reciprocity.  The  hearts  of  Christ  and  His  people 
are  "  knit  together  in  love."  3.  It  is  His  true  disciples  only  who  are  admitted  to 
His  friendship.  He  has  compassion  and  kindness  for  all.  But  still  His  kindness, 
great  and  tender  as  it  is,  is  not  His  friendship.  He  wept  over  Jerusalem,  the  city 
of  His  enemies — there  was  His  compassion  :  He  has  only  His  dear,  faithful  dis- 
ciples around  Him,  when  He  says  here,  "  Ye  are  My  friends."  4.  This  friendship 
does  not  set  aside  the  relation  of  Master  and  servant  existing  between  our  Lord  and  His 
people  (ver  14).  Spiritual  privileges,  however  high,  never  alter  our  obligations.  They 
never  put  us  out  of  our  proper  places,  nor  remove  the  exalted  Jesus  from  His.  5. 
This  friendship  is  in  truth  a  friendship  between  us  and  God.  It  begins  with  Christ ; 
but  it  does  not  terminate  with  Him.  All  the  love  of  the  Father  dwells  in  Him  and 
embraces  us  as  soon  as  Christ's  love  embraces  us,  and  soon  too  we  discover  this  and 
joyfully  embrace  the  Father  in  our  love.  It  takes  in  His  Divine  nature  as  well. 
•*  Truly  our  fellowship  is  with  the  Father,"  &c.  II.  The  grounds  of  it.  AU  these 
may  be  comprehended  in  one  word — grace ;  yet  we  may  trace  it  still  to  intermediate 
things,  themselves  the  fruits  of  this  grace.  1.  To  mutual  knowledge.  (1)  "  1  know 
My  sheep,  and  am  known  of  Mine."  Christ  knows  their  persons,  peculiarities,  all 
that  can  be  known  of  them ;  all  they  are  to  be  to  Him ;  and  thus,  knowing  them, 
He  fixes  His  love  on  them,  draws  them  to  Him,  makes  them  His  friends.  (2)  And 
there  is  a  knowledge  too  of  Him  on  their  side :  "  Whom  haying  not  seen  ye  love." 
The  Holy  Spirit  opens  the  sinner's  eyes  to  behold  Christ,  discovers  to  Him  the 
glory  of  His  character  and  the  amiableness  of  it,  and  enables  him  to  see  and  feel 
how  worthy  Christ  is  in  Himself  of  His  love.  "  They  that  know  Thy  name  will 
put  their  trust  in  Thee."  2.  Congeniality.  Men  may  be  perfect  opposites ;  but  let 
there  be  a  real  friendship  between  them,  and  we  know  that  there  is  much  that  is 
common  between  them.  So  wherever  there  is  friendship  between  the  soul  and  Christ, 
a  conformity  to  Christ  has  been  wrought  in  that  soul.  Without  it  Christ  might  love 
ihe  soul  with  a  love  of  compassion,  but  not  with  a  love  of  complacency.  And  the 
«oul  could  have  without  this  a  little  of  what  we  call  gratitude,  but  gratitude  is  not 
friendship.  The  soul  must  begin  to  love  what  Christ  loves,  to  have  the  same  mind 
that  is  in  Chrisi  and  the  same  heart — then  the  soul  lays  hold  with  its  affections  on 
the  SaTiour  and  true  friendship  between  them  begins.  3.  A  mutual  power  of  con- 
ferring pleasure.  I  love  the  man  who  in  any  way  contributes  personally  to  my  hap- 
piness, and  I  love  him  the  most  who  contributes  most  to  my  happiness.  Now  the 
Lord  Jesus  contributes  to  the  happiness  of  His  people.  He  is  precious  to  their  soul, 
becaase  He  is  even  now  their  soul's  satisfaction  and  rest.  On  the  other  hand, 
"the  Lord  taketh  pleasure  in  His  people."    His  ielights  are  with  them."    He 


5HA».  XT.]  ST.  JOHN.  665 

fejoices  over  them,  as  a  father  rejoices  over  a  recovered  child,  or  as  a  bridegroom 
rejoices  in  his  bride.  And  this  joy,  strange  as  it  may  seem  to  us,  can  be  partly 
'ixplained.  What  constitutes  the  Divine  happiness  ?  The  exercise  of  the  Divine  love, 
and  with  it  the  exercise  and  enjoyment  of  the  other  Divine  perfections.  And  where 
does  God  so  exercise  His  love,  so  call  into  action  and  display  His  perfections,  as  in 
His  people?  in  their  salvation  pardon,  sanctification,  and  final  blessedness?  HI. 
Its  pkoofs.  1.  He  has  made  a  great  sacrifice  for  His  people  (ver.  13).  2.  He  admits 
His  people  to  His  confidence.  3.  On  our  side  we  should  obey  His  commands  (ver. 
14).  C.  Bradley,  M.  A.)  Christ  a  friend: — Jonathan  Edwards  when  he  came  to 
die,  his  last  words,  after  bidding  his  relations  good-bye,  were — "Now  where  is  Jesus 
of  Nazareth,  my  true  and  never  failing  Friend  ?  "  and  so  saying  he  fell  asleep. 
The  service  of  friendship : — I.  Christ's  seevicb  is  a  seevice  of  fbiendship.  1. 
The  relation  between  the  Lord  and  His  people  is  that  of  Master  and  servants  ;  but 
the  perfect  bond  of  that  relation  is  love  to  His  person.  (1)  These  disciples  had 
hitherto  been  servants,  whose  awful  sense  of  their  Lord's  dignity  had  never  yet 
been  quickened  into  the  ardour  of  personal  devotion  that  He  desired.  "Henceforth" 
— after  they  had  received  into  their  inmost  souls  the  self-sacrifice  of  Christ  in 
laying  down  His  life  for  them — they  added  perfect  love  to  perfect  homage.  Servants 
they  termed  themselves  to  the  end  ;  but  from  that  time  one  spoke  for  the  rest  the 
common  sentimeut,  "  We  love  Him,  for  He  first  loved  us."  (2)  In  every  Christian 
there  is  the  same  "  henceforth."  Until  the  hour  of  the  manifestation  of  the  personal 
Saviour  comes,  we  can  neither  perfectly  love  nor  serve  Him.  But  when  the  Son  of 
God  is  revealed  in  us,  then,  "  Whether  we  live  we  live  unto  the  Lord,"  Ac.  The  love 
of  God  is  "  then  "  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts.  2.  Our  interest  in  the  Saviour's 
work  is  when  made  perfect  that  of  friendship.  He  shares  His  counsels  with  us,  not 
as  being  His  servants  only,  but  as  being  His  friends.  (1)  Before  the  "henceforth" 
the  disciples'  thought  of  His  work  was  that  of  servants  who  know  not  what  their 
Lord  doeth.  When  He  spoke  to  them  of  the  vast  designs  He  came  to  accomplish, 
they  were  like  men  that  dreamed.  When,  however.  He  had  died,  and  the  Holy 
Spirit  shed  His  light  upon  the  Eedeemer's  passion,  their  minds  entered  into  the 
infinite  Secret  and  made  it  their  own.  (2)  This  is,  in  a  sense,  the  dignity  and  pri- 
vilege of  all  believers.  They  enter  into  the  fellowship,  not  only  of  the  Saviour's 
death  and  resurrection,  but  of  His  government  also.  "  Shall  I  hide  from  Abraham 
the  thing  that  I  do  "  expresses  the  spirit  of  our  Lord's  dealings  with  His  friends. 
Etis  language  is  not  "  Go  and  do  this  for  Me,"  so  much  as  "  Come  and  let  us  do  it 
together."  8.  The  principle  that  animates  true  Christian  service  is  that  of  the 
truest  love.  (1)  These  disciples  before  that  "  henceforth  "  had  done  their  Master's 
will  from  a  lower  impulse :  sometimes  from  fear,  ambition,  or  reward.  "  What 
shall  we  have  ?  "  But  when  they  went  forth  to  their  duty  after  the  baptism  of 
Pentecost,  we  trace  no  other  constraint  but  that  of  love.  (2)  And  so  it  is  with  us 
if  our  devotion  is  made  perfect.  We  are  indeed  servants  still;  but  the  commanding 
energy  of  duty  is  always  and  only  love.  II.  The  counterpart  of  this  truth.  Their 
friendship  must  not  degenerate  into  licence  or  presumption  :  it  must  be  the  fbiend- 
BHip  OF  SEBVicB.  He  who  knew  what  was  in  man  knew  what  would  be  the  danger 
of  His  friends ;  and  with  exquisite  tenderness  shows  what  their  peril  would  be  and 
how  they  should  effectually  suard  against  it.  1.  There  is  an  everlasting  destinction 
between  the  Redeemer  and  His  people  in  their  mutual  friendship.  (1)  This  word  in 
the  language  of  men  implies,  generally  speaking,  a  certain  equality,  and  thus  it  is 
in  some  affecting  respects  between  Christ  and  His  friends.  But  still  the  eternal 
distinction  remains.  "He  chose  us."  Though  in  His  union  with  our  humanity. 
He  is  one  with  our  race.  He  never  ceases  to  be  God.  Though  He  came  down  from 
heaven  to  make  us  His  friends  He  is  still  the  Son  of  Man  which  is  in  heaven.  Hence 
the  profound  reverence  which  is  stamped  on  their  every  allusion  to  His  person.  He 
called  them  not  servants :  they  called  themselves  by  no  other  name.  (2)  In  this 
they  are  examples  to  us.  We  must  enter  into  their  feelings  of  reverence,  while 
cherishing  the  warmest  personal  love  towards  Him.  "  He  is  thy  Lord,  and  wor- 
ship thou  Him."  "  Ye  call  Me  Master  and  Lord,  and  ye  say  well :  "  which  reminds 
as  that  we  say  well  when  we  keep  our  language  free  from  endearing  epithets.  2. 
As  on  the  one  hand  our  interest  in  Christ's  work  must  be  that  of  friends,  so  on 
the  other  we  must  remember  that  we  are  entirely  dependent  on  Him  for  the  besk 
ability  in  His  service.  Human  friends  are  mutually  serviceable;  but  in  this 
heavenly  relation  we  have  nothing  that  we  did  not  receive.  "  Without  Me  ye  can 
do  nothing."  •' lean  do  all  things  through  Christ."  ?.  The  Lord  guards  our  sen- 
timents of  love  and  delight  in  His  service  l;y  the  solemn  intimation  that  His 


664  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cmr.  x?. 

disciples  are  under  probation  for  the  blessedness  of  His  present  and  final  friendship 
(ver.  14).  Conclusion :  The  two  leading  terms  of  the  text  point  to  two  prevalent 
errors  in  religion.  1.  There  is  a  religion  which  is  a  service  without  love,  which 
regards  the  Lord  as  only  an  austere  man.  2.  There  is  also  a  religion  which  is  too 
full  of  a  baseless  confidence  in  Christ.     (W.  B.  Pope,  D.D.) 

Ver.  18.  Ye  have  not  chosen  Me,  but  I  have  chosen  yon. — Christian  discipleship : 
— I.  Its  origin.  1.  Negatively.  "  Ye  have  not  chosen  Me."  This  is  true,  both 
in  regard  to  election  unto  salvation  and  election  unto  ofifice.  Christ  no  more 
chooses  us  because  we  have  first  chosen  Him,  than  He  loves  us  because  we  have 
first  loved  Him.  He  makes  His  universal  offer  of  mercy ;  we  close  vrith  it,  and  are 
elected.  He  says,  ••  Whom  shall  I  send  ?  "  We  have  to  say, "  Here  am  I ;  send  me." 
*•  Choose  ye  this  day  whom  ye  will  serve  "  was  addressed  to  the  chosen  people.  2. 
Positively.  The  Divine  choice  which  originates  our  discipleship — (1)  Is  not  arbi- 
trary. Those  are  chosen  for  salvation  who  evince  the  qualifications  for  receiving 
salvation.  "  Chosen  .  .  .  through  belief  of  the  truth."  In  regard  to  office,  the 
apos'les  were  the  choice  men  of  their  race,  as  is  seen  in  their  after  careers.  Christ 
chose  for  His  work  Peter  and  Paul,  rather  than  Caiaphas  or  Gamaliel,  because  they 
were  immeasurably  better  men.  Appearances  and  circumstances  go  for  nothing, 
as  is  seen  in  God's  choice  of  David.  So  to-day  Christ  chooses  with  reference  to  fit- 
ness. There  were  more  brilliant  men  at  Oxford  ;  but  when  God  wanted  a  man  for 
Africa  He  went  to  a  factory  and  chose  Livingstone.  2.  May  be  frustrated.  Judaa 
was  chosen,  and  the  traitor  had  elements  about  him  which  would  have  made  him 
a  prince  amongst  the  apostles.  Election  is  not  indelible  in  regard  either  to  nations 
or  individuals.  Israel  was  chosen  because  of  unique  racial  qualities,  but  was 
rejected  because  those  qualities  were  abused.  England  has  been  chosen  ;  may  she 
be  faithful.  As  for  us,  however  distinguished  the  ofHce  we  hold,  let  us  not  be  high- 
minded,  but  fear.  ••  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth,"  &c.  II.  Its  validation. 
"  Ordained  you."  1.  Designation  for  the  work.  This  is  a  Divine  prerogative. 
Sometimes  it  is  voiced  by  the  appointment  of  the  Church.  Sometimes,  alas  1  not. 
No  human  authority,  however  august,  can  validate  an  appointment  that  has  not 
been  ratified  in  heaven.  Let  aU  Church  officers  note  this.  Often  the  clearest 
Divine  designation  is  apparent  where  there  has  been  no  human  sanction.  2. 
Qualification.  Whom  Christ  ordains  He  qualifies.  This  may  be  indej.endent  of 
human  qualifications,  or  it  may  include  them.  There  are  posts  for  which  Christ 
ordains  a  man  where  they  would  be  in  the  way.  There  are  others  where  they  are 
imperative.  In  the  latter  case  He  works  in  us  the  desire  to  amass  learning, 
eloquence,  &c.,  and  sanctifies  these  and  other  gifts  to  the  accomplishment  of  His 
purposes.  III.  Its  works.  1.  •'  That  ye  should  go  and  bring  forth  fruit "  in  two 
senses.  (1)  In  the  graces  of  personal  character ;  because  these  are  often  the 
means  of  successful  evangelism,  and  without  them  a  man  in  the  highest  office  is 
but  a  "sounding  brass,"  &c.  (2)  In  conversions  to  God.  This  is  the  grand  outcome 
of  all  spiritual  ministries.  2.  "  That  your  fruit  should  remain."  (1)  Of  what 
value  are  the  "  fruits  of  the  Spirit"  unless  permanent?  Of  what  value  is  faith  if 
to-morrow  we  are  unbelieving  ?  Of  love  if  it  alternates  with  hatred?  Of  joy  if  it 
is  drowned  in  despondency  ?  &e.  (2)  Of  what  value  to  a  Church  are  converts 
unless  they  "  remain  "  t  The  curse  of  modern  times  is  great  ingatherings,  fol- 
lowed by  great  fallings  away.  IV.  Its  privileqe.  Prayer — 1.  Keeps  alive  our 
sense  of  the  Divine  choice,  and  maintains  our  position  as  chosen  ones.  2.  Augments 
our  personal  and  official  qualifications.  "  Without  Me  ye  can  do  nothing."  "  I 
can  do  all  things  through  Christ,"  &c.  3.  Ensures  abiding  success  in  our  work. 
{J.  W.  Burn.)  That  ye  should  go  and  bring  forth  fruit. — The  fruit : — 1.  Fruit- 
fulness  is  the  great  end  of  God's  ordinances  in  the  vegetable  kingdom.  It  is  the 
focus  into  which  all  the  various  secondary  purposes  of  nature  are  concentrated. 
And  is  it  not  so  in  the  kingdom  of  grace  ?  For  the  fruitfulness  of  those  who  love 
God  the  whole  material  system  of  the  earth  is  upheld  ;  and  the  whole  spiritual 
world  exists  and  revolves  on  its  axis,  that  the  harvest  of  spiritual  life  may  be  pro- 
duced in  the  Church  and  in  the  believer.  2.  But  while  fruitfulness  is  the  great 
end  of  vegetable  life,  there  are  some  plants  in  which  this  quality  is  of  more  im- 
portance than  in  others.  It  is  necessary  that  every  plant  should  bring  forth  fruit 
in  order  to  propagate  itself ;  but,  besides  this,  some  plants  confer  benefits 
upon  the  rest  of  creation  by  means  of  their  fruit.  Like  the  cow,  which  produces 
more  milk  than  its  progeny  needs ;  and  the  bee,  which  stores  a  larger  quantity  of  honey 
than  it  requires ;  the  vine  produces  a  fruit  whose  exceptional  excess  of  nonrishness  ia 


3HAP.  XT.]  8T.  JOHN.  665 

intended  for  the  use  of  man.  Fruit  is  not  so  important  to  the  vine  itself  as  it  is  to 
man.  We  grow  some  plants  in  order  to  produce  seed ;  but  we  can  perpetuate  the 
vine  by  slips,  and,  therefore,  we  grow  it  solely  to  supply  man's  wants.  3.  Apart 
from  its  fruit,  the  vine  is,  indeed,  a  beautiful  plant ;  but  this  is  subordinate  to  the 
one  great  purpose  of  producing  grapes :  and  did  it  cease  to  produce  fruit  it  would 
be  coudemned  as  a  failure.  It  was  for  the  sake  of  the  fruit  of  salvation — the 
redemption  of  a  fallen  world — that  God  cultivated  His  own  Son  by  the  sufferings 
which  He  endured.  And  as  with  the  Vine  Himself,  so  with  the  branches.  The 
Husbandman  of  souls  grafts  these  branches  in  the  Vine  for  the  special  purpose  of 
producing  spiritual  fruit ;  and  if  this  result  does  not  follow,  no  mere  natural  beauty 
or  grace  will  compensate.  And  so  Christ  speaks  as  if  in  the  bringing  forth  of  fruit 
was  summed  up  all  duty  and  privilege.  God's  glory  is  the  chief  end  of  man ;  but 
"  Herein  is  My  Father  glorified  that  ye  bear  much  fruit."  God  requires  of  us  to 
believe  in  Christ ;  but  faith  is  the  root  of  fruitfulness.  Fa-th  and  fruit  are  not 
distinct ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  the  same  thing  at  different  periods  of  existence ; 
just  as  the  fruit  of  autumn  is  the  seed  of  spring,  and  vice  vend.  God  desires  our 
highest  happiness  ;  but  oar  highest  happiness  is  indissolubly  linked  together  with 
our  fruitfubiess.  No  man  can  have  a  continual  feast  of  gladness  who  is  barren 
and  unfruitfuL  And  here  we  come  to  the  great  outstanding  question — I.  What  is 
THE  BEAii  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  FEUiT  ?  1.  The  fruit  of  a  plant  is  simply  an  aiTested 
and  metamorphosed  branch.  The  bud  of  a  plant  which,  under  the  ordinary  laws 
of  vegetation,  would  have  elongated  into  a  leafy  branch,  remains,  in  a  special  case, 
shortened,  and  develops  finally,  according  to  some  regular  law,  blossom  and  fruit 
instead.  Its  further  growth  is  thus  stayed ;  it  has  attained  the  end  of  its  existence; 
its  life  terminates  with  the  ripe  fruit  that  drops  off  to  the  ground.  In  producing 
blossom  and  fruit,  therefore,  a  branch  sacrifices  itself,  yields  up  its  own  individual 
vegetative  life  for  the  sake  of  another  life  that  is  to  spring  from  it,  and  to  perpetuate 
the  species.  Every  annual  plant  dies  when  it  has  produced  blossom  and  fruit ; 
every  individual  branch  in  a  tree  which  corresponds  with  an  annual  plant  also 
dies  when  it  has  blossomed  and  fruited.  Fruit-trees  are  the  most  short-lived  of  all 
trees  ;  and  cultivated  fruit-trees  are  less  vigorous  in  growth,  and  do  not  last  so  long 
as  the  wild  varieties.  Producing  larger  and  more  abundant  fruit  than  is  natural, 
they  necessarily  so  much  the  more  exhaust  their  vital  energies.  Every  Idossom 
is  a  Passion-flower.  The  sign  of  the  cross,  which  superstitious  eyes  saw  in  one 
mystical  flower,  the  enlightened  eye  sees  in  every  blossom  that  opens  to  the  summer 
son.  The  great  spiritual  principle  which  every  blossom  shadows  forth  is — self- 
sacrifice.  And  is  it  not  most  instructive  to  notice  that  it  is  in  this  self-sacrifice  of 
the  plant  that  all  its  beauty  comes  out  and  culmmates  ?  2.  And  is  it  not  so  in  the 
kingdom  of  grace  ?  Christian  fruit  is  an  arrestment  and  transformation  of  the 
branch  in  the  True  Vine.  Instead  of  growing  for  its  own  ends,  it  produces  the 
blossoms  of  holiness  and  the  fruits  of  righteousness  for  the  glory  of  God  and  the 
good  of  men.  The  Christian  life  begins  in  self-sacrifice.  We  can  bring  forth  no 
fruit  that  is  pleasing  to  God  until,  besought  by  His  mercies,  we  yield  ourselves  a 
living  sacrifice  to  Him.  And  in  this  self-sacrifice  all  the  beauty  of  the  Christian 
life  comes  out  and  culminates.  The  life  that  lives  for  another,  in  so  doing  bursts 
into  flower,  and  shows  its  brightest  hues,  and  yields  its  sweetest  fragrance.  All 
given  to  Christ  is  received  back  a  hundredfold.  Have  we  not  seen  the  glory  of 
self-sacrifice  ennobling  even  the  aspect  of  the  countenance,  the  expression  of  the 
eye,  thi:!  carriage  of  the  form,  making  the  plainest  and  homliest  face  beautiful  and 
heroic  ?  II.  It  is  fruit  and  not  works  that  the  believkr  produces.  1.  Woik  and 
fruit  are  contrasted  in  a  very  striking  mannc  at  the  close  of  Gal.  v. ; — "  the  works  of 
the  flesh  " — "  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit."  This  contrast  is  very  instructive.  Works 
bear  upon  them  the  curse  of  Adam.  They  are  wrought  in  the  sweat  of  the  brow 
ftnd  in  the  sweat  of  the  soul.  All  that  a  natural  man  does  comes  under  the  category 
of  works.  And  even  in  the  case  of  believers,  some  things  which  they  do  are  works, 
because  they  are  the  result  of  a  legal  and  servile  spirit.  Such  works  are  only  like 
those  of  a  manufacturer,  which  display  his  skill  and  power,  but  do  not  reveal 
character.  You  cannot  tell  what  kind  of  a  man  he  is  who  makes  your  furniture 
from  his  productions.  You  may  be  able  to  say  that  he  is  a  clever  workman,  but 
not  that  he  is  a  wise,  a  good,  or  an  upright  man.  But  fruit,  on  the  other  hand,  is 
the  spontaneous  natural  manifestation  of  the  life  within.  The  soul  that  has  the 
life  and  the  love  of  Christ  in  it  cannot  help  producing  fruit.  Fruit  is  the  tree, 
unrestrained  outpouring  of  a  heart  at  peace  with  God,  filled  with  the  love  of  Christ, 
and  stimulated  by  the  presence  and  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.    The  curse  is  removed 


666  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rVv 

from  it.  It  brings  back  the  pure  and  innocent  conditions  of  Eden.  Tbe  wholt 
man  is  displayed  in  it,  as  the  whole  life  of  the  tree  is  gathered  into  and  manifested 
in  its  fruit.  By  their  fruit  we  know  believeis  as  well  as  trees.  2.  It  is  fruit  that 
Cnrist  wants,  not  works ;  because  it  is  the  free-will  offering  of  a  heart  of  love,  not 
the  constrained  service  of  fear  or  of  law,  and  because  He  studies  the  individual 
character  and  regulates  His  discipline  according  to  individual  requirements.  If 
works  were  what  He  desired,  He  could  order  Christians  in  the  mass  to  do  thern^ 
caring  nothing  for  any  one  of  them  in  particular.  But,  in  order  to  produce  fruit, 
His  sap  must  How  to,  His  personal  influence  must  reach,  the  smallest  twig,  the 
humblest  individual  that  yields  it.  3.  How  significant  in  the  light  of  this  idea  is 
the  reward  promised — "  a  crown  of  life."  It  is  not  an  arbitrary  reward  from 
without,  but  the  fruit  of  their  own  efforts — a  living  crown,  the  crown  of  their  own 
life.  It  is  with  us  as  it  is  with  some  mountains  whose  deepest  or  primary  forma- 
tions appear  on  the  summit,  which  are  not  mere  masses  laid  in  dead  weight  upon 
the  surface  of  the  earth,  but  the  protrusion  of  their  own  energies.  So  we  are 
crowned  with  the  deepest  and  most  essential  part  of  our  own  life.  Our  highest 
summit  is  our  deepest  foundation.  Our  crown  of  life  is  that  which  we  ourselves 
have  formed,  and  which  passes  through  our  own  being.  Heaven  is  the  fruit  of 
what  we  have  sown,  the  living  crown  of  the  life  that  we  have  lived.    III.  It  is 

FEUIT,    AND   NOT   FRUITS,   WHICH  THE   BRANCH    IN     THE   TrUE   VinE     PRODUCES.        The 

*•  fruit  "  of  the  Spirit  is  not  so  many  apples  growing  on  separate  twigs  and  having 
no  organic  connection  except  as  produced  by  the  same  tree.  It  is  a  bunch  of 
grapes,  all  growing  from  one  stalk  and  united  to  each  other  in  the  closest  manner. 
Each  grace  is,  as  it  were,  a  separate  berry,  connected  with  the  others  by  organic 
ties,  and  forming  a  complete  cluster.  It  should  be  the  Christian's  endeavour, 
therefore,  that  the  whole  cluster  should  appear — each  grape  full  formed  and  in  due 
proportion  to  the  rest.  IV.  It  is  heavenly,  and  not  earthly,  fruit  that  the 
Husbandman  demands.  1.  The  fruits  of  Egypt  were  melons  and  cucumbers,  grown 
close  to  the  earth ;  while  its  vegetables  were  leeks,  onions,  and  garlic,  which  are 
not  fruits  at  all,  but  roots.  It  is  such  low  earth-born  fruits  that  the  natural  man 
produces,  and  for  which  alone  he  has  a  relish.  All  his  tendencies  and  labours  are 
earthward.  The  cucumber  and  the  melon  are  climbing  plants  by  nature ;  they 
have  tendrils  to  raise  them  up  among  the  trees,  but  they  are  cultivated  on  the 
ground,  and  therefore  their  tendrils  are  useless.  So  every  man  has  tendrils  of 
hopes  and  aspirations  that  were  meant  to  raise  him  above  the  world,  but  he  per- 
verts them  from  their  proper  purpose,  and  they  run  among  earthly  things  utterly 
wasted.  In  marked  contrast  with  the  earth-borne  fruits  of  Egypt  were  the  fruits 
of  the  Holy  Land.  It  is  a  mountainous  country,  on  which  everything  is  lifted 
above  the  world.  The  people  went  literally,  as  well  as  spiritually,  up  from  Egypt 
to  Palestine,  up  to  God's  house.  Its  fruits  were  grown  on  trees,  raised  up  from  the 
ground  and  ripening  in  the  pure  air  and  bright  sunshine  of  heaven.  Believers  are 
risen  with  Christ.  They  are  not  merely  elevated  a  little,  but  are  raised  to  being 
fruits  in  the  sky.  V.  The  fbuit  op  the  Christian  life  is  permanent.  "  That 
your  fruit  should  remain."  1.  In  spring,  when  the  blossoms  have  withered  and 
fallen  off,  a  large  proportion  of  these  blossoms  leave  behind  young  fruits  that  have 
actually  set.  These  fruits  grow  for  a  few  weeks,  acquire  shape,  become  tinted  with 
colour,  cheat  the  eye  with  the  hope  of  a  rich  harvest  of  ripe  and  full-formed  fruit 
in  autumn.  But,  alas  1  ere  long,  they  wither  and  fall.  And  is  it  not  so  with  the 
fruits  which  unsanctiffed  man  produces  ?  They  are  beautiful  in  blossom ;  they 
minister  to  his  self-glorification  and  enjoyment ;  they  delude  him  with  fair  pro> 
mlses ;  but  they  never  come  to  maturity  and  abide.  They  are  fruits  that  set,  but 
do  not  ripen.  On  every  brow  we  see  care  planting  his  wrinkles — bare,  wintry 
branches,  whose  stem  is  rooted  in  the  heart,  from  which  have  fallen,  one  after 
another,  the  fairest  fruits  of  life,  and  which,  through  future  springs  and  summers, 
will  bear  no  more  leaves  or  fruit.  2.  But  in  contrast  with  all  the  passing  and 
perishing  fruits  of  earth,  we  have  the  abiding  fruits  of  righteousness.  It  is  the 
glorious  distinction  of  the  fruit  which  Christ  enables  us  to  produce  that  it  endures. 
How  literally  were  these  words  fulfilled  in  the  case  of  the  disciples  themselves  I 
Of  all  the  works  of  all  the  men  who  were  living  eighteen  hundred  years  ago,  what 
is  remaining  now  ?  Bat  twelve  poor  uneducated  peasants  went  forth,  and  where  is 
the  fruit  of  their  labours  ?  Look  around  1  And  what  is  thus  true  of  the  glorious 
fruit  of  the  disciples,  is  also  true  of  the  humblest  fruit  of  the  humblest  Christian. 
What  has  been  done  for  God  cannot  be  lost  or  forgotten.  As  the  Tree  upon  which 
the  Christian  is  grafted  as  a  branch  is  the  Tree  of  Life,  so  the  fruit  that  he  brings 


CHAP.  XV.]  ST.  JOHN.  661 

forth  when  nourished  by  its  sap  is  "  fruit  unto  holiness,  and  the  end  everlasting 
life."  VI.  In  thx  gbafb  thbbb  are  two  pabts,  that  serve  two  purposes — there 
is  a  fleshy,  or  saoculent  pai-t,  and  there  are  the  seeds  embedded  in  the  core,  or 
interior.  1.  The  fleshy  part  is  for  nourishment ;  the  seeds  are  intended  to  per- 
petuate the  plant.  And  so  every  fruit  of  the  Spirit  contains  these  two  parts — 
holiness  and  usefulness.  Personal  holiness  is  the  succulent  nourishing  portion, 
delighting  God  and  man ;  and  embedded  in  it  is  the  seed  of  usefulness.  An  earnest 
desire  to  extend  the  blessings  of  the  gospel  is  an  invariable  result  of  their  true  en- 
joyment. What  the  soul  has  received  it  would  communicate.  2.  There  are  cases 
in  nature  in  which  the  fruit  swells  and  becomes,  to  all  appearance,  perfect,  while 
no  seeds  are  produced.  Seedless  oranges  and  grapes  are  often  met  with.  And  is 
there  not  good  cause  to  fear  that  too  much  of  what  is  called  Christian  fruit  con- 
tains no  seed  with  the  embryo  spark  of  life  in  it,  although  it  may  seem  fair  and 
perfectly  formed?  What  should  go  to  develop  the  seed  of  righteousness  for  others 
is  diverted  to  the  production  of  greater  self-righteousness  and  self-indulgence. 
Many  Christians  are  satisfied  with  enjoying  themselves  spiritual  blessings  which 
they  ought  to  communicate  to  others.  They  are  pampered  in  the  selfish  use  of 
privileges  and  means  of  grace.  Moreover,  it  is  necessary  that  the  fruit  should 
have  pulp  as  well  as  seed ;  that  the  perpetuating  principle  of  righteousness  should 
be  imbedded  in  all  that  is  lovely,  and  amiable,  and  of  good  report.  The  fruits  of 
some  Christians  are  harsh  and  hard  as  the  wild  hips  on  the  hedges — all  seed  and 
no  luscious  pulp.  They  are  zealous  in  recommending  religion  to  others,  while  they 
do  not  exhibit  the  amenities  of  it  themselves.     {H.  Macmillan,  D.D.)  Fruit 

bearing : — The  wonder  of  fruit  growing.  What  nature  does,  men  and  women  and 
children  are  to  do.  Lives  are  to  be  fruitful  lives.  This  what  those  of  the  apostles 
were.  Eesults  of  their  labours.  The  fruit  remains.  Different  kinds  of  moral  and 
spiritual  fruit.  I.  Those  harmful  or  useless.  1.  Crab-apples  and  sour  cherries, 
emblems  of  crabbed  tempers,  sour  looks,  and  general  disagreeableness.  Cross 
temper.  Sour  temper.  Sharp  temper.  Spiteful  temper.  Surly  temper.  Fretful 
temper.  2.  Poison  berries.  Fair  seeming,  but  death  within.  Selfishness.  Hatred. 
Falsehood.  Bevenge.  Hypocrisy.  False  friendship.  3,  Hips  and  haws.  Dis- 
order. Idleness.  Procrastination.  II.  Good  fruits.  Don't  grow  by  accident. 
Faith  the  root.  Cultivated.  1.  Loving  obedience  and  goodness  at  home.  2. 
Kindness,  brightness,  cheerfulness.  3.  Prayerf ulness.  4.  Consecration.  5.  Attend- 
ance on  means  of  grace.  6.  Work  for  others.  Such  fruits  remain  in  their  effects, 
influence,  and  blessedness.  Those  that  he  planted  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  &c. 
{Preacher's  Monthly.)  Continuance  the  test  of  religious  profession  : — 1.  There  are 
few  things  which,  as  we  grow  older,  impress  us  more  deeply  than  the  transitoriness 
of  thoughts  and  feelings.  Places  and  persons  that  we  once  thought  we  never  could 
forget,  as  years  go  on  are  all  but  quite  forgotten  ;  and  so  with  feelings.  And  there 
is  no  respect  in  which  this  is  more  sadly  felt  than  in  the  case  of  pious  feelings  and 
holy  resolutions.  We  often  think  sadly  of  those  whose  goodness  was  like  the  morn- 
ing cloud  and  the  er.rly  dew.  We  sometimes  fear  lest  we  have  been  deluding  our- 
selves with  the  behef  that  we  were  better  and  safer  than  we  ever  have  been,  and 
mourn  for  the  soul-refreshing  views,  the  earnest  purpose,  the  warm  affections,  of 
the  days  when  we  first  believed  in  Christ.  2.  No  doubt,  by  the  make  of  our  being, 
as  we  grow  older,  we  grow  less  capable  of  emotion.  Eeligion  in  the  soul,  after  all, 
is  a  matter  of  fixed  choice  and  resolution,  of  principle  rather  than  of  feeling.  And 
yet  it  remains  a  great  and  true  principle,  that  in  the  matter  of  Christian  faith  and 
feelings,  that  which  lasts  longest  is  best.  This,  indeed,  is  true  of  most  things. 
The  worth  of  anything  depends  much  upon  its  durability.  It  is  not  the  gaudy 
annual  we  value  most,  but  the  stedfast  forest  tree.  The  slight  triumphal-arch,  run 
np  in  a  day,  may  flout  the  sober-looking  buildings  near  it ;  but  they  remain  after  it 
is  gone.  The  fairest  profession,  the  most  earnest  labours,  the  most  ardent  affection 
for  a  time,  wiU  not  suflSce.  That  only  is  the  true  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  which  does 
not  wear  out  with  advancing  time.  The  text  hints  to  us  that  it  is  even  a  harder 
thing  to  keep  up  a  consistent  Christian  profession — year  after  year,  through  tempta- 
tions, through  troubles — than  to  make  it,  however  fairly,  at  the  first.    I.  It  i» 

ONLT  BY   OUR    FRUIT    REMATNINO    THAT   WE   ARE   WARRANTED   IN  BELIEVING   THAT   IT   IS 

IHB  BIGHT  FRUIT.  The  Only  satisfactory  proof,  either  to  ourselves  or  to  others,  that 
our  Christian  faith,  and  hope,  and  charity,  are  the  true  fruits  of  the  Spirit  is 
that  they  last.  In  religion,  the  fruit  which  "  remains "  is  the  only  fruit.  Any- 
thing else  is  a  pretender.  Herein  is  a  point  of  difference  between  worldly  and 
spiritual  things.     It  would  not  be  just  to  say  that  things  which  wear  oat  have  nc 


668  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  rr. 

valae.  Who  shall  say  that  the  flower  which  blooms  in  the  morning  and  withers 
before  the  sunset  is  not  a  fair  and  kind  gift  of  the  Creator?  Who  shall  affirm  that  the 
summer  sunset  is  not  beautiful,  though  even  while  we  gaze  upon  it  its  hues  are 
fading?  Who  shall  deny  that  there  is  something  precious  in  the  lightsome  glee  of 
childhood,  even  though  in  a  little  while  that  cheerful  face  is  sure  to  be  shadowed 
by  the  cares  of  manhood?  Indeed,  the  beauty  and  value  of  many  things  in  this 
world  are  increased  by  the  shortness  of  the  time  for  which  they  last.  But  it  is  not 
thus  with  Christian  grace.  If  it  be  not  a  grace  which  will  last  for  ever,  it  is  no 
grace  at  all.  A  man  may  show  every  appearance  of  being  a  true  disciple  ;  but  if 
his  zeal  wanes  and  expires,  if  the  throne  of  grace  is  deserted,  the  Bible  neglected, 
and  the  little  task  of  Christian  philanthropy  abandoned,  how  much  reason  there  is 
then  to  fear  lest  the  man  was  deceiving  himself  with  a  name  to  live  while  he  was 
dead — that  he  was  mistaking  the  transient  warmth  of  mere  human  emotion  for  the 
gracious  working  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  Godl     II.  "  Feuit  which  etsjiains  "  is  thb 

ONLY   KIND    OF   ChBISTIAN    PROFESSION    WHICH     WILL     KECOMJkrEND     EELIGION    TO    THOSE 

WHO  ABE  NOT  Chbistians.  Men  judge  of  religion  by  the  conduct  and  character  of  its 
professors.  And  just  as  a  humble,  consistent  believer  is  a  letter  of  recommendation 
of  Christianity  to  all  who  kuow  him,  just  so  is  the  inconsistent  believer's  life  a  some- 
thing to  make  them  doubt  whether  religion  be  a  real  thing,  and  not  a  mere  matter  of 
profession  and  pretence.  No  one  but  God  can  tell  how  much  harm  is  done  by  the 
Christian  who,  in  his  new-born  zeal,  disdains  the  quiet  faith  of  old  disciples  who 
have  long  walked  consistently,  but  whose  zeal  passes  like  the  morning  cloud  and 
the  early  dew.  Oh !  far  better  the  modest  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  which  makes  little 
show  at  first,  but  which  remains  year  after  year.  Conclusion :  The  same  power 
which  implanted  the  better  life  within  must  keep  it  alive  day  by  day ;  the  con- 
tinual working  of  the  Spirit  must  foster  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit;  and  that  Spirit  is 
to  be  had  for  the  asking  in  fervent,  humble  prayer.  Let  us  watch  against  the  first 
symptoms  of  declension  in  religion  ;  remember  that  spiritual  decline  begins  in  the 
closet ;  guard  against  that  worldly  spirit  wljich  is  always  ready  to  creep  over  us ; 
seek  to  walk  by  faith,  and  not  by  sight ;  be  diligent  in  the  use  of  all  the  appointed 
means  of  grace,  and  vigilant  in  guarding  against  every  approach  of  temptation ; 
and  seek  to  have  our  loins  girt  and  our  lamps  burning,  as  those  who  do  not  know 
how  soon  or  suddenly  the  Bridegroom  may  come.  (A.  K.  II.  Boyd,  D.D.)  Re- 
ligious  permanence: — Think  of  the  Speaker  Himself  1  He  is  near  unto  His  end. 
Will  He  indeed  remain  ?  Listen  to  the  angry  roar  of  the  multitude,  "Away  with 
Him  1 "  If  an  artist  of  that  age  had  been  asked  to  put  on  fresco  the  permanent, 
would  he  have  chosen  "  the  Christ "  ?  He  might  have  selected  the  emperor,  or 
Jerusalem's  marble  temple  ;  but  he  would  scarcely  have  selected  the  Saviour  when 
He  was  led  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter.  But  our  Lord  Himself  ?  Did  He  not  know 
the  secret  of  permanence?  Full  well  we  know  His  thoughts.  "  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up 
will  draw  all  men  unto  Me."  "  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  awav,  but  My  words 
shall  not  pass  away."  The  same  spiritual  permanence  He  would  see  in  all  His 
professed  disciples.  Let  them  but  abide  in  Him,  and  then  the  branch  would  be  as 
the  vine  1  Fruit  is  to  remain — I.  In  PRiNorPLE.  Keligion  is  founded  on  the  per- 
manence of  the  moral  nature.  It  lays  hold  on  the  eternally  right  and  true  within 
us.  Eeligion  without  principle  is  but  a  Jonah's  gourd.  There  may  be  beauty  in 
our  life,  but  there  must  be  strength,  or  the  beauty  itself  will  be  but  the  hectic  flush 
of  consumption.  Think  of  a  divine  teacher  who  had  to  suit  his  thesis  of  virtue  to 
education  or  country  1  No  I  His  virtue  was  Sinai  etherealized  and  glorified,  but 
it  was  the  same  virtue.  Christ  has  made  morality  living  and  real.  His  principles 
will  live  on  in  every  age.  None  can  displace  them  until  men  have  denied  the  con- 
science within  them.  His  words  still  are  spirit,  still  are  life.  Thus,  then,  if  we 
are  Christians,  we  shall  be  firm  and  strong  in  moral  principle.  Ours  will  be  no 
sentimental  life.  II.  In  influence.  We  are  so  to  live  that  others  may  gather 
fruit  from  our  lives  when  we  are  gone.  We  say  Milton  lives,  and  Baxter,  and 
Pascal.  True.  The  lustre  of  noble  words  and  beautiful  deeds  lingers  on, yea,  even 
brightens  with  time.    But  the  humblest  life  also  lives  on  in  the  future  years.     The 

Eermanent  influence  is  not  that  of  the  mere  orator,  thinker,  or  theologian.  Bril- 
ant  epochs  do  not  make  lives.  It  is  easy  to  fulfil  special  tasks,  to  enter  upon 
Bome  memorable  struggle  with  all  eyes  fixed  upon  us.  It  is  difficult  in  daily  life, 
amid  the  distraction  of  little  things,  to  be  faithful,  patient,  earnest  unto  the  end. 
in.  In  feeling.  The  emotional  nature  is  not  to  be  crushed,  or  even  relegated  to 
an  inferior  place.  No  life  is  beautiful  that  is  a  stranger  to  tenderness  or  tears. 
But  unless  the  heart  keeps  alive  affection,  all  else  will  suffer ;  foi  we  were  made  to 


OUT.  XV.]  ST.  JOHN.  669 

love,  and  our  influence  will  cease  if  that  dies  out.  Why  should  emotion  be  a 
transient  thing,  to  be  apologized  for  or  treated  with  affected  criticism  as  unmanly  ? 
Christ  was  moved  with  compassion.  Feeling  should  be  permanent.  Why  not  ? 
We  need  not  exhaust  it  by  stimulants,  nor  mortgage  the  emotion  of  to-morrow  by 
drawing  upon  its  exchequer  to-day.  Within  us  aU  there  ought  to  be  a  nature  which 
the  Divine  memories  of  the  gospel  always  touch  with  tenderness.  IV.  In  active 
ENDEAVOUR.  As  flowers  retire  into  themselves  at  eventide,  so  too  often  do  men  and 
women.  There  is  lassitude  or  languor  not  born  of  physical  weakness,  but  of 
mental  ennui,  which  too  often  comes  in  the  evening  of  life.  It  is  a  characteristic  of  a 
true  Christian  faith  that  it  vivifies  all  eras  of  life.  For  there  can  be  no  preserved 
sanctities  of  service  where  there  is  no  delight  in  the  dear  old  ways,  no  true  foun- 
tains of  joy  in  God.  When  men  lose  interest,  you  cannot  quicken  their  energy. 
Appeal  will  not  do  it,  nor  arguments,  nor  firmness  of  will.  A  regiment  in  which 
there  are  grey-headed  soldiers  is  likely  to  have  enduring  men  in  it ;  and  a  Christian 
army  in  which  the  veterans  do  not  tire  is  not  only  a  beautiful  spectacle,  but  eon- 
stitutes  a  brave  contingent  for  the  war.    V.  Iumobtalixy.      {W.  M.  Statham.) 

Ver.  17.  These  things  I  command  you  that  ye  love  one  another  (see  ver.  12). — 
Love  in  the  Christian  system : — The  work  is  all  love  :  love  in  its  hidden  source  the 
love  of  the  Father ;  in  its  first  manifestation,  the  love  of  Christ ;  and  lastly,  in  its 
full  outpouring,  the  love  of  believers  for  each  other.  Love  is  its  root,  its  stem,  its 
fruit.  It  forms  the  essential  characteristic  of  the  new  kingdom,  whose  power  and 
conquests  are  owing  solely  to  the  contagion  of  love.  This  is  why  our  Lord  left  no 
other  law  but  that  of  love  to  those  who  had  by  faith  become  members  of  His  body. 
(F.  Oodet,  D.D.)  Brotherly  love : — As  the  spokes  of  a  carriage-wheel  approach 
their  centre,  they  approach  each  other :  so  also,  when  men  are  brought  to  Jesus 
Christ,  the  centre  of  life  and  hope,  they  are  drawn  towards  each  other  in  brotherly 
relationship,  and  stand  side  by  side  journeying  to  their  heavenly  home.  (J.  F. 
Serjeant.)  Christian  love : — When  a  rose-bud  is  formed,  if  the  soil  is  soft,  and 
the  sky  is  genial,  it  is  not  long  before  it  bursts  ;  for  the  life  within  is  so  abundant, 
that  it  can  no  longer  contain  it  all,  but  in  blossomed  brightness  and  swimming 
fragrance  it  must  needs  let  forth  its  joy,  and  gladden  all  the  air.  And  if,  when 
thus  ripe,  it  refused  to  expand,  it  would  quickly  rot  at  heart,  and  die.  And  Chris- 
tian love  is  just  piety  with  its  petals  fully  spread,  developing  itself,  and  making  it 
a  happier  world.  The  religion  which  fancies  that  it  loves  Qod,  when  it  never 
evinces  love  to  its  brother,  is  not  piety,  but  a  poor  mildewed  theology,  a  dogma 
with  a  worm  in  the  heart.    (J.  Hamilton,  D.D.) 

Vers.  18-25.  If  the  world  hate  you. — Kosmos:  unregenerate  humanity — is  here 
presented.  I.  As  olowino  with  hatb.  1.  It  was  a  hatred  of  goodness.  To 
hate  the  mean,  the  selfish,  the  false,  the  dishonest,  and  morally  dishonourable 
would  be  right.  But  evil  was  not  the  object  of  their  hatred.  (1)  It  was  good 
as  embodied  in  the  life  of  Christ.  "  It  hated  Me  before  it  hated  yon."  How 
deep,  burning,  persistent,  and  cruelly  operative  was  this  enmity  from  Beth- 
lehem to  Calvary.  (2)  It  was  good  as  reflected  in  His  disciples.  Just  so  far 
as  they  imbibed  and  reflected  tiie  Spirit  of  Christ  were  they  hated.  "For  My 
name's  sake."  2.  I*  was  a  hatred  developed  in  persecution.  It  was  not  a  hatred 
that  slumbered  in  a  passion  or  that  went  off  even  in  abusive  language,  it  prompted 
the  infliction  of  the  greatest  cruelties.  The  history  of  true  Christians  in  all  ages 
has  been  a  history  of  persecution.  3.  It  was  a  hatred  without  a  just  reason. 
"  Without  a  cause."  Of  course  they  had  a  "  cause."  The  doctrines  of  goodness 
clashed  with  their  deep  rooted  prejudices,  its  policy  with  their  daily  procedure,  its 
eternal  principles  flashed  on  their  consciences  and  exposed  their  wickedness.  But 
their  "  cause  "  was  the  very  reason  why  they  ought  to  have  loved  Christ.  Chxisi 
knew  and  stated  the  cause  of  the  hatred  (ver.  19).  4.  It  was  a  hatred  forming  a 
strong  reason  for  brotherly  love  amongst  the  disciples.  Christ  begins  His  fore- 
warning them  of  it  by  urging  them  to  love  one  another  (ver.  17).  As  your  enemies 
outside  of  you  are  strong  in  their  passionate  hostihty  towards  you,  be  yon  oom< 
pactly  welded  together  in  mutual  love.  Unity  is  strength.  U.  As  loaded  with 
BESPONSiBiLiTY  (vor.  22).  These  words  must,  of  course,  be  taken  in  their  compara- 
tive sense.  Before  He  came  amongst  them  the  guilt  of  their  nation  had  been 
augmenting  for  centuries,  and  they  had  been  filling  up  the  measure  of  their  iniqui- 
ties. But  great  as  was  their  sin  before  He  came  it  was  trifling  compared  to  it  now 
since  His  advent  amongst  them.    1.  Had  He  not  oome  they  would  not  have  known 


670  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ofiAi?.  if, 

the  sin  of  hating  Him.  Hatred  towards  the  best  of  beings,  the  incarnation  of 
goodness,  is  sin  in  its  most  malignant  form,  it  was  the  culmination  of  human 
depravity.  But  had  they  not  known  Him  they  could  not  have  hated  Him,  the 
heart  is  dead  to  all  objects  outside  the  region  of  knowledge.  2.  Had  He  not  come 
they  would  not  have  rejected  Him.  "  He  came  to  His  own  and  His  own  received 
Him  not."  The  rejection  of  Him  involved  the  most  wicked  foUy,  the  most  heartless 
ingratitude,  the  most  daring  impiety.  •'  If  they  which  despised  Moses'  law  died 
without  mercy  under  two  witnesses,"  &c.  3.  If  He  had  not  come  they  would  not 
have  crucified  Him.  What  crime  on  the  long  black  catalogue  of  human  wickedness 
is  to  be  compared  to  this  ?  Conclusion :  1.  Good  men  accept  the  moral  hostility 
of  the  unregenerate  world.  Your  great  Master  taught  you  to  accept  it.  It  is  in 
truth  a  test  of  your  character  and  an  evidence  of  your  Christliness.  2.  Nominal 
Christians  read  your  doom.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  world : — The  children  of 
this  world  as  distinguished  from  the  children  of  God.  Called  the  world  as  indi- 
cating number,  confederacy,  and  spirit.  Three  characteristics.  I.  Governed  by 
SENSE.  II.  Living  fob  the  pbeseni.  HI.  Buled  by  the  opinions  and  customs 
OP  MEN.  (W.  H.  Van  Daren,  D.D.)  The  world: — The  world  of  John's  day  we 
know,  as  to  its  actual  condition,  from  other  sources.  Let  any  one  turn  over  the 
pages  of  Tacitus,  Martial,  or  Persius,  and  what  he  learns  will  put  "  colour  "  into 
John's  outlines :  nay,  one  dare  not  say,  "  turn  over  their  pages,"  for  some  of  them 
can  scarcely  be  read  without  hurt  by  the  saintliest  living.  The  same  "  world  " — at 
heart — we  still  find  in  the  present  century,  under  modern  conditions.  It  has 
grown  in  wealth.  It  has  become  civilized  and  refined.  Law  has  become  a  mightier 
thing.  The  glory  of  science  was  never  half  so  radiant.  But,  looking  close  in,  we 
still  find  the  old  facts — a  dislike  of  God  and  love  of  sin,  pride  and  self-sufficiency, 
a  godless  and  selfish  use  of  things,  men  "  hating  one  another,"  selfishness  fighting 
selfishness — an  infinite  mass  of  misery.  Look  beyond  the  borders  of  comfort  and 
respectability,  and  think  of  what  exists  to-day  round  about  us.  Think  of  the  nn- 
blest  poverty  that  is  growing  side  by  side  with  enormous  wealth  and  luxury, 
associated  in  many  cases  with  vice  and  crime,  crushing  the  spirit  in  ways  that 
comfortable  people  cannot  understand,  and  frequently  aggravated  by  the  temper  in 
which  it  is  borne,  and  by  added  evils  which  do  not  properly  belong  to  it.  Think 
of  the  ignorance  that  has  grown  to  such  proportions  under  the  very  shadow  of  our 
schools  and  churches.  (J.  Culross,  D.D.)  Sheep  among  wolves: — 1.  These 
words  strike  a  discord  in  the  midst  of  sweet  music.  The  keynote  of  all  that  has 
preceded  has  been  love,  and  just  because  it  binds  the  disciples  to  Christ  in  a  sacred 
community,  it  separates  them  from  those  who  do  not  share  in  His  life,  and  hence 
there  result  two  communities — the  Church  and  the  World ;  and  the  antagonism 
between  these  is  perpetual.  2.  Our  Lord  is  here  speaking  with  special  reference  to 
the  apostles,  who  were  "  sent  forth  as  sheep  in  the  midst  of  wolves."  If  we  may 
trust  tradition,  every  one  of  that  little  company  died  a  martyr's  death,  with  the 
exception  of  John.  But  there  is  no  more  reason  for  restricting  the  force  of  these 
words  to  the  heareri,  than  there  is  for  restricting  any  of  the  rest  of  this  discourse. 
I.  What  makes  this  hostility  xnettcable  ?  Our  Lord  here  prepares  His  hearers 
for  what  is  coming  by  putting  it  in  the  gentle  form  of  an  hypothesis.  The  frequency 
with  which  "  if "  occurs  in  this  section  is  very  remarkable,  but  the  tense  of  the 
original  shows  us  that,  whilst  the  form  is  hypothetical,  the  substance  of  it  is  pro- 
phetic. Jesus  points  to  two  things  which  make  this  hostility  inevitable.  1.  If  we 
share  Christ's  ufe,  we  mast  necessarily,  in  some  measure,  share  His  fate  (ver.  18.) 
He  is  the  typical  example  of  what  the  world  thinks  of,  and  does  to,  goodness.  And 
all  who  have  the  spirit  of  life  which  was  in  Jesus  Christ  will  come  under  the  same 
influences  which  carried  Him  to  the  cross.  In  a  world  like  this  it  is  impossible 
tor  a  man  to  "love  righteousness  and  hate  iniquity,"  and  to  order  his  life  accord- 
ingly, without  treading  on  somebody's  corns.  2.  And  then  (ver.  19),  there  are  two 
bands,  and  the  fundamental  principles  that  underlie  each  are  in  deadly  antagonism. 
We  stand  in  diametrical  opposition  in  thought  about  God,  self,  duty,  life,  death, 
the  future ;  and  that  opposition  goes  right  down  to  the  bottom  of  things,  and, 
however  it  may  be  covered  over,  there  is  a  golf,  as  in  some  of  those  American 
canons :  the  towering  banks  may  be  very  near — but  a  yard  or  two  seems  to  separate 
them ;  but  they  go  down  for  thousands  and  thousands  of  feet,  and  never  get  any 
nearer  each  other,  and  between  them  at  the  bottom  a  black,  sullen  river  flows.  If 
the  world  loves  you  it  is  because  ye  are  of  it.  H.  How  thIs  hostility  is  masked 
AND  modified.  1.  There  are  a  great  many  bonds  that  unite  men  together  besides 
religion  or  its  absence.    There  are  the  domestic  ties,  the  associations  of  commeroa 


OHAJ.  XV.]  ST.  JOHN,  6T1 

and  neighbourhood,  surface  identities  of  opinion.  We  have  all  the  same  affectiona 
and  needs,  do  the  same  sort  of  things.  So  there  is  a  film  of  roofing  thrown  over 
the  gulf.  You  can  make  up  a  crack  in  a  wall  with  plaster  after  a  fashion,  and  it 
will  hide  the  colution  of  continuity  that  lies  beneath.  But,  let  bad  weather  come, 
and  the  bricks  gape  apart  as  before.  And  so,  as  soon  as  we  get  down  below  the 
surface  of  things  and  come  to  grapple  with  real,  deep-lying,  and  formative  principles 
of  a  life,  we  come  to  antagonism.  2.  Then  the  world  has  got  a  dash  of  Christianity 
into  it.  Thus  Christian  men  and  others  have,  to  a  large  extent,  a  common  code  of 
morality,  as  long  as  you  keep  on  the  surface ;  and  do  a  great  many  things  from 
substantially  the  same  motives.  And  thus  the  gulf  is  partly  bridged  over  ;  and  so 
the  hostility  talies  another  form.  We  do  not  wrap  Christians  up  in  pitch  and  stick 
them  up  for  candles  in  the  emperor's  garden  nowadays,  but  the  same  thing  can  be 
done  in  different  ways.  Newspaper  articles,  the  light  laugh  of  scorn,  the  whoop  of 
exultation  over  the  failures  or  faults  of  any  prominent  man  that  has  stood  out 
boldly  on  Christ's  side ;  all  these  indicate  what  lies  below  the  surface,  and  some- 
times not  80  very  far  below.  Many  a  young  man  in  a  warehouse,  trying  to  live  a 
godly  life,  many  a  workman,  commercial  traveller,  student,  has  to  find  out  that  there 
is  a  great  gulf  between  him  and  the  man  that  sits  close  to  him  ;  and  that  he  cannot 
be  faithful  to  his  Lord  and  at  the  same  time  down  to  the  depths  of  his  being  a 
friend  of  one  who  has  no  friendship  to  his  Master.  3.  And  again  the  world  has  a 
conscience  that  responds  to  goodness,  though  grumbUngly.  After  all,  men  do  know 
that  it  is  better  and  wiser  to  be  like  Christ,  and  that  cannot  but  modify  to  some  ex- 
tent the  manifestations  of  the  hostility.  But  it  is  there  all  the  same.  Let  a  man 
for  Christ's  sake  avow  unpopular  beliefs,  let  him  boldly  seek  to  apply  Christian 
principles  to  the  fashionable  and  popular  sins  of  his  class  or  of  his  country,  and 
what  a  chorus  will  be  yelping  at  his  heels  1  The  law  remains  still,  if  any 
man  will  be  a  friend  of  the  world  he  is  at  enmity  with  God.  III.  How  yod  mat 
KSCAPE  THE  HOSTILITY.  A  half-Christiauized  world  and  a  more  than  half -secularised 
Church  get  on  well  togetber.  And  it  is  a  miserable  thing  to  reflect  that  about  the 
average  Christianity  of  this  generation  there  is  so  very  little  that  does  deserve  the 
antagonism  of  the  world.  Why  should  the  world  care  to  hate  a  professing  Church, 
large  tracts  of  which  are  only  a  bit  of  the  world  under  another  name  ?  If  you  want 
to  escape  the  hostility  drop  your  flag,  button  your  coat  over  the  badge  that  shows 
that  you  belong  to  Christ,  and  do  the  thing  that  the  people  round  about  you  do,  and 
yoa  will  have  a  perfectly  easy  and  undisturbed  life.  Of  course,  a  Christianity  that 
^inks  at  commercial  immoralities  is  very  welcome  on  the  exchange,  a  Christianity 
that  lets  beer  barrels  alone  may  reckon  upon  having  publicans  for  its  adherents,  a 
Christianity  that  blesses  flags  and  sings  Te  Deums  over  victories  will  get  its  share  of 
the  spoil  If  the  world  can  put  a  hook  in  the  nostrils  of  leviathan,  and  make  him 
play  with  its  maidens,  it  will  substitute  good  nature,  half  contemptuous,  for  the 
hostility  which  our  Master  here  predicts.  Christian  men  and  woman  1  be  you  sure 
that  you  deserve  the  hostility  which  my  text  predicts.  IV.  How  to  meet  this 
ANTAGONISM.  1.  Hcckou  it  as  a  sign  and  test  of  our  true  nnion  with  Jesus  Christ. 
Let  us  count  the  reproach  of  Christ  as  a  treasure  to  be  proud  of,  and  to  be  guarded. 
2.  Be  sure  that  it  is  your  goodness,  and  not  your  evils  or  your  weakness,  that  men 
dislike.  The  world  has  a  very  keen  eye,  and  it  is  a  good  thing  that  it  has,  for  the  faults 
of  professing  Christians.  Many  bring  down  a  great  deal  of  deserved  hostility  upon 
themselves  and  of  discredit  upon  Christianity ;  and  then  they  comfort  themselvea 
and  say  they  are  bearing  the  reproach  of  the  Cross.  Not  a  bit  of  it.  Be  you  care- 
ful for  this,  that  it  is  Christ  in  you  that  men  turn  from,  and  not  yoa  yourself  and 
your  weakness  and  sin.  3.  Meet  this  antagonism  by  not  dropping  your  standard 
one  inch.  If  you  begin  to  haul  it  down  where  are  you  going  to  stop  ?  Nowhere, 
until  you  have  got  it  draggling  in  the  mud  at  your  foot.  It  is  no  use  tryingito  con- 
ciliate by  compromise.  All  that  we  shall  gain  by  that  will  be  indifference  and  oon« 
tempt.  4.  Meet  hostility  with  unmoved,  patient,  Christ-like,  and  Christ-derived 
love  and  sympathy.  The  patient  sunshine  pours  upon  the  glaciers  and  melts  the 
thick-ribbed  ice  at  last  mto  sweet  water.  The  patient  sunshine  beats  upon  the 
mist-clouds  and  breaks  up  its  edges  and  scatters  it  at  the  last.  And  oar  Lord  here 
tells  us  that  our  experience,  if  we  are  faithful  to  Him,  will  be  like  His  experience, 
iu  that  some  will  hearken  to  our  word  though  others  will  persecute,  and  to  some 
our  testimony  will  come  as  a  message  from  Ood  that  draws  them  to  the  Lord  Him- 
self. The  only  conqueror  of  the  world  is  the  love  that  was  in  Christ  breathed 
through  us.  The  only  way  to  overcome  the  world's  hostility  is  by  turning  the  world 
kito  a  church.     (A.  Madaren,  D.D.) 


•71  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cnAP.  it. 

Ver.  19.  If  ye  were  of  the  ■world  the  world,  would  love  bis  own. — The  pedigree  and 
•position  of  true  men: — I.  The  pedigbee  of  true  men.  1.  They  were  once  in  the 
world.  That  world  is  characterized  by — (1)  Practical  athiesm.  They  who  make  it 
up  are  without  God,  if  not  avowedly,  at  least  in  spirit,  conduct  and  aim.  (2) 
Imperial  materialism.  They  have  no  practical  recognition  of  a  spiritual  universe, 
relationship,  obligation.  They  walk  after  the  flesh,  and  seek  their  happiness, 
wealth,  dignity  in  earthly  things.  (3)  Dominant  selfishness.  Each  one  is  governed 
by  selfish  interests.  These  are  the  goal  towards  which  their  steps  are  directed , 
the  idol  they  worship.  2.  They  have  been  brought  out  of  the  world  by  Christ.  No 
one  but  Christ  can  bring  men  out  of  such  a  state.  Philosophy,  civilization,  natural 
reUgion  are  powerless.  Christ  penetrates  men  with  the  idea  of  the  true  God.  He 
draws  the  curtain  of  materialism  and  reveals  the  spiritual  world.  He  destroys 
selfishness  and  constrains  men  with  His  own  love.  This  work  is  represented  by  an 
emancipation,  regeneration,  resurrection,  creation — and  none  of  tbese  words  are 
too  strong.  II.  The  position  of  true  men.  They  are  rendered  repugnant  to  the 
world  by  Christ.  1.  The  hatred  of  the  world  to  true  men  is  of  the  same  kind  as 
that  which  Christ  experienced.  The  forms  of  persecution  change,  but  the  spirit 
remains.  If  it  is  prevented  from  mangling  the  body,  it  will  mangle  the  reputation. 
2,  Then  hatred  is  for  the  same  reason.  The  world  hated  Christ  because — (1)  His 
purity  condemned  their  depravity.  (2)  His  benevolence  their  selfishness.  (3)  His 
humility  their  pride.  (4)  His  truth  their  prejudices.  (5)  His  spirituality  their 
carnal  pleasures.  For  these  reasons  now  the  world  hates  true  men.  (D.  Thomas, 
D.D.)  The  world  we  have  renounced : — 1.  Perhaps  there  is  no  word  more 
commonly  in  our  mouth  than  "  the  world  ;  "  and  yet  hardly  any  to  which  we  attach 
less  clear  and  certain  meaning,  Indeed,  the  sense  intended  by  it  varies  according 
to  the  character  of  the  person  that  uses  it.  Some  people  denounce  the  world  as 
unmixed  evil ;  some  say  it  is  for  the  most  part  good,  or  at  least  innocent :  some 
profess  to  see  its  deceitful  workings  everywhere ;  some  will  see  them  nowhere : 
some  make  their  religion  to  consist  in  a  separation  from  the  world ;  some  think  the 
field  of  their  religious  duty  is  in  the  world  :  in  a  word,  there  is  little  or  no  agree- 
ment or  certainly  but  in  this,  that  there  is  such  a  power  and  reality  as  the  world, 
and  that  it  is  of  great  moment  to  us  to  know  what  it  is.  2.  In  its  original  sense, 
the  world  is  altogether  good.  By  the  work  and  will  of  God  it  is  all  sinless  and 
pure.  It  is  only  in  its  second  intention  that  the  world  has  an  evil  sense  ;  but  that 
sense  is  its  prevailing  and  true  one — "  the  world  "  is  the  creation  of  God  as  it  is 
possessed  by  sin  and  death.  So  subtle  and  far-spreading  is  the  original  sin  of 
man,  that  no  living  soul  is  without  a  taint.  The  original  sin  was  not  a  measured 
quantity,  so  to  speak,  of  evil,  which,  like  a  hereditary  disease,  might  exhaust  itself 
in  the  course  of  two  or  three  descents.  Every  several  generation  renewed  it  afresh  ; 
every  several  man  reproduced  it,  and  sustained  the  tradition  of  evil  by  example, 
habit,  and  license ;  it  was  perpetuated  in  races,  nations,  families  ;  by  custom, 
usage,  law.  And  what  is  this  great  tradition  of  human  thought  and  will,  action 
and  imagination,  with  all  its  illusions,  misjudgments,  indulgences,  and  abuses  of 
God's  creatures,  but  the  world  ?  We  mean  by  it  something  external  to  our  minds, 
and  yet  not  identical  with  the  creation  of  God  ;  something  which  has  thrust  itself 
between  it  and  us;  something  parasitical,  which  has  fastened  upon  all  God's  works, 
and  has  wound  itself  into  its  inmost  action,  and  into  its  very  being.  I.  It  is  true  to 
DiSTiNODisH  BETWEEN  THE  Chdbch  AND  THE  WORLD,  as  between  things  antagonistic 
and  irreconcilable :  for  the  Son  of  God,  by  His  incarnation  and  atonement,  and  by 
the  calling  and  mission  of  His  apostles,  has  founded  and  built  up  in  the  earth  a 
visible  kingdom,  which  has  no  other  Head  bat  Him  alone.  That  visible  kingdom 
is  so  taken  out  of  the  world,  that  a  man  must  either  be  in  it  or  out  of  it ;  and  must, 
therefore,  be  either  in  the  Church  or  in  the  world.  In  the  visible  kingdom  of 
Christ  are  all  Ihe  graces  and  promises  of  life ;  in  the  world  are  the  powers  and 
traditions  of  death.    II.  But  it  is  no  less  true  to  say,  that  the  world,  which  in  thb 

BEQINNINO  WAS  VISIBLY  WITHOUT  THB  ChURCH,  IS  NOW  INVISIBLY  WITHIN  IT.      So  loug 

as  the  world  was  heathen,  it  warred  against  the  Church  in  bitter  and  relentless 
persecutions.  The  two  great  traditions — the  one  of  God,  the  other  of  the  world, 
the  powers  of  the  regeneration  and  of  the  fall — kept  their  own  integrity  by  con- 
tradiction and  perpetual  conflict.  The  Church  stood  alone — a  kingdom  ordained 
t)f  God,  having  her  own  princes  and  thrones,  her  own  judges  and  tribunals,  her  own 
laws  and  equity,  her  own  public  customs  an<i  private  economy  of  life.  It  was 
when  the  conversion  of  individuals  drew  after  it,  at  last,  the  whole  civil  state  ;  when 
the  secular  powers,  with  all  their  eourta,;pomps,  institutions,  laws,  judicatures,  and 


0HA9.  X?.]  ST.  JOHN.  67t 

the  entire  political  order  of  the  world,  came  into  the  precincts  of  the  Church ;  then 
it  was  that  the  great  tradition  of  human  thought,  passion,  belief,  prejudice,  and 
custom,  mingled  itself  vpith  the  unwritten  usages  of  the  Church.  In  the  beginning 
the  Church  had  a  sorer  and  a  more  fiery  trial :  but  who  can  say  that  the  peril  of 
Bouls  is  not  greater  now?  In  those  days  it  was  no  hard  matter  to  discern  between 
the  world  and  the  Church.  But  now  our  very  difBculty  is,  to  know  what  is  that 
world  which  we  have  renounced  ;  to  detect  its  snares,  and  to  overcome  its  allure- 
ments. ...  I  will  say,  that  the  state  of  public  morals,  the  habits  of  personal  and 
social  life,  popular  amusements,  and  the  policy  of  governments,  so  far  as  they  are 
noi  under  the  direct  guidance  of  religion,  are  examples  of  the  presence  and  power 
of  that  which  is  properly  and  truly  called  "  the  world."  And  nobody  need  fear  to 
add,  that  the  tone  and  moral  effect  of  all  these,  except  when  they  are  especially 
guided  by  religion  to  a  Christian  use  and  purpose,  is  almost  always,  in  a  greater  or 
less  degree,  at  variance  with  God.  This,  then,  is  the  world  which  in  our  baptism 
we  renounced.  It  was  no  remote  or  imaginary  notion,  but  a  present  and  active 
reality :  that  very  same  principle  of  original  evil  which,  in  all  ages,  under  all 
shapes,  in  all  places,  has  issued  in  lust,  pride,  covetousness,  vainglory.  We  are  not 
called  to  separate  ourselves  from  any  outward  system,  but  to  be  inwardly  as 
estranged  from  the  evil  that  cleaves  to  the  system  around  us,  as  if  we  were  not  of  it. 

i  Archdeacon  Manning.)  Christians  separated  from  the  world : — It  is  a  remarkable 
act,  that  while  the  baser  metals  are  diffused  through  the  body  of  the  rocks,  gold 
and  silver  usually  lie  in  veins  ;  collected  together  in  distinct  metallic  masses.  They 
are  in  the  rocks  but  not  of  them.  .  .  .  And  as  by  some  power  in  nature  God  has 
separated  them  from  the  base  and  common  earths,  even  so  by  the  power  of  His 
grace  will  he  separate  His  chosen  from  a  reprobate  and  rejected  world.  (T. 
Guthrie,  D.D.)  The  believer  not  of  the  world: — When  courtiers  come  down 

into  the  country,  the  common  home-bred  people  possibly  think  their  habits 
strange ;  but  they  care  not  for  that.  "  It  is  the  fashion  at  Court."  What  need, 
then,  have  the  godly  to  be  so  tender-forebeaded,  to  be  out  of  countenance  because 
the  world  looks  on  holiness  as  a  singularity  ?  It  is  the  only  fashion  in  the  highest 
Court, — yea,  of  the  King  of  kings  Himself."  (H.  G.  Salter.)  Christians  not  to 
compromise  with  the  world : — That  idea  is  very  popular.  "  Now  then.  Mopes,  do 
not  be  too  strict.  Some  people  are  a  deal  too  particular.  Those  old-fashioned 
puritanical  people  are  narrow  and  strait-laced :  be  liberal  and  take  broader  views. 
Cannot  you  make  a  compromise?  Tell  Pharaoh's  daughter  you  are  an  Israelite,  but 
that,  in  consequence  of  her  great  kindness,  you  will  also  be  an  Egyptian.  Thus  you 
can  become  an  Egypto-Israelite — what  a  fine  blend  !  Or  say  an  Israelito-Egyptian— 
with  the  better  part  in  the  front.  You  see,  it  seems  a  simple  way  out  of  a  difficulty, 
to  hold  with  the  hare  and  run  with  the  hounds.  It  saves  you  from  unpleasant 
decisions  and  separations.  Besides,  Jack-of-both-sides  has  great  praise  from  both 
parties  for  his  large-heartedness.  My  hearers,  come  out,  I  pray  you,  one  way  or 
the  other.  If  God  be  God,  serve  Him  ;  if  Baal  be  God,  serve  him.  If  it  is  right  to 
be  an  Israelite,  be  an  Israelite ;  if  it  is  right  to  be  an  Egyptian,  be  an  Egyptian. 
None  of  your  trimming.  It  will  go  hard  with  trimmers  at  the  last  great  day.  When 
Christ  comes  to  divide  the  sheep  from  the  goats,  there  will  be  no  middle  sort,  and 
meanwhile  you  border  people  will  be  driven  down  to  hell.  May  God  grant  us 
grace  to  be  decided  1    (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vara.  21-25.  But  all  these  things  will  they  do  unto  yon. — The  tvorld^s  hatred,  at 
Christ  saw  it: — I.  Thk  woeld's  ignokance  (ver.  21).  "The  world,"  in  Christ's 
language,  is  the  aggregate  of  Godless  men.  There  is  no  mincing  of  the  matter  in 
the  antithesis  which  Christ  here  draws;  no  hesitation,  as  if  there  were  a  great 
central  mass,  too  bad  for  a  blessing  perhaps,  but  too  good  for  a  curse.  No  I  how- 
ever it  may  be  with  the  masses  beyond  the  reach  of  the  truth,  the  men  that  come 
into  contact  with  Him,  like  a  heap  of  metal  filings  brought  into  contact  with  a 
magnet  mass  themselves  into  two  bunches,  the  one,  those  that  yield  to  the  attrac- 
tion, and  the  other  those  that  do  not.  The  one  is  "  My  disciples,"  and  the  other  is 
"  the  world."  And  now,  says  Jesus  Christ,  all  that  mass  that  stands  apart  from 
Him,  have,  as  the  underlying  motive  of  their  conduct  and  their  feelings,  a  real 
ignorance  of  God.  2.  Our  Lord  assumes  that  He  is  so  completely  the  revealer  of  the 
Divine  nature  as  that  any  man  that  looks  upon  Him  has  had  the  opportunity  of 
becoming  acquainted  with  God,  and  that  any  man  who  turns  away  from  Him  has 
lost  that  opportunity.  Out  of  Him  God  is  not  known,  and  they  that  turn  away 
from  His  beneficent  manifestation  turn  their  faces  to  the  black  North,  from  which 

Tou  n.  48 


674  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x?. 

no  light  o*D  flhice.  S.  Bat  there  is  a  deeper  meaning  than  simply  the  jiosRession 
of  true  thoughts  concerning  the  Divine  nature.  We  know  God  as  we  know  ona 
another ;  because  God  is  a  Person,  as  we  are  persons.  And  the  only  way  to  know 
persons  is  through  familiar  acquaintance  and  sympathy.  And  so  the  world  which 
turns  away  from  Christ  has  no  acquaintance  with  God.  This  is  the  surface  fact. 
Our  Lord  goes  on  to  show  what  lies  below  it.  II.  The  would' s  ignorance  in  thb 
FACB  of  Christ's  light  is  worse  than  ignorance  :  it  is  bin.  1.  Mark  Low 
He  speaks  (vers.  22,  24).  He  puts  before  us  two  forms  of  His  manifestation 
of  the  Divine  nature  by  His  words  and  His  works.  And  of  these  two  He 
puts  His  words  foremost,  as  being  a  deeper  and  more  precious  and  brilliant 
revelation.  Miracles  are  subordinate,  they  come  as  a  second  source  of 
illumination.  The  miracle  to  the  word  is  but  like  the  picture  in  the  child's 
book  to  the  text,  fit  for  feeble  eyes  and  infantile  judgments,  but  containing 
far  less  of  the  revelation  of  God  than  the  sacred  words.  2.  But  notice,  too,  how 
decisively,  and  yet  sorrowfully,  our  Lord  here  makes  a  claim  which,  on  the  lips  of 
any  but  Himself,  would  have  been  mere  madness  of  presumption.  Think  of 
any  of  us  saying  that  our  words  made  all  the  difference  between  innocence, 
ignorance,  and  criminality  1  Think  of  any  of  us  pointing  to  our  actions  and  saying, 
in  these  God  is  so  manifest  that  not  to  see  Him  augurs  wickedness,  and  is  con- 
demnation  I  And  yet  Jesus  Christ  says  all  this.  And  what  is  move  wonderful, 
nobody  wonders  that  He  says  it,  and  the  world  believes  that  He  is  saying 
the  truth  when  He  says  it.  How  does  that  come  ?  There  is  only  one  answer.  He 
Himself  was  Divine.  3.  But,  notice  how  our  Lord  here  declares  that  in  comparison 
with  the  sin  of  not  listening  to  His  words,  and  being  taught  by  His  manifestation, 
all  other  sins  dwindle  into  nothing.  •'  If  I  had  not  spoken,  they  had  not  had  sin." 
That  does  not  mean,  of  course,  that  these  men  would  have  been  clear  of  all  moral 
delinquency.  There  were  men  committing  all  the  ordinary  forms  of  human 
transgression  amongst  them.  And  yet,  says  Clirist,  black  as  these  natures  are,  they 
are  white  in  comparison  with  the  blackness  of  the  man  that,  looking  into  His  face, 
pees  nothing  there  that  he  should  desire.  4.  As  light  grows  responsibility  grows. 
The  truth  that  the  measure  of  light  is  the  measure  of  guilt  turns  a  face  of  aUevia- 
tion  to  the  dark  place  of  the  earth  ;  but  adds  weight  to  the  condemnation  of  you, 
who  are  bathed  in  the  light  of  Christianity.  No  shadows  are  so  black  as  those 
which  the  intensest  sunshine  at  the  tropics  casts.  III.  Tbe  ignorance  which  is 
SIN  IS  THE  manifestation  OF  HATRED.  1.  Observc  our  Lord's  indentiti cation  of  Him* 
self  with  the  Father,  so  that  the  feelings  with  which  men  regard  Him  are,  ipso 
facto,  the  feelings  with  which  they  regaid  God.  2.  You  f^ay,  "  I  do  not  pretend  to 
be  a  Christian,  but  I  do  not  hate  God.  Take  the  ordinary  run  of  people  round 
about  us  in  the  world ;  if  you  say  God  is  not  in  all  their  thoughts  I  agree  with  you, 
but  if  you  say  that  they  hate  God,  I  do  not  believe  it."  Well,  do  you  think  it  would 
be  possible  for  a  man  that  loved  God  to  go  on  for  a  twelvemonth  and  never  think 
of  the  object  that  he  loved?  And  inasmuch  as,  deep  down  in  our  moral  being,  there 
is  no  such  thing  as  indifference  in  reference  to  God,  it  is  clear,  that  although  the 
word  must  not  be  pressed  as  if  it  meant  conscious  and  active  antagonism — where 
there  is  no  love  there  is  hate.  If  a  man  does  not  love  God,  he  does  not  care  to 
please  Him.  And  if  obedience  is  the  very  lifebreath  of  love,  disobedience  or  non- 
obedience  are  the  manifestation  of  antagonism,  and  antagonism  is  the  same  thing 
as  hate.  There  is  no  neutrality  in  a  man's  relation  to  God.  It  is  one  thing  or  other. 
"Ye  cannot  serve  God  and  Mammon."  "  The  friends^hip  of  the  world  is  enmity 
against  God."  IV.  This  ignorance,  which  is  sin  and  hatred,  is  dtterlt  irrational. 
(ver.  25).  One  hears  sighing  through  these  words  the  Master's  meek  wonder  that 
His  love  should  be  so  met.  The  most  mysterious  and  irrational  thing  in  men's 
whole  history  and  experience  is  the  way  in  which  they  recompense  God  in  Christ 
for  what  He  has  done  for  them.  Think  of  that  Cross  1  Do  we  not  stand  ashamed  at 
the  absurdity  as  well  as  at  the  criminality  of  our  requital  ?  Causeless  love  on  the 
one  side,  and  causeless  indifference  on  the  other,  are  the  two  powers  that  meet  in 
this  mystery — men's  rejection  of  the  infinite  love  of  G'/d.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
Pertecution  for  Christ'/  name's  sake : — Among  all  the  malefactors  you  condemn 
there  is  not  a  Christian  to  be  found  char^jeable  with  any  crime  but  His  name.  So 
much  is  the  hatred  of  our  name  above  all  the  advantages  of  virtue  flowing  from  it. 
Setting  aside  all  inquiry  into  the  principle  of  our  religion  and  its  Founder,  and  aU 
knowledge  of  them,  the  mere  name  is  laid  hold  of ;  tbe  name  is  attacked ;  and  ■ 
word  alone  prejudges  a  sect  unknown,  and  its  Author  also  unknown,  because  they 
have  a  name,  not  because  they  are  convicted.    {TertulUan.) 


nup.  Xf.}  ST.  JOHN.  676 

Ter.  22.  If  I  had  not  come  and  spoken  unto  tbem,  they  bad  not  bad  sin. — Human 

responsibility  : — Tlie  peculiar  sin  of  the  Jews,  the  sin  which  aggravated  above 
everything  their  former  iniquities,  was  their  rejection  of  Christ.  He  had  been  very 
plainly  described  in  the  prophets,  and  they  who  waited  for  Him  rejoiced  to  see 
Him.  But  because  Jesus  had  not  the  outward  garnishing  of  a  prince,  they  shut 
their  eyes  against  Him,  and  were  not  content  till  they  had  crucified  Him.  Now,  the 
gin  of  the  Jews  is  every  day  repeated  by  the  Gentiles.  As  often  as  ye  hear  the  Word 
preached  and  reject  it,  so  often  do  you  in  effect  once  more  pierce  the  hand  and  the 
•ide.  I.  In  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  there  is  to  man's  conscience  the  coming 
or  OUR  Lord.  He  that  despiseth  us  despiseth  not  us,  but  Him  that  sent  us.  As  for 
what  I  may  say,  as  a  man,  it  is  but  little  that  I  should  say  it;  but  if  I  speak  as  the 
Lord's  ambassador,  take  heed  that  ye  slight  not  tbe  message.  Have  we  not  all  of 
as  grossly  sinned  against  God,  in  the  neglect  that  we  have  often  pat  upon  the  means 
of  grace  ?  How  often  have  you  stayed  away  from  the  house  of  God,  when  God 
Himself  was  speaking  there?  And  when  ye  have  come  up,  how  often  ye  have 
heard  as  though  ye  heard  not.  In  all  this  you  have  despised  God,  and  woe  unto 
you,  except  ye  repent,  for  'tis  a  fearful  thing  to  have  despised  the  voice  of  Him 
that  speaketh  from  heaven.  II.  The  rejection  of  thb  gospel  aggravates  men's 
BIN.  Now,  understand,  we  do  not  increase  our  condemnation  by  going  to  the  house 
of  God ;  we  are  far  more  likely  to  increase  it  by  stopping  away ;  for  in  stopping  away 
there  is  a  double  rejection  of  Christ ;  you  reject  Him  even  with  the  outward  mind, 
as  well  as  with  tbe  inward  spirit.  Your  sin  is  not  aggravated  merely  by  the  hearing 
of  the  gospel,  but  by  the  wilful  and  wicked  rejection  of  it  when  it  is  heard.  Becaus* 
the  man  who  does  this — 1.  Gets  a  new  sin.  Bring  me  a  wild  savage  who  has  never 
listened  to  the  Word.  That  man  may  have  every  sin  in  the  catalogue  of  guilt 
except  one ;  but  that  one  I  am  sure  he  has  not.  He  has  not  the  sin  of  rejecting 
the  gospel  when  it  is  preached  to  him.  But  you,  when  you  hear  the  gospel,  if  you 
have  rejected  it,  you  have  added  a  fresh  iniquity  to  all  others.  "  He  that  believeth 
not  is  condemned  already,"  &c.  "  If  I  had  not  done  among  them  the  works  which 
none  other  man  did,"  &o.  "  Woe  unto  thee,  Chorazin!  "  Ac.  To  reject  Christ 
destroys  a  man  hopelessly.  The  murderer,  the  thief,  the  drunkard,  may  yet  enter 
the  kingdom  of  heaven,  if,  repenting  of  his  sins,  he  will  lay  hold  on  th«  cross  of 
Christ ;  but  with  these  sins,  a  man  is  inevitably  lost,  if  he  believeth  not  on  Christ. 
Consider  what  an  awful  sin  this  is.  There  is  murder  in  this  ;  for  if  the  man  on 
the  scajEfold  rejects  a  pardon,  does  he  not  murder  himself?  There  is  pride  in  this ; 
for  you  reject  Christ,  because  your  proud  hearts  have  turned  you  aside.  There  is 
high  treason  in  this;  for  you  reject  a  king.  2.  He  aggravates  all  the  rest.  Yon 
cannot  sin  so  cheap  as  other  people,  you,  who  have  had  the  gospel.  He  who  sina 
ignorantly  hath  some  little  excuse ;  but  he  who  sins  against  light  and  knowledge 
sins  presumptuously ;  and  under  the  law  there  was  no  atonement  for  this.  m.  Ths 

PBEACHING  OF  THE    GOSPEL  TAKES    AWAY   ALL  EXCUSE    FROM   THOSE   WHO  HEAB  IT  AMD 

REJECT  IT.  •*  Now  have  they  no  cloke  for  their  sin."  A  cloak  is  a  very  poor  cover* 
ing  for  sin,  when  there  is  an  all-seeing  eye  to  look  through  it.  In  the  great  day  of 
the  tempest  of  God's  wrath  a  cloak  will  be  a  very  poor  sholter ;  but  still  man  is 
always  fond  of  a  cloak.  And  so  it  is  with  you ;  you  will  gather,  if  you  can,  an 
excuse  for  your  sin,  and  when  conscience  pricks  you,  you  seek  to  heal  the  wotmd 
with  an  excuse.  And  even  in  the  day  of  judgment,  although  a  cloak  will  be  a  sorry 
covering,  yet  it  will  be  better  than  nothing  at  all.  "  But  now  ye  have  no  cloke  for 
your  sin."  The  traveller  is  left  in  the  rain  without  his  covering,  exposed  to  the 
tempest  without  that  garment  which  once  did  shelter  him.  Notice  how  the  preach* 
ing  of  the  gospel  takes  away  all  cloaks  for  sin.  1.  One  man  might  get  up  and  say, 
"  I  did  not  know  I  was  doing  wrong  when  I  committed  such  and  such  an  iniquity." 
Now,  that  you  cannot  say.  God  has  by  His  law  told  you  solemnly  what  is  wrong. 
If  the  Mahommedan  commits  lust,  I  doubt  not  his  conscience  doth  prick  him,  but 
his  sacred  books  give  him  liberty.  But  you  profess  to  believe  your  Bibles,  and 
therefore  when  you  sin,  you  do  wilfully  violate  a  well-known  law.  2.  Again  you 
might  say,  "  When  I  sinned,  I  did  not  know  how  great  would  be  the  punishment," 
Of  this  eJso,  by  the  gospel,  you  are  left  without  excuse ;  for  did  not  Jesus  Christ 
tell  you,  that  those  who  will  not  have  Him  shall  be  cast  into  outer  darkness  ?  8. 
But  some  of  you  may  say,  "  Ah,  I  heard  the  gospel,  and  I  knew  that  I  was  doing 
wrong,  but  I  did  not  know  what  I  must  do  to  be  saved."  Is  there  one  among  yoa 
who  can  urge  such  an  excuse  as  this  ?  "  Believe  and  live  "  is  preached  every  oay 
in  your  hearing.  4.  I  can  hear  another  say,  "  I  heard  the  gospel  preached,  bnt  I 
never  had  a  good  example  set  me. "    Some  of  you  may  say  that,  and  it  woald  b« 


678  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  (cha*.  rt. 

partially  trne  ;  but  there  are  others  of  yon,  concerning  whom  this  would  be  a  lying 
excuse.    Ah  I  man  ;  you  have  been  very  fond  of  speaking  of  the  inconsistencies  of 
Christians.  But  there  was  one  Christian  whom  you  knew,  and  whose  character  you 
were  compelled  to  admire.    It  was  your  mother.    That  has  always  been  the  one 
diflSoulty  with  you  up  to  this  day.    You  could  have  rejected  the  gospel  very  easily, 
but  your  mother's  example  stood  before  you,  and  you  could  not  overcome  that.    5. 
But  others  of  you  can  say  that  you  had  no  such  mother ;  your  first  school  was  the 
street,  and  the  finrst  example  you  ever  had  was  that  of  a  swearing  father.    BecoUect, 
there  is  one  perfect  example — Christ.    6.  One  more  excuse  is  this :  "  I  had  many 
advantages,  but  they  were  never  sent  home  to  my  conscience  so  that  I  felt  them." 
Now,  there  are  very  few  of  you  here  who  can  say  that.    No,  you  have  not  always 
been  unmoved  by  the  gospel ;  you  have  grown  old  now,  and  it  takes  a  deal  to  stir 
you,  but  it  was  not  always  so.    IV.  I  have  now  as  it  were  to  pronounck  thb 
SENTENCE  OF  CONDEMNATION.    FoT  those  who  live  and  die  rejecting  Christ  there  is  a 
most  fearful  doom.   They  shall  perish  with  an  utter  destruction.   There  are  degrees 
of  punishment ;  but  the  highest  degree  is  given  to  the  man  who  rejects  Christ. 
The  liar  and  the  whoremonger,  and  drunkards  shall  have  their  portion — whom  do 
you  suppose  with  ? — with  unbelievers ;  as  if  hell  was  made  first  of  all  for  unbelievers. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)      Cloaks  for  sin :  or  excuses  removed ; — No  excuse  for  sin  ?   That 
IS  a  strange  statement.    Excuses  have  been  one  of  the  specialties  of  each  sinner's 
stock-in-trade  from  Eden.     These  "  cloaks  for  sin  "  are  "  always  on  hand."    And 
yet  Christ  declares  of  those  who  wickedly  and  presumptuously  reject  the  offered 
pardon  and  guidance,  that  they  have  no  good  excuse,  "  no  cloak  for  their  sin." 
But  you  say,  I  "  I  have  a  valid  excuse  for  not  being  a  Christian — the  hypocrisies 
AND  WRONO-DoiKOS  or  CHURCH  MEMBERS."    1.  I  admit  that  some  rogues  are  hiding 
their  wolfish  hearts  under  the  deceptive  wool  of  churchly  professions.    As  Jacob, 
by  putting  hair  upon  himself  and  thus  professing  to  be  Esau,  secured  a  blessing 
from  blind  Isaac,  so  some  bad  men  have  secured  credit  and  confidence  by  stealing 
the  livery  of  heaven  to  serve  the  devil  in.     One  Sunday  morning  a  dressmaker  told 
her  little  niece  to  put  on  her  things  and  take  a  bundle  of  dress  goods  under  her 
shawl  to  the  house  of  one  of  her  patrons,  remarking,  ••  Nobody  will  see  it."    The 
child  replied,  "  But,  Aunty,  is  it  not  Sunday  under  my  shawl  ?  "    There  are  some 
professors  to  whom  church  membership  is  only  a  shawl  to  cover  up  sin.    Such  an 
empty  profession  affords  "  no  cloak  for  sin."     2.  You  say  then,  "  I  believe  in  a 
man  living  up  to  what  he  professes  I  "  I  answer,  "  I  believe  in  a  man's  daring  to 
profess  what  he  believes."    The  outward  and  inward  life  should  fit  both  ways.    Do 
not  think  your  strange  eagerness  to  point  out  stains  on  Christian  garments  arisei 
from  pure  love  of  truth  and  righteousness.    Look  down  into  your  heart  and  ask, 
•'  Why  do  I  BO  readily  hear  and  so  quickly  believe  and  so  promptly  circulate,  with- 
out investigation,  reports  against  professing  Christians  "  (Acts  viii.  58)  ?    Besides, 
Christians  never  profess  perfection  in  conduct,  but  only  in  love,  with  sincere  though 
imperfect  efforts  toward  goodness.      II.  But  another  says,  ••  I  have  a  real  excuse — 
A  GOOD  MORAL  LIFE  IS  A  CHRISTIAN  LIFE.    I  gavc  my  old  ovcrcoat  the  other  day  to  a 
poor  man,  and  I  give  away  to  the  poor  more  than  anybody  knows."    Let  it  be 
remembered  that  Dorcas  was  saved  because  she  was  "  a  disciple."  She  did  not  hold 
up  the  garments  she  had  made  for  the  poor  to  cover  up  the  sin  of  disobeying  and 
rejecting  Christ — indeed,  she  did  not  exhibit  her  charity  at  all ;  but  those  to  whom 
she  gave  them  praised  her  and  not  her  own  lips.    This  effort  to  cloak  our  sins  is 
only  a  repetition  of  Naaman's  effort  to  hide  and  heal  his  leprosy  by  giving  away 
changes  of  raiment  instead  of  obeying  God  in  His  command.    III.  Some  of  you 
are  wrapping  yourself  in  another  cloak,  which  you  think  is  fireproof  asbestos — 
"  God  is  too  merciful  to  punish  me.  I  don't  believe  as  you  do  about  future  punish* 
ment."    But  the  laws  of  the  world  assert  that  there  must  be  punishment  or  atone- 
ment  for  sin,  as  well  as  the  Old  and  New  Testaments.    But  questions  about  endless 
punishment  cannot  fairly  be  made  excuses  for  any  one  refusing  to  accept  personal 
salvation,  as  the  only  condition  of  conversion  in  the  matter  of  belief  is,  "  Believe 
on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."    "I  don't  believe  "  is  no  cloak 
for  sin  when  God  challenges  you  to  test  religion.     "  Come  and  see."    IV.  Another 
wrap  is,  "  I  am  trying  to  be  a  Christun  in  a  quiet  way.   I  don't  believe  in  talking 
about  it."    As  well  might  our  soldiers  have  said  in  the  late  war,  *•  We  are  trying  to 
be  Icyal,  but  we  don't  think  that  the  order  to  wear  blue  uniforms  and  carry  the  stars 
and  stripes  and  o  ganize  into  regiments  is  essential."   V.  Another  wraps  a  cloak  of 
mingled  humility  and  pride  over  his  sin  as  he  says,  "  I'm  not  good  enough  to  be  a 
Christian.     I'm  very  conscientious  and  I  couldnH  be  a  Christian  without  being 


OHA».  rv.J  8T.  JOHN.  671 

a  perfect  one."  Hear  that  sick  man  saying,  "  I'm  not  well  enough  yet  to  send  fof 
the  Great  Physician."  VI.  Or  do  you  say,  "  I  tbied  this  thing  oncb  and  failed  ?  " 
As  well  say,  •'  I  tried  to  wear  an  overcoat  but  I  didn't  have  it  made  carefully  and  it 
came  to  pieces  in  a  little  while,  and  so  I'll  never  try  to  wear  another,  however  cold 
the  winds  may  blow."  Throw  away  that  shivering  cloak  of  past  failures  as  an  excuse 
for  sin  and  have  another  robe  made  more  thoroughly  than  your  first — the  robe  of 
Christ's  righteousness.  VII.  Another  cloak  is,  "  I  feab  I  should  fail  and  not  livb 
OP  to  my  profession.  I  have  very  unfavourable  surroundings  and  a  peculiar 
temperament."  Exchange  that  miserable  cloak  for  the  sword  of  Divine  help  and 
defence  and  "  the  whole  armour  of  God  "  (Eph.  vi.  11.)  As  to  unfavourable 
surroundings,  there  were  "  aaints  in  CaBsar's  household,"  and  also  in  the  households 
of  Ahub,  Pharaoh,  and  other  famous  foes  of  God.  Abraham  reared  his  altar  in  the 
very  midst  of  idolaters.  VIII.  Or  do  you  frankly  say,  "I  couldn't  be  a  Chkistian 
AND  continue  IN  MY  BUSINESS,  and  I  cau't  give  that  up,  for  a  man  must  live?  "  Mark 
you,  when  every  man  gives  an  account  of  himself  to  God,  church  records  will  never 
appear  in  evidence.  What  is  wrong  is  wrong,  whether  a  man's  name  is  on  the 
church  book  or  not,  and  it  is  simply  ridiculous  to  suppose  you  have  a  cloak  for  sin 
that  will  wash,  because  you  can  say,  "  My  name  is  not  on  the  church  book  "  (James 
v.  2).  IX.  Or  do  you  wave  that  "  cloak  for  sin  "  aloft? — " I  want  to  have  fun  and 
FBEEDOM  A  LITTLE  LONGER."  "  Only  use  not  liberty  as  a  cloak  of  maliciousness  " 
(1  Pet.  ii.  16).  Joseph,  when  tempted  by  the  wife  of  Potiphar,  left  the  outer  robe 
she  had  seized  upon  in  her  hand  and  fled,  saying,  •'  How  can  I  do  this  great  wicked- 
ness and  sin  against  God  ?  "  X.  Or  do  you  offer  the  excuse,  "  Can't  afford  to  be 
A  CniusTiAN  7  "  The  church  of  Elijah  and  John  the  Baptist,  with  their  rough  camel's 
hair  coats,  and  of  the  widow  who  gave  the  two  mites,  is  surely  a  place  for  the 
poorest.  Think  less  of  pews  and  pennies  and  appearance  and  more  of  the  penitence 
and  the  inward  adorning  of  the  hearts.  XI.  Or  do  you  say  by  way  of  excuse,  "  I'm 
TOO  BUSY  to  think  OF  RELIGIOUS  MATTERS  ?  The  care  of  the  body  is  about  all  I  can 
attend  to  just  now."  That  was  Dives'  mistake.  He  was  so  busy  in  robing  himself 
and  family  in  purple  and  fine  linen  that  he  left  his  soul  in  rags  and  at  last  brought 
himself  to  hell's  robe  of  fire.  XII.  Otheb  excuses — 1.  "  Too  old."  "  He  is  able  to 
save  unto  the  uttermost."  2.  Too  young  ?  As  Samuel  wore  the  ephod  of  a  priest 
at  three  .years  of  age,  so  in  early  life  any  child  may  wear  the  robe  of  righteousness. 
3.  Don't  feel  enough  ?  When  you  have  feeling  the  tempter  will  suggest  the  opposite 
excuse,  "  You  feel  too  much  excitement."  Between  these  two  halves  of  his  shears 
he  is  striving  to  cut  in  twain  your  offered  robe  of  righteousness.  Conclusion : 
1.  What  comedies  are  these  excuses  1  To  be  frank  and  honest,  most  are  mere 
quibbling,  dilatory  motions,  talking  against  time.  Such  shallow  excuses  for 
absence  from  a  business  engagement  would  not  be  accepted — not  even  offered,  and 
instead  of  providing  a  cloak  for  our  sin,  weave  another  scarlet  robe  of  mockery  for 
the  Crucified  (Matt,  xxvii.  28).  When  Joseph  was  called  before  Pharaoh,  he 
"  changed  his  raiment "  (Gen.  xli.  14).  We  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment 
seat  of  Christ.  Are  you  willing  to  appear  there  with  no  change  of  raiment, 
wrapped  in  these  ragged  excuses  ?  Thank  God  that  a  change  of  raiment,  a  wedding 
garment  is  provided — a  real  cloak  for  sin  (Isa.  Ixi.  10).  With  this  robe  of  Christ's 
righteousness  offered  to  us  a  real  cloak  to  cover  sin,  shall  we  not,  like  the  return- 
ing prodigal,  throw  away  our  ragged  excuses  and  accede  to  that  plan  of  God's 
infinite  love,  "  bring  forth  the  best  robe  and  put  it  on  him."  As  Peter  threw  off 
his  outer  robe  when  he  plunged  into  the  sea,  that  he  might  the  quicker  swim  to 
Christ  who  stood  upon  the  shore ;  as  Lazarus  was  loosed  from  the  grave-clothes,  sc 
let  ns,  lay  aside  every  weight  and  the  cloaks  of  excuse  for  sin  that  keep  us  back 
from  God  and  Heaven,  and  let  us  first  hasten  to  Christ,  and  run  with  patience  the 
race  thHt  is  set  before  us.  As  Lord  Kaleigh  gallantly  threw  his  beautiful  robe  upon 
the  muddy  ground  for  Queen  Elizabeth  to  walk  upon,  so  let  us  throw  all  our  excusing 
cloaks  of  sin  at  the  feet  of  Jesus  and  take  instead  Christ's  cloaks  of  zeal  (Isa.  lix.  17). 
{W.  F.  Crafts.)  TIte  pleas  of  gospel-ivipenitents  examined  and  refuted  : — Gospel-im- 
penitents  who  finally  reject  Christ  have  no  cloak  for  their  sin — I.  From  ant  pleas  or 
pretences  THEY  CAN  MAKE  RELATING  TO  GoD  THEiB  Maker.  They  canuot  plead — 1. 
That  they  are  not  invited  to  believe  in  Christ  for  salvation.  The  gospel-invitation 
runs  in  imlefinite  terms,  "Whosoever  will,  let  him  come."  2.  That  they  are  not 
elected.  It  is  not  the  undiscovered  decree,  but  the  revealed  precept,  that  is  our 
rule,  according  to  which  we  are  to  conduct  ourselves,  and  by  which  we  shall  finally 
be  judged  (Deut.  xxix.  29.)  &.  That  God  uses  any  compulsion,  or  exerts  any 
positive  influence,  to  keep  them  in  unbelief  and  harden  them  in  sin  (James  i.  13). 


618  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ena.  xf. 

i.  That  there  is  any  deficiency  of  suitable  means  on  God's  part,  or  that  He  doei 
not  afford  them  necessary  external  helps  for  their  believing  in  Christ  (Isaiah  v.  4). 
He  has  given  men  the  Bible,  the  Church,  pastors  and  teachers,  sabbaths,  &g.  5. 
That  there  is  a  want  of  internal  assistances,  and  a  defect  of  necessary  influences 
from  God  to  make  the  means  effectual.  The  fact  is — (1)  Sinners  do  not  realise 
what  God  tells  them  of  the  necessity  of  His  grace,  and  of  their  own  impotency,  but 
•re  apt  vainly  to  magnify  their  own  abilities,  and  to  think  every  man  of  himself 
more  highly  than  he  ought  to  think.  (2)  Sinners  do  not  pray  to  God  for  His  Spirit 
as  they  ought,  although  they  confess  their  own  impotency.  (3)  Sinners  under  the 
gospel,  whether  they  pray  for  the  Spirit  or  not,  do  actually  experience  those 
assistances  of  common  grace,  which  are  a  full  vindication  of  God,  and  leave  them 
without  all  excuse.  The  Spirit  of  God  is  often  at  work  in  their  consciences.  He 
convinces  them  of  sin,  admonishes  them  of  duty,  and  stirs  up  their  affections, 
desires,  fears,  and  hopes.  But  here  is  the  misery  and  folly  of  sinners :  they  do 
always  resist  and  vex  the   Holy  Ghost.     II.  Feom  ant  pleas   they   can   make 

EErEBEINO  TO   SaTAN,   AND    AN     EVU.     WORLD,   THEIB    BPIEITUAL    ADVERSARIES.      They 

Buffer  no  violence  from  external  causes,  nor  will  any  impediments  they  met  with  in 
the  way  of  duty,  afford  them  a  plea  sufiScient  to  justify  their  not  repenting  and 
receiving  Christ.  What  or  who  should  compel  the  sinner  to  refuse  Christ?  They 
may  persuade  and  entice,  but  they  cannot  force.  They  may  indeed  use  a  violence 
upon  the  body,  and  hinder  that  from  external  duties ;  but  they  cannot  reach  the 
Boul,  to  hinder  repentance  toward  God,  and  faith  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (James 
iv.  7).  It  is  the  fault  and  folly  of  sinners,  they  do  not  resist  the  devil.  And  then, 
if  Satan  has  gained  a  power  over  any,  which  seems  almost  irresistible  (2  Tim.  ii. 
26),  they  have  brought  this  upon  themselves  (Psa.  Ixxxi.  11,  12).  IH.  It  bemains, 
therefore,  that  sinnees  take  all  the  blame  of  theie  sin  and  buin  to  them- 
selves (James  i.  14 ;  John  iii.  19).  Gospel-impenitents — 1.  Neglect  to  use,  or 
trifle  in  using,  those  means  which  are  in  their  own  power,  and  which  they  might 
probably  hope  God  would  bless,  in  order  to  their  salvation  (John  vi.  27 ;  Luke  xiii. 
24  ;  Phil.  ii.  12).  2.  Resist  the  methods  of  grace,  which  the  blessed  God  uses  with 
them,  and  quench  the  Holy  Spirit  striving  in  them  (Isa.  Ixiii.  10 ;  Acts  vii.  61). 
3.  Do  actually  commit  those  sins,  which,  as  they  have  a  natural  tendency  to  hinder 
their  conversion,  so  they  provoke  God  to  withhold  His  special  grace  from  them 
(Zech.  vii.  11,  12  ;  Ezek.  xxiv.  13).  4.  Do  all  this  in  a  free  and  voluntary  manner, 
and  upon  motives  which,  at  the  time,  appear  to  them  founded  in  reason.  Conclu- 
sion :  Have  gospel-impenitents  no  cloak  for  their  sin  ?  1.  Hence  we  may  learn 
the  justice  of  God  in  the  eternal  condemnation  of  such  in  a  future  state.  2.  Hence 
the  awfulness  of  our  standing  under  the  gospel,  and  the  miserable  delusion  of  such 
as  trust  to  mere  privileges  and  externals  in  religion.  3.  Hence  the  folly  of  delay  in 
the  grand  affair  of  conversion.  4.  If  gospel-impenitents  are  inexusable,  who 
perish  in  their  own  iniquity;  how  much  more  such  sinners  as  are  voluntarily 
instrumental  to  the  sin  and  ruin  of  others  1  5.  What  abundant  reason  have  they 
to  admire  the  grace  of  God  toward  them,  who  after  a  course  of  great  sin,  under 
gospel  hght,  have  been  converted  1    (T.  Foxcroft.)        They  hated  Me  without  • 

cause. Hatred  without  cause  : — It  is  usually  understood  that  the  quotation  is  from 

Psa.  zxxv.  19.  No  being  was  ever  more  lovely  than  the  Saviour ;  it  would  seem 
almost  impossible  not  to  have  affection  for  Him.  And  yet,  loveable  as  He  was, 
from  His  first  moment  to  the  cross,  save  the  temporary  lull  while  He  was  a  child, 
it  seemed  as  if  all  men  sought  to  destroy  Him.  In  different  ways  that  hatred  dis- 
played itself,  in  overt  deeds,  in  words  of  slander,  or  in  looks  of  contempt.  At  other 
times  that  hatred  dwelt  in  their  thoughts,  and  they  thought  within  themselves, 
•«  This  man  blasphemeth."  All  grades  of  men  hated  Him.  Most  men  have  to 
meet  with  some  opposition;  but  then  it  is  frequently  a  class  opposition.  The 
demagogue  must  expect  to  be  despised  by  the  rich,  and  he  who  labours  for  the 
aristocracy  of  course  meets  with  the  contempt  of  the  many.  But  here  was  a  man 
who  walked  among  the  people,  who  loved  them,  who  spoke  to  the  rich  and  poor  aa 
though  they  were  on  one  level  in  His  blessed  sight ;  and  yet  all  classes  conspired  to 
hate  Him.  I.  Let  us  justify  what  the  Savioub  said.  1.  In  Christ's  person 
there  was  an  absence  of  almost  everything  which  excites  hatred  between  man  and 
man.  (1)  There  was  no  gre»t  rank  in  Christ  to  excite  envy.  Let  a  man  be  ever  so 
good.  If  he  be  at  all  lifted  above  his  fellow-creatures  the  many  often  speak  against 
him.  Now,  Christ  had  none  of  the  outward  circumstances  of  rank.  Instead  of 
being  lifted  above  men.  He  did,  in  some  sense,  seem  to  be  below  them,  for  foxes 
had  holeSt  dkc     (2)  Many  persons  envy  those  who  exercisi  rule  or  government  over 


•HAP.  XT.]  ST.  JOHN,  Vn 

Ihem.  If  anthorities  were  changed  every  month,  in  some  countries  there  would  be 
revolutions  as  much  under  one  as  under  another.  But  this  did  not  operate  in 
Christ's  case :  He  did  not  assume  sway  over  the  multitude.  In  fact,  instead  of 
binding  laws  upon  them  which  were  severe.  He  loosened  the  rigidity  of  their  system. 
(3)  Some  men  make  others  dislike  them  because  they  are  proud.  Somehow  or 
other  the  human  mind  cannot  bear  pride ;  we  always  kick  against  it.  But  there 
was  nothing  of  that  in  our  Saviour.  How  humble  He  was  1  He  would  wash  His 
disciples'  feet.  (4)  There  are  others  that  you  cannot  help  disliking,  because  they 
are  so  snappish,  and  waspish,  and  angry.  But  you  cannot  find  that  Christ  spake 
one  angry  word,  save  those  words  of  holy  wrath  against  Pharasaic  pride.  Such  a 
loving,  kind,  gentle  spirit,  one  would  have  thought  would  have  gone  through  the  world 
as  easy  as  possible.  (5)  Another  set  you  can  scarcely  help  disliking — selfish 
people.  But  whatever  Christ  did,  He  did  for  others.  "He  saved  others;  Himself 
He  did  not  save."  Self-sacrifice  was  the  life  of  Christ ;  but  He  did  it  with  such  an 
ease  that  it  seemed  no  sacrifice.  (6)  Another  sort  of  people  there  are  that  I  do  not 
like,  vi«.,  the  hypocritical.  But  there  never  was  a  more  unvarnished  man  than 
Christ.  Among  all  the  slanders  men  brought  against  Christ  they  never  disputed 
His  sincerity.  2.  Was  there  anything  in  Christ's  errand  which  could  make  people 
hate  Him  ?  He  came — (1)  To  explain  mysteries,  to  tell  them  what  was  meant  by 
the  sacrificial  lamb.  Should  they  have  hated  one  who  made  dark  things  light.  (2) 
To  reclaim  the  wanderer ;  and  is  there  anything  in  that  that  should  make  men 
hate  Christ?  (3)  To  heal  the  diseases  of  the  body.  Shall  I  hate  the  physician 
who  goes  about  gratuitously  healing  all  manner  of  diseases  ?  Surely,  He  might 
well  say,  "  For  which  of  the  works  do  ye  stone  Me."  (4)  To  die,  that  sinners 
might  not  die  ?  Ought  I  to  hate  the  substitute  who  takes  my  sins  and  griefs  upon 
Him,  and  carries  my  sorrows  ?  3.  Was  there  anything  in  Christ's  doctrine  that 
that  should  have  made  us  hate  Him  ?  (1)  Take  His  preceptive  doctrines.  Did  He 
not  teach  us  to  do  to  others  as  we  would  they  should  do  to  us  ?  (2)  Was  it  the 
ethical  part  of  His  doctrines  that  men  liated  ?  He  taught  that  rich  and  poor  must 
stand  oa  one  level ;  He  taught  that  His  gospel  was  to  be  gloriously  expansive. 
This,  perhaps,  was  one  principal  reason  of  their  hating  Him  ;  but  surely  there  was 
no  justifiable  cause  for  their  indignation  in  this.    II.  Man's  sin,  that  he  should 

HAVE    HATED     THE     SaVIOUR    WITHOUT    A    CAUSF.        1.     I    will    DOt   tell   yOU    Of   mau'S 

adulteries,  murders,  wars,  cruelties,  and  rebellions  ;  if  I  want  to  tell  you  man's  sin, 
I  must  tell  you  that  man  is  a  deicide — that  he  put  to  death  his  God,  and  slew  his 
Saviour ;  and  when  I  have  told  you  that  I  have  given  you  the  essence  of  all  sin. 
In  every  other  case,  when  man  has  hated  goodness,  there  have  always  been  some 
extenuating  circumstances.  We  never  do  see  goodness  in  this  world  without  alloy. 
But  because  the  Saviour  had  no  inconsistencies  or  infirmities,  men  were  stripped  of 
all  their  excuses  for  hating  Him,  and  it  came  out  that  man  naturally  hates  good- 
ness, because  he  is  so  evil  that  he  cannot  but  detest  it.  2.  And  now  let  me  appeal 
to  every  sinner,  and  ask  him  whether  he  ever  had  any  cause  for  hating  Christ. 
But  some  one  says,  "  I  do  not  hate  Him  ;  if  He  were  to  come  to  my  house  I  would 
love  Him  very  much. "  But  Christ  lives  next  door  to  you,  in  the  person  of  poor 
Betty  there.  Why  don't  you  like  Betty  f  She  is  one  of  Christ's  members,  and  "  In- 
asmuch as  ye  have  done  it  unto  one  of  the  least  of  these  ye  have  done  it  unto  Me." 
Don't  you  know  a  very  holy  man  you  cannot  bear  because  he  told  you  of  your  faults 
once?  Ah  !  sir,  if  you  loved  Christ  you  would  love  His  members.  I  must  suppose 
you  to  be  hostile  to  Christ,  unless  you  love  Him  ;  for  I  know  there  are  only  two 
opinions  of  Him.  You  must  either  hate  Him  or  love  Him.  Indifference  with 
regard  to  Christ  is  a  clear  impossibility.  A  man  might  as  well  say,  *'  I  am  indifferent 
towards  honesty."  3.  And  now.  Christian  men,  I  must  preach  at  you.  Sure 
ye  have  great  reason  to  love  Christ  now,  for  ye  once  hated  Him  without  a  cause. 
Did  ye  ever  treat  a  friend  ill,  and  did  not  know  it.  III.  Lessons  :  1.  If  your  Master 
was  hated  without  a  cause,  do  not  you  expect  to  get  off  very  easily  in  this  world. 
2.  Take  care,  if  the  world  does  hate  you,  that  it  hates  you  without  a  cause.  (C  H. 
Spurgeon.) 

Ters.  26,  27.  But  when  the  Comforter  Is  come.— The  Holy  Spirit :  Hit  work  and 
mission  : — I.  The  Holy  Spirit.  1.  Our  text  speaks  of  the  Holy  Spirit  as  a  Person. 
"He  shall  testify;  "  "  and  ye  also"  (see  also  chap.  xvi.  7,  8,  13,  14,  15).  In  the 
first  of  the?;e  places  He  is  spoken  of  as  a  Person  acting  with  other  persons,  of  whose 
personality  there  can  be  no  doubt,  viz.,  the  apostles.  In  the  last  He  is  represented 
as  acting  intermediately  between  the  Father,  an  undoubted  Person,  and  the  apostles. 


680  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHA».  x?. 

We  know  that  the  effects  of  His  operation  are  sometimes  personified.  But  still  onf 
Lord  and  the  sacred  writers  speak  of  Him  in  a  way  which  requires  us  to  understand 
an  intelligent  agent,  e.g.,  in  the  form  of  baptism  (Matt,  xxviii.  19).  If  the  Spirit 
is  a  figure  of  speech,  so  are  the  Father  and  the  Son.  2.  He  is  a  Divine  Person. 
Otherwise  an  idol  is  eet  np  on  the  very  threshold  of  the  Christian  temple ;  and  we 
are  taught  by  the  form  of  baptism  to  worship  a  creature  of  our  own  fancy.  If  the 
inspired  language  is  perplexing,  if  He  is  not  a  real  Person,  it  is  delusive  and 
dangerous  if  He  be  not  divine  (Matt.  xii.  28 ;  John  xiv.  12 ;  ef.  Eom.  xv.  19).  We 
turn  our  thoughts  to  the  offer  of  forgiveness  so  free  and  wide  (Isa.  Iv.  7 ;  Mark 
iii.  28) ;  but  amidst  all  this  wealth  of  mercy  we  find  a  solitary  exception—  blasphemy 
against  the  Holy  Ghost  (Mark  iii.  29).  Is  a  figure  of  speech  the  object  of  the  one 
irremissible  sin  ?  3.  The  Three  Divine  Persons,  though  equal  in  dignity  and  power, 
have  been  pleased  to  estabhsh  a  method  of  procedure  which  corresponds  in  a 
measure  to  the  mode  of  the  Divine  existence.  The  Father  is  "  of  none,"  and  ia 
never  said  to  be  sent  or  given.  The  Son  ia  of  the  Father,  and  as  the  Son  of  the 
Father,  is  sent  and  given  by  Him  (2  John  3 ;  1  John  iv.  9;  John  iii.  16),  The  Holy 
Spirit  is  never  said  to  give  or  send  the  Son ;  but  to  proceed  from  the  Father,  to  be 
given,  and  sent  by  the  Father.  In  like  manner,  also,  as  the  Son  is  called  the  Son 
of  the  Father,  the  Holy  Spirit  is  called  "  the  Spirit  of  His  Son,"  &o.  (Gal.  iv.  6 ;  1 
Pet.  i.  11),  and  ia  said  to  be  sent  and  given  by  Christ  (chap.  xvi.  7 ;  Acts  ii.  33). 
II.  His  woek.  1.  "  The  testimony  of  Jesus  ia  the  Spirit  of  prophecy."  All  the 
preannouncements  concerning  the  coming  and  work  of  Christ  were  but  the  voice  of 
the  Spirit  (Matt.  i.  22 ;  Acta  xxviii.  25).  This  testimony  ia  so  manifold  as  to 
anticipate  the  gospel  at  every  point  (Acts  xxvi.  22).  It  was  by  the  agency  of  the 
Spirit  that  this  prophecy  was  turned  into  history.  (1)  Our  Eedeemer  must  be  a 
man  like  ourselves,  and  a  body  was  prepared  Him  by  the  agency  of  the  Spirit 
(Luke  i.  35).  (2)  He  must  be  a  holy  man,  and  so  that  conceived  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  was  "  that  holy  thing,"  and  continued  so.  (3)  In  His  public  capacity  He 
was  anointed  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  power.  (4)  To  the  same  gracious  agency 
we  are  taught  to  ascribe  the  virtues  exhibited  in  His  passion.  (5)  After  death  Jesus 
was  "quickened  by  the  Spirit."  2.  The  Holy  Spirit's  testimony  as  borne  by  the 
apostles.  (1)  All  Christ's  oral  teachings  was  recalled  to  their  minds,  and  the 
knowledge,  courage,  &c.,  needed  to  discharge  their  duties.  (2)  Their  testimony 
was  confirmed  by  the  Spirit  in  a  wonderful  manner  in  ••  wonders  and  signs,"  &c. 
(3)  The  spoken  testimony  has  perished,  but  the  written  testimony  remains  from 
generation  to  generation.  (4)  In  the  long  succession  of  faithful  men  who  have 
been  "  able  to  teach  others  also,"  from  that  day  to  this  the  Spirit  haa  borne  a 
continuoua  testimony  to  Christ.  3.  In  the  Church,  as  in  the  ministry,  the  Holy 
Spirit  bears  this  testimony,  and  not  only  in  many  persons,  but  in  many  ways  in  the 
same  persons.  (1)  He  testifies  to  men's  need  of  Christ,  by  convincing  them  of  sin. 
(2)  He  reveals  Christ  as  a  Saviour,  and  enables  the  penitent  to  receive  and  rest  on 
Him  for  salvation.  (3)  The  spirit  of  adoption  is  a  testimony  of  Christ.  When  we 
cry,  "  Abba,  Father,"  it  is  by  the  spirit  of  God's  Son.  (4)  The  spirit  of  adoption 
is  also  the  spirit  of  holiness,  and  growth  in  holiness  is  inseparably  connected  with 
the  knowledge  of  Christ  (2  Pet.  iii.  18 ;  Heb.  vi.  1).  (G.  Osborn,  D.D.)  The 
Spirit  testifying  of  Christ : — I.  Coksider  statements  in  obnebaii  terms  of  the 
WORK  OF  THE  HoLT  SpiRiT.  1.  "  He  shall  testify  " — bear  witness.  Now,  when  we 
have  a  witness  it  is  most  important  that  we  should  understand  whether  or  not  he  ia 
competent  to  bear  witness  about  the  matter  in  question.  This  witness  ia  •*  the 
Spirit  who  searcheth  all  things,  yea,  the  deep  things  of  God."  He  ia  a  Divine  and 
therefore  a  competent  witness  with  regard  to  Christ  Jesus.  2.  Again,  in  a  court  of 
justice  it  is  important  to  know  whether  a  witness  is  reliable.  This  witness  is  none 
other  than  "  tbe  Spirit  of  Truth "  Himself.  3.  He  is  one  who  puts  honour  on 
Christ.  In  chap.  xvi.  14  we  read,  "  He  shall  glorify  Me."  As  we  preach,  the  Holy 
Ghost  bears  witness  to  Him — carries  home  the  truth  in  power  to  the  hearts  of  those 
to  whom  it  is  addressed,  and  by  His  sweet  constraint  leads  them  to  yield  to  the 
Saviour  and  to  put  their  trust  in  Him.  4.  In  chap.  xvi.  8,  Ac,  we  read — (1)  "He 
will  convict  of  sin  because  they  believe  not  on  Me ;  "  of  all  sins  the  most  heinous 
is  the  rejection  of  Christ  Jesus.  (2)  "  Of  righteousness,"  &c.,  i.e.,  of  righteousness  in 
Christ  Jesus.  (3)  "  Of  judgment,  because  the  prince  of  this  world  ia  judged." 
This  is  of  triumph  over  Satan's  power.  II.  Statements  op  His  work  in  pakticulab 
CASES.  1.  A  striking  example  of  that  is  afforded  in  1  Cor.  vi.  9,  10.  What  a 
catalogue!  "Such  were  some  of  you,"  says  the  apostle,  "but  ye  are  washed, 
ye  are  sanctified,"  &o.     What  a  wondrous  change  1    How  had  the  change  oome 


CEAP.  XT.]  BT.  JOHN,  681 

aboQt?  By  the  Spirit  of  God.  He  bad  spoken  to  them ;  He  had  dealt  with  them ; 
He  had  drawn  them;  He  had  united  them  to  Christ  Jesas,  so  that  they  were 
sanctified  and  justified  in  Him.  A  strolling  conjuror  was  one  night  in  a  tramps' 
lodging-house  in  Sheffield,  and  different  members  of  the  fraternity  were  sitting  over 
the  fire,  and  they  were  overhauling  the  contents  of  their  bags,  and  he  told  me  that 
he  saw  one  bring  out  a  New  Testament  that  he  had  bought  for  his  little  girl.  The 
conjuror  was  greatly  struck,  and  bought  it,  and  that  night,  before  he  lay  down  upon 
his  bed  in  that  tramps'  lodging-house,  by  tbe  dim  light  of  the  candle,  he  opened 
his  new  purchase  to  see  what  it  contained,  and  his  eye  fell  upon  these  words, 
♦'  Know  ye  not  that  the  unrighteous  shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God?  "  He 
was  like  a  man  who  had  been  shot.  He  tossed  backwards  and  forwards  upon  his 
bed  that  night ;  there  was  no  rest,  no  sleep  for  him.  The  Holy  Ghost  had  carried 
the  word  home  to  his  heart.  He  gave  up  his  conjuring,  and  followed  some  honest 
trade,  and  for  months  he  went  up  and  down  England  with  the  arrow  of  conviction 
sticking  fast  in  his  heart ;  and  then,  through  the  kindly  counsels  of  a  town 
missionary,  he  was  brought  to  put  his  trust  in  the  Lord  Jesus  as  his  Saviour 
When  last  I  saw  him  he  was  earning  an  honest  living,  making  and  selling  braces, 
and  as  he  offered  them  for  sale  he  would  speak  some  homely  earnest  words  about 
the  Saviour.  2.  If  you  will  turn  to  the  Epistle  to  Titus  iii.  3,  you  will  find  another 
list  of  sins.  Now,  when  we  read  the  list  in  the  Corinthians,  we  cannot  help  thinking 
what  loathsome,  horrible  people  they  were.  When  we  read  the  list  in  Titus,  we 
cannot  help  thinking  what  exceedingly  disagreeable  people  they  must  have  been  to 
live  with.  But  the  Apostle  says,  "  But  after  that  the  kindness  and  love  of  God  our 
Saviour,"  &c.  Those  persons  had  become  the  heirs  of  God  in  the  hope  of  eternal 
life.  And  how  ?  By  the  work  of  God,  because  the  Holy  Spirit  had  spoken  to  them 
and  had  dealt  with  them,  had  wrought  in  their  hearts,  had  drawn  them  to  the  Lord 
Jesus,  and  united  them  in  faith  to  Him.  HI.  Tbebb  abe  soub  meoatite  state- 
ments OP  great  importance,  as  throwino  light  upon  this  subject.  1.  Turn  to 
Eomans  viii.  9.  "  If  any  man,"  whosoever  he  may  be,  however  beautiful  may 
be  his  character,  and  however  excellent  may  be  his  natural  disposition,  "  have 
not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  His."  2.  Another  statement  occurs  in  1 
Corinthians  xii.  3.  These  words  imply  that  we  not  only  recognize  in  Christ  a 
Saviour,  but  a  Lord  to  whom  we  yield,  and  to  whose  service  we  consecrate  all  that  we 
are  and  all  that  we  have.  No  man  can  do  that  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  8.  Another 
negative  statement  is  found  in  Jude  19,  where  we  read,  '•  These  be  they  who 
separate  themselves,  sensual — not  having  the  Spirit" — those  who  are  beyond  the 
pale  ;  those  who  are  not  to  be  numbered  amongst  the  children  of  God.  They  are 
in  their  natural  or  unrenewed  state  because  they  have  not  the  Spirit.    IV.  One  ob 

TWO  VERY  PERSONAL  OB   STBIEINO   WORDS   IM    ScRIPXCRE  ON    THIS    SAME    SUBJECT.      1. 

•'  My  Spirit  shall  not  always  strive  with  men."  3.  Turn  to  Hebrews  iii.  15,  iv.  7. 
Why  has  God  seen  fit  to  repeat  that  sentence  three  times  over  ?  Do  yon  know  that 
when  a  division  on  a  most  important  subject  is  about  to  take  place  in  the  House  of 
Commons  the  whips  on  the  respective  sides  of  the  House  send  out  a  letter  urging 
members  individually  not  to  fail  to  be  present?  And  they  put  what  is  called 
"  underlining,"  and  when  you  have  a  "  three-line  whip "  or  •  "  four-line 
whip "  it  means  that  the  matter  is  most  urgent,  and  that  the  member 
must  by  aU  means  give  heed  to  it.  Now,  when  God  caused  this  word  to  be 
written  three  times  over,  it  is  aa  if  He  had  sent  oat  a  three-line  whip  to  the 
children  of  men.  It  is  the  message  of  one  who  lovea  the  souls  of  men 
as  tenderly  as  does    the   Father  or  as  does   the  Son.  {W.  P.  Lockhart.) 

The  Spirit  the  witness  to  truth : — 1.  Pilate  put  the  question  to  our  Lord,  What  is 
truth  ?  The  answer  was  given  in  a  manner  more  direct  and  forcible  than  words 
ean  express :  in  person  and  in  deed.  Jesus  was  Himself  the  Truth.  But  Pilate 
had  neither  an  eye  to  see  the  Truth,  nor  an  ear  to  hear  it.  2.  Many  men,  worthy 
and  noble,  before  and  since  have  put  the  question,  presuming  that  truth  belongs  to 
the  region  of  thought  and  human  speech.  But  truth  does  not  lie  in  the  sphere  of 
thought  and  speculation.  Befiectious  and  images  of  the  truth  are  indeed  to  be 
found  there ;  but  truth  is  deeper  and  more  original  than  human  intelligence.  Oor 
Lord  says  of  Himself, "  I  am  the  Truth  " — absolute  Truth.  All  other  truth  is  snoh 
only  relatively  to  Himself.  He  is  the  Truth  of  all  other  truths.  But  to  know  the 
truth  and  to  receive  its  light  and  power,  a  man  must  be  in  positive  sympathy  with 
it.  "  Every  one  that  is  of  the  truth  beareth  My  voice."  8.  Jesus  Christ  witnesses 
of  Himself  as  the  Absolute  Truth  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  is  the  Spirit  of  Truth. 
Other  witnesses,  indeed,  there  are  and  will  always  be.    But  such  only  are  witnesses 


68S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOB,.  [cbap.  xh 

who  are  the  organs  of  the  Spirit.  Let  as  consider  the  Christian  doctrine— that 
the  Holy  Ghost,  as  the  Spirit  of  Truth,  is  the  all-sufficient  witness  to  Jesus  Christ, 
I.  That  the  Spirit  is  the  Spirit  of  Truth  is  specially  manifested  by  the  fact 

THAT   THROUGH    HiS   AGENCY   THE    TRUTH    OF    THE     GoDHEAD     HAS    BECOME    INCARNATB 

IN  MAN.  1.  The  Creator  and  the  creature,  the  Absolute  Truth  in  God  and  the 
relative  truth  in  man  are  constituted  one  life  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ.  The 
Word  was  made  flesh  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  •'  The  Holy  Ghost  shall  come  upon 
thee,  Ac.  The  Divine  was  made  human  according  to  the  law  of  human  life;  for 
Jesus  was  bom.  And  the  human  was  assumed  into  the  Divine  after  the  Divine 
manner,  for  Jesus  was  conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  eternal  and  absolute 
Truth  was  revealed  and  made  manifest  in  the  person  and  life  of  a  veritable  man, 
who  is  for  us  and  for  all  men  the  living  and  ultimate  Truth,  in  whom  and  by 
whom  alone  the  truth  of  all  truths  is  accessible  to  faith,  and  through  faitb 
accessible  to  intelligence.  2.  If  we  inquire  further,  How  was  it  that  He  became 
the  Truth  in  life  and  in  death  ?  The  answer  is  as  by  the  Spirit  Jesus  was  born  the 
Holy  Babe,  so  by  the  Spirit  did  He  manifest  God  by  a  perfectly  holy  manhood, 
and  oiTer  a  spotless  sacrifice  for  sin  upon  the  cross,  and  vanquish  all  the  powers  of 
darkness  in  His  resurrection  from  the  dead.    H.  This  Spirit  of  Truth,  whereby 

JeBUS   accomplished   the    work    of   REDEMPTION,    18   BY    HiM    SENT    FROM    HEAVEN    TO 

eabth  as  His  representative  and  witness,  that  He  may  live  in  those  who 
BECEiVE  Him,  and  guidb  them  into  all  truth.  The  Spirit  makes  those  true 
who  are  by  nature  perverse.  1.  The  truth  is  heavenly  and  spiritual,  not  earihly 
and  material.  No  earthly  thing  can  witness  of  the  e^^sence  of  the  heavenly.  No 
material  thing  can  exhibit  the  life  of  the  spirtual.  Human  genius  cannot  look  into 
the  depths  of  the  Divine  and  announce  its  unfathomable  fulness.  If,  as  He  claims, 
Jesus  be  the  Truth,  and  if  the  Truth  be  spiritual  and  heavenly,  transcendent  and 
Divine,  then  in  this  fallen,  dark,  wicked  world,  where  the  lie  is  enthroned  and  men 
walk  in  a  vain  show,  there  can  be  no  agencies,  no  resources,  whereby  the  depraved 
heart  and  tlie  darkened  understanding  and  the  perverted  will  may  come  to  a  know- 
ledge of  the  Truth.  •'  Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,"  Ac.  The  wisdom  of 
this  world  is  utterly  inadequate  to  the  task  of  discovering  the  truth  of  God.  But 
God  has  revealed  to  us  His  wisdom  by  the  Spirit.  2.  It  must  needs  be,  then,  that 
the  truth  being  spiritual  and  heavenly,  the  agency,  by  whom  we  may  know  the 
truth,  must  likewise  be  spiritual  and  heavenly.  To  this  end,  the  presence  and  the 
power  of  the  Spirit  is  effectual.  In  those  who  receive  Him,  the  Spirit  dissipates 
the  clouds  of  natural  darkness,  removes  the  aversion  of  the  carnal  mind,  and  sheds 
the  light  of  heavenly  truth  into  the  soul  with  convincing  power.  As  on  the  day  of 
Pentecost  the  Spirit  touched  the  consciences  of  the  multitudes ;  as  the  revelation 
of  Christ  smote  Saul  of  Tarsus  to  the  ground,  as  the  Spirit  opened  the  heart  of 
Lydia,  so  has  the  same  Spirit  all  along  the  ages  been  a  power  working  mysteriously 
in  those  to  whom  the  Word  was  preached,  convincing  them  of  sin,  of  righteousness, 
and  of  judgment.  The  Spirit  alone  can  shed  the  light  of  truth  into  the  souls  of 
men  now.  III.  The  Spirit  awakens  in  men  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  by  making 
THEH  POSSESSORS  OF  THE  TRUTH.  1.  No  right  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ  is  external 
or  merely  intellectual.  To  appreciate  Christ  men  must  be  members  of  Christ. 
The  Spirit,  accordingly,  is  the  Divine  agency  whereby  Christ  apprehends  men  and 
men  appropriate  Christ.  In  the  Spirit  the  separation  is  resolved  into  unity,  the 
contradiction  into  the  fellowship  of  faith.  The  dominion  of  error  and  falsehood  is 
broken — broken  because  He  who  is  the  Truth  lives  in  the  believer,  and  the  believer 
thus  also  becomes  true.  2.  To  this  end  the  power  of  the  Spirit  is  effectual,  inde- 
pendently  of  time  or  place,  independently  of  rank  or  station.  3.  For  this  work  of 
the  Spirit  there  can  be  no  substitute.  No  discoveries  in  the  natural  world,  no 
progress  in  science,  no  achievement  of  human  genius  can  put  man  in  possession  of 
the  truth,  and  thus  make  man  personally  true.  In  spite  of  all  these  empty  glories 
he  will  remain  the  victim  of  a  lie,  and  all  his  proud  knowledge  will  confirm  his 
delusion  and  deepen  his  spiritual  darkness.     IV.  Making  men  possessors  of  the 

TBUTH,  THE   SPIBIT  IS  ALSO  THE   POWER  BY   WHICH   BELIEVERS   FULFIL  THE   TRUTH   BT 

A  BiOBTKOUS  AND  ooDLY  WALK.  1.  When  the  truth  lives  in  the  soul,  it  becomes 
the  principle  of  action.  The  truth  fills  our  ethical  nature  and  gives  it  freedom. 
The  truth  sets  the  will  free  from  the  bondage  of  self-love  and  the  world-spirit.  It 
becomes  active  in  the  truth  and  for  the  truth.  Thus  consciously  active  our  ethical 
life  acquires  strength,  that  strength  which  is  of  the  truth  itself,  a  strength  as 
mighty  as  the  truth  is  mighty.  2.  No  such  strength  can  come  from  the  resoluteness 
and  firmness  of  the  natural  will;  not  from  any  kind  of  self -imposed  moral  discipline. 


MAP.  XT.]  IT.  JOHN.  68S 

The  self-denial  and  self-sacrifioe  of  which  the  natural  man  is  capable  is  but  the 
renunciation  of  one  falsehood  to  lay  hold  of  another.  The  noble  heroism  and  the 
stern  morality  of  which,  without  possessing  the  truth  that  is  in  Christ,  some  men 
are  capable,  falls  short  just  as  certainly  of  freedom.  3.  Not  that  the  spiritual  man 
is  without  spot  or  blemish.  Nevertheless  the  man  who  by  the  Spirit  possesses  the 
truth  and  hves  by  faith  under  its  power,  asserts  and  develops  a  new  morality. 
Thus  in  him  the  Spirit  bears  witness  of  Christ  as  the  Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life, 
and  the  believer  in  turn  is  a  Uving  perpetual  witness  to  the  truth  of  God  in  Christ. 
V.  Reckiving  thk  Holt  Spibit  as  the  Spibit  of  truth.  He  becomes  fob  the 
Chdbch  and  fob  the  iNDiviDtJAL  Cheistian  THE  WITNESS  TO  Cheist.  1.  He  is  the 
immediate  witness.  The  Spirit  is  the  living  bond  by  which  Jesus  Christ  and  fallen 
men  become  one  life.  Possessing  the  believer,  Christ  authenticates  Himself  to  his 
heart  and  mind,  in  his  will  and  consciousness.  In  that  He  shows  onto  us  the 
things  of  Christ,  the  Spirit  witnesses  directly  of  Christ  to  us  that  He  (Jesus  Christ)  is 
the  Truth.  Such  witness  is  like  the  witness  of  self -consciousness.  No  truth  can  be 
more  certainly  known  than  this :  that  I  am,  that  I  think  and  will.  Even  so,  in 
the  heart  and  consciousness  of  a  true  believer,  does  the  Holy  Ghost  testify  that 
Jesus  is  the  Truth  of  all  truths.  2.  The  Spirit  is  the  all-sufficisnt  witness.  What- 
ever question  the  natural  reason  may  raise,  or  philosophy  suggest ;  whatever  new 
problem  may  arise  in  the  history  of  the  world  ;  whatever  doubts  may  be  prompted 
by  revolutions  in  science  or  convulsions  in  social  life;  whatever  strength  the  human 
intellect  may  acquire  by  culture  and  disciphne;  however  imposing  and  fearful  may 
be  the  hostile  array  of  the  enemies  of  the  Cross  ;  however  proud  and  triumphant 
the  boasts  and  predictions  of  unbelief  and  naturalism,  the  status  of  the  Christian 
Church  remains  unchanged.  The  witness  is  at  hand,  adequate  to  every  objection 
that  scepticism,  materialism,  and  wickedness  may  seek  to  establish  ;  a  witness  just 
as  satisfying  to  every  man  who  is  not  of  the  lie  but  of  the  truth  as  an  axiom  of 
quantitative  truth  is  satisfying  to  the  intellect  of  a  mathematician.  Here  is  the 
refuge  and  the  strength  of  the  Church  and  of  the  ministry  and  of  the  people  of 
God  in  every  land  and  in  every  age.  No  other  witness  is  valid,  or  can  satisfy  the 
spiritual  demands  of  the  soul.  (E.  V.  Gerluirt,  D.D.)  The  great  world-restoring 
Spirit : — I.  His  advent  foretold.  "  When  the  Comforter  is  come."  1.  The  pre- 
diction was  given  to  comfort  them  in  the  prospect  of  the  persecution  to  which 
Christ  had  just  directed  their  attention.  They  are  given  to  understand  that  how- 
ever great  their  approaching  trials  may  be,  and  though  He  Himself  was  about 
departing  from  them,  One  would  soon  come  to  them  from  His  Father  who  would  be 
ail  BufiQcient  for  their  help.  2.  The  prediction  was  strikingly  fulfilled  on  the  day  of 
Pentecost,  in  connection  with  the  preaching  of  Peter  (Acts  ii.  1-3).  II.  His  characteb 
FOBTEATED.  "  The  Spirit  of  truth."  There  is  a  spirit  of  lyiug  abroad  in  the  world, 
sowing  the  seeds  of  error  in  human  souls,  and  cultivating  them  into  briars  and 
thorns,  into  poisonous  weeds  and  upas  trees.  But  here  is  the  Spirit  of  Truth  who 
is  also  abroad  and  at  work.  1.  He  is  infallible  Truth.  Truth  without  any  admixture 
of  error  or  impunity.  His  ideas  and  His  affections,  so  to  say,  are  in  perfect  accoi  d 
with  eternal  fact.  2.  He  is  Bedemptive  Truth.  His  truth  is  to  open  the  eyes  of 
ignorance,  to  break  the  chains  of  bondage,  to  cleanse  the  heart  from  impurities,  to 
deliver  the  conscience  from  guilt  I  In  one  word,  to  restore  the  soul  to  the  know- 
ledge, the  image,  the  friendship,  and  the  enjoyment  of  the  great  God.  III.  His 
WORK  indicated.  1,  His  work  is  that  of  an  advocate.  He  goes  into  the  court  of 
human  conscience  and  there  He  pleads  for  spirituality,  benevolence,  righteousness, 
God,  against  worldliness,  selfishness,  wrong,  the  devil.  Sometimes  He  pleads  in 
whispers,  sometimes  in  thunder.  Always  is  He  earnest  and  persevering.  He 
inspires  His  ministers  to  say,  **  We  beseech  you  in  Christ's  stead  be  ye  reconciled 
onto  God."  2.  His  work  is  that  of  a  witness.  A  witness  for  Christ,  for  the  per- 
fection of  His  character,  the  purity  of  His  doctrines,  and  the  beneficence  of  His 
infiuence.  He  does  this  through  the  teaching,  the  miraculous  works,  the  moral 
triumphs,  and  the  noble  lives  of  those  whom  He  inspired  as  the  apostles  of  Christ. 
Conclusion :  Let  the  assurance  that  this  restoring  Spirit  is  in  the  world  encourage 
OS  in  our  efforts  to  spread  truth,  and  in  our  trials  to  be  magnanimous  and  patient.  (D. 
Thomag,  D.D.)  The  defence  against  a  hostile  world: — Our  Lord  has  been  speaking 
of  •  world  hostile  to  His  followers  and  to  Him.  He  proceeds,  in  the  words  which 
follow,  to  paint  that  hostility  as  aggravated  even  to  the  pitch  of  religious  murder. 
But  here  He  lets  a  beam  of  light  in  upon  the  darkness.  He  lets  them  see  that  they 
will  not  be  left  alone,  but  have  a  great  champion,  who  will  put  into  their  hands  a 
weapon,  with  which  they  may  conquer  the  world,  and  turn  it  into  a  friend,  mhI 


684  TBE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  (cha».  xr, 

with  which  alone  they  must  meet  the  world's  hate.  Consider — I.  The  obeat 
PROMISE  or  AN  ALLY  AS  AOAiNST  A  HOSTILE  WORLD.  1.  The  wonderful  designation 
of  this  Champion-Friend.  (1)  The  *'  Comforter  "  is  no  mere  gentle  consoler.  The 
word  which  means  one  who  is  summoned  to  the  side  of  another,  conveys  the  idea 
of  a  helper.  The  verses  before  our  text  suggest  what  sort  of  aid  and  succour  the 
disciples  will  need.  And  that  Paraclete  is  a  strong  Spirit  who  will  be  our  champion 
and  our  ally,  whatever  antagonism  may  storm  against  us,  and  however  strong  and 
well-armed  may  be  the  assaulting  legions  of  the  world's  hate.  (2)  ••  The  Spirit  of 
Truth,"  which  means  not  so  much  His  characteristic  attribute  as  rather  the  weapon 
which  He  wields,  or  the  material  with  which  He  works.  That  is  to  say,  the  Spirit 
of  God  is  the  Strengthener,  the  Encourager,  the  Comforter,  the  Fighter  for  us  and 
with  us,  because  He  wields  that  great  body  of  truth,  the  perfect  revelation  of  God, 
and  man,  and  duty,  and  salvation,  which  is  embodied  in  the  Incarnation  and  work 
of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  The  truth  is  His  weapon,  and  it  is  by  that  that  He 
makes  as  strong.  2.  The  twofold  description  of  the  mission  of  this  Divine 
Champion.  (1)  "  Sent"  by  Christ.  In  a  previous  part  of  this  discourse,  our  Lord 
speaks  of  Him  as  being  sent  by  the  Father  in  His  name  and  in  answer  to  His 
prayer.  The  representation  here  is  by  no  means  antagonistic  to  this,  for  '•  whatso- 
ever the  Son  seeth  the  Father  do  that  also  the  Son  doeth  likewise."  And  therefore 
the  Spirit  is  sent  forth  by  the  Father,  and  also  the  Son  sends  the  Spirit.  (2)  But, 
on  the  other  hand,  we  are  not  to  regard  that  Divine  Spirit  as  merely  a  messenger 
sent  by  another.  He  "  proceeds  from  the  Father."  That  word  has  been  the 
battlefield  of  theological  controversy,  but  what  is  meant  is  the  simple  historical 
coming  forth  into  human  life  of  that  Divine  Spirit.  And,  possibly,  the  word  is 
chosen  to  give  the  idea  of  a  voluntary  and  personal  action  of  the  Messenger,  who 
not  only  is  sent  by  the  Father,  but  of  Himself  proceeds  on  the  mighty  work  to 
which  He  is  destined.  Mark  that  wonderful  phrase,  twice  repeated  and  emphasized 
by  repetition  "  from  the  Father. "  The  word  translated  "  from  "  designates  a  position 
at  the  side  of,  and  suggests  much  rather  the  intimate  and  ineffable  union  between, 
Father,  Son,  and  Spirit  than  the  source  from  which  the  Spirit  comes.  3.  Is  not 
all  this  enough  to  make  the  weakest  strong,  and  to  make  us  "  more  than  conquerors 
through  Him  that  loved  us  "  ?  All  nations  have  legends  of  the  gods  fighting  at  the 
head  of  their  armies,  and  through  the  dust  of  battle  the  white  horses  and  the 
shining  armour  of  the  celestial  champions  have  been  seen.  The  childish  dream  is  a 
historical  reality.  It  is  not  we  that  fight,  it  is  the  Spirit  of  God  that  fighteth  in 
us.  II.  The  witness  of  the  Spirit  which  foktifies  against  the  world.  ••He 
shall  bear  witness  of  Me."  That  phrase,  ••  unto  you,"  tells  us  that  the  witness  is 
something  which  is  done  within  the  circle  of  the  Christian  believers,  and  not  in  the 
wide  field  of  the  world's  history  or  in  nature.  Of  course  it  is  a  great  truth  that 
long  before  Jesus  Christ,  and  to-day  far  beyond  the  limits  of  His  name  the  Spirit 
of  God  is  working.  As  of  old,  He  brooded  over  the  chaotic  darkness,  ever  labouring 
to  turn  chaos  into  order,  and  darkness  into  light ;  so  to-day,  all  over  the  field  of 
humanity,  He  is  operating.  But  what  is  spoken  of  here  is  something  that  is  done 
in  and  on  Christian  men,  and  not  even  through  them  on  the  world,  but  in  them  for 
themselves.  •*  He  shall  testify  of  Me  "  to  you.  1.  The  first  application  of  these 
words  is  to  the  little  group  listening  to  Him.  Never  were  men  more  desolate  and 
beaten  down  than  these  were,  in  the  prospect  of  Christ's  departure.  Never  were 
men  more  utterly  bewildered  and  dispirited  than  these  were,  in  the  days  between 
His  crucifixion  and  His  resurrection.  Think  of  them  during  His  earthly  life,  their 
narrow  understandings,  their  manifold  faults,  moral  as  well  as  intellectual.  What 
was  it  that  made  these  dwarfs  into  giants  in  six  weeks ;  that  made  them  start  np 
all  at  once  as  heroes  and  that  so  swiftly  matuied  them,  as  the  fruits  and  flowers  are 
ripened  nnder  tropical  sunshine  ?  The  witness  of  the  Spirit  of  God  working  within 
them,  working  upon  what  they  knew  of  the  historical  facts  of  Christ's  life,  and 
interpreting  them,  was  the  explanation  of  their  change  and  growth.  And  the  New 
Testament  is  product  of  that.  Christ's  life  was  the  truth  which  the  Spirit  used, 
and  the  product  of  His  teaching  was  these  epistles  which  we  have,  and  which  for 
us  step  into  the  place  which  the  historical  facts  held  for  them ;  and  become  the 
instrument  with  which  the  Spirit  of  God  will  deepen  our  understanding  of  Christ 
and  enlarge  our  knowledge  of  what  He  is  to  us.  2.  The  promise  still  applies  to 
each  of  ns  in  a  secondary  and  modified  sense.  For  there  is  nothing  in  these  great 
valedictory  words  which  is  not  the  revelation  of  a  permanent  truth  in  regard  to  the 
Christian  Church.  And,  therefore,  we  have  the  promise  of  a  universal  gift  to  all 
Ohriitian  men  and  women,  an  actual  Divine  Spirit  to  dwell  with  each  of  us,  to 


OBAT.  XTj  ST.  JOHN.  «^ 

speak  in  onr  hearts.  And  what  will  He  do  there?  He  will  tet.eu  ns  \f  deeper 
Imowledge  of  Jesus  Christ.  He  will  help  us  to  understand  better  'xhat  He  in.  He 
will  show  OB  more  and  more  of  the  whole  sweep  of  His  work,  of  (he  whole  infinite 
truth  for  morals  and  religion,  for  politics  and  society,  for  timj  and  for  eternity, 
about  men  and  about  God,  which  is  wrapped  up  in  that  great  saying  which  we  first 
of  all,  perhaps  under  the  pressure  of  our  own  sense  of  sin,  grasp  as  our  deliverance 
from  sin — "  God  so  loved  the  world,"  &o.  And  as  the  dayu  roll  on,  and  new 
problems  rise,  and  new  difficulties  present  themselves,  and  new  circumstances 
emerge  in  onr  personal  life,  we  find  the  truth  that  we  first  of  all  dimly  grasped  as 
life  and  salvation,  opening  out  into  wisdom  and  d  pth  and  meaning  that  we  never 
dreamed  of  in  the  early  hours.  8.  Then,  note  that  this  ruT/ard  witness  of  Christ's 
depth  and  preciousness  is  the  true  weapon  and  stay  against  a  hostile  world.  (1)  A 
little  candle  in  a  room  will  make  the  lightning  outside  tlmost  invisible ;  and  if  I 
have  burning  in  my  heart  the  inward  experience  and  conviction  of  what  Jesus 
Christ  is,  and  what  He  has  done  and  will  do  for  me — oh,  then  all  the  storm  without 
may  rage  and  it  will  not  trouble.  (2)  If  you  take  a'4.  empty  vessel  and  bring 
pressure  to  bear  upon  it,  in  go  the  sides.  Fill  it,  and  they  will  resist  the  pressure. 
So  with  growing  knowledge  of  Christ  and  growing  personal  experience  of  His 
sweetness  in  our  souls,  we  shall  be  able  to  throw  off,  untouched  and  undinted,  the 
pressure  which  would  otherwise  have  crushed  us.  4.  And  so  here  is  the  true  secret 
of  tranquillity,  in  an  age  of  questioning  and  doubt.  Let  me  have  that  Divine  voice 
speaking  in  my  heart,  and  no  matter  what  question  >  may  be  doubtful,  this  is  sura 
— "  We  know  whom  we  have  believed  " ;  and  we  ctn  say,  "  Settle  all  your  oontro- 
Tersies  any  way  yon  like,  one  thing  I  know — "  th  d  Son  of  God  is  come  and  hath 
given  ns  understanding  that  we  may  know  Him  that  is  true ;  and  we  are  in  Him 
tiiat  is  true."  Labour  for  more  of  this  inward,  personal  conviction  of  the  precious^ 
ness  of  Jesus  Christ  to  strengthen  you  against  a  hostile  world.  6.  And  remember 
that  there  are  conditions  under  which  this  Yoi'ce  speaks  in  our  souls — (1)  One  is 
that  we  attend  to  the  instrument  which  the  Spirit  of  God  uses,  and  that  is  "  the 
truth."  If  Christians  will  not  read  their  Bibks,  they  need  not  expect  to  have  the 
words  of  these  Bibles  interpreted  and  made  real  to  them  by  any  inward  experience. 
(2)  And  there  mnst  be  moral  discipline  too.  laziness,  worldliness,  the  absorption 
of  attention  with  other  things,  self-conceit,  prejudice,  and  the  taking  of  our  religion 
at  second-hand,  stand  in  the  way  of  our  hearing  the  Spirit  of  God  when  He  speaks. 
Come  away  from  the  babble  and  go  by  yourself,  and  take  your  Bibles  with  you  and 
read  them  and  meditate  upon  them  and  get  near  the  Master  of  whom  they  speak, 
and  the  Spirit  which  uses  the  truth  will  use  it  to  fortify  yoo.    HI.  The  consequent 

WITNESS  WITH   WHICH   THE    CHRISTIAN   MAY   WIN    THE    WOBLD.        "And    je    alSO    shall 

bear  witness  of  Me,"  &o.  That  also  has,  of  course,  direct  reference  to  the  apostles, 
and  therefore  their  qualification  was  simply  the  companionship  with  Him  which 
enabled  them  to  say, "  We  saw  what  we  ttU  yon ;  we  were  witnesses  from  the 
beginning."  But  tiien,  again,  it  belongs  to  ns  all,  and  so  here  is  the  task  of  the 
Christian  Church  in  all  its  members.  They  receive  the  witness  of  the  Spirit,  and 
tiiey  are  Christ's  witnesses  in  the  world.  Koie — 1.  What  we  have  to  do — to  bear 
witness :  not  to  argue,  to  adorn,  but  simply  to  attest.  2.  What  we  have  to  attest 
— the  fact,  not  of  the  historical  life  of  Jesus  Christ,  because  we  are  not  in  a  position 
to  be  witnesses  of  that,  but  the  fact  of  His  preciousness  and  power,  and  the  fact  of 
onr  own  experience  of  what  He  has  done  for  as.  8.  That  is  by  far  the  most 
powerful  agency  for  winning  the  world.  Ton  can  never  make  men  angry  by  saying 
to  them,  "  We  have  found  the  Messias."  You  cannot  irritate  people,  or  provoke 
them  into  a  controversial  opposition  when  you  say,  "  Brother  I  let  me  tell  you  my 
experience.  I  was  dark,  sad,  sinfol,  weak,  soUtary,  miserable ;  and  I  got  light, 
gladness,  pardon,  strength,  companionship,  and  a  joyful  hope."  We  can  all  say 
that.  This  is  the  witness  that  needs  no  eloquence,  no  genius,  no  anything  except 
honesty  and  experience ;  and  whosoever  has  tasted  and  felt  and  handled  of  the 
Word  of  Life  may  surely  go  to  a  brother  and  say,  "  Brother !  I  have  eaten  and  am 
satisfied.  Will  jou  not  help  yourself  ?  "  We  can  all  do  it,  and  we  ought  to  do 
it.  Conclusion :  The  Christian  privilege  of  being  witnessed  to  by  the  Spirit  of 
Qod  in  onr  hearts  brings  with  it  the  Christian  duty  of  being  witnesses  in  our  turn 
to  the  world.  Oh  1  listen  to  the  Master,  who  says,  "  Him  that  oonfesseth  Me 
before  men,  will  I  also  confess  before  My  Father  in  heaven."    {A.  Maclaren,  DJ).) 

Yer.  27.  And  ye  also  shall  bear  witness. — True  Christian  testimony  (text  in  oon> 
Jnnotion  with  chap,  itvL  1-4) : — In  this  we  see— L  Tan  Srnux  or  Oodlt  hciouxz. 


6M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.z?. 

It  eomes  only  from  the  Lord,  and  serves  the  Lord  only  (yer.  26).  Do  not  tmst 
your  own  talents  and  power,  but  implore  heaven's  blessing.  Otherwise  you  will  be 
in  the  case  of  Gehazi  with  the  prophet's  stick.  The  witnessing  must  be  concerning 
Him,  not  concerning  us,  our  zeal,  wisdom,  or  success.  II.  SiNcsas  tbcth.  It 
comes  from  the  heart  and  goes  to  the  heart  (ver.  27).  III.  Fearless  couiuob 
(chap.  zvi.  2).  Stephen  and  the  martyrs  of  every  age  had  this.  If  an  unfriendly 
world  has  persecuted  the  Master,  His  followers  must  not  expect  to  escape,  although 
it  may  only  take  the  form  of  a  smile  or  a  sneer.  IV.  Holt  lovb — a  love  for  men 
that  says,  "  They  do  not  know  the  Lord  "  (ver.  8).  He  prayed  for  His  enemies 
because  they  knew  not  what  they  did.  It  is  not  all  malignity  which  meets  ns  in 
the  shape  of  evil  at  the  hands  of  our  fellow-creatures — much  of  it  is  folly,  blind- 
ness, and  infirmity.  (C.  Gerok,  D.D.)  Witness-bearing  for  Christ : — I.  Its 
XATCBE.  To  witness  is  to  give  testimony  :  and  testimony  is  ft  statement  of  facta 
within  the  knowledge  of  the  witness.  1.  The  facts.  Christ  risen;  alive;  living 
in  the  witness ;  saving  the  witness  now.  The  facts  relate  to  a  present  experience, 
and  not  to  what  may  have  been  realized  years  ago.  2.  A  knowledge  of  the  facts. 
No  court  will  admit  a  desire,  hope,  belief,  as  evidence.  So  the  Christian  witness 
must  know  that  Christ  is  able  to  save.  3.  A  statement  of  the  facts  known.  A 
holy  life  is  necessary  not  only  to  salvation,  but  to  give  credibility  to  testimony;  but 
it  cannot  of  itself  bear  testimony.  We  must  declare  Christ  as  the  source  of  our 
excellencies  and  joys,  and  confirm  our  statement  by  a  consistent  life.  U.  Its 
OBLiQATioMS.  The  text  is  imperative.  It  is  not  a  matter  of  option  whether  we 
bear  witness  or  not.  1.  It  is  demanded  by  the  constitution  of  things.  Science, 
art,  and  enterprize,  &c.,  are  largely  dependent  on  testimony  for  success.  And  so 
the  gospel  is  spread  by  the  testimony  of  those  who  enjoy  it  as  a  living  power  in 
the  soul.  2.  It  is  one  of  the  ordained  weapons  for  the  conquest  of  the  world.  Oar 
Lord  did  not  burden  His  soldiers.  One  coat,  a  pair  of  shoes,  and  two  weapons — 
the  Word  and  the  testimony — made  up  their  outfit.  They  preached  Christ  from 
the  prophecies  and  then  charged  upon  the  enemy  by  their  testimony.  "They 
testified  and  preached."  Paul  was  made  "  a  minister  and  a  witness."  The  secret 
of  many  failures  is  a  want  of  true  and  deep  experience  which  enables  the  preacher 
to  join  clear  and  definite  testimony  to  the  Word.  8.  Its  power  to  stir  and  overcome 
the  wicked  one.  Witness  the  success  of  evangelists  of  very  limited  ability.  (5. 
Baker.)  The  witness  of  the  Church  to  Christ: — It  is  in  truth  one  of  the  most 
serious  things  in  life  to  be  called  upon  solemnly  to  bear  witness  before  our  fellow- 
men  and  with  the  invocation  of  the  presence  and  help  of  Ood,  even  to  one's  own 
observation,  experience,  oonviction.  To  speak  out  simply  and  fully,  without  regard 
to  consequences,  the  whole  truth  and  nothing  but  the  truth  of  those  matters  on 
which  our  testimony  may  be  required,  involves  a  simplicity  of  mind,  a  straight- 
forwardness, and  a  courage  which  are  probably  less  common  than  we  are  apt  to 
suppose.  How  much  more  awful  the  duty  of  bearing  witness  for  God,  of  repre- 
senting to  the  world  His  thoughts.  His  words.  His  life  I  And  yet  this  is  the  duty 
of  all  who  know  Him.  It  was  the  work  to  which  He  called  that  ancient  people 
whom  He  separated  from  the  idolatrous  nations  of  the  earth,  and  recorded  His 
incommunicable  Name  among  them.  But  even  He,  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  not  alone  in 
the  work  of  testifying  of  Jesus ;  for  He  adds,  **  And  ye  also  shall  bear  witness, 
because  ye  have  been  with  Me  from  the  beginning."  The  members  of  His  mystical 
body  are  to  be  felloW'Workers  with  God,  and  organs  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  And 
what  is  the  nature  of  the  witness  which  they  were  to  carry  to  the  world.  1.  They 
were  to  testify  to  His  Person.  "  Bear  witness — not  merely  of  My  doctrine,  not 
merely  of  My  works  but — of  Me."  It  is  the  one  most  marked  peculiarity  of  ooi 
blessed  Lord's  teaching.  Other  teachers  and  leaders  had  been  contented  to  have 
followers  who  would  receive  and  disseminate  their  doctrines.  And  the  true  witness 
must  also  direct  men  to  Him,  as  the  God  man,  the  Redeemer,  the  Prophet,  Priest, 
and  King  of  humanity.  2.  They  were  to  testify  to  His  work.  They  had  been  with 
Him  from  the  beginning,  and  had  heard  His  words  and  seen  His  deeds  of  truth 
and  love  and  power.  The  testimony  to  His  work  is  the  completion  of  the  witness 
to  His  Person.  What  He  has  done  for  us  must  explain  what  He  is  to  ns.  S.  Bat 
they  were  also  to  testify  to  His  life.  It  was  in  His  life  that  the  nature  of  His 
person  and  the  character  of  His  work  were  most  fully  disclosed.  His  Divine  great- 
ness, His  moral  sublimity,  His  redeeming  power  all  shone  out  in  the  unequalled, 
unapproachable  grandeur  of  His  life.  It  declared  itself  to  be  unearthly,  super. 
haman,  from  God.  This,  then,  is  the  very  core  of  our  witness  for  Christ — not 
merely  a  better  life  than  the  life  of  the  world :  it  will  of  coarse  be  in  all  respects  • 


oup.  XT.]  ST.  JOHN.  «87 

better  life,  bat  that  !a  not  all :  it  must  be  another  life,  drawing  its  origin  from  a 
higher  source,  animated  by  a  higher  principle,  directed  towards  a  higher  end. 
It  is  not  difficult  to  account  for  the  profound  impression  produced  upon  men  of  all 
ages  and  lands,  and  of  the  most  various  culture,  by  the  grandeur  and  sablimity  of 
the  character  of  Jesus  Christ.  Men  could  not  help  being  struck  with  the  absolute 
Belf -renunciation,  the  entire  spirit  of  self-sacrifice  which  pervaded,  like  an  atmos- 
phere, His  every  thought,  and  word,  and  deed.  It  was  a  thing,  a  thought  so 
absolutely  new  to  the  world.  Obedience  more  or  less  ready  and  willing  to  the 
command  of  a  superior  they  were  not  unacquainted  with.  Bat  the  complete, 
voluntary,  and  a  cheerful  surrender  of  a  will  to  God,  so  complete  and  entire  that 
there  was  no  hesitancy,  no  momentary  effort  at  self-assertion,  was  a  phenomenon 
nnezpected  and  startling,  which  revealed  a  kind  of  spiritual  force  which  they  had 
never  seen  in  operation.  Can  we  wonder  that,  when  men  have  seen  the  disciples 
of  Jesus  fond  of  worldly  display,  greedy  of  honoar,  ambitious  of  place  and  of 
power,  craving  for  earthly  distinction,  they  should  have  found  aa  false  witnesses 
for  Ood,  and  laughed  us  to  scorn  ?  Can  we  wonder  that  some,  not  caring  to  mark 
the  startling  contrast  between  the  Master  and  the  scholar,  should  have  blasphemed 
the  Holy  JName  b\  which  we  are  called?  Mark  another  element  in  the  superhuman 
life  of  Christ :  His  ardent  and  unquenchable  love  of  souls.  They  who  would  be 
witnesses  for  our  Lord  must  first  be  deeply  convinced  of  the  anworldliness  of  the 
life  of  Christ,  they  must  have  heard  and  received  His  testimony  to  Himself  and  to 
them  :  *'  Ye  are  not  of  the  world,  but  I  have  chosen  you  out  of  the  world."  ♦'  They 
are  not  of  the  world,  even  as  I  am  not  of  the  world."  And  yet  again,  we  do  not 
learn  from  the  example  of  our  Lord  that  ours  need  not  be,  ought  not  to  be,  an 
unsympathetic  unworldliness  ?  The  light  of  Christ  was  not  the  clear  cold,  hard 
moonlight  of  a  winter's  night ;  bat  the  bright,  soft,  warm  sanshine  of  a  summer's 
day.  The  anworldliness  of  the  Son  of  God  was  not  that  of  a  stem  asceticism 
which  refused  to  own  relationship  with  those  who  ooald  not  riM  to  its  level.  It 
was  on  the  contrary  gentle,  tolerant,  winning.  The  life  of  anworldliness  of  which 
we  have  spoken,  as  the  trae  witness  for  Christ,  ii  beset  with  great  and  peooUai 
Mfiealties  in  our  own  day.    {W.  &.  Clark,  M.d.i 


Princeton  Theological  Seminary-Speer  Library 


1012  01127  8076 


.^' 


■0" 


DATE  DUE 

^ ill^'lllim 

* 

f 

■ 

-mss^ 

88" 

w 

•—- ' 

CAYLORD 

PRINTED  INU.S.A. 

