CTbc University o 
libraries 




The Gospel 
According to Matthew 



By 
G. CAMPBELL MORGAN, D.D. 

_ A * 




NEW YORK CHICAGO 

Fleming H. Revell Company 

LONDON AND EDINBURGH 




By G. CAMPBELL MORGAN 



The Gospel According to Matthew .... $3.50 

The Gospel According to Mark $2.50 

Searchlights from the Word $3.75 

The Acts of the Apostles $3.75 

The Teaching of Christ $3.00 

The Crises of the Christ. Popular Edition. . . $3.00 
Living Messages of the Books of the Bible 

Now Complete in Two Volumes. Each . . . $2.00 

Vol. I, O. T. Genesis to Malachi. 

Vol. II, N. T. Matthew to Revelation. 
The Analyzed Bible. (Introductory) 

Introductory Volumes. Vols. I, II, III, 8 Vols., Each $1.75 
The Analyzed Bible. Each $1.75 

The Gospel According to John. 

The Book of Job. 

Romans. 

The Prophecy of Isaiah I. 

The Prophecy of Isaiah II. 

Genesis. 

The Gospel of Matthew. 
The Parables of the Kingdom. Expositions of 

Matt. XIH $1.75 

The Spirit of God $1.50 

The Ministry of the Word $1.50 

God's Perfect Will $1.00 

Wherein Have We Robbed God? 75 

The Studying and Teaching of the English Bible . .75 

The Ten Commandments 75 

The Hidden Years at Nazareth 40 

The Bible in Five Years Net .35 



DEVOTIONAL 

The True Estimate of Life and How to Live $1.00 

"Behold, He Cometh!" ..... .75 

The Practice of Prayer ..... .75 

The Simple Things of the Christian Life . .75 

Life Problems ....... .75 

Discipleship ......... .75 

The Christ of To-Day. What? Whence? Whither ? .50 

Mountains and Valleys in the Ministry of Jesus .40 

Christ and the Bible Paper-Boards ... .35 



All Things New." A Message to New Converts. 

Paper ......... Net .20 



Copyright, MCMXXIX, by 
FLEMING H. REVEU. COMPANY 



w 






Foreword 

A3 in the case of my volume on The Acts of the Apostles, and that on 
Mark, in this volume we have stenographically reported sermons. 
They consist of seventy-three such. 

From this method they suffer, and gain. They suffer the loss of 
literary finish possible to the Writer ; but they gain from the very rough- 
ness and directness associated with the word extemporaneously uttered, 
as to the form of sentences. 

They proceed, from first to last, on the assumption that it was the inten- 
tion of the writer of this Gospel to set forth the Person of our Lord in 
relation to His Kingly office. 

From the mystic account of His advent in human history, through the 
record of the authority of His ethical enunciation, the mercifulness of His 
method, the majesty of His Death, and the glory of His Resurrection, to 
the ringing claim of "all authority," and clarion command to "disciple 
the nations," we are ever in the presence of the King. 

With happy memories of the days when they were prepared and 
spoken, and profound gratitude to God for His acceptance of them then, 
manifested in the blessing they were to many, I now commit them to the 
wider ministry of the printed page, praying that they may still be helpful, 
in some measure, in showing forth some of the glories of Him Who was 
attested of God in the words, " This is My beloved Son, in Whom I am 
well pleased;" and thus the Son, to Whom He gives the nations for His 
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for His possession. 

G. C. M. 

Glendale, 
California. 



THE GOSPEL 
ACCORDING TO MATTHEW 



MATTHEW I. 1-17 



rpHE first verse of this chapter gives 
Jl the title to the section under con- 
0ideration; while the last verse of that 
section summarizes its content. The first 
is undoubtedly the title of the geneal- 
ogy of Jesus as it appeared in the Jew- 
ish records. The last is Matthew's 
summary of the content thereof. 

It is not my purpose to dwell at any 
length upon the matter of the difference 
between this genealogy and that which 
we have in the gospel according to 
Luke. There are, however, one or two 
matters that it may be well for us to 
note by way of introduction. 

The first is that to which I have al- 
ready twice drawn attention. The open- 
ing words, " The book of the generation 
of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the 
son of Abraham," do not constitute the 
title to the gospel according to Matthew, 
but the title of the genealogy of Jesus 
Christ as it is here given. We shall 
take it for granted that this genealogy 
was taken from the legal records by 
Matthew in order to preface the gospel 
in which he was about to present the 
One Whom he had come to know as 
the long-looked-for Messiah-King of his 
people. 

My personal conviction is that this 
genealogy does not appear in our gospel 
exactly as Matthew found it in the 
records. His concluding summary, in 
which he declares that these gener- 
ations from Abraham to the Messiah 
fall into three cycles of fourteen, makes 
this improbable for the simple reason 
that there are conspicuous omissions. 
In the eighth verse between Joram and 
Uzziah the names of Ahaziah, Joash, 
and Amaziah are omitted, and in verse 
eleven Jehoiakim is omitted between 
Josiah and Jehoniah. I am inclined to 
believe that the former omissions were 
deliberately made for spiritual reasons. 



It is noticeable that the evangelist says, 
"All the generations from Abraham 
unto David are fourteen generations," 
and in that section there are no omis- 
sions. But with regard to the subse- 
quent divisions he says, "from David 
unto the carrying away to Babylon 
fourteen generations; and from the 
carrying away to Babylon unto the 
Christ fourteen generations;" not that 
they are all, but that he has named 
those chosen to complete the chain. 
When it is remembered that those 
omitted first were the immediate de- 
scendants of the daughter of Ahab and 
Jezebel, we may have a clue to the 
principle of Matthew's selection. In all 
likelihood the omission of Jehoiakim 
was due to the work of a copyist, be- 
cause that omission makes it necessary, 
in order to the three fourteens, to use 
the name Jechoniah at the end of the 
second and at the beginning of the 
third. 

It should finally be noticed that this 
genealogy does not say that Jesus was 
the son of Joseph. It is the genealogy 
of Jesus only because of His mother's 
marriage with Joseph, and in the Jew- 
ish records He appears as one born to 
Mary whose husband was Joseph. 

I propose to glance briefly at the 
genealogy itself as given in the para- 
graph commencing with the second 
verse and ending with the sixteenth 
verse ; and then to examine more care- 
fully the title as given in the first verse, 
and the summary as given in the seven- 
teenth verse. 

These intervening verses are inter- 
esting for several reasons. The first is 
that while they are entirely Jewish in 
outlook, they do nevertheless overleap 
the boundary of the Hebrew nation in a 
most remarkable way in the inclusion 
of Rahab; and they violate the preju- 



[MAM. i. 1-17] 



MATTHEW 



dice of Judaism in the introduction of 
women. This violation is the more re- 
markable when we remember the char- 
acter of the women whose names are 
introduced. The first is that of Tamar, 
a notorious sinner. The second is that 
of Rahab, a foreigner and a sinner. 
The third is that of Ruth, a foreigner, 
although received into the nation. The 
fourth is that of Bathsheba, through 
whose sin with David the shadow of 
shame for ever rests upon the royal 
line. The fifth is that of Mary the 
mother of the Lord. Thus in this 
genealogy, consciously or unconsciously, 
there are signs and portents of the 
grace which is being brought to all 
men through the coming King. 

Another point of interest is that of 
the closing declaration of the genealogy 
proper; "Jacob begat Joseph, the hus- 
band of Mary, of whom was born 
Jesus," which is entirely out of har- 
mony with the method of obtaining all 
through until that point. It marks a 
separation to be explained by the story 
of the birth of Jesus which immediately 
follows. It emphasises the fact that He 
was not the son of Joseph. Thus on the 
first page of the gospel Jesus is pre- 
sented as connected with a race which 
nevertheless could not produce Him. 
He came into it, was of it ; and yet was 
distinct from it. As we have said, the 
mystery is not explained here, but waits 
for the unveiling of the subsequent 
story. 

Turning to the examination of the 
first verse, which constitutes the title 
of the genealogy, we are at once ar- 
rested by the fact that it emphasises a 
relation between Jesus Christ and the 
two outstanding men in Hebrew history, 
namely Abraham and David. In each 
case the relationship is distinctly af- 
firmed to be that of sonship. He is the 
son of David, and the son of Abraham. 
Thus His connection with the Hebrew 
people is royal and racial. He is of the 
kingly line, and He is from the father 
and founder of the people. It may be 
as well at this point to draw attention 
to the fact that the genealogy given in 
Matthew corresponds exactly with that 
given in I/uke between Abraham and 
David. The differences are found in 
the portion of the genealogy from 



David to Jesus. The genealogy in 
Luke gives His lineal descent through 
Mary, and He was through her, son of 
David. Matthew therefore speaks of 
Him as son of David, and not as son 
of any of those who are in the geneal- 
ogy of Joseph subsequent to that point. 

The remarkable fact of this title is 
that it speaks of Jesus as son of David 
and son of Abraham. Now the peculiar 
promise of God to each of these men, 
according to Old Testament history, 
was that of a son; and the immediate 
fulfilment in each case was in many 
senses disappointing. Therefore the son 
of Abraham, who came for the fulfil- 
ment of the ideals for which he stood 
in obedience to faith; and the son of 
David, who came for the fulfilment of 
the ideals for which he stood in obedi- 
ence to faith; was neither Isaac, nor 
Solomon, but Jesus. 

This fact is worthy of a somewhat 
closer examination in each case. Let 
us take them in the order of statement 
in the verse. 

The son of David to whom he looked 
for the fulfilment of his purpose of the 
establishment of the kingdom around 
the temple of Jehovah was Solomon. 
His name, Solomon, the peaceful, sug- 
gested the principle of the kingdom. His 
greatest endowment was that of wis- 
dom. His specific work was that of the 
building of the temple. His reign was 
characterised by peace and prosperity. 

Nevertheless the story of Solomon is 
one of disastrous failure. In spite of 
the gifts of wisdom from on high he 
lived a life of unutterable and appalling 
folly. Even though he built the temple, 
he so contradicted all that for which it 
stood as to make it a centre of form 
without power; and even though, 
through the goodness of God to him, 
for the sake of his father, the kingdom 
was maintained in peace and prosperity 
during the period of his life, he had 
sown it with seeds of disruption which 
bore harvest immediately after his 
death. Thus was David disappointed in 
his son after the flesh. 

Jesus Christ, the Son of David after 
the flesh, but the Son of God as the 
resurrection finally attested, came for 
the overcoming of all the failure which 
characterised the life and reign of Solo- 



8 



MATTHEW 



. T. 1-17] 



mon. With an infinite wisdom He pro- 
ceeded to the building of the temple 
which cannot be destroyed; and laid 
the foundation for the establishment of 
the Kingdom in peace and prosperity 
from which all that offends will finally 
be cast forth. 

The son of Abraham to whom he 
looked for the fulfilment of the promise 
of God, that from him there should 
spring a nation which should be the 
medium of blessing to all the nations, 
was Isaac. His name, Isaac, laughter, 
was to Abraham for evermore a witness 
of the merging of the human and the 
Divine, in that he was born because 
" Sarah received power to conceive seed 
when she was past age." Through him 
there was given to Abraham that seed 
which consisted of sons who, to his 
vision, were destined to carry forward 
the enterprises of God. The one in- 
fluence which he exerted was that of 
the power, which he retained by faith, 
of blessing his sons after him. 

Nevertheless the story of Isaac is one 
of disappointment, both in the weakness 
of his own character, and in the ap- 
palling failure of his sons through the 
long succession of the ages; and in 
the fact that they failed to enter into 
the true meaning and value of the bless- 
ing he pronounced. Thus was Abraham 
disappointed in his son after the flesh. 

Jesus, the son of Abraham after the 
flesh, but in the mystery of His Person 
able to say, " Before Abraham was I 
am," came to realise and fulfil all the 
purpose which had failed through Isaac 
and his seed after him. He was the 
true son of Abraham both human and 
Divine, and there sprang from Him " so 
many as the stars of heaven in multi- 
tude, and as the sand, which is by the 
seashore, innumerable," to carry out the 
purposes of God. 

Thus Jesus Christ, the Son of David 
and Son of Abraham, came in the ful- 
ness of the times to overcome the fail- 
ure of Solomon the son of David and 
Isaac the son of Abraham; and to es- 
tablish the throne and to perfect the 
nation. 

In the summary with which the sec- 
tion ends three crises in the history of 
the people are mentioned. The first is 
that original movement connected with 



the call of Abraham; his obedience and 
consequent founding of the new race on 
the principle of faith. The second is 
connected with David, the king after 
God's own heart; whose appointment 
was nevertheless the outcome of na- 
tional failure in that they clamoured 
for " a king like unto the nations," The 
last is that of the carrying away into 
captivity to Babylon of the people 
whose very existence in the economy 
of God was intended to be a force an- 
tagonistic to everything of which Baby- 
lon was the embodiment. 

The three cycles culminate in Christ, 
and that fact suggests His relation to 
all. As we think of them and of Him, 
we are impressed by the threefold fact 
of relationship in each case which may 
be described as identity of principle, 
superiority of realisation, and correc- 
tion of failure. 

The relationship between Abraham 
and Christ is first that of identity of 
principle. The principle on which 
Abraham acted when he left Ur of the 
Chaldees, and throughout the whole of 
his life, in so far as it was in accord 
with the Divine will, was that of faith. 
The whole life and ministry of Jesus, 
on the plane of His humanity, was true 
to the selfsame principle ; and as it has 
often been pointed out, the writer of the 
letter to the Hebrews gives Him prece- 
dence of Abraham in this matter, as he 
declares Him to be the Author, or File- 
leader of faith. 

The difference is at once seen in the 
absolute superiority of His realisation 
of this principle of faith. In the life of 
Abraham we have accounts of deflec- 
tions issuing in disgrace, and almost in 
disaster. In the life of Jesus there was 
no doubt, and consequently no deviation 
from the path of obedience. 

Moreover, and principally, the rela- 
tion between Christ and Abraham is 
that of His correction of the failure. 
In His case the city of God is not only 
looked for, but built; the glory of God 
is not only sought, but manifested. 

The relationship between David and 
Christ is first that of identity of prin- 
ciple in the matter of kingship. David's 
loyalty to Jehovah was the condition of 
his royalty. It was because of his fidel- 
ity to Him in circumstances of difficulty 



[MA**, i. 18-23] 



MATTHEW 



that he came at last to full and glorious 
crowning. In the case of Jesus all that 
was imperfectly foreshadowed in the 
experience of David was absolutely ful- 
filled. Loyalty to the will of God was 
the master passion of His life, and 
created the majesty and might of His 
regal authority. 

The superiority of realisation is even 
more marked in this case than in the 
former. David's deflections from loy- 
alty not only tarnished the escutcheon 
of his royalty, but limited the extent of 
his authority. The absolute abandon- 
ment of Jesus to the acceptable will of 
His Father created the lustre of His 
crown, and ensured that limitlessness of 
empire which enabled Him to say, " All 
authority hath been given unto Me in 
heaven and on earth." 

The final and gracious fact of rela- 
tionship between Christ and David is 
that of His assured establishment of 
the Kingdom, and the vindication of 
the glory of God. 

The relationship between the carry- 
ing away into captivity and Christ is 
again that of identity of principle. 
These people passed under the yoke of 
a nation full of pride and rebellious 
against God's government. Christ was 
born under the yoke of Rome, amid 
His people, in days when their inde- 
pendence was lost. The very surround- 
ings of His birth were created by the 
fact that His mother with Joseph her 
husband were travelling in obedience to 
the edict of the Emperor that all the 
world should be enrolled. 



His infinite superiority is seen in the 
quiet dignity of His submission through 
all the days of His earthly life, as He 
rendered to Caesar the things that be- 
longed to Caesar; and in that fine tri- 
umph over the outward yoke of Caesar, 
as He rendered to God the things that 
belong unto God. 

The final fact of relationship between 
Christ and the captivity is that of His 
breaking of all the bonds resulting from 
sin, and leading the exodus of all such 
as trust Him. 

Thus in this genealogical paragraph 
humanity's aspirations and incompe- 
tencies are represented in these 
generations; and aspirations and in- 
competencies alike look wistfully to 
Him. The founder and the king look 
to Him as Son for the fulfilment of 
purpose. Faith, which by comparison 
with sight has seemed feeble through 
the passing of the centuries, waits His 
vindication. Government which has 
perpetually failed waits His adminis- 
tration. Captivity which has sighed 
and sobbed in its agony waits His 
emancipation. What can He do? We 
will pursue the story presently, and in 
the meantime crown Him in hope; 

"Hail to the Lord's anointed: 

Great David's greater Son I 
Hail, in the time appointed, 

His reign on earth begun! 
He comes to break oppression, 

To set the captive free, 
To take away transgression, 

And rule in equity." 



MATTHEW I. 18-23 



WE have considered the genealogy 
of Jesus as recorded in the first 
seventeen verses. Now we commence 
the study of the story of His birth. 

Dr. Horton once ended a singularly 
beautiful sermon on the Virgin Birth o 
Jesus in words which are well worth 
reading as a preliminary to this study. 
After treating the story as constituting 
one of the idylls of the infancy and life 
dealing with it in a most reverent 
way, as being one of those sweet and 
sacred things that never could have 
been known unless told by Joseph, or 



Mary, or both he said, " I believe, my 
dear friends, that you can do a great 
service' to-day; you can relieve the 
minds and consciences of thousands of 
people if you can simply pass on the 
thought: I believe in the Divinity of 
Jesus Christ my Lord, on the grounds 
that St. Paul and St. John have given; 
and then, I believe in the stories of the 
infancy because I believe in the Divin- 
ity of the Lord, and I have found in 
them a beautiful illustration of what 
Christ meant when He said, ' I am from 
above ; I am not of this world.' " 



10 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. i. 18-23J 



That position one is fully prepared to 
accept. Our belief in the truth of this 
sacred story is based upon the facts of 
the Person and purposes of Jesus as 
unfolded in the writings of the Apos- 
tles, which writings are in turn dem- 
onstrated true in our own personal 
experience. 

The very position indicated makes it 
impossible to agree with Dr. Horton in 
a statement immediately preceding this. 
Speaking of the Virgin Birth of Jesus, 
he said, " Never give anyone the im- 
pression that the faith of Jesus depends 
upon it, or that a man cannot believe in 
our Lord because he does not believe in 
the idylls of the infancy." 

While recognizing the spirit of pa- 
tience and toleration which such a 
statement breathes, it is impossible to 
accept it as logical. If belief in the 
teaching of Paul and John necessarily 
leads to belief in the truth of this story 
of Matthew, lien it necessarily follows 
that to reject this story of Matthew is 
finally to reject the teaching of Paul 
and John, and so not to believe in the 
Deity of the Lord Jesus Christ. 

All our future studies will be from 
the standpoint of belief in the Deity 
of Jesus as taught in the subsequent 
writings of the New Testament, and 
therefore as accepting this story, as 
presenting in idyllic form, the sublime, 
mysterious, and infinite truth "that 
which is conceived in her is of the 
Holy Spirit." 

From this whole idyll we select the 
words which chronicle two prophecies. 
The angelic prophecy is in the words 

" She shall bring forth a Son ; and 
thou shalt call His name JESUS; for 
it is He that shall save His people from 
their sins." 

The angel's quotation is from the proph- 
ecy of Isaiah, and follows immediately. 

" Now all this is come to pass, that it 
might be fulfilled which was spoken by 
the Lord through the prophet, saying, 
"Behold, the Virgin shall be with 
child, and shall bring forth a son, 
"And they shall call his name 
Immanuel." 

Eliminating the words which speak 
of the method of His coming words 
which are so severely plain as to de- 



mand simple acceptance or equally sim- 
ple rejection* because we accept them, 
for the reasons already stated, we shall 
take the two prophetic words concern- 
ing Him 

"Thou shalt call His name Jesus, 
for it is He that shall save His people 
from their sins," 

and, 

"They shall call His name Imman- 
uel, which is, being interpreted, God 
with us." 

The second is a prophecy of the past, 
expressing the hope of the people. The 
past looked on, and looked up, and 
looked out, and sighed for "Immanuel 
God with us." The first is the proph- 
ecy which tells us how that hope has 
been realised. The angel declares that 
all that longing is to be answered, for 
Jesus is to be born, Who is to save His 
people from their sins. Observe care- 
fully the angelic message. He is to 
fulfil the prophecy of the past, "Im- 
manuel God with us." 

While in the text the prophecies are 
placed in the order, first of realisation, 
and then of the statement of the hope, 
in this study we will take them in the 
other order, which is that of their real 
occurrence in the Divine Library. 

We will consider, then, first, the hope 
" They shall call His name Imman- 
uel, which is, being interpreted, God 
with us;" and secondly, the realisation 
" Thou shalt call His name Jesus, for 
it is He that shall save His people from 
their sins." 

I. This old-time prophecy quoted by 
the angel, is from the seventh chapter 
of the prophecy of Isaiah. Look very 
carefully at its setting therein. It reads 
thus : " Therefore the Lord Himself will 
give you a sign; behold, a virgin shall 
conceive, and bear a son, and shall call 
His name Immanuel. Butter and honey 
shall He eat, when He knoweth to re- 
fuse the evil, and choose the good. 
For before the Child shall know to re- 
fuse the evil, and choose the good, the 
land whose two kings thou abhorrest 
shall be forsaken." (Ch. vii. 14-16.) 

To take the quotation in this way is 
at once to be brought into the presence 
of something that increasingly seems to 



11 



[MATT. i. 18-23] 



MATTHEW 



have, as the history is examined, no 
connection with this great subject of 
the Birth of Jesus. If the whole chap- 
ter be read, it will be found that the 
prophet Isaiah was talking to king Ahaz 
who was in peril, because Rezin, king 
of Syria, and Pekah, king of Israel, 
were coming up against Jerusalem. The 
prophet told Ahaz to be quiet; that 
there need be no panic in his heart. 

Comparing the prophecy of Isaiah 
with the historical books, we discover 
that Ahaz was bent upon seeking aid 
from some other power. The prophet 
appealed to him to do nothing of the 
kind, and said. "Ask thee a sign of 
Jehovah thy God; ask it either in the 
depth, or in the height above." Ahaz 
replied that he would not ask a sign of 
God. Then said the prophet, "There- 
fore the Lord Himself will give thee a 
sign; behold the virgin shall conceive." 

" For before the child shall know to 
refuse the evil, and choose the good, the 
land whose two kings thou abhorrest 
shall be forsaken." He then proceeded 
to say that not only should the enemies 
be defeated, but that his own nation 
should be broken because of their lack 
of faith. 

That prophecy was perhaps partially 
fulfilled in the birth of a child to 
Isaiah. In the story in the following 
chapter there was a child born who 
was named Maher-shalal-hash-baz, the 
meaning of which is, the spoil speedeth, 
the prey hasteth. For all local fulfil- 
ment this was the child referred to. 
The phrase, " Immanuel, God with us," 
had never occurred before. It occurs 
twice in Isaiah once here, and once in 
the following chapter and never again 
until the angel whispered it to Joseph, 
as chronicled in the story in Matthew. 
We can hardly understand the value of 
this in a study of the mere text. The 
whole context must be taken. For an 
interpretation of this prophecy chapters 
six to nine should be studied. The 
reference to Immanuel in chapter seven 
is incidental not accidental but pre- 
paratory, a gleam of light flashing on a 
purely local circumstance. 

Let us epitomise chapters six to nine 
in order to see the setting. 

In chapter six the death of Uzziah is 
recorded, also the story of that marvel- 



lous vision, as a result of which Isaiah 
was anointed and consecrated for his 
work. 

Then, immediately we pass into 
changed circumstances. Ahaz was on 
the throne; The two kings Rezin and 
Pekah had come up against Jerusalem, 
and Ahaz wanted to call in aid from 
without. The prophet besought him not 
to do this, but to trust in God; and told 
him that a son should be given. 

Notice what is here stated concerning 
Immanuel, for the prophecy merges into 
something larger than the local setting, 
as prophecies always do. 

It is impossible to study the proph- 
ecies of the Old Testament without dis- 
covering that the prophets looked down 
the vista of years, and sometimes de- 
scribed something quite close at hand; 
then saw how its lines ran out into the 
coming ages; and omitting intervening 
ages, described the final issue. So here 
Isaiah's prophecy merges into something 
larger. He said that when Immanuel 
came He should eat " curds and 
honey," which signifies that He would 
come into the midst of circumstances 
of poverty and trouble. 

Turn to chapter eight. A son was 
born to Isaiah, and tae propftet an- 
nounced the coming of Assyria in verse 
eight " It shall sweep onward into 
Judah; it shall overflow and pass 
through; it shall reach even to the 
neck; and the stretching out of its 
wings shall fill the breadth of thy land, 
O Immanuel." 

There was a person in the mind of 
the prophet, not yet focussed or re- 
vealed, as he spoke of the Virgin's 
Child, Immanuel. As he saw desola- 
tion coming to the land of the ancient 
people he spoke of it as the land of 
Immanuel. He evidently contemplated 
the incoming foes and spoke of them, 
and said, " Make an uproar, O ye peo- 
ples, and be broken in pieces. . . . 
Take counsel together, and it shall be 
brought to nought; speak the word, and 
it shall not stand; for Immanuel, God 
is with us." 

The name is mentioned in the local 
prophecy, but thus it merges into a 
larger application when the prophet 
speaks of the land as "Immanuel's 
land." It includes a still larger outlook 



12 



MATTHEW 



[MA**, i. 18-23] 



when the prophet declares that the foes 
coming against the land will be de- 
feated because Immanuel will be with 
Israel. 

The Messianic quality gradually 
grows as we read through the prophecy. 
Who is Immanuel? What is He to be? 
He is to be a sanctuary, and a rock of 
offence. 

The Person Immanuel, incidentally 
mentioned in local connection, in chap- 
ter seven, blazes out into splendid light 
in the ninth chapter as the prophet 
wrote, " For unto us a Child is born, 
unto us a Son is given ; and the govern- 
ment shall be upon His shoulder: and 
His name shall be called Wonderful 
Counsellor, Mighty God, Everlasting 
Father, Prince of Peace. Of the in- 
crease of His government and of peace 
there shall be no end, upon the throne 
of David, and upon His kingdom, to 
establish it." 

Long centuries passed, and an angel 
came in a dream to a man and told him 
that the ultimate fulfilment of that 
prophecy was at hand. While the words 
of Isaiah had local applications, they 
had vaster values than such applica- 
tions could contain. So the birth of 
Jesus was for the fulfilment of those 
vaster values that lay within the old- 
time prophecy. This hope must be in- 
terpreted in its local setting, and yet 
with that more spacious intention which 
it evidently contains. 

From this examination of Isaiah's 
prophecy we make general deductions. 
Take the first and the last of these 
verses. The first (ch. vii. 14) "A 
Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son, 
and shall call His name Immanuel;" 
the last (ch. ix. 6) "Unto us a Child 
is born, unto us a Son is given." This 
one great prophecy* beginning in such 
a simple circumstance and growing to 
such a sublime declaration, expressed 
the hope that God would presence Him- 
self in actual human life through a 
human birth; that by some mysterious 
method which could not be expressed 
fully in human language, God would 
come and manifest Himself in a four- 
fold character. 

The Bible may be divided around 
that description of manifestation. 
"Wonderful Counsellor;" so man first 



knew Him. " Mighty God ;" so was He 
revealed through all the processes of 
the history of the Hebrew nation. 
"Everlasting Father;" so is He known 
in this dispensation. "Prince of 
Peace;" so shall He be revealed in the 
established Kingdom. All that was 
focussed in this Child. 

Thus the immediate teaching o 
Isaiah's prophecy flashed its light for- 
ward. Immanuel shall come into the 
midst of His people's degradation and 
share it. Immanuel shall become a 
sanctuary and a stone of stumbling. 
Immanuel shall finally conquer all His 
enemies. At last the God-inspired hope 
of His people, expressed through proph- 
ecy, is declared to be realised in the 
birth of the Child of Mary. Joseph 
heard it and believed it. Mary heard 
it and sang the Magnificat. Early dis- 
ciples heard it, and hearing it believed 
it, and proclaimed it. It is far easier 
for us to believe it than it was for any 
of these to do so, because we see the 
programme carried out into the centu- 
ries. As we read carefully and ponder 
it, we discover the whole programme of 
events, from the time Isaiah spoke 
until now, and beyond it, gathered 
round the word Immanuel. It was a 
great hope, and all that we see fulfilling 
the prophecy, is the result of His birth. 

II. Now let us go back to the first 
prophecy, made directly by the angel 
to the man Joseph " She shall bring 
forth a Son; and thou shalt call His 
name JESUS; for it is He that shall 
save His people from their sins." 

Take the local setting. This story is 
beautiful in its simplicity. Joseph was 
a just* man, " a righteous man." One 
hardly knows which word is best to use. 
We talk to-day of a just man ; and we 
may think of a man hard and cold. We 
talk of a righteous man, and we have 
said, " Scarcely for a righteous man 
will one die; for peradventure for the 
good man some one would even dare to 
die." The good man is the man of the 
simple heart. A blunt translation would 
be Joseph was a straight man, a true 
man. Not that he was severe and 
harshly just; not coldly and cynically 
righteous; but he was a true man, the 
carpenter, the village builder. 

Mary was his betrothed, and accord- 



13 



[MATT. i. 18-23] 



MATTHEW 



ing to the old and beautiful Hebrew 
custom was bound to Joseph, the be- 
trothal ceremony being as sacred as the 
marriage rite, after which the bride- 
groom took his bride home, with songs 
and rejoicing, and accompaniment of 
music. They were simple village folk 
of royal lineage, for when the angel 
spoke to Joseph he did not call Jesus 
his son, but Son of David. A straight 
strong man, and a simple, sweet maid. 

There is no love story quite as sweet 
as the love story of mountain, hill and 
village. All the conventional arrange- 
ments of marriages are of hell. Love 
that is a dream, breaking in upon the 
soul, is always beautiful. 

In the midst of that period of be- 
trothal came that awe-inspiring and 
Holy Mystery, that sacred Mystery that 
we meditate in solemn silence; the 
Holy Mystery the touch of God upon 
the simple life that made it for ever 
sublime. A thing not to be repeated; 
unique, and alone in the history of the 
race. The word of God is not void but 
powerful; and the maiden was pos- 
sessed with the Holy Mystery. 

Then the angel visitor came, and an- 
nounced the name, " Thou shalt call His 
name Jesus." It was just an ordinary 
Jewish name about as common in Judaea 
as John is common amongst us. The 
name had not the significance that we 
understand to-day. Thank God it has 
gathered so much beauty and fragrance 
about it, that we can never dare call 
our children by that Name, and we are 
right. It was a beautiful, Jewish boy's 
name, a common name of the common 
people. But here, as everywhere in the 
great spiritual movement, God took hold 
of the commonplace to show that there 
was something infinitely more than the 
common. Jesus is a Greek form of 
the Hebrew Joshua, meaning Saviour. 
Other men had borne that name. Many 
a mother called her boy Joshua, in the 
hope that he would be a saviour, and 
break oppression, and set the people 
free. Now the angel said: Give that 
name to this Boy ; " It is He that shall 
save His people from their sins." Take 
the human name, sweetest of them all, 
and give it to the Child of the Holy 
Mystery; the Child Who is not of 
Joseph, but of God, Tell His sweet 



mother Mary to give Him this name 
Jesus. Moreover, the name means " Je- 
hovah Salvation." 

Mark the intention of it. They are 
"His people." Give Him the name as 
one of His people; calling Him by the 
ordinary name of His people; He is 
coming to identification with them. 
They are under a yoke, eating curds 
and honey; He is coming to eat curds 
and honey with them, as the prophet 
said. They are an oppressed and a 
devastated people; He is coming to 
identification with them; give Him the 
name signifying identification in all its 
deepest meaning. He is coming to 
suffer. 

Then mark how the angel told 
heaven's secret in heaven's language. 
What the people thought they wanted 
was a Joshua who could reveal himself 
to this material Jerusalem as King, 
break the power of Rome, and set up 
an earthly Kingdom. The angel said 
the deeper trouble was not that of the 
Roman yoke; or that they had been 
beaten in battle; the trouble with them 
was that they were sinners " He shall 
save His people from their sins." He 
will not come to battle with externali- 
ties, but to grip sin at its heart. 

We look on as the angel speaks, and 
we see the Cross, the way by which 
"He shall save His people from their 
sins." The name is a prohecy. Joseph 
was commanded to give it to Jesus, and 
when Joseph gave it to Him, it was 
prophecy only " Call His name Jesus, 
for it is He that shall save His people 
from their sins." 

A generation passed away, three 
score years, and, at the close of the 
period, the story was recorded by the 
evangelists. At last the Apostle of 
the Gentiles told it also. Jesus, "exist- 
ing in the form of God, counted not the 
being on an equality with God a thing 
to be grasped, but emptied Himself, 
taking the form of a Servant, being 
made in the likeness of men." He did 
not abhor the virgin's womb, but came 
in "the likeness of men." That is the 
apostles' story of the incarnation. 

Now follow the story. "Becoming 
obedient even unto death, yea, the 
death of the Cross. Wherefore also 
God highly exalted Him, and gave unto 



14 



MATTHEW 



[MAM. 11. 5, 15, 17, 23] 



Him the name." WHat name is this? 
Joseph called Him Jesus because the 
angel said that He was to be named so. 
It was a prophecy; but it was fulfilled 
by His birth, His Cross, and His 
Resurrection. 

God gave Him the name when He 
ascended. What name was it ? " That 
in the name of Jesus every knee should 
bow." It was prophecy at His birth. 
It is an evangel on the Ascension morn- 
ing. It was an indication of purpose 
when He was born. It is a declaration 
of accomplishment when He ascended 
on high. 

"Jesus, name of sweetness, 

Jesus, sound of love; 
Cheering exiles onward, 
To their rest above. 

" Jesus, oh the magic ! 

Of the sweet love sound, 
How it thrills and trembles 
To creation's bound." 

Never was there so much music as 
there is in that Name. 

So came the King. Standing back 
to-day, and looking over the centuries, 
we see the merging of the Hope Im- 
manuel, into realisation in Jesus. God 
is born of a virgin into human life. 
God is born into the midst of the degra- 
dation of man. God moves in this Man 
to the Throne of imperial and unending 
Government. God through this Man 
saves from sins, and establishes and 



upholds a Kingdom for ever. God per- 
forms all this in His own zeal through 
Jesus Christ. 

"O little town of Bethlehem, 

How still we see thee lie! 
Above thy deep and dreamless sleep 

The silent stars go by; 
Yet in thy dark streets shineth 

The everlasting Light; 
The hopes and fears of all the years 

Are met in thee to-night! 

"For Christ is born of Mary; 

And gathered all above, 
While mortals sleep the angels keep 

Their watch of wondering love; 
O morning stars ! together 

Proclaim the holy birth, 
And praises sing to God the King, 

And peace to men on earth. 

"How silently, how silently 

The wondrous gift is given! 
So God imparts to human hearts 
The blessings of His heaven; 
No ear may hear His coming; 

But in this world of sin, 
Where meek souls will receive Him 

still, 
The dear Christ enters in. 

"O holy Child of Bethlehem, 

Descend to us, we pray; 
Cast out our sin, and enter in 

Be born in us to-day! 
We hear the Christmas angels 

The great glad tidings tell 
Oh, come to us, abide with us, 

Our Lord Emmanuel ! " 



MATTHEW II. 5, 15, 17, 23 



second chapter of the Gospel is 
J. at once historic and prophetic. 

All the stories gather round four 
prophecies, and indicate the fulfilment 
of their deepest intention in history. 

The first prophecy is from Micah: 
"But thou, Bethlehem Ephrathah, 
which art little to be among the thou- 
sands of Judah, out of thee shall One 
come forth unto Me that is to be Ruler 
in Israel." 

The second is from Hosea: "I ... 
called my Son out of Egypt." 

The third is from Jeremiah: "A 
voice is heard in Ramah; lamentation, 
and bitter weeping, Rachel weeping for 
her children; she refuseth to be com- 



forted for her children, because they 
are not." 

The fourth is a truth uttered by 
many of the prophets in some form: 
"That He should be called a 
Nazarene." 

Thus the chapter shows us that the 
coming of the King was the fulfilment 
of the prophecies of the past. 

But that is only one of the values 
that we find in this chapter. It be- 
comes in itself a prophecy not directly 
or intentionally, but incidentally, and 
yet by no means less powerfully. The 
whole chapter is a prophecy indicating 
the line of the new history; revealing 
as in a flash the condition of things 



15 



. IT. 5, 15, 17, 23] 



MATTHEW 



which will obtain around this King 
through all the period following: His 
first advent, until His second advent. 
It is a microcosm of the Christian age, 
revealing principles that abide unto 
this hour. 

First, then, we will consider the ful- 
filment of the prophecies of the past in 
the coming of Jesus; and secondly we 
will attempt to notice how a new 
prophecy is articulated in these stories. 

Now the Bible student, finding in the 
New Testament a reference to the Old, 
must always take time to turn to such 
a reference. If we take these proph- 
ecies simply as they are uttered here, 
we cannot appreciate all their value. 
We must see them in their relation to 
context. 

Turn first to the prophecy of Micah. 
In ch. v. 2, we find this prophecy which 
Matthew first quotes : " But thou, 
Bethlehem Ephrathah, which art little 
to be among the thousands of Judah, 
out of thee shall One come forth unto 
Me that is to be Ruler in Israel ; Whose 
goings forth are from of old, from 
everlasting." 

Let us consider the circumstances 
under which these words were uttered; 
and remember the great burden of this 
prophecy. It centres round the subject 
of authority. Every one of these old 
prophets had a burden and a message. 
They had many burdens, and yet in 
every single prophecy you will find that 
the many burdens are included in some 
one great conception of truth. Micah's 
is the message of authority. He thun- 
dered denunciations against the false 
rulers of his own time, and looking on 
down the centuries, saw the revelation 
of the coming of the true King. It is 
the voice of the prophet of order, of 
authority ; the voice of the prophet who 
uttered the sob of the nation for the 
King, and fore-announced His coming. 

Now we go back to our story. Jesus, 
Child of the virgin, is born, not at 
Nazareth, but at Bethlehem ; born there 
through the decree of the Roman Em- 
peror, under whose yoke the chosen 
people are serving at the moment ; born 
there because His parents were going 
up to the taxing which had been or- 
dered by the Imperial decree. For that 
reason the people of Nazareth were in 



Bethlehem, and out of Bethlehem Jesus 
comes little Bethlehem, from which no 
one would look for a governor or a 
ruler, or expect a great man to arise. 
Thou art little to be among the thou- 
sands of Judah, but out of thee shall 
come a Governor, a Ruler. And 
Matthew, who by this time has learned 
the character of Jesus, takes liberties 
with the text of the old prophecy, and 
says more than Micah said ; adds to the 
prophecy of Micah a tender touch 
which explains the character of the 
Ruler. Matthew has seen a little more 
deeply into the nature of the Ruler, and 
says that He shall be a Shepherd. 

Now notice the actual facts surround- 
ing that prophecy which was here ful- 
filled. Two forces are represented. 
Homage is rendered to the Ruler as to 
kings; hatred is manifested against 
Him. Standing in opposition and con- 
trast to each other, are the Wise Men 
with their gold, frankincense, and 
myrrh; and Herod with the hatred of 
his lust and blood-thirstiness. So, as 
out of Bethlehem there comes the 
Ruler, the Shepherd, the Governor, the 
King, Who is yet to occupy the throne 
and hold the sceptre, there are those 
who welcome Him, and those who hate 
Him. There are those who take the 
long journey, following the guiding star, 
to lay at the feet of the new King 
even though He came in lowliness in 
little Bethlehem their gold and frank- 
incense and myrrh ; and there are those 
who are stupid, blind, and untouched, 
and moved wholly to destroy Him. So 
He comes; and concerning the coming 
of the King the prophet spoke long 
before. Homage and hatred are re- 
vealed side by side. 

Pass to the second of these prophe- 
cies. Again we must go back to the 
prophecy of Hosea. In ch. xi. 1 are the 
words from which Matthew is quoting 
" When Israel was a child, then I 
loved him, and called my son out of 
Egypt." It is perfectly evident that 
the reference here is to Israel as a 
nation. 

Let us see the whole scope of this 
prophecy of Hosea. The message of 
Hosea is one concerning the decadence 
and failure of Israel to fulfil its first in- 
tention. The subject-matter of Hosea's 



16 



MATTHEW 



. ii. 5, 15, 17, 23] 



prophecy is that of spiritual harlotry as 
the worst of all sin. Hosea spoke of 
the condition of affairs, the worst that 
ever existed in the history of the na- 
tion, and he spoke to the people out of 
the strangest and most tragic of cir- 
cumstances; experiences in his domes- 
tic life through which God had brought 
him into sympathy with Himself. 
When Hosea's heart was broken; when 
he had seen the fair ideal of his dreams 
wrecked before his eyes; when he had 
suffered that worst agony that ever 
comes to the human heart, the agony 
that follows upon the infidelity of hus- 
band or wife; then God said to him in 
effect: Now, Hosea, you know what I 
am feeling about Israel, for Israel has 
played the harlot against Me. Around 
that tragic training of the prophet lies 
the great message he bore. 

There are three cycles in the proph- 
ecy of Hosea. In the first cycle, the 
prophet dealt with pollution and its 
cause; in the second cycle, with pollu- 
tion and its punishment; at the begin- 
ning of the third cycle the prophet 
sang the love song of Jehovah. 

Take the whole love song and analyse 
it, and there are again three great 
movements: first the prophet sang the 
song of the present condition of the 
people in the light of God's past love; 
then he sang the song of the present 
condition of the people in the light of 
God's present love; finally he sang the 
song of the present condition of the 
people in the light of the love of God 
which is yet to come. 

In ch. xi. 1-4 God is singing, through 
the prophet, of the way He loved Israel 
as of old : " When Israel was a child, 
then I loved him, and called my son out 
of Egypt. . . ." Out of the midst of 
that love song, Matthew made a quota- 
tion, applying it to Jesus Christ; and at 
first it appears almost strange. " Out 
of Egypt did I call My Son." What 
does it mean? When God is telling the 
story of His love to Israel, He says to 
them : I loved you, and brought you out 
of Egypt. Egypt to you was a place of 
oppression, the place of slavery; but I 
brought you out. There was a great 
exodus, and I led the exodus out of 
Egypt. What has happened to these 
people? They have been scattered. 



The message of Hosea was heard for 
a little, and then forgotten. The 
movement of degeneration went on 
until Jeremiah thundered denunciations 
against the nation; until finally the last 
prophet, Malachi, spoke. Then no 
prophetic voice sounded for four hun- 
dred years. 

Now, four hundred years after the 
voice of prophecy and the last vision, a 
Child is born, the Child upon Whom all 
the hopes of God should rest, and 
therefore the hopes of men. The Child 
immediately shares the result of the 
sin of His own people. The man who 
occupied the throne when the Child was 
born was not an Israelite but an Edom- 
ite. Herod was outside the Covenant, 
and he was on the throne. The sin of 
Israel was that of making alliances with 
outside powers. By His coming, the 
true worship, and the worship of the 
false, are brought to light. Herod, 
the corrupt in his degradation, sat upon 
the throne, expressing in the very fact 
of his kingship everything that was un- 
like the purpose of God. He drove the 
chosen King down into Egypt, the place 
of oppression and sin. But the chosen 
King was not to stay in Egypt " Out 
of Egypt did I call My Son." 

It was a statement having historic 
value when Hosea sang it, but it had a 
prophetic value also; and now that at 
last the fruition of Israel, the fruitage 
of Hebraism, is to be found in the Per- 
son of this One, we see this historic 
Child, driven by the corruption of Is- 
rael into Egypt. As of old God loved 
Israel when a child, the child na- 
tion, and brought it out of Egypt; so 
His love centres still upon the King 
Who is yet to build a city and establish 
a nation ; and as He also shall come out 
of Egypt, and coming out shall lead the 
exodus, so, with others following, a 
great ideal shall be realised. It is a 
simple historical fact. Herod was niad 
with rage, and the angel warned Joseph 
and Mary, and they took the little 
Child and hurried into Egypt. But 
heaven watched and saw all Israel 
driven into Egypt in the Person of that 
little Child. Matthew says that He was 
to come back again. He had only gone 
there that He might be afflicted in all 
their affliction, that He might enter into 



17 



[MAM. ir. 5, 15, 17, 23] 



MATTHEW 



their sorrows. And as of old it was 
written, " Out of Egypt did I call my 
son," so again shall the King come out 
of Egypt; only a little Child, but lead- 
ing a great and glorious exodus. 

Take the next prophecy, Jeremiah 
xxxi. 15: "Thus saith the Lord; A 
voice is heard in Ramah; lamentation 
and bitter weeping, Rachel weeping for 
her children; she refuseth to be com- 
forted for her children, because they 
are not." Such is the part of Jere- 
miah's prophecy that Matthew quoted. 
What were the circumstances tinder 
which Jeremiah uttered his prophecy? 
We will go over its content that we 
may see the connection between it and 
the birth of the King. The prophesy- 
ing of Jeremiah was in some senses the 
most tragic of all. Jeremiah uttered 
the doom of a dying nation, and as 
every man of God does when he utters 
a doom, uttered it in tears. Presently 
Another shall come greater than Jere- 
miah; One Who will say everything in 
more fiery words; Who shall stand 
upon the slopes of Olivet, and look at 
the city smitten with the glow and 
glory of the setting sun; and as He 
sees it He shall say, "0 Jerusalem, 
Jerusalem, that killeth the prophets, and 
stoneth them that are sent unto her! 
how often would I have gathered thy 
children together, even as a hen gath- 
ereth her chickens under her wings, 
and ye would not! Behold, your house 
is left unto you desolate." And as He 
shall say it, the very tears of God will 
rain down His cheeks. Jeremiah was 
the forerunner of Jesus, centuries be- 
fore in this matter. It is a terrible and 
awful story, that of his prophesying, 
and suffering, and tears. But in Jere- 
miah, as in every other prophecy, there 
was a gleam of the glory of hope. How 
great were these Hebrew prophets so 
cloudy, so rough, so stormy; but on 
every storm-cloud there is a rainbow, 
and the promise of deliverance. Read- 
ing the prophecy of Jeremiah, we find 
that, beginning with chapter xxx. and 
ending with chapter xxxiii., there are 
four chapters in the heart of the book, 
full of consolation, full of comfort, full 
of joy; and these are the chapters in 
which Jeremiah went a little higher 
than the cloud-land in which he spoke, 



and saw the dawning of another morn- 
ing far off, the coming of the Branch, 
and the Deliverer. 

Now the prophecy tibat Matthew 
quotes is in the Book of consolation, 
but we seldom read it as though it had 
consolation in it. Rachel was weeping 
for her children and would not be com- 
forted because they are not. Surely 
this should not be in the book of con- 
solation! Let us read the context of 
the passage in Jeremiah. We have 
heard the plaintive wailing, the weeping 
of Rachel, the mother, because her chil- 
dren were gone ; but " Thus saith Jeho- 
vah : Refrain thy voice from weeping 
and thine eyes from tears : for thy work 
shall be rewarded, saith Jehovah; and 
they shall come again from the land of 
the enemy. And there is hope for thy 
latter end, saith Jehovah; and thy chil- 
dren shall come again to their own 
border." 

Now we begin to understand why this 
prophecy is so placed, when we see the 
sequence of it all. Yes, there was 
weeping when Jesus was driven out. 
How many suffered death in Bethlehem, 
we do not know; but there were moth- 
ers weeping, and Matthew heard of it, 
and said, It is the wail of the Mother 
Rachel, Mother of us all. Then, said 
Matthew, was fulfilled the old prophecy 
of Jeremiah. Matthew did not quote 
the entire prophecy, but only that part 
dealing with the weeping. Surely, 
though, he meant to refer us to the con- 
text of the quotation. 

The first prophecy quoted in the sec- 
ond chapter mentioned the Coming of 
the King. The second prophecy con- 
cerned His leading of an Exodus from 
Egypt. The third prophecy was that 
Rachel should have her tears dried and 
her weeping should cease. The King 
has come, as Micah foretold; the Exo- 
dus has come, as Hosea prophesied; 
and Rachel's weeping shall cease, as 
Jeremiah foretold. 

There is a triumphant march and a 
great sequence through this collection 
of the prophetic words, which leads us 
to the last of these prophecies, the gen- 
eral word "That He should be called 
a Nazarene." 

is the meaning here of this 



18 



MATTHEW 



[MAM. n. 5, 15, 17, 23] 



word Nazarene? It is a term of con- 
tempt. We must first get back into the 
historic setting, and understand the 
story as Matthew wrote it, and as the 
men of the day understood it. To have 
lived then, and to have said that a man 
was a Nazarene, would have been to 
use a term of contempt. Nothing de- 
cisive can be said as to the root origin 
or real meaning of the word Nazareth. 
There are two interpretations one 
meaning a sprout, a branch; the other 
meaning a protectress, or a guard. 
Probably the name Nazareth came 
from the old Hebrew "Netzer," which 
means a sprout, and so was something 
to be held in contempt. A tree is cut 
off, hewn down and left. One morning 
the passer-by sees just one green sprout 
coming up from the stump; "netzer." 
It is of no use. The tree is gone. And 
so this little town, high up off the main 
roads at the foot of the mountains; 
along which the great merchants of 
Greece came; along which Roman le- 
gions marched, 1 and the priests passed; 
was held in contempt. There were 
great movements down in the valley, 
but Nazareth was so much out of reach 
as never to be affected by them. And 
there is that thought in the quotation, 
" He shall be called a Nazarene ;" a 
Man belonging to the city that is not 
worth naming; a Man off the highways 
of life, knowing nothing of the great 
movements of the world; a Nazarene. 

In Isa. xi. 1 we read, "And there 
shall come forth a shoot out of the 
stock of Jesse, and a Branch out of his 
roots." It is the Hebrew word "net- 
zer," the same word as that from which 
Nazareth is probably derived. The fig- 
ure is that of a green tree cut down. 
Isaiah has foretold this cutting down, 
the destruction of the nation, of the 
country, of its city; but he says there 
shall come forth a shoot, just a little 
sprout that nobody will think to be of 
value; something that everyone will de- 
spise : and " The Spirit of Jehovah shall 
rest upon Him, the Spirit of wisdom 
and understanding, the Spirit of coun- 
sel and might, the Spirit of knowledge, 
and of the fear of Jehovah." The 
prophecy declared that when Messiah 
comes He shall be despised, counted 
nothing worth, just a branch, a sprout. 



Go on through the prophecy and you 
will find out more about the Branch. 

Then in the prophecy of Jeremiah, 
xxxiii. 15, we read: "In those days, 
and at that tune, will I cause a Branch 
of righteousness to grow up unto 
David; and He shall execute justice 
and righteousness in the land." The 
branch, the sprout, the thing held in 
contempt, shall count; a thing despised 
shall have dominion. When will the 
world learn its lessons? When will the 
world come to see that though He is 
the Nazarene of men, counted nothing 
worth, He is God's Imperial One in the 
race ? 

Micah said the King should come 
through Bethlehem; and He came. 
Hosea said through Egypt He should 
come, living through all oppression; 
and from Egypt He came. Jeremiah 
said Rachel should weep, but that He 
should Himself stop her weeping, for 
her captives would be brought back. 
And finally the prophets said He would 
be a Nazarene, a sprout; He would 
dwell in Nazareth. But the Sprout be- 
came a Branch, Spirit-clothed, and 
flaming with the majesty of God. 

The whole chapter is microcosmic. 
It is a picture for all time, until He 
come again. It indicates the treatment 
Christ will receive at the hands of the 
world through the centuries, until He 
come the second time. Through every 
century the critics of that chapter have 
been manifest. Take these four proph- 
ecies, and what have you? 
Homage and Hatred. 
Exile and Exodus. 
Sorrow and Song. 
Meanness and Majesty. 

Where is the King to-day? Hated. 
But, thank God we bring our gold, 
frankincense, and myrrh, to lay at His 
blessed feet. 

Where is the King? Exiled from 
hearts and homes and lives; but, thank 
God, He is leading an exodus of men 
and women. 

What is the result of His presence 
in this world? Sorrow. Rachel still 
weeps for her children; the suffering 
saints are all here; but there is a 
song that rises high above the dirge of 
sorrow. 

How is He accounted of men to-day? 



19 



[MATT. in. 1-12] 



MATTHEW 



Men are still saying, "Can any good 
thing come out of Nazareth ? " only 
they are now talking in past tenses and 
saying Christianity is worn out; it has 



had its day. But that is not all. We 
are crowning Him, we are lifting high 
above the conflict the song that tells He 
is King of kings, and Lord of lords. 



MATTHEW III. 1-12 



AT the commencement of this pas- 
sage we read, " In those days," 
but the reference is not necessarily one 
of immediate time. Matthew takes the 
story up after thirty years have elapsed, 
and gives us no details of the happen- 
ings of that period. A generation has 
passed away since we saw Jesus car- 
ried to Nazareth as He returned from 
Egypt. The time of the showing of the 
King is approaching; the hour at which 
He must be manifested to His people; 
the hour at which He is coming forth 
from privacy to publicity. He will 
cease to tread the lowly, patient path- 
way of a subject merely, and will begin 
to exercise His authority by declaring 
His manifesto, by exhibiting the bene- 
fits of His kingdom, and by finally 
moving to His Cross and Throne. But 
before His manifestation, His herald is 
seen, and it is with the herald that we 
have to do in this passage. 

Let us, then, look at the herald him- 
self. Let us consider the ministry he 
exercised among the Hebrew people. 
Let us finally consider his Christian 
ministry that is, the ministry by which 
he linked the old economy to the new; 
culminating one dispensation, and utter- 
ing the word which indicated the com- 
mencement of the new movement. 

In the first four verses the man him- 
self is presented to our view. The key- 
note of his ministry is struck ; but we 
are principally occupied with the man. 

Let us look at the man first according 
to the old-time prophecy (ver. 3). Sec- 
ondly let us see the man as he appeared 
to his day and generation (ver. 4). 
Finally let us listen to the key-note of 
his ministry (ver. 2). 

First, then, the man, according to 
prophecy. Here again the Hebrew 
evangelist, writing specifically from the 
Hebrew standpoint, linked the coming 
of John with the prophecies of the past. 

Turn to the prophecy of Isaiah (ch. 
xl. 3) : " The voice of one that crieth, 



Prepare ye in the wilderness the way 
of Jehovah, make level in the desert a 
highway for our God." Let us en- 
deavour . to keep in view the whole 
sweep of the prophecy of Isaiah, for we 
can only grasp individual verses by 
great outlooks. We shall only see 
where this quotation fits into the min- 
istry of Jesus Christ, as we attempt to 
fasten upon our minds what this proph- 
ecy teaches. 

Leaving any discussion of the unity 
of the authorship of Isaiah, but remem- 
bering that it is a unified message, there 
will be manifest a very distinct method. 
The book falls naturally into three great 
divisions. There are first thirty-five 
chapters, constituting a great move- 
ment; of judgment pronounced, shot 
through again and again, as all the 
Hebrew prophecies are, with the light 
of mercy, and the gleaming glory of 
infinite grace, that for evermore en- 
wraps the judgment of God. The great 
subject of this first division is judg- 
ment. The prophet first of all utters 
an impeachment of the nation, with 
strange, alarming, and terrible denunci- 
ation of the condition of God's ancient 
people. Then moving on, he tells the 
story of how he was called and com- 
missioned to his work. In those chap- 
ters are two movements of judgment: 
first, the judgment of the chosen people 
on account of their failure; secondly, 
the judgment of the nations. 

Then there is a small division in the 
heart of the prophecy, chapters xxxvi.- 
xxxix., four chapters only, which may 
be called historic; corresponding with 
the story in some of the historic books 
of the Bible. In these the prophet de- 
scribes the condition of affairs in his 
own time, and so explains the great 
burden of judgment that he has been 
compelled to utter. 

Then at chapter xl. commences the 
supreme message of the Book of Isaiah, 
that for which all the rest has been 



20 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. in. 1-12] 



necessarily preparatory. In Isaiah, as 
in every Hebrew prophecy, judgment is 
not the final word, and the prophet 
breaks out, " Comfort ye, comfort ye 
My people, saith your God." Then, as 
if he were listening to something that 
was not to come for centuries after 
for an inspired man has not only keen 
vision, but acute hearing he says, 
without naming the man, " The voice 
of one that crieth. Prepare ye in the 
wilderness the way of Jehovah, Make 
level in the desert a highway for our 
God." The prophet has heard the cry 
afar off before any one else has heard 
it. It is a voice in the desert; but he 
understands it, he knows what it means, 
and in a moment he begins, " Every 
valley shall be exalted, and every 
mountain and hill shall be made low; 
and the uneven shall be made level, 
and the rough places a plain;" and the 
majestic description of issues moves on 
through chapters xl. and xli., and 
everything moves forward to chapter 
xlii. "Behold My Servant, Whom I 
uphold; My Chosen in Whom My soul 
delighteth." From that moment the 
prophecy centres in, and proceeds 
through, that Servant of Jehovah. 

We shall find presently in Matthew's 
Gospel that he quotes this prophecy of 
the Servant of Jehovah. We stand 
back from this old prophecy, and turn 
over to ch. iii. of the Gospel and read, 
"And in those days cometh John the 
Baptist, preaching in the wilderness of 
Judaea, saying, Repent ye ; for the King- 
dom of heaven is at hand. For this is 
he that was spoken of through Isaiah 
the prophet saying, 

The voice of one crying in the 
wilderness, 

Make ye ready the way of the 
Lord, 

Make His paths straight." 
The King is coming; the Servant of 
God that Isaiah described in all the 
remaining portion of his great book. 
John is preaching, and the voice that 
Isaiah heard with keen, quick hearing, 
centuries before, is singing in the wil- 
derness, sounding over the Jordan, 
through the region round Jerusalem, 
through Judasa, penetrating to the heart 
of the metropolis Jerusalem. It is the 
voice that foretells the advent of the 



Kingdom of heaven, when " Every val- 
ley shall be exalted, and every moun- 
tain and hill shall be made low." The 
voice announces the new age, the new 
movement; a new age and movement 
not sentimentally, but personally gov- 
erned. The Kingdom is at the doors, 
and the fulfilling of the ancient proph- 
ecy, the ministry of John the Baptist 
commences. 

Secondly, let us look at the man as he 
appeared to his people (ver. 4). " Now 
John himself had his raiment of camel's 
hair, and a leathern girdle about his 
loins, and his food was locusts and wild 
honey." That is all. It is one of those 
pictures that has very little light and 
shade from without. There are no fine 
outlines merging into the shadows and 
coming up into great light. There was 
nothing of this in John the Baptist. He 
was a man severe, ascetic; one bur- 
dened with a sense of the sin of his 
times. 

The story of John is a wonderful one. 
He was born in the priesthood, and 
therefore for the priesthood. As to how 
far he and the Boy Jesus knew each 
other there has been much speculation. 
This boy John was born in remarkable 
circumstances. He grew up, coming to 
young manhood, when he should have 
taken upon him the vows of the priest- 
hood according to Divine and human 
arrangements. But elections of the past 
are set aside, and suddenly the young 
man, cared for, prayed for, and nur- 
tured in the home of his father, turned 
his back upon home, and upon the 
priesthood; and went, for preparation 
for his work, into the wilderness, and 
dwelt there until the hour of his mani- 
festation. There he may have brooded 
over the story of the past ; brooded over 
the strange conviction within him that 
told of day-dawn at hand; brooded, if 
he had known the Boy Jesus, over what 
he had seen in Him, perchance of sim- 
plicity which had astonished him; 
brooded almost certainly over his 
mother's story of his own birth, and the 
birth at the same time of this Boy 
Jesus. He thought long and in loneli- 
ness. It is Quite true that if a man 
would know something of the sin of his 
own age, he must live in the midst of 
his age. But no man has ever spoken 



21 



[MATT. in. 1-12] 



MATTHEW 



against the sin of his age with the au- 
thoritative voice of God, who has only 
lived in the midst of his age. He must 
also see it from the distance. This man 
went into the wilderness, and suddenly, 
without warning, he broke upon the 
whole nation; a great voice, ringing 
over the mountains and plains. 

Thirdly, what was his message ? " Re- 
pent " Change your minds. This word, 
Repent, was the key-note of Jesus' 
teaching. This is radical, revolutionary. 
A man comes out of the wilderness, and 
looks into the faces of the village-folk, 
of the suburban people, of the metro- 
politan people, and he says : Repent ; 
you are all wrong; wrong at the heart 
and core of things; wrong in your see- 
ing, and therefore in your doing. 

But the reason is, that the " Kingdom 
of heaven is at hand." The " Kingdom 
of heaven" was a current phrase of 
Jewish speech, which is almost peculiar 
to the Gospel of Matthew, representing 
a perpetual consciousness in Jewish 
thinking. "The Kingdom of Heaven" 
the theocracy, the Divine government, 
the heavenly Order. In earthly life the 
authority of God exercised among men. 
Now, said this strange ascetic preacher 
as he came, This Kingdom is at hand. 
The ideal your fathers have cherished 
is about to be realised in your midst, 
and you are not ready for it. "Re- 
pent," change your minds. It was a 
great word and a great message, deliv- 
ered with no tone of tenderness judging 
from the records which, while meagre, 
are yet sufficient. There was never a 
tone of tenderness about John until he 
saw Jesus; and then the stern ascetic 
became full of tenderness as he used 
the greatest phrase of the spirit of ten- 
derness : " Behold, the Lamb of God, 
that taketh away the sin of the world." 
But until the great Sin-bearer came, 
John was the sin-bearer in his own con- 
sciousness ; the sin of the nation was on 
his heart. He was the most magnificent 
in many ways of all the long line of 
prophets, with an awful monotony in 
his message " Repent ye, for the King- 
dom of heaven is at hand." 

Yet his message to the Hebrew people 
is given a little more fully. We have 
only so far looked at the key-note. Now 
look at ver. 5. "Then went out unto 



him Jerusalem, and all Judsea, and all 
the region round about the Jordan, and 
they were baptized of him in the river 
Jordan, confessing their sins. But when 
he saw many of the Pharisees and 
Sadducees coming to his baptism, he 
said unto them, Ye generation of 
vipers " offspring, genus, kin " who 
warned you to flee from the wrath to 
come ? " And yet he did not turn them 
back. He did not say they could not 
flee. He did not say their repentance 
was not genuine ; but he told them what 
to do. " Bring forth, therefore, fruit 
worthy of repentance: and think not 
to say within yourselves, We have 
Abraham to our father : for I say unto 
you, that God is able of these stones to 
raise up children unto Abraham." 

Such is the brief analysis of the He- 
brew ministry of John; and there are 
three qualities in it. First, it was at- 
tractive "Then went out unto him 
Jerusalem, and all Judsea, and all the 
region round about the Jordan;" sec- 
ondly, it was convictive " They were 
baptized of him in the river Jordan, 
confessing their sins;" finally, it was 
invective. Against the men who con- 
stituted the fountain-head of all Is- 
rael's trouble Pharisees, Sadducees 
he flung himself in passionate protest. 

We sometimes imagine that there is 
nothing attractive in our ministry, ex- 
cept the winning, wooing note. But 
there are times when we seem to need 
again the voice of the herald; and 
when God finds a John the Baptist and 
sends him out, his message is full of 
attractiveness. This is a great picture 
of attractiveness, of a man with a note 
of conviction in his message and au- 
thority in the way that he deals with 
sin. He came with no theology; he 
came with no philosophy to discuss; he 
came with no new cult to introduce ; he 
did not come to ask men to consider a 
position which they could accept or re- 
ject as they pleased; he came with the 
thundering voice of a great inspiration 
" Repent ;" and the message of God's 
authority stirred every place, and every 
one. Thank God it is true to-day. We 
do not need one Gospel for the city, and 
another for the suburbs, and another 
for the country. Jerusalem, and all 
Judaea, and all the villages need the 



22 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. in. 1-12] 



same message. Before Jesus come, 
John Baptist must come to the city, and 
suburbs, and country; and as his mes- 
sage is heard there will be attractive- 
ness in it. 

Then notice, his message was convic- 
tive. At least men acknowledged the 
truth externally, and submitted to the 
baptism which was a symbol of their 
repentance. Of course it all fell short 
there. It can never be any more than 
that. John Baptist can never communi- 
cate life. Coming after him is the Sin- 
bearer, the great tender-hearted King 
of men, Who does not only produce re- 
pentance, but gives life. If we are con- 
vinced of sin, thank God for it, but it is 
not enough. The crowds that thronged 
the banks of the Jordan, and went down 
into its waters of baptism, which was a 
baptism of repentance, were very sin- 
cere; but to accept Jesus there must be 
something more than this. 

Once again, notice the invective note 
in his preaching. Now the leaders were 
responsible Pharisees and Sadducees. 
The Pharisee was a ritualist; the Sad- 
ducee a rationalist. The Pharisee be- 
lieved in all supernatural things, but 
imagined that they could be expressed 
in external things, and that is always 
the story of ritualism. The Sadducees 
did not believe in angel, spirit, or resur- 
rection. They were rationalists, cold 
and hard. These are the forces that 
damn a people, that blight a nation. 
John saw them coming; the ritualists 
and the rationalists, who with their 
splendid observance of externalities and 
their inward corruptness of life, had 
blighted the whole nation. And John 
said with roughness, " Who warned you 
to flee from the wrath to come," ye kin 
of vipers? And then, as if he had 
said: You have come, and you say you 
repent; but by you, more than by all 
others, must be manifested the reality 
of your repentance. " Bring forth 
therefore fruit worthy of repentance;" 
trust no longer in your physical rela- 
tionship to Abraham " God is able of 
these stones to raise up children unto 
Abraham." 

What a message it was! It must 
have burned and scorched these men. 
The more one studies it the more glad 
one is that Jesus' ministry of renewing 



followed. Thank God that the message 
to-day is that of this blessed King! 

Notice what John said about the 
King, for after all it is the supreme 
matter. "And even now the axe lieth 
at the root of the trees; every tree 
therefore that bringeth not forth good 
fruit is hewn down, and cast into the 
fire." It is a wonderful message 1 God 
help us to catch its notes. 

The first thing that John testifies, 
is to the coming One, and he says two 
things of Him first, He is supreme in 
His Person; secondly, He is supreme 
in His work. There is a humility about 
this ; there is a touch of modesty in it ; 
and the difference between a real hu- 
mility and a mock humility, we all 
know. Real humility never knows it is 
humble; mock humility is proud of its 
humility. " He that cometh after me is 
mightier than I, Whose shoes I am not 
worthy to bear." John was quite right. 
We will take Another's estimate of 
John: "Verily I say unto you, Among 
them that are born of women, there 
hath not arisen a greater than John the 
Baptist." This is what the King said 
of him, and this is true also. And yet, 
greatest of women born, said the King, 
he was not worthy to bear the shoes of 
the King. This is quite true. 

There is a supreme difference in 
their work. We need not describe the 
difference between the two men the 
rugged and rough prophet, and the 
magnificent and majestic King, Whose 
very gentleness is mightier than the 
hurricane of His herald. '" Thy gentle- 
ness hath made me great." The con- 
trast is not only in the persons ; it is in 
their work. " I indeed baptize you with 
water unto repentance, but He that 
cometh after me is mightier than I 
He shall baptise you in the Holy Spirit 
and in fire " I lead you to the external 
symbol of your repentance; He shall 
whelm you in the fire-whelming of the 
Holy Ghost, that burns your sin out of 
you, and re-makes you. I have to do, 
said John, with the external thing 
water, that which can only touch the 
surface of things; He shall work with 
fire, that which shall go through 
everything. 

That is the difference between Jesus 
and John to-day. If we listen to the 



23 



[MAT*, in. 13-17] 



MATTHEW 



message of John only, we stall be busy 
with water-baptism and washing. But 
if we listen to the message of Jesus, the 
fire will burn, and burn to purity, and 
burn to realisation, and burn to crown- 
ing. The work of Jesus is superior to 
the work of John. 

Listen to what John says about His 
methods. This is to be a strange and 
wonderful King Who is coming. He is 
to be destructive and constructive in 
His method ; and His victories are to be 
destructive and constructive. 

His methods of destruction are, "the 
axe," " the fan," and " the fire." " The 
axe lieth at the root of the trees," said 
John. It is ready. He is coming, and 
His " fan is in His hand," the fan that 
winnows. And the fire will burn. 

But His methods are constructive. 
He shall baptize you with fire ; He shall 
cleanse the threshing-floor, not destroy 
it, and " He will gather His wheat into 
the garner." Mark the contrast. The 
axe at the root of the trees for destruc- 
tion for the cutting off of the fruit- 
less; the fan for scattering the chaff; 
the fire for immediately devouring the 
chaff. But mark the constructive work. 
The fire is for cleansing and energy; 
the cleansing of the threshing-floor, 
that perfect work may go forward, and 
the garnering and the gathering in of 
the wheat. It is the same thing, and the 
same instrument that does two opposite 
things. The fan drives away the chaff, 
leaving the wheat. The fire burns up 
the thing that cannot stand its fierce 
flame ; and perfects that which can bear 
the flame. And so the King Who comes 
is to be destructive and constructive 
destructive, for the fruitless tree is to 



be hewn down ; the chaff is to be driven 
away and burnt, constructive, for the 
threshing-floor is to be cleansed; the 
wheat is to be gathered and garnered, 
and men are to be fire-baptized. 

Nineteen centuries have gone since 
this rugged prophet heralded the com- 
ing of the King. The work of Jesus 
has proceeded in human history for 
nineteen centuries on exactly the lines 
he laid down. Jesus Christ has always 
been the King of destruction and con- 
struction. Glance back; think of the 
centuries, and think of the influence of 
Jesus in the centuries. What has He 
done? Oh! the things He has burnt 
up. Oh ! the things He has built. Al- 
ways fanning, and chaff is flung before 
it; always a gatherer, and the wheat 
is being garnered. It is so to-day. The 
axe of Jesus lies at the root of the tree 
that is fruitless. The winnowing fan 
of Christ is at work; the chaff must go. 
Do you imagine that after all the chaff 
is going to submerge the wheat, and 
fruitless trees crowd out the fruit- 
bearing vines of God? Then you do 
not know the King. His fan is in His 
hand, and if we live on the mountains 
of God, we shall feel the wind of God 
which blows and scatters things which 
must go. 

The question of importance for us, 
for our work in the little day God 
allows us to live, is this : 'Am I chaff, 
or wheat? Is the work I am doing 
chaff or wheat? If I am chaff, His 
wind will blow me to the unquenchable 
fire; but if I am wheat, He will gather 
me, and garner me. So with my work, 
and with everything. 



MATTHEW III. 13-17 



few verses reveal the rela- 
J. tion of the King to heaven, as they 
tell the story of His attestation and 
anointing. 

The paragraph commences with the 
word "then," which connects it with 
what has preceded, and reminds us that 
these events took place in a time of 
general consciousness of sin, and of 
that great moral movement throughout 
the whole region consequent upon the 



ministry of John the Baptist. Then, the 
King came out of seclusion to manifest 
Himself to men. The voice had cried 
in the wilderness, and the way of the 
Lord was thus made ready, and His 
paths made straight. At the set time, 
the King came from privacy into pub- 
licity. From the quiet seclusion of the 
years spent in Nazareth, He came to 
inaugurate His work and assume His 
office. 



24 



MATTHEW 



[MA*. in. 13-17] 



In these few verses there are three 
matters for our consideration: the bap- 
tism of the King; His anointing; and 
the Divine word concerning Him. 

Notice that it is carefully stated that 
He came " to be baptized." His coming 
was of set purpose and for a special 
reason. Considering the note of John's 
message, and the meaning of his min- 
istry, this action on the part of Jesus 
at once arrests attention and arouses 
inquiry. John had been preaching re- 
pentance, and his baptism was the bap- 
tism of repentance. All men had 
crowded to him the men of the city, 
of Judsea, of the wayside, and of the 
whole region of Jordan. Among the 
rest, Jesus of Nazareth set His face 
towards the place where the prophet's 
voice was heard and the prophet's 
baptism was being administered. He 
set His face, moreover, not as one of a 
curious multitude going to listen and 
observe, but for the special purpose of 
being baptized. We ask with wonder 
and amazement, Why should He be 
baptized with the baptism of repen- 
tance? That is the question to which 
we are to attempt to find an answer. 

I. In looking at the baptism let us 
first notice its place in the life of Jesus. 
Forgetting His office, which is the su- 
preme matter in this Gospel; turning 
our attention from the fact that He is 
King, anointed of God from eternity for 
this work, we will simply look at Him 
as the Man as He has appeared before 
us in the story of His genealogy and 
birth. The life of Jesus was absolutely 
sinless. If He were not sinless, then 
we have no Gospel. All the value of 
His dying depends upon the virtue of 
His living. Why, then, did the Sinless 
submit to a baptism of repentance? 
John looked into the face of this one 
Man, among all other men coming to 
his baptism; and with the keen, quick 
insight of the truly inspired seer, he 
saw the difference. He had been bap- 
tizing many men as they had pressed 
to him, and as he looked upon their 
faces he had seen in all of them the 
evidences of anxiety for repentance. 
But when this Man came to him, One 
among a crowd, so like them that the 
crowd did not distinguish Him, there 
was yet a difference. John said, "In 



the midst of you standeth One Whom 
ye know not." And then John looked 
at Him and said, "I have need to be 
baptized of Thee, and comest Thou to 
me?" 

John, looking into His face, became 
conscious of the absolute perfection and 
sinless spotlessness of this Man. He 
was amazed and arrested; he felt as if 
he dare not lay his hands upon that 
Man to immerse Him in the waters of 
the Jordan. 

So far as the human life of Jesus is 
concerned, John was perfectly right in 
that feeling. There was no place for 
John's baptism in the life of Jesus ; He 
had nothing to repent of, no sin to be 
put away, the putting away of which 
was symbolised in this ablution in 
water. If Jesus was simply living out 
a human life to consummation, which 
would henceforth be pattern and ideal 
only, then that baptism was out of place, 
having neither value nor meaning. 

Then we must go further if we are 
to understand the meaning of the bap- 
tism of Jesus. If it did not occupy a 
place in the life of Jesus, did it occupy 
a place in the mission of the King? 

The question suggests the answer. 
When John was reluctant, and felt he 
could not lay his hands upon Jesus to 
baptize Him, Jesus looked at him and 
said, " Suffer it now; for thus it be- 
cometh us" that was John and Him- 
self " Thus it becometh us to fulfil all 
righteousness" thus it becometh you 
to act with Me, and Me to act with you 
for the fulfilment of righteousness. 

In that statement we find the mean- 
ing. The supreme element in the bap- 
tism of Jesus was the identification of 
the Sinless with the sinner. He Who 
had no sin to repent of, took His place 
among those who had sin to repent of. 
He Who was sinless, went down into 
the baptism that was the portion of the 
sinner. 

In Isaiah liii. we read, "He . . . 
was numbered with the transgressors." 
There, in baptism as in incarnation and 
birth, and finally and for consummation, 
in the mystery of His Passion, we see 
the King identifying Himself with the 
people over whom He is to reign, in 
the fact of their deepest need, and 
direst failure. This chapter of Isaiah 



25 



[MAM. in. 13-17] 



MATTHEW 



is the one in which the picture of the 
Servant of God finds its culminating 
glory. The prophecy of the forerunner, 
which was fulfilled in the ministry of 
John, is found in chapter xl. In chap- 
ter xlii. is recorded the beginning of 
the new movement, " Behold My Ser- 
vant," and from there onwards, the 
Servant of the Lord is presented. In 
chapter liii. we see the Servant of the 
Lord rejected, bruised, cast out; the 
suffering Messiah, the King that men 
will not have. Towards its close we 
have the story of His Person, and of 
His ultimate victory, and in verse 11 
we find these words, " He shall see of 
the travail of His soul, and shall be 
satisfied. By the knowledge of Him- 
self shall my righteous Servant jus- 
tify many; and He shall bear their 
iniquities." 

These words, "My righteous Servant 
shall justify many," are the explana- 
tion of the meaning of Jesus when He 
said to John, "Thus it becometh us to 
fulfil all righteousness." By identifica- 
tion with them in sin and suffering 
" He bare the sin of many." He 
identified Himself with them in their 
sins, and "was numbered with the 
transgressors;" and therefore "by the 
knowledge of Himself shall My right- 
eous Servant justify many." His 
knowledge of Himself is His first-hand 
knowledge (see John ii. 24, 25), and so 
is knowledge of the need, knowledge of 
the remedy, and consent to all such 
knowledge is involved. " He shall bear 
their iniquities." The King was facing 
the problem of obtaining His Kingdom, 
and He faced first the sin of man. He 
submitted to the baptism of John, in- 
dicating by this symbolic action His 
identification of Himself with His peo- 
ple in their sin, in order that He may 
put that sin away, and build and estab- 
lish the Kingdom of God, and so fulfil 
all righteousness. 

His going down into the waters of 
baptism was a consent and a prophecy. 
It was a consent to the only method by 
which the King could save from sin; 
and it uttered the prophecy of that final 
baptism towards which His face was 
set through all the days of public min- 
istry the baptism of His Passion. 
Jesus referred to personal baptism only 



twice subsequently. Both Matthew and 
Mark tell the story of some office- 
seeking disciples who asked to sit one 
on the right hand, and the other on the 
left in His Kingdom. And He looked 
at them and said, " Are ye able to drink 
the cup that I drink? or to be baptized 
with the baptism that I am baptized 
with ? " Perhaps they thought He was 
speaking of that past baptism in water, 
for they said, "We are able." We 
know He was looking on to that other 
baptism of which the first baptism was 
the foreshadowing and the prophecy 
the Passion Baptism. That was His 
great baptism. 

Only on one other occasion did He 
make reference to His own personal 
baptism. In that wonderful soliloquy 
of His recorded by Luke, when, sur- 
rounded by His own disciples and op- 
pressed, He broke out into these words, 
" I came to cast fire upon the earth ; 
and what will I? Oh that it were al- 
ready kindled! But I have a baptism, 
to be baptized with; and how am I 
straitened till it be accomplished ? " 
John baptized in water. Jesus came to 
baptize with fire; but He could not 
baptize with fire, until He Himself had 
been baptized in the whelming waters 
of death. 

Thus the King is seen commencing 
His public ministry. There lie behind 
Him the quiet years of seclusion and 
preparation, the years in which He has 
done the Will of God in the common- 
place. Now the great crisis has come. 
He will presently enunciate the laws of 
His Kingdom, personally exhibit the 
benefits of that Kingdom; and enforce 
the claims of His Kingship. He knows 
that the culminating work will be the 
Cross; that these multitudes, baptized 
of John, will reject Him. He knows 
that He cannot win them by His ex- 
ample and by preaching, but only by 
the way of His dying. He knows the 
issue of sin. These sinners on the banks 
of the Jordan are making necessary His 
death death in its profoundest sense; 
and as He watches them going down to 
those waters, He goes with them, and 
in that whelming in the Jordan He 
typifies and prophesies that death- 
whelming through which He, the Inno- 
cent, will presently pass in order to 



26 



MATTHEW 



[MAM. in. 13-17] 



fulfil all righteousness, to cancel sin, to 
banish it, to make it not to be; that He 
may build His Kingdom on the founda- 
tions of righteousness, and " bring forth 
the topstone with shoutings of Grace." 
By His knowledge as Isaiah said long 
before by His knowledge of the need, 
and of the real meaning of sin; by His 
knowledge of the way by which men 
may be redeemed, His soul consents to 
an identification that shall issue in 
death, the supreme character of which 
shall be expressed by the terrible words, 
"The pains of Sheol gat hold upon 
Me." And as He goes down into these 
waters of baptism He consents to that 
mission, and formally commits "Himself 
to the cause of man, for man's saving. 

This baptism of Jesus has no applica- 
tion to us. We rob this passage of all 
its significance when we say that as 
Jesus was baptized, therefore we ought 
to be baptized. I^et us not take hold of 
this great and marvellous passage, and 
use it in a small and unworthy way. 
We have something to do with this bap- 
tism of Jesus, but it is a baptism that 
we cannot be baptized with ^save by 
identification through His grace. " The 
cup that I* drink ye shall drink; and 
with the baptism that I am baptized 
withal shall ye be baptized." That was 
a word of infinite love. 

There are two applications of the 
great baptism that of judgment and of 
death, and that of life and of fire. We 
share only in that of life and fire. That, 
He can only bestow upon us by the way 
of judgment and of death ; by the mys- 
tery of His Cross. Thus He fulfilled all 
righteousness. By His baptism He com- 
mitted Himself to men, and to the pur- 
poses of God; consented at the begin- 
ning of His public ministry to God's 
method for the saving of men. 

II. Now let us turn to that which im- 
mediately followed the baptism. "And 
Jesus, when He was baptized, went up 
straightway from the water ; and lo, the 
heavens were opened unto Him, and He 
saw the Spirit of God descending as a 
dove, and coming upon Him; and lo, a 
Voice out of the heavens, saying, This 
is My beloved Son, in Whom I am well 
pleased." There is little doubt that 
none saw this descent of the Spirit save 
Jesus and John. What was the meaning 



of this anointing, in the life of Jesus? 
Jesus did not now for the first time re- 
ceive the Holy Spirit. There was a per- 
manent relation between Jesus and the 
Spirit of God. He was, in a sense in 
which none other ever has been or can 
be, born of the Holy Ghost; His devel- 
opment had been under the control of 
the Spirit of God. When He came to 
baptism, He was a Man of the Spirit of 
God, as all men might have been, had 
there been no sin. Jesus was a natural 
Man ; not as Paul uses the word, not in 
the theological sense, but in the simpler 
sense that lies behind the theological 
sense. We are told that the natural 
man is the sinner, and there are present 
senses in which that is true; but God's 
ideal for a man is that he should live 
in perpetual communion with the Spirit 
of God. That is truly natural life. The 
natural life of the ideal man is super- 
natural. The whole life of Jesus was 
dominated by the Spirit of God. He 
willed, and thought, and lived under 
the Spirit's power, and illumination, 
and impulse. 

Therefore without question this was 
a special anointing of Jesus as He en- 
tered upon His public ministry. The 
Spirit of God never appears under the 
figure of a dove anywhere save here. 
The Spirit of God never manifested 
Himself in this form before. We have 
no right to pray that the Spirit may 
descend on us as a dove. It descended 
on Him in this outward, and visible, 
and symbolic fashion, and on Him 
alone. 

It has been said by Puritan writers 
that the dove is among the birds what 
the lamb is among the beasts a symbol 
of great gentleness and sweetness. 
Jesus used the figure of a dove in that 
application in those remarkable words 
when He said to His disciples that they 
were to be "wise as serpents, and 
harmless as doves." The dove and the 
lamb are gentle and harmless in their 
character; and they are therefore also 
types of sacrifice. Jesus was led " as a 
lamb ... to the slaughter, and as a 
sheep that before its shearers is dumb " 
so was He. 

The Spirit therefore came upon Him 
as a dove. The Book of Leviticus de- 
picts this strange yet wonderful rite of 



27 



[MAM. in. 13-17] 



MATTHEW 



Hebraism which typified and shadowed 
sacrifice. In the great sin-offerings 
men brought offerings graded, as to 
value, according to their social position. 
A man who could afford it brought a 
bullock, another would offer a lamb, and 
the poorest brought a dove. It is inter- 
esting to remember that when Mary 
brought Jesus up to the Temple, her 
offering was a dove. The dove there- 
fore is the bird that signifies patience, 
gentleness, harmlessness ; and is the 
type of sacrifice possible to the lowliest 
of the people. 

We must put ourselves back into 
Hebrew thinking to understand these 
things, and their spiritual significances. 
Matthew wrote his Gospel specifically 
for the Jew. When the Hebrew heard 
of a dove, or of a lamb, he always 
thought of a sacrifice for sin. The 
coming of the Spirit as a bird of sacri- 
fice for sin for the lowliest was the 
equipment of Jesus for the carrying out 
of the deepest purpose of sacrifice. He 
had just consented to death in His 
whelming in the waters, and the Spirit 
of God fell upon Him as a dove. The 
bird of sacrifice for sin in the ancient 
economy rested in holy gentleness upon 
Him, Who is God's one, perfect, final 
Sacrifice for sin. The dove is the em- 
blem of weakness; but tHe Spirit of 
God in the form of a dove is an emblem 
of power in gentleness Deity submis- 
sive to sacrifice for the salvation of 
men. This was an anointing for death, 
for atonement. It was not simply an 
anointing for preaching, but for living 
in order to dying. He had consented to 
death; and Heaven crowned Him with 
power for that death. " Christ . . . 
through the eternal Spirit, offered Him- 
self without blemish unto God;" and 
when the Spirit came as a dove, it was 
for that crowning and that purpose. 
The King as a man is energised by God 
for dealing with that which is funda- 
mentally wrong in the Kingdom, and 
setting it right. God clothes Himself 
with man that He may proceed to the 
redemption of the lost race; and the 
Son is enwrapped in the power of 
the Spirit's anointing, and crowned 
with the dove-like form. So the King 
faces the conflict, already conquering in 
the glory of the victory that is to be. 



III. Finally we listen to the attesta- 
tion. The Voice is heard saying : " This 
is My Beloved Son, in Whom I am well 
pleased." We must interpret that Di- 
vine affirmation by the second Psalm, 
in which we see the anointing of the 
Son, and the King, "upon His holy hill 
of Zion." Therein We hear the decree 
of God: 

" Jehovah said unto Me, Thou art 

My Son; 
This day have I begotten Thee." 

That is one of the most glorious 
references to the Son of God as the 
reigning King that the Old Testament 
Scriptures contain. God's King is to 
ask for the nations, and possess them 
with the heathen, and hold them for 
an inheritance. " Thou art My Son." 
The thought of the Scriptures that He 
was a Son runs through the old Hebrew 
prophecies, and ritual, and thinking. 
Now at last, on the banks of the Jor- 
dan, God says, " This is My ... Son." 
This is the Son of man, but He is " My 
. . . Son," Whose advent the prophets 
foretold. Men have been waiting and 
looking for His appearing; calling to 
the watchers on the mountains, and 
asking, "What of the night?" They 
have wondered at the delay of His 
coming, and have cried out through the 
days, Come quickly ! " This is My . . . 
Son." So God marks out the King. 

But God declares another thing con- 
cerning Him. " In Whom I am well 
pleased." This declaration flashes its 
light back on those hidden years of 
Nazareth. We have no chronicle of 
those years. There is an almost com- 
plete silence from the time He was 
twelve years of age to His thirtieth 
year. It is now at thirty years of age 
we see Him on the banks of the Jor- 
dan, spotless, and sinless, and ready for 
sacrifice. One's mind goes necessarily 
back to the old economy, and we see 
the priest examining the sacrifice, which 
must be without blemish. Is this Man 
without blemish ? God says " I am well 
pleased." He sets the seal of perfec- 
tion upon the hidden years. We want 
to know no more. We ask for no de- 
tails; it is enough. 

In Nazareth He has pleased God as 
a Man ; He has done what no other did, 



28 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. iv. 1-1 1] 



or could do, since man fell by sin. And 
so the light is flashed upon the past, 
and shows its perfection. 

But there is a further value. Said 
Jesus, " Therefore doth the Father love 
Me, because I lay down My life." And 
when God said, " I am well pleased," it 
was a declaration of the Divine com- 
placency with the act of baptism, which 
indicated perfect union with God in the 
purpose of salvation, even by the way 
of the Cross of death. 

There was the most perfect unity of 
purpose and of spirit between the 
Father and the Son through all the 
process of redemption. Smitten? Yes. 
Afflicted? Yes. Bruised? Yes. Be- 
cause of righteousness and holiness? 
Yes. But, "In all their affliction" 
even in lie affliction of the Cross 
" He was afflicted," not merely as Man, 
but One with God Himself working for 



salvation. "Therefore doth the Father 
love Me" because of this accomplish- 
ment. And as He sets His face toward 
the Cross, in perfect union with the 
Will of God, God breaks the silence and 
says, "I am well pleased." 

Thus in baptism He assumed respon- 
sibility for sinning men ; by the anoint- 
ing of the Spirit He was crowned and 
empowered; and by the Divine Voice 
He was attested God's King, set upon 
the holy hill of Zion. 

Let us close with the words of the 
Psalmist : 

' Now therefore be wise, O ye kings : 
Be instructed, ye judges of the earth. 
Serve Jehovah with fear, 
And rejoice with trembling. 
Kiss the Son, lest He be angry, and 

ye perish in the way, 
For His wrath will soon be kindled. 
Blessed are all they that put their 

trust in Him." 



MATTHEW IV. 1-11 



WE have now to consider the King 
in His relation to the great 
under-world of evil, and to its god, 
" the prince of the power of the air." 
The King has come, not merely to 
reign. There is an initial work devolv- 
ing upon Him that of subduing the 
Kingdom to Himself. He does not enter 
into a Kingdom waiting for Him, re- 
sponsive to His claim. He comes to a 
Kingdom characterised by anarchy and 
rebellion. In God's economy of the 
Kingdom, a. Man is to be King. But 
this Man, if indeed He is to receive the 
Kingdom, and reign over it, must be 
demonstrated as personally victorious 
over these forces of antagonism, by vic- 
tory over the master foe. The King has 
been attested as being in perfect har- 
mony with the order and beauty of the 
heavens, in the word that God spoke at 
His baptism, " This is My beloved Son, 
in Whom I am well pleased." But He 
is now to face the disorder and the 
ugliness of the abyss. Goodness at its 
highest He knows, and is. Evil at its 
lowest He must face, and overcome. 

The subject reveals Him to us in 
three ways: first, as perfect Man; sec- 
ondly, as Man demonstrated perfect 



through testing; and finally, as Man 
victorious, and therefore fitted for 
supremacy. 

I. In this story of the temptation, 
the King is revealed as perfect Man. 
Turning our attention for a moment 
from the enemy and his method, and 
fixing it upon the Person of Jesus, we 
see in the background, not distinctly 
described, but most evidently present, 
God's ideal of humanity. This is 
brought out in the threefold movement 
of temptation. 

This temptation is an orderly tempta- 
tion, if we may use such a word in 
speaking of any method of hell; it is 
utterly disorderly in the profounder 
sense; but it is a scientific and system- 
atic attack upon a Man. It is this we 
need to see. These temptations are 
not the swift, sudden, subtle, insidious 
temptations that sweep upon men. Our 
Lord faced such also; but these consti- 
tute an organised and systematic attack 
upon a man in every department of 
his life. 

Mark in one brief glance the order 
of the temptations. First, an appeal to 
the physical nature bread; secondly, 
an appeal to the spiritual nature trust 



29 



[MATT. iv. 1-113 



MATTHEW 



in God; finally an appeal to the voca- 
tional purpose Here are the Kingdoms 
of the world for which Thou hast come, 
take them from me. 

In that glance there stands revealed 
in all the sombre shade, and yet the 
vivid light of the wilderness, God's 
Man. What is man? Physical and 
spiritual in being; yet existing, not 
merely for the sake of existence, but 
for a purpose. Material, spiritual, voca- 
tional. In this order Matthew records 
the temptations. 

We see Jesus in this first temptation 
as of the earth. He is of the material 
order, consciously realising all the facts 
of the material life, its limitations and 
its necessities. He depends upon the 
material for the sustenance of the ma- 
terial side of His nature; He is a Man 
Who fasts for a long time, but after- 
wards becomes conscious of His hunger. 
Superior, in His material nature, to all 
the material order; able for a period 
not to eat; yet needing to eat eventu- 
ally in order to the sustenance of His 
life. That is the first fact about man, 
any man. There are differences be- 
tween this Man and other men, because 
others are not perfect men; they are 
members of a ruined and fallen race. 
This Man is a perfect Man according to 
the Divine pattern, but in the essential 
facts of being He is our Kinsman. We 
are children of the earth, and the first 
thing we come into contact with, if we 
meet each other, is the material. We 
do not know the spiritual fact of the 
man we meet in the street. We must 
get nearer to him before we can know 
that. Here in the wilderness is Jesus 
of Nazareth of the dust, but crowned 
and glorified ; yet, dust as every man is. 
Man on his physical side is the highest 
and final fact in God's material cre- 
ation, superior to everything else; ris- 
ing over every form of life, master 
of the rest, regnant in the midst of a 
magnificent creation, of which he is the 
consummation and culmination. The 
physical side is temporal, transient ; but 
it is essential to this strange and mar- 
vellous thing which we speak of as hu- 
man nature. 

In the second of these temptations we 
see Jesus, no longer of the earth, ma- 
terial; but of the infinite, spiritual. In 



that spiritual nature He is conscious of 
God, seeks to know the will of God, is 
submissive to the spiritual order, yields 
to the law of God. 

On the material side He is of the 
earth, and something of the earth is 
needed to sustain Him bread. On the 
spiritual side He is of the infinite, and 
something of the infinite is needed to 
sustain Him. Thus here we see a Man, 
physical and spiritual, but the spiritual 
is the deepest fact in His life, as it is 
the deepest fact in every life. The 
physical is temporary, transient, and 
passing ; the spiritual is the abiding and 
the supreme. 

Then once again, in the third tempta- 
tion, Jesus is seen as existing for a pur- 
pose. He was born to serve. He was 
equipped in His being for service. He 
knew that service could only be ren- 
dered as He worshipped God. "Thou 
shalt worship the Lord thy God, and 
Him only shalt thou serve." 

Here, then, is revealed the Man 
Whom God ordained to be King God's 
archetypal Man, the perfect Man and 
as we look at Him we see that the su- 
preme end of life is vocation; that the 
essence of life is spiritual; that the 
present expression of the spiritual fact 
and vocation is physical. Temptation 
commences in the external, which is 
physical ; passes to the internal, which 
is spiritual; attacks finally the voca- 
tional, which is the supreme thing in 
the life of every man. This is the 
picture of human life, according to the 
purpose of God. 

The government of such beings is 
placed by God in the authority of One 
of them; but the King must be unim- 
paired in realisation of the Divine 
Ideal. A man who has failed at any 
point cannot govern men. He cannot 
govern those who have not failed, and 
he certainly cannot redeem those who 
have failed. A man who has prosti- 
tuted his physical nature to base uses; 
a man who has silenced and stifled and 
dwarfed his spiritual nature; a man 
who has failed to realise his vocation, 
cannot be king. An imperfect being 
cannot demand our loyalty; we cannot 
be loyal to inferiority; we cannot bow 
the knee and worship in the presence 



30 



MATTHEW 



. iv. 1-11] 



of anything other than perfection. That 
is only one side of the great story. 

See it from the other side, and in 
view of the fact with which we com- 
menced this study that the King has 
first to subdue to Himself a Kingdom 
full of anarchy and rebellion. He can- 
not do it if there be anarchy in His 
own personality. If there be failure in 
His own life, His arm is paralysed, His 
heart lacks courage, and He cannot re- 
deem. There must be the perfection 
of humanity in order to reign over 
humanity. 

II. Therefore, in order to reign, the 
perfect One must be demonstrated per- 
fect through testing. 

Here we touch the deepest mystery 
and majesty of human nature. The 
awful and yet magnificent responsibility 
of choice is imposed upon every indi- 
vidual. Man stands in his probation 
between two possibilities. He can use 
his whole nature in response to evil, or 
to good, both in the material and spiri- 
tual realms, for evil and good assault 
and woo him. 

Again we are bound to pause and 
make a distinction between the perfect 
Man and ourselves. It is still true that 
we are called to choose between evil 
and good, but we start in life, and find 
that when the choice is presented to us 
we would do the good, but evil is pres- 
ent with us; and that perpetually in our 
life, we want to choose the good, and 
would choose it, but the force and pas- 
sion of evil and the feebleness resulting 
therefrom are in us, and we cannot. 
Some man says, That is exactly the 
truth. That is what I want explained 
in my case. What am I to do? In an- 
swer "Where sin abounded, grace did 
abound more exceedingly," and while in 
our own unaided strength, the strength 
of the nature into which we were born, 
we cannot do good; in the strength and 
victory that this Man won, and the 
work He did, we can choose and do the 
good if we will, and there is no reason 
why any man should continue in sin. 

But let us get back to Jesus in the 
wilderness. He stood alone. There 
were no forces burning within Him 
which He could not overcome. He oc- 
cupied the position which was occupied 
by the first Adam before he failed. 



Standing there, with a perfect Man- 
hood in the presence of temptation, He 
must be tested, and make His choice 
between the good and the evil. 

The first purpose of the enemy is the 
spoiling of the instrument of expression. 
He appeals to the physical, he appeals 
to the material, he appeals to that ex- 
ternal fact in the Person of Jesus, 
through which impressions are received 
by the spirit, and through which the 
spirit for a while is to express itself. 
The occasion of the testing is the 
proper desire for sustenance. This Man 
felt the clamant cry of the physical, 
for material sustenance. Here was His 
infirmity. 

What is an infirmity? We are told 
by the writer of the letter to the He- 
brews that "we have not a high priest 
that cannot be touched -with the feeling 
of our infirmities." What are these 
infirmities? A man with an atrociously 
bad temper says, That is my infirmity. 
That is not so ; that uncontrolled temper 
is sin. A man with some evil habit, 
for which he blames his father, says, 
That is my infirmity. It is not ; it is sin. 
An infirmity is a weakened power that 
requires strengthening. You go forth 
to toil and work, and presently there 
comes to you the sense of hunger. That 
is an infirmity. Oh, you say, I always 
thought hunger was a sign of strength. 
No, it is a sign of weakened strength, 
a beneficent, beautiful sign, a sign that 
you are in health, a sign that God is 
still governing your life, at least on the 
physical side. Your hunger is the voice 
that says, Supply sustenance, and the 
thing that makes you need sustenance 
is that the physical part of you is weak- 
ened for the moment. That is your in- 
firmity. That weakening is the avenue 
through which temptation comes ; it pre- 
sents itself to the clamant cry of a 
weakened power, properly weakened 
through exercise. And a man who 
never weakens his powers is wasting 
his life; a man who never takes the 
force that is in him and uses it until it 
grows a little flaccid and nerves give 
way, is wasting his life. Yet that 
weakened power is the opportunity of 
temptation. 

Now, what is the testing? It is as 
though the enemy had said: There is 



31 



[MATT. iv. 1-11] 



MATTHEW 



an inter-relation between the two sides 
of Thy nature. The physical is hun- 
gry ; but Thou art the Son of God, Thou 
art offspring of God, Thou art kin of 
God; there is in Thee this spiritual en- 
tity. Turn Thy spiritual nature into a 
means of satisfying Thy material need 
without reference to the will of God. 
If Thou art the Son of God, if Thou 
hast a spiritual nature, use that power 
in order to turn stones into bread, and 
satisfy Thy physical need. Act for 
Thyself, prove Thy Sonship by Thy 
independence. 

The perfection of the Man Jesus is 
demonstrated in His refusal. Hunger 
was not wrong; bread was not an im- 
proper thing ; but Jesus stands for ever- 
more in the isolated splendour of the 
wilderness saying to man; It is better 
to be hungry than to be fed without 
reference to the will of God. I cannot, 
He says, take hold of a spiritual capac- 
ity, and use it for the supply of a proper 
physical need, without reference to the 
will of My Father. I cannot act in in- 
dependence as a Son; the essence of 
Sonship is obedience; and if for the 
moment the circumstances into which 
the Spirit has led Me necessitate My 
hunger, then I will do nothing to alter 
the Divine condition and surrounding. 
I do not live only by bread; man lives 
also by the word of God that which 
conditions His life. And so in the first 
temptation against the physical He is 
victorious. 

Next came the test of the spiritual. 
What is the purpose here? If, in the 
first, it was the spoliation of the in- 
strument, here it is the ruin of the 
essential. 

The occasion of the test of the spiri- 
tual is the strain which has just been 
put upon the spiritual relationship by 
the choice made to suffer hunger by 
faith in God. The material victory was 
a spiritual victory. And in the moment 
of that victory what happened ? A Man 
feeling all the pangs of hunger, all the 
weariness of weakness, said; I choose 
the hunger, and choose the weakness, 
because, essentially, I am not material, 
but spiritual. And the hunger contin- 
ues, and there is a strain put upon re- 
lationship; and as the strain is put 
upon relationship the tempter comes 



again, and says, "If Thou art the Son 
of God." 

The suggestion is that He should 
make improper use of the relation be- 
tween the spiritual essence, and the 
physical mode of expression; that He 
should take the instrument, and venture 
something heroic in demonstration of 
the perfection of His spiritual nature. 
It is as though the enemy had said to 
the perfect Man, You have declared 
your allegiance in response to my first 
temptation; you have declared your 
trust in God ; very well ; if you do trust 
Him, venture something on your trust; 
do something heroic; do something 
splendid; show how much you trust in 
God by flinging yourself from the pin- 
nacle of the temple. 

The moment a man begins to tempt 
God, to prove trust; he proves that he 
does not trust. The moment a man 
begins to do something heroic to demon- 
strate trust, he gives evidence that trust 
is lacking. Perfect trust is quiet, and 
waits. Trust trembling, wants to do 
something heroic to make it steady. 
Jesus said, No, My trust is so perfect 
that I need to do nothing heroic to 
prove it. "Thou shalt not tempt." 
The spiritual nature retained its dig- 
nity; He refused to do anything 
spectacular. 

Finally, the temptation moved into 
the last realm. Its purpose was the 
prevention of the accomplishment of 
the work of the King. Its occasion was 
the consciousness of victory already 
won, and the consequent new flaming 
of the supreme passion to serve. The 
moment you have won a great victory, 
in the power of the victory won, you 
want to be doing. Jesus had won a 
victory in the physical realm, and had 
won a victory in the spiritual realm. 
Now the enemy came again and said : 
Well, you have won, you have not failed 
as an instrument ; now here is your 
work; here are the kingdoms of the 
world; you have come for them; give 
me one moment's homage, and I will 
abdicate. What a lie it was ! 

Did he imagine for a moment that 
he could deceive Immaculate Purity this 
way? He was a liar from the begin- 
ning, and he never lied more directly . 
I will give Thee the kingdoms ! Never 



32 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. iv. 12-25] 



would he have done so. That was the 
tempting bait. Jesus saw the king- 
doms, and their glory, but He saw all 
the permeating influence of evil and 
destruction, and He knew had He not 
consented to it in baptism? that these 
kingdoms could only be won by blood 
and suffering, and death. And with the 
voice of quiet authority, He said, " Get 
thee hence, Satan: for it is written, 
Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God 
and Him only shalt thou serve," which 
is to say, My vocational power is as- 
sured under the Divine Government, 
and I abide there. I will take these 
kingdoms from God, in God's way. In 
His answer there is a prophecy, a flam- 
ing prophecy. " Get thee hence." Thou 
dost offer Me the kingdoms if I will 
give thee homage ; I will take the king- 
doms by turning thee out : " Get thee 
hence, Satan!" Thus the King is 
demonstrated perfect by victory. 

III. The great value of all this is 
discovered as it is remembered that the 
victory was won wholly within the 
sphere of human life. To every assault 
of evil He has answered wholly as Man. 
There is no obtrusion of Deity into the 
conflict. The -law He quoted was man's 
law, and in human obedience to that 
law, He has won. 

But His victory was the victory of a 



Man with God. Every man by original 
design and creation is offspring of God, 
and has certain claims on God. Man 
can urge his claim on God if he fulfils 
the law of God. Jesus fulfilled the law, 
and urged His claim, and in communion 
with God, He won His victory. 

And yet, thank God, His victory was 
won not only as Man, and as Man with 
God, but for men. To defeat the victor 
is to save the vanquished, and one reads 
that one brief sentence at the close, 
that makes one's soul thrill with music 
"the devil leaveth Him." 

Thus the great personal conflict is 
over. There are other battles to be 
fought and won, but they will be in 
more direct sense representative and 
redeeming. Never again will the foe 
directly attack Him, and in the open. 
The attack was made against every vul- 
nerable point hunger, trust, and re- 
sponsibility and when these are held, 
there remains no other avenue through 
which the foe can assault the citadel of 
the human will. The need of material 
sustenance, the spirit's confidence in 
God, and the carrying out of a Divine 
commission in a Divine way, these are 
all the avenues. The King has held 
every one. His defeated foe now leaves 
Him, and the King in personal life, and 
character, and victory, holds the field. 



MATTHEW IV. 12-25 



IT is quite plain that between verses 
11 and 12 there is a gap in the 
chronology. It is interesting and re- 
markable, that the three evangelists 
whom we describe as synoptists, omit a 
section of the public ministry of Jesus, 
covering twelve months. There can be 
no doubt that such a period of time 
elapsed between verses 11 and 12, in 
this fourth chapter of Matthew. We 
read, "Then the devil leaveth Him; 
and behold, angels came and ministered 
unto Him;" and immediately following, 
" Now when He heard that John was 
delivered up " that is, when John was 
arrested and imprisoned " He with- 
drew into Galilee." 

Although we are studying the Gospel 
of Matthew, it will not be out of place, 
and certainly not lacking in interest, if 



we attempt to fill up the gap, in order 
that we may know what happened in 
the ministry of Jesus. 

Coming back from the wilderness, 
and from His temptation, Jesus seems 
to have lingered in the neighbourhood 
of John's ministry for at least three 
days. On the first day, He stood 
amongst the crowd unrecognized by 
them, but discovered by John. On that 
first day John said, "In the midst of 
you standeth One Whom ye know not." 
On the second day, for some purpose, 
Jesus moved through the crowd towards 
John himself, and John saw Him com- 
ing to him, and then made his great 
pronouncement, " Behold, the Lamb of 
God, that taketh away the sin of the 
world ! " On the third day, Jesus was 
again seen by John, but walking away; 



33 



[MATT. iv. 12-25] 



MATTHEW 



and as He went. John cried out, "Be- 
hold the Lamb of God," and immedi- 
ately two at least of John's disciples 
left him, and followed Jesus. On the 
first day, John spoke of the perfect Per- 
son " In the midst of you standeth 
One Whom ye know not, even He that 
cometh after me, the latchet of Whose 
shoe I am not worthy to unloose." On 
the second day he spoke of the perfect 
Propitiation "The Lamb of God, that 
taketh away the sin of the world ! " On 
the last day he spoke of the perfect 
Pattern "The Lamb of God." 

Immediately following this, Jesus 
turned to John's disciples who came 
after Him, and said, " What seek ye? " 
One of them replied by asking, " Rabbi, 
where abidest Thou ? " And He said, 
" Come and ye shall see." And they 
followed Him. One of them was 
Andrew. The other is not named. 
Andrew immediately found Simon his 
brother, and brought him to Jesus. 
And Jesus "findeth Philip." Whether 
He knew him before or not, we cannot 
tell, but He sought him and found him. 
And " Philip findeth Nathanael." That 
group constituted the first nucleus of 
disciples. 

But we are not yet at the point in the 
history which Matthew records. The 
disciples and Jesus went to Cana of 
Galilee. Jesus went as. a guest. It was 
a purely social function. He tarried for 
two or three days down in Capernaum, 
and then went on to Jerusalem; pre- 
sented Himself in the Temple; and 
cleansed it. This was His official pre- 
sentation to the rulers of His people. 
Then we have an account of His con- 
versation with Nicodemus, after which 
He left the metropolis and came into 
Judaea. John was still pursuing his 
ministry, and "baptizing in J32non near 
to Salim, because there was much water 
there." Jesus preached in Judaea, and 
baptized (though He did not baptize 
personally, but His disciples for Him). 

Thus He did not commence to exer- 
cise His definitely official ministry as 
King until John's ministry ended, 
through his arrest. These things that 
John records for us are of value, but 
they have a peculiar relation to the 
message of John. 

In this Gospel of Matthew all these 



matters are omitted. Matthew, writing 
the Gospel of the Kingdom, after having 
presented the person of the King, takes 
up the story at the point where, the 
message of the herald having been si- 
lenced by his arrest and imprisonment, 
Jesus began His official work as King, 
proclaiming His Kingdom prior to enun- 
ciating its laws and exhibiting its 
benefits. 

In this paragraph we have the ac- 
count of the initial work in the procla- 
mation of the Kingdom ; the propaganda 
of the King commences. 

There are three movements to notice 
in this brief passage. First, Jesus 
came down into Capernaum, and took 
up His residence there, and began to 
utter the fundamental note of His 
Kingly ministry " Repent ye, for the 
Kingdom of heaven is at hand." 

Then Jesus gathered a nucleus of 
men, for purposes of co-operation with 
Him. 

The rest of the paragraph is occupied 
with a very brief and yet beautiful 
statement of the remarkable success at- 
tending the initial ministry of the King. 

His residence in Capernaum is in it- 
self remarkable, demanding attention. 
Why did Jesus come to Capernaum of 
all other places ? Matthew, who is per- 
petually tracing the connection between 
the ministry of Jesus and the great 
prophecies of the past, distinctly says 
that "He came and dwelt in Caper- 
naum, which is by the sea, in the bor- 
ders of Zebulun and Naphtali : that it 
might be fulfilled which was spoken by 
Isaiah the prophet, saying, 

The land of Zebulun and the land of 

Naphtali, 

Toward the sea, beyond the Jordan, 
Galilee of the Gentiles, 
The people that sat in darkness 
Saw a great light, 
And to them which sat in the region 

and shadow of death, 
To them did light spring up." 

Now let us go back to the prophecy 
of Isaiah. In ch. ix. 1 we read: 

" But there shall be no gloom to her 
that was in anguish. In the former 
time He brought into contempt the land 
of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, 
but in the latter time hath He made it 
glorious, by the way of the sea, beyond 
the Jordan, Galilee of the nations. The 



34 



MATTHEW 



[MAT*, iv. 12-253 



people that walked in darkness have 
seen a great light: they that dwelt in 
the land of the shadow of death, upon 
them hath the light shined." 

In the consideration of the beginning 
of our Gospel we saw how Matthew 
quoted from Isaiah with regard to the 
virgin birth of our Lord; "The virgin 
shall be with child, and shall bring 
forth a son." The prophecy begins with 
the promise of the virgin conception 
and ends here with the Child born, and 
the government placed upon His shoul- 
ders; and constitutes a complete unveil- 
ing of the Divine purpose. The prophet 
Isaiah, standing on that mountain peak, 
and looking out over the mist and the 
darkness of his own time, saw the com- 
ing of Immanuel, God with us. He saw 
Immanuel go down to Zebulun and 
Naphtali, the lands that suffered most 
from the Assyrians, to the place and 
peoples most degraded as the result of 
their presence. This is not merely a 
geographical prophecy it is that in a 
secondary sense but it is a prophecy 
based upon a principle. When God 
visits His people for redemption, He 
comes where the darkness is greatest; 
where the peoples sit in the shadow of 
death. Geographically, and .according 
to principle, He did that very thing. 
Capernaum was in the despised region 
of the country of the chosen people 
known as " Galilee of the Gentiles." 

And you must be a Hebrew to under- 
stand that, or at least must feel with 
the heart of a Hebrew. It was " a por- 
tion of the country which had been 
overrun more than any other by the 
foreign invader, and therefore known 
as ' the region and shadow of death.' " 
That was Capernaum; and Jesus 
began His public ministry there. He 
went down and dwelt in Capernaum. 
There was the first Christian settle- 
ment. Jesus did not go down to teach 
them how to obtain better social condi- 
tions, but to bring them to God. The 
difference is fundamental. His first 
word was "Repent." He did not com- 
mence where people were least likely to 
need it. Capernaum was His basis; 
His centre; the point from which He 
moved out to begin His preaching. 
The people which sat in darkness saw 
light; the people which sat in the 



region of the shadow of death saw the 
great light; He began His initial, 
Kingly ministry, in Capernaum, on the 
fringe of things. 

If we would be partakers with Christ 
in work, we must go to Capernaum ; to 
the fringe of things; to the despised 
countries, to the helpless districts; to 
the regions wrapped in the pall of a 
great death, and a great darkness. It 
was not accidentally that Christ went 
and dwelt in Capernaum. 

But what did His coming to Caper- 
naum mean? When He came it was a 
great day for Capernaum, if Capernaum 
had only understood it "The people 
that sat in darkness saw a great light. 
And to them that sat in the region and 
shadow of death, to them did light 
spring up." Think of it, that for a 
little at least, there dwelt in Capernaum 
the very Light of Life, the very Light 
of Love, the very Light of Truth. They 
became familiar with His form and the 
tones of His voice; for everywhere they 
crowded to Him from all the district, 
bringing unfit people in crowds. He 
was the prophet Who had lived in 
Nazareth through long years; now He 
made Capernaum His base of oper- 
ations, that neglected city living under 
the shadow of death. When He came, 
men saw Life at its highest, and its 
best, according to a Divine Ideal; the 
Light of Love flashed over their sor- 
rows and their sins ; the Light of Truth 
illuminated the dark corners, and re- 
vealed evil things. There, in the midst 
of the darkness and in the midst of the 
need, He struck the key-note of His 
ministry. 

That key-note was the proclamation 
of a great fact, and the uttering of a 
great call! The fact "the Kingdom 
of heaven is at hand;" the call "Re- 
pent ye." Jesus came into Capernaum, 
and men woke from their stupor, slum- 
ber, and degradation, and asked the 
meaning of the light. 

He said, "the Kingdom of heaven is 
at hand." And while they heard Him 
say "the Kingdom of heaven is at 
hand," His own heavenly, Kingly life 
revealed it. Then they heard Him say, 
"repent," change your minds. They 
heard Him say, You are wrong in your 
surroundings because you are wrong in 



35 



[MATT. iv. 12-25] 



MATTHEW 



your heart. The darkness is on you 
because the darkness is in you. The 
Kingdom of heaven is come to you, and 
the Light is on you. Admit it by re- 
pentance. There was much more to 
say, much unveiling, much exposition, 
much illumination, but that was the 
key-note of all the message. 

Then there came the necessity for 
something more; and we find Him 
calling to Himself these four men. Let 
us notice first, the call of the four men ; 
secondly, the purpose for which He 
called them; and finally, their answer 
to Him. 

Simon and Andrew were already per- 
sonal disciples, as we see by reference 
to John's Gospel. 

Andrew was one of John's disciples. 
On that third day, when Jesus had 
moved away and left John in order to 
proceed to His own work, Andrew had 
followed Him, and having come to the 
Messiah, had called Simon. In this 
picture in Matthew they are all fishing. 
rThis call was not to discipleship ; it 
was the call to fellowship in servicey 
He saw them there at their work, ana 
looking at them while they handled the 
net, He said, " Come ye after Me, and 
I will make you fishers of men." It 
was the call to new work; to the aban- 
donment of everything, in order to de- 
vote themselves to Him and His work. 

This is not a call that comes to every 
man. Every man was not called, even 
in the days of our Lord's earthly min- 
istry. All men are not called now. 
These men were thus specially called. 
For a year they had been personal dis- 
ciples ; now He called them to quit their 
fishing, to lay aside their nets, to go 
with Him for a new vocation and work. 
He illustrated their new work by using 
the figure of their old occupation " I 
will make you fishers of men." 

James and John were in their father's 
boat mending nets, and doing the work 
of their daily calling. It may be they 
had been called into personal fellowship 
before, but this was the call to service 
and work. 

The King was about to enunciate His 
great propaganda of the Kingdom. In 
order to do so it was necessary that He 
should have a few men gathered around 
Kim, who were loyal to His kingship. 



He desired to utter the laws of His 
Kingdom, but He could only do so to 
men who were in His Kingdom. 

When our Lord calls men away 
from their daily vocation into a new 
vocation, He calls them with infinite 
simplicity, and great sublimity, by sug- 
gesting to them that all that they have 
been using for themselves they can now 
use for Him. " I will make you fishers 
of men." 

The principle here is not that Jesus 
is going to make us all fishers of men. 
He is going to make us all workers, and 
turn any capacity we have into account. 
Jesus found me at my desk with boys 
about me, teaching them, and He passed 
me one day and said, Come with Me, 
and I will make you a teacher of men. 
He took hold of that which I could do, 
and said, Do it for Me. If He had 
said " fishers," He never would have 
won me. He took fishermen, and He 
said, Fish. He will take soldiers if 
they will hear, and He will say to 
them, Fight for Me. He will take the 
teacher and say to Him, Teach for Me. 
What He wants, is men who will give 
Him the capacity they have, and let 
Him lift it into a higher realm, and He 
will use it, never mind what it is. He 
said to these men, Come with Me and 
I will make you fishers of men; I will 
take the training you have, and use it 
on higher levels. 

And how beautiful is the answer! It 
is the same in each case. " Straight- 
way " for Andrew and Simon ; and 
" Straightway " for James and John. 
Straightway they dropped their nets 
and went out after Him. They left 
their nets and their father, and went 
out after Him to follow Him. At His 
command for service, they abandoned 
their daily calling. They did not do 
this until He ordered them to. The 
vast multitude of Christian people are 
not called to leave their fishing-nets. 
They are called to abide in their calling 
with God; which is quite as honourable 
as leaving it. The honourable thing is 
to obey Christ, and the despicable thing 
is to disobey. What He wants is men 
who can keep hold of the things of the 
daily calling, until He calls. Has He 
called you ? If He has called you to the 
ministry, drop the things in your hands 



36 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. v. 1, 2] 



straightway; the Kingdom waits for 
violent hands. If He has not called 
you, keep hold of the fishing-nets, and 
you will find when the glory breaks 
upon your vision by and by, that the 
fishing-nets, and the fishing, were 
parts of God's work for winning the 
world. He called them, and they went 
straightway. 

That last paragraph which tells of the 
initial success of this ministry of the 
King is very beautiful. He went every- 
where, teaching, preaching, and heal- 
ing. "The report of Him went forth 
into all Syria, and they brought unto 
Him all that were sick, holden with 
divers diseases and torments, possessed 
with devils and epileptic, and palsied." 
Was there ever such a crowd as that? 
The picture is hardly fascinating at 
first. Look at the crowd. Look at the 
fit, who are bringing all the unfit peo- 
ple of the district to Him. Yet it is the 
most beautiful picture. They brought 
the sick, the diseased, and the devil- 
possessed to Him, and He healed them. 
He is doing it to-day wherever He 
comes and exercises His ministry, 



though His word be stern as the flash 
of Heaven's own word " Repent." 
They came after Him with diseased 
people, and broken people those physi- 
cally and spiritually afflicted. They are 
still gathering to-day, notwithstanding 
the fact that people criticise certain 
men and methods. Some come out of 
idle curiosity, but deep down under- 
neath is the hunger to find some one 
Who will heal. This is a great picture ! 
Oh, it is a fearfully sad picture! 
One is always thankful as one reads it, 
though it seems a strange thing to say, 
to remember that the Master was not 
deceived by the multitudes. He knew 
perfectly well those thronging multi- 
tudes. He took accurate measure of the 
depth of their conviction, and its shal- 
lowness. He knew that within a short 
year or two, some of these very people 
would hound Him to His death. He 
knew they would kill Him, and He 
stayed with them, and loved them, and 
died for them. Oh! matchless King! 
Let us crown Him anew. Let us put 
upon His brow some other wreath, some 
other chaplet! 



MATTHEW V. l a 2 



IT is important that we should intelli- 
gently understand the place of this 
Manifesto in the work of Jesus. We 
will therefore consider its occasion, its 
method, and its nature as revealed in 
these words; "And seeing the multi- 
tudes He went up 'into the mountain; 
and when He had sat down, His dis- 
ciples came unto Him; and He opened 
His mouth and taught them." Its oc- 
casion was Christ's vision of the multi- 
tudes. Its method was that of the 
enunciation of the laws of His King- 
dom, not to the multitudes, but to His 
own disciples. Its nature was that of 
revealing to them the first value of the 
Kingdom as being spiritual, and its ulti- 
mate expression as being material. 

The occasion " Seeing the multi- 
tudes." This is a very familiar phrase. 
Jesus had commenced His ministry. 
The days of privacy were for ever over. 
He had emerged from the quietness and 
seclusion of Nazareth, and had com- 
menced to tread the pathway upon 



which there beats a fiercer light than 
ever falls upon a throne the pathway 
of the public teacher. As He began 
there was a strange and wonderful at- 
tractiveness in Him, and 'the multitudes 
gathered round Him. The unfit people 
of all the countryside were attracted to 
Him. Probably the people in that dis- 
trict had no idea how many unfit and 
incompetent people there were in their 
midst until Jesus, moving through the 
towns and villages, drew them round 
Himself. We cannot too often read 
these words or too solemnly consider 
them and catch their meaning " They 
brought unto Him all that were sick, 
holden with divers diseases and tor- 
ments, possessed with devils, and epi- 
leptic, and palsied, and He healed 
them." What a gathering of unfit peo- 
ple! But not merely such. They 
crowded after Him, from Decapolis, 
from Galilee, from Jerusalem, from 
Judsea and beyond Jordan. 

The people attracted by Jesus were 



37 



[MA**, v, 1, 2] 



MATTHEW 



not a people of one class or of one 
caste. He attracted to Himself all sorts 
and conditions of men ; and as the King 
passed through that region, all kinds of 
people came out after Him, crowded 
after Him; many of them to see His 
works, the curious crowd, always at- 
tracted by something out of the ordi- 
nary, the weakest part of the crowd, 
always the most difficult to deal with. 
Other men were attracted to Him not 
so much by His works as by His words. 
But whatever the motive, they came, all 
sorts and conditions of men. People 
jostled each other who had never done 
so before; Pharisees side by side with 
publicans; ritualists side by side with 
harlots, and sinners; men of light and 
leading, and the scholarly men of the 
age, side by side with the illiterate, the 
degraded, the depraved. The presence 
of Jesus meant the massing of human- 
ity without any reference whatever to 
the mere accidentals of birth, and caste, 
and position. Pharisees dropped their 
quibbling for a little to listen. Pub- 
licans quitted their seats of custom to 
hear Him. Men forgot everything 
about their divisions. Caste never lives 
for five minutes in the presence of 
Jesus Christ. He burns it up with His 
coming. He is never attracted to a 
man because of the breadth of his phy- 
lactery, or the enlargement of the bor- 
der of his garment. He is never 
repelled from a man blessed be God! 
by his rags. Underneath the rags 
and the phylactery He sees the man, 
and He is after the man, not his 
clothes. And men know it, and they 
are always attracted by a man who is 
after men; so they gather to Him. 
That, then, was the occasion " Seeing 
the multitudes, He went up into the 
mountain" leaving the multitudes in 
the valley. 

They did not stay there; they fol- 
lowed Him, and there is no doubt they 
heard a great deal of this Manifesto. 
But He did not address it to them; the 
Manifesto was not for the mixed multi- 
tude. It is not for the mixed multitude 
to-day. " Seeing the multitudes, He 
went up into the mountain, and when 
He had sat down His disciples came 
unto Him, and He opened His mouth 
and taught them the disciples, not the 



multitudes. You ask; Do you mean to 
say Jesus did not intend this enunci- 
ation of laws for the multitude? Do 
you mean to say He left the multitude, 
abandoned the multitude, had no care 
for the multitude, and gave His teach- 
ing to a handful ? Yes; but He left the 
multitude in order that He might get 
back to the multitude. He left the mul- 
titude in order that He might equip the 
men who would obey His law, and then 
show the multitude what that law really 
meant in life. He left the multitude in 
order that He might begin the training 
of that company of men who should 
return to the multitude and bless the 
multitude. 

The method of Jesus is manifested in 
this. The multitude cannot appreciate 
this law; cannot obey it; will not be 
attracted by it ; will rather be affrighted 
by it. He must give the law to some 
souls who can appreciate it, obey it, and 
then manifest it. He must give His 
law, not to the promiscuous mob, which 
is curious merely, but to the selected 
souls who are loyal. That is the prin- 
ciple. Do not forget that the multitude 
is in His vision and in His heart. It is 
that He may get back to them, that He 
leaves them, and enunciates the ethic 
of His Kingdom to the few. He saw 
the multitudes. How think you, He 
saw them ? He saw them as they were, 
and He saw them as they might have 
been. Christ's vision of the crowd is a 
vision of the crowd as it is, in compari- 
son with the crowd as it might be. He 
saw their ruin, but He saw the possi- 
bility lying behind the ruin. He saw 
God's order. He was God's King. He 
knew what God's Kingdom meant in 
an individual life, for He was living 
therein Himself. He knew what God's 
government meant in a social order. 
He knew that if God's Kingdom were 
established among the multitudes, there 
would be none of the class bitterness 
and caste distinction driving man from 
man, brother from brother. He knew 
that if God's Kingdom were established 
among the multitudes there would fol- 
low the true social order; that human- 
ity in the Kingdom of God would not 
be an aggregation of individuals fight- 
ing for individual existence, but a great 
community of men, in which every man 



38 



MATTHEW 



[MAM. v. 1, 2] 



should make his contribution to the 
commonwealth. He saw the possibility 
of a great communism. Do not be 
afraid of great words because they 
have been abused. Jesus Christ's was 
the real socialism, the communism of 
humanity, the great brotherhood of 
men. He knew these things could only 
be realised as men were related to the 
throne of God. He knew that socialism 
is not anarchy. First there must be the 
relation of all men to the throne of 
God, and then their necessary and con- 
sequent interrelation among each other. 
And as Jesus Christ looked out over the 
multitudes He saw them scattered as 
sheep without a shepherd; no one to 
fold them, no one to feed. them, no one 
to lead them, no one to govern them. 
And seeing the multitudes, and know- 
ing that they needed supremely the 
Kingdom of God set up, He left them 
and took a few men with Him, and un- 
folded to them the laws of the King- 
dom, and began the work of coming 
back to the multitude with the revela- 
tion of that Kingdom. 

He saw the multitudes. One loves 
to read those words, for here we see 
the King, God's King, our King, the 
King of tie whole world, looking at the 
disorderly multitudes, the disorganised 
multitudes, and we see burning in His 
heart the primal passion of a King. 
God's kings are always shepherds, and 
shepherds feed the flock, rather than 
are fed by the flock. Shepherds fold 
the flock, rather than expect the flock 
to fold them. And the primal passion 
of the King is burning here. Here are 
the people, spoiled, disorganised, be- 
cause they have lost their relation to 
the throne of God; and seeing them, 
seeing the multitudes, the great heart 
of the King yearning over His people, 
He went up into the mountain. 

That leads us by a necessary se- 
quence to the second matter the 
method of the Master as He sets Him- 
self toward reaching the multitudes 
with the Kingdom of God. " His dis- 
ciples came unto Him, and He opened 
His mouth and taught them." Here we 
must pause carefully, for an under- 
standing of that principle, and this 
method will help us through the study 
of this Manifesto. 



Who are these men to whom He is 
speaking? Souls loyal to His Kingdom. 
Jesus never gives the law of His King- 
dom to any save to those in His King- 
dom. No man can have the benefits of 
this Kingdom until he has kissed the 
sceptre of the King. When a man has 
bowed to the King then he has an obli- 
gation to the King and must obey the 
law of the King. 

The late Archbishop Magee once said 
that it was impossible to conduct the 
affairs of the English nation on the 
basis of the Sermon on the Mount, and 
there was a great commotion among the" 
religious and irreligious papers, and he 
was criticised from Dan to Beersheba. 
But Archbishop Magee was quite right. 
You cannot govern the English nation 
on the basis of the Sermon on the 
Mount because the nation is not loyal 
to the King. If you have any doubt, 
all you have to do in these interesting 
days is to get a seat in the legislative 
chambers and endeavour to introduce 
half a dozen principles from the Ser- 
mon on the Mount in a short bill, and 
see if you can get them carried. You 
will find that to be the surest test of 
the accuracy of what the Archbishop 
said. You cannot do it, because you 
are not dealing with a people prepared 
to obey. 

Let not this be misunderstood for a 
single moment. Has a Christian man 
nothing to do with Government? He 
has everything to do with it, or ought 
to have. We are to dictate the terms 
of righteousness to every Government. 
The Church of God needs to shake her- 
self free from all complicity with every 
political party in the State, and then 
she will be able to dictate the terms of 
righteousness on behalf of humanity 
and God. That is her business. 

It is quite impossible to take the 
Sermon on the Mount and try to get 
men to obey it until they are themselves 
obedient to the King. Think of some 
of the things He said : " Ye are the salt 
of the earth. . . . Ye are the light of 
the world." Do you suppose He meant 
the mixed multitude when He said 
that ? And every benefit that He speaks 
of is a benefit belonging to the man who 
is in the Kingdom, and not to the man 
outside. A man conies and asks if we 



39 



[MATT, v, 1, 2] 



MATTHEW 



will not treat him as Jesus has taught 
us to do in the Sermon on the Mount. 
Certainly we will. But when a man in 
rebellion against the laws of Jesus asks 
us to give him our coat, we decline. 
Let him enter the Kingdom, and as God 
shall help us we will try and help him, 
suffer with him, rejoice with him. We 
have no right to take these benefits of 
the Kingdom and scatter them before a 
people who are still rebelling against 
the King. He begins by enunciating 
the law to the disciples. 

The nature of this Manifesto is re- 
vealed in the words, " He taught them." 
Now the need of a Kingdom was com- 
mon consciousness in the days of Jesus 
Christ. The very crowd who crucified 
Him were sighing after the setting up 
of a Kingdom. There was no question 
in the mind as to the value which 
would have accrued if this Kingdom 
could have been set up in some way. 
That is true to-day. Men are every- 
where acknowledging the need of some 
new social order. Jesus had to teach 
in order to show that the ideal of the 
Kingdom in their mind was a degraded 
ideal. The ideal of the Kingdom, 
popular in the days of Jesus, was that 
of a Kingdom material in its concep- 
tion and exclusive in its application. 

We need not follow the subject 
further than to say that we have only 
to watch the disciples themselves to see 
how degraded their ideal was. Not- 
withstanding the teaching, it was a long 
time before the vision of the Kingdom 
broke upon them! After His resurrec- 
tion they came back with the same old 
question : " Lord, dost Thou at this time 
restore the kingdom to Israel?" It 
was purely a material question. They 
expected a king with an earthly policy, 
an earthly government, an earthly army 
and retainers, setting up a kingdom of 
the earth. That is what men were look- 
ing for. Even men outside the circle of 
His followers had hoped that Jesus 
Christ had come to break the power of 
Rome, to be the divider amongst them 
as to property. And Christ had to teach 
these men that He was not proposing 
to begin His government thus. The 
Christ does not begin in the material 
realm; He came to teach men that 
character is before conduct. He came 



to teach them that the spiritual relation 
underlies the material manifestation. 
He came to teach them, as we shall 
see, tha He does not say a word about 
policy, not a word about the govern- 
ment of property, not a single word 
about any of these things; but He gets 
down under the surface, and He cor- 
rects man in the realm of his character. 
He says " Blessed," but never a single 
blessing does He pronounce upon hav- 
ing anything or doing anything; every 
blessing is pronounced upon being. 

When Jesus came to set up a King- 
dom, the first thing He said was; It is 
not a question of what you have, or 
what you do, save in a secondary sense ; 
it is a question of what you are. And 
that abides until this hour in all na- 
tional affairs. We are bound to go on 
legislating in this country, of course. 
The Legislature must meet and do some 
good or harm, as the case may be. 
They must go on. But the true im- 
perialist is the Christian man who rec- 
ognizes that Jesus was right when He 
said : Deal with men as to what they 
are first, then you can touch all the 
other things. Everybody else who has 
tried to lift the world has tried to 
purify a stream. He passes back to 
the fountain source and purifies it 
there. Character is supreme. The 
spiritual is the fundamental. These 
things being set right, everything else 
will be set right. And so Jesus left the 
world without a political programme 
uttered, without the constitution of a 
State given to men in detail. And yet 
He left having uttered the one and only 
political programme, the one and only 
State constitution He left the world, 
leaving behind Him the revelation of 
the fact that being is more than having 
or doing; that the spiritual fact is the 
fundamental fact in all life. 

The occasion of the Manifesto, then, 
was Christ's vision of the multitudes, 
and their need, and His determination 
to reach them. Retiring from them, He 
took time to instruct a few loyal souls 
concerning His Kingdom in order that 
through them the multitudes might see 
the breadth and beauty and beneficence 
of the Kingdom of God. 

His method was that of gathering 



40 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. v. 3-12] 



loyal souls around Him, giving them 
the law of the Kingdom because they 
had yielded to the claim of the King. 
Finally, the nature of the Manifesto 



is an unfolding of principle, a teaching 
of men, which corrects the mistaken 
notions of national greatness and re- 
veals the things which are supreme. 



MATTHEW V. 3-12 



IN considering the first two verses of 
this chapter, we dwelt upon the fact 
that the ultimate purpose in the mind 
of the King was that of bringing the 
multitudes into the Kingdom of God; 
but that in order to do so it was neces- 
sary for Him to gather round Him a 
nucleus of such as were actually sub- 
mitted to His Kingship, in order to 
unfold to them the meaning of that 
Kingdom by an enunciation of its laws. 

Perhaps the best name for this enun- 
ciation is that given to it by Dr. Os- 
wald Dykes, "The Manifesto of the 
King." That exactly expresses the 
truth concerning the nature of this 
great utterance of law. 

In these opening Beatitudes, the King 
revealed the truth concerning the essen- 
tial nature of His Kingdom, as He 
made plain this one, simple, and all- 
inclusive fact, that the Kingdom of 
Heaven has first of all to do with char- 
acter. How strange these words of 
Jesus must have sounded in the ears of 
His disciples, if, peradventure, they 
were expecting Him to give them a 
Manifesto of the Kingdom. They had 
heard the herald say, " The Kingdom of 
Heaven is at hand. Repent." They 
had heard Jesus say, "Repent ye, for 
the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand," 
but in all probability so far they only 
looked upon Him as another teacher, 
preparing the way, and leading them 
on toward the coming King. 

But, supposing for a. single moment, 
that they understood the fact that He 
was indeed God's anointed King, and 
supposing that in their submission to 
Him there was an intelligent submis- 
sion to the Kingdom of God, focussed, 
and manifested, and demonstrated in a 
Person; then if they had climbed that 
mountain to listen to Him as King, they 
must have been strangely startled with 
His first words. There is not a word 
in these Beatitudes which appears to 
have anything to do with a kingdom, 



according to popular conceptions of 
what kingdoms are, and in what the 
greatness of kingdoms consists. 

Human ideas of a kingdom gather 
round thoughts of race power, of mili- 
tary prowess, of material pomp. Even 
to-day we hear people, largely void of 
the Christian spirit, boasting of such 
things, imagining that greatness con- 
sists in armaments. Our ideals of a 
kingdom are still somehow strangely 
mixed with trust in military prowess. 
But they are false ideals if we under- 
stand the deep meaning of righteous- 
ness. We still think of pomp, and 
glitter, and tinsel, as signs of greatness. 
Our ideas of a kingdom are still very 
much what they were in olden days. 
Slowly, very slowly, there is dawning 
on the common consciousness of man 
the conception that national greatness 
is the greatness of character. 

This, however, forms the first stage 
in the teaching of the Manifesto of 
God's great King. Both in His Person, 
and in His teaching, He ignored popu- 
lar conceptions concerning the ideas of 
government, and, by ignoring, denied 
them. When He ascended the moun- 
tain it was with no fanfare of trumpets, 
with no pomp, and no pageantry. This 
King, sublime in the simplicity of His 
Manhood, ascended a mountain, gath- 
ered around Him a few loyal souls, 
who did not perfectly understand Him, 
and taught them that nothing is of 
greater importance than the making of 
character. Thus He taught them; and 
the first things He said were the funda- 
mental things of the Kingdom; but 
there is not a word about race power, 
or military prowess, or material pomp, 
from beginning to end. 

Let us, then, consider the words; 
and in doing so, we will attempt first 
of all to indicate the general principles; 
and then we will endeavour to see 
the particular revelation of character 
granted. 



41 



. V. 3-12] 



MATTHEW 



In looking at the general principles, 
we notice the first word that fell from 
the lips of the King when He com- 
menced the enunciation of the laws of 
the Kingdom "Blessed" 

This word reveals God's will for 
man, and so reveals the purpose of the 
King in the establishment of His King- 
dom. How strange a thing, and yet 
how gracious a thing it is! The word 
in the original is translated in our 
Authorised Version as " blessed " forty- 
three times, and as " happy " six times. 
There is a general consensus of opinion 
that the word most accurately expres- 
sing the meaning here is the word 
" happy " rather than " blessed." There 
is no doubt that the finer and fuller 
word is " blessed," always providing we 
understand it in its true meaning, as 
indicating a consciousness and a con- 
dition, rather than as referring to be- 
stowment from without. It is true that 
the blessing is bestowed, but the word 
"blessed" here, refers to a condition, 
and therefore to a consciousness. But 
the word "happy" more easily sug- 
gests the simple thought of the Greek 
word in its common use. " Blessed " is 
correct if we understand it in the sense 
in which we use it of God in the phrase 
"The glorious Gospel of the blessed 
God." Yet that may be translated with 
equal accuracy, and perhaps with a 
finer sense of its real meaning, "The 
Gospel of the glory of the happy God." 

" Blessed " is therefore a condition 
such a condition as to create a con- 
sciousness, which is the consciousness 
of a perfect peace, and a perfect joy, 
and a perfect rest. All these things are 
included in the condition of Happiness ! 
That is God's will for man. That is 
the Divine intention for human life. 
Sorrow and sighing are to flee away; 
He will wipe away all tears. Happi- 
ness and joy are never to flee away; 
He will never banish merriment and 
laughter. 

"Happy" is the first word of the 
Manifesto. It is a word full of sun- 
shine, thrilling with music, brimming 
over with just what man is seeking 
after in a thousand false ways. The 
Manifesto is not formal and docu- 
mentary. It does not begin " Whereas," 
but " Happy." That was the first word 



of the King as He sat upon the moun- 
tain, surrounded by His disciples. But 
ah ! His own heart was unhappy, wrung 
with a great anguish, moved with an 
infinite compassion. But why His sor- 
row, why His unhappiness, why the 
melting, moving, thrilling compassion? 
Because He saw all the tragedy of 
human sorrow. From the centre of that 
sorrow He said, "Happy;" and thus 
revealed the Divine purpose for men. 

Then we notice that happiness is de- 
clared by the King to depend, not on 
doing, not on possessing, but on being. 
" Blessed are the poor." " Blessed are 
they that mourn." "Blessed are the 
meek." " Blessed are they that hunger 
and thirst." "Blessed are the merci- 
ful." " Blessed are the pure in heart." 
"Blessed are the peacemakers." Not 
a single word about doing or possessing. 
It is what a man is that matters. 

An evangelical value runs through 
these "Blesseds;" for the King de- 
clared happiness for such as, through 
sin, lack true happiness. " The poor in 
spirit." Apart from the King's Beati- 
tude, this is the description of a condi- 
tion which popular conception looks 
upon as unhappy. " Poor " is a word 
which does not suggest happiness. 
" Poor " means lack, lack means sor- 
row; and yet the King said, "Blessed 
are the poor in spirit." That is the 
recognition of a lack, but it is also a 
recognition of something that supplies 
the lack; and so sounding through the 
Manifesto we hear the music of the 
great evangel. There was in the mind 
of the King the consciousness of a 
great need, a great provision, and the 
possibility of a great result. 

Once again, notice the peculiar form 
of the Beatitudes. "Blessed are the 
poor in spirit; for theirs is the King- 
dom of Heaven." "Blessed are they 
that mourn; for they shall be com- 
forted," and so throughout. "Blessed 
are . . . for." Character creates con- 
ditions which result in happiness. 

Take the first, by way of illustration. 
Poverty of spirit results in realisation 
of the Kingdom of God. That is hap- 
piness. Jesus does not say that the 
Kingdom shall be given to the man that 
is poor in spirit. He does not say that 
if a man is poor in spirit, He will give 



42 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. v. 3-12] 



him the Kingdom to make him happy. 
The poor in spirit is happy because he 
has the Kingdom of 'God. The happi- 
ness of the Kingdom is a natural se- 
quence, not an arbitrary reward. The 
King does not bestow gifts to make men 
happy. He creates a condition within 
the man, which enables him to find hap- 
piness everywhere. He does not create 
happiness by new surroundings. He 
creates new surroundings by happiness. 
He takes a man and makes him happy 
by reason of his character, and then 
immediately this man puts his hand on 
everything that lies about him, chang- 
ing his environment by himself being 
changed. Happiness begins within the 
man, never without. 

There are thousands of illustrations 
of this to-day. Some one stands out- 
side certain circumstances of life, say- 
ing; Oh, if only I were in those 
circumstances I would be happy. The 
King does not begin there. " Blessed " 
is a condition consequent upon charac- 
ter. Happiness has its root, not in 
outward circumstances, but in inward 
condition of character. 

But in order that these things may be 
more clearly revealed, let us pass to a 
particular examination of the particular 
character in the Kingdom which the 
King revealed. First, let us take the 
characteristics, remembering that a 
characteristic is always a smaller mat- 
ter than a character. Character is the 
sum and substance of characteristics. 
It is very difficult to describe a char- 
acter. Character may defy our perfect 
analysis. It does not defy the perfect 
analysis of the King. He thus described 
the characteristics. Poor in spirit ; they 
that mourn; the meek; Ihey that hun- 
ger and thirst; the merciful; the pure 
in heart; the peacemakers. These are 
the characteristics that go to make the 
perfect character, upon which the King- 
dom of God is to be based. 

There are two sets of characteristics 
in the seven Beatitudes. The eighth, 
which is a double Beatitude, has to do 
with the process and not with the char- 
acter. But in the first seven you have 
a set of four which are passive, and a 
set of three which are active. The 
poor in spirit ; the mourners ; the meek ; 
they that hunger and thirst; these are 



the passive characteristics of the char- 
acter. Merciful; pure and pure here 
means infinitely more than clean, it 
means undivided, wholehearted peace- 
makers; these are the active qualities 
in character. 

Let us consider the passive charac- 
teristics. " Poor in spirit." It means 
truly subject. The man who is poor in 
spirit is the man who is willing to be 
governed. The man who is not poor in 
spirit is rebellious, troublesome, creat- 
ing discord within the Kingdom. This 
is the first thing. It is very simple ! It 
is very sublime J If this life of mine is 
willing to be ruled, it is ruled. If this 
life of mine is willing to be governed, 
it is governed. If I will but take this 
life of mine and surrender it wholly to 
the King, the King will take charge of 
it and administer it, and I shall be in 
myself, when every one else is excluded, 
a Kingdom of God; and I shall be in 
myself, when all others are included, a 
part of the Kingdom of God. " Poor in 
spirit" theirs is the Kingdom of God. 
We never know the breadth and beauty 
and beneficence of God's humanity by 
looking at it from without. The poor in 
spirit are those in whom the pride of 
the will, and the pride of the intellect, 
and the pride of the heart, are alike 
bent to the royalty of the King. We 
obtain the Kingdom when we submit in 
poverty of spirit to the King. 

But again, " They that mourn." And 
here the evangelistic value is at once 
manifest. The first matter is initial. 
The man poor in spirit is so because he 
has learned his own incompetence, his 
own unworthiness ; because he is con- 
scious of his own failure, conscious that 
he cannot of himself take hold upon all 
the ideals that are being represented to 
him by the King. This man mourns 
over his own sin, over his own failure. 
This is the mourning intended. Jesus 
says, "They shall be comforted." The 
great word "comforted" is related to 
the word that Jesus used when He 
promised the coming of the Holy Spirit. 
The Comforter disannuls orphanage, 
takes hold of a man in his sorrow and 
assuages it, heals it. The poor in spirit, 
submitting to the Throne, and to the 
government of the King, is troubled im- 
mediately; he mourns over sin, and in- 



43 



[MATT. v. 3-12] 



MATTHEW 



competence, and failure. That soul is 
comforted with the comfort of the Holy 
Spirit, the Paraclete, the very life and 
soul of the Kingdom. 

"Blessed are the meek" The meek 
are those who are obedient to the rule 
of the King; meekness is the submis- 
sive spirit, the spirit of true humility, 
which is unconscious of humility; the 
spirit that rejoices in the Kingdom 
already established, on account of the 
comfort already given, and waits for 
orders, and does not obtrude itself. As 
we read these words, " Blessed are the 
meek, for they shall inherit the earth," 
we seem to hear those other words, 
" Come unto Me . . . for I am meek 
and lowly in heart; and ye shall find 
rest unto your souls." The men, poor 
in spirit, mourning over failure, com- 
forted by the One great Comforter, are 
meek ; and " they shall inherit the 
earth," for they have partaken of the 
very spirit of the King Himself. 

And yet again. " Blessed are they 
that hunger and thirst after righteous- 
ness." This seems to be a retro- 
gression, a going back. But it is a 
progression, a going forward. Who is 
the man that hungers and thirsts after 
righteousness but the man who himself 
is meek and possesses the earth, who has 
mourned and has been comforted, who 
is poor in spirit and has submitted to 
rule? What is hunger and thirst after 
righteousness? It is Divine discontent 
with everything unlike God. Do not 
make this a small and narrow personal 
experience. It is that, but it is infi- 
nitely more. It is the passion for the 
setting up of the Kingdom of God 
amongst men. It is the thing that 
makes you if you are a Christly soul 
hot, and restless, and angry, and dis- 
contented, in the presence of all the 
mal-administration of the affairs of 
men, which results in the ruin and sor- 
row of men on every hand. " They that 
hunger and thirst after righteousness 
. . . shall be filled," they shall fee satis- 
fied, there shall come to such all that 
for which they hunger and thirst. 
Perchance not to-day, perchance not 
to-morrow ; 

" The fog's on the world to-day, 
It will be on the world to-morrow; 



Not all the strength of the sun 

Can drive his bright spears thorough. 

"Yesterday and to-day 
Have been heavy with care and 

sorrow ; 

I should faint if I did not see 
The day that is after to-morrow. 

" The cause of the peoples I serve 
To-day, in impatience and sorrow, 
Once more is defeated but yet, 
'Twill be won the day after to-morrow.. 

"And for me with spirit elate, 
The mire and the fog I press thorough ; 
For heaven shines under the cloud 
Of the day that is after to-morrow." 

These, then, are the passive charac- 
teristics of the character of the King- 
dom; poverty of spirit, which submits 
to government and possesses the King- 
dom; mourning over declension, which 
is comforted with the great comfort of 
God; meekness which is unconscious 
humility and willingness to submit, 
which possesses the earth; hunger and 
thirst after righteousness a great pas- 
sion for the Kingdom of God, which is 
filled in hope and at last shall be filled 
in actual realisation. 

Then immediately the characteristics 
pass from the passive into the active. 
"The merciful." That is, those who 
give and those who serve. It is the 
activity of life toward the suffering. 
" Blessed are the merciful, for they 
shall obtain mercy." 

" Pure in heart." And here, as has 
been already noticed, we have more 
than cleanness; we have wholeness, the 
undivided heart, the heart that is ut- 
terly and absolutely loyal. This is the 
expression toward the King of the mer- 
cifulness described. " They shall see 
God." 

And this again merges into yet an- 
other description "The peacemakers." 
This is the propagative character, the 
man who, being all the rest, therefore 
brings peace wherever he comes. And 
the great word concerning the peace- 
makers is, " They shall be called sons 
of God," for in that they manifest the 
nature of the Father and the likeness 
of the Father more than in anything 
else making peace among the sons of 
men. 

This description of character is a 
growth. Poverty of spirit issues in 



44 



MATTHEW 



[MAM. v. 13-16] 



mourning for sin, and the twofold 
primary condition is answered by the 
Kingdom bestowed, and comfort given. 

Then meekness of spirit is submis- 
sion to the will of God. Hunger and 
thirst evidence passion for the will of 
God, and the twofold answer to those 
who have submitted to His will in 
meekness is a present contentment. 
" They shall inherit the earth ;" and to 
those in whom there burns the passion 
for the final setting up of His Kingdom, 
and the accomplishment of His will, 
there is a promise of the ultimate satis- 
faction" They shall be filled." 

Then upon the basis of that growth 
there follow the virtues of Christian 
life. Mercifulness indicating service; 
purity of heart indicating the inward 
condition; peacemaking indicating the 
effect produced on others. 

Then crowning all, there is the great 
Beatitude which illuminates the proc- 
ess of pain, and suffering, and persecu- 
tion, through which men pass into this 
great character. 

This is not merely a growth, it is a 
unity. We can take any one of the 
rewards and use it after any one of the 
conditions, and find no lack of harmony. 
We may say, " Blessed are the poor in 
spirit, for they shall be comforted." It 
is perfectly true. " Blessed are the 
merciful, for theirs is the Kingdom of 
Heaven." That is equally correct. 
" Blessed are they that hunger and 
thirst after righteousness, for they shall 
inherit the earth." That is a great 
philosophy. " Blessed are the meek, for 



they shall be satisfied." That is equally 
true. We may transpose all these an- 
swers of happiness to all these con- 
ditions. The King gave us an analysis 
of one character rather than a descrip- 
tion of different characters. All these 
virtues and values are to be found in 
the one type of character which lies at 
the foundation of this Kingdom. 

And yet that must not be misunder- 
stood, for there is a great sequence. 
Experimentally no man enters into any 
of these, save in the order indicated. 
First, the poverty of spirit, which ends 
rebellion, and, submissive to the King, 
kisses His sceptre; then the mourning 
that follows; then the meekness that 
ensues; then the passion that flames; 
then the service that is merciful; then 
the purity of heart that enables a man 
to see God; and then the great, sweet, 
strong, influence of peace, and man be- 
comes a peacemaker. 

The proportion in which men realise 
this character is the proportion in 
which they realise happiness. But the 
realisation of such character in the 
midst of all the conditions of worldly 
life which are contradictory to that 
character, will stir up opposition. How 
correct a picture of worldly life we 
have in this passage if before each 
promise or blessing the word not were 
added! Theirs is not the Kingdom of 
Heaven; they are not comforted; they 
shall not inherit the earth ; they shall 
be hungry and thirsty, yet they shall 
not be filled; their hearts are corrupt, 
they cannot see God. 



MATTHEW V. 13-16 



IT is at once evident that these words 
were addressed, not to the promis- 
cuous multitude, but to the inner circle 
of disciples. Having declared that the 
supreme matter in His Kingdom is 
character, and having described that 
character in the Beatitudes; the King 
showed that the purpose of the realisa- 
tion of character, in the subjects of the 
Kingdom, is that they may exercise an 
influence upon those who are outside 
the Kingdom, and revealed the nature 
of that influence. 
Influence is His ultimate intention in 



His present government of, and relation 
to, His Kingdom. To recognize this is 
again to be brought face to face with 
that fundamental truth, that, although 
He spoke to His own, the multitudes 
were ever in His sight, and on His 
heart. The law of the Kingdom is for 
such as have submitted to the King; 
but they are to be governed by that law 
in order that they may become the 
means of blessing to the multitudes be- 
yond. As the Shepherd King leaves 
the multitudes, for the saints, that He 
may instruct them, it is not for their 



45 



[MATT. v. 13-16] 



MATTHEW 



sakes merely. He loves the people, the 
vast unheeding multitudes ; and if He 
blesses us, it is that we may bless them. 
If He conditions our life, it is that we 
may exert among them an influence 
that shall be for their healing and for 
their uplifting. 

Christ's estimate of the needs of the 
multitude is revealed by His description 
of the influence His people are to exert. 
The influence is to be that of salt and 
light. Salt is needed where there is 
corruption. Light is needed where 
there is darkness. Jesus, looking out 
over the multitudes of His day, saw the 
corruption, the disintegration of life at 
every point its break-up, its spoli- 
ation; and, because of His love of the 
multitudes, He knew that the thing they 
needed most was salt in order that the 
corruption should be arrested. He saw 
them also wrapped in gloom, sitting in 
darkness, groping amid mists and fogs. 
He knew that they needed, above every- 
thing else, the irradiation of the path- 
way, the illumination of all things; 
that they needed light. 

This is Christ's estimate of the need 
of the multitude of to-day, for His 
words were not for a day or an age, 
for a geographical position, a coast 
limitation, or a national boundary; His 
words were words for all ages. He did 
not deal with the accidentals of human 
life, but with the essentials. As Jesus 
looks out over the vast multitudes, for 
whom we are responsible, He knows 
their need, and that need is still ex- 
pressed in the two thoughts suggested 
by the description of influence; they 
are in circumstances of corruption and 
darkness. 

With these preliminary positions in 
mind, let us consider the passage before 
us in three ways. First, the character 
of the influence which Jesus declares 
will be exerted by such as are in His 
Kingdom; secondly, the influence of 
character; thirdly, the solemn, and 
earnest, and urgent teaching of Jesus 
concerning the responsibility of the 
subjects of the Kingdom with relation 
to the exertion of such influence. 

First, then, the character of the in- 
fluence which is to be exerted. 

According to the teaching of Jesus, 
the character of the influence is the 



influence of character. "Ye are salt," 
" Ye are light ;" not, Ye have salt, or, 
Ye have light. Much less does He say, 
Ye dispense the salt, or, Ye dispense 
the light. There is all the difference 
between a living influence and a dead, 
official, attempt at influence. If Christ 
had said, Ye dispense the salt, then we 
might have looked upon our position as 
official. There is no such thought. The 
King began with the fundamental ne- 
cessity of human nature, and He said, 
"Ye are." It is only as a man is salt 
in his character that he can exercise 
the influence of salt in his age. It is 
only as a man is light in himself that 
he can scatter light upon the pathway 
of others. Jesus always takes hold of 
human nature as it is according to 
Divine intention, and bases His whole 
philosophy of life and influence upon 
the first Divine thought in the creation 
of man! The influence you exert is 
always the influence of what you are. 
No man exerts upon other people any 
influence by what he says to them, save 
only as what he says is the outcome 
of what he is in the deepest fact of 
his being. 

As the father of a family, the in- 
fluence you exert upon your boys and 
girls, is the influence of what you are, 
and not of what you tell them they 
ought to be. It is the influence of your 
own personality in its deepest fibre that 
is going to make or mar your bairns. 
There is no escape from this. We" may 
tell our boys to be good; and, if we are 
bad, by the grace of God they may be 
good some other hand may mould 
them, some other life may win them 
but if we are going to win our boys for 
goodness, we must be good. Our in- 
fluence comes out of what we are. " Ye 
are salt," and if you are not salt, you 
lack the power to exercise the aseptic 
function. 

" Ye are the light of the world," and 
if we are not light we cannot shine. 

As one studies the teaching of our 
!Lord, one is more and more impressed 
with the fact that He never tarried 
upon the surface of things, but that He 
got down to the depths. We shall never 
exercise the influence of salt, or the in- 
fluence of light in our family, in our 
church, or in our city or nation, unless 



46 



MATTHEW 



CMATT. v. 13-16] 



we are right ourselves. One of the 
most damnable heresies that has ever 
been foisted upon the thinking of any 
age is that a man may be pure in public 
influence if impure in private life. He 
cannot be. What we are, determines 
the character of our influence in the 
world, whether we will or no. Thus 
the character of the influence to be 
exerted by those who are in the King- 
dom, is the influence of character. 

Secondly, what is this influence of 
character? The Lord made use of two 
figures, "salt" and "light." Here, 
again, He was careful with the infinite 
care of an infinite wisdom, and He 
made application of each figure in a 
natural sphere, and not carelessly. He 
did not say, Ye are the salt of the 
world. He did not say, Ye are the light 
of the earth. He said, " Ye are the salt 
of the earth," " Ye are the light of the 
world." 

We will look in each case at the 
property described, and at the sphere 
of its activity. 

First, salt and its sphere the earth; 
secondly, light and its sphere the 
world. 

" Ye are the salt of the earth." The 
one value of salt is aseptic. ' In the 
presence o the fact of corruption, it 
prevents its spread. Salt never changes 
corruption into incorruption ; it has no 
power to do so, but it prevents it 
spreading; moreover it reveals sound- 
ness, and creates the opportunity for its 
continuance. 

There is not a believing man, woman, 
or child, who is able to take hold of 
any corrupt man and make him pure. 
That is not our work; we are not equal 
to it. Thank God, the Master is equal 
to it. Thank God, the King at the 
wicket-gate of the Kingdom can take 
hold of the vilest man and make him 
pure as He is pure. Our influence is 
of another value. Salt takes hold of 
that which is not yet corrupt, and pre- 
vents its becoming corrupted; it holds 
back the corrupting forces, and creates 
the opportunity for the exercise of 
goodness, and the continuity of sound- 
ness. Jesus never made a mistake in 
His figures. The intellectual supremacy 
of Jesus is such as to enable us to take 
the smallest figure He made use of, and 



base on it a whole philosophy that is 
suggested by its use. " Salt " we are 
to be, men and women, who by our life 
and presence in the world check the 
spread of corruption and give goodness 
its opportunity. 

Do not forget that the Beatitudes 
closed with the affirmation of persecu- 
tion. Do not be surprised at that. But 
we want " salt " men and women in the 
stores, in the offices; we want men and 
women everywhere, who, by their liv- 
ing, check corruption young men in 
whose presence no man dare tell a ques- 
tionable story; young women to whom 
other young women in their sin will 
come, and ask for help and advice, that 
the good desire that has been hindered 
by evil power may blossom into beauty. 

Now let us notice the sphere in which 
salt operates. " Ye are the salt of the 
earth" The word which Jesus made 
use of here marks the distinctly ma- 
terial side of things the earth, literally 
the standing place; primarily the soil. 
It is a purely material word. But, of 
course, here it is used with reference to 
the people, the people viewed as of the 
earth. Men and women are of the 
earth. It is impossible for us to escape 
from the material, while we are in the 
material, and of the material; and we 
need have no desire to escape from it. 
But Jesus said you are to be the salt of 
the earth. You are to live in the midst 
of men and women who live in earthly 
conditions, and are material, in order 
to influence that side of things with an 
aseptic influence. You are to save men, 
render possible their salvation by hin- 
dering corruption on that side of their 
nature that is distinctly of the earth. 

To go back to the first of the Beati- 
tudes, " Blessed are the poor in spirit, 
for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven." 
Now, look at those people poor in spirit. 
Theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. The 
government of heaven, the touch of 
heaven, is upon their life, dominating, 
thrilling, and impulsing. Ye are the 
people who have the Kingdom of 
Heaven; ye are the salt of the earth, 
the medium through which the heav- 
enly government shall operate in ma- 
terial things. The earth divorced from 
heaven is corrupt. Live in it as heav- 
enly people, and check the spread of 



47 



[MATT. v. 13-16] 



MATTHEW 



the corruption. The earth divorced 
from heaven has in it unrealised ca- 
pacities. Realise in it the heavenly 
order, so that the capacities may be 
realised. 

But again, "Ye are the light of the 
world." Here our Lord takes another 
figure, with a different note. The value 
of light is illumination, and that is at 
once a positive principle of life, and the 
condition for intelligent activity. Light 
is a revelation of how life ought to be 
lived, and wherever you get a revela- 
tion of how life ought to be lived, there 
is in the revelation that which begins 
to help men to live it. Example is not 
enough to save a man, but example is a 
great force in the growth of the man 
who is saved. It is a great force also 
in luring a man toward salvation. We 
are not called upon in any sense to save 
men. We are called upon to shine on 
men, revealing to them the truth con- 
cerning human life, the possibilities of 
human life, the principles that under- 
lie human life, giving them to see what 
life may be; we are called upon to be 
light. 

Now, notice the sphere of its oper- 
ation the world. " Ye are the light of 
the world," not the age, but the world, 
the cosmos. A great word, which in- 
cludes not merely the life, but the whole 
created order. Here Jesus declares that 
His people are to illuminate other men 
as to their relation to the whole order, 
of which they form a part, and as to 
the necessary laws which govern it. All 
about us are men and women living not 
merely on the earth, but having relation 
to the infinite spaces, having relation to 
all created things, and therefore having 
necessary, even if unconfessed, relation 
to the Christ Himself. The cosmos is a 
word which speaks of the infinite order, 
and presupposes the intelligence which 
caused and controls the infinite order. 
Every man loyal to the law of Jesus 
Christ, and living in His Kingdom, is 
in himself a revelation of the unity of 
the universe of God, of the perfection 
of the harmony of all its parts, and of 
that unity and harmony as consisting in 
relationship to the Throne of God. 

To live on Christian principles is to 
show men what would result if all the 
world were obedient to the whisper of 



the Throne of the Most High. Every 
truly Christian life, every life sub- 
mitted to the King, in loyal surrender, 
lights up the order of the universe; and 
from such life light will flash which 
will help men who are groping in dark- 
ness, and trying to find out secrets. 
The "Riddle of the Universe" will 
never be solved by examining the proto- 
plasmic germ, or by careful examina- 
tion of natural phenomena. Men living 
in the will of God are the light of 
the world. 

But notice two things here. We are 
not to try to illuminate the universe ; 
we are to live in loyalty to Christ; that 
is all. It is not by effort after illumina- 
tion of the problem ; but by quiet simple 
abiding in His will in the world, that 
character will flash its light abroad. 

But, then, do not forget another mat- 
ter. We hear a great deal about re- 
flected light. We have heard it said 
that Jesus is the infinite Sun, and that 
we take the place of the moon. True, 
the great allegorical passage in the 
Song of Solomon says " she is fair as 
a moon," but it also says she is " clear 
as the sun," and she will only be fair 
as the silver moon, which kisses the 
night with softness and beauty, as she 
is clear as the sun. It is not reflected 
light merely; it is the light of our own 
life, communicated to us from the Es- 
sential Light. When we received the 
Essential Light it was not merely that 
we might reflect it; it was that it might 
ignite us and burn in us. It is only 
when Christian men are burning, as 
well as shining lights, that the world 
knows they are the light of the world. 

Finally, what did Jesus say about 
the responsibility of the subjects of the 
Kingdom as to being the salt of the 
earth ? " If the salt have lost its savour, 
wherewith shall it be salted? It is 
thenceforth good for nothing but to be 
cast out and trodden under foot of 
men." This has nothing to do with the 
question of a man's ultimate salvation. 
It has everything to do with the ques- 
tion of a man's present influence. We 
have no right to take things out of the 
context and say that Jesus says, if 
Christian people do not exercise the 
Christian influence of salt He will cast 
them out and they will be lost. This is 



48 



MATTHEW 



[MAT*, v. 13-16] 



a question of influence. The Master 
says, " If the salt have lost its savour." 
It is difficult to find a word that seems 
to catch and carry the real value of this 
word " savour." Of course, there is a 
simpler translation, "If the salt have 
lost its taste." 

In a little pamphlet containing the 
Gospel of Matthew in broad Scotch, the 
reading is " The saut o* the yirth are 
ye, but gin the saut hae tint its tang." 
Perhaps that gets nearer to it than any- 
thing one can find. "Tang" is that 
quality in taste which is pungent, keen. 
Have you lost the "tang" of your 
Christianity? Do men know that you 
are a Christian ? If there is no " tang " 
then listen to Jesus. He says you are 
good for nothing except to be cast out 
and trodden under foot of man. There 
are thousands of Christian men who 
have lost their "tang" and men tram- 
ple them under foot; laugh at them, 
make fun of their Christianity. It is 
not enough to recite the Beatitudes. 
We must live in them, in order that the 
savour of them may tell among men. 

As to the other responsibility for 
light, the King declared that there is a 
twofold influence of light a city, and 
a lamp. "A city cannot be hid on the 
top of a mountain lying." Take out the 
affirmation that it cannot be hidden, 
and observe the description, " A city on 
the top of a mountain lying." That is 
the element of the Church influence of 
light. No individual Christian can ex- 
ert that One may be a beacon on the 
top of a mountain, but one cannot be a 
city. By the way of those who are in 
the Kingdom there will be the illumina- 
tion of vast expanses. A city on a 
mountain lying, is seen from all the 
distant valleys; its flaming glory is 
caught from peaks far off and near. 
This is the picture of an influence that 
the Church has almost entirely lost; it 
is the picture of the Church's social 
order flashing its light upon the age. 
This is no careless figure. A city in 
which God is the Governor; a city in 
which there is nothing that defileth, nor 
worketh an abomination, nor maketh a 



lie ; a city in which all things of beauty, 
and order, and light, and delight, are 
gathered; all that, the Church ought to 
be, and consequently she should guard 
the gates of entrance against all likely 
to corrupt and harm her. And when 
the city is that, when within her bor- 
ders there is the realisation of the 
social ideal, so that when one weeps, 
others weep; and when one laughs, 
others laugh; when to the poor saint 
there is given of the world's substance, 
and to the needy, of spiritual help ; and 
when no man says anything belongs to 
him, but they have all things common 
when that is realised, then the Church 
is the " city on the top of the mountain 
lying," flashing her light over far places 
of the earth. 

That is not all. "A lamp." The 
King passes from the city to the house. 
"A lamp that shineth unto all that are 
in the house." If the figure of the city 
illustrates the light as illuminating vast 
expanses, the figure of the lamp illus- 
trates the light as irradiating private 
places. One cannot be a city lying on 
a mountain, but one can be a lamp in 
the house. That is the other exercise 
of the influence, so that all the family 
order is illumined by the presence of 
one Christian soul, one lamp burning 
for Jesus in the house. " Neither do 
men light a lamp and put it under the 
bushel, but on the stand, and it shineth 
unto all that are in the house." Do not 
forget this negative application. The 
exposition of Dr. Alexander Maclaren 
makes others unnecessary. He says, 
" No man lighteth a lamp and puts it 
tinder the bushel; but supposing he 
does, what will happen? One of two 
things: Either the bushel will put the 
lamp out, or the lamp will set fire to 
the bushel." 

Lastly, the King said, " Let your light 
shine before men that they may . . . 
glorify your Father." And thus He 
summarized, employing in the final ut- 
terancethe last part of His figure 
the whole truth, that in His King- 
dom, character counts, because it exerts 
influence. 



[MATT. v. 17-20] 



MATTHEW 



MATTHEW V. 17-20 



HAVING thus declared the neces- 
sity for character; and indicated 
its issue in influence; the King pref- 
aced His enunciation of laws, by a 
prologue on the general subject of law. 

Let us carefully examine this pro- 
logue. Let us first analyse it, that we 
may discover its revelation of the rela- 
tion of the King to the law ; and the re- 
lation of His subjects to the law; and, 
secondly, let us notice two great prin- 
ciples, which are all-inclusive, and must 
be understood and remembered as we 
proceed to consider the law as He 
enunciated it. 

When He said, "Think not that I 
came to destroy the law or the proph- 
ets," what did He mean by "the law" 
and "the prophets"? What did the 
phrase mean to the men who heard it? 
If we can put ourselves in their place, 
and find that out, we shall have the 
true thought. 

They were men born in Hebraism, 
brought up in the atmosphere of the 
Hebrew economy; and there can be no 
doubt that they understood Him to 
refer to the Scriptures of the Old 
Testament. These consisted of three 
sections the Law, the Prophets, and 
the Hagiographa, or Writings. These 
men, therefore, certainly understood 
Him to say: I have not come to 
destroy the ethical code under which 
you have been living; I have not come 
to minimise morality; I have not come 
to loosen bonds which are intended to 
hold you to everything that is high and 
true and pure and noble; I have not 
come to destroy the law and the proph- 
ets, but to fulfil. These men thought of 
the law and the prophets as giving the 
economy which conditioned their life 
in the minutest particular and detail. 
They were governed by the law and the 
prophets; or they knew they ought to 
be governed by the law and the proph- 
ets; and that the measure in which 
they were sinning men, was the mea- 
sure in which they were breaking the 
law, and disobeying the voice of the 
prophets. 

The King ruthlessly swept away all 
the traditions of the elders; denying, by 



ignoring, the method of the Pharisee, 
the tithing of mint and anise and rue 
and cummin, the constant washing of 
hands. All this is of no value; the 
matters of importance are, the law, a 
Divine conditioning of life; and the 
prophets, a Divine call to obedience. 
Thus He brought these men face to 
face with the ethical requirement, and 
declared, "Think not that I came to 
destroy the law or the prophets " I 
have not come to minimise morality; 
within the sphere of My government 
there will be no license; none of these 
laws will be destroyed in My Kingdom; 
nothing will be abrogated by My com- 
ing "I came not to destroy, but to 
fulfil." 

There are various interpretations of 
the King's meaning when He said He 
had come to fulfil the law. All of them 
may be correct, but most of them are 
partial. In my own study of these won- 
derful sayings of Jesus, I am more and 
more impressed that one of the surest 
methods of true interpretation is to get 
back and stand with the men who 
heard them. 

Did He mean He had come to estab- 
lish that great Kingdom wherein the 
law would be realised and obeyed? 
Yes, He meant that. But when the 
men heard Hun, what did they under- 
stand Him to mean? On the eastern 
sky, so long grey and dark, the glory 
of a new morning was flashing. These 
men who had lived so long in the cold 
wintertide heard " the voice of the tur- 
tle in the land," and felt that spring- 
time was coming whenever He spoke. 
Their hope was for the coming of the 
golden age, the dawning of the great 
day, of which the Psalmist sang, and 
which the prophets foretold. When He 
said, "I came not to destroy, but to 
fulfil," He meant: I have come to real- 
ise all that the law attempted to realise. 
It is not likely that they saw the Cross 
in His programme; although He knew 
it to be so. What they understood Him 
to mean was that He had come to fulfil 
the law personally, communicatively, 
universally. 

And yet again. This was not merely 



50 



MATTHEW 



[MAT*, v. 17-20] 



the declaration of a personal determina- 
tion; it was an official proclamation. 
" For I say unto you, till heaven and 
earth pass away, one jot or one tittle 
shall in no wise pass away from the law 
till all things be accomplished." Here 
again one is tempted to ask, What did 
our Lord mean ; " Till heaven and earth 
pass away " ? The answer which comes 
most easily is that this was a figure of 
speech ; that it was an indefinite way of 
saying that the law can never pass 
away. But it was not so. It is a most 
matter-of-fact utterance on the part of 
Jesus. When He said those words, it 
is as though He stood at the centre of 
the cosmos; of Heaven, which was ever 
the supreme place with Him; of Earth, 
the things which are patent to the 
senses ; and said : The law cannot fail 
in the tiniest accent, in the minutest 
matter; it cannot be set aside, it can- 
not be abrogated, it cannot be trifled 
with as non-important while these 
things last as they are; "Till heaven 
and earth pass away; . . . till all be 
accomplished." 

If we interpret the words by the con- 
stant law of Scripture we shall find that 
the words were not carelessly chosen. 
Is heaven to pass away? Yes, He says 
so; "Heaven and earth shall pass 
away, but My words shall not pass 
away." Is the material order in the 
midst of which the Son of God and Son 
of Man stood, in the midst of which we 
live, to pass away? He says so. The 
law, which is the statement in words of 
God's ideal, cannot pass, cannot be 
done away, cannot be abrogated in one 
jot or tittle, until heaven and earth 
pass. It must last while the cosmos as 
it is, lasts. 

But when heaven and earth pass, 
does the law pass into non-existence? 
Until righteousness, the ultimate of law, 
be realised, law cannot pass; and that 
will not be till the heaven and earth 
pass. But beyond the heaven and earth 
that shall pass away, Peter saw "new 
heavens and a new earth, wherein 
dwelleth righteousness" (2 Peter iii. 
13). Then righteousness will be un- 
hindered, dynamical, masterful. Then 
the law will pass. It will not then be 
destroyed; it will have passed from 
word into spirit, from the cold letter 



which affrights us, into the warm life 
which energises. That is what we are 
living for, and working toward. If you 
want to know how God is getting on, do 
not look around you to-day. Fight to- 
day, but look on to the new heavens 
and the new earth, wherein dwelleth 
righteousness. 

p Do not let us read these words of 
Jesus as though they were merely hu- 
man rhetoric! I have not come to 
destroy law. I have not come to de- 
stroy the prophets. I am come to fulfil 
them. The law will abide; the prophets 
will remain until this sin-scarred earth 
and sullied heaven pass; and there 
come the new heavens and the new 
earth wherein dwelleth righteousness. 
That is the King's official declaration. 
Underneath that declaration, and in the 
presence of that manifesto, we who 
have seen Him and love Him are to 
live and fight and serve, God helping us. 
Now, what does Jesus say of the re- 
lation of His subjects to law? I am 
not referring to the law of Moses the 
ten commandments; but to the under- 
lying principles which the law of Moses 
and the ten commandments imperfectly 
portrayed. We need not attempt to 
discover the relation between the Mo- 
saic economy and that of the King; all 
that He will presently explain. He will 
show us how far the law of Moses is 
binding on us still. It is a deeper, pro- 
founder matter with which He was now 
dealing "Whosoever shall break one 
of these least commandments, and shall 
teach men so, shall be called least in 
the Kingdom of heaven." This was a 
word of warning for the men inside the 
Kingdom. Notice carefully, "break" 
and "teach." You never find a man 
teaching that any commandment of God 
is unimportant, but that behind his 
teaching is the fact that he himself is 
breaking that commandment. " Whoso- 
ever shall break, and teach men so." 
That is a close connection, and the 
issue for that man is that he is to be 
least in the Kingdom. It is not a ques- 
tion of being cast out of the Kingdom; 
it is a question of his losing the hon- 
ours and the rewards ; the sense that he 
is co-operating in the building of the 
city, and the bringing in of the new 
heaven and the new earth. 



51 



. v. 17-20] 



MATTHEW 



But mark also the other side, in 
which the same philosophy is manifest 
" Whosoever shall do and teach 
them." The only power of teaching is 
that of the doing which precedes it. 
No man ever teaches a commandment 
with power, if he is breaking it in his 
own life. 

This is the relation of His disciples 
to law. Break the commandment, and 
teach men so, and you are least in the 
Kingdom. Do the commandment and 
teach men so, and you are great in the 
Kingdom. 

Now from this analysis let us gather 
out the principles revealed. 

The summary of all is in this last 
word of Jesus "I say unto you, that 
except your righteousness shall exceed 
the righteousness of the Scribes and 
Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter 
into the Kingdom of Heaven." 

The conflict with the Scribes and 
Pharisees was beginning. It continued 
as He exhibited the benefits of the 
Kingdom; and when He enforced the 
claims thereof, it became more acute, 
until there came a day when He stood 
face to face with Scribes and Pharisees 
in constant conflict. In order to under- 
stand what He says here, we must turn 
to chapter xxiii., "Then spake Jesus to 
the multitudes and to His disciples, say- 
ing, The Scribes and the Pharisees sit 
on Moses' seat; all things therefore 
whatsoever they bid you, these do and 
observe." Have you ever noticed that 
Jesus said that these men were to obey 
the teaching of the Scribes and Phari- 
sees? His quarrel is not with their 
teaching, in the measure in which it is 
an interpretation of law. He sweeps 
ruthlessly aside, as we shall see again 
and again, their whole teaching, when 
it becomes traditional merely. In so 
far as they sat on Moses' seat, men 
were to do and observe all they told 
them. "But," He continued, "do not 
ye after their works; for they say, and 
do not." 

That is the whole story. At last He 
unmasked them. He warned His dis- 
ciples, however, at the beginning, that 
their righteousness must exceed the 
righteousness of the Scribes and Phari- 
sees. When at last the time came to 
expose them, He explained the inner 



meaning of their failure. He began 
His preaching with the manifesto and 
the eight Beatitudes. He closed it for 
the public, by hurling eight woes upon 
the heads of the Pharisees. " They say 
and do not." That was the trouble with 
them. "They bind and bear not." 
" They do to be seen of men." " They 
love the chief seats . . . and the salu- 
tations." All the rest is a growth. The 
root is "they say and do not." Jesus 
declared that in His Kingdom the prime 
necessity is that there must be a right- 
eousness which exceeds that. 

What is the righteousness that ex-, 
ceeds ? He that " shall do and teach," 
the same shall be great. You are to do 
and say; you are to be and teach; you 
are to do to be seen of God; you are to 
be poor and meek and merciful. Briefly, 
the righteousness of the Pharisees was 
the righteousness that conditioned ex- 
ternalities only. The righteousness that 
the King demands is one that condi- 
tions the hidden and the internal, and 
so conditions the externalities. The 
righteousness of the Pharisees is the 
righteousness which expresses itself in 
the correct garment, and the wide phy- 
lactery on which quotations from law 
are written; something wholly for the 
eyes of men. 

Here is a point at which to pause, 
lest we misunderstand. The righteous- 
ness which exceeds is not the right- 
eousness which is careless of testimony ; 
but it begins farther back. The Phari- 
see is careful about the platter and the 
cup, the tithing of mint and anise and 
rue and cummin. The righteousness 
that exceeds is not careless about the 
platter and the cup; the righteousness 
that exceeds is not careless about the 
tithing of the small, the minute; but it 
does not begin there. The righteous- 
ness that exceeds is the righteousness 
that is anxious about righteousness, 
judgment, mercy, truth, the weightier 
matters of the law. The ethic of Jesus 
is far more severe than the ethic of 
Moses. 

One other word. "I came to fulfil." 
Is not that a stern word? Oh to say 
it as it ought to be said ! He says to 
these men standing about Him : Do not 
imagine that I have come to make 
things easy ; I have not ; do not imagine 



52 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. v. 21-48] 



that I am going- to let you loose from 
obligation; do not imagine for a single 
moment that I am going to destroy law 
or prophetic interpretation of law; I 
have come to fulfil. These multitudes 
would give anything to be let loose 
from obligation to law ; I have not come 
to do that. 

It is Christ's word to this hour. 
There is to be no license for passion. 
Here in My Kingdom, says Christ, you 
are not to be permitted the indulgence 
of sin if you pay pence; you are not to 
be excused from moral obligation and 
ethical exactitude, because you have 
high ideals. 

" I came not to destroy . . . but to 
fulfil," and as the King utters the 
words, the flaming splendour of the law 
bursts upon us and the white search- 
light of the Divine holiness lays bare 
our inner sin. Do not imagine that if 
you give yourself to Christ and crown 
Him King; He is going to minimise 
moral obligation. Do not imagine for a 
single moment that because you trust in 
this great, wounded, stricken, dying Re- 
deemer; you are going to be allowed to 
nurse your sin, and refuse to confess it, 
and go on insulting His holiness. "I 
am come to fulfil." As He speaks one 
is aifrighted. And yet, oh sinning 
heart, behold the Man Who speaks. 
While you see the white light of Divine 
holiness gleam from His eyes; see also 
the tender, God-like compassion of 
those eyes; and know this, that ere He 
has finished the prophecy of that word, 
" I came not to destroy but to fulfil," 



He will in some mystery of death and 
pain have taken hold of paralysis, and 
replaced it by empowerment. So that 
the King says ; If you are going to fol- 
low Me, you must be pure, and you can. 
I will make you pure. You must fulfil 
law, and I will enable you to do it; I 
have come to fulfil. It is a great word ; 
the last cry of the dying agony of the 
Son of God is in it. 

Yet that is not the final thing. The 
triumphant shout of the risen Christ is 
in it. From that moment until this, He 
has taken men who come to Him to 
fulfil law in them, and so make law 
unnecessary. We do not want any ten 
commandments now, because His word 
is written in our hearts. We want no 
external standard to show how short we 
come, for we have the eternal dynamic 
that shows how great we may become 
in Jesus Christ. 

Thus the King sets forth the value 
of law. It is a guide to righteousness 
in the sense of being a text-book re- 
vealing its expression. Law is not, nor 
can it ever be, the dynamic of right- 
eousness. The law is a revelation of 
righteousness, and as a revelation of 
requirement cannot become obsolete 
until the righteousness described is 
realised. That righteousness exceeds 
that of Scribes and Pharisees. 

The King will next proceed to de- 
scribe it by example. The prelude may 
well affright us; it is a flaming sword; 
but let us follow the King, and we shall 
find that the great message of law is 
the evangel of grace. 



MATTHEW V. 21-48 



I SAY unto you, that except your 
righteousness shall exceed the right- 
eousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, 
ye shall in no wise enter into the King- 
dom of heaven." 

"Ye therefore shall be perfect, as 
your heavenly Father is perfect." 

The first of these verses constitutes 
the concluding statement in the pro- 
logue on law. In that statement the 
inspirational principle of obedience is 
declared to be passion for a righteous- 
ness which exceeds that of Scribes and 
Pharisees. In the giving of the laws of 



the Kingdom there was neither the ab- 
rogation of existing laws, nor the utter- 
ance of any which are to replace them. 
In other words, Jesus lays down no 
rules for the government of human 
lives. He rather enunciates principles 
and communicates a life, which life in 
itself is at once pattern and power, a 
revelation of purpose, and a dynamic 
for the realisation thereof. No soul 
living in His Kingdom is governed by 
anything external to himself or to her- 
self. We are not governed by a law of 
carnal ordinances ; we are not governed 



53 



[MATT. v. 21-48] 



MATTHEW 



by anything which Jesus said from 
without; we are governed by the living 
Christ Who dwells within, and inter- 
prets His will to us by the Holy Spirit. 
And yet speaking to these men who 
were to form the nucleus of His 
Kingdom He illustrated the ethic and 
illuminated the righteousness which ex- 
ceeds, by reference to the Mosaic law. 

This He did first with regard to 
human inter-relationships. 

He first quoted two illustrative com- 
mandments from the decalogue (w. 
21-32). 

He then laid down two bases of 
wider social relationship by quotations 
from other of the writings of Moses 
(vv. 33-42). 

He finally declared that in His King- 
dom the new attitude of men toward all 
other men, and especially toward ene- 
mies, is to be that of a great love (w. 
43-48). 

In each case, after making quotations 
from the old economy, He interpreted 
their true meaning, and showed that 
He was not destroying but fulfilling. 
Making use of words they had been 
accustomed to, which had been inter- 
preted by Scribes and Pharisees as to 
external obligation, He showed that 
these external requirements could only 
be fulfilled according to the mind of 
God, as men acted from an inner life 
which was pure. From the decalogue 
He selected the words which deal with 
the foundations of life the laws of 
murder and marriage; the organism 
and its organisation " Thou shalt not 
kill," "Thou shalt not commit adul- 
tery;" the one conditioning life as to 
the rights of personal being, the other 
conditioning that social system into 
which life is to be built tip. 

He then made selections from what 
we have sometimes called the minor 
laws of Moses, and in doing so He laid 
two bases of a wider social application, 
and dealt with the twofold spirit which 
is to actuate men in their relationship 
to one another truth and justice. He 
conditioned their converse, banishing 
the oath, and establishing the simplicity 
of undeviating truth ; and then showed 
them that justice is to be ensured be- 
tween man and man, not from the cen- 
tre of personal insistence, upon rights, 



but from the new centre of making a 
man supremely anxious to do something 
more for his neighbour than his neigh- 
bour has any right to expect him to do. 

He then rose to the final and supreme 
word of love. He did not insist upon 
love among neighbours and friends. 
That, with a tender and beautiful scorn, 
He treated as of small value " If ye 
love them that love you, what reward 
have ye ? " There is nothing which 
exceeds about that. It is not wrong to 
love the man that loves you. It is not 
wrong to love your friend and neigh- 
bour, but there is no particular virtue 
in it ; there is none of the righteousness 
which exceeds. Scribes do it, Pharisees 
do it, Publicans do it, sinners do it. So 
He began with the impossible " Love 
your enemies." 

Here is a threefold process, moving 
out from the lower to the higher. In 
the individual man we first have laws 
conditioning physical life; then laws 
which condition mental attitudes; and, 
finally, one law conditioning spiritual 
being. From the basis of the body, 
through the superstructure of the mind, 
we come to the crowning glory of the 
spirit. Such is the line of develop- 
ment in man. So also in society comes 
first that which is physical life and 
its culture ; then that which is mental 
the tone, the temper, truth, and jus- 
tice; and then that which is spiritual 
love. Not that the lowest is divorced 
from the highest, for all the truth con- 
cerning life and the marriage relation- 
ship is smitten through with the 
crowning glory of a spiritual love; and 
the underlying inspiration of truth and 
justice is the love which He insists 
upon at last. Into the warm light of 
the infinite Love the crowning glory 
are lifted all the lower relationships. It 
is a harmony, a great unity. The Mas- 
ter Lawgiver touches life in every one 
of its relationships. 

Take, first, the illustrative command- 
ments from the decalogue. " Thou shalt 
not kill," " Thou shalt not commit adul- 
tery." These are the foundation laws 
of social relationship. You cannot build 
up a new society except as these funda- 
mental facts and requirements are per- 
petually borne in mind. 

First, the sacredness of life, and 



54 



MATTHEW 



, v. 21-483 



therefore the sternest possible dealing 
with anything which might issue in the 
destruction of life. " Thou shalt not 
kill." That is the first law of social 
life individual life. Life is so sacred 
a thing, received from God, that it must 
not be interfered with or destroyed by 
any other living being. That is funda- 
mental. There are a thousand ways of 
killing; you do not merely kill a man 
when you shoot him or stab him. This 
word of the Sinaitic requirement is a 
word which safeguards, as with a flam- 
ing sword, every life from harm, 
wrought by any other life. " Thou shalt 
not kill." 

Then, "Thou shalt not commit adul- 
tery." Here is a recognition of the 
sacredness of marriage, through which 
the race is to be propagated and 
trained. God's first circle of society is 
not the Church, it is the family. 
Races are to be made or unmade as the 
family is made or unmade. Nations are 
to rise to progress, to power ; or to pass, 
to perish, in proportion as they obey or 
break this Divine law. 

Thus with delicate touch the King 
takes out of the Decalogue the funda- 
mental things when He would illustrate 
the righteousness which is to exceed. 

What does He say about the first? 
He gives us the picture of Jewish legal 
proceedings. " In danger of the judg- 
ment ;" " In danger of the Council," 
" In danger of Gehenna." These 
phrases are purely Jewish. There was 
a court which dealt with minor matters, 
things of which, if a man were guilty, 
he was " in danger of the judgment " 
the lower court. There were other mat- 
ters that could not be dealt with in the 
lower court, things in which it had no 
jurisdiction; they must be submitted to 
the Council, the Sanhedrin, the higher 
court. And finally there was the valley 
of Hinnom, where the bodies of crim- 
inals were thrown, where they cast all 
the refuse of the city, and the heaps 
were set on fire for their utter destruc- 
tion. Jesus, and those whom He ad- 
dressed, were perfectly familiar with 
these tilings. When He said "judg- 
ment," nobody understood Him to mean 
the final day of assize; He meant this 
first tribunal, which dealt with minor 
matters. When He said " the Council," 



every one knew He meant the higher 
court, the Sanhedrin. And when He 
said "Gehenna," the hell of fire, they 
knew He meant that rubbish heap out- 
side the city into which all its refuse 
was poured, and where fires were per- 
petually burning for its destruction; 
the rubbish heap on to which they cast 
the dead bodies of malefactors. Be- 
cause this is a Jewish figure it does not 
lose its force. In the figurative the fact 
is always of greater force than the 
figure. 

Now let us hear the King. He says, 
If you are angry with your brother, 
you are " in danger of the judgment." 
He is not now dealing with the actual 
Jewish judgment; that is the figure. 
The fact is His own judgment. You 
are in danger of having to stand before 
a tribunal, which is the tribunal of the 
criminal. Anger in the heart creates 
the condition of the criminal. This is 
the law inside the Kingdom. Not if 
you are angry with your brother " with- 
out a cause." Mark well the omission. 
We like these words, we would like to 
keep them. We can always find a 
cause if we want to be angry with our 
brother. Practically there is no doubt 
that the words "without a cause" are 
an interpolation, and do not occur in 
the original manuscripts; and their 
omission by the Revisers is the result 
of most careful examination, and a cor- 
rect conclusion. If you are angry with 
your brother, He does not say you will 
appear for judgment, but you are in 
danger of it. You are on the path of 
peril that may lead you there. 

But if you say to your brother, 
" Raca ! " A great deal of time has 
been spent over this word, as to what 
it signifies, but this much is perfectly 
certain, it is a term of contempt. Ad- 
dress your brother with contempt, call 
him " Raca," and you are " in danger 
of the Council." The offense is more 
heinous, it will take a higher court to 
deal with you, because your sin is 
subtler, and more pronounced. 

But if you shall call your brother, 
" Thou fool," which is a term of insult, 
then you are in danger of the ultimate 
punishment, of the casting out, of being 
counted fit only for the rubbish heap, 
which is outside the Kingdom of God, 



55 



[MAW. v. 21-48] 



MATTHEW 



and shares neither its benefits nor its 
privileges. 

When you are angry, when you hold 
a man in contempt, when you insult 
him, you are in danger of the Judg- 
ment, of the Council, of Gehenna. 
There is not a word about murder here. 
And there is not a word about killing 
here. There is no need. Jesus Christ 
does not begin to insist upon His penal 
code when a man has murdered; He 
arrests him before that. Murder in 
the making is arrested; and no man 
was ever murdered yet, whether by cool 
and calculating forethought, or in the 
heat of passion, but that at the back of 
it was the spirit that insults, the spirit 
of contempt, the spirit that is angry. 

So to come back to the first of these, 
the King says: If you are never angry 
you will never murder. I will make 
your anger penal, and thus save you 
from murder. Life is to be sacred, so 
sacred that there is not to be the re- 
motest chance of your hurting or harm- 
ing by killing, because you will never 
hurt in insult, or despise in contempt, 
or nurse in your own bosom the anger 
in which lies the making of the ulti- 
mate murder. 

Jesus has not yet done with this. He 
goes still further. He now gives them 
a law by which they are to govern their 
own conduct. It is law by illustration 
rather than by rule " If therefore thou 
art offering thy gift at the altar, and 
there rememberest that thy brother hath 
aught against thee " not that thou hast 
aught against thy brother; that is an- 
other thing which the Lord deals with 
elsewhere "If therefore thou ... re- 
memberest that thy brother hath aught 
against thee," if you have been angry 
wr;h him, if you have called him Raca, 
or fool, if you have wronged him, what 
are you to do? Drop your gifts and 
leave them. You are first to be recon- 
ciled to your brother, " and then come 
and offer thy gift." So the King safe- 
guards the altar of God from the un- 
holy intrusion upon its steps, or the 
unholy pouring upon its fires, of gifts 
by men who have in their hearts some- 
thing which is harmful to the commun- 
ity. That is the law. Obey it, and 
there will be no murder. Obey it, and 
life will become sacred; every man's 



life will become as sacred to every 
other man as is his own. 

But the King goes further yet. 
"Agree with thine adversary quickly 
while thou art with him in the way; 
lest haply the adversary deliver thee to 
the judge, and the judge deliver thee to 
the officer, and thou be cast into prison. 
Verily I say unto thee, Thou shalt by 
no means come out thence, till thou hast 
paid the last farthing." It would seem 
that Jesus is here passing behind the 
feeling that may be in a man's heart 
against his brother, and is dragging the 
arch-enemy into the light. Probably 
this term adversary refers here, as 
everywhere, to Satan. This is a figure 
of law. The adversary is the antagon- 
ist. It is strictly a legal word, and yet 
it is a curious fact that it occurs only 
four times in the New Testament, and 
every time it is used of an antagonist 
in law in a bad sense, and never in a 
good. It is the one word Peter uses 
concerning the great enemy, " Your ad- 
versary the devil." And the Greek 
word very bluntly translated means, 
" against right." It is the adversary 
in law, who is not on the side of 
righteousness. 

But you say, Surely Jesus was not 
advising us to agree with the devil? 
Yes, exactly that. Let us follow it care- 
fully. Here again in a flash He reveals 
the relation Satan bears to all such as 
are in His Kingdom. Satan is not pow- 
erful over such as put their trust in 
God. Jesus said on another occasion, 
" Satan asked to have you, that he 
might sift you as wheat." Now He 
says: If there is evil in your heart to- 
ward your brother, if you have wronged 
your brother, and he has that against 
you, then the adversary himself has a 
claim upon you; he can claim you to 
deliver you to punishment. His claim 
is established because of your wrong- 
doing. Haste from the altar, be recon- 
ciled to your brother; have the evil put 
away; agree with your brother; and so 
have done with the adversary that he 
may have no complaint. Remember 
Satan is the accuser of the brethren, 
the one who charges us with sin. So 
long as we are living in sin he has 
right over us, even though we be in 
God's Kingdom; we give him the right 



56 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. v. 21-48] 



to lead us into the place of ultimate 
penalty. Thus the King safeguards 
human life. 

Oh this ethic of Jesus, how it 
scorches ! It was so easy a thing to do 
no murder. Through the accident of 
birth, or the accident of earlier sur- 
roundings we are devoid of a certain 
kind of animal courage, and so do not 
murder. But, oh my soul, when He 
says if I am angry and contemptuous 
I am in danger of Gehenna, there is 
only one thing for me to do hurry to 
the Cross and its blood and its cleans- 
ing; to the Resurrection and its life 
and its dynamic. This ethic of Jesus, 
which does not express itself in small 
rules, but in great principles; not in 
a decalogue on stone, but in a require- 
ment in the heart, is the severest thing 
that the world has ever had. 

Again, how will He feel with this 
whole question of the marriage relation- 
ship and ihe first circle of human so- 
ciety? This is one of the things that 
Jesus, the Infinite Purity, knew must 
for evermore be handled with a touch 
of infinite delicacy, and yet with the 
grip of steel. There are no words 
wasted. There is no long description, 
satisfying the morbid curiosity of the 
unclean. There is one swift, burning, 
heart-searching flame. " Every one 
that looketh on a woman to lust after 
her hath committed adultery." Let no 
man who begins to undervalue the 
sacredness of the marriage relationship 
ever dare to say that he is in any 
sense a Christian. Here speaks the 
flaming heart of the Infinite Purity, lov- 
ing the bairns, taking care of succeed- 
ing generations. The sin that curses 
society is a sin of the heart. Though 
that which Moses forbade be never 
committed, if the evil thing is there, 
the King says that it is sin. Stern 
words! Surely with love He is think- 
ing of the little children. He is think- 
ing of home, and the family; He is 
talking in the interests of the boys and 
the girls, of what they are to be when 
they touch the larger life. But there is 
no need to attempt to scent the rose, or 
to paint the glow of an evening sky, 
or to add any lustre to Infinite Purity. 
Read it until it search you and burn 
you, and know for evermore that this 



is the ethic of purity in the Kingdom 
of the great King. 

So we pass to the two bases of wider 
social reform. 

First of all, truth. Here we need not 
tarry, for again the words are so beau- 
tifully simple. Jesus says oaths of any 
kind are unnecessary in His Kingdom. 
The new character will make the old 
oath superfluous. You need not swear 
by heaven or earth, by Jerusalem, or by 
your hair. You will say, Yea, and it 
will be yea. You will say, Nay, and it 
will be nay. Simple truth, profounder 
far in convincing men than all your 
laboured oaths. We know full well that 
an oath is always a revelation of a pos- 
sibility of deceit. We know perfectly 
well when a man is talking to us, if he 
begins to say that he is prepared to take 
his oath, we begin to think he is a. liar. 
No man ever begins to offer to take an 
oath to prove a thing, but that one 
knows, that, even supposing this time he 
is true, the fact that he needs an oath 
to make one believe him, shows that at 
other times he is not true. Jesus says, 
Do not swear by heaven, for it is God's 
throne. Do not swear by Jerusalem, 
for it is His city, the "city of the 
Great King." Do not swear by your 
head, for you cannot make one hair 
white or black. Live in the conscious- 
ness of God, and you will not want to 
swear by things that are less than God. 
Do not swear by heaven, it is God's 
throne. Remember that, and you will 
always tell God's truth. The earth 
green, beautiful is God's earth. Re- 
member that, and on its sward, and on 
its dust, and on its heaving billows you 
cannot lie. Remember that you are in 
the presence of God; that He clothes 
the earth with green; He is in the 
city, with its thrill, and throb, and 
pressure; that He is watching the sil- 
ver of your hair ; and then you will say, 
No, and every man will know that you 
mean No; you will say Yes, and the 
world will believe it ; because they have 
come to know you. 

And, secondly, justice. Justice is to 
have a new centre, a new desire. It is 
to be secured to others by overplus of 
love. The old economy proceeded from 
the centre of personal rights, but the 
new proceeds from the centre of delight 



57 



[MATT. vi. 1-18] 



MATTHEW 



in undeserved and unnecessary gener- 
osity. The other cheek ! The man who 
struck the one does not deserve the 
other. Thy cloak also! No man de- 
serves your cloak if he has made you 
give your coat up. The second mile! 
No man deserves that we should go the 
second mile with him when he has com- 
pelled us to go one. Notice, it is not 
if you go with a man, but if he compel 
you to go one, you must go the second. 
You say impracticable for London? 
Yes, utterly, until London bends at the 
Cross. You will have truest justice 
from the man who does more than can 
be required, for the more always means 
the inclusion of everything which can 
be required. When one sees a man 
cheerfully tramping the second mile, 
justice is there in the first, but the 
demonstration of it is in the second. 
That is Christianity; that is the over- 
plusage. It is more than is required. 
The Christly soul, the man in the King- 
dom is for evermore overfilling the 
measure, overstepping the necessity, do- 
ing that which no man had any right 
to expect from him. Justice becomes 
love-lit, and full, when He interprets it. 
Finally, He says, love not your 
friends only, but your enemies. How 
does it culminate ? " Ye therefore shall 
be perfect." And that is not the end 
of the Sermon on the Mount. There is 
a great deal more to be said after that. 
That commandment does not refer to 



anything except that which is set in 
close relation. Love your enemies, and 
so be like your Father. This is the 
ethic only, not the dynamic. Pres- 
ently we shall have to say, Be like 
your Father, and so love your enemies. 
For the moment love is the law, the 
rule, the regulation, "the principle of 
life that crowns everything. Go back 
over all this chapter, and you will find 
it is so. If you love you will never be 
angry, or call your brother Raca, or call 
him fool. If you love there will be no 
breaking down of the holy enclosure of 
marriage relationship, and the family 
circle. If you really love you will tell 
the truth, for a liar cannot love. If 
you love, as we have seen, justice will 
always be satisfied. Love is everything. 
And so the whole law is fulfilled in the 
one word love. 

Let us take these requirements of 
the King one by one, and by them let 
us test our lives. It is impossible for 
us to do so without being driven to the 
conclusion that, unless He does infi- 
nitely more for the world than give it a 
code of ethics, He has but mocked our 
impotence and revealed our weakness. 
Thank God that we know Him not only, 
or first, as Lawgiver; but first as our 
great Redeemer, blotting out the sin of 
the past by blood, communicating new 
power by resurrection, and coming with 
us through all these human interrela- 
tionships, enabling us to fulfil them. 



MATTHEW VI. 1-18 



WE now pass to that section of the 
Manifesto which deals with the 
relation of man to God. 

The King first lays down a funda- 
mental principle, negative in form, but 
positive in intention and result. That 
principle is expressed in the words, 
"Take heed that ye do not your right- 
eousness before men to be seen of 
them." The Authorised Version reads, 
" Take heed that ye do not your alms 
before men." The Revised Versions, 
English and American, substitute the 
word " righteousness " for " alms." 
" Righteousness " includes alms, and 
prayer, and fasting, the three matters 
subsequently dealt with. When Jesus 



uttered that first word He said every- 
thing, and all that followed was illus- 
trative of the application of this 
principle to life; three departments be- 
ing selected which peculiarly reveal 
human relationship to God in the pres- 
ent and probationary condition. 

The principle is first applied in the 
matter of the giving of alms; secondly 
in the matter of prayer; and, finally, 
in the matter of fasting; alms, prayer, 
and fasting, the three great means of 
grace; the first stated being the final 
one in the order of experience. Alms 
is the last thing; prayer precedes it; 
and fasting prepares for prayer. The 
statement moves backward from the ex- 



58 



MATTHEW 



[MAM. vi. 1-18] 



ternal manifestation of Divine relation- 
ship, to the internal sources of power. 
The proof of human relationship to God 
in the world is the giving of alms. The 
power that creates the giving of alms 
is prayer. The condition that makes 
prayer powerful, is that of fasting. 
These are the three great means of 
grace. There are others, external and 
smaller ones, which are merely sacra- 
mental symbols of the larger. The 
means of grace and let us begin where 
the King finished are: first, fasting; 
secondly, prayer; thirdly, the giving 
of alms. 

First, fasting the denial of every- 
thing that interferes with intimate, di- 
rect fellowship between the life and 
God. We may have our symbol of fast- 
ing if we like, in a day in which we eat 
no food; but that is by no means essen- 
tial. Fasting is a matter far deeper, 
far profounder. It is the life suffering 
the loss even of rights in order that it 
may come into more strenuous relation- 
ship with God. That is the deepest 
means of grace; and in proportion as 
we learn what fasting really means, we 
approach the infinite sources of power. 

After that comes prayer; and to the 
fasting life this is delightful, natural, 
spontaneous. The highest outreaching 
of the life is only possible as it is free 
from sordidness, sensuality, and the 
dust of to-day; and thus can hold un- 
hindered spiritual communion with God. 

The result of such prayer will always 
be that we hurry from the secret place, 
to give; to pour out alms! The giving 
of alms is much more than the giving 
of money. We may have no money. 
We may honestly be unable to put any- 
thing in a collection plate; and yet we 
may be giving God the richest gifts, a 
service of sacrifice our blood, our life 
to help our brother. 

The first words are fundamental. 
Let us begin there. "Take heed!" 
That is a flaming sword, warning men 
off from holy ground. Do not let us 
play with fire, do not let us come to 
these statements imagining that we 
have found a soft and sentimental 
teaching. They constitute rather a 
fierce fire! "Take heed." That is the 
word of a King. It is the word of in- 



carnate Light. It is the word of abso- 
lute Purity. "Take heed." 

Let us pause upon the threshold. We 
have been listening to what He said 
about murder and adultery; about 
truth, justice, and love. We have 
listened to the words, "Ye therefore 
shall be perfect, as your heavenly 
Father is perfect ;" and as we are filled 
with fear at that requirement, He 
warns us yet again, " Take heed ! " 
We are bound to listen reverently when 
Jesus says, "Take heed." 

A reason precedes every deed. It 
may be a very poor one, an utterly 
false one, but it exists. There was 
never a deed done, but that it was pre- 
ceded by a dream ; never a victory won, 
but that it was inspired by a vision. 
Therefore the King says: Get your 
right dream, your true vision; that is, 
see to it that your motive is pure. 
Motive is everything in the Kingdom. 
Take heed that ye do not your right- 
eousness before men. If we give alms 
that men may see us, we fail utterly in 
the ethic of this Kingdom. If we pray 
to be heard of men, or seen of men, our 
prayer is not prayer in this Kingdom. 
If we fast that men may be impressed 
with our religious devotion, we have 
our reward, but we are not in this 
Kingdom. Thus the King denounces as 
unworthy all religious acting which is 
inspired by the opinion of men. 

How this scorches and burns ! Dare 
any of us bring our lives to this test? 
We dare, we must, but it is a terrible 
ordeal. How much have we prayed 
before men? How much of our con- 
duct is regulated by the opinion of 
men, and the thought of men? How 
much of our lower things, and even o 
our higher affairs, are under the im- 
pulse of what men will think? Prob- 
ably the vast majority of people are 
more influenced by what men will say, 
than by what God Almighty thinks. 

But listen again : " Do not your 
righteousness before men, to be seen of 
them ; else ye have no reward with your 
Father Who is in Heaven." God has 
no reward for the man who is living 
before men. Thus the negative state- 
ment of principle becomes positive, in 
that it teaches us that the one, all- 
inclusive, all satisfactory motive of life 



59 



[MATT. vi. 1-18] 



MATTHEW 



is to be well pleasing to God. That is 
the ethic of the King. 

He now proceeds to make application 
of the principle. First to alms, begin- 
ning in the external, with that which 
reveals to men, our relationship to God. 
" When therefore thou doest alms, 
sound not a trumpet before thee." This 
is a picture of the popular method of 
the hour in which Jesus lived. It is 
an actual piece of portraiture. Some 
Pharisee, intending to distribute gifts, 
would come to a conspicuous place in 
Ihe city, and blow a small silver trum- 
pet, at which there would gather round 
him the maimed, the halt, the blind. 
Then, with a great show of generosity, 
he would scatter gifts upon them. We 
may say that has no interest for us in 
these days. But it has interest for all 
time; for here, as ever, if the Eastern 
and local colouring has faded from the 
picture, the great lines of truth stand 
out. Listen to the sarcasm of Jesus, 
"Verily I say unto you, They have 
received their reward;" they did it to 
be seen of men; they have been seen 
of men; that is all they need; they 
have what they sought. " But when 
thou doest alms, let not thy left hand 
know what thy right hand doeth; that 
thine alms may be in secret." Nothing 
is in secret finally "Thy Father Who 
seeth in secret shall recompense thee." 
Your Father has to do with that secret 
thing. Your Father has to do with the 
hidden things, the motives, the reasons 
that lie at the back of life ; and He says 
that the secret alms, given from secret 
love, He will reward. 

Amos, in scathing sarcasm and de- 
nunciation of the people of his own age, 
said, You "proclaim freewill offerings, 
and publish them." And this age is a 
continuation of the age of Amos. The 
King declares that this is not right- 
eousness before God. 

If I left this here, where Jesus did 
not leave it, it would present a very 
difficult ideal. Yet it is simple, if mo- 
tives are right; and therefore we go 
beyond this externality, this giving to 
others; to that deeper thing that ought 
to underlie such giving the prepara- 
tion of prayer. The order of statement 
is, first, Divine relationship in its out- 
ward expression toward men alms; 



and secondly, Divine relationship in its 
secret expression toward God prayer. 

Here again we have first an applica- 
tion of the principle to the communion 
of man with God. It is to be between 
the man and God. The popular method, 
to be seen of men, again meets with the 
sarcasm of Christ. " " They have re- 
ceived their reward." 

Then follow instructions for prayer. 
First, privacy go to your inner cham- 
ber, shut the door. That is the true 
place of prayer. We call the church 
building the house of prayer. In a sec- 
ondary sense it is so, but the true place 
of prayer, for the man who is in the 
Kingdom, is in the inner chamber with 
the door shut. How much do we know 
of the inner chamber and the shut 
door? When a man announces that he 
is always, at such a time, in the inner 
chamber, with the door shut, that is a 
denial of secrecy. The principle is that 
we go there when no one else knows; 
that we escape from human observation 
to loneliness with God. That is the first 
principle of prayer. 

The next matter is directness. When 
you find your way into that inner cham- 
ber and the door is shut, "pray to thy 
Father." Directness of application and 
directness of statement are included in 
this simple phrase. There is a story 
which strikingly illustrates this prin- 
ciple of directness in prayer. In a 
Yorkshire chapel a prayer meeting was 
being held, and a few people were there 
who knew what prayer meant. There 
wandered into that meeting a man from 
the city, who had very little under- 
standing of the force and fire and fer- 
vour of true prayer meetings. He had 
that most terrible habit of making pray- 
ers; and he made a prayer in that 
prayer meeting which consisted of 
beautiful sentences, in which he gave 
God all kinds of information which He 
had long before this man was born. 
For well nigh twenty minutes he 
prayed. At last he said, "And now, 
Lord, what more shall we say unto 
Thee ? " One old man, who knew his 
way into the Secret Place, and knew 
what prayer was, and who was weary 
and tired of this exhibition, cried out, 
"Call Him Feyther, mon, and ax for 



60 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. vi. 1-18] 



summat." That is the whole philoso- 
phy of prayer. " Pray to thy Father." 

And then simplicity, " not vain repe- 
titions." Of course this again is local 
colouring, for these Orientals would 
take one sentence, and repeat it again 
and again, imagining that the exhaus- 
tion that such repetition produced was 
a sign of power. Privacy, directness, 
simplicity, are the notes of true prayer. 

He then gave them a pattern. In the 
opening sentence we have a great doc- 
trine of God " Our Father Who art in 
the heavens." The word here is plural, 
though our translators have not shown 
it; "Our Father Who art in the 
heavens." The New Testament speaks 
at least of three heavens. "The birds 
of the heaven," where the reference is 
to the atmosphere encircling the earth. 
" Wonders in the heaven," where the 
stellar spaces are intended. " Caught 
up even to the third heaven," that is, 
beyond the stellar spaces, to the place 
of the supreme manifestation of the 
presence of God. 

" Our Father Who art in the heav- 
ens " all of them. That is a doctrine 
of the transcendence of God; He is far 
away beyond all that of which we can 
be conscious. It is also a doctrine of 
the immanence of God; He is in the 
very air we breathe, as well as far 
away, infinitely out beyond the possi- 
bility of the mind's comprehension; in 
all infinite spaces, and in all near de- 
tails, everywhere. That doctrine of 
God is the doctrine which enables a 
man to pray. 

Again He is Father. If we under- 
stand that, we shall not stay arguing 
as to the possibility of prayer. We 
shall pray. 

This pattern of prayer also reveals 
the true order of prayer. It falls 
naturally into two halves; the first has 
to do with God's Kingdom ; the second 
with our need. " Our Father Who art 
in the heavens Hallowed be Thy name. 
Thy Kingdom come. Thy will be done, 
as in heaven, so on earth." That is the 
first concern in prayer. Prayer is not 
first of all a means by which we get 
something for ourselves; it is rather a 
method of helping God to get something 
for Himself. Thus, as in life, so also 
in prayer, the same law obtains " Seek 

61 



^e first His Kingdom, and His right- 
eousness, and all these things shall be 
added unto you." Apply this pattern 
of prayer to much of our praying, and 
we are ashamed! We pray about our 
need, and our family, and our neigh- 
bours, and our Church, and our coun- 
try; and if we have a few minutes at 
the end, we pray for the missionaries. 
Jesus says that this is all wrong, for 
first must come God's Kingdom, and 
then our need. There is nothing 
omitted from that prayer. Our daily 
sustenance physical, mental, spiritual 
it is all there in " daily bread." Our 
inter-relationship amongst men " For- 
give us, as we forgive." We cannot 
expect forgiveness while there is malice 
in our heart. It is the only petition of 
which Jesus gives us an exposition. It 
will not do to say : We will forgive our 
debtors. We must get our paying done, 
before we begin our praying. And 
finally, prayer concerning the conflict 
with evil. " Bring us not into tempta- 
tion " that is the sense of fearfulness ; 
" But deliver us from the evil " that 
is the determination that whether 
through temptation or without it, the 
supreme matter is that of deliverance 
from evil. 

Yet look at the prayer again. It is 
the inspirer of work. "Hallowed be 
Thy name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy 
will be done." If we are praying that 
way we must live that way, we must 
work that way; not merely for our- 
selves, but for our city, our nation, and 
the world, that everywhere God's name 
may be hallowed, God's Kingdom come, 
God's will be done. We shall work 
along that line if we pray in that way. 

Then, again, it is the prayer of trust. 
We need sustenance; we tell our 
Father about it. We need restoration; 
we go to our Father. We need dis- 
cipline; we talk to Him about it as we 
stand upon the threshold of it. 

Then observe the socialism, the com- 
munism of the prayer. We must use a 
strong word because it is a strong 
prayer. Notice the pronouns of the 
prayer, the pronouns in the first per- 
son ; " Our us our us our we 
our us us." There is not a pronoun 
in the first person singular. They are 
all plural. We cannot pray that prayer 



[MATT. vi. 1-18] 



MATTHEW 



alone. There is no room for selfishness 
there. We are bound to bring some- 
body else in with us. It is interesting 
moreover to look at the cases here. 
There are four possessives, four ob- 
jectives, and only one nominative. The 
nominative case is the popular one. We 
always like to be the subject of the 
sentence, and use the capital We. 
There is only one nominative here, and 
it occurs when we say, " as we also 
have forgiven our debtors." The only 
right we have to be the subject of the 
sentence is the right to forgive the man 
who has wronged us. That is prayer 
according to Jesus. It is a great social 
prayer. We cannot pray it alone, and 
yet we should go alone and pray it. 
He says, " Enter into thine inner cham- 
ber, and . . . shut thy door," and when 
nobody is there but yourself, begin to 
pray as though the whole world were 
with you. That is Christ's socialism. 
It is based upon strong individualism; 
individually, a man alone with God; 
socially the world on the heart, as the 
prayer is offered. If we learn to pray 
this way, a great deal of praying will 
cease, and a great deal of praying will 
begin. 

And now the final matter. "When 
ye fast." The popular method is a sad 
countenance, a disfigured face, " that 
they may be seen of men to fast." 
What is Christ's instruction? "Anoint 
thy head, and wash thy face; that thou 
be not seen of men to fast, but of thy 
Father Who is in secret; and thy 
Father, Who seeth in secret, shall 
recompense thee." That is the true 
method of restraint and of self-denial. 

We are perpetually insisting upon the 
necessity for self-denial, and we do well 
to insist upon it. It is at the very heart 
and centre of Christian life. That is 
the process by which the life is made 
strenuous. The athlete denies himself 
a great many things, in themselves 
harmless and proper, in order to win. 
There must be self-denial, there must 
be restraint, there must be fasting. But 
the mistake is that we fast in order that 
men may think how good we are. We 
get our reward, and there is nothing 
beyond. But if fasting is for the pur- 



pose of finding the stronger, the truer, 
the nobler; in order to create larger 
room for the coming and going and 
sweep of the Spirit then it is true. 
But what are to be the outward signs 
of fasting? The sad countenance and 
the disfigured face ? Rather the washed 
face and the anointed head. Is it not 
time that we in the Christian Church 
talked a little less about self-denial, 
and lived it more? Have we not by 
over emphasising in our conventions on 
the one hand, and on the other, in the 
new ascetic ideal manifesting itself in 
scourging, been false to this word of 
Jesus, "Anoint thy head and wash thy 
face " ? Oh, my life, thou shouldest 
keep perpetual Lent within the secret 
chamber of thy being, and everlasting 
Easter on thy face! The inner life 
must always be a denial of self, but we 
must come to the world with a smile 
and a song, and the anointed head, and 
the washed face. This is religion, this 
is life. 

These are three great subjects, and 
they mark the revelation of man to God 
alms, and prayer, and fasting. Deny 
the Divine existence, wholly or in part, 
and wholly or in part all these will 
cease. As a man loses his hold upon 
God, or as a man comes to deny God 
altogether, these things cease in the in- 
verted order. First, fasting ceases. 
Then prayer ceases, for a man cannot 
pray unless he fasts that inner fasting 
of the life; if that cease, prayer will 
cease. And then alms will cease. A 
man gives less now than when he had 
less to give, because he has been so 
very busy getting, that he forgot to 
pray. He forgot that not in making, 
but in fasting, is the real strength 
of life, and there is always degrada- 
tion and deterioration, when that is 
forgotten. 

These words and these deeds and 
these activities must be undertaken in 
actual relationship with Him. Alms 
must be given in the consciousness of 
His observation. Prayer must be of- 
fered in the place of loneliness with 
Him. Fasting must be solely a means 
of helping communion with Him. 



62 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. vi. 19-24] 



MATTHEW VI. 19-24 



King having declared the laws 

. of human inter-relationship, and 
having dealt with the principles of 
Divine relationship, proceeded to the 
discussion of the attitude of His sub- 
jects towards earthly things. The 
subjects of the Kingdom still have 
necessary relationships with the earth. 
They are spiritually minded, but they 
have to touch material things. How- 
ever much the inner life may be, and 
ought to be, in communion with that 
which is essentially spiritual, we can 
only continue to live at all as we touch 
and handle things which are seen and 
temporal. 

The Manifesto of the King proceeds, 
therefore, to make clear what our rela- 
tionship ought to be to the material 
things by which we are surrounded, 
and with which we have to deal. 

Here, as on all former occasions, 
there is a remarkable absence of rules, 
but there is the clearest revelation of 
principle. Not by legal enactments, 
formulated, tabulated, and learned by 
heart; but rather by the creation of an 
atmosphere, and the indication of art 
attitude, does the King correct and con- 
dition our relationship to the things of 
the present life. Broadly, He teaches 
that, in all contact of His subjects with 
earthly things, they must be dominated 
by a super-earthly consciousness. Men 
must deal with the wealth of the world, 
but if their consciousness is conditioned 
merely within that material wealth, 
they fail. If all their dealing with 
wealth is motived by, and conditioned 
within a spiritual conception, then they 
will have found the deepest secret of 
life, and fulfilled the highest purpose 
of their Master. Men must have food 
to eat, must have clothes to wear; but 
if they spend all their days thinking 
about what they shall eat, or what they 
shall wear, they are not understanding 
or realising the ethic of Jesus. If, on 
the other hand, they recognize their 
Father's recognition of their need, and 
trust it; and then seek the Kingdom, 
in matters of food and in clothing, they 
are living in the realm of the true 
morality. 

This section consists of two parts, 



each characterised by warning and in- 
struction. The first is a revelation of 
the attitude of the subjects of the King- 
dom toward wealth they are to be 
without covetousness. In the second 
section, which we shall take for our 
next study, the attitude of the same 
subjects toward necessary things is in- 
dicated they are to be without care. 

This is the whole of His will for His 
people. This is not irrational; He 
proves it to be reasonable. This is not 
an appeal to credulity ; it is a call for 
faith. This is not fatalism; it is the 
essence of fidelity, fidelity to the prin- 
ciples afore enunciated, to the purposes 
perpetually revealed, and to the great 
Lord and Master to Whom allegiance 
is owned. 

In this first section, in which our 
Lord deals with the true attitude of His 
subjects toward wealth, let us first 
notice His distinct commands: "Lay 
not up," . . . "Lay up." Here is a 
negative and a positive "Lay not up 
for yourselves treasures upon the 
earth." " Lay up for yourselves trea- 
sures in heaven." 

Then let us notice the comparison of 
values. On the one hand are treasures 
laid up on earth which moth and rust 
consume, and thieves break through 
and steal. On the other are treasures 
laid up in heaven, to which neither 
moth, rust, nor thieves have access. 

Next we will notice Christ's reason 
for this injunction, and revelation of 
attitudes. "Where thy treasure is, 
there will thy heart be also." 

Still further we will look at Christ's 
exposition of the urgency of His com- 
mandments. The single eye necessary 
to the true illumination of the life. 

Finally, we will consider Christ's 
last word, " No man can serve two 
masters." 

First as to Christ's distinct command, 
" Lay not up for yourselves treasures 
upon the earth." The same word oc- 
curs twice; in the one case as verb, 
and in the other as substantive. We 
come nearer to an appreciation of what 
He said when we read, " Treasure not 
tip treasures upon the earth, but trea- 
sure for yourselves treasure in heaven." 



63 



[MAT*, vi. 19-24] 



MATTHEW 



The simple idea of the word treasure 
is that of placing something some- 
where; but it is in striking contrast to 
other words which also mean to place 
something somewhere. There is a pe- 
culiar quality in the Greek word which 
is not suggested by our word "trea- 
sure." Very literally the idea is to 
place something horizontally. There are 
other Greek words which mean to place 
something perpendicularly. Here we 
have an instance of the figurative ele- 
ment in language. 

What was meant by placing horizon- 
tally? To place in a passive condition, 
as the word which indicates to place 
something perpendicularly means put- 
ting it in an active relationship. This 
word means to lay something aside 
horizontally that is, to store some- 
thing up, to keep it; not to place 
something perpendicularly, ready for 
activity and work, but to hoard it. It 
is the laying of things up, one thing 
upon another, piece upon piece, horizon- 
tally, that we may possess them, take 
care of them, and accumulate them. 
Every boy remembers that he has often 
been told, that the miser says coins are 
flat that they may rest; and the spend- 
thrift says they are round that they 
may roll. 

Now the King does not say that it is 
wrong to lay up, for while He says 
" treasure not up," He also says " trea- 
sure up." We need to recognize the 
positive as well as the negative part 
of the command. The common capacity 
to which He is here appealing is that 
of the passion for possession. There is 
not a single capacity of human life 
wrong inherently. The abuse of it, the 
misuse of it, is wrong. Whenever we 
see a man passionately desirous of pos- 
session we may say: That is all right. 
It may be made all wrong by his 
method and motive; by the way in 
which he attempts to possess, and the 
purpose for which he desires to possess. 
It is always the purpose at the back of 
things which matters. The King does 
not begin with externalities; He gets 
back to the deepest thing in a man's 
life, and deals with that. It is as 
though He said: You have a passion 
to possess wealth, you want to be able 
to place things horizontally; and it is 



quite right that you should do so God 
made you so. Being, having, doing; 
that is the story of human life. There 
is no Beatitude on possessing, but pos- 
session may be sanctified. 

We want to make our fortunes. We 
have desires as passionate as those of 
any man to possess. And the nearer 
we come to our Ivord, and the more we 
know of the indwelling Spirit, the more 
powerfully is the passion to possess 
burning in our heart and life. But the 
question of importance is as to the 
principle upon which we seek posses- 
sion. Passion without principle . burns 
out the life. Principle without passion 
sterilises it, and makes it hard and 
cold and stony. 

That is a great word in the book of 
Ezekiel, spoken to the Prince of Tyre: 
" I have destroyed thee, O covering 
cherub, from the midst of the stones of 
fire." What a strange bringing to- 
gether of contradiction ! " Stones of 
fire." A stone is the last embodiment 
of principle hard and cold. Fire is of 
the essence of passion warm and en- 
ergising. Put the two together, and we 
have stones principle ; fire passion ; 
principle shot through with passion, 
passion held by principle. Men have 
the passion to possess, to treasure up. 
What principle is going to govern us? 
That is the matter with which the 
Master is dealing. 

The principle revealed is not that it 
is wrong to lay up treasures for our- 
selves, for when the Master comes to 
the positive statement, He distinctly 
says, "I,ay up for yourselves." We 
have not yet discovered the secret. 

It is discovered in the phrases, 
"Treasures upon earth." "Treasures 
in heaven." Christ says to His sub- 
jests, You are to fulfil that passion for 
possession by making your fortune, not 
for the present, the perishing, the pass- 
ing ; but for the future, the lasting, and 
the eternal. You are to remember, 
with the passion burning within you, 
that you are not the child of to-day, 
you are not of the earth, you are more 
rthan dust; you are the child of to- 
morrow, you are of the eternities, you 
are the offspring of Deity. The mea- 
surements of your lives cannot be cir- 
cumscribed by the point where blue sky 



64 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. vi. 19-243 



kisses green earth. All the fact of 
your life cannot be encompassed in the 
one small sphere upon which you live. 
You belong to the infinite. If you make 
your fortune on the earth, poor, sorry, 
silly soul, you have made a fortune, 
and stored it, in a place where you can- 
not hold it. Make your fortune, but 
store it where it will greet you in the 
dawning of the new morning, when old 
earth passes from you. Make your for- 
tune there. Possess not the things of 
the now; but the things of the now 
and the forever. 

In dealing with Christ's comparison 
of values, we must allow for the East- 
ern colouring. Wealth consisted in 
those days very largely of fabrics, pur- 
ple and fine twined linen : and the King 
says, I will tell you the story of them 
moths ! That is a fine touch of tender 
sarcasm. There is no anger in it. 
There is no thunder in it. It is a fine 
play of the summer lightning. Moths ! 
Your immortal life cannot be hurt by a 
moth ; do not try to enrich it with stuff 
which moths eat. 

Or, if you will take some other cur- 
rency, such as metal, store it up, lay it 
horizontally, pile it up, make it your 
treasure. The King says, Rust! What 
is rust? Fire. Present in all things is 
this eremacausis, this slowly burning 
fire, which eats into, disintegrates your 
most solid metal, melting it into azure 
air. The subjects of the King are not 
to try and make themselves rich with 
things which the frail moth can ruin, 
and the silent rust destroy. 

And once again, " Where thieves dig 
through and steal." We need not dwell 
upon that. That is so modern that it 
needs no exposition. 

What does Jesus say about the stor- 
ing of the heavenly, about the laying 
up of treasure in heaven? Nothing . 
positive; it is all negative, but thank 
God for the negatives of the spiritual 
world. No moth, no rust, no thief. If 
we can only store the true riches, as 
we work and toil, we shall know that 
no moth can ever eat the garment, or 
destroying fire touch the fine gold, or 
marauding thief rob us of that which 
is our own. 

But next, why this urgency? "For 
where thy treasure is, there will thy 



heart be also." There is a passion for 
possession. We must satisfy it. The 
thing which matters is not so much the 
possession of the treasure, as the effect 
the possession of the treasure will have 
upon us. Here we hear our Lord's 
deepest heart speaking, and it is as 
though He said: My child, I know that 
passion for possession; it is quite right; 
God made thee so. It must be met and 
satisfied; but I am seeking, even more 
than the satisfaction of any desire of 
thy life, proper as it may be, to teach 
thee that everything depends upon 
where thy treasure is as to where thy 
heart will be; and everything depends 
upon where thy heart is, as to what 
thou wilt be, for as a man thinketh in 
his heart so is he. 

If we take our treasures and place 
them here, our heart will be here, and 
we shall be here, and we shall become 
of the earth earthly, sensualised, ma- 
terialised, degraded, because we have 
put our treasure here. But if we put 
our treasure out yonder in the infinite, 
if we somehow learn the secret of lay- 
ing up treasure beyond, pur heart will 
be beyond, and our life will be lifted, 
and all the light of the infinite spaces 
will be within us, and all the love of 
the Infinite Heart will dominate us, and 
all the undying life of the infinite God 
will be ours, surging, beating, thrilling, 
throbbing through us. 

And then, as though the Lord turned 
from these things to give an exposition 
of the meaning and urgency of it all, 
He says, " The lamp of the body is the 
eye." The eye is the lamp, not the 
light. The light is outside it, beating 
all round about it, but it is the lamp 
which catches the light, and enables us 
to see and to realise. "The lamp of 
the body is the eye: if therefore thine 
eye be single, thy whole body shall be 
full of light. But if thine eye be 
evil, thy whole body shall be full of 
darkness." 

The word " evil " here does not mean 
wicked, but out of order. Evil is a 
larger word than sin. Evil includes 
sorrow, and affliction, and calamity, and 
fault, as well as definite and positive 
and wilful sin. " If thine eye be evil " 
out of order "thy whole body shall 
be full of darkness." Here Jesus seems 



65 



[MAM. vi. 19-24] 



MATTHEW 



to say, the thing of utmost importance 
is that you should have a right view of 
these things in satisfying the passion 
for possession. You must have a true 
view, and that is what He has been 
attempting to give. The single eye. 
The evil eye. These are the contrasts. 
The single eye is the eye that is unified 
or simple. The evil eye is the eye that 
is not simple. An oculist will tell you 
that there is such a thing as astigma- 
tism a malformation of the lenses, of 
such a nature that rays of light pro- 
ceeding from one centre do not con- 
verge in one point. The single eye is 
the eye without astigmatism. It is the 
eye with the lenses properly adjusted, 
of such a nature that rays of light pro- 
ceeding from one centre do converge at 
one point. Jesus was not using the 
word here carelessly when He said 
" single." It is the eye which has no 
obliquity, which sees everything true, 
and in proper proportion. If the eye be 
evil, then how great is the darkness, 
what misunderstanding of life, what 
dire and disastrous failure ! 

In Modern Painters John Ruskin 
says: "Seeing falsely is worse than 
blindness. A man who is too dun- 
sighted to discern the road from the 
ditch may feel which is which; but if 
the ditch appears manifestly to be the 
road, and the road to be the ditch, 
what shall become of him? False see- 
ing is unseeing, or the negative side of 
blindness." 

That is the modern method of saying 
what Jesus said in far more remarkable 
language : If your eye is single your 
body is full of light. If it is evil, 
suffering from malformation, distorted 
in its view, then your conceptions will 
be false. The single eye is the eye that 
looks always toward the infinite, and 
answers the passion of the soul to pos- 
sess, in the light of it. The evil eye is 
the eye that suffers from astigmatism, 
or obliquity, and has varying centres, 
and varying reasons, and no focussed 
light, and consequently produces a de- 
graded conception of things. 

Finally, the King sums up, saying, 
" No man can serve two masters : for 
either he will hate the one, and love the 
other; or else he will hold to one, and 
despise the other. Ye cannot serve God 



and Mammon." Here is the deepest 
thing of all. We want to possess. 
What shall we do with this passion of 
our life? We must worship with it, as 
we must worship with every passion. 
With it we may worship Mammon. 
With it we may. worship God. We 
cannot do both. That is the great dis- 
tinctive principle. No man can be- 
come the slave of his treasure and 
worship it, without thereby proving 
himself traitor to God. No man can be 
the bond-slave of God, worshipping and 
serving Him with all the heart, and all 
the mind, and all the strength, and be 
enslaved by Mammon. 

" Lay not up for yourselves treasures 
upon the earth." " Lay up for yourselves 
treasures in heaven." Does our Lord, 
then, mean that we are to have nothing 
to do with the wealth of the earth when 
He says, " Lay up for yourselves trea- 
sures in heaven"? Does He simply 
mean we are to pray, and strive, and 
work for the salvation of men? All 
that we are to do, but that is not what 
the Lord means here. He is simply 
speaking of earthly treasure from be- 
ginning to end. He is referring to the 
same class of treasure when He says, 
" Lay not up treasures upon the earth," 
as when He says, "Lay up treasure in 
heaven." He does not mean by this 
second "Lay up treasure," your toil 
and prayer and work. He is speaking 
of the self-same material, earthly 
wealth. He teaches His people what 
is the right and wrong use of wealth. 
He tells them how to deal with a super- 
abundance of wealth. You may say: 
There is not a man who has a super- 
abundance. There is not a man who 
has not a superabundance ! This is not 
an attempt to put any measure upon 
the quantity of it. Do you know what 
is necessary after all? What God has 
promised to supply us with in the mat- 
ter of material things is that which is 
necessary for our life to-day bread 
and water; that is all God has prom- 
ised. " His bread shall be given him ; 
his water shall be sure." Whatever 
additions you have had to bread 
and water, have been superabundance. 
Think it out in the light of all Christ's 
habit of teaching, and you will come to 
the recognition of the fact that we are 



66 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. vi. 25-34] 



living in an age which is being spoiled 
by its softness. We call very many 
things necessary to-day that our fathers 
called luxuries. 

A man may say, What shall I do ? "I 
cannot lay purple up in heaven, ducats 
up in heaven 1 Oh, yes, you can! 
Christ hereby declares that every child 
of His love, and every subject of His 
Kingdom, is the steward of all he pos- 
sesses, and that, beyond the necessities, 
with which we shall deal in our next 
study, all the superabundance is to be 
at the disposal of the King, in the in- 
terests of the Kingdom of heaven. On 
another occasion He said, " Make to 
yourselves friends by means of the 
mammon of unrighteousness; that, 



when it shall fail " mark the new ren- 
dering of the Revised "they" the 
friends that you have made by means 
of the mammon "may receive you 
into the eternal tabernacles." " Lay 
not up for yourselves treasures upon 
the earth." Do not take the mammon 
and pile it to possess it. So use it as 
to make friends by its means, that pres- 
ently they, the friends, shall meet you, 
and greet you in the everlasting habita- 
tions. Let us make such a fortune that 
when at last we come home we shall be 
greeted by the friends that we have 
helped to reach home. Let us rather 
have our fortune on the other side than 
on this. 



MATTHEW VI. 25-34 



IN this section of our Lord's Mani- 
festo; continuing His revelation of 
the principles which are to govern His 
people in their relation to the things of 
this life, He enjoins on them the neces- 
sity for a super-earthly consciousness in 
touching earthly things. Towards su- 
perabundance, as we have seen, they 
are to be without covetousness. We 
will now consider their attitude towards 
necessary things, which is, that they 
are to be without care. 

In this connection one injunction is 
thrice repeated. " Be not anxious." 
"Therefore I say unto you, Be not 
anxious " (ver. 25). " Be not therefore 
anxious" (ver. 31). "Be not there- 
fore anxious" (ver. 34). This is the 
all-inclusive word. It is illustrated, em- 
phasised, argued, with inimitable skill 
by the great Master and Teacher Him- 
self. It accurately defines the whole 
attitude of mind which His disciples 
should maintain .toward necessary 
things. "Take no thought" was a 
most unhappy mistranslation, for, as we 
shall see before we have finished, that 
is exactly what the King did not mean. 
All His argument as to our attitude 
being characterised by freedom from 
anxiety, is based upon the fact of our 
ability to take thought. He does not 
hint for a single moment that we are 
to be careless or improvident. That 
against which He charged His disciples, 
and still charges us, is corking care, 



the care which means fretting, worry, 
restlessness, f everishness ; or perhaps, 
better than all, in the simple terms of 
the Revision, "Anxiety;" "Be not 
anxious." There are things of this life 
which are necessary, which, so far as 
we know, have no place in the larger 
life toward which we go. Food, drink, 
raiment, are necessary things, but are 
not provided for us by God apart from 
our own thought, our own endeavour, 
our own activity. But none of these 
things is to produce anxiety in the 
hearts of the subjects of the King. 

" Be not anxious." The Lord argues 
for this injunction by three positions. 
"Therefore I say unto you, Be not 
anxious;" the first proposition occupy- 
ing verses 25-30. " Be not therefore 
anxious;" the second proposition found 
in verses 31-33. "Be not therefore 
anxious;" the third proposition of illus- 
tration and enforcement found in verse 
34. There are three movements and 
one message; three methods of empha- 
sis and illustration and enforcement; 
and one matter of importance. Our 
Lord not only says, " Be not anxious ;" 
but " Be not therefore anxious." Thus, 
in each new movement of emphasis and 
illustration He drives us back to some- 
thing preceding. This is the word of 
the King. 

Let us see how He enforces it. First, 
He declares anxiety to be unnecessary 
in the children of such a Father. In 



67 



[MATT. vi. 25-34] 



MA.TTHEW 



the second movement He declares 
anxiety to be unworthy in the sub- 
jects of such a Kingdom. In the third 
movement He declares anxiety to be 
unfruitful. 

First, then, our Lord teaches us that 
anxiety is unnecessary. Look at the 
"therefore." "Therefore I say unto 
you." We are compelled to ask where- 
fore? On what is Jesus basing this 
appeal? You will remember two truths 
brought before us in the previous sec- 
tion. In showing what our attitude 
ought to be toward superabundance, He 
first made the truth about values per- 
fectly clear. He insisted on the neces- 
sity for the single eye which sees things 
properly focussed; sharp, clear, true; 
in proportion and perspective. The 
point of view is everything. The evil 
eye is that which sees things obliquely; 
its vision is distorted, nothing is sharp, 
nothing is true, everything is out of 
proportion and perspective. Christ em- 
phasised the necessity for the single 
eye, truly focussed; and He told His 
disciples in effect that they had that 
single eye when they lived for the glory 
of God, and that the true view-point of 
life is that of seeing things in their 
relation to the Infinite, to the Divine, to 
God Himself. The eye, single for God's 
glory, admits true light into the life. 
Further, we noticed how Jesus declared 
the unification of life in worship to be 
necessary. We cannot serve God and 
Mammon. Whomsoever we worship will 
demand the whole of our service. Life 
is unified by the principle of worship 
which governs it. He takes it for 
granted that these men have found the 
unifying principle in the service of 
God; that because they are serving God 
they cannot serve Mammon. Now, He 
says, "Therefore," upon the basis of 
the true vision of values, upon the basis 
of the fact that your life has become 
unified in the service of God ; " There- 
fore be not anxious." Thus He defends 
the word; charging His own to be free 
from fret and friction and feverish- 
ness; upon the fact that, being in His 
Kingdom, they have found the true 
view-point, they have found the true 
principle, unifying and making life 
consistent. 

From that He proceeds to work out 



in detail the truth of the love and the 
care of God. "I say unto you, Be not 
anxious for your life, what ye shall eat, 
or what ye shall drink; nor yet for 
your body, what ye shall put on. Is 
not the life more than the food, and 
the body than the raiment?" Declar- 
ing the care of the Father for the 
birds, He asks, "Why are ye anx- 
ious concerning raiment? Consider the 
lilies of the field, how they grow." 
The lilies to which Jesus pointed were 
not, of course, our lilies of the valley, 
but the great huleh lilies of Palestine, 
the most gorgeous and beautiful of all 
the flowers growing there. They grow 
in cultivated districts, or amongst the 
rankest verdure. 

"As a lily among thorns, 
So is my love among the daughters." 

Of this gorgeous flower the Master 
said, "Consider the lilies of the field, 
how they grow." Mark this again: 
"they toil not, neither do they spin; 
yet" even though they do not toil or 
spin "yet I say unto you, that even 
Solomon in all his glory was not ar- 
rayed like one of these." The King 
comes where the children can accom- 
pany Him, and among the birds and 
flowers, in sweetest and tenderest of 
illustrations, He teaches the sublimest 
truths for the comfort of the heart of 
His people. 

Let us ponder His teaching, first 
about the birds. He says in effect: 
These birds of the air neither sow nor 
reap nor gather into barns, but your 
Father feedeth them; you can sow and 
reap and gather, therefore much more 
does your Father care for you. The 
Lord's argument here is not that we 
are to cease our sowing and reaping 
and gathering, but that if He takes 
care of those who cannot do such 
things, much more will He take care of 
those who can. These birds of the air 
are without rational forethought. By 
comparison with men there can be no 
toiling, no sowing, no reaping, no gath- 
ering. But Jesus says, God has given 
you the power of rational forethought, 
and much more will He take care of 
you. It is not that we are to neglect 
the use of reason, or forethought, or 
preparation. It is not that we are to 



68 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. vi. 25-34] 



take no thought unhappy mistransla- 
tion but that we are to take thought 
for the morrow without anxiety, know- 
ing that, as God cares for the birds, He 
will more perfectly take care of us. 

So also with the flowers. " They toil 
not, neither do they spin; yet I say 
unto you that even Solomon in all his 
glory was not arrayed like one of 
these." Did you imagine that was 
figurative, an overstrained metaphor? 
Take that flower, that huleh lily, gor- 
geous and beautiful in its colouring, 
and put it by the side of Solomon in 
his magnificence, in his robes of gold 
and silver and jewels and splendour 
the lily is more beautifully clothed than 
Solomon. Take the finest fabric that 
monarch ever wore, and submit it to 
microscopic examination, and it is sack- 
cloth. Take the lily and submit its 
garment of delicate velvet to micro- 
scopic examination and investigation, 
and the more perfect your lens the 
more exquisite the weaving of the robe 
of the lily will be seen to be. Christ 
is not indulging in hyperbole. He is 
stating cold fact No garment loomed 
to the finest and softest texture is any- 
thing but rough sackcloth when placed 
by the side of the drapery with which 
He clothes the lily. Christ says : Open 
your eyes, My children, and look at the 
lilies lying scattered over the valleys 
and mountains, growing among thorns, 
and know that when God makes the 
lily, kings desire and cannot obtain 
such a robing. Looking at the flower, 
and seeing all its decking, know this: 

"He Who clothes the lilies, 
Will clothe His children too." 

There is not a flower and not a petal 
which, in exquisite finish and delicate 
perfection, would not put all the robes 
of a king to shame. 

But all this is true not only of those 
flowers of Palestine. Consider the 
daisy of the English fields, the sweet 
and simplest flower which you tread 
beneath your feet; and a king in all 
his robes of state is not arrayed like 
one of these. "But if God doth so 
clothe the grass of the field, which 
to-day is, and to-morrow is cast into 
the oven, shall He not much more 
Clothe you, O ye of little faith?" 



The emphatic words are, "much 
more," and it is important that we 
grasp their true meaning. The lily 
cannot toil, it cannot spin. You can 
do both; and if God takes care of the 
flowers which He has not gifted with 
this power of reason to toil and work 
for self-preservation, how much more 
the creatures to whom He has given 
this superabounding gift, and to whom 
He perpetually gives Himself in im- 
mediate and living presence. 

I/et us now look at the other two 
arguments briefly. He passes from this 
first statement, which shows how un- 
necessary care is if we are the children 
of such a Father, and He says " There- 
fore" once again. "Be not therefore 
anxious, saying, What shall we eat? or, 
What shall we drink? or, Wherewithal 
shall we be clothed? For after all 
these things do the Gentiles seek; for 
your heavenly Father knoweth that ye 
have need of all these things." Do not 
be anxious about these lower things, but 
there is something you ought to be 
anxious about. Do not always be plan- 
ning and scheming even to the point 
of anxiety about food and raiment; 
"but seek." No life is complete that 
does not feel upon it some great com- 
pulsion, driving it. We want to learn 
to be loving and patient with all sorts 
of people, but it is difficult to have 
patience with some men! Their eye 
never gleams, they have no passion, no 
power; they drift. A man that is a 
real man has something that drives, 
something that creates enthusiasm. 
Now, says the Master, I have told you 
not to be anxious about these things. 
But there is something you are to be 
anxious about, something to seek, some- 
thing to consume you. There is some- 
thing that ought to drive you, making 
every nerve tingle and throb, and every 
artery flow with force. What is it? 
The Kingdom of God. So the Master 
would save US from the anxiety of a 
lower level, which makes force impos- 
sible on a higher, in order that He may 
develop force on the higher. Do not 
be anxious about the lower things, 
"But seek ye first His Kingdom, and 
His righteousness." Seek it in essence. 
Let it be the underlying passion. Seek 
it in enterprise. Seek it everywhere. 



69 



[MAM. vi. 25-34] 



MATTHEW 



But is there not an immediate appli- 
cation? Food, drink, raiment. Do not 
be anxious about them, but seek the 
Kingdom in them. Dress for the King- 
dom of God. Eat for the Kingdom of 
God. Let the great underlying passion, 
which is the great principle of the life, 
find its throbbing way into the extremi- 
ties of the life. Things about which 
you are not to be anxious in themselves, 
and for themselves; you are to be anx- 
ious about, in order that through them 
also the Kingdom of God may come. 
Seek that in essence, in enterprise, and 
in individual application. With a 
touch of fine and beautiful disdain, 
which is not contempt if we may make 
so fine a distinction the Lord says, 
"All these things shall be added unto 
you." "Added unto you." Mark the 
conception food, drink, raiment, added. 
That is, the necessary luggage with 
which you travel, the added things 
which are nevertheless impedimenta. 
Some people are always worrying, when 
travelling, about their luggage, and that 
is just what a great many are doing 
about food and raiment. These things 
shall be added. Trust them to your 
Father. Trust them after your toil is 
over, after your planning is done. After 
you have sown and reaped and gath- 
ered, leave the rest. And if you do not 
think by your calculation that your 
doing, and reaping, and gathering is 
enough for all, then let there be no anx- 
iety. Your Father knows, and here is 
your blank cheque for necessities 
"These things shall be added unto 
you." 

Once again, anxiety is always care 
about the future. To-morrow, that is it. 
It is always to-morrow, and so Jesus 
sums the whole thing up finally, and 
says: "Be not therefore anxious for 
the morrow; for the morrow will be 
anxious for itself," by which we do not 
understand the Lord to mean that it is 
a proper function of to-morrow to be 
anxious about to-morrow, but by which 
we do understand Him to mean, Do 
what you will, there will be something 
in to-morrow to be anxious about. You 
cannot kill to-morrow's anxiety by being 
anxious about it to-day. And so He 
says, " Sufficient unto the day is the 
evil thereof." Evil does not mean sin. 



It means adversity. Every day that 
comes will have in it evil adversity 
things calculated to make us anxious. 
To-morrow will be anxious. The evil 
will come whatever you do. All of 
which may be stated thus: Live, oh 
child of thy Father, subject of thy King, 
live to-day. 

"Lord, for to-morrow and its needs 

I do not pray. 

Keep me, O Lord, from stain of sin 
Just for to-day." 

There is no suspicion of asceticism 
in this section. Our Father knows that 
His people will be here in the world, 
and will have to do with earthly things. 
He does not even say it is wrong to lay 
up treasure. He only advises us as to 
how we shall make our investment of 
treasure. Do not lay it up on earth. 
Lay it up in heaven. There is nothing 
ascetic here. There is no warrant for 
improvidence here. The man who will 
go out and say, Very well, I will be like 
the sparrow, I will not sow, or reap, or 
gather well, we know the issue, and 
neither we nor anyone else will pity 
him. If a man shall say, I will go and 
be as the flower of the field, I will not 
toil or spin well, we see at once the 
unutterable folly of such an argument. 
Do not imagine that the King com- 
mands us not to think for the future. 
Do not say, that because God cares, you 
are not to provide for your wife, and 
your bairns, in the case of your dying. 
Let us have no nonsense talked about 
the evil of insurance. " If any pro- 
videth not for his own, and specially his 
own household, he hath denied the faith, 
and is worse than an unbeliever," says 
the apostle; and the whole teaching of 
Jesus is, not that we are not to reap, 
sow, gather, toil, spin ; but that through 
our toil and planning we are not to be 
anxious; through reaping we are to 
trust; in our gathering we are to sing; 
as we toil we are to rejoice; as we spin 
we are to be quiet. It is a call to the 
life that is frictionless, because by the 
principle of faith man takes hold upon 
God, and, submitting, knows what it is 
to have His power operating through 
his work, and His life providing for 
his need. 



70 



MATTHEW 



. vii. 1-121 



MATTHEW VII. 1-12 



npHIS chapter contains the last sec- 
X tion of the Manifesto of the King, 
and may be described as a summary of 
principles of action. Its light flashes 
back on the teaching of our Lord, 
and forward on the obedience of His 
subjects. 

The first twelve verses deal with the 
attitude of the subjects of the Kingdom 
to those who are without. In the first 
six verses the King describes that atti- 
tude. In the next five (7-11) He tells 
His subjects of the power in which they 
will be able to obey the injunctions 
given. In verse 12 He returns to the 
original teaching, linking it, in a cry- 
stallised form, with the truth He has 
declared concerning the power at their 
disposal. 

First the attitude described. It is a 
twofold attitude without censorious- 
ness, "Judge not;" but with careful 
discrimination Do not cast holy things 
to dogs. 

As there breaks upon us a conscious- 
ness of the difficulty of obedience to 
this description of attitude, it seems as 
though the Lord, looking at that little 
group of men listening to Him, the first 
subjects of the Kingdom, had said to 
them, Does this appear to be difficult? 
Do you feel this is an impossible ethic? 
Is this something far exceeding the 
righteousness of Scribes and Pharisees ? 
Are you doubtful as to how you will be 
able to obey ? " Ask," " seek," " knock," 
and everything you need for obedience 
is at your disposal. 

Then, having revealed the dynamic, 
He continues, and we specially need to 
notice one word in His next statement, 
for it is the key to the unity of the 
whole section. He says, "All things 
therefore" and that "therefore" leans 
back upon the " ask," " seek," " knock." 
" Therefore " links the final declaration 
concerning our attitude to the outside 
man, with the initial description, 
through the medium of the promised 
power. 

This paragraph is unified, and its 
one teaching has to do with our atti- 
tudes toward other people. First, a 
detailed description; secondly, a decla- 
ration of the power in which we shall 



be able to obey so fine and searching 
an ideal ; and finally, a command, which 
we describe as the golden rule, and 
often misquote by taking the words out 
of the context, and by omission of the 
" therefore," rob of half its force. We 
have no right to read this verse, "All 
things whatsoever ye would that men 
should do unto you, even so do ye also 
unto them." We have no right to quote 
it in that way, and to call it the golden 
rule. We must not omit the "there- 
fore." If we do we cannot obey. If 
we retain the " therefore," then, amazed 
and terrified by the tremendous claim, 
we are driven to ask, to seek, to knock, 
and to know that the Listener to the 
asking, to the seeking, to the knocking, 
is our Father. Then the rule is golden, 
golden with heaven's own light, flashing 
with heaven's own fire, possible with 
heaven's own power but in no other 
way. 

Now let us turn to a consideration of 
these three sections. First, our Lord's 
description of the attitude of His sub- 
jects to those who are without. As 
already indicated, this divides itself 
into two parts. The first five verses 
forbid censoriousness ; and the sixth 
verse insists upon a careful discrimina- 
tion. The one commandment is con- 
tained in the first words. Everything 
that follows explains and argues for 
obedience to that command " For with 
what judgment ye judge ye shall be 
judged; and with what measure ye 
mete it shall be measured unto you." 
That is graphic illustration. The King 
decrees that whatever measure we use, 
the other man will use the same. In 
what measure we mete in that same 
measure it shall be measured unto us. 

A careful understanding of the use 
of the word "judge" here is very- 
necessary, because in the second section 
when our Lord says, " Give not that 
which is holy unto the dogs, neither 
cast your pearls before the swine," H 
commands us to judge; and upon an* 
other occasion He distinctly said to His 
disciples, " Judge righteous judgment." 
So that this command, " Judge not, 
that ye be not judged," must not be 
taken superlatively as though we were 



71 



[MATT. vii. 1-12] 



MATTHEW 



not to use the reason and the powers 
of discrimination which are ours within 
the Kingdom of God. We must there- 
fore understand what our Lord really 
meant by the word, and how He used 
it in this particular connection. 

The strict meaning of the word 
" judge " is to distinguish, to decide ; 
and the variety of applications possible 
to such a word is evidenced by the fact 
of the variety of ways in which it is 
translated in our New Testament. In 
the Authorised Version it is translated 
in all these ways : Avenge, condemn, 
decree, esteem, go to law, ordain, sen- 
tence to, think, conclude, damn, deter- 
mine, judge, sue at the law, call in 
question. There is no value in that 
grouping save as it reveals the fact that 
the simplest thought in the word is that 
of distinguishing decision. Sometimes 
the decision may be adverse, sometimes 
it may express itself as a decree deter- 
mined upon, sometimes it may express 
itself as a sentence to be carried out. 
All these varieties are seen in the trans- 
lations made use of. The simplest 
thought is that of distinguishing, com- 
ing to a decision. Sometimes it runs 
out into action, sometimes it conditions 
a passive position. Therefore its par- 
ticular sense must always be determined 
by the context. Here, evidently, the 
Lord did not use the word " judge " in 
the sense of forbidding us to discrimi- 
nate, to distinguish, to decide. There 
can be no doubt whatever that He used 
it of coming to adverse conclusion in 
the sense of condemnatory censorious- 
ness. " Judge not," condemn not, come 
to no final decision, do not usurp the 
throne of judgment, or pass a sentence, 
or find a final verdict; "Judge not, 
that ye be not judged." So He forbids 
to His subjects, the usurpation of the 
throne of final judgment about any 
human being. He tells them that they 
are not to judge in the sense of con- 
demnation; that there is no power de- 
posited in the individual life that shall 
enable that individual to find a verdict, 
and to pass a final sentence; and He 
warns us off, every one of us, from that 
spirit of critical censoriousness which 
decides concerning our brother, as to 
the Tightness or wrongness of his action, 
because we cannot possibly weigh in the 



balances all the motives that may lie 
behind that action. 

Our Lord then proceeds to give rea- 
sons against such judgment First, 
retributive judgment will fall back 
upon the man who exercises such judg- 
ment. Of course th'ere are different in- 
terpretations of the meaning of the 
words, " With what judgment ye judge, 
ye shall be judged." Does He mean 
with what judgment we judge our 
fellow man we shall be judged by God ? 
Some commentators tell us so. We may 
judge our fellow man falsely ; God can- 
not. We come to wrong conclusions 
because of the limitations of our being ; 
God cannot come to wrong conclusions. 
That can hardly therefore be the 
meaning. 

Then He proceeds to say, "With 
what measure ye mete, it shall be, mea- 
sured unto you." Luke chronicles the 
uttering of the same words at another 
time : " Give, and it shall be given unto 
you; good measure, pressed down, 
shaken together, running over, shall 
they give into your bosom. For with 
what measure ye mete it shall be mea- 
sured to you again." There is no doubt 
that the King's purpose is to teach us 
that we must expect to receive judg- 
ment on the same basis as that on 
which we give it. If we set ourselves 
up as men finding verdicts and sen- 
tences, then we must expect to be so 
judged; and in the measure in which 
we mete to men our judgment, in that 
measure they will mete their judgment 
to us. 

The King immediately rises into what 
would appear to be a higher realm 
" Why beholdest thou the mote that is 
in thy brother's eye, but considerest 
not the beam that is in thine own eye? 
Or how wilt thou say to thy brother, 
Let me cast out the mote out of thine 
eye; and lo, the beam is in thine own 
eye ? Thou hypocrite ; cast out first the 
beam out of thine own eye; and then 
shalt thou see clearly to cast out the 
mote out of thy brother's eye." 

"Beam," "mote." Nowhere else in 
the New Testament are these words 
used. Very literally, a beam is just 
exactly what the word means to us, the 
branch of a tree, or a massive piece of 
timber. A mote is hardly what we un- 



72 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. vii. 1-12] 



derstand by a mote. It is a dry twig 
off a branch, a chip from the beam 
itself. Of course, the proportion is the 
same. The small thing is the mote; 
the beam is the great thing that blinds 
entirely. What is the beam to which 
the Lord refers? He is speaking to 
men who exercise a spirit of criticism 
against other men, who are supposed to 
be sinners above the measure in which 
the critic is a sinner. This cannot ap- 
ply, therefore, to the case of a man who 
is living in vulgar sin if he criticise the 
man guilty of a sin less venal. The 
beam is not what the world calls a 
vulgar sin, because the man living in 
open and vulgar sin never does criticise 
the man guilty of small sin. If the 
beam be some prominent vulgarity, then 
there is no point in the illustration at 
all. The man who says there is some- 
thing in the other man's life which is 
not consistent, is the man that says that 
there is nothing inconsistent in his own 
life. Yet the King says that there is a 
beam in his eye; he who professes to 
have the right to criticise his brother 
has something greater -a beam in his 
own eye, and it is that lack of love 
which expresses itself in censorious- 
ness. When men look for motes, the 
passion that makes them do so is a 
beam, more guilty in the sight of 
heaven than the mote for which they 
look. We should be far more pitiful, 
faf more gentle and kindly in our judg- 
ment, far less anxious to criticise the 
man with the habit that we have not, 
had we more love. Christ arrests the 
man who has no mote, and says, Your 
search for a mote is evidence of a 
beam, and you have no power to see 
the mote in its true relation and pro- 
portion; there is a hindrance to the 
vision because the beam is in your own 
eye. The slight change in the final 
word is interesting. " Thou hypocrite, 
cast out first the beam out of thine own 
eye; then shalt thou see clearly to cast 
the mote out of thy brother's eye." He 
did not say, "Then shalt thou see 
clearly the mote," but, "Then shalt 
thou see clearly to cast it out." The 
man with the beam is the man who is 
looking for the mote, and beholding it. 
Notice the question, "Why beholdest 
thou the mote?" You criticise it, you 



attack it, but you cannot move it. Get 
the beam out of your own eye, get the 
passion for criticism removed, get the 
ungodly and unchristlike endeavour to 
find the mote destroyed; and then you 
will see clearly, not the mote, but how 
to remove it. The power for removing 
the mote to which you object lies, not 
in the acuteness of your vision, but in 
the passionate love which makes you 
desire to remove it. And so with the 
beam of unchristly censoriousness and 
criticism gone, you will be able to take 
the mote out of your brother's eye. 

There is nothing more ungodly than a 
critical spirit; nothing more unchristly 
than that false righteousness which is 
always looking for a mote. Once let 
the beam be removed, then will come 
the Christlike spirit that knows how, 
with gentle delicate touch, to remove 
the mote, that the brother's vision may 
be clear. So the Lord warns us from 
usurping the throne of judgment. Do 
not form a final judgment; do not come 
to adverse and critical conclusions con- 
cerning men. 

Then there is a sudden change. 
" Give not that which is holy unto the 
dogs, neither cast your pearls before 
the swine, lest haply they trample them 
under their feet, and turn and rend 
you." We are not to be critically cen- 
sorious, but we must exercise discrimi- 
nation and discretion. There are 
characters we must discern and be 
careful of, for there are things com- 
mitted to our care which we must safe- 
guard at all costs. This may appear a 
rough description of the characters, but 
the King makes use of no vulgar de- 
scriptions save when He is describing 
vulgar things. Who are the " dogs," 
the "swine"? Let Scripture interpret 
Scripture. No doubt Peter heard Him 
say this, and after he had passed 
through very wonderful experiences he 
wrote, and used words his Master used. 
"It has happened to them according to 
the true proverb, The dog turning to 
his own vomit again, and the sow that 
had washed to wallowing in the mire" 
(2 Peter ii. 22). "It has happened 
unto them." In the previous chapter 
we have a remarkable exposition of 
these words of Jesus. The chapter be- 
gins with false prophets. As we go on 



73 



[MAW. vii. 1-12] 



MATTHEW 



through, the chapter we have the ter- 
rible teaching that, though we may be 
in the place of privilege and blessing, 
if we turn our back upon it we must 
be cast out therefrom. It is a terrible 
and dark description of certain men 
who resolutely set themselves against 
holy things, but who come into holy 
places to traffic with holy things with 
unholy purposes dogs, who presently 
will go back to their vomit; swine, who 
presently will be back to their wallow- 
ing in the mire. Do not judge your 
fellow man hastily; but when a man 
has manifested his character do not 
give holy things to dogs, do not fling 
pearls before swine. Remember, if out 
of false charity or pity you allow men 
of material ideals and worldly wisdom 
to touch holy things, to handle the 
pearls of the Kingdom, presently they 
will turn and rend you. That is the 
whole history of Christendom's ruin, in 
the measure in which Christendom is 
ruined. There is a very clear distinc- 
tion between the Church of God and 
Christendom. The Church of God is 
not a failure the great holy entity in 
union with Him but the outward mani- 
festation is. We gave holy things to 
dogs. We imagined that when a 
Roman emperor espoused the cause of 
Christianity, it was a great thing. We 
cast the pearls of the Kingdom before 
swine; and the men who had to do 
only with the earthly things have 
turned again, and rent the outward 
manifestation of unity. If a brother 
stands out, makes choice against the 
will of God, and refuses the light, then 
we are to discriminate. There is a 
separation made within the borders o 
Christ's Kingdom, and, while we are to 
indulge in no censorious criticism and 
final judgment of our fellow man, if 
that man, judged by his own action and 
character, is unworthy, then we are not 
to give him holy things, we are not to 
cast our pearls before swine. 

Then notice what immediately fol- 
lows. This fine distinction between cen- 
soriousness and discrimination creates 
a difficulty, in the presence of which 
we may well be afraid. How shall we 
know just where to draw the line? 
What is to be the difference between 
the thing Christ will not have, and the 



thing He commands? How are we to 
know in this world whether we are to 
come to a judgment or no? The Lord 
lays down no rule, but He says, "Ask" 
" seek " " knock." So important are 
the two injunctions that we should 
judge not; that we must discriminate 
that we must for evermore maintain 
our attitude toward our fellow men by 
maintaining our relationship with God. 
These great words, " Ask " " seek "> 
"knock" may have a far wider appli- 
cation, but this is the application the 
King made of them in His Manifesto. 
Christ could say no little thing, and for 
two smaller matters He applies great 
principles. We do no wrong to the 
principles if sometimes we apply them 
to larger matters; but we do wrong if 
we miss the fact that He applies them 
to the smaller things. "Ask" in rela- 
tion to " these things." If you question 
this link you have only to go to the 
repetition in the Golden Rule and re- 
member the word "therefore." The 
Golden Rule is closely connected with 
these instructions. It would be per- 
fectly correct to read the first six 
verses, and then immediately the 
twelfth. Do not judge men; do not 
come to hasty decision; discriminate 
between them; do not give to dogs. 
"All things therefore whatsoever ye 
would." Between this final epitome and 
the clear statement at the beginning, 
occurs this command to Ask, Seek, 
Knock. The King drives us back into 
perpetual and intimate relationship 
with God in order that our attitude 
with regard to our fellow men should 
be what it ought to be. 

Let us, then, consider that threefold 
command. 

"Ask." The Lord never used the 
same words to describe His own pray- 
ers as those He employed to describe 
the prayers of other people. The word 
" ask " here means as to simplest in- 
tention, to beg in the sense of depen- 
dence. It is the word of the man who 
comes with empty hands and says, "I 
have nothing to buy with." Christ 
never used that word of His praying; 
He never asked God as a pauper. 
When He spoke of His own praying He 
used words that might be translated: 
I will inquire of the Father, I will 



74 



MATTHEW 



[MAT*. VH. 1-12] 



speak with Him concerning this matter 
as One upon a perfect equality. But, 
for us, "ask" is the first thing. We 
must recognize our dependence upon 
God. 

The next word is " Seek," and in that 
there is the suggestion of care; it 
marks the true anxiety. Do not merely 
ask in dependence, but ask with the 
urgency of a great desire. 

Finally, "Knock." In that word we 
have the mingling of dependence and 
effort, suggested by the first two 
"ask," "seek." "Ask" when you do 
not know how to judge. " Seek " 
which is the effort of the sanctified man 
after the mind of God. " Knock," per- 
petually making application. We can- 
not live one day in office, or shop, or 
ordinary place of action, and know 
when to discriminate, and when not to 
judge, except as we live every day and 
every hour asking, seeking, knocking. 
We must live near God if we would 
live in right relationship with our 
fellow men. We must live right with 
our fellow men if we would live right 
with God. 

Again, if these are the words that 
mark human responsibility, let us mark 
the words which reveal the Divine 
attitude. 

First, God is willing to bestow, and 
Jesus bases His argument on the char- 
acter of God. Notice the suggested 
contrast : " If ye, then, being evil, 
know how to give good gifts unto your 
children, how much more shall your 
Father Who is in heaven?" evidently 
the suggestion is that He is not evil, 
nor can be evil. The word " evil " 
does not merely mean sinful; it is a 
word which includes natural and moral 
limitation and fault. It takes in frailty, 
and weakness, and sickness, and sor- 
row. We are evil, subjects of limita- 
tion as well as sin. God is not evil. 
Time writes no wrinkle upon the Infi- 
nite Brow of Deity. He fainteth not 
neither is weary. He is not limited by 
observation or bounded by horizons ; 
and if we, with our limitation, know 
how to give our children good gifts, 
how much more our heavenly Father? 

Are you afraid as you face the de- 
mand Christ's law makes upon you? 
Ask, seek, knock, and know that the 



Listener is your Father. Learn, says 
Jesus, how He listens, and how He 
appeals to the highest thing within 
yourself, even though you are evil 
your own fatherhood. If your boy asks 
you for bread you will not give him a 
stone. The thing is absurd. It is well 
sometimes to be superlative. We stand 
among men having to discriminate, 
never to judge; forbidden the usurpa- 
tion of a final throne of judgment, and 
yet forbidden to cast holy things before 
dogs and swine. How can we do it? 
"Ask, seek, knock." It is not a ser- 
vant keeps the door; it is your Father. 
The King has taken us into the power- 
house of all true living; He has 
brought us back to the place where 
wheels are throbbing with infinite en- 
ergy; but at the centre of the wheels 
is not an axle, but a heart. All the 
infinite dynamic of righteousness is 
born in the compassion of the heart 
of God. "Ask, seek, knock;" "Your 
Father." 

Finally, "therefore." How that 
" therefore " flames upon one as one 
searches one's own soul in the presence 
of these commands. Do not judge, yet 
discriminate. How devilish is the crit- 
ical spirit that sees the mote; and yet 
how necessary is the discrimination 
that withholds holy things from dogs 
and swine. The voice of the infinite 
Fatherhood says, " My child, for obedi- 
ence to every command I am here to 
provide you power," and we are afraid 
no more. "Therefore" links the ne- 
cessity with the power "Ask, seek, 
knock." 

What is this summarising of our 
duty? Do unto your neighbour what 
you would that your neighbour should 
do to you. That is the whole thing. 
We are told sometimes that this is not 
peculiar to Jesus Christ. That the 
Golden Rule is not the peculiar prop- 
erty of Christianity. But you cannot 
find this rule anywhere else. Hillel, 
the great Hebrew master, said, " Do 
not do to thy neighbour what is hateful 
to thyself." That is very like it. He 
said that before Jesus came. Socrates, 
before Christ, wrote these words: 
" What stirs your anger when done to 
you by others, that do not to others." 
That is very much like it Aristotle 



75 



EMATT. vii. 13-281 



MATTHEW 



said, "We should bear ourselves to- 
ward others as we would desire they 
should bear themselves toward us." 
That seems even nearer, but it is not 
the same. Confucius, the great Chinese 
teacher, said, " What you do not want 
done to yourself, do not do to others." 
These things were said before Christ 
spoke, and we are told they are the 
same. 

There is this radical difference 
these are negative and passive; Christ's 
command is positive and active. These 
say to man, Stand still, and do not do 
what you do not want anyone to do to 
you; Christ says, Go and do what you 
would that he should do to you. It is 



not merely that you are to refrain from 
harming him; you are to do him good. 
It is not that you are not to rob him; 
you are to give to him. It is not that 
you are not to murder- him; you are to 
love him. And so the gleams of light 
which characterise the teaching of Gen- 
tiles, as well as the revelation which 
had come to Jews, He took up, and ful- 
filled and made final. We might, out 
of a selfish self-respect, decline to harm 
our neighbour but we cannot do this 
higher thing without power. We can- 
not do continuously what we would our 
neighbour should do to us save as we 
ask, seek, and knock, and know that 
our Father is pledged to us in power. 



MATTHEW VII. 13-28 



final words of the King in this 
JL Manifesto are full of dignity in 
very deed the words of a King. Nay, 
rather, and more correctly, they are the 
words of the one and only King of men. 
They are words of warning; thrilling 
with the concern of a great love; 
vibrant with the majesty of His own 
power. 

The passage may be divided into two 
main parts. In the first section (vv. 
13-23) the Lord laid upon those who 
had been listening to Him a threefold 
responsibility; while in the second sec- 
tion, the very last utterance of the 
Manifesto (vv. 24-27), He laid before 
them alternative issues. 

The Manifesto was introduced by the 
words ; " Seeing the multitudes, He 
went up into the mountain: and when 
He had sat down, His disciples came 
unto Him: and He opened His mouth 
and taught ttiem" that is, the dis- 
ciples, not the multitudes. At the end 
He spoke still to His disciples, for the 
things He said cannot have their first 
application to the outside crowd. He 
desired to set up the Kingdom of God 
everywhere; therefore He had in- 
structed those who were already in it, 
that they were to live it, and teach 
it, and apply it in all the larger 
relationships. 

Speaking still thus to His own, He 
laid upon them a threefold responsi- 
bility, first as to the beginning (w. 



13-14) ; then as to progress (w. 15-20) ; 
and, finally, as to issues (vv. 21-23). 

Notice carefully the sequence of these 
three. First, responsibility as to the 
beginning : " Enter ye in by the narrow 
gate" that is, get into the true way. 
Then responsibility as to progress upon 
the way ; " Beware of false prophets " 
that is, be true to truth after you have 
entered the Kingdom. Finally, live in 
the light of the ultimate day; and re- 
member that then, no profession of re- 
lationship or of service will avail, but 
one thing only life homed in the will 
of God. 

These, then, are the words which 
condition responsibility as to the way, 
as to the truth, as to the life. " Enter 
ye in by the narrow gate," that you 
may be in the true way; "Beware of 
false prophets," that you may live in 
the sphere of truth ; Live in the light 
of the final day, that your life may 
be not only progressive, but finally 
rounded out to that perfection for 
which God is seeking. 

Said Jesus on another occasion to 
men and the words flash their light 
upon this passage " I am the Way, and 
the Truth, and the Life." " Enter ye in 
by the narrow gate," and find the true 
way, for " I am the Way." " Beware of 
false prophets, who come to you in 
sheep's clothing, but inwardly are raven- 
ing wolves," but listen to the true 
Prophet, Who is essential Truth, for " I 



76 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. vn. 13-28] 



am the Truth;" and walk in comrade- 
ship with Him upon the way, having 
come to Him for entrance to the King- 
dom. Do not depend upon what you 
do, but upon what you are. Do not 
trust to the fact that you have named 
the name of Christ, and have rendered 
Him service. Trust only to the fact 
that you are in yourself, as He was in 
Himself conditioned in the will of 
God, for "I am the Life." 

Now let us examine these one by one. 
First, He brings us to the wicket gate. 
He pointed to the wicket gate in the 
very first words of the Manifesto. 
" Blessed are the poor in spirit." Pov- 
erty of spirit, lowliness, and meekness, 
constitute the true tone and temper of 
the mind that is, submission, alle- 
giance, and obedience. That was the 
beginning. It is very sweet and tender 
in its wording; but we know, if we 
have come to the King, that it is a 
drastic requirement, which demands the 
giving up of everything that interferes 
with a man's quick and ready obedience 
to the King. 

Now He brings us back again to the 
wicket gate, and shows how men enter. 
Notice the figures of speech of which 
He makes use. There are two en- 
trances and two ways. He describes 
them. There is a narrow gate and a 
wide gate; a broad way and a strait- 
ened way. Yet to leave these things 
grouped in that way is not to catch 
the final movement of this suggestive 
teaching of Jesus. We need to keep 
the way in each case in relation to the 
gate. Doing so, we find that in effect 
the King says ; You enter this Kingdom 
by a very narrow gate ; and you walk 
along a straitened way which for ever- 
more grows broader, until at last it be- 
comes broad in the fulness of eternal 
life. If you enter through the other 
gate, it is wide, it is easy to get 
through; and you walk along a broad 
way, which is for evermore straitening, 
until at last it becomes destruction. 
We generally take these verses, and 
deal only with the gateways and the 
pathway immediately beyond the en- 
trances. Never omit the final words in 
either case; it "leadeth to destruction," 
it "leadeth unto life." The word "de- 
struction" suggests the narrowing of 



things, the limitation of things, the im- 
prisonment of everything. It means a 
condition of life in which aspiration 
never realises, in which a man is shut 
up within the things that are narrow. 
So that Jesus says: If you refuse My 
teaching, if you will not have this King- 
dom, then you go through the wide gate 
and find yourself on a broad way, which 
may be smooth, and even flowery, but it 
"leadeth to destruction." The man 
who is only looking at the gate and the 
road he is tramping to-day is a fool. 
Lift your eyes and look ahead. The 
wide gate and the broad way of refus- 
ing this King and His ideals, and re- 
fusing allegiance to Him "leadeth to 
destruction;" the way narrows, until 
the soul is in the prison-house. 

But on the other hand and with this 
positive element we are now more inter- 
ested the way into the Kingdom is by 
a narrow gate; and the way is a strait- 
ened road. But it " leadeth unto life." 

What does He mean when at the 
close of this wonderful unfolding of law 
He brings us back to the narrowness of 
the gate, to the straitness of the way? 
These conditions imply the making of 
heroic character! For entrance to, and 
abiding in, this Kingdom there can be 
no dilettante fooling with the passing 
hours. If men would pass that gate 
and walk that way they must enter into 
strenuous life. If a man should tell 
you that Christianity is an easy soft- 
ness, he knows nothing of it. If a man 
should tell you that for your life there 
is nothing to do, he is right as to the 
initiation of it by the act of God, for 
life is the gift of His grace; but he is 
wrong as to human responsibility for 
entering into it. Every man who would 
enter this Kingdom must come through 
the narrow gate. Every man who 
would live in this Kingdom must walk 
the straitened way. 

There is no great kingdom which man 
desires to possess which does not bring 
him to a narrow gate and a straitened 
way. Those who have set their faces, 
honourably and splendidly, toward pro- 
ficiency in medical skill know there is 
the narrow gate and the straitened way 
of toil hard, strenuous toil. Those in 
whom there burn the fires and the pas- 
sions of the true artist can never ex- 



77 



. vir. 13-283 



MATTHEW 



pect to succeed by going through a wide 
gate and treading a broad way. There 
must be the infinite patience which 
takes pains. Was ever a true artist 
born who had not to take pains ? These 
illustrations are on a low level; lift 
them into the higher. If you would 
possess the Kingdom that includes all 
kingdoms; if you would live within the 
Kingdom in which all values are to be 
finally perfected and realised, you must 
get through the narrow gate and the 
straitened way. No man can be a 
Christian in all the full senses of the 
word who is not prepared to get to 
the wicket, and strip, and tramp the 
straitened way. These are the words 
of the King, and He knows 1 He gained 
His redemptive authority by submis- 
sion; He yielded Himself to the su- 
preme authority of His Father, and we 
read this very startling thing con- 
cerning Him in the Scriptures of in- 
spiration. " He . . . learned obedience 
by the things which He suffered." 
That does not mean that He learned 
to be obedient through suffering; but 
that He learned obedience experimen- 
tally through treading the pathway of 
suffering. 

So He brings us back again to the 
wicket. It is a narrow gate, a strait- 
ened way; and with that infinite ten- 
derness, so characteristic of Him, just 
as He has taken hold of us with a grip 
of infinite power and charged us to 
strip, He points us to the ultimate, the 
infinite life. When Jesus says life we 
have nothing to add. 

Secondly; as to progress, He said; 
" Beware of false prophets, who come 
to you in sheep's clothing, but in- 
wardly are ravening wolves." Notice 
very carefully that our Lord is not 
warning us against heretical views in 
this passage. He is not warning us 
against heterodox teaching, so far as 
heterodoxy means a wrong system of 
truth; but He is warning us against 
the prophet who is a wolf, but who 
wears a sheep's clothing ; that is against 
the orthodox veiling of heterodox life. 
He is not warning us against a man 
who does not exactly express truth in 
the terms with which we are familiar; 
but He is warning us against the wolf 
in sheep's clothing; the teacher -who 



affects the speech of orthodoxy, but 
lives a false life; not the man who 
holds a false doctrine, but the false 
prophet. His prophecy may be per- 
fectly accurate, his preaching may be 
absolutely orthodox, but the man is 
false. That is the man who will lead 
farthest from truth. It is possible to 
pronounce the shibboleths of the Bible 
in the most accurate manner, and yet 
for the heart to be far away from their 
purpose and intention. Here it is not 
intellectual heterodoxy; but men who 
laud the teaching, and deny the /spirit; 
men whose appearance is outward and 
ostentatious; who appear in sheep's 
clothing; but whose energy and in- 
fluence are wolfish. 

How are we to know these men? 
This evil cannot be dealt with by a 
committee, or conference, or synod, or 
council. We cannot find out whether 
a man is orthodox or heterodox in life, 
by examining him in words. We can 
only know men by their fruit. We 
must wait. " By their fruits ye shall 
know them." Our Lord introduced and 
closed His statement by that word; but 
between, He made an appeal as to the 
accuracy of His position, first by asking 
the question : " Do men gather grapes 
of thorns, or figs of thistles ? " It is as 
though He said, This is a true test. Is 
not fruit the final test of the nature of 
life? Notice how He immediately pro- 
ceeded ; " Even so." Have you ever 
tried to connect that " even so " ? Have 
you asked yourself why He said " even 
so " ? He asked them, " Do men gather 
grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles ? " 
There was the answering, No, on the 
faces of the men. Perhaps they shook 
their heads, as though they would say, 
Of course not. " Even so " shows that 
He had carried their judgment, that 
they had agreed with Him; that it is 
impossible to gather fruitage from any 
tree save that which is the outcome of 
its inner life. One of the Puritan 
Fathers, writing on this passage, said: 
" It is quite possible to put grapes on 
thorns. It is quite possible to put figs 
on thistles, but they cannot grow there." 
It is quite possible for a wolf to wear a 
sheep's clothing, but it cannot grow a 
sheep's clothing. And when our Lord 
had asked the question, and gained the 



78 



MATTHEW 



IMAM. vii. 13-283 



assent of the judgment of His hearers, 
then He made a great positive affirma- 
tion ; " Even so every good tree bring- 
eth forth good fruit;" and a great 
negative affirmation, "but the corrupt 
tree bringeth forth evil fruit ;" and then 
a further negative statement; "A good 
tree cannot bring forth evil fruit; 
neither can a corrupt tree bring forth 
good fruit" It is the repetition of a 
principle from which we cannot depart. 
We cannot gather good fruit from a 
corrupt tree. 

We cannot make any appeal against 
such repetition as this, in which our 
Lord by affirmation, negation, question, 
and by renewed affirmation, stating the 
case from every standpoint, asserted 
this great truth; that the test of the 
prophet is the prophet's life. It is a 
searching word for the prophet, to be 
spoken quietly, to be thought of seri- 
ously; to the testing of which every 
man who opens his mouth to prophesy, 
should bring his life every day and 
every hour. 

And once again; as to the issue, the 
King said, perhaps, some of the most 
solemn things He ever said. Profession 
of allegiance is absolutely valueless. 
We all believe that. To hear the law, 
and to disobey, is the most terrible kind 
of profanity of which man can be 
guilty. This does not need arguing, but 
simply restating, because of its terrible 
solemnity and its most searching ap- 
plication. You have perhaps heard 
somewhere a child of the slum using 
profane language, and you have said, 
He is taking the name of God in vain; 
it is a terrible sin. It is. But when 
you prayed, " Our Father, Who art in 
heaven, Hallowed be Thy name. Thy 
kingdom come, Thy will be done," un- 
less you had let His Kingdom come in 
your life, your profanity was worse 
than the profanity of the man on the 
street, your blasphemy was more ter- 
rible than the blasphemy of the child of 
the slum. Jesus said, " In that day " 
the light of which flames over all these 
days if we have but eyes to see "In 
that day" He will say to the man who 
says, "Lord, Lord," but does not obey 
Him, "I never knew you." Yes, the 
blasphemy of the sanctuary is more 
awful than the blasphemy of the slum. 



To pray, " Lord, Lord," and to disobey 
Him, is of the very essence of villainy. 
That is what Judas did; kissed Him, 
and betrayed Him ! If these words of 
Jesus have startled us with their sever- 
ity; let us know that there is a pro- 
found reason for that severity. 

Finally as to the issue. This, per- 
haps, is a more searching word still. 
"Many will say to Me in that day, 
Lord, Lord, did we not prophesy by 
Thy name, and by Thy name cast out 
demons, and by Thy name do many 
mighty works? And then will I pro- 
fess unto them, I never knew you: de- 
part from Me, ye that work iniquity." 

Listen to what they say. " We have 
done." Yes, they had done everything 
but the Lord's will. They had hoped to 
make up for disobedience to His will, 
in personal life, by doing many things 
for Hun in their church, their city, and 
in the world. Mark well what the King 
said of the whole of such activity. 
"Workers of iniquity." 

So that if it should be that we who 
have prophesied in His name, yet dis- 
obey Him in the individual and per- 
sonal matters of our own life; if we 
should preach about this Manifesto, 
and yet not submit to the King in all 
the details of our life; what then? 
Our preaching is iniquity, our casting 
out of demons is a sin. All service is 
rejected, except the service rendered 
by such as are themselves doing the 
will of God. Christ will say to such; 
" I never knew you," which does not 
mean, I did not know about you, I do 
not know your name, I did not watch 
your life; but, "I never knew you;" 
there was no intimacy, no comradeship, 
no fellowship between us. You took 
My name to make your name ; you took 
My name to work your miracles; you 
took My name for certain self-centred 
purposes; but you did not know Me, 
and I did not know you. 

Here is the imperial King, in these 
last utterances of His Manifesto, stand- 
ing in the light of "that day" which 
is to be claiming the throne, claiming 
that His verdict will be the final one, 
claiming that the final sentences will 
fall from His own lips. 

What shall we do in the presence of 
these words? .We had better betake 



[MATT. vii. 13-28] 



MATTHEW 



ourselves to some lonely secret chamber 
and read them all again. We had bet- 
ter say, Have we ever come through the 
strait gate? Have we been misled by 
some false spirit of prophecy, which 
says the correct thing, and lives the 
wrong life? Have we been saying, 
"Lord, Lord," and failing to do the 
will? 

Do you think this is all hard and 
harsh? It is the hardness and the 
harshness of the Infinite love. " Nar- 
row is the gate, straitened is the 
way " beware of anything that is 
false in the prophet, beware of saying, 
"Lord, Lord." Let the light of "that 
day" flash; and the thunder of it ar- 
rest; and the fire of it affright; yet 
know that He will save us from the 
things that harm and blight and curse 
and spoil. May these words with which 
He closes the Manifesto come into our 
life as a new fire, as a new force of 
purity. 

Lastly, notice the second division of 
the paragraph. There is an alternative 
of issues. We need specially to remem- 
ber the majesty of these last words of 
Christ, the marvellous claim He makes. 
He says, in effect: You must all build 
character. This is the day of character 
building. This is the day in which, in 
our systems of pedagogy, and of philos- 
ophy, we are discussing character build- 
ing. The King supremely recognizes 
the importance of it. He says : Every 
man builds. There is a common quan- 
tity in this final illustration the fact 
of building. But notice the difference. 
It is not in the men who build; or in 
the materials with which they build; 
but in the foundation on which they 
build. The foundation is everything. 
We may build with the same materials, 
and with the same structural correct- 
ness upon sand as upon rock; and all 
through summer days the buildings both 
appear to be all right. But summer 
days do not exhaust the days. There 
are days of pelting rain, of sweeping 
winds and hurricanes; and those are 
the days that will test our buildings. 
Therefore, it is not so much a matter of 
the man building, not so much a matter 
of the material, but of the foundation. 

Hear, then, the imperial claim of 
Christ. He says: Take these sayings 



of Mine and build on them; and no 
storm can destroy your building. Hear 
these sayings of Mine and disobey 
them and remember that this has 
nothing to do with the man who has 
never heard them; he is not here in 
view at all; this word is not to the 
heathen, it is to the man who hears and 
disobeys, the man who has seen a vision 
and dreamed a dream, the man who has 
heard the Infinite music, and will set 
his instruments to catch the tune you 
can go on building, and we may look 
at the structure and say: What is the 
use of Christianity? that house is as 
beautiful as this; this man's character 
is as beautiful as the other's. But ob- 
serve it, wait, wait! Presently there 
will come the storms of sorrow, of be- 
reavement and of temptation, and then 
presently "that day;" and unless there 
be rock foundation, the fair superstruc- 
ture will be spoiled by the sweeping 
storm. The King stands before all of 
us as He closes His Manifesto, and 
says, " These sayings of Mine ;" build 
on them; and no storm can wreck your 
building. 

We know all this to be true. We are 
not discussing the Person of Christ. 
We are not discussing the larger ques- 
tion of the work of Christ. We pause 
now where He ended. " These sayings 
of Mine." We know perfectly well that 
if we build on them our character will 
be such that no storm can wreck it. 
And if we will not, if we, having heard 
the sayings, do not obey them, there is 
no foundation upon which we can build 
a character that will weather the storm 
and stand to the very day of destiny. 

We thus end our study of the Mani- 
festo, listening first to a sublime claim, 
that His teaching is such foundation 
that no storm can disturb it; hearing 
also a message of hope, that here is 
stability on which we may build, know- 
ing that our building will abide; and 
finally impressed by a solemn warning, 
that mere knowledge is of no value in 
the day of storm and flood. 

When presently men shall rest in 
perfect peace, it will be within the 
sacred circle of this unfolding of law. 

May God grant that we may be, not 
hearers only, but doers of the word o{ 
the King. 



80 



MATTHEW 



" [MATT. vin. 1-17] 



MATTHEW VIII. 1-17 



WE now come to the consideration 
of the section in which the King 
is seen acting in power in every realm. 

In the course of His Manifesto He 
had presented a great deal of life; but 
dreams are of no avail unless deeds 
follow. Men cannot live by merely 
gazing on a vision. The vision may 
arrest, may attract; but unless it can 
be translated into victory, it is of very 
little use to men. And so, now that 
the ethic was unfolded, the Manifesto 
uttered; now that the wondrous words 
had fallen upon the listening ears of 
His disciples, and of the crowds, the 
natural and inevitable question was: 
What can this Man accomplish? Is He 
equal to doing, as well as dreaming? 
Is it possible for Him to realise a vic- 
tory, as well as project a vision? 

In this paragraph we see that He 
began to answer that question by a 
series of simple and yet sublime mani- 
festations of the fact that the Unfolder 
of the ethic, is also the Giver of dy- 
namic ; that He is not merely a Dreamer 
come to suggest better ways to men; 
but a Doer, equal to reaching them in 
the places of their need, and making 
them doers also. 

In chapters eight and nine of this 
Gospel, we have nine manifestations of 
His power; and these arrange them- 
selves naturally into three groups of 
three each. He gave three illustrations 
of power; and immediately afterwards 
we find the effect produced on the peo- 
ple by what they saw. Then three 
other illustrations of power, and again 
the effect produced. Finally, three 
further illustrations of power, and once 
again the effect produced. 

In looking at these two chapters let 
us be careful not to imagine that Jesus 
Christ presented Himself to the people, 
and asked them to observe what He 
was able to do. There was nothing 
theatrical in these manifestations of 
power; they were natural, necessary, 
and beautiful; but they have been so 
grouped that, looking back, we may see 
how, having taught in wondrous words, 
He now triumphed in equally wondrous 
works. 



The first three illustrations were 
those of the cleansing of the leper, the 
healing of the centurion's servant, and 
the restoration of Peter's wife's mother. 
Immediately afterwards a man said to 
him: "Teacher, I will follow Thee 
whithersoever Thou goest." 

Then moving beyond the realm of 
the physical, He proved Himself Master 
of the elements, in the stilling of the 
storm; Master of the great world of 
spiritual forces, as He cast out the 
demons; Master of disease and its 
source of sin, as He cured the palsy 
and forgave sin. Immediately after 
these things we read, "They were, 
afraid, and glorified God." 

Then we have the third group of 
three the raising of the child of 
Jairus, the healing of the woman who 
touched Him; and the healing of the 
blind. Then we read, " The multitudes 
marvelled." 

We have now to deal with the first 
of the three groups only; the leper, 
the centurion's servant, and Peter's 
wife's mother. 

Let us first take a general survey of 
the passage. As Jesus commenced these 
deeds of His Kingship, we are arrested 
by the peculiarity of that commence- 
ment. Here is God's attested King; 
gathering first a small nucleus of loyal 
souls. He had enunciated the ethic of 
His Kingdom; now the moment had 
come in which He was about to accom- 
plish something. He did not form a 
party, formulate a policy, or plan a 
campaign. There is nothing more re- 
markable in all His ministry than the 
fact that He never held consultations 
with men, or attempted to form a party 
in our sense of the word, or gave men 
a programme. He was not restricted 
by party, policy, or programme. 

Glancing over the movement of these 
seventeen verses we notice, first, that 
the King began to deal with need at its 
lowest, in the physical realm; with 
leprosy, palsy, and fever. This King, 
in order to set up His Kingdom, did 
not stay on the summit of the mount; 
He went down to the depth of the 
leper's condition. The first call to the 



81 



[MATT. vnr. 1-17] 



MATTHEW 



King was the call of the most needy 
man. We shall come to a higher plane 
presently, and find Him dealing with 
spiritual qualities and quantities; but 
the first exhibition of His power was 
given in the realm of the most con- 
scious need. 

We notice in the second place, as He 
commenced His work, that He acted in 
response to appeals, and voluntarily 
also. First there came the cry of a 
leper, separated from the crowd, and 
yet in the vicinity of the crowd, " Lord, 
if Thou wilt, Thou canst make me 
clean" it was a cry of need and He 
responded to it. In the second place, 
it was the cry of a man, not for him- 
self, but for another, for his servant 
" My servant lieth in the house, sick 
of the palsy." And Jesus said, " I will 
come and heal him." In the third 
place, His action was in response to 
the appeal of friends (see Luke iv. 38). 
In the first case He was yet on the 
mountain; in the second He had en- 
tered the city; in the third He had 
entered into the narrowest circle the 
home of Peter. 

Then notice, He commenced His 
work with the unfit in more senses 
than one. If we had been with Him, 
and had been Hebrews, as His dis- 
ciples were, we should have been 
greatly startled. First, He touched a 
leper, an outcast, whom no man must 
dare to touch. Secondly, He healed the 
servant of a Roman, who was outside 
the covenant of Israel, and with whom 
there could properly be no communica- 
tion. Thirdly, He touched a woman, 
who, according to Jewish ideas, did not 
count. He began with the unfit persons 
for whom there was no provision in the 
economy of the nation. A great many 
people have been sorely troubled about 
this touching of the leper, saying that 
in doing so He broke the law. But He 
was not as other men. On another oc- 
casion they said, "This Man receiveth 
sinners, and eateth with them." They 
meant to say; Pollution is mightier 
than purity; though He be pure, con- 
tact with sinners will produce pollution 
in Himself. But He was such that He 
could be a friend of sinners, and suffer 
no contamination by contact, but rather 
surcharge them with His purity. We 



dare not become friends of sinners, 
save in the power of His redeeming 
life, or their pollution will be commune 
cated to us. When He touched them, 
He imparted His purity to them, and 
the proportion in which Christ actually 
possesses us and dwells in us, is the 
proportion in which we can become the 
friends of sinners. If we touch a leper, 
we catch the leprosy because our every 
fibre is weakened through the agency 
of sin ; but the very material life of the 
Son of God was absolutely strong, and 
perfect, and pure, and when He touched 
a man He took no contamination, for 
there was nothing in Him upon which 
leprosy could fasten; but rather He 
communicated the strength and virtue 
and purity of His Manhood to the leper, 
and healed him. So also He answered 
a Roman's prayer; and thus over- 
stepped all narrow and provincial 
bounds; and the cool, healing hand of 
the Master touched the hand of a 
woman, and the fever left her. 

At the end of this section we read, 
"And when even was come, they 
brought unto Him many possessed with 
demons; and He cast out the spirits 
with a word, and healed all that were 
sick." That reads so easily and seems 
so simple, but let us continue our read- 
ing" That it might be fulfilled which 
was spoken through Isaiah the prophet, 
saying, Himself took our infirmities, 
and bare our diseases." 

Here we need to pause for a moment. 
When He healed with a word, with a 
touch, what did He? "Himself took 
our infirmities, and bare our diseases." 
It is a very superficial exposition which 
makes it appear that the King, as He 
came to touch and heal, took into His 
own heart, sympathetically only, the 
feeling of the pain and the weakness. 
This action of healing was the fulfil- 
ment of the prophecy of Isaiah, and we 
cannot interpret this working of the 
power of the King save in the light of 
that prophecy. There is a growing 
revelation through the teaching of 
Isaiah until we come to the culmina- 
ting glory of the great Servant of God 
suffering to save, and in that sense the 
fifty-third chapter is the very heart of 
the prophecy. Here we see that word 
being fulfilled ; " He was wounded for 



82 



MATTHEW 



. VIII. 1-17] 



our transgressions, He was bruised for 
our iniquities; the chastisement of our 
peace was upon Him." Briefly, it is 
the chapter of atonement, of vicarious 
suffering; the chapter in which we see 
the King dealing, not with the super- 
ficial externality of things; but getting 
down until He touched the deep under- 
lying reason of all suffering and evil in 
tiie moral and material realm alike. In 
order to deal with these He took hold 
of sin itself; and when He healed the 
leper, the centurion's servant, Peter's 
wife's mother, with a word and a 
touch; and the multitude, halted for a 
moment with surprise, brought unto 
Him many possessed with demons, He 
perfectly understood that all the dis- 
abilty He corrected was the outcome of 
man's sin; that at the back of physical 
leprosy lay sin, not necessarily in the 
actual leper, but in the past of the race. 
When He dealt first with physical need, 
He knew that His right to work these 
miracles was the right of the coming 
Cross in which He should gather into 
His very heart the sin that lay at the 
back of all these things. In the Cross 
was the right by which He distributed 
His virtues to the impure, and gave of 
His strength to the sick. Thus the 
King revealed the fact that His power 
in dealing with disability was based 
upon His passion. We shall see this 
yet more clearly when we come to an- 
other group ; He said to the sick of the 
palsy, " Son, be of good cheer, thy sins 
are forgiven ;" and when men criticised 
Him, He said, " Which is easier, to 
say, Thy sins are forgiven; or to say, 
Arise, and walk ? " He acted as know- 
ing that physical disability and moral 
malady are linked, and whenever He 
healed disease it was in the right of 
His coming Passion, in which He would 
deal not merely with these manifesta- 
tions, but with the root of evil from 
which they sprang. And so it was in 
the power of the Cross, ante-dating the 
historic accomplishment of a Divine 
purpose, that He healed the leper, and 
the servant, and the woman sick of 
the fever. 

All this does not mean that immedi- 
ate physical healing is secured to us in 
the Atonement. This is not so, any 
more than immunity from natural dy- 



ing is immediately secured. Ultimately 
freedom from disease and triumph over 
death are ours through the Cross, but 
for the period of probation sickness is 
permitted, always with some value in 
the Divine purpose, even though at the 
moment we may not know what that 
value is. 

Notice one other thing about these 
actions of the King. Not only did He 
accomplish at cost, He restored to the 
natural. This is a day in which we are 
spending a very great deal of time dis- 
cussing the possibility of the miracu- 
lous. As men get to see more clearly, 
they will understand that a miracle is 
not a setting aside of law, but that it is 
rather an operation in a realm of law 
not yet discovered by men living on a 
lower plane. We are constantly discov- 
ering laws unknown to our fathers, and 
applying them. Every miracle Jesus 
wrought, He wrought, not to prove His 
Deity, not essentially in the power of 
His Deity, but in the power of a per- 
fectly poised humanity through which 
God could work. These miracles of 
Jesus, so far from being violations of 
law, were restorations of men to the 
life according to- law. Leprosy is un- 
lawful; cleansing is lawful. Fever is 
due to violation of law; and this Man 
by- a touch restored to law. The King 
came to restore a lost -order. 
"~FinaHy7~as""we~su"fvey"fhis first of the 
three groups.we see that the one thing 
the King was doing was that of draw- 
ing attention to Himself. If we said 
that of any other man, it would be to 
utter his condemnation; when we say 
it of Him, we are all conscious of the 
eminent fitness of the action. This 
Man, meekest of the meek, proceeded 
from beginning to end along a line that 
demanded that men should attend to 
Him, listen to Him, obey Him. The 
King Who had uttered words of wis- 
dom that astonished men, now came to 
do such things that must of necessity 
make the people look at Him, listen to 
Him, decide concerning Him. In quiet, 
kingly attitude, He proceeded through 
all these miracles of healing in perfect 
naturalness. "If Thou wilt,. Thoq 
canst make me clean," and in a mo-i 
ment came the word of the King, "I 
will, be thou made clean." " Only say 



83 



EMATT. vin. 1-17] 



MATTHEW 



the word, and my servant shall be 
healed;" and the word was spoken, 
" Go thy way ; as thou hast believed, 
so be it done unto thee." The touch 
of the King, and the woman was cured. 

Now let us turn from general ex- 
amination to a more particular one. 

Mark how the leper came to Jesus. 
He came with a known need. " If 
Thou wilt, Thou canst make me clean." 
If we are coming to the King, we must 
know what we want. All the prayers 
that storm heaven are brief. There is 
a place for the longer prayer. There 
is a place for the adoration and the 
pouring out of the heart ; but it is when 
a man knows what he wants, that he 
takes hold of God. "Lord, if Thou 
wilt, Thou canst make me clean." It is 
hardly a prayer, it is a statement, an 
affirmation, a cry of need. Next, his at- 
titude was submissive he worshipped. 
His cry was an honest cry, "// Thou 
wilt, Thou canst make me clean." Why 
question the willingness of Jesus? Be- 
cause the man was not sure that Jesus 
would be willing, and he was honest 
enough to say so. If we look closely we 
see that this man had learned a lesson, 
that the will of the King is supreme; 
"If Thou wilt, Thou canst." He did 
not question His power. It is not that 
he questioned His willingness unkindly, 
but that he recognized that it must be 
as He willed. It is when a soul gets 
there that he makes contact with all 
the power of Jesus Christ. To state it 
boldly, the Master, Jesus Christ, could 
not possibly do other than answer this 
man as He did. This King had come 
to claim the surrender of the will, and 
the man yielded. "If Thou wilt." 
And glorious and Kingly, like the flash- 
ing of the sun illuminating the morn- 
ing, came the answer, "I will, be thou 
made clean." When the man's will 
bent to the will of Christ, Christ's will 
touched the man's will, and through 
that contact there was communicated to 
him the power and virtue of the King. 

Then He sent him away, telling him 
not to tell any one of this miracle, to 
keep silent about it. That is the first 
intimation that Christ's estimate of the 
physical is that it is secondary. He 
always prevented men talking about 
physical miracles because He did not 



deal with~thmgs-on-the-surface. In the 
fourteenth_chapter of the Book of 
Leviticus you will find that when a man 
was healed of leprosy he had to offer 
sacrifice. Through all the Hebrew 
economy men were taught that this is 
the basis of man's approach to God. 
Clean or unclean, there must be the 
ceremonial law of sacrifice. Christ's 
was not accomplished, and until it 
should be this man must go back to 
Moses and offer the shadow of sacrifice. 
The healing that had come to him was 
at the cost of infinite sacrifice, of which 
all others were but shadows. 

The next case is that of a man com- 
ing to Christ, not for himself, but for 
another; and the first fact to be no- 
ticed is, that he stated his need, and 
Jesus said, " I will come and heal him." 
When reading the New Testament 
nothing is more wonderful than the 
tremendous assumptions of Jesus. The 
man came to him in trouble. Christ 
did not say, I will come and see what 
I can do. He said, " I will come and 
heal him." There was perfect confi- 
dence in Himself. It was the quiet, but 
dignified voice of a great authority. 

The centurion said, " Lord, I am not 
worthy that Thou shouldest come under 
my roof: but only say the word, and 
my servant shall be healed." Notice 
the centurion's faith, " Speak the word 
and my servant shall be healed." And 
then notice his philosophy of authority. 
" For I also am a man under authority, 
having under myself soldiers; and I 
say to this one, Go, and he goeth; and 
to another, Come, and- he cometh ; and 
to my servant, Do this, and he doeth 
it." The centurion was not putting 
himself into contrast with Jesus, but 
was saying, What is true of me is 
true of Thee; Thou art also under au- 
thority, and because Thou art under 
authority Thou art able to^exercise au- 
thority. This is the true philosophy of 
government. And so, "when Jesus 
heard it, He marvelled." The word 
"marvelled" does not mean neces- 
sarily that He was surprised, but that 
He admired his faith, that it startled 
Him by comparison with the faith of 
other men. What was it in the faith 
of the centurion at which Jesus mar- 
velled? Probably the intelligence of it. 



84 



MATTHEW 



[MAW. vin. 18-34] 



We hear a gooddeal_about-simcle_fai^. 
But here~is-a"~maS~~whose faith'Ts based 
upon a true philosophy of life. With 
the leper it was the consciousness of a 
great need in himself, a great might in 
the Master. But when the centurion 
came, Jesus marvelled at his faith and 
said, "Verily, I say unto you, I have 
not found so great faith, no, not in 
Israel." It was a moment of great joy 
for Jesus. But with the joy a great 
shadow came, for He saw the exclusion 
of the very children of the King, who, 
disobedient to the King, should be 
cast out. 

In the case of the woman in a fever, 
the appeal was made by her friends. 
He touched her, and the fever left her, 
and she arose and ministered unto 
them. The Revised Version says, " She 
arose and ministered unto Him." He 
touched her, the fever left her, and she 
responded by becoming His servant. 

Then we have that last brief account 
of the wonderful eventide. It is a 
great picture the incapable and suffer- 
ing gathered to Him, possessed of evil 
spirits, and all manner of diseases; and 
the King, by speaking a word, im- 
parting health, and all in fulfilment of 
prophecy. 



In conclusion; as to the King we 
learn from these first three movements, 
that the Dreamer is the Doer, that the 
Teacher is a Man of action, that the 
Unfolder of the great task is the Giver 
of a new dynamic; and these facts, 
first revealed in the physical, are for 
us to-day true supremely in the spiri- 
tual. If not, He has merely revealed 
a great ideal. 

You are a leper and need cleansing; 
palsied and need healing ; fever-stricken 
and need to feel the touch of* His cool- 
ness and His balm. Oh, blessed be God, 
the Teacher is the same, great in 
words; but to a poor struggling heart, 
greater yet in works. If there be some- 
thing in your life, something of moral 
depravity, something of incapability, 
some evil desire that prevents your 
doing the thing you would, come to 
Him as the leper came, " Lord, if Thou 
wilt, Thou canst. . . ." Come as the 
centurion came, " Speak the word 
only;" He is close to you, and if you 
will only look into His face with all 
the pain of your incompetence, and sigh 
in trust, He will touch you, and break 
the power of cancelled sin, and set the 
prisoner free. 



MATTHEW VIII. 18-34- 



THIS section of the Gospel consists 
of a brief paragraph, revealing 
certain effects produced by the works 
already recorded; and of further illus- 
trations of His power. , 

" Now when Jesus saw great multi- 
tudes about Him, He gave command- 
ment to depart unto the other side." 
This decision on His part called forth 
the words which show the effect pro- 
duced on the minds of some who had 
seen His works. One man said to Him, 
"Teacher, I will follow Thee whither- 
soever Thou goest;" and another said, 
"Lord, suffer me first to go and bury 
my father." These were typical cases, 
and reveal what, in all probability, was 
going on in the minds of vast numbers 
of the people. The King's methods of 
dealing with these first impressions 
made by His words and by His works 
are clearly revealed. 



Then follows the account of how the 
King crossed the sea in the boat with 
His disciples; and we have a new 
manifestation of His power operating 
in a new realm; a manifestation made, 
not to the multitude, but to His own, 
who were in the boat with Him. As to 
actual realisation at the moment the 
whole Kingdom of God was in that 
boat the King and His subjects; and 
to that inner circle He revealed a new 
plane upon which He moved with the 
same quiet, Kingly authority, as that 
which they already had seen Him exer- 
cise upon the plane of physical disease. 

Finally, we have the story of the 
demoniacs; and the King's power is 
seen exercised in yet another sphere. 
With quiet dignity and authority, free 
from all perturbation and feverishness, 
He approached that strange and mystic 
realm, of which men have ever been 



85 



[MAM. vni. 18-34] 



MATTHEW 



more or less conscious the spirit-world. 
This manifestation was to the whole 
company of people, and not merely to 
His own. 

Let us consider first the effects im- 
mediately produced by the words al- 
ready spoken, and the works already 
manifest. 

We see the multitudes, and we see 
the action of Jesus because of the mul- 
titudes a somewhat strange action as 
it appears at first and then we have 
these two illustrations of the feelings 
of probably hundreds of people gath- 
ered round about Christ. 

The multitudes were growing in num- 
ber. He had gone up into the moun- 
tain, taking with Him a few disciples, 
and to them He had enunciated the 
ethic of His Kingdom. As He taught 
the disciples, the multitudes had 
climbed the mountain, had come nearer 
to Hun, and heard Him, and by the 
time the last sentence of that marvel- 
lous Manifesto had passed His lips, it 
is recorded that those outside the little 
group to whom He was primarily speak- 
ing, "were astonished at His teaching, 
for He taught them as One having 
authority, and not as their scribes." 
When He was come down from the 
mountain these multitudes followed 
Him, and He entered into Capernaum. 

As we have seen, at the beginning of 
His ministry, "He came and dwelt in 
Capernaum," in "Galilee of the Gen- 
tiles," which was despised because con- 
taminated with Gentile thought and 
Gentile connection. He now came back 
into the same city, and the multitudes 
who had followed Him from the moun- 
tain were swelled in number by the city 
folk. They all knew of the leper 
cleansed on the way down the moun- 
tain; of the servant of the centurion 
healed from a distance; of the fever- 
stricken woman restored in the house 
of His disciple. Attracted first by His 
words, their interest was deepened by 
these things. Then, suddenly, as al- 
ready noticed, when Jesus saw them, 
" He gave commandment to depart unto 
the other side." 

This was a strange action, one which 
inevitably arrests our thought. He was 
attracted by the crowds; the crowds 
sought Him; and yet, over and over 



again, just as the crowds were gath- 
ered, just as the moment seemed ripe 
for proclaiming the Kingdom, asserting 
His claim, stirring up the populace, be- 
ginning the march, He withdrew Him- 
self from them. But He never left 
them because He did not love them; 
He left them because He did love them. 
These people were impressed with ma- 
terial values only, and Jesus withdrew 
in order that, having fixed and centred 
attention upon Himself, He might pres- 
ently return to them for deeper matters, 
and higher things. 

If we study this ministry of Jesus 
Christ, whether in His propaganda as 
King, which is specifically brought be- 
fore us in Matthew, or whether in any 
of the other phases, as taught in the 
other gospels, we find this constantly 
that our Lord discounted the value of 
His miracles. That is to say, He never 
appealed to men by miracle, save as a 
secondary method. The whole philoso- 
phy of this may best be expressed in 
His own words, when He said to Philip, 
" Believe Me ... or else " if you are 
not equal to that, if you cannot be per- 
suaded by the supreme credential, by 
the final argument "believe Me for 
the very works' sake." But the 
" works' sake " is secondary. Jesus did 
not work miracles in order to convince 
men; and when men, impressed by 
works of wonder wrought in the ma- 
terial realm, wanted to see what other 
thing He could do, He took ship and 
left them, with a larger intention in 
His mind. 

It was just as our Lord was leaving 
that the events transpired which con- 
stitute our two illustrations. A scribe 
came to Him and said, "Teacher, I 
will follow Thee whithersoever Thou 
goest." And then a disciple said, 
"Lord, suffer me first to go and bury 
my father." But we will first take them 
together. When Luke told the same 
story, he introduced a third man, who 
said, "I will follow Thee, Lord; but 
first suffer me to bid farewell to them 
that are at my house." Most people 
imagine that none of these men fol- 
lowed Christ. There is not a word to 
prove that they did not follow Him. 
We are not told the sequel, and we 
have as much right to think that they 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. viii. 18-34] 



ultimately followed Him, as that they 
did not. 

Let us look at this first man, the 
scribe. He was one of the literary men 
of his time. He had listened to Jesus 
in all probability, and had watched 
Him. Just as his interest was becom- 
ing deeper, he saw that Jesus was 
leaving the crowds, and was going 
towards the boat, and, pressing through 
the crowds, he said to Him, " Teacher, 
I will follow Thee whithersoever Thou 
goest." We call this impulsiveness. 
Would that there were a great deal 
more impulsiveness of this kind in the 
world to-day 1 May. God give us a new 
baptism of emotion! Here was a man 
who laid bare his heart to Jesus Christ; 
and to whom, therefore, Jesus could lay 
bare His heart. This He did in the 
unveiling of His poverty. He looked at 
the man and said, "The foxes have 
holes, and the birds of the heaven have 
nests ; but the Son of Man hath not 
where to lay His head." That was 
heart answering heart. When a man 
out of his heart said, I am going to 
follow Thee, Lord, the Lord told that 
man what He did not tell to every one 
the secret of His poverty, the secret 
of His homelessness. Some one has 
written about the blessed poverty of 
Christ. There is no such thing as 
blessed poverty. Poverty was part of 
the curse He bore, the curse that rested 
upon humanity on account of sin. It 
was part of His sorrow, and He told 
this man of His sorrow of homelessness. 

Yet this is not the deepest note. 
This scribe, impulsive, daring, had un- 
doubtedly been moved by the physical 
miracles ; and it seems to me that Jesus 
not merely told of His own personal 
poverty, but uttered a. great word re- 
vealing His ideal of life. He called 
Himself the Son of Man. It was 
Christ's favourite description of Hun- 
self; He seems to have loved it. It is 
on the lips of Jesus an illuminative 
word, standing for humanity as true to 
the ideal. It would seem as though 
Jesus looked at that scribe, captivated 
by His words, impressed by His works, 
and said to him in effect ; For what are 
you coming after Me? Do not forget 
that the Son of Man is homeless in this 
world. The ideal Man in the midst of 



such conditions as I am in, and as you 
will be in, if you follow Me, will have 
no anchorage here. " The foxes have 
holes, and the birds of heaven have 
nests,, but the Son of Man," the Master 
of the new order, the King of the new 
Kingdom, in the midst of present con- 
ditions, can have no home. Thus, to 
the man who bared the deepest thing 
in his heart, Christ revealed the cross. 
Not Christ's Cross for the man; that is 
not revealed here; but the man's cross, 
if he would come into the Kingdom and 
into power. To him Christ said, Every- 
thing must be lost. You must be home- 
less if you would be with Me. Every 
tie that binds you and hinders you and 
fetters you must be dropped. Men who 
are coming after Me wherever I go, 
must come to homelessness, must under- 
stand that there is no rest until the 
Kingdom is built; the Son of Man can 
only be homed in the very Bosom of 
God. 

Then another man spoke to Him, and 
Luke tells us that it was in answer to 
something that Jesus said to him. 
Jesus said, "Follow Me," and the man 
replied, "Lord, suffer me first to go 
and bury my father." Notice that 
Matthew calls this man a disciple, so 
that when Jesus called him to " fol- 
low," it was not a call to discipleship, 
but to service, for Luke again intro- 
duces something which Matthew omits. 
Jesus said to him, " Leave the dead to 
bury their own dead; but go thou and 
publish abroad the Kingdom of God." 

What was the trouble in this man's 
case? There was in his heart a con- 
flicting affection that for his father. 
We have hardly caught the real value 
of this story; we have treated it as 
though this man wanted to attend a 
funeral, and asked time to do so. Dr. 
George Adam Smith tells of how he 
was one day trying hard to persuade a 
young man to go with him as a guide 
into a district not frequented by trav- 
ellers. Healthy and robust he stood by 
his tent, a genuine Arab; and there, 
sitting in the doorway of the tent, was 
his father, of patriarchal appearance, 
but well and healthy. The intended 
journey would have occupied some 
months at least, and the young man at 
last, with peculiar courtesy, said, " Sir, 



87 



[MATT. vm. 18-34] 



MATTHEW 



suffer me first to bury my father," thus 
using the very words of the Bible story, 
and revealing its true meaning. There 
was no immediate prospect of the death 
of the father; but the son said, I can- 
not leave my father, a most admirable 
thing, a beautiful thing, examined by 
all the canons of human conduct; a 
noble decision on the part of the young 
Arab, and right, if anybody else called 
other than the King. But here at once 
we see the claim of Jesus. He was per- 
petually setting up these superlative 
claims for Himself. He had none of 
the humility of the human teacher. His 
claim was always the claim of an abso- 
lute supremacy. He never admitted 
that any other tie of affection could be 
allowed for a moment to interfere with 
the soul's loyalty to Himself, and He 
crystalised this fact into one burning 
sentence when He said, " He that 
loveth father or mother more than Me, 
is not worthy of Me." That is the 
principle He applied when He said, 
'' L,eave the dead to bury their own 
dead." 

So far, then, the King having given 
the first evidences of His power, two 
men spoke of following Him. To the 
man who bared his heart, Christ re- 
vealed the deepest fact, the necessity 
for the cross. To the man who had a 
tie of affection that hindered him, 
Christ gave rebuke in most stern 
words. Having thus dealt with these 
men, He entered into the boat and left 
the multitude. 

The King's power was now exercised 
on other planes. It operated first in the 
sphere of the elements, which is pecu- 
liarly retained for God; and it operated 
in the spirit-world, of which man is 
conscious, and by which he is in- 
fluenced, but which he never yet has 
been able to master. 

It is a great comfort that even to-day 
God has kept some things absolutely in 
His own hands. The winds and the 
waves are under His command. The 
King now revealed Himself to that lit- 
tle inner circle of His disciples as Mas- 
ter there also. It was a revelation of 
Himself made to His own. They saw 
that day, perhaps as they had never 
done before, the composure of the King. 
He could sleep when the storm was 



sweeping. They were fishermen used to 
the sea. He was a landsman. .They 
who were used to the sea were per- 
turbed, but He was fast asleep through 
it all. They saw His sympathy the 
moment they roused Him. Then they 
saw His authority. Standing on the 
side of the vessel, He looked out on 
those heaving waters, and said very 
literally, "Be muzzled." And, like 
dogs, hounds held by the leash, the 
waves cowered back, and the sea was 
calm. They saw His supremacy also, 
not merely as manifested in His power 
over wind and water, but in the strange 
thing He said to them. Before He re- 
buked the sea, He rebuked them, in 
the words, "Why are ye fearful, O ye 
of little faith?" by which He meant 
that men never ought to be afraid if 
they are with Him. This again was a 
superlative claim. We dare not say such 
a thing to our children, except under 
certain very restricted circumstances. 

When they saw His power they said, 
"What manner of Man is this that 
even the winds and the sea obey 
Him?" 

There is also a revelation here of 
these men. They were loyal ; they went 
with Him; they sought His aid; but 
they did not rightly know His power. 
"Carest Thou not that we perish?" 
That is what they said when they woke 
Him. I do not believe it was the cry 
of personal fear so much as the reve- 
lation of their conviction that if that 
boat went down, all the Kingdom would 
perish. Sometimes it is better not to 
wake Jesus when we are troubled. 
There is a higher faith; a faith that 
waits for deliverance out of a storm; 
a faith that says, If He is here, it is 
all right; let the waves roll, let the 
waters beat 

" With Christ in the vessel, 
I smile at the storm." 

There is here also a revelation of the 
Kingdom. The perfect King and the 
imperfect subjects; and the King per- 
fecting the subjects by process. They 
cannot bear the storm, they are afraid. 
Then He will hush the storm, and He 
will answer the prayer of imperfection 
in order that He may build upon it. 
Some day they will brave the storm, 



MATTHEW 



[MAW?, ix. 1-17] 



and -will be content to abide it, trusting 
Him for peace under all circumstances. 
When He came out of the boat on 
the other side, they had a new mani- 
festation of His power. This was a 
manifestation both to disciples and to 
the multitudes, in which we touch for 
the first time in the progress of our 
study, the fact of demon possession. It 
is an unfortunate thing that in the 
English revision the word which should 
be demons is translated devils. The 
American revisers have made the dis- 
tinction. Demon possession and devil 
possession are not identical. This is 
the story of two possessed by demons. 
As to who these demons were, all kinds 
of theories have been advanced. Prob- 
ably they were fallen angels under the 
control of the arch-enemy of the race, 
the personal devil, and no doubt there 
is still a good deal of demon possession 
in the world. This is a terrible illus- 
tration of the power of a demon over a 
man, first obsessed, and then possessed 
by the spirit. First there was the 
temptation to give way to the evil spirit, 
and the struggle that followed; and 
then the bringing of the man into sub- 
jection by the demon, who obtained en- 
tire possession of him. Here were men 
so fierce that none could tame them; so 
fierce that men were afraid to pass by 
their way. In the presence of that 
awful fact of which men were con- 
scious, but with which they could not 
deal, the Lord came. His authority 
was acknowledged by the demons. 
" What have we to do with Thee, Thou 
Son of God?" That authority He im- 
mediately exercised; and when the 
demons asked that they might pass out 
into the herd of swine, He uttered one 
word, "Go." Thus the King exercised 



His power beneficently; for the indi- 
vidual, by freeing him of possession; 
and for the community, by freeing them 
of their swine, for all traffic in swine 
was forbidden within the area of the 
Hebrew economy. 

We have a strange ending to the 
chapter. "And behold, all the city 
came out to see Jesus; and when they 
saw Him, they besought Him that He 
would depart from their borders." 

This is our King. The human limi- 
tations have passed away. His essen- 
tial powers are abiding powers. There 
is no sphere in which He is unable to 
act. We listen to His teaching; it is 
superlative teaching. He came down 
from the mountain top, and the ques- 
tion arose, What can He do? His 
works gave the answer. In the physical 
plane He was Master; among the ele- 
ments He was Master ; and in that 
strange spirit-world, which encom- 
passes us, and of which we know so 
little, He was Master also. 

There is no limit to His power. Yes, 
there is limitation. His power is lim- 
ited in us. We may send Him away, 
as did the Gadarenes. We may limit 
Him as did the disciples; by the very 
deliverance they procured, preventing 
Him working out a more marvellous 
manifestation. We may love father or 
mother more, as the man seemed to do 
when he came to Christ. 

Let us rather say to Him, with the 
scribe, "Teacher, I will follow Thee 
whithersoever Thou goest." And let 
us say it though He has shown us the 
cross, though we know it may mean 
homelessness in the deepest sense of 
the word; though we know it must 
mean sacrificial living, if we are to live 
for the saving of men. 



MATTHEW IX. 1-17 



IN this study we have the third illus- 
tration in the second group showing 
the power of the King. It is that of the 
forgiveness of sins and the healing of 
the sick of the palsy. This is followed 
by the account of the call of Matthew; 
which is thus set in relation to the heal- 
ing of the palsy and the forgiveness of 
sins, in a very striking manner. That 



in turn is followed by a record of criti- 
cism and inquiry. Let us mark the 
lines of analysis before we give more 
detailed attention to the teaching. 

In the first eight verses we have the 
story of Christ's crossing over into His 
own city, and His pronouncing forgive- 
ness upon the man and healing him. 

Then in verse nine we have the story 



89 



[MAM. ix. 1-17] 



MATTHEW 



of the calling of Matthew; all told in 
the compass of one verse, and yet 
thrilling with suggestiveness. 

Immediately following, in verses ten 
to thirteen, we have the first criticism. 
" Why eateth your Teacher with the 
publicans and sinners ? " 

Then in verses fourteen to seventeen 
we have the inquiry, " Why do we and 
the Pharisees fast oft, but Thy disciples 
fast not?" This, then, is the outline 
of our study. 

We commence with the incident of 
healing, and notice first some of its 
points of beauty. 

"When He saw their faith." That 
is the statement which first arrests at- 
tention on reading the story. Details 
are not given here, beyond that of the 
faith with which these men came. One 
of the other evangelists tells us that 
they broke up the roof, and let the sick 
man down into the midst. The fact 
here standing out is, that " He saw 
their faith." There has been a good 
deal of speculation as to whose faith is 
referred to, but of one thing we may 
be perfectly sure, it was not only the 
faith of the men who brought him. 
" Their faith " demands some other in- 
terpretation ; it demands the faith of 
the man, as well as the faith of the men 
who brought him, because Christ said 
to him, "Thy sins are forgiven." It 
would appear that our Lord saw that 
in his heart there was a desire for 
something deeper than physical heal- 
ing; and that he was conscious that 
physical disability was the result of his 
own sin; and therefore with a great 
tenderness, in words thrilling with the 
music of the evangel He had come to 
create, He said to him, in effect: Be of 
good cheer I am able to deal with the 
deepest matter; thy sins are forgiven. 
That word was a response to faith. 

And yet, while we believe there was 
faith in the heart of the man himself, 
we must not miss the important fact 
here that there is such a thing as 
vicarious faith. It is possible to help 
a man's faith. "Jesus seeing their 
faith." 

Then notice that when they brought 
him, instead of first dealing with his 
disability, Jesus at once said to him, 
"Be of good cheer, thy sins are for- 



given." In a moment the suspicion of 
the crowd was evident, and their criti- 
cism was aroused, because He pro- 
nounced forgiveness with authority. 
The men who had been watching with 
curiosity became angry, and charged 
Him with blasphemy. It was then that 
the King for the first time in His proc- 
ess of revelation, defended an action. 
He looked at these men criticising, and 
said to them, "Which is easier, to say, 
Thy sins are forgiven; or to say, Arise, 
and walk? But that ye may know that 
the Son of Man hath authority on 
earth to forgive sins" (He turned to 
the man), "Arise, and take up thy bed, 
and go unto thy house." And he arose 
and left. Then there came upon the 
people a great sense of fear, and they 
marvelled. The fear was due to the 
fact that there was demonstrated to 
their consciousness the fact that some- 
how, in that Man, or through that Man, 
God was very near. They had heard 
the great word of forgiveness, the word 
for which the heart of an honest man 
hungers, more than any other. They 
had heard this Man say, " Thy sins are 
forgiven," and they did not believe it; 
they questioned it; they thought He 
was blasphemous ; they felt that He was 
saying something easy, a word that was 
not capable of demonstration, and which 
therefore they did not accept as truth. 
And instantly, with a great tenderness, 
rot because the Lord was anxious for 
His own defence, but that they might 
believe, He challenged the man to rise 
up and walk. And so in concrete and 
evident fashion He demonstrated His 
power. 

But there is more than that in the 
story. Probably to all intelligent men 
who watched Him that day there was 
a clear consciousness of the connection 
between the man's physical disability 
and his sin; and that instead of touch- 
ing the surface, Jesus went right to the 
root of the matter, when He pronounced 
forgiveness. The demonstration which 
the King gave these men in very con- 
crete fashion, is the perpetual demon- 
stration of the fact of forgiveness. 
With the forgiveness of sin, if it be a 
true experience, there pass away dis- 
abilities, which hold men in bondage 
while sin remains unforgiven. 



90 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. ix. 1-17] 



When Jesus asked these people, " For 
which is easier to say, Thy sins are for- 
given, or to say, Arise, and walk?" He 
suggested to them the relation between 
sin and suffering. Again one is driven 
back to the prophecy of Isaiah. In 
Matthew viii. 17 we read, "That it 
might be fulfilled which was spoken by 
Isaiah the prophet, saying, Himself took 
our infirmities, and bare our diseases." 
Thus Matthew claimed that the healing 
of all those who came to Jesus was in 
fulfilment of Isaiah's prophecy in chap- 
ter liii. 4 : " Surely He hath borne our 
griefs, and carried our sorrows." Let 
us continue the reading in Isaiah : " Yet 
we did esteem Him stricken, smitten of 
God, and afflicted. But He was wounded 
for our transgressions, He was bruised 
for our iniquities, the chastisement of 
our peace was upon Him ; and with His 
stripes we are healed." Thus the 
prophet looking down through the cen- 
turies to the perfect Servant of God, the 
Great Healer, said of Him, first, " He 
hath borne our griefs and carried our 
sorrows." He did not end there; but 
went on to tell how this One would 
heal, not in the local cases merely, but 
in the great issue of all His mission as 
the Servant of God : " He was wounded 
for our transgressions." That is to say 
that by the vicarious suffering of the 
Servant of God sin would be dealt with. 
Sin* lies at the back of all human dis- 
ability; and because sin is dealt with 
all its results can be dealt with. That 
is the whole mission of the Servant of 
God. This was so in the case of this 
man. He had palsy. Sin is the root of 
palsy. The King pardoned his sin by 
virtue of the fact that He would pres- 
ently bear it in His own body on the 
tree. The Passion was the right and 
warrant for everything that Jesus did 
in this realm of healing physical dis- 
ability. He healed by the mystery of 
the Cross, by bearing our transgressions 
and being bruised for our iniquity. In 
the long outworking of the mission of 
Jesus, by the way of that Cross, every 
tear shall be wiped away, all diseases 
shall be dealt with and cast out, and 
His ultimate victory in the physical 
realm, based upon His bearing of sin, 
the cause of disease, will be the perfect 
physical salvation of the race that puts 



its trust in Him. The mission of the 
Son of Man is that of dealing with sin; 
and, secondly, that of healing disease; 
so that here again is manifested the 
fact that the miracles of Jesus were 
wrought by the restoration of a lost 
order, rather than by violation of ex- 
isting law. Men who had seen Him 
Master in the realm of the physical; 
Master of the elements; Master of the 
surrounding spiritual world; now saw 
Him King in the moral realm, pro- 
nouncing absolution, and giving the evi- 
dence of the absolution, in the curing 
of a physical disability. 

Now it is not without suggestiveness 
that the next thing we read is that 
Jesus called Matthew. Matthew was 
a tax-gatherer, and we know how un- 
popular the Roman tax-gatherer was, 
and how far more unpopular was the 
Jew who lent himself to the work of 
Rome. Matthew was of such, a lower 
caste of Jew; not necessarily the poor 
Jew; but the man who. in the opinion 
of his compatriots, was of blunted moral 
sense, and of dead national aspiration. 

The King saw this man, one of a 
class supremely despised by the people, 
and as He passed said to him, " Follow 
Me," and thus immediately included 
one outcast of the nation, in the inner 
circle of His Kingdom. He had claimed 
the power to forgive sins. Here in the 
eyes of the people was a sinner above 
all men, and the King called him, and 
he followed. The way Matthew himself 
tells the story is full of beauty: "And 
as Jesus passed by from thence, He saw 
a man, called Matthew, sitting at the 
place of toll; and He saith unto him, 
Follow Me. And he arose and followed 
Him." "As Jesus passed by from 
thence He saw" What did He see? 
The man. What did they see? The 
tax-gatherer. The world sees all sorts 
of things in us the accidental things. 
Christ will not see them, although He 
sees everything. He sees the man. We 
may be bruised and broken and scarred, 
and it may be all our own fault; but 
in each case He sees the man; and He 
calls us in the same sweet voice that 
Matthew heard: "Follow Me."' 

Is not this a new exhibition of the 
King's power and authority in yet 
another sphere ? Here the King is seen 



91 



[MAM. ix. 1-17] 



MATTHEW 



exercising His authority, so far as He 
can exercise it, in the realm of human 
will, by expressing the demand of a 
paramount claim, " Follow Me." Per- 
petually one is being startled at the 
Master's method. Only once in the 
four Gospels can we find any occasion 
when He asked advice. He once asked 
Philip what they were to do to feed 
the crowd. But notice the parenthesis. 
"This He said to prove him, for He 
Himself knew what He would do." 
He always knew what He would do; 
and He came to this man, sitting 
there in the midst of custom and toll, 
and He said to him, "Follow Me." 
There was no argument, no apology. 
He did not even suggest to him that it 
might be well if he first considered His 
claims. It was a quiet, strong, musical, 
mystical demand; and everything for 
that man, depended upon his answer. 

But if there is here a note of great 
authority, mark its limitation. Yes, the 
King is limited. "Follow Me," He 
said ; but the " I will " of the man was 
needed to complete the relationship. 
One stands appalled with the tremen- 
dous fact that a man can say, No. 
These chapters reveal it. He went to 
the country of the Gadarenes, and they 
said, Leave us, and He left them. The 
King is limited by human will. But 
thank God for the issue of this story, 
for we want to live in the light of it. 
" He arose and followed Him." So the 
despised tax-gatherer became the royal 
chronicler, and has given us this great 
Gospel of the Kingdom. 

Now let us turn to the paragraph of 
criticism and inquiry. 

The first criticism circles round the 
question of the Pharisees: "Why eat- 
eth your Teacher with the publicans 
and sinners?" The occasion of the 
criticism was the action of Jesus in 
sitting familiarly and eating with, pub- 
licans and sinners. It was in Matthew's 
house that He thus sat down; and the 
occasion was a special one. The first 
thing Matthew did was to make a great 
feast for Jesus and invite to it all the 
publicans and sinners of his acquain- 
tance. That is the way to entertain 
Jesus. It is very beautiful. Everybody 
else despised the publican and the sin- 



ner. Matthew gathered them together, 
the people of his own despised class, 
and Jesus sat down "reclined" is the 
word with them. Now the Pharisees 
came and said to the disciples, "Why 
eateth your Teacher with the publicans 
and sinners ? " We have referred to 
their philosophy on a previous occasion. 
They objected because they believed if 
a man sat down among publicans and 
sinners to eat, he would be contami- 
nated. What they failed to appreciate 
was the difference between this Man 
and themselves. His answer was again 
a vindication of His action : " They that 
are whole have no need of a physician, 
but they that are sick. But go ye" 
ye Pharisees, ye men of the false phi- 
losophy, ye men that do not know God 
" Go ye and learn what this meaneth ; 
I desire mercy, and not sacrifice; for I 
came not to call the righteous, but sin- 
ners." It is as though Jesus said : Why 
do you criticise me? I am a physician, 
and therefore I must be where the peo- 
ple are who need Me. They that are 
whole do not need a physician, but 
they that are sick. 

We notice here particularly how the 
physical and the moral necessarily 
merge in the thinking of Jesus. He 
used the figure of the physician, in con- 
nection with His presence in the midst 
of the moral depravity of which the 
Pharisees were so afraid. The very 
thing that kept the others away drew 
Him irresistibly. 

There is yet a deeper note : " Go ye 
and learn what this means : I desire 
mercy, and not sacrifice." This He 
quoted from one of their own prophets 
(Hosea vi. 6). We ought to read the 
whole prophecy to catch the meaning 
of it. The prophecy of Hosea deals 
with spiritual adultery, spiritual har- 
lotry. The great agonising emphasis 
of the prophetic message is that God 
is wounded in His love, because of the 
infidelity of His people to the Covenant. 
And this is the cry of God, "O 
Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee?" 
Then he tells these people that their 
goodness is as the morning cloud, it 
vanishes and is gone. You bring Me 
sacrifices as though I wanted them. 
Ephraim, Judah, it is not sacrifice that 
I want from you; it is mercy toward 



92 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. ix. 1-17] 



you that I want; and I would fain find 
a way unto you in love and mercy. 

Jesus looked at these men who 
thought they knew the law and the 
prophets, and said to them: You do 
not understand the God Who is re- 
vealed in your own writings. He was 
talking to the teachers, to the men who 
were interpreting the prophets, and He 
said, " Go ye and learn what this mean- 
eth, I desire mercy, and not sacrifice." 
Go and learn what the heart of God is; 
go and find out, that according to your 
own writings, God is far more anxious 
to have mercy than He is to receive 
any offering that a man brings to Him. 
When you have learnt this, then you 
will understand why I sit down with 
publicans and sinners, why I recline 
and eat in the midst of them. 

After the criticism of the Pharisees 
came the inquiry of the disciples of 
John. "Why do we and the Pharisees 
fast oft, and Thy disciples fast not?" 
Sometimes this has been treated as 
though it were a question inspired by 
the Pharisees, and part of the criticism. 
But I am inclined to think that this was 
not so, but that it was a perfectly hon- 
est inquiry. 

There are really two questions here: 
" Why do we and the Pharisees fast ? " 
and "Why do Thy disciples fast not?" 
These men came to Christ; and they 
said in effect : The religious ideal which 
we have believed to be true, and which 
the Pharisees have evidently believed to 
be true, seems to be utterly different 
from the religious ideal of Thy dis- 
ciples; we fast, we mourn, but these 
men that Thou hast gathered about 
Thee seem to be pre-eminently happy; 
they make no place for fasting and 
mourning. 

Christ's answer gives colour to that 
explanation of the inquiry. He said, 
" Can the sons of the bridechamber 
mourn, as long as the Bridegroom is 
with them?" Christ defended that 
which puzzled them, by taking a figure 
that was more full of rejoicing than 
anything else could be. A wedding 
ceremony in an Eastern country lasted 
for seven days. It was a week of un- 
bounded and unceasing rejoicing, of 
songs and music and mirth. And Jesus, 
said, These men are the sons of the 



bridechamber, and you must not expect 
them to fast while the Bridegroom is 
with them, but, "the days will come, 
when the Bridegroom shall be taken 
away from them, and then will they 
fast." 

This is Christ's defence of the right 
of His people to be merry; and that 
right to be merry is the fact that He 
is with them. If that be true, then 
we have the right to be merry always. 
What He said about sorrow was ful- 
filled. He was taken away from them, 
and they fasted and were sad through 
those days of darkness; but He came 
back, and, standing on the slope of 
Olivet, He said, "IyO, I am with you 
alway." Then there is no more room 
for mourning; no more room for the 
sad face of agony; but there is room 
for mirth, room for joy, and room for 
gladness. 

Then the Lord uttered the final word 
of illustration in this connection. You 
cannot put a piece of undressed cloth 
upon an old garment. It will pull and 
tear the old garment to destruction. 
You must not put new wine into old 
wine-skins; the old are not strong 
enough to hold it; it will break them 
and the wine be wasted. Thus the King 
said in effect to these questioning men, 
Do not attempt to measure this new 
thing by that old thing. The old was 
right as long as it lasted; but this is 
new. There are new motives, new 
forces, new impulses coming into play; 
and you must not try to place the new 
within the narrow limits of the old. It 
is Christ's clear declaration that the 
new covenant which He had come to 
initiate, demanded new methods of ex- 
pression; the purple of royalty, instead 
of the sackcloth of sorrow ; the laughter 
of triumph, instead of the weeping of 
defeat; Easter morning instead of the 
day of Crucifixion. 

Yet we can never get to the purple, 
but by the way of the sackcloth ; never 
triumph save through defeat; never 
reach Easter morning, but by the way 
of Good Friday. 

The whole genius of Christianity is 
in this. He went by the way of Good 
Friday, and He gives us Easter for 
ever. He wore the sackcloth, and 
turned it into purple for us. He trod 



93 



[MATT. ix. 18-34] 



MATTHEW 



the winepress alone, and we have the 
cup filled with the new wine of the 
Kingdom. 

There is in this study a great se- 
quence of revelation. Sin is forgiven; 
a despised man is included in the inner 
circle; God's heart is revealed, "I will 



have mercy;" God's answer is affirmed 
in those figures of the new forces. 

What, then, shall we say?. Let us 
trust His heart, let us trust His power, 
by leaving all and following Him, 
knowing that in Him we shall find all 
we need. 



MATTHEW IX. 18-34 



THIS is the last paragraph in that 
section of the Gospel which deals 
with the King's exhibition of the bene- 
fits of His Kingdom. Of course, that is 
not to say that there was no further 
manifestation of His power, for He 
continued to work wonders to the very 
end. 

This account is full of life, full of 
light, full of love, full of colour. Here 
the King is seen dealing with specific 
cases as they made application to Him. 
All sorts and conditions of men mixed 
together in the multitudes that sur- 
rounded Him at this time publicans 
and sinners, Scribes and Pharisees, 
beggars by the highway, wealthy men 
who watched and listened with great 
interest, country people who had 
crowded into the cities, learned people 
who were deeply interested in His 
teaching. And yet the people He 
brought into prominence, upon whom 
men have continued to look through 
the long centuries, were all of one class 
they were needy people. In those 
days in which He passed from teach- 
ing to doing, He drew to Himself the 
people who were in trouble, in need, in 
difficulty. 

Of those we are now to observe, 
some were wealthy and some were poor. 
Here a wealthy ruler, and there a 
woman beggared by her illness; and 
yet again two men who were begging 
by the highway-side, but who turned to 
Him because of a great sense of need, 
and finally a man demon-possessed. 
Such power was resident in Him that 
weakness felt its attraction, and out 
from the great curious, jostling, crowd- 
ing multitudes, individuals conscious of 
their need came near to Him. As we 
look back at the pictures of this chap- 
ter we see the crowd generally and 



indefinitely; but the needy souls par- 
ticularly and definitely. The King 
rendered need conspicuous, that He 
might meet it and cancel it. The cases 
are drawn out of the crowd one by one, 
brought into living contact with Christ, 
and dealt with ; and as we look at them, 
the impression made upon our minds, 
carrying complete conviction, is that 
our King is not a Teacher only, but a 
Worker also; that He does something 
more than propound a theory, He is 
ever communicating strength; that He 
not only holds up before men a great 
ideal, as He did in the Manifesto, but 
that He ever touches men in their 
paralysis, and makes them powerful in 
the very places of their need with per- 
fect sufficiency. 

Let us first survey the cases, noticing 
their diversity. How different are the 
people with whom Christ deals in this 
section! Matthew tells these stories 
very briefly. In Mark and Luke the 
details stand out far more conspicu- 
ously, but Matthew chronicled the facts 
simply, in order to reveal the power of 
the King. In the other Gospels other 
aspects of the work of Christ are re- 
vealed His perfect service, and His 
perfect Manhood with its human sym- 
pathy; and it may help us to borrow 
from Mark and Luke in order that we 
may see more clearly the need that 
came to the King. 

The first picture is that of a father, 
whose life was shadowed because at 
home his little daughter, twelve years 
of age, lay sick. Twelve years of sun- 
shine were threatened with eclipse; 
twelve years of playfulness were merg- 
ing towards a tragedy in the heart and 
life of Jairus. This man came to Jesus, 
driven towards Him by his sense of 
awful sorrow. Matthew says, " Behold, 



94 



MATTHEW 



[MAW. ix. 18-34] 



there came a ruler, and worshipped 
Him, saying, My daughter is even now 
dead/' which of course does not mean 
that Jairus declared that his daughter 
was actually dead. The " even now 
dead" is an idiomatic phrase, signify- 
ing at the point of death, very nearly 
dead, or, as we sometimes say in the 
blind brutality of our overwhelming 
dread, as good as dead. So Jairus 
came to Christ, a man driven to the 
King by the need of his threatened 
sorrow. 

The next picture is that of the 
woman overwhelmed in weakness and 
sorrow. Again Matthew tells us very 
little about her, but quite enough for 
us to understand her condition. He 
says, "A woman, who had an issue of 
blood twelve years, came behind Him." 
That descriptive phrase must be consid- 
ered in the light of the age in which 
she lived, and not in the light of our 
age. First, by reason of her trouble, 
she was excommunicated religiously. 
The Hebrew economy did not permit 
a woman so suffering to take any part 
or place in the worship of God. She was 
shut out from temple and synagogue 
worship. She was divorced from her hus- 
band by the same law. She was ostracized 
from society. We are not dealing with 
that law, certainly we have no right to 
criticise it; but we thank God that it 
has passed away for ever, and that the 
spirit of the age is one which desires to 
take care of the helpless and suffering. 
This woman had been spending her 
money perpetually for twelve years to 
find a remedy; and, as Luke says, could 
not be cured of any, or, as Mark says, 
was nothing bettered but rather the 
worse. Twelve years. Jairus's little 
girl twelve years of age; this woman, 
twelve years of suffering. Twelve years 
of sunshine, twelve years of shadow. 
A little child full of laughter going out 
towards death; and a woman who had 
been in the midst of a living death for 
twelve years; and they both came into 
contact with Him. 

Then two blind men. They heard, 
but could not see; they felt, but could 
not perceive. Two blind men, but they 
fought their way to Him. 

And finally a demon-possessed man, 
whom the demon held in the thrall of 



dumbness; for there was a close con- 
nection between the dumbness of the 
man and his possession. 

The sorrowing father, a wealthy man, 
a man of position, but his life over- 
shadowed because his bairn was dying; 
he came to Jesus. The woman who had 
lost everything that was worth having, 
religious privilege, family care, social 
position, all her wealth; she came to 
Jesus. Two blind men who, perhaps, 
as one of the commentators says, did 
often talk about what other men saw, 
and perchance did often talk about the 
Healer Whose fame had gone through 
all the district, unable to see His face, 
unable to see their own, unable to see 
the faces of their loved ones; they 
found their way to Him. The demon- 
possessed man, who could not find his 
way to Jesus, was brought by others. 
All kinds of need. Thus the King 
passed into the midst of the multitudes, 
and He drew to Himself, into the 
closest circle, the most needy people 
from among the crowds. And so it is 
to-day. It is the broken heart, the 
bereft, the discouraged, the unfit, that 
He will bring nearer to Himself than 
any others. 

Now notice the method of their com- 
ing. Jairus came for his child, and he 
came asking that Jesus would come and 
lay His hand upon her. He said, " She 
is even now dead " there is practically 
no hope; indeed, there is no hope apart 
from God, for that is the meaning of 
the confession " but come and lay Thy 
hand upon her, and she shall live." He 
asked for the touch of the hand of 
Christ. That was one method. 

The woman came quite differently. 
While Jairus came and publicly prof- 
fered his request, this woman tried to 
get to Him without anybody knowing. 
She did not ask Him to touch her; she 
touched Him. It was quite a different 
method. 

Then came the blind men, crying out 
they were clamorous, noisy men 
"Have mercy on us, Thou Son of 
David." In the other evangels we are 
told that the crowd tried to silence 
them, and they cried out the more, 
"Jesus, Thou Son of David, have 
mercy." They were not only clamor- 
ous, they were persistent. They got 



. ix. 18-34] 



MATTHEW 



right into the house where Jesus had 
gone. It was the method of men de- 
termined to get to Him, persisting in 
spite of opposition. 

And then the last case. This man 
did not come to Him at all; other peo- 
ple brought him; he was too far gone 
to come. Reason was dethroned. The 
other people brought him, and there is 
no word in the story about his faith. 
There is no single word that indicates 
that he had anything to do with his own 
coming. He was past the possibility of 
realising his need, so that there was not 
only diversity of need, there was diver- 
sity also in the method of approach. 

And yet there is a great unity in these 
illustrations. They all approached Him. 
They all appealed to Him for force. 
They all appealed to Him for exactly 
what they needed. Jairus came to Him 
with quiet dignity, surcharged with the 
sorrow of his heart; but he came to 
Him for just what he needed. The 
woman came to Him secretly, pressing 
her way through the crowd, not a surg- 
ing crowd only, but a moving crowd on 
the way to Jairus's house. Perhaps a 
little way in front of all the rest was 
Jairus himself, for if he could have 
hurried Christ that day he would. And 
then next to Jesus and round about 
Him were the apostles, the most digni- 
fied men in the whole company. 
Through that crowd of jostling and 
pressing strong men, with perchance 
here and there a mother, lifting up her 
little child to look into the face of the 
great Prophet as He paused, one 
woman, weak and wan and emaciated 
and thin, pressed near to Him. In 
that woman's coming one sees the most 
wonderful combination of weakness and 
strength. She forced her way through 
that crowd until she touched Jesus. It 
was quite different from Jairus's com- 
ing, but it was a coming for what she 
needed, the claim for power. The 
blind men came to Him for the same 
thing, and the dumb demoniac, brought 
to Him by others, came for the same 
thing. 

What was the issue in every case? 
The need was met; death vanquished, 
disease cured, sight granted, and, in 
the case of the man possessed, freedom 
from the demon, followed by speech. 



" Behold your King " is the word of 
Matthew from first to last. He van- 
quishes death for the broken heart of 
a father; He deals with all the neces- 
sity of the excommunicated, divorced, 
ostracized woman; He opens the eyes 
of the blind; He looses the silence of 
the tongue of the dumb as He exorcises 
the demon that has seized him. 

Let us now look at the King more 
closely. Notice first of all His readi- 
ness. When Jairus came it is written, 
He "arose and followed." He needed 
no pressure save that of the man's 
broken heart. That is an argument He 
never can refuse. 

When the woman touched Him she 
was healed before He spoke, when she 
grasped the border of His garment. 
Perhaps it was the fringe of the gar- 
ment on which she took hold; that in 
which the Hebrews were commanded to 
wear a ribbon of blue that they might 
look upon it, and remember the words 
of the law to do them. While Jesus 
Christ was supremely disdainful of all 
merely Hebrew ritual, He observed the 
law of Moses to its last tittle. So, 
probably, He wore the ribbon of blue, 
and the woman grasped at it with her 
frail hand. He knew it, and swifter 
than the lightning's flash, quick as the 
heartbeat of God, His virtue healed 
her. There was no persuasion neces- 
sary beyond the persuasion of her 
agony; and the moment she took hold, 
healing came. 

Then the blind men. You may say 
there is a good deal of persuasion 
necessary here. No; it is simply that 
wonderful method by which Jesus 
Christ did sometimes proceed, of letting 
people pour out their whole heart, and 
show their earnestness, before He an- 
swered. When they had persistently 
clamoured for His help, following Him 
into the house, sight came. 

In the healing of the dumb demoniac, 
which is almost brutal in its bluntness 
as Matthew tells the story, there is 
never a word of request, to say nothing 
of appreciation. " There was brought 
to Him a dumb man possessed with a 
demon. And when the demon was cast 
out, the dumb man spake." That is all. 
It was the movement of a great readi- 



96 



MATTHEW 



[MAT*, ix. 18-34] 



ness. So through all we see the King 
ready. 

But look at the King again, and mark 
His method. How the method varies ! 
It is a great picture, this of Jesus com- 
ing to the house of Jairus. We need 
the three Gospel stories to see it, it is 
so exquisite in its beauty. He came in 
where the child was lying dead, and He 
said, " She is not dead, but sleepeth." 
And they laughed Him to scorn. What 
did He do ? He put them all out. Do not 
imagine that this King is only capable 
of tenderness; He can do very drastic 
things. He was justified in His action. 
When He came in they were wailing; 
before He had been there two minutes 
they were laughing; but there are some 
people who must be put out before 
Jesus can do anything. " He could 
there do no mighty work . . . because 
of their unbelief." A critical, scorning, 
scoffing crowd must be put out before 
He can do anything. He Himself was 
affected by it. Criticism was sterilising 
in its effect upon Him. Faith was fer- 
tilising. Then there is a beautiful 
touch of tenderness in the Master's 
method with the maiden. Remember 
He was also healing the man's heart. 
He put His hand on the child and said, 
" Talitha cumi ; which is, being inter- 
preted, Damsel, I say unto thee, Arise." 
Yet that does not interpret it, it hardly 
translates it. If you translate " Talitha 
cumi" literally, Jesus really said, Little 
lamb, I say unto thee, Arise. Oh that 
sweet touch, that tenderness of tone! 
Then "He charged them much, that no 
man should know this; and He com- 
manded that something should be given 
her to eat." Observe the sweet reason- 
ableness of the Lord ! He ordered them 
to give her, not the catechism, but 
meat physical food. Jairus, here is 
your bairn. Take care of her, give her 
meat. We talk about the Man Jesus, 
and blessed be His humanity; but this 
is God, and He robs death of its prey, 
and thinks about the meal of a little 
maiden; and springtime comes into the 
heart of the man, and summer follows 
it, and all life is different to him. 

But on His way to the house of 
Jairus, in dealing with the woman, the 
King's method was quite a different 
one. First, a question was asked, not 



because He wanted to know, but be- 
cause it was necessary that this woman 
should go a good deal further than she 
had done. "Who touched Me?" said 
Jesus. You need not be angry with the 
question the disciples asked, " Thou 
seest the multitude thronging Thee, and 
sayest Thou, Who touched Me? " That 
is precisely what we should have said. 
Tenderly and reverently, with a touch 
of amazement in our voice, we would 
have said, Dear Master, why do you 
ask that? Many have touched You in 
the last half-hour. He always knows 
the difference between the jostle of a 
curious mob and the touch of a soul in 
its agony. The soul that touches Him 
is the soul that will gain the virtue. 
"Who touched ME?" He differentiates 
between the curious crowd and the soul 
in its need. But follow on a little, and 
see His method, for He has not 
finished. The woman seeing that every- 
thing was known, came in front of Him 
and told Him all the truth. Then 
Matthew tells us the most beautiful 
thing. The King said, "Daughter." 
We cannot say these things as they 
ought to be said. Oh for the breath of 
the Spirit of God to make the music 
for us ! All that came after, " Be of 
good cheer; thy faith hath made thee 
whole," was included when He said, 
" Daughter." She is excommunicated ; 
" Daughter " she is adopted. She is 
divorced ; " Daughter " He takes her 
to His heart. She is ostracized; 
" Daughter " and He admits her to 
heaven's society. In one word He drove 
the clouds away and showed her the 
blue sky, with the golden sunshine all 
about her. By one word the shackles 
of her pain and impotence fell from 
her, and she stood in all the light 
and liberty of conscious relationship 
with God. But before He could say 
" Daughter," He had to bring her from 
secret discipleship into the place of 
confessed discipleship. She took hold 
of the border of His garment, and the 
power came. Then He said in effect, 
I want you to have more than that. I 
do not want you to be satisfied with 
virtue communicated through My gar- 
ments. Come, and look into My face. 
He looked down into her face. Behold 
those eyes! Oh the light and glory of 



97 



[MATT. ix. 35-38] 



MATTHEW 



them the quiet tenderness, the sur- 
passing beauty of them! 

Then came the blind men. Here was 
another method. " Believe ye that I 
am able to do this?" "Yea, Lord." 
Then His hands were put upon their 
eyes. Have you ever thought it would 
have been worth while to be blind for 
fifty years to feel those hands touch the 
eyes, and know the breaking of the 
light? 

In healing the dumb man we have 
no account of His method; we simply 
see His quiet majesty. All need ap- 
pealed to His force. He appealed in 
every case to faith ; and where faith 
responded, either personally or vicari- 
ously His power was made manifest 
over death, disease, blindness, demons 
power that defies explanation, but 
arrests because of its abundance. 

The thing which is supremely impres- 
sive is the ease of His might There 
is no struggle, no long mysterious 
preparation. The need comes; He 
speaks, He touches; the need is met. 
And all these are little things that He 
did not account worth talking about. 
He said to the men about Him, Do not 
go and talk about these things; do not 
go and publish this abroad. This is 
not the thing I want you to see : " Be- 
lieve Me that I am in the Father, and 
the Father in Me; or else believe Me 
for the very works' sake." 

The spiritual miracles, the moral re- 
makings, are going on all around us 
to-day. God help us all to see the King, 



to touch the King as He passes. The 
arm of flesh need not be lifted; the 
sigh of faith is enough. Make it thine 
by submission, and all the glory of His 
reign will shine upon you, and the 
supernatural power resident within Him 
will be yours. 

Oh matchless" King 1 In this exhibi- 
tion of benefits we have seen the su- 
premacy and the power of the King in 
every realm. He has demonstrated His 
power to do as well as to teach. Do 
not be afraid to let Him tear away the 
veil behind which thou hast hidden 
some evil thing in thy life. Let Him 
reveal it, for He will heal it. This is 
the method and purpose of the King. 

The final word in this section reveals 
the antagonism of His foe and ours. It 
expressed itself through the religious 
leaders of the time. " By the prince of 
the demons casteth He out demons." A 
King so marvellous in teaching and 
power, yet to the prejudiced mind 
bringing no conviction; and there were 
men who dared to say that He moved 
to victory in the power of evil. Let us 
jealously inquire in what attitude we 
listen and study, for it is possible for 
prejudice and pride to blind us to the 
most solemn and sacred truths. May 
God grant that instead of the blas- 
phemy which attributes His victories 
to evil, we may be among the number 
of those who say, This is our King; we 
have waited for Him; upon His brow 
we put the crown, and by God's help 
we will serve Him. 



MATTHEW IX. 35-38 



IN reading this passage we notice that 
it chronicles no definite acts in the 
work of Jesus. The verses form rather 
a statement of general facts and gen- 
eral effects. This statement deals with 
the passing of the King from place to 
place; with what He saw as He thus 
passed through cities and villages; with 
what He felt in the presence of the 
things He saw; and with the result of 
that consciousness. 

The general statement is that " Jesus 
went about all the cities and the vil- 
lages," and, by way of introduction, the 



one matter to be recognized is that, in 
so doing, He came into contact with all 
sorts and conditions of people. The 
problem of the city, and the problem 
of the village existed in those days as 
it does to-day. Jesus went to cities 
and villages; to the people who lived 
in crowds, and at the heart of the 
movements of the day; and to the peo- 
ple far away in the hamlets on the 
hillside, and in the valley, whose little 
world was the vineyard and the corn- 
field. As He went He had a threefold 
method: that of teaching, preaching, 



98 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. ix. 35-38] 



and healing. Thus He prosecuted His 
Kingly work. 

His teaching of the people consisted 
of interpretations of their own Scrip- 
tures and economy. That was the first 
method of the King; emphasising the 
truth taught by immediate application. 
We have no detailed account of this 
teaching of the general multitudes, but 
occasional illustrations by the record of 
what happened at some particular place. 
Once we are told He went, as His cus- 
tom was, to the Synagogue, and, finding 
the book of the Prophet, He read old 
and perfectly familiar words, giving 
them new life and meaning, teaching 
their deepest intention. 

His preaching consisted of the procla- 
mation of the good news of the King- 
dom of God; or, to put that into other 
words, the good tidings of His own 
work in establishing that Kingdom. He 
was preaching that prophetically only. 
He waited for the Cross ere that great 
evangel could be sent forth in all its 
fulness ; but He went through the cities 
and the villages preaching the Kingdom 
of God; saying to men, God is on the 
Throne ; affirming the fact of the King- 
ship of God. 

The ministry of healing was the 
manifestation of His power to work 
as well as to preach; and such mani- 
festation was, moreover, a revelation of 
the order of the Divine government. 
God is King, and everything that limits 
the sphere of His control must be sub- 
dued to His purpose ; and, therefore, He 
healed disease. We have already seen 
that the miracles of Jesus were not in- 
terferences with law, but restorations of 
law; and that disease is lawlessness. 
Therefore to heal is not to interfere 
with law, but to restore the operation 
of law. In all the miracles of Jesus, 
miracles of physical healing, there was 
a symbolic value, and a spiritual inten- 
tion. Whenever Jesus healed a sick 
person, He said in effect to that person, 
All suffering results from failure to 
yield to the control of our Father; all 
these limitations of life, and this de- 
struction of life, result from rebellion 
against the Kingship of God. Thus, 
doing this threefold work, He went 
about all the cities, and all the villages. 

But now the time had come in the 



mission of the King, when it was 
necessary to appoint fellow-labourers, 
labourers together with Himself. This 
passage reveals the reason for such ap- 
pointment. The work was one in which 
He needed helpers of a very definite 
type labourers; and the need for the 
work was created by compassion in the 
heart of Jesus, which is the deepest 
thing in the heart of God ; and it is that 
which this passage reveals to us. 

Let us state that again in other 
words. The time had come in the work 
of Jesus when He was constrained to 
appoint other labourers who should help 
Him. Humanly speaking, He could not 
overtake His work. He had been 
preaching, teaching, healing; but there 
were so many places He could not 
reach in His human and localised and 
straitened circumstances; and He must 
have men to help Him, for the work 
must be done. Must, because Jesus 
saw the multitudes distressed, scattered 
as sheep without a shepherd. 

O Man of Nazareth, majestic, with 
eyes all love-lit; strange King of men, 
enunciating such an ethic that one's 
soul has been ashamed in its flaming 
glory, what matter about these people, 
why not leave them alone? Why must 
they be cared for? And the answer is, 
"He was moved with compassion." 
The necessity for the salvation of men 
is revealed in that statement. There is 
no reason in man that God should save ; 
the need is born of His own compas- 
sion. No man has any claim upon God. 
Why, then, should men be cared for? 
Why should they not become the prey 
of the ravening wolf, having wandered 
from the fold? It has been said that 
the great work of redemption was the 
outcome of a passion for the righteous- 
ness and holiness of God; that Jesus 
must come and teach and live and 
suffer and die because God is righteous 
and holy. I do not so read the story. 
God could have met every demand of 
His righteousness and holiness by 
handing men over to the doom they 
had brought upon themselves. But 
deepest in the being of God, holding in 
its great energising might, both holi- 
ness and righteousness, is love and 
compassion. God said, according to 
Hosea, "How shall I give thee up, 



99 



[MATT. ix. 3S-38] 



MATTHEW 



Ephraim ? " It is out of the love 
which inspired that wail of the Divine 
heart, that salvation has been provided, 
and our evangel has come. 

"He was moved with compassion." 
That is just a simple lattice-window 
made up of crossing human words. 
Look through it, and you will see the 
flaming glory of the infinite love of the 
infinite God. You will see the birth- 
place of everything that makes for the 
uplifting of man. 

The thoughts of paramount impor- 
tance in this passage are such as are 
suggested by two pronouns. " He " and 
"they." "He jaw, and was moved 
with compassion." "They were dis- 
tressed and scattered, as sheep having 
no shepherd." 

Let us look, then, first at the King 
as here revealed ; secondly, at the King- 
dom as He saw it waiting to be re- 
deemed and realised; and, finally, at 
His purpose and His method. 

The King of Whom we have already 
said so much, was moved with com- 
passion. The word compassion has 
come into our language from the Latin. 
It is, no doubt, the correct word at this 
point, spiritually; and yet the Greek 
word here translated compassion is a 
very remarkable one. It is a word of 
the kind which is largely passing out 
of use to-day, and the passing would 
not appear to be a loss, but rather a 
gain. The Greek word is one of those 
in which emotion is suggested by a 
physical figure. Very literally the 
declaration is that " His bowels were 
moved within Him." By the Greek, 
the bowels were regarded as the seat 
of violent passion, such as anger or 
love. By the Hebrew, they were re- 
garded as the seat of the tender affec- 
tions. Isaac Watts sang a hymn bear- 
ing on this verse, which we have 
changed in most of our hymn-books, 
and yet he was but translating from his 
Greek Testament, 

" With joy we meditate the grace 

Of our High Priest above ; 
His heart is made of tenderness, 
His bowels yearn with love." 

If Isaac Watts is a little out of date, 
he is quite accurate. He translated 
literally, definitely, and positively, from 



this very word here rendered compas- 
sion. Then knowing that the transla- 
tion was insufficient, Isaac Watts moved 
on, and took another word: 

"Touched with a sympathy within, 

He knows our feeble frame; 
He knows what sore temptations 

mean, 
For He hath felt the same." 

Thus on the human level, this picture 
of God is that of a Man Who went into 
the cities, and into the villages, and 
looked at the people; and what He 
saw made His whole inner physical life, 
as the sacramental symbol of the spiri- 
tual, move and burn. We all know 
some little of this; how in certain cir- 
cumstances, in some great overwhelm- 
ing fear, in some sudden sorrow, our 
very physical life, acting in harmony 
with the mental, is filled with pain. 
" He was moved with compassion." He 
was moved to the agony of the physical 
by the pain of the spiritual. 

But that was only sacramental and 
symbolic. What lay behind it all ? Let 
us go back to our translation " He was 
moved with compassion." What is 
compassion? Feeling with, pain with, 
comradeship in sorrow, fellowship in 
agony; an at-one-ment between this 
King and those upon whom He looked, 
culminating in the Cross as to outward 
expression. It existed in the heart of 
God long before the material Cross was 
uplifted; and it expressed itself in the 
suffering of the Son of .God through all 
the years of His sympathy with man 
before He went to that actual Cross. 
He could not see a woman who had 
suffered twelve years of pain but that 
He felt her feebleness. He came so in- 
timately into comradeship and sympathy 
with human life that its pain was His 
pain. Do not ever think of this word 
compassion as though it meant pity 
merely. You can pity people and see 
them die in misery; but He bare with 
them ; He identified Himself with the 
very issue of their pain ; the very issue 
of their sin. That is compassion. 

Then look at the King again. He 
wanted to shepherd these distressed 
ones. That was His main desire. 
" They were distressed and scattered 
as sheep not having a shepherd," and 



100 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. ix. 35-38] 



He wanted to shepherd them. Perhaps 
we cannot quite understand this desire; 
yet every mother appreciates it in some 
measure; the mothers who, seeing the 
neglected children of the slum, yearn 
to mother them all, understand. That 
is God's heart. That is how Jesus 
felt. He wanted to shepherd these peo- 
ple, He wanted to take care of them. 
He wanted to fold them ; He wanted to 
feed them. 

These are the two functions of the 
King. The real King is always folding 
and feeding the sheep. In spiritual 
things the one who folds the sheep is 
the priest, and the one who feeds the 
sheep is the prophet. So that in true 
Kingship there are included the func- 
tions of the priest and the prophet; 
and these were the passions stirred in 
the heart of Jesus by His vision of the 
multitudes. 

But let us turn our eyes from this 
wonderful King, moved with compas- 
sion, a shepherd by nature, desiring the 
folding and feeding of all sheep, and 
look at the Kingdom as He saw it. The 
people at whom He had been looking 
were not all of one class. It cannot 
too often be stated that His view was 
of Humanity, Jesus did not pay special 
attention to the rulers, neither did He 
pay special attention to the people of 
the submerged classes as they came to 
Him, and appealed to Him. He saw all 
sorts and conditions of people. He saw 
the multitudes as sheep, not as goats 
and sheep. The Scriptures never speak 
of men as goats except once, and it is a 
very great question as to whether it is 
not wrong to look upon that as a picture 
of the judgment of individuals. It is 
the picture of a national judgment, and 
the figure applies not to men, but to 
nations. Jesus saw men as sheep out in 
the highways. Every man is in God's 
image. Every human being has, if we 
can but see it, the hall-mark of the 
likeness of God, and He saw in the 
multitudes their natural possibility of 
realising a Divine purpose. If a man 
is lost, if a child shall so wander from 
the pathway as eventually to be lost, it 
will be by not realising the possibility 
of their own lives, and so being lost by 
degeneration and degradation. He saw 
the multitudes as sheep. 



Yes, but He clearly saw their actual 
condition. Here again the Greek words 
are graphic words. They were dis- 
tressed, fleeced, lacerated by the fleec- 
ing, scattered, flung, tossed by violence. 
In these words we have the picture of 
sheep departed from the fold, into the 
midst of wolves; they are seen with 
their fleece torn, half-dead, bleeding 
from wounds, and fainting. This is 
how He saw men and women, because 
they had no shepherd. That is a dread 
and awe-inspiring passage in Ezekiel 
about shepherds who fed themselves in- 
stead of the sheep, shepherds who came 
with no healing to the wounded sheep, 
shepherds who never went to seek lost 
sheep. That is Ezekiel's picture. That 
is how the King saw the people; and 
He had come to do what the shepherds 
had failed to do. He had come to fold 
and feed them. He had come to heal 
them. He had come to seek and save 
that which was lost. He was the 
"Good Shepherd," and "The Good 
Shepherd layeth down His life for the 
sheep." 

Finally, let us notice His purpose and 
His method. His purpose is to be the 
Shepherd, to fold the sheep and to feed 
the sheep. In order to fold the sheep 
He must come into conflict with the foe, 
and He accomplished His victory by 
the purity of His life, and by the in- 
finite passion of His dying. He had 
also come to feed the sheep, that is to 
give sustenance to their neglected life. 

Now the moment had come when the 
King, Who is the Shepherd, was about 
to gather a few more around Himself; 
when He would avail Himself of the 
help of others. What did He do with 
them? He first gave them His vision 
of the multitudes, and then He said, 
" Pray ye therefore the Lord of the 
harvest that He send forth labourers." 
If we are going to do anything that is 
worth doing we must see as He sees. 
Let us say: O Shepherd true, open our 
eyes that we may see as Thou seest. 
And if we see as He sees we shall hear 
Him say to us, " Pray thou the Lord of 
the harvest to thrust forth labourers 
into His harvest." 

In this brief paragraph Jesus makes 
use of two figures, and here again, as 
on other occasions, it looks as though 



101 



[MAM. r. 1-23] 



MATTHEW 



He almost inadvertently confused fig- 
ures, and mixed metaphors. But He 
never really did so. First it is the fig- 
ure of the shepherd and the sheep; and 
then it is the figure of the harvest and 
the labourers. But in these two you 
have the perfect unfolding of two sides 
of the great question. In the sheep and 
the shepherd you see man's need met 
by God. But in the harvest and the 
labourers you see God's need met by 



man. Our Gospel is, "Jehovah is my 
Shepherd." But the Master says to us, 
If that is the Gospel, and if My com- 
passion has given you the Gospel ; now 
look, the fields are white unto harvest. 
That is God's harvest. All those 
sheaves ought to be garnered for Him. 
They are sheaves of harvest which God 
would have gathered and garnered, but 
He needs labourers to gather His white 
harvest. 



MATTHEW X. 1-23 



T)ETWEEN the final charge of the 
Jj last chapter, and the action of the 
King now described, there is a close 
and a very striking connection. It is 
first to be carefully noted that the men 
whom He charged to pray specifically 
for labourers, were those whom He im- 
mediately sent forth to labour. " Pray 
ye," is the first command; "go ye," is 
the next. The men who have learnt to 
look with the eyes of Jesus until they 
feel with the heart of Jesus; and who, 
out of such vision and such feeling, 
begin to pray, are more than half ready 
for the work of bringing in the harvest. 
"Pray," that is the first thing; but 
" go " is the next ; and as surely as He 
says " pray," He says " go." Yet let it 
be remembered that He never says 
"go" until He has said "pray." 

If that fundamental connection be- 
tween the compassion of the King, and 
His commissioning of the twelve is 
recognized, then we may proceed to the 
discovery of the main value of this sec- 
tion. That main value lies in the fact 
that it contains " His commandments." 
Chapter eleven begins, " And it came to 
pass, when Jesus had finished com- 
manding His twelve disciples, He de- 
parted thence to teach and preach in 
their cities." Thus it is at once seen 
that chapter ten consists of the Mas- 
ter's charge to those men whom He 
was about to send out, in co-operation 
with Himself, to do the work which lay 
so heavily upon His heart. In this 
charge the King Himself reveals the 
lines of service, the methods to be 
adopted, and the prayer to be offered. 

So far in the propaganda of the King 
we have considered His enunciation of 



ethics; and have observed His exhibi- 
tion of benefits. Now we see Him 
about to enter upon the great work of 
enforcing His claims; and first He 
sends forth these disciples. Thus they 
become more than disciples; He con- 
stitutes them apostles. This is the first 
time the word is applied to them. Only 
once in Matthew is this word, which 
indicates their relation to Him in spe- 
cific and well-defined service, made use 
of. An apostle is a delegate, the first 
messenger, the one who represents the 
King, whose only business is to repre- 
sent the King, who speaks the word of 
the King, and speaks it with authority 
because he is sent, delegated, the am- 
bassador of the King. 

Let us first make a broad analysis of 
the whole chapter, that we may follow 
its movement, and understand to some 
extent what the King was really doing, 
as He prepared those twelve men and 
sent them forth on their mission. 

The King's outlook was upon the 
work which those whom He appoints 
will have to do to the end of the age. 
Some of the things which He said have 
no application to us; they were only 
for the men who were then with Him. 
Nevertheless there are underlying prin- 
ciples in every part of these charges 
which are of perpetual application. The 
changes which would follow in circum- 
stances and conditions were recognized 
by the King; and in an orderly move- 
ment, perfectly balanced, perfectly ad- 
justed, He gave instructions to the 
apostles for the whole dispensation 
which He was about to initiate. As the 
King stood in the midst of the twelve, 
He looked at them and at the immedi- 



102 



MATTHEW 



EMATT. x. 1-23] 



ate present; but He also looked with 
those clear, far-seeing eyes into the 
near decades; and still further He 
looked down all the centuries; and 
speaking to the first apostles, He deliv- 
ered a charge which in its comprehen- 
siveness and finality is applicable to 
the whole movement of His enterprise, 
until His second advent. He declared 
the abiding principles, which must ob- 
tain through all the ages; and He de- 
scribed the changing conditions, which 
would necessitate changing methods. 

This charge divided the age into 
three distinctly-marked epochs. In the 
first four verses we read of how our 
Lord called these disciples and named 
them apostles; and we have the names 
of the twelve. Then from verse five to 
the end of verse fifteen we have the 
first section of the charge. The fif- 
teenth verse reads, "Verily I say unto 
you, It shall be more tolerable for the 
land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the 
day of judgment, than for that city," 
that is for any city to which these men 
would come and would be refused; 
against such a city He charged them to 
shake the dust from their feet. This is 
one movement, one division of the 
discourse. 

At verse sixteen it is evident that our 
Lord lifted His eyes and looked further 
on, and saw how His apostles, His mes- 
sengers, these very men, would pres- 
ently enter upon, a new phase in their 
work, and have to face new difficulties; 
He said, "Behold I send you forth as 
sheep in the midst of wolves." That 
was the description of a new movement, 
quite different from the one described 
in verses five to fifteen, as we shall see 
more clearly presently. It ended with 
the strange words of verse twenty- 
three, " But when they persecute you 
in this city, flee into the next: for 
verily I say unto you, Ye shall not have 
gone through the cities of Israel, till 
the Son of Man be come." There ends 
the second movement in the great 
charge. 

Then begins the third, which com- 
mences with the words, "A disciple is 
not above his teacher, nor a servant 
above his lord ;" and runs to the end of 
the chapter. 

Thus, in this one discourse, the King 



referred to three distinct epochs; the 
first division, verses five to fifteen, ex- 
actly describing the work of the apos j 
ties from the day when He ordained 
them, until the day of His own cruci- 
fixion. It had to do with their immedi- 
ate work. All His instructions in that 
division were applicable to the men 
whom He sent forth, while He still 
lived amongst them, until the day of 
His crucifixion. With His crucifixion, 
the order initiated ended, and save in 
fundamental principles, the commission 
of those verses has no application to us. 
Immediately following these instruc- 
tions, He continued, " Behold I send 
you forth as sheep in the midst of 
wolves." Now, these men knew prac- 
tically nothing of persecution until after 
the crucifixion of Jesus. He was re- 
jected, but they were treated with re- 
spect, even by the crowds. The crowds 
argued with them, tried to understand 
what relation they bore to Jesus, asked 
them what Christ meant by certain 
things ; but did not persecute them. He 
kept them to the end, bore the brunt of 
persecution, gathered it into His own 
heart, and they knew nothing of it. 
But when the rough and rugged Cross 
was revealed, persecution broke upon 
them from their own nation In view 
of this He charged them that when they 
were persecuted in one city they were 
to flee to another, saying, "Ye shall 
not have gone through the cities of 
Israel, till the Son of Man be come." 
In these words He was evidently re- 
ferring to His coming in judgment at 
the fall of Jerusalem, which took place 
in the year A. D. 70. Thus the second 
period ended with the fall of Jerusalem. 
It was then that the Son of Man came 
in the sense in which He meant here. 
A very remarkable fact of history 
throws light upon this; never from the 
day of Jerusalem's fall until now has a 
Christian believer been scourged in a 
Jewish synagogue. From the moment 
when Jerusalem passed out of human 
history as a commonwealth, her direct 
persecution of Christ ended. Alas, and 
alas, that Christians have persecuted 
Jews, but the Jew has never persecuted 
the Christian since the fall of Jerusa- 
lem. Thus in the second movement the 
King was dealing with the new condi- 



103 



[MATT. x. 1-23] 



MATTHEW 



tions of His apostles' service, following 
His crucifixion and continuing until the 
fall of Jerusalem; and again, save in 
fundamental principles, the instructions 
are not applicable to us. 

Then He saw still further down the 
centuries, all that would follow the fall 
of Jerusalem, to the end of the age; 
and in view of that period He began to 
talk about the relationship of His ser- 
vants to Himself, going back to the 
word disciple, and no longer using the 
word apostle, thus including in the final 
movement of His instruction all the 
company of His children who will be 
His servants until He come again. " A 
disciple is not above his teacher;" and 
so on, in that wonderful passage in 
which He revealed this supreme truth, 
that after Israel's nationality ceased, 
and His Church should become the in- 
strument for the proclaiming of His 
Gospel, her power would consist in her 
immediate identification with Himself; 
and her mission be that of constant 
co-operation with His purpose. 

That is, of course, only a broad sur- 
vey of these commandments of the 
King. We shall need to consider them 
more carefully ; but before we do so, 
let us notice that the change of condi- 
tions created by the crucifixion of 
Jesus, and again by the fall of Jeru- 
salem are self-evident. The position of 
these men was greatly changed after 
the crucifixion of Jesus; and it was as 
greatly changed again when the prin- 
cipal force in persecuting them was 
broken. It is perfectly clear that the 
King foresaw these things, and that He 
understood perfectly the whole move- 
ment of the years that stretched before 
Him. Let us recognize the perfect wis- 
dom and sufficiency of the King. One 
of the profoundest reasons for trusting 
Christ to-day in the matter of all Chris- 
tian service is that here and elsewhere 
He revealed His perfect knowledge of 
conditions which no man could fore- 
cast, and which yet have transpired ex- 
actly as He foretold them. 

Now let us go back to a more par- 
ticular examination of the first two of 
these movements. We will notice the 
immediate application of what He said 
to the men who stood around Him as 
to their work until His crucifixion ; and 



then the application of the next words, 
which He spoke to them concerning the 
period after His Cross until the de- 
struction of Jerusalem. After consider- 
ing the immediate application of these 
things, we will consider two principles 
of permanent value which bear their 
message to us. 

~ As to the first period, we first notice 
the sphere of their operations. They 
were not to go to the Gentiles, they 
were not to go to the Samaritans. 
They were to " Go rather to the lost 
sheep of the House of Israel." It was 
a limited sphere. Ere He ascended all 
this was abrogated, as He said, " Go ye 
into all the world, and preach the Gos- 
pel to the whole creation." 

Notice further, that He charged them 
that came into a. city of Israel, being 
forbidden to go to a Gentile city, or a 
city of the Samaritan, they were to seek 
out those who were worthy. If the 
house were worthy they were to enter; 
if not, they were not to enter. That is 
the exact opposite of what we are to do 
to-day; the messenger to-day seeks the 
house of the lost and the unworthy. So 
that the charges He gave to these men, 
are not the charges He gives to us. 

Yet again, notice the message these 
men were to deliver; that "The King- 
dom of Heaven is at hand;" that the 
Kingdom was close because the King 
was there; that the King, long looked 
for, hoped for, waited for, was amongst 
them; that if they did but turn to Him 
they would find the Messiah. It was a 
peculiar message. Not a word about 
forgiveness of sin, not a word concern- 
ing the filling of the Holy Spirit, not a 
word concerning the things which are 
our special message and glory. Their 
message was Messianic, but not fully 
interpreted, and the proofs they were 
to give evidenced the divinity of their 
mission, " Heal the sick, raise the dead, 
cleanse the lepers, cast out demons." 
It is because men have lost the sense 
of the proportion of our Master's 
orderly speech that, to-day, some imag- 
ine that all this is still our work. This 
is not our work. We have no commis- 
sion to heal the sick miraculously. If 
we have a commission to heal the sick 
miraculously we have also a commission 
to raise the dead, for the two things are 



104 



. MATTHEW 



[MATT. x. 1-23] 



closely connected. Every man who 
claims that he has a commission to heal 
the sick, must, in order to convince of 
his authority, be able to raise the dead 
also. We are not now discussing the 
question of divine healing. All healing 
is divine; the devil never heals. It is 
possible for God to heal us without 
medicine, without aid, but we have no 
warrant for claiming healing at the 
caprice of our will, but only as we use 
the means that God has given to us. 
This commission to heal the sick, and 
raise the dead, and cleanse the lepers, 
and cast out demons, was a commis- 
sion to those early disciples, their cre- 
dentials of power, because they were 
preaching the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. 
The whole was withdrawn when the 
Spirit came, and made the Church the 
spiritual messenger of the Spiritual 
Kingdom, which finally is to unfold and 
manifest and realise the material also. 

Then notice the methods they were to 
adopt. They were to make no physical 
provision for themselves. They were 
to be dependent upon those to whom 
they came. They were to take no gold 
nor silver nor brass. That command 
was definitely set aside by our Lord in 
the words chronicled by Luke ; " When 
I sent you forth without purse, and 
wallet, and shoes, lacked ye anything? 
And they said, Nothing. And He said 
unto them, But now, he that hath a 
purse, let him take it, and likewise a 
wallet: and he that hath none, let him 
sell his cloak, and buy a sword." The 
necessity for provision presently be- 
came part of the work of these men. 
In this first commission He was 
speaking of a local and limited min- 
istry which they were immediately to 
exercise. 

Then the result of their coming was 
to be that they were to pronounce 
peace, a message of joy and gladness. 
But if the house refused, in the dust 
they cast behind them their curse re- 
mained upon that house. All that has 
changed now. 

Has He changed His method because 
this earlier method failed ? No ; this is 
a mistake we all often make. He ful- 
filled His first intentions by these early 
methods and then changed them. 

In the next section also we find words 



which were of immediate application. 
First He said, "Behold I send you 
forth as sheep in the midst of wolves." 
There have been other eras of persecu- 
tion in the Church, but never from the 
day in which Jerusalem fell has there 
been a systematic persecution of Chris- 
tians by Jews. That was a manifesta-- 
tion peculiar to the period immediately 
following His crucifixion. Another was 
that of the destruction of family peace. 
As the evangel came into the families 
of the Jews, and certain therein be- 
lieved, strife followed in peculiar form 
and ferocity, such as had never been 
known. Then was to come the Spirit's 
witness under circumstances of trial, 
the peculiar witness of defence. 

Finally they were to haste through 
the cities of Israel because the coming 
of the Son of Man was imminent, and 
unless they hasted they would not have 
passed through the cities of Israel be- 
fore He came. Here again is a fact to 
be carefully noted. Never since the 
destruction of Jerusalem has Israel had 
a city anywhere on earth. She has 
gathered into the cities of the Gentiles 
and the people have made their power 
felt, but to-day Israel has no city to 
call its own. Jerusalem itself, "the 
city of the great King," whose very 
dust is precious to the Jew, is the one 
spot in all the world he would fain pos- 
sess. It is the one city in all the world 
that those who possess wish they did 
not. And yet those who hate it cannot 
lose it, and those who want it cannot 
gain it. Here is a problem for the 
politicians, in the face of which we 
must take God into account. There are 
more Jews gathered together in New 
York than ever were gathered together 
in Jewish cities in later times, but it 
is not their city; they are aliens among 
the nations. 

What is meant here by the coming of 
the Son of Man? Some hold that the 
Second Advent of Jesus is past; that 
He actually came in Person at the time 
of the fall of Jerusalem; and was seen 
of some few faithful souls. There may 
be an element of truth in that view, 
but that does not exhaust the teaching 
of the New Testament concerning the 
Second Advent. He had often come 
before; He had talked with Abraham, 



105 



[MAT?, x. 24-42] 



MATTHEW 



He had spoken to men in the past as 
the Angel of Jehovah, and who shall 
say that in His Personal Form He did 
not guide the Roman legions as they 
took Jerusalem? It is quite certain 
there can be no explanation of the 
coming of the Son of Man in this case 
except in the sense of judgment. His 
coming at the fall of Jerusalem, ended 
the cities of Israel, and this accounted 
for His urgency and haste in driving 
His apostles out to tell the story of the 
King and the Kingdom. 

But if these two sections are very 
largely applicable to the days we have 
referred to, there are permanent prin- 
ciples in each. In the first section none 
of the things we have mentioned apply 
to us. But in the words, " Freely ye 
received, freely give;" we touch a deep 
permanent truth which never changes. 
It was His word to those early dis- 
ciples who went with the first procla- 
mation of His Messiahship; it was His 
word to those whom He sent out as 
sheep among wolves; it is His word to 
us, " Freely ye received, freely give." 

It is the law of Christian service as 
to its disposition, rather than in its 
amount. The word " freely " does not 
mean abundantly. Jesus does not say, 
"Abundantly ye have received, abun- 
dantly give." The word signifies rather, 
" Gratuitously ye have received, gratu- 
itously give." Our giving in service is 
to be on the pattern of God's giving to 
us. We cannot buy anything from 
God; we are not to expect men to buy 
anything from us in this sacred ser- 
vice. God is good to us not for gain to 
Himself, but out of His grace, out of 
His passion for giving. Now as Jesus 
said to His workers in that earliest 
period, so He says to us, "Freely ye 



received, freely give." Our service is 
not to be for success or profit, but for 
the sake of those we serve, expecting 
nothing in return. This is the law of 
Christian service. Freely we are to 
pour out of our best in sacrifice, in 
order to be in true co-operation with 
Him. 

Then again in the second period, we 
find a word of immediate application, 
and of abiding principle ; " Be ye there- 
fore wise as serpents, and harmless as 
doves." " Wise " means sagacious, not 
sly; it is the quality of the serpent in 
its wariness for self-defence. " Harm- 
less" means simple, or as Luther al- 
most perfectly translated it, without 
fault, without flaw, simple and undevi- 
ating in life. That is a strange com- 
bination, but it is a perfect revelation. 
It is impossible to be wise as serpents 
save as we are simple as doves, for the 
serpent's wisdom ends when it becomes 
vicious. It is impossible to be harmless 
as a dove without the wisdom of a ser- 
pent, for the dove's simplicity ends 
when it becomes careless. 

But we can have the perfect com- 
bination, because He says, " I send 
you;" and if He send us, He will give 
us His wisdom, His harmlessness. Let 
us see to it that we are about His busi- 
ness, ready to do His will, then we can 
lean back upon all that He is, and ap- 
propriate it for our work. 

The teaching here for us in these 
first movements may be simply stated. 

Our authority is His; and proceeds 
out of His compassion for the unfit. 

Our service must be like His ; gratu- 
itous, free. 

Our attitudes are to be worthy of 
Him; we must be wise with His wis- 
dom, simple with His simplicity. 



MATTHEW X. 24-42 



IN this section we have words which 
have direct application to ourselves. 
Just as in the great intercessory prayer 
of Jesus, recorded in the seventeenth 
chapter of John, He included us with 
those who were then round about Him, 
so here He included all those who 
should share in His toil, until the 



consummation of the age at His second 
advent. 

This, then, is a section of supreme 
interest to us, and of supreme helpful- 
ness. The area of application widens. 
This is indicated by the instruction 
given to those to whom the Lord began 
to speak when He said, "A disciple is 



106 



MATTHEW 



[MA??, x. 24-42] 



not above his teacher, nor a servant 
above his lord." Keep these two words 
in mind disciple, servant. Then go to 
the, end, and in verse forty-one, where, 
when dealing with that great subject 
of identification, He said, " He that re- 
ceiveth a prophet in the name of a 
prophet shall receive a prophet's re- 
ward ; and he that receiveth a righteous 
man in the name of a righteous man 
shall receive a righteous man's reward." 
These are words descriptive of those to 
whom He speaks in this final section 
not apostles exclusively, but disciples 
also. There cannot be an apostle who 
is not a disciple, but there may be a 
disciple who is not an apostle. The 
apostle is the first messenger of the 
King. That is the distinct office of the 
apostle. The apostle always breaks up 
new ground, flashes light into darkness 
that has never before received it; and 
we thank God for those who have been 
successful in that long succession of 
apostolic toil. 

But the apostles are not the only 
workers in the orderliness of Christ's 
Church; they do not exhaust the line 
of service. " He gave some to be apos- 
tles; and some, prophets; and some, 
evangelists; and some, pastors and 
teachers." Even these do not exhaust 
the line of service, for, following the 
word of that Ephesian declaration we 
read, He gave these "for the perfect- 
ing of the saints, unto the work of min- 
istering." That is to say, the whole 
Church is in the ministry, and those 
gifted within the Church are gifted in 
order that they may perfect the Church 
for the doing of this work. So not the 
apostle only, not the prophet only, not 
the evangelist only, not the pastor and 
teacher only, is in the ministry, but 
every disciple, every servant of Jesus. 
When any man receives the gift of the 
apostle, that constitutes him the first 
messenger of the King; or of the 
prophet, that sends him like a flame of 
fire through the land; or of the evan- 
gelist, that bids him go forth in wooing 
tenderness to bring men to Christ; or 
of the pastor and teacher, that enables 
him to feed the flock of God, and take 
the oversight of all sacred and holy 
work ; all are in order to find and equip 
disciples and servants for ministry. 



Every disciple is called into fellowship 
with Jesus in His work; and standirg 
here among these first twelve, who were 
to be apostles, He spoke to them, and 
through them, to the whole company of 
His disciples; and in this wonderful 
section He teaches us supreme and fun- 
damental lessons about our relationship 
with Hun in service. The work to be 
done is not described in detail here, but 
it is inferentially seen. It is that of 
confessing Christ before men. That is 
the Church's work. It is all-inclusive. 
When we have said that, we have said 
everything we can say about the apos- 
tle, the evangelist, the prophet, the pas- 
tor and teacher, and the disciple and 
servant. Whatever our gift may be 
within the Church, or as a member of 
the Church, our work is to confess 
Christ before men. Confession does not 
mean merely saying, He is mine, and I 
am His. That is a blessed thing to say, 
and, if only all disciples would say that 
to men, multitudes would be born into 
the Kingdom of God. But by confession 
we are to reveal Him, to flash His 
glory, to make Him known. The 
Church of Jesus Christ is not consti- 
tuted in order that it may discuss 
philosophies or indulge in speculations. 
It is created to confess Christ, and it 
never ought to rest for one moment, 
until the last weary, sin-bound soul, in 
the furthest region of the world, has 
heard His evangel, has beheld His 
glory. 

The first movement of this chapter 
had to do with men who were going to 
be sent away from Jesus, though, of 
course, identified with Him in sym- 
pathy. In the second movement, when 
they were to go as sheep in the midst 
of wolves, and yet bound to Him by 
the Holy Spirit, they were to have no 
fear when they stood upon their de- 
fence. This last movement becomes 
more gracious and tender, more search- 
ing and fiery; and the whole theme is 
that of the identification of the worker 
with Jesus, and all that it means to 
him as he goes forth. 

First, our Lord shows what the result 
of identification with Himself 'will be in 
the personal position of the workers 
(verses 24-28) ; secondly, what the re- 
sult of identification with Himself will 



107 



[MATT. x. 24-42] 



MATTHEW 



be, in the matter of the workers' rela- 
tionship to God (verses 29-33) ; finally, 
what the result of the workers' identifi- 
cation with Himself will be in the mat- 
ter of the workers' relationship to men 
who are outside, and to whom they are 
sent (verses 34-42). 

Let us take the first of these the 
worker in identification with Christ. 
The Lord first stated the fact of identi- 
fication. He declared the issue of 
identification. Next He spoke a word 
of assurance based upon the fact of 
identification. Further He uttered the 
commission which is the outcome of 
identification. Finally He revealed the 
one and only fear that need result from 
identification. 

The fact of identification is revealed 
in the statement, "A disciple is not 
above his teacher, nor a servant above 
his lord. It is enough for the disciple 
that he be (or become) as his teacher, 
and the servant as his lord." One need 
hardly say anything here by way of 
exposition. This statement of the fact 
that the worker is identified with the 
Lord, is a wonderful statement, thrilling 
with grace. We readily bow to the first 
position, "The disciple is not above his 
teacher, nor a servant above his mas- 
ter." The word servant here is bond- 
servant, slave, and means not merely a 
servant as one who renders service, but 
a servant as one who is the property of 
his master, and therefore renders ser- 
vice. That is the word that runs 
through the New Testament as descrip- 
tive of service. Thus our Lord intro- 
duces us to the fact of our relationship 
to Him. We are His disciples, learn- 
ing. We are His bond-slaves, bound to 
obey Him. We are therefore not above 
Him. 

If the statement had ended there, we 
should reverently have bowed the head 
and worshipped. But He said another 
thing, a very wonderful thing, a thing 
no other master ever said, and no other 
lord ever said, " It is enough for the 
disciple that he become as his teacher, 
and the servant as his lord." By this 
word the King teaches us that, in all 
our service for Him, He reckons us as 
identified with Himself, as going in His 
place, for at the conclusion He said, 
"He that receiveth you receiveth Me, 



and he that receiveth Me receiveth Him 
that sent Me." We are His disciples, 
He is our Teacher, and He is above us ; 
but His teaching is to make us become 
as He is, and all He is, is ours in this 
matter of service. Thus He brings us 
into the place of perfect identification 
with Himself. 'The bond-servant, bound 
to obey, because the property of the 
King, is yet as he goes forth, identi- 
fied with his Lord, with his Lord's roy- 
alty, his Lord's dignity, his Lord's 
authority, delegated by the King to 
speak for the King, in the name and 
nature and the power of the King. 

Next we are taught the issue of that 
identification; "If they have called the 
master of the house Beelzebub, how 
much more them of his household ! " 
That is to say, the Master has been 
misunderstood, the Master has been 
misinterpreted, and we must not ex- 
pect any other experience. If the Mas- 
ter has not been able to make clear to 
certain minds the truths He has been 
teaching, we must remember that we 
have to face the same difficulty. No 
doubt the Lord knew that there lurked 
in the mind of these twelve men the 
thoughts that are so often with us 
the thought of their inability, the 
thought of the tremendous work He 
was sending them forth to do, and they 
trembled. They were afraid of the 
forces that were moving against them, 
and He said in effect; Yes, you will 
have difficulties, you will be misunder- 
stood, you will be misrepresented, but 
ever remember this is the necessary 
issue of identification. 

In view of that He uttered the word 
of assurance, " Fear them not there- 
fore: for there is nothing covered, that 
shall not be revealed; and hid, that 
shall not be known." Here our Lord 
did not mean that the evil secrets of 
the hearts of evil men were going to be 
uncovered. That is also true, but here 
there is another application. It is as 
though He had said; Do not be afraid 
of difficulties which are in front of 
you; men will misunderstand and 
misinterpret you as they have mis- 
understood and misinterpreted Me; 
but do not be afraid; the covered 
thing you want to make known must 
be made known sooner or later; the 



108 



MATTHEW 



[MAT*, x. 24-42] 



thing that is hidden, that you strive 
to make real, must be revealed sooner 
or later. He said to these men and to 
us in effect; You are going out against 
terrible odds; I have been called Beel- 
zebub; Men have attributed My works 
to demons, and My words to satanic 
agency; You are not going to be un- 
derstood any better than I have been; 
but do not be afraid, the truth must 
triumph; the covered thing that you 
cannot make men see, must be seen at 
last; the hidden thing you desire to 
bring out into the light, must come out 
into the liffht at last. It was a great 
word of assurance. 

Now mark the commission and it is 
this commission, flinging its light back 
upon the former consideration, that ex- 
plains the previous word " What I tell 
you in the darkness" that is the cov- 
ered thing "speak ye in the light: 
and what ye hear in the ear" whis- 
pered that is the hidden thing "pro- 
claim upon the house-tops." In other 
words, the King said; You are to be 
acquainted with the covered things, and 
the hidden things, the things not seen 
by the rulers of this world, the things 
not discovered by human philosophers, 
of this or any other age ; the things that 
the wise and prudent never knew; and 
your work is a twofold work; you are 
first to listen while I whisper them to 
you, and then to mount the house-top 
and proclaim them to men. That is the 
real order of Christian service. No 
man has anything to say worth saying 
to a congregation who has not been 
alone and waited while the Lord 
whispered secrets to him. This is our 
commission, "What I tell you in the 
darkness, speak ye in the light." Note 
the change here. He had constantly 
been telling them not to tell. He told 
them to tell the vision to no man until 
the Son of Man should be glorified. 
They were secret things which He told 
them in those days of preparation. 
Such was the attitude of the Lord dur- 
ing the days of His flesh; but the day 
was coming when they were to tell the 
secret, to flash the light. That is our 
work to-day. 

Then came the final word here, as to 
their personal relationship. . You have 
only one thing to fear, said the Lord. 



You need not fear these men who do 
not understand when a hidden thing is 
revealed, and who, when the light 
flashes, will become angry. Ignorance 
will merge into hostility when light 
rebukes the sin which resulted from 
ignorance. 

And did our King ever say anything 
more thrilling with dignity than this, 
" Be not afraid of them which kill the 
body, but are not able to kill the soul " ? 
There is no utterance more vibrant with 
victory. If a man Mils the body that 
is the utmost he can do; and the Lord 
said, that by comparison, that is a small 
thing. Presently this King went to the 
Cross without faltering, without flinch- 
ing, with regal bearing, so that the men 
who condemned Him look for all time 
mean and contemptible in His presence. 
He went to the Cross in the power of 
that philosophy. Beyond the limits of 
human power stretch the infinite reali- 
ties. He said, Do not be afraid, there 
is a spiritual entity which they cannot 
touch. 

But there is One to fear. By some 
strange perversion there are those who 
say that Jesus here meant the devil. 
Satan has no power to fling soul and 
body into Gehenna, and we are never 
told from Genesis to Revelation to fear 
the devil. We are always told to fear 
God. Men may destroy the body, but 
there is One Who can take hold of the 
body and the spirit, and condemn them 
to lie place of rubbish and ruin. Fear 
Him! 

Then immediately, and by a change 
as startling as it is sudden, Jesus pro- 
ceeded to discuss the relation of the 
worker to God, the outcome of identifi- 
cation with Himself. There is an inter- 
esting merging here of the two sections. 
The last closed by charging the dis- 
ciples that in service only one fear is 
necessary or warranted, and that is the 
fear of God. Now carefully note the 
sequence. He first tells them the truth 
about the God Whom they are warned 
to fear, by giving two very simple illus- 
trations. First, He is always with a 
sparrow when it dies; secondly, He 
numbers the hairs of our -heads. Al- 
ways with the sparrow. Yes, do not 
spoil this quotation by saying that Jesus 
meant that not one of them shall fall 



109 



[MAW. x. 24-42] 



MATTHEW 



to the ground -without the Father's 
knowledge. He did not say that. A 
Scotch commentator, usually to be abso- 
lutely trusted, in his commentary puts 
it thus, " Not one of them shall fall on 
the ground without your Father" and 
then he puts in brackets, " That is 
without His permission," and by that 
parenthesis spoils his exposition. The 
King said that God is with the dying 
sparrow ! 

And the hairs of your head are num- 
bered. That is a passage out of which 
some would-be clever men have found 
great amusement. They have said, Do 
you suppose that God counts the num- 
ber of hairs in a man's head? Jesus 
never said so. He said God numbers 
them. Counting is a human process. 
Numbering is more than counting. It 
is attaching a value to every one, al- 
most labelling each; a far more won- 
derful thing than counting. Jesus was 
showing that God is in the infinitely 
little as well as in the infinitely great, 
and when the tired man at his work 
passes his hand across his brow to 
brush away the perspiration and just 
one hair goes with it, God knows! Do 
not be afraid, fear God, He is very 
tender, very gracious, very loving. 
Our Lord here charges us to fear, in 
order that we may be fearless; He 
charges upon us the fearlessness that 
grows out of fear. Dread Him, and 
Him alone, Who is able to cast the soul 
and body into Gehenna. But does He 
cast soul and body into Gehenna? It 
depends. The sparrow that fulfils the 
purpose of its being, He gives a nest in 
which to die, and the nest is His own 
soft and infinite Presence. Do not be 
afraid slavishly, only fear Him because 
He is right. 

" Fear Him, ye saints, and ye will then 
Have nothing else to fear." 

So God is here revealed in all His 
tenderness, and our relationship to Him 
is made plain. 

Then notice what follows in close 
connection. " Every one therefore who 
shall confess Me before men, him will 
I confess before My Father Who is in 
heaven." There is a little preposition 
in the Greek New Testament which is 



omitted in translation, but our revisers 
have put it in the margin. What Jesus 
said was this, " Every one therefore 
who shall confess in Me before men, in 
Him will I also confess before My 
Father." But there is no such prepo- 
sition in the other part of the state- 
ment" But whosoever shall deny Me " 
not in Me '"before men, him will I 
also deny," not in him "before My 
Father Who is in heaven." Therein is 
revealed the difference between identi- 
fication and separation. It is our work 
to confess in Christ, in the sphere of 
His life, to make Him the whole fact. 
" Who shall confess in Me before men, 
in him," says Jesus, " I will confess 
before My Father." That man stands 
before My Father in Me and I in him. 
Identification in confession on earth is 
identification in confession in heaven. 
Whenever we go forth and confess the 
truth in Christ, we are standing in 
Him, hidden and secure. While we are 
doing that, He is standing in us before 
the Throne confessing in us there, so 
that while men see Him in us, God sees 
us in Hun. 

Identification with Christ is a great 
responsibility as well as a great privi- 
lege. If we deny Him, then we are 
separate from Him, and He, in separa- 
tion, denies us before His Father Who 
is in heaven. 

There remain the last few words in 
which the relation of those in identifi- 
cation with Christ to the men of the 
world is stated. There are some who 
will refuse us; our coming will create 
variance, and foes, and a sword ; but 
we are not to forget that in the pres- 
ence of differences created by that 
variance and that sword and those foes, 
we must be worthy of Him. We must 
love Him more than husband, wife, 
father, mother, child. We must take 
up our cross and follow Him. 

And then, by a sudden transition, the 
King speaks as though standing out in 
the far distance welcoming the workers. 
Mark the words, " He that findeth his 
life shall lose it; and he that loseth his 
life for My sake shall find it." Oh, to 
meet Him and to hear Him say, You 
lost your life for Me, find it I 



110 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xr. 1-193 



MATTHEW XI. 1-19 



HAVING charged and sent forth 
His disciples on their first work, 
the King went forward with His own 
work of teaching and preaching in en- 
forcement of His claims. 

His path was now beset with new 
difficulties, and the attitude of His ene- 
mies was marked by increasing oppo- 
sition. In this chapter some of these 
things are vividly revealed. It is one 
of general survey in which different 
aspects of the obstacles confronting His 
work are brought before us in the reve- 
lation of the different attitudes of mind 
with which He had to deal, as He went 
forth upon His work. They are all 
typical. The same attitudes still con- 
front His disciples as they go forward 
to service. 

Let us first glance at this section in 
rough outline. In verses two to fifteen 
we have the story of John, in which 
the perplexity of the loyal-hearted is 
evident. 

Then, at verse sixteen there begins 
the second section of the chapter, which 
is a very brief one, occupying four 
verses only. In this section we see the 
unreasonableness of His age. 

In the third section, beginning at 
verse twenty and ending at verse 
twenty-four, we are brought face to 
face with the fact of the impenitence 
of the cities which He had visited. 
He names Chorazin, Bethsaida, and 
Capernaum. 

At verse twenty-five begins the final 
passage in which we meet with quite 
another class of persons, which the 
King described as babes. 

Four classes are thus revealed, and 
so four aspects of the opposition and 
difficulty which the King encountered. 
In each of these we see the perfection 
of His method. The loyal-hearted, who 
was perplexed, He corrected and vindi- 
cated. The unreasonable He committed 
to the judgment of time. The impeni- 
tent He cursed. The babes He called 
to Himself for rest 

First let us consider this story of 
John. A great many have attempted 
to defend John from what they .seem to 
think a lapse in faith and confidence in 



the King Whose herald he was. In 
attempting to defend John from this 
supposed lapse of faith, it has been 
suggested that he sent his disciples be- 
cause his disciples were wavering, and 
he knew that if they came into contact 
'with Jesus, and had His answer, they 
would be re-assured. While there may 
be an element of truth in the sugges- 
tion, when John sent the question, there 
can be little doubt that he was 
strangely perplexed; it was a question 
not of disloyalty but of perplexity. 
Some have attempted to account for the 
question by saying that John, after the 
thrilling excitement of preaching to 
thousands, and being now in prison, 
was like Elijah under the juniper tree, 
disheartened. That however is hardly 
likely. John was too accustomed to 
loneliness to be disloyal because within 
prison walls. His hard and rugged life 
in the wilderness had probably made 
him quite independent of the soft rai- 
ment and luxury of kings' houses; and 
one cannot believe there was a tremor 
in his courage. His question was rather 
an evidence of the continuity of his 
courage. The thing that surprised him 
was that Jesus was not doing exactly 
what he thought He was going to do. 
He neither doubted nor faltered in his 
convictions about right, but he doubted 
and faltered as to the method of the 
Master. Let us therefore look at John 
and Jesus, and then at Jesus and John ; 
that is to say, let us take first the ques- 
tion of John and the answer of Christ; 
and, secondly, Christ's vindication of 
John, after John's disciples had gone 
back with their answer. 

In order to understand the question 
which John sent by his disciples, we 
must place the works of Jesus into con- 
trast with what John had said of Him 
before He began His public ministry. 
John had been an almost fierce ascetic, 
thundering against the sin of his age. 
He had shaken off the dust of his feet 
against the cities, and had gone into 
the wilderness; and by that wonderful 
attraction of a man with a living mes- 
sage, he had drawn multitudes after 
him. There on the banks of the Jordan 



111 



[MAT*, xi. 1-19] 



MATTHEW 



this rough, rugged, magnificent man, 
the final prophet of the Hebrew econ- 
omy, had thundered against the sins of 
his time, had singled out from the 
crowds about him, the ring-leaders who 
were seducing the people from loyalty 
to God, and had called them a gener- 
ation of vipers. Having denounced sin, 
he had spoken of the coming King in a 
wonderful description : " Whose fan is 
in His hand, and He will thoroughly 
cleanse His threshing-floor; and He 
will gather His wheat into the garner, 
but the chaff He will burn up with 
unquenchable fire." This was magnifi- 
cent and majestic language, describing 
the King as a great and mighty re- 
former, breaking down abuse, sweeping 
out oppression, gathering precious 
things, and blasting evil things as with 
thunder-bolts. John in prison inquired 
about the King; and the prophetic fire 
was still burning within him, the pas- 
sion for righteousness was still like a 
blaze in his heart. They told him that 
Jesus -had gathered a handful of men, 
had gone up into the mountains, and 
had been talking to them; that He had 
healed a leper; that He seemed to be 
doing gentle, sweet, loving things. So 
far there had been no word of judg- 
ment. So far no woe had fallen from 
His lips. His was a mission of mercy, 
not of judgment; and John in prison 
was strangely perplexed. Abuses were 
everywhere; lightning was needed to 
blast them ; and He was healing men. 
Men had turned their back upon the 
Divine government; they should have 
been dealt with in judgment; and He 
was preaching good news. John thought 
He would have smitten the oppressor 
to death ; and He was singing the song 
of the Gospel. Out of the perplexity 
of his heart he sent his disciples hur- 
riedly to Him, with the blunt and hon- 
est question, "Art Thou He that com- 
eth, or look we for another ? " 

Now carefully observe the Master's 
method with such perplexity of the 
loyal. Jesus said to his disciples, " Go 
and tell John the things which ye hear 
and see; the blind receive their sight, 
and the lame walk, the lepers are 
cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead 
are raised up, and the poor have good 
tidings preached to them." If we are 



surprised at the question of John we 
are more surprised at the answer of 
Jesus. But we miss the whole point if 
we do not notice that He linked the 
story of His works with a great pro- 
phetic word which John, who was of 
the very spirit of the prophets, would 
understand. When the answer came 
back in the words of Jesus to John, he 
must have found in it a new interpre- 
tation of the mission of the King. The 
last thing Jesus said was, "The poor 
have good tidings preached to them." 
This was a quotation from the great 
prophecy of Isaiah, and from that por- 
tion of it which He had already read in 
the Synagogue as He entered upon this 
very work that was causing John per- 
plexity (Isaiah Ixi. 1, 2). When Jesus 
read that in the Synagogue at His in- 
duction, He did not read the whole 
statement, but stopped before the last 
clause, " the day of -vengeance of our 
God," ending with the words, "to pro- 
claim the acceptable year of the Lord." 
He it is Who proclaims the accep- 
table year of our Lord. He it is Who 
will proclaim the day of vengeance of 
our God. He has never proclaimed it 
yet. In the Bible there is only a 
comma between the two, and that 
comma indicates a measurement al- 
ready of over nineteen hundred years. 
But the proclamation will be completed : 
" This Jesus, Who was received up from 
you into heaven, shall so come in like 
manner as ye beheld Him going into 
heaven." " He shall appear the second 
time apart from sin, to them that wait 
for Him, unto salvation." He Who 
came to usher in the day of the ac- 
ceptable year of our Lord, must come 
to usher in the day of vengeance of our 
God. When John's disciples came back 
and told him what Jesus did, that He 
was making the blind to see, the lame 
to walk, raising the dead, and giving 
them life, he knew that He was ful- 
filling the ancient prophecy. He would 
turn back to it, and would see that the 
first part of the Messianic mission was 
the preaching of the acceptable year of 
our Lord; he would come to under- 
stand that he had not been wrong as 
the herald of the King, to speak of 
thunder and of judgment; but that he 
must understand the larger value of the 



112 



MATTHEW 



[MAM. xi. 1-19] 



Messianic work, and know that, before 
the final judgment falls, there is a 
mission of tenderness and grace, and 
healing and wooing and blessing. In 
effect Jesus said, Go back and tell John 
to look again at the things that puzzle 
him, to look at them in the light of his 
own prophetic mission, in the light of 
the declared purpose of God concerning 
Me, of all that has been written con- 
cerning Me; tell him to look more 
carefully, and there will be light in- 
stead of darkness. 

Are you troubled about Jesus? Then 
look more carefully and comprehen- 
sively at the very things that have 
troubled you, and you will find the mist 
merge to light, and a larger under- 
standing will end in the solution of all 
your problems. 

The King added another word, very 
tenderly, not rebuking him, but warn- 
ing him, " And blessed is he, whosoever 
shall find no occasion of stumbling in 
Me." If you cannot perfectly under- 
stand My method, trust Me. If you are 
not able for the moment to see how I 
am going to accomplish that upon which 
your heart is set as a passion, do not 
be offended, do not stumble, do not 
halt, trust Me perfectly. That is al- 
ways the word of the King to His 
followers. 

Then Jesus turned to the crowd who 
had heard John's question, and who 
might have been inclined to say, John 
has evidently failed, he is afraid, he is 
trembling; and He said to them in 
effect, Let Me tell you the truth about 
John. What did you go out into the 
wilderness to see? A reed shaken by 
the wind? Do you imagine he is weak 
and trembling? And the question car- 
ried its own answer in the very tone 
and emphasis in which the Master 
asked it. No wind shook him. He 
dared guilty Herod, and told him the 
truth. 

"But what went ye out to see? A 
man clothed in soft raiment ? " a man, 
weak, enervated, spoiled by luxury. 
And then with infinite and fine scorn, 
"Behold they that wear soft raiment 
are in kings' houses" not in kings' 
prisons that is the emphasis. John 
might have had soft raiment if he 
would excuse the king's sin. Make no 



mistake about him because he has sent 
Me this question. This was the King's 
defence of a loyal soul, and it is very 
beautiful. 

"But wherefore went ye out? To 
see a prophet? " He had brought them 
back from wrong impressions to the 
earlier and the truer thought of John. 
" Yea, I say unto 3'ou, and much more 
than a prophet;" he was the herald of 
the King, commissioned, inspired, sent 
before His face. " This is he, of whom 
it is written, 

Behold I send my messenger before 

thy face, 
Who shall prepare thy way before 

thee." 

He had prepared the way for Jesus, 
having fulfilled the prophetic word of 
Isaiah, " Prepare ye in the wilderness 
the way of Jehovah, make level in the 
desert a highway for our God." The 
throwing up of a highway is a. rough, 
laborious process. Kings will pass 
along the highway presently, but there 
must be a great deal of work to prepare 
it blasting with dynamite. That was 
the work of John; no reed, no soft 
man, no mere prophet was he, but the 
last of the prophets, the herald himself, 
flinging up the highway and preparing 
for the coming of the King. 

And then the Master spoke perhaps 
the most wonderful word of all; 
"Verily I say unto you, Among them 
that are born of women there hath not 
arisen a greater than John the Baptist." 
The simplest exposition is that of 
changing the phrasing. Of natural 
men, never has there been a greater 
than John. It was Christ's tribute to 
his moral fibre, to his mental breadth, 
to his magnificent natural endowments. 
Born in the priestly line, he turned his 
back upon priestism to become the 
rough prophet of the wilderness; he 
was a statesman seeing national life 
and understanding the national sore; 
and he had rent the garments that hid 
the sore, and laid it bare in all its 
hideousness to the gaze of his age. 

Then the King accounted for the fact 
that he was perplexed : " Yet he that is 
but little in the Kingdom of heaven is 
greater than he." This again is a pas- 
sage which has been very much dis- 



113 



[MATT. xi. 1-19] 



MATTHEW 



cussed. The only way to understand it 
is to take it in close connection with all 
the rest of the defence of Jesus. Our 
Lord meant to say, You have seen this 
man who naturally is greatest among 
menj asking a question in perplexity. 
Yes, there are things he cannot know, 
there are methods that he cannot un- 
derstand, and presently the least soul 
brought into the Kingdom will have 
greater light than this man, with all his 
natural endowments, has had in the 
past. Presently the little child who 
comes into My Kingdom by the mystery 
of My mercy, might, and passion, will 
have more light than John, until he 
also comes to understand the sweet- 
ness and mercy and majesty by coming 
into this Kingdom of power. John was 
in the light that preceded the Kingdom, 
and the weakest inside knows more 
than John. 

Upon this vindication .of John the 
King based an appeal to the people. 
He said of the prophets, " for all the 
prophets and the law prophesied until 
John." Theirs was not the message of 
experience and realisation; and one 
five minutes of experience is worth long 
years of anticipation; one single half- 
hour in the Kingdom, by the mystery 
of the death of the King, has more of 
light, than gathered in all the centu- 
ries before His work was done. " The 
prophets and the law prophesied until 
John." 

Now said Jesus, "The Kingdom of 
heaven suffereth violence, and men of 
violence take it by force;" because men 
cannot understand the method, they 
must enter in by the violence that 
tramples under foot all pride, and is 
content to trust the King. 

Then followed the last word of Jesus 
to the people about John; "And if ye 
are willing to receive it, this is Elijah 
that is to come;" this is the reformer; 
follow him, obey him, and he will lead 
you by his thunder past Sinai until you 
find yourself in the presence of the 
dawning light and the new glory of the 
rule of the Kingdom of God. 

And so we come to that brief para- 
graph in which the King complained of 
the unreasonableness of the age. Hav- 
ing answered John's questions, and vin- 
dicated him, He put John into contrast 



with his age John, the rough, the 
violent, the magnificent, the strenuous. 
Of the age He said, "It is like unto 
children who sit in the market-places," 
and they " call unto their fellows and 
say, We piped unto you, and ye" did not 
dance; we wailed, and ye did not 
mourn." Anyone who has children un- 
derstands the figure perfectly. There 
come moments when nothing is right, 
and the only unanimity is that of com- 
plaint, of dissatisfaction. What is the 
meaning of it among children? First, 
an evil nature which they have inher- 
ited. Do not be angry with your bairns 
when they are discontented they de- 
rive their nature from you. Then there 
is weariness which they have con- 
tracted. And again a little, strong, 
tender, shepherd-like discipline is lack- 
ing. All that was the matter with the 
age. Mark His application of His illus- 
tration. "We piped unto you, and ye 
did not dance." John came, and you 
all piped to John, you went out after 
him, you made him popular, you 
crowded to him, but he did not dance 
to you, he thundered at you. " We 
wailed, and ye did not mourn." The 
Son of Man is come, and you wail in 
His presence, but He has not lamented ; 
He has been your friend, comforting, 
cheering, eating and drinking with you ; 
and you say He is gluttonous. Oh, 
the unreasonableness of the age! 

And what was the King's answer? 
" Wisdom is justified by her works." 
Some ancient manuscripts have the 
word " works " and others " children," 
so decision must be based on the con- 
text, and it would appear best to adopt 
the revised word "works," for this 
harmonises with the words of Jesus 
throughout this section. In every case 
He appealed to His works. Of these 
John in prison was to be told; and 
these were the evidences of His right, 
refusing to obey which, the cities were 
condemned. The works of John and 
Jesus were wise. They were both the 
methods of God. To the restless and 
unreasonable age the King declared 
that wisdom would yet be vindicated 
in John's ascetic strength, and in His 
own comradeship of tenderness. 

The supreme value of this study is 
its revelation of the King as a worker. 



114 



MATTHEW 



[MAM. xi. 20-24] 



The picture of His dealing with John 
shows us that honesty is always valued 
and patiently answered. Let us be true 
with the Lord; do not let us affect a 
confidence which our heart does not 
feel. Only, if the doubt be there, in- 
stead of turning our back upon Him 
and abandoning His cause, instead of 
turning to the philosophies of men for 
explanation of the method of God, let 
us go straight to Him and tell Him. 
Oh the comfort of being able to go into 



the Master's presence and tell Him that 
He is doing something that we cannot 
understand. He loves honesty, He 
would rather the Thomas who blurts 
out his unbelief, than the Judas who 
kisses Him. Thank God for John, who 
was honest, and more, thank God for 
Jesus, Who received the honest ques- 
tion and answered it so patiently and 
so perfectly. His answer to all such 
doubt, is a call to a larger vision of the 
facts creating the doubt. 



MATTHEW XI. 20-24 



WE now turn to the subject of the 
impenitence of the cities. There 
is something startling in the words with 
which this paragraph commences 
"Then began He to upbraid." This 
spirit of upbraiding seems to be so for- 
eign to Him, so unlike Him; and yet 
such an idea of Him reveals a very 
superficial understanding both of the 
cause and the meaning of His upbraid- 
ing. If we think it is foreign to His 
nature to upbraid, and to pronounce 
woe, because we think of Him as loving 
and gentle, we misunderstand love. 
Jesus is quite capable of being stern, 
severe. There is such a thing as the 
wrath of the Lamb, even though that 
description seems to contradict itself. 
If we are astonished, as we hear Him, 
in the midst of His teaching, upbraid- 
ing cities, it is because we do not un- 
derstand love perfectly. Love is not 
always gentle, sometimes it is rough. 
Love is not always uttering sweet, 
smooth things. By the very necessity 
of its own nature there are moments 
when its speech is rugged, scorching, 
devastating. We have neither under- 
stood the Master, nor His essential 
love, if we really are surprised in the 
presence of such a section as this. 

Three cities are here named by the 
Lord Himself Chorazin, Bethsaida and 
Capernaum. We have no account of 
any visit to Chorazin, but it is perfectly 
evident that our Lord went through all 
these cities, and incidentally this whole 
passage shows us how much more Jesus 
did than we know. Chorazin was one 
of the cities in which most of His 



mighty works were done, and yet we 
have no account of His work there. 

Then we pass to Bethsaida, and we 
find that the records refer to frequent 
visits by our Lord. We need to re- 
member in passing, that from the city 
of Bethsaida, Peter, Andrew, and 
Philip had all followed Him, had 
obeyed Him, had repented in answer 
to His call, and set their faces towards 
the coming of the Kingdom of Heaven. 

When we come to Capernaum we are 
almost irresistibly driven back to one 
of our earlier studies in the Gospel 
(chapter iv. 12-16). We have already 
seen that in the prophecy quoted there, 
interpreted from the Jewish standpoint, 
when they spoke of " the land of Zebu- 
lun, and the land of Naphtali, toward 
the sea, beyond the Jordan, Galilee of 
the Gentiles," their terms were those 
of reproach, because that whole district, 
more than any other, had become in- 
fluenced by Gentile thinking. But when 
the King began His work, this public 
ministry of the Kingdom, "He came 
and dwelt in Capernaum." That is al- 
ways His method. If there is a district 
neglected, abandoned, forsaken, there 
He comes and dwells. So we know of 
Capernaum that it was the adopted 
home of Jesus for a long period, during 
His public ministry, the centre from 
which He went forth upon His way. 
That fourth chapter goes on to say, 
" From that time began Jesus to preach, 
and to say, Repent ye, for the Kingdom 
of Heaven is at hand." When John 
preached that, he did so in the tone 
and with the emphasis of severity. 



115 



[MATT. xi. 20-24] 



MATTHEW 



When he was cast into prison Jesus 
commenced His more public, set, and 
orderly ministry, with exactly the same 
message, and He delivered it in Caper- 
naum. He came and dwelt there, and 
Capernaum then first heard the word of 
the King spoken with His own grace 
and tenderness, and ineffable sweetness, 
" Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven 
is at hand." 

But now we see Jesus looking out 
upon the cities where most of His 
mighty works had been done, and we 
hear Him beginning to upbraid. What 
was the cause of His upbraiding? 
" Because they repented not." This 
does not merely mean that Jesus was 
angry because they did not obey Him. 
That was true in a sense, but the rea- 
son of the anger lies deeper. It was 
not selfish resentment at being re- 
jected; that was never present in the 
upbraiding of Christ; there was some- 
thing infinitely deeper. We must go 
back to the initial word of Jesus 
" Repent " that is, Change your mind, 
for whenever a man changes his con- 
ception, his thinking is changed, and 
his conduct. The real creed of a man 
is the inspiration lying behind his con- 
duct, and when Jesus began His min- 
istry, and said to men, Repent, change 
your minds, He was doing a simple and 
yet a searching thing. He was asking 
men to change their ancient conception 
of things, in order that their conduct 
might be changed, in order that finally 
their character might be changed. That 
is always the order. First, the concep- 
tion; then the external conduct based 
upon it; and, finally, the character re- 
sulting therefrom. 

Christ's word was not only Repent. 
He indicated the direction of the 
change necessary; for a man may 
change his mind, and the new set of 
convictions may be as false as the old 
" Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven 
is at hand." The mind must be 
changed in the direction of submission 
to the Kingdom of Heaven. The root- 
wrong in all civic life then, and to-day, 
is godlessness; the fact that God is 
left out of account in its arrangements. 
So it was in these cities of the past, 
Chorazin, Bethsaida, Capernaum and 
the rest. He came to the city and He 



said, Change your mind toward the 
Kingdom of Heaven, the Kingdom of 
Heaven is at hand; it is here, em- 
bodied in the Person of its King. I am 
here to show you the Kingdom, to lead 
you into the Kingdom, to be your King 
within the Kingdom. Change your 
minds towards it. He had healed their 
diseases, and in the enforcement of 
His claims, He had been calling these 
cities to change their minds towards 
God, and towards the Kingdom of God. 

He had shown the real meaning of 
the Kingdom of God. As we have 
seen, every miracle of Jesus was a 
revelation of what the Kingdom of God 
really means when it is perfectly set 
up. None of the miracles of Jesus was 
a violation of law; they were all re- 
versions to law. Here was a man dis- 
eased; He healed him. He was not 
violating the law of the universe by 
doing so. Nay, verily, He was restor- 
ing the law broken by the presence of 
disease. All the way through, His 
mighty powers, operating in the realm 
of the physical, were revelations of 
what the Divine Kingship meant, and 
what the Kingdom of God really is. 
He had been to Chorazin, and to Beth- 
saida, He had dwelt in Capernaum, and 
in these three cities He had said, " Re- 
pent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at 
hand." In these three cities, by mighty 
works, He had shown the meaning of 
the Kingdom ; but they did not repent ; 
and because they did not repent He 
began to upbraid them. 

Now the second question that we ask 
is, What was the note of His up- 
braiding? The words "upbraid" and 
"woe" in this paragraph are mutually 
expository. We can only understand 
the upbraiding, as we hear Him say 
"Woe"! We can only understand 
what He meant when He said "Woe" 
as we catch the tone of His upbraiding ! 
The meaning of upbraiding very liter- 
ally is that He reproached them. Re- 
proach may be perfectly pure, and 
inspired by love. It may, of course, be 
impure, and inspired by hatred, but 
that was impossible with Jesus. We 
take the word, then, in its simplest 
meaning. He reproached the cities. 
" Woe unto thee, Chorazin ! " is not 



116 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xr. 20-24] 



the thunder of some one highly an- 
gered, not the denunciation of some 
plague that is about to fall on the city; 
it is rather the wailing declaration of 
what must inevitably result from the 
city's own deliberate choice of action. 
" There is a wail in the woe," said one 
of the old puritan commentators, and in 
that sentence he comes to finest exposi- 
tion of the meaning of the "woe." 
Jesus meant to say, You have refused 
to repent, you have deliberately chosen 
for yourselves the woes that are to 
come upon you, you have deliberately 
refused the light, and chosen the dark- 
ness; by refusing the life you have 
chosen the death. He was not pro- 
nouncing a judgment which He would 
inflict capriciously; He was announc- 
ing the result which they had deliber- 
ately chosen, and from which there 
could be no escape. 

How have these woes been carried 
out? Remember they were woes pro- 
nounced upon cities. There is abso- 
lutely no trace of Chorazin to be found 
to-day. Men have never been able per- 
fectly to agree about the site of Beth- 
saida. While Dr. Thomson argues for 
the probability of the site in Naphtali, 
a great weight of opinion is against his 
decision, and so we may broadly say 
Chorazin and Bethsaida, cities of nine- 
teen centuries ago, rich and flourishing, 
in the midst of which the Bang came 
with light, and life, and love, have ab- 
solutely vanished as cities, because they 
repented not. The woe has wrought 
itself out by the working out of the law 
from which there is no escape, this 
simple law whatever a man or city 
chooses, that is the destiny of the man 
or the city. I should like to lay em- 
phasis upon this principle, in case some 
one should merely be interested in the 
exposition, and find no message for 
himself. This is the supremacy of 
Jesus, the sovereignty of Jesus, and the 
full majesty of Jesus, that, when He 
confronts a man or a city, then in the 
light of His coming that man or that 
city must make its choice. If the city 
shall return and repent, it shall be ex- 
alted to very heaven. If it will not 
hear Him, it must be thrust down into 
darkness. It is not His hand that 
thrusts it out; it is the city's own hand 



which slays itself when it rejects God's 
Kingdom. 

This is still more markedly empha- 
sised in the words which He addressed 
particularly to Capernaum, in which, 
town He had dwelt. Notice the change 
from the Authorised, a change giving a 
more accurate rendering. Jesus did 
not say Capernaum was exalted to 
heaven. He asked a question, " Shalt 
thou be exalted unto heaven ? " And 
He answered, I tell you no. Thou 
shalt be thrust down into Hades, into 
death, into darkness, into obliteration. 
Remember again, this was a civic word, 
the word concerning a city. 

Observe the connection of this doom 
with the word He had spoken at the 
first, " Repent ye, for the Kingdom of 
Heaven is at hand." Capernaum had 
refused to repent. Then said Jesus to 
Capernaum, If you will not repent, do 
you suppose you will ever gain the 
benefits of the heavenly order? Do 
you suppose you can set up heaven's 
order, when you have rejected heaven's 
King? If you refuse to hear the voice 
of the King, will you be exalted unto 
heaven, with heaven's order, where love 
is the impulse, and light is the illumi- 
nation, and love the energy? Do you 
hope to climb into the realisation of a 
perfect civic life when you refuse the 
King ? Nay, verily ; thou shalt go down 
into Hades. Capernaum desired the 
heavenly order, as all cities desire the 
heavenly order; yet, while the great 
ideal was seen, refused to repent. And 
in the prophetic words of Jesus more 
than prophecy if prophecy be merely 
foretelling, but great prophecy if proph- 
ecy be foretelling with forth-telling of 
God's will Capernaum has passed 
down as a city into Hades, into dark- 
ness, and into death, and into cessa- 
tion. Why? Because she refused to 
repent at the call of the King. 

Prom this upbraiding of Jesus, what 
is the teaching of value for us? First, 
that the greater the light the greater 
the responsibility. That leads us to 
touch upon a part of this section to 
which we have not yet referred Jesus' 
comparisons. Look at them -briefly in 
order that we may make other com- 
parisons presently. He said, " It shall 
be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon 



117 



[MATT. xi. 20-24] 



MATTHEW 



in the day of judgment, than for you." 
More tolerable for Tyre and Sidon than 
for Chorazin and Bethsaida. Tyre and 
Sidon were cities then existing. Then 
when He came to Capernaum, the most 
highly blessed of all the cities, He said, 
"But I say unto you that it shall be 
more tolerable for the land of Sodom 
in the day of judgment, than for thee." 
Sodom was a city that had long ceased 
to exist It had been blotted out of 
existence for specific reasons hinted at 
in the Old Testament history, clearly 
declared in later prophecy. He took 
the cities of Tyre and Sidon, and put 
them into comparison with Chorazin 
and Bethsaida; and the land of Sodom 
into comparison with Capernaum. 

Thus He revealed the truth that re- 
sponsibility is always created by light. 
Tyre and Sidon had not been visited 
as Chorazin and Bethsaida had been. 
Tyre and Sidon had perchance heard 
the rumour of His work, but He had 
not come into the midst of them. They 
were two living cities when He spoke. 

We hear His word and bow in the 
presence of it. He declares that it will 
be more tolerable for the cities of our 
own day to which He has not come, 
than for the cities to which He has 
come if those cities refuse to repent. 

When He speaks of Capernaum, we 
have a yet more startling contrast. We 
have but to read the history of the Old 
Testament which is veiled and guarded 
with an extreme delicacy, to know how 
fearful were the conditions of life in 
Sodom, how awful was the corruption 
that held that wealthy city fast in its 
grip. At least the Old Testament his- 
tory reveals this much to us, that there 
were not ten righteous men to be found 
in the whole city, and therefore it was 
swept out. Could anything be worse 
than Sodom? Yes, Capernaum. Now 
the possibility is that Capernaum never 
descended to the beastliness of Sodom. 
The probability is that the sins of 
Sodom, judged by all human canons, 
were far more terrible than the sins of 
Capernaum; but Jesus Christ said in 
effect, If Sodom had received My light, 
if Sodom had heard My message, if 
Sodom had seen My works, it would 
have continued until this day. That is 
to say, in the sight of God, sin is nver 



measured as it is in the sight of men. 
We measure sin and call it vulgar, or 
debased, or pardonable, or excusable, 
according to some false measurements 
of our own. God measures sin by the 
light a man has had, or a city has had. 
The city to which Jesus has come with 
His message, in which He has mani- 
fested His mighty works, if it refuse 
Him, and His ideals, if it will not 
crown Hun, is guilty of a more terrible 
sin than the sin of the city which has 
sunk to the lowest level of beastliness, 
if it have never heard His message, 
and never seen His work. This is 
Christ's own estimate. 

Let us, then, proceed further with 
our comparison. We have compared, 
following our Lord's word, Tyre and 
Sidon with Chorazin and Bethsaida, 
and Sodom with Capernaum. Now let 
us compare Chorazin, Bethsaida, and 
Capernaum with the cities of to-day, 
simply indicating a line for solemn con- 
sideration. Our cities know Jesus 
Christ far better than Chorazin, Beth- 
saida, or Capernaum; because when 
Jesus Christ was in Chorazin, Beth- 
saida, and Capernaum, according to His 
own estimate, He was straitened, lim- 
ited. His mighty powers operating 
very largely in the sphere of the phys- 
ical, because He had not yet unlocked 
the gate, had not scattered the fire, had 
not yet Himself bent His head to the 
great passion Baptism. 

When Jesus came to Chorazin, Beth- 
saida, Capernaum, He was a Man 
among men, a Teacher among teachers. 
He was infinitely more, for His words 
at once lifted Him above all other 
teachers in His own age; and the pur- 
ity of His life, its glorious beauty, 
perfect tenderness, elevated Him above 
all men in character. Nevertheless, as 
men heard Him they had nothing to 
base their conclusions upon save His 
imperial presence and the essential and 
inherent truth of the things He uttered. 
We have a great deal more. We have 
His resurrection from among the dead, 
attested by witnesses, proved by the 
miracles of the centuries. We have in 
our midst to-day works that are far 
more wonderful than any miracle He 
ever performed in the physical realm. 
Do we, as Christians, quite believe it P 



118 



MATTHEW 



[MAW. xi. 25-30] 



Before Jesus went away He said, 
" Greater works than these shall he do, 
because I go unto the Father." There 
is a sense in which He did not value 
the miracles as credentials, but put 
them in a secondary place. He said, 
" Believe Me or else believe Me for 
the very works' sake." "The works" 
constituted a secondary line of argu- 
ment Now He has been demonstrated 
in the centuries in His own Person by 
the resurrection, as that resurrection 
has been demonstrated in the life and 
progress of the living Church ; and that 
Church by His living presence, His 
spiritual presence, is more wonderful 
and powerful than His bodily presence 
was, and He is still working miracles 
more marvellous, more wonderful, than 
any He wrought then. 

Need we labour this point? If our 
cities have but eyes to see, in every 
quarter of the globe miracles are being 
wrought by Jesus Christ more wonder- 
ful than any He wrought while He was 
here miracles of so renewing men in 
the inner facts of their life, that in the 
power of that renewal, they renew 
the externality of their lives. 

This is the supreme miracle. The 
supreme miracle is not that the body 
shall be healed, but that the spirit shall 
be healed. The supreme miracle is 
that a man low sunk in the social scale, 
a beast, a plague to the city, may be 
touched by the Spirit of Jesus and be 



re-made, and become one who blesses 
the city wherever he goes. These mir- 
acles are on every hand. 

What has this to do with us ? Every- 
thing ! If we are prepared to receive 
the King on His own terms, if we are 
prepared to obey His "repent," in the 
individual life, and if we are prepared 
to set our faces toward Him for the 
establishment of God's Kingdom, indi- 
vidually, then socially, and in all civic 
matters; then our cities may be lifted 
into the realisation of the blessedness 
of the Kingdom of Heaven. But if we 
turn our back upon the proof Jesus 
gives, if we turn our back upon the 
ministry He exercises, if we will not 
crown the King by obeying Him, then 
nothing can save the city. Its sorrows 
will put out its joy, its sighing will 
make its songs to cease, its sin will 
submerge it as sin has submerged the 
cities of the past 

Our duty, therefore, as Christians, is 
to preach the Evangel, to carry the 
great Gospel not narrowly but broadly, 
yet always with insistence upon the 
primal necessity of the yielding of the 
individual will to Christ, in order that 
the social relationships of the city may 
be influenced from that standpoint of 
regenerate humanity. 

May God grant we may so live and 
serve as to help to bring our city into 
line with His law, and into obedience 
to His gracious will. 



MATTHEW XI. 25-30 



can be no doubt that these 
A last verses of chapter eleven tell 
the story of what happened immediately 
in connection with the events recorded 
in the previous verses. The King had 
upbraided the cities; He had pro- 
nounced woes upon them; He had de- 
clared that the measure of light creates 
the measure of responsibility; and with 
great severity, in every tone of which 
there vibrated the pity of His heart, 
He had pronounced the doom of the 
impenitent cities. 

And now what followed? He turned 
from upbraiding the multitudes, and 
spoke to God. Having done that, He 



spoke again to the multitudes in pro- 
clamation and invitation. 

It is important that we recognize this 
order and sequence. Pausing in His 
upbraiding, He lifted His heart to God: 
"I thank Thee, O Father, Lord of 
heaven and earth, that Thou didst hide 
these things from the wise and under- 
standing, and didst reveal them unto 
babes, yea, Father, for so it was well- 
pleasing in Thy sight." Having thus 
spoken to God, He made a proclama- 
tion concerning Himself: "All things 
have been delivered unto Me of My 
Father: and no one knoweth the Son, 
save the Father ; neither doth any know 



119 



[MATT. xi. 25-30] 



MATTHEW 



the Father, save the Son, and he to 
whomsoever the Son willeth to reveal 
Him." And then immediately, without 
a break, He said, " Come unto Me, all 
ye that labour and are heavy laden, and 
I will rest you." This more literal 
translation, "I will rest you," is very 
beautiful. Not as though rest were 
something apart from Himself. It was 
the mother love of God that spoke, 
" Come unto Me . . . and I will rest 
you. Take My yoke upon you and 
learn of Me : for I am meek and lowly 
in heart: and ye shall find rest unto 
your souls. For My yoke is easy and 
My burden is light." 

First, then, He offered praise to God. 
Secondly, He made the proclamation 
concerning Himself; and wonderful are 
its terms. Then, turning to the multi- 
tudes, He called them to Himself in the 
light of the proclamation He had made, 
promising to lead them into relationship 
with the Father Whom He had wor- 
shipped, that they might find their rest. 

Taking first of all His attitude 
toward His Father, we notice that the 
King worshipped in the presence of 
difficulty, that He offered praise in the 
face of discouragement. One supreme 
value of this chapter is its revelation 
of the fact of His restfulness even in 
the face of obstacles. John, loyal soul, 
whom He was so careful to defend, was 
wondering, perplexed by His methods; 
His own generation was petulant, un- 
reasonable, complaining; and the cities 
that had seen the working of His 
power were rejecting Him. All these 
things He clearly understood, and yet 
He took the position of the worshipper. 
There was yet one other class of per- 
sons with whom He came in contact, 
the simple-hearted, who perhaps did 
not think deeply enough to be perplexed 
about anything; they were merely 
babes. The King saw more clearly 
than we do, and He said, "I praise 
Thee, O Father." That fact in itself 
comes as a ministry of inspiration, and 
of love. Are you discouraged? Have 
you felt as though the people you are 
trying to reach are hopeless, always 
perplexed, always criticising, always 
impenitent? Pause then and worship! 
Make your difficulty the occasion of 
your thanksgiving. But this we shall 



never do save as we live very near 
to Him. 

Now let us look at the reason of His 
praise. That reason He distinctly 
stated. God had hidden the things He 
had come to make clear from the wise 
and understanding, and had revealed 
them to the untutored, the immature. 
He praised God for this method. 

The first thing to be noticed is that 
the King rested in the absolute suprem- 
acy and will of His Father. He 
thanked God that this was so because 
it was God's will. Perhaps some of us 
must rest there very often, being unable 
to understand the reason of the will. 

We may press this matter a little 
further and ask the question: was the 
fact that this was God's way the only 
reason for the thanksgiving? No, the 
Son knew that it was the best way, 
that it was the only way; this way of 
hiding these things from the wise and 
understanding, and the revealing of 
them to babes. Our Gospel is a Gospel 
for those who are fools and blind. That 
is not to say that the Gospel is not 
wise, that it lacks intelligence. 

Who are the people from whom the 
Gospel is hidden according to Jesus? 
He called all people, but there are those 
whom He described as "the wise and 
the understanding" who do not come. 
" The wise " are, very literally, people 
who are gifted with practical skill, 
natural acumen, and ability to under- 
stand. The "prudent," in the Author- 
ised, or "understanding," as it is in 
the Revised, are those who are able to 
put things together. Jesus says, Father, 
Thou hast hidden these things from the 
people who are naturally wise and have 
the power to put things together. We 
have heard a man say, " Oh, believe 
me, I know what two and two make." 
That is the man! Not that he does 
not know what two and two make; not 
that it is wrong to put two and two 
together; but that the putting of two 
and two together brings the man to the 
conclusion that when he has put two 
and two together he knows everything. 
It is the man of natural acumen who is 
able to put things together and come to 
logical conclusions; who imagines that 
he can express the things of the Spirit 
in the formulae of the mind; from 



120 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xi. 25-30] 



whom these things are hidden. The 
condition for acquiring knowledge is 
always conscious ignorance. The mo- 
ment a man says he does not know, 
then at least he has fulfilled the first 
condition for acquiring knowledge. 
Some years ago a remarkable article 
appeared in The Engineer discussing 
the question whether the man of tech- 
nical knowledge, or the man without 
it, was most likely to serve his age by 
the way of invention. In the course of 
that article the writer said: "There is 
not a portion of the framing of a bi- 
cycle that is not, in the eyes of any one 
carefully educated in the strength of 
materials, utterly wrong. If any one 
of our readers will take the trouble to 
work out the stresses in a bicycle 
weighing twenty-eight pounds, and car- 
rying at ten miles an hour, a man 
weighing twelve stone, he will see that 
from first to last the whole machine is 
so completely impossible that nothing 
of the kind exists outside the land of 
dreams. Let us suppose that a law was 
passed under which no one was per- 
mitted to use a bicycle that was not 
pronounced to be quite safe by the 
Board of Trade; and let the Surveyors 
of the Board deal with the cycle pre- 
cisely on the same lines as they deal 
with marine boilers, and see then what 
the Board of Trade machines would be 
like. Is it too much to say that, twenty 
years ago, any and every thoroughly 
trained engineer would have pro- 
nounced the modern light roadster a 
mechanical impossibility? Such men 
would know too much to attempt to 
produce anything of the kind. . . . 

" Knowledge is too often assumed to 
have reached finality, when it has done 
nothing of the kind, and the belief is 
fostered and inculcated by those who 
write books, and treatises, and teach in 
various ways. 

"Lastly, we would point out that it 
is not the possession of knowledge that 
stops progress; the mischief is done 
by the assumption that the knowledge 
is final." 

That is the philosophy of our para- 
graph. There were men of Jesus' day 
who said ; We know this is so, and that 
is so, and therefore this must be so; 
therefore He is wrong! They were 



wise men, they were understanding 
men, they put two and two together, 
and they called it four; and they said 
this is final, there is nothing beyond, 
we know all to be known. And Jesus 
said, "I thank Thee, O Father, . . . 
that Thou didst hide these things from 
the wise and understanding;" that 
Thou hast not revealed these things to 
these men. 

To what sort of people, then, does 
He reveal these things? To babes. 
And here the Greek word traced to its 
root means "not speaking," and in this 
use indicates the immature, which 
means that they are not indisposed to 
receive. Or again, to leave the figure 
of the infant, let the Master speak as 
He spoke on another occasion, and we 
see how His philosophy is always the 
same. " Except ye be converted " 
turned back "and become as little 
children" believing that there is 
something you do not know, believing 
that the knowledge in your possession 
is not final unless you get there, you 
cannot enter the Kingdom of God. " I 
thank Thee, O Father, Lord of heaven 
and earth, that Thou didst hide these 
things from the wise and understand- 
ing" the men of acumen who put 
things together and imagine all God's 
truth can be expressed in the sequence 
of their reasoning " and didst reveal 
them unto babes," who do not know 
anything, but who are dreaming to- 
wards truth, in whom is the spirit of 
romance, the spirit that soars. 

What a blessed thing it is that God 
has always revealed these things to the 
simple-hearted and the simple-minded ! 
One may have lost the priestism of 
ecclesiasticism, but there is a new 
priestism abroad to-day which says that 
we cannot interpret this Book unless 
we know original languages in all their 
ramifications. It is not true. The man 
who can put two and two together as to 
Semitic languages, and as to Greek 
dialect, may never see the flame of 
glory that any little child can see who 
takes up the Book and studies it with 
the simple heart of the babe. 

Having uttered these words of wor- 
ship, the King made the claim for Him- 
self. His words are so clear and com- 
prehensive, we need do little more than 



121 



[MATT. xi. 25-30] 



MATTHEW 



read them. The statement falls into 
three parts. First, the King claimed 
His own investiture with some peculiar 
authority. "All things." What things? 
We must go back to the previous verse, 
"I thank Thee, O Father, Lord of 
heaven and earth, that Thou didst hide 
these things from the wise and under- 
standing, and didst reveal them unto 
babes." Revealed them, the things of 
truth, the things He had come to re- 
veal, the things at which the unreason- 
able generation scoffed, the things the 
impenitent cities would not accept, the 
things of truth and righteousness and 
love. God has given Me, said the King, 
all these things. " All things have been 
delivered unto Me of My Father." 

You may say, But does not this break 
down your argument? Would you 
speak of Jesus as a babe, as immature 
in any sense? We are speaking of 
Jesus in the realm of His humanity, 
as One Who did not depend upon His 
own human wisdom. He spoke always 
and only out of the infinite wisdom of 
His Father. We speak of Jesus as He 
spoke of Himself before these words 
were finished; said He, "I am meek 
and lowly in heart;" I am not petulant 
and unreasonable, I am not disobedient 
to light as it falls upon My soul. I am 
amongst the babes, and therefore all 
things are delivered unto Me. He was 
the great Mystic, the One Who, in all 
simplicity, waited for light, and recog- 
nized in all its infinite reaches, its rela- 
tion to God and eternity. Speaking 
out of the realm of His perfect human- 
ity He said, He hath committed all 
things unto Me; I come to bring the 
words of revelation. This is what Paul 
meant concerning Him in the Colossian 
Epistle when he wrote, " For it was the 
good pleasure of the Father that in Him 
should all the fulness dwell." Jesus 
thus stood in the midst of the men of 
His age and said to them, The things 
that wise men did not understand, the 
things that understanding men could 
not formulate and finally state, are 
committed to Me. I know them, not by 
deduction and logical sequence, but be- 
cause God has committed them to Me, 
seeing that I am meek and lowly in 
heart. 

Having thus claimed investiture, He 



went on to say, " No one knoweth the 
Son, save the Father." Here He was 
accounting for the fact that men had 
not understood Him. He thus declared 
the mystery of His own personality; no 
one perfectly understands Him, except 
the Father. This, is a perpetual truth, 
and it may be said to this hour that no 
one knows the Son save the Father. 

Let us carefully observe what now 
immediately follows. " Neither doth 
any know the Father, save the Son, 
and he to whomsoever the Son willeth 
to reveal Him. Come unto Me all ye 
that labour and are heavy laden, and 
I will give you rest." 

Consider, then, this twofold fact. 
Jesus declared that no one can know 
the Son perfectly, except the Father; 
but He affirmed that the Father can be 
known through the Son. We have a 
far more correct knowledge of God at 
this hour than we have of Jesus. The 
great mysteries and the great problems, 
and the great perplexities, are still con- 
cerning the Person of Jesus. Grace 
operates by revealing the things that 
never were known through the instru- 
ment of a Person; but the things 
revealed are so mighty that the instru- 
ment of their revelation must remain a 
mystery. " No one knoweth the Son, 
save the Father, neither doth any know 
the Father save the Son, and he to 
whomsoever the Son willeth to reveal 
Him." 

We make a great mistake when we 
commence to quote this passage at verse 
twenty-eight. We have no right to be- 
gin at " Come unto Me, all ye that 
labour." If we do so, we miss the 
music; we may indulge in a great deal 
of sentiment around this text, but all 
its strength, that upon which the soul 
of man takes hold for strength, is 
missed if we omit verse twenty-seven 
and fail to recognize the connection. 
This is no mere lullaby; it was no mere 
expression of sentimental pity when 
Jesus said, "Come unto Me." Rever- 
ently changing the actual wording it is 
as though He had said: Come unto Me 
and I will reveal the Father unto you; 
trust Me, and find God; accept My law 
of life by accepting Me, and so find 
rest; for My yoke, the yoke I wear, is 
easy; and My burden, the burden I 



122 



MATTHEW 



[MAM. xr. 25-30] 



bear, is light. Come to Me, be identi- 
fied with Me, let Me become the win- 
dow through which the light flashes, 
the door through which you pass to 
God. The trouble with men is that 
they do not know the Father, and see- 
ing that they do not know the Father, 
they are hot, and restless, and feverish, 
and in agony. To all such He said, 
Come unto Me, I know the Father; I 
will bring you to Him, and when you 
find the Father you will find your rest. 
" Come unto Me, all ye that labour." 

Notice finally that this call was ut- 
tered, not merely to the babes, but to 
all the multitude. " Come unto Me, all 
ye that labour and are heavy laden." 
It was His call to John when John was 
in difficulty about His method Come 
to Me, and I will rest your perplexed 
spirit. It was His call to the unrea- 
sonable and unsatisfied age, to come to 
Him and be satisfied, by faith, and wait 
for the dawning light for full explana- 
tion. It was His call to the cities, re- 
jecting, and rejected Come to Me, and 
I will come back to you with healing 
and with blessing. It was His call to 
the babes Come to Me, be obedient, 
and gain the light that leads you into 
the places of God's own wisdom. It 
was His call to all. They did not all 
obey as John did in his perplexity. 
When his disciples went back and set 
the works of Jesus in relation to the 
ancient prophecies, surely there came 
to John a quiet sense of rest. He found 
God anew in the dungeon, because in 
honest perplexity he had sent directly to 
Jesus. Perhaps some of the discon- 
tented children of the age found rest 
because they ceased their criticism and 
became babes. The cities would not 
come, and Chorazin, Bethsaida and 
Capernaum are names only, their very 
sites being blotted out. And the babes ? 
Thank God they have been coming ever 
since, and as they come, they find God 
and rest. 

Mark the conditions. "Come," that 
is the first. "Take My yoke," that is 
the second. " Learn of Me," that is the 
third. We must get to Him, we must 
submit to Him, we must obey Him. By 
these things we find our rest, a twofold 
rest some commentators say, but prob- 
ably they are two manifestations of the 



same rest the rest of finding the 
Father; the rest of obeying the Father. 

Oh, there is rest for the storm-tossed 
soul in finding God! The cries of the 
old Bible are the cries of to-day. "As 
the hart panteth after the water brooks, 
so panteth my soul after Thee, O 
God!" "Oh that I knew where I 
might find Him ! " And not in tones 
that ring through centuries only, but 
in the still small voice sounding in our 
hearts to-day, we hear the same sweet 
Saviour say, " Come unto Me." We 
have tried to find God, we have tried 
to encompass Him; but Ve have felt 
that such small atoms as we are, must 
be of small account; and it is almost 
impossible to be sure of God by these 
processes. But, when the Infinite Word, 
Whose tones fill eternity, Whose wis- 
dom guides, and Whose power upholds 
all things, becomes flesh, a Man of men, 
human, warm, sweet, tender, we come 
to Him, and we find God. With one's 
head upon His bosom there comes to the 
fevered heart the rest of eternity, the 
peace that passeth all understanding. 

How shall we perfect our rest? By 
obeying Him. When Jesus said, " Take 
My yoke upon you," He did not mean 
only the yoke He would give us, the 
burden He would impose upon us. He 
did mean that ultimately; but primar- 
ily He meant the yoke that He wore is 
easy, the burden that He bore is light. 
What burden did He carry? There 
was only one. The burden of doing 
God's will, the burden of obedience to 
the Divine command. "I do always 
the things that are pleasing to Him." 
" My meat is to do the will of Him 
that sent Me, and to accomplish His 
work." " We must work the works of 
Him that sent Me." That was the 
master-passion in the life of Jesus. He 
said, His burden was light. We hardly 
believe it. We say it is hard work to 
please God. In that view we are 
wrong. It is fearfully hard work to 
please our neighbours. It is impossible 
to please our friends. It is absurd to 
try and please ourselves. Then let the 
prayer of each one of us be; "Teach 
me to do Thy will, O my God." That 
is the easiest, the sublimest, the sim- 
plest law of life; and therein is rest. 
May we all find it. 



123 



[MATT. xu. 1-21] 



MATTHEW 



MATTHEW XII. 1-21 



npHERE are three movements in 
JL chapter twelve, all of them dealing 
with the subject of the conflict between 
Jesus and the rulers. First, the conflict 
concerning the Sabbath, in verses one 
to twenty-one. Then, the conflict con- 
cerning His power, where He obtained 
it, and what its nature was; in verses 
twenty-two to thirty-seven. Finally, the 
conflict concerning a sign; they asked 
for some sign, and He refused it; in 
verses thirty-eight to fifty. 

At the beginning of His ministry the 
rulers were not only interested in Jesus, 
they were attracted by Him, and ad- 
mired Him. They invited Him to din- 
ner. They propounded their questions 
to Him. This did not last long ; and we 
saw in chapter nine that they really 
broke with Him when He claimed au- 
thority in the moral realm, and claimed 
the right to forgive sins. This was the 
first outward break; but the first wan- 
ing of admiration of Jesus on the part 
of the rulers was born of the fact that 
He made Himself the friend of sinners, 
and so violated all their conceptions of 
righteousness and purity; their concep- 
tions being that righteousness and pur- 
ity consisted in external separation 
from sinners, and from their sin. Now 
we approach that period in His propa- 
ganda when hostility became evident, 
positive. It never ended until they 
folded their arms across their breasts 
satisfied because they had encompassed 
His death. 

In these twenty-one verses the subject 
is the Sabbath ; first, the Sabbath in the 
corn-fields, verses one to eight; sec- 
ondly, the Sabbath in the synagogue, 
verses nine to twenty-one. In the first 
eight verses dealing with the Sabbath in 
the corn-fields, we have the King's 
claim of authority; in the second divi- 
sion, the Sabbath in the synagogue, we 
have the King's activity upon the basis 
of that authority. 

Before proceeding to the examination 
of these two passages, it is well to spe- 
cially notice that the Sabbath question 
was that which led the rulers to deter- 
mine on the death of Jesus. They op- 
posed and criticised Hun before; they 



wanted to find some method of dealing 
with Him; but each of the Evangelists 
refers to this fact, though in each 
Gospel it is stated in different setting, 
under different circumstances, that it 
was because of our Lord's attitude 
toward the Sabbath that these men de- 
cided to kill Him. If this is established 
it reveals the importance of the Sab- 
bath question, and forbids any super- 
ficial exposition of the verses we are 
studying. For instance, it has been 
very commonly said that the attitude of 
Jesus to the Sabbath was a protest 
against the Rabbinical view of the Sab- 
bath. It has been generally said that 
when He defended His disciples for 
plucking ears of corn, and when He 
Himself healed on the Sabbath, He was 
setting the Sabbath free from false 
methods of observance. There is an 
element of truth in all this, but to leave 
the subject there is to miss the pro- 
foundest values of this wonderful sec- 
tion, in which the King, claiming 
authority for the Sabbath, and prose- 
cuting His activity on the Sabbath, 
aroused the ire of the rulers so that 
they begin to plot to take His life. 
Probably these men would not have 
plotted to take the life of Jesus simply 
because He attempted to broaden men's 
views concerning the % Sabbath. We 
must read more closely if we would find 
out what Jesus did both in the corn- 
fields, and in the synagogue. The Sab- 
bath was the most sacred symbol of the 
real nature of Judaism ; indeed the only 
symbol peculiar to Judaism. We think 
of other things in the Hebrew economy 
of the past; for instance their sacri- 
fices, the rite of circumcision, the pecu- 
liarity of the Temple in which God was 
supposed to dwell. But all these things 
were found amongst heathen people in 
some form or other. Burnt sacrifices 
were found among all the Semitic peo- 
ples. Circumcision was a common rite 
among other peoples as well as . Jews. 
Temples in which the gods were sup- 
posed to dwell were common things. 
But the Sabbath was peculiar to the 
Jew, the setting apart of one day upon 
which men were to give themselves 



124 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xn. 1-21] 



wholly to, and exclusively to, the culti- 
vation of the spiritual within them, in 
recognition of their perpetual and un- 
derlying relationship to the eternal 
things. The Sabbath as a physical 
blessing provided for men by God is 
as old as the human race, though not 
the peculiar quality of the Sabbath as 
the symbol of separation to God, the 
seal of God set upon all the phases of 
life. The Sabbath according to the 
Hebrew economy was not one day given 
to God, while men were permitted to 
keep six for themselves; it was rather 
the peculiar sign and symbol of the 
deepest things in the life of the people. 

Now both in the corn-fields, and in 
the synagogue, and on other occasions, 
Jesus said things about the Sabbath, 
and claimed relationship to the Sabbath, 
which the keen critics of His own day 
perfectly understood, and upon which 
they came to the decision that the only 
thing they could do with Him was to 
disprove the claim He made by killing 
Him. In no relationship or application 
of His teaching did Jesus make more 
remarkable claims for Himself than in 
the words He uttered about the Sab- 
bath, and in our present study there are 
revealed both His claim, and the reason 
of their objection to that claim, in two 
movements. 

Let us attempt to look at them with 
simplicity and naturalness, that we may 
see what Jesus really said, and under- 
stand the claim that He made in the 
matter of the Sabbath; and discover 
why it so stirred the hatred of these 
men. 

First, the Sabbath in the corn-fields, 
the King's claim of authority. He was 
walking through the corn-fields on the 
Sabbath day with His disciples, prose- 
cuting His work, journeying from one 
place to another to preach the King- 
dom, to heal, to blessj to call men back 
again to God; and on the journey the 
disciples were hungry. There is a very 
wonderful teaching in that very fact ; it 
is a revelation of the poverty of these 
men. And there is a very strange 
teaching in it, too. He, the King, was 
so poor in earthly things that He was 
not able to feed the men who followed 
Him. At the time they were hungry 
to use the language of to-day they 



were doing missionary work, they were 
going somewhere to proclaim the evan- 
gel of the Kingdom. As these hungry 
men passed through the corn-fields they 
plucked the ears, and fed themselves 
with the corn. It was a perfectly sim- 
ple and natural action of the disciples, 
and reveals very clearly their estimate 
of their Lord's heart. They did not for 
a moment imagine that He would re- 
buke them. They knew, as members of 
the Hebrew nation, that they were do- 
ing things that the Pharisees would 
object to, but they were with Him, and 
familiarity with Him, and a conscious- 
ness of His attitude towards the Sab- 
bath, set them free to pluck the ears, 
to rub them, to eat, and so to satisfy 
their hunger. It is a revelation of the 
relationship existing between Christ and 
His disciples. There was no hesitation, 
no appeal, no fear. This action the 
Pharisees at once criticised. They 
began to pluck the ears of corn. They 
began, that is all. Criticism was dog- 
ging the footsteps of Jesus and waiting 
to blaze forth, and immediately the 
Pharisees raised their objection. 

Again notice how the familiarity be- 
tween Christ and His disciples is 
brought out in the fact that the Phari- 
sees did not criticise the disciples; they 
criticised Christ, they put the responsi- 
bility for all the disciples were doing 
upon Him. The appeal which they 
made was an appeal to Him. "The 
Pharisees, when they saw it, said unto 
Him, Behold, Thy disciples do that 
which is not lawful to do upon the Sab- 
bath." They knew right well that the 
disciples' action revealed the attitude of 
their Master, that either by express 
teaching, or evident example, He had 
set these men free from certain tradi- 
tional obligations. 

Now we come to that which is of 
supreme importance, our Lord's answer 
to His critics. First, His answer as- 
sumed responsibility for their action. 
There is not the faintest suggestion of 
defence of what they were doing, as 
though it were something apart from 
Him. He reminded them of what David 
did, and so identified Himself with the 
action of His disciples. 

Moreover, He justified their action, 
and He did so by illustration. Not so 



125 



[MATT. xn. 1-21] 



MATTHEW 



much in the actual words He used as in 
the peculiar illustrations He selected, 
do we touch the deepest heart of this 
defence. He first reminded them of 
David, that is, He took as an illustra- 
tion of the rectitude of His conduct the 
action of the one king of all their his- 
tory who was after God's own heart 
notwithstanding all his failure. Solo- 
mon was the magnificent, but the name 
of Solomon never moved the heart of 
the true Hebrew as did the name of 
David. He passed back in their history 
until He came to the one king in whom 
the kingly ideal had been most perfectly 
realised, and He said, " David when he 
was hungry, and they that were with 
him . . . ate the shewbread, which it 
was not lawful for him to eat, neither 
for them that were with him, but only 
for the priests." David did the thing 
unlawful by their standards, unlawful 
by the technicalities of the law as well 
as by the tradition of the elders. Jesus 
would not have said unlawful if re- 
ferring to tradition merely. Christ was 
always careful to distinguish between 
the law of Moses and tradition. And 
yet He said that David did this, and 
was guiltless. 

Passing from David the king He took 
the other personality that bulks large in 
the Hebrew history, and spoke of the 
priest. He declared that priests pro- 
faned the Temple on the Sabbath day 
in the very act and attitude of their 
worship. The priest must break the 
Sabbath to do his manual work of the 
Temple on the Sabbath. And yet the 
priest was guiltless. Such is the clear 
inference. 

We miss a great deal of the force of 
these things unless we keep our minds 
upon these Pharisees. They were the 
rulers, the teachers of the people; and 
Jesus said to them in effect, You are 
criticising My disciples for the breaking 
of the law; your criticism is not due to 
enlightenment, it is due to ignorance. 
Your objection to what you have seen 
is not due to your perfect understand- 
ing of the deep things of God ; it is due 
to your blindness and misunderstanding 
of them. " If ye had known what this 
meaneth, I desire mercy, and not sacri- 
fice, ye would not have condemned the 
guiltless." Hosea meant, that God looks 



for mercy and not sacrifice; and that if 
a man brings a sacrifice, and there is no 
mercy in his heart, his sacrifice be- 
comes a blasphemy. If you knew, said 
Jesus to these men, what your own 
Scriptures meant. If you only under- 
stood that the hungry man must be fed 
Sabbath or no Sabbath! If you had 
known what all this meant, you would 
not have blamed the guiltless. 

But we have yet to touch the deepest 
note. All that did not make the Phari- 
sees angry enough to want to kill Him ; 
but this did ; " But I say unto you that 
One greater than the Temple is here." 
"For the Son of Man is Lord of the 
Sabbath." The Sabbath is a means of 
grace, the Sabbath is a Divine provision 
by which man can have help and 
strength and blessing, not something by 
which he is to be bound, and fastened, 
and burdened. The Sabbath is that 
through which God in infinite love 
would cheer the drooping heart of hu- 
manity; and it is the Son of Man, the 
Master of men, Who is the Lord and 
Master of the Sabbath. He will take 
the Sabbath and fulfil it according to 
the intention of God's heart, even 
though He violate all the traditions of 
the elders, even if He seem for the mo- 
ment to be breaking the external com- 
mandment of the lav/. The King has 
claimed to have the perfect right to use 
the Sabbath as He would. The King 
distinctly declared that the priest was 
guiltless in what would have been his 
profanity, because he was ministering 
in the Temple ; and then He said, " But 
I say unto you that One greater than 
the Temple is here." And if the priest 
in the Temple is freed from guilt, when 
he appears to break the Sabbath, how 
much more these men journeying with 
Me if they satisfy this hunger by pluck- 
ing ears of corn! The vindication of 
what I do is in Myself. The vindica- 
tion of what My disciples do is in the 
underlying purposes of My ministry. If 
you do not understand what that mean- 
eth, " I desire mercy, and not sacri- 
fice," I understand what it means, and 
as I prosecute the purposes of the infi- 
nite mercy amongst men, I am Lord 
and Master of the Sabbath. 

So, to the listening ear of the rulers, 
this strange young Galilean peasant 



126 



MATTHEW 



[MAM. xir. 1-21] 



claimed a prerogative which is a pre- 
rogative of Deity. He spoke with the 
authority of the one and only God. He 
said what no other man ever dared to 
say. He laid that right hand of His 
upon the most sacred symbol of national 
life, that Sabbath which they were 
desecrating in spirit, and said: I am 
Master of it, and the vindication of 
what men do in fellowship with Me on 
the Sabbath is to be found in the fact 
of their fellowship with Me. J 

But to pass to the next section. 
Here the teaching is even more remark- 
ably and beautifully brought out. We 
suddenly find ourselves in the syna- 
gogue. Again it was the Sabbath day. 
Jesus had come into the synagogue, 
and somewhere in the synagogue was a 
man with a withered hand. These two 
things are supreme; the presence of 
Christ, and the presence of the man 
with the withered hand. Have you 
ever noticed what unconscious compli- 
ments Christ's enemies paid Him? 
When Jesus came into the synagogue 
they immediately connected Him with 
the man with the withered hand, and 
asked Him if it was lawful to heal on 
the Sabbath. There was malice behind 
the question, for we are told they 
asked Him " that - they might accuse 
Hun," He had made an astounding 
claim about the Sabbath, and they were 
determined to deal with Him. They 
were trying to see if they could put 
Him into a difficult position in order to 
accuse Him. 

He answered their question by asking 
another; "What man shall there be of 
you, that shall have one sheep, and if 
this fall into a pit upon the Sabbath 
day, will he not lay hold on it, and lift 
it out ? " Again here is a small matter 
needing careful attention. He did not 
say, If a man see a sheep; but if he 
have one. He said, If your sheep fall 
into the pit you rescue it, and you res- 
cue it because it is yours. " How much 
then is a man of more value than a 
sheep?" You own sheep and care for 
them and rescue them. 

Now we have come into the new light 
and glory. Now the Son of Man is 
claiming not the Sabbath, but the man. 
Now the Son of Man is not only saying 
that He is Lord of the Sabbath, but 



that He is Owner of man. That man 
belongs to Me. I am here to rescue 
him, and to set him free from the 
limitation of the evil that is in the 
world. You know full well, you men 
that criticise, that you would violate 
the Sabbath and be guiltless in saving 
your sheep, because it is yours. Under- 
stand, for evermore, that the supreme 
work of the Sabbath is that of reaching 
man and saving him. 

All the emphasis of the argument 
here is upon the thought of ownership. 
Jesus Christ is not excusing what He 
is going to do upon the basis of author- 
ity. It is the work of necessity. I 
cannot help it; this is My man. That 
was the great cry of His heart. 

There was another occasion when 
they criticised Him about the Sabbath, 
recorded in John's Gospel, which flashes 
its light upon this. When He passed 
through the porches at the Bethesda 
pool, He healed a man on the Sabbath, 
and they criticised Him then. He an- 
swered, " My Father worketh even until 
now, and I work." In other words He 
said; Man by his sin has broken God's 
Sabbath, and God is fulfilling the Sab- 
bath intention of rest by working for 
the rescue of man. So Jesus said to 
the critics in the synagogue; That man 
is not at rest, look at his withered 
hand, he is restless and suffering and 
limited; and I Who am Lord of the 
Sabbath, Who made the golden splen- 
dour of the waving corn, have claimed 
authority over the Sabbath; and I am 
now exercising that Lordship by saving 
My man on the Sabbath, and so ful- 
filling the very deepest intention of the 
Sabbath. Yes, He said, it is lawful to 
do good on the Sabbath. 

When Jesus had said these things the 
Pharisees determined to destroy Him, 
for He had claimed to be Lord of the 
Sabbath, and Owner of man; and to 
have the royal kingly right to do what- 
ever was pleasing to His heart, im- 
pulsed by the tenderest love. 

Then Jesus left the synagogue and 
multitudes of people flocked around 
Him. "Jesus . . . withdrew . . . and 
many followed Him; and He healed 
them all." Oh what virtue coming out 
of Him ! Oh what a stream of life and 



127 



[MATT. xn. 22-37] 



MATTHEW 



health ! It was still the Sabbath, " and 
He healed them all ! " 

He charged the people that they 
should not tell of this healing at the 
time, "that it might be fulfilled which 
was spoken by Isaiah the prophet." 
The prophet of the past saw that this 
supreme Servant, Whom he described, 
would overstep all the boundaries of 
mere prejudice, and nationality, and go 
out to those that lay farther away the 
Gentiles. It is generally said that this 
passage from Isaiah teaches Christ's 
meekness, that if a man is bruised He 
will not break him, and that He will 
not put out the smoking flax, but that 
He will help it. But it really teaches 
Christ's restraint from judgment during 
His ministry of grace. He withdrew in 
order that He might not smite them for 
their hypocrisy; for a bruised reed is 
weakness weakened, and smoking flax 
has the element of destruction in itself, 
and Christ said of these enemies, they 
are bruised reeds, they are smoking 
flax, I cannot break or quench until I 
send forth judgment to victory, and 



then the bruised reed will be broken, 
and the smoking flax fanned into a 
flame for its own quenching. 

This is not to deny that He is very 
gentle with weakness, but to recognize 
that it is not the teaching here. 

It is the great King that we see, 
claiming the Sabbath, claiming the own- 
ership of man, and restraining judg- 
ment which might have proceeded in 
fire against the blasphemers, in order 
that He may accomplish His work in 
His own way, and send forth the mes- 
sage of health to the Gentiles also. He 
restrained judgment because the day of 
His mercy was not perfected, and 
accomplished. 

The outstanding matter of this study 
is that of the claims of Christ. Greater 
than the Temple, Lord of the Sabbath, 
Owner of man, Restrainer of judgment 
until He please. Let us kiss His 
sceptre anew, and bow the knee in the 
presence of His supernal majesty, and 
say, "All hail the power of Jesus' 
name." 



MATTHEW XII. 22-37 



IN this study we shall consider the 
second movement in the opposition 
of the rulers. We have already seen 
how the answers of Jesus to the differ- 
ent positions of the attack of the rulers 
varied; indeed there was a progress in 
His method. In the first, when their 
complaint was concerning His claim in 
respect of the Sabbath, Jesus stood on 
the defensive. In the second of these 
movements, the one which we are now 
to examine, He defended Himself 
against the charge they made, but He 
added to the defence words terrifically 
solemn as He warned these men con- 
cerning the peril which threatened 
them. In the last movement, which we 
have yet to consider, He denounced and 
condemned, refusing absolutely to give 
them evidence when they asked for it. 

Let us first break up the section 
which we are to study into its com- 
ponent parts, and then consider them. 
In verses twenty-two and twenty-three 
we have the occasion of this outbreak 
of conflict. 



"Then was brought unto Him one 
possessed with a devil, blind and dumb : 
and He healed him, insomuch that the 
dumb man spake and saw. And all the 
multitudes were amazed, and said, Can 
this be the Son of David?" 

Then in verse twenty-four, brief and 
yet forceful, we have the account of the 
attack which the rulers made on Him, 
in the presence of this miracle which 
He had performed in their sight, and in 
the sight of the people. 

All the remaining part of the para- 
graph is devoted to Christ's answer to 
the attack. 

Let us look, then, first, at the occa- 
sion; secondly, at the attack; and 
principally and particularly, at Christ's 
answer. 

The occasion was that of the healing 
of a demoniac. A man possessed with 
a demon was brought to Him, a man 
in whose physical life the demon had 
wrought sad havoc, a man who was 
both blind and dumb; and with a word 
of power, with no incantations, with 



128 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xn. 22-37] 



none of the methods of the exorcists of 
that particular time, the man was 
healed; and the fact that the demon 
had been exorcised was made evident 
by the man seeing and speaking. It 
was one of the wonders that Jesus 
wrought habitually. 

The effect produced by this particular 
miracle upon the crowd reveals the real 
meaning of the Pharisees' complaint 
and attack. When the crowds saw 
what Jesus did with this man, they are 
reported to have exclaimed, " Can this 
be the Son of David?" They did not 
say, "Is not this the Son of David?" 
If the question had been in that form 
it would have suggested a stronger con- 
viction that Jesus was the Son of David 
than the question actually did suggest. 
It was the question of the perplexed 
crowd. They had been watching Him, 
and listening to Him, and beholding the 
wonders that He wrought, and at last 
in the presence of this wonderful mir- 
acle, wrought with absolute ease, sim- 
ply by the uttering of a word, they 
cried out in perplexity, " Can this be 
the Son of David?" They meant to 
say, We cannot make up our minds. 
To insert a phrase for the sake of ex- 
position it was as though they had said, 
" Is this, after all, the Son of David? " 

When we hear the question, and see 
what it indicated, we know why the 
Pharisees said what they did. It was 
a perpetual fear among the Pharisees 
and rulers that they might lose their 
hold on the people. Upon occasion they 
said, "What do we?" ... "The world 
is gone after Him." They saw very 
clearly that if His line of teaching was 
accepted, their power would be abso- 
lutely gone; and when they heard this 
wavering, hesitating question, " Can this 
be the Son of David?" they attempted 
to account for the wonder that had pro- 
duced the question by this declaration: 
" This Man doth not cast out demons, 
but by Beelzebub the prince of the 
demons." What they said was either a 
lie and they knew it; or else it was 
the result of their degenerate moral 
nature, so that they were unable to dis- 
tinguish between good and bad, between 
heaven and hell, between purity and 
pollution. Whichever alternative is 
chosen, this at least remains true, they 



were attempting to turn the people from 
the Christ, by attributing the wonders 
that He wrought to diabolic influence. 

The King's answer proceeded along 
two lines. First, that of refutation; 
and, secondly, that of declaration. He 
refuted their argument by appeal to 
logic. This was one of the rare occa- 
sions when Jesus by argument answered 
attacks upon Himself. As a rule, a 
man who criticised Him He let severely 
alone, or replied to his question briefly 
and finally. It would be a very profit- 
able and interesting study to take the 
Gospels and collect the questions men 
asked, and the answers He gave. The 
wonder of the answers of Jesus is re- 
vealed in the fact that we hardly ever 
find that men asked Him two questions 
consecutively; and now, nineteen cen- 
turies later, no man can improve on 
any answer Jesus gave as to the philos- 
ophy revealed, the method adopted, or 
the purpose gained. 

But here, so terrible was the thing 
the rulers had said that Jesus, first of 
all, refuted by argument what they said. 

The charge made against Him was 
that He wrought His wonders by com- 
plicity with evil; that by Beelzebub, 
Satan, He cast Satan out. In His refu- 
tation, our Lord attacked and denied 
their suggestion; and then proceeded to 
state and defend the truth concerning 
His method; He affirmed that He 
wrought by the Spirit, and defended 
His affirmation. 

He revealed in His answer, first, the 
folly of their suggestion; secondly, the 
inconsistency thereof; thirdly, the wil- 
ful rebellion that induced it; fourthly, 
the blindness which caused it; and, 
finally, their complicity with Satan as 
the secret of it. So that commencing 
by denying His own complicity with 
Satan logically, and in such a way that 
they could not reply, He ended by in- 
ferentially charging upon them com- 
plicity with Satan. 

Let us trace these movements one by 
one. First. He showed the folly of their 
suggestion in a simple and logical state- 
ment. He told them that by . common 
knowledge a house divided against it- 
self cannot stand, a " Kingdom divided 
against itself is brought to desolation." 
Therefore if He in complicity with 



129 



[MATT. xn. 22-37] 



MATTHEW 



Satan were casting Satan out, then 
Satan was working for his own 
destruction. 

He next revealed the inconsistency 
of their position, as He said, "If I by 
Beelzebub cast out demons, by whom 
do your sons cast them out? There- 
fore shall they be your judges." There 
was abundant evidence that there were 
exorcists abroad, men who in one way 
or another, were casting our evil spirits. 
Christ did not defend them or attack 
them, but simply referred to them in 
His argument with their fathers, the 
rulers of the people. 

Mark the final words of the argu- 
ment, "But if I by the Spirit of God 
cast out demons, then is the Kingdom 
of God come upon you." There was but 
one alternative to their suggestion; if 
not by Satan, then by the Spirit of God 
is Satan cast out; and in such action 
men were brought face to face with the 
Kingdom of God, not only as to its 
claim, but as to its power. 

In a moment the deeper truth began 
to burn and flame before the eyes of 
these men as to Christ's intention. Not 
only was their charge false and incon- 
sistent; it was of the nature of rebel- 
lion against the Kingdom of God. It 
was because they were living in rebel- 
lion against the Kingdom that they had 
attempted to attack Him. 

Now follow a step further. He now 
took for granted that complicity with 
Beelzebub on His part could no longer 
be maintained; and that His claim that 
He cast out devils by the Spirit must 
be conceded. Taking these things for 
granted, mark the progress of His argu- 
ment. " Or how can one enter into the 
house of the strong man, and spoil his 
goods, except he first bind the strong 
man?" In effect He thus said to 
them; You charge Me with casting out 
demons by the prince of demons; have 
you not eyes with which to see that 
when I cast out demons it is a proof 
that I have already laid My conquering 
hand upon the master of demons; that 
instead of working by his power I am 
working as the result of having over- 
come his power; that I have entered 
into the house of the strong man and 
bound him, and therefore am able to 
spoil his house? The binding of the 



strong one was wrought out by the per- 
fection of the Christ. Not merely by 
virtue of the death of Jesus, but by the 
virtue of His pure humanity did He 
bind the strong one, and so was able to 
spoil his house. As Man He overcame 
the enemy in personal temptation, bound 
him, and thereby made Himself able to 
spoil his house. God's children who 
have entered into His victory by the 
Cross, also know something of what it 
is to bind the strong one. His Cross 
is the force that sets us free to spoil 
the house of the strong one, and rescue 
other souls. 

He said one other thing by way of 
refutation, "He that is not with Me is 
against Me, and he that gathereth not 
with Me scattereth." That was a state- 
ment containing principles of perpetual 
application. Carefully note its setting. 
"He" refers first to Satan, and. in that 
verse, flaming with light, the two great 
personalities are brought into contact, 
the One the Gatherer, and the other 
the scatterer; and they are for ever 
against each other. The truth about 
Satan is not that the King was in com- 
plicity with him. The truth is that He 
was in antagonism to everything he did. 
He had cast the demon out of a man, 
and so had gathered him back into uni- 
fied and balanced life; had gathered 
him back to His family, and to the 
family of God. It was Satan that had 
scattered, it was he that had spoiled. 

Thus as the King commenced by 
showing the folly of saying that Satan 
was working with Him, He ended His 
refutation by declaring the absolute an- 
tagonism between them; He was the 
Gatherer; Satan was the scatterer. 
There are but two forces at work, the 
force that gathers and the force that 
scatters. And Jesus said in effect; Do 
not confuse the Person Who stands at 
the centre of the gathering force with 
the person who stands at the centre of 
the scattering force. A distinction must 
be maintained between good and evil 
in all logical thinking. 

But the "he" of our Lord's state- 
ment has also personal application to 
every life. It is as though Jesus had 
said to these men, all life is centripetal 
or centrifugal. I am gathering. What 
are you doing? He meant to say that 



130 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xn. 22-37] 



they were scattering; that it was not 
He Who was with Satan, but they. 

Thus by one sweeping statement, 
true as God is true and every man 
knows it is true in his deepest heart 
that the Gatherer is against the scat- 
terer, Jesus marked a. clear line, divid- 
ing all He does from all the devil does, 
and that line is His dividing line be- 
tween men. That line is the Judgment 
Throne. We are with Him or against 
Him; and we may know which by 
asking, Are we gathering or are we 
scattering ? 

We now reach those awe-inspiring 
words with which the paragraph closes. 
For searching solemnity they are un- 
surpassed in the records of the things 
Jesus said. We tremble as we read 
them. Jesus Christ opens here before 
the mind a sphere into which if a man 
ever enter, his case is absolutely hope- 
less. The One Who proclaimed, as the 
supreme meaning of His mission, that 
He had come to seek and to save the 
lost; the One Who declared that He 
was able and willing to save and re- 
make men and women whom others had 
cast out as hopeless, is the One Who 
here declared that there is an attitude 
of the human soul which is hopeless. 
Such solemn words as these demand 
our careful attention for two reasons; 
first, in order that we may place no 
untrue emphasis on them ; and, sec- 
ondly, that we may by no means mini- 
mize their terrible meaning. We are in 
danger of making both these mistakes. 
We may read into them meanings 
which He never intended; or we ex- 
plain away the most solemn words 
Jesus Christ ever uttered. The only 
way in which we can hope to under- 
stand, is by taking them in the sim- 
plest way possible. 

The whole statement falls into three 
parts. The first is a solemn warning. 
The second is the chronicle of the ap- 
peal He made to His traducers. Then, 
finally, we have what seem to be the 
most awful words of all, because in 
them it would appear as though Jesus 
Christ Himself had become almost 
hopeless of the men to whom He spoke. 

First, the warning. In order that 
there may be no undue emphasis put 
upon the solemn words, let us carefully 



observe that they constituted a warning, 
and not a sentence. We are not war- 
ranted in believing that the Pharisees 
had committed the unpardonable sin, 
but that they had come near to its com- 
mittal; so near that presently, in the 
final lament, Jesus, usually so full of 
hope for men, in one brief, wailing 
complaint makes it evident that they 
had almost crossed the boundary line. 
But, at the moment when these words 
were uttered, they had not crossed that 
awful boundary line, and the words 
were for warning, and not for sentence. 
Therefore we are not true to the con- 
text, when we say that the blasphemy 
against the Holy Ghost is that of at- 
tributing to the Son of Man complicity 
with Satan. That is blasphemy against 
the Son of Man, and He distinctly said 
that such may be forgiven. 

What, then, is the nature of the 
warning? The Lord had said, "If by 
the Spirit I cast out demons, then is 
the Kingdom of God come upon you;" 
and in those words He evidently in- 
tended to teach that there are only 
these alternatives; exorcism of demons 
is either by Satan or by the Spirit of 
God. They said that He had wrought 
by Satan. In so doing they had denied 
that He wrought by the Spirit, which 
according to His interpretation meant 
that they were refusing the Kingdom of 
God. In the presence of the claims 
of that Kingdom, in the presence of the 
demonstration of the power of that 
Kingdom, they were refusing it. That, 
if it be ultimately and finally persisted 
in, is the sin against the Holy Ghost 
which has no forgiveness. The sin 
against the Holy Ghost is the ultimate 
refusal to believe on the testimony of 
the Spirit concerning Jesus Christ. The 
sin against the Holy Ghost is persistent, 
determined, and final rejection of the 
Spirit's demonstration of the meaning 
of the Kingdom, and of the power of 
the King. 

In the final words of the King this 
statement is found ; " Out of the abun- 
dance of the heart the mouth speaketh." 
Notice that principle. Speaking against 
the Holy Ghost does not consist in a 
theory advanced ; nor in a sentence that 
drops thoughtlessly from the lips. 
When a man says I will not believe the 



131 



22-37] 



MATTHEW 



health ! It was still the Sabbath, " and 
He healed them all!" 

He charged the people that they 
should not tell of this healing at the 
time, "that it might be fulfilled which 
was spoken by Isaiah the prophet." 
The prophet of the past saw that this 
supreme Servant, Whom he described, 
would overstep all the boundaries of 
mere prejudice, and nationality, and go 
out to those that lay farther away the 
Gentiles, It is generally said that this 
passage from Isaiah teaches Christ's 
meekness, that if a man is bruised He 
will not break him, and that He will 
cot put out the smoking flax, but that 
He will help it. But it really teaches 
Christ's restraint from judgment during 
His ministry of grace. He withdrew in 
order that He might not smite them for 
their hypocrisy; for a bruised reed is 
weakness weakened, and smoking flax 
has the element of destruction in itself, 
and Christ said of these enemies, they 
are bruised reeds, they are smoking 
flax, I cannot break or quench until I 
send forth judgment to victory, and 



then the bruised reed will be broken, 
and the smoking flax fanned into a 
flame for its own quenching. 

This is not to deny that He is very 
gentle with weakness, but to recognize 
that it is not the teaching here. 

It is the great King that we see, 
claiming the Sabbath, claiming the own- 
ership of man, and restraining judg- 
ment which might have proceeded in 
fire against the blasphemers, in order 
that He may accomplish His work in 
His own way, and send forth the mes- 
sage of health to the Gentiles also. He 
restrained judgment because the day of 
His mercy was not perfected, and 
accomplished. 

The outstanding matter of this study 
is that of the claims of Christ. Greater 
than the Temple, Lord of the Sabbath, 
Owner of man, Restrainer of judgment 
until He please. Let us kiss His 
sceptre anew, and bow the knee in the 
presence of His supernal majesty, and 
say, "All hail the power of Jesus' 
name." 



MATTHEW XII. 22-37 



IN this study we shall consider the 
second movement in the opposition 
of the rulers. We have already seen 
how the answers of Jesus to the differ- 
ent positions of the attack of the rulers 
varied; indeed there was a progress in 
His method. In the first, when their 
complaint was concerning His claim in 
respect of the Sabbath, Jesus stood on 
the defensive. In the second of these 
movements, the one which we are now 
to examine, He defended Himself 
against the charge they made, but He 
added to the defence words terrifically 
solemn as He warned these men con- 
cerning the peril which threatened 
them. In the last movement, which we 
have yet to consider, He denounced and 
condemned, refusing absolutely to give 
them evidence when they asked for it. 

Let us first break up the section 
which we are to study into its com- 
ponent parts, and then consider them. 
In verses twenty-two and twenty-three 
we have the occasion of this outbreak 
of conflict. 



"Then was brought unto Him one 
possessed with a devil, blind and dumb : 
and He healed him, insomuch that the 
dumb man spake and saw. And all the 
multitudes were amazed, and said, Can 
this be the Son of David ? " 

Then in verse twenty-four, brief and 
yet forceful, we have the account of the 
attack which the rulers made on Him, 
in the presence of this miracle which 
He had performed in their sight, and in 
the sight of the people. 

All the remaining part of the para- 
graph is devoted to Christ's answer to 
the attack. 

Let us look, then, first, at the occa- 
sion; secondly, at the attack; and 
principally and particularly, at Christ's 
answer. 

The occasion was that of the healing 
of a demoniac. A man possessed with 
a demon was brought to Him, a man 
in whose physical life the demon had 
wrought sad havoc, a man who was 
both blind and dumb; and with a word 
of power, with no incantations, with 



128 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xii. 22-372 



none of the methods of the exorcists of 
that particular time, the man was 
healed; and the fact that the demon 
had been exorcised was made evident 
by the man seeing and speaking. It 
was one of the wonders that Jesus 
wrought habitually. 

The effect produced by this particular 
miracle upon the crowd reveals the real 
meaning of the Pharisees' complaint 
and attack. When the crowds saw 
what Jesus did with this man, they are 
reported to have exclaimed, " Can this 
be the Son of David?" They did not 
say, "Is not this the Son of David?" 
If the question had been in that form 
it would have suggested a stronger con- 
viction that Jesus was the Son of David 
than the question actually did suggest. 
It was the question of the perplexed 
crowd. They had been watching Him, 
and listening to Him, and beholding the 
wonders that He wrought, and at last 
in the presence of this wonderful mir- 
acle, wrought with absolute ease, sim- 
ply by the uttering of a word, they 
cried out in perplexity, " Can this be 
the Son of David?" They meant to 
say, We cannot make up our minds. 
To insert a phrase for the sake of ex- 
position it was as though they had said, 
"Is this, after all, tie Son of David?" 

When we hear the question, and see 
what it indicated, we know why the 
Pharisees said what they did. It was 
a perpetual fear among the Pharisees 
and rulers that they might lose their 
hold on the people. Upon occasion they 
said, "What do we?" ... "The world 
is gone after Him." They saw very 
clearly that if His line of teaching was 
accepted, their power would be abso- 
lutely gone; and when they heard this 
wavering, hesitating question, " Can this 
be the Son of David?" they attempted 
to account for the wonder that had pro- 
duced the question by this declaration: 
"This Man doth not cast out demons, 
but by Beelzebub the prince of the 
demons." What they said was either a 
lie and they knew it; or else it was 
the result of their degenerate moral 
nature, so that they were unable to dis- 
tinguish between good and bad, between 
heaven and hell, between purity and 
pollution. Whichever alternative is 
chosen, this at least remains true, they 



were attempting to turn the people from 
the Christ, by attributing the wonders 
that He wrought to diabolic influence. 

The King's answer proceeded along 
two lines. First, that of refutation; 
and, secondly, that of declaration. He 
refuted their argument by appeal to 
logic. This was one of the rare occa- 
sions when Jesus by argument answered 
attacks upon Himself. As a rule, a 
man who criticised Him He let severely 
alone, or replied to his question briefly 
and finally. It would be a very profit- 
able and interesting study to take the 
Gospels and collect the questions men 
asked, and the answers He gave. The 
wonder of the answers of Jesus is re- 
vealed in the fact that we hardly ever 
find that men asked Him two questions 
consecutively; and now, nineteen cen- 
turies later, no man can improve on 
any answer Jesus gave as to the philos- 
ophy revealed, the method adopted, or 
the purpose gained. 

But here, so terrible was the thing 
the rulers had said that Jesus, first of 
all, refuted by argument what they said. 

The charge made against Him was 
that He wrought His wonders by com- 
plicity with evil; that by Beelzebub, 
Satan, He cast Satan out. In His refu- 
tation, our .Lord attacked and denied 
their suggestion; and then proceeded to 
state and defend the truth concerning 
His method; He affirmed that He 
wrought by the Spirit, and defended 
His affirmation. 

He revealed in His answer, first, the 
folly of their suggestion; secondly, the 
inconsistency thereof; thirdly, the wil- 
ful rebellion that induced it; fourthly, 
the blindness which caused it; and, 
finally, their complicity with Satan as 
the secret of it. So that commencing 
by denying His own complicity with 
Satan logically, and in such a way that 
they could not reply, He ended by in- 
ferentially charging upon them com- 
plicity with Satan. 

Let us trace these movements one by 
one. First He showed the folly of their 
suggestion in a simple and logical state- 
ment. He told them that by common 
knowledge a house divided against it- 
self cannot stand, a "Kingdom divided 
against itself is brought to desolation." 
Therefore if He in complicity with 



129 



[MATT. xn. 22-37] 



MATTHEW 



Satan were casting Satan out, then 
Satan was working for his own 
destruction. 

He next revealed the inconsistency 
of their position, as He said, " If I by 
Beelzebub cast out demons, by whom 
do your sons cast them out? There- 
fore shall they be your judges." There 
was abundant evidence that there were 
exorcists abroad, men who in one way 
or another, were casting our evil spirits. 
Christ did not defend them or attack 
them, but simply referred to them in 
His argument with their fathers, the 
rulers of the people. 

Mark the final words of the argu- 
ment, "But if I by the Spirit of God 
cast out demons, then is the Kingdom 
of God come upon you." There was but 
one alternative to their suggestion; if 
not by Satan, then by the Spirit of God 
is Satan cast out; and in such action 
men were brought face to face with the 
Kingdom of God, not only as to its 
claim, but as to its power. 

In a moment the deeper truth began 
to burn and flame before the eyes of 
these men as to Christ's intention. Not 
only was their charge false and incon- 
sistent; it was of the nature of rebel- 
lion against the Kingdom of God. It 
was because they were living in rebel- 
lion against the Kingdom that they had 
attempted to attack Him. 

Now follow a step further. He now 
took for granted that complicity with 
Beelzebub on His part could no longer 
be maintained; and that His claim that 
He cast out devils by the Spirit must 
be conceded. Taking these things for 
granted, mark the progress of His argu- 
ment. " Or how can one enter into the 
house of the strong man, and spoil his 
goods, except he first bind the strong 
man?" In effect He thus said to 
them; You charge Me with casting out 
demons by the prince of demons; have 
you not eyes with which to see that 
when I cast out demons it is a proof 
that I have already laid My conquering 
hand upon the master of demons; that 
instead of working by his power I am 
working as the result of having over- 
come his power; that I have entered 
into the house of the strong man and 
bound him, and therefore am able to 
spoil his house? The binding of the 



strong one was wrought out by the per- 
fection of the Christ. Not merely by 
virtue of the death of Jesus, but by the 
virtue of His pure humanity did He 
bind the strong one, and so was able to 
spoil his house. As Man He overcame 
the enemy in personal temptation, bound 
him, and thereby made Himself able to 
spoil his house. God's children who 
have entered into His victory by the 
Cross, also know something of what it 
is to bind the strong one. His Cross 
is the force that sets us free to spoil 
the house of the strong one, and rescue 
other souls. 

He said one other thing by way of 
refutation, "He that is not with Me is 
against Me, and he that gathereth not 
with Me scattereth." That was a state- 
ment containing principles of perpetual 
application. Carefully note its setting. 
"He" refers first to Satan, and. in that 
verse, flaming with light, the two great 
personalities are brought into contact, 
the One the Gatherer, and the other 
the scatterer; and they are for ever 
against each other. The truth about 
Satan is not that the King was in com- 
plicity with him. The truth is that He 
was in antagonism to everything he did. 
He had cast the demon out of a man, 
and so had gathered him back into uni- 
fied and balanced life; had gathered 
him back to His family, and to the 
family of God. It was Satan that had 
scattered, it was he that had spoiled. 

Thus as the King commenced by 
showing the folly of saying that Satan 
was working with Him, He ended His 
refutation by declaring the absolute an- 
tagonism between them; He was the 
Gatherer; Satan was the scatterer. 
There are but two forces at work, the 
force that gathers and the force that 
scatters. And Jesus said in effect; Do 
not confuse the Person Who stands at 
the centre of the gathering force with 
the person who stands at the centre of 
the scattering force. A distinction must 
be maintained between good and evil 
in all logical thinking. 

But the "he" of our Lord's state- 
ment has also personal application to 
every life. It is as though Jesus had 
said to these men, all life is centripetal 
or centrifugal. I am gathering. What 
are you doing? He meant to say that 



130 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xn. 22-37] 



they were scattering; that it was not 
He Who was with Satan, but they. 

Thus by one sweeping statement, 
true as God is true and every man 
knows it is true in his deepest heart- 
that the Gatherer is against the scat- 
terer, Jesus marked a clear line, divid- 
ing all He does from all the devil does, 
and that line is His dividing line be- 
tween men. That line is the Judgment 
Throne. We are with Him or against 
Him ; and we may know which by 
asking, Are we gathering or are we 
scattering ? 

We now reach those awe-inspiring 
words with which the paragraph closes. 
For searching solemnity they are un- 
surpassed in the records of the things 
Jesus said. We tremble as we read 
them. Jesus Christ opens here before 
the mind a sphere into which if a man 
ever enter, his case is absolutely hope- 
less. The One Who proclaimed, as the 
supreme meaning of His mission, that 
He had come to seek and to save the 
lost; the One Who declared that He 
was able and willing to save and re- 
make men and women whom others had 
cast out as hopeless, is the One Who 
here declared that there is an attitude 
of the human soul which is hopeless. 
Such solemn words as these demand 
our careful attention for two reasons; 
first, in order that we may place no 
untrue emphasis on them; and, sec- 
ondly, that we may by no means mini- 
mize their terrible meaning. We are in 
danger of making both these mistakes. 
We may read into them meanings 
which He never intended; or we ex- 
plain away the most solemn words 
Jesus Christ ever uttered. The only 
way in which we can hope to under- 
stand, is by taking them in the sim- 
plest way possible. 

The whole statement falls into three 
parts. The first is a solemn warning. 
The second is the chronicle of the ap- 
peal He made to His traducers. Then, 
finally, we have what seem to be the 
most awful words of all, because in 
them it would appear as though Jesus 
Christ Himself had become almost 
hopeless of the men to whom He spoke. 

First, the warning. In order that 
there may be no undue emphasis put 
upon the solemn words, let us carefully 



observe that they constituted a warning, 
and not a sentence. We are not war- 
ranted in believing that the Pharisees 
had committed the unpardonable sin, 
but that they had come near to its com- 
mittal; so near that presently, in the 
final lament, Jesus, usually so full of 
hope for men, in one brief, wailing 
complaint makes it evident that they 
had almost crossed the boundary line. 
But, at the moment when these words 
were uttered, they had not crossed that 
awful boundary line, and the words 
were for warning, and not for sentence. 
Therefore we are not true to the con- 
text, when we say that the blasphemy 
against the Holy Ghost is that of at- 
tributing to the Son of Man complicity 
with Satan. That is blasphemy against 
the Son of Man, and He distinctly said 
that such may be forgiven. 

What, then, is the nature of the 
warning? The Lord had said, "If by 
the Spirit I cast out demons, then is 
the Kingdom of God come upon you;" 
and in those words He evidently in- 
tended to teach that there are only 
these alternatives; exorcism of demons 
is either by Satan or by the Spirit of 
God. They said that He had wrought 
by Satan. In so doing they had denied 
that He wrought by the Spirit, which 
according to His interpretation meant 
that they were refusing the Kingdom of 
God. In the presence of the claims 
of that Kingdom, in the presence of the 
demonstration of the power of that 
Kingdom, they were refusing it. That, 
if it be ultimately and finally persisted 
in, is the sin against the Holy Ghost 
which has no forgiveness. The sin 
against the Holy Ghost is the ultimate 
refusal to believe on the testimony of 
the Spirit concerning Jesus Christ. The 
sin against the Holy Ghost is persistent, 
determined, and final rejection of the 
Spirit's demonstration of the meaning 
of the Kingdom, and of the power of 
the King. 

In the final words of the King this 
statement is found ; " Out of the abun- 
dance of the heart the mouth speaketh." 
Notice that principle. Speaking against 
the Holy Ghost does not consist in a 
theory advanced ; nor in a sentence that 
drops thoughtlessly from the lips. 
When a man says I will not believe the 



131 



[MATT. xii. 38-45] 



MATTHEW 



testimony, he does so because in his 
heart he is refusing the King. That is 
the unpardonable sin. There is no sin 
under heaven that may not be put 
away by infinite mercy, through the 
Cross, except the sin which declines to 
receive the mercy, to receive the grace, 
because it declines to submit to the 
sceptre of the King. 

These men were very near that sin. 
He declared that sin can be forgiven so 
far as it is a slight and insult to Him ; 
but if men persist in refusal to obey, if 
they will have none of His grace, then 
they cannot be forgiven. The sin 
against the Holy Ghost is wilful, per- 
sonal, final rejection of the Spirit's 
testimony, by words of the mouth which 
express the decision of the heart. 

Then He made His appeal to them; 
" Either make the tree good, and its 
fruit good, or make the tree corrupt and 
its fruit corrupt." Say that you know 
the tree is corrupt because its fruit is 
corrupt; or dare to say that the tree is 
good, because its fruit is good. There 
is in these words the touch of a great 
pity, of a great desire to help these 
men. He appealed to them not to at- 
tribute good fruit to a corrupt tree. 
That is what they were doing. They 
said that the good result, of a man 
freed from demon possession, was 
wrought by Satan. He appealed to them 
to be consistent; to believe on Him for 
the very works' sake. 

Then finally He uttered the most 
awe-inspiring words of all ; " Ye off- 
spring of vipers, how can ye, being 
evil, speak good things ? " The sever- 
ity of that consists in His evident pity 
for them. It seems as if even the hope- 
ful spirit of Christ was almost hopeless 
about these men. He said, How can ye 
speak a true thing? How can ye say 



the tree is good because its fruit is 
good? How can you tell the truth? 
You are the offspring of vipers; you 
are morally degenerate; you have lost 
your moral discrimination. 

It is impossible to undertake a study 
like this, without feeling its searching 
force and power in one's own heart and 
life. The power of Christ is as evident 
to-day as ever. The works that He is 
doing in our time are far more wonder- 
ful than the works that He did in the 
days of His flesh. There are multi- 
tudes of witnesses who can tell of moral 
change in their lives, that cannot be 
produced in any other way than by His 
power; men who were mean and das- 
tardly, and to-day are victorious and 
noble. On every hand evidences of His 
power abound, as mighty, and mightier, 
than any wrought in the material realm. 
They are the moral victories of Jesus 
to-day. J. Cotter Morrison, in his book, 
The Service of Man, in which he pro- 
fesses not to believe in Christ, says, 
"The Christian doctrine has the power 
of elevating and developing saintliness 
which has had no equal in any other 
creed or philosophy." How do we ac- 
count for that? The answer to this 
question will depend upon what we are 
in ourselves. If in our heart there is 
simple honesty, there is but one answer 
He Who flings out impurity is pure; 
He Who saves man from the power of 
passion is in Himself a Master of th.3 
tides of passion; He Who lifts a man 
from degradation is Himself noble and 
honest. To see these present-day mir- 
acles in the realm of morals, is to be 
compelled, unless the heart' be utterly 
depraved, to crown Him Lord of all, 
kiss His sceptre, and bow in reverential 
worship in the presence of His glory. 



MATTHEW XII. 38-45 



IN this paragraph we have the last 
phase of this particular conflict of 
our Lord with the rulers. Concerning 
the Sabbath He had assumed the de- 
fensive attitude, claiming to be Lord of 
the Sabbath and Possessor of men. In 
me second phase of the controversy, 



when His power was under discussion, 
He defended Himself against the 
charge they made of complicity with 
Satan, and then in some of the most 
solemn words that ever fell from His 
lips, warned them of the awful peril 
that threatened them when they made 



132 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xii. 38-45] 



such a charge and thus revealed their 
inability to distinguish between good 
and bad. 

The time-note "Then" with which 
this section begins shows us that this 
demand for a sign followed immedi- 
ately upon the King's solemn words of 
warning. That is in itself significant 
and partly accounts for the answer they 
received. That answer was a positive 
and emphatic refusal to give them a 
sign such as they asked, followed by 
-Srords of direct and searching denunci- 
ation and condemnation. 

In Matthew's account of this event 
we have first the request of the Scribes 
and Pharisees; and secondly the care- 
ful and revealing answer of the King; 
both .of which demand our very careful 
consideration in the light of the whole 
of the surroundings, and especially that 
process of controversy which we have 
been considering. 

The tone and temper of these men is 
revealed in all that has gone before, 
and we must take tune to consider this 
if we are to understand their request, 
and the King's answer. If we glance 
back in the chapter to the fourteenth 
verse, we have at once a revelation of 
their underlying motive. Then Matthew 
tells us that after Jesus had answered 
their question as to the legality of 
healing a man on the Sabbath, by ap- 
peal to them, and by healing the man 
with the withered hand; "The Phari- 
sees went out, and took counsel against 
Him, how they might destroy Him." 
That purpose was still in their heart 
when they accused Him of casting out 
demons by Beelzebub; and after His 
stern rebuke and solemn warning, it 
was the inspiration of this request. 
They were not honestly seeking for a 
sign, as men who really desired to 
know the truth about Him. The re- 
quest was in itself malicious. They 
had come to definite conclusion as to 
what their line of action toward Him 
should be. They were set upon His 
destruction; and their request was in- 
spired by their malice. 

Its tone was that of satire, " Teacher, 
we would see a sign from Thee." This 
is self-evident in the light of the record 
of what they had already said concern- 
ing Him which we find in the twenty- 



fourth verse, " This man doth not cast 
out demons, but by Beelzebub the princ> 
of the demons." If that statement 
did not express honest conviction, it 
certainly revealed their attitude toward 
Him personally, and out of such an at- 
titude the request for a sign could not 
be honest. They were not really pre- 
pared to receive a sign. If they had 
been, the casting out of the demons was 
in itself sufficient to have proved His 
co-operation with the Spirit of God, as 
He had declared. Thus when a suffi- 
cient sign had been given they had re- 
fused it by attempting to account for it 
in the most terrible way. Yet these 
men, already hardened against convinc- 
ing signs, asked for one; and the ask- 
ing was satirical, the asking of men 
who were not prepared to accept as 
sufficient any sign He could give, be- 
cause of their personal hatred of Him. 
That is exactly what He meant when 
He declared in words of the sternest, 
"Ye generation of vipers, how can ye, 
being evil, speak good things? for out 
of the abundance of the heart the 
mouth speaketh." Their use of the 
word "Teacher" was in itself an in- 
sult, as they refused to accept Him or 
His teaching. Their spirit was exactly 
that of the men who mocked at Isaiah, 
saying, " Whom will He teach knowl- 
edge?" (xxviii. 9). They despised 
and rejected the Teacher and were de- 
termined not to accept His teaching; 
yet they called Him " Teacher " ! They 
came to Him with this request, while 
they were filled with wilful and wicked 
unbelief. They had seen many of His 
mighty works, but under the impulse of 
a deep and growing hatred they dis- 
counted them all; and their demand 
now was for a sensual and spectacular 
proof, such as He never gave, and such 
as, even had He given, they would no 
more have yielded to as proving the 
divinity of His mission than they had 
done in the case of the signs of His 
beneficent and mighty operations in the 
relief of human suffering both physical 
and mental. 

The paragraph is occupied mainly 
with the King's answer. This answer 
is remarkable in every way, but the 
first matter which is impressive is that, 
refusing definitely and in so many 



133 



[MA**, xir. 38-45] 



MATTHEW 



words, to give them the sign they 
asked, He lifted the matter out of the 
then present surroundings, and spoke 
wholly of the future. For the purpose 
of careful consideration we may divide 
this answer into three parts. The first 
had to do with the Last Sign which 
would be given; and suggested another 
opportunity which would be created for 
that generation (39-40). The second 
dealt with the Last Judgment; and sol- 
emnly declared the nature of the ver- 
dict which would be found concerning 
the generation (41-42). The third de- 
scribed the Last State of the genera- 
tion, and was of the nature of a 
sentence pronounced (43-45). Thus, in 
the presence of men who represented 
their generation, the King now spoke 
as One Whose testimony was rejected, 
and Whose signs had been ignored; 
and dealt with the future, foretelling an 
opportunity, a verdict, and a sentence. 

While refusing a sign He promised 
a sign; and thus in the presence of 
their malicious hostility foretold the 
new opportunity which would be cre- 
ated for them by the carrying out to 
completeness of His divine work in the 
world. His purpose was that of saving 
and redeeming. Therefore He refused 
the sign they asked, which would have 
had no effect; and promised them the 
only sign that could by any means ar- 
rest and constrain them, that namely of 
His own Resurrection from the dead 
after their malice had encompassed that 
death. The giving of that sign would 
afford them a new and final opportunity. 

The awful solemnity of the occasion 
is revealed in the words in which the 
King uttered His estimate of these 
men, and of the generation which they 
represented in their hostility to Him. 
That estimate is revealed in the two 
words which He employed, "evil," and 
" adulterous." The first described what 
they were in themselves. The second 
described their failure in relationship 
to God. 

The word " evil " really means harm- 
ful, hurtful; and thus was two-edged 
as the King used it. It described the 
influence these men were exerting, and 
thus revealed their true character. In 
spite of all their external observances 
of religion they were essentially evil, 



wicked of heart; and therefore in spite 
of all their teaching of the formulae of 
religion and morality, they were exert- 
ing and influence that was hurtful ; and 
thus the generation which they in- 
fluenced was as evil as they were in 
themselves. 

The word "adulterous" is a terribly 
searching one, and the more so in that 
here it is certain that the King used it, 
not in its material or physical sense, 
but in its spiritual significance. This 
was a method of use not unfamiliar to 
these men, in that they knew at least 
the letter of their own Sacred Scrip- 
tures. The figure implicated is that 
most sacred one o the Old Testament 
in which Jehovah speaks of His people 
as betrothed to Him; and the sin de- 
scribed is that most terrible sin of spiri- 
tual harlotry which Hosea had dealt 
with. The word, as the King used it, 
was a charge made against these men 
of disloyalty, infidelity to the sacred 
and holy covenant between them and 
Jehovah. They were adulterous, un- 
faithful to their vows. The one burn- 
ing word was a condensation of the 
complaint of Hosea; "Jehovah hath a 
controversy with the inhabitants of the 
land, because there is no truth, nor 
goodness, nor knowledge of God in the 
land;" which was the prophet's inter- 
pretation of his figure of adultery and 
harlotry in the spiritual realm. 

Such was the King's estimate of these 
men, and of the generation of which 
they were the spokesmen when they re- 
quested a sign. And in this hour of 
their malicious, satirical unbelief, He 
told them of the one full and final sign 
which would presently be given to them. 
That sign would in all essentials be 
similar to one with which they were 
perfectly familiar. They knew how 
Jonah had been a sign to Nineveh in 
its sin by virtue of the fact that he 
had appeared in the city a preacher of 
Jehovah, after he had been cast out to 
death. That is the only possible solu- 
tion of the words of the King here, for 
in that is the only parallel between 
Jonah and Jesus. In every other way 
they stand in contrast. That throws 
some light upon the book of Jonah, but 
that is not now our subject. 

Thus our Lord declared to these men 



134 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xii. 38-453 



that His final sign would be that after 
their hatred had encompassed His 
death, He would return out of death, 
and the demonstration of the truth of 
His teaching, and the divinity of His 
mission would be found in that return. 
How all this was verified we know full 
well. To men in evil mood asking a 
sign, the King spoke of the only sign 
which would be sufficient for such 
demonstration, the sign which would 
be the last possible. They had re- 
fused every other sign possible. They 
must now wait for that. 

From that foretelling of a last sign, 
the King passed to the uttering of His 
last verdict on these men and their gen- 
eration. This He did illustratively by 
instituting two comparisons, and utter- 
ing a two-fold condemnation. 

His first comparison was between the 
men of Nineveh and the men and gen- 
eration with which He was personally 
dealing. The men of Nineveh were 
honest. They received the sign, heard 
the preaching and yielded to it in re- 
pentance. The men of His own gener- 
ation would fail in that particular. 
The accuracy of the prediction we 
know. After the resurrection the truth 
was proclaimed with all the signs o 
Pentecostal power following therefrom, 
and with what results we know. 

His second comparison was between 
the Queen of the South and the gener- 
ation. She had come from the ends of 
the earth in diligent determination to 
hear the wisdom of Solomon, while 
their diligence had been that of per- 
sistent determination to silence the 
speech of the King. 

The condemnation which the King 
announced was the result of the com- 
parisons He made. He claimed to be 
greater than Jonah under whose preach- 
ing Nineveh had repented, and greater 
than Solomon to receive whose teaching 
the Queen of the South had shown such 
diligence. The comparison has another 
application also. They were children 
of the Covenant, familiar with the 
Divine Economy, versed in the great 
prophetic Scriptures; while Nineveh 
was a city outside the Covenant, and 
without the advantages which Israel 
had possessed, and the Queen of the 
South was of another nation and peo- 



ple, and so had not the privileges of 
the chosen and peculiar people. 

Thus less enlightened people had 
obeyed less enlightening preaching and 
teaching; and in that fact the patent 
condemnation of those to whom He 
spoke, and who were to receive His 
final sign was declared. 

The last part of the answer of the 
King was a very remarkable and in- 
clusive summing up of the whole situ- 
ation, and pronouncement of sentence. 
This takes the form of an illustration 
drawn from individual experience in 
the matter of demon possession; and 
if we examine that with care we shall 
be prepared for the application which 
the King made when He said, " Even 
so shall it be also unto this evil 
generation." 

The illustration begins at the point o 
dispossession. An unclean spirit is 
cast out of a man. The Lord shows 
the activity of that spirit. It needs 
some medium through which to act; 
it is restless and dissatisfied, unable to 
find what it seeks, for lack of such ma- 
terial medium. That in itself is a most 
remarkable revelation throwing- light 
on a dark subject. It does not, how- 
ever, come within the purpose of the 
present consideration to follow it up. 
For us it leads up to the return of the 
evil spirit to the man, and to the dis- 
covery of what condition the man 
was in. That condition is described 
in the words, " Empty, swept, and gar- 
nished." The arresting word is the 
first, "empty" The man was im- 
proved in certain ways, "swept and 
garnished;" but not possessed, empty 1 
The result was that the improvements 
were of no avail. Seeing there was no 
indweller, possessing, holding, master- 
ing, the unclean spirit re-entered, taking 
others with him, and all the improve- 
ment was swept away, and the last 
state of the man was worse than the 
first. To cast out the unclean is of no 
lasting value, unless there follow new 
possession by the clean. 

That is in itself a wonderful revela* 
tion of what is necessary ' to the re- 
making of a man and of society; and 
the King applied it immediately to His 
generation, that is to the men with 



135 



[MATT. xir. 46-50] 



MATTHEW 



whom He was dealing and to those 
whom they represented. 

Thus inferentially He claimed that 
His presence and mission had loosed 
the power of evil. All His casting out 
of demons, which they had criticised, 
had but illustrated this wider fact, that 
while He was among them,, the whole 
underworld of evil was within His gov- 
ernment, and for a period He had 
held it in check and given men and the 
age an opportunity for better things. 
At this point human responsibility be- 
gan. It was not enough that men 
should be loosed from the powers of 
evil. They must be submitted to the 
good. He Who had cast out the evil 
spirits was Himself the King, able to 
possess the swept and garnished houses, 
so that they should be no longer empty, 
but held in possession by purity and 
power stronger than all the power of 
the enemy. This they had refused in 
their rejection of Him, and therefore 
the house though improved, " swept and 
garnished," would sink to a lower level 
as more and worse evil spirits took 
possession. It was a solemn but care- 
fully explained sentence; every word 
of which was fulfilled so far as that 
generation was concerned; and every 
word of which is fulfilled in the case 
of all men who are brought into con- 
tact with the King. 

In the course of this study we have 
incidentally noticed, and it should now 
be directly recognized, that the King 
treated the opposition of the rulers as 
being the expression of the dominant 
spirit of the age; and therefore while 
dealing with those men, He constantly 
addressed Himself to the " Generation." 
"An evil and adulterous generation" 
(39); "The men of Nineveh shall 
stand up in the judgment with this 



generation" (41); "The Queen of the 
South shall rise up in the judgment 
with this generation" (42). "This evil 
generation" (45). The lessons there- 
fore are peculiarly applicable to an age, 
while having, of course, an immediate 
application to individuals. 

Our generation lives in the light of 
the ultimate sign. The supreme vindi- 
cation of the Christian Evangel, and 
demonstration of the Kingship of Jesus 
is that of the Resurrection; and that 
resurrection attested by the fact of the 
moral and spiritual changes wrought in 
the lives of countless multitudes of men 
and women. The Kingship of Christ 
is more than that of One Who casts 
out unclean spirits. It is that of One 
Who takes possession, and holds for 
purity against all opposing forces. 
This is proven, as we have said, in all 
those who have proved His power. 

The teaching of His verdicts is that 
judgment will be according to oppor- 
tunity. Therefore seeing that the 
Resurrection thus attested, proves Him 
the greatest Prophet, the greatest King, 
those who refuse His teaching and 
rebel against His rule will merit the 
severest condemnation. 

The warning of His sentences is 
patent and pertinent. Christ's presence 
always loosens the bonds of evil. Men 
always are conscious of that, whether 
they confess it or yield to it or no ! 
Sometimes in the sense of that possi- 
bility we sweep and garnish our 
houses! We are great on cleanliness 
and decoration ! Let us beware ! Such 
swept and garnished houses are attrac- 
tive to demons. Unless they are pos- 
sessed and held by the King through 
His Spirit, the last state may be worse 
than the first. 



MATTHEW XII. 46-50 



IN our last three studies we have 
been considering the opposition of 
the rulers to the King as it manifested 
itself along three lines of attack. The 
first was that of their criticism of His 
attitude toward the Sabbath ; the second 
that of their attempt to account for His 
power; and the third that of their re- 
quest for a sign. 



His attitude toward the Sabbath He 
defended. His power, He declared to 
be that of co-operation with the Spirit 
of God, and solemnly warned these men 
of the peril they were running in re- 
fusing to recognize this fact. As to a 
sign, He refused what they asked in the 
material realm, and foretold the ulti- 
mate sign of His own resurrection. 



136 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xii. 46-50] 



We now come to a brief paragraph 
which at first does not seem to have 
any relation to this movement of oppo- 
sition, giving as it does the account of 
the coming to Him, at this period, of 
His mother and His brethren. 

As a matter of fact, the story is vi- 
tally and intimately related to all that 
has preceded it, and is the account of 
opposition of the most subtle and pow- 
erful kind, proceeding from an entirely 
different motive. 

In the incident recorded, interpreted 
in the light of the words of the Bang 
called out thereby, we have a superla- 
tive revelation of the most subtle form 
which opposition to the work of the 
establishment of the Kingdom of God 
ever takes. In this story therefore we 
also find a revelation of the reason why 
the Master, in the prosecution of His 
work, did not depend upon purely hu- 
man affection, or trust Himself to those 
who were united to Him merely by the 
ties of earthly relationship. 

In order that we may understand the 
passage, we shall consider the signifi- 
cance of the coming of Mary, and the 
consequent meaning of the words of the 
King. 

Matthew simply records the fact that 
while He was speaking to the multi- 
tudes, His mother and His brethren 
stood without, seeking to speak with 
Him. If we turn to Mark's account of 
the same incident, we have some ex- 
planation of the reason why they came 
to Him at this time. The multitudes 
were so eager to be near Him, and to 
hear Him, that He and the disciples 
had neither time nor room to eat bread ; 
" and when His friends heard it, they 
went out to lay hold on Him; for they 
said, He is beside Himself" (Mark 
in. 21). 

It is evident that His mother and 
His brethren were not with Hun at 
this time, but in all probability were 
in Nazareth, where the news reached 
them of His persistent and laborious 
toil, and of the fact that He was com- 
ing into conflict with the rulers of the 
people. The news filled them with 
alarm, and they came to the conclusion 
that He was beside Himself, and im- 
mediately started on their journey to 
Him, in order to take Him away, and 



prevent His continuing this kind of 
work. Between the time when this 
rumour reached them and their arrival, 
His conflict with the rulers had con- 
tinued concerning His power, and evi- 
dently concerning the sign also, al- 
though Mark does not chronicle that 
in the same connection. 

At last His mother and His brethren 
arrived in Capernaum, where He prob- 
ably then was (Mark iii. 31). 

Thus Mary's journey from Nazareth 
to Capernaum was the result of her 
great love for Him, and was taken be- 
cause she thought He had lost His 
reason, and she would fain save Him 
from the results of His own folly. 

If that was the reason of the coming 
of Mary, we at once have a revelation 
which accounts for the attitude of the 
King when He was informed of her ar- 
rival. It is a clear and superlative il- 
lustration of the fact that the Kingdom 
of God cannot be established on natural 
lines. His mother was, as to all 
earthly relationship, His nearest of kin, 
and yet she was evidently entirely un- 
able to understand His method. His 
foes had said that the works He 
wrought were the result of co-operation 
with Beelzebub. His lovers declared 
that He had lost His reason. This is 
a startling revelation of how near 
hatred and love may be in the conclu- 
sions at which they arrive, when 
neither is familiar with the deepest 
secret prompting the activity of those 
who are working in fellowship with 
God. 

In the light of this consideration of 
the significance of the coming of Mary, 
we may now consider more particu- 
larly the meaning of the words of 
Jesus. In the question He asked, and 
the declaration He made, He gave 
fresh evidence of the fact that the 
supreme passion of His heart was that 
of the accomplishment of the will of 
God. Such accomplishment He made 
the standard of His judgment, and the 
gauge of His relationships. Every other 
interest, however near, or however 
sacred by all the laws of human inter- 
relationship, He counted secondary, and 
without hesitation or tremor, broke with 
them completely when they threatened 



137 



[MATT. xn. 46-50] 



MATTHEW 



in any measure to interfere with that 
supreme matter. 

This is not to say that He lost His 
affection for His brethren, or failed in 
love to His mother. In the last and 
awful hours of His intensest suffering, 
He still thought of her, and with ten- 
der solicitude entrusted her to the care 
of John. His brethren, moreover, ac- 
cording to the flesh, we find eventually 
numbered among His disciples. But in 
this hour, when unable to understand 
Him, they sought from the motive of a 
true affection to hinder Him in His 
work, He resolutely refused to yield to 
their desire, and by His words revealed 
the fact that He counted earthly rela- 
tionships as nothing compared to those 
spiritual relationships which were born 
of a common loyalty to the will of God. 

Thus we see the King Himself enter- 
ing into the experience to which He 
referred when He declared that "a 
man's foes should be they of his own 
household;" and that He "came not 
to send peace, but a sword." 

It is impossible thus carefully to con- 
sider the story of the mother and the 
brethren of Jesus without feeling that 
this was a phase of opposition more 
subtle than any which had preceded it. 
In so far as it is permitted us to in- 
terpret His experience by our own, we 
should certainly be inclined to say that 
it was easier to resist the definite hos- 
tility of those who were in open re- 
bellion, than to stand firm against 
suggestions which came from those who 
loved Him, and who, according to the 
measure of their light, were acting in 
His interest. Nothing other than the 
clearest vision of the will of God, and 
the most perfect acquiescence therein, 
would be equal to victory in such an 
hour of crisis. 

The words of Jesus on the positive 
side are full of beauty and of encour- 
agement for all those who share His 
devotion to the accomplishment of the 
Divine will. Conscious of the mistake 
made by His mother and His brethren, 
He pointed to the disciples, and de- 
clared that they were His next of kin. 
It is a truth not easy to believe, and 
yet witness is borne to it in every de- 
partment of life. The highest and 
closest comradeships are always the re- 



sult of spiritual affinity. That is the 
basis of true marriage. It is moreover, 
the ground of all high fellowship, such 
as that of art, or music, or literature. 
Those who come into communion upon 
the basis of a common capacity for the 
higher things of the spiritual life, find 
closer kinship than those united by ties 
of blood where there is no such spiri- 
tual affinity. And supremely this is 
true of those who are one in their 
vision of the Kingdom of God, in their 
passion for its realisation, and in their 
devotion to the King Himself. 

It is an amazing word when we think 
of the frailty of these disciples. Under 
the stress of all that lay before them, 
they were presently scattered like chaff 
before the wind; but notwithstanding 
all that, the history of the Christian 
Church has vindicated this gracious 
word of the King. When presently by 
the way of His resurrection, and the 
coming of the Spirit, the vision of these 
men was clarified, and their under- 
standing of the true meaning of His 
mission was perfected, they were 
welded together with each other and 
with Him in a unity far mightier than 
that of flesh and blood relationship, 
and as they went forth to the fulfilment 
of His purposes in the world, like their 
Master they were enabled to count all 
the ties of human kinship as of no 
moment when in any measure they in- 
terfered with their loyalty to Him. 

Such a meditation as this compels 
the inquiry as to how nearly those of 
us who profess to follow in His train 
are really related to the King. If we 
not only admire, but do the will of His 
Father, we are, according to His own 
most gracious words, related to Him as 
brethren, sisters, mother; that is, we 
are His next of kin. 

As we have already inferred, in the 
case of the disciples who were gathered 
about Him, His words were prophetic 
rather than descriptive. In measure 
they were even then devoted to the will 
of God, but He knew how they, too, ere 
long would falter and fail. Neverthe- 
less, they had made their choice, had 
left all to follow Him ; and therefore 
it was possible that His power should 
operate in them, in order to their per- 
fect conformity to that will. The sequel 



138 



MATTHEW 



. xiii.] 



we know. That power won its victory 
eventually, and they became actually 
co-operative with Him in the carrying 
out of His purposes. 

Through such next of kin in spiritual 
relationship and loyal devotion to the 
will of God, His Kingdom is set up. 

The principle revealed in this story 
is one of very solemn present applica- 



tion. We prove our distance from Him 
when in the fellowship of Mary and 
His brethren in the days of their 
limited understanding, we attempt to 
dissuade those who are in closest fel- 
lowship with Him, from such sacrificial 
service as demonstrates their nearness 
to Him. 



MATTHEW XIII. 



rpHE thirteenth chapter of Matthew 
JL is necessarily full of interest to all 
students of the teaching of Jesus. In 
it we have a setting forth of truth con- 
cerning the progress of the Kingdom of 
heaven in this age. Any study of it, 
therefore, which is to be of real value, 
necessitates a careful consideration of 
its scope and method. 

The chapter is a set discourse of 
Jesus, and not a collection of truths 
taken from the Saviour's teaching at 
different times, and set forth by 
Matthew as a consecutive discourse. 
Dean Alford's words on the subject 
may be quoted as giving one simple and 
yet sufficient reason for holding this 
view. 

"The seven parables related in this 
chapter cannot be regarded as a collec- 
tion made by the evangelist, as related 
to one subject, the Kingdom of Heaven 
and its development; they are clearly 
indicated by verse 53 to have been all 
spoken on one and the same occasion,* 
and form indeed a complete and glori- 
ous whole in their inner and deeper 
sense. 

The King was approaching the great 
crisis in His propaganda, when it would 
be necessary for Him to challenge His 
disciples as to the result of His mis- 
sion, and their opinion concerning Him. 
In view of this, and in all probability 
in preparation for it, He uttered this 
parabolic discourse, which is in large 
measure illuminated by the experiences 
of His ministry, and which illuminated 
the future for them in the matter of 
their ministry. 

Let us first briefly examine a group 
of Scriptures which forms the founda- 
tion of our present study. 

*The italics are Dean Alford's. 



Verses 1-3 A. We first see the King 
as He emerges from the house in which 
He had been holding communion with 
His disciples, and taking the seat of a 
teacher by the sea. Multitudes gath- 
ered about Him, and "He spake to 
them many things in parables." 

Verses 10-16. In the midst of this 
discourse, indeed, after the first of the 
parables, His" disciples approached Him 
and asked, " Why speakest Thou unto 
them in parables?" Then follows the 
answer which He gave to them, and 
which contains for us His own ex- 
planation of His method. 

Verses 34, 35. At the close of the 
account of the parables addressed to 
the multitudes, Matthew carefully de- 
clares the fact that here He adopted 
the method of parable, and announces 
His reason for doing so. 

Verse 53. The last verse (53) read 
in connection with the first three, re- 
veals the boundaries of the discourse. 

The question of the disciples, " Why 
speakest Thou unto them in parables ? " 
is our question as we commence our 
study of this discourse. Perhaps we 
shall best be able to understand the 
answer as we look at the question in 
its context of time and circumstance. 
It is evident that at this point in His 
ministry Jesus commenced practically a 
new method. He had already made use 
in His teaching of the parable-method, 
but from now He employed it su- 
premely. The disciples noticed the 
change, and therefore asked Him the 
question. 

Perhaps the force of their question 
is to be discovered by placing the em- 
phasis upon the words "unto them," 
for in answer, Jesus immediately said, 
"Unto you it is given to know the 
mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven, 



139 



[MATT, xnij 



MATTHEW 



but to them it is not given." If this 
contrast between the multitudes and 
themselves were in their mind, and if it 
were a real one as the reply of Jesus 
made clear, it must still be remembered 
that before the discourse was finished, 
He addressed Himself to them also in 
parables. I draw attention to this, in 
order that we may at once understand 
that whatever was the reason of His 
adopting the parabolic method with the 
multitudes, it obtained also in some 
degree at that time in the case of His 
own disciples. 

We are not left to any speculation 
as to the meaning of the method. The 
King answered their question, and His 
explanation of His own method must 
be accepted. It is, however, of such a 
nature as to demand a very careful 
consideration, or it may be entirely mis- 
interpreted. I utter this word of warn- 
ing because I am convinced that it 
often is sadly misinterpreted, and much 
of its most tender purpose lost thereby. 

Let us first inquire into the meaning 
of the word parable. Literally, it is a 
throwing or placing of things side by 
side, with the suggestion of compari- 
son. Something is placed by the side 
of something else, with the intention of 
explaining the one by the other. Such 
a method is that of the parable. The 
old and simple definition comes back to 
us "A parable is an earthly story 
with a heavenly meaning;" that is to 
say, some familiar thing of earth is 
placed alongside of some mysterious 
thing of heaven, that our understanding 
of the one may help us to an under- 
standing of the other. The method is 
that of taking some one set of facts, 
familiar and material, and making 
them explanatory of others, strange and 
spiritual. Invariably in the teaching of 
Jesus a parable was a picture of things 
seen, intended to reveal and explain 
things unseen, and a rapid glance over 
this chapter will show how the King 
made use of the things that were most 
common in the experience of those 
amongst whom He was teaching for 
this purpose. I do not suppose that if 
Jesus were teaching in our cities to-day 
He would use any of the comparisons 
He used then; He would rather draw 
attention to the commonest sights of 



the city life, and use them as illustra- 
tions. All tie parables of this chapter 
were facts under the actual observa- 
tion, or within the immediate experi- 
ence of the men He was teaching. 
Perhaps even then in the distance a 
sower may have been seen scattering 
his seed. The field sown with wheat 
and intermixed with darnel was one of 
the most familiar things to them from 
boyhood. The mustard tree, about 
which we know so little, they knew 
full well. The woman hiding the 
leaven in the meal was an everyday 
home picture. Treasure found in the 
field was not so common, but still not 
unknown; and so with the merchant 
seeking pearls. The fisherman with his 
net, and the householder of the final 
parable were perhaps the most familiar 
of all. 

In the use of the parable it is always 
necessary to emphasize the teaching of 
similarity and disparity. The similar- 
ity of principle is emphasised by the 
recognition of disparity. To forget the 
teaching of disparity is to fall into 
the blunder of fanciful interpretation. 

The question naturally arises as to 
why Jesus adopted this parabolic 
method of teaching. What was His 
intention? Let me answer first by a 
simple statement based upon what we 
have already seen. The purpose of the 
parable is that of revelation by illustra- 
tion, and the method is always in- 
tended to aid, and never to hinder 
understanding. I know of nothing more 
curious, and at the same time more 
pernicious, than a certain interpreta- 
tion of the motive which the King had 
in His use of parables, and I feel that 
it is of the greatest importance that 
we should avoid it. I refer to the view 
that our Lord adopted the parabolic 
method with His hearers because He 
had abandoned them in anger, and that 
His purpose was to hide His truth so 
that they should not see it. This I 
most strenuously deny. Christ never 
adopted any method characterised by 
such subtlety and cruelty. He never 
professed to be teaching men while at 
the same time He was resolutely at- 
tempting to hide truth from them. To 
charge Him with doing so would be to 
charge Him with dishonesty. The 



140 



MATTHEW 



[MATT, xm.] 



parable is an aid, not a hindrance. It 
veils truth, not that men may not grasp 
it, but that it shall not escape them. 
There is a sense in which the sun is 
hidden by the piece of smoked glass 
which the boy holds before his eyes, 
and yet without such an instrument he 
could not look upon the sun at all. Es- 
sential light unveiled, blinds. Its veil- 
ing is the opportunity of vision. 

It is not, however, for us to specu- 
late, but to hear what the King Himself 
said in answer to the disciples' inquiry. 
Let us, however, hear all He says, not 
contenting ourselves with His first sen- 
tence, but giving attention to His whole 
explanation. In answer to the inquiry, 
"Why speakest Thou unto them in 
parables? He said unto them, Unto 
you it is given to know the mysteries 
of the Kingdom of heaven, but to them 
it is not given." If Jesus had said no 
more than this, I should have made the 
deduction which I maintain has often 
been falsely made. I should have un- 
derstood Him to mean that He was 
compelled to use the method of the 
parable in speaking to these people be- 
cause it was intended that they should 
not know the truths concealed. Having 
made such a deduction, I should have 
been sorely perplexed. The whole 
meaning of His mission was that of 
giving men to know the truth; why, 
then, should He use a method ordi- 
narily employed for illumination, in 
order to obviate His first intention of 
revelation, and produce exactly oppo- 
site effects in His hearers? 

But let us follow Him further, and 
the meaning of the first statement be- 
comes apparent. " For whosoever hath, 
to him shall be given, and he shall have 
abundance: but whosoever hath not, 
from him shall be taken away even that 
which he hath." Note most carefully 
the contrast of which this is an ex- 
planation. "Unto you it is given . . . 
to them it is not given." Now the ex- 
planation. "Whosoever hath, to him 
shall be given." He declared that it 
was given to His disciples to know the 
mysteries. Why was this knowledge 
given to them? According to the 
Teacher's explanation it was because 
of something they already possessed. 
Bearing that in mind, turn to the con- 



trasted position. " But whosoever hath 
not, from him shall be taken away even 
that which he hath." He declared it 
was not given to these men to know 
the mysteries. Why was that knowl- 
edge denied? According to His own 
explanation it was because of something 
they lacked. These men lacked that 
which the disciples possessed, the pos- 
session of which created in them a 
capacity for receiving the mysteries of 
the Kingdom. It was not therefore pos- 
sible for them to grasp these mysteries, 
and even what understanding they did 
possess, they were in danger of losing. 

What, then, did the disciples of Jesus 
possess which these men lacked? In 
order to answer that question let us 
take it in another form. What was 
the essential difference between the dis- 
ciples and the rulers and multitudes 
standing around? Did it not lie here, 
that the disciples had received Jesus as 
King, and by reason of that action and 
their attitude towards Hun had become 
able to receive the mysteries of His 
Kingdom ? 

The people, notwithstanding His min- 
istry, had rejected Him up to this time, 
and therefore He could not give to 
them, nor could they have received, 
the mysteries of the Kingdom. To the 
men who had crowned Him, He be- 
longed ; and all the principles and privi- 
leges of the Kingdom they were able to 
appreciate and possess. The others had 
so far refused their allegiance and were 
therefore unable to see, or enter into, 
the Kingdom. 

If we go further back for a moment, 
we may state the case thus. All these 
men among whom the ministry of Jesus 
had been exercised had preliminary 
knowledge of the ways of God as a 
result of the religion in which they 
had been born and trained. In ful- 
filment of the messages of their own 
Scriptures He had come. Certain of 
them had received Him, others of them 
had rejected Him. To those receiving 
Him were given the mysteries of the 
Kingdom. To those rejecting Him 
these messages could not be given, and 
they were in danger of losing the real 
value of all that they had gained 
through their early religious training. 
Now with these men to whom are de- 



141 



[MATT, xin.] 



MATTHEW 



nied the secrets of the Kingdom, be- 
cause of their disloyalty to the King, 
Jesus adopts a new method. He will 
give them pictures to lure them toward 
the truth. 

Follow Him still further, " Therefore 
speak I to them in parables; because 
seeing they see not, and hearing they 
hear not, neither do they understand. 
And unto them is fulfilled the prophecy 
of Isaiah, which saith, 

" By hearing ye shall hear, and shall in 

no wise understand; 
And seeing ye shall see, and shall in 
no wise perceive." 

That prophecy of Isaiah Christ de- 
clared to be fulfilled in the case of the 
people to whom the mysteries of the 
Kingdom were "not given." They 
were the people that hearing, did not 
understand; seeing, could not see, nor 
perceive. Upon whom was the blame 
of their blindness and deafness to be 
laid? In answer to this inquiry, let 
us continue the quotation as Christ 
continued it. 

" For this people's heart is waxed 

gross, 

And their ears are dull of hearing, 
And their eyes they have closed; 
Lest haply they should perceive with 

their eyes, 

And hear with their ears, 
And understand with their heart, 
And should turn again, 
And I should heal them." 

Now in this passage the heart of the 
whole subject is laid bare. Christ de- 
clared in effect that these people did 
not see the things that His disciples 
saw. They saw without seeing, they 
heard without hearing. And why? 
They had shut their eyes lest they 
should see, and they had stopped their 
ears lest they should hear. They had 
rejected the King, and without the 
King they had no key to the mysteries 
of the Kingdom. 

Because of this dulness consequent 
upon disobedience, He now proceeded to 
address them in parables. Nowhere is 
the infinite pity of the heart of God, 
revealed in Jesus Christ, more beauti- 
fully seen than in the method. 

We have all seen a skilful teacher 
arrest a class with a story. Here, 
then, is the great Teacher, talking in 



parables, not in order that these men 
might not see, nor hear, nor feel, but in 
order to constrain them to a willingness 
to see and hear and feel. Presently we 
shall see that Jesus had to use the same 
method with His disciples, and for the 
self-same reason. Their vision was not 
yet perfectly clear, for they had not 
yet absolutely surrendered everything to 
His Kingship. There were things, 
therefore, which He could only inter- 
pret to them in this way. 

The parable is always the method of 
Infinite Love. It is the method adopted 
in grace to meet the need of near- 
sightedness. All that it suggests to us 
is ultimately interpreted and enlarged 
by more direct teaching. 

Let us first examine the scheme of 
the discourse. In it we have the King's 
own view of His Kingdom, as to its 
history in the age which He initiated. 

The Kingdom of God in its funda- 
mental ideal and ultimate realisation is 
infinitely greater than any condition re- 
vealed in the process of these parables. 
In human history there had been al- 
ready different phases of manifestation, 
and various degrees of realisation of 
that Kingdom amongst men. Beyond 
the particular age in which we live, 
there will be, according to the teaching 
of Scripture, manifestations more per- 
fect and far more glorious than any- 
thing our eyes have yet seen. In these 
parables the King deals only with the 
manifestation and method of progress 
in this age of God's Kingdom. 

The first parable is not introduced by 
any direct reference to the Kingdom. 
It is simply the story of the initial work 
of sowing. Then immediately Jesus 
proceeded in a series of other parables 
to refer to the issues of that work 
throughout the age. That the applica- 
tion of these parables is limited to the 
age He initiated is clearly manifest in 
the phrases with which the King in- 
troduces each parable, excepting the 
first and last. The second parable, 
that of the two sowings, is introduced 
by the words, "The Kingdom of 
heaven is likened unto," and the re- 
maining ones by the words, " The King- 
dom of heaven is like unto." The first 
phrase means "The Kingdom of 
heaven has become like unto," th 



142 



MATTHEW 



[MATT, xm.l 



expression suggesting the changing 
manifestations of the Kingdom in suc- 
ceeding generations. The second phrase 
implies simply the manifestation of the 
Kingdom in the generation then present. 

What this limit of application is, is 
made perfectly clear as the discourse 
proceeds. Twice does Jesus refer to 
the "end of the world" (vers. 39 and 
49). In each case a far more correct 
and 'helpful translation is that sug- 
gested by the revisers in the margin, 
" the consummation of the age." Thus 
the pictures of the Kingdom are pic- 
tures of conditions obtaining between 
the moment in which Jesus spoke and 
the consummation of the age meaning 
not the end of the world, in the sense 
of the dissolution of the material uni- 
verse, .but the completion of the period 
which began with His first advent, and 
which will be closed by His second. 

A general survey of the discourse 
reveals three principal divisions. First 
(vers. 1-35), " Jesus went out of the 
house " and uttered four parables in the 
hearing of the multitudes. Second 
(vers. 36-50), Jesus "left the multi- 
tudes, and went into the house," and 
spoke to His disciples parables which 
were of a different nature from those 
already spoken to the crowd. Third 
(vers. 51-53), Jesus addressed Himself 
to His disciples concerning their re- 
sponsibility during the age. 

Of these parables the King Himself 
gave the explanation of two. In each 
case the explanation was to His own 
disciples. 

The first explanation, that of the 
parable of the sower, was possibly given 
in the hearing of the multitude. The 
second explanation, that of the two 
sowings, was given to the disciples 
privately. 

In preparation for a more detailed 
study of these parables, it is of great 
importance to state certain necessary 
canons of interpretation. Let me first 
name these, and then consider them a 
little more particularly. 

I. Simplicity of interpretation, for 
remembering the intention of the 
parable, the simplest interpreta- 
tion is the most likely to be the 
true on*. 



II. Restriction in application of the 
pictures to the limits clearly 
marked by the King. 
III. A consistent use of the figurative 
terms employed, both within the 
system and with the general use 
of Scripture, except where spe- 
cifically otherwise stated. 
With regard to the first canon, it is 
quite possible to examine these parables 
of Jesus, as it is possible to examine 
His miracles, with a desire to find hid- 
den depths and hidden meanings. That 
there are such in all of them, I do not 
deny, for the simplest thing Jesus said 
was in itself of the essence of eternal 
truth, and may have a thousand appli- 
cations. I hold, however, that in our 
study it is better to interpret them in 
the light of the multitudes to whom 
they were addressed. Seeing that He 
spoke, not to hide spiritual truth, but 
to reveal it, we may take it for granted 
that the sublimest meaning is also the 
simplest. 

As regards the second, it must be 
remembered that we shall utterly miss 
the real value of this discourse if we 
attempt to make any of the parables 
include the whole fact of the estab- 
lishment and administration of God's 
Kingdom. We must recognize from the 
beginning that they are pictures of one 
age, and remember that that age is not 
final. 

Upon the third canon I desire to lay 
special emphasis. The figurative terms 
of these parables are used consistently 
within the system. That is to say that 
Jesus was true to His own figures, and 
used them in one sense only. Person- 
ally I believe that to be a principle, not 
merely in the teaching of Jesus, but 
throughout the whole of Scripture. So 
important do I hold this to be that I 
desire at once to gather out from the 
parables some of the figures which 
Jesus used, and which at first sight may 
appear to have different significations, 
but which, as a matter of fact, have 
always the same value and intention. 
We read of the sower, the seed, the 
birds, the soil, the sun, the thorns, the 
fruit, an enemy, reapers or servants, 
the harvest, a tree, leaven, meal, a 
woman, treasure, a man, a merchant, 
a pearl, a net, the seashore, fish; and 



145 



[MATT, xin.] 



MATTHEW 



although some of these illustrations are 
repeated in different parables, it will be 
seen, as we continue our study of them, 
that their significance never changes. 
The figure always stands for the same 
truth, in whatever parable it is found. 

The sower is found in three parables, 
in the first, in that of the darnel, and 
in that of the mustard seed, and when 
we come to their particular interpreta- 
tion we shall find that the sower in each 
represents the same Person, the Son 
of Man. 

Again in the same connection, we find 
the figure of seed sown, and with the 
exception of the bad seed, which is dis- 
tinctly so called and thus differentiated 
from^he other, it has a uniform signifi- 
cance in all connections. 

The figure of birds is used in the 
parable of the sower, and in that of the 
mustard seed. It is a mistake to inter- 
pret it as symbolic of evil in the first, 
and of good in the second. In both 
parables, birds are symbols of evil. 

Again the soil appears in the parable 
of the sower, in that of the darnel, in 
that of the mustard seed, and in that of 
the treasure. Ifc has always the same 
meaning, and this meaning is once 
given, "the field is the world." 

Fruit is found in the parables of the 
sower and the darnel, and in each case 
must be interpreted according to the 
seed. 

Reapers or servants are found in 
the parables of the darnel and the net, 
and in each case represent angels at the 
end of the age, acting with the King 
Himself. 

The harvest is referred to in the 
parables of the darnel and of the net, 
and in both cases refers to the end of 
the age. 

Then lastly we have illustrations 
which do not repeat in the discourse, 
but which are used in other parts of 
the Bible. Thorns are here, as every- 
where, symbols of evil. A tree is here, 
as always, a symbol of great and wide- 
spread worldly power. As in every 
other case in Scripture, so here, leaven 
must be the type of evil. The meal 
here must be considered as the three 
measures, and thus its identification 
with the meal offering of the ancient 
economy is seen. Treasure is found in 



one parable, and it can only be ex- 
plained in conjunction with the parable 
of the pearl. Thus I maintain that in 
order to an understanding of these 
matchless parables of Jesus, we must 
recognize the perfect consistency of 
Jesus in His use of figures. 

Let us now turn to a general survey 
of the main divisions and particular 
parables, and the teachings contained 
in each. The first four parables (one, 
and three) were spoken wholly to the 
crowds, and reveal the Kingdom from 
the human standpoint. The second four 
parables (three, and one) were spoken 
exclusively to the disciples, and repre- 
sent the Kingdom from the Divine 
standpoint. First, the external fact of 
the Kingdom in the four parables for 
the crowd. Secondly, the internal secret 
of the Kingdom in four parables for the 
disciples. 

Taking the first four we find running 
through them the same elements. In 
each one the Lord reveals the fact of 
antagonistic forces with continued con- 
flict, and an issue in which failure 
apparently predominates, rather than 
success. In the first parable there is 
hindrance in the soil. In the second, 
there is opposition on the part of an 
enemy who by night sows counterfeit 
seed in the field. In the third, there is 
seen the counter-development of a 
worldly power affording shelter and 
protection to evil. In the last of the 
four there is revealed an alien principle 
which makes for disintegration and 
destruction. 

Thus it is evident that these four 
parables do not give us the picture of 
an age in which there is to be a greater 
increase of goodness until final perfec- 
tion is attained ; but rather one charac- 
terised by conflict, and one in which it 
appears as though evil triumphed rather 
than good. In the parable of the sower 
the work of the King is revealed, that 
namely, of scattering seed to produce 
Kingdom results. The work of the 
enemy is manifested in his attempt to 
prevent Kingdom results by the injury 
of the seed through the soil on which 
it falls. In the parable of the two sow- 
ings the work of the King is manifest, 
and also the spoiling work of the enemy 
who sows the same field with darnel. 



144 



MATTHEW 



[MATT, xm.J 



In the parable of the mustard seed 
which, contrary to all law, produces a 
great tree, we have a revelation of an 
unnatural growth, an abortion, some- 
thing never intended, and therefore 
lacking the true elements of strength. 
In the leaven, as we have seen, we 
have the simplest symbol of corruption. 

It is most important to remember that 
these parables give us pictures of the 
Kingdom as realised in the world, 
showing how far that realisation is at- 
tained in the present age. The sub- 
ject of the Church is involved as the 
means to an end and as the measure of 
the realisation of the Kingdom. Our 
Lord was not for the moment dealing 
with its ultimate destination and calling 
in the ages to come. 

Leaving the multitudes by the sea, 
the King gathered His disciples about 
Him in the house, and proceeded to 
utter to them parables which were not 
for the crowd. In them He revealed 
one activity, that of the King Himself. 
Here a great and glorious success is 
achieved in each case, and yet there is 
discrimination. There is first the find- 
ing of treasure in a field, and the pur- 
chase of the field to possess it. By no 
stretch of imagination can that pur- 
chase be made the picture of what any 
human being can ever do. He Who 
purchased the field of the world is not 
a rebellious subject, but the King Him- 
self; and the treasure hidden is that 
latent possibility for the development of 
which the whole field must be pur- 
chased. So also in the next parable, 
notwithstanding all our exposition, and 
singing, 

" I've found lie pearl of greatest price ! 

My heart doth sing for joy; 
And sing I must, for Christ is mine! 
Christ shall my song employ," 

the pearl is not intended to represent 
Christ. It is perfectly true that to find 
Him is to find the chief treasure here, 
but that is not the teaching of this par- 
ticular parable. When we find Him, 
He is God's free gift to us, but this 
merchant purchased the pearl, selling 
all that he had to do it. Finally, in the 
parable of the net no workers are 
recognized in the casting of the net into 



the sea. It is the act of God Himself. 
At the end of the age, when it is gath- 
ered in, there will be discrimination, 
and the measure of success is clearly 
shown. 

We have, then, simply and rapidly 
in this study, looked merely at the 
broad outlines of teaching. The chief 
interest at this moment is the contrast 
between the parables spoken to the mul- 
titudes and those to the disciples. To 
the crowds He declared the facts con- 
cerning the Kingdom in this age, which 
would eventually become patent to out- 
ward observation. When He gathered 
His disciples about Him alone, He 
showed them the inside truth. While 
there may appear to be in the passing 
centuries failure, shortcoming, the leav- 
ening of everything that should be pure, 
yet through all such failure God is 
Himself gathering out His treasure and 
finding His pearl. 

Finally we come to the last parable. 
It is interesting to remember that al- 
most invariably we speak of the seven 
parables of the thirteenth chapter of 
Matthew. As a matter of fact there are 
eight. Seven of them reveal truth con- 
cerning the Kingdom. The eighth, 
which is as full of beauty and of im- 
portance as any, deals with the respon- 
sibility of those who know the truth. 
Having uttered the seven parables, He 
asked His disciples, " Have ye under- 
stood all these things?" One is almost 
surprised to read their answer. " They 
say unto Him, Yea." I do not suppose 
for a moment that they did understand 
all, but they saw some little way, had 
some gleam of light, had in all probabil- 
ity caught the general teaching of the 
discourse in both its private and more 
public aspects. The King knew that 
presently they would understand, that 
with the coming of the Spirit there 
would come perfect illumination; and 
with infinite patience He accepted their 
confession, and proceeded to lay upon 
them a charge of responsibility. 

This general survey of the scheme of 
the King's teaching makes evident cer- 
tain matters of present and pressing im- 
portance. We must have the Master's 
conception of our age if we are to do 
the best work in it for His glory. If 
our eyes are set upon some consumma- 



145 



[MATT. xnr. 3-9 AND 18-23] 



MATTHEW 



tion which He did not expect, then 
what can we expect other than that we 
shall be heart-sick ere long? If, on 
the other hand, we accept His view and 



consecrate ourselves to its realisation, 
then we shall be able to bear " the bur- 
den and heat of the day," and do the 
work He has appointed. 



MATTHEW XIII. 3-9 AND 18-23 



THIS first parable is one of two 
which the King explained. He 
evidently considered it to be funda- 
mental, for He said that if men were 
not able to understand this one, they 
could not understand the others. Let 
us, then, first look at the picture pre- 
sented in the parable, secondly attend 
to Christ's explanation thereof, and 
finally deduce from such examination 
the instruction which is of present 
value. 

The picture is a perfectly natural 
one, but the naturalness is eastern 
rather than western. Let us, then, at- 
tempt so far as is possible to watch the 
eastern sower at his work. Speaking 
of this particular parable, Dr. Thomson 
says, in The Land and the Book, de- 
scribing what he actually saw : 

" ' Behold a sower went forth to sow.' 
There is a nice and close adherence to 
actual life in this form of expression. 
These people have actually come forth 
all the way from Dahr-June to this 
place. The expression implies that the 
sower, in the days of our Saviour, lived 
in a hamlet or village, as all these 
farmers now do ; that he did not sow 
near his own house, or in a garden 
fenced or walled, for such a field does 
not furnish a^l the basis of the parable. 
There are neither roads nor thorns nor 
stony places in such lots. He must go 
forth into the open country as these 
have done, where there are no fences; 
where the path passes through the culti- 
vated land; where thorns grow in 
clumps all around; where the rocks 
peep out in places through the scanty 
soil ; and where also, hard by, are 
patches extremely fertile. Now here 
we have the whole four within a dozen 
rods of us. Our horses are actually 
trampling down some seeds which have 
fallen by the wayside, and larks and 
sparrows are busy picking them up. 
That man, with his mattock, is digging 
about places where the rock is too near 
the surface for the plough, and much 
that is sown there will wither away, 
because it has no deepness of earth. 



And not a few seeds have fallen among 
this bellan, and will be effectually 
choked by this most tangled of thorn 
bushes. But a large portion, after all, 
falls into really good ground, and four 
months hence will exhibit every variety 
of crop." 

This brief paragraph describing what 
may be seen any day in Palestine shows 
us how simple, real, and direct was the 
picture to the men to whom Jesus 
talked. The points of interest in the 
parable are the sower, the seed, the 
soil, and the sequence. One man is 
sowing. He sows one kind of seed. 
That seed falls on different kinds of 
soil. A certain sequence or result fol- 
lows, such as is dependent upon the 
nature of the soil. That is the simple 
and perfectly familiar picture presented 
by the parable to those who heard the 
King's words. 

Keeping this picture in view, we turn 
our attention to the King's explanation. 
In doing so there are one or two pre- 
liminary matters specially to be noticed 
before attempting a close examination. 
First, Jesus makes no reference to the 
sower. He gives no explanation of who 
the sower is. The chief value of the 
parable is seen in the fact that He 
speaks of the seed, and of the relation 
which the seed bears to the soil. 
Listening to the parable we should cer- 
tainly be inclined to think that the chief 
lessons were to be learnt from the na- 
ture of the soil. Indeed, already in 
epitomizing we have said that the se- 
quence depends upon the soil. When, 
however, we turn to Christ's explana- 
tion, we find that such is not the case, 
but rather that the chief lessons of the 
parable are those concerning the nature 
of the seed. Without His explanation 
we should inevitably say that the har- 
vest depends upon whether the nature 
of the soil be the open highway or the 
rocky places of the fields, or the thorny 
ground, or the fruitful ground. Jesus, 



146 



MATTHEW 



. xin. 3-9 AND 18-23] 



however, lays no emphasis upon the 
soil, but all emphasis upon the con- 
dition of the seed which is cast into 
the soil. This is a most important dis- 
tinction to be kept carefully in mind, 
or we shall continue to misinterpret all 
the parables. I am aware that this 
statement may seem at first to obscure 
the vision of truth, contradicting, as it 
does, popular conceptions of the teach- 
ing of this parable. Yet it is only as 
this guiding principle is observed, that 
we shall be able to discover the pro- 
foundest and most remarkable teaching. 

Let us, then, carefully examine His 
explanation, following Him as He takes 
each of the four sowings separately. 

" Hear then ye the parable of the 
sower. When any one heareth the 
word of the Kingdom, and understand- 
eth it not, then cometh the evil one, 
and snatcheth away that which hath 
been sown in his heart. This is he that 
was sown by the way side." Notice 
most carefully here the actual words: 
" This is he that was sown by the way 
side." Not, this is it, but " this is he." 

"And he that was sown upon the 
rocky places, this is he that heareth the 
word, and straightway with joy receiv- 
eth it." Again notice the words, "he 
that was sown," not it, but he. 

"And he that was sown among the 
thorns, this is he that heareth the 
word." Once more, "he that was 
sown," not it. 

"And he that was sown upon the 
good ground, this is he that heareth the 
word." Thus finally, "he that was 
sown," not it. 

We have generally regarded the 
"sower" of this parable as a type first 
of our Lord Himself, and then of all 
those who preach the word, and the 
seed as the word sown in the hearts o 
men who respond to it in different ways 
according to their nature. This is a 
treatment of the parable which contra- 
dicts absolutely Christ's own explana- 
tion of it. In that explanation He 
declares, not that the sowing of the seed 
is the word cast into the heart of a 
man, but that it is the casting of a. man 
into a certain age and generation. The 
sowing here referred to, then, to state 
the case broadly, is the sowing, not of 
truth, but of men, for in the next par- 



able, where the Lord again takes up 
the figure of sowing, He distinctly says 
of the good seed, "These are the sons 
of the Kingdom." This truth is empha- 
sised, too, in the first parable by the 
fact that, in every instance in His ex- 
planation, the King said, "he that was 
sown." 

Take a broad survey of this. Re- 
member the two studies we have al- 
ready taken, and that our Lord is de- 
scribing in these parables the condition 
of the Kingdom. It is not a question 
of the creation of the Church by the 
gathering of individual men to Him- 
self, but rather of the establishment of 
the Kingdom. Here, then, is the method 
of His work during this age the sow- 
ing of the sons of the Kingdom. Some 
of them are non-productive, some of 
them productive. Some of them bring 
forth fruit, fruit that is toward the 
Kingdom. They influence the age, cre- 
ating in it the recognition of, and ap- 
proximation to, the government of God. 
Others produce no such fruit. They 
are men who come into contact with 
the thought of the Kingdom and the 
ideals of the Kingdom, but who never 
produce the fruit of the Kingdom. The 
keyword of the explanation is " he that 
was sown." 

There is, besides this, another sow- 
ing, that of the word in the heart. In 
Luke's account of our Lord's explana- 
tion (Luke viii. 11-15) he shows that 
side of the truth. There is no contra- 
diction between the two things. The 
sowing of the word in the heart of a 
man is the introduction of the principle 
which makes him a fruitful seed in 
the age. 

Let us examine our Lord's descrip- 
tion of these seeds, " He that was sown 
by the way side." Who is he that was 
sown by the way side ? " Any one who 
heareth the word of the Kingdom, and 
understandeth it not;" that is, one who 
listens to the word of the Kingdom, but 
to whom that word is but a jingle of 
empty sounds. Such are seeds planted 
by the way side. "The evil one . . . 
snatcheth away that which hath been 
sown in his heart." There is the recog- 
nition of the sowing of the word in the 
heart. If the word be snatched away 
out of a man's heart, he becomes a 



.147 



[MATT. xin. 3-9 AND 18-23] 



MATTHEW 



seed of the hard highway, and no issue 
results from his planting, no fruitful- 
ness, no influence in his age, nothing 
that brings the Kingdom nearer. This 
is the first land of seed. 

Again, "he that was sown upon the 
rocky places," who is he? The man 
who hears the word, and rejoices in 
the word, "with joy receiveth it; yet 
hath he not root in himself." This is 
a man who goes farther than the first 
man; one who not only knows the 
sound of the word of the Kingdom, and 
is familiar with its letter, but who con- 
sents to its claim, and rejoices in it; 
and yet he never allows it to take 
grasp o his own life, to take root 
therein. "When tribulation and perse- 
cution ariseth because of the word, 
straightway he stumbleth;" because the 
word has not taken root in himself, he 
cannot influence the age for the King- 
dom. That man becomes a non- 
productive seed in the soil. 

Again, "he that was sown among the 
thorns," who is he? He is the man 
who hears the word, but the "care of 
the age, and the deceitfulness of riches, 
choke the word, and he becometh un- 
fruitful." This is a man who has 
within him the life-giving principle, but 
who becomes so occupied with the 
things of the age, with its methods 
and maxims, its cares and its pleasures, 
that they operate in his life as thorns, 
choking the vital principle, and pre- 
venting his having any effect upon the 
age in which he lives. 

But finally, we have "he that was 
sown upon the good ground." Who is 
he? He is the man who hears the 
word, and " understandeth it, who bear- 
eth fruit, and bringeth forth." This is 
the man who hears the word of the 
Kingdom, who understands it, who 
obeys it, and therefore in his age pro- 
duces fruit. 

Let us re-state these truths. The 
seed which the King plants is men who 
have heard the word. One has heard 
and never understood. To him the 
word is a form, a jingle of empty 
sounds. Plant that man in the age and 
what is the result? With persecution 
and testing his witness fails. Yet an- 
other receives the same word of the 
Kingdom, but he is enamoured of his 



age, desires to catch its spirit, and to 
adopt its method. What effect has he 
on the age? None. The age chokes 
him under the press and crush of the 
material interests to which he has given 
himself, his influence dies. Here is 
another who hears, understands, obeys. 
, The word produces fruit in his life. 
Plant that man, and what is the result? 
He produces fruit toward the Kingdom 
of God. His life is the life that pre- 
pares for the return of the King. 

Now, let us take the parable and 
explanation, and deduce their simple 
and natural instruction. Here again, 
I ask you to notice the apparent differ- 
ence between the incidence of the teach- 
ing in the parable, and the explanation. 
In the former, the whole issue seems to 
depend on the nature of the soil. In 
the latter, it is seen to depend on the 
seed. This distinction, however, is only 
apparent. It cannot be real, because 
when Jesus explained His own parable, 
He distinctly said that the nature of the 
seed was the important thing. So that 
the harvest depends, not upon the soil, 
but upon the seed sown. The soil re- 
sponds or refuses to respond according 
to what that seed is in itself. We all 
feel how much more nearly this inter- 
pretation of the parable harmonises 
with experience than any other. If it 
be interpreted in the usual way, then 
there is no responsibility whatever upon 
the seed, neither can the soil be blamed 
for the lack of result due to its own 
natural hardness, for it cannot help 
being what it is. But when we come 
to our Lord's explanation we find how 
serious our responsibility is, for He 
teaches that the age will respond or fail 
to respond according to what we are in 
ourselves. The age will be hard, rocky, 
thorny, or fruitful according to the 
nature of the seed. What a man's 
influence in the age is going to be 
depends entirely upon whether the word 
of the Kingdom is in his heart or not, 
and further upon his response to the 
word which is in his heart Take a 
man who has never received the word, 
and put him down in his age, and he 
cannot produce the influences of the 
Kingdom. We shall meet such a man 
in our next study, in the parable of 
the tares. 



148 



MATTHEW 



[MAM. xiii. 3-9 AND 18-23] 



Let us now fix our attention upon the 
men who have heard the word. There 
has been the primary sowing, the mys- 
terious impartation of the principle of 
life which makes of them seeds equal 
to producing harvest. At this point our 
parable begins, and we have one sower, 
the Lord Himself; one soil, the age; 
one seed, men who have acquaintance 
with the word o the Kingdom. Now, 
however, we see four results, all de- 
pending upon the nature of the seed. 
To the seed understanding not, the 
beaten way of the age is hard, and 
there is no harvest. The seed with no 
root in itself, the persecuting age de- 
stroys. The seed which is careful for 
the things of the age, the age absorbs 
and chokes. None of these three bring 
any harvest. To the seed that under- 
stands and obeys and responds in per- 
sonal life, the age responds, and an 
abundant harvest is the result 

Members of the Church are here, 
they are the sons of the Kingdom. 
Jesus in effect says in this first parable, 
as in the second, that the harvest of 
the Kingdom will be produced by im- 
planting in the age such souls as have 
received the word of the Kingdom. If 
they receive the word and do not re- 
spond to it, they bear no fruit, and do 
not lift the age toward the Kingdom. 
If they respond and obey, they will 
bring forth harvest, thirty, sixty, a 
hundredfold. Then the philosophy of 
the parable is that Jesus Christ works 
toward the realisation of the heavenly 
Kingdom on earth, by planting in the 
midst of its life such souls as have 
heard His word, have received it, and 
obeyed it. He influences the age 
through their presence, through their 
living, through all that they are in 
themselves. 

This is one aspect of Church respon- 
sibility. Our inclusive responsibility is 
that of the evangelisation of the world, 
but that evangelisation has in it two 
values ; first, the calling out of individ- 
ual souls, and second, that these may 
for the time become as seeds planted 
in order to a greater harvest. In this 
purpose we see the larger issue of the 
Church's responsibility. Paul, in his 
letter to the Romans, says : " The whole 
creation groaneth and travaileth in pain 



together until now," waiting "for the 
revealing of the sons of God." It may 
quite correctly be affirmed that the 
apostle is there speaking of the fact 
that presently, when the hidden sons of 
God are manifest with Christ in His 
advent glory, then will begin the final 
work of healing creation's pain. That 
will be the historic fulfilment of the 
principle, but the principle itself is at 
work to-day. Wherever creation groans, 
the only method of healing its wounds 
and assuaging its grief is that of plant- 
ing the sons of God in the midst. 
Wherever such men and women have 
come to live, there is found, in a. 
measure, the healing of creation's 
wounds, and the soothing of its pain. 
That is the great story of missionary 
enterprise. The sob of the women and 
children of the dark places of the earth 
is healed by the preaching of the word, 
but there would be no healing but for 
the living presence of those who prac- 
tise the word they preach. Plant the 
son of the Kingdom in the midst of an 
age that is against the King, and he 
will exert an influence that tells for the 
Kingdom. Wherever sorrow is as- 
suaged, wherever wounds are healed, 
wherever love becomes the law of life, 
wherever men are loosed from the 
power of sin, there the Kingdom of 
God is come. And such a harvest is 
the result of the living seeds flung 
from the hand of the living Sower upon 
the soil, which of itself produces no 
Kingdom result, but which laughs into 
the harvest of the Kingdom in sure re- 
sponse to the fruitful seed. 

Finally, one word by way of applica- 
tion to our own hearts. The harvest 
the King is seeking is the harvest of 
the Kingdom. He sows the age with 
the sons of the Kingdom, and yet many 
of them are non-productive. We know 
His word. The question is, What effect 
are we producing upon our age? The 
answer depends upon the extent to 
which the word we know has affected 
our lives. How many there are who 
hear the words of the Kingdom, who 
have never yet understood them. They 
repeat them, they sing them, they love 
them perhaps, but there is no resulting 
harvest in the age in which they live. 
The harvest of the Kingdom is not 



149 



[MAM. xiii. 24-30 AND 36-43] MATTHEW 



found even in their own homes. There 
is no Kingdom influence exerted in 
their social circle. There is no com- 
pulsion toward the Kingdom produced 
by their lives in city or nation. Why 
not? Because they heard the words, 
but did not understand them. It is 
possible to recite all the words of the 
Kingdom by heart, and yet in home 
life, in social life, in civic life, in na- 
tional life, to realise nothing. 

Or, again, some have gone beyond 
that. They have not only heard the 
words, but they rejoice in them. They 
consent to the glory of the ideal. Yet 
as the word of the Kingdom sets up its 
imperial demand within, seeking to 
change the life, they hinder it. They 
do not allow it to take root, with the 
result that the age remains hard and 
cruel. 

Some have gone yet farther. They 
have heard and obeyed the word up to 
a certain point, but have never in their 
deepest heart been delivered from the 
age itself. No man can exert an in- 
fluence for God until that deliverance is 
absolutely his. You were a worker, 
such a worker that men felt your 
power; but in the matters of this life 
you have been "getting on." Oh, this 
devil of "getting on," when it kills a 
man's power for God in his age! The 
care of the age, the deceitfulness of 
riches, the successes of material life 
have destroyed the testimony of many 
for the Kingdom. When a man gives 
himself wholly to the age, to be great 
with its greatness, to be wise in its 



wisdom, he cuts the nerve of his testi- 
mony for God. The thorns of worldli- 
ness choke him, and the voice that was 
powerful is silenced, and the life that 
was productive is barren, and nothing 
is done for the Kingdom. 

But, thank God, there are those who 
have heard the word, who understand 
the word, who obey the word, and 
through whose lives the Kingdom is in- 
fluential. What is the issue? There 
is a harvest coming wherever they go, 
some thirty, some .sixty, some a hun- 
dredfold. There are men and women 
whose names never appear in the news- 
papers, who never found any report of 
their work even in the manual of their 
Church, but who have lived in obedi- 
ence to the word of the King. If angels 
wrote the epitaph of such at their 
passing, they would write, These are 
they who helped the coming of the 
Kingdom. No finer testimony to suc- 
cessful life could possibly be written. 

As we pass out to individual work, 
teaching in the Sabbath School, speak- 
ing amid the needy men and women of 
the age, whatever it may be, never for- 
get that whenever we win man, woman, 
or little child to the word of the King- 
dom, we are planting another seed in 
the age, and preparing for the harvest 
which is yet to be. Every one of us 
who has heard the word, and who un- 
derstands it, and obeys it, is part of 
the King's influence, and every soul we 
win is another seed planted for the 
final harvest of His Kingdom. 



MATTHEW XIII. 24-30 AND 36-43 



THIS is the second and last parable 
which the King Himself explained 
to His disciples. It is perfectly clear 
that this explanation was given to the 
disciples alone, and at their request. 
The form in which they preferred that 
request reveals the impression made 
upon them by the parable as the Lord 
spoke it. They did not say, " Explain 
unto us the parable of the two sowings" 
or " the parable of the enemy ;" but, 
" Explain unto us the parable of the 
tares of the field." This shows that the 
emphasis of the King was laid on 
the matter of the tares. 



In considering this parable we shall 
follow our method with the previous 
one, first, looking at the simple pic- 
ture suggested, secondly, attending to 
the explanation of Jesus, and, thirdly, 
deducing from that explanation the 
instruction which it contains for 
ourselves. 

There are three outstanding things 
in the picture presented. The first may 
be dismissed quite briefly, but it must 
not be omitted. " The Kingdom of 
heaven is likened unto a man that 
sowed good seed in his field." The 
picture set forth is that of a field, tha 



ISO 



MATTHEW [MAW. xm. 24-30 AND 36-43] 



property of the man who sows the 
good seed, and not of the one who sows 
darnel. The proprietor is at work in 
his own field. 

In the next place we notice that there 
are two sowings. The sowing of the 
good seed by the owner with the spe- 
cial desire of gathering a definite har- 
vest is perfectly natural. There is so 
far nothing out of the common, nothing 
which specially arrests attention. But 
now immediately there follows some- 
thing which is out of place, something 
which we recognize as wrong, against 
which our simple sense of right makes 
protest. It is the sowing of the field 
with darnel. I make use of the word 
darnel, because tares as we know them 
do not bear the slightest resemblance to 
wheat, and do not therefore suggest 
to us the essential meaning of this par- 
able. Darnel, on the other hand, is so 
much like wheat that in the first stages 
of its growth it is impossible to dis- 
tinguish between them. Yet they are 
absolutely different. The farmers of 
Palestine are perfectly familiar with 
darnel to-day, and there are some of 
them who affirm that it is simply de- 
generate wheat the effect of a particu- 
larly wet and heavy season upon the 
originally good wheat seed. This, how- 
ever, is not the case. It may be that a 
wet season is one in which darnel will 
flourish while wheat fails; but there is 
no doubt whatever as to the essential 
difference between the two. This differ- 
ence, however, is only manifested in de- 
velopment, and it is in this fact of 
similarity that the maliciousness of the 
enemy is discovered. 

The third matter which arrests us as 
we look at the picture is the enemy. 
We know this man of the second sow- 
ing to be a trespasser, for, as we have 
seen, the field was the property of the 
one who sowed the good seed therein. 
He had no right whatever in the field. 
" While men slept," he came, with 
subtlety and stealth. In indicating thus 
the occasion of the enemy's opportunity, 
there may have been rebuke in the 
mind of the Master for the men who 
slept. Be that as it may, the method 
so far as the foe is concerned marks 
his wiliness, his cowardliness, his das- 
tardly determination to harm. He was 



a trespasser, full of subtlety, animated 
by malice. There was no other motive 
in his action. He could gain nothing 
by sowing another's field with darnel, 
for it is not a saleable produce, and no 
profit can be made out of its growth. 
It is as worthless to the man who sows 
it as to the owner of the field. This 
sowing, then, was the result of pure 
malice if I may bring into conjunction 
so fine an adjective and so fearful a 
substantive. It was an act prompted 
by hatred for the owner, and judging 
the offence as we should a similar one 
in our own country, there is no one of 
us, however tender of heart, who would 
not consent to its punishment. The 
absolute meanness of the action appals. 

The method of the owner is per- 
fectly natural and proper. " Let both 
grow together until the harvest." First, 
for the sake of the good, lest while at- 
tempting to uproot the evil some of the 
good may suffer ; and secondly, in order 
to the full manifestation of the truth 
concerning the darnel. If these sow- 
ings are allowed to work themselves 
out to consummation, discrimination will 
be possible upon the basis of manifesta- 
tion, and in that manifestation there 
will be vindication of the destinies of 
darnel and of wheat. The darnel will 
be bound in bundles for burning. The 
wheat will be gathered into the garner 
of the owner. 

We recognize at once that in the pic- 
ture we have the simplicity of a great 
sublimity, and now turn to our Lord's 
explanation, first, of the field ; secondly, 
of the two sowings; thirdly, of the har- 
vest. As to the field (verses 36-43), 
"He that soweth the good seed is the 
Son of Man, and the field is the world." 
The word used for world here is not 
that which He employs later when 
speaking of the harvest. The phrase, 
"the end of the -world" should cer- 
tainly be translated as in the previous 
parable, the consummation or comple- 
tion of the age, but the word used in 
this connection is cosmos, meaning the 
whole of the ordered universe, including 
the earth, its inhabitants, and. all cre- 
ation. One cannot help wondering why 
certain fathers of the Church and theo- 
logians of an earlier age insisted on 
teaching that the field is the Church 



151 



[MATT. xm. 24-30 AND 36-43] MATTHEW 



and that the darnel simply signifies the 
coming into the Church of unworthy 
persons and ideals. There is, of course, 
an element of truth in this; but the 
King was perfectly clear in His state- 
ment, "the field is the world." Thus 
He claims proprietorship of the whole 
creation. The same thought underlies 
the apostle's teaching in that wonder- 
ful chapter in his letter to the Romans, 
when, dealing with the condition of 
creation in its sorrow and pain, he 
writes, " The whole creation groaneth 
and travaileth in pain together." That 
which is indicated by the phrase, "the 
whole creation," is that which was also 
in the mind of the King when He 
said, "the field is the world." There 
is infinite poetry in this. The whole 
creation, every form of life, every con- 
dition of being, every part of the great 
whole belongs to the Son of Man. The 
creation is His field, and if indeed there 
be mourning everywhere, if nature is 
" red in tooth and claw," if it be true 
that there is suffering throughout all the 
cosmos let us never forget that this 
field of the world is His, and it is 
waiting for the sowing of the good seed 
which is to produce the harvest of the 
Kingdom. Wherever in the midst of 
the suffering and sorrow and groaning 
of creation the Son of Man plants a 
son of the Kingdom, there He helps 
towards the healing of the wound, the 
drying of the tear, and the turning of 
the groaning into an anthem of praise. 
I do not know how this appeals to you, 
or how it may affect you. I can never 
tell the inexpressible comfort it is to 
me in all life and service. I never feel 
that I am engaged, even under the 
leadership of Christ, in attempting to 
wrest something from one to whom it 
belongs. Our toil and conflict are di- 
rected rather toward bringing back to 
the rightful owner that which belongs 
to Him. "The earth is Jehovah's, and 
the fulness thereof." A certain man 
" sowed good seed in his field." I find 
in these facts a conviction which sends 
me out upon the track of His feet to 
serve and to suffer, and to share the 
travail which makes His Kingdom 
come. Everything belongs to Him, 
mountains and valleys, continents and 
countries, beasts and birds, flowers 



and fruits, and men of all kindreds 
and tribes and nations. The recogni- 
tion of this fundamental fact is neces- 
sary to the interpretation of the parable. 
The great Kingdom of Jesus is far from 
its perfect order, but no other than He 
has any crown rights throughout the 
whole world. 

Turn now to our Lord's explanation 
of the two sowings. First, the good 
seed, " these are the sons of the King- 
dom;" secondly, we see that the sower 
of the good seed is the Son of Man; 
and finally, that the harvest He seeks 
is the Kingdom itself. Now turn to the 
other sowing. The sower of darnel is 
the devil. The very name which Christ 
uses for him here is suggestive the 
adversary, the enemy, or to be perfectly 
literal, the traducer, the one who from 
the beginning and continually, traduces, 
libels, blasphemes God. Notice what 
this parable teaches about him. First 
of all, as we have seen, he has no right 
in the world. He is a trespasser. I 
once heard a Methodist local preacher 
say, " The devil is a squatter," and then 
proceed to explain that, "A squatter is 
a man who settles on land he has no 
right to, and works it for his own ad- 
vantage." With that definition I am 
perfectly in agreement. It expresses 
the whole truth concerning the devil. 
When presently we shall know the 
mystery of this great personality, we 
shall perhaps find that he was the god 
of this world before he fell. It may be 
that this world was given to him in 
some past economy which ended in fail- 
ure. The opening story of the Bible 
suggests this possibility. There was a 
certain economy which ended in dark- 
ness and void, and it may be that be- 
hind that catastrophe is the story of 
the devil. Be that as it may, we know 
from Scripture that he left mark the 
words left his "proper habitation;" 
that is, he wandered from the orbit in 
which the infinite wisdom of God had 
placed him, sacrificing all right to his 
principality. Again I am constrained 
to exclaim, Oh, the comfort of the cer- 
tainty that the devil has no claim to the 
world! I think we have missed much 
in our thinking and work as Christian 
people, because we have been too ready 
to yield to him as his right everything 



152 



MATTHEW [MAM. xm. 24-30 AND 36-43] 



upon which his hand rests. Our busi- 
ness is ever to say, Hands off in the 
name of the Proprietor: to declare at 
every point that the whole field belongs 
to the Son of Man, and wherever it is 
sown with the seed of evil it is done 
by an enemy, a marauder. In this par- 
able the King has done what indeed He 
did in all His life and teaching 
dragged the great foe from his hiding- 
place into clear daylight. To me it is 
as remarkable and valuable a fact that 
Jesus came to show the work of the 
devil as that He came to reveal God. 
Paul could say, " We are not ignorant 
of his devices," but he could not have 
said that until he had been brought into 
the light of the Christian revelation. It 
is when a man submits himself to Jesus 
Christ that he sees clearly, not God 
only, not himself only, but his enemy 
also. It is one of the great advantages 
of coming into the light of Christ's 
teaching that man is enabled to see the 
devil for what he is, and is able there- 
fore to place a true value on both his 
person and his purpose. 

Then as to the seed. The seed is the 
sons of the evil of the evil one. I 
prefer the word evil to stand in its 
abstract suggestiveness of not only the 
evil one, but of all the issue of his 
work. The seeds producing darnel are 
the sons of evil. As to the sowing, 
there is a phrase which we must not 
miss, "among the wheat." This does 
not necessarily mean that all who are 
not Christian people are to be described 
as darnel. The word "among" has 
behind it two Greek words. One of 
these words would suffice for ordinary 
expression, but the combination of the 
two lends intensity to the thought. The 
phrase occurs only four times in the 
New Testament, once used here, again 
by Mark in connection with the same 
teaching, again in the Corinthian letter 
in quite another realm of thought, and 
once more in Revelation, where it is 
said that the Lamb is " in the midst of 
the throne." It is the most intense way 
of saying " among." Herein is revealed 
the subtlety of the foe. He scattered 
his darnel among the wheat. The 
devil's method is that of mingling the 
counterfeit with the real. It is that of 
introducing into the Master's own 



property that which is so like the good 
that at first you cannot tell the differ- 
ence. That is the devil's mission of 
imitation. It is the heart of the parable. 

What is to be the issue of the two 
sowings? Their time of operation is to 
be until " the end of the age," and until 
then the word of the King is, " Let 
both grow together until the harvest" 
Let these two sowings work themselves 
out to final manifestation, and then 
there will be separation. 

No matter how closely together sons 
of the Kingdom and sons of evil are 
planted, in process of time the differ- 
ence must be seen. The Kingdom heart 
will manifest a Kingdom life. The evil 
nature will produce an evil character. 
"Let them alone." The sons of the 
Kingdom will influence the age toward 
the Kingdom, and the King will gather 
His harvest as the result of their pres- 
ence in the world. The sons of evil 
will produce a harvest of abomination 
which at last the reapers will bind and 
burn. The harvest of the sons of the 
Kingdom will be a harvest of sunlight 
upon the world. They shall "shine 
forth as the sun in the Kingdom of 
their Father." The harvest of the sons 
of evil will be one of evil, of things 
which offend and defile, and He by His 
reapers will at the last gather them out 
and cast them forth to burning. 

Now, finally, what instruction are we 
to gather from this parable ? First, that 
the method of the foe in this age of the 
Kingdom is that of imitation. This is 
the teaching of the parable of the dar- 
nel. The parable of the mustard seed 
reveals another quality, and of the 
leaven yet another; but here the 
enemy's method of imitation is re- 
vealed. He began in the days of the 
apostles. Ananias and Sapphira, Simon 
Magus with his following were darnel 
among the wheat. Later on, as the 
apostolic writings show, men crept in 
.privily, came in unawares, men who 
were "not of us," who taught another 
doctrine and yet talked in the language 
of the Christian faith. It was perpet- 
ually the method of imitation. Leaving 
behind the apostolic times and "passing 
through the centuries it is still to be 
found. The essential power of the sons 
of the Kingdom has been imitated by 



153 



[MAM. xin. 31, 32] 



MATTHEW 



false power. Their true purity has 
been counterfeited by that false sanc- 
tity which insists upon external things, 
and knows nothing of cleanness of the 
heart. Even to-day the method is still 
apparent. In matters of doctrine men 
are taking the great phrases of the New 
Testament, and are interpreting them so 
as to contradict their simplest meaning. 
In matters of spirituality, some "holi- 
ness" movements have run riot, until 
they have become bestial, and an un- 
holy traffic with matters occult mas- 
querades as spiritual religion. Imitation 
is the devil's master-method. 

The method of the King is still that 
of waiting for the development of the 
inner truth. No harm can come to the 
good seed because darnel is sown be- 
side it, and in order that judgment upon 
the evil may be complete it must be 
permitted to work itself out to final 
manifestation. The two sowings will 
go forward to the end of the age, and 
difficulty is often caused through not 
recognizing this truth. One person tells 
me that the world is getting worse and 
worse, while another affirms that it is 
getting better and better. The pity is 
that the two quarrel, for they are both 
right. Evil has become more evil in every 
age. Devilry has become more devilish 
with the passing of the centuries. Evil 
to-day is far more diabolic than any- 
thing which existed before the coming 
of Christ. It is more cunning, more in- 
sidious, more cruel in its refinement. 



On the other hand, goodness is being 
manifested on ever higher planes, and 
the Kingdom harvest is surely growing. 
Everywhere darnel is growing by the 
side of the wheat. What, then, is our 
duty toward the darnel? I am some- 
times asked to take part in the uproot- 
ing of imitations, but the method of 
the King is other. He said, "Let it 
alone." 

The King will not always let it alone. 
There is a day coming when this age 
shall end. Then there will be the burn- 
ing of the darnel and the garnering of 
the wheat. The King will clear out of 
His field all the things which offend. 

There are questions not discussed in 
this parable, and we must not therefore 
look for them here. It is taken for 
granted, for instance, that a man who 
is a son of evil may be changed into a 
son of the Kingdom. Thank God that 
it is possible. It is the stupendous mir- 
acle of Christianity that the son of evil, 
the darnel, can become changed into the 
son of the Kingdom, the wheat. This 
is one of the things impossible with 
men, but possible with God. Every- 
where such men are to be found, and 
where they live and work, the Kingdom 
of heaven is growing. It is the comfort 
of the hour. Darnel is everywhere ; but 
wheat is everywhere. Throughout the 
world the King has sown the sons of 
His Kingdom, and their presence every- 
where is creating an influence and pre- 
paring for the consummation of the age. 



MATTHEW XIII. 31, 32 



WE now come to the first of the 
parables of which the King gave 
no distinct explanation. It is therefore 
important that we proceed with care. 
There are perils of interpretation which 
we must avoid, and principles of inter- 
pretation which we must observe. The 
perils to which I refer are two; first, 
popularity of opinion; secondly, misin- 
terpretation of history. Unless we 
guard against the first we shall con- 
stantly find ourselves mistaken as to the 
meaning of Scripture. The fact that in 
the judgment of a majority of exposi- 
tors a passage has a certain meaning is 
not necessarily proof that that meaning 



is correct. Popular interpretations of 
the Old Testament Scriptures resulted 
in the crucifixion of Jesus Christ. 

We need also very carefully to guard 
against a misinterpretation of history 
which may drive us to misinterpreta- 
tion of the parables. We may be in- 
clined to say these parables mean 
certain things because of what has hap- 
pened in the centuries : while yet as a 
matter of fact we do not correctly un- 
derstand the history. 

As to the principles of interpretation. 
First, we must expect to find in this 
parable harmony of teaching with the 
other parables. We must be suspicious 



154 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xm. 31, 32] 



of any interpretation of the one parable 
which contradicts that of any other. 
We may take it for granted that Christ 
is consistent in His teaching. Hence 
the value of the fact that the first two 
parables were explained by the King 
Himself. From these explanations we 
may proceed to an examination of all 
the rest. Once again, we must remem- 
ber the consistency of our Lord's fig- 
ures. He does not confuse them in His 
use. The sower of the different par- 
ables always represents the same per- 
son, and so throughout. When He has 
given us the explanation of a figure we 
may apply that explanation uniformly. 

Let us now inquire into the meaning 
of our parable, remembering both the 
perils and principles of interpretation. 
It is generally believed that by it Jesus 
intended to teach the satisfactory 
growth of the Kingdom idea until it 
became dominant in human history, and 
an expositor of Holy Scripture, whom 
I personally value most highly, but from 
whom at this point I differ, expresses 
the popular interpretation as follows: 

" The parables already considered 
might suggest that the Kingdom was 
destined to partial and shaded success. 
The first spoke of three parts of the 
seed as coming to nothing, and the sec- 
ond, of the fourth part as coming up 
amid tares. The listeners might say, 
'Is this all?' Therefore in the next 
two, our Lord sets forth a brighter 
aspect of the future of the Kingdom, 
exhibiting in the former its growth 
from small beginnings to great magni- 
tude, and in the second its transforming 
influence on the mass in which it is 
deposited." 

Such a view admits in the first two 
parables what they most certainly sug- 
gest and teach; but it then declares 
that the next two contradict that teach- 
ing. I claim, therefore, that such inter- 
pretation, though popular, is incorrect. 

Take the history of the Kingdom 
during the past nineteen centuries. Is 
there any one who will care to affirm 
that it has been a complete success ? Is 
it not true if I may borrow this phrase 
again that it has met only with "par- 
tial and shaded success"? Who will 
care to say that the Kingdom of God 
has ever been truly exhibited among 



men? We talk very glibly about Chris- 
tian nations; but there are no Christian 
nations. Of course, if we use the 
phrase in a limited sense we may by 
comparison be called Christian nations; 
but even so I fear that our Christian- 
ity, manifested nationally, is of a very 
poor type. The world has never seen the 
Kingdom of God set up in perfection 
yet; and notwithstanding the fact that 
nineteen centuries have passed away, 
the Kingdom idea of Jesus has met with 
but "partial and shaded success." Let 
no one misinterpret me, God is not fail- 
ing. He is doing the work He intends 
to do, and beyond the little while of this 
age and the tiny span of our endeavour, 
He has other and mighty work to ac- 
complish. Do not let us ever attempt 
to interpret the doings of God by the 
appearances of half an hour, or half a 
millennium. To make any parable teach 
the complete and final success of the 
Kingdom purpose in the present age is 
not only to misinterpret the other par- 
ables to make them square with this 
idea, but it is to misinterpret the actual 
facts of history. The general teaching 
of the parables is that throughout this 
age there will be difficulty, limitation, 
admixture, opposition. Separation be- 
tween the conflicting elements is post- 
poned to the consummation of the age, 
when perfect victory will follow. 

Now, notice the figures in this par- 
able which have appeared in previous 
ones. The seed and we have already 
seen that in the thought of Jesus the 
seed is ever that of human lives in 
which the word has been realised. The 
sower according to His own teaching 
the sower is Himself, the Son of Man. 
The soil and as we have heard Him 
say, " the field is the world." The birds 
and according to His interpretation 
already given, they are such as harm 
rather than help. These facts must be 
kept in mind as we proceed to examine 
this parable, first as to the picture pre- 
sented, and then as to the lessons 
taught. 

The picture presented is one of an 
unnatural development, and unintended 
issue. The mustard is well known in 
Palestine, and is not a tree, but a 
herb. As a tree it has been well de- 
scribed as a "garden shrub outdoing 



155 



[MAM. xiii. 31, 32] 



MATTHEW 



itself," and all attempts to make it sym- 
bolic of unqualified success are of the 
nature of special pleading. In con- 
nection with this parable I have been 
interested to notice how many exposi- 
tors refer to a sentence in Dr. Thom- 
son's The Land and the Book. He 
says: 

" Is this wild mustard that is growing 
so luxuriantly and blossoming so fra- 
grantly along our path? It is; and I 
have always found it here in the 
spring; and, a little later than this, the 
whole surface of the vale will be gilded 
over with its yellow flowers. / have 
seen this plant on the rich plain of 
Akkar as tall as the horse and his 
rider." 

It is this last sentence which is so 
constantly quoted in support of the idea 
that the mustard seed becomes a tree. 
Let us, however, read further from 
Dr. Thomson in this connection. He 
continues : 

" It has occurred to me on former 
visits that the mustard tree of the par- 
able probably grew at this spot, or pos- 
sibly at Tabiga, near Capernaum, for 
the water in both is somewhat similar 
and so are the vegetable productions. 
To furnish an adequate basis for the 
parable, it is necessary to suppose that 
a variety of it was cultivated in the 
time of our Saviour, which grew to an 
enormous size, and shot forth large 
branches, so that the fowls of the air 
could lodge in the branches of it. It 
may have been perennial and have 
grown to a considerable tree, and there 
are traditions in the country of such so 
large that a man could climb into them ; 
and after having seen red pepper 
bushes grow on year after year into 
tall shrubs, and the castor bean line the 
brooks about Damascus like the willows 
and poplars, I can readily credit the 
existence of mustard trees large enough 
to meet the demands of our Lord's 
parable." 

Thus it is evident that Dr. Thomson, 
after careful observation, was convinced 
that it was possible for there to be, 
occasionally and exceptionally, a mus- 
tard tree large enough to correspond 
with the description of Jesus. What is 
the necessary and simple deduction? 
That if there be such a tree it is ab- 
normal, unnatural, something which has 
escaped its original intention. 



Again, so accurate a writer as Dr. 
Hamilton says: 

"When this little seed is sown in 
the 'garden' or 'field' it shoots up, 
and soon overtops the pulse and other 
potherbs around it and becomes a 
'great tree;' not meaning thereby an 
oak or a cedar, but a plant sufficiently 
tall and expansive for birds to find 
shelter in the branches." 

These quotations serve to show the 
difficulty that the popular interpretation 
of this parable at once creates. A mus- 
tard seed cannot properly and normally 
produce a magnificent and far-spreading 
tree. It must be recognized that Jesus 
was describing something out of the 
ordinary, something unnatural. The 
mustard is a herb and not a tree, and 
if it so happen that the mustard plant, 
which is naturally small and unob- 
trusive, pass out of the stage of the 
yellow flowering herb of beauty to that 
of a great and mighty tree with 
branches, then both process and result 
are abnormal and unnatural. Dr. Carr 
says, " The mustard plant does not 
grow to a very great height, so that 
Luke's expression, ' waxed a great tree/ 
must not be pressed." But I cannot 
consent so to deal with Luke's expres- 
sion. I must abide by the actual words, 
and doing so I learn from the lips of 
Jesus the fact of the perverted growth 
of the Kingdom in this age. The mus- 
tard seed was to become greater than 
all herbs, but when it becomes greater 
than its true species it is abnormal. It 
is not what the man who planted it in- 
tended it to be, and the fact that it 
affords lodgment in its. branches for 
the birds of the heaven, proves its 
abnormality. 

What, then, are the lessons which the 
parable teaches us? First, that in this 
age there will be an unnatural develop- 
ment of the Kingdom principle. The 
true line of development is suggested 
by the figure of the mustard seed which 
is that of lowliness, meekness, unob- 
trusiveness. What has been the actual 
development? From the mustard seed, 
the herb denoting humility, has arisen 
a great and lofty tree significant of 
pride, dominance, mastership. I recall 
a conversation I once had with Sir Hall 
Caine, soon after the publication of his 



156 



MATTHEW 



[MAW. xiii. 31, 32] 



book, The Christian. I strongly ob- 
jected to what seemed to me to be a 
misinterpretation of the Christian ideal 
in that book, and I said to him. " Do 
you mean to tell the world that John 
Storm is a Christian?" His answer 
was a remarkable one. " By no means. 
I intend to teach the fact that we do 
not understand what Christ really 
taught." He then gave me two illus- 
trations of what he meant. " I am pre- 
pared," he said, "to put the whole eth- 
ical teaching of Jesus into two phrases : 
first, ' He that is greatest among you 
shall be your servant/ and second, ' Lay 
not up for yourselves treasures upon the 
earth.' " I am not for the moment dis- 
cussing the comprehensiveness of these 
two principles I am simply quoting Sir 
Hall Caine. He then declared, what is 
perfectly patent to all of us, that our 
national greatness is such as has re- 
sulted from our violation of these two 
principles. We have sought power 
before service, and possession before 
sacrifice. 

Turning from Sir Hall Caine's decla- 
ration of the nation's failure to realise 
the Kingdom, I ask if the Church of 
God has realized that Kingdom in its 
ideal of lowliness, of meekness, of ser- 
vice? In the days when Jesus was 
preaching the Kingdom His own im- 
mediate followers were constantly ask- 
ing, Who is master among us ? Who is 
the greatest among us? Who shall sit 
at the King's right hand in power? In 
the early Church the same spirit was 
manifest, men so craving for master- 
ship, homage, power, that Peter was 
compelled to write to those who had 
oversight of the flock of God, charging 
them not to "lord it" over God's 
heritage. 

In process of time Constantine es- 
poused the cause of Christianity. With 
reference to this epoch one of the old 
expositors says that the mustard seed 
planted in Judea was but a small thing, 
but it suddenly sprang into a tree, 
great and magnificent, in that wonder- 
ful hour when Constantine became a 
Christian. That statement is, I believe, 
true, but was the development good or 
bad? Did it help Christianity or hin- 
der it? I am of opinion that nothing 
EO hindered the true Kingdom prin- 



ciple in the world, as Constantine's es- 
pousal of the cause of Christianity. 

In the Papacy the same principle is 
manifest. The spirit of the Church 
which desires worldly power and 
worldly authority, is the very opposite 
of the spirit of lowliness and meekness 
and service. The small and lowly seed 
has become a great tree, and into its 
branches the fowls of the air have come 
to lodge. Greatness in external and 
material things is but a false great- 
ness, and wherever the Church has 
risen to anything like worldly power 
it has become a refuge for the things 
that are unclean and polluting and 
life-destructive. 

We must remind ourselves again 
that the Lord in these parables is not 
dealing with the true nature of the 
Kingdom, neither is He declaring the 
ultimate issue thereof. God's Kingdom 
will yet be set up on this earth, and 
the true principles of greatness revealed 
in His own humility and enunciated in 
His teaching will be the principles 
which obtain in the affairs of the world. 
Somewhere on in that dim distance 
and measuring distances by our mea- 
sures it sometimes looks a long way 
he will be counted great who has 
girded himself with a towel to serve. 
Sometime, when God's great Kingdom 
comes, we shall not imagine that he is 
great who has mastered his fellow man ; 
rather, he who has served him in lowly 
and loving unobtrusiveness. The ideal 
is already dawning. Men are beginning 
to see its glory. An influence is being 
exerted to-day among men which will 
come to harvest when the King Him- 
self comes. Do not imagine that this 
parable teaches the ultimate failure of 
the Kingdom life and growth, but it 
does teach comparative failure, the re- 
sult of misinterpretation and misappli- 
cation of the ideals of Jesus. Men 
have attempted by manipulation of ma- 
terial things to make of Christianity a 
great imperial power. The figure of the 
tree as denoting worldly greatness was 
used of Nebuchadnezzar and of Pha- 
raoh, and in this sense our Lord made 
use of it. True to His prediction, the 
seed typifying the meekness and lowli" 
ness of the Kingdom ideal has devel- 
oped along a false line which has re- 



157 



[MATT. XIII. 33] 



MATTHEW 



suited in a tree of worldly power 
affording shelter and protection to that 
which is evil and dishonouring. 

What is the bearing of this study 
upon us? Surely first the recognition 
of the facts of the case in order that 
we may be aided thereby in our life and 
service. I pass by that application, 
however, that in a closing word I may 
make a personal one. In our individ- 
ual life, and so far as possible in our 
Church capacity, we ought to attempt 
to realise the purpose of the King. We 
ought to be ready to turn from the false 
greatness which He disowns to the true 
greatness which He recognizes. In in- 
dividual life, and also in the corporate 
life of the Church, we shall realise His 
purpose in proportion as we remember 
that in meekness and lowliness, in un- 
ceasing zeal and consecrated service, in 
perpetual outpouring of the life in sacri- 
ficial toil, in endless running on His 
errands of tender mercy we shall be 



most loyal to the King, and shall best 
give the world to see the infinite con- 
trast between the material ideal of 
pomp and pageantry and pride, and the 
spiritual ideal of simplicity and sweet- 
ness and service. 

Christ was under no delusion as to 
what would happen in this age. A 
sower sowing seed, and only a quarter 
of it responsive ! A sower sowing seed, 
and an enemy sowing darnel ! A sower 
sowing seed which transgresses the 
bounds of its own nature and becomes 
a tree sheltering evil things. It is for 
us to bow in the presence of His knowl- 
edge of the characteristics of the age 
which He was introducing; but it is 
ours, moreover, to give ourselves so 
fully to Him in consecration as to real- 
ise in the sphere of our own responsi- 
bility His ideals and His purposes, and 
so to move toward the consummation of 
the age, and the dawning of the one 
which lies beyond. 



MATTHEW XIII. 33 



fTlHERE are two interpretations of 
JL this parable. The first and the 
most popular is that which treats leaven 
as the type of the Kingdom. The other 
claims that the whole picture is re- 
quired to set forth what the King 
intended to teach concerning the King- 
dom. That is to say, one method of 
interpretation lays emphasis upon the 
fact that the Lord said, " The Kingdom 
of heaven is like unto leaven." The 
other interpretation insists that to stop 
there is to miss the Master's meaning, 
and that it is necessary to read "The 
Kingdom of heaven is like unto leaven, 
which a woman took, and hid in three 
measures of meal." Either leaven alone 
is the type of. the Kingdom, or all the 
facts of the picture the meal, the 
woman, the leaven, the hiding, and the 
issue are required in order to under- 
stand what the King intended to teach. 
If the first interpretation of the par- 
able, that leaven is the symbol of the 
Kingdom, be the correct one, we are 
necessarily driven to the conclusion 
that in this instance leaven must be 
the type of good, and that as a result 
of its working all things will be finally 



brought into subjection to the King. 
That is the view which seems to be 
held to-day by the great majority of 
expositors. 

According to the second view leaven 
is not a type of good but of evil, as it 
is in every other case in Scripture. It 
is thus the type of a principle which 
affects for evil the Kingdom testimony 
of this particular age. The ultimate 
issue described, therefore, is not the 
conquest of the age by the principles 
of the Kingdom, but rather the inter- 
mixture with the Kingdom testimony of 
forces which enfeeble it. 

If a view is not to be accepted be- 
cause of its popularity, neither ought it 
to be rejected on that account. There 
are, however, other reasons which com- 
pel me to accept the second theory as 
the true one. I do so in the first place 
because the former view is out of har- 
mony with the symbolic use of leaven 
in the Bible in other places. Those 
who hold the first view admit frankly 
that this is the only case in which 
leaven is used as a type of good. Uni- 
formly, from its first mention to its last, 
with this one exception if it be an 



158 



MATTHEW 



. XIII. 331 



exception leaven is a type of evil. In 
its actual effect leaven ever produces 
disintegration and corruption, and in 
all other cases it is used in harmony 
with this fact, as a type of evil. I do 
not personally believe that in this one 
instance there is a departure from the 
general rule. But secondly, and this to 
me is a more convincing proof, I can- 
not accept the more popular interpreta- 
tion, because it contradicts the teaching 
of all the other parables, not one of 
which suggests that the Kingdom in- 
fluence in this age is to be victorious 
wholly and absolutely. Mixture is sug- 
gested from beginning to end. The 
sowing of the seed in the first parable 
results not in universal harvest of good, 
for three-quarters of the seed so sown 
is inoperative. In the second we have 
not merely the sowing of good seed, but 
the deliberate sowing of darnel, and the 
Master distinctly commanded that there 
was to be no separation until the con- 
summation of the age. In the parable 
of the mustard seed, while its growing 
was a symbol of good, its false develop- 
ment revealed the intermixture of evil. 
If these first three parables teach that 
this age is not to be characterised by 
perfect victory for good, and if the 
leaven is a type of good, then all the 
teaching of the first three is contra- 
dicted by that of the fourth. 

A further reason for my inability to 
accept the more general interpretation 
is that the history of the centuries and 
the experience of the present hour alike 
contradict that interpretation, and har- 
monise rather with the teaching of the 
earlier parables. There has been no 
complete mastery of evil by good in 
any part of the world in any age, nor 
even in the Church of God. The mix- 
ture of the two principles is manifest 
everywhere. Finally, I cannot believe 
that the teaching of the parable is ac- 
cording to popular interpretation, be- 
cause it would be out of harmony with 
the other parables as to method. It is 
perpetually insisted that Jesus said, 
"The Kingdom of heaven is like unto 
leaven," and that therefore no one has 
any right to say that leaven is not 
typical of the Kingdom of heaven. But 
in the parable of the darnel we read, 
"The Kingdom of heaven is likened 



unto a man," and here nobody suggests 
that the man in that parable is the type 
of the Kingdom of heaven. It is abso- 
lutely necessary to take the whole pic- 
ture of the man sowing darnel in a field 
already sown with good seed in order 
to understand the teaching of the 
Lord. We have no more right to pause 
upon the word " leaven " in the fourth 
parable than upon the word " man " in 
the second. If the word "leaven" ex- 
hausts the Master's teaching at this 
point concerning the similitude which 
He is suggesting, then the word " man " 
exhausts His thought in the parable of 
the darnel concerning the similitude 
which He there sets up. The same test 
may be applied to other parables. In a 
subsequent one the King said, " The 
Kingdom of heaven is like unto a king," 
and if we are compelled to stop at the 
word " leaven " in this parable, we must 
do so at the word "king." It is evi- 
dent, therefore, that to understand the 
teaching the whole picture must be 
kept in mind. That picture is one of 
three measures of meal, of a woman 
deliberately hiding the leaven in the 
meal, and of the working of that leaven 
until all the meal is under its influence. 
Now let us examine the symbolism. 
In order to do so we inquire first, What 
is the essential thing in the picture? 
Then, What are those matters which 
affect the essential thing? As regards 
the first, we reply that the thing of 
primary importance is not the leaven, 
and not the woman, but the three mea- 
sures of meal. The woman and the 
leaven are considered according to their 
relation to the meal, and the effect pro- 
duced is regarded also in its relation 
to the meal, " Till it was all leavened." 
Therefore, the matter of supreme in- 
terest is the meal, and what happened 
to it. We proceed to inquire, then, 
what Jesus meant by using this figure. 
It has been correctly pointed out that 
it is both important and interesting to 
interpret any expression or thought in 
Scripture by the presence thereof in 
other parts of Scripture, and especially 
by its first occurrence. Following that 
principle of investigation, we find that 
the first occasion upon which the three 
measures of meal are mentioned in 
Scripture is as far back as the book 



159 



[MAW. xiii. 333 



MATTHEW 



of Genesis (xviii. 6). There we have 
an account of the entertainment of 
Jehovah by Abraham. In one of the 
great Theophanies of the Old Testa- 
ment Jehovah manifested Himself as an 
Angel. Whether Abraham at the mo- 
ment knew Who the visitor was, I am 
not prepared to affirm; but recognizing 
Him as supernatural he hastened to en- 
tertain Him. In order to this, Sarah 
took three measures of meal and pre- 
pared it. Passing on through the Bible 
I find the figure again in connection 
with the meal offering. For this there 
was fixed a minimum and a maximum 
amount. Gideon brought an offering, 
and Hannah also, and on each occasion 
three measures of meal are spoken of. 
In the book of Ezekiel, in connection 
with the final and perfect offerings, 
seven times over in one brief instruc- 
tion the amount of the meal offering is 
three measures of meal. In the Divine 
economy the meal offering followed the 
burnt offering. The burnt offering sig- 
nifies the devotion of the life to God. 
The meal offering was the result of 
cultivation, manufacture, preparation, 
and, therefore, so far as man was con- 
cerned, always signified dedication of 
his work to God. Remember, too, the 
meal offering was an offering of hospi- 
tality; part was retained by the wor- 
shipper and part was at the disposal 
of the priest. In the meal offering, 
then, we have a symbol of the perfect 
communion established between the 
worshipper and God upon the basis of 
the worshipper's service. From the 
simple rites of home life was taken 
that which was to be the perpetual 
symbol of dedication to God in. service 
as the ground of perpetual communion 
with Him. 

In the list of offerings it was most 
explicitly commanded that no leaven 
was to be mixed with the meal offering. 
Its presence would have been the sym- 
bol of intrusion of that which corrupted, 
into the fellowship of service. In our 
parable then, fellowship with God in 
service is seen to be marred during the 
present age by the introduction of a 
corrupting influence. The woman mix- 
ing the meal stands as the representa- 
tive of authority and management in 
the matter of service to God. Turning 



to the leaven, we repeat that it is in 
itself a corrupt thing, and can only 
exercise a corrupting influence. I know 
it may be objected that in our common 
life to-day it is used, as, for instance, 
in the making of bread. It is, however, 
by no means certain that this method is 
the best possible, just as we are com- 
ing to understand that the intrusion 
into the physical life of man of alcohol 
is in itself a grave peril, it may be that 
presently we shall come to believe that 
the use of leaven is injurious physi- 
cally. That I am not prepared to dis- 
cuss; it is simply a passing suggestion. 
The fact that leaven is used in certain 
ways to-day does not for a moment 
affect the simple truth that if it have 
its perfect outworking the result is 
destruction. It is in itself corrupt, 
and is always an agent of corrup- 
tion. When Sarah prepared the meal 
for the angel, she mixed no leaven 
with it. Leaven was distinctly for- 
bidden in the meal offering, and when 
Paul used the figure of the leaven, 
whether in reference to the Levit- 
ical code, the Jewish custom, or the 
Master's use of it, it was always in 
the sense of evil. "Your glorying is 
not good. Know ye not that a little 
leaven leaveneth the whole lump? 
Purge out the old leaven, that ye may 
be a new lump, even as ye are unleav- 
ened. For our passover also hath been 
sacrificed, even Christ: wherefore let 
us keep the feast, not with old leaven, 
neither with the leaven of malice and 
wickedness, but with the unleavened 
bread of sincerity and truth." 

In the parable, then, we see a woman, 
the type of authority and management, 
hiding leaven, the emblem of disinte- 
gration and corruption, in the meal, the 
symbol of service and fellowship. Such 
is the principle of the parable. What, 
then, according to this interpretation, 
does it teach? It first recognizes that 
the Kingdom testimony in the present 
age must be based upon the fellowship 
of the people of God with Him in in- 
corruptness; that the Church and the 
individual can only bear testimony 
which is influential for the Kingdom of 
God as they are entirely separated from 
all that of which leaven is the symbol. 
Underneath the oaks of Mamre, after 



160 



MATTHEW 



[MAT*, xm. 33] 



participation in the symbolic meal, 
Abraham stood talking face to face 
with the One Whom he had enter- 
tained. There he pleaded for Sodom, 
and his right of approach, his right of 
appeal, his right of argument were 
based upon the fact of his personal 
separation from all the corrupting in- 
fluences of the country into which he 
had been brought, the unleavened cakes 
which Sarah had prepared being the 
symbol of that separation. While 
Abraham thus interceded with Jehovah, 
Lot was in the midst of Sodom ; a right- 
eous man, according to the teaching of 
Peter in his epistle, and yet utterly 
without influence for good in the city. 
Lot could do nothing for Sodom. He 
could not lift it. He could not per- 
suade it. He could not save it. If 
the city was nearly saved, it was not 
by the influence of Lot, but by the in- 
tercession of Abraham. Lot, though a 
good man in his personal attitude and 
in his deepest intention, had corrupted 
his testimony and lost his power by ad- 
mitting the influences of Sodom into his 
heart. Abraham, on the other hand, 
living in separation from its sin, had 
maintained his power to pray for 
Sodom. Similarly in the teaching of 
the parable. The Kingdom testimony 
depends upon separation. It follows by 
necessary sequence that testimony for 
the King is weakened in the measure 
in which the Church in her manage- 
ment of her own affairs the woman 
becoming the type of ecclesiastical gov- 
ernment is weakened by the intrusion 
of such motives and methods as are 
worldly. 

The use of the word " leaven " in the 
New Testament is most remarkable. 
Its first occurrence, in the actual read- 
ing of the books rather than in the 
chronology of events, is in our text. 
Later on, as the King came to Caesarea 
Philippi, and approached the crisis when 
the period of His propaganda merged 
into that of His Passion, He warned 
His disciples to " Beware of the leaven 
of the Pharisees and Sadducees." Mark 
tells us that He said, " Beware of the 
leaven of the Pharisees, and the leaven 
of Herod;" while Luke reports Him as 
saying, " Beware ye of the leaven of 
the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy." 



Coming to the letter to the Corinthians, 
from which I have already quoted, Paul 
uses the figure in connection with the 
toleration in the Church of an incest- 
uous person, an3 the lack of discipline 
which characterised that toleration. 
Yet again, in the Galatian epistle, in 
combating the influence of Judaizing 
teachers, Paul declared, " A little leaven 
leaveneth the whole lump." These re- 
ferences exhaust the use of the figure 
in the New Testament. Thus in the 
Old and New alike, leaven is the sym- 
bol of that against which the men o 
faith are to guard. From these refer- 
ences we may clearly see its evil nature. 
Christ distinctly affirmed that the leaven 
of the Pharisees was hypocrisy ; that is, 
the acting of a part, professing to be 
something which one really is not, the 
uttering with the lips of certain formulae 
of devotion while the heart is not sub- 
ject to the King. The leaven of the 
Sadducees was that of rationalism. 
They denied angel, spirit, resurrection. 
The leaven of Herod was that of ma- 
terialism, government by the mani- 
festation of material splendour. He 
overawed his people by pageantry and 
display. Ignoring true greatness, he 
laid all emphasis upon external magnifi- 
cence, and the result was the utter cor- 
ruption of his empire. 

According to Paul, leaven was the 
symbol of the toleration of evil inside 
the Church. He used it in connection 
with a man living in actual impurity, 
to whom had been given the shelter of 
her fellowship. Again, leaven was the 
type of formalism, and of return to such 
ritualistic practices as robbed religion 
of its spirit and life. 

To summarize, the New Testament 
teaches that hypocrisy is leaven; ra- 
tionalism is leaven; a material idea of 
government is leaven; toleration of evil 
within the borders of the Church is 
leaven; formalism is leaven. Any or 
all of these things serve to break up 
the life of the Church, and a weakened 
testimony results. They constitute a 
ferment, a disturbance, a disintegration. 
Wherever the Church has come under 
the influence of such evils, corruption 
has spread throughout, manifested in 
spoiled lives and feeble witness to the 
Kingdom of God. 



161 



CMATT. xm. 445 



MATTHEW 



If we turn from this interpretation of 
our parable to the facts of history, what 
do we find? Has it not been the case 
that the Church's power to speak au- 
thoritatively of the mystery of God, and 
to exhibit the benefits and enforce the 
claims of the Kingdom in the world, has 
been paralysed by the evil things of 
which the New Testament clearly 
teaches leaven to be the symbol? Is it 
not true that at the present moment the 
Church's power to bring the world 
under conviction concerning the King- 
dom of God is feeble because of her 
complicity with evil things? She is 
still weakened by the leaven of hypoc- 
risy, which is profession without posses- 
sion : by the leaven of rationalism, 
which is denial of the supernatural : by 
the leaven of materialism, which is the 
adoption of the world's standpoints and 
principles, making the fact of Christ 
one of ostentation rather than one of 
purity and power. And is it not true 
that not least among the leavening in- 
fluences at work is that weak toleration 
of evil, and false pity for the wrong- 
doer which allows him to stay within 
her borders, making her incapable of 
speaking with authority to those in re- 
bellion against the Kingdom of God? 
Moreover, is it not true that formalism 
in a thousand different forms, express- 
ing the widespread hankering after rit- 
ual, is a. leavening force to-day, marring 
our testimony and spoiling our service 
of God which can only be effectual when 
based upon our own separation to Him? 

In this connection I say, as I have 
said in dealing with former parables, 
that this is not a picture of the final fact 
concerning the Kingdom of God. It is 
a picture of the age which ends with the 



advent. "When the Son of Man com- 
eth, shall He find faith on the earth ? " 
The popular answer of theology is, Yes. 
Christ's answer is, No; and it is infi- 
nitely better in order to do our work 
as it ought to be done, that we should 
accept His estimate of our age. It may 
be objected that this outlook is pessi- 
mistic in the extreme. It would be, in- 
deed, if this age were the final one ; but 
it is not so, it is only initial. With the 
flaming of His advent feet will come 
the Kingdom administration of the 
King's own presence. For that the 
world is waiting, and that we, by con- 
secration, are attempting to hasten. 

Thus far we have considered the first 
four parables, those spoken to the dis- 
ciples in the hearing of the multitudes. 
In them, two things are made perfectly 
clear. First, that the Kingdom influence 
is to be felt from beginning to end of 
the age. The Son of Man sows His 
good seed and waits for the harvest; 
and there is relationship with God on 
the part of His own in separation and 
service. We have also seen that 
throughout the age there is present and 
at work the principle of evil. Three- 
fourths of the good seed fails of har- 
vest, and the enemy deliberately inter- 
mixes with the wheat the darnel. 
There is a false development even of 
the good into ostentatious display which 
is out of harmony with the true spirit 
of the King. The meal offering of fel- 
lowship in service is corrupted by the 
intrusion of the leaven of impurity. 

There are other aspects of this age 
to which we now come in parables ad- 
dressed only to those who were His own 
disciples. 



MATTHEW XIII. 44 



WE now turn to the second section 
of the parables, that is, to those 
which the King uttered to His disciples 
alone. Having left the multitudes, His 
disciples gathered about Him in the 
Quietness of the house. There, first in 
answer to the request they preferred, 
He explained to them the parable of 
the darnel, and then proceeded to give 
them further instruction. 



As we turn to the consideration of 
these parables we must still bear in 
mind that our Lord is dealing with the 
subject of the Kingdom in the age be- 
tween His advents. The view-point 
now, however, is changed. There are 
distinct differences between the first 
four and the last four parables. In the 
first series the King was addressing 
Himself especially to men of sight, to 



MATTHEW 



[MA*T. xin. 44] 



those who would watch events, to those 
who, in all probability, would be intel- 
lectually interested in the progress or 
failure of the Kingdom He had 
preached; that is, to men who were 
not in the Kingdom, but who viewed 
it from the outside as interested spec- 
tators. He had therefore dealt with 
such aspects of the Kingdom as would 
be patent to all observers the different 
results dependent upon the quality of 
the seed, the enemy's imitation, the un- 
natural development of the Kingdom 
principle into material power, the cor- 
ruption of the Church's influence by the 
introduction of wrong methods. All 
these have been evident to those who 
have watched in every successive age. 

Now, in the parables which remain, 
the King addresses Himself no longer 
to men of sight. He speaks from this 
moment exclusively to men of faith, to 
such as live not merely in the conscious- 
ness of things seen, but in the confi- 
dence of things unseen. Therefore, as 
in speaking to the men of sight He had 
dealt with the evident things of the 
Kingdom, so in speaking to men of 
faith He set forth the hidden things 
of the Kingdom. Having declared what 
the external manifestation of the King- 
dom would be in this age, He proceeded 
to show to His own circle of disciples 
what God is accomplishing. The par- 
ables we are considering, therefore, will 
teach us the specific values of the King- 
dom in this age, from the standpoint of 
the Divine purpose and economy. Let 
us, then, pause to glance in broad out- 
line at these parables which we are 
about to consider. 

The first one sets forth the relation 
of this age to the purpose of God for 
the whole world. The great sentence 
is, "He ... buyeth that field." In the 
parable of the pearl we see the relation 
of this age to other spheres and other 
ages. It is the story of the gathering 
out from this age of all the precious 
treasure which is to belong to succeed- 
ing ages, and in them to have its mis- 
sion. In the parable of the drag-net 
there is revealed the method of this age 
in the economy of God. Finally, the 
parable of the householder, bringing 
things new and old out of his treasure 
house, indicates the responsibility of the 



disciples in this age, in view of the 
teaching of all the former parables. 

In considering the first in order, the 
parable of the treasure, we shall follow 
our usual habit, and notice, first, the 
picture presented. In doing so, we 
must still bear in mind the principle 
insisted upon, of the consistency main- 
tained in the use of the figures in these 
parables as throughout all the Bible. 
Bearing this in mind, we find two fig- 
ures we have already met with, and 
which have had explanation. There 
are also two new figures at which we 
shall specially look. The figures already 
used are those of the field and the man. 
The field has appeared before, and we 
have seen the Son of Man sowing 
therein His good seed, and the enemy 
sowing his darnel. We have, moreover, 
seen the mustard seed planted in the 
field. What the field was in the earlier 
parables, it is also in this. We go back 
to our Lord's direct explanation "The 
field is the world." The field, there- 
fore, in which the treasure was discov- 
ered and hidden is the world. The sec- 
ond thing in this parable which we 
have met with before, is the man. In 
each case he has been the King Him- 
self the sower of the seed in the first 
parable, the man who sowed the good 
seed in the second, and again, the man 
sowing the mustard seed. The man, 
then, in this parable who finds the 
treasure and then hides it, is the Son 
of Man Himself. Of the new elements 
in the parable, the first is that of the 
treasure, hidden in the field, discovered, 
and hidden again. The second element, 
which is new, is that of purchase, and 
purchase at cost, " He goeth and selleth 
all that he hath, and buyeth that field." 
This presence of two old figures with 
the two new ones in our parable should 
help us in the study of it. On two 
points we are relieved of the necessity 
for speculation. Concerning the field 
and the man, we start with light already 
in our possession. I think, in the light 
of these things, we may now discuss the 
new figures, those of the treasure and 
of purchase. 

It will immediately be seen that our 
interpretation of the parable will con- 
flict with the popular conception of its 
meaning, which explains both the trea- 



163 



[MATT. xm. 44] 



MATTHEW 



sure in this parable and the pearl in 
the next as a type of salvation, or 
Christ. If that be so, then the man 
who found the treasure in one case, 
and the pearl in the other, is the sinner. 
Any such view contradicts the figurative 
language of the earlier parables, and 
is indeed nothing short of absurd. It 
may be said that this is a strong state- 
ment to make. I make it, nevertheless, 
without hesitation. If, indeed, the hid- 
den treasure is salvation, and I am the 
man who finds, then I am able to pur- 
chase that which contains my salvation, 
and am saved by selling all I have. My 
own conception of my true position is 
that when I seek for salvation, my con- 
dition is bankrupt, and I can only ob- 
tain it as the free gift of God's grace. 
If the hymn which we have sometimes 
sung be true 

" I've found the pearl of greatest price ! 

My heart doth sing for joy; 
And sing I must, for Christ is minel 
Christ shall my song employ," 

then it is possible for me out of some- 
thing I possess to purchase Jesus 
Christ. It surely needs no argument to 
prove that there is no warrant in Scrip- 
ture, or indeed in the experience of 
men, for accepting such a view of the 
method of salvation. 

Claiming, then, that the two figures 
referred to have their true explanation 
in the use made of them in the earlier 
parables, we affirm that the man who 
found the treasure is Christ, and that 
the field in which He hid the treasure 
is the world. We turn at once to the 
teaching of the parable concerning the 
treasure, and concerning its purchase. 

If we think in all simplicity of the 
field as the world, there can be very 
little difficulty in discovering what the 
treasure is which the King finds 
therein. That hidden treasure is the 
latent possibility in the world of the 
realisation of the Kingship and gov- 
ernment of God. The principles of that 
government, the order of that govern- 
ment, and the beauty of that gov- 
ernment all constitute the treasure 
hidden in the world. The world is 
made for the display of the Kingdom 
and government of God. The being 
whom God placed in dominion is in 



rebellion against Him, and therefore 
the whole territory lies waste, failing 
to realise, and therefore failing to 
manifest, the breadth and beauty and 
beneficence of the Kingdom of God. 
Supposing, for the sake of argument, 
that this world is under observation by 
other worlds, does it reveal these 
things? It may be said that this is a 
piece of gratuitous imagination, but I 
submit that it is quite in order, for if 
we do not know that other worlds are 
observing ours, revelation has assured 
us that the " angels desire to look into 
these things," and it is impossible not 
to believe that the earth is the centre 
of observation in the universe of God. 
My question, then, is, supposing other 
worlds are watching this world, does 
the present condition of things exhibit 
the glory of the Divine government? 
There are some aspects, some places, 
and some matters, concerning which of 
course our answer would have to be, 
Yes. For eyes which are clear enough 
to see, every flower that decks the sod 
exhibits the glory of the Divine gov- 
ernment; and the coming of seed-time 
and harvest, and the regular rotation 
of the seasons, attest the perfection of 
His rule. But in all the higher facts 
of life is there not everywhere mani- 
fest a condition of chaos? Taking 
men, not in any individual case, or 
even, perhaps, in the small circle of 
personal friendship, but in the broad 
outlook upon humanity as a whole, does 
the human race exhibit the glory of 
God's Kingship? Are there not in the 
world habitations of cruelty ? Are there 
not places where darkness dwells and 
devilry obtains? Or if we come to the 
places upon which the light is falling, 
do we not find that what we call 
civilisation is endeavouring to make 
unrighteous profit out of the uncivil- 
ised? I imagine that were I a visitor 
from some other planet I should be 
inclined to say, Where is God? The 
earth is made for Him. It is His, and 
in every blade of grass there thrill the 
forces of His life, and every flower 
sings the song of His glory, but when 
I come to examine the men who should 
be supremely expressing the fact of 
God's government, I cannot discern the 
glory of the Kingdom. It is not yet 



164 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xm. 44] 



clearly manifest. The world does not 
know it experimentally, and cannot 
therefore reveal what the Kingdom of 
God really means. We sing of it, and 
speak of it, and imagine that we see it 
in the light of morning, and the dark- 
ness of night. It has been the perpet- 
ual refrain of the song of prophets, 
seers, and psalmists ; but experimentally 
the world has not found it. It is the 
supreme fact, and yet it is hidden. 

But the man in the parable found it. 
The finding was not a discovery which 
startled him. He knew that the field 
contained the treasure, and he came 
deliberately to seek it. What does this 
parable suggest concerning the King- 
dom? First, that the King knew this 
hidden fact of the government of God 
in the world. He, looking through the 
chaos, clearly saw the cosmos. He, 
looking at the sheep scattered and har- 
ried by wolves, saw through and beyond 
the vision to the still waters and quiet 
resting-places and the flock of God 
shepherded from all harm. He saw the 
Kingdom as it ought to be through the 
Kingdom as it was. He knew the hid- 
den secret of the world. This is one 
of the fundamental truths necessary to 
the understanding of all Christ's work, 
and necessary, moreover, to any co- 
operation with Him in service. What 
is equal to the sustenance of the heart 
in strength in the midst of the travail 
and toil of Christian service? Simply 
a clear vision of the Divine possibility 
which lies behind all the dereliction, 
both in the case of the individual and 
of the world at large. It was this hid- 
den treasure which this man knew of 
and brought to light. He knew that 
where ruin reigned, order might pre- 
vail. He saw that every man, and all 
society, yes, and every blade of grass, 
and every inch of earthly territory, 
were of God and through God, and 
could only realise their latent possibili- 
ties in relation to His Kingship. He 
discovered in the world the treasure, 
the Kingdom idea. 

Jesus exhibited this in strange ways 
during His ministry. He declared it 
with unceasing iteration. His one mes- 
sage as He passed from place to place 
was that of the Kingdom of God. 
Flowers? God clothed them. Chil- 



dren? God's angels guarded them. 
Men? God's Kingdom was their first 
concern. He saw that everything was 
in God and of God, and He set Himself 
to tell men that God is King. He re- 
vealed in the flashes of His simplest 
sentences, and in the glory of His set 
discourses, the truth concerning the un- 
realised values of the world. He came 
into the field in which His treasure was 
hidden. It existed though men did not 
know it. Every man was capable of 
God's government. All society was 
waiting for the recognition of the 
throne. The whole world needed the 
Divine administration. But all this 
was hidden from the eyes of men. Men 
were in rebellion, nature was in re- 
bellion. Sin and sighing were every- 
where. Or, to put the whole fact in 
the forceful language of the apostle, 
"The whole creation groaneth and tra- 
vaileth in pain together until now." 
Behind the ruin He saw the possibility, 
and in teaching and doing He discov- 
ered this possibility to His age, and, to 
all subsequent ages. In His personal 
life He realised all that the psalmist 
declared concerning man (Psalm viii). 
He had dominion over fish and fowl, 
and over the beasts of the field. In the 
hour of His temptation He was "with 
the wild beasts." That is not a state- 
ment inspiring terror, but revealing a 
truth full of beauty. He was with them 
in comradeship, Master of them, be- 
cause He was God's perfect Man. 

If this Man came and discovered 
treasure, He also hid it. Here perhaps 
is the touch of greatest mystery in our 
parable. It affirms the hiding of the 
treasure discovered. What have we 
that is parallel to this in the case of 
Christ? If we think of His ministry 
and interpret our parable in the light 
of it, we shall find that this is exactly 
what He did. He Who called people to 
the Kingdom of God, because of their 
refusal, because of their rejection of 
Him as King, shut the door of the 
Kingdom against them. By solemn act 
He rejected the nation, pronounced 
eight woes over against His eight 
Beatitudes, announced the doom of 
Jerusalem, flung out the city from the 
place of government, and hid these 
things from the wise and prudent. 



165 



[MAM. xni. 44] 



MATTHEW 



Then as Redeemer King, He prevented 
the manifestation of the glory of God 
in material magnificence and proceeded 
to the administration of the Kingdom 
in redemption and grace. 

This parable does not cover all the 
ground. There are other things not 
dealt with here. It does, however, re-, 
veal what is the relationship of the 
Kingdom of God to this age. This is 
the age which rejects Christ. It is the 
age of the Church, which is the real- 
isation of the Kingdom within its own 
borders. It exists to realise its prin- 
ciples, and reveal its beauties, and call 
men individually into relationship with 
it. But socially, and by act of Parlia- 
ment, even the Church cannot establish 
the Kingdom of God. That will be 
done eventually, but only by the King 
Himself. Our hope for the world is in 
the coming of the King to rule with a 
rod of iron. I never quite understand 
why men tremble when they hear that 
He rules with a rod of iron. The rod 
of iron is not a terrible thing. It is 
that which is perfect in its straight- 
ness, inflexible in its rule. We thank 
God for One Who will rule with a rod 
of iron. The world has suffered so 
long from ruling by reeds which bend 
and break. It has been cursed for ages 
by india-rubber government. 

The King purchased, not the treasure 
only, but the whole field. 

Carefully notice the passion which 
lay behind the purchase " In his joy." 
Notice, moreover, the price paid "all 
that he had." Notice, finally, the pur- 
chase" He ... buyeth that field." 

First, then, how came that joy of 
heart in the finding of the treasure? 
The question can only be answered by 
asking another. What was the treasure, 
the finding of which filled Him with, 
joy? It was the certainty of the pos- 
sibility of setting up the government 
of God. That was always the joy of 
Jesus. It is His personal word, " I 
delight to do Thy will, O my God." 
Concerning that thought we may get 
light from the great classic passage in 
the letter to the Hebrews. The writer 
had been speaking of the men of faith 
who had seen in the dim distance the 
city of God, of the men who had turned 
their backs upon the failure all about 



them, and lifted their faces towards the 
light of God's great city. Having 
spoken of such he wrote: "Therefore 
let us also, seeing we are compassed 
about with so great a cloud of wit- 
nesses, lay aside every weight, and the 
sin which doth so easily beset us, and 
let us run with patience the race that 
is set before us, looking unto Jesus the 
Author and File-leader of faith, Who 
for the joy that was set before Him 
endured the Cross, despising shame, 
and hath sat down at the right hand of 
the throne of God." What was the 
joy? That of the certainty that after 
the passion should come the fulfilment 
of purpose the building of the city of 
God, or, in other words, the realisation 
in the world of the Kingdom of God. 
For that joy He sold all that He had. 
The joy which constituted the strength 
of the Cross was the joy of leading 
back to God in reconciliation that 
which had wandered from Him. He 
came down into the world, and knew 
its possibility, knew its hidden trea- 
sure; but He knew that it was bound 
by chains of gold to the throne of God, 
and that its anthem could only be per- 
fectly sung as it realised its funda- 
mental relationship, and answered it in 
full surrender. He recognized that 
every man was capable of worship, and 
the whole social order capable of a per- 
fect realisation, and the whole world 
capable of singing the anthem of God's 
praise. The joy of that certainty was 
the strength in which He " endured the 
cross, despising shame." 

The man in the parable sold all that 
he had. The equivalent to that in 
the case of Jesus is : He " emptied 
Himself," and made Himself of no 
reputation. Who " endured the cross, 
despising shame." By this infinite 
sacrifice He purchased the whole field. 
The whole world is redeemed, waiting 
to be claimed. That sacrifice was 
necessary. Had Jesus Christ remained 
an ethical Teacher merely, He could 
not have set up God's Kingdom. There 
must be the intrusion into the ruin of 
a new regenerative dynamic. He must 
change the nature of the dog ere it can 
appreciate holy things. He must re- 
fashion and absolutely change the na- 
ture of the swine ere pearls will have 



166 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xm. 45, 46] 



any value. He bought the whole field 
at cost. 

I should like to say one word in this 
connection concerning the word bought 
or purchased. Never read into this 
word as it represents the work of Jesus 
anything merely of a commercial na- 
ture. To do so is to bring oneself into 
inextricable confusion. We shall ask 
from whom He purchased the field. I 
have even heard it said that He pur- 
chased it from the devil. Never ! He 
never granted the devil's right to it. 
He never paid to the devil any price 
for the possession of the world. Then 
I hear it said that He purchased it 
from God. He was God. There was 
never the slightest difference between 
Himself and God. He did not attempt 
to persuade God to any new line of 
action, or to any line of action out of 
harmony with His own nature. It is 
impossible to read into this merely a 
commercial explanation. There is a 
use of the word which is more in har- 
mony with its intention here. A man 
finds himself beset by robbers, and, 
speaking afterwards of the peril, he de- 
clares that he determined to sell his 
life dearly. That is the true figurative 
use of the word. Or another man, who 
has rescued some precious thing at the 
cost of suffering, declares he has pur- 
chased it at great price. We know that 
in neither case is there the thought of 
purchase by commercial interchange, 
but that of securing the desired thing 
by strife and tears and pain. In that 
sense Christ purchased. We " were re- 
deemed, not with corruptible things, 



with silver or gold" that is commer- 
cialism " but with precious blood . . . 
even the blood of Christ" That blood 
was not handed over to meet the devil's 
demand, nor even to persuade God. 
That outpouring of blood was the ma- 
terial interpretation of that passion of 
God, through which the world in which 
the treasure was hidden might be re- 
deemed by passion, at the deepest heart 
of which is joy, and the expression of 
which is pain. 

The man of faith will be conscious 
of all that the man of sight sees in 
this particular age. Yet the things of 
sight cannot make the man of faith 
hopeless, because he has heard the 
teaching of this parable. 

It gives me Christ's estimate of pos- 
sibility. Christ's purchase of the world 
makes Him possessor of the world, and 
that is the guarantee of His ultimate 
realisation of all upon which His heart 
is set. If in the one point of His hid- 
ing the treasure for a while there is an 
element of mystery, I am still perfectly 
sure of its infinite wisdom, and I know 
that presently, as a result, the mani- 
festation will be more perfect and more 
glorious. Yet, finally, remember He 
does not hide from faith. To trust 
Him is to have revealed in the deepest 
life the glory of the Kingdom upon 
which His heart is set. He will kindle 
in the heart of the faithful the joy 
which made Him endure, and so equip 
them also for that suffering with Hun 
which must eventuate in triumph with 
Him. 



MATTHEW XIII. 45, 46 



parable of the pearl, while most 
JL evidently kin to that of the hidden 
treasure, is in advance of it, and in 
some aspects different from it. Essen- 
tially there is nothing here which we 
have not already dealt with. The cen- 
tral and acting Person is again " a 
man." The search for, and the dis- 
covery of treasure dealt with in the last 
parable is also present. The thought 
of purchase at cost, to which we were 
introduced in the last parable, is also 
in this, " He went and sold all that he 



had, and bought it." 

It is upon new emphases that our 
attention is principally centred when 
we come to a study of this parable. 
The man here is a merchant seeking 
treasure of a peculiar kind, "goodly 
pearls." In this quest he is rewarded, 
as he finds "one pearl of great price." 

I need hardly stay to say that I do 
not accept the interpretation of the par- 
able which regards the pearl of great 
price as the Saviour, and the merchant 
seeking and selling all to obtain the 



167 



[MATT. xiu. 45, 46] 



MATTHEW 



pearl, as the sinner. Such an interpre- 
tation, as we have already seen, contra- 
dicts the whole scheme of the teaching, 
and is out of harmony with all the facts 
of experience. 

Let us first examine these new em- 
phases of the pearl and the merchant, 
and then attempt to interpret the par- 
able according to their suggestiveness. 

While the actual wording of the par- 
able introduces us first to the man who 
is a merchant seeking goodly pearls, I 
propose to commence examination by 
taking the pearl itself. " One pearl of 
great price." We invariably speak of 
this parable as the parable of the pearl. 
It is that which arrests our attention, 
and, I think, according to the Master's 
intention. 

First remember, the pearl was not 
precious to the Hebrews. In the Old 
Testament there are some wonderful 
and graphic descriptions of precious 
stones, " stones of fire," as they are 
poetically called, but the pearl is not 
mentioned. It had no place on the 
breastplate of the high priest. When 
Job answered the criticism of Bildad 
the Shuhite in parable, he asks, 

"But where shall wisdom be found?" 

Then he proceeds to enumerate precious 
things which are not current coin in the 
market place where wisdom is to be 
sought, things with which wisdom can- 
not be bought. 

"It cannot be valued with the gold of 

Ophir, 
With the precious onyx, or the 

sapphire. 

Gold and glass cannot equal it: 
Neither shall it be exchanged for 

jewels of fine gold. 
No mention shall be made of coral, 

or of crystal: 
Yea, the price of wisdom is above 

rubies." 

You will notice in the Authorised Ver- 
sion the word " pearl " occurs instead 
of "crystal." I think there can be no 
doubt that the revisers are right in sub- 
stituting "crystal" for "pearl." The 
root of the Hebrew word suggests some- 
thing, frozen. It is certainly open to 
doubt as to what is really meant, but 
there can be very little question that 
the reference is not to pearl. Again, 



instead of " Yea, the price of wisdom is 
above rubies," the margin reads, "The 
price of wisdom is above red coral," or 
"above pearls," a very questionable 
reading. Now it is a striking fact that 
only in these cases is the word pearl 
mentioned in our .translations. Suppos- 
ing, however, for the sake of argument, 
that the word pearl is the one intended, 
still remember it is quoted by the great- 
est of all the men of the East as not to 
be mentioned beside the worth of wis- 
dom. Other stones are mentioned, even 
though dismissed, but he says, " No 
mention shall be made of coral or of 
pearl," thus signifying its contemptible 
value. 

I have taken time to show this, be- 
cause it is an interesting fact that the 
Hebrews did not count the pearl in 
the least precious. One can imagine, 
therefore, when Jesus used the figure 
how surprised a look would come upon 
the faces of the Hebrew disciples gath- 
ered round Him. He had spoken in 
previous parables of the treasure hid- 
den in the field, and they understood 
it; but when He particularised, and 
used the words "pearl," "goodly 
pearls," the thought was startling from 
the Hebrew standpoint. These men 
were, of course, quite conversant with 
the fact that the pearl was held as a 
precious stone among the Gentiles. The 
study of the place of the pearl in Gen- 
tile usage is most interesting. From 
recent investigations made in Egypt, it 
has been discovered that the decoration 
of ancient kings consisted largely of 
gold, inset with jewels, and occasionally 
with pearls. When we come to Nine- 
veh, we find that the pearl was in 
greater use. An increasing value was 
gradually set upon it, until in our day 
it is accounted as the most precious 
thing in the East. It is, however, of 
Gentile value. Thus Christ took as an 
emblem of the most precious thing that 
which was most valuable according to 
Gentile estimate, but something which 
was outside Hebrew figures of speech, 
because outside Hebrew conceptions of 
value. 

Bearing that in mind, let us go a 
step further. There are certain facts 
about the pearl we shall do well to 
notice. First, the pearl is the direct 



168 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xm. 45, 46] 



product of a living organism. So far 
as I am aware there is no other pre- 
cious stone of which that is true. In 
the next place, remember that the pearl 
is the result of injury done to the life 
that produces it. 

"A pearl is found beneath the flowing 

tide, 
And there is held a worse than 

worthless thing, 
Spoiling the shell-built home where 

it doth cling 

Marring the life near which it 
must abide." 

A grain, of sand intruding, something 
that hinders and injures and harms, is 
the root principle of the pearl. 

But that is not the pearl. What, 
then, is it? The pearl is the answer 
of the injured to the injury done. The 
pearl is the injuring element trans- 
muted by processes of covering until 
the injurious thing is turned into a 
precious jewel. We all know the story 
of how in the shell of the oyster the 
pearl is formed. The intrusion of a 
grain of sand, or some other foreign 
substance; and then the covering of it 
with the nacre, or mother-of-pearl, layer 
after layer, exquisitely wrought, until 
at last the thing that hurt and harmed 
and injured has been made the basis 
upon which this whole pearl, a rare 
and beautiful jewel, is built up. So 
the pearl is the answer of the injured 
life to that which injures it. 

Go one step further in considering 
this. What is the use of the pearl? 
It is to us wholly a thing of beauty, 
ornamental, decorative; but in eastern 
thought it is emblematic and symbolic. 
From the artistic standpoint merely, it 
is regarded carelessly, but in those east- 
ern countries, where all the lights and 
shadows of imagination play so won- 
derful a part, and every rare thing is 
symbolic, the pearl is an ornament sym- 
bolising innocence and purity, and 
prized for its significance. The equiv- 
alent Greek word, margarites, means 
purity. It probably is derived from an 
old Sanscrit word also meaning purity, 
and this fact is very suggestive. The 
pearl is the answer of an injured life 
to the thing .that injures, and the pearl 



is the symbol of innocence. That which 
has worked an injury, that which was 
impure and harmful, has been so dealt 
with by the very life it has injured that 
it is transformed into a thing of glori- 
ous beauty, and stands for ever as a 
flashing illustration of essential purity. 
But the pearl is more than the symbol 
or emblem of purity. It stood for the 
triumph of purity over impurity, and 
the wearing of the pearl was not in its 
deepest significance the wearing of that 
which stood for innocence only, but 
for the mighty triumph of good over 
evil. 

Turn for a moment to the other spe- 
cial emphasis, that of the merchant. 
He is here one who is seeking goodly 
pearls. Yet it is impossible to think of 
him as seeking goodly pearls merely for 
his own sake or adornment. He is a 
merchant seeking goodly pearls for 
others, and the easternness of the pic- 
ture is apparent. Put yourself back 
into the eastern land, and watch the 
operation. His haste to purchase, his 
determination to purchase at any cost, 
is the eastern colouring of the picture, 
and shows that he has at length dis- 
covered a jewel so precious as to be 
worthy for the adornment of a king 
only; for in those eastern lands none 
but kings were allowed to wear the 
finest, and even in Persia to-day the 
discovery of any costly pearl means that 
it must find its way to the Shah. Here, 
then, is a merchant, finding a pearl 
which is worthy of the king's accep- 
tance, and which may be for the adorn- 
ment of one who alone has the right to 
wear it. There are other pearls, but 
this is of supreme value, for it mani- 
fests the most wonderful victory, con- 
tains within itself the most resplendent 
beauty, and is therefore the most per- 
fect symbol of all that such a jewel 
may represent. 

Turning from this examination of the 
special emphases of the pearl and the 
merchant, let us in the light of these 
things think for a moment of what this 
parable really means. At this point our 
Lord touches a mystery far deeper than 
any already declared. Here He speaks 
in the hearing of His disciples things 
they will only come to understand pres- 
ently. This is what Paul speaks of as 



169 



[MATT. xm. 45, 46] 



MATTHEW 



the definite and specific "mystery" of 
the Church. 

In this parable Jesus shows that the 
chief, though not the final value of this 
Kingdom age is that during it there is 
to be gathered out and presented to 
God that which will be the finest, fair- 
est, and most resplendent jewel that 
will ever flash upon His bosom in all 
the ages of eternity. I know full well 
how imperfect these words are, and 
j-et I have no other in which to clothe 
the thoughts. Out of the mystery o 
sin, and out of the mystery of evil, 
and out of the mystery of this age in 
which the Kingdom values seem to be 
so fluctuating and uncertain, there is 
yet to be found and gathered the chief 
jewel of the Father's house, the most 
glorious thing for His possession, which 
shall reveal to the ages to come, and to 
unfallen intelligences, the grace and 
glory of God. Among the treasures of 
this age the Church of Jesus Christ is 
supreme. The finding of the Church, 
in this as in the previous parables, is 
not accidental. Its discovery includes 
discernment of it, the indication of it 
to others, and the obtaining of it. The 
merchant came, not seeking promiscu- 
ously, but bent on finding this very 
pearl. Remember, no figure can ever 
convey all the infinite fact, and looking 
at it in its infiniteness we see the limi- 
tations of the picture, and its inability 
to represent the whole truth. We see 
Christ discovering this precious pearl, 
bringing it to the light and then mark 
very carefully the words made use of 
concerning Him here "having found 
one pearl of great price, He went and 
sold all that He had, and bought it" 
May I change that, and read, very liter- 
ally, " Having gone away, has sold all 
that He had, and bought it." This does 
not for a moment mean that He went 
away from the earth to buy it, but that 
He went away from Heaven to buy it. 
We are looking at the Kingdom from 
Heaven's standpoint, not from earth's^ 
Earth has never seen the precious pearl, 
has no conception of it. The pearl has 
not yet found itself. The Church has 
never been seen by the eye of mortal 
man. We catch glimpses of its glory, 
but the Church itself has never been 
seen. But Christ has seen the Church 



from eternity. He sees it through all 
the processes of its working; His love 
is set upon what it is, and what it will 
be ; and He patiently awaits the accom- 
-plishment. This parable records the 
estimate placed upon the pearl in the 
sight of high Heaven. " Having gone 
away " from Heaven, " He sold all that 
He had, and bought it." It is a perfect 
picture of One Who, seeing a pearl of 
great price, surrenders place, posses- 
sions, and all, that He may purchase 
that pearl, and take it back with Him 
to the place which He left for its 
purchasing. 

Turn with me once more to another 
Scripture, 1 Peter ii. 4 and 7. Here 
again while the figure of the pearl is 
not to be found, the great facts of 
which it is a figure are set forth per- 
fectly. " Unto whom coming, a living 
Stone, rejected indeed of men, but with 
God elect, precious." Mark that word 
" precious." " The precious Stone," this 
is spoken of the Lord Himself. "Ye 
also, as living stones, are built up a 
spiritual house." I omit the rest, be- 
cause it describes the issue, and I go 
to verse 7, which describes the process. 
"For you therefore which believe is 
the preciousness." What preciousness ? 
His preciousness. The Christ of God 
is here described as being precious, and 
you may read all values into that word. 
In character, precious; in conduct, pre- 
cious; in all the facts of His great 
personality, precious. All the things 
God values centre in Him. Rejected of 
men, but precious to God is He. 

We come to Him, says the apostle, 
and are built up. " For you which be- 
lieve is the preciousness;" that is to 
say, all that is precious in Him, is 
communicated to us who believe. That 
is the whole story of the development 
of Christian character. To the last, to 
the unending ages of eternity, I shall 
never have anything of myself of which 
to boast in the presence of God. I 
shall always boast in the values that 
have been made mine by communica- 
tion the values of the Christ char- 
acter. Anything excellent in us is the 
Christ-life realised in us. He is pre- 
cious, but unto you that " believe is the 
preciousness." That does not mean 
that you hold Him precious in your 



170 



MATTHEW 



. xm. 45, 46] 



affection; but that the precious values 
in Him are communicated to you, and 
we who come to Him worthless and 
base, are changed into worth and pre- 
ciousness because He communicates to 
us His own infinite value. Such is the 
story of the pearl. It is first of all 
base, a worthless thing:, harming the 
life to which it comes. And here is a 
most remarkable and exquisite figure 
of what happens in the building of the 
Church of Jesus Christ. We " were no 
people" I still quote from Peter, and 
he is quoting from Hosea we " now 
are the people of God;" we "had not 
obtained mercy," we "now have ob- 
tained mercy." How has the change 
been wrought? We came to Him 
worthless, and it was in our approach 
to Him that He was wounded and 
harmed, injured and bruised. Yet the 
answer of the injured One to that 
which harmed, was that He made over 
to us in the mystery of His harming, 
all the virtues and glories of His own 
character. As the pearl is the outcome 
of a hurtful thing transformed into 
beauty and innocence by the communi- 
cation of the life it hurt, so the Church 
of Jesus Christ in its entirety consists 
of such as wounded Him, and yet from 
that very wounding, and because of it, 
there has been, and is being communi- 
cated to them His virtue, His grace, 
His glory, His beauty. He Who for 
the moment in the parable is the mer- 
chant, is infinitely more than the mer- 
chant. He is not only the One Who 
sees the possibility of the precious 
Jewel, but He Who transmutes the un- 
sightly thing into the thing of beauty, 
the impure thing into the thing of in- 
nocence ; the One Who has lifted out of 
the troubled sea of human sorrow a 
people that shall flash in glory for ever 
upon the bosom of God, the chief me- 
dium through which He shall manifest 
His grace and His glory in all the ages 
to come. 

This is the subject of the Ephesian 
epistle. The parable is silent about 
that final issue, because it is only deal- 
ing with this age, but we may follow 
the pearl in imagination until it flashes 
upon the bosom of some potentate. If 
we reverently inquire what becomes of 
the pearl that Jesus finds, we may turn 



to that epistle and there see its desti- 
nation. Paul first of all prays that 
these Christians may know "the riches 
of the glory of His inheritance in the 
saints," a phrase rich and gracious and 
glorious in meaning. Notice carefully 
Paul did not pray that they might 
know what was the greatness of their 
inheritance in God, but what was the 
greatness of God's inheritance in them. 
The thought is not that the saints are 
made rich in God, but that God is en- 
riched in the saints, that in them He 
gains something for His possession. I 
dare not say that if it were not the 
teaching of the whole epistle, and I 
dare hardly say it if it were but the 
suggestion of a verse. But mark the 
argument of the great Ephesian epistle, 
and see to what end it works out. In 
it Paul distinctly teaches us in what 
sense God gains in the Church. He 
tells us that the Church is to be the 
medium through which His grace, His 
goodness, His love are to be made 
known to the ages to come. The 
Church is to be that through which the 
unborn ages will know the grace of 
God and the love of God. A little 
further on in the same epistle, he tells 
us that the Church is to be the instru- 
ment through which angels, principali- 
ties, powers, the unfallen intelligences 
of other worlds, will learn the wis- 
dom of God. This Church, redeemed, 
purchased, purified, glorified, is for 
ever more to be the instrument through 
which the grace of God and the wis- 
dom of God will be made known to 
ages and to principalities and to pow- 
ers, until we get to the close of the let- 
ter, and Paul with one flash of light 
says and reading, think of the pearl 
of the parable " Christ also loved the 
Church, and gave Himself up for it; 
that He might sanctify it, having 
cleansed it by the washing of water 
with the Word, that He might present 
the Church to Himself a glorious 
Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or 
any such thing; but that it should be 
holy and without blemish." 

The pearl of great price is found in 
the midst of human wreckage } is gath- 
ered out of it, exalted, and made the 
medium through which in coming ages 
the infinite truth of God's grace and 



171 



[MATT. xm. 45, 46] 



MATTHEW 



wisdom shall be revealed. Thus does 
God gain in the Church. He gains 
nothing of essential glory, but He gains 
a medium through which He may 
manifest that glory. He gains nothing 
of essential grace, but He gains a peo- 
ple, through whom His grace shall be 
revealed as could be in no other way. 
No angel can sing the story of God's 
grace as we whom His grace has trans- 
formed. Some of you remember that 
wonderful poem by Mrs. Barrett 
Browning, "The Seraphim." Imagina- 
tion call it if you will, but it is high 
and holy imagination. She describes 
seraphim watching the processes of the 
Master's work on earth, watching with 
wonder as their Lord and King stoops 
to its dark places and suffers along its 
ways, until the meaning of His work 
breaking upon the intelligence of the 
angel-watchers, one turns to the other 
and says 

" Hereafter shall the blood-bought cap- 
tives raise 
The passion-song of blood." 

And the other answering says 

"And we extend 
Our holy vacant hands towards the 

throne, 
Crying, ' We have no music.' " 

And by comparison it is true. When 
the ransomed reach the land of light 
there will be some things of which they 
cannot sing more perfectly than the 
angels; but they will be able to sing of 
His love as angels never will. No angel 
can put into these words so much as I 
can put into them, " He loved me and 
gave Himself up for me" And when 
all earth's anthems have ceased, that 
will be the highest music of the 
eternities. 

So in this age He is building this 
Church. He saw the pearl when yet 
but a possibility, injurious, useless, far 
off in the deep, dense darkness. He 



gathered the offending thing into His 
own life, and it wounded Him, harmed 
Him, and slew Him, but, 

" He death by dying slew, 
He hell in hell laid low," 

and as He transmutes the evil thing 
that harmed Him by the impartation of 
His own blameless character and holy 
life, He is building a glorious body for 
Himself, to which He ever shall be the 
Head, and which shall, in union with 
Himself, be God's chief adornment in 
the ages yet to come. 

"He found the pearl of greatest price, 

My heart doth sing for joy; 
And sing I must, for I am His, 
And He is mine for aye." 

He has drawn and lifted me who 
harmed Him, and bestowed upon me 
His nature, His character, and His 
beauty, and presently He will present 
me, oh, matchless wonder, even me, 
"faultless before . . . glory!" Then, 
O blessed be God, He will send me 
forth to other worlds, to other ages, to 
other beings, to preach His Cross, that 
they, too, may know the glory of His 
grace. 

This Church of the living God, the 
chosen and elect company who will be- 
come in their union with Christ the 
medium of manifestation, is the pearl 
the Merchant saw; and to give which 
to God He poured out all that He had. 
Our hearts may rest assured that in 
all the apparent failure of the Kingdom 
ideal in the age not actual failure, for 
everything moves toward God's ulti- 
mate the chief value, the chief glory, 
and the chief business, from Heaven's 
standpoint, is the gathering out of the 
Church, and its preparation for a high 
and holy vocation in the ages yet to 
come, for that Church is the redeemed 
Kingdom of God. 



172 



MATTHEW 



CMATT. xm. 47-50] 



MATTHEW XIII. 47-50 



WITH this parable the series re- 
vealing the process and condi- 
tion of the Kingdom principle in the 
present age comes to conclusion. 

In this study we are greatly aided by 
our Lord's partial interpretation. The 
picture is that of a great net cast out 
into the sea. This is not Ezeldel's pic- 
ture of fishermen standing along the 
waters from En-gedi to En-eglaim, 
drawing out fish individually. This is 
not a picture of the work that the apos- 
tles were to do which Jesus described 
when He said, " I will make you fishers 
of men." This is quite a different 
method of fishing. A great net is 
taken out, let down into the sea, and 
left until after a while, those who 
placed it come back and haul it in, 
including within its meshes all kinds of 
fish. When filled it is drawn up upon 
the beach, and a process of selection 
and separation goes forward. The good 
are gathered into vessels. The bad are 
cast away. 

Now our Lord does not explain all 
the parts of this parable. " So " indi- 
cates the beginning of His interpreta- 
tion. " So shall it be in the end of the 
age." The Lord's interpretation has to 
do with the final fact depicted in the 
parable. The first is the casting out of 
the net. The second gives a glimpse 
of the intervening hours when the sea 
plays backwards and forwards through 
the net, and fishes of all kinds are en- 
closed. The last draws attention to the 
drawing in of the net at the moment of 
its fulness by skilful hands. All these 
suggestive facts are in the parable. But 
Jesus does not attempt any explanation 
concerning the net or the sea or the 
fishes. His explanation has to do with 
the final movement, the separation, the 
selection. " So shall it be in the end 
of the age," the consummation of the 
age: "the angels shall come forth, and 
sever the wicked from among the right- 
eous, and shall cast them into the fur- 
nace of fire : there shall be the weeping 
and the gnashing of teeth." 

We grasp at once, therefore, the true 
emphasis of this parable. It is intended 
above all to reveal the method of the 



completion of the age. My own con- 
viction is that we are in danger of 
fanciful interpretation if we attempt in 
any detail to explain the other parts of 
the parable. Let us take that which our 
Lord explains, and only explain the 
former as His explanation of the final 
movement may make possible. The 
main value of the parable, broadly 
stated, lies in the fact of the separa- 
tion which is to follow upon the draw- 
ing in of the net. This separation is 
to take place at the end of the age, 
and understanding that, we are saved 
from wrong conceptions, both as to the 
net and the fishermen, and such fish as 
are enclosed within the net. 

Very popularly this parable is taken 
to illustrate the work of evangelism, 
but though that work is spoken of by 
our Lord under the symbol of fishing, 
it has no place in the teaching here. 

Let us say at once that in some 
senses this parable is of no vital mo- 
ment to us. In some senses it does not 
help us in our work; it is just a 
glimpse, a flash, of events transpiring 
at the end of the age. In another 
sense it is of great and immediate 
value, as I shall hope to show in con- 
clusion. Here we are not looking first 
at the processes of the moment, but at 
the final process with its great meaning. 

The process that is to bring to an 
end the age in which we live and work 
is a single process. It is that of sever- 
ing the bad from among the good, of 
severing "the wicked from among the 
righteous." The picture our Lord used 
was altogether familiar, but He chose 
out of the picture a single fact, and let 
all the rest go. He pointed His dis- 
ciples, who for the most part were fish- 
ermen, to what they had done many a. 
night, flung the nets out, and left them ; 
. and then hauled them in, and sitting 
down on the beach rejected the bad and 
conserved the good. But only on one 
incident in the familiar picture does He 
lay any emphasis. Ignoring the con- 
servation of the good, and all other 
processes, our Lord selects this one 
fact, the severance of the bad. " So 
shall it be in the end of the age." 



173 



[MATT. xm. 47-50] 



MATTHEW 



What is this severance of the wicked 
for? That they may be destroyed, that 
they may be cast to the fire; and our 
Lord's words here are full of signifi- 
cance. He says, There, on that occa- 
sion, when angels gather out evil men 
and cast them to destruction, "there 
shall be the weeping- and the gnashing 
of teeth." And when Christ uses such 
startling words, we may well ponder 
solemnly, and read into them nothing 
that is not there ; and read out of them 
nothing that is evidently in them. 
" Weeping," lamentation ; " gnashing of 
teeth," the grinding of the teeth, either 
in pain or rage, or in all probability, 
both. 

What, then, can be the meaning of 
this net, and this gathering of it up, 
and this action of the angels regarding 
it? "Again, the Kingdom of heaven 
is like unto a net," and as I have said 
before, the whole picture is needed to 
show the process of the Kingdom in 
this age. Notice where the emphasis 
begins, " So shall it be." This net en- 
closing within itself a certain number 
is undoubtedly that of the Kingdom in- 
fluence of which we have spoken, which 
is being exercised in the world through 
the presence in the world of Christ and 
His Church; and the net is let down 
into the sea of human life, and wher- 
ever it spreads, wherever the influence 
of the Church is exerted, this final 
work of the gathering out the bad will 
proceed. The fact of the Kingdom, as 
a consciousness, a sub-consciousness, a 
semi-consciousness, in human thinking 
has come wherever the Church has 
come, wherever the missionary has 
come, wherever the Gospel has come. 
Wherever the Gospel has been preached 
as a witness, there men have been 
brought consciously face to face with 
the fact of the Divine government, and 
it is of such that the number enclosed 
by the net is made up. At the close of 
the dispensation or age, when the net 
is gathered in, the great separation will 
take place. 

There will come a moment when 
there will be, according to the teaching- 
of Scripture, and this specific word of 
Jesus, the return to direct intervention 
in human affairs of angels. To-day 
their ministrations are unseen. They 



are still all ministering spirits; but 
they minister specifically to the men of 
faith in the mystery of this little while. 
But as they have been visible in olden 
days and if you deny the truth of it, 
you have to deny your Bible so will 
they be visible again. The new era in 
the world's history will be ushered in 
by this strange and marvellous and 
overwhelming angel visitation, angel 
discrimination, and angel separation. 
Angel discrimination means Heaven's 
standards set up among the affairs of 
men. Angel separation means Heaven's 
might enforcing Heaven's standards. 

One of the most interesting subjects 
in art is the history of angel painting. 
I am not proposing to discuss it at 
length. I am inclined to say that I think 
the great artists, the great masters 
as we still call them, who in my own 
opinion so sadly and absolutely failed 
to represent Christianity, were far more 
successful in depicting the truth con- 
cerning angels. Take one of the latest, 
that great picture, " Despised and Re- 
jected of Men," by Sigismund Goetz. 
Everybody has seen it. Everybody has 
gazed upon the awful figure of the 
Christ and the crowding figures of the 
men and women about Him, but how 
many have noticed that majestic angel 
form in the background? To me that 
is the finest thing in all the picture. If 
this be true, that representation of tow- 
ering majesty, that conception of an- 
gelic being such as is according to 
Scripture and here you must not 
charge me with imagination "a flame 
of fire," flashing in beauty and in glory 
if that be true, then think of what 
it will mean for the world when angels 
come to sever the wicked from among 
the good. Do not be afraid of material- 
ising spiritual things. In our great fear 
of spiritualising material things, do not 
let us run to the other extreme. Think 
what it would mean if angels could 
come upon our city to-day to lay an 
arrest upon all evil-doers, and extract 
them from the midst of the people. 
That is what will happen. This is the 
day of long-suffering patience. This is 
the day when the net lies out in the 
sea, and the waves lap it and rock it, 
and men wonder what is happening. 
This is the day when the great Mer- 



174 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xm. 51, 52] 



chant is gathering out the pearl, and 
preparing it for the mystery of un- 
born ages. When presently the day is 
ended, and its purpose in the economy 
of God accomplished, then this new age 
begins for the world itself, and angels, 
according to Jesus, are to initiate it by 
gathering out the wicked from among 
the good. 

There the parable leaves us. In some 
senses we can go no further. And yet 
while our parable does not declare to 
us what the final issue will be, we may 
for purposes of understanding it, in all 
fairness refer to the King's previous 
and fuller statement which at the time 
we did not dwell upon at any great 
length. So that returning to the par- 
able of the darnel and the wheat, we 
shall find something that helps us in 
interpretation of the present one. " The 
Son of Man shall send forth His an- 
gels, and they shall gather out of His 
Kingdom all things that cause stum- 
bling, and them that do iniquity, and 
shall cast them into the furnace of fire : 
there shall be the weeping and the 
gnashing of teeth." The parable we 
are looking at goes no step beyond that. 
But this parable of the darnel does. 
" Then shall the righteous shine forth 
as the sun in the Kingdom of their 
Father." 

What, then, is the meaning of the 



angel ministry which will consummate 
the age? First the cleansing of the 
Kingdom from things that cause stum- 
bling, and from them that do iniquity. 
But what beyond it ? " The righteous 
shall shine forth as the sun in the 
Kingdom of their Father." I do not 
know when that hour will be. I have 
no idea when the King is coming. It 
may be immediately. It may not be for 
a thousand years. I do not know, and 
I do not attempt to discover. The fact 
is everything "The Son of Man shall 
send forth His angels, and they shall 
gather out of His Kingdom all things 
that cause stumbling," everything that 
offends. 

This parable is of the nature of a 
look ahead. In some senses we to-day 
have little to do with it, but in other 
senses it is a gracious source of 
strength, as it assures us of a sure 
process of judgment, and so gives us 
hope where otherwise there would be 
none. Take this parable, and study it 
in the light of all the rest. It will give 
you, oppressed with all the failure of 
the hour, to see that if man fails, God 
is not failing. The world, the scarred, 
seamed, sorrow-stricken earth, will be 
healed by a mercy that operates in 
judgment, by justice that operates in 
mercy. 



MATTHEW XIII. 51, 52 



parable of the householder is 
A the completion of the octave. We 
have considered seven parables. This 
is the eighth and last. The others have 
set forth the truth concerning the his- 
tory of the Kingdom of God in the 
present age. This parable teaches the 
responsibility of the disciples during 
the same period. 

There are two statements which have 
been almost monotonously repeated in . 
this series, but they need to be made 
again and again. These parables do 
not deal with the deepest facts con- 
cerning the Kingdom of God, neither 
are they parables which tell the whole 
story of that Kingdom. They have no 
application to the age which preceded 
the first advent of our Lord, neither 



have they application to the age which 
shall succeed His second advent. They 
are simply His setting forth of truth 
concerning the process and history of 
the Kingdom during the period com- 
mencing with His first advent and end- 
ing with His second. 

So these verses, with the brief par- 
able which they contain, reveal the re- 
sponsibility of such as have been made 
disciples of the Kingdom in an age 
when Kingdom principles are not 
wholly and absolutely victorious. 

The parable follows a question and 
description, and must be considered 
in the light thereof. First the ques- 
tion, "Have ye understood all these 
things?" When they answered Yes, 
He said, "Therefore every scribe w,ho 



175 



[MATT. xin. 51, 52] 



MATTHEW 



hath been made a disciple to the King- 
dom of heaven." These two sayings 
of Jesus, question and description, are 
mutually explanatory. To understand 
the things which He has taught is to 
be instructed to the Kingdom of heaven. 
To be a scribe instructed to the King- 
dom of heaven is to have received His 
teaching, and to have understood it. 

Let us examine this requirement. In 
the question, "Have ye understood all 
these things?" the emphasis is most 
certainly upon the word "understood." 
They had heard them all, they had been 
interested in them all. They had heard 
the first four parables spoken to the 
listening multitudes. They had heard 
His explanation of the first two of 
them. They had heard the three par- 
ables spoken to themselves privately 
within the house, and they had heard 
His explanation of the last of the three. 
They had heard everything, and their 
interest had been manifested in the 
questions they had asked. 

Now He asks, " Have ye understood 
all these things ? " and the word trans- 
lated "understood" means quite liter- 
ally to put together. That is, have you 
comprehended the main drift of this 
teaching ? Have you put together these 
things so that you see what I have 
been attempting to teach you? Notice 
very carefully that our Lord says, "All 
these things." There has been a bal- 
ance and proportion in the teaching. 
He has been moving steadily forward, 
unveiling different phases of Kingdom 
history and process during the period. 
Now He says, " Have ye understood all 
these things ? " What He asks is 
whether they have recognized the sys- 
tem of His teaching, for this is what is 
necessary in order to fulfil responsibil- 
ity in the age. When they answered 
Him, " Yea," upon the basis of that 
answer He proceeded to declare their 
responsibility. In doing so He first 
described their position in the words, 
" a scribe, made a disciple to the King- 
dom of heaven." 

Our Lord's use of the word " scribe " 
at this point necessitates an inquiry as 
to its real significance, for we know 
that the scribes of His day were bit- 
terly opposed to Him. As a class the 
scribes began to exist in the time of 



Ezra. The word is used before the 
time of Ezra, and yet a careful ex- 
amination will show that it was never 
used before that time in the sense in 
which it was used then, and subse- 
quently. The scribes originally were 
chroniclers, and .were closely associated 
with the military movements of the 
ancient people. But with the advent of 
Ezra the scribe filled a new office. He 
became, as in the case of Ezra himself, 
a reader and an expounder of the law 
of God. Ezra is the most conspicuous 
example of the true scribe, he who 
stood in the midst of the people and 
read the words of the law, indicating 
the meaning of them, not merely by 
elocutionary perfection, but by com- 
ment, annotation, exposition. That was 
the real office of the scribe. In the 
days of Jesus they were still the pro- 
fessed exponents of the law; but they 
then proceeded upon two principles, 
that first of oral tradition, and that 
secondly of the interpretation of the 
letter with an almost painful accuracy. 

These two principles had become the 
means of obscuring rather than ex- 
pounding the law. The scribes them- 
selves declared that the oral tradition 
for which they stood was a fence 
around it. They had superadded to the 
actual law of God the traditions of the 
elders, and according to their own phi- 
losophy they had done this to maintain 
the law in stricter integrity. But their 
tradition had become a fence around 
the law in another sense than that in- 
tended, for, being a misinterpretation 
of the law, it had become that which 
shut men out from the law. In the 
days of Jesus, therefore, the scribes 
were in constant antagonism to Him 
Who ruthlessly swept aside all their 
traditions, and yet religiously lived 
within the sphere of the law. 

Moreover, these scribes were men 
who had indulged in literal interpreta- 
tion to such an extent as to absolutely 
change the meaning of the law. Devoid 
of any understanding of its deeper 
spirit, they had slavishly given them- 
selves over to the letter. 

Jesus now chose the word which had 
been used to define the office of the 
men who had led the opposition to 
Him in His kingly propaganda, and He 



176 



MATTHEW 



[MAM*, xm. 51, 521 



said, " Every scribe who hath been 
made a disciple to the Kingdom of 
heaven," and by so doing, He suggested 
that His disciples were to take hold of 
the old idea and fulfil it. They were 
to become in their age the interpreters 
of the law of God. He said in effect, 
You are to become the new scribes, 
the interpreters of the Kingdom, those 
through whom the age will know the 
facts concerning the government of 
God. 

In order to fulfilment of this respon- 
sibility there must be understanding of 
the King's teaching concerning the 
Kingdom in this age. A wrong concep- 
tion of its true meaning and value may 
not interfere with our enthusiasm in 
its cause, or with our devotion to the 
King; but it will interfere with the in- 
telligence of our service, and thus limit 
the sphere of its action. What, then, 
is the teaching of these parables in 
broad outline? That this age is one of 
conflict from beginning to end; that it 
is characterised to a large extent by 
human failure; that it is an age in 
which God accomplishes definite pur- 
poses; that, as to the heavenly side, it 
is an age from which a people is gath- 
ered out to serve God throughout the 
countless ages that are to come as the 
revealers of His grace and His love; 
that, as to the earthly value, it is an 
age that moves to a super-natural con- 
summation. These truths must be un- 
derstood. If we fail to perceive them, 
then our service may be sustained, but 
it will surely be defective. I pity from 
the depth of my heart the man who is 
labouring to-day in the hope that this 
age is to be consummated by the con- 
version of the world. I cannot per- 
sonally understand where he gathers 
his comfort when he sees how heathen- 
dom is increasing proportionately with 
every decade as it passes, as he sees 
that even in so-called Christian coun- 
tries, notwithstanding all the light that 
has come, and is still coming, notwith- 
standing all the undoubted progress that 
is being made, there is also along with 
the progress, retrogression; along with 
the increasing light, increasing dark- 
ness; side by side with a new sense of 
the Christ spirit in the age, an ever 
new revolt against that spirit But I 



realise through the teaching of Jesus 
in these parables that this is an age of 
conflict, of conflict stern and necessary, 
when the enemy sows his darnel by 
the wheat, and that I have no right to 
attempt to uproot the darnel until the 
end of the age. Then as I understand 
this to be an age in which God is 
gathering out for Himself a people for 
heavenly service, and is preparing by 
all the processes of the years for that 
consummation, I can take up my day's 
work, and do it with full purpose of 
heart, knowing that the world's great 
hope is the advent of the King, with 
the rule of the rod of iron, when right- 
eousness will be established. 

Jesus declared that it is the scribe 
instructed to the Kingdom of heaven, 
according to the teaching which He had 
Himself given, who is to fulfil the re- 
sponsibility which is then described. 

Now let us turn to that responsibil- 
ity. The picture is a very simple one, 
and yet again, wholly eastern. We 
pause and look at it in its separation 
from the teaching. It is the picture of 
a householder- an eastern householder, 
I pray you remember. You cannot in- 
terpret this parable by anything you 
know of the householder in this coun- 
try, or in any western land. One must 
go back to the East. The word trans- 
lated "householder" might be trans- 
lated with a bluntness that perhaps is 
unfair, and yet perfectly accurate, as 
the house-despot All our western mind 
is in revolt at the very use of the 
word, but despotism is not necessarily 
cruel; it may be gracious, tender, kind, 
beneficent. In the East the householder 
was one in absolute authority, a king, 
a shepherd, a father. And so the figure 
employed is that of a despot, apart from 
the undesirable significance of the term. 
In this word "householder," then, there 
is present the thought of loving yet 
absolute authority. Christ often used 
. the word, and almost invariably con- 
cerning Himself. 

Then pass to another word in the 
picture. " Which bringeth forth out of 
his treasure" Here we have the same 
word for "treasure" that occurred in 
the manifesto of the King. There are 
two distinct Greek words for treasure 
each indicating a certain value. This 



177 



[MATT. xm. 51, 52] 



MATTHEW 



is the word that indicates treasure laid 
horizontally. It is wealth, treasure laid 
up, possessed. The treasure possessed 
is that of the truth concerning the 
Kingdom. 

Then take the next phrase, the house- 
holder brings forth out of his treasure 
" things new and old." " New " does 
not mean young. " Old " does not 
mean worn out. The phrase means 
things fresh and ancient, rather than 
things young and worn out. 

Again, the householder brings forth 
out of his treasure things fresh, an- 
cient. " Bringeth forth," literally, fling- 
ing forth, scattereth around. There is 
the thought of prodigality in giving, of 
great generosity and bountifulness. 

The whole picture is one of an east- 
ern householder, the master of a house, 
an authoritative ruler, lavishly scatter- 
ing out of his wealth the things which 
are necessary for the supply and gov- 
ernment of his household. Those who 
are gifted with imagination see the pic- 
ture. It is full of colour. No neutral 
tints are in it. The eastern house- 
master, house-despot, out of his treasure 
scattering upon his people, upon the 
children of his family, the sheep of his 
flock, the subjects of his kingdom, all 
that they need. It is the attitude of 
real kingship, and real fatherhood, and 
real shepherdhood. 

Having looked at the picture thus we 
are filled with astonishment at it, for 
Jesus said that it represented the posi- 
tion His disciple is to occupy through- 
out all this period. 

What, then, does it mean? First, 
that His disciples are the householders 
of this age. Moreover, in proportion as 
they bring out of their treasure-house, 
which is His treasure-house, things 
new and old, they are the rulers of 
the age. 

I am increasingly impressed with the 
fact that some of the simplest things 
Jesus said are the most startling and 
sublime. At the end of the parables 
of the Kingdom, with stately and kingly 
dignity the King sweeps aside all the 
thrones of earth, and all the govern- 
ments of men, and He says for pur- 
poses of God's great and only Kingdom 
throughout this age, the ruling author- 
ity is to be vested in the disciples who 



are instructed to the Kingdom of 
heaven. Every scribe is to be like a 
householder. He had spoken of Him- 
self as the great Householder. These 
disciples are now to represent Him, 
and take His place in the world, and 
what He has done they are to do. 
According to the suggestion of this 
wonderful, brief, final parable, the dis- 
ciples of the Christ, instructed to the 
Kingdom, are the ruling class in the 
centuries as they come and go, until 
the King Himself appears again. They 
are to bring out of the treasure-house, 
out of the wealth that is theirs, " things 
new and old." 

Let us consider a little more closely 
this expression, one of the most re- 
markable of the whole paragraph. 
"Things new and old." Not, if I un- 
derstand the Lord aright, new things 
and old things ; but " things new and 
old." The same things, new and old. 
Not one set of things that are new, and 
another set of things that are old. That 
would be opposition, antagonism, mutual 
destruction. Christ has said that no 
man puts new wine into old wine- 
skins. There you have the opposition 
of a new thing to an old thing, and 
that is destruction. That is not the 
thought here. " Things new and old." 
The principle is old, the application is 
new. The root is old, the blossom and 
the fruit are new, and the two are 
necessary to growth and development. 
Destroy the old root in your garden, 
and there will be no new blossoms in 
spring-time, nor fruit in autumn. But 
the absence of the new denies the life 
of the old. If there be no bud, no 
blossom, and no fruit, then I take it 
the tree is dead, and may be destroyed. 
"Things new and old" old in their 
unseen and eternal principles; new in 
their seen and temporal practice. The 
interrelation is for evermore a test. 
The new thing which contradicts the 
old is always false. The old thing that 
has no fresh and new production is 
dead, and the sooner we are rid of it 
the better. "Things new and old," 
said Jesus. You are going to represent 
Me, lie great Householder. You are to 
be the householder of this age. It 
was as though He had said, I depose 
kings and rulers and governors. They 



178 



MATTHEW 



[MAM. xiii. 51, 52] 



will sit upon their thrones, and pass 
their measures, and imagine they are 
manipulating the age. That is not so. 
You are to be the householders. You 
are to be the masters of the age, not 
with the mastery which is apparent 
always, but with the mastery which 
prepares for Me. You are to be My 
householders, and you are to do your 
work by bringing out of your treasure- 
house, out of this infinite wealth that 
is Mine, and which I make yours, 
"things new and old." 

That is the perpetual responsibility 
of such as understand the way of His 
Kingdom. Surely Russell Lowell had 
this great thought in mind, subcon- 
sciously or not, when he wrote: 

" New occasions teach new duties, 
Time makes ancient good uncouth ; 

They must upward still and onward, 
who would keep abreast of truth ; 

I<o before us gleam her camp fires! 
we ourselves must pilgrims be; 

Launch our Mayflower, and steer 
boldly through lie desperate win- 
ter sea, 

Nor attempt the Future's portal with 
the Past's blood-rusted key." 

That is a plea for the new; yes, but 
if you try the future's portal with any 
other key than the key that hangs upon 
the girdle of the King, you will never 
unlock it. If you forget that the new 
door can only be opened by the old 
principle, that door will never be 
opened. We are to come into every 
successive decade or century with 
things new and old, living messages to 
the age in which we live; living appli- 
cation of the truth which God has 
eternally enthroned. Because the King- 
dom of God is old, ancient as God is 
ancient, it has ever new applications. 
Methods, manners, men may change; 
but this underlying principle of Divine 
government abideth, rooted in the na- 
ture of God, and active in redeeming 
grace, and it blossoms fresh in every 
generation among the sons of men. 

Now, said Jesus to these disciples, 
Have you understood these things? 
Have you understood the underlying 
principle? Have you understood My 
teaching concerning the age in which 
you are to serve? Have you put My 
measurements upon this age? Do you 



understand what God is doing? Do 
you understand these things the things 
of the Divine purpose, of the Divine 
programme, of the Divine plan? And 
upon the basis of the gleam of light 
that had come to them, upon the basis 
of the fact that if at least they did 
not perfectly understand, they yet be- 
longed to Him Who held the key of 
knowledge as well as the key of power: 
upon that basis He said, Then go out 
into this age and be householders, 
bringing out of your treasure things 
new and old. Insist wherever you are 
upon the old and abiding, but make 
application of it to the new and the 
transient. " New and old." 

That is the work of the people of 
the Kingdom of God in this age. The 
old for us is the Kingdom of God. 
Will not somebody give me another 
phrase? How shall I find another? 
There is no better, but we have taken 
these Bible phrases, and robbed them 
of their virtue by repetition. What is 
the Kingdom of God? The Kingship 
of God. The fact that He is King, and 
that amid the clash of devilish attack 
His throne has never trembled for a 
moment. That is the old, the Kingship 
of God. And what is the new? The 
application of that eternal verity to the 
age in which we live, to personal life, 
to social life, to national life. Our 
business, as we are disciples instructed 
to the Kingdom, is to make this 
application. 

May I illustrate what I mean by a 
protest? I am often told to-day told 
seriously that what the Church of God 
needs in order to succeed is to catch 
the spirit of the age. I reply that the 
Church of God only succeeds in propor- 
tion as she corrects the spirit of the 
age. I am told that if I am to succeed 
in Christian work, I must adopt the 
methods of the world. Then, by God's 
help, I will be defeated. We are not 
in the world to borrow the world's 
maxims and spirit. The world would 
crucify Jesus as readily now as nine- 
teen centuries ago. The Cross is no 
more popular in the world to-day than 
when men nailed Him to it on the green 
hill outside the city gate nineteen cen- 
turies ago. The Church of Christ is 
for evermore to stand for Him as King, 



179 



[MAT*, xm. 53-58] 



MATTHEW 



and for that redeemed Kingdom which 
He represents; and as she does it, as 
the disciples instructed to the Kingdom 
bring forth things new and old from 
the treasure-house, that and only that 
will save individuals and society and 
the nation. 

Do you not believe that here is great 
need for such bringing forth of things 
new and old? Do you not recognize in 
this hour in which we live, we need to 
emphasise supremely the Kingdom of 
God? This is a matter I am almost 
afraid to put into words lest I should 
be misunderstood. There are times 
when it seems to me that in our mis- 
interpretation of Jesus as gentle and 
pitiful and tolerant, we have imagined 
that all we have to do to make a man 
a Christian is to sing him some sweet, 
soft nothing, set to dance music. We 
need to get back to the sterner teach- 
ings of our Puritan fathers, or back to 
the rugged magnificence of the old He- 
brew prophets. If we are householders 
true to the great Master-Householder, 
we shall insist upon the Kingdom of 
God, and we shall never say to men, It 
does not matter, you are doing your 
best, you are struggling through. We 
shall say to men, You will be for ever 
lost, unless you submit to the throne. 
Yes, salvation is by the Cross, but the 
Cross is the place of the throne, and 
these old eternal truths are the tilings 
we need to recognize and preach. 

We have been playing with the surf 
that beats upon the shore. We need 
to get down to the depths and pro- 
fundities of faith, the everlasting rock 
upon which our feet rest. Things old, 
not worn out, but ancient and honour- 



able things that are grey with the ma- 
jesty of the eternities. These are the 
things that we stand in the world for; 
and in proportion as we stand for these, 
and make application of them to per- 
sonal life, and social life, and national 
life, in that proportion we become for 
our absent and hidden King, Who 
presently is to be revealed in glory, 
the true householders. 

Yet, brethren, what gracious gifts 
there are in our hands, what treasures 
we have for this age that none other 
has, if we but understand our position! 
Never must we forget the throne. But, 
thank God, it is also the throne of 
grace, and when we, in the name of 
God Almighty, have uttered our fiercest 
denunciation against the sin of the age, 
we can come to the man who is 
scorched with the lightning of denun- 
ciation, and bring him to the healing 
of the Cross, and the cleansing blood, 
and the power of the Spirit 

"We come, we come, the children of 

salvation, 

Treasures all countless in our hands 
we bring." 

We are to bring out of our treasure- 
house things new and old, and give 
them to the age. Then we need not 
be at all anxious about statistics. It 
does not matter whether one, or a hun- 
dred, or a thousand names are taken. 
The thing that matters is that we have 
brought out the old thing in its new 
meaning and new application. Pres- 
ently the King will come, and will sever 
the wicked from the good, and to the 
old and weary world will come at last 
its golden age. 



MATTHEW XIII. 53-58 



THE parabolic discourse completed, 
our Lord went on with His work, 
and in continuing our study of the par- 
ticular section dealing with the enforce- 
ment of His claims, we have two 
sub-divisions left. First of all the 
period marked by increasing opposition; 
then the brief story of how one man at 
least had seen Him and known Him 
the confession of Peter at Caesarea 
Philippi. 



Looking at the section beginning with 
verse fifty-three of chapter thirteen, 
and running to verse twelve of chapter 
sixteen, we see the King going forward 
once more, and the opposition was 
more marked, more definite. He 
moved on in His propaganda in an 
atmosphere characterised by hatred and 
misunderstanding. 

There are two ways in which this 
whole passage might be analysed; 



180 



s MATTHEW 



[MATT. xin. 53-58] 



around the opposition offered, or around 
the mistakes made concerning Jesus. 
To survey it from the second stand- 
point would be to find mistake after 
mistake chronicled. First, the mistake 
of the men of Nazareth, then the mis- 
take of Herod, then the mistake of the 
multitudes who wanted to take Jesus 
by force and make Him the King, and 
then the mistake of the disciples, who 
saw Him moving over the water at 
midnight. Mistake followed mistake, 
because the people did not understand 
Him. This was the last period of the 
intensive public ministry. Not that the 
public ministry entirely closed now, for 
after Cassarea Philippi our Lord ap- 
peared publicly, but He specially de- 
voted Himself to His own disciples, 
instructing them concerning the Cross. 
Finally He appeared in Jerusalem for 
the official rejection of the Nation. 

In this study we take the first of 
the sub-divisions, which deals with the 
opposition of His own people; not His 
own disciples, but the people of Naza- 
reth, Having instructed His disciples 
in the mysteries of the Kingdom of 
God, that is to say having taught them 
what the Kingdom would be in that 
particular age, thus preparing them for 
future ministry, the King continued 
His work, and the first place to which 
He went was Nazareth. He set His 
face again toward the old and familiar 
scenes of His boyhood and His young 
manhood. This visit of Jesus to Naza- 
reth is not the same as that which is 
recorded by Luke. This was much 
later. Here He was going back to 
Nazareth after prolonged ministry, and 
very near to the close of things. 

The picture of this verse is one very 
full of beauty. Perhaps we can best 
interpret it to our own hearts by calling 
to mind what our own sensations have 
been, when, after years of life's stren- 
uous battle, we have taken our way 
back to the scenes of childhood, of 
youth, to what we sometimes think of 
as the dull and dreary days of prepara- 
tion for the more public service. That 
description would not be at all appli- 
cable in the case of our Lord, for the 
perpetual sunshine of His life was the 
consciousness that He was doing God's 
will; and whether at Nazareth, or on 



the public highways and byways, His 
one joy and delight was His Father's 
will. But He had taken His way back 
again to these scenes of early life; and 
one can imagine Him, as He went into 
the old familiar synagogue on the 
Sabbath day, the synagogue to which 
His mother had taken Him in the 
earlier days, where He had listened to 
the reading of the law, and sometimes 
to its exposition; the synagogue so 
closely associated with those days of 
childhood, boyhood, and youth. It is 
well sometimes to strip ourselves of 
the larger and truer ideas of the Christ, 
and try and look at Him on the purely 
human level. If we can do so here, we 
catch the beauty of this story. He had 
gone back again to the little town 
nestling on the hillside, far removed 
from the great crowds and activities, 
the great centres in the midst of which 
He had been busily occupied. He had 
left them for ever, when He began His 
ministry, and set His face to go to 
Capernaum, and to take up His resi- 
dence there. He had made Capernaum 
the centre of His operations, but at last 
He had to say, "And thou, Capernaum, 
shalt thou be exalted unto heaven? 
thou shalt go down unto Hades." He 
had turned His back upon it for the 
last time, and He was now back again 
in Nazareth. Back home in the old 
synagogue, among the old familiar 
scenes, looking into the faces of the 
men who were boys when He was, and 
who had grown up to manhood with 
Him. And there in the synagogue He 
taught them. After the reading of the 
law He expounded it, told them its 
inner meaning. Oh, to have heard Him 
as, beginning at Moses, and on through 
the prophets, He taught those listening 
men! He had gone back from the 
crowds to the quietness of Nazareth. 
Now let us see what happened. In 
order to do so we must look first at 
the men of Nazareth; then at the King 
Himself. 

The men of Nazareth. What was 
their first attitude as He came that 
day to the synagogue? They had 
heard the fame of Him : it had spread 
through all the region round about. 
The very next paragraph, with which 
chapter fourteen opens, makes it per- 



181 



[MATT, xm 53-58] 



MATTHEW 



fectly plain how far the fame of Jesus 
had spread, for we find that the report 
concerning Him had reached Herod, 
and the last place in which any man 
becomes famous is the royal palace. 
Everybody knows the rumour before it 
reaches the King. And so the people 
of Nazareth had heard of Him, and 
undoubtedly had been interested in 
Him. They knew about Him, so that 
when He returned to Nazareth, and 
went into the synagogue, their first 
attitude toward Him was one of per- 
fect familiarity with Him. They were 
His people. " Is not this the carpen- 
ter's son? Is not His mother called 
Mary? and His brethren James, and 
Joseph, and Simon, and Judas? And 
His sisters, are they not all with us ? " 
These were the things naturally in their 
minds when He entered. We know 
Him, we know all about Him, His 
people are all here with us. Mother, 
and brothers, and sisters. He is just 
one of us. We know His development ; 
we watched Him grow up here as a 
Boy, and we loved Him in those old 
days. He grew " in wisdom and stat- 
ure, and in favour with God and men." 
We know all about Him. We know 
His occupation. Did we not often 
come and watch as He began to use 
the tools of His craft by the side of 
Joseph? Did not He make the very 
yokes in which our oxen are ploughing? 
That was the first attitude, and it was 
a very dangerous attitude, and yet it 
was perfectly natural. He went into 
the synagogue, not as a stranger. There 
was very little curiosity in their midst 
as He entered, save curiosity arising 
out of the reports that had reached 
them. It is all so human; we under- 
stand it perfectly. The boy who grew 
up by your side went out. Other peo- 
ple were startled and surprised because 
he did something, and accomplished 
something. He comes back. His suc- 
cess is interesting; but you say, we 
know him. That was the attitude of 
Nazareth towards Him. It was very 
perilous, as we shall see, that first atti- 
tude of perfect familiarity. 

What happened? He began to teach 
them. We can quite imagine the faces 
of those men in that synagogue, those 
strange, strong, Jewish faces, as they 



watched Him that day before they be- 
gan to discuss Him. We can imagine 
the astonished surprise on their faces. 
They were listening, they had never 
heard things like that before; such ex- 
position, such interpretation of their 
own Scriptures. As He talked about 
them, the old familiar words they had 
been reciting for years, flamed into 
light and glory. He merely repeated 
them; and as they listened they heard 
illustrations which proved that He was 
in possession of a knowledge which was 
quite foreign to them. There was no 
university in Nazareth. There was no 
school of the prophets in Nazareth. 
The great Rabbis never set up their 
seat in Nazareth, and He had been 
there all the time, through all the 
years; and yet interwoven with His 
matchless speech were allusions which 
they had always imagined, and rightly 
imagined within the limitation of their 
own life, could only be gained by the 
processes of learning, and the school. 
We are not told upon this occasion that 
He wrought any miracles. Indeed we 
are told, " He did not many mighty 
works there, because of their unbelief." 
The inference is that He did some; 
and perchance before He spoke they 
saw some wonder, or it may be that 
the report of wonders He had wrought 
had come to the place. They watched 
Him and listened to Him, and there 
was no escape from the conviction that 
He had wisdom, and there was no es- 
cape from the evidence that He had 
power. These things they could not 
deny. But, they said, This wisdom is 
not of human origin, for we watched 
Him as a baby, growing into boyhood; 
we watched Him as a boy growing into 
youth. He never went away to study 
in the schools, and yet He has the 
wisdom. And the power certainly 
comes from no human source! Look 
at His people, Mary, and His brothers 
and sisters, just ordinary people. He 
is one of the same kith and kin, but 
He has the power, He has the wisdom. 
And so the second attitude was one of 
astonishment. 

Now we come to the final attitude of 
these men of Nazareth. "They were 
offended." Perhaps we are not war- 
ranted in reading that word exactly in 



1S2 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xiir. 53-58] 



that form. Literally, they were made 
to stumble. One of the old versions 
gets very near the heart of translation 
when it reads, "they were scandal- 
ised," for remember the scandalon was 
the rock of offence over which people 
stumbled. He had become a rock of 
offence, something over which men 
stumbled. At first they were perplexed, 
but perplexity is not offence and stum- 
bling. There was more in it than that. 
In the presence of the mystery pre- 
sented to their view, they stumbled by 
taking up a wrong attitude towards 
Him. There was only one logical se- 
quence. What astonished these men 
was not to be accounted for, yet it 
existed. Therefore these things were 
supernatural things, beyond human ken 
and understanding, but to be received 
because of what they were, and because 
of what they testified concerning Him. 
A mystery, but yet a revelation. Here 
is the point where they fell and stum- 
bled. They did not admit the sequence 
concerning Himself. They made their 
judgment blind. Wrapped up in that 
simplicity of personality with which we 
have become acquainted, was a sublim- 
ity of personality which even we have 
never yet fully discovered. There is 
only one attitude in the presence of 
such a phenomenon as that. While we 
cannot understand the mystery, at least 
we ought not to reject the Person sim- 
ply on account of the fact that we can- 
not follow the working and explain the 
method. But there they failed. They 
were offended. The link was missing, 
they could not find it. Therefore they 
refused the wisdom and refused the 
works because they refused Him. 
"And He did not many mighty works 
there because of their unbelief." Such 
is the picture of the men of Nazareth. 
Now let us look at the King Himself. 
If we have noticed their familiarity 
with Him, what shall we say of His 
familiarity with them? He also knew 
them ; He had lived in their midst and 
observed them. He had seen them in 
the process of their growth, as they 
had seen Him in the process of His 
growth; and from the human side He 
was more familiar with these people 
than with any others. But He also 
knew them in their deepest life, as He 



knows the underlying secret in every 
life. "He needed not that any one 
should bear witness concerning man; 
for He Himself knew what was in 
man." And yet, notwithstanding this, 
He went back to them once more. He 
taught them, and wrought amongst 
them, and gave them new manifesta- 
tions of Himself; things they never 
could have discovered, for they were 
not emblazoned upon His personality. 
He gave them manifestations of His 
power in great grace; but the final 
thing is this, "He did not many 
mighty works there because of their 
unbelief." The popular conception of 
a miracle or "mighty work" is that it 
is something which creates belief, and 
we should be inclined to say that was 
His opportunity for a miracle, just be- 
cause they did not believe. But there 
is a matter to bear in mind perpetually. 
Jesus never wrought miracles to create - 
belief. Not in a single instance in the 
New Testament can we find that a 
miracle was wrought to create belief or 
faith. They were all beneficent. Un- 
belief was the atmosphere in which He 
could not perform a miracle, and there 
was lacking at Nazareth the atmos- 
phere in which it was possible for Him 
to work a miracle, a wonder, a mighty 
power. Belief is not merely intellectual 
conviction. They had intellectual con- 
viction. They knew His wisdom, they 
knew His power; they were perfectly 
convinced of the wisdom of His speech, 
of the might of His work. Belief is 
the abandoning of the will to convic- 
tion, the handing over of the life to 
the thing concerning which we are con- 
vinced. If we say we believe in God 
the Father Almighty, and live all the 
week as though there were no God, we 
may have an intellectual conviction of 
His existence, but we do not believe 
in God. They believed intellectually 
certain things concerning Him, but as 
belief is the abandonment to conviction, 
when that abandonment is withheld 
there can be no progress, contact is 
not made. 

Now let us go back with Him to 
the synagogue of His boyhood. There 
He was mighty in speech and mighty in 
deed. All wisdom and power were 
His. He spoke the words of wisdom 



183 



[MATT. xm. 53-58] 



MATTHEW 



and He worked the deeds of might. 
Those people heard the wisdom and 
recognized it; saw the deed and knew 
it, and then said, Whence did He get 
His wisdom and His might? The men 
of Nazareth went astray attempting to 
account for something half understood. 
Oh, that they had responded to the 
fact of wisdom, and to the fact of 
power, and believed in Him upon the 
basis of the evidences! He could then 
have wrought miracles amongst them, 
He could have done other things, and 
said other things, but their unbelief 
sterilised His power, and He could 
make no contact with them. At the 
first evidence of His wisdom and might 
which makes a demand upon us, let us 
answer it, yield to it, not merely intel- 
lectually but volitionally, and we shall 
see that the same wisdom can go 
further in its giving of light, that the 
same power can work more mightily. 
Refuse to answer it, and Christ Him- 
self cannot make us understand Him, 
and Christ Himself cannot do more 
mighty works. 

Nazareth is the symbol of many an 
individual life. The Christ comes, there 
is the flash of His wisdom, the thrill 
of His power ; and then the man begins 
speculating and wondering, and oft- 
times refuses light. Christ can go no 
further with that man. Christ Him- 
self cannot make that man know Him; 
until he answer the first flash of light 
with obedience, the first thrill of power 
with abandonment. That is the great 
word here, the startling word, the tre- 
mendous word " He did not many 
mighty works there because of their 
unbelief." 

There are in this study lessons of 
personal relationship and lessons of co- 
operative fellowship. 

As to the first, this story teaches us 
the unutterable folly of refusing to ac- 
cept fact because it is astonishing. Yet 
there are thousands of people standing 
in that position to-day concerning Jesus 
Christ. It is utterly unscientific, not 
to say irreligious. Here is an aston- 
ishing thing. They say we cannot un- 
derstand how this Man hath this 
wisdom. Has He the wisdom? Why, 
yes, we cannot escape it. Then in the 
name of God and common honesty, obey 



the injunction and postpone the investi- 
gation. Oh, the unutterable folly of 
refusing to accept a fact because it is 
astonishing! If we had done that per- 
sistently in other realms, we should 
never have had our buildings lit with 
electricity, for no man understands 
electricity. There are certain laws we 
have discovered, and we are obeying 
the laws, and the light is illuminating 
our buildings, and the force is driving 
the machinery. We have harnessed 
the lightning, but we do not understand 
the lightning. These men of Nazareth 
came into the presence of an actual 
fact, and they saw wonders, and they 
were in danger of eternal perdition, 
because they tarried in the wonder. 

That is a peculiar characteristic of 
our own age. We may not understand 
the Incarnation, and we never shall; 
we do not understand the Atonement, 
and we never shall; but is there any 
other teacher who spake as this Teacher 
spoke? Oh, no. We are bound to ad- 
mit the wisdom. We may be puzzled. 
Let us postpone the problem, and obey. 
That was the blunder of the men of 
Nazareth. They saw the wonders, and 
their attitude remained the same as 
when on a former occasion they had 
tried to fling Him over the brow of 
the hill. 

And immediately growing out of this 
there is the tremendous blunder of at- 
tempting to account for Christ by ordi- 
nary standards. There are men who 
say: Until we can account for Him we 
cannot submit to Him. If we could 
account for Him, we would not submit, 
because there are many people we can 
account for by ordinary standards, and 
we have never submitted to them. If 
we could once put the Christ of God 
into the formulae of human interpreta- 
tion, we should consider Him useless as 
Teacher, and Lord, and Saviour. It is 
because He towers above us, and im- 
presses us, and bafHes us, and eludes 
us; enwraps us with love, and thrills 
us with power; that we are Christians. 
We are Christians in the presence of 
the Infinite Mystery, infinitely more 
than in the presence of things that 
can be perfectly explained. 

There is another peril, that of famil- 
iarity with Jesus. There is a terrible 



184 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xiv. 1-22] 



danger threatening those born in the 
atmosphere of Christianity. We may 
thank God for Christian parents and 
Christian home training. And yet, oh 
the peril of it ! As a great preacher 
once said to a crowd of preachers, 
Whatever else you lose, pray God you 
may never lose the element of surprise 
when you see Jesus. Does He startle 
us? Does He astonish and surprise 
us? Let us be careful not to be famil- 
iar with the familiarity of the men of 
Nazareth. If they had not known Him 
so well, they might have known Him 
better, and that principle abides for 
ever true. 

One thought as to the lessons of co- 
operative fellowship for workers. Let 
us remember concerning each other as 
with Him, faith fertilises, criticism 



sterilises. It is in the atmosphere of 
faith, and belief, and confidence, that 
the worker does his best. It is the 
critical, and the cynical, that kills. 

And yet once more. Are we ever 
guilty of hindering Him by unbelief? 
He is the same to-day. If we are say- 
ing in our hearts we are not sure of 
Him, we shall have to end by saying, 
He did not many mighty works. It is 
when we come believing in Him that 
He touches our hearts with His fingers, 
and heaven's music is in our souls. 
He is to-day, as ever, the One Who 
answers faith. God help us to believe 
in Him with all our heart and soul. 
So shall we receive from Him new 
wisdom and new light in all the enter- 
prises of life. 



MATTHEW XIV. 1-22 



IN this passage we are introduced to 
two other opposing forces ; first, the 
opposition of the false king Herod, 
which was threatened; secondly, that 
of the multitudes, which did not seem 
to be opposition, but which Christ 
treated as hindrance rather than help. 

To see this division of our paragraph 
is to understand the place of these 
narratives in the history of the King. 

Let us, then, carefully notice its 
structure. First observe the connec- 
tion between verses one and two, and 
verse thirteen. "At that season Herod 
the tejjajch heard the report concern- 
ing Jesus, and said unto his servants, 
This is John the Baptist; he is risen 
from the dead; and therefore do these 
powers work in him." " Now when 
Jesus heard it, He withdrew." That is 
the true connection. Verse thirteen 
should be read, as to the continuity of 
the story, in immediate connection with 
verses one and two. It was not when 
He heard the story of the death of 
John. That had taken place before, 
and is introduced here for a special 
purpose, as we shall see. It was when 
Jesus heard what Herod the tetrarch 
was saying concerning Him that "-He 
withdrew from thence in a boat, to a 
desert place apart." 

In verses three to twelve we have 



the story of the murder of John, told 
here because of the light it throws 
upon the character of Herod, and be- 
cause it explains Herod's attitude at 
that time toward Jesus. Herod heard 
of the fame of Jesus, of the mighty 
works that were manifesting themselves 
wherever He went, and he said, "This 
is John the Baptist risen from the 
dead." We do not understand that 
opinion, until we have read the story 
that follows of how Herod had rid 
himself of John, and until we begin to 
enter into the feelings of Herod, and 
remember how a guilty conscience 
makes cowards of us all. It was the 
cry of a terror-stricken conscience, but 
it created his attitude toward the 
Christ. When, presently, he pulled 
himself together, he in all probability 
said: Of course it is not John the 
Baptist, but it is another who is saying 
similar things; I must be rid of him. 
Opposition threatened the King there- 
fore from that quarter. When Jesus 
heard that His claim had reached the 
Herodian dwelling, and that Herod was 
at first afraid, He withdrew thus in a 
boat, and departed to a desert place, 
for Herod's case was utterly hopeless. 
It is at this act of Jesus, that we must 
look very carefully. 
In John's Gospel we have an ex- 



185 



[MATT. xiv. 1-22] 



MATTHEW 



planation of the action of Jesus, when 
He withdrew from the multitude. It 
was when He found they would take 
Him by force and make Him King-, 
that He withdrew. Our King is seen 
therefore withdrawing Himself from 
the fear and opposition of the false 
king; and He is seen moreover with- 
drawing Himself from the desire of the 
multitude to crown Him under certain 
clearly denned conditions. 

First, the attitude of Herod. The 
story of Herod is the most terrible in 
the whole of the New Testament. We 
will only touch upon certain points 
which are necessary to our understand- 
ing of his relation to our King. Herod 
was a tetrarch that is, the ruler of a 
fourth part who claimed the title of 
king. That sentence should be enough 
to give us an insight to one side of his 
character. He was not a king in the 
true sense of the word, but one who 
held rule under authority; and yet he 
was a man who was rebellious against 
the authority under - which he held 
sway, and had, as far as possible, es- 
tablished for himself the full courtly 
life and regime. He was ambitious, 
aspiring, and rebellious politically. 
Think again of the man himself. It 
is an astonishing fact, and one reveal- 
ing the condition of the age, that he 
was a descendant of Esau, reigning 
over a portion of the children of Jacob. 
He was a dissolute man, giving him- 
self over to all excesses, yet he was a 
man troubled with a conscience, and 
perpetually refusing to obey its call. 
If we trace the story of Herod, we find 
there was a day when he heard John 
gladly. In all probability, setting aside 
for some brief hour the purple of his 
royalty, he found his way to the 
prophet to listen to him, and he had 
come very near the Kingdom which 
John had proclaimed. Even in that 
hour of drunken and shameless de- 
bauch, in which he ordered the murder 
of John, there are the evidences of the 
pain of his conscience. He did not 
desire to kill John; and yet he did so. 
It was an hour of drunken and shame- 
less revelry, an hour in which the cen- 
tral attraction was something sprung 
upon a half-drunken crowd, the dancing 
of a shameless wanton. It was an 



hour that- becomes most tragic and 
awful, when we look carefully at this 
man Herod; an hour when he felt 
himself bound by the maudlin honour 
of an evil oath to violate every prin- 
ciple of right and truth. " For the 
sake of his oaths.". Notice the plural 
in the Revised. He had repeated his 
oath more than once, as a drunken man 
will, the oath that had come out of his 
diabolic animalism, that had come 
under the false inspiration of drink. 

When shall we be rid of the idea 
that because we have said a thing, it 
must be done? If we have taken an 
oath that violates righteousness, let us 
break it before the sun sinks. If under 
some stress we have sworn an oath, let 
us not think we save our conscience 
by keeping it; if the oath be evil, then 
we sear our conscience and spoil it, 
and wrong ourselves in the keeping 
of it. 

The reports of Jesus reached this 
man. There came, through the crowds 
of men about him, the sycophants who 
had helped him in his baseness, news 
of some new Power working through 
the district, doing mighty deeds, speak- 
ing wondrous words; and the king, 
shaking in his purple, said, " This is 
John the Baptist, he is risen from the 
dead; and therefore do these powers 
work in him." There is hardly any 
doubt that Herod was of the sect of the 
Sadducees. It has been said he could 
not be a Sadducee, because he spoke 
of John's rising from the dead. But 
that is to forget that in a moment 
.when conscience troubles, a man's 
false philosophy generally breaks down. 
Herod's Sadducean philosophy was for- 
gotten as he said, "This is John the 
Baptist, he is risen from the dead." 
He was nearer accuracy than he knew, 
or would have acknowledged, perhaps 
five minutes after. You cannot murder 
truth, though you may silence the voice 
that utters it. It filled him with alarm, 
and the issue of it must inevitably be a 
new antagonism to Jesus Christ, for it 
is a remarkable fact that frenzy born 
of fear will do the most foolhardy 
things. Even if he really did believe 
that this was John the Baptist risen 
from the dead, that there was a re- 
incarnation of the prophet, under whom 



186 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xiv. 1-22] 



he had been almost persuaded; that 
would not hinder the man who had 
violated his conscience and refused the 
claim of truth, from attempting to lay 
unholy hands upon him. 

That is a very graphic picture which 
Jesus once drew of a man who had 
passed the borderline, and was lost, 
and who said, " Father Abraham, have 
mercy on me I have five brethren," 
send Lazarus to them. And the an- 
swer was startling and strange, Christ's 
own interpretation of Heaven's esti- 
mate, however we may account for it; 
"They have Moses and the prophets, 
let them hear them if they hear not 
Moses and the prophets, neither will 
they be persuaded, if one rise from 
the dead." And if Herod would not 
listen to John, living, he would not 
listen to him risen from the dead. If 
Herod would not listen to John ere he 
murdered him, he would attempt to 
murder him again, though he came 
back from the dead. There was a 
frenzy in his soul as well as a terror; 
there was a determined opposition to 
that which he once rejected in the fear 
that paralysed him ; and, " When Jesus 
heard it, He withdrew from thence in 
a boat." 

This withdrawal of Christ was final. 
Herod never saw Jesus until Pjflate sent 
Him to him, a few hours before His 
death. He had long wanted to see 
Him, and he had been intensely curi- 
ous about Him ; and it is an awful fact 
that he and Pilate were made friends 
over the death of Jesus. Herod never 
heard a single accent of the voice of 
Jesus. Though he cross-questioned 
Him, gathered his soldiers -about Him, 
laughed at Him, mocked Him, made 
sport of Him, and put Him to shame, 
through the whole process Christ never 
opened His mouth. There are men for 
whom Christ has no word. But what 
a fearful revelation it is of Herod's 
condition! How far this man must 
have gone in his determined opposition 
to truth, before Jesus would be si- 
lenced! Upon the very cross, in the 
midst of all the mystery of His dying 
pain, a malefactor who demanded His 
attention, received His pity, and before 
His glazing eyes the dying Christ flung 
open the pearly gates of God's own 



Kingdom to let him in. Yet He had 
not a word for Herod. 

Why did Jesus withdraw Himself? 
It was the attitude of the true King 
towards the false. He once sent Herod 
a message; "Go and say to that fox, 
Behold, I cast out demons and perform 
cures to-day and to-morrow, and the 
third day I am perfected. Nevertheless 
I must go on My way to-day and to- 
morrow, and the day following; for it 
cannot be that a prophet perish out of 
Jerusalem" (Luke xiii. 32, 33). Mark 
the pathetic majesty of this word of 
Jesus to Herod. It is reported that 
Herod would kill Thee, said the Phari- 
sees, and with the only touch of con- 
tempt we ever find in the words of 
Jesus, He said, " Go and say to that 
fox," go tell him that he is helpless, 
there is no fear in My heart of him, he 
cannot kill Me until I have done My 
day's work. I have three days' work 
to do this was figurative, poetic two 
of them will be for works of wonder 
wrought in the sight of men, the third 
will be a day of mystery and darkness 
and passion, the perfecting day. So 
that when He withdrew, it was not for 
fear of Herod, but it was because the 
two days' work was not yet finished. 
The hour had not yet come for the 
third day's mystery and perfecting ; and 
He passed with quiet dignity out of the 
reach of the man, left him to his ter- 
ror, his fear, and his frenzy; aban- 
doned him. 

There are occasions when it seems 
as though men are rejecting Jesus; 
when as a matter of fact, He is reject- 
ing them. He never rejects a man 
until the man rejects Him; but there 
is a moment when the line is crossed. 
We often speak of Jerusalem's rejec- 
tion of Christ. Never forget that we 
have not told all the story until we 
remember that there came a day when 
He went back to Jerusalem officially, 
with Kingly dignity, and rejected it. 
There were tears in His voice, there 
was pain in His heart when He did it, 
for God's act of judgment is always a 
strange act. There was a day when 
He looked out over Jerusalem and said, 
" O Jerusalem, Jerusalem how often 
would I have gathered thy children to- 
gether, even as a hen gathereth her 



187 



[MAT*. XIV. 1-22] 



MATTHEW 



own brood tinder her wings, and ye 
would not \-2l-=z=L-iwould; ye would not; 
" Behold your house is left unto you 
desolate." If Jerusalem rejected Him, 
the final word, the higher word, the 
reigning word, the word that had the 
throne of God behind it, was the word 
that declared that He rejected it. So 
with Herod. The King turned His 
back upon the man who had his oppor- 
tunity, and had flung it away. 

Then the scene strangely changes..' 
Christ, escaping to a desert -place, there 
found the ubiquitous crowd waiting for 
Him. One never reads these stories 
without noticing how the multitudes 
flocked after Him. Then follows the 
story of the feeding, a beautiful story 
in itself, which we must pass over now 
so far as making any application of it 
to our own condition is concerned. He 
had fed the multitudes, and again He 
withdrew. In John's Gospel we find 
an explanation of Christ's withdrawal 
in this case. "When therefore the 
people saw the sign which He did, 
they said, This is of a truth the prophet 
that cometh into the world. Jesus 
therefore perceiving that they were 
about to come and take Him by force, 
to make Him King, withdrew again 
into the mountain Himself alone" 
(John vi. 14, IS). There Jesus is seen 
withdrawing from Kingship. He had 
just fed five thousand men, besides 
women and children; and they were 
gathering around Him, most likely con- 
sulting in crowds, and He saw the 
popular will and wish to compel Him to 
become their King. It was one of those 
tense moments when a man may do 
anything with a crowd. Jesus Christ 
might at that moment have been 
crowned King, He might have gathered 
that five thousand men about Him and 
led them up against Jerusalem, not to 
victory perhaps, but He might have 
roused them. It was an electric mo- 
ment. They were determined to have 
Him for their King. It was His 
chance, His opportunity, even the dis- 
ciples might have said. But what was 
the motive behind the popular acclaim? 
Their motive was that of the material 
benefit they found He was able to be- 
stow. If this Man can feed us as He 
has done, with five loaves and two 



fishes, let us crown Hun; we can have 
perpetual spring-time, perpetual har- 
vest, perpetual plenty. There will be 
no more sighing or material discom- 
fort; let us crown Him. The motive 
was material. - 

And then mark the method; Let us 
take Him by force, and make Him 
King ; which may mean, either let us 
compel Him to the Kingship, or let Him 
claim His Kingdom by force. What 
was Jesus' answer to this attitude? 
Refusal. He refused the motive, He 
refused the method. He would not be 
made King upon any such basis. It is 
well to remember to-day that Jesus 
Christ declines to be made King upon 
the basis of His ability to feed hungry 
men with material bread. If we will 
make Him King as He ought to be 
made King, He will take care of a}l 
the things that follow; but He will not 
begin there. We cannot make Jesus 
King of the social order, until we have 
made Him King of the spiritual fact 
at the centre of our being. He refused 
the method of force, He dismissed the 
multitude, first sending His disciples 
away. Perhaps there was a touch of 
sweet art and high policy in the send- 
ing of the disciples away, knowing they 
would side with the multitude. They 
were always attempting to force Him. 
There are some who believe that 
Judas's action in betraying Him, was 
an attempt to force Him to take up 
His Kingdom. After He was risen 
they came back with the same old 
question, " Dost Thou at this time re- 
store the kingdom to Israel ? " Art 
Thou not going to do something? 

So He sent them away first, very 
tenderly and beautifully, over the lake 
out of the way of the crisis, for He 
alone was equal to it. Alone He dis- 
missed the multitudes, and went to the 
mountain. We have no account of 
what He said or did in the mountain 
when He was alone. One feels one 
would have liked to go with Hinf. But 
it is only permitted for us reverently 
to see Him as He turned His back 
upon the false king Herod, and upon 
the false thinking of the multitudes to 
look into the face of Him from Whom- 
He should receive the Kingdom, the 
One Whose Throne He was here to 



188 



MATTHEW 



[MAM. xrv. 1-22] 



establish and defend, and bring men 
into relationship with, as He turned 
from the clamour of the crowd . that 
fain would have... crowoed__JHim.'' The 
real meaning of this act of Jesus is to 
be gathered from a study of the dis- 
course chronicled by John wherein, on 
the next day, coming back to the 
crowds, Jesus reopened the question of 
that feeding of the multitude, and re- 
buked them because they were still ma- 
terialised, seeking Him not because 
they saw signs, not even because of 
the wonder of what He did, but be- 
cause they ate of the loaves, and were 
filled. In that discourse, following His 
action of turning His back upon the 
crowds, is contained the rebuke of all 
material ideals, and His enforcement 
of the fact of the supremacy of the 
spiritual. 

And now, in conclusion, let us take 
these two movements in our study, and 
ask, What have they to say to us? 
Very solemnly one looks back at 
Christ's attitude toward Herod, and 
remembers that Christ's victories over 
corrupt rule were gained by with- 
drawal from that rule. There are 
things which are self-destructive. To 
such He makes no appearance. To 
such He utters no word. He leaves 
all the false rule and authority to work 
out its own inevitable destruction. 
Herod's curiosity was for ever unsatis- 
fied. Herod's opposition was always 
eluded. Herod's doom was sealed by 
his own choice; and all that Jesus did 
for the ensuring of his doom was, when 
he had chosen, to let him alone. Oh, is 
there not in that some voice for us 
also? Is there not in it more than the 
message to kings and those in author- 
ity? How often have we put Him 
away when He has come to us? Re- 
member if He goes, He abides by our 
decision; and that is our unutterable 
undoing. He has nothing to do save to 
leave us alone. 

But turn to the other side. What 
are we to learn from Christ's attitude 
to the crowd? That Christ fed the 
multitudes despite their sin and despite 
their folly. Christ did not even ask 



that they should bring a recommenda- 
tion from the synagogue, before He 
gave them a meal. He took them just 
as they were, the hungry crowd; and 
we cannot gather together five thou- 
sand men, beside women and children, 
without having a strange assortment. 
He never asked a question about char- 
acter. He fed them because they were 
hungry, and a hungry man, if he is the 
worst in the city, touches the heart of 
God with pity, and it is for us to feed 
him. Jesus did not begin by saying to 
a man, If you will enter My Kingdom, 
I will feed you. He fed him. But 
then He will not let a man say, Now, 
because You have fed me I will come 
into Thy Kingdom. No, a man must 
begin somewhere else. I will feed you, 
I will care for you, My pity will mani- 
fest itself in benevolent activity toward 
you, even though you are going to 
crucify Me. But I will not be crowned 
King upon the basis of that feeding. 
He will not ascend the throne of our 
life on that basis. He does not begin 
in .the accidentals but in the essential. 
He does not base His throne upon the 
shifting sand of a man's material 
needs; He must establish it upon the 
rock of a man's spiritual recognition 
and spiritual life. He begins in the 
realm of spirit, but having begun there 
He proceeds through all the life, and 
the man who crowns Him honestly in 
the depth of his spiritual nature, may 
rest assured that He will take under 
His care and guidance and provision all 
his -material life, and all his mental life. 
It may be He will make poorer in- 
stead of richer ; one of the most benefi- 
cent things that could happen to some. 
To crown Christ in the spiritual, and 
to obey Him, is sometimes to have to 
disgorge in the material. Jesus Christ 
will only be crowned upon the basis of 
Dejty, the spiritual in us finding essen- 
tial Deity in Him and bowing to it. 
When we do that He comes to us as 
King, and when He comes, He comes 



^ oppression, to se_tfae prisoner 

free! May God help us to crown Him 
there, and so to find His gifts extend- 
ing through all our lives. 



189 



. xiv. 22-36] 



MATTHEW 



MATTHEW XIV. 22-36 



THE picture at which we are now to 
look stands in remarkable contrast 
to three which have immediately pre- 
ceded it. All the outstanding facts 
noticed in them are revealed by con- 
trast more clearly in this story. The 
first picture ended with the words, " He 
did not many mighty works there be- 
cause of their unbelief;" but in this 
picture we see Him working one of 
His mightiest works. In the second 
picture we saw Him hiding Himself 
from a man who was afraid of Him, 
imagining that He was an apparition; 
in this picture the disciples also said, 
"It is a ghost;" they also being filled 
with fear; but instead of hiding Him- 
self from them, He came nearer, and 
said, "Be of good cheer; it is I; be 
not afraid." In the third case we saw 
that He declined to be crowned upon 
the conditions which men desired; but 
in this picture we see Him holding the 
reins, and swaying the sceptre, and 
manipulating all events. Here we see 
Him the crowned Lord, in the midst of 
His own Kingdom. It was a poor King- 
dom, measured by all the standards of 
men, just a frail fisherman's rowing 
boat, in the midst of a storm-tossed 
sea; a boat that the men who knew it 
best were absolutely failing to manage. 
Nevertheless, that little boat in the 
midst of the sea, that handful of men, 
that One Lord and Master; constituted 
God's established Kingdom in the world 
at that moment. His own had refused 
Him at Nazareth. The reigning au- 
thority, Herod, was seeking to find 
Him, probably that he might deal with 
Him as he had dealt with John. The 
multitudes would have been glad to 
have Him if He would have come to 
the throne on the basis of feeding them 
without work. He had left Nazareth, 
He had turned His back on Herod, and 
He had declined the Kingdom; and 
here He was in the midst of His King- 
dom in that little boat, in which all 
God's enterprises were embarked. If 
we had known it at the moment, and 
had stood on the seashore, and had 
looked, we should have been as much 
afraid about God's Kingdom in the 



world as we are sometimes still. We 
should have imagined that the next 
wave would have engulfed the little 
boat, as we sometimes still think the 
next wave will destroy God's pro- 
gramme and God's purpose. So it is 
well for us to look back at the actual 
picture of Christ's Kingdom at that 
moment ; and then to see how far it 
has spread, and to observe it in con- 
trast with other things, that we may 
learn lessons of permanent value for 
our own help. 

Notice first, then, the contrast be- 
tween this picture and the other three 
a little more fully. First, "He did not 
many mighty works there because of 
their unbelief." Why was it that here 
He could do such a mighty work? Be- 
cause here faith reposed in Him. You 
say that it was frail faith, and faulty 
faith, and failing faith. Yes, but it 
was simple faith, and convinced faith. 
Faith may often falter, and yet never 
finally fail. Faith may often tremble, 
and yet still continue to be faith. Faith 
does not always mean the fully in- 
structed intellect grasping the whole 
fact. The faith that saves is a per- 
sonal confidence in Christ. And that 
is what these men on the boat pos- 
sessed. He came from the loneliness 
of the mountain, and prayer, to men 
who believed in Him. And again we 
have a revelation of uttermost impor- 
tance that we sterilise the power of 
the Christ when we are merely critical 
in His presence, but we create an at- 
mosphere in which He can do His 
mighty works, when our faith simply 
and quietly takes hold upon Him. It 
is the difference between the Nazareth 
picture, and the sea picture. In the 
one case, we see men who thought they 
knew all about Him and refused to 
accept the things that astonished them ; 
and because of their criticism He could 
do nothing. But He came to these be- 
wildered, blundering men who had 
come to Him, and stilled the sea, and 
hushed the wind and made His power 
manifest. 

Now look again at the next contrast; 
and notice the difference between the 



190 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xiv. 22-36] 



case of His hiding and the case of His 
revelation. On both occasions men 
took Him for something supernatural, 
strange, or, to use that very expressive 
Scotch word, uncanny. In the one 
case we see a. man who was afraid of 
the mystic, who expressed himself im- 
perfectly, hardly believing what he said 
for we cannot really think Herod 
believed it was John the Baptist; it 
was just an exclamation of a panic- 
stricken conscience ; from that man 
He hid Himself, because he had de- 
liberately and positively shut his eyes 
in the presence of light, and stopped 
his ears in the presence of truth, and 
sold his soul to keep a false oath made 
to a dancing wanton. - 

But on the other hand we see men 
who, in spite of all their failure, in 
spite of all their faltering, in spite of 
all their shortcoming, were true to the 
light they had received, and to them 
He revealed Himself. At that very 
moment they were doing a difficult 
thing. He had sent them in a boat to 
the other side of the sea. Matthew 
tells the story with artless simplicity. 
" The boat was now in the midst of the 
sea, distressed by the waves; for the 
wind was contrary." Think of it for 
a moment, and what it reveals. What 
should we have done under like cir- 
cumstances? The probability is that, 
being as these men were, accustomed 
to the storms on Galilee, well able to 
manage the boat, "we should have 
turned the boat round and run with 
the wind, for all the difficulty came out 
of the fact that the wind was contrary. 
It is not easy to turn a boat against 
the wind, but even that is easier than 
continuing to proceed against the wind. 
Why did they not do that? Because 
He had said, Cross to the other side; 
and it was their loyalty to Him which 
kept them in the place of peril. He 
had pointed to the other shore, and 
those blundering, frail, faulty men; 
men so much like ourselves that we 
are bound to love them when we read 
of them, were at any rate true enough 
to what they knew, to keep the prow 
pointing to the shore He indicated for 
them. Consequently He came to them, 
. and when their hearts were sick with 
fear in the presence of the apparition, 



with splendid cheerfulness He spoke 
out of the mystery and said, " Be of 
good cheer ; It is I ; be not afraid." 

Finally notice the contrast between 
this story, and the story of His refusal 
to be crowned. We have dwelt at 
length with His refusal to be crowned 
as indicating the perpetual principle 
that He will never be crowned upon 
the basis of supplying material things. 
He will supply material things, but we 
must crown Him for other reasons. 
Now here were men over whom He 
exercised the sway of a great Kingship. 
Where is the contrast? First, they 
were obedient men. Nay, we may go 
further back, they were, first, surren- 
dered men. They were the men who 
constituted His Kingdom up to that 
moment, not the crowds that He fed. 
They were obedient men; they had set 
the prow of their vessel in the direction 
He had indicated. They were dis- 
tressed men, distressed by the waves 
and the contrary wind. As the story 
goes forward, we see them to be men 
strangely perplexed by His coming, by 
this apparition. And yet as we watch 
them a little longer, we see they were 
men who out of the midst of their per- 
plexity, when suddenly light broke upon 
them, were venturesome. Peter was 
the spokesman again; just a little in 
front of the others in the matter; he 
said, " Lord, if it be Thou, bid me 
come unto Thee upon the waters." In 
the next place they were men who 
were liable to fail even in their venture 
of faith. Peter came and walked upon 
the water. Some men criticise Peter 
and say he had no right to do it, that 
it was presumption. Christ said, 
" Come," and He never invites us to do 
anything that is presumptuous. Some 
pictures represent Peter as leaving the 
boat and beginning to sink at once. No. 
" Peter . . . walked upon the waters to 
come to Jesus." He did the thing he 
wanted to do; he made the venture of 
faith, and achieved the victory of faith. 
And yet we see that he failed also. 
There was a moment when he took his 
eyes off his Lord and fixed them upon 
the surrounding circumstances, and he 
went down. To do that is always to 
sink. 

And yt what ii th last thing r- 



191 



[MATT. xiv. 22-36] 



MATTHEW 



corded ? They worshipped Jesus. " And 
they that were in the boat worshipped 
Him, saying, Of a truth Thou art the 
Son of God." It- was not a Kingdom 
of perfect souls, but it was a King- 
dom of souls that had put their trust 
in Him, and over whom He was reign- 
ing in order to make them perfect-,, 
patiently leading them on, waiting for 
them, halting by them, attempting to 
lead them by rapid stages, for " He 
would have passed by them," says one 
of the Evangelists. He tried their 
faith, but when faith was unequal to 
the strain He turned to them and deliv- 
ered them. It is a perfect picture of 
His Kingdom as it is to-day. These 
were the men who had crowned Him 
upon the basis of the essential truth 
He had presented to them, who had 
crowned Him upon the basis of the 
spiritual within them. And He de- 
livered them in the hour of material 
difficulty. 

Let us look at this story from an- 
other standpoint. If in its setting it is 
a revelation of essential truth concern- 
ing His Kingdom by a contrast with the 
other pictures, then it remains for ever- 
more a picture of Jesus in relation to 
His Church. There may be many ap- 
plications, but we will confine our- 
selves to one. Here we have the reve- 
lation of our Lord's relation to His 
people in the times of difficulty and 
trouble and peril, which come to them 
because of their loyalty to His supreme 
will. One would not wish to take this 
story away from any tempest-tossed 
soul whatever may be the nature of the 
tempest; and yet it would not appear 
that this message is to those who may 
be in sorrow or in difficulty or in the 
midst of tempest as the result of their 
own disobedience. It seems to exclude 
them from this story, but it does not 
exclude them from the Christ. What- 
ever difficulty we have found our way 
into and we have found our way into 
more difficulties through disobedience 
^than obedience He is always there to 
help us out. Peter got into difficulty 
when he sank, through failure, and the 
Lord was there " immediately." It is 
one of those words which ought to be 
printed in gold, and hung up in view 
of all faltering souls^-" JHMEDIATSI.Y ! " 



He then said to him, " O thou of little 
faith, wherefore didst thou doubt?" 
One would rather have missed the 
touch of His hand, and have missed the 
rebuke. But if we fall as Peter "fell, 
and sink, thank God for the quick hand 
of our Lord, which is always there. 

But the essential values of this are 
for obedient souls in difficulty. First 
we see the perfect picture of the rela- 
tionship of Christ to His people to-day. 
When this story opens He was on the 
mountain alone with God. It was one 
of those rare and beautiful and brief 
occasions in which He broke away from 
the pressure of the crowd and was 
alone with God. It was His place of 
rest, of joy, of quietness, of perfect 
peace. His disciples were on the sea, 
where He put them, in the place of 
peril. He was in lie place of calm 
restfulness; they were in the place 
where the storm might sweep at any 
moment. Such is the contrast between 
the attitude of Jesus our Master now, 
and ourselves. He has reached the 
right hand of His Father. All of us 
are on the sea. There are some who 
know nothing of storms. Thank God 
for every sunshiny day, with blue sky 
and sea; but the storm may come. 
That is the first contrast, He in the 
place of rest, we in the place of toil; 
He in the place of perfect calm, we in 
the place where the hurricanes may 
sweep at any moment. 

What next? The storm which came 
to Gennesaret was one of those hurri- 
canes about which we know so little, 
sweeping down upon the men ere they 
knew it, tossing wave upon wave, the 
whole sky black with a sudden black- 
ness, and they, in imminent peril of 
their lives. Where was their Lord? 
First, notice that He had never lost 
sight of them, though He was on the 
mountain and they were on the sea. 
So now, He will have even His rest 
and communion broken in upon if His 
own people are in trouble, and He will 
never rest perfectly in high heaven so 
long as His own are tempest-tossed 
upon the sea of the little while. He 
turned His back upon the mountain, 
and treading its slopes, and crossing 
the intervening space, He put His feet 
upon the waters, and mark this, as He 



192 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xiv. 22-363 



went to them, in overtaking them, 
He went in the way they had gone. He 
did not meet them as from the other 
side; He followed them. He went to 
them over the very waters that threat- 
ened to engulf them, easily Master of 
them all; through the very wind that 
was contrary to them, it seeming to 
open its doors as He came with easy, 
quiet majesty. 

Is this not a revelation that should 
give us peace? The billows perhaps 
are breaking upon the frail craft of 
some soul, some child of God, and all 
the storm that is being experienced is 
because he is where God has put him. 
But he is in the path of obedience and 
he knows it; no one can rob him of 
that sweet consciousness and convic- 
tion. But Christ does not seem to be 
near; He seems to be away in the day 
of tempest, and trial, and storm. That 
soul says, I was in a storm once before, 
and He was on the vessel and I could 
wake Hun, but He is not here to-day, 
this is different. Ah, but He knows, 
He is coming. It is too dark for you 
to see Him yet, but He is coming. He 
cannot leave you alone to perish. And 
mark this, He is coming over the very 
waves you are most afraid of. The 
very waves that threaten to buffet and 
break you to pieces are the pavement 
for His blessed feet. "But you say, it 
is not the waves, it is the contrary 
wind; if I could only turn round and 
run with the wind. But He is coming 
through that wind, and as the waves 
become adamant at the touch of His 
feet, the wind loses its power to hin- 
der, when the majesty of His presence 
confronts, it. 

But look again at our picture. The 
darkest part of the dark night to those 
men was not the darkness of the clouds, 
not the terror of the wind, not the 
threatening billows; the most terrible 
thing in all that night was the phan- 
tom. They forgot all about the storm 
as they peered over the side of the ves- 
sel at the strange phantom approaching 
them over the waters. They were for 
the most part rough-handed fishermen. 
They knew the use of the oar. The 
storm was more than usually severe; 
they could fight that, but they could 
not fight a ghost. The most terrible 



troubles that come to us are the unex- 
plained, and the unexplainable things. 
There are troubles very severe, but 
they are common to all men. We ex- 
pect them, they must come presently. 
But once or twice in the course of a 
lifetime, there come to every man and 
woman days of great horror of dark- 
ness, that have no explanation. " Mine 
own familiar friend in whom I trusted; 
who did eat of my bread! hath lifted 
up his heel against me." That is an 
almost unsurpassed horror of darkness. 
It may be you have never known it, it 
may be you never will; God grant you 
never may. It was trouble inexplicable 
that came to them that night. As they 
strained in their looking out over the 
side of the ship at this strange appari- 
tion, this phantom of the night, sud- 
denly it took voice and said, "Be of 
good cheer; it is I." That is a part of 
the story where exposition fails. We 
cannot explain it ; it is so simple a 
-story, we are so familiar with it. 

But what is the spiritual value here 
for a tempest-tossed soul? That almost 
invariably to the soul that is really 
trusting and true, the darkest hour is 
the dawning of the clearest day; the 
direst sorrow of the heart is that out of 
which the chief joy of life comes; the 
most brutal bruising of the vintage is 
that out of which the finest wine comes 
forth. The phantom is the Master. 
The hours that some of us would be 
most loath to have undone in our past 
are the hours of our greatest sorrows. 
It was in them we found Him; it was 
in them we heard the infinite music 
saying, " Be of good cheer ; it is I ; be 
not afraid." We may do without that 
yesterday of sunshine, but not without 
that day before, of shadow. It was 
out of that He came close to us. We 
have all sorts of little proverbs, some 
of them very true, and some of them 
very foolish; but a proverb we make 
great use of is, "Man's extremity is 
God's opportunity." Quite true ! But 
let us revise it thus Man's extremity 
is man's opportunity for finding God. 
It is in the hour of greatest heart-ache 
that we find Him. Be still, sad heart, 
if it be possible ; wait, rest in the Lord, 
and wait patiently for Hun, and pres- 
ently you will look back to the day of 



193 



[MAM. xv. 1-20] 



MATTHEW 



your unutterable agony, and you will 
say, For that day above all days His 
name be praised; out of that darkness 
came the light; out of that bitterness 
came the sweetness ; out of that mys- 
terious phantom chilling my heart and 
well-nigh stopping my pulses, came my 
Lord, warming my heart and making 
every fibre pulsate with new joy and 
new enthusiasm. 

Let us take one thing more out of 
this story. Matthew says, They gladly 
received Him on board, and they 
crossed over. Mark says, He came on 
board, and they crossed over, they 
finished the journey. But John says 
something else, " They were willing to 
receive Him into the boat; and 
straightway the boat was at the land 
whither they were going." What are 
we to understand by that word of 
John? Are we to understand there 
was a miracle wrought there; that the 
ship in the midst of the sea finished the 
journey by the annihilation of time and 
space ? In our eagerness to retain all 



the miracles we need not be eager to 
read miracles into things that are not 
miracles. John the mystic, John the 
lover, John the man who talks most 
about fellowship says, When He came 
on board we were there directly. Did 
not John go as far as the rest? 
" Straightway ! " Every youth and 
maiden who is in love understands that. 
A long journey may be covered in 
what seems but a few moments. 
" Straightway the boat was at the land 
whither they were going." The storms 
are about us yet, and He is trying our 
faith by being absent from us, or so it 
seems. We are never far from Him 
nor He from us. He is coming over 
the waters and through the wind. Pres- 
ently in the company of the King, we 
shall be home, and we shall hear His 
voice more clearly and see His face per- 
fectly. O that God may help us to be 
so true to Him that He may be able to 
correct all our faltering and failing! 
May we be in His Kingdom, and He 
our King. 



MATTHEW XV. 1-20 



IN the verses we are now to consider 
we are still face to face with the 
manifestation of opposition to the King. 
Indeed, prior to the dividing of the 
ways at Caesarea Philippi, the account 
of which is found in the next chapter, 
opposition became more direct, more 
keen, more systematic. 

These Pharisees and scribes consti- 
tuted a very definite deputation from 
Jerusalem. They sought Him out with 
the set purpose of critical consultation, 
the nature of their question revealed 
their eagerness and anxiety to draw 
Him into controversy; their critical at- 
titude was at once manifest. The first 
eleven verses tell us the story of their 
coming, and of how the Lord dealt 
with them. In the other nine verses 
we have the account of the conversa- 
tion of the disciples with Jesus con- 
cerning what He had said to the Phari- 
sees, and the way in which He had 
dealt with them. 

In the second verse we have the 
Pharisees' question. At the close of 
the section we find that our Lord was 



still dealing with that subject, though 
speaking to His disciples. 

The fame of Jesus was spreading, 
and His influence was also spreading 
among the common people, that is 
among all the people who did not hold 
official positions. All sorts and con- 
ditions of men were attracted by Christ. 
Pharisees and publicans mingled often- 
times; the rulers and the ruled were 
side by side; rich and poor, learned 
and illiterate followed Him and lis- 
tened to Him. The attractive power 
of Jesus Christ did not lie in the acci- 
dentals which appealed to a few; it 
was rather that of His essential hu- 
manity, which found an answer in all 
human life, notwithstanding the acci- 
dentals of birth and position and edu- 
cation. There was growing opposition, 
but at the same time there was grow- 
ing attractiveness; and men were 
crowding after Him, and that, not- 
withstanding that He was saying things 
of increasing severity as time went on. 

At last this deputation of Pharisees 
and scribes came from Jerusalem, and 



194 



MATTHEW 



EMATT. xv. 1-203 



came with a definite problem. The 
point of their criticism does not appear 
upon the surface. They asked, " Why 
do Thy disciples transgress the tradi- 
tion of the elders? for they wash not 
their hands when they eat bread." 
Behind this question there lay the es- 
sential difference between their religion, 
and that of Jesus Christ. It is as 
though they had said to Him, We are 
anxious to understand Your position, 
and the meaning of Your teaching; and 
we bring You a simple illustration of 
difference between Your disciples and 
ours. We are ready to enter into con- 
sultation. Is there any way of com- 
promise between us? They did not at 
the first say how strong was their ob- 
jection to the attitude of His disciples ; 
that they considered that His disciples 
were doing wrong. They simply asked 
a question, Why do Thy disciples eat 
bread with unwashed hands? 

Now, in order to understand Christ's 
answer, it is necessary to recognize that 
this was not a question as to cleanli- 
ness; it was purely a question of ritual. 
They were objecting to the fact that 
His disciples, in their comradeship with 
Christ, neglected certain ceremonial ob- 
servances, which they, the Pharisees, 
held to be of supreme importance. The 
whole religious life of Hebraism at this 
time had become encumbered with cere- 
monial observances that followed men 
into all the details of their lives; and 
these were based upon the interpreta- 
tion of men, who had added the tradi- 
tions of the elders to the divinely 
revealed religion. This very question 
of washing before meals was the result 
of a tradition that Shibta, a demon, sat 
upon the hands of men as they slept 
during the hours of the night, and if 
any person should touch his food with 
unwashed hands, then that demon sat 
upon his food and made it dangerous. 
We are very much inclined to smile at 
this, but it was the actual teaching of 
certain of the Rabbis. The Rabbi 
Taanith, in consequence of this super- 
stition, taught that, "Whosoever hath 
his abode in the land of Israel and 
eateth his common food with washed 
hands, and speaks the holy language, 
and recites his phylacteries morning 
and evening, he may rest assured that 



he shall obtain eternal life." Gradually 
religion had degenerated into the ob- 
servance of such outward ceremonies 
as these. Men who had taught these 
things came to Jesus Christ and asked 
Him, How is it that Your disciples 
neglect this washing of hands, this 
ritualistic ceremonial before meals, 
whereby men may be made sure of 
eternal life? Thus behind the local 
and illustrative question, there existed 
their concern that the disciples of Jesus 
had violated tradition; and what that 
meant may be gathered from other Rab- 
binical teachings. One of the Rabbis 
had declared; "The words of the eld- 
ers are weightier than the words of 
the prophets." While yet another had 
said, " Some of the words of the law 
and the prophets are weighty, others- 
are not weighty. All the words of tra- 
dition are weighty words." Thus the 
real condition of affairs was that these 
Pharisees and scribes, who had become 
the authoritative interpreters of the 
law of God, had super-added thereto 
the tradition of elders ; indeed they had 
submerged the law of God beneath tra- 
dition; they had actually minimised the 
value of the law of God and the mes- 
sages of the prophets in their exalta- 
tion of these traditions. They said in 
effect, The Scriptures of the Hebrew 
people are not enough, they must be 
interpreted; and interpretation in many 
cases had become contradiction. Out 
of the midst of their traditions they 
brought this one illustration of how 
the disciples of Jesus Christ were vio- 
lating them. 

Our Lord's answer to these men was 
twofold. First, He directly answered 
the Pharisees; and then He called the 
multitudes to Him, and uttered a very 
remarkable and solemn word of warn- 
ing to them about the Pharisees. 

He commenced His answer to the 
Pharisees with the words ; " Why do 
ye also?" Mark the "also;" there is 
tremendous force in it. There was not 
a single word in Christ's answer that 
denied that His disciples had violated 
tradition. So far from denying that 
they had violated tradition, He vindi- 
cated them for doing so. If He had 
for one single moment said anything, 
or said what He did say in such a 



195 



[MATT. xv. 1-20] 



MATTHEW 



"form as to suggest that after all they 
had not violated tradition, there may 
have been some excuse for tradition. 
But He did not, and therefore the set 
teaching of this passage is against 
tradition. 

He admitted their violation in the 
word " also ;" they did not wash their 
hands, not merely by neglect, but of 
set purpose. They had swept out of 
their lives the very things upon which 
the Pharisees set value. 

His whole question to these Pharisees 
was; "Why do ye also transgress the 
commandment of God, because of your 
tradition ? " and in that answering in- 
quiry we come to the very heart of 
the difference between the religion of 
the Pharisees and the religion of Jesus 
Christ. He charged them that by their 
very tradition they had transgressed 
the commandment of God. His ques- 
tion suggested the inference, that the 
supreme thing in every life is not hu- 
man tradition, but God's commandment. 

These men had brought an illustra- 
tion of how His disciples violated tra- 
dition. He gave them one of how 
they, by tradition, violated the Divine 
Commandment. He said to them in 
effect; You have a tradition that if a 
man shall say over anything that he 
possesses, "Corban" that is, it is de- 
voted; or it is a gift to God; in the 
case of everything so protected, he 
shall not only not be compelled to min- 
ister to the need of his parents, but is 
forbidden to do so. 

Thus the King showed by this su- 
preme and remarkable contrast, how 
tradition violated the commandment of 
God to honour father and mother; in 
that they would allow some mystic 
word to be pronounced to save a man 
from obligation; and thus a man was 
taught by tradition, that he could be 
religious and true to God, a worshipper, 
and a man of high principle, while all 
the while he was violating God's first 
commandment with promise. Our Lord 
did not answer them by dealing first 
with their own illustration, but by pro- 
viding another illustration to show how 
tradition may cause a man to break in 
upon his relationship to God. 

Then by quotation from their own 
ancient prophecy, which He directly 



applied to them, He revealed the secret 
of their failure; 

" Ye hypocrites, well did Isaiah proph- 
esy of you, saying, 

This people honoureth Me with their 
lips, 

But their heart is far from Me. 

But in vain do' they worship Me, 

Teaching as their doctrines the pre- 
cepts of men." 

Christ's charge was that it is possible 
to honour God with the lip while the 
heart is far from Him. 

Then He turned to the multitudes, 
and, calling them to Him, He rebuked 
the Pharisees. In the words He ut- 
tered to the multitudes we find His 
condemnation of external religion, and 
His affirmation of the importance of 
heart relationship. 

Now He took up their own illustra- 
tion, as He said; the things that enter 
a man as to his body never defile a 
man, but the things that come from 
the centre of a man's essential life are 
the things that defile. How revolution- 
ary these words must have sounded in 
the hearing of the multitudes; how 
searching even to His own disciples; 
and how angry they must have made 
the Pharisees. What to eat, and what 
not to eat; what to wear, and what 
not to wear; what to do and what not 
to do ; these were trivialities which had 
become supreme matters in the in- 
fluence and the teaching of scribes and 
Pharisees. In correction the King de- 
clared; It is not the thing that a man 
touches in his physical life that pol- 
lutes him. Not that Jesus meant to 
say that there is no relationship be- 
tween the physical and spiritual. We 
must not take a single text and base a 
false philosophy upon it, or we shall 
be violating the commandment of God 
as these men did. There is the closest 
relationship between spirit, mind, and 
body; and this is taught throughout 
the old and new economies. But when 
a man thinks he makes himself reli- 
gious by observing rules which deal 
only with the physical, he has missed 
the heart and centre of religion; and 
therefore the King affirmed in the 
hearing of the multitudes, that it was 
not the physical thing that entered into 
the man that defiled him, but the things 



196 



MATTHEW 



[MAM?, xv. 1-20] 



that came from his heart, the seat of 
intelligence, and emotion, and will, the 
spiritual centre of a man. Christ said 
that from that spiritual centre spring 
all the forces that defile. So that a 
man may wash his hands not only be- 
fore meals, but as the Pharisees did, 
between the courses, a man may be 
ceremonially clean by the observance 
of all the traditions of the elders, and 
yet his heart may be a veritable sink 
of iniquity, a flowing stream and a 
river, not polluting himself only, but 
also the life of family, friends, of the 
city and the nation. This was the 
King's protest against any religion that 
consists in the observance of externali- 
ties; and His affirmation of the fact 
that nothing makes life pure but in- 
ward purity which will influence all the 
externalities. 

After this teaching the disciples came 
to Jesus, filled with concern. They 
said, Do you know that the Pharisees 
are offended? There is a very human 
touch in this; something that makes it 
very kin to our own age. They seemed 
to say, The deputation was from Jeru- 
salem, a deputation of elders; they 
were men of light and learning, and 
You have offended these men? Per- 
haps there was a touch of reproach in 
their question. Observe what we may 
describe as the ruthlessness of Christ's 
answer. There is no pity in the word 
of Jesus for error, no matter by whom- 
soever the error may be taught Men 
who were violating the commandment 
of God by insisting upon the tradition, 
men who were hiding that command- 
ment underneath tradition had no place 
in His pity. Our Lord said, "Every 
plant which My heavenly Father 
planted not, shall be rooted up." He 
was not referring to the men, but to 
the system for which they stood; and 
in effect He said to His disciples, when 
they told Him the Pharisees were 
offended, that He had nothing to do 
with these Pharisees. He never de- 
scended to the level of dealing with 
men personally in order to hurt and 
harm them. The plant of traditional 
religion God had not planted, and it 
was His indication of His method with 
His' disciples when He told them that 
the plants which were not of God's 



planting must be rooted up. Therefore 
He said, "Let them alone: they are 
blind guides." That explained what 
He had done. He had not attacked 
them; He was not dealing with them 
as individuals; but with the evil thing 
in their system and teaching. He came, 
the Truth, to correct error; He came, 
God's own great Vine of life, and light, 
and love, to destroy the false fungus 
growths upon religious thinking which 
were sapping the very life of men and 
ruining them. When Peter came and 
inquired the meaning of the parable, 
showing how they were astonished at 
the radical thing Jesus had said, He 
repeated what He had already said as 
to the sources of defilement. 

Now let us notice the teaching of 
this section for ourselves. First, in 
His dealing with the tradition of the 
scribes and Pharisees, Christ revealed 
the perpetual conflict between divine 
and human religion. Human religion 
is conditioned in externalities, and 
therefore fails to touch essential life. 
Divine religion begins in essential life, 
and from that centre governs the last 
externality. There is perpetual differ- 
ence. It is manifest all through the 
New Testament, and when we come to 
the teaching of the Epistles we find it 
specially emphasised. If we take the 
Galatian Epistle, the charter of Chris- 
tian liberty, it sets at nought the idea 
that any man may be made spiritual 
by fleshly observance; and insists upon 
the necessity for spiritual relationship, 
if there is to be spiritual purity. The 
difference between human and divine 
religion is always seen in this respect. 
In all heathen religions, religion and 
morality are divorced. This is the 
supreme test of religion. Is our re- 
ligion a thing of the heart, a commun- 
ion between our inner life and God, a 
force that drives us to the watch-tower 
in the morning to catch the gleam of 
the glory of the pathway of His feet, 
a passion that sends us back to Him 
with shame and disgust when we have 
sinned? That is the true religion. If 
Jesus in all the virtue of His life and 
love sits sentinel in our heart we shall 
guard our lips, and be careful as to 
what we eat or drink; but it is not the 
things that enter in, but the things 



197 



[MAM. xv. 1-20] 



MATTHEW 



that come out of the centre which de- 
file the man. That is the perpetual 
test. Christ's estimate concerning tra- 
dition must be ours also. Wherever 
tradition violates the commandment of 
God, it is to be violated. And every 
plant which God has not planted must 
be rooted up. 

Tradition still binds us very largely. 
We have super-added very much in our 
Christian life to the simplicity of Jesus 
Christ. Man is naturally, unless he be 
very careful, the slave of tradition. In 
certain parts of Wales people will not 
lay the bodies of their loved ones to 
final resting-places save as they are 
enswathed in flannel, because in a cer- 
tain reign a law was passed that this 
should be done for the purpose of giv- 
ing a new impetus to the flannel indus- 
try. There was a reason for the 
practice once; but the reason has be- 
come a tradition, and these people 
would think they were irreligious if 
they violated the tradition. What tra- 
dition binds us? Are we bound by a 
tradition that it is a good thing to 
read our Bible every morning? Break 
through it if there is nothing more in 
such reading than the observance of a 
tradition. If we are simply the slaves 
of tradition, even though the tradition 
may have had its foundation in a rea- 
son, the tradition becomes a barrier 
that shuts us out from God. There 
are some persons, for instance, who are 
so harmed by the traditions of public 
worship that all the warmth, and soul, 
and force of public worship fails to 
touch them. There are people to whom 
the tradition of Church relationship 
has no other value than that of the 
lightning-conductor to a building. It 
serves to catch the electric force and 
carry it off, so that it never touches 
the building. Our King desires to 
bring every man from the bondage of 
everything, into living touch with God. 
Everything that separates between us 
and God, though it be the most reli- 



gious and sanctified thing by old associ- 
ations, we had better sweep it away. 
The very sacred Supper of the Lord 
may become such a tradition as to 
shut us out of communion with Jesus 
Christ. The very ceremony of sacred 
and reverent worship may become a 
door that bars us from communion; 
the very conventionalities of our re- 
spectability may become the traditions 
that exclude us from God. 

There must be personal and direct 
heart relationship with God. Let us 
therefore be very much afraid of any 
system of religion that declares that 
anything more is needed for the culti- 
vation of religious life than the com- 
mandment of God. Any interpretation 
of men becomes at last a tradition. 
Any exposition which is human, when 
you lift it into a necessity becomes a 
curse. There is a place for exposition, 
there is a place for interpretation, there 
is a place for teaching; but the inter- 
pretation and the exposition, and the 
teaching, must never be made essential. 
The essential thing is the command- 
ment of God, and lest our interpreta- 
tions, and expositions, and traditions, 
should violate that commandment, let 
us guard our souls, and- let us see to it 
that we stand first in relationship with 
God. In true religion there is no room 
for anything between the spirit of a 
man and the flaming Spirit of God, and 
whether the thing between be priest, 
or sacrament, or ceremony, or obser- 
vance, it must be swept out, 

" Nothing between, Lord, nothing 
between," 

is the cry of the true worshipper, and 
when that cry is answered, then there 
is religion which will immediately af- 
fect all the externalities. Let us be 
very much afraid of externalities, lest 
they seduce us from spiritual worship. 
Let us very jealously cultivate spiri- 
tual worship that it may affect and 
govern all the externalities of life. 



198 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xv. 21-39] 



MATTHEW XV. 21-39 



THE key to the understanding of 
this paragraph in its relationship 
to the progress of the King's enforce- 
ment of His claims, is to be found in 
the opening statement; "And Jesus 
went out thence, and withdrew into the 
parts of Tyre and Sidon." A similar 
statement has occurred before in this 
Gospel three times at least; and now 
again we read that He withdrew; but 
here a break is indicated, and a marked 
contrast is manifested in the things 
before His withdrawal and those which 
followed. Perhaps we may summarize 
the whole matter by saying that He 
withdrew from the infidelity of tradi- 
tional religion, to the faith which lives 
outside the covenant. He had been 
exercising His ministry amongst His 
own people, and, as we have seen, 
there had been an increase of confi- 
dence; men had gathered to Him, and 
had been helped, healed, and blessed 
by Him. On the other hand, there had 
been a clearly defined growth of oppo- 
sition, which, "i so far, had culminated 
in the coming of the deputation of 
Pharisees and scribes, who raised in 
illustration the whole question of His 
method. Now turning His back upon 
them, and the whole ideal for which 
they stood, He broke more definitely 
with His own people than ever before, 
and went to Tyre and Sidon. The 
story following gives us the picture of 
His ministry among people other than 
His own. The Canaanitish woman, the 
multitudes that gathered to Him at 
Decapolis, and the multitudes that He 
fed, were people outside the Hebrew 
covenant of flesh relationship. He 
passed over the border, crossed the line 
of geographical limitation, and first 
dealt with the woman who was a 
daughter of the outcast people. He 
then exercised the power of His King- 
dom among people who were all out- 
side the covenant, and who came into 
living relationship with Him upon one 
single principle, as we shall see. 
Finally, in a great beneficent flow of 
His tenderness, He fed the multitudes 
outside the border of Israel, as but 
recently He had fed the multitudes 



within that border. Such is the 
character of the passage we are now 
to consider. 

First, let us look still more carefully 
at this contrast of place, and people, 
and condition. To the King the jour- 
ney to Tyre and Sidon was one of set 
purpose, and for specific reason. He 
must have been supremely conscious of 
all the blindness that had happened to 
Israel, of the darkness that had set- 
tled upon God's own people, and to 
Him, may we not say, it was a journey 
in which the song of the larger purpose 
was in His heart. 

The story of Tyre and Sidon the 
region long under the curse of God-- 
lay in the background. Not long be- 
fore, when warning the cities inside 
the geographical boundary Chorazin, 
Bethsaida, and Capernaum He held 
Tyre and Sidon up, as an illustration, 
to a people who had received the light, 
saying Tyre and Sidon would have re- 
pented in sackcloth and ashes had they 
had the same light. Having dealt with 
the Syrophenician woman, He left the 
immediate neighbourhood of the cities, 
and came to the sea of Galilee. Mark 
distinctly tells us that He came into 
Decapolis, so that it is evident that 
He remained in Gentile territory and 
among Gentile people. 

Let us look, then, at the new people 
by whom He was surrounded. Begin- 
ning with that Canaanitish woman, we 
recognize that she was a direct de- 
scendant of people who were outcasts 
in the divine economy, people who had 
been swept out on account of their 
awful and disastrous failure in the 
past, because the love of God needed 
to make way for purer people to fulfil 
His purpose in succeeding generations. 
We learn from Mark that she was a 
Syrophenician woman, and a Greek. 
The word Greek does not refer to na- 
tionality. She was not a Greek by 
birth, but one of the Semitic peoples, 
and yet not within the covenant. She 
was a Greek by religion, and Greek, as 
Mark used the word, meant heathen. 
It has been said that this was the first 
heathen convert to Christianity. She 



199 



EMATT. xv. 21-39] 



MATTHEW 



was undoubtedly a worshipper of Ashe- 
rali or Astarte, that strange system, 
false and degraded on the one side, 
high and beautiful on the other. There 
were elect souls who saw the higher 
ideal, and who walked in the glimmer- 
ing light. It may be this woman in 
the worship of Astarte had realised the 
highest ideal possible to her of religion. 
But presently, she turned from Astarte 
the goddess of nature, because she was 
unable therein to find the answer to 
her deepest need. 

The new people also were foreign, 
using the word foreign as the Hebrew 
would have used it. In the last part 
of our chapter, at verse thirty-seven, 
we read, "And they all ate, and were 
filled; and they took up that which 
remained over of the broken pieces, 
seven baskets full." In the fourteenth 
chapter and the twentieth verse, we 
read, "And they all ate, and were 
filled; and they took up that which 
remained over of the broken pieces 
twelve baskets full." In chapter six- 
teen, verses nine and ten, the margin 
of the Revised Version draws attention 
to a suggestive fact when it says, 
"Basket in verses nine and ten repre- 
sent different Greek words." Jesus, in 
referring to the two miracles, said; 
" Do ye not yet perceive, neither re- 
member the five loaves of the five thou- 
sand " that was the first miracle in 
the midst of the Hebrew people " and 
how many baskets ye took up ? Neither 
the seven loaves of the four thou- 
sand," that was the second miracle 
among these people outside the cove- 
nant "and how many baskets ye took 
up ? " He used two entirely different 
words in referring to the baskets. The 
word He used of the first miracle was 
the same as we have in the account of 
the first miracle, and the word He used 
of the second miracle was the same as 
in the account of the A second miracle. 
There was carefulness and discrimina- 
tion in this choice of words. If we 
trace this through the Gospels, we shall 
find that the four Evangelists give the 
account of the first miracle, and they 
all use the first word. Only two of 
them give the account of the second 
miracle, and they both use the second 
word. The difference is that the first 



word translated basket refers to a re- 
ceptacle that was peculiarly Hebrew, a 
small basket in which the travelling 
Hebrew carried his food. The second 
word basket refers to a much larger 
receptacle, platted and woven, the bas- 
ket carried by the Gentile merchant- 
man on his journey. With all accuracy 
we may describe the difference by say- 
ing that the one was the basket of the 
Jews, and the other the basket of the 
Gentiles. All this strengthens the view 
that the feeding of the four thousand 
was the feeding, not of the people of 
the same economy, but of people out- 
side. We see the King halting with 
the child of the cursed race. We see 
Him healing people outside the cove- 
nant in Decapolis. We see Him feed- 
ing four thousand people outside the 
covenant. 

Now mark the new condition to 
which Jesus had come. He had turned 
His back upon the critical unbelief 
of the rulers of His own people; and 
He found Himself in the atmosphere 
of faith; and this fact drew forth from 
Him a remarkable commendation. He 
had warned the people against the 
Pharisees, the rulers of religion in their 
own age, but to a woman outside the 
covenant, an idolater, a worshipper of 
Astarte, He said, " O woman, great is 
thy faith: be it done unto thee even, 
as thou wilt." 

This faith was manifested not only 
by the woman, but also by the multi- 
tudes. We see Him returning from 
the city and going to Decapolis and 
climbing the mountain, and we watch 
them thronging up after Him. What 
a sight it must have been, these people 
crowding, hurrying, jostling after Him, 
carrying sick, blind, maimed, lame! 
The Greek word suggests a great rush, 
and hurry. They flung them at His 
feet as fast as they could bear them 
to Him, and as fast as they came He 
healed them. What wonderful reti- 
cence there is in these Gospel narra- 
tives! Whole crowds of miracles are 
packed into a passing sentence; "He 
healed them." What made these peo- 
ple bring these sick folk? Faith. Not 
faith as a theoretical conviction, not 
faith as a creed recited, such as the 
Pharisees had, but faith in a Person, 



200 



MATTHEW 



[MAM. xv. 21-39] 



faith in His ability. With all rever- 
ence we may say that day in Decapolis 
was a great day for Jesus. He found 
one woman, and He said, " Great is 
thy faith." He found great multitudes 
of people in the midst of idolatry, who 
nevertheless when the light shone, an- 
swered it, and carried their sick to Him 
for healing. 

Finally notice, however, that the 
feeding of the four thousand was not 
the answer to faith. It was the over- 
plus of His tenderness. Let us not try 
to add dignity to it by robbing it of 
its simplicity. He knew that if the 
multitudes went back as they were 
they would be hungry and faint; and 
He fed them. It was the King, unable 
to hold His bounty in check when hun- 
gering men and women, although out- 
side the covenant, were in need. 

The great truth taught by all this is 
that the benefits of the Kingdom are 
granted to simple faith. Look at this 
woman. In the background was her 
religion; in the foreground was her 
need. The worship of Astarte, per- 
haps, had sufficed for her till then. 
But when the dark day came, and the 
demon entered her child, and she cried 
and wailed to the goddess Astarte, 
there was no answer. And so as this 
woman came to Jesus Christ we see 
her religious background fading away, 
because it could not help her. In the 
foreground there was her anguish. 
Mark how she came; how faith oper- 
ated. She came first of all against 
prejudice, for the prejudice of the 
Gentile was as great against the Jew 
as that of the Jew against the Gentile. 
Here the prejudice was on both sides, 
and yet this woman, driven by her 
need, came to seek Him. 

She persevered against silence. 
Sometimes we question the meaning 
of Christ's strange attitude towards 
this woman. In Mark's Gospel we 
read, when He came into this region 
"He entered into a house, and would 
have no man know it" He went into 
the house for rest. How did the 
woman get to Him? Mark says, "He 
could not be hid." Why not? She 
was outside, and her need drew Him 
forth. He could not remain in hiding 
or in rest while that woman was out- 



side in trouble. And when He came 
out of the house she proffered her re- 
quest, first calling Him Son of David; 
and He was silent. And the disciples 
came to Jesus, and said to Him, " Send 
her away : for she crieth after us." 
We might misunderstand that request 
if it were not for Christ's reply to her, 
which shows that they meant, Give her 
what she wants and let her go. They 
were not unkind; they did not mean, 
Refuse her, send her away. Christ's 
answer was, "I was not sent but unto 
the lost sheep of the house of Israel." 
That was His reason for not giving 
her what she sought. She still pleaded; 
and dropped the title distinctive of 
Hebraism "Son of David." She put 
the whole of her need into the one 
word, "Lord, help me." Then He 
turned towards her and spoke, and at 
the first moment His speech seemed al- 
most more unkind than His silence. 
" It is not meet to take the children's 
bread and cast it to the dogs." Here 
again occurs a word we need to ex- 
amine. There are two distinct words 
for dogs, and they mark two entirely 
different ideas. We all know how pro- 
found was the hatred of the Hebrew 
to the low, marauding, fierce, half- 
scavenger, half-wolf dog of that coun- 
try. But then it is also true that dogs 
were found in Jewish households; they 
were the little dogs, the playthings of 
the children; and the word Christ used 
here was that for the little dogs. 
Probably there was a great welling of 
pity and tenderness in the voice of 
Jesus as He said to her, "It is not 
meet to take the children's bread and 
cast it to the little dogs." Now, on 
the basis of that distinction, let us see 
what she said "Yea, Lord, for even 
the little dogs eat of the crumbs that 
fall from their masters' tables." No- 
tice carefully the placing of the apos- 
trophe. "Masters" is plural. It is 
as if she said, It is true I am outside 
the covenant; they are masters, they 
have been for centuries. If you say 
you cannot take the bread of the chil- 
dren and give it to the little dogs under 
the table, the playthings of the chil- 
dren, it is quite true; but even the 
little dogs have the crumbs. It is not 
surprising that Jesus looked at her and 



201 



[MATT. xv. 21-39] 



MATTHEW 



said, " O woman, great is thy faith : 
be it done unto thee even as thou 
wilt." Against prejudice she came, 
against silence she persevered, against 
exclusion she proceeded, against rebuff 
she won. That is what He found out- 
side the covenant. Her appeal was 
based on faith. When she said, " Son 
of David," it was the hope of faith. 
When she said, "Lord, help me," it 
was the appeal of faith. When she 
said, "True, Lord, yet the little dogs 
eat of the crumbs," it was what an 
old Puritan commentator called " the 
wit of faith," using the word wit in 
the true old Saxon sense, the tact of 
faith. 

Turn for a moment from the woman, 
and glance at the multitudes. We have 
exactly the same truth the Kingdom 
benefits given in answer to faith. The 
bringing of the unfit to Jesus was a 
venture of faith, in all likelihood the 
outcome of this woman's victory, for 
faith is always propagative, and some 
one else will believe because we have 
believed. Let faith in Christ be mani- 
fested in some victory we gain, and 
there is nothing in the wide world more 
propagative of faith in other people. 
As we see these people crowd up the 
mountain sides carrying all the incom- 
petents of the neighbourhood, what 
does it mean? That one woman's 
faith, which had won a victory, had 
created faith in Jesus in the whole dis- 
trict and neighbourhood, and amongst 
all the people. And what did He do? 
He answered them all as they came. 
Oh the glory of the King! All the 
difficulties were in Jerusalem among 
those men who were always washing 
their hands ! Christ has no difficulty 
with the man who is polluted with sin, 
when that man sighs his soul to Him 
in faith. But He has a good deal of 
difficulty with the traditional ritualist. 
It is the man who comes with the 
great burden, who in faith commits his 
need to the King, that feels all the 
virtue of His healing pass into his life. 
There was no difficulty with these peo- 
ple when they believed. 

When these people obtained their 
blessings "They glorified the God of 
Israel." These were not of Israel after 
the flesh. They were outside, they 



were people of Decapolis. They were 
the condemned Gentiles, but they glori- 
fied the God of Israel. Why? Because 
one Man, Jesus of Israel, of Judah's 
Kingly tribe, had fulfilled toward them 
the Divine intention. When God made 
the nation He said, to the Founder, 
" I will bless thee and make thy name 
great; and be thou a blessing." This 
Man, living in the covenant relation- 
ship under God's blessing, was made 
a blessing; and through Him the rivers 
of God's life were flowing, not merely 
inside the geographical boundary in 
which He lived as a Jew, but out to 
Tyre and Sidon, to Decapolis, to a 
Canaanitish woman, to the multitudes 
of men and women outside the cove- 
nant ! Thus the Divine ideal for Israel 
was realised in this King, and outsiders 
were made of Israel in spirit by faith. 

Finally, notice how the movement 
of the latter half of this chapter is the 
demonstration of the strength of faith. 
Perhaps He took His disciples there, 
that they might see the thing He had 
not been able to show them in the 
midst of His own people with their 
traditionalism and ritualism ; that they 
might see faith working free and un- 
trammelled; and as He took them 
there He revealed to them the force 
of faith in contrast with the barrenness 
of ritualism. 

In His dealing with the woman there 
was not half the severity we sometimes 
imagine. In His every action there was 
a gleam of light. First, He came out 
of the house and was silent; but she 
could not forget that because she was 
outside claiming Him, He had come 
forth. This was the inspiration of her 
firmer faith. Then when she cried, and 
He was silent, let us remember that 
silence is not refusal; indeed, we have 
heard that silence gives consent ! In 
His silence there was still the gleam 
of hope. When He answered the dis- 
ciples she heard Him say, "I was not 
sent but unto the lost sheep of the 
house of Israel." In that there was a 
suggestion of hope; she may have said 
within herself, Then perhaps .He will 
do something, after all; If He is after 
lost sheep, perhaps He will come put- 
side the one fold and touch me. Then 
she cried, "Lord, help me" That cry 



202 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xvi. 1-12] 



was born of the gleam o hope when 
He said "lost sheep;" and when He 
turned to her it was not with the tone 
of severity, as we have already seen. 
Christ never spoke severely except to 
Pharisees. He was leading her on, in- 
creasing her faith. He knew the 
strength of her faith, and He wanted 
to bring it out into all its strength. 
He could have said to the woman, 
" great is thy faith " at the beginning, 
but He led her through the process of 
sifting until it flamed into the sight of 
men. The strength of faith as devel- 
oped by Jesus, seems to be the special 
value of this story. 

And then, finally, notice the King's 
pure pity as He fed the multitude. 
That feeding was not an answer to 
faith. The crowd did not ask Him to 
feed them. The disciples did not seem 
to believe that He was called upon to 
feed them. They had seen Him feed 
the multitudes in Judea; but that was 
within the covenant, and the geograph- 
ically correct place. But there was 
pity in His heart and power there; and 
though among people who might never 



see the spiritual life, still He fed them, 
lest they should faint by the way. 

Behold the King. Behold Him with 
the woman, all strength and tenderness, 
merging from the process of apparent 
severity to the triumph of a great 
beneficence. Behold Him with the in- 
capable people as they are brought to 
Him, the breadth and plenteousness of 
His power operating on their behalf. 
Behold Him with the hungry; in sim- 
ple and exquisite sympathy, He fed 
them. 

Let us learn from this meditation 
what is the law of relation to this King 
which brings men into the place of 
blessing. It is faith which is persist- 
ent ; faith which is amenable to law, 
answering every word He says I 
"Lord, increase our faith." 

In our relation to Jesus Christ as His 
messengers and workers, let us look for 
faith in unexpected places. Let us not 
keep out of Tyre and Sidon because 
there are no good people there. There 
is a freshness of faith everywhere 
waiting to surprise us if we will only 
venture to cross the line. 



MATTHEW XVI. 1-12 



WE are now approaching the end 
of the second division of the 
book of Matthew, which deals with the 
King's propaganda. We have heard 
His Enunciation of Laws; we have 
seen His Exhibition of Benefits; and 
we are now approaching the end of the 
section dealing with His Enforcement 
of Claims. 

In this paragraph we see the last 
coming of the rulers to Him, before 
He broke with them, and the nation, 
and the crowds; and devoted Himself 
to His own disciples, and to that sacred 
ministry which led up to, and cul- 
minated in, the Passion. In this para- 
graph, therefore, we have His last 
reply to the rulers during their period 
of probation. After Csesarea Philippi, 
His relation to these men was that of 
judge, and His message that of denun- 
ciation. He never dealt with them 
again, save, directly or indirectly, to 
emphasise the doom that had fallen 



upon the nation that had rejected Him. 
In this paragraph we have also the 
final proof of how little His disciples 
had understood His methods; for when 
He said to them after the Pharisees 
had left, " Beware of the leaven of 
the Pharisees," they were so dull of 
apprehension, that they imagined He 
was talking to them about a certain 
kind of leaven, for the Pharisees were 
very punctilious about leaven. They 
did use certain kinds under certain 
circumstances, but they were particular 
not to use any contaminated by Gen- 
tile use. They thought that He was 
afraid that they would have some of 
the Pharisees' bread in which was 
leaven. He said to them, " O ye of 
little faith, why reason ye among your- 
selves, because ye have no bread. Do 
ye not yet perceive ? " It is in some 
senses a pathetic picture of Jesus 
Christ which this paragraph presents 
to us. By the rulers of His people His 



203 



[MATT. xvi. 1-12] 



MATTHEW 



laws were rejected, His benefits con- 
temned, His claims ignored. By His 
own, that little group of disciples He 
had gathered about Him, His spiritual 
meanings were entirely missed. It is 
the story of the failure of His times 
to know Him. It is the story of the 
failure of His own disciples to appreci- 
ate Him. The revelation that this para- 
graph gives us is the revelation of the 
absolute inability of man, unaided, to 
understand the highest and best things 
of God. We must be very careful that 
we do not speak of His failure. There 
is a danger, there is a peril, there is 
quite a tendency to imagine that He 
experimented and tried one method 
after another, and that when one failed 
He tried a new one. That is not the 
story. It is rather the story of con- 
secutive links in one great chain. The 
master hand forged them all. He 
failed at no point, but by His patient 
persistence toward victory, He brought 
into view the failure of man. Thank 
God there is another chapter, the story 
of the Passion. Had there been nothing 
but Propaganda it would have been 
disastrous in its failure, but because 
there was a Passion, the Propaganda 
presently became powerful, and all the 
great harvest of that patient, suffering, 
lonely ministry was garnered. 

I<et us, then, look first of all at the 
King and the rulers, as they are re- 
vealed to us in the first four verses; 
and then at the disciples and the King, 
as they are revealed to us in verses five 
to twelve. 

In looking at the King and the rulers, 
the first matter that attracts our at- 
tention is the coalition of criticism. 
" And the Pharisees and Sadducees 
came, and trying Him, asked Him to 
show them a sign from heaven." Some 
of us have read that so constantly, and 
have been so accustomed to put all 
these men in the same list Pharisees, 
Sadducees, scribes that we think of 
them as all alike. So they were in one 
particular, and yet it must have been 
a startling thing to those who knew 
them to see these men together at all, 
and together on a matter of religious 
principle, and on a mission to a re- 
ligious teacher. 

Who were the Pharisees? They 



were the ritualists of their day; or, to 
use the word that more correctly re- 
veals them, they were the traditional- 
ists of their day. They believed in 
God, they believed in the work of the 
Holy Spirit, not exactly as we under- 
stand it to-day, but in the fact of the 
Spirit's operation. They believed in 
the essential purity and holiness of 
God. They believed in the funda- 
mental things. They believed in 
angels; they believed in resurrection; 
they held all the spiritual verities; but 
they hid them from the people whom 
they were supposed to teach and lead. 
They hid the spiritualities underneath 
the grave-clothes of ritualism and tra- 
dition. They heaped upon men's shoul- 
ders burdens too heavy to be borne, 
and as Jesus once said, did "not move 
them with their finger." 

Who were the Sadducees? The ra- 
tionalists of their day. They did not 
believe in spirits, they did not believe 
in angels, they did not believe in resur- 
rection. They denied all the super- 
natural elements in religion. They 
made religion a mere ethical code. 
They declared that a man ought to be 
true to certain high and noble prin- 
ciples without any aid from an unseen 
world. 

The Pharisee had no dealings with 
the Sadducee; the Sadducee looked 
with supreme contempt on the Phari- 
see. The Sadducee would speak of the 
Pharisee as the man of fanaticism, as 
being out of date, not level with his 
times; that he was still enslaved, not 
merely by the tradition that charac- 
terised his teaching, but by these very 
obsolete ideas concerning angels, and 
demons, and resurrection, and spirits. 
The Sadducee was the cultured man 
of the age, and nearly all the wealthy 
families of the time were Sadducees. 
The high priest himself, strange and 
marvellous mockery, in the midst of 
Hebraism was a Sadducee. It was the 
correct thing of the hour to be a Sad- 
ducee! They had left Jesus alone up 
to this point That kind of man al- 
ways professes to hold in contempt a 
man who believes in the spiritual and 
the supernatural. 

These were the men who came with 
one purpose to ask a question, and to 



204 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xvi. 1-123 



puzzle Jesus Christ the Pharisees and 
the Sadducees. Men absolutely divided 
as between themselves were united on 
this occasion. Some of the old writers 
got right to the heart of this Scripture 
in ways that are somewhat rough. 
Trapp, referring to this passage, says, 
"Dogs, though they fight never so 
fierce, and mutually inter-tear one an- 
other, yet if a hare run by, give over, 
and run after her." That is the whole 
story of the coalition between Phari- 
sees and Sadducees in their coming to 
Christ. The Pharisees found Him ir- 
religious because He swept away their 
tradition. The Sadducees counted Him 
irrational because He insisted upon the 
spiritual. 

Now, what was it they wanted? One 
is inclined to think that the Pharisees 
framed the request in view of the fact 
that the Sadducees were with them. 
They came and asked Him for "a sign 
from heaven." The emphasis is to be 
put on the words from heaven. The 
Pharisees taught that demons and false 
gods could give signs on earth. The 
feeding of five thousand or four thou- 
sand might be done by some false deity 
or demon : and it was a part of their 
teaching that signs from heaven were 
the final proofs of the working of God; 
and if the sun might be made to stand 
still, if fire might fall from heaven, if 
there might come to them some miracu- 
lous portent on the sky; then they 
would believe. Jesus had been work- 
ing miracles on earth healing sick, 
feeding men. As miracles they had the 
peculiar quality that they had touched 
the things of earth, and these men 
would be more impressed by a thunder- 
bolt than by the healing of a man; by 
some vivid illumination of the sky in 
an impossible hour on a dark night, 
than by the fact that Jesus had gath- 
ered the hungry crowd of men and 
women together and fed them. These 
men werjfe always seeking the spec- 
tacular, and Jesus religiously declined 
to satisfy their curiosity. He could 
have given them signs from heaven. 
"Thinkest thou," He said in the hour 
of His extremity, "that I cannot be- 
seech My Father, and He shall even 
now send Me more than twelve legions 
of angels?" One sigh lifted to hea- 



ven, and all the armies of heaven would 
have been let loose through the am- 
bient air! 

They asked Him this question "try- 
ing Him," which means to say that 
they did not at all believe that He 
could give a sign from heaven. What 
they wanted to do was to lead Him 
out into a realm where they thought 
that a sign of His power could not be 
manifested. Perhaps in their request 
there was a revelation of the fact that 
they still believed what they had sug- 
gested so long ago, that He wrought 
miracles by Beelzebub. 

Mark the effect of this coalition. The 
Pharisees would say, This thing can 
be, there can be signs out of heaven, 
but He cannot produce them; there- 
fore let us ask Him to do it The 
Sadducees would say, There could be 
no sign out of heaven, so you are safe 
in asking Him to do it. We have two 
opposing ideas, but united in their op- 
position to Him. And so in a. com- 
mon hostility to Him, a common desire 
to see His defeat, these men came 
to Him. 

Now mark our Lord's answer, " He 
answered and said unto them, When 
it is evening, ye say, It will be fair 
weather." Notice the italics here, "it 
will be" These words have been in- 
serted to help us. We should be bet- 
ter without them. " When it is evening, 
ye say, Fair weather; for the heaven 
is red. And in the morning" again 
miss the it will be "Foul weather to- 
day, for the heaven is red and lower- 
ing. Ye know how to discern the face 
of the heaven: but ye cannot the signs 
of the times." The more we ponder 
His method with those men, and the 
matchless marvel of His wisdom with 
them, the more we are driven into the 
place of adoration, when we see the 
calm, quiet, satirical dignity of the 
whole movement; for we cannot read 
the story of Jesus and His teaching 
without finding a vein of satire, but 
which was never cruel and brutal. It 
was the satire of the summer lightning 
that clears the atmosphere; but it could 
become a thunderbolt that smote to 
death if men persisted in hypocritical 
criticism. 

Jesus Christ did not say these men 



205 



[MATT. xvi. 1-12] 



MATTHEW 



were wrong. They came to criticise 
Him, but they went away criticised; 
they came to measure Him, but they 
went away measured. He knew the 
measure of their incapacity as well as 
the measure of their ability. They 
were equal to watching precedents and 
sequences in the realm of the external, 
but they were not equal to watching 
precedents and sequences in the realm 
of the spiritual. Said Jesus, You ask 
Me for a sign out of heaven. The air 
is full of signs. All about you are the 
voices of the eternal and infinite speak- 
ing to you, but you are blind concern- 
ing the things of God. 

And He said much more than this. 
He accounted for their blindness in 
His use of the words "An evil and 
adulterous generation." That was their 
measurement, that lay behind their in- 
ability, and was the reason for it. 
" Evil," that described them as wicked 
in themselves and as exerting an in- 
fluence which was harmful. When 
Jesus used the word " adulterous " He 
did so in the spiritual realm, in the 
sense in which the old prophets had 
used it, as revealing the failure in re- 
lation between God and His people. 
" I will betroth thee unto Me for ever," 
was the great love-message of God to 
His people. The most scathing indict- 
ment brought by the prophets against 
the people was that they had played 
the harlot. Jesus employed the pro- 
phetic message of the past and flung it 
red-hot upon them. He said, How can 
you interpret religion when you are evil 
in yourselves, and adulterous in your 
relationship to God, unfaithful to the 
covenant with God? And now you 
come and ask for a sign, such a sign 
as will satisfy your debased and de- 
praved nature, a sign in the realm 
which you think you understand. 
"There shall no sign be given unto it, 
but the sign of Jonah." That was but 
a repetition of what our Lord had said 
to them on another occasion at greater 
length. The sign of Jonah was not a 
sign given to Israel but to Nineveh. 
It was the sign of a man coming into 
Nineveh who had been flung out to 
death, and of that man's preaching in 
Nineveh. Jesus had amplified the illus- 
tration before, when He had said: 



" For as Jonah was three days and 
three nights in the belly of the whale; 
so shall the Son of Man be three days 
and three nights in the heart of the 
earth." The man who had been in the 
heart of the fish, flung out to death, 
came back and preached; and the Lord 
told these men that the last time they 
would have this sign, which condemned 
their whole system, both of traditional- 
ism and rationalism, would be when the 
voice that had been attempting to in- 
terpret the spiritualities to them, and 
which they would silence in death, 
would again be heard; and their tradi- 
tional blunders would perish while His 
message would live on. He told the 
Sadducees, who held in contempt the 
whole story of the supernatural, that 
the Man whom they attempted to trap 
in His conversation, would come back 
to deny their rationalism by the fact of 
resurrection. That was their sign. 
They must wait for it. 

"And He left them, and departed." 
In these words we have a revelation of 
the hopelessness of their condition, and 
an account of the act of the saddened 
and rejected King. 

Now let us turn to observe the King 
and His own. They crossed over and 
they came to the other side, and when 
they got there Jesus said to them, 
" Take heed and beware of the leaven 
of the Pharisees and Sadducees;" take 
heed of that which is in itself corrupt, 
and which produces corruption; of that 
which is in itself disintegrating, and 
which, communicated to other things, 
will carry on that process of disinte- 
gration. "Take heed," that is, discern 
it, know it, be acquainted with it; 
literally stare at itl And then "Be- 
ware" literally, hold yourself against 
it. These were Christ's two words con- 
cerning the leaven of the Pharisees- 
the influence of traditionalism; and the 
leaven of the Sadducees the influence 
of rationalism. Thus the King was 
guarding the religion of His own dis- 
ciples, the religion for which He Him- 
self stood, against His most insidious 
enemies for all time, for He knew the 
things that would most harm Christian- 
ity would be these two things the ad- 
dition of tradition, and the subtraction 
of the supernatural. These repeat them- 



206 



MATTHEW 



[MAM. xvi. 1-123 



selves in every successive century. 
There are no men now wearing phy- 
lacteries, but there are a great many 
Pharisees who are saying, You must 
do this, which God has not commanded, 
or else you are not doing what God has 
commanded. Let us protest against 
that. Also against the naturalism of 
the Sadducees which brings Christian- 
ity to the level of a cult, of a system of 
ethics, of an ideal. Let us still believe 
in the virgin birth; let us still believe 
in the actual resurrection of the body 
of Jesus; and that at the right hand of 
the Majesty on high, is the Man of 
Nazareth, the great Mystery of spiritual 
Omnipresence, and yet a physical form, 
existing in oneness with God. 

But how came the disciples to mis- 
interpret Him ? They said, He is warn- 
ing us against them because we forgot 
to take bread. Perhaps their misinter- 
pretation was due first to preoccupation 
of mind. They were worrying about 
loaves. He reminded them they had 
seen Him feed four thousand before, 
and five thousand a little earlier " O 
ye of little faith, why reason ye among 
yourselves ? " ; do you not remember 
what I have done? Preoccupation with 
loaves was due to lack of faith. We 
cannot quite understand the lack of 
faith when we remember that they had 
seen Him twice over, quite recently, 
feed the multitudes; when we consider 
that 
"'Twas springtime when He blessed 

the bread, 
'Twas harvest when He brake." 

If they had seen Him feed five thou- 
sand with five loaves, surely they need 
not have been afraid so long as He was 
present. Somehow they forgot. Let 
the failure of these men utter its warn- 
ing to us. Let us not imagine that 
victory in the past means that faith will 
never tremble again. The disciples saw 
the tongues of fire only once; then they 
had to work the spiritual fact out in 
their lives. Do not let us think too 
much about loaves. God help us to keep 
our mind upon the Master. Lack of 
faith, which means preoccupation with 
loaves, issues in spiritual blindness. 

What did He do with them? He 
chided them for their lack of faith. 
He revealed to them that He was more 



occupied with the sustenance of the 
spiritual than the material. And it is 
written that at last they understood 
Him. He Who turned His back in 
satirical scorn upon the Pharisees and 
Sadducees who had come for no other 
purpose than to tempt Him, was very 
patient with the blundering disciples 
and waited for them. Oh He is a won- 
derful Master! He will say it again if 
we do not understand it the first time. 
If you are a Pharisee or a Sadducee 
with your animosity, and your criti- 
cism, and your cleverness, He will 
laugh at you in high heaven, and He 
will turn His back upon you. But if 
you are a weak, trembling, foolish, frail 
child, thinking about loaves when you 
ought to be thinking about spiritual 
things, He will say it again. Oh it is 
these second things that reveal His 
patience ! 

Thus ends, as to its apparent failure, 
the King's enforcement of His claims. 
His laws have been enunciated and re- 
jected; His benefits have been exhib- 
ited and contemned; His claims have 
been enforced and refused. Nothing is 
clearer than the absolute necessity for 
more than propaganda in this very ap- 
parent failure of Jesus. To end here 
is to end at failure. Take the Gospel 
of Matthew and take out the last part, 
the story of the via dolorosa and the 
Passion, and the Resurrection, and 
Christ was a failure. But thank God 
the Passion is also here, and the vic- 
tory is won. If He had ended here He 
would have been a failure, not as the 
Revealer of ideals, for His ideals are 
high and noble; not as the Teacher of 
an ethic, for His ethic is unmatched; 
but as a Helper of souls, as One able 
to take hold of the incompetent and 
make him competent. If that were the 
end, then our Lord was but a great 
Experimenter. The failure of such 
methods was due to man's incapacity, 
until touched with the new light and 
life to see the Kingdom and to enter 
in. He had said so at the beginning, 
" Except one be born anew, he cannot 
see the Kingdom of God." The failure 
was evident to His own mind from the 
very beginning; but it must be re- 
vealed; and on the way to the Passion 
He explained it 



207 



[MATT. xvi. 13-20] 



MATTHEW 



This explains a great deal that per- 
plexes us. We often think God is slow 
in the interests of His eternal throne 
and universe; but things that lie hid- 
den in human life must be wrought out 



into manifestation; and that accounts 
for the slowness of the centuries. But, 
as to Propaganda He added Passion, 
so to Passion He will add His Perfect 
Victory. 



MATTHEW XVI. 13-20 



THIS is one of the most remarkable 
passages in the whole of this Gos- 
pel of the King. Here we are at the 
centre of our story; here we find light 
which flashes backward and forward, 
illuminating the path we have already 
travelled, and casting its light upon 
what remains to us of the study of this 
book. 

The central matters of the paragraph 
are evidently those of the confession of 
Peter, and the answer of Christ to that 
confession. All the surrounding state- 
ments we may therefore treat first by 
way of introduction. 

There is certainly some significance 
in the place where Peter's confession 
was made, and where our Lord uttered 
His first words concerning the Church. 
Csasarea Philippi was situated at the 
northern extremity of Jewish territory. 
It was a district which had been pecu- 
liarly and terribly associated with idol 
worship. To this day there are re- 
mains of temples and altars which were 
raised in connection with idolatry. 

There was also a political and reli- 
gious significance in the place. It was 
in this vicinity that Herod the Great 
had raised a temple of white marble to 
Caesar Augustus, a temple recognising 
the element of worship in the attitude 
of the Roman Empire to the Emperor. 

The place in the ministry of our Lord 
is of supreme interest The King was 
practically already rejected, in spirit if 
not outwardly and openly. The King 
was about to proceed to that new work, 
by which His Kingship would be estab- 
lished, and His Kingdom ensured. 

Having gathered His disciples into 
this remarkable locality, He said to 
them, "Who do men say that the Son 
of man is?" The term, "the Son of 
man," is personal, and not generic here. 
It was perhaps sometimes used in a 
generic sense, but not by our Lord ; and 
in this instance the disciples did not 



so understand it, or they would never 
have answered, "Elijah," "John the 
Baptist," "Jeremiah or one of the 
prophets." They understood it as a 
personal question. In effect Jesus said 
to these men, What is the result of My 
work so far? What do men say about 
Me? He did not need information; 
He was perfectly familiar with the 
general attitude towards Himself; but 
in order to prepare the way for the new 
movement, to lead these men forward, 
He gathered them quietly about Him 
at Caesarea Philippi, and said to them, 
if we may reverently change the phras- 
ing; Now let us see what all My work 
so far amounts to. What is the result 
of My preaching and teaching and 
working of miracles, and your preach- 
ing and teaching ? " Who do men say 
that the Son of man is ? " 

Their reply was one that shows the 
measure in which He had succeeded; 
that there had come to His age a re- 
markable conviction concerning Him. 
But it also shows that the men of the 
age had not appreciated Him, and that 
the measure of their understanding was 
distinctly limited. These disciples at 
Caesarea Philippi told Him only the 
best things they had heard about Him. 
Although they had heard men say, He 
is beside Himself, He hath a devil; 
they said, " Some say John the Bap- 
tist; some, Elijah; and others, Jere- 
miah, or one of the prophets." 

Taking that answer very broadly, and 
accepting their testimony, as a correct 
estimate of the best which the age had 
discovered about Jesus; it is evident 
that there was widespread conviction 
that there was something supernatural 
about Him. Men had come so far as 
to decide that they could not account 
for Him in any ordinary way; they 
could not place Him in any school of 
the prophets of their own day. They 
listened to other men, and detected the) 



208 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xvi. 13-20] 



accent of Hillel, or the accent of Gama- 
liel, or of some other teacher. 

They could not do so with Jesus. 
They said, It is John the Baptist come 
again; or the prophecy that Elijah 
should come again is being fulfilled; or 
Jeremiah has returned with his thunder 
and his tears; or one of the prophets 
of the past has returned. They ranked 
Him amongst the prophets, the men of 
vision, the men who declared God's 
word to their age. They could not 
account for Him in any other way. 

If we remember the differences be- 
tween John, and Elijah, and Jeremiah, 
and the other prophets, it is evident 
that these differing opinions constitute 
a revelation of the variety of the mes- 
sage and mission of Jesus. They said, 
We cannot quite place Him. We can 
hear something of the lamentations of 
Jeremiah ; we have seen a good deal 
of the fire of Mount Carmel flashing 
from His eyes; we have also heard the 
tones of the sweet lullaby of Zepha- 
niah's final love-song. We do not know 
where to place Him; He has notes 
which remind us of them all. His own 
age had come so far as that, but it 
had not discovered the deepest truth 
concerning Him. 

Then He narrowed the inquiry. In- 
stead of the wider sweep, He turned 
to the smaller circle, to those who had 
been with Him, and still were with 
Him. He said, You have been with 
Me, you have walked this highway be- 
tween Jerusalem and Jericho with Me, 
you have seen the healing and heard 
the teaching, and watched the opposi- 
tion, and seen how I have dealt with 
it. The age has come so far and no 
farther; the age has lived in the twi- 
light; have you found the light? 
" Who say ye that I am? " That leads 
us to the heart of our passage, to 
Peter's confession. 

Nineteen centuries have passed, and 
the phrasing of this wonderful passage 
has been the familiar language of the 
Church of God for all that time; and 
we have often robbed it of its glory by 
attempting to add to its meaning. We 
have twisted it and contorted it, to 
establish some philosophy of our own, 
to bolster up some preconceived no- 



tion, until we are in danger of missing 
its music. 

The simplest way in which to hear 
this confession is to attempt to lift our- 
selves out of our present position, and 
to put ourselves back into the midst 
of that first little group of disciples, 
and to listen as they listened to Peter's 
confession and our Lord's answer 
thereto. Peter looked at Him and said, 
"Thou art the Christ, the Son of the 
living God." 

Let us take the first part of Peter's 
confession in all its simplicity; and 
hear only what Peter undoubtedly de- 
sired to express, the Hebrew thought, 
"Thou art the Messiah." If we say 
to-day, Jesus of Nazareth is the Christ, 
we have a larger conception of the 
meaning of the title Christ than Peter 
had. The very word Christ has taken 
on a more spacious, radiant, and mystic 
meaning. Peter was a Hebrew, a. child 
of the Hebrew race. He was born in 
its midst, and had been nurtured upon 
its thinking. Every fibre of his per- 
sonality was affected by its conceptions, 
and it was as a Hebrew that he said to 
that Man Who styled Himself "The 
Son of man," "Thou are the Christ," 
the Messiah. That is, Thou art the 
Fulfiller of all the expectations of the 
Hebrew people, the One by Whom our 
hopes are to be realised, the One in 
Whom the economy culminates, the 
One from Whom there is to break the 
dawn of a new day and a new era. 
The Hebrew seers, psalmists, and 
prophets, had all looked for the coming 
of One. All through their literature we 
see the ideal merging into a personality. 
If we read Isaiah with any carefulness, 
we see how through the national ideal 
there gradually emerges into view a 
Person, and that Person is at once Ser- 
vant and King; oppressed, broken, 
afflicted; and triumphant, crowned, 
victorious. All the men of vision of 
the Hebrew economy had looked for 
One Who should fulfil their expecta- 
tions, realise their hopes. The Hebrew 
prophets were perpetually speaking of 
the day of God. Their eyes were al- 
ways looking forward, and as some of 
them climbed higher than others on the 
great mountain peaks, they saw farther 
along the distances, and, with wonder- 



209 



[MATT. xvi. 13-20] 



MATTHEW 



ful accuracy, they described that Per- 
son. They waited for Him and watched 
for Him. He was to break oppression, 
to establish righteousness, to baptize 
the nations with the river of God, and 
wherever the river came there would 
be life. 

At last a son of the nation, a fish- 
erman only, standing in the neigh- 
bourhood of the ruins of the ancient 
temples of idolatry, looking into the 
face of this Man, Whom he had heard 
teaching and preaching for nearly three 
years, said to Him, " Thou art the Mes- 
siah," the One for Whom we have all 
been waiting, for Whom we have all 
been looking; and he added to that, 
" The Son of the living God." 

We must read the question and an- 
swer carefully, if we would find the 
values. Jesus first said, " Who do men 
say that the Son of man is?" When 
He spoke to the disciples He said, 
"Who say ye that I am?" Thus He 
identified Himself with the Son of* man. 
Peter said, "Thou," the Son of man, 
"art the Christ, the Son of the living 
God." The description, "the Son of 
the living God," is correlative to 
Christ's description, "the Son of man." 
I am the Son of man, said Jesus in 
effect, Who am I? "Thou art the 
Messiah, the Son of the living God," 
said Peter. So as the title, "the 
Christ," answered the question " Who ;" 
the description, "the Son of the living 
God," stood in correlation to "the Son 
of man." 

Peter's confession was a very definite 
one, and yet one that recognized his 
consciousness of the mystic element in 
this Man, beyond the things the age 
had seen. The age had caught the com- 
prehensiveness of the prophetic note. 
The age had recognized more the su- 
pernaturalness of this Teacher. Peter, 
recognizing all this, defined it, and 
went beyond the age, and said; "Thou 
art the Messiah ;" -more than John the 
forerunner, more than Elijah the fore- 
teller, more than Jeremiah the watcher 
and the one who waited; Thou art the 
One toward Whom they all looked. 
There is manifested in all Thy doing, 
and in all Thy teaching, something 
that differentiates Thee from all other 
teachers and men. Son of man, but 



Son of the living God, the Messiah. 
United to us in that Thou art our Mes- 
siah, yet distanced from us by the mys- 
tic gleaming of Thy glory, the fair 
brightness of Thy Person as it falls 
upon our lives. 

In the King's answer to this great 
confession let us notice first, His 
Beatitude; 

" Blessed art thou, Simon Bar- Jonah : 
for flesh and blood hath not revealed it 
unto thee, but My Father Who is in 
heaven " ; 

Secondly, His great announcement; 

" I also say unto thee, that thou art 
Peter, and upon this rock I will build 
My Church; and the gates of Hades 
shall not prevail against it. I will give 
unto thee the keys of the kingdom of 
heaven : and whatsoever thou shalt bind 
on earth shall be bound in heaven : and 
whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth, 
shall be loosed in heaven"; 

Finally, the warning note, strange 
and peculiar at first seeming, yet neces- 
sary when carefully considered; 

"Then charged He the disciples that 
they should tell no man that He was 
the Christ." 

First, the Beatitude. Jesus did not 
pronounce a reward upon Peter, for the 
discovery he had made, when He said, 
" Blessed art thou, Simon Bar- Jonah." 
On the contrary, He was rather de- 
scribing the condition into which Peter 
had come by the gain of this new 
knowledge which he had confessed. 
Such confession, that He was the 
Christ, and the Son of the living God, 
was in itself the result of Divine il- 
lumination. Not in the confession, but 
in the consciousness out of which the 
confession was born, was Peter blessed. 
Probably he spoke for the rest as well 
as for himself, but one man at least 
had made contact with the purposes and 
power of God. He said, " Thou art the 
Christ, the Son of the living God." 
Jesus said, "Blessed art thou, Simon 
Bar-Jonah." That is the key to the 
situation. That is the discovery upon 
which the human soul is remade. That 
is the discovery upon which human so- 
ciety is to be remade. That is the dis- 
covery upon which the city of God is 



210 



MATTHEW 



[MAM. xvi. 13-20J 



to be built, and the everlasting King- 
dom established. 

How did Peter learn this fact? Let 
the Lord continue, " Flesh and blood 
hath not revealed it unto thee, but My 
Father Who is in heaven." He took 
hold of a common colloquialism of His 
times and used it. The man in the 
street would say, Flesh and blood can- 
not endure this; flesh and blood cannot 
see through this. Christ said, That 
confession you have made is not some- 
thing that another man told you; you 
have not discovered it; My Father hath 
revealed it unto thee. 

How did the Father reveal that to 
Peter? Men have tried to account for 
it in various ways, and all the while 
the naming truth is in front of them 
Through Christ Himself. What Jesus 
said in effect was this There is My 
victory as Revealer. I have come to 
reveal the Father, and I have been 
successful, for here is one man who 
finds in Me the expression of the 
Father, and knows My relation to the 
Father, not by the wit or wisdom of 
man, but by My own revelation of the 
Father. One soul at least had seen 
God in Him, and heard God through 
Him. He had followed and listened, 
and had come over the mountains, and 
through the driving mists, until at last 
it had flamed upon his consciousness 
that there was God, in His Son, the 
long-looked-for Messiah, and he con- 
fessed it. He had found God, he had 
touched the eternal principles, he had 
come into contact with the purposes 
and plan and power of God. That was 
the beginning of the new era; the first 
movement of which, as Christians, we 
are the continuation. 

Then our Lord went farther. He 
said, "Thou art Peter." That is when 
he really obtained his name; he had 
never possessed it properly before. In 
the Gospel of John, in the first chap- 
ter, we read, "He findeth first his own 
brother Simon, and saith unto him, We 
have found the Messiah (which is, be- 
ing interpreted, Christ). He brought 
him unto Jesus." Andrew brought his 
brother Simon. Jesus looked upon him, 
and said, "Thou art Simon the son of 
John: thou shalt be called Cephas 
(which, is by interpretation, Peter)." 



Now at Csesarea Philippi He said, 
"Thou art Peter" I told you what 
you would be when first My eyes rested 
upon you. I knew your human setting 
and pedigree; but I said to you, You 
shall be rock, a man of strength. He 
had led the man on and on, and at last 
He brought him to Caesarea Philippi, 
and said, Now do you know Me, 
Simon ? Simon said, " Thou art the 
Christ, the Son of the living God." 
Jesus said, "Blessed art thou;" not by 
the discovery of thy flesh-and-blood 
nature, which is represented by the 
symbol of Simon Bar-Jonah, hath it 
been revealed unto thee; but through 
My speech and life thou hast come to 
the light. Now thou art Petros, rock. 

Then what? "Upon this rock" 
not Petros, a piece of rock, a. fragment 
of the rock nature, but Petra, the es- 
sential rock " Upon this rock I will 
build My Church." Thou art of the 
rock nature, and thou shalt be built 
upon the rock foundation. 

"Upon this rock." Remember, He 
was talking to Hebrews. If we trace 
the figurative use of the word rock 
through the Hebrew Scriptures, we 
find that it is never used symbolically 
of man, but always of God. So here 
at Caesarea Philippi. It is not upon 
Peter that the Church is built. Jesus 
did not trifle with figures of speech. 
He took up their old Hebrew illustra- 
tion rock, always the symbol of Deity 
and said, Upon God Himself I will 
build My Church. My Kingdom shall 
consist of those who are built into 
God, "partakers of the Divine nature." 

Mark the intention carefully by 
taking Peter's final words first " The 
living God." Then the word immedi- 
ately preceding " the Son of the living 
God;" and then the first word "Thou 
art Messiah." Jesus said; On that, I 
will build My Church, on Jehovah God, 
manifest in time in His Son, adminis- 
tering the affairs of the world through 
that Son as Messiah. Peter had found 
the foundation, had touched Jehovah, 
and by touching Him had become 
petros. 

As to the structure to be erected on 
this foundation our Lord said, "I will 
build My Church." Our word Church 
does not correctly express the idea. 



211 



[MAT*, xvi. 13-20] 



MATTHEW 



The word ecclesia was a very familiar 
word in our Lord's time, and it had a 
Hebrew and a Greek use. The He- 
brews spoke of the ecclesia. They had 
two words very much alike in their 
intention, and yet separated in use 
synagogue, and ecclesia. They marked 
the facts in which the Hebrew people 
were different from other nations. 
Synagogue meant the assembling to- 
gether of God's people in worship. 
Jesus did not say, My synagogue, He 
said, My ecclesia. The Hebrew use of 
the word ecclesia marked the Hebrew 
people as a selected people, as a The- 
ocracy. That was the great thought in 
the word, a God-governed people, not 
governed by policy or by human kings. 
That was the underlying thought in the 
Hebrew mind. Ecclesia was also in 
common use in Greek cities at the time. 
In one of the later chapters of the book 
of Acts we find that the whole ecclesia 
came together to discuss their affairs. 
It does not mean the Church of God. 
It was the town meeting, an assemblage 
of free men. No slave could be a 
member of the ecclesia. Jesus stood 
in the midst of these Hebrew and 
Greek ideas, and said, "My ecclesia;" 
My people, My Theocracy; and My 
assembly for the purpose of authority 
and government in the affairs of the 
world. "My Church." 

Of that Church Christ said, "I will 
build." There was no unveiling here 
of the method, save as it is illuminated 
by the happening at the moment, when 
this one man was brought into relation- 
ship with Jesus Christ. We must wait 
for the teaching of the Spirit in the 
epistles perfectly to comprehend the 
meaning of the Master. The thought 
was afterwards elaborated in the teach- 
ing of Peter and of Paul. When Peter 
himself, later on, wrote about the build- 
ing of the Church, he spoke of living 
stones, built on a living Stone. He in- 
troduced the thought of life. He lifted 
the figure out of its natural realm, and 
infused into it a new quantity and a 
new element, something which differ- 
entiated it from the figure itself, so 
that by the disparity we learn quite as 
much as by the actual symbolism. For 
illumination as to the process of the 
building we turn to that wonderful 



fourth chapter of the letter to the 
Ephesians, with its unveiling of the 
Church in the process of its erection; 
"There is one body, and one Spirit, 
even as also ye were called in one hope 
of your calling." That is the whole 
fact of the Church. One Body, Christ 
the Head and all believers the mem- 
bers; One Spirit, the common life of 
Christ shared by the members. That 
is the catholic Church. 

From that the Apostle proceeded to 
show how men come into that Body, 
and share that life, "One Lord," the 
object of faith presented to the mind; 
" one faith," fastening upon the Lord- 
ship, and yielding to it ; " one baptism," 
that of the Holy Spirit, whereby the 
believer is made a member of the Lord. 
Through the illustration of Paul's 
phrasing we go back to Caesarea Phil- 
ippi, and watch the process. " One 
Lord," Jesus; "one faith," the faith 
which says, " Thou are the Messiah, the 
Son of the living God ;" " one baptism " 
of the Spirit, that whereby Peter was at 
Pentecost made a partaker of the na- 
ture of his Lord, and a member of the 
body of Christ, a living stone in the 
great building. Then the Apostle com- 
pleted his statement, " One God and 
Father of us all, Who is over all, and 
through all, and in all." 

This is the Master's method of build- 
ing His Church, but it will never be 
seen in all its perfect glory until the 
morning of the second Advent, when, 
gathered into perfect unity with Jesus, 
all the scaffolding removed, it will be 
manifested in its splendid beauty and 
glory. 

Because Jesus said, "I will build," 
we are sure of the impregnability of 
the Church, that nothing can destroy 
it, that all the forces of darkness can 
never finally prevent the completion of 
His Church. No rite or ceremony of 
man can admit us to that Church. Its 
strength lies in the fact that He builds 
it stone for stone, fitting each into its 
proper place, taking only such as by 
living faith participate in His own na- 
ture, and therefore are ready to be 
built into His great Church. 

We know from that declaration also 
that the Church will be glorious in 
beauty. If we are inclined to say that 



212 



MATTHEW 



[MA**, xvi. 13-20] 



we have not seen very much of its 
beauty yet, we must remember that we 
have never seen its corporate beauty. 
We have, all of us, thank God, had 
some glimpses of the glory of the 
Church in its individual members. We 
have seen and known Christly souls 
who have not only caught the Spirit of 
Christ, but who so share the life of 
Christ, that His beauty, His compas- 
sion, and His tenderness are all mani- 
fested in their lives. Think for qne 
prophetic moment, in which we fore- 
cast the future, of what it will be when 
that whole glorious company is gath- 
ered out and completed, and He pre- 
sents His Church to God, a glorious 
thing, not having spot or wrinkle or 
any such thing. The beauty of His 
Church will consist, first of all, in the 
diversity of individual lives, all types 
and temperaments gathered into one 
great harmony; and the beauty will 
consist finally in the unity of the mani- 
festation of the glories of Christ. In 
the letter to the Ephesians the Apostle 
urges us "to keep the unity of the 
spirit in the bond of peace," and, as 
the argument proceeds, we see that we 
are to " grow up in all things into Him, 
Who is the Head, even Christ." If we 
take that passage as indicating the ne- 
cessity and importance of individual 
development, we must not imagine that 
to be its only meaning, or that it ex- 
hausts the passage; "Till we all attain 
unto the unity of the faith, and of the 
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a 
full-grown man, unto the measure of 
the stature of the fulness of Christ" 
Individually we can never come to that. 
It will take the whole Church to real- 
ise the measure of the stature of the 
fulness of Christ." 

The Colossiah epistle, which is the 
twin epistle of the Ephesian one, throws 
light upon this, "It was the good 
pleasure of the Father that in Him 
should all the fulness dwell ... in 
Him dwelleth all the fulness of the 
Godhead bodily." The fulness of God 
is the fulness of Christ; and the fulness 
of Christ is the fulness of the Church. 
That is the radiant splendour of the 
Church, that when He has completed 
His building upon the Rock foundation; 
then His ransomed and redeemed 



Church will be a medium through 
which all the glory of God, realised in 
Himself, shall flash in resplendent glory 
through ages that are yet unborn. 

Christ then went on to speak of two 
present activities or influences of the 
Church. First, "The gates of Hades 
shall not prevail against it," That is 
a description of the aggressive mission, 
or the destructive powers of the 
Church. This word of Jesus needs 
careful consideration. In common with 
many of the utterances of our Lord, we 
have been in danger of dealing with it 
superficially. First, notice that there 
is a difference between the inclusive 
statement, "I will build My Church," 
and the next word, "The gates of 
Hades shall not prevail against it." 
The first word declares His construc- 
tion of the instrument. The second 
word declares partially what the func- 
tion of the instrument shall be ; " The 
gates of Hades shall not prevail against 
it" This cannot refer to the strength 
of the Church against attack. Careless 
reading would give us to think that 
Jesus meant, I build My Church, and 
though all Hades come up against it, 
it cannot overcome it The figure the 
Lord uses does not admit that inter- 
pretation. An attacking force never 
carries its city gates up when it goes 
to fight It is not a figure of the de- 
fensive strength of the Church. 

Neither does it mean that the Church 
shall be able to capture Hades. The 
Church does not desire to possess 
Hades. We must look more closely, or 
we miss the meaning of this great 
word. It is the figure of escape. It 
is a declaration of the fact that the 
Church will be able to make a way of 
escape from a beleagured city, which is 
in harmony with the perpetual outlook 
upon death in the life of the Christian. 
Death in the New Testament is never 
getting into harbour; it is getting out 
of the harbour on to the boundless sea. 
Tennyson caught the New Testament 
idea when he sang, 

"I hope to see my Pilot face to face 
.When I have crossed the bar." 

That crossing is outward, not inward. 
It is a false figure of speech that 
imagines that in the case of the Chris- 



213 



. xvi. 13-20] 



MATTHEW 



tian, death is running into harbour with 
rent cordage and tattered sails. When 
Paul speaks of death he speaks of his 
departure, unloosing, the cutting of the 
cord that binds him, the liberating of 
the ship from the restraint of the har- 
bour to the boundless sea for which it 
was made. Here the idea is the saine. 
The Church is seen in a beleagured 
city; and Jesus says, The Church will 
take the gates of the city and escape 
into the larger life that lies beyond. 

But that is not the deepest thing of 
all. What is death in the economy of 
Jesus? The last enemy. What are 
the enemies that precede death? First, 
sin, or rebellion, for sin in its genesis 
is rebellion against God's government. 
Next, sorrow, in its widest sense, as 
including all lack and limitation. Then 
the final enemy death. There they 
stand, the three great enemies of the 
race; sin, sorrow, death. The Chris- 
tian man sings an anthem when he 
looks at death, " O death, where is thy 
victory? O death, where is thy 
sting?" How can he thus sing in the 
face of death, the last enemy, that has 
held the race enthralled so long? 
"The sting of death is sin; and the 
power of sin is the law; but thanks be 
to God, Who giveth us the victory 
through our Lord Jesus Christ." Vic- 
tory begins over sin; it proceeds over 
sorrow; it ends over death. Jesus 
Christ says, My Church which I build 
shall be a great aggressive force. 
Jesus was always merging the two fig- 
ures of battle and building. He is the 
Builder, Who needs builders that He 
can depend upon. He is the King go- 
ing forth to conquest, Who needs sol- 
diers He can depend upon. For the 
moment He speaks as the great Com- 
mander leading His Church as an ag- 
gressive force, and as the great 
Commander He sees, not merely the 
battle, but all the issues of the cam- 
paign. The whole field was in the 
vision of Jesus, as He stood at Csesarea 
Philippi. He Himself was about to 
enter into conflict with sin; to enter 
into conflict with sorrow, wiping tears 
away, healing wounds; mastering 
death; and all His people coming 
after Him, must be people in conflict 



with sin and sorrow, and finally in con- 
flict with death. 

Jesus here saw the whole field 
stretched out before Him, and with 
the tone of assured victory in His 
voice, He did not stay to enumerate 
the battles and the foes, but passed to 
the last, and said, "The gates of Hades 
shall not prevail against it." My 
Church shall be an aggressive force 
moving ever on, overcoming foe after 
foe, until, presently, when they come 
to the gates of lie beleagured city, 
they shall find their way through them 
and into the life that lies beyond. 

In the view of Jesus the world it- 
self is seen as a beleagured city held 
in death's power. In the midst of the 
world, not outside it, He Himself is 
working, building; and His Church in 
the beleaguered city is to be a force 
intended to wage war against things 
that harm, and open the way out into 
life for the beleagured peoples. The 
war is within, not without. The 
Church wins its victory over sin by 
His blood; wins its victory over sorrow 
by His sympathy manifest in the pres- 
ence of sorrow; wins its victory over 
death by breaking down the fear of 
death in trusting hearts, and, as the 
individual soldiers come down to the 
end, they find that the gates are cap- 
tured, and they march through, not 
passing through swollen rivers as we 
sometimes sing, but dryshod into the 
land that lies beyond, without a thread 
of the garments wetted even by the 
dews that rise from the river. "The 
gates of Hades shall not prevail 
against it." 

If the Church has not been victorious 
in the conflict with sin and sorrow and 
death, it is due to the unfaithfulness of 
the Church. Let us not blame the 
Master and Leader. Did we but realise 
all His preciousness, that the security 
and energy of His life is at our disposal 
by the Spirit, we should be perpetually 
victorious, and the Church of God 
would not only be, "Fair as the moon, 
Clear as the sun," but "Terrible as an 
army with banners." If we are de- 
feated in the fight it is because, like the 
Israelites, we have some Achan in the 
camp with a wedge of gold or Babylon- 
ish garment; and that complicity with 



214 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xvi. 13-20] 



the things that are against God, weak- 
ens us in our conflict. 

But further, the King said; "I will 
give unto thee the keys of the Kingdom 
of heaven." What are these keys ? He 
was speaking to Hebrews, and the 
phrase, "the keys" was perfectly fa- 
miliar to them. They were the insignia 
of the office of the scribe, the teacher 
of the law of God. The key was the 
sign, not of priestly office, but of the 
office of the scribe. The keys com- 
mitted to Peter were not the keys of 
the Church, but the keys of the King- 
dom. When Jesus spoke to Peter upon 
this occasion He spoke to him as a 
scribe. In chapter thirteen we have 
the parables of the Kingdom, and they 
end with the words, "Therefore," be- 
cause ye have understood, " every scribe 
who hath been made a disciple to the 
Kingdom of heaven is like unto a man 
that is a householder, who bringeth 
forth out of his treasure things new 
and old." The parting of the ways 
had come at Csesarea Philippi. Because 
Peter had answered, "Thou art the 
Messiah," he had become a scribe in- 
structed in the Kingdom of heaven. 
Now, said Christ, I will give you the 
keys of the Kingdom of heaven. You 
are My scribe. The keys of the King- 
dom were given to the illuminated, to 
those who understood the principle of 
the Kingdom, the laws of the Kingdom, 
the method of the Kingdom. When 
Jesus said to Peter, "I will give unto 
thee the keys of the Kingdom," He 
spoke to him as representative man, He 
spoke to him as the first man who had 
gained the vision of illumination, 
" Blessed art thou, Simon Bar- Jonah : 
for flesh and blood hath not revealed it 
unto thee, but My Father Who is in 
heaven;" thou shalt have the keys of 
the Kingdom. 

To-day these keys belong to every 
one who proclaims that Kingdom. They 
are the warrant for the preacher. 
They do not constitute a warrant for 
priesthood, but for the scribe instructed 
in the Kingdom, preaching, teaching 
the Kingdom, unlocking its meaning, 
explaining its law. So that Christ said 
not merely; My Church is to be an 
aggressive force; but My Church is to 
be a constructive force in the midst 



of the age, teaching the Kingdom and 
holding the keys of the Kingdom; not 
to lock, or shut out, or exclude, but to 
interpret and administer. 

In close connection follow the words; 
" Whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth 
shall be bound in heaven: and what- 
soever thou shalt loose on earth shall 
be loosed in heaven." In these words 
He committed to His Church the final 
authority in human life. These phrases 
were perfectly familiar to the Jew, we 
find them in the literature of the time. 
They said, Shammai binds this, but 
Hillel looses; which simply meant, 
Shammai makes this obligatory, but 
Hillel leaves it optional. Binding sim- 
ply meant an authoritative declaration 
concerning what must be done, or what 
must not be done. Loosing meant per- 
mission given to. men to do or not to do. 
It was purely and simply a Hebrew 
method of describing ethical authority. 
Jesus said, In the history of the world, 
My Church shall not merely be an ag- 
gressive force to which Hades' gates 
shall yield; My Church shall hold the 
keys of interpretation of the Divine 
Will; My Church shall erect the moral 
standards for the world. Whatever 
My Church shall bind, shall be bound; 
whatever it shall loose, shall be loosed. 
In the twenty-third chapter of Matthew 
Jesus is reported to have said, speaking 
of the scribes and Pharisees, " They 
bind heavy burdens," using the word 
in the same sense as that in which He 
used it of His Church. The Church is 
to be the standard of ethics. All the 
binding and loosing of the Church is to 
be based upon His authority, and that 
is what He meant when He said, 
" Come unto Me, all ye that labour and 
are heavy laden, and I will give you 
rest. Take My yoke upon you, and 
learn of Me; for I am meek and lowly 
in heart: and ye shall find rest unto 
your souls. For My yoke is easy, and 
My burden is light." In that word of 
Jesus is discovered the central author- 
ity; it is the will of God. Conse- 
quently the Church is to be, not merely 
an aggressive force, conquering His 
enemies, and opening a way out of all 
prisons; but it is also to interpret to 
the world the moral standards of life, 
and to teach men the will of God. 



215 



[MATT. xvi. 21-28] 



MATTHEW 



Every high ideal that obtains to-day 
in civilised countries has been learnt 
from the Church of God. The final 
ethic of the world was born with Jesus. 
Everything that is high, and noble, and 
uplifting, in the thinking and legisla- 
tion of the nations, has come out of 
His heart by the interpretation of His 
Church. 

If we had been true to Him the 
world would have learnt more rapidly; 
but the measure in which it has learnt 
is the measure in which the Church 
has been the interpreter of the ethic 
of God. 

In conclusion let us glance at the 
warning that He addressed to these 
men. It seems a very strange thing 
that He said; "Then charged He the 
disciples that they should tell no man 
that He was the Christ." If we con- 
nect the word " they " of verse twenty 
with the "My Father" of verse seven- 
teen, we shall better understand the 
meaning of that charge. Jesus said to 
Peter, " Blessed art thou, Simon Bar- 
Jonah : for flesh and blood hath not 
revealed it unto thee, but My Father 
Who is in heaven." Then He charged 
them "that they should tell no man He 
was the Christ." That is to say, it is 
not in the power of the Church to re- 
veal the truth about Christ to the soul 
of a man; that must be the work of 
God. The work of the Church is not 
that of preaching a theory, even though 



it be a correct theory, of the Person of 
Christ; the work of the Church is that 
of preaching the Kingdom of God, the 
evangel of salvation, by bringing men 
into personal contact with Christ. 

We can do what was done when 
Peter was led to Jesus, we can say 
to men, "Come and see." But they 
must look for themselves, they must 
have God's revelation in their own soul. 
If men attempt to depend for their 
Christianity upon another's theory of 
the Christ, they will be lost. If a man 
for himself listen, and watch, and wait, 
until there is personal revelation, there 
will come to him the light of the 
Father's own manifestation. So shall 
he be changed into a living stone, be 
built upon the Rock, become a member 
of His Church. 

All this was teaching in advance, so 
far as these men were concerned. 
They did not understand Him perfectly. 
He had to begin now to show them 
how He could put His radiant, virtuous, 
victorious life at their disposal through 
dying; and when He did so, they were 
afraid. Never did they understand 
Him until the Spirit came, and, in an- 
swer to their faith, baptized them into 
living union with their Lord. They 
received their final explanation of 
Christ, His Cross, and His Church, by 
the baptism of the Holy Spirit; and 
so must we. 



MATTHEW XVI. 21^28 



fTlHE words with which this para- 
JL graph opens indicate a new begin- 
ning in the mission of the King. 
"From that time began Jesus to show 
unto His disciples that He must go 
unto Jerusalem, and suffer many things 
. . . and be killed, and the third day 
be raised up." We are not necessarily 
to understand that He at once said 
all these things exactly in this form. 
He then began to tell them these things. 
This declaration is Matthew's summary, 
and constitutes the key to the final sec- 
tion of the Gospel. The ministry of 
Jesus was no longer mainly a ministry 
to the multitudes, but a ministry to 
His own. He devoted himself largely 



to preparing them for the experience 
of His Passion. Presently He went up 
to Jerusalem in solemn and Kingly 
glory in order to denounce and reject 
the whole Hebrew nation. Finally we 
see Him passing through the Passion 
experiences to complete triumph. 

From here, then, to the end, we see 
the King; first, unveiling His Cross to 
His own disciples; secondly, authori- 
tatively and officially casting off the 
Hebrew nation; thirdly, giving His dis- 
ciples the programme of the coming 
economy; and, finally, passing to His 
Passion, and His triumph. 

At the commencement of this divi- 
sion dealing with the Passion of the 



216 



MATTHEW 



[MA**, xvi. 21-28] 



King, we have this section; and there 
is a sense in which everything that 
follows is mirrored in this scene. It 
is, as it were, a preface to the rest. In 
it we see all the principles operating 
discovered to the end of the story. 

These, moreover, are the principles 
of action from then until now, and 
throughout the whole of this age. The 
understanding of these is absolutely 
necessary to us at all times as we face 
our work for our Lord and Master. 

The first matter of importance is that 
of the antagonism revealed. Christ 
began to talk of His Cross, and Peter 
at once objected. For a moment, very 
reverently, let us forget the persons, 
Christ and Peter, and see the antagon- 
istic principles. The contrast is made 
plain in the words, "The things of God 
the things of men" "From that 
time began Jesus to show unto His 
disciples, that He must go unto Jeru- 
salem, and suffer many things of the 
elders and chief priests and scribes, 
and be killed, and the third day be 
raised up. And Peter took Him, and 
began to rebuke Him, saying, Be it far 
from Thee, Lord: this shall never be 
unto Thee." Jesus began to say that 
He must suffer; Peter began to object 
and to say, "Be it far from Thee, 
Lord." The things of God are Christ's 
estimate of necessity and of method. 
The Son of Man "must go unto Jeru- 
salem, and suffer . . . and be killed 
. . . and be raised up." The things of 
men are revealed in Peter's thought, 
Lord, not that; pity Thyself, have 
mercy upon Thyself; that be far from 
Thee; anything but that. The things 
of God; the method of the, Cross that 
merges into the victory of resurrec- 
tion. The things of men; the method 
of self-seeking that shuns the Cross, 
and ends in ultimate destruction. 

Let us look at these things of God 
more carefully. "From that time be- 
gan Jesus to show unto His disciples 
that He must go unto Jerusalem." 
Jerusalem was the place of danger and 
peril. The line of policy was to miss 
Jerusalem. The line of expediency, 
from human standards, was that, 
wherever else He went, He should not 
go to Jerusalem. And He began by 
saying The Son of Man " must go unto 



Jerusalem." The emphasis of that 
"must" continues throughout the state- 
ment. " He must suffer many things," 
and "must be killed," and "must be 
raised again the third day." If we 
thus repeat the "must" before each 
of these declarations we notice that 
there is a value in the "must" which 
may be interpreted along the line of 
human experience and passion, and 
that there is a value in the "must" 
which defies any such interpretation. 
There is a sense in which the "must" 
was the "must" of human surround- 
ings. "He must suffer and be killed," 
because that was the natural outcome 
of all that He had been saying and 
doing. It had been made perfectly 
evident in the period of the propaganda 
that men would not have Him, that 
they would reject Him. They were 
declining His ethic, refusing His ideal, 
laughing at Him, and attempting to 
get rid of Him; and He said to His 
disciples, There is only one issue to all 
this; I am compelled to go to Jeru- 
salem, I must suffer, I must be killed. 
It was heroism, if we only look at it 
from the low level of human stand- 
point. Why must He? These men 
would not have made Him suffer, and 
would not have killed Hun if He would 
have accommodated the standard of His 
teaching to their ideals. But in the 
mind of the King there was the 
"must" of a tremendous conviction, 
and an absolute loyalty to that convic- 
tion. It was as though Jesus said, I 
cannot lower My standard, I cannot 
deny My ideal, I cannot unsay My 
manifesto. I have not been uttering 
theories which I have learned in 
schools, and which can be abandoned 
upon occasion. I have talked out of 
the fibre of My personality. I must. 
And the "must" means that men who 
have shown their hostility will carry it 
out to consummation, and I shall suffer 
and die. 

But that is not the deepest note. 
His last word was not of suffering. 
He did not end with dying. There was 
another must. He must be " raised 
again." That was not the language 
merely of an obedient man. It was 
not the language of a man who said; 
Well, I have done my best and I am 



217 



[MATT. xvi. 21-28] 



MATTHEW 



prepared to die for it. It was the lan- 
guage of One Who knew that He held 
in His own hands the issue of all the 
way through which He was going; I 
am Master of the suffering, Master o 
the killing. I must be raised again. 
That was the must of the Divine pro- 
cedure. I must go unto Jerusalem ; and 
the immediate result will be that I 
shall suffer and be killed; but beyond 
that will operate the divine power; I 
must be raised up. 

That "must" was older than the 
circumstances. That "must" came 
thundering in music out of eternity. 
When Jesus set His face toward Jeru- 
salem, saying, I must go, and I must 
suffer, and I must be killed, and I 
roust be raised up again, the force pro- 
pelling Him was not merely the force 
of human devotion to an ideal, it was 
the force of His own ageless life; the 
Divine and eternal counsels of God 
were operating in Him and through 
Him, and driving Him along that path- 
way. That is what Peter, who mis- 
understood Him for a little while, came 
to understand presently. When we 
turn to the Acts of the Apostles and 
listen to Peter preaching for the first 
time in the power of Pentecost, the 
man who had shunned the Cross be- 
cause he did not understand it, said, 
"Him" that is, Jesus "being deliv- 
ered up by the determinate counsel and 
foreknowledge of God, ye by the hand 
of lawless men did crucify and slay." 
Thus he put the "must" back upon its 
true basis. He came at last to know 
that when Jesus said " must," He spoke 
with the authority of the eternal coun- 
sel of God, and was acting under the 
impulse of the things that are ageless 
and abiding; that He knew all the 
movements of eternity; that he saw 
through the mists of the moment all 
that lay beyond; past the bloody bap- 
tism of His Passion to the radiant 
morning of His crowning. These are 
"the things of God." 

But what are "the things of men"? 
First, the things of men are character- 
ised by their lack. Peter did not see 
the ultimate, did not feel the original. 
He lived in the small conceptions of the 
immediate. That is always faulty and 
a failure. No man can live this hour 



unless he feels behind him the infinite 
movement of the ages gone, and before 
him the infinite pull of the ages un- 
born. If we live in the power of the 
things unseen we march to certain vic- 
tory. Peter, in his letter, subsequently 
referred to those who see only the 
things which are near, having forgotten 
the cleansing. Near-sightedness ! Peter 
was suffering from it at this point. He 
did not hear the music of the past; did 
not see the light of the future; his 
was the limited outlook, and therefore 
the present was misunderstood. And 
this was the attitude of all the dis- 
ciples. They feared the present, and 
that because of the enthronement of 
self. They were still living for self, 
they were still considering self. Jesus 
Christ was so absolutely void of self- 
centred life that it did not matter to 
Him what suffering He endured if the 
great and ultimate victory should be 
achieved. We read, " For the joy that 
is set before Him," He " endured the 
Cross." Not the joy of His own vic- 
tory but of God's victory. It was His 
joy to know that God, through the 
processes of His suffering, would win 
His victory and triumph. Peter saw 
only the things of men; present dark- 
ness, present pain, and present suffer- 
ing. When he said to Jesus, " Be it far 
from Thee," he was speaking in affec- 
tion, but it was near-sighted affection. 
When we stand in the presence of a 
soul suffering in the will of God, and 
employ such words as these, are we not 
asserting our own inability to bear that 
very pain, and is not that a refined 
form of the assertion of self-love within 
us? A self-centred man is self- 
circumf erenced ; a God-centred man is 
a God-circumferenced man, and to be 
God-circumferenced is to take in past 
eternity and coming eternity. Peter, 
being self-centred, was self-circumfer- 
enced, and being self-circumferenced 
lived in the dust of an hour, and saw 
only the pain of a process, and none 
of the glory of the ultimate issue. 

But these are antagonistic ideals, 
they are mutually destructive. The 
things of God are a stumbling-block to 
the man who is minding the things of 
men. Christ placed before Peter the 
methods of His work, told him of the 



218 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xvi. 21-283 



Cross, and it was a stumbling-block. 
That is what Paul said in writing to 
the Corinthians, "The Cross . . . unto 
Jews a stumbling-block." A man mini- 
ing the things of men always finds the 
Cross a stumbling-block. 

But it is equally true that the things 
of men are a stumbling-block to him 
who minds the things of God. 

There is a very remarkable scene 
here. Peter took Him aside, just a 
little way from all the rest, and began 
to rebuke Him. We must not soften 
that word. Indeed, if we would have 
the real meaning of it, we must make 
it a little harsher. He chided Him, he 
was angry with Him. He said, What 
is coming to Your Kingdom if You 
die? How are You going to do the 
things You hope to do? Then Jesus 
turned. Probably He turned from 
him; He turned His back upon him, 
and His face to the other disciples; 
and said, " Get thee behind Me, Satan : 
thou art a stumbling-block unto Me." 
The man who loves Jesus, but who 
shuns God's method, is a stumbling- 
block to Him. A little while before 
Jesus had said, "Thou art Peter, and 
upon this rock I will build My Church." 
Now He said: Thou art a skandalon, 
a rock of offence, a rock still, but a 
rock in the way; a rock lying across 
My pathway to hinder Me. He turned 
His back upon. him because the "must" 
of eternity was upon His Spirit. Thus 
with sternness and severity He re- 
buked the man who, minding the things 
of men had ventured to rebuke Him, a 
Man Who was minding the things of 
God. 

How often the very stones of Christ's 
Church have become stones of stum- 
bling in His way? When does a man 
become a scandal to the Church? 
When he obtrudes his view of method 
as against God's view of method; when 
he tries to build God's Kingdom with- 
out God's Cross, and without God's suf- 
fering; when he ventures to say in 
answer to the "must" of God spoken 
from the lips of Jesus, Not that way, 
that is a mistake, but by some easier 
method; when he attempts to make 
the method of His victory easy. Every 
suggestion of this age which leads us to 
imagine that we may bring His King- 



dom in by softness and by sweetness, 
without blood and suffering, and agony, 
is a scandal, a stumbling-block. 

In view of that mistake of Peter our 
Lord restated the terms of His disciple- 
ship, "If any man would come after 
Me." They all wanted to, they all 
loved Him, they all had affection for 
Him. He said, If this is so, if any 
man desires to come after me let him 
first " Deny himself ;" and secondly, 
"Take up his Cross." Let us consider 
those conditions carefully. Denying of 
self is far more than self-denial in our 
usual sense of that term. Perhaps we 
may best illustrate it by declaring that 
we have no right to make any sacrifice 
for Jesus Christ which He does not 
appoint. When a man takes on him 
some effort of sacrifice, simply because 
he thinks sacrifice is the right thing, 
and does not wait for orders, he is as 
surely a skandalon to his Lord as 
when he does not deny himself and 
take up his cross at the command of 
the Master. The true disciple chooses 
neither song nor dirge, neither sunshine 
nor shadow; has no choice but to know 
his Master's will and to do it. If He 
appoint for us the blue waters of the 
lake and all the sunshine of the sum- 
mer, then let us rejoice therein, and not 
vex our souls because we know no suf- 
fering and pain. If He appoint a via 
dolorosa and a sunless sky, then God 
make us willing to take the way, be- 
cause the way is His appointment. We 
must be in His will if we are to co- 
operate with Him. 

The programme of the disciple is 
expressed in these words, " Follow 
Me." That is, make the "must" of 
My life the "must" of your life. I 
must. Does not that mean suffering? 
It may, or it may not. Suffering is 
not the deepest thing in the " must." 
The deepest thing is this; I must co- 
operate with the purpose of God, what- 
soever it may be. I must co-operate 
with Him towards that resurrection 
that means ransom and redemption. 
On the way there may be the suffering 
and the killing there surely will be 
some measure of it but the suffering 
and the killing are not the deepest 
things. The deepest thing is that we 
get into touch with God and do His 



219 



[MATT. xvn. 1-13] 



MATTHEW 



will; and whether it be laughter or 
crying, sorrowing or sighing, the secret 
of life is to follow Him on the pathway 
of loyalty to the Divine will. 

He explained this in gracious terms 
when He said, " Whosoever would save 
his life shall lose it; and whosoever 
shall lose his life for My sake shall 
find it." This is the commonplace phi- 
losophy of true life. It is always so. 
Find any man who is always saving 
his life, and he will lose it. The way 
to lose our physical life is always to 
be saving it. The way to lose our 
mental life is to be careful that it never 
feels the storms and bruises of passion. 
The way to lose our spiritual life is 
to be so perpetually anxious to get into 
heaven that we never move into line 
with God in His work for the building 
of His Kingdom here on earth. 

Then the King made His appeal in 
two questions : " What shall a man be 
profited, if he shall gain the whole 
world, and forfeit his life? or what 
shall a man give in exchange for his 
life? For the Son of Man shall come 
in the glory." 

The Judge will be the Lord, Whose 
Cross you will not share to-day. To 
whom will you appeal from His ver- 
dict? The last throne is His throne, 
and at the final assize He presides. 



If you save your life to-day, how will 
you buy it back, for the Man for Whom 
you will not suffer is the Man coming 
to reign in His glory? 

The final appeal, therefore, is that 
we fall into line with His progress, and 
with the things of God; because He is 
also to come in the glory of His 
Father; and the glory of His Father 
is the outworking in history of the 
things of God upon which His heart 
and mind were set in the days of His 
flesh. And that means, first of all, a 
facing of the Cross. 

The antagonism abides. We need 
not go far to find it; we can find it in 
our own heart. We hear in our own 
heart the searching and tremendous 
voice saying, " I must." We hear also 
in our own heart something that says; 
Not that, let me escape that, let that 
be far from me. To which are we 
going to yield? Let us in imagination 
hurry back to the rocky places of 
Caesarea Philippi and ask ourselves, 
Which "must" shall master us? Are 
we going with Him in the will of God, 
enwrapped by the forces of eternity, to 
suffer and to triumph; or are we going 
to stand alone, saving our own miser- 
able lives, and so lose them? May 
God help us to decision. 



MATTHEW XVII. 1-13 



THIS paragraph tells the story of the 
Transfiguration of our Lord. We 
need to give careful attention to the 
place of the Transfiguration in the 
scheme of our Lord's work as King. 
The question of first importance for 
us now is; What did this Transfigur- 
ation of the King mean to the three 
disciples who were permitted to wit- 
ness it; and, subsequently, to those 
who, through them, heard the story? 
It is hardly overstating the case to de- 
clare that the glory of the Mount of 
Transfiguration rests upon Peter's two 
epistles. It was there, "On the Holy 
Mount," as he termed it, that he heard 
the voice and saw the glory, the mean- 
ings of which to him at the moment, 
were hidden, but the value of which 
came to him in subsequent years, so 



that when he looked back through 
Resurrection, and the mystery of the 
Cross, to the mountain, he spoke of it 
as the " Holy Mount," and constructed 
his first letter around the twofold im- 
pression which that Mount made upon 
him the impression which he de- 
scribes as that of the Coming, and the 
Power, or more accurately, the Pres- 
ence and Power of Jesus Christ. 

In order to answer this question as 
to what the Transfiguration meant to 
these men, there are certain matters 
as to its setting which we must take 
time to notice. 

First of all it is necessary to take 
the final verse of the previous chapter, 
which we have not yet considered, but 
which is intimately related to all that 
has preceded it. The King was talking 



220 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xvii. 1-13] 



to that group of men, so afraid of the 
Cross, of whom Peter had been the 
spokesman, when He said, " Verily I 
say unto you, There are some of them 
that stand here, who shall in no wise 
taste of death, till they see the Son 
of Man coming in His Kingdom." 

There are many interpretations of the 
meaning of these words. There are 
those who believe that He meant to 
say that, in the age of Gospel preach- 
ing, and in the victories which should 
follow such preaching, man would live 
to see the vindication of His claim, and 
would live to see the coming of His 
Kingdom ; and there is certainly an ele- 
ment of truth in that view. 

There are those who say His refer- 
ence to His coming was a reference to 
the destruction of Jerusalem; and here 
again we certainly have part of the 
truth. There is a sense in which there 
is no doubt He was present at that 
judgment of the city, as He is present, 
and presiding over, all the events of 
human history. It may be that there 
was some more special sense in which 
He came at that destruction, but surely 
none of us is prepared to say that He 
came into His Kingdom in the hour in 
which Jerusalem "beautiful in eleva- 
tion, the joy of the whole earth," over 
which He had wept tears of sincere 
pity, even though He had pronounced 
its doom was swept away. As a mat- 
ter of fact He had come into His King- 
dom before then. 

There is yet another interpretation 
of the meaning of these words. It is 
that His reference was to that which 
immediately follows in the chronicle, 
the unveiling of the established King- 
dom in microcosm in the Transfigur- 
ation scene upon the sacred Mount. 
While that is also true, I do not think 
it exhausts the meaning. When He 
said, " Some of them that stand here," 
He was not distinguishing between cer- 
tain of His disciples and others of 
them; but between His disciples and 
outsiders. From Mark we learn that 
by this time He was speaking to the 
multitudes He had called, as well as 
to His disciples (Mark viii. 34). His 
disciples saw Him come into His King- 
dom, or as Mark puts it, " the Kingdom 
of God come with power," through the 



Cross interpreted by the Resurrection. 
(See Rom. i. 4.) Of this they had the 
final indisputable proof when power 
came to them at Pentecost. " The 
Kingdom of the Son of His Love," 
began at the Ascension of our Lord. 
Since then He has been reigning. If 
this be recognized we may turn to the 
immediate revelation of His Kingship 
as found in the Transfiguration. 

Let us observe the setting a little 
carefully. Jesus took three representa- 
tive men to the Mount, and was trans- 
figured before them. They were dazed 
and overwhelmed. Peter said, "It is 
good for us to be here; if Thou wilt, I 
will make three tabernacles; one for 
Thee, and one for Moses, and one for 
Elijah." He was immediately rebuked 
by the encompassing quiet, and by the 
voice which said, " This is My Beloved 
Son in Whom I am well pleased: hear 
ye Him." And the whole scene passed. 

Now carefully notice these words; 
"And as they were coming down from 
the mountain, Jesus commanded them, 
saying, Tell tie vision to no man until 
the Son of Man be risen from the 
dead." "And His disciples asked Him, 
saying, Why then say the scribes that 
Elijah must first come?" There does 
not at first seem to be any connection 
whatever between His charge, "Tell 
the vision to no man, until the Son of 
Man be risen from the dead," and their 
question. But there is a very intimate 
connection between their question and 
the promise He made to them at Caesa- 
rea Philippi, that they should see His 
Kingdom. That question was their ex- 
pression of the wonder that filled their 
hearts as they walked back down the 
mountain side, after all that they had 
seen. The glory had all vanished. 
There He was, walking by their side, 
the same Jesus Who had taken them 
up to the Mount, and there broke upon 
them the consciousness of the fact that 
they had seen the Son of Man in His 
Kingdom. Then they remembered the 
teaching of their own Scriptures, that 
before the Messianic Kingdom would 
be set up, there must come a Forerun- 
ner, and resuming the old conversation, 
they said, "Why then say the scribes 
that Elijah must first come?" If this 
strange glory upon the mountain that 



221 



[MATT. XVH. 1-13] 



MATTHEW 



blinded us reveals the coming of the 
Son of Man in His Kingdom, how is 
it that Elijah has not come? Mark 
His answer. " Elijah indeed cometh, 
and shall restore all things." Then He 
added, " Elijah is come already, and 
they knew him not, but did unto him 
whatsoever they would." Then it was 
made clear to them that He was re- 
ferring to John the Baptist. Thus He 
declared that by the coming of John 
the Baptist the promise of Elijah had 
been fulfilled, and that what they had 
seen was the prophetic vision of the 
Son of Man in the Kingdom. No 
doubt when He said, "Till they see 
the Son of Man coming in His King- 
dom," He referred to what was about 
to take place not on the Mount when 
they should behold Him in His glory, 
but in all that was to follow His de- 
scent from the Mount. 

Let us now consider, first, the natural 
place of the Transfiguration in the 
mission o Jesus; secondly, the Trans- 
figuration as an unveiling of the coming 
Kingdom; and, finally, the message of 
the Transfiguration to us. 

In considering the natural place o 
the Transfiguration in the mission of 
the King, we must see the place of the 
Transfiguration in the history of the 
Person of Jesus. On that Transfigura- 
tion Mount the human life of Christ 
reached its crowning glory. This is 
very largely, and very often overlooked. 
We may state the process of the hu- 
man life of Jesus in three words; 
innocence, holiness, perfected glory. 
Innocence, the primal condition of hu- 
man nature, not only not having sinned, 
but being without sin. There are no 
innocent children born to-day in the 
full sense in which the childhood of 
Jesus was innocent. He was absolutely 
sinless in nature; but it was necessary 
to the perfecting of that nature that 
He should face temptation. Human na- 
ture is never perfect until it has 
chosen for itself the right, as against 
the wrong which comes by allurement 
from without. A holy man is infinitely 
greater than an innocent man. A holy 
man is not merely a man in whose 
nature there is no sin. A holy man is 
a man who has looked into its face and 
said no. "He hath been in all points 



tempted like as we are, ' yet without 
sin." He was victorious over every 
form of temptation that the enemy 
brought to bear upon Him. When He 
came to the Mount of Transfiguration, 
what the disciples saw was not the 
glory of Deity, not. the glory of heaven 
shining upon Him; it was the outshin- 
ing of the glory of humanity which had 
passed from innocence, through holi- 
ness, to absolute and final perfection. 
He was metamorphosed before them, 
and the glory they saw was the glory 
of perfected humanity. Just as there 
is a gulf that seems to be impassable 
between the newly born body of an in- 
fant child and the mature strength of a 
full-grown man, so there is an even 
more impassable gulf between that full- 
grown strength of a mature man and 
the complete realisation in that man of 
the fuller meaning of his own spiritual 
life, as it masters the body, flames 
through it, and flashes into beauty, as 
matter and spirit merge into a common 
radiance of loveliness. We know 
nothing of that because there is sin in 
us; but in Christ we see God's ideal 
Man, absolutely sinless, innocent, grow- 
ing up to be holy; and at last, with all 
the temptations of life and of service 
overcome, there came a moment when, 
without death, He was metamorphosed, 
and ready for passing into a spiritual 
existence, carrying with Him His ma- 
terial body, changed, so that it was 
ready for life in the heaven of God. 
The Transfiguration was not the proof 
of Deity; it was the proof of absolute, 
essential, and victorious humanity. It 
was a revelation of what He is going 
to restore to us, if we trust Him; but 
we shall never reach our transfigur- 
ation but through His death and life. 
That is what the second advent means, 
that is what the changing of the bodies 
of our humiliation that they may be 
conformed to the body of His glory 
means. There is no hope for anything 
of that kind to any man who does not 
know Christ as his Saviour. This is 
the meaning of the Transfiguration in 
its relation to the Person of Jesus. 

Now notice that the perfection of the 
Person was necessary for the perfect 
King. We have seen the King, His 
Person, His propaganda, and now we 



222 



MATTHEW, 



[MAT*. XVH. 14-27] 



are coming to His Passion. But before 
we come to the Passion we must have 
the perfection of the Person. 

That final perfection of humanity 
was reached in the fact of Transfigur- 
ation. But that perfection does not 
bring Him to the Throne. He cannot 
so come into His Kingdom. The King- 
dom of God does not come with power 
so. Presently from that Mount of 
Transfiguration we shall go down the 
mountain side with the King, and along 
the rough and rugged road to the Cross. 
He descended out of heaven, the Son 
of God, and became incarnate, and in 
human life He won. Now for the sec- 
ond time He set His face towards the 
ways of men; and He Who came at 
first to share their life, from the Trans- 
figuration Mount passed down to share 
their death. He talked in the glory of 
the mountain with Moses and Elijah, 
of His decease, His exodus; and pres- 
ently He set His face towards it, and 
for the second time turned His back 
upon heaven, in order that, as per- 
fected Man, He might share in the 
mystery of human death, and so per- 
fect many sons for glory. 

If that be the place occupied by the 
Transfiguration in the mission of Jesus, 
let us observe how in that glory those 
men had unveiled before them the 
order of the coming Kingdom. The 
Kingdom had not yet come. It was 



coming, and these men saw its order. 
In the flashing glory of that night scene 
they saw what it would be like. The 
Kingdom was revealed to them in that 
hour upon the mountain. What they 
saw, corroborated all He had said to 
them in that Ccesarea Philippi conver- 
sation eight days before. 

They saw Him in the glory of His 
perfected humanity, and they heard 
His converse concerning the exodus He 
should accomplish. When, dazed and 
mystified, they suggested the perpetu- 
ation of the glory as there seen, the 
voice from heaven recalled them to 
obedience to what the Son said. The 
last thing He had said to them was that 
He must go to the Cross. Thus, though 
they did not apprehend the meaning 
then, they came afterwards to the un- 
derstanding of the fact that the Perfect 
Son could only bring the Kingdom with 
Power by the way of His Cross. 

As the vision passed, "they saw no 
Man save Jesus only." Then, mystified 
while yet illumined, they followed 
Him in His descent from the moun- 
tain humbling Himself and on to 
Death and through Death to Resur- 
rection and through Resurrection to 
Ascension and Coronation and so they 
saw " The Son of man coming in His 
Kingdom," " The Kingdom of God come 
with Power." 



MATTHEW XVII. 14-27 



IN this section we see the perfect 
King in the midst of His imperfect 
Kingdom. He was on His way to that 
mighty work through which alone He 
could come into possession of the King- 
dom, and as we accompany Him we 
see the difficulties confronting Him, and 
observe His methods in the presence 
of such difficulties. 

To-day the King has come into His 
Kingdom. He is appointed and anointed 
as God's King. The Kingdom is not yet 
perfected, but His Kingship is estab- 
lished. The antagonism still continues; 
the conflict is as severe as ever, if it 
be subtler. The terms of discipleship 
are not changed. There can be no fel- 
lowship with Christ in the perfecting 



of His Kingdom save by the way of 
the Cross. Nevertheless the light of 
coming victory still flashes upon the 
way. 

This paragraph naturally divides it- 
self into two parts. We have first, in 
verses fourteen to twenty-one, the ac- 
count of the coming of the King from 
the mountain into the consciousness of 
the age in which He lived, the age 
which continues until now. In this 
picture we see Him coming down from 
the Mount, where, in radiant glory, He 
had been revealed as the prepared 
King; and now all about Him were the 
facts and forces of the age. In verses 
twenty-two to twenty-seven, we have 
the picture of the King and His dis- 



223 



[MATT. xvii. 14-27] 



MATTHEW 



ciples. We see Jesus gathering to 
Him His own disciples, and talking to 
them in view of the age in which their 
ministry was to be exercised. 

Let us first consider our Lord's char- 
acterisation of the age as it is found in 
the twenty-seventh verse ; " O faithless 
and perverse generation, how long shall 
I be with you?" In these words we 
have a revelation of our Lord's con- 
sciousness of the condition of affairs in 
the midst of which He found Himself. 
There was no thunder in the words, but 
rather the wail of a great sorrow; " O 
faithless and perverse generation, how 
long shall I be with you? how long 
shall I bear with you?" His use of 
the word "generation" shows that He 
was speaking of a far wider circle than 
that of His disciples. He was referring 
to the whole condition of things in the 
midst of which He found Himself. 
And more. These words of Jesus 
Christ, spoken in local circumstances, 
come reverberating through the centu- 
ries, with perpetual application. If 
Jesus stood in our cities to-day He 
would say, " O faithless and perverse 
generation." "Faithless," that is, lack- 
ing faith; a generation that cannot be 
provoked to faith. "How long shall I 
be with you?" In other words, Jesus 
said, For three years I have exercised 
My ministry amongst you, healing and 
blessing as I have gone, teaching the 
underlying principles of God's King- 
dom. How long do you need persuad- 
ing to faith? How many evidences do 
you want before you rise into an atti- 
tude of confidence? What proofs are 
sufficient to provoke you to believe? 

Moreover, the age was not only 
"faithless;" it was "perverse;" which 
does not mean merely that it was re- 
bellious, but that it was a generation 
twisted, and contorted; a generation in 
which things were out of the regular; 
a generation distorted in its thinking, 
in its feeling, in its action; a gener- 
ation unable to think straightly, to feel 
thoroughly, to act with rectitude; a 
generation in which everything was 
wrong. 

The use of the two words, "faith- 
less and perverse," indicates a se- 
quence. A generation that loses its 
faith, becomes distorted, out of shape. 



A people who live exclusively upon the 
basis of the things seen, form untrue 
estimates; their thinking is distorted, 
their feeling is out of the straight, 
their activity is iniquity, which simply 
means crookedness. That was Christ's 
estimate of His .own age. And the 
lament of the Lord's wail is this, 
" How long shall I be with you ? how 
long shall I bear with you?" What 
do you need to provoke you to faith, 
in order that, out of your faith may 
come the straightening of all your life 
in thought, and feeling, and action? 
So our Lord's conception of human 
conditions is revealed in this lament 
over His age. 

What gave rise to this cry of the 
King as He came down from lie moun- 
tain into the valley? 

Let us now look at the immediate 
things. We see first a father with his 
boy, and the picture is yet again a 
microcosm in which the whole fact is 
revealed in one single case. This father 
brought his boy to Jesus, and he said, 
" Lord, have mercy on my son ; for he 
is a lunatic, and suffereth grievously." 
The Authorised Version is preferable 
here. The Revised " epileptic " is sim- 
ply a medical explanation of the signs 
following. The Greek word is lunatic. 
He may have been epileptic, but let 
us leave it as it is without attempting 
to account for the condition. The 
deepest tragedy of the story is found 
in the words; "I brought him to Thy 
disciples, and they could not cure him." 
Luke chronicles something here which 
Matthew has omitted, the fact that the 
man used a very remarkable expression 
when he came to Jesus. He said, 
" Have mercy . . . for he is mine only 
child," that is my only begotten son, 
exactly the same word which is used 
of Jesus in another connection. 

In a moment we see the vision; two 
personalities confronting each other, the 
Only begotten Son of the Father, and 
the only begotten son of man. The 
son of man was demon-possessed, and 
nothing in the age was equal to setting 
him free. It was the age of culture, 
of refinement, of learning, of religion; 
and in the midst of the Hebrew people 
all the forces of light and learning were 
at work, but there was nothing that 



224 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xvii. 14-27] 



would touch that boy. At last they 
brought him to the disciples of Jesus, 
but they were not able to deal with 
him. That is the picture of the age. 
The King, ready for His Kingdom, 
passed down the mountain into the 
valley, and found Himself confronted 
by that helpless boy, by that helpless 
father, by that helpless age, by those 
helpless disciples. Then there broke 
out of His heart the great wail, " O 
faithless and perverse generation, how 
long shall I be with you? how long 
shall I bear with you ? " 

That is a true picture of the con- 
dition of things to-day. We may take 
every one of these points, and find 
them being fulfilled in this particular 
age. We still have the demon-possessed 
sons of men. We still have the abso- 
lute helplessness of the most modern 
philosophy to set them free from the 
demons that possess them. And alas, 
the Church is sometimes as helpless as 
the rest! Many Christian people are 
unable to cast out demons in this age; 
and it seems as though the Lord con- 
tinues until now saying, " How long 
shall I bear with you?" What more 
do you need to provoke you to that 
living faith which lies at the back of 
all endeavour that is uplifting and 
ennobling? 

But now let us observe the action of 
the King. He said to the father, 
"Bring him hither to Me." Oh the 
majesty of that word of Jesus ! What 
confidence He had in His own ability! 
The boy was brought to Him, past the 
incompetent teachers of the age, past 
the feeble and faltering disciples, and 
it was but a. few moments before He 
gave the boy back to his father, healed. 

When the gracious deed was done, 
the disciples came to the Lord, or the 
Lord gathered the disciples about Him, 
and they said, "Why could not we 
cast it out?" Would that the Church 
would give time to ask that question. 
Then the Lord would say the same 
thing that He said to these men, "Be- 
cause of your little faith." If these 
men had been discussing the question 
in an annual religious assembly they 
would probably have come to a very 
different conclusion. They would have 
decided that they were unable to cast 



out the demon because of the diffi- 
culties of the surroundings, because of 
the criticism with which the air was 
filled ; for undoubtedly they were in the 
presence of men who were always 
watching them keenly. Or perhaps 
they would have accounted for it by 
the fact that this was a very peculiar 
case, one far more subtle and complex 
than any they had touched before. But 
Jesus said, " Because of your little 
faith." Perhaps this unbelief began at 
Csesarea Philippi, there at the parting 
of the ways, when Peter being the 
spokesman of the rest, had said, in the 
presence of the Cross; "That be far 
from Thee I " 

From that time they had been 
afraid; they had been at a little dis- 
tance from Him; they had held back; 
there had crept into their heart insidi- 
ously, unconsciously, questioning about 
Himself. They were not quite so sure 
of Him as they had been. They had 
thought that His method was to be 
purely educational, or that His method 
was to be a method of policy; but this 
rough and vulgar Cross, with blood, and 
shame, and suffering, had filled them 
with doubt. Then these men who were 
afraid, and who were discounting their 
Lord it may have been almost uncon- 
sciously, but quite positively came 
face to face with a demon-possessed 
boy, and they could not cast him out 
because of their unbelief. Lack of 
faith in the imperial and Divine Person 
of Jesus is paralysis in the presence of 
the world's need, and the world's agony. 
We may reduce our thinking about 
Jesus to the level upon which we at- 
tempt to get rid of the supernatural 
mysteries that surround His birth and 
His being, but when we do so we in- 
evitably paralyse our power to deal 
with demon-possessed men and women. 
Degrade Christ in thought by a. hair's- 
breadth, and our faith is weakened. 
Be afraid of Hun, afraid to press after 
Him, even though the pathway be 
rough, afraid lest He be mistaken in 
His estimates and thinking; and, in 
that moment, we have lost power to 
deal with demon-possessed children. 

In the last half of the paragraph we 
have our Lord's teaching of the dis- 
ciples. He repeated the very thing 



225 



[MATT. xvn. 14-27} 



MATTHEW 



they had questioned and had feared. 
He took them back to the point where 
their faith in Him had weakened and 
faltered. "While they abode in Gali- 
lee, Jesus said unto them, The Son of 
Man shall be delivered up into the 
hands of men ; and they shall kill Him, 
and the third day He shall be raised 
up. And they were exceeding sorry." 
How long that quiet time and that 
teaching lasted we do not know. It 
is certain that for a time He stayed in 
Galilee, and taught His disciples, in- 
sisting upon the necessity for the Cross 
and the issue of Resurrection. Now 
mark the impression He produced 
"And they were exceeding sorry." 
That sorrow was a. proof of their lack 
of sympathy with Him. That sounds a 
strange and contradictory thing to say. 
We always thought sorrow was sym- 
pathy, and sympathy was sorrow. In 
this case sorrow was lack of sympathy. 
To the minds of the disciples there was 
a perpetual veiling of victory by suffer- 
ing. During the months after Caesarea 
Philippi, Jesus was perpetually talking 
about His Cross, and He never did so 
without declaring His Resurrection. 
He said He would fall into the hands of 
men, and they would kill Him, and the 
third day He would be raised up again, 
and "they were exceeding sorry." 
Sorry that He should be raised up? 
That is unthinkable; and the only way 
to account for their sorrow is to recog- 
nize that they were so confused with 
the thought of the Cross, that they 
never heard the declaration of Resur- 
rection, or else interpreted His story of 
Resurrection as Martha did when He 
said to her about her brother, "Thy 
brother shall rise again," and she said, 
" I know that he shall rise again in the 
resurrection at the last day." And per- 
haps these men, too, thought that when 
He talked of rising on the third day 
it was figurative. These men were un- 
able to look through the Cross to the 
Resurrection. After this miracle at the 
foot of the mountain, they were still 
in the same condition, unbelieving. 

There is a strange and beautiful 
story closely related to this. "And 
when they were come to Capernaum, 
they that received the half shekel came 
to Peter, and said, Doth not your 



Teacher pay the half shekel?" The 
negative form of the question shows 
that it was a question of criticism, a 
question of men who thought they had 
some occasion of complaint against 
Jesus. Peter replied to their inquiry 
by saying, Yes. And when they came 
into the house, Jesus, knowing what 
had happened outside, anticipated him, 
by asking him a question. The half 
shekel was not a Roman tax, but a 
Temple tax for every man, whether 
rich or poor; it was the redemption 
money. Under the Divine economy it 
had a proper place and significance; 
but gradually, by the tradition of men, 
it had become an annual payment ex- 
acted by the authorities. And they 
came to Peter and asked him if his 
Master paid it. And he said,. Yes. 
Christ said to him, "What thinkest 
thou, Simon? The Icings of the earth, 
from whom do they receive toll or 
tribute? from their sons, or from 
strangers?" And the answer was cor- 
rect. " From strangers." Then said 
Jesus, "Therefore the sons are free." 
He was reminding Peter of Caesarea 
Philippi. There Peter had said, " Thou 
are the Christ, the Son of the living 
God." Now Christ said to him, This 
half shekel is the payment of the sub- 
jects of the King, and you have said 
that I am the Son. When you con- 
fessed that, you did not quite under- 
stand the dignity and glory of the fact, 
for now you say that I pay this half 
shekel. You must have recognized that 
there is no claim on Me to pay it, if 
you had understood your own declara- 
tion, and the revelation of the Mount. 
It is for you to pay this because you 
are the strangers, the subjects, the peo- 
ple under the rule of the King. I am 
the Son. 

" But, lest we cause them to stum- 
ble;" lest we put a stumbling-block in 
the way of these men that they may 
not understand, you and I will pay this 
together. "Go thou to the sea, cast 
a hook." That is the only occasion in 
the New Testament where that mode 
of fishing is referred to. "Cast a 
hook." Only one fish is needed. And 
he did it, and found a shekel. Not 
half a shekel-piece, for Peter and Jesus 
were together in this matter. "Thou 



226 



MATTHEW 



[MAM. xviii. 1-14] 



shalt find a shekel; that take, and give 
unto them for Me and thee." Thus 
the King brought Himself to the place 
of submission in order that others 
might not be caused to stumble. He 
put Himself into fellowship with Peter. 
Peter, you must all pay the shekel, but 
I will pay it with you. You must take 
this place of submission; I take it side 
by side with you. In the commonplace 
of life I am with you, just as I was 
in the glory of the Mount, where all My 
Kingliness was manifested; just as I 
will be with you in the midst of the 
need of the age. 

And so it would seem that our Lord 
was leading Peter and the rest back to 
the faith in Him which they lacked, 
and from lack of which some of their 
number, left in the valley, had been 
unable to cope with the difficulty which 
presented itself. 

The first application of this story, 
as ever, is a simple one. We cannot 
exhaust the value of any of these 
stories in the day in which they hap- 
pened, or in the circumstances in the 
midst of which we find ourselves in 
imagination. We must see Jesus stand- 
ing in the age. He is standing in this 
age now. Still He is saying, " O faith- 



less and perverse generation." Still He 
is saying, " Bring him to Me." But 
we cannot do it if we have lost Him in 
any measure, if our confidence in Him 
is not all that it was, and all that it 
ought to be. If we place Him among 
other sons of men, one among many of 
the teachers of the nations, of the lead- 
ers of men, then we can no more take a 
demon-possessed boy to Him than to 
Buddha, or to Confucius, or to Ma- 
homet. It is only when He is to us 
mystery of all mysteries the greatest; 
the "altogether Lovely" as well as the 
Living One, not less than the portrai- 
ture of the New Testament, but incom- 
parably greater, because John was right 
when he wrote, "There are also many 
other things which Jesus did, the which 
if they should be written every one, I 
suppose that even the world itself 
would not contain the books that should 
be written." It is only when that vision 
of the Christ fills our souls, and that 
conception of Him is the rock-founda- 
tion of our confidence, that we can hope 
to cast out demons in His name. In the 
midst of a great deal that troubles the 
heart, if we have that Christ, we can 
look up in His face and say, " Lord, I 
believe; help Thou mine unbelief." 



MATTHEW XVIII. 1-14 



main purport of the King, in 
the period covered by this last 
division of Matthew, was not that of 
presenting His Kingdom to the outside 
world as He had done before, nor that 
of demonstrating His power to the out- 
side world; it was rather that of gath- 
ering His disciples about Himself, and 
instructing them carefully, in view of 
His coming Passion. His public min- 
istry continued. The multitudes came 
to Him with need, and He always 
turned to them graciously. He never 
refused to respond to the approach of 
the multitude even though He was de- 
voting Himself to this training of 
His own. 

This chapter records instructions 
which our Lord gave to these disciples 
in view of the work that lay before 
them. 

It falls into two parts; the Master's 



instruction, first concerning greatness, 
and secondly concerning forgiveness. 
The first part was His answer to their 
question "Who then is greatest in the 
Kingdom of heaven?" Then He 
merged His teaching concerning great- 
ness, into His teaching concerning for- 
giveness, the attitude of His people 
towards wrongdoing. Our present study 
is concerned with the first of these 
teachings, that concerning greatness. 

Now, in order that we may under- 
stand our Lord's teaching, let us con- 
sider it; first, by the examination of 
its method; secondly, and principally, 
by the consideration of the teaching 
itself. Our Lord made His answer 
clear and definite, precise and immedi- 
ate; but He recognized that in the ques- 
tion asked there were many other mat- 
ters involved, and He dealt with them, 
leading these men a great deal farther 



227 



[MATT. xvm. 1-1411 



MATTHEW 



than they expected He would lead them, 
when they asked their question. 

We will first notice the method of 
this section, and the method of our 
Lord's answer to His disciples' ques- 
tion. " In that hour came the disciples 
unto Jesus, saying, Who then is great- 
est in the Kingdom of heaven ? " What 
did this question mean? First let us 
notice the little word, "then." In the 
Authorised Version this word does not 
occur, but it is of great importance. It 
is perfectly evident that the word then 
has no time-value here. They were not 
thinking of that time, or time past, nor 
of time to come. The " then " is an 
indication of the fact that these people 
were thinking about our Lord's teach- 
ing, and they were greatly puzzled by 
all the new things He was saying to 
them about the Kingdom. It is the 
then of contrast between their ideas 
and His ideas. They had looked for 
the Kingdom, with its gradations from 
King, through officers of State, down 
to the common level of the people; the 
ordinary human ideal of a kingdom, 
which is so utterly and absolutely false. 
They had looked for a King and a 
Kingdom upon the pattern of material 
purposes and ideals. They had ex- 
pected Him presently to assert Him- 
self in the midst of the age in which 
He lived, to break the power of Rome, 
and to re-establish the throne of David 
in Jerusalem; to appoint Peter in all 
probability as Prime Minister that 
was the natural order of things and 
the other apostles to all the other offices 
of State. He had said to them, Your 
King is going to Jerusalem to suffer, 
to be murdered, and to rise again. 
They said, "Who then is greatest?" 
All the hopes of Himself that they had 
been cherishing, had turned into dust, 
and they stood in the midst of the 
wreckage of their own ideals, and 
hopes, and aspirations. They may not 
have been personally seeking for office, 
although there evidently was a con- 
sciousness that they had lost the chance 
of office. This is a greater question 
than it appears, for as a matter of fact 
the actual word is, "Who then is the 
greater of them in the Kingdom?" 
What they really asked was, What is 
the condition of greatness in Thy King- 



dom? They said in effect; Greatness 
in our kingdom is manifested by some 
high office, dignity issues in notoriety. 
If you rob us of our ideals, what is 
Thy ideal of greatness? In conse- 
quence of His strange prediction of 
the Cross they were completely baffled 
and perplexed. 

Let us now consider Christ's answer, 
observing carefully His method. 

We have first of all the action ; " He 
called to Him a little child, and set 
him in the midst of them." We miss 
all the poetry of this if we do not see 
the actual scene in Galilee. Behold the 
King! We should never have taken 
Him for the King if we had been tour- 
ists through that district, and passed 
by while He was talking to those men. 
There was no beauty that material eyes, 
seeing, should desire Him. He wore a 
plain seamless robe woven from the top 
throughout; a home-made garment. 
But home-made garments are very 
beautiful when love's fingers have made 
them; and love made that robe for 
Jesus. It was perfectly evident that 
He was a Man of the people, a car- 
penter. Round about Him we see these 
men, for the most part young fisher- 
men. They were men of infinite ca- 
pacity, men capable of splendid daring, 
yet frail, fickle, feeble, and often faint- 
hearted. These men asked this Man 
this question, a perfectly proper and 
pertinent question. In all likelihood 
some Hebrew lad was playing near, and 
Christ called him, and he came, and 
Jesus put him in the midst of these 
men. That is the first fact of His 
answer. 

Then, after this action, came the an- 
swer direct. There was a kindly satire 
about the speech of Jesus, but His 
satire never wounded men. He said, 
You want to know what is the law of 
greatness. You must get down there, 
to the level of that boy, before you get 
in at all ; " Except ye turn, and be- 
come as little children, ye shall in no 
wise enter into the Kingdom of 
heaven." But if you be as little as 
the child, "the same is the greatest." 
He meant first that everybody is great 
inside; there are no little souls inside 
the Kingdom. Thus He swept away 
any incipient desire for caste, and class, 



228 



MATTHEW 



[MATT, xviii. 1-14] 



and gradation, that lurked in their 
question. He had said on another oc- 
casion, "Among them that are born of 
women there hath not arisen a greater 
than John the Baptist: yet he that is 
but little in the Kingdom of heaven is 
greater than he." Christ had a ma- 
jestic conception of His own Kingdom. 
That was His answer direct. j 

Now notice that He proceeded from 
that point to bring out of His answer 
involved truths, and to apply them. 
First, He applied practical tests to these 
men. "And whoso shall receive one 
such little child in My name receiveth 
Me : but whoso shall cause one of these 
little ones that believe on Me to stum- 
ble, it is profitable for him that a great 
millstone should be hanged about his 
neck, and that he should be sunk in the 
depth of the sea." There seems at 
first sight to be a lack of continuity in 
these words, but as a matter of fact 
there is a most intimate connection. If 
we are like the child we shall receive 
the child. A man to be successful in 
the Sunday school or the day-school, 
must have the child-heart. Only those 
who lack the child-heart themselves 
could cause the child to stumble. Of 
such the King declared, "It is profit- 
able for him that a great millstone 
should be hanged about his neck, and 
that he should be sunk in the depth of 
the sea." The thick millstone, not the 
millstone at which the two women 
ground, but the great upper millstone 
that had to be turned by a beast of 
burden. They knew what He meant. 
Put that round about his neck, and 
drown him in the depth of the sea. 
" It is profitable for him ;" he will make 
more in the economy of God out of 
such drowning, than out of being a 
stumbling-block in the way of a child. 

Then followed His resulting warning. 
"Woe unto the world. . . . Woe to 
that man through whom the occasion 
cometh ! " Here was a curious change 
of application. He was talking about 
offences coming to some one else, and 
then He said, " If thy hand or thy foot 
causeth thee to stumble, cut it off, and 
cast it from thee," by which He meant 
to say that the man who causes the 
stumbling-block becomes a stumbling- 
block to himself, and if we destroy a 



child we destroy ourselves. So He sol- 
emnly warned them. 

Then He gave them the final instruc- 
tion, beginning thus, " Despise not one 
of these little ones." 

Now let us more particularly examine 
this, in order that we may have the 
teaching of it for ourselves. What was 
this that Jesus said and did when He 
took the child and set it in their midst? 
He gave us the type of character in 
His Kingdom, and of such as may enter 
that Kingdom. No man has ever en- 
tered the Kingdom of God who has not 
taken up this place, and come to the 
level of a little child, which is the 
level of imperfection, of simplicity, of 
submissiveness. 

It is the level of imperfection. Per- 
haps that is where most men stumble. 
The little child is the emblem of imper- 
fection, waiting for correction and in- 
struction, in order to development. No 
man can enter the Kingdom except 
upon this level. Jesus Christ did not 
say, in order to enter My Kingdom you 
must be perfect. When we have en- 
tered He will say as one of the severest 
things, "Ye shall be perfect, as your 
Father ... is perfect." But the con- 
dition for entrance is imperfection. 
That does not mean that the condition 
for coming in is hopeless imperfection. 
A little child is not for evermore 
troubling about imperfection. The child 
subconsciously knows it, and in the 
knowledge of its imperfection yields 
itself to instruction, and correction, if 
it have a true child nature. 

It is the level of simplicity. In the 
child we have all the things that are 
elemental. Complexity is not yet. All 
the powers of its being express them- 
selves freely, readily, naturally; there 
is no guile. 

But the final thing is that the child 
is plastic, submissive. It was a Roman 
Catholic Prelate who said, Give me the 
children until they are seven, I care 
not what you do after. It is perfectly 
true. A little child is always plastic. 
There may be a good deal of inherited 
sin in the child, but give the child its 
opportunity, it is submissive, and yields 
to the touch of our hand. All this is 
for us, and it is fearfully solemn and 
searching for any who have children 



229 



[MAT*, xviii. 1-14] 



MATTHEW 



in the home, or who teach them in the 
schools. The little children will bear 
our impress to the end of their lives, 
and through eternity. 

What, then, did He say to these men 
who wanted to know what was the con- 
dition of greatness in His Kingdom? 
" Except ye turn and become as little 
children." He was stating a general 
principle, that a man must turn back 
to that. Mark the recognition that 
when the child leaves childhood, and 
enters upon its youth and manhood, 
these very things pass and fail; and 
therefore He said, You must get back 
again to that condition of imperfection, 
and simplicity and submissiveness ; if 
you will humble yourself to that, then 
you will realise the ideal of greatness. 

But now, following along this line of 
application, let us look at the practical 
tests. The child-heart receives the 
child, and the being who has lost the 
child-heart will offend the child. Now 
while our Lord makes these statements 
and they become tests, they are not 
tests only; they are words of terrific 
meaning and importance, words full of 
comfort and encouragement. Do you 
know what it is to receive a little child ? 
Do you know what it is to take a child 
into your heart and life in Christian 
sympathy? In the moment you of the 
child-heart receive a little child, you 
receive to yourself the Christ Himself. 
" Whoso shall receive one such little 
child in My name, receiveth Me." 
Offend that little child and you offend 
Him. By comparison " it is profitable 
for him that a great millstone should 
be hanged about his neck, and that he 
should be sunk in the depth of the 
sea." He was teaching His disciples 
by that which is dear to God's heart, 
a child; and He was teaching them 
that they could test their own spirit by 
their relation to the child. 

And then it seems as though the 
eyes of the Master, from that moment, 
looked on down the centuries "Woe 
unto the world" and the first woe of 
that verse, by its setting, is evidently 
not the woe of a curse, but the woe of 
a great lamentation "Woe unto the 
world because of occasions of stum- 
bling! for it must needs be that the 
occasions come; but woe to that man 



through whom the occasion cometh ! " 
The second woe is the same, but it has 
taken on the nature of a curse. First 
Christ's pity for the world, and then 
Christ's pronouncement of punishment 
upon men by whom the offences come. 
He traced the woes of the world to 
those from whom they proceed, such 
as cause stumbling and offence; and 
gathering up the world's sorrow, He 
fastened it upon the head of the man 
that causes it. In it we see the in- 
finite equity and justice of Christ. 
That is His attitude to-day. Woe to 
the city where the offences come! 
That is a lamentation. But woe to the 
men from whom they come ! That is a 
fiery word, burning with anger. Thus 
He gathered up into the economy of 
His ultimate dealings with men, all the 
woes of the race, and fixed them upon 
the men that have been the cause of 
them. The spirit that receives a child 
and will not offend it, is the spirit that 
will not put a stumbling-block in the 
way of the world. The man who 
offends a child is the man who wounds 
the world. Let there be no softening 
of these words of Jesus. He talks 
about the age-abiding fire, the Gehenna 
of fire, always burning, where refuse 
is flung. That is the place for the man 
who lacks the child-heart. He will be 
treated in the economy of God as out- 
side the city, fit only for the rubbish 
heap. So there rings through this 
great speech of Jesus His tenderness 
and His thunder. 

What is the ultimate instruction? 
He came back again to the child. 
Maybe he looked once again on the boy 
who stood there wondering at the words 
which, perhaps, he did not understand 
at all more occupied with the loveli- 
ness of the face of the One Who was 
uttering them and He said, " See that 
ye despise not one of these little ones." 
He gave them three reasons. First of 
all, "In heaven their angels do always 
behold the face of My Father Who is 
in heaven." The children have angels 
who behold the face of the Father, and 
who minister to them, and Jesus said, 
to these men who were going to be in 
His Kingdom, and who wanted to know 
about greatness; Do not forget that the 
angels do not despise the children. 



230 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xvm. 15-35] 



They watch them and guard them, and 
stand in heaven's Court for them. The 
angels are all ministering spirits, sent 
forth to do service for the sake of 
them that shall inherit salvation. And 
if you have wandered from the tender 
Fatherhood of God, your angel is still 
following you, and if, without sound or 
sigh, you turn back again to God, all 
the angels will join in the joy of that 
angel who announces your turning, be- 
cause he has watched you so long. The 
little ones have angels waiting. 

But that is not the highest reason 
for not despising them. He moved on 
to a higher level. In the Revised Ver- 
sion verse eleven is omitted, but the 
truth is not omitted. Our revisers felt 
it was out of place here, and ought to 
be omitted " The Son of Man has 
come to seek and to save that which 
was lost." Even though we miss that, 
the next statement is the same thing; 
" How think ye ? If any man have a 
hundred sheep, and one of them be 
gone astray, doth He not leave the 
ninety and nine, and go unto the 
mountains, and seek that which goeth 
astray? And if so be that He find 
it ... he rejoiceth over it more than 
over the ninety and nine which have 
not gone astray." So if we ask, What 
about the inherited sin of the child? 
The Shepherd- came to seek _such. He 
was still talking about a child, so that 
another reason we are not to despise a 
child, is the fact that He has come to 
find the little child. 

Once again, there is yet a mightier 
reason than the reason of angel min- 
istry, and the reason of the Son's in- 
terest and mission ; " Even so " as 



angels are interested, as the Son is 
interested" Even so, it is not the will 
of My Father . . . that one of these 
little ones should perish." If you de- 
spise a little child, then you are against 
the angels, you are against the Son of 
God, you are against the Eternal 
Father. 

Oh the false measurements of great- 
ness ! A man is sometimes thought 
great because of his notoriety. It is 
often a more unpleasant word but a 
truer word than popularity. Men some- 
times measure greatness by a man's 
power to manage other men and reign 
over them. But there is another word 
for that tyranny. What is Christ's 
standard? Begin with the last thing 
and move backwards. Despise not a 
child, offend not a child, receive a 
child. What . is the condition for all 
that? Be like a child, and when you 
become like a child, you become great. 

To despise a child is to be out of 
harmony with the angels, the Son, and 
the Father. To offend a child is to 
make it profitable not to be. To receive 
a child is to entertain Jesus Christ. 
To be like a child is to be great. 

As we listen to the King talking to 
His disciples and to us, we see how 
close heaven and hell are to each other ! 
In the words of His lips He illumi- 
nates for us the infinite spaces, and we 
see the glories of God's own heaven; 
and in another moment, He lights for 
us the lurid depths of the underworld, 
and of judgment and punishment! 
May God give us the heart of a 
child! May God help us to put upon 
our own ambition the measurement of 
the little child. 



MATTHEW XVIII. 15-35 



IN this whole paragraph we have 
practically one discourse of our 
Lord to His own disciples. There are 
two great subjects with which He 
dealt. The first is that of greatness; 
the second, that of forgiveness. In 
our last section we considered the 
King's teaching concerning greatness. 
Here we have another side of the 
same truth, that namely, of the atti- 



tude of the subjects of the King to- 
wards a man who offends. The theme 
therefore is that of forgiveness. We 
should hardly relate these two things, 
greatness and forgiveness ; and yet they 
are intimately related, for the final 
proof of greatness is ability to forgive. 
This is true of God, and therefore it 
must be true of men. 
In words that seem to scorch us, He 



231 



IMAM, xviir. 15-35] 



MATTHEW 



warned His disciples not to offend. 
But, supposing that some man has of- 
fended, has been a stumbling-block to 
some one else, what shall we do with 
him? We cannot study this teaching 
of Jesus without being startled at the 
way in which the thunder merges into 
the love-song, and the lightning into 
the sunlight. This Teacher, so severe, 
so terrible, Who makes one tremble 
lest one should offend, when a man 
has offended, summons us by the com- 
passion of God's heart, to go after 
him, to bring him back. That is the 
whole story of the relationship between 
greatness and forgiveness. We put 
them far apart in these days, and speak 
of the man who forgives as a weak 
man. But Christ shows the greatness 
of the man who forgives. 

This passage divides itself quite 
naturally into two parts. We have in 
verses fifteen to twenty the King's defi- 
nite instruction concerning forgiveness, 
commencing with the words, " If thy 
brother sin against thee." The words 
"against thee" are open to question. 
In some manuscripts they are not 
found; while in others they are. In 
the margin of the Revision it is writ- 
ten, " Some ancient authorities omit 
against thee." Nothing dogmatic can 
be said as to whether these words 
ought to be retained or not, and yet 
the whole context suggests that the 
word of Christ here had a wider appli- 
cation than that of dealing with sin 
against us personally. Our responsi- 
bility against our sinning brother is not 
created by the fact that he has wronged 
us, but by the fact that he has sinned 
and harmed himself. 

Then in verses twenty-one to thirty- 
five we have an account of how the 
disciples misunderstood Him; and of 
the King's correction. 

Now let us, first of all, look at the 
King's instructions. Before looking at 
some of the things particularly, let us 
observe the spirit and purpose of them. 
The underlying purpose of Jesus con- 
cerning the sinning brother is expressed 
in the words, " Thou hast gained thy 
brother." In considering our Lord's 
use of the word "gained" here, it is 
very interesting to trace it through the 
New Testament. It is a commercial 



word, a word of the market place. It 
is a word which is used to characterise 
the processes by which a man accumu- 
lates wealth. The use of the word in 
this connection, so far as the sinning 
brother is concerned, recognizes ioss. 
A man who has sinned is in certain 
senses lost; when he is restored he is 
gained, and the gain is interpreted by 
the context. 

We are personally to attempt to gain 
our brother, because we have lost him 
as a brother through his sin. If he 
will not hear us, we are to take two or 
three with us, because by persisting in 
sin, his friends have lost him, he is 
lost to comradeship. If he will not 
hear them we are to go to the Church, 
because the Church has lost him; by 
his sin. The Church is to take the 
matter to heaven, because heaven has 
lost him by his sin. It is the great 
tragedy of a man lost which colours 
all this instruction; and the purpose 
that is to be in our heart when we deal 
with a sinning brother, is that of gain- 
ing him. 

This word "gain" suggests, not 
merely the effect on the one lost, but 
the value it creates for those who seek 
him. When presently we have done 
with the shadows and the mists of the 
little while, we shall understand in the 
light of the undying ages that if we 
have gained one man we shall be richer 
than if we have piled up all the wealth 
of the world, and never won a human 
soul. What a blessed thing to gain a 
man, to possess him for oneself, for 
the fellowship of friends, for the enter- 
prises of the Church, for the pro- 
gramme of high heaven. 

But now how is this to be done? 
Our Lord was very careful in His reve- 
lation of the method. We are to begin 
by personal effort. " If thy brother sin 
against thee, go, show him his fault be- 
tween thee and him alone." This is 
not gentle permission. It is definite 
instruction. Any Church of Jesus 
Christ is weak in the proportion in 
which its members allow false pity or 
sentiment to prevent their being faith- 
ful to this great work of attempting to 
show an erring brother his fault, in 
order that he may be restored. Jesus 
said, " If thy brother sin, go, show him 



232 



MATTHEW 



TMAOT?. XVIH. IS-35J 



his fault," declare it unto him. Charge 
him with it. By no means in the spirit 
of jealousy or judgment, but bring him 
to realise it as a fault, as sin. It is not 
enough to convince him that we count 
it as sin. Our business is to bring the 
man to see that he has sinned. And if 
an erring brother shall say to us when 
we go to him, I know it in the depths 
of my soul, then we begin the min- 
istry of restoration. There may be a 
great many things necessary with re- 
gard to the man's relationship to the 
Kingdom and the Church, but so far 
as his relationship to us is concerned, 
we have gained him when he confesses 
his sin. Out of such conviction con- 
trition comes, and out of such contri- 
tion, the face is set back again towards 
God, and right, and purity. That is 
the first method. 

But supposing he will not hear, then 
the Lord says, our responsibility is not 
over, for the interest is a larger one 
than personal, in any man who has 
sinned. There is the interest of the 
comradeship. And so we must take 
with us one or two; and we are still 
going on the same business; to show 
him his fault, in order to bring him to 
contrition and return. 

But supposing this man will neither 
hear us nor those whom we take with 
us, does not realise his sin, will not 
confess his sin, or is rebellious in his 
sin, continuing therein, what then? 
Then we are to tell it to the Church. 
Here we must be very careful to notice 
what our Lord really meant, for He 
clearly declared the alternative that is 
before the Church, when, lastly, the 
case is brought to it. The one side o 
the alternative is, that he will hear the 
Church. If the Church can restore this 
man, when one has failed, when two 
or three have failed, to contrition and 
conviction and consciousness of sin, 
then the Church has gained the man. 
But if he will not, what then? The 
other side of the alternative on the 
part of the Church is that then the 
man is to be as a Gentile and a 
publican. 

Now before we examine that, let us 
notice what follows, because what fol- 
lows explains the meaning of this 
power of the Church, "Verily, I say 



unto you what things soever ye shall 
bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; 
and what things soever ye shall loose 
on earth shall be loosed in heaven. 
Again I say. unto you, that if two of 
you shall agree on earth as touching 
anything that they shall ask, it shall 
be done for them of My Father which 
is in heaven. For where two or three 
are gathered together in My name 
there am I in the midst of them." 

These are some of the most remark- 
able things that our Lord said about 
His Church. They have much wider 
application than the application Jesus 
made of them at this point We are 
perfectly justified in lifting them out 
of their setting, and using them over a 
wider area of thought. But sometimes 
the danger is that we take these great 
words of Jesus and use them in the 
wider application, and so lose the im- 
mediate first-hand application which He 
Himself made of. them. All these great 
words have to do with the Church's 
attitude towards the sinning man, to 
which we will return. 

Yet they have to do with a much 
wider area which we cannot altogether 
pass over now. For some of us this is 
the whole ground of truth concerning 
the constitution and power of the 
Christian Church. " Where two or 
three are gathered together, there am 
I in the midst" That is the char- 
ter of the Church. How spacious, and 
gracious, and wonderful it is! . First 
of all it breaks down all idea of a 
localised meeting-place with God. We 
have gained a temple everywhere by 
the loss of the temple in a locality. 
Mark the magnificence of it. It is not 
the temple that makes the place of 
worship, but the gathering "in My 
name." There are worshipping souls 
in the great cathedrals, but they are 
not all there. On the mountain height, 
in some shepherd hut, far away from 
church, chapel, or conventicle, two 
shepherds are gathered in the name of 
Jesus. There is the Church. "Where 
two or three are gathered together, 
there am I in the midst." May God 
deliver us from putting limits upon 
His "where." All that is necessary, 
is that two or three should be gathered 
in His name. 



233 



[MATT. xvm. 15-35] 



MATTHEW 



Again, " If two of you shall agree on 
earth as touching anything that they 
shall ask, it shall be done for them of 
My Father Who is in heaven." That 
is the authority for collective praying. 
And yet once more, "What things so- 
ever ye shall bind on earth, shall be 
bound in heaven." That is the Church's 
ethical authority in the world. The 
Church teaches the standard of moral- 
ity, and what the Church says is bind- 
ing, is binding; and what the Church 
says is not, is not. But that is only 
true when we link it with what follows 
the Church gathering in the name of 
Christ. 

So the great passage is the charter 
of Church authority, of Church method, 
of Church foundation. The Church au- 
thority she binds and looses in the 
old ethical sense of the words in which 
the scribes perpetually made use of 
them. The Church is the authority in 
the world, which sets up the moral 
standards; and it has always been so, 
for the last nineteen centuries; the 
true standards obtaining in the com- 
mon consciousness of this hour are 
those which the Church has established. 
How does the Church gain this author- 
ity? By asking the Father, seeking 
from Him the light. But upon what 
basis does the Church gather to ask the 
Father for the light which shall make 
her message authoritative ? " Where 
two or three are gathered together in 
My name, there am I in the midst." 
These are some of the wider applica- 
tions of this teaching. 

Now mark this fact, that Jesus used 
these tremendous truths in this matter 
of how we should deal with our brother 
who has sinned. If the Church has 
consulted the will of God concerning 
him, because the Church has gathered 
in the name of Jesus, then her decision 
is binding, authoritative, final. Heaven 
ratifies it The Church, consisting of 
only two or three units, or of tens, 
scores, hundreds, gathered waiting be- 
fore God in the name and nature of 
God's Son, her conclusions are binding 
conclusions, and Heaven seals them. 
The Church, so gathered, is to deal 
with the case of this man, and if this 
man will not hear her, will not accept 
her ruling, will not be submissive to 



her authority, what then is she to do? 
If he will hear, she will fold him to 
her bosom; if this sinning man, who 
has offended, and ought to have had a 
millstone about his neck, is won back 
by the individual, or the two or three, . 
or the Church, then mother Church is 
to fold him, and as the father kissed re- 
peatedly the home-coming boy, mother 
Church, Bride of the Son of God, is to 
receive him, and smother him with her 
kisses. God give us hearts like that! 

But if not, what then? Then the 
pity of the Church is to be more than 
false pity for the individual, and the 
holiness of the assembly is to be of 
greater importance than the sheltering 
of a man that has done wrong, and is 
unrepentant. "Let him be unto thee 
as the Gentile and the publican." It 
is a terrific sentence. It is first, that 
the Church must put that man outside 
her fellowship, that the Church must 
exercise her authority on the side of 
Heaven's unsullied purity. 

But is that all? If we have so read 
it, we nave misread it. We may take 
these words of Jesus Christ and make 
them blasphemous by the very tone in 
which we read them. There is a hymn 
we often sing, 

"Lord, speak to me, that I may speak 
In living echoes of Thy tone." 

He never put the tone of thunder and 
denunciation into those words. He 
never put into them the tone of an 
unholy and unchristian excommunica- 
tion. That is what we have too often 
done. What did He say? This man 
you have been after, and could not 
gain, this man that two or three of you 
saw and could not gain, this man that 
the Church would fain have folded to 
her motherly bosom, and could not gain, 
" Let him be unto thee as the Gentile 
and the publican." You must put him 
outside the fellowship, and you must 
put him outside the shadow of the 
Church. He must not have the shelter 
of the Church for impurity. But the 
moment he is there, he is the man I 
came to win, he is the man for whom 
I came to die. "The Son of Man is 
come to seek and to save that which 
was lost." You must keep him from 
the privilege and the shelter of the 



234 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xvm. 15-35] 



Church, in order to bring him to con- 
sciousness, first of his need, and then 
of My exceeding grace and free 
forgiveness. 

Now let us glance at the misunder- 
standing of the disciples, because we 
are in succession to them, and are 
liable to make the same mistakes. 
Peter said, " Ivord, how oft shall my 
brother sin against me, and I forgive 
him ? until seven times ? " Observe 
Peter's magnanimity and Peter's mean- 
ness; and whether you count it mag- 
nanimity or meanness will depend upon 
that with which you put his proposi- 
tion into contrast. Now there is no 
doubt whatever that when Peter came 
to Jesus with that question, and that 
suggested answer, How oft shall I for- 
give my brother, " until seven times ? " 
he thought he had climbed to the sev- 
enth heaven of greatness; he thought 
he had tittered the last word of mag- 
nanimity, " Until seven times ? " The 
teaching of all the scribes and Rabbis 
was, forgive once, forgive twice, but 
the third offence merits no forgiveness. 
We find it scattered throughout all the 
Rabbinical teaching. Peter had been 
told that he was one of the new scribes, 
and so he borrowed the language of 
the scribes to show how graciously he 
went beyond it. The scribes had said 
thrice, Peter said, I know more than 
those men; I am prepared to go beyond 
that ; " seven times." It was magnan- 
imity by the side of the teaching of 
the scribes. How some things perpetu- 
ate themselves through the centuries. 
There are some things that never die 
until submerged in the life of God. 
The proverb of to-day says, " The third 
time pays for all." The world at its 
best forgives a man twice, and damns 
him at the third time. Peter said, 
Master, I am beyond that, "until seven 
times." John Wesley makes a very 
caustic comment on this story. He 
said, "If this be Christianity, where 
do Christians live ? " 

Now note the Master's answer. May 
there not have been a smile of love or 
pity for the meanness of this concep- 



tion of His own Spirit? "I say not 
unto thee, Until seven times; but, 
Until seventy times seven." 

Then He gave a parabolic illustra- 
tion, which is a picture fair and won- 
derful. It was a picture for Peter. 
How much did this man owe the king? 
Ten thousand talents. Translate it into 
the coinage of England, and it was at 
least two million pounds; or of the 
United States, roughly ten million dol- 
lars. This man had involved the whole 
State, and he owed the king at least 
ten thousand talents, and the king 
loosed him from all his bondage, and 
set him free. And then he went out 
and found a fellow servant who owed 
him a hundred pence. Let us take a 
penny as the Roman denarius, and say 
this man owed him less than five 
pounds, or twenty-five dollars. I owed 
the king two millions sterling, and he 
let me go; and I got my brother by 
the throat for five pounds! What did 
Christ mean? You have been forgiven 
a debt immeasurable. You have no 
right to exact a hundred pence from 
a man who, if you will give him three 
months, will pay you. 

Mark carefully Christ's last word, 
" So shall also My heavenly Father do 
unto you, if ye forgive not every one 
his brother from your hearts." The 
arrest of the man that had been re- 
leased, and his imprisonment, not for 
the debt which he had been forgiven, 
but for the brutality against his brother 
conveys its own teaching. 

The two sections of this chapter as 
they reveal the two sides of the one 
attitude toward the subjects of the 
King, are very remarkable. Absolute 
absence of pity towards sin in oneself 
which may cause a brother to offend; 
and unceasing pity toward a sinning 
brother with never-failing attempts to 
gain him. To fail in the first is to 
make the millstone a profitable invest- 
ment; and to fail in the second is to 
be dealt with in severe and dire pun- 
ishment by God Himself, for the one 
thing God will not forgive is an unfor- 
giving heart. 



235 



[MAT*, xix. 1-223 



MATTHEW 



MATTHEW XIX. 1-22 



HIS paragraph constitutes one of 
J. the interludes which characterise 
the third section of the Gospel accord- 
ing to Matthew. In it Christ is seen 
turning to the multitudes, from His 
more immediate work of instructing 
His own disciples. The King, rejected 
already by the rulers, and growingly 
the cause of perplexity to the multi- 
tudes, yet responded to all who came, 
acording to their needs. 

There are four classes represented 
here. The multitudes who came to 
Him in need, bringing their sick with 
them; those who came in the critical 
spirit, attempting to entrap Him in 
His talk; those who came impulsed by 
natural affection, bringing their chil- 
dren with them; and one who came 
with a profound inquiry and a sincere 
desire for help. 

And there are four subjects dealt 
with by the King. He invaded four 
different spheres, and revealed His 
power in each. The physical, as He 
healed disease; the ethical, as He an- 
swered the criticism of the critics; the 
social, as He rebuked the disciples, and 
gathered the children in His arms; the 
spiritual, as He flashed light upon the 
pathway of this man who came to 
Him; and through all the story we, 
who are following the pathway of the 
King with loving interest and adoring 
hearts, are impressed by the ease with 
which He dealt with the varying 
conditions. 

The first is a brief story, contained 
within the first two verses. The occa- 
sion was that of His departure from 
Galilee. His life there was closed, His 
work was done, His message was deliv- 
ered, His power was made manifest. 
He went into the borders of Judea 
beyond Jordan. His face was set to- 
ward Jerusalem. He had said that it 
could not be that a. prophet perish out 
of his own country. He had said to 
them over and over again since Csesa- 
rea Philippi, " I must go up to Jeru- 
salem and suffer . . . and be killed 
. . . and be raised." The must of His 
Passion was upon His heart and soul. 
As He came into the coasts of Judea 



He found Himself again surrounded by 
great multitudes of people; and al- 
though details are not given, it is per- 
fectly evident that the people came 
bringing their sick folk with them. We 
simply read, "He healed them there." 
In that sentence is the revelation of a 
mighty compassion, and an equally 
mighty ability. There are no details, 
yet do not let us miss the grandeur of 
the scene, the pathos of it, the great- 
ness of it, the tenderness of it, the 
glory of it. We see the King. The 
years of His earthly life were drawing 
to a close. He had enunciated His 
ethic, exhibited the benefits of His rule, 
enforced His claims; and He knew full 
well what the verdict of the people 
would be ; " Crucify Him, crucify 
Him," "we will not that this Man 
reign over us." He had told the dis- 
ciples this, and He was now setting 
His face towards that final fact of the 
Cross. Nevertheless when these peo- 
ple crowded around Him with their sick 
folk, all the compassion of His heart 
responded, and He put forth His might 
to heal. 

In the next section we have, first, 
the question of the Pharisees, and the 
Master's answer; then the objection 
which they raised to His answer, and 
His reply to that objection; and finally, 
the surprised comment of His disciples, 
and His answer to them. 

First, the question and the answer. 
We at once see that the question was 
of the hour, something which was then 
debatable. They said, "Is it lawful 
for a man to put away his wife for 
every cause?" There was something 
behind that question, a division of opin- 
ion amongst the rulers; two schools of 
thought were involved. The whole dis- 
pute arose out of the teaching in Deu- 
teronomy (xxiv. 1). " When a man 
taketh a wife, and marrieth her, then 
it shall be, if she find no favour in his 
eyes, because he hath found some un- 
seemly thing in her, that he shall write 
her a bill of divorcement, and give it 
in her hand, and send her out of his 
house." Now there was a difference 
of opinion between two masters, Hillel 



236 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xix. 1-22] 



and Shammai, as to what Moses meant 
by these words. Hillel had been the 
mightiest influence in Judaism for long 
years as a teacher, and had been dead 
about twenty years when Christ was 
teaching. He had maintained that in 
that word Moses allowed divorce upon 
the ground of what we to-day should 
speak of as incompatibility of tempera- 
ment. Shammai held that there was 
only one cause for divorce. The two 
schools had many bitter disputations as 
to which was right; and that dispute 
was in the background of this question 
to Jesus. 

By way of answer, Christ first re- 
vealed the true foundation of the mar- 
riage relation ; " Have ye not read, that 
He Who made them from the begin- 
ning made them male and female, and 
said, For. this cause shall a man leave 
his father and mother, and shall cleave 
to his wife; and the two shall become 
one flesh?" That was in itself a full 
and final answer. The method of the 
King here is to be carefully observed. 
In the presence of a surface difficulty, 
He appealed to the foundation of eter- 
nal principle. He ignored Hillel and 
Shammai; He passed Moses; and 
sweeping back through interpreters and 
lawgivers to the divine arrangement, 
He said, "From the beginning." This 
method of our- Lord is in itself a reve- 
lation of the final law of life. The 
things that Moses said were transitory, 
having application only to certain times 
and places. If we are in doubt or 
difficulty we are not to appeal to teach- 
ers who are interpreters; to a lawgiver 
who was the lawgiver of an age, and 
whose ethical code has been superseded 
by a higher; we are rather to make 
our appeal to divine intention. 

Having thus appealed to the age- 
abiding principle, He made application 
thereof; "For this cause shall a man 
leave his father and mother, and shall 
cleave to his wife; and the two shall 
become one flesh." Thus He revealed 
in a sublime statement the awful sanc- 
tity of marriage. The marriage rela- 
tionship is to supersede, because of its 
sacredness, the most sacred relationship 
that can exist apart from it, that of the 
child to father and mother. Christ 
made no allowances for the difficulties 



by which these men were surrounded, 
and by which we are surrounded, these 
declarations of incompatibility and dis- 
similarity. Christ lifted the subject to 
the pure altitudes of the divine inten- 
tion as to the sanctity of the marriage 
relation. 

Then He came down to the level of 
their disputes, "What therefore God 
hath joined together, let not man put 
asunder." Mark the marvellous mean- 
ing of this. To express the thought of 
Jesus in other words, it is as though 
He had said; According to the divine 
intention a man leaves father and 
mother, and cleaves to his wife, in the 
high sanctity of the marriage relation- 
ship. If that ideal of the marriage re- 
lationship has been realised, then let 
no man break in upon it, "what God 
hath joined together, let not man put 
asunder." Jesus did not mean to say 
that every man and woman living to- 
gether in civil relationship is married 
in the sight of heaven; but He did 
mean to say where this ideal lies at 
the basis of the marriage relationship 
"let not man put asunder." A mar- 
riage according to eternal principles, 
and according to the sanctity of this 
ideal, is consummated by God. 

Then they brought their objection, 
and the objection was stated in the 
terms of their own dispute "Why 
then did Moses command to give a bill 
of divorcement, and to put her away ? " 
What they meant to say was, For what 
reason did Moses command it; what 
were the grounds of his permission? 
Jesus replied in effect that when Moses 
gave that permission, he accommodated 
himself to the need of the hour; there 
was in the permission, contravention of 
the divine intention, but it was made 
necessary by the hardness of men's 
hearts, by the fact that they had lost 
the simplicity and tenderness that made 
is impossible for them to realise the 
high ideal. The permission of Moses 
to a hardened people is not to be taken 
as the final standard of ethics in the 
Kingdom of God. 

Then He proceeded to utter words 
which, if read by Christian people, an- 
swer all these difficulties for the pres- 
ent hour, "I say unto you, whosoever 
shall put away his wife, except for for- 



237 



[MATT. xix. 1-22] 



MATTHEW 



nication, and shall marry another, com- 
mitteth adultery; and he that marrieth 
her when she is put away committeth 
adultery." To that nothing need be 
added! No man, believing on Christ, 
and taking Christ's pure name on his 
lips, can say that upon the basis of dis- 
similarity, or upon the basis of incom- 
patibility of temperament, there may 
be divorce. Oh the tragedy may be .a 
lifelong tragedy, but for the sake of 
the strength of society, and for the 
sake of family life, we must accept the 
standard of Christ. It is a solemn and 
a searching word ; it makes indissoluble 
the bond once made, save for the one, 
and only sin. If there be suffering, 
that is not the fault of Christ, or of 
God; it is the result of the violation of 
the ideal of the marriage relationship; 
and the penalty must remain until the 
end of time. 

Having thus dealt with the Pharisees, 
the disciples in amazement said; "If 
the case of a man is so with his wife, 
it is not expedient to marry." This 
was not so much complaint as a recog- 
nition of the high ideal which was set 
up by Christ. They said in effect, The 
ideal is too high for the present life; 
had not men who are going to be true 
to God, better live the celibate life? 

Christ's answer to them is important 
for all time. He did not contradict 
their view, but said ; " Not all men can 
receive this saying." To what saying 
did He refer ? Not His own, but theirs. 
Thus Christ declared that the celibate 
life is not for all. It may be for some. 
All men cannot receive it; which does 
not necessarily mean that they are 
weak, but that they are not called to it, 
for it is only given to some. He named 
three classes of men who can observe 
the celibate life; some are born to 
celibacy; some are made celibates a 
class with which we have nothing to 
do, the reference being local and obso- 
lete and some choose celibacy for the 
sake of the Kingdom of God. Christ 
did not condemn such ; He spoke of 
them with respect and honour; but He 
would not allow His disciples to con- 
demn the men who did not observe the 
celibate life. It is not given to all. 
Thus He forbade His disciples to build 
upon His underlying principle a rule or 



set of rules to be observed by all men. 
That was the perpetual method of 
Christ. We cannot build rules upon 
His principles; we must deal individ- 
ually with the underlying principle. 
Here is a man to whom it is not given, 
he is not called to the life of celibacy, 
and we must not apply any rule to him. 
Here is another man who is called, and 
for some purpose that we cannot un- 
derstand, he devotes himself to celibacy 
for the sake of the Kingdom of God. 
That man is to be honoured; but he 
is not to despise a man who does not 
devote himself to celibacy. This is the 
perpetual method of Christianity; every 
man must find his own rule out of the 
principle. We cannot make rules for 
our fellow men. 

Christ recognized two things in this 
wonderful passage. He recognized first 
of all the absolute sacredness and sanc- 
tity of the marriage relationship; and 
safeguarded it from every attempt to 
break it down and undervalue it with 
words of burning fire; and He recog- 
nized with fine taste and beautiful sym- 
pathy, that there may be those who 
will devote themselves to the celibate 
life for the Kingdom of God, and 
declared that they are to be held in 
absolute esteem. When the Christian 
Church preached the doctrine of celi- 
bacy for its ministry, they erected a 
rule upon a principle, with disastrous 
results, as we know full well. Never- 
theless there have been men devoted to 
celibacy in the ministry of the Roman 
Church, pure, strong, high, noble sons 
of God; but again and again, because 
men have tried to bind their lives by 
rules never intended for them, they 
have violated the very principle upon 
which they attempted to work, and 
that is always so. To be governed by 
Jesus Christ is to be governed by Him 
directly and immediately, and by prin- 
ciples which one must apply to one's 
own life, always declining to allow 
others to make rules. 

The last two paragraphs are very 
familiar. We have first the exquisite 
story of the children. Both Matthew 
and Mark put this incident of the 
bringing of the children immediately 
after the words of Jesus about the mar- 
riage relationship. May we not have 



238 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xix. 1-22] 



some light on the action of the disciples 
when they attempted to forbid the 
bringing of children, from what was in 
their mind concerning celibate life? 
Did they not recognize that their Mas- 
ter was living the celibate life ? And 
may it not be that after all, notwith- 
standing His correction of the falseness 
of attempting to erect a rule upon a 
principle, there was in their mind an 
underlying thought that celibacy was 
the purer and higher and nobler life; 
and therefore the children must be kept 
away from Him? If so, how power- 
fully and finally Christ corrected their 
false philosophy! 

The bringing of the children to Him 
was an act of parental solicitude, the 
last sign of confidence in Him. They 
brought their children to Him. It is 
wonderful how this lives! There are 
many parents to-day, who have no per- 
sonal relationship to Jesus, but who 
want their children to be His. In the 
men who want their children to be 
right with God, there lives a conviction 
about Him, which makes the sin of 
rejecting Jesus Christ yet more heinous. 

But observe the disciples' mistake. 
It was based upon a wrong estimate of 
their Lord; it may have been a wrong 
estimate of His dignity; it may have 
been a wrong estimate of the quality 
of His purity, It was also due to a 
wrong conception of the child. One of 
the old Puritan Fathers has a very 
graphic description of what happened. 
Perhaps he was right. He imagines the 
disciples talking to these parents about 
the absurdity of the idea that so great 
a Teacher, Who had answered the poli- 
ticians, could have any interest in a 
little child. But be that as it may, it 
is evident that they did not know their 
Lord, and they did not know a little 
child, from their attempt to keep a lit- 
tle child away from Him. If we read 
the story in the light of the other 
Evangelists, we see that Christ's atti- 
tude towards His disciples in connec- 
tion with the children was one of anger. 
We have it distinctly declared by Mark 
that He was moved with indignation. 
There are only two or three occasions 
where we read that Christ was angry 
at all. This is one of them. He was 
angry with the men who so misunder- 



stood Him, as to think He was not 
willing to welcome a child. His atti- 
tude towards the child was that of wel- 
come and blessing, on the simple, warm, 
everyday terms of pure human affec- 
tion. He blessed them, yes, and not 
with two fingers outstretched to touch 
them; He took them in His arms and 
blessed them; it was a great warm lov- 
ing embrace. Thank God that is the 
place of all the babes, in the very arms 
of this great Christ. 

The last picture is that of the rich 
young ruler. In studying it, let us no- 
tice the seeker and his search. A clean, 
upright, honest man, of fine natural 
temperament was searching for the one 
thing of supreme importance age- 
abiding life. In observing the Master's 
method with Him, notice first the young 
ruler's arresting question concerning 
goodness, which indicated the fact that 
he was already on the track, in that 
he connected life with goodness; 
"What good thing shall I do, that I 
may have eternal life?" The ques- 
tion moreover revealed the fact that in 
his thought of the Teacher as good, he 
had come nearer the mark than he him- 
self knew. Then Christ flashed upon 
him external light, the light of the Sec- 
ond Table of the Decalogue with all its 
requirements concerning the relation of 
man to man. And the young man stood 
erect, and said, "All these things have 
I observed : what lack I yet ? " Then 
the Master, instead of flashing upon 
him external light, sent light right 
through the darkened cells of his inner 
life, and revealed the fact that he was 
a self-centred man, never having found 
his true King, never having kissed the 
sceptre, or bent to control. He found 
that the power of the things that min- 
istered to selfish desire was greater 
than the call within him after good- 
ness. " He went away sorrowful ; for 
he was one that had great possessions." 
Perhaps that was not the end of the 
young man, but it is the end of the 
story. One of two things happened. 
Either there was a day when he turned 
back again to Christ and the Cross, and 
found life; or he found a tomb for his 
soul in the very things he refused to 
give up, when Christ called him so 
to do. 



239 



[MATT. xix. 23-xx. 16] 



MATTHEW 



Now let all the others pass out of 
sight. The King fills the vision, as 
He deals with disability in forceful 
ease; establishes the ethical standard 
of marriage for all time; gathers all 
little children into His arms and into 
His love; and flashes upon the soul 
such brilliant light that whether that 



soul walk henceforth towards death or 
life, the pathway is perfectly clear. 

In the presence of such a King; be- 
cause of what He is, we say, 

"True hearted, whole-hearted, faithful 

and loyal, 

King of our lives, by Thy grace we 
will be." ' 



MATTHEW XIX. 23-XX. 16 



HHHE main values of this section are 
A indicated in the words of Jesus 
recorded in verses twenty-six and 
thirty of chapter nineteen, taken in 
conjunction with those found in verse 
sixteen of chapter twenty, "With men 
this is impossible; but with God all 
things are possible . . . but many shall 
be last that are first; and first that 
are last. ... So the last shall be first, 
and the first last." These verses bring 
into immediate prominence our Mas- 
ter's deductions from His teaching; 
but the section cannot be intelligently 
understood save as we remember its re- 
lation to that which has preceded it. 

In this section the King tiirned again 
from the crowd to His own disciples. 
The paragraph begins, " And Jesus said 
unti His disciples," and it is directly 
connected with the case of the young 
ruler. All that our Lord said to His 
disciples concerning riches and the 
Kingdom of God; and all that He said 
in answer to a question which Peter 
propounded, grew out of the coming of 
the young ruler, and our Lord's dealing 
with him. The teaching goes far be- 
yond the case of the young ruler, and 
far beyond all similar cases; but it be- 
gins there; and we certainly shall not 
understand our Lord's attitude when 
He spoke of riches, neither shall we 
understand His parable, if we forget 
these two preliminary matters; first, 
that He was talking to His own dis- 
ciples; and secondly, that He was 
speaking to them in the light of what 
had happened with regard to the young 
ruler, and of the attitude of their minds 
resulting from His attitude toward the 
young ruler. 

We may, then, divide our study into 
two parts; the first, a comparatively 
brief, and yet a most important one, 



Christ's comment on the case of the 
rich young ruler, and the resulting con- 
versation. Then secondly; Christ hav- 
ing settled the difficulty suggested by 
the disciples, Peter raised a new ques- 
tion, "We have left all, and followed 
Thee; what then shall we have?" and 
Christ answered him. 

First, Christ's comment on the case 
of the rich young ruler and the result- 
ing conversation. We may read an 
entirely false meaning into the words 
of Christ concerning the rich young 
ruler unless we are careful to catch 
the Master's tone. Although the fact 
is not recorded here, one of the other 
Evangelists makes the very interesting 
declaration that when the rich young 
ruler had said to Jesus, in answer to 
His presentation of the twofold table 
of the Decalogue as the standard of 
measurement, Master, all these things 
have I observed from my youth, 
" Jesus, looking upon him, loved him." 

Now with that love in His heart, 
Christ turned to His own disciples and 
said, " It is hard for a rich man to 
enter into the Kingdom of heaven." 
That was a severe word, but there were 
tears in it, there was pity in it, there 
was love in it. We shall do no vio- 
lence to this text if we change it 
slightly, and read It is very difficult 
for a rich man to enter into the King- 
dom of heaven. And when He re- 
peated the same thing with a new em- 
phasis, there was still the same tone 
and the same spirit, the tone and spirit 
of regret, and sorrow, and love, "And 
again I say unto you, It is easier for 
a camel to go through a needle's eye, 
than for a rich man to enter into the 
Kingdom of God." 

Why is it difficult for a rich man to 
enter into the Kingdom of heaven? 



240 



MATTHEW 



[MAM. xix. 23-xx. 161 



Here again we need not indulge in 
speculation. Let us go back to the 
King's own wonderful Manifesto the 
Sermon on the Mount. In His first 
sentence He set the door open, and 
revealed how men may enter into all 
the blessedness which He described. 
" Blessed are the poor in spirit ; for 
theirs is the Kingdom of heaven." 
Now over against that fundamental as- 
sertion put those tender, regretful 
words of Jesus, It is hard work for a 
rich man to enter in. Why? Because 
wealth means power, and power is far 
more likely to create pride than to 
create poverty of spirit. It is very 
difficult for a wealthy man to be poor 
in spirit; not impossible in the econ- 
omy of God; but very, very difficult. 
Jesus had seen the going away of that 
rich young ruler, and the cry of His 
heart was full of sorrow, for He loved 
him. 

It is more than hard, it is practically 
impossible. ,"It is easier for a camel 
to go through a needle's eye." pos- 
sibly by the "needle's eye," our Lord 
referred to the small gate of a city, 
through which no camel could pass ex- 
cept by being unloaded, and bending 
in order to gain entrance. It is a fig- 
ure intended to teach the impossibility, 
so far as the man himself is concerned. 
It is impossible for any man who is 
possessed of wealth which gives him 
power, to become poor in spirit, and 
learn the lesson of an absolute sub- 
mission in his own strength. 

Now notice the disciples' question. 
When Jesus had said this thing, and 
said it with a sob and a regret in His 
voice, the disciples were astonished ex- 
ceedingly, saying, "Who then can be 
saved? " Here we may wrong the dis- 
ciples if we are not careful. The 
usual, and popular, and yet superficial 
interpretation of this is", that they 
meant to say, If a rich man cannot be 
saved, who can? that they were each 
looking to the time when rich and in- 
fluential men would come into the King- 
dom the more easily because of their 
wealth. But probably that would be 
to charge them with baser materialism 
than that of which they were really 
guilty. One would rather believe that 
when Christ said that, they saw very 



deeply into the heart of His meaning, 
and saw that He intended to teach 
that absolute poverty of spirit, freedom 
from the desire to possess for selfish 
purposes, lay at the wicket-gate of the 
Kingdom; and that they said in effect, 
in one of those confessions of the heart 
that men suddenly make oftentimes, 
and hardly know they are making them. 
There is not one of us that would not 
be rich if we could; and if the desire 
to possess wealth, and the determina- 
tion to do it if we were able, prevents 
us coming into the Kingdom, who can 
be saved? These disciples were in all 
likelihood more honest than we often 
are. They recognized that if they 
could have possessed the young man's 
wealth, they would; and they recog- 
nized that Jesus Christ in His state- 
ment of difficulty was not dealing with 
a class after all He never did deal 
with a class but that He was getting 
down to the common facts of human 
nature and human peril ; and they said, 
Who then can be saved? 

Now carefully notice our Lord's an- 
swer, which is an answer to the whole 
question, and not to a part of it. The 
question is this If a rich man cannot 
be saved, who then can be saved? 
Who then, in view of these terms and 
these requirements, can be saved at all ; 
what hope is there of any man's sal- 
vation? Christ's answer was to the 
question concerning the salvation of 
man ; and not merely to that concerning 
the salvation of a rich man " With 
men this is impossible;" no man can 
be saved out of his own will, by his 
own determination, whether he be rich 
or poor, bond or free, "But with God 
all things are possible." 

This word of Christ was not simply 
His declaration that a rich man cannot 
be saved by the power of men; but 
that with God he can be saved. In a 
moment He had risen from that first 
ground of viewing the wealthy class; 
into the larger ground of recognizing 
the underlying humanity of all men. 

One other thought as to emphasis 
here. Our Lord did not say, to men 
this thing is impossible, to God all 
things are possible. There is a very 
peculiar value in the preposition which 
He used. With men impossible, with 



241 



[MATT. xix. 23-xx. 16] 



MATTHEW 



God possible. If a man co-operates 
with men, makes their maxims his, 
makes their methods his, salvation is 
impossible. So long as a man lives 
upon the plane of humanity alone, and 
loses his touch with God, and recog- 
nition of Him, he cannot be saved. 
The material level of life will_ have 
material ideals, a material goal, and 
material failure. But with God ; that 
is the man who has linked his life to 
God will find it possible, be he wealthy 
or be he poor, to enter the Kingdom 
and be saved. So the whole theme of 
human salvation lies by suggestion 
within this statement of Jesus. 

Now let us consider Peter's comment 
and the answering instruction of our 
Lord. Peter's question went back un- 
doubtedly to the case of the rich young 
ruler, and we are simply compelled to 
understand it thus, and to put a re- 
sulting emphasis upon the passage. 
" Then answered Peter and said unto 
Him, Lo we have felt all, and followed 
Thee; what then shall we have?" 
Jesus had said to the ruler, " If thou 
wouldest be perfect, go, sell that thou 
hast, and give to the poor, and thou 
shalt have treasure in heaven; and 
come, follow Me." Peter said, We have 
done it; what is the treasure we are 
to have? The subject of the possibility 
of human salvation had gone out of 
Peter's mind. The Lord had settled 
that, and now we have a new subject. 
Peter was, in his deepest thinking, put- 
ting himself and others into contrast 
with the young ruler. It is as though 
he said, A young man came to Thee, O 
Master, with great wealth. You told 
him what to do, and You promised him 
treasure in heaven, and he has turned 
his back upon Thee, he has not been 
obedient. But, Master, we have been 
obedient, we have left all to follow 
Thee; what treasure are we to have? 

Now mark the answer of Jesus, and 
let His answer rebuke any tendency in 
our soul to be angry with Peter on 
account of his question, for the Lord 
was not angry with him. The answer 
of Jesus moved within two distinct 
realms; first, a definite answer to his 
question about reward; and secondly, 
a warning against what is revealed in 
his asking the question. 



He said to him in effect, You have 
asked Me what you shall have, I will 
tell you, "Verily" mark the word of 
authority "I say unto you, that ye 
who have followed Me, in the regener- 
ation when the Son of man shall sit 
on the throne of His glory" not Ye 
that have followed Me in the regener- 
ation, but "Ye who have followed Me, 
in the regeneration when the Son of 
man shall sit on the throne of His 
glory" placing the comma as in the 
Revision shall occupy twelve thrones 
under My control and My government; 
judging, not condemning, but oversee- 
ing, administering on My behalf the 
affairs of the Kingdom to be set up in 
the world. He took one long glance 
ahead over the centuries to the day 
which He described as " the regener- 
ation." These men were to share in 
His authority in His Kingdom which 
is that of regeneration. That was His 
first answer to them. But His answer 
was broader. Not only ye, but all 
others who shall suffer loss, all those 
people who in the coming days shall 
leave "houses, or brethren, or sisters, 
or father, or mother, or children, or 
lands, for My name's sake, shall re- 
ceive a hundredfold, and shall inherit 
eternal life." So that our Lord did 
not rebuke Peter's question, but an- 
swered it. It is as though He said to 
them, Is it true you have left all to 
follow Me? If you want to know what 
you shall have, here is My answer, as 
to you particularly, the twelve first 
messengers of My love. My Kingdom 
is the day of regeneration and re- 
storation, and when I have won the 
victory, you shall be administrators 
sitting upon thrones, and judging; and 
all who suffer loss, turning the back 
upon property, and friends, and love, 
and relations, shall enter into great pos- 
sessions. I did not speak idly to the 
young ruler; whoever sacrifices for Me 
shall win a hundredfold. 

But now notice the word of warning. 
"But," said Jesus, "many shall be last 
that are first; and first that are last." 
Then followed the parable, and it ended 
with these words, " So the last shall be 
first, and the first last." Notice care- 
fully these two statements, and the re- 
lation of the parable to them. Christ 



242 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xix. 23-xx. 16] 



warned His disciples by saying to 
them ; " Many shall be last that are 
first,- and first that are last." Then 
He illustrated the meaning of His 
words by a parable, which was a par- 
able to His own disciples. We must 
not take this parable and make it of 
general application. John Ruskin, in 
his book, Unto This Last, has abso- 
lutely missed the meaning of it. There 
is an application of it to the social 
order which will be realised when that 
order becomes Christian. But within 
the Christian Church it is a parable 
concerning precedence in the matters 
of reward. It is a parable directed 
against Peter's implication of superior- 
ity over the young ruler. " Lo, we have 
left all and followed Thee; what then 
shall we have ? " We are the first of 
Thy disciples. That man has turned 
his back, and even though he comes 
back presently at the eleventh hour, 
we are first ; " What shall we have ? " 
There are many first that shall be last, 
there are last that shall be first. So 
our I<ord would teach these men the 
truth concerning precedence in His 
Kingdom, and He would correct their 
implication of superiority. 

The figure of the householder was 
here used by Jesus of Himself. He 
had used it upon one occasion of His 
own disciples, in chapter thirteen. He 
used it in several parables of Himself. 
The whole application of the parable 
is to service, and the reward of service 
for men in the Kingdom. There is no 
question here about salvation, no ques- 
tion about entering the Kingdom. 
There is no thought about equal pay- 
ment for unequal work. If we attempt 
to base upon this parable the teaching 
that if a man lives and loiters through 
ten hours, and comes in at the eleventh, 
he is on equal rights with the man 
who has worked from the beginning, we 
are absolutely unfair to the other par- 
ables of Jesus. If we build upon this 
parable a doctrine of social order, we 
must also include the parables of the 
talents and the pounds, for all three 
are needed to have a perfect picture 
of social service. This parable is in- 
tended to teach one simple truth, that 
a man's reward will be, not according 
to the length of his service, not ac- 



cording to the notoriety of his service, 
but according to his fidelity to the op- 
portunity which is given him. The 
men at the beginning of the day en- 
tered into a covenant and an agree- 
ment. The Master of the vineyard 
went out later in the day, saw others 
standing idle, and sent them in. When 
He said, " Why stand ye here all the 
day idle?" their answer was, "Because 
no man hath hired us." That is why 
they had not been at work before, they 
had not had their opportunity. When 
He created opportunity by sending 
them in, then in that last hour they 
were true to the only opportunity they 
had, and therefore their reward was as 
great as the reward of the men that 
had been at work twelve hours. It is 
as though He said to Peter, to revert 
to our illustration, If that young man 
comes now, though he has been long 
delaying, his reward will be as great 
as yours, if he is faithful. 

Yes, but why did not the Lord give 
him the opportunity before? That is 
not in the parable. If we take the other 
parables we find in that of the pounds, 
that He gave to every man a pound. 
That teaches that there is an oppor- 
tunity for every man. If we want the 
doctrine of opportunity we find it there, 
not here. It is absolutely unfair to 
read into any parable something for 
which the parable was not used. He 
first corrected the false standards of 
comparison, such as length of notoriety 
of service; and then revealed the true 
standard of reward that of fidelity to 
opportunity. Here is a man to whom 
is given the opportunity to speak to 
thousands upon thousands of people the 
great word of God. It is a great op- 
portunity. But here is a woman living 
away off upon the mountain, who never 
saw a city in her life, but has wrought 
with God in the training of two or 
three children. When that man and 
woman stand for final reward, they will 
each have their penny if they have been 
faithful. This is so in all Christian 
service. 

So in conclusion we have no right 
to take this parable and use it in ap- 
plication to the social questions of un- 
regenerate men. It is impossible to do 
so without violating the sense of jus- 



243 



. xx. 17-34] 



MATTHEW 



tice. Christianity has no pity for those 
who, being unfit remain so, in spite of 
the opportunity for fitness which He 
creates. It is a false message to the 
age which says that Christianity will 
take hold of the unfit man and nurse 
him and take care of him, when by 
response to her evangel he can be made 
fit. If his unfitness is the unfitness of 
a physical limitation for which he is 
not to blame, Christianity will take 
hold of him, and love him. But if the 
unfitness is a moral disease which Jesus 
Christ can correct, then Christianity is 
sterner than Hebraism in refusing to 
feed him or help him until he have 
taken advantage of the dynamic of 
Jesus Christ. The one plain meaning 
of this parable is that those highly 



privileged will not receive wage ac- 
cording to privilege, but according to 
fidelity. Or again, those whose privi- 
lege is less, will not receive less wage 
if they are true to the opportunity 
which comes to them. 

Consequently, the great word to each, 
one of us is a word that warns us 
against being proud of anything we 
have done in the past and imagining 
that by virtue of a greater opportunity 
we are entering into a greater reward. 
It is a word that drives us back to the 
whole day, or the one hour of oppor- 
tunity, in order that we may fill it to 
the full with consecrated toil, and so 
enter into the reward which He gives 
to faithfulness. 



MATTHEW XX. 17-34- 



THE words, " The Son of Man came 
not to be ministered unto, but to 
minister, and to give His life a ran- 
som for many" (xx. 28), may be said 
to constitute the central statement of 
the whole paragraph. The great truth 
therein declared, explains the mind of 
the Master as revealed in this story; 
the perplexity of the disciples; and the 
Master's attitude toward need, as re- 
vealed in the crowds which followed 
Him. 

This section is most interesting, as 
it brings before us the different classes 
of people by which the King was sur- 
rounded in the last days. Again we 
may describe it as a microcosm, show- 
ing us the whole condition of affairs 
in those last days. We have watched 
Him as He devoted Himself almost 
exclusively to His own disciples, and 
yet manifested a perpetual readiness 
to turn to the multitudes as they came, 
to Him in their need, and with their 
question, and continually maintained 
His attitude of defence against the at- 
tacks of His foes. Now in this para- 
graph we see first the Lord Himself 
and there is a wonderful revelation of 
the working of His mind at this point. 
We see next the group of disciples, the 
first circle immediately around Him, 
and we learn what they were thinking. 
We see beyond them, a great multitude 



following Him, curious, interested, and 
expectant. 

We shall divide the paragraph into 
three sections for our study. First, 
that revealing the mind of the King 
(verses 17-19). Secondly, that reveal- 
ing the mind of the Kingdom, as it 
was established in the hearts of those 
who were yielded to the King (verses 
20-28). Finally, that revealing the mul- 
titudes (verses" 29-34). 

First, then, as to the revelation o 
the mind of the King. It is first mani- 
fest that He had a clear understanding 
of what lay before Him at the hands 
of lawless men. Mark the minuteness 
of His description. There is not a per- 
haps in it, or a peradventure, or a 
maybe; not a single word that will 
allow us to imagine that Jesus was 
speculating as to the future. He said, 
" We go up to Jerusalem ; and the Son 
of man shall be delivered unto the chief 
priests and scribes; and they shall con- 
demn Him to death and shall deliver 
Him unto the Gentiles to mock, and to 
scourge, and to crucify." There is the 
utmost accuracy in the details, and a 
calm, quiet knowledge of the actual 
things that were before Him. The 
roads to Jerusalem were thronged with 
multitudes who were going to the 
feasts. Many of them would be near 
Him because of their interest in Him. 



244 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xx. 17-34] 



He took His disciples apart from these 
crowds perhaps turning off the high- 
road into some bypath for a little, or 
making it evident that He desired to 
be alone and calmly told them in brief 
words of the facts to which He was 
moving in Jerusalem. 

In the second place there was evi- 
dently in the mind of the King a clear 
vision of the fact that what lay before 
Him was within the determinate coun- 
sel of God, for He ended the declara- 
tion of coming suffering with these 
words, "And the third day He shall 
be raised up." From that wonderful 
day at Csesarea Philippi after the con- 
fession of Peter, when Jesus began to 
talk about His Cross, He never men- 
tioned His Cross to His disciples upon 
any one occasion without also declaring 
the fact of His coming resurrection. 

Not only the clear vision of the dark- 
ness, and the clear vision of the light 
beyond; not only a certain knowledge 
of all the suffering and the pain, and 
an equally certain knowledge of the 
ultimate triumph over these things in 
resurrection; but, and because of this 
dual certainly in His mind, there was 
manifested a quiet and dignified co- 
operation with the "determinate coun- 
sel " of God as He set His face towards 
Jerusalem, saying quietly and calmly to 
His disciples, "Behold we go up to 
Jerusalem." There was never a thought 
of turning aside; undeterred by what 
He knew most certainly of coming 
pain, He set His face toward the suffer- 
ing deliberately, compelled toward Jeru- 
salem by no other than His perpetual 
devotion to the will of God, and His 
perpetual determination to co-operate 
with that will, to its ultimate purpose. 

Then notice the action consequent 
upon that consciousness. He took the 
disciples apart, and He told them in 
detail the things He knew. It has been 
said our Lord was attempting to draw 
these men into sympathy with Him; 
that He wanted them to come into a 
closer comradeship with Him, in order 
to His own comfort. The probability 
is that He was not thinking of Himself 
for a moment, that He was still a self- 
emptied soul; and that He was rather 
getting them ready for the pathways of 
pain that lay before them. He did not 



lean upon human sympathy as He faced 
the lonely sufferings of the Cross. The 
only strength He knew was the strength 
of His unbroken fellowship and com- 
munion with God. He was storing 
their minds with things which at the 
moment they could not possibly under- 
stand, for these men never knew Him 
while He was still amongst them. They 
loved Him, they saw enough in Him 
to draw out their affections after Him. 
They saw enough to make them believe 
in Him in some unintelligent sense, but 
they never understood Him. In the 
Paschal discourses, which John has pre- 
served for us, He said to them in 
effect, The things I am saying to-day, 
you will understand in the days to 
come, when the Comforter has come 
and opened your minds. It is better 
for you that I go away, for if I do not 
go away, the Comforter cannot come, 
but when He comes He will guide you 
into the truth. And in the first four- 
and-twenty hours after the baptism of 
the Spirit, on the day of Pentecost, 
they were more familiar with the truth 
concerning Jesus than they had ever 
been during the whole period of His 
ministry in their midst. Nineteen cen- 
turies have passed away, and now by 
the illumination of that Spirit of God, 
Who has withdrawn the signs which 
were material, the tongues of fire, but 
Who abides in all spiritual power, we 
can walk with Him on the pathway of 
suffering in a more intimate fellowship 
than those men could. 

But let us consider the mind of the 
Kingdom. Taking the story of the 
coming of these two men with their 
mother, let us notice the revelation of 
mind which it affords. First, in the 
mind of those who constituted the 
Kingdom, there was evident present 
faith in Him. They still believed in 
His coming into His Kingdom. As to 
what they meant by the Kingdom does 
not at all matter for the moment. They 
were not perfectly clear concerning His 
Kingdom; their ideas were largely ma- 
terial ideas, yet not wholly; but they 
did not see all the spiritual height and 
depth and spaciousness. What made 
those two men persuade their mother 
to come and ask that they should sit 
one on His right hand and the other 



245 



[MAW. xx. 17-34] 



MATTHEW 



on His left? They would never have 
preferred the request if they had not 
believed that He was coming into a 
Kingdom. Then mark the anger of 
the ten, and remember that their anger 
and criticism was because of their be- 
lief in the King, and because they 
wanted the positions of importance 
themselves. The twelve believed "that 
He was coming into a Kingdom. Yet 
they were strangely perplexed since 
Caesarea Philippi. He was always 
making them uncomfortable by talking 
of a Cross, and they could not believe 
that by death life could begin, that 
through defeat a crown could come. 
Perhaps they said within their hearts; 
He is tired, weary, and oppressed; He 
thinks He is going to be defeated, but 
we do not. He is going to build His 
Kingdom. Perhaps in this request, a 
repeated one, there was a desire on 
their part to comfort Him. He said; 
I am going to Jerusalem to be mocked, 
and scourged, and crucified. They re- 
plied; Nay, Lord, who art Thou going 
to appoint in Thy Kingdom, who will 
sit on Thy right hand and on Thy left? 
One's admiration, for the faith of these 
men grows, the more we study the 
records. They came to Him, and asked 
things which evidenced their faith in 
Him. No man asks to sit on the right 
hand and left of a man who is going 
to the gallows. They still believed that 
He was a King, and that He was about 
to establish His Kingdom. 

Again, we see not merely their faith 
in Him, but their devotion to Him. 
When, in infinite patience and great 
gentleness, and as it always seems, with 
a touch of loving satire, He said, "Are 
ye able to drink the cup that I am 
about to drink ? " they said, " We are 
able." Again they meant well; they 
thought they were able, and they were 
willing, so far as they could, to go with 
Him. They were just as magnificent, 
devoted, and honest-hearted as Peter 
was when he contradicted his Lord's 
estimate of himself, " If all shall be 
offended in Thee, I will never be of- 
fended." It was a mistake, a blunder 
to put his opinion against his Lord's, 
a mistake also to put himself into com- 
parison with his own brethren, to their 
disadvantage. But it was devotion. 



And these men meant it when they 
said, "We are able." Had He not 
called them sons of thunder? 

Ah, but they were not able! A few 
short weeks at most, days in all proba- 
bility, and He would see the sons of 
thunder flying with the crowd of 
frightened disciples. The failure re- 
vealed then, is the failure of the self- 
centred life. Faith in Christ, devotion 
to Christ, and yet self-seeking. " Com- 
mand that these my two sons may sit, 
one on Thy right hand, and one on Thy 
left hand, in Thy Kingdom." They 
wanted the places of power. 

He never' spoke of Cross and Resur- 
rection but that some of His disciples 
broke in and asked Him who was the 
greatest man, or who was to have the 
place of power in His Kingdom. If we 
read on to the last Supper and the in- 
stitution of the Christian feast, when 
He said that awful and tragic thing 
that no man can read without trem- 
bling, " One of you shall betray Me," 
then we also read, " There arose also 
a contention among them, which of 
them was accounted to be greatest." 
Their devotion was sincere, and yet 
there was the desire to get out of this 
Kingdom something for themselves. 

Let us go back to Csesarea Philippi 
once more in memory, and see the 
shadow of it all. As long as Jesus 
talked to Peter about building the 
Church, and giving him keys, Peter was 
contented. But when He mentioned the 
Cross, he drew back. The King had 
set His face towards Jerusalem, and 
the next thing was the Cross, the thing 
for which He was almost eager, the 
thing concerning which He continued 
to speak to these men. But they were 
anxious about the keys, and the seats 
of power, and precedence. How these 
things have continued! 

What did the King do with these 
disciples? Observe first, His patience 
in that He did not say one single angry 
word. Probably if we had been doing 
what He was doing, we should have 
been angry. When they said, Grant 
that we may sit, one on Thy right 
hand, and the other on Thy left, He 
looked back at them with ineffable ten- 
derness, and said, " Ye know not what 
ye ask. Are ye able to drink of the 



246 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xx. 17-34] 



cup that I am about to drink?" And 
when they said, "We are able," He 
did not even then tell them that it was 
impossible. No, He allowed them to 
come into fellowship, and He told them 
they should do so; '"My cup indeed ye 
shall drink;" You also shall come to 
death and sorrow. You shall follow 
Me presently, and shall consent to the 
very thing from which you shrink. 
One, swift sudden death by the sword; 
one, long wearisome exile in Patmos. 
They drank of His cup. They did not 
drink of its fulness. They never knew 
its unutterable fulness, but they drank 
in some measure; but lo, they found it 
to be the red wine of life as they drank. 
He pressed that sacramental cup of 
sorrow to His lips alone, and then al- 
lowed men to share in the sorrow. But 
as for Him, so also for all who share 
that cup, it became full of blessing, the 
cup of salvation, not in any narrow 
sense, but in the broadest, and deepest, 
and highest sense. When the shadows 
were about His soul, and there was no 
sympathy, He said I will admit you 
even to this. 

His correction is discovered in the 
words, " But to sit on My right hand, 
and on My left hand, is not Mine to 
give, but it is for them." These four 
words are in italics in the Authorised 
and the Revised, and they are put in 
by the translators, not so much by way 
of translation as interpretation. If we 
leave them out, the wording is some- 
what awkward. If we include them it 
is as if Jesus said, It is not Mine to 
give the places of power and prece- 
dence in My Kingdom, but they shall 
be given by My Father, to those for 
whom it is prepared. If we miss the 
words out. He said, It is not Mine to 
give these places, except to those for 
whom it is prepared. 

He did not for a moment say He had 
not power to give the places. He had 
the power; but He could only give the 
places, the precedence, the power, to 
those for whom it was prepared. That 
is to say, He corrected the thinking of 
the disciples by telling them that when 
they came, asking Him to give to them 
capriciously, or in arbitrary fashion, 
places of power, it was not His pur- 
pose so to do. That is the kind of 



thing that still goes on in the world, 
although we are moving slowly toward 
the great ideals of the Christ in this 
respect. We are beginning to put men 
into power upon the basis of their 
moral fitness for power ; to erect monu- 
ments to men upon the basis of char- 
acter. Christ said, Not upon the basis 
of favour will men get into office in 
My Kingdom; they will be put into 
office according to fitness, and that 
within the will of God. When God 
prepares an office for a man, He pre- 
pares the man for the office; and there 
is perfect fitness. And the King said, 
So shall I appoint in My Kingdom. 
There was no anger in it, He was cor- 
recting them, and He ended by giving 
them the one supreme example, His 
own, of what brings a man to the place 
of power in His Kingdom. He said, 
among the Gentiles this is the method, 
this exercise of lordship, but not so 
among those of My Kingdom, " Not so 
shall it be among you: but whosoever 
would become great among you shall be 
your minister; and whosoever would 
be first among you, shall be your ser- 
vant : even as the Son of man came not 
to be ministered unto, but to minister" 

We see the light flashing back upon 
their request. They wanted the posi- 
tions of power, not to do good to others, 
but that they might be ministered to. 
No, He said, "The Son of man came 
not to be ministered unto, but to min- 
ister, and to give His life a ransom 
for many." He had told them that He 
was going to Jerusalem to suffer, to 
rise. They had broken in with this re- 
quest about place and power. He took 
them back to the original word The 
Son of man came to give His life a 
ransom, by the pathway of that suffer- 
ing. Do not argue about your place 
of power, but get ready for any place 
your King may give you by following 
the Son of man, in giving your life for 
the ransom of others. By sacrifice a 
man fits himself for power. By self- 
abnegation, by the actual denial of self 
and readiness to serve does a man 
climb to the throne of power; and he 
only retains his throne of power as he 
retains his badge of service. 

Then we have one passing glimpse 
of the multitudes. They took their way 



247 



IMAM*, xxi. 1-17] 



MATTHEW 



through Jericho, on that last journey 
to Jerusalem, and as they went forth 
from Jericho, the multitudes looked at 
them, curious, expectant, wondering 
what He was going to do, following 
Him along the highway, sharing the 
disciples' idea of the- Kingdom. Now 
let us listen to the blind men. They 
were in need, and they made a ven- 
ture. We do not know whether it was 
a venture of faith. Perhaps it was. 
If not, it was a venture of hope, as 
they said, "Lord, have mercy on us, 
Thou Son of David." 

Mark the crowd's estimate of Him. 
The crowd silenced these men, in all 
probability because they thought He 
was too dignified to turn to beggars. 
But, "They cried out the more." It 
was their one chance, He was passing 
by. Now let us leave the multitude, 
and the men, and look at the King. 
He halted the whole movement, and 
stood still and called for these two 
men, and they were brought to Him. 
We shall fail to understand this if we 
forget that which we have been consid- 
ering. He was going to Jerusalem to 
suffer. He had a little group round 
about Him, who did not understand 
Him at all. The multitudes were after 
Him, the curious, crushing mob; but 
He halted the whole movement to help 



these two men. He would wait till they 
came. And then the old word recurs, 
surging in music, beating in beauty, He 
was " moved with compassion," He 
"touched their eyes; and straightway 
they received their sight, and followed 
Him." The first thing they saw was 
this wonderful King, and they followed 
Him in the way. Mark the relation of 
the last scene to the foregoing sections, 
how by this action the King corrected 
the false idea of the Kingdom, the false 
idea of dignity, the false idea of the 
right to place and power, as He re- 
vealed Himself as a King Who had 
compassion enough to halt the move- 
ment toward the mystery of the Cross, 
for the sake of two men that needed 
help; that He would turn aside from 
that pathway, which according to His 
own showing was a pathway toward 
His crowning, to heal them. 

One can only say again, Let us be- 
hold our King. Let us press more 
closely to Him, and, in order that we 
may be more kingly after the measure 
and manner of His life, let us follow 
Hun, even by the way of the Cross; 
knowing this, that for evermore the 
light of resurrection life and power lies 
just beyond the place of the pain a.nd 
the suffering. 



MATTHEW XXI. 1-17 



WITH this chapter we reach the 
second section of the final divi- 
sion of the Gospel. The first section 
revealed the King as specially devoting 
Himself to His own disciples in view 
of His coming Cross. In this section, 
which occupies three chapters, we 
really begin ths study of the last week 
in the life of our Lord. The time cov- 
ered was brief, but filled with solem- 
nity. The King is seen deliberately 
passing back to Jerusalem for the ex- 
press purpose of definitely and officially 
rejecting the Hebrew nation. It is the 
story of the rejection of the Hebrew 
nation by the King, not that of the re- 
jection of the King by the nation. 

In this paragraph the subject is that 
of the coming of the King to Jerusa- 
lem. In the first seven verses we have 



an account of His preparation for en- 
tering the city. In verses eight to 
eleven we have an account of the 
actual entry. In verses twelve to sev- 
enteen we have the story of the first 
act of the King in the city, His ex- 
ecutive cleansing of the Temple of God. 
First, let us observe carefully this 
story of the preparations; how He 
acted when they drew nigh to Jeru- 
salem. There are three very simple 
and yet important points to be noticed. 
First, He acted deliberately and with 
evident intention. His going into Jeru- 
salem as He did, was not a result of 
accident. He rode in by His own will 
and upon His own initiative. This 
action of Jesus was an extraordinary 
one for Him: He had always seemed 
to avoid anything which would provoke 



248 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xxi. 1-17] 



enthusiasm; but upon this occasion He 
definitely did so. There have not been 
wanting those who have questioned the 
authenticity of the narrative, because 
it seems to be out of harmony with 
that unobtrusiveness of spirit, which 
fulfilled the prophetic word concerning 
Him, "He will not cry, nor lift up 
His voice, nor cause it to be heard in 
the street." 

It is our business to interpret these 
actions of Jesus by the King Himself; 
and to remember that, if for a moment 
He departed from the ordinary course 
of the exercise of His ministry, there 
must have been .some reason for it; 
and it is good for us to seek that rea- 
son. He did not yield Himself to the 
popular clamour, but He evoked the 
popular clamour, and that of set and 
deliberate purpose. 

It is evident also that He acted with 
knowledge. This is manifested in the 
detailed instructions. If we read the 
story quite naturally and simply, we 
cannot escape from this view. He 
knew where they would find the colt. 
He knew the frame of mind in which 
the people would be, to whom He sent 
them. This is another of the simple 
and yet complex stories, which we must 
change in some way if we are to think 
of Jesus as a man within the limita- 
tions of other men. As He hastened 
His disciples down and across the 
ravine to prepare for His coming, He 
choosing to travel round with the rest 
of the people along the highway, there 
was manifest an accurate knowledge 
which none of them shared, " Go into 
the village that is over against you, 
and straightway ye shall find" and 
He told them exactly what they would 
find "And if any one say aught unto 
you, ye shall say, The Lord hath need 
of them: and straightway he will send 
them." 

And finally He acted with unques- 
tioned authority. A great deal has 
been written about the fact that Jesus 
said, "If any one say aught unto you 
ye shall say, The Lord hath need of 
them : and straightway he will send 
them." There are those who have in- 
terpreted the word Lord there as re- 
ferring simply to the local association 
between Jesus and His disciples. It is 



more in harmony with the facts of the 
incident to say that He used the word 
as indicating His universal authority, 
His Chief Proprietorship of all things 
the Lord hath need of them. 
Matthew's interpretation of what our 
Lord said warrants us in this conclu- 
sion. Referring not merely to the send- 
ing of the colt, but to everything that 
happened afterwards, Matthew wrote; 
"This is come to pass, that it might 
be fulfilled which was spoken through 
the prophet, saying, 

" Tell ye the daughter of Zion, 
Behold, thy King cometh unto thee, 
Meek, and riding upon an ass, 
And upon a colt the foal of an ass." 

That quotation is from the ninth chap- 
ter of Zechariah. It occurs in that 
portion of the prophecy of Zechariah 
which is called, "The burden of the 
word of Jehovah upon the land of Had- 
rach and Damascus." If we pass on 
to the twelfth chapter we read, "The 
burden of the word of Jehovah con- 
cerning Israel." These are the begin- 
nings of two consecutive messages, and 
yet two separate ones. "The burden 
of the word of Jehovah upon the land 
of Hadrach," occupies chapters nine to 
eleven, and consists of the message of 
the prophet concerning an anointed 
King Who would be rejected. If we 
take the next burden, "The burden of 
the word of Jehovah concerning Is- 
rael," chapters twelve to fourteen, we 
find that the message is that of the 
rejected King enthroned. Out of the 
prophecy then which deals with the re- 
jection of the anointed King, Matthew 
quoted; and he affirmed that this send- 
ing for the colt, this riding into Jeru- 
salem, this cleansing of the Temple, 
all was in fulfilment of the prophecy 
of Zechariah, and of that part of it 
which foretold the rejection of the 
anointed King. So that according to 
Matthew, we see this action of Jesus 
set in relation to the ancient proph- 
ecies; and we see how He Who in- 
spired the prophecy, Himself came to 
fulfil it; He Who fore-arranged all 
things, and gave men visions of things 
to come, moved into human history 
with set purpose, and fulfilled the 
things according to His own inter- 



249 



[MA*T. xxi. 1-17] 



MATTHEW 



pretation by the spirit of prophecy in 
the past. That is the value of the 
quotation. 

Now that quotation emphasised two 
things according to Matthew's inter- 
pretation of the ancient prophecy; first, 
the coming of the King, " Behold, thy 
King cometh unto thee;" and, secondly, 
the meekness of the King, 

" Meek, and riding upon an ass, 
And upon a colt the foal of an ass." 

Two things were intended by the 
coming of Jesus to Jerusalem in this 
way. The first was that of official 
kingly entry. That is one reason why 
He provoked this demonstration, riding 
into Jerusalem in such a way as to at- 
tract attention. He had often passed 
into Jerusalem quietly. Men had often 
crowded to Him. He had spoken 
kingly words and phrases, and had 
exerted kingly power in benefits con- 
ferred; and men had listened, criti- 
cising, admiring, rejecting, believing. 
But here, once, and once only, He 
went in such a way as to manifest the 
fact of His Kingship to the crowds of 
Jerusalem, "Behold, thy King cometh." 
And yet Jesus went in this way to 
exhibit not merely His Kingliness, but 
His meekness. And if Jerusalem, in 
that last hour of her dying day, had 
known Him, there would have been 
not judgment, but mercy. He never 
closes the door in the face of a sinner. 
He waits only until the sinner closes 
that door for himself. Thus they found 
the colt, and brought it to Him. His 
own disciples yielded Him homage as 
they spread their garments on the colt, 
and He accepted the homage as He sat 
thereon. 

And so we pass to the second stage 
of the story, that which records the 
actual entry. Notice the things ma- 
terial, and the things essential in this 
story. 

The things material. If it were pos- 
sible for us to imagine ourselves back 
in Jerusalem, not among the Galilean 
crowds coming up with Jesus, but 
among the dwellers in Jerusalem; if 
we could imagine that we were Romans 
in Jerusalem on the day of that tri- 
umphal entry, we should find ourselves 
saying; Who is this that is coming? 



If we asked the multitudes they would 
say, Jesus of Nazareth. That would 
mean nothing to us, for Nazareth was 
obscure; or if we knew anything of it 
our attitude would be one of contempt. 
The Central Figure in the strange pro- 
cession was riding upon a beast of bur- 
den. Kings never ride upon beasts 
of burden. There was a race of swift 
asses in those eastern countries, the 
peculiar animals of Kings, but the 
word describing this one is the word 
showing that it was a beast of burden 
picked up by the wayside. Who were 
those people all about Him? An un- 
organised mob. What were the signs 
of loyalty and rejoicing? Old clothes 
and broken trees. Imagine how a 
Roman, familiar with imperial Rome 
having perhaps seen one of those tri- 
umphal entries, when some emperor or 
general returned from war, was led in 
triumph through the streets of the city, 
that imperial city on the seven hills 
would have looked upon this scene. 
What the Romans really thought of it 
all we can gather by noticing their at- 
titude toward the movement. Pilate's 
attitude was one of absolute indiffer- 
ence from the beginning. All the 
gathering of this mob of Galileans 
around some man that they thought 
was a prophet, did not affect Rome. 
Rome could afford to ignore it. She 
said; There are no arms amongst the'm, 
there is not a scowl upon a face, they 
are all full of laughter and song; it is 
perfectly harmless; it is amusing; they 
think it is a triumphal entry; they are 
shouting about a King; let them shout. 
Remember, that notwithstanding all 
our popular interpretation of the text, 
when presently Pilate said, "I find no 
crime in Him/' he did not mean that 
He was sinless; but that He was not 
guilty of sedition; He had not plotted 
against Rome. 

If we look back upon the triumphal 
entry from the standpoint of earthly 
kingship it was indeed characterised 
by weakness and poverty. A beast of 
burden, an abscure man, a shouting 
mob, mainly of Galilee. Metropolitan 
Jerusalem despised them. We know 
the current contemptuous phraseology 
of Jerusalem concerning Galilee 
"Galilee of the Gentiles." 



250 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xxi. 1-17] 



But let us look again, "Behold, thy 
King." Nineteen centuries vindicate 
the truth of the prophetic message. He 
was a King; royal without trappings. 
His garment was a home-made gar- 
ment. Presently they would cast lots 
for it, perhaps because it was pre- 
eminently comfortable, woven from the 
top throughout without a seam, which 
simply means woven by the deft fingers 
of some loving woman. A King in a 
home-made garment! His steed was a 
beast of burden not yet broken to har- 
ness, "Whereon no man ever yet sat." 
His courtiers were fisher-folk, His 
cavalcade a mob of Galileans. And yet 
no pageant that ever passed through 
the streets of imperial Rome has so 
impressed the centuries as that. The 
triumphal entries of Roman emperors 
are almost forgotten, but of that entry 
of Jesus to Jerusalem, every detail re- 
corded is known by the common people 
everywhere. 

As they moved into the city, "All 
the city was stirred." The Greek word 
translated stirred is the one from 
which we obtain our word seismic. 
There was an earthquake, not mate- 
rially, but mentally. His coming made 
an earthquake, it shook the metropolis 
to its very centre. The wildest excite- 
ment prevailed. A man, a mob of 
shouting Galileans, old clothes, and 
palm branches ; and the city was stirred 
to its very centre. That was His in- 
tention; He would attract the attention 
of Jerusalem to the fact of His coming. 
He was compelling Jerusalem to recog- 
nize Him at least for an hour, at least 
till it should have heard His voice 
again, and have seen His authority 
once more. As she would not listen, 
He would stir her as by an earthquake, 
and attract her to Himself, if only to 
pronounce that final doom upon her. 

But now we come to the last part of 
this paragraph. This was the second 
time Jesus had cleansed the Temple. 
He did so at the commencement of His 
ministry. John tells the story of that. 
But now again at the close of that 
public ministry, the King, Who had 
thus come deliberately to attract men 
and to make them see and hear Him 
once again, Who had come in all the 
symbolism of Kingship, a symbolism 



suggestive of meekness and poverty in 
material things, went immediately and 
directly to the Temple of God. How 
many things He passed on the way 
which needed attention. His eyes must 
have seen many things out of harmony 
with the Kingdom of heaven, contrary 
to the will of God His Father. There 
were many things waiting for the activ- 
ity of the social reformer, but He 
passed the whole of them and went 
to the Temple. Do not misinterpret 
this. It does not mean that He had 
nothing to do with the social condi- 
tions through which He rode, but He 
knew the best way to touch them. 
" Judgment " must " begin at the House 
of God." That is the meaning of His 
passing through to the centre, of His 
going to the Temple. As long as the 
Temple was wrong the city was bound 
to be wrong. Presently there will be 
a CITY WITHOUT A TEMPLE. As the 
Seer in Patmos said, " I saw no Temple 
therein." Why not? Because the 
whole city will have become a Temple. 
All the streets will be courts in which 
men worship, and all the civic authori- 
ties will be ministers of the Most High. 
So long as the Temple at the heart of 
the city is wrong, the city cannot be 
saved. The King came to the city 
Jerusalem, beautiful for elevation. 
How He loved it! At the end of this 
section we shall hear the tears in His 
voice as He said ; " Oh, Jerusalem, 
Jerusalem . . . how often would I have 
gathered thy children, and ye would 
not!" The ancient King-Psalmist 
never loved Jerusalem as He loved 
Jerusalem; and He went to the city, 
the centre of the nation, and He went 
to the Temple, the centre of the city. 

Now what did He do? We love the 
tender pictures of Jesus, but we need 
such as these also. He "cast out," 
He "overthrew." There is more than 
gentleness in that. There is more than 
.sentiment in that He "cast out all 
them that sold and bought in the Tem- 
ple." There was a magnificence in His 
roughness. He "overthrew the tables 
of the money-changers, and the seats 
of them that sold doves." Why did He 
do these things? Notice very care- 
fully His own words; "It is written, 
My house shall be called a house of 



251 



[MATT. xxi. 1-17] 



MATTHEW 



prayer, but ye make it a den of rob- 
bers." Two quotations from the Old 
Testament prophecies are brought to- 
gether here Isaiah, chapter fifty-six, 
verse seven, and Jeremiah, chapter 
seven, verse eleven. Let them be read 
in connection with their context. 

The King, having come to the city, 
and come to the Temple, cast out and 
overthrew; and He vindicated His 
action by quotation from the ancient 
writings of Scripture, one descriptive 
of what the house should be a house 
of prayer; the other descriptive of 
what the house had become a den of 
robbers. Taking a word from Isaiah, 
the prophet of vision and hope; and 
capturing a word from Jeremiah, the 
prophet of vision and of tears, He put 
them together. The house ought to be 
a house of prayer. They had made it 
a den of robbers. Those were great 
moments for Jerusalem. Oh if Jeru- 
salem had but known! There, at the 
centre of the city, not because He did 
not love the city, but because He did 
love it, He stood in the Temple and 
said in effect, If the city is ever to 
be seasoned with salt, the Temple must 
be right; 

" Let the priests themselves believe 
And put salvation on." 

Then for one brief moment, so brief 
a moment that if we are not careful 
we miss it in our reading we find the 
Temple made beautiful indeed; "the 
blind and the lame came to Him in 
the Temple, and He healed them." 
That was one brief moment of restora- 
tion. For one brief moment the house 
was no longer a den of robbers, it was 
a house of prayer. What a picture! 
The Temple was not tidy. There were 
overturned tables, and money scattered 
everywhere, the debris of a great re- 
construction. But there were the blind 
and the lame; and the face that a mo- 
ment before had flamed with indigna- 
tion was soft with the radiance of a 
great pity. That is one of the greatest 
pictures in the Gospel according to 
Matthew. He casts out, but He takes 
in; He overthrows, but He builds up. 

Let us go back to Isaiah. In that 



fifty-sixth chapter we read, " My house 
shall be called a house of prayer for 
all peoples." That is what the King 
quoted. He stayed His quotation there; 
but what follows? "The Lord Jeho- 
vah Who gathereth the outcasts of 
Israel, saith, Yet will I gather others 
to Him, besides His own that are gath- 
ered." He did not quote that, but He 
did it! He rebuked them for the dese- 
cration of the house. He cast out, and 
He overthrew; and then He gathered 
the outcasts of Israel; and He gathered 
others besides His own. We know 
there is a wider significance. We know 
that this was one of the greatest pro- 
phetic words of Isaiah; but there was 
the first fulfilment of it. 

Thank God for that vision of the 
King. We could not live in the midst 
of all the iniquity that prevails if we 
did not believe in a King Who can 
overthrow and cast out. And thank 
God, that before the rearrangement of 
details, before we have put the house 
in order; with the tables still upset, 
the money scattered, and the men of 
affairs driven forth, He gathers the 
outcasts, and heals them. 

We know the rest of the story- 
priests; and as surely as we hear the 
word, we know that mischief is brew- 
ing. They heard of the wonderful 
things, and they heard children sing- 
ing, and were moved with indignation ! 
Think of it! They saw the wonderful 
things that He did, and they heard the 
bairns singing, and they were angry. 
We do not want to know anything more 
about them ; that is their condemnation. 
These children were practically pro- 
claiming the Messiah. Dost thou hear 
it? they asked. "Yea," said Jesus, I 
do hear it, and "Did ye never read, 
Out of the mouths of babes and suck- 
lings Thou hast perfected praise ? " It 
was an uproarious day in Jerusalem. 
The Galileans had been shouting, and 
Jerusalem had been shaken. He had 
turned out money-changers, and the 
crash and the flash of it all was about 
Him. Then the children sang, and He 
said, That is perfected praise. God 
help us, what a King He isl 



252 



MATTHEW 



[MAM. xxi. 18-22] 



MATTHEW XXI. 18-22 



fTpHE last verse ,of our previous study 
J. declared that after the priests' ob- 
jection to the singing of the children, 
"He left them, and went forth out of 
the city to Bethany, and lodged there." 
These verses contain the story of His 
coming from Bethany, after a night 
spent there, back to Jerusalem, and of 
what happened on the way. This story- 
has created difficulty in the minds of 
many, and it is well to notice at once, 
and to recognize the fact, that it is 
peculiar, in that it is the only record 
we have of the performance by Christ 
of a miracle of judgment. There are 
other occasions when> by . exercise of 
His power judgment was manifested, 
but on such occasions there was also 
always deliverance wrought. Accord- 
ing to the story of the Evangelists, in 
the country of the Gadarenes He de- 
stroyed an unholy traffic in swine, but 
He did it in connection with His free- 
ing two men from demon possession. 
But this is the story of Christ coming 
to a fig-tree, and pronouncing upon it a 
doom, and of how the disciples saw it 
wither away. Mark tells us the story 
with a little more detail than Matthew, 
and we gather that their question was 
asked not there and then, but on the 
morning after, 
its important and permanent values. 

Let us consider first of all the diffi- 
culties; and then look at the story as to 

It has been said that this act of 
Christ was an act of injustice, because, 
according to Mark, it was not the sea- 
son of figs. The story has also been 
objected to because it has been said 
that Christ manifested a spirit of anger, 
that, being hungry, and finding no fruit, 
He immediately cursed the tree, and 
that such manifestation of anger is out 
of harmony with the character of 
Christ. That same thing has also been 
stated, not as a reflection upon the 
character of Christ, but as being out 
of harmony with His method, in that 
He did not come to destroy life, but to 
save it, that He did not come to exe- 
cute judgment, but to show mercy. 

Let us look at these three objections. 
First, what are the facts concerning 



this fig-tree? The usual time of figs 
was June, and there is no doubt what- 
ever that this was what would answer 
to our month of April. But there was 
a "first ripe fig before the summer." 
The phrase occurs in the prophecy of 
Isaiah, the twenty-eight chapter, and 
there is an intimate association between 
the prophecy of Isaiah and this par- 
ticular miracle. The phrase referred 
to was undoubtedly used by Isaiah as a 
figure of speech, and yet of course it 
was one that was familiar to the men 
of his time, and indicated a fact con- 
cerning a certain kind of fig-tree to be 
found in Palestine. There were those 
that constantly produced what the 
prophet called "the first ripe fig before 
the summer," and one of the peculiari- 
ties of that tree was that the fruit ap- 
peared before the foliage. The pres- 
ence of foliage on the tree before sum- 
mer ought to have indicated the fact 
that fruit was there, too. If this ex- 
planation is accepted we have a per- 
fectly natural understanding of the 
equity of His dealing with this tree, 
so that there was no injustice in the 
sentence He pronounced upon it. This 
miracle was also a parable, as all His 
miracles were; and this tree was not 
faithful in fulfilling its true function; 
it was putting forth a manifestation 
which was not true to its inner life. 

There is not in this parable any sign 
of personal vindictiveness. Notice, the 
effect produced upon the men who be- 
held what happened, was not one of 
wonder that He should act as He did 
in the presence of the tree, but rather 
at the speed with which His fiat was 
carried out; and surely we have the 
right to interpret the attitude of Jesus, 
and the method of His action, and the 
spirit manifested, by the effect pro- 
duced upon the men who were there, 
rather than by the effect produced upon 
others, centuries after, who did not sec 
or hear what He said, and how He said 
it. The disciples were evidently in 
agreement with what He had done. 

Then, finally, the objection and this 
is perhaps the most serious of them 
that this is not in harmony with the 



253 



[MATT. xxi. 18-22] 



MATTHEW 



methods of Jesus as revealed in the 
Gospel stories. When He entered into 
the synagogue at the commencement of 
His public ministry, and read from the 
prophecy of Isaiah the great Scriptures 
which indicated the meaning of His 
mission, He ended abruptly in the 
midst of His reading. He read from 
that portion of the prophecy of Isaiah 
where it is written, " The Spirit of the 
Lord is upon Me;" but He did not read 
the latter part; He paused with the 
words, "The acceptable year of the 
Lord." He was then commencing His 
ministry, and in the prophecy of Isaiah, 
as we have it by translation, there is 
but a comma between that phrase, 
" The year of Jehovah's favour," 
and the phrase, "The day of venge- 
ance of our God." So that we need 
to remember that in the counsel of 
God, as revealed in the ancient pro- 
phetic writing, the Servant of God 
came not only for the "year of Jeho- 
vah's favour," but also for " the day of 
vengeance of our God." That day of 
vengeance had not yet dawned. But 
so far as the Hebrew nation was con- 
cerned, the "acceptable year of the 
Lord " had ended; and the King had 
now come up to Jerusalem for the spe- 
cific purpose of pronouncing its doom. 
We immediately find Him in conflict 
with the rulers in the Temple. In a 
series of parables He revealed the 
doom, and the reason of it. He gath- 
ered His disciples together, and most 
marvellously predicted the overthrow 
of Jerusalem by aliens; and cursed it 
with an eightfold woe. All this has no 
application to personal salvation, but 
only to national accountability. Also in 
Matthew another of the prophecies of 
Isaiah is quoted. "A bruised reed 
shall He not break, and smoking flax 
shall He not quench," and it is an in- 
teresting thing, we almost invariably 
end our quotation there. And yet the 
quotation ends, "Till He send forth 
judgment unto victory." When He 
sends forth judgment unto victory, He 
will break the bruised reed, and quench 
the smoking flax. 

One other illustration of the method 
of Jesus. We remember His own par- 
able of the fig-tree. The parable of 
words was borrowed, as to its thought, 



from the song of Isaiah, " Let me sing 
for my well-beloved a song of my be- 
loved touching his vineyard." That 
parable declared that a certain man 
had a vineyard, and a fig-tree planted 
within it. The plea of the intercessor 
was that he might have opportunity to 
provoke it to fruit-bearing, and the 
final word was, "If it bear fruit 
thenceforth, well; but if not, thou shalt 
cut it down." The intercessor was at 
one with the proprietor; and the last 
method of the intercessor was a method 
of judgment and destruction for that 
which did not yield to his ministry. 
Jerusalem had had its opportunity. 
The King was coming up to pronounce 
judgment upon it, to be at one with 
the Proprietor in flinging it out as a 
nation for testimony, and reducing it to 
ashes in the economy of God. On the 
way, this method of His work, never 
seen before, flamed out, as He no 
longer acted in pity, but in judgment; 
no longer in mercy, but for the destruc- 
tion of something which in itself was a 
failure. 

Let us now look at the immediate 
and permanent values of this miracle 
of judgment. Carefully notice the 
opening words of this section ; " Now 
in the morning as He returned to the 
city, He hungered." Why did He hun- 
ger? During the last week in the life 
of our Lord, He never stayed in Jeru- 
salem for the night. Speaking merely 
on the level of the human, He dare 
not. Men were waiting to arrest Him. 
The first night that He did stay in the 
neighbourhood of Jerusalem, on the 
mount of Olives, He was arrested. So 
that during those days, in which He 
was officially denouncing Jerusalem by 
parable and by woe, He went out every 
night to Bethany. Now Bethany calls 
to mind at once certain associations. 
Bethany was the home of Lazarus, 
and Martha, and Mary, and it is a 
most strange thing to read at the begin- 
ning of this paragraph that, coming 
back from Bethany in the early morn- 
ing, He was hungry. It is inconceiv- 
able that He had spent the night in the 
home of Martha and Mary, and Laza- 
rus. It may be only speculation, but 
perchance it was out of tender regard 
for them, knowing He was being fol- 



254 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xxi. 18-22] 



lowed, knowing very likely that Laza- 
rus's life would be in danger on His 
account. In all probability He had 
spent the night in some long lone vigil 
on the hill-side, in a quiet and secluded 
place, and when the morning came, and 
He turned; His face back toward Jeru- 
salem, He was hungry. Through the 
stress and strain of the spiritual con- 
flict there had been no sense of hun- 
ger; and suddenly, He hungered. And 
what had been His spiritual experience 
through that night, and during the 
whole of that period? One of intense 
spiritual hunger. The song of Isaiah 
and the parable of Luke both come 
back to mind. In that great song of 
Isaiah, God's desire after the fruitful- 
ness of His people is pathetically and 
magnificently declared, " What could 
have been done more to My vineyard, 
that I have not done in it? Where- 
fore, when I looked that it should bring 
forth grapes, brought it forth wild 
grapes?" Jehovah in the person of 
Jesus of Nazareth had been in Jerusa-r 
lem, looking for judgment and finding 
oppression, looking for righteousness 
and finding a cry. Or, to take His own 
parable, He Who was at once Proprie- 
tor and Intercessor in a strange and 
wonderful unity of purpose, had been 
there, attempting by the ministry of 
His teaching and the ministry of His 
doing, to provoke Jerusalem to fruit- 
bearing, and the men and rulers of His 
time to being what God intended they 
should be; and they had refused Him. 
We can enter in some measure into the 
intense and overwhelming hunger of 
the heart of the Christ. "Who hath 
believed our message? and to whom 
hath the arm of Jehovah been re- 
vealed?" was infinitely more than the 
cry of Isaiah. We know how it was 
fulfilled in this King, and probably dur- 
ing that night He had been filled with 
spiritual hunger. The material hunger 
was caused by the spiritual. That is 
to say, the spiritual hunger had made 
Him for the moment careless as to 
food, careless for the sustenance of the 
body, and when morning came, and He 
set His face toward Jerusalem for all 
the awful ministry to be exercised 
there, the spiritual hunger was ex- 
pressed through the material. 



Now notice what happened. With 
all naturalness, walking back to Jeru- 
salem with a little group of men, 
strangely perplexed around Him, we 
have this strange act. Let us go back 
again to the prophecy of Isaiah, the 
twenty-eighth chapter. It is the chap- 
ter in which the prophet declares that 
at last God deals in judgment with 
people who refuse the ministry of His 
servant. That is the peculiar message 
of the chapter in which the prophet 
describes the taunts of the men who 
opposed Him, " Precept upon precept, 
precept upon precept; line upon line, 
line upon line : here a little, there a lit- 
tle." And he answered them, Yes, so 
God has spoken to you, because He has 
been bound so to speak. And at last 
the prophet uttered this word, in verse 
twenty-one, " For Jehovah will rise up 
as in Mount Perazim, He will be wroth 
as in the valley of Gibeon, that He 
may do His work, His strange work, 
and bring to pass His act, His strange 
act." If men will not listen to the 
wooing, patient, halting speech of grace, 
halting because men can only hear line 
upon line, precept upon precept; then 
at last God will be driven to judgment, 
and He will be compelled to do that 
which is strange to Hun, His strange 
work, His strange act. 

Now on His way to the national 
rejection, conscious of material hunger, 
He stood in the presence of the fig-tree 
with leaves that ought to have been 
the sign of the early ripe fruit before 
summer. There was no fruit, and the 
condition was symbolic. He understood 
His relation to the ancient prophecies 
and that the prophet of old had fore- 
told His coming there. There at the 
parting of the ways stood the fig-tree, 
symbolic of the new condition of the 
people to whom He had been sent, with 
a fine exterior of promise, but with no 
fruit. Then the wail of God sounded 
in His heart, "Wherefore, when I 
looked that it should bring forth 
grapes, brought it forth wild grapes ? " 
and the word of God thundered 
through His soul, " Cut it down ; why 
doth it also cumber the ground ? " In 
the presence of the symbol He acted 
in answer to material hunger, but in 
order to express the spiritual hunger, 



255 



[MAM. xxi. 18-22] 



MATTHEW 



and the absolute necessity that was 
thrust upon Him for carrying out the 
intention and the purpose of God. 

When His disciples wondered, He 
gave them no answer to the astonish- 
ment in the way in which they ex- 
pected; but by saying a thing which 
seemed to have very little connection, 
He declared to those men that if they 
had faith, not only this fig-tree, but 
mountains should be removed. Let us 
try to enter into the very mind of 
Christ and see what was passing 
therein. 

Why was it necessary for Him to 
denounce this nation, and cast it out? 
Because of its lack of faith. The whole 
economy of God in connection with the 
Hebrew nation was that of revealing 
to the nations of the world the fact that 
the one master-principle of life for men 
was that of faith in Himself. The 
whole nation was founded upon faith. 
" By faith Abraham." And because 
the people had failed in their faith, and 
had garbed themselves in the works of 
a mere external ritualism, they must be 
flung out. They had lost their contact 
with infinite power because they had 
lost their faith. And so, in the pres- 
ence of the miracle, Jesus did not ac- 
count for His power at all, did not 
draw attention to Himself at all, but 
said to this little group of men round 
about Him, "If ye have faith, and 
doubt not, ye shall not only do what is 
done to the fig-tree," but you will be 
able to fling all obstacles out of the 
way of God's progress. He gave no 
explanation of the meaning of this mir- 
acle of judgment; but calling His own 
disciples, the little group of men to 
whom He was about to give the respon- 
sibility of expressing the will of God 
in the world, which responsibility was 
being taken away from the Hebrew 
people, He called them back to the 
fundamental principle, for having for- 
gotten which, the Hebrew people were 
to be cast out from testimony and to 
be rejected, while He pronounced upon 
them the woes that negatived the 
Beatitudes with which He had opened 
His ministry. 

There are permanent lessons here 
which we do well to understand. First 
of all, we have a revelation of the 



absolute oneness of Christ with God. 
His ministry of mercy merges into that 
of judgment when men refuse to sub- 
mit themselves to His mercy. Of 
course, this is to recognize and to abide 
by the truth of man's responsibility. 
The next two parables are both parables 
of the vineyard the ancient figure of 
Isaiah directed against the rulers, and 
then against the people; and through 
all Christ recognized human responsi- 
bility. Jesus Christ is one with God 
in underlying purpose as He deals with 
men. He seeks to provoke men to 
fruit-bearing for the satisfaction of 
God. He comes seeking righteousness; 
He does more, He comes to make it 
possible for men to live the life of judg- 
ment and of righteousness. But if man 
refuses, then Jesus Christ is absolutely 
one with God and as in the parable of 
the fig-tree, so in the miracle of the 
fig-tree, the ministry of Jesus is in- 
tended not to be a ministry of pity 
merely, but a ministry that provokes 
us to the realisation of God's under- 
lying purpose for us. To imagine that 
He simply came to plead for pity upon 
men who fail, is false to the whole of 
the New Testament teaching. He came 
to reveal sin to be what it is, active, 
wilful, definite, positive rebellion against 
God; and He came to deal with men, 
so that their will should be turned in 
the direction of the will of God, that 
men should be made to fulfil the divine 
intention. Of course the application in 
this story is national, but we may ap- 
ply it also in individual life ; and if a 
man shall, in spite of all the ministry 
of grace, and mercy, and power, still 
refuse and fail to trust Him; then, as 
surely as Jesus blasted the fig-tree on 
the way between Bethany and Jerusa- 
lem, He will blast the life of that man. 
There is the other side of the appli- 
cation; and it also is of permanent 
value. The power in which His own 
are to cast obstacles out of God's high- 
way is to be that of faith in Him. He 
was emerging along the great highway 
of the Divine purpose, and if we miss 
that view, we miss the whole point of 
our story. When we see Him as the 
great Servant of God, that His every 
act was a link in the chain of the 
Divine continuity of purpose and o 



256 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xxi. 23-44] 



power, when we understand that His 
casting out of Jerusalem was by the 
act, and power, and will of God, then 
we understand what He meant when 
He said to His disciples, If you have 
faith, you will not only be able to 
wither away one fig-tree, but all the 
mountains ; you will be able to speak 
to them with faith, and they shall be 
removed. 

The Hebrew people had become God's 
greatest hindrance instead of God's 
greatest help; and officially and posi- 
tively He flung the nation away, de- 
claring in detail how that judgment 
should fall within a generation. Within 
one generation the Roman legions had 
swept through the city, and it was flung 
down until no stone was left upon an- 
other. He was thus flinging a moun- 
tain of difficulty out of the way of 
God, that He might move forward ac- 
cording to the purpose of His heart, in 
blessing to others. So men of faith, 
operating through faith, are able to 
take hold of the power of God for the 
accomplishment of the purpose of God, 
that purpose being the setting up of 
His Kingdom. God operates through 
faithful men, but men can do nothing 
toward removing mountains of diffi- 
culty without God. So that when 
Christ tells us we are to have faith, it 
is not merely an individual thought, it 
is not merely in order that a soul may 



be saved; it is that, but it is in order 
that we may be workers together with 
Him, in order that we may fling the 
mountains of difficulty away, and make 
the high places smooth, and fling up the 
valleys to levelness. 

God through the centuries has been 
moving ever onward, and He has al- 
ways moved onward through human 
agency, but He has never been able to 
move onward through human agency 
save where man has operated upon the 
rock foundation of faith in Himself. 
Let us remember as we go forward we 
are the servants of a Christ Who waits 
in infinite and long-continued patience, 
but Who, at last, if the fig-tree bear 
no fruit, will Himself wither it with a 
word, and fling it away; but He does 
it in order that in the place which it 
occupied in the vineyard of God some 
other may be placed for the fulfilment 
of His ultimate purpose. 

And so the miracle becomes a flam- 
ing teaching, filling the heart with fear 
in the presence of the Lord, making 
one recognize that if He be tie Lamb 
of God which beareth sin in the mys- 
tery of an infinite meekness, there is 
such a thing as the wrath of the Lamb, 
against which none can stand. If we 
fail to answer the ministry of His love, 
we must be blasted by the ministry of 
His judgment. 



MATTHEW XXI. 23-44 



WE now commence the section in 
which we see the King in Jeru- 
salem, and in the Temple, the Centre 
of opposition. The hostility of the 
priests and rulers is more than ever 
manifest. First, they challenged Him 
as to His authority, and He answered 
them in parables. They were angry, 
for .they saw that His two parables 
were intended to apply to them, and 
they commenced with more earnestness 
than before to plot against His life. 
He answered their anger with a third 
parable, a parable of judgment. Then 
they endeavoured to entangle Him in 
His talk, bringing to Him questions. 

In this section we see the forces that 
had always been against Him manir 



festing themselves in clear succession; 
and they are the forces which are 
against Him still. They are, first un- 
belief, as represented in the rulers who 
asked Him concerning His authority; 
secondly worldliness, as represented in 
the men who asked Him questions con- 
cerning the tribute money; thirdly ra- 
tionalism, as represented in the men 
who asked Hun questions about the 
resurrection; and, finally intellectual 
dishonesty, as represented in the man 
who asked Him a question which was 
merely that of casuistry. 

Let us consider first, the challenge 
of unbelief; and the King's answer. 
The challenge was expressed in the 
words : " By what authority doest Thou 



257 



[MATT. xxi. 23-44] 



MATTHEW 



these things? and who gave Thee this 
authority?" Let us remember the oc- 
casion upon which the question was 
put. Think of the surroundings. We 
have studied the story of our Lord's 
entry into Jerusalem, and the fact of 
the cleansing of the Temple. We now 
see the Christ, having returned from 
the quiet, lonely vigil near Bethany, 
coming into the Temple which He had 
cleansed. Remember these events all 
took place within two or three days. 
He had driven out the money-changers, 
overturned the tables of the traffickers 
in the courts of the House of God, and 
for "one brief moment restored the 
Temple to its original purpose. 

He had now returned to the cleansed 
Temple, and was teaching. He had 
come with quiet assumption of author- 
ity. We cannot understand these men's 
questions at this point unless we see 
this, the Man Who had dared to 
cleanse the Temple, had now returned 
to it in order to teach, and the people 
Jerusalem was very full at this time 
were crowding upon Him. That was 
the occasion, 
never far away, sometimes on the 

While He was so teaching, the chief 
priests and the elders came to Him. 
That appears a simple statement, but 
it was no mere casual coming of the 
chief priests and elders. They were 
fringe of the crowd, sometimes nearer, 
these rulers, the members of the official 
council, members of the Sanhedrim. 
But this was not an occasion when 
some member of the Sanhedrim, having 
heard Him teaching, asked Him some 
casual question. This was an official 
visit of the chief priests and the elders 
of the people, the representatives of the 
ruling powers of Jerusalem in matters 
of religion, the men of authority, the 
men whose authority had perhaps never 
been questioned for long years until 
Jesus came. He did not commence by 
questioning their authority. As a mat- 
ter of fact, He told His disciples that 
they were to do all that the Pharisees 
told them as they sat on Moses' seat. 
He had never called in question the 
fact that these men had authority; but 
He had so taught as to make the peo- 
ple call in question their authority; 
for as we have already seen, they 



" were astonished at His teaching ; for 
He taught them as one having author- 
ity, and not as their scribes." 

Now this was His last visit to Jeru- 
salem, and the men of authority, who 
had been put into contrast with Him 
by the people, .and not by Himself, 
came to Him, and interrupted Him in 
His teaching. They had the technical 
right to do this within the Temple 
Courts, according to their own under- 
standing of their own position, and 
according to the popular estimate of 
that position. 

They now asked Him two questions. 
First, "By what authority doest Thou 
these things?" "In what authority," 
as the word is more accurately; that 
is, What is the note of Your author- 
ity? Is Your authority a political 
authority, a social authority, or a spiri- 
tual authority? What do You claim? 
That was the first question, and that 
was the deepest. But that which really 
troubled them was revealed in their 
second question, "Who gave Thee this 
authority?" His presence there was 
without their sanction. He had asked 
no permission from the elders or 
priests to find His way into the Temple 
Courts and to teach. Such was their 
challenge, and it was made in order 
that they might encompass His arrest, 
and end His mission. 

Now let us carefully notice the King's 
answer. This story, in common with 
many others, has suffered from a very 
superficial interpretation. We need to 
understand the spirit of it. First, He 
declared to them that He was quite 
willing to tell them, if they were ready 
Jo receive His answer. "I also will 
~ask you one question, which if ye tell 
Me, I likewise will tell you by what 
authority I do these things." It was 
not that He declined to declare His 
authority. It was not that He resented 
their interference, and was not pre- 
pared to answer; but that it was quite 
useless for Him to tell them His au- 
thority; they were not prepared to 
believe Him. He was perfectly pre- 
pared to declare what was the nature 
of His authority, and whence He ob- 
tained His authority, to men who were 
ready to receive it. 

What was His test? "The baptism 



258 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xxi. 23-44] 



of John, whence was it? from heaven 
or from men ? " He said, in effect, 
You are challenging Me as to whether 
I have any right to come into the 
House of God, and assume authority 
in the House of God. Am I a Teacher 
answering the authority of God, or am 
I here as a man craving the popular 
acclaim of the people? I will ask you 
one question, "The baptism of John, 
was it from heaven or from men ? " 
Before He could reveal to them what 
they asked, He took them back to the 
last revelation which they had re- 
ceived; for readiness to receive a new 
revelation always depends upon the at- 
titude to the previous one. That is 
always the principle of God's dealing 
with men. Thus we see that there 
was more in Christ's question, than ap- 
pears upon the surface. Supposing 
these men had admitted that the bap- 
tism of John was from heaven, then 
their question concerning Christ was 
immediately answered, because John 
had been His herald. John discontin- 
ued his ministry when Jesus began. 
John had said, " He must decrease, but 
I must increase." If they had ac- 
cepted that testimony as from heaven 
they would not have asked Him this 
question about His authority. They 
knew full well what John's testimony 
to Him had been. Thus there was an 
intimate connection between His ques- 
tion and their answer. The prime 
meaning of Jesus' question was this; 
What did you do with the last light 
that fell upon your pathway? If you 
tell Me that, I shall know whether you 
are ready to receive more light or not! 

How did they reply? Their diffi- 
culty was twofold. " If we shall say, 
From heaven" and that is what we 
ought to say then He will ask us why 
we do not obey Him. "If we shall 
say, From men" and that is what we 
would prefer saying "we fear the 
multitude." The people had come to 
the common conclusion that John was a 
prophet, and they dare not say that he 
was not. Therefore "they answered: 
We know not." 

To catch its significance we must 
interpret that particular answer of 
these men in the light of what Jesus 
said to them immediately afterwards 



" Neither tell I you." He ignored, and 
treated as untrue, what they declared, 
when they said they knew not. They 
withheld an honest answer; He with- 
held the answer which they asked. 
Theirs was the answer of blindness and 
of dishonesty. Of blindness, for they 
had seen the issue of John's ministry. 
They had seen an ethical revival re- 
sulting from the emotional revival. 
They had seen harlots and publicans 
pressing into the Kingdom of God, 
which meant obeying God, yielding to 
His demands, giving up the things 
John denounced, turning to the way of 
righteousness; and yet they dared to 
look in the face of Jesus, and say, 
" We know not" It was wilful blind- 
ness, and it was absolute dishonesty; 
and as such our Lord treated it. Then 
said He, " Neither tell I you." 

And why not? Because it was quite 
useless. If they were blind in the pres- 
ence of the evidences of the Divinity 
of the mission of John, then they would 
also be blind, as they were, in the 
presence of the evidences of the Divin- 
ity of the mission of Jesus. If they 
were dishonest in dealing with the 
former light, they would be dishonest 
whatever He declared to them. 

And not only because reply was use- 
less, but because reply was needless. 
" By what authority," said these men, 
" doest Thou these things?" and in 
the use of that word they revealed 
their subconscious conviction. They 
did not say, By what authority sayest 
Thou these things? They knew per- 
fectly well that wherever He had come 
with His ethic, He had also provided 
a dynamic, and by obedience men had 
been changed. His answer therefore 
declared that the things concerning the 
authority of which they had questioned 
Him, were themselves the evidences of 
the authority. 

Then immediately, not allowing them 
to escape, He continued; "But what 
think ye ? " And then He gave them 
two parables, in which He condemned 
first of all their methods, in the parable 
of the two sons; and, secondly, their 
motives, in the parable of the vineyard, 
the husbandmen, and the one son who 
was cast out. 

In considering the blasting of the 



259 



[MAM. xxi. 23-44] 



MATTHEW 



fig-tree we turned to the song of Isaiah, 
that great song of the vineyard. Now 
observe that both these parables are 
parables of the vineyard. Christ spoke 
as in the particular region which the 
prophet had described; as the Servant 
of God, The song of the well-beloved 
concerning His vineyard, was the. song 
of the vineyard neglected. The jfences 
were to be broken down, and destruc- 
tion was to come thereto; and He was 
in Jerusalem for the specific purpose 
of pronouncing doom upon that very 
vineyard of the Lord of hosts, because 
of its failure. Thus when He was deal- 
ing with the rulers, His two parables 
returned to the figure of Isaiah, the 
figure of the vineyard. The second one 
is most evidently an accommodation of 
the Song of Isaiah, in order to apply 
its truth to the rulers of His day, who 
had failed. 

Let us take the first, and notice what 
our Lord did. He stated the case by 
employing the figure of two sons. The 
father said to the first of them, " Son, 
go work to-day in the vineyard," and 
he said, "I will not," and then he re- 
pented and the word " repent " here is 
not to change the mind, but to be filled 
with sorrow he realised the mistake, 
and he went into the vineyard. To the 
next son he said the same thing, and 
he replied and it is a somewhat curi- 
ous and yet remarkable reply " I sir." 
We read it, "I go, sir/' but the word 
"go" is not in the Greek. He simply 
said, "I sir." The phrase is idiom- 
atic and suggests that this son put 
himself into contrast with the other 
one, who said he would not go, as 
though he said, You may depend on 
me sir! That is the graphic force of 
the word here. And he went not. 
Now said Christ to these men: Which 
was the true son which did the will of 
his father? He compelled them to find 
the verdict He made them the jury of 
their own actions. They found the ver- 
dict. "They say, The first;" the man 
who said, I will not go, but repenting, 
went, is the man who does the will of 
God ; rather than the man who declared, 
I am ready to go, but went not. 

Then notice carefully the applica- 
tion. He put into contrast two classes 
of people the publicans and the har- 



lots, the rebellious people who said, We 
will not do the will of God; and those 
very men who were the rulers. He 
said in effect; You have given a ver- 
dict against yourselves. The publicans 
and harlots had said, We will not; and 
then repenting, went. The rulers had 
said, We go,. and had not done so. 

For the purpose of this contrast He 
had taken them back to John's minis- 
try. They had heard him, and pro- 
fessing obedience had been disobedient. 
The publicans and harlots had heard 
him, and they who had said, We will 
not go, had repented, and entered into 
the Kingdom of God. There is no 
question as to what Christ thought of 
those men ; He knew perfectly well that 
they were sure John's ministry was 
from heaven. John came in the way 
of righteousness, and they knew that 
they, the exponents of the ethic of 
Judaism, could not quarrel with the 
great ethic he declared; they knew it 
was the way of righteousness; and yet 
when he pronounced the way of right- 
eousness they did not obey; they who 
affirmed their loyalty to God, would 
not obey the ethic through John. And 
it was not merely true that the pub- 
licans and harlots believed and obeyed, 
and they did not; the truth was that 
they refused to believe, even though 
they saw the signs of the publicans and 
harlots entering into the way of right- 
eousness. They not only refused to be 
persuaded by John himself, but when 
they saw the effect of John's preaching, 
that those men and women whom they 
despised, and would not help, were 
helped, and lifted, and healed, they 
still refused. 

The parable was indeed a white light, 
and a fierce fire; and the King stand- 
ing there in the Temple, challenged as 
to His authority, instead of answering 
the quibble, assumed the throne of 
judgment, and welcomed into the King- 
dom of God harlots and publicans who 
set their faces toward the Kingdom, 
and flung out the men who had pro- 
fessed to be the exponents of His 
Kingdom, who nevertheless had been 
disobedient to His command. 

If in this first parable He had con- 
demned their methods, He now probed 
more deeply into their lives, and dealt 



260 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xxi. 23-44] 



with their motives. And once more 
the figure is Isaiah's figure. The pro- 
prietor's perfect provision was in order 
to the production of fruit. "Hear an- 
other parable: There was a man that 
was a householder, who planted a vine- 
yard, and set a hedge about it, and 
digged a winepress in it, and built a 
tower." He made every provision 
necessary in order that He might 
gather fruit from His vineyard. To 
borrow the word of Isaiah, " He looked 
for justice, but, behold, oppression; for 
righteousness, but, behold, a cry." 
What did He look for? For judg- 
ment, for righteousness. Thus Jesus 
reminded them of this song of their 
own prophet. He then declared that 
the proprietor let this vineyard "out 
to husbandmen." He said, "he went 
into another country," which was a 
figurative way of saying that God made 
the priests and rulers and elders re- 
sponsible for the vineyard; and the 
failure of the vineyard was to be 
charged back upon them. 

That was the perpetual message of 
the prophets ; " Woe to the false shep- 
herds." And so also when Christ saw 
the multitudes and was moved with 
compassion it was because they were 
as sheep without a shepherd. This 
parable is not for the crowd, but it is 
for the shepherds. The priests and the 
elders were in front of Him; the men 
who ought to have taken care of the 
vineyard of the Lord of hosts, and so 
cultivated it that it would have brought 
forth fruit for which God looked; 
judgment which is justice, and right- 
eousness. They were responsible. But 
what had these husbandmen done ? The 
messengers came to receive the fruit. 
They beat them, bruised them, flinging 
them out, because instead of husband- 
ing the vineyard for the proprietor, 
they had been cultivating it for them- 
selves. And at last, said the King, He 
sent His own Son. Now, said the hus- 
bandmen, is the opportunity, that for 
which we have been waiting. We have 
gathered the fruit for our own self- 
enrichment, now we will possess the 
whole husbandry; let us kill Him, and 
the inheritance shall be ours. Said 
Jesus, What shall be done with these 
men? 



He had made them find the verdict; 
He now made them pass the sentence. 
He Who compelled them to be the jury, 
finding the verdict in the case of their 
own wrong, now compelled them to be 
the judge, passing sentence upon their 
own iniquity. And they were quite 
vehement about it, and their very 
vehemence is the evidence of the tre- 
mendous force with which Jesus spoke 
the words, that searching intensity that 
stirred the conscience, and compelled 
attention, and made the chief priests 
forget their quarrel with Him and 
speak out the truth. He found the 
deepest in them, and appealed to that 
deepest in them which they were reso- 
lutely setting themselves to stifle, in 
order to crucify Him. He compelled 
them to tell the truth. What shall be 
done to these men? Oh, they said, 
" He will miserably destroy those 
miserable men, and will let out the 
vineyard unto other husbandmen, who 
shall render Him the fruits in their 
seasons." 

There was no need for Christ to say 
anything more. They saw He spoke 
concerning them. They knew perfectly 
well that they had come to arrest Him, 
and challenge His authority in the 
Temple; and yet with quiet and match- 
less authority He had gathered them 
to the judgment throne of the unend- 
ing ages, and made them say they were 
miserable sinners who deserved punish- 
ment at the hands of an angry God. 
They made their own confession. 

This was the condemnation of their 
motive. They had been exercising au- 
thority in ethical and religious matters, 
but never for the sake of the glory of 
God, but for the sake of the main- 
tenance of their own official position. 
They said, We will take this vineyard 
of Jehovah of hosts; it is our great 
opportunity to maintain our own posi- 
tion; we will farm it, and work it for 
ourselves. We are not anxious that 
God should find judgment and right- 
eousness, we are anxious that we should 
find dignity and office. That is the 
dastardly sin of false authority in every 
age, that it cares for its own robing 
and dignity, and for the enslaving of 
the people to its own rule, and not for 



261 



[MAM. xxr. 45-xxir. 14] 



MATTHEW 



judgment and righteousness and truth 
for which God is seeking. 

Thus our King brought these rulers 
to His judgment throne, and then flung 
back upon them their own sentence, 
" I say unto you, The Kingdom of God 
shall be taken away from you, and 
shall be given to a nation bringing 
forth the fruits thereof." You are here 
to arrest Me, you are here to encom- 
pass My death, you are the builders, 
you are here to take this Stone that 
lies in your way, a stumbling-block, 
and fling it out ! " Did ye never read 
in the Scriptures, 

" The stone which the builders rejected, 
The same was made the head of the 
corner : 



This was from the Lord, 

And it is marvellous in our eyes?" 

A stone of stumbling, and a rock of 
offence. Fall on it and there is a 
touch of mercy even here and you 
will be broken, but the broken man 
can be healed. But let it fall on you, 
and you will be ground to dust, and 
there is no healing then. 

The supreme interest in this para- 
graph is the revelation of Jesus. He 
is the Master of all ages, and His judg- 
ments are the judgments of the ages. 
His is the voice of eternity, and He 
so deals with men as to compel them 
to acquiesce in the justice and right- 
eousness of His verdicts and sentence. 



MATTHEW XXI. 45-XXII. 14 



IN our previous study we found the 
solemn words of the King in which 
He declared the Hebrew nation to be 
rejected: "Therefore say I unto you, 
The Kingdom of God shall be taken 
away from you, and shall be given to 
a nation bringing forth the fruits 
thereof." There is the most intimate 
connection between that declaration 
and the parable which we have now 
to study. 

There is a difference between this 
parable and those already considered 
which we must notice at the outset. 
In the former two the King was deal- 
ing with the rulers' responsibility con- 
cerning the Kingdom of God in the 
world. In this it is no longer respon- 
sibility, but privilege which is under 
consideration. The figure changes from 
that of a vineyard into which labour- 
ers are sent, to that of a marriage 
feast to which guests are bidden; and 
if we interpret the figures from the 
Eastern view point, we at once see the 
contrast. On the one hand, we have 
toil and service; and on the other, re- 
joicing, and gladness, and merriment 

Then notice that running through all 
these parables there is an identity, not 
declared, but most evidently claimed, 
between Christ and His Father. What- 
ever we may think of the meaning of 
these parables, it is quite evident, as 



Matthew tells us, that the chief priests 
and the Pharisees knew that He was 
applying them to themselves. It is 
quite evident that our Lord intended 
to teach the proprietorship of God, the 
fact that these men owed allegiance to 
Him. Moreover, by the second parable 
it was perfectly evident that He in- 
tended to teach that He had come as 
the Sent of the Father; they having 
refused the messengers, He had come 
with the final message as the Son. In 
the three parables there is a growing 
movement. In the first He showed 
what the attitude of these rulers had 
been toward God. They had said, I 
go, and had failed to go; the attitude 
of disobedience and disloyalty. In the 
second He showed what their attitude 
would be toward Himself, " This is the 
heir; come, let us kill Him, and take 
His inheritance;" His inheritance of 
rule and authority and influence shall 
be ours. In the third parable He re- 
vealed to them what their attitude 
would be toward His messengers, those 
who are sent to bid them to the privi- 
leges. So long as He was dealing with 
their attitude to the Father, and to 
Himself, the parables moved in the 
realm of responsibility. When He be- 
gan to deal with their attitude toward 
His messengers, His parable moved in 
the realm of privilege. 



262 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xxr. 45-xxii. 14] 



There are three distinct movements 
in the particular parable we have now 
to consider, indicated by the three in- 
vitations sent out. The King was very 
near the end of His ministry, and was 
in Jerusalem for the specific purpose 
of casting out from privilege and re- 
sponsibility the people that had refused 
His Kingship. Thus all His parables 
become more intensely suggestive, and 
need examination in the light of that 
fact. To take this parable, and to 
preach the Gospel from it, is to strain 
its meaning. There is not a word here 
concerning the preaching of the Gospel. 

Remembering that our Lord was in 
Jerusalem definitely for the purpose of 
dealing with the rulers and the nation, 
notice how these three invitations ex- 
actly cover the fact of His ministry 
in the world, concerning the Kingdom 
of God. In the first invitation He was 
referring to the call already given by 
Himself and His disciples in their jour- 
neyings throughout that whole district. 
By the second invitation He was re- 
ferring to the work which His dis- 
ciples would do from that moment 
until, the nation rejecting the message 
for the second time, God would send 
His armies and destroy their city, a 
definite prophecy of the destruction of 
Jerusalem. We have therefore in the 
second movement, a reference to the 
call to the Kingdom, from the point 
of His rejection, until, rejecting not 
merely Jesus, but the ministry of the 
Holy Spirit, Jerusalem was destroyed. 
That took place a generation after- 
wards. Thirdly, we have in the par- 
able a movement which follows that. 
After the destruction of Jerusalem the 
messengers would be sent forth into 
the highways; that is, beyond the 
places of covenant, beyond the people 
of privilege, beyond those who were 
originally bidden; and they were to 
go forth with the same message. But 
the difference is that, instead of bring- 
ing to the marriage feast the bidden 
ones, they were to bring bad and good 
together, in order that the house might 
be filled, in order that the ideal might 
be realised. In that third invitation, 
then, we have a picture of the call 
which His messengers were to utter 
after the destruction of Jerusalem until 



this time. It is a reference to work 
which we have to do. 

Turn, then, to the first of these in- 
vitations, " The Kingdom of heaven is 
likened unto a certain king, who made 
a marriage feast for his son." What 
is the Kingdom of heaven? Exactly 
what this Gospel has revealed. In 
order to understand the phrase here, 
we must first, behold the King; sec- 
ondly, listen to the laws which are in 
His Manifesto ; thirdly, observe the 
facts of His Kingship as revealed in 
His authority in the realms of the ma- 
terial, mental, and moral. If we would 
know the claims of the Kingdom, let 
us listen to the King as He demanded 
of men that they should submit and 
obey, and yield to Him their allegiance. 
If it were possible for us to lift out 
of this Gospel the great ideal which 
Jesus presented; if it were possible 
for us for a moment to forget these 
particular men that crowded about 
Him; and if it were possible for us 
to forget popular interpretations of the 
meaning of the Gospel; and if we could 
appreciate the ideal of the Kingdom, 
apart from the refusal, and apart from 
the local circumstances, what would it 
be? God absolutely enthroned. It is 
the Kingdom of God. Under His en- 
thronement character is the supreme 
thing. Individualism consists of the 
realisation of character that harmon- 
ises with the character of God. Peo- 
ple of character, harmonising with the 
Kingdom of God, living in mutual in- 
terrelationship, would constitute a great 
theocracy of souls loyal to the Throne 
of God, and serving each other, and 
thus bearing testimony to those out- 
side, concerning the graciousness and 
goodness of the government of God. 
That was the ideal that filled the heart 
and mind of Jesus. When He taught 
us to pray the prayer, Thy Kingdom 
come on earth, He saw the ideal con- 
ditions of life in the world. It is not 
a prayer that anything may come in 
Heaven; it is a prayer that things 
may be here as they are there. Wher- 
ever we take the words of Jesus, and 
apply them simply, we see that to have 
been His ideal. " Thou shalt love the 
Lord thy God with all thy heart, . . . 
and . . . thy neighbour as thyself. On 



263 



[MATT. xxi. 45-xxii. 14] 



MATTHEW 



these two commandments the whole 
law hangeth, and the prophets." 

Now said the Master, the Kingdom 
of heaven is likened unto a marriage 
feast. As our Lord, in dealing with 
responsibility, chose the figure of the 
Old Testament, the vineyard, so here, 
in dealing with the privileges of His 
Kingship, He employed the prophetic 
figure ; " I will betroth thee unto Me 
for ever." That was the word of God 
to the people whom He had chosen to 
represent Him in the world. And yet 
Hosea uttered those awful prophecies 
of his ! He charged Israel with having 
broken the relationship between her- 
self and God, between husband and 
betrothed. Spiritual adultery and har- 
lotry, said Hosea, is the sin of the 
chosen people. That figure of the Old 
Testament, Christ now employed, and 
said, God has made a marriage feast 
for His Son, a day of gladness and re- 
joicing. But this is Christ's picture 
of the Kingdom of God as to its right- 
eousness and peace and joy. " The 
Kingdom of God is ... righteousness 
and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit." 

The first call to the Kingdom went 
out " to them that were bidden," to 
those who were under authority, to 
those who ought to have heard, and 
understood, and answered. With what 
result? They would not come. Jesus 
and His twelve disciples had through 
that whole neighbourhood, for about 
three years, preached that Kingdom, 
preached its principles, preached its 
privileges, preached its responsibilities, 
and the people would have none of it. 
They had, as His previous parables 
revealed, declined the responsibilities, 
and so they had rejected the privileges. 
They would not come to the marriage 
feast. That was His first charge 
against them. 

Then He told them that there was 
another invitation. First, the figura- 
tive description of the King's prepara- 
tion ; " Again He sent forth other 
servants, saying, Tell them that are 
bidden, Behold, I have made ready my 
dinner: my oxen and my failings are 
killed, and all things are ready: come 
to the marriage feast." Very quaint, 
and very beautiful, and very solemn, 
are some of the Puritan writings upon 



that passage. They draw attention to 
the fact that the way in which the 
King spread the great feast, whereby 
men should come into the Kingdom 
realisation, was a costly way. When 
Jesus uttered those words, and said, 
"All things are ready," He knew at 
what infinite cost God was preparing 
for the possibility of the realising of 
that great Kingdom which He had 
preached, and which men had rejected. 
This declaration that all things are 
ready so far as God is concerned, was 
a new call to men to come into the 
privileges of the Kingdom. 

How did they respond? There were 
two classes, the indifferent, and the re- 
bellious. The indifferent turned every 
one to his own farm; and there is 
a special emphasis there. " His own 
farm." Christ had preached the King- 
dom, God's Kingdom, in which men 
should seek, not their own, but His and 
each other's good; a Kingdom in which 
the first passion of the individual life 
should be the glory of God; and the 
necessary sequence of that passion the 
good of other men; but they would not 
come. They went back to the self- 
centred life that sought for personal 
enrichment and comfort, without re- 
gard to the Kingdom of God, or the 
good of their fellow men. Others were 
definitely rebellious. They treated the 
messengers ill, they beat and flung 
them out, and killed them. And all 
that actually happened in those days 
succeeding the ministry of Jesus. In 
the Acts of the Apostles we find the 
story. We must not forget that in 
those early days of Christian preach- 
ing, they preached the Kingdom of 
God, not nebulously as we do, as though 
the Kingdom of God only meant that 
a man should submit to God; but so- 
cially, as we do not, realising that they 
came, not merely for the saving of 
their own soul, but for His glory, and 
for the realisation of the ideal national 
communal life. 

But they killed the messengers and 
at last the King was wroth, and He 
sent His own armies. He Who girded 
Cyrus long before, led and guided the 
Roman armies, sweeping the city out, 
burning and destroying it, and irre- 
vocably scattering to the winds His 



264 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xxi. 45-xxn. 143 



people who would not have His King- 
dom because His Kingdom interfered 
with their own self-centred interest. 

Then said Christ in this parable, 
"The wedding is ready, but they that 
were bidden were not worthy. Go ye 
therefore unto the partings of the high- 
ways," go and gather in the bad and 
the good; which does not mean that 
He was inviting into His Kingdom a 
promiscuous crowd both bad and good, 
but that no longer was the invitation 
to be confined to a people of a certain 
order. Our Lord was not minimising 
the importance of character, as we see 
by the final reference to the man with- 
out a wedding garment. This is one 
of the cases where one is bound to 
confess that no translation can quite 
accurately carry the sense of the 
method by which Jesus said that the 
King addressed that man ; " He saith 
unto him, Friend, how earnest thou in 
hither not having a wedding gar- 
ment?" The word not in verse eleven 
is a different word from the not in 
verse twelve, and it is impossible to 
translate the different meaning by any 
equivalent in our language. Dr. Vin- 
cent stated the matter in the simplest 
form when he said, In the Greek lan- 
guage the first not was always used 
when referring to a matter of fact, 
while the second was always used in 
reference to a matter of thought. By 
that he means, and this is certainly 
the intention of the passage, there 
came in a man not having a wedding 
garment; that is the fact. But when 
the king looked at him and said, " How 
earnest thou in hither not having" that 
is, deliberately not having, with deter- 
mination not having, it is the not of 
thought you did not mean to have a 
wedding garment, you have dared to 
come without a wedding garment. And 
so by that Jesus revealed to us that, 
even though the bad and good were to 
be called into the Kingdom, the ques- 
tion of character did matter. 

Let us now go back to that state- 
ment in the previous chapter, not so 
much now for its application to the 
Hebrew people as for its principle. 
"The Kingdom of God shall be taken 
away from you, and shall be given to 
a nation bringing forth the fruits 



thereof." How does this apply to us 
as to responsibility? What is the 
fruit of the Kingdom of God? The 
fruit of the Kingdom of God is the 
Kingdom of heaven. They are inti- 
mately related. The greatest word of 
all is the Kingdom of God, which 
means the Kingship of God, which 
means the Kingship of God recognized 
and obeyed; and the Kingdom of God 
in some senses includes the whole uni- 
verse over which He governs. Hell 
itself is in that Kingdom. The King- 
dom of God, if we understand the 
phrase in all its breadth, and length, 
and height, and depth of meaning, de- 
scribes His ultimate and final and 
present authority everywhere. The im- 
manence of God, and the transcendence 
of God, are not contradictory ideas, but 
mutually expository ideas; and whether 
it be far or near, near or far, God is, 
and rules, and governs all. He has 
created in the great mystery of His 
universe, beings with will, and to cer- 
tain of these people, in a fallen world, 
and in the mid^t of a fallen race, He 
has committed the Kingdom of God; 
He has made them responsible to re- 
veal it, to let other men see what it 
means. If we can find a community 
realising the Kingdom of God in its 
own life, that is the Kingdom of 
heaven; it is the fruit of the Kingdom 
of God. There was a time, a little 
time in the history of the Hebrew peo- 
ple when they realised it, when they 
were a theocracy purely and simply ; no 
King interfering but lie one King Je- 
hovah ; all their life centred about Him. 
That was the Kingdom of heaven. 
There were a few fleeting months 
in Florence when the world saw the 
coming of the Kingdom of God in 
power and judgment, when in answer 
to the preaching of Savonarola people 
woke, and broke the chain of Lorenzo 
de Medici. There was a moment in 
our English history when we had a 
glimpse of the Kingdom of God it was 
never a perfect glimpse when men 
called Ironsides held sword and Bible, 
and tramped to the music of the decla- 
rations of Holy Writ. We had one gleam 
when Oliver Cromwell saved us all 
from the evil of a decadent age. They 
were never lasting. They could not 



265 



[MATT. xxi. 45-xxii. 14] 



MATTHEW 



last because, even though there was a 
gleam of the glory of the Kingdom, the 
conditions were not established by the 
methods of the King. The Kingdom 
of heaven is realisation in actual hu- 
man life of the fact of the Kingship 
of God. The King coming up to Jeru- 
salem, said to the people who had been 
made the depository of the holy and 
sacred truth, "The Kingdom of God 
shall be taken away from you, and shall 
be given to a nation bringing forth the 
fruits thereof;" that is, to a people who 
will exhibit all that is meant by the 
Kingdom of God. And what was the 
nation to whom it was given? The 
Church. 

Peter, to whom our Lord first spoke 
concerning the Church, said in his let- 
ter, " Ye are an elect race, a royal 
priesthood, a holy nation, a people for 
God's own possession." That does not 
exhaust the Divine intention. It will 
never be exhausted until the whole 
world realises the Kingdom of God. 
From then until now the world is only 
able to know the meaning of the King- 
dom of God as it sees it realised in the 
Church of Jesus Christ. But the 
Church has failed to reveal the King- 
dom of God in all its earthly meaning 
and glory as the Hebrew people did. 
That is why we are being broken up, 
and scattered abroad; that is why our 
work has become largely individual- 
istic. There have been some attempts; 
some stately and magnificent, and yet 
terrible; some full of marvellous power, 
yet always failing; and some grotesque. 
One of the greatest attempts to realise 
it has been that of the Roman Catholic 
Church ; that great and massive struc- 
ture, boastfully one o'er all the face of 
the earth. But Rome has failed be- 
cause she has allowed the Christian 
ideal to be paganised, and thus has 
ruined the testimony to the Kingdom of 
God. The movement of the Plymouth 
Brethren was a great one. They had 
the vision of a great ideal, but their 
testimony is a ruined and spoiled testi- 
mony, because they became Romanised 
with a popery more severe than that 
of Rome, a popery that tracked a man 
from village to village if perchance he 



did not quite agree with some view of 
truth, until he was ostracised and 
hounded almost out of existence. More 
recently another attempt at the mani- 
festation was seen in Dowieism. But 
Bowie's ministry was that of taking his 
community, and putting it into a city 
by itself. Jesus Christ would have His 
people scattered, for His salt must live 
next door to the corruption; His light 
must shine in the darkness. Outside 
the borders of the Church, there are 
men to-day who are seeing at least the 
Divine intention though they have not 
discovered the Divine dynamic; and 
perhaps, presently, we shall be sur- 
prised to see God moving toward a 
realisation through people we thought 
could not be used for it, and all be- 
cause His Church has not been true to 
Him in this matter. 

What is our responsibility? What 
shall we do? Attempt to re-unite 
Christendom? In the name of God, 
no. There is no time to waste; life is 
all too brief. What shall we do? At 
least we ought, wherever there is a 
Christian fellowship, to realise the 
Kingdom of God within it. Every 
Church ought to find out how, in that 
local fellowship, there may be at least 
a centre of light, a revelation to the 
men outside, of the love, and the light, 
and the life, which come to men inside 
the Kingdom of God. It is not enough 
that in our personal life we reveal to 
the world what Christ can do for us. 
The world is waiting to see, not merely 
what Christ can do for a man, but 
what Christ can do for the community 
of souls who, having come to Him in- 
dividually, are now living within His 
Kingdom. And if He has committed to 
us the Kingdom, and we do not bring 
forth the fruits of it, so surely as He 
cast His Hebrew people away from ser- 
vice not from salvation, but from 
service so surely will God move out- 
side the churches and do His work be- 
yond it in ways that will astonish us. 
This is the message of His Kingship, 
and unless we realise what He means, 
and obey Him, we also will be cast 
away from service, and from helping 
to fulfil His great ideals in the world. 



266 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xxn. 15-46] 



MATTHEW XXII. 15-46 



THE King is still seen in the Tem- 
ple. In this section we have a 
radiant display of His wisdom. All 
that we read concerning the Pharisees 
and Sadducees is background, and 
serves to throw up into clear relief the 
matchless wisdom of the King. 

The Pharisees now gathered them- 
selves together for a new attack by 
the most despicable of methods; they 
descended to the meanness of attempt- 
ing to lay traps for Him, to bring such 
problems to Him, or questions, or diffi- 
culties, as would involve Him in com- 
plications with regard to His own 
teaching, His own claim; or, far more 
to their satisfaction, which might in- 
volve Him in conflict with the civil 
authorities. The Sadducees somewhat 
flippantly suggested a problem to Him, 
and when He had muzzled them using 
that word quite accurately, it is the 
word in the New Testament a lawyer, 
perhaps sincerely, so far as his ques- 
tion was concerned, and yet with un- 
belief in his heart, asked Him a ques- 
tion. Finally, the King propounded a 
question, which flashed its light upon 
all their questions, and upon them. 

Examining this series of pictures, we 
have four groups, and four happenings. 
The coming of the Pharisees ; then that 
of the Sadducees; then that of the 
lawyer; and finally Christ's question. 

Examining them one after the other, 
taking picture by picture, these are the 
things which impress the mind; first, 
that these men did not know Him; 
and, secondly, that they did not un- 
derstand the very problems which they 
themselves suggested to Him. By con- 
trast to that, one cannot read these four 
stories, or look at these four pictures, 
without seeing how perfectly He knew 
them, and how absolutely He was Mas- 
ter of all the problems which they sug- 
gested to Him. 

There came to Him first the Phari- 
sees and Herodians. This was a coali- 
tion. The Pharisees and Herodians 
represented opposing political views, 
and their question was distinctly a po- 
litical one. They came together in 
order to entrap Him in His talk; and 



the very fact that this was a coalition 
created the subtlety of their approach, 
and the difficulty of Christ. 

How little they knew Him! They 
attempted to fling about Him the mist 
of their flattery. Reading the story 
carefully we find that these men had 
come to challenge His authority as 
evidently as the official deputation from 
the Sanhedrim, the leading Pharisees, 
had come on a previous occasion. 
These men were not leading Pharisees, 
but disciples of the Pharisees ; that is 
to say, the leaders, having been an- 
swered, were in the background; but 
they sent up some young men, some 
of their disciples, with a new method 
of attack; not with the official dignity 
that challenged authority, but with the 
civil manner that suggested a belief in 
Christ's integrity. 

How little they knew Him, and how 
very surprised they must have been 
when, before attempting to answer 
their question, He looked back into 
their faces and said, " Why make ye 
trial of Me, ye hypocrites?" They 
thought that He might be moved or at 
least mystified by flattery. Praise is a 
graver peril than blame to a strong 
soul. Blame a man, challenge him, 
and if he stands upon a bed-rock of 
certainty and conviction, he will win; 
but it is a trying moment when a man 
is told that he is quite perfect and 
upright, and knows the way of God. 
Jesus ruthlessly tore the veil away, as 
He said, "ye hypocrites." 

What was their problem? Its blind- 
ness is self-evident, but it was a very 
subtle one. The question was of the 
simplest, "Is it lawful?" There is 
no meaning in this, save as we remem- 
ber that they understood that He had 
made Messianic claims. They were not 
referring to Roman law, but Hebrew 
law, Messianic law. "Is it lawful to 
give tribute unto Caesar, or not ? " The 
subtlety of the question lay in the 
dilemma into which they intended to 
put Him. If He had said, Yes, it is 
lawful, then, according to their idea, 
He would have abandoned His claim 
to be Messiah and Deliverer; for the 



267 



[MAM. xxii. 15-46] 



MATTHEW 



Messiah could never consent that the 
Hebrew people should put their neck 
under a yoke. If, on the other hand, 
He had said, It is not lawful, then 
they would have been able to report 
Him to Rome, and have Him arrested. 

Mark the answer. He said to these 
men, " Shew Me the tribute money." 
In that very request, and in the fact 
that He proffered that request to them, 
we see His method. If the King had 
Himself produced a penny, or asked 
one of His own followers for the de- 
narius, the silver Roman coin with the 
Hebrew inscription, intended for the 
specific purpose of paying tribute it 
was the amount and coin for that pur- 
pose He still might have said all He 
said, but His declaration would have 
lost something of weight. The penny 
was immediately produced, perhaps 
handed to Him; and then He looked 
into their faces, and said, " Whose is 
this image and superscription ? " With- 
out a moment's hesitation, they re- 
plied: "Czesar's." 

That settled it; the penny was theirs, 
and the image Caesar's. They were 
using Caesar's coinage. Let them be 
honest enough to pay Caesar his due; 
but let them not forget that there is a 
higher law than the law of Caesar; let 
them " Render unto God the things that 
are God's." 

The second part of the answer led 
them into the inner secret of how they 
were to fulfil the first part. " Render 
therefore unto Caesar the things that 
are Caesar's;" but while you do it, in 
the doing of it, " render to God the 
things that are God's." When you pay 
tribute and you must pay tribute do 
not forget that the final Throne to 
which you owe allegiance, is the Divine 
Throne. 

What is the principle? The King 
recognized man's place in the State, 
and his obligation to the State; and 
declared that if men be in the State, it 
is their business to pay tribute to the 
State. He does not take men out of 
the State, and put them as separate 
from it; but He does say, that the 
deepest and the final thing in the life 
of men who are supposed to represent 
the Kingdom of God in the world, is 
the Kingdom of God. Such men are to 



be in the State, recognizing its respon- 
sibilities, fulfilling their obligations, but 
all the while they are to act under the 
one master-passion and principle of loy- 
alty to the Throne of God. 

This was a political problem, and in 
it we see the King's relation to politics 
for all time. He reveals the principles 
which bind the State to the Throne of 
God. He declares that the Throne 
of God is final and supreme; and a 
man in the State is to pay his tribute, 
and do his duty to the State; but al- 
ways under the guidance and inspira- 
tion of his loyalty to the Throne of 
God. No man can interfere with what 
any other man does in that respect. 
We have no business to tell each other 
what we ought to do. It is by indi- 
vidual loyalty, and not by an associ- 
ation or resolution of crowds that we 
affect the State. The Church affects 
the State toward God in no other way 
than by the individual conscience; and 
its absolute freedom to God. 

Next there came to Him the Sad- 
ducees, the rationalists in religion. The 
Sadducee denied angel and spirit and 
resurrection; that is to say, he at- 
tempted to be religious without any 
reference to what people speak of as 
supernatural things. They came to 
Christ and first of all quoted to Him 
the Mosaic command, that if a man 
die, his brother should take his wife, 
and raise up seed. Then they gave 
Him an illustration, a grotesque illus- 
tration. We can almost see the self- 
satisfied air with which they said : " In 
the resurrection therefore, whose wife 
shall she be of the seven? for they all 
had her." And yet notice when our 
Lord answered these men there was 
an utter absence of the severity which 
characterised His answer to the Phari- 
sees. He did not speak to them as 
hypocrites, and it may be that if their 
illustration was grotesque, and their 
method was flippant, they were yet 
stating an actual difficulty in their 
thinking. First of all He answered 
their illustration by declaring to them 
that they were ignorant of the Scrip- 
tures. But further, He answered their 
philosophy by declaring that they were 
ignorant of the power of God. 

He answered their illustration. They 



268 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xxii. 15-46] 



were ignorant of their Scriptures, and 
in one quiet dignified sentence He de- 
clared to them, "In the resurrection 
they neither marry, nor are given in 
marriage, but are as angels in heaven ;" 
you are imagining a condition of affairs 
that cannot, and will not exist. In a 
moment their illustration was swept on 
one side as being not applicable to 
their argument or their philosophy. 

But He did not so leave them. 
"But/' said He, "as touching the re- 
surrection of the dead." By that 
phrase He touched the underlying phi- 
losophy that had made the difficulty 
and suggested the illustration. Not 
ruthlessly, not with the severity which 
characterised His answer to the Phari- 
sees, but quite as surely, He stripped 
them of all disguises. He said to them 
in effect, Your difficulty is this diffi- 
culty concerning resurrection. Your 
difficulty is the difficulty concerning 
the supernatural in religion. You are 
rationalists concerning resurrection ; 
" Have ye not read that which was 
spoken unto you by God, saying" do 
not miss the apparently trivial things 
in reading your New Testament, they 
said, "Moses said;" He said, "spoken 
unto you by God" "I am the God of 
Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and 
the God of Jacob? God is not the God 
of the dead, but of the living." 

This answer of Jesus was a most 
remarkable one. He went beneath the 
surface to the underlying fact of God. 
"God is not the God of the dead." 
The difficulty as to the bodily resur- 
rection of a man is no difficulty at all 
when the question concerning God is 
settled. When a man understands the 
truth that the Bible reveals concerning 
God, the difficulties that the Bible pre- 
sents concerning man, and what we 
call the supernatural, melt into thin air. 
He said to these rationalists in effect, 
You are building your view of the im- 
possibility of resurrection upon a mis- 
conception of God. Ye neither know 
the Scriptures, nor the power of God; 
which does not merely mean God's 
power to do this one thing, but God's 
essential power, the truth concerning 
God. God is the Ged of the living. In 
that great word of Jesus we have a 
declaration of the immortality of the 



soul. He is not the God of the dead. 
These men are not dead. Christ did 
not say a word about a bodily resurrec- 
tion, but He affirmed that these men 
were alive. He declared that the God, 
Who is the God of Abraham, and the 
God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, 
is the God of the living; and what He 
said, indicates the fact that through 
all ages He is their God, and that they 
are living still. If we once recognize 
the truth of the immortality of the soul, 
the question of the bodily resurrection 
is very simple. Just as in the mys- 
teries of the original economy of God a 
man who is a spirit and not a body, is 
clothed in a body by certain processes, 
some little of which we understand; so 
that selfsame man, that spirit, can pres- 
ently be clothed in a body again, and 
it will not be the body that was, but a 
new body, yet in some mystery beyond 
our comprehension fashioned out of the 
old body. An actual resurrection is in 
this way conceivable when we believe 
in God, as to His power, and His rela- 
tion to all souls who put their trust 
in Him. 

So, not answering their difficulty 
concerning bodily resurrection, but by 
declaring the true philosophy of God, 
new to them, He corrected their ra- 
tionalistic speculations. This was a 
rationalistic problem, and the King's 
answer was clear, as it revealed the 
fact that the degradation of human 
thinking about man, is due to a de- 
graded conception of God, 

The third questioner was a lawyer, 
a Pharisee lawyer. He came, as we 
have seen, with a sincere question. 
"Which is the great commandment in 
the law ? " This does not mean, Name 
one of the commandments which is 
greater than the rest. The particular 
word translated " which " is qualita- 
tive; and therefore the meaning of the 
lawyer was, What is the principle 
which makes any commandment great? 
In that day men were teaching the 
relative importance of the command- 
ments. There was a school of inter- 
pretation which taught that the third 
commandment in the Decalogue was 
the supreme commandment, and that all 
the rest were minor ones; and so this 
particular question grew out of the 



269 



[MATT. xxn. 15-46] 



MATTHEW 



differences of opinion concerning which 
commandments were greatest, and they 
asked Christ to decide what was the 
real principle by which they might test 
the greatness of a commandment. 

When He gave the answer He did 
not name one of the commandments 
in the Decalogue, but went outside 
them. Both of the passages that- He 
gave are to be found in the Pentateuch. 
The one is in the book of Deuteronomy, 
and the other is in Leviticus. First, 
"Thou shalt love the Lord thy God 
with all thy heart, and with all thy 
soul, and with all thy mind. This is 
the great and first commandment." 
The man had asked the Master to tell 
him the principle of greatness in a 
commandment. "This is the great;" 
and it is great because first, great be- 
cause fundamental, great because un- 
derlying all the others. "This is the 
great and first commandment." The 
article is emphatic. "And a second" 
not the second " a second," a some- 
thing coming out of the first, related 
to the first, not standing even in dis- 
tinction from it. Then He declared: 
" On these two commandments the 
whole law hangeth, and the prophets." 
The principle of greatness is the recog- 
nition of the fundamental law which 
includes the whole. This is great and 
first, and these two are the strength of 
all the rest. 

This was a problem of conduct. It 
was the King's revelation of His un- 
derstanding of the meaning of law. 
What is law? Relation to God, ex- 
pressed toward the neighbour. " Thou 
shalt love the Lord thy God." The 
second is like it, kin to it, belonging 
to it, the outward expression of it, 
"Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy- 
self." John afterwards wrote about 
love, and unfolded this great philos- 
ophy of Jesus Christ, teaching us that 
if a man say he love his brother, and 
leave him hungry, he is a liar. Thou 
shalt love the Lord thy God, and thou 
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. 
The principle in law is love. 

Notice the words introducing the last 
picture, " Now while the Pharisees 
were gathered together." That is, 
when the Pharisees had done, when 
He had muzzled the Sadducees, when 



the lawyer had gone. Probably that 
had been a concerted movement and 
these men had come one after another 
by arrangement. The Pharisees were 
still there, and for a moment Jesus 
arrested them, and asked them two 
questions. 

The first was" startling, " What think 
ye of Christ ? " Let us understand that. 
He was not saying to them directly, 
What do you think of Me? If we 
change the word Christ to Messiah, we 
find the meaning. What is your opin- 
ion, your conception of Messiah ? He 
asked their opinion of Messiah in one 
particular only: Whose Son is He? 
Their answer was ready and accurate, 
"David's." That He did not deny. 
He asked the question in order to re- 
ceive that answer. He knew that would 
be the answer. It was the only an- 
swer possible. It was true, absolutely 
true, according to all prophecy, accord- 
ing to the inspired expectation of the 
nation. 

Then He asked His second question: 
" How then doth David in the Spirit 
call Him Lord?" Christ was quoting 
from Psalm ex. He said three things 
about that psalm. He said David wrote 
it. We are told to-day that he did not. 
He said in the second place he wrote it 
by the Spirit. We are told it is not 
inspired. He said in the third place 
He wrote it about the Messiah. We 
are told it is not Messianic. Let us 
stand with Christ, and maintain that 
David wrote Psalm ex. by the in- 
spiration of the Spirit, and concerning 
Messiah. 

What He asked these men was; If 
Messiah was David's Lord, how was 
He also his Son? They were silent. 
The silence is a revelation. This ques- 
tion of Christ was a revealing question. 
Their conception of Messiah was a 
wrong conception. Moreover, the bear- 
ing of His question on all their ques- 
tions is a very interesting one. They 
came to Him about their politics, they 
expected a Messiah who would lead an 
army, and break the yoke and set them 
free; but He said, You do not know 
your Messiah. You think of Him as 
coming in David's line, but He is more 
than David's Son, He is David's Lord. 
Account for that, and if you do, you 



270 



MATTHEW 



[MAM. xxin. 1-12] 



will have all your political problems 
solved. He comes for the interpreta- 
iton of a spiritual Kingdom, which is 
not to be powerless, but which is to be 
an inward dynamic, correcting all 
things from the centre. 

In the next place, if the Messiah is 
David's Lord, His dominion is an ever- 
lasting dominion, and the doctrine of 
resurrection is not a difficult one. If 
the Ruler that was to come, of Whom 
David sang in the Psalm long ago, is 
his Lord, Son of God as well as Son 
of David, then all your difficulty about 
those who have passed on, as to 
whether there is to be resurrection, is 
solved. 

And once again, your wrong concep- 
tion of your Messiah has meant the 
materialisation of your ideals concern- 
ing greatness in law. Realise that 
when Messiah comes, He will be, not 
merely son of David, but David's Lord, 
and you will understand the abiding 
authority and supremacy in law. 



Take that word of Christ and ex- 
amine it more carefully. We have only 
touched upon the outlying truths, at- 
tempting to reveal the structure of the 
argument in all its delicacy of applica- 
tion. Here is His problem, Who is 
Messiah? David's Son? Then why 
does David call Him Lord? If He is 
only David's Son, He cannot be David's 
Lord. The inferential claim of Christ 
is that He is David's Lord, as well as 
his son, descended through the flesh 
from David, yet before David. If you 
cut out the first part of your Gospel, 
the story of a. virgin birth, you must 
cut out this also, for they are inti- 
mately related. As in the beginning we 
saw Him coming through the line of 
the flesh, yet not by the act of the 
flesh; so here we find Him claiming 
that His Messiahship is based, not 
merely upon His Davidic descent, but 
upon His absolute supremacy and Lord- 
ship, as David had long ago foreseen. 



MATTHEW XXIII. 1-12 



THIS passage constitutes a brief 
parenthesis in the special work 
which the King was doing at this time. 
It gives the account of words spoken 
to the multitudes and to His disciples, 
between His conflict with the rulers 
which ended in their discomfiture; and 
His pronouncing of woes upon them, 
and doom upon the people who had 
rejected Him. 

The passage is a very interesting one 
in that it reveals a remarkable contrast 
between the false and the true in re- 
ligion. The King addressed Himself 
to the multitudes and to His disciples, 
and it is by no means difficult to see 
that part of the address was intended 
for the disciples, and that part was in- 
tended for the multitudes. He first 
spoke to the multitudes. Having done 
so in general terms of warning, He ad- 
dressed Himself specifically to His own 
disciples. This contrast between the 
false and true in religion is made by 
the comparison between the false rulers 
with whom He had been in conflict, 
and the true spiritual teachers, His own 
disciples, whom He was commissioning 



to go forth to exercise a religious au- 
thority as they should interpret the 
meaning of His own message. 

At the close of the thirteenth chap- 
ter of our Gospel, after the King had 
spoken the great parables of the King- 
dom, part of them to the multitudes 
and part of them to His own disciples, 
He ended that parabolic instruction by 
declaring that a scribe instructed to the 
Kingdom of heaven must bring forth 
out of His treasure-house things new 
and old; and by that statement He ap- 
propriated the word scribe for His own 
disciples. In that statement He enun- 
ciated His rejection of the official 
scribe of the period, but also indicated 
the fact that His disciples constituted 
the new order of scribes for the days 
to come. In this passage, He first 
warned the multitude against the false 
teachers, the scribes and the Pharisees, 
that sit on Moses' seat; and turning 
from that warning He charged His own 
disciples as to what their attitude and 
relationship to men should be, when He 
said to them, Ye shall not be called 
Rabbi, you shall call no man father, 



271 



[MAM. xxm. 1-12] 



MATTHEW 



you shall not be called masters or 
guides. The false teachers are exposed 
in the words our Lord addressed to the 
multitudes contained in verses two to 
seven; and as He exposed the false 
rulers, He revealed what false religion 
is. The true position of spiritual teach- 
ers is revealed in His charge to His 
own disciples, to be found in verses 
eight to twelve; and in that charge 
He also revealed the essence of true 
religion. 

First, then, we have His revelation 
of the essential failure of the rulers. 
Christ's conflict had never been with 
the people, it had been with the rulers. 
All His anger wherever it was mani- 
fest, wherever it flamed and flashed, 
was directed against false shepherds, 
men who, standing between the people 
and God, had misinterpreted the way 
and will of God; and we find in this 
passage a. very remarkable and care- 
fully expressed estimate of that which 
was wrong in the rulers ; against which, 
Christ, with all the dignity of His 
Kingship, with the force of His person- 
ality, cast Himself. 

Notice in the first place His recogni- 
tion of the position occupied by these 
men; He said: "The scribes and the 
Pharisees sit on Moses' seat." There 
is a fine discrimination in the state- 
ment, which perhaps we are apt to lose 
sight of in the reading. We can only 
express what Christ said by using_ an- 
other tense, and using the verb in a 
slightly different form. Said He, The 
scribes and Pharisees have seated 
themselves on Moses' seat. That is 
not to say that Christ was saying their 
position was a false one, although there 
was a remarkably fine indication of the 
fact that they were never appointed by 
God. He was not saying their position 
was out of harmony with the thought 
and purpose and intention of God, be- 
cause immediately afterwards He said 
to the people, "all things therefore 
whatsoever they bid you, these do and 
observe." He recognized that a certain 
authority belonged to scribes and 
Pharisees. Bearing these two things in 
mind we must be careful to see what 
He really meant. First of all He said 
that they had seated themselves on 
Moses' seat. This was not a reference 



merely to the men of His own age. 
This was His definition of the position 
occupied by the whole order of the 
scribes. In all likelihood the order 
was instituted in the days of Ezra; and 
the scribe was the interpreter of the 
law, the man who taught the people its 
meaning. Now there was nothing 
wrong in such a position, and yet 
Christ was very careful to indicate in 
the way He stated the case, that they 
were self-appointed teachers. They 
seated themselves on Moses' seat. The 
expression, " Moses' seat," demands 
our attention. It is peculiarly the word 
that indicates authority. The Greek 
word here is Cathedra. These people 
sat on Moses' seat, the seat of the 
teachers, of authority, the seat from 
which they spoke in interpretation of 
the law with final authority. Their 
position was authoritative so far. It 
is impossible, however, to imagine that 
Christ meant here that men were to 
obey all the things that the Pharisees 
were telling them to do. We must 
not omit the " therefore " from the 
text, because He Himself resolutely 
broke the traditions of the elders, 
treated with disdain the thousand and 
one things which they had superadded 
to the Mosaic economy, ignored their 
multitudinous technicalities, sat down 
with unwashen hands to eat as a pro- 
test against the externality of their re- 
ligious ideals. So that He certainly did 
not mean to say that everything the 
scribes and Pharisees said to men, they 
were to do. We shall understand Him 
by putting emphasis on the " there- 
fore." They have seated themselves 
on Moses' chair, therefore, that is, in 
so far as their interpretation is indeed 
true to the Mosaic economy, you must 
obey them; so far as they fulfil the 
function of the position they have 
taken, they have authority, and their 
teaching is binding upon men. 

But having said so much, our Lord 
proceeded to show the failure of these 
men. There is no need for exposition, 
for the statement is so clear. " They 
say, and do not." " They bind heavy 
burdens and grievous to be borne, and 
lay them on men's shoulders; but they 
themselves will not move them with 
their finger;" which- does not mean 



272 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xxm. 1-12] 



they put burdens on men's shoulders, 
and then would not help men to bear 
the burden; but that they put burdens 
on men's shoulders which they would 
not carry themselves even with the 
finger. That is to say, they were not 
true to their own ethical teaching. 

The King then proceeded to show the 
supreme motive of these men. They 
wore the phylactery. Christ did not 
say it was wrong to wear it. Tradi- 
tion has it, and perchance tradition is 
accurate, that He Himself wore phy- 
lacteries. They wore phylacteries, and 
were careful to wear them conspicu- 
ously. They widened the borders of 
the garment, broadening the cases in 
which the phylacteries rested, in order 
to attract the notice of men, in order 
that men might see the phylacteries. 
There we have the underlying reason 
of all the failure of the scribes and 
Pharisees, "to be seen of men." It 
was a ruthless unveiling of the false 
in religion. The false in religion is 
that which is punctilious and particular 
in all the matters of external observ- 
ance, and this in answer to the under- 
lying desire to be notorious religiously, 
in the view of men. In the Manifesto 
He had said that men prayed at the 
corners of the streets. He did not say 
it was wrong to pray at the corners of 
the streets, but He said these men 
prayed at the corners of the street to 
be seen of men, and with a fine scorn 
for them He added, " Verily I say unto 
you, They have received their reward." 
That is, they pray to be seen of men, 
and they are seen of men, and they 
get out of their praying all they want. 
So here again, coming to the end of 
the conflict, with the rulers standing 
around Him, listening to Him, He de- 
nounced the same evil. 

We miss very much of these stories 
if we allow the local setting to fade 
from our mind. Christ was in the 
Temple, multitudes were with Him, 
His disciples were there; and there all 
around were the men who had been 
questioning Him, and He had silenced 
and defeated them. With these men 
as object lessons, the broadened borders 
of their garments visible, the enlarged 
receptacle for the phylactery patent, 
He said, All this to be seen of men! 



All their interpretation of law had as 
its inspiration, the desire to create for 
themselves a position of authority, of 
pre-eminence. They loved the saluta- 
tion in the market-places, they loved 
the recognition of the crowd, and in 
order to gain these things, they sat 
in the Mosaic seat, and interpreted 
the law. 

Now the false in religion stands re- 
vealed in Christ's contemplation of 
these men, not only in the case of the 
men themselves, but in the case of 
the people who are under the influence 
of such men. The false in religion in 
the case of the people is due to failure 
to discriminate between the human and 
the divine; and consists of submission 
to unauthorised authority. This always 
issues in degradation. Obedience to 
anything other than the highest, issues 
sooner or later in .bondage to the low- 
est. Here was the peril of the age; 
nay more than the peril; here was the 
reason of its doom, when presently it 
was uttered by the lips of the gentle 
Servant of God. 

Immediately turning from His warn- 
ing, He addressed Himself to His own 
disciples, and He said to them, " But 
be not ye called Rabbi;" you are not 
to claim to have in your teaching any 
final authority; you are not to call any 
man your Father; there is to be no 
claim on your part of spiritual-life 
relation to any human being; you shall 
not be called Master, or Guide; you 
have no right to direct the conduct of 
any other individual soul. This was 
His threefold charge to His own dis- 
ciples. How largely we have lost sight 
of these things! 

In that threefold negation the King 
recognized the essential element in re- 
ligion. The deepest fact in religion is 
suggested by the central of the three 
things, and we will take that first. 
You shall call no man Father. It is a 
superficial treatment to imagine that 
Jesus meant, we are not to give other 
men the title of father; it is not the 
title that matters; it is the thing the 
title indicates that matters. "Call no 
man your father." This is our Lord's 
forbidding of the recognition of any 
man's power to impart by ceremony or 
in any other way, spiritual life to his 



273 



[MATT. xxm. 1-12] 



MATTHEW 



fellow man. The father is the one who 
begets, the one from whom life comes. 
That is the essential and deepest fact 
in fatherhood in our common use of 
the word. So undoubtedly the word 
means in this connection. The essen- 
tial thing in religion is life. The false 
knew nothing of life in the soul, the 
false spent its time in making burdens, 
and binding them on men. There is 
the difference between false and true 
religion. False religion is on, true 
religion is in. That is Isaiah's teach- 
ing, in that fine chapter in which he 
satirises idolatry. The man goes to the 
forest, he cuts down a tree, makes an 
image, and he carries it. That is false 
religion. But Isaiah goes on to say 
Jehovah hath carried us. That is true 
religion. And the difference between 
the two is Life. That is the central 
word. Now said Jesus Christ, "Call 
no man your father on the earth," you 
shall never recognize any man who 
claims to be able, by sacramentarian 
grace or any other thing, to communi- 
cate life to your soul. The life of God 
in the soul of a man must come by 
the begetting of God. 

The other two words reveal the other 
essentials in true religion. First, Au- 
thority. Every man feels his need of 
it. It is of the very essence of reli- 
gion. When we have life, our life 
needs authority, the ultimate and the 
binding fact, that which commands us. 
The whole story of religion, false and 
true, in its conflict in the world, gath- 
ers around this question of authority. 
The Roman Church claims authority, 
and pity us who are not within the 
pale of that Church, because they say 
we have no authority. Let us dismiss 
all the differences and recognize the 
need. The soul of man needs author- 
ity, needs the voice that speaks to it 
with authority, needs the word that is 
binding upon it. 

And more, the soul needs direction, 
not merely that direction of truth, 
which is authoritative and binding and 
final, but the perpetual application of 
truth to the incidents of everyday life, 
to the commonplaces and the crises as 
they come. We are always needing in 
the religious life some one to say to 
us, This is the way, walk ye in it; the 



relating of truth to conduct at every 
point in the life. Religion is life first; 
secondly it is the authority to which 
man yields allegiance; finally it is the 
perpetual guidance which he follows. 
These are the things that Christ 
recognizes. 

Here we have revealed the standard 
of truth, and here we have revealed 
to us the fact of what the real essence 
of religion is. First, it is the life of 
God in the soul of a man. And that 
life can only come to us by His im- 
parting. It was He Who said to an 
honest and sincere inquirer upon the 
housetop, in the loneliness of the night, 
You must be born anew, you need life. 
" As Moses lifted up the serpent in 
the wilderness, even so must the Son 
of man be lifted up : that whosoever 
believeth may in Him have eternal 
life." This is how you will obtain life 
by My lifting up. We can only un- 
derstand what Christ meant as we track 
Him through, and hear when He uses 
the phrase again, " And I, if I be 
lifted up from the earth, will draw all 
men unto Myself." And that there 
may be no doubt as to His meaning 
the Spirit interprets it for us, " This 
He said, signifying by what manner of 
death He should die." So the King 
offers men life which is the funda- 
mental necessity of religion, through 
the mystery of His own dying. 

And then He stands for evermore 
as the final authority. Remember that 
His authority is not the authority of 
the interpretation of truth. His au- 
thority is the authority of essential 
truth. He said not, I teach, I declare, 
I explain truth, but, "I am the truth." 
If we can bring the soul of man face 
to face with the Christ, not with any 
human interpretation of Him, but to 
the actual Christ of the New Testa- 
ment, that man immediately knows that 
he stands in the presence of essential 
and eternal truth. The one and final 
authority in religion, is the authority 
of Christ, and the authority of Christ 
as revealed to us in the Scriptures of 
truth. 

Finally, the immediate guidance o 
Christ, for He is near to every one o 
us, and in every moment waiting to 



274 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xxur. 1-123 



"Direct, control, suggest, each day." 

He sweeps away the intermediation of 
the man who claims authority, the in- 
termediation of the man who claims 
to be able by any process to communi- 
cate life to the soul of a man, the 
intermediation of the man who dares 
to interfere in the conduct of another 
soul as between that soul and God. 
We see at once how religion has been 
falsified wherever its vital principles 
have been interfered with. We speak 
with awe and profound respect, of the 
saints of the great Roman Church, and 
we see at once how that Church 
recognizes this threefold conception of 
religion. There is the reason of its 
long-continued strength. It recognizes 
that man needs authority, that man 
needs Life, that man needs guidance, 
and in the .threefold office of its min- 
istry it professes to meet those needs. 
In the priestly office it claims to com- 
municate life through sacramentarian 
processes. In the teaching office it 
claims to speak infallibly to man and 
answer his cry for authority. In the 
office of the confessional it claims to 
investigate and guide men, and so to 
meet their need at that point. Its ap- 
palling heresy consists in the fact that 
it takes hold of the essentials of re- 
ligion and attempts to continue them 
by cutting their nerve, and denying 
what Christ said concerning them. 

Our protest, in the name of spiritual 
religion, is for evermore to be made 
against all such blasphemous misuse of 
sacred things. First against all that 
intermediates between the soul and God 
as Life Giver; we can only receive life 
directly from Him; neither through 
official priesthood nor sacramentarian 
arrangement can life touch the soul; 
the Supper of the Lord is the Euchar- 
ist, beautiful word indeed; the sacra- 
ment of thanksgiving; but the Table 
of the Lord is not the place where we 
receive life; it is the place where we 
give back our song in praise to God; 
but no man is richer in life by sitting 
there. 

So also with baptism. There is no 
sacramentarian grace in it. No infant 
was ever made an inheritor of the 
Kingdom of heaven in baptism. No 



adult was ever made a member of the 
Church by baptism. These things may 
be valuable external symbols of in- 
ternal truths, but there is no communi- 
cation of life to the soul thereby, or 
kind or measure. The soul can only 
have life by His begetting, by its actual 
contact with God. 

So also in matters of guidance. Let 
us make our perpetual, our constant, 
our vehement protest, against any hu- 
man interference in matters of con- 
duct. Remember here that priestism is 
a very insidious thing. It reappears in 
strange new forms with the passing of 
years, and there are some people, most 
pronounced in their objection to Roman 
Catholicism, who themselves are prac- 
tising it in their interference with 
others. Away with priestism! Let us 
take our orders from Him alone. 

But do not let us forget that this 
conception of religion is more than a 
negative responsibility; it reveals a 
positive duty, that of actual submis- 
sion to Christ's authority if we deal 
with authority as something which is 
to illuminate our intelligence, and 
not command our will, it is a peril 
and a poison. But if we remit our 
soul to the Christ for His commanding 
word, and when we hear that com- 
manding word obey it, then are we 
fulfilling our positive duty. 

This fact that One is our Father, 
lays upon us the positive duty of the 
practice of fellowship with God. If 
indeed His life be in our soul, then 
our life in all its externality is to be 
ordered by the fact of the impulse of 
that indwelling life. We are to have 
fellowship with Him, not merely on the 
morning of the first day of the week 
in assembling for worship, but in all 
the acts and attitudes of everyday life. 
We are to remember that the only con- 
straining force to which one must yield 
oneself is the force of the life of God 
in. the soul. 

Finally, if indeed we are determined 
that we will suffer no interference in 
matters of conduct, we must be equally 
determined that we will remit every 
matter of conduct to the arbitration of 
the Christ. We have no right to have 
anything in our business that we have 
not asked His will concerning. We 



275 



[MAM. xxm. 13-39] 



MATTHEW 



have no right to have anything in our 
recreation that we are not quite sure 
He approves. We have no right to 
have anything in our attitudes towards 
civic, or national, or world-wide inter- 
ests, that we have not held up in the 
light of His present and immediate 
interpretation. 



This is religion. It is the bringing 
of the individual soul into direct rela- 
tionship with God; the answer of the 
soul to the lonely authority of Christ; 
and the testing of the life in the pres- 
ence of Christ, and by His will and His 
will alone. May God lead us into these 
deepest things of religion. 



MATTHEW XXIII. 13-39 



npHIS passage contains the most ter- 
A rible words which ever fell from 
the lips of the King. At the com- 
mencement of His ministry, in enunci- 
ating the laws of the Kingdom to His 
own disciples, He declared that their 
righteousness must exceed the right- 
eousness of the scribes and Pharisees, 
and now as we follow these woes 
through, we discover that He was elab- 
orating that comparison, showing how 
the righteousness of these men had 
failed, how it had come short. His 
sentence was but a ratification of the 
definite choices which these men had 
made. 

Here, as everywhere, we may do 
strange violence to the very spirit of 
the King by missing His tone, and 
failing to discover the pity which is 
evident throughout the whole of these 
strange and undoubtedly terrible words. 
The final impression of the reading of 
this passage is that of the severity of 
Jesus, and His unbending loyalty to 
righteousness. But while that is true, 
it is impossible to read this carefully 
without discovering that the method 
was the method of tears, that from 
beginning to end there was evidence of 
sorrow; that there is a wail running 
throughout the whole of this discourse, 
as well as the thunder of denunciation. 
It is only as we catch these two tones 
that we shall understand all the mean- 
ing of this passage. 

The severity of Jesus is discovered 
in the words He made use of; in the 
repetition of the word "hypocrites," 
in the use of the words " fools and 
blind," in the one terrible sentence that 
appals as we read it, in which He 
called them "serpents" and "offspring 
of vipers," in that most fearful illus- 
tration suggested by His use of the 



term the "judgment of Gehenna." All 
these are terms which indicate the se- 
verity of Christ. We cannot cancel 
these terms, they are as surely here as 
anything else in the passage. 

And yet not to discover the other 
tone is to miss much. There were 
tears in His voice; there was sorrow in 
His heart. These things are not 
merely manifest in the last lamenta- 
tion, " Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem," but 
in all the woes. We do violence to the 
spirit of the Christ, and to the genius 
of the whole passage, if we put into 
the reading of the word "woe" 
nothing but thunder. It was a wail 
of compassion as well as a message of 
strong and severe denunciation. Yet 
even this compassion was denunciatory, 
for in every case He declared that the 
woe was unto these men. 

We have in this passage; first, the 
King's judicial verdict, His findings 
concerning the people to whom He was 
addressing Himself; and, secondly, His 
judicial sentence. 

In the Manifesto, the King had said 
to His disciples ; " For I say unto you, 
Except your righteousness shall exceed 
the righteousness of the scribes and 
Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter 
into the Kingdom of heaven " (chap. v. 
20). Those words were spoken in the 
first section of the Manifesto. Imme- 
diately following we read, " Ye have 
heard that it was said to them of old 
time, Thou shalt not kill: and who- 
soever shall kill shall be in danger of 
the judgment:" He took up the law 
under which these people had been 
living, and so far from abrogating it, 
emphasised its binding nature by in- 
terpreting its inner meaning. But He 
indicated the failure of the scribes and 
Pharisees by this declaration of re- 



276 



MATTHEW 



[MAM. xxm. 13-39] 



quirement. This comparison between 
that righteousness of which He had 
come to teach men the necessity, and 
that of the Pharisees must be inter- 
preted in the light of the Beatitudes, 
those words in which Jesus revealed 
the character which is necessary in His 
Kingdom. We go back to that because 
we are now at the end of the Master's 
ministry. That is how He opened it. 
We have now come to the passage in 
which He closed it; and the verdict 
which He found, as addressing the 
scribes and Pharisees directly, in the 
presence of the multitudes, is an elab- 
oration of the suggestion He made at 
the beginning. They stood before Him, 
in character the direct opposite of that 
which He described at the beginning 
of His ministry. 

While not desiring unduly to press 
the comparison between the Beatitudes 
and the woes, this at least is true, that 
if we get the view of the whole charac- 
ter revealed in those Beatitudes, and 
then the view of the whole character 
revealed in the woes, the contrast is 
patent; they stand in direct opposition 
to each other. 

Let us place the Beatitudes side by 
side with the woes, and we shall see 
how the King said in effect; I came to 
bring you face to face with God's ideal 
of righteousness; you have rejected the 
" blessed " with which I opened My 
ministry; there is nothing for it, there- 
fore, but that I should utter the " woe " 
that must inevitably result from the 
rejection of the blessing. 

The first blessing pronounced was 
upon poverty of spirit, " Blessed are 
the poor in spirit." And the resulting 
blessing from that attitude was pos- 
session; "theirs is the Kingdom of 
heaven." Now mark the first woe of 
Jesus. "Woe unto you, scribes and 
Pharisees, hypocrites ! because ye shut 
the Kingdom of heaven against men." 
Poverty of spirit results in possession 
of the Kingdom. Pride of spirit results 
in the closing of the door against such 
as would strive to enter in, by men 
who refuse to enter in themselves. 

"Blessed are they that mourn, for 
they shall be comforted." "Woe unto 
you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites ! 
for ye compass sea and land to make 



one proselyte; and when he is become 
so, ye make him twofold more a son of 
hell than yourselves." In the first 
place penitence, the mourning which 
issues in the comfort of God. In the 
next place the things which are against 
the Kingdom of God, they attempt to 
make a man proselyte, for which Jesus 
says in fine scorn, "Ye compass sea 
and land." And the issue, "Ye make 
him twofold more a son of hell than 
yourselves." The expression, " the son 
of Gehenna/' does not indicate the evil 
character that results, but rather the 
pain, and unrest, and misery that re- 
sult. We remember upon another oc- 
casion our Lord, referring in figurative 
and symbolic language to punishment, 
spoke of Gehenna as the place " where 
their worm dieth not." And so over 
against the comfort that comes to 
mourning and repentant souls, there is 
the pain and unrest and remorse that 
come to such as persist in the attitude 
of rebellion. 

" Blessed are the meek, for they shall 
inherit the earth." Over against meek- 
ness we have the woe against the blind 
guides, the exposure of the subtle 
casuistry which characterised the age 
in which Christ lived, which is the very 
essence of iniquity, the very opposite 
of meekness, the final expression of 
that pride of heart which is in revolt 
against God and issues in profanation. 

" Blessed are they that hunger and 
thirst after righteousness : for they 
shall be filled." That is followed by 
the woe against men who were tithing 
mint, anise, and cummin, and were 
leaving undone weightier matters. This 
is a contrast between spiritual health 
and spiritual disease. On the one hand 
is the healthy hunger after righteous- 
ness; and on the other hand the fas- 
tidiousness of disease, which is par- 
ticular about the small external things 
of no matter, and feels no hunger after 
righteousness; the neglect of the 
weighty matters of law, which attempts 
to atone for itself by all the minutiEe 
of the tithing of small things. Christ 
was careful to say that these things 
also should be attended to, but that 
the weightier things should not be 
neglected. 

" Blessed are the merciful ; for they 



277 



[MATT. xxni. 13-39] 



MATTHEW 



shall obtain mercy." The next woe was 
that upon such as veil internal vice by 
external profession. We do not touch 
the heart of it until we read these 
words, " full from extortion and ex- 
cess," two things that stand exactly op- 
posite to the merciful spirit. 

" Blessed are the pure in heart : for 
they shall see God." Standing "oppo- 
site to that is the woe that describes 
these men. Mark it carefully, out- 
wardly beautiful, but inwardly full o 
dead men's bones and uncleanness ! 
The contrast is striking between purity 
of heart, and the uncleanness of the 
inner life. 

And, finally over against the blessing 
pronounced upon the peacemakers who 
are the sons of God is the woe against 
men who "build the sepulchres of the 
prophets" while yet they are the sons 
mark the contrast of the men who 
slay the prophets. 

If in this contrast we do not find 
every woe set in direct contrast to 
every blessing, we at least discover 
that the character which our Lord de- 
scribed in that sevenfold Beatitude of 
the Manifesto, is in absolute opposition 
to the character which He described in 
this sevenfold woe of the final denun- 
ciation. We might continue the con- 
trast further, for in the fifth chapter 
there is the added and double Beati- 
tude upon persons who suffer for right- 
eousness' sake; and when we turn over 
to the twenty-third chapter we find Him 
saying to these men, referring to the 
ministry which should follow His own 
crucifixion, "I send unto you prophets, 
and wise men, and scribes; some of 
them shall ye kill and . . . scourge, 
and persecute." At the beginning o 
the ministry in the Manifesto, He said 
to the disciples gathered about Him 
who would enter into the suffering 
as they proclaimed that Manifesto, 
"Blessed are ye when men shall . . . 
persecute you." At the close of it 
He drew attention to the fact that 
the men of opposite character would 
be the men who would inflict the 
suffering, afflicting and scourging and 
crucifying those who should stand for 
righteousness. 

Our Lord in uttering these severe 
words revealed first of all their abso- 



lute justice. If we agree with the 
blessing of the character upon which 
He commenced His ministry, we must 
of necessity agree with the woe upon 
the character revealed in the men 
whom He denounced. He had spoken 
the words of abiding truth and right- 
eousness, and' every woe is but the 
other side of every blessing. The 
blessing was upon character, the woe 
was upon character; and the character 
upon which the blessing rested, was the 
exact opposite of the character upon 
which His final woe was pronounced. 

The judicial sentence was a declara- 
tion of sequence. " Wherefore ye wit- 
ness to yourselves, that ye are the sons 
of them that slew the prophets. Fill 
ye up then the measure of your 
fathers." One sometimes feels as 
though that word can hardly be under- 
stood by the Western mind. It is pecu- 
liarly Eastern. We Westerners have 
broken away more and more from 
the consciousness of relationship to 
our fathers. These men were perpet- 
ually boasting of their relationship to 
Abraham. They said one day, " Our 
father is Abraham." He said, You 
make your boast in your fathers, in 
your relationship to the past, you re- 
fuse to stand on the plane of isolated 
responsibility, "fill ye up then the 
measure of your fathers," be true to 
the thing you boast, and do not now 
by the garnishing of the tombs of the 
prophets attempt to dissociate your- 
selves from the sins of your fathers. 
You are still of their spirit, you are 
still rejecting the right, as they re- 
jected the right, you are still perse- 
cuting and will continue to do so. We 
cannot believe that Jesus Christ was 
pronouncing sentence save as He was 
indicating the sequence. He was 
showing them what they would do, He 
was showing them what the issue of it 
would be; for mark what immediately 
follows the words, "Fill ye up then 
the measure of your fathers," "Ye 
serpents, ye offspring of vipers, how 
shall ye escape the judgment of 
Gehenna ? " 

When John the Baptist opened his 
ministry as the herald of the King, 
when these selfsame men came to him, 
he said with a touch of irony and 



278 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xxur. 13-39] 



scorn, " Who warned you to flee from 
the wrath to come? " Now at the close 
of His ministry Jesus took up the word 
and used it differently, with no irony, 
but with the terrible revelation of a 
necessary sequence, How can ye es- 
cape? "Fill up the measure of your 
fathers," you are the sons of the men 
who slew the prophets, you also have 
refused the righteousness of God. 
Carry this out to the end, and what 
then? There at the beginning are the 
Beatitudes, the words indicating the 
Master's purpose and intention for His 
people, accompanied by the conditions 
of righteousness upon which happiness 
must depend. Here He was talking to 
the men who had refused the condi- 
tions, and He asked, " How shall ye 
escape the judgment of Gehenna ? " 
Thus our Lord declared that the judg- 
ment of hell is the inevitable issue of 
refusal to submit to the truth of which 
the inward conscience has been con- 
vinced, for that is the meaning of His 
word hypocrites; hypocrites are men 
who play the part that is not true in 
the externalities of righteousness, while 
within they are evil. And there is a 
deeper significance, they are men who 
remain evil in their inner life, in spite 
of profound conviction. It was His 
declaration of sequence, His declaration 
that hell is the inevitable harvest of a 
man's own sowing. 

He then proceeded in the terms of 
His great lamentation to show that this 
is the result of their own deliberate 
choice, " How often would I have gath- 
ered thy children together, even as a 
hen gathereth her chickens under her 
wings, and ye would not!" That is 
the very heart of sin "Ye would 
not ;" the human will set up against the 
will of God. The human will set up 
against the will which had interpreted 
righteousness, and had expressed to 
men God's desire for human happiness 
and blessedness. "Blessed" is the 
word which revealed the purpose of the 
King. "I would have gathered you." 
Incidentally we have here another of 
those illustrations of the startling 
claims of Christ. Mark the magnifi- 
cence of it. He personified the nation 
in the city, as the prophets of the past 
had so often done. " Oh Jerusalem, 



Jerusalem, that killeth the prophets, 
and stoneth them that are sent unto 
her I how often would I" the Gali- 
lean peasant, Jesus of Nazareth. 
" How often would I have gathered 
thy children together, even as a hen 
gathereth her chickens under her 
wings." His claim was that had they 
but come to Him, He could have gath- 
ered the whole of them from the im- 
pending judgment of evil. It is an 
exquisite figure; simple, but more than 
simple. It is the coming out in the 
simplicity of truth, of all the great 
underlying fact of the Motherhood of 
God as well as that of His Fatherhood. 
He said, "I would have gathered." 
Just that one Man, just a Galilean car- 
penter? A thousand times no; infi- 
nitely more, God incarnate! In these 
last words, standing there as the One 
Who had uttered the Manifesto, and 
the One presently to be rejected and 
cast out, He was gathering up all the 
brooding tenderness of the old revela- 
tion of God, and expressing it in that 
sobbing word of lamentation, "I 
would." His purpose was not to pro- 
nounce a curse but to bring a blessing; 
not to wail in woe over failure, but to 
sing over men. We remember the 
mother-figure of Zephaniah, "Jehovah 
thy God is in the midst of thee, a 
mighty One Who will save: He will 
rejoice over thee with joy, He will be 
silent in His love, He will joy over 
thee with singing." This was His pur- 
pose, " I would ;" and this was their 
sin, "Ye would not." 

Then He pronounced the sentence. 
" Behold, your house is left unto you 
desolate." Some of the ancient manu- 
scripts omit that word " desolate," but 
the concensus of opinion is in favour 
of its retention. Probably He was re- 
ferring to the Temple as the centre of 
their life, the place to which they had 
looked from long distances and to 
which He came at the commencement 
of His ministry, cleansing it and say- 
ing, "It is written, Make not My 
Father's house a house of merchan- 
dise." He came and cleansed the Tem- 
ple again and said, " My house shall 
be called a house of prayer." Now He 
said, "Your house is left unto you;" 
to you hypocrites, blind, fools, men in 



279 



[MA*T. "xxiv. AND xxv.3 



MATTHEW 



whom there is uncleanness, men who 
have rejected the throne of God, the 
righteousness of God, the mercy of 
God, and the will of God. 

And yet once again, notice most care- 
fully His claim. "Your house is left 
unto you desolate. For I say unto 
you, Ye shall not see Me henceforth." 
The desolateness of the house is -cre- 
ated by the absence of the Master of 
the house. And in the next chapter 
He said, "There shall not be left here 
one stone upon another, that shall not 
be thrown down." "Desolate." 

But look at the King. His sorrow 
we have spoken of, His judgment we 
have heard pronounced. What is this 
last word ? " For I say unto you, Ye 
shall not see Me henceforth, till ye 
shall say, Blessed is He that cometh 
in the name of the Lord." Who shall 
interpret that? It is interesting to see 
how many interpretations there are, 
and how eager and anxious some are 
to adapt the word of Jesus, so that it 
can fit their own philosophy. We do 
know what He meant as to local ap- 
plication, and local fulfilment of that 
Scripture; but we need to see, that 
even here, as He pronounced the final 
judgment upon a nation, a city; even 
as He spoke of their house being left 
desolate, hope was in His heart; and 
looking forward, He saw some hour in 
which they should say, "Blessed is He 
that cometh in the name of the Lord." 

After that survey of this passage let 
us notice two things. First, that its 
study has meant an almost terrific 
revelation of the appalling issue of dis- 
honesty. The word hypocrisy is the 
revealing one. The action of these men 
had been wilfully wicked. Even their 
external cleanness was proof of their 
consciousness of the beauty of holiness, 
and their inward pollution was of 
choice. " Ye would not." At last that 
attitude must work out to its own issue. 



In the words of Jesus, men become the 
sons of Gehenna, they pass to the judg- 
ment of Gehenna. This has nothing at 
all to do with the men who have never 
heard the message. This has nothing 
whatever to do with the men who have 
never confronted this Christ of God, 
this King of kings. It has everything 
to do with us. Standing in the pres- 
ence of this Teacher and Lord, remem- 
ber and know assuredly that any 
hypocrisy must issue in the harvest 
of hell. There is nothing else for it. 
If we who heard the "blessed" will 
not obey the condition, then we take 
our own way of set purpose toward the 
"woe," and there can be no escape. 

Behold the King! What a solemn 
revelation we have of Him here. How 
gracious and yet how just. In these 
words there is a revelation of His pas- 
sion for righteousness, and also of His 
compassion for the worst and most de- 
graded. His passion for righteousness 
never destroys His compassion for the 
worst. His compassion for the worst 
never destroys His passion for right- 
eousness. It is well that our hearts 
should be warned by these solemn woes. 
The work of the King is not the work 
of excusing a man who persists in un- 
righteousness, and presently admitting 
him to the presence of God and the 
heaven of light. Naught that defileth 
can ever enter there, and the man who, 
in spite of all His ministry of infinite 
grace, persists in disobedience, passes 
to the judgment of Gehenna; there can 
be no escape. The deepest and pro- 
foundest passion of the King, is the 
passion for the Kingship of God and 
righteousness, and if He must pro- 
nounce a doom it will be with tears, 
but it will be pronounced. So let us 
ever bring ourselves to His judgment, 
and as we yield to that, pray for that 
which He will supply, grace to obey. 



MATTHEW XXIV. AND XXV. 



AS the King passed out from the 
Temple, His disciples showed Him 
its buildings. Why did they draw His 
special attention to the buildings of the 
Temple at this point? How often they 
had been there together, how often 



they had walked with Him the streets 
of Jerusalem, how often they had 
passed through the courts of the Tem- 
ple, how often they had listened to His 
teaching, but they drew His special at- 
tention to the buildings now. There 



280 



MATTHEW 



[MA**; xxiv. AND xxv.3 



can be little doubt that we must link 
this fact with what He had just said, 
" Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem . . . how 
often would I have gathered thy chil- 
dren together, and ye would not! be- 
hold, your house is left unto you 
desolate." There was nothing that in- 
dicated desolation in the material as- 
pect of affairs at that moment in 
Jerusalem. The Jews had never been 
more strongly attached to their Tem- 
ple. Of course the ancient glory of 
Solomon's Temple had passed and had 
never been replaced in some respects; 
but in other ways, the Temple existing 
was even finer than that existing in 
Solomon's time. As Jesus passed out 
of that Temple, His disciples came to 
Him to draw His attention to it, to its 
beauty, to its strength, to its solidity, 
in all likelihood to contradict the possi- 
bility of what He had said. It was as 
though they had said, Master, do you 
mean to say this house is ever to be 
desolate ? Behold its beauty, we want 
Thee to examine it. He immediately 
answered ; " See ye not all these 
things? Verily, I say unto you, There 
shall not be left here one stone upon 
another, that shall not be thrown 
down." That was a definite and posi- 
tive prophecy, fulfilled quite literally, a 
little more than a generation later. 
Nothing seemed so unlikely when our 
Lord said it. The Hebrew people were 
then on excellent terms with their 
Roman Governors. There had been re- 
bellions, there had been difficulties; 
but these things had been largely set- 
tled to all appearance. The perpetual 
principle of Roman government was 
never to interfere with the religion of 
a people unless the people made that 
religion the cause of disaffection. 
Everything seemed at the moment to 
be hopeful and prosperous. 

The King passed on through the 
Temple to the Mount of Olives, and as 
He sat on the Mount of Olives the 
disciples came to Him, and said, "Tell 
us, when shall these things be? and 
what shall be the sign of Thy coming, 
and of the consummation of the age ? " 

We are very much in danger of 
taking this question out of its setting, 
and considering it as a later day ques- 
tion, and not understanding what these 



men really meant by it. We must put 
the question into relationship with what 
they had asked Christ to behold, and 
what Christ had said concerning the 
destruction of the Temple. That is 
where it began. It led to much larger 
things in His answer, but so fax as the 
men who asked the question were con- 
cerned, that is where it began. 

In the form in which these men 
asked their question, it is evident that 
they considered that the destruction of 
the Temple would be associated with 
His presence, and with the consumma- 
tion of the age. In the parables of the 
Kingdom in the thirteenth chapter, 
there is an unfortunate translation, 
which has been perpetuated in the 
Revised Version, in the phrase, " The 
end of the world." Not that this is 
necessarily inaccurate; but our inter- 
pretation of it is inaccurate. We have 
spoken of it as though it meant, the 
break up of the material universe. We 
have had graphic pictures of a day of 
Judgment, when things are all burnt 
to a cinder, and pass away. Nothing 
of the kind is intended by this phrase, 
which would be better rendered, the 
consummation of the age. And just as 
in the thirteenth chapter when our 
Lord spoke of the end of the world 
according to our translations, He really 
referred to the ending of one particular 
age, so also in His reply to His dis- 
ciples on this occasion. Evidently in 
their mind they associated three 
things; the destruction of the Temple, 
the presence of Jesus, and the ending 
of the age. What they meant by the 
age, who shall say? Possibly they did 
not mean by the age exactly what 
Christ meant by it, but they had some 
conception of a purpose of God, which 
was working out toward a consumma- 
tion. They were looking for the set- 
ting up of a material Kingdom on the 
earth. 

We shall never understand this 
prophecy of Jesus, if we do not get 
back into the spirit of these men. We 
must know what their question meant. 
Volume after volume has been written 
on the subject, and almost invariably 
we start by tabulating these questions 
in the light of our interpretation of the 
answer. That may be quite legitimate, 



281 



[MATT. xxiv. AND xxv.J 



MATTHEW 



but it is well to begin with the question 
as it was asked. 

Jesus had been strangely puzzling 
these men for months. Ever since 
Caesarea Philippi, they had been quite 
out of harmony with Him; they did 
not understand what He was doing. 
They had followed Hun with intense 
eagerness until He came to Caesarea 
Philippi ; and then He began to talk 
about a Cross, and they had never been 
able to understand Him since. They 
had watched Him come up to Jeru- 
salem, had seen His conflict with the 
rulers, had heard His scathing denun- 
ciation and His parabolic inquisition, 
and, finally, His actual sentence and 
doom; and they had heard Him say, 
that lie beautiful house was to be left 
desolate, and they said, Master, come 
and look at these buildings. " Verily, 
I say unto you," was His answer to 
them, "There shall not be left here 
one stone upon another, that shall not 
be thrown down." Then they were 
silent. It was a silent walk out of 
the city, and down the hill, and up the 
other side of Olivet. Then on Olivet 
they looked at Him as He was looking 
toward the city, and they gathered to 
Him, and they said, Master, "tell us, 
when shall these things be? and what 
shall be the sign of Thy presence, and 
of the end of the age ? " Such was 
their question. 

What did they mean by "these 
things," by "Thy coming," by "the 
consummation of the age ? " One can- 
not believe that these men meant; 
When shall be Thy second advent? 
All that they were thinking of could 
only come by the way of the second 
advent, but they had no conception of 
it. The second advent must be pre- 
pared for fundamentally by the Cross 
and the Resurrection; and they had no 
apprehension of the Resurrection. He 
had told them again and again that He 
must suffer, and that He would rise 
again, but they had never grasped the 
truth of Resurrection, or consented to 
the necessity for the Cross. They were 
in revolt against the idea of the Cross, 
and blind to the fact of the Resurrec- 
tion. So that if we take this question 
not in the way our Lord answered it, 
but in the way they asked it, we see 



that they evidently thought that pres- 
ently, in some way or other He would 
pass out of sight, perhaps would es- 
cape from this pronounced hostility of 
the rulers. And yet they had heard 
Him say, that the very scene before 
them was to be one of devastation and 
desolation ; and they said, " Tell us, 
when shall these things be? and what 
shall be the sign of Thy coming, and 
of the consummation of the age?" If 
these things are to be, if this Temple is 
to be destroyed, if Thou art coming in 
judgment, how art Thou coming in 
judgment? when art Thou coming 
in judgment? Their question simply 
meant, When art Thou going to do 
these things? 

To this question Christ gave the 
longest answer He ever gave to any 
question recorded in the New Testa- 
ment. His answer occupies all that re- 
mains of chapter twenty-four, and all 
that lies within chapter twenty-five; 
and constitutes what we speak of as 
the prophecy on Olivet. Here Christ 
became a prophet in the predictive 
sense of the word. A prophet is a 
forth-teller of the Divine Will. He had 
been that, through all His ministry, but 
one element of prophecy, not the most 
important, but a most evident one, is 
the predictive element. Here Christ 
became a prophet in that sense. He 
had done this before, incidentally words 
had fallen from His lips which pointed 
to the future; but here, in quietness, 
speaking to His own disciples on Olivet 
in answer to their question, He spoke 
of things that were then wholly to 
come. How important a study this is, 
and how careful we need to be in pro- 
ceeding with it. 

In attempting to see the general out- 
line of the prophecy we at once see 
that the question of these men was 
one which indicated their desire to look 
into the future, and Christ did not 
altogether rebuke that desire. He did 
warn them of the danger that beset 
investigation, yet He answered that 
desire so far as it was proper that it 
should be answered to inquiring and 
investigating minds. In our Lord's an- 
swer, we find, first, a warning; "And 
Jesus answered and said unto them, 
Take heed that no man lead you 



282 



MATTHEW 



[MA?*, xxiv. AND xxv.] 



astray." This is not to be passed over 
lightly. When Christ adopted the pre- 
dictive element in prophecy He warned 
His disciples lest they should be led 
astray. Whenever we speak of future 
things we are dealing with a. matter 
full of importance, yet so full of peril 
that there have been all kinds of fanci- 
ful interpretations, all wandering from 
the clear declarations of Scripture, in 
order to fit in with some preconceived 
notions of future things, until we find 
in the Church of God to-day, vast num- 
bers of God's own children, saints 
without a. doubt, who have altogether 
given up any attention to what the 
Bible has to say concerning things to 
come. Christ knew this danger. These 
men came to Him in the supreme mo- 
ment when the shadows were upon 
Him, and when the great strain was 
before Him, and they asked Him, Tell 
us something about the future? And 
His first word was, "Take heed that 
no man lead you astray." As we read 
these two chapters, we need that that 
warning should fall upon our spirits. 
"Take heed." We cannot read these 
things carelessly. - 

In the next place notice, in the read- 
ing of these chapters, the very evident 
and indeed most careful discrimination 
on the part of our Lord between the 
parts of their question, must be ob- 
served. Their question was one, as 
they asked it, and expressed in His 
hearing all the puzzling emotion of 
their minds. When they said to Him, 
"Tell us, when shall these things be? 
what shall be the sign of Thy presence, 
and of the end of the age?" they 
thought of these things as closely con- 
nected. One of the first things that 
we discover in the reading of the 
prophecy which followed is that Christ 
corrected the false impression. They 
said, "These things ... the sign of 
Thy presence . . . and of the end of 
the age." He spoke of "these things," 
that is, the destruction of Jerusalem, 
which He had foretold; and then of 
the coming of the Son of Man, and of 
the consummation. He said, "Ye shall 
hear of wars and rumours of wars: 
see that ye be not troubled: for these 
things must needs come to pass; but 
the end is not yet;" the wars and the 



rumours of wars, leading up to the 
destruction of Jerusalem, must come to 
pass, they were at hand; but He said, 
"The end is not yet." 

Then notice how He separated His 
coming from "these things." He had 
been warning them against false 
Christs, those who should come in His 
name and declare, " L,o, here is the 
Christ," and in reference to that He 
said, "For as the lightning cometh 
forth from the east, and is seen even 
unto the west; so shall be the coming 
of the Son of man," which simply 
means that the coming of the Son of 
Man shall be clearly manifest. There 
shall be no need of prophets to an- 
nounce the fact that He has come, or 
invite men to visit Him. 

He continued by declaring that the 
coming of the Son of Man would be 
followed by the. mourning of the tribes 
of the earth, and the gathering together 
of His elect, that is, of all Israel. He 
finally told them, that "of that day and 
hour knoweth no one, not even the 
angels of heaven, neither the Son, but 
the Father only." Thus He took the 
truth about the coming of the Son of 
Man, and removed it from the region 
of the destruction of the Temple. 

It may be said that there are other 
senses in which He was spiritually 
present at the destruction of Jerusalem, 
and there is no doubt that that is 
so. Nevertheless, He separated His 
coming at the end of the age from 
the destruction of Jerusalem with 
great care, rather than associated it 
therewith. 

He also declared, that these things 
of judgment and terror and tribulation 
and destruction, would be completed 
in connection with the destruction of 
Jerusalem. This principle of discrimi- 
nation pn the part of the King ran 
through all this prophecy. He cor- 
rected the false impression of His dis- 
ciples. He discovered to them the fact 
that the things of immediate judgment, 
and the presence of the Son of Man, 
and the consummation of the age, were 
separate. 

If this principle of discrimination ba 
discovered we find that for general 
teaching this great prophecy of our 
Lord falls into three parts, and the 



283 



[MATT. xxiv. AND xxv.] 



MATTHEW 



three parts are not chronologically di- 
vided. He first showed them what the 
future had in store for Israel after the 
flesh. He then showed them what 
the future had in store for His Church, 
that is, Israel after the Spirit He then 
showed them what the future had in 
store for the Gentile nations; and the 
divisions are most clearly marked. "In 
verses five to thirty-five, the prophetic 
utterance concerned the excommuni- 
cated nation. 

Beginning at verse thirty-six, "But 
of that day and hour knoweth no one," 
and running right on to the thirtieth 
verse of the twenty-fifth chapter, He 
was dealing with the responsibility of 
His Church as the spiritual Israel of 
God in the parables that teach the 
Church's position between the destruc- 
tion of Jerusalem, and the ultimate 
gathering together of the elect at the 
coming of the Son of Man. 

Finally in chapter twenty-five, verses 
thirty-one to forty-six, the King was 
looking on to the judgment of the na- 
tions. All this is in harmony with the 
teaching of the Old Testament and with 
the teaching of the whole Bible, in 
which it is evident that God deals with 
men, never by an election which is to 
the exclusion of any who will turn 
to Him, but by an election which is to 
service, in order that through the elect 
the light may flash, the message be de- 
livered, and the ultimate purpose of 
God be realised. 

Our last thought must be of the 
King Himself, and of the position He 
here occupied, quite alone on Olivet. 
Yes, the disciples were with Him; but 
are we ever quite so much alone as 
when people are around us who think 
they understand us, and do not? They 
did not understand Him; He was 
alone. The rulers had rejected Him, 
and while He sat on Olivet with His 
disciples they were planning and plot- 
ting for His life, and He knew it. His 
face was resolutely set towards the 
Cross, for He saw more than the Cross, 
He saw His victory, and God's victory. 
And yet for the moment He was alone. 
At that moment He knew the attitude 
of His enemies. They thought they 
were plotting in secret, but all was 
naked and open to His eyes. 



He knew also the frailty of His 
friends, and how those men, eagerly 
inquiring for some glimpses into the 
future would presently, to the last man 
of them, turn their back upon Him. 
His Cross was just ahead, and yet be- 
hold Him on Olivet. Whether we un- 
derstand all this" prediction or not, let 
us come reverently into His presence. 
Here sat the King, despised and re- 
jected, "a Man of sorrows and ac- 
quainted with grief." And yet He was 
looking through all the shadow to the 
light, looking beyond all the difficulties 
to the accomplishment. It is the King 
upon Whom our eyes are resting, Who, 
quite quietly, looking through all the 
darkness and difficulties in the future, 
saw His own crowning and His own 
vindication. 

If He could so talk under the shadow 
of the Cross, then we can only be con- 
vinced again, as we ever must be con- 
vinced when we listen to Jesus only, 
that He is the Son of God as well as the 
Son of Man; Christ, in all the mystic 
meaning of that word which the New 
Testament writers perpetually convey. 

A man whose claims were false,, a 
man who had simply been deceived by 
the clamour of his own disciples, would 
break down in the presence of ap- 
proaching death, when his disciples 
were about to leave him, and he knew 
it. But our King is seen intimately 
acquainted with the fact that all the 
powers of the world were against Him, 
that His own friends were so frail that 
they would forsake Him, and yet He 
quietly indicated the processes of the 
coming centuries. And if any one 
question His accuracy about the more 
distant things, at least let them re- 
member that they do so while admit- 
ting that the things He said about 
immediate desolation and the actual 
destruction of the city were carried out 
to the very letter, within a little more 
than a generation from the moment in 
which He spoke. 

And so again it is the King we see, 
in all His dignity, and to that King let 
us anew yield ourselves, and listen at- 
tentively that we may know how to 
serve the King, for it is certain that 
we can only serve Him, as we hear 
Him and understand His teaching. 



284 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. XXIV. 1-44] 



MATTHEW XXIV. 1-44 



SOME preliminary words are neces- 
sary before we attempt a brief sur- 
vey of the long passage before us. 
This is a difficult part of our Gospel, 
where interpretation should be reverent, 
and where there should be a perpetual 
recognition of the fact that interpreters 
have differed, and still are differing. If 
that is recognized we may go forward. 

Our attitude toward this prophecy of 
Christ must be largely determined by 
our attitude toward the prophecies of 
the Old Testament. That may be a 
somewhat startling thing to say, and 
yet our conception of the prophecies 
of the Old Testament, naturally, even 
though subconsciously, will affect our 
attitude toward this prophecy of Christ. 

The standpoint from which we ap- 
proach all the ancient prophecies, and 
consequently this prophecy of our Lord, 
is that all the things which the ancient 
prophets said concerning Israel which 
have not yet been fulfilled, will be ful- 
filled. This being so, it is also of 
supreme importance that we should 
clearly recognize that our Lord did 
finally reject the earthly people, and 
clearly declared that their responsibility 
for bringing forth the fruits of the 
Kingdom of God should be transferred 
to another nation. 

Therefore we are to look for fulfil- 
ment, not in the rejected nation, but in 
the newly appointed nation, in which 
all of God's essential purposes are to 
be fulfilled, and through which His 
programme is to be carried out. 

The present section is in some senses 
not of immediate interest to us, as it 
has a very small application to our- 
selves. Yet a clearer apprehension of 
it is of value in appreciating the next 
section, which reveals our present posi- 
tion and responsibility. 

In the forty-fifth verse we read, 
"Who then is the faithful and wise 
servant, whom his lord hath set over 
his household, to give them their food 
in due season?" and that question 
takes us a good way back in our Gos- 
pel in order to explanation. At the 
close of chapter thirteen, when our 
Lord had been uttering the parables 



of the Kingdom, His last parable was 
the parable of the householder, and the 
householder's responsibility concerning 
the truths of the Kingdom which He 
had committed to His disciples. He 
spoke there of the disciples' new posi- 
tion as scribes instructed to the King- 
dom, as that of the householder who 
brings " forth from his treasure things 
new and old." Now, in the midst of 
this great prophecy on Olivet, our Lord 
asked the question, "Who then is the 
faithful and wise servant ? " and from 
that moment the prophecy which had 
been dealing with the earthly people 
passed to a revelation of the present 
responsibility of His own disciples and 
of the Christian Church, the spiritual 
Israel. From that question, at verse 
forty-five, through chapter twenty-five, 
to verse thirty, we have a section of 
the prophecy which deals with the 
Church's responsibility^ the parable of 
the virgins and the parable of the tal- 
ents. At verse thirty-one, we begin a 
third and final section of the great 
prophecy, " But when the Son of man 
shall come." 

Our Lord first distinctly and care- 
fully warned these men who asked the 
question with a warning that is of per- 
petual application and value. " Jesus 
answered and said unto them, Take 
heed that no man lead you astray. For 
many shall come in My name, saying, 
I am the Christ, and shall lead many 
astray." The fact that Jesus uttered 
this warning is in itself most signifi- 
cant. They had asked Him a ques- 
tion in a realm full of mystery, full of 
difficulty, in which it was very difficult 
indeed for them to follow His teaching, 
and He knew it; and He knew full 
well how in this very realm of the 
method of the interpretation of the 
ways of God in the future, there would 
be room for false Christs and false 
teaching; and so He first solemnly 
warned men. 

Then He commenced to utter His 
prophecy as to the earthly people, 
Israel. He first spoke of things im- 
mediately at hand. " And ye shall hear 
of wars and rumours of wars : see that 



285 



[MATT. xxiv. 45-xxv. 30] 



MATTHEW 



ye be not troubled: for these things 
must needs come to pass; but the end 
is not yet." Nothing can be clearer 
than that He distinctly told these 
men standing round about Him, that 
they were on the eve of consternation 
and difficulty, but they were not to be 
troubled because, said He, "the end 
is not yet." Read that in the light > of 
their question, "When shall these 
things be? and what shall be the sign 
of Thy coming, and of the end of the 
world?" 

Through the discourses which fol- 
lowed, He was very careful to show 
that the end lay far away. But He 
clearly outlined the course of events 
then close at hand, that is happening 
within a generation. 

Everything predicted from verse six 
to verse twenty-two was fulfilled to 
the letter in connection with the Fall 
of Jerusalem within a generation. 

Having revealed these things, and 
shown that the destruction of the 
Temple was imminent, but that the 
" end " was not then, He told them 
what would be the manner of His 
coming. From beginning to end of the 
prophecy He emphasised the fact that 
none knew, nor could know, when, that 
coming would be, but the fact of it was 
certain. 

Thus we come to those final words 
in verse forty-four, "Therefore be ye 
also ready: for in an hour that ye 
think not the Son of man cometh." 

The day of vengeance for the world 
at large is yet to come, and toward that 
day our Lord was looking when in the 



final discourses on Olivet He talked of 
days yet to come, when the Son of man 
shall be manifested. To-day He is still 
the Servant Who does not cry, or lift 
up His voice. But He has another 
method, illustrated in the figure of the 
smoking flax and the bruised reed. 
Smoking flax is that which has the ele- 
ment of destruction within itself; the 
bruised reed is weakness weakened; 
and if we take the ancient prophecy, 
and look at that passage, we find it is 
a description, not of a penitent soul 
seeking mercy, but of a rebellious soul 
as it appears in the sight of God. Be- 
yond the method of the gentle Servant 
Who does not cry or lift up His voice, 
is the method of the King Who 
quenches the smoking flax and breaks 
the bruised reed, and proceeds by judg- 
ment to ultimate victory. Our Lord 
here in quiet calmness on Olivet's 
slopes, with His own disciples and none 
other about Him, was looking on to the 
final movements. Beyond the method 
of His patience is the method of His 
power. Beyond these quiet years in 
which He suffers men and bears with 
them, and woos them and stands pa- 
tiently waiting to deal with them in 
mercy, lies another day in which with 
fire and flame and flashing glory, by 
vengeance He will cast out all -evil. 
The day will come when He will 
exercise the powers which are to-day 
restrained, held in check in the econ- 
omy of infinite grace. As to the earthly 
people, the day of vengeance came 
with the destruction of Jerusalem. As 
to the world at large, it is yet to come. 



MATTHEW XXIV. 45-XXV. 30 



IN this second part of the Olivet 
prophecy of Jesus there are certain 
marked differences from the first, and 
from the third. 

In this section, commencing with this 
question, "Who then is the faithful 
and wise servant?" and ending with 
the thirtieth verse of the next chapter, 
our Lord does not once refer to Him- 
self as the Son of man. In the Author- 
ised Version, in the thirteenth verse of 
the twenty-fifth chapter the expression 
does occur: "Watch therefore, for ye 



know neither the day nor the hour 
wherein the Son of man cometh," but 
the Revisers have omitted the last 
phrase, and there is no question that 
the omission is warranted. The title, 
" Son of man," was the one by which 
our Lord most often described Himself 
in the days of His earthly ministry. 
Indeed it may be said that He never 
called Himself the Son of God, save 
when it was necessary so to do in an- 
swer to criticism, or inquiry, or inves- 
tigation of the deepest truth concerning 



286 



MATTHEW 



[MAT*, xxiv. 45-xxv. 30] 



Himself. The title, "Son of man," 
was one which indicated His relation 
to the purpose of establishing the 
heavenly Kingdom on earth. It cannot 
be too often repeated that this was the 
purpose included in the mission of 
Christ. This is not for a moment to 
deny the fact that He came to seek 
and to save lost men individually in the 
deepest and profoundest evangelical 
sense of that word; so to change men, 
that when this probationary life is over, 
they shall enter into the homeland the 
joy, and the rest of the Divine pres- 
ence. But if we think of the mission 
of Jesus as one simply of saving men 
here, in order that they may be ready 
for the life beyond, we have most 
strangely misread all that He ever 
said, and all He ever did, and taught 
men to pray for. The prayer taught in 
the Manifesto clearly sets forth the 
passion of the heart of Christ for the 
earth, as therein He taught His dis- 
ciples to pray that the Kingdom might 
come, and the will of God be done, on 
earth as in heaven. 

It is very significant that this title, . 
" the Son of man," drops out of use in 
the writings of the New Testament. It 
is never found in the epistles. He is 
not therein referred to in this way at 
all. It is equally suggestive that it 
comes into sight again when we reach 
the Book of Revelation, the Book 
which, whatever present application it 
may have, surely does set forth in pic- 
torial form the movements by which 
Babylon is to be destroyed, and the 
Kingdom of God is to be ultimately 
and finally established. There the title, 
"Son of man," reappears. In this par- 
ticular prophecy the title appears in 
the first part; and again immediately 
at the thirty-first verse of the twenty- 
fifth chapter, when the third section is 
reached " When the Son of man shall 
come in His glory." 

Then again in this section there are 
no references to prophets, no references 
to the Temple, and no references to 
the Sabbath day; no references in- 
deed, to any of those sacred signs and 
symbols of the old economy, which had 
indicated the truth concerning the gov- 
ernment of God in the world. 

The time of the employment of these 



means passed for ever away with the 
beginning of the age of His redeem- 
ing reign. 

To turn from this negative survey to 
a more positive one; this passage con- 
sists of three parables, indicating the 
responsibilities resting upon His own, 
during a period in which He, as to 
bodily presence, would be absent from 
them. In these three parables there 
are marked similarities, and distinct 
differences. 

Let us first observe the similarities 
between the three. In every parable 
there is an absent lord. In the first 
the lord of the household, who has 
committed certain duties to his ser- 
vants, is absent. In the second, the 
bridegroom is waited for, but is absent. 
In the third, the lord is the owner of 
goods, and he has given talents to his 
servants, but is himself absent. 

In the next place, there is the rela- 
tion to him of those from whom he is 
absent. In the first they represented 
his authority; in the second their very 
waiting attested the fact of their belief 
in his return; in the third they prose- 
cuted His commerce, with his goods; 
the talents which he gave to them are 
all his goods; not their ability, not 
their capacity, for a talent does not 
stand for quality, but for quantity in 
this parable. 

Then again, it is evident in each of 
these parables that the responsibility of 
these servants is always to their lord, 
and to him alone. The servant of the 
household is responsible to none save 
the absent lord. The waiting virgins 
are only responsible to him. So also 
those to whom he gave the talents are 
responsible to him only. 

Now let us notice the differences be- 
tween the parables. These may not be 
so obvious, but they are very certain. 
The first parable is communal. It is 
the picture of His household in itself, 
while He is away. The second is per- 
sonal. It is a picture of individual 
souls in relation to Himself the wise 
and the foolish. The last is imperial. 
It is a. picture of the responsibility of 
those whom He has left behind for the 
carrying out of His enterprises in the 
world. The parable of the household, 
and of the two examples of servants 



287 



[MAM?, xxiv. 45-xxv. 30] 



MATTHEW 



set over it; the faithful and wise, and 
the wicked is a parable wholly per- 
taining to the Church of God, as a 
household over which He is Lord and 
Master. The parable of the virgins, if 
we take the parable of the virgins as 
a whole, is one that indicates the true 
attitude of individual souls to Him in 
the days of His absence. The last 
is a parable which teaches the respon- 
sibility of His servants in His absence 
concerning His enterprises, His goods, 
of which He gives them talents, that 
is measurements, quantities, that they 
with these may trade. 

There is much of detail in this sec- 
tion, but we will take it as a whole, 
that the cumulative message of the 
three parables to Christian people may 
not be missed. Prophetic literature has 
lost its power to appeal to us, partly 
because we have been prone to trifle 
over details, instead of gathering up 
the great messages of Christ to His 
people. Therefore, in the broadest out- 
line let us look at these parables, that 
we may catch the spirit of the mes- 
sages, and understand the one great 
message to the Church of God in this 
age which lies between His ascension 
and His coming again. 

In the parable of the household, the 
word itself is suggestive. Jesus said: 
" Who then is the faithful and wise 
servant, whom his lord hath set over 
his household?" The Greek word here 
translated household is only once again 
used. In Revelation we read that 
" the leaves of the tree were for the 
healing of the nations." What relation 
can there be between healing and 
household? This question can only be 
answered byan understanding of what 
this word household really signifies. It 
is the word from which we derive our 
word therapeutic, and the basal idea of 
it is healing. The word household 
refers to all such in the house as serve. 

That first word, "Who then is the 
faithful and wise servant?" is the 
word bond-slave; but the word house- 
hold comes from another term for ser- 
vant, which is other than the word 
bond-slave. It is a word that signifies 
a loving service, a purpose of healing 
in service. This is a case of metonymy, 
where one word is put for another, 



which the other suggests, as when we 
say a man keeps a good table, when 
we refer really to his food. This word 
in the parable, then, suggests the pic- 
ture of a great house, and one Lord; 
and of all those in the house under His 
control, as thinking of His interests, 
while serving under His command. 
He used the word that indicated 
the love principle in service, the ten- 
der healing ministry that only grows 
out of love. Thus in a word, flaming 
and flashing with meaning, we dis- 
cover our Lord's conception of His 
Church, during the time of His ab- 
sence. His household all serve, but 
all serve by love, and the ministry is 
a healing ministry. 

Now let us very carefully notice His 
word; "Who then is the faithful and 
wise servant, whom his lord hath set 
over his household?" This word must 
be interpreted by the consistent teach- 
ing of the Lord, that service is the 
condition of greatness. The servant is 
"set over." Why "set over"? Be- 
cause he is a servant. This is not a 
picture of the priesthood, or of the 
ministry according to many modern 
conceptions of these. There is no sense 
in which any priesthood or ministry is 
set over the Church of God, save by 
their ministry. " Whosoever would be 
first among you, shall be servant of 
all." Here is Christ's picture of one 
servant set over the rest, because he 
serves all the rest. It is not a picture 
of any man in the household, it is not 
a picture of one in official authority; 
it is the picture of each one in the 
exercise of the ministry of healing and 
of love. 

Now, in the parable we see two at- 
titudes. First that of the faithful and 
wise servant. His attitude is simply 
that of bringing forth meat in due 
season, and feeding the rest; the atti- 
tude of caring for all the other mem- 
bers of the household during the Lord's 
absence, for the sake of the absent 
Lord. But there is another servant 
here, and Jesus speaks of him as "that 
evil servant." He says, " My lord tar- 
rieth," He is not returning yet; and 
with that sense of the Master's ab- 
sence, he turns to evil courses within 
the household, beating his fellow ser- 



288 



MATTHEW 



[MAT*, xxiv. 45-xxv. 30] 



vants, instead of feeding and caring 
for them; turning aside to the com- 
panionship of drunken men, instead of 
standing in the place of loyalty to the 
absent Lord. 

In the parable we have two results. 
When the lord returns, the servant who 
has been loyal to the service of his 
fellow servants, for the sake of his 
absent lord, is promoted and put into 
the place of a new authority; while 
the evil servant is cut asunder and 
cast out. 

We must not attempt to carry these 
parables farther than they go. This 
is a picture first of all of a. household, 
and the relation of all within it to the 
absent Lord. To gather it up we may 
state it thus. We shall prove our loy- 
alty in the Church of God to the absent 
Lord, by the measure in which we 
serve one another; and we shall prove 
our disloyalty by the measure in which 
we beat and slay our brethren. 

In the next parable there is a com- 
mon hope, that of the coming of the 
bridegroom; but there are two atti- 
tudes. First the foolish. This is that 
of expectation they "went forth to 
meet the bridegroom ;" but of careless- 
ness " they took no oil with them." 
The details we pass over, and come to 
the end in order to see what this really 
means. To these 'the bridegroom says, 
" I know you hot." There is nothing 
more. We must not confuse this with 
another parable in which men claimed 
a right to entrance upon a basis of 
work done. This is not a story of 
service, but of personal relationship. 
Apparent expectation, for they went to 
meet him ! But no true expectation, 
for they took no oil with them. When 
presently they came to the door, ac- 
cording to lie figurative and poetic 
language of the parable, and asked ad- 
mission, there could be but one answer. 
It was the answer of a perfect justice, 
and a perfect knowledge, "I know you 
not." 

Look upon the wise. Definite ex- 
pectation; they "went forth to meet 
the bridegroom." So far apparently 
there was no difference. They all set 
their faces toward His coming; they 
all spoke as though they were inter- 
ested in him; they all spoke as though 



they desired to meet him. But these 
took oil. They said, The vigil may be 
long, he may not come so soon as may 
have been expected, and there must be 
provision for the waiting. These went 
into the marriage feast. This is a pic- 
ture not of a particular section of 
Christendom, but of individual souls in 
their relation to Him. There is nothing 
here about a household, or any respon- 
sibility; this has to do with an attitude 
to Christ. The wise virgins are such 
as have no eyes, no thought, no care 
for anything except the Bridegroom, 
and the hour of His approach. 

The last parable is concerned with 
enterprise; He "delivered unto them 
his goods." Mark His method. As 
we have already seen, the word talent 
here indicates quantity rather than 
quality. In our language we use the 
word as though it signified some special 
capacity or ability. But that is not 
the meaning of the parable, for mark 
this well, "unto one he gave five tal- 
ents, to another two, to another one; 
to each according to his several abil- 
ity." Ability is thus evidently some- 
thing entirely separate from the talents. 
The talents were given according to 
the ability. In ability the question of 
measurement does not come in. That 
is a question of fitness. Out of His 
goods, His property, He gave to this 
man the amount of goods which he was 
able to make use of. And if we take 
up all the Pauline writings about gifts 
in the Church, we find this philosophy 
He gives according to each man's 
ability; the gift of tongues, the gift 
of healing, the gift of prayer, the gift 
of prophesying, the gift of help; all 
are given according to ability. The 
principle revealed here is that the Lord 
and Master, Christ, never sets a man 
to preach who has not natural ability 
for preaching. We may do that sort 
of thing, but He never does. He never 
puts a man down to the oversight of 
the business enterprises of His Church, 
who lacks business enterprise. If we 
turn to the Ephesian letter, we find all 
these parables there. We find there 
first of all the household, " endeavour- 
ing to keep the unity of the Spirit in 
the bond of peace." We find loyalty, 
personal loyalty to the absent Lord, 



289 



[MAT*, xxiv. 45-xxv. 30] MAT! 

"Put away ... the old man . . . put 
on the new man." Walk as before 
Him. We find the business of the 
King prosecuted, "Buying up the op- 
portunities, because the days are evil." 

Now observe the different use of the 
talents. Fidelity; five produced five; 
two produced two. Infidelity; the one 
hidden by the man who attempted to 
silence his own conscience by traduc- 
ing his absent Lord. 

Mark the issues. The reward in the 
case of the man with five talents com- 
mitted to him, and in the case of the 
man with two, are exactly the same. 
To each of these men Jesus said; 
" Well done, good and faithful ser- 
vant, thou hast been faithful over 
a few things, I will set thee over 
many things." The reward of service 
is apportioned according to fidelity to 
opportunity. 

In the case of the unfaithful ser- 
vant; first his life was exposed; sec- 
ondly, his talent was recalled; thirdly 
and finally, he himself was cast out. 

With those broad, rough outlines of 
the three parables upon our mind, let 
us notice what they teach concern- 
ing the threefold responsibility of the 
Church. 

Within her own borders the Church 
is to be a great household of mutual 
ministry. Is it possible to say a thing 
like that without having the heart sad- 
dened? The faithful servant is the one 
who cares for and feeds the other ser- 
vants. The evil servant is the one who 
illtreats and beats his fellow servants. 

In her own personal life the Church 
is to maintain an attitude of loyalty, 
of love to the Lord Christ. Her loy- 
alty is to be tested by that very love; 
and her love is to be tested by her 
loyalty in the small things. How many 
of us have set our faces toward the 
East, and sing the song of His coming? 
But what is our attitude toward it? 
If we merely sing of it, and in our 
heart there are other loves, other de- 
sires, other aspirations, so that we 
neglect whatever may be typified by 
the oil; if we neglect attention to the 
details, the waiting of loyalty, then 
we are failing. But if indeed the lamps 
be trimmed and burning, and the oil 
be carried, then there is meaning in 



MATTHEW 



the song, and love for our Lord is dem- 
onstrated and proven. 

The Church is responsible for the 
Master's work He has committed to 
us His goods. There are many figures 
of the Christian life, but this is one 
which combines the commercial and 
imperial ideas. "His goods;" the 
things which He would" have us repre- 
sent to the age, He has committed to 
us, the things of His Kingdom. All 
the light of the thirteenth chapter of 
Matthew flashes here; all the truth 
which culminated in that eighth and 
final parable in which our Lord said 
a scribe instructed to the Kingdom of 
heaven brings forth things new and old 
out of his treasures. What are the 
things? The goods of the absent Lord. 
His revelation of God and of man; His 
provision for man's great need; His 
perpetual call; His mediation; His dy- 
namic for paralysed souls. We all 
have some of them committed to us; 
talents, five, two, one, according to our 
ability, and His choice; and these tal- 
ents become our deposit. The mind 
reverts to the Pauline word, " I know 
Him Whom I have believed, and I am 
persuaded that He is able to guard." 
What? "That which I have com- 
mitted unto Him." That is by no 
means necessarily the apostolic mean- 
ing. What, then? Hear Paul's own 
word, "my deposit" which may mean 
that which He had committed to Paul, 
and I think that the context proves 
that is what he did mean. That charge 
which He has given to us; that charge 
which made Paul say, I am debtor, I 
have something committed to me from 
the absent Master, with which I am to 
trade for Him; He is able to guard. 

The Church has committed to her 
the goods of the absent Lord. What 
is she doing with them? 

Notice, finally, in each case that the 
Church's responsibility is defined by 
her relation to her Lord. True to the 
absent Lord, the household is at peace. 
Waiting for the absent Lord, the lamps 
are burning, and individual character 
is what it should be. Working for the 
absent Lord, His goods are increased, 
and the five gain five, and the two, two. 

So that whether it be the Church as 
a household, whether it be the Church 



290 




Ml 
PAGE 




ING 









MATTHEW 



I them about with him, for four 
ic had watched his opportunity, 
ounsel of the priests had said 
1 after the feast be over, and 
was charged, no doubt, by the 
not to precipitate matters, but 

to wait until the Passover was 
nd the crowds had gone. Then 
compelled Judas to act at once. 
I said, " One of you shall betray 
and having indicated the one, 
tells us that He said to him, 
t thou doest do quickly." Judas, 

under that compulsion, finding 
e was discovered, without any 
ince in his soul, hastened to the 
, hastened and obtained a com- 
f men, and, not according to the 
: the rulers, but before they in- 
, he had precipitated the arrest 
ial of Christ in the midst of the 
er feast. 

3 we see the King deliberately 
f towards the end of His set 
e, but not allowing the rulers 
lose the hour, or the method; 
s own quiet and deliberate act 
r , the right hand of His supreme 
ity upon all their counsels, and 
ig it to effect His purpose; drag- 
ieir crafty subtlety from the 
[-places of their deceit into the 
ight, as He drove Judas out to 

dastardly work, at the hour of 
appointing, rather than at the 
jf the rulers' choice. Such is 
ation of this part of the story to 
jvement of preparation. 

let us look at things a little 
carefully. 
: first at the two forces moving 

the death of Jesus. After the 
xion, and after the Resurrection, 
ter Pentecost, Peter stood up and 
to preach in the power of the 
ring of the Spirit, and as he 
out upon those masses of people 

him, and saw amongst them 

He said, " Jesus of Nazareth, a 

ipproved of God unto you by 

works and wonders and signs, 
God did by Him in the midst- 
, even as ye yourselves know; 
being delivered up by the de- 
ite counsel and foreknowledge of 
e by the hand of lawless men did 
and slay." Mark the two 



297 



THEW [MATT. xxvi. 1-30] 

things that Peter recognized. " Deliv- 
ered up by the determinate counsel and 
foreknowledge of God." That is one 
side of the story. And the other, 
" Crucified by the hands of lawless 
men." Here is the historic fact in 
Christ's approach to the Cross. Here 
in a mystery which almost overwhelms 
us, we see God and sin combining 
towards one goal. 

Look at the King. He was moving 
towards His Cross. One might almost 
say leisurely, for notice, " When Jesus 
had finished all these words, He said." 
His was the leisure that had in it nc 
unrest, no haste, no friction. " When 
He had finished all these words." How 
often they had tried to arrest Him. 
How constantly He had said, " My 
hour is not yet come." " Go and say 
to that fox, Behold. I cast out demons 
and perform cures to-day and to- 
morrow, and the third day I am per- 
fected;" when I am ready I shall be 
perfected. "When He had finished 
all these words." His teaching was 
not complete until He had said the 
last word, until He had not merely 
enunciated the ethic given at the com- 
mencement of His ministry, until He 
had not merely uttered the glorious 
and prophetic instructions to His own, 
but until He had also uttered the mys- 
terious and marvellous prophecy on 
Olivet. "When He had finished, He 
said" and no hand could arrest Him 
until He was ready. That man has 
never read these stories thoroughly who 
says that Jesus Christ was a victim of 
circumstances and men. He was the 
Master of circumstances and of men. 

Thus we see this Galilean, this Man, 
lacking in all the things that men count 
great, moving in the midst of circum- 
stances that seem to hem Him in, and 
master Him, and beat Him ; and yet as 
we look at Him, His hand is upon 
them all, and with quiet leisure and 
definite intention, and intelligent pur- 
pose, unafraid, and unsurprised, He 
moved towards His Cross. 

There in the court of the high- 
priests was the Sanhedrim. They were 
also moving towards the Cross. It was 
the final gathering, and they were at- 
tempting to encompass His death offi- 
cially. It was a crafty gathering, 

97 



[MAT*, xxvi. 1-30] 



MATTHEW 



They saw He must die, but they were 
not quite sure of time and place. The 
only thing to avoid is the feast. " Not 
during the feast." 

Thus grace and sin were moving 
toward the same sad end; grace in 
the person of God's King planning for 
the Cross; sin in the person of the 
rulers plotting for the Cross. As we 
look back upon those two scenes, of 
the Christ in the midst of His disciples, 
of the rulers at the palace, they were 
as far apart as heaven and hell, as 
love and malice, as right and wrong, 
as clear open action, and crafty devil- 
ish deceit. Yet both were moving 
toward the one end. As we read the 
story again, and the two pictures be- 
come impressed upon our mental vision, 
we see the Lord high and lifted up, His 
train filling the Temple, and we learn 
anew the meaning of the old Psalmist's 
declaration, 

" Surely the wrath of man shall praise 

Thee: 

The residue of wrath shalt Thou gird 
upon Thee." 

This was no human Teacher to be 
bruised and beaten at man's choice. It 
was the King, with His hand upon cir- 
cumstances, governing the Sanhedrim, 
letting them work out their own ne- 
farious designs, and yet so high seated 
over all, that presently He took the 
spear of their uttermost malice, and 
bathed it in the blood of God's utter- 
most grace. So He approached His 
Cross. 

Then let us look at this picture of 
the Supper at Bethany the action of 
Mary and the action of Judas. We 
will not now go into the details of 
these stories, all the touches of exqui- 
site beauty in the action of Mary; and 
all the lines of red and flaming fire 
that frighten us when we come to 
Judas. But with the general impres- 
sion of these two things upon our 
minds, let us notice carefully how the 
instruments were the instruments of 
grace and of sin. Mary was the in- 
strument of grace. Judas was the 
instrument of sin. In the story we see 
shining about the Master a great light, 
and deepening over Him a great dark- 
ness. There is the light of Mary's love. 



There is the darkness of Judas' treach- 
ery. These two people were also mov- 
ing toward His Cross, she with a love 
that went beyond death, anointing Him 
for burial; he with a hate that merged 
all things in death, arranging for His 
death. The contrast is vivid. This 
woman got nearer to the inner heart 
of Jesus than any human being prior 
to Pentecost. When she brought that 
alabaster cruse and poured some oint- 
ment on His head and some on His 
feet, the whole company of the dis- 
ciples, and not Judas only, murmured, 
they all said, Why this waste? What a 
revelation of apostolic incompetence 
was that question. Quite kindly one 
may say, and yet with tremendous con- 
viction, one would rather be in succes- 
sion to Mary than the whole crowd of 
apostles. Mary saw into His soul; not 
that she perfectly knew all the mean- 
ing; but she saw in His eyes the 
shadow of the coming suffering and the 
Cross. A mutual sympathy was there, 
hers for Him and His for her. Maybe 
Mary looked at Him sitting there in 
Simon's house, and she thought in her 
soul, there is a shadow in His soul, the 
end is near; I wonder if I can do any- 
thing to let Him know that at least I 
have touched the fringe of His gar- 
ment of sackcloth. Love is * always 
prodigal. Love overlaps all the bounds 
of prudence, and gets the most precious 
thing in the house and pours it out. 
It was a sacrament of sympathy, but 
it will not be a perfect picture unless 
He knows. Sympathy must be an- 
swered by sympathy. Love like this 
must have the answer of love. He 
said, " In that she poured this oint- 
ment upon My body she did it to pre- 
pare Me for burial. Verily I say unto 
you, Wheresoever this Gospel shall be 
preached in the whole world, that also 
which this woman hath done shall be 
spoken of for a memorial of her." 
That is the only time Christ ever sug- 
gested the raising of a memorial to 
any one, and the memorial He sug- 
gested was not a memorial of marble 
or of gold, not of a temple upon which 
old Time will act until it crumbles its 
magnificence to the dust. It was a 
memorial of a fragrance; and earth is 
sweeter, and heaven richer, for Mary's 



298 



MATTHEW 



[MA*T. xxvi. 1-30] 



love and Christ's acceptance of it. 
There was no tremor in His voice, 
" She did it to prepare Me for burial." 
He was arranging, manipulating, mas- 
tering evil; and He gathered up the 
sweet and precious fragrance of a de- 
voted love. It was dear to Him and 
precious, and He said, It shall be her 
memorial. Thank God for that light 
in the darkness. Thank God there was 
one heart came somewhere near to 
Him, one frail woman, despised as 
sentimental by the apostles, who poured 
upon Him an ointment that makes 
heaven finer for its rich and rare 
aroma. 

And then the darkness is revealed 
in Judas' lack of sympathy. He had 
no sympathy for Mary, because he had 
no sympathy for Jesus. Observe his 
selfishness and his act of baseness.. No 
comment is necessary ; in such brief 
words we leave it. 

Finally we come to the Passover. 
Here we see the perfecting and passing 
of the old economy, and the beginning 
of the new. The Passover was ob- 
served, the feast of deliverance from 
slavery, the feast of the exodus, the 
feast of hope. Men had kept it fit- 
fully through the long centuries, regu- 
larly at first, and then occasionally 
through the age of decadence. The 
King sat down to keep it as one of 
that nation and people. That was its 
last keeping in the economy of God, 
because all that it had foreshadowed 
was fulfilled as He sat at the board, 
and all that to which it had pointed 
found the ultimate fulfilment in Him. 
He completed that of which the exodus 
had been but the preparation. The 
final exodus came by the way of that 
Cross to which He was going. 

Then, still sitting there in the midst 
of the feast of a past and failing dis- 
pensation, at a board where there was 
still the unfermented wine of the Pass- 
over feast, and where there was still 
the unleavened cake fragments remain- 
ing, He instituted a new feast. He 
took bread, some of that which was 
there, and broke it, and said, "Take, 
eat; this is My body." He took the 
cup and said, "Drink ye all of it; for 
this is My blood of the covenant, 
which is poured out for many unto 



remission of sins." Jesus was at the 
Passover board, and He took the Pass- 
over bread, and the cup of the old 
economy of anticipation; but as His 
hands touched that Passover bread, He 
made all things new; as His hand took 
hold upon the Passover cup, He made 
it flush with the new glory of a new 
dawn, and a new age, and a new dis- 
pensation. In the simplicity of this 
picture we see the establishment of the 
Christian feast. 

There are three things we need to 
remember concerning it. It is a com- 
memoration. Christ said, "This do 'in 
remembrance of Me." It is more than 
a commemoration, it is a communion, 
in which, through all the coming age, 
bands of His disciples shall sit down 
and take bread and fruit of the vine, 
and in the sacred material act enter 
into an actual and spiritual communion 
with Him. It is more, it is a covenant, 
declaring that those who sit at the 
board are made one with Him in all 
the enterprises of His heart. The old 
Passover feast was the feast of the 
exodus, and was a feast of hope. The 
new is the feast of the exodus, but 
the exodus that He has accomplished, 
which no longer fills the heart with 
hope, but with the certainty of an 
already achieved victory. When men 
and women gather through the ages 
around that board, it is to remember 
Him, it is to commune with Him, it 
is to pledge themselves in loyalty to 
Him. Never let us forget that. Away 
behind ecclesiastical Rome is pagan 
Rome, and there among the ruins of 
pagan Rome we still see upon the 
fresco the Roman soldier taking his 
sacramentum. This is our Sacra- 
mentum, our oath of allegiance to live 
and fight and die for this King. 

Thus symbolically He led His dis- 
ciples through the shadows of darkness 
into the sunlight of a new morning. 
How simple it was; at the end of the 
Passover feast. He touched the old 
bread and it broke into infinite sus- 
tenance for the world; He put His 
hand upon the old cup, and out of it 
came the red wine of the Kingdom of 
God. When we sit in simple symbol- 
ism around the table let us never for- 
get that He is there, the King Himself. 



299 



[MAW. xxvi. 31-56] 



MATTHEW 



"And when they had sung a hymn 
they went out into the Mount of 
Olives." There is no doubt whatever 
that they sang the great Hallel. And 
if we turn back to Psalms 113-118 we 
find exactly what they sang. They 
sang the first two of those hymns, 
Psalms 113 and 114, at the commence- 
ment of Passover; the psalms which 
tell of Jehovah the high and the 
humbled One, a song of the exodus, 
bow He led them out of Egypt into 
Canaan. Think of Jesus sitting at 
that last Passover Supper, singing those 
two Psalms before the Passover, and 
see how exquisitely they fit and per- 
fectly fall in with all those thoughts 
that are in our mind. Then Psalm 115 
begins, 



" Not unto us, O Jehovah, not unto us, 
But unto Thy name give glory." 

That speaks o Passion for the glory 
of God. 

Psalm 116 is the story of a passing 
through death to life and service. 

Psalm 117 is the psalm of universal 
praise following upon that passing 
through death to life and service. 

Psalm 118 has as refrain, 

"His lovingkindness endureth for 
ever," 

That was the last note of the song. 

And when they had sung that hymn 
they went out to the Mount of Olives. 
Thus the King came to the darkness 
of the Cross singing of the enduring 
lovingkindness of God. 



MATTHEW XXVI. 31-56 



WITH reverent reticence we have 
now to follow the King through 
Gethsemane. We cannot attempt to 
interpret the sorrows of Christ as they 
are suggested to us by this narrative; 
from beginning to end of the medita- 
tion we shall but walk around the 
margin, stand on the outside of the 
darkness, and come to know in a very 
faint and far-off way all that is re- 
vealed in this story of Agony. 

Let us notice, however, that in this 
passage there are again three sub- 
divisions, and let us make Christ the 
centre of all our meditation. The dis- 
ciples are here; we shall see them 
incidentally; we are bound to do that; 
but let us fix our reverent thought upon 
the Lord Himself as He is seen in this 
matchless picture. 

First we stand in the vestibule of 
that inner shrine and sanctuary of sor- 
row to which the Lord came under the 
shade of the Olive trees in Geth- 
semane. Standing there, we see Christ 
preparing His disciples for what was 
then immediately to follow. 

Then, in the central section of the 
passage, we pass to the inner sanctu- 
ary of sorrow, and there Christ is seen 
alone. The disciples are there also, 
but their presence but emphasises the 
fact of His absolute and desolate 
loneliness. 



Then finally, we have a picture of 
Christ triumphant. 

We come first to the vestibule of the 
sanctuary. It was night. The moon 
was at the full, as we know by the 
feast that was being observed. There 
had been that strange and wonderful 
gathering in the upper room, the 
passing of the old feast and the insti- 
tution of the new. They had sung a 
hymn, the Hallel Psalms, and the song 
was in their minds as they had gone 
forth from the upper room, along the 
streets and out by the road, until they 
came to the slopes of Olivet and found 
their way into the enclosed place. Such 
is the meaning of the word Geth- 
semane. How strangely they had been 
perturbed, and perplexed, and puzzled 
by the things He had said. They had 
asked Him, " Whither goest Thou ? " 
and He had answered them in what 
seemed to be emphatic terms, of going 
to the Father, but He had failed to 
give them any geographical description 
of His goings. Now He was going 
and they were accompanying Him. 
Suddenly the silence of that walk to- 
ward Gethsemane was broken by Christ 
Himself. Turning to this group of men 
He said, "All ye shall be offended in 
Me this night: for it is written, I will 
smite the shepherd, and the sheep of 
the flock shall be scattered abroad." 



300 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xxvi. 31-56] 



His first words told them of the dark- 
ness which was just ahead. Maybe 
they were hoping that He had done 
with the strange and troublous things 
since Judas had left the company. But 
now He looked at the eleven that re- 
mained, and said, You will all be 
scandalized in me this night, made to 
stumble in Me; I shall be the object 
over which you will fall ; you will all 
be offended in Me, for it is written, I 
will smite the shepherd, and the sheep 
of the flock shall be scattered abroad. 
He knew the darkness far better than 
they, and He told them of the worst 
thing that was coming to them, that 
the whole of them would be offended. 
Yet it was not the voice of a fatalist, 
but of One Who told them whither they 
were inevitably moving, of One con- 
scious of a pre-arranged programme. 
These men were familiar with the Old 
Testament Scriptures; they knew full 
well the great prophecy of Zechariah 
from which the quotation was made. 
And He said, This is the night of that 
smiting and scattering. No accident 
is happening to-night; this is part of 
a divine plan and movement. How 
constantly He said, "It is written," 
or, the Scriptures have foretold. And 
so, while the shadows were deepening 
about them, He told them of the deeper 
darkness, and of the fact that they 
were going into a darkness so pro- 
found as to scandalize, and drive them 
away. 

But that was not all. He was pre- 
paring them by giving them to know 
before they should be offended, that 
He knew they would be offended. 
Christ was always making it easy for 
these men to get back presently; and 
when He told them the worst that was 
in them, and they did not believe Him; 
though they all personally declared they 
would not be offended, He did not 
argue; but He left something in the 
heart, and mind, and memory, whichj 
returning presently, would make it 
easier for them. It is a great thing 
to be able to say within one's own soul, 
Well, my friend knew and warned me, 
I will go back to Him. Christ was 
telling them the worst. But not only 
the worst. Mark the next words well, 
words flashing with light, "But after 



I am raised up, I will go before you 
into Galilee." 

Christ was on the way to Geth- 
semane with this little group of men, 
frightened souls, not knowing what was 
going to happen next, wondering what 
He meant, sadly disappointed He had 
not forced things to an issue and set 
up a Kingdom; brokenhearted because 
they thought He was going to be mur- 
dered; and He said, "All ye shall be 
offended in Me this night. . . . but 
after I am raised up I will go before 
you into Galilee." Your scattering is 
not the last thing, there will be a gath- 
ering; My defeat is not the end, there 
will be a raising up; this darkness is 
not finality, there is light beyond it. 

Peter's answer was the protestation 
of love and of ignorance ; " If all shall 
be offended in Thee, I will never be 
offended." Jesus said unto him, 
"Verily I say unto thee, that this 
night," and then to emphasise the 
immediateness of it " before the cock 
crow, thou shalt deny Me thrice." And 
Peter replied, " Even if I must die with 
Thee, yet will I not deny Thee." 

The King Himself was quiet and 
calm, full of tenderness for these frail 
men. He had no rebuke for them, but 
a solemn warning of what was coming, 
so definite and positive, that there could 
be no mistake. The one thing He was 
impressing upon them was His knowl- 
edge. Peter said in effect; If I do 
not know myself, who does know me? 
The one thing a man does not know is 
himself, and that is what we find out 
when we see Christ with His disciples. 
Peter meant it, "I will never be 
offended in Thee;" he was absolutely 
sincere; but he did not know himself, 
he did not know his weakness or his 
power, he did not know the forces com- 
ing against him, he did not know how 
dark the darkness could be, or how 
terrible the temptation might become. 
He was perfectly honest. But Christ 
knew him, Christ knew that beneath all 
that wonderful devotion which was so 
precious to His heart, in the very 
strength of his nature lay his weakness, 
the passionate man, impulsive, fiery, 
like a thunderstorm; He knew under 
stress of great temptation that he could 
and would deny. The King was calm 



301 



[MATT. xxvr. 31-56] 



MATTHEW 



and tender toward His disciples. They, 
while loving Him, were nevertheless 
perplexed and blundering. 

Then we pass into Gethsemane. The 
presence of the disciples throughout 
this section but serves to intensify the 
realisation of His loneliness. Notice 
how He passed to loneliness with them. 
He took eleven of them from the upper 
room, and having come to the garden, 
eight of them were left either outside 
its gate or perhaps just inside. Three 
of them were taken yet a little further 
with Him; they were the boanergic 
men, Peter, James, and John. They 
were the men who had been with Him 
en the Mount of Transfiguration. They 
were the men who had been with Him 
in the house of Jairus when He raised 
the maiden. They were the men who 
for some reason or other He perpet- 
ually took a little nearer to Him than 
the rest. It is almost uniformly held 
that they were an elect inner circle, 
and that He trusted them more, and 
could say more to them. One cannot 
be at all convinced of that. Perchance 
they were the weakest three of the 
twelve, and therefore it was necessary 
for Him to keep them near to Himself. 
Perhaps the man who never has a vis- 
ion is stronger than the man who gets 
his vision. Presently, in the light of 
our Lord's revelation of Himself in 
the Father's home, we may find that 
the people who always seemed to be 
left at the gate and never had a nam- 
ing vision, and no high ecstatic experi- 
ence, but who have quietly pursued the 
line of commonplace devotion, are 
stronger than the others. It is recorded 
that a long time ago a nun was dream- 
ing that she saw three other nuns at 
prayer, and she imagined that as they 
were at prayer she saw the Master 
Himself coming, passing by them. The 
first of them He brushed by almost 
rudely without a glance or touch. To 
the second He spoke some brief word 
as He passed, but with the third He 
lingered, and laid a caressing hand 
upon her head, and with His face all 
wreathed in smiles, whispered some 
word of infinite love in her ear. And 
in her dream the nun thought to her- 
self, How the Master loves that last 
woman; the second must have grieved 



Him somehow; and with the first He 
must be very angry. Then in her 
dream she thought the Master turned 
to her and said, O woman of the world, 
how wrongly hast thou judged. The 
faith and trust and obedience of this 
first woman is so perfect that I can 
train her for "higher service than the 
others can ever attain. The last one 
needs all my attention or she would 
never follow at all. Perhaps Peter, 
James, and John were of that sort. 
He took these three men, yet they were 
unable to go with Him all the way. 
He asked them to watch, and then 
going still a little further He prayed. 

Next let us notice the terms that are 
used here about our Lord. He "began 
to be sorrowful and sore troubled." 
We have seen that word "began" 
twice before in this book of Matthew 
about Jesus. In chapter four, He be- 
gan to preach. In chapter sixteen, He 
began to tell His disciples that He 
must suffer. Now He began to be sor- 
rowful and sore troubled. This word, 
"sore troubled," is a strange word. 
Nothing can be definitely said as to 
its derivation. It may have come from 
two words. Most probably it has come 
from one that means " away from 
home," He began to be sorrowful and 
away from home. It means more than 
that, of course; but that is the root 
idea, that of desolating loneliness. He 
began to enter into that consciousness 
of His absolute isolation. When He 
began His ministry the crowds were 
with Him. They had left Him long 
ago. When He began His ministry the 
rulers were interested, they now were 
plotting for His death, and He knew it. 
He had gathered about Him a band of 
disciples, a large company, more than 
twelve; but there came a day when 
He tried to teach them spiritual things 
concerning bread that comes out of 
heaven, and from that time many of 
His disciples went back and walked 
no more with Him. But at least there 
are twelve. No, one of them is now 
out somewhere, bringing the mob. But 
at least there are eleven? No, eight 
of them were left at the gate. But at 
least there are three? No, they will 
all be asleep in half an hour. He 
began to be sorrowful and away from 



302 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xxvi. 31-563 



home. And then He spoke of it. How 
seldom He spoke of His sorrow ! But 
He said to these men, " My soul is 
exceeding sorrowful." And here we 
have another word that arrests the at- 
tention. He "began to be sorrowful" 
is one word. Then " He said My soul 
is exceeding sorrowful" That is the 
same word with a prefix which gives 
emphasis to it. It means, My soul is 
the centre of surging sorrows, and He 
said to them, "Abide ye here, and 
watch with Me." It was His last ap- 
peal to humanity, His last appeal to 
His disciples. 

Then we go a step further with 
Him. We can do nothing more with 
this threefold prayer than notice three 
of the simplest things about it. Three 
times He prayed. First, He said, "My 
Father, if it be possible, let this cup 
pass away from Me : nevertheless, not 
as I will, but as Thou wilt." The 
second time He did not ask that if it 
be possible the cup should pass, but 
He consented to the impossibility, "My 
Father, if this cannot pass away, ex- 
cept I drink it, Thy will be done." 
The third time He said the same 
thing. 

Mark the first prayer most care- 
fully. In the presence of it, one is 
inclined to think that there was a 
shrinking there had never been before, 
yet it is not a prayer that the cup may 
pass, it is a prayer that God's will may 
be done. Notice first of all, His recog- 
nition of His abiding relation to God, 
"My Father." We hardly dare ven- 
ture to try and illustrate from our own 
experience because there is a gulf be- 
tween His sorrow and ours that never 
can be bridged. And yet, seeing it is 
the Man Christ we are looking at, may 
we not venture to say, It is in the 
moment of overwhelming agony that 
the soul is tempted to doubt God's love 
and goodness. But with all the surging 
sea of sorrow surrounding Him, and 
His intense loneliness filling His heart, 
His sense of relation was unbroken; as 
yet there was no obscuring of the face 
of God. And then the request. First 
the condition, " If it be possible let 
this cup pass away." And the final 
prayer, " Nevertheless, not as I will 
but as Thou wilt." 



Again He speaks. The relation is 
unchanged, " My Father " and there 
is a recognition of the impossibility of 
the passing of the cup " if this cannot 
pass," and the same great prayer 
ascends, " Thy will be done." 

The final attitude was that of the 
repetition and ratification of abandon- 
ment to the will of God. What did 
Christ pray for in the garden? That 
God's will might be done. What is 
the meaning of this shrinking? The 
last shadow of temptation. To go back 
in the story of His ministry to the 
things we have already seen; long ago 
in the wilderness, the enemy, in open 
guise, unveiled before the eyes of the 
Christ, the kingdoms of the world and 
said, If Thou givest me one moment's 
homage I will make them over to Thee. 
This was a . suggestion that He might 
gain the kingdoms without the pas- 
sion. That was the first temptation. 
It was in open guise in the wilder- 
ness, and with quiet, calm dignity and 
absence of perturbation, the answer 
was, "Thou shalt worship the Lord 
Thy God, and Him only shalt thou 
serve." That was at the beginning of 
public ministry. 

Then at Csesarea Philippi the same 
temptation, no longer voiced by the 
enemy in open guise, but voiced by 
the devil disguised in an apostle, "He 
began to show unto His disciples, that 
He must go unto Jerusalem, and suffer 
and be killed, and ... be raised 
up." And the apostle said, Not that. 
Lord, "Be it far from Thee." And 
eight days after, or thereabouts, with 
the glory of the mount flashing upon 
Jesus, the same apostle had made as 
great a blunder when he said, " It is 
good for us to be here," which meant, 
Not the Cross, but the mountain of 
glory, Lord. Get the Kingdom, but miss 
the Cross. He refused the tempta- 
tion with greater severity in the case 
of the apostle when the devil was in 
disguise, than in the case of the devil 
when he was in open vision. " Get 
thee behind Me, Satan: thou art a 
stumbling-block unto Me: for thou 
mindest not the things of God, but 
the things of men." 

Now in Gethsemane the devil is not 
there in open guise; the apostle is 



303 



[MATT. xxvi. 31-56] 



MATTHEW 



asleep ; but the shadow of it all is upon 
the soul of Christ, " If it be possible, 
let this cup pass away from Me." To 
go back outside the garden for a mo- 
ment. He had said to these men, You 
will all be offended in Me this night; 
but after I am raised up I will go 
before you into Galilee. That is to say, 
I am going through the passion, but I 
am coming to the Kingdom. I must set 
up this Kingdom. The will of God 
must be done. I must leave you, but 
you who will be scattered will also be 
gathered. Now, alone, the last dis- 
ciple away, He looked again toward the 
light beyond. The darkness was around 
Him, and the cup, this mystery of a 
sorrow that we cannot understand, this 
cup, this sacrament of infinite, sorrow, 
was presented to Him. The shadow 
of the passion was upon Him, and with 
it came the shadow of a great tempta- 
tion; "If it be possible, let this cup 
pass away from Me." If that had 
been all; if He had halted! But He 
did not halt! Quick, sharp, immedi- 
ate, resolute, followed the words; 
" Nevertheless not as I will, but as 
Thou wilt." In that moment He took 
the cup, took it finally, took it alone, 
took it as He had taken it against the 
devil's temptation, and the apostle's 
suggestion, took it in the desolating 
loneliness, because it was the will of 
His Father. All this is but an unveil- 
ing, that we may see something that is 
too great for human explanation. It 
is the unveiling of the passion and 
agony of God Himself in the presence 
of human sorrow. We cannot read this 
story without feeling somehow or other 
that it is too difficult to see. It does 
seem as though at least there was a 
breach, a difference, between this Man 
and God. Yet there never was a differ- 
ence, never a shadow of a difference. 
Jesus was never more God Incarnate 
than when He was in Gethsemane; 
and at the back of all we see that 
which we can never fathom God's 
heart broken in the presence of hu- 
man sin. 

At last He came to His disciples and 



He said, " Sleep on now, and take your 
rest; behold, the hour is at hand, and 
the Son of man is betrayed into the 
hands of sinners." "Arise, let us be 
going." These two verses have caused 
some difficulty. A great many of the 
old expositors declare that when He 
spoke to them of taking their rest He 
spoke satirically. That is impossible. 
Satire had its place in His method, it 
bad often played like summer light- 
ning, clearing the atmosphere. But 
this was no satire. Then what did He 
mean? We must put a break between 
verses forty-five and forty-six. He 
came back to them, His own triumph 
won, and they were still drowsy, and 
opened their eyes as He came per- 
chance, and He quietly said to them, 
There is a little time left, sleep on 
now. And they went back to sleep 
and He watched over them. He kept 
the lone vigil over those sleeping men 
until presently He saw the flash of the 
torches, for Judas was coming, and 
then He put His hand upon them and 
said, "Arise, let us be going." What 
passed through His soul in those hours 
we do not know. Nothing but love for 
those men, those drowsy men whom 
He had to rebuke was in His heart. 
He knew that presently out of the 
darkness He would win the inspiration 
that should make them selfless in their 
toil for Him, flames of fire carrying 
on His victory. O that vigil and that 
awaking ! 

L,astly observe the Master's victory. 
He said to Judas, What you do, do 
quickly; to Peter, Put thy sword up; 
I have no need of .it. Twelve legions 
of angels I could have, but I will not. 
Why not? For very love of humanity. 

So we see Him coming out of the 
garden and men attempting to hold 
Him. Hold Him fast said Judas, as 
if the puny hands of soldiers could 
have held Him. But He was held 
fast. What held Him? "He loved 
me, and gave Himself up for me." 
That is the whole story. May God 
help us to say it each for ourselves. 



304 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xxvi. 57-75] 



MATTHEW XXVI. 57-75 



THE supreme impression made upon 
our minds by our last study was 
that of the triumph of the King, as 
we saw Him emerging from the gar- 
den, Master of all the forces that had 
gathered about Him in the lone hour 
of the night. 

Now we are to see the King passing 
through the hands of men, while still 
in the hands of God. First His 
judges; and one is almost inclined to 
say, God forgive us for calling them 
judges; those men who sought His 
death by the violation of justice. Then 
Peter, His own, a representative man 
here as everywhere. Then the traitor 
Judas. And finally Pilate the vacil- 
lating, time-serving slave of expedi- 
ence. Our contemplation of the King 
flings all these men up into clear relief, 
and we see them for what they really 
are. Then, presently, He passed again 
into that unutterable loneliness on the 
margin of which we may be able to 
stand, and listen to the sighing wind, 
and the beating surf, but we shall 
never be able to fathom it, or under- 
stand it perfectly. Throughout the 
whole movement we shall see the same 
attitude of authority and dignity. He 
was never beaten, never defeated. 

In the passage before us there are 
two things which arrest our attention. 
The first is to be found in verses fifty- 
seven to sixty-eight, omitting verse 
fifty-eight because it has to do with 
Peter. The second section we find in 
verse fifty-eight, and verses sixty-nine 
to seventy-five. In the first, we have 
brought before us the vision of the 
King rejected of men, but chosen of 
God. In the second, we see the King 
denied by His own, but saving them. 

In the first section let us fix our 
attention first upon the King Himself. 
Very little is said about Him. It is 
announced that they had taken Him, 
led Him away to the house of Caia- 
phas, where the scribes and elders were 
gathered together. The next thing that 
we read about Him immediately is that 
He "held His peace." The final thing 
is that in answer to the priest's ad- 
ministering to Him a judicial oath, He 



made a double claim for Himself, first, 
that He was the Messiah, the Son of 
God; and, secondly, that He would 
ascend to the place of power, and 
finally come again and manifest Him- 
self. So that two things impress us 
as we look at the King, first His 
silence; and, secondly, His speech on 
oath. 

First His silence. Notice it care- 
fully; He was silent when the wit- 
nesses, quite correctly called false 
witnesses by Matthew, bore testimony 
against Him. He was silent because 
He knew full well the purpose of the 
lie, and that correction was useless. 
They were men with the one set pur- 
pose of putting Him to death. When 
a court proceeds upon such lines as 
that, there is no hope. How many 
witnesses they brought we do not know, 
quite a number evidently, and the 
stories they told were so flimsy, and 
foolish, and futile, that even the high 
priest made no use of them; until at 
last two were found who could repre- 
sent something that He was reported 
to have said, upon which the high 
priest thought he could fasten. Even 
they lied ignorantly or wilfully. They 
declared that He had said, I will de- 
stroy this temple and build it again in 
three days. No such word had ever 
passed His lips. He had said, " De- 
stroy this temple," not "I will destroy." 
He had never affirmed His ability to 
destroy. He is not the Destroyer. 
His words had been a supposition of 
their power to destroy. They were 
men blinded by their rationalism, 
having no vision beyond the immedi- 
ate, no conception beyond that which 
was absolutely and wholly material; 
and they had twisted His supposition 
into an affirmation. 

We next observe His silence in the 
presence of the priest When the 
priest asked Him purely in his per- 
sonal capacity, " Answerest Thou 
nothing?" and as attempting to en- 
force Him to incriminate Himself, He 
was silent, no word passed His lips. 

But that which is the most surpris- 
ing and arresting in this scene, is 



305 



[MATT. xxvi. 57-75] 



MATTHEW 



Christ's claim on oath. Notice very 
carefully how the high priest spoke to 
Him ; " I adjure Thee by the living 
God." That was the legal form of 
administering the oath. That which 
follows is not part of the legal form, 
but declares what would be the issue 
of His answer on oath. He did not 
say, I adjure Thee in order that Thou 
tell us; but I place Thee on oath in 
order that we may hear from Thee 
on oath, whether or not Thou art the 
Son of God, the Christ. It is the 
exact phrasing with which the Hebrew 
was familiar at the time. It was a 
careful question, and it was a question 
revealing the true attitude of the priest 
toward Jesus. It was a question re- 
vealing first of all the high priest's 
conception of the Messianic hope and 
office as it existed among his people. 
It was a question revealing the high 
priest's familiarity with the ancient 
Scriptures, and his perfect understand- 
ing of that Messianic hope which 
burned at the centre of the national 
life. The hope of the people concern- 
ing the Messiah was that He should be 
the Son of God, and the anointed 
One for the accomplishment of a Di- 
vine purpose. 

But the high priest's question re- 
vealed more. It revealed quite clearly 
the fact that he understood that Jesus 
had been making this very claim. He 
gathered up into his question the re- 
sult made upon the mind of the high 
priest and all the rulers, of the teach- 
ing and preaching of Jesus. The ques- 
tion would only be asked of a Man 
Who made claims which amounted to 
this. And without staying to go back 
over the whole of our Gospel, or even 
to gather incidents, if we think what 
Christ had been doing we shall recog- 
nize that it did amount to this. He 
had claimed over and over again, Mes- 
sianic power and office; He had 
claimed to be the Son of God; and 
therefore the high priest in effect said 
to Him, The hope of the Hebrew peo- 
ple is Messiah; Messiah is to be the 
Son of God; Thou hast been so speak- 
ing and teaching as to lead men to 
think that Thou art the Messiah, the 
Son of God. Let us have no more 
uncertainty, I place Thee, on oath; tell 



us plainly is this Thy claim? He did 
not believe Jesus, and he did not be- 
lieve that He was trifling. He felt it 
was necessary to put Him on oath, in 
order that He might be compelled thus 
definitely to make His claim. 

It is necessary to emphasise this be- 
cause that emphasis lends tremendous 
force to Christ's answer. If we once 
clearly see that the high priest was 
definitely leading Him to open con- 
fession, then immediately we see the 
meaning of His answer. It was a 
double answer. He first immediately 
answered the high priest's question, 
and then added to it something other, 
more startling than the suggestion the 
high priest had made. With regard 
to the question, Jesus said, " Thou hast 
said." This was an affirmation as 
direct, simple, and profound, as the 
question of the high priest. 

Thus we see the King, hemmed in 
by His foes, standing at the illegal 
tribunal, silent while witnesses lie, 
silent while the priest asked Him why 
He did not answer; but when chal- 
lenged on oath answering immediately, 
affirming that He was exactly what 
the high priest suggested, the Christ, 
the Son of God. 

And now, with this in mind let us 
carefully observe the next word which 
has caused some difficulty in the minds 
of expositors. " Nevertheless I say 
unto you, Henceforth ye shall see the 
Son of man sitting at the right hand 
of Power, and coming on the clouds of 
heaven." 

Efforts have been made to change 
the word "nevertheless," and to say it 
must be translated in some other way. 
Let us look at this simply but care- 
fully. "Thou hast said." That was 
His answering affirmation on oath. 
One suggests we must change the next 
word " nevertheless " and read instead 
"Moreover." Another suggests that 
we substitute the word "But" None 
of these changes is necessary unless 
we lose our sense of the scene. But 
there is no real escape from it, the 
word means " Nevertheless," and we 
have no business to change it. Watch 
the scene for a moment. Look care- 
fully into the face of the high priest 
and elders about Him. Endeavouring 



306 



MATTHEW 



[-MATT. XXVI. 57-75] 



to entrap Him, the high priest had put 
Him upon oath. Christ absolutely, defi- 
nitely, clearly, positively, without am- 
biguity or circumvention, on oath 
affirmed His Messiahship. In a mo- 
ment we see upon the face of the high 
priest the infinite scorn and incredulity 
with which he heard the answer. If 
we see that, we shall understand the 
" Nevertheless." Nevertheless, that is, 
in spite of thine unbelief, thou shalt 
see! 

So that here Christ, in answer to 
the high priest's charge, declared on 
oath that He was the Christ, the Son 
of God; and secondly in answer to 
his scorn and incredulity He laid claim 
to triumph even in the hour of de- 
feat. This was His last magnificent 
claim to the high priest of the Hebrew 
nation. 

In the second Psalm we find the 
Hebrew conception of Messianic hope 
crystalized. There is no doubt what- 
ever that the Hebrew expositors, and 
teachers, treated that psalm as Mes- 
sianic; it is the psalm that tells that 
the Son is anointed, and set upon the 
throne of power, that He shall ask for 
the heathen, and possess them, and for 
the uttermost part of the earth, and 
they shall be granted to Him. The 
high priest had used the thought 
crystalized in that psalm, and had said, 
Are you that Person, You, Galilean 
peasant, Nazarene? Do you claim to 
be the Person described in our ancient 
Scripture, the Son Who is anointed to 
such a place of power, the very Son 
of God ruling? And Christ said, Yes! 
The high priest was astonished, incred- 
ulous. And then Christ said, "Never- 
theless," and immediately quoted from 
the book of Daniel, which was as surely 
Messianic to Hebrew thinking as was 
the great psalm. In the book of Dan- 
iel the place of vision is heaven. The 
coming in the clouds there, is a coming 
from - earth to heaven. When Daniel 
wrote, "I beheld till thrones were 
placed," it was the uppermost spaces 
into which he was looking, the infinite, 
and the spiritual. Then followed Dan- 
iel's vision of the Ancient of Days; 
" I saw in the night visions, and, be- 
hold, there came with the clouds of 
heaven one like unto a Son of man." 



He came from the earth, to the An- 
cient of Days; and the One Who 
came was "Like unto a. Son of man. 
He came even to the Ancient of Days, 
and they brought Him near before 
Him. And there was given Him do- 
minion, and glory, and a kingdom, that 
all the peoples, nations, and languages' 
should serve Him." 

Now let us return to our scene.' 
Jesus said, You have asked Me if I 
am the Son of God, the Messiah. I 
am. You do not believe it. Then let 
Me remind you of another of your 
Messianic predictions that speaks of 
the Son of man coming to the Ancient 
of Days for crowning and dominion 
and power. I am that Son of man. 
You do not believe the spiritual claim; 
you shall have it wrought out into 
your sight. I stand here in the midst 
of you, beaten and baffled as it seems. 
You have encompassed My death by 
lying, treachery, meanness. You have 
suborned false witnesses, to whom I 
have given no answer; and now you 
ask Me on oath to make declaration, 
and your face indicates incredulity as 
I make My declaration. Nevertheless, 
henceforth, from this hour of mock 
injustice, from henceforth the Son of 
man of Daniel's vision, shall ascend 
to the place of power, and you shall 
see it. 

And did they see it? They nailed 
Him to the Cross; they bartered His 
life away; they flung Him out; and 
one can imagine that after He was 
dead, buried in Joseph of Arimathsea's 
grave, they said, Now He is done 
with! Within four days they began 
to find out that He was not done with; 
they had to reckon with Him as on the 
throne of empire; and in a very little 
while we find them gathering a little 
group of fishermen with perturbation 
in their hearts and terror in their souls, 
saying to them, "We strictly charged 
you not to teach in this name; and 
behold, ye have filled Jerusalem with 
your teaching, and intend to bring this 
Man's blood upon us." What does that 
mean? It means that the Son of man 
had ascended to the throne, and re- 
ceived dominion from the Ancient of 
Days, and all the things that they had 
tried to encompass were nothing to 



307 



[MATT. xxvi. 57-75] 



MATTHEW 



Him. So that either He was all that 
He laid claim to be, or Caiaphas was 
right when He charged Him with 
blasphemy. We have no middle course 
to-day any more than they had ; He is 
a liar, or incarnate Truth; an impostor, 

, or God the Son, raised to the place of 

-. eternal Empire. 

We have looked at the King; now 

!let us look at the things seen inci- 

; dentally. Is there anything in human 
history that compares with this for a 
travesty of justice ; it was a lie in the 
name of truth, wickedness in the name 
of religion. This was not a Roman 
court, but a Hebrew court, and by the 
laws of the Hebrew people it was il- 
legal for the Sanhedrim to meet in the 
night to try a case such as this, but 
they arraigned Him in the night. It 
was illegal for the Sanhedrim to pass 
sentence on the day that the prisoner 
was arrested, but they did it in this 
case in a few hours. 

Mark the travesty of justice in the 
witnesses. "The chief priests and the 
whole council sought false witness 
against Jesus, that they might put Him 
to death ; and they found it not, though 
many false witnesses came." After 
Christ's great claim we see the high 
priest rising, and we hear the clamour 
of his angry voice, " What further need 
have we of witnesses," and then he 
rent his garments, and in the doing of 
it violated the law under which he 
served as a priest. We have but to 
turn to Leviticus and we find it dis- 
tinctly ordered that the high priest 
shall not rend his garments in the hour 
of sorrow or anguish. It was but a 
little thing, but it was symbolic of the 
whole attitude; they were trampling 
upon law, violating justice to encom- 
pass the death of this Man. The ver- 
dict of the council was shouted out in 
hot anger, and was followed by bru- 
tality to the prisoner as they ' buff eted 
Him. That is human nature, and that 
is human nature as it is to-day, but for 
the grace of God. 

The story of Peter is a very famil- 
iar one. We may first of all say that, 
making allowance for his failure, all 
allowance for the awfulness of his de- 
nial, we must not forget that we must 
account for Peter by one word, and 



that word is love. He loved his Lord 
throughout all the process. Truly love 
works through faith. Love needs faith 
as its central element, and Peter's faith 
in Jesus never failed, his love never 
failed. Christ had said to him a little 
before, " Satan asked to have you, that 
he might sift you as wheat, but I made 
supplication for thee, that thy faith 
fail not." His courage failed, his hope 
failed, his faith that Jesus would ac- 
complish the thing Peter thought He 
was going to accomplish, failed; but 
His faith in Jesus never failed, his 
faith in the Person never failed, he 
believed in Him all through. And so 
as we trace the story it is one of love, 
blundering love, foolish love, but it 
is love. 

Let us notice three things about 
Peter. Love at a distance and curious, 
" He followed Him afar " to see what 
the end would be. Secondly, love 
challenged and cowardly, until he de- 
nied. But finally, love remembering 
and contrite, " He went out, and wept 
bitterly." Love at a distance, and 
curious. That was Peter's failure. 
Love challenged, and cowardly. That 
was the devil's sifting. Love remem- 
bering, and contrite. That was Christ's 
victory. 

First, love at a distance and curious. 
We need not lay any undue stress 
upon this, but it is certainly interesting 
to read the first Psalm when we read 
about Peter. As we read this Psalm 
we think about Christ. 

"Blessed is the man that walketh not 

in the counsel of the wicked. 
Nor standeth in the way of sinners, 
Nor sitteth in the seat of scoffers." 

But negatively Peter is there also. 
There is the process; we can hardly 
say progress, for it is a downward 
movement Walking, standing, sitting; 
that is exactly what Peter did. Walk- 
ing, "He followed Him afar off." 
Standing, he went "into the court" 
and stood among these people. Sitting, 
he "sat with the officers" by the fire 
that the enemies of Christ had built. 
He was following afar. But why did 
Peter come there at all? And if he 
could speak he would say because I 
loved Him, I wanted to see the end. 



308 



MATTHEW 



[MAT*, xxvir. 1-26] 



I was disappointed, He was doing 
nothing of what I thought He would 
do. Ah yes, but love merely curious, 
that walks with sinners and stands 
with sinners, and sits to gain its 
warmth by the fire that sinners have 
built, is in peril. That was Peter's 
failure. 

Then mark that love was challenged. 
One maid spoke to him, "Thou also." 
Why the also? John was there some- 
where, Judas was lurking somewhere. 
" Thou also wast with Jesus the Gali- 
lean ;" " Of a truth thou also art one 
of them." He tried to evade denial 
the first time. "I know not what thou 
sayest." We know and understand 
that. Challenged, we do not deny, but 
we evade! That also is a lie. Then 
another maid did not speak to him, but 
spoke to the whole company and said, 
"This man also was with Jesus of 
Nazareth." Then it was that he put 
himself on oath, for that is the mean- 
ing of swearing here. He took his 
oath that he did not know Him. Then 
the whole of them spoke to him pres- 
ently, saying, Really you are one, your 
very speech betrays you, you have the 
Galilean accent, you cannot escape that 
wayl Then he added curses to the 
oath. That was Satan's sifting. Long 
ago Jesus had said, Satan will sift 
you! Someone has quaintly said Peter 
shut the door to all the upper things 
and opened it to all the downward 
things. Peter was finding himself out. 
Never a man that loves Jesus Christ 
but that he comes into circumstances 



sooner or later that will reveal what 
is in him. He is brought into them in 
order that he may be delivered from 
the things that are in him. 

And then the last thing. It is so 
full of light and colour even in the 
darkness. The whole thing is so dra- 
matic if we could but see it. He had 
just uttered that last protestation and 
had cursed; and outside in the dark- 
ness was heard the crowing of the 
cock; and he remembered. One can- 
not read it without forgetting Peter, 
and thinking of Christ. Christ had 
said to him, "before the cock crow 
thou shalt deny Me thrice." It was 
such a simple thing, such a childish 
thing, that does not seem to have any- 
thing in it. But He will employ the 
chirping of a sparrow to win a soul 
to God. He . will press into the busi- 
ness of restoring a wandering one, the 
crowing of a cock in the dawning of 
the morning. He remembered, and we 
need not follow him out, as he went 
weeping; the evangelist with a fine 
delicacy leaves him a brokenhearted 
man, because he had denied his Lord. 

So we see hate murdering the King, 
and love denying the King; and it 
seems as though the King says to us 
two things. First, come, see if there 
ever was sorrow like Mine! But per- 
haps the final thing He said was, From 
henceforth the Son of man is on the 
throne of power! Let us trust Him 
and follow Him, even though it be 
through darkness. 



MATTHEW XXVII. 1-26 



THE first two verses of this chapter 
link its narrative to that of the 
preceding one. We have considered 
the first trial scene, that travesty of 
justice; the gathering of the San- 
hedrim in the night, which was in itself 
illegal according to their own law. 
That is revealed in the action which 
Matthew so briefly chronicles in these 
two first verses ; " Now, when morning 
was come, all the chief priests and 
the elders of the people took counsel 
against Jesus to put Him to death." 
That is they met in the morning and 



took counsel as to how they should 
carry out the decision of the night, in 
order to be technically within the law. 
Their decision was that they would so 
act as to compel the Roman power to 
be the instrument of their own base 
decision; so they "bound Him, and 
led Him away, and delivered Him up 
to Pilate the governor." 

The outstanding figures in the sec- 
tion are those of the King Himself, 
Judas and Pilate. 

First of all our eyes are fixed upon 
the King. Standing in the presence 



309 



[MATT, xxvii. 1-26] 



MATTHEW 



of Pilate, He made His claim to be 
the King of the Jews. On solemn 
oath, in the presence of the Sanhedrim 
in the night, He claimed to be the Son 
of God, the Messiah. Now once again 
before Pilate the question was asked, 
not with the same formality, but it was 
the question of the judge directly 
spoken to the prisoner; "Art Thou the 
King of the Jews?" And again 
quietly, with little formality, and yet 
as clearly as in the night, He an- 
swered the inquiry of the Procurator. 
"Thou sayest." That is to say, What 
thou sayest is so, I am the King of 
the Jews. Then immediately Pilate 
turned aside from his true line of 
action as a dispassionate judge, and 
reminded the Prisoner of the clamour 
of these priests. And Christ answered 
nothing. Christ's sense of true ju- 
dicial procedure was far finer than 
Pilate's. He would answer His judge, 
but He had no answer for clamour, no 
answer for those men who were there 
for the set purpose of encompassing 
His death. The foregone conclusion of 
His opponents made Him silent. 

Let us now look at the two men 
here coming into contact with Christ. 
In each case we see the most dis- 
astrous failure. 

This is the final picture of Judas. 
What are the things that are impressed 
upon our mind as we look at him? 
First, a too late repentance ; secondly, 
a too late restitution, the flinging back 
of the thirty pieces of silver; and 
finally, an appalling retribution coming 
upon him by his own hand. Judas 
appears in this trial scene as one of 
the band of Christ's own disciples, one 
of the inner circle. In following this 
Gospel, we have seen vast multitudes 
crowding about Him, the rulers and 
those in authority deeply interested in 
Him. We have- also seen how they 
gradually fell away, the rulers first, 
and then the multitudes, until He 
slowly and solemnly proceeded to the 
place He occupied in the awful hour 
of His passion, absolutely alone so far 
as human friendship was concerned. 
Judas had been His companion along 
the highway of His public ministry. 
He had sat at the table with Him, and 
had heard those intimate and private 



conversations. He had been one of the 
inner circle of souls, loyal to Him, at 
least by confession and profession. 
This man was the traitor in the camp, 
the betrayer of our Lord from the 
inner circle to the outer circle; as in 
turn, they of His own nationality be- 
came His betrayers to that yet wider 
circle of Roman power. So by a proc- 
ess of betrayal from the inner circle 
outward, our Lord was handed over; 
by a member of His own disciples to 
the foes plotting for His own life; and 
by the members of His own nation to 
the nation without, which cared nothing 
for Him, but wholly for themselves. 

Many brilliant and interesting at- 
tempts have been made to redeem 
Judas from obloquy, but let us be con- 
tent to abide by his own conception of 
what he had done "I have sinned." 
Not, I have blundered, or have been 
mistaken, or foolish, or wrong; not, I 
have attempted to hurry this Messiah 
to declare Himself, but, " I have 
sinned." As we look at Judas in that 
terrible picture, we see a man filled 
with terror, the terror of a lost soul; 
the sense of sin, and the dread of its 
issue. Not regret, not the sense of sin 
with desire to escape it, but the sense 
of sin with desire to escape the issue 
of it. That is not the repentance that 
brings a man to God. If a man simply 
repents of sin, by attempting to escape 
its issue, he knows nothing of repen- 
tance in the true sense of the word. 
Repentance which would be glad to 
bear the fire of hell if it would purge 
from sin, is the repentance that works 
salvation. 

His restitution was also too late. It 
was a dramatic scene. The priests 
were moving across the courtyard, from 
the place where they had met in the 
palace of the high priest to the palace 
of the Procurator. Just over the wall 
were the Temple courts ; and suddenly 
this man confronted the procession of 
priests, with Jesus in the midst, and 
cried to them, "I have sinned in that 
I betrayed innocent blood." Mark the 
brutality of the answer, " What is that 
to us? See thou to it;" you made 
your bargain, abide by it! Then, real- 
ising the whole meaning of the situ- 
ation, Judas took those thirty pieces 



310 



MATTHEW 



[MATT, xxvii. 1-26] 



of silver he had not spent one of 
them, what he got he did not gain, a 
man never does when he is selling 
Christ and flung them over into the 
Temple enclosure. An awful revelation 
of the illumination of a soul too late! 
Then he hurried away and hanged him- 
self. Thus the one traitor in the inner 
circle of Christ's Kingdom, became his 
own executioner. 

If we would know the difference 
between true repentance and false, let 
us go back to the story of Peter, and 
put the statement there into compari- 
son with the statement here. Peter 
had basely denied Him; but mark the 
ending of the two stories. Of Peter it 
is written, " He went out and wept bit- 
terly." Of Judas it is written, "He 
went away and hanged himself." In 
the one case, we have the man re- 
pentant, sorry for the actual sin, and 
turning from it, desiring to escape 
from the wrong done. In the other 
case we have a man, desiring to escape 
the consequences of his sin, by his own 
act plunging himself into them. 

Now let us look at the high priests, 
and if it be possible, calmly. They 
gathered up those thirty pieces of sil- 
ver. Notice their religious conscience. 
In the midst of the greatest travesty 
of justice that the world has ever seen, 
themselves the inspirers and instigators 
of the foul deed, the darkest sin ever 
committed, they said "It is not law- 
ful to put them into the treasury." 
What shall we do with them? We 
will endeavour to cleanse this money 
which has been cast into the Temple 
courts by putting it to charitable uses! 
We will buy the potter's field, and we 
will make it the place to bury strangers 
in. How often men attempt to cleanse 
money by putting it to charitable uses. 
Mark the irony of the whole situation, 
how the people named the thing cor- 
rectly, even when the priests tried to 
hide it. The priests said, A field to 
bury strangers in. The people said, 
The field of blood! Thus, all uninten- 
tionally, they sent down through all the 
years the right naming of the thing 
they had done, " The field of blood." 

The story of Pilate is a story of 
conscience; and there are these dis- 
tinct movements in the process; first 



conscience startled; then conscience 
struggling; then conscience compromis- 
ing; and, finally, conscience drugged, 
silenced! The final revelation of the 
study is that the man who governs his 
life simply by conscience, is likely to 
ruin his life. 

His conscience was startled by the 
very presence of Jesus. There would 
seem to be no other explanation. Pilate 
was a man never popular, even among 
his own friends; hard, cold, dispas- 
sionate, used to scenes of blood; a man 
who in all likelihood had risen from 
the rank of a slave, not immediately, 
but by succession. The man who rises, 
without the grace of God, always be- 
comes the greatest despot, when he is 
given power. But when the priests 
came to him, bearing that Prisoner, he 
was a startled man. No such prisoner 
had stood before him up to that mo- 
ment. Pilate embodied Roman au- 
thority; but here was a Prisoner at 
the bar, Who immediately became the 
Judge, while the judge became the 
prisoner. Pilate felt the influence of 
His stately and quiet affirmation of 
Kingship. "Art Thou the King of the 
Jews?" which meant to say, Thou art 
claiming to be the King of the Jews; 
it is an absurd position; settle it at 
once by saying that Thou art not! But 
instead of a denial, there was an affir- 
mation. Pilate expected the Prisoner 
would wish to escape; he found the 
Prisoner had no desire to escape. Pi- 
late himself ' would have given anything 
to escape. His conscience was aroused. 

Then we see a man struggling with 
his conscience. His arguments for 
Jesus as against the priests, and that 
last suggestion supposed to be by him- 
self a master-stroke of cleverness, 
prove this. It was his custom to re- 
lease a notable prisoner. Barabbas was 
a man guilty of robbery and murder, 
and yet a man making claims to free 
his people. Barabbas means son of the 
father; and is a title rather than a 
name. Some of the ancient manu- 
scripts give the name as Jesus Barab- 
bas. In all probability he had set up 
Messianic claims, on the low level of a 
material fight and robbery. Pilate saw 
the difference, and thought that surely 
these religious men, if driven to choice, 



311 



[MATT. xxvu. 1-26] 



MATTHEW 



would be bound to accept Jesus. So 
little did Pilate know of priestism! 
Which will you have, Jesus which is 
called Christ, or Barabbas? 

Then there occurred an interval, in 
which the priests persuaded the people 
to ask for Barabbas; and, as John tells 
us, in the loneliness of an inner cham- 
ber, face to face with Christ, Pilate 
asked, "What is truth?" 

The hidden interview over, the peo- 
ple were ready to answer; and Pilate 
came with his question, " Which of the 
two will ye that I release unto you ? " 
They replied, "Barabbas." Then, per- 
plexed, struggling with his conscience, 
Pilate said, "What then shall I do 
unto Jesus Who is called Christ ? " 
Again the answer came, quick and 
ready, priest-inspired, " Let Him be 
crucified." And again Pilate asked, 
" Why, what evil hath He done? " We 
see how now his conscience was strug- 
gling between obedience and expedi- 
ence; struggling as to whether it would 
obey the deep conviction concerning the 
Man in front of him or listen to the 
clamour of these men, and secure his 
own position. He knew the subtlety 
of the priests, he knew full well if he 
handed Jesus over to freedom, they 
would complain against him at Rome, 
that he had committed high treason 
against Cassar. 

Then followed the washing of his 
hands in water. Judas, a frenzied soul, 
went back and faced the high priests 
and said, "I have betrayed innocent 
blood." Now Pilate said, "I am in- 
nocent of the blood of this righteous 
Man; see ye to it." 

What next? Conscience drugged. 
" Then . . . Jesus he scourged and de- 
livered to be crucified." 

Now once more we look back; and 
this story of Judas teaches us that 
there is an unpardonable sin. There 
are many passages in the New Testa- 
ment that speak of it, always with aw- 
ful solemnity. What is it? Rejection 
of the Saviour. If Judas, instead of 
confessing his sin to the high priest, 
had confessed it to Christ, he would 
have been pardoned there and then; if, 
instead of allowing an awful fear re- 
sulting from sin to drive him to self- 
destruction, he had flung himself upon 



the tender compassion of Jesus he 
would have been forgiven even then. 
The unpardonable sin, and the only 
one for which Christ has no word, no 
look, no help, is the sin of deliberately, 
and wilfully, and finally, rejecting Hun, 
as Saviour. 

As we look at Judas, we learn also 
that whatever price we put upon Christ 
we are likely to get for Him. Is is an 
awful truth. We can sell Christ for 
our own price ! The devil will take 
care of that! F. Beard, of Chicago, 
in one of his wonderful cartoons, has 
a picture that would shock the sensi- 
bilities of some. It is that of a man 
in his inner office, leaning on his desk, 
writing, and looking over his ledgers 
and books. Outside the door of that 
office stands the Christ, knocking, but 
the door is locked and there is no en- 
trance for Hun. Standing by the man 
is the devil not the devil of the Mid- 
dle Ages, with horns and hoofs, but the 
cultured, refined, and insidious devil of 
the nineteenth century, who woos and 
wins with gold. And what is he do- 
ing? He is giving this man all that 
he asks, in order to keep Christ out. 
It is graphic, awful, and true! That 
is the devil's mission, to give men any- 
thing, in order to keep Christ out. 

But there is a difference between 
getting and gaining. The things a man 
gets when he sells Christ are not cur- 
rent in the eternities; and at the last, 
his soul passing out into the darkness, 
as did that of Judas, he will fling back 
the getting of years into the Temple, 
having lost Christ and the thirty pieces 
of silver. 

We see the King in Pilate's hall ar- 
raigned. But Pilate was arraigned. 
Nineteen centuries have gone and the 
world knows it now. Not the high 
priests are jailors. He is the Jailor; 
He holds them in His right hand, and 
their eternal destinies depend upon 
Him. Not the Roman Procurator was 
judge. He was a prisoner, and his 
question was more than he knew, 
"What shall I do with Jesus?" In 
that moment when Pilate released 
Barabbas, and gave Jesus to the Cross, 
the Roman kingdom was doomed in 
the economy of God. Presently the 
followers of the Christ found their way 



312 



MATTHEW 



[MAT*, xxvii. 27-56] 



to Rome. A halting man, feeble in 
bodily appearance, came into Rome as 
a prisoner, and receiving into his own 
hired house all that came to him, he 
taught them the things concerning 



Jesus, Whom their Governor had given 
to the Cross. Thus Rome was shaken 
at the centre; and its pagan power 
was broken by the coming of the King 
Pilate had flung out. 



MATTHEW XXVII. 27-56 



THESE verses tell the story of the 
Passion and Passing of the King. 
To say that, is to recognize the diffi- 
culty of exposition, and to fill the soul 
with that awe and reverence without 
which all such attempts would be sacri- 
legious. There are matters here too 
profound for words, things that cannot 
be fully apprehended by our finite 
minds. Here, as never before in the 
reading of this Gospel, we see the King 
in a loneliness and a dignity which 
defy explanation. The story is full of 
contradictions, and yet wonderfully 
complete. If we read it as a passage 
out of merely human history, it would 
be a story of an ignominious and over- 
whelming defeat. It is not too late to 
read it in that way. Nineteen centu- 
ries have revealed the fact that the 
rough and bloody Roman gibbet was 
the throne of imperial monarchy, and 
spiritual empire. 

As we come to the story, we have 
the great advantage of all the gathered 
light of the experience of the Church, 
and the experience of the world, and 
we see these things as it would have 
been utterly impossible for men to see 
them at the tune. The seeing of these 
things in the gathered light of the cen- 
turies, creates this difference, among 
others, between the men who looked 
upon them then, and ourselves. They 
imagined that they perfectly understood 
all that was happening. We know that 
we do not even now understand all 
that happened. Had that been an ordi- 
nary death, then all that these men 
said in the presence of it was true; but 
that is a supposition which cannot be 
entertained in view of the effect which 
has been produced in individual, social, 
national, and worldwide life, as the 
issue of that Cross. There have been 
other details sublimely heroic; but to 
speak of this merely as heroic, is almost 
to insult it. There have been other 



deaths tragic and dreadful, and while 
this is more tragic than any other, to 
speak of it as a tragedy merely, would 
savour of irreverence. 

One is quite powerless in the pres- 
ence of this story. Here exposition 
has to end, save as perchance it may 
reverently touch upon some of the outer 
things. To the inner heart of the 
mystery exposition cannot penetrate. 
It is well in that connection to notice 
the remarkable reticence of Matthew. 
Other evangelists tell us more than he 
tells us, and yet they are all rever- 
ently reticent in the presence of the 
Cross. Much more might have been 
written of that scene in the palace, 
when Pilate, having handed Jesus over 
in answer to the clamour of the mob 
inspired by the priests, the whole band 
of Jews gathered about Hun; but there 
is a dignity and reverent reticence in 
the story of Matthew. That reticence 
is more marked as we proceed. He 
does not describe the crucifixion at all. 
There is a change in this connection 
in the Revised Version, full of signifi- 
cance. The Authorised makes it ap- 
pear that Matthew declares that they 
crucified Him, for it reads there "they 
crucified Him," as though drawing at- 
tention to the act itself as being per- 
formed. The Revised reads, "when 
they were come unto the place called 
Golgotha, that is to say, The place of 
a skull, they gave Him wine to drink, 
mingled with gall : and when He had 
tasted it, He would not drink. And 
when thety had crucified Him, they 
parted His garments among them, cast- 
ing lots: and they sat and watched 
Hun there." He does not describe it, 
but refers to it as a fact accomplished. 
We need in the reading of that to re- 
member that between verses thirty-four 
and thirty-five the crucifixion took 
place. It would seem that Matthew, 
when -writing the story of the King, 



313 



. xxvu. 27-56] 



MATTHEW 



turned away as though he would say 
to those who would read, I cannot even 
look upon that. Let us observe the 
same attitude. The longer one lives 
and contemplates this central mystery 
of our faith, the less one can peer into 
it on the material side, and the less 
one can attempt to explain it in the 
profundity of its spiritual meaning. 

Let us, then, reverently meditate on 
this paragraph, in three ways. First, 
the attitude of God as revealed; sec- 
ondly, the attitude of the King; finally, 
the attitude of humanity. 

The attitude of God in the presence 
of this Passing and Passion of the 
King. One may be inclined to say that 
the passage says hardly anything about 
God. And that indeed is the first mat- 
ter which arrests attention, the appar- 
ent non-interference of God. That 
becomes most remarkable as we re- 
member previous matters in this Gos- 
pel, how at the close of the years o 
privacy God broke the silence and 
spoke, "This is My beloved Son, in 
Whom I am well pleased;" how on the 
Mount of Transfiguration when His 
humanity had wrought itself out to an 
absolute perfection and was ready for 
glory, and yet turned again to the 
earthly way, and the way of sorrow, 
God said to the disciples who were 
fearful in their obedience and their 
following, "This is My beloved Son, in 
Whom I am well pleased: hear ye 
Him." Think of the relation existing 
between the King and God as we have 
seen it flashing out every now and then 
in the course of the ministry and teach- 
ing of Jesus. Remember how He said, 
"No one knoweth the Son, save the 
Father." Then turn to this picture in 
which we see this One, Who was per- 
fect in His life, Who pleased God in 
His teaching so that God had broken 
the silence of heaven to set the seal of 
His approval upon Him, now in the 
midst of a brutal band of soldiers who 
were making sport of Him, and there 
was no interference. That is the mys- 
tery of all mysteries. We talk of the 
problem of pain; there it is focussed. 
We talk of the problem of evil, there 
it is concrete; that God could leave 
Hun alone in that hour of human per- 
secution. All this is most apparent at 



Golgotha. When the King was hang- 
ing upon the Cross and the interpreters 
of religion, the priests, misinterpreted 
God, there was a great silence. God's 
non-interference is the first thing that 
impresses one, as the story is read. 

But that is not all the story. It was 
not wholly non-interference. There is 
one touch full of beauty ; " From the 
sixth hour there was darkness over all 
the land until the ninth hour." That 
seems to have been the act of God. It 
would seem that in infinite tenderness 
God wrapped the land in darkness in 
the hour of His Son's supreme suffer- 
ing. About those three hours we know 
nothing, save the words that escaped 
the lips of the Sufferer Himself. Here 
we approach that which is perhaps the 
matter most difficult of interpretation. 
There came a moment when the voice 
was heard amid the darkness, and it 
said, " My God, My God, why hast 
Thou forsaken Me ? " The men about 
the Cross were quite familiar with the 
words. They were not strange words. 
They were quoted from the Psalter, 
from the Worship-book of the Hebrew 
people. They had often chanted the 
psalm in solemn monotone and recited 
it in many an hour of heart anguish. 
But there are values in it far deeper 
and more profound than the Psalmist 
knew when he wrote the song. When 
he wrote it, it was the expression of 
sorrow such as he was then passing 
through. But it has become for ever- 
more full of meaning to us, because 
Christ uttered these words upon the 
Cross. There is great value in recog- 
nizing the fact that it was a human 
cry, and that Jesus quoted it. And 
the value is all the greater if we re- 
member that all that follows in that 
twenty-second Psalm is an exposition 
of what it is to be God-forsaken. The 
Psalmist was not looking at the Cross 
on the green hill, he had no vision of 
it; he was writing of his own heart's 
agony; and here this One, this King 
upon the Cross, stretched back through 
the centuries and took hold of the most 
awful wail of agony that ever escaped 
the human heart, and quoted it as His 
own experience. He was of our hu- 
manity, born of the virgin, throughout 
the whole of His public ministry He 



314 



MATTHEW 



[MATT. xxvu. 27-56] 



had spoken in human terms, and yet 
with an unequivocal Divine authority. 
When we look at this Cross and listen 
to His words thereon, we must be very 
careful that we do not divide between 
the Deity and the humanity of Jesus. 
If He was God manifest in the days 
of His teaching; He was God manifest 
on the Cross; God coming into identi- 
fication with the issue of the sin of 
man. "My God, My God, why hast 
Thou forsaken Me?" It was first of 
all the cry of a soul at the uttermost 
of sin, having losj: the vision of God. 
It was the cry of a soul at the utter- 
most of sorrow, conscious of its lack 
of God. All sorrow is lack. All grief 
is consciousness of lack. And the final 
lack is God. When the soul becomes 
conscious of the lack of God, that is 
the uttermost sorrow. Moreover, it was 
the soul in the presence of mystery, in 
the presence of silence, with no voice, 
with no answer. Here, then, because 
this Man was God incarnate, because 
from beginning to end every word that 
fell from His lips was a word of God, 
this also is the word of God. In that 
moment He expressed in human speech 
the fact that the pains and penalties of 
the human sin were His. That is as 
far as we can see into the Atonement. 
That is the heart of it, and the centre 
of it, and the soul of it, and the marvel 
of it, and the mystery of it! If we 
make this Man upon the Cross a Man 
merely, then the presentation is out 
of harmony with the rest of the Gospel 
story, and out of harmony with the 
deepest of human experience concern- 
ing Him. But when we say that this 
Man upon the Cross was still the un- 
veiled God, then all the physical bruis- 
ing, terrible as it was, so that eyes can 
hardly bear to look on it, is but a 
material shadow of the suffering of the 
Divine heart in the presence of sin, by 
which suffering He dealt with sin and 
bore it, as the Lamb slain from the 
foundation of the world. We see the 
Man among the soldiers, we see them 
press the crown of thorns upon His 
brow; they are thorn-crowning God! 

Whence came the thorns? Let us 
go back to the beginning of Bible 
human history, and we find it was 
said; "Cursed is the ground for thy 



sake: in toil shalt thou eat of it all 
the days of thy life, thorns also, and 
thistles shall it bring forth to thee." 
In Pilate's judgment hall, we see the 
soldiers with rough hands plaiting a 
rude crown of thorns; and there is a 
suggestiveness which arrests the soul. 
They were pressing back into the brow 
of God incarnate, the very curse that 
followed sin. And what was He doing? 
We speak of the non-interference of 
God; it was His non-interference with 
Himself, for it was His determination 
to work out the mystery of His pain 
in the shedding of blood in order to 
cleanse the very sin of the men who 
crushed the thorns upon His brow. 

But where was God when the last 
word had been spoken and the King 
had yielded up His Spirit? And again 
the answer was not the answer of 
speech, but the answer of an act. 
"And behold, the veil of the Temple 
was rent in two from the top to the 
bottom." That was a great symbolic 
act, indicating the fact that symbolism 
was for ever over. The veil of the 
Temple was that which excluded men 
from God. Think of that holy of holies 
in the Temple in Jerusalem, of its 
darkness! No light was ever there! 
There had been light in olden days 
when the glory of the Shekinah shone 
between the overshadowing wings of 
the cherubim; but that had long since 
passed away. Men were outside, not 
permitted to enter. But when our King 
died, the veil was rent, and that meant 
first that light broke through where all 
had been darkness, and secondly that 
the God Who had been a mystery be- 
came a Revelation, shining out upon 
all human history; and it meant also 
that excluded men were admitted. 
What happened when the veil was 
rent? All the world was brought in- 
side; and all souls were made priests, 
who come through the name and merit 
of the Priest Who that day had died. 
And so if we see first the non-inter- 
ference of God; we see also the tri- 
umph of God by identification with 
men; and we see that triumph mani- 
fested, in the rending of that veil. 

Now let us reverently look at the 
King Himself. We begin exactly where 
we began before. Mark these words 



315 



[MATT, xxvii. 27-56] 



MATTHEW 



for a moment as the very words of 
the King Himself, "My God, My God, 
why hast Thou forsaken Me?" Notice 
that they indicate His identification 
with God in the experience of that 
issue. No one can read this story 
consecutively from the beginning of the 
Gospel until this point and imagine that 
in the Cross there was some kind of 
conflict as between Christ and God. 
There was nothing to mar the perfect 
harmony between God and Christ in 
that Cross. He was neither persuading 
God to love us, nor overcoming reluc- 
tance in the heart of God to save us. 
He was co-operating with the work of 
God in the revelation of the love that 
makes man know what the heart of 
God really is. As we listen to the 
voice of the King, we detect the per- 
fect harmony, and realise how here, as 
everywhere, the first recorded words 
of Jesus were still true, " Knew ye not 
that I must be about My Father's busi- 
ness ? " This also was His business, 
and the King was in perfect accord 
with the law and purposes of God. 

He cried with a loud voice. Matthew 
does not tell us what He said, but that 
having spoken, He yielded up His 
Spirit; very literally, He sent His 
Spirit away. This was a phrase in 
common use to describe death. In the 
Cross of Christ, it was justified. We 
have seen as we have traced the story, 
how, in the last days of the King's 
Passion, as He was approaching the 
Cross, He compelled circumstances to 
His own will, and the same fact is 
revealed here. That was the King's 
triumph. He triumphed, not merely 
by resurrection, and not alone in that 
He compelled the hour of His dying 
to fall in with the counsels of God and 
with the symbolism of the ancient sys- 
tem, but in that, at the moment when 
He had passed" through all, "He yielded 
up His Spirit." 

As we look at the attitude of hu- 
manity we need do no more than in- 
dicate certain lines of thought. It is 
a very interesting study, that of the 
people who gathered about the Cross 
of Jesus. We see humanity material- 
ised, in the soldiers. They began by 
making sport of Him in the palace. 
Then they manifested a touch of rough 



pity as they offered Him the wine and 
the gall. This was succeeded by an 
awful indifference, as, having done 
their work of crucifixion, in the sight 
of the Cross they gambled for His gar- 
ments; and "they watched Him." To 
what depths humanity falls when its 
ideals are materialised! To these men 
there was no beauty that they should 
desire Him, because they were blind 
to all high and spiritual things. 

But there is a worse picture than 
that. It is that of religion in the 
presence of the Cross. The most devil- 
ish thing in human history is religion 
when it becomes false. The higher and 
the nobler a thing, the lower and the 
more ignoble it becomes when it is 
false. Begin on the lowest level of 
illustration. A lost woman is a greater 
tragedy than a lost man. All reform- 
ers and all workers know that it is 
most difficult to lift and reclaim a 
woman. And why is this? Because 
her nature is finer, nearer the spiritual. 

One is appalled by the ignorance of 
the priests, far more than horrified by 
their brutality. "He saved others, 
Himself He cannot save." Now had 
these men had any spiritual under- 
standing at all, they would have known 
that this was not true of Jesus merely, 
but has always been true of humanity. 
In order to save any one to the highest 
degree, from the lowest plane, the sav- 
iour must be willing not to save him- 
self. It is only by the giving of our 
life away that we can hope to save 
another life. The whole of life is built 
upon that great principle, and yet here 
were interpreters of moral and spiritual 
things, flinging this as a gibe and a 
taunt into the face of the dying Christ 
Himself, " He saved others, Himself 
He cannot save." 

Then observe their misinterpretation 
of God, "He trusteth on God; let Him 
deliver Him now, if He desireth Him; 
for He said, I am the Son of God." 
How ignorant they were of God! 

All the things they said to Him were 
true, but not as they meant them. 
These final taunts of the priests con- 
stitute a great revelation of the heart 
of atonement. 

There is one other group at which 
we will glance, that of the women. 



316 



MATTHEW 



[MATT, xxvii. 57-xxviii.] 



Reverently, though perplexed; loyal, 
though disappointed; standing afar off 
and waiting; were the women who had 
ministered to Him. We leave them 
there, that sorrow-stricken company. 
We shall meet them again; and we 
shall find that some of them stayed and 
watched His burial. No apostles did. 
Some of them watched through the 
darkness of the night for the break of 
day. No apostle did. As we look 
back at that scene, we thank God for 
the women who waited 1 

Look finally at that Cross. It is the 
throne. See how it divides to the 
right and the left. It divided the sol- 
diers. One of their number looked, 
and looked, the captain of the band, the 
centurion, and the truth broke upon 
him, and he said, "Truly this was the 
Son of God." It divided the thieves; 



the dying Christ had no word for one 
but the imperial word of entrance to 
light for the other. It divided atti- 
tudes of mind; priests and women; 
priests laughing and mocking in their 
ignorance of spiritual things; women 
waiting and worshipping in their igno- 
rance of what He was doing. 

So to-day we are judged by that 
Cross, and when we pass our verdict 
upon it, the verdict we pass upon it is, 
if we could but hear and understand 
it, its verdict upon us. Ever since that 
hour, that has been His throne for 
present administration. Presently He 
will change it for the throne of glory, 
and the throne of empire. To that 
throne of the Cross He brings us now; 
and according to what we do with it, 
He will do with us, when He sits on 
the throne of His glory. 



MATTHEW XXVII. 57-XXVIII. 



MAN'S last and worst was done. 
The King was dead! From the 
moment of His dying, none but tender 
hands touched Him, and from the mo- 
ment of His burial none but loving 
eyes saw Him. 

Night is past; day is breaking! A 
new glory is on the whole creation. 
Long years, as men count time, must 
intervene ere the groaning cease, and 
the sob is hushed; but the deepest pain 
is past in His pain, and the wound 
of humanity is staunched at its very 
centre in His wounds. 

Strange glories broke with the dawn- 
ing of the first day of the new week. 
The King's followers, discouraged and 
scattered by the Cross, were gathered 
together again; a new affection mani- 
fested itself, and a new heroism pos- 
sessed them. For a brief while, He 
tarried among them, and meeting them 
in Galilee, with the majesty of an au- 
thority, such as man had never known, 
He uttered His great commission, and 
declared His abiding presence among 
His own disciples. 

Reverently then, and with meaning 
such as mortals never knew, there pass 
our lips in His presence, the presence 
of the risen King, words often uttered 
before, but never with such confidence 



and such courage, "Long live the 
King ! " And in answer, we presently 
hear His own words spoken to a lonely 
man on an island of the sea, "I am 
alive for evermore." 

In this final study, then, we see the 
end of the beginning, and the begin- 
ning of the end. In order to dismiss 
the question of difficulty, or of har- 
mony as between the Gospel narratives, 
let us still remember that Matthew 
wrote from the one standpoint, that of 
presenting the King of Israel; and 
therefore from the appearances after 
the resurrection, and from the different 
facts concerning Resurrection, he se- 
lected only those which are necessary 
for setting "^fqjth this one truth of the 
Kingship of Christ in its last manifes- 
tation in the earthly mission of Jesus, 
and in the ultimate intention and pur- 
pose of God. 

Our study falls into three parts, 
First, the King resting; secondly, the 
King risen; finally, the King reigning. 

The King resting. For a little while 
He is out of our sight Our attention 
therefore is fixed first upon the King's 
lovers, and then upon the King's foes, 
and upon how they acted after the 
death of the King. 

His lovers are represented by Joseph 



317 



[MATT. xxvu. 57-xxvm.] 



MATTHEW 



and the Marys. We are immediately 
arrested by the fact that the light of 
Resurrection had not yet broken upon 
the hearts of His disciples. Neverthe- 
less, while as yet they had no under- 
standing of the spiritual meaning of 
His mission, while as yet they were 
only simple souls who had learned to 
love Him, but had not come to under- 
stand Him; a secret disciple, and those 
avowedly His, were brought into a 
sacred and beautiful union in their 
ministry of love Not only is it true 
that secret and avowedly open dis- 
ciples are brought together; it is also 
true that among these lovers of Jesus, 
fulfilling their last tender offices of love 
in the presence of His dead body, were 
those who represented the highest in 
the land, and those who represented 
the simple and lowly. Joseph of Ari- 
mathaea was a member of the San- 
hedrim, and Luke tells us that he was 
the minority in the hour of the trial 
(Luke xxiii. 51). He was the man 
who did not give his consent to the 
decision of the illegal gathering of 
these people at night, or to their de- 
cision to hand Jesus over to death. 
His had been a hidden loyalty, and 
yet a true one, and now in the presence 
of the ultimate catastrophe, in the 
presence of the death of his Lord, the 
secret disciple became the most cour- 
ageous of them all ; he begged the body 
of Jesus the Crucified, the One of 
Whom they had been so eager to rid 
themselves. The secret discipleship 
flamed out into a great courage when 
Jesus was dead. He took his way to 
the Roman governor, and asked for the 
privilege of taking that body and lay- 
ing it to rest; and for resting place he 
gave Him his own tomb. What did he 
feel that day as he laid Christ to rest? 
Probably there was no hope in his 
heart, but there was love there. Per- 
haps he felt He had been wrong, as 
all the other disciples felt they had 
been wrong, in placing their confidence 
in the ability of Jesus to do the great 
things He said He was going to do. 
But he had not lost faith in Christ; 
for there is a distinct difference be- 
tween faith in Christ's ability to do 
things, and faith in Christ for what He 
is in Himself. 



(Then there were the Marys; Mary 
01" Magdala, and the other Mary. 
Nothing is said of them save this, that 
they were sitting over against the 
sepulchre. \ If we arrange these stories 
chronologically, we find that these 
women watched even after Joseph of 
Arimathsa had gone, that they watched 
and waited through all that first night. 
Augustine said, " Oh that men in all 
time would learn the lesson of the 
Marys, and when they can do none 
other for the Christ, watch ! " 

It is a tragic picture, this of His 
lovers; but it is a beautiful pic- 
ture. Hopeless, disappointed, bereaved, 
heartbroken; but the love He had cre- 
ated in those hearts for Himself could 
not be quenched, even by His dying; 
could not be overcome, even though 
they were disappointed; could not be 
extinguished, even though the light of 
hope had gone out, and over the sea 
of their sorrow there was no sighing 
wind that told of the dawn. 

His foes are next seen; the priests, 
with the Pharisees, and Pilate. Priests 
and Pharisees were filled with a name- 
less and superstitious fear, "We re- 
member that that deceiver said, while 
He was yet alive, After three days I 
rise again. Command therefore that 
the sepulchre be made sure until the 
third day." Side by side with this 
superstitious fear, a great and con- 
tinued contempt for Him was revealed 
in the words "that deceiver." It is 
wonderful how men may set themselves 
in such resolute antagonism to a truth, 
that at last they are persuaded that 
their antagonism is the truth, and the 
truth itself a lie. These men had lis- 
tened in the early days of our Lord's 
ministry with profound interest to Him, 
had been impressed by Him, impressed 
by the scholarly note in His preaching, 
" How knoweth this Man letters, hav- 
ing never learned?" impressed by the 
loftiness and beauty of His ethical 
ideal, impressed by His marvellous un- 
veiling of the glory of God; yet be- 
cause they were not able to account 
for Him, and were jealous of the 
power He exerted, they fought against 
Him until at last, when He was dead, 
they could only speak of Him as "that 
deceiver." 



318 



MATTHEW 



[MATT, xxvii. 57-xxvmJ 



Pilate responded to their request by 
saying ; " Ye have a guard : go, make it 
as sure as ye can." With what empha- 
sis shall we read that word? Was his 
the emphasis of doubt? Was there still 
in his heart the hatred of the priests 
which was manifest during the trial? 
Was there a sarcasm in the word, born 
of the consciousness that they were 
helpless in the presence of that dead 
Man? Or was there a lurking sus- 
picion of fear? Was he coming into 
sympathy with those priests in their 
desire to stamp out the Name? We do 
not know. Most probably it was the 
language of weary indifference as 
though he had said, Let me be done 
with this thing; take the guard and 
get away, and do anything you like. 

Whatever our interpretation may be, 
this we do know, that in the day of his 
vacillation he had chosen expedience 
rather than obedience, had sought to 
save himself, as his Prisoner had not 
done; and so had lost himself, while 
his 'Prisoner was saving Himself, and 
His Kingdom. 

(The King risen. The account .of 
the earthquake, and the coming of the 
angel is interpolated to explain the 
presence of the angel who spoke to 
the women as they returned from their 
Sabbath observances. Chronologically, 
therefore, these events stand first in 
the story, and we will so look at them. 
The risen King and the angel; the 
risen King and the women; the risen 
King and His enemies. 

The risen King and the angel. When 
the King was coming angels announced 
the fact; and now an angel came again. 
He, did not come to roll away the stone, 
in Border that Christ might come forth 
from the grave; but to roll away the 
stone, in order to show that Christ had 
left the grave. He had risen ere the 
angel came, He had left behind Him 
the linen cloths without displacing 
them, and the grave without the rolling 
away of the stone. He had emerged 
into that new, mysterious, and yet 
actual bodily life, which so baffles all 
our explanation as we read the story in 
the Gospel of John. He had departed 
without flame or flash of glory upon 
which the eye of sense might look. He 
had left His grave behind Him, not 



through a door opened by disciple 
fingers, or angel fingers, but without 
the opening of a door. So the Christ 
had risen, unseen by friend or foe in 
the mysterious and majestic act; and 
the angel mission was to show men, 
not the exit or exodus of the Christ 
from the grave, but the empty grave. 

The effect of the angel's coming to 
the foes of Christ, was that of their 
absolute discomfiture. They became 
as dead men in the presence of the 
blinding glory of the angel visitor; but 
to the friends of Christ it was a strange 
and tender comfort. He said to the 
women, " Fear not ye ; for I know that 
ye seek Jesus." But the place where 
they laid Him could not hold Him. 
Their coming was the coming of love 
and fear, as we have already seen. 
Their coming was the agony of a mis- 
taken intention, they brought "spices 
that they might come and anoint Him." 
They thought of Him. only as dead. 
How strange that seems, in the light* 
of the fact that, as the evangelists 
record, He never spoke of His Cross in 
those last days, but that He also fore- 
told His Resurrection. They seem 
never to have heard Him, or never to 
have understood Him. They were so 
blinded by the blood of the tragedy, 
that they never saw the light shining 
beyond. They loved Him with a great 
love; though He had failed, they loved 
Him, and would minister to Him dead. 
With what surprise they found the 
angel there, and listened to the mes- 
sage! First their fear was assuaged, 
" Fear not ye : for I know that ye seek 
Jesus Who hath been crucified." They 
were seeking Him in the wrong way; 
but they were seeking Him. Their 
knowledge was not perfect, but their 
love was strong, and that is ever the 
supreme thing. Then came the an- 
nouncement, the great fact was de- 
clared, " He is not here, He is risen," 
and that was accompanied by a gentle 
touch of rebuke, in the words, " as He 
said." 

The last words the angel spoke indi- 
cated the real meaning of His presence 
there : " Come, see the place where the 
Lord lay.* The value of the actual 
bodily Resurrection of Jesus, both to 
the disciples and to disciples for all 



319 



[MATT, xxvii. 57-xxvm.] 



MATTHEW 



ages, was its demonstration that He 
had accomplished all He said He would 
accomplish, that His great announce- 
ments concerning Himself were not the 
dreamings of a disordered imagination, 
were not the hopes of a helpless, 
powerless man. When He came out 
from the grave in bodily Resurrection, 
all He had said was verified, and all 
He had done began to be explained. 
The ministry, of teaching, and of won- 
der working, the patient love of the 
three years, began to take a new colour, 
and tone, and emphasis, as they looked 
at the empty grave and saw that the 
King Whom they loved was dead, and 
Whose body they would have em- 
balmed, was beyond their reach; that 
He had broken the bands of death, and 
without the aid or assistance or inter- 
vention of disciples or of angels, had 
left the tomb, and left it for ever. 

The risen King and the women. His 
first appearance was to them, that is 
to love at its finest, and fullest, and 
strongest. They were mistaken. In all 
probability when the angel gave them 
their commission, and had started to 
tell the disciples that Jesus would meet 
them in Galilee they dropped their 
spices. He knew the business upon 
which they had come to the sepulchre, 
and He appeared to them in spite of 
their mistake, in spite of the fact that 
they had come to embalm Him dead. 
We are anxious that people should hold 
the absolute truth concerning Him; He 
is anxious that souls should love Him ! 
We turn away from fellowship with 
those who do not hold all we hold to 
be true concerning Him, forgetting that 
we as well as they, they as well as we, 
may be incorrect or partial only, in our 
present conclusions concerning Him; 
He will give Himself first to love, even 
when love is so blind and foolish, that 
it desires to embalm Him dead, never 
having believed the great words con- 
cerning Resurrection. 

He said to them "All hail!" This 
was the ordinary salutation of the 
marketplace, the highway, and the 
home. There is a glory in that fact. 
There is, as He says it, a Kingly tone 
in it, a majestic touch, that appeals to 
us; yet in the artlessness of it, in the 
simplicity of it, in the ordinariness of 



it, is the revelation of the perfect ease 
with which He had passed through the 
old life into the new, and the unveiling 
of the fact that He had brought into 
the new resurrection life all the old 
human tendernesses and natural human 
sympathies. 

They were conscious of the change, 
and in a moment they were at His feet. 
Quickly He called them back from that 
attitude of adoring worship, and exul- 
tation, and sent them to their new 
work; "Go tell My brethren that they 
depart into Galilee.") 

Thus the risen Christ met His dis- 
ciples, appearing first to love, which 
we do well to remember. When we 
meet Him let us know that He will 
speak to us in the ordinary and every- 
day language of our own life. While 
He values our adoring worship, He will 
always lift us from the attitude of pros- 
tration, and will send us about His 
business. To lie at His feet is a sacred 
and blessed thing; but to remain there 
is to miss the meaning of His Resur- 
rection. It is a greater thing to tell 
some soul out of personal knowledge 
and conviction that Christ is risen, and 
that therefore there is hope for all men. 

The risen King and His enemies. 
This story is told in one brief para- 
graph. Their last weapon was a lie, 
and their last craft was folly. There 
we leave them, in order to follow Him. 

The King reigning. Our attention 
is first directed to the disciples. They 
kept the appointment with Him, in 
Galilee. They yielded wholly to Him, 
for they worshipped Him. Yet they 
were imperfect, for " some doubted." 
Nevertheless everything He subse- 
quently said was addressed to the whole 
of them, to the men who doubted as 
well as to those who worshipped. 

The King was standing upon a moun- 
tain; the eleven men were round Him, 
and perhaps the five hundred brethren 
were round Him also. How He loved 
the mountains! It was upon a moun- 
tain that He uttered the ethic of His 
Kingdom; that He came to the per- 
fecting of His Manhood in transfigur- 
ation glory; that He uttered His great 
prophecies, so imperfectly understood 
even unto this hour; that He wept 
over the doomed city He was to reject. 



320 



MATTHEW 



[MAM. xxvii. S7-XXVHI.3 



Again He gathered His disciples to a 
mountain. There He uttered three 
things; His claim, His commands, and 
His final declaration. 

His claim; "All authority hath been 
given unto Me in heaven and on earth." 
These were the phrases of the prayer 
He taught them when He uttered the 
Manifesto of His Kingdom, " Our 
Father Who art in the heavens, Hal- 
lowed be Thy name. Thy Kingdom 
come. Thy will be done, as in heaven, 
so on earth" Now He claimed that 
His place in the economy of God is that 
of all authority in heaven and on earth. 

His command ; " Go ye therefore ; 
and disciple the nations." He did not 
say, make disciples of, there is no sub- 
stantive in the command except nations. 
This command includes a far larger 
enterprise than that of bringing indi- 
vidual souls to Himself. It is a com- 
mand to influence all the nations 
toward His standards and His ideals. 
Disciple the nations, teach the na- 
tions. Then He spoke of the individual 
work. "Baptizing them;" that is the 
work of bringing individual souls into 
relationship with God, in the name of 
the Father and of the Son and of the 
Spirit. "Teaching them;" that is the 
work of insisting on the ethic of 
the Kingdom. It is a great and 
gracious and spacious commission. Ob- 
serve its relationship to His claim. He 
is put in the supreme place of the 
economy. All authority hath been 
given unto Me. Therefore His Church 
is to go forth to bring the whole world 
into recognition of the place of author- 
ity in which God has put Him, and 
into agreement therewith by submission. 

His final word; "I am with you al- 
ways, even unto the end of the world." 
Many years ago I was sitting by the 



side of an aged saint of God, an old 
woman of eighty-five. I had been 
reading this chapter to her, and when 
I finished I looked at her and said, 
That is a great promise. She looked 
up and said sharply, with the light of 
sanctified humour in her eyes; That is 
not a promise at all, that is a fact. Oh 
if the Church of God could remember 
that fact! 

There is no story of ascension here; 
the last matter is that the King takes 
the Divine name by which Israel had 
known Him, "I am," and puts it into 
living association with His disciples as 
they go forward on His business; "I 
am with you" The ideal of ancient 
Israel is to be fulfilled in the Church, 
Emmanuel, God with us. "All the 
days," days of sunshine, and of 
shadow; days of strength and days of 
weakness; days of battle, and days of 
victory; tie longest day and the short- 
est day. 

Have we really crowned this King? 
If we are only interested in Him, we 
sadly fail. On His head are many 
diadems. He is waiting for the crown 
of our manhood, our womanhood. He 
cannot rest in us, until He have our 
love and our loyalty. If we reply, Yes, 
He is our King, then are we obeying 
Him in His final command ; " Go ye 
therefore and disciple the nations"? 
Are we helping to make our own na- 
tion like Him? Are we winning indi- 
vidual souls to Him? Is the highest 
passion of our life to weave another 
garland wherewith to deck His brow, 
to place another gem in His diadem? 
If not; then to see such a King and 
not to obey Him is to add to our con- 
demnation ! But to see Him, and know 
Him, and crown Him; and to suffer 
with Him as we serve, is life indeed. 



Printed in the United States of America 



321 



735" 
18 








-V?.;/ N-., A., ' 

*&f f J '"' r .*+*rt^ - 

^4 . /"/ . 
- -' v--s I ;-..(.. 



UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO 



21 127 682 



